


The 
Tabernacle 
ood 








I. M. Haldeman, D.D. 


THE TABERNACLE 
PRIESTHOOD and OFFERINGS 


I. M. HALDEMAN 


The threefold subject from which this vol- 
ume takes its title is quite generally re- 
cognized by Bible scholars to contain some 
of the choicest and richest teachings in all 
Scripture — teachings mysteriously en- 
folded in the Old Testament Law but 
gloriously unfolded in the New Testament 
Gospel. 


In the adroit hands of Dr. Haldeman, 
these fountains of the ancient writings in 
type and symbol burst forth with a maxi- 
mum of power and beauty. Regardless of 
what portion of this book to which one 
might turn — to the description of the 
framework, coverings, curtains, or hang- 
ings of the Tabernacle, of the robes and 
rites of the priesthood, or of the successive 
offerings — one comes face to face with 
the Person, the work, and the glory of 
Christ. These symbols, the author shows, 
are divinely-given illustrations to teach 
that the only human approach to a holy 
God is through the shed blood of a sacri- 
ficial substitute. Christ is revealed as that 
eternally ordained Substitute who, for the 


(Continued on ‘back flap) 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2021 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/tabernaclepriest0000hald 


The Tabernacle 
Priesthood 
and Offerings 


By 
I. M. HALDEMAN, D. D. 
Author of ‘‘ How to Study the Bible,” ‘Ten Sermons on 
the Second Coming,” “‘ Christ, Christianity * 
and the Bible,”’ etc. 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 
OLD TAPPAN, NEW JERSEY 


COPYRIGHT MCMXXV BY FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


All rights reserved 


Printed in the United States of America 


PREFACE 


VOLUME on the Tabernacle, Priesthood and 
Offerings is not new, others have digged, and 
digged deeply, in these exhaustless mines. 

In the present volume there will be found a same- 
ness of exposition. Even under different headings a 
truth already stated is repeated, not necessarily in the 
same language, but again and again with renewed em- 
phasis and amplification of the same thoughts. The 
same truth, the same teaching, from another angle. 

This is so, because, no matter whether you take up 
the Framework, the Coverings, the Curtains, or the 
Hangings; whether you consider the Priesthood, the 
Priestly Robes, or the successive Offerings, you will 
find the Person, the Work and the Glory of Christ con- 
fronting you at every turn and the fulness of these 
facts inwrought, more or less, with every type or 
symbol. 

The constant reiteration of already stated truth is 
a demonstration that the objective purpose of these 
symbols is to exalt the Person of Christ, to set Him 
before us as Real Man and Very God, Son of God, and 
God the Son and to bring us face to face with the 
sublime truth that His work on earth was not to live, 
but to die, and that there is yet a fuller revelation of 
His glory when He shall come the Second time. 

Under no circumstance and in no direction is type 
or symbol occupied with an ethical, but only and al- 
ways with a sacrificial, Christ. 

In these divinely-given illustrations it will be seen 


PREFACE 


the best human being can approach a holy God only 
on the ground of the shed blood of a sacrificial and 
voluntarily offered substitute. 

Always it will be seen (and little effort is required 
to see it) that our Lord Jesus Christ was no less than 
this eternally ordained Substitute, Who, for our sakes 
and our redemption, became a willing victim and the 
glad recipient of the judgment of God due in righteous- 
ness to the guilt of men. 

Always it will be seen the title of the best as well 
as the worst to enter Heaven, hold fellowship with God 
and call Him Father, is in the blood of His Son; that 
any touch, or intimacy, or consciousness we may have 
of Him as our Father must come through the interces- 
sion, the advocacy and unceasing ministry of Jesus 
Christ as His Only Begotten Son and our now risen, 
ascended and glorified Lord. 

No matter from what point of view you attempt to 
expound the Tabernacle and its inclusive truths you 
will find yourself repeating, reemphasizing, the truths 
you have already stated just as though you had never 
done so; and every renewed statement will seem to 
you, indeed, as though you were discovering and not- 
ing for the first time the adorable Person, the Perfect 
Work, the Infinite Glory of Him whom we call with 
ever increasing delight—Our Great God and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. 

I. M. H. 

New York, N.Y. 


Contents 


ENTRODUCTIONG Se tiiba) ch) ha) sone oO 
. THe DWELLING PLace or Gop WITH 
Man 19 
. THE FRAMEWORK 27 
. THE Boarps 33 
. THE Bars 47 
. THE PILLarRs 38 
a FouNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE 71 
. THE Court FENCE 87 
. THE COVERINGS . 94 
. Tue Goats’ Harr CurTAINs LOL 
. THE LINEN CuRTAINS 4 
. THe HancInecs Kl 48) 
. THE UNRENT VAIL wil Zo 
. THe Rent VAIL Sh 
. Pins AND Corps . 141 
. Tue FurNITURE OF THE TABERNACLE 161 
. THe ARK OF THE COVENANT . 166 
. Tue Mercy SEAT = 1176 
. THE TABLE OF SHEWBREAD . #2192 
. THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK . 199 
. Tue ALTAR OF INCENSE 220 


XXI. 
xX 
XXIII. 
AAXLY, 


XXV. 
XXVI. 
XXVII. 
XXVIII. 
XXIX. 


XXX. 
XXXII. 
XXXII. 
XXXII. 
XXXIV. 
XXXV. 
XXXVI. 


XXXVII. 


XXXVIITI. 


CONTENTS 


THE BrAzeEN LAVER . 234 
TH BRAZEN ALTAR, (..0 : 259 
THE PRIEST . 249 
THe Priest’s GARMENTS. (The 
Embroidered Linen Coat) . 266 
THE GIRDLE mere 
THE RosBE oF THE EPHOD . 280 
Tue EpHop AND THE BREASTPLATE . 287 
Tue MITRE AND THE GOLDEN PLATE . 302 
CONSECRATION OF THE Priests (Le- 
viticus 8) . 308 
THE Five Great OFFERINGS fae 
Tue MEAT OFFERING . 324 
THE BurNT OFFERING ood 
THe Sin OFFERING (Leviticus 4) . 346 
THE PEACE OFFERING (Leviticus 3) . 355 
Tue Trespass OFFERING (Leviticus 5) 364 
CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE PEOPLE For 
CoNSTRUCTION OF THE TABERNACLE 
(Exodus 25) Men 6s) 
ORDER OF THE Camp (Numbers 2 
and 3) . 388 
THE PILLAR oF CLoup . 397 


The following illustrations appear in a group between pp. 206 
and 207: 


THE BOARDS, BARS, PILLARS AND SOCKETS OF 
THE TABERNACLE—Exopus xxv1i 


THE CURTAINS AND COVERINGS OF THE TABER- 
_ NACLE—Exopus xxv 

THE HOLY PLACE—Exopus xt, 22-27 

THE ARK AND MERCY SEAT—Exopus xxv, 10 
THE LAVER—Exopus xxx, 18 


THE BRAZEN ALTAR, OR ALTAR OF BURNT 
OFFERING—Exopus xxvl1 


ISRAEL ABIDING IN THEIR TENTS IN THE PLAINS 
OF MOAB—NumbBERS xxII and XXIII 


THE CAMP, THE TABERNACLE, AND CLOUDY 
PILLAR 


v 





i Pe Me A 
” mt 


ini : 
fth 

7 oe ne n rs 
> oe 

ae ae Var 





INTRODUCTION 


HE Children of Israel were captives in the 
land of Egypt. 


Pharaoh oppressed them. He set over 
them taskmasters who cruelly entreated them. 

Their cry came into the ears of the God of Sabaoth. 

He sent Moses and Aaron to demand of Pharaoh 
that he let the people go. 

- He refused. 

By the hand of Moses the Lord then Neereds forth 
bitter plagues upon Egypt. 

Each plague served only to harden Pharaoh’s heart 
and tighten his grip upon the captives. 

The Lord announced through Moses that He would 
send one more plague. 

He would slay the first born in the land. 

This doom involved the first born in Israel. 

To deliver them from this doom the Lord provided 
a substitute for them. 

In obedience to His command Moses bade the 
people take a lamb on the tenth day of the month 
according to their families, a firstling (a first born) 
of the flock, without spot or blemish, keep it till the 
fourteenth day, kill it between the two evenings of 
that day, put the blood in a bason, dip a bunch of 
hyssop in the blood and strike it against the sides of 
the door and above, thus marking the house with a 
crimson stain. 

They were then to go into the house, shut the door, 
fix the slain lamb on a spit in the form of a cross, 

9 


10 INTRODUCTION 


roast it before an open fire, eat it with bitter herbs, 
and eat it in haste, shoes on the feet, loins girded and 
staff in hand. 

At midnight the Lord would go forth and slay the 
first born. 

It would be the Lord’s Passover. 

The first born in the house under the shelter of the 
blood of the lamb would be spared—saved. 

The people did as they were commanded. 

At midnight the Lord, in fulfillment of His promise, 
went forth to slay. 

Wherever He saw blood on a door He passed over 
that house. 

The next morning there was a first-born dead in 
every house. 

In the homes of the Egyptians it was a first-born 
son or daughter, and from that home came the sound 
of weeping, the voice of lamentation, hearts that ached 
and would not be comforted. 

In the houses of the Israelites there was, indeed, a 
first-born dead, but it was the first-born substitute— 
the slain lamb provided of God. 

By this sore judgment the Lord broke the chains 
of Israel’s bondage, showed Himself a Redeemer and 
Saviour of His chosen people. 

He led them out of the land of bondage and the 
house of affliction, He divided the waters of the Red 
Sea that they might pass over dry-shod. 

In a pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night He 
led them through a “waste howling” wilderness to 
Mount Sinai. 

At Sinai He tested them. 

He rehearsed all He had done in their behalf. 

He had brought them thus far on eagles’ wings. 


INTRODUCTION 11 


Would they, henceforth, cast themselves in obedient 
and dependent faith upon Him; or, would they by 
relying upon their own strength, their own wisdom, 
walk in their own righteousness and earn their way 
into the Promised Land? 

There was only one true course to follow. 

They should have confessed their helplessness and 
cast themselves wholly upon the omnipotence and the 
grace of God. 

They did nothing of the kind. 

With consummate spiritual blindness and offensive 
self-sufficiency they agreed to earn and merit their 
way into the Promised Land. 

With united voice they said: 

“ All the Lord hath spoken (that is, all He peauied 
of them) we will—do.’’ 

By that response they repudiated the grace of God, 
set aside the Abrahamic, unconditional covenant and 
placed themselves on the ground of law. 

It was a fatal act. 

Immediately, the Lord changed His attitude to them. 

He caused a line to be drawn between Himself and 
them. 

He threatened with instant death all who should 
cross that line. 

Herein you may behold the essential difference be- 
tween law and grace. 

Grace bids us draw nigh to God. 

Law shuts us out from God. 

Grace bids us to consider God. 

Law bids us consider ourselves. 

Grace bids us to behold what God can and is willing 
to do for us. 

Law bids us know we can do nothing for ourselves. 


12 INTRODUCTION 


Under grace we are taken up with God. 

Under law we are taken up with self. 

Under grace we discover what God is—full of 
mercy and saving love. 

Under law we find out what we are—sinful, un- 
righteous, lost. » 

Grace is expressed in four letters—done. 

Law is contained in a word of two letters—do. 

Under grace all is done, the work has been done 
for us, it is completely and perfectly finished. There 
is nothing for us to do but to rest in the finished work. 

Under law we are always doing and never done. 
We never accomplish, we never meet the demand made 
of us, we never can begin to give even the slightest 
hint of satisfaction, we have no place of rest, there 
is not a moment in which we are secure. 

Grace bids us hope. 

Law tells us to fear. 

Grace brings salvation. - 

Law puts under condemnation and demands the 
penalty without mercy. 

The people desired law and despised grace. 

God gave them their request. 

From the top of Sinai now covered with a thick 
cloud, flashing with lightnings, echoing with thunder, 
filled with smoke as from the opening of furnace doors, 
with the voice of a trumpet waxing louder and louder 
till the whole mount seemed to quiver and rock, the 
Lord God proclaimed the law the people had invoked, 
giving it to them in the form of Ten Commandments. 

There was no longer any joy or peace among the 
people, no sense of nearness to God, there was nothing 
but consciousness of the clanging, clashing, clamor- 
ing law and the revelation of God as that God who will 


INTRODUCTION 13 


“by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of 
the fathers upon the children, and upon the children’s 
children, even unto the third and fourth generation; ” 
a revelation of that God who has said (and said it with 
the accent of an inexorable and unchanging decree) 
“the soul that sinneth it shall die.” 

To this people, the God who had been their Re- 
deemer from death and their Deliverer from the land 
of bondage, was now to them as a God afar off, unap- 
proachable, terrible. Every breast was filled with 
dread, every heart throbbed with fear. 

The Lord called Moses up into the mount to re- 
ceive a transcript of the law He had ‘so thundrously 
proclaimed. 

While he was gone and before they had as et re- 
ceived a copy of it, the people broke the very first 
commandment: that they should have the Lord as 
their only God. 

Filled with murmuring and unbelief at the pro- 
longed absence of Moses they set up a god of Egypt, 
the golden calf, Apis. They bowed down and wor- 
shipped it, and did so with all the lewdness and shame- 
lessness of the Egyptian rites; for, we are told, they 
were naked. 

They had thus become idolaters as guilty as the 
people from whom the Lord had saved and separated 
them. 

In the midst of this orgie of lust and treason against 
Jehovah, Moses came down from the mount bringing 
the law as it had been written by the finger of God on 
tables of stone. 

Filled with indignation, with horror and righteous 
anger he cast down the tables of stone and broke them. 

He did this as a testimony that in breaking the first 


14 INTRODUCTION 


commandment they had broken and were guilty of the 
whole law; as it is written: 

“ Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet 
offend in one point, he is guilty of all.” 

He stood in the gate and called upon those who 
were on the Lord’s side to come to him. 

The sons of Levi answered the call. 

He bade each man gird himself with his sword, go 
through the camp and slay as they should go. 

Three thousand idolaters were slain. 

Moses did not take up the broken law and bid the 
people keep it. 

He knew better than that. 

He knew that in God’s sight it was utterly broken. 

He saw the people needed, not law, but atone- 
ment. 

Therefore he said: 

“T will go up unto the Lord, peradventure I shall 
make an atonement for your sin.” 

He returned to the mount. He made intercession 
before the Lord that He would turn aside His justly 
aroused anger, and that the whole nation might not 
be destroyed. 

The Lord heard his appeal 

He gave him the law written again upon other tables 
of stone. 

It was under these circumstances the Tabernacle 
was built and set up, that the Lord might dwell in the 
midst of the people; by His presence own them as His 
and save them, no longer as from the bondage of 
Egypt, but from the bondage, the condemnation, the 
judgment and disaster of their own failure. 

A holy God could not dwell in the midst of a sinful 
people except upon the ground of a blood atonement; 


INTRODUCTION 15 


for, it is written: “without shedding of blood is no 
remission,” no holding back of judgment due; neither 
could the sinner approach a righteous God except on 
the ground of a sacrifice offered by the individual 
which should be an acknowledgment of the need of 
atonement and a confession of the grace that per- 
mitted and provided it. 

Moses was therefore instructed to give to the people 
a system of sacrificial offerings and to ordain Aaron, 
his brother, as high priest and his sons as associate 
priests with him. 

These sacrifices were to be a witness to the people 
that they had sinned against Jehovah and could be 
saved only by a sacrificial and substitutionary, death 
offered in their behalf. 

Each time an Israelite brought a victim to the priest, 
laid his hand upon its head, confessed his sin and slew 
it, he was testifying that his life was forfeited and that 
he lived only by virtue of the victim slain in his stead. 

At the same time the continual repetition of these 
offerings was a witness that the blood of bulls and of 
goats could not take away sin. This constant demon- 
stration of their inefficiency was, nevertheless, in itself, 
a prophecy, a promise and a pledge that an acceptable 
substitute should be found whose shed blood would be 
the guarantee of an eternal salvation and an abiding 
reconciliation with God. 

By virtue of the death of such an one all claims of 
the broken law would be settled, the law itself as a 
temporary and condemnatory system would be set 
aside and the unconditional covenant with Abraham 
again brought in and through it the blessings promised 
both to Israel and the Gentile world fulfilled. 

In the fulness of time the Son of God and God the 


16 INTRODUCTION 


Son became incarnate of a virgin woman, revealed 
Himself as Jesus of Nazareth, king of the Jews and 
the Lamb of God ordained before the foundation of 
the world. 

He offered Himself as King. He was rejected by 
the Jews (not by the Ten Tribes). He was crucified, 
God the Father accepted Him as the Antitypical Sub- 
stitute for both Jew and Gentile, owned His death as 
a sacrifice for sin, raised Him from the dead, took Him 
to Heaven and seated Him at His own right hand as 
immortal man and eternally incarnate God—God 
eternally manifest in the flesh. 

All the types, figures, symbols and prophecies were 
fulfilled in Him. 

All claims of the law were met and satisfied. 

As the coming in of the law could not annul 
the covenant made with Abraham four hundred years 
before, as it was brought in that it might be a revela- 
tion to the people of their sinfulness (“ for, by the law 
is the knowledge of sin”) and that it might be finally 
as a “ schoolmaster ” to lead them to Christ, the death 
of Christ therefore in satisfying the claims of the law 
against Israel, “ took it out of the way,” and delivered 
them from its bondage; as it is written: 

“ Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that 
was against us, (Jews) which was contrary to us, 
(Jews) and took it out of the way, nailing it to his 
cross.” (Colossians 2:14.) 

As the law of Sinai was never given to the Gentiles, 
then the law, today, has no relation to the world 
whether Jew or Gentile. 

According to Holy Scripture the law was— 

“A ministration of condemnation.” 


INTRODUCTION 1% 


“The ministration of death, written and engraven 
in stones.” 

“Tt has been abolished.” 

“ Done away.” 

“Done away in Christ.” (2 Corinthians 3, 9, 7, 
P31 1145) 

“Our Lord Jesus Christ is the seed of Abraham; as 
it is written: 

““ Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises 

made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many, but 
as of one, And thy seed, which is Christ.” (Galatians 
33.16%) 
_ As the Seed of Abraham our Lord Jesus Christ is the 
depository of all the promises made in the coyenant 
with Abraham; when He rose from the dead, ascended 
and sat down on the throne of the Most High God He 
brought in again the unconditional covenant, and it is 
on the basis of this verified and unconditional cove- 
nant with Abraham that God is dealing in uncondi- 
tional grace with the world today. 

The Episode of the law is over. 

The shadowy types have been fulfilled. 

Salvation is for all who by faith will offer our Lord 
Jesus Christ as the sacrifice provided of God and claim 
Him on the cross as a personal substitute. 

The Law came by Moses. 

Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ. 

It is in the shadows, the types, the figures, the sym- 
bols of the Tabernacle, the Priesthood and the Offer- 
ings that we may behold the wonder of our Lord’s 
divine person, His perfect work and coming glory. 







t ph 4 rn " , 2 & ae ay is a, t 
‘ - SS bd, wt y age J le hats > iN 
Aa Set Tier ep Sea 


7 \ ie ae 
7 fe eed pat wy Cee 
my : - posi. 
a j i, leet Se SE ow eH eat 
{ 7 * y oy are ; 
rf Wes k . ’ me) aie 13,8” 3m ae Py ais iy ee ap An 


| ; wh me 
a) - =a ’ ae i Coke «sve v Pane Tot Me : 


“saa offs: 


i 
‘ 
- a 
f 
id 
8 Me 
¢ Pa e 
v4 
ea vy ls 
y * 
ek’ 
. » : be 


I 
THE DWELLING PLACE OF GOD WITH MAN 


pe ND the Lorp spake unto Moses, saying, 
A Speak unto the children of Israel . . . 
let them make me a sanctuary; that I may 
dwell among them. 

According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern 
of the Tabernacle.” (Exodus 25:1, 2,9.) » 

In this you have a revelation of divine grace and 
divine order. 

Grace, that God should consent to dwell among men. 

Order, that nothing should be done in His name, 
neither by guess, nor will, nor plan of man, but accord- 
ing to His pattern, His will and plan. 

He created the first man that He might dwell in him. 

Man failed, he sinned, and God’s creation rest was 
broken up. 

The purpose of God is unchangeable. 

It was necessary that sooner or later there should 
be a man in whom He could dwell, a man who should 
be His manifestation, His visibility and incarnation. 

This Tabernacle now ordered of God to be set up 
in the wilderness, and whose plan of construction was 
given in minute detail to Moses, was intended to be, 
not merely the official dwelling place of God in Israel, 
but a symbol, a picture and a prophecy of the man in 
whom God should become incarnate, the man who 
should be His final and eternal dwelling place. 

19 


20 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


That man exists today as the antitypical fulfillment 
of God’s purpose. The Apostle John testifies concern- 
ing Him. 

He says: 

“ In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and the Word was God (God was the Word). 

The same was in the beginning with God. (That is, 
He was coeval with God.) 

All things were made by him; and without him was 
not anything made that was made.” 

This person called the Word of God, the Almighty 
maker of heaven and earth, came into the world and 
“was made flesh.” 

Such is the statement of John: 

“The Word was made flesh.” 

The verb and tense form, “ was made,” is literally 
‘‘became,’’ and carries the thought, not of passivity, 
but activity. 

He became flesh by His own action. 

This definition of the verb form is corroborated in 
Hebrews 2:14. 

There it is written: 

“Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of 
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part 
of the same. 

In becoming flesh He is represented as the sole and 
responsible actor; He is not the object of some ex- 
traneous action that makes Him to become flesh, He 
is Himself the actor who so definitely and personally 
acts that He becomes flesh. 

This construction is emphasized in V. 16: 

“ He took not on him the nature of angels; but he 
took on him the seed of Abraham.” (That is, human 
nature. ) 


DWELLING PLACE OF GOD WITH MAN x 


The Greek verb rendered, “took on him,” is, epi- 
lambano, and signifies, “To lay hold of,” ‘‘to as- 
sume.”’ 

The verb is the indicative present, the voice the 
middle or reflexive. 

The statement therefore should read: 

“He assumes not the nature of angels, but the seed 
(the nature) of Abraham, He, Himself, assumes.’’ 

From this unequivocal Scripture we learn that He 
who was the eternal Word of Ged, personally, ac- 
tively and in individual responsibility assumed for 
Himself a human nature of flesh and blood. 

_ As the assumption of flesh and blood by such an 
one as the eternal God is incarnation, then God the 
Word became incarnate by His own will and abso- 
lutely by His own creative act. 

Since He created and assumed this nature by His 
own act, that act excludes any producing act or agency 
less than His own; it excludes any act on the part of 
man; it necessarily excludes the act of any human 
father. 

As He was in respect to His human nature born out 
of a woman; as the act was entirely the act of God 
and therefore there could have been no human father, 
He was logically and necessarily virgin-born, His birth 
was a Virgin Birth. 

This is the indisputable testimony of both John 
and Paul. 

And this in face of the teaching of would-be wise 
men (wise above that which is written) that neither 
John nor Paul says anything about a virgin birth. 

John testifies further concerning this incarnation 

He not only says the Creator of the universe be- 
came flesh and blood, but that He, 


22 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“ Dwelt among us.” 

The word, “ dwelt,” is, literally, ‘“‘ tabernacled.” 

Therefore we should read: 

“The Word became flesh and tabernacled among 
uS.< 

Here again in language which leaves no excuse for 
uncertainty we learn that the human nature created 
and assumed by the Word of God was His Tabernacle, 
His dwelling place among men. 

Thus the purpose of God was achieved. 

He found His dwelling place and rest in man. 

John goes still further and gives a revelation of His 
essential identity. 

He says: 

“We beheld his glory as the only begotten of the 
Father.” 

Thus the Word of God was the Son of God. 

As a son partakes of the essence of a father, and as 
the father of the Word was God, then the Word was 
not only Son of God, but God the Son. 

As whatever God is essentially today (that is, what- 
ever He is in His being) He always has been, to say 
He is a Father today, is to say He always has been a 
Father. Since He has always been the Father, He 
has always had a Son, and that Son in the nature of 
the case has eternally been the Son. Since the Father 
never had a beginning as the Father, the Son never 
had a beginning, He was coeval with the Father; as 
it is written: “the same was in the beginning with 
God.” As a son is begotten of a father and neither 
God the Father nor God the Son had a beginning, the 
Son was eternally begotten of the Father. Since He 
was the only One who ever was or could be eternally 


DWELLING PLACE OF GOD WITH MAN 23 


begotten, then it is true He was (in this sense) the 
only begotten of the Father. 

The Apostle John testifies this only begotten Son of 
the Father whose glory he beheld as such was—Jesus 
Christ. 

John the Baptist so announced Him. 

He baptized Him in the river Jordan, and after he 
had baptized Him, pointed Him out to some of His 
own disciples and said: 

“ T saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God.” 

Nathanael when he met Him confessed Him and 
said: 

“ Rabbi, thou art the Son of God.” . 

Here, therefore, is the amazing, but undeniable fact: 

He whom we know as our Lord Jesus Christ is none 
other than that Son of God and God the Son who 
created the universe; that creative Word who in 
Genesis 1:26, breaks the silence of Godhead, saying, 
“Let us make man in our image;” and in Genesis 
Second is seen to be the Lord God—Yaveh Elohim, 
the declared Creator of the earth and the heavens and 
recorded spokesman of Godhead. 

By the same omnipotence with which He created all 
things (so that without Him there was not one thing 
made that was made) He created for Himself a sin- 
less, perfect human nature, took it into union with His 
infinite person and personally dwelt in it as His Taber- 
nacle-—His dwelling place among men. 

Concerning this indwelling of His humanity Paul 
says: 

“ In him dwelleth all the fulness of the godhead 
bodily.” 

By “ fulness ” is meant, not merely the majesty and 
might of God, but that which alone constitutes the 


24 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


fulness of the Godhead—nothing less than the per- 
sonalities of the Godhead. 

He is therefore the absolute, concrete of the Tri- 
unity of Godhead. 

He Himself says the person of the Father dwelt 
in Him. 

When Philip said to Him: 

“‘ Shew us the Father,” 

He answered and said: 

“He that hath seen me hath seen the Father. . . 
the Father dwelleth in me.” (Not some character- 
istics of the Father, but the Father Himself.) 

Speaking of the Holy Spirit in relation to Him, John 
the Baptist says: 

“God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto Him.” 

He had the measurelessness of the Spirit, and the 
measurelessness of the Spirit is the Spirit Himself. 

Concerning His own personalism as a Son in rela- 
tion to the Father, John says: 

“No man hath seen God (that is, God the Father) 
at any time (neither will He ever be seen apart from 
the Son) the only begotten Son (in some readings it 
is begotten God) which is. in the bosom of the Father, 
he only hath declared him.” 

Literally, “ hath told him out.” 

That is, He has spoken Him out, worded Him forth; 
in short, He is the Word of the otherwise eternal 
silence of God. 

With profoundest reverence, therefore, I would say 
(never for a moment with the slightest intent, suggest- 
ing or hinting at any modification, mixture or change 
of the divine persons of the Godhead) I would say— 
all there is of God (all there is of the one essential 


DWELLING PLACE OF GOD WITH MAN 25 


being of the Godhead) is in Jesus Christ, and apart 
from Jesus Christ there is no God. 

Such a phrase as, “ God out of Christ,” is untenable 
and intellectually impossible. 

Beyond all “ controversy ” He was, 

“God manifest in the flesh.” (I Timothy 3:16.) 

“The image of the invisible God.” (Colossians 
1:16.) 

“The express image of his person.” (Hebrews 1:3.) 

“Our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ.” (Titus 
2:13:) 

The “ Over All God.” (Romans 9:5.) 

And now with outburst of joy and adoration John 
the ‘“‘ Beloved ” disciple who leaned upon His breast 
and heard the throb beat of His heart says of Him in 
terms that swing wide as eternity: 

“‘ Jesus Christ—this is the true God and eternal 
Hite = (john 5°22>) 

Wonderful beyond words is the PERSON of Him 
whom we style as our Lord Jesus Christ. 

He is— 

‘* The man Christ Jesus.’’ 

He in whom the fulness of the Being of God now 
dwells and abidingly rests not only because of the 
perfection of His humanity, but, also, because of the 
redemption He achieved by offering that humanity in 
sacrificial death making an atonement for sin, demon- 
strating the inexorableness of divine righteousness, 
satisfying all its claims, justifying God in all his ways 
and thereby opening up a legal channel through which 
the love of God might flow righteously and in saving 
value to all who by faith should offer up His crucified 
Son as a sacrifice for sin and claim Him as a personal 
substitute under the judgment due them. 


26 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


In Him the rest of God is not creation rest, it is 
redemption rest. 

The conscience of God is at rest because of His law 
justified, His grace proclaimed and His love revealed. 

Here, indeed, is “the true tabernacle which God 
pitched, and not man.” (Hebrews 8:1.) 

Study the Tabernacle in the wilderness with surren- 
dered faith and you will find in every detail of its in- 
spired construction a revelation of the Infinite Per- 
son, the Finished Work and the Resplendent Glory of 
our soon coming Lord. 


II 
THE FRAMEWORK 


HE general appearance of the Tabernacle was 

: that of an oblong box, thirty cubits in length, 

ten cubits high and, including the corner 
boards of the back, ten cubits wide. (Exodus 
26:15-30.) 

It was constructed of forty-eight boards of shittim, 
or, acacia, an incorruptible, wood, twenty on each side, 
six on the western end with two corner boards which 
lapped over. 

Each board was covered with pure gold and had 
two tenons or fingers which dropped into or were 
mortised into two sockets of silver, weighing ninety 
pounds. 

There were one hundred of these sockets or bases 
of silver, ninety-six for the boards and four under the 
pillars of the vail. 

These boards were held in place by fifteen wooden 
bars covered with gold, five on the north and south 
side, and five on the end or back. Three long bars 
passed through rings horizontally from end to end of 
the construction. There were twelve short bars, four 
on each side and the end, two above and two below 
the larger middle bar. 

This constituted the main framework. 

The Tabernacle was divided into two distinct parts 


28 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The first was twenty cubits long, the second ten 
cubits. Each way its length and heighth and breadth 
were equal. 

The division was made by four pillars of wood 
covered with gold. 

The pillars had no capitals, they were cut sheer off. 

These were the pillars that had the four sockets of 
silver for base. 

A vail of white byssus linen with figures of the 
cherubim wrought in fine needlework in blue, purple 
and scarlet completely enclosed, shut in and concealed 
the smaller division. 

It contained the ark of the covenant, a chest of 
wood covered with gold, and with a lid of solid gold 
called the mercy seat, out of each end of which was 
beaten an angel of gold, each angel bending face 
downward to the mercy seat in an attitude of repre- 
sentative interest and adoration. 

In this ark or chest and under the lid or mercy seat 
there were the tables of the law, eventually Aaron’s 
rod that budded and a golden pot with manna. 

This portion of the Tabernacle was called, “‘ The 
Most Holy Place.” 

It could be entered but once a year, on the day of 
atonement, and then only by the high priest with blood 
from the brazen altar—the blood of sacrifice. 

The outer and larger division (it was twice as large) 
contained the golden altar of incense, the golden can- 
dlestick and the golden table of shewbread. 

The entrance was at the eastern end through five 
pillars of wood covered with gold, having capitals of 
gold and sockets of brass. 

From these pillars hung a curtain of linen in white, 


THE FRAMEWORK 29 


blue, purple and scarlet, called “‘The door of the 
Tabernacle.” 

This division was called ‘The Holy Place.” 

Over the framework was thrown an outer covering 
of badgers’ skins, under this another of rams’ skins 
dyed red, under that eleven curtains of goats’ hair. 
These were linked and looped together in two great 
breadths of five curtains each. Five were over the 
Holy Place. The sixth curtain was folded, doubled 
and hung down over the door in front. One-half of 
the second breadth covered the Most Holy Place, the 
other half fell down over the back. Innermost of all 
was an embroidered white linen curtain with figures 
of the cherubim wrought with needlework in blue, 
purple and scarlet. ‘ 

All this formed the covering or clothing of the 
Tabernacle. 

Surrounding this construction was a linen fence sup- 
ported by sixty pillars of wood with silver tops and 
sockets of brass. There were twenty on each side, 
ten on each end. 

This fence inclosed and constituted the “ court ” 
of the Tabernacle. 

In it was the brazen laver at which the priests 
washed their hands and feet before entering into the 
Holy Place. 

It was located near the door. 

At the eastern and open end of the court was the 
brazen altar of sacrifice. 

The gate of entrance was through four central 
pillars. 

On this was hung a curtain similar to the one at the 
door of the Tabernacle. 

It was called “ The Gate of the Court.” 


380 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The Tabernacle and the court were held in place by 
linen cords fastened to pins of brass, and these driven 
deeply into the ground. 

The Tabernacle and Court were set in the midst of 
the people. 

They pitched their tents about that center accord- 
ing to tribes and in an order fixed and commanded 
of God. 

The pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night 
rested upon the sacred building, upon The Most Holy 
Place, and shone within in shekinal splendor, between 
the wings of the cherubim above the mercy seat. 

It was the light, the illumination and blinding glory 
of the place. 

When the Cloud came to a halt, no matter the 
locality nor condition of it, the people halted and ac- 
cording to manner ordained and by particular persons 
indicated of the Lord set up the Tabernacle and its 
Court. 

When the Pillar lifted and moved forward the 
Tabernacle was taken down, the people struck their 
tents and went forward, following whither the Cloud 
led. . 

The Tabernacle was built exactly according to the 
plan shown to Moses in the Mount; as it is written: 

“ According to all that I shew thee, after the pat- 
tern of the Tabernacle, and the pattern of all the in- 
struments thereof, even so shall ye make it.” (Ex- 
odus 25:9.) 

Everything was done according to the will and regu- 
lation of God. 

No movement nor attitude was taken except by His 
command and by His specific direction. 

The framework of the Tabernacle, the boards, bars. 


THE FRAMEWORK 31 


pillars and sockets had a special relation to the Taber- 
nacle as a whole. 

The Coverings, the Curtains, the Hangings, all de- 
pended on the framework. 

If the framework could be overthrown, everything 
upon it would fall and be flung and twisted into inex- 
tricable confusion. 

The framework is a symbol of the Person of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

If the integrity of the Person of Christ, His essen- 
tial being and character cannot be maintained, then 
every doctrine built upon Him falls down, the whole 
system becomes a confusion, a hopeless ruin. If the 
claims He made concerning Himself, if what the Apos- 
tles teach concerning Him are not true, Christianity, 
whether considered as a doctrinal or merely ethical 
system, breaks down. 

And it is just here—against the Person of Christ— 
that all the Satanic assault of the hour is concentrated, 
the denial of His pre-existent deity, His Virgin Birth, 
the sacrificial and atoning character of His death, His 
resurrection, His bodily ascension to Heaven, the fact 
that He sits upon the throne of the universe, immortal] 
man and very God——the eternal incarnation of God. 

The one thing the unbelieving heart of the false 
teachers in the professing Church antagonizes, the 
thing these men who “have crept in unawares,” ac- 
tually hate and would destroy if they could, is faith 
in the deity of Christ. They will accept any testimony 
about Him if by their subtle methods they can bring 
to pass the total rejection of Him as—absolute God. 

But let it once be established and unwaveringly held 
that Jesus Christ was very God, no less than the Lord 
God of the Old Testament, the Creator of the universe, 


32 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


then all miracles predicated of Him are seen to be 
logical, His deity self evidently upholds and sustains 
them and those who would deny them are convicted 
both of moral and intellectual folly. 

Let it be demonstrated that He was no more essen- 
tially divine than the best of men, it is impossible to 
credit Him even with the suggestion of a miracle 
whether it be in the deeds He wrought or of the hour 
of His birth, and those who believe in Him stand to 
be pitied as the most cruelly and wofully deceived 
of earth. 

Study the Framework, follow it in its details and 
it will be seen that in it we have the symbolic, but 
inspired portrait of our Lord as real man and very 


III 
THE BOARDS 


HE boards were of incorruptible wood. 
As such they were a perfect symbol of the 
incorruptible iiumanity of our Lord, a wit- 
ness to its sinlessness. 

That our Lord was a sinless man is in the nature 
of the case. 

‘When the angel Gabriel announced to Mary that 
God had chosen her to be the Mother of His Son, she 
was troubled, reasoned in her mind about it and’ was 
unable to understand how it could be. 

She supposed this Son was to be obtained in a 
natural manner, that the child born of her should he 
begotten by some man chosen of God. 

She was engaged to Joseph, not yet actually his 
wife. Even though Joseph should be permitted to act 
as the Father, she could not comprehend how, under 
the circumstances, such a child could be called the 
Son of the Highest, the Son of the living God. 

The angel explained to her that no man should be 
the father of her child, man should have no part in it 
whatever; on the contrary, that which should be 
wrought in her and born out of her should be by the 
direct act of the blessed and eternal God. 

He said: 

“The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, 

And the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: 

Therefore that Holy Thing which shall be born of 
thee shall be called the Son of God.’’ (Luke 1:35.) 

33 


384 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


In giving the announcement to Mary that man 
should have nothing to do with her in this matter, that 
her conception should not be by man, but by the Holy 
Ghost, that the relation should be between herself and 
Almighty God alone, the angel announced this tran- 
scendent fact not only to her, but advertised it to all 
the ages since, and particularly to those who in this 
hour of a rank and fetid materialism are willing to 
take the intellectual stultification of denying a virgin 
birth to Him who was, not only Son of Mary, but 
Son of God. 

In actual operation the pre-existent Son of God and 
God the Son in coordination with the Father and the 
Spirit, took of the substance or seed or cell of the 
Virgin Mary and fashioned, not a personality, but a 
human nature for Himself. This nature He assumed 
and took into indissoluble union with His unchange- 
able and eternal personality; as it is written: 

“He took not on him the nature of angels; but he 
took on him the seed (the nature) of Abraham.” 
(Hebrews 2:16.) 

That He was Virgin Born ought to be self evident. 

If a natural father had begotten Him He would not 
have been, He could not have been, what Gabriel calls: 

‘‘ That Holy Thing.’’ 

He would have partaken of his sinful father’s sin. 
ful being: 

“Sin in the flesh.” 

A sinful father could not have begotten a holy 
human nature. 

No human father ever has. 

A sinless father could not have begotten it because 


THE BOARDS 35 


—nature comes from the woman and personality from 
the father; as it is written: 

“Levi was in the loins of his father (Abraham).” 
(Hebrews 7:9, 10.) 

Had even a sinless father begotten our Lord, He 
would have had a personality from that father. 

Call it a sinless personality if you will—what then? 

Clearly enough! our Lord would have had a dual 
personality. Personality as the pre-existent Son of 
God and His distinct personality as man. 

This would not only have made Him a dual per- 
sonality in Himself, it would have added personality 
to Godhead, that Godhead which Scripture reveals as 
iriune and fixed forever. 

To double the personality of the Son of God and 
add personality to Godhead would be the guilt and 
shame of a compound and excuseless blasphemy. 

No man, therefore, whether sinful or sinless, could 
have produced the humanity of Christ without the 
addition of personality. 

This is at once a demonstration and a proof that 
the humanity of Christ was not of a distinct person- 
ality other than His eternal, and unchanged and unit 
personality of Godhead. 

As a consequence the conception and birth of our 
Lord’s humanity was not that of a person at all, but 
a—nature. 

The nature of humanity comes essentially and char- 
acteristically from the woman—she is the mould of it. 

Since the humanity of Christ was a nature and not 
a personality it could not have come from a man and 
must have come from a woman. 

It did come from a woman. 

It came from Mary as His Mother. 





36 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


As it could not be produced by man, other than with 
personality, without personality it could be produced 
only by the particular act of God. 

It was therefore produced by the act of God. 

Since it was produced by the act of God it was pro- 
duced exclusively by His act. 

As it was produced by the exclusive act of God it | 
was necessarily virgin born; that is—conception and 
birth without the agency of man. 

The humanity of Christ therefore was not an evolu- 
tion, it was a new and direct creation from God. 

Because of its origin Gabriel properly called it 
“That holy thing.” 

Because it was holy it was sinless. 

The human life of our Lord Jesus Christ was neces- 
sarily sinless. 

The record of His life demonstrates it; as it is 
written: 

“Jesus the Son of God . . . tempted in all points 
as we are, yet without sin.” (Hebrews 4:15.) 

“Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.” 
(Hebrews 7:25.) 

“Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his 
mouth." \(hyPeter2:227) 

“*In him is no sin.’’ (I John 3:5.) 

In the midst of those who knew Him intimately 
and from childhood, He flung down this challenge: 

“Which of you convinceth me of sin?” (John 
8:46.) 

His life was unconcealed. 

He was continually open to inspection. 

Every eye watched Him, every ear was bent to lis- 
ten, every word He spoke was weighed and analyzed, 


THE BOARDS 37 


every step noted, and yet none dared bring the charge 
of sin against Him. 

For two thousand years He has been the object of 
intensive analysis. 

He has been subject to the white light of an un- 
paralleled investigation. The highways and lanes over 
which He traveled, the villages, towns and cities 
through which He passed, the well curb upon which 
He sat, the boat in which He sailed, the places in which 
He prayed, the water which it is reported He turned 
to wine, the very bread and fish (the kind He mul- 
tiplied) have been brought into the light, subjected to 
this investigation and surrendered to this analysis. 

His words have been taken apart, put into the 
laboratory of critical chemistry, tested in respect to 
base, to combination and compounded parts, but not 
an accent, not an emphasis has been found out of 
place, not a sentence or a word that need be changed, 
not a thought nor statement that must be reversed or 
recalled. 

He stands out among men absolutely human, yet of 
an order entirely new, sinless, God filled, compassion- 
ate, sympathetic, going among, the outcast and the 
worthless, among those sick in body, sick in soul, in 
daily contact with leprosy of body and leprosy of mind, 
uncovering pollution and shame and iniquity at every 
step; and yet, even as the sun that reveals the mud, 
the mire, the slime and corruption, and is unstained 
by them, so He ate with publicans and sinners and 
shone more resplendently pure because of the con- 
trasted evil and wrong revealed in them. 

He spoke softly, gently, so graciously, that the offi- 
cers sent by His foes to arrest Him as a disturber of 
the public peace, enthralled by the sound of His voice 


38 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


the accent of His words and the marvellous measure 
of His thoughts, went back to those who sent them 
and said: 

‘“‘ Never man spake like this man.” 

There were times, however, when His words had in 
them the note as of distant thunder, and there was an 
upflash of flame, a light in His eyes as terrible as that 
which had flashed on Sinai. 

When He saw the multitude He was moved with 
compassion; they were to Him as sheep without a 
shepherd; they had been harried and skinned (such is 
the word in the original) by human wolves, they had 
been the prey of the avarice, injustice and tyranny of 
men; but when He spoke of a lost soul in hell, suffer- 
ing, agonizing, tormented, His voice was cold, calm, 
emotionless, as the utterance of a judge, as hard as 
the decrees of eternity; forgiving a sinful woman 
taken in the act of a particular treason of sin, He 
poured forth a tidal sweep of anathema against re- 
ligious formalism and hypocrisy, against false teach- 
ing and tradition as though indeed the day of unre- 
strained wrath and anger had come. 

He is unique. 

There never was anything like Him before. 

There has never been anything like Him since. 

He is as a white rose surrounded by scarlet poppies. 

As a smile of love against a scowl of hate. 

As a song above discord. 

As a shaft of light in the blackness of a starless 
midnight. 

He was pure, He was holy, He was sinless. 

Not even in death did His body see corruption. 

There is only one collocation of terms that expresses 
Him; and that is: 


THE BOARDS 39 


‘* Sinless perfection.’’ 

The boards of the Tabernacle were covered with 
pure gold. 

The gold was a distinct material from the wood. It 
was placed above it. Thus each board consisted of 
two materials. 

The twofoldedness of material in the boards is a 
symbol of the twofoldedness of our Lord. 

As the board was of two materials, He was of two 
natures. 

The nature of man. 

The nature of God. 

‘The wood is a symbol of His human nature. 

The gold symbolizes His divine nature. 

The two materials, the incorruptible wood and the 
gold, constitute, not two, but one board of the Taber- 
nacle. 

The two materials were absolutely distinct. 

The wood never became gold. 

The gold never became wood. 

They did not modify each other. 

The two natures in Christ are distinct. 

His humanity never becomes deity. 

His deity never merges into His humanity. 

They do not modify each other. 

They were absolutely distinct and separate from 
each other; but while the two natures dwelt in Him 
and were distinct, He was not two persons but one; 
nevertheless, He was personally God and personally 
man. 

He was actual man; as it is written: 

“The man Christ Jesus.” (I Timothy 2:5.) 

He was very and true God. 

The Father owned Him as such. 


40 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He said unto Him: 

“Thy throne, O God, is for ever and for ever.” 
(Hebrews 1:8.) 

And again it is written: 

“Our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ.” (Titus 
27135) 

It is simple enough to see how the gold can be upon 
the wood. 

It is a mystery beyond human solution how the two 
distinct natures could be united in the one person so 
that the two natures were never confounded nor the 
personality divided. 

It is a mystery to mere reason but a sublime fact to 
God given faith. 

He acted, He spoke, He thought as a man. 

He was hungry, thirsty and grew weary as a man. 

He ate, He drank and He slept. 

He was sensitive. 

He could feel sorrow. 

He wept human tears. 

He died as generations of human beings before Him 
had died, and He was buried as the dead of human 
kind are buried. 

In all this He was real man. 

But He claimed to be God. 

He said and said it without hesitation, said it simply 
as a fact to Himself, as a part of His individual con- 
sciousness, that before the foundation of the world was 
laid and therefore before the universe was sent upon 
its course, He sat side by side with the Father upon 
His throne in all the infinitude of His glory as God. 

He said all the Father could do He could do. 

He could give eternal life. He could raise the dead. 

He would send some of the risen dead to partake 


THE BOARDS 4) 


of the Father’s favor and the Father’s glory forever. 
He would send others to endless punishment. 

He said all judgment had been committed to His 
hands. 

He affirmed Himself to be the way to God, the truth 
of God and the life of God. 

He said He was the only way by which any man 
might come to God as a Father. 

He invoked those who heard Him to believe on Him 
with the same faith and in the same manner as they 
believed in God. 

He testified without the slightest abashment that 
those who saw Him saw the Father also, that He was 
His image both essentially and omnipotently. ; 

He said an astounding thing coming from the lips 
of a man, He said this: 

‘* Whatsoever things the Father doeth, these also 
doeth the Son likewise.’’ (John 5:19.) 

“ Likewise ” is Same-wise, in the same way, with 
the same authority and the same power. 

The Father did them as Almighty God. 

To do them as the Father did them therefore was to 
claim Himself to be no less than the Almighty, Om- 
nipotent God. 

He put an accent and emphasis on the claim by de- 
claring He had life in Himself—that is—self existence. 

Think you any other man in his senses would claim 
as He did and unqualifiedly to be self existent? 

All this He claimed while revealing Himself every 
day and in all things as actual man. 

He supported His extraordinary claims by miracles. 

He performed His miracles as only God could per- 


form them. 


42 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He performed them by the simple exercise of His 
will. 

He said: 

6é I will.’’ 

He spoke and it was done, He commanded and it 
stood fast. 

If anything in this world can be demonstrated and 
proved, He demonstrated and proved He was very God. 

And yet—He was but—one person. 

His personality did not begin with His humanity. 

To the Jews He said: 

“Before Abraham was (not—I was, but) I am.’’ 
(John 8:58.) 

His personal identity is seen in the remarkable use 
of the present tense, ‘‘ I am.’’ 

That is to say, before Abraham was He not only 
existed, but existed as one who could bridge the dis- 
tance from that hour, ‘‘ before” Abraham to the mo- 
ment in which He spoke with the present tense applied 
to Himself over the whole stretch of that existence— 
so that never in any part of it He should say—“I 
was,” but always—‘‘ I am.”’ 

‘*T am,’’ that was the sacred name the Jew gave to 
God, and God officially gave to Himself, the name that 
blots out time with its sliding scale of past and future 
and records only one—eternal present. 

In saying ‘‘I am”’ in relation to Abraham, He was 
saying He was Himself no less than that God who is 
the eternal I am. 

That this is what He meant and said in such a way 
that those who heard Him should know He meant it, 
is incontrovertibly proven by the action of the Jews. 

They took up stones to stone Him. 

It was not because He claimed pre-existence they 


THE BOARDS 43 


would stone Him. It was not a new claim among 
them. They had no revolt against Him for that, but 
because in using the expression, “I am,” instead of 
saying what, if speaking naturally, He should have 
said: ‘‘ Before Abraham was, I was,” He deliber- 
ately used the sacred name as a declaration that 
His being was eternally pre-existent, that never at any 
point was He less than “I am,” and was therefore 
equal to and identical in being with the eternal God. 

Beyond all question He affirmed Himself to be the 
“Tam” of Israel and thus identified Himself as that 
being who at the Burning Bush said to Moses: 

‘*T am that I am.”’ 

On another occasion He said: 

“JT and my Father are one.” (John 10:30.) 

The numeral adjective is neuter, therefore—one 
thing. 

A thing is a substance. 

He said therefore that He and the Father were of— 
one substance. 

The substance of the Father is—being. 

Consequently He said He and the Father were of 
one being, that is—the same being. 

The being of the Father is—deity. 

Thus He said He and the Father were—one deity. 

Deity is—God. 

With unmistakeable absolutism therefore He said 
He and the Father were—One God. 

He did not say—one person. 

On the contrary He said—‘‘ I and My Father.” 

He was one person, the Father was another and dis- 
tinct person. As two distinct persons they were but 
—QOne God. The Father was God. He as the Son 
was God, of the same being and substance as the 


44 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Father and equally God; not two Gods, but one God 
and yet two persons and each person absolutely God; 
so that, in saying, ‘““I and my Father are one,” He 
said, ‘‘as much as the Father is God, by so much as 
I am His Son and of His substance and being, I too— 
am God.’’ 

Those who heard Him say, “I and my Father are 
one,” knew He was making this claim. 

That they knew it is proven in their action. 

They took up stones to stone Him. 

When He asked why they thought to stone Him 
they gave Him a plain and logical answer. They said: 

‘* Because that thou—being a man—makest thy- 
self God.’’ (John 10:33.) 

The people said He was—a man. 

And He was. 

They said He made Himself to be God. 

He did. 

He was God as well as man. 

He was not God and man. 

He was the—Godman. 

One personality, two distinct natures. 

This one personality and two distinct natures is con- 
tinually revealed. It is definitely seen in the storm 
on Galilee. 

He and His disciples were in a boat in the midst of 
the lake. 

He was weary, and because of His weariness had 
fallen asleep in the hinder part of the ship. 

Suddenly the winds broke from their leash. 

They lifted the waters and flung them in giant waves 
from shore to shore where they broke and crashed and 
fell as in a baffled rage of white spume. 

They cried and shouted, these waves, and then 


THE BOARDS 45 


screamed as though full of fiendish delight at the very 
madness of their fury. 

They tore the long, three-cornered sail from the 
quivering mast. 

They poured the white, yeasty waves in their whip- 
lashed return from the resounding shores into the hold 
of the ship. 

Amid the tumult and tempest, even when the frail 
construction flung on the top of a breaking ridge of 
black waters threatened to capsize and engulf them 
all—the man Christ Jesus slept on. 

What a spectacle. 

A tempest-tossed ship—a sleeping Christ in the 
midst. ; 

Then the frightened disciples (frightened with a 
Christ in the ship) called to Him, aroused Him out of 
His sleep and reproached Him with His seeming in- 
difference to their danger. 

He awoke, He arose. 

But the thing that appealed to Him was not the 
storm, the wild might of it, the fast filling ship and the 
yawning, black mouth of death. 

No! 

The thing that moved Him was the unbelief and 
fear of those who sailed with Him. 

He turned and faced, not the blinding storm, but the 
trembling men, and said: 

“O ye of little faith.” 

Unbelief! 

That was more terrible to Him than the storm; that 
called for more rebuke than the tempest. 

Then He faced the driving waters, the black clouds, 
the bellowing winds and said quietly: 

“ Peace, be still.” 


46 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Like wild beasts at the voice of the master, the 
winds slunk away and hushed their thundrous com- 
plaining, the waves became as smooth as a flawless 
mirror, and we are told: 

“There was a great calm.” (Matthew 8:26.) 

In that scene on Galilee He was a real man, as really 
human as the men in the boat with Him. 

In that same scene He was very God. 

Consider, will you, in analyzing this miracle, that 
you have to reckon the force of the winds, the bulk and 
movement of the waters, the fact of gravitation, and 
over all the control that met the insistent demand of 
each and suddenly changed the operation of one set 
of forces and brought in others that nullified them; 
and this control expressed, not in any physical act, but 
by a flat word, and you have a scenic demonstration 
that He who spoke the word was none other than very 
God. 

And yet, real man as He was and very God as He 
was, He was— 

Only One Person. 

The Man Christ Jesus. 

Our Great God and Saviour. 

Incorruptible wood—-sinless humanity, perfect man. 

Gold above the wood—absolute, essential deity. 

Two materials—one board. 

Two natures—one person. 


IV 
THE BARS 


Tee were fifteen bars of wood covered with 
gold. 


There were five on each side of the Taber- 
nacle and at the back or western end. 
- They passed through and were held in-place by rings 
in the boards. 

Three were long. They were middle bars going 
through the rings from end to end of each side and 
back of the Tabernacle. 

There were twelve short bars, four on each side and 
back. 

Two of the short bars were above the middle one, 
iwo below. 

Two short bars extended above and below the mid- 
dle bar the length of The Holy Place. 

The other two extended above and below the middle 
bar the length of The Most Holy Place. 

All this was according to the pattern and command- 
ment of God given to Moses; as it is written: 

“* And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five 
for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle. 

And five bars for the boards of the other side of the 
Tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side 
of the Tabernacle, for the two sides westward. 

And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall 
reach from end to end. ote 26:26-28.) 

4 


48 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“ And thou shalt rear up the Tabernacle according 
to the fashion thereof which was shewed thee in 
the mount.’’ (V. 30.) 

The long bars went from one end of the Tabernacle © 
to the other on both sides and from end to end in the 
back. 

They were the beginning and the ending of the 
Tabernacle, the beginning and end of the Tabernacle 
as the revelation of God among men. 

As such they are a fitting and perfectly illustrative 
symbol of our Lord Jesus Christ as the beginning and 
the ending of God’s revelation of Himself to man. 

He declares Himself to be the beginning and the 
ending; as it is written: 

“T am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end- 
ing, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and 
which is to come, the Almighty.” (Revelation 1:8.) 

This is the Lord who is speaking. 

He claimed to be Almighty. 

He claimed it specially after His resurrection and 
just before His ascension. 

He said: 

“ All power is given unto me in heaven and in 
earth.” (Matthew 28:18.) “All power,” is expressed 
in the term, “ Almighty.” 

That it is the Lord Jesus Christ who speaks in V. 8, 
is demonstrated by V. 11. 

In that verse the speaker introduces his phrase with 
the same terms: “I am Alpha and Omega, the first 
and the last.” 

“First and last ” are equivalent to the “ beginning 
and ending ” of V. 8. 

That the speaker is our Lord Jesus Christ is demon- 
strated by the vision given to John. 


THE BARS 49 


He turned to see who it was that spoke with Him 
and beheld our Lord Jesus Christ, risen, glorified, 
clothed with the garment of His high priestly office and 
function as final judge. 

But it is said the expression with which V. 11 opens, 
“Tam Alpha and Omega, the first and the last,” is not 
sanctioned by the oldest manuscripts. 

That does not affect the fact (the truth is, the 
“oldest” manuscripts are not always the most reli- 
able. This is notoriously true of the Vatican and 
Sinaitic codices. The present text should be the most 
authoritative). Even if it were set aside, V. 17 gives 
the same thought as V. 11. 

In that verse the Lord says to John: 

“‘T am the first and the last.” 

As in V. 8, Alpha and Omega, the first and the last 
letter of the Greek alphabet were used to introduce and ~ 
emphasize the phrase, “the beginning and the end- 
ing,” then the “ first and last ” of V. 17, is equivalent 
to the letters Alpha and Omega and the “ first and 
last ” of V. 11; and since our Lord Jesus Christ Him- 
self claims the application in V. 17, “the first and 
last,” and this title is equivalent to “ beginning and 
ending” of V. 8, then it is beyond all question our 
Lord Jesus Christ is the speaker in V. 8. | 

He it is who speaks and calls Himself, “ the begin- 
ning and the ending—the Almighty.” 

When He says He is the “ beginning and the end- 
ing, the first and the last, the Almighty,” He is saying 
He is the full and final revelation of what God is, ever 
has been and ever will be. 

That He is the beginning of the revelation of God 
is set forth in the essential title He claims for Himself. 

In V. 8, He speaks of Himself as—the Lord, the 


a 


50 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


God (such is the full text). In the Old Testament the 
Hebrew is Yaveh—Elohim—The Lord God. 

In Genesis 1, God is introduced in His unit and ab- 
solute name—Elohim; that is, God. 

In V. 20, and succeeding verses, we find the expres- 
sion, “‘ God said.” 

To speak, to say a thing intelligently requires not 
only voice, but a word. In the third chapter the voice 
is heard and the speaker is described as the Lorp God. 

In V. 22, the Lorn God speaks and says: 

“The man is become as one of—us, to know good 
and evil.” 

In thus speaking the Lorp God declares Himself in 
partnership with another person on equality with 
Himself. 

The key to this pluralism is found in the fact that 
the absolute name of God is—Elohim, is plural and 
includes the coincident existence of more than one 
person in the being of God. 

Since the Lorp is the speaker of the Elohim, the 
only speaker, He is authoritatively and officially, the 
utterance of the Elohim and therefore the very Word 
of God. 

The Gospel of John opens with the significant state- 
ment: 

‘In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and God was the Word. 

All things were made by him; and without him was 
not anything made that was made.” (John 1:1-3.) 

When therefore it is said in Genesis 1:1: 

“In the beginning God created the heavens and the 
earth,” and we learn from John’s Gospel that God the 
Creator was the Word of God, and in Genesis the 
Word of God is the Lorp God, then the Lorp God of 


THE BARS 51 


Genesis and the Word of God of John’s Gospel are 
One and the Same. 

As previously stated, the whole matter is settled by 
Genesis 1:26. 

There one of the persons of the Godhead says, “ Let 
us make man;” in the second chapter the person who 
“makes ” man and is at the same time declared to be 
the Creator of the earth and the Heavens is seen to 
be the Lorp God, the speaker, the Word of God. 

From John’s Gospel we learn the Word was made 
flesh, became incarnate as our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Since the Lorp God was the Word of God, then our 
Lord Jesus Christ in His pre-existent state was the 
Lorp God, and since the Lorp God is the ,utterance 
of Godhead, the beginning of the revelation concern- 
ing Him, His mind and will, our Lord Jesus Christ is 
Himself that beginning of the revelation of God to 
man. 

And this is, indeed, the very statement of John. 

He says: 

“No man hath seen God (God the Father) at any 
time; the only begotten Son (God) which is in the 
bosom of the Father, he hath declared him (literally, 
revealed Him).” (John 1:18.) 

Our Lord Jesus Christ as the Lorp God of the Old 
Testament is therefore in all verity the Alpha and 
Omega—The First—The Beginning of the revelation 
of God. 

All we know of God as set forth in the Old Testa- 
ment has come through Him. 

All manifestation of Him from eternity as recorded 
in the Old Testament has been by and through our 
Lord Jesus Christ in His pre-existent state; as it is 
written: 


52 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“ But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be 
little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee 
shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in 
Israel; whose goings forth have been from old, 
from everlasting.’’ (Micah 5:2.) 

“From everlasting,” that is from eternity. From 
eternity He has been the outgoing, the forth putting, 
manifestation and expression of Almighty God. 

From all eternity He has been the visibility of God; 
as it is written: 

“Who being in the form of God . . . took upon 
him the form of a servant.” (Philippians 2:6, 7.) 

If the form of the servant He took upon Him 
represents His visibility as a servant, then the form 
He had of God before He laid it aside to take upon 
Him the form of a servant represents His visibility 
as God. 

The truth is, God has never been seen apart from 
Him and never can be. 

If He is the beginning of the revelation of God, He 
is the ending; that is to say, the completion of the 
revelation—the Omega of Godhead. 

Henceforth God is to be seen and known in the uni- 
verse through the humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The God who became man. 

The man who is God. 

The eternal God—man. 

All there is of God is in Him; as it is written: 

“In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead 
bodily.’’ (Colossians 2:9.) 

He is the beginning and the ending. 

He is all between the beginning and the ending. 

He is both circumference and center. 

He is extension and concentration. 


THE BARS 53 


The long bars of the Tabernacle held it together. 

It might be truly said the Tabernacle consisted in 
the long bars. 

Without them it would have fallen apart. 

In this the long bar is the logical symbo! of our 
‘Lord; for it is written: 

“By him (in Him) all things consist.’’ (Colos- 
sians 1:17.) 

The verb form of the verb is, ‘‘ sunesteeken,’’ it 
signifies, “ put together,” “ permanently framed to- 
gether.” 

The verse therefore should read: 

“In him all things have been permanently framed 
together.’’ 

How wonderful this is. 

All things have been put together, all things have 
been framed together, all things are held together—in 
Christ. 

The universe is held together in Him. 

The universe is therefore—Christo-centric. 

Because Christ is, all things are; and because of 
Christ all things continue to be. 

It is not the law of gravitation that holds all things 
together, but this God-man, our Lord Jesus Christ. 

There are two words in Scripture that are measure- 
less. 

These two words are: 

‘*In him.’’ 

“In him is life.”” (John 1:4.) 

In Him is the purpose which God purposed from 
the beginning; as it is written: 

“The eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ 
Jesus our Lord.” (Ephesians 3:11.) 


4 


54 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


In him, we who believe, are the very ‘‘ righteous- 
ness of God.’’ (II Corinthians 5:21.) 

In Him, we who believe, are complete; as it is 
written: 

“And ye are complete in him, which is the head of 
all principality and power.” (Colossians 2:10.) 

Think of that, will you! 

He is the “ fulness ” of the Godhead. (Colossians 
2:9.) 

All there is of God is in Him. 

And we who believe are in Him. 

Complete in Him—the word is—pepleeromenoi— 
“we have been filled up full in him.” 

We are so complete in Him that in God’s sight we— 
lack nothing. 

In Christ we are absolutely perfect before the 
Father. 

The binding and holding together of the Tabernacle 
by the bars is emphasized in the two corner boards of 
the western end. 

They are particularly described: 

“ And the two boards thou shalt make for the cor- 
ners of the tabernacle in the two sides. 

“ And they shall be coupled together beneath, and 
they shall be coupled together above the head of it 
unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they 
shall be for the two corners.” (Exodus 26:23, 24.) 

The two boards were joined together above and 
below and lapped each side from top to bottom and 
bottom to top where the end of the sides and the back 
came together. These boards like a long—V—the 
base of the—V—placed on the ridge of the corners 
and the members of it extending upon the sides met 
the bars and with them held the Tabernacle together. 


THE BARS 55 


Thus the corner boards in their relation to the bars 
emphasized and illustrated the declaration that “in 
him all things consist.” 

These long bars were three in number. 

Three is the number of resurrection. 

The whole economy of God is held together, is 
framed together and permanently secured in the Risen 
Man. 

There were twelve short bars, six above and six 
below the middle bar. 

The six above with the middle bar made seven. 

The six below with the middle bar made seven. 

As three is the number of resurrection, seven, com- 
pletion, perfection, and as twelve is administration, 
you have here illustrated the truth that all things in 
Heaven and in earth are to be headed up in Him as 
the Risen Man, as the Eternally Incarnate God; 
even as it is written: 

“That in the dispensation of the fulness of times 
he (God, the Father) might gather together in one all 
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which 
are on earth; even in him.” (Ephesians 1:10.) 

This verse may be rendered: 

“That in the dispensation of the complete filling up 
of the ages, he, (God, the Father) might head up all 
things in Christ.” 

When the world was remade after the chaos into 
which it had fallen, all things were headed up in 
Adam. God gave him dominion over all things, put 
all things ‘“‘ under his feet.” (Psalm 8:4-6.) 

Man fell, lost his headship and today is under the 
feet of all things, sin, sickness, sorrow and death. 

Our Lord came that He might meet the conse- 
quences of Adam’s sin, offered a sacrifice for the sin 


56 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


of the world, rose, ascended to Heaven and sits there 
now as the true Adam, the last Adam, and the second 
man. 

The time is coming, that hour called “ the fulness 
of times,” the age toward which all times and seasons 
are flowing, when all things will be headed up in Him; 
when He will be seen and owned as the Lorp God to 
the glory of the Father, owned and confessed by a 
prostrate universe as the Son of the Father, eternal 
Head of the universe, eternal visibility of God, eter- 
nally visible as—Man. 

All the effort man is now making in the realm of 
applied science; all his effort to obtain the mastery of 
the world is simply the involuntary endeavor to get 
back the headship of the first man. 

The deliverance of the world from sin, sickness, law- 
lessness, war and death will never be found by and 
through the natural man. / 

All his schemes for rebuilding the world and exalt- 
ing natural humanity into the place originally or- 
dained of God will fail. 

Wherefore it is written: 

“ Now we see not yet all things put under him (that 
is, under the Adam man). But we see Jesus.’’ 
(Hebrews 2:8, 9.) 

By virtue of His death for the sake of which He 
actually became incarnate (as it is written: made a 
little lower than the angels for the suffering of 
death) He is now crowned with honor. Seated at the 
right hand of the Father, He is the man in the glory, 
The head of that new race He is creating and through 
which He will rule the world, having all things under 
His feet. 


THE BARS 57 


He it is to whom we are to look. 

It is He in whom humanity is to find the fulfillment 
of its hopes. It is by and through Him the world 
is to be delivered, lifted up and dominion, mastery, 
eternal life and immortality given to all who are— 
in Him. 

All things were bound up and secured in the long 
bars of the Tabernacle. 

All things that are to be permanent and glorious are 
secured in Christ. 

In Him all the shadows become substance, in Him 
who is— 

The beginning and the ending. 


v 
THE PILLARS 


HERE were three sets of pillars. 
Sixty pillars of the Court surrounding the 
Tabernacle, twenty on each side, ten at 
each end. 
They had capitals of silver and sockets of brass. 
Five pillars were at the eastern end of the Holy 
Place. 
Four pillars separated between the Holy and Most 
Holy Place. 


THE Four PILLARS OF THE EASTERN END 
OF THE CouRT 

They had a hanging of fine linen with blue, purple 
and scarlet color wrought in needlework. 

This was called ‘“‘ The Gate of the Court.” 

“And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging 
of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and 
fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: and their 
pillars shall be four, and their sockets four.” (Exodus 
2721.0,) 


THE FIVE PILLARS AT THE EASTERN END OF THE 
TABERNACLE 

They had capitals of Gold and sockets, or base, of 
brass. 

On these five pillars there was a hanging similar to 
the one on the pillars of the gate. 

This hanging was called ‘“‘ The Tabernacle door.” 

“And he made an hanging for the tabernacle door 

58 


THE PILLARS &9 


of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, 
of needlework; 

And the five pillars of it with their hooks; and he 
overlaid their chapiters and their fillets with gold; and 
their five sockets were brass.” (Exodus 36:37, 38.) 


THE Four Pittars BETWEEN THE HOLY 
AND Most Hoty PLAceE 

They had no capitals. 

They were cut clean off. 

They were covered with gold. 

They had sockets of silver. 

- On them was hung a vail of blue, and purple, and 
scarlet and fine-twined linen; this had worked upon 
it with needlework, the figures of the cherubim. 

“‘ And he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scar- 
let, and fine-twined linen: with cherubims made he it 
of cunning work. 

And he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, 
and overlaid them with gold: their hooks were of gold; 
and he cast for them four sockets of silver.” (Exo- 
dus 36:35, 36.) 

By these three sets of pillars alone could entrance 
be had into the Tabernacle. 

These pillars represent our Lord in three characters. 

The Way. 

The Truth. 

The Life. 

He said: 

““T am the way, the truth, and the life: no man 
cometh unto the Father, but by me.” (John 14:6.) 


THE GATE OF THE COURT 
This was the prominent door or way of entrance to 
the Tabernacle. 


60 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


All approach to it as the dwelling place of God must 
begin here. 

It was a fitting symbol of our Lord as the door of 
the sheepfold, the door of the sheep and the door of 
the Church. 

“Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, I am the door of the sheep . . . Iam 
the door; by me if any man enter in, he shall be 
saved.” (John 10:7, 9.) 

“This gate of the Lord, into which the righteous 
shall enter.” (Psalm 118:20.) 

On the other side of the gate was the brazen altar, 
the altar of sacrifice. 

All who would pass through that door and draw 
nigh to the Lord who reveals Himself in the Taber- 
nacle must pass by the blood-stained altar or not at all. 

Christ is, indeed, the door, but He is the door 
opened and swung wide on the cross, the door opened 
by His sacrificial death, by the shedding of His blood. 

If you wish to draw nigh unto God you must come 
by way of the cross, by the way of His blood; as it is 
written: 

‘Ye who sometime were far off are made nigh by 
the blood of Christ.’’ (Ephesians 2:13.) 

Apart from His sacrificial death and outpoured 
blood Jesus Christ is not the way to God. 

You cannot come to God by or through Him merely 
as a good man, a righteous exemplar. 

When John, the Apostle, declares we become sons of 
God by faith in His name, he hastens to put on record 
as the “‘ way,” the testimony of John the Baptist, who 
pointed his disciples to the Lord and said: 

“Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh (bear- 
eth) away the sin of the world.” (John 1:29.) 


THE PILLARS 61 


Paul emphasizes it when he says to the Corinthians: 

“TI determined not to know anything among you, 
save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.” (I Corin- 
thians 2:2.) 

Christ is the way to God and to God the Father 
only through the blood of His cross. 


THE Four Pitiars oF THE GATE OF THE CouRT 

These four pillars illustrate the fourfold Sonship of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

He was— 

The Son of David. 

Son of Abraham. 

Son of man. 

Son of God. , 

The book of Matthew opens with the record of His 
genealogy as the Son of David and the Son of 
Abraham. 

“The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the 
son of David, the son of Abraham.” (Matthew 1:1.) 

As the Son of David, He is the heir of David’s 
throne and ordained to sit upon it; as it is written: 

“He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of 
the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him 
the throne of his father David.” (Luke 1:32.) 

As the Son of Abraham, He is the Seed promised 
to Abraham. 

“Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises 
made. He saith not, and to seeds, as of many; but as 
of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.’’ (Galatians 
3:16.) 

To Abraham was promised and covenanted the land 
of Palestine, from the river of Egypt to the great river 
Euphrates. 


62 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“ The Lorp made a covenant with Abram, saying: 
Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river 
of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates.” 
(Genesis 15:18.) 

Since our Lord Jesus Christ is the seed of Abraham, 
and the land was given by solemn covenant to Abra- 
ham, then our Lord Jesus Christ as the official son of 
Abraham is the heir of Abraham and true owner of the 
land of Palestine. 

Heir of David’s throne and heir of Abraham’s 
land. 

No matter what schemes and mandates nations may 
make among themselves concerning Jerusalem and 
Palestine, God has ordained that our Lord Jesus 
Christ shall sit on David’s throne, possess and rule 
over the land. 

The land concerning which it is written: 

“Thy land O Immanuel.” (Isaiah 8:8.) 

He will rise up, He will take to Himself His great 
power, He will come forth in His glory and Jerusalem 
shall be established and made His throne; as it is 
written: 

““ At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne 
of the Lorp.” (Jeremiah 3:17.) 

The place of His throne will be in the temple that 
is to be built after His return, a temple built accord- 
ing to the plan laid down in the book of the prophet 
Ezekiel; as it is there written: 

“ And the glory of the Lorp came into the house by 
the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east. 

So the Spirit took me up, and brought me into the 
inner Court; and behold, the glory of the Lorp filled 
the house. 


THE PILLARS 63 


And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house; 
and the man stood by me. 

And he said unto me, “Son of man, the place of my 
throne.” 

And that there may be no possible excuse for ex- 
plaining away the truth by spiritualizing it, the Lord 
says: 

“The place of the soles of my feet, where I will 
dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for 
ever.’’ (Ezekiel 43:4-7.) 

That the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ in Jeru- 
salem at that time is to be a literal, actual, bodily 
“presence is demonstrated and proven by the name 
henceforth to be given to the city; as it is written: 

“The name of the city from that day shall be, the 
Lord is there.’’ (Ezekiel 48:35.) 

Literally it should read: 

‘‘ The Lord is therein.”’ 

And He will be there, in that city, and in that 
temple with— 

‘* The soles of His feet.’’ 

If that language does not mean He will be in the 
temple, dwell in Jerusalem, be seen and known in His 
bodily presence, then language has no other function 
(even when inspired[?] of God) than to juggle and 
fool the sons of men. 

But the language means just what it says. 

It means that— 

When the people from the uttermost parts of the 
earth shall come up to worship the Lord in Jerusalem, 
at the very sight of the city there will break from their 
lips, involuntarily, the cry— 

‘* Jehovah Shammah—the Lord is therein.’’ 

Thus will it pass into name and title of the city. 


64 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


As Son of Man, He is final judge; as it is written: 

“ For as the Father hath life in himself (self exist- 
ence); so hath he given to the Son to have life in him- 
self (self existence.) ; 

And hath given him authority to execute judgment 
also, because he is the Son of man.’’ (John 5:26.) 

“He (God the Father) hath appointed a day, in 
the which he will judge the world in righteousness hy 
that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath 
given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised 
him from the dead.” (Acts 17:31.) 

As the Son of God, He is the Father’s heir, heir of 
all things; as it is written: 

“His Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all 
things.” (Hebrews 1:2.) 

As the Son of God He partakes of the essential 
nature of the Father. 

As the Father is God, He is, and by necessity, not 
only Son of God, but God the Son. 

As such the Father addresses Him: 

“Unto the Son he saith, thy throne, O God, is for 
ever and ever.” (Hebrews 1:8.) 

The Four Gospels, like the four pillars of the Gate, 
proclaim His fourfold Sonship. 

In Matthew, we behold Him as the Son of Abra- 
ham coming into Palestine, into His own land, and as 
the Son of David, riding into Jerusalem at the ap- 
pointed time and in foretold manner to offer Himself 
as King and to claim His throne. 

In Mark, we have vision of Him as Son of Man for- 
giving sin, and forgiving, because as Son of Man He 
has the authority of final and eternal judge; as it is 
written: 


THE PILLARS 65 


“The Son of Man hath power on earth to forgive 
sins.” (Mark 2:10.) 

In Luke, as Son of Man we behold Him a man 
among men, receiving sinners and eating with them, 
talking to them in speech so that “ the common peo- 
ple ” heard Him “ gladly,” illustrating His mission by 
such wondrous pictures as the shepherd seeking the 
lost sheep—the woman seeking the lost piece of 
money—and the father receiving the returning 
prodigal. 

As the Son of man He is seen executing judgment 
on the nations, putting an end to the “times of the 
Gentiles,” and delivering Jerusalem; as it is written: 

“¢ Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, 
until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled . . * 

And then shall they see the Son of man coming in 
a cloud with power and great glory.” (Luke 21: 
24-27.) 

In John, He is set before us as the Son of God, 
God the Son, God the Word, the God who 
created all things. 

“God the Word was made flesh (and we beheld his 
glory, the glory as the only begotten of the Father.” 
(John. 1:14.) “ All things were made by Him.” 

In the Gospel of John we have the confession that 
He is to be worshipped as God. The confession was 
made by Thomas: 

“ Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord 
and my God.’’ (John 20:28.) 


Tue Five PILvtars OF THE Door OF THE TABERNACLE 
In the prophetic announcement of His birth five 


great names are given Him: 
Wonderful. 


66 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Counsellor. 
The Mighty God. 
The Everlasting Father. 
The Prince of Peace. 
“His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, 
The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince 
of Peace.” (Isaiah 9:6.) 


THE Four PILLARS OF THE VAIL 


These had no capitals. 

The tops were abruptly—cut off. 

There is a very startling prophecy concerning our 
Lord before He was born in which may be found this 
expression “cut off.” 

“He was (that is, He would be) cut off out of the 
land of the living; for the transgression of my people 
was he (that is, he would be) stricken.” (Isaiah 53:4.) 

Because He was “cut off,” slain, sacrificed, sacri- 
ficed not only on behalf of Israel but for all who offer 
Him by faith as sacrifice for sin and claim Him as 
personal substitute under the judgment due them. 
He is made unto them like the four golden pillars to 
uphold and sustain them in the sight of God. 

These four pillars of the believers’ strength are, 

Wisdom. 
Righteousness. 
Sanctification. 
Redemption. 

By virtue of His amazing death on the cross He is 
made all that to those who believe in and confess Him. 

“ But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is 
made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctifi- 
cation, and redemption.” (I Corinthians 1:30.) 

He is our wisdom. 


THE PILLARS 67 


In Him we are made ‘‘ wise unto salvation.” We 
are able to see what the natural mind cannot compre- 
hend—and find in Him the wisdom we need to walk as 
sons of God in the midst of a “ crooked and perverse 
generation.” 

He is our righteousness. 

On the cross He became obedient unto the death 
which the righteousness of God demanded of us. 

When we believed, His obedience was transferred 
to our account. In Him we met and paid all we owed 
to justice. We became at once legally righteous in 
_ God’s sight. Risen and ascended to Heaven, our Lord 

there represents us as having met all claims against 
us and thus becomes our righteousness before God; 
wherefore it is written: 

‘*The Lord our righteousness.’’ (Jeremiah 
23505) 

Again it is written: 

“The righteousness of God which is by faith of 
Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe.” 
(Romans 3:22.) 

And again: 

“ God hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no 
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God 
in him.” (II Corinthians 5:21.) 

He is our sanctification. 

We do not have to work and toil and fight the flesh 
and take specific note of our spiritual progress and 
talk about “ attaining ” unto righteousness. 

The moment we believe we are sanctified. 

We are immediately, holy before God. 

He is our holiness, He is our righteousness, He is 
our completeness; wherefore it is written: 

“ Ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are 


68 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the 
Spirit of our God.” (I Corinthians 6:11.) 

And mark who these were of whom this was written: 

They were the lowest, the worst, the vilest sinners 
of the most sinful city of the earth. 

“ Fornicators, adulterers, effeminate, abusers of 
themselves with mankind. Thieves, covetous, drunk- 
ards, revilers, extortioners.” 

Writing to them after they had believed and were 
saved in virtue of the blood of the cross, the Apostle 
says: 

“ And such were some of you.” (I Corinthians 
6:9-11.) 

That is what they were, that is the life they lived 
until they heard the Gospel from the lips of Paul; then 
when they turned to the Lord; when they claimed His 
atoning blood; when they drew nigh to God in His 
name, they became in God’s sight as clean as that 
Son who had died for them, and clean—at once. 

There is no personal, self purification we must go 
through before we are fit for Heaven. We are, as be- 
lievers, fit and meet to go there now, stumbling, falter- 
ing Christians as we may be, all our fitness is in Him, 
what He has done for us, and what He is for us. It is 
His fitness that makes us meet to go to Heaven, to go 
there any moment He may call us, even as it is 
written: 

“ Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made 
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the 
saints in light.’’ (Colossians 1:12.) 

Let this Scripture be read literally: 

“Who has qualified us (made us competent, fit) to 
have a share in the inheritance of the holy ones in the 
light.” 


THE PILLARS 69 


It is written: 

“Ye are complete in him.” (Colossians 2:10.) 

Live righteously, live holily, live as a son of God 
should, seeking to glorify God in daily life, in deed, 
in word and thought, intent, impulse and purpose—do 
all that, seek to do it with all that is in you, it is your 
privilege and mine—we have been equipped for it— 
but do not seek to follow the false lead of those who 
teach the old nature of sin in you can be destroyed 
here, that you can modify and finally make perfect 
and sinless that old nature. 

With the Apostle we may ask: 

“ Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? ” 

And with the Apostle we are, as regenerated sons of 
God, under bonds to answer: 

‘God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin 
(died to sin, to the penalty of sin in our substitute) 
live any longer therein?” (Romans 6:2.) 

He is our redemption. 

His presence in Heaven as the Risen One is witness 
He paid in full the debt against us, and is there as our 
living receipt, our guarantee against any charge that 
may be brought against us; so that with boldness we 
may fling out the believer’s challenge and ask: 

“Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s 
elect? 

It is God that justifieth. 

Who is he that condemneth? 

It is Christ that died. 

Yea, rather, that is risen again. 

Who is even at the right hand of God. 

Who also maketh intercession for us.’’ (Romans 


8:33, 34.) 


70 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


This then is the teaching of the Framework with 
its boards, its bars, its pillars: 

The Person of Christ in all the glory of His being, 
in all the perfection of His perfect work. 

(It is in place here to note that while the system 
of typology is not an invention of man, a matter of 
mere imagination, a scheme of more or less successful 
guessing, but an essential part of Scripture construc- 
tion, the divinely given key of truth, the revelation 
and illumination of it; nevertheless, there is a direct 
law concerning it, a law that forbids us to found a doc- 
trine on a type, never under any circumstance to build 
one thereon. We are to go into the New Testament, 
find the doctrine there, then go back to the Old Testa- 
ment and seek to discover the type that shall match 
it. We are to do this with prayer and absolute rever- 
ence, rebuking any suggestion that would lead us to 
bend or accommodate the type to the doctrine in any 
degree whatever. The type and the doctrine must fit 
so plainly that the one will supplement the other, the 
type, so completely that it becomes the prophecy of 
the doctrine, the doctrine, the demonstration and proof 
of the inspiration of the type—thus justifying the 
literal statement of the Apostle: 

“Now all these things happened unto them as 
types; and they are written for our admonition upon 
whom the ends of the age have come.” [I Corin- 
thians 10:11.] 

Also Paul’s particular reference to the Holy and 
Most Holy Places in the Tabernacle and thus to the 
Tabernacle itself: 

“Christ is not entered into the holy places made 
with hands, which are the types of the true, but into 
heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God 
for us.’ [Hebrews 9:24.]) 


VI 
FOUNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE 


‘Te foundation of the Tabernacle consisted of 
one hundred sockets of silver, two under 
each of the forty-eight boards, and four 
under the pillars of the vail. 

Each socket weighed a talent (nearly a hundred 
pounds). 

“A talent for a socket.” (Exodus, 38:27.) 

The silver was taken from the atonement money 
which each man above twenty must give as a’ransom 
for his soul. 

It was his redemption price. 

“And the Lorp spake unto Moses, saying, 

When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel 
after their number, then shall they give every man a 
ransom for his soul unto the Lorp, when thou num- 
berest them; that there be no plague among them, 
when thou numberest them. 

This they shall give, every one that passeth among 
them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel 
of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an 
half shekel shall be the offering of the Lorp. 

Every one that passeth among them that are num- 
bered, from twenty years old and above, shall give an 
offering unto the Lorp. 

The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not 
give less than half a shekel, when they give an offer- 
ing unto the Lorp, to make an atonement for your 
souls.” (Exodus popes) 


72 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“ And the silver of them that were numbered of the 
congregation was an hundred talents, and a thousand 
seven hundred and three score and fifteen shekels, 
after the shekel of the sanctuary: 

A bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went 
to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, 
for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five 
hundred and fifty men. 

And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the 
sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; 
an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent 
for a socket.” (Exodus 38:25-27.) 

The silver money sockets of the Tabernacle are a 
symbol of the precious price paid by our Lord Jesus 
Christ for the ransom of those who are His; as it is 
written: 

“Ye are bought with a price.” (I Corinthians 
6:20.) 

But this redemption price was paid by Him neither 
in silver nor gold, but with His own precious blood. 

“Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as 
silver and gold— 

But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb 
without blemish and without spot.” (I Peter 1:18, 19.) 

The word, “ precious,”’ signifies, “ costly.” 

It was costly indeed, this blood, this “ half shekel 
of the sanctuary,” told out drop by drop in the 
anguish of the cross. 

But “precious ” means of “ exalted worth.” 

It was. 

It was nothing less than the—blood or Gon. 

Startling! but true. 

Hear the word of Holy Scripture about it: 


FOUNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE 13 


* The church of God which he (God) hath purchased 
with his own blood.’’ (Acts 20:28.) 

Since our Lord Jesus Christ was the “ purchaser,” 
the statement is therefore, of course, a declaration that 
He was God. 

This is only another one of those side testimonies 
which are continually waiting to thrust themselves in 
that they may suddenly and unexpectedly proclaim 
His deity. 

Atonement by—the blood or Gop—that is the 
authoritative word of Holy Scripture. 

_ And it is on this basis of atonement the Tabernacle 
was set up. 

The basis of—redemption by atonement. , 

The basis on which our Lord Jesus Christ is pre- 
sented to men is not that of a good man, nor yet, as 
merely God manifest in the flesh. 

He did not come into the world that He might live 
in sinless perfection as a man, nor that He might 
demonstrate Himself to be a God-man. 

If that were all, there would be little hope for sin- 
ful man. 

The more such a Christ should reveal Himself in 
holiness and divinity, the greater and more bridgeless 
would be seen to be the gulf between Him and the 
natural man. 

To set Him up as an example to men would be to 
mock the helplessness of men. 

He did not come into the world to live a life so 
transcendently perfect and beautiful that the multi- 
tude would fall in love with Him—No! 

He did not come into the world to live at all. 

His one great purpose was to die. 

To die, that by His death He might provide an 


"74 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


atonement for the sinner, ransom him from guilt, from 
penalty and power of sin. 

He Himself testifies He came into the world to die. 

“Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay 
down my life, that I might take it again. 

No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of 
myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it again. This commandment have I 
received of my Father.” (John 10:17, 18.) 

He received this command before He came into the 
world; and this in the nature of the case; for as the 
Lamb of God He was ordained before the foundation 
of the world.” (I Peter 1:20.) 

He received this commandment in His pre-incarnate 
state while He was in the “form” of God. (Philip- 
pians 2:6.) 

As He was God the Lord, coeval and coeternal and 
coequal with the Father, He could not be ‘“ com- 
manded ” without His willingness. If He received a 
commandment from the Father to lay down His in- 
carnate life, it was because He had agreed to do so, 
and agreement in Godhead between Father and Son 
is—covenant. 

It was according to covenant He was brought again 
from the dead—such is the assertion of Scripture. 

“The God of peace that brought again from the 
dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant.” (He- 
brews 13:20.) 

The logic of that statement is inexorable. 

If He were raised from the dead according to the 
everlasting covenant, then by and through that same 
covenant He entered into death. 

This is His own definite statement: 


FOUNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE 15 


“‘ Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? 
Father save me from this hour? ” 

Do you see the meaning of that? 

He is soliloquizing. 

He is asking Himself whether He shall call upon 
the Father to save Him from that shameful death of 
the cross already casting its deepening shadows upon 
Him. 

He could have done that. 

At the grave of Lazarus He declared before the 
people that the Father always heard Him, and He 
meant by that—always answered Him. 

He said: 

“T knew that thou hearest me always.” (John 
11:42.) ; 

If He had called upon the Father, the Father would 
have heard and answered Him. 

Listen, I pray you, how He finished His soliloquy: 

‘‘But—for this cause (literally—on account of 
this) came I unto this nour.” (John 12:27.) 

He came to be rejected of His own people and hung 
upon a Roman cross—and at once He speaks of that 
death and the manner of it; 

He says: 

“And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw 
all men unto me.” 

And then in explanation of the peculiarity of this 
expression it is written: 

“ This he said, signifying what death he should die.” 
Cjonns £2732; 33.) 

Wherefore, also, it is written: 

“We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than 
the angels (angels are not subject to death) made a 
little lower than the angels for—the suffering of 


76 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


death . . . that He by the grace of God should taste 
death for every man (one).” (Hebrews 2:9.) 

Continually He announced He had come into the 
world to die. 

Persistently He told His disciples He would be 
crucified. 

As the hour drew on we are told, 

“He steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem.” 
(Luke 9:51.) 

From all eternity He was ordained to be crucified. 

As such Paul preached Him. 

He refused to preach Him in any other way. 

He might have preached Him as a good man. 

He might have preached Him as the God who came 
down to earth to show Himself as such to men. 

He never did so preach Him. 

In none of his discourses does he dwell upon the 
perfect, human life of Christ that he may set Him 
before men as a worth-while and saving example. 

If he speak of His deity (and none has written 
more amazingly in support of it than he) he does so 
that he may draw attention to the immensity of the 
transaction on the cross; that it might be seen He was 
there in all the perfectness of His humanity and all 
the plenitude of His deity—perfect man for a perfect 
sacrifice—eternal and very God, that as God His 
sacrifice might satisfy the being of God—God atoning 
to God on behalf of man that God in all righteous- 
ness and to the justification of His righteousness 
might save unrighteous and sinful men—making them 
at last essentially and eternally righteous. 

Never, not for a moment, does Paul engage in the 
worse than babbling of those who talk about such 


FOUNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE 17 


meaningless and extra Scriptural things as the “ pre- 
cepts ” and “ principles ” of Christ. 

His one theme was Christ and Him crucified. 

A crucified, a sacrificial and an atoning Christ, whose 
shed blood, like the silver base of the Tabernacle, was 
the only foundation upon which any human being 
could stand and be accepted of a holy God. 


THE TABERNACLE A SYMBOL OF THE CHURCH 


If the Tabernacle set forth our Lord Jesus Christ 
as the dwelling place of God, equally so is it a symbol 
_ of the Church as the dwelling place of God on earth 
today. 

By regeneration, by the impartation of His life and 
nature through the operation of the Holy Spirit the 
risen Christ dwells in each genuine believer; each be- 
liever, each real Christian is—the reincarnation of 
Christ. 

It is this process of reincarnating Christ in a human 
life that gives us the distinctive character of this age 
and the distinctive character of God’s dealing with 
the world today; as it is written: 

“Even the mystery (secret) which has been hid 
from ages and from generations, but is now made 
manifest to his saints: 

To whom God would make known what is the riches 
of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; whick 
is—-Christ in you, the hope of glory.” (Colossians 
To20, aie) 

The believer is “joined” to the Lord as “ one 
spirit.” (I Corinthians 6:17.) 

Christ in each believer joins each believer to every 
other believer, and these individual believers consti- 


78 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


tute the spiritual body of Christ in which each is a 
special and “ particular ” member. 

“By (in) one Spirit are we (we have been) bap- 
tized into one body whether we be Jews or Gentiles.” 
(I Corinthians 12:13.) 

(This baptism by the Risen Lord of Jewish believ- 
ers into one spirit took place at Pentecost in Jeru- 
salem, the baptism of the Gentile believers at the 
house of Cornelius in Caesarea, where after they had 
been baptized into the Spirit they were, also, baptized 
in water.) 

“So we, being many, are one body in Christ, and 
every one members one of another.” Romans 12:5.) 

Again it is written: 

“Christ liveth in me.” (Galatians 2:20.) 

Since Christ dwells in the believer, and Christ is 
God, very God of very God, then God is dwelling in 
the Church and the Church is the Tabernacle of God, 
the dwelling place of God; as it is written: 

‘“‘ Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner (like 
the corner board of the Tabernacle going from the 
bottom all the way to the top). 

In whom all the building fitly framed together 
groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord; 

In whom ye also are builded together (are being 
builded) for an habitation (dwelling place) of God 
through the Spirit.” (Ephesians 2:21, 22.) 

Beyond question the Tabernacle is a symbol of the 
Church as the reincarnation of Christ, the dwelling 
place of God on earth. 

Since the Tabernacle was built upon the silver of 
the half shekel and that silver was the silver money of 
atonement for Israel and a symbol of the atonement 
to be made by our Lord Jesus Christ by and through 


FOUNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE ‘19 


His sacrificial death, it is an open declaration that the 
Church stands before God today on the basis of the 
atonement made by that sacrificial death and out- 
poured blood and finds its acceptance and security on 
none other. 

And that his sacrificial and atoning death may 
ever be kept before the Church as the ground and 
security of her acceptance before God there has been 
given to her two ordinances and two only, 

Baptism and the Breaking of Bread. 

Baptism is the confession of the individual be- 
liever that Christ died, was buried and rose again. 

It is the confession of the believer. that the moment 
he believed he was owned of God as having been put 
to death judicially in the death of Christ as his sub- 
stitute; that he was buried representatively in His 
grave, rose and ascended representatively in Him and 
is now accepted as seated in “ heavenly places” in 
Christ. 

It is the believer’s further confession of his confi- 
dence should he die and his body be buried away, he, 
too, like his Lord, and by His power should rise from 
the dead and be made immortal. 

The Breaking of Bread is the confession of the 
Church as a Body, and in assembly order, not only 
that Christ died, but that His death is the sole ground 
of approach to and worship of God. 

The Breaking of Bread is the setting up of the 
cross in the very midst of the assembly and a procla- 
mation by the Church that its standing and accept- 
ance before God as His Tabernacle and dwelling place 
on earth is alone in the atoning sacrificial death of 
His Son, 


80 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The authoritative word of the ordinance is this: 

“Ve do shew the Lord’s death.’’ 

By that ordinance the attention of the Church is 
drawn, not to the life our Lord lived on the earth, but 
—to the death He died on the cross. 

With such an ordinance in the midst (and continu- 
ously—not spasmodically) observed, neither the 
preacher in the pulpit, nor the professor in the pew 
has any excuse for missing the mission of the Lord in 
the world. 

With that ordinance centered before them there is 
no ground on which to exalt Him merely as a good 
man, a teacher and a dispenser of “ precepts ” and 
“ principles; ” in the broken bread and poured out 
wine; in the headquarters statement: ‘This is my 
body, This is my blood,” there is only one vision of 
Him given to the Church—His bloody and sacrificial 
offering of Himself as the Great Sin Offering provided 
of God for the salvation of guilty and ruined human 
beings. And as she takes of that bread and wine the 
Church confesses that she lives because—He died. 

Nor is this all of the ordinance. 

“Ye do shew the Lord’s death till—He come.” 

“ Till He come.” 

Then He is coming again! 

What daylight in those words for the assembled 
Church. 

If He is coming again then—He is alive. 

If He is alive then He rose from the dead, and His 
resurrection is the incontrovertible demonstration and 
proof that the sacrificial death the Church is solemnly 
memorializing in that ordinance has met and settled 
all claims of righteousness against her. It is the guar- 
antee of the promise He made: 


FOUNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE 81 


“ Because I live (will live again after my death) ye 
shall live also.” 

“ Till He come!” 

What music in those words—what a prospect they 
unvail. 

He is coming back, coming for the Church for 
whom He died. 

How immense is this ordinance. 

It sets forth: 

The Death, 

The Burial, 

The Resurrection, 

The Ascension, 

The Second coming of our Lord. 

How can a Church go wrong with these two ordi- 
nances: 

Baptism as the individual confession of the Be- 
liever that he has passed through the judgment 
with Christ on the cross. 

Breaking the Bread—the Church seated together 
on the Lord’s Day (Day of His resurrection) with the 
judgment of the cross behind her and the glory of 
the Coming Lord before her. 

Just think of it! 

Judgment behind us. 

Glory before us. 

Let the wisdom and genius of the Lord who inspired 
these ordinances as safeguards of the Church in re- 
spect to doctrine be glorified; for, in face of any de- 
nial of the truth these ordinances are there the proc- 
lamation of it and the rock-like resistance to any 
denial of it. 

See how Baptism rebukes any one who fails to recog- 
nize that his faith must own a Christ dead, buried 


82 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


and risen again; and as baptism requires that the body 
buried in the baptismal water shall be lifted out again, 
how this baptism keenly rebukes those who would 
profess faith in Christ and deny His bodily resur- 
rection. 

See how the ordinance of the Breaking of Bread, 
the Lord’s Supper rebukes those who fail to see that 
the only ground of approach to God is in the sacri- 
ficial death of His Son. 

The sockets of the Tabernacle were made of indi- 
vidually given half shekels. 

Each man had to bring his half shekel. 

Salvation is not to be had in bloc. 

Social salvation, salvation of society as such is 
something entirely unknown to Holy Scripture—it is 
absolutely—extra Biblical. 

Salvation is individual—personal. 

Social and personal salvation considered as systems 
are as far apart as the east is from the west. 

Social salvation has to do with man here, it does not 
go beyond the horizon of this world and time. 

Individual salvation has to do with man not merely 
here, but beyond this world, in eternity, it is his rela- 
tion to eternity that determines God’s dealings with 
him here. The man who is saved for eternity has the 
grace and equipment of God to live here no matter 
what the social condition. The man who is identified 
with a social salvation, with a mere moral adjustment 
of the world and no guaranty of the favor of God in 
eternity lacks the favor of God here, and no matter 
how fine may be the civilization of which he is a con- 
tributing factor both that civilization and himself are 
doomed to judgment and destruction. 

Wherefore our Lord has said, “ What shall it profit 


FOUNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE 83 


a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his 

own soul?” ‘There is a far-reaching meaning in that. 

It is saying in final terms that no matter how this 

world may be builded, what comfort and beauty you 

may put into it for the sake of the mass, if you do not 
have a personal salvation by and through a personal 

Saviour, it shall profit you nothing—a whole world 

gained and a personal soul lost is a fearful rebuke to 

the illusion and delusion of a so-called—Social Gospel. 
Nay! salvation must be individual—you must bring 
your half shekel. 

You must make a personal application of the cross 
to your soul, you must claim an individual part in it. 
Do .not make a mistake, the Gospel is not’ for the 

mass, it is for “every creature.” It separates you 

from the mass and says to you: “If thou shalt con- 
fess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe 
in thine heart that God raised him from the dead— 

thou—shalt be saved.” (Romans 10:9.) 

In Israel there was the same standard for all. 

Each must bring a half shekel. 

The rich could bring no more. 

The poor should bring no less; as it is written: 

“The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall 
not give less than half a shekel, when they give an 
offering unto the Lorp, to make an atonement for your 

souls.” (Exodus 30:15.) 

The rich had no pre-eminence by reason of their 


wealth. 
The poor were not shut out because of their 


poverty. 
You may be rich in moral character—you may have 
a great reserve capital in the merit of works of right- 


eousness you have wrought. 


84 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


This will not save you, it will not give you eternal 
life, it will not give title to enter Heaven and the king- 
dom of God. 

If you would be saved you must bring the half 
shekel—the blood of Christ, that is the true half shekel 
of the sanctuary; that is the only coin that will pass 
at the throne of God—and that is—all sufficient. 
Come with the blood of Christ and offer that to God, 
you shall be accepted and saved no matter who you 
are or what you have been. 

You may be poor, utterly bankrupt in character, a 
moral outcast, no matter, you can offer the half shekel 
of the sanctuary, the precious blood of Christ, it will 
pay your debt and you shall stand absolved and clean 
in God’s sight; for it is written: 

“The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanseth us 
from all sin.” (I John 1.) 

The half shekel counted for the rich, it brought him 
atonement. 

The half shekel counted for the poor, it brought him 
atonement. 

It is the blood, and the blood alone that counts, it 
is the blood alone that meets the individual case; as 
it is written: 

‘It is the blood that maketh an atonement for 
the soul.’’ (Leviticus 17:11.) 

The silver sockets were a continual memorial to the 
children of Israel that the Lord had redeemed them; 
it was, also, a memorial that He had purchased them, 
they were His and no longer their own. 

This is the logic of the price paid for us on the 
cross, the logic for all who believe; as it is written: 

“Ye are not your own. 

For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify 


FOUNDATION OF THE TABERNACLE 85 


God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God’s.” 
(I Corinthians 6:19, 20.) 

The sum of the teaching is simple enough. 

The silver foundation of the Tabernacle testified 
that our Lord Jesus Christ should come into the world 
to die as a sacrifice for sin and on that basis make it 
possible for God to dwell in man. 

The silver sockets of the Tabernacle testify that as 
a Church and individual members of it we stand be- 
fore God accepted in His sight and owned as His 
dwelling place on the basis of the half shekel of the 
cross, even the atoning blood of the Son of God offered 
by us through faith. 

Not only is our standing before God on,the basis 
of the atoning sacrifice of the Cross and the fact that 
we have claimed the blood as offered on our behalf, 
but our approach individually is on that ground. 

At no time in our Christian experience, no matter 
how fully we may have surrendered to the indwelling 
of Christ, never, at any time, even in the most exalted 
state of our appropriation of Christ can we approach 
Him and the Father’s throne on any other ground than 
of the blood shed for us. When the Church as His 
glorified Bride shall be caught up at His Coming for 
her and enter Heaven with Him, when she shall find 
herself on the threshold of the kingdom and about to 
return with Him in His Kingly splendor, even then 
every individual member will break out into the great 
song that shall thrill Heaven with its paean of praise 
to the redeeming grace and triumphant authority of 
the blood. 

This will be the song they will sing: 

“Thou art worthy to take the book, (the title deeds 
of the kingdom), and to open the seals (the signals 


86 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


for the outpouring of judgments) thereof: for thou 
wast slain, and has redeemed us to God by thy blood 
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and 
nation.” (An individual redemption.) (Revelation 
529) 


VII 
THE COURT FENCE 


HE Court was a space about the Tabernacle 
one hundred and seventy-five feet long and 
eighty-seven and a half feet wide; that is, 

half as wide as long. 

It was enclosed by a fence made of white linen and 
hung from sixty pillars, twenty on each side, and ten 
on each end. ; 

The four pillars of the eastern end as already stated 
formed the gate of entrance. 

As the Tabernacle was the dwelling place of God, 
and the camp the allotted dwelling place of man, the 
Court fence occupied a definite position between them. 

As the Tabernacle in all its parts, its accessories 
and detail set forth our Lord Jesus Christ in His per- 
sonal being, work and glory, and as the linen is par- 
ticularly the symbol of His humanity, then the fence 
represents Him as filling the office between God and 
man. 

The position and office thus symbolized is that of a 
Mediator. 

Scripture speaks of our Lord Jesus Christ as such. 

“For there is one God, and one mediator between 
God and men, the man Christ Jesus.” (I Timothy 
2:5; Hebrews 8:6.) 

“ He is the mediator of the new covenant.” (He- 
brews 12:24.) 

A mediator is one who takes an official and ac- 
cepted position between Lye parties. 


88 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He is a go-between. 

A mediator is under bonds to offer something that 
will satisfy each of the parties. 

It is by satisfying the claims of each he will be able 
to reconcile them, harmonize their difference, make 
them friends. 

In this linen fence there were two things to be noted 
—the top and the bottom of the pillars. 

The top was silver, the bottom or base, brass. 

Brass is a composition that will stand the test of fire. 

Fire is, again and again, set forth in Scripture as a 
symbol of the judgment of God. 

“Thou shalt be visited of the Lorp of hosts with 
thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with 
storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire.” 
(Isaiah 29:6.) 

“With the indignation of his anger, and with the 
flame of a devouring fire.” (Isaiah 30:30.) 

“For, behold, the Lorp will come with fire, and 
with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger 
with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.” (Isaiah 
66:15.) 

There is only one thing that can stand the test of 
the fire of divine judgment and that is—righteousness. 

The best righteousness of the best man offered to 
God would be an offence to Him and call for added 
wrath. 

The best righteousness of the best man offered to 
God is nothing better in His sight than rags, not merely 
rags, but the foulest and most unclean of foul and un- 
clean rags; even as it is written: 

‘¢ All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags.” (Isaiah 
64:6.) 

Under the devouring fire of God’s judgment such 


THE COURT FENCE 89 


righteousness would be turned to ashes, the individual 
offering them would be ruined, consumed, utterly de- 
stroyed. 

What man needs is a righteousness that will meet 
the demands of God’s holiness. 

Because man has failed, because he is a violator of 
God’s standard, wholly unrighteous and unclean be- 
fore Him, the living, holy and righteous God demands 
atonement, satisfaction from the sinner. 

That satisfaction is found in the death of the sinner. 

But once in there is “no discharge in that war.” 

There is no remedy. 

Behold the two facts: 

Man needs righteousness before he can be saved and 
appear in the presence of God. 

God demands atonement for man’s lack of it, and 
demands it unto the uttermost. 

If some one can be found who will make atonement 
for man, and make it on the basis of a satisfaction that 
will meet all the requirement of God’s righteousness, 
God will give him the righteousness he needs. He will 
accept him in this bestowed righteousness, they shall 
be reconciled, they shall no longer be enemies, but 
friends. 

The answer to all this is in the symbol of the Court 
fence. 

In the silver tops of the pillars you have—atone- 
ment. 

In the brazen base you have—righteousness. 

In the linen you have the Man Christ Jesus (for, 
since linen is flax, and flax comes up out of the earth, 
it is the symbol of the humanity of Christ); and it is 
He who has been found of God the Father to offer 
atonement on behalf of man. 


90 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINIS 


By His sacrificial death He provides that atonement. 

He becomes obedient unto death for man, meets his 
sentence and expiates his guilt. 

He offers this obedience unto death on behalf of the 
believing sinner. 

God the Father accepts that act of obedience as the 
obedience of the believer, imputes it to him, charges 
it over to his credit. The believer becomes at once 
legally righteous in the sight of God; not only so, 
Christ Himself becomes his righteousness; as it is 
written: 

“ The righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus 
Christ unto all and upon all them that believe.” (Ro- 
mans 3:22.) 

On that basis the risen Son of God gives eternal life 
to the believer, joins him to Himself. The believer is 
in Him, joined to Him as one spirit. 

“ He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.” (I 
Corinthians 6:17.) 

Not only so. 

He is joined to the Lord’s risen and glorified body; 
as it is written: 

“We are members of his body, of his flesh and 
bones.” (Ephesians 5:30.) 

(The oldest Greek manuscripts lack this reading, 
but the oldest versions have it and indicate that older 
codices than the oldest now known had it. Our Lord’s 
statement when He rose from the dead concerning His 
body as “ flesh and bones,” testifies thai union with 
Him in spirit equally calls for union with His body.) 

The believer is united to a complete Lord. The 
Lord becomes to him his essential and organic right- 
eousness, and the believer in Him becomes the very 


THE COURT FENCE 91 


righteousness of the righteous God; as it is written, 
and cannot too often be repeated: 

““God hath made him to be sin for us, who knew 
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of 
God in him.” (II Corinthians 5:21.) 

By this mediation God and man have been brought 
together and are at one in Christ. 

The linen Court fence with the silver tops and brazen 
bases of the pillars set before us the great Mediator 
between God and man, 


THE MAN CurIsT JESUS. 


It seems fitting here to meet a false concept con- 
cerning our Lord’s death. ? 

It is freely stated by those who are the enemies of 
the Gospel that the doctrine of mediation built upon 
sacrificial and substitutional death, the innocent suf- 
fering for the guilty, is not only revolting in itself, but 
that it represents God as an angry God anxious to 
punish the sinner and make him suffer, requiring all 
the agony of Christ’s crucifixion, all His moral suffer- 
ing and the shedding of His blood to make Him re- 
lent and show some degree of favor, some measure of 
unwilling love to the sinner. 

Such in fact is a libel on the Gospel and a scandal 
to the cross. 

The truth is—God is love as well as law. He has 
always loved the sinner. But He could not allow His 
love to violate His law. The Icve that violates law is 
lawlessness. It was lawless love at the outset that 
filled the world with sin and has succeeded in burning 
the blister of sin and shame and lust upon the fore- 
front of humanity today. 

For God to violate the law which promises death 


92 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


against sin and for love’s sake set it aside would be to 
make God the great law violator of the universe, His 
throne the center of lawlessness and send this same 
universe upon a course of endless confusion and cata- 
clysmic destruction. God’s love to man could be ex- 
pressed and given to him only through a righteousness 
which should condemn sin and yet, save the sinner. 

God’s love must have a righteous channel. 

Where and how should it be found. 

The cross of Christ is the answer. 

On that cross the Son of God comes that He may 
open up a righteous way by which and through which 
God’s love may come to the sinner and save him. 

He goes to that cross voluntarily. He is not an 
innocent one dragged there against His will. He is 
God the Son who created a sinless humanity for Him- 
self and for the express purpose that He might die and 
meet ail the righteous demands of God. He is some- 
thing more than a mere man, He is God, and God the 
Father Himself is there and in Him, it is God providing 
the way for His love to flow out. It is love immense. It 
is not only love on the part of the Son who gives Him- 
self in sacrifice, it is the love of a Father who feels, 
and must feel, the anguish of love in surrendering His 
beloved Son to the righteous law wrath He Himself in- 
vokes. And the whole transaction is precisely upon the 
same basis by which one man sinned and made all un- 
righteous—on that same basis, the one for the many, 
He offers Himself to glorify the righteousness of God 
and thus permit the love of God to flow forth. 

In the light of this, how immense, how full of illumi- 
nation is that marvellous statement of His: 

“For God so loved the world, that he gave his only 


THE COURT FENCE 93 


begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life.” 

As voluntary sacrifice, substitute, mediator, He 
brings the wrath side of God’s righteousness upon 
Himself, exhausts it, justifies God in all His righteous 
ways and thus allows God the Father to stretch out 
His hand of love to the sinner, to be just and yet the 
justifier of the sinner. 

As the Mediator between God and man He did not 
hold back the smiting of an angry God, exercising 
anger for mere anger’s sake, but provided the way by 
which a righteous God might still be righteous and yet 
‘pour forth in a righteous way, a way that punished 
sin and proclaimed to all the universe the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin and His hatred of it, the infinite and 
measureless love which from all eternity had been in 
His heart for a lost and dying world. 


VIII 
THE COVERINGS 


HERE were two coverings for the Tabernacle, 
one of badgers’ skins, the other of rams’ skins 
dyed red. 


THE Bapcers’ SKINS 


“And thou shalt make a covering for the tent 
(Tabernacle) of badgers’ skins.” (Exodus 26:14.) 

These badgers’ skins were of a dull, bluish-grey 
color. 

There was no recorded measure. 

They had no definite form. 

There was neither comeliness nor beauty about 
them. 

There was nothing in appearance that could make 
any one desire them. 

To one looking at them they seemed common, ordi- 
nary, and the tendency would be to despise and reject 
them. 

In this covering you have a perfect picture of our 
Lord Jesus Christ as He passed through the world and 
as He appeared in the eyes of men. 

The manner of Him was foretold centuries before 
He was born. 

“He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we 
shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire 
him. 

He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sor- 

94 


THE COVERINGS 95 


rows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were 
our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed 
him not.” (Isaiah 53:2, 3.) 

No one who saw the Tabernacle under the outer 
covering of badgers’ skins would have dreamed of the 
wealth, the gold, the form, the color and the exquisite 
beauty beneath it. 

Only when such an one should enter and behold the 
golden table of shew bread, the golden candlestick, the 
golden altar of incense, the beautiful vail, the sacred 
precincts of the Most Holy Place, the ark of the cove- 
nant, the golden mercy seat with the two golden an- 

-gels, the solemn, mysterious shekinal light; only when 

he should see the inner walls of pure, gleaming gold, 
the ceiling above in spotless white, byssus linen and 
on it as a background the spreading wings of the amaz- 
ing cherubim in blue, purple and scarlei, wrought with 
the rarest skill of fine needlework and emproidery; 
only when he should walk in the light, not the light of 
day, but the sacred light of the sacred and holy oil; 
only when he should catch the almost blinding flash 
of splendor meeting him at every turn and breathed 
in the white, ascending smoke of the fragrant incense; 
only when he could stand within and say: “I am in 
the Tabernacle, the dwelling place and enthronement 
of God,” only then could he know its beauty, wealth 
and glory. 

And he only could stand within who should come by 
way of the brazen altar at the gate of the Court with 
the blood of sacrifice offered there; he, and he only, 
could enter the Tabernacle and behold all it revealed 
of the divine plan and inspired workmanship. 

No one who saw our Lord garbed in the coarse, 
seamless robe of the poor, walking over the highways, 


96 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


through the streets and lanes of villages, towns and 
cities; no one who heard Him testify that birds of the 
air had nests and foxes had holes, but He, Himself, 
had not where to lay His head; no one who saw Him 
seated at a public table in a wayside kahn or inn, talk- 
ing, eating and drinking with publicans and sinners; 
no one who saw Him as He appeared to the general 
eye, a weary passer-by, a houseless, homeless wan- 
derer, seemingly without occupation, with a face 
marred as never was face marred before, a man of 
sorrowful countenance and acquainted with grief, and 
cheeks grooved with the course of tears, such as He 
shed in the agony of His soul at the grave of Lazarus 
and of the kind He wept over Jerusalem, moved with 
compassion at the vision of sickness and disease, filled 
with heartache at the every-day demonstrated fact 
of sin, taking on Himself the very sickness and in- 
firmities of others, despised, treated with contempt, 
and at last rejected by men as a fool, a fanatic, 
a weakling or impostor; none seeing Him in this guise 
had the slightest, wildest dream of imagination that 
He was the actual and absolute maker of Heaven and 
earth; that He had come down trom Heaven and the 
eternal throne to visit His chosen people; that He was 
the true Tabernacle which God pitched and not man, 
the dwelling place of the Godhead among men, God 
manifest in the flesh, Immanuel, God with us, up- 
holding all things by the word of His power, and that 
in Him was wrought with all the fulness of divine per- 
fection the characteristics and essential qualities of a 
holy, spotless, sinless and heavenly fragrant humanity; 
no one looking at Him as He passed could conceive 
this. 


THE COVERINGS 97 


Nor can any one know Him and know all He is till 
he can say: 

**T am in Christ.’’ 

And no one can say that till like the priest he shall 
come by way of the brazen altar of sacrifice, by way 
of the cross, owning and confessing the blood shed 
there as the blood of atonement, the blood of redemp- 
tion, then and then only will he be in Christ. 

Then he can see and know the beauty tHat is in 
Him. 

But to those who do not come by way of the brazen 
altar of the cross, to those who do not enter in and 
become in Him, one with Him, He is only as the 
badgers’ skins, so without form and comeliness that 
none desires Him. ’ 


Tue Rams’ SkIns DveEpD RED 


“And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of 
rams’ skins dyed red.” (Exodus 26:14.) 

These were placed immediately under the badgers’ 
skins. 

The ram is set before us in Scripture as a substitute. 

When Abraham in obedience to the command of 
God, given to test his faith, lifted up his knife and in 
all sincerity was about to slay his son as a sacrificial 
offering unto the Lord, but in full confidence, since 
God had made that son the depository of all the 
promises of God, that God the Lord would raise him 
from the dead, his arm was arrested by the voice of 
the Lord who, satisfied with this display of faith, bade 
him halt and hold back the stroke, and when at that 
command he turned away from the altar he beheld a 
ram caught by its horns in a thicket. 

Then we are told: 


98 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


‘And Abraham went and took the ram, and offered 
him up—in the stead of his son.” (Genesis 22:23.) 

The ram was directly provided of God as a—sub- 
stitute. 

Our Lord came into the world as the sent of the 
Father, and yet by His own will, to die as a substitute 
for guilty men. 

He came to take the place of those condemned 
to die. 

He came to die as the holy for the unholy. 

He came to die as the sinless for the sinful. 

He came to die as the just for the unjust. 

“For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the 
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.” 
(I Peter 3:18.) 

“ He was made sin for us.” (II Corinthians 5:21.) 

““ His own self bare our sins in his own body on the 
freee ei Peter 22212) 

“Christ died for our sins according to the scrip- 
tures.” (I Corinthians 15:4.) 

“Who gave himself for our sins.” (Galatians 1:4.) 

“Who was delivered for our offences.” (Romans 
4:25.) 

“While we were yet sinners Christ died for us.” 
(Romans 5:8.) 

“The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.” 
(Isaiah 53:6.) 

If there be one thing more clearly set forth in Scrip- 
ture than another concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, 
it is that He came into the world to exchange places 
with the sinner condemned to death and eternal banish- 
ment from God, came to take the place of those who 
justly should suffer the downpour of the righteous 
wrath of the righteous God for ever. 


THE COVERINGS 99 


If language be worth while, if words mean what 
they say, then it is beyond dispute that the eternal 
Son of God divested Himself of His glory, came into 
this world, took a specially created humanity into 
union with Himself that He might die the death of, 

God’s substitute for every believing sinner. 

Indeed, when you remove from the Gospels and cast 
out from the Epistles all the direct and indirect state- 
ments about the death of Christ and consider only the 
life He lived, the discourses He gave, you have the most 
incomplete figure in history, the most fragmentary life. 
Compared to Socrates or the martyrs who died in His 
_hame He is unheroic and His death an unqualified 
defeat. 

Recognize Him as a substitute provided of God, then 
His history from the hour when the Angel announced 
Him till the moment when He cried, “ It is finished,” 
makes Him instead of a near by, groping martyr of 
local circumstance, the revelation of divine genius and 
His death a disclosure of the heartthrob of God. 

In John 3:16, we read and all the world reads 


with us: 

“God so loved the world, that he gave his only be- 
gotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life.” 

There is just one key word to that universally quoted 
text. 

That word is— 

Gave. 

And when you go down to its root meaning and think 
out to its ultimate you are under bonds to read the text 
in this way: 

“God so loved the world, that he devoted his only 


100 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


begotten Son to be a substitute, that whosoever believ- 
eth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 
That word “ substitute” is the only word that re- 
veals and proves God’s love to the sinner. 
He loved us so, as Paul says, that, ‘“‘ He spared not 
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all.’’ 
Delivered Him up as—Our Substitute. 


IX 
THE GOATS’ HAIR CURTAINS 


HERE were eleven of these curtains. 
They were placed under the rams’ skins. 
They extended over the top of the Taber. 
nacle, down the sides and back to the ground. 

Five of them were coupled together into one breadth 
over the Most Holy Place. 

Five were coupled together over the Holy “Place. 

They were coupled by clasps of brass fitted into 
loops on each edge. 

The curtains over the Most Holy Place were long 
enough to fall down and cover the back. 

The eleventh curtain was doubled up and hung over 
the five pillars at the entrance—at the east end. 

“ And thou shalt make curtains of goats’ hair to be 
a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt 
thou make. 

The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and 
the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven 
curtains shall be all of one measure. 

And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, 
and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double the 
sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle. 

And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the 
one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty 
loops in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the 


second. 
101 


102 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put 
the taches into the loops, and couple the tent together, 
that it may be one. 

And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of 
the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang 
over the backside of the tabernacle. 

And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other 
side of that which remaineth in the length of the cur- 
tains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the 
tabernacle on this side and that side, to cover it.” 
(Exodus 26:7-13.) 

The goat was set apart for the sin-offering. 

‘“‘ And he brought the people’s offering, and took the 
goat, which was the sin-offering for the people, and 
slew it, and offered it for sin.” (Leviticus 9:15.) 

“One goat for a sin-offering, to make atonement for 
you.” (Numbers 28:22.) 

The goats’ skins are a clear symbol of our Lord 
Jesus Christ as the antitypical Sin-offering; as it is 
written: 

“It pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him 
to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for 
sin.” (Isaiah 53:10.) 

“ Christ through the eternal Spirit offered himself 
without spot.” (Hebrews 9:14.) 

“In the end of the age hath he appeared to put 
away sin by the sacrifice of himself.” (Hebrews 9:26.) 

“Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many.” 
(Hebrews 9:28.) 

“Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself 
for us an offering.” (Ephesians 5:2.) 

“We are sanctified through the offering of the body 
of Jesus Christ once for all.” (Hebrews 10:10.) 


THE GOATS’ HAIR CURTAINS 103 


“By one offering he hath perfected for ever them 
that are sanctified.” (Hebrews 10:14.) 

(Sanctified by the offering of the body of our Lord 
Jesus Christ.) 

“‘He hath made him to be sin for us.” (II Corin- 
thians 5:21.) 

God the Father treated Him as sin, the very essence 
of sin. 

All that sin means of the violation of God’s intrinsic 
law, repudiation of His will; all it means of high trea- 
son against Jehovah and readiness to overthrow His 
throne; all it means of that impulse which has filled 
- the world with corruption, iniquity, shame and moral 
shipwreck; all that has made earth an arena for every 
force antagonistic to God, to holiness and truth, the 
seed and source of all crime, the matrix of lust and 
death and hell. 

On the cross He became all that in God’s sight. 

He became the initial and consequent of sin, its es- 
sence and substance. 

God looked upon Him and dealt with Him on the 
cross as—the criminal of the universe. 

All the evil and wrong and shame and misery brought 
in by Satan as the Author of sin; all the tragedy 
wrought in man and by man; all that made man an 
offence to God—all this—the eternal God in the ful- 
ness of Godhead put on Him, charged to Him as His 
and held Him responsible as though He had actually 
thought every thought of evil and committed every 
deed of sin. 

It was this indescribable objective, this thing that 
awaited Him, this condition He foresaw when in the 
garden that overwhelmed Him. 

It was not physical death that appalled Him. 


104 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He knew, as He said, He could and would rise again 
from the dead. 

No! it was not physical death, it was what He saw 
would take place in that awful moment on the cross 
when treated as sin He should be repudiated of a Holy 
God. 

He knew He would be repudiated and forsaken of 
God. 

He was forsaken. 

He said He was. 

It is His own testimony. 

Hear how He said it: 

“My God, my God,” that was His cry, “ why hast 
thou forsaken me? ” 

He did not say: 

“My Father, my Father, why hast thou forsaken 
mer” 

No! He said: ‘ My God.” 

How and wherein did He say that? 

It ought to be clear enough. 

In Him was the fulness of the Godhead bodily. 

He was forsaken of the fulness of Godhead. 

He was forsaken of deity. 

Not that, even for the fraction of a suspicion or the 
imagination of a second of time He ceased in His per- 
sonality, being and essence to be very God of very 
God— 

Nay! But the moral sense of His own deity 
revolted against His own humanity as the repre- 
sentative of sin. 

The nature and law of the divine being that hates 
sin (and is automatically, because essentially, against 
sin), this nature and law in Him repudiated the 
humanity that He had taken into union with Himself 


THE GOATS’ HAIR CURTAINS 105 


when that humanity in the name of and as the repre- 
sentative of sin thrust itself against His unchangeable 
personality and divine nature. 

It was as when a man stumbles and falls below his 
own ideal, the higher moral concept in him makes him 
turn upon himself with all the antagonistic and accus- 
ing bitterness of that concept until he feels himself 
smitten, stricken, separated from and forsaken of all 
that is worth while in him. 

Thus our Lord felt Himself forsaken morally and 
actually of all there was of God in Him. 

In that unspeakable moment He had only one con- 
. sciousness in His humanity, it was the consciousness 
of the sin He represented; all there was of God in Him 
repudiated it and thus intensified that consciou$ness. 

And so completely did He have the consciousness 
of sin on Him, so fully did He anticipate and identify 
Himself with it that even in His pre-existent state He 
cries out through the mouth of the Psalmist: 

“MINE INIQUITIES have taken hold upon me, so 
that I am not able to look up; they are more than 
the hairs of mine head: therefore my heart faileth 
me.” (Psalm 40:12.) 

He was the object of the whelming scorn of His own 
supreme divine nature. He endured the woe and an- 
guish of His hatred of sin, it was the wholeness of the 
being of God in Him that repudiated the sin laid on 
His humanity, it was His humanity that agonized 
under this sense of the attitude of the whole being of 
God in Him and made Him lift that cry, “ My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me? ” 

As a man through the deity in Him He loathed Him- 


self as a man. 


106 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Is there anything more terrible than that—for a 
man to loathe himself. 

Is there any punishment more horrifying than that? 

To loathe yourself and justify the judgment of jus- 
tice against yourself. 

- Bat now mark the combination of woe in that hour. 

He knew He was, as a man, innocent, sinless, holy, 
holy as a man, full of devotion to the Father; and as 
God, as the Son of God and God the Son the very ex- 
pression and outgoing of the love of the Fatherhood 
of God, the very essence of His love. 

He knew He was all that, and then He knew the 
brutal, mad, screaming, murderous crowd rioting there 
at the foot of His cross looked upon Him as a deceiver, 
sincerely believed Him to be a wicked blasphemer 
against God. 

To know that He could come down from the place 
of shame and torture and reveal Himself in all His 
integrity; that He was held fast to that accursed tree 
not by the nails, nor His own insufficiency, but by His 
covenant faithfulness to that brute, senseless mass 
clamoring for His agony and its prolongation as well 
as for His death. 

Not only does He utter His agony through the 
Psalmist, but by and through the prophet Jeremiah. 

Hear, I pray you, these terrible words: 

“Ts it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, 
and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, 
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lorp hath af- 
flicted me in the day of his fierce anger. 

From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it 
prevaileth against them: he hath spread a net for my 
feet, he hath turned me back: he hath made me 
desolate and faint all the day. 


SHE GOATS’ HAIR CURTAINS 107 


The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his 
hand.” (Lamentations 1:12-14.) 

In that awful hour God was punishing sinful human- 
ity in the person of its representative, punishing it by 
banishing it from His presence with the brand of His 
infinite and eternal hatred against sin. 

In this hour of the Great Sin Offering on a Roman 
cross you may get some faint measure of God’s 
thought about sin. 

You may see that in God’s mind sin is something 
more than genital weakness. He considers it as high 
treason against Himself. 
_ Wherefore the Psalmist recalling his own unforget- 

able sin, under the quickening of the Holy Spirit, sees 
it is supremely and pre-eminently against God Him- 
self, and therefore he cries out: 

“ Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done 
this evil in thy sight.” 

He recognizes that this is the basis on which the 
judgment of God is against the sinner; that is, because 
sin is against God, because if carried to its ultimate 
it would overthrow the throne of God and turn the uni- 
verse into a swirling, endless sweep of mad lawlessness 
and confusion where all holiness and truth would be 
strangled in the insane joy of Devil and fiend, God is 
justified in executing judgment against sin without 
mercy and without default. 

In fullest recognition of this the Psalmist cries out: 

“ That thou mightest be justified when thou speak- 
est, and be clear when thou judgest.” (Psalm 51:4.) 

This sin offering of our Lord Jesus Christ has two 
distinct operations. 

It is an offering for sin and an act of substitution. 


108 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


As a sin offering He meets in His death the demand 
of God’s law and government and being. 

By virtue of that He reconciles the world to God, 
gets a stay in proceedings and puts the world under a 
suspended sentence. 

In virtue of that offering not only has there been an 
estoppment of judgment, but grace has been brought 
in to reign through righteousness; that is, righteous- 
ness has been so exhibited on the cross, sin has been so 
thoroughly punished, the law, government and being 
of God so upheld and justified by the punishment that 
fell upon the sinless victim that grace can be pro- 
claimed without detriment to righteousness. 

The death of Christ was also the death of a sub- 
stitute. 

He not only offered Himself for sin that He might 
hold back the judgment that for ages had been ac- 
cumulating against the world, but that He might be- 
come the Saviour of individual men. 

On the basis of the sin offering the world has been 
rendered immune of judgment in this particular age. 

It may go on in sin and treason and riotous blas- 
phemy, no judgment will fall, no one will be singled 
out and punished. 

But as a sin offering alone the death of Christ is 
of no avail to save any man from the judgment of God 
that must finally fall. 

He who would escape from that judgment that is as 
sure to fall as that God is God; he who would be justi- 
fied and accepted before God and receive eternal life, 
must put in an individual claim, personally claiming 
the Lord on the cross in the hour of His agonizing 
death, in the climax of His death as a penal death, as 
His substitute dying there for him and instead of him. 


THE GOATS’ HAIR CURTAINS 109 


He who would be saved must say in effect: 

“T offer Jesus Christ on that cross as my sacrifice 
for sin: I claim Him as my substitute, His death as 
my death, His punishment as the punishment due to 
me and as exhausting all punishment against me now 
and for ever.” 

With the Apostle in simple and claiming faith you 
must say: 

“Who loved me, and gave himself for me.” (Gala- 
tians 2:20.) 

But listen, I pray you, and get the meaning of that 
cry of agony on the cross to those who do not claim 
our Lord Jesus Christ there as a personal substitute. 

Tf you do not claim Him as your substitute it is all 
plain enough. r 

Then that cry will be your cry. 

‘““ My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? ” 

It is a terrible, agonizing question, but we who have 
accepted Him as our substitute understand that cry. 
We know it was His cry as our substitute and with 
profound adoration we can answer and say: 

“O Lord, our great God and Saviour, thou wast for- 
saken and knew the hiding of the face of God that we 
might never know it, that we might never be forsaken; 
thou wast forsaken that we might not be forsaken.” 

But, alas! if you have not claimed Him as your sub- 
stitute, even though you stood under His cross and 
knew He died as a sin offering, then you will have to 
answer your own question why you are forsaken. 

You will have to say: 

“‘ We are forsaken of God because we did not accept 
Jesus Christ on the cross in the hour of His agony as 
our substitute; we did not by faith claim Him to be 


110 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


forsaken for us; we did not say to Him, ‘ Lord thou 
wast forsaken for us.’ And we are forsaken not merely 
for our sin and sins, but because we rejected the sub- 
stitute provided by the grace of God.” 

The goats’ hair curtains completely covered the 
Tabernacle. 

Since the Tabernacle is not only a symbol of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, but the Church (as we have already 
seen), this complete covering is a symbol of the com- 
plete way in which the sacrificial death of our Lord 
Jesus Christ covers those who are His and hides their 
sin from the face of justice. 

God could not dwell in that Tabernacle nor in the 
midst of the Children of Israel until sin was cere- 
monially satisfied for and thus judicially shut out of 
His sight. 

When these goats’ skin curtains were spread out and 
covered the Tabernacle—He no longer saw iniquity in 
Israel. 

This was the testimony of Baalim, even against his 
own will. 

Although he would have cursed Israel if he could, 
he was forced to say under divine pressure and speak- 
ing in the name of God: 

“He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither 
hath he seen perverseness in Israel: the Lorp his 
God is with him.” (Numbers 23:21.) 

This is our character and standing before God as 
believers, our sins and transgressions are under the 
blood of the great sin offering, under the perfectness 
of His perfect sacrifice. 

All we are as having sin on us is out of sight. 

There is sin in us because we have in us the old 
nature, “sin in the flesh.” 


THE GOATS’ HAIR CURTAINS 111 


There is no sin on us, that is, against us, because 
our sins were laid on Him as our sin offering. 

When we confessed the Lord as our personal sin 
offering we were dated back to the hour of the cross. 
Our nature of sin and all its acts were imputed to the 
sinless sufferer. His act of obedience unto death was 
imputed, charged over to our credit, we were justified, 
accepted as righteous. The risen and glorified Christ 
in Heaven became our righteousness. He became our 
environment. We became united to and actually in 
Him as our life. Weare in Him and God the Father 
sees us only in Him, covered by His perfect work and 
by Him. 

Anticipating this supreme act and fact of grace the 
Psalmist says: 

“Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, 
whose sin is covered. 

Blessed is the man unto whom the Lorp imputeth 
not iniquity.” (Psalm 32:1, 2.) 

Because of the perfect work of the Lord the believer 
can say: 

“Our transgressions have been blotted out and our 
sins as a thick cloud.” (Isaiah 44:22.) 

“‘ As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he 
removed our transgressions from us.” (Psalm 103:12.) 

The East and the West—can never meet. 

Our sins will never meet nor accuse us again. 

The believer may say in all confidence: 

“Thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.” 
(Isaiah 38:17.) 

And How? 

By turning His back on His beloved Son, hanging 
there on the cross, bearing our sins. 

And why? 


112 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The preceding clause gives the answer: 

** In love to my soul.’’ 

Amazing proof of love— 

Turning His back upon and forsaking His Son that 
He might forget our sins and see them or know them 
no more for ever; for it is true, is it not, that when a 
thing is behind your back you cannot see it—it is out 
of sight? 

That is what the prophet means. 

Your sins as a believer are out of God’s sight. He 
cannot see them. 

“ Thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the 
sea.” (Micah 7:19.) 

When a stone is cast into the sea and the ripples 
have died away you can no longer find a trace of it. 

It is as though it had not been. 

Our sins as believers have been cast into the depths 
of God’s Almighty love and the wave that rolled over 
them and hides the trace of them for ever was the 
crimson, measureless wave of the cross. 

The blood that hides them is still visible to our 
faith, but our sins are as though they had never been. 

It is great that God has forgiven them. 

But He has done more than forgive. 

We forgive one another; but we do not always forget 
the wrong done us. 

How infinitely God rises above man. 

He not only forgives, but—forgets; as it is written: 

“Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.” 
(Hebrews 10:17.) 

Not to remember is to forget. 

To forget is to have the thing blotted from the mind 
so that it is, indeed, as though it never had been. 

He can never recall it. 


THE GOATS’ HAIR CURTAINS 113 


Put these two words side by side. 

‘‘ Forgiven! Forgotten!!’’ 

Let it be spoken with all reverence, but it is true, 
our sins are off God’s mind just as though they never 
had been upon His mind because of the blood of Christ 
between Him and them—off His mind for ever. 

All this we learn in the goats’ hair curtains. 

No matter what we may have been; no matter how 
deep and dark the root of sin in us, nor how unforget- 
able our sins and transgressions may be to us, once we 
turn in full heart sincerity unto the Lord, by faith 
offer up the crucified one and claim that He died, that 
He atoned, that He expiated, that He freely and fully 
. Satisfied the demands of justice against us, fulfilled the 
sentence and utterly destroyed the guilt and demerit 
of our.sin—we are at once owned of God as in the Risen 
Christ and as righteous, holy and spotless as Himself. 

Whenever the memory of any past may come upon 
you, and your sense of sin trouble you, get the vision 
of the goats’ hair covering of the Tabernacle and re- 
peat to yourself the undeniable fact that the sin offer- 
ing of the cross covers and ‘hides you as completely 
as they did the Tabernacle, and that all your wrong 


and sin and evil are, 
Under the blood. 


x 
THE LINEN CURTAINS 


HESE curtains were ten in number. 
They were made into two great breadths of 
five curtains each. 

They were coupled together with clasps of gold into 
loops of blue on the edge of the breadth. 

They were placed directly under the goats’ hair 
curtains. 

They were a cubit shorter than the goats’ hair cur- 
tains. They did not touch the ground as the upper 
curtains did. 

They were fifty cubits in breadth from end to end 
when coupled together. 

They were coupled together over the four pillars 
that separated the Holy Place from the Most Holy. 

One breadth of five curtains, twenty cubits, covered 
the Holy Place and formed the ceiling. 

The other breadth covered the Most Holy Place. 

Half of the breadth formed the ceiling, the other 
half fell down over the back. 

These curtains were seen only as the ceiling. They 
were dropped over the outside of the boards, so that 
the boards constituted walls of pure gold for both the 
sacred places of the interior. 

Figures of the cherubim in blue, purple and scarlet 
were wrought in all the breadths. They were exqui- 
sitely wrought in fine needle work. 

“Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with 
ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, 

114 


THE LINEN CURTAINS 115 


and scarlet: with cherubim of cunning work shalt thou 
make them. 

The length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty 
cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits; 
and every one of the curtains shall have the same 
measure. 

The five curtains shall be coupled together one to 
another; and other five curtains shall be coupled one to 
another. 

And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge 
of the one curtain uttermost from the selvedge in the 
coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the edge of 
another curtain, in the coupling of the second. 

Fifty loops shalt thou make in the. one curtain, and 
fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain 
that is in the coupling of the second; that the ldops may 
take hold one of another. 

And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple 
the curtains together with the taches; and it shall be 
one tabernacle.” (Exodus 26:1-6.) 

Linen is flax. 

Flax is that which comes up out of the earth. 

Considered as to base, the linen represents the 
humanity of our Lord. 

Pure white, spotless, these curtains were a fitting 
symbol of the perfect character of our Lord; as it is 
written: 

“ Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, Separate from sinners.” 
(Hebrews 7:26.) 

The three colors, blue, purple and scarlet are direct 
symbols. 

Blue is the color of Heaven. 

Scarlet is the color of earth, it is the color of kings, 
the color of their kingly robes. 


116 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Purple is the blending of blue and scarlet. 

In Christ there is an equal blending of Heaven and 
earth. 

He has the nature of Heaven—divine. 

He has the nature of earth—human nature. 

Two distinct natures, just as distinct as blue and 
scarlet—divine and human. 

These two natures though distinct are united in one 
personality. 

As the nature of Heaven is the nature of God and 
the nature from earth is the nature of man, the union 
of these two in one gives us the combination of all 
combinations—the God-man. 

Whenever and wherever you see purple, whenever 
you realize it is the blending of Heaven and the color 
of earth, let it say to you that our Lord Jesus Christ 
is the union of God and man in one eternal person. 

The cherubim were wrought into the pure, snowy 
linen in these three colors. 

The cherubim are “ living creatures.” 

They had four faces. 

They had wings. 

They had the face of a man, a lion, an ox, an eagle. 
(Ezekiel 1:10.) 

The face of the man represents intellect, mind, 
thought, knowledge and personal will power. 

The lion, kingly dignity, power and glory. 

The ox, strength for service. 

The eagle, power of supreme perception. 

The cherubim are angels. 

Angels have their class. 

There is the angel of the species, a range of creation 


just above man. 


THE LINEN CURTAINS LV 


The seraphim are the burning ones. They are the 
singers of the universe. 

The cherubim are the highest order. 

The word, “cherub,” in its root meaning signifies 
strength, mightiness. 

They are majestic, kingly, almost limitless in power. 

They are the masters of nature’s forces. 

They can play with the winds and the lightnings. 

They are the delegated engineers of the universe. 

They are the executors of judgments. 

They will execute the providential judgments of God 
in the closing hours of this age; as it is written: 

“The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and 
they shall gather out of his kingdom (the area of it) 
all things that offend, and them which do iniquity. 

And shall cast them into a furnace of fire.? (Mat- 
thew 13:41, 42.) 

Read the book of Revelation from the seventh 
chapter to the nineteenth and you will behold these 
mighty ones. You will find them acting with supreme 
control over all the forces of nature, whether they 
stand upon the four corners of the earth and hold the 
winds in abeyance, or whether they stand as with one 
foot planted on the sea or stand immune in the seeth- 
ing flaming glories of the sun. 

Angels are what their name and title signify—mes- 
sengers. 

They are the messengers of, and wholly in subjec- 
tion to, our risen and glorified Lord; as it is written: 

“Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand 
of God; angels and authorities and powers being made 
subject unto him.” (I Peter 3:22.) 

Since the cherubim set forth the angels of God, since 
they are subject unto our Lord Jesus Christ and re- 


118 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


ceive all power and authority from Him, then these 
cherubic figures embroidered in the white linen in all 
their symbolic colors represent the Lord’s supremacy 
in the universe over all material and intellectual 
powers. 

Supreme intellect, supreme force express omnipo- 
tence. The cherubim therefore set forth omnipotence 
in its final form, in humanity; in short, the cherubim 
proclaim the deity of the Man Christ Jesus. 

The priest who walked beneath these curtains in the 
Tabernacle, walked beneath a mass of outspread wings 
and feathers. 

As he looked up he saw everywhere the face of a 
man surrounded by the symbol! of majesty and power 
and deity; everywhere there were wings and feathers, 
the face of a man looking out from and above the sym- 
bols of deity; everywhere his eye beheld the figure of 
a man supreme and as very God. ; 

Here is the explanation of that phrase to be found 
in the psalms about the wings and the feathers of God: 

“Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under 
the shadow of thy wings.” (Psalm 17:8.) 

“How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! 
therefore the children of men put their trust under the 
shadow of thy wings.” (Psalm 36:7.) 

“Yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my 
refuge, until these calamities be over past.” (Psalm 
S741) 

“T will abide in thy tabernacle for ever, I will trust 
in the covert of thy wings.” (Psalm 61:4.) 

“In the shadow of thy wings I will rejoice.” (Psalm 
63:72) 

“He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under 
his wings shalt thou trust.” (Psalm 91:4.) 


THE LINEN CURTAINS 119 


What a vision it all was. 

Light shining from the seven branched golden can- 
dlestick and reflected in the burnished, pure gold of 
the side walls, the golden table with its symmetrical 
rows of bread, where priests ate and communed with 
God and with one another in the light, the golden altar 
with its ascending, white smoke of fragrant incense, 
the gorgeous vail, the vail beautiful, the ark of the 
covenant, the solid gold mercy seat, the supernatural 
shekinah burning in its scintillating, Heaven-sent fire 
beneath the bowing, golden angels; above in the il- 
luminated, outspread ceiling, blue, purple and scarlet, 
everywhere the eyes of the Man looking and following 
. each movement of the priest; everywhere the extended 
wings as a canopy of feathers; everywhere the sense 
of mystery, glory, God in man and for man, symbol- 
ized, proclaimed at every turn. 

How little would the passer-by upon the outside who 
saw only the formless, dull and common looking badg- 
ers’ skins know of this. 

Only those within the Tabernacle could see and 
know. 

How little do those who are not Christians know of 
the beauty and wonder and glory of our Lord. 

Only those, as I have already said, who are in 
Christ have seen the beauty, witnessed the glory; and 
when they speak to others in glowing terms of all He 
is to them they seem, indeed, to those who have never 
entered in, as though they were beside themselves and 
spoke at random. 

Inside the Tabernacle—only there could you know 
the Tabernacle. 

In Christ—only there and then can you know Christ. 


XI 
THE HANGINGS 


‘Ts word, ‘“‘ hanging,” is applied exclusively to 
three special curtains. 

The one at the gate of the Court, the one 
at the entrance of the Tabernacle and the third which 
hung from the four pillars between the Holy and the 
Most Holy Place. 

The last was designated as “‘ The Vail.” 

Each was of fine twined linen with blue, purple and 
scarlet color wrought in with needlework. 

The vail alone had the colors wrought into the forms 
of the cherubim. 

As it enclosed the Most Holy Place it formed a con- 
stituent part of the ten curtains, taking the place of 
the eleventh curtain and like them. 


THE HANGING OF THE GATE OF THE CouRT 


“‘ And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging 
of twenty cubits of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and 
fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: and their 
pillars shall be four, and their sockets four.” (Exodus 
27716:) 

As there were ten pillars on this end, the four repre- 
sent the central pillars, three on either side. 

In this hanging you have our Lord Jesus Christ as 


—The Way. 
120 


THE HANGINGS 121 


He is the one and only way any man can come to 
God and find Him to be a Father. 

He says so: 

““T am the way, no man cometh to the Father, but 
by me.” (John 14:6.) 

But mark it well—the moment that hanging was 
lifted up or pushed aside it brought him who would 
enter there and into the Court face to face with the 
brazen altar, the altar of bloody sacrifice. 

He could not enter in without accepting the sacri- 
fice and its shed blood, without owning and confessing 
it as the sole ground of his approach to God; nay, he 
must himself bring the sacrifice, ay it and appro- 
' priate it for himself. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ is, indeed, the way to the 
Father. He is the Son and knows Him as the son 
knows a father; but you can no more separate our 
Lord from His relation to the cross as the altar of His 
sacrificial death than you could separate the gate from 
its relation to the brazen altar. 

Just as the way led by that altar and over blood- 
stained ground, every inch of it a bloodstained way 
to the Tabernacle and the symbolic presence of God, 
so also our Lord Jesus Christ as the way to the Father 
is such only as you go by the cross, own Him thereon 
as your sacrifice for sin, as your substitute pouring out 
His blood for you. 


THE HANGING OF THE TABERNACLE 


“ And he (Moses) made an hanging for the taber- 
nacle (that is, for the five pillars of the front of the 
Tabernacle) of blue, and purple and scarlet, and fine 
twined linen of needlework.” (Exodus 36:37, 38.) 

If the hanging of the Gate represent our Lord Jesus 


122 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Christ as the Way, this hanging sets Him forth as— 
The Truth. 

He says He is very and essential truth. 

“T am the truth.” (John 14:6.) 

The hanging at the five pillars was a way, it was a 
door, but it was also a revelation, a revelation of the 
truth concerning the Tabernacle. 

When the priest passed under the hanging he was 
face to face with the golden symbols within. 

In these symbols He saw the truth of God’s way in 
grace, in redemption and glory. 

Outside of that hanging he could not know the truth 
of the Tabernacle, the truth it alone could reveal. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ is the antitype of all that. 

He is the revelation of God. 

He is the revelation of God as the Father. 

He is the revelation of God as the God of infinite 
love. 

He reveals Him as the God of measureless grace. 

He reveals Him as a God who is able to save unto 
the uttermost all who come unto Him by faith in His 
crucified, self-immolated and risen Son. He reveals 
Him as the God of glory, the God who will give grace 
and glory and no good thing withhold from them who 
put their trust in Him. 

He is the full and complete disclosure of God. 

He is the truth about God. 

He is the truth of God. 

He is the God of truth. 

He is God manifest in the flesh. 

Since He is God in the flesh and the truth of God 
He is indeed entitled to say, ““I am the truth;” and 
fittingly does the hanging which revealed the truth of 
the Tabernacle symbolize Him as the truth. 


THE HANGINGS 123 


THE VAIL 


“And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and 
scarlet, and fine twined linen of cunning work: with 
cherubims shall it be made. 

And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim 
wood overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, 
upon the four sockets of silver. 

And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, 
that thou mayest bring in thither within the vail the 
ark of the testimony: and the vail shall divide unto 
you between the holy place and the most holy.” 
(Exodus 26:31-33.) 

Beautiful as were the other two hangings, this was 

‘transcendently beautiful, gorgeous in color, mysterious 

in the outspreading wings, awesome, strange, terrible 
in the figure of the lion, the ox and the eagle, but above 
all, in the face of the man looking out from the midst 
and dominating, the very look like that of a spoken 
command. 

If the hanging at the gate represent our Lord as the 
Way, and the hanging at the door of the Tabernacle 
represent Him as the Truth, the Vail should be a sym- 
bol of Him as Life, thus making the trinity of His 
claimed appellatives complete: 

“‘T am the way, the truth and the life.” 

He is that life which from all eternity was with the 
Father, and for our redemption was made flesh, be- 
came visible, could be seen and handled; as it is 
written: 

“That which was from the beginning, which we 
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we 
have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the 


Word of life; 


124 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


(For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, 
and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, 
which was with the Father, and was manifested unto 
us. “jer iajonnele| 25) 

Since the vail (as we shall see more fully in the next 
chapter) is a symbol of our Lord incarnate, as eternal 
life incarnate, then as the first two hangings proclaim 
Him the way and the truth, it is a demonstration that 
the vail sets Him forth as that life by which alone any 
man can enter within the vail in Heaven and have 
eternal part with God as His child. 


XII 
THE UNRENT VAIL 


E have a direct Scripture which tells us the 
vail was a symbol of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

“‘ Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into 
the holiest (the Most Holy Place in Heaven) by the 
blood of Jesus, 

By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated 
for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh.’’ 
(Hebrews 10:19, 20.) 

By “flesh” is meant, of course, our ‘Lord’s 
humanity. 

Behind the vail in the Most Holy Place was the ark 
of the covenant, the symbol of the throne of God, with 
the shekinal light, symbol of the divine presence, 
shining above the mercy seat (the golden lid of the 
ark) and between the figures of the cherubim. 

As the cherubim figures were fashioned into the 
vail, and as these in their final terms signify deific 
powers, the vail is a symbol of the deity dwelling in 
the humanity of our Lord. 

The vail was the silent, but prophetic declaration 
that God should be made manifest in the flesh; as it 
is written: 

“Without controversy great is the mystery of god- 
liness: God was manifest in the flesh.” (I Timothy 
LG) 

“God was in Christ.” (II Corinthians 5:19.) 

126 


126 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“In him dwelleth all the fulness of the godhead 
bodily.” (Colossians 2:9.) 

It shone through His humanity on the “holy 
mount,” the mount of Transfiguration. 

He had led three of His disciples, Peter, James and 
John, to the snow-crested heights of Hermon. 

It was midnight. 

The stars were far off and the darkness deep. 

A light came across the darkness. 

It began to glow, it widened in its shining till it filled 
all the place where they were even as the sun at high 
noon. 

But the light came neither from moon, nor stars, 
nor sun. 

It came from His body. 

His garments were white as no fuller on earth could 
whiten them. 

The light proceeded out of His very flesh. 

There was a cloud, a cloud of white light that 
canopied them all, expanding, enfolding, matching and 
becoming one with the light that shone from His body. 

The light of the cloud and the light of the body 
were one. 

It was the shekinal splendor that had dwelt in the 
pillar of cloud and of fire of old time and between the 
wings of the cherubim. 

It was the shining out of the divine essence. 

Out from the midst of the terrible light came the 
voice of God the Father, saying: 

“This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased; hear ye him.” (Matthew 17:5.) 

It was the official announcement from Heaven that 
He was the spokesman of God, the very Word of God. 


THE UNRENT VAIL 127 


The vail is the perfect symbol and the absolute 
affirmation that “‘ God was in Christ.” 

So long as that vail hung down it shut man out from 
the typical presence of God. 

So long as Christ walked the earth in His beautiful 
and perfect humanity, He shut men out from God. 

And this ought to be self evident. 

If the humanity of Christ is the standard humanity 
in which alone God can enthrone Himself; if man must 
be as perfect as Christ was before God can take up 
‘His abode in him, before man can have fellowship and 
accepted and intimate relationship with God, then the 
Christ of God so far from being a way by which men 
can approach God, or God enter into man, becomes 
an impassable barrier, a terrific, concrete witness to 

the hopeless, measureless distance between God and 
the natural man. 

A man might stand before this vail as it itn down 
between him and the symbolic dwelling place of God. 

He might admire the fineness of its texture, the per- 
fectness of its coloring, the majesty and mystery of the 
winged figures; but the more he should look, the more 
he should study, the more evident it would become to 
him that in its imperviousness, even though beautiful, 
it shut him out from and entirely concealed the God 
who typically dwelt behind it. 

He would see that all approach to the presence of 
God ended there. Let a man study intently and 
analytically the life of the Lord Jesus Christ. Let 
him take up His deeds, His words, His attitude to God 
and man, the more he studies, the more evident it will 
become that he and Jesus of Nazareth were not cast 
in the same mould, that they exist upon planes as far 


| 


128 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


apart from each other as the east is from the west, as 
the ever receding west is from the east. 

Take the history of the best man who ever lived 
and who may have sought continuously and with con- 
secrated effort to copy that life and shape his char- 
acter according to it, and it will be found, no matter 
who the man may have been, nor what intensity of 
endeavor he may have made, that he approaches no 
nearer to its faintest and most rudimentary outlines 
than the crawling worm to the soaring eagle, no nearer 
than the smallest grain of sand at the bottom of the 
highest mountain is to that mountain’s most exalted 
height. 

To set Christ before men and bid them attain unto 
the consciousness of God by following His example is 
as much a mockery as it would have been to have told 
the priest to fix his eyes upon the vail and by dint of 
looking at its impenetrable material persuade himself 
that he was inside the Most Holy Place or that he 
beheld even a gleam of the divine light as it flashed 
between the wings of the cherubim above the mercy 
seat. 

The startling and demonstrable truth is, the incar- 
nation of Christ neither brings man to God nor God 
to man. 

If there had been nothing more than the incarnation 
of Christ, if Christ had lived and then after a season 
had gone back to the Heaven from whence He came, 
there would have been left to the world only the mem- 
ory of a man who made manifest the bridgeless gulf 
between Himself and the natural man. 

There was just one means by which that vail could 
be put aside as a barrier and become a way of en- 


THE UNRENT VAIL 129 


trance into the Holy of Holies, and into the glory of 
the symbolized presence. 

That one means was the blood of sacrifice shed on 
the brazen altar. 

Once a year, on a day called “the day of atone- 
ment,” the high priest went out to the brazen altar, 
took a bullock and a goat, slew them, put the blood 
in a bason, brought it into the Holy Place and sprin- 
kled it before the vail. 

Having sprinkled the blood he lifted up the vail, 
put it aside, entered the Most Holy Place and sprin- 
kled the blood upon the mercy seat. 

He could not sit down. 

He must not tarry, he must hasten in that which he 
had to do and go out quickly lest he die. 

It was by the blood of atonement the way into the 
throne room of God was opened. 

Not by the beauty of the vail could the priest enter. 

Not because of the fineness of its texture, nor the 
perfectness of its workmanship could he enter. 

Not by contemplating the vail and seeking to stamp 
its color and figures upon the retina of his soul could 
he enter into the presence of the most excellent glory. 

No! 

There was only one way. 

He must enter with the blood of the altar—the blood 
offered in sacrifice on the brazen altar. 

Not by or because of the beautiful earthly life of 
Christ can any man come to God. 

Not by the study of His life, nor the praising Him 
for His spotless character, His unselfishness, His con- 
secration to humanity; not by seeking to copy the life 
He lived on earth can any man enter Heaven and find 


acceptance of God. 


130 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


No! 

There is only—one way. 

That one and only way, is the way of the blood— 
the blood of the great brazen altar—the blood of the 
cross. 

By that sacrificial death of the cross our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Son of God, opened Heaven to all who own 
and confess it as such; wherefore it is written: 

“ By his own blood he entered in once into the holy 
place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.” 
(Hebrews 9:12.) 

After He rose from the dead, entered Heaven and 
made the atonement there by placing His blood upon 
the throne, turning it from a throne of judgment to a 
throne of grace, it became possible for all who believe, 
for all who by faith offer Him on the cross as a sacri- 
fice for sin to draw nigh and as spiritual priests, in 
Spirit, to enter within the vail and worship there; as 
it is written: 

“ Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into 
the holiest of all—by the blood of Jesus, 

By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated 
for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh (by 
the sacrificial death of that flesh). 

And having an high priest over the house of God 
(the Church). 

Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance 
of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil con- 
science, and our bodies washed with pure water (this 
—as we shall see later—has reference to the brazen 
laver at the door of the Tabernacle in which the priests 
washed hands and feet before entering in—the laver is 
a symbol of the Word of God, and the teaching here 
is that on the basis of a perfect sacrifice we have a 


THE UNRENT VAIL 131 


right to draw nigh unto God in worship, but should 
continually bathe ourselves in the Word that our ser- 
vice and walk may be according to the mind and will 
of God—nevertheless we are to draw nigh and with 
boldness, not on the ground of our walk—but by 
the merit of the blood).’’ (Hebrews 10:19-22.) 

Let it be impressed upon the heart of every believer 
that we draw nigh to-God, enter within the secret place 
of communion and fellowship with Him, not by the 
life of Christ, but by His death. 

Let it be known and held with thankful joy that by 
virtue of the death of Christ, not only has every bar- 
rier been taken away between us and the Heavenly 
Father, but that by the sanctifying value of the blood 
of the cross, should we die, we at once depart from 
. this body and are immediately at home with the Lord 
within the vail. 

Such is the meaning, the glory and the wohder of 
the vail. 

By His death we get deliverance from death, get 
life and entrance into Heaven. 

Rejoicingly therefore it may be said, the three hang- 
ings, the hanging at the gate of the Court, the hanging 
at the door of the Tabernacle and this hanging on the 
four golden pillars, the beautiful vail, proclaim in unit 
testimony that our Lord Jesus Christ is 

THE Way, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE. 


XIIT 
THE RENT VAIL 


HEN our Lord Jesus Christ died the vail 
of the temple was rent in twain. 
The record of this event is given in 
three of the Gospels. 
“ Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, 
yielded up the ghost. 
And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain 
from the top to the bottom.” (Matthew 27:50, 51.) 
“And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up 
the ghost, 
And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from 
the top to the bottom.” (Mark 15:37, 38.) 
“ And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the 
temple was rent in the midst.” (Luke 23:45.) 
The Vail was rent while hanging between Heaven 
and earth. 
Like that vail the Son of God was hung up between 
Heaven and earth on a Roman cross. 
It was to the cross He referred when He said: 
“And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw 
all men unto me. 
This he said, signifying what death he should die.” 
(John 12:32, 33.) 
The Vail was rent from top to bottom. 
The Vail was so woven together that two pairs of 
oxen attached to either edge and driven in opposite 
directions could not tear it asunder. 


THE RENT VAIL 133 


It was not stretched, drawn tight and fixed. 

It hung in a loose fold. 

It could not be cut nor torn by a direct stroke, it 
was too soft and yielding for that. 

It was rent not from the bottom to the top, but from 
the top downward to the bottom. 

Such rending could not come from a man. 

Since it came from above and not by man, it was 
the act of God. 

In this you have the immense truth concerning the 
death of the cross. 

It did net come from below. 

It did not come from the hand of man. 

Our Lord openly affirmed no man could take His 
life from Him: 

“No man taketh it from me.” (John 10:18.) 

The death of Christ was the act of God. _ 

His death was as much the act of God as His in- 
carnation. 

It was God and not man who smote Him. 

Speaking anticipatively in the Spirit through the 
mouth of David, He Himself says: 

“Thou (the Almighty) hast brought me into the 
dust of death.” (Psalm 22:15.) 

“Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand 
presseth me sore.” (Psalm 38:2.) 

““T was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because 
thou didst it.” (Psalm 39:9.) 

“ All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.” 
(Psalm 42:7.) 

“Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast 
afflicted me with all thy waves. 

Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy terrors have 
cut me off.” (Psalm 88:7, 16.) 


134 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


This is His own delineation and definition. 

How terrific. 

Just as the billows of the sea lifted up by wind and 
storm ascend up and up like as to mountain heights, 
then fall with their crashing, crushing weight upon 
the quivering, trembling ship, overwhelm it, burying 
it in the blackening depths, so the wrath of God fell 
upon Him—the hand of the Almighty cut Him off. 

“ He weakened my strength in the way; he short- 
ened my days.” (Psalm 102:23.) 

“Tt pleased the Lorp to bruise him; he hath put 
him to grief: thou shalt make his soul an offering for 
sin.” (Isaiah 53:10.) 

“ Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against 
the man that is my fellow, saith the Lorp of hosts: 
smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.” 
(Zechariah 13:7.) 

Our Lord applied this prophecy to Himself; as it 
is written: 

“Then saith Jesus unto them (the disciples) All 
ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it 
is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of 
the flock shall be scattered abroad.” (Matthew 26:31.) 

Read again that immense and terrible Scripture in 
Lamentations 1:12-14. 

The Vail was rent in twain at the hour of the even- 
ing sacrifice. 

That hour was three o’clock in the afternoon. 
(Matthew 27:46.) 

At that hour the evening lamb was on the altar in 
the temple. At the same hour the lamb of the pass- 
over was being sacrificed in the court of the temple. 

In that hour our Lord became the antitypical and 
true passover; as it is written: 


THE RENT VAIL 135 


“Christ our passover is sacrificed for us.” (I Co- 
rinthians 5:7.) 

The Vail was rent in twain at the moment when He 
cried: 

“Tt is finished.” 

“Jesus when he had cried again with a loud voice, 
yielded up the ghost.” (Matthew 27:50.) 

The word, “ yielded ” is, literally, “‘ commanded.” 

He commanded His Spirit to go. 

“When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, 
he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and 
gave up the ghost.” (John 19:30.) 

“Literally, handed over his spirit.” 

In Luke 23:46, He expresses the same thought 

about His spirit: 

'  “ Father, into thy hands I commend (entrust) my 
spirit.” 2 

As He hung on the cross He could see the smoke 
from the altar, and He knew He was Himself the true 
passover of God; He knew all things foretold of Him 
upon the cross were now fulfilled, and then it was, lift- 
ing up His voice with the accent of triumph, knowing 
He had met every condition agreed upon in the ever- 
lasting covenant, He cried as a conqueror cries, His 
voice ringing up to the very throne of God on high: 

‘* It is finished.’’ 

So triumphant was that cry, so full of authority, so 
full of command, it appealed to the centurion in com- 
mand of the soldiers, and instantly his soldier sense 
of authority and command responded; as it is written: 

“When the centurion which stood over against him, 
saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost he said: 

“Truly, this man was the Son of God.” (Mark 
152697) 


186 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


When the Vail was rent in twain, it was changed at 
once from a barrier to an open way into the Holy of 
Holies. 

When on earth His perfect life, as I have said, was 
itself a barrier between God and man. 

His holiness was a witness of the sinfulness of the 
natural man, a demonstration of his unholiness and 
unfitness for God. 

His union with God, the enthronement of God in 
Him, all this was a demonstration of man’s essential 
and hopeless separation from God. 

Previous to His arrest He said to those about Him: 

“The hour is come that the Son of man should be 
glorified. 

Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of 
wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; 
but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.” (John 
12:24.) 

If the grain of corn do not die it abideth alone. 

It must die in the earth, then it will germinate, rise, 
come forth, multiply, reduplicate itself, bring forth 
many grains in its own likeness. 

And this teaches that life comes out of death; as 
it is written: 

“That which thou sowest is not quickened (made 
alive) except it die.” (I Corinthians 15:36.) 

As our Lord walked the earth there was none like 
unto Him. 

There has never been one since. 

If He had not died, if He had gone back to Heaven 
He would have been the one and only man of His kind. 

He would, like the grain of corn, have abided—but 
alone. 

There never could be another like Him. 


THE RENT VAIL 137 


Primarily, because the nature of man never could 
evolve a humanity like His; but, ultimately, because 
the sentence of death is against him here and hereafter. 

Not until that penalty was paid could there be any 
hope of a new life for sin begotten men. 

But the natural man never could get beyond that 
penalty. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ came into the world to meet 
this desperate issue between a holy God and sinful man. 

He came to put aside the penalty. 

He came to abolish death on behalf of all whom the 
Father had given Him. 

He put it away, abolished it by His sacrificial and 
substitutionary death; as it is written: 

“Once in the end of the age hath he appeared to put 
away sin (that is, the penalty of sin) by the sacrifice 
of himself.” (Hebrews 9:26.) 

‘He hath abolished death.” (II Timothy 1:10.) 

(That is for those who offer Him by faith as sacri- 
fice and substitute—the death of such is no longer 
penal, punitive, it is—providential.) 

When He arose from the dead and ascended to 
Heaven He took His place as the Second Man, the 
Last Adam, as the Eternal Life Giver; and on the 
basis of the complete satisfaction rendered by His 
death, obtained the right to impart His life and nature 
to all who should own that sacrifice. 

By virtue of His death and therefore—out of His 
death—He gives life, multiplies this life and character 
of it in men, brings many sons to God. 

Thus it is true that life—eternal life—is out of 
death, out of His death, and is being wrought in those 
who accept His sacrificial death and who at last like 
Himsek shall be made immortal. 


1388 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Because He died and rose again we have this age 
of grace in which it is possible for all who believe 
to say: 

“ Christ liveth in me.” 

And of whom it may be said: 

“ Christ in you the hope of glory.” 

Today the way into Heaven is open for all who, like 
the high priest, will come with the blood of the divine 
atonement. 

Of old time the priest who entered within the vail 
on the day of atonement could not sit down, he must 
stand and then remain but a moment within the vail. 

All this was witness that the sacrifice must be re- 
peated, it was not complete. 

It could never make the comers thereunto perfect. 

But when our Lord Jesus Christ as the true high 
priest entered Heaven with His own sacrificial blood— 
He sat down, even at the right hand of God. 

It was a witness that His sacrifice had been ac- 
cepted, was perfect, finished and would never be re- 
peated—it was once for all and all sufficient. 

“He died unto sin once.” (Romans 6:10.) 

“ Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more.” 
(Romans 6:9.) 

“We are sanctified through the offering of the body 
of Jesus Christ once for all.”” (Hebrews 10:10.) 

“This man (our Lord) after he had offered one 
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand 
of God.” (Hebrews 10:12.) 

“By one offering he hath perfected for ever them 
that are sanctified.” (Hebrews 10:14.) 

His session in Heaven at the right hand of God pro- 
claims a finished sacrifice. 

Any system that attempts to offer Him afresh (as 


THE RENT VAIL 139 


the Roman Catholic Church does in the Mass) denies 
the perfection and efficacy of His death on the cross 
and throws it back to the level of the oft-repeated and 
insufficient sacrifices in Israel. 

When He entered Heaven into the Holiest of all He 
did so not for Himself, but as the representative of 
every believer. 

That is the standing and character of every believer 
today. 

In God’s sight we too have risen and ascended into 
Heaven and are seated there before Him at His right 
hand in Christ. 

As it is written: 

“ But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love 
wherewith he hath loved us, 

_ Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us 
together with Christ, (by grace are ye saved; ) 

And hath raised us up together, and made/’us sit 
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” (Ephe- 
sians 2:4-6.) 

What a marvellous “ together ” relationship it is. 

What a co-partnership. 

Co-crucified with Him. 

Co-quickened. 

Co-raised from the dead. 

Co-ascended with Him. 

Co-seated with Him. 

And all because, like the Vail of the temple, He was 
smitten, slain and rent for us, instead of us. 

Read again that splendid Scripture: 

“ Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into 
the holiest—by the blood of Jesus, 

By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated 
for us, through the vail, that is to say his flesh, 


\ 


140 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


And having an high priest over the house of God; 

Let us draw near with a true heart in full assur- 
ance of faith.” (Hebrews 10:19-22.) 

And listen to this Scripture: 

“‘ Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that 
has passed through the heavens (as Aaron passed 
through the vail) Jesus the Son of God, let us hold 
fast our profession. 

For we have not an high priest which cannot be 
touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in 
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. 

Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to 
help in time of need.” (Hebrews 4:15, 16.) 

Such is the grace and glory of the Rent Vail. 


XIV 
PINS AND CORDS 


HE Tabernacle was secured to its place by 
pins of brass and cords of linen. 

The pins were driven into the ground, the 
cords passed over the outer covering of badgers’ skins, 
tying them down, and were fastened at the end and 
sides to the pins or nails. 

“All the pins of the court shall be of brass.” 
(Exodus 27:19.) 

“The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the 
court, and their cords.” (Exodus 35:18.) 


THE PINs oF BRASS 


The word, “pin,” is also translated, “nail.” 
(Judges 4:21; Judges 5:26.) 

It is also rendered, “stake.” (Isaiah 33:20; Isaiah 
54:12.) 

The pin or nail is a symbol of our Lord. 

He is called a Nail. 

“ A nail in a sure place.” 

This is set forth in a remarkable Scripture in Isaiah 
22:20-25. 

The Lord speaks of a certain Eliakim, the son of 
Hilkiah, as His servant. 

He says He will commit His government unto him. 

He makes this far-reaching promise: 

“ And the key of the house of David will I lay upon 
his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut; and 
he shall shut, and none Sn Chet: 

4 


142 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he 
shall be for a glorious throne to his father’s house. 

And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his 
father’s house.” 

After His death, His resurrection and ascension to 
Heaven, our Lord Jesus Christ applies this Scripture 
to Himself. 

In a letter which He sent through the Apostle John 
to the Church in Philadelphia, a city in the province 
of Asia, He says: 

“ He that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the 
key of David, he that openeth, and no man shutteth; 
and shutteth, and no man openeth.” (Revelation 3:7.) 

Since He thus claims to have the key of David with 
power to open and shut, it is a demonstration and 
proof that He is the Eliakim of whom the prophet 
Isaiah speaks; and since Eliakim is to be fastened as 
a nail in a sure place, and this sure place is the throne 
of David in Jerusalem, and all the glory of the Father’s 
house is to be hung upon Him, you have the clear and 
unmistakeable teaching that the nail or pin of brass is 
a divinely chosen symbol of Him and sets Him forth 
as He who shall establish the throne of His father 
David and become the guarantor for the fulfillment 
of all the promises of glory made to the nation of the 
Jews first and then to all Israel. 

In V. 25, of Isaiah’s prophecy, another nail is 
spoken of as fastened in the sure, place, a nail upon 
which the Jews will hang all their hopes of glory in 
the latter days; but this nail will be cut down and all 
that is hung upon it will fall; as it is written: 

“In that day, saith the Lorp of hosts, shall the nail 
that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be 


PINS AND CORDS 143 


cut down, and fall; and the burden that was upon it 
shall be cut off: for the Lorp hath spoken it.” 

This second nail is a symbol of Antichrist who, as 
his name indicates, will come before the true Christ, 
even, our Lord Jesus Christ. He will make a cove- 
nant or agreement with the returned Jews. He will 
make such promises and concessions to them that they 
will hail him as their deliverer; but the Lord will come 
and cut him off and all who cast their hopes upon him 
and reveal Himself to be the true and abiding nail, 
fastened in the sure and covenant place upon Mount 
Zion for ever. 

The nails or pins of the Tabernacle were brass. 

They would not rust. 

The action of rain, wind and storm would not affect 
them. 

The pins of brass stood every test. ° 

They symbolize our Lord Jesus Christ as—, 

The Tested One. 

He was tested in the Mount. 

He was tested there by the Devil as the first man 
had been tested by him. 

He was tested in His appetite. 

He had fasted forty days and nights and the Devil 
appealing to His hunger bade Him turn the plentiful 
stones about Him into bread. 

These stones which may be seen today had the sug- 
gestive appearance of loaves of bread. 

The temptation was psychologically and _illustra- 
tively forceful. 

In bidding Him to do this thing the Devil was 
tempting Him to turn away from His chosen attitude 
of faith, take Himself out of His Father’s hand, cease 


144 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


acting like a man and exercise His covenantly re- 
strained deity. 

It was a genuine test. 

It was an appeal to His claims as God. 

He stood the test. 

He refused to act in His divine power even though 
hunger was making its demands upon Him and the 
deity in Him could have instantly responded. 

He had taken the place of a man in perfect and ab- 
solute dependence on the Father. 

He refused to take Himself out of His hand. 

He would abide before Him as the man who had 
chosen to walk by faith and not by sight. 

He was tested as to His faith in the Father’s 
promise concerning the Providence that should 
watch over Him daily as a man. 

The Father had promised should He walk the earth 
by faith as a man He would give Him and His circum- 
stantial experiences into the care of guardian angels; 
they should be continually at His side to support Him 
with their greater than human strength, lest in His 
weariness He might even dash His foot against a 
stone; as it is written: 

“‘He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep 
thee in all thy ways, 

They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou 
dash thy foot against a stone.” (Psalm 91:11, 12.) 

That he might test Him in this the Devil led Him 
to the highest point in the temple, quoted the promise 
of God the Father, and then bade Him cast Himself 
headlong and see whether the God whom He claimed 
to be so specially and specifically His Father would 
interfere with the laws of nature and whether the an- 


PINS AND CORDS 145 


gels with their upbearing hands would come to the 
rescue. 

To experiment with the promise of God, to see 
whether God will keep faith with Himself is the rank- 
est kind of dishonoring and treasonable unbelief. It 
is raw guilt, the guilt of trifling with the integrity and 
honor of the Almighty. It is the sin of presumption, 
a presumption which might well call for the sudden 
letting loose of the fiery judgments of God. 

The Son of God stood the test. 

He refused to trifle with the Father who had com- 
mitted His honor to the faith and surrender of His Son. 

He repudiated the temptation. 

He was tested with the offer of worldly power 
and glory. 

He came into the world to be King of the Jews, 

King of Israel and King of kings. 

He knew the way thereto led through the ,bloody 
sweat of Gethsemane and the agony of the cross. 

The Devil offered Him a short cut. 

He offered Him the rulership of the world without 
going to the cross. 

It was not an idle offer. 

He was the original prince of this world. 

God gave Him the title, power and authority in the 
“‘beginning;” when He created the heavens and the 
earth. 

The earth was then perfect, beautiful, a province in 
the Empire of God. 

The Devil was not satisfied with the rulership of 
the world. 

He was an angel, the chief of the cherubim. 

He was Lucifer, the son of the morning. 

He was full of knowledge. 


146 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“wise,” that “no 


He was so full of knowledge, so 
secret ” could be hid from him. 

He was so full of beauty that by reason of it his 
heart was “ lifted up.” 

His “ brightness ” corrupted his wisdom. (Ezekiel 
23335472) 

His pride was equal to his greatness. 

He exalted himself above measure. 

He would be satisfied with nothing less than an 
equal share of the rulership of the universe. 

He would not overthrow God nor take His place. 

He would be equal with God. 

He is the one to whom Paul refers inferentially in 
Philippians 2:6, who (in contrast to our Lord who 
would not hold on to his equality but ‘‘ emptied ” 
Himself of it and became a servant) snatched at 
equality with God. 

He said: 

“‘T will exalt my throne above the stars of God.” 

“T will be like the Most High.” (Isaiah 14:13, 14.) 

He said: 

‘*T am God.’’ 

“T sit in the seat of God.” (Ezekiel 28:1.) 

By this act and attitude he became Satan (the word 
“satan ” signifies an “ adversary ”’). 

After this, by a cataclysmic event the earth fell into 
a state of chaos. , 

Satan and his host were banished to the dark void 
surrounding the earth. 

When the earth was remade, man created and set 
upon it as the provisional ruler and prince, Satan ac- 
cepted it as a challenge. 

He determined to destroy man and ruin the purpose 
and plan of God concerning him. 


PINS AND CORDS 147 


He tempted man with his own fatal desire to be as 
God. 

Man yielded, fell, was set aside of God and became 
the willing, but unconscious slave of Satan. 

Satan then became the Devil. “ Devil” signifies 
“‘a slanderer.” 

He was the slanderer of God, traducing His name 
and character to man. 

In facing our Lord Jesus Christ he faced the “‘ Sec- 
ond Man,” the “ Last Adam.” 

Although cast out, cast down and utterly fallen from 
his high place, he was still by title the “ prince of this 
world.” 

Our Lord Himself owns him as such. 

He says: 

“The prince of this world cometh, and hath noth- 

ing in me.” (John 14:30.) 

With his usurping angels as the “ rulers of the dark- 
ness of this world, and in spite of the official judgment 
against him and his system called ‘“‘ the world,” he is 
still (under God) the power behind the powers and 
authorities of earth. 

He was willing to hand over his practical rulership 
to the Lord. 

The condition he made was a straight one. 

He knew it was in the infinite plan that the Son of 
man as immortal man should be coequal ruler of the 
universe with the Father; he would give up all claims 
to the world, retire his evil angels from the border land 
of the earth, cease all battle to hold it and give full and 
undisputed title to Him as ‘“ The God of the whvle 
earth ” if He would fall down and acknowledge him as 
the true and by right “equal” ruler of the universe 
with the Father. 


148 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Listen to the offer as he made it: 

“And the devil, taking him up into a high moun- 
tain, shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the world 
in a moment of time. 

And the devil said unto him, All this power will I 
give thee, and the glory of them: for that is delivered 
unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give it. 

If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.” 
(Luke 4:5-7.) 

Back of all this the supreme aim of the Devil was 
to break up the everlasting covenant and prevent Man 
from ascending in Christ to the joint rulership of the 
universe with the Father. 

But the Son of God stood the test. 

He bade the tempter to be gone. 

He said: 7 

“ Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou 
shalt worship the Lord thy God and him only shalt 
thou serve.” 

The test continued in other forms. 

He was tested with an offer of the crown of 
David, temptation to take the crown and ruler- 
ship of the Jews at once. He was tempted by the 
Jews themselves. 

Five thousand people had followed Him into a place 
where there was no opportunity to obtain provisions. 
The people hungered. The Lord took the loaves of 
bread and two small fish which a lad had with him. 
He bade the multitude sit down, then multiplied the 
five loaves and the fish, gave to the disciples, and the 
disciples gave to the people; and when all had eaten 
and were fully satisfied there were twelve baskets full 
of food remaining. 

The people felt that a man who could meet their — 


PINS AND CORDS 149 


necessities in such a fashion was fit to be, and by 
right should be, king. Such a king would deliver them 
from the two things from which men yearned to be 
freed—toil and taxation. 

With a wild, sudden outburst, they rushed upon 
Him and determined to make Him king. They were 
ready to follow Him into Jerusalem and own Him as 
the Son of David. 

It was popular frenzy and enthusiasm. 

It had made kings before, it has made them since. 

It was an appeal to ambition, to vanity and the love 
of power. : 

Mark how He met the assault: 

“When Jesus therefore perceived that they would 
come and take him by force, to make him a king, he 
departed again into a mountain himself alone.” (John 
Ol.) 

And what think you He did then? 

Gave Himself up to prayer; as it is written: 

“ And when he had sent the multitude away, he went 
up into a mountain apart to pray: and when the even- 
ing was come, he was there alone.” (Matthew 14:23.) 

He met the test, repudiated the crown, gave Himself 
up to prayer, to meditation and communion with the 
Father. 

He was tested in the garden with the cup the 
Father gave Him to drink. 

As a man He shrank from the cup. 

In the depth and loneliness of the garden He prayed. 

The statement of it is simple—but O how cuttingly, 
penetratingly pathetic: 

“He fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my 
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.” 

In this cup, He saw Himself to be made sin, to be 


150 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


treated as sin, and to be treated as such by the infinite - 
Father. 

What a test it was. 

To submit to all the judgment of God the Father 
whom He loved, and for whose sake He had become 
incarnate; to allow Himself to be set aside, even for 
a moment and treated as the very sum and substance 
of sin. 

But He stood the test. : 

Hear His cry coming up out of the very heart of 
His agony: 

‘Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt. 

If this cup may not pass from me, except I drink it, 
thy will be done.” (Matthew 26:37, 42.) 

He was tested with the possibility of escaping 
from the death of the cross. 

They came to arrest Him. 

Peter drew out his sword to defend Him. 

He bade him put up the sword and said to him: 

“Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my 
Father, and he shall presently give me more than 
twelve legion (72,000) of angels? ” 

What a possibility, seventy-two thousand of the 
strong angels of God sweeping like a guard of honor 
and glory about Him. 

What an easy way to confound His foes, glorify 
Himself and then ascend in radiant pomp to Heaven. 

He stood the test of what such a staggering sugges- 
tion might give. 

He said: 

“But how then shall the Scripture be fulfilled, that 
thus it must be?” (Matthew 26:53, 54.) 

What a revelation of decree in Holy Scripture. 

‘* Thus it must be.’’ 


PINS AND CORDS 151 


What a sublime exaltation of the written Word, not 
only that it must be, but that it should be, that at all 
cost it should be fulfilled. 

What a revelation of the written Word as the su- 
preme rule of the Son of God. 

What an arraignment of the limited mentality and 
shrivelled spirituality of men who, even in His name, 
attempt to teach and yet question the full authority 
of that Scripture He continuously quoted and by which 
He regulated every movement and moment of His 
daily life. . 

Behold, the eternal, immaculate, Almighty Son of 
God taking His place in obedience to the everlasting 
covenant and on the threshold of the representative 
hell through which He was about to pass, feeling Him- 
self under bonds and surrendering Himself absolutely 
to the written Word as full, final and supreme author- 
ity for Him. 

No thought of Himself obtruded here. 

His one anxiety! that the Scripture should be ful- 
filled, and that He might fulfill it even at the price of 
His own measureless agony. 

Nothing could more dynamically demonstrate and 
prove the Scripture to be the inspired, inerrant, in- 
fallible Word of God than the surrender to it of the 
Living Word. 

He was tested on the cross. 

While He was hanging in agony on that cross the 
people tested Him. 

They mocked Him. 

They saw His poor head turning from side to side 
in the horror of His physical woe. They passed and 
repassed under His cross, laughing, jeering at Him, 


152 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


imitating the helpless movement of His head, turning 
their own and wagging it from side to side. 

They called out to Him: 

“Tf thou be the Son of God, come down from the 
cross.” (Matthew 27:40.) 

He was tested by the priests. 

They said: 

“ He saved others; himself he cannot.save, (true! 
He was under covenant not to save Himself that He 
might save others). If he be the king of Israel, let him 
now come down from the cross, and we will believe 
him (O the stigma that abides upon them—the people 
who refuse to believe in Christ on the cross; and that 
is the stigma of the professed religionist today who 
will not believe in and glorify the Christ on the cross). 

“ He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he 
will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God.” 
(Vs. 42, 43.) 

He was tested by the thieves who were crucified 
with Him. 

They took up what the mob, the priests, the scribes 
and the elders had said and “cast it in his teeth.” 
(One of them it is to be remembered, took it all back, 
repented and confessed Him as his only hope and 
Saviour. ) 

He was tested in all points where man can be 
tested. 

He met all the tests; as it is written: 

“In all points tempted like as we are, yet without 
sin.” (Hebrews 4:15.) 

He met every assault of the Devil with a two-edged 
sword. That sword, the Sword of the Spirit; as it is 
written: 


PINS AND CORDS 153 


“The sword of the Spirit, which is The Word of 
God.” (Ephesians 6:17.) 

(The Written Word.) 

To every suggestion of the Adversary He lifted up 
that sword and said: 

‘It is written.’’ 

He cast Himself in absolute faith upon God His 
Father; He took the place of a dependent before Him. 
He made the written Word His law and command. 

He won the victory. 

All this testing and triumph is symbolically set 
forth in the brazen pins of the Tabernacle. , 

They proclaim Him The Tested One, The Vic- 
torious One. 

The pins were the things to which the cords were 
fastened. 

They were the anchorage and security of the Taber- 
nacle. 

They were its hope and security against any windy 
blast or storm or destroying tempest. 

Herein are they again a fitting symbol of our Lord. 

He Himself is the anchor of the soul that trusteth 
in Him. 

He is our Surety. 

He is our Hope; as it is written: 

“‘ Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both 
sure and steadfast, and which entereth into that within 
the veil.” (Hebrews 6:19, 20.) 

The Tabernacle was rooted, grounded, built up and 
established by the function of the brazen pins. 

This is the secure relation between us and our Lord 
Jesus Christ; as it is written: 

“ Rooted and built up in him, and established in the 
faith.” (Colossians 2:7.) 


154 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


A pin or nail is that on which things are hung or 
suspended. 

The hope of our manifestation to the world as sons 
of God at His appearing and glory is hung on Him; 
as it is written: 

“‘ And every man that hath this hope in (on) him.” 
(I John 3:2.) 

We are told in the prophecy of Isaiah that He will 
be fastened as a nail in a sure place. 

That sure place is the throne of David on Mount 
Zion; as it is written: 

“Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” 
(Psalm 2:6.) 

It is the Father’s assurance to the Son, so sure He 
speaks of it in advance as though already accom- 
plished. 

It is an immensely suggestive fact that the root of 
the word “sure,” is the root of the word ‘‘ amen.” 

It means that which is “ faithful,” ‘‘ permanent,” 
that which “ abides.” 

Wherefore it is written: 

‘‘ All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him 
Amen, unto the glory of God by us.” (II Corinthians 
1:20.) 

It is immensely suggestive because our Lord calls 
Himself—The Amen—The Sure. 

“These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true 
witness, the beginning (the Word of God) of the crea- 
tion of God.” (Revelation 3:14.) 

But Amen is the ending. 

Thus He is both the beginning and the ending. 

The Fiat that creates, the Amen that records the 
decree accomplished. 

He is The Amen, let it go at that—He is The Sure. 


PINS AND CORDS 155 


All this the brazen pins in final terms set forth; but 
let it be well noted, ever remembered, the security of 
the pin was not merely in what it was in itself, but in 
the fact that it was driven deep, was buried in the 
earth, and it was that part which emerged from the 
earth, was risen above it, to which the cords were 
fastened. 

The security of the believer is to be found in the 
fact that our Lord Jesus Christ died, was buried and 
rose again. It is the risen Christ that makes His 
‘death of avail and it is to the risen Christ we are 
joined and in His resurrection life made secure; as it 
is written: 

“Tf Christ be not raised your faith is vain.” (I 
Corinthians 15:17.) 

Thus while it is true that the Lord will come as the 
Living One and seat Himself upon Mount Zion and 
all the promises made to fathers in Israel shall find 
their sure fulfillment in Him—for us who are believ- 
ers today, the sure place is the throne of God on high 
on which He sits at the right hand of the Father. To 
the risen man upon the unchanging, unshakeable 
throne of God we are securely fastened. 

For us He is now—the nail fastened in a sure 
place. 

THE Corps 

The cords were fastened to the pins. 

By holding down the coverings they held the Taber- 
nacle together, made it secure and abiding. 

They drew the Tabernacle together and made it 
whole, complete. 

The cords set forth the drawing and holding power 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 


156 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The drawing power of His mighty love; as it is 
written: 

“I drew them with the cords of a man, with bands 
of love.” (Hosea 11:4.) 

“The love of Christ (Christ’s love for us) con- 
straineth us.” (II Corinthians 5:14.) 

The word ‘“constraineth” signifies ‘to hold to- 
gether.” 

The love of Christ holds us together. 

If our union with and abiding in Christ depended 
upon our love and steadfastness to Him, how the 
winds of circumstance would blow us apart. 

It is His love for us that holds us. 

It is His unchanging love for the Church that holds 
it together. 

If it were not for the peerless drawing and holding 
power of the love of Christ manifested to us the 
Church would be wrecked, swung apart into discon- 
nected and individual fragments. 

“And I, if I be lifted up from the earth will draw all 
men unto me. | 

This he said, signifying by what death he should 
die.v, o(johnsl22327.33%) 

“To draw” has in it here the force “to pull,” as 
when a rope or cord is tautly pulled. 

Thus the cords set forth the work of Christ in the 
energy of His infinite love. 

The pins give us the person of Christ in all the 
wonder and beauty of His faithfulness to God and 
man. 

The pins and the cords went together. 

One was of no use without the other. 

Pins were useless without the cords. 

The cords had no function without the pins. 


PINS AND CORDS 157 


The Person and the Work of Christ must go to- 
gether. 

You cannot separate the person of Christ from His 
work, whether that work be on the cross or now in 
Heaven. 

Hear what Paul says: 

“Jesus Christ and him crucified.” (I Corinthians 
Deon) 

That conjunction—and—is the inspiration of the 
Holy Spirit. 

_ It is set there as the divine and eternal link between 
the Person of Christ and the Work of Christ. 

As to the Person of Christ, Paul tells us that in Him 
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and 
that He is God manifest in the flesh. As to His Work, 
Paul tells us that He died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures. 

The work He finished on the cross was the prelude 
to another work He is carrying on in Heaven on the 
throne of God today. 

“He ever liveth to make intercession.” (Hebrews 
De) 

Christ as God manifest in the flesh, Christ on the 
cross an atoning sacrifice and Christ in Heaven the 
loving and ever living high priest, cannot be separated 
in any of His parts and functions. 

When therefore Paul says, “ Christ and him cruci- 
fied,” he is saying, ‘“‘ The Christ whom I preach unto 
you is the Christ who died on a Roman cross, but now 
lives, the same Christ, on the throne of God.” 

To attempt to separate the person of Christ from 
His work is to be guilty of treason both to the person 
and the work of Christ. 

There are those who do attempt to separate them. 


158 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


They exalt and glorify the person of Christ. 

They are willing to do this that they may discredit 
His work on the cross. 

They are willing to say He was good, even an holy 
man, the fullest manifestation God ever made of Him- 
self personally in man; but they refuse to accept His 
death on the cross as a penal sacrifice, an atonement 
for sin. They set Him up simply as the highest ex- 
pression of merely human ethics. They exhort people 
to contemplate His love for His fellow-men, His com- 
passion and measureless denial of self. They affirm, 
should the world follow His example it would bring in 
a warless world and an era of everlasting peace. 

An ethical Christ wins the applause of the hour. 

A sacrificial Christ is rejected. 

But the person and the work of Christ cannot be 
treated in that way without open infidelity to Christ, 
without disaster both to His person and His work. 

To treat Him merely as a good man denies His own 
claims to deity. 

To treat His death as a moral and not a penal sacri- 
fice makes it nothing better than a brutal, ruthless and 
useless murder. 

A Christ without deity and a cross without 
atoning blood presents a Christ unknown to 
Scripture. 

Separate the pins from the cords and see what 
follows. 

Let the pins be driven into the ground never so 
firmly, without the cords there is nothing to connect 
them with the Tabernacle. 

Set up the person of Christ alone, glorify, magnify, 
exalt Him as you will, there is nothing to connect 
Him with man. 


PINS AND CORDS 159 


His holy, sinless, perfect person is a repudiation of 
the natural man. 

Apart from His work on the cross the life of Christ 
is an indictment of the natural man, and His holiness 
like the flames of Sinai against him. 

Separate the cords from the pins and there is noth- 
ing to make them of avail. Unless they are fastened 
to the pins they cannot hold the Tabernacle in its 
place, the coverings would be subject to every gusty, 
blowing wind. 

Preach the cross of Christ, talk of His sacrifice and 
fail to connect it with Him as Ged incarnate—the 
sacrifice is worthless—for only God can atone to God. 

The death of Christ is of avail because He is very 
God. It is God atoning to God, God satisfying God, 
God meeting and sustaining His own claims of right- 
eousness, satisfying the demands of His own essential 
being. God finding the righteous way in which He 
may still be righteous and yet save the unrighteous 
sinner. 

Take away the deity of Christ and the cross is a 
pitiful failure; it is not only the place of the cry of 
despair, it is the place of a man actually forsaken of 
God, and forsaken of men. 

Take away the sacrificial, atoning character of the 
death of Christ and His deity is a fiction and Himself 
either a deceived weakling or a fittingly exposed 
deceiver. 

Never was there a time when it was more important 
for those who pretend to preach Christ to preach 
Christ and Him crucified. 

Preach the Christ who as very God offered Himself 
in sacrifice as real and true man. 

Preach Him as the Christ who arose from the dead, 


160 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


ascended to Heaven, and because He was crucified, be- 
cause He died as a sacrifice for sin, can give eternal 
life to the believing sinner, lives in Heaven for such 
and from thence seeks ever to draw him closer to Him- 
self with the cords of His mighty and unfailing love. 


To preach Christ and Him crucified, means to | 


preach the living Christ who was crucified and whose 
resurrection life and power is proof that His death has 
been accepted as atoning sacrifice and way of salva- 
tion for men. 

The pins and the cords must go together. 

Turi resolutely away from the man who preaches 
the perscn of Christ and not His death. 

Refuse to hear him who preaches Christ on the cross 
but denies His deity. 

Refuse to hear him who separates the person of 
Christ from the work of Christ, the person of Christ 
from the death of Christ. Turn away from the 
preacher who seeks to preach the one without the other. 

Pins and cords must go together. 


XV 
THE FURNITURE OF THE TABERNACLE 


HE furniture of the Tabernacle consisted of 
seven pieces. 


The Ark of the covenant. 

The Mercy Seat or covering for the Ark. 

The Altar of Incense. 

The Table of Shewbread. 

The Candlestick. “ 

The Brazen Laver. 

The Brazen Altar. 

The Ark of the covenant and the Mercy Seat as one 
piece were set in the Most Holy Place behind the 
beautiful vail. 

The Altar of Incense was set up in the Holy Place 
in front of the vail. 

The Table of Shewbread occupied the northern side. 

The Candlestick was on the south. 

The Laver was placed outside the door of the Taber- 
nacle. 

The Brazen Altar stood a short distance inside the 
gate of the Court. 

Beginning with the Ark of the covenant and coming 
outward the next piece of furniture was the golden 
Incense Altar, and in giving the description of it the 
natural order would be to mention it after the Ark of 
the covenant; but when the Lord speaks of it to Moses 
it is not till after He has given instruction and descrip- 
tion of the Table, the Candlestick and the Brazen 


Altar. 
161 


162 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


This is not accidental. 

It is fundamental and in the logic of the symbols. 

The Golden Incense Altar is a symbol of our Lord’s 
high priestly intercession in Heaven. 

But He could not be a high priest till after He had 
offered Himself as a sacrifice for sin, had risen from 
the dead and ascended to Heaven. 

He is not a priest after the order of Aaron. 

He is a priest after the order of Melchisedec. 

The Brazen Altar is a symbol of the cross. 

The cross must come before the intercession. 

Priestly intercession is based upon sacrifice. 

Had the Altar of Incense been ordained before the 
Brazen Altar it would have been a declaration that our 
Lord Jesus Christ became a priest before His death. 

It would have been the teaching that He was a priest 
while on the earth. 

Such teaching would be a denial of all foundation 
truth. 

Priesthood on earth belongs exclusively to the Jew- 
ish nation and the people of Israel, to the tribe of Levi 
and the house of Aaron. 

That priesthood has been postponed to the Millen- 
nium, to the era of our Lord’s visible reign on earth. 

Our Lord was not of the tribe of Levi. He was not 
of the house of Aaron. 

He came out of the tribe of Judah and the house of 
David. 

Concerning the tribe of Judah there is no mention 
of priesthood; as the Apostle writes: 

“Of which tribe (Judah) Moses spake nothing con- 
cerning priesthood.” (Hebrews 7:14.) 

He was not a priest while on earth. 

He did not act as a priest while on the cross. 


THE FURNITURE OF THE TABERNACLE 163 


On the cross He was both offering and offerer. 

He entered into His function as priest according to 
the order of Melchisedec only after He died, rose again 
and ascended to Heaven and sat down at the right 
hand of God. 

If He were on earth today He could not be a priest; 
even as it is written: 

“‘ If he were on earth, he would not be a priest, see- 
ing there are priests that offer gifts according to the 
law.” (Hebrews 8:4.) 

In the light of this Scripture what an audacity it 
is, what a bold treason against the Word of God, for 
any man or set of men to take the office and exercise 
the function of priest in the professing Church of 
Christ. 

It is true, as Christians, we are all spiritual priests 
to offer up spiritual sacrifices; as it is written: 

“ Ye also, as lively (living) stones, are built up a 
spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual 
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.” (1 
Peter 2:5.) 

“‘ By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise 
to God continually, the fruit of our lips giving thanks 
to his name.” (Hebrews 13:15.) 

There is no other priesthood owned of God in the 
Church today. 

The man who calls himself a priest (separately from 
the spiritual priesthood belonging to all believers) is 
a usurper and shames the high priesthood of our Lord 
in Heaven. 

Rome builds up her priesthood by usurping the 
office and function of the priesthood in Israel, mixing 
Judaism with Christianity, and in so doing shames 


164 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


both the sacrifice of the Cross and our Lord’s Melchis- 
edec priesthood in Heaven. 

The priesthood of Christ is based upon sacrifice. 
Rome seeks to repeat that sacrifice in the mass. The 
mass is a function in which the priest claims to trans- 
form the bread and wine of the Lord’s memorial 
supper into His body and blood, and offer Him again. 
In that, they “ crucify the Son of God afresh and put 
him to an open shame.” 

Repetition of a sacrifice is proof of its incomplete- 
ness, imperfection and therefore inefficiency. It was 
the repetition of the sacrifices in Israel that proclaimed 
their inefficiency; as it is written: 

“For the law having a shadow of good things to 
come, and not the very image of the things, can never 
with those sacrifices which they offered year by year 
continually make the comers thereunto perfect. 

For then would they not have ceased to be offered?” 
(Hebrews 10:1, 2.) 

This is the plain statement that a perfect sacrifice 
is not repeated, but is once and for all; as it is written: 

“We are sanctified through the offering of the body 
of Jesus Christ once for all.”” (Hebrews 10:10.) 

Also: 

“For in that he died, he died unto sin once.” 
(Romans 6:10.) 

And climacterically: 

“Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more.”’ 
(VER) 

Thus, in seeking to repeat the offering of the Cross 
the Romish priest proclaims it inefficient, and acting 
as a priest to offer it again, not only shames our Lord 
as the offerer, but denies the efficiency of His priest- 
hood in Heaven. 


THE FURNITURE OF THE TABERNACLE 165 


All this demonstrates the disaster of departing from 
the divine order. 

In the fact that the Brazen Altar as the symbol of 
the cross is ordained before the Golden Altar of In- 
cense (the symbol of our Lord’s priestly office and in- 
tercession) you have the dynamic demonstration and 
proof of the accuracy and divinity of the types and 
the inspiration of Holy Scripture both in the Old and 
New Testaments. 


XVI 
THE ARK OF THE COVENANT 


HE Ark was what the Hebrew word signifies 
—a chest. 


It was two cubits and a half long, a cubit 
and a half wide and a cubit and a half high. 

It was made of incorruptible wood and covered with 
pure gold both on the inside and out. 

It had a crown of gold running round the top. 

There were four golden rings at the corners, two on 
each side. 

Through these rings were passed staves or bars of 
wood covered with gold. 

These served as handles by which the Ark was to 
be carried. 

These staves were never to be removed. (Exodus 
25:10-16.) 

It was called the “ Ark a the Covenant ”’ because 
it contained the tables of the law, the covenant into 
which the people entered at Sinai when they presump- 
tuously repudiated the unconditional covenant of 
Abraham, the covenant of grace under which the Lord 
had brought them out of Egpyt. It contained also 
the golden pot of manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded; 
as it is written: 

“The ark of the covenant overlaid round about with 
gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and 
Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the cove- 


nant.” (Hebrews 9:4.) 
166 


THE ARK OF THE COVENANT 167 


‘‘The Ark was God’s throne in the midst of 
Israel. 

He manifested Himself in the shekinal light shin- 
ing between the wings of the cherubim in the Mercy 
Seat; as it is written: 

“The Lord reigneth: let the people tremble; he 
that sitteth between the cherubim.” (Psalm 99:1.) 

The Ark was a perfect symbol of our Lord Jesus 
Christ as the enthronement of God in humanity. 

The incorruptible wood speaks of Him as the sin- 
less one, sinless in conception, sinless in life and 
character. 

The pure gold above the wood—inside and otttside 
—that nature which was above His humanity and yet 
resided in it—His Deity. 

The Ark with its two materials and yet, the one 
chest, repeats the continuous testimony, the two na- 
tures and the one, indivisible personality of our Lord. 

Our Lord was the throne of God in this world. 

If He were full of sympathy and tender compas- 
sion, giving to those who sorrowed beauty for ashes, 
the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for 
the spirit of heaviness, it was because He was real and 
actual man. 

If He healed the sick, raised the dead, stilled the 
storm and did it all by a fiat word, it was because He 
was God in the flesh, because He made His impeccable 
humanity the throne of the Godhead; as it is written: 

“In him dwelleth all the fulness of the godhead 
bodily.” (Colossians 2:9.) 

All the forces of the universe were concentrated in 
that marvellous body; a body more resplendent in its 
essential glory than all the stars, the suns and systems 
in the endless spaces. All the operation of all the 


168 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


energy in the universe proceeded and came forth from 
that body. When He spoke it was with the same ac- 
cent with which in the beginning He had spoken the 
universe upon its course. The miracles He did were 
of the same ease with which He had hung the earth 
on nothing. Realize that He was the Creator of all 
things, and the fact that He raised the dead, trod the 
waters beneath His feet and held back the storm-flung 
waves of Galilee should neither amaze, nor be disquiet- 
ing to the weakest faith. 

“ Ye believe in God,” He said—“ believe also in me.” 

That He was God alone explains Him; that He was 
the very throne of God descended to the earth makes 
all He did of divinest logic. 

The Ark had the law hidden in the heart of it. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ had the law hidden in His 
heart; as it is written: 

“ Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire; burnt 
offering and sin offering hast thou not required. 

Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book 
it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God: 
yea thy law is within my heart.” (Psalm 40:6-8.) 

He was born under the law, circumcized the eighth 
day according to the law. 

He kept the law perfectly, perfectly toward God and 
perfectly toward man. 

He loved God with all His mind and heart and soul 
and strength. He was full of the atmosphere of God. 
Every deed He did He did to glorify Him. Every 
word He spoke He uttered that He might exalt Him. 
His very breath distilled the idea of God, and the par- 
ticular idea and concept of Him as the Father. If He 
spoke of sheep upon the hillside, it was as His Father’s 


THE ARK OF THE COVENANT 169 


sheep; if He described a lily it was that men might 
see His Father’s hand had fashioned and formed it. 

If He loved God with all His being, He loved His 
neighbor as Himself. 

When on one occasion He was speaking and they 
came to Him and told Him His Mother and His 
brethren were outside desiring to speak with Him, He 
said: 

“Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? ” 
and stretching out His hands toward His disciples He 
. said all who should do the will of God were His mother 
and His brethren. 

He received sinners and ate with them. , 

He was perfect in all the requirements of the law. 

In keeping the law He proved He was sinless. 

In His sinlessness under the law He unmasked the 
pretence of those who professed to keep the law; not 
only so, He demonstrated that the law had been or- 
iginally given to make manifest the sin and helpless- 
ness of those who in their folly had asked for the law. 
He demonstrated and proved it by the fact that on the 
one side He was the concrete of the law and on the 
other that His sinlessness revealed their sinfulness and 
open transgression of the law. 

If He had not had eternal life His obedience to the 
law would have earned Him the right to it. 

He kept the law that He might demonstrate His 
ability to do the will of God; that the will of God was 
the supreme law and that He came into the world to 
do that will. 

Continually He affirmed that this was His work—to 
do the will of God. 

He said: 


170 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“ T seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father 
which hath sent me.” (John 5:30.) 

“‘ T came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, 
but the will of him that sent me.” (John 6:38.) 

“T do always those things which please my Father.” 
(John 8:29.) 

“My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, 
and to finish his work.” (John 4:34.) 

In all this He shows Himself to be of a distinct fibre 
from the natural man. 

He shows it in the absolute and tremendously auda- 
cious claim: 

‘*T came down—from Heaven.’’ 

What honest man ever said that before. 

What honest, self-respecting man would dare to say 
it today. 

(And by the way, let it be asked if He came down 
from Heaven, by what logic do men with their unbelief 
keep Him from going back to Heaven. Does it not 
lie in the realm of indisputable logic that a being and 
personality who had power to come down from Heaven 
should have equal power to go back to Heaven; that 
a being who should have power to overcome what ap- 
pears to be fixed law in relation to this planet would 
have equal power to rise above that law whether in 
life or death and go back to a world outside of this 
planet? ) 

He showed Himself, indeed, distinct from all other 
men in this exaltation of the will of God in His life. 

Listen to this utterance: 

“Not my will, but thine, be done.” 

What a blazing contrast to the natural man whose 
whole inspiration and motive is the accomplishment of 
his own will, 


THE ARK OF THE COVENANT 171 


And what think you was that will that made Him 
keep the law of Sinai, and the will behind Sinai that 
made Him lay aside His form and appearing as God 
and come down from Heaven to dwell among men? 

Is there any need to be in doubt about it? 

Is there any need to be in doubt about the work He 
came to do as the expression of the Father’s will? 

Need we be caught at all in the snares of those who 
teach the will of God concerning Him was that He 
should just lead a sinaitic, law-abiding life as the sav- 
ing example of men? 

‘No! a thousand times—no! 

Scripture makes it as clear as a cloudless sky. , 

God the Father found no satisfaction in the yearly 
day of atonement, in the sacrifices offered thereon. 
The sacrifice of bulls and goats could not take away 
sin and thus permit God to become the Saviour of men. 

“In those sacrifices there is a remembrance again 
made of sins every year. 

For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of 
goats should take away sins.”” (Hebrews 10:3, 4.) 

The living God wanted a sacrifice that would meet 
the demands of His law, His government and being. 

That was His desire. 

God’s desire is God’s will. 

The eternal Son of God at once responded to this 
desire, to this will. 

He laid aside “ the form of God,” came down from 
Heaven and entered the world to do the will of God, to 
be His perfect servant; as it is written: 

‘“ When he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice 
and offering thou wouldest not, (that is the sacrifice 
of bulls and goats) but a body hast thou prepared 
me.’’ (Hebrews 10:5.) 


172 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


God the Father was not satisfied with the bodies of 
bulls and goats offered Him in sacrifice. He wanted a 
better body than theirs. 

Immediately the Son says: 

“‘T come to do thy will, O God.” (V. 7.) 

And that we may have no excuse for being in the 
dark and blundering about this will of God our Lord 
came to fulfill, the Apostle under the inspiration of the 
Holy Spirit writes: 

“‘ By the which will we (who believe) are sanctified 
by the offering of the body (the prepared body spoken 
of in V. 5) of Jesus Christ once for all.” (V. 10.) 

Here then beyond the need of discussion we are told, 
and told from headquarters, that our Lord Jesus 
Christ offered His prepared body as a sacrifice for sin 
according to the will of God the Father, that it was 
the will of God that He should become incarnate and 
offer Himself as a whole Burnt Offering and as a per- 
fect Sin Offering. 

This was the will our Lord Jesus Christ came from 
Heaven to do 

He hid the law in His heart as it was hidden in 
the ark. 

He fulfilled it to the letter. 

It was that complete fulfillment which found its ac- 
cent in His cry on the cross: “ It is finished.” 

The Ark contained the Golden pot that had manna. 

Manna was the bread God sent down from Heaven 
to feed the Children of Israel on their way to the 
Promised Land. (Exodus 16:11-15.) 

The Manna was a symbol of our Lord Jesus Christ 
as the Bread of Life on which as Christians we are to 
feed as we journey through the world on our way to 
the great inheritance; for He Himself has said: 


THE ARK OF THE COVENANT 173 


“ T am that bread of life. 

Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and 
are dead. 

This is the bread which cometh down from heaven 
* * * if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: 
and the bread I will give is my flesh which I will give 
for the life of the world.” (John 6:48-51.) 

The manna in the ark and the ark as the symbol of 
His incarnation, are symbols of the fact that He be- 
came incarnate that He might die, rise again, ascend 
to Heaven and from thence become the source of the 
new and spiritual life He should give. 

The golden pot that held the manna emphasizes the 
fact that He was divine as well as human. 

In the Ark was placed Aaron’s rod that budded. 

There was a revolt in Israel against Moses and 
Aaron. 

They were charged with taking too much upon 
themselves. 

The Lord entered into judgment with the rebels and 
slew them. (Numbers 16.) 

That He might establish the priesthood of Aaron 
against all controversy He required that a rod should 
be taken from each tribe with the name of the head 
of the tribe written on it. 

Aaron’s name was written on his rod as from the 
tribe of Levi. 

The Lord commanded the rods to be placed in the 
Tabernacle before the Ark. 

The man whose rod should blossom should be 
proven to be the man whom God had chosen and or- 
dained to be priest. 

The next day when Moses entered in to look at them 
he found the rod of Aaron had budded; not only so, it 


174 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


had burst out into full blossom; not only that—it bore 
fruit of almonds. 

It was thus in three stages: bud, blossom, fruit. 

It was full of almonds. 

The Almond tree is the first to bloom after the chill 
and death of winter. 

It is a symbol of resurrection life. 

This living rod was not only an avouchment of the 
priesthood of Aaron, but a symbolic prophecy of the 
priesthood of our Lord. 

He should be a priest after He rose from the dead. 

His priesthood should not be like that of Aaron’s, 
subject to change by reason of death. He should rise 
never to die again. He should ever live and make in- 
tercession; as it is written: 

“But this man because he continueth ever, hath an 
unchangeable priesthood . . ._ he ever liveth to 
make intercession.” (Hebrews 7:24, 25.) 

The rod in the ark with its bud, blossom and fruit 
was a witness that the Son of God should become in- 
carnate, bring the throne of God from Heaven to earth, 
that with omnipotent power He might offer Himself in 
sacrificial death, rise again and from Heaven be the 
continual source of life, strength and abounding hope 
to all who should believe in and trust Him as such. 

The Ark was made complete with a golden 
crown at the top. 

The border had the band and edge of a king’s crown. 

It was the consummation of the Ark. 

It was a prophetic symbol that the incarnation of 
the Son of God should find its consummation in the 
office, the function and the glory of a king. 

He was born a king. (Matthew 2:2.) 


THE ARK OF THE COVENANT 175 


He rode into Jerusalem and offered Himself as King. 
(John 12:13-15.) 

He was offered by Pilate to the Jews as their King. 
(John 19:14.) 

He was crucified as King. 

God the Father took Him to Heaven as a rejected 
King, placed Him at His right hand and bade Him sit 
there till the hour should come to make His enemies 
His footstool. (Psalm 110:1.) 

He is seen in Heaven as the Lamb that had been 
slain, and at the same time, as the Lion of the Tribe 
.of Judah, and therefore as the King. of the Jews in 
exile. 

God the Father will yet set Him as a King upon His 
Holy Hill of Zion. (Psalm 2:6.) 

He is coming as King of kings and Lord of lords. 
(Revelation 19:16.) 

Thus in the Ark of the Covenant we have a picture 
of our Lord Jesus Christ and His varied glories. 

The enthronement of God in humanity—His per- 
fect humanity. 

The concrete of the Law of Sinai. 

The Prepared Body. 

The Heavenly Bread. 

The Everlasting Priest. 

The King of the Jews. 

The King of Israel. 

The King of kings. 

Immortal man. 

Very God. 


XVII 
THE MERCY SEAT 


HE Mercy Seat was the lid of the Ark of the 
Covenant. 


It was pure, solid gold. 

Out from each end of it there was beaten and 
fashioned a figure of the cherubim. 

They bowed inward toward each other with their 
faces to the Mercy Seat. 

Their wings were lifted up above their heads, form- 
ing a canopy of wings. 

The lid of gold was set in a groove under the cor- 
nice or crown of the Ark and fitted with absolute 
exactness. 

Between the cherubim figures the shekinal light 
shone forth. 

It was here God met and dealt with the representa- 
tives of Israel; as it is written: 

“And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: 
two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and 
a cubit and a half the breadth thereof. 

And thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of 
beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of 
the mercy seat. 

And make one cherub on the one end, and the other 
cherub on the other end: even of the mercy seat shall 
ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof. 

And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on 
high, covering the mercy seat with their wings, ana 
their faces shall look one to another; toward the mercy 
seat shall the faces of the cherubims be. 


THE MERCY SEAT 177 


And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the 
ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that 
I shall give thee. 

And there I will meet with thee, and I will com- 
mune with thee from above the mercy seat, from be- 
tween the two cherubims which are upon the ark of 
the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in 
commandment unto the children of Israel.” (Exodus 
25:17-21.) 

The Mercy Seat is a distinct symbol of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

There is a Scripture which He, declares that 
it is; as it is written: 

Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation 
through faith in his blood.” (Romans 3:25.) 

The word “propitiation” is a translation of the 
Greek word, hilasterion, and hilasterion means— 
“mercy seat.” 

Literally, the Apostle says: 

“Whom God hath set forth to be a mercy seat 
through faith in his blood.” 

According to Holy Scripture therefore the Mercy 
Seat in the Tabernacle was a symbol of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

He is the true Mercy Seat and to be approached by 
faith in His blood. 

The Mercy Seat was placed upon the Ark of the 
Covenant, the symbol of the throne of God. 

The Ark and therefore the Mercy Seat were behind 
the vail in the Most Holy Place, the Holy of Hollies. 

The Mercy Seat as well as the Ark could be seen 
but once a year and that on the day of atonement. 

On that day the priest offered a sacrifice at the 
Brazen Altar, took the blood, sprinkled it before the 


178 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


vail, put it aside, entered the sacred place, stood be- 
fore the Mercy Seat, sprinkled the blood thereon and 
hastened out lest if he tarried a moment he should die. 

As the Mercy Seat is a symbol of our Lord Jesus 
Christ (Scripturally so declared) and the Mercy Seat 
was upon the Ark of the Covenant, the symbol of the 
throne of God (Scripturally so declared) and as the 
Mercy Seat could be seen only after the sacrifice had 
been offered on the day of atonement, then you have 
a perfect picture of our Lord after He had offered 
Himself on the cross as a sacrifice for sin, after He 
rose from the dead, ascended to Heaven and sat down 
on the throne of God. 

The Type and the antitype are complete. 

The picture is such as only the Spirit of the living 
God could paint. 

It is the picture of a risen, ascended, deathless, im- 
mortal man on the throne of God. 

The Cherubim were on the Mercy Seat and formed 
an essential part of it. 

You could not separate the cherubim from the 
Mercy Seat. 

To separate the Cherubim from the Mercy Seat you 
would have had to break, ruin and destroy the Mercy 
Seat. 

The Cherubim represent supremacy over natural 
powers. 

They symbolize all power. 

In the logic of symbols they testify that our Lord 
Jesus Christ on the throne of God today has all power. 

He claimed all power when He was on earth. 

He claimed all power after His resurrection and just 
before He ascended, to His disciples He said: 


THE MERCY SEAT WY 


“ All power is given unto me in heaven and in 
earth.” (Matthew 28: 18.) 

All Power is—omnipotence. 

Here then you have the amazing fact: 

An omnipotent man on the throne of God in 
Heaven. 

What that ought to mean to those of us who believe 
in Him! 

Behold us in our mortal flesh, subject to a thousand 
ills, in a world of sin, confronted by problems we can- 
not solve and where we are called upon to turn away 
from sight and mere reason and live by faith. 

At the sight of things we see, in the face of condi- 
tions that sometimes seem to crush out all hope and 
all impulse to live, when we are absolutely nigh unto 
fainting under burdens which seem not only too heavy 
but actually unjust, when perplexity stands at the 
cross roads and smiles with a cruel smile at our inde- 
cision, the smile of the sphynx that will not speak and 
instruct us; when we confront all this where shall we 
turn to find comfort, get fresh courage to take up the 
burden again and go on in the pilgrim way? 

There is one answer. 

“Look up.” 

Behold Him whose face was once wet with tears of 
sympathy, who walked the earth “a man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief,” behold Him on the cross, 
having come all the way down from His pre-existent 
glory and hanging there for us, our sacrifice, our sin 
bearer, our punishment for sin; behold Him now on 
the throne of the All Highest and with all power, 
omnipotent, the man who died for us because He loved 
us even when we were dead in sins, loving us still and 


180 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


still filled with sympathy, the sympathy that even now 
inspires and distills His tears for us. 

He is up there specially for us. 

What then? 

Shall we cry aloud and insist that for our sakes He 
shall fash the forked lightnings and send down the 
chariots of His glory. Shall we demand that He open 
Heaven and send forth a squadron of His mighty and 
waiting angels and prove Himself omnipotent God and 
at the same time that we shamefully are of little faith 
and unwilling to abide in His wisdom, His grace, as well 
as power? 

Nay! 

Because of all He was in Himself when here, be- 
cause of all He was for us on the cross, because of all 
He is for us now and changeth not, because He is 
Jesus Christ the immutable, the same yesterday, today 
and for ever, and has all power, and because the re- 
straint of His power is as much an evidence of His 
omnipotence as the exercise of it we are to do just the 
one thing: 

Trust Him. 

Say with the Psalmist: 

“In the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, 
until these calamities are overpast.” (Psalm 57:1.) 

The fact that He is there on the throne, the omnipo- 
tent man who is very God, and there for us, knowing 
each one of us by name and all the circumstances of 
our life, that should be all sufficient to bid us rest with 
peace in the love that is as much for us in its silence 
and quiescence as well as when in open action. 

Again with the Psalmist we may say: 

“What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.” 
(Psalm 56:3.) 


THE MERCY SEAT 181 


And remember this well: 

You cannot separate the Cherubim from the Mercy 
Seat without ruining it; just so, you cannot set aside 
the deity of Christ without utterly repudiating Him as 
the Christ set forth in Holy Scripture. 

Indeed you cannot separate His humanity and His 
deity without destroying the Scriptures themselves. 

The verses which speak most clearly of His human- 
ity are the verses which speak most authoritatively of 
His deity. 

Behold Him at the well of Sychar. 

What does the record say: 

“ Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey, sat 
thus on the well.” (John 4:6.) 

To the sinful woman who came there He said: 

“Give me to drink.” 

Weary! and thirsty! 

Can there be anything more human than that? 

But then you have V. 10. 

Listen to the record: 

““ Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest 
the gift of God, and who it is that saith unto thee, 
Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, 
and he would have given thee living water.” 

He declares the “living water” to be the gift of 
God, and then says He is able to give it. 

Who can give the gift of God but God Himself? 

In affirming “living water” to be the gift of God 
and claiming power to give that gift Himself He 
openly and plainly declares Himself to be very God. 

You cannot separate His humanity and His deity in 
that record. 

Behold Him weeping at the grave of Lazarus, and 
weeping with tears as human as ever washed the face 


182 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


of sorrowing men and women, groaning in Himself and 
making a protest against death, rebelling against it, 
and then doing what only God can do, calling the dead 
to life. 

Where will you find the knife whose blade is thin 
enough and sharp enough to separate between the 
deity and the humanity of Christ in that record? 

Asleep in the midst of the storm in Galilee, asleep 
from very weariness, arising and with a word stilling 
the storm, doing that which is declared to be the func- 
tion and the privilege as well as the power of God 
alone; as it is written: 

“Thou (the Lord God) rulest the raging of the sea; 
when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them.” 
(Psalm 89:9.) 

Either you must accept the whole record with its 
human weariness and its unqualified act of God, or 
reject it all. 

No! you cannot separate the Cherubim from the 
Mercy Seat. 

Like the Cherubim beaten out of the pure gold of 
the Mercy Seat, in it and of it, the humanity and the 
deity of Christ are of one piece—one person. 

The Mercy Seat was covered with the blood of 
the atoning sacrifice. 

Immediately after the sacrifice was offered on the 
Brazen Altar the priest took the blood of the victim 
in a bason, went within the vail and sprinkled it upon 
the Mercy Seat. 

Our Lord fulfilled the type and symbol exactly. 

On the day He rose from the dead as antitypical 
high priest He ascended to Heaven and put His blood 
upon the throne of God; as it is written: 

“Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by 


THE MERCY SEAT 183 


(dia with the Genitive as instrument of action and 
therefore, with, as well as, by) his own blood he en- 
tered in once into the holy place, (that is, Heaven) 
having obtained eternal redemption for us.” (He- 
brews 9:12.) 

He ascended and took His blood within the vail and 
placed it on the throne of God the very day He arose. 

His words to Mary demonstrate it. 

In the grey dawn of the resurrection morning when 
she came to the tomb, her face still wet with continual 
weeping, and found the sepulchre empty and the body 
gone, it came upon her like a shock that some ruthless 
enemy had entered the sacred place arid taken away 
the body of her Lord. 

She saw one whom she supposed to be the rich 
man’s gardner. 

He turned to her and said: 

“Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest 
thoue ” 

When the angels had asked her that question she 
answered and said: 

“Because they have taken away my Lord, and I 
know not where they have laid him.” 

But to the man whom she supposed to be the gard- 
ner she said: 

“Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where 
thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.” 

O wondrous Mary, what Jove was thine, precious 
that crucified body to thee. 

But she did not know this supposed gardner who 
talked to her was the Lord Himself. In the grey mist 
of the hour she did not see distinctly and her tears 
seemed to vail everything from her vision, everything 
was blinded by that soul mist that filled her eyes. 


164 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Then this seeming gardner said just one word: 

66 Mary.’’ 

O the music of it. 

Suppose your beloved dead (more beloved now they 
are dead than ever you dreamed) should suddenly ap- 
pear to you and speak your name? 

Do you think there is any music on earth would be 
like that to you? 

Thanks be to God this is the music that shall sound 
in our ears on the morning of the First Resurrection 
when He shall come to take us up together and our 
names shall be uttered on lips long since held closed 
under the seal of death. 

And mark how she answered: 

“ Rabboni; which is to say, Master.” 

All He put into that word, ‘“‘ Mary,” she put back 
into that word, “ Master.” 

All the love that said, “‘ Mary,” from His lips, from 
her lips replied in ‘‘ Master.” 

But she said more than just “ Master.” 

“Rabboni ” is a noun, in the possessive it means: 

‘*My Master.” 

Just as David said, “ My shepherd.” 

With that same intense accent of personal appro- 
priation she said, ‘“‘ My Master.” 

In that supreme moment she forgot everybody, 
everything else but Him and herself. 

There He was face to face with her and—alive. 

She shut out the thought of the relation of anybody 
to Him but herself. 

‘““My Master alive, and mine for ever more.” For 
the moment there was nothing else in the universe for 
her but that. 


This is the personal appropriation that brings inti- 


THE MERCY SEAT 185 


mate joy. There is nothing like it: My Master and 
Me. Let the world fade and all things in it be as 
though they never had been, here is the abiding thing, 
My Master and me in a relationship of life that death 
cannot sever, in a relationship of love that nothing can 
destroy. 

She prostrated herself in the gladness of self-abase- 
ment before Him and would have kissed His feet. 

But with almost terrifying abruptness He said: 

“Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my 
Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I 
ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my 
' God, and your God.” (John 20:11-17.) 

“T ascend to my Father.” 

Literally, 

“T am now about to ascend to my Father.” 

He was on His way to Heaven and the Holy of 
Holies within the vail. 

Because He was about to ascend there He would not 
allow her mortal lips even to touch His feet. 

But that same evening in the upper room where the 
disciples were gathered together, He came and stood in 
their midst and said unto them: 

“Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my- 
self: handle me and see.” (Luke 24:39.) 

If in the morning He would not allow His body to 
be touched because as He said to Mary He was on His 
way to Heaven and to the Father, and in the evening 
of the same day commanded the disciples not only to 
touch Him, but to handle Him, and the word as used 
here means, intimately, closely to examine Him, there 
is only one conclusion, and that is, between the time 
He saw Mary in the morning and spoke to her, and 
the evening when He stood face to face with the dis- 


, 


186 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


ciples and insisted on their doing what He had forbid- 
den Mary to do, He had ascended to the Father’s 
throne in Heaven and had returned to earth. 

And all this is in strict accordance with the type. 

On the day of atonement the priest offered a sin 
offering. 

All the blood of the sin offering was to be poured 
out at the bottom of the altar, there was to be no blood 
left in the body of the victim. 

As it is written: 

“And the priest . . . shall pour all the blood of 
the bullock (sin offering) at the bottom of the altar 
of the burnt offering, (the Brazen Altar) which is at 
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.” 
(Leviticus 4:7.) 

Our Lord Jesus Christ was the true sin offering. 

“God hath made him to be sin for us.” (II Corin- 
thians 5:21.) 

“Once in the end of the age hath he appeared to 
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.” (Hebrews 
9:26.) 

“‘ His own self bare our sins in his own body on the 
tree.” (I Peter 2:24.) 

The Prophet Isaiah foretold God would make Him 
to be a sin offering. 

“Thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin.” 
(Isaiah 53:10.) 

The Cross of Calvary was the Brazen Altar. 

On the cross He poured out all His blood. 

It poured out from beneath the crown of thorns that 
stabbed His forehead. 

It poured out from His hands where the nails went 
driving, crunchingly through to the wood of the cross. 

It poured out from His right hand. 


THE MERCY SEAT 187 


It poured out from His left hand. 

It poured out from His feet. 

The feet driven through with a spike that held them. 

Then a spear was thrust into His side, and the blood 
poured out from His heart with water, a witness that 
He was already dead, that He died of a physically 
broken heart—a broken-hearted Christ. 

And the blood flowed down like a rain of blood. 

It fell into the bottom of the Altar—-the bottom of 
the Cross. 

The blood was all poured out of His body. 

Thus was He the fulfilled Sin Offering. 

That this blood had all been poured out of His body, 
He Himself declared in that upper room that Sunday 
night of His resurrection. 

Hear what He says to them: 

“Handle me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and 
bones, as ye see me have.” (Luke 24:39.) 

When speaking of men we often describe them as 
“ flesh and blood.” 

We do not say, “ flesh and bones.” 

But He said, “ flesh and bones.” 

If He had said, “ flesh and blood” as ye see me 
have, He would have destroyed Himself as the Anti- 
typical Sin Offering, destroyed the meaning of His 
death and the value of His cross. 

But He said, “ flesh and bones,” because He was the 
actual Sin Offering and all the blood had been 
poured out of His body on the cross. 

But now mark the type and its characteristic ful- 
fillment. 

On the day of atonement the priest should proceed 
as follows: 

“He shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire 


188 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


from off the altar before the Lorp (the Altar of In- 
cense), and his hands full of sweet incense beaten 
small, and bring it within the vail: 

And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the 
Lorp, that the cloud of the incense may cover the 
mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he die not: 

And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and 
sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy seat east- 
ward; and before the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of 
the blood with his finger seven times.” (Leviticus 
16:12-14.) 

When our Lord rose from the dead He became a 
priest, not after the order of Aaron, but after the order 
of Melchisedec; as it is written: 

“Made an high priest for ever after the order of 
Melchisedec.” (Hebrews 6:20.) 

As a Priest on that resurrection morning when He 
met Mary on His way to Heaven He took His blood 
to the throne of God within the vail. 

“Within the vail; 

Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, 
made an high priest, for ever after the order of 
Melchisedec.”’ 

The incense He took up with the blood was the fra- 
grance of His perfect work in offering Himself as a 
sacrifice for sin. 

The blood within the vail changed the throne of God 
from a throne of judgment to a throne of grace; as it 
is written: 

“Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that 
is passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, 
let us hold fast our profession, (do not allow any doubt 
to rob you of the joy and privilege of it). 

Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 


THE MERCY SEAT 189 


grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace.” 
(Hebrews 4:14-16.) 

The Ark was a chest. 

The tables of the law were placed within it. 

The Mercy Seat like a golden lid covered the Ark. 

It covered it exactly. 

It covered over the law within it, covered it exactly, 
met it at every point and hid it from view. 

When the priest approached the Mercy Seat he saw 
the blood thereon. 

He knew the blood was between him and the law. 

He knew the blood of the sin offering had met and 
settled (ceremonially) all claims of the law against him. 

He knew judgment against him for that year was at 
an end. 

The Lord looked at the blood. 

He knew it had met (ceremonially) all His claims 
against the sinner. 

He had no judgment against him. 

Where there is no judgment there is grace. 

On the basis of His ceremonially established right- 
eousness, established by the sacrificial death of a vic- 
tim on the Brazen Altar, He could deal in grace, invite 
men to approach and hold communion with Him. 

All this is set forth in the Lord’s instruction to 
Moses concerning the Mercy Seat. 

He says: 

“‘ And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the 
ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony (the 
law) that I shall give thee. 

And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune 
with thee from above the mercy seat.” (Exodus 
25:20 4225) 

At the blood stained Mercy Seat He would meet and 


1909 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


commune with those who approached Him on the basis 
of that blood. 

And all this has been wondrously fulfilled. 

The blood is on the throne in Heaven. 

The throne of God is a blood sprinkled throne. 

When we look up, by faith we see the blood. 

We know the blood is between us and all the claims, 
not only of the law of Sinai; but the essential law of 
God’s righteousness. 

We know all claims against us have been “ covered,” 
(the Hebrew word “to atone” means “to cover,”) 
that is, ‘‘ met,” (for sometimes in speaking of the set- 
tlement of a claim involving money, or price, we say, 
the claims were covered, the expenses were covered, or 
met, and we mean satisfied—) complete satisfaction 
has been rendered to God, the voice of judgment is 
hushed. 

When God looks at the blood He knows all His 
claims against us have been met at every “ point,” and 
His righteousness exalted hy the death of the cross. 

He no longer has judgment against us. 

Thus it is that the throne of God today is a throne 
of grace. . 

On the basis of blood established righteousness He 
now invites us to draw near that we may hold com- 
munion with Him and He with us. 

This then is our privilege as believers, to ascend by 
faith to Him who is on the throne, both as Mercy Seat 
and Priest, and He will meet us there. 

Not in lordly fanes, amid the sounds of swelling 
organ, not where censers are swung by human hands 
are we to meet Him and have Him hold communion 
with us, but in Spirit, by faith—within the vail—in 
Heaven itself. 


THE MERCY SEAT 19] 


To the woman of Samaria the Lord said: 

“Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall 
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship 
the Father. 

But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true 
worshipper shall worship the Father in Spirit and in 
truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him.” 
(John 4:22, 23.) 

Therefore it is that the Apostle writes his ex- 
hortation: 

“ Having therefore, brethren, boldness (liberty) to 
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. 

By a new and living way which he hath consecrated 
for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh; 

And having a high priest over the house of God; 

Let us draw near in full assurance of faith.” (He- 
brews 10:19-22.) 

Sprinkled with the bleod that was shed for us, blood 
that has met our case, blood that tells us He who shed 
it, who died for us, is alive upon the throne for us, 
immortal, glorified, omnipotent man, our living and 
ever interceding priest. 

Wondrous Mercy Seat! well may we draw near and 
listen while He talks to us; for the startling thing is this, 
when we draw nigh in Spirit and in truth, when His 
Word is dwelling richly in us, by and through that 
very Word He will speak intelligently to us, and our 
hearts shall burn within us as we hear His gracious 
and hope-inspiring speech, 


XVIII 
THE TABLE OF SHEWBREAD 


HE Table occupied the northern side of the 
Holy Place. 


It was two cubits long, a cubit wide and a 
cubit and a half high. 

It was made of the usual incorruptible wood. 

It was overlaid with pure gold. 

It had two cornices or crowns, an outer and an inner 
crown. 

There were four gold rings at the four corners, two 
on a side. 

Through these were passed wooden bars or staves 
covered with gold. They were the handles by which 
the Table was to be carried when on the journey. 

Twelve loaves of bread were placed on the table, six 
in a row. 

On these were placed frankincense; for, it was 
counted as an offering made by fire unto the Lord. 

The bread was to be renewed every Sabbath. 

It was to be eaten by the priestly family in the Holy 
Place. 

“Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two 
cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the 
breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height 
thereof. 

And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make 
thereto a crown of gold round about. 

And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand- 
breadth round about, and thou shalt make a golden 
crown to the border thereof round about. 


THE TABLE OF SHEWBREAD 198 


_ And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and 
put the rings in the four corners that are on the four 
feet thereof. 

Over against the border shall the rings be for places 
of the staves to bear the table. 

And thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and 
overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne 
with them.” (Exodus 25:23-28.) 

“And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve 
cakes thereof: two tenth deals shall be in one cake. 

And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, 
. upon the pure table before the Lorp. 

And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each 
row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even 
an offering made by fire unto the Lorp. 

Every Sabbath he (Aaron, the high priest) shall set 
it in order before the Lorp continually, being taken 
from the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant. 

And it shall be Aaron’s and his sons; and they shall 
eat it in the holy place: for it is most holy unto him 
of the offerings of the Lorp made by fire by a per- 
petual statute.” (Leviticus 24:5-9.) 

The Table and the Bread were considered as one. 

When the Table is spoken of it includes the bread. 

When the Bread is mentioned it signifies the Table. 

The word, “ shewbread,” is, literally, ‘“ bread of the 
face,” that is to say, ‘‘ bread of the presence.” 

It is called the “continual” bread. (Numbers 4:7, 
2; Chronicles 2:4.) 

The twelve loaves represented the twelve tribes of 
Israel. 

They were a continual memorial unto the Lord of 
the twelve tribes and His covenant promises unto them. 

As these twelve loaves set the twelve tribes as one 


194 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


people before the Lord; so, also, it is a symbol that 
the Church although constituted of many members is 
one bread; as it is written: 

“‘ We being many are one bread (that is, one loaf).” 
(I Corinthians 10:7.) 

The one bread, the one loaf, the one Church, ever 
recalling to the Lord His covenant promises made unto 
her. 

As the Table and the Bread were one, so Christ and 
the Church are one Christ. 

He is the Head, the Church is the Body; as it is 
written: 

“ For as the body is one, and hath many members, 
and all the members of that one body, being many, are 
one body: so also is Christ.” (I Corinthians 12:12.) 

The word ‘‘ Christ ” should have the article. 

Properly it should read: 

“So is the Christ.”’ 

The Christ here refers to the Church as the Body 
of Christ. 

A mar’s name belongs both to his head and his body. 

Just so, the Head of the Church is called Christ, and 
because the Church is His Body it is, also, called 
Christ. 

The Table upheld the loaves. 

It is Christ who upholds the Church and presents 
her continually as the “ continual bread” before God 
the Father; as it is written: 

“‘ Able to keep you from falling, and to present you 
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceed- 
ing joy.” (Jude 24.) 

The Table was the center of union for the 
priestly family. 

The typical teaching is plain enough. 


THE TABLE OF SHEWBREAD 195 


As Christians we are spiritual priests; as it is 
written: 

‘An holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, 
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.” (I Peter 2:5.) 

“Present your bodies a living (not dead) sacrifice.” 
(Romans 12:1.) 

““ By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise 
to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving 
thanks to his name.” (Hebrews 13:15.) 

As spiritual priests there is only one center around 
which we can meet and that center is the Risen and 
Living Christ. 

He has declared Himself to be the center of every 
true. assembly; as it is written: 

“Where two or three are gathered together in my 
name, there am I in the midst of them.” (Matthew 
18:20.) 

Apart from all other teaching, what an astounding 
statement is this. 

The statement that wherever in this round world, 
and no matter how far they may be from one another, 
ali Christians who gather sincerely in His name, there 
He is, not His influence, but Himself. 

‘* There am I.”’ 

This is nothing less than—omnipresence. 

What a claim, and because He is truth itself, there- 
fore true. 

What a dynamic, irrefutable demonstration that He 
claimed to be and was very God. 

The Table was the center of daily nourishment 
for the priestly family. 

The shewbread was their divinely appointed food. 

‘They shall eat it in the holy place.” (Leviticus 
24:9.) 


196 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The loaves also set forth our Lord Jesus Christ as 
the Bread of Life. 

He declared unto the Jews He was such. 

God had given their fathers manna in the wilder- 
ness, and were dead. 

He had come down from Heaven as the True bread, 
those who should eat of Him should never die. Then 
He told them that He would give His flesh for the 
salvation of men. He would offer Himself as a sacri- 
fice for sin, those who should eat His flesh and drink 
His blood would find Him the bread of everlasting 
life unto them. By eating His flesh and drinking His 
blood He meant the appropriation of His sacrificial 
death and the acceptance of Him by faith as their per- 
sonal substitute. 

The symbolic meaning of eating is self evident. 

It is by eating we appropriate the food and make 
it a part of ourselves. 

There must be this personal, individual appropria- 
tion of Christ if we would live by and in Him and have 
Him to live in us. 

But personal appropriation does not stop with the 
mere acceptance of the Lord as a personal, sacrificial 
Saviour. 

He says: 

“Tam come that they might have life, and that they 
might have it more abundantly.’’ (John 10:10.) 

A thing grows by what it feeds on. 

It is our privilege to feed on Christ day by day and 
grow in Him while He expands in and fills us with 
Himself. 

We are to feed on Him by more and more appro- 
priating Him to ourselves, appropriating Him as our 
perfect sacrifice and resting in the love and security 


THE TABLE OF SHEWBREAD 197 


of it; we are to appropriate Him as our living Head, 
loving us and living for us; and throwing ourselves 
more and more open to the penetration of His will 
above our will, allow Him to fill us with His own joy. 

Let a Christian so appropriate the Lord Jesus Christ 
day by day, He will find His soul fed and filled with 
Christ as the living bread and living each day more 
and more in the consciousness that it is the living 
Christ that liveth in Him. 

And now let it be remembered in the logic of the 
symbols that the bread became such only after the 
flour had been ground beneath the upper and the 
nether millstones, moulded into a loaf by a determin- 
ing hand and made to pass through the test of a fire- 
heated oven, so the Christ of God became the living 
bread for appropriation only after He had been ground 
beneath the upper and the nether millstones of the 
cross, felt the determining, decreeing hand of a cove- 
nant God, had passed through the agonizing test of 
body and soul in the down sweep and the all environ- 
ing, oven-like heat, of the wrath of God against the sin 
He represented. As He Himself said through the lips 
of a prophet, ‘‘ From above hath He sent fire into my 
bones and it prevaileth against them.” 

Let it be further said—only after the priests had 
come by way of the Brazen Altar of sacrifice could 
they eat of the bread; only after Christ is accepted on 
the cross as a personal sacrifice for sin is it possible to 
feed on Him as the Bread of Heaven. 

The Table was the center of fellowship in the 
priestly family. 

Here the priests came together. 

Here they found their unity. 


198 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Here they got into close and happy communion with 
one another. 

They got into this close touch with one another be- 
cause each was gathered about the same table and each 
was occupied with the same bread. 

To have harmony in the assembly of Christ it is 
necessary to be occupied with Christ. 

Only as we get near to Christ do we get near to one 
another. 

Let a Church be taken up with Christ, with the 
glory of His eternal past, the wonder of His redeem- 
ing love, the perfect efficiency of His sacrificial death, 
His unfailing priestly intercession in Heaven now and 
the assurance of His imminent Coming; let a Church 
think Christ, talk Christ, live Christ and serve Christ, 
that Church will become the circumference of Christ, 
the environment revelation of Christ, where each shall 
have the same mind, the mind of Christ, and be at one 
in Christ. 


XIX 
THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 


HE Golden Candlestick was set in the Holy 
Place on the south side opposite the Table of 
Shewbread. 

It was handmade. 

It was beaten by hand out of pure gold. 

It had a central shaft and six branches, three com- 
ing out of each side. 

A branch came out of the shaft at the top and was 
actually the extension of the shaft. 

There were seven branches in all. 

It was highly ornamented. 

Each side branch had three sections. 

Each section had spindles shaped like almonds, a 
knob at the upper end and a flower. 

The central shaft had four of these sections. 

Goiden lamps were placed on the top of the flowers. 

“And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: 
of beaten work shall the candlestick be made: his 
shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his 
flowers, shall be of the same. 

And six branches shall come out of the sides of it; 
three branches of the candlestick out of the one side, 
and three branches of the candlestick out of the other 
side: 

Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop 
and a flower in one branch; and three bowls made like 
almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: 
so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick. 


200 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


And in the candlestick shall be four bowls made like 
unto almonds, with their knops and their flowers. 

And there shall be a knop under two branches of 
the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, 
and a knop under two branches of the same, according 
to the six branches that proceed out of the candlestick. 

Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: 
all it shall be one beaten work of pure gold. 

And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and 
they shall light the lamps thereof, that they may give 
light over against it.” (That is, over against the cen- 
tral shaft.) , (Exodus 25:31-37.) 

The Golden Candlestick was both a light and a 
light bearer. 

It was a perfect, a fitting and a divine symbol of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

He was both light and light bearer. 

He was light as it is written: 

“‘He was the true light, which lighteth every man 
that cometh into the world.” (John 1:9.) 

The correct rendering should read: 

“The true light which lighteth (is able to light) 
every man, was coming into the world.” 

“T the Lorp have called thee in righteousness, and 
will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee 
for a covenant of the people, for a light of the 
Gentiles.’’ (Isaiah 42:6.) 

“‘T will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that 
thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the 
earth.” (Isaiah 49:6.) 

“Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am 
the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 201 


walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.” 
(John 8:12.) 

“As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the 
world.” (John 9:5.) 

He was moral and spiritual light. 

He was essential light; as it is written: 

“God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.” 
(I John 1:5.) 

As He was God manifest in the flesh, He was pure, 
essential light, and in Him was no darkness at all. 

The priests walked in the light of the Golden Can- 
. dlestick that they might perform the service of God. 

It is in Him as the light we must walk if we would 
efficiently fulfill the service of God; as it is written: 

‘“‘ Come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lorp.” 
(Isaiah 2:5.) 

““ Now are ye light in the world: walk as children of 
light.” (Ephesians 5:8.) 

““ Tf we walk in the light, as he (God) is in the light, 
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of 
Jesus Christ, his Son cleanseth us from all sin.” (I 
John 1:7.) 

‘““As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the 
Lord, so walk ye in him.” (Colossians 2:6.) 

The Golden Candlestick was a constant testi- 
mony to the priests that they must not walk in 
the light of nature; and that they could fulfill the 
service of God only as they walked in the light 
provided by Him. 

All natural light was excluded from the Tabernacle. 

They had only the light of the Golden Light Bearer. 

The moment they wished to walk by the light of 
nature they must go outside the Tabernacle. 

But the moment they were outside with all the 


202 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


light of nature upon them they were unable to see 
the wondrous things in the Tabernacle. 

No longer would they have the vision of a man’s 
face in the midst of the outspreading wings of the 
cherubim; that symbol of a man who is very God, and 
that God who is real man would be shut out from them. 

No longer would they see the blood of the Brazen 
Altar upon the Golden Altar of Incense; that symbol 
of priestly intercession in Heaven, based on the blood 
of the cross as the blood of a penal sacrifice, could no 
longer be seen. 

The priest entering behind the vail with the blood 
of atonement and putting the blood before and upon 
the Mercy Seat would have been hidden from their 
eyes; that symbol of a priest, risen and ascended to 
Heaven with the blood of the cross would have been 
blotted from their vision. 

The more they should walk in the light of 
nature, less and less would they be able to see the 
things in the Holy and the Most Holy Place. 

And here you have in startling and terrific object 
lesson the secret of the unbelief, the down grade and 
the open apostasy among:those who profess to serve 
the Lord in His sanctuary today and call themselves, 
the “ ministers of Christ; ”? men who profess to preach 
Christ. 

They are no longer walking in the light of the Holy 
Place. 

They are walking in the light of human reason. 

Christ in the Cherubim they cannot see. 

Christ as Over All God, Son of Mary and real man 
has disappeared from their view. 

The light of nature is so strong, so dazzling, the 
refraction of light from evolution and biology so 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 203 


intense they cannot get the vision of the Virgin Birth; 
they cannot read intelligently, understandingly, the 
great fact that God sent His own Son, not the son of 
any man, but His own Son, “made (and by Him) 
out of a woman.” 

The blood on the Mercy Seat disappears. 

Christ as High Priest after the order of Melchisedec 
disappears. 

Nature’s light has become spiritual darkness to 
them. 

The truth is, they walk by the boundaries of limited 
human reason and not with the eagle-like eyesight of 
faith. 

They are no longer in the sanctuary, the secret place 
of the Most High. 

They are out in the world, on the plane of the world, 
going by the light of the world, and not by the light 
that God provides and which alone shines in the Taber- 
nacle of His presence. 

The moment a professed believer attempts to live 
the Christian life or serve the Lord in the light of the 
natural understanding he is walking outside of 
Christ; he is no longer in fellowship with Him and 
the Father. 

He is not walking nor serving according to the Word 
of God; he is not going according to His mind and will. 
Such an one cannot and will not be used of God. 

To go according to the light of nature is to go ac- 
cording to a light that becomes the darkest of all dark- 
ness; as our Lord Himself has said: 

“Tf the light that is in thee be darkness, how great 
is that darkness.” (Matthew 6:23.) 

If we would be used of God, if we would be in fel- 
lowship with the Father and the Son we must walk in 


204 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


the light as Christ is in the light, in Him as the light 
and the Light bearer—the Golden candlestick and the 
light of God. 

The Golden Candlestick was furnished with oil 
of the sanctuary, oil specially prepared and or- 
dered of God. 

“ And thou shalt command the children of Israel, 
that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, 
to cause the lamp to burn always.” (Exodus 27:20.) 

Oil was for anointing. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ was anointed; as it is written: 

“Thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed.” 
(Acts 4:27.) 

He was anointed by the Spirit. 

He speaks anticipatively through the prophet of that 
anointing. 

He says: 

“The Spirit of the Lorp God is upon me; because 
the Lorp hath anointed me.” (Isaiah 61:1.) 

The Apostle Peter says: 

“God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy 
Ghost and with power.” (Acts 10:38.) 

Oil is therefore the divine symbol of the Holy Spirit. 

Our Lord had the Spirit without measure; as it is 
written: 

“God giveth not the Spirit by measure to him.” 
(John 3:34.) 

The Spirit was not given to Him by measure be- 
cause the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in Him bodily. 

He walked the earth a Spirit-filled man. 

Because He was Spirit filled He was absolute and 
essential truth. 

Truth is light, therefore was He the True Light, the 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 205 


only light by which any man can find his way to God 
~—as the Father. 

He says so Himself: 

“No man cometh unto the Father, but by me.” 
(John 14:6.) 

Therefore He says: 

“He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, 
but have the light of life.’ (John 8:12.) 

As the Church is the reincarnation of Christ and the 
Candlestick is the symbol of Christ, then the Candle- 
stick is also a symbol of the Church of Christ. 

Our risen and glorified Lord says so: 

After His resurrection and ascension to Heaven He 
appeared to John in a vision on the Island of Patmos. 

John saw Him in High Priestly garments walking in 
the midst of seven golden candlesticks. 

He tells John what the golden candlesticks mean: 

He says: 

“The seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the 
seven churches.” (Revelation 1:20.) 

As the Golden Candlestick represents our Lord 
Jesus Christ and was filled with oil as a symbol that He 
was filled with the Spirit; and as the Candlestick is 
declared by Him to be a symbol of the Church, then 
the Candlestick filled with oil is a testimony that the 
Holy Spirit has been given to the Church. 

But mark how the oil was brought forth and made 
to fill the Candlestick. 

It was, ‘“ beaten.” 

The olives were not put into a press, but beaten by 
hand. 

The word “ beaten ” signifies “ bruised.” 

He was “ bruised,” and “ bruised ” by the hand of 
the Father; as it is written: 


206 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“ But it pleased the Lorp to bruise him.” (Isaiah 
397100) 

The Hebrew employs two distinct words for 
“bruise,” but the signification is the same, it is a 
smiting, a beating, a breaking down. 

It was out of, as a consequence of, the agony of the 
Cross the Spirit came to the Church. 

After He rose from the dead and in the evening 
when he had returned from His high priestly ascen- 
sion to Heaven, He gave the Spirit. 

He gave it to the disciples assembled in the upper 
room; as it is written: 

“He breathed on them, and saith unto them, Re- 
ceive ye the Holy Ghost.” (John 20:23.) 

You will notice He did not say “ receive ye the Holy 
Ghost and power;” He said simply, “ Receive ye the 
Holy Ghost.” 

This was the fulfillment of the promise made con- 
cerning the Comforter. 

He promised that after He should rise from the dead 
He would send the Holy Spirit to be their Comforter 
to comfort and sustain them during His absence. 

“Comforter ” means, literally, “stand by.” 

The Holy Spirit should come to them, be their 
Stand by and His Vice-gerent, His Vicar, His unseen 
but representative Agent and Proxy. 

He had said to them: 

“The Spirit of truth . . . dwelleth with you, (at 
that moment in the Lord’s own body) and shall be in 
you.” (John 14:17.) 

“The Comforter . . . whom I will send unto 
you from the Father.” (John 15:26.) 

Ten days before He ascended to Heaven publicly, 


IAXX SNGOXY—ATOVNUAGVL AHL AO SLAMDOS GNV SUVTId ‘SUVA ‘SGYVOd AHL 





IAXX SNdOXY—AIOVNYAAVL AHL AO SONIMHAOD ANV SNIVLYUND AHL 


B 
oO 
i 


Sh 





L2-@2 “1X sndoxyY—AOVId ATIOH AHL 


: 
: 
: 





OI ‘Axx sndoxyY—LVaS ADYAW UNV AAV AHL 














THE LAVER—Exopus xxx, 18 


WAXX SNdOXY—ONINAIAO LNUNG AO UVLIV YO UVLITV NAZvad aHL 


os reetne eres 
“ x 





IIIXX put IIXX saq@WwnAN 
—aVOW AO SNIVId HHL NI SLINHYL YIoHL NI ONICGIGV THVUSI 





YVTId AGNOI ANV ‘ATOVNYAGVL AHL ‘dNVD AHL 





THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 207 


He promised the disciples they should be baptized in 
the Holy Ghost. He said: 

“Ye shall be baptized with (in) the Holy Ghost not 
many days hence.” (Acts 1:5.) 

On the day of Pentecost while the disciples (there 
were now twelve, Matthias having been chosen in the 
place of Judas—-Acts 1:26) while the disciples were 
all “with one accord” in one place the Holy Ghost 
was manifested to them as a mighty rushing wind and 
cloven tongues of fire. He sat upon each of them and 
gave them power to speak with tongues. 

The Apostle Peter standing up with the eleven de- 
_ clared the Lord had, not only risen (and of that resur- 
rection they were the living witnesses) but that this 
risen Lord had ascended to Heaven and sat on the 
throne of God as incarnate Jehovah; and that this 
mighty power impelling the disciples to speak with dif- 
ferent tongues was the proof. 

He said: 

“This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we are 
all witnesses, 

Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, 
and having received of the Father the promise of the 
Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now 
see and hear.” (Acts 2:32, 33.) 

“To shed forth ” is literally “ to pour out.” 

The outpouring of the Holy Spirit and the giving 
of the Comforter are widely distinct from each other, 
they are absolutely as far apart as the east and the 
west. 

The Comforter is the promise of the Son. 

The Outpouring is the promise of the Father. 

The promise of the Comforter was made by the 
Lord previous to His death. 


208 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The promise of the Outpouring at Pentecost was 
made eight hundred years before our Lord was 
born. 

The promise of the Comforter was made directly 
and individually by the Lord Himself. 

The promise of Pentecost was made by the Father 
through the prophet Joel. 

This is the statement of the Apostle Peter. 

He said: 

‘This is that which was spoken by the prophet 
Joel.” (Acts 2:16.) 

Joel foretold the great and notable day of the Lord 
was coming. The Lord Himself would descend to 
Jerusalem, to the valley of Jehoshaphat, and pour out 
His judgments on the nations assembled there. He 
would overthrow the enemies of Israel and establish 
the covenant kingdom. 

Just before He should reveal Himself in His judg- 
ments He would pour out of His Spirit on the in- 
habitants of Jerusalem, they should speak with tongues 
and all who should call upon the name of the Lord 
should be saved. 

This explains the question of the disciples. 

When the Lord announced to them the outpouring 
of the Spirit, they said unto Him: 

“ Wilt thou at this time (at the outpouring of the 
Spirit) restore again the kingdom to Israel? ” (Acts 
P63) 

They knew the promise of the outpouring had been 
given by Joel. They knew its fulfillment meant the 
overthrow of their national oppressors, the establish- 
ment of the kingdom and the coming again of the glory 
of Israel. 

The question in the light of the Lord’s promise was 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 209 


logical: if the Spirit should be given would all that Joel 
foretold come to pass, would the long desired kingdom 
be brought in? 

They were in the quiver of expectation. 

He did not answer them directly. 

He said it was not for them to know the times and 
the seasons the Father (you will notice it is the issue 
of the Father, not the Son) had put in His own power 
(that is, had shut up to His own final determination). 

There are wide and inclusive areas in the promises 
of God, the incoming of events and conditions not al- 
ways precised. 

He did not answer because Pentecost was to be a 
test to the Jewish nation. 

If they should accept the outpouring of ie Spirit 
as the begun fulfillment of the prophecy of Joel, as 
the proof that Jesus of Nazareth whom they had so 
wantonly crucified was their true Messiah, had risen 
and was now on the throne of God, if they should be 
willing to accept Him as their covenant King, the 
Father would send Him back, restore the nation and 
fill the land of Israel with glory. 

Later on, standing in the temple after he had healed 
the lame man at the gate Beautiful, arraigning the 
people because they had accepted a murderer and cru- 
cified their own Messiah, and yet recognizing they had 
done it through ignorance, not knowing that this Jesus 
was the very Prince of life, and assuring them He had 
fulfilled all the law and the prophets, and was now 
seated on the Father’s throne waiting to be gracious 
to them, Peter announced to the listening throng their 
opportunity and obligation as a nation. 

He said: 

“ Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your 


210 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


sins may be blotted out when (so that) the times of 
refreshing (restoration of the kingdom) shall (may) 
come from the presence of the Lord; 

And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was 
preached unto you.” (Acts 3:20.) 

As a nation they failed to meet the test. 

They failed to recognize the meaning of Pentecost. 

Having rejected the Lord when He walked in their 
midst, having acclaimed Caesar instead of Christ for 
King, they finally and officially rejected Him as risen 
from the dead, refused to believe He was on the throne 
of God. And this they did when the Sanhedrim rose 
up as one man against Stephen whom they had sum- 
moned before them, rose up against him when full of 
the Holy Ghost he declared unto them that he saw 
Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and casting 
him out of their midst caused him to be stoned to 
death. 

After that Peter under the call of the Lord went to 
the house of Cornelius in Caesarea and preached 
Christ to a chosen and elect company of Gentiles; and 
on them the Lord poured forth His Spirit as He did 
at Jerusalem. 

The spiritual body of Christ was thus made com- 
plete, being composed of elect Jews and Gentiles. 

From that moment the Jew nationally was set 
aside. 

The Church and this parenthetic age were brought in. 

The manifestation of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost 
and at the house of Cornelius was—a baptism. 

Our Lord was the Baptizer. 

The Holy Spirit never has, and does not now, baptize 
any one, He is the environment in which the baptism 
takes place. 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 211 


And herein is to be seen the distinction between the 
giving of the Comforter and Pentecost. 

The Coming of the Comforter was a—breathing. 

The manifestation at Pentecost was a baptism. 

To baptize is to—immerse. 

In water baptism the water becomes the environ- 
ment of the person baptized. 

At Pentecost the risen Lord immersed His disciples 
in the Holy Spirit. 

When He gave the Comforter He put the Spirit in 
the disciples. 

At Pentecost He put the disciples in the Spirit. 

~When the Comforter came they got life. 

At Pentecost they got the power of that life. 

When the Gentiles were baptized in the Holy Spirit 
at the house of Cornelius, and the Body of Christ was 
then fully formed in all its functional responsibility, 
baptism in the Holy Spirit ceased for the Church 
age. 

The laying on of hands, the gift and gifts of the 
Holy Ghost were not baptisms, not a single one of 
them. 

There is no such thing as baptism in the Holy 
Spirit today. 

It would be fundamentally out of place. 

There can be no baptism in the Holy Spirit till the 
Church is taken away. 

When this occurs the Spirit will again be poured out. 

This outpouring will take place at Jerusalem, upon 
the elect remnant among the Jews, and according to 
the Prophet Joel, just before the Lord appears in His 
glory to deliver Jerusalem and set up His kingdom. 

This is unqualifiedly and distinctively the age of the 
Church. 


212 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


As the oil was in the Candlestick, so the Holy Spirit 
is in the Church and on the Church corporately. 

What is true of the Church corporately is true of the 
Church individually. 

The Spirit in the Christian makes him the most 
sacred and holy temple on earth; as it is written: 

“What? Know ye not that your body is the tem- 
ple of the Holy Ghost which is in you?” (I Corin- 
thians 6:19.) 

The Holy Spirit is in the believer so that the be- 
liever may be the agent by which the light of divine 
truth may be given to the world. 

The Candlestick was seven branched. 

There was a central shaft, and as already described 
six branches going out of the shaft. 

The six branches joined on to and in the shaft con- 
stituted the complete Candlestick. 

A candlestick represents a church or assembly in a 
definite place. / 

This is illustrated in the letter which the risen Lord 
commands John to write to the Pastor of the Church 
at Ephesus. 

He says: 

““T will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy 
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.” 
(Revelation 2:5.) 

The Church in Ephesus is definitely called a candle- 
stick, the light bearer, the spiritual light for that city 
—the transmitter of Heaven-sent truth. 

A Church in a city or province might be composed 
of several assembles and pastors. 

A letter addressed to any Church in any locality 
would mean a circular letter to be read in all the as- 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 213 


semblies of that locality; the different assemblies would 
be reckoned as the one Church. 

These assemblies found their unity in Christ as the 
Head of the Church. 

He was the Head and He was the Center. 

This is clearly set forth in the vision given to John. 

He said: 

““T saw seven golden candlesticks; 

And in the midst of the candlesticks one like unto 
the Son of man.” (Revelation 1:12, 13.) 

Our Lord declares these seven candlesticks repre- 
sent the seven churches of the province of Asia: 

' “The seven candlesticks which thou’ sawest are the 
seven churches.” (Revelation 1:20.) 

These seven churches represent the whole Church 
in the world during the time of our Lord’s absence. 

They particularly represent the seven distinct char- 
acteristics during that time, be it long or short. 

All the characteristics of all the churches may be 
found in any one of the churches in principle and 
incipiency at any one period; so that, the whole 
range of characteristics might be released and con- 
summated at any one stage in the Church’s history. 

In other words, while the picture is a forecast of 
what might become detailed and lengthened out his- 
tory, yet the whole might be telescoped at any one 
time under the pressure of the Lord’s imminency, the 
sudden ripening of Satanic evil or the accelerated 
falling away in the professing Church. 

But whatever may be the varied history through 
which the Church shall pass during the time our 
Lord is away, its unity is to be found in Him and in 
Him alone. 

The six branches of the Golden Candlestick pro- 


214 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


claim the manifoldness of the assemblies of Christ, but 
the Shaft to which they are joined reveal the Lord 
Jesus Christ in the midst, the center of life and rela- 
tionship. Without the central shaft the side branches 
could not be maintained. Without Christ as the very 
center the Church cannot exist. 

The Golden Candlestick is a symbol of the 
Church as a light bearer in the world. 

Our Lord said to His disciples: 

“Ye are the light of the world.” (Matthew 5:14.) 

“Let your loins be girded about, and your lights 
burning.” (Luke 12:35.) 

“Ye shine as lights in the world.” (Philippians 
Zoos) 

As the light of the Candlestick was not the light of 
nature, but a light specially provided of God; as the 
light was fed and made possible only by the oil, and 
the oil is a symbol of the Holy Spirit, then the Church 
is not in the world to give the light of nature to men, 
but the light and truth that comes through the energy 
and revelation of the Spirit. 

The Church is not here to give instruction in the 
things of nature. 

The Church is not here to become a school, an acad- 
emy, a college or a university of human knowledge. 

It is not the function of the Church to educate in 
the sciences, to deal in the philosophy and speculations 
of men; the Church is not called on to educate or cul- 
ture the natural man in any direction. 

These things lie in the realm of human research and 
the light of applied reason. 

Just as the light of the Candlestick revealed what 
was hidden from the light of nature, even the wonders 
of the sanctuary, the symbols of redemption and glory, 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 215 


so the Church is to set before men what the light 
of nature cannot reveal concerning these things. 

The Church is to set before men the things that are 
supremely worth knowing, and the knowledge of which 
makes for life eternal: 

The fact of God, His being and relationship to man, 
man’s fall, his sin, the full meaning of death, the way 
of redemption through sacrificial death and blood, 
eternal life and immortality, the glorious ultimate of 
the earth when it shall be delivered from sin, sickness, 
sorrow and death, warning men that apart from the 
crucified, risen and ascended Son of God eternity holds 
‘ neither life nor the hope of it, but only death and end- 
less loss. : 

The Church is to preach all this by and through the 
Holy Scriptures as the inspired, inerrant, infallible 
Word of God, and to preach it, proclaim it in the en- 
ergy and demonstration of the Spirit. 

In short the Church is to give the light of God’s re- 
vealed truth to the world. 

An illustration of the Church as the light bearer 
may be found in the story of the woman seeking for 
the lost piece of money, as recorded in the Gospel ac- 
cording to Luke. 

The piece had on it the image and the superscrip- 
tion of the king. 

It had fallen from its place and rolled away into a 
dark corner. 

It was lost. 

It was out of circulation. 

The king’s face and name were no longer revealed 
by it. 

Both name and face were hidden from view. 


216 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The woman lighted a lamp, swept the house and 
sought diligently till she found it. 

The piece of money is man. 

He was created in the image of God. 

He fell from his true place as the revelation of God, 
as His manifestation in the flesh. 

He has fallen into dark and hidden corners of sin. 

He is out of the divine circulation. 

God’s name and character are no longer revealed in 
and by him. 

He is no longer the manifestation of God in the flesh. 

He is a lost value, lost to God and lost to himself. 

The woman is the Church. 

The lamp is the Word of God. 

The light is the truth that flashes out of the Word. 

Seeking the lost piece with the light of the lamp is 
seeking the lost soul with the light of God’s truth. 

Sweeping the house is using the God-given energy of 
the Church, the Holy Spirit. 

The light of the woman’s lamp was cast into all 
corners. 

The Gospel is to be preached to every creature. 

The woman continued till she found that chosen and 
select piece that had been lost. 

The Church is to continue in this world till she find 
those who have been foreseen and chosen, and elect 
and bring them to the God who has foreseen and 
chosen and elected them. 

The seven lamps of the Golden Candlestick cast 
their light upon the central shaft and revealed 
the wealth, the beauty and the wonder of it. 

*““ And the Lorp spake unto Moses saying, 

Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, When thou 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 217 


lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over 
against the candlestick.” (Numbers 8:2.) 

The ultimate work of the Church in the world is to 
so shine that Christ may be seen in all the wealth, the 
beauty, the wonder and the glory of His person and 
work. 

The Church is here to magnify and exalt Him in all 
that He was and is and is to come; in all that He has 
done, is doing and will do. 

This thought is fully expressed both for the Church 
and the individual in the lofty utterance of the Apostle: 

““ According to my earnest expectation and my hope, 
‘that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all 
boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be magni- 
fied in my body, whether it be by life or by death.” 
(Philippians 1:20.) 

Whenever the Church fails to exalt Him above all 
things; whenever it fails to set Him forth as revealed 
in Holy Scripture, in all His pre-existent state, in all 
His fulness of the Godhead bodily, in all the perfection 
of His divine and sacrificial death, in the triumph of 
His resurrection; whenever the Church fails to hold up 
to view so all can see it the crimson of His outpoured 
blood; whenever the ministers of the Church fail to 
enter the sanctuary or preach to the people with 
the priest’s bason full of blood; whenever the Church 
fails to preach the finished work of the cross and salva- 
tion without human merit and by the work of Christ 
alone, it is no longer like the Golden Candlestick flash- 
ing its light over against the central shaft, it no longer 
glorifies Him who died for her and rose again; nay, 
the light of such a professing Church is put out and 
the risen Lord will no longer recognize it as His candle- 
stick at all. 


218 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The Golden Candlestick was made of beaten 
gold. 

“And this work of the candlestick was of beaten 
gold, unto the shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, 
was beaten work.” (Numbers 8:4.) 

The symbol in its application to our Lord is com- 
plete. 

The word “ beaten ” means “ hammered.” 

He was hammered. 

In all the earth, in all the ages of the earth, was there 
ever such hammering as took place that day on the 
hill called ‘‘ Calvary? ” 

They laid Him down upon the cross. 

They hammered first one hand and then they ham- 
mered the other to the accursed tree. 

They hammered His feet fast. 

They hung Him up there in the sight of men such 
a piece of hammered work as never was seen before 
or since that hour. 

But ‘“ hammering ”’ means, as when gold is beaten 
and shapened with blow after blow till it stands out 
in open relief, clear, distinct, what men call repoussé 
work, the outline and form revealed in sharp and 
manifest intensity; so was He hammered and beaten 
till the outlines of the infinite purpose of God were 
seen and may be seen today in all their repoussé intent 
and decree. 

He was hammered by the hand of God. 

I repeat to you again and again that it was the hand 
of God that hammered Him. 

He was hammered with the hammer of divine right- 
eousness, the righteousness that mercilessly strikes its 
blow upon sin. 

How mercilessly those strokes fell upon Him in that 


THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 219 


evil hour; for that day He was counted sin and the 
hammer of God’s inexorable justice smote Him and 
smote Him in the place of all who have claimed Him 
since that hour to this and all who claim Him now. 

As we are identified with Him in His hammering, 
in His death for us, it is our privilege to be identified 
with Him in this life, be His shining, and make the life 
we live for Him—each word we speak and deed we 
do for Him, a compensation to Him for every ham- 
mered blow He received in our behalf. 

It is our privilege to own that we are children of the 
light and not children of darkness; that we are chil- 
' dren of the day (the day to come) and not children 
of the night (the night of spiritual darkness). It is 
our right to affirm that we are sons of God in all the 
illumination of our Lord’s golden light, and then go 
forth and by fellowship with Him in our inmost soul, 
walking in the light He gives, shine forth so that we 
may reveal Him to the darkened minds of men as the 
true light, as the only light that leadeth to Heaven, 
to Home, to glory and to God. 


KX 
THE ALTAR OF INCENSE 


HE Altar of Incense was four square. 
It was two cubits high and a cubit long and 
broad. 

It was made of incorruptible wood and overlaid 
with gold. 

There were four horns upon the four corners. 

It had a crown of gold. 

It had a ring of gold on each side under the crown 
for the two staves by which it was to be carried. 

It occupied a position in the Holy Place directly in 
front of the Vail. 

It was the tallest piece of furniture in the Holy 
Place and stood level to the wings of the cherubim on 
the Mercy Seat in the Most Holy Place. 

It had burning coals placed upon it. 

Sweet incense was put upon the coals morning and 
evening. 

Morning and evening a column of fragrant white 
smoke ascended therefrom. 

“And thou shalt make an altar to burn, incense 
upon: of shittim wood shalt thou make it. 

A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the 
breadth thereof; four-square shall it be: and two 
cubits shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof 
shall be of the same. 

And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top 
thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the 


THE ALTAR OF INCENSE 221 


horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown 
of gold round about. 

And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under 
the crown of it, by the two corners thereof, upon the 
two sides of it shalt thou make it; and they shall be 
for places for the staves to bear it withal. 

And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and 
overlay them with gold. 

And thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the 
ark of the testimony, before the mercy seat that is 
over the testimony, where I will meet with thee. 

And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every 
morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn 
incense upon it. 

And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall 
burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense before the 
Lorp throughout your generations. 

Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt 
sacrifice, nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink 
offering thereon. 

And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns 
of it once in a year with the blood of the sin offering 
of atonements: once in the year shall he make atone- 
ment upon it throughout your generations: it is most 
holy unto the Lord. (Exodus 30:1-10.) 

It was an altar from which the smoke of in- 
cense was to ascend. 

The composition of the incense is particularly and 
definitely described: 

“And the Lorp said unto Moses, Take unto thee 
sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these 
sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall 
there be a like weight: 

And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after 


222 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and 
holy: 

And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put 
of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto 
you most holy.” (Exodus 30:34-36.) 

Incense is a symbol of prayer. 

“Let my prayer be set before thee as incense.’’ 
(Psalm 141:2.) 

“ Odours (literally, incense) which are the prayers 
of saints.” (Revelation 5:8.) 

Amid all the things of sound and sense that rise 
Heavenward, nothing is more acceptable to the living 
God than the voice and breath of sincere prayer. It 
has in it the music of praise and the fragrance of open 
and confessed dependence. Praise glorifies God and 
dependence appeals to Him. 

Incense on the Altar was offered by Aaron the 
High Priest. 

“Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every 
morning . . . And when Aaron lighteth the lamps 
at even, he shall burn incense upon it. (Vs. 7, 8.) 

Aaron is a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ in Heaven 
offering up prayer in behalf of those who are His. 

“For Christ is not entered into the holy places 
made with hands, which are the figures of the true; 
but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence 
of God for us.” (Hebrews 9:24.) 

“‘ Now of the things we have spoken this is the sum: 
We have such an high priest, who is set on the right 
hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens.” 
(Hebrews 8:1.) 

As Aaron offered up this incense exclusively for the 


THE ALTAR OF INCENSE 223 


Children of Israel, so is it true that our Lord Jesus 
Christ prays only for those who are His. 

Hear His own words: 

‘*T pray not for the world.’’ 

There is no need of making any mistake about it. 

With all the grace we may attribute to Him it is an 
outstanding fact. 

He does not pray for the world, for those who are 
not His. 

This is what He says: 

“T pray not for the world, but—for them which 
thou hast given me.’’ (John 17:9.) 

Wnat a seal of separation from .the world and 
separation unto Himself there is in that statement and 
the fact of it. ; 

How it manifests our relation as believers; what a 
sense of intimacy and nearness it gives; what sacred- 
ness in the relation. 

What an amazing fact it is, that He who is the Mas- 
ter of Heaven and earth prays for us—and prays in 
Heaven on the throne of the Highest. 

It may not be that He is praying for just the things 
we wish, nor even such we dream we need, but the fact 
that He is praying for us is beyond definition of all it 
demonstrates of interest in, of grace and care for us. 

Believe He is praying for us, and what matter the 
cloud-covered sky, the tempest swirling and uprooting 
all things we hold dear, leaving us neither root nor 
branch in those things; what matter though we stand 
with hands folded, hands of helplessness, and the frag- 
ments of shattered plans scattered at our feet; what 
matter though our soul be filled with darkness and our 
lips be dumb and faith shivers and begins to grope and 
at times stops and listens to subtle questions filled with 


224 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


a hiss, the hiss of the serpent; what matter that at 
its worst if, through it all and at the last, we can be- 
lieve, and will believe in spite of every increeping fear, 
that He is yonder back of storm or woe praying for 
us, interceding for us? 

To believe that, gives assurance He will meet us in 
the blessing such as never could have come had the 
answer been in response (9 our own poor, blind, un- 
thinking and wholly selfish prayer. 

How often we escape sickness, disease, the assault 
of circumstance and sudden death because He has 
prayed, has interceded on our behalf and caused the 
special providences to be swung over us and along our 
path, we shall never know till the record of it is read 
to us when we stand face to face with Him in the glory 
hour. 

If there are times when faith would sink and sink 
as in the anguish of a drowning soul and then suddenly 
rises aS on a Swelling tide which lifts us out of the 
deeps of dark distress till we find firm footing on the 
shore of peace and rest again in His Word and truth, 
it is because He prays for us, because He neither slum- 
bers nor sleeps nor closes His eyelids, but open-eyed 
and watchful bears us on His heart and lifts us in un- 
failing petition before the Father’s throne. 

Before Peter stumbled and fell the Lord prayed for 
him. 

He told him frankly the Devil desired him that he 
might sift him as wheat. 

It is very startling if you read the record. 

He did not tell Peter He had prayed for him that 
he might escape the Devil’s assault and snare. 

Not at all. 


THE ALTAR OF INCENSE 225 


On the contrary, He assured him the Devil would 
succeed in ensnaring and overthrowing him. 

He prayed for Peter, but for just one thing. 

He prayed that his—faith might not fail. 

He said: 

“T have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not.” 
(Luke 22:32.) 

Peter went down into the black pit the Devil had 
prepared for him. 

The Devil used Peter’s infirmity, his self-con- 
sciousness, his boasting, and then filled him with 
fear and arrant cowardice, so that in the hour of trial 
-he marked himself and that hour with indelible shame. 

Peter denied his Lord. 

He denied Him because he feared he might ose his 
life if he confessed Him. 

It would have been hard to have done worse than 
that. 

But the Lord looked at Peter; faith responded to 
the look and to the prayer that had been offered be- 
forehand. The Lord’s look was the emphasis of His 
anticipative prayer. 

Out of the darkness Peter came back to be more 
loyal and more devoted than before, with triumphant 
faith, but chastened soul. 

Our Lord as High priest, not only lifts up His pray- 
ers in our behalf, but takes our own prayers and pre- 
sents them like incense before the Father’s throne. 

Scripture gives us a very dramatic illustration how 
He does this. 

As it is written: 

“ And another angel came and stood at the altar, 
(the Altar of Incense shown in Heaven) having a 
golden censer; and there was given unto him much 


226 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all 
saints upon the golden altar which was before the 
throne.” (Revelation 8:3.) 

What a picture that is. 

Like that angel the Lord takes the prayers of the 
believer and presents them before God in the fragrance 
of His high priestly character and on the basis of His 
perfect sacrifice. 

Without His intercession not a single petition of ours 
would ever ascend to the Court of Heaven. 

No prayer of ours would ever reach the Father. 

He says so: 

“No man cometh unto the Father, but by me.” 
(John 14:6.) 

Therefore it is written: 

“In the name of the Lord Jesus— 

Giving thanks (and this must be the order) to God 
and the Father—by him.” (Colossians 3:17.) 

The horns of the Golden Altar of Incense were 
stained once a year with the blood of atonement 
from the Brazen Altar. 

“And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the 
horns of it once in a year with the blood of the sin 
offering.” (Exodus 30:10.) 

The sin offering was offered on the Brazen Altar. 

The Brazen Altar was a symbol of the Cross. 

The full meaning of the symbol is that the interces- 
sion of our Lord is based on and finds its effectiveness 
in the sacrifice of the cross, in the offering of Himself 
as the Sin Offering there. 

The Priesthood of Christ and His work of interces- 
sion on our behalf rest wholly in the blood of the 
cross. 


THE ALTAR OF INCENSE 227 


Had He not died and met the claims of divine jus- 
tice against us He could not intercede for us. 

Had He not offered Himself as a sacrifice for us He 
could not enter that Court in our name and on our 
behalf at all. 

He would never dare to breathe our name. 

His priestly intercession for the believer on the basis 
of that blood is therefore a demonstration that the 
blood has been applied, has been accepted on our 
behalf, and we are accounted with our Lord as mem- 
bers of the family of God. 

It is to be noted the atonement was made on the In- 
-cense Altar. The sacrifice was made.on the Brazen 
Altar, but the Atonement is complete on the Golden 
Altar; as it is written: 

f And the bullock for the sin offering, whose blood 
was brought in to make atonement in the holy place.” 
(Leviticus 16:27.) 

All this is clear and beautiful. 

The living priest on the other side of death as seen 
in the death of the victim on the Brazen Altar is a 
picture of resurrection, the Holy Place is a picture of 
Heaven and the priest entering there is our Lord Jesus 
Christ after His resurrection taking the blood of the 
Cross to the throne of God in Heaven. 

As I have shown, and as Scripture teaches, only in 
resurrection does our Lord become a priest. Had He 
not risen His death would have been of no avail and 
our faith would have been in vain; as it is written: 

“Tf Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are 
yet in your sins.” (I Corinthians 15:17.) 

On the morning of the resurrection as the risen and 
immortal priest He took His blood within the vail con- 


228 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


summated the Atonement there, made reconciliation, 
reconciling every individual, individually to God. 

It is after the blood of atonement is on the Golden 
Altar that the censer of incense is brought in and 
swung before the Mercy Seat; as it is written: 

“ And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of 
fire from off the altar before the Lorp, and his hand 
full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within 
the vail. 

And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the 
Lorp, that the cloud of the incense may cover the 
mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he die 
not?’ (Leviticuse!6:129.13.3) 

It was the blood that gave value to the incense. 

It is the blood of Christ, the merit of Christ’s 
death, that makes our prayers worth while when 
He presents them. 

This is set forth in the statement concerning the in- 
terceding angel already quoted: 

“There was given him much incense, that he should 
offer it with the prayers of all saints.” 

Literally rendered it reads thus: 

“There was given him much incense that he might 
—add to the prayers—of all saints.” 

Incense added to the prayers. 

Added to the prayers, not of some saints, but all 
saints. 

O the double wonder of it. 

All who believe are “‘ saints ” whether of this or any 
other dispensation. 

Holy in the merits of His all cleansing blood, holy 
in His holiness. 

There may be greater or lesser attainment spir- 
itually, but they are all saints. 


THE ALTAR OF INCENSE 229 


And all prayers, better or worse, all are made fra- 
grant with the added merit of the great high priest, the 
merit of His death, the merit of the perfection of His 
perfect life, His resurrection and priestly life. 

The burning of the Incense on the Golden Altar 
was to be continual. 

“He shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense 
before the Lorn.” (Exodus 30:8.) 

The intercession of our Lord is perpetual; that is, 
it is continual, unchanging, it never varies, falters nor 
fails. He ever liveth to make intercession; as it is 
written: 

“He is able to save them to the uttermost that 
come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make 
intercession for them.” (Hebrews 7:25.) ‘ 

It is the high priestly intercession of our Lord that 
constitutes the very climax and quintessence of the be- 
liever’s security: 

“‘ Who is he that condemneth? ” 

Listen to the answer: 

“Tt is Christ that died.’’ 

That in itself should be sufficient to still every fear, 
answer every doubt. 

If Christ has taken my place and died in my stead 
—why should I fear? 

It is a fact. 

Proclaim it till it echoes and reechoes beneath every 
sky and in every ear. 

Christ has taken the believer’s place, has ex- 
changed places with him; so that when the judg- 
ment of God fell on Him He was answering for 
me, an answer written in agony and blood. 

The blood has met every charge so perfectly that 


230 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


there is not a single stain against our name; as it is 
written: 

“ The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from 
all sin.” (I John 1:7.) (Cleanses us legally.) 

Having met fully and completely all the demands 
of divine righteousness in my divinely provided sub- 
stitute, who shall demand payment twice, once frorn 
my substitute and then from me? 

I answer you—no one in Heaven, nor earth, nor 
Hell. 

It is agreed Christ died for our sins and settled 
them, but here is something more than the fact of the 
payment. 

Listen to this: 

“Yea, rather, that is risen again.’’ 

Christ died—that is great—but Christ is risen 
that is greater still—a risen Christ is our receipt, and 
guarantee that His death has availed for us. 

If He had not risen He would still be under the 
burden of my unpaid debt; His resurrection is proof 
He has been released from that debt and it proves in 
splendor of light that I have been just as fully and 
completely released from it as He. 

the death of Christ and the resurrection of Christ, 
what more do I need to give me the sense of unshake- 
able security? 

I am no longer a debtor, the blood has cancelled the 
debt, the risen Christ is in Heaven as my living re- 
ceipt; but how can I approach God and be sure He 
will receive me into His fellowship? 

Listen to the gracious and wonderful answer: 

‘* Who is even at the right hand of God.’’ 

Mark the full meaning of that; listen to the full 
statement of it; 


THE ALTAR OF INCENSE 231 


“ Into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence 
of God for us.’’ 

Here is the glorious truth—He is in Heaven as the 
believer’s representative. 

As much as He represented him on the cross and 
endured for him, He is in Heaven living for him. 

As much as He was the believer’s sin on the cross, 
He is the believer’s righteousness in Heaven. 

As He is our righteousness in Heaven and has been 
accepted at the Father’s right hand, sits there as His 
beloved Son, likewise is it true God the Father be- 
holds us seated with Him and owned as His accepted 
- sons; wherefore it is written: 

“ And hath raised us up together, and made us sit 
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” ‘ (Ephe- 
sians 2:6.) 

Debt paid, living receipt given, taken into Heaven, 
seated at God’s right hand so near to God we cannot 
nearer be, because in the person of His Son—we are 
just as near as He. 

Could we ask more to make us feel secure? 

Humanly speaking, I should say—‘‘ No!” 

But more has been done for us. 

Here is the climacteric statement: 

‘‘ Who also maketh intercession for us.’’ (Ro- 
mans 8:34.) 

This is supreme, absolute and sublime. 

He died for us and paid the debt—yes, all we owe. 

He has risen and is our living receipt at the court of 
justice. 

He has gone into Heaven and given us the place of 
perfect acceptance before the Father. 

To the Father He says continually: 


232 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“No longer look at that believer as he is in himself, 
but him as he is in me. 

Look at me and see him in me, as perfect as I am, 
as perfect as he will be revealed to be in the morning 
of the First Resurrection when I shall bring him bodily 
to Heaven and the enjoyment of its glories.” 

All that. 

And added to that—this: 

Ever living for me, ever presenting me in His per- 
fection before the Father, ever interceding for me, 
praying for me, constantly listening to catch the 
breath or the plaint of my prayer, taking that prayer, 
sweetening it with the frankincense, the compounded 
perfume of His blood, His holiness and His unchang- 
ing love for me. 

How perfect is the type, how wonderful the fulfill- 
ment, how glorious the fact that a man is in Heaven, 
on the throne of God, occupied with us and the things 
that concern us. 

It sets before us the great truth that the work of 
Christ on behalf of those of us who have claimed and 
confessed Him is both finished and unfinished. Fin- 
ished on the Cross where He met all the claims of 
divine righteousness against us in the perfection of 
His own death in our name so that His death was 
our death and therefore our personal atonement for 
sin, the wiping out of all remembrance of sin against 
us for ever; unfinished, in that He is ceaselessly taken 
up with our individual interests. 

That is the wonder of it. 

This wonderful fact that He never gets done think- 
ing about us; so that the Psalmist writes: 

“How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O 
God! how great is the sum of them! 


THE ALTAR OF INCENSE 233 


If I should count them, they are more than the 
sand: when I am awake, I am still with thee.” (That 
is, still before Him, still the object of His thinking.) 
(Psalm 139:17, 18.) 

Always that throne on which He sits is approach- 
able for us. Always we may go to Him in the assur- 
ance that all the sweep of all the measureless affairs 
of the universe cannot and will not come in between 
us and His thought about us. 

Hear what the Apostle says and let us hear it with 
fresh meaning: 

“For we have not an high priest which cannot be 
‘touched with a feeling of our infirmities; but was in 
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. 

Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to 
help in time of need.” (Hebrews 4:15, 16.) 

He is our Golden Altar—our place of refuge. 

He is our priest, ministering at the Golden Incense 
Altar of the throne of God. 


XXI 
THE BRAZEN LAVER 


ME laver was a bason of brass set on a stand 
or pedestal, called the “ foot.” 
“ And the Lorp spake unto Moses, saying, 

Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot 
also of brass, to wash withal: and thou shalt put it be- 
tween the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, 
and thou shalt put water therein. 

For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and 
their feet thereat: 

When they go into the tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion, they shall wash with water, that they die not; or 
when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn 
offering made by fire unto the Lorp: 

So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that 
they die not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, 
even to him and his seed throughout their generations.” 
(Exodus 30:17-21.) 

The laver was made from the mirrors used by 
the women. 

“And he made the laver of brass, and the foot of 
it of brass, of the looking-glasses of the women assem- 
bling, which assembled at the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation.” (Exodus 38:8.) 

The looking-glass in Scripture is a symbol of the 
written Word of God; as it is written: 

“Tf any be a hearer of the word, and not a 

234 


THE BRAZEN LAVER 235 


doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face 
in a glass: 

For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and 
straightway forgetteth what manner he was.” (James 
1:23, 24.) 

The fact of looking into the Word of God is com- 
pared to looking into a glass, the glass is plainly com- 
pared to the Word of God. 

The Laver made of the looking-glasses is a symbol 
of the written Word of God. 

The laver was filled with water and the priests 
were commanded to wash in it when performing 
the service of the Tabernacle. 

As the Laver was a symbol of the Word, to wash in 
the laver and apply the water signifies to wash in and 
apply the Word of God. 

Scripture tells us there is a washing in and by the 
written Word. 

“Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself 
for it; 

That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the wash- 
ing of water by the word.” (Ephesians 5:25, 26.) 

Just as there is a washing by water that cleanses 
and purifies, so there is a washing in, an application 
of, the Word of God that cleanses morally and spirit- 
ually; as it is written: 

“Ve are clean through the word which I have 
spoken unto you.” (John 15:3.) 

There is a washing of water by the word that is 
called the washing of regeneration: 

“Not by works of righteousness which we have 
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the 
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy 
Ghost.” (Titus 3:5.) 


236 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The word “ washing ” should be rendered “ laver.” 

The literal reading would be: 

“ According to his mercy he saved us by the laver 
of regeneration.’’ 

The laver at the door of the Tabernacle is the 
symbol of regeneration. 

No one could be admitted to that Tabernacle except 
he wash in the laver. 

The symbol is full of enormous accent. 

The Tabernacle is a symbol of the Church. 

Is there any difficulty in understanding it? 

There ought to be none. 

As it was impossible to enter into the Tabernacle 
except by washing in the laver, so is it impossible to 
enter into and become a living member of the Church 
of Christ except by and through regeneration. 

Every day that laver in the midst of Israel was say- 
ing what our Lord said to Nicodemus: 

“Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.” (John 3:5.) 

Literally: 

“Except a man be begotten out of the water and 
out of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of 
God.” 

Water when spoken of in connection with the Spirit 
signifies the Word in and under the operation of the 
Spirit; wherefore it is written: 

“The washing of regeneration, and renewing of the 
Holy Ghost.” 

Renewing and regeneration are here in the same 
category. 

Regeneration is not only in and by the laver—the 
Word of God—it is by the operation of the Holy Ghost 
in applying the Word. 


THE BRAZEN LAVER 237 


The Word is the instrument, the Holy Spirit is the 
Agent. 

The Apostle says: 

“Our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but 
also in power, and in the Holy Ghost.” (I Thessa- 
lonians 1:5.) 

Not in the water of baptism, not in any baptismal 
pool or font as a laver, but through the written Word 
and by the Spirit only can a human being be begotten 
again and become a child of God. 

Let it be remembered then, this Brazen Laver at the 
door of the Tabernacle, though voiceless, proclaimed 
_ In unmistakeable accents the tremendous legislation of 
the Son of God to all who would enter the Church of 
Christ: , 

‘Ye must be born again.”’ 

The priest who would serve in the Tabernacle must 
daily wash his hands and feet in the laver. 

‘So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that 
they die not.” (Exodus 30:21.) 

Hands are for service. 

Feet are for walk. 

The Christian who would serve the Lord effectively 
must walk before the Lord acceptably. 

Both his walk as well as his service must be clean. 

However much by grace through faith we become 
the children of God, the Lord will not fellowship us 
in any uncleanness, whether by deed or word or 
thought. 

The Christian can be kept clean in walk and service 
only as he applies the Word of God to his daily life, 
walking according to its rule and surrendering to its 
demands. 


238 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


We can be clean only as we apply the truth to heart 
and conscience. 

There is one thing the Christian must do if he would 
keep in spiritual health and purity: 

He must take a bath every day in the Word of 
God; every day he must wash in this laver of 
regeneration. 

The Christian who fails to do this will sooner or 
later find the inherent uncleanness of the flesh mani- 
festing itself uncomfortably to himself in his spiritual 
experience and uncomfortably to others. 

Keep the hands and the feet clean, the walk will be 
honoring and the service effectual. 

“‘ Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who 
shall stand in his holy place? 

He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; who 
hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn de- 
ceitfully.” (Psalm 24:4.) 

There is a very solemn warning in connection with 
the laver. The priests are exhorted to wash hands and 
feet therein, ‘‘ lest they die.’’ 

The spiritual application is clear enough. 

The Christian who is not walking according to the 
Word of God, who is not going according to His mind 
and will revealed therein, who is unwilling to apply 
the truth of God to his own life, will sooner or later 
lose the consciousness of the Spirit in his own soul and 
seem, indeed, as one spiritually dead. 


XXII 
THE BRAZEN ALTAR 


ee ND thou shalt make an altar of shittim 
A wood, five cubits long, and five cubits 
broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and 

the height thereof shall be three cubits. 

And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four 
corners thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and 
‘thou shalt overlay it with brass. 

And thou shalt make his pans to receive his, ashes, 
and his shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, 
and his fire pans: all the vessels thereof thou shalt 
make of brass. 

And thou shalt make for it a grate of network of 
brass; and upon the net shalt thou make four brazen 
rings in the four corners thereof. 

And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar 
beneath, that the net may be even to the midst of the 
altar. 

And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of 
shittim wood, and overlay them with brass. 

And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the 
staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, to 
bear it. 

Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was 
shewed thee in the mount, so shall they make it.” 
(Exodus 27:1-8.) 

The Altar was the place of sacrifice for the sins of 


the people. 
239 


240 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


It is called the altar of burnt offering. (Exodus 
30:28.) 

It was placed in the Court between the Gate of the 
Court and the Tabernacle. 

“And he put the altar of burnt offering by the door 
of the Tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and 
offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat of- 
fering; as the Lorp commanded Moses.” (Exodus 
40:29.) 

The Burnt offering was a sweet savour offering 
unto the Lord. (Leviticus 1:9.) 

Our Lord Jesus Christ died on the cross and His 
death thereon is declared to be a ‘‘ Sweet savour 
offering ’’; as it is written: 

“Christ hath given himself for us an offering and 
a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour.’’ 
(Ephesians 5:2.) 

Since our Lord is the announced antitype of the 
burnt offering and that was offered on the Brazen 
Altar, then the Brazen Altar is the symbol of the cross 
on which He died and demonstrates it to be, not 
merely the instrument of a Roman judicial death, 
but the divinely ordained and definite, chosen Altar of 
Sacrifice. 

The Brazen Altar was made by the hands of men, 
but according to the pattern and purpose of God 
shown beforehand to Moses in the Mount. 

By the hands of men our Lord was led outside the 
gate of Jerusalem and nailed to the Roman cross; but 
He died there according to the plan and purpose of 
God, determined and ordained in the counsels of God- 
head; as it is written: 

“Him being delivered by the determinate counsel 
(covenant purpose) and foreknowledge of God, ye 


THE BRAZEN ALTAR 241 


have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and 
slain.” (Acts 2:23.) 

The prophet said He should be led as a lamb to the 
slaughter. 

They came to arrest Him. 

The moment He looked upon them and announced 
Himself they fell backward. 

The sense of His power though withheld smote 
them with fear, paralyzed them. 

Had He used His power and counted on their fear, 
they would have fled and multiplied the story of His 
mightiness. 

He did not use His power. 

He did not appeal to their fear. 

He let them take His hands and tie them. 

They put a rope around His neck. 

They took Him away like a veritable sheep to 
slaughter led. 

Before His accusers He was silent. 

He submitted to the testimony of false witnesses. 

He gave Himself up as a victim to the hands of men. 

He did so that He might wondrously act at the last. 

He would act as never He had acted before. 

It would be an act greater than when with a single 
word He had heaved creation into place. 

He submitted to men that He might with omnipotent 
power and coordinately surrendered human will offer 
Himself a Burnt Offering and sacrifice unto God and 
a Sin Offering for men. 

Let Scripture proclaim it: 

“ Once in the end of the world (the age) hath he 
appeared to put away sin by— 

The sacrifice of himself. 


242 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but 
after this the judgment: 

So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of 
many.” (Hebrews 9:26, 28.) 

On the cross He is the obedience of the Second 
Man set over against the disobedience of the First 
Man. 

The Brazen Altar stood practically at the entrance 
of the Court. 

No Israelite could get absolution (ceremonial ab- 
solution) for his sins, nor a blessing from the priest 
till he came to this Altar with a victim. 

He must lay his hand upon its head and claim its 
sacrificial death in his behalf. 

Apart from that Brazen Altar he could not approach 
God at all. | 

Unless he claimed the victim laid on the altar as his 
substitute he could not be accepted, he could not be 
accepted and pronounced ceremonially clean. 

In no possible way can men approach God and be 
accepted of Him save by way of the cross of Christ. 

Only when He is offered 'y faith as a sacrifice for 
sin and claimed as a substitute can the best and the 
worst of men be accepted and saved by Him. 

“As many as received him, (our Lord Jesus Christ) 
to them gave He power (liberty) to become the sons 
of God, even to them that believe on his name: 

Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of 
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.” (John 
Pet 13.) 

In V. 29, we are told the saving name which is of- 
fered to faith at this hour: 

“The next day John (John the Baptist) seeth Jesus 
coming unto him, and saith, Behold, the Lamb of God, 


THE BRAZEN ALTAR 243 


which taketh away (beareth away) the sin of the 
world.” 

It is in this chapter the Apostle John pictures Him 
as the Incarnate God. 

John the Baptist declares Him to be the foreor- 
dained victim provided of God. 

You can be begotten of God through faith in Him 
as the Lamb of sacrifice. 

There is no other way. 

To talk about Him as a good man and speak in 
admiration of His character and ignore Him as the 
Lamb of God ordained to sacrifice as revealed in the 
light of Holy Scripture is to be guilty either of intel- 
lectual treason or moral perversity. 

He was the Lamb of God. : 

He has not ceased to be the Lamb of God. 

Holy Scripture gives us the picture of Him as He is 
seen in Fleaven today. 

“‘ And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne 
and of the four beasts, (living creatures) and in the 
midst of the elders, (the Church) stood a Lamb as it 
had been slain.” (Revelation 5:6.) 

A lamb that had been slain but is now seen alive is 
a risen lamb. 

The preceding verse testifies in one of those para- 
doxical ways and in divinely mixing its metaphors, 
that this lamb was also a lion—the lion of the tribe of 
Judah and the Root of David. 

These names are the exclusive titles of our Lord 
Jesus Chris*. 

This Lanib then is a picture of Himself in resur- 
rection. 

The Divine Sacrifice risen and accepted of God. 

The divinely sent King rejected of the Jews, His 


244 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


covenant people, seated by God at His right hand to 
wait the hour when He should send Him back in 
power. 

The Brazen Altar stood before the door of the 
Tabernacle. 

The Cross of Christ stands before the door of 
Heaven. 

Only with the blood of the Brazen Altar could en- 
trance be had into the Tabernacle. 

Only by way of the cross as an altar of sacrifice can 
any one enter into the upper and Holy Tabernacle, 
into Heaven itself. 

Consider what a travesty it would have been for an 
Israelite to have brought to the Brazen Altar a bul- 
lock or a lamb, any sacrificial victim, extolled it as a 
firstling of the herd or flock, spoken in glowing terms 
of its perfections, affirming there was neither spot nor 
blemish in it, and then sought to pass within the Court 
and draw nigh to the Tabernacle without offering the 
victim as his sacrifice for sin upon that altar. 

The priest would have turned upon that Israelite 
and driven him back with indignation and the anath- 
ema of God; he would have told him the Brazen 
Altar was the place, not for a living, but a slain vic- 
tim and that his endeavor to pass it with the living, 
was a mockery of the Altar. 

As much as the attempt to pass the Brazen Altar 
without owning a sacrificial victim thereon would have 
been a mockery of that Altar, so any attempt to set 
aside the Cross as the Altar of a penal sacrifice, and 
every effort to approach God with merely good speech 
for the beautiful life of Christ, would be a bitter mock- 
ery of His cross and might well bring down the in- 
dignation and the anathema of God. 


THE BRAZEN ALTAR 245 


The truth is, the Brazen Altar was a barrier to any 
man. who sought to draw nigh to the Tabernacle as the 
dwelling place of God who did not own and confess 
an atoning sacrifice for himself on the altar. 

He could not pass by. 

The blood and the consuming flame of the Altar 
spoke of the judgment of God against him, banished 
him, bade him begone as a ceremonially unclean sin- 
ner and shut him out of the congregation of God. 

The Cross of Christ is a barrier to all who will not 
see it and own it as the place of a penal sacrifice. 

The blood of that cross, the consuming fire of God’s 
wrath burning there, the agonizing cry of the forsaken 
one, proclaim the judgment of God against all who do 
not accept it as an atoning, personal sacrifice. ’ 

The Brazen Altar had two staves. 

By these staves it was carried from place to place 
and set up. 

The staves represent the Gospel by which the cross 
of Christ is carried from place to place. 

As there were two staves to the Altar, there are 
two parts to the Gospel. 

The one part of the Gospel is the proclamation of 
the death of Christ. 

The wonderful statement that He died for sinful 
men. 

That He died as a sin bearer for all who own and 
confess Him as such. 

The other part of the Gospel is the proclamation 
that He rose from the dead. 

The glorious news, not only that He has triumphed 
over death and the grave, but that this triumph makes 
good the purpose of His death as an atoning sacrifice 


for sin. 


246 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Each of the staves was necessary to the Brazen 
Altar. 

One stave would not have carried it. 

To have attempted to carry it by one stave would 
have overturned and wrecked it. 

The two staves balanced it. 

By the two staves it could be carried and set up in 
one place precisely as it had been set up in another. 

To announce the death of Christ only is not suf- 
ficient. 

Say all you can say, say all the Scriptures say, 
about His death; but if He did not rise from the dead, 
His death was of no more importance than the death 
of any other man who failed and felt himself forsaken 
of God. 

To set aside the death of Christ and speak only of 
His resurrection, makes His resurrection life of no 
avail; for if He did not die for our sins, then we are 
still under the judgment of God and His resurrection 
is the proof of an infinite and eternal separation be- 
tween us. 

Both sides of the Gospel must be preached. 

The good news that Christ offered Himself a sacri- 
fice for sins. 

The good news that He rose from the dead and has 
demonstrated that His sacrifice has been made of 
avail for all who shall claim it. 

A death and resurrection Gospel—that is the 
Gospel. 

The Gospel is officially set forth by the Apostle: 

“Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel 
which I preached unto you, 

By which also ye are saved, 

For I delivered unto you first of all that which I 


THE BRAZEN ALTAR 247 


also received, how that Christ died for our sins accord- 
ing to the scriptures.” 

Mark that well! 

‘According to the scriptures.” 

That has a two-fold meaning. 

According to the doctrine of the Scriptures. 

The doctrine of the Old Testament Scriptures. 

The doctrine of the Old Testament Scripture is, that 
approach to a Holy God can be had only on the 
ground of sacrificial blood, the blood of a vicarious 
victim, the ground set forth and illustrated in the 
Brazen Altar. 

“And that he was buried.” 

“According to the Scriptures” is here grammati- 
cally understood. , 

The Old Testament Scripture spoke of His burial 
as well as His death. 

“And he made his grave with the wicked, and with 
the rich in his death.” 

The actual rendering should be: 

“His grave was appointed with the wicked, but 
with the rich man he found his tomb.” (Isaiah 53:9.) 

The body of the Lord considered as that of a con- 
vict would have been dragged away with ropes and 
cast into a trench with the thieves; but Joseph of 
Arimathea, a rich man, foreseen of God before our 
Lord was born, came with a rescript from Pilate giv- 
ing him the possession of the body, had it taken down 
and caused it to be laid in his own new made tomb. 

This indeed was fulfillment of Scripture and with 
startling exactness. 

“ And that he rose again the third day according to 
the scriptures.” (I Corinthians 15:1-4.) 


248 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


This is the Gospel of the two staves, the Gospel of 
death and resurrection. 

You see these two staves in Paul’s declaration to 
the Church at Corinth. 

He says: 

“JT determined not to know anything among you, 
save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.” (I Corinthians 
232.) 

He means the Christ who was crucified but is now 
alive. 

Let it be remembered the Gospel is a two stave 
Gospel—the Gospel of death and resurrection. 

The Brazen Altar must have both the Staves. 

The cross of Christ must be proclaimed as the 
sacrificial death of Christ. 

The cross of Christ must be exalted in the an- 
nouncement of His resurrection from the dead. 


XXIII 
THE PRIEST 


af ND take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, 

A and his sons with him, from among the 

children of Israel, that he may minister 

unto me in the priest’s office, even Aaron, Nadab and 
Abihu, Eleazer and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons.” (Exodus 
28215) 

There is a difference between a prophet and a priest. 

A prophet tells out God to man. 

A priest tells out man to God. 

A prophet acts for God before men. 

A priest acts for men before God. 

The Apostle gives us the definition of a priest: 

He is taken from among men. 

He is ordained for men. 

He is ordained, set apart, for men, in the things of 
God. 

He is to offer gifts and sacrifices for men. 

He is to be full of compassion for the ignorant and 
those who have fallen by the way. (Hebrews 5:12.) 

Aaron was high priest. 

Aaron’s sons were priests under, and in association 
with, him. 

Aaron and his sons constituted a priestly family. 

Aaron was a figure of Christ. 

“Now of the things we have spoken this is the 


sum: we have such an high priest, who is set at the 
249 


250 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the 
heavens.” (Hebrews 8:1.) 

Aaron is a type of the Lord Jesus Christ by 
contrast. 

Aaron was of the tribe of Levi. 

Christ was of the tribe of Judah. 

Aaron was a priest after the order of a mortal man. 

Christ was a priest after the order of Melchisedec, 
the deathless, immortal man. 

Melchisedec was king of righteousness and king of 
peace. 

He was without father or mother and had neither 
beginning of days nor end of life. (Hebrews 7:1-4.) 

Aaron was a priest on earth of an earthly Taber- 
nacle. 

Christ was never a priest on earth; as it is written: 

“For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, 
seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according 
to the law.” (Hebrews 8:4.) 

Aaron ceased to be a priest when he died. 

Christ became a priest only after He died. 

He became a priest by and through resurrection; 
as it is written: 

“ Christ glorified not: himself to be made an high 
priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, 
today have I begotten thee.” 

The Apostle is quoting from the Second Psalm and 
applies it to the resurrection of Christ. 

He says: 

“God hath raised up Jesus again; as it is also writ- 
ten in the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day 
have I begotten thee.” (Acts 13:33.) 

If our Lord was made a high priest the day He was 
begotten, and He was begotten the day He rose from 


THE PRIEST 251 


the dead, begotten by and through resurrection, then 
He became a high priest the day of, and by and 
through the fact of, His resurrection. 

This fact is typified by the action of Aaron on the 
day of atonement. 

Not till after the death of the victim did he leave 
the place of death, take the blood in the bason, put 
aside the Vail and go into the Holy Place to act as 
priest there. 

It is a complete picture of our Lord Jesus Christ 
after He had offered Himself as a sacrifice leaving the 
place of death, rising from the dead, and entering 
‘Heaven as a priest in resurrection. . 

Just as Aaron entered the Holy Place with the blood 
of bulls and of goats our Lord with His own blood 
entered Heaven; as it is written: 

“Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by 
his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, 
having obtained eternal redemption for us. 

For Christ is not entered into the holy places made 
with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into 
heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God 
for us.” (Hebrews 9:12, 24.) 

Consider the office work of our Lord Jesus Christ 
as a priest in Heaven. 

He acts for us (believers) in Heaven. 

As Aaron went into the Most Holy Place with 
sacrificial blood on behalf of Israel to bear witness 
that the sacrifice had been made for them, so our Lord 
entered within the Vail, into Heaven itself, with His 
own blood as witness that He had offered Himself in 
death as our sin offering, as our atonement; that He 
had met every issue and settled every claim on our 
behalf. 


252 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


As the Brazen Altar responded to the claims of the 
Ark of the Covenant and gave it the blood of the vic- 
tim it demanded, so the Cross of Christ answered to 
the throne of God with the blood of sacrifice offered 
on it. 

Christ as priest is our righteousness in Heaven. 

“This is the name whereby he shall be called, the 
Lord our righteousness.’’ (Jeremiah 23:6.) 

He is such by His act of obedience unto death, and 
this obedience has been charged to our account as be- 
lievers; so that the righteousness of God as essential 
justice has no claims against us. 

He is the perfect and holy one in whom God the 
Father sees us. He is our reputation and character in 
that Court where holiness is always the fashion. 

In Him we are no less than the very righteousness 
of God Himself; as it is written: 

“ He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew ne 
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God 
in him.” (II Corinthians 5:21.) 

God the Father sees us even while we are down 
here covered with the dust of the way just as He is in 
His beauty and holiness and perfection up there; as 
it is written: 

“ As he is, so are we in this world.” (I John 4:17.) 

That is His work, His wondrous work, to live for 
us just as though it were we who were in the glory 
already perfected as He is perfect. 

What a dynamic rebuke it is to sin and failure on 
the part of any Christian, this fact that Christ is be- 
fore God the Father continually representing us to be 
as holy as Himself, representing us as perfect sons of 
God. 

What an inspiration, impulsion and exhortation that 


THE PRIEST 253 


is to bring our daily life and experience up to the 
plane of this reputation; to try and make our charac- 
ter and reputation on earth as Christians as good and 
perfect as it is reckoned in Heaven. 

He is our Advocate in Heaven. 

“And if any man (any Christian) sin, we have an 
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.” 
(isJohn:221,) 

An Advocate for us includes the idea of a Prose. 
cutor against us. 

There is such an one and that one is Satan. 

He has his headquarters in the atmospheric heavens 
_ surrounding this earth, from thence he has access to 
the throne of God. 

He is seen in the Heavens under the symbol of a 
dragon. 

“And there appeared another wonder in Heaven; 
and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and 
ten horns, and seven crowns upon his head.” (Rev- 
elation 12:3.) 

The identity of the dragon is revealed; as it is 
‘vritten: 

“That old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, 
which deceiveth the whole world.” (Revelation 12:9.) 

Since time began he has filled the role of accuser 
against the followers of God. 

““ Now there was a day when the sons of God came 
to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came 
also.” (Job 1:6.) 

When the Lord drew the Devil’s attention to Job 
and spoke of the righteousness of his character, he 
brought an accusation against him, slandered him, 
impugned his motives for being righteous and exhorted 
the Lord to send trials on him and prove him and test 


254 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


him and see how much his professed righteousness was 
really worth. 

This is the Devil’s occupation now, seeking to ac- 
cuse and bring the follower of God into disrepute with 
God; as it is written: 

“ And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now 
is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of 
our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser 
of our brethren is cast down, which accused them 
before our God day and night.” (Revelation 12:10.) 

This particular scene in Heaven is yet future and 
looks on to that moment when the Church having 
been translated from earth to Heaven at the Lord’s 
Coming for her will be assembled at the Judgment Seat 
of Christ, and when Satan will make his last great 
effort to tarnish the glory of the Church of the first 
born (the first risen from the dead) by bringing the 
record of defaulting Christians into the light. 

But while Satan may act the part of prosecutor, as 
he will claim, for righteousness, the Lord will meet his 
accusation and fill for us the part of Advocate; or, as 
the word really means—Our Stand-by. 

Others may profess to be for us and in the hour of 
test fall down, He abides for us through evil and 
through good report. He is faithful and cannot deny 
Himself, nor the office He has assumed for us—Our 
Advocate, Our Friend in Heaven. 

He is our Confessor. 

The Roman Catholic priest is a Confessor. 

He listens to the confessions of his parishioners. 

They are exhorted to go to him and confess their 
sins down to the most minute detail, not only of deed, 
of word, but thought and impulse. 

The Christian can sin. 


THE PRIEST 255 


He can sin because in regeneration he does not get 
rid of the old nature of sin. He gets a new and holy 
nature from the risen Son of God, but the nature of 
the first man remains, and thus the Christian has two 
natures, the nature of the first Adam and the nature 
of the Second, a nature of flesh and a nature of spirit. 
But while the Christian has two natures he has but 
one responsibility. When that responsibility is not 
exercised against the motions of sin, the Christian will 
stumble and fall, dishonor the Lord and wound his 
own soul. 

The Christian who denies there is sin in him after 
regeneration makes God a liar; as it is written: 

“If we (Christians) say that we have not sinned, 
we make him (God) a liar, and his word is not in 
us.” °(1 John 1:10.) 

(Self evidently not in us, because the Word of God 
is light, it is a revelator.) 

You may be sitting in a dimly lighted room. 

Presently the full light is turned on. You discover 
at once things you had not observed before. 

The light did not put them there, the light just re- 
vealed they were there. 

That is the manner of the Word of God, in propor- 
tion as it is allowed to shine in the heart it will make 
manifest what is in the heart. 

The more you allow the light to shine, the more you 
seek to walk in the light as Christ is in the light, the 
more you endeavor to be obedient to the will of God 
as the Word sets it before you, the more you will 
awake to the fact that the old nature is in you and 
exceedingly and unchangeably sinful. 

Get on the heights where the light shines in unhin- 
dered power, try to keep pace with Christ as He walks 


256 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


in that upper region and you will have a revelation 
of yourself that will make you to cry out with 
anguish, with heartache and bitterness of soul. 

But sin in a Christian when not judged and repudi- 
ated is a dangerous thing; not that a true child of God 
even though he stumble and continue to walk in the 
way of unrighteousness, ceases to be a child of God, 
the fixed relation between a father and a son disproves 
that. A son may be openly disobedient to his father 
and walk in a way that dishonors that father, he does 
not cease to be a son; how much more true is this of 
the relation between a child of God and his infinite 
Father. 

The earthly father may set his son aside, he may 
refuse to hold communion with him, he may cause him 
to suffer loss in many directions, but the fact of son- 
ship remains. 

All this is so in our relation with God the Father. 

We shall not cease to be His children, but He will 
refuse to hold communion with us. He will with- 
draw His manifested presence from us. The Spirit 
will not leave us, but will refuse to make Himself 
known to us, we shall be as though He did not dwell 
in us, as though He never had been in us. We shall 
be without any consciousness of divine life in us. 
Alas! there are multitudes of real Christians who are 
today practically disjuncted from the living God and 
seem to the world as those who have nothing better to 
recommend them than lip service, and are in fact 
stumbling-blocks to the unbeliever. 

They have yielded to sin in one form or another. 

The sin may be slight. It may be a wrong word 
spoken, a false judgment entertained. It may be a 
secret violation of the will of God, a secret sin indulged 


THE PRIEST 257 


in, whatever it may be it is enough to cut the Christian 
off from the steady supply of the Heaven life, leaving 
him in blackness of spiritual darkness and to all in- 
tents and purposes as dead as the dead world about 
him. 

What shall he do to get back to the consciousness 
of God in his soul? 

What shall he do to have communion with God and 
the Spirit restored? 

Do what the Roman Catholic does. 

Go to the Priest and confess the sin or sins, make 
a clean breast of it. 

Go to your Priest, not to a poor, pretentious priest 
set up by the hand of man and the deceiving, subtle 
inspiration of the Devil, but to your Priest in Heaven 
and confess to Him. That is what He is there for— 
to listen to your confession and to act as your—Con- 
fessor. 

And behold what He does: 

He will take your confession and present it to the 
Father, not as the confession of an alien and unre- 
generate, but as the confession of one of His own dear 
children, one who has stumbled and fallen by the way, 
one who has been grievously hurt by the failure and 
is full of genuine and sore repentance, one who de- 
sires to get back and into touch of the divine presence 
and the comfort of the Holy Ghost in the soul. 

Make this confession and the Great High Priest will 
give you complete and perfect absolution and in the 
name of the Father cleanse and restore you; as it is 
written: 

“Tf we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all un- 
righteousness.” (I John 1:9.) 


258 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The Father does this because He is faithful and 
just. 

Faithful to the covenant relationship between Him- 
self and the Son. 

The Son appeals to the Father and says this con- 
fessing Christian is one whom the Father gave Him 
before the foundation of the world; and the Father 
because He is faithful will own and restore that child 
of God to His personal favor. But the Father does 
this because He is just as well as faithful. The Son 
testifies to the Father that this confessing Christian 
is one for whom He died and the Father had agreed 
to accept His death for this covenant given Christian 
through all the experiences of his earthly and pilgrim 
way and He claims the permanent application of that 
blood now and in this particular case. Because the 
Father has respect to that blood and the relation of the 
Lord to the believer as his surety, He will not demand 
payment twice, once from the Believer’s Surety and 
then from the believer too. He is both faithful and 
just, He both forgives and cleanses and the confessing 
Christian feels suddenly as though Heaven’s gates had 
been opened and a breath from the throne of God was 
sweeping with its celestial cleansing through his soul. 

O there is no act in the Christian life that can so 
fill the soul with the music of redemption as full and 
sincere confession to our Great High Priest. 

It is a gracious and measureless privilege given to 
believers. 

Nor need we hesitate to come even though again and 
again we have stumbled. 

Has he not said man should forgive his brother man 
not seven times but seventy times seven; and does He 
not mean the Court of Heaven is open, the Confessor 


THE PRIEST 259 


ever on the throne, His ear ever bent to listen to the 
most hesitating and trembling confession that shall 
carry in it the accent of genuine contrition and a 
yearning desire once more for the embracing arms of 
a Saviour’s love? 

The beauty and the value of confession is set before 
us in the wonder and pathos of the Last Supper when 
our Lord at the close of it takes a towel, girds Him- 
self, pours water into a bason and washes the feet of 
His disciples. (John 13:1-7.) 

Peter demurs, he will not allow the Lord to wash 
his feet; but when the Lord assures him that if He 
do not wash his feet he shall have no part with him, 
the impulsive Apostle goes to the other extreme and 
would have the Lord not only to wash his feet, but his 
hands and his head as well. 

Then the Lord says to him: 

“He that is washed needeth not save to wash his 
feet, but is clean every whit.” 

This is what the Lord says literally: 

“He that is bathed (that is, has had his body 
bathed) needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean 
every whit.” 

The body having been bathed is protected by the 
clothing, but the feet having only sandals are exposed 
and in walking contract more or less defilement by the 
way. 

It was not necessary to take a fresh bath. 

It was simply necessary to have the feet washed. 

As believers we have been redeemed by the blood 
and are in Christ the very righteousness of God; as 
our Lord said to Peter, we are— 

‘* Clean every whit.’’ 

But in our daily life even when we do not commit 


260 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


outbreaking sin we contract more or less defilement 
in our pilgrim way, the sense of communion is lost, 
there is an estrangement between our spirit and the 
Spirit of the Lord, we are out of touch, that thing, 
whatever it may be, is between us and Him, we have 
neither peace nor power. 

What shall we do? 

Do what Peter did at last. 

He submitted his feet to the inspection of the Lord. 

That is what we must do: 

Show our feet to the Lord. 

Expose our walk before Him, let Him have the com- 
plete detail of deed, word and thought, and all the 
environing circumstances. 

When Peter submitted His feet to the Lord, the 
Lord applied the water to them and washed them. 

The water is a symbol of the Word and truth of God. 

When we confess our sins to the Lord He presents 
this confession to the Father, the Father, as already 
stated, owns His covenant relation to the Son and to 
the cross and the justness of the Son’s demands that 
the believer’s confession shall be accepted; then it is 
the Lord applies the forgiveness and the cleansing to 
the believer, applies the truth to his heart and con- 
science, the Word takes its rightful place in his heart, 
it becomes in him, indeed, as a well of water springing 
up and cleansing every thought, gives purity to every 
word, making the walk a walk of holiness and separa- 
tion unto the Lord. 

He is our Intercessor. 

“He is able also to save them to the uttermost that 
come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make 
intercession for them.” (Hebrews 7:25.) 

Intercede means to present a petition, to pray. 


THE PRIEST 261 


He prays for those who are His. 

(This has been fully set forth in the chapter on the 
Golden Incense Altar.) 

A Christ in Heaven praying for us! 

What grace, what assurance is that. 

Again and again when the believer is on the edge 
where it seems the next step would make him slip, 
plunge and fall into the black abyss of unbelief, there 
comes as directly out of Heaven itself a touch of 
power that repudiates even the thought of doubt or 
question and gives him a vigor of faith such as he 
never dreamed ever could be his. 

Yonder at the throne He has seen our special need 
and prayed for us. 

As already shown He takes our prayers, pfesents 
them and makes them acceptable before the Father’s 
throne. 

He is in Heaven as our life. 

He is the Second Man. 

He stands in contrast to the First Man. 

The First Man has been and is—our Death. 

Moral, spiritual and organic death. 

The Lord as the Second Man is our—Life. 

The source of moral, spiritual and immortal life. 

He is such to all who believe in Him. 

All life is by environment. 

He is our environment. 

We live in Him. He is, actually, our life; as it is 
written: 

“‘ Christ who is our life.”” (Colossians 3:4.) 

He is our Forerunner in Heaven. 

“Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even 
Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of 
Melchisedec.”” (Hebrews 6:20.) 


%62 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


A Forerunner is one who goes ahead of others. 

He goes ahead as a sample of those who are to 
follow. 

The presence of Christ in Heaven is a pledge to the 
believer of four great things: 

1. We shall enter Heaven the moment of 
death. 

“T am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to 
depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better.” 
(Philippians 1:23.) 

To die, according to Scripture, is to depart. 

Let us remember that, it is the action of a traveler: 
we depart, we go just as we do here from one locality 
to another. 

Listen to this still further detailed announcement: 

“We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be 
absent from our home out of the body, and to be 
immediately present at our home with the Lord.’’ 
(II Corinthians 5:8.) 

As the Lord is in Heaven at the right hand of God, 
it follows, when the Christian dies he is immediately 
at the right hand of God, with the Lord. 

2. We shall enter Heaven some day in our 
body. . 

This will be when the Lord comes for the Church; 
as it is written: 

“The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with 
a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the 
trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: 

Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught 
up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord 
in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.” 
(I Thessalonians 4:16, 17.) 

Between us and this Coming of the Lord there is 


THE PRIEST 263 


not a single predicted event. It will be at an hour 
when we “think not.” It may be any moment. 

According to the word of the Lord Himself we are 
always standing on the threshold of it. It is the “ next 
thing ” solemnly promised to the Church. 

It is not necessary for us to die to go to Heaven. 

It may be at morning or noon or evening the 
“door ” in Heaven will open and He will say: 

“Come up hither.” 

And lo, we shall be with Him. 

3. We shall be where He is in Heaven. 

He is at the “ right hand of God.” 

He has said we shall be where He is: 

Listen to His words: ; 

“IT will come again, and receive you unto myself; 
that where I am, there ye may be also.” (John 14:3.) 

In His wonderful prayer He said: 

“Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast 
given me, be with me where Iam.” (John 17:24.) 

He said: 

‘““T go to prepare a place for you.” (John 14:2.) 

When He comes He will take us into the “ place 
prepared.” 

4. We shall be like Him. 

“Tt doth not yet appear (is not yet made manifest 
to the world) what we shall be: but we know that, 
when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we 
shall see him as he is.” (I John 3:2.) 

Until that hour of mutual glory He is in 
Heaven as the sympathizing priest who makes 
the throne of God the infinite Dispensary of the 
mercy and grace which help in time of need. 

“ For we have not an high priest which cannot be 


264 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


touched with a feeling of our infirmities; but was in 
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. 

Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to 
help in time of need.” (Hebrews 4:15, 16.) 

If Aaron contrastively and yet in certain details is 
a direct type of our Lord Jesus Christ as the Great 
High Priest, Aaron’s sons, the priestly family, set 
forth the Church as such; as it is written: 

“Ye also, as lively (living) stones, (Peter is think- 
ing of himself as the first living stone built on Christ 
the living Rock) are built up a spiritual house, an holy 
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ. 

Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood.” 
(CiPeteriz25),.95) 

“‘ By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise 
to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving 
thanks in his name.” (Hebrews 13:15.) 

There is no warrant for any high priest on earth 
today. 

Priesthood on earth can be exercised only in Israel, 
in the tribe of Levi and by the house of Aaron. 

The nation of Israel has been rent in twain. Ten 
tribes are nationally lost to view. The Jews have been 
set aside as the people of God in this age; they are 
Lo Ammi—‘ Not my People.” 

The Church has been brought in in the stead of the 
law system. 

With the setting aside of the Jew is the setting aside 
of priesthood on earth. 

The only High Priest is our Lord Jesus Christ and 
He exercises His office as such only in Heaven. 


THE PRIEST 265 


There is no warrant for any special class of priests 
in the Church. 

All Christians are priests. 

They are spiritual priests. 

As priests all Christians are on a level with each 
other; no one Christian has a right to special pre- 
eminence as a priest. 

Christians are a family of priests, each having the 
same function as the other, and that is: 

“To offer up spiritual sacrifices.” 


XXIV 
(The Priest’s Garments) 
THE EMBROIDERED LINEN COAT 


ARON the high priest had distinctive garments 
A called, ‘‘ Garments for glory and beauty.” 
“ And thou shalt make holy garments for 
Aaron thy brother for glory and beauty.” (Exodus 
28°21) 

The garments were: 

A Breastplate. 

An Ephod. 

A Robe. 

A Broidered Coat. 

A Mitre. 

A Girdle. (Exodus 28:4.) 

The materials were blue, and purple, and scarlet, 
and fine twined linen. (Exodus 28:5.) 

When Aaron and his sons were consecrated to the 
priesthood the garments were put upon Aaron in the 
following order: 

The Coat. 

The Girdle. 

The Robe of the Ephod. 

The Breastplate. 

The Mitre. 

The golden plate on the Mitre. 

The inner linen garments came necessarily first. 


THE EMBROIDERED LINEN COAT 


“ And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen.” 


(Exodus 28:39.) 
266 


THE EMBROIDERED LINEN COAT 267 


The coat was of fine linen. 

It was of “ woven work.” (Exodus 39:27.) 

Linen is a symbol of righteousness; as it is written: 

“The fine linen is the righteousness of saints.” 
(Revelation 19:8.) 

The word “righteousness” should be written in 
the plural. It is righteousnesses.” 

As Aaron is a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ these 
inner garments of linen set forth His essential char- 
acter, His moral cleanness, His purity, His sinless 
perfection. 

The testimony to His perfection is universal, over- 
whelming, conclusive. 


THE TESTIMONY OF PILATE 


“Pilate went out again to the Jews, and said unto 
them, I find in him—no fault at all.’’ (John 18:38.) 

“Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto 
them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may 
know that I find no fault in him.’’ (John 19:4.) 

“ Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify 
him: for I find no fault in him.” (John 19:6.) 

“ When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, 
but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, 
and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I 
am innocent of the blood of this just person.’’ 
(Matthew 27:24.) 


THE TESTIMONY OF PILATE’S WIFE 


““When he (Pilate) was set down on the judgment 
seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou noth- 
ing to do with—that just man.’’ /Matthew 27:19.) 


268 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


THE TESTIMONY OF HEROD 


“And Pilate, when he had called together the chief 
priests and the rulers and the people, 

Said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, 
as one that perverteth the people; and, behold, I, hav- 
ing examined him before you, have found no fault in 
this man touching those things whereof ye accuse 
him: 

No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him; and, lo, 
nothing worthy of death is done unto him.” (Luke 
23:13-15.) 


TESTIMONY Or THE THIEF ON THE Cross 

“And one of the malefactors which were hanged 
railed on him, saying, 

If thou be Christ, save thyself and us. 

But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost 
not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same con- 
demnation? . 

And we indeed justly; for we receive the due re- 
ward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing 
amiss.’’ (Luke 23:39-41.) 


TESTIMONY Or THE CENTURION 

“And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he 
said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and 
having said thus, he gave up the ghost. 

Now when the centurion saw what was done, he 
glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous 
man.’’ (Luke 23:46, 47.) 

“And when the centurion, which stood over against 
him, and saw that he so cried out, and gave up the 
ghost (literally—commanded his Spirit to go), he said, 
Truly this man was the Son of God.” (Mark 15:39.) 


THE EMBROIDERED LINEN COAT 269 


TESTIMONY OF STEPHEN 


Stephen was speaking before the Jewish Sanhedrim. 

He said: 

““ Which of the prophets have not your fathers per- 
secuted? and they have slain them which shewed 
before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye 
have been now the betrayers and murderers.” (Acts 
7:52.) 


TESTIMONY OF Tuer APOSTLE PETER 


Standing before the Jewish Council he said: 
“Ye denied the holy one and the just.’’ (Acts 


3:14.) 
‘* Who did no sin, neither was guile found in 
his mouth.’’ (I Peter 2:22.) , 


TEesTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE JOHN 
“In him is—no sin.’’ (I John 3:5.) 


TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE PAUL 


‘Who knew no sin.’’ (II Corinthians 5:21.) 
“Tn all points tempted as we are, yet without 
sin.’’ (Hebrews 4:15.) 


TESTIMONY Or DEMONS FROM THE BOTTOMLESS 
PIT 


“‘ And, behold, they (the demons) cried out, saying, 
What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of 
God?’’ (Matthew 8:29.) 

“ And there was in their synagogue a man with an 
unclean spirit; and he cried out, 

Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, 
thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? 


270 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God.’’ 
(Mark 1:23, 24.) 

“ But when he (the demon) saw Jesus afar off, he 
ran and worshipped him, 

And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have 
I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High 
God?’’ (Mark 5:6, 7.) 

““When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down 
before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I 
10 do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God Most 
High?’’ (Luke 8:28.) 


TESTIMONY Or THE HOLy SPIRIT 


“ And John (the Baptist) bare record, saying, I saw 
the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and 
it abode upon him.’’ (John 1:32.) 


TESTIMONY OF Gop THE FATHER 


“This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased.” (Matthew 17:5.) 

‘* But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, 
is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is 
the sceptre of thy kingdom. 

Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated in- 
iquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. 

And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the 
foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the 
works of thine hands: 

They shall perish; but thou remainest; and they 
all shall wax old as doth a garment; 

And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they 
shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years 
shall not fail.” (Hebrews 1:8-12.) 


THE EMBROIDERED LINEN COAT 271 


His Own Testimony. 


“Which of you convinceth (convicteth) me of 
sin?” (John 8:46.) 


The Answer Of The World Unto This Very Hour: 
‘* None.”’ 


Men of all sorts and conditions testified to the per- 
fectness of His life. 

The police officers who came to arrest Him returned 
to those who sent them and said: | 

“Never man spake like this man.” (John 7:46.) 

And watching Him at every step, listening to every 
word, the people said: 

_ “He hath done all things well.” (John 7:36.) 

Perfect in deed, perfect in word, perfect in thought 
—the Perfect Man. 

The Linen Coat in the wonder of its weaving, and 
embroidery, in the perfection of its needlework, testify 
to the ‘‘ beauty of holiness” inwrought with every 
fibre of His human texture. 


XXV 
THE GIRDLE 


oo ND a girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, 
A and purple, and scarlet, of needlework; as 
the Lorp commanded Moses.” (Exodus 

39:29.) 

This girdle is not as is commonly supposed the 
“curious ” girdle of the Ephod. That was not a girdle 
at all, it was rather intended as a means to keep the 
Ephod in its place. It did not girdle the loins at all. 

The real girdle was bound under the linen coat. 

A girdle is the symbol of service: 

“ Gird thyself and serve me.” (Luke 17:8.) 

It is a symbol of strength for service: 

“JT will strengthen him with thy girdle.” (Isaiah 
D2 7205) 

All this finds its perfect fulfillment in the Son of 
God. 

Speaking of Him anticipatively the Father says: 

“Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, 
in whom my soul delighteth.” (Isaiah 42:1.) 

“He took on Him the form of a servant.” 

Literally, we should read: 

“Being in the form of God, thought not to hold 
on to equality with God: 

But emptied himself, (of His form of God) and 
took upon him the form of a servant.” (Philippians 
2:65%12) . 

He Himself said: 

272 


THE GIRDLE 273 


“The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, 
but to minister (serve).” (Matthew 20:28.) 

To His disciples He said: 

“JT among you as—he that serveth.’’ (Luke 
ET IA 

He poured Himself out in service. 

Multitudes followed Him that they might receive 
something at His hands. 

When He went into a secret place to pray Simon 
Peter and the other disciples sought Him out and said 
unto Him: 

*‘ All men seek thee.” (Mark 1:37.) 

From morning to night He girded Himself in service 
and gave Himself up to the claims and needs of others. 

He was the patient, uncomplaining, servant of/men, 
testifying continually that He came not to do His own 
will. 

Continually He put upon Himself the startling and 
suggestive title: 

“ The sent of God.” 

In the Gospel according to John and the thirteenth 
chapter you have a divinely etched picture of Him as 
the servant of men. 

It is the scene to which reference has already been 
made wherein He washes the feet of His disciples. 

Is there a man living on earth today, will there ever 
arise among the sons of men one, who can paint that 
scene? 

Not only must he paint the location, the figure of 
the disciples and the amazing Man, he must throw 
upon the canvas that which no colors of the pallette 
can represent—the distance He traveled to become 
that servant: the distance from the throne of God 
where He held the sceptre of glory to the midst of His 


274 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


disciples where with towel girded loins He washed the 
earth stained feet of stumbling men. 

No! he could not paint that scene. 

No surveyor’s chain could measure the distance; 
for, even though his chain might give the actual dis- 
tance in extension of degree, it could not measure the 
moral distance between that hour when with a fiat 
word He sent the universe upon its course, and that 
moment when He arose from the last supper He should 
eat on earth, took a towel and girded Himself to wash 
the feet of uncomprehending men. 

Although reference has already been made to this 
scene in its suggestive teaching concerning confession 
it seems fitting that I should take it up again and 
follow it out in all its analytical detail: 

He riseth from supper. 

The supper was the Passover supper. 

The Passover is a symbol of His sacrificial death as 
the true Passover Lamb of God; as it is written: 

‘* Christ our passover is sacrificed for us.” (I 
Corinthians 5:7.) 

As the passover is a symbol of His death, rising 
from the passover supper is a symbol of His resurrec- 
tion from the dead. 

In all this scene therefore we have portrayed the 
activity of our Lord in resurrection and in His high 
priestly function in Heaven. 

He girds Himself. 

He takes the towel and binds it upon His loins. 

He takes the attitude of self-denying service before 
His disciples, and as the scene typifies Him in resur- 
rection and after His ascension to Heaven, we behold 
Him as He is now in Heaven performing His service 


THE GIRDLE 275 


for those who still walk amid the dust and stain of 
earth bearing His name. 

He pours water into a bason and washes the 
feet of His disciples. 

This action is foreshadowed in the relation of the 
priest to the Brazen Laver at the door of the Taber- 
nacle. 

The priest, it will be remembered, who would draw 
nigh to God and serve Him acceptably must wash his 
hands and feet in the Laver. 

Hands set forth service. 

Feet give us the walk and stand for character. 

As Christians we live not only on the earth, but in 
the environment of a system called, “the world;” a 
system of modes, manners and customs; a system 
where the basic principle is denial of the will of God, 
exaltation of self will and self gratification—a course 
that leads through violated law, gratified appetites, 
repudiation of God and the things of God. 

Coming into contact with this system the Christian 
contracts more or less defilement of his spiritual life, 
whether it be in association with individual lives, in 
suggested words that fill the air, in transmitted thought, 
or in the stumbling due to unheeded ways—and with 
this comes a sense of loss of spiritual power, a sense 
of increasing distance from God, a sense of the dust 
and stain of a world at variance with God and His 
Holy Spirit. 

In the East during a meal they reclined at table and 
did so in close contact, so that the feet of the one 
would come more or less in contact with the head of 
another. 

Because of this and to make the relationship en- 


276 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


tirely proper there were placed at the entrance of the 
dining-room, jars or basons of fresh water. 

When the guest entered the servants of the house- 
hold removed his sandals and washed his feet. 

To eat with Christ is to commune with Christ. 

But if our daily Christian walk is not clean, if it is 
not free from the dust and stain of the world (and a 
careless word, a jest, a flippant manner, a look, may 
bring a stain and sense of wrong) it is impossible to 
eat with Him. He will not eat with us and our con- 
sciousness of communion and contact with the Father 
is gone. 

To commune with Him we must have our feet 
washed, made clean and sweet. 

He must wash our feet. 

This is the service the Lord fulfills for those who 
are His. 

This is His work in Heaven now. 

He takes our feet, our spiritual feet, our daily walk 
and conversation and makes them clean in the sight of 
God the Father; washes and cleanses us, not as guilty 
sinners of the outside, but as children of God who have 
become spiritually unclean. 

Before the Lord could wash the feet of the dis- 
ciples they must present them to Him for in- 
spection. 

In presenting their feet they were confessing the 
actual condition of them. 

Before the Lord can cleanse us we must confess our 
sins and failures, holding back nothing, making no 
concealment or excuse. 

Peter at first refused to have his feet washed. 

The Lord assured him unless they were washed he 
could have no part or lot in this great priestly action. 


THE GIRDLE 277 


The solemn fact is if we do not allow the Lord to 
deal with us here according to His own will—if we 
do not give Him our feet, make full and free confes- 
sion, we shall be confronted at the Judgment Seat of 
Christ with an accumulation of unconfessed, but re- 
corded sin and failure. Under the accusation of Satan 
these unconfessed things will witness against us, not 
as imperilling our salvation, but as shutting us out 
from rewards and privileges that might have been ours. 

The Lord told Peter it was only necessary to 
have his feet washed. 

The Lord made this explanatory statement because 
when the Apostle found he must have his feet washed 
he insisted that he should also have his hands and his 
head washed. s 

He told him when his feet were washed he would 
be, ‘‘ every whit clean.” 

The statemeiut of the Lord and the teaching become 
plain the moment it is known that although the word, 
“wash,” is used twice there are really two distinct 
words with distinct meanings. 

The first word signifies ‘‘ to bathe,” the second word 
signifies simply to apply the water to any single or 
definite portion of the body. 

Peter had bathed his body. His body was pro- 
tected by clothing. It was not necessary to take a 
fresh bath; but his sandalled feet had come in contact 
with the dust and soil of the way; to apply the water 
to the feet was all that was now necessary. 

And here you have the whole spiritual truth: 

When you first believe you are bathed, bathed in 
the blood, sanctified, as well as justified, and stand 
clean and perfect before God in Christ. 


278 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


That is your reputation and standing in the Court 
of Heaven. 

What you need is to have your daily life on earth 
kept clean and acceptable unto the Lord. 

To obtain this result you do not need a fresh bath 
in the blood of the cross, you do not need to have the 
work of salvation applied to you again to deliver you 
from the shortcomings of the way—you need simply 
to confess these shortcomings and failures. As you 
surrender, the Lord will bring home the truth to your 
heart and conscience. With the assurance of forgive- 
ness guaranteed in the Word and the Word owned as 
the rule of your life, even as the application of the 
water cleanses the feet, the truth will permeate your 
soul and there will come to you the touch of the Mas- 
ter’s hand and you will know He has taken you into 
a restored and closer fellowship than before; your 
confession has given Him the pulse beat of your sin- 
cerity and your genuine love for Him. 

Our Lord is in Heaven as the service girdled 
one. 

After He had washed the feet of His disciples He 
announced to them that what He had done should be 
an example for them. 

He said: 

“Tf I then your Lord and Master, have washed your 
feet; ye also ought to wash one another’s feet. 

For I have given you an example, that ye should 
do as I have done to you.” (V. 14.) 

As this scene looks forward to that hour when the 
Lord should enter on His High Priestly service in 
Heaven, the washing of one another’s feet is equally 
symbolical and signifies that like Him we are to take 
the place of servants of the Most High God in this 


THE GIRDLE 279 


world, serving God in His name, serving one another, 
and confessing our faults to one another; as it is 
written: 

“Confess your faults one to another, and pray for 
one another.” (James 5:6.) 

As He acts in Heaven as a priest for us, bringing to 
our confession, forgiveness and restoration, we as spir- 
itual priests should so act toward one another, con- 
fessing to each other, forgiving one another and restor- 
ing each other to the place of spiritual surrender to 
Him. 


XXVI 
THE ROBE OF THE EPHOD 


HE material of the Robe is not given. 
It was of woven work. 
It was of one color—blue. 

It was of one piece from top to bottom. 

At the top there was a hole by which the head might 
be slipt through, and this was bound round about in 
such a fashion that it could neither be torn nor rent. 

“ And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of 
blue. 

And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the 
midst thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work 
round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an 
habergeon, that it might not be rent. 

And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make 
pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet 
round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold be- 
tween them round about: 

A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and 
a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about. 

And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his 
sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy 
place before the Lord, and when he cometh out, that 
he die not.” (Exodus 28:31-35.) 

A robe is the symbol of position, office and character. 

“My judgment was a robe.” (Job 29:14.) 

“Clad with zeal as a cloak (robe).”’ (Isaiah 59:17.) 

“The robe of righteousness.” (Isaiah 61:10.) 

280 


THE ROBE OF THE EPHOD 281 


As the robe was the garment of priesthood and our 
Lord is the Great Antitypical Priest, the robe sets 
forth both His office and character as such. 

The colors of the robe are the distinctive features 
of His character. 

Blue is the color of Heaven. 

In the robe therefore you have a picture of Him as 
—The Heavenly Man. 

From Heaven He came, of Heaven He spoke, to 
Heaven He lifted His eyes, toward Heaven He walked, 
Heaven was continually in His thought and Heaven 
was the environment in which He lived. 

He stands in contrast to Adam, the First Man, who 
was “out of the earth—earthy.” 

He had no earthly dwelling place. : 

He had no earthly possessions. 

His riches and His store, all His treasures, were in 
Heaven. 

“ Heavenly ” is the word and title befitting Him. 

‘* Blue is the symbol of grace.’’ 

He was the incarnation of grace. 

“Thou art fairer than the children of men; grace 
is poured into thy lips.” (Psalm 45:2.) 

From these lips as from an exquisite chalice He 
poured forth the words that fell upon wounded hearts 
as the balm that “ never was in Gilead.” 

In His first sermon at Nazareth all bore witness and 
wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out 
of His mouth. 

“The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ.”” (John 1:17.) 

It was grace that brought Him from Heaven’s riches 
to Earth’s poverty; so that His grace is spoken of as: 

‘¢ The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.”’ 


282 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He lived in grace and died because of His grace. 

His heart was moved at the sight of sorrow. 

He healed the sick. 

He forgave sin. 

Grace and truth came by Him. 

Not grace alone—but grace and truth. 

Grace without truth is weakness. 

Truth without grace is judgment. 

But while truth reveals and hurts, grace heals and 
comforts. 

Thus He was full and equipoised. 

He had Heaven’s truth and Heaven’s grace. 

Blue is the color of distance. 

The blue of Heaven reveals distance, distance on 
distance till there is no measure, there is only infinite 
extension. 

He spoke as one who had no limiting horizon, no 
past that had a beginning, no future that had an 
ending. 

He said He lived before the foundation of the 
world was laid; that is, in the unbegun eternities; and 
in those unbegun eternities He sat as a beloved Son 
side by side with the unseen Father, His visibility and 
glory. 

There were times when His speech was simple and 
bounded by the locality in which for the moment He 
lived. 

There were moments when His words had in them 
the accent of eternities and therefore unbounded. 

The robe as a symbol of Him is expressed in the 
terms of the prophet Micah: 

“Whose goings forth have been from of old—from 
everlasting.’’ (Micah 5:2.) 


THE ROBE OF THE EPHOD 283 


The golden bells upon the hem of the robe sounded 
each time the priest walked. 

The sound of bells is equivalent to words. 
~ They have a meaning, a speech, a testimony. 

The pomegranate is perfect fruit. 

The pomegranate was hung between the golden bells. 

The golden bells are a symbol of the perfect 
speech of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

““ Never man spake like this man.” (John 7:46.) 

If the bell be equivalent to words, the pomegranate 
as the perfect fruit in sequence of the bell gives us the 
perfect fruit of words. 

The fruit of words are deeds. 

' In the pomegranate therefore you have the perfect 
deed that matched the perfect word. ’ 

The people proclaimed a matchless fact in the his- 
tory of humanity. 

They said: 

“He hath done all things well.” (Mark 7:37.) 

When the priest went inside the Holy Place he was 
invisible to the people. 

As he walked back and forth there was the sound 
of the golden bells. 

By the sound of those bells the people knew he was 
alive and acting before God on their behalf. 

The golden bells gave forth their sound by means 
of tongues. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ left this world two thousand 
years ago. 

During all that time He has been out of sight. He 
has been invisible to His Church. He is invisible 
today. 

Everything for us who believe in Him depends on 


284 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


His being alive in Heaven. How do we know He is 
alive; how do we know He is in Heaven? 

If He is the complete Antitype, the actual fulfill- 
ment of the typical priest, then He ought to give forth 
a testimony from the Holy Place in Heaven, a testi- 
mony equivalent to the sounding of the golden bells 
upon the robe of the high priest. 

He has done so. 

He did it on the day of Pentecost. 

The disciples were gathered together in Jerusalem 
and waiting. 

Suddenly there came from Heaven the sound of a 
mighty, rushing wind, tongues of fire were given to 
the disciples and they began to so speak that every 
man in the mixed multitude heard in his own tongue 
the wonderful works of God. 

Whence came this startling manifestation? 

The Apostle Peter answers: 

“This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are 
witnesses, 

Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, 
and having received of the Father the promise of the 
Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth (poured out) this 
which ye now see and hear.” (Acts 2:32, 33.) 

The disciples were witnesses of His resurrection; 
but they could not know by eyesight that He was act- 
ing in Heaven as the high priest on their behalf. 

He was invisible. 

He sent forth these tongues as the tongues of the 
golden bells to announce that He was alive in Heaven; 
but, unlike the high priest on earth who was forced to 
stand in the holy places, who could stay only a moment, 
he had taken his seat on the throne of God a priest for 
ever after the order of Melchisedec. 


THE ROBE OF THE EPHOD 285 


Pentecost was the answer to the ringing of the 
golden bells on the priestly robe of the ephod, a wit- 
ness to the presence of a risen, glorified, immortal man 
in Heaven acting as our High Priest today. 

It is preeminently important to lay hold of the fact 
that Pentecost was a witness to the Jewish nation that 
the Jesus of Nazareth whom they crucified, not only 
had risen and ascended to Heaven, but that in Heaven 
He was now upon the throne of God the Father and 
owned of Him as both Lord and Christ; as it is 
written: 

“Therefore let all the house of Israel know assur- 
edly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye 
have crucified, both Lord and Christ.” (Acts 2:36.) 

That is to say, by the outpouring of the Spirit from 
the hand of the risen Christ, God the Father testified 
to them that He was not only their Messiah, King of 
the Jews, King of Israel, but the Lord God of the Old 
Testament, the Holy One of Israel. 

This manifestation of the Spirit was the begun ful- 
fillment of the prophecy of Joel. He had prophesied 
that before the great and notable day of the Lord the 
Spirit should be poured out upon the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, the Lord should descend in glory, and 
deliver the city from the heel of the Gentile forever. 
When our Lord made this promise of the Spirit just 
before He ascended His disciples knowing such a 
manifestation was to be the precursor of the kingdom 
asked Him if He would at that time restore the king- 
dom. He did not answer them because He meant this 
manifestation to be a test to the Nation. If they 
should turn to Him He would return from Heaven and 
set up the kingdom. They failed to meet the test, 
rejected Him risen as they had rejected Him when He 


286 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


walked the earth. The full detail of the prophecy of 
Joel was postponed, the Nation set aside and the 
Church brought in. Pentecost as Joel foretold it 
therefore is not operative in these days. (The teach- 
ing about the baptism of the Holy Ghost now and the 
gift of tongues is dispensationally false.) Pentecost 
became therefore a witness of Jewish national blind- 
ness, the parenthetic character of this Church age and 
the assurance to Israel that when the Church shall be 
translated at the secret Coming of the Lord, the Spirit 
will be poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 
the Lord will appear in glory and an elect remnant 
shall be saved. 


XXVIII 
THE EPHOD AND THE BREASTPLATE 


oe Ephod was an outer garment. 
It was a sleeveless tunic, coming below the 
waist. 

It was composed of two pieces, a front and back. 

These pieces were fastened together on the shoul- 
ders with two buttons of onyx stone. 

_ The names of six of the tribes of Israel were en- 
graved on one stone, the names of the remaining six 
tribes on the other stone. , 

It was belted in at the waist with a “ curious” 
girdle of fine twined linen, blue, purple and scarlet 
color. 

The word “curious ” signifies “ skilfully made.” 

The Ephod was made by beating gold into thin 
plates, cutting them into wires and weaving them into 
the fine twined linen, blue, purple and scarlet color. 

The divine description of it is definite and worth 
while. 

“And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, 
and of purple, and of scarlet and fine twined linen, 
with cunning work. 

It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined 
at the two edges thereof; and so it shal] be joined 
together. 

And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon 
it, shall be of the same, according to the work thereof; 
even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine 


twined linen. 
287 


288 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on 
them the names of the children of Israel: 

Six of their names on one stone, and the other six 
names of the rest on the other stone, according to 
their birth. 

With the work of an engraver in stone, like the en- 
graving of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones 
with the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt 
make them to be set in ouches of gold. 

And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoul- 
ders of the ephod for stones of memorial unto the chil- 
dren of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names be- 
fore the Lord upon his two shoulders for a memorial. 

And thou shalt make ouches of gold; 

And two chains of pure gold at the ends; of wreathen 
work shalt thou make them, and fasten the wreathen 
chains to the ouches.” (Exodus 28:6-14.) 

“And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and 
cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the 
purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with 
cunning work.’’ (Exodus 39:3.) 

It was a magnificent garment of glory and beauty. 

Looked at in one way it was all gold, catching 
every ray of light and flashing forth in gleaming 
splendor. 

Every movement of the priest revealed the genius 
and the glory of its construction. 

Looked at from a different angle it was all linen, 
white and blue and purple and scarlet color. 

And yet, there were not two ephods—there was 
but one. 

One ephod with two distinct materials. 

And the distinction of the materials was maintained 
throughout the entire garment. 


THE EPHOD AND THE BREASTPLATE 289 


The gold did not become linen, the linen did not 
become gold. 

The Ephod is a perfect, a divine, symbol of our 
Lord Jesus Christ in the wonder of His person, the 
God-man, the one, changeless, infinite person, having 
two distinct, unmixable natures, human and divine. 

Considered on one side of His life our Lord was 
genuinely human. 

He was born of a woman. 

He was born a babe. 

He grew in stature, in wisdom and knowledge and 
favor with men. 

He became a day laborer. He earned His bread in 
the sweat of His face. 

He grew weary, He hungered, He thirsted, He ate, 
He drank, He slept for needed refreshment of body. 

He desired to know what men thought of Him. He 
was keenly sensitive and suffered when men thought 
ill of Him. 

He knew what it was to be burdened, to have sor- 
row and heaviness of soul. 

He could shed tears. 

He shrank from the ignominy of death and at the 
grave of Lazarus protested against it as an enemy and 
scandal of the human race. 

At last He died, His body became cold, inert. It 
was wrapped round with a winding sheet and buried 
as uncounted millions, dead and silent, had been buried 
before Him. 

On the other side of His life He was more than 
human. 

He was sinless. 

And God knows and man knows, to be that, is to be 
altogether more than human. 


290 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He was holy. 

But it was a holiness that revealed sin in others, 
made iniquity declare itself and stand naked and self 
accusing in His presence; a holiness that had in it all 
the restrained thunder and fire and hatred of God’s 
wrath against sin. 

No human Father could have begotten such a Son, 
even of the most stainless and virginal woman. 

God, and God alone, could have begotten such a 
humanity. 

He manifested His super-human quality in His 
miracles. 

He gave sight to the blind and hearing to the deaf, 
He made the dumb man to speak, He cleansed the 
leper and made the lame man to leap like a hart. 

When He multiplied the loaves and the fishes He 
created atoms. When He hushed the storm He was 
superior to and the Master of mass, weight, specific 
gravity, density and motion. When He raised Lazarus 
from the dead He created new tissue; it was an act of 
creation as distinct as when He created Orion and the 
Seven stars. 

But the marvel of His miracles was not in the act 
of them, but in the manner of them. 

They were wrought apart from visible instru- 
mentalities. 

They were wrought by a fiat word. 

He said, “I will,” and it was done. 

He commanded and it came to pass. 

In this He demonstrates one thing, one immense, 
indisputable thing, and that is, 

His will was superior to all forces in nature. 

A will superior to all forces in nature defines and 
demonstrates—God. 


THE EPHOD AND THE BREASTPLATE 291 


The law and logic of His history is that He was 
God, very God of very God. 

You could not separate the gold from the linen 
without rending and ruining the linen. 

You could not separate the linen from the gold with- 
out bending and twisting and ruining the gold. 

You could not separate the two materials without 
destroying the ephod. 

You cannot separate the two natures in Christ. 

You cannot take the deity out of Christ without 
ruining His humanity. 

Not only would you make His humanity a weak and 
inefficient humanity, you would make it a cowardly 
and despicable humanity. 

He sweat blood at the thought of His approaching 
death on the cross. 

He is not as courageous as the thieves by His side. 
He lacks the courage, the endurance and the heroism 
of the martyrs who have since gone to death in His 
name. At the last He utters that fearful cry which 
has echoed and reechoed down the centuries to this 
hour, the bitter and awful reproach that God had for- 
saken Him. 

If He were only human then these martyrs who died 
in His name and for His sake, fair women who suf- 
fered every outrage and every agony of torture the 
flesh could feel for the love of Him and made no sign 
of their suffering, even wreathing their torture marked 
faces in smiles that they might glorify Him, these are 
quivering, shame smiting rebukes and judgments 
against His repudiation of the faith He proclaimed 
in life and denied in death. 

Take the deity out of Him, make Him only a man, 
He becomes a false and deceiving teacher of men. 


292 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He becomes worse than that; so bad, indeed, that 
words cannot describe His wickedness. 

He claimed preexistence. 

He said before the world was founded, before the 
universe, therefore, was created, He sat on the throne 
with God as His Father. 

He said all the Father could do He could do. 

He made Himself coeval and coequal with God 
(the very thing the Devil claimed and for which he 
became the Devil and was cast out of God). 

He said He was self existent. 

He said no man could come to God and find Him 
a Father, but by Him. 

He said Whosoever saw Him saw the Father. 

He made eternal damnation and eternal salvation 
dependent not on any principles or precepts He 
taught, but upon faith in Himself for all He claimed 
Himself to be. 

He said the Old Testament from Genesis to Malachi 
had been written to testify of Him, and on one oc- 
casion openly claimed to be the—“‘ I am,” the Holy 
One of Israel. 

Whatever difficulty self announced scholars may 
have today concerning. His words and claims, those 
who saw and heard Him had none. 

They took up stones to stone Him and when with 
apparent innocence He asked why they would do that, 
they answered Him in such a fashion that it puts the 
record of His own claims on Him in such a manner 
that there can be but one of two reasons why any man 
who reads the record can have any trouble about it, 
and that alternative is, either he is unqualifiedly unin- 
tellectual and unreasoning in spite of all pretentious 


THE EPHOD AND THE BREASTPLATE 293 


learning, or he is perversely and determinedly an un- 
believer and a wilful infidel. 

This is what the people flung in His face, the ac- 
cusation that either makes Him God or Devil: 

Because that thou, being a man, makest thyself 
God. 

There is not the slightest doubt about it. 

He did. 

The record is there. 

He did claim to be God. 

You cannot go through the New Testament and 
separate those portions which bear witness to His 
deity from those which describe His humanity. 

Try it. 

Take that scene at the well of Sychar. ; 

Repudiate His deity, make Him only a man. 

The moment you do that you are under bonds of 
inexorable logic to set aside the offer of eternal life 
which He makes to the sinful woman. 

Do that and you have a man who is either an un- 
balanced weakling or a gross and cruel deceiver. 

Take away His deity from the record of the storm 
scene on Galilee and the whole thing becomes a piece 
of paramount acting, the quick seizure of coincidence 
and nothing better than the cheap comedy that ex- 
ploits it. 

Take away His deity at the grave of Lazarus, and 
aS no mere man can raise the dead, then the whole 
scene is nothing better than a blundering, melodra- 
matic scenario stupidly arranged beforehand, but 
easily revealing all its self-evident parts; either that, 
or the story is blankly false, made out of whole cloth 
from the beginning to the end. 

Take His deity out of the New Testament and you 


294 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


may as well throw the New Testament into the waste- 
basket, even that is too much honor for it. 

There is no possible point of compromise. 

If you accept the New Testament as the Word of 
God you will find it binds His humanity and His deity 
together as the gold and the linen were bound together 
in the Ephod, a wondrous garment of glory and 
beauty, bound together in the unit of His One eternal 
and unchangeable personality—The God-man. 


THE BREASTPLATE 


Inseparably connected with the Ephod and a con- 
stituent part of it was the Breastplate. 

It was a four-square bag. 

It was made of the same materials as the Ephod; 
that is, of gold, blue, purple, scarlet color and fine 
twined linen. 

On the front of it there were placed in settings, 
twelve precious jewels in four rows of three each. 

On each stone was cut the name of a tribe of the 
Children of Israel. 

In the bag were placed two objects, not described, 
but called Urim and Thummim, which mean lights 
and perfections. 

By consulting these the priest obtained his answers 
from the Lord. 

The bag or plate was fastened to the front of the 
Ephod by twisted golden chains that looked like 
golden ropes. These were secured to two onyx stones 
on the shoulders. 

There were two rings on the back of the bag at 
the bottom and two rings in the ephod just above the 
“curious ” girdle, 


THE EPHOD AND THE BREASTPLATE 295 


The breastplate was secured to these lower rings by 
a lace of blue. 

“And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment 
with cunning work; after the work of the ephod thou 
shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of 
scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt thou make it. 

Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall 
be the length thereof, and a span shall be the breadth 
thereof. 

And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four 
rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, 
and a carbuncle: this shall! be the first row. 

And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, 
and a diamond. 

And the third row a ligure, an Ate. and an 
amethyst. 

And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a 
jasper: they shall be set in gold in their inclosings. 

And the stones shall be with the names of the chil- 
dren of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like 
the engravings of a signet; every one with his name 
shall they be according to the twelve tribes. 

And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at 
the ends of wreathen work of pure gold. 

And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings 
of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends 
of the breastplate. 

And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold 
in the two rings which are on the ends of the breast- 
plate. 

And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains 
thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put them on 
the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it. 

And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou 


296 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate 
in the border thereof, which is in the side of the ephod 
inward. 

And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and 
shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod under- 
neath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the 
other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the 
ephod. 

And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings 
thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, 
that it may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, 
and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod. 

And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of 
Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, 
when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial 
before the Lorp continually. 

And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment 
the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon 
Aaron’s heart, when he goeth in before the Lorp: 
And Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of 
Israel upon his heart before the Lorp continually.” 
(Exodus 28:15-30.) | 

The Ephod, the shoulderpieces, the breastplate and 
the curious girdle were all bound together and formed 
one garment. 

In wearing it the high priest carried the names of 
the Children of Israel both on his shoulder and on his 
heart. 

He carried them on his shoulders. 

The shoulder is the symbol of strength. 

You have the shoulder as the symbol of strength set 
forth in the story of the shepherd who seeks his lost 
sheep and when he has found it puts it on his shoulder 
and carries it all the way back to the fold from which 


THE EPHOD AND THE BREASTPLATE 297% 


it had strayed; so the Lord came from Heaven, sought 
His lost sheep (all who believe in and own Him), finds 
them and bears them up on His mighty shoulder, His 
infinite strength, and will continue so to carry them 
till they reach the cloudless day, Heaven’s fold and the 
abiding home. 

“Trust ye in the Lorp for ever: for in the Lorp 
JeHOovAH is everlasting strength.’’ (Isaiah 26: 4.) 

He carried them on his heart. 

The heart is the symbol of love. 

Just as Aaron was commanded to bear the names of 
the Children of Israel continually on his heart before 
the Lord, even so the Lord Jesus Christ, our great high 
priest, bears us up on His heart of love, and will keep 
us there till we greet Him face to face in His day and 
our day of glory. 

The work of our great high priest in Heaven is not 
a perfunctory work. 

He represents us, intercedes for us and maintains 
our standing and character there with a heart full of 
love, with exceeding great delight and abounding joy. 

“Now unto him that is able to keep you from 
falling, (there you have His shoulder) and to present 
you faultless before the presence of his glory with 
exceeding joy’’ (there you have His heart). (Jude 
24.) 

But there was a striking difference in the setting of 
the names on the stones of the shoulder and those of 
the Breastplate. 

Those graven on the stones of the shoulder were 
placed there according to their birth; as it is written: 

“ Six of their names on one stone, and the other six 
names of the rest on the other stone, according to 
their birth.’’ (Exodus 28:10.) 


298 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The names on the Breastplate were according to 
the position they held in the camp or on the 
march. 

There was a difference in the jewels. 

Those of the shoulder were of one kind. 

Those on the breastplate were not only different 
from those on the shoulder, but they were different 
from each other. 

Those on the shoulder were alike. 

They each had the same value. 

They were equally held up by Aaron. 

Those on the shoulders were there by birth. 

As believers we are all alike on the shoulder of our 
Lord; we are all there by spiritual birth. 

By birth, by regeneration, as believers, we are all 
alike before God, the weakest or the strongest of us— 
we are all the children of God, we are all such by 
faith; as it is written: 

“For ye are all the children of God by faith 
in Christ Jesus.” (Galatians 3:26.) 

As Children, the Lord presents us to the Father, 
holds each of us up with the same divine strength, the 
same grace and gives to each one of us the same 
reputation before the Court of Heaven. 

We are all on His heart as well as on His shoulder. 

He loves us all; there is not one of us for whom He 
paid the price of redemption whom He does not love. 

But while we are all on His heart and He loves us 
all, we are not all alike on His heart. 

That is startling, but—it is true. 

Just as the jewels were all on Aaron’s heart but dis- 
tinct from each other, so we are different from each 
other on the heart of the Lord. 


THE EPHOD AND THE BREASTPLATE 299 


We are all jewels, let there be no mistake there; 
for it is written: 

“They shall be mine, saith the Lorp of hosts, in 
that day when I make up my jewels. 

Yes, we are jewels, and costly jewels; behold it is 
written: 

“Ye are bought with a price.” (I Corinthians 
6:20.) 

The jewels occupied different places on Aaron’s 
heart, some were closer and more directly centered 
over his heartbeat. 

They were in their different positions on his heart 
according to the position they occupied in the camp 
or on the march, according to the place and kind of 
service they fulfilled. 

While we are on the shoulders of our Lord accord- 
ing to our birth, because we are all the children of 
God, we occupy our distinctive places on His heart ac- 
cording to the place we occupy in our daily life down 
here, according to our rank and service before Him. 

At the first He had seventy disciples. 

Then He chose a special twelve. 

Out of these twelve there were three who were more 
intimate and in closer touch with Him than the others. 

Of these three there was only one who leaned upon 
His breast in the intimacy of the supper celebration. 

While the Lord loved them all there was only this 
one disciple of whom it is said: 

‘‘ That disciple whom Jesus loved.’’ 

That disciple was John; and of him it is written: 

“The beloved disciple.” 

Every Christian may say with Paul: 

“ He loved me and gave himself for me.”’ 


3800 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


But the intensity and degree of His love for us will 
be in proportion as to whether we are following Him, 
“afar off” or ‘‘leaning’’ on His breast. 

Paul wants to lean on His breast, just above His 
heartbeat, Paul wants to hear every throb of it. 

This is what he means when he says: 

“ That I may win Christ.” (Philippians 3:3.) 

He had Christ already as his Saviour and Lord. He 
knew his redemption and security in Him; but he 
wanted more than that, he wanted a closer intimacy 
with the Lord, a deeper consciousness of Him in his 
inmost soul. 

Therefore he says: 

“That I may know him.” 

He desired to su walk before the Lord, so serve Him, 
that he might win a fuller, richer inflow of Him into 
every essence of his being. 

To this end he consecrated himself, gave himself up 
wholly to the Lord and said: 

“For me to live is Christ.” 

Therefore he says: 

“Wherefore we labor, that whether present or ab- 
sent, (whether in the flesh or out of the flesh) we 
may be accepted of him.” (II Corinthians 5:9.) 

The word “ accepted ” should be rendered “ accept- 
able;” that is, pleasing. 

He wanted to so please the Lord in his daily life 
that the Lord would take him right upon the center of 
His heart. 

It is our privilege to so live down here as Christians 
that we may continually win the special favor of the 
Lord and be classified—any one of us—as “ that dis- 
ciple whom Jesus loves.” 

The different position of the names, the difference 


THE EPHOD AND THE BREASTPLATE 301 


in the jewels, the difference in their beauty and splen- 
dor, testify that disciples will differ from one another 
in the relation they will sustain to the coming king- 
dom, ‘“‘even, as one star differeth from another star 
in glory;” and this difference will be according to life, 
to love and service here. 

Saved for nothing but by the sovereign and elective 
grace of a holy and righteous God, redeemed by the 
perfect sacrifice of His eternal Son, made partakers of 
the divine nature, sealed by the indwelling of the Holy 
Spirit and our life hid with Christ in God where death 
cannot touch us, saved, securely and eternally saved, 
owned before God and by Him as His children, made 
the very righteousness of God in Christ and looked at 
only in the perfections of Christ, and so presented by 
Him with exceeding joy and efficiency on His part that 
our standing as the spotless sons of God may not fail— 
we who believe do not have to live like sons of God to 
become such; but, because we are sons of God we are 
to live like sons of God, each day win deeper con- 
sciousness of our Lord’s measureless love, each day 
seek to serve Him more fully until we shall feel the 
outstretching of His heart to us and know we are closer 
to its inmost beating every present day than any 
yesterday. 


XXVIII 
THE MITRE AND THE GOLDEN PLATE 


a HOU shalt make the mitre of fine linen.” 
(Exodus 28:39.) 


The word “ mitre ”” comes from the He- 
brew and signifies “ to wrap,” “ to roll around.” 

The fine linen was wrapped or folded in folds 
around the head of the high priest in the form of a 
turban. 

In the New Testament Christian women are com- 
manded when in the public assembly to cover their 
head; they are commanded to do so because while 
Christ is the head of the man, the man in the public 
assembly as the representative of Christ in office 
bearing and teaching is over the woman and con- 
sidered as her head there, and the covered head is the 
sign of the woman’s obedience to this ordinance of 
the Lord. , 

The woman is also the symbol of the Church as a 
Body and in covering her head she symbolizes the 
Church surrendering to and owning the headship of 
Christ. It is the symbol of absolute subjection and 
obedience. 

The Mitre, the head covering of the priest, is there- 
fore a symbol of our Lord as— 

The Obedient One. 

Although in His preexistent state our Lord was 
coeval and coequal with the Father, He laid aside 
the “ form of God,” and took upon Himself the form 
and function of a servant. 


THE MITRE AND THE GOLDEN PLATE 303 


He took the place of a servant, called Himself the 
“Sent ” of the Father, said continually He did not 
come to do His own will but the will of Him who sent 
Him and reached the climax of obedience in the death 
of the cross so that it is written of Him: 

“He became obedient unto death, even the death 
of the cross.” 

So perfectly did He fulfill the role of a servant of 
God that the Father looking forward to that splendid 
display of subjection and service anticipatively draws 
attention to Him as such, 

He says: 

“ Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine eles in 
whom my soul delighteth. ”  C[saiah 42:1.) 

In all this unfaltering obedience to the will of God 
He stands in contrast to the First Man who walked 
exclusively after the counsel of his own will, begetting 
a race whose daily and consistent aim is to dethrone 
God, enthrone self and the full, unbridled exercise 
of the human will. 

Walking every day in delighted recognition of the 
will of God and every day making it supreme, setting 
aside self for the glory of the Father, trampling 
all selfishness beneath His feet, enthroning God in 
the perfection of His words and deeds, and breath- 
ing out His subjection to the will of God in the 
slightest accent of His thought, Jesus Christ demon- 
strates that He is not an evolution of the First Man, 
that He is not of his humanity and that no human 
father could have begotten the humanity in which He 
lived; that God and God alone could (as He Himself 
anticipatively says in the Twenty-second Psalm) have 
taken Him, “out of the womb,” and made Him to 
hope when He was upon His “ mother’s breasts.” 


304 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


As the Obedient One He stands in sharp, sword-like 
contrast to the ‘“‘ Coming Man ”’—the Antichrist, the 
Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition. 

The distinctive feature of the Antichrist is that he 
will come to do his own will; as it is written: 

“And the king shall do according to his will; 
and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself 
above every god and shall speak ‘marvellous things 
against the God of gods.” (Daniel 11:36.) 

The Apostle Paul gives a full description of him: 

“ That man of sin, the son of perdition; 

Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that 
is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God 
sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is 
God.” (II Thessalonians 2:4.) 

He is coming to be the climacteric expression of that 
which is now manifesting itself everywhere in the 
mass, the breakdown of respect for law, the indiffer- 
ence to the standards of righteousness, the almost 
wild-beast determination to gratify human desire, the 
setting of individuality and individual will against any 
possible restraint from God, or the idea of God, the 
multiplying evidence that man is rapidly reaching the 
place where he will consider himself his own God, his 
own wish and will determining his final action, boast- 
ing concerning his own limitless innate powers, glorify- 
ing himself in the belief that he did not originate by 
the fiat of a personal God, but that he arose out of im- 
personal slime and has fought his way up through 
brute forms to his present state, that the urge in him 
is divine energy and that the day is coming when en- 
throned on the laws and forces of nature by reason of 
attained scientific knowledge and invention, he shall | 
reveal himself as the very and only true God in the 


THE MITRE AND THE GOLDEN PLATE 305 


world—this man is coming to gather into himself all 
this spirit and set himself up as the authoritative ex- 
ponent of it, as the “ God of the whole earth.” 

Six thousand years of sin, sickness, war, woe, 
anguish, bloodshed, misery and the graveyard tell the 
story of the First Man’s disobedience and coming end 
—the extermination of Adam’s race from the earth 
and sending them forth as discarnate rebels to wander 
eternally through the limitless spaces, ‘‘ seeking rest 
and finding none ” as the fitting finale of the disobedi- 
ence and self exaltation that would, if it could, re- 
pudiate and cast down God from His own throne. 

Perfect obedience to the will of God by the Second 
Man, even unto death, has obtained the right of re- 
demption from the hand of justice and is the real 
matrix out of which is to be formed a new and per- 
fect race, being formed now, as sons of God in em- 
bryo, but in the birth hour, the birth hour of resur- 
rection and transfiguration, of immortality at His 
Coming, to be made the dwellers and possessors of a 
renewed and sinless earth; all this is the reward of 
one man’s obedience and the inspiration to those who 
call themselves by His name to walk His path, seek- 
ing to do, not their own will, but the will of Him who 
has called them to be the sharers of His glory. 


THE GOLDEN PLATE 


“ And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and 
grave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, Hott- 
NESS TO THE LORD. 

And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be 
upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it 


shall be. 
And it shall be upon Aaron’s forehead, that Aaron 


306 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the 
children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; 
and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may 
be accepted before the Lord.’’ (Exodus 28:36-38.) 

The golden plate was the crowning piece in the gar- 
ments of glory and beauty. 

When Aaron stood before the Lord clothed in his 
magnificently glorious and beautiful garments, the 
Lord looked at that plate flashing forth holiness unto 
His name and accepted the people in their priest in all 
the moral beauty and ceremonial righteousness which 
he displayed and represented. 

He stood before God as the holiness of the Chil- 
dren of Israel. 

In all this he is a wondrous picture of the Lord 
Jesus Christ as the righteousness and holiness of those 
who have confessed His name; as it is written: 

“He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no 
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God 
in him.’’ (II Corinthians 5:21.) 

“He hath made us accepted in the beloved.” 
(Ephesians 1:4.) 

Literally: 

“ He hath graced us, or made us acceptable, in the 
beloved.” 

Just as God saw the Children of Israel in all the 
glory and beauty and graciousness of Aaron’s high- 
priestly garments, saw them in the light of the golden 
plate and the signet of holiness, so He sees the weak- 
est of us who believes in Him who is our Great High 
Priest, sees us in all the wealth of His grace, His holi- 
ness and matchless perfections. 

Listen to these wondrous words which tell us how 


THE MITRE AND THE GOLDEN PLATE 307 


perfect we are before God in our Priest even in rela- 
tion to this world: 

‘As he is, so are we in this world.’’ (I John 
4:17.) 


A Summary Of The Teaching Of The Garments 
Of Glory And Beauty. 


Linen Coat and Breeches—The Sinless One. 
Linen Girdle—The Serving One. 
Robe of the Ephod—The Heavenly and Gracious 
- One. 
The Ephod—The Human and Divine One. 
Shoulderpieces—The Strengthening and Sus- 
taining One. 
Breastplate—The Loving One. 
Mitre—The Obedient One. 
The Golden Plate—The Holy One. 


XXIX 


CONSECRATION OF THE PRIESTS 
(Leviticus 8) 


sons are publicly set apart and inducted into the 
office of the priesthood. 

Aaron and his sons are first washed together. 

Aaron and his sons are a figure of Christ and His 
Church. 

Moses applies the water, it is he who washes them. 

Water is a symbol of the Word. 

Washing is applying the Word, applying the Truth. 

Applying the truth and setting apart for a particular 
service is sanctification. 

The washing together of Aaron and his sons sets 
forth unity in the sanctification. 

Christ and the Church are a unit in sanctification 
before God; as it is written: 

“For both he that sanctifieth and they who are 
sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call them brethren.” (Hebrews 2:11.) 

Since our Lord Jesus Christ was essentially and 
eternally clean, sanctification in this relation has a 
deeper sense than cleansing, it signifies to set apart, 
to consecrate. 

From all eternity Christ and His Church have been 
looked at as One, and have been set apart, consecrated 
and devoted to God and His service. | 

For the sake of the Church our Lord Jesus Christ 

308 


|: this eighth chapter of Leviticus, Aaron and his 


CONSECRATION OF THE PRIESTS 309 


sanctified Himself, set Himself apart, devoted Himself 
to God the Father and sanctified the Church before 
Him, setting them apart unto Him in Himself; as it 
is written: 

“And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they 
might also be sanctified through the truth.” (John 
17:19.) 

Aaron was first consecrated. 

Moses took the garments of glory and beauty and 
put them upon him piece by piece, so that they might 
~be seen in all the details of skilled workmanship and 
surpassing beauty. 

He put on him the embroidered linen coat with the 
linen breeches and girdled him with the girdle, bind- 
ing him in with its fineness of texture and perfectness 
of color. 

He put upon him the blue robe with its ringing, 
golden bells and pomegranates in their trinity of color. 

Then he clothed him with the ephod, buttoned it 
on the shoulders with the two onyx buttons, set the 
breastplate in place, put the Urim and Thummim 
within, bound it to the shoulders with the wreathen 
chains and underneath the Ephod at the waist with 
the curious girdle or belt. 

Last of all he took the snowy, white linen, the costly 
byssus, wound it fold on fold around his head, maxing 
a turban of it, laid a blue lace on the forefront of it, 
and on that fastened the golden plate with the graven 
words upon it—Holiness Unto the Lord. 

In this manner of investiture the people saw the in- 
trinsic worth of these garments of glory and beauty, 
beheld Aaron exalted and set apart from all others, 
exalted above the people and yet—for the people. 


310 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


For two thousand years the aloneness of Christ has 
been forced upon the consciousness of the world. 

The more He is studied, analyzed, the more His 
character is taken apart, each element of it, like the 
separate pieces in the garments of glory and beauty, 
the more it will reveal Him to be the perfect, the 
glorious, the beautiful, the wonder of all wonders, per- 
fect man and very God. 

Aaron and his sons were sanctified together by 
the blood of sacrifice and the pouring of oil upon 
them. 

The blovud was the blood of the ceremonial redemp- 
tion, the oil the seal of that redemption and anoint- 
ing for service. 

When our Lord died upon the cross He was not 
alone. 

In the mind and purpose of God the Church, each 
regenerated member of it, was there and crucified with 
Him. 

The Apostle was speaking, not for himself alone, 
but for all Christians, for all believers when he wrote: 

“T was crucified with Christ.” 


Literally, 
I was co-crucified—crucified together—with Christ. 
The word “together” *- the accent of purpose and 


the revelation of grace. 

We were crucified—together 

We were made alive—together. 

We were caised up—together. 

We have ascended to Heaven—together. 

We have been made to sit in Heavenly places— 
together. 


And in the ages to.come we are to be the recipients 


CONSECRATION OF THE PRIESTS 311 


of the riches of the glory and kindness of God in 
Christ—He and We—together. 

‘Hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace 
ye are saved;) and hath raised us up together, and 
made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. 

That in the ages to come he might shew the exceed- 
ing riches of his grace in his kindness toward us 
through (and therefore together with) Christ Jesus.’’ 
(Ephesians 2:5-8.) 

The blood of the sacrifice was applied to Aaron 

_and his sons. 

The blood was put upon the tip of the right ear, 
upon the thumb of the right hand and the toé of the 
right foot. 

The meaning of all this is simple enough. 

It means the hearing, the service and the walk of 
the priests had been ceremonially purchased by the 
blood and were now solemnly and individually conse- 
crated to God. 

Nor is there any uncertainty as to meaning for those 
of us who believe—our hearing, service and walk be- 
long unto the God who has purchased us with the 
blood of His own Son. 

Because of the blood upon our ear we are to 
recognize our hearing does not belong to our- 
selves. 

We have no right to listen as it may please us. 

There are things which if we permit them to enter 
the ear, will pass into the mind, poison it, and paralyze 
all activities for Christ. 

There is even more peril in listening than in looking 
and seeing. 

We are therefore called upon to be careful not only 
as to how we hear but as to what we hear. 


312 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“And he said unto them, Take heed what ye hear.” 
(Mark 4:24.) 

“ Take heed therefore how ye hear.” (Luke 8:18.) 

The blood upon the ear tells us He claims our ears 
that they may hear Him speak, listen to His words, 
give attention to His message. 

Wherefore it is written: 

“Who hath ears to hear let him hear.” (Matthew 
32195) 

Such was the admonition of the Lord when He 
walked the earth; such is His exhortation now by and 
through the Spirit. 

“He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit 
saith unto the churches.” (Revelation 2:7.) 

The blood upon the thumb bids us to use our 
hands in His service. 

It means to give ourselves to Him for His service; 
hand ourselves over to Him completely for His use 
of us. It means we must never come before Him with 
an empty hand; always and under all circumstances 
we must come with something in our hand for Him, 
some service accomplished and handed to Ilim or some 
gift presented to Him. 

Hear what Scripture says: 

“For Moses said, consecrate yourselves today to 
the Lord.’’ (Exodus 32:29.) 

Literally rendered, he said: 

“Fill your hands this day to the Lord.’’ 

That is the actual meaning of the word used in these 
instances—it means, ‘‘ to fill the hand.”’ 

That is God’s concept of consecration, coming into 
His presence with something in your hands. 

David says: 


CONSECRATION OF THE PRIESTS 313 


“Who then is willing to consecrate his service this 
day unto the Lorp?” (I Chronicles 29:5.) 

“Who then is willing to fill his hand with service 
this day unto the Lord?’’ 

If we would really consecrate ourselves to the Lord 
we must fill our hands; we must never come before 
Him empty-handed. 

‘‘And none shall appear before me—empty.’’ 
(Exodus 23:15. Exodus 34:20.) 

“Three times a year shall all thy males appear 

‘before the Lorp thy God . . . and they shall not 
appear before the Lorp empty” (empty handed). 
(Deuteronomy 16:16.) 

The blood upon the toe meant the consecration 
of the walk before God. 

Such is to be our walk as those who profess the 
name of the Lord and own His blood as having all 
purchasing rights upon us. Live and serve as those 
who have no initial claims upon themselves and whose 
walk and conversation shall glorify Him who has all 
purchase and invested rights in us; so that we shall 
say what His outpoured blood for us requires we shall 
say—that we are not our own; as it is written: 

‘* Ye are not your own, 

For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify 
God in your body, and in your spirit, which are 
God’s. (I Corinthians 6:19, 20.) 

After their consecration Aaron and his sons 
went into the Tabernacle, into the Holy Place, 
shut themselves in from the people for seven days 
and during that time feasted on the sacrifice. 

“ And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil 
the flesh at the door (the flesh of the sacrifice) of the 
tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with 


$14 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


the bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as I 
commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it... 

And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation in seven days, until the days of 
your consecration be at an end: for seven days shall 
he consecrate you.” (Leviticus 8:31-36.) 

In this you have an illustration of the moral, spir- 
itual and essential separation of the Church, both cor- 
porately and individually, from the world, considered 
as a system, and their separation unto the Lord. 

We are a separated people. 

We have been separated by sovereign and elective 
grace which saw us and chose us before the founda- 
tion of the world. 

We have been separated by the eternal purpose 
and covenant counsel which knew us, named us 
and predestinated us unto assured salvation. 

We have been separated by the cross which rolls 
its crimson tide between us and the world of natural 
men, even as the Red Sea rolled its flood between the 
children of Israel and the land of Egypt. 

The cross has brought about a double separation by 
reason of a double crucifixion; as it is written: 

“ But God forbid that I should glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is 
crucified unto me, and T unto the world.” (Galatians 
6:14.) 

We are separated by the Gospel and the call of 
the Spirit. 

By this instrument and agent we have been called 
out, sealed and separated from men of the world and 
their ways, to faith, to trust and confidence in a Lord 
and Master disowned and rejected by the world. 

We are separated by the supreme creative act of 


CONSECRATION OF THE PRIESTS 315 


God when He communicated to us the life and nature 
of His Son; and when it was said of us for the first 
time, “ Christ in you the hope of glory;” for, it is an 
astounding fact that we as believers are the result of 
an act of God, a creative act, greater than when He 
created the universe; that, had to do with material 
things, this, with the soul, with spirit and personality; 
wherefore it is written: 

“We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus.” 
(Ephesians 2:10.) 

“Tf any man be in Christ he is a new creature (a 
new creation). (II Corinthians 5:17.) , 

We are separated by our union with the Lord, the 
essential oneness of His spirit and ours; as it is 
written: 

“ He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.” (1 
Corinthians 6:17.) 

There are two great statements in that. 

We are joined to the Lord. 

This is true of the believer because he has been 
made a partaker of the very life and nature of the 
risen Son of God. 

By this union the believer is as far separated from 
the natural man who is not joined to the Lord as the 
east is from the west, as the living man is from the 
dead. 

Here is the other great thing: 

We are one spirit with the Lord. 

The distinctive essence of being which makes Him 
to be the Son of God is in us; so that He is in us and 
we are in Him. 

There is no possible point of incision between us 
and the risen, glorified Lord Himself. 

As separate and distinct then as the Lord is in es- 


316 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


sence from the natural man; so that He could say to 
such, “I am from above, ye are from below,” we as 
believers are as distinct and separate. 

We are separated by the indwelling of the Holy 
Spirit. 

Such a thing as the Holy Spirit taking up His abode 
and dwelling in a human being never took place in the 
history of mankind till our Lord Jesus Christ rose 
from the dead. 

The Holy Spirit had entered into men, took hoid 
of them, came upon them, moved them and greatly 
used them, but He never made the body His perma- 
nent dwelling place. 

But He does this great thing today. 

Today He enters the body of the believer, owning 
it as a blood bought body, and makes it His temple, 
the most wonderful, the most sacred, temple on earth, 
the most sacred thing this side of Heaven. 

It is this indwelling of the Holy Spirit that rails us 
off as believers from the world, from all material 
beings, from angels and _ spirits, from all other crea- 
tures in the universe of God. 

Just as Aaron and his sons were separated from the 
camp and separated themselves from it, we are to own 
ourselves in this age as a separated people and shut 
ourselves up by faith with Christ in His Holy Place. 

The true Church, the living and spiritual Church, 
can find no place, no comfort, nor fellowship with a 
world system that repudiates her Lord; no matter 
what schemes of morals or righteousness the world 
may advertize, the Church can have no partnership 
therein; she is not called to cleanse Sodom, but to 
come out of it, not to empty old wells but to dig 
mew ones, and under no circumstances to identify 


CONSECRATION OF THE PRIESTS 317% 


herself with reformation, but to demand regenera- 
tion, 

Aaron and his sons were shut in the Holy Place 
for seven days. 

That shutting in of Aaron and his sons from the 
people was a definite and dramatic demonstration that 
they were a particularly chosen and separated family. 

Overwhelmingly so is it an illustration of the fact 
that the Church is yet to be revealed and in a start- 
ling way as a body of persons eniitely separated from 


‘ the world. 


That particular separation fact will take place at 
the Coming of the Lord. 

He is coming for the Church. 

He is coming to take her into the Tabernacle on 
high. 

He is coming to take her into the Most Holy Place, 
and into the Holy of Holies within the vail. 

When He went away He left the promise to His 
disciples that He was going into Heaven to prepare 
a dwelling place for them and that He would come 
again and receive them, the Church, to Himself and 
take them, take her, there. 

In his first epistle to the Thessalonians the apostle 
by a special revelation from the risen Lora tells us 
how this will be. 

The Lord will come down into the upper air. 

He will come with a shout, with the voice of the 
archangel and the trump of God. 

He will raise from the dead all who have died in 
His name. 

He will change and transfigure the living who be- 
lieve in Him. 

He will gather them all up into the air to meet Him 


$18 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


and then will take them into the place prepared, into 
the Tabernacle on high. 

This coming of the Lord is always imminent. 

Between us and that moment there is not a pre- 
dicted event. 

The shout, the archangel’s voice and the sound of 
the trump may be heard any moment by the redeemed 
of the Lord. 

Any moment the Church may be caught up. 

This is not a matter of speculation and something 
that requires ocular evidence and multiplication of 
signs, it is an announced fact, announced specially by 
the risen Lord Himself and to be received by faith, 
with the eyes and even the ears shut, waiting till His 
voice shall open both ears and eyes. 

The Church will remain in that upper and holy 
place for at least seven years above the riot, the 
break down and anarchy now approaching the earth 
with hastening strides. 

You have only to read the book of the Revelation 
from the sixth chapter to the eighteenth inclusive to 
have a picture of the hour of desperate woe and 
tribulation coming on the earth. 

In the fourth and fifth chapters you see the Church 
after having been caught up, safely housed in the 
place prepared, feasting with the Lord. 

What a proof this is that the Church is a body of 
separated people, separated unto the Lord, His, and 
for Him. 

The world below given up to all the iniquity, pas- 
sion and shame of man and the finally impotent rage 
of the Devil. 

The Church above resting in peace, waiting for the | 
hour of her manifested glory. 


CONSECRATION OF THE PRIESTS 319 


There was a climacteric moment to these seven 
days in which Aaron and his sons were shut up 
in the Tabernacle. 

On the eighth day Moses bade Aaron and his sons 
go forth from the Holy place, and offer sacrifice. 

He said to them: 

“Today the Lord will appear.” (Leviticus 9: 1-4.) 

After the sacrifice was offered Moses and Aaron 
went into the Tabernacle and then came out in their 
full kingly and priestly function, blessed the people 
-and the glory of the Lord appeared unto them and to 
all the people; as it is written: 

“And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle 
of the congregation, and came out, and blessed the 
people; and the glory of the Lorp appeared unto aJJ 
the people.” (Leviticus 9:23.) 

At the end of the seven years in which the Church 
is shut in with Christ in Heaven, when at last the 
iniquity of the earth is full, when Satan stakes his 
final great throw, when he seats himself in the person 
of his son in the rebuilt temple at Jerusalem, when 
this man proclaims himself the God of the whole world, 
then on the great prophetic eighth day, the Day of 
the Lord, the Lord Himself will fling back the Taber- 
nacle door, Heaven will open, and with His triumphant 
Church as a body of kings and priests He will come 
forth to execute the judgment of His long slumbering 
wrath, roll back for ever the tides of iniquity, set up 
His everlasting kingdom and make this sin stained, 
death smitten earth, the worth-while place for the 
worth-while life of the redeemed, the glorified and im- 
mortal sons of God. 

The eighth chapter of Leviticus and this particuiar 


820 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


priestly scene gives us the whole character of the age 
in which we now live. 

In Heaven we have a high priest who is there on 
our behalf, who ever liveth to make intercession for us. 

As spiritual priests it is our privilege to draw near 
in spirit and in truth to offer up the sacrifices of 
thanksgiving and praise. 

It is our privilege by faith to enter within the vail 
and feed on the once crucified but now living and com- 
ing Christ, and then to walk with consecrated, blood 
bought and Spirit anointed lives before the world, 
waiting in undisturbed assurance that should the 
shout, the voice and the trump be heard, in the twin- 
kling of an eye we should be with Him, and, at the 
last, come forth with Him, even, as it is written: 

“When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then 
shall ye also appear with him in glory.” 


XXX 
THE FIVE GREAT OFFERINGS 


HE first five chapters in the book of Leviticus 
: give a description of five offerings made unto 
the Lord. . 
They are: 
The Burnt Offering. 
The Meat Offering. 
The Peace Offering. 
The Sin Offering. 
The Trespass Offering. 
The Meat Offering was the only one that was 
bloodless. 
This Offering represents our Lord in His life, not 
in His death. 
The other four were blood offerings and give us a 
four-fold picture of His death on the cross. 


THE BURNT OFFERING 
“Christ through the eternal Spirit offered himself 
without spot to God.’’ (Hebrews 9:14.) 
THE Meat OFFERING 


“ For there is one God, and one mediator between 
God and men—the man Christ Jesus.” (I Timothy 
neo: ) 

THE PEACE OFFERING 

“God hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus 

Christ.” (II Corinthians 5:18.) 
321 


322 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“Having made peace through the blood of his 
cross.” (Colossians 1:20.) 


THE SIN OFFERING 


“ He hath made him to be sin for us.’’ (II Corin- 
thians 5:21.) 

‘Behold the lamb of God that beareth away 
the sin of the world.” (John 1:30.) 

‘He appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice 
of himself.’’ (Hebrews 9:27.) 

‘* His own self bare our sins in his own body 
on the tree.’’ (I Peter 2:24.) 

“Christ died for our sins.’’ (I Corinthians 15:3.) 

“Who gave himself for our sins.’’ (Galatians 
1:4.) 

“Christ was once offered to bear the sins of 
many.” (Hebrews 9:28.) | 

“The propitiation for our sins.” (I John 4:10.) 

“He suffered the just for the unjust.’’ (I Peter 
3:18.) 

THE TRESPASS OFFERING 

“Tf we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins.” (I John 1:9.) 

In the Burnt Offering we have Christ giving Him- 
self unto God as a sweet smelling savour: 

“Christ hath given himself for us an offering and 
a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour.’’ 
(Ephesians 5:1.) 

In the Sin Offering we have Christ giving Himself 
for us. 

“Who gave himself for us.” (Titus 2:14.) 

“Who loved me and gave himself for me.’’ 
(Galatians 2:20.) | 


THE FIVE GREAT OFFERINGS 323 


In the Peace Offering we have Christ reconciling 
us and bringing us to God. 

“And you, that were sometime alienated and 
enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath 
he reconciled. 

In the body of his flesh through death, to pre- 
sent you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in 
his sight.” (Colossians 1:21, 22.) 

In the Trespass Offering we have Christ making 
provision in His death for our failures by the way, 
receiving our confessions, bringing us absolution, com- 
plete forgiveness and cleansing. 

“Tf we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unright- 
eousness.” (I John 1:9.) 


XXXI 
THE MEAT OFFERING 


HE Meat Offering was the bloodless 
offering. 


It presents to us all the symbols of the 
person and character of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

It was composed of fine flour. 

It was flour that had been thoroughly ground, there 
were no lumps in it. 

There was no unevenness in it. 

It sets forth the perfect, balanced humanity of the 
Lord. 

There is no balance, no equilibrium, no equipoise in 
the natural man, he is uneven in all his ways. He 
may have extraordinary qualifications in one direc- 
tion and none whatever in another. It is this intensifi- 
cation of one quality over another that is called 
“Genius.” ‘“ Genius” in reality is overbalance, it is 
incompleteness, a failure of all round fulness. 

A study of genius reveals sharp antitheses, the 
measure of greatness is equalled by the lack of it in 
the same person; he may be marvellous as a musician, 
and incapable as a mathematician, brilliant as an 
orator and shallow as a thinker, fluent as a writer and 
hesitating as a speaker, a giant in one degree and a 
pigmy in another. To be a genius is to be unequally 
developed, one-sided, there is no better word for it 
than overbalance—unevenness. 

No one would ever think of applying this analysis 


to the Son of God. 
324 


THE MEAT OFFERING 325 


To call Him a genius, make Him more marked in 
one characteristic than in another, would be to belittle 
Him, rob Him of His perfection. 

The people described Him correctly. 

They said: 

“He hath done all things well.” 

It was true. 

He did one thing just as well as another. 

He lived under law and dealt in grace. 

He rebuked sin and forgave the sinner. 

When they brought the woman taken in sin that He 
might give His testimony against her for stoning, He 
said to the men: “ He that is without sin among you, 
let him first cast a stone at her;” and when they went 
out one by one shamefaced, He turned to the woman 
and said: ‘‘ Neither do I condemn thee: go and sin 
no more;” on the one side He revealed and unmasked 
the hypocrisy clothing itself with righteousness, act- 
ing as a judge and refusing to forgive; on the other, 
He made Himself manifest as holiness, as the right- 
eous judge and having power on earth to forgive sin. 

If He invited the sinner to come to him and said: 
“ Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out,” 
He maintained His perfect and judicial balance when 
He told the story of the rich man hopelessly in hell, 
neither because he was rich nor neglected the poor, 
but because he had refused to believe the written 
Word of God, even the law and the prophets. He 
would be full of compassion to him who should come 
and confess Him as the living Word, He would be 
merciless to Him who denied the written word and in 
denying it denied Him as the living Word. 

He fed the hungry with a few loaves and fishes, and 
then, although He had baskets full left over, He re- 


3826 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


buked those who sought Him just for the loaves and 
the fishes. 

When He began His sermon in the synagogue in 
Nazareth He so spoke that the people “ wondered at 
the gracious words which proceeded out of His mouth;”’ 
when He stood in the temple for the last time He so 
denounced the Scribes and the Pharisees that His 
words, “‘ woe, woe, ‘ hypocrites,’ ‘ whited sepulchres,’ 
‘serpents,’ ‘generation of vipers how can ye escape 
the damnation of hell,’”” sounded like thunders of the 
last judgment. 

If He came into the world that He might bring 
grace, He came also that He might speak the truth. 

He was perfectly balanced. 

He spoke the right word, He did the right thing, 
spoke the word and did the thing at the time or- 
dained; so that He never spoke hastily, nor yet acted 
till He could say at every step: “ Father, the hour is 
come.” 

He was the perfect man. 

And this the Meat Offering symbolizes and antici. 
patively proclaims. 

Oil was mingled with and poured upon the 
flour. 

Oil is a symbol of the Holy Spirit. 

Flour is a symbol of our Lord’s humanity. 

In the combination of the flour and the oil you have 
the symbol of—Incarnation. 

The humanity of our Lord became a fact and got 
its holiness and sinless perfection by and through the 
Holy Spirit. 

It was by and through the Holy Spirit Mary was 
enabled to conceive without sin; therefore it is said | 
of the humanity she was to bring forth, 


THE MEAT OFFERING 327 


“That holy thing that shall be born of thee.” 

Oil when poured upon an object is said to anoint it. 

The humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ was not 
only conceived by and through the Holy Spirit, but 
the Spirit came upon Him and anointed Him as a 
man; wherefore it is written: 

“God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy 
Ghost and with power.” (Acts 10:38.) 

Speaking anticipatively through the mouth of the 
Prophet Isaiah He Himself said: 

“The Spirit of the Lorp God is upon me. . . The 
Lorp hath anointed me.” (Isaiah 61:1.) 

Frankincense was placed upon the oil and the 
flour. 

Frankincense was a sweet gum. 

When fire was applied it gave forth a fragrance 
that pleased. 

This represents the attitude of the Son of God to 
the Father. 

Concerning His relation to the Father, He says: 

“JT do always those things that please him.” 
(John 8:29.) 

And again He said: 

‘“My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, 
and to finish his work.” (John 4:34.) 

Trial, like fire, brought out this quality. 

The more He was tried the more it was manifest 
that He sought to please the Father and fulfill His 
will. 

Behold Him there in the garden. 

It is a night of nights. 

Yonder at the gate are the three disciples who have 
been the most intimate and in the closest touch with 


Him. 


828 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He has asked them to stay there and keep watch 
while He goes into the deeper recesses of the garden 
to pray. 

Lo, they have fallen asleep at their post. 

He is now in the darkest, blackest lonesomeness of 
Gethsemane. 

The white light of the young moon breaks against 
the old gnarled trunks of the wide branched olive 
trees, streams through their openings and falls upon 
the ground in ghostly bands side by side with the 
breadths of midnight blackness. The brook Kedron 
sounds like a strangled voice as its intermittent echoes 
are borne upon the damp night air, the winds are full 
of moaning and lament as of one with a broken heart, 
and a great cry of pain makes every leaf of every tree 
and bending bush shiver as with mortal fear. 

It is the voice of the Son of God. 

He is praying. 

What a prayer is that. 

It comes from the edge of a precipice—the edge of 
a moral precipice. 

And this is the prayer: 

‘* Tf it be possible let this cup pass from me.’’ 

I say it is the edge of a precipice, a moral precipice, 
a precipice that looks sheer down into the bottomless 
abyss of a tragedy of endless despair and of a hope- 
lessly wrecked and ruined humanity. 

Yea! if He should be willing to use His own omnipo- 
tence and put aside this cup the blue would go out of 
the sky and earth be clothed in the rayless gloom of 
a moral and spiritual sackcloth forever. 

It is a moment of fire, a moment of trial and it 
burns and burns into the very soul. 


He sees the cup, He sees the dregs. He sees the 


THE MEAT OFFERING 329 


bottom of it, the unspeakable horror and woe and 
hell and wordless anguish of the cross—all in that 
cup; and all His soul, and all the fire of the perfect- 
ness of hate against sin and shame in His soul cry out 
and throb in Him, till every essence of His perfect 
humanity revolts; and all He is of God and all the 
claims He has on the Father, and the assurance that 
should He press for it the Father who has always an- 
swered Him will answer Him now—all this drives in 
in a sharp, stinging torment of justified pain—inno- 
‘cence, purity, holiness, sinlessness, flow upward 
like a tidal wave of demand to the very throne of 
God; if He let it roll on the prayer must be answered 
and He must be delivered—the cup will be put aside. 

But listen to the most wonderful, “ nevertheless ” 
that ever came from human lips. 

‘* Nevertheless! not as I will, but as thou wilt.’’ 

Surely, there is frankincense in that! 

What an odour of sweetness ascends like the fra- 
grant white smoke from the golden Incense Altar out 
of that garden; yea, that garden is as the garden of 
spices—and these spices are His faith, His love and 
His surrendered will, wholly surrendered to the Father 
and for the Father’s glory. 

The Meat Offering was seasoned with salt. 

Salt is pungent and a barrier against corruption. 

It is used in Scripture in connection with speech. 

“Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned 
with salt.” (Colossians 4:15.) 

The speech of our Lord was pungent, penetrating, 
full of sanity and divinest health. 

Every word had in it the accent and the breath of 
the eternal Spirit. 

He said: 


330 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, 
and they are life.” 

He did not say, “ spiritual,” nor “living,” He said 
*‘ spirit,” and He said “ life.” 

That is to say, they were neither qualities nor 
qualifications of spirit and life, they were the very 
substance, the very essence—very spirit and very life. 

After two thousand years not a word He spoke, 
needs to be forgiven, forgotten, modified, corrected or 
erased; after two thousand years they remain in the 
very essence of spirit, the very pulse of life, the very 
concrete of cleanness, impassable barriers against cor- 
ruption, against sin in thought as well as deed. 

What a contrast is His speech to that of the natural 
man. 

How utterly lacking in salt and filled with corrup- 
tion is the speech of the natural man. 

In all the earth there is nothing so unclean, so foul, 
so full of pestilential disaster as human speech may 
be; a word uttered in the ear, a word or a phrase on 
the printed page, may contain sufficient corruption to 
ruin a human soul or poison a whole community. 

It is the careless word, the word without salt that 
can destroy a soul for time and eternity—the soul that 
hears it and the soul that utters it. 

It is, indeed, the speech of the natural man that 
ruins the world and is carrying it swiftly on to judg- 
ment; as it is written: 

“IT say unto you, That every idle word that men 
shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day 
of judgment. 

For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by 
thy words thou shalt be condemned.” (Matthew 
12:36, 37.) 


‘THE MEAT OFFERING 331 


In this day when by radio a whisper may be heard 
round the world, when a word may be picked up out 
of the air and a thought for good or ill sent in view- 
less wave lengths across land or sea, the reality and 
solemnity of the divine warning come back to us. 

Yes! Every oath, all cursing, all speech that sows 
iniquity, every word spoken against God, against the 
Bible, every word that makes light of Heaven’s grace, 
the Gospel, the blood, the long suffering and the for- 

_bearance of God; every word that denies the deity of 

the Son of God or shames His Mother as the Mother 
of God, goes up through the listening air to the’ throne 
in Heaven and to God the Son. 

And He is coming to respond to all these words, to 
execute judgment against all those whose speech is 
without salt. 

Listen to the warning words: 

“ Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of 
his saints, 

To execute judgment upon all, and to convince 
(convict) all that are ungodly among them of all their 
ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, 
and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sin- 
ners have spoken against him.” (Jude 14, 15.) 

Such is the speech of the natural man. 

The speech that will bring him to judgment and the 
wrath of God. 

How marvellous the speech of the man Christ Jesus 
in contrast to all that; so pure, so absolutely vital that 
once it enters a human soul, that soul is saved from 
corruption and has all the saving power from corrup- 
tion every day, if he will; wherefore it is written: 

“Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.” 
\Colossians 3:16.) 


882 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Ah! there is no antidote against the poison of evil 
thought and the shame of unclean and corrupting 
words like the word of Christ abiding in us. 

It is, indeed, absolute salt. 

There was no leaven in the Meat Offering. 

Leaven in itself is a sour and corrupt thing. 

Because it is so it was banished by the law of God 
from the passover observance. He who had it in his 
house in those days, even though it were the smallest 
of all portions, even the shadow of a particle, was ex- 
communicated by the decree of God. 

The Son of God used it as a symbol of false and 
corrupt doctrine. 

It is a symbol of the flesh and its iniquities. 

It is not only the symbol of corrupt deeds, but the 
inhering sin of the flesh—‘“ sin in the flesh.” 

The exclusion of it from the Meat Offering is not 
only a witness that the Lord was sinless in deed, word 
and thought, but that He had no sin in the texture of 
His humanity. 

His humanity was as the Angel Gabriel declared it: 

‘* That holy thing.’’ 

There must be no honey in the Meat Offering. 

Honey is nature’s sweetness. 

It is the symbol of that which is attractive and ap- 
pealing in nature. 

Nothing is fuller of honey and sweetness and at- 
tractiveness than sin. 

The honey in sin is “ pleasure.” 

It is the warning of the Holy Spirit that one of the 
most attractive and honeyed forms of sin in the clos- 
ing hours of this age will be “ pleasure.” 

We are told that there will be the maddest of all 
mad rushes after pleasure and the “ pleasures of sin.” 


THE MEAT OFFERING 333 


The pleasures that have the heat and fire and crim- 
son of sin. 

And sin has its pleasures, the honey that is sweet 
to the tongue. 

He indeed is blind or deaf or without his natural 
senses who does not know it; 

Moses was a Prince in Egypt, that Egypt whose 
wonders, glories and luxuries are now being revealed 
to us in opened tombs of ancient Pharaohs. 

Every pleasure that could appeal was offered to 
. him. He had an opportunity to give himself up to 
this banquet of honey, and take of it without limit. 

He was not deceived. He judged the honey at its 
true value. He knew it had a horizon, a time limit. 
There were pleasures of sin, but they were— 

“The pleasures of sin for a—season.’’ 

He refused to abide as a prince. He was unwilling 
to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter. He 
‘ooked beyond the “ treasures ” of Egypt to the Judg- 
ment Seat of Christ and the rewards of faith, and the 
pleasures at God’s right hand for ever more; where- 
fore it is written of him: 

“ Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people 
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; 

Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches 
than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto 
the recompense of the reward.” (Hebrews 11:24-26.) 

Honey was offered to our Lord when the crowd 
rushed in upon Him, hailed Him with words of ap- 
preciation and with high acclaim would have made 
Him king. 

Honey was offered Him when Simon Peter tried to 
persuade Him to “ pity himself” and not suffer the 
death of the cross. 


334 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


There is no sweeter honey than the exhortation to 
self pity or the indulgence in it. 

In no way can the Devil more quickly weaken and 
overthrow the Christian who seeks to serve the Lord 
than by leading him to pity himself, to be taken up 
with himself, his burdens or his cares. Nothing is 
more acceptable than to have some one to tell us we 
are working too hard for the Lord, that we ought to 
spare ourselves, take it easier, go slower. 

The Lord saw through the honey of this temptation. 

He saw behind the honest, sympathizing face of 
Simon Peter, the leering face of the Devil. 

The applause of the world is great honey. 

For the sake of it men charged with high commis- 
sion and under bonds to speak the words of soberness 
and truth have softened their speech or held back the 
message due. 

With warning words our Lord has said: 

“Woe unto you, when all men speak well of you! 
for so did their fathers to the false prophets.” (Luke 
6:26.) 

It is the honey of applause, the pleasure of being 
well spoken of, that has put the false note into many 
a prophet’s speech or blinded his vision to duty and 
to truth. 

Sooner or later honey will turn sour. 

Sooner or later the most perfect human pleasure, 
the most exhilarating human joy, will have in it the 
corroding taste and turn—sour. 

Pleasures of today are the regrets of tomorrow. 

Our Lord found His joy, His pleasure, in owning 
and doing the will of the Father. 

The Meat Offering was an offering made by 
fire unto the Lord. 


THE MEAT OFFERING 335 


This is a picture of Our Lord Jesus Christ as the 
perfect man, perfectly fitted to endure and sustain 
and satisfy the fire of God’s judgment on the cross. 

It is the symbolic and prophetic announcement that 
though He should come into the world and show Him- 
self the perfect man, He was not coming to so live that 
men might make Him an example and by imitating 
Him build up a character that would bring them into 
favor with God. He was not coming to give founda- 
tion to the thought that salvation is by character and 
‘ not by the blood of sacrifice. The Meat Offering is 
a rebuke of that thought. It is the open declaration 
that He came to be the perfect sacrifice, offer up that 
“holy thing,” His perfect humanity. 

After a handful of the Meat Offering had been 
presented to God the remainder was eaten by the 
priests in the Holy Place. 

*“* And this is the law of the meat offering: the sons 
of Aaron shall offer it before the Lorp, before the 
altar. 

And he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of 
the meat offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the 
frankincense which is upon the meat offering, and 
shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour, even 
the memorial of it, unto the Lorp, 

And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons 
eat: with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the 
holy place; in the court of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation they shall eat it.” (Leviticus 6:14-16.) 

This is a picture of the Church feeding on Christ 
after He has offered Himself the perfect sacrifice, en- 
tering by faith into the Holy Place, into Heaven, ap- 
propriating Him there in all His fulness as the once 
crucified, but now living one, living for us. 


336 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


It is not the man exhibited to us in all the details 
of His perfect life as He lived it here whom we are 
to contemplate, copy and, by reason thereof, grow 
strong; but, rather, the man who offered Himself for 
us as a sweet smelling savour unto God and tri- 
umphed, not only over death and the grave in a risen, 
a glorious and immortal manhood, but by virtue of 
His death, met all claims of righteousness against us, 
and thus honored God both in the holiness of His 
character and the justice of His judgment against us. 

By faith we are to ascend to Heaven, enter within 
the Vail, even into the Holiest of all, contemplate our 
Lord as perfect man there, adore Him because of what 
He did for us, because of what He is representatively 
for us, and open our heart for the reception of that 
life and character which He seeks to give, net only as 
being perfect man, but very God. 

It is in meditating on His sacrifice for us in the per- 
fect humanity which made it acceptable to a holy God 
(a perfect humanity that was always Godward and 
never—manward) that we shall receive from Him that 
life which is both human and divine, because He is 
Himself perfectly human and absolutely divine—per- 
fect man and very God—even “our great God and 
saviour Jesus Christ.” 

In this fashion, and in this alone, we are to feed on 
Christ as our—Divine Meat Offering. 


XXXII 
THE BURNT OFFERING 


on the Altar. God got all, the Offerer got 
nothing. 

“The priest shall burn all on the altar.” (Leviticus 
1:9.) 

It is called a “sweet savour” offering. (V. 9.) 

An offering in which God finds delight. 

The Burnt Offering is the portrayal of that side of 
the cross in which our Lord Jesus Christ as the Son 
of the Father gives Himself in death wholly unto Him 
that He may reveal His love as a Son for the Father. 

It is the complete surrender of Himself in unre- 
served devotion to the Father. 

There is that side of the cross in which the Father 
vails His face from the Son; beholds Him as the 
representative of sin, treats Him as sin; but in the 
Burnt Offering side of the cross He is filled with joy, 
with divine delight because He sees in this self sur- 
render and complete self immolation of the Son a love 
so great, so fathomless, a love that would glorify Him 
in every element of His law, His government and 
being; a love, indeed, so great that had the first man 
never sinned, had he begotten a sinless race, it never 
could have so glorified and magnified the Father as 
this offering of the Son Himself unto Him. 

The Offering must be without blemish. 

Sinless in His daily Mic RANane justified every re- 

33 


I N the Burnt Offering everything was burned 


338 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


quirement of the law, having so lived that no man 
could convict Him of sin, on the cross, He offered 
Himself, “ without spot ” to God; as it is written: 

“Through the eternal Spirit offered himself without 
spot to God.” (Hebrews 9:14.) 

It must be a voluntary offering. (V. 3.) 

That man might be saved it was necessary an aton- 
ing sacrifice should be made in his behalf. 

It must be made by God Himself and necessarily in 
human form. 

It must be made by God because only God can 
atone to God. 

It must be made in human form because if God 
would atone God must die. 

God could die for man and pay the penalty of death 
due to man only as He should have a human nature. 

To have a human nature God must needs become 
incarnate. 

To become incarnate He would become visible. 

Visibility belonged only to one person of the God- 
head—to the Son of God and God the Son. 

From all eternity He had been visible in the “ form 
of God.” 

The Son of God therefore alone could become vis- 
ible as a man, and as a man die for man. 

The Son of God therefore alone could become in- 
carnate. 

The Son of God therefore as God alone could make 
atonement to God for man, and make it by and 
through the humanity in which He should become in- 
carnate. 

To do this He must lay aside the “ form of God,” 
and take upon Himself the “ form of man.” | 

Would He be willing to do that? 


THE BURNT OFFERING 339 


Would He be willing to do that for the glory of God 
His Father and for sake of the salvation of lost and 
dying men. 

It all depended upon His own personal will. 

It depended entirely upon His will because He was 
both coeval and coequal with the Father. 

He was willing. 

He was more than willing, it was His delight. 

Behold His attitude as set forth in Holy Scripture; 
as it is written: 

-“ Being in the form of God, thought it not robbery 
to be equal with God.” ’ 

Literally this may be translated: 

“ Thought not to snatch at, to hold on to, equality.” 

Great and indescribable as was this glory that was 
His—the form of God—He did not clutch it and hold 
it in His grasp as something He would not let go. 

Nay! His love of the Father was so great, His 
love for lost and ruined men whom the Father wished 
to save, was so great, He was willing to put aside His 
glory and become incarnate. He was willing to lay 
aside His visibility as God and become visible as a 
man. He was willing to leave Heaven and its joys for 
earth and its sorrows; wherefore it is written: 

He “ made himself of no reputation.” 

Literally, 

“He emptied himself.” 

Not of His deity! 

That would be impossible. 

He emptied Himself of His form and appearing, 
His outward glory as God. 

That was His attitude and that was His act. 

Listen to His own statement when He comes into 
the world that He may become incarnate: 


340 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“When he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacri- 
fice and offering thou wouldest not (that is, He was 
no longer satisfied with the offerings of bulls and of 
goats), but a body hast thou prepared me: (that 
is a body in which a sacrifice might be offered that 
would be pleasing to Him). 

Then said, I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book 
it is written of me,) to do thy will, (the will of God the 
Father that He should offer Himself in sacrifice) O 
God.’’ (Psalm 40: 8.) 

Then in terms of magnificent clearness He pro- 
claims that His death on the cross was not by the hand 
of man, but by His own will in surrender to the will 
of the Father: 

He says: 

“Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay 
down my life, that I might take it again, 

No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of 
myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it again. This commandment have I 
received of my Father.” 

A commandment! 

Yes! because the desire of the Father’s heart was 
a command to the concept of the Son. He was the 
Son of the Father’s love, and the Father’s love to Him 
was law supreme. He said: 

“My meat is to do the will of him that sent me.” 

Others might feed on the food of earth, His food 
was doing the will of the Father, that was His bread 
and meat, that was all sufficient nourishment for Him. 

The sacrifice must be laid in order on the wood. 

That is to say, it must be placed on the wood ac- 
cording to the details ordained of God. 


THE BURNT OFFERING 341 


Every detail of our Lord’s death on the cross was 
foreseen and arranged in the counsels of eternity. 

Those who should crucify Him should part His 
raiment among them and cast lots for His seamless 
robe. 

They should mock Him. 

The crowd should pass before His cross and wag 
their heads in imitation of the involuntary movement 
of His suffering head. Vinegar and gall should be 
given Him in answer to His cry of thirst. He should 
offer the most fearful words that could come from 
human lips, ‘“‘ My God, my God, why hast thou for- 
saken me? ” 

While the bones of those crucified with Him should 
be broken to hasten their death, not a bone of Him 
should be broken, He should die not by any act of 
man but by His own will. When they should come 
with their hammers they should find Him already 
dead. 

His heart should be physically broken. 

Aithough the burial of His body should be ap: 
pointed with that of the malefactors, nevertheless, it 
should be laid in the rich man’s tomb. 

Listen to the Scriptures as they give these details 
centuries before He was born: 

“They part my garments among them, and cast 
lots upon my vesture ” (His robe). (Psalm 22:18.) 

“« All they that see me laugh me to scorn: they shoot 
out the lip, they shake the head, saying, 

He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him: 
let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him.” 
(Psalm 22:8.) 

“They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my 
thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.” (Psalm 69:21.) 


342 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


““My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? ” 
(Psalm 22:1.) 

“He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is 
broken.” (Psalm 34:20.) 

“ Reproach hath broken my heart.” (Psalm 69:20.) 

“He made his grave with the wicked, and with the 
rich in his death.” (Isaiah 53:9.) 

Literally it may be translated: 

“His grave was appointed with the wicked, but 
with the rich man was his tomb.” 

And now mark how this forecast and the record of 
it by Holy Scriptuure have been fulfilled to the very 
letter, to the most minute detail. 

“And they crucified him, and parted his garments, 
casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was 
spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments 
among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.” 
(Matthew 27:35.) 

“And they that passed by reviled him, wagging 
their heads, 

And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and 
buildest in three days, save thyself. If thou be the 
Son of God, come down from the cross. 

Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with 
the scribes and elders, said, 

He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be 
the King of Israel, let him now come down from the 
cross, and we will believe him. 

He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he 
will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God.” 
(Matthew 27:39-43.) 

And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud 
voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to 


THE BURNT OFFERING 343 


say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? ” 

(Matthew 27:46.) 

“And straightway one of them ran, and took a 
spunge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, 
and gave him to drink.” (Matthew 27:48.) 

“Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the 
first, (thief) and of the other which was crucified with 
him. 

But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was 
dead already, they brake not his legs. 

. These things were done, that the scripture should 
be fulfilled, A bone of him sha!l not be broken.” 
(John 19:32, 33, 36.) ‘ 

“But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his 
side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.” 
(John 19:34.) 

This is proof His heart was broken. 

“When the even was come, there came a rich man 
of Arimathaea, named Joseph, who also himself was 
Jesus’ disciple: 

He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. 
Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered. 

And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped 
it in a clean linen cloth, 

And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had 
hewn out in the rock.” (Matthew 27:57-60.) 

The sacrifice was, indeed, laid in order on the 
wood. . 

Every detail of the cross foretold fulfilled. 

The Offering must be flayed and cut in pieces. 

Flaying is taking off the outside skin and exposing 
the inner flesh, the very tissue. 

The Devil sought to flay Him, to expose His inner 
life. 


344 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


That is the meaning of the temptation the Devil 
gave Him. 

He would find out the very inmost of Him. 

But the more He was tempted, tested and tried, the 
more the inner glory of His perfection was revealed. 

Concerning the Devil who tempted Him and the 
fruitlessness of his effort, He said: 

“The prince of this world cometh, and hath noth- 
ing in me.’’ (John 14:30.) 

No man ever said that before, no man has dared 
to say it since. 

Think of it! the man in whom the Devil had no 
real estate, had no place wherein he could enter, find 
a foothold and abide. 

The Devil had no more place in Him than he had 
on that throne of God at which he snatched and be- 
cause of which he fell. 

Concerning what men could find in Him though 
they sought to discover the inmost of Him, He said: 

Which of you convicteth me of sin? ” 

Down through the long ages to this hour the chal- 
lenge has been confronted by an unbroken silence; not 
a whisper of response has ever been heard. There is 
none today. 

The inwards and the legs of the offering were 
washed with water. 

The inwards set forth the motives, the impulses and 
the inspirations of life. 

The legs, the walk, the manner of life. 

Scripture speaks definitely of inward things. 

“Thou desirest truth in the inward parts.” (Psalm 
5126) 

‘“T shall put my law in their inward parts.” (Jere- 
miah 31:33.) 


THE BURNT OFFERING 345 


Take the light of all suns and systems, focus them 
into one ray and let it penetrate to the inmost being 
of Christ. 

In that all penetrating light you will find He had 
but one motive, one impulse, one inspiration. He 
Himself declares it: 

‘““The Father hath not left me alone; for I do al- 
ways those things that please him.” (John 8:29.) 

His walk was wholly governed by the written Word. 

Speaking anticipatively by the Spirit through the 
mouth of the Psalmist, He says: 

“Thy word have I hid in my heart.” (Psalm 
119:11.) 

“Thy law is within my heart.” (Psalm 40:8.) 

Thus was He fit to offer Himseli as a love pledge 
to God and because He was fit He became the whole 
Burnt Offering on a Roman Cross. 


XXXII 


THE SIN OFFERING 
(Leviticus 4) 


HE Sin Offering stands in direct contrast to 
the Burnt Offering. 


In the Burnt Offering, all is for God. 

In the Sin Offering, all is for man. 

In the Sin Offering our Lord Jesus Christ is pic- 
tured as giving Himself an offering and a sacrifice 
unto God for—men. 

The Sin Offering was for sins of ignorance. 

Man is a sinner whether he knows it or not. 

Sin is deeper than the deeds any man may do. 

Sin is not only what a man does, but what a man is. 

He has a nature of sin. 

It is called, ‘‘ sin in the flesh.’”’ (Romans 8:3.) 

That is the root of all sin. 

Man is not a sinner because he commits sin, he 
commits sin because he is a sinner, because the root 
of sin is in him. 

Our Lord Himself defines the source of sin. 

He says: 

“Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, 
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blas- 
phemies.” (Matthew 15:19.) 

In saying this He simply emphasizes what He had 
said centuries before: 

“The heart is deceitful above all things and des- 


perately wicked: who can know it? ” 
346 


THE SIN OFFERING 347 


And then He says: 

“I the Lorn search the heart.” (Jeremiah 17:9, 10.) 

He alone knows the heart. 

He knows it as the fountain of sin. 

Sin is sin, whether it be innate, dormant or full 
blown in violence and outbreaking transgression. 

God’s standard is holiness. 

It is written: 

“Holiness, without which no man shall see the 
Lord.” (Hebrews 12:14.) 

- The man who is an out-and-out sinner falls short 
of that standard. ’ 

The man who is perfectly moral falls short of that 
standard, not only because he is lacking in absolute 
holiness, but because he has a nature of sin. 

There is a difference in men in respect to the 
degrees of sin. 

The man who is moral and upright, is living a com- 
mendable life for his own sake and that of others. 

It is better to be sober, honest, upright and ready 
to discharge all duties than to be an outbreaking 
sinner. 

It is better for his bodily health and conscience. 

It is better for the community in which he lives and 
at every angle of his life in this world. 

But—he is short of the standard of God’s righteous- 
ness—sinless perfection. (And God out of respect to 
His own holiness can demand no less.) 

Failing in this with all his good character, he has 
fallen short of that which God requires of him. 

The man who is completely gone in sin falls short 
of God’s standard in every direction, in every degree. 

There is a difference between these two men in the 
degree of sin, but there is no difference between them 


348 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


in the fact of sin. Both are short in what God 
requires. 

Both are short of holiness; both are short of sin- 
less perfection. 

It must be said fairly and squarely of each: 

Each is short of the standard of God. 

No matter in what degree of shortage they stand 
before God, they are both short. 

So far as the fact of shortness then—there is abso- 
lutely no difference between them. 

The splendidly good man and the outrageously bad 
man are each of them short of what God requires; 
and since to be short of what God requires as set up 
in this standard is to be lost, then both are lost! the 
bad man and the good man, both are separated from 
God and in themselves undone. 

Let it be repeated that in respect to God’s standard, 
both are short, both are lost and there is no difference 
in respect to that between them. 

And this is the declaration of the Word of God; as 
it is written: 

“There is no difference: 

For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of 
God.” (Romans 3:22, 23.) 

The victim for the sacrifice must be without 
blemish. 

If you would have a man pay for you the debt you 
cannot yourself pay, that man must himself be free 
from debt. 

If you would have some one meet the penalty of 
death against you as a sinner, that one who would 
pay it for you must himself be free from the penalty 
of death, some one against whom the law of righteous- 
ness has no claim. 


THE SIN OFFERING 349 


On the basis of His sinless perfection and that the 
righteous government of God had no claims against 
Him, our Lord Jesus Christ comes forward and offers 
Himself as a substitute for the sinner, offers to pay 
the debt he owes. 

In the Sin Offering the victim was the cere- 
monial substitute for the sinner. 

There are two texts which explain it all: 

“He hath made him to be sin for us.” (II Corin- 
thians 5:21.) 

“For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the 
just for the unjust.” (I Peter 3:18.) 

The blood of the Sin Offering was all poured 
out at the bottom of the Altar. 

“ And the priest shall pour all the blood at the bot- 
tom of the altar.” (Leviticus 4:7.) 

As the Antitypical Sin Offering our Lord Jesus 
Christ poured out all His blood at the bottom of the 
cross. 

From head and hands and feet it poured a living 
stream to the thirsty ground below. 

That He poured it all out is revealed, demonstrated 
and proved by His own statement to the disciples in 
the upper room at Jerusalem the night after His 
resurrection when He said to them: 

“A spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me 
have.” 

The logic of the statement is simple enough: 

He said in plain speech, 

“Ye see me have flesh and bones.” 

“ A spirit does not have flesh and bones.” 

“ Therefore I am not a spirit.” 

But He said more than that in saying that much. 

He said He had flesh and bones. 


350 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Let it be repeated a thousand times and in as many 
different connections. 

He said He had flesh and bones. 

He said flesh and bones because He was not flesh 
and blood. 

He had no blood in His body. 

He had poured it all out. 

He poured it all out because He was the actual Sin 
Offering of whom all the other sin offerings were but 
shadows. 

All the shadows were fulfilled on the cross. 

They took Him down from the cross, a white, limp 
body, as white as the linen in which they wrapped 
Him. 

But now He stands before them in that upper room. 

They are frozen into silence. 

Fear with the sharp tooth of unbelief bites into 
their heart; and now He gives the low uttered but 
clear triumphant challenge: 

“Handle me and see.” 

How they have yearned to do it during these three 
most awful days in human history. 

“‘ A spirit hath not flesh and bones.” 

Well! they knew that. 

“Flesh and bones as ye see me—have.”’ 

The Sin Offering standing before them—no blood in 
the body. 

All poured out for guilty men—a sacrifice for sin. 

But it meant more than that to fulfill the type. 

The priest must take some of the blood in a bason 
and bear it within the vail, into the Most Holy Place. 

And He had been there—into Heaven itself. 

He told Mary when He met her in the morning that 
He was on His way there then. 


THE SIN OFFERING 351 


Well! He had been there and returned. 

Thus with bated breath, in the flickering light of 
the lamp, they beheld their Sin Offering and their 
Heavenly Priest, the Priest after the order of Mel- 
chisedec. 

The victim must be taken outside the camp and 
burned to ashes. 

Our Lord was taken outside the camp. 

He suffered outside the gate; as it is written: 

“Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the 
people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. 

Let us go forth therefore unto him without the 
camp, bearing his reproach.” (Hebrews 13:12!) 

Outside the gate of the court, outside of the camp, 
they took the body of the sin offering, set it on fire 
and burned it to ashes. 

Outside the gate of Jerusalem they took our Lord 
to the place called Calvary. 

There they put Him on the altar of a Roman cross. 

And the fire fell upon Him. 

The fire of the consuming wrath of God against the 
sin He represented. 

He says, through the lips of the prophet: 

“From above hath he sent fire into my bones.” 
(Lamentations 1:13.) 

“Thy wrath lieth hard upon me. 

Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy terrors have 
cut me off.” (Psalm 88:7, 16.) 

‘*T am consumed by the blow of thine hand.” 
(Psalm 39:10.) 

The relation of the individual offerer to the Sin 
Offering. 

He must come before God and own himself a 
sinner. 


352 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


He must confess himself a sinner, not because he 
was conscious of sin, but because God had said he was 
a sinner and he must take God’s estimate of himself. 

He must take the sacrifice God had provided for 
him and offer it as his personal sacrifice. 

He must lay his hand upon the victim’s head, con- 
fess his sins and claim it as his individual substitute. 

“And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the 
sin offering, and slay the sin offering in the place of 
the burnt offering.” (Leviticus 4:29.) 

Precisely so must the individual act who would be 
saved today. 

He must take God’s estimate of himself as a sinner 
whether by nature or transgression. 

God says he is a sinner by nature and transgression. 

He must accept that estimate. 

He must lay his hand upon the head of the crucified. 

That is—he must accept Him there on that cross 
as the sacrifice provided of God for him. He must 
offer Him by faith for himself and not for another, 
claim Him as his substitute enduring the judgment 
and death due him. 

It is in this way and in this way only that Christ 
can be made of avail. 

In this way and in this way only can the Christ of 
God become a Saviour unto the best as well as the 
worst of men. 

You may believe in Him as a good man; you may 
exalt Him as a teacher and follow Him as a perfect 
example; if that be all—then He shall be of no more 
avail to you than the live bullock or lamb would have 
been to the Jew who brought it to the altar and led it 
away again alive and unslain; He, the Christ of God, 
shall be of no more value to you than if you should 


THE SIN OFFERING 353 


believe in Buddha or cast your soul for salvation upon 
the best, the most moral, the most perfect John Smith 
in the whole wide world. 

Christ as your Sin Offering offered to God by faith, 
and Christ claimed as your personal Substitute, alone 
can save you. 

The twofold relation of the Sin Offering to the 
offerer. 

The blood was within the vail whither the priest 
had taken it for him. 

_The ashes were outside the camp. . 

Blood within the vail, ashes outside the camp! 

The blood within the vail told him the sacrificé had 
been accepted on his behalf. 

The ashes outside the gate told him the priest was 
inside the vail, making reconciliation for him. 

When he looked at the ashes he saw the judgment 
of God had ceremonially fallen on his sins. 

As he looked and saw the wind blow the ashes away 
out of his sight, he knew the matter between him and 
the God of Israel had been settled and that, cere- 
monially, his sins had been put away. 

Look at the Cross. 

It tells us the judgment of God against us as be- 
lievers has been fully exhausted, it is finished. The 
issue between us and the God of righteousness is set- 
tled and settled to His perfect satisfaction; so settled 
that His conscience is at absolute rest about it. 

God looks upon us as having paid to the uttermost 
the penalty against us in the death of His Son as our 
Substitute. 

As the winds carry away the ashes, so our sins and 
transgressions have been swept away out of God’s 
sight for ever—forgiven, forgotten; as it is written: 


354 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“Their sins and iniquities will I remember no 
more.” (Hebrews 10:17.) 

Christ outside the camp, our sins consumed to 
ashes on His Cross. 

Christ within the vail, His blood therein testifying 
to our sins consumed. 

Christ outside the camp, dead for us. 

Christ inside the vail, alive for us. 

Christ outside the camp, our suffering substitute. 

Christ inside the vail, our living priest. 

Ashes outside the camp, blood within the vail. 

Judgment at an end, salvation secured. 

What more could we have? 


XXXIV 


THE PEACE OFFERING 
(Leviticus 3) 


HE law of the Peace Offering is to be found 
in Leviticus 7:28-36. 


Its distinctive feature is that the offerer 
and the priest each got a portion of it. 

It was to be eaten before the Lord. 

Eating. before the Lord is communing with the 
Lord. 

It is a picture of God and the sinner at peace with 
each other, all issues between them perfectly settled. 

It is peace upon the basis of a mutually accepted 
sacrifice. 

It is the picture of reconciliation. 

By the death of the cross our Lord Jesus Christ 
satisfied the law, the government and the being of 
God. 

In virtue of that satisfaction He has reconciled the 
world to Himself; as it is written: 

“God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto 
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.” 
(II Corinthians 5:19.) 

By that act of reconciliation He brought the world 
up on mercy ground where He could deal with it in 
absolute grace. 

For two thousand years the cross has held back 
judgment from the world. 

For two thousand years the world has lived under 


a suspended sentence. 
355 


856 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


On the basis of the righteousness displayed in the 
cross God is able to be just and yet the justifier of all 
who accept the sacrifice of the cross. 

The moment the individual owns the death of the 
cross as a sacrifice for sin and claims Him who died 
thereon as a personal substitute, his sin both of nature 
and transgression is imputed to the crucified Christ, 
the obedience of Christ unto death is imputed to the 
believer, and he is at once individually reconciled to 
God; as it is written: . 

“And you that were sometime alienated and ene- 
mies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he 
reconciled, 

In the body of his flesh through death to present 
you holy and unblameable and unreprovable in his 
sight.” (Colossians 1:21, 22.) 

This peace is made between the individual sinner 
who believes and his God; as it is written: 

“Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace 
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.” (Romans 
$15) 

This is the meaning of the oft repeated and much 
misunderstood announcement of the angels on that 
natal night in Bethlehem: 

“Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, 
good will to men.” (Luke 2:14.) 

It has been interpreted to mean that this was the 
particular announcement the Lord had come into the 
world to make peace between warring nations. He is 
coming to do that very thing, but this song of the 
angels was not that announcement and did not have 
any such meaning. 

It was given in emphasis to the message of Gabriel. 

Gabriel had given the message to Shepherds who 


THE PEACE OFFERING 357 


watched their flocks by night, keeping guard over 
sheep and lamb. 

Every morning and evening in the temple a lamb 
was sacrificed. 

The Gloria in Excelsis of the angel choir was a 
proclamation in the ears of these shepherds that lambs 
were no longer needed for temple service. 

God had provided Himself a Lamb. 

The Lamb was His Son over whose wondrous human 
birth the choral song was sung. 

He had come as the Lamb ordained before the 
foundation of the world. 

He should offer a sacrifice by which peace’should be 
made, not between warring nations, but between the 
individual sinner and his God. 

But this peace between God and the sinner was for 
a special class of sinners. 

The angels did not say: 

“* Peace, good will to men.” 

No, not at all. 

They said: 

“Peace, to men of good will.’’ 

What that good will is our Lord Jesus Christ Him- 
self later on in His ministry declares. 

He said: 

“This is the will of him that sent me, that every 
one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may 
have everlasting life.” (John 6:40.) 

That is the good will of which the angels spoke. 

This is the class for whom He came to make peace. 

To such He becomes peace; as it is written: 

“ He is our peace.” (Ephesians 2:14.) 

“These things have I spoken unto you, that in me 
ye might have peace.” (John 16:33.) 


358 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


‘“‘ And this man shall be the peace.” (Micah 5:5.) 

Peace made between the believing sinner and his 
God by the blood of the cross; as it is written: 

“ Having made peace through the blood of his 
cross.” (Colossians 1:20.) 

‘* Peace through the blood of his cross.’’ 

That is the peace the angels were singing and chant- 
ing, and over which they were giving glory to God that 
star-filled night. 

There is not even the shadow of a suggestion of a 
hint in Scripture that the peace of the world, the beat- 
ing of swords into ploughshares and spears into prun- 
ing hooks, is to be brought about by preaching the 
Gospel of the cross, the Gospel of the Crucified. 

For two thousand years this Gospel has been 
preached and has not brought the edge or outline of 
peace to a warring world. 

In the recent great world war the nations which 
fought in the most scientific and murderous fashion 
were those nations which pass current in history as 
“Christian Nations.” 

To talk about peace on earth while the cross casts 
its accusing shadow on it is to testify to spiritual 
blindness. 

To talk about peace on earth so long as human 
nature is at enmity with God is worse than childish, 
and wholly without excuse for those who have an open 
Bible. 

In clear, unqualified statement Holy Scripture af- 
firms that while knowledge shall increase, men run to 
and fro, inventions be multiplied till man shall seem 
almost like God, the world as a system will go farther 
and farther away from Him and from the peace that 
abides. 


THE PEACE OFFERING 359 


Instead of beating their swords into ploughshares 
and their spears into pruning hooks, they shall beat 
their ploughshares into swords and their pruning hooks 
into spears; as it is written: 

“Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; Prepare 
war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war 
draw near; let them come up: 

Beat your ploughshares into swords, and your prun- 
ing hooks into spears: let. the weak say, I am strong.” 
(Joel3:9%10:) 

In the closing hours of this age the genius of man 
will find its mightiest exercise in ‘producing engines 
of destruction. The whole world will become an 
arméd camp. Nations will be angry and filled with 
envy, jealousy and hatred of one another. Every- 
where shall be heard the tramp of armed men and the 
challenge of battle. 

The Son of God, He who cannot lie, who cannot be 
mistaken and who cannot deceive, has said the closing 
hours of this age shall be as it was in the days of 
Noah: 

Materialism, lust, wealth, lust for the lusts of the 
flesh, lust for the lusts of pleasure, lawlessness, an- 
archy, rampant violence, order at an end, confusion 
supreme. 

Not only this—but— 

The Church, the professing Church, will fall into the 
hands and be under the leadership of false teachers 
until it shall become a wholly apostate thing, repudiat- 
ing every foundation on which it has professed to build, 
and so far from being a barrier to the lust of the world 
and its reek of materialism, by its infidelity, by its 
denial of the Deity of the Son of God, the Virgin Birth, 
its repudiation of the blood of the cross as the blood 


360 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


of atonement, its cheap laughter and brutal mockery 
of the thought of a returning Lord, it shall help to 
break down all barriers of righteousness till it is 
scorned by a godless world as more godless than itself, 
and at the last like salt that has lost its savour and is 
only fit to be cast out and trodden under foot, so will 
the world despise and trample it in the mire of a com- 
mon shame. 

So far from peace while He is away, our Lord has 
said lawlessness will be multiplied, and everywhere the 
evidence that human government has reached its limit, 
is disintegrating, and will come to a sudden and final 
overthrow; that a time of tribulation is coming on the 
earth, a time of suffering and woe so awful that in the 
ages of war and woe and human anguish, in all that 
has been most terrible in human history, there never 
has been anything like this tribulation will be, and so 
completely the horror of horrors that nothing ever can 
come again to match it. 

And thus while men are boasting and laughing and 
singing and crying, “on with the dance,” “ tomorrow 
shall be as today and much more abundant;” while 
men are mocking as they did in the days of Noah be- 
fore the flood, the age is moving each day with in- 
creased momentum to the cumulative and cataclysmic 
crash. 

Nevertheless, He who died on Calvary’s cross is the 
Prince of Peace, and peace He will establish, and so 
establish it that never again shall war’s alarums be 
heard, nor lawlessness lift up its hydra head and hiss 
with its forked and Satanic tongue. 

He Himself is coming as the Prince of Peace to in- 
augurate and establish peace. 

But how is He coming? 


THE PEACE OFFERING 361 


Is He coming with the olive branch, with words_of. 
gentleness and steps as light and soft as though He 
trod on eiderdown? 

Hear what He Himself says about it: 

“T will tread them (the people) in mine anger, and 
trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be 
sprinkled upon my garment, and I will stain all my 
raiment. 

I will tread down the people in mine anger and make 
them drunk in my fury, and I will tread down their 
strength to the earth.” (Isaiah 63:1-6.) (Revelation 
19:11-16.) 

And what kind of a day will it be? ’ 

That day when He comes to bring peace? 

Is it to be a day of beauty, a cloudless sky, a wealth 
of sunshine on hill and dale, on land and sea? 

Nay! listen: 

‘““A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of 
clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread 
upon the mountains.” (Joel 2:2.) 

‘““A day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a 
day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and 
gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness.” 
(Zephaniah 1:15.) 

“ And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and 
the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all 
their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from 
the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree.” (Isaiah 
34:4.) 

And now behold the picture of the Lord’s Coming 
as presented by John, the Beloved disciple, under the 
stress and inspiration of the Holy Spirit: 

“ And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white 
horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful 


3862 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and 
make war. 

His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head 
were many crowns; and he had a name written, that 
no man knew, but he himself. 

And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: 
and his name is called The Word of God. 

And the armies which were in heaven followed him 
upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and 
clean. 

And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with 
it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them 
with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress 
of the fierceness and wrath of Almigthy God. 

And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name 
written, King of kings, and Lord of lords.’’ (Rev- 
elation 19:11-16.) 

And speaking to him anticipatively the Father says: 

“ Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou 
shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” 
(Psalm 2:9.) 

Not through the Golden Rule nor the preaching of 
the Gospel will the world become a world of peace. 
Not till He comes who is the Prince of Peace, not till 
He comes to overthrow the combination of man and 
Devil, not till He comes to execute righteousness upon 
an ungodly world and bind Satan, will peace dwell 
within it and abide. 

But amid all the storm and trial and unrest even 
now the most tempest tossed soul may find personal 
peace with God. 

The offerer ate of the Peace Offering before the 
Lord, 


THE PEACE OFFERING 363 


On the basis of the sacrifice he ate before the Lord. 

This may you do. 

This is the privilege of the weakest believer, make 
the sacrifice all your own by faith, rest in the complete 
assurance of the perfect satisfaction the Father has 
found in the shed blood of His Son, appropriate to 
yourself more and more each day the worth of Him 
who died for you, rest in Him as your once crucified 
but now risen Lord and find delight in Him for all He 
has done, is doing and surely will do for you; and as 
_ you delight in Him you will find yourself in conscious 
touch with Him, in rich communion and in fellowship 
with God the Father who finds His delight in’ Him. 

Two that are agreed can walk together. 

The mutual delight of yourself and the Father in 
His risen and glorified Son will bring you the peace of 
God because of your fellowship and communion with 
the God of peace. 


XXXV 


THE TRESPASS OFFERING 
(Leviticus 5) 


HERE is a marked difference between the Sin 

Offering and the Trespass Offering. 

In the Sin Offering you have a sacrifice for 
the nature of sin. 

In the Trespass Offering you have a sacrifice for the 
sins of nature. 

Nor is the distinction without a difference. 

In the one case God is dealing with the root of sin. 

In the other He is dealing with the fruit of sin. 

The blood of Christ not only meets the root, ‘‘ sin 
in the flesh,’’ it meets and provides for the fruit, the 
sins produced by the nature of sin in us. 

After the believer has owned and accepted the Lord; 
after he is assured, not only that he has been forgiven 
and justified, but that he has received a new and spir- 
itual nature, he awakes with a shock to discover the 
nature of sin still in him. 

In whatever way this consciousness comes to the be- 
liever it brings also the consciousness of defilement and 
the shutting out of close and intimate communion with 
God. 

The defilement must be removed and the conscious- 
ness of communion and fellowship restored. 

The provision for this and the manner thereof is set 
forth in the Trespass Offering. 

The manner of it is by confession; as it is written: 

364 


THE TRESPASS OFFERING 365 


“‘ And it shall be, when he (the Israelite) shall be 
guilty in one of these things, (mentioned in the preced- 
ing verses) that he shall confess that he hath sinned 
in that thing.” (Leviticus 5:5.) 

This tells us the sacrifice of Christ is available for 
the sins and trespasses of the believer by the way; that 
it is made available by confession on the believer’s 
part. 

This truth has already been largely dealt with, but 
it seems proper to restate it in analytical form. 

1. The Christian can sin. 

“Tf any man (any Christian) sin.” (I John 2:1.) 

The supposition is based on the fact that he can sin. 

He can sin because the old nature is stillin him. It 
is not taken away in the slightest degree in regerera- 
tion. It is still in him, the nature that is, “ enmity 
with God, is not subject to the law of God, neither 
indeed can be.”’ 

The new nature is holy, sinless, it cannot sin and is 
essentially against the old nature. 

Thus the Christian has two natures; but while he 
has the two natures, he is not two persons; he is but 
one person and with one responsibility. 

He can sin or he can resist sin. 

He can live in the region of the flesh. 

He can live in the realm of the spirit. 

If the Christian who stumbles, sins and loses 
communion and fellowship with God would be re- 
stored, he must confess his sins unto God, and 
confess them as sins against the Lord. (I John 
1:9.) 

Unconfessed sin becomes a canker in the heart. 

Confession brings it out, puts it into the light, makes 
its ugliness and horrible deformity to be plainly seen, 


866 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


inspires sorrow for the guilt of it, hatred of it and sin- 
cere desire to be quit of it. 

Confession brings back the dominance of God in the 
soul. 

The prodigal never loved his home so much as when, 
after his wanderings, he returned to it. 

Peace with God, joy in the Lord and rest of con- 
science never seem so rich and sweet as when, having 
lost them, they are found again. 

A precious jewel lost for many days and all hope of 
recovering it gone, never has seemed so precious and 
worth while as when it is found again. 

The shepherd never thought so much of his sheep, 
his lost sheep, till he found it and brought it home 
again. 

The woman never so prized her lost piece of money 
till she discovered it, brought it out of the dark corner 
and fastened it among the other pieces on her fore- 
head once more. 

The joy of restored communion, is a joy rich, deep 
and worth more than all gold and silver. 

Restored communion brings increased spiritual 
power and desire to be used of the Lord. 

The Psalmist comprehended that. 

He says: 

“Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and 
uphold me by thy free spirit. 

Then will I teach transgressors thy way; and sin- 
ners shall be converted unto thee.” (Psalm 51:12, 
13.) 

3. Our Lord Jesus Christ as the believer’s 
Great High Priest takes the confession and 
brings it before the Father. 


THE TRESPASS OFFERING 367 


He sets the confession before Him as from those 
who are His children, members of His family. 

4. The Father is faithful and just. 

Faithful to the covenant between Himself and the 
Son. 

Just to the sacrifice offered once for all. 

5. Because He is faithful and just to the Son, 
the Father, through the Son, will receive the con- 
fession, forgive, purge and fully cleanse the con- 
fessing one. 

In the light of the Trespass Offering we learn that 
the sin of an Israelite against a brother Israelite was 
counted of the Lord as a sin against Himself; as it is 
written: : 

“And the Lorp spake unto Moses, saying, 

If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the 
Lorp, and lie unto his neighbour in that which was 
delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing 
taken away by violence, or hath deceived his neigh- 
bour (a full list of possible sins is given in succeeding 
verses).” (Leviticus 6:1, 2.) 

In any of these things the Lord looks upon it as a 
sin against Himself. 

This is illustrated in the tremendous scene where 
Paul armed with authority from the Sanhedrim is on 
his way to Damascus to arrest and cast into prison all 
whom he should find among the Jews turning unto the 
Lord. The Lord meets him on the way, reveals Him- 
self in the splendor of His glorified humanity and asks 
him this startling question: 

“Why persecutest thou me? ” 

When Paul asks who it is speaking to him, he gets 
this answer: 

“T am Jesus.” 


868 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


if He had said nothing more than just those three 
words, they would in themselves have been the revela- 
tion of wonder and glory. 

Apart from anything else they might teach, they do 
teach this (and I cannot afford to pass it by), they 
teach this, that the Son of God is in Heaven, that He 
is there as Jesus (and of course), absolutely as Jesus 
of Nazareth, “ this same Jesus,” the Jesus who walked 
the ways of earth, was crucified on a Roman cross, 
dead, buried and risen again. Not a mere flimsy, 
shadowy, ghostly Jesus, a mere spirit but a real man, 
the real man Christ Jesus—there in His own very and 
actual human body. 

But listen to all He said to Paul: 

‘T am Jesus whom thou persecutest.”’ 

In this amazing statement the Lord from Heaven 
identifies those on earth who believe in Him as one 
with Himself; so one, so a part of Him, that any blow 
against them He counts and feels as a blow against 
Himself. 

It is the recognition of the great fact that the 
Church on earth is His spiritual Body. It is the 
recognition that each individual believer is a member 
of that body and therefore in intimate union with 
Himself. 

When one Christian sins against another Christian 
he is sinning against another member of the Body of 
Christ and therefore in the nature of the case against 
the Lord Himself. 

When a Christian has an unkind or critical thought 
against another Christian, when he speaks a word that 
wounds a fellow Christian, his critical thought, his 
wounding word, strikes the Lord and strikes Him to 
the very heart. 


THE TRESPASS OFFERING 369 


Nor does sin against a member of the Body of 
Christ stop with the wrong against the Lord personally 
—it goes even more widely; for just as injury to one 
member of the body, even of our natural body, may 
affect other members of our body and make the whole 
body sick; so a Christian who sins against another 
Christian may so hurt the spiritual life of one Chris- 
tian till the hurt spread and infect other Christians 
and the whole membership in that particular assembly 
of the Church become sick, spiritually weak and in- 
effective; wherefore it is written: 

“Ye are the body of Christ and ‘members in par- 
ticular, ; 

And whether one member suffer, all the members 
suffer with it.” (I Corinthians 12:27, 26.) 

The Christian then who sins against another Chris- 
tian sins against the Lord indeed; in short, all sin, be 
it of whatever sort, great or small, is against the Lord, 
and requires free and full confession from the Chris- 
tian who thus sins; he must confess if he would heal 
the hurt and stand in his true place before the Lord. 

6. In the Trespass Offering the offerer must 
make restoration for the sin committed and add 
the fifth part to the principal of that which he 
took away or in which he caused loss or wrong 
to another. 

“‘ He shall even restore it in the principal, and shall 
add the fifth part more thereto.” (Leviticus 6:5.) 

There are three things connected with the Tres- 
pass Offering. 

Expiation. 

Restoration, 

Addition. 


870 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


All this finds its complete fulfillment in our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

He was the true Trespass Offering. 

In Him we get Expiation, Restoration and Addition. 

Expiation. 

Never forget it! the death of our Lord Jesus Christ 
is expiatory. 

By His death He has expiated the nature as well 
as the fruit of that nature in the Believer. 

So completely has He expiated for us as believers 
that, not only has He taken away the penalty of our 
sin, but the very guilt and demerit of it in the sight of 
a holy God. 

Restoration. 

Because He has so fully expiated the guilt and de- 
merit of sin and so established the righteousness and 
truth of God and so justified him in all His ways; be- 
cause by that expiation He has proclaimed throughout 
the universe the exceeding sinfulness of sin and the 
glorious righteousness of the will of God; because by 
His death He has broken down every barrier and pur- 
chased all rights to the world, He will restore it as it 
was “in the beginning.” 

He will give the world back to God as it was first 
created, freed from sin and stain and shame and sick- 
ness and pain and death and from every rebel will; 
as it is written: 

“There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor 
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the 
former things are passed away. 

And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I 
make all things new” (that is—not all new things, 
but—all things new; that is, make them over again— 
renew them). (Revelation 21:5.) 


THE TRESPASS OFFERING 371 


Is it possible to imagine such an era on this earth? 

A period when a tear will never be seen on a human 
cheek, when a choking sob will no longer clutch at the 
throat; when men and women shall no longer stand at 
the bedside of one they love and watch the ebbing 
away of life and the coming in of that thing we call 
the shadow of death; when because of this black sin- 
ister thing tragedy waits at that bedside and thrusts 
its finger into and tears and twists the heart-strings of 
those who watch the beloved as they go out with the 
tide. Can you conceive of that moment when there 
- shall be no more graves, no chiselled‘bits of stone to 
tell you that underneath in the dust there lie the frag- 
ments of what was once a man of strength, a woman 
of beauty, a child of promise; that coming hour when 
the veiled guest who sits uninvited in so many homes 
today and whose name is—sorrow—shall no longer 
cross the threshold; when in the night no more shall 
be heard the Mother crying for her Son who was, and 
is not, and the orphans making lamentation because 
they have been cut loose and sent adrift upon the 
troubled waters of a fatherless and motherless life; 
but above all the coming of that hour of hours when 
the strange, drear word “ pain,” that word which in: 
cludes everything there is of the fires of fever, the 
octopus tentacles or wolf-like teeth of the cancer, all 
there is of surgeon’s knife and the long days of lan- 
guishing; when that word “pain,” which means not 
only agony of body, but deeper agony of the soul shall 
no longer be written, nor heard, nor remembered; that 
hour at last when human beings shall walk beneath 
skies that have no clouds, from whence shall come no 
more the windy storm and tempest, a world no longer 
shattered by earthquakes, scorched and melted by red- 


372 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


throated volcanoes, or drowned with tidal waves, a 
world burning in summer and frozen in winter, but a 
pleasant land where the flowers fade not and there is 
no thorn in the rose, a paradise regained where life 
flows on and on in ever unfolding degree of wonder, in 
knowledge and power; where peace and unbounded 
love abide beneath every roof tree; when all restraint 
of genius in man shall be released from the leash of 
the curse and rise to the level of Him in whom are 
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, a world 
restored to God minus all that has hurt the vision, the 
conscience and the heart of God. 

Addition. 

In the Trespass Offering the offerer was to give back 
the principal and then add the fifth part. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ as the True Trespass Offer- 
ing and therefore the True Trespass Offerer will give 
to God the principal. 

He will restore to Him all that he lost in the world 
through the sin of man. 

But He will do more than that. 

He will not only restore the world as it was at first, 
but He will add the fifth part; that is to say, He will 
give Him the world again with—plus. 

God shall get more through the redemption of the 
cross than He had in the world before man sinned, be- 
fore the era of chaos and before Satan fell. 

I repeat He will get the world back with plus. 

And this is the plus—not a world full of an Adam 
race, stumbling in sin and rebellion against God, re- 
jecting Him in all his ways, marking the earth with 
iniquity at every step and filling the very air with the 
poison of it, but a race of redeemed, regenerated men, 
shining in the image of Him who redeemed them, sons 


THE TRESPASS OFFERING 373 


of God like He is, glorifying the Father in the procla- 
mation of His grace and enthroning Him in heart and 
life. 

This is the glorious addition which the cross brings 
to God the Father—the “ many sons” He has sought; 
not only a world from which every trace of sin has 
been removed, but a race of sons of God testifying to 
the onlooking universe that the supreme glory of God 
is not to be found in the material creation filled as it 
is with the sign manual of His omnipotence, but in the 
matchless love that gave His Son to die for sinful men 
‘and the sovereign grace that has made sons of rebels 
and kings of slaves. / 

This is the great plus, this is the immense addition, 
this is the divine fifth part, this is the ‘‘ much 
more ’’ of which an Apostle speaks, given by the Son, 
given in the great Trespass Offering of the cross. 

O the marvel on marvels of that Cross. 

A Burnt Offering. 

A Sin Offering. 

A Peace Offering. 

A Trespass Offering. 

Measureless devotion to the Father. 

Complete and perfect atonement for man. 

Reconciliation of a rebel world. 

Provision for failures by the way. 

Expiation. 

Restoration. 

Addition. 

And all this is the covenant and eternal purpose of 
God, finding its initial when He sent the universe upon 
its course; finding its emphasis and accent when He 
created this earth that it might become, finally, the 


374 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


arena for the revelation of infinite love and “ amaz- 
ing” grace. 

Well may we cry out in the words of the Apostle: 

“ O the depths of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judg- 
ments, and his ways past finding out! 

For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who 
hath been his counsellor? 

Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be 
recompensed unto him again? 

For of him, and through him, and to him, are all 
things: to whom be glory for ever. 

Amen.” (Romans 11:33-36.) 

And well may we sing: 

‘In The Cross Of Christ I Glory.’’ 

And with the Apostle, add: 

‘* God forbid that I should glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.’’ 


XXXVI 


CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE PEOPLE FOR CON- 
STRUCTION OF THE TABERNACLE 
(Exodus 25) 


Pa ND the Lorp spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, that 
they bring me an offering: of every man 
that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my 
offering. 

And this is the offering which ye shall take of them; 
gold, and silver, and brass, 

And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, 
and goats’ hair, 

And rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and 
shittim wood, 

Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for 
sweet incense, 

Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and 
in the breastplate. 

And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may 
dwell among them. 

According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern 
of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instru- 
ments thereof, even so shall ye make it.” (Exodus 
25:1-9.) 

At the outset it is to be noted the Tabernacle was 
to be built upon a plan and according to the position 
ordained of God. 

There was to be no departure from the plan, even 


3876 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


in the smallest detail, whether of pin or cord. It must 
be built with that minute detail from silver socket to 
formless badgers’ skins. 

The Tabernacle is not only a symbol of our Lord 
Jesus Christ as the dwelling place of God in humanity, 
it is also a symbol of the Church as the reincarnation 
of Christ, as His Spiritual Body on earth. 

The Church is to be built and administered in the 
world according to the pattern shown in the New 
Testament, in the Word of God. 

Every thing in respect to those who shall consti- 
tute the membership, the special and initial charac- 
teristic required of each one, the ordinances and the 
office bearers and the position and function of the 
Church in the world. 

Every thing was planned and arranged not only for 
the first century, but for this century to the last mo- 
ment the Church should be in an unregenerate world. 

Every thing must be followed out even to the 
smallest detail as set down in Holy Scripture. 

If any Church in the world today is not exactly ac- 
cording to the pattern shown in the New Testament, 
it is not the Church of our Lord Jesus Christ, no 
matter what name it may bear, nor what traditions it 
may claim. 

As there was nothing superfluous in the building of 
the Tabernacle, nothing upon which the finger could 
be laid, and of which it might be said, ‘“‘ This is super- 
fluous, it is non-essential; so, it is impossible to say 
with truth that there is a single thing in the constitu- 
tion, the ordinances and the arranged administration 
of the Church that is—non-essential. 

“‘ Non-essential ”’! 

That is a cheap and dishonoring phrase. 


CONTRIBUTIONS FOR TABERNACLE 377 


No greater insult can be rendered to God than to 
speak of any part of His plan as non-essential. 

No Christian who honors his Lord should be guilty 
of using it. 

To use it under the inspiration of compromise or the 
belittling “ get together ” suggestion, is an evidence of 
spiritual blindness or open disloyalty to the Word. 

To depart from the divine plan and the divine in- 
struction, to endeavor to change in any degree to suit 
the fancy of the so-called “ advanced and liberal ” 
ideas of the hour, is to deny the will of God and en- 

.deavor to build that which in the Day of Christ will 
be no better than the “ wood, hay and stubble ” which 
the fire is to consume. : 

The Tabernacle was planned for all the way, even 
to the end of the journey. 

It was to be the same kind of a Tabernacle at the 
end as it was at the beginning of the journey. 

Thus was the Church planned for all the way, for 
the last century as well as the first. . 

Nothing has been overlooked. 

No matter what the discoveries of man, the defini- 
tions and declarations of science, the appeal of self 
elected scholarship, the change in times and seasons, 
and the demand for new methods and new interpreta- 
tions, the Church is to move forward on the lines and 
plan ordained of God. 

It was planned, not by the mind of man, but by the 
wisdom and foreknowledge of God. 

The contributions of the people for the building of 
the Tabernacle therefore set forth the privilege and 
obligation of the individual member of the Church to 
uphold and sustain it in its journey through the spir- 
itual wilderness of the world, from its dusty and wind- 


378 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


ing ways to the golden street of the upper city and the 
fruited shores of the river of life. 

The Church in the world is to be sustained by the 
gifts of its members, not only by exercise of spiritual 
endowments, but by temporal and liberal gifts. 

God made it possible for the Children of Israel to 
give what He required of them. 

When they were about to leave Egypt He gave them 
favor in the eyes of the Egyptians; as it is written: 

“And they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of 
silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: 

And the Lorp gave the people favor in the sight of 
the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things 
as they required.” (Exodus 12:36.) 

Whatever we have as Christians, be it more or be it 
less, comes from the Lord. 

He provides. 

Out of our poverty or out of our wealth we are to 
bring an offering unto the Lord and give it to Him by 
giving it to the Church, His Church. 

We are to give because like the Children of Israel 
we are a redeemed people. 

Not like them redeemed by the blood of a mere 
earthly lamb, but by the blood of Him who is the 
Lamb of God. 

The price paid for us has not only redeemed us, but 
it has transferred us to the ownership of Him who paid 
the price for us. 

We do not belong to ourselves. 

Nothing we have or are is ours. 

All is His; as it is written: 

‘*Ye are not your own, 

For ye are bought with a price: therefore 


CONTRIBUTIONS FOR TABERNACLE 379 


glorify God in your body, and in your spirit 
which are God’s.’’ (I Corinthians 6:19, 20.) 

What an assumption for a Christian to talk about 
things as “ his.” 

What a blunder of blunders for a Christian to haggle 
whether he shall give much or give little to the Lord. 

All we have belongs to the Lord and He may take 
it away when He wills. 

We are simply His stewards, put in charge of His 
property and values for a little season. 

It will be a terrific awakening among Christians at 
- the Judgment Seat of Christ to find they will be called 
upon to give a reckoning of the funds entrusted to 
them by the Lord and that property they claimed as 
their own, the real estate they named after their own 
name, and the use they made of those things. It will 
be startling to discover that their place in the kingdom 
and the glory will largely depend upon the way in 
which they have recognized and used their steward- 
ship. 

On one occasion the Lord asked the penetrating 
question: 

“ Will a man rob God? ” 

He asked this question of the Children of Israel. 

He answered His own question. 

He said: 

“Vet, ye have robbed me.” 

Then they said unto Him: 

“ Wherein have we robbed thee? ” 

And He answers again: 

“Tn tithes and offerings.” 

They robbed Him by withholding these tithes and 
offerings, tithes and offerings they were under bonds 
by covenant relation with Him to give. 


380 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


They came before Him empty handed. 

They were not keeping back their own property. 

It did not belong to them at all. 

They were withholding from Him the things that 
were His. 

In withholding those things, in taking them away 
from the Lord their God, they were just as much rob- 
bers, just as guilty as if they had stolen the property 
of a neighbor. 

They were living on the benefit of stolen goods. 

Christians who withhold their gifts from the Lord 
are living on the benefit of stolen goods. 

The true attitude of the Christian in respect to his 
substance is to be found, as expressed, in the splendid 
utterance of David: 

He said: 

“For all things come of thee, and of thine own 
have we given thee.” (I Chronicles 29:14.) 

The Lord not only wants the offering, the gift, He 
wants it to be given in a definite manner and spirit. 

He has laid it down as a law. 

This is the law: 

“ Bring me an offering: of every one that giveth it— 
willingly with his heart.’’ 

God wants the gift from the heart—He wants it as 
a heart gift. 

He wants it as a gift given—willingly. 

Would you like to take a gift from a person when 
you felt in your own inmost soul that person did not 
give it willingly, gave it because he felt he had to give 
it, rebelled all the time at the necessity of it, begrudged 
it to your 

Would you like to take such a gift, given in such 
a way? 


CONTRIBUTIONS FOR TABERNACLE 381 


No! I trow not. 

You might use the gift, but you would be apt to 
despise the giver. 

How much more must the living God repudiate in 
His inmost being a gift that is unwillingly made to 
Him. 

He does not want a gift from any Christian who 
gives it under the whip lash of necessity. 

A man may give a thousand dollars with a reluctant 
hand, a resentful heart. 

God will use it, but take little note of the giver, ex- 
cept to remember and record in the register on high 
that he was—an unwilling giver, a giver who gave 
begrudgingly. 

O what think you will be the feeling of the Chris- 
tian man or woman in the great day of the glory when 
it is made manifest to the assembled saints that this 
Christian was an unwilling and begrudging giver. 

Let another Christian give an insignificant sum, a 
gift of apparently little value, yet give it to the extent 
of his capacity, give it with joy and sincerely wishing 
he could give more, that gift and the spirit of it makes 
music in Heaven and fills the heart of God with richer 
love and deeper consideration for the giver. He will 
take that gift and magnify it and use it. 

In the hour of the glory what a crown that Chris- 
tian will get, not because he gave much, but because 
he gave it willingly, put his heart into it. 

Behold the Lord seated yonder in the temple near 
the great treasury receptacle where He can see the peo- 
ple as they give in their gifts, what they give and how 
they give. 

Did the Son of God ever do anything that was a 


882 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


waste of time, or just accidentally or indifferently or 
out of mere idle curiosity? 

Nay! He is seated there because He is profoundly 
interested in this act of giving unto God. 

Read the simple statement of it: 

“And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and be- 
held how the people cast money into the treasury: and 
many that were rich cast in much. 

And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw 
in two mites, which make a farthing. 

And he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto 
them, Verily I say unto you, 

That this poor widow hath cast more in, than all 
they which have cast into the treasury: 

For all they did cast in of their abundance; but 
she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all 
her living.” (Mark 12:41-44.) 

That is an enormous piece of literature, the descrip- 
tion of that scene; what does it mean? 

What does He mean? 

He means the rich who had much gave out of a 
sense of obligation to their position, socially and 
religiously. 

It cost them no effort. 

They gave out of “ their abundance.” 

And that word literally means, “ their overabound- 
ing, their overflowing ” wealth. 

She gave because God was the supreme thought in 
her mind; because the Lord God to her was above all 
the treasure of earth. 

She felt the honor of God’s house was above all the 
requirements of her own. She did not figure to her- 
self how difficult it was to get along in her daily life, 
how necessary to meet the crowding expenses that 


CONTRIBUTIONS FOR TABERNACLE 383 


never got less no matter how much she pinched, that 
there were others she had to care for beside herself, 
and when she was able to meet all this strain and drain, 
then whatever might be left she would give that to the 
Lord. 

No! she did not figure and reason that way. 

She just thought of the Lord and His honor first, 
not of her need, but His. 

What a revelation it is of the wealth of this woman, 
not wealth in earthly substance, but the wealth in her 
soul. She knew God, that is self evident. She had 
‘had communion with Him in and through the symbols 
of the temple. She knew He was Jehovah-jireh, He 
would provide. He had promised to be the God of 
the widow. She believed His Word. She trusted in 
Him. She would make Him first. 

She gave with a willing and not with a grudging 
heart. 

Hear what an Apostle has to say about the manner 
of giving: 

“Every man according as he purposeth in his 
heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of neces- 
sity: for God loveth a cheerful giver. — 

The word ‘‘ cheerful’’ in the Greek as every one 
knows, is hilarous, and hilarous in English means 
—hilarious. 

That is the spirit the Lord wants in our giving as 
Christians—joyfulness, gladness, delight that we are 
permitted to give a gift unto Him. 


THE RESPONSE OF THE PEOPLE 


Read the response as it is recorded. 
It ought to be printed in gold and hung up in a 


384 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


tablet in every Christian home and on a pillar in every 
Christian Church. 

“And they came, every one whose heart stirred 
him up, and every one whom his spirit made 
willing, and they brought the Lord’s offering to the 
work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all 
his service, and for the holy garments. 

And they came, both men and women, as many as 
were Willing hearted, and they brought bracelets, and 
earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and 
every man that offered offered an offering of gold unto 
the Lorp. 

And every man, with whom was found blue, and 
purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, and 
red skins of rams, and badgers’ skins, brought them. 

Every one that did offer an offering of silver and 
brass brought the Lorn’s offering: and every man, 
with whom was found shittim wood for any work of 
the service, brought it. 

And all the women that were wise-hearted did 
spin with their hands, and brought that which they 
had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, 
and of fine linen. ; 

And all the women whose heart stirred them up in 
wisdom spun goats’ hair. 

And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be 
set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate; 

And spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing 
oil, and for the sweet incense. 

The children of Israel brought a willing offering 
unto the Lorp, every man and woman, whose heart 
made them willing to bring for all manner of work, 
which the Lorp had commanded to be made by the 
hand of Moses.” (Exodus 35:21-29.) 


CONTRIBUTIONS FOR TABERNACLE 385 


Just think of the gifts: 

Bracelets. 

Earrings. 

Tablets. 

Jewels of gold. 

Silver. 

Brass. 

Blue, purple and scarlet color. 

Fine linen. 

Rams’ skins. 

Badgers’ skins. 

Goats’ hair. 

Wood. 

Onyx stones. 

Priceless stones. 

Spices. 

Oil. 

Sweet incense. 

And now behold the climax of this giving. 

They brought so willingly, so gladly, so bountifully 
that the men charged with the responsibility of receiv- 
ing the gifts came to Moses and said: 

“The people bring much more than enough for the 
service of the work, which the Lord commanded to 
make. 

And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it 
to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let 
neither man nor woman make any more work for the 
offering of the sanctuary. So the people were re- 
strained from bringing. 

For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work 
to make it, and too much,’’ (Exodus 36:4-7.) 

What a testimony! 

Just think of it. 


886 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Not a struggle and push to get a scant enough, but 
so abundant, so overflowing there was more than 
enough—there was too much. 

‘* Too much.’’ 

Just think of it! 

The Lord not put to shame as a mendicant, turned 
away with a few pennies and a scowl because He had 
even dared to ask for that which was His own. 

Nay! they glorified Him. 

They filled their hands and poured it upon Him with 
willing hearts, hearts that had in them no sense of re- 
straint, but only joy to give. 

But mark it well—the source, the spring and im- 
pulse within them. 

It is as plain as noonday light. 

They had overflowing hearts. 

That is the secret. Let each one of us repeat it to 
himself or herself: 

The overflowing heart gives the overflowing 
gift. 

The Apostle draws our attention to the way in which 
the churches in Macedonia gave unto the Lord. 

He says: 

‘* In a great trial of affliction the abundance of 
their joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the 
riches of their liberality.’’ (II Corinthians 8:1, 2.) 

When the heart is right with God the hand is 
quickly filled with gifts for Him. 

Get the vision of His gift to us and then it will be 
easy to give to Him. 

Behold how He gave: 

“For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he 


CONTRIBUTIONS FOR TABERNACLE 387 


became poor, that ye through his poverty might 
be rich.’’ (II Corinthians 8:9.) 

His poverty consisted in the substitution of the form 
of man for the “ form of God.” 

He took this form of man, the humanity He created 
for Himself, that through it by the death of the cross 
He might pay off the debt of righteousness against us 
and in resurrection as the eternal God-man make us 
rich with His risen, glorified, immortal humanity. 

And in giving us this He gave us something infinitely 
more, He gave us—Himself; as it is written: 

‘*'Who loved me, and gave himself for me.” 

Behold how God has given to us and then say there 
should be any hesitation on our part in giving to Him: 

“He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up 
for us all.” 

And remember! in giving to the Church you are 
giving to the Father and the Son. You are giving to 
God— 

When you give to His Church. 


XXXVIT 


ORDER OF THE CAMP 
(Numbers 2 and 3) 


HE Camp was arranged about the Tabernacle 
in the order ordained of God. 

The Tribe of Levi was separated from the 
rest of the tribes for the immediate service of the 
Tabernacle, the setting of it up, the taking of it down 
and the transportation of it on the march. 

“‘ And the Lorp spake unto Moses, saying, 

Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them be- 
fore Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him 
. . . to do the service of the tabernacle.””’ (Numbers 
3:6-13.) 

“Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among 
the children of Israel: and the Levites shall be mine.” 
(Numbers 8:14.) 

The Tribe of Levi was constituted of three families, 
the sons of Gershon, the sons of Kohath, the sons of 
Merari. (Numbers 3:17.) 

The Gershonites camped on the west. (V. 23.) 

The Kohathites on the south. (V. 29.) 

The Merarites on the north. (V. 35.) 

Moses and Aaron and Aaron’s sons were of the 
family of Kohath and pitched their tents on the east 
directly in front of the Tabernacle. (V. 38.) 

Moses was as a king in the midst; as it is written: 

“And he was king in Jeshurun (Israel), when the 
heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gath- 


ered together.” (Deuteronomy 33:4, 5.) 
388 


ORDER OF THE CAMP 389 


Aaron and his sons filled the priest’s office. 

The Gershonites had charge of the coverings of the 
Tabernacle, hangings for the door of the Holy Place, 
the curtains, the hangings of the court and the cords. 
(Numbers 3:25, 26.) 

They were given two waggons and four oxen with 
which to transport these things when on the journey. 
(Numbers 7:7.) 

The sons of Merari had charge of the boards, bars, 
pillars, sockets and pins and the cords of the court. 
(Numbers 3:36, 37.) 

To them was apportioned four waggons and eight 
oxen. (Numbers 7:8.) i 

The Kohathites were entrusted with the ark, the 
table, the candlestick, the altar of Incense, the Brazen 
Altar, the vessels of the sanctuary and the vail. 
(Numbers 3:31.) 

They had to carry everything upon their shoulders, 

“But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none (no 
waggons nor oxen) because the service of the sanc- 
tuary belonging unto them was that they should bear 
upon their shoulders.”” (Numbers 7:9.) 

The rest of the tribes pitched in a definite and strict 
order: 

The Tribe of Judah on the east with Issachar and 
Zebulon. 

Reuben on the south with Simeon and Gad. 

Ephraim on the west with Manasseh and Benjamin. 

Dan on the north with Asher and Naphtali. 

The men of these camps constituted four armies of 
three divisions each. 

They totaled over six hundred thousand soldiers. 

The order of the camp therefore was three-fold. 

Outermost of all the soldiers. 


390 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


Next the Levites, the workers. 

Innermost of all Moses and the priests. 

There was a place for every one in that camp; 
every one had his allotted place and was expected of 
the Jord to be in his place. 

There was no confusion, all was order, and it was 
order ordained of the Lord. 

This arrangement had its spiritual significance. 

The center was the Tabernacle. 

Without the Tabernacle there would have been no 
plan, there could have been no order in the camp; 
there would have been nothing but a constantly chang- 
ing, shifting, unsettled conglomeration, a disorderly 
mob. 

Without Christ, of whom that Tabernacle is, pri- 
marily, the symbol, the Church has no definite center, 
no rallying point, there is no standard, no order, no 
final authority. 

If the Church would live and be effective, fulfill the 
purpose for which it was created, Christ must be the 
Head and center; all movement and action must be 
about Him as the Head-Center. 

The three-fold division was equally suggestive. 

Warriors, Workers, Worshippers. 

Warriors—soldiers. 

The Christian is in a world that is “no friend to 
grace to help us on to God.”” The moment he declares 
himself for God he finds himself face to face with three 
challenging, assaulting, insatiable enemies: 

The World, the Flesh, the Devil. 

Because of these ceaseless enemies the Christian is 
called upon to take his place as a soldier, a spiritual 
walrior. 


ORDER OF THE CAMP 391 


The Lord is his Captain, “The Captain of our 
salvation.” 

The Christian is called upon to endure hardness as 
a good soldier. (II Timothy 2:3.) 

He is to put on the armor of a soldier, an armor 
chosen and forged for him by the Lord Himself: 

“Take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye 
may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having 
done all, to stand.” (Ephesians 6:13.) 

We are exhorted as warriors to war a good warfare. 

“This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy. . . 
war a good warfare.” (I Timothy 1:18.) 

We are exhorted to fight the “ good fight.” 

“ Fight the good fight of faith.” (I Timothy 6:12.) 

We are to contend (fight) for the faith: 

“Contend for the faith which was once for all de- 
livered to the saints.” (Jude 3.) 

The Apostle sends forth a ringing appeal: 

“Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like 
men, be strong.” (I Corinthians 16:13.) 

The Apostle describes this Christian warfare in its 
inspiration and ultimate: 

He says: 

“We do not war after the flesh: 

(For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but 
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong- 
holds; ) 

Casting down imaginations, and every high thing 
that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and 
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience 
of Christ.” (II Corinthians 10:3-5.) 

It is a precious privilege to fight this fight of faith 
against the Devil without, the flesh within and the 
world that environs us. 


392 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


It is an exhilarating thing to contend for the “ once 
for all faith.” 

In proportion as the enemy, whether in disguise or 
in the open, brings his charge against the truth; when 
he assaults the person of our Lord, His Virgin Birth, 
His atoning work on the cross, His priestly office in 
Heaven, His kingly glory, and His triumphant return 
to the earth; in short, the integrity of the Holy Word 
that declares Him, such assault fills the soul with bat- 
tle spirit high and lifted up and the desire as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ to fling out the banner far and 
wide. 

As Paul came to the hour of his departure, the sol- 
dier, warrior spirit in him disclosed itself. 

Exultingly, triumphantly, he says: 

“T have fought a good fight, I have finished my 
course, I have kept the faith.” (II Timothy 4:7.) 

Workers, 

Not only are we called on as Christians to be sol- 
diers, but levites. 

The levites were the servants of the high priest. 

To this we have been called: no longer the slaves 
of the god and ruler of this world, but slaves of Jesus 
Christ our great High Priest. 

Hear how Paul declares his name and station: 

“Paul a servant of Jesus Christ.” (Romans 1:1.) 

The word “servant” here is actually ‘‘ bond 
slave.’’ 

One time slaves of Satan were we, but now by the 
fearful price of the cross ransomed from his service 
and power and made the bond slaves of Him who died 
for us. 

Paul gloried in his position as a slave of the Son 
of God. 


ORDER OF THE CAMP 393 


Well may we. 

It is beyond words to describe the privilege of being 
owned by Him, to serve Him in deed, in word and 
thought; to serve Him as our great High Priest, enter- 
ing into all His purposes and desires, joying to make 
His will our own and counting it the crowning of a day 
when we have done some little thing in His name and 
for Him. 

It is a great thing to be a soldier of Jesus Christ. 

It is wonderful to be a worker. 

To be a worker is to take a step nearer to Him. 

Even so—for, surely, you understand that a servant 
to serve his master well must come into his presence 
and stand, waiting and listening for his slightest word. 

And this is the delight in serving the Christ of God. 

As you seek to serve Him you find you must draw 
nearer and nearer, closer and closer to His blessed 
presence, that you may not lose a word He wishes to 
speak to you; closer that you may catch the glance of 
His eye, the light of His countenance, and by that read, 
even, the suggestion of His will concerning you. 

Seek to serve Him, and more and more you will have 
the consciousness of His presence, more and more you 
will find it easier to hear what He says, to understand, 
and to do His will. 

But there is a privilege beyond even that of a 
worker. 

It is the position and function of the priestly family. 

That position and function was entrance into the 
Holy Place and ministration in the sanctuary. 

It was—worship. 

The soldier stood ready on the line of battle. 

The levite was ready to receive the word of com- 


$394 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


mand, as a worker, take his place and carry the burden 
allotted to him. 

But the priest entered into the Tabernacle and be- 
held the symbols of the divine glory; he entered into 
the Holy of Holies and swung the censer of fragrant 
incense before the Mercy Seat. 

It was an act of thanksgiving, praise and adoration 
—it was worship. 

As Christians we are spiritual priests—we are a 
priestly family. 

It is our privilege by faith, in spirit, to enter within 
the vail and lift up the sweet incense of thanksgiving, 
praise and adoration. 

It is our privilege to worship, to magnify and adore 
Him who loved us and gave Himself for us and who 
sits upon the throne in His radiant glory as the God- 
man. 

It is our privilege here and now to sing by anticipa- 
tion the song the Church will sing in Heaven after her 
translation and just before she appears in glory with 
Him: 

“Thou art worthy, . . . for thou wast slain, and 
hast redeemed us to God by thy blood . . . and 
hast made us kings and priests unto our God, and we 
shall reign on the earth.” 

True worship is neither in temple made with hands, 
with blast of trumpet, swell of organ note, nor cadence 
of choral song, it is the soul ascending in the fragrance 
of its faith and confidence like incense from the golden 
altar, glorifying Him as our great God and Saviour, 
joying and rejoicing in Him, so that He shall be to us 
as the “chiefest among ten thousands and the One 
altogether lovely.” The soul filled with delight, with 
ecstasy at the vision of Him and feeling the answering 


ORDER OF THE CAMP 395 


thrill of His love pouring back into us and holding us 
till our will and sense are confounded in His will and 
the all-pervading sense of—Himself. A worship that 
does not leave us in a state of mere quiescent contem- 
plation, a mere mood of meditation and self satisfac- 
tion, but will send us forth again to be His levites for 
service, His soldiers and heroes on the firing line till 
as the Captain of our salvation He shall give His tri- 
umphant shout and call us up to the rendezvous in 
glory. 

Warriors, workers and priests—that was the order. 

And let it be repeated, let it be héld fast that this 
order of the encampment was not after man’s devis- 
ing, but according to the will and word of the Lord. 

The divine will and the order for the Church in her 
journey through time has been clearly stated in the 
Word of God. There is no need for a single mistake 
in it; no need of any conflict or controversy of in- 
terpretation. 

The one supreme obligation of the Church is to 
listen to the Word, get a “thus saith the Lord,” and 
go by that, let the consequences be what they may. 

There could have been an unhappy controversy be- 
tween the tribes had they insisted on being judges for 
themselves as to the order in the camp and the par- 
ticular division of place and service among them. 

The distinctions were marked of God. 

The priesthood was composed of one family. 

To one family alone was given the responsibility of 
carrying the Tabernacle and the holy things of the 
sanctuary. 

To each tribe was given the position it should oc- 
cupy in the camp and the position it should and must 
hold on the march. 


896 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


There was just one single thing they had to do. 

Take God at His Word and follow His command. 

They did so—the order of the camp was perfect. 

They did so—the order of the march was equally 
perfect. 

They followed the Word of God to the letter. 

They did everything as it had been planned and pat- 
terned for them in the mount. 

Their march was as an army with banners. 

And God was over all, directing all. 

To the Church of today, speaking through the Apos- 
tle, the Holy Spirit in the name of the risen and 
ascended Lord says: 

“Let all things be done decently and in order.’’ 
(I Corinthians 14:40.) 


XXXVIII 
THE PILLAR OF CLOUD 


HEN the Lord led the Children of Israel 

out of Egypt, He went before them in a 

pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night; 
as it is written: 

‘“‘ And the Lorp went before them by day in a pillar 
of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a 
pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by ‘day and 
night: 

He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, 
nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people.” 
(Exodus 13:21, 22.) 

When Pharaoh awoke to the fact that the Children 
of Israel had taken up their line of march out of 
tgypt, he determined to pursue them and bring them 
back, He pursued them as far as the Red Sea and there 
found them encamped. 

At once the pillar of cloud changed its position. 

Instead of going before them it went behind them 
and stood between them and the Egyptians; so that 
they were unable to come after the Children of Israel; 
as it is written: 

“ And the angel of God, which went before the camp 
of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the 
pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and 
stood behind them: 

And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and 
the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness 


398 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that 
the one came not near the other all the night.” (Exo- 
dus 14:19, 20.) 

The Lorp divided the waters of the Red Sea and the 
Children of Israel went over dry shod. When Pharaoh 
and his hosts endeavored to follow the Lord looked 
through the pillar and troubled them; as it is written: 

“And it came to pass, that in the morning watch 
the Lorp looked unto the host of the Egyptians 
through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled 
the host of the Egyptians.” (Exodus 14:24.) 

The Egyptians attempted to follow. The Lord com- 
manded Moses to stretch out his hand over the sea. 
The sea returned upon them, engulfed them, so that 
in the morning the Israelites saw them dead upon the 
shore. 

Thus did the Lord that day save by the right hand 
of His power. 

From thence the pillar of cloud led them to Sinai 
and abode there during the dramatic and tragic hour 
in which Israel took themselves off the ground of 
grace and put themselves under the law. The cloud 
abode there during the absence of Moses in the mount, 
during the shameful worship of the golden calf, till he 
executed judgment upon them, obtained the second 
tables of the law and set up the Tabernacle according 
to the pattern and instructions given him in the mount. 

When the Tabernacle was finished and all things in 
order the cloud covered it; as it is written: 

“Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, 
and the glory of the Lorp filled the tabernacle. 

And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the 
congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the 
glory of the Lorp filled the tabernacle. 


THE PILLAR OF CLOUD 399 


And when the cloud was taken up from over the 
tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward in all 
their journeys: 

But if the cloud vere not taken up, then they jour- 
neyed not till the day that it was taken up. 

For the cloud of the Lorp was upon the tabernacle 
by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of all 
the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.” 
(Exodus 40:34-38.) 

The Pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night 
was a symbol of the Holy Spirit, by and through 
_ whom the Lord would manifest Himself to, in, on 
and with the Church in her journey through the 
world during the present age. 

Our Lord gave the promise of the Spirit before He 
ascended. 

He said: 

“ And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you 
another Comforter, that he may abide with you 
for ever; 

Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot 
receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: 
but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall 
be in you. 

I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to 
you.” (John 14:16-18.) 

“Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the 
world (age).” (Matthew 28:20.) 

“ One of the distinctive titles of the Son of God is: 

“ Emmanuel.” 

And that means: 

“ God with us.” 

Matthew testifies the Lord will be with us by the 
Holy Spirit. 


400 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


John corroborates this testimony and emphasizes it 
by saying He shall be—in us. 

Pentecost demonstrated the Spirit is on the Church. 

As the Lord manifested Himself in the cloud by 
fire, so by fire He manifested Himself at Pentecost; as 
it is written: 

“‘ And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like 
as fire.” (Acts 2:3.) 

Thus the Holy Spirit is to the Church as the fiery 
cloudy pillar to the Children of Israel; it was the 
medium of His presence with them and the seal they 
were His; so, likewise, the Spirit is the Proxy by whom 
the Lord is in, on and with His Church today. 

A study of Scripture will show that the persons of 
the Godhead efface themselves before one another, al- 
lowing each to manifest the other. 

In creation the Father manifests the Son, creating 
all things by Him and setting Him forth “in the 
form ” and appearing of God. 

On earth the Son manifested the Father, testified of 
Him, declared the works He did were not His works, 
but the Father’s; so testified of Him that He said it 
was the Father who wrought the works by Him and 
that in seeing Him they were in reality seeing the 
Father. 

In this age the Spirit manifests the Son. He never 
speaks of Himself. 

He is here to glorify the Son; as it is written: 

“When the Spirit of truth is come . . . he shall 
not speak of himself.’’ (John 16:13, 14.) 

“He shall take of mine and shew it unto you.” 
(John 16:15.) 

“He shall glorify me.” (John 16:13, 14.) 

The Pillar of fire was the light of the Children 


THE PILLAR OF CLOUD 401 


of Israel during the absence of the sun and while 
they were deep in nature’s darkness. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ is the light of the world. 

During his absence the world is plunged into the 
depths of spiritual darkness. 

The very light of nature is spiritual darkness. 

The age in which we live is called—‘‘ the night.’’ 
(Romans 13:12.) 

To walk in the light of nature is to walk in the 
deepest kind of spiritual darkness, even in the night. 

The Church or individual Christian who seeks to 
' walk by such light will stumble and fall and there 
shall be no remedy. f 

Read the Word of God in the light of mere reason 
(the only light nature can offer) the Church and its 
ministry will wander from the right way and the 
Christian will find himself in a darkness that becomes 
more and more impenetrable till doubt and unbelief 
like ill-omened birds fly in his face and smite him with 
their black and evil wings. 

The Church must have light, Heaven light, spiritual 
light, light radiated from Him who while He was here 
was the unfailing light of the world. 

The Holy Spirit is here to give that radiation. 

He gives it through the written Word. 

He gives demonstrations of the truth; as it is 
written: 

“And my speech and my preaching was not with 
enticing words of man’s wisdom, but in demonstra- 
tion of the Spirit.’’ (1 Corinthians 2:4.) 

A “demonstration ” includes proof, a revelation of 
the truth. 

The Spirit gives the light, the revelation, the convic- 
tion of the truth. 


402 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


The Cloud became the Guide of the Children of 
Israel throughout all the perplexities of the way. 
It guided them by day and it guided them by night. 

Concerning the Spirit the Lord said: 

“When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide 
you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; 
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and 
he will shew you things to come. 

He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, 
and shew it unto you. 

“All things that the Father hath are mine: there- 
fore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew 
it unto you.” (John 16:13-15.) 

The Cloud regulated all the movements of the 
Children of Israel. 

‘“‘ And when the cloud was taken up from the taber- 
nacle, then after that the children of Israel journeyed; 
and in the place where the cloud abode, there the chil- 
dren of Israel pitched their tents. 

At the commandment of the Lorp the children of 
Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of the 
Lorp they pitched: as long as the cloud abode upon 
the tabernacle they rested in their tents. 

And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle 
many days, then the children of Israel kept the charge 
of the Lorp, and journeyed not. 

And so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon 
the tabernacle; according to the commandment of the 
Lorp they abode in their tents, and according to the 
commandment of the Lorp they journeyed. 

And so it was, when the cloud abode from even unto 
the morning, and that the cloud was taken up in the 
morning, then they journeyed: whether it was by day 


THE PILLAR OF CLOUD 403 


or by night that the cloud was taken up, they jour- 
neyed. 

Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, 
that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining 
thereon, the children of Israel abode in their tents, and 
journeyed not: but when it was taken up, they 
journeyed. 

At the commandment of the Lorp they rested in 
the tents, and at the commandment of the Lorp they 
journeyed: they kept the charge of the Lorp, at the 
commandment of the Lorp by the hand of Moses.” 

(Numbers 9:17-23.) 

What supremacy, authority and power are here 
represented upon the one side; what obedience and 
discipline upon the other. 

There was no opportunity for liberal thought and 
independence of opinions. 

The people had nothing to do with the journey, 
neither when they should march, nor when they should 
halt. 

They had no choice as to the particular spot in 
which they should camp; neither had they any choice 
as to the circumstances under which they should pitch 
their tents, nor the conditions thereof, whether the 
water ran in crystal streams or the desert heaped its 
sands, they had no choice about it whatever. 

They had no choice whether they should march at 
sunrise or break camp at the midnight hour. 

They absolutely had no choice at all. They were 
not consulted whether they should tarry in any one 
spot for a day, a month or a year. 

All this was entirely regulated by the Cloud. 

The people recognized its authority. 

When it moved they moved. 


404 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


When it halted they halted. 

There was unity, harmony and precision. 

The people recognized their dependence on the 
Cloud. 

Coincident with the movement of the Cloud was the 
word or command of Moses, speaking a thus saith the 
Lord. 

The Cloud and the Word operated together. 

The Holy Spirit like the Cloud is here to regulate 
the movements of the Church. 

He is here to operate, not through sentiment, mere 
feeling, or the judgment of man, but by and through 
the utterance of the written Word, and by the written 
Word alone. 

He is here to direct the Church in the selection of 
her office bearers, in the establishment of the ordi- 
nances, in the method and manner of the assemblies 
and as the energy and urge without which there can 
be no spiritual efficiency. 

He is here to be the supreme power in the Church. 

Continually the voice of God is saying to the 
Church: 

“Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, 
saith the Lord of hosts.” (Zechariah 4:6.) 

The cloud taught the people to set aside their own 
initial action and wait on it. 

What is the true attitude to take in respect to the 
operation of the Spirit? 

Wait. 

This is the word the Lord gave to the Church con- 
cerning the Spirit. 

He said: 

“ Wait.” 


THE PILLAR OF CLOUD 405 


“Wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith 
he, ye have heard of me.” (Acts 1:4.) 

Just as the Children of Israel waited for the move- 
ment of the Cloud, the Church waited for the move- 
ment of the Spirit. 

O the immense grace of waiting on the Spirit. 

What loss the Church has suffered, what loss the 
individual Christian has suffered, by not waiting on the 
Lord that He might reveal Himself through the Spirit; 
what loss by not waiting on the Spirit that He might 
reveal the Lord. 

In failing to wait on the Spirit, in our impatience 
we have had recourse to the flesh, then defeat, over- 
throw and disaster, aS—the sure consequence. 

The Cloud was the evidence of the Lord’s 
presence with the Children of Israe] and sepa- 
rated them from all other peoples. 

The Lord said to Moses: 

“My presence shall go with thee, and I will give 
thee rest. 

And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with 
me, carry us not up hence. 

For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy 
people have found grace in thy sight? is it not in that 
thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I and 
thy people, from all the people that are upon the face 
2f the earth.” (Exodus 33:14-16.) 

There you have it in all its fulness of immense 
truth. 

The presence of the Lord with His people was not 
only the seal they were His, but that they were a sepa- 
rated people, separated from all others on the face of 
the earth. 

The Lord’s presence is a separating presence. 


406 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


If you have it, it will separate you from those who 
do not have it. 

The fact of the separating power of the Cloud was 
illustrated in Israel in that hour when it became dark- 
ness to the Egyptians and separated the people of God 
from them; as it is written: 

“And it came between the camp of the Egyptians 
and the camp of Israel: so that the one came not near 
the other all the night.” (Exodus 14:19, 20.) 

Just as definitely and distinctly as that, the Holy 
Spirit is between those who are genuine Christians and 
the people of the world. 

Just as definitely as that, the Holy Spirit rails us off 
as believers from all other classes of beings in the 
universe. 

We are the only beings in whom the Holy Spirit 
dwells. 

And He does dwell in us, as it is written: 

“Your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which 
is—in you.” (I Corinthians 6:19.) 

He does not dwell in the natural man. 

He does not dwell in angels. 

He dwells in the body only of those who have been 
redeemed by the blood of the cross and to whom the 
risen Son of God has communicated His life and 
nature. 

He dwells in us as the seal of the blood purchase 
of the cross. 

He is in us as the pledge and guarantee of our 
resurrection or transfiguration into the glorious like- 
ness and immortality of our Lord. 

His very indwelling makes us a separated class of 
beings. 

The separation is made manifest in the effect the 


THE PILLAR OF CLOUD 407 


things of God have upon those who have the Spirit 
and those who do not have that indwelling. 

The operation of the Holy Spirit as the revelator of 
the divine presence, the illuminator of the written 
Word, and as the personal illuminator of the believer’s 
heart and mind and conscience, is as very light in the 
darkness.’ 

The things of God under His ministration become 
to us the joy of our soul and create in us a hungering 
and a thirsting after God and His way. 

To the unbeliever the Holy Spirit is but a name and 
- the things of God when presented to ‘them are but as 
darkness itself; as it is written: 

“But the nateral man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: 
neither can he know them, because they are spir- 
itually discerned (that is—by the Spirit).” (I Corin- 
thians 2:14.) 

The indwelling Spirit and the Word of God separate 
us from the people of the world. 

What is light to us is darkness to them. 

They cannot understand. 

No! 

The world’s incomprehension is witness of their 
separation from us and our complete, essential separa- 
tion from them. 

The Cloud never left the Children of Israel in 
their wilderness journey. 

Before the resurrection the Holy Spirit came upon 
men, entered into, used them, but never took up His 
permanent abode in them. 

David was moved by the Spirit, used by the Spirit, 
but the Spirit did not abide in him as continual guest; 
therefore he could cry out and say as he did: 


408 TABERNACLE PRIESTHOOD OFFERINGS 


“Take not thy Holy Spirit from me.” (Psalm 
51:11.) 

No child of God, taught of the Lord, can offer that 
prayer. 

The Holy Spirit will never leave the Church, the 
true, the regenerated Church. He will be her guide 
till the Lord shall come to receive her and present her 
to Himself. 

The Spirit will never be taken away from the gen- 
uine believer. 

We may grieve Him. 

We may resist Him. 

We may quench Him as a flame of fire in the soul, 
but He will never be taken out of us; as it is written: 

“ Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are 
sealed unto the day of redemption (redemption of 
the body).” (Ephesians 4:30.) 

He is the resurrection and transfiguration power 
dwelling in the believer’s body; as it is written: 

“The Spirit of him that raised up Jesus . . . shall 
also quicken (make alive) your mortal bodies by his 
Spirit that dwelleth in you.’’ (Romans 8:11.) 

The spirit will never leave us. 

Nay! 

The Spirit and the written Word in their mutual 
operation shall be unto us as our cloudy fiery pillar till 
the journey is over—till the day dawn and the shadows 
flee away. 


THE END 


Printed in the United States of America 








(Continued from front flap) 


purpose of redemption, became a willing 
victim of that judgment of God which 
otherwise might fall on guilty man. 


In this monumental work, the author 
devotes painstaking attention to the most 
minute detail and does so with the senti- 
ment of a poet and the eloquence of a 
prophet. To all who read it, the ancient 
ordinances are certain to take on newer 


’ 


and deeper significance. 


About the author... 


For nearly half a century, Dr. Haldeman’s 
congregation filled to overflowing the vast 
auditorium of the First Baptist Church in 
New York City. Statesmen from every 
corner of the world sat at his feet. He was 
the author of many _ widely-circulated 
volumes including HOW TO STUDY THE 
BIBLE; CHRIST, CHRISTIANITY, AND 
THE BIBLE; and TEN SERMONS ON 
THE SECOND COMING. 


These reference books from Revell 
will help you dig deeper 
into God’s Word. 


Bagster’s Bible Handbook, Samuel Bagster. This 
enlightening reference tool provides a wealth of information 
about the Bible’s history, canon, original languages, and 
much more. 


Bagster’s Keyword Concordance, Samuel Bagster. Con- 
tains an alphabetical listing of some 28,000 entries which 
are commonly used by pastors, teachers, and students. 


Davis Dictionary of the Bible, J. D. Davis. Information 
on any Bible character, descriptions of places, development 
of the canon of the Bible, modern equivalents of money. 


Matthew Henry’s A Commentary on the Whole Bible, 
Matthew Henry. A monumental work that has been for 
nearly two centuries without an equal. To Bible teachers 
and preachers what Shakespeare is to secular literature. 


The Teaching of Christ, G. Campbell Morgan. A reverent 
examination of the actual words of Christ and their implica- 
tions for modern Christians. 


The Treasury of Scripture Knowledge, Introduction by 
k. A. Torrey. Thousands of biblical passages explained 
through the application of other scriptural passages. 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY * PUBLISHERS 
OLD TAPPAN, NEW JERSEY 
IN CANADA: G.R. WELCH CO. LTD., BURLINGTON, ONTARIO 


0-8007-0303-0 


