y^\  OF  PRI/^ 
^Nov.  S^   1905 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses    of    the    Bible 


f*^ 


L/- 


^ 


Jj- 


Rev.  JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,    M.A. 


THE  MINOR.   PROPHETS.     Vol.  II. 
NAHUM,  HABAKKUK,  ZEPHANIAH,  HAGGAI 
ZECHARIAH,  AND  MALACHI 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming   H.    Revell   Company 

London     and     Edinburgh 


INTEODUCTION  TO  NAHUM. 

Thsbi  are  two  sides  to  the  character  of  God — two  sides  which  yet  are  perfectly 
consistent  and  harmonious.  At  times  He  shows  Himself  most  gentle  and  com- 
passionate, ready  to  pardon  wrong-doing,  willing  to  admit  the  wrong-doer  to  Hia 
own  fellowship  and  favour.  At  other  times  He  is  stern  in  Hia  justice,  inflicting 
punishment  upon  evil,  visiting  the  crimes  of  men  with  the  tribulation  and  anguish 
which  are  their  due.  There  is  no  contradiction,  as  I  have  said,  between  these 
perfections  of  God.  He  is  stable,  consistent,  immutable,  although  now  He  speaks 
in  the  thunder  and  the  mighty  rushing  wind,  and  now  in  the  still,  small  voice. 
For,  first  of  all.  He  cannot  but  act  differently  toward  different  classes  of  men — 
different  moods  and  conditions  of  soul.  To  the  penitent  heart  that  weeps  bitterly 
over  its  sin,  to  the  faithful  servant  who  keeps  well  his  Master's  trust,  He  must 
of  necessity  reveal  His  mercy  and  love ;  it  is  not  in  His  nature  to  shut  such  as 
these  out  from  BKs  favour.  But  to  souls  that  are  proud  and  wilful  and  wedded 
to  their  iniquity,  what  can  God  be  but  just  and  severe  and  terrible,  a  consuming 
fire,  a  hammer  to  break  the  flinty  rock  in  pieces  7  He  would  forfeit  His  upright- 
ness were  He  to  deal  leniently  with  these.  And  then,  also,  so  far  from  mercy  and 
judgment  being  irreconcilable  the  one  with  the  other,  there  are  seasons  when  the 
infliction  of  judgment  is  indeed  the  truest  mercy.  His  own  children  will  breathe 
more  freely  once  their  oppressor  and  antagonist  is  away ;  weak  and  yielding 
souls  will  be  prevented  from  surrendering  themselves  to  His  will ;  and  the  world 
will  be  lifted  up  to  a  higher  level.  Very  frequently  mercy  and  justice  are  in 
reality  synonymous  terms.  Such  thoughts  as  these  are  awakened  within  us  when 
we  open  this  Book  of  Nahum.  It  is  not  a  book  which  deals  either  with  Israel  or 
with  Judah.  It  has  no  direct  reference  to  the  chosen  people.  It  is  concerned 
from  first  to  last  with  the  fate  of  Nineveh,  the  proud  capital  of  Assyria.  Jonah, 
the  son  of  Amittai,  had  been  sent  thither  by  God  about  two  hundred  years  before 
Nahum's  time.  And  the  Assyrian  monarch  and  people  of  Jonah's  day  had  opened 
their  hearts  to  hear  God's  Word  and  to  acknowledge  His  presence  and  authority. 
Seeing  their  sorrow  and  rejoicing  at  its  manifestation.  He  had  passed  from  the 
fierceness  of  His  anger.  But  their  penitence  was  of  short  duration.  Soon  they 
had  grown  haughty  and  sin-loving  and  cruel  again.  And  God  could  bear  with  their 
tyranny  and  evil  no  longer.  He  bade  His  servant  Nahum  prophesy  their  speedy 
destruction.  Jonah  had  been  His  messenger  of  grace  to  Assyria ;  Nahum  is  Hia 
messenger  of  judgment.  I.  It  is  exceedingly  little  that  we  know  of  the  personai, 
HISTORY  OF  THIS  PROPHET.  To  most  of  US  he  is  simply  a  voice  crying  in  the  desert ; 
we  remember  him  by  his  words  alone.  But  I  think  it  is  possible  for  us  to  fashion 
for  ourselves  some  authentic  picture  of  the  man  and  his  surroundings.  There 
has  long  been  debate  as  to  the  locality  of  his  birth.  "Nahum  the  Elkoshite,"  he 
is  described  in  the  opening  of  the  book  ;  but  it  is  hard  to  decide  what  meaning 
should  be  attached  to  the  epithet.  The  Christian  father  Jerome  speaks  of  a 
village  called  Elkesai  which  lay  in  Galilee,  and  tells  us  that  a  few  relics  of  it  were 
pointed  out  to  him  by  a  dweller  in  the  district.     Such  a  testimony  is  undoubtedly 

T 


INTRODUCTION  TO  NAHUM. 


possessed  of  considerable  value,  for  Jerome  had  his  home  for  a  great  part  of  his 
life  in  Palestine,  and  was  well  acquainted  with  its  villages  and  towns.  And  some 
expositors  have  found  a  confirmation  of  the  theory  that  Nahum  was  a  Galilean, 
born  and  brought  up  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  Holy  Land,  in  another  name 
which  is  familiar  to  us  in  connection  with  the  history  of  One  greater  than  the 
prophet — the  name  Capernaum.  For  Capernaum  means  "  the  village  or  hamlet 
of  Nahum  " ;  and  who  more  likely  to  give  it  its  distinctive  title,  it  has  been  asked, 
than  the  ancient  servant  of  God  who  proclaimed  the  downfall  of  his  people's 
enemies  7  It  would  be  pleasant,  indeed,  to  imagine  the  prophet  moving  about 
the  very  scenes  which  were  afterwards  to  be  hallowed  by  the  presence  of  Christ ; 
walking  in  prayer  and  meditation  by  the  shore  of  the  lake  which  the  Saviour 
knew  so  well ;  spending  the  most  of  his  days  in  those  holy  fields  which  six  himdred 
years  later  were  trodden  by  the  Son  of  God.  But  however  attractive  such  a 
theory  may  be,  I  cannot  but  incline  to  the  other  solution  which  has  been  suggested 
for  the  phrase,  "  The  Elkoshite."  Travellers  in  the  East  tell  us  of  a  village  called 
Alkush  (Sir  A.  H.  Layard  describes  this  village  and  the  supposed  tomb  of  Nahum, 
in  his  Nineveh  and  Babylon)  not  far  from  Mosul,  away  in  what  was  ancient 
Assyria,  where  the  tomb  of  Nahum  is  pointed  out  at  this  day.  The  tomb  is  no 
doubt  an  erection  comparatively  modem  ;  but  at  least  it  bears  witness  to  the 
existence  of  an  older  belief  that  here,  in  the  land  of  the  alien  and  the  oppressoi", 
God's  prophet  had  lived  and  died.  And  there  is  that  in  the  character  of  the 
prophecy  which  strengthens  our  conviction  that  Nahum  was  himself  an  exile  in 
Assyria.  Its  descriptions  are  so  graphic  and  vivid,  so  apparently  painted  from 
the  life,  that  we  can  scarcely  escape  the  conclusion  that  the  writer  is  recounting 
what  his  own  eyes  have  seen  and  his  own  ears  have  heard.  He  seems  to  have 
dwelt  in  the  very  heart  of  the  country  against  which  he  proclaimed  God's  judg- 
ment. It  is  true  that  this  clear  and  definite  knowledge  of  Nineveh  and  its  in- 
habitants may  have  been  supernaturally  imparted  to  the  prophet.  But  that  is 
far  from  likely.  For  the  most  part,  the  prophets  of  the  Lord  deal  with  those 
sights  and  sounds,  those  persons  and  events,  by  which  they  are  themselves  sur- 
rounded. They  read  to  men  the  lessons  of  warning  or  of  comfort  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  enables  them  to  gather  in  that  world  in  which  they  live  and  move  and  have 
their  being.  Let  us  think  of  Nahum,  therefore,  as  the  son  of  a  Hebrew  family 
that  had  been  carried  captive  to  AssjTia  when  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes 
was  broken  and  destroyed.  He  was  born  among  strangers  who  were  harsh  and 
cruel ;  but  at  home  he  breathed  an  atmosphere  of  love.  For  his  name  means 
"  consolation  " ;  and  probably  it  describes  the  comfort  which  the  child  brought 
with  him  to  the  hearts  of  his  parents.  Outside,  in  the  alien  territory  where  they 
were  forced  to  stay,  they  saw  only  high-handed  wrong-doing  and  daily  sin  ;  but 
within  the  walls  of  their  dwelling  they  had  what  compensated  them  for  the 
oppressor's  wrong  and  the  proud  man's  contumely ;  they  were  cheered  and 
strengthened  as  they  looked  on  the  boy  whom  God  had  sent  them,  and  offered  up 
their  prayers  for  him,  and  hoped  that  he  might  yet  do  great  things  for  his  injured 
and  afflicted  people.  When  Nahum  grew  up  to  manhood  he  showed  that  he  had 
the  heart  of  a  patriot  tlirobbing  within  him.  He  loved  and  remembered  the  land 
of  his  ancestors.  Bashan  and  Carmel  and  Lebanon  were  familiar  names  to  him 
(Nah.  i.  4),  even  although  he  had  never  looked  on  thera  with  the  bodily  eye. 
And,  in  proportion  as  he  took  delight  in  that  sweet  and  pleasant  soil  from  which 
he  and  his  had  been  banished,  he  loathed  the  tyranny  and  the  manifold  evil  of 
the  heathen  who  had  triumphed  over  God's  heritage.  He  saw  before  him  the 
splendour  of  Nineveh,  and  its  ferocity  and  its  luxury  and  its  sensuality,  and 
he  hated  it  with  a  righteous  hatred.  The  Latin  satiri.st  says  that  it  is  indignation 
which  makes  a  man  a  poet ;  and  Nahum's  exultant  and  pitiless  words  were 
prompted  by  his  indignation  against  the  empire  which  had  robbed  his  fatherland 
of  peace  and  prosperity  and  life  itself.  But  if  these  were  dark  and  awful  words 
for  the  Assyrian,  they  were  bright  and  soothing  for  the  Israelite.  They  assured 
him  of  the  opening  of  the  prison-house  and  the  dawning  of  a  better  day.  He  was 
indeed  a  poet — this  old  Hebrew.  Many  have  remarked  how  terse  and  vigorous, 
how  forcible  and  vivid  and  fervent,  his  phrases  are.  Very  bitter  and  relentless 
he  is  towards  his  enemies  ;  but  we  must  remember  that  they  were  the  enemies  of 
God  as  well  as  his  own,  and  that  his  w£is  a  religious  enthusiasm.  There  is  music 
of  an  inspiring  and  triumphant  sort  in  all  that  he  utters — music  like  that  of  the 
trumpet  which  calls  to  battle  and  victory.  He  depicts  the  fall  of  Nineveh  as  though 
he  actually  beheld  it.     He  rejoices  in  its  desolation  as  though  it  were  present  to  his 


INTRODUCTION  TO  NAHUM. 


eyea.  There  is  energy  in  every  verse.  II.  Let  us  look  a  little  more  particularly  at 
THE  WORK  WHICH  WAS  GIVEN  HIM  TO  DO.  The  Assyria  which  he  knew  was  powerful 
in  the  extreme.  The  empire  had  attained  the  very  summit  of  its  splendour  and 
prosperity.  It  had  "  multiplied  its  merchants  as  the  stars  of  heaven."  Its  crowned 
ones,  its  princes  and  nobles,  were  "  as  the  locusts  "  for  number — as  the  locusts, 
also,  in  their  destructiveness  and  their  love  of  spoU.  It  seemed  as  if  Nineveh  had 
never  been  seated  on  a  throne  more  secure  and  stable.  We  can  fix  pretty  accurately 
the  date  of  Nahum's  prophecy  from  a  historical  reference  which  he  makes  in  the 
course  of  it.  Addressing  the  haughty  city,  which  had  no  disquieting  dreams  of 
coming  evil,  he  asks,  "  Art  thou  better  than  No-Amon  that  was  situate  among 
the  rivers,  that  had  the  waters  round  about  her,  whose  rampart  was  the  sea,  and 
her  wall  was  of  the  sea  ?  "  Yet  what  a  destruction,  entire  and  irrevocable,  had 
befallen  her,  as  the  prophet  goes  on  to  point  out  !  "  She  was  carried  away,  she 
went  into  captivity  ;  her  young  children  also  were  dashed  in  pieces  at  the  top  of 
all  the  streets  ;  and  they  cast  lots  for  her  honourable  men,  and  all  her  great  men 
were  bound  in  chains"  (iii.  8,  10,  R.V.).  Now,  this  triumph  over  No-Amon, 
which  we  are  better  acquainted  with  under  the  name  of  Thebes,  was  gained  by 
Assyria  itself.  It  was  one  of  the  achievements  of  King  Assm--bani-pal  that  he 
crushed  a  dangerous  revolt  which  had  broken  out  in  Egypt,  and  drove  the  leader 
of  it  from  the  country,  and  plundered  Thebes  and  laid  it  waste.  Its  temples  were 
hewed  in  pieces,  and  two  of  its  obelisks  were  carried  as  trophies  to  Nineveh.  Its 
people,  as  Nahum  declares,  were  treated  with  the  terrible  barbarities  of  heathen 
war.  And  this  victory  over  the  city  of  Amon  was  won  about  the  year  665  b.c.  ; 
so  that  the  prophet,  who  is  familiar  with  it,  must  have  preached  and  laboured  at 
a  somewhat  later  period,  perhaps  about  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century  before 
the  coming  of  our  Lord.^  It  was  only  the  inspiration  of  God's  Spiiit  which  could 
lead  any  one  to  foretell,  at  an  era  when  the  Assyrian  empire  had  reached  its  widest 
limits,  that  its  overthrow  was  close  at  hand.  To  ordinary  onlookers  everything 
seemed  to  presage  for  it  a  long  and  a  successful  future ;  no  ominous  cloud  had  aa 
yet  appeared  in  the  sky ;  no  enemy  too  formidable  to  be  met  and  overcome  had 
shown  himself.  Assur-bani-pal  *  was  not  personally,  indeed,  a  brave  and  fearless 
ruler,  such  as  his  predecessors  Esar-haddon  and  Sargon  had  been.  He  was  liker 
the  haughty  and  luxurious  and  boastful  Sennacherib,  who  had  led  his  armies 
against  Hezekiah  half  a  century  before,  ordy  to  see  them  "  melted  like  snow  in 
the  glance  of  the  Lord."  But  yet  he  had  gained  for  Nineveh  a  glory  which  the 
city  had  never  possessed  formerly.  It  needed  a  Divine  enlightenment  to  predict 
an  issue  so  utterly  improbable  and  so  far  beyond  the  ken  of  human  foresight. 
And  very  speedily  and  very  terribly  the  ruin  came.  Before  Assur-bani-pal  had 
been  forty  years  dead  his  empire  had  ceased  to  be,  and  his  rich  and  glorious  capital 
had  been  blotted  out  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  Perhaps  no  part  of  Old  Testa- 
ment Scripture  has  had  greater  light  thrown  upon  it  by  those  excavations  which 
have  been  carried  on  during  recent  years  in  Assyria  than  this  short  prophecy. 
As  we  read  the  records  of  the  investigators,  and  thread  our  way  in  thought  among 
the  remains  of  Nineveh,  and  trace  the  after  history  of  the  deserted  and  forgotten 
site,  we  see  everywhere  the  fuMment  of  Nahum's  righteous  denimciations.  Of 
the  words  which  he  uttered  against  the  doomed  city,  there  is  none  which  has  not 
come  to  pass.  The  Medes  and  the  Babylonians  were  the  chief  assailants  of  the 
great  empire,  although  its  antagonists  seemed  to  rise  up  from  every  quarter.  So 
mighty  a  nation  died  hard.  When  its  armies  were  routed  in  the  open  field  the 
king  '  made  a  final  stand  in  the  capital,  and  closed  the  city  gates.  The  siege,  as 
we  learn  from  some  tablets  which  survive  from  these  days  of  mortal  struggle, 
lasted  over  two  years  ;  for  the  walls  were  one  hundred  feet  high  and  fifty  "feet 
thick,  and  had  been  impregnable  hitherto.  But  at  length  the  end  came — came 
not  in  the  way  of  ordinary  warfare.  A  great  rise  of  the  Tigris  brought  about  the 
fall  of  Nineveh,  the  flood  undermining  the  fortifications.     It  was  exactly  as  Nahum 

^  Nahum's  date  has  been  placed  earlier  by  some,  who  regard  him  as  a  con- 
temporary of  Isaiah  and  belonging  to  the  second  half  of  the  reign  of  Hezekiah. 
But  on  this  supposition  it  is  hard  to  explain  the  allusion  to  the  capture  and  destruc- 
tion of  No-Amon. 

'^  Assur-bani-pal  is  probably  the  "  great  and  noble  "  Asnapper  of  Ezra  iv.  10. 
We  are  better  acquainted  with  him  under  his  Greek  name,  Sardanapalus. 
^  The  last  king  of  Nineveh  was  Esar-haddon  II.,  called  Sarakos  by  the  Greeks. 
The  fall  of  the  city  may  be  placed  in  the  year  606  B.C. 


viii  INTRODUCTION  TO  NAHUM. 

h.^id  foretold,  "  the  gates  of  the  rivers  had  been  opened,  and  the  palacea  had  been 
dissolved."  Entering  the  city  through  the  breach  which  the  torrent  had  caused, 
the  besiegers  soon  made  it  "  void  and  waste."  Built  only  of  sun-dried  clay,  its 
houses  and  temples  quickly  crumbled  into  dust.i  We  can  well  believe  that,  to 
many  of  the  poor  afflicted  Israelites  who  heard  them,  Nahum's  words  seemed  too 
good  to  be  true  ;  yet  God  has  carried  them  out  literally  and  in  every  detail.  What 
a  blessed  deliverance  this  was  which  the  seer  beheld  !  Nineveh  was  as  cruel  as  it 
was  great.  It  was  in  reality  what  the  prophet  of  Elkosh  pictured  it,  a  lion  which 
"  did  tear  in  pieces  enough  for  his  whelps,  and  strangled  for  his  lionesses,  and  filled 
his  holes  with  prey,  and  his  dens  with  ravin."  "  The  Assyrian  annals,"  says 
Professor  Sayce,  who  has  made  them  his  daUy  study,  "  glory  in  the  record  of  a 
ferocity  at  which  we  stand  aghast."  And,  no  doubt,  the  captive  Hebrews  had 
felt  in  many  ways  the  brutality  of  their  conqueror ;  the  godly  among  them,  too, 
shuddered  when  they  saw  his  molten  images,  his  drunkenness,  his  lust,  his  exalting 
of  himself  against  Jehovah.  It  was  no  mere  vindictiveness  which  led  them  to 
wish  and  pray  that  the  earth  might  be  freed  from  a  monster  such  as  this — a  monster 
which,  like  the  Grendel  that  Beowulf  slew,  made  the  hearts  of  men  everywhere 
sad  and  weary  and  hopeless.  Rather  it  was  the  truest  piety  and  the  most  genuine 
religion.  How  these  sorrowful  and  yearning  souls  would  welcome  Nahum'a 
prophecy !  III.  Can  we  gather  any  lessons  fob  ourselves  from  Nahum  and  his 
prophecy  ?  1.  One  of  them  will  be  a  lesson  of  the  vanity  and  hopelessness  of 
resisting  God.  Very  impressively  that  truth  is  taught  us  by  the  words  of  the 
prophet,  if  they  be  read  in  the  light  of  their  fulfilment.  The  Nineveh  of  Nahum'a 
day  looked  fair  and  strong,  as  though  no  evil  were  ever  likely  to  befall  it  and  no 
plague  to  come  nigh  it.  But  it  had  taken  up  arms  against  God.  Its  idol  worship, 
its  licentiousness,  its  pride,  its  cruelty  towards  His  people,  whom  He  had  given 
into  its  hands  to  be  chastened  and  not  to  be  destroyed, — all  these  things  made  Him 
its  enemy.  And  in  conflict  with  such  an  Adversary  even  Nineveh  could  avail 
nothing  ;  it  dashed  itself  in  vain  against  the  bosses  of  Jehovah's  buckler.  Nay, 
He  has  utterly  vanquished  it ;  He  has  ground  it  to  powder.  What  a  tragedy 
there  is  in  the  history  of  every  nation,  and  of  every  individual  heart,  that  is  opposed 
to  God  !  Sooner  or  later  the  history  closes  in  darkness  and  misery  and  ruin. 
2.  Again,  we  gather  from  Nahum's  prophecy  a  lesson  with  regard  to  the  motives 
which  guide  and  animate  God's  government  of  the  world.  He  rules  it  in  the 
interests  of  His  own  people.  There  is  something  grand  and  sublime  in  the  spectacle 
of  the  lonely  Hebrew  captive  who  stands  up  to  face  the  great  Assyrian  tyranny, 
and  to  tell  it  that  the  destined  hour  for  its  fall  is  almost  come.  What  was  it  that 
wrought  within  him  such  faith  as  this — a  faith  which  "  laughs  at  impossibihties, 
and  says,  '  It  shall  be  done  '  "  ?  It  was  the  conviction  that  his  Lord  remembered 
still  His  own  chosen  generation,  the  seed  of  Abraham  His  friend.  But  such  a 
confidence  all  God's  sons  and  daughters  should  seek  after  and  should  cherish.  Let 
them  believe  that  He  governs  the  world  and  controls  its  affairs  on  their  behalf ; 
that  He  has  thought  of  their  necessities  in  planning  all  the  events  which  take  place 
among  men ;  that  He  cares  more  for  the  souls  of  His  little  ones  than  for  the  princi- 
palities, and  powers,  the  thrones  and  dominions,  of  the  earth.  They  dwell  secure 
who  find  their  home  in  Him.  3.  Once  more,  we  may  learn  from  some  of  Nahum's 
words  the  supreme  blessedness  of  leaning  upon  God.  Now  and  then  there  is  a 
lull  in  the  thunder  of  his  sentences,  and  his  speech  drops  as  the  rain  and  distils  as 
the  dew — as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb,  and  as  the  showers  upon  the  grass. 
He  forgets  Nineveh  for  a  little,  and  turns  in  pity  and  love  to  Israel.  This  is  his 
language  at  one  moment,  "  The  Lord  hath  His  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  in  the 
storm,  and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  His  feet.  Who  can  stand  before  His  indigna- 
tion ?  and  who  can  abide  the  fierceness  of  His  anger  ?  His  fmy  is  poured  out 
like  fire,  and  the  rocks  are  thrown  down  by  Him."  But,  the  next  moment,  how 
soft  and  sweet  are  the  tones  of  his  voice  !  "  The  Lord  is  good,  a  stronghold  in 
the  day  of  trouble,  and  He  knoweth  them  that  trust  in  Him."  There  is  no  more 
beautiful  verse  in  all  the  Bible.     And  it  is  as  true  as  it  is  beautiful.     We  should 

1  "  Rich,  in  1818,  conjectured  that  the  mounds  of  Kouyunjik,  opposite  the 
modem  town  of  Mosul,  concealed  the  ruins  of  Nineveh  beneath  them  ;  but  it  was 
not  until  the  excavations  of  the  Frenchman  Botta,  in  1842,  and  the  Englishman 
Layard,  in  1845,  that  the  remains  first  of  Dur-Sargon,  and  then  of  Nineveh  itself, 
were  revealed  to  the  eyes  of  a  wondering  world." — Professor  Sayoe,  Assyria  :  itt 
Princes,  Prieata,  and  People. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  NAHUM. 


have  no  doubt  of  its  truth — we  who  live  after  Bethlehem  and  Calvary  and  the 
grave  in  Joseph's  garden,  and  who  are  familiar  with  the  exceeding  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Clmst.     (Original  Secession  Magazine.) 

Nahttm's  bangs  as  an  inspibid  TEAC3HKB. — As  to  this  prophet's  rank  in  the 
series  of  inspired  teachers,  it  is  suggested  that  his  message  is  meagre  and  his 
conceptions  are  narrow.  He  has  nothing  to  say  about  Israel's  Messianic  character 
and  future.  He  has  no  rebuke  for  her  sinfulness  and  imworthiness.  His  soul  is 
consumed  with  unreasoning  indignation  against  Assyria,  and  he  is  devoid  of  that 
lofty  conception  of  the  world's  government  which  enabled  earUer  prophets  to 
recognise  in  AssjTia  Jehovah's  scourge  for  His  people's  stubbornness  and  the 
chastening  rod  of  His  gracious  discipline.  In  contrast  to  that  largo  and  religious 
interpretation  of  Providence,  Nahum  appears  as  the  representative  of  a  retrogres- 
sion into  narrow,  national  particularism.  Now  it  is  to  be  admitted  that  the  form 
of  Nahum's  oracle  lends  itself  to  this  misreading,  but  the  spirit  and  aim  of  the  ^ 
prophet  ought  to  have  prevented  it.  Besides  the  wrong  of  Israel,  more  than  once 
in  his  short  utterance  he  presents  Assyria  as  the  oppressor  of  mankind,  whose 
avenger  Jehovah  is  (iii.  4,  7,  19).  Nor  even  in  the  contemplation  of  his  own 
people's  injuries  is  the  prophet's  zeal  vindictive  and  national.  It  is  not  revenge, 
out  righteousness  that  demands  the  transgressor's  downfall.  It  is  not  Israel's 
pride  that  is  at  stake,  but  Grod's  honour ;  not  the  redemption  of  his  people,  but 
the  vindication  of  his  God,  that  is  in  question.  With  Nahum  Nineveh's  punish- 
ment is  the  guarantee  of  the  world's  Divine  government,  and  his  impassioned 
declaration  of  its  downfall  is  the  measure,  not  of  his  hostility  to  it,  but  of  the 
struggle  and  triumph  of  his  faith  in  God,  and  in  God's  kingdom.  That  being  the 
single  and  simple  issue  present  to  his  mind,  he  naturally  does  not  even  touch  that 
aspect  of  the  Assyrian  enigma  which  explains  its  evil  power  over  God's  people  and 
the  world  by  their  sinful  failure  to  be  what  God  would  have  had  them  be  for  their 
own  happiness  and  humanity's  good.    (If.  0.  Elmslie,  D.D.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 

NAHUM. 

CHAPTER  L 

Vbiu  1.  The  book  of  tlie  yision  of  Nahtun  the  EUEOshite. — Nahunis  hoolt  ;— 
Nahum  writes  a  book.  It  was  a  curious  thing  to  do  in  those  days.  It 
was  a  book  of  a  vision,  and  therefore  likely  to  be  quite  misunderstood ; 
for  who  has  eyes  that  can  see  visions  of  the  shadowy,  aerial  kind  T  Only  a 
visionist  can  read  visions.  There  are  some  men  who  ought  never  to  attempt 
to  read  poetry,  because  they  kiU  it.  They  do  not  know  that  they  are  killing 
it,  but  their  slaughter  is  none  the  less  complete.  There  are  persons  who  ought 
not  to  read  the  lighter  kinds  of  literature,  say  even  comedy  itself,  because  they 
were  born  to  live  at  the  graveside,  and  never  have  caught  a  laugh  on  the  wing. 
Only  those  who  have  the  inspired  heart  can  read  the  prophets,  either  major  or 
minor,  and  understand  what  they  are  about, — not  understand  what  they  are 
merely  saying,  but  understand  what  they  are  meaning.  There  is  a  common 
drift  in  aU  the  prophecies,  a  set,  a  tendency  in  this  great  biblical  movement. 
Unless  you  comprehend  that  tendency  or  movement  you  will  be  lost  in  the  details 
of  the  dislocated  parts.  The  Bible  reveals  Grod  ;  now  let  all  the  rest  faU  into 
proper  adjustment  under  the  influence  of  that  dominant  and  ennobling  thought. 
How  will  Nahum  talk  about  God  ?  He  will  talk  about  God  in  his  own  way.  If 
every  man  would  do  that  we  should  have  a  new  and  grand  theology,  because 
we  should  have  as  many  theologies  as  there  are  human  beings  reverently  engaged 
in  the  profound  study  of  God.  Every  man  sees  his  own  aspect  of  the  Divine 
Being ;  every  man  catches  his  own  particular  view  of  the  Cross ;  hence  a  good 
deal  of  the  obstinacy  that  is  found  in  theological  controversy  and  religious 
disputation.     (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  God  is  jealous,  and  the  Lord  revengeth. — The  jealous  Ood : — There 
is  in  man  a  selfishness  that  is  Divine.  It  is  a  singular  fact,  in  oiu:  moral 
constitution,  that  often  the  tenderest  feelings  of  our  nature  should  also  be  the 
most  selfish.  Love,  even  apparently  in  its  highest  moods,  is  sometimes  also 
most  exacting  and  difficult  of  satisfaction.  I  have  known  a  mother  most  jealous 
of  the  departure  of  a  daughter's  heart  to  its  natural  home  and  rest.  When  I 
have  seen  this,  I  have  thought  of  the  selfishness  of  God.  God  is  infinitely  selfish, 
for  we  may  appropriately  use  that  term.  For  selfishness  may  be  celestial,  and 
an  attribute  of  benevolence.  We  do  not,  indeed,  think  much  of  love  that  cannot, 
in  circumstances,  be  jealous  ;  such  is  but  a  cold,  indifferent,  impoverished  affection. 
How  can  it  be  other  than  that  the  best  natures  of  the  imiverse  must  be  most 
selfish  ?  Jealousy  is  not  necessarily  an  infirmity.  It  may  be  a  Divine  emotion. 
The  apostle  speaks  of  a  "  godly  jealousy."  No  doubt  aU  our  love  is  infirmity. 
The  best,  what  we  call  the  most  purely  unselfish,  has  its  infirmity.  I  call  that 
love  of  the  highest  which  most  intensely  desires  the  well-being  of  its  objects; 
this  is  the  selfishness  of  love.  Jealousy  is  a  passion  that  depends  for  its  charaoter 
upon  the  fuel  that  gives  its  flame.  It  is  the  sorrowing  and  pitjdng  passion  which 
would  save,  if  it  could,  from  the  perdition  and  the  doom,  and  unable  to  do  so^ 
or  even  seeking  to  do  so,  moves  all  its  powers,  takes  all  the  minor  emotions, 
faculties,  and  casts  them  into  the  flames  of  its  love,  bidding  all  blaze.    This  la 

X 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

the  apostle's  "  godly  jealousy."  And  God  is  jealous.  Do  not  think  of  Him 
as  beneath  the  influence  of  that  passion  which  sometimes,  as  envy,  spite,  and 
malice,  disturbs  our  rest ;  still  think  of  Him  as,  in  a  lofty  sense,  the  jealous  God. 
There  are  many  terms  applied  to  Him  in  Scripture  which  seem  to  anthropomor- 
phise  His  character.  '  Angry,"  "  repenting,"  "  foreseeing."  Whenever  such 
terms  are  used,  think  of  them  as  steps  of  Divine  descent.  We  may  be  sure  they 
do  represent  some  qualities  of  the  Divine  nature  on  which  it  is  important  that  we 
should  reflect,  and  of  which  we  should  stand  in  awe.  The  meaning  of  words 
assists  to  the  conception  of  things.  Jealous  is  the  same  word  as  zealous,  and 
both  are  derived  from  the  Greek  word  zeal,  fire  ;  zeal  is  enthusiasm — moral  fire  ; 
and  jealousy, — what  is  jealousy  but  love  on  fire  ?  Is  not  this  the  representation 
we  constantly  have  of  God  ?  I  do  believe  in  the  mercy,  and  gentleness,  and 
goodness  of  God.  I  do  believe  that  He  who  "  knows  our  frame  "  does  save  His 
children  from  the  alienation  of  eternity,  even  when  the  heart  has  so  vehemently 
loved  in  time  the  children  of  time.  But  then  you  must  take  the  consequences 
here  of  that  too  vehement  love.  God  is  jealous  of  sin,  of  all  aberrations  from 
Himself.  He  is  jealous  of  love,  of  power,  of  knowledge.  See  how  He  is  con- 
stantly reminding  man  of  his  weakness  as  He  incarnates  his  strength;  and  God 
is  constantly  absorbing  man's  knowledge,  power,  and  love  to  Himself.  Divine 
love  on  fire,  God  is  jealous  !  There  is  no  love  where  there  is  no  fire,  but  let  it 
burn  with  the  white,  not  with  the  red  heat.  Imagine  no  evil  against  (Jod  from 
this  declaration  of  His  Book.  God  is  jealous,  His  love  is  on  fire,  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  love  on  fire, — hell  is  love  on  fire.  The  one  by  gentle  persuasion  entreats ; 
the  other,  by  forcible  compulsion,  guards  His  holy  ones.  Thus  His  fire  folds 
inward  and  outward;  inward  to  bless,  outward  to  punish — so  a  calm  breath 
of  holy  life,  a  stormy  fire  of  doom.  {Paxton  Hood.)  The  Lord  will  take 
vengeance  on  His  adversaries. — Great  sins  bringing  great  ruin : — I.  That  thb 

GREAT  SINS  OF  A  PEOPLB  MUST  EVER  BRING  UPON  THBM  GREAT  RUIN.  The  popu- 
lation of  Nineveh  was  pre-eminently  wicked.  It  is  represented  in  the  Scriptures 
as  a  "  bloody  city,"  a  "  city  full  of  lies  and  robberies  "  ;  the  Hebrew  prophets 
dwell  upon  its  impious  haughtiness  and  ruthless  fierceness  (Isa.  x.  7,  8).  Great 
sins  bring  great  ruin.  It  was  so  with  the  antediluvians,  with  the  inhabitants  of 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  The  principle  of  moral  causation  and  the  Eternal  Justice 
of  the  universe  demand  that  wherever  there  is  sin  there  shall  be  suffering,  and  in 
proportion  to  the  amount  of  sin  shall  be  the  amount  of  suffering.     II.  The  great 

RUIN  that  comes  PRESENTS  GOD  TO  THE  "  VISION  "  OF  MAN  AS  TEEBIBLY  INDIGNANT. 

The  passions  of  man  are  here  ascribed  to  God.  It  is  only  when  terrible  anguish 
comes  upon  the  sinner  that  God  appears  to  the  observer  as  indignant.  (Homilist.) 
National  punishments  part  of  God's  moral  government : — I.  The  certainty  that 
SIN  WILL  NOT  remain  UNPUNISHED.  1.  The  inevitable  working  of  natural  laws 
secures  this.  Physical,  social,  and  spiritual  evils  follow  sin.  2.  The  declared 
character  of  God  secures  it.  He  is  a  jealous  God.  II.  There  is  no  resisting 
THE  judgments  OF  GoD.  His  power  is  seen  in  nature.  The  rolling  whirlwind, 
the  dark  tempest,  the  desolating  storm  are  symbols  of  His  wTath  and  of  His 
might.  III.  Yet  in  wrath  God  remembers  mercy.  1.  There  is  a  refuge  for 
those  who  turn  and  repent.  2.  No  sins  preclude  hope.  3.  Salvation  is  full  and 
certain  to  the  truly  penitent.  4.  Though  the  godly  suffer  trouble,  they  will  be 
delivered  from  it.  Their  trials  are  only  a  discipline,  if  used  aright.  (C  Cunningham 
Geikie,  D.D.)  God's  judgments  will  he  fulfilled: — As  you  stood  some  stormy 
day  upon  a  sea  cliff  and  marked  the  giant  billow  rise  from  the  deep  to  rush  on 
with  foaming  crest,  and  throw  itself  thundering  on  the  trembling  shore,  did  you 
ever  fancy  that  you  could  stay  its  course  and  hurl  it  back  to  the  depths  of  the 
ocean  ?  Did  you  ever  stand  beneath  the  leaden,  lowering  cloud,  and  mark  the 
lightning's  leap  as  it  shot  and  flashed,  and  think  that  you  could  grasp  the  bolt 
and  change  its  path  ?  Still  more  foolish  and  vain  his  thought  who  fancies  that 
he  can  arrest  and  turn  aside  the  purpose  of  God.     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  and  g^reat  In  power,  and  will  not  at  all 
acquit  the  wicked. — Mercy,  omnipotence,  and  justice  : — Works  of  art  require  some 
education  in  the  beholder  before  they  can  be  thoroughly  appreciated.  There 
must  be  something  in  the  man  himself  before  he  can  xmderstand  the  wonders 
either  of  nature  or  of  art.  Certainly  this  is  true  of  character.  By  reason  of 
failures  in  our  character,  and  faults  in  our  life,  we  are  not  capable  of  understanding 
all  the  separate  beauties  and  the  united  perfection  of  the  character  of  Christ,  or 


CHAP.  I.]  NAHUM.  S 

of  God  HiB  Father.  Men,  through  the  alienation  of  their  natures,  are  constantly 
misrepresenting  God,  because  they  cannot  appreciate  His  perfection.  This  is 
especially  true  with  regard  to  certain  lights  and  shadows  in  the  character  of  CJod, 
which  He  has  so  marvellously  blended  in  the  perfection  of  His  nature,  that, 
although  we  cannot  see  the  exact  point  of  meeting,  yet  we  are  struck  with  wonder 
at  the  sacred  harmony.  How  can  God  be  "  slow  to  anger,"  and  yet  unwilling 
to  "acquit  the  wicked"  ?  Our  character  is  so  imperfect  that  we  cannot  see  the 
congruity  of  these  two  attributes.  It  is  because  His  character  is  perfect  that  we 
do  not  see  where  these  two  things  melt  into  each  other.  I.  The  fiest  chabac- 
TERiSTic  OF  God.  "  Slow  to  anger."  1.  Because  He  never  smites  without  tirst 
threatening.  2.  But  He  is  very  slow  to  threaten.  God's  lips  move  swiftly  when 
He  promises,  but  slowly  when  He  threatens.  3.  When  He  threatens,  how  slow 
He  is  to  sentence  the  criminal.  4.  Even  when  the  sentence  against  a  sinner  is 
signed  and  sealed,  how  slow  God  is  to  carry  it  out.  Illustrate  from  case  of  Sodom. 
Trace  this  attribute  of  God  to  its  source.  He  is  "  slow  to  anger  "  because  He  is 
infinitely  good.  And  because  He  is  great.  II.  The  link  between  the  pibst 
SENTENCE  OF  THE  TEXT  AND  THE  LAST.  He  is  "  great  in  power."  He  that  is 
great  in  power  has  power  over  Himself.  When  God's  power  doth  restrain  Himself, 
then  it  is  power  indeed.  HI.  The  last  atteibutb  is  this — "  Hb  will  not  at 
ALL  ACQUIT  THE  WICKED."  Never  once  has  God  pardoned  an  unpunished  sin. 
Trace  this  attribute  to  its  source,  and  you  find  it  in  this,  "  because  He  is  good." 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  patience  of  Ood : — I.  Implies  GRaAT  powhe.     Note — 

1.  This  exquisite  sensitiveness.  He  is  sensibility  itself.  2.  His  abhorrence  of 
Bin.  It  is  the  "  abominable  thing,"  which  He  emphatically  hates.  His  whole 
nature  revolts  from  it.  He  feels  that  it  is  antagonism  to  His  will,  and  to  the  order 
and  well-being  of  the  universe.  3.  His  provocation  by  the  world.  4.  BUs  right 
to  do  whatever  He  pleases.  He  could  show  His  anger,  if  He  pleased,  anywhen, 
anjrwhere,  or  anyhow.  II.  His  patience  PEECLtroBS  not  the  punishment  op 
the  impenitbnt.  "  And  will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked."  1.  To  "  acquit " 
the  impenitent,  wo\ild  be  an  infrtiction  of  His  law.  He  has  bound  suffering  to 
sin  by  a  law  as  strong  and  as  inviolable  as  that  which  binds  the  planets  to  the 
sun.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  2.  To  "acquit"  the  impenitent,  would  be  a 
violation  of  His  Word.  3.  To  "  acquit "  the  impenitent,  would  be  to  break  the 
harmony  of  His  universe.  If  inveterate  rebels  were  acquitted,  what  an  impulse 
there  would  be  given  in  God's  moral  empire  to  anarchy.  Abuse  not  the  patience 
of  Grod ;  nay,  avail  yourselves  of  it.  {Homilist. )  A  discourse  upon  OocTs 
patience  : — Slowness  to  anger,  or  admirable  patience,  is  the  property  of  the  Divine 
nature.  This  patience  is  seen  in  His  providential  works  in  the  world.  CJonsider 
— I.  The  nature  of  this  patience.  1.  It  is  a  part  of  the  Divine  goodness  and 
mercy,  yet  differs  from  both.  It  differs  from  mercy  in  the  formal  consideration 
of  the  object.  Mercy  respects  the  creature  as  miserable,  patience  respects  the 
creature  as  criminal.  Mercy  is  one  end  of  patience.  It  differs  in  regard  of  the 
object.  The  object  of  goodness  is  every  creature.  The  object  of  patience  is 
primarily  man.  2.  Since  it  is  a  part  of  goodness  and  mercy,  it  is  not  an  insensible 
patience.  3.  It  is  not  a  constrained  or  half-hearted  patience.  4.  Since  it  is  not 
for  want  of  power  over  the  creature,  it  is  from  a  fulness  of  power  over  Himself. 
6.  The  exercise  of  this  patience  is  founded  in  the  death  of  Christ.  The  natural- 
ness of  God's  veracity  and  holiness,  and  the  strictness  of  His  justice,  are  no  bars 
to  the  exercise  of  His  patience.  II.  How  this  patience,  oe  slowness  to  angek, 
is  manifested.  1.  To  our  first  parents.  2.  To  the  Gentiles.  3.  To  the  Israelites. 
In  particular,  this  patience  is  manifest — (1)  In  His  giving  warning  of  judgments 
before  He  orders  them  to  go  forth.  He  speaks  before  He  strikes,  and  speaks 
that  He  may  not  strike.  (2)  In  long  delaying  His  threatened  judgments,  though  He 
finds  no  repentance  in  the  rebels.  (3)  In  &s  unwillingness  to  execute  His  judg- 
ments, when  He  can  delay  no  longer.  (4)  In  moderating  His  judgments,  even 
when  He  sends  them.  (5)  In  giving  great  mercies  after  provocations.  (6)  All 
this  is  more  manifest  if  we  consider  the  provocations  He  hath.  IH.  Why  doth 
God  exbecisb  so  much  patience  ?  1.  To  show  HimaeLf  appeasable.  2.  To 
wait  for  men's  repentance.  3.  For  the  propagation  of  mankind.  4.  For  the 
continuance  of  the  Church.  5.  To  manifest  the  equity  of  His  future  justice  on 
righteous  and  wicked.     For  instruction — I.  How  do  men  abuse  this  patienoe  ! 

2.  The  second  use  is  for  comfort.  3.  For  exhortation.  Meditate  often  on  the 
patience  of  Grod.  {S.  Charnocke,)  The  Ood  of  providence  a  forbearing  Ood  : — 
I.  Thb  admibablx  patibncb  of  thb  Divinb  Being.    The  prophet  adds  a  refer- 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU  ST  BATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ence  to  the  power  of  God,  and  His  punishment  of  the  wicked,  in  order  to  guard 
men  against  presuming  on  His  forbearance.  We  need  not  stay  to  prove  that 
slowness  to  anger  is  a  property  of  God.  Divine  patience  could  not  be  displayed 
unless  there  were  sin.  There  was  abundant  evidence  of  the  Divine  goodness 
before  man  transgressed ;  but  none  of  the  Divine  patience.  When  our  race 
rebelled,  Divine  patience  displayed  itself.  There  could  be  no  forbearance,  no 
long-suffering,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  now  use  the  word,  unless  there  were  the 
possibility  of  ultimate  pardon.  When  the  Almighty  spares  a  sinner.  He  is  even 
more  wonderful  than  when  He  builds  a  universe.  But  the  Divine  patience  is  in 
no  degree  opposed  to  the  justice  and  faithfulness  of  Grod.  It  leaves  room  for  the 
exercise  of  every  other  attribute.  II.  Thb  mystbriotjs  and  awsttl  chabactbb 
OF  Divine  providbntial  opbbations.  Grod  has  everything  at  His  disposal; 
and  He  accomplishes  His  purposes,  and  works  out  the  counsel  of  His  own  will, 
through  a  varied  instrumentality.  Our  text,  with  its  sublime  and  magnificent 
imagery,  is  fiill  of  consolation  to  the  afflicted  as  well  as  terror  to  the  impenitent. 
(H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  And  will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked. — Ood  both  forgiving 
and  unforgiving  : — Calvin's  translation  is,  "  Jehovah  is  slow  to  wrath,  and  great 
in  power,  and  by  clearing  He  will  not  clear."  God  is  irreconcilable  to  the 
impenitent.  He  deals  strictly  with  sinners,  so  as  to  remit  no  punishment.  He 
will  not  clear  by  clearing,  but  will  rigidly  execute  His  judgment.  There  seems 
to  be  some  inconsistency  in  saying  that  God  is  reconcilable  and  ready  to  pardon, 
and  yet  that  by  clearing  He  will  not  clear.  But  the  aspect  of  things  is  different. 
The  ungodly  ever  promise  impunity  to  themselves,  and  in  this  confidence  petu- 
lantly deride  God  Himself.  The  prophet  answers  them,  and  declares  that  there 
was  no  reason  why  they  thus  abused  God's  forbearance,  for  he  says,  By  clearing 
He  will  not  clear,  that  is,  the  reprobate  :  for  our  salvation  consists  in  a  free 
remission  of  sins  ;  and  whence  comes  our  righteousness  but  from  the  imputation 
of  God,  and  from  this — that  our  sins  are  buried  in  oblivion  ?  Yea,  our  whole 
clearing  depends  on  the  mercy  of  God.  But  God  then  exercises  also  His  judgment, 
and  by  clearing  He  clears,  when  He  remits  to  the  faithful  their  sins  ;  for  the 
faithful,  by  repentance,  anticipate  His  judgment ;  and  He  searches  their  hearts, 
that  He  may  clear  them.  As  then  God  absolves  none  but  the  condemned,  our 
prophet  here  rightly  declares,  that  "  by  clearing  He  will  not  clear,"  that  is.  He 
will  not  remit  their  sins,  except  He  tries  them,  and  discharges  the  office  of  a  judge  ; 
in  short,  that  no  sin  is  remitted  by  God  which  He  does  not  first  condemn.  But 
with  regard  to  the  reprobate,  who  are  wholly  obstinate  in  their  wickedness,  the 
prophet  justly  declares  this  to  them, — that  they  have  no  hope  of  pardon,  as  they 
perversely  adhere  to  their  own  devices,  and  think  that  they  can  escape  the  hand 
of  God  :  the  prophet  tells  them  that  they  are  deceived,  for  God  passes  by  nothing, 
and  will  not  blot  out  one  sin,  until  all  be  brought  to  mind.  {John  Calvin.) 
The  Lord  hath  His  way  in  the  whirlwind,  and  in  the  storm,  and  the  clouds  are 
the  dust  of  His  feet — The  way  of  the  Lord  in  the  whirlwind  and  in  the  storm  : — 
Philosophers  contemplate  hurricanes  as  natural  evils,  and  investigate  the  material 
causes  of  these  elementary  commotions.  But  Scriptm:*  raises  us  up  to  a  higher 
sphere  of  contemplation,  and  presents  to  our  minds  the  terrible  operations  of 
nature,  under  consideration  of  the  works  and  judgments  of  the  God  of  nature. 
He  commands  the  storm,  whirls  the  wind,  rules  the  sea,  and  superintends  the 
destructions  of  death.  The  literal  sense  of  the  text  appears  to  have  a  foundation 
in  fact,  and  may  be  traced  to  the  terrible  hurricane  in  which  the  God  of  Israel 
came  down,  and  by  a  mighty  angel  destroyed  the  Assjrrian  camp  before  Jerusalem. 
1.  The  way  of  the  Lord  in  these  elementary  and  violent  commotions  which  have 
been  described.  (1)  They  are  awaked  and  roused  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 
(2)  They  are  directed  by  the  will  of  God.  (3)  They  are  ruled  by  the  providence 
of  God.  (4)  They  are  restrained  and  moderated  by  the  power  of  God.  (5)  They 
are  calmed  by  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God.  Application — 1.  The  way  of  the 
Lord  in  whirlwinds  and  storms,  and  the  illustrations  of  it,  are  proofs  and  demon- 
strations to  the  world  of  His  existence  and  providence.  2.  Exhibitions  to  our 
senses  of  the  glory  and  terror  of  His  majesty.  3.  Declarations  to  the  world  that 
it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.  4.  Admonitions  to 
the  nations,  to  consider  the  miseries  of  war,  and  to  settle  among  themselves  those 
differences  for  which  they  have  taken  up  arms  against  one  another.  5.  Calls  to 
the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  to  turn  from  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness,  and 
to  serve  the  Lord  with  reverence  and  godly  fear.  Knowing  the  terrors,  and 
knowing  that  they  are  coming  upon  all  who  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the 


CHAP.  I.]  NAHUM.  5 

Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  would  persuade  you  who  are  living  in  sin 
and  unbelief,  to  foresee  the  great  day  of  His  wrath,  to  believe  your  guilt  and 
danger,  and  to  hide  yourselves  under  His  righteousness.  {A.  Shanks.)  The 
clonds  are  the  dust  of  Hia  feet — What  are  IIk  dovda  ? — I.  Thh  way  of  God  la 
OBifEBALLT  A  HIDDSK  OKE.  When  God  works  His  wonders,  He  always  conceals 
Himself.  Even  the  motion  of  His  feet  causes  clouds  to  arise.  II.  Gbhat  things 
WITH  trs  ABB  UTTLH  THINGS  WITH  GoD,  What  great  things  clouds  are  to  us  ! 
Great  things  are  they  ?    Nay,  they  are  only  the  dust  of  God's  feet.     III.  Thb 

MOST  TBRRIBLB  THINGS  IN  NATUBH  HAVB  NO  TBBBOB  TO  THE  CHILD  OF  GOD.  Some- 
times clouds  are  fearful  things  to  mariners.  But  there  is  nothing  terrible  now, 
because  it  is  only  the  dust  of  my  Father's  feet.  IV.  At.t.  things  in  natubb  abb 
CALCULATED  TO  TEEBiFY  THH  TJNGODLY  MAN.  Sinner,  hast  thou  ever  seen  the 
clouds  as  they  roll  along  the  sky  ?  Those  clouds  are  the  dust  of  the  feet  of  Jehovah. 
If  these  clouds  are  but  the  dust,  what  is  He  Himself  ?     (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  3-6.*  He  rebuketh  the  sea. — OocTt  power: — Here  is  a  description  of 
God's  power  unrivalled  in  its  sublimity  and  soul-stirring  foroe.  Power  belongeth 
unto  Grod.  It  is  absolute,  inexhaustible,  ever  and  everywhere  operative. 
"  He  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  His  power  is  here  presented  in  two 
aspects.  I.  As  opebateno  ibbesistibly  in  natubb.  1.  It  works  in  the  air. 
"  The  Lord  hath  His  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  the  storm,  and  the  clouds  are 
the  dust  of  His  feet."  2.  It  works  in  the  sea.  "  He  rebuketh  the  sea.  and  maketh 
it  dry,  and  drieth  up  all  the  rivers."  There  is  undoubtedly  an  allusion  here  to 
the  Red  Sea  and  the  Jordan.  "  He  holdeth  the  winds  in  His  fists,  and  the  waters 
in  the  hollow  of  His  hands."  His  "  way  is  in  the  sea,"  and  His  "  path  in  the  great 
waters."  3.  It  works  on  the  earth.  Bashan  languisheth,  and  Carmel  and  the 
flower  of  Lebanon  languisheth."  No  spots  in  Palestine  were  more  fruitfiil  than 
these  three.  But  their  life  and  their  growth  depended  on  the  results  of  God's 
power.  Nor  is  His  power  less  active  in  the  inorganic  parts  of  the  world.  "  The 
mountains  quake  at  Him,  and  the  hills  melt,  and  the  earth  is  burned  at  His  presence, 
yea,  the  world  and  all  that  dwell  therein."  God's  power  is  seen  in  aU  the  phen- 
omena of  the  material  world.  How  graphically  and  beautifully  is  this  presented 
in  Psalm  civ.  The  fact  that  God's  power  is  ever  acting  in  the  material  vmiverse 
is — (1)  The  most  philosophic  explanation  of  all  its  phenomena.  The  men  who 
ascribe  all  the  operations  of  nature  to  what  they  call  laws,  fail  to  satisfy  my 
intellect.  For  what  are  those  laws  ?  The  fact  that  God's  power  is  ever  acting 
is  (2)  The  most  hallowing  aspect  of  the  world  we  live  in.  God  is  in  aU.  Then 
walk  the  earth  in  reverence.  II.  As  ibbesistibly  opposed  to  the  wicked. 
"Who  can  stand  before  His  indignation?"  {HomUist.)  God's  control  over 
nature,  and  deliverance  of  His  people  : — In  these  words  there  is  a  striking  display 
of  the  power,  the  severity,  and  the  long-siifFering  and  mercy  of  God.  I.  God's 
OONTBOL  OVBB  THE  POWEBS  OF  NATUBB.  With  the  terrible  effects  of  His  wrath. 
He  ruleth  in  the  heavens  above,  and  in  the  earth  beneath,  and  in  the  waters  imder 
the  earth,  n.  The  essential  goodness  of  God's  chabacter,  and  the  all- 
sufficiency  OF  His  pbotkction.  Both  the  scenes  of  external  nature,  and  the 
general  condition  of  nations  and  individuals  will,  on  the  slightest  reflection,  con- 
vince you  of  the  prevailing  goodness  of  God.  K  there  is  any  doubt  on  the  subject, 
turn  to  the  book  of  inspiration.  HI.  The  means  whebeby  man  may  avebt 
GrOD's  angeb,  AND  SECUBE  His  FAVOUR  (ver.  7).  "  He  knoweth  them  that  are 
His."  Trust  in  Him  is  the  grand  means  to  be  employed.  The  faith  that  is 
wrought  in  your  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  This  faith  will  work  sub- 
mission to  His  will,  and  repentance  towards  Him.  This  faith  wUl  lay  hold 
of  the  stronghold  that  can  defend  in  the  day  of  trouble.  This  faith  worketh 
by  love.     (Hugh  Hughes,  B.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Who  can  stand  before  His  indignation  7 — Repentance  through  fear  : — 
This  and  similar  passages  address  themselves  directly  to  our  fears.  The 
term  *'  fear  of  God  "  in  Scripture,  does  not  always  bear  the  same  meaning. 
There  is  a  filial  fear,  and  there  is  a  servile  fear.  Servile  fear  gives  place 
to  filial  when  God  becomes  known  to  us  as  our  reconciled  Father  in  Christ. 
We  begm  with  the  dread  of  God.  The  dread  drives  us  to  the  Cross.  Mistakes 
are  often  made  as  to  that  fear  of  God  which  we  denominate  servile.  Christians 
are  afraid  of  fear,  looking  with  suspicion  on  any  part  which  fear  may  have  had 
in  moving  them  to  forsake  evil  ways,  as  if  it  were  a  base  and  imgenerous  agent^ 


6  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

which  ought  not  to  have  had  share  in  the  great  work  of  conversion.  Whilst 
80  much  of  the  Bible  speaks  of  fear,  fear  cannot  be  without  its  use  in  religion. 
I.  What  uisappbehbnsion  may  thbbs  bk  in  befebsnoe  to  the  use  of  feab  7 
Noah,  in  preparing  the  ark,  is  said  to  have  been  "  moved  with  fear."  It  was 
dread  of  impending  wrath.  Fears  may  rightly  move  us  to  genuine  and  acceptable 
repentance.  We  are  so  constituted  as  to  be  just  as  accessible  through  fear  as 
through  hope.  We  feel  that  with  the  great  mass  of  men  we  can  make  no  way 
without  appealing  to  their  fears.  Men  must  commonly  be  wrought  upon  by 
fear  through  what  they  are  incurring  rather  than  through  what  they  are  losing. 
We  must  come  down  upon  them  with  tidings  of  disaster.  Let  a  man  continue 
his  struggles  and  his  endeavours  even  though  he  feel  actuated  only  by  fear,  and 
in  due  time  other  motives  shall  gain  sway  in  his  breast.  II.  The  leoitimatb 
USE  of  such  awful  denunciations  as  these  in  the  text.  Or  the  way  in  which 
threatenings  ought  to  be  employed  by  the  preacher.  St.  Paul  says,  "  Knowing 
the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."  Neither  should  the  engine  of  terror 
be  otherwise  used  by  the  present  ministers  of  Christ.  Threatenings  are  to  be 
employed  as  inducements  to  the  laying  hold  on  the  succour  provided  by  Christ, 
{E.  MdviU,  B.D.) 

Ver.  7.  The  Lord  is  good,  a  stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble. — Goodneaa 
a  stronghold : — The  great  design  of  religion  is  to  bring  us  to  God  and  true 
blessedness.  In  order  to  this,  there  must  be  full  and  practical  confidence  in 
God, — submission  to  His  providence  and  law, — vmquestioning  repose  in  Himself. 
The  text,  though  not  possessing  the  form  of  a  promise,  is  a  declaration  concerning 
God  Himself,  which  includes  the  whole  system  of  promise.  Such  is  God.  If 
such  is  God,  then  happy  the  people  that  is  in  such  a  case ;  yea,  blessed  they  whose 
God  is  the  Lord.  I.  "  The  Lobd  is  good."  L  The  expression  reminds  us  of 
the  absolute  goodness  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  especially  of  the  Divine  benevo- 
lence. Whatever  goodness  there  is  in  the  creature  is  derived — God  is  its  source ; 
it  is  limited — in  God  it  is  unbounded  ;  dependent — in  Grod  it  is  essential  and 
independent;  mutable — in  God  it  is  changeless.  2.  The  active  character  of  the 
Divine  goodness.  He  "  doeth "  good.  In  inanimate  creation  are  displayed  His 
perfections.  All  living  beings  look  up  to  God.  He  universally  provides.  But 
we  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows.  And  He  cares  for  us.  3.  God's  good- 
ness in  its  suitableness  to  man's  present  condition.  He  is  a  sinner.  Providential 
blessings  continued.  Evil  tendencies  of  sin  checked.  A  wisely  ordered  scheme 
of  redemption ;  and  hence,  forbearance,  salvation.  II.  "A  stbonghold  en 
the  day  of  tbouble."  Figure  forcible  in  the  East,  where  predatory  expeditions 
are  usual.  God  a  "  stronghold  for  defence  of  His  people."  Recollect  what 
He  is  in  Himself.  All  His  attributes  are  employed  for  the  benefit  of  His  people. 
In  the  day  of  trouble  they  are  shut  up  with  God.  III.  "He  knoweth  them 
that  teust  in  Him."  To  trust  in  God  implies  satisfied  persuasion  He  will  be 
and  do  as  He  has  said.  Two  results — we  shall  seek  all  good  in  Him.  We  shall 
abide  with  Him.  Trust  in  God  and  doing  good  are  ever  conjoined — in  nature 
as  well  as  duty.  {Q.  Cuhitt.)  The  goodness  of  God  in  seasons  of  calamity: — 
This  book  is  "The  Burden  of  Nineveh."  Nahum  was  contemporary  with 
Hezekiah.  The  immediate  design  of  the  prophecy  was  to  minister  comfort  to 
the  afflicted  and  alarmed  Jews;  for  the  defeat  of  the  enemies  of  the  Chiuxjh 
involves  ite  deliverance.  The  name  of  the  prophet  indicates  this  design ; — it 
signifies  comfort  or  comforter.  The  text  teaches  that  the  Lord  is  good,  even 
in  seasons  of  calamity.  1.  Such  seasons  are  not  only  not  inconsistent  with  the 
Divine  goodness,  but  in  various  ways  manifest  it.  There  is  always  much  affliction 
in  the  world.  When  we  suffer  under  calamities,  imworthy  thoughts  of  God  are 
apt  to  rise  within  us,  and  especially  suspicions  of  His  goodness.  If  we  indulge 
these  suspicions,  they  will  alienate  oiu-  hearts  from  God  and  His  service,  and  prompt 
us  to  impatience,  murmuring,  and  impiety.  But  they  are  not  inconsistent  with 
God's  goodness.  The  punishment  of  transgression  is  not  inconsistent  with 
goodness.  Days  of  judgment  on  us  may  be  merciful  warnings  to  others.  They 
are  often  means  of  delivering  and  purifying  the  Church.  They  are  instructors 
and  monitors  to  future  ages.  2.  In  seasons  of  calamity  the  Lord  is  good,  for  He 
reveals  Himself  to  us  as  a  stronghold,  and  invites  us  to  flee  to  Him  for  safety 
and  comfort.  3.  In  days  of  trouble  the  Lord  ia  good,  for  He  affectionately  watehes 
over  all  who  honour  Him  with  their  trust.  (Janus  Stark,  D.D.)  The  Divine, 
goodness  a  refuge  in  trouble : — These  words  have  been  well  compared  to  a  biu«t 


CHAP.  I.]  NAHVM.  7 

of  simshine  on  a  cloudy  tempestuous  day.  The  prophet  opens  his  commission 
with  setting  forth  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  But  on  a  sudden  this  appalling  strain 
ceases.  As  though  impelled  by  an  inward  feeling  which  had  obliged  him  to  look 
around  for  something  to  uphold  him  amid  these  terrors,  he  thinks  and  speaks 
of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  I.  What  this  goodness  is.  We  are  not  to  under- 
Btand  here  the  Divine  purity,  or  holiness,  but  the  benevolence,  the  kindness, 
the  graciousness  of  the  Lord.  The  goodness  of  God,  taken  in  this  sense,  is  that 
perfection  of  His  nature  which  inclines  Him  to  deal  graciously  with  His  creatures  ; 
rich  and  happy  in  Himself,  to  give  out  of  His  riches  and  happiness,  and  make 
His  creatures  partakers  of  them,  as  far  as  their  different  capacities  will  admit. 
This  goodness  of  God  is,  like  every  other  perfection  of  His  natiu-e,  infinite.  By 
this  I  mean,  it  cannot  be  added  to,  it  could  not  be  greater.  And  His  is  holy 
goodness.  It  always  moves  and  acts  in  conformity  with  His  just  and  holy  natiu-e. 
Here  it  is  that  we  make  such  mistakes  in  thinking  of  God.  We  take  one  of  His 
attributes,  anfl  we  look  on  it  alone,  as  though  God  had  no  other  attribute  but 
that ;  and  then  a  mystery  comes  over  His  nature  and  doings.  This  goodness 
is  also  self-moved,  spontaneous,  free.  It  requires  nothing  in  us  to  call  it  into 
exercise  towards  us ;  it  requires  nothing  whatever  out  of  God  to  bring  it  into 
operation.  It  is  not  the  Cross  and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  that  makes  God  good 
and  gracious  to  us  sinners.  He  was  good  and  gracious  to  us  before.  It  was 
God's  love  to  us  that  found  for  us  a  Saviour.  The  Cross  and  mediation  of  Christ 
is  the  way  the  Divine  goodness  has  opened  for  itself  into  ovu"  world.  It  is  the 
channel  through  which  it  flows  to  us,  not  the  fountain  whence  it  takes  its  rise. 
II.  What  this  God  of  goodness  is  to  His  people  in  the  day  of  their  trouble. 
*'  A  stronghold."  This  language  conveys  the  idea  of  protection  and  defence. 
The  countries  in  which  the  Old  Scriptures  were  written  were  scenes  of  almost 
incessant  warfare.  Men  were  continually  exposed  to  hostile  inroads  and  invasions, 
and  were  obliged  to  have  fortresses  or  holds  to  flee  to  for  security.  God  is  this 
refuge  to  the  troubled  soul  in  various  ways.  Sometimes  keeping  impending 
trouble  off.  At  other  times  removing  His  people  out  of  reach  of  trouble.  More 
frequently  giving  them  strength  to  bear  their  trouble.  The  prophet  here  intimates, 
that  the  Lord's  goodness  shall  be  the  stronghold,  the  strength  and  the  support. 
The  mere  thought  of  His  goodness  is  to  be  a  consolation  and  a  stay.  III.  What 
assurance  they  who  trust  Him  have  that  He  will  be  this  to  them.  "  He 
knoweth  them  that  trust  in  Him."  This  brings  the  infinite  knowledge  of  God 
to  bear  upon  their  case.  When  I  make  a  living  Being  my  refuge,  when  I  fly  to 
Him  to  protect  me,  it  is  clear  that  He  must  know  I  am  come  to  Him  for  protection, 
and  know  too  what  my  dangers  are  that  He  may  shield  me  against  them.  He 
knows  both  us  and  our  troubles.  It  is  impossible  for  words  to  exaggerate  the 
attention  God  pays  to  His  suffering  people.  The  mere  act  of  trusting  in  God 
eeems  to  be  something  spoken  of  here  as  something  like  a  claim  on  His  attention 
and  care.  Then  if  you  are  in  affliction,  encourage  yovu-selves  in  the  Lord  your 
God.  He  is  all-sufficient  in  Himself.  Make  Him  the  centre  of  your  affections, 
desires,  and  consolations.  Flee  to  Him  to  hide  you.  (C  Bradley.)  God  a 
refuge  : — At  Holyhead  there  is  a  splendid  breakwater  which  cost  a  million  and 
a  half  of  money.  Rising  thirty  feet  above  the  waves  it  defies  their  utmost  fury. 
We  are  not  surprised  that  it  should  be  built  on  so  massive  a  scale,  for  in  a  great 
etorm  each  wave  strikes  with  the  sledge  hammer  force  of  three  tons  to  the  square 
foot.  Though  a  hurricane  blow,  and  the  sea  be  mountains  high,  shipping  .sheltered 
behind  it  ride  in  perfect  safety.  This  is  a  type  of  the  security  God  is  to  those 
who  trust  Him.  Qod  is  our  refuge  : — A  heathen  could  say,  when  a  bird,  scared 
by  a  hawk,  flew  into  his  bosom  for  refuge,  "  I  wiU  not  kill  thee,  nor  betray  thee 
to  thine  enemy,  seeing  thou  fliest  to  me  for  sanctuary  "  :  much  less  will  God  either 
elay  or  give  up  the  soul  that  takes  sanctuary  in  His  name.  ( W.  Gurnall.)  Secure 
in  God  : — Readers  of  Darwin  will  recall  the  description  he  gives  of  a  marine  plant 
which  rises  from  a  depth  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  feet,  and  floats 
on  the  great  breakers  of  the  western  ocean.  The  stem  of  this  plant  is  less  than 
an  inch  through ;  yet  it  grows  and  thrives  and  holds  its  OAvn  against  the  fierce 
emitings  and  pressures  of  breakers  which  no  masses  of  rock,  however  hard,  could 
long  withstand.  What  is  the  secret  of  this  marvellous  resistance  and  endurance  ? 
How  can  this  slender  plant  face  the  fury  of  the  elements  so  successfully,  and,  in 
Bpite  of  storm  and  tempests,  keep  its  hold,  and  perpetuate  itself  from  century 
to  centvu-y  ?  The  answer  has  leaped  to  every  lip :  It  reaches  down  into  the  still 
depths,  where  it  fixes  its  grasp  after  the  fashion  of  the  instinct  that  has  been 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

put  into  it,  to  the  naked  rocks  ;  and  no  commotion  of  the  waters  can  shake  it 
from  its  fastenings.  When  a  man  has  deep  and  inner  clingings  to  God,  when 
the  roots  of  his  life  go  down  and  take  hold  on  God,  mere  surface  agitation  and 
pressures  will  not  overcome  him.  He  may  be  floated  here  and  there  within  a 
given  sweep  like  a  plant  bosomed  on  the  sea,  and  there  may  be  times  when  it 
is  very  rough  and  the  strain  is  great,  but  he  will  siu-vive  it  all  and  preserve  his 
integrity.  {F.  A.  Noble.)  Ood's  shielding  love : — Astronomers  tell  us  that 
every  year  millions  of  meteoric  bodies  make  their  way  towards  our  earth  with 
a  speed  many  times  greater  than  that  of  the  swiftest  cannon-ball.  These,  beyond 
doubt,  would  strike  the  earth  and  destroy  its  inhabitants  but  for  the  air  which 
surrounds  it.  That  air,  soft  and  yielding  as  it  seems,  offers  so  powerful  a  resistance 
to  the  swift  motion  of  the  falling  meteors  that  they  become  vaporised  through 
increased  heat,  and  if  they  reach  the  earth  at  all,  it  is  only  in  the  form  of  minute 
meteoric  dust.  This  physical  fact  has  its  counterpart  in  the  spiritual  realm. 
The  influences  of  evil  which  assail  the  Christian  as  he  goes  through  the  world 
are  often  enough  to  crush  and  kill  in  him  all  spiritual  life  and  joy  and  beauty, 
but  round  about  him  there  is  the  atmosphere  of  the  Divine  love,  and  that  love 
resists  all  evil,  being  as  a  consuming  fire,  keeping  back  from  contact  with  the 
trusting  soul  everything  that  would  destroy  its  purity  and  blast  its  blessedness. 
The  love  of  God  is  a  perfect  protection  to  every  Christian  believer ;  with  it  around 
us  we  can  walk  with  imtrembling  tread,  knowing  that  no  "  weapon  formed  against 
us  can  prosper."  (Great  Thoughts.)  God  a  refuge  : — I  once  heard  of  a  lonely 
traveller  who  sought  to  cross  one  of  the  western  prairies.  The  only  thing  he  had 
to  guide  him  was  a  path  that  had  been  made  by  other  travellers  in  the  rank  grass. 
But  he  had  not  gone  very  far  before  the  snow  began  to  fall,  at  first  in  scattered 
flakes,  like  large  white  feathers,  but  by  and  by  with  thick  and  blinding  fierceness. 
He  soon  lost  every  trace  of  the  path  along  which  he  travelled.  He  was  lost, 
bewildered,  and  as  the  darkness  began  to  gather  around  him  he  was  greatly 
alarmed.  He  cried  out  for  help,  but  the  wild  winds  only  laughed  at  him  as  hey 
swept  by.  He  was  almost  in  despair  when  he  saw  through  the  blinding  flakes 
a  flickering  light.  Toward  it  he  bent  his  exhausted  energies.  Stumbling  and 
falling  over  the  drifts  that  had  accumulated  here  and  there,  he  at  length  came 
to  a  settler's  cottage.  Can  you  imagine  his  thankfulness  and  joy  when  he  found 
the  storm  behind  him,  in  that  friendly  hut  ?  He  was  safe.  He  was  happy. 
In  the  moment  of  greatest  peril  he  had  foimd  a  refuge.  Now  that  is  just  what 
God  is  to  every  traveller  caught  in  the  storm  of  life.  If  you  but  see  the  light 
that  streams  out  from  the  windows  of  His  palace,  of  His  heart,  and  follow  it, 
you  will  be  safe  from  harm.  The  door  of  mercy  is  always  open  ;  the  fires  of  His 
love  and  forgiveness  are  always  glowing ;  the  welcome  which  He  gives  is  always 
abundant.  God's  ways  with  friends  and  enemies: — The  sentiment  of  the  passage 
is,  that  the  same  power  which  the  Almighty  displays  for  the  destruction  of  His 
enemies,  He  employs  for  the  protection  of  His  friends.  I.  The  benignity  of 
THE  EVER-BLESSED  GoD.  "  The  Lord  is  good."  Goodness  is  associated  with 
every  idea  it  is  possible  to  form  of  the  Most  High.  Goodness  is  the  perfection 
of  His  nature,  the  foundation  of  His  actions,  and  comprehends  all  His  other  attri- 
butes. When  His  goodne-ss  supplies  the  needy,  it  is  bounty;  when  it  visits 
the  miserable,  it  is  pity  ;  when  it  pardons  the  guilty,  it  is  mercy  ;  when  it  performs 
His  promises,  it  is  faithfulness  ;  when  it  protects  our  persons,  it  is  His  power ; 
when  it  orders  events  to  our  advantage,  it  is  His  wisdom  ;  and  when  it  converts 
and  saves  the  soul,  it  is  His  grace.  But  where  shall  we  look  for  its  especial  display  ? 
Not  in  providence  but  in  redemption.  His  goodness  here  is  love.  This  love 
is — 1.  Comprehensive  in  its  objects.  2.  Satisfying  in  its  nature.  3.  Exalting 
in  its  influence.  4.  Perpetual  in  its  existence.  II.  The  refuge  He  affords 
His  afflicted  people.  "  He  is  a  stronghold."  1.  The  distressing  period  to 
which  the  text  refers.  Such  as  national  calamities  ;  family  trouble  ;  soul  trouble. 
2.  The  refuge  unfolded  to  our  view.  A  stronghold,  i.e.,  a  fortification,  a  place 
of  strength  and  defence.  III.  The  approbation  He  expresses  in  their  con- 
fidence. "  He  knoweth  them  that  trust  in  Him."  It  is  supposed  that  we 
betake  ourselves  to  the  shelter  which  Divine  goodness  provides  for  our  safety. 
A  refuge,  unless  it  be  embraced,  is  no  refuge  at  all.  1.  What  is  the  trust  of  which 
the  text  speaks  ?  It  is  the  fruit  of  faith.  2.  What  is  the  import  of  the  terra, 
"  He  knoweth  them "  ?  It  is  designed  to  express  a  distinguishing  and  an 
approving  knowledge.  He  regards  their  confidence  in  Him  with  peculiar  favour. 
(J.  E.  Good.)        How  good  God  is  .' — Two  kinds  of  persona  are  spoken  of  here. 


CHAP.  I.]  NAHUM.  9 

I.  Thosb  who  abb  IK  TROTTBUC.  1.  Trouble  may  be  the  result  of  our  own 
imprudence.  Or  perhaps  worse,  of  our  sinfulness.  2.  It  may  arise  from  family 
or  business  perplexities.  Sometimes  trouble  is  allowed  to  come  and  go  unheeded. 
The  rod  is  felt,  but  not  the  hand  that  brought  it  down.  Sometimes  trouble  is 
received  angrily  or  peevishly.     It  is  very  hard  to  contend  against  these  feelings. 

II.  The  characters  that  calmly  wait  for  God  ;  expecting  some  further  develop- 
ment of  His  mind,  and  not  venturing  to  judge  according  to  present  appearances. 
1.  Trusting  in  God  supposes  there  is  some  occasion  for  trust.  The  work  of  faith 
is  to  trust  in  God  when  all  outward  things  go  wrong,  and  there  is  nothing  but 
the  Word  of  God  to  rely  on.  2.  Trusting  in  God  is  the  highest  manifestation 
of  real  principle.  3.  Trusting  in  God  is  not  an  adventure.  His  revealed  will 
puts  a  peradventure  out  of  the  question.  (W.  G.  Barrett.)  The  Lord's  favour 
to  those  who  trust  in  Him: — The  Bible  abounds  with  the  most  sublime  descriptions 
of  God,  and  represents,  in  a  variety  of  passages.  His  awful  character  and  glorioua 
perfections.  *0n  reading  the  description  in  the  passage  connected  with  the  text 
it  may  appear  to  contain  a  contradiction.  It  may  seem  to  represent  the  Almighty 
under  two  different  characters.  We  may  be  ready  to  think  that  He  cannot  be 
at  once  "  a  jealous  God  "  and  "  good,  slow  to  anger."  There  is  no  real  difficulty. 
God  is  in  Himself  the  same,  infinitely  glorious  in  all  perfections.  The  seeming 
differences  in  His  character  arise  from  the  different  characters  of  those  with  whom 
He  has  to  deal.  In  this  respect  His  character,  like  the  cloud  which  accompanied 
Israel,  has  a  dark  side  and  a  bright  side.  To  His  adversaries  He  is  a  "  jealous 
God."     To  His  people  He  is   "  rich  in  mercy."     The  description  here  given — 

1.  Of  the  people  of  God.  "  They  that  trust  in  Him."  Trust  is  often  used 
for  the  whole  of  religion.  It  signifies  a  confidence  in  His  power  and  faithfulness 
for  protection  and  support,  and  for  a  supply  of  all  things  necessary  to  life  and 
godliness.      Things   which  characterise  this   confidence   are — 1.   It  is  habitual. 

2.  It  is  practical.  3.  It  is  a  patient  and  persevering  trust.  4.  It  is  a  solid  and 
well  -  grounded  confidence.  Trust  in  God  must  be  founded  on  His  promise. 
II.  Of  the  favour  of  God  to  His  people.  1.  "  The  Lord  is  good."  God  is 
goodness.  Even  His  severity  against  sin  is  the  effect  of  His  goodness.  2.  He 
is  "  a  stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble."  The  Lord's  people  are  not  exempt  from 
trouble.  But  if  they  have  peculiar  trials  they  have  peculiar  support  under 
them.  3.  The  Lord  "  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  He  sees,  distinguishes, 
approves.  Especially  has  He  respect  to  them  as  putting  their  trust  in  Him.  He 
sees  the  humble  confidence  with  which  they  repose  in  His  truth  and  faithful- 
ness.    Surely  blessed  are  the  people  who  make  the  Lord  their  trust.     {E.  Cooper.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  He  knoweth  them  that  trust  in  Him;  but  with  an  ovemumin^ 
flood  He  will  make  an  utter  end  of  the  place  thereof.  —  Opposite  types  of 
human  character,  and  opposite  lines  of  Divine  procedure  : — I.  Opposite  types  of 
CHARACTER.  1.  The  friends  of  God.  (1)  They  trust  in  Him.  This  is  the  universal 
character  of  the  good  in  all  ages.  They  trust  His  love  ever  to  provide  for  them ; 
His  wisdom  as  their  infallible  guide  ;  and  His  power  as  their  strength  and  shield. 
(2)  He  acknowledges  them.  "  And  He  knoweth."  This  means,  that  He  recoc- 
nises  them  as  His  loyal  subjects  and  loving  children,  His  people.  In  Hosea  xiii.°5 
He  saith,  "  I  did  know  thee  in  the  wilderness,"  which  means,  "  I  did  acknowledu-e 
thee  and  took  care  of  thee  "  !  The  words  imply  the  cognisance  of  special  sympathy 
with  the  just.  Here  we  have  the  enemies  of  God.  "  Darkness  shall  pursue  His 
enemies."  Those  who  pursue  a  course  of  life  directly  opposed  to  the  moral  laws 
of  heaven,  whatever  they  may  say,  are  His  enemies.  How  numerous  are  God's 
enemies  !  II.  Two  opposite  lines  of  Divine  procedttre.  God's  procedure  is 
very  different  towards  these  two  opposite  classes  of  men.  I.  He  affords  protec- 
tion to  the  one.  When  the  hosts  of  Sennacherib  were  approaching  Jerusalem, 
Hezekiah,  the  king,  imder  Divine  inspiration,  said  to  the  people,  "  Be  strong 
and  cotirageous,  be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  for  the  king  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all 
the  multitude  that  is  with  him  :  for  there  be  more  with  us  than  with  him.  With 
him  is  an  arm  of  flesh,  but  with  us  is  the  Lord  our  God  to  help  us,  and  to  fight 
our  battles.  And  the  people  rested  themselves  upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah, 
king  of  Judah."  Thus  it  is  ever;  God  is  always  the  refuge  and  strength  of  His 
people  in  times  of  tribulation.  As  a  refuge  He  is — (1)  Ever  accessible.  However 
suddenly  the  storm  may  come,  the  refuge  is  at  your  side,  the  door  is  open.  "  I 
will  never  leave  thee,"  &c.  He  is — (2)  Ever  secure.  Once  entered,  and  no  injury 
-oan  follow.     He  sends  destruction  to  the  other.     "  But  with  an  overrunning 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

flood  He  will  make  an  utter  end  of  the  place  thereof,  and  darkness  shall  pursue 
His  enemies."  The  primary  allusion  here,  no  doubt,  is  to  the  way  which 
Nineveh  was  captured  by  the  means  of  the  Babylonians.  Conclusion — The 
grand  question  for  every  man  to  ask  is.  How  do  I  stand  in  relation  to  God  1 
(Homilist.)  The  varied  destinies  of  men  : — How  various  are  the  destinies  of 
men  I  One  goes  to  honour  and  life,  another  to  disgrace  and  death.  There  are 
two  lakes  high  up  in  the  Alps,  which  lie  so  near  that  the  bystander  may  throw 
a  stone  from  the  one  to  the  other.  Lago  Blanco  the  one  is  named,  or  the  White 
Loch,  because  it  is  of  a  light  green  colour ;  while  its  neighbour  is  Lago  Nero,  or 
the  Black  Loch,  because  it  is  dark  and  gloomy  looking.  But  though  they  are 
EO  close,  they  are  on  different  inclines  of  the  watershed.  Lago  Blanco  sends  its 
overflow  down  to  the  Adriatic,  but  Lago  Nero  is  connected  with  the  Black  Sea. 
1  look  at  the  one,  and  I  think  about  Venice  and  sunny  Italy  ;  I  look  at  the  other, 
and  I  think  about  Sebastopol  and  the  wintry  Crimea.  So  I  may  be  side  by  side 
in  one  home,  in  one  business,  in  one  Christian  congregation,  with  a  man  who  is 
yet  on  the  different  slope  of  the  watershed.  We  receive  the  same  messages  of 
warning  and  of  salvation.  We  enjoy  much  the  same  opportunities.  But  one 
of  us  believes  God,  and  the  other  does  not.  One  of  us  passes  into  glorious  liberty, 
and  the  other  into  darkness  and  despair.  Ah,  let  me  watch  in  which  direction 
I  turn.     (A.  Smellie,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  What  do  ye  imagine  against  the  Lord  ? — Sin  : — I.  Thb  essence 
OP  SIN  IS  SUGGESTED.  It  is  hostility  to  God.  It  is  opposition  to  the  laws,  pur- 
poses. Spirit  of  God.  It  involves — 1.  The  basest  of  ingratitude.  2.  The  greatest 
injustice.  3.  Impious  presumption.  II.  The  seat  of  sin  is  suggested.  It  is 
in  the  mind.  Sin  is  not  language,  not  mere  actions.  Sin  is  in  the  deep  mute 
thoughts  of  the  hearts.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  lH.  The 
FOLLY  OF  sin  IS  SUGGESTED.  It  is  Opposition  to  Omnipotence.  In  opposing 
Him,  remember — 1.  He  will  completely  ruin  you.  2.  He  wiU  completely  ruin 
you,  whatever  the  kind  of  resistance  you  may  offer.  Fighting  against  God  is  a 
mad  fight.  (Homilist.)  Folly  of  opposing  God : — Sin,  when  it  is  mightiest 
and  most  successful,  is  transitory.  Lord  Rosebery  has  been  telling  us  the  story 
of  Napoleon  the  Great.  His  energy,  his  intellect,  his  genius  were  such  that  he 
"  enlarges  the  scope  of  human  achievement."  Once  he  "  fought  the  Austrians 
for  five  consecutive  days  without  taking  off  his  boots  or  closing  his  eyes."  "  He 
was  as  much  the  first  ruler  as  the  first  captain  in  the  world,"  "  Ordinary  measures 
do  not  apply  to  him ;  we  seem  to  be  trying  to  spsin  a  mountain  with  a  tape." 
Napoleon  was  the  largest  personal  force  that  has  come  into  the  modem  European 
world.  But  his  career  ended  in  defeat  and  exile.  At  forty-six  the  man  who 
had  dreamed  of  governing  a  continent  was  a  captive.  His  conquests  left  no 
mark.  The  kings  whom  he  made  lost  their  thrones.  France  was  beggared  and 
exhausted  by  him.  Why  T  Because  God  was  not  his  God.  "  I  am  not  a  man 
like  other  men,"  he  asserted  himself ;  "  the  laws  of  morality  could  not  be  intended 
to  apply  to  me."  Therefore  I  will  fear  nothing,  though  wickedness  seems  to 
prosper  for  a  time.  Such  prosperity  has  no  permanence  about  it.  It  is  better 
to  walk  humbly  with  God  than  to  stand  alone  on  the  proudest  eminence  in  the 
world.  (A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  While  they  be  folden  together  as  thorns.— National 
undergrowth  : — Illustrate  by  the  undergrowth  in  a  great  forest.  It  must  be  cut 
down  before  anything  hopeful  can  be  done  with  the  soil  There  is  a  national 
moral  undergrowth :  a  brutal,  vile,  wretched  population  of  a  most  repulsive 
and  dangerous  character.  Ignorance,  sensuality,  violence,  and  irreligion,  fostered 
and  perpetuated  by  drunkenness,  forms  a  dismal  moral  undergrowth,  where 
human  tigers  watch  for  prey,  where  foul  habits  breed  disease,  where  women 
lose  all  beauty  and  joy,  and  'where  children — the  offspring  of  immoral  parents — 
are  like  "  a  nest  of  unclean  birds."  What  is  to  be  done  with  this  deadly  moral 
imdergrowth  ?  Soft  measures,  easy-going,  self-indulgent  Christianity  are  of  no 
use  here.  1.  Let  us  take  increased  care  that  good  and  precious  seed  shall  be 
sown  in  the  hearts  of  the  young.  This  is  of  paramount  and  urgent  importance. 
Take  care  of  the  little  ones.  2.  Seek  to  reach  the  people  who  never  enter  places 
of  worship.  3.  Endeavour  to  abate  incentives  to  drunkenness.  4.  Consecrate 
yourselves  afresh  to  God,  and  the  work  of  His  kingdom.     (George  W.  McCree.) 

Vera.  11-14.  There  ia  one  come  out  of  thee,  that  ImAgrlneth  evil  against  the 
Lord,  a  wicked  counsellor. — Corrupt  kings  : — These  words  suggest  a  few  thoughta^ 


CHAP.  I.]  NAEUM.  11 

concerning  human  kings  and  kingdoms.  T.  Human  kings  are  sometimes  terribly 
COBEUTT.  "  There  is  one  come  out  of  thee,  that  imagineth  evil  against  the  Lord, 
a  wicked  coimsellor."  This  evidently  means  Sennacherib,  the  king  of  Nineveh. 
n.  Corrupt  kings  often  ruin  their  kingdoms.  "  Though  they  be  quiet,  and 
likewise  many,  yet  thus  shall  they  be  cut  down,  when  he  shall  pass  through. 
Though  I  have  afflicted  thee,  I  will  afflict  thee  no  more."  These  words  seemed 
to  be  addressed  to  Judah  concerning  the  utter  destruction  that  will  befall  their 
enemies,  and  their  consequent  deliverance  from  all  fear  from  that  quarter.  It 
was  here  said  they  should  be  destroyed — 1.  Notwithstanding  their  military 
completeness.  "  Though  they  be  quiet."  The  word  "  quiet "  means  complete. 
No  doubt  the  military  organisation,  discipline,  and  equipment  of  Sennacherib's 
mighty  army,  as  he  led  them  up  to  attack  Jerusalem,  were  as  complete  as  the 
intelligence,  the  art,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  age  could  make  them.  Not- 
withstanding this,  ruin  befell  them.  2.  Notwithstanding  their  numerical  force. 
"  Likewise  many."  IH.  The  ruin  op  corrupt  kingdoms  is  a  blessing  to  thk 
oppressed.  "  Yoke "  here  refers  to  the  tribute  imposed  upon  Hezekiah  by 
Sennacherib.  And  so  it  ever  is,  when  despotism  has  fallen,  the  oppressed  rise  to 
liberty.  Conclusion — 1.  Realise  the  truth  of  prophecy.  2.  Realise  the  import- 
ance of  promoting  education  among  the  people.     (Homilist.) 

Yer.  1 5.  Behold  npon  the  monntaliis  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings. — 
Three  things  worthy  of  note : — I.  Peace  proclaimed.  Glorious  to  the  ears  of  the 
men  of  Jerusalem  must  have  been  the  intelligence  that  their  great  enemy  was 
destroyed,  that  the  Assyrian  hosts  were  crushed,  and  now  peace  had  come.  A 
proclamation  of  national  peace  is  "  good  tidings."  But  the  procl9.mation  of 
moral  peace  is  still  more  delightful.  "  How  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that 
preach  the  Gospel  of  peace,  and  bring  glad  tidings  of  good  things  !  "  (Rom.  x.  15). 
"  My  peace  I  give  wnto  you,  not  as  the  world  giveth  give  I  unto  you."  II.  Worship 
ENJOINED.  '  0  Judah,  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy  vows."  "  During 
the  Assyrian  invasion  the  inhabitants  of  Judah  were  cut  off  from  all  access  to  the 
metropolis  ;  now  they  would  be  at  liberty  to  proceed  thither  as  usual  in  order  to 
observe  their  religious  rites,  and  they  are  here  commanded  to  do  so."  1.  War 
disturbs  religious  observances.  As  peace  in  nature  is  the  time  to  cultivate  your 
ground  and  sow  your  seed,  peace  in  the  nation  is  the  time  to  promote  growth 
in  religion  and  virtue.  2.  In  war  men  are  disposed  to  make  religious  vows. 
in.  Enemies  vanquished.  "  For  the  wicked  shall  no  more  pass  through  thee  ; 
he  is  utterly  cut  off."  {Homilist.)  Peace  proclaimed: — "At  the  close  of  the 
last  war  with  Great  Britain,"  says  an  American  writer,  "  the  prospects  of  our 
nation  were  shrouded  in  gloom.  Our  harbours  were  blockaded.  Commvmication 
coastwise  between  our  ports  was  cut  off.  Our  immense  annual  products  were 
mouldering  in  our  warehouses.  Our  currency  was  reduced  to  irredeemable  paper. 
Differences  of  political  opinion  were  embittering  the  peace  of  many  households. 
No  one  could  predict  when  the  contest  would  terminate,  or  discover  the  means 
by  which  it  could  much  longer  be  protracted.  It  happened  that  one  afternoon 
in  February  a  ship  was  discovered  in  the  offing,  which  was  supposed  to  be  a  cartel, 
bringing  home  our  commissioners  at  Ghent  from  their  unsuccessful  mission. 
The  sun  had  set  gloomily  before  any  intelligence  from  the  vessel  had  reached  the 
city.  Expectation  became  painfully  intense  as  the  hours  of  darkness  drew  on. 
At  length  a  boat  reached  the  wharf,  aimouncing  the  fact  that  a  treaty  of  peace 
had  been  signed,  and  was  waiting  for  nothing  but  the  action  of  our  Government 
to  become  a  law.  The  men  on  whose  ears  these  words  first  fell  rushed  in  breath- 
less haste  into  the  city  to  repeat  them  to  their  friends,  shouting  as  they  ran  through 
the  streets,  '  Peace  !  Peace  !  Peace  ! '  Every  one  who  heard  the  soimd  repeated 
it.  From  house  to  house,  from  street  to  street,  the  news  spread  with  electric 
rapidity.  The  whole  city  was  in  commotion.  Men  bearing  lighted  torches  were 
flying  to  and  fro,  shouting,  '  Peace  !  Peace  !  Peace  !  '  When  the  rapture  had 
partially  subsided,  one  idea  occupied  every  mind.  But  few  men  slept  that  night. 
In  groups  they  were  gathered  in  the  streets,  and  by  the  fireside,  beguihng  the 
hours  of  midnight  by  reminding  each  other  that  the  agony  of  war  was  over,  and 
that  a  worn-out  and  distracted  country  was  about  to  enter  again  upon  its 
wonted  career  of  prosperity.  Thus,  every  one  becoming  a  herald,  the  news  soon 
reached  every  man,  woman,  and  child  in  the  city,  and  filled  their  hearts  with 
joy." 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Vbbs.    1,  2.  He  tliat  daslietli  in  pieces  is  come  up  before  thy  face. — God 

the  Vindicator  of  the  oppressed : — I.  The  oppression  of  the  chosen  people 
BY  THE  Assyrians.  1.  This  is  expressed  figuratively.  "  The  emptiers  have 
emptied  them  out "  (ver.  2),  had  exhausted  their  resources,  as  the  contents  of 
a  vessel  poured  out  until  every  drain  had  been  withdra%vn,  so  had  both  Israel 
and  Judah  been  impoverished  by  the  AssjTians.  "  And  marred  their  vine 
branches."  Ancient  Israel  was  often  described  as  God's  vineyard  (Isa.  v.  1  ; 
Psa.  Ixxx.  9).  This  vineyard  the  foe  had  ruthlessly  invaded,  casting  down  and 
injuring  its  fruit-bearing  trees.  2.  These  figurative  representations  are  sus- 
tained by  historical  fact.  The  more  familiar  we  become  with  Assyrian  history 
the  more  do  we  trace  in  that  vast  heathen  power  the  prevalence  of  the  haughty, 
overbearing  spirit.  Its  rulers  and  people  vainly  supposed  that  national  great- 
ness consisted  in  the  possession  of  might  to  be  used  in  oppressing  other  nations 
and  peoples.  To  be  able  to  depict  upon  the  walls  of  the  palaces  of  Ninus  battle 
scenes  indicative  of  military  triumph,  accompanied  by  great  spoil  and  cruel  chastise- 
ment inflicted  upon  their  adversaries,  seems  to  have  been  their  highest  ambi- 
tion. Their  whole  relationship  to  Israel  and  Judah  was  based  upon  this  principle. 
The  favoured  of  heaven,  having  forsaken  their  God,  and  hence  lost  His  protecting 
care,  turned  in  their  exigencies  to  Assyria  for  aid,  but  only  to  find,  in  this  supposed 
helper  against  their  foes,  a  more  powerful  enemy.  In  this  way  the  kingdom 
of  Israel  was  first  made  tributary  to  Assyria  by  Paul  (2  Kings  xv.  17-20),  and, 
soon  after,  its  tribes  were  carried  away  into  captivity  by  Shalmaneser  (2  Kings 
xvii.  3-23),  whilst  the  kingdom  of  Judah  in  like  manner  became  compelled  to 
acknowledge  the  lordship  of  Tilgath-Pilneser  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  16-21).  Hezekiah 
sought  to  cast  ofF  the  Assjrian  yoke,  but  this  only  resulted  in  the  nation,  in 
Nahum's  time,  being  brought  into  circumstances  of  extreme  peril  (2  Klings  xviii, 
13-17),  and  from  which  eventually  supernatural  help  alone  was  able  to  deliver 
it  (Isa.  xxxvii.  36).  II.  Divine  interposition  promised  on  behalf  of  the 
OPPRESSED.  (Ver.  2.)  Such  interposition  had  in  a  measure  but  recently  taken 
place  (Isa.  xxxvii.  36).  "  The  angel  of  death  "  had  "  breathed  in  the  face  of 
the  foe,"  and  had  caused  "  the  might  of  the  Gentile  "  to  "  melt  like  snow," 
and  the  oppressor  to  return  humbled  to  his  capital  (Isa.  xxxvii.  37).  The  time, 
however,  for  the  complete  and  final  interposition  of  heaven  had  not  yet  arrived. 
Still,  it  should  come.  The  seer  in  rapt  vision  beheld  it  as  though  it  had  been 
then  in  operation,  and  for  the  encouragement  of  the  oppressed  he  declared  that 
the  Divine  eye  observed  all  that  was  being  endured,  that  the  Lord  Almighty 
still  regarded  them  with  favour  (ver.  2),  and  would  yet  make  them  "  an  eternal 
excellency,  a  joy  of  many  generations  "  (Isa.  Ix.  15).  III.  This  Divine  intbr- 
position  eventually  to  be  experienced  viewed  as  carrying  with  it  the 
entire  overthrow  of  the  oppressor.  (Ver.  1.)  Asshur  should  in  due  course 
be  brought  low,  and  the  yoke  of  bondage  should  fall  from  off  the  necks  of  the 
captives.  In  "  the  day  of  visitation  " — 1.  Agents  should  not  be  wanting  to 
carry  out  the  Divine  behests.  The  defection  of  the  Assyrian  general,  the  forces 
of  the  King  of  Media,  and  the  overflowing  of  the  Tigris,  should  all  combine  to 
bring  about  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  purpose  ;  and  these  forces  are 
here  personified  as  "  the  dasher  in  pieces  "  (ver.  1).  2.  Resistance  should  be 
in  vain.  They  might  "  keep  the  munition,  watch  the  ways,"  &c.  (ver.  1),  but 
all  to  no  purpose.  The  proud  power  must  inevitably  fall,  and  in  its  overthrow 
proclamation  be  made  that  it  is  not  by  means  of  tyranny  and  oppression  and 
wrong-doing  that  any  nation  can  become  truly  great  and  lastingly  established, 
but  by  the  prevalence  in  its  midst  of  liberty,  virtue,  and  righteousness.  Nineveh 
in  her  downfall 

"...  seems  to  cry  aloud 
To  warn  the  mighty  and  instruct  the  proud 
That  of  the  great,  neglecting  to  be  just, 
Heaven  in  a  moment  makes  a  heap  of  dust." 

(S.D.HiUman,B.A.) 

Vers.  3-13.  The  shield  of  His  mig^hty  men  is  made  red. — The  downfall 
of  Nineveh,  as  illustrative  of  the  Divine  and  the  human  elements  in  revelation  : 
—There  are  two  elements  in  the  Bible,  the  Divine  and  the  human.     God  speaks 


CHAP,  n.]  NAHUM.  13 

to  us  in  every  page,  nor  does  He  speak  the  less  emphatically,  but  all  the  more 
so,  in  that  He  addresses  us  through  men  possessing  throbbing  hearts,  and  who 
were  passing  through  experiences  like  oxjr  own.  The  account  given  in  these  verses 
of  the  predicted  ruin  of  Nineveh  must  be  taken  as  a  whole,  and  in  the  graphic 
picture  here  presented  to  us  we  have  strikingly  illustrated  this  twofold  character 
of  the  Scriptures  of  eternal  truth.     I.  The  account  contatnkd  heee  of  the 

PBEDICTED  OVERTHROW  OF  NiNBVEH  SERVES  TO  ILLUSTRATE  THE  DlVTNE  ELE- 
MENT IN  REVELATION.  Nahum  flourished  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  (b.o.  725- 
696),  and  Nineveh  was  destroyed  between  B.C.  609  and  606.  He  lived  and 
prophesied  thus  say  a  hundred  years  before  the  occurrence  of  the  events  he  so 
vividly  described,  and  when  the  Assyrian  power  was  in  the  zenith  of  its  pro- 
sperity. His  announcements  were  very  distinct  and  definite,  and  by  placing 
these  and  the  records  of  secular  historians  given  at  a  subsequent  period  side 
by  side,  we  see  how  minutely  the  predictions  of  this  seer  have  been  fulfilled,  and 
that  hence,  ia  making  these,  he  must  have  been  God's  messenger,  uttering, 
not  his  own  thoughts,  but  those  which  had  been  communicated  to  him  by  "  visions 
and  revelations  of  the  Lord."  In  chap.  i.  10  we  read,  "  For  while  they  be  folden 
together  as  thorns,  and  while  they  are  drunken  as  drunkards,  they  shall  be  devoured 
as  stubble  fuUy  dry."  The  secular  historian  writes :  "  While  all  the  Assyrian 
army  were  feasting  for  their  former  victories,  those  about  Arbuces,  being  informed 
by  some  deserters  of  the  negligence  and  drunkenness  in  the  camp  of  the  enemies, 
assaulted  them  unexpectedly  by  night,  and  falling  orderly  on  them  disorderly, 
and  prepared  on  them  tmprepared,  became  masters  of  the  camp,  and  slew  many 
of  the  soldiers  and  drove  the  rest  into  the  city  "  (Diodorus  Siculus,  bk.  ii.  p.  80). 
In  chap.  ii.  6  we  read,  "  The  gates  of  the  rivers  shall  be  opened,  and  the  palace 
shall  be  dissolved."  The  secular  historian  writes:  "  There  was  an  oracle  among 
the  Assyrians  that  Nineveh  should  not  be  taken  till  the  river  became  an  enemy 
to  the  city ;  and  in  the  third  year  of  the  siege  the  river,  being  swollen  with  con- 
tinual rains,  overflowed  part  of  the  city,  and  broke  down  the  wall  for  twenty 
furlongs.  Then  the  king,  thinking  that  the  oracle  was  fulfilled,  and  the  river 
had  become  an  enemy  to  the  city,  built  a  large  funeral  pile  in  the  palace,  and, 
collecting  together  all  his  wealth  and  his  concubines  and  eunuchs,  burnt  himself 
and  the  palace  with  them  all,  and  the  enemy  entered  at  the  breach  that  the  waters 
had  made,  and  took  the  city  "  (Diodorus  Siculus,  bk.  ii.  p.  80).  In  chap.  ii.  9 
the  prophet,  as  though  addressing  the  adversaries  of  Nineveh,  said,  "  Take  ye 
the  spoil  of  silver,  take  the  spoil  of  gold  :  for  there  is  none  end  of  the  store  and 
glory  out  of  all  the  pleasant  furniture  "  ;  and  the  same  secular  historian  already 
quoted  informs  us  that  the  conquerors  carried  many  talents  of  gold  and  silver 
to  Ecbatana,  the  royal  city  of  the  Medes,  No  language  could  be  more  explicit 
than  that  in  which  Nahum  predicted  the  total  destruction  of  the  city  (chap.  ii. 
10-13,  iii.  7,  15-17).  The  prophet  Zephaniah  used  words  equally  plain  (ii. 
13-15).  Their  utterances  would  have  appeared  very  strange  to  the  Ninevites 
at  the  time  they  were  spoken ;  as  strange,  indeed,  as  similar  utterances  would 
appear  if  addressed  at  the  present  time  to  the  inhabitants  of  otir  own  metropolis  ; 
but  they  were  true,  nevertheless,  and  the  facts  of  history  furnish  abundant  con- 
firmations. For  upwards  of  two  thousand  years  after  its  overthrow  Nineveh 
lay  buried  in  the  earth.     II.  The  accoitnt  contained  herb  of  the  predicted 

OVERTHROW  OF  NiNEVBH  SERVES  TO  ILLTTSTRATE  THE  HUMAN  ELEMENT  IN  REVELA- 
TION. Holy  Scripture  is  remarkable  in  its  variety — not  variety  in  piu-pose,  for 
this  is  single  throughout,  but  variety  in  expression.  History,  prophecy,  poetry, 
parable,  proverb,  miracle,  biography,  vision,  epistle,  are  all  laid  under  tribute. 
As  there  is  a  Divine  element  in  the  Bible,  so  also  there  is  a  human  element  therein- 
Biblical  critics  are  agreed  in  recognising  "  the  classic  beauty  and  the  finished 
elegance  "  of  the  style  of  Nahum,  and  in  assigning  to  this  writer  a  place  in  the 
first  rank  of  Hebrew  literatiu-e.  "  The  variety  in  his  method  of  presenting  ideas 
discovers  much  poetic  talent  in  the  prophet.  The  reader  of  taste  and  sensi- 
bility will  be  affected  by  the  entire  structure  of  the  poem,  by  the  agreeable  manner 
in  which  the  ideas  are  brought  forward,  by  the  flexibility  of  the  expressions, 
the  roundness  of  his  turns,  the  delicate  outlines  of  his  flgures,  by  the  strength 
and  delicacy,  and  the  expression  of  sympathy  and  greatness,  which  diffuse  them- 
selves over  the  whole  subject"  (De  Wette's  Introduction).  His  description 
of  the  siege  and  fall  of  Nineveh,  contained  in  this  chapter  (vers.  3-13),  is  wonder- 
fully vivid.  As  we  read  the  account,  even  at  this  distant  date,  the  stirring  scenefi 
seem  to  live  again,  and  to  pass  in  review  before  us.     We  see  the  attacking  warriors 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

in  their  scarlet  attire  and  with  their  chariots  armed  with  sharp  instruments  of 
steel  (ver.  3),  and  the  defenders  of  the  city,  suddenly  startled,  hastening  their 
preparations,  their  chariots  in  the  hurry  jostling  against  each  other  in  the  streets, 
and  the  gallants  summoned  by  the  king  hastening  to  the  ramparts,  which  the 
foe  is  seeking  with  battering-rams  to  cast  down  (vers.  4,  5).  We  behold  the 
overflowing  of  the  river,  facilitating  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  and  paralysing 
the  people  by  reason  of  the  popular  tradition  now  seemingly  being  fulfilled  (ver.  6). 
We  witness  the  inhabitants  brought  low  in  shame  and  dishonour,  moaning  like 
a  captive  woman  (ver.  7),  or  fleeing  for  their  very  life  in  hopelessness  and  despair, 
conscious  that  resistance  is  vain  (ver.  8).  We  view  the  spoiling  of  the  city — 
the  conqueror  carrying  away  the  gold  and  the  silver  to  the  Median  capital, 
trophies  of  victory  (ver.  9).  Finally,  we  picture  to  ourselves  the  prophets  of 
the  Lord  gazing  upon  the  waste  and  desolation,  reflecting  upon  the  proud  being 
abased,  their  offspring  cut  off,  their  gains  confiscated,  their  boastful  messengers 
eilenced,  and  ascribing  all  the  terrible  reverses  thus  experienced  to  the  righteous 
retribution  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  (vers.  10-13) ;  and  we  feel,  as  we  linger  upon 
the  scene  thus  graphically  portrayed,  that  whilst  rejoicing  in  this  volume  of 
revelation  as  having  been  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  as  containing  Divine 
lessons  abounding  both  in  encouragement  and  warning,  we  may  well  prize  it 
also  even  on  the  lower  ground  of  its  literary  merit,  and  heartUy  rejoice  in  the 
infimite  variety  of  human  powers  and  endowments  here  consecrated  to  the  pre- 
sentation of  the  loftiest  and  grandest  spiritual  teaching.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  13.  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. — Man  in- 
curring the  Divine  disjdeasure  : — This  attitude  of  God  towards  man — I.  Implies 
WBONG-DcrNG  ON  MAu's  PABT.  God  is  not  thus  adverse  to  man  for  naught. 
"  His  delights  are  with  the  sons  of  men  "  (Pro v.  viii.  31).  Sin  alienates  man 
from  God,  and  causes  God  to  be  righteously  displeased  with  man.  II.  Involves 
MAN  IN  PRESENT  DISTRESS.  Man  Cannot  be  at  ease  whilst  imder  the  ban  of 
Jehovah.  "  In  His  favour  is  life  "  (Psa.  xxx.  5).  Separation  from  Him  through 
sin  means  disquietude  and  unrest.  "  The  worst  troubler  in  the  world  is  a  wilful 
heart."  "  Conscience  makes  cowards  of  us  all ! "  "  The  heart  melteth,  the 
knees  smite  together  "  (ver.  10).  III.  Resulting  in  ultimate  ruin  to  such 
AS  WILFULLY  PERSIST  IN  SIN.  God  is  "  the  Lord  of  hosts."  All  power  is  His. 
"  Who  shall  stand  when  He  is  angry  ?  "  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  7).  All  have  sinned,  and 
hence  have  incurred  the  displeasure  of  Him  who  "  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
iniquity,"  but  in  Christ,  whose  day  the  seers  saw  afar  off,  God  is  reconciled 
to  man  ;  so  that  the  distress  and  ruin  indicated  can  alone  result  from  man  refusing 
to  be  reconciled  unto  God.  {Ibid.)  And  the  voice  of  thy  messengers  shall 
no  more  be  heard  (with  chap.  i.  15). — The  messengers  of  Nineveh  and  the 
messengers  of  Zion :  a  comparison : — "  And  the  voice  of  thy  messengers 
shall  no  more  be  heard  "  (ver.  13) ;  "  Behold  upon  the  mountains  the  feet  of 
him  that  bringeth  good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace  !  "  (chap.  i.  15).  The 
messengers  of  Nineveh  and  the  messengers  of  Zion  are  alluded  to  in  these  passages. 
A  comparison  of  these  respective  messengers  may  prove  suggestive  and  useful 
in  its  application  to  certain  developments  in  these  modern  times.  From  the 
Second  Book  of  Kings  and  the  Second  Book  of  Chronicles  we  learn  that  the  heralds 
or  messengers  of  Nineveh  cherished  the  spirit  of  blasphemy  with  reference  to  the 
God  of  heaven.  The  faith  of  the  pious  Hebrews  consisted  in  the  recognition  of 
the  one  living  and  true  God,  and  of  His  providential  care  over  all  His  creatures  ; 
and  it  was  against  this  bulwark  that  the  emissaries  of  Assyria  constantly  directed 
their  assaults  in  words  foul  and  filthy  (see  Rabshakeh's  appeal  to  the  Jews, 
2  Kings  xviii.  33-35  ;  and  his  letter,  2  Chron.  xxxii.  17).  The  great  and  dis- 
tinguishing characteristic  of  the  messengers  of  Zion  was  loyalty  to  the  God 
of  heaven.  Their  feet  stood  upon  the  mountains,  and  their  voice  proclaimed 
to  the  people,  "  Behold  your  God  !  "  (Isa.  xl.  9) ;  "  Thy  God  reigneth  !  "  (Isa. 
Hi.  7).  In  the  present  age  there  are  messengers  who  boldly  declare  their  non- 
acceptance  of  the  teaching  that  recognises  the  Divine  Being  and  His  working, 
and  who  seek  to  disseminate  their  views,  and  in  doing  so  are  not  particular  if 
they  blaspheme  the  God  of  heaven.  And  whilst  there  are  such  messengers  in 
the  world  doing  their  injurious  work,  there  are  also  those  who  are  thoroughly 
loyal  to  the  King  of  kings,  who  delight  to  show  forth  His  praise,  to  tell  the  story 
of  His  love  in  the  gift  and  work  of  Christ,  and  to  seek  to  draw  men  in  loving 
obedience  to  His  authority  and  wilL     Note  certain  contrasts,  then,  suggested; 


CHAP.  III.]  NAHUM.  15 

thus — I.  Captivity  in  contbast  with  freedom.  The  messengers  of  Nineveh 
approached  Jerusalem,  to  which  Sennacherib  was  laying  siege,  but  they  bore 
no  tidings  of  liberty.  They  claimed  full  submission,  and  declared  that  even 
this  must  be  followed  by  captivity  in  a  strange  land  (2  Kings  xviii.  31,  32).  The 
assurance  of  ultimate  deliverance  came  from  the  messengers  of  the  Lord  (chap.  L 
12,  13).  Sin  is  bondage.  Transgressors  are  slaves.  And  scepticism  has  nothing 
to  offer  such  by  way  of  helping  them  to  escape.  Lo  !  the  messengers  of  Zioa 
come.  They  tell  him  of  the  great  Father's  unwearying  love,  the  Saviour's 
obedience  unto  the  death  of  the  Cross,  the  energising  and  sanctifying  Spirit  ready 
to  gird  him  with  all-sufficient  strength.  II.  Strife  in  contrast  to  peace. 
The  messengers  of  Nineveh  to  Judah  had  nothing  conciliatory  to  convey ;  they 
told  only  of  contention  and  strife.  The  assurance  that  peace  should  ultimately 
be  enjoyed  came  to  the  anxious  King  of  Judah  from  God's  messengers,  who 
published  peace.  The  messengers  of  scepticism  have  no  proclamation  of  peace 
to  make.  It  'is  the  privilege,  however,  of  the  messengers  of  Zion  to  proclaim 
those  spiritual  and  eternal  verities  in  which  the  heart  may  securely  and  tranquilly 
repose,  and  to  point  to  him  who  can  quell  every  storm  and  give  rest  unto  the  soul. 
III.  Gloom  in  contrast  to  gladness.  Hezekiah  and  his  people  were  in  ex- 
tremity ;  it  was  to  them  a  time  of  "  trouble  "  ;  but  not  a  ray  of  hope  came  to 
them  through  the  messengers  of  Nineveh.  Their  worst  fears  were  confirmed ; 
the  foe  was  unrelenting.  Their  hope  was  in  God,  and  in  the  words  spoken  by  His 
holy  prophets.  So  in  the  extremities  of  life — in  sickness  and  sorrow,  and  especially 
at  life's  close,  hope  springs  not  from  unbelief,  but  from  the  words  God  has  addressed 
to  us  through  His  servants.  The  Gospel  has  no  rival  in  such  seasons.  Scepticism 
has  no  voice  then,  or,  if  it  speaks,  it  but  deepens  the  prevailing  gloom ;  but  the 
good  tidings  God  has  revealed  dispels  our  sadness  and  fills  the  soul  with  immortal 
hopes.  Happy  messengers  who  are  thus  enabled  to  "  comfort  all  that  mourn,"  &c. 
((Isa.  Ixi.  2).  IV.  Shame  in  contrast  to  honour.  The  voice  of  all  messengers  who 
blaspheme  the  holy  name  of  God  "  shall  be  no  more  heard,"  for  God  will  put  them 
to  silence  ;  but  voices  publishing  His  love  and  grace  shall  go  sounding  on  through 
the  ages, — the  bright  succession  of  proclaimers  shall  not  cease.  Growing  numbers 
shall  be  raised  up  who  shall  find  their  way  to  all  nations  and  kindreds  and  tribes, 
until  the  glad  tidings  shall  reach  every  shore,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  fill 
the  earth  (Isa.  xi.  9).    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  IIL 

Veb.  10.  Yet  was  she  carried  away,  she  went  Into  captivity. — Environ- 
ments : — These  were  certainly  close  environments ;  but  whence  had  they  come  ? 
From  still  closer  ones,  like  those  of  pride  and  enervating  habits  among  a  luxurious 
people  ;  from  neglect  of  the  higher  demands  of  the  spiritual  life ;  from  Ht  ing 
too  much  on  the  lower  plane,  which  prophets  in  all  ages  have  warned  against. 
It  did  not  require  miraculous  power  then  to  discern  what  causes  would  be  sure 
to  prodiice  disintegration  of  a  city  or  nation.  It  does  not  require  any  super- 
human gift  to-day.  Every  clear  seeing  mind  knows  that  dissipation  will  make 
nations  and  individuals  weak  and  easily  overcome.  Certain  courses  will  tend  to 
strengthen  and  fortify ;  opposite  courses  will  produce  final  disaster.  There  is 
no  power  enduring  and  sufficient  but  the  power  of  the  Spirit ;  and  if  this  be 
neglected  there  remains,  of  course,  nothing  with  which  to  repel  invasions.  This 
is  true  of  a  single  individual,  or  of  many  united.  Not  the  force  from  without, 
but  the  weakness  within,  should  cause  apprehension.  We  have  often  seen  good 
work  done  in  overcoming  environments.  Hard,  crushing,  discouraging  environ- 
ments do  not  hinder  brave  spirits.  There  have  been  crises  in  the  world's  history 
when  the  massed  power  of  dauntless  spirit  has  finally  swept  away  seemingly 
immovable  environment.  It  is  not  in  the  nature  of  our  surroundings  to  hold 
us  caged  for  ever,  or  even  for  this  life.  There  are  no  chains  for  the  free  spirit. 
Let  us  beware  of  the  chains  of  pride,  resentment,  envy,  of  criticism  and  complaint, 
and  break  those  that  we  can  break.     {Mrs.  E.  M.  Hichoh.) 

Ver.  17.  Wliich  camp  in  the  hedges  in  the  cold  day. — Locusts  affected  hy  the 
cold : — Pazton  and  others  have  remarked  that  there  is  much  difficulty  in  this 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

passage  ;  but  to  anyone  who  has  attentively  watched  the  habits  of  the  locusts 
it  is  not  only  plain,  but  very  striking.  In  the  evenings,  as  soon  as  the  air  became 
cool,  at  Abeih,  they  literally  camped  in  the  hedges  and  loose  stone  walls,  covering 
them  over  like  a  swarm  of  bees  settled  on  a  bush.  There  they  remained  untU 
the  next  day's  sun  waxed  warm,  when  they  again  commenced  to  march.  One 
of  the  days  on  which  they  were  passing  was  quite  cool,  and  the  locusts  scarcely 
moved  at  all  from  their  camps,  and  multitudes  remained  actually  stationary 
imtil  the  next  morning.  Those  that  did  march  crept  along  very  heavily,  as  if 
cramped  and  stifE ;  but  in  a  hot  day  they  hurried  forward  in  a  very  earnest, 
lively  manner.  It  is  an  aggravation  of  the  calamity  if  the  weather  continues 
cool;  for  then  they  prolong  their  stay,  and  do  fac  more  damage.  {Thomaon's 
"  Land  and  Book.) 


INTEODUCTION  TO   HABAKKUK. 

I  THINK  that  an  argument  for  the  divinity  of  Scripture  might  be  found  in  ite 
silence  as  well  as  in  its  speech.  It  draws  a  veil,  thick  and  impenetrable,  over  very 
much  which  men,  left  to  themselves,  would  have  been  certain  to  bring  forth  to  the 
light  of  open  day.  How  remarkable,  for  example,  is  the  reticence  of  the  sacred 
writers  about  themselves  !  But  for  their  names  at  the  commencement  of  their 
books  we  should  never  have  known  in  many  instances  to  whom  we  owed  these 
Scriptures  which  are  "  beyond  all  Greek,  beyond  all  Roman  fame."  That  is 
not  the  manner  of  men.  They  are  very  prone  to  obtrude  themselves.  The 
workman  does  not  care  to  lose  his  own  personaUty  in  the  work  which  he  performs, 
or  to  be  remembered  only  by  what  he  has  done  ;  he  likes  to  carve  his  name  over 
his  achievement  in  bold  and  striking  letters  which  all  can  read.  We  are  too  self- 
conscious,  too  proud,  too  anxious  for  praise,  to  be  mere  voices  crying  in  the  wilder- 
ness for  God's  glory  and  the  world's  good.  There  is  no  better  biography  in 
existence  than  that  which  James  Boswell  wrote  of  Dr.  Johnson  ;  it  makes  the 
very  man  hve  before  us  once  more :  but  the  biographer  shows  himself  at  every 
turn  ;  he  must  be  seen  and  known  and  recognised  in  the  company  of  his  hero, 
for  good  or  for  ill,  in  wisdom  and  in  folly ;  rather  than  go  unnoticed,  he  will 
reveal  to  us  his  own  weaknesses  and  foibles.  But  the  methods  of  the  human 
authors  of  the  Bible  are  altogether  different.  God  inspired  them  ;  and,  if  there 
were  any  uprisings  within  their  minds  of  the  egotism  and  pride  which  are  so  natural 
to  us.  His  Spirit  reproved  and  suppressed  the  unworthy  thought.  To  disclose 
God  in  His  character  and  will,  they  wrote  ;  and  therefore  they  kept  themselves 
sedulously  in  the  background.  Thoughts  like  these  can  scarcely  fail  to  be  awakened 
within  us  in  connection  with  this  prophecy  of  Habakkuk.  Short  as  it  is,  it  is  one 
of  the  subUmest  books  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  speaks  a  great  and  lofty  language. 
It  throbs  with  an  intense  and  ardent  feeling.  Yet  how  exceedingly  little  we  know 
of  its  author  !  He  is  a  mere  name  to  us,  and  not  a  very  pleasant  or  melodious 
name,  as  we  imagine,  although  we  may  find  some  cause  to  modify  that  opinion 
by  and  by.  So  much  were  the  old  Jewish  rabbis  impressed  by  this  doubt  and 
uncertainty  that  enveloped  the  prophet — so  unwilling  were  they  to  rest  content 
with  the  obscurity  in  which  Habakkuk  himself  was  perfectly  satisfied  to  remain — 
that  they  framed  all  manner  of  legends  about  him.  They  declared  that  his  mother 
was  the  Shunammite  woman  who  built  a  little  chamber  in  the  wall  of  her  house 
for  Elisha,  the  man  of  God ;  that  thus  he  was  himself  the  lad  to  whom  death 
came  so  suddenly  in  the  harvest-field  as  he  played  among  the  reapers,  but  whom 
Ehsha  restored  to  life  and  gave  back  to  his  mother ;  that,  in  after  years,  when 
the  Holy  Land  was  overrun  and  conquered  by  the  Chaldeans,  he  fled  to  a  place 
of  hiding  in  Arabia,  and  returned  again  when  the  foreigner  had  gone,  to  live  for  a 
long  period  in  peace  and  to  die  at  last  in  his  own  hom£.  It  is  all  a  tissue  of  fables, 
originating  in  man's  unwillingness  to  be  contented  with  the  silence  of  Scripture. 
One  or  two  facts,  however,  about  the  prophet  it  is  possible  for  us  to  gather.  So 
let  us  think  first  of  the  man,  and  then  of  the  book  which  he  has  bequeathed  to  us. 

iU 


INTRODUCTION  TO  HABAKKUK. 


I.  His  name  is  full  of  meaning.  To  all  of  us,  I  suppose,  it  is  a  name  which 
sounds  harsh  and  untuneful  in  the  extreme  ;  and  others  beside  ourselves  have 
had  the  same  feeling.  About  the  rough  and  uncouth  title  one  good  expositor  of 
our  own  writes,  "  We  apprehend  that  this  name  has  been  a  great  disparagement 
to  our  prophet,  and  has  operated  in  no  faint  degree  in  causing  many  readers  to 
hold  the  book  in  less  regard  than  they  might  otherwise  have  done."  But  such 
readers  have  been  very  superficial,  and  have  not  looked  below  the  surface  of  things. 
For  this  ragged  name  has  a  beautiful  significance.  It  is  hke  some  costly  stone, 
unlovely  and  apparently  worthless  at  first  sight,  but  needing  only  to  be  examined 
and  polished  to  brighten  into  the  lustre  of  the  diamond  or  to  deepen  into  the  glow 
of  the  ruby.  Habakkuk  means  one  who  "  strongly  enfolds,"  or  one  who  "  firmly 
and  closely  and  tenderly  embraces."  Luther  puts  a  delightfully  simple  inter- 
pretation upon  the  word.  The  prophet,  he  says,  "  embraces  his  people  and  takes 
them  to  his  arms ;  that  is,  he  comforts  them  and  lifts  them  up  as  one  embraces  a 
weeping  child,  to  quiet  it  with  the  assurance  that,  if  God  will,  all  shall  be  right 
ere  long."  But  while  it  is  true  that  Habakkuk  had  a  very  deep  and  fond  love 
for  his  people,  being  patriot  no  less  than  prophet,  I  prefer  to  regard  the  name  as 
descriptive  of  his  attitude  towards  God.  He  embraces  the  Almighty  ;  he  clings 
with  fast  and  faithful  hold  to  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  "  in  God's  breast, 
his  own  abode,  he  lays  his  spirit  down."  That  is  no  fanciful  meaning  to  extract 
from  the  Hebrew  word.  It  indicates  the  real  character  of  the  man.  In  the 
fellowship  of  the  Old  Testament  seers  Habakkuk  stands  out  pre-eminent  as  the 
prophet  of  faith.  More  than  most,  he  believed  God.  His  was  not  always  a 
victorious  and  jubilant  faith,  an  unclouded  assurance.  Sometimes  it  had  a  sore 
battle  to  wage  with  doubt.  Frequently  he  was  cast  down.  It  was  an  enigma 
to  him,  as  it  has  been  to  many,  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  should  act  as  He 
did.  "  Thou  that  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,"  he  exclaimed,  "  wherefore 
lookest  Thou  upon  them  that  deal  treacherously,  and  boldest  Thy  peace  when 
the  wicked  swalloweth  up  the  man  that  is  more  righteous  than  he  ?  "  But  it 
was  the  very  simphcity  of  his  dependence,  the  very  thoroughness  of  his  confidence, 
which  led  him  to  speak  in  these  expostulating  tones.  He  could  not  satisfy  himself, 
as  we  do,  with  empty  phrases,  telhng  his  heart  that  no  doubt  the  mystery  would 
be  solved  in  good  time,  and  that  all  was  for  the  best.  J  .t  because  he  had  an 
absolute  faith  in  God's  rectitude  and  mercy — just  because  he  leaned  on  Him  entirely 
and  had  an  unquestioning  trust  in  His  character  and  ways,  it  was  puzzhng  to 
him  to  see  the  unrighteous  prosperous  and  the  good  downtrodden.  And  when 
the  gloom  and  the  perplexity  have  passed,  Habakkuk's  eyes  are  still  directed 
heavenward ;  his  affections  are  above.  Through  the  calm  and  the  storm  ;  in 
the  daytime  of  peace  and  the  night- season  of  sorrow  ;  when  the  fields  wave  with 
the  yellow  grain,  and  when  the  fig-tree  does  not  blossom  and  there  is  no  fruit 
in  the  vines — he  keeps  the  even  tenor  of  his  way  ;  his  heart  is  fixed  ;  he  rests 
in  the  Lord  and  waits  patiently  for  Him.  We  learn  from  his  prophecy,  too,  what 
his  calling  and  occupation  were.  The  closing  chapter  of  his  book  contains  a 
magnificent  ode  or  hymn  in  praise  of  God — a  hymn  to  which  he  has  appended  the 
words.  "  For  the  chief  musician,  on  my  stringed  instruments,"  meaning  thereby, 
no  doubt,  "  Let  this  ode  be  sung  in  the  Temple  service  to  the  sound  of  the  harps, 
viols,  psalteries,  which  I  am  myself  accustomed  to  employ  when  I  minister  in 
God's  sanctuary."  And  so  it  has  been  reasonably  inferred  that  Habakkuk  was 
an  accomplished  musician  as  well  as  a  poet  of  the  highest  order — that  he  belonged 
to  those  bands  of  Levites  who  were  set  apart  to  sing  and  play  before  the  Lord — 
that  perhaps  he  was  even  a  choir-master  in  the  holy  house  on  Zion,  one  whose 
duty  and  privilege  it  was  to  arrange  appropriate  harmonies  for  the  psalms  and 
hymns  and  spiritual  songs  which  were  sung  there,  and  to  see  that  they  were 
rendered  well  and  fitly,  with  grave  sweet  melody.  We  may  think  of  liim  going 
out  and  in,  like  Samuel,  in  the  sacred  courts  ;  praising  the  Lord  with  heart  and 
voice  ;  delighting  to  join  in  the  glad  and  solemn  and  thrilling  music  of  the  hallowed 
place.  He  tells  us — does  he  not  ? — that  we  should  worship  God  by  our  songs  a.'* 
well  as  invoke  His  mercy  and  succour  by  our  prayers.  God  looks  for  this  glad 
and  open  tribute,  and  we  disappoint  Him  when  we  withhold  it  or  when  we  render 
it  only  in  a  formal  way.  Let  Habakkuk  teach  us  to  ])raise  the  Lord,  for  He  is 
good  and  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  One  other  question  about  the  man  we 
can  decide,  in  part  at  least — the  question  of  the  age  in  Jewish  history  at  which 
he  lived  and  prophesied.  There  has,  indeed,  been  a  difFerence  of  view  regarding 
the  matter.     Habakkuk  has  received  an  earlier  date  from  some,  who  have  placed 


INTRODUCTION  TO  HABAKKVK. 


him  in  the  closing  years  of  Manasseh — the  years  when  the  king,  as  quaint  Thomas 
Fuller  says,  "  being  carried  into  a  strange  land,  came  home  to  himself  "  ;  a  later 
date  from  some  others,  who  assign  his  preaching  and  activity  to  the  days  of 
Jehoiakim  when  Judea  was  tottering  to  its  fall,  so  making  him  one  of  the  prophets 
of  the  Captivity.  But  we  may  follow  those  who  steer  a  middle  course,  and  who 
fix  upon  the  reign  of  Josiah  as  the  most  probable  period  of  Habakkuk's  life  and 
work.  His  prophecies  were  spoken,  we  know,  before  the  Babylonian  invasion, 
for  he  predicts  it  in  graphic  and  powerful  words.  But  that  invasion  took  place 
very  soon  after  good  King  Josiah  had  fallen  in  battle  with  Egypt,  and  after  all 
Jerusalem  and  Judah  had  mourned  for  him  who  seemed  to  be  taken  away  from 
the  evil  to  come.  What  more  likely,  then,  than  that  this  seer  and  singer  hved  and 
wrote  and  sang  in  the  short  epoch  of  prosperity  which  preceded  the  catastrophe  ?  -^ 
In  those  days  there  was  stern  work  to  be  done  by  the  preacher  of  righteousness  and 
judgment ;  for  though  it  was  a  time  of  revival,  wickedness  still  dwelt  in  the  land, 
and  God's  punishment  was  not  far  awaj'.  II.  Let  us  turn  to  look  at  the  book 
AVHICH  HE  HAS  LEFT  TO  US.  It  divides  itself  into  two  parts,  the  one  containing 
the  first  and  second  chapters,  the  other  the  sublime  poem  of  the  third.  Biit  the 
opening  division  breaks  itself  up,  again,  into  two  lesser  sections,  in  the  earlier 
of  which  God's  judgment  on  Judah  is  described ;  in  the  later,  God's  judgment  on 
the  Chaldeans  who  had  led  Judah  captive  and  wasted  and  destroyed  it.  Habakkuk, 
the  prophet  of  faith,  shows  us,  first  of  all,  faith  struggling  and  perplexed  at  the 
sight  of  the  sufferings  measured  out  to  the  Lord's  chosen  people  ;  and  then  faith 
filled  with  a  stern  joy  when  it  beholds  the  utter  overthrow  of  the  conqueror  and 
tyrant.  And  in  the  end  he  sings  a  song  which  has  faith  for  its  theme — how  it 
takes  comfort  amid  the  fears  and  glooms  of  the  present  from  the  deMverances 
of  the  past;  how  it  bates  not  a  jot  of  heart  or  hope;  how  it  rejoices  in  the  Lord 
and  exults  for  joy  in  the  God  of  salvation.  1.  Habakkuk  speaks  of  the  doom 
that  is  about  to  fall  on  his  own  country  and  people.  It  is  a  daily  grief  to  him, 
he  says,  to  see  the  violence  and  oppression  and  strife  and  plunder  which  prevail  i 
around  him,  the  powerlessness  of  the  law,  the  crookedness  of  justice,  the  entrapping 
of  the  righteous  by  the  wicked.  He  finds  it  hard  to  understand  why  God  does 
not  interpose  to  take  vengeance  on  the  evil  and  to  diadem  the  right.  "  How  long 
shall  I  cry,"  he  complains,  "  and  Thou  wilt  not  hear  ?  "  But,  even  while  he 
wonders  and  questions,  God  answers  that  a  day  of  terrible  retribution  is  fast  ^ 
approaching;  that  He  is  about  to  raise  up  the  Chaldeans,  a  bitter  and  hasty 
nation,  against  His  erring  children ;  that  a  sore  and  fearful  experience,  a  furnace 
heated  seven  times,  lies  before  them  in  the  near  future.  It  is  a  vivid  picture 
which  the  prophet  draws  of  these  Chaldeans,  the  instruments  of  God's  anger. 
What  ruin  they  bring  with  them,  what  misery,  what  helplessness  and  despair  !  The 
desire  of  Habakkuk  for  the  punishment  of  those  who  were  evildoers  in  his  nation 
waa  more  than  satisfied  now.  It  seemed  to  him,  indeed,  that  this  penalty  was  too  ^ 
severe,  this  chastisement  too  sweeping  and  terrible.  It  feU  on  all  alike,  the  good 
as  well  as  the  bad.  It  overwhelmed  land  and  people  in  utter  destruction.  Once 
again,  therefore,  he  ventured  to  plead  with  God.  Was  it  just  and  fitting  to  go 
so  far  ?  Was  it  right  to  give  free  rein  to  so  godless  a  power — one  which  sacrificed 
to  its  own  net,  and  hfted  itself  in  pride  to  the  very  heavens  ?  Thus  the  doom  of 
Judah,  the  burden  which  the  seer  beheld  with  reference  to  his  native  land,  is 
brought  to  a  close.  Here  let  us  pause  for  a  moment,  that  we  may  learn  something 
for  oiu-selves  from  the  attitude  of  the  prophet.  He  is  a  pattern  to  us.  Ought  we 
not,  like  him,  to  desire  that  evil  may  be  wholly  rooted  out  from  among  God's 
redeemed  and  renewed  people;  that,  at  whatever  cost  and  with  whatever  trying 
discipline,  they  may  be  made  entirely  piu:e  ?  And  ought  we  not  to  pray,  too, 
that  the  chastisement  be  not  too  sharp  and  grievous,  and  that  God  may  stay  His 
rough  wind  in  the  day  of  His  east  wind  ?  The  entreaties  of  Habakkuk  were  heard. 
He  waited  for  a  while,  tarrying  in  patience  hke  a  sentinel  on  his  watchtower  ; 
and  then  again  the  Lord  spoke  to  him.  It  was  the  doom  of  the  arrogant  Chaldeans 
which  was  disclosed  now.  The  mighty  were  ultimately  to  be  cast  down  from  their 
seats  ;  the  proud  were  to  be  abased.  Over  and  over  again  the  prophet  reiterates 
this  assurance  of  his  Lord  ;  he  glories  in  it ;  it  is  hard  for  him  to  let  it  go.  He 
tells  how  the  Babylonian  plunderer,  who  had  increased  that  which  was  not  his,  and 
had  loaded  himself  with  pledges,  should  become  in  turn  the  booty  of  others  ; 
how  the  Babylonian  tyrant,  who  had  set  his  nest  on  high,  was  really  flinging 
away  his  hfe  and  exposing  himself  to  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty ;  how  the  Baby- 
lonian league- breaker,  who  had  enticed  other  people  into  alUances  which  were 


INTRODUCTION  TO  HABAKKUK. 


turned  to  their  shame  and  ruin,  should  drink  of  the  same  cup  with  which  he  had 
intoxicated  them  ;  how  the  Babylonian  idolater,  who  forsook  the  Hving  God  for 
dumb  idols,  should  be  left  unanswered  and  unaided  in  the  hour  of  his  need.  These 
seem  pitiless  threats  to  utter  even  against  a  sinful  race,  and  this  mood  of  the 
prophet  looks  harsh  and  intolerant.  But  when  men  cry  out  against  the  denuncia- 
tions and  judgments  of  the  Bible,  they  should  remember  that  God  only  puts  into 
exercise  that  right  with  which  no  earthly  sovereign  would  or  could  dispense — 
the  right  of  removing  offenders  from  the  earth.  And  Habakkuk  did  well  to 
approve  of  it.  Finally,  he  breaks  out  into  that  glorious  song  in  honour  of  the  God 
whom  he  trusted  and  loved.  It  is  a  song  which  is  to  be  sung,  he  declares,  'aZ 
shigydndth,  that  is,  in  wandering  measures,  in  music  of  an  impulsive  and  passionate 
kind,  full  of  sudden  changes  and  transitions,  such  as  the  words  of  the  ode  demand. 
For  it  passes  rapidly  from  one  theme  to  another,  from  one  mood  and  feeUng  to 
another.  It  is  Uke  the  slave  whom  Longfellow  heard  singing  the  Psalms  at  mid- 
night ;  its  tones  "  by  turns  are  glad,  sweetly  solemn,  wildly  sad."  Habakkuk 
sets  out  with  the  request  that  those  judgments  which  he  had  foreseen  may  come 
quickly,  but  that  mercy  may  be  mingled  with  them  too.  Then,  to  revive  his  faith, 
he  recalls  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High,  the  mighty  deeds  done  of 
old  by  God.  He  speaks  of  the  Lord's  giving  of  the  law  from  Sinai,  when  "  Has 
brightness  was  as  the  hght,  and  He  had  rays  coming  forth  from  His  hand,  and 
there  was  the  hiding  of  His  power  "  ;  of  the  ravages  of  plague  and  pestilence  in 
the  desert ;  of  the  terror  of  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  when  the  hosts  of  Israel 
crossed  their  border  ;  of  the  memorable  victory  gained  by  Joshua,  when  "  the 
sun  and  the  moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation."  All  these  had  been  manifesta- 
tions of  Jehovah's  power,  terrible  to  His  enemies,  but  most  gracious  and  comforting 
to  such  as  confided  in  Him.  From  the  contemplation  of  them  Habakkuk  takes 
hope  and  courage.  All  will  be  well,  he  assures  himself,  with  him  who  has  God 
on  his  side.  And  so  he  closes  his  hymn  with  those  confident  and  victorious  lines, 
whose  beauty  and  music  are  not  siu-passed  in  any  literatiire.  In  his  song  the 
prophet  shows  us  the  secret  of  real  tranquillity  in  the  midst  of  outward  alarms 
and  distresses.  It  hes  in  the  possession  of  a  personal  trust  in  the  Lord.  "  The 
just  shall  hve  by  his  faith,"  we  are  told  in  another  part  of  this  book — hve  in  calm 
through  trouble  and  danger  and  temptation,  if  he  believe  God  and  cling  to  Him. 
No  evil  will  befall  him,  and  no  plague  come  nigh  him.  God,  he  feels,  has  wrought 
wondrously  in  the  past,  and  He  can  save  him  still.     {Original  Secession  Magazine.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 

HABAEKUE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Vebs,  1-4.  The  burden  wlilch  Habakkuk  the  prophet  did  see. — Responsi- 
bilities : — We  can  see  how  appropriate  is  the  word  "  burden "  used  by 
the  prophets  to  describe  their  gift  and  duty.  The  obligation  laid  on  them 
often  involved  strain  and  danger.  And  yet  it  was  a  glorious  privilege  to  be 
commissioned  by  God,  to  act  for  Him,  to  be  His  mouthpiece  to  the  people. 
Habakkuk's  burden  was  the  sight  of  the  general  evil  and  corruption  prevalent 
in  the  Holy  Land,  among  the  chosen  people.  What  burden  can  be  heavier  than 
this,  to  see  evil  prevail  among  God's  people,  and  to  be  unable  to  remedy  it  ?  Two 
lessons — 1.  Every  privilege  entails  suffering.  2.  Do  not  lose  heart.  The  burden 
is  laid  on  you  by  the  Lord  who  gave  you  your  glorious  privilege.  Look  at  the 
vocation,  not  at  the  burden.  {S.  Baring-Gould. )  The  burden  of  enligliienment : — 
The  light  of  Divine  favour  bestowed  upon  Habakkuk  was  the  soiirce  of  much 
perplexity  of  mind  and  distress  of  soul  to  him.  This  paradox  is  common  in 
Christian  experience.  The  prophet's  mission  of  mercy  was  a  burden  to  himself. 
I.  A  BURDEN  OF  ENLIGHTENMENT.  He  was — 1  A  Spectator  of  evil ;  looking 
upon  the  great  and  terrible  disorders  that  devastated  his  country.  2.  An  inspired 
spectator  of  evil.  "  God  showed  him  iniquity,"  &c.  To  see,  in  the  light  of  heaven, 
the  fearful  ram^cations  of  evil  in  society  is  an  essential  condition  of  Christian 
service.  3.  A  troubled  spectator  of  evil.  His  heart-strings  vibrated  with  jarring 
discords  at  the  touch  of  the  workers  of  iniquity.  II.  A  bueden  of  prayeb. 
With  a  vivid  consciousness  of  God's  almighty  power  the  prophet  called  upon 
Him  to  interpose  and  save  His  people.  But  days  rolled  on  and  lengthened  into 
months,  and  still  evil  abounded.  Oh,  the  burden  of  prayers  unheard !  Oh,  the 
burden  of  unanswered  prayers  !  Oh,  the  burden  of  delay !  The  heart  grows 
sick  with  hope  deferred.  III.  A  burden  of  discipline.  Designed — 1.  As  a  test 
to  see  if  they  will  continue  to  work  and  witness  for  God.  2.  Still  trust  in  the 
Lord,  even  in  the  presence  of  the  great  mystery  of  iniquity.  The  burden  is — 
3.  For  training,  that  God's  servants  may  become  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to 
God.     {Joseph  Willcox.) 

Ver.  2.  0  Lord !  how  long  shall  I  cry,  and  Thou  wilt  not  hear  ? — The  crisis 
of  prayer : — The  question  to  be  answered  is  this :  How  long  will  God  suffer 
His  people  to  pray,  and  still  neglect  to  hear  ?  Answer — 1.  Till  they  see  the 
plague  of  their  own  hearts — till  each  one  sees  his  own  individual  iniquities,  and 
lies  in  the  dust  before  God.  2.  Till  the  Church  feels  that  she  stands  in  the  gap 
between  God  and  a  sin-destroyed  world.  3.  Till  they  are  willing  to  do  whatever 
of  duty  He  requires,  in  addition  to  praying.  4.  Till  they  move  the  stumbling- 
blocks  out  of  the  way  of  a  revival  of  His  work.  5.  If  God  sees  in  His  people 
any  disposition  to  withhold  from  Him  the  glory  of  the  work  He  does.  We  see 
from  this  subject — (1)  Why  so  many  prayers  seem  to  be  offered  in  vain.  (2)  We 
see  some  of  the  causes  of  spiritual  declension  in  the  Church.  (3)  The  subject 
shows  how  we  should  set  about  raising  the  Church  from  her  low  estate.  (4)  We 
see  the  duty  of  every  Christian  to  search  well  his  own  heart.  The  hindrances 
to  revivals  are  the  sins  of  individuals.     Each  Christian,  therefore,  must  search 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  purify  himself.  (5)  How  fearful  is  the  Chiu-ch's  responsibility ;  and  how 
great  should  be  her  watchfulness,  lest  by  her  apathy,  her  selfishness,  or  her  unbelief, 
Bhe  hinder  the  work  of  the  Lord.  (Nationcd  Preacher.)  The  cry  of  a  good 
man  under  the  perplexing  procedure  of  God: — I.  God's  apparent  diseegard  to 
HIS  EARNEST  PRAYER.  Under  the  pressure  of  that  "  burden  "  which  was  resting 
on  his  heart,  namely,  the  moral  corruption  and  the  coming  doom  of  his  country  ; 
it  would  seem  that  he  had  often  cried  unto  the  Almighty  and  implored  His  inter- 
position ;  but  no  answer  had  come.  Why  are  not  the  prayers  of  good  men  immedi- 
ately answered  ?  In  reply  to  this  question  three  undoubted  facts  should  be  borne 
in  mind.  1.  That  importunity  of  soul  is  necessary  to  qualify  for  the  appreciation 
of  the  mercies  sought.  It  is  not  imtil  a  man  is  made  to  feel  the  deep  necessity 
of  a  thing  that  he  values  it  when  it  comes.  "  How  long  shall  I  cry  ?  "  Until  the 
sense  of  need  is  so  intensified  as  to  qualify  for  the  reception  and  due  appreciation 
of  the  blessing.  Another  fact  that  should  be  borne  in  mind  is — 2.  That  the 
exercise  of  true  prayer  is  in  itself  the  best  means  of  spiritual  culture.  Conscious 
contact  with  God  is  essential  to  moral  excellence.  You  must  bring  the  sunbeam 
to  the  seed  you  have  sown,  if  you  would  have  the  seed  quickened  and  developed  ; 
and  you  must  bring  God  into  conscious  contact  with  your  powers,  if  you  would 
have  them  vivified  and  brought  forth  into  strength  and  perfection.  True  prayer 
does  this  ;  it  is  the  soul  realising  itself  in  the  presence  of  Him  "  who  quickeneth 
all  things."  3.  That  prayers  are  answered  where  there  is  no  bestowment  of 
the  blessing  invoked.  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  This  is  all  we  want. 
Acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will  is  the  moral  perfection,  dignity,  and  blessedness 
of  all  creatures  in  the  imiverse.  With  these  facts  let  us  not  be  anxious  about 
the  apparent  disregard  of  God  to  our  prayers.  II.  God's  apparent  disregard 
TO  THE  MORAL  CONDITION  OF  SOCIETY.  "  Why  dost  Thou  show  me  iniquity, 
and  cause  me  to  behold  grievance  ?  for  spoiling  and  violence  are  before  me : 
and  there  are  that  raise  up  strife  and  contention.  Therefore  the  law  is  slacked, 
and  judgment  doth  never  go  forth  :  for  the  wicked  doth  compass  about  the 
righteous ;  therefore  wrong  judgment  proceedeth."  The  substance  of  this  is 
the  old  complaint,  "  Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  prosper  ?  "  Two 
facts  should  be  set  against  this  complaint.  1.  The  good  have  the  best  of  it, 
even  in  this  life.  2.  The  evil  will  have  the  worst  of  it  in  the  next  life.  {HomUist.) 
The  expostulation  of  faith : — The  prophet  is  deeply  afflicted,  for  there  is 
little  religion  in  the  land,  and  as  little  of  the  true  service  of  God.  The  one 
in  reality  is  the  measure  of  the  other,  although  there  may  often  seem  more 
religion  than  righteousness.  He  does  not,  however,  begin  with  attacking  vice 
and  Lrreligion  and  sin.  He  knows  better  than  to  do  this.  He  carries  his  complaint 
to  God,  and  in  this  way  he  would  find  some  relief  from  his  perplexity.  The 
prophet  expostulates  with  his  God.  His  work  seems  almost  hopeless,  but  he 
is  a  godly  man,  and  he  turns  instinctively  from  man  to  God.  Assuredly  there 
is  an  expostulation  of  faith  as  well  as  of  presumption.  It  may  be  good  for  the 
prophet,  and  for  those  in  like  circumstances,  that  at  times  God  is  silent.  It  is 
not  that  the  prophet  distrusts  the  justice  or  the  mercy  of  God  ;  it  is  rather,  that 
in  his  impatience  he  would  set  times  and  seasons  for  His  working.  The  times 
in  which  the  prophet  lived  were  times  of  ungodliness,  of  violence,  and  of  misrule. 
Every  one  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes.  To  correct  this,  the  merely 
human  sense  of  right  is  powerless.  In  such  times,  righteous  men,  such  as  wished 
to  "  lead  a  tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all  godliness  and  gravity,"  must  go  to  the 
wall.  Even  thus  they  cannot  escape  injustice  and  violence,  scorn  and  oppression, 
from  the  many  who  have  no  belief  in  the  Unseen,  and  who  act  accordingly.  And 
BO  they  are  compassed  about  with  wickedness.  The  mercy  of  God  may  be 
compassing  them  about,  but  for  the  time  they  can  hardly  see  any  evidences  of 
it,  and  they  are  almost  in  despair.  They  are  tempted  to  think  that  "  all  the 
foundations  of  the  earth  are  moved,"  and  to  say,  *'  God  hath  forsaken  the  earth." 
(P.  Barclay,  M.A.)  Freedom  allowed  in  prayer: — The  prophet  does  not  here 
teach  the  Jews,  but  prepares  them  for  a  coming  judgment,  as  they  could  not 
but  see  that  they  were  justly  condemned,  since  they  were  proved  guilty  by  the 
cry  and  complaints  made  by  all  the  godly.  Now  this  passage  teaches  us  that 
all  who  really  serve  and  love  God,  ought,  according  to  the  prophet's  example, 
to  burn  with  holy  indignation  whenever  they  .see  wickedness  reigning  without 
restraint  among  men,  and  es|iecially  in  the  Church  of  God.  There  is  indeed 
nothing  which  ought  to  cause  us  more  grief  than  to  see  men  raging  with  profane 
contempt  for  God,  and  no  regard  had  for  His  law  and  for  Divine  truth,  and  all 


CHAP.  I.]  HABAKKUK.  3 

order  trodden  under  foot.  When  therefore  such  a  confusion  appears  to  us,  we 
must  feel  roused,  if  we  have  in  us  any  spark  of  religion.  If  it  be  objected  that 
the  prophet  exceeded  moderation,  the  obvious  answer  is  this, — that  though  he 
freely  pours  forth  his  feelings,  there  was  nothing  wrong  in  this  before  God,  at 
least  nothing  wrong  is  imputed  to  him :  for  wherefore  do  we  pray,  but  that  each 
of  us  may  unburden  his  cares,  his  griefs,  and  anxieties,  by  pouring  them  into  the 
bosom  of  God  ?  Since  then  God  allows  us  to  deal  so  familiarly  with  Him,  nothing 
wrong  ought  to  be  ascribed  to  our  prayers,  when  we  thus  freely  pour  forth  oiu- 
feelings,  provided  the  bridle  of  obedience  keeps  us  always  within  due  limits, 
as  was  the  case  with  the  prophet ;  for  it  is  certain  that  he  was  retained  under 
the  influence  of  real  kindness.  Our  prophet  here  undertakes  the  defence  of 
justice ;  for  he  could  not  endure  the  law  of  God  to  be  made  a  sport,  and  men 
to  allow  themselves  every  liberty  in  sinning.  He  can  be  justly  excused, 
though  he  expostulates  here  with  God,  for  God  does  not  condemn  this  freedom 
in  our  prayers.  The  end  of  praying  is,  that  every  one  of  us  pour  forth  his  heart 
before  God.  (John  Calvin. )  The  deeper  plan  in  human  events  : — In  listening 
to  a  great  organ,  played  by  the  hand  of  a  master,  there  is  often  an  undertone 
that  controls  the  whole  piece.  Sometimes  it  is  scarcely  audible,  and  a  careless 
listener  would  miss  it  altogether.  The  lighter  play  goes  on,  ebbing  and  flowing, 
rising  and  sinking,  now  softly  gliding  on  the  gentler  stops,  and  now  swelling  out 
to  the  full  power  of  the  great  organ.  But  amid  all  the  changes  and  transpositions 
this  undertone  may  be  heard,  steadily  pursuing  its  own  thought.  The  careless 
listener  thinks  the  lighter  play  the  main  thing  ;  but  he  that  can  appreciate  musical 
ideas,  as  well  as  sounds,  follows  the  quiet  undertone  of  the  piece,  and  finds  in  it 
the  leading  thought  of  the  artist.  So  men  see  the  outward  events  of  life,  the 
actions,  the  words,  the  wars,  famines,  sins ;  but  underneath  all  God  is  carrying 
out  His  own  plans,  and  compelling  all  outward  things  to  aid  the  music  He  would 
make  in  this  world.     {Christian  Age.) 

Vers.  5-10.  I  ■will  work  a  work  in  your  days,  which  ye  will  not  believe,  though 
it  be  told  you. — The  doom  of  a  nation  of  conventional  religionists  : — The  Jews  were 
such  a  nation.  They  prided  themselves  in  the  orthodoxy  of  their  faith,  in  the 
ceremonials  of  their  worship,  in  the  polity  of  their  Church.  The  doom  threatened 
was  terrible  in  many  respects.  I.  It  was  to  be  wrought  by  the  iNSTRXjMENTAijcTy 
OF  A  WICKED  NATION.  "  I  will  work  a  work  in  your  days,  which  ye  will  not 
believe,  though  it  be  told  you.  For,  lo,  I  raise  up  the  Chaldeans,  that  bitter  and 
hasty  nation,  which  shall  march  through  the  breadth  of  the  land,  to  possess  the 
dwelling-places  that  are  not  theirs."  "  Nabopolassar  had  akeady  destroyed 
the  mighty  empire  of  Ass5Tia,  and  founded  the  Chaldeo- Babylonian  rule.  He 
had  made  himself  so  formidable  that  Necho  found  it  necessary  to  march  an  army 
against  him,  in  order  to  check  his  progress  ;  and  though  defeated  at  Megiddo, 
he  had,  in  conjunction  with  his  son  Nebuchadnezzar,  gained  a  complete  victory 
over  the  Egyptians  at  Carchemish.  These  events  were  calculated  to  alarm  the 
Jews,  whose  coimtry  lay  between  the  dominions  of  the  two  contending  powers ; 
but,  accustomed  as  they  were  to  confide  in  Egypt  and  in  the  sacred  localities 
of  their  own  capital  (Isa.  xxxi.  1  ;  Jer.  vii.  4),  and  being  in  alliance  with  the 
Chaldeans,  they  were  indisposed  to  listen  to,  and  treated  with  the  utmost  incre- 
dulity, any  predictions  which  described  their  overthrow  by  that  people" 
(Henderson).  God  employs  wicked  nations  as  His  instruments.  "  I  will  work 
a  work,"  He  says,  but  how  ?  By  the  Chaldeans.  How  does  He  raise  up  wicked 
nations  to  do  His  work  ?  1.  Not  instigatingly.  He  does  not  inspire  them  with 
wicked  passions  necessary  to  qualify  them  for  the  infernal  work  of  violence,  war, 
rapine,  bloodshed.  God  could  not  do  this.  2.  Not  coercively.  He  does  not 
force  them  to  it,  in  no  way  does  He  interfere  with  them.  They  are  the  responsible 
party.  How  then  does  He  "raise"  them  up?  He  permits  them.  He  could 
prevent  them ;  but  He  allows  them.  He  gives  them  life,  capacity,  and  oppor- 
tunities. Now,  would  not  the  fact  that  their  destruction  would  come  upon  them 
from  a  heathen  nation,  a  nation  which  they  despised,  make  it  all  the  more  terrible  ? 
II.  It  was  to  be  wrought  with  resistless  violence.  1.  The  violence  would 
be  uncontrolled.  "  Their  judgment  and  their  dignity  shall  proceed  of  themselves." 
They  recognise  no  authority,  and  proudly  spurn  the  dictates  of  others.  "  They 
recognise  no  judge  save  themselves,  and  they  get  for  themselves  in  their  own 
dignity,  without  needing  others'  help."  2.  The  violence  would  be  rapid  and 
fierce.     "  Swifter  than  the  leopard."     "  Evening  wolves."    lU.  It  was  to  bb 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

WROUGHT  WITH  IMMENSE  HAVOC.  As  the  east  Wind,  or  .simoom ;  spreading 
destruction  everywhere.  (Homilist.)  The  Chaldeans,  that  bitter  and  hasty 
nation. — The  Chaldeans  : — Very  gi-aphic  is  the  description  of  this  new  and  for- 
midable enemy.  Gather  four  lessons  for  our.selves.  I.  The  evil  of  sin.  It 
separates  the  soul  from  God.  Wherever  sin  is  it  makes  the  prophet's  roll  to  be 
written  within  and  without.  "  Lamentation,  and  weeping,  and  woe."  "  All 
imrighteousness  is  sin."  II.  National  sins  lead  to  national  judgments. 
They  are  said  to  "  defile  "  a  land,  and  to  be  a  "  reproach  "  to  any  people.  Direct 
judgments  come  on  a  nation  for  its  sin  ;  as  on  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Egypt, 
Israel,  &c.  Then  let  our  nation  take  heed.  III.  The  powek  of  tjttle  things. 
"  He  heapeth  up  dust,  and  taketh  it."  That  is,  the  king  of  Babylon,  by  means 
of  mounds  of  dust,  would  put  himself  on  a  level  with  the  besieged,  and  rapidly 
overcome  them.  It  needs  no  great  means  when  God  is  using  the  instrument. 
IV.  The  danger  of  false  security.  "  Thej'  shall  deride  every  stronghold." 
When  the  Lord  God  is  not  there,  the  defence  is  vain.  "  The  name  of  the  Lord 
is  a  strong  tower ;  the  righteous  nmneth  in,  and  is  safe."  Every  false  hiding- 
place  will  be  swept  away  in  the  coining  storm.  Last  year  I  saw  in  Pompeii 
a  cellar  where  eighteen  persons  had  fled  for  safety  in  the  time  of  the  great  over- 
throw, but  it  was  a  false  refuge.  They  were  all  lost.  There  is  something  like 
that  in  spiritual  things.  Many  souls  are  hiding  in  a  refuge  of  lies.  They  are 
trusting  to  their  own  merits,  or  to  God's  uncovenanted  goodness  apart  from  Jesus 
Christ,  and  Him  crucified.  Without  Christ,  the  God  Man,  you  are  defenceless 
and  exposed  to  storm  and  tempest.     {A.  C.  Thisdton.) 

Ver.  12.  Art  Thou  not  from  everlasting,  0  Lord  my  God,  mine  Holy  One? 
we  shall  not  die. — The  Christian  conception  of  immortality : — We  know 
that  this  prophet  was  inspired,  from  the  profoimd  moral  insight  and  far- 
reaching  spiritual  vision  revealed  in  his  utterance.  His  words  are  his  only 
credentials,  but  they  are  amply  sufficient.  The  pronhecy  dates  near  the  close 
of  the  seventh  or  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  B.C.  The  circumstances 
of  Habakkuk's  time  largely  determined  the  contents  as  well  as  the  form  of  his 
prophecy.  What  were  these  circumstances  T  On  the  one  hand  grave  disap- 
pointment in  the  development  of  his  own  nation.  The  hope  centring  in  Josiah 
was  dispelled  by  his  death  in  ill-advised  battle.  Simultaneously  the  power  of 
Assyria  waned,  and  the  power  of  Babylon  grew.  The  politician's  despair  is  the 
prophet's  opportunity,  and  grandly  does  Habakkuk  rise  to  the  occasion.  The 
prophet  saw  that  though  Babylon  was  a  hindrance  to  Judah's  political  emanci- 
pation, yet  it  was  one  of  the  necessary  agents  of  its  moral  deliverance.  Chaldea 
is  to  this  extent  God's  agent,  that  it  will  compel  Judah  to  fall  back  upon  its 
religion  and  its  God.  Because  the  Eternal  God  is  holy,  Judah  cannot  die.  The 
argument  deals,  strictly  speaking,  only  with  the  persistence  and  decay  of  earthly 
societies  and  kingdoms.  The  life  which  is  inferred  from  ethical  kinship  with 
God  is  victorious  national  life.  The  individual  counterpart  of  the  prophet's 
argument  is  given  by  our  Saviour  in  His  inspiring  words,  "  Because  I  live,  ye 
shall  live  also."  The  relation  of  the  principle  to  the  individual,  and  individual 
immortality  is,  no  doubt,  more  subtle  and  complicated,  especially  with  regard 
to  the  negative  results  of  the  principle ;  but  there  is  a  wide  field  of  positive  con- 
clusions, where  the  argument  is  quite  as  strong  and  clear  and  inspiring  in  the 
case  of  the  individual  as  of  the  nation,  and  this  profounder  and  richer  application 
has  been  fully  made  in  the  New  Testament.  Indeed  the  whole  progress  of  revela- 
tion has  been  the  unfolding  of  old  principles  into  ampler  significance  rather  than 
the  addition  of  new  ones.  In  the  New  Testament  the  individual  is  emphasised, 
and  all  ethical  and  religious  considerations  are  first  of  all  studied  in  reference  to 
the  individual.  There  is  a  little  danger  nowadays  of  losing  sight  of  the  individual 
again,  of  going  back  to  the  old  world  immature  conceptions  of  society,  in  which 
the  individual  lay  latent  in  the  mass.  This  is  a  mistake.  We  shall  not 
create  an  ideal  society  by  accomplishing  superficial  reformations  in  the  ma.s8  ; 
we  must  be  ever  searching  through  the  mass  for  the  individual.  The  religion 
of  Christ  is  primarily  for  the  individual.  Primarily,  therefore,  in  the  application 
of  the  Divine  message,  we  have  to  deal  with  the  spirit  of  man  in  its  individual 
relation  to  God.  I.  The  spiritual  man's  conviction  of  immortauty.  The 
Scriptures  nowhere  assert  the  general  principle  of  human  immortality.  There 
is  certainly  no  clear  indication  of  conditional  immortality.  The  biblical  revela- 
tion of  immortality  is  in  part  bright  and  clear  as  the  noonday,  in  part  obscure 


CHAP.  I.]  EABAKKUK.  6 

and  Bhadowy.  We  must  not  confoimd  the  method  of  Plato  and  Butler  with  the 
biblical  method.  One  thing  is  clear.  As  man  is,  like  God,  an  essentially  ethical 
being,  he  cannot  be  destroyed  by  a  merely  physical  change  like  death.  The 
sense  of  spiritual  kinship  with  God  gradually  compelled  the  personal  conviction 
of  immortality.  The  revelation  has  always  come  in  the  intense  individual  con- 
viction, "  I  live  in  God,  and  so  live  for  ever."  The  manifest  aim  of  revelation 
has  been  to  develop  the  Christian  consciousness,  not  to  satisfy  all  our  curiosity 
about  the  eternal  future.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  the  only  certain  proof  of 
immortality  is  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  correct,  if  it  is  carefully 
stated.  It  ia  correct,  when  the  resurrection  of  Christ  completes  the  Christian 
consciousness,  and  is  vitally  related  to  it.  Paul  argues  thus,  "  If  the  resurrection 
of  Christ  be  not  a  historic  fact,  then  the  deepest  and  noblest  spiritual  consciousness 
of  men  is  a  vanity  and  a  falsehood,  for  that  depends  upon  and  demands  a  risen 
Christ."  The  Christ  within  me  is  the  final  assurance  of  life  and  immortality. 
n.  The  CHBistiAN  contents  of  this  conviction.  It  is  a  conviction,  not  of 
mere  continued  existence,  but  of  eternal  life,  rich  and  varied  in  its  content,  a  life 
filled  to  overflowing  with  the  fulness  of  the  Eternal.  1.  The  Christian  conviction 
of  immortality  involves  the  assiurance  of  a  great  increase  and  expansion  of  life 
after  death.  This  assurance  of  expansion  of  life  does  not  imply  a  breach  of  con- 
tinuity between  this  life  and  the  next.  2.  The  contents  of  this  conviction  include 
the  resurrection  of  the  body.  Scepticism  on  this  subject  has  arisen  from  supposed 
intellectual  difficulties,  which  have  been  allowed  to  obscure  the  utterance  of  the 
living  voice  of  the  Christ-spirit  within.  The  denial  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body  is  virtually  a  denial  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  Are  there  then  no 
difficulties  ?  None  at  all,  except  those  created  by  superficial  theories  of  the 
resurrection.  The  continuity  and  redemption  of  our  wonderful  complex  life 
will  be  complete.  {John  Thomas,  M.A.)  The  eternity,  providence,  and  holiness 
of  Jehovah  : — I.  The  rEOPHET  regards  the  eternity  of  Jehovah  as  an  argu- 
ment FOR  their  preservation.  "  Art  Thou  not  from  everlasting  ?  "  The 
interrogatory  does  not  imply  doubt  on  his  part.  The  true  God  is  essentially 
eternal,  He  "  inhabiteth  eternity."  From  His  eternity  the  prophet  argues  that 
His  people  will  not  perish, — "  we  shall  not  die."  There  is  force  in  this  argument. 
His  people  live  in  Him.  Christ  said  to  His  disciples,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall 
live  also."  Man's  immortality  is  not  in  himself,  but  in  God.  II.  He  regards 
His  providence  as  a  source  or  comfort.  "  0  Lord,  Thou  hast  ordained  them 
for  judgment ;  and,  0  Mighty  God,  Thou  hast  established  them  for  correction." 
"  Jehovah,  for  judgment  Thou  hast  appointed  it,  and,  0  Rock,  Thou  hast  founded 
it  for  chfistisement"  (Delitzsch).  Whatever  evil  of  any  kind,  from  any  quarter,  comes 
upon  the  loyal  servants  of  God,  comes  not  by  accident :  it  is  under  the  direction 
of  the  All-wise  and  the  All-beneficent.  These  Chaldeans  could  not  move  without 
Him,  nor  could  they  strike  one  blow  without  His  permission  ;  they  were  but  the 
rod  in  His  hand.  All  the  most  furious  fiends  in  the  imiversc  are  under  His  direc- 
tion. Whatever  mischief  men  design  to  inflict  upon  His  people.  He  purposes  to 
bring  good  out  of  it;  and  His  counsel  shall  stand.  III.  He  regards  His  holiness 
as  an  occasion  for  perplexity.  "  Thou  art  of  pin-er  eyes  than  to  behold  evil, 
and  canst  not  look  on  iniquity :  wherefore  lookest  Thou  upon  them  that  deal 
treacherously,  and  boldest  Thy  tongue  when  the  wicked  devoureth  the  man  that 
is  more  righteous  than  he  ?  "  Jehovah  is  the  Holy  One.  As  if  he  had  said. 
Since  Thou  art  holy,  why  allow  such  abominations  to  take  place  ?  why  permit 
wicked  men  to  work  such  iniquities,  and  to  inflict  such  sufi'ering  upon  the  righteous  ? 
This  has  always  been  a  source  of  perplexity  to  good  men.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  13.  Thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  canst  not  look  upon 
Iniquity. — The  holiness  of  God  : — There  is  in  our  Maker  a  purity  of  nature,  and  an 
essential  sort  of  holiness  which  render  Him  incapable  of  enduring  sin  in  any  person, 
or  under  any  circumstances.  I  believe  this  is  the  very  foundation  of  all  religious 
feeling  whatever.  The  true  fear  of  God  is  the  fear  of  His  holiness.  I.  This  is 
no  contradiction  to  the  character  in  which  God  is  exhibited  to  us  in  the  Gospel, 
as  a  God  of  love.  But  we  must  notice  the  limits  under  which  the  love  of  God  must 
be  taken  in  application  to  ourselves.  Only  in  the  Gospel  is  it  revealed.  2.  God 
has  always  shown  a  sort  of  instinctive  abhorrence  of  sin,  which  no  worth  of  the 
individual  sinner  could  induce  Him  to  overcome.  This  holiness  of  God  is  opposed 
to  sin  in  every  form  and  degree.  There  is  nothing  in  man  which  can  reconcile 
the  nature  of  God  to  sin.     Is  sin  regarded  by  us,  as  we  must  know  and  believe 


6  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

it  is  regarded  by  God  ?  (H.  Raikes,  A.M.)  The  holiness  of  God: — I.  His  holiness 
IS  UNIVERSALLY  MANIFEST.  1.  It  is  manifest  to  man.  (1)  In  law.  The  prin- 
ciples of  His  moral  law  are  holy,  just,  and  good.  (2)  In  providence.  Justice 
is  but  holiness  in  action,  and  through  all  ages  God  has  expressed  His  abhorrence 
of  sin  in  the  judgments  He  has  inflicted.  (3)  In  Christ.  He  sent  His  Son  into 
the  world.  What  for  ?  "  To  put  away  sin."  To  cleanse  humanity  by  His 
self-sacrificing  life.  (4)  In  conscience.  The  moral  constitution  of  man,  which 
recoils  from  the  wrong  and  sympathises  with  the  right,  manifests  God's  holiness. 
There  is  no  room  for  man,  then,  to  doubt  God's  holiness.  2.  It  is  manifest  to 
angels.  They  Uve  in  its  light.  They  are  adorned  with  its  beauties,  they  are 
inspired  with  its  glories,  and  their  anthem  is,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  God 
Almighty."  3.  It  is  manifest  to  the  lost.  They  are  bound  to  exclaim,  "  Just 
and  right  are  Thy  ways,  Thou  King  of  saints."  II.  His  holiness  is  eternally 
ORIGINAL.  The  holiness  of  all  holy  intelligences  is  derived  from  Him.  III.  His 
HOLINESS  IS  GLORIOUSLY  EFFULGENT.  "  He  is  glorious  in  holiness."  He  is 
light,  in  Him  there  is  no  darkness  at  all.  IV.  His  holiness  is  absolutely 
STANDARD.  It  is  that  to  which  the  holiness  of  all  other  beings  must  come,  and 
by  which  it  must  be  tested.  The  law  is,  we  are  "  to  be  holy  as  He  is  holy."  But 
how  can  fallen  man  be  raised  to  this  standard  of  holiness  ?  Here  is  the  answer, 
and  the  only  satisfactory  answer  :  "  For  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation 
hath  appeared  to  all  men,"  &c.  (Homilist.)  Wherefore  lookest  Thou  upon 
them  that  deal  treacherously  ?  —  Things  that  suggest  mistrust  of  God  : — St. 
Hierom's  opinion  is  that  the  name  Habakkuk  is  derived  from  a  word  that 
signifies  embracing,  and  may  imply  the  embraces  of  a  wrestler,  who  clasps  his 
arms  about  the  person  he  contends  with.  In  this  chapter  we  have  the  prophet 
contending  with  no  less  an  antagonist  than  the  great  God,  and  upon  no  lower 
subject  than  His  holiness,  justice,  and  goodness.  Is  it  not  a  very  bold  and  daring 
thing  for  a  creature  thus  to  arraign  the  justice  of  His  Creator  ?  The  father  fore- 
mentioned  explains  that  the  prophet  in  his  own  person  represents  the  frailty 
and  impatience  of  man.  We  understand  Habakkuk  to  be  really  saying,  "  True 
it  is,  0  Lord,  we  are  a  very  wicked  and  sinful  people  ;  but  yet  not  so  bad  as  the 
tyrannous  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  his  idolatrous  Chaldeans.  How  then  can  it  be 
consistent  with  Thy  justice  and  hatred  to  sin,  to  permit  the  greater  sinners  to 
prosper  in  their  oppression  of  the  less,  of  those  that  are  better  than  themselves  ?  " 
"  Why  dost  Thou  favour  them  in  their  treacherous  enterprises  ?  "  The  words 
of  the  text  contain  an  expostulalton  with  God,  concerning  that  seemingly  strange 
dispensation  of  His  providence  in  suffering  the  wicked  to  prosper  and  thrive, 
and  that  by  the  afflictions  and  oppressions  of  the  righteous.  I.  The  ground 
AND  OCCASION  OF  THIS  EXPOSTULATION  OF  THE  TEXT.  Good  men  cannot  oppress, 
or  take  indirect  methods  to  thrive  ;  they  have  a  God  above,  and  a  conscience 
within,  which  overawe  them,  and  will  not  suffer  them  to  do  it.  Nor  can  they 
be  supposed  to  use  such  means  as  may  effectually  secure  them  from  the  violences 
and  oppressions  of  others  ;  for  the  good  man,  charitably  measuring  others  by 
himself,  does  not  stand  upon  a  constant  guard,  nor  use  preventive  methods  to 
keep  off  those  injuries  that  he  is  not  apprehensive  of.  But  a  bad  man  has  none 
of  those  restraints  of  God,  or  conscience,  or  charity,  to  hinder  him  from  falling 
upon  the  prey  that  lies  exposed  to  him.  It  is  not  then  to  be  wondered  at  that 
"those  who  deal  treacherously  prosper,"  or  "that  the  wicked  devoureth  the  man 
that  is  more  righteous  than  he."  II.  Inquire  into  the  objections  that  abb 
MADE  AGAINST  God's  PERMISSION  HEREOF.  How  comcs  it  to  pass  that  God  does 
not  interpose,  that  He  does  not  hinder  the  evil  and  defend  the  good  ?  This 
has  been  a  stumbling-block  in  all  ages.  It  was  to  holy  Job  ;  to  Jeremiah ;  and 
to  Asaph.  It  is  a  great  argument  of  the  atheists  to  banish  the  belief  of  a  God 
and  His  providence  out  of  the  world.  They  say.  If  God  would  hinder  them  but 
cannot,  then  is  He  not  omnipotent ;  if  He  can,  but  will  not,  then  is  He  not  just 
and  good  ;  so  that  either  His  power,  or  His  justice  and  goodness,  must  be  given 
up  ;  or  else  those  attributes  must  be  salved  by  the  imperfection  of  His  knowledge. 
But  the  true  notion  of  God  is  a  Being  infinite  in  all  perfections,  and  therefore 
he  that  is  defective  in  knowledge  can  no  more  be  God  tnan  he  that  is  not  infinite 
in  power,  justice,  or  goodness.  And  so  they  would  dispute  God  out  of  being. 
III.  Vindicate  the  Divine  providence  by  showing  the  weakness  of  thesb 
OBJECTIONS.  It  may  be  very  consistent  with  the  justice  and  goodness  of  God 
to  permit  these  things.  The  objection  is  built  upon  the  contrary  supposition.  1.  It 
i6  not  inconsistent  with  God's  justice  and  goodness  to  suffer  good  men  to  be  afflicted 


CHAP.  I.]  BABAKKUK. 


in  this  world,  because — (1)  Afflictions  are  not  always  punishments,  but  means 
whereby  God  does  a  great  deal  of  good  and  benefit  to  them  that  are  exercised 
with  them.  He  weans  them  from  the  world,  reduces  them  (leads  them  back) 
when  they  are  going  astray,  tries  and  proves  their  faith,  patience,  submission, 
resignation,  &c.  2.  Supposing  afflictions  to  be  punishments,  the  best  men  will 
find  failings  and  sins  enough  in  themselves  to  make  the  punishment  reasonable. 
They  may  well  think  God  good  and  merciful  in  thus  chastising  them.  3.  He  has 
appointed  a  day  wherein  He  will  abimdantly  recompense  all  the  troubles  and 
sorrows  and  sufferings  of  pious  men  with  joys  unspeakable.  4.  It  is  not  incon- 
sistent with  God's  justice  and  goodness  to  suffer  bad  men  to  be  prosperous  here. 
(1)  Prosperity  is  not  always  a  blessing.  If  the  impunity  of  the  wicked  be  their 
hardening  and  judgment,  it  is  certainly  not  unjust  with  God  to  suffer  it.  (2)  There 
is  hardly  any  man  so  bad  but  has  something  of  good  in  him,  by  which  he  is  useful 
and  serviceable  to  the  world.  For  God  to  reward  the  natural  or  moral  goodness 
of  otherwise  bad  men,  with  outward  temporal  blessings,  is  agreeable  to  His  rule 
of  rewarding  every  one  according  to  his  works.  (3)  It  cannot  argue  want  of 
justice  or  goodness  in  God  to  try  all  means  to  reduce  wholly  wicked  men  and 
make  them  better.  (4)  There  is  a  day  of  retribution  coming.  5.  It  is  not  incon- 
sistent with  God's  justice  and  goodness  to  suffer  bad  men  to  be  the  instruments 
whereby  good  men  are  afflicted.  If  a  thing  has  to  be  done,  and  is  right  to  do, 
it  cannot  matter  whether  the  agent  employed  is  good  or  bad,  so  long  as  he  is 
efficient  for  the  work.  And  can  the  good  be  employed  in  many  of  these  judg- 
ments, or  calamities,  or  wrongs  ?  If  God  may  work  by  such  things.  He  must 
use  the  sort  of  people  who  can  do  them.  Inferences — 1.  This  subject  gives  us 
an  irrefragable  assurance  of  a  futiu-e  judgment  and  state.  2.  Learn  not  to  "love 
the  world,  nor  the  things  of  the  world."  3.  The  facts  dwelt  on  should  excite  and 
inflame  our  desires  and  longings  after  the  other  world,  where  the  wicked  shall 
be  made  miserable,  and  the  good  man  happy.  4.  Learn  not  to  think  hardly  of 
God,  nor  to  envy  wicked  men  when  He  permits  them  to  persecute  His  Church, 
and  to  triumph  in  the  miseries  and  ruin  of  His  best  servants.  (W.  Talbot,  D.D.) 
"  Wait,  and  you  will  see  "  .• — Linnell,  the  artist,  had  a  commission  to  paint  a  picture, 
for  which  he  was  to  receive  £1000.  Not  wishing  any  one  to  inspect  it  until  per- 
fected, he  veiled  it  when  not  working  at  it,  and  wrote  over  it  in  Latin,  "  Wait, 
and  you  will  see."  The  final  issue  of  much  of  God's  work  is  now  hidden  from 
us,  but  assured  that,  even  in  times  of  affliction,  God  is  acting  wisely,  we  must  wait 
until  He  is  pleased  to  let  us  see  the  finished  glory  of  His  work.    {Gates  of  Imagery.) 

Vers.  14-17.  And  makest  men  as  the  fishes  of  the  sea. — Rapacious  selfish- 
ness in  power  : — Illustrated  in  Nebuchadnezzar.  Selfishness  is  the  root  and 
essence  of  sin.  All  unregenerate  men  are  therefore  more  or  less  selfish,  and 
rapacity  is  an  instinct  of  selfishness.  Selfishness  hungers  for  the  things  of  others. 
I.  It  practically  ignores  the  rights  of  man  as  man.  "  And  makest  man 
as  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  as  the  creeping  things,  that  have  no  ruler  over  them." 
The  Babylonian  tyrant  did  not  see  in  the  population  of  Judea  men  possessing 
natural  endowments,  sustaining  moral  relationships,  invested  with  rights  and 
responsibilities  similar  to  his  own  fellow-men  ;  but  merely  "  fishes  "  ; — his  object 
was,  to  catch  them  and  turn  them  to  his  own  use.  It  is  ever  so  with  selfishness  : 
it  blinds  man  to  the  claims  of  his  brother.  What  does  the  selfish  employer  care 
for  the  man  in  those  who  work  in  his  service  and  build  up  his  fortune  ?  He  treats 
them  rather  as  fishes  to  be  used,  than  as  brethren  to  be  respected.  What  does  the 
selfish  despot  care  for  the  moral  humanity  of  the  people  over  whom  he  sways  his 
sceptre  ?  He  values  them  only  as  they  can  fight  his  battles,  enrich  his  exchequer, 
and  contribute  to  his  pageantry  and  pomp.  What  were  men  to  Napoleon  ? 
&c.  II.  It  assiduously  works  to  turn  men  to  its  own  use.  "  They  take 
up  all  of  them  with  the  angle,  they  catch  them  in  their  net,  and  gather  them  in 
their  drag ;  therefore  they  rejoice  and  are  glad."  Ah  me  !  Human  life  is  like 
a  sea — deep,  unresting,  treacherous  ;  and  the  teaming  millions  of  men  are  but 
as  fishes,  the  weaker  devoured  by  the  stronger.  The  mighty  ones  use  the  hook 
to  oppress  individuals  one  by  one,  the  net  and  the  drag  to  carry  multitudes  away. 
As  the  fisherman  works  by  various  expedients  to  catch  the  fish,  the  selfish  man 
in  power  is  ever  active  in  devising  the  best  expedients  to  turn  human  flesh  to  hia 
own  use.  III.  It  adores  self  on  account  of  its  success.  "Therefore  they 
sacrifice  unto  their  net,  and  burn  incense  unto  their  drag  ;  because  by  them  their 
portion  is  fat,  and  their  meat  plenteous."     Because  men  are  everywhere  selfish. 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

they  are  everywhere  "  sacrificing  unto  their  net,  and  burning  incense  unto  their 
drag."  The  selfish  statesman  says,  There  is  no  measure  like  mine  ;  the  selfish 
sectarian.  There  is  no  Church  like  mine  ;  the  selfish  author,  There  is  no  book 
like  mine  ;  the  selfish  preacher.  There  is  no  sermon  hke  mine.  IV.  It  rbmains 
UNSATiABLB  NOTWITHSTANDING  ITS  PBOSPERiTY.  "Shall  they  therefore  empty 
their  net  ?  "  &c.  An  old  author  thus  paraphrases  the  language,  "  Shall  they 
enrich  themselves  and  fill  their  own  vessels,  with  that  which  they  have  by  violence 
and  oppression  taken  away  from  their  neighbours  ?  Shall  they  empty  their  net 
of  what  they  have  caught,  that  they  may  cast  it  into  the  sea  again  to  catch  more  ? 
And  wilt  Thou  suffer  them  to  proceed  in  this  wicked  course  ?  Shall  they  not 
spare  continually  to  slay  the  nations  ?  Must  the  numbers  and  wealth  of  nations 
be  sacrificed  to  their  net  ?  "  Conclusion — What  an  awful  picture  of  the  world 
we  have  here  !  (Homilist. )  The  hails  of  Satan  : — All  sorts  of  baits  are  used 
to  catch  human  souls.  One  of  the  old  fathers  of  the  Church  says  that  Satan  is 
the  ape  of  God.  That  is,  Satan  imitates  whatever  God  does,  but  with  a  different 
object.  God  uses  the  beautiful  things  He  has  made  to  draw  you  to  Him.  Satan 
uses  the  same  things  to  lure  you  into  his  power,  and  draw  you  away  from  God. 
Since  man  has  been  in  the  world,  he  has  had  to  work.  And  God  has  blessed 
work.  But  Satan  takes  work,  and  tries  to  make  mischief  with  it.  He  tries  to 
make  you  care  for  your  work  apart  from  God,  and  thus  it  is  turned  into  dead, 
graceless,  unprofitable  work.  The  world — the  society  of  yovir  fellows — may 
draw  the  souls  of  those  who  move  in  it  to  God  ;  for  there  is  a  great  deal  of  good 
in  the  world.  You  cannot  always  say  that  this  or  that  is  bad  in  itself.  It  is 
bad  only  when  Satan  has  put  his  hook  thiough  it.  Consequently  you  must 
not  rastJy  denoimce  an  amusement  or  a  pursuit,  as  bad,  unless  you  can  see  the 
hook  in  it.  Look  at  some  scriptural  instances  of  Satan's  fishing.  Case  of  Job; 
of  David  ;  of  Judas  Iscariot.  As  you  go  through  life  you  will  meet  with  all  sorts 
of  temptations.  Temptations  are  Satan's  baits.  Then,  whatever  you  undertake, 
keep  God  before  your  eyes  :  keep  God  in  yoiu:  thoughts.  Directly  you  begin 
to  lose  sight  of  God  and  to  forget  Him — then  beware  !  Recover  yourself  as 
quickly  as  you  can  ;  you  have  somehow  got  hold  of  a  bait  which  Satan  is 
pulling  towards  him.     (S.  Baring-Ootdd,  M.A.) 

Ver.  16.  Therefore  they  sacrifice  unto  their  net,  and  bum  incense  to  their 
drag;  because  by  them  their  portion  is  fat,  and  their  meat  plenteous. — Sdf- 
worship: — Nebuchadnezzar  is  here  represented  as  gathering  the  people  into 
his  net,  and  then,  forgetting  that  he  was  only  an  instrument,  doing  homage 
to    his  own  power  and  skill,   as  though   they  had  won  for  him   the   victory. 

1.  The  most  numerous  illustrations  of  this  spirit  are  those  which  may  be  found 
in  the  conduct  of  our  secular  work.  The  imgodliness  of  the  daily  life  of  men 
is  a  fact  too  manifest  to  be  disputed.  They  see  in  every  increase  of  their  wealth 
and  power  a  fresh  evidence  of  their  skill  and  strength  ;  and,  intoxicated  with  pride 
or  vanity,  bimi  incense  only  to  their  own  net.  Among  those  who  bear  the  Christian 
name  there  are  evidences  only  too  palpable  of  its  presence  and  power.  How  prone 
are  we,  in  secular  matters,  to  forget  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  God.  The 
precept,  "  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him,"  is  either  wholly  ignored,  or  its 
application  restricted  to  special  spiritual  exercises  and  duties.  We  need  a  more 
thorough  and  pervading  sense  of  God's  presence,  and  our  reliance  on  Him  to  pene- 
trate oiu-  lives.  The  danger  is  one  to  which  we  are  specially  liable  in  an  age  when 
the  science  and  industry  of  man  have  achieved  so  much.  Science  has  unveiled 
80  many  secrets  of  nature  that  we  begin  to  fancy  that  there  is  nothing  so  hidden 
that  the  same  skill  may  not  drag  it  from  its  retreat.  It  is  not  wonderful  that  man 
Bhould  deify  intellect,  and  forgetful  of  Him  from  whom  comes  every  talent,  should 
ask,  "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  built  ? "  Everywhere,  in  fact,  do  we 
Bee  men  thus  exalting  themselves  and  their  own  wisdom.  They  would  fain  put 
God  out  of  His  own  world,  by  enthroning  man  in  His  place.  To  correct  these 
godless  views  of  life,  God,  from  time  to  time,  sends  us  solemn  and  emphatic  warnings 
of  His  power  and  our  dependence.  The  wise  hear  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed 
it.    Judgment  instructs  those  whom  the  gentler  voice  of  mercy  did  not  reach. 

2.  Mark  the  development  of  this  spirit  in  our  spiritual  life.  Much  apparently 
Christian  service  would  not  abide  the  Master's  test,  because  so  much  of  this  earthly 
element  enters  into  the  spirit  by  which  it  is  inspired.  Is  there  not  too  often  a 
disposition  to  trust  in  the  wisdom  of  our  plans  and  the  efficiency  of  our  instru- 
ments, rather  than  in  that  blessing  which  alone  can  make  rich  ?     Self-reliance, 


CHAP.  I.]  HABAKKUK.  9 

self-conceit,  self-exaltation,  self-seeking,  self-worship,  are  evils  that  intrude  even 
into  religious  institutions.  (1)  This  spirit  may  reveal  itself  in  the  motives  that 
induce  activity  in  the  service  of  the  Church.  Love  to  Christ  is  the  only  true  and 
enduring  motive  of  all  Christian  labour.  But  we  may  work  to  extend  oiu-  party 
rather  than  to  glorify  God.  There  is  danger  in  mere  sectional  attachments. 
Our  motives  may  be  more  directly  personal.  We  may  labour  only  to  gratify 
our  own  ambition  or  fancy.  Our  vanity  may  be  pleased  by  the  rich  incense  of 
flattery.  Owe  desire  for  power  may  be  gratified  by  the  influence  we  gain  over 
other  men.  There  are  tests  which  we  may  all  employ  with  advantage  to  prove 
the  character  of  our  work.  (2)  The  spirit  displays  itself  in  regard  to  the  modes  of 
Christian  labour.  There  are  two  opposite  extremes  against  which  we  have  to  guard. 
There  are  not  a  few  who  are  crying  out  for  a  new  Gospel.  There  are  those  who 
are  sticklers  not  only  for  truth,  but  for  the  very  phrases  in  which  it  is  set  forth. 
These  two  parties  are  wide  as  the  poles  asunder,  yet  they  agree  in  this — they  are 
both  burning  incense  to  their  own  net.  (3)  This  spirit  may  reveal  itself  in  the 
way  in  which  we  regard  the  results  of  Christian  labour.  In  the  hour  of  success 
we  think  more  of  the  efficiency  of  the  instrument  than  of  the  grace  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  The  greatest  taJent  is  insufficient  if  alone.  We  want  aU  the  power  that 
Christians  possess  sanctified  to  Christ.  We  want  to  see  the  most  perfect  instru- 
mentality, but  we  want  something  beyond  that.  There  is  no  real  power  unless 
the  Spirit  of  God  be  in  our  midst.  (J.  Guinness  Rogers,  D.D.)  The  worship  of 
the  net : — The  word  "  drag  "  simply  means  a  large  fishing  net.  The  bold  metaphor 
of  the  text  is  that  of  a  fisherman  whose  mind  is  so  overborne  by  the  large  draughts 
of  fish  which  he  is  continually  taking  that  he  begins  actually  to  worship  those 
nets  which  are  the  instruments  of  such  wonderful  success.  The  prophet  is  por- 
traying the  condition  of  the  Babylonian  Empire.  It  had  been  swallowing  up  tho 
smaller  nations.  Puffed  up  by  its  military  successes,  it  had  simk  into  a  condition 
of  practical  atheism.  They  came  to  worship  the  resources  which  they  had  at  their 
disposal.  They  paid  homage  to  material  power.  In  answer  to  his  prayer  the 
prophet  receives  a  vision  of  judgment.  Haughty,  idolatrous  Babylon  will  not 
continue  for  ever.  They  worshipped  the  net;  they  would  be  captured  by  the  net 
of  another  military  empire.  The  sin  of  man  keeps  repeating  itself  throughout 
the  ages.  Notwithstanding  all  the  lessons  of  the  past,  there  are  still  multitudes 
who  forget  the  living  God.  They  seek  their  own  gratification  and  aggrandisement. 
When  they  are  successful  they  are  puffed  up  with  pride.  They  boast  themselves 
of  the  means  and  methods  which  have  been  the  instruments  of  their  success. 
Let  us  be  thankful  that  the  righteousness  of  God  keeps  repeating  itself  too.     The 

Principles  of  the  Divine  government  are  eternal.  God  was  in  the  history  of  old 
udaea  and  Assyria,  but  He  is  also  in  the  history  of  every  nation  of  modem  Europe. 
His  providence  must  not  be  left  out  of  human  calculations.  Have  we  in  England 
learnt  the  lesson  that  only  "  righteousness  "  can  really  and  permanently  exalt 
any  nation  ?  How  prone  are  we  to  magnify  the  instruments  of  our  national 
greatness  I  We  worship  rank,  wealth,  intellect,  business.  But  God  is  not  mocked, 
and  in  many  ways  He  breaks  men's  idols  before  their  eyes.  {T.  Campbell  F  inlay  son.) 
The  idolatry  of  tvork  : — In  our  times  the  idolatry  of  work  has  replaced  the  thirst 
for  wisdom  ;  there  is  no  time  to  fill  the  treasure-house,  and  there  is  no  time  to 
dispense  its  stores.  The  consequences  of  this  sort  of  life  are  sufficiently  mischievous 
before  we  bring  in  on  it  the  light  of  Christ  and  the  Gospel.  What  was  our  Lord's 
teaching  in  correction  of  this  tendency  to  an  idol-worship  of  work  ?  He  taught 
that  work  is  not  an  end,  but  a  means.  It  may  be  fruitful  or  imfruitful,  stopping 
with  itself,  or  producing  something.  It  is  essentially  of  two  kinds — it  may  begin 
with  itself,  or  it  may  have  a  beginning  behind  it ;  it  may  be  (so  to  say)  its  own 
life,  or  it  may  be  the  manifestation  of  a  life  prior  and  ancient.  Not  the  work,  but 
the  workman,  is  the  all-important  thing.  All  depends,  not  upon  what  the  man 
wrought,  but  upon  what  he  was.  (C  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  Self-conceit : — The 
over-estimate  of  one's  capabilities  and  powers,  and  the  depreciation  of  the  capa- 
bilities and  powers  of  all  other  people.  Self-knowledge  is  not  self-conceit.  Nor  is  the 
right  and  diligent  use  of  the  talents  with  which  God  has  entrusted  us  any  indication 
of  self-conceit.  Illustration — The  principle  contained  in  the  words,  "  They  sacrifice 
unto  their  own  net,"  &c.     I.  Men  do  this  when  they  attribute  their  temporal 

PROSPERITY  to  THEIR  OWN  SKILL  AND  ENERGY,  AND  NOT  TO   GoD.       Wealth  may, 

or  may  not,  be  a  proof  of  skill  and  industry.     Self-reliance  is  a  noble  quality  ; 
it  is  different  from  self-sufficiency.     But  we  are  dependent  upon  God.     II.  When 

IHEY  ATTRIBUTE  THE  DISCOVERIES  OF  SCIENCE  AND  THE  INVENTIONS  THAT  HAVE 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

BBNEFITBD    THB  WORLD    TO    THB    HUMAN    INTELLBCT   AND    NOT   TO  GOD.      Man's 

discoveries  are  God's  revelations.  III.  When  they  atteibute  the  pkospebity 
OF  A  COUNTRY  TO  ANY  OTHER  SOURCE  THAN  TO  GoD.  Patriotism  is  a  virtue.  Our 
prosperity  may  be  ascribed  to  different  causes.  liet  us  honour  God  ;  let  not  our 
pride  weaken  us.     IV.  In  their  treatment  of  God's  merciful  revelation  to 

THE  WORLD.  V.  WhEN  THEY  DEPEND  FOR  THE  SPREAD  OF  God's  RULE  ON  HUMAN 
PLANS  AND  organisations,  AND   NOT  ON  THE   BLESSING   OF  THE   HIGHEST.       "  The 

excellency  of  the  power  is  of  God."      Without  God's  presence  and  blessing  all 
that  we  do  is  in  vain.     {James  Owen.)        Conceit  horn  of  success  : — This  passage 
discovers  to  us  the  secret  impiety  of  all  those  who  do  not  serve  God  sincerely 
and  with  an  honest  mind.     There  is,  indeed,  imprinted  on  the  hearts  of  men  a 
certain  conviction  respecting  the  existence  of  a  God  ;  for  none  are  so  barbarous 
as  not  to  have  some  sense  of  religion  ;   and  thus  all  are  rendered   inexcusable, 
as  they  carry  in  their  hearts  a  law  which  is  sufficient  to  make  them  a  thousand 
times  guilty.     But  at  the  same  time  the  ungodly,  and  those  who  are  not  illuminated 
by  faith,  bury  this  knowledge,  for  they  are  enveloped  in  themselves  ;  and  when 
some  recollection  of  God  creeps  in,  they  are  at  first  impressed,  and  ascribe  some 
honour  to  him ;  but  this  is  evanescent,  for  they  soon  suppress  it  as  much  as  they 
can ;  yea,  they  even  strive  to  extinguish  (though  they  cannot)  this  knowledge, 
and  whatever  light  they  have  from  heaven.     This  is  what  the  prophet  now  graphi- 
cally sets  forth  in  the  person  of  the  Assyrian  king.     He  had  before  said,  "  This 
power  is  that  of  his  God."     He  had  complained  that  the  Assyrians  would  give 
to  their  idols  what  was  peculiar  to  God  alone,  and  thus  deprive  Him  of  His  right ; 
but  he  says  now,  that  they  would  "  sacrifice  to  their  own  drag,  and  offer  incense 
to  their  net."     This  is  a  very  different  thing  ;  for  how  could  they  sacrifice  to  their 
idols  if  they  ascribed  to  their  drag  whatever  victories  they  gained  ?     Now  by  the 
words  "  drag  "  and  "net"  the  prophet  means  their  efforts,  strength,  forces,  power, 
councils,  and  policies,  as  they  call  them,  and  whatever  else  there  be  which  profsine 
men  arrogate  to  themselves.     But  what  is  it  to  sacrifice  to  their  own  net  ?     The 
AssjTian  did  this,  because  he  thought  he  surpassed  all  others  in  craftiness ;  be- 
cause he  thought  himself  so  courageous  as  not  to  hesitate  to  make  war  with  all 
nations,  regarding  himself  as  well  prepared  with  forces,  and  justified  in  his  pro- 
ceedings ;  and  because  he  became  successful,  and  omitted  nothing  calculated  to 
ensure  victory.     Thus  the   Assyrian  regarded  as   nothing  his  idols  ;  for  he  put 
himself  in  the  place  of  all  his  gods.     But  if  it  be  asked,  whence  came  his  success  ? 
we  must  answer,  that  the  Assyrian  ought  to  have  ascribed  it  all  to  the  one  true 
God  ;  but  he  thought  that  he  prospered  through  his  own  valour.     If  we  refer  to 
coimsel,  it  is  certain  that  God  is  He  who  governs  the  coimsels  and  minds  of  men  ; 
but  the  Assyrian  thought  he  gained  everything  by  his  own  skill.     If,  again,  we 
speak  of  strength,  whence  is  it  ?     And  of  courage,  whence  is  it  but  from  God  ? 
But  the  Assyrian  appropriated  all  these  things  to  himself.     What  regard,  then, 
had  he  for  God  ?     We  see  how  he  now  takes  away  all  honom-  even  from  his  own 
idols,  and  attributes  everything  to  himself.     But  this  sin  belongs  to  all  the  im- 
godly ;  for  where  God's  Spirit  does  not  reign  there  is  no  humility,  and  men  ever 
swell  with  inward  pride  until  God  thoroughly  cleanse  them.     It  is,  then,  necessary 
that  God  should  empty  us  by  His  special  grace,  that  we  may  not  be  filled  with  this 
Satanic  pride,  which  is  innate,  and  which  cannot  by  any  means  be  shaken  off  by  U3 
until  the  Lord  regenerates  us  by  His  Spirit.     God  cannot  be  really  glorified  except 
when  men  wholly  empty  themselves.     (John  Calvin.)        Sacrificing  to  the  net : — 
There  is  a  curious  passage  in  the  prophecy  of  Habakkuk  which  speaks  of  fishermen 
who  "sacrifice  to  their  net,  and  burn  incense  to  their  drag."     I  think  that  some- 
times very  true  and  earnest  Christians  are  in  danger  of  doing  that.     They  almost 
worship  the  visible  Church,  which,  after  all,  is  only  a  net  "  to  catch  men  "  for 
Christ.     They  delight  in  its  historic  character.     They  glory  in  its  apostolic  order. 
They  venerate  every  feature  of  its  organic  structure.     In  one  word,  it  becomes 
no  rnore  a  spiritual  Church,  but  a  kingdom  of  this  world.     But  by  and  by  a  terrible 
shock  shakes  them  like  an  earthquake.     Some  iniquity  appears  in  Zion.     Wicked- 
ness shelters  itself  under  the  robes  of  piety.     Political  scheming  creeps  into  ecclesias- 
tical councils.     The  very  law  of  the  Church  is  made  an  instrument  of  oppression. 
They  stand  confounded  and  amazed.     What  means  it  all  ?     Why,  it  means  just 
this,  that  Christ  is  telling  you  that  no  earthly  kingdom  is  the  Church  of  Christ. 
This  is  not  your  rest.     The  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  is  not  in  the  poor  feast 
of  a  visible  Church.     The  "  New  Jerusalem  "  is  not  yet  let  down  from  God  out  of 
heaven.     (Bishop  Cheney.) 


CHAP.  11.]  EABAKKUK.  ll 


CHAPTER  n. 

Veb.  I.  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,  and  set  me  upon  the  tower. — Awaiting 
the  Lord's  message  : — Nothing  definite  is  known  of  this  man  Habakkuk.  In  the 
text  we  see  him  preparing  himself  for  his  holy  task — ascending  his  tower,  that 
he  may  see  ;  secluding  himself,  that  he  may  hear ;  making  his  oosom  bare,  that 
he  may  feel  the  message  of  the  Unseen.  I.  The  secbet  of  life  is  to  realise 
THE  Unseen.  To  this  man  the  world  is  full  of  an  unseen,  majestic  presence. 
The  very  air  he  breathes  throbs  with  the  pulse  of  God,  and  the  silence  may  be 
broken  at  any  time  by  God's  voice.  So  he  spends  life  watching,  listening,  waiting. 
Is  not  every  life  noble  and  grand  and  true  just  in  proportion  as  it  realises  this, 
as  it  seeks  the  Unseen  ?  This  is  indeed  the  Gospel — that  God  is  now  reconciled 
to  us,  and  that  His  presence  broods  over  us  in  unutterable  love.  To  realise  this 
and  enter  int6  its  blessedness  is  not  only  the  secret  of  life,  but  it  is  the  whole 
duty  of  man.  II.  We  ought  to  expect  messages  from  the  Unseen.  To  the 
prophet  this  great  Unseen  One  is  no  dumb  God.  The  truth  is,  that  God  seems 
to  be  always  seeking  some  heart  sufficiently  at  leisure  from  itself  that  He  may 
talk  with  it.  He  found  such  an  one  in  Abraham  and  in  Moses.  In  the  days  of 
Eli  we  read  there  was  "  no  open  vision."  God  was  silent,  for  none  could  hear 
His  voice ;  God  was  invisible,  for  earth-blinded  eyes  could  not  see  Him.  If  we 
could  but  hear.  He  has  much  to  say  imto  us — much  about  His  purposes  of  grace 
toward  ourselves,  and  about  His  purpose  toward  the  world  ;  much  about  the 
coming  glory.  In  three  ways — 1.  By  His  Spirit  through  the  Word.  2.  By  His 
Spirit  through  our  conscience.  3.  By  His  spirit  through  His  Providence.  We 
need  these  voices  from  the  Unseen  to  guide  and  help  us  in  the  sorrows  and  perplexities 
of  our  lives.  If  it  be  a  miracle  for  the  Unseen  to  speak  with  men,  then  that  is  a 
miracle  that  happens  almost  every  hour.  III.  How  we  should  dispose  ourselves 
to  receive  God's  messages.  1.  We  should  get  up,  up  above  the  heads  of  the 
crowd,  up  above  the  crush  and  clamour  of  the  worldly  throng,  to  where  there  is 
clearer  air  and  greater  peace.  It  is  not  the  new  play  we  want,  nor  the  most 
fashionable  church,  but  the  new  vision  of  His  face.  Wherever  we  can  get  most 
of  that  is  the  place  for  us.  2.  We  are  next  to  quicken  our  whole  being  into  a 
listening  and  receptive  attitude.  3.  Quiet  is  needed  also ;  for  God  most  often 
speaks  in  a  still,  small  voice.  (J.  C.  Johnston,  M.A.)  The  watch-tower: — 
Almost  nothing  is  known  about  the  personal  history  of  the  author  of  the  prophecy 
contained  in  this  book.  He  himself  retires  into  the  background,  as  one  content 
to  be  forgotten  if  the  Word  of  God  uttered  by  him  receives  the  attention  it  deserves. 
The  self-abnegation  of  many  of  those  whom  God  employed  to  do  a  great  work 
among  His  ancient  people  teaches  a  lesson  that  is  much  needed.  It  implies  a 
whole-hearted  consecration  to  God's  work  and  interests  in  the  world  that  ought 
to  be  more  aimed  at  than  it  sometimes  is.  It  is  a  trial  that  comes  to  the  prophet's 
faith,  and  how  he  met  it,  that  are  brought  before  us  in  the  whole  passage  of  which 
our  text  forms  a  part.  What  was  the  trial  of  his  faith  ?  In  answer  to  his  cry 
to  God  to  interpose  to  put  a  stop  to  abounding  wickedness  in  the  Covenant  nation, 
the  reply  is  given  to  him  that  terrible  judgment  was  about  to  faU  upon  it,  and 
from  an  unexpected  quarter — from  Babylon.  The  havoc  that  would  be  made 
by  this  fierce,  proud,  self-sufficient  world-power  is  made  in  vision  to  pass  distinctly 
and  clearly  before  him.  He  sees  its  terrible  army  marching  through  the  land — 
a  garden  of  Eden  before  it  and  a  wilderness  behind  it.  The  scene  that  thus  fills 
his  mind's  eye,  his  patriotic  spirit  would  not  allow  him  to  contemplate  unmoved. 
He  trembles  for  the  safety  of  his  people  under  this  dark  cloud  of  judgment.  He 
seeks  refuge  from  them  in  God,  holding  fast  the  conviction  that  a  righteous  God 
would  not  allow  a  wicked,  proud  nation  like  that  of  the  Chaldeans  to  hold  His  people 
for  ever  in  cruel  bondage.  ' '  Art  Thou  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and 
canst  Thou  not  look  upon  iniquity  ?  Wherefore  lookest  Thou,  then,  upon  them 
that  deal  treacherously,  and  boldest  Thy  tongue  when  the  wicked  devom"eth 
the  man  that  is  more  righteous  than  he  ?  "  As  he  contemplates  the  Chaldean 
army,  conscious  of  its  own  strength  and  making  a  god  of  it,  ravaging  the  whole 
land,  this  conviction  grew  doubtful  to  him.  It  seemed  sometimes  to  slip  away 
from  his  grasp.  This  was  the  trial  of  his  faith,  and  the  greatness  of  it  can  only 
be  measured  by  the  sincerity  of  his  religion  and  the  strength  of  his  patriotism. 
How  does  he  meet  this  trial  ?  The  words  of  our  text  inform  us.  "  I  will  stand 
upon  my  watch-tower,  and  set  me  upon  the  fortress,  and  will  watch  to  see  what 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

He  will  say  in  me,  and  what  I  shall  answer  to  my  plea."  He  resolves  to  lay  his 
doubts  before  God,  and  to  wait  upon  Him — withdrawing  his  attention  from  all 
earthly  things — for  solution.  In  carrying  out  this  resolution  he  compares  himself 
to  one  who  mounts  the  watch-tower — attached  to  ancient  toTvns  and  fortresses 
— that  he  may  scan  the  surrounding  district  to  see  if  any  one  might  be  approach- 
ing, whether  friend  or  foe.  Like  one  on  the  watch-tower  in  the  eager  strained 
outlook  for  some  messenger,  would  the  prophet  be  in  relation  to  the  expected 
explanation  from  God.  When  he  himself  tells  us  that  on  this  watch-tower  he 
was  watching  to  see  what  God  would  say  in  him — for  this  is  the  proper  rendering 
of  the  words — waiting  for  an  inward  voice  he  could  recognise  as  God's,  the 
spiritual  nature  of  the  transaction  is  placed  beyond  all  doubt.  The  revelation 
which  came  to  his  soul  thus  waiting,  of  which  we  have  an  account  in  the  subsequent 
part  of  the  chapter,  solved  his  difficulties  and  strengthened  his  faith  and  hope. 
The  assurance  was  given  to  him,  as  we  learn  from  the  14th  verse,  that  not  only 
Canaan,  but  "  the  whole  earth  would  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  I.  The  moxtnttng  of  the  watch- 
tower.  This  is  an  exercise  to  which  we  must  be  no  strangers  if  we  are  to  have 
God's  light  shining  on  our  path,  God's  voice  saying  to  us  :  "  This  is  the  way, 
walk  ye  in  it,"  and  God's  hand  laid  upon  us  to  strengthen  us  for  every  trial  and 
conflict.  1.  May  we  not  regard  it  as  laying  before  God  the  difficulties  caused 
by  his  own  dealings  ?  There  was  a  mystery  in  the  events  of  Providence  which 
the  prophet  felt  that  he  could  not  penetrate.  Was  it  possible  that  God's  chosen 
people — to  whom  pertained  the  adoption  and  the  glory  and  the  covenants — 
would  be  overwhelmed  in  the  disasters  in  which  he  saw  them  plunged  ?  Would 
the  ungodly  might  of  Chaldea  be  allowed  to  crush  them  altogether,  and  all  the 
hopes  bound  up  in  their  life  ?  To  the  eye  of  sense  this  seemed  likely,  but  the 
prophet  knew  that  behind  all  events  and  forces  there  was  a  personal  God — 
Jehovah  the  Covenant  God  of  Israel.  He  knew  that  they  were  but  carrying 
out  His  will,  and  he  would  not  believe,  even  though  the  appearances  of  things 
pointed  to  it — that  that  will  was  seeking  the  destruction  of  the  Covenant  nation. 
Sense  was  drawing  him  one  way,  his  faith  was  drawing  him  another,  and  the 
questions  bom  of  this  conflict  which  were  agitating  his  mind  he  wisely  resolves 
to  lay  before  God.  What  are  Job's  wonderful  speeches  in  his  conversations 
with  his  friends,  but  a  series  of  impassioned  reasonings  with  God  about  His  dealings 
with  him  ?  What,  again,  was  Asaph's  exercise  under  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked 
as  recorded  in  a  well-known  Psalm,  but  a  talking  with  God  about  His  dealings  ? 
And  do  we  not  find  the  plaintive  Jeremiah,  when  his  soul  was  sore  vexed  with 
cruel  opposition,  saying,  "  Righteous  art  Thou,  O  Lord,  when  I  plead  with  Thee  ; 
yet  let  me  talk  with  Thee  of  Thy  judgments.  Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the 
wicked  prosper  ?  Wherefore  are  all  they  happy  that  deal  very  treacherously  ?  " 
It  is  not  a  blind  impersonal  force  that  the  believer  sees  behind  the  events  that 
take  place,  compelling  sullen  submission  to  whatever  happens  ?  No !  It  is  a 
loving  Father  to  whom  appeal  may  be  made  about  the  perplexing  questions 
that  may  be  aroused  by  His  own  dealings.  Fatalism — in  which  things  are  accepted 
simply  because  they  caimot  be  changed — is  not  Christian  resignation,  and  falls 
far  short  of  the  attitude  in  which  the  believing  heart  can  find  rest.  Openness 
in  otir  dealings  with  God  is  what  He  delights  in,  and  what  will  lead  us  to  the 
knowledge  of  that  secret  of  His  that  is  with  them  that  fear  Him.  Faith  will  have 
its  difficulties  both  with  the  wondrous  revelation  God  has  given  to  us  in  His  Word, 
and  with  the  unfolding  of  His  piu-poses  in  the  course  of  His  Providence.  The 
finest  natures — those  touched  to  finest  issues — are  very  often  those  who  feel 
these  difficulties  most  keenly,  and  have  to  fight  their  way  to  the  bright  shining 
shore  of  certainty  and  rest  by  buffeting  with  many  a  storm.  And  the  best  way 
of  dealing  with  all  those  difficulties  is  just  to  take  them  to  the  watch-tower  and  lay 
them  before  God.  2.  But  this  dealing  with  God  about  questions  that  may  per- 
plex us  implies  the  stilling  of  oiu-  souls  before  Him,  that  He  may  give  us  light 
and  guidance.  The  prophet  after  pleading  with  God,  expostulating  with  Him 
on  the  apparent  contradiction  between  the  Divine  providence  and  the  Divine 
promise,  places  himself  before  God  and  waits  for  His  voice.  That  he  may  hear 
it  all  the  better — may  catch  the  slightest  whisper  of  the  Divine  voice  within  him 
— he  retires  into  himself,  quiets  his  own  spirit,  and  intently  waits.  The  expressive 
language  of  the  Psalmist  may  be  used  to  describe  his  attitude,  "  My  soul  is  silence 
unto  God."  And  this  exercise,  need  we  say,  is  essential  to  the  obtaining  of  any 
deep  insight  into  God's  will,  to  oiu-  receiving  those  discoveries  of  Himself  as  a 


CHAP.  II.]  HABAKKUK.  13 

Grod  of  grace  and  love,  that  will  give  us  rest  even  under  the  most  trying  dispen< 
sations.     It  is  by  the  Divine  voice  within  us  that  the  Divine  voice  without  us 
in  His  written  Word  is  clearly,  distinctly  understood,  and  is  made  to  throw  its 
blessed   light   upon   Divine   Providence.     Without   the   inward   revelation   that 
comes  to  us  by  the  teaching  of  God's  Spirit,  the  outward  revelation  given  in  our 
Bibles  will  remain  dark  and  unintelligible.     If  we  do  not  withdraw  now  and 
again  from  the  bustle  and  noise  of  the  world,  and  commime  with  our  own  hearts, 
the  Divine  voice  will  be  lost  to  us.     It  will  remain  unheard,  as  the  bell  striking 
the  hour  above  some  busy  thoroughfare  is  often  unheard  by  those  in  the  throng. 
It  is  the  calm  lake  which  mirrors  the  sun  most  perfectly,  and  so  it  is  the  calm 
soul  that  will  catch  the  most  of  the  heavenly  glory  that  shines  upon  the  watch- 
tower,  and  reflect  it  on  the  world  aroimd.     But  we  must  uot  think  of  this  calmness 
or  silence  of  the  soul  toward  God  as  a  mere  passive  attitude.     "  It  requires  the 
intensest  energy  of  aU  our  being  to  keep  all  oiu-  being  still  and  waiting  upon  God. 
All  oiu:  strength  must   be   put  into  the  task ;  and  our  soul  will  never  be  more 
intensely  alive  than  when  in  deepest  abnegation  it  waits  hushed  before  God." 
3.  Though  it  may  involve  an  apparent  contradiction,  the  silent  soul  will  be  one 
full  of  the  spirit  of  prayer.     The  prophet  had  been  pleading  with  God  for  light 
to  guide  him  in  dark  days,  and  it  is  with  a  longing  pleading  soid  that  he  mounts 
the  watch-tower  and  waits  for  an  answer.     He  has  directed  his  prayer  to  God, 
and  he  looks  up  expecting  an  answer.     There  is  really  as  much  prayer  in  this 
silent  submissive  waiting  for  an  answer  to  his  cry  as  there  was  in  the  cry  itself. 
The  expectant  look  of  the  beggar  after  his  request  has  been  made  has  often  more 
power  to  move  the  generous  heart  than  the  request  itself.     And  the  moimting 
of  the  watch-tower  after  prayer  to  maintain  an  outlook  for  the  promised  answer 
puts  beyond  all  doubt  that  we  have  been  sincere  and  earnest  in  the  exercise,  and 
wiU  have  power  with  God.     The  place  on  the  watch-tower  may  have  to  be  main- 
tained for  a  time  before  the  answer  comes,  but  it  is  sure  to  come  in  some  form 
or  another.     4.  But  last  of  all  here,  this  standing  upon  the  watch-tower  has  been 
regarded  by  some  as  the  prophet's  continuance  at  his  work  notwithstanding 
the  difficulties  that  encompassed  it.     Not  unfrequently  in  the  Old  Testament 
is  the  prophet's  office  compared  to  that  of  a  watchman.     What  the  watchman 
in  the  tower  did  in  the  earthly  sphere — keeping  an  outlook  for  the  people  and 
warning  them  of  coming  danger — the  prophet  was  to  do  in  the  spiritual  sphere. 
And  so  when  the  prophet  here  says  :  "I  will  stand  upon  my  watch-tower,"  he 
is  regarded  as  meaning,  "  I  wiU  not  leave  my  post — the  place  in  which  God  has 
put  me,  but  will  wait   in  the  faithful  discharge  of  every  commanded  duty  for 
the  solving  of  my  doubts  and  the  removal  of  my  difficulties."     Certainly  in  acting 
in  such  a  way  he  took  the  very  best  plan  of  getting  his  way  made  clear.     When 
we  allow  our  perplexities,  whatever  they  may  be,  to  keep  us  back  from  work 
God  is  plainly  laying  to  our  hands,  they  will  increase  around  us.     Activity  and 
steadfastness  in  duty  will  purge  our  spiritual  atmosphere,  while  melancholy  in- 
active brooding  will  laden  it  with  pestilential  vapours.     A  higher  attainment 
still  is  to  have  the  soul  stilled  before  God,  and  expectant  even  in  the  midst  of 
our   labour.     11.  What   is    enjoyed    in    this    watch-toweb.     The    prophet's 
experience  was  one  so  rich  and  blessed  that  a  glimpse  of  it  may  well  stir  us  up 
to  follow  his  example  :     1.  He  heard  the  Divine  voice  for  which  he  listened. 
"  Then  Jehovah  answered  me  and  said."     He  became  aware  of  a  Divine  presence 
within  his  soul,  and  conscious  of  a  Divine  voice  speaking  to  his  heart.     His 
waiting  and  looking  up  met  with  a  rich  reward.     Though  this  experience  cannot 
now  come  in  the  same  form  to  the  trustful  waiting  soul,  yet,  in  its  inner  essence, 
it  may  and  does  come.     The  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  believers  as 
their  teacher  is  a  blessed  reality.     They  who  submit  themselves  to  His  guidance 
will  be  led  by  Him  into  aU  truth,  will  not  only  gain  a  deep  insight  into  God's  will, 
but  will  see  its  bearing  upon  events  in  Providence.     It  was  a  very  simple  truth 
that  was  now  divinely  spoken  to  the  prophet :  "  Behold  his  soul  which  is  lifted 
up  is  not  upright  in  him  ;  but  the  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."     The  man  or  the 
race  of  men  that  are  lifted  up  with  vain  self-confidence  shall  experience  no  tran- 
quillity, but  they  who  abide  firm  in  their  allegiance  to  Grod  and  make  Him  their 
trust  shall  be  maintained  by  His  mighty  gracious  power.     The  simplest  truths, 
that  may  in  some  of  their  aspects  have  long  been  familiar  to  us,  are  often  used 
in  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  to  lift  the  soul  above  the  mists  that  obscure  its  vision. 
It  will  be  the  declaration  of  truths  thus  divinely  spoken  to  our  hearts  that  will 
be  accompanied  with  greatest  power.    2.  Again,  let  us  notice  that  this  expertenoe 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

brought  him  a  new  sense  of  the  Divine  presence  with  His  people.  The  song  with 
which  the  sad  prophecy  ends,  recorded  in  the  third  chapter,  expresses  this  sense 
of  the  Divine  nearness  to  His  people.  The  land  that  had  witnessed  such  marked 
manifestations  of  His  presence  and  power,  the  memory  of  which  was  fondly 
cherished  by  the  pious,  had  not  been  forsaken  by  Him.  What  had  been  done 
when  "  God  came  from  Teman,  and  the  Holy  One  from  Mount  Paran,"  would 
again  be  done  for  the  overthrow  of  the  proud  oppressor,  and  for  the  deliverance 
of  the  humble  fearers  of  His  name.  The  eternal  order  lay  behind  the  confusion 
caused  by  the  wicked,  and  would  in  due  time  assert  itself,  for  the  God  of  this 
order  was  behind  all.  3.  So  the  prophet  finds  his  labours  for  the  land  and  people 
he  loved  sustained  by  a  restful  hope.  Dark  days  may  come  in  which  the  fig- 
tree  shall  not  blossom,  and  there  shall  be  no  fruit  in  the  vine,  and  the  field 
shall  yield  no  meat,  but  when  their  purifying  work  is  accomplished  brighter 
times  shall  dawn.  His  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  Neither 
will  ours  if  done  in  the  right  spirit.  {R.  Morton.)  Watchfulness : — I.  Thb 
DUTY  OF  WATCHFULNESS.  I.  This  duty  arises  from  various  causes  which  affect 
us  in  our  outward  circumstances,  as  well  as  in  our  minds  and  hearts.  They  are 
our  enemies  or  our  friends ;  such  as  build  up  the  character  of  man  for  good,  and 
lift  it  heavenwards,  or  mar  it  and  force  it  downwards  to  destruction.  The 
ever-present,  active,  and  all-pervading  causes  of  good  and  evil,  acting  upon  man's 
moral  and  spiritual  nature,  provide  a  powerful  reason  for  this  duty.  For  while 
a  man  is  thus  taught  his  dependence  upon  God  for  strength,  and  is  shewn  his  own 
weakness  in  the  battle  of  life,  he  is  at  the  same  time  taught  to  use  every  precaution 
against  his  foes,  to  guard  every  avenue  of  his  heart  against  their  influence,  and 
to  be  vigilant  and  watchful  in  all  his  daily  undertakings.  2.  But  watchfulness 
as  a  moral  duty  may  be  considered  as  a  recognition  of  God's  laws  and  govern- 
ment. The  man  who  waits,  like  Habakkuk,  for  the  Almighty,  will  see  the  hand 
of  God  ever5rwhere.  He  recognises  God  as  the  watchful  Father,  noting  every 
tear  and  hearing  every  sigh  that  inspires  the  watchful  heart  with  hope,  and  that 
sheds  a  bright  ray  of  comfort  through  the  gloom.     II.  Faith  founded  upon 

THE    EEVELATIONS    OF   GOD    IS   AN   ARGUMENT   AGAINST   ALL   MISTRUST   AND    DOUBT 

OF  His  power  and  goodness.  1.  The  answer  which  God  gave  to  the  prayers 
of  Habakkuk  was  the  authority  by  which  he  met  every  quibble  of  his  opponents, 
and  by  which  he  confronted  his  enmity.  2.  A  true  faith  acts  on  the  revelation 
of  God  in  the  life  history  of  Christ,  and  on  the  soul's  immortality.  In  the  life 
of  Christ,  weighted  with  suffering  the  most  intense,  we  find  a  solution  to  our  own 
troubles,  as  well  as  their  sanction.  Then  let  us  "  stand  upon  our  watch."  (W. 
Horwood. )  On  the  watch-tower  : — There  is  no  remedy,  when  such  trials  as  those 
mentioned  by  the  prophet  in  the  first  chapter  meet  us,  except  we  learn  to  raise 
up  our  minds  above  the  world.  For  if  we  contend  with  Satan,  according  to  our 
own  view  of  things,  he  will  a  hundred  times  overwhelm  us,  and  we  can  never  be 
able  to  resist  him.  Let  us  therefore  know  that  here  is  shown  to  us  the  right  way 
of  fighting  with  him :  when  our  minds  are  agitated  with  vmbelief,  when  doubts 
respecting  God's  providence  creep  in,  when  things  are  so  confused  in  this  world 
as  to  involve  us  in  darkness,  so  that  no  light  appears,  we  must  bid  adieu  to  our 
own  reason  ;  for  all  our  thoughts  are  nothing  worth  when  we  seek,  according 
to  our  own  reason,  to  form  a  judgment.  Until  then  tlie  faithful  ascend  to  their 
tower,  and  stand  in  their  citadel,  of  which  the  prophet  here  speaks,  their  temptations 
will  drive  them  here  and  there,  and  sink  them  as  it  were  in  a  bottomless  gulf. 
But  that  we  may  more  fully  understand  the  meaning,  we  must  know  that  there 
is  here  an  implied  contrast  between  the  tower  and  the  citadel,  which  the  prophet 
mentions,  and  a  station  on  earth.  As  long,  then,  as  we  judge  according  to  our  own 
perceptions  we  walk  on  the  earth  ;  and  while  we  do  so,  many  clouds  arise,  and 
Satan  scatters  ashes  in  our  eyes,  and  wholly  darkens  our  judgment,  and  thus 
it  happens  that  we  lie  down  altogether  confounded.  It  is  hence  wholly  necessary 
that  we  should  tread  our  reason  under  foot,  and  come  nigh  to  God  Himself. 
We  have  said  that  the  tower  is  the  recess  of  the  mind,  but  how  can  we  ascend 
to  it  ?  Even  by  following  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  For  we  creep  on  the  earth  ; 
nay,  we  find  that  our  flesh  ever  draws  us  downward, — except  when  the  truth 
from  above  becomes  to  us,  as  it  were,  wings,  or  a  ladder,  or  a  vehicle,  we  cannot 
rise  up  one  foot,  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  shall  seek  refuges  on  the  earth  rather 
than  ascend  into  heaven.  But  let  the  Word  of  God  became  our  ladder,  or  our 
vehicle,  or  our  wings,  and,  however  difficult  the  ascent  may  be,  we  shall  yet  be 
able  to  fly  upward,  provided  God's  Word  be  allowed  to  have  its  own  authority. 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKUK.  15 

We  hence  see  how  unsuitable  is  the  view  of  those  interpreters  who  think  that 
the  tower  and  the  citadel  is  the  Word  of  God  ;  for  it  is  by  God's  Word  that  we 
are  raised  up  to  this  citadel,  that  is,  to  the  safeguard  of  hope,  where  we  may 
remain  safe  and  secure  while  looking  down  from  this  eminence  on  those  things 
which  disturb  us  and  darken  all  our  senses  as  long  as  we  lie  on  the  earth.  This  is 
one  thing.  Then  the  repetition  is  not  without  its  use ;  for  the  prophet  says, 
"  On  my  tower  will  I  stand,  on  the  citadel  will  I  set  myself."  He  does  not  repeat 
in  other  words  the  same  thing  because  it  is  obscure,  but  in  order  to  remind  the 
faithful  that,  though  they  are  inclined  to  sloth,  they  must  yet  strive  to  extricate 
themselves.  And  we  soon  find  how  slothful  we  become,  except  each  of  us  stirs 
up  himself.  For  when  any  perplexity  takes  hold  on  our  minds  we  soon  succumb 
to  despair.  This,  then,  is  the  reason  why  the  prophet,  after  having  spoken  of  the 
tower,  again  mentions  the  citadel.  {John  Calvin.)  Watching  for  God: — 1.  It 
is  our  safest  way,  in  times  of  temptation  and  perplexity,  not  to  lie  down  under 
discouragement,*  but  to  recollect  ourselves,  and  fix  our  eyes  on  God,  who  only 
can  clear  our  minds  and  quiet  our  spirits ;  therefore  the  prophet,  after  his  deep 
plimge  in  temptation,  sets  himself  to  look  to  God,  and  get  somewhat  to  answer 
upon  his  arguing,  or  reproof  and  expostulation,  that  so  his  mind  may  be  settled. 
2.  It  is  by  the  Word  that  the  Lord  cleareth  darkness,  and  would  have  His  people 
answer  their  temptations  and  silence  their  reasonings.  3.  Meditation,  earnest 
prayer,  withdrawing  of  our  minds  off  from  things  visible,  and  elevating  them 
towards  God,  are  the  means  in  the  use  whereof  God  revealeth  Himself,  and  His 
mind  from  His  Word,  to  His  people  in  dark  times.  4.  Faithful  ministers  ought 
to  acquit  themselves  like  watchmen  in  a  city  or  army,  to  be  awake  when  others 
sleep,  to  be  watching  with  God,  and  over  the  people,  seeking  af  t€r  faithful  instructions 
which  they  may  communicate,  seeking  to  be  filled  from  heaven  with  light  and  life, 
that  they  may  pour  it  out  upon  the  people ;  and  all  this  especially  in  hard  times. 
5.  Albeit  the  Lord's  people  may  have  their  own  debates  and  faintings  betwixt 
God  and  them,  yet  it  is  their  part  to  smother  these  as  much  as  they  can,  and  to 
bring  up  a  good  report  of  God  and  His  way  to  others.  (George  Hutcheson.)  On 
noting  the  providences  of  God  : — The  observer  of  greice  should  be  studious  to  discern 
the  workings  of  Divine  providence,  and  to  consider  their  purposes  in  the  counsels 
of  the  Most  High.  We  inquire  into  the  importance  of  observing  the  various 
ways  in  which  the  Almighty  is  pleased  to  address  us,  and  of  determining  how  far  we 
have  hitherto  regarded  them,  and  tiurned  them  to  our  individual  improvement. 
In  reply  to  the  complaints  of  His  servant,  the  Almighty  shows  that  mercy  would 
not  be  long  extended  ;  that  the  Chaldeans  would  soon  inflict  summary  vengeance 
on  the  Jews.  To  these  declarations  of  the  Divine  displeasure  the  prophet  rejoins 
by  stating  the  conviction  of  his  own  safety,  and  of  the  protection  which  would  be 
extended  to  the  rest  of  God's  people.  He  had  hoped  that  God  would  have 
been  satisfied  with  gentler  corrections,  and  not  have  employed  an  idolatrous 
nation  to  punish  His  chosen  people.  But  he  resolves  to  wait  patiently,  in  quietness 
and  in  confidence,  for  the  answer  of  God,  that  he  may  know  what  statement  he 
was  to  publish.  Every  Christian  is  as  a  man  standing  on  the  watch,  as  one  who 
will  have  to  give  account ;  who  watches  to  see  what  God  will  say  to  him.  The 
will  of  God  is  declared  both  in  His  Word  and  in  His  works.  The  great  end  to 
be  effected  by  watchfulness  is,  that  we  may  know  our  actual  state,  and  be  ready 
at  any  time  for  aught  that  may  befall  us.  It  is  that  we  may  not  be  surprised, 
that  we  may  not  be  taken  at  unawares.  What  do  you  propose  to  answer  when 
you  are  called  to  appear  before  an  all-seeing  God  ?  He  has  not  only  spoken  to 
us  in  national  judgments  and  mercies.  He  has  said  a  word  privately  to  eewh  one 
of  us  as  individual.  {Richard  Harvey,  M.A.)  Man's  moral  mission  in  the 
world : — Wherefore  are  we  in  this  world  ?  We  are  not  here  by  choice,  nor  by  chance. 
Man's  moral  mission — I.  Consists  in  receiving  communications  from  the  eter- 
nal MIND.  This  will  appear — 1.  From  man's  nature  as  a  spiritual  being.  (1)  Man 
has  a  native  instinct  for  it.  (2)  A  native  capacity  for  it.  (3)  A  native  necessity 
for  it.  2.  From  man's  condition  as  a  fallen  being.  As  a  sinner,  man  has  a  deeper 
and  a  more  special  need  than  angels  can  have.  Communications  from  God  are 
of  infinite  moment  to  man.  3.  From  the  purposes  of  Christ's  mediation.  Christ 
came  to  bring  men  to  God.  His  Cross  is  the  meeting-place  between  man  and 
his  Maker.  4.  From  the  special  manifestations  of  God  for  the  purpose.  These 
we  have  in  the  Bible.  5.  From  the  general  teaching  of  the  Bible.  In  the  Book 
men  are  called  to  audience  with  God.  II.  How  are  Divine  communications 
TO  BB  BECEiVBD  ?     Two  things  are  necessary — 1.   That  we  resort  to  the  right 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

scene.  The  prophet  to  his  "  tower."  2.  That  we  resort  to  the  right  scene  in 
the  right  spirit.  III.  Man's  moral  mission  consists  in  impakting  communica- 
tions FROM  THE  ETERNAL  MIND.  That  we  have  to  impart  as  well  as  to  receive 
is  evident — 1.  From  the  tendency  of  Divine  thoughts  to  express  themselves.  Ideas 
of  a  religious  kind  always  struggle  for  utterance.  2.  From  the  universal  adaptation 
of  Divine  thoughts.  3.  From  the  spiritual  dependence  of  man  upon  man.  4.  From 
the  general  teaching  of  the  Bible.     IV.  Man's  moral  mission  consists  in  thb 

PRACTICAL   realisation   OF   COMMUNICATIONS   FROM   THE   ETERNAL   MIND.      In    the 

Divine  purpose  there  is  a  period  fixed  for  the  reaUsation  of  every  Divine  promise. 
However  distant  it  may  seem,  our  duty  is  to  wait  in  earnest  practical  faith  for 
it.  Learn  who  it  is  that  fulfils  his  moral  missions  in  the  world.  The  man  who 
practically  carries  out  God's  revelation  in  the  spirit  and  habits  of  his  life.  Notice 
— (1)  The  reasonableness  of  religion.  (2)  The  grandevu:  of  a  religious  life.  (2)  The 
function  of  Christianity.  What  is  the  special  design  of  the  Gospel  ?  To  qualify 
man  to  fulfil  his  mission  on  earth.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  2.  Write  the  vision,  and  make  it  plain. — Teaching  must  be  flain : — 
Think  of  that  railway  excursion  train  as  it  hunies  onwards  with  impetuous 
speed  !  A  vast  crowd  is  collected  there,  and  how  various  and  complicated 
are  the  interests  of  each  I  A  rapid  impulse  bears  forward  the  whole ;  that 
impulse  resides  in  every  member  of  the  group;  one  single  bystander  directs 
and  controls  it  all.  In  an  imexpected  moment  a  shock,  as  of  a  thunderbolt, 
crushes  them  together ;  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  the  elements  of  destruction 
are  terribly  let  loose  ;  each  hapless  one  becomes  an  instrument  of  injury  or  death 
to  his  neighbour.  What  pain  can  paint  the  terror,  the  agony,  the  anguish  of 
such  a  scene  !  They  will  be  remembered  for  long,  long  years  in  mutilated  forms, 
in  shaken  nerves,  in  bereaved  or  orphaned  homes  ;  the  records  will  make  multi- 
tudes shudder  by  their  firesides,  or  will  havmt  them  in  their  slumbers.  Such  have 
been  the  effects  of  one  false  or  mistaken  signal !  Let  us  who  are  ministers  of  the 
Gospel  remember  what  interests  we  hold,  and  by  how  much  the  soul  is  more 
precious  than  the  body.  Let  us  beware  !  There  are,  in  the  age  in  which  we 
live,  spiritual  impulses  innumerable,  strange,  impetuous.  And  we  are  the  signal- 
men !  (J.  0.  Miall.)  The  voice  of  the  old  pulpit : — I.  The  old  pulpit's 
APOLOGY  FOR  SPEAKING.  I  am  old.  My  outward  appearance  has  been  diversified 
at  different  times  and  places.  I  have  a  variety  of  experiences.  My  great  influence 
is  acknowledged  by  a  large  majority  in  every  age  and  clime.  II.  The  old  pulpit's 
COMPLAINTS  AND  BOASTINGS.  1.  My  Complaints — (1)  I  complain  because  some 
very  ungodly  characters  have  taken  the  liberty  of  ascending  my  steps.  (2)  Because 
some  look  at  me  a.s  a  mere  workshop  to  make  a  living  in.  (3)  Because  I  have 
been  compelled  to  serve  as  a  stage  to  exhibit  men,  and  not  Christ.  (4)  Because 
I  have  been  too  long  used  as  a  place  of  refuge  for  blind  bigotry  and  prejudice. 
(5)  Because  many  who  have  stood  on  my  floor  did  not  do  my  work  with  all  their 
might.  (6)  Because  there  is  not  more  attention  paid  me.  2.  My  boastings — 
( 1  f  In  the  multitude  of  my  sons.  (2)  Of  the  fame  of  my  sons.  (3)  In  the  greatness 
and  glory  of  my  themes.  (4)  In  the  extent  of  my  influence  in  the  world.  (5)  In 
the  preservation  of  ray  life  in  spit«  of  numerous  and  powerful  enemies.  (6)  That 
I  am  the  great  favourite  of  heaven.  (J.  Roberts.)  The  simplicity  and  freenesa 
of  the  Go.ipel  salvation  : — The  vision  was  to  be  written  upon  tables,  and  made 
plain,  that  every  one  who  read  it  might  run.  He  who  gave  the  vision  com- 
manded that  it  should  be  made  plain  upon  tables,  that  the  way  of  escape  might 
be  at  once  learned  by  those  that  were  in  peril,  and  that  without  a  moment's  delay 
they  might  run  in  that  way  and  be  delivered.  What  was  the  danger  with  which 
the  people  were  threatened,  and  from  which  this  vision  was  to  indicate  the  way 
of  escape  ?  It  is  usually  thought  to  be  an  anticipated  invasion  of  the  Chaldeans. 
It  seems  to  me  the  danger  is  that  to  which  all  men  as  sinners  are  exposed  ;  and 
that  the  way  of  escape  indicated  is  that  which  is  revealed  to  us  by  the  Gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ.  I  regard  the  prophet  as  here  commissioned  to  announce  to  his 
countrymen,  and  ultimately,  through  the  volume  of  inspiration,  to  the  world 
at  large,  the  folly,  sin,  and  danger  of  rebellion  against  God,  and  forgetfulness  of 
Him  ;  and  having  thus  warned  them  of  the  evil  and  peril  of  their  ways,  to  urge 
upon  them  the  importance  of  running  in  that  way  which  has  been  opened  for 
their  escape.  In  favour  of  this  interpretation  the  following  considerations  may 
be  adduced — 1.  Ixjok  at  the  circumstances  in  which  the  prophet  tells  us  this  com- 
mission was  delivered  to  him.     2.  In  verse  4  is  a  passage  three  times  quoted  by 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKUK.  17 

the  apostle  Paul,  as  applicable  to  the  salvation  of  the  Gospel — to  the  enjoyment 
of  eternal  life.  3.  Peter  (Acts  x.  43)  tells  Cornelius  that  all  the  prophets  preached 
the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  faith  through  Christ.  4,  The  interpretation  proposed 
seems  to  give  greater  unity  and  appropriateness  to  the  prophet's  subsequent 
declarations.  The  commission,  then,  which  the  prophet  received  from  God 
was  a  commission  to  declare  plainly  and  faithfully  to  men  their  guilt  and  danger 
as  siimers  against  God,  and  to  point  them  to  that  salvation  in  connection  with 
which  God  has  revealed  Himself  to  them,  that  they  may  escape  the  calamities  to 
which  their  iniquity  has  exposed  them.  It  is  plain,  then,  that  in  order  to  ascertain 
correctly  the  way  of  salvation  we  must  go  to  the  written  records  of  God's  will, 
and  read.     (W.  Lindsay  Alexander,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  For  the  vision  is  yet  for  an  appointed  time. — Visions : — He  whom 
men  style  a  visionary  has  for  the  most  part  little  or  no  honour  among 
them.  But  no  one  can  help  having  visions  unless  he  be  devoid  of  imagina- 
tion. A  vision  is  an  inward  view,  an  image,  or  series  of  images,  broader, 
larger,  grander,  deeper  than  aught  that  the  bodily  eye  can  see ;  it  is  evoked  by 
some  outward  sign,  on  which  a  spiritual  force  acts.  Visions  may  come  from 
God;  they  may  bring  men  near  to  God.  There  are  day  visions.  It  was  to  be 
a  sign  of  the  latter  days,  that  in  them  there  should  be  second  sight  far  into  hidden 
things.  And  a  life  without  visions  is  not  that  which  an  imaginative  and  sympa- 
thetic man  or  woman  would  care  to  live.  There  are  false  visions  and  true  ;  some 
that  never  come,  and  some  that  will  come,  and  truly.  The  false  visions  are  those 
which  have  this  world  for  their  boimdary,  and  the  things  of  this  world  for  their 
substance.  They  generally  relate  to  self :  to  one's  own  aggrandisement,  to  one's 
own  enjoyment,  or  to  the  gratification  of  some  desire  of  the  natural  heart.  There 
is  a  great  variety  in  them,  even  at  that  rate.  It  is  sometimes  the  will  of  God 
that  men  should  get  the  discipline  they  need,  and  without  which  they  would  be 
lost  for  ever,  by  making  the  pilgrimage  of  life  with  visions  before  them  which  for 
ever  fly  pursuit.  Turn  from  visions  that  fade  to  one  which  does  not  fade.  That 
vision  is  supernatural ;  it  is  pure  vision,  for  it  is  seen  by  faith,  and  by  faith  only. 
What  is  that  vision  of  these  latter  days  ?  Jesus  came  to  earth,  lived,  disappeared. 
But  with  that  departure  came  a  vision  such  as  never  mortals  beheld  before. 
The  vision  of  a  ransomed  and  purified  race  of  men  and  women  ;  of  the  destruction 
of  all  that  is  false,  and  the  setting  straight  all  that  is  wrong ;  of  perfect  truth,  and 
a  clear  view  thereof.  Then  never  lose  faith,  never  fear.  God's  light  will  grow 
brighter  and  stronger  every  year  as  you  fight  off  the  powers  of  darkness  and 
hold  faster  to  Him,  and  at  last  you  shall  see  what  made  the  light  of  your  life,  and 
you  shall  find  all  truth  and  all  knowledge  and  full  reward  in  the  beatific  vision 
of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  {Morgan  Dix.)  Though  it  tarry,  wait  for 
it. — Waiting  on  God  : — Li  these  words  we  have  something  supposed,  and  a 
duty  prescribed.  "  Though  it  tarry."  This  implies  some  degree  of  impatience, 
which  may  be  due  either  to  unbelief  or  strength  of  desire.  "  Wait  for  it."  The 
vision  is  at  present  hid  in  the  Divine  purposes,  but  will  at  length  break  forth  and 
be  revealed.  I.  Inquire  what  is  implied  ts  "  waiting."  1.  A  firm  persuasion 
of  the  being  and  reality  of  what  God  has  promised.  Faith  makes  unseen  things 
visible,  and  future  things  present;  and  as  to  things  of  a  spiritual  nature,  it  so 
demonstrates  their  excellency  a.s  to  engage  us  to  choose  and  give  them  the  pre- 
ference to  all  other  things,  while  it  excites  strong  desires  after  them.  Faith 
therefore  enters  into  the  very  essence  of  the  duty  here  enjoined.  2.  The  deepest 
humility,  joined  with  reverence  and  love.  In  order  rightly  to  wait  upon  God 
we  must  have  high  apprehensions  of  Him  and  low  apprehensions  of  om-selves. 
The  waiting  soul  is  sensible  of  its  own  dependence  on  the  Divine  all-sufiBciency. 
3.  Fervent  and  continued  desire.  For  these  two  are  joined  together  in  Isa.  xxvi.  8. 
Waiting  will  cease  when  desire  fails  ;  but  when  everything  else  in  a  Christian 
seems  to  be  gone,  this  remains.  Waiting  upon  God  is  opposed  to  a  stupid  and 
lethargic  frame  of  spirit.  4.  Patience  must  be  exercised  in  waiting.  Not  despair- 
ing patience.  Not  merely  natural  patience.  A  truly  Christian  patience,  whereby 
we  bear  without  murmuring  the  greatest  afilictions,  and  are  not  totally  discouraged 
by  the  longest  delays.  A  patient  spirit  is  neither  timorous  and  distrustful  on 
the  one  hand,  nor  rash  and  hasty  on  the  other.  For  an  apostolic  similitude, 
see  James  v.  7,  8.  We  expect  from  God ;  we  must  not  prescribe  to  Him.  6.  Fixed- 
ness and  stability,  in  opposition  to  a  fluctuating  and  unstable  temper  of  mind  ; 
constancy  and  resolution,  in  opposition  to  fickleness  and  levity.  The  prophet 
8 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

calls  it  "  standing  upon  a  watch-tower."  6.  Diligence  and  constancy,  in  opposition 
to  sloth  and  weariness.  Waiting  upon  God  does  not  imply  indolence,  but  activity ; 
not  neglect  of  the  means,  but  diligent  use  of  them.  Diligence  without  depend- 
ence is  the  greatest  folly ;  and  dependence  without  diligence  is  no  better  than 
presumption.  II.  The  reasonableness  of  the  exhortation.  Consider — 
1.  We  are  but  servants  ;  and  what  should  servants  do  but  wait  ?  2.  What  God 
has  promised  must  be  worth  waiting  for.  Surely  those  put  a  great  slight  upon 
the  promised  blessings  who  will  not  earnestly  seek  and  patiently  wait  for  them. 
3.  God  has  long  waited  upon  us.  He  h£is  had  great  patience  with  us,  and  shall 
we  not  patiently  wait  for  His  mercy  ?  4.  It  is  one  end  for  which  God  bestows 
His  grace  upon  us,  that  we  might  be  able  and  willing  to  wait.  It  is  this  which 
calms  the  boisterous  passions  and  stills  the  tumult  of  the  soul.  5.  God  seldom 
performs  His  promises  or  answers  our  expectations  till  we  are  brought  to  this 
state  of  mind.  AVhen  we  are  submissive  in  the  want  of  blessings  v/e  are  most 
likely  to  enjoy  them  ;  whereas  fretfulness  and  discontent  will  provoke  God  to 
withhold  them.  When  we  contend  with  Him,  He  will  contend  with  us  ;  but 
when  we  resign  ourselves  up  to  His  will,  He  will  gratify  us  in  our  wishes.  6.  The 
sweetness  of  blessings  is  generally  proportioned  to  the  time  we  have  waited  for 
them,  and  the  longer  they  have  tarried  the  more  welcome  they  are  when  they 
come.  Learn  from  hence  that  when  grace  has  reached  the  heart  there  is  still 
much  for  the  Christian  to  do.  Our  present  state  is  oftentimes  a  state  of  sore  and 
pressing  want,  and  always  of  imperfect  enjoyment ;  and  therefore  we  should  wait, 
and  our  waiting  should  be  accompanied  with  cheerfulness ;  and  to  secure  this  we 
should  regard  promises  more  than  appearances.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  A  three- 
fold tarrying  : — Three  different  Hebrew  words  are  in  English  rendered  by  the  one 
word  "  tarry."  One  means,  to  tarry  for  a  reason,  because  constrained  to  do  so 
by  some  rational  necessity  exterior  to  the  actor.  One  signifies  to  tarry  for  shame, 
to  remain  in  a  place  because  ashamed  to  leave  it.  One  word  has  in  it  the  idea 
of  choice,  and  means  to  remain  behind  willingly.  Illustrate  by  Gen.  xxiv.  56 ; 
Deut.  vii.  10 ;  Gen.  xix.  16.  Habakkuk  is  speaking  of  the  second  Jidvent  of 
Christ.  To  the  yearning  inquiry  of  the  Church,  spiritually  heard  by  the  prophet, 
"  Lord,  when  wilt  Thou  come  in  Thy  glory  ?  "  the  answer  comes — "  The  time  for 
His  coming  is  appointed,  though  He  tarry  for  some  reason  "  ;  such  reasons  there 
are  in  the  conditions  of  this  wicked  world  which  delay  His  coming;  still,  wait  for 
Him;  because  it  (He)  will  surely  come  ;  it  (He)  will  not  tarry  freely,  willinglj% 
upon  His  own  account,  of  His  own  arbitrary  choice.  (Alex.  Mrywinitz,  A.M.) 
God's  delays  : — There  is  nothing  so  painful  or  mysterious  in  the  experience  of 
the  children  of  God  as  the  Lord's  frequently  long  delay  in  coming  to  their  help 
in  answer  to  their  cry.  This  experience  is  not  only  painful  in  itself,  but  it  often 
implies  much  spiritual  conflict.  It  tends  to  shake  faith  to  its  foundations.  Yet 
this  is  often  God's  way.  And  since  it  is  His  way,  our  first  source  of  comfort  under 
this  trial  is — 1.  To  be  still,  and  know  that  He  is  God.  In  all  extremities  we  must 
fall  back  upon  this,  the  sovereignty  of  God.  2.  However  dark  be  our  path, 
we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  His  love.  3.  We  can  sometimes  discern  reasons  why 
the  Lord  delays  His  coming.  The  expression,  "  the  fulness  of  time,"  reveals  to 
us  much  of  the  secret  of  God's  delays.  The  waiting  time  is  usually  a  time  of 
growth.  The  suppliant  sees  things  very  differently  at  the  close  of  his  struggle 
from  what  he  did  at  the  outset ;  and  the  blessing  so  ardently  sought  becomes 
now  a  real  blessing  from  his  being  thus  prepared  to  receive  it.  4.  It  will  follow 
from  this  that  when  our  prayers  are  offered  up  for  blessings  for  others  they  too, 
at  that  time,  may  be  unfitted  to  receive  them.  5.  As  it  is  with  human  souls, 
who  cannot,  without  a  miracle,  be  in  a  moment  transformed  from  childhood  to 
maturity,  there  must  be  in  all  mental  and  spiritual  processes,  first,  the  blade, 
then  the  ear,  then  the  full  com  in  the  ear.  So  it  is  with  the  constitution  of  things. 
Sometimes  before  prayer  can  be  answered  many  things  must  happen.  (Evan- 
gelical  Advocate.)  The  Divine  slowness: — This  word  is  the  one  word  which 
the  Divine  wisdom  often  seems  to  utter  in  rebuke  of  human  impatience.  God  is 
never  in  haste.  I.  The  Divine  proceedings  are  slow.  1.  The  history  of  the 
earth  illustrates  this  principle.  Creation  was  the  work  of  long  eras.  2.  There  ia 
something  in  the  movement  of  the  seasons  tending  to  remind  us  of  this  great 
law.  How  silently  and  slowly  winter  retires  before  spring,  and  spring  gives  place 
to  summer  and  autumn.  To  the  Divine  mind  that  orders  it  all  there  is  a  majesty 
in  slowness.  3.  The  history  of  all  life  conveys  the  same  lesson.  Life,  whether  in 
pluitsor  animals,  is  everywhere  a  growth;  and  all  growth  is  silent,  gradual, — so 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKVK.  19 

gradual  as  not  to  be  perceived.  The  education  of  an  individual  is  slow;  the 
education  of  a  people  must  be  very  slow.  II.  Guabd  against  impatience  nr 
JUDGING  THE  WAYS  OF  GoD,  AND  KNOW  HOW  TO  WAIT.  Religion,  revealed  religion, 
includes  much  in  harmony  with  these  facts  of  nature  and  providence.  1.  Note 
the  long  interval  which  was  to  pass  between  the  promise  of  a  Saviour  and  His 
advent.  2.  So,  when  the  Saviour  did  come,  the  maimer  of  His  coming  was  not 
such  as  the  thoughts  of  men  would  have  anticipated.  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
was  to  come  without  observation.  3.  It  is  not  without  mystery  to  many  minds 
that  the  history  of  revealed  religion  since  the  advent  should  have  been  such  as  it 
has  been.  We  might  have  anticipated  that  the  doctrine  of  Christ  would  be 
retained  in  its  purity,  and  that  its  subduing  power  would  be  everywhere  felt. 
But  on  reflection  we  find  analogy  suggesting  that  this  was  by  no  means  probable. 
4.  If  we  descend  from  the  general  life  of  the  Church  to  the  spiritual  history  of 
the  individual  believer,  we  may  find  much  there  to  remind  us  that  the  experience 
of  the  Church  at  large,  and  the  Christian  taken  separately,  are  regulated  by  the 
same  intelligence.  With  regard  to  much  of  our  personal  history,  we  are  expected 
to  wait  for  the  revelations  of  God.     (Robert  Vaughan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith. — Faith  and  the  higher  life : — All  men 
live  by  faith,  and  in  our  world  man  is  the  only  creature  who  lives  by  faith.  A 
world  altogether  without  faith,  where  no  man  could  trust  another  in  anything, 
would  be  a  most  miserable  world.  Take  away  faith  altogether,  and  all  the  social 
fabric  would  be  one  heap  of  ruins.  Man  is  the  only  creature  in  this  world  who 
can  live  by  faith.  All  creatures  and  all  things  depend  upon  God  for  the  continu- 
ance of  their  existence  as  truly  as  man  does,  but  it  is  man  only  who  can  trust 
in  God.  The  fact  that  man  can  know  God  and  trust  in  Him  is  a  proof  of  his 
greatness  and  glory,  and  shows  him  to  be  the  object  of  God's  special  care  and 
tenderness,  as  was  shown  by  Christ  in  His  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Yet  there  are 
many  men  who  do  not  trust  in  Him  for  His  blessings,  and  live  for  His  glory,  in. 
the  enjoyment  of  them.  Faith  in  Him  is  not  a  condition  of  the  bestowal  of  His 
temporal  blessings  upon  men.  But  men  cannot  have  God's  spiritual  blessings 
without  faith  in  Him.  To  Uve  for  the  spiritual  and  invisible  is  impossible  without 
faith  in  God,  and  man  is  too  great  and  glorious  a  being  to  live  only  for  the  present. 
The  truth  is,  that  the  man  of  faith  in  God  is  the  only  man  who  truly  lives.  I.  The 
NOBLEST  CHARACTER.  In  the  Bible  men  are  divided  into  two  great  divisions,  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked.  The  righteous  is  a  man  who  trusts  God's  Word,  submits 
to  God's  will,  and  Uves  in  conformity  with  God's  righteous  and  holy  law.  He  is 
a  straight,  or  right,  man — right  in  mind,  in  heart,  and  in  life.  The  unjust  man 
is  a  man  with  a  crooked  soul.  In  the  Old  Testament  the  word  righteousness  refers 
more  to  conduct  than  to  the  inward  principle  of  spiritual  Ufe,  and  the  righteous 
man  is  characterised  by  truthfulness,  honesty,  uprightness,  tenderness,  and 
unswerving  fidelity  to  duty  in  relation  to  God  and  man.  II.  The  highest  life. 
Man's  highest  Ufe  is  a  life  of  trust  in  God.  No  man  can  live  to  himself  in  the 
highest  sense  of  life,  and  if  he  tries  to  do  so  he  will  die  in  the  very  attempt.  It 
is  through  the  death  of  the  lower  self  that  the  higher  and  true  self  can  five.  To 
enable  men  to  do  this  was  Christ's  object  in  coming  to  the  world  to  live  and  die 
for  us.  Through  faith  men  die  in  His  death  and  hve  in  His  Ufe,  and  this  is  the 
only  way  in  which  fallen  man,  who  is  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  can  find  his 
life.  The  greatest  thing  the  blessed  Saviour  could  give  for  man  was  Ufe,  and  the 
greatest  thing  He  can  give  to  man  is  Ufe.  In  giving  life  Christ  gives  to  men  all 
they  stand  in  need  of  for  time  and  eternity.  There  is  more  in  life  than  corre- 
spondence of  an  organism  with  its  environment.  There  is  a  Arital,  mysterious 
principle,  which  manifests  itself  through  the  correspondence  of  the  organism  with 
its  environment,  and  reaches  its  perfection  when  that  correspondence  becomes 
perfect.  The  highest  Ufe  is  the  spiritual,  which,  said  Christ,  consists  in  the  knowledge 
of  God  and  Himself.  The  spiritual  man  not  only  Uves  and  moves  and  has  his 
being  in  Grod  and  EQs  Son,  as  the  true  environment  of  spiritual  and  eternal 
life,  but  God  in  His  Son  must  Uve  in  him.  What  is  it  to  live  according  to  the 
sense  of  the  word  in  the  text  ?  It  consists  of  three  things — 1.  Participation  of 
Grod's  nature.  Men  live  in  God  and  unto  God  by  becoming  partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature.  2.  Perfect  delight  in  God.  We  associate  enjoyment  with  all 
conscious  Ufe.  God  has  no  way  of  giving  joy  but  by  giving  Ufe.  3.  Usefulness 
for  Grod.  The  crown  of  every  Ufe  is  its  usefulness ;  its  highest  end  is  service. 
There  is  no  true  joy  of  Ufe  possible  without  life  of  service.    The  Ufe  which  consista 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  il 

of  the  knowledge  of  God  in  His  Son  will  be  eternally  progressive.      III.  Thh 

CONDITION    OF   THE    BLESSED    LIFE   OF   THE   RIGHTEOUS.       '    By    his   faith."       Man's 

highest  life  is  a  life  of  living  trust  in  a  living  God.  Faith  in  God  is  the  animating 
and  sustaining  principle  of  the  life  of  the  righteous.  Only  a  per  son  can  be  an 
object  of  trust.  Faith  cannot  live  but  in  the  constant  vision  of  its  object.  This 
living  faith  in  God  is  given  to  man  to  enable  him  to  do  his  work  for  God.  The 
only  faith  worthy  of  the  name  is  that  which  enables  us  to  live  the  truest  and 
highest  life.  (Z.  Mather.)  The  just : — When  we  repent  and  believe  the  Gospel, 
we  live — are  raised  from  spiritual  death  to  spiritual  life.  I.  The  just.  Behold, 
his  soul  that  is  lifted  up  is  not  upright  in  him.  Works  which  are  supposed  to 
merit,  naturally  puff  up  the  mind  with  pride.  The  prophet  says,  that  proud 
disposition  which  you  think  merits,  because  of  your  works,  is  not  an  upright 
disposition.  Good  works  cannot  avail  to  justification.  You  must  believe,  not 
works.  Good  works  are  evidences  of  faith.  The  just  are  such  as  God  justifies 
by  faith  in  His  own  beloved  Son.  For  Christ's  righteousness  is  to  all,  and  upon 
all  them  that  believe.  II.  They  are  alive.  Did  they  not  live  before  ?  Yes, 
a  natural  life.  They  are  quickened  to  a  new  and  higher  life.  None  are  alive 
till  born  again  of  the  Spirit.  We  must  experience  the  "  washing  of  regeneration, 
and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  III.  How  the  believer  lives  this  spiritual 
LIFE.  By  his  faith.  The  man  who  is  justified  by  faith  is  made  spiritually  alive, 
and  this  life  is  maintained  and  supported  by  repeated  acts  of  faith  in  the  Son 
of  God  and  Saviour  of  the  world.  Faith  in  Christ  justifies,  and  by  believing  we 
receive  righteousness  and  strength,  and  are  made  holy  and  acceptable  to  God. 
{R.  Horsjall. )  Nothing  better  than  reliance  on  God  : — The  prophet  means  to 
show  that  nothing  is  better  than  to  rely  on  God's  Word,  how  much  soever  may 
various  temptations  assault  our  souls.  He  sets  the  two  clauses  of  the  verse, 
the  one  opposed  to  the  other  :  every  man  who  would  fortify  himself,  would  ever 
be  subject  to  various  changes,  and  never  attain  a  quiet  mind  ;  then  comes  the 
other  clause — that  man  cannot  otherwise  obtain  rest  than  by  faith.  The  first 
clause  I  would  render,  "  Where  there  is  an  elation  of  mind  there  is  no  tranquillity." 
When  the  prophet  says  that  there  is  no  calmness  of  mind  possessed  by  those  who 
deem  themselves  well  fortified,  he  intimates  that  they  are  their  own  executioners, 
for  they  seek  for  themselves  many  troubles,  many  sorrows,  many  anxieties,  and 
contrive  and  mingle  together  many  designs  and  purposes  ;  now  they  think  of  one 
thing,  then  they  turn  to  another  ;  for  the  Hebrews  say  that  the  soul  is  made 
right  when  we  acquiesce  in  a  thing,  and  continue  in  a  tranquil  state  of  mind  ; 
but  when  confused  thoughts  distract  us,  then  they  say  that  our  soul  is  not  right 
in  us.  We  now  perceive  the  real  meaning  of  the  prophet.  "  Behold,"  he  says: 
by  this  demonstrative  particle  he  intimates  that  what  he  teaches  us  may  be 
clearly  seen  if  we  attend  to  daily  events.  The  meaning  then  is,  that  a  proof  of 
this  fact  exists  evidently  in  the  common  life  of  men — that  he  who  fortifies  himself, 
and  is  also  elated  with  self-confidence,  never  finds  a  tranquil  haven,  for  some  new 
suspicion  or  fear  ever  disturbs  his  mind.  Hence  it  comes  that  the  soul  entangles 
itself  in  various  cares  and  anxieties.  This  is  the  reward  which  is  allotted  by  God's 
just  judgment  to  the  unbelieving.  The  prophet,  in  the  second  clause,  places 
faith  in  opposition  to  all  those  defences  by  which  men  so  blind  themselves  as  to 
neglect  God,  and  to  seek  no  aid  from  Him.  (John  Calvin. )  Life  by  faith  : — 
In  this  connection  there  is  a  peculiar  shade  of  meaning  in  living  by  faith.  Immediate 
reference  is  to  approaching  trials  of  an  extraordinary  kind.  There  is  a  vision 
of  national  calamity,  an  impending  invasion  of  the  Chaldeans.  It  is  declared 
that  humility  is  the  only  upright  attitude  of  soul,  in  such  circumstances :  and 
contrasted  with  the  proud  impatience  which  cannot  wait  for  God,  in  His  appointed 
time,  is  the  meek  reliance  of  the  just  man.     "  But  the  just  shall  live  by  his  faith." 

I.  Ordinarily,  the  just  man  lives  by  faith.  1.  As  it  is  the  first  act  of  that 
new  spiritual  life  which  the  Holy  Ghost  produces  in  the  soul.  It  is  that  coming 
to  Christ  which  the  Scriptures  make  anterior  to  every  other  gift  or  exercise  of 
grace.  2.  We  live  by  faith,  as  it  apprehends  the  plea  by  which  the  condemnation 
of  death  is  set  aside,  or  as  it  is  a  justifying  instrument.  We  are  said  to  live  by 
that  instrumentality  which  delivers  us,  and  shields  us  from  the  operation  of 
death.  3.  We  live  by  faith,  as  it  unites  the  soul  in  mystical  union  with  the  Head, 
in  whom  there  is  all  the  fulness  of  life.  4.  We  live  by  faith,  as  it  is  in  the  range 
of  its  appropriation  the  highest  and  best  condition  of  life.  5.  We  live  by  faith, 
as  it  is  a  principle  essentially  indicative  of  Ufe,  active,  operative,  and  fruitful. 

II.  How  DOBS  SUCH  faith  SURVIVE  IN  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  BXTRAOBDINABY  TRIAL  t 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKUK.  21 

1.  Calamity,  that  which  exceeds  the  bounds  of  ordinary  affliction.  Such  as  war, 
famine,  pestilence,  earthquake.  2.  Reproach  for  the  faithful  maintenance  of 
truth  and  holiness.  3.  The  return  of  infidelity — extraordinary  in  that  no  com- 
pleteness of  defeat  can  prevent  its  returning  invasion.  4.  Another  trial  is  apostasy. 
Faith  is  first  in  order ;  every  other  grace  in  the  soul  implies  the  precedence  of 
this  faith  ;  hope  herself  must  give  up  the  sure  and  steadfast  anchor,  before  this 
inner  and  ultimate  life  of  faith  can  be  destroyed.  (.4.  T.  M'Gill,  D.D.)  Life 
t»  due  to  faith  : — The  prophet  here  places  faith  in  opposition  to  all  those  defences 
by  which  men  so  blind  themselves  as  to  neglect  God,  and  to  seek  no  aid  from  Him. 
As  men  therefore  rely  on  what  the  earth  affords,  depending  on  their  fallacious 
supports,  the  prophet  here  ascribes  life  to  faith.  But  faith,  as  is  well  known, 
depends  on  God  alone.  That  we  may  then  live  by  faith,  the  prophet  intimates 
that  we  must  willingly  give  up  all  those  defences  which  are  wont  to  disappoint 
us.  He  then  who  finds  that  he  is  deprived  of  all  protection,  will  live  by  his  faith, 
provided  he  seeks  in  God  alone  what  he  wants,  and  leaving  the  world,  would  fix 
his  mind  on  heaven.  The  prophet  imderstands  by  the  word  amunat,  that  faith 
which  strips  us  of  all  arrogance,  and  leads  us  naked  and  needy  to  God,  that  we 
may  seek  salvation  from  Him  alone,  which  would  otherwise  be  far  removed  from 
us.  We  perceive  why  Habakkiik  has  put  these  two  things  in  opposition  the  one 
to  the  other — that  the  defences  of  this  world  are  not  only  evanescent,  but  also 
bring  always  with  them  many  tormenting  fears — and  then,  that  the  just  shall 
live  by  his  faith.  Faith  is  not  to  be  taken  here  for  man's  integrity,  but  for  that 
faith  which  sets  man  before  God  emptied  of  all  good  things,  so  that  he  seeks  what 
he  needs  from  His  gratuitous  goodness :  for  all  the  unbelieving  try  to  fortify 
themselves  ;  and  thus  they  strengthen  themselves,  thinking  that  anything  in 
which  they  trust  is  sufficient  for  them.  But  what  does  the  just  do  ?  He  brings 
nothing  before  God  except  faith  :  then  he  brings  nothing  of  his  own,  because 
faith  borrows,  as  it  were,  through  favour,  what  is  not  in  man's  possession.  He, 
then,  who  lives  by  faith,  has  no  life  in  himself,  but  because  he  wants  it,  he  iiies 
for  it  to  God  alone.  The  prophet  also  puts  the  verb  in  the  future  tense,  in  order 
to  show  the  perpetuity  of  this  life  ;  for  the  unbelieving  glory  in  a  shadowy  life ; 
but  the  Lord  will  at  last  discern  their  folly,  and  they  themselves  shall  really 
know  that  they  have  been  deceived.  But  as  God  never  disappoints  the  hope  of 
His  people,  the  prophet  here  promises  a  perpetual  life  to  the  faithful.  [John 
Calvin.)  The  use  of  faith  in  a  time  of  general  declension  in  religion  : — What 
is  a  calamitous  season  ?  I.  When  it  exceeds  the  boimds  of  affliction,  or  when  the 
dispensations  of  God's  anger  in  it  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  head  of  affliction. 
2.  When  judgments  fall  promiscuously  upon  all  sorts  of  persons,  and  make  no 
distinction.  I.  How  ave  shall  live  by  faith  ;  what  faith  will  do  in  such 
A  SEASON.  1.  Faith  will  give  the  soul  a  reverential  fear  of  God  in  His  judgments. 
2.  It  will  put  the  soul  upon  preparing  and  providing  an  ark  for  itself.  (I)  This 
ark  is  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  There  must  be  a  door  in  this  ark.  To  obtain  an  interest 
in  Christ  is  the  general  work  of  faith  in  these  days.  (3)  It  will  put  us  upon  the 
search  and  examination  of  our  own  hearts,  what  accession  we  have  made  to  the 
sins  that  have  procured  these  judgments.  The  sins  which  do  and  have  procured 
these  judgments  are — open  and  flagitious  sins  of  the  world.  And  the  sins  of 
Churches  and  professors.  These  latter  include  lukewarmness  ;  contenting  ourselves 
in  outward  order  ;  want  of  love  among  ourselves  ;  earth  ly-mindedness.     II.  How 

FAITH   WILL   CARRY  IT   UNDER  OTHER  PERPLEXITIES  THAT  MAY   BE   COMING   ON   US. 

I.  How  we  may  live  by  faith  under  reproaches.  (1)  Faith  will  give  us  such  an 
experience  of  the  power,  efficacy,  sweetness  and  benefit  of  Gospel  ordinances 
and  Gospel  worship,  as  shall  cause  us  to  despise  all  that  the  world  can  do  in 
opposition  to  us.  (2)  It  will  bring  the  soul  into  such  an  experimental  sense  of 
the  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  to  make  it  despise  all  other  things.  Faith  will 
work  this  double  respect  unto  the  authority  of  Jesus  Christ — as  He  is  the  great 
Head  and  Lawgiver  of  the  Church,  and  as  He  is  Lord  of  lords  and  King  of  kings. 
(3)  Faith  will  bring  to  mind,  and  make  effectual  upon  our  souls,  the  examples 
of  them  that  have  gone  before  us,  in  giving  the  same  testimony  that  we  do,  and 
in  the  sufferings  that  they  underwent  upon  that  account.  (4)  Faith  will  receive 
in  the  supplies  that  Christ  hath  laid  up  for  His  people  in  such  a  season.  (5)  It 
is  faith  alone  that  can  relieve  us  with  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  reward. 
(6)  Faith  will  work  by  patience  when  difficulties  shall  be  multiplied  upon  us.  2.  Hot 
we  may  live  by  faith,  under  an  apprehension  of  the  great  and  woefu.  decays  ii, 
Churches,  in  Chiirch  members,  in  professors  of  all  sorts ;    and  in  the  gradua4 


22  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

withdrawing  of  the  glory  of  God  from  us  all  on  that  account.  (1)  This  is  such  a 
time  of  decay  among  us.  A  sense  of  it  is  impressed  upon  the  minds  of  all  the 
most  judicious  and  diligent  Christians,  that  do  abound  most  in  self-examination, 
or  do  take  most  notice  of  the  ways  of  God.  They  recognise  the  open  want  of 
love  among  Church  members ;  want  of  delight  and  diligence  in  the  ordinances 
of  Gospel  worship ;  and  ovu*  worldly-mindedness,  conformity  to  the  world,  and 
Becurity.  A  sense  of  this  general  decay  ought  to  be  an  exercise  and  concern  to 
our  minds.  Grod  is  dishonoured  by  this  general  decay.  The  world  is  offended 
and  scandalised  by  it.  The  ruin  of  Churches  is  hastened  by  it.  (2)  What  is  the 
work  of  faith  imder  this  condition  7  It  will  remind  the  soul  that,  notwithstanding 
this,  Christ  hath  built  His  Church  upon  a  rock,  that  it  shall  not  be  utterly  prevailed 
against.  It  will  remind  the  soul  that  God  hath  yet  the  fulness  and  residue  of 
the  Spirit.  Faith  will  cheer  us  by  saying,  "  Are  not  all  these  things  foretold 
thee  ?  "  And  it  will  put  every  sovd  in  whom  it  is  upon  an  especial  attendance 
imto  those  duties  God  calls  him  unto  in  such  a  season.  Such  as  self-examination ; 
great  mourning,  by  reason  of  God's  withdrawing  Himself  from  us ;  watchfulness 
over  ourselves,  and  over  one  another,  that  we  be  not  overtaken  by  the  means  and 
causes  of  these  decays ;  zeal  for  God  and  the  honour  of  the  Gospel,  that  it  may 
not  suffer  by  reason  of  our  miscarriages.  (J.  Owen,  D.D.)  The  life  of  faith: — 
The  text  may  be  taken  in  two  ways.  In  a  moral  sense,  as  regards  the  circiimstances 
of  the  Jews.  In  a  theological  sense,  as  respects  that  great  object  on  which 
believers  have  fixed  their  eye  in  all  ages  of  the  Church.  The  Rabbis  give  a  very 
curious  exposition  of  the  words,  "  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch."  They  translate, 
"  I  will  confine  myself  in  a  circle,"  and  explain  that  the  prophet  drew  a  circle, 
and  made  a  solemn  vow  that  he  would  not  go  out  of  it,  \mtil  God  had  unfolded 
those  dark  dispensations  to  him,  which  seemed  so  injurious  to  His  perfections. 
I.  Explain  the  terms  of  this  proposition,  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith." 

1.  Who  is  the  just  or  righteous  man  ?  There  are  two  sorts  of  righteousness, 
according  to  the  law,  and  according  to  faith.  By  righteousness  after  the  law 
understand  that  which  man  wishes  to  derive  from  his  own  personal  ability.  By 
righteousness  of  faith  understand  that  which  man  derives  from  his  own  personal 
ability.  To  have  faith,  or  to  believe,  is  a  vague  expression.  Faith  is  sometimes  a 
disposition  common  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked ;  sometimes  the  distinguishing 
character  of  a  Christian  ;  sometimes  it  is  put  for  the  virtue  of  Abraham  ;  sometimes 
it  stands  for  the  credence  of  devils.  Faith  is  a  disposition  of  mind  that  changeth 
its  nature  ticcording  to  the  various  objects  which  are  proposed  to  it.  We  are 
inquiring  about  saving  faith,  and  have  to  inquire  what  is  its  object.  It  is  Jesus 
Christ  as  dying  and  offering  Himself  to  the  justice  of  the  Father.  We  must 
distinguish  two  sorts  of  desires  to  share  the  benefits  of  the  death  of  Christ.  A 
desire  unconnected  with  all  the  acts  which  God  is  pleased  to  require  of  us ;  and 
a  desire  that  animates  us  with  a  determination  to  participate  these  benefite. 
Jesus  is  proposed  to  the  believer's  mind  and  heart  and  conduct.  There  are  two 
kinds  or  causes  of  justification.       1.   The   fimdamental  or  meritorious  cause. 

2.  The  instrumental  cause.  That  is  the  fimdamental  which  acquires,  merits,  and 
lays  the  foundation  of  our  justification  and  salvation.  By  the  instrumental  we 
mean  those  acts  which  it  hath  pleased  God  to  prescribe  to  us,  in  order  to  our 
participation  of  this  acquired  salvation.  If  faith  justifies  us,  it  is  as  an  instrument, 
that  of  itself  can  merit  nothing,  and  which  contributes  to  our  justification  only 
as  it  capacitates  us  for  participating  the  benefits  of  the  death  of  Christ.  Justifying 
faith  is  a  general  principle  of  virtue  and  holiness.  1.  Justifying  faith  is  lively 
faith,  a  believer  cannot  live  by  a  dead  faith.  2.  Justifying  faith  must  assort 
with  the  genius  of  the  covenant,  to  which  it  belongs.  3.  Justifying  faith  must 
mclude  all  the  virtues  to  which  the  Scriptures  attribute  justification  and  salvation. 
4.  Justifying  faith  must  merit  all  the  praises  which  are  given  to  it  in  Scripture. 
6.  Justifying  faith  miist  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  mystery  of  the  satisfaction 
of  Jesus  Christ.  II.  Objections  made  against  this  doctrine.  1.  Is  it  pretended 
that  the  design  of  excluding  holiness  from  the  essence  of  faith  is  to  elevate  the 
merit  of  the  death  of  Christ  ?  2.  Dost  thou  say,  thy  design  is  to  humble  man  1 
What  can  be  more  proper  to  humble  man  than  the  system  we  have  expounded  if 

3.  Dost  thou  say,  our  system  is  contrary  to  experience  ?  4.  Or  that  our  justifica- 
tion and  salvation  flow  from  a  decree  made  before  the  foimdation  of  the  world, 
and  not  from  our  embracing  the  Gospel  in  time  ?  5.  Or  dost  thou  still  object,  that, 
although  our  system  is  true  in  the  main,  yet  it  is  always  dangerous  to  publish  it ; 
because  man  has  always  an  inclination  to  "  sacrifice  xmto  his  own  net,"  and  by  preee- 


CHAP   II.]  HABAKKUK.  23 

ing  the  necessity  of  good  works,  occasion  is  insensibly  given  to  the  doctrine  of 
merit  ?  (J.  Saurin. )  Faith,  a  life-giving  power : — Righteousness  has  been  defined 
aa  the  fulfilment  of  relations.  But  those  relations  are  not  primarily  relations  of 
earth.  The  higher  relation  rests  on  revelation.  It  is  our  relation  to  God.  "  Life  " 
is  not  here,  living  in  the  sense  of  existing,  nor  in  the  sense  of  exercising  existence. 
Three  ideas  have  to  be  added  to  the  primary  idea  of  existence.  This  life  is  con- 
Bcious,  satisfying,  everlasting  existence.  "  Faith  "  is  the  realisation  of  a  future, 
the  conviction  of  the  invisible.  Faith  in  a  person  is  the  realisation  of  that  person, 
the  having  him  so  present  to  the  eye  of  the  soul  that  the  presence  is  a  power. 
Too  often  by  faith  is  meant  the  realisation  not  of  a  person,  but  of  a  thing ;  not 
of  Jesus  Christ  as  all  that  He  is,  and  God  in  Him,  but  of  one  single  thing  about 
Jesus  Christ — His  atoning  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  and  even  this  rather 
in  the  aspect  of  the  death  than  in  the  aspect  of  the  life,  rather  as  a  fact  accomphshed 
and  done  with  than  as  a  reality  having  in  it  the  motive  of  a  dedication,  and  the 
power  of  a  life.  (Dean  Vaughan,D.D.)  The  jvst  shall  live  by  his  faith : — The  great 
Babylonian  empire  was  swallowing  up  the  smaller  nations  roimd  about.  To  the 
prophet  who  believed  in  the  Holy  Almighty  God,  ruling  in  the  earth  in  righteousness, 
this  was  a  mystery.  It  was  a  strange  problem.  He  could  not  vmderstand  why 
that  great  empire  should  grow  greater,  and  why  the  nations  round  about  should 
thus  be  turned  into  their  net,  and  brought  under  their  rule.  Bad  as  the  Jewish 
people  were,  they  were  not  so  far  astray  from  the  true  God  and  from  righteousness 
as  were  the  mwi  of  Babylon.  Why  then  should  this  nation  control  ?  He  stands 
and  looks  at  this  mystery,  and  finds  that  he  has  no  solution  for  it.  He  is  perplexed 
and  baffled.  But  like  a  wise  and  true  prophet,  he  goes  aside  and  stands  upon 
what  he  calls  his  watch-tower  that  he  may  see  what  God  will  say.  He  will  be 
quiet  and  still  in  heart,  waiting  for  the  Divine  message  to  come  to  solve  the 
difficulty.  The  text  is  the  answer.  I.  The  fplifted  sour,  and  its  penalty. 
What  is  it  for  a  man  to  be  lifted  up  ?  It  is  to  be  proud,  haughty,  to  have  a 
feeling  of  self-dependence  and  self-sufficiency.  It  is  to  forget  God,  and  to  assume 
that  a  man's  life  is  in  his  own  hands.  There  are  many  things  that  will  produce 
an  uplifted  soul.  Such  as  worldly  success  ;  intellectual  culture  ;  a  man's  unbelief. 
There  is  hardly  a  step  between  unbelief  in  God  and  a  man  having  a  vain,  proud, 
self-satisfied,  and  uplifted  soul.  Such  a  soul  is  not  upright.  It  is  crooked, 
perverse,  froward.  That  is  the  penalty.  For  what  is  the  glory  of  man  ?  It  is 
to  know  God,  and  to  live  in  fellowship  with  Him.  The  great  glory  of  man  is 
righteousness.  How  do  those  who  are  "  lifted  up  "  carry  themselves  in  times  of 
trouble  ?  They  are  grotmd  to  pieces —broken  up.  What  strength  have  they 
for  the  day  of  adversity  ?  II.  The  trite  life  fob  man.  It  is  a  Divine  message 
spoken  to  the  just  man.  "  Your  duty  is  to  live  by  faith."  This  faith  is  the  antithesis 
of  "  lifted  up."  It  is  a  spirit  of  trust  in  God,  a  devout  belief  in  God,  in  the  righteous- 
ness and  the  love  of  God :  it  is  lowliness  and  humbleness  of  mind  ;  it  is  a  feeling 
of  true  dependence  upon  the  great  Father  in  heaven.  All  the  holy  and  just  men 
who  ever  Uved  a  true  and  noble  life,  have  done  so  because  they  have  lived  by 
their  faith.  How  wiU  this  work  ?  God  becomes  a  reality  to  the  soul  that  is 
full  of  trust  and  prayer.  God  draws  near  to  us  as  we  live  in  faith  and  spirituality 
to  Him.  We  make  great  mistakes  in  the  matter  of  realising  God  and  the  love  of 
God.  Try  by  argument,  by  subtle  process  of  reasoning,  by  investigation,  to 
find  out  God  and  to  know  Him,  and  you  are  baffled.  It  is  by  faith  God  becomes 
known.  And  a  life  of  faith  and  devoutness  gives  strength  for  obedience.  Faith 
brings  us  into  union  with  the  great  Source  of  all  life,  and  causes  us  to  be  equipped 
with  power  for  obedience  in  righteousness.  The  path  in  which  Christ  walked, 
and  we  are  called  to  walk — the  path  of  self-sacrifice,  purity,  meekness,  love  to 
enemies,  trust  in  God,  moral  covu-age — this  path  is  one  which  severely  strains 
and  taxes  all  the  powers  of  a  man.  Hindrances  and  temptations  throng  around 
you  at  every  step.  Christian  victory  is  not  so  much  a  stem  exercise  of  resolution 
as  a  devout  consecration  to  God  ;  not  so  much  self-strainmg  as  self-surrender  to 
God  ;  a  loving  consent  to  the  guidance  and  inspiration  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  The 
hour  of  quiet,  simple  yielding  up  of  self  to  God,  with  utter  dependence  on  His 
moulding  touch  and  strengthening  grace,  is  always  the  hoiu:  of  our  fullest  power 
for  obedience.  There  is  another  element  that  enters  into  the  life  of  faith — peace, 
serenity,  joy.  The  outward  circumstances  of  life  are  never  without  some  kind 
of  discord  or  pain.  If  we  make  ourselves  dependent  upon  the  perfect  adjust- 
ment of  outward  things  for  peace,  then  never  will  peace  be  ours.  Open  the  portals 
of  the  soul,  with  lowliness  and  childlike  dependence  before  God,  bow  in  hushed 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

submission,  and  then  into  the  soul,  noiselessly,  yet  with  living  power,  like  the 
calm  dawn  of  a  summer  day,  peace  will  come.  Live  the  life  of  faith,  and  you 
will  find  God  everywhere,  and  your  character  will  grow  in  righteousness,  and  your 
peace  and  joy  shall  flow  and  abound  like  the  waters  of  a  great  sea.  {Thomas 
Hammond.)  Life  by  faith: — Take  the  text  as  it  stands  on  the  page  of  the 
Hebrew  prophet.  This  oracle  of  Habakkuk  really  means,  "  A  righteous  man 
shall  live  by  his  fidelity."  You  will  best  understand  the  beauty  of  a  Scripture 
passage  when  you  look  at  it  in  its  original  setting.  Habakkuk  lived  near  the 
beginning  of  the  Babylonian  Captivity.  In  his  large  insight,  in  his  poetic  fire, 
he  claims  kindred  with  his  mightier  predecessors,  Amos,  Micah,  Isaiah.  He  was 
faced  by  a  new  and  eminently  painful  problem,  he  was  precluded  from  holding 
out  to  his  people  any  near  or  direct  hope.  And  he  was  right.  Habakkuk  had 
to  face  the  problem  of  the  strength  of  the  wicked  and  the  humiliation  of  the 
just.  The  aggravations  of  the  problem  arose  from  the  struggles  of  suffering 
innocence,  but  hitberto  they  had  mainly  presented  themselves  in  individual 
instances.  When  the  sufferer  was  a  nation,  and  God's  chosen  people,  it  was 
natural  that  terrible  misgivings  should  overcloud  the  souls  of  men.  In  the  very 
moment  of  repentance  and  reform  came  the  threat  of  exile  terrible  and  remediless. 
The  Chaldean  power  was  upon  them  ;  there  was  no  remedy,  save  in  comfortless 
endurance,  and  a  hope  yearning  but  still  deferred.  In  those  days  of  endurance 
and  hope  deferred,  the  lives  of  men,  the  life  of  the  prophet  himself,  the  life  of  that 
whole  generation  might  ebb  away.  But  the  faithful  are  never  utterly  forsaken. 
For  the  prophet  himself  and  for  his  nation,  for  all  time,  it  was  granted  him  to 
see  at  least  in  germ,  to  set  forth  at  least  in  outline  two  of  the  universal  truths 
on  which  the  consolations  of  our  little  human  life  must  rest.  The  answer  that 
came  to  the  prophet  in  his  watch-tower  was  this,  "  The  righteous  man  shall  live 
by  his  fidehty."  Does  this  seem  obscure,  meagre,  and  unsatisfactory  ?  The 
prophet  caught  its  meaning.  He  breaks  out,  and  concludes  his  book  with  one 
of  the  most  splendid  poems  in  the  whole  Bible.  Nothing,  neither  drought  nor 
desolation,  could  shake  Habakkuk  in  his  inextinguishable  trust  in  God.  The 
soul  of  the  Chaldean  is  arrogant  and  wicked.  That  is  enough.  Then  because 
God  is  God,  in  the  pride  and  injustice  of  the  oppressor  lie  the  certain  germs  of 
his  final  overthrow.  "  The  moral  law  is  written  on  the  tables  of  eternity."  And 
the  righteous  shall  live  by  his  faithfulness.  Is  he  faithful  ?  That  is  enough. 
Because  God  is  God,  righteousness  not  only  contains  the  promise  of  life,  when 
rightly  understood,  it  is  the  only  life.  The  just  man,  the  ideal  nation  is  not 
under  the  crushing  disadvantage  which  he  imagines.  The  power  to  serve  God 
never  fails,  and  the  love  of  God  is  never  rejected.  There  is  the  oracle  to  the 
troubled  prophet,  and  to  the  trembling  nation.  It  has  two  sides.  The  first  is 
the  old  law,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  The  other  is,  "  The  righteous 
man  shall  live  by  his  fidelity."  What  more  would  you  have  ?  Righteousness 
may  be  hated  and  persecuted.  Wickedness  may  be  lapped  in  luxury ;  but 
nevertheless,  righteousness  is  life,  sin  is  death.  (Dean  Farrar. )  Habakkuk  : — 
The  design  of  this  prophecy  is  to  confirm  the  servants  of  God  in  their  belief  of 
His  power,  and  reliance  on  His  providence,  as  the  Ruler  and  Disposer  of  the  universe, 
notwithstanding  the  prosperity  wherein  wicked  men  are  sometimes  seen  to  flourish 
in  the  earth,  while  the  pious  and  godly  are  tried  with  affliction  and  adversity. 
The  practical  principle  of  religious  faith  is  that,  let  the  probable  consequences 
of  present  advantage  or  loss  be  what  they  may,  it  is  our  true  wisdom  always  to 
hold  fast  by  God,  and  put  our  trust  in  Him.  Habakkuk  prophesied  in  the  reign 
of  Jehoiakim,  son  of  the  pious  Josiah.  But  he,  instead  of  imitating  the  piety 
of  his  father,  followed  the  evil  practices  of  his  more  distant  ancestors,  Amon  and 
Manasseh.  He  and  his  subjects  abandoned  themselves  to  every  sort  of  profane- 
ness  towards  God,  of  violence,  oppression,  deceit,  and  dishonesty  towards  each 
other,  and  of  sensuality  and  debauchery  in  their  own  lives.  Such  was  the  state 
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  when  Habakkuk  saw  his  "  burden."  He  first  inquires 
of  God  why  injustice  was  suffered  to  prevail  in  Judah,  and  the  wicked  to  oppress 
and  get  the  advantage  over  upright  and  religious  persons.  The  answer  of  God 
proclaims  the  speedy  arrival  of  tne  Chaldeans,  as  a  scourge  of  God.  The  mind 
of  Habakkuk  was  even  more  disturbed  with  the  expectation  of  the  dreadful 
excesses  of  the  Chaldeans,  than  it  had  been  at  the  sight  of  the  enormities  already 
practised  in  Judea.  He  therefore,  with  all  humility,  proceeds  to  ask  the  reasons 
of  so  apparently  strange  a  dispensation.  He  professes  his  own  confidence  in  God, 
and  his  persuasion  that  the  Chaldeans  are  not  really  the  favourites  of  God,  bul 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKVK.  25 

only  the  executioners  of  His  wrath.  Having  been  allowed  to  put  these 
questions,  the  prophet  describes  himself  as  anxiously  waiting  to  have  them 
answered.  Here  the  second  chapter  opens.  The  "  lifting  up  "  in  the  text  means 
the  withdrawing  of  our  trust  in  God,  either  through  careless  arrogance,  which 
makes  men  forget  their  dependence  upon  Him,  or  through  unsteadiness  of  faith, 
which  leaves  them  to  be  tossed  about,  without  stay  or  foimdation,  like  a  feather, 
a  leaf,  or  any  other  light  and  worthless  body,  that  is  lifted  up  and  whirled  about 
in  the  air.  "  His  soul  which  is  lifted  up,"  withdrawn  from  an  entire  dependence  on 
God,  "  is  not  upright  in  him,"  for  he  murmurs  and  is  discontented  at  the  arrange- 
ments of  God's  providence  in  things  pertaining  to  this  life.  A  man's  "  soul  is 
not  upright  in  him,"  who  makes  light  of  the  expectation  of  a  futvire  state,  and  of 
the  rewards  and  punishments  to  be  therein  distributed  by  the  righteous  judgment 
of  God.  Or  who  cavils  at,  and  finds  fault  with  any  of  the  commandments  of 
God,  as  burthens  grievous  to  be  borne.  Or  who  trusts  to  his  own  performance 
of  the  law  for  acceptance.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."  Faith  has  always 
been  the  support  and  comfort  of  the  humble  and  confiding  servants  of  God. 
{J as.  Randall,  M.A.)  Faith  crowned  : — He  that  believeth  God's  Word  so  as  to 
walk  worthy  of  the  great  things  which  He  has  promised  to  do  for  him,  shall  have 
his  faith»  crowned  with  a  happy  accomplishment.  From  these  words  we  raise  the 
following  observations — 1.  We  see  the  method  which  God  has  taken  in  revealing 
to  us  things  to  come.  He  has  thought  it  sufficient  to  reveal  to  us  the  things 
themselves,  without  notifying  the  time  when  thej'  shall  be  performed  and  manifested 
in  the  world.  2.  We  see  the  great  sin  of  infidelity,  and  how  much  of  the  Divine 
displeasure  we  incur,  when  we  disbelieve  any  Word  of  God,  only  because  the 
completion  of  it  falls  not  within  the  time  which  we  had  reckoned  upon  for  the 
doing  of  it.  3.  We  hear  the  blessing  which  accompanies  our  sincere  belief  and 
dutiful  observance  of  God's  Word.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."  This  is 
the  only  true  life  that  men  can  live.  (IF.  Beading,  31. A.)  The  life  by  faith  : — 
The  immediate  cause  which  gave  rise  to  these  words  was  the  strong  temptation 
of  the  prophet  to  distrust  the  providence  of  God,  arising  from  the  prosperity  of 
the  wicked,  and  their  cruel  oppression  of  the  righteous.  He  points  to  faith  in 
God  as  the  sustaining,  animating  principle  of  the  righteous  man  until  his  trial 
should  be  over.  Consider  the  various  ways  in  which  it  is  true  of  the  just  man 
that  he  lives  by  faith.  The  just  man's  faith  in  God  is  the  belief  and  conviction 
of  his  mind  of  the  reality  and  truth  of  aU  that  God  has  been  pleased  to  assure 
him  of.  It  is  the  persuasion  that  all  God's  promises  to  him  are  true,  and  will  be 
fulfilled — a  persuasion  so  real  that  he  is  supported  by  it,  and  acts  upon  it.  What 
is  this  life  of  the  just  man  that  is  spoken  of  here  ?  Not  mere  animal  life.  Not 
mere  intellectual  life.  It  is  the  spiritual  life  of  the  soul  before  its  redeeming 
Lord.  It  is  a  life  peculiar  to  the  just,  such  as  none  else  lives.  A  life  of  acceptance 
with  God,  of  love  to  God,  of  obedience  and  submission  to  Him.  1.  Man  is  justified, 
declared  just  before  God,  through  this  great  principle  of  faith.  2.  To  his  faith  in 
God  the  just  man  owes  the  life  of  obedience  and  holiness  which  he  lives  before  Him. 
3.  Faith  represents  God  as  the  source  of  strength  in  present  trial,  and  of  comfort 
in  all  affliction.  Such  a  belief  is  absolutely  necessary,  in  order  to  stir  up  man 
to  exertion  and  perseverance  in  his  spiritual  contest  with  evil.  4.  Faith,  assuring 
the  mind  of  the  Christian  of  the  glory  that  awaits  him  in  the  futiu-e  life,  prevents 
the  discouragements  that  he  meets  with,  and  the  denial  to  which  he  submits, 
from  overcoming  his  patient  perseverance  in  well-doing.  {H.  Constable,  M.A.) 
The  portraiture  of  a  good  man  : — Whether  the  man  whose  soul  here  is  represented 
as  "  lifted  up,"  refers  to  the  unbelieving  Jew,  or  to  the  Babylonian,  is  an  unsettled 
question  amongst  biblical  critics ;  and  a  question  of  but  little  practical  moment. 

1.  A  good  man  is  a  humble  man.  This  is  implied.  His  soul  is  not  "  lifted  up." 
Pride  is  not  only  no  part  of  moral  goodness,  but  is  essentially  inimical  to  it.  A 
proud  Christian  is  a  solecism.  Jonathan  Edwards  describes  a  Christian  as  being 
such  a  "  little  flower  as  we  see  in  the  spring  of  the  year,  low  and  humble  in  the 
ground,  opening  its  bosom  for  the  beams  of  the  sim,  rejoicing  in  a  calm  rapture, 
suffusing  aroimd  sweet  fragrance,  and  standing  peacefully  and  lowly  in  the  midst 
of  other  flowers."  Pride  is  an  obstruction  to  all  progress  and  Imowledge  and 
virtue,  and  is  abhorrent  to  the  Holy  One.  "  He  resisteth  the  proud,  but  gives 
grace  to  the  humble."  II.  A  good  man  is  a  just  man.  "  The  just  shall  live  by 
his  faith."  To  be  good,  is  nothing  more  than  to  be  just.  1.  Just  to  self.  Doing 
the  right  thing  to  one's  own  faculties  and  affections  as  the  offsprings  of  God. 

2.  Just  to  others.     Doing  unto  others  what  we  would  that  they  should  do  unto 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

ufl.  3.  Juat  to  God.  To  be  just  to  self,  society,  and  God,  this  is  religion.  III.  A 
good  man  is  a  confiding  man.  He  lives  "  by  his  faith."  This  passage  is  quoted 
by  Paul  in  Rom.  i.  17  ;  GaL  iii.  11  ;  it  is  also  quoted  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
(chap.  X.  38).  (Homilist.)  Justifying  faith  : — It  is  as  if  the  prophet  had  said. 
Depend  upon  it,  when  this  world  has  done  its  best  and  its  worst,  it  will  plainly 
appear  that  the  great  question  between  it  and  the  Church  is,  whether  it  is  better 
to  trust  in  one's  self,  one's  own  wisdom,  and  fame,  and  riches,  and  high  spirit,  or 
to  go  altogether  out  of  one's  self,  and  to  live  entirely  on  the  heavenly  righteousness 
which  God  gives  to  His  own  people.  The  world  rests  upon  itself,  the  Church 
lives  by  faith.  Faith  is  that  by  which  we  abide  in  Christ.  The  spiritual  life 
within  us  depends  in  some  special  manner  on  this  grace.  How  impossible  that 
those  men  should  have  true  faith  who  allow  themselves  in  self-righteousness. 
What  difference  can  it  make  in  point  of  pride  and  presumption,  whether  a  man 
trusts  in  his  own  faith,  or  in  his  own  works  ?  In  either  case  he  trusts  in  something 
of  his  own.  The  true  faith  in  Christ  leads  immediately  to  the  obeying  of  all  Hia 
commandments.  Faith  in  Christ  will  make  our  fortunes  in  the  world  of  small 
consequence :  and  will  help  us  to  endure  trials  patiently.  (Plain  Sermcma  hy 
Contr^utors  to  "  Tracts  for  the  Times")  The  life  of  faith  in  the  midst  of  a  self- 
confident  world  : — The  subject  here  is,  how  they  that  are  just  continue  to  live. 
The  bond  of  this  union,  whereby  a  man  becomes  just  is  coafidence — trust — faith. 
What  is  this  living  ?  It  is  put  in  opposition  to  the  characters  on  the  other  side, 
who  are  not  upright,  the  man  shall  live  unto  God  by  this  principle  of  confidence. 
The  very  same  principle  that  brings  him  to  Jesus  for  righteousness  that  he  may 
be  just,  works  in  him  when  he  is  in  Jesus,  and  by  it  he  lives.  It  requires  such 
a  principle  as  this  to  live  consistently.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  Christianity 
made  easy.  The  power  of  uprightness  is  in  faith,  and  no  man  but  a  man  of  faith 
will  be  found  thoroughly  upright.  {Hugh  M 'Neile,  M.A.)  Faith : — These  words 
were  spoken  to  Habakkuk,  to  check  him  for  his  impatience  vmder  God's  hand. 
They  are  just  as  true  for  every  man  that  ever  was  and  ever  wiU  be  as  they  were 
for  him.  It  always  was  true,  and  always  must  be  true,  that  if  reasonable  beings 
are  to  live  at  all,  it  is  by  faith.  Because  everything  that  is,  heaven  and  earth, 
men  and  angels,  are  all  the  work  of  God.  We  do  not  remember  enough  what  we 
do  know  of  God.  All  things  lie,  like  a  grain  of  dust,  in  the  hollow  of  God's  hand. 
Think  of  the  infinite  power  of  God,  and  then  think  how  it  is  possible  to  live,  except 
by  faith  in  Him,  by  trusting  to  Him  utterly.  After  all,  what  can  we  do  without 
God  ?  The  life  of  ovu:  spirits  is  a  gift  from  God,  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  He  has 
chosen  to  declare  that  unless  we  trust  to  Him  for  life,  and  ask  Him  for  life.  He  will 
not  bestow  it  upon  us.  If  we  wish  to  be  loving,  pure,  wise,  manly,  noble,  we  must 
ask  those  excellent  gifts  of  God,  who  is  Himself  infinite  love  and  purity,  wisdom 
and  nobleness.  And  it  is  by  faith  in  Christ  we  must  live, — in  Christ,  a  man  like 
ourselves,  yet  God  blessed  for  ever.  It  is  a  certain  truth,  that  men  cannot  believe 
in  God,  or  trust  in  Him  imless  they  can  think  of  Him  as  a  man.  All  that  men 
have  ever  done  well,  or  nobly,  or  lovingly,  in  this  world,  was  done  by  faith — by 
faith  in  God  of  some  sort  or  other.  Without  Christ  we  can  do  nothing — by  trusting 
in  Christ  we  can  do  everything.  (C.  Kingsley.)  Living  hy  faith  : — The  prophet 
is  speaking  of  a  time  of  terrible  calamity,  which  was  to  come  upon  himself  and 
upon  all  his  people.  One  event  Ls  to  happen  to  all, — to  the  righteous,  and  to  the 
wicked.  Some  of  his  people  shall  meet  these  terrible  calamities  with  the  spirit 
of  pride,  refusing  to  humble  themselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God.  And,  seeing 
that  those  who  do  not  bend  under  God's  providences,  are  invariably  broken  by 
them,  the  prophet  contrasts  the  position  of  such  persons  with  the  position  of  those 
whom  he  describes  in  the  text,  and  he  remarks.  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith." 
What  is  it  for  a  man  to  live,  in  God's  sense  of  the  word,  and  to  live  in  a  time  of 
calamity  ?  Such  a  man  will  hear  God's  voice  in  the  calamity;  he  will  hear  the  rod, 
and  Him  who  hath  appointed  it.  The  man  who  really  lives,  in  a  time  of  calamity, 
will  see  God's  face  even  in  that  time  ;  he  will  see  the  face  of  God  behind  the  cloud. 
He  will  not  be  crushed  by  calamity.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith  "  means,  he 
shall  be  equal  to  the  claims  which  are  made  upon  him,  even  in  times  of  calamity, 
by  the  support  which  he  derives  through  the  operation  of  his  faitlv  Faith  is 
not  mere  assent.  It  follows  belief  in  a  particular  kind  of  testimony.  If  we 
believe  a  worthy  testimony,  a  certain  state  of  heart  must  follow  that  belief.  It 
is  trust  or  reliance.  Take  the  word  "  just  "  to  represent  a  justified  sinner,  and 
that  man  shall  live  by  his  faith.  1.  Man  is  introduced  into  a  new  life  by  this 
faith.    Trusting  in  God's  beloved  Son,  life  is  immediately  given  to  him.     He  no 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKUK.  27 

sooner  trusts,  than  all  that  is  involved  in  everlasting  life  becomes  his.  This  ia 
God's  free  gift  to  him.  2.  Man  has  support  in  time  of  trouble  through  faith. 
Hope  is  closely  related  to  faith.  If  you  would  have  a  stronger  hope,  you  must 
have  a  stronger  faith.  There  is  a  work  which  faith  performs  that  hope  cannot 
accomplish.  Hope  has  a  limited  sphere,  faith  has  not.  Faith  has  to  do  with 
all  that  God  has  said  about  Himself,  and  about  His  Son,  and  about  His  Spirit, 
and  about  the  privileges  of  the  redeemed,  and  about  the  destiny  of  the  redeemed. 
Faith  is  the  principle  whose  operations  render  God's  descriptions  of  unseen  things 
real  to  us,  so  that  His  words  take  the  place  of  facts.  One  effect  of  the  faith  of 
a  Christian  is  to  bring  us  into  an  entirely  different  style  of  life  from  that  in  which 
those  men  live  who  walk  by  sight.  It  must  be  so.  Note  some  of  the  points  of 
difference  between  a  believer  and  an  unbeliever.  On©  holds  the  world  tight,  the 
other  holds  it  with  a  slack  hand.  One  orders  his  life  by  the  will  of  his  fellow-men, 
the  other  by  the  will  of  God.  Then  ask  yourselves  whether  you  have  what  tha 
Scriptures  call  "  faith,"  the  faith  that  saves.     {Samud  Martin.) 

Ver.  5.  Who  enlargeth  his  desire  as  hell,  and  is  as  death,  and  cannot  be  satisfied. — 
Moral  tvrong  ;  some  of  its  national  phases : — Evil,  like  good,  is  one  in  essence, 
but  it  has  many  forms  and  phases.  The  branches  that  grow  out  of  the  root, 
whilst  filled  with  the  same  sap,  vary  widely  in  shape  and  hue.  I.  DEtraKENNESS. 
This  is  one  of  the  most  loathsome,  irrational,  and  pernicious  forms  which  it  caa 
assume.  Drunkenness  puts  the  man  or  the  woman  absolutely  into  the  hands 
of  Satan,  to  do  whatsoever  he  wills.  II.  HAtroHTrNESS.  "  Is  a  proud  man." 
Babylon  became  inspired  with  a  haughty  insolence.  She  regarded  herself  as 
the  queen  of  the  world,  and  looked  down  with  supercilious  contempt  upon  all 
the  other  nations  of  the  earth,  even  upon  the  Hebrew  people,  the  heavenly  chosen 
race.  Nebuchadnezzar  expresses  the  spirit  of  the  kingdom  as  well  as  his  own, 
when  he  says,  "Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  built  for  the  house  of  the 
kingdom  by  the  might  of  my  power,  and  for  the  honour  of  my  majesty  ?  "  It  is 
suggested  that  their  love  of  wine  had  much  to  do  in  the  developing  of  this  haughty 
spirit.  We  read,  chapter  5th,  that  Belshazzar  at  his  feast  drank  wine  with  the 
thousands  of  his  lords,  his  princes,  his  wives,  his  concubines.  III.  Rapacity. 
Two  things  are  suggested  concerning  the  rapacious  form  it  assumed  in  Babylon. 
1.  It  was  restless.  "  Neither  keepeth  at  home."  Not  content  with  its  owti 
grandeur,  wealth,  and  luxuries,  it  goes  from  home  in  search  of  others  ;  goes  out 
into  other  countries  to  rifle  and  to  rob.  2.  It  is  insatiable.  "Who  enlargeth 
his  desire  as  hell," — that  is,  as  Sheol  the  grave, — "  and  is  as  death,  and  cannot 
be  satisfied."     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  6.  Him  that  ladeth  himself  with  thick  clay. — Heavy  day : — It  is  the 
glory  of  the  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  when  it  is  regarded  in  its  moral 
aspect,  that  it  is  not  the  religion  merely  of  transcendental  and  unpractical  truths, 
but  that  its  motives  and  precepts  go  down  to  the  minutest  details  of  every- 
day duty.  Note — 1.  The  danger  of  a  false  start  and  a  false  aim  in  life.  God 
has  given  us  a  complex  nature,  and  He  has  given  us  the  use  of  our  reason  and 
the  other  faculties,  physical  and  mental,  which  He  bestows  upon  men.  And 
the  great  end  of  man  is  to  glorify  God.  If  a  man  uses  his  powers  only  to  found 
a  family  or  amass  wealth,  we  earnestly  warn  that  man.  He  has  mistaken  the 
great  end  of  his  being.  2.  A  form  in  which  the  lading  of  thick  clay  is  found  is 
greed  of  money.  Covetousness  in  some  one  or  other  of  its  forms  or  specious 
disguises  is  one  of  the  besetting  idolatries  of  the  day.  This  greed  of  money  mani« 
fests  itself  in  money-getting  and  in  money-losing,  and  also  in  money-spending. 
Comparatively  few  recognise  the  principle  of  stewardship  to  God  in  the  expendi- 
ture of  their  income.  3.  Another  form  in  which  this  heavy  clay  is  sometimes 
found  is  anxiety.  What  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  tell  us  to  avoid  is  the  carking, 
distracting  care  which  turns  a  man's  mind  away  from  God,  and  keeps  him  con- 
tinually on  the  rack,  forgetting  the  loving  Father  who  is  willing  to  be  the  bearer 
of  all  his  cares.  4.  Another  form  of  this  clay  among  business  men  is  sharp  practice. 
Sharp  practice  is  in  our  manufactories,  upon  the  exchange,  with  lawyers,  and  not 
only  among  the  little  petty  hucksters,  but  among  tradesmen  who  make  a  much 
fairer  show  in  our  streets.  5.  Another  form  is  a  worldly  tone  and  spirit.  To 
be  a  Christian,  there  is  no  necessity  to  leave  your  work  and  to  lead  the  life  of 
a  recluse.  Go  into  the  world  and  make  your  money,  but  do  not  worship  it. 
{Canon  Miller,  D.D.)        Under  a  heaf  of  day  : — The  avancious  "  accumulate 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

on  themselves  thick  clay."  Hardly,  indeed,  an  avaricious  man  can  be  found 
who  is  not  a  burden  to  himself,  and  to  whom  his  wealth  is  not  a  source  of  trouble. 
Everyone  who  has  accumulated  much,  when  he  comes  to  old  age,  is  afraid  to 
use  what  he  has  got,  being  ever  solicitous  lest  he  should  lose  anything ;  and 
then,  as  he  thinks  nothing  is  sufficient,  the  more  he  possesses  the  more  grasping 
he  becomes,  and  frugality  is  the  name  given  to  that  sordid  and,  so  to  speak,  that 
servile  restraint  within  which  the  rich  confine  themselves.  In  short,  when  any- 
one forms  a  judgment  of  all  the  avaricious  of  this  world,  and  is  himself  free  from 
all  avarice,  having  a  free  and  unbiassed  mind,  he  will  easily  apprehend  what 
the  prophet  says  here, — that  all  the  wealth  of  this  world  is  nothing  else  but  a  heap 
of  clay,  as  when  any  one  puts  himself  of  his  own  accord  under  a  great  heap  which 
he  had  collected  together.  The  general  truth  to  be  drawn  from  the  expression 
is,  that  all  the  avaricious,  the  more  they  heap  together,  the  more  they  lade 
themselves,  and,  as  it  were,  bury  themselves  under  a  great  load.  Riches  acquired 
by  frauds  and  plunders  are  nothing  else  than  a  heavy  and  cumbrous  lump  of 
earth  ;  for  God  returns  on  the  heads  of  those  who  thus  seek  to  enrich  themselves 
whatever  they  have  plundered  from  others.  Had  they  been  contented  with  some 
moderate  portion,  they  might  have  lived  cheerfully  and  happily,  as  we  see  to  be 
the  case  with  all  the  godly,  who,  though  they  possess  but  little,  are  yet  cheerful ; 
for  they  live  in  hope,  and  know  that  their  supplies  are  in  God's  hands,  and  expect 
everything  from  His  blessing.  (John  Calvin. )  Making  money : — Whatever  we 
do  to  please  ourselves,  and  only  for  the  sake  of  the  pleasure,  not  for  an  ultimate 
object,  is  "  play,"  the  pleasing  thing,  not  the  useful  thing.  .  .  .  The  first  of  all 
English  games  is  making  money.  That  is  an  all-absorbing  game ;  and  we  knock 
each  other  down  of tener  in  playing  at  that  than  at  football  or  any  other  rougher 
sport ;  and  it  is  absolutely  without  purpose.  No  one  who  engages  heavily  in 
that  game  ever  knows  why.  Ask  a  great  money-maker  what  he  wants  to  do 
with  his  money ;  he  never  knows.  He  doesn't  make  it  to  do  anything  with  it. 
He  gets  it  only  that  he  may  get  it.  "  What  will  you  make  of  what  you  have 
got  ?  "  you  ask.  "  Well,  I'll  get  more,"  he  says.  Just  as  at  cricket  you  get 
more  runs.  There's  no  use  in  the  runs,  but  to  get  more  of  them  than  other  people 
is  the  game.  And  there's  no  use  in  the  money,  but  to  have  more  of  it  than  other 
people  is  the  game.     {John  Ruskin.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousnesa  to  his  house. — 
Covetousness  and  self-trust : — I.  The  national  wrongs  here  indicated.  1.  Covet- 
ing the  possessions  of  others.  "  Woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetcousness 
to  his  house."  "An  evil  covetousness"  ?  There  is  a  good  covetousness.  We 
are  commanded  to  "  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts."  But  to  hunger  for  those 
things  which  are  not  our  own,  but  the  property  of  others,  and  that  for  our  own 
gratification  and  aggrandisement,  is  that  which  is  prohibited  in  the  Decalogue. 
2.  Trusting  in  false  securities.  So  "  that  he  may  set  his  nest  on  high,  that  he 
may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil."  The  image  is  from  an  eagle  (Job  xxix.  37). 
The  royal  citadel  is  meant.  The  Chaldeans  built  high  towers  like  the  Babel 
founders,  to  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil.  They  sought  protection,  not 
in  the  Creator  but  in  the  creature,  not  in  moral  means  but  in  material.  Thus 
foolishly  nations  have  always  acted,  and  are  still  acting ;  they  trust  to  armies 
and  to  navies,  not  to  righteousness,  truth,  and  God.  A  moral  character  built 
on  justice,  purity,  and  universal  benevolence  is  the  only  right  and  safe  defence 
of  nations.  3.  Sinning  against  the  soul.  "  And  hast  sinned  against  thy  soul," 
or  against  thyself.  Indeed,  all  wrong  is  a  sin  against  oneself — a  sin  against  the 
laws  of  reason,  conscience,  and  happiness.  II.  The  national  woes  here  indicated. 
"  Woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  house,"  &c.  What  is 
the  woe  connected  with  these  evils  ?  It  is  contained  in  these  words  :  "  The  stone 
shall  cry  out  of  the  wall,  and  the  beam  out  of  the  timber  shall  answer  it."  Their 
guilty  conscience  will  endow  the  dead  materials  of  their  own  dwelling  with  the 
tongue  to  denounce  in  thunder  their  deeds  of  rapacity  and  blood.  Startling 
personification  this  !  "  Note,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "  those  that  do  wrong 
to  their  neighbour  do  a  much  greater  wrong  to  their  own  souls.  But  if  the  sinner 
pleads  Not  guilty,  and  thinks  he  has  managed  his  frauds  and  violence  with  so 
much  art  and  contrivance  that  they  cannot  be  proved  upon  him,  let  him  know 
that  if  there  be  no  other  witnesses  against  him  the  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall 
against  him,  and  the  beam  out  of  the  timber  in  the  roof  shall  answer  it,  shall 
second  it,  shall  witness  it,  that  the  money  and  materials  wherewith  he  built  the 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKVK.  29 

house  were  unjusUy  gotten  (ver.  11).  The  stones  and  timber  cry  to  heaven 
for  vengeance,  as  the  whole  creation  groans  under  the  sin  of  man,  and  waits  to 
be  delivered  from  that  bondage  of  corruption.  (1)  That  mind  gives  to  all  the 
objects  that  once  impressed  it  a  mystic  power  of  suggestion.  Who  has  not  felt 
this  ?  Who  does  not  feel  it  every  day  ?  The  tree,  the  house,  the  street,  the 
lane,  the  stream,  the  meadow,  the  mountain,  that  once  touched  our  consciousness, 
seldom  fail  to  start  thoughts  in  us  whenever  we  are  brought  into  contact  with 
them  again.  It  seems  as  if  the  mind  gave  part  of  itself  to  all  the  objects  that 
once  impressed  it.  Hence,  when  we  leave  a  place  which  in  person  we  may  never 
revisit  we  are  still  tied  to  it  by  an  indissoluble  bond.  Nay,  we  carry  it  with 
us  and  reproduce  it  in  memory.  (2)  That  mind  gives  to  those  objects  that  im- 
pressed us  when  in  the  commission  of  any  sin  a  terrible  power  to  start  remorseful 
memories.  No  intelligent  personal  witness  is  required  to  prove  a  sinner's  guilt. 
All  the  scenes  of  his  conscious  life  vocalise  his  guilt.  {Homilist.)  Deceitful 
riches  : — Usually,  when  a  worldling  is  dead,  we  ask  how  rich  he  died.  "  Oh," 
say  many,  "  he  died  rich  ;  he  hath  left  a  great  estate."  Alas  !  the  poor  man 
has  slept  his  sleep,  lost  his  dream,  and  now  he  awakes  he  finds  nothing  in  his 
hand.  Where  lies  his  golden  heap  ?  Only  the  rust  of  that  heap  is  gone  to  witness 
against  him  ;  his  mansion  fails  him  ;  only  the  unrighteousness  of  it  follows  him  ; 
others  have  the  use  of  it ;  only  the  abuse  of  it  he  carries  to  judgment  with  him  ; 
he  hath  made  his  friends  (as  we  say),  but  he  hath  undone  himself ;  so  that  I  may 
justly  write  this  motto  upon  every  bag :  "  This  is  the  price  of  blood."  Shall 
I  then  treasure  up  the  price  of  blood  ? 

Ver.  10.  Thou  hast  consulted  shame  to  thy  house. — Consulting  shame: — 
The  prophet  again  confirms  the  truth,  that  those  who  count  themselves  happy, 
imagining  that  they  are  like  God,  busy  themselves  in  vain ;  for  God  will  turn 
to  shame  whatever  they  think  to  be  their  glory,  derived  from  their  riches.  The 
avaricious  indeed  wish,  as  it  appears  from  the  last  verse,  to  prepare  splendour 
for  their  prosperity,  and  they  think  to  render  illustrious  their  race  by  their  wealth  ; 
for  this  is  deemed  to  be  nobility,  that  the  richer  anyone  is  the  more  he  excels, 
as  he  thinks,  in  dignity,  and  the  more  is  he  to  be  esteemed  by  all.  Since,  then, 
this  is  the  object  of  almost  all  the  avaricious,  the  prophet  here  reminds  them, 
that  they  are  greatly  deceived  ;  for  the  Lord  will  not  only  frustrate  their  hopes, 
but  will  also  convert  their  glory  into  shame.  Hence  he  says  that  they  consult 
shame  to  their  family.  He  includes  in  the  word  "  consult "  all  the  industry, 
diligence,  skill,  care,  and  labour  displayed  by  the  avaricious.  We  indeed  see 
how  very  sagacious  they  are  ;  for  if  they  smell  any  gain  at  a  distance,  they  draw 
it  to  themselves,  night  and  day  they  form  new  designs,  that  they  may  circumvent 
this  person  and  plunder  that  person  and  accumulate  into  their  heap  whatever 
money  they  can  find,  and  also  that  they  may  join  fields  to  fields,  build  great 
palaces,  and  secm-e  great  revenues.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  prophet  says 
that  they  "consult  shame."  What  is  the  object  of  all  their  designs  ?  For  what 
purpose  are  all  these  things  ?  Even  for  this,  that  their  posterity  may  be  eminent, 
that  their  nobility  may  be  in  the  mouths  of  all,  and  spread  far  and  wide.  But 
the  prophet  shows  that  they  labour  in  vain  ;  for  God  will  tm:n  to  shame  whatever 
they  in  their  great  wisdom  contrived  for  the  honour  of  their  families.  The  more 
provident,  then,  the  avaricious  are,  the  more  foolish  they  are,  for  they  consult 
nothing  but  disgrace  to  their  posterity.     {John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  1 1.  The  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall,  and  the  beam  out  of  the  timber  shall 
answer  it. — Retribution : — The  prophet  in  this  connection  is  declaring  that  the  Chal- 
deans shall  be  punished  for  their  cruel  rapacity.  Retribution  is  everywhere  assumed 
as  a  great  first-truth,  which  nature  itself  constantly  teaches,  and  to  which  man's 
universal  conscience  as  constantly  responds.  I.  The  sin.  What  was  the  iniquity 
for  which  the  Chaldean  monarch  is  here  so  solemnly  denounced  ?  Not  the  mere 
outer  act  of  building  a  great  city,  but  in  the  manner  and  motive  of  his  doing  it. 
"  He  had  built  his  city  in  blood,  and  established  it  in  iniquity."  There  was 
sin  in  the  motive,  for  the  monarch  only  built  for  his  selfish  aggrandisement. 
We  perceive,  then,  glaring  ungodliness  in  both  manner  and  motive  of  this  great 
work  of  Babylon.  II.  The  pfkishment.  The  Bible  does  not  teach  that  men 
are  punished  eternally  for  the  sins  committed  in  time.  Man  goes  on  sinning 
for  ever,  and  therefore  is  punished  for  ever.  By  a  law  of  a  man's  own  mental 
constitution,  memory  and  conscience  are  summoning  from  the  past  both  ministry 


30  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  material  of  a  righteous  retribution.  This  is  retribution — a  punishment 
really  more  dreadful  than  any  material  imagery  whereby  the  Bible  sets  it  forth — 
a  retribution  which  becomes,  of  itself,  eternal  torment.  We  do  not  say  that 
in  this  is  all  of  retribution.  {Charles  Wadsivorth,  D.D.)  The  handtvriting 
on  the  wall : — Very  startling  was  the  vision  which  appeared  to  Belshazzar  and 
his  courtiers  when  their  feasting  and  mirth  were  at  their  height.  But  not  in 
terrible  omens  and  supernatural  visions  alone  do  we  see  the  Divine  handwriting. 
To  thoughtful  men  on  every  wall  by  the  wayside  appear  mystic  letters  of  pro- 
found significance.  The  hand  itself  is  unseen  behind  the  veil  of  nature,  but 
the  words  are  formed  clear  and  distinct  upon  the  stones  of  the  wall,  and  they 
remain  as  if  graven  with  a  pen  of  iron.  Botanists  are  familiar  with  a  pecxiliar 
genus  of  lichen  called  Opegrapha,  from  the  resemblance  which  the  fructification 
of  all  its  species  bears  to  written  characters.  On  the  surface  are  numerous 
dark  intricate  lines,  like  Arabic,  Hebrew,  or  Chinese  letters.  The  likeness  in 
some  instances  is  remarkably  close.  Nature  has  thus  mimicked  in  almost  every 
wood,  and  on  almost  every  rock  and  wall,  the  I?:te8t  and  highest  result  of  man's 
civilisation  ;  and  in  her  humblest  plant  forms  has  written  her  wonderful  runes. 
It  can,  indeed,  be  said  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  whole  family  of  lichens  that  they 
are  Grod's  handwriting  on  the  wall.  Lichens  form  the  nebulae,  so  to  speak,  of  the 
firmament  of  life.  Lichens  are  in  the  ocean  of  air  that  covers  the  dry  land  what 
seaweeds  are  in  the  ocean  of  waters  that  covers  the  depths  of  the  sea.  They 
are  as  the  pioneers  of  vegetation,  climbing  the  bare  crag,  and  penetrating  into 
the  lonely  wilderness,  and  planting  there  the  flag  of  life.  As  elements  in  the 
picturesque,  lichens  have  long  held  a  high  place  in  the  estimation  of  all  lovers 
of  nature.  What  would  a  ruin  be  without  them  ?  Lichens  run  through  the 
whole  chromatic  scale,  and  show  what  striking  effects  nature  can  produce  by 
an  harmonious  combination  of  a  few  simple  lines  and  hues.  Not  less  worthy 
of  examination  is  the  specialised  organ  with  which  the  lichen  decks  itself  than 
the  blossom  of  the  brightest  flower.  Nothing  is  lost  in  nature.  God's  hand- 
writing on  the  wayside  wall  and  the  weather-beaten  rock  writes  no  sentence — 
"  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances  and  art  found  wanting."  {Hugh  Macmillan, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Woe  to  him  that  buildeth  a  town  with  blood. — A  curse  denounced 
against  bloodshed  : — I.  The  ground  oe  caosb  of  this  cxjkse.  The  crying, 
crimson  sin  of  bloodshed.  In  all  generations  it  has  been  the  care  of  providence, 
both  by  civil  and  religious  means,  to  extinguish  all  principles  of  savageness  in  the 
minds  of  men,  and  to  make  friendship  and  tenderness  over  men's  lives  a  great  part 
of  religion.  By  nothing  has  this  been  so  highly  endeavoured  as  by  the  rules  and 
constitution  of  Cliristianity.  II.  The  condition  of  the  pekson  against  whom 
THIS  WOE  OK  CUESE  IS  DENOtTNCED.  He  was  such  an  one  as  had  actually  estab- 
lished a  government  and  built  a  city  with  blood.  As  soon  as  Cain  had  murdered 
his  brother  he  presently  betook  himself  to  the  building  of  a  city.  Bloodiness 
has  usually  a  connection  with  building,  which  represents  the  setting  up  of  govern- 
ment.    Nebuchadnezzar  seems  to  be  the  person  here  spoken  of.    III.  The  latitude 

AND    extent    of   THIS   WOE   OE   CUESE,    AND   WHAT   IS    COMPEEHENDED   IN   IT.       It 

includes  the  miseries  of  both  worlds,  present  and  future.  1.  It  fastens  a  general 
hatred  and  detestation  upon  such  men's  persons.  Cruelty  alarms  and  calls  up 
all  the  passions  of  human  nature,  and  puts  them  into  a  posture  of  hostility  and 
defiance.  The  tyrant  is  universally  hated  and  scorned.  2.  The  torment  of  con- 
tinual jealousy  and  suspicion.  3.  The  shortness  and  certain  dissolution  of  the 
government  that  endeavours  to  establish  itself  with  blood.  4.  The  sad  and 
dismal  end  that  usually  att«nds  such  persons.  IV.  The  reasons  why  a  cursb 
oe  woe  is  so  peculiaely  DENOUNCED  AGAINST  THIS  SIN.  1.  It  makes  the  most 
direct  breach  upon  human  society.  2.  Because  of  the  malignity  of  those  sins  that 
go  in  conjunction  with  it.  V.  Apply  to  the  peesent  occasion.  All  unjust 
bloodshed  is  twofold.  Either  public,  and  acted  by  or  upon  a  community,  as  in  a 
war.  Or  personal,  in  the  assassination  of  any  particular  man.  {B.  South, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  For  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea. — The  knowledge  of  God : — There  shall 
be  such  a  revelation  of  God's  character  and  attributes  as  shall  win  the  faith  and 
love  and  adoration  of  the  human  family.     Now,  where  is  that  revelation  made  T 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKVK.  31 

In  nature  you  get  only  glimpses  of  God ;  it  tells  us  something  of  His  wisdom  and 
His  power,  but  it  tells  us  nothing  about  His  mercy  and  His  forgiving  love.  Every 
word  that  nature  utters  to  a  sinner  is  a  word  of  terror.  God  has  so  loved  us  that 
He  has  sent  His  "  only-begotten  Son,"  through  whom  we  may  learn  to  know  the 
Father.  This  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ  meets  every  want.  It  is  of  this  know- 
ledge the  text  speaks — an  experimental  knowledge  of  Christ  which  brings  us  to 
God,  and  fits  us  for  heaven.  This  knowledge  gives  us  L.j.  It  has  a  quickening 
power.  The  man  that  knows  and  receives  Christ  hves — lives  a  spiritual  life  that 
shall  last  for  ever.  This  knowledge  also  produces  love.  And  it  produces  holiness 
in  the  heart  and  life.  It  prepares  us  for  heaven,  which  is  the  home  of  love.  This 
knowledge  is  to  be  universal !  Reason  teaches  us  to  expect  it.  2.  The  Bible 
proclaims  it.  3.  There  are  signs  of  the  near  approach  of  this  glorious  day.  The 
first  sign  is  the  decay  of  idolatry ;  the  second  is  the  decline  of  popery.  A  third 
is  the  increase  of  knowledge.  A  fourth  is  the  uprising  of  humanity.  A  fifth  is  the 
condition  of  Christianity.  [Charles  Garrett.)  God^s  glory  universally  knoion  : — 
The  prophet  teaches  here,  that  so  remarkable  would  be  God's  judgment  on  the 
Babylonians  that  His  name  would  thereby  be  celebrated  through  the  whole  world. 
There  is  in  the  verse  an  implied  contrast ;  for  God  appeared  not  in  His  own  glory 
when  the  Jews  were  led  away  into  exile ;  the  temple  being  demolished  and  the 
whole  city  destroyed  ;  and  also  when  the  whole  eastern  region  was  exposed  to 
rapine  and  plunder.  When,  therefore,  the  Babylonians  were,  after  the  Assyrians, 
Bwallowing  up  aU  their  neighbours,  the  glory  of  God  did  not  then  shine,  nor  was  it 
conspicuous  in  the  world.  The  Jews  themselves  had  become  mute ;  for  their 
miseries  had,  as  it  were,  stupefied  them ;  their  mouths  were  at  least  closed,  so 
that  they  could  not  from  the  heart  bless  God,  while  He  was  so  severely  afflicting 
them.  And  then,  in  that  manifold  confusion  of  all  things  the  profane  thought 
that  all  things  here  take  place  fortuitously,  and  that  there  is  no  Divine  providence. 
Grod,  then,  was  at  that  time  hid ;  hence  the  prophet  says,  "  Filled  shall  be  the 
earth  with  the  knowledge  of  God  "  ;  that  is,  God  will  again  become  known  when, 
by  stretching  forth  His  hand,  He  will  execute  vengeance  on  the  Babylonians ;  then 
wiU  the  Jews,  as  well  as  other  nations,  acknowledge  that  the  world  is  governed  by 
God's  providence,  as  it  had  been  once  created  by  Him.  We  now  understand  his 
meaning,  and  why  he  says  that  the  earth  would  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of 
God's  glory ;  for  the  glory  of  God  previously  disappeared  from  the  world,  with 
regard  to  the  perceptions  of  men  ;  but  it  shone  forth  again  when  God  Himself  had 
erected  His  tribunal  by  overthrowing  Babylon,  and  thereby  proved  that  there 
is  no  power  among  men  which  He  caimot  control.  We  have  the  same  sentence  in 
Isa.  xi.  9.  The  prophet  then  speaks,  indeed,  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ ;  for  when 
Christ  was  openly  made  known  to  the  world,  the  knowledge  of  God's  glory  at  the 
same  time  filled  the  earth ;  for  God  then  appeared  in  His  own  living  image.  But 
yet  our  prophet  uses  a  proper  language  when  he  says  that  the  earth  shall  then 
be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God's  glory,  when  He  should  execute  vengeance  on 
the  Babylonians.  Hence  incorrectly  have  some  applied  this  to  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel,  as  though  Habakkuk  made  a  transition  from  the  ruin  of  Babylon  to  the 
general  judgment.  This  is  (surely)  a  strained  exposition.  It  is,  indeed,  a  well- 
known  mode  of  speaking,  and  often  occurs  in  the  Psalms,  that  the  power,  grace, 
and  truth  of  God  are  made  known  through  the  world,  when  He  delivers  His  people 
and  restrains  the  ungodly.  The  same  mode  the  prophet  now  adopts ;  and  he 
compares  his  fulness  of  knowledge  to  the  waters  of  the  sea,  because  the  sea  is  so 
deep  that  there  is  no  measuring  of  the  waters.  So  Habakkuk  intimates  that  the 
glory  of  God  would  be  so  much  known  that  it  would  not  only  fill  the  world,  but  in 
a  manner  overflow  it ;  as  the  waters  of  the  sea  by  their  vast  quantity  cover  the 
deep,  so  the  glory  of  God  would  fiU  heaven  and  earth,  so  as  to  have  no  limits.  If, 
at  the  same  time,  there  be  a  wish  to  extend  this  sentence  to  the  coming  of  Christ, 
I  do  not  object ;  for  we  know  that  the  grace  of  redemption  flowed  in  a  perpetual 
stream  until  Christ  appeared  in  the  world.  But  the  prophet,  I  have  no  doubt, 
Bets  forth  here  the  greatness  of  God's  power  in  the  destruction  of  Babylon.  (John 
Calvin.)  The  triumph  of  the  Gospel': — If  we  seek  at  all  times  to  trace  the  provi- 
dences of  God  we  shall  often  find  that  He  makes  His  throne  darkness  to  us ;  and  from 
the  thick  darkness  we  hear  a  voice  saying,  "  What  I  do,  thou  knowest  not  now ; 
but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  But  in  tracing  the  operations  of  the  word  of  His 
grace,  and  the  state  of  His  Church,  we  find  this  clearly  made  known.  The  eternal 
fiat  has  gone  forth,  "  The  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
ol  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."    I.  Thb  suBjBCT-MATTiai  OJT  this 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

PBOPHECY.  The  "  glory  of  the  Lord  "  has  various  meanings.  A  grand  display 
of  it  was  made  when  Moses  and  Aaron  and  the  seventy  elders  were  called  up  into 
the  mount.  Any  particular  visible  display  of  God's  presence  was  His  glory.  But 
the  term  has  also  reference  to  the  Gospel.  There  was  a  glory  attending  the  law, 
but  this  was  much  more  glorious.  It  is  more  glorious  than  the  law  in  its  Author, 
His  Person,  and  His  work.  The  Gospel  is  peculiarly  glorious  above  the  law — 1.  In 
its  extent.  If  we  look  at  former  times  we  might  perhaps  think  that  God  had 
selected  a  few — one  family — as  His  peculiar  treasure  ;  but  now  we  find  this  was 
only  that  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  might  be  more  clearly  marked.  2.  It  re- 
presents the  Divine  attributes  more  gloriously  than  the  law.  Majesty,  justice, 
hatred  of  sin  were  shown.  Here  is  the  richest  display  both  of  grace  and  justice. 
Here  God's  glory  is  concentrated  as  in  a  focus.  3.  It  is  more  glorious  as  life  and 
immortality  are  more  clearly  revealed.  ..."  The  knowledge,"  &c.  This  word 
has  also  various  meanings.  Sometimes  it  means  "discrimination";  at  others, 
"  publication  "  ;  and  when  applied  by  a  believer,  it  is  full  assurance.  The  know- 
ledge in  the  text  implies — ( 1 )  Clearness ;  (2)  impression.  AH  the  theoretical  displays 
of  the  Gospel  are  of  no  avail  without  the  impression  of  its  truth.  The  design  of 
the  Gospel  is  to  change  him  who  heartily  believes  it  into  its  own  nature.  It  is  the 
glory  of  God,  and  it  changes  the  soul  from  glory  to  glory,  and  makes  it  partaker 
of  the  Divine  nature.  3.  Performance.  Believe  and  obey  the  Gospel.  The  sinner 
believes ;  the  believer  works.  4.  This  leads  us  to  the  universal  tendency  of  this 
knowledge.  Like  leaven,  it  will  work  its  way.  II.  What  is  said  concebning 
THIS  GLORY.      The  margin  of   some  Bibles  reads,  "  the  channels  of  the  sea." 

1.  Qearness.     These  channels  are  very  deep  ;  so  is  Divine  science — not  superficial. 

2.  Experience.  The  waters  do  touch  every  surface  of  land  ;  they  wash  every 
shore.  The  glory  of  God  shall  be  felt  by  every  people.  3.  Universal.  The 
channels  are  effectually  covered  ;  so  shall  the  world  be  filled.  III.  Remarks  in 
SUPPOET  OP  THE  PROPHET 's  DECLARATION.  1.  God's  Covenant  with  Abraham. 
"  All  the  families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed  in  him."  2.  It  was  renewed  to 
Isaac,  Jacob,  &c.  ;  but  especially  to  Jesus  Christ.  3.  It  was  the  burden  of  aU  the 
prophecies.  4.  See  the  commission  of  the  apostles.  5.  We  may  refer  the  accom- 
plishment of  this  to  the  promised  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  6.  We  argue  it 
from  the  effects  which  have  been  produced.  Application — ( 1 )  You  are  interested 
in  this  individually.     (2)  See  what  God  expects  from  us.     (J.  Summerfield,  A.M.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  What  proflteth  the  graven  image,  that  the  maker  thereof  hath 
graven  it. — National  wrongs  ending  in  national  ivoes : — I.  That  men  often  give  to 

THE  WORKS  OF  THEIR  OWN  HANDS  THE  DEVOTIONS  THAT  BELONG  TO  GOD.       These  old 

Chaldean  idolaters  gave  their  devotions  to  the  "  graven  image  "  and  to  the  "  molten 
image  "  that  men  had  carved  in  wood  and  stone  or  moulded  from  molten  metals. 
It  was  the  works  of  their  own  hands  they  worshipped.  Are  men's  sympathies  in 
their  strong  current  for  God,  or  for  something  else  ?  Do  they  expend  the  larger 
portion  of  their  time  and  the  greater  amount  of  their  energies  in  the  service  of 
the  Eternal,  or  in  the  service  of  themselves  ?     II.  That  men  often  look  to  thk 

WORKS   of  THEIR   OWN   HANDS   FOR  A   BLESSING   WHICH   GOD   ALONE   CAN   BESTOW. 

These  old  idolaters  said  to  the  *'  wood.  Awake,  to  the  dumb  stone,  Arise."  Now, 
it  is  true  that  men  do  not  say  formal  prayers  to  wealth,  or  fashion,  or  fame,  or 
power,  albeit  to  these  they  look  with  all  their  souls  for  happiness.  Men  who 
are  looking  for  happiness  to  any  of  these  objects  are  like  the  devotees 
of  Baal,  who  cried  from  morning  to  evening  for  help,  and  no  help  came. 
III.  That  in  all  this  men  entail  on  themselves  the  woes  of  outraged  reason 
AND  JUSTICE.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  saith  to  the  wood,  Awake,  to  the  dumb 
stone,  Arise."  1.  It  is  the  woe  of  outraged  reason.  What  help  could  they  expect 
of  the  "  molten  image,  and  a  teacher  of  hes  "  ?  What  answer  could  they  expect 
from  the  dumb  "  idols  "  that  they  themselves  had  made  ?  How  irrational  all 
this  !  Equally  unreasonable  it  is  for  men  to  search  for  happiness  in  any  of  the 
works  of  their  hands,  and  in  any  being  or  object  independent  of  God.  2.  It  is 
the  woe  of  insulted  justice.  What  has  God  said  ?  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other 
gods  before  Me."  All  this  devotion,  therefore,  to  the  works  of  our  own  hands, 
or  to  any  other  creature,  is  an  infraction  of  man's  cardinal  obligation.  (Homilist.) 
The  miaapplication  of  the  teaching  of  art  in  the  service  of  religion  : — There  is 
some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  exact  time  at  which  the  prophet  Habakkuk 
delivered  his  message.  But  there  is  no  question  that  it  coincided  with  the  period 
in  which  Israel  came  in  contact  with  the  great  empires  of  the  East,  and  was  allowed 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKUK.  33 

to  be  humbled  and  punished  by  them.  One  of  the  consequences  of  intercoxirse 
with  these  empires,  ending  in  the  Captivity,  was  to  familiarise  their  minds  with 
buildings  and  workings  of  art  which,  while  they  marked  the  absence  of  a  knowledge 
and  worship  of  the  true  God,  presented  marvellous  instances  of  the  power  and 
skill  of  man  !  The  mind  of  man,  in  his  fallen  state,  is  ever  prone  to  forget  God 
and  to  reject  Him  ;  it  is  ever  prone  to  corrupt  the  simple  idea  of  His  majesty 
and  power.  The  idolatry  of  power  was  expressed  in  the  architecture  and  image- 
worship  of  this  period.  The  words  of  the  text  refer  to  it.  The  dumb  stone  (of 
the  monuments)  speaks  still;  it  speaks  of  abject  submission  to  irresistible  power. 
It  speaks  of  rule  and  might  and  iron  will ;  but  there  is  no  love,  no  tenderness, 
no  hope  in  its  utterances.  History  re-echoes  the  prophet's  denunciation,  and 
extends  it  to  after  generations,  embracing  the  later  and  more  engaging  forms  of 
art  thus  employed.  The  message  of  works  of  art  addresses  itself  to  the  carnal 
and  the  sensuous  that  is  in  us.  It  does  not  bring  us  into  contact  with  the  unseen 
and  the  infinite.  There  is  a  woe  in  it.  May  we  not,  descending  the  stream  of 
time,  go  on  to  point  out  that  the  prophet's  woe  also  lights  upon  what  is  called 
Christian  Art — on  them  who,  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  have  said  unto  the  wood. 
Awake,  and  have  called  upon  the  dumb  stone  to  teach  ?  The  woe  has  taken 
effect  in  bringing  down  a  thick  pall  of  dark  superstition  and  loss  of  spiritual  life 
wherever  the  practice  has  prevailed.  It  is  not  to  the  wood  or  to  the  stone  that 
we  are  directed  for  our  instruction  in  Divine  things,  but  to  the  Word  and  to  the 
testimony.  And  therefore  it  is  that  in  the  arranging  of  our  churches  and  the 
adjusting  of  their  ornaments,  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  it  appeared  right 
to  those  who  were  charged  with  this  work  that  the  wood  and  the  stone  which  had 
been  set  up  to  speak  and  to  teach  should  be  excluded  from  this  office;  thatnoattempt 
should  be  made,  by  an  exhibition  of  the  passion  and  death  of  our  blessed  Lord, 
to  the  outward  eye,  to  move  the  feelings  and  to  strengthen  the  faith ;  but  rather 
that  such  things  were  to  be  removed  as  a  danger  and  a  hindrance  to  acceptable 
worship.  In  place  of  ornaments  and  images  the  Reformers  put  the  Creed,  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  and  the  Ten  Commandments.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  in  our 
day  there  is  some  danger  lest  too  much  importance  be  attached  to  external  appear- 
ance, to  architecture  and  decoration.  ^Vhile  we  do  not  look  to  the  wood  to  speak, 
or  to  the  dumb  stone  to  teach,  we  will  not  hesitate  to  make  both  minister  to  the 
comeliness  of  the  sanctuary.  In  so  doing  we  shall  not  impede  but  assist  devotion. 
Holding  fast  the  essential  truths,  and  taught  by  the  Word  of  the  living  God,  we 
may  rejoice  with  thanksgiving  for  the  comeliness  of  the  sanctuaries  which  now 
cover  our  land  in  every  direction,  and  cheerfully  do  our  part,  that  the  wood  and 
the  stone  may  be  made  worthily  to  set  forth  the  honour  of  God's  service,  and 
furnish  us  fitting  accompaniment  for  the  prayer  and  the  praise  we  offer  in  His 
name.     (Archdeacon  Cooper,  M.A.) 

Ver.  20.  But  the  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple.  —  The  Lord  in  His  holy 
temple: — What  comparison  can  be  formed  between  an  idol  which  is  nothing, 
and  the  great  God  who  made  heaven  and  earth  ?  What  stronger  proof  can 
be  given  that  man  is  far  gone  from  original  righteousness,  and  inclined  to  evil 
continually,  than  this, — he  has  chosen  idols,  and  bowed  the  knee  before  them, 
in  preference  to  that  Being  who  is,  and  was,  and  is  to  come  ?  Notwithstanding, 
however,  the  indifference  and  rebellion  of  His  creatures,  their  neglect  and  con- 
tempt of  His  word,  "  The  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple."  The  Lord,  that  is  Jehovah, 
is  self-existent.  He  is  indebted  to  no  other  for  His  being,  for  He  has  life  in  Him- 
self. He  is  accountable  to  no  one.  He  is  indebted  to  no  one.  In  this  vast 
temple  of  creation  He  dwells.  Though  God  is  everywhere  present,  He  is  present 
in  some  places  in  a  more  peculiar  sense.  The  Lord's  throne  is  in  heaven.  In 
order  that  we  may  be  worshippers  in  that  temple  which  is  above,  it  behoves  us  to  be 
constant  in  our  worship  in  the  Lord's  temple  here  below.  In  a  peculiar  sense  also  the 
house  of  prayer  is  His  temple.  The  Jewish  temple  was.  "  Keeping  silence  "  indi- 
cates a  sense  of  weakness  and  unworthiness,  reverence  and  devout  attention. 
It  points  also  to  the  glory,  majesty,  and  power  of  the  Lord  God  omnipotent. 
God,  indeed,  permits  us  to  speak  to  Him,  whether  with  the  voice  of  confession, 
of  prayer,  or  of  thanksgiving.  Notwithstanding  our  own  unworthiness,  God  does 
not  reject  our  sacrifices.  Keeping  silence  is  indicative  of  fear.  There  is  a  fear  of 
God  without  which  there  can  be  no  religion  ;  a  fear  which  is  the  beginning  of 
wisdom,  and  which  is  productive  of  much  spiritual  fruit.  There  is  a  fear  of  God 
which  has  respect  chiefly  to  His  power,  greatness,  or  majesty.    Such  a  feai  is 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

reasonable.  But  the  fear  is  tempered  with  love,  and  thus  it  grows  into  reverence. 
It  is  the  feeling  entertained  toward  those  who  are  our  seniors  in  age  or  station,  piety 
or  virtue.  This  reverence  of  God  is  the  perfection  towards  which  we  tend.  Keep- 
ing silence  before  God  betokens  attention.  It  implies  not  merely  the  dread  of 
God's  power  and  majesty,  but  attention  to  His  words.  God  speaks  to  man  in 
nature  and  in  providence.  But  especially  by  His  Word.  He,  in  a  sense,  speaks 
to  man  by  His  ministers  and  through  His  sacraments.  Let  me  urge  upon  you  the 
solemn  truth  that  the  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple,  and  press  upon  you  the  sacred 
duty  of  drawing  nigh  unto  BUm  constantly,  and  with  reverence.  If  on  His  throne 
in  the  heavens  He  waiteth  to  be  gracious,  here  in  His  temple  He  ordinarily  dis- 
penses His  benefits.  Let  me  impress  upon  you  the  importance  of  joining  not  only 
heartily,  but  with  your  voice  also,  in  those  parts  of  our  service  which  are  proper 
to  a  congregation.  God  waiteth  to  be  gracious  to  us,  and  ought  we  not  gladly 
to  avail  ourselves  of  every  opportunity  of  hearing  His  voice  and  receiving  His  mercy  ? 
(H.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.)  God  in  His  temph: — I.  Who  it  is  to  whom  all  eyes 
AEE  TO  BE  DIRECTED.  The  "  Lord  Jehovali."  He  is  the  God  who  seeth.  "Thou, 
God,  seest  me."  The  "Lord  our  Righteousness."  The  "Lord  my  Banner." 
The  "  Lord  my  Shield."  II.  What  is  included  in  His  presence.  God  loves 
the  tents  of  Jacob,  He  loves  the  dwellings  of  Israel,  but  He  loves  His  own  house 
above  them  all,  as  the  place  where  He  makes  His  honour  to  be  known.  Infer- 
ences— I.  See  why  it  is  that  some  of  you  have  been  attending  God's  house  for 
years  and  are  none  the  better  for  it.  2.  Though  a  minister  may  leave  his  people, 
he  does  not  take  God  away  from  his  flock.  {Thomas  Mortimer,  B.D.)  The 
presence  of  God  in  His  temple : — This  forms — I.  The  grand  element  of  its 
consecration.  Consecration  implies — 1.  That  there  are  subordinate  elements 
in  the  dedication,  or  the  setting  apart  of  it  as  the  house  of  God.  A  Church  is 
sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God,  prayer,  and  praise,  independent  of  all  other  cere- 
monies. 2.  During  the  dedication  we  are  to  look  and  wait  for  demonstrations 
of  the  Divine  presence  therein.  The  "  cloud,"  at  the  consecration  of  Solomon's 
temple,  "  filled  the  house  of  the  Lord."  This  was  a  visible  and  special  token 
of  the  Divine  Presence  suited  to  the  auspicious  event.  There  were  five  per- 
manent symbols  of  God's  presence  in  the  temple.  (1)  The  Shekinah.  (2)  The  Ark 
and  Mercy-seat.  (3)  The  Urim  and  Thummim.  (4)  Fire  from  heaven.  (5)  The 
spirit  of  prophecy.  These  were  "shadows  of  good  things  to  come"  in  the 
spiritual  temple.  3.  Consecration  of  a  church  to  the  service  of  God  should  be 
accompanied  with  firm  resolution  and  vigilant  watchfulness,  lest  any  exercises 
of  common  or  unclean  character  be  tolerated  therein.  II.  The  presence  of 
God  in  His  temple  dem^ands  the  spirit  of  adoration.  A  spirit  manifesting 
itself  in  "  reverence  and  godly  fear."  Our  sole  object  in  coming  into  the  temple 
should  be  to  worship  God.  When  we  attend  to  our  duty  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  we  may  reasonably  expect  the  blessing  of  God  to  rest  upon  us.  III.  Thb 
presence  of  the  Lord  in  His  temple  justifies  and  encourages  the  exercisb 
op  expectation.  Sinners  may  expect  the  blessing  of  regeneration  and  con- 
version. Warrants  of  expectation  are  God's  express  promise,  the  atonement, 
and  recorded  instances  of  God's  gracious  dealings.  IV.  By  the  presence  of 
God  in  His  temple  we  have  sweet  and  holy  communion  with  Him.  This 
is  the  highest  honour  that  can  be  conferred  upon  sinful  men;  it  is  an  indis- 
pensable qualification  for  the  enjoyment  of  His  presence  in  heaven.  {William 
Roberts,  D.D.)  God's  house  : — The  conception  is  partly  Christian  and  partly 
pagan,  partly  true  and  partly  false.  We  find  it  in  the  religions  of  ancient  Greece 
and  Rome.  For  every  god  there  must  be  a  temple  or  shrine,  where  that  god 
would  be  sure  to  hear  the  prayers  of  his  suppliants.  Even  in  the  purer  worship 
of  Israel  the  same  idea  prevails,  God  making  His  dwelling  in  the  tabernacle, 
and  especially  in  the  awful  holy  of  holies.  To  the  unspiritual  the  thought  would 
be  narrow  and  misleading.  It  behoves  us  to  take  heed  lest  the  very  aids  to 
worship  should  shut  in  our  thought  of  God,  and  make  it  small  and  mean.  The 
common  idea  that  God  is  to  bo  found  especially  in  some  building  sacred  to  Him 
is  right,  after  all.  No  idea  can  be  universal  in  which  there  is  not  something  good. 
While  God  is  alike  everywhere,  practically  to  us  He  is  most  present  where  the 
soul  can  most  feel  Him.  We  know  the  power  of  association.  True,  God  can 
be  found  everywhere ;  and  worshipyjed  anywhere.  The  place,  the  forms,  the 
times  of  worship  are  things  of  comparatively  small  importance.  Vain  are  all 
efforts,  and  vain  all  gifts,  if  we  depend  upon  a  place  to  draw  near  to  God.  The 
temple  is  holy,  not  because  it  has  been  made  so  by  the  skill  of  man,  bui  because 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKUK.  36 

the  Lord  is  in  it.  No  less  holy  should  be  the  home  of  every  Christian.  But 
Paul  teaches  that  God  is  especially  to  be  found  in  man.  God  in  man  we  find 
in  Christ.  The  real  temple,  where  God  most  certainly  dwells,  is  man  himself. 
Only  as  we  reverence  man,  then,  can  we  worship  God.  Because  of  the  life  and 
work  and  death  of  the  Son  of  Man,  who  was  also  Son  of  God,  every  man  is  to 
know  himself  a  son  of  God.  Does  not  this  make  all  life  sacred  ?  What  principles 
ought  to  guide  us  in  worship  ?  1.  That  all  men  are  brothers.  2.  That  we  come 
hither  seekers  for  truth.  We  are  to  ask,  not  what  do  others  believe,  what  is 
it  politic  to  believe,  what  did  former  generations  believe, — but  what  is  truth  ? 
What  is  God's  revelation  of  Himself  to-day  ?  {Wcdcott  Fay.)  The  'presence  of 
God  in  the  Churches  of  His  saints  : — The  universe  is  the  temple  of  Jehovah.  The 
idea  of  the  omnipresence  of  God  is  calculated  to  have  a  commanding  influence 
over  the  mind,  and  consequently  over  the  conduct.  The  feelings  produced 
in  a  mind  rightly  affected  by  it  are  altogether  of  a  religious  nature.  In  no  situa- 
tion is  the  influence  of  this  doctrine  more  felt  than  when  the  true  Christian  is 
engaged  in  the  more  immediate  performance  of  religious  duty.  Wherever  we 
are,  the  Lord  is  there.  The  text  makes  known  the  presence  of  the  Lord  in  the 
place  appointed  for  His  worship.  His  presence  has  been  peculiarly  with  the 
Chiu-ch  in  all  ages.  The  presence  of  God  in  His  holy  temple  is  felt  by  all  true 
worshippers  as  the  life  of  all  the  services  which  are  performed.  It  is  to  be  feared, 
however,  that  with  all  that  is  outwardly  becoming,  in  many  there  is  a  total  want 
of  all  that  is  inwardly  required  of  those  who  would  worship  God.  Bodily  exercise 
profiteth  little.  1.  The  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple,  to  receive  the  adoration  of 
His  people  and  hear  their  prayers.  To  worship  God  is  the  duty  of  every  rational 
being.  2.  The  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple,  that  He  may  manifest  Himself  to 
His  worshipping  people  in  the  way  of  gracious  commimication.  In  the  per- 
formance of  duty  there  is  always  a  feeling  in  itself  agreeable.  3.  The  Lord  is 
in  His  holy  temple,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  back  wandering  sinners  to  Him- 
self. This  was  the  great  purpose  for  which  Jesus  came  from  heaven  to  earth. 
Seeing  that  the  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple,  how  unbecoming  must  everjrthing 
like  levity  be  in  His  presence  !  How  utterly  vain  must  hypocrisy  be  in  the 
service  of  God  !  Let  believers  study  to  improve  the  privileges  of  the  temple 
below,  that  by  means  of  them  they  may  be  fitted  for  the  more  exalted  service 
of  the  temple  above.  (Archibald  Jack.)  The  spiritual  temple : — Heaven  is 
not  merely  the  seat  of  royal  power  and  grandeur ;  it  is  a  temple,  and  as  siich  is 
the  seat  of  exalt«d  and  sacred  worship,.  The  Redeemer  appears  there  minister- 
ing in  His  official  character.  His  life  there,  no  less  than  His  death  on  earth, 
is  necessary  to  our  salvation.  By  the  temple  here  is  meant  the  Church  of  the 
living  God.  There  are  particular  churches,  there  is  the  one  Chm-ch  universal.. 
All  who  rest  by  faith  on  the  atonement  offered  on  the  Hill  of  Calvary,  and  who 
exhibit  by  their  holy  life  and  conversation  their  attachment  to  the  Saviour,  are 
members  of  this  Church.  Take  a  survey  of  this  spiritual  temple.  I.  Its  founda- 
tion. It  is  built  upon  the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 
II.  Its  materials.  Countless  myriads  of  saints.  There  is  a  beautiful  variety, 
though  at  the  same  time  a  substantial  sameness,  in  the  precious  stones  of  this 
grand  superstructure.  III.  Its  symmetry.  The  unity  of  the  Chvu-ch  of  Christ, 
when  her  members  are  knit  together  in  love,  perfectly  joined  together  in  the 
same  mind,  and  in  the  same  judgment,  and  keeping  the  unity  of  the  spirit  in 
the  bond  of  peace.  What  are  the  heavenly  graces  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  but 
the  exercises  of  the  mind  in  a  state  of  moral  order  ?  IV.  Its  design.  "  A 
habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit."  V.  Its  purity.  The  spiritual  temple, 
the  members  of  the  invisible  body  of  Christ  are  sanctified  worshippers,  reflecting 
in  the  transforming  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  glory  and  power  of  the  Divine 
perfections.  (J.  C.  Edwards,  M.A.)  The  Lord  in  His  temple  : — I.  A  reason 
for  consecration.  Where  God  is  should  be  holy.  God  gave  symbols  of  His 
presence — the  Shekinah,  Mercy  Seat,  &c.,  which  were  shadows  of  that  which 
was  to  come.  Consecration  is  the  devoting  anything  entirely  to  the  service  of 
God,  and  demands — 1.  Pvurity.  There  should  be  nothing  unholy.  2.  Sacredness. 
There  should  be  nothing  secular.  3.  Perfectness.  Nothing  common  so  far 
as  it  is  in  the  sphere  of  our  power  to  exclude  it.     II.  A  bbason  fob  adoratioit. 

1.  The  object  of  going  to  God's  house  is  to  honour  Him.     Hence  we  should — 
(1)  Watch   our   motives;    (2)  Watch   our   conduct;    (3)  Watch   our   thoughts. 

2.  To  worship  Him.     3.  To  carry  out  our  profession  in  the  sight  of  the  world, 
and  let  others  take  knowledge  of  us  that  we  have  been  with  Jesus.    IIL  A 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

REASON  FOR  EXPECTATION.  God  is  there — 1.  To  hear  His  people.  2.  To  bless 
His  people.  3.  To  sanctify  His  people.  The  Bible  is  full  of  promises  of  this 
great  truth  and  its  reality.  IV.  A  reason  fob  satisfaction  How  high  an 
honour  to  meet  with  God  !  It  is  a  preparation  and  a  prelude  to  heaven. 
{Homilist.)  God  in  His  tempf.e: — This  sublime  declaration  and  solemn  precept 
of  the  prophet,  may  be  considered  as  relative  to  the  proper  worship  of  God 
both  in  public  and  private.  Indeed,  these  two  kinds  of  worship  are  necessarily 
connected,  one  being  always  preparatory  to  the  other.  The  knowledge  of  (.'od 
must  be  first  obtained,  before  we  can  have  any  idea  of  the  worship  that  will  be 
acceptable  to  Him.  But  how  is  this  knowledge  of  God  to  be  obtained  ?  In 
vain  do  we  seek  for  God  in  arguments  and  reasonings  ;  the  knowledge  of  His 
existence  and  attributes,  collected  from  the  works  of  nature,  may  satisfy  our 
understandings,  but  cannot  comfort  our  hearts.  His  own  blessed  revelation, 
without  which  we  could  never  have  known  where  to  look  for  Him,  directs  us 
to  our  own  hearts.  There  is  His  holy  temple,  in  which  He  is  to  be  spiiitually 
worshipped — we  must  find,  we  must  feel  His  presence  there — till  we  do  so,  we 
cannot  be  said  to  have  any  true  knowledge  of  Him.  Every  good  and  virtuous 
thought ;  every  sensibility  of  meekness,  humility,  patience,  resignation,  and  love  ; 
every  little  rising  of  conscience  against  the  suggestions  of  vice ;  every  little 
check  or  reproach  thou  feelest  for  an  unworthy  thought,  or  a  shameful  action, 
— all  bespeak  a  present  Deity,  a  God  and  Saviour,  seeking  to  make  HimseliE 
known  to  thee  in  His  holy  temple.  It  is  true,  the  first  appearances  of  the  Divinity 
to  the  fallen  spirit  of  man,  are  faint  and  shadowy,  like  the  first  feeble  ray  of 
morn  that  shoots  athwart  the  gloom  of  night.  But  do  thou  observe  the  precept 
of  the  prophet  in  the  text.  Wait  and  watch  in  awful  stillness ;  impose  silence 
on  the  clamorous  calls  of  every  earthbom  passion  and  appetite ;  stand  in  meek- 
ness and  humility,  with  thine  inward  eye  turned  towards  these  first  emanations 
of  Divine  light,  and  thou  shalt  soon  perceive  "  the  day  dawn,  and  the  day-star 
arise  upon  thy  soul."  By  this  awful  silence,  and  waiting  upon  the  Lord  in  Hia 
temple,  we  place  ourselves,  as  it  were,  upon  hallowed  ground  ;  and  if  I  may 
borrow  an  image  from  ancient  superstition,  a  magic  circle  of  heavenly  light  and 
lustre  is  drawn  round  us, — nor  will  the  dark  malicious  enchanter,  who  only 
rules  in  earth  and  hell,  dare  to  approach  its  radiant  limits.  What  does  thia 
awful  silence  mean  when  applied  to  public  worship  ?  Were  we  all  pure  spirit, 
unembarrassed  with  these  gross  vehicles  of  clay,  there  is  no  doubt  but  we  might, 
even  publicly,  join  in  silent  worship,  and  catch  the  fervours  of  devotion  from 
each  other,  without  the  intervention  of  speech  or  corporeal  sound.  "  There 
is  a  communion  which  language  cannot  express,  a  worship  that  wants  not  the 
aid  of  words,  nor  is  it  to  be  defined  by  a  harmony  of  sounds,  in  which  we  approach 
the  sacred  Author  of  unutterable  love."  There  are  times  when  the  sanctified 
soul  is  constrained,  as  it  were,  to  offer  up  the  silent  sacrifice  of  the  spirit,  and 
when  the  sacrifice  of  words  must  fail.  When  applied  to  public  worship,  the 
silence  here  enjoined  means  that  reverential  awe  and  profound  submission,  which, 
though  due  at  all  times  and  in  all  places,  from  the  creature  to  his  adorable  Creator, 
seems  to  be  more  immediately  so,  when  we  assemble  together  in  places  dedi- 
cated to  His  worship,  which,  according  to  His  own  declaration,  He  favours  with 
His  more  immediate  presence,  and  where  "  His  honour  more  particularly  dwells." 
(Jacob  Duchf!,  M.A.)  God  present  in  Hia  holy  temple  .-—I.  What  the  prophet 
HERB  intimates.  There  are  several  senses  in  which  we  may  understand  this 
expression  of  the  prophet,  and  all  equally  in  accordance  with  the  Word  of  God. 

1.  God  dwelling  in  the  temple  of  the  universe — inhabiting  all  space  :  omnipresent. 

2.  In  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  dwelt  "  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily."  3.  In  the  congregation  of  His  saints,  wherever  they  meet  together ; 
but  more  especially  in  those  buildings  set  apart  for  His  public  worship.  4.  Every 
true  believer  is  himself  a  temple  of  the  living  God  ;  a  holy  temple,  filled  with 
"  all  the  fulness  of  God."  II.  Practical  lesson.  "  Let  all  the  earth  keep 
silence  before  Him."  It  behoves  us  at  all  times  to  cherish  such  feelings  of  reverence 
and  submission  as  become  the  sinner  in  the  sight  of  hia  God.  and  worms  of  the 
dust  before  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth.  In  all  circumstances  of  life  a  ready 
acquiescence  and  unmiu-muring  spirit  should  mark  the  Christian's  conduct. 
Attend  especially  to  the  disposition  of  heart  and  mind  in  which  God  should 
be  approached  in  His  holy  ordinances.  Here  the  King  of  kings  invites  rebellious 
subjects  to  meet  Him  ;  here  He  is  present  and  ready  to  receive  the  humble 
suppliant,   and   to  offer  him   a  full    and    free    pardon,   and    an    incorruptible 


CHAP,  n.]  HABAKKUK.  37 

and    heavenly   inheritance,   seoored  through  the  merits  of  His  beloved  Son. 
(J.  L.  F.  Russell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  20.  Let  all  the  earth  keep  silence  hefore  Him. — Keeping  silence : — 
Habakkuk  commends  the  power  of  God,  that  the  Israelites  might  proceed 
with  alacrity  in  their  religious  cotirse,  knowing  it  to  be  a  sufficient  security 
to  be  under  the  protection  of  the  only  true  God,  and  that  they  might  not  seek 
after  the  superstitions  of  the  nations,  nor  be  carried  here  and  there,  as  it  often 
happens,  by  vain  desires.  "  Keep  silence,"  then,  he  says,  "  let  all  the  earth." 
He  shows  that  though  the  Israelites  might  be  far  inferior  to  the  Babylonians, 
and  other  nations,  and  be  far  unequal  to  them  in  strength,  military  art,  forces, 
and  in  short,  in  all  things  of  this  kind,  yet  they  would  always  be  safe  under  the 
guardianship  of  God  ;  for  the  Lord  was  able  to  control  whatever  power  there 
might  be  in  the  world.  We  now  see  what  the  prophet  had  in  view ;  for  he  does 
not  here  simply  exhort  all  people  to  worship  God,  but  shows  that,  though  men 
may  grow  mad  against  Him,  He  yet  can  easily  by  His  hand  subjugate  them ;  for 
after  aU  the  tumiJts  made  by  kings  and  their  people,  the  Lord  can,  by  one  breath 
of  His  mouth,  dissipate  all  their  attempts,  however  furious  they  may  be.  This, 
then,  is  the  silence  of  which  the  prophet  now  speaks.  But  there  is  another  kind 
of  silence,  and  that  is,  when  we  willingly  submit  to  God  ;  for  silence  in  this  respect 
is  nothing  else  but  submission  :  and  we  submit  to  God,  when  we  bring  not  our 
own  inventions  and  imaginations,  but  suffer  ourselves  to  be  taught  by  His  Word. 
We  also  submit  to  Him,  when  we  murmur  not  against  His  power  or  His  judg- 
ments, when  we  humble  ourselves  under  His  powerful  hand,  and  do  not  fiercely 
resist  Him,  as  those  do  who  indulge  their  own  lusts.  This  is  indeed  a  vohmtary 
submission  :  but  the  prophet  here  shows  that  there  is  power  in  God  to  lay  pro- 
strate the  whole  world,  and  to  tread  it  under  His  feet,  whenever  it  may  please 
Him ;  so  that  the  faithful  have  nothing  to  fear,  for  they  know  that  their  salva- 
tion is  secured  ;  for  though  the  whole  world  were  leagued  against  them,  it  yet 
caimot  resist  God.  {John  Calvin.)  The  teaching  of  silence: — There  is  an 
eloquence  that  hves  not  in  words.  There  is  an  appeal  to  the  heart,  ay,  and  to 
the  reason  too,  in  the  language  of  silence.  The  child  that  wakes  in  the  night 
and  hstens  for  a  sound  and  hears  none,  realises  loneliness,  and  vastness,  and 
the  sense  of  mystery,  and  cries  out  for  fear.  There  is  a  voice  in  the  silence  of 
old  associations,  as  we  stand  amid  the  relics  of  the  past.  There  is  a  silence  too 
amongst  men  that  speaks  most  unmistakably, — the  silence  of  deep  feeling, 
whether  of  sorrow,  or  rage,  or  attention,  or  determination,  when  men  have  ceased 
to  talk,  because  they  feel  words  are  out  of  place,  and  the  time  for  work  has  come. 
The  silence  spoken  of  in  the  text  is  a  silence  created  by  a  sense  of  the  present 
majesty  of  God.  I.  The  presence  of  God.  He  has  Himself  declared  His 
omnipresence.  He  condescended  to  dwell  in  the  tabernacle  and  the  temple. 
In  the  newer  dispensation  there  were  manifest  declarations  that  God  is  among 
His  worshippers  of  a  truth.  It  is  no  relic  of  a  bygone  superstition  to  assert  that 
God  is  in  the  midst  of  us.  At  the  present  day,  with  altered  circumstances 
externally,  are  we  to  suppose  the  reality  is  changed  ?  Because  the  temple  gave 
way  to  the  riverside  or  the  catacombs,  and  they  in  turn  to  the  Basilica  and  the 
Church,  are  we  to  think  that  God  has  failed  His  people  or  broken  His  covenant  ? 
Are  we  to  imagine  that  God  does  not  now  draw  near  to  hear  the  prayer  addressed 
to  Him,  or  that,  while  He  is  present  everywhere  else,  He  excludes  Himself  from 
those  sanctuaries  where  His  people  specially  desire  His  presence  ?  We  are  here 
for  a  festival  of  parochial  choirs.  But  in  whose  honour  is  that  festival  ?  Our 
own  or  God's  ?  II.  The  work  of  music.  Regard  it  as  an  influence.  Which  of 
us  is  altogether  insensible  to  it  ?  And  as  a  means  of  expression.  The  influence 
of  music  must  lead  on  to  something  further.  If  we  feel  it  in  any  degree,  we  are 
bound  to  make  it  our  own,  and  employ  it  till  we  realise  something  of  the  worth 
of  music  as  a  means  of  expression.  When  Mendelssohn,  as  a  boy,  had  seen  any- 
thing very  beautiful,  if  he  was  asked  to  describe  it,  he  would  say,  "  Oh,  I  can't 
spf^ak  it,  I  will  play  it  to  you,"  and  would  then  sit  down  and  draw  out  of  the 
instrument  tones  that  expressed  the  deep  impression  which  the  beautiful  had 
made  on  him.  We  are  not  all  so.  Still  we  all  have  some  such  power  in  some 
degree.  III.  What  has  this  to  do  with  silence  ?  A  great  deal.  For  all 
great  works  great  preparation  is  needed.  For  the  true  preparation  of  the  music 
of  the  sanctuary,  silence  is  necessary.  The  music  we  have  been  speaking  of  is 
the  music  of  worship,  and  the  music  of  hearts.     Silence  is  the  attitude  of  listen- 


38  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

ing  and  attention.  What  is  necessary  in  God's  house  is  silent  reverence.  And 
it  is  the  condition  of  real  work, — of  most  work  with  the  hand,  of  all  real  work  with 
the  head.  The  silence  of  preparation  is  like  a  dam  across  a  stream.  In  the 
silence  of  thought,  in  the  sUence  of  humility,  in  the  silence  of  reverence,  in  the 
Bilence  of  deep  feelings,  in  the  silence  of  earnest  determination,  we  prepare  an 
offering  of  prayer  and  praise,  which  wells  forth,  not  from  the  noisy  utterance 
of  our  lips,  without  influence  and  without  expression,  but  a  strong  deep  flood 
from  the  heart  itself,  which  flows,  and  will  flow  on  and  on  for  ever,  which  has 
God  for  its  object,  our  own  deepest  interest  for  its  subject,  our  whole  life  for  its 
channel,  and  eternity  for  its  end.  ((?.  C.  Harris.)  Sentiments  for  a  great 
crisis  : — This  prophetic  book  was  written  in  troublous  times.  I.  The  attitude 
OF  God  towards  the  earth  in  the  great  crisis  of  its  history.  Some 
think  by  Jehovah's  temple  the  prophet  means  the  Church  ;  others  the  universe  ; 
others  heaven  ;  others  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  We  understand  our  text  to 
speak  of  heaven  as  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  1.  The  fact  that  the  Lord  is  in  His 
temple  speaks  to  us  of  the  hiding  of  His  purposes.  To  us>  in  this  lower  world, 
God's  face  is  often  veiled.  Our  vision  is  not  keen  enough  to  pierce  the  mysteries 
of  that  temple  into  which  He  withdraws  Himself.  2.  Indicates  the  interest 
which  He  takes  in  human  affairs.  Though  the  Lord  is  hidden,  He  is  not  unob- 
servant. It  is  our  consolation  to  know  that  our  Heavenly  Father,  though  unseen, 
is  all-seeing  and  all- pervading.  And  if  God  care  for  the  most  insignificant  indi- 
vidual, must  He  not  care  much  more  when  the  fate  of  nations  hangs  in  the  balance  7 
3.  Intimates  His  infinite  repose  in  spite  of  all  external  changes.  No  disquiet 
can  be  felt  by  the  Almighty.  4.  He  is  ready  to  interfere  effectively  at  the  proper 
moment.  As  a  rule,  He  conceals  His  designs,  until  the  time  comes  for  action. 
II.  The  fitting  attitude  of  man  towards  God  in  eventful  times.  "  Let 
all  the  earth  keep  silence  before  Him."  There  should  be — 1.  The  silence  of 
humiliation.  2.  The  silence  of  adoration.  3.  The  silence  of  submission.  4.  The 
silence  of  expectation.  5.  The  silence  of  quiet  resolution — the  resolution  to  follow 
implicitly  the  guidance  of  providence,  and,  at  whatever  cost,  to  do  our  duty  to 
our  country,  the  world,  and  to  God.  The  expressiveness  of  devout  silence  : — 
Addison  professes  to  have  been  wonderfully  delighted  with  a  masterpiece  of 
music,  when  in  the  very  tumult  and  ferment  of  their  harmony  all  the  voices  and 
instruments  have  stopped  short  on  a  sudden,  and  after  a  little  pause  recovered 
themselves  again  as  it  were,  and  renewed  the  concert  in  all  its  parts.  "  Methought 
this  short  interval  of  silence  has  had  more  music  in  it  than  any  one  same  space 
of  time  before  or  after  it."  And  he  goes  on  to  cite  from  Homer  and  from  Virgil 
two  instances  of  silence,  **  which  have  something  in  them  as  sublime  as  any  of 
the  speeches  in  their  whole  works."  {Francis  Jacox.)  Silence: — What  ia 
silence  ?  You  often  use  the  word,  but  are  you  sure  that  you  always  use  it  cor- 
rectly ?  or  that  you  are  able  to  discriminate  between  the  literal  and  the  meta- 
phorical use  of  the  word  T  Strictly  speaking,  silence  is  the  suspension  of  articulate 
speech,  though  by  a  metaphor  we  transfer  the  term  to  a  cessation  of  any  sound 
whatever.  Thus,  we  read  of  the  hushed  silence  which,  in  tropical  countries, 
precedes  the  shock  of  the  earthquake  ;  and  we  have  all  been  awed  by  the  sflence 
which  fills  up  the  intervals  between  the  peals  in  the  thunderstorm.  But  in  these 
instances  the  word  silence,  which  strictly  means  the  pause  of  articulate  speech, 
is  not  used  in  its  primary  and  literal  sense,  but  figuratively  or  metaphorically. 
The  Psalmist  calls  the  human  voice  "  man's  glory  "  ;  and  so  it  is,  as  sharing 
with  the  possession  of  reason  "  the  glory  "  of  distinguishing  between  man  himself 
and  the  beasts  that  perish.  And  our  Lord  warns  us  against  the  vain  and  idle 
use  of  this  great  gift,  by  the  solemn  declaration  that  "  by  thy  words  thou  shalt 
be  justified,  and  by  thj'  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned  "  ;  and  again,  that  "  for 
every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day 
of  judgment."  But  if  the  faculty  of  speech  be  thus  wonderful  and  sacred,  and 
if  a  responsibility  thus  strict  and  awful  attach  to  its  right  employment,  must 
not  something  of  the  like  sacredness,  something  of  the  like  responsibility,  belong 
also  to  that  correlative  power — the  power  of  silence  ?  I.  The  silence  of  wor- 
ship, OF  AWE  AND  REVERENCE.  "  The  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple  ;  let  all  the 
earth  keep  silence  before  Him."  When  we  come  up  to  the  house  of  prayer,  to 
meet  Christ  upon  the  mercy-seat, — to  hear  His  voice  speaking  to  us  in  the  read 
and  spoken  word, — to  receive  Him  into  our  very  souls  in  the  Sacrament  of  His 
broken  body  and  ehed  blood,  we  are  bound  to  observe  the  silence  of  awe  and 
reverence.     Except  when  we  open  our  lips  to  join  in  prayer  or  praise  to  God,. 


CHAP,  n.]  BABAKKUK.  39 

OTJT  attitude  within  these  hallowed  walls  shoiild  be  that  of  silence,  of  those  who 
are  impressed  with  the  sanctity  of  the  place,  and  who  know  and  feel  that  the 
Almighty  God  is  indeed  in  their  midst.  Yes ;  and  it  would  be  well,  could  we 
put  more  of  this  holy  silence  into  all  our  religious  acts.  Our  religion  shares  too 
much  in  the  faults  of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  It  is  too  public,  too  outspoken, 
conducted  too  much  as  a  business  ;  and  so  the  inner  and  contemplative  element  is 
too  much  lost  sight  of.  "  Commune  with  thine  own  heart,  and  in  thy  chamber, 
and  be  still " ;  this  is  the  direction  of  the  Psalmist,  and  it  is  a  direction  to  which 
we  shall  do  well  to  give  heed  in  this  busy,  noisy,  bustling  generation.  Do  not 
suppose  that  it  is  only  the  clergy,  or  persons  of  retired  life,  or  those  who  have 
given  themselves  up  to  the  attainment  of  a  higher  sanctity,  who  must  court  the 
silence  of  prayer  and  meditation.  It  is  even  yet  more  necessary  for  you  whose 
lives  are  spent  amid  the  busy  competition  of  trade,  or  professional  enterprise,  or 
manual  labour, — whose  thoughts  from  early  morning  till  late  night  are  almost 
uninterruptedly  engrossed  with  the  cares  and  riches  and  business  of  this  life, — 
it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  you  if,  while  living  in  the  world,  you  would  live 
with  God  and  for  God,  that  you  make  a  point  each  day  of  withdrawing  yourselves, 
if  it  be  but  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  from  the  outer  world,  and  retiring  into  your- 
selves, to  meditate  on  your  own  spiritual  state,  and  on  God's  great  love  and 
goodness  towards  you.  Devotion  is  possible  even  in  the  busiest  life.  Never 
plead  worldly  business  as  an  excuse  for  irreligion,  or  for  deficient  fervour  in  religion. 
On  the  contrary,  worldly  business  will  be  a  great  help  to  your  religion  if  only 
you  recollect  that,  in  order  to  make  it  such,  you  must  ever  cultivate — educate 
that  inner  life  of  the  soul  which  naturally  aspires  after  God.  And  how  will  you 
cultivate  and  educate  it  ?  You  can  only  do  it  by  diligent  seeking,  and  faithful 
use  each  day  of  a  period  of  silence, — silence  for  prayer,  for  penitence,  for  com- 
munion with  the  Unseen  and  the  Eternal.  II.  The  silence  of  pebpakation. 
Every  great  achievement,  whether  in  the  moral  or  the  intellectual  world,  has 
been  in  a  sense  like  Solomon's  temple, — it  has  risen  noiselessly,  silently,  without 
sound  of  axe  or  hammer.  Therefore  is  that  great  primary  act  in  religion — the 
conviction  of  sin — invariably  preceded  by  deep  and  solemn  silence,  while  the 
sinner  stands  before  God  self-accused  and  self-condemned.  Therefore,  also, 
is  silence  ever  present  at  all  the  more  solemn  passages  of  our  Ufe.  Sorrow — real, 
genuine  sorrow — is  ever  silent.  A  cry  ! — a  tear  ! — what  relief  would  these  be, 
— but  they  must  not  intrude  into  the  sacred  ground  of  sorrow, — the  sorrow  of 
the  just-bereaved  widow  or  orphan.  And  so,  too,  sympathy  with  sorrow  is  ever 
silent.  Idle  words,  or  still  idler  tears, — these  are  for  false  comforters,  like  those 
that  troubled  the  patriarch  Job  :  the  true  sympathy  is  the  sympathy  of  a  look, 
— of  the  presence  of  silence,  not  of  uttered  consolation.  III.  But  I  must  name 
that  last  silence, — a  silence  that  we  must  all  experience,  and  for  which,  by  silence, 
we  must  prepare  now — the  silence  of  death.  What  exactly  the  silence  of 
death  is,  none  but  the  dying  can  know.  When  that  silence  comes  upon  us,  and 
come  upon  us  it  must,  with  a  certainty  to  which  no  other  future  certainty  bears 
the  slightest  resemblance,  may  it  find  us  experienced  in  silence.  May  we  have 
sought  it,  may  we  have  profited  by  it,  may  we  have  practised  it,  while  it  was 
still  ours  to  choose  or  to  refuse.  May  we  have  known  what  it  was,  day  by  day, 
to  be  many  times  alone  with  that  God  who  must  then  be  alone  with  us,  to  judge 
or  else  to  save.  (C.  H.  Collier,  M.A.)  The  religion  of  silence  : — We  all  speak 
too  much,  and  make  too  much  noise.  Every  one  has  felt  irritated  sometimes, 
when  in  thoughtful  mood  he  could  not  escape  from  people's  voices.  A  panorama 
of  the  Alps  from  a  Swiss  mountain-top  may  be  spoiled  even  by  the  cries  of 
"  Wunder-schon  ! "  No  one  can  worship  rightly,  no  one  can  even  hear  the  call 
to  worship,  who  does  not  often  feel  that  he  must  be  silent.  This  is  the  rehgious 
aspect  of  the  modern  demand  for  more  leisure  time.  And  one  of  the  things  we 
most  of  all  need  to  learn  and  teach,  is  how  to  use  the  leisure  that  we  are  demand- 
ing, so  that  our  "  silences  may  be  blessed  with  sweet  thoughts."  For  worship, 
there  are  three  main  uses  of  silence — 1.  To  get  rid  of  evil  voices  that  speak  within 
us.  Passion,  selfishness,  self-assertion,  lust,  fear,  are  voices  that  cry  within 
the  souls  of  most  men  more  than  they  know.  Their  cries  mingle  with  the  other 
noises  of  life,  and  so  escape  notice.  But  when  the  soul  is  hushed  for  worship 
it  can  distinguish  any  such  voice,  will  feel  its  wrongness,  and  be  at  pains  to  silence 
it.  There  are  many  thoughts  we  dare  not  allow  when  we  realise  ourselves  in 
Grod's  holy  temple.  The  silence  which  discovers  and  banishes  these  is  a  means 
of  moral  victory.     2.  To  let  the  "  still  small  voices  "  be  heard  within.     Often 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

busy  people  feel  that  there  are  many  things  in  their  mind  and  heart  which  they 
can  only  half  express,  even  to  themselves.  Wordsworth  describes  these  in  his 
Ode  on  Immortality.  The  reason  why  these  are  so  inexpressible  is  often  our 
want  of  silence  rather  than  our  spiritual  incapacity.  There  are  some  scientific 
instruments  so  fine  that  to  do  their  work  they  must  be  set  at  night  in  a  quiet 
country-house  far  from  traffic.  The  mind  and  heart  and  conscience  are  such 
instruments.  All  that  is  best  in  us  of  thought  and  feeling  exceeds  speech.  WTien  we 
try  to  speak  out  all  that  we  want  to  say,  we  know  how  true  it  is  that  "  langisage 
is  a  means  of  concealing  thought."  But  in  reverent  silence,  thought  and  love 
and  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  in  finer  shades  than  language  can  match,  may 
be  drawn  out,  and  the  soul  attain  a  richer  and  fuller  being  in  this  temple  of  God 
than  elsewhere.  3.  To  know  God.  For  there  is  more  to  be  had  than  the  quick- 
ening of  human  nature  to  its  fullest  hfe.  There  is  a  Presence  in  the  world  ;  one 
whose  thought  we  share,  whose  love  we  feel,  and  whose  voice  speaks  in  conscience. 
That  which  the  finest  spirits  prize  most  in  silence  and  loneliness  is  the  real  com- 
panionship they  reveal.  We  know  ourselves  alone,  yet  not  alone,  for  the  Father 
is  with  UB.  The  holy  temple  is  the  place  of  revelation  and  communion  for  its 
silent  worshippers.     \Joh,n  Kdman,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Vebb.  I,  2.  A   prayer   of  Habakkuk  the   prophet   npon    SM^onoth.  —  Ood 

devoutly  addressed  : — This  chapter  presents  to  us  God  in  three  aspects,  as  devoutly 
addressed,  as  poetically  portrayed,  and  as  triumphantly  enjoyed.  I.  It  was 
COMPOSED  FOB  GENERAL  USE.  It  is  not  an  extemporaneous  address ;  it  is  a 
settled  form  of  devotion.  Pre-arranged  forms  of  devotion  are  both  scriptural 
and  expedient.  There  is  a  set  form  given  to  the  priests  for  blessing  the  people 
in  Numbers  vi.  2,  3.  Psalm  xcii.  is  called  a  psalm  for  the  Sabbath,  and  cii. 
a  prayer  for  the  afflicted.  Hezekiah  commanded  the  Levites  to  "  praise  the 
Lord  in  the  words  of  David  and  of  Asaph  the  seer,"  which  is  Psalm  cvi.  And 
Christ  Himself  gave  His  disciples  a  form  of  prayer.  Whilst  it  is  scriptural  it 
is  also  expedient.  To  get  a  whole  congregation  into  the  channel  of  devotion, 
a  pre-arranged  form  seems  desirable.  II.  It  was  in  prospect  of  a  terrible 
CALAMITY.  "  O  Lord,  I  have  heard  Thy  speech,  and  was  afraid."  Terrible 
was  the  calamity  now  looming  on  the  vision  of  the  prophet.  The  Chaldean  army 
was  approaching  ;  the  ruthless  troops  would  soon  be  in  his  country,  sack  Jerusalem 
its  metropolis,  and  bear  his  countrymen  away  into  captivity.  In  view  of  this 
the  prayer  is  addressed.  "  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble,"  &c.  Surely, 
if  men  fully  realised  the  predicted  judgments  that  will  fall  on  this  world,  prayer 
would  be  the  habitude  of  their  souls.  III.  It  was  for  a  revival  of  Divine 
WORK.  "  Revive  Thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years 
make  known ;  in  Avrath  remember  mercy."  Kiel  thus  renders  the  passage — 
"  Jehovah,  Thy  work  in  the  midst  of  Thy  years  call  to  life,  in  the  midst  of  the 
years  make  it  known."  This  may  mean.  Perfect  the  work  of  delivering  Thy 
people  ;  let  not  Thy  promise  lie  as  it  were  dead,  give  it  new  life  by  performing 
it.  Do  it  now,  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  when  our  calamities  are  at  their  height, 
when  Thy  wrath  seems  to  be  at  high  tide  and  terrible.  Now  "  revive  Thy  work." 
Three  thoughts  are  suggested — 1.  The  work  of  human  deliverance  is  the  work 
of  God.  2.  This  work  of  God  may  appear  to  decline.  3.  This  decline  of 
God's  work  can  only  be  overcome  by  His  intervention.  "  Revive  Thy  work." 
(Homilist.) 

Ver.  2.  0  Lord,  revive  Thy  work. — Revival : — I.  What  is  meant  by  the 
■WORK  OF  THE  LoRD,  AND  ITS  REVIVAL?  1.  It  may  mean  the  work  of  creation. 
Or  the  preservation  and  government  of  the  world.  At  other  times  it  means 
the  works  of  Christ ;  or  the  work  of  the  ministry.  2.  What  is  meant  by  a  revival 
of  this  work  ?  (1)  A  deeper  work  of  grace  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  the 
children  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  When  the  number  of  believers 
increases.  When  conviction  seizes  the  hearts  of  sinners,  and  causes  them  to 
become  true  penitents  ;  when  that  conviction  ends  in  true  conversion.     11.  What 


CHAP,  ni.]  HABAKKVK.  41 

IS  COMPBEHENDED  IN  THIS  PRAYER?  1.  That  the  Lord  wovJd  pour  out  of  His 
Spirit  upon  His  people,  and  accomplish  in  them  His  gracious  promises.  2.  That 
the  Lord  would  have  mercy  upon  sinners.  3.  That  the  end  may  be  answered 
for  which  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world,  the  Spirit  was  given,  and  ordinances 
instituted.  UI.  What  induces  the  sadjts  thus  to  pray  ?  1.  The  love  they 
have  to  the  children  of  God.  2.  The  love  they  have  to  sinners.  3.  The  hatred 
they  have  to  sin.  4.  A  desire  that  all  those  evils  may  be  removed  out  of  the 
world  which  are  the  consequences  of  sin.  5.  The  promises  of  God.  IV.  What 
MANNER  OF  PERSON  OUGHT  HE  TO  BE  WHO  THUS  PRAYS  ?  In  Order  to  ensure  a 
suitable  correspondence  between  his  prayer  and  practice — 1.  He  himself  must 
abstain  from  every  appearance  of  evil.  2.  The  person  who  prays  for  a  revival 
must  use  all  the  means  in  his  power  to  do  good.  By  example,  reproof,  speech 
in  season,  &c.  3.  He  must  cultivate  a  spirit  of  tender  affection  for  all  his  Christian 
friends,  that  love  and  unity  may  reign  in  the  Church.  {B.  Bailey.)  Revival 
of  the  Lord's  work  : — This  prophecy  was  probably  written  during  the  reign  of 
the  good  King  Josiah,  who  attempted  a  serious  religious  reformation.  It  proved 
to  be  only  partial  and  temporary.  It  was  reluctant  and  counterfeit  on  the  part 
of  many  of  the  people ;  as  was  evinced  by  their  speedy  return  to  idolatrous 
practices  after  the  untimely  death  of  the  distinguished  reformer.  What  was 
the  "  burden  "  the  prophet  saw  ?  It  was  intimated  to  him  that  the  decree  of 
God  was  unalterable,  and  that  the  day  of  visitation  was  at  hand  ;  and  the  very 
people  are  named  who  should  be  the  instrument  of  God's  righteous  judgments 
on  treacherous  Judah.  Turn  now  to  the  exercise  in  which  the  prophet  engaged, 
in  the  certain  anticipation  of  national  calamity.  It  was  the  exercise  of  prayer. 
In  his  prayer  there  were  three  special  petitions.  Although  the  condition  of  his 
coimtrymen  was  dangerous,  and  their  banishment  inevitable,  yet  so  long  as  a 
remnant  was  preserved,  their  case  was  not  desperate.  If  he  could  not  see  his 
friends  reformed  and  regenerated  in  their  native  country,  he  would  plead  for 
their  conversion  in  a  foreign  land.  "  0  Lord,  revive  Thy  work  in  the  midst  of 
the  years."  This  is  an  earnest  supplication  for  the  revival  of  God's  work  of  gra«e, 
in  the  hearts  of  His  people,  in  the  time  of  outward  distress.  Do  this  "  in  the 
midst  of  the  years,"  that  is,  dm:ing  the  seventy  years  of  captivity.  While  these 
melancholy  years  pass  heavily  along,  let  the  work  of  repentance  commence ; 
let  the  tears  of  godly  sorrow  flow.  The  second  petition  is,  "  In  the  midst  of 
the  years  make  known."  Make  known  Thy  character,  and  perfection,  and  grace, 
dm:ing  the  years  of  captivity,  to  those  now  estranged  from  Thee.  If  they  were 
xmmindf ul  of  Thee  in  the  time  of  prosperity ;  in  the  day  of  adversity  let  them 
consider.  Make  Thy  faithfulness  known  as  a  God  still  in  covenant  with  them, 
as  still  willing  to  be  reconciled  to  them.  The  third  petition  is,  "  In  wrath 
remember  mercy."  Wrath  is  incurred,  judgment  is  threatened,  the  sword  is 
unsheathed,  and  vengeance  must  be  inflicted.  But  see  how  the  man  of  God 
perseveres  in  prayer.  If  judgment  may  not  be  altogether  averted,  it  may  be 
mitigated.  We  must  bear  the  indignation  of  the  Lord,  in  submitting  to  slavery 
in  a  foreign  land,  and  in  being  deprived  of  the  soul-refreshing  ordinances  of  religion. 
But,  gracious  Father,  "  in  wrath  remember  mercy."  It  were  easy  to  prove 
that  all  the  petitions  in  this  prayer  were  literally  and  remarkably  fulfilled.  That 
there  was  a  revival  of  religion  during  the  captivity,  may  be  proved  from  the 
grateful  and  devout  sentiments  of  the  captives  in  the  announcement  of  their 
enlargement.  "  When  the  Lord  tm-ned  again  the  captivity,"  &c.  We  find 
a  confirmation  also  in  the  character  of  those  who  returned  from  Babylon.  God 
had  evidently  granted  them,  in  the  words  of  Ezra,  "  a  little  reviving  "  ;  and  their 
first  care  on  their  return  to  Palestine  was  to  rebuild  the  temple,  which  was  lying 
in  ruins.  And  as  a  decisive  proof  that  the  prayer  of  the  prophet  had  received  a 
gracious  answer  diu-ing  the  captivity,  we  find  that  the  Jews  were  henceforward 
cured  of  what  may  be  called  their  hereditary  and  besetting  sin — the  degrading 
and  God- dishonouring  sin  of  idolatry.  The  second  part  of  the  prophet's  prayer 
was  not  less  clearly  answered.  Was  not  much  made  known  to  Ezekiel,  by  the 
spirit  of  prophecy,  during  the  captivity  ?  Was  not  much  made  known  to  Daniel  ? 
Behold  then  the  efficacy  and  fruit  of  prayer.  The  third  part  of  the  prayer  was 
as  remarkably  answered  as  the  other  two  parts.  "  In  wrath  remember  mercy." 
In  every  circumstance  that  tended  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  their  bondage,  God 
was  fulfilling  the  prayer  of  the  prophet.  Learn — 1.  That  sin  incurs  the  displeasure 
of  Grod.  2.  That  prayer  is  the  only  way  of  averting  the  judgments  of  God.  3.  That 
the  extension  of  religious  knowledge  is  the  only  rational  means  for  effecting  a 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

national  reformation.  4.  That  while  Jehovah  ia  the  Supreme  Governor  of  the 
universe,  religion  is  His  great  work  in  the  world.  {James  Glen,  A.M.)  On 
revivals  of  religion  : — I.  What,  in  a  Christian  sense,  is  a  bbvival  of  beugion  ? 
It  cannot  better  be  described  than  by  a  representation  of  its  origin  and  effect 
in  the  case  of  individuals  and  Christian  communities.  When  is  there  a  revival 
of  religion  in  individuals  ?  Suppose  such  as  need  this  revival  to  consist  of  two 
classes.  One  made  up  of  such  as  have  a  "  form  of  godliness."  They  have  a 
general  faith  in  Christianity,  and  educational  relations  with  it,  and  they  do  not 
openly  violate  any  of  its  moral  rules.  Still,  these  persons  may  be  examples  of  a 
sort  of  negative  religion  only.  They  may  be  spiritually  inanimate  and  drowsy. 
If  these  men  are  the  subjects  of  a  genuine  religious  revival,  their  lukewarmness 
is  abandoned.  Then  there  is  in  them  a  consistency  of  character.  The  other 
class  is  formed  of  the  notoriously  abandoned  and  corrupt.  In  these,  there  is  a 
general  abdication  of  restraint,  both  moral  and  religious.  When  these  are  the 
subjects  of  a  revival,  their  moral  taste  is  changed.  Their  hatred  of  sin  is  excited. 
Their  respect  for  Divine  ordinances  is  enkindled.  Survey  the  operation  of  a  revival 
of  religion  on  Christian  communities.  Since  the  first  age  of  the  Gospel,  Churches 
and  societies  have  been  found  in  the  lukewarm  condition  of  the  Church  in  Laodicea. 
A  more  awful  state  of  a  Christian  community  is  supposable,  a  state  not  merely 
of  lukewarmness,  but  of  positive  corruption  and  wickedness.  If  a  revival  of 
religion  take  place,  there  will  be  an  united,  vigorous,  persevering  effort,  on  the 
part  of  the  members,  to  display  in  all  its  excellence  and  worth  the  Christian 
character.  Nor  is  this  revival  manifest  in  things  exclusively  religious.  It  will 
appear  in  their  worldly  and  social  state  ;  in  their  habits  of  industry  and  sobriety, 
&c.  Give  the  reasons  why  the  class  of  Christians,  denominated  liberal,  have  not 
thought  favourably  of,  nor  promoted  revivals.  1.  The  means  used  to  bring  them 
about  do  not  appear  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  and  instructions  of  Scrip- 
ture. ( 1 )  These  means  are  heated  and  impassioned  addresses  to  the  feelings  and 
passions,  tending  to  produce  an  unnatural  excitement  of  the  imagination,  and 
of  the  whole  man,  which  interrupts  cool  reflection,  and  a  sober  and  edifying 
attendance  on  religious  duties.  What  an  entire  contrast  do  these  means  exhibit 
to  those  adopted  by  the  Saviour  and  His  apostles !  (2)  The  persons  who  are 
held  up  to  the  world  as  having  experienced  a  revival  of  religion,  too  often  display 
fruits  which  are  equally  at  variance  with  the  test  of  character  established  by 
Him  who  spake  as  never  man  spake.  Review  the  lessons  of  Jesus,  enforcing 
secret  devotion,  guarding  His  disciples  against  ostentation  and  vain  boasting, 
inculcating  upon  them  humility.  We  cannot  persuade  ourselves  to  believe 
that  a  suspension  of  Christian  charity  is  evangelical  proof  of  advancement  in 
religion.  (3)  The  reason  which  has  equally  operated  with  others,  is  a  knowledge 
of  the  unhappy  consequences  which  have  followed.  Review  the  state  of  our 
Churches  and  towns.  Where  such  revivals  have  been  brought  about,  there  will 
be  seen  a  multiplication  of  religious  societies ;  Christians  engaged  in  bitter 
contentions  and  controversies ;  members  of  families  alienated  from  each  other. 
II.  What  are  the  means  by  which  a  tritly  Christian  revival  of  religion 
MAY  BE  brought  ABOUT  ?  1.  Every  member  of  society,  however  ignoble  and 
obscure,  may  have  an  agency  in  this  great  work.  2.  Those  more  elevated  either 
by  wealth,  rank,  education,  &c.,  have  a  still  greater  degree  of  responsibleness. 
See  in  this  matter  the  importance  of  family  religion,  and  the  value  of  attendance 
on  the  duties  of  the  Sabbath,  habitual  piety,  and  the  solemn  act  of  prayer. 
(W.  Thayer.)  Revival  of  the  Lord's  work: — The  wTiter  of  this  book  mourned 
over  the  spiritual  degeneracy  of  his  times,  and  was  apprehensive  of  the  entire 
removal  of  the  privileges  which  were  so  much  despised.  The  "  years  "  mentioned 
were  years  of  spiritual  declension  and  backsliding,  and  prevailing  wickedness, 
and  consequently  years  of  God's  righteous  displeasure  ;  and  therefore  he  says, 
"  0  Lord,  revive  Thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years."  1.  In  what  does  this  work 
consist  ?  By  the  "  work  of  the  Ix)rd  "  we  are  to  understand  the  redemption  and 
recovery  of  this  ruined  world.  This  is  the  work  which  the  Holy  Spirit,  through 
the  medium  of  His  enlightening,  renewing,  and  sanctifying  influence  on  the  human 
heart,  is  ever  active  in  promoting.  Surely  it  is  a  work  of  the  greatest  interest 
and  importance.  This  work  may  be  said  to  be  making  progress  in  the  world, 
when  a  general  interest  is  felt  in  matters  of  religion.  2.  What  is  the  object  of  the 
prayer  in  regard  to  the  work  of  the  Lord  ?  In  the  moral  government  of  God, 
there  exists  an  inseparable  connection  between  the  offering  of  prayer  and  the 
obtaining  of  spiritual  blessings.     In  answer  to  prayer  we  find  that  in  Scripture 


CHAP,  in.]  HABAKKUK.  43 

God  has  often  promised  the  richest  manifestations  of  His  grace.  But  nowhere 
has  He  warranted  us  to  suppose  that  without  prayer  these  blessings  can  be  obtained. 
The  object  of  the  prophet  in  this  prayer  was  that  God  would  grant  a  revival  to 
the  Jewish  Church.  And  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  in  answer  to  prayer, 
God  will  yet  arise,  and  plead  His  own  cause  in  the  world,  and  revive  His  own 
work.  Whatever  be  the  relationship  in  which  we  stand  to  those  around  us,  we 
have,  as  Christians,  a  message  given  us  to  all,  and  that  is  the  message  of  God 
the  Father's  love,  and  of  God  the  Son's  death,  and  of  God  the  Spirit's  sanctifying 
grace,  a  message  so  plain  that  none  can  mistake  it,  so  imperative  that  none  v.  ith 
impunity  can  neglect  it,  and  so  pressing  that  none  can  delay  it.  {John  Lindsay.) 
GocTs  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years : — Time,  like  eternity,  is  full  of  God,  and  of 
the  glory  of  His  power.  God's  ceaseless  work  in  nature  is  maintained  unchanging 
"  in  the  midst  of  the  years."  But  there  is  a  work  of  God  to  which  everything 
in  nature  is  subordinate.  It  is  His  work  of  grace ;  His  work  of  redemption  and 
recovery  in  this  lost  world  ;  His  work  of  establishing  His  own  kingdom  in  the 
hearts  of  men.  In  the  mind  of  the  prophet,  this  work  of  God  was  identified  with 
the  welfare  of  that  chosen  nation,  that  peculiar  people,  which  God  had  placed  in 
covenant  relation  with  Himself.  What  lessons  may  we  gather  from  the  prophet's 
words  ?  In  the  first  and  second  chapters  of  his  prophecy,  the  prophet  sees  God's 
judgments  coming  upon  Israel,  then  upon  Israel's  oppressors.  We  see  what 
years  those  were  of  which  the  prophet  speaks  in  the  text.  They  were  years  of 
declension  and  prevailing  wickedness,  and  years  of  God's  displeasiu-e.  The 
prophet's  first  and  foremost  thought  is  that  of  the  paramount  importance  of 
God's  spiritual  and  saving  work.  Then  he  knows — the  spirit  of  faith  assm-es 
him — that  God's  great  work  will  live,  and  will  outlive  every  catastrophe.  He 
not  only  prays  that  God  will  make  His  work  to  live,  but  that  He  will  make  it 
known.  Learn — 1.  The  prayer  for  the  revival,  or  the  keeping  alive  of  God's 
work,  is  the  spontaneous  utterance  of  a  heart  touched  by  God's  Spirit.  2.  God's 
work  is  often  going  on  in  the  world  when  it  is  not  seen  or  made  known,  when 
even  His  own  people  are  not  permitted  to  discern  its  progress.  3.  Sometimes  it 
is  necessary  for  God  to  carry  on  His  work  by  dispensations  of  wrath.  4.  Blessed 
are  the  years  in  which  God  makes  known  His  work  as  a  work  of  power  and  mercy. 
{Leonard  Bacon,  D.D.)  Revival  in  the  midst  of  the  years  : — The  utterance 
of  God  made  the  prophet  afraid.  The  period  of  chastening  must  be  fulfilled. 
But  one  thought  fills  the  prophet's  mind  :  diuring  this  period  of  suffering  the 
work  of  God  might  be  revived.  God  in  His  wrath  remembers  mercy  most  when 
He  does  not  stay  His  chastening,  but  deepens  penitence,  stirs  up  prayer,  creates 
heart-searching,  and  earnest  endeavours  after  a  new  life.  I.  The  fdkst  part 
OF  THE  PRAYER  IS  THAT  Got)  WOULD  REVIVE  His  WORK.  We  believe  in  a  God 
who  works,  now  and  always,  both  in  the  natural  and  in  the  spiritual.  God  not 
merely  vrills.  He  works.  Work  occupies  a  foremost  place  in  the  Divine  arrange- 
ment. God's  works  on  matter  illustrate  and  explain  His  working  on  mind.  There 
is  one  feature  common  to  both  the  natm-al  and  the  spiritual  sphere,  the  require- 
ment of  human  co-operation.  God  waits  on  man's  working.  On  account  of 
the  sin  and  sloth  and  heedlessness  of  man,  God's  work  declines,  and  God  seems 
to  withdraw.  It  is  here  that  a  place  for  revival  is  foimd.  And  explanation 
of  it  includes  both  the  Divine  sphere  and  the  human.  God's  working  in  nature 
goes  on  in  cycles.  So  does  man's  working  all  through.  Uniformity  of  action 
would  not  be  adapted  to  man.  The  fluctuation  which  covers  the  regions  of  politics, 
literature,  science,  and  art,  extends  also  to  religion.  Religious  earnestness  is 
under  the  same  law.  An  enthusiasm  is  awakened  at  times  for  the  supreme  object 
of  religion  which  it  is  not  in  human  nature  to  sustain.  The  departure  of  such 
a  period  may  be  either  the  deepening  and  broadening  of  the  channels  of  life, 
or  it  may  be  a  period  of  stagnation.  This  is  true  of  the  individual,  as  well  as  of 
society  at  large.  Revival  is  a  fervour  or  intensity  resolved  on  the  highest  aims, 
a  deeper  sense  of  the  meaning  of  life,  a  determination  to  subordinate  all  to  God. 
The  fact  that  such  times  in  a  community  are  often  characterised  by  excitement, 
and  by  a  kind  of  contagion  in  which  religion  seems  to  be  less  a  matter  of  individual 
conviction  than  a  diffused  influence  is,  again,  only  in  accordance  with  the  laws 
of  human  nature.  Why  should  the  spread  of  religious  conviction  not  be  aided 
by  the  contagion  of  feeling  ?  May  not  genuine  and  deep  feeling  be  aroused  in 
this  way  ?  Why  may  not  the  surging  of  a  vague  enthusiasm  through  the  hearts 
of  men  work  great  things  in  religion  as  in  other  matters  ?  If  religion  is  a  genuinely 
human  thing ;  if  it  is  in  the  true  sense  the  most  human  of  all,  must  it  not  partake 

/ 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

of  the  usual  characteristics  of  human  feeling  ?  What  a  force  there  is  in  the 
expression  of  the  text,  Make  Thy  work  to  live :  put  life  into  Thy  work.  How 
often  the  work  seems  to  have  everything  but  life.  Life  comes,  and  all  is  changed. 
God's  working  is  the  hope  of  the  natural  world,  and  equally  of  the  spiritual.  We 
wait  for  God.  And  our  waiting  utters  itself.  It  is  an  eager,  earnest  feeling 
that  pours  itself  out  in  supplication.  It  is  in  this  way  that  our  energy  most 
fully  unites  itself  with  the  Divine.  11.  The  prayer  is  also  that  God  woxtld 
"  M*TfTi  KNOWN."  That  is,  reveal  Himself  and  Divine  truth.  The  prayer  is, 
that  God  would  not  only  work  but  reveal ;  that  God  would  show  men  the  reality. 
Clouds  lie  between  them  and  the  spiritual  and  eternal.  It  is  well  that  these 
two  things  are  joined  together,  reviving  of  God's  work,  and  making  known. 
rn.  What  weight  is  given  to  the  prayer  by  the  addition,  "  in  the  midst 
OF  the  years  "  ?  There  is  an  argument,  or  plea,  in  the  thought,  that  many 
years  are  gone  beyond  recall,  and  that  so  many  years  fewer  are  to  come.  The 
irrevocable  past,  as  it  rises  before  us,  brings  bitter  regrets.  How  different  those 
years  might  have  been  !  The  words  seem  suggestive  of  the  confusion  and  dark- 
ness of  time.  And  the  fleetingness  and  evanescence  of  the  years  rise  before  us 
in  contrast  to  the  immutable  and  eternal  of  the  Divine  life.  (J.  Leckie,  D.D.) 
The  necessity  of  a  great  spiritual  change  throughout  the  world  : — I.  As  to  the  state 
OF  THE  professing  Church  OF  Christ.  1.  Note  the  ignorance  of  the  Chxirch. 
2.  The  divisions  of  the  Church.  3.  The  worldly  conformity  of  the  Chvu-ch.  4.  The 
want  of  activity  in  the  Chiu-ch.     5.  The  deadness  of  prayer  in  the  Church.     II.  As 

TO   THE    state    of   THE    UNCONVERTED    AND    UNGODLY    WORLD.       1.    In   relation   tO 

civil  governments,  and  to  publicly  recognised  social  institutions  and  authorities. 
Refer  to  despotism,  corruption,  war,  &c.  2.  In  direct  relation  to  religion. 
Nominal  Christians.  Note  the  positive  crimes  by  which  the  country  is  stained  ; 
Sabbath-breaking,  profane-swearing,  fraud,  drinking,  &c.  III.  Certain  systems 
which  must  be  swept  away.  Such  as  popery,  Judaism,  infidelity,  Moham- 
medanism, heathenism.  Surely  we  may  well  pray,  "  0  Lord,  revive  Thy  work 
in  the  midst  of  the  years."  (James  Parsons.)  Means  of  'promoting  the  revival 
of  religion  : — I.  Does  the  man  of  sincere  goodness  observe  vice  prevalent,  and 
spreading  its  unhappy  influence  through  all  ranks  and  degrees  of  the  community  ? 
This  is  a  powerful  inducement  to  desire  and  to  work  for  its  reformation.  2.  The 
decay  of  religion  is  not  more  owing  to  open  wickedness  than  to  inconsiderate 
negligence.  A  good  man,  who  has  the  happiness  of  the  species  at  heart,  will 
offer  up  his  most  fervent  petitions  to  the  Father  of  Lights,  that  He  would  be 
pleased  to  spread  abroad  in  the  breasts  of  the  people  a  spirit  of  prayer  and  reforma- 
tion. [James  Rvdge,  D.D.)  The  revival  of  the  Lord^s  work: — 1.  The  prayer 
of  the  text  rises  to  heaven  in  the  time  of  affliction.  2.  The  prayer  of  the  prophet 
is  founded  upon  need.  3.  Observe  whose  work  it  is  that  is  implored  to  be  revived 
— it  is  the  work  of  God.  And  He  alone  can  accomplish  it.  4.  Consider  the  use 
of  certain  means  for  the  spread  and  establishment  of  the  Divine  work.  He  has 
commanded  us  to  call  upon  His  name,  to  trust  in  Him,  to  seek  Him,  to  repent 
of  oiu:  misdoings,  to  do  battle  against  evil  wherever  foimd,  and  to  assemble 
ourselves  together  for  Divine  worship.  (IF.  Horwood.)  Nature  and  origin  of 
revivals : — I.  The  state  calling  for  a  revival.  A  revival  is  a  retvun  to  life 
and  vigour  from  a  state  of  languor  and  decay.  The  Chiorch  of  Christ  needs 
revival.  It  is  not  in  a  lively  state  as  to  deep  and  practical  godliness.  There 
are  comparatively  few  flourishing  Churches.  There  is  much  disunion.  There 
is  a  low  standard  of  devotedness  to  Christ.  This  state  of  things  calls  for  a  revival 
in  the  Church  generally.  As  individuals  is  om*  condition  satisfactory  ?  Is 
there  not  a  state  of  worldliness,  lukewarmness,  and  formality  ?  The  apostle 
speaks  of  many  in  his  day  as  having  "  the  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the 
power  thereof."  This  surely  is  a  state  calling  for  a  revival.  II.  The  nature 
of  the  revival  of  God's  work.  What  is  God's  work  in  the  heart  of  man  ? 
It  is  very  different  from  man's  work.  It  is  marked  by  a  new  birth.  It  is  marked 
by  Christian  graces.  It  is  marked  by  walking  in  all  good  works.  It  is  the  work 
of  grace  in  the  heart  of  man.  What  is  the  revival  of  this  work  ?  L  An  increase 
of  zeal  on  the  part  of  God's  people.  2.  An  awakening  among  careless  sinners. 
in.  The  only  source  from  which  it  can  flow.  "  0  Lord,  revive  Thy  work." 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  great  source  of  the  revival  of  the  work  of  grace  in  the  heart 
of  man.  If  you  desire  revivals,  the  means  must  be  diligently  used — reading 
God's  Word,  prayer  in  secret,  social  prayer,  public  worship,  self-examination  ; 
but  if  yon  stop  at  the  means  you  deceive  yourselves ;  this  is  the  proper  posture 


CHAP,  m.]  HABAKKUK.  46 

for  the  Christian,  "  My  soul,  wait  thou  only  upon  God,  for  my  expectation  is 
from  Him."     IV.  The  time  in  which  it  should  be  sought.     "  In  the  midst 
of  the  years."     Before  the  day  of  sickness  comes.     Before  the  day  of  old  age 
comes.     Before  the  judgments  of  God  come  on  the  world.     Before  the  Saviour 
appears      Before  the  final  sentence  is  pronounced.     Seek  a  revival,  while  the 
day  of  grace  continues  ;  while  God's  ministers  invite  you.     While  opportimity 
is  afforded.     Then — 1.  Search  into  the  state  of  your  own  hearts.     2.  Seek  revival 
from    God    by    prayer    in    private.       Devote    yourselves    afresh    unto    God. 
(E.  Bickersteth,  A.M.)        God's  work  revived : — I.  The  work  itself.    The  salvation 
of  the  sinner  is  the  peculiar  work  of  Jehovah.     It  implies  the  exercise  of  infinite 
mercy.     It  requires  Divine  care.     II.  Why  may  it  very  properly  be  called 
God's  work  ?     Because  it  glorifies  God.     III.  When  may  God  be  said  to  revive 
His  people  ?     WTien  His  people  are  preserved  aUve.     When  His  people  grow  in 
grace.     When  His  people  are  led  to   surmount  trouble,  affliction,  and  sorrow. 
When  the  backslider  is  restored.     (Hugh  Allen,  M.A.)        Lent,  a  season  of  revival 
to  the  soul : — The  Christian  Ufe  has  its  ebb  and  flow,  like  the  currents  of  the  ocean, 
and  no  one  need  hope  to  preserve  the  same  imiform  frames  and  feelings  at  every 
step  of  his  earthly  probation.     If  we  are  ever  enabled  to  do  right,  it  is  because 
the  good  Lord  has  helped  us.     There  is  a  revival  which  we  all  need  ;  such  a  revival 
as  shall  lead  us  to  forsake  our  sins,  and  crucify  our  corrupt  affections  and  lusts ; 
such  a  revival  as  shall  render  us  more  devout  and  devoted  to  God's  service.     I 
mean   nothing    akin   to   the   unwholesome    modern   system    of   revivals.     The 
Church  has  a  revival  system  of  her  own,  which  has  been  practised  with  most 
abundant  success  from  the  earliest  days  of  Christianity  until  now.     Her  revival 
season  begins  with  the  four  weeks  of  Advent,  when  she  calls  men  to  repentance  and 
amendment,  that  they  may  make  themselves  ready  to  welcome  the  Saviour  afresh 
on  the  return  of  His  birthday.     Another  revival  season  is  the  forty  days  of  Lent ; 
when  the  motive  appealed  to  is  the  love  of  God,  manifested  in  the  gift  of  His  only 
Son.     Throughout  the  whole  sacred  season,  His  life,  His  teaching.  His  miracles 
are  kept  constantly  before  us,  deepened  in  its  penetrating  power  by  fastings  and 
prayer.     (John  N.  Norton.)        Revivals  : — I.  The  chief  need  of  the  world 
to-day  is  a  general  revival  of  the  Christian  religion.     The  preconceptions 
of  most  of  us  are  not  favourable  to  revivals.     Theories,  however,  cannot  stand 
for  a  moment  against  stubborn  facts.     There  is  one  fact  which  renders  a  revival 
necessary  for  a  vast  number  of  people.     AH  scientists  recognise  that  retrogression 
is  as  much  a  fact  of  nature  as  is  evolution  or  progress.     History  is  full  of  illustra- 
tions of  the  decay  of  races  and  the  decline  of  nations.     Only  one  remedy  is  open 
to  us,  when  the  decay  concerns  our  religious  life.     It  is  a  revival — the  regaining, 
by  a  supreme   moral  effort,   of   the    spiritual  heights   which  have   been   lost. 
li.  Revivals  are  normal.    We  a^e  inclined  to  think  that  with  the  world  and  the 
Chm-ch  in  an  ideal  state,  a  ihovement  closely  corresponding  to  revivals  would 
still  take  place.     Life  moves  in  periods  or  cycles.     III.  Both  the  history  of 
the  Church  and  the  Bible  confirm  this  view  of  Christian  progress.     The 
Church  has  always  made  her  great  conquests  under  revival  influences.     Revival  of 
religion  was  inaugurated  by  the  Wesleys  and  Whitefield.     Puritanism  was  a  great 
religious  revival.     The  Reformation  began  as  a  revival  of  religion.     The  Christian 
Church  was  born  in  a  revival  which  swept  three  thousand  souls  into  the  kingdom 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost.    IV.  How  may  we  promote  a  revival  ?    1.  By  earnest 
prayer.     2.  By  determined,  personal  effort.     (J.  W.  Bashford. )        Lessons  of  the 
Reformation  : — 1.  The  Reformation  was  providential.     It  was  the  handwriting  of 
God  visible  to  men.     2.  It  was  a  reformation  of  the  Church.     It  was  a  conten- 
tion raised  within,  about,  and  by  the  Chiu-ch.     3.  It  was  a  reformation  of  doctrine. 
It  began  on  a  point  of  doctrine.     Its  weapons  were  argument  and  learning.     4.  It 
w£is  a  reformation  of  public  worship.     Here,  most  especially,  it  came  in  touch  with 
the  people.     6.  It  was  a  reformation  of  personal  piety.     If  it  had  not  led  to  this, 
all  else  would  have  been  of  little  moment.     But  this  it  did.     Upon  us  it  devolves 
not  to  be  heedless  of  the  lessons  of  the  Reformation,  but  to  profit  by  them,  and 
transmit  them  to  others.     (J.  B.  Remensnyder,  D.D.)        Religicma  revivcUs : — 
I  Genuinb  religion  is  the  work  of  God  in  the  soul.     "  Thy  work."    What 
is  genuine  religion  ?    Not  theology,  not  ceremony,  but  simply  this,  supreme  love 
to  Grod.     The  production  of  this  in  the  soul  is  the  work  of  God.     He  produces  it, 
it  is  true,  by  means ;  nevertheless,  no  one  else  can  or  does  produce  it  but  Himself. 
II.  This  work  op  God  in  the  soul  is  liable  to  decay.     There  are  many  things 
in  and  outside  of  man  that  tend  to  impair,  weaken,  and  destroy  this  supreme 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

love.  Carnal  impulses,  impure  associations,  social  influences,  engrossing  worldly 
cares,  these  are  all  detrimental.  They  are  to  it  like  a  blighting  atmosphere  to 
vegetation.  III.  This  decay  should  be  overcome  by  a  revival.  "  Revive 
Thy  work."  Revive  this  supreme  love — quicken,  energise  it,  give  it  more  force 
and  influence  in  the  soul  !  This  is  the  true  revival.  (Homilist.)  The  revival 
of  God's  u-ork  implored  : — I.  Some  particulars  respecting  this  work.  1.  The 
work  itself ;  or  what  is  meant  by  the  work  here  spoken  of  ?  It  is  certainly 
the  work  of  Divine  grace  in  the  souls  of  mankind.  2.  Why  it  may  be  called  God's 
work.  Because  no  one  but  God  can  effect  it.  3.  When  God  may  be  said  to  revive 
it.  God  revives  His  work  when  souls  are  raised  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life 
of  righteousness ;  and  when  they  grow  in  grace.  II.  How  we  may  and  should 
contribute  towards  its  revival.  1.  We  should  labour  for  it.  2.  We  should 
live  for  it.  3.  We  should  pray  for  it.  III.  Why  we  should  thus  interest  our- 
selves IN  its  revival.  1.  We  are  excited  to  this  by  piety.  2.  We  are  urged  to 
this  by  philanthropy,  or  love  to  mankind.  3.  We  are  obligated  to  this  by  prudence. 
4.  We  are  animated  to  this  by  a  well-supported  hope.  Applications — (1)  The 
state  of  God's  work  among  us  should  excite  correspondent  affections  in  us. 
(2)  We  should  consider  and  deplore  our  deficiencies.  (3)  We  should  improve 
our  convictions  by  renewed  application  to  God ;  for  pardoning  mercy,  and 
gracious  help.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Revivalism: — Following 
closely  upon  Jeremiah,  Habakkuk  was  face  to  face  with  the  woes  which  were 
hastening  for  the  dissolution  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  He,  more  than  any  other 
of  the  prophets,  represents  the  perplexities,  not  of  the  nation,  but  of  the  individual 
soul,  the  peculiar  trial  which  tormented  so  many  exalted  spirits  of  his  day.  He 
saw  with  grief  the  increasing  contrast  of  sin  and  prosperity,  innocence  and 
suffering — this  was  his  burden.  It  is  essentially  personal :  he  takes  it  all  upon 
himself.  Our  text  is  always  a  good,  a  wise,  a  necessary  prayer.  The  work  of  the 
Lord  is  never  so  forward  that  we  need  not  pray  for  its  further  advance.  But 
what  is  to  be  said  about  the  movement  known  as  "  Revivalism"  ?  It  begins  with, 
and  proceeds  upon  the  assumption  that  man  can  only  be  reconciled  to  God  in 
one  particular  way.  It  recognises  but  one  type  of  religion,  and  that  the  most 
delusive  one.  It  repudiates  the  idea  that  God  is  ever  pleased  with  a  dutiful, 
earnest,  moral  life.  It  regards  as  positively  dangerous  a  mere  intellectual  grasp 
of  the  Christian  faith.  Revivalism  tells  you  that,  unless  at  a  certain  time,  and 
at  a  certain  place,  and  under  conditions  that  you  can  recall  and  define,  you  have 
undergone  an  emotional  process  which  has  changed  the  whole  drift  of  your  life, 
and  given  you  an  assurance  of  nearness  to  God  hitherto  unfelt,  you  are  not  a 
Christian  at  all.  Revivalism  confronts  you  like  a  spiritual  footpad,  and  holds  to 
your  head  the  pistol  of  modern  pharisaism  :  "  Are  you  a  Christian  ?  Is  your 
soul  saved  ?  Have  you  found  the  Lord  ?  "  The  answer  involves  an  awful 
alternative.  You  must  either  surrender  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made 
you  free  to  the  monstrous  claims  of  this  pretentious  crusade,  or  consent  to  be 
branded  as  an  outcast  from  the  flock  of  the  Good  Shepherd.  This  barrier  of 
separation  between  converted  and  unconverted  has  no  sanction  to  which  any 
follower  of  Jesus  Christ  is  called  upon  to  submit.  We  must  not,  however,  cease 
to  pray,  "  0  Lord,  revive  Thy  work."  Revive  it,  0  Lord,  in  politics,  in  public 
life,  in  commerce,  in  trade,  in  toil  of  every  kind,  so  that  in  all  places  and  at  all 
times  men  shall  realise  Thy  presence.  (R.  H.  Haddew,  B.A.)  The  law  of 
revivals  : — Are  revivals  of  religion  under  law,  or  the  result  of  any  previously 
operating  and  well-defined  cause  ?  By  the  revival  of  religion  we  mean  a  quickened 
state  of  religious  activity  and  prayer,  resulting  in  the  conversion  of  sinners,  the 
increased  efficiency  of  the  Church,  and  all  the  effect  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  con- 
junction with  the  appointed  means  of  grace.  Our  position  is,  that  it  is  a 
rule  of  God's  economy  to  bestow  His  grace  or  Spirit  upon  the  employment  of 
means,  just  in  proportion  as  those  means  are  adapted  to  the  result.  Observe 
that  the  results  are  predicated,  not  of  the  means  as  a  power  in  themselves,  but  of 
the  Spirit's  conformity  to  this  law  of  operation.  1.  In  favour  of  our  position 
our  first  argument  is  from  analogy.  There  is  such  a  law  of  adaptation  in  all  the 
world  of  nature — an  established  and  reliable  connection  between  means  and  end, 
and  results  correspond  with  the  nature — the  perfection  or  imperfection  of  the 
antecedent  cause.  This  law  is  observable  in  all  the  world  of  industry,  science, 
and  art.  It  is  fair  to  infer  that  the  same  law  is  observed  in  the  spiritual  world, 
and  that  the  results — the  quickened  graces,  the  conversions,  the  ingatherings  to 
the  Church — will  be  in  proportion  to  the  wise,  diligent,  and  prayerful  use  of  the 


CHAP,  in.]  HABAKKUK.  47 

means  of  grace.  2.  The  second  argument  is  derived  from  the  facts  of  Christian 
experience.  The  early  apostles  and  Christians  were  successful,  in  a  very  remark- 
able degree,  in  producing  moral  changes,  in  the  conviction  and  conversion  of 
sinners.  Everything  objective  and  visible  seemed  to  forbid  success.  But  they 
were  filled  with  the  Spirit.  They  went  forth  to  their  work  with  an  ardour 
unparalleled.  They  preached  to  save,  they  were  wise  to  win  souls.  We  can 
trace  the  cormection  between  appropriate  means  and  the  sublimest  results.  This 
principle  of  wise  adjustment  of  means  to  ends  is  universally  acknowledged.  3.  This 
law  must  be  acknowledged  as  true,  else  there  is  no  ground  of  confidence  in  the 
use  of  Gospel  means.  Learn — 1.  As  Christian  workers,  to  graduate  our  success. 
As  a  general  rule  it  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  aptness,  skill,  persistency,  and 
prayerfulness  of  our  labours.  2.  The  responsibility  and  guilt  of  those  Churches 
who  reap  no  fruit  of  their  labour.  There  must  be  responsibility  and  guilt  some- 
where. (5.  D.  Burchard,  D.D.)  Spiritual  revival : — The  "  work  of  the  Lord  " 
means  the  salvation  of  immortal  souls,  and  the  extension  of  our  Redeemer's 
kingdom.  I.  The  prosperity  of  God's  work  is  the  chief  business  of  God's 
PEOPLE.  The  prophet  sees  into  the  futvu-e,  and  instead  of  being  overwhelmed 
by  coming  calamities,  he  realises  how  immeasurably  greater  is  the  welfare  of  the 
soul  than  the  welfare  of  the  body,  and  his  earnest,  heart-prompted  entreaty  is, 
"  O  Lord,  revive  Thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years  "     II.  The  work  of  God  in 

THE  SOUL  MAY  SO  DECLINE  AS  TO  STAND  IN  NEED  OF  REVIVAL.       DoeS  OUT  Spiritual 

life  still  retain  all  the  freshness  and  charm  of  its  bu-th  ?  Is  it,  as  it  ought  to  be, 
more  real,  more  intense,  more  earnest,  more  fully  developed  by  the  lapse  of  time  ? 
III.  Although  the  work  of  God  within  us  may  decline,  yet  there  is  a  power 
THAT  CAN  REVIVE  IT.  God  Can  make  the  dry  bones  to  live,  and  God  can  breathe 
a  new  life  even  into  the  soul  that  seems  to  be  dead,  so  deathlike  is  its  sleep.  Why 
does  God  every  year  perform  the  miracles  of  the  spring-time  ?  That  we  may 
have  perpetually  before  our  eyes  illustrations  of  His  reviving  power.  Then  are 
you  not  anxious  that  a  mighty  revival  of  this  spiritual  life  should  be  experienced 
in  yovu"  own  souls,  and  in  the  souls  of  those  who  are  dear  to  you  ?  If  you  are, 
pray  for  it.  {John  F.  Haynes,  LL.D.)  Revivals  : — Literally,  to  revive  is  to 
live  again.  It  supposes  life  possessed,  life  departed,  life  restored.  Sometimes  it 
means  to  infuse  fresh  vigoiu-,  increased  animation,  where  life  is  weak  and  droop- 
ing, though  not  extinct.  When  Habakkuk  says,  "  O  Lord,  revive  Thy  work,"  he 
does  not  imply  that  God's  work  had  died  out,  only  that  it  was  in  a  low  and  declin- 
ing state.  Mercy  he  implores — pardoning,  restoring,  reviving  mercy.  This  is 
the  object  we  seek  when  we  ask  God  to  revive  His  work  in  us  and  amongst  us.  A 
revival  of  religion  supposes  it  to  exist,  but  to  be  in  a  low  and  declining  state. 
Let  every  Church  be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things  that  remain.  The 
Divine  favour  will  be  restored,  and  the  Chiurch  will  be  revived.  Such  a  Church 
God  will  own  and  bless.  What  is  necessary  to  a  revival  ?  L  To  recognise  the 
fact  that  a  revival  is  needed.  Well  satisfied  with  our  present  need,  we  neither 
desire  nor  seek  anything  better.  2.  We  must  know  and  feel  that  guilt  is  incurred 
by  our  lukewarmness  and  worldly-mindedness.  Are  we  in  a  declining  state  ? 
Then  it  is  not  simply  our  misfortune,  but  our  sin,  for  which  God  will  call  us  to 
account.  We  must  see,  too,  the  individual  and  personal  character  of  our  responsi- 
bility and  guilt.  3.  If  a  better  state  of  things  is  to  be  brought  about,  we  must 
sincerely  and  heartily  repent  of  our  sins,  confess  and  forsake  them  all,  and  look  to 
Him  who  has  graciously  promised,  "  I  will  heal  their  backslidings."  The  invitations 
and  promises  of  our  God  are  all  based  on  this  principle,  "  Draw  nigh  unto  God, 
and  He  will  draw  nigh  unto  you."  This  humility,  this  repentance,  this  brokenness 
of  heart  generally  precedes  a  revival  of  religion  in  our  Churches.  4.  There  must 
be  faith  in  God,  in  Christ,  in  His  Holy  Word.  Faith  in  God's  character.  His  per- 
fections, His  excellences.  Faith  in  the  promises  of  God.  5.  Faith  must  lead  to 
prayer.  Each  must  pray,  all  must  pray  ;  only  ask  in  faith,  nothing  doubting. 
If  there  be  an  increase  of  real  prosperity  in  the  Church,  there  must  be  an  increase 
of  believing  prayer.  When  once  Christian  Churches  and  Christian  ministers  shall 
thus  wrestle  with  God  in  prayer,  depend  upon  it,  God  is  on  His  way,  and  soon 
shall  they  behold  the  wonderful  workings  of  His  power.  {Thoughts  for  Week 
Evening  Services.)  Revival: — The  symptoms  and  evidences  of  spiritual  life 
in  possession  and  active  operation,  on  the  part  of  the  Church  collectively  and 
of  the  individual  believer,  are  many,  and  are  such  as  may  be  easily  recognised. 
I.  A  DEEP  SENSE  OF  THE  NEED  OF  REVIVAL.  It  is  in  this  as  in  regard  to  personal 
spiritual  concerns.     There  must  be  felt  need  before  there  can  be  fervent  prayer. 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Let  us  now  consider  more  particularly  what  is  really  needed  at  the  present  time, 
or  in  what  respects  revival  may  be  said  to  be  needed.  1.  We  require  a  revival 
of  personal  religion.  The  influence  and  power  of  personal  religion  and  of  well- 
founded,  deeply  rooted  convictions  of  the  efficacy  and  power  of  the  Word  of 
God,  and  of  the  Gospel  of  His  Son  in  the  hand  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  cannot  be  over- 
estimated. 2.  We  require  a  revival  of  family  religion.  Let  there  but  be  a  revival 
of  personal  holiness  vouchsafed  throughout  the  land,  and  religion  in  a  more  open 
and  public  form  would  be  sure  to  follow.  3.  We  require  a  revival  of  national 
religion.  IT.  An  acknowledgment  of  God  as  the  Attthob  of  this  much 
NEEDED  REVIVAL.  The  prophet  calls  it  His  work.  Yes,  the  revival  of  the  work 
of  grace  in  the  individual  soul,  of  spiritual  vitality  in  the  Church,  and  of  real  and 
lively  regard  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  supreme  authority  of  His  law,  in  the 
supreme  and  subordinate  legislative  assemblies  of  the  nation,  is  the  work  of 
God.  Hence  God  alone  can  revive  it.  III.  The  necessity  of  prayer 
TO  PRODUCE  THE  REVIVAL  OF  God's  WORK.  As  well  as  Zerubbabcl,  the 
prophet  Habakkuk  knew  that  this  great  work  was  not  to  be  accomplished 
by  might  or  by  power,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord ;  but  clearly  as  he 
understood  this,  no  less  strongly  did  he  feel  his  obligation  to  pray  for  it. 
(A.  Stirling.)  How  can  a  Church  he  brcnight  into  a  revival  condition? — This 
is  a  very  important  question  ;  for  the  conversions  in  any  Church  will  gener- 
ally be  in  proportion  to  the  average  spiritual  life  of  the  Church.  This  is  the  law. 
Of  course,  there  are  exceptions.  Men  fish  through  the  ice  in  midwinter  and 
catch  a  large  supply ;  and  so  it  is  possible  for  a  pastor  to  dip  right  through  the 
crust  of  worldliness  and  formality,  with  which  the  Church  is  covered,  and  bring 
out  converts  by  the  score.  But  a  fisher  of  men  that  can  do  this  must  be  endowed 
with  a  powerful  personality  and  an  uncommon  zeal.  But  taking  it  for  granted, 
then,  that  the  first  thing  is  to  bring  the  Church  into  a  revived  condition,  how 
shall  we  proceed  ?  Now,  we  remember  that  in  physics  it  is  said,  that,  in  thawing 
a  cake  of  ice,  all  the  heat  which  you  pour  in  below  the  melting  point  becomes 
latent  and  disappears,  but  that  having  raised  the  whole  temperature  up  to  the 
melting  point,  it  takes  but  little  heat  to  keep  it  thawing.  It  is  exactly  so  with 
a  Church.  There  is  what  may  be  called  the  zealothemial  point  in  the  spiritual 
thermometer.  When  the  temperature  of  the  body  is  below  that  point,  you  may 
pour  in  sermons  and  prayers  and  pleadings,  and  all  will  soon  be  absorbed  and 
lost.  But  once  bring  the  condition  above  that  point,  and  a  little  effort  will  keep 
converts  coming  constantly.  {A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.)  Stimulants  not  required 
for  a  revival : — Use  nourishments  instead  of  stimulants  in  yom-  efforts  to  bring 
up  the  spiritual  tone  of  the  Chm-ch.  By  stimulants,  we  mean  frantic  appeals, 
severe  denunciations,  stinging  rebuke.  These  rouse  for  the  Sabbath  on  which 
they  are  employed,  but  their  effect  is  exhausted  before  the  week  is  over,  and  the 
application  must  be  repeated  next  Sunday,  and  so  on,  week  after  week.  By 
nourishment,  we  mean  the  Scriptures  unfolded,  expounded,  and  steadily  applied. 
"  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life."  (Ibid.) 
Revivals  commence  with  the  few  : — Begin  with  a  part  of  the  Church  instead  of 
attempting  to  move  the  whole  mass  together.  Those  of  us  who  were  country 
boys  know  how  impossible  it  is  to  make  a  fire  out  of  green  logs  alone ;  but  if  we 
can  get  some  dry  sticks  kindled  around  and  underneath  these  green  logs,  we  can 
make  a  very  hot  fire  with  them.  Don't  begin  your  revival  by  trying  to  rouse  the 
whole  unseasoned  mass  of  Church  members,  but  begin  with  a  few  of  the  most 
spiritual,  and  from  these  work  out  towards  the  others.  Lyman  Beecher  said,  in 
answer  to  the  question.  How  can  we  promote  a  revival  in  the  Church  ? — "  First 
get  revived  yourself,  then  get  some  brother  Chiu-ch  member  revived,  and  the 
work  has  begun."  That  is  practical  wisdom.  (Ibid.)  In  wrath  remember 
mercy. — The  limitations  of  Divine  wrath  : — What  the  prophet  now  subjoins  is 
intended  to  anticipate  an  objection  ;  for  this  thought  might  have  occurred 
to  the  faithful — "  there  is  no  ground  for  us  to  hope  pardon  from  God,  whom  we 
have  so  grievously  provoked,  nor  is  there  any  reason  for  us  to  rely  any  more  on 
the  covenant  which  we  have  so  perfidiously  violated."  The  prophet  meets  this 
objection,  and  he  flees  to  the  gracious  favour  of  God,  however  much  he  perceived 
that  the  people  would  have  to  suffer  the  just  punishment  of  their  sins,  such  as  they 
deserved.  He  then  confesses  that  God  was  justly  angry  with  His  people,  and 
yet  that  the  hope  of  salvation  was  not  on  that  account  closed  up,  for  the  Lord 
had  promised  to  be  propitious.  Since  God  then  is  not  inexorable  towards  His 
people, — nay,  while  He  chastises  them  He  ceases  not  to  be  a  Father, — hence,  the 


OHAP.  in.]  HABAKKUK.  49 

prophet  connects  here  the  mercy  of  God  with  His  wrath.  The  word  "  wrath  " 
is  not  to  be  taken  according  to  its  strict  sense,  when  the  faithftd  or  the  elect  are 
spoken  of ;  for  God  does  not  chastise  them  because  He  hates  them ;  nay,  on  the 
contrary.  He  thereby  manifests  the  care  He  has  for  their  salvation.  Hence  the 
scourges  by  which  God  chastises  His  children  are  testimonies  of  His  love.  But 
the  Scripture  represents  the  judgment  with  which  God  visits  His  people  as  wrath, 
not  towards  their  persons,  but  towards  their  sins.  Though  then  God  shows  love 
to  His  chosen,  yet  He  testifies  when  He  punishes  their  sins  that  iniquity  is  hated 
by  Him.  When  God  then  comes  forth  as  it  were  as  a  judge,  and  shows  that  sins 
displease  Him,  He  is  said  to  be  angry  with  the  faithful ;  and  there  is  also  in  this 
a  reference  to  the  perceptions  of  men ;  for  we  cannot,  when  God  chastises  us,  do 
otherwise  than  feel  the  accusations  of  oiir  own  conscience.  Hence  then  is  this 
hatred ;  for  when  our  conscience  condemns  us,  we  must  necessarily  acknowledge 
God  to  be  angry  with  us,  that  is  with  respect  to  us.  When  therefore  we  provoke 
God's  wrath  by  our  sins,  we  feel  Him  to  be  angry  with  us ;  but  yet  the  prophet 
connects  together  things  that  seem  wholly  contrary  —  even  that  God  would 
"  remember  mercy  in  wrath  "  ;  that  is,  that  He  would  show  Himself  displeased 
with  them  in  such  a  way  as  to  afford  to  the  faithful  at  the  same  time  some  taste  of 
His  favour  and  mercy  by  finding  Him  to  be  propitious  to  them.  Whenever,  then, 
the  judgment  of  the  flesh  would  lead  us  to  despair,  let  us  ever  set  up  against  it 
this  truth — that  God  is  in  such  a  way  angry  that  He  never  forgets  His  mercy — ■ 
that  is,  in  His  dealings  with  His  elect.  {John  Calvin.)  HabakkuVa  prayer: — 
Wrath  and  mercy  are  here  put  in  juxtaposition  the  one  to  the  other.  The  wrath 
spoken  of  is  the  wrath  of  a  holy,  omnipotent  God.  Who  can  dare  to  meet  that 
wrath  ?  If  we  want  to  know  the  extent,  the  fury,  the  power  of  that  wrath, 
we  have  only  to  look  to  the  Saviour,  the  very  Son  of  the  very  eternal  God,  the 
Father's  co-equal,  co-eternal  Son,  when  He  stands  as  the  substitute  of  His  people, 
as  the  representative  of  His  Church,  the  sword  of  God's  wrath  falls  upon  Him. 
This  wrath  will  come  upon  a  guilty  and  sinful  world  in  the  last  days.  It  will 
come  as  the  messenger  of  God  to  purge  His  Church  from  its  alloy,  and  its  imperfec- 
tions, and  its  impurities,  and  the  fire  shall  bum  them  up.  But  in  the  text  there 
is  a  word  of  mercy  for  God's  Church.  Say  ye  to  the  righteous  that  it  shall  be  weU 
with  him.  Whatever  judgments  may  come  upon  us,  nothing  can  come  beyond 
what  we  deserve.  What  then  have  we  to  do  ?  To  pray  for  mercy.  Nothing 
can  be  done  without  mercy.     {T.  Mortimer,  A.M.) 

Vers.  3-15.  Cfod  came  from  Teman. — God  poeticaUy  portrayed  and  practically 
remembered : — The  Bible  contains  many  grand  songs  and  odes.  But  thia 
fiong  of  Habakkuk  stands  in  peerless  splendour  amongst  them  all.  I.  Poeti- 
cally POETRAYED.  God  is  here  presented,  not  as  the  Absolute  One,  whom  "  no 
eye  hath  seen  or  can  see,"  nor  as  He  appears  to  philosophical  or  logical  minds, 
but  as  He  appears  to  a  lofty  imagination  Divinely  inspired.  To  the  prophet's 
imagination  He  appears  as  coming  from  Teman  and  Mount  Paran,  which  refers 
to  the  visible  display  of  His  glory  when  He  gave  the  law  upon  Mount  Sinai  amidst 
thunders  and  lightnings  and  earthquakes.  Then  indeed  His  glory  covered  the 
heavens.  But  whilst  we  take  this  as  a  poetic  representation,  we  must  not  fail 
to  notice  some  of  the  grand  truths  which  it  contains.  1.  That  God's  glory  tran- 
scends aU  revelations.  The  brightness  of  the  Shekinah,  in  which  He  appeared 
on  Sinai  and  elsewhere  to  the  Jews,  however  effulgent,  was  but  a  mere  scintillation 
of  the  infinite  splendour  of  His  being,  the  mere  "  hiding  of  His  power."  All 
His  glory  as  seen  in  nature,  both  in  the  material  and  the  spiritual  universe,  is 
but  as  one  ray  to  the  eternal  sun.  2.  That  God's  power  over  the  material  universe 
is  absolute.  He  makes  the  mountains  tremble,  and  the  seas  divide,  and  the 
orbs  of  heaven  stand  stilL  3.  That  God's  interest  in  good  men  is  profound  and 
practical  All  His  operations,  as  here  poetically  described,  are  on  behalf  of  His 
chosen  people.  II.  Practically  eemembeeed.  Why  did  the  prophet  recall 
all  these  Divine  manifestations  to  the  Hebrew  people  in  past  times  ?  Undoubtedly 
to  encourage  in  himself  and  in  his  countrymen  unbounded  confidence  in  Him, 
in  the  critical  and  dangerous  period  in  which  they  were  placed.  The  Chaldean 
hosts  were  threatening  their  ruin.  Under  these  perilous  circumstances  he  tumfl 
to  God,  he  calls  to  mind  and  portrays  in  vivid  poetry  what  He  had  been  to  His 
people  in  ancient  times.  1.  He  recalls  the  fact  that  God  had  delivered  His  people 
in  ancient  times  from  perils  as  great  as  those  to  which  they  were  now  exposed. 
From  the  Egyptians,  the  Canaanites,  the  Philistines,  &c.     2.  That  God  had  deoe 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nL 

thia  by  stupendous  manifestations  of  His  power.  Manifestations  of  His  power 
in  the  sea,  in  the  mountains,  in  the  orbs  of  heaven,  &c.  3.  That  what  God  had 
done  for  His  people,  He  would  continue  to  do.  "  His  ways  are  everlasting," 
or,  as  Kiel  renders  it.  His  are  ways  of  the  olden  times.  The  idea  perhaps  is,  that 
He  has  an  eternal  plan,  fixed  and  settled.  What  He  has  done  for  them,  He  will 
still  do.  Thus  the  prophet  remembered  the  days  of  old  and  took  courage. 
{Homilist.) 

Ver.  4.  He  had  horns  coming  out  of  His  hand. — The  horn  as  a  symhol : — 
The  use  of  the  word  "  horn  "  as  a  metaphor  to  express  strength  and  honour 
is  of  very  ancient  origin.  It  appears  to  have  arisen  from  the  expression 
in  Exodus  xxxiv.  29,  Moses'  "face  shone,"  or,  literally,  "emitted  raj^s,"  where 
the  Hebrew  word  karan — from  keren,  a  horn — means  "  to  shoot  forth  horns," 
hence  applied  to  the  horn-like  rays  of  light.  But  it  was  frequently  translated, 
as  in  the  Latin  Vulgate,  "  put  forth  horns  "  ;  and  from  this  absurd  translation 
arose  the  belief  that  Moses  actually  had  horns,  and,  as  we  know,  he  is  always 
so  depicted  in  mediaeval  paintings  when  bearing  the  tables  of  stone,  and  the 
grotesque  error  has  been  too  often  followed  by  modern  artists.  The  horn  was 
naturally  a  symbol  of  strength ;  for  in  its  horns  lay  the  strength  of  the  aurocks 
or  bison,  long  since  extinct,  erroneously  translated  "  unicorn  "  in  our  version, 
and  which  was  the  strongest  and  mightiest  land  animal  known  to  the  Israelites. 
When  represented  as  worn  by  Moses,  horns  became  naturally  an  emblem  also 
of  honour,  and  thus  of  royal  power  and  dignity.  One  of  the  daily  prayers  of 
the  Jews  at  the  present  day  is,  "  Soon  may  the  Branch,  the  Root  of  David,  spring 
up,  and  His  horn  be  excellent."  This  petition  may  have  been  in  use  before  the 
time  of  Zacharias,  and  may  have  suggested  this  utterance.  The  metaphor  was 
also  used  among  others  than  the  Jews.  An  Arabic  expression  speaks  of  the 
sun's  rays  as  the  horns  of  a  deer.  The  horn  on  either  side  of  the  head  is  employed 
on  the  coins  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  of  some  of  his  successors,  the  Seleucid 
kings  of  Syria,  as  well  as  by  the  Ptolemies.  From  his  well-known  coins  is  doubt- 
less derived  the  Arabic  epithet  of  Alexander  the  Great,  "  the  two-horned  king." 
In  the  prophetical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  well  as  in  the  Apocalpyse, 
the  horn  is  frequently  used  as  a  metaphor  for  a  king  or  kingdom,  as  in  this  song 
of  Zacharias  ;  for  example,  the  two  horns  of  Media  and  Persia,  the  horn  of  the 
king  of  Grecia,  the  ten  horns  or  kingdoms,  the  horn  that  had  eyes,  and  a  mouth 
that  spake  great  things.  In  former  times,  a  single  horn,  generally  of  silver, 
fastened  over  the  forehead,  was  not  an  uncommon  Syrian  decoration  of  great 
men  ;  but  the  fashion  now  lingers  only  in  the  Lebanon,  where  on  gala  days  the 
married  women  of  rank  wear  a  silver  horn  about  a  foot  long,  fixed  upright  on 
the  head,  over  which  is  thro\vn  the  veil.  I  have  only  once  seen  the  horn  worn, 
though  specimens  have  several  times  been  offered  to  me  for  sale  by  the  villagers. 
In  the  vision  in  Habakkuk  iii.  4,  "  He  had  horns  coming  out  of  His  hand,"  the 
rendering  should  be,  as  in  Exodus,  "  rays  of  light,  or  lightnings,  darted  from 
His  hand."  (H.  B.  Tristram,  D.D.)  And  there  was  the  hiding  of  His  power. — 
God's  reserved  power  : — The  prayer  with  which  this  prophecy  concludes  is  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  pieces  of  composition  ever  written  with  pen,  whether 
inspired  or  uninspired.  The  imagery  employed  is  an  impassioned  setting  forth 
of  God's  majesty  and  beneficence  as  He  led  His  people  through  the  wilderness. 
The  prophet  comforts  himself  in  the  assurance  that  the  same  Jehovah  is  the 
God  of  Israel  still.  The  chief  interest  of  the  text  lies  in  its  concluding  words — 
"  the  hiding  of  His  power."  The  thought  is,  the  Divine  concealments  which 
accompany  all  Divine  revelations.  I.  Vv'^hat  do  the  words  mean,  as  applied 
TO  THE  EVENTS  HE  MAINLY  HAS  IN  MIND  ?  The  imagery  here  may  have  been 
suggested  by  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  flame  which  led  the  host.  When  God's  hand 
was  stretched  out  to  work  some  miracle  of  deliverance,  to  feed  the  famishing 
multitude,  to  make  rivers  for  them  in  the  desert,  or  to  smite  the  foe  that  with- 
stood them,  a  glory  streamed  from  it  wholly  Divine.  In  the  imagery  of  the 
prophet,  these  rays  of  glorious  manifestation  were  as  horns,  so  often,  in  the  poetical 
and  prophetical  Scriptures,  used  as  symbols  of  power  and  sovereigntj^  coming 
out  of  His  hand.  And  yet,  so  far  from  all  these  great  acts  of  God  constituting 
a  full  display  of  Him  as  He  is,  in  reality  they  were  but  as  hidings  of  His  power. 
If  you  study  closely  those  manifestations  of  God's  goodness  and  power  which 
were  then  and  thus  made,  you  will  see  that  this  was  so.  Look  at  them — 1.  As 
His  providences  on  behalf  of  His  people.     Behind  the  providences  there  was  a 


CHAP,  in.]  HABAKKUK.  51 

grace — more  mighty,  more  amazing  than  the  providences.  Incidents  then  which 
seemed  to  intend  some  present  deliverance,  or  some  national  institution  merelj^ 
we  find  now  to  have  meant  far  more.  Of  even  the  smitten  rock  we  read,  "  That 
Bock  was  Christ."  Concerning  the  manna,  we  find  Christ  declaring,  "  I  am 
that  Bread  from  heaven."  And  the  innocent  victim  from  the  flock,  brought 
for  sacrifice,  led  one,  in  the  power  of  inspiration,  to  point  to  Jesus  and  say, 
"  Behold,  the  Lamb  of  God ! "  II.  This  of  which  we  speak  cannot  be  a  merely 
ABBITRAKY  THING  IN  GoD.  Something  in  His  dispensations  without  an  adequate 
Divine  reason.  It  results  partly  from  the  fact  that  in  all  the  Divine  dealings 
with  us,  it  is  God  dealing  with  man.  It  must  be  the  study  of  a  whole  eternity 
for  man  to  find  out  God  or  God's  doings  imto  perfection.  He  must  be  full  of 
concealments.  And  this  applies  even  to  the  most  common  events  and  exigencies. 
It  is  impossible  that  God  should,  at  each  stage  in  our  onward  course,  make  us 
imderstand  all  things  as  He.  understands  them.  God  leads  us  blindfold.  God's 
concealments  are  not  arbitrary ;  they  are  a  necessity ;  and  while  they  are  so, 
they  serve,  in  a  most  Divine  way,  the  purposes  of  human  instruction.     III.  What 

IS  meant  here  by  the  HIDING  OF  God'S  POWER  IS  THE  KEY  TO  MUCH  OF  THE 
MYSTERY    OF    HiS    DISPENSATIONS,    BOTH    IN    PROVIDENCE    AND    IN    GRACE.       It    is 

easy  to  say  that  what  we  see  is  the  result  of  the  operation  of  instituted  laws  and 
conditions.  But  this  cannot  be  an  exhaustive  theory  of  the  imiverse  and  of 
man's  relation  to  it.  The  difGculties  of  providence  have  their  solution,  if  not 
in  any  of  our  expedients  for  accounting  for  events,  still  in  what  we  know  of  God's 
infinite  power  and  resources.  What  a  hiding  of  power  it  was  which  the  world 
saw  in  Jesus  ; — a  wonderful  manifestation  indeed,  yet  a  far  more  wonderful 
concealing,  with  the  great  reality  breaking  through  only  as  the  fit  occasion  served. 
(J.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  hiding  of  His  power  : — They  saw  marvellous  light, 
exceeding  power  and  magnificence ;  but,  after  all,  there  was  even  then  only  a 
partial  display.  Omnipotence  had  not  shown  itself,  more  was  concealed  than 
was  unfolded.  I.  In  the  realm  of  nature  there  are  hidings  of  God's  power. 
When  the  geologist,  physiologist,  chemist,  have  told  us  all  they  know,  we  find 
they  have  left  wondrous  secrets  unrevealed.  Concerning  the  world  of  creation 
there  is  more  unknown  than  known.  We  have  not  exhausted,  and  surely  we 
cannot  exhaust  the  resources  of  God.  II.  In  the  revelations  of  spiritual 
truth  there  are  hidings  of  God's  power.  The  universe  is  a  revelation.  But 
by  "  revelation  "  we  understand  direct  knowledge  of  the  character  and  the  will 
of  God,  His  relation  to  His  creatures.  His  purposes  and  work  in  them,  and  their 
future  destiny.  Revelation,  like  all  other  things,  has  been  progressive.  While 
much  was  given,  much  was  withheld  for  the  "  fulness  of  time."  What  an  enor- 
mous difference  is  perceptible  between  the  knowledge  of  God  which  the  earliest 
people  possessed  and  that  which  shines  full  orbed  in  Jesus  Christ !  And  is  it 
not  stiU  true  ?  Do  we  know  all,  though  we  know  so  much  ?  Are  there  not  fresh 
revelations  to  come,  through  the  power  of  the  promised  Teacher  of  the  Church 
in  every  age  ?  III.  In  His  providences  there  is  the  hiding  of  His  power. 
By  Divine  providence  is  meant  the  foresight  and  control  which  God  exercises 
over  national  and  iudividual  life.  He  does  not  reveal  all  He  has  in  store  for 
us  at  any  one  moment.  There  are  reserves,  hidings  of  Divine  help  until  want 
presses,  then  the  help  will  come,  and  come  in  fullest  measure.  As  individuals 
we  do  not  know  for  what  we  are  now  being  prepared.  God  is  educating  and 
disciplining  us  by  various  processes.     What  truths  should  we  learn  from  this  ? 

Reverence;    confidence;    hope.      (William  Braden.)        God's  hidden   power: 

Habakkuk  seems  to  have  been  wonderfully  impressed  with  a  sense  of  God's 
majesty  and  power.  And  well  he  might  be.  We  are  astonished  at  the  exhibitions 
of  His  creative  power.  But  there  is  an  imseen  power — an  invisible  and  subtle 
agent  in  the  Divine  arm,  and  in  the  Divine  government.  The  Almighty  often 
works  in  disguise,  in  a  way,  at  least,  in  which  we  do  not  at  the  time  recognise 
His  hand.  He  often  throws  a  thick  cloud  around  His  plans,  and  a  mask  about 
His  operations  which  even  the  eye  of  faith  cannot  penetrate.  Behind  a  screen 
He  devises  His  most  stupendous  purposes.  Look  at  some  manifestations  of 
hidden  power.  I.  As  natural  and  physical  forces.  Illustrations  in  nature. 
Acorn.  Corn  grains  in  mummy  cases.  Elements  of  gunpowder.  Steam,  or 
power  concealed  in  water-drops.  Electricity.  Telephone.  II.  As  moral  and 
spiritual  forces.  The  latent  power  there  is  in  the  simple  Gospel  of  Christ 
and  its  institutions.  There  is  power  sufficient  in  the  Gospel  to  evoke  a  spirit 
of  faith  and  Christian  heroism  that  will  lead  a  million  martyrs  to  the  stake.     How 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

small  and  feeble  in  the  beginning  was  the  Church  !  The  little  mustard  seed 
was  the  fit  emblem  to  represent  it.  Is  not  the  thought  of  the  concentration 
of  God's  vast  powers — His  hidden  resources,  as  they  shall  be  developed  and 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  Church  and  the  world  in  the  next  century,  well-nigh 
overwhelming  ?  When  art,  science,  and  philosophy  shall  walk  hand  in  hand  with 
religion,  there  will  be  such  a  revealment  of  power  as  shall  astonish  both  men 
and  angels.  (J.  L.  Harris.)  The  hiding  of  God's  power: — In  this  chapter 
we  have  Habakkuk's  earnest  prayer  for  deliverance  from  the  foes  of  his  people. 
He  describes  Jehovah's  revelation  of  Himself  at  Sinai  and  at  Gibeon  as  ground 
for  believing  that  He  will  again  interpose  in  behalf  of  Israel.  I.  In  the  works 
OF  CREATION  God's  OMNIPOTENCE  IS  HIDDEN.  God  never  makes  display;  in  all 
His  works  we  have  evidences  of  restrained  power.  In  nature  nothing  is  forced  to 
its  utmost  tension.  All  the  objects  of  creation  around  us  show  marks  of  deliberate 
wisdom  and  restrained  strength.  The  fruits  of  the  earth.  The  flowers  of  the 
garden,  the  seasons,  &c.  Through  all  nature  we  see  horns  coming  out  of  His 
hand — rays  from  the  central  sun  of  His  omnipotence.  But  with  regard  to  omni- 
potence, in  all  its  essential  grandeur,  there  is  the  "  hiding  of  His  power."  II.  In 
God's  providential  dealings  with  the  race  there  is  the  hiding  op  His 
POWER.  There  are  many  wrongs  on  earth  that  need  righting.  All  things  in 
providence  proceed  according  to  an  eternal  plan.  His  worlds  circulate,  so  do 
His  providential  dealings.  God's  worlds  circulate  quietly  and  without  clashing; 
so  do  His  providences ;  issuing  from  the  source  of  all  harmony  and  light  they  are 
gradually  evolving  light  out  of  dai'kness,  harmony  out  of  discord,  life  out  of 
death,  happiness  out  of  grief.  III.  In  Christ's  redemptive  work  there  was 
THE  hiding  of  His  POWER.  Through  our  Saviour's  life  there  was  "  the  hiding 
of  His  power."  Two  methods  are  used  to  impress  people  with  the  idea  of  power. 
The  passive  method.  The  stock  in  trade  of  some  public  speakers  is  the  trick  of 
appearing  wise.  The  demonstrative  method  of  manifesting  power  is  more  popular. 
But  how  remarkably  free  from  all  display  was  the  life  of  Christ.  The  death  of  Christ 
brings  out  this  idea  very  forcibly.  Lessons — 1.  The  hoUowness  of  mere  religious  dis- 
play. 2.  That  God  has  no  absolute  need  of  man's  help  in  forwarding  the  interests 
of  His  kingdom.  3.  Our  need  to  get  into  sympathy  with  God.  {Alex.  Macfarlane. ) 
The  hiding  of  Divine  power : — "  It  is  the  glory  of  God,"  says  an  mspired  writer, 
"  to  conceal  a  thing."  "  He  holdeth  back  the  face  of  His  throne,  and  spreadeth 
a  cloud  upon  it."  Up  to  a  given  point  all  is  clearness,  beyond  that  all  is  mystery. 
It  is  revelation  so  far,  it  is  reservation  onward.  And  this,  not  to  keep  our  curiosity 
and  sense  of  wonder  on  perpetual  stretch  of  seeking  to  pry  into  the  hidden,  but 
out  of  pity  to  our  feeble  finite  eyes,  which  would  be  blinded  for  ever  were  the 
infinite  blaze  to  be  outpoured  upon  us.  Concealment  is  absolutely  necessary  : 
the  "  holding  back  "  is  a  boon.  Full  unfoldment  would  be  cruel  on  the  Divine 
side,  and  inevitable  death  on  the  human  side.  Mystery,  however,  is  a  com- 
parative term :  what  is  mystery  to  a  child  is  plain  to  a  man.  What  is  mystery 
to  a  peasant  is  intelligible  and  simple  to  a  philosopher.  What  is  mystery  to 
a  philosopher  is  easy  reading  to  the  saint  in  glory.  The  finite  will  never  outgrow 
mystery.  The  depths  of  infinity,  whether  of  power,  of  v.isdom,  or  of  love,  can 
never  be  sounded  by  any  human  plumb-line  of  thought.  However  vast  and 
rich  may  be  the  revelations  given.  Deity  ever  must  be  hidden  in  the  abstract 
and  absolute  sense.  Seeing  God  in  His  works  is  not  seeing  Him  in  His  essence  ; 
beholding  Him  in  His  Word  is  not  beholding  Him  as  He  is  ;  even  gazing  on  Him 
as  incarnated  in  His  beloved  and  sinless  Son  is  not  to  see  Him  in  the  unclouded 
majesty  and  mystery  of  His  Being.  As  the  sun  conceals  more  power  than  it 
can  ever  display,  so  Jehovah  hides  more  might  in  the  abysses  of  His  natiure  than 
He  can  ever  show.  Bright  beamings  He  gives  apportioned  to  our  strength  of 
vision,  but  beyond  that  tiiere  is  gracious  reservation,  there  is  merciful  "  hiding." 
"  Power  !  "  Habakkuk  was  awed  and  impressed  by  the  "  horns  "  and  "  hidings  " 
of  this  glorious  attribute.  "  Once  have  I  heard  this,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  yea, 
twice  have  I  heard  it  that  power  belongeth  unto  God."  A  God  without  power — 
power  to  will,  to  think,  to  act,  to  create,  to  conserve,  to  govern,  to  reward  and 
punish — would  be,  could  be  no  God  at  all.  Almightincss  is  an  essential  of  God- 
hood.  Omnipotence  as  well  as  eternity  must  inhere  as  an  attribute  in  a  Being 
existing  from  necessity.  Its  evolutions  are  vast,  varied,  minute,  and  majestic.  In 
type  of  careering  worlds  and  wheeling  systems  Jehovah  has  written  the  language  of 
His  power  on  the  glorious  page  of  the  heavens.  And  what  voluminous  emblems 
and  evidences  of  mightiness  we  have  in  the  world  of  mind,  and  what  in  the  universe 


CHAP,  m.]  HABAKKUK.  63 

of  truth  !     Next  to  God  Himself,  man  wields  a  power  almost  omnipotent ;  and 
through  him  Jehovah  is  bringing  to  bear  upon  races,  tribes,  nationalities,  soul- 
worlds,  evolutions  of  His  almightiness,  which  effect  magnificent  reforms  in  mind 
and  morals,  and  lead  them  up  to  imperial  heights  of  moral  and  immortal  honour, 
holiness,  and  truth,  or  sink  them  by  wilful  obstinacy  and  rebellion  to  depths 
of  ruin  and  woe.     Are  storms  and  earthquakes,  and  rolling  seasons  and  fruitful 
showers,  and  quickening  sunshine  the  result  of  wilful  rebellious  forces  of  caprice, 
or  rioting  powers  of  accidentalism  ?     Do  they  look  like  it  ?     Is  it  in  the  nature 
of  caprice  to  be  so  unerringly  regular  in  its  freaks  and  doings  as  the  revolutions 
of  the  seasons  ?     Could  an  unconscious  energy — a  blind  force — which  is  only 
another  name  from  the  vocabulary  of  scepticism  for  "  chance  " — could  it  possibly 
be  so  transcendently  wise  in  its  exploits  and  infinitely  clever  in  its  achievements 
as  the  miracles  and  manifestations  of  the  power  to  be  witnessed  on  the  theatre 
of  our  globe  ?     A  thousand  times  no  !     These  are  the  workings  of  Omnipotence 
through  the  medium  of  the  material  by  which  humanity  may  learn  and  receive 
constant  assurance  that  verily  there  is  a  God  to  whom  power  belongeth,  and 
that  despite  the  most  astounding  manifestations  thereof  there  still  is  and  ever 
will  be  what  the  prophet  has  declared,  "  the  hiding  of  His  power."     But,  I  am 
asked,  does  creation  apart  from  revelation  afford  proof  that  this  power,  the  effects 
of  which  we  see,  is  centred  in  and  exercised  by  a  'person  ?     Decidedly  so.     I 
would  ask,  in  reply,  do  the  effects  beheld  show  evidences  of  thought,  intelligence, 
wisdom  ?     "  Laws "   argue  a  lawgiver,   and  a  lawgiver    argues  an   intelligent, 
personal  being.     Therefore  nature  does  afford  presumptive  evidence  that  power, 
the  effects  of  which  we  see,  has  behind  it  personality — that  it  is  wielded  by  an 
imperial  will,  governed  by  an  all-wise  mind,  and  obedient  to  an  mfiaite  spirit. 
To   supplement   nature,   Jehovah   has   graciously   given   us   revelation.     Power 
,   uncentred  in  an  intelligent  Personality,  supposing  it  were  possible,  would  be 
lawless,   reckless,   ruinous !     Power   is   centred    in    the   Living  God.     And   His 
presence  and  power  in  nature  is  the  source  of  all  force,  energy,  and  law,  and  the 
necessary  condition  of  any  course  of  events.     While  omnipotence  in  Jehovah 
is  one  as  an  attribute,  nevertheless  it  is  varied  in  its  exertions  and  manifestations 
according  to  the  mediums  through  which  it  operates.     Seen  in  creation  over 
matter,  it  is  physical ;     in  prophecy  over  mind,  it  is  intellectual ;  in  providence 
over  events  and  circumstances,  it  is  sovereign  and  judicial ;  in  religious  influences 
on  conscience,  character,  life,  it  is  moral.     The  seat  of  power  is  the  will.     Accord- 
ing to  the  teaching  of  this  sacred  book,  the  infinitude  of  power  has  been  hidden 
in  Jesus  Christ.     God,  so  to  speak,  has  compressed  Himself  into  the  limits  of 
the   human.     Omnipotence,  with  every  other   attribute   of  Divinity,  has   been 
presented  in  mysterious  condensation  in  the  person  of  the  Logos.     "  Christ," 
says  St.  Paul,  "  is  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  24).     What 
demonstrations  thereof  He  gave  when  tabernacling  in  human  form.     From  His 
look  and    touch  and  word   outbeamed   the  "  horns,"  while   behind  tbe  veil  of 
flesh  were  the  "hidings"  of  Omnipotence.     The  Cross  is  the  centralisation  of 
the   highest   power — the   concentrated   power   of   love !     Christianity   is   moral 
plenipotence.     "  The  Gospel  is  the  power  of  God."     It  creates  not  new  worlds, 
but  clean  hearts.     It  subdues  not  earthly  kingdoms,  but  rebel  wills.     Yes  ;  the 
world  is  what  it  is  to-day  through  the  living  revolutionising  power  of  Christianity. 
"  Without  Jesus  Christ,"  says  Pascal,  "  the  world  would  not  even  exist ;  for  either 
it  would  have  been  already  destroyed,  or  it  would   have   become  like  a  hell." 
Remember,  it  is  not  the  human,  but  the  Divine  through  the  human,  which  has 
produced  such  effects.     It  is  not  the  instrumentahty,  but  the  God- power  through 
which  it  has  wrought  such  supernatural  changes  in  all  lands  where  it  has  had 
full  and  imfettered  sway.     The  age  of  physical  miracles  may  be  among  the  vestige 
of  the  past,  but  moral  miracles,  perhaps,  were  never  so  plentiful  and  constant 
as  to-day.     This,  indeed,  is  the  mighty  power  of  God.     The  power  of  truth  over 
mind,  light  over  darkness,  love  over  hate,  divinity  over  human  sin,  sorrow,  woe. 
Nothing  can  withstand  it.     What  ?     I  am  not  quite  so  sure  of  that.     Moral 
power  with  Jehovah  is  powerless  to  effect  a  moral  change  in  man  if  there  be  no 
concurrence  of  will.     Physical  might  with  Him  is  illimitable,  nothing  can  withstand 
it ;  but  moral  might  can  only  successfully  work  when  and  where  there  is  voluntary 
acquiescence  on  the  creatiu:e-side  in  the  Divine  will.     Hence  the  slowness  of 
Gospel  progress  of  which  our  sceptical  enemies  accuse  us,  far  from  being  evidence 
of  failure,  is  a  glaring  and  terrible  illustration  of  man's  deep-seated  depravity 
and  stubborn  unwillingness  to  accept  salvation.     Did  He  proceed  on  the  principle 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  iu. 

of  coercion  in  the  realm  of  truth,  human  hearts  and  wills  would  bend  in  subjection 
before  Him  as  golden  grain  before  the  breeze  ;  but  it  would  be  the  subjection 
of  trembling  slaves,  and  not  the  loyal,  loving  homage  of  sons.  Compulsion  makes 
serfs,  but  not  saints.  From  "  the  hiding  of  His  power " — His  grand  reserve 
of  forces — at  His  bidding,  shall  yet  sally  forth  battalions  of  might  to  accomplish 
His  purposes  and  promises  of  love,  or  execute  His  threatenings  of  wrath  ;  for 
the  "  kingdoms  of  this  world"  are  to  become  "  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of 
His  Christ."     (J.  0.  Keen,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Was  the  Lord  displeased  against  the  rivers?  —  The  destruction  of 
forests  : — We  secure  dominion  over  the  forces  of  nature  only  through  recogni- 
tion of  the  laws  that  govern  them.  The  floods  that  have  made  so  great  havoo 
in  Europe  and  America  this  season  are  the  natural  results  of  violated  law.  1.  The 
forests  of  the  hills  and  mountains  are  God's  natural  check  on  the  overflow  of  streams. 
2.  As  a  nation  we  are  guilty  of  violation  of  this  law  for  protection  of  the  valleys. 
The  plunder  of  the  leafy  wealth  of  the  hiUs  has  been  most  wanton.  The  penalty 
has  been  visited  upon  the  valleys.  3.  The  protection  must  be  secured  through 
the  dissemination  of  knowledge  upon  the  subject,  and  through  the  State  and 
national  law.  Otherwise  the  floods  will  augment  each  year  until  they  become 
immeasurable  calamities.     {Homiletic  Beview.) 

Ver.  9.  The  bow  was  made  quite  naked,  according  to  the  oaths  of  the  tribes, 
even  Thy  Word. —  The  prophet's  closing  prayer  is  that  God  would,  in  wrath, 
remember  mercy.  For  this  he  is  encouraged  to  hope  by  a  remembrance  of  Grod's 
past  dealings  with  His  people,  which  he  reviews  in  a  strain  of  sublime  eloquence. 
Lifting  up  his  heart  to  God  with  devout  acknowledgment  of  past  help,  he 
exclaims,  "Thy  bow  was  made  quite  naked,"  &c.  Apply — I.  To  the  defencb 
OF  God's  people  against  their  enemies.  There  is  allusion  to  the  Eastern 
mode  of  warfare.  The  bow  was  taken  out  of  its  case,  and  placed  upon  the  string 
ready  to  go  forth  on  its  errand  of  destruction  against  those  who  assailed  the  servants 
of  God.  1.  The  opposition  of  the  imgodly.  There  has  always  been  a  wide  distinc- 
tion between  those  who  serve  God,  and  those  who  serve  Him  not.  The  latter 
have  always  set  themselves  in  fierce  antagonism  against  the  former.  But  God's' 
people  have  never  wanted  an  avenger  in  God.  2.  The  designs  of  evil  spirits. 
We  have  enemies  in  the  invisible  world.  One  arrow  from  the  bow  of  the  Almighty 
wiU  put  to  flight  the  hosts  of  Satan.  .S.  The  plague  of  our  own  hearts.  We  often 
carry  our  most  dangerous  enemies  within  us.  If  we  allow  sin  to  dwell  unmolested 
within  us,  we  carry  about  with  us  a  combustible  material.  Until  you  get  rid 
of  these,  you  can  have  no  abiding  peace.  The  blood  of  Christ  can  wash  them  all 
away,  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit  can  consume  them  all.  II.  The  triumph  of 
God's  truth  over  every  form  op  error.  1.  The  abominations  of  idolatry. 
2.  The  delusions  of  superstition.  3.  The  fallacies  of  human  reasoning.  Intellect 
alone  is  insufiicient  to  guide  us  in  our  search  after  truth  without  some  directing 
power  from  heaven.  But  the  issue  of  conflict  with  all  error  is  certain.  These 
things  will  surely  be  accomplished  "according  to  the  oaths  of  the  tribes," 
that  is,  the  covenant  of  God  with  His  people,  according  to  His  infaUible  Word. 
(W.  J.  Brock,  B.A.) 

Ver.  16.  And  I  trembled  in  myself.— Horror  of  God  .-—I.  It  is  an  abnormal 
state  of  mind.  The  benevolent  character  of  God,  and  the  moral  constitution 
of  the  soul  are  sufiicient  to  show  that  it  was  never  intended  that  man  should 
ever  dread  his  Maker  or  be  touched  with  any  servile  feelings  in  relation  to 
Him.  Unbounded  confidence,  cheerful  trust,  loyal  love,  these  are  the  normal 
states  of  mind  in  relation  to  the  Creator.  How  has  the  abnormal  state  arisen  f 
The  history  of  the  Fall  shows  this.  "  I  heard  Thy  voice  in  the  garden  and  was 
afraid."  11.  It  is  an  unnecessary  state  of  mind.  God  is  not  terrible.  There 
is  nothing  in  Him  to  dread.  His  voice  to  man — 1.  In  all  nature  is,  "  Be  not  afraid." 
2.  In  all  true  philosophy.  Things  show  benevolence  of  intention.  3.  In  all  true 
Christianity.  The  Christianity  of  Christ  reveals  Him  as  love,  and  love  orJy. 
III.  It  is  a  pernicious  state  of  mend.  It  is  pernicious  to  the  body.  Horrific 
feeling  is  inimical  to  physical  health.  But  dread  of  God  is  even  more  pernicious 
to  the  soul.  1.  It  destroys  its  peace.  2.  It  depresses  its  powers.  3.  It  distorts 
its  view.  It  is  fear  that  has  given  men  that  Calvinian  Deity  which  frightens 
the  millions  away  from  the  glorious  Gospel  of  the  blessed  God.     {Homilist.y 


CHAP,  m.]  HABAKKUK. 


I  trembled  in  myself,  that  I  migrht  rest  in  the  day  of  trouble. —  TremUinj 
into  rest : — We  know  things  which  do  tremble  that  they  may  rest — the  magnet, 
the  planet,  the  bird,  the  heart.  Do  not  regard  this  text  as  any  melancholy  and 
prophetic  foreboding.  It  is  a  wise  repression  of  a  too  vehement  self-consciousness 
— the  assurance  that  our  labour  is  not  guaranteed  by  our  present  exuberance, 
but  by  a  wise  and  thoughtful  fear.  Wise  fear  is  forethought  and  safety.  This 
prayer  of  Habakkuk  grounds  the  hope  of  future  mercy  on  the  remembrance  of 
the  past ;  it  is  the  history  of  a  state  of  humbled  feeling,  and  a  hope  from  this  to 
rest  in  the  day  of  trouble.  I.  The  peinciplb  of  fbar  is  excited  by  the  sensh 
or  God.  Job  said,  "When  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  Him."  When  we  think 
wisely  and  thoughtfully  of  God  we  may  well  tremble.  It  is  the  dictate  of  natural 
religion.  II.  There  is  a  use  in  this  teembling  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
RECOGNISES.  The  apostle  says,  "  Knowing,  therefore,  the  terror  of  the  Lord, 
we  persuade  men  "  ;  and  this  is  ever  the  effect  of  this.  Fear  not  to  paralyse. 
There  is  a  wise  and  healthy  trembling.  We  are  often  shaken  by  undefined  terrors. 
There  seems  nothing  to  make  us  afraid  ;  but  the  spirit  is  overwhelmed — all 
within  us  sinks.  You  may  tremble  beneath  some  highly  wrought  sermon  ;  but 
this  is  different  to  trembling  beneath  the  Spirit's  touch  of  power.  III.  What 
IS  THE  ISSUE  ?  Rest  in  the  day  of  trouble.  Holy  fear  is  the  guardian  of  the 
soul ;  it  bears  us  into  real  life,  into  a  soothed  life.  This  trembling  is  a  sense  of 
the  soul,  the  vision  and  knowledge  of  the  soul, — it  is  all  the  soul, — it  is  within,  it 
is  ourselves.  And  as  we  tremble  so  we  rest.  Rest  in  the  day  of  trouble  means 
that  a  kingdom  of  peace  is  set  up  in  our  soul.  {E.  Paxton  Hood.)  The  'prayer 
of  Habakkuk  : — 1.  Unfold  the  maxim  which  these  words  contain.  Fear,  excited 
by  the  threatenings  of  God,  issues  in  "  rest,"  followed  by  the  mercies  of  God. 
As  a  moral  proverb  only  this  maxim  is  susceptible  of  much  powerful  and  practical 
illustration.  The  maxim  presents  itself  in  accordance  with  the  whole  Gospel 
of  Christ.  2.  The  use  which  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  of  the  threatenings  of  the 
Word — the  sinner  is  brought  to  tremble  in  himself.  It  was  never  designed  that 
the  threatenings  of  the  Word  should  seize  on  a  man  with  a  paralysing  grasp. 
They  were  intended  to  subserve  the  purpose  of  solemn  and  salutary  warning. 
Threatening  preaching  is  not  in  general  effective  preaching.  He  who  trembles 
beneath  the  Spirit's  teaching,  trembles  in  himself.  It  is  an  internal  shock.  There 
may  be  no  outward  sign.  The  converted  man  is  one  who  must  have  trembled  in 
himself.  3.  The  state  into  which  such  trembling  conducts  a  sinner.  There  is 
a  close  connection  between  the  "  trembling  "  and  the  "  resting."  Let  the  empire 
of  Satan  be  overthrown,  and  the  empire  of  Christ  is  instantly  set  up.  "The 
kingdom  of  God  is  righteousness  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  And 
must  there  not  be  resting  then  ?     {Henry  MelviU,  B.D.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  Although  the  fig-tree  shall  not  blossom,  &c. —  United  prayer 
for  removal  of  temporal  afflictions  : — We  are  called  in  a  special  manner  to  humble 
ourselves  before  God,  on  account  of  a  great  national  calamity — an  outbreak 
of  cattle  plague.  So  far  as  we  can  see,  it  comes  directly  from  God.  Some  will 
say  that  the  remedy  is  proper  attention  to  the  conditions  of  the  disease,  and 
not  humiliation  or  prayer.  But  shall  we  admit  the  uselessness  of  prayer  ?  Shall 
we  say  prayer  must  be  confined  to  spiritual  things  ?  Siu^ely  we  may  ask  what 
we  need,  "  both  for  the  body  and  the  soul."  We  must  not  ask  God  to  alter  the 
laws  of  nature,  or  work  miracles  for  our  deliverance.  God  does  not  take  away 
a  plague,  either  from  nations  or  from  individuals,  simply  because  they  asked  Him 
to  do  so.  In  relation  to  such  a  plague,  human  endeavour  can  find  appropriate 
spheres,  and  yet  room  be  left  for  prayer.  Our  praying,  and  humbling  ourselves 
before  God,  is  sure  to  do  us  good,  if  we  engage  in  it  with  sincerity  of  heart. 
(0.  G.  Lawrence,  M.A.)  Hard  times  : — It  is  easy  to  understand  how  a  soul 
should,  in  poverty  and  great  straits,  be  induced  to  seek  after  God  ;  indeed,  the 
goad  of  want  more  frequently  drives  men  to  Him  than  the  enjoyment  of  plenty 
draws  them.  There  is  no  doubt  that  if,  in  times  of  want,  either  an  individual  or 
a  nation  desires  to  find  Him,  and  secure  His  help.  He  will  hear  their  prayer  and 
deliver  them.  We  shall  never  get  forward  until  we  see  what  Habakkuk  saw— that 
God  is  our  strength,  and  that  He  will  uphold  us  through  the  trial  by  which  we  shall 
come  into  the  possession  of  our  purer  blessings.  No  experience  is  so  uniform 
among  the  people  of  God,  as  that  they  enjoyed  more  of  the  presence  of  God  in 
their  trouble  than  at  any  other  time.  But  there  is  more  than  the  experience  of 
the  nearness  of  God,  more  than  a  vision  of  His  glory  and  grace.     There  is  deliver- 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

ance  out  of  our  straits.  (J.  P.  Glcdstone.)  Man  facing  calamity  : — This  passage 
sets  down  the  entertainment  which  the  prophet  gave  to  a  sad  prediction.  He 
entertains  it  with  fear,  and  with  faith  and  confidence.  A  sweet  combination. 
These  are  the  two  blessed  entertainments  of  any  threatened  judgment.  A  deep 
humiliation,  and  a  steadfast  faith  and  consolation.  1.  The  supposition.  The 
strength  and  comfort  of  the  creatures  may  fail  us.  In  their  production  and 
breeding  there  is  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty.  And  also  in  their  use.  And  the 
very  being  and  substance  of  these  natural  helps,  carry  with  it  this  condition,  that 
they  are  vanishing  and  fading.  When  scarcity  and  want  come  as  a  judgment 
from  God,  then  it  is  extreme  and  extraordinary,  and  beyond  the  course  of  nature. 
God's  displeasure  oft  breaks  out  in  this  kind  of  judgment.  God  sometimes  vouch- 
safes a  special  exemption  to  His  Church  and  children :  but  the  saints  have  their 
share  and  portion  in  these  calamities  upon  divers  reasons.  The  privileges  of 
God's  people  are  not  temporal,  but  spiritual.  The  saints  are  members  of  those 
societies  and  people  wlio  are  thus  punished.  The  servants  of  God  are  often  con- 
tributors to  the  common  heap  of  sin  that  brings  down  judgments.  2.  The 
resolution.  "  Although,"  forecasts  the  misery.  "  Yet,"  forelays  the  remedy. 
The  piety  of  the  prophet  appears  in  two  degrees.  Here  is  the  low  degree  of  the 
affliction,  and  the  high  degree  of  the  affection.  He  will  suffer  patiently  and 
meekly.  He  will  not  only  be  content  with  it,  he  will  be  well  pleased  with  his 
condition.  He  knows  how  even  to  rejoice  in  affliction.  {Bishop  Brownrigg.) 
The  possibilities  in  the  life  of  a  good  man  : — I.  The  greatest  jiaterial  destitu- 
tion is  possible  to  a  good  man.  It  is  possible  for  the  fig-tree  not  to  blossom,  &c. 
Man  lives  by  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  They  may  fail  from  one  of  two  reasons. 
(1)  From  human  neglect.  It  is  the  eternal  ordination  of  God,  that  what  man 
wants  from  the  earth  for  his  existence  he  must  get  from  it  by  labour — skilful, 
timely,  persevering  labour.  They  may  fail  (2)  From  Divine  visitation.  The 
mighty  Maker  can,  and  sometimes  does  wither  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  destroy 
the  cattle  of  the  fields.  II.  The  highest  spiritual  joy  is  possible  to  a  good  man. 
"  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation."  "  Spiritual 
joy,"  says  Caleb  Morris,  "  is  a  free,  full,  and  overflowing  stream,  that  takes  its 
rise  in  the  very  depth  of  the  Divine  Essence,  in  the  immutability,  perfection, 
abundance,  munificence  of  the  Divine  nature.  While  there  is  a  God,  and  that 
God  is  happy,  there  is  no  necessity  that  there  should  be  any  unhappy  Christians." 
What  is  it  to  "  joy  in  God  "  ?  1.  It  is  the  joy  of  the  highest  contemplation.  The 
joys  of  contemplation  are  amongst  the  most  pure  and  elevating  which  intelligent 
creatures  can  experience.  These  rise  in  the  character  according  to  their  subjects. 
The  highest  subject  is  God,  His  attributes  and  works.  2.  It  is  the  joy  of  the  most 
elevating  friendship.  The  joys  of  friendship  are  amongst  the  chief  joys  of  earth  ; 
but  the  joys  of  friendship  depend  upon  the  purity,  depth,  constancy,  reciprocity 
of  love  ;  and  friendship  with  God  secures  all  this  in  the  highest  degree.  3.  It  is 
the  joy  of  the  sublimest  admiration.  Whatever  the  mind  admires  it  enjoys, 
and  enjoys  in  proportion  to  its  admiration,  whether  it  be  a  landscape  or  a  painting. 
Moral  admiration  is  enjoyment  of  the  highest  kind,  and  this  in  proportion  to  the 
grandness  of  the  character.  Admiration  of  Divine  excellence  is  the  sublimest 
joy.  "  I  will  joy  in  God."  III.  The  highest  spiritual  joy  in  the  midst  of  the 
GREATEST  MATERIAL  DESTITUTION  is  possible  to  a  good  man.  "  Although " 
every  material  blessing  is  gone,  "  I  will  rejoice."  Good  men  have  always  been 
enabled  to  do  so.  Like  Paul  they  have  "  gloried  in  tribulation,"  &c.  All  things 
have  been  theirs.  In  material  destitution  they  folt — 1.  In  God  the}'  had  strength. 
"  The  Lord  God  is  my  strength."  "  As  thy  day,  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 
2.  In  God  they  had  swiftness.  "  He  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet."  The 
reference  is  here  perhaps  to  the  swiftness  with  which  God  would  enable  him  to 
flee  from  the  dangers  which  were  overtaking  his  country.  It  is,  however,  a 
universal  truth,  that  God  gives  to  a  good  man  a  holy  alacrity  in  duty.  Duty  to 
him  is  not  a  clog  or  a  bu.-dcn,  but  a  delight.  3.  In  God  they  had  elevation. 
"  He  will  make  me  to  walk  upon  mine  high  places."  "  They  that  wait  upon 
God  shall  renew  their  strength,  and  shall  mount  as  on  the  wings  of  eagles,"  &c. 
(Homilist.)  Habakkuk's  faith: — I.  The  apprehension  of  great  suffering 
AND  WANT.  Our  apprehensions  concerning  the  future  are  of  a  totally  different 
character  to  the  prophet's.  Ours  are  not  national,  but  personal  and  relative 
afflictions.  II.  The  expression  of  the  prophet's  confidence  and  joy.  Here 
is  a  very  wonderful  exhibition  of  a  devout  and  holy  character.  This  language  of 
hope  and  joy  is  a  striking  contrast  to  three  things — 1.  The  language  and  conduct 


CHAP,  in.]  HABAKKUK.  67 

of  idolaters.  2.  The  low,  dull,  heavy  feeling  of  the  man  who  does  not  believe  in 
the  providential  government  of  God.  3.  The  faint  and  feeble  feelings  of  confidence 
in  God  which  distinguish  many  real  Christians.  (W.  6.  Barrett.)  On  the 
influence  of  religion  under  privations  and  afflictions  : — We  may  learn  that  nothing 
should  withdraw  us  from  our  trust  in  God  and  the  consolations  of  His  Divine 
Word.  I.  Cherish  a  proper  sense  of  the  Divine  providence  and  our  own 
DEPENDENT  STATE.  Perfect  and  unbounded  confidence  in  God,  in  the  wisdom, 
power,  and  mercy  of  God,  must  be  the  ground  of  all  our  religious  hope.    II.  Adjiirb 

THE  CHEERFUL  HOMAGE  OF  THE  PROPHET,  AND  CONSIDER  SOME  OF  THE  PRACTICAL 

USES  OF  ADVERSITY.  1.  Consider  it  as  opening  to  us  a  new  field  of  virtue  and  of 
knowledge.  2.  As  effectually  curing  the  insolence  of  pride  and  the  follies  of 
prosperity.  3.  As  proving  the  sincerity  of  some,  and  lajning  bare  the  treachery 
and  baseness  of  others.  4.  As  teaching  us  to  estimate,  as  we  ought,  the  many 
blessings  which  the  Divine  love  has  showered  upon  us.  (J.  Hewlett,  B.D.) 
The  great  calamity  : — I.  The  Divine  rule  is  to  make  an  abundant  provision 
FOR  man's  PHYSICAL  WANTS.  The  Great  Creator  gives  him  the  fig  tree,  the  vine, 
the  olive,  the  fields,  the  flock,  and  the  herd.  Observe — 1.  The  vastness  of  God's 
wealth.  2.  His  supreme  regard  for  man's  comfort.  II.  The  good  man  recog- 
nises THE  POSSIBILITY  OF  A  TOTAL  FAILURE  IN  THIS  PROVISION.       "  Although  the 

fig  tree,"  &c.     Such  a  failure  is  fearful  to  contemplate.     III.  That  in  the  very  a 


V 


li 


FACE  OF  THIS  GREAT  CALAMITY  THE  GOOD  MAN  TRIUMPHANTLY  CONFIDES  IN  GoD 

"  Yet  will  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord."  The  wisdom  of  this  conduct  is  seen  in  two 
things — 1.  In  the  Divine  immutability.  2.  Great  calamities  afford  scope  for 
the  development  of  great  principles.  Trials,  if  very  heavy,  kill  little  men,  but 
make  great  ones.  Just  as  an  Altantic  billow  bears  the  reeling  ship  aloft,  so  does  ■*' 
the  mighty  wave  of  trouble  lift  to  notice  a  true  son  of  God.  Trials  strengthen 
and  develop  love  and  faith.     IV.  That  this  sublime  confidence  is  exercised 

BY  the  good  man  BECAUSE  HE  HAS  EXPERIENCED  A  GREAT  DELIVERANCE.   "  I  /([ 

will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation."     1.  This  is  a  deliverance  from  the  greatestn^ 
evil.     2.  This  is  a  deliverance  to  the  possession  of  the  greatest  good.     This  man  11 
has  in  him  the  elements  of  immortality.     He   is  a  King's  son,  and  an  heir  ofll 
heaven.     Heaven  is  his  future  residence,  and  the  universe  his  estate.     (Homilist.)  j 
A  daring  faith, : — I.  A  mournful  supposition.     Every  sentence  in  this  verse  is 
pitched  in  the  minor  key.      Every  symbol  is  fringed  with  mourning.     1.  The 
prophet  supposes  a  condition  in  which  he  is  deprived  of  the  common  luxuries  of 
life.     The  Jews  were  a   favoured   people.     God  had  made  special  provision  for 
their  welfare.     But  the  prophet  foresaw  that  He  who  gave  these  possessions  could 
take  them  away.     All  the  agencies  of  nature  and  providence  were  in  God  s  hand. 
2.  The  prophet  supposes  a  condition  in  which  he  will  be  deprived  of  the  common 
necessaries  of  life.     Some  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  are  for  enjoyment,  and  others 
for  our  support.     We  can  do  without  the  former,  we  cannot  do  without  the  latter. 
The  prophet  supposes  a  time  when  not  only  the  luxuries  but  the  necessaries  of 
life  might  fail,  when  the  tree  should  be  without  fruit,  the  fields  without  pasture, 
and  the  stalls  without  herd.     It  is  foolish  to  brood  over  imaginary  troubles,  and   ' 
to  magnify  the  evils  of  life.     Fear  not  only  weakens  our  strength,  but  it  intensifies  , 
owe  misery.     But  it  is  wise  to  consider  how  xmcertain  all  material  possessions 
are,  and  to  fortify  the  heart  against  the  probable  calamities  that  may  overtake 
us.     II.  A  CHEERFUL  RESOLUTION.     "  I  will  rcjoico  in  God."     How  could  there  f 
be  inward  joy  amidst  so  much  outward  sorrow  ?     1.  This  was  a  Divine  joy.  ' 
"  Rejoice  in  God."     There  is  a  great  difference  between  a  human  and  a  Divine 
joy.     One  arises  from  without,  but  the  other  from  within  ;  one  comes  from  the 
freature,  the  other  from  the  Creator.     If  our  joy  depended  upon  our  wealth,  it 
might  fail ;  if  upon  our  friends,  it  might  change  ;  if  upon  our  health,  it  might  be 
broken.     But  it  depends  upon  God,  and  we  know  that  "  He  will  supply  all  our 
need  according  to  His  riches  in  glory,  through  Jesus  Christ."     2.  Tliis  was  an 
experimental  joy.     It  refers  to  the  present,  and  includes  forgiveness,  fellowship, 
and  expectation.     III.  A   delightful   expectation.     "  The  Lord  God  is  my 
strength."     That  is  experience.     "  He  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet."     That 
is  expectancy.     The  Christian  life  is  both  a  service  and  a  hope ;  an  experience 
and  an  expectation.      (J.   T.    Woodhouse.)        Faith  triumphant  in  the  day  of 
calamity : — The  text  exhibits  a  season  of  peculiar  distress,  and  the  exercise  of 
a  gracious  heart  in  the  time  of  calamity.     I.  A  season  of  peculiar  distress. 
I.  Such  seasons  are  effected  by  the  hand  of  God.     He  is  not  a  mere  spectator, 
He  is  the  great  agent  in  bringing  these  things  to  pass.     2.  Such  seasons  are  the 


58  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

consequence  of  man's  sin.  Sin  introduced  this  and  every  other  misery.  3.  Such 
seasons  are  designed  by  Infinite  Wisdom  to  answer  some  important  end.  To 
manifest  His  absolute  right  over  all  creatures  and  things.  He  claims  them  all  aa 
His  own.  And  He  makes  it  manifest  that  they  are  His  own,  by  taking  them 
away  at  His  pleasure.  To  convince  us  of  our  entire  dependence  upon  Him  for 
all  our  temporal  enjoyments.  Without  the  Divine  blessing,  all  men  do  is 
ineffectual.  To  prove  to  us  that  earthly  comforts  are  uncertain  and  perishing. 
The  design  of  God,  in  bestowing  temporal  benefits,  is  to  help  us  through  life,  not 
to  make  us  too  much  in  love  with  it.  To  lead  us  to  the  exercise  of  gratitude, 
when  temporal  blessings  abound,  and  for  the  exercise  of  Christian  graces  in  the 
hearts  of  His  people.  Now  is  the  trial  of  their  faith,  patience,  and  resignation. 
II.  The  exbkcise  of  a  gracious  heart  in  times  of  calamity.  1.  Gracious 
souls  have  a  source  of  joy,  when  those  of  the  ungodly  are  all  dried  up.  2.  This 
rejoicing  in  God,  in  the  midst  of  calamity,  is  the  fruit  of  our  Divine  faith.  If 
the  promises  were  not  believed,  the  soul  would  not  rejoice.  3.  It  is  a  view  of 
the  gracious  character  of  God,  as  a  Saviour,  that  causes  the  sinner  to  rejoice  in 
Him.  Improvements — (1)  God  can  as  easily  take  away  the  whole  of  our  posses- 
sions as  part  of  them.  (2)  You  will  continue  strangers  to  true  happiness,  while 
you  remain  strangers  to  the  spirit  of  the  prophet.  (3)  In  such  seasons  beware 
how  you  endeavour  to  add  to  your  own  enjoyments  at  the  expense  of  any  others' 
comfort.  (4)  Let  the  oppressed  poor  remember  to  whom  vengeance  belongeth. 
(5)  If  you  can  rejoice  in  God,  you  shall  soon  be  in  a  country  where  neither  famine 
nor  scarcity  can  ever  be  experienced.  {T.  Hannam.)  The  triumph  of  piety 
over  adversity  : — Pleasure  and  pain  are  the  alternate  companions  of  every  man 
through  the  journey  of  life.  Surrounded  by  uncertainty,  prudence  would  suggest 
the  propriety  of  being  prepared  for  calamities  which  cannot  be  avoided,  so  aa 
to  contemplate  them  without  alarm,  and  to  bear  them  with  becoming  fortitude. 
Religion  proposes  no  exemption  from  sorrow,  but  promises  that  support  under 
the  troubles  of  life,  which  reconciles  the  mind  to  every  event.  The  prophet's 
anticipation  of  evils  proceeded  not  from  a  melancholy  disposition,  but  was 
intimated  to  him  by  the  sins  of  the  people, — the  complexion  of  the  times, — and 
above  all,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  dwelt  in  him.  I.  The  exposition  of  the 
TEXT.  He  supposes,  in  the  first  instance,  the  fig-tree  to  fail  in  its  accustomed 
produce.  The  failure  of  the  vines  is  the  next  calamity.  Then  the  usual  supply 
of  the  oil-olive  trees  is  cut  off.  Then  the  "  fields  may  yield  no  meat,"  and  as  a 
consequence,  the  "  flocks  may  be  cut  off  from  the  field."  Merciful  God  !  In 
the  midst  of  distress  like  this,  where  shall  the  wretched  flee  ?  The  prophet's 
ardent  soul  breathed  the  trustful  language  of  our  text.  II.  Reflections  sug- 
gested. The  text  reminds  us  of  the  uncertainty  of  temporal  enjoyments,  and 
of  the  peculiar  felicity  of  a  good  man.  The  text  reminds  us  of  the  insecurity  of 
our  temporal  enjoyments,  as  it  respects  the  produce  of  the  earth.|  It  is  the 
privilege  of  good  men  not  to  be  wholly  dependent  for  happiness  upon  temporal 
things.  Joy  in  God  is  the  peculiar  and  the  supreme  delight  of  a  pious  mind. 
Let  us  learn  that  it  is  of  unspeakable  importance  that  we  stand  prepared  for 
trials  which  cannot  be  avoided.  {S.  Lowell. )  Joy  in  the  face  of  adversity  : — 
I.  The  object  of  our  joy.  Our  God  in  whom  we  rejoice.  He  is  Lord.  Jehovah 
is  both  His  name  and  His  description.  He  is  "  God  of  salvation."  He  is  the  God 
of  my  salvation.  Our  joy  is  spiritual  joy ;  it  comprehends  in  its  object  the 
characters  and  offices  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  redemption.  The  essence  of  this  joy  is  complacency  in  its  object. 
The  joy  is  nourished  and  increased  by  the  Spirit,  with  scriptural  discoveries  of 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Clirist.  And  joy  in  the  Lord  God  of  our 
salvation  hath  little  in  it  which  is  vehement,  but  much  that  is  operative  and 
practical.  II.  Forming  resolutions  to  abound  in  this  joy.  Such  resolutions 
have  been  formed.  Such  resolutions  may  be  formed.  Such  resolutions  should 
be  formed.  They  are  always  formed  under  spiritual  influence.  Bold  professions 
are  founded  on  the  revealed  glory  of  God's  faithfulness  and  all-suflSciency,  He  is 
the  Almighty  God,  and  His  faithfulness  is  engaged  to  support  the  people  of  His 
love  and  care.  These  bold  resolutions  look  out  of  countenance  all  the  evils  that 
would  intimidate  and  shake  the  confidence  of  God's  people.  Of  these  bold 
resolutions  we  have  some  eminent  and  illustrious  scriptural  examples.  Such 
resolutions  are  neither  formed  nor  executed  without  a  conflict.  Then  suffer  the 
word  of  exhortation.  Be  not  surprised  that  the  word  is,  "  Rejoice  evermore." 
Nothing  in  the  subject  should  hinder  our  joy.     And  the  honour  of  our  profession 


CHAP,  in.]  HABAKKUK.  69 

calleth  us  to  rejoice.  Attend  to  the  following  instructions — 1.  Be  well  assured 
of  the  solidity  of  the  foundation  on  which  the  joys  of  faith  are  built.  2.  Seek 
to  attain  clearness  concerning  your  interest  in  the  God  of  salvation,  through 
union  with  Christ  in  effectual  calling.  3.  Be  followers  of  that  which  is  good. 
4.  Look  to  the  Lord  in  the  administration  of  providence,  and  submit  to  His  will 
manifested  in  it,  {A,  Shanks.)  Rejoicing  in  Ood : — Mr.  Garrett  preached 
again  in  the  afternoon.  The  text  was  Psalm  cxxviii.  12.  Again  the  preacher 
drew  several  lifelike  pictures.  He  took  his  hearers  to  the  mansion  of  the  rich, 
to  the  study  of  the  learned,  and  to  the  palace  of  royalty,  in  search  of  true  happi- 
ness, but  found  it  not.  Then  we  were  conducted  to  a  little  straw-thatched  cottage, 
the  lowly  home  of  a  humble  Christian  toiler,  who  had  a  sick  wife  and  child  and 
no  work  to  do.  As  we  approached  it,  the  preacher  paused  and  cried,  "  Hark  ! 
he  is  singing.  What  is  it  ?  "  Just  before  we  reached  the  cottage  door,  the 
preacher  again  cried,  "  Hark  !  "  We  listened,  and  heard  the  verse  beginning, 
'  I'll  praise  my  Maker  while  I've  breath."  The  effect  was  simply  overpowering. 
{Memoir  of  Rev.  C.  Garrett.)  Constant  joy  : — Bishop  Tucker,  on  the  occasion 
of  his  recent  visit  to  Toro,  ordained  a  native  of  Uganda  who  has  worked  for  five 
years  on  the  edge  of  the  great  pigmy  forest.  "  This  remarkable  man,"  says  the 
bishop,  '*  has  been  beaten,  imprisoned,  put  in  the  chain  gang,  had  his  house  burnt 
down,  and  all  his  property  destroyed ;  and  yet  he  has  borne  it  all  with  a  smile 
upon  hia  face  and  a  song  upon  his  lips  !  "  Opalescent  men  : — In  ancient  times, 
before  men  learned  how  to  cut  the  diamond,  the  opal  was  the  most  fashionable 
stone,  most  highly  prized,  and  most  costly.  There  are  not  lacking  men  in  modem 
times  who  still  hold  to  this  ancient  estimate  of  that  beautiful  stone.  No  jewel, 
in  all  the  range  of  precious  stones,  displays  a  finer  range  of  splendid  colours — 
the  brightest  tints  of  the  rainbow,  softened  as  if  seen  through  a  silver  haze.  As 
you  look  at  it  from  different  angles,  or  as  you  turn  the  stone,  there  come  glimpses 
of  the  richest  azure,  the  deepest  emerald,  the  most  fiery  ruby,  yet  all  of  them 
mellowed  by  the  opal's  own  charm,  and  very  different  from  the  dazzling  bril- 
liancy of  the  diamond  and  sapphire.  Whence  comes  this  beautiful  play  of  colour 
that  takes  its  name  from  the  opal,  and  is  called  "  opalescence  "  ?  It  is  not  in 
the  stone.  Hold  the  opal  up  to  the  light,  and  it  has  nothing  but  a  yellowish 
tinge.  Besides,  the  colours  shift  and  vary,  as  the  stone  is  changed  in  position. 
Let  me  tell  you  the  secret  of  the  opal's  beauty.  The  stone  is  filled  with  fissures — 
minute  rifts  in  its  substance,  too  small  to  be  seen  by  the  eye,  yet  not  too  fine  to 
be  seen  by  the  light.  These  fissures  catch  up  the  light,  beat  it  back  and  forth 
between  their  sides,  and  break  it  up  into  its  constituent  colours,  very  much  as  a 
prism  would  do.  And  so  the  stone,  out  of  what  might  seem  to  be  a  flaw  or 
blemish,  draws  its  wonderful  crown  of  beauty.  Have  you  ever  seen  opalescent 
men  and  women  ?  They  are  all  around  you,  shining  with  loveliness  in  many  a 
Christian  home.  They  are  men  and  women  whose  lives  are  fissured  with  poverty, 
seamed  with  sickness,  cleft  with  some  deformity,  shattered  by  blindness,  or  deaf- 
ness, or  ugliness ;  and  yet  these  opalescent  Christians  make  the  very  shattering 
of  their  body,  and  the  flaws  in  their  fortune,  a  trap  for  God's  sunlight.  They 
catch  in  these  clefts  of  misfortune  the  rays  that  come  from  heaven.  They  toss 
them  back  and  forth  and  from  side  to  side  of  their  seamed  and  fissured  lives, 
and  lo !  we  see  them  glowing  with  a  beauty  far  more  wonderful  than  any  opal  of 
earth,  or  any  rainbow  of  heaven.  {Amos  B.  Wells.)  Satisfied  with  the  best : — 
"  I  was  going  down  town  in  a  car,  one  day,"  says  a  New  York  merchant,  "  when 
I  heard  somebody  cry  out,  '  Hallo,  Mr.  Conductor,  please  stop  your  car  a  moment ; 
I  can't  run  very  fast.'  The  car  stopped,  and  presently  there  hobbled  into  it  a 
little  lame  boy,  about  ten  or  twelve  years  old.  His  face  told  such  a  tale  of  suffer- 
ing, and  yet  he  was  bright  and  cheerful.  He  put  his  crutch  behind  him,  and 
placing  his  leg  in  an  easier  position,  he  began  to  look  round.  A  happy  smile 
played  over  his  pale  face,  and  he  seemed  to  take  notice  of  everything.  Presently 
I  got  a  seat  next  to  him,  and  had  a  little  talk  with  him.  I  found  that  he  knew 
and  loved  the  Saviour,  and  it  was  this  which  made  him  so  contented  and  cheerful. 
He  told  me  that  the  doctor  said  his  leg  would  never  be  any  better.  '  Well,  my  dear 
boy,'  I  said,  *  how  can  you  be  so  happy  and  cheerful  ?  '  His  reply  was,  '  Jesus, 
my  Saviour,  has  sent  this  trial  for  me  to  bear.  Father  tells  me  He  would  not 
have  sent  it,  imless  He  knew  it  would  be  best  for  me.  And  don't  you  think,  sir, 
that  I  ought  to  be  satisfied  with  the  best  ?  '  When  I  said  good-bye  to  the  boy, 
I  thanked  him  for  the  lesson  he  had  taught  me,  which  I  shall  never  forget." 
Yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord. — Joy  in  being  in  God's  hands : — The  prophet 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

teaches   us    what   advantage    it    is    to    the    faithful    assembly,    seasonably   to 
submit  to  God,  and   to  entertain   serious   fear  when   He   threatens  them,  and 
when  He  summonses  them  to  judgment :  and  he  shows  that,  though  they  may 
perish  a  hundred  times,  they  yet  would  not  perish,  for  the  Lord  would  ever  supply 
them  with  occasions  of  joy,  and  would  also  cherish  this  joy  within,  so  as  to  enable 
them  to  rise  above  all  their  adversities.     Though  the  land  was  threatened  with 
famine,  and  though  no  food  would  be  supplied  to  them,  they  would  yet  be  able 
always  to  rejoice  in  the  God  of  their  salvation  ;  for  they  would  know  Him  to  be 
their  Father,  though  for  a  time  He  severely  chastised  them.     We  now  perceive 
more  clearly,  that  the  sorrow  produced  by  the  sense  of  our  guilt  is  recommended 
to  us  on  account  of  its  advantage  :  for  nothing  is  worse  than  to  provoke  God's 
wrath  to  destroy  us  ;  and  nothing  is  better  than  to  anticipate  it,  so  that  the 
Lord   Himself  may  comfort  us.      We   shall  not  always   escape,   for  He   may 
apparently  treat  us  with  severity  ;  but  though  we  may  not  be  exempt  from 
punishment.  He  will  give  us  reasons  to  rejoice  ;  and  then  in  His  own  time.  He 
will  mitigate  His  severity,  and  by  the  effects  will  show  Himself  propitious  to  us. 
During  the  time  when  want  or  famine,  or  any  other  affliction  is  to  be  borne, 
He  will  render  us  joyful  with  this  one  consolation,  for  rel3dng  on  His  promises, 
we  shall  look  for  Him  as  the  God  of  our  salvation.     We  may  hence  gather  a  most 
useful  lesson, — That  whenever  signs  of  God's  wrath  meet  us  in  outward  things, 
this  remedy  remains  to  us, — to   consider  what  God  is  to  us  inwardly ;  for  the 
inward  joy,  which  faith  brings  to  us,  can  overcome  all  fears,  terrors,  sorrows, 
and   anxieties.     (John  Calvin. )        Religion  the  secret  of  contentment  : — There  is 
nothing  here  of  the  exuberance  of  Oriental  imagination.     It  is  absolute  matter  of 
fact,  capable  of  being  proved  by  countless  witnesses.     Various  lessons  are  to  be 
drawn  from  it,  but  the  most  valuable  of  all  for  these  times  is  the  overwhelming 
testimony  bo-ne  by  it  to  the  religious  nature  of  man,  and  to  the  high  degree  of 
probabihty  of  the  existence  of  a  God  of  love  who  can  inspire  such  absolute  trust 
in  Himself  under  the  most  crushing  temporal  misfortune.     It  places  the  efforts 
to  uproot  all  faith  in  God  in  the  light  of  an  inexpressible  folly,  not  to  say  of 
a  flagrant  crime.     Is  it  not  folly  to  take  away  from  any  man  the  power  by  which 
he  becomes  able  to  behave  in  a  more  manly  way  than  he  could  have  done  without 
it  ?     Viewed  even  from  atheistic  ground,  mankind  at  large  are  all  the  better  for 
the  calm  and  resigned  behaviour  of  those  who  suffer  adversity.     We  go  further, 
and  say,  it  verges  closely  on  criminal  blindness  to  the  interests  of  humanity  to 
proclaim  an  atheism  which,  if  accepted,  would  leave  the  souls  of  the  afflicted 
absolutely  without  anything  to  cling  to,  without  consolation,   without  hope ; 
worse  still,  to  deprive  them  of  that  conviction  by  which  all  the  nobler  part  of  their 
nature  is  sustained  and  called  into  vigorous  exercise.     How  shall  we  bear  the 
storm  of  adversity  when  it  breaks  upon  us  ?     Shall  we  prove  our  sovereignty 
over  things  of  time  and  sense,  or  shall  we  disclose  ovir  shame  in  exhibiting  our- 
selves as  their  slaves  ?     The  alternative  depends  upon  what  is  the  ground  of  our 
daily  hopes.     Not  in  Stoicism  is  to  be  found  the  normal  type  of  manliness  under 
adversity.     Contentment  is  a  virtue  of  soul  which,  when  healthy,  exercises  itself 
in  various  ways.     A  great  deal  of  so-called  contentment  is  nothing  more  than 
physical  indifference  or  mental  inactivity.     Habit  is  the  parent  of  such  content- 
ment, and  where  the  habits  have  been  always  moderate  and  temperate,  content- 
ment with  a  small  portion  is  easy  and  natural.     But  the  virtue  of  contentment 
is  something  much  higher  than  this.     Virtue  is  always  active  ;  when  it  is  passive 
it  ceases  to  be  virtue,  and  becomes  only  an  admirable  quality,  or  enviable  habit. 
Contentment,  to  be  viituous,  must  spring  from  opposition  to  our  wills  and  desires, 
can  only  exist  in  circumstances  which  are  trjdng  and  painful.     It  is  oiur  task  to 
show  how  certain  virtues  can  best  be  attained  by  those  who  are  deficient  in  them, 
to  point  out  by  what  spiritual  forces  the  native  weakness  of  our  nature  may  be 
justified,  and  what  relation  true  religious  faith  bears  to  the  necessities  of  our  lot, 
and  the  exigencies  of  our  moral  character.     I  would  show,  if  I  could,  whence 
the  blessed  springs  of  virtue  can  be  drawTi  ;  to  whom  we  may  look  for  the  light 
and  warmth  needful  for  its  birth  and  fertility.     If  a  discontented  man  would  fain 
possess  the  virtue  of  contentment,  he  will  never  get  it  by  altering  the  conditions 
of  his  lot,  but  by  the  elevation  of  his  soul  above  them,  by  finding,  in  a  will 
higher  than  his  own,  complete  and  boundless  satisfaction.   This  virtue  is  largely 
begotten   and   cultured  by  faith  in  the  living  God.     But  what  is  this  faith  in 
the  living  God  ?     It  is  not  merely  the  assent  of  our  intellect  to  certain  proposi- 
tions about  God,  though  it  must  be  such  as  the  reason  entirely  endorses.     Firsts 


CHAP,  in.]  HABAKKUK.  61 

it  implies  the  possession  of  a  soul  which  cannot  be  satisfied  with  earthly  good 
or  animal  pleasure.  He  who  believes  in  God  has  a  life  of  conscious  existence, 
of  hopes,  and  fears,  and  appetites,  which  find  activity  and  satisfaction  in  a  purely 
spiritual  region  of  its  own.  To  such  a  soul  God  is  not  less  a  reality  than  the 
earth  on  which  the  body  treads,  or  the  sun  shining  in  the  heavens.  Out  of  this 
conscious  communion  with  God  grow  two  important  constituents  of  faith — 
perfect  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will,  and  a  supreme  desire  to  obey  its  behests. 
The  former  of  these  is  the  essence  of  contentment.  It  differs  by  a  whole  heaven 
from  the  contentment  of  the  fatalist.  No  supreme  power  has  a  right  to  demand 
the  assent  of  man  to  wrongs  and  injuries  which  are  the  result  of  blind  chance,  or 
inflicted  by  caprice,  still  less  to  wrongs  which  will  not  issue  in  final  good.  But 
how  different  must  be  the  feeling  and  conduct  of  man,  when  the  power  which 
seems  to  crush  him  is  invested  with  all  the  attributes  of  justice  and  fatherly 
love.  He  promptly  surrenders,  because  he  knows,  at  least,  that  there  is  a  higher 
wisdom  than  his  own  which  guides  the  forces  of  pain  and  destruction  ;  more 
perfect  goodness  than  his  own  is  the  cause  of  misfortune,  and  best  of  all,  that  a 
love  infinite  in  its  benevolence,  is  the  impulse  from  which  every  motion  in  the 
universe  has  sprung.  This  is  faith ;  to  see  what  is  invisible  to  the  senses,  or  to 
the  immatiure  mind.  God  does  not  wish  us  to  bear  a  single  sorrow  that  we  can 
by  righteous  means  avert ;  all  He  asks  is  that  we  will  trust  in  His  wisdom  and 
greater  love  when  trouble  comes  which  we  cannot  prevent.  And  if  faith  con- 
soles us,  still  more  does  it  purify  and  refine  us.  {Charles  Voysey.)  Joy  in 
God  : — Worldly  men  do  not  rejoice  in  God.  I.  JoY  in  God  is  well  grotjnded. 
1.  Because  it  is  a  joy  in  God  considered  as  the  God  of  salvation.  If  a  man  were 
found  joying  in  an  absolute  God,  he  might  well  be  esteemed  foolish  ;  for  he  would 
be  rejoicing  in  the  contemplation  of  a  strong  and  irresistible  enemy.  It  is  in 
the  God  of  salvation  that  the  believer  greatly  rejoices.  There  is  the  best  of  all 
reasons  for  holy  satisfaction.  He  perceives  in  Him  justice  satisfied,  and  truth 
magnified ;  he  discerns  that,  instead  of  fury,  there  is  overflowing  love,  and 
mercy  to  pardon  all  his  transgressions  ;  he  sees  in  Him  omnipotent  power,  not 
armed  for  his  perdition,  but  engaged  to  preserve  his  soul  through  faith  unto 
salvation  ;  he  beholds  eternal  faithfulness  to  be  to  him  a  shield  and  buckler  ;  he 
perceives  also,  that  God  is  omniscient  to  see  all  the  dangers  which  may  threaten 
him,  and  aU-powerful  to  protect  in  every  case.  Who  is  the  God  of  salvation  ? 
The  Triune  God,  the  one  God  subsisting  in  three  persons.  2.  Joy  in  God  is  well 
grounded,  because  God  is  on  the  side  of  the  believer.  This  was  not  always  the  case. 
Since  he  has  been  justified  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  there  is  no  longer  any  condemna- 
tion for  him.  If  God  acquits,  who  shall  condemn  ?  If  God  defends,  who  can 
injure  ?  3.  Joy  in  God  is  well  grounded,  because  of  what  Grod  has  done  for  the 
believer.  Do  we  not  delight  in  a  deliverer  ?  Here  is  an  unspeakably  great 
Deliverer ;  and  has  He  been  so  at  little  expense  ?  Following  the  great  deliverance 
are  many  lesser  deliverances ;  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  4.  Joy  in  God  is 
well  grounded,  because  of  what  God  is  now  doing  for  the  believer.  Do  we  not 
rejoice  in  a  healer  ?  5.  Joy  in  God  is  well  grounded,  because  of  what  God  will 
yet  do  for  His  people.  He  will  make  all  things  work  together  for  their  good. 
6.  Joy  is  well  grounded,  on  account  of  what  God  has  provided  for  the  believer, 
and  on  account  of  what  He  is  to  the  believer.  He  has  righteousness  in  Him,  and 
also  strength,  counsel,  provision,  and  promises.  And  He  is  the  portion  of  the 
believer ;  a  sure  portion ;  an  enduring  portion ;  a  never-failing  portion ;  an 
unchangeable  portion ;  and  a  satisfying  portion.  II.  To  point  out  some  pro- 
perties OF  JOY  IN  God.  1.  It  is  a  supernatural  joy.  It  springs  not  from  the 
world,  but  is  derived  from  above.  2.  It  is  a  real  joy.  Earthly  joys  have  no 
substance.  They  cause  a  momentary  flow  of  spirits,  but  they  only  skim  the 
surface  of  the  heart,  and  do  not  take  full  possession  of  it.  There  are  degrees  in 
the  Christian's  joy.  3.  It  is  a  joy  which  this  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away. 
4.  It  is  a  joy  which  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  5.  It  is  an  everlasting  joy. 
In  consideration  of  the  nature  and  grounds  of  joy  in  God,  we  invite  believers  to 
lift  up  the  hands  that  hang  down.  Be  not  cast  down  on  account  of  the  trials 
of  life.  (A.  Ross,  M.A.)  Religious  joy  surmounting  temporal  adversity  : — That 
the  world  is  insufficient  for  our  happiness,  who  does  not  confess,  or,  at  least,  who 
does  not  feel  ?  The  insufficiency  of  external  objects  to  furnish  the  soul  with 
rational  fruition  or  exercise,  is  demonstrated  in  the  disappointment  of  those 
who  have  made  the  acquisition  of  those  objects  the  chief  study  of  their  lives. 
Were  they  ever  content  ?     Things  earthly  are  too  fluctuat  ng  to  be  built  on  with 


62  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

assurance.  They  want  stability,  and  leave  those  who  rely  on  them,  in  a  little 
while,  destitute  and  spoiled  of  peace.  The  Christian  has  something  more  solid 
and  unchanging  on  which  his  soul  reposes.  Let  none  imagine  that  these  senti- 
ments were  peculiar  to  Habakkuk,  or  may  be  entertained  only  by  an  eminent  few 
among  the  saints ;  by  prophets,  apostles,  or  men  favoured  with  special  distinc- 
tions from  above  ;  for  there  is  not  a  reconciled  sinner  at  this  day  upon  earth, 
who,  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  love,  and  hope,  may  not  and  will  not  cherish  and 
express  sentiments  essentially  similar.  Ye  on  earth  who  have  known  the  Lord, 
fail  not  to  exercise  your  souls  in  the  same  way  as  the  prophet.  (J.  Sieveright, 
A.M.)  Joy  amidst  earthly  sorrow: — The  sentiment  is — That  no  extremity 
of  earthly  sorrow  should  prevent  the  Christian  rejoicing  in  the  God  of  his  salva- 
tion. 1.  There  is  implied  in  the  adoption  of  this  truth,  a  firm  belief  in  the  super- 
intending providence  of  God.  Could  we  set  aside  the  doctrine  of  a  particular 
providence,  the  circumstances  of  life  would  change  their  character.  Affliction 
would  double  her  sorrows,  and  prosperity  lose  half  her  joys.  2.  There  is  also 
implied  a  well-founded  hope  of  interest  in  the  God  of  salvation.  The  doctrine 
of  providence  would  be  a  poor  substitute  to  perishing  sinners  for  the  grace  of 
the  Gospel.  Why  should  the  Christian  rejoice  in  God  under  affliction  ?  It  is 
not  necessary  to  rob  the  world  of  any  of  its  beauty,  or  to  disparage  the  happiness 
it  is  capable  of  communicating.  But  it  is  the  nature  of  riches  to  take  to  them- 
selves wings  and  flee  away.  1.  Consider  the  sanctifying  tendency  of  afflictions. 
Sometimes  they  are  sent  for  the  purposes  of  trial ;  to  prove  the  integrity  of  our 
principles,  and  to  bring  into  exercise  our  latent  virtues.  But  for  the  most  part 
afflictions  are  corrective,  and  not  for  purposes  of  discipline.  They  are  either 
to  preserve  or  to  extricate  you  from  danger.  2.  Affliction  does  not  injuriously 
affect  our  best  interests.  We  live  for  a  higher  and  nobler  object  than  worldly 
wealth.  3.  The  Christian  may  rejoice  because  he  knows  his  afflictions  will  have 
a  happy  issue.  The  transitory  character  of  suffering  is  powerfully  calculated 
to  sustain  the  mind  under  it.  4.  In  every  conceivable  extremity  of  woe,  God  is 
an  all-sufficient  portion.  The  enjoyment  of  God  will  constitute  the  happiness 
of  heaven.  5.  The  joy  of  the  Christian  in  the  season  of  affliction  is  the  fruit  of 
the  Saviour's  mediation.  It  was  in  the  God  of  salvation  that  Habakkuk  rejoiced. 
It  is  only  in  this  character  that  He  is  an  object  of  confidence  and  joy  to  us.  The 
mediation  of  Christ  is  the  ground  of  our  hope  towards  God.  But  for  His  inter- 
position, afflictions  would  have  been  unmixed  evils.  They  would  have  possessed 
no  ingredient  of  mercy,  nor  given  any  indication  of  kindness.  (S.  Summers.) 
Spiritual  joy : — Spiritual  joy  does  not  consist  in  mere  placidity  ;  it  is  not  like 
the  water,  which  in  fertilising  showers  descends,  and  does  not  depend  on  our 
volition  or  agency ;  but  it  is  like  the  water  we  draw  from  the  well,  there  must  be 
activity  and  labour.  There  can  be  no  happiness  without  thought.  Habakkuk 
thought  of  God,  of  His  nature.  His  moral  perfections.  His  covenant.  His  promise  ; 
he  not  only  thought  of  God  generally,  but  in  the  particular  relation  which  He 
sustained  to  him.  "  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation."  I  understand  Him  in 
some  measure,  I  feel  an  interest  in  Him  and  He  in  me.  The  mere  fact  of  the 
existence  or  benevolence  of  God  cannot  make  any  creature  happy ;  it  is  the 
conviction,  the  intelligent,  deeply  rooted,  legitimate  conclusion  that  He  is  our  God, 
can  produce  joy.  This  was  the  case  with  Habakkuk,  and  must  be  so  with  every 
true  believer.  I.  True  religion  [i.e.,  its  doctrines,  prospects,  emotions)  does 
IMPART  JOY.  Because — 1.  True  religion  gives  decision  to  the  mind.  Indecision 
or  dubiousness  is  always  painful,  and  painful  in  exact  correspondence  to  the 
value  of  the  object  to  which  it  refers.  2.  True  religion  imparts  true  liberty  to 
the  mind.  While  bodily  bondage  is  a  great  evil,  spiritual  bondage  is  great«r ; 
religion  alone  imparts  to  man  the  charter  of  freedom — the  moment  man  receives 
true  freedom  he  is  happy,  and  not  before.  (I)  Freedom  from  eternal  punishment. 
When  we  are  brought  under  the  influence  of  religion,  we  are  led  first  to  perceive 
our  liability  to  it,  and  then  to  accept  of  deliverance  through  Christ.  (2)  Freedom 
from  the  government  of  depravity.  The  moment  a  man  feels  that  he  is  dependent 
for  happiness  upon  God,  he  feels  desirous  to  know,  love,  and  please  that  Being. 
(3)  Freedom  from  the  evils  of  affliction.  Afflictions  in  themselves  are  evil,  they 
make  a  man  morose,  unkind,  bitter,  despairing,  devilish :  it  is  only  when  applied 
by  God  that  they  become  useful  to  the  believer's  mind.  3.  True  religion  imparts 
exercise  and  expectation  to  the  mind.  In  order  to  be  happy,  there  must  be 
a  right  end  in  view — the  glory  of  God  ;  proper  rule  to  guide— the  Bible  ;  and 
right  motives  to  actuate — love  to  God  and  love  to  men.     II.  The  nature  or 


CHAP,  m.]  HABAKKUK.  63 

THIS  JOY.  1.  It  is  always  pure.  When  does  the  soul  experience  it  7  Only  when 
it  is  pure.  This  is  a  question  not  only  of  facts  but  of  degrees  ;  not  only  the  pure 
mind  can  be  happy,  but  it  is  happy  in  exact  proportion  to  its  purity.  When  is 
it  enjoyed  ?  When  the  soul  is  raised  to  contemplate  holy  objects.  2.  It  is 
personal  and  progressive.  It  is  secret,  "  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord  " ;  and  when 
seen,  seen  only  in  its  effects.  {Caleb  Morris. )  Rejoicing  in  God  : — The  language 
is  that  of  faith,  hope,  patience,  and  fortitude.  I.  The  nature  of  the  Cheistian's 
JOY.  1.  It  is  spiritual.  Arising  from  saving  knowledge  of  God  :  from  pardon : 
from  adoption :  from  the  habitual  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  It  is  satis- 
fying. The  Almighty  is  suited  to  our  capacities  ;  adequate  to  our  necessity ; 
durable  as  oiu-  existence.  II.  The  object  of  the  Christian's  rejoicing.  1.  In 
the  perfection  of  His  nature,  we  rejoice  in  God.  2.  In  His  works  of  creation, 
providence,   and  grace.     3.   In   His   Word.     4.   In    His    ordinances.     III.   Thh 

FARTICTTLAR  SEASONS  WHEN  A  TBtTE  CHRISTIAN  CAN  REJOICE  IN  THE  LORD.       1.  In 

seasons  of  poverty.     2.   In  seasons  of  persecution.     3.  In  seasons  of  national 

commotion.     4.   In  the  season  of  death.     (Homilist.)        The  prophet's  joy : 

1.  The  sombre  background  from  which  the  joy  of  the  prophet  sprang.  2.  The 
sublime  height  to  which  the  joy  of  the  prophet  leaped.  Habakkuk  supposes 
the  loss  of  all  things,  and  yet  he  had  unwavering  faith  in  God,  and  supreme  love 
to  God.  (1)  We  may  rejoice  in  the  works  of  God's  hand.  (2)  In  the  bounties 
of  His  providence.  (3)  In  the  amenities  of  society.  But  the  highest  joy  we  can 
know  is  to  "  joy  in  the  Lord."  His  loving-kindness  is  better  than  life.  {Ibid.) 
Christian  rejoicing  : — 1.  The  conditions.  "  Yet."  In  spite  of  what  verse  17 
describes — apparent  failure  of  our  efforts  for  God,  or  apparent  desolation  of  His 
cause  around  us.  Deep  reality  of  such  trials.  Success  is  to  be  sought  and  prayed 
for  ;  we  are  not  to  ask  for  the  discipline  of  failure.  But  it  may  come,  and  in  one 
degree  or  another  it  will,  in  every  deep  Christian  experience,  whether  as  personal 
failure  or  as  a  sense  of  surrounding  failure.  On  its  external  side  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ's  work  partook  of  the  pain  of  failure.  2.  The  resolve.  "  I  will 
rejoice  in  the  Lord."  The  will  is  called  up.  Believers  "  will  to  do  His  will " 
only  by  His  special  grace  preventing  them ;  but  they  do  really  will,  the  act  of 
willing  is  their  own.  We  must  not  sit  down  passive,  and  wait  for  a  sensible  im- 
pulse. It  will  come  through  our  own  will  when  it  comes.  Let  us,  in  this  spirit, 
cultivate  the  habit  of  holy  resolves,  as  well  as  holy  desires.  It  is  the  joy  of  per- 
sonal appropriation,  of  objective  pardon  and  peace — "  my  salvation."  Comp. 
Micah  vii.  7  for  a  rich  parallel.  The  soul,  outwardly  tried  and  tired,  goes  to  Him 
who  is  "  my  hiding-place,"  and  there  is  "  compassed  about  with  songs  of  deliver- 
ance "  (Psalm  xxxii.  7).  3.  The  result.  Not  selfish  sloth.  Some  say  "  per- 
sonal enjoyment  of  present  salvation  is  selfish."  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  spring 
of  deepest  sympathy  with  souls,  and  of  love-animated  efforts  for  them.  Personal 
joy  "compels  affectionate  work.  {Handley  C.  G.  Movie,  M.A.)  Cheerful 
spirits  : — A  woman  who  had  had  many  sorrows  and  heaA^y  burdens  to  bear,  but 
who  was  noted  for  her  cheerful  spirits,  once  said  in  explanation :  "  You  know,  I 
have  had  no  money.  I  had  nothing  I  could  give  but  myself,  and  so  I  made  the 
resolution  that  I  would  never  sadden  anyone  else  with  my  troubles.  I  have 
laughed  and  told  jokes  when  I  could  have  wept.  I  have  always  smiled  in  the 
face  of  every  misfortune.  I  have  tried  never  to  let  anyone  go  from  my  presence 
without  a  happy  word  or  a  bright  thought  to  carry  with  them.  And  happiness 
makes  happiness.  I  myself  am  happier  than  I  would  have  been  had  I  sat  down 
and  bemoaned  my  fate."  Cheerfulness : — Cheerfulness  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  others. 
There  is  an  old  tradition  that  a  cup  of  gold  is  to  be  found  wherever  a  rainbow 
touches  the  earth,  and  there  are  some  people  whose  smile,  the  sound  of  whose 
voice,  whose  very  presence,  seems  like  a  ray  of  sunshine,  to  turn  everything  they 
touch  into  gold.  Men  never  break  down  as  long  as  they  can  keep  cheerful. 
"  A  merry  heart  is  a  continual  feast  to  others  besides  itself."  The  shadow  of 
Florence  Nightingale  cured  more  than  her  medicmes  ;  and  if  we  share  the  burdens 
of  others,  we  lighten  our  own.     {Sir  John  Lubbock.) 

Ver.  19.  The  Lord  God  is  my  atrength,  and  He  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds* 
feeXh— -Strength,  buoyancy,  elevation : — The  expressions  are  of  a  highly  metaphorical 
and  imaginative  character,  but  they  admit  of  being  brought  down  to  very  plain 
facts,  and  they  tell  us  the  results  in  heart  and  mind  of  true  faith  and  communion 
with  God.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  a  parallel  saying,  almost  verbatim,  the  same 
as  that  of  my  text,  occurs  in  the  18th  Psalm.    I  note  that  the  three  clauses  of  our 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

text  present  three  aspects  of  what  our  lives  and  ourselves  may  steadfastly  be  if  we, 
too,  will  rejoice  in  the  God  of  our  salvation.  First,  such  communion  with  God 
brings — I.  God  to  a  man  fob  his  strength.  The  18th  Psalm  gives  a  somewhat 
different  and  inferior  version  of  that  thought  when  it  says,  "  It  is  the  Lord  that 
girdeth  me  with  strength."     But  Habakkuk,  though  perhaps  he  could  not  have 

Eut  into  dogmatic  shape  all  that  he  meant,  had  come  further  than  that,  "  The 
ord  is  my  strength."  He  not  only  gives,  as  one  might  put  a  coin  into  the  hand 
of  a  beggar,  while  standing  separate  from  him  all  the  while,  but  "  the  Lord  is 
my  strength."  And  what  does  that  mean  ?  It  is  an  anticipation  of  that  most 
wonderful  and  highest  of  all  the  New  Testament  truths  which  the  Apostle  declared 
when  he  said  :  "  I  can  do  all  things  in  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me  within." 
"  My  grace  is  sufiScient  for  thee,  and  My  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness." 
Ah  !  do  not  let  us  deprive  ourselves  of  the  lofty  consolations  and  the  mysterious 
influx  of  power  which  may  be  ours.  That  is  the  first  blessing  that  this  ancient 
believer,  out  of  the  twilight  of  early  revelation,  felt  as  certain  to  come  through 
communion  with  God.  The  second  is  like  unto  it.  Such  rejoicing  communion 
with  God  will  give — II.  Light-footedness  in  the  path  of  life.  "  He  makes  my 
feet  like  hinds'  feet."  The  stag,  in  aU  languages  spoken  by  people  that  have 
ever  seen  it,  is  the  very  emblem  of  elastic,  springing  ease,  of  light  and  bounding 
gracefulness,  that  clears  every  obstacle,  and  sweeps  swiftly  over  the  moor.  And 
when  this  singer,  or  his  brother  psalmist  in  the  other  psalm  that  we  have  referred 
to,  says  "  Thou  makest  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet,"  what  he  is  thinking  about  is 
that  light  and  easy,  springing,  elastic  gait,  that  swiftness  of  advance.  What  a 
contrast  that  is  to  the  way  in  which  most  of  us  get  through  our  day's  work  !  The 
monotony  of  trivial,  constantly  recurring  doings,  the  fluctuations  in  the  ther- 
mometer of  our  own  spirits  ;  the  stiff  bits  of  road  that  we  have  all  to  encounter 
sooner  or  later  ;  and,  as  days  go  on,  the  diminishing  buoyancy  of  natvu-e,  and  the 
love  of  walking  a  little  slower  than  we  used  to  do ;  we  all  know  these  things, 
and  our  gait  is  affected  by  them.  It  is  the  same  thought,  under  a  somewhat 
different  garb,  which  the  apostle  has  when  he  tells  us  that  the  Christian  soldier 
ought  to  have  his  "  feet  shod  with  the  alacrity  that  comes  from  the  Gospel  of 
peace."  We  are  to  be  always  ready  to  riui,  and  to  run  with  light  hearts  when 
we  do.  That  is  a  possible  result  of  Christian  communion,  and  ought,  far  more 
than  it  is,  to  be  an  achieved  reality  with  each  of  us.  Of  course,  physical  conditions 
vary.  Of  course,  our  spirits  go  up  and  down.  Of  course,  the  work  that  we  have 
to  do  one  day  seems  easier  than  the  same  work  does  another.  Unless  that  is 
true,  that  Christianity  gives  to  a  man  the  Divine  gladness  which  makes  him  ready 
for  work,  I  do  not  know  what  is  the  good  of  hi.?  Christianity  to  him.  But  not 
only  is  that  so,  but  this  same  communion  with  God,  which  is  the  opening  of  the 
heart  for  the  influx  of  the  Divine  power,  brings  to  bear  upon  all  our  work  new 
motives  which  redeem  it  from  being  oppressive,  tedious,  monotonous,  trivial,  too 
much  for  our  endurance,  or  too  little  for  our  effort.  All  work  that  is  not  done 
in  fellowship  with  Jesus  Christ  tends  to  become  either  too  heavy  to  be  tackled 
successfully,  or  too  trivial  to  demand  oiu:  best  energies  ;  and  in  either  case  will 
be  done  perfunctorily,  and,  as  the  days  go  on,  mechanically  and  wearisomely, 
as  a  grind  and  a  plod.  If  we  live  in  daily  communion  with  God,  another  thought, 
too,  will  come  in,  which  will,  in  like  manner,  make  us  ready  "  to  run  with  "  cheer- 
fulness "  the  race  that  is  set  before  us."  We  shall  connect  everything  that  befalls 
us,  and  everything  that  we  have  to  do,  with  the  final  issue,  and  life  will  become 
solemn,  grave,  and  blessed,  because  it  is  the  outer  court  and  vestibule  of  the 
eternal  life  with  God  in  Christ.  The  last  of  the  thoughts  here  is,  communion 
with  God  brings — III.  Elevation.  "  He  will  make  me  to  walk  upon  my  high 
places."  One  sees  the  herd  on  the  skyline  of  the  mountain  ridge,  and  at  home 
up  there,  far  above  dangers  and  attack ;  able  to  keep  their  footing  on  cliff  and 
precipice,  and  tossing  their  antlers  in  the  pure  air.  One  wave  of  the  hand,  and 
they  are  miles  away.  "  He  sets  me  upon  my  high  places."  Communion  with 
God  does  not  only  help  us  to  plod  and  to  travel,  but  it  helps  us  to  soar.  If  we 
keep  oiu'selves  in  touch  with  Him  we  shall  be  like  a  weight  that  is  hung  on  to 
a  balloon.  The  buoyancy  of  the  one  will  lift  the  leadenness  of  the  other.  Are 
you  and  I  familiar  with  these  upper  ranges  of  thought  and  experience  and  life  T 
Do  we  feel  at  home  there  more  than  down  in  the  bottom,  amongst  the  swamps 
and  the  miasma  and  the  mists  ?  It  is  safe  up  there.  The  air  is  pure ;  the 
poison  mists  are  down  lower ;  the  himters  do  not  come  there  ;  their  arrows  or 
their  rifles  will  not  carry  so  far.    It  is  only  when  the  herd  ventures  a  little  down 


OHAP.  m.]  HABAKKUK.  65 

the  hill  that  it  is  in  danger  from  shots.  But  the  elevation  will  not  be  such  as 
to  make  us  despise  the  low  paths  on  which  duty — the  sufficient  and  loftiest  thing 
of  all — lies  for  us.  Our  souls  may  be  like  stars,  and  dwell  apart,  and  yet 
may  lay  the  humblest  duties  upon  themselves,  and  whilst  we  live  in  the 
high  places,  we  "  may  travel  on  life's  common  way  in  cheerful  godliness."  So 
we  may  go  on  until  at  last  we  shall  hear  the  Voice  that  says,  "  Come  up 
higher,"  and  shall  be  lifted  to  the  moxmtain  of  God,  where  the  living  waters 
are,  and  shall  fear  no  snares  or  himters  any  more  for  ever.  [A.  Madaren,  D.D.) 
And  will  make  me  to  walk  upon  mine  high  places. — High  jUacea : — "  High 
places "  are  the  best  things  in  life  and  experience.  They  lift  a  man  up  to 
God.  I.  High  places  of  vision.  On  a  mountain  we  see  more  clearly.  There 
are  seasons  when  we  get  clear  views  of  Divine  truth,  when  they  appear  in  a 
new  glory.  True,  the  revelation  is  made, — it  is  all  in  the  book.  But  so  the 
landscape  exists.  Yet  unless  your  feet  ascend  the  high  places  it  is  as  though 
it  were  not  there.  So  the  revelation  is  in  the  book,  but  you  must  get  up  the 
mount  of  vision  to  see  it.  II.  The  high  places  of  faith.  On  "  high  places  " 
we  see  things  farthest,  and  so  the  mount  of  faith.  Not  only  is  there  nothing 
between  you  and  the  distant  object,  but  through  a  rarefied  atmosphere  there  is 
the  least  possible  obstruction.  Moses  on  the  heights  of  Pisgah  saw  the  goodly 
land  of  promise  spread  out  before  him.  It  is  a  beautiful  type  of  faith.  Gazing 
upon  the  land  which  lies  across  the  "  narrow  stream,"  a  man  may  take  out  his 
title-deeds  and  contemplate  his  possessions.  III.  The  high  places  of  enjoy- 
ment. In  "  high  places  "  men  breathe  more  freely,  so  pure  and  exhilarating 
is  the  rarefied  air.  So  it  is  with  the  soul.  Drink  in  the  quickening,  inspiring 
influence  of  the  Spirit.  "  Yield  yourselves  to  God."  "  If  you  live  in  the  Spirit, 
walk  in  the  Spirit."  Be  spiritually  minded.  IV.  The  high  places  of  exektion. 
On  the  heights  a  man  can  do  more  than  on  the  low  places  of  ordinary  life.  This 
is  an  image  of  spiritual  life.  God  makes  a  man's  feet  like  "  hinds'  feet "  ;  that 
is.  He  makes  the  heavy,  sluggish  mortal  into  a  light  active  being.  To  reach 
these  heights  we  must  climb.  God  will  lead,  but  we  must  walk.  If  we 
would  be  great  or  high  we  must  bear  in  mind  they  must  depend  on  our  own 
labour.     {Homilist.) 


INTEODUCTION  TO   ZEPHANIAH. 

Author  of  the  Book. — Of  Zephaniah  we  know  absolutely  nothing  but  what 
he  himself  mentions  in  the  superscription  of  his  Book.  No  information  can  be 
gathered  from  the  contents  of  the  prophecy,  where  the  writer's  personal  history 
is  wholly  unnoticed.  He  calls  himself  "  the  son  of  Cushi,  the  son  of  Gedahah, 
the  son  of  Amariah,  the  son  of  Hizkiah."  As  it  is  usual  to  mention  only  the  name 
of  the  father,  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  genealogy  is  carried  up  to  the  fourth 
generation,  because  Hizkiah,  i.e.  Hezekiah,  was  a  celebrated  personage,  and  most 
probably  the  famous  King  of  Judah.  But  the  inference  is  not  undoubted.  Hizkiah 
is  not  called  "  King  of  Judah  "  in  the  genealogy,  which  would  naturally  have  been 
done  had  he  been  the  ancestor  intended,  as  in  Prov.  xxv.  1 ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  9.  There 
is  room  enough,  indeed,  between  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  for  the  four  specified  descents, 
though  only  three  are  named  in  the  case  of  Josiah  himself;  but  the  name  Hezekiah 
was  not  unknown  among  the  Jews,  and  we  cannot  assume  without  further  support 
that  the  person  here  mentioned  is  the  king.  It  is  fair  to  argue  that  the  insertion 
of  the  genealogical  details  shows  that  the  prophet  was  of  distinguished  birth  ; 
but  fmrther  it  is  impossible  to  go  with  any  certainty.  The  name  of  the  prophet 
is  variously  explained  as  "  The  Lord  hath  hid,"  or  "  The  Lord  hath  guarded," 
or  "  The  Lord's  Watch-tower."  Keil  is  generally  followed  in  interpreting  it  as 
"  He  whom  Jehovah  hides,  or  shelters."  The  LXX  writes  it  So^o^/ias :  Vulgate 
Sophoniah.  There  were  others  who  bore  this  name  (see  2  Kings  xxv.  18  ;  1  Chron. 
vi.  36 ;  Zech.  vi.  10,  14). 

Date  of  the  Book. — Zephaniah,  in  the  inscription  of  his  Book,  states 
that  he  prophesied  "  in  the  days  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Amon,  King  of  Judah  "  ; 
and  this  assertion  has  never  been  seriously  disputed.  The  only  question 
is  in  what  part  of  that  king's  reign  did  he  exercise  his  oflSce.  Josiah 
reigned  thirty-one  years,  according  to  the  usually  received  dates — from  640  B.C. 
to  609  B.C.  The  destruction  of  Nineveh,  which  Zephaniah  foretold,  took  place 
quite  at  the  end  of  Josiah's  reign,  and  his  prophecy  must  have  been  uttered  some 
time  before  this  event.  No  other  data  for  determining  the  question  exist  save 
what  may  be  gathered  from  internal  evidences.  And  these  are  most  uncertain, 
depending  chiefly  upon  inferences  drawn  from  the  great  reformation  effected  by 
the  good  king.  Did  he  prophesy  before  this  reformation  was  begun,  or  after  it 
was  effected,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  first  or  second  half  of  Josiah's  reign  ?  A  third 
alternative  may  be  added — Was  it  during  the  progress  of  this  religious  amelioration  ? 
Those  who  assign  the  prophecy  to  the  earlier  period,  before  the  king's  eighteenth 
year,  when  his  vigorous  measiu-es  produced  their  happy  results,  rely  upon  the 
fact  that  the  prophet  speaks  as  though  idolatry  and  the  disorders  which  Josiah 
repressed  were  still  rampant,  even  the  members  of  the  royal  family  being  implicated 
in  the  general  iniquity.  It  is  inconceivable,  they  say,  that  Zephaniah  should 
have  taken  this  gloomy  view,  and  have  entirely  omitted  all  mention  of  the  young 
prince's  noble  efforts  to  effect  a  change  for  the  better,  had  this  attempt  already 

iU 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ZEPHANIAH. 


been  commenced.  All  this  points  to  a  time  when  Josiah  was  still  a  minor,  and 
before  he  had  begxm  to  assert  himself  in  the  direction  of  affairs.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  contended  that  certain  statements  in  the  body  of  the  work  prove  that 
the  reformation  was  being  carried  on  at  the  time  when  it  was  composed  :  the  public 
worship  of  Jehovah  existed  (iii.  4,  5),  and  this  side  by  side  with  that  of  Baal  and 
with  many  idolatrous  practices  (i.  4,  5) ;  there  were  priests  of  Jehovah  as  well 
as  priests  of  false  gods  at  the  same  time.  Nor  can  we  reason  from  Zephaniah's 
silence  concerning  reforms  that  none  had  been  essayed  ;  for  Jeremiah,  v'ho  began 
to  prophesy  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah,  is  quite  as  strong  as  Zephaniah  in 
his  denunciations  of  idolatry,  the  fact  being  that,  though  it  was  publicly  abolished, 
it  was  still  practised  extensively  in  secret.  Others,  again,  claim  a  still  later  date 
for  the  prophecy,  because  it  speaks  of  the  extermination  of  the  remnant  of  Baal 
(i.  4),  which  implies  that  the  purification  had  already  been  effected,  and  that 
only  isolated  instances  still  existed ;  the  prophet  also  speaks  of  and  refers  to  the 
Mosaic  books  as  well  known  to  his  hearers  (comp.  i.  13,  15,  17,  ii.  2,  5,  7,  11, 
iii.  5,  19,  20),  which  could  only  have  been  after  the  discovery  of  the  "  Book  of  the 
Law,"  in  Josiah's  eighteenth  year  (2  Kings  xxii.  8).  It  must  be  noted  that  on 
this  occasion  reference  was  made  to  the  Prophetess  Huldah,  not  to  Zephaniah 
(2  Kings  xxii.  14).  Hence  some  suppose  that  he  was  dead  at  this  time.  From 
this  brief  recapitulation  of  arguments  it  will  be  seen  that  each  of  the  three  theories 
mentioned  above  has  much  to  be  said  in  its  favour ;  and  that  the  only  safe  con- 
clusion to  adopt  is  this — that  although  the  present  book,  as  now  displayed  in  the 
sacred  canon,  forms  one  connected  whole,  it  is  composed  of  prophecies  uttered 
at  various  times  and  gathered  by  their  author  into  a  volume  and  arranged  on  a 
definite  plan.  Its  place  in  the  canon  is  the  same  both  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek, 
and  coincides  with  the  chronological  order  to  which  it  is  assigned.  ( W.  J.  Deane, 
M.A.) 

The  temper  of  Zephaniah.  —  For  so  young  a  man  the  vision  of  Zephaniah 
may  seem  strangely  dark  and  final.  Yet  not  otherwise  was  Isaiah's  inaugural 
vision,  and  as  a  rule  it  is  the  young  and  not  the  old  whose  indignation  is  ardent 
and  unsparing.  Zephaniah  carries  this  temper  to  the  extreme.  There  is  no 
great  hope  in  his  Book,  hardly  any  tenderness,  and  never  a  glimpse  of  beauty.  A 
townsman,  Zephaniah  has  no  eye  for  nature ;  not  only  is  no  fair  prospect  described 
by  him,  he  has  not  even  a  single  metaphor  drawn  from  nature's  loveUness  or  peace. 
He  is  pitilessly  true  to  his  great  keynotes  :  "  I  will  sweep,  sweep  from  the  face  of 
the  ground ;  He  will  bum,  bum  up  everything."  No  hottei  book  lies  in  all  the  Old 
Testament.  Neither  dew  nor  grass  nor  any  tree  nor  any  blossom  hves  in  it,  but 
it  is  everywhere  fire,  smoke,  and  darkness,  drifting  chaff,  ruins,  nettles,  salt-pits,  and 
owls  and  i  avens  looking  from  the  wndows  of  desolate  palaces.  Nor  does  Zephaniah 
foretell  the  restoration  of  nature  in  the  end  of  the  days.  There  is  no  prospect 
of  a  redeemed  and  fruitful  land,  but  only  of  a  group  of  battered  and  hardly  saved 
characters  ;  a  few  meek  and  righteous  are  hidden  from  the  fire  and  creep  forth  when 
it  is  over.  Israel  is  left  "  a  poor  and  humble  folk."  No  prophet  is  more  true  to 
the  doctrine  of  the  remnant,  or  more  resolutely  refuses  to  modify  it.  Perhaps 
he  died  young.  The  full  truth,  however,  is  that  Zephaniah,  though  he  found  his 
material  in  the  events  of  his  own  day,  tears  himself  loose  from  history  altogether. 
To  Zephaniah  the  day  of  the  Lord  begins  to  assume  what  we  call  the  "  supernatural." 
Though  the  first  of  apocalyptic  writers,  Zephaniah  does  not  allow  himself  the 
licence  of  apocalypse,     (Geo.  Adam  Smith,  D.D,) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 

ZEPHANIAH. 

CHAPTER  L 
Vbbs.  1-6.  The  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  unto  Zephaniah. — The  Ward  : — I.  Thb 

DISTINGUTSHING     CAPACITY     OF    MAN,    AND     THE    WONDERFUL    CONDESCENSION    OF 

GtoD.  1.  The  distinguishing  capacity  of  man.  To  receive  the  word  of  Jehovah. 
To  receive  a  word  from  another  is  to  appreciate  its  meaning.  The  word  of  the 
Lord  comes  to  every  man  at  times, — comes  in  visions  of  the  night,  comes  in  the 
intuitions  of  conscience,  comes  in  the  impressions  that  nature  makes  on  the  heart. 
2.  The  wonderful  condescension  of  God.  Even  to  speak  to  man.  "  The  Lord 
hath  respect  unto  the  humble."  II.  The  moral  corruption  op  m.  n  and  the 
EXCLUSIVE  prerogative  OF  GoD.  1.  The  moral  corruption  of  man.  There 
are  three  great  moral  evils  indicated  in  these  verses.  (1)  Idolatry.  "I  will 
cut  off  the  remnant  of  Baal  from  this  place,  and  the  name  of  the  Chemarims  with 
the  priests  ;  and  them  that  worship  the  host  of  heaven  upon  the  housetops." 
The  remains  of  Baal  worship,  which  as  yet  Josiah  was  unable  utterly  to  eradicate 
in  remoter  places.  (2)  Backsliding.  "  Them  that  had  turned  back  from  the  Lord." 
The  other  evil  here  is — (3)  Indifferentism.  "  And  those  that  have  not  sought 
the  Lord  nor  inquired  for  Him."  2.  The  exclusive  prerogative  of  God.  What  is 
that  ?  To  destroy.  "  I  will  utterly  consume  all  things  from  off  the  land,  saith 
the  Lord.  I  will  consume  man  and  beast ;  I  will  consume  the  fowls  of  the  heaven, 
and  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  the  stumbling  blocks  with  the  wicked  ;  and  I  will  cut 
off  man  from  off  the  land,  saith  the  Lord."  (1)  No  one  can  really  destroy  but  God. 
"  I  kiU  and  I  make  alive."  Annihilation  is  as  far  behind  the  work  of  the  creatiu-e  as 
the  work  of  creation.  (2)  God  has  a  right  to  destroy  human  life.  (3)  His  destructive 
work  is  as  beneficent  as  His  sustaining  and  creating.  Destruction  is  a  principle  in 
all  nature:  one  plant  destroys  another,  one  animal  dest  oys  another,  and  there 
are  elements  in  nature  whose  work  is  destruction.  From  destruction  new  life  and 
beauty  come  ;  destruction  keeps  the  universe  alive,  fresh,  and  healthy.    {Homilist.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  I  will  utterly  consume  all  things  from  off  the  land. — The  menace  of 
Zefhaniah : — It  would  not  be  easy  to  find  words  more  fully  charged  and  surcharged 
with  terror  than  these.  Nor  do  they  grow  less  sombre  and  dreadful  as  we  con- 
sider either  the  men  against  whom  they  are  launched,  or  the  occasion  that 
gave  them  form.  In  the  time  of  Zephaniah  the  Jews  were  incredibly  corrupt. 
The  occasion  of  Zephaniah's  writing  was  the  invasion  of  Asia  by  the  Scyths.  As 
he  looked  out  from  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  and  saw  the  goodly  land  stripped  and 
devoured  before  them,  and  recalled  the  havoc  they  had  carried  through  neigh- 
bouring kingdoms,  he  found  the  very  symbol  of  judgment  which  would  best  express 
his  thought.  Jehovah  would  sweep  everything  from  the  face  of  the  whole  earth, 
even  as  the  Scythians,  with  fire  and  sword  in  their  train,  were  sweeping  away  the 
fruits  and  the  wealth  of  the  East.  The  conception  which  the  passage  suggests 
is  that,  angered  beyond  endurance  by  the  sins  of  men,  Jehovah  is  about  to  storm 
through  the  earth  like  a  mighty  Scythian  chieftain  destroying  empire  after  empire, 
sweeping  the  whole  world  bare  and  empty.  But  these  words,  when  rightly  under- 
stood, are  found  to  breathe  a  most  catholic  charity,  a  most  tender  humanity, 
and  a  mercy  wholly  divine.     I.  A  most  catholic  charity.     His  view  extended 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

over  the  whole  civilised  world,  over  the  whole  world  the  prophet  knew.     We 
commonly  conceive  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  as  the  most  narrow  and  exclusive 
of  men,  as  devoted  solely  to  the  affairs  and  interests  of  the  Hebrew  race.     And 
in  so  conceiving  of  them  we  do  them  a  grave  wrong.     They  were  patriots,  indeed, 
and  patriots  of  the  sincerest  and  noblest  strain.    Instead  of  being  the  most  exclusive, 
they  were  really  the  most  catholic  of  men.     There  is  no  one  of  them  who  does  not 
look  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  country  and  desire  the  welfare  of  the  world. 
And  men  ought  to  rejoice  that  the  judgments  of  man  are  abroad  in  the  whole 
earth,  especially  when  they  can  see  that  Divine  judgments  veil  purposes  of  mercy. 
This  is  the   true  catholicity,  which  desires  not  only  the  good  of  all  men,  but 
the  highest  good   of  all.      II.   A  most  noble  and  tender  humanity.     They 
exalt  man,  and  yet  they  take  thought  for   beasts.      They  are  at  once  human 
and  humane.      It  is  now  too  much  the  fashion   to  regard   man  as  the  mere 
creature  of  the  vast  natural  and  cosmic  forces  amid  which  he  stands  and  moves. 
It  is  assumed  that  physical  laws  govern  his  whole  being.     The  Hebrew  prophets 
breathed  another,  and  surely  a  higher  spirit.     To  them  it  seemed  that  man  was 
the  lord  of  natural  forces  and  laws,  though  himself  "  under  authority."     This 
high  conception  of  man,  as  standing  with  only  God  above  him,  and  the  whole 
world  beneath  his  feet,  though  it  was  the  conception  of  a  pre-scientific  age,  accords 
with  the  profoundest  intuitions,  and  satisfies  the  deepest  cravings  of  our  hearts. 
III.  A  MERCY  WHOLLY  DiviNE.     Though  the  words  of  the  text  sound  so  stem 
and  judicial,  all  the  Hebrew  prophets  are  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  conviction 
that  the  meaning  of  judgment  is  mercy,  that  all  the  sorrows  and  calamities  of 
human  life  are  designed  to  reach  an  end  of  compassion  and  love.     That  it  was 
the  mercy  of  judgment  which  Zephaniah  had  in  mind  when  he  rejoiced  that  "  their 
offences  "  were  to  be  swept  away  with  the  siimers  of  his  time,  that  men  were  to 
suffer  in  order  that  man  might  be  saved,  is  evident  so  soon  as  we  permit  him  to 
interpret  himself.     In  passages  of  an  exquisite  tenderness  and  beauty  he  expands 
his  opening  words.     See  chap.  ii.  11,  iii.  9.     It  was  because  the  Hebrew  prophets 
were  so  strong  in  this  conviction  of  the  beneficent  uses  of  "  judgments  "  that  they 
could  dwell  on  them,  and  even  exult  in  them,  as  they  undoubtedly  do.     Let  us 
learn  of  Zephaniah  the  mercy  of  the  Divine  judgments.     They  simply  sheathe 
and  convey  the  saving  health  of  the  Divine  compassion  and  love.     With  Zephaniah 
let  us  welcome  and  rely  on  the  conviction  that,  when  God  sweeps  the  face  of  the 
earth,  it  is  that  He  may  renew  the  heart  of  the  world,  and  gladden  us  with  larger 
disclosures    of    His    grace.     (Samuel    Cox,    D.D.)        I  will  consume  man  and 
beast;  I  will  consume  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the  fishes  of  the  sea. — 
Animals  sharing  the  punishments  of  man : — Why  did  God  turn  His  wrath  against 
fishes  and  other  animals  ?     This  seems  to  have  been  a  hasty  and  unreasonable 
infliction.     But  let  this  rule  be  first  borne  in  mind,  that  it  is  preposterous  in  us 
to  estimate  God's  dealings  according  to  our  judgment,  as  froward  and  proud  men 
do  in  our  day  ;  for  they  are  disposed  to  judge  of  God's  works  with  such  presumption 
that  whatever  they  do  not  approve  they  think  it  right  wholly  to  condemn.     But 
it  behoves  us  to  judge  modestly  and  soberly,  and  to  confess  that  God's  judgments 
are  a  deep  abyss  ;  and  when  a  reason  for  them  does  not  appear  we  ought  reverently 
and  with  due  humility  to  look  for  the  day  of  their  full  revelation.     This  is  one 
thing.     Then  it  is  meet  at  the  same  time  to  remember  that  as  auimals  were  created 
for  man's  use,  they  must  imdergo  a  lot  in  common  with  him  ;  for  God  made 
subservient  to  man  both  thte  biids  of  heaven  and  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  all 
other  animals.     It  is,  then,  no  matter  of  wonder  that  the  condemnation  of  him 
who   enjoys   sovereignty  over   the   whole   earth   should  reach  to  animals.     The 
reason  is  sufficiently  plain.     Why,  the  prophet  speaks  here  of  the  beasts  of  the 
earth,  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  the  birds  of  heaven ;  for  we  find  that  men  grow 
torpid,  or  rather  stupid  in  their  own  indifference,  except  as  they  are  forcibly 
roused.     It  was  therefore  necessary  for  the  prophet,  when  he  saw  the  people 
so  hardened  in  their  wickedness,  and  that  he  had  to  do  with  men  past  recovery,  to 
set  clearly  before  them  these  judgments  of  God.     {John  Calvin.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  And  that  swear  by  the  Lord,  and  that  swear  by  Malcham. — The 
demonstrativeness  of  true  religion  : — In  this  text  it  is  a  sort  of  mixed  religion  that 
the  Lord  declares  He  will  not  tolerate.  Impress  ( he  necessity  of  decision  in  religion. 
What  is  the  lowest  amount  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  which  will  avail  to  save  a  man's 
soul  ?  L  What  definition  the  Scripture  gives  us  of  true  Christianity.  Mark  the 
distinction  between  coming  to  Christ  and  following  Christ.    Coming  to  Christ  costa 


CHAP.  I.]  ZEPHANIAH. 


a  man  nothing  ;  but  following  Christ  and  remaining  with  Christ  involve  the  taking 
up  the  cross  and  the  exercise  of  stern  self-denial.  True  Christianity  demands  an 
entire  surrender  of  the  heart  to  God,  a  thorough  abandonment  of  wilful  sin, 
an  unceasing  vigilance  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil.  2.  If  a  man  has  cordially 
embraced,  with  a  living  faith,  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  will  he — can  he — be 
undemonstrative  ?  By  demonstrativeness  is  not  meant  talkativeness,  nor  can 
it  be  explained  by  formalism.  When  forms  are  allowed  to  usurp  the  place  of 
the  heart,  they  demonstrate  too  much.  Nor  is  it  being  charitable,  or  regularly 
attending  worship.  By  demonstrativeness  is  meant  a  quiet  earnestness,  which 
will  show  itself  as  much  by  what  it  does  not  as  by  what  it  does.  A  man  cannot, 
in  a  proper  sense,  be  undemonstrative  if  he  has  embraced,  with  a  living  faith, 
the  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  3.  To  what  is  the  undemonstrativeness  of  the  mere 
professor  of  religion  traceable  ?  Is  it  not  that  he  makes  God  the  offering  of  half 
his  heart,  while  he  gives  the  other  half  to  the  world  ?  4.  Are  we  to  call  the 
undemonstrative  true  Christians,  and  the  demonstrative  advanced  Christians  ? 
Let  God  answer.  See  the  text.  He  who  readeth  the  heart  will  not  be  mocked 
and  trifled  with.  God  will  cut  ofif  the  undecided.  In  the  last  great  assize  those 
who  in  their  lives  have  halted  between  two  opinions  shall  find  no  mercy.  ( W.  I. 
Chapman,  M.A.)  Double-hearted  people  : — A  little  while  ago  I  was  with  some 
friends,  going  through  Her  Majesty's  State  apartments  in  Windsor  Castle.  At 
the  end  of  the  great  banquet-haU  we  were  shown,  in  a  gallery  above  our  heads, 
a  fine  organ.  Now  this  organ,  I  found,  was  just  like  one  of  the  double-hearted 
people;  for  the  old  man  who  was  taking  us  round  explained  carefully  that  it 
performed  double  duty,  having  two  finger-boards.  At  the  sides  from  which  we 
saw  it  it  was  played  on  the  occasion  of  a  royal  banquet,  to  the  delight  and  pleasure 
of  those  who  feasted  below.  But  on  the  side  which  we  could  not  see  it  had  another 
finger-board,  and  performed  a  wholly  different  service,  for  it  was  in  the  royal 
chapel,  and  pealed  forth  strains  of  sacred  music  to  help  the  worship  of  those  who 
gathered  there.  Well,  I  despised  that  organ  for  its  double-dealing,  though,  of 
course,  you  know  the  organ  could  not  help  itself.  It  was  only  what  it  had  been 
made,  but  it  seemed  to  me  like  "  a  double-minded  man,  unstable  in  all  his  ways." 
God  keep  us  from  having  two  finger-boards  !  Do  you  understand  what  I  mean  ? 
Do  you  see  that  we,  who  are  blood-bought  and  made  nigh  to  God,  have  the  blessed 
privilege  of  being  brought  as  worshippers  into  the  holiest  ?  That  there  we  may 
be  as  beautiful  instruments,  in  full  tune  for  the  Master's  hand,  that,  when  He 
strikes  the  chords,  there  may  rise  rich  swelling  notes  of  worship  and  praise  to  His 
ear  and  heart.  Having,  then,  a  finger-board  in  the  holiest,  in  the  place  of  worship, 
let  us  be  very  jealous  that  there  be  none  to  which  the  revellers  of  this  world  can 
have  access,  that  no  note  of  sympathy  may  be  ever  struck  from  our  hearts  by 
the  world,  that  has  rejected  Christ,  the  David  whom  we  own  as  Lord.  {A.  J. 
Gordon,  D.D.)  There  ought  to  be  continuity  in  our  religious  life  : — There  should 
be  continuity  in  our  religious  life.  Some  people  are  pious  by  fits  and  starts. 
They  are  with  God  in  the  sanctuary,  but  not  in  the  shop ;  they  drink  the  cup 
of  the  Lord  on  Sunday,  and  the  cup  of  the  devil  on  Monday.  At  the  mouths  of 
certain  large  rivers  are  formed  what  geologists  call  lagoons.  A  lagoon  is  a  small 
lake  separated  from  the  sea  by  a  bar  of  sand,  and  is  filled  with  fresh  and  salt  water 
by  turns.  Often  a  lagoon  communicates  exclusively  with  the  river  for  months, 
and  during  this  period  its  water  is  fresh.  Then  a  breach  is  made  in  the  bar  of 
Band  and  there  is  an  eruption  of  salt  water,  which  for  a  season  holds  undisputed 
sway.  In  these  lagoons  we  may  find  an  illustration  of  not  a  few  people  connected 
with  all  our  chiu-ches.  For  a  time  they  are  seemingly  in  communication  with 
God  and  spiritual  things,  and  these  are  the  forces  that  shape  and  mould  and  colour 
their  life.  But  suddenly  that  communication  seems  to  break  off,  to  be  interrupted ; 
the  world  rushes  in  through  some  breach  of  their  own  making,  and  for  a  season, 
at  least,  the  things  that  are  seen  and  temporal  gain  complete  mastery  over  them. 
The  change  in  their  life  and  conduct  is  no  less  marked  than  the  change  in  the  waters 
of  the  lagoon.  This  type  of  Christian,  this  religious  Reuben,  will  never  attain 
to  spiritual  strength  and  ripeness,  the  stature  of  the  perfect  man  Christ  Jesus. 
The  true  follower  of  the  Son  of  Man  finds  his  illustration  not  in  the  lagoon,  but  in 
the  glory  of  the  Shechinah  which  shone  continuously  and  with  unabated  splendour 
in  the  temple.     (W.  B.  Sproule.) 

Vers.  7-18.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand. — The  day  of  war,  the  day  of 
horrors : — The  war  day  is  represented  here — I.  As  A  day  of  enoemous  saceificb. 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

1.  Sacrifice  of  life.  Among  several  classes.  (1)  Royalty.  (2)  Nobility. 
(3)  Traders.  (4)  The  masses.  2.  Sacrifice  of  property.  II.  As  a  day  of  Divinb 
BKTRiBUTioN.  AU  the  hoFTors  of  war  are  here  represented  as  judgments  from 
the  Almighty.  In  using  war  as  a  punishment  for  sin  it  may  be  observed — 1.  That 
all  who  perish  in  war  righteously  deserve  their  fate.  2.  That  warriors,  in  executing 
the  Divine  justice,  demonstrate  the  enormity  of  the  evil  requiring  punishment. 
3.  War,  as  an  officer  of  Divine  justice,  reveals  the  amazing  freedom  allowed  to  the 
sinner  in  this  world,  and  God's  controlling  power  over  hostile  forces.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  8.  I  will  punish  ...  all  such  as  are  clothed  with  strange  apparel. — The 
sinfulness  of  strange  apparel : — I.  The  criminals.  Consider  the  principals, 
and  the  accessaries.  II.  The  crime.  Either  wearing  exotic  and  foreign  apparel, 
or  such  as  they  had  newly  invented  among  themselves.  III.  The  punishment. 
This  is  indefinitely  expressed.  How,  in  what  way,  degree,  or  measure,  He  will 
punish.  He  reserves  to  Himself.     (Vincent  Alsop,  A.M.) 

Ver.  12.  At  that  time. — At  that  time  : — The  day  of  the  Lord  is  any  season 
in  which  He  reveals  Himself  in  a  special  manner.  Of  the  dealings  of  God  with 
His  visible  Church  on  that  day  the  text  presents  a  striking  description.  I.  The 
party  here  spoken  of — Jerusalem.  1.  In  the  day  of  the  Lord  the  visible 
Church  is  not  exempted  from  His  special  notice  and  appropriate  dealings.  2.  The 
grounds  of  God's  procedmre  towards  His  Church  may  be  the  following.  To  whom 
much  is  given,  of  them  shall  much  be  required.  With  the  visible  Church  the 
interests  of  the  world  are  entrusted.  With  the  visible  Church,  in  a  sense,  the 
honour  and  glory  of  God's  name  are  entrusted.  God,  having  loved  His  Church, 
is  jealous  of  His  Church's  love.  3.  These  views  not  only  satisfy  as  to  God's  pro- 
cedure, but  furnish  strong  inducements  to  faithfulness  to  the  Church.  4.  When 
God  shall  come,  it  will  be  to  His  Church  specially  II.  The  peculiar  aspect  of 
the  day  op  the  Lord  towards  Jerusalem.  That  is,  the  particular  character 
of  His  dealings  towards  His  Church — He  shall  "  search  with  candles."  1.  This 
expression  proves  the  existence  of  suspicion.  2.  It  shows  that  the  Church  has 
hidden  her  sin.  3.  It  teaches  that  the  search  is  close  and  narrow  and  prying.  Illus- 
tration— The  woman  seeking  her  lost  piece  of  silver,  candle  in  hand.  4.  It  teaches 
that  God  Himself  will  search  His  Church.  Not  to  satisfy  Himself,  but  to  indicate 
His  complete  knowledge,  and  to  lead  the  Church  to  seek  knowledge.  5.  God 
searches  l)y  various  means  or  agencies.  1.  Ministers  of  the  Gospel.  2.  Individuals 
or  churches.  3.  Events  of  providence.  4.  All  these  by  the  candle  of  His  Word. 
Are  you  prepared  to  be  searched  by  God  ?  III.  The  result  of  this  search 
IN  Jerusalem  is  the  discovery  of  the  men  that  are  "  settled  on  theib 
LEES."  1.  The  class  described  (Jer.  xlviii.  11).  2.  The  cause  of  this  feature 
of  their  character.  Quiescence  of  one  and  another  class  of  feeling.  3.  This  is 
infidelity  of  heart.  4.  There  is  not  necessarily  a  quiescence  of  worldly  feelings. 
IV.  The  Divine  treatment  of  this  class.  Their  punishment  may  be  judicial 
blindness.  In  eternity  it  will  be  God's  wrath.  {James  Stewart.)  I  win  search 
Jerusalem  with  candles. — Searching  with  candles  : — The  Lord  threatens,  in  the 
taking  of  the  city,  to  take  order  with  all  atheists  and  epicures,  who,  aboimding 
in  wealth,  lay  secure  and  at  ease  (like  wine  on  its  dregs  when  it  is  not  removed), 
in  their  heart  denying  God's  providence,  or  that  He  took  any  care  of  things  beneath, 
to  reward  good  or  punish  evil ;  and  therefore  neither  loved  nor  believed  Hia 
promises,  that  they  might  walk  in  His  way,  nor  feared  Hie  justice,  so  as  to 
abandon  sin.  Concerning  these  the  Lord  threatens,  that  as  a  man  searcheth 
what  is  hid  or  lost  with  a  candle,  so  He  would  narrowly  search  out  their  sins, 
and  themselves  so  as  to  punish  them  for  their  sins,  so  as  none  should  escape ; 
and  their  goods  to  give  them  for  a  spoil ;  whereby  their  houses  should  become 
desolate,  and  they  should  be  disappointed  of  all  their  expectations  from  their 
enjoyments,  according  to  His  sentence  pronounced  of  old  in  His  law  (Deut.  xxviii. 
30,  39).  Doctrine — 1.  Ease  and  prosperity  slayeth  the  fool,  and  breeds  such 
distempers  of  security,  and  settling  on  the  earth,  as  justly  provokes  God  to  smite. 

2.  Prosperitv  and  want  of  exercise,  by  vicissitudes  of  dispensations,  is  a  great 
feeder  of  atheism,  and  an  enemy  to  the  observation  and  making  use  of  Divine 
providence ;  and  this  again  doth  embolden  and  harden  men  yet  more  in  their 
secure  and  wicked  courses.  3.  Secure  atheists  and  contenmers  of  God  and  His 
providence  may  expect  that  God  will  refute  them  in  a  language  which  they  will 
understand,  and  make  them  know  His  providence  at  their  own  expense.     4.  When 


CHAP.  I.]  ZEPHANIAH. 


the  Lord  strips  a  sinful  person  or  people  of  any  mercies  which  they  enjoyed  they 
will  find  upon  narrow  search  that  their  enjoyment  thereof  hath  been  a  snare 
to  them,  to  lead  them  into  sin ;  and  thej'  should  read  this  in  the  stroke.  5.  The 
holy  justice  of  God  is  to  be  adored  in  disappointing  men  of  any  happiness  or 
contentment  they  expected  in  these  things  for  which  they  hazard  their  souls, 
and  so  rendering  them  twice  losers  who  will  not  serve  Him.  [George  Hvlcheson.) 
Sovl  searching  : — It  seems  to  be  commonly  thought  that  the  one  fear  and  the 
one  foe  in  these  days  is  infidelity.  Two  things  only  have  to  be  remembered  by 
those  who  preach  against  infidelity  to  ordinary  congregations, — the  one  is,  that 
they  do  not,  in  furnishing  answers,  suggest  the  doubt  with  them  ;  the  other  is, 
that  they  be  careful  to  deal  fairly  and  charitably  with  opponents  in  a  place  where, 
of  course,  there  can  be  no  reply.  I.  Indifference  is  practical  infidelity. 
Without  disparaging  the  prevalence  in  these  days  of  an  intellectual  and  specu- 
lative infidelity,  we  must  feel  that  there  are  other  dangers  and  other  impediments 
to  the  life  of  souls  which  may  make  less  demand  upon  the  logic  or  the  rhetoric 
of  preachers,  but  which  are  at  least  as  serious  in  their  nature,  and  even  more 
likely  to  be  found  in  an  assembly  of  worshippers.  There  is  indifference.  Indiffer- 
ence and  infidelity  have  a  closer  affinity  than  is  implied  in  their  natures.  For 
one  person  who  is  made  sceptical  by  thinking  or  reading,  twenty  and  a  hundred 
persons  are  made  sceptics  by  indifference.  They  "  care  for  none  of  these  things," 
and  therefore  they  can  amuse  themselves  by  playing  with  those  edge-tools  of 
sarcasm  over  things  sacred  which  they  would  rather  die  than  do,  if  they  knew 
what  may  be  the  consequences  to  others  now,  and  some  day  to  themselves.  The 
figure  of  the  text  is  taken  from  the  experience  of  vintners  and  wine  merchants 
who  have  suffered  some  of  the  necessary  processes  of  their  business  to  be  too 
long  delayed,  with  the  effect  of  making  the  wine  what  the  margin  represents 
the  Hebrew  original  to  call  curded  or  thickened.  The  general  idea  seems  to  be 
that  of  the  Psalm,  "  Because  they  have  no  changings,  therefore  they  fear  not." 
It  may  be  the  sad,  remorseful  feeling  of  some  one  whom  I  address,  that  there 
is  gradually  sinking  down  upon  him  something  of  the  dull,  drowsy,  stupid 
indifference  towards  the  three  paramount  realities — God,  the  soul,  and  eternity, 
which,  if  it  should  become  permanent,  if  it  should  become  inveterate,  will  be  in  the 
most  terrible  of  senses  the  very  sleep  of  death.  II.  Causes  of  spiritual  decline. 
This  state  has  many  histories.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing,  dangerous  even  for  the 
soul,  to  live  always  on  one  spot,  in  one  society,  a  life  of  routine,  whether  that 
routine  be  of  pleasure  or  of  business.  The  life  of  what  is  called  society  not  only 
lays  a  heavy  weight  on  the  soul,  of  weariness,  of  depression,  of  simple  worldliness; 
it  has  a  dissipating,  it  has  an  enfeebling  action  upon  the  vigorous  energy,  upon 
the  sturdy  independence,  upon  the  p\u"e  affection  of  mind  and  heart. 
There  is  a  wonderful  inequality  in  this  matter  of  human  experience.  One  life 
has  its  even  tenor  from  year  to  year,  another  life  is  lacerated  by  a  succession  of 
sorrows.  There  is  nothing  of  fatalism  in  saying  that  the  never  being  emptied 
by  providential  discipline  from  vessel  to  vessel,  the  never  going  into  captivity 
under  a  chastisement  not  joyous  but  grievous,  is  a  less  advantageous  treatment, 
morally  and  spiritually,  than  the  opposite.  How  graphic  the  description  of 
the  man  who  is  "  settled  on  his  lees  "  ;  the  man  who  has  lost  all  freshness  and 
liveliness  of  feeling,  in  the  monotony  of  comfort  and  luxury,  of  health  and  habit, 
of  regular  alternation  and  unbroken  routine  !  They  say  in  their  heart,  "  The 
Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  He  do  evil."  This  is  the  Nemesis  of  long 
forgetfulness.  God,  the  living,  acting  God,  disappears  at  last  from  the  scene 
of  being.  .  .  .  Then  let  us  try  earnestly  to  bring  God  back  into  our  lives  ;  let 
lis  try  to  do  or  forbear  each  day  some  one  thing  quite  definitely  and  quite  expressly 
because  of  God  ;  because  He  wills,  and  it  will  please  Him  ;  or  because  He  wills  not, 
and  therefore  we  will  forbear.  It  is  wonderful  how  this  kind  of  self- treatment  will 
spread  and  grow,  till  at  last  the  blessed  habit  has  become  ours  of  setting  God 
always  before  us,  and  doing  all  things  as  in  His  sight.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Divine 
judgments  : — To  the  Hebrew  prophets  the  world  was  without  meaning  if  it  was 
not  moral.  Righteousness — the  desire  for  it,  the  endeavour  after  it,  was  at  the 
heart  of  things.  We  may  thank  Matthew  Arnold  for  the  phrase  "  The  power 
that  makes  for  righteousness "  as  a  definition  of  God.  The  Hebrew  prophet 
was  a  moral  philosopher,  a  statesman,  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  a  declarer 
of  God's  will  as  expressed  in  the  laws  and  tendencies  of  human  history.  He  was 
a  scientist  as  well  as  a  seer,  discerning  the  face  of  the  sky  and  the  signs  of  the 
times,  and  predicting  the  rise  and  fall  of  states.     It  was  the  fate  of  Zephaniah 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i 

to  fall  on  evil  times.  I.  The  subject  of  Divine  judgments.  1.  They  embrace 
the  whole  earth.  God's  moral  law  is  co-extensive  with  the  whole  world.  God's 
commandments  are  one  and  the  same  all  the  world  over.  2.  It  is  just  as  true 
that,  though  universal,  God's  judgments  are  sometimes  particular  and  special. 
"  I  will  search  Jerusalem."  God  begins  at  home.  When  God  comes  to  make 
inquisition  for  sin  He  begins  at  the  sanctuary.  3.  The  prophet  leads  us  into 
yet  inner  circles, — "  I  will  punish  the  men  that  are  settled  on  their  lees."  The 
metaphor  is  drawn  from  the  manufacture.  By  the  expression  two  classes  are 
intended — (1)  The  indifferent  and  ease-loving.  (2)  The  carnally-minded.  The 
man  who  settles  down  upon  the  sediment  that  is  in  him  takes  his  tone  and 
standard  from  the  worse  and  not  from  the  better  part  of  his  nature.  3.  The 
innermost  circle  of  all  is  occupied  by  those  who  say  "  in  their  heart,  the  Lord 
will  not  do  good,  neither  will  He  do  evil," — the  practical  atheists  of  the  Church 
who  swear  by  the  Lord,  but  relegate  Him  to  a  distant  corner  of  His  domain. 

II.  The  method  of  God's  judgments.  "  Search  with  candles."  No  half- 
measures,  no  compromise  with  evil  will  satisfy  Jehovah.  III.  The  purpose  of 
God's  judgments  is  not  simply  penal,  but  pueifying  and  remedial.  Our 
God  is  just  to  forgive,  loving  to  punish.  Let  the  Lord  work  His  gracious 
fatherly  will  in  your  life.  {J.  D.  Thompson.)  Punish  the  men  that  are 
settled  on  their  lees. — Religious  indi§erentism  : — We  have  it  here — I.  Divinelt 
portrayed.  It  is  marked  by  two  elements.  1.  Carnality.  "  The  men  that 
are  settled  on  their  lees."  The  image  is  taken  from  the  crust  that  is  formed 
on  the  bottom  of  wines  that  have  been  long  left  undistvurbed.  It  is  marked 
by — 2.  Atheism.  "They  say  in  their  heart,  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither 
will  He  do  evil."  This  atheism  is — (1)  Not  a  theoretical  denial  of  the  existence  of 
God.  "  They  say  in  their  heart,  The  Lord  will  not  do  good."  They  assume  His 
existence,  they  have  no  intellectual  conviction  for  or  against.  The  most  popidar 
and  pernicious  atheism  is  that  which  theoretically  admits  the  being  of  God.  It 
is  a  stupid,  stolid,  thoughtless  state  of  mind,  and  you  cannot  argue  with  it.  This 
atheism  is — (2)  A  heart  misrepresentation  of  God.  "  They  say  in  their  heart, 
The  Lord  will  not  do  good,"  &c.  They  have  a  God  ;  but  He  is  inactive,  dormant, 
and  concerns  Himself  with  neither  good  nor  evil.  He  is  a  mere  fiction  of  their 
depraved  heart.  We  have  religious  indifferentism  here — II.  Divinely  detected. 
"  I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  candles,"  or  lamps.  The  language,  of  course,  is 
highly  figurative.  Omniscience  does  not  require  lamps  to  light  Him,  or  to  employ 
any  effort  to  discover.  He  sees  all  things.  "  There  is  not  a  word  on  my  tongue 
but  lo,  0  Lord,  Thou  knowest  it  altogether."  The  language  means,  God's  com 
plete  knowledge  of  this  religious  indifferentism  wherever  it  exists.  He  sees  it 
— 1.  He  sees  it  though  it  may  not  reveal  itself  in  any  palpable  forms  to  men 
Though  it  may  conform  to  all  the  rules  of  social  morality  and  popular  religion. 
He  sees  it.  2.  He  sees  it  though  it  may  be  robed  in  the  forms  of  religious  devo 
tion.     It  may  attend  churches,  join  in  liturgies,  sing  psalms, — yet  He  sees  it 

III.  Divinely  punished.  I  will  "  punish  the  men  that  are  settled  on  their  lees.' 
"  Though  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  Carmel,  I  will  search  and  take  them 
out  "  (Amos  ix.  3).  The  religiously  indifferent  must  be  punished  sooner  or  later. 
How?  By  burning  moral  convictions.  Convictions — L  As  to  the  absurdity 
of  their  conduct.  They  will  one  day  have  the  miserable  god  of  their  own  hearts 
and  the  God  of  the  universe  brought  into  contact  within  them.  2.  As  to  the 
wickedness  of  their  conduct.  3.  As  to  the  ruinousness  of  their  conduct.  "  Because 
I  called  and  ye  refused,  I  stretched  out  My  hand  and  ye  would  not ;  therefore 
I  will  laugh  when  your  fear  cometh,  and  mock  at  your  day  of  calamity." 
(Homilist.)  Stagnant  upon  their  lees: — This  starts  questions  for  ourselves. 
Here  is  evidently  the  same  public  temper  which  at  all  periods  provokes  alike  the 
despair  of  the  reformer  and  the  indignation  of  the  prophet,  the  criminal  apathy 
of  the  well-to-do  classes  sunk  in  ease  and  religious  indifference.  We  have  to-day 
the  same  mass  of  obscure  nameless  persons,  who  oppose  their  almost  uncon- 
querable inertia  to  every  movement  of  reform,  and  are  the  drag  upon  all  vital 
and  progressive  religion.  The  great  causes  of  God  and  humanity  are  not  defeated 
by  the  hot  assaults  of  the  devil,  but  by  the  slow,  crushing,  glacier-like  mass  of 
thousands  and  thousands  of  indifferent  nobodies.  God's  causes  are  never  destroyed 
by  being  blown  up,  but  by  being  sat  upon.  It  is  not  the  violent  and  anarchical 
whom  we  have  to  fear  in  the  war  for  human  progress,  but  the  slow,  the  staid, 
and  the  respectable.  And  the  danger  of  these  does  not  lie  in  their  stupidity. 
Notwithstanding  all  their  religious  profession,  it  lies  in  their  real  scepticism. 


CHAP.  I.]  ZEPHANIAH. 


Respectability  may  be  the  precipitate  of  unbelief.  Nay,  it  is  that,  however 
religious  its  mask,  wherever  it  is  mere  comfort,  decorousness,  and  conventionality  ; 
where,  though  it  would  abhor  articulately  confessing  that  God  does  nothing, 
it  virtually  means  so — "  says  so  "  (ae  Zephaniah  puts  it)  "  in  its  heart,"  by  re- 
fusing to  share  manifest  opportunities  of  serving  Him,  and  covers  its  sloth  and  its 
fear  by  sneering  that  God  is  not  with  the  great  crusades  for  freedom  and  purity 
to  which  it  is  summoned.  In  these  ways  respectability  is  the  precipitate  which 
unbelief  naturally  forms  in  the  selfish  ease  and  stillness  of  so  much  of  our  middle - 
class  life.  And  that  is  what  makes  mere  respectability  so  dangerous.  Like  the 
unshaken,  unstrained  wine  to  which  the  prophet  compares  its  obscure  and  muddy 
comfort,  it  tends  to  decay.  To  some  extent  our  respectable  classes  are  just  the 
dregs  and  lees  of  our  national  life ;  like  all  dregs,  they  are  subject  to  corruption. 
A  great  sermon  could  be  preached  on  the  putrescence  of  respectability, — how 
the  ignoble  comfort  of  our  respectable  classes  and  their  indifference  to  holy  causes 
lead  to  sensuality,  and  poison  the  very  institutions  of  the  home  and  family,  on 
which  they  pride  themselves.  A  large  amoimt  of  the  licentiousness  of  the  present 
day  is  not  that  of  outlaw  and  disordered  lives,  but  is  bred  from  the  settled  ease 
and  indifference  of  many  of  our  middle-class  families.  It  is  perhaps  the  chief 
part  of  the  sin  of  the  obscure  units,  which  form  these  great  masses  of  indifference, 
that  they  think  they  escape  notice  and  cover  their  individual  responsibility.  At 
all  times  many  have  sought  obscurity,  not  because  they  are  humble,  but  because 
they  are  slothful,  cowardly,  or  indifferent.  Obviously  it  is  this  temper  which 
is  met  by  the  words,  "  I  will  search  out  Jerusalem  with  lights."  (Oeo.  Adam, 
Smith,  D.D.)  The  danger  of  uninterrupted  prosperity: — God  is  omniscient. 
Why,  then,  should  He  represent  Himself  as  searching  Jerusalem  with  candles,  as 
though  there  were  the  remotest  possibility  of  any  acts  escaping  His  detection  ? 
These  representations  are  simply  intended  to  work  powerfully  on  our  minds. 
For  whom  is  it  that  the  Almighty  institutes  this  close  and  piercing  search  ?  Not 
the  perpetrators  of  any  very  secret  and  hidden  sin;  but  men  who  are  "  settled 
on  their  lees,"  whom  prosperity  has  lulled  into  a  kind  of  practical  atheism,  so 
that  they  deny  the  providence  of  God  or  His  interference  in  human  affairs.  God 
would  not  employ  this  strong  figure  if  there  may  not  be  a  great  deal  of  this  sensual 
indifference,  this  haughty  indolence,  even  in  those  in  whom  prosperity  may  not 
seem  to  us  to  have  acted  injuriously.  I.  The  natural  tendencies  of  a  state 
IN  WHICH  THERE  IS  NO  ADVERSE  CHANGE.  Take  the  case  of  a  man  on  whom, 
from  his  youth  up,  everything  has  seemed  to  smile.  When  there  is  not  unbroken 
prosperity  there  is  often  a  sudden  tide  of  success.  This  may  apply  to  both 
public  and  private  life.  To  these  the  description  "  settled  on  their  lees  "  may 
apply.  Prosperity  is  really  far  harder  to  bear  than  adversity.  It  is  a  great 
touchstone,  and  marvellously  exposes  the  weakness  of  man's  virtues.  There  is  a 
direct  tendency  in  prosperity  to  the  fostering  and  strengthening  the  corruptions 
of  our  nature.  The  more  a  man  obtains,  the  more  will  he  desire.  The  bent  of  our 
dispositions  being  towards  the  earth,  if  nothing  ever  happen  to  txu-n  them  from 
earth  there  is  little  ground  for  expecting  that  they  will  centre  themselves  on  heaven. 
Prosperity  has  a  tendency  to  keep  men  at  a  distance  from  God.  A  religious  man 
may  be  prosperous,  and  prosperity  not  prove  the  grave  of  his  religion;  but  the 
prosperous  man  who  is  yet  a  stranger  to  religion  is  amongst  the  most  unpromis- 
ing of  subjects  for  moral  attack.  II.  What  advantages  follow  upon  un- 
certainties AND  reverses  OF  FORTUNE.  1.  Change  admonishes  us  of  the 
transitory  natiu^e  of  terrestrial  good.  Every  change,  but  yet  more  a  succession 
of  changes,  speaks,  saying,  "  Arise  ye,  and  depart  hence,  for  this  is  not  your  rest." 
It  is  a  gracious  appointment  of  Providence  for  most  of  us  that  we  are  not  permitted 
to  "  settle  on  our  lees."  The  great  practical,  personal  truth  is,  the  necessity, 
the  paramount  necessity,  of  moral  renewal.  To  disciples  the  Lord  presented  the 
necessity  of  being  converted.  Regeneration  is  no  argument  against  the  need  for 
conversion.  {Henry  MelviU,  B.D.)  That  say  in  their  heart.  The  Lord  will  not 
do  good,  neither  will  He  do  evil. — The  unheeding  God  : — There  was  widespread 
apathy  and  unresponsiveness,  a  temper  which  seemed  to  make  the  judgments 
preached  by  Zephaniah  inevitable.  Even  those  who  had  a  theoretical  faith 
in  the  supremacy  of  Jehovah  looked  upon  Him  as  of  little  practical  account  in 
history.  This  apathetic  temper  miserably  disqualified  both  for  worship  and 
reform.  Zephaniah,  like  others  of  his  goodly  fellowship,  demanded  not  only 
formal  allegiance  to  the  authority  of  Jehovah,  but  a  thousand  loyalties  of  the 
secret  and  the  sohtary  thought.  '  I.  The  prophet  reminds  us  of  the  habit  of 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 

lilFS    OUT    OF   WHICH   THIS    DISTORTED    VIEW   OF   THE    DlVTNE    CHABACTEE   OFTEN 

GROWS — GEOSS  rsDOLENCE.  This  condition  of  character  is  described  by  an 
Eastern  metaphor  that  has  become  one  of  the  commonplaces  of  religious  speech, 
"  settled  upon  their  lees."  The  figure  brings  before  us  one  of  the  processes  of 
the  Jewish  vintage.  The  fermented  wine  was  poured  back  upon  the  thick  sedi- 
ment of  the  grapes  from  which  it  had  been  pressed,  and  in  this  way  the  wine 
gathered  to  itself  greater  strength.  But  the  process  needed  care  and  watch- 
nilness,  for  if  left  upon  the  lees  for  an  undue  length  of  time  the  wine  became 
highly  intoxicating,  and  incurably  harsh  in  flavour.  It  needed  to  be  separated, 
by  careful  and  repeated  strainings,  from  the  husk  and  sediment  with  which  it 
had  been  mixed  for  a  time.  The  man  whose  soul  has  sunk  into  moral  and 
religious  stupor  is  just  like  that.  In  his  daily  life  and  consciousness  the  coarse 
and  the  fine,  the  earthly  and  the  spiritual,  the  brutish  and  the  God-like,  lie  mixed 
together  in  contiguous  layers.  There  are  the  base  deposits  of  animalism  within 
the  man,  and  not  far  off  there  are  likewise  elements  of  purity,  reverence,  and 
righteousness.  In  those  who  are  godly  and  zealous  for  the  things  of  God  an 
effectual  separation  between  these  opposing  quahties  has  been  brought  about. 
The  soul  is  no  longer  touched,  inflamed,  stupefied  by  the  grossness  of  the  blood- 
On  the  other  hand,  one  who  is  careless  of  God  and  the  things  of  God  derives  the 
dominating  tone  of  his  thought  and  life  from  the  things  that  address  the  senses. 
A  man,  of  course,  is  compounded  of  flesh  and  blood,  and  there  are  legitimate 
needf  that  must  be  satisfied.  He  is  providentially  placed  in  social  relations, 
and  he  may  rightly  feel  pleasure  in  the  warmth  and  simshine  of  those  relation- 
ships. But  the  type  of  man  described  in  this  Jewish  metaphor  finds  in  mean 
and  sensuous  things  the  satisfactions  that  fix  the  qualities  of  his  personality. 
No  separating  crisis  has  come  to  save  the  man  from  his  dregs  and  his  animalisms. 
These  words  imply  that  men  of  the  inert  and  careless  type  are  accustomed  to 
make  the  pleasant  monotony  of  their  outward  lives  an  occasion  for  encouraging 
themselves  in  apathetic  tempers  and  traditions.  Intellectual  and  moral  life 
stagnates  in  the  race  that  is  cut  off  by  some  high  dividing  wall  from  surrounding 
nations.  We  have  the  highest  possible  securities  for  our  temporal  happiness 
and  well-being.  Our  national  habit  tends  to  become  more  and  more  luxurious, 
self- contented,  imperturbable.  We  build  ourselves  up  in  our  sleek  and  well- 
insured  respectability.  Nations  themselves  play  the  rich  fool,  saying,  "  Soul, 
take  thine  ease."  All  such  things  tend  to  beget  the  temper  of  a  lethargic 
materialism  within  us,  and  to  favour  our  unconfessed  belief  that  God  is  just 
as  apathetic  as  ourselves.  That,  of  coxu-se,  applies  to  the  individual  as  well 
as  to  the  nation.  For  some  in  our  midst  life  is  comparatively  even,  although 
as  a  rule  Providence  sooner  or  later  provides  us  with  many  sharp  antidotes  to 
the  coma  which  steals  upon  us.  Few  changes  may  have  come  since  the  first 
position  in  business  was  attained.  It  is  only  at  rare  intervals  that  death  creeps 
into  our  homes.  Life  is  genial  and  soul-satisfying,  and  we  should  like  to  keep 
things  as  they  are  for  generations  to  come.  We  discountenance  new  movements, 
because  they  might  disturb  the  rdgime  that  has  worked  so  smoothly  in  the  past. 
Men  settle  down  into  a  refined  sensuousness  that  is  fatal  to  stern  conviction, 
keen  consciousness  of  spiritual  facts,  and  consuming  zeal  for  righteousness.  No 
wonder  that  the  children  of  elegant  and  not  entirely  godless  somnambulists 
should  grow  up  apathetic  and  come  to  believe  in  an  apathetic  God,  if  indeed 
they  hold  to  any  figment  of  a  God  at  all.  And  this  description  appUes  too  often 
to  the  man  who  was  once  religious  after  the  best  pattern.  In  the  earUer  stages 
of  his  history  many  things  combined  to  keep  him  active,  prayerful,  strenuous. 
His  hfe  was  one  of  struggle,  sacrifice,  hardness,  disappointment.  But  smoother 
and  more  prosperous  days  came  to  him,  and  he  met  the  temptation  that  deteri- 
orated the  best  fibres  in  his  character.  He  is  nominally  religious  still,  but  a 
model  Laodicean.  The  danger  of  this  condition  is  great,  and  perhaps  no  surer 
sign  of  it  is  to  be  found  than  in  the  change  it  makes  in  a  man's  view  of  God.  A 
eelf-contented  Laodicean  is  always  under  the  temptation  to  believe  that  God 
must  be  more  or  less  like  himself,  since  he  has  ceased  to  feel  any  necessity  to 
become  like  God.  II.  The  peophet  ventures  to  put  into  aeticulate  speech 
THIS  VAouE  Laodicean  ceeed  of  the  heaet.  "  The  Lord  will  not  do  good, 
neither  will  He  do  evil."  Alen  sometimes  hold  contradictory  and  antagonistic 
creeds  at  one  and  the  same  period  of  their  history,  and  the  creed  fenced  in  with 
whispered  reserves  is  often  the  more  significant  and  decisive  of  the  two.  There 
is  a  sceptic  and  a  believer,  a  pagan  and  a  theist  in  most  of  us,  and  a  depraved 


CHAT.  I.]  ZEPHANIAH.  9 

will  sometimes  imposes  itself  on  a  sound  and  healthy  creed.  All  that  is  a  part 
of  the  dualism  of  human  nature.  Those  supine  and  well-to-do  citizens  of  Jeru- 
salem denounced  by  the  prophet  may  have  had  reserves  of  orthodoxy  and 
of  pious  patriotism  behind  their  time-serving  expediency  and  supineness.  God 
does  not  interfere  even  for  the  nation  supposed  to  be  under  His  special  protec- 
tion. He  lets  Hezekiah  and  Manasseh,  Amon  and  Josiah,  do  as  they  like,  and 
neither  frowns  nor  smiles  upon  the  national  fortunes.  The  pains  and  pleasures 
of  human  life  have  no  fine  correspondence  to  character.  Good  and  evil  befall 
men  without  any  special  relation  to  the  kind  of  lives  they  live.  It  is  not  easy 
to  see  any  sign  of  God's  judicial  dealings  with  the  children  of  men.  We  need 
not  stay  to  discuss  the  question  whether  it  is  the  habit  of  life  or  a  dishonouring 
idea  of  God  against  which  the  prophet  threatens  sharp  and  discerniiig  penalty. 
The  two  things  are  inseparable.  A  careless  hfe  always  fosters  an  irreverent 
creed,  and  an  irreverent  creed  is  formulated  as  excuse  or  sanction  for  a  careless 
and  self-indulgent  Ufe,  and  makes  the  carnal  sleep  doubly  sound.  It  is  some- 
thing in  the  character  which  is  to  be  punished,  but  a  vice  which  shows  itself  in 
twofold  form,  disabling  from  all  reforming  enterprise  on  the  one  hand,  and  turning 
the  creed  into  a  blasphemy  on  the  other.  The  wickedness  of  a  supine  and  self- 
indulgent  temper  culminates  when  it  engenders  a  base  conception  of  the  Most 
High.  Sometimes  a  man  may  mcvke  God  in  the  image  of  an  ideal  that  is  far 
loftier  than  anything  to  be  found  in  his  own  character,  but  in  the  case  of  the 
man  who  is  "  settled  upon  his  lees  "  such  ideals  are  extinct.  We  cannot  be  tepid 
in  our  moral  sensibilities  without  making  God  tepid  also.  The  strenuous  man 
will  believe  in  a  strenuous  God,  and  wiU  turn  atheist  if  asked  to  do  homage  to 
an  Olympian  dilletante  who  lounges  on  a  couch  of  ivory  with  cupbearers  at  his 
side.  It  is  perhaps  a  more  insulting  thing  to  make  God  a  Laodicean  like  our- 
selves than  to  think  of  Him  as  a  fiction  of  the  imagination.  A  denial  of  His 
existence  may  be  better  than  wholesale  misrepresentation.  If  God  seems  slow 
to  act,  it  is  because  He  is  waiting  for  our  repentance.  Natural  law  is  so  wide- 
spread and  inexorable  that  there  is  no  room  for  moral  interpositions.  We  can 
xinderstand  a  being  who  never  concerns  himself  with  human  affairs  because  of 
the  limitations  of  his  intelligence,  but  to  concede  intelligence  and  deny  the  will 
or  the  capacity  for  moral  interest  in  human  affairs  looks  like  an  insult  of  supreme 
shaniefulne.ss.  We  refuse  to  the  Being  behind  and  above  and  within  the  uni- 
verse that  which  is  greatest  and  most  honourable  in  oiirselvee.  We  accept  the 
broad  dogma  of  a  God,  for  the  universe  would  be  too  much  of  a  tangle  without 
that,  and  then  make  His  sway  theoretical,  secretly  questioning  whether  He  cares 
to  exercise  retributive  power  over  the  realms  subject  to  His  sway.  That  com- 
promise is  necessary  to  our  mental  comfort.  It  is  often  said  that  in  comparison 
with  the  universe,  man  is  such  an  insignificant  atom  that,  even  assuming  the 
existence  of  a  God,  it  would  not  be  worth  God's  while  either  to  reward  or  punish 
him.  Is  it  too  much  to  say  that  the  least  thing  in  the  world  of  animate  is  greater 
than  the  sum  of  all  things  in  the  world  of  inanimate  Ufe  ?  The  ant,  after  all, 
is  more  wonderful  than  the  sun  with  its  unfathomable  marvel  of  brightness. 
Mere  magnitude  cannot  become  a  true  standard  of  value  for  the  estimate  of 
that  which  is  moral  and  intellectual.  Most  of  us  have  come  to  learn  that  there 
is  an  arithmetic  which  dea,ls  with  quality  as  well  as  quantity,  and  it  is  perhaps 
the  more  important  of  the  two.  There  is  a  power  and  possibility  of  feeling  in 
God  to  which  no  conceivable  term  can  be  put.  He  does  care  even  for  ants,  and 
has  shown  that  by  bestowing  upon  them  a  wonderfiil  talent  for  caring  for  them- 
selves and  their  kind.  He  does  think  about  me,  and  it  is  rank  blasphemy  to 
say  He  cares  about  every  side  of  my  nature  but  its  moral  side.  History  teems 
with  the  rewards  and  punishments  He  never  fails  to  administer  for  our  encourage- 
ment and  warning.  If  His  kingship  is  living,  competent,  righteous,  it  is  impos- 
sible He  should  forget  His  duties  to  those  whom  He  governs.  If  we  accept  the 
message  of  modern  science,  evolution  itself  in  its  higher  ethical  stages  is  a  sufficient 
refutation  of  this  Laodicean  travesty  of  God.  We  are  told  that  the  so-called 
sense  of  right  and  wrong  has  been  slowly  awakened  within  men,  and  that  it  has 
its  primitive  roots  in  an  elementary  susceptibility  to  pleasure  and  pain.  That 
theory  implies  that  through  the  untold  cycles  of  the  past,  retributive  activities 
have  been  playing  upon  the  sense  of  pleasure  and  pain,  till  at  last,  when  the 
animal  emerged  into  the  human,  this  complex  and  marvellous  faculty  appeared. 
For  ages  upon  ages  some  unseen  power  has  been  patiently  reading  into  the  con- 
sciousness of  mankind  the  blessings  and  curses  of  the  law,  and  enforcing  the 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

message  with  lavish  bounty  on  the  one  hand  and  strokes  of  the  rod  on  the  other, 
till  at  last  mind-stufiF  quivered  into  the  Divine  thing  we  call  conscience.  That 
looks  as  though  God  had  intervened  in  the  past  times  without  number,  and 
as  though  His  righteousness  were  always  unresting  in  asserting  itself.  The 
analogies  of  our  imperfectly  ordered  social  life  often  give  some  kind  of  colour 
to  these  false  and  insulting  estimates  of  God  and  His  ways.  It  is  said  that  the 
passing  age  has  been  one  of  exaggerated  individualism.  Men  have  been  so  much 
occupied  in  asserting  the  sacredness  of  the  individual  and  his  separate  rights 
that  they  have  forgotten  the  responsibilities  of  each  member  of  the  community 
to  the  organic  whole.  They  repudiate  the  duties  of  citizenship.  "  They  will 
not  do  good,  neither  will  they  do  evil."  For  those  in  authority  over  us  to  pursue 
a  policy  of  masterly  inaction  in  times  of  national  peril  and  demorali.sation  would 
be  a  capital  crime,  and  can  it  be  accounted  less  shameful  in  Him  whom  we  assume 
to  be  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  ?  A  man  may  sometimes  excuse  him- 
self from  taking  part  in  public  affairs,  because  he  trusts  the  aggregate  good  sense 
and  virtue  of  his  fellow-citizens,  and  assumes  things  will  not  go  very  far  wrong. 
But  God  cannot  abstain  from  intervening  in  human  history  on  the  ground  that 
the  course  of  affairs  will  move  on  in  the  same  way,  whether  He  come  upon  the 
scene  or  not.  We  loathe  the  wretch  for  whose  arrest  the  Poor  Guardians  offer 
a  reward  because  he  has  deserted  his  family,  and  that  kind  of  man  as  well  as 
the  man  brought  to  book  by  the  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Children 
is  punished.  God  would  be  just  as  guilty  and  shameless  if  He  were  to  show 
no  concern  for  our  moral  discipline  and  upbringing,  and  abstain  from  all  inter- 
position in  our  lives ;  and  His  greatness  would  aggravate  and  not  excuse  the 
misdemeanour.  If  we  believe  in  a  God  we  must  believe  in  His  moral  earnest- 
ness. Is  it  not  possible  that  this  tendency  to  attenuate  God's  moral  earnestness 
may  underlie  the  half  beliefs  and  the  limp,  amiable  theology  of  the  hour  ?  If 
it  be  true  that  the  God  in  whom  we  have  come  to  believe  would  satisfy  the 
Laodicean  ideal,  the  call  to  repentance  loses  its  urgency,  and  sin  neither  needs 
specific  forgiveness  upon  a  basis  of  righteousness  nor  will  the  sinner  have  to  dread 
an  awaiting  punishment,  keen,  overwhelming,  irremediable.  We  can  disburden 
ourselves  of  the  rigid  and  uncomfortable  doctrines  of  the  past.  He  will  not 
trouble  Himself  about  our  peccadilloes.  Those  thoughts  concerning  God  to  which 
we  lean  in  our  silent  meditations,  and  which  influence  us  in  the  critical  and 
tempted  moments  of  life,  will  be  subject-matter  of  Divine  judgment.  We  cannot 
separate  this  whispered  creed  of  the  heart  from  selfish  and  neglectful  courses 
of  conduct,  for  it  is  that  by  which  we  excuse  ourselves.  The  fluid  creed  within 
us  crystallises  into  a  superstructure  of  character.  The  creed  of  the  heart,  more- 
over, must  be  judged  because  we  belong  to  invisible  more  essentially  than  to 
visible  spheres.  The  man  who  says,  "  I  believe  in  a  Laodicean  God,"  is  not 
only  inert  and  selfish  himself,  but  is  bent  on  making  his  own  characteristic  vice 
dominant  on  the  throne  of  the  supreme  sovereignty.     III.   We  are  reminded 

of  THE  FAB-KEACHING  AND  INEVITABLE  JUDGMENT  THAT  WILL  ONE  DAY  OVER- 
TAKE THOSE  WHO  ARE  LETHARGIC  IN  CHARACTER.  "  I  will  Search  Jerusalem 
with  candles,  and  punish  the  men  who  are  settled  on  their  lees."  These  lethargic 
souls  had  said  God  was  slack  to  fulfil  His  promise,  and  careless  as  to  the  chastise- 
ment of  every  kind  of  transgression.  God  will  answer  the  libel  by  inexorable 
punishment.  Their  evil  creed  had  been  cherished  in  secret,  but  God  will  bring 
wrath  upon  them  for  their  half -formulated  aspersions  upon  His  holy  zeal,  and 
will  find  them  out  in  the  dim  places  to  which  they  have  fled.  This  half-articulate 
murmur  which  makes  God  magnificently  inert  may  have  a  power  of  mischief 
in  it  sufficient  to  wreck  a  universe.  These  minute  blasphemies  and  scepticisms 
God  will  search  out  with  an  illuminating  severity  nothing  can  escape.  This 
sin  was  more  or  less  veiled,  for  at  one  time  Jeru.salem  had  been  religious  to  the 
verge  of  fanaticism.  And  in  one  party  in  the  state  there  was  still  enough  of 
zeal  to  make  it  expedient  for  unbelief  to  be  wary  and  reticent.  With  the  spread 
of  religion  and  the  growth  of  a  strong  public  opinion  there  is  always  a  danger 
lest  men  should  be  driven  into  secret  irreligion  and  unbelief.  Pagan  contamin- 
ations are  sometimes  latent  where  there  is  a  devout  and  zealous  exterior. 
{T.  G.  Selby.)  Practical  atheism  in  denying  the  agency  of  Divine  Providence 
exposed : — Practical  atheism  brought  the  judgments  of  God  upon  the  Jews. 
These  were  fully  executed  in  the  Babylonish  Captivity.  By  being  "  settled 
on  their  lees  "  we  may  understand  their  riches  ;  for  wine  grows  rich  by  being  kept 
on  the  lees.     So,  by  a  long  scene  of  peace  and  prosperity,  the   inhabitants   of 


CHAP.  I.]  ZEPHANIAH.  11 

Jerusalem  were  arriving  at  very  great  riches.  Or  it  may  signify  a  state  of  security ; 
like  wine  settled  on  the  lees,  they  have  been  undisturbed.  "  I  will  punish  "  should 
be  "  I  will  visit."  The  charge  here  brought  against  the  Jews  amounts  to  this — 
that  their  temper  and  practice  were  such  as  would  not  at  all  agree  to  the  practical 
belief  of  a  Providence.  They  thought  and  acted  as  if  it  were  their  real  and 
professed  belief  that  the  Lord  would  do  neither  good  nor  evil,  nor  meddle  with 
human  affairs.  This  atheistical  affectation  of  independency,  and  secret  or 
practical  renunciation  of  Divine  Providence,  is  the  fatal  thing  that  generally 
overturned  the  empires,  and  impoverished,  enslaved,  and  ruined  the  nations 
of  the  earth.  I.  The  doctrine  of  a  Divine  Pbovidence.  Maybe  you  already 
speculatively  believe  this  doctrine,  but  the  grand  defect  lies  in  the  efl&cacy  of 
this  belief  on  your  hearts  and  lives.  We  may  argue  from  the  perfections  of  God, 
and  His  relations  to  us.  We  may  argue  from  our  confessed  obligations  to  religion 
and  the  worship  of  God.  The  testimony  of  Scripture  is  plain.  New  and  un- 
expected witnesses  may  be  found  in  the  heathen, —  such  as  Nebuchadnezzar, 
Cyrus,  Plato,  Horace,  Cicero,  and  various  poets  and  philosophers.  II.  Things 
IN  temper  and  conduct  which  argtje  a  secret  and  practical  disbelief  op 
THE  doctrine  OF  PROVIDENCE.  I.  Would  there  be  so  little  prayer  among  us, 
if  we  were  generally  affected  with  this  truth  ?  2.  Is  not  the  general  indulgence 
of  vice,  and  neglect  of  religion,  a  plain  evidence  of  the  general  disbelief  of  a  Divine 
providence  over  the  country  ?  3.  Is  not  the  general  impenitence,  notwithstanding 
the  many  public  calamities  under  which  our  country  has  groaned,  a  melancholy 
evidence  of  this  practical  atheism  ?  4.  Is  not  the  general  ingratitude  a  plain 
evidence  of  the  general  disbelief  of  a  providential  government  over  the  world  ? 
5.  How  little  serious  and  humble  acknowledgment  of  the  providence  of  God  in  our 
disappointments  and  mortifications  is  to  be  found  among  us.  III.  The  wickedness 
OF  this  atheistical  temper  and  conduct.  To  deny  the  agency  of  providence  is 
the  most  daring  rebellion  against  the  King  of  heaven  ;  it  is  to  abjure  His  govern- 
ment in  His  own  territories,  in  His  own  world  which  He  has  made.  What  unnatural 
ingratitude  !  What  intolerable  pride  and  arrogance  !  What  impiety  and  insolence  ! 
This  atheistical  spirit  is  the  source  of  all  vice  and  irreligion.  {S.  Davies,  A.M.) 
Moral  scepticism  : — Beyond  a  doubt  there  is  a  great  deal  of  moral  scepticism  in 
our  own  time  and  in  regard  to  our  own  lives.  And  there  is  excuse  enough,  explana- 
tion enough,  of  this  sort  of  moral  scepticism  when  we  look  round  at  national 
and  political  life.  We  think  of  the  Armenians,  of  a  nation  massacred.  It  passes 
by,  it  is  half-forgotten,  and  God  is  silent.  Where  is  the  God  of  Judgment  ?  Surely 
He  does  not  care  !  "  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  He  do  evil."  And 
from  a  number  of  other  sources  we  may  feel  inclined  to  draw  that  same  lesson. 
Of  course,  those  who  look  deeper  Avill  tell  us  the  reasoning  is  shallow.  Look, 
they  will  say,  at  the  very  empire  of  the  Sultan.  It  is,  by  the  confession  of  all 
men,  on  its  way  to  ruin.  It  cannot  stand,  simply  because  it  is  corrupt  and  vicious 
and  cruel.  The  mill  of  God  grinds  slowly,  but  it  grinds  at  last,  sure  and  small. 
Yes,  it  is  certainly  true,  if  you  look  at  any  section  of  human  life  in  the  political 
field  you  may  draw  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  judgment  and  no  moral  God 
governing  the  nation.  It  is  not  so  if  you  take  a  long  enough  view  of  history  down 
its  long  region.  Where  there  is  a  luxury  and  an  undue  love  of  pleasure  there 
you  sap  the  roots  of  steadfast  industry,  and  where  industry  fails  the  nation  fails. 
Where  commercial  dishonesty  goes  beyond  a  certain  point,  there  the  reputation 
and  therefore  the  position  of  the  nation  suffers.  Certainly  there  is  always  in 
national  vice  a  tendency,  an  inevitable  tendency,  towards  national  decay.  It 
is  sin  that  is  first  the  reproach  and  then  the  disaster  of  any  nation.  There  is  a 
tendency  towards  judgment,  a  tendency  very  imperfect  at  present  in  its  mani- 
festation, but  even  in  the  great  national  regions  the  tendency  is  there.  You 
cannot,  unless  you  are  shallow-hearted,  say  that  the  Lord  doth  not  good,  neither 
doth  He  do  evil.  But  let  us  leave  the  wide  sphere  of  national  life  and  think  of 
this  moral  scepticism  as  it  touches  individual  lives  only.  Here,  too,  the  excuse 
for  it  is  apparent  enough.  It  is  only  sometimes  that  honesty  appears  to  be  the 
best  policy.  There  are  men  whom  we  would  not  trust,  because  we  believe  they  are 
hard-hearted.  And  yet  they  come  to  no  abrupt  or  signal  ruin ;  they  seem  to 
flourish  as  well  as  anybody  else.  There  are  moral  collapses,  disgraceful,  disgusting 
to  our  moral  sense,  and  yet  a  little  while,  and  without  any  appearance  of  repentance, 
simply  by  lapse  of  time,  the  subjects  of  them  seem  to  creep  back  into  respectability 
or  even  credit.  There  are  struggles,  persevering  as  it  seems,  against  vice  and  sin 
which  never  seem  to  become  effectual  or  to  succeed.    The  Lord  in  the  region  of 


12  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

our  own  lives,  as  we  watch  human  life  in  experience,  the  Lord  surely  doth  not  in 
fact  do  good,  neither  doth  He  do  evil.  But,  once  again,  the  scepticism  is  shallow. 
You  cannot  take  this  as  a  complete  account  of  human  life.  There  is  that  in  all 
human  consciousness  and  in  all  human  experience  which  rebels  against  the  con- 
clusion. Call  no  man's  life  happy  till  you  have  seen  the  whole ;  watch  the  life  to 
the  end.  Even  cautious  sin  is  found  to  ruin  persons  and  families.  And  sin — 
is  it  not  true  7 — is  very  seldom  alwajra  cautious.  So  it  is  that  we  look  around, 
and  in  all  classes,  in  our  own  experience,  we  see  the  victims,  the  manifest  victims, 
of  lust  and  gambling  and  drimkenness.  But  these,  you  say,  are  the  disreputable 
vices ;  nobody  ever  doubted  that  these  open  and  disreputable  and  reckless 
vices  brought  ruin.  Ay,  but  short  of  these,  in  respectable  lives  !  Why  are  so 
many  marriages  failures,  moral  failures  ?  Inquire,  and  you  will  find,  because  those 
marriages  were  rooted  in  worldliness  and  selfishness  ;  there  was  no  moral  and 
spiritual  discipline  behind  them.  After  a  little  time  the  temporary  attraction 
wears  off,  and  there  is  nothing  left  there  but  the  conflict  of  two  rival  selfishnesses 
and  the  discrepant  traits  of  divergent  characters  to  make  the  bond.  And  what  is 
that  ?  It  is  but  the  mark  of  the  Divine  judgment  upon  selfishness.  Or,  look 
at  this  and  that  and  the  other  individual.  Wilfulness  is  one  of  the  commonest 
of  human  qualities — wilfulness  which  comes  from  being  spoilt  when  one  is  yoimg, 
or  from  having  the  opportimity  to  do  just  as  one  pleases  in  somewhat  later  life, 
but  the  sort  of  wilfulness  that  will  not  bend  itself  to  the  Divine  requirements, 
sooner  or  later  brings  more  or  less  of  ruin  or  misery.  God's  judgment  is  in  this 
and  that  and  the  other  life  which  comes  under  our  experience  :  God's  judgment 
is  upon  wilfulness.  These  are  facts.  But,  we  say,  there  is  no  complete  picture 
of  Divine  judgment.  No,  that  is  the  fact,  no  complet/C  picture  here,  certainly. 
This  world,  certainly,  is  no  sphere  in  which  a  Divine  judgment  works  itself  out 
full  and  satisfactorily.  We  walk  by  faith,  certainly  not  by  sight, — if  we  believe  in 
the  reality  of  Divine  judgment — certainly  by  faith.  But  what  there  is  is  this, 
surely  a  tendency,  an  indication  of  Divine  judgment  which  checks  anybody  who 
thinks  at  all.  If  he  takes  the  sceptical  conclusion — "  The  Lord  does  not  do  good, 
neither  does  He  do  evil,"  there  is  something  rooted  alike  in  men's  moral  con- 
sciences and  in  their  experiences  which  assures  them,  in  spite  of  its  imperfect 
manifestation  here  and  now,  that  those  who  are  on  the  side  of  righteousness  are 
in  harmony  with  the  system  of  things,  and  those  who  are  neglectful  are  walking 
upon  a  volcano.  He  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works,  by  no 
arbitrary  judgment  from  which  there  can  be  any  possible  exemption,  but  by  an 
inevitable  moral  law  which  works  as  securely  as  the  physical  laws  of  growth  and 
decav,  of  life  and  destruction.  There  is  no  chance  of  escape,  not  for  a  single 
sin.  '  There  is  the  difference  between  moral  scepticism  and  moral  belief.  "  The 
Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  He  do  evil,"  therefore  "  I  will  not  be  righteous 
over-much,  nor  will  I  be  over-much  wicked."  It  does  not  really  at  the  bottom 
so  very  much  matter ;  there  is  no  such  very  searching  sieve  through  which  my 
life  has  to  be  passed.  That  is  the  scepticism,  that  is  the  shallowness,  that  is  the 
lie.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  the  tendency,  now  the  tendency  pointing  to  ita 
perfect  realisation  afterward.  The  Lord  judges  every  man  according  to  his 
works.  He  is  the  God  of  knowledge ;  He  sifts  thoroughly.  There  is  no  escape 
for  a  single  sin.  That  is  the  point.  Therefore  awake  to  righteousness  £ind 
sin  not.  Other  prophets  may  have  other  topics  in  store  for  us.  Let  Zephaniah 
take  this  and  that  moral  scepticism  which  tolerates  sin  because  the  Divine  judgment, 
after  all,  does  not  seem  to  act,  because  it  believes  your  hopes,  it  believes  that 
the  Lord  does  not  do  good,  neither  does  He  do  evil.  That  moral  scepticism  is 
Bhallowness  and  a  lie  at  the  bottom.  God  is  a  living  God  ;  God  is  a  God  of 
judgment ;  God  trieth  the  heart.  The  Lord  will  do  good,  and  the  Lord  will  do 
evil.  Everything  depends  on  what  you  are  trying  after,  what  you  are  tolerating, 
and  what  you  are  not  tolerating;  whether  you  are  simply  smoothing  over  the 
surface  of  your  life,  and  leaving  its  real  moral  contents  at  the  bottom,  unsifted, 
unexamined,  imresisted.     [Bishop  Oore.) 

Ver.  14.  The  great  day  of  the  Lord  is  near,  and  hasteth  greatly,  even 
the  voice  of  the  day  of  the  Lord. — The  comings  of  the  Lord : — The  times 
of  King  Josiah,  about  606  years  before  Christ,  were  times  of  much  religious 
awakening,  like  our  own.  The  Book  of  the  Lord  had  been  found  and  studied, 
the  idols  had  been  destroyed,  the  bones  of  false  prophets  and  idolatrous  priests 
publicly  burnt.     But  tindei  the  outside,  external  improvement  there  remained 


CHAP.  I.]  ZEPHANIAH.  13 

an  inner  and  obstinate  corruption  which  resisted  cure,  and  threatened  ere  long 
to  break  out  in  renewed  acts  of  idolatry  and  profligacy.  Against  this  the  prophet 
Zephaniah  was  sent  to  raise  a  warning  voice — to  protest  that  the  Mighty  Lord 
was  in  the  midst  of  His  people,  watching  not  only  their  public  acts,  but  their 
private  ways  and  thoughts.  In  the  seemingly  purged  Holy  City  there  were  men 
who,  in  their  heart  of  hearts,  were  practical  atheists,  men  really  careless  about 
serving  God,  living  secure  in  ease  and  plenty,  not  having  God  in  all  their  thoughts, 
persuading  themselves  that  the  Great  Ruler  would  take  no  notice  of  good  or 
evil,  and  that  a  watchful,  rewarding,  and  punishing  providence  was  but  an  empty 
dream.  The  prophet  denounces  and  warns  all  such.  But  alas  !  the  prophet's 
voice  was  disregarded.  So  Judah  went  into  captivity,  and  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  was  with  awful  vengeance.  Bitter  woe  descended  on  the  insensate  people 
who  wickedly  despised  their  day  of  grace  and  warning.  These  things  are  written 
for  our  admonition.  May  we  all  profit  by  the  Church's  faithful  warnings  !  There 
is  a  tendency  in  many  of  us  to  sink  the  future  in  the  present,  and  to  lull  ourselves 
with  the  delusive  notion  that  it  will  be  all  right  at  last ;  that  God  is  love,  and  love 
will  cover  all  our  sins.  Nevertheless  it  is  our  duty  to  proclaim  in  word  and  deed 
our  faith  in  the  Lord's  coming,  in  its  nearness  and  its  greatness.  He  who  once 
came  in  the  flesh  will  come  again  as  our  Judge.  Yet  men's  lives  are  often  a 
practical  denial  of  this  elementary  foundation  doctrine  of  Christianity.  Some 
men  say,  No  doubt  there  is  a  judgment,  but  it  is  going  on  continually  from  day 
to  day  now.  The  Judge  is  now  at  every  man's  door ;  He  comes  quickly  indeed, 
for  every  action  brings  at  once  its  immediate  reward  or  immediate  punishment. 
No  doubt,  in  the  main,  this  is  true,  but,  brethren,  the  voice  of  conscience  and  the 
voice  of  God  in  His  Word  agree  in  telling  us  that  the  present  judgments  are  but 
heralds  of  the  future  final  one.  When  they  are  judgments  now  of  pain  and  punish- 
ment, they  are  merciful  judgments  to  turn  sinners  to  repentance.  But  the  futiu-e 
judgment  will  have  still  higher  aim  and  purpose.  To  vindicate  the  ways  of  God 
to  men,  to  finally  put  a  stop  to  sin,  and  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness.  We 
who  really  believe  in  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord  in  glory  to  judgment,  as 
we  believe  in  His  first  coming  as  Man  to  live  on  earth  in  great  humQity  for  our 
sakes,  should  "  be  diligent  that  we  be  found  of  Him  in  peace,  without  spot  and 
blameless."     {Canon  Emery,  B.D.) 

Ver.  17.  They  shall  walk  like  blind  men. — The  sinner  a  blind  traveller : — 
The  sinner  is  on  a  jom-ney,  step  by  step  he  is  moving  on  to  a  destination. 
But  how  does  he  walk  ?  The  text  tells  us  as  a  blind  man.  How  does  the 
blind  man  walk  ?  I.  Unnaturally.  Though  a  few  men  may  be  born  blind, 
vision  is  one  of  the  chief  attributes  of  humanity.  Without  the  human  eye  all  the 
beauties  of  nature  would  go  for  nothing.  Blindness  is  unnatural.  So  is  sin.  The 
life  of  sin  is  a  life  of  unnattu-alness.  II.  Privationally.  What  does  the  blind 
lose  ?  The  great  world  of  beauty  and  sublimity,  the  great  firmament  of  biu-ning 
worlds,  and  all  the  exquisite  and  exhilarating  sensations  of  vision  are  excluded 
from  him.  What  does  the  sinner  lose  ?  Peace  of  conscience — harmony  of  feel- 
ing— feUowship  with  the  Infinite — power  over  death — a  blessed  hope  of  heaven, 
&c.  III.  Servilely.  The  blind  man  must  slavishly  depend  on  others  to  guide 
him  on  his  way.  We  have  seen  him  feeling  his  way  with  a  stick,  led  by  a  little 
child,  and  sometimes  dependent  even  on  a  dog.  The  sinner,  however  he  may 
boast  of  his  independence,  is  a  slave  to  the  world.  He  is  the  servant  of  sin — 
a  tyrant.  He  has  no  true  independence.  IV.  Perilously.  The  blind  man 
always  feels  himself  in  danger  when  alone.  The  sinner's  walk  is  perilous  indeed. 
His  danger  is  great — ever  accumulating,  and  ever  approaching.  Such  then  is  the 
walk  of  the  sinner.  But  moral  blindness  is  worse  far  than  corporeal.  1.  The  one 
is  a  calamity,  the  other  is  a  crime.  2.  The  one  is  to  be  pitied,  the  other  is  to  be 
condemned.  3.  The  one  can  be  turned  to  a  good  account,  the  other  cannot. 
(HomUiat.) 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Vers.    1-3.    Seek   ye   the   Lord,    all    ye    meek    of    the    earth.  —  Sin   and 

repentance,  the  bane  and  antidote  : — An  exhortation  to  the  men  of  Judah  to 
repent  ere  the  Chaldean  invaders  approach  and  wreak  destruction  on  their  land. 
I.  Sin  exposes  mast  to  ruin.  It  was  sin,  in  the  form  of  idolatry  and  gross  immor- 
ality, that  exposed  the  Jewish  people  to  the  terrible  doom  that  was  now  hanging 
over  them.  1.  The  suffering  that  follows  sin  is  sometimes  very  terrible.  Sin 
brings  to  a  people  famines,  pestilences,  wars,  hells.  2.  The  suffering  expresses 
God's  antagonism  to  sin.  "  The  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord,"  or,  as  Henderson  has 
it,  "  the  burning  anger  of  Jehovah."  The  connection  between  sin  and  misery  is 
a  beneficent  arrangement.  It  is  well  that  misery  should  pursue  wrong.  II.  That 
REPENTANCE  DELIVERS  MAN  FROM  RUIN.  1.  The  preparation  for  repentance. 
"  Gather  yourselves  together."  It  is  well  for  sinners  in  the  prospect  of  their  doom 
to  meet  and  confer  concerning  their  relations  to  Almighty  God.  2.  The  nature  of 
repentance.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord,  all  ye  meek  of  the  earth  "  ;  or,  as  Henderson 
renders  it,  "  Seek  ye  Jehovah,  all  ye  humble  of  the  earth."  There  are  two  seek- 
ings  here.  (1)  The  seeking  of  God.  He  is  "  not  far  from  every  one  of  us."  But 
we  are  all  away  from  Him  in  sympathy.  The  other  seeking  is — (2)  The  seeking  of 
goodness.  "  Seek  righteousness,  seek  goodness."  3.  The  urgency  of  repentance. 
Before  the  decree  bring  forth,  before  the  day  pass  as  the  chaff,  before  the  fierce 
anger  of  the  Lord  come  upon  you,  before  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  come  upon 
you."  (HomUist.)  Seek  righteousness,  seek  meekness. — True  ivay  of  seeking 
God : — The  prophet  defines  what  the  true  and  rightful  way  of  seeking  God 
is,  and  that  is,  when  righteousness  is  sought,  when  humility  is  sought.  By 
righteousness  he  understands  the  same  thing  as  by  judgment ;  as  though 
he  had  said,  "  Advance  in  a  righteous  and  holy  course  of  life,  for  God  will  not 
forget  yom:  obedience,  provided  your  hearts  grow  not  faint,  and  ye  persevere 
to  the  end."  We  hence  see  that  God  complains,  not  only  when  we  obtrude 
external  pomps  and  devices,  I  know  not  what,  as  though  He  might  like  a  child  be 
amused  by  us  ;  but  also  when  we  do  not  sincerely  devote  our  life  to  His  service. 
And  he  adds  humility  to  righteousness ;  for  it  is  difficult  even  for  the  very  best 
of  men  not  to  murmur  against  God  when  He  severely  chastises  them.  We  indeed 
find  how  much  their  own  delicacy  embitters  the  minds  of  men  when  God  appears 
somewhat  severe  with  them.  Hence  the  prophet,  in  order  to  check  all  clamours, 
exhorts  the  faithful  here  to  cultivate  humility,  so  that  they  might  bear  patiently 
the  rigour  by  which  God  would  try  them,  and  might  suffer  themselves  to  be  ruled 
by  His  hand  (1  Pet.  v.  6).  The  prophet  requires  humility,  in  order  that  they 
might  with  composed  minds  wait  for  the  deliverance  which  God  had  promised. 
They  were  not  in  the  interval  to  murmur,  nor  to  give  vent  to  their  o%vn  perverse 
feelings,  however  severely  God  might  treat  them.  We  may  hence  gather  a  profit- 
able instruction.  The  prophet  does  not  address  here  men  who  were  depraved, 
and  had  whoUy  neglected  what  was  just  and  right,  but  he  directs  his  discourse 
to  the  best,  the  most  upright,  the  most  holy :  and  yet  he  shows  that  they  had  no 
other  remedy,  but  humbly  and  patiently  to  bear  the  chastisement  of  God.  It 
then  follows  that  no  perfection  can  be  found  among  men,  such  as  can  meet  the 
judgment  of  God.  {John  Calvin.)  It  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  day 
of  the  Lord's  anger. — Prayer  and  providence  : — Zephaniah  could  not  promise 
the  people  exemption  from  the  trials  that  should  come  upon  them  from 
the  Chaldeans.  But  neither  was  it  possible  for  him,  or  any  other,  to  say  how 
much,  in  the  way  of  mitigation  of  those  threatened  evils,  might  be  effected  by 
prayer,  by  effort,  by  an  humble  seeking  unto  the  Lord  their  God.  "  It  may  be  " — 
a  theology  from  which  these  words  should  be  excluded,  would,  if  it  met  with 
universal  acceptance,  go  far  towards  turning  the  world  upside  down.  It  would 
paralyse  all  the  powers  of  our  religious  nature.  It  would  take  from  under  us 
all  grounds  for  trusting  in  a  moral  providence.  Let  certainty,  in  relation  to  the 
Divine  Being,  be  as  fixed  a  thing  as  you  will,  I  must  have  some  room  left  for  a 
peradventure — must  be  permitted  to  believe  that  there  are  possibilities  in  the 
future  of  indeterminate  issue.  This  indeterminateness  may  be  looked  at  in  two 
different  ways.  I.  As  it  bears  upon  the  principles  of  a  Divine  administra- 
HON.  Is  the  use  of  such  language  as  "  it  may  be,"  compatible  with  that  fixed 
order  of  procedure  by  which,  it  is  commonly  assumed,  the  Almighty  governs 
the  world  ?     L  These  words  suppose,  if  they  do  not  directly  affirm,  the  doctrine 


CHAP,  n.]  ZBPHANIAH.  16 

of  a  moral  providence  ;  as  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  fatalism ;  or  of  irresistible 
necessity.  There  is  a  constant,  continuous,  moral  superintendence  over  the 
affairs  of  men,  for  moral  purposes.  God  never  permits  secondary  agencies  to 
go  out  of  His  own  hands.  This  view  is  not  more  a  disclosure  of  revelation,  than 
it  is  an  essential  element  of  our  first  conceptions  of  an  Infinite  Being.  On  the 
Christian  showing  of  what  God  is,  we  cannot  admit  His  existence  without  admitting 
His  providence  also.  Of  course  nothing  more  is  contended  for,  than  the  fact  of 
a  special  providence  overruling  the  affairs  of  men.  Of  the  methods  of  our  preser- 
vation, or  deliverance,  in  trying  circumstances,  we  often  know  nothing.  2.  Take 
the  words  "  it  may  be,"  as  against  that  rinchanging  fixity  of  natural  laws,  which 
it  is  the  fashion  of  a  modern  philosophy  to  make  the  grand  autocratic  power  in 
the  universe  of  God.  The  form  of  the  objection  is,  that  since  cause  and  effect, 
in  the  natural  world,  are  joined  together  by  a  nexus  of  undeviating  certainty, 
all  prayer  for  the  modification  of  events,  occurring  in  the  order  of  physical  law,  is 
"  absurd."  But  this  not  only  limits  the  agency  of  the  Divine  Being  in  the  natural 
world,  but  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  our  conceptions  of  God  as  a  moral  governor. 
God  and  nature,  upon  this  theory,  make  up  the  universe,  and  the  only  relation 
which  God  has  to  nature  is  to  keep  the  wondrous  machine  going.  A  high  and 
impersonal  abstraction  governs  all  things.  Free  moral  agents,  in  this  apparatus 
of  eternal  sequences,  there  are  none,  either  in  relation  to  God  or  man.  What 
is  the  foundation  fallacy  of  this  reasoning  ?  But  prayer  asks  for  no  violation  of 
any  inevitable  law  of  sequence.  It  is  merely  an  appeal  to  Infinite  Wisdom 
to  devise  some  method  for  our  relief.  This  is  the  fault  we  charge  upon  the  so- 
called  scientific  objection.  It  assumes  that  all  the  events  in  this  world's  history, 
however  intimately  affecting  man's  happiness,  depend  for  their  accomplishment 
on  physical  laws  only,  rather  than,  as  they  do,  upon  those  laws  liable  to  be  modified 
in  their  operation  by  the  intervention  or  volition  of  moral  agents.  Just  here, 
where  a  fixed  thing  is  intercalated  with  an  unfixed  thing,  room  is  left  for  the 
putting  forth  of  human  effort,  and  the  offering  up  of  faithful  prayer.  The  assump- 
tion is  entirely  gratuitous  that,  in  praying  against  any  form  of  apprehended 
danger,  I  expect  the  laws  of  the  material  world  to  be  suspended,  or  altered,  or  put 
out  of  course,  in  any  miraculous  way.  My  prayer  only  goes  upon  the  supposition 
that  there  are  multitudinous  agencies  in  God,  which  may  be  employed  to  turn 
a  threatened  evil  aside,  or  to  modify  its  operation  before  it  reaches  me.  II.  Con- 
sider THE  SUBJECT  IK  RELATION  TO  HUMAN  AGENCY.  Or  what  man  may  and  ought 
to  do  towards  the  same  object.  1.  Seek  the  Lord  by  earnest  prayer.  2.  Take 
care  not  to  stipulate  for  any  particular  form  of  relief.  {D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The 
sainfs  hiding-place: — Notice  the  matter  of  the  exhortation  to  the  godly,  which 
is,  "  To  seek  the  Lord,  to  seek  righteousness,  to  seek  meekness."  The  subjects 
or  persons  upon  whom  this  exhortation  falls.  "  The  meek  of  the  earth."  And 
the  motive  pressing  thereto.  "  It  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's 
anger."  Ye  shall  surely  be  hidden  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  it  may  be  from 
the  wrath  present.  I.  God  hath  His  days  of  anger.  Take  anger  properly 
for  a  passion,  and  then  there  is  none  in  God.  Take  anger  for  the  effects  and 
fruits  thereof,  and  so  it  is  not  with  God  as  mercy  is.  Yet  He  hath  His  days  of 
anger.  The  more  excellent  a  person,  the  sooner  he  is  moved  to  anger.  Now 
there  is  most  excellency  in  God,  and  therefore  sin  being  a  contempt  of  Him,  He 
cannot  but  be  moved  to  anger.  Anger  is  the  dagger  that  love  wears  to  save 
itself,  and  to  hurt  all  that  wrongs  the  thing  loved :  there  is  infinite  love  in  God, 
and  therefore  there  must  needs  be  anger  too.  God  has  three  houses  that  He 
puts  men  into :  an  house  of  instruction,  an  house  of  correction,  an  house  of 
destruction.  It  is  not  in  itself  unlawful  to  be  angry,  only  your  anger  must  be 
unto  reformation,  as  God's  is.  If  there  be  wrath  in  God,  how  infinitely  are  our 
souls  bound  imto  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  we  are  delivered  from  the  wTath  to  come, 
reconciled  to  God,  and  made  friends  to  Him.  And  being  friends.  His  very  wrath 
and  anger  are  our  friends  also.  II.  In  days  of  anger,  God  is  very  wtllino 
to  hide,  save,  and  defend  His  people.  God  knows  how  to  deliver  from  danger 
by  danger,  from  death  by  death,  from  misery  by  misery.  Much  of  the  saints' 
preservation  is  put  into  the  hand  of  angels.  Those  that  hide  the  saints  are  sure  to 
be  hidden  by  God.  Those  that  keep  the  word  of  God's  patience,  have  a  promise 
to  be  hidden  by  God.  Those  are  sure  to  be  hidden  by  God  in  evil  times,  that  fear 
not  the  fears  of  men.  And  those  that  remain  green  and  flourishing  in  their  religion, 
notwithstanding  all  the  scorching  heats  of  opposition  that  do  faU  on  them.  And 
the  "  meek  of  the  earth  "  shall  be  hidden  by  God.     Ul.  Though  God  is  wiULiNa 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

TO  HIDE  His  own  people  in  Evrt  times,  yet  He  doih  sometimes  leave  them 
AT  OEEAT  UNCERTAINTIES.  They  have  more  than  a  "  may  be  "  for  their  eternal 
salvation.  But  as  for  our  temporal  and  outward  salvation,  God  doth  sometimes 
leave  His  people  to  a  "  may  be."  God  loves  to  have  His  people  trust  to  the 
goodness  of  His  nature.  IV.  When  His  people  have  only  a  may  be,"  it  is 
theie  duty  to  seek  unto  God.  There  is  no  such  way  to  establish  our  thoughts 
as  to  commit  our  ways  unto  God.  The  text  points  unto  three  things — 1.  Seek  the 
Lord  Himself :  not  His  goods,  but  His  goodness.  2.  Seek  righteousness.  3.  Seek 
truth.  V.  If  any  man  can  do  any  good  in  the  day  of  God's  anger,  it  is  the 
meek  of  the  earth.  Therefore  the  text  calls  on  them  specially  to  seek  the  Lord. 
The  meek  have  the  promise  of  the  earth.  The  meek  do  most  honour  Christ,  the 
way  of  Christ,  and  the  Gospel.  A  meek  person  leaves  his  cause  with  God  and  his 
revenge  to  Him.  The  meek  person  is  most  fit  for  the  service  of  God.  Hereby, 
even  your  meekness,  ye  walk  as  becometh  the  Gospel,  ye  inherit  the  earth,  are 
made  like  unto  Jesus  Christ,  have  a  great  power  and  credit  in  heaven  for  your- 
selves and  others,  and  shall  be  hidden  in  the  evil  day.  (W.  Bridge,  M.A.) 
Divine  discipline  (with  chap.  iii.  vers.  11  and  12): — The  prophet  spoke,  and 
in  fact  it  happened  that  judgment  fell ;  the  nations  passed.  Israel  was  chastised  ; 
it  went  into  captivity.  And  there  did  come  back  that  meek,  that  poor,  that 
afflicted  people,  despised  even  of  the  Samaritans — those  feeble  Jews.  They 
came  back  trusting  in  Jehovah  ;  they  laid  the  foundations  of  that  piteous  and 
miserable  new  temple.  Its  very  foundations  cause  contempt ;  tjiose  who  re- 
member the  old  temple  could  but  weep.  But  this  new  temple  was  to  be  clothed 
with  a  glory  which  the  old  temple  had  never  known.  It  was  the  religion  of 
humanity  that  was  to  come  out  from  that  regenerated  and  purged  people — that 
little  band  of  the  meek  of  the  earth.  Brethren,  we  speak  of  poetical  justice, 
and  we  mean  by  that  generally  when  we  want  to  see  the  hnes  of  ideal  actions 
clear  and  unblurred.  We  have  to  look  to  our  great  works  of  fiction,  to  some 
great  drama,  or  poem,  or  novel,  and  there,  if  they  are  great  of  their  kind,  we 
see  the  ideal  lines  of  Divine  judgment,  and  of  human  progress,  standing  out  clear 
and  vivid  in  that  which  the  imagination  of  the  artist  conceives.  And  the  artist 
mvist  conceive  it  for  us,  and  teach  us  through  these  ideal  lines,  because,  in  the 
most  of  our  ordinary  experience,  the  lines  of  Divine  action,  of  human  experience, 
are  blurred  and  confused  in  the  mixture  and  confusion  of  this  com*r;on  earthly 
scene.  But  it  is  not  always  so.  There  are  days  of  the  Lord.  The  days  of  the 
Lord  are  the  moments  in  history  when  the  ideal  issues  appear,  and  the  Divine 
hand  is  plain.  Such  a  moment  was  the  judgment  and  the  restoration  of  Israel. 
There  have  been  other  such  moments  in  history,  like  the  decay  of  Spain,  like  the 
French  Revolution,  like  the  collapse  of  Napoleon.  There  are  moments  in  history 
when  God  bares  His  arms  and  speaks  plainly.  It  might  be  so  again  one  day 
upon  what  is  proud  and  exalting  in  this  English  nation  of  ours.  Anyway,  God 
does  it.  Beyond  our  sight  He  will  do  it,  or  in  our  sight  from  time  to  time  He 
does  it.  That  is  the  Divine  method.  Always,  it  is  through  this  discipline, 
whereby  God  must  single  out  for  progress  those  who  will  consent  to  be  chastened 
into  meekness.  But  for  to-day  let  us  leave  again  the  scene  of  political  and  social 
history,  and  trace  this  method  of  God  again  in  the  individual  soul.  There  again, 
the  method  of  Divine  discipline,  the  method  whereby  we,  individual  after  indi- 
vidual, are  prepared  for  effective  fruitfulness,  is  this  same  method  of  chastening. 
One  after  annther,  in  our  pride  and  our  haughtiness,  we  have  to  be  chastened 
into  that  quality  which — it  is  the  very  paradox  of  Divine  justice — is  the  one 
really  strong  and  effective  quality  in  the  progress  of  the  human  soul,  and  it  is 
meekness.  Disciplined  into  effective  meekness — that  is  the  verdict  which  might 
be  written  upon  the  history  of  every  single  human  soul  which  fulfils  in  any  real 
measure  the  purpose  of  God.  Englishmen  are  proud  ;  we  know  it.  In  a  ceitain 
way  we  are  proud  of  being  proud.  Look  round  about  in  the  world.  What  are 
the  spectacles,  the  strange  and  overpowering  spectacles,  which  we  behold  of  the 
insolence  of  human  pride  ?  From  time  to  time  the  record  of  some  millionaire 
in  America  or  South  Africa  or  England  is  laid  bare  to  us — some  one  who  con- 
fessedly, and  before  the  eyes  of  men,  bids  defiance  to  ail  the  laws  of  mercy,  and 
simply  sets  himself  to  scrape  together  gold,  almost  professedly  making  gold  his 
god,  and  trampling  under  foot  the  laws  of  mercy  and  of  justice  and  of  considera- 
tion. And  there  are  smaller  men  who  never  rise  into  note,  or  come  before  the 
public  either  in  their  rise  or  their  catastrophe,  who  are  in  their  humbler  sphere 
doing  the  same  thing.     Or,  look  at  him,  that  rich  young  man,  that  Superbus, 


CHAP,  n.]  ZEPHANIAH.  17 

who  feels  that  the  land  is  made  for  him.  Look  at  him  as  he  goes  out  into  life 
with  his  preposterous  claim  for  amusement,  for  luxury,  for  self-satisfaction, 
with  the  recklessness  of  his  selfish  lusts,  as  he  does  despite  to  every  law  that  ought 
to  bind  men  in  mercy  and  consideration  and  purity,  because  he  must  gratify 
his  passion  at  all  costs  in  that  claim  for  amusement,  in  that  almost  riotous  estima- 
tion of  himself ;  so  that,  as  one  looks  at  him  in  his  arrogance,  one  wonders  why 
Grod  stands  it,  and  why  a  very  little  thunderbolt  is  not  sent  about  its  business 
to  despatch  him  there  in  the  impotence  of  his  vanity.  God  does  not  strike  them 
with  thunderbolts  ;  God  has  other  methods.  He  is  the  Father  of  each  one. 
In  slow  and  patient  silence  God  waits ;  God  provides  for  them  His  judgment. 
It  waits  upon  them  ;  it  will  come  at  last  in  this  world,  so  that  we  can  see  it ;  or 
beyond  this  world,  where  it  is  dark  to  our  vision,  God  will  judge  them.  But 
the  question  is  this — When  the  judgment  falls,  how  will  it  strike  ?  Surely 
they  will  know  that  God  is  God,  they  will  know  at  the  last  it  is  the  fool  that  saith 
in  his  heart,  "  There  is  no  God."  Yes,  they  will  know  that  they  were  fools.  But 
the  question  is,  in  what  disposition  of  mind  ?  Will  it  be  to  them  mere  punish- 
ment, mere  retribution,  or  will  it  be  to  them  purging,  healing,  disciplining  chastise- 
ment ?  That  is  the  question.  No  question  so  far  as  the  intention  of  God  is 
concerned  ;  in  God's  intention  these  judgments  are  for  chastisement,  for  dis- 
cipline, for  recovery.  But  there  is  a  soul  that  has  worked  itself  into  a  stubborn- 
ness which  will  not  bend,  and  perforce  can  only  be  broken.  That  is  the  question. 
Pharaoh  is  in  the  old  story  raised  up  in  the  scene  of  human  history,  to  stand  as 
the  type  of  the  soul  that  must  be  broken  because  it  will  not  bend.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  our  Bible,  Old  and  New  Testament,  is  full  of  the  gracious  pictures 
of  those  whom  the  chastisement  of  God  has  slowly,  and  at  last,  disciplined  into 
that  effective  meekness  which  is  the  one  charm,  the  beauty  of  the  children  of 
God.  Moses,  brought  up  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,  and  in  the  splendid 
opportunities  of  that  court — we  read  of  him  how,  in  the  pride  of  strong  manhood, 
he  went  out  to  be  the  deliverer  of  his  people.  He  met  with  nothing  but  rebuffs. 
"  Who  made  thee  a  leader  and  deliverer  ?  "  and  he  fled  alarmed  and  baflfled,  and,  in 
the  back  side  of  the  desert,  through  the  long  discipline  of  silence,  away  from  all 
political  interests,  Moses  learned  the  lesson  of  meekness,  and  he  goes  back,  that  old 
call  of  God  not  withdrawn,  now  effective  because  meek.  Moses  was  very  meek. 
"  0  Lord,  I  am  not  eloquent,  neither  now  nor  since.  Thou  hast  spoken  unto  Thy 
servant."  Pass  to  the  New  Testament.  Think  of  those  words  to  Peter,  "  When 
thou  wast  young,  thou  girdest  thyself ;  when  thou  shalt  be  old,  others  shall  gird 
thee,  and  carry  thee  whither  thou  wouldest  not."  It  is  the  record  of  experience 
of  every  one.  Limitations  crowd  in  upon  us.  There  are  multitudes  of  things 
which  in  our  hateful  arrogance  we  thought  we  would  do.  We  find  we  cannot 
do  them.  Limitations  close  in  upon  us — hindrances,  disappointments,  sufferings, 
pain.  How  are  we  to  bear  it  all  ?  Are  we  to  become  all  the  more  querulous, 
resentful,  irritating,  or  is  each  stroke  of  the  Divine  discipline  to  be  the  learning 
to  us  all  a  lesson,  so  that  all  the  more,  stroke  after  stroke,  the  soul  learning  its 
limitations,  is  forced  into  the  line  of  Divine  correspondence,  and  made  meek 
is  made  effective  ?  So  it  was  with  the  proud  and  the  impulsive  Peter,  so  that 
that  late  writing  of  his,  that  epistle  of  his,  is  full,  as  hardly  any  other  book  of  the 
New  Testament  is  full,  of  the  rich  power  of  the  spirit  of  meekness.  Or  Saul  the 
Pharisee,  yielding  at  last  with  one  blow  to  the  Divine  claim,  and  becoming,  for 
all  that  Jewish  pride  of  his,  once  and  for  ever  the  slave  of  the  meek  Jesus.  These 
are  the  meek  of  the  earth ;  because  they  are  meek,  therefore,  in  the  kingdom 
of  God,  the  effective — the  men  who  do  fruitful  things,  the  men  whose  work  lasts 
because  they  are  the  followers  of  Him  who  was  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.  Jesus 
had  no  pride  to  be  overcome.  What  are  you  expecting  of  this  human  life  of 
yours  ?  It  matters  so  much  what  we  expect.  Pleasure,  success  ?  Ah,  yes  ! 
There  is  in  this  human  heart  of  ours  an  inextinguishable  thirst  for  happiness. 
And  it  is  there,  God-given.  Do  not  listen  to  those  altruistic  philosophers  of 
our  modem  time  who  would  tell  us  that  to  have  care  for  ourselves  is  simple  and 
radical  selfishness.  Nay,  the  Bible  throughout  is  true  to  what  I  call  the  ineradic- 
able instinct  of  the  human  heart.  God  made  us,  and  because  He  made  us  we 
are  made  for  happiness,  we  are  made  to  realise  ourselves.  But  the  question 
is,  How  ?  Look  for  happiness,  make  it  your  aim,  hunt  for  pleasure,  and  you 
are  baffled.  It  is  by  the  law  of  indirectness  that  we  are  to  realise  happiness. 
He  that  saveth  his  life,  seeketh  his  own  life,  he  shall  lose  it ;  he  that  loseth  it, 
Jie  shall  save  it.     That  is  the  law.     Here  in  this  world  we  are  set  to  gain  character. 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

So  we  are  to  expect  discipline.  It  is  one  of  the  simple  laws  of  human  life,  character 
develops  by  discipline,  develops  through  pain.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He 
chasteneth."  Therefore  this  is  the  point,  a  point  of  supreme  importance  when 
you  come  to  think  about  your  life.  Am  I,  I  as  I  am  to-day,  I  being  the  sort  of 
man  I  am,  am  I  yielding  myself  so  that  God  by  disciplining  me  can  make  me 
meek  and,  in  meekness,  effective  ?  That  very  thing  which  I  have  always  said 
is  the  one  thing  I  could  not  stand,  when  it  comes,  as  it  probably  does  come,  if  I  set 
myself  too  much  to  rebel  against  it — when  it  comes,  how  do  I  take  it  ?  Have 
I  that  measure  of  spiritual  insight  and  thoughtfulness  which  enables  me  to  say, 
"  This  is  just  that  moulding,  graving  tool  which  is  so  necessary  to  rub  off  that 
sharp  angle,  to  blot  out  that  dark  stain,  to  do  this  or  that  or  the  other  necessary 
work  m  my  character  ?  "  Do  I  regard  it  as  the  trenchant  treatment  of  the 
Burgeon  who  is  to  again  make  me  soimd  ?  Humiliation  is  the  way  to  humility. 
Learn  the  lesson  which  the  humiliation  contains  for  us,  to  become  the  wiser  man, 
the  more  docile  while  not  the  less  resolute.  That  is  the  discipline  of  God — point 
by  point,  step  by  step,  biting  after  biting  of  the  tool,  smiting  after  smiting  of  the 
hammer.  So  it  is,  moulding  after  moulding  of  the  Divine  hand,  we  are  to  be 
brought  into  shape.  Now,  I  say  it,  there  is  not  a  day  of  om:  life  in  which  it  does 
not  make  a  real  vital  difference  whether  we  have  had  this  expectation  in  our 
will,  our  intelligence,  our  heart,  so  that  when  the  blow,  little  or  great,  comes, 
the  disappointment,  be  it  never  so  trivial,  it  may  teach  us  the  lesson.  The  little 
humiliation  may  come  on  its  way  and  speed  on  as  a  messenger  which  has  fulfilled 
its  obligation  and  done  its  duty.  For  it  has  taught  us  something,  and  we  go  to 
bed  something  wiser  men  and  women  than  we  got  up  in  the  morning.  There 
is  hardly  a  department  of  life  in  which  there  are  not  great  and  vital  changes  which 
are  needed.  Yes,  but  are  we  fit  to  do  them  ?  That  is  the  question.  Perhaps  we 
have  willingness,  but  have  we  what  is  a  part  of  meekness — patience  ?  Do  we  arrive 
with  our  enthusiasm,  our  ideal  enthusiasm,  and  then  shrink  altogether  from  the 
task  of  drudgery  ?  Because  you  know  there  are  only  two  qualities  by  which  any- 
thing finally  effective  can  be  done — enthusiasm  and  drudgery,  and  they  are  no 
good  apart.  Or,  is  it  vanity  ?  Yes,  I  offered  myself  to  work  on  that  particular 
committee,  I  offered  myself  to  do  that  good  job  which  sittely  was  for  the  bettering 
of  mankind.  But  then  I  thought  that  I  was  to  be  secretary,  or  I  was  to  be  put 
into  the  chair,  and  somebody  else  who  surely  had  no  better  claim  than  I  waa 
put  there.  Or,  is  it  the  refusal  of  pain  ?  There  it  is,  the  pain,  the  ugliness,  the 
dirt,  and  squalor,  and  to  do  anything  effective  I  must  be  in  contact  with  the 
pain  and  the  dirt  and  the  ugliness  and  the  squalor.  I  must  not  be  hiding 
myself  from  my  own  flesh.  But  I  shrink  from  it,  I  think  I  carmot  bear  it,  and 
the  task  is  undone,  and  the  Kingdom  of  God  makes  not  the  progress  it  might 
make  because  I  am  not  with  the  meek  and  the  patient,  with  the  sorrowful  and 
the  suffering.  Or,  is  it  prayerlessness  ?  I  have  my  schemes,  my  plans,  but  I 
do  not  keep  myself  in  correspondence  with  God.  It  is  my  own  pride  that  guides 
me,  my  own  ideas,  my  own  schemes.  The  question  is,  whether  in  the  larger  or 
less  sphere  we  will  mould,  mould  to  the  Divine  hand,  or  whether  we  will  be  that 
obstinate  stuff,  that  moral  character  that  will  not  mould,  and  which  becomes 
the  vessel  of  wrath,  the  vessel  which  the  Divine  Potter,  after  patient  trying,  finds 
unmalleable,  and  at  the  last  must  cast  aside  as  of  a  stuff  that  will  not  make  imder 
the  Divine  hand.  That  is  it,  the  Divine  Potter  would  mould  you.  And  is  there 
anything  to  the  spiritual  imagination  so  beautiful,  anything  so  lovely  to  think 
about,  as  the  discipline  of  the  soul,  conscious  of  the  hand  of  God  upon  it,  and, 
for  all  its  occasional  wilfulness  and  sins  and  faults,  ever  coming  back  to  be 
moulded  according  to  the  plan  and  will  of  the  Divine  Potter,  according  to  the 
love  of  oiu:  Father,  Who  chastens  us  into  effective  meekness  that  at  the  last  we 
may  share  in  the  glory  of  His  kingdom  as  things  that  have  realised  their  end  in 
that  fruitfulness  which  belongs  to  the  meek  ?  That  is  the  consciousness  which 
every  Christian  soul  is  sooner  or  later  meant  to  have.     {Bishop  Qore.) 

Vers.  4-7.  For  Gaza  shall  be  forsaken. — The  sinner's  baleful  influence,  and 
Ood's  disposal  of  all : — I.  The  calamities  fallinq  upon  onb  sennee  oftkw 
INVOLVB  OTHERS.  The  Tuin  of  the  Hebrew  nation  would  be  most  calamitous 
to  the  Philistine  cities,  and  indeed  to  the  neighbouring  States.  It  is  so — 1.  With 
nations.  2.  With  individuals.  This  shows — (1)  The  social  connection  between 
man  and  man.  No  man  can  live  unto  himself.  Each  man  is  a  link  in  the  great 
chain  of  hxmian  life ;  and  he  cannot  move  without  influencing  others.    Each 


<JHAP.  n.]  ZEPHANIAH.  19 

man  is  a  limb  in  the  great  human  body ;  and  if  one  suffers,  all  suffer.  (2)  The 
duty  of  man  to  look  well  after  his  own  conduct.  A  sinner  has  no  right  to  say 
he  will  do  what  he  likes,  and  that  no  one  has  a  right  to  interfere  with  him. 
II.  That  the  lot  of  man  is  at  the  disposal  of  Almighty  God.  "  And  the 
sea  coast  shall  be  dwellings  and  cottages  for  shepherds,  and  folds  for  flocks.  And 
the  coast  shall  be  for  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Judah  ;  they  shall  feed  thereupon  : 
in  the  houses  of  Ashkelon  shall  they  lie  down  in  the  evening :  for  the  Lord  their 
God  shall  visit  them,  and  turn  away  their  captivity."  Here  the  Almighty  is 
represented  as  arranging  the  futvu:e  home  and  circumstances  of  "  the  remnant 
of  the  house  of  Judah."  Though  we  are  free,  and  are  conscious  of  our  freedom, 
we  are  at  the  disposal  of  One  above  us.  He  has  appointed — 1.  Our  place  in 
the  world.  He  has  set  bounds  to  ova  habitation  '  that  we  cannot  pass." 
2.  Our  period  in  the  world.  "  My  times  are  in  Thy  hand."  We  are  often 
tempted  to  imagine  that  chance  rules  us.  But  amidst  all  this  feeling  of  con- 
tingency and  over  all  there  is  the  niling  plan  of  the  Beneficent  God.     {HomUist.) 

Vers.  8-10.  I  have  heard  the  reproacli  of  Moab. — The  persectUion  of  the  good : — 
I.  That  good  men  abb  often  subject  to  annoyances  from  the  ungodly 
WORLD.  "  I  have  heard  the  reproach  [abuse]  of  Moab,  and  the  revilings  of  the 
children  of  Anamon,  whereby  they  have  reproached  My  people  [abused  My  nation], 
and  magnified  themselves  against  their  border."  These  people,  the  Moabites  and 
the  Ammonites,  were  constantly  annojong  and  abusing  the  chosen  people.  In 
the  time  of  Moses,  Balak,  the  king  of  the  Moabites,  sought  to  destroy  the  Israelites 
by  means  of  Balaam's  curses  (Numb.  xxii.).  And  in  the  time  of  the  Judges,  both 
peoples  endeavoured  to  oppress  Israel  (Judg.  iii.  12,  x.  7).  The  charge  here 
probably  refers  to  the  hostile  attitude  assumed  by  both  tribes  at  all  times  towards 
the  people  of  God.  Both  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  charged  them  with  annoying 
them  (Isa.  xvi.  6 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  29).  The  hostile  conduct  of  Moab  and 
Ammon  towards  Israel  is  only  a  specimen  and  an  Dlustration  of  the  antagonism 
of  wicked  men  towards  the  truly  pious.  They  "  reproach  "  them,  they  charge 
them  with  superstition,  fanaticism,  cant,  hypocrisy,  &c.  The  best  men,  the  men 
of  whom  the  world  is  not  worthy,  are  always  persecuted.  11.  That  these 
annoyances  escape  not  the  notice  of  God.  '  I  have  heard  the  reproach." 
1.  God's  attention  to  the  minute  concerns  of  human  life.  2.  God's  special 
interest  in  His  people  (Jer.  xxiii.  23).  III.  That  God  will  not  fail  to  chastise 
the  authors  of  such  annoyances.  "  Therefore  as  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  the  God  of  Israel,  surely  Moab  shall  be  as  Sodom,  and  the  children  of 
Ammon  as  Gomorrah,  even  the  breeding  of  nettles,  and  saltpits,  and  a  perpetual 
desolation."  Mark — 1.  The  doom  of  those  reproachers.  They  shall  be  as  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah.  2.  The  cause  of  their  doom.  "  This  they  shall  have  for  their 
pride."     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  11.  And  men  shall  worship  Him.  —  Good  things  in  the  future:  — 
I.  The  destruction  of  idolatry.  You  may  burn  up  all  heathen  temples 
and  leave  idolatry  as  rampant  as  ever.  II.  The  advancement  of  true 
worship.  "  And  men  shall  worship  Him,  every  one  from  his  place,  even  all  the 
isles  of  the  heathen."  Observe — 1.  The  object  of  true  worship.  "  Men  shall 
worship  Him," — that  is,  Jehovah.  Him,  not  it — not  the  universe,  but  the  Infinite 
Personality  that  created  it.  2.  The  scene  of  true  worship.  "  Every  one  from 
his  place."  Wherever  he  is.  He  need  not  go  to  any  particular  scene — to  temple, 
chapel,  or  cathedral.  3.  The  extent  of  true  worship.  "  Even  all  the  isles  of 
the  heathen."     What  a  glorious  future  awaits  this  world  I     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  13-15.  He  will  stretch  out  His  hand  agalnBt  the  north. — National 
pride  and  national  ruin : — Two  facts  are  suggested — I.  That  men  are 
often  prone  to  pride  themselves  on  thh  greatness  of  their  country. 
The  men  of  the  city  of  Nmeveh — the  capital  of  Assyria — were  proud  of  their 
nation.  There  was  much  in  the  city  of  Nineveh  to  acco\mt  for,  if  not  to  justify, 
the  exultant  spirit  of  its  population.  It  was  the  metropolis  of  a  vast  empire  ;  it 
was  a  city  60  miles  in  compass,  it  had  walls  100  feet  high,  and  so  thick  and  strong 
that  three  chariots  could  be  driven  abreast  on  them ;  it  had  1500  massive  towers. 
Italy,  Austria,  Germany,  America,  England,  each  says  in  its  spirit,  "  I  am,  and 
there  is  none  beside  me."  This  spirit  of  national  boasting  is  unjustifiable.  There 
is  nothir^  in  a  nation  of  which  it  should  be  proud,  except  moral  excellence.     On 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

the  contrary,  how  much  ignorance,  sensuality,  worldliness,  intolerance,  impiety, 
that  should  humble  us  in  the  dust.  It  is  moreover  a  foolish  spirit.  It  is  a  check 
to  true  national  progress,  and  its  haughty  swaggerings  tend  to  irritate  other 
countries.  II.  That  the  greatest  country  must  sooner  or  later  fall,  to 
RUIN.  "  He  will  stretch  out  His  hand  against  the  north,  and  destroy  Assyria." 
"  Flocks  shall  lie  down  in  the  midst  of  her,"  &c.  Not  only  a  receptacle  for  beasts, 
but  a  derision  to  travellers.  "  Every  one  that  passeth  by  her  shall  hiss,  and 
wag  his  hand."  This  is  the  fate  that  awaits  all  the  nations  under  heaven,  even 
the  greatest.    (Homilist.) 


CHAPTER  III. 

Vbes.  1-5.  Woe  to  her  that  is  filthy  and  polluted,  to  the  oppressing: 
city !  —  A  religious  city  terribly  degenerate  :  —  I.  A  professedly  religious 
CITY  terribly  degenerated.  1.  The  princes  are  mentioned.  They  are 
"  roaring  lions."  2.  The  judges  are  mentioned.  They  are  "  evening 
wolves."  3.  The  prophets  are  mentioned.  They  are  "  light  and  treacherous 
persons."  4.  The  priests  are  mentioned.  These  "  polluted  the  sanctuary,"  by 
desecrating  the  sacred,  and  outraged  the  "  law,"  by  distorting  its  meaning  and 
misrepresenting  its  genius  and  aim.  II.  A  professedly  religious  city  terribly 
degenerated  although  God  was  specially  working  in  its  midst.  "  The 
just  Lord  is  in  the  midst  thereof  ;  He  will  not  do  iniquity  :  every  morning  doth 
He  bring  His  judgment  to  light.  He  faileth  not ;  but  the  unjust  knoweth  no 
shame."  1.  The  wonderful  freedom  which  the  Almighty  allows  to  wicked  men 
on  this  earth.  Though  He  strives  to  improve  them.  He  does  not  coerce  them. 
He  makes  no  invasion  of  their  moral  agency.  2.  The  tremendous  force  of  human 
depravity.  What  a  power  sin  gains  over  man  !  (1)  Do  not  hinder  Christian 
propagandism  from  entering  a  city  because  it  is  nominally  Christian.  The 
Gospel  is  wanted  there  perhaps  more  than  anywhere  else.  (2)  Do  not  expect 
that  the  world  will  be  morally  renovated  by  miraculous  agency.  Almighty 
Goodness  does  not  coerce.  There  is  no  way  by  which  mere  force  can  travel  to  a 
man's  soul.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  2.  She  obeyed  not  the  voice;  she  received  not  correction;  she  trusted 
not  in  the  Lord.  —  God's  lamentations  of  His  people's  incorrigibleness : — 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  city  mentioned  in  the  first  verse  of  this 
chapter  is  Jerusalem ;  and  if  we  duly  consider  the  whole  description  of  its 
moral  state,  as  detailed  from  vers.  I  to  4  inclusive,  we  shall  be  constrained  to 
exclaim,  "  How  is  the  faithful  city  become  an  harlot !  "  And  to  confirm  this 
statement,  we  only  need  refer  to  the  historical  records  of  the  two  preceding  reigns, 
to  that  of  Josiah,  at  the  beginning  of  the  latter  of  which  Zephaniah  prophesied. 
Manasseh  and  Araon,  the  two  preceding  kings  of  Judah  referred  to,  were  flagrant 
idolaters,  and  filled  Jerusalem  with  impiety,  violence,  and  blood  (2  Kings  xxi. 
3-6,  11,  16,  19,  22).  Wh,t  a  change  in  that  city  which  had  been  called  "  a  city 
of  righteousness  "  !  Well,  indeed,  might  Jehovah  say,  "  Shall  I  not  visit  for  these 
things,  and  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation  as  this  ?  "  Yes ;  and 
He  assures  them  in  ver.  8  that  He  will  punish  them  in  an  exemplary  manner.  The 
timely  reformation  of  good  King  Josiah,  however,  averted  the  stroke  for  a  time ; 
but  ultimately  "  wrath  came  upon  them  to  the  uttermost."     I.  That  the  foub 

FACTS  affirmed  IN  THE  TEXT  ARE  APPLICABLE  TO  SINNERS   OF  THE  PRESENT  TIME, 

AS  WELL  AS  TO  THE  Jews  OF  OLD  TIME.  The  facts  alleged  are  the  following — 
1.  Inattention  to  instruction.  "She  obeyed  not  the  voice."  During  the  reign 
of  Manasseh,  God  sent  His  prophets  to  remonstrate  with  the  idolatrous  king  and 
His  people,  but  they  would  not  hear  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  10).  Their  conduct  in 
this  matter  seems  to  have  disappointed  Jehovah  Himself,  as  is  evident  from 
verse  7  :  "  I  said  thou  wilt  fear  Me,  for  thou  wilt  receive  instruction,  but  they 
rose  early,  and  corrupted  all  their  doings."  Truly,  then,  "  Thev  obeyed  not 
the  voice."  The  fact  is  asserted  concerning  them,  Jer.  xxii.  21  :  '  I  spake  unto 
thee  in  thy  prosperity,  but  thou  saidst  I  will  not  hear.  This  hath  been  thy 
manner  from  thy  youth,  that  thou  obeyedst  not  My  voice."  Ministers  preacl^ 
conscience  reproves,  the  Holy  Spirit  strives,  and  Providence  pleads  against  men ; 


CHAP,  m.]  ZEPHANIAH.  21 

yet  do  they  not  hearken  nor  consider.  Furthermore,  the  text  alleges  against 
them — 2.  Incorrigibleness.  "  She  received  not  correction."  For  the  confirma- 
tion of  this  part  of  the  charge  let  us  hear  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  chap.  v.  3  :  "0 
Lord,  are  not  Thine  eyes  upon  the  truth  ?  Thou  hast  stricken  them,  but  they 
have  not  grieved ;  Thou  hast  consumed  them,  but  they  have  refused  to  receive 
correction  ;  they  have  made  their  faces  harder  than  a  rock ;  they  have  refused 
to  return."  Aad  if  you  would  know  how  severely  and  repeatedly  He  had 
stricken  them,  read  Amos  iv.  6-11.  There  you  will  find  that  Jehovah  had 
stricken  them  by  want  of  bread,  scarcity  of  water,  blasting  mildew,  palmer- 
worms,  pestilence,  the  sword,  fire,  and  destruction  ;  and  yet,  after  all,  had  to  say, 
"  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  Me,  saith  the  Lord."  How  impervious  must 
have  been  their  hearts  to  withstand  all  these  corrective  measures.  Call  to  mind, 
ye  hitherto  incorrigible  sinners,  the  afflictions,  privations,  losses,  and  troubles 
that  have  come  upon  you ;  still  many  of  you  have  not  yet  "  heard  the  rod,  nor 
Him  that  appointed  it."  Can  all  these  things  have  come  upon  you  by  chance  ? 
Is  there  no  meaning  in  them  ?  "  He  that,  being  often  reproved,  hardeneth  his 
neck,  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy."  "  Hear,  therefore, 
and  your  souls  shall  live."  Again,  oiir  text  alleges  against  them — 3.  Perfidy,  or 
faithlessness  towards  God — "  She  trusted  not  in  the  Lord."  This  stroke  makes 
their  moral  portraiture  darker  still.  In  the  days  of  their  fidelity  to  the  God  of 
their  forefathers,  in  seasons  of  perplexity,  they  had  confided  in  the  all-sufficiency 
of  His  wisdom,  love,  power,  and  faithfulness.  But  when  they  turned  aside  after 
other  gods,  in  their  straits  and  national  troubles,  they  looked  to  man  alone  for 
euccour  and  deliverance.  Hence  they  are  reproved  for  this  by  the  prophet 
Isaiah  (xxx.  1,  3,  15,  16,  and  Jer.  ii.  18-36).  Ah,  how  anxiously  did  they  rely 
upon  Egypt,  Assyria,  or  any  other  heathen  nation,  in  time  of  invasion,  instead 
of  trusting  in  their  God.  And,  alas  !  is  not  this  the  conduct  pursued  by  multi- 
tudes in  the  present  day  ?  In  times  of  afflictive  visitations  they  know  not  God, 
nor  put  their  trust  in  Him.  They  look  alone  to  human  prudence  and  prowess ; 
they  "  weary  themselves  in  the  fire  "  ;  but  seek  not  imto  Him  who  alone  can 
save  or  deliver.  But  how  frequently  are  they  ashamed  of  their  confidence,  as 
was  Israel  of  Egypt.  No  language  can  sufficiently  describe  the  turpitude  of 
this  defection  from  God.  Finally,  our  text  alleges  against  them — 4.  Neglect 
of  His  worship.  "  She  drew  not  near  to  her  God."  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
by  "  drawing  near  to  God,"  His  worship  is  meant  (1  Sam.  iv.  36  ;  Psa.  Ixxiii.  28 ; 
Heb.  X.  22).  It  appears  that  in  the  days  of  the  prophet  Isaiah  "  they  drew 
near  with  their  lips  "  ;  but  now  they  had  entirely  relinquished  the  worship  of 
Jehovah.  Manasseh,  and  Amon  his  son,  had  uprooted  the  worship  of  the  living 
and  true  God,  and  established  the  worship  of  idols  instead  thereof,  having  placed 
images  and  altars  in  the  very  house  of  the  Lord  (chap.  i.  4,  5;  2  Kings  xxi.  3-7). 
Thus  they  "  forsook  the  Lord,  and  lightly  esteemed  the  Rock  of  their  salvation." 
Solemn  feasts  and  daily  sacrifices  to  her  God  no  longer  graced  this  city.  Well, 
indeed,  might  He  say,  "  I  will  go  and  return  to  My  place  tiU  they  aclmowledge 
their  iniquity"  (Hosea  v.  15).  "  I  will  forsake  you"  (Jer.  xxiii.  33).  But  what 
did  these  backsliders  more  than  is  done  by  multitudes  in  the  present  day  ?  Have 
we  need  to  go  far  to  find  those  who  walk  in  the  same  footsteps  ?  First  look  at 
the  scanty  attendance  at  every  place  of  worship ;  then  visit  those  synagogues  of 
Satan  which  abound  in  our  land,  and  mark  the  crowds,  the  bustle,  and  the  business 
there.  We  need  not  ask,  do  these  draw  near  to  God  ?  II.  Give  a  general 
VIEW  OF  WHAT  IS  IMPLIED  IN  THIS  CASE.  1.  An  awful  manifestation  of  wilful 
disobedience.  The  very  facts  here  stated,  as  well  as  the  manner  of  their  being 
stated,  demonstrate  that  all  this  was  done  by  the  Israelites  contrary  to  the  will 
of  God.  The  doctrine  of  human  free-agency  is  here,  as  in  many  other  places  of 
eacred  writ,  and  also  in  the  daily  deportment  of  millions  of  transgressors,  most 
decisively  and  irrefragably  demonstrated.  2.  A  state  of  dreadful  impiety.  The 
allegations  contained  in  the  text  are  at  variance  with  every  thing  like  duty  to 
God.  There  is  no  docility,  reverence,  affiance,  nor  devotion.  Notwithstanding 
all  God  had  done  for  that  people,  thus  did  they  requite  Him  with  hatred  and 
disobedience.  So  enormous  was  their  guilt  that  Jehovah  exclaims,  "  Hear,  0 
heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth, — I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and 
they  have  rebelled  against  Me."  But  what  shall  be  said  concerning  the  flagrant 
impiety  of  vast  numbers  in  our  times  ?  If  possible,  the  latter  outdoes  the  former. 
If  we  reflect  on  the  vastly  increased  facilities  we  enjoy  for  knowing  and  serving 
God,  can  we  hesitate  to  entertain  this  fact  ?    3.  A  view  of  the  gradations  of 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

apostasy  from  God.  When  men  depart  from  Grod,  He  reproves  them  secretly 
by  His  Spirit ;  if  they  proceed.  He  chastens  them  by  various  means ;  if  they 
fly  from  Him  still,  and  put  their  trust  in  men.  He  withdraws  His  Spirit,  and  fre- 
quently confirmed  apostasy  is  the  resxilt.  Let  this  serve  as  a  warning  beacon  to 
us ;  for  assuredly  it  is  written  for  our  admonition.  Would  we  avoid  this  disgrace- 
ful conduct  we  must  beware  of  turning  away  our  ear  from  the  warning  voice  of 
the  Spirit.  4.  A  rational  vindication  of  those  signal  acts  of  retribution  which 
have  fallen  on  incorrigible  sinners  at  sundry  times.  Certainly  the  most  appalling 
calamities  have  befallen  the  Jews  at  sun(Hy  times,  especially  by  the  Chaldeans 
and  others  of  their  surrounding  nations,  as  well  as  the  Romans.  Yes,  whenever 
God  has  arisen  to  shake  terribly  the  nations,  or  sections  of  His  Church,  there  has 
certainly  been  a  cause  ;  nor  could  that  cause  be  other  than  what  is  indicated  in 
our  text.  Apart  from  the  necessary  exercises  of  a  probationary  state,  the  unerr- 
ing wisdom,  pure  benevolence,  and  impartial  justice  of  our  Sovereign  God,  neces- 
sarily prevent  Him  from  wanton  displays  of  His  omnipotent  power  and  terrible 
majesty.  "  The  just  Lord,"  it  was  said  of  old,  "  is  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  He  will 
not  do  iniquity."  Rather  than  complain,  therefore,  when  "  God  cometh  out 
of  His  place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,"  be  it  our  care  to  "  stand 
in  awe  and  sin  not"  ; — "to  humble  oiirselves  under  His  mighty  hand."  Remark 
— 1.  What  a  caution  we  have  here  against  apostasy :  in  effect  it  says  to  professors 
of  religion,  "  awake  to  righteousness,  and  sin  not."  2.  What  care  and  concern 
does  the  Almighty  manifest  in  using  so  many  endeavours  for  the  preservation 
of  His  followers.  3.  What  an  inducement  for  sinners  to  avail  themselves  of  the 
mercy  and  forbearance  of  God.  4.  How  affecting  the  expressions  of  God's  regret 
at  the  infidelities  and  apostasies  of  His  people.  How  pathetic  His  apostrophy, 
"  Why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ?  "     (G.  W.  Armitage.) 

Vers.  6-8.  1  have  cut  off  the  nations. — Terrible  calamities  in  human 
history  : — In  these  verses  the  prophet  sums  up  all  that  he  had  said  in  the 
preceding  verses  of  this  chapter,  and  thus  closes  his  admonition  to  repentance 
with  the  announcement  of  tremendous  judgments.  These  verses  remind  us  of  the 
following  great  truths — I.  That  theeb  is  a  sense  in  which  the  most  teeriblb 
CALAMITIES  in  HUMAN  HiSTOEY  MAY  BE  ASCEiBED  TO  GoD.  Here  He  is  represented 
as  cutting  off  the  nations,  destroying  their  "  towers,"  making  their  "  streets 
waste,"  so  that  "  there  is  no  man,"  and  "  none  inhabitant."     II.  That  the  geand 

DESIGN  OF  SUCH  CALAMITIES  IS  THE  PEOMOTION  OF  MOEAL  IMPEOVEMENT  AMONGST 

MANKIND.  As  the  storms,  the  snows,  the  frosts,  and  the  cutting  winds  of  winter 
help  to  bring  on  the  luxuriant  spring,  so  the  calamities  in  human  life  contribute 
to  the  moral   regeneration  of  mankind.     III.  That  the  non-ebalisation  op 

THIS  design  amongst  A  PEOPLE  EXPOSES  THEM  TO  TEEEIBLE  EETEIBUTION.      "  But 

they  rose  early,  and  corrupted  all  their  doings."  The  men  of  Jerusalem,  instead 
of  getting  better  for  these  terrible  calamities,  grew  worse.  They  "  corrupted 
all  their  doings."    This  they  did  with  assiduity.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  8-10.  Therefore  wait  ye  upoii  Me,  saith  the  Lord,  until  the  day  that  1  rise 
up  to  the  prey. — The  encouraging  aspects  of  God's  judgments : — In  this  latter  portion 
of  his  prophecy,  in  language  pathetic,  awe-inspiring,  and  subUme,  Zephaniah  fore- 
tells "  the  restitution  of  all  things,"  when  "  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  remember 
themselves,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord."  I.The  beneficent  end  which  the  Almighty 
HAS  IN  VIEW  IN  SENDING  THE  JUDGMENTS  EEFEERBD  TO.  1.  The  Conversion 
of  the  heathen.     2.  The  bringing  back  of  the  dispersed  of  Judah,  by  the  Gentiles. 

II.    The  GREAT  EFFECTS  WHICH  WILL  FOLLOW  THE  CONVEESION  AND  EESTORATION 

AS  HERE  PREDICTED.     1.  God  will  tuTu  to  the  nations  a  pure  language  (Heb.,  "  a 

Eure  lip").     And  2.  The  nations  of  the  world  shall  all  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
ord,  and  serve  Him  with  one  consent  (Heb.,  "with  one  shoulder").     III.  The 

LESSONS  TO  be  DRAWN  FROM  THE  DECLARED  PURPOSE  OF  ALMIGHTY  GOD.       These 

are — 1.  Patience  under  the  judgments  of  God.  2.  Faith  in  the  promises  of  God. 
3.  Encouragement  from  the  partial  fulfilment  of  the  different  judgments  and 
promises  of  God.     (C.  Appleyard,  B.A.) 

Ver.  9.  For  then  will  I  turn  to  the  natlooB  a  pure  lip,  that  they  may 
all  invoke  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  serve  Elm  with  one  shoulder. — 
On  serving  Ood  with  one  shoulder: — "Then!"  When?  In  the  day  in 
which  God  has  risen  up  to  pour  out  all  the  heat  of  His  fury  on  the  natioiLS 


CHAP,  in.]  ZEPHANIAH.  23 

and  kingdoms  of  the  earth.  No  question  more  frequently  and  deeply  frets 
our  hearts  than  this,  —  What  is  the  meaning,  what  the  intention  of  the 
iimumerable  miseries  by  which  we  are  tormented  ?  What  is  the  true  function 
of  the  sufferings  of  which  the  world  is  full  ?  The  best  answer  is  this, — The  miseries 
of  men  are  intended  to  purify  and  elevate  them,  to  make  them  perfect.  Springing 
from  their  sins,  they  are  designed  to  correct  their  sins,  and  to  lead  them  to  the 
love  and  pursuit  of  righteousness.  God  deals  with  us  as  the  goldsmith  deals  with 
virgin  ore.  He  tempers  it  with  an  alloy,  and  thus  makes  it  hard  enough  to  endure 
"  the  file's  tooth  and  the  hammer's  rap,"  and  the  keen  edge  of  the  graver.  When 
the  work  is  done,  he  washes  it  in  "  the  proper  fiery  acid,"  which  eats  out  the  base 
alloy,  and  leaves  the  pure  gold  untouched.  No  grain  of  the  precious  metal  is 
lost ;  but  its  value  is  indefinitely  enhanced  by  the  artistic  labour  bestowed  upon 
it.  And  thus  God  deals  with  us.  The  miseries  and  calamities  which  come  upon 
us  are  but  as  the  edge  of  the  graving  tool,  the  rap  of  the  hammer,  the  grating  teeth 
of  the  file.  By  these  He  gradually  and  patiently  carries  out  His  conception  of  us. 
His  purpose  in  us.  And  at  last,  like  the  fiery  acid  which  separates  the  base  alloy 
from  the  pure  gold,  death  comes  to  divide  the  carnal  in  us  from  the  spiritual,  and 
to  reveal  the  beauty  and  the  value  of  the  character  which  the  Divine  Artist  haa 
wrought  in  and  upon  us.  "  Cure  sin,  and  you  cure  sorrow,"  say  the  reason  and 
the  conscience  of  man.  And  "  the  sorrow  comes  that  the  sin  may  be  cured,"  says 
the  Word  of  God.  The  mercy  of  judgment  is  the  prophet's  theme  in  the  verse 
before  us.  To  the  image  of  the  final  clause  of  the  text — they  shall "  serve  God  with 
one  shoulder  " — attention  is  now  directed.  The  image  the  prophet  had  in  mine! 
was  that  of  a  number  of  men  bearing  a  single  burden.  If  they  are  to  bear  it 
without  strain  or  distress,  they  must  walk  with  even  or  level  shoulders,  no  one  of 
them  shirking  his  part  of  the  task,  each  of  them  keeping  step  with  the  rest. 
They  must  stand  and  move  as  if  they  had  but  "  one  shoulder  "  among  them. 
Only  thus  can  they  move  freely  and  happily,  and  make  the  burden  as  little  biu'den- 
some  as  possible  to  each  and  all.  The  law  of  God  is  a  burden  which  all  men  have 
to  bear ;  it  rests  on  the  shoulders  of  the  whole  world.  Men  can  only  bear  ifc 
without  strain  or  distress  of  spirit  as  each  of  them  freely  assumes  it,  as  they  all 
help  each  other  to  bear  it,  as  they  pace  together  under  it  with  a  happy  consent 
of  obedience.  I.  The  Divine  law  is  a  bueden  which  men  are  reluctant  to 
ASSUME.  Does  that  need  proof  ?  Do  we  not  ovu^elves  find  it  hard  to  cross  our 
wills,  in  order  to  adopt  the  pure  and  steadfast  will  that  rules  the  universe  ?  The 
will  of  God  is  never  so  fuU  of  grace  and  attraction  for  us  as  when  it  is  incarnated 
in  the  life  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  And  yet  even  this  is  hard.  To  our  self-will 
it  is  hard,  and  cannot  but  be  hard,  to  submit  even  to  the  purest  and  tenderest 
will.  Take  any  of  the  most  distinctively  Christian  precepts,  and  there  is  that 
in  us  which  resents  and  rebels  against  them.  We  delight  in  the  law  of  Christ 
after  the  inward  man ;  but  we  find  another  law  in  oiu"  members,  warring  against 
the  law  of  ovu"  mind.  We  can  only  find  rest  as  we  impose  a  yoke  on  the  flesh 
with  its  passions  and  lusts,  and  compel  them  to  bear  the  burden  of  obedience  to 
the  higher  law.  In  the  flesh,  or  in  the  spirit,  we  must  suffer.  The  only  option 
before  us  is — in  which  ?  Of  course  it  is  the  flesh  that  ought  to  be  subdued  and 
made  to  serve.  Shall  we  let  these  weak  wavering  wills  of  ours  be  the  sport  of  the 
impulses,  now  good  and  now  evil,  which  rise  within  us,  and  try  to  be  content  with 
yielding  at  one  time  to  the  flesh,  and  at  another  time  to  the  spirit  ?  We  must 
get  imity  into  our  life.  II.  The  teue  freedom  consists  in  a  willing  assump- 
tion  OF  THIS   BURDEN,   A  CHEERFUL  AND  UNFORCED   OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  DlVTNH 

LAW.  Doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart.  Sooner  or  later  self-will  makes  us 
hateful  both  to  ourselves  and  to  ovir  neighbours.  It  renders  us  incapable  both  of 
social  and  of  spiritual  life.  Let  a  man  acknowledge  no  higher  will  than  his  own, 
no  law  which  he  is  bound  to  obey,  and  he  becomes  a  burden  to  himself  and  to  all 
about  him.  We  must  take  up  some  burden  ;  we  must  bear  some  yoke.  All  we 
can  do  is  choose  the  law  to  which  we  will  yield.  The  law  of  God  it  vrill  be  wise 
for  us  to  accept.  This  is  the  law  which  really  rules  in  human  affairs.  If  we 
would  enter  into  a  true  security  and  an  enduring  rest,  we  must  make  His  will  our 
will.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  yidd  to  the  will  of  God ;  we  must  heartily  and 
cheerfully  adopt  it  if  we  are  to  be  free.  Obedience  involves  self-denial,  self- 
sacrifice.  There  is  but  one  way  in  which  we  can  make  the  hard  yoke  easy,  and 
the  heavy  burden  light.  It  is  the  excellent  way  of  charity,  of  love.  When  a  true 
and  pure  affection  has  been  kindled  in  the  soul,  the  most  difficult  tasks  grow  easy. 

in.    ThB  HAPPINESS  OF  OBEDIENCI  DEPENDS  LABGELT  ON  THE  UNAKmiTY  AND 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

THE  TTNivEESALiTy  OF  THE  OBEDIENCE.  Only  when  all  men  serve  God  with  one 
shoulder  that  all  sense  of  distress  and  effort  will  pass  away.  And  that  for  two 
reasons — 1.  If  we  really  love  God  and  His  law,  we  must  also  love  men,  and  yearn 
that  they  should  keep  His  law.  2.  Till  they  love  Him  and  do  His  will,  they 
will  put  many  hindrances  in  ovu:  path,  strew  in  it  many  stones  of  stumbling  and 
rocks  of  offence  which  cannot  fail  to  make  obedience  difficult  and  painful  for  us. 
When  the  Church  serves  God  with  one  shoulder,  and  when  all  "  the  nations  "  serve 
Him  with  one  shoulder,  then  at  last  the  pain  and  effort  of  obedience  will  be  over, 
and  we  shall  serve  God  with  unbroken  gladness  because  we  and  all  men  serve  Him 
with  a  single  and  a  perfect  heart,  {^amud  Cox,  D.D. )  The  chosen  people  ; 
their  language  and  worship : — I.  The  fikst  prtvileqe  which  God  givbth  His 
PEOPLE  IN  this  promise  IS  PTJBE  LANGUAGE.  Pure  Hebrew  had  become  degenerate 
Hebrew  in  Zephaniah's  time.  The  language  of  Adam  in  the  garden  had  no  sin  in 
it ;  it  was  not  capable  of  expressing  falsehood,  rebellion,  or  error.  We  speak  the 
human  language,  but  not  as  God  gave  it.  We  have  learnt  some  of  the  language 
of  demons.  Let  man  alone,  and  his  language  would  be  a  constant  opposition  to 
the  Divine  will ;  it  would  be  full  of  envy,  greediness,  covetousness,  murmuring, 
rebellion,  blasphemy  against  the  Most  High.  When  grace  comes,  God  will  restore 
the  pure  language.  What  is  this  pure  language,  and  how  may  we  know  it  ?  By 
its  very  letters.  In  those  letters  Christ  is  Alpha,  and  Christ  is  Omega.  Give  the 
Boul  once  the  pure  language,  and  it  begins  to  talk  of  Christ  as  its  beginning,  and 
Christ  as  its  end.  Christ  becomes  all  in  all  to  that  man  who  has  received  Christ 
into  his  heart.  You  may  know  that  language  by  its  syntax,  for  the  rules  of  that 
language  are  the  law  of  God.  Its  hardest  words  are  such  as  these, — implicit 
trust,  unstaggering  faith.  It  is  the  language  which  Jesus  spoke.  You  may 
know  it  by  its  very  ring  and  tone.  Wherein  does  its  purity  lie  ?  You  may 
discover  its  purity — 1.  When  it  is  used  towards  God.  Then  a  man  must  be  humble, 
confident,  and  filial.  There  is  a  pure  language  with  regard  to  providence.  The 
child  of  God  talks  about  God's  providence  as  being  always  wise  and  good.  2.  When 
it  is  used  concerning  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  3.  In  reference  to  omi  fellow- 
men.  Where  is  this  pure  language  spoken  ?  In  the  Bible ;  from  the  pulpit ; 
in  Christian  society.  II.  OtrR  common  worship.  All  converted  men  and 
women  do  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  1.  In  public.  2.  In  private  prayer. 
3.  In  making  Christian  profession.  III.  We  should  serve  Him  with  one  con- 
sent. When  the  Lord  saves  souls,  it  is  that  they  may  serve  Him.  "  Serve  and 
save  "  are  two  good  words  to  put  together,  but  you  must  take  care  which  you  put 
first.  Note  that  the  service  is,  and  must  be,  altogether  voluntary.  It  is  not 
"with  one  constraint,"  but  with  one  consent.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  To  serve 
Fitn  with  one  consent.  —  The  adaptation  of  the  established  Church  to  the 
prophesied  purposes  of  God : — The  right  improvement  of  life  consists,  mainly, 
in  two  grand  pursuits ;  our  personal  preparation  to  meet  our  God,  and  the  proper 
employment  of  our  talents  tor  edification  and  benefit  to  our  fellow-men.  These 
two  pursuits  will  generally  be  found  to  prosper  the  most  when  they  are  duly 
carried  on  together.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  press  on  your  attention  your  Christian 
obligations.  The  manifold  varieties  of  Christian  benevolence  will  be  found  resolv- 
able into  two  classes :  the  one  relating  to  the  temporal,  the  other  to  the  spiritual 
good  of  OUT  brethren  of  mankind.  God's  purpose  is,  the  extension  among  mankind 
of  "  the  knowledge  of  the  one  true  Grod,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent  "  ; 
His  end  is,  that  we,  through  Divine  grace,  should  secure  the  eternal  salvation  of 
our  perishing  brethren.  1.  The  foundation  of  all  our  hopes  and  confidence  for 
success,  in  the  purpose  of  God,  as  shown  in  revelation,  concerning  the  universal 
extension  of  religious  knowledge  in  the  world.  2.  There  is  a  peculiar  adaptation 
in  the  system  of  our  national  Chvurch  for  the  promotion,  under  the  Divine  blessing, 
of  the  gracious  purpose  of  Jehovah.  This  is  seen  in — ( I )  The  purity  of  her  doctrines. 
(2)  In  the  spirituality  of  her  ordinances,  (3)  In  the  catholicity  of  her  devotions. 
3.  A  plea  for  the  promulgation  of  the  scriptural  principles  of  our  Church  among 
the  rising  generation.     ( W.  Scoresby,  B.D.) 

Vers.  11-13.  In  that  day  shalt  thou  not  be  ashamed  for  all  thy  Aoings. 
—  A  sketch  of  a  morally  regenerated  city: — I.  The  uttee  absence  of 
THE  bad.  There  is  an  absence  of — 1.  Painful  memories.  "  In  that  day  shalt 
thou  not  be  ashamed  for  all  thy  doings."  Thou  wilt  not  need  to  be  ashamed 
of  all  thy  iniquities — (1)  Because  they  are  all  forgiven,  (2)  Because  they  will  occur 
no  more.    2.  Wicked  citizens.     "  I  will  take  away  out  of  the  midst  of  thee  them 


CHAP,  in.]  ZEPHANIAH.  25 

that  rejoice  in  thy  pride."  3.  All  crimes.  "  The  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do 
iniquity,  nor  speak  lies  ;  neither  shall  a  deceitful  tongue  be  found  in  their  mouth." 
No  wrong  committed,  no  lies  spoken,  no  deceit  practised.  The  whole  atmosphere 
of  the  city  cleared  of  such  moral  impurities.  II.  The  blessed  presence 
OF  THE  GOOD.  "  I  will  also  leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an  afflicted  and 
poor  people,  and  they  shall  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Who  will  be  the 
citizens  ?  1.  Men  of  humility.  Delitzsch  translates  the  word  "  afflicted," 
"  bowed  down  "  ;  and  Henderson,  "  humble."  Humility  is  evidently  the  idea. 
There  will  be  men  who  are  "  poor  in  spirit."  Moral  humility  is  moral  nobility. 
The  humbler  a  man  is,  the  nobler  and  the  happier  too.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor 
in  spirit."  2.  Men  of  piety  "  They  shall  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Their 
chief  confidence  will  be  placed,  not  in  their  strength,  their  wealth,  or  their  wisdom, 
but  in  God.  They  wiU  centre  then-  trust,  not  in  the  creature,  but  in  the  Creator. 
3.  Men  of  concord.  "  They  shall  feed  and  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make  them 
afraid."  There  will  be  amongst  them  no  acrimonious  disputations,  no  com- 
mercial rivahies,  no  social  jealousies  or  envyings,  no  painful  divisions  of  any 
kind.     {HomUist.) 

Ver.  12.  I  will  leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an  aJOicted  and  poor  people,  and 
they  shall  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. — The  rich  poverty : — I.  God's  deal- 
ings WITH  His  poor  Chukch  when  He  comes  to  visit  the  world.  "  I  will 
leave  in  the  midst  of  thee."  God  will  have  some  in  the  worst  time.  This  is  an 
article  of  om*  faith.  We  believe  in  the  "  holy  Catholic  Chtu-ch."  The  world 
Bhould  not  stand  were  it  not  for  a  company  in  the  world  that  are  His.  Though 
God's  people  be  but  a  few,  yet  hath  He  a  special  care  of  them.  Sometimes, 
indeed,  it  seems  otherwise.  God's  children  are  taken  away  in  common  judg- 
ments. But  He  deals  with  His  children  as  becometh  His  infinite  wisdom,  and 
so  that  they  shall  find  most  comfort  in  the  hardest  times.  II.  The  state  and 
condition  of  these  people.  "  An  afflicted  and  poor  people."  This  is  for  the 
most  part  the  state  of  God's  children  and  Chm-ch  in  the  world.  We  must  not 
say  it  is  a  general  rule.  Reasons  are — 1.  It  is  fit  that  the  body  should  be 
conformable  to  the  head.  2.  By  reason  of  the  remainder  of  our  corruptions  it 
is  needful.  God  sanctifies  outward  affliction  and  poverty,  to  help  inward  poverty 
of  spirit.  It  takes  away  the  fuel  that  feeds  pride.  And  it  has  a  power  to  bring 
us  to  God.  Inward  and  spiritual  poverty  is  not  mere  want  of  grace.  There  is 
a  poverty  of  spirit  before  we  are  in  a  state  of  grace,  and  after.  Where  this  con- 
viction and  poverty  is,  a  man  sees  an  emptiness  and  vanity  in  all  things  in  the 
world  whatsoever,  but  in  Christ.  There  is  a  desire  for  the  grace  and  favour  of 
God  above  all  things.  A  wondrous  earnestness  after  pardon  and  mercy,  and  after 
grace.  It  is  always  joined  with  a  wondrous  abasing  of  self.  There  is  a  continual 
frame  and  disposition  of  soul  which  is  a  poverty  of  spirit  that  accompanies  God's 
children  aU  the  days  of  their  life.  In  justification  and  in  sanctification  there 
must  be  poverty  of  spirit.  III.  The  carriage  of  these  poor  and  afflicted 
people.  Naturally  every  man  will  have  a  trust  in  himself,  or  out  of  himself. 
God  is  the  trust  of  the  poor  man.  What  he  wants  in  himself  he  has  in  God. 
Learn,  then,  to  know  God :  in  His  special  attributes,  and  in  His  promises. 
{R.  Sibbes.)  The  condition  and  character  of  the  people  of  God: — I.  The  condition 
OF  God's  PEOPLE  IN  this  WORLD.  "An  afflicted  and  poor  people."  "A  remnant." 
Though  trouble,  vanity,  and  vexation  of  spirit  attend  upon  believers  as  the  children 
of  this  world,  yet  there  are  trials,  difficulties,  and  woes  of  a  far  more  grievous 
nature,  peculiar  to  them  as  the  people  of  God.  Sin  is  the  greatest  of  the  great 
troubles  of  the  righteous.  Then  there  is  what  ScriptTire  calls,  "  the  hiding  of  God's 
coimtenance."  They  are  "  poor  "  in  the  sense  of  being  "  poor  in  spirit."  And 
the  true  Church  of  Christ  has  ever  been  a  protesting  minority.  II.  Their  hope 
AND  character.  Their  hope  is  "  a  good  hope."  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is 
a  strong  tower  ;  the  righteous  runneth  into  it  and  is  safe."  As  to  their  character, 
God  calls  them  to  holiness,  to  purity,  to  love,  to  peace.  The  most  devoted 
Christian  cannot  hope  to  be  entirely  free  from  sin  until  "  mortality  is  swallowed 
up  of  life."  But  the  believer  does  not  love  sin,  or  allow  it  to  reign  over  him, 
in.  Their  privileges.  1.  Their  wants  shall  be  supplied.  2.  They  shall  be  free 
from  terror  and  danger.  (C.  Arthur  Maginn,  M.A.)  God's  people  afflicted 
and  poor  : — The  Book  of  Providence  is  confessedly  a  difficult  book.  Perhaps  there 
are  few  more  mysterious  things  in  it  than  the  deep  trials  of  the  family  of  God. 
L  The  Lord  has  a  people.     They  are  the  Lord's  witnesses.     Yet  they  are  but 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

a  remnant.  A  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace.  II.  The  circttm- 
STANCES  OF  His  PEOPLE.  "  Afflicted  and  poor."  There  is  not  an  evil  in  life  from 
which  they  are  exempt.  They  have  afflictions  common  to  men,  and  afflictions 
peculiar  to  themselves.  Oftentimes  they  are  heavy  afflictions.  Many  of  God's 
people  are  literally  poor,  and  certainly  they  are  poor  in  the  sense  of  being  humble. 
III.  What  are  the  blessings  of  these  circumstances  ?  Affliction  is  the 
means  of  bringing  them  to  think.  And  it  is  the  means  of  drawing  out  the  sym- 
pathies of  the  saints  of  God.     (J.  Harington  Evans,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  The  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity. — The  saved  remnarU : — 
The  "  remnant "  is  those  who  are  left  after  the  sifting  out.  God  is  ever 
sifting  out,  and  the  unworthy  fall  through  the  meshes  of  the  mighty  sieve. 
They  are  swept  up  and  cast  out,  but  the  worthy  remain.  He  sifted  Israel. 
The  Captivity  tested  them.  He  sifted  the  infant  Church.  Persecution  proved 
its  members.  The  text  refers  to  the  blessed  privilege  of  those  who  shall  endure. 
I.  Their  number.  Only  a  "  remnant  "  It  was  but  a  remnant  of  those  people 
who  left  Egypt  that  entered  Canaan — only  two  men.  It  was  only  a  remnant 
returned  from  the  Captivity.  It  is  only  a  remnant  of  those  who  hear  the  Grospel 
who  are  saved.  Still,  there  is  a  remnant.  There  are  always  some  who  fear  God. 
God  never  leaves  Himself  without  witness  of  some  sort.  II.  Theib  character. 
1.  They  are  holy — "  Shall  do  no  uaiquity."  But  there  must  be  great  changes  in 
our  natures  and  circumstances  before  this  promise  is  fulfilled.  2.  They  shall 
be  faithful — "  Not  speak  lies."  This  is  one  branch  of  holiness,  but  it  is  a  very 
important  one,  and  is  mentioned  particularly  in  order  to  show  us  the  thorough- 
ness of  their  piety.  III.  Their  privileoes.  There  are  three  here  specified. 
1.  Provision —  They  shall  feed."  That  is,  have  spu-itual  food.  There  is  such  a 
thing  as  spiritual  starvation.  2.  Rest — "  They  shall  lie  down."  There  shall  be 
no  care,  no  anxiety,  no  toil.  3.  Protection — "  None  shall  make  them  afraid." 
It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  endure  the  Lord's  sifting.  Those  who  do  so  shall  live  for 
ever.     (Homiliat.) 

Vers.  14-17.  Sing,  0  daughter  of  Zlon. — Joy :  hitman  and  Divine  : — Here  is 
a  call  to  the  regenerated  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  to  exult  in  the  mercy  of  God, 
who  has  wrought  their   deliverance.     I.  The  joy  of  the  regenerated  man. 

1.  The  joy  of  gratitude  for  the  deliverance  from  evil.  2.  The  joy  of  conscious 
security.  II.  The  joy  of  the  regenerating  God.  The  joy  of  infinite  bene- 
volence. In  this  joy  the  redeemed  will  participate.  [Homilist.)  Exhortation 
to  joy  : — These  words  form  the  basis  of  an  exhortation  to  joy,  and  are  given  as 
the  reason  why  the  Church  should  rejoice  for  her  salvation,  accomplished  by  her 
Saviour.  I.  The  great  deliverance  of  the  Church.  1.  The  deliverer  is  God 
in  Christ.  2.  Her  captivity,  lying  under  judgment.  3.  Imprisoned  by  her 
enemies.  4.  The  removal  of  her  judgment  by  Christ.  5.  And  victory  obtained 
over  her  foes.  II.  Her  blessed  state  after  deliverance.  1.  God  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  Church.  2.  As  a  mighty  king  to  protect  her.  3.  As  a  wise  prince  to 
govern  her.  4.  As  the  father  of  all  His  people,  to  provide  for  all  their  wants. 
Hence  we  natiurally  suppose  that,  being  thus  blessed,  they  will  gather  round 
Him,  depend  upon  Him,  fight  for  Him,  and  live  and  die  with  Him.  III.  Her 
PROMISED  prospects.     "  Not  see  evil  any  more."     1.  Sin  shall  not  destroy  her. 

2.  Satan  shall  not  prevail  against  her.  3.  The  world  shall  not  ruin  her.  4.  The 
law  cannot  condemn  her.  IV.  Her  appointed  proceedings.  "  Let  not  thine 
hands  be  slack."  1.  We  are  commanded  not  to  fear,  either  Satan,  the  world, 
sin,  the  law,  the  anger  of  God,  or  wrath  to  come.  2.  We  are  to  be  courageous. 
Inferences.  See  what  encouragement — ( 1 )  For  earnestness  in  prayer.  (2)  Dili- 
gence in  reading.  (3)  Constancy  in  hearing.  (4)  Faithfulness  in  reproving. 
(6)  Boldness  in  standing  out  for  Christ,  and  the  truth  of  His  Gospel.     {T.  B.  Baker.) 

Ver.  16.  Let  not  thine  hands  be  slack. — The  Church  of  Christ  exhorted 
to  diligence : — I.  These  words  suggest  to  the  Church  of  Christ  that 
THERE  IS  A  WORK  TO  BE  PERFORMED.  The  caution  "  not  to  be  slack  "  implies 
an  injunction  to  be  diligent,  and  is  supposed  to  refer  first  to  the  rebuilding  of  the 
temple,  and  then  to  the  spread  of  the  Cnurch  of  Christ  in  Gospel  days.  To  ascer- 
tain the  special  work  to  be  performed  we  have  only  to  acquaint  ourselves  with 
the  sacred  character  and  required  employment  of  the  persons  addressed.  A 
people  of  holy  character  are  called  to  exertion,  and  their  work  must  be  in  imison 


CHAP,  m.]  ZEPHANIAH.  27 

with  their  character.  The  work  to  be  accomplished  by  the  inhabitants  of  Zion 
is  a  work  of  grace.  As  such — 1.  The  work  to  be  performed  is  spiritual  in  its 
nature.  Being  a  spiritual  work,  it  has  special  regard  to  the  interests  of  the  souls 
of  men,  and  embraces  every  duty  calculated  to  promote  the  purity  and  happiness, 
the  present  and  eternal  salvation,  of  intelligent  beings.  The  inhabitants  of  Zion, 
collectively  or  individually,  if  they  would  promote  the  happiness  of  men,  must 
lead  them  to  an  acquaintance  with  that  Saviour,  "  whom  to  know  is  life  eternaL" 
2.  The  work  to  be  performed  is  beneficial  in  its  operations.  Contemplate  the 
effects  in  their  immediate  subjects.  The  dark  mind  is  enlightened,  the  hard 
heart  is  softened,  the  perverse  will  is  subjected,  the  drowsy  conscience  is  roused, 
the  inverted  affections  are  rightly  directed,  the  carnal  nature  regenerated,  and 
the  profligate  life  is  changed  into  purity  of  deportment.  Contemplate  the  effects 
in  their  direct  tendency.  The  operations  of  grace  are  visible  in  all  the  kindred 
relations  of  life,  and  in  all  the  relations  of  society.  Contemplate  the  effects  in 
their  extended  influence.  3.  The  work  to  be  performed  is  important  in  its  char- 
acter. This  is  seen  if  we  reflect  on  the  exalted  interest  which  it  engages.  The 
spiritual  interest  of  man  engages  all  the  perfections  of  God,  and  all  the  persons 
of  the  sacred  Trinity.  Reflect  also  on  the  honomr  it  secures  to  man.  4.  The  work 
to  be  performed  is  indispensable  in  its  obligations.  These  are  numerous,  powerful, 
and  binding.  The  obligation  arises  from  man's  misery,  through  sin,  and  should  be 
felt  and  ac£iowledged  by  all  who  have  found  mercy  in  God.     II.  The  words  itnder 

CONSIDERATION  ALSO  SUGGEST  UNTO  THE  ChURCH  A  POWER  TO  BE  EXERTED.      Hands, 

in  Scripture,  signify  power.  The}"^  are  also  expressive  of  an  agent  employed. 
Zion  should  employ — 1.  The  mighty  power  of  truth.  2.  The  necessary  power 
of  imion.  3.  The  extensive  power  of  influence.  4.  The  consecrated  power  of 
wealth.     5.  The  prevailing  power  of  prayer.     III.  By  this  Scripture  we  are 

FURTHER  instructed  THAT  SUPINENESS  OF  SPIRIT  MUST  BE  AVOIDED.  "  Slack- 
ness of  hands"  indicates  a  disposition  that  is  most  enervating  in  its  influence. 

1.  Supineness  of  spirit  is  unworthy  of  a  work  of  grace.  2.  It  is  unequal  to  a  work 
of  grace.  3.  It  would  fail  to  accomplish  the  work  of  grace.  4.  It  is  very  offensive 
to  the  God  of  Grace.  IV.  From  these  words  we  are  taught  that  an  exhorta- 
tion IS  TO  BE  given.     1.  This  is  the  voice  of  God  from  His  sovereign  throne. 

2.  This  is  the  voice  of  ministers  from  the  towers  of  Zion.  3.  This  is  the  voice  of 
thousands  whose  state  demands  assistance.  In  conclusion — (1)  The  work  of 
grace  is  the  work  of  Zion.  2.  The  members  of  Zion  have  a  hand,  a  power  for 
this  work.  3.  The  members  of  Zion  are  called  to  im wearied  exertions.  {William 
Naylor.) 

Ver.  17.  The  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty. — God  in  the  midst 
of  His  Church  : — Almost  all  the  messages  of  the  prophets  to  the  ancient  Church 
begin  with  the  most  awful  threatenings  and  end  with  the  most  animating 
promises.  I.  What  is  here  said  to  the  Church  by  way  of  encouragement. 
1.  The  Chiurch  is  encovuraged  by  the  assurance  that  Jehovah  is  her  God,  her 
own  covenant  God.  2.  By  assurances  of  God's  everlasting,  unchanging  love, 
and  of  His  gracious  designs  respecting  her.  He  has  formed  an  unalterable  deter- 
mination to  save  her.  3.  That  God  rejoices  in  His  love,  and  in  all  its  sanctifying, 
saving  effects  upon  His  people.  4.  That  her  God  is  no  less  able  than  willing  to 
effect  her  salvation.  He  is  a  God  at  hand,  and  not  afar  off.  "  The  Lord  Thy 
God  is  in  the  midst  of  thee."  II.  What  is  said  by  way  of  exhortation.  "  Fear 
thou  not."  There  are  various  kinds  of  fear  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures, — filial 
fear,  reverential  fear,  humble  fear,  unbelieving  fear,  slavish  fear,  &c.  The  text 
forbids  the  Church — 1.   To   indulge   unbelieving  fears ;   or  2.  Slavish  fear ;    or 

3.  A  desponding,  pusillanimous  fear.  The  second  exhortation  is,  "  Let  not  thine 
hands  be  slack."  Slackness  is  opposed  to  zeal  and  diligence.  The  remark  is  no 
less  applicable  to  our  spiritual  than  to  our  temporal  concerns.  Slackness  or  in- 
dolence is  the  principal  cause  why  so  few  Christians  are  eminently  pious  or  usefuL 
Inferences — 1.  All  the  doctrines  and  promises  of  God's  Word,  and  all  the  gracious 
assurances  of  His  love,  have  a  practical  tendency,  and  are  designed  to  produce 
holy  zeal  and  activity.  2.  Learn  whether  our  belief  of  the  Divine  promises,  and 
the  hopes  and  consolations  which  we  derive  from  them,  are  real  and  scriptural. 
3.  Is  God  in  the  midst  of  us,  resting  in  His  love  to  us,  and  rejoicing  over  us  with 
joy  ?  Then  with  what  emotions  does  it  become  us  to  receive  and  embrace  Him  ! 
\E.  Payson,  D.D. )  God's  activity  : — This  text  is  cast  in  the  Gospel  mould. 
it  has  the  true  evangelical  mark.     It  discovers  the  revelation  of  God's  character. 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

which  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  fully  confirms.  I.  God's  work  tjpon 
THE  EARTH.  This  is  one  of  the  fundamental  facts  of  our  religion, — God  is  in  our 
very  midst.  Think  of  the  unworthy  conceptions  the  heathen  formed  of  God, 
and  the  imperfect  conceptions  Jews  formed.  Christianity  brought  God  in  Christ 
to  the  homes  of  men,  to  the  workshops ;  God  became  God  with  us  in  the  very 
breath  we  breathe.  But  Christianity  is  more  than  teaching.  It  is  not  a  school ; 
it  is  a  Church.  Doctrine  by  itself  might  enlighten  men's  minds ;  the  doctrine  and 
Christ's  presence  together  will  conquer  the  heart.  God  is  great  in  salvation ; 
God  is  mighty  to  save.  II.  How  does  God  think  about  His  work  ?  What  is 
His  attitude  in  it.  His  personal  interest  in  it  ?  The  activities  of  man  go  into 
two  great  divisions — 1.  Those  who  labour  for  bread.  2.  Those  who  find  their 
wages  in  the  work  itself.  The  one  is  the  labourer,  the  other  the  artist.  God 
takes  delight  in  His  work.  (William  Pierce.)  The  connection  existing  between 
God  and  His  people : — In  religious  concerns  men  are  always  prone  to  run  into 
the  opposite  extremes  of  presumption  and  despair.  Both  these  mistakes  arise 
from  defective  or  partial  views  of  the  character  and  design  of  Jehovah.  I.  What 
does  the  text  say  concerning  God's  relation  to  us  ?  "  The  Lord  thy  God." 
He  is  our  Maker ;  the  former  of  our  bodies  ;  and  the  former  of  our  spirits  within 
us.  But  as  far  as  we  are  sinners  we  are  not  the  work  of  His  own  hands.  II.  What 
DOES  THE  text  TELL  US  CONCERNING  His  RESIDENCE  ?  "In  the  midst  of  thee." 
God  is  everywhere,  but  not  everywhere  as  Friend  and  Saviour.  II.  What  says 
OUR  TEXT  CONCERNING  His  SUFFICIENCY  ?  "  Is  mighty."  "  Is  anything  too 
hard  for  the  Lord  ?  "  IV.  What  says  our  text  concerning  His  work  ?  "  He 
will  save."  Save  from  what  ? — From  our  supreme  calamity  and  peril.  But 
Bome  may  say,  We  are  saved  already.  But  you  may  know  more  of  this  salvation, 
feel  more  of  it,  rejoice  more  in  it,  and  communicate  it  more  to  others.  V.  What 
DOES  THE  TEXT  TELL  US  CONCERNING  His  HEART  ?  Here  is  a  love  accom- 
panied with  three  characters.  L  A  character  of  Divine  delight.  2.  A  character 
of  Divine  permanency.  3.  A  character  of  Divine  expression.  "  With  singing." 
( William  Jay. )  The  presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  His  Church : — A  revelation 
of  the  Divine  goodness  is  essential  in  proportion  to  human  affliction  and  sorrow. 
This  is  true  in  personal  and  individual  experience^  and  also  in  the  general  history 
of  the  Chiurch.  Where  affliction  is  found,  there  consolation  is  found.  I.  God  is 
IN  THE  MIDST  OF  THE  Church.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  them  for  gracious  purposes. 
There  He  is  to  record  His  name  ;  there  He  is  by  the  sweet  experience  of  His 
promises  and  there  He  is  by  the  most  abundant  communications,  beyond  all 
they  ask,  of  that  grace  which  is  requisite  for  their  comfort.  II.  God  is  in  the 
MIDST  OF  His  people  to  save  them.  There  He  communicates  the  immense 
blessings  of  salvation.  So  gracious  is  God,  so  dependent  and  necessitous  is  man, 
that  everything  may  be  considered  as  coming  to  us  in  the  way  of  salvation.  All 
that  we  receive  we  receive  from  the  hand  of  God  freely.  It  is  one  thing  to  find 
a  Helper,  but  another  thing  to  find  a  Saviour.  III.  He  is  mighty  to  accomplish 
that  salvation.  It  is  not  every  effort  in  favour  of  another  that  can  be  considered 
as  salvation.  Wherever  salvation  is  wrought  by  one  individual  in  favour  of 
another  it  implies  weakness  on  the  part  of  the  one,  and  power  on  the  part  of  the 
other.  Consider  the  "  mightiness  "  of  the  Son  of  God  as  essential  to  qualify 
Him  to  become  a  Saviour.  He  must  be  mighty  to  save,  so  as  to  overcome  the 
defects  in  our  own  strength,  to  satisfy  the  outstanding  claims  of  justice  against 
the  sinner,  to  bring  us  with  Divine  approbation  before  God.  IV.  He  is  resolved 
ON  THAT  salvation.  "  He  will  save."  The  declaration  is  so  put  as  to  pledge 
the  will  of  God  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  work.  It  is  not  on  our  determination 
and  resolves  that  the  work  is  suspended,  but  on  the  resolution,  the  determination 
of  Christ.  V.  Christ  our  Saviour  delights  in  our  salvation.  Though  it  has 
cost  Him  so  much,  there  is  nothing  gives  Him  half  the  pleasure.  He  is  said  to 
"rest  in  His  love."     Infer  from  this  subject  two  things — 1.  The  nature  of  sin. 

2.  The  danger  of  an  unconverted  state.  (Andrew  Reed,  B.A  )  God  and  His 
people  : — God  is  everywhere.  His  special  presence  in  His  Church  is  the  present 
theme.  I.  God's  dwelling  among  His  people.  1.  Under  the  former  dis- 
pensations of  mercy.  2.  Under  the  present  administration  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  ;   the  ministration  of  the  Spirit. 

3.  In  the  heavenly  world.  II.  God's  deliverance  of  His  people.  I.  The 
power  of  God.  Including  physical  power,  mental  power,  moral  power.  2.  God 
»8  mighty  in  the  use  of  intellectual  power  to  save  His  people.  3.  God  is  mighty 
in  moral  and  spiritual  power  to  save  His  people.     God  is  mighty — (1)  To  convert. 


CHAP,  ra.]  ZEPHANIAH.  29 

(2)  To  pardon.     (3)  To  make  His  people  holy.     (4)  To  protect  and  secure  His 
people.     (5)  To  make  His  people  peaceful,  joyful,  and  happy.     (6)  To  glorify 
His  people.     III.  God's  delight  in  His  pboplh.     He  fills  Himself  with  joy  over 
His  redeemed  Church.     1.  The  presence  of  Grod  in  His  Church  is  its  glory.     2.  The 
power  of  God  is  the  strength  of  His  people      {T.  E.  Thoresby.)        A  transfiguring 
presence  : — One  of  Goethe's  tales  is  of  a  rude  fisherman's  hut  which  was  changed 
to  silver  by  the  setting  in  it  of  a  little  silver  lamp.     The  logs  of  which  the  hut  waa 
built,  its  jfloors,  its  doors,  its  roof,  its  furniture — all  were  changed  to  silver  by 
this  magic  lamp.     The  story  illustrates  what  takes  place  in  the  Hfe  when  Christ 
comes  into  it.     The  character  is  transformed,  but  not  the  character  only ;  all 
life  is  made  new  when  one  becomes  a  child  of  God.     Everything  after  that  is 
different.     The  outward  conditions  and  circumstances  may  be  the  same,  but  they 
ehine  now  with  a  new  beauty.        He  will  save. — Mighty  to  save  : — These  words 
are  full  of  encouragement.     I.  The  exhortation  which  God  herb  addresses 
TO  His  people.     They  are  called  upon — 1.  To  banish  every  alarming  apprehen- 
Bion.     There  is  much  to  excite  their  anxiety.     2.  To  prevent  faintheartedness 
and  lukewarmness.     Th^^y  were  to  be  up  and  doing.     II.  The  GROtmDS  on  which 
the  above  exhortation  rests.     1.  The  deliverance  they  were  to  experience. 
Regarding  the  passage  as  applicable  to  our  great  and  glorious  salvation,  we  are 
shown — (1)  His  ability   to   save.     (2)  His   purpose   to   save.     (3)  The   feelings 
with  which  He  saves.     2.  The  consolations  they  were  to  realise.     3.  The  honour 
they  were  to  receive.     It  is  only  for  the  heirs  of  salvation  that  this  honour  is 
reserved,  and  it  is  by  them  alone  that  true  consolation  is  enjoyed.     {Author  of 
"  Footsteps  of  Jesus")         He  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy. — God's  joy  in 
salvation  : — It  is  obvious.   He  can  save — for  He  is  in  the  midst  of  them,  and 
mighty.     Here  is  nearness  and  power.     But   He   will  save — He  is  inclined,  He 
is  engaged.     He  wiU  save.  He  will  rejoice   over  them  with  joy.     What  is  this 
salvation  ?     It  does  not  exclude  temporal  preservation  and  deliverance.     We 
are  not  to  look  for  miracles,  but  we  may  look  for  Him  who  performed  them. 
Temporal  deliverances  are  promised  conditionally.     Salvation  includes  redemption 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  deliverance  from  the  powers  of  darkness,  freedom  from 
the  sting  of  death,  release  from  the  dominion  and  being  of  sin.     This  salvation 
is  ensured.     This   salvation  is   begun.     (William  Jay.)         Christ's  joy  in  His 
people  : — In  the  time  of  Zephaniah  the  iniquity  of  the  Jews  was  very  great,  and 
as  a  nation  they  were  fast  ripening  for  punishment.     Battle  and  defeat,  exile  and 
slavery,  were  in  store  for  them,  but  these  would  pass  away,  and  days  of  rejoicing 
would  come  again.     Referring  to  that  time,  the  prophet  calls  for  songs  of  hope. 
I.  The  Lord  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty.     He  doeth  what  He  will 
with  His  own,  and  all  things  are  His.     The  greatest  feel  His  power,  and  the  least 
are  not  exempt  from  His  care.     II.  He  will  save — From  all  useless  dread  and 
alarm,  from  all  unnecessary  trials   and   assaults.     There  is  no  promise  that  a 
believer  shall  be  saved   from  suffering  and   sorrow  and  temptation  ;    what  is 
promised  is,  that  he  shall  not  be  overcome  of  these.     Christ  will  show  Himself  as 
Saviour  in  the  days  to  come,  as  truly  as  in  days  past.     He  has  saved.     He  will 
save.     III.  He  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy.     His  people  are  His  by 
creation,   purchase,   adoption,   and  by  a  begun  and  progressive  sanctification. 
There  is  nought  in  the  contemplation  of  the  natural  man  to  call  forth  the  joy  of 
the  Saviour.     IV.  He  will  rest  in  His  love.     Margin,  "  He  will  be  silent,"  or 
"  keep  silence  in  His  love."     This  suggests  the  idea  of  a  love  too  great  for  utter- 
ance.    V.  He  will  joy  over  thee  with  singing.     If  this  is  not  an  amplification 
of  the  preceding  promises,  rather  than  a  new  promise,  it  speaks  of  a  time  when 
the  watchful  care  of  the  Saviour  will  be  followed  by  a  feeling  of  ecstatic  joy — of  a 
time  when  the  silence  of  imutterable  emotion  will   be  broken  in  upon  by  the 
triumphant  voice  of  Him  whose  voice  is  "  as  the  sound  of  many  waters."     Then, 
if  these  things  be  so,  let  me  say,  "  What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be,  in  all 
holy  conversation  and  godliness  ?  "     {J.  B.  Omond.)        Ood's  delight  in  saving 
souls  : — A  knowledge  of  ourselves  will  show  us  how  much  need  we  have  of  repent- 
ance ;  and  a  knowledge  of  God  wiU  encourage  us  to  repent.     I.  God's  power  to 
SAVE.     We  shall  not  speak  of  God's  power  in  general,  but  as  it  is  manifested  in 
the  salvation  of  His  Church  and  people.     II.  His  determination  to  save.     If 
He  should  leave  us  to  ourselves  none  of  us  would  be  saved.     He  takes  the  matter 
into  His  own  hands,  and  determines  to  save  those  whom  He  has  given  to  His  Son. 
He  does  not  destroy  oiu:  free  agency  ;  but  He  overcomes  our  reluctance,  and  draws 
US  to  Himself  by  an  operation  no  less  powerful  than  that  which  He  exerted  in 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

raising  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  from  the  dead.  III.  His  delight  to  save.  Not 
merely  will  He  feel  an  inward  pleasure  ;  but  as  a  man,  overjoyed  at  any  event, 
involuntarily  expresses  his  joy  by  singing,  or  some  other  outward  token,  so  will 
God  manifest  His  pleasure  to  the  returning  soul.  IV.  His  immutability  towards 
THOSE  ^VHOM  Hb  INTENDS  TO  SAVE.  Man  is  often  alienated  from  the  object  of  his 
affections,  either  by  means  of  some  unexpected  evil  He  has  discovered,  or  through 
his  own  fickleness  and  inconstancy.  But  God  changeth  not.  In  this  glorious 
character  of  God  we  may  see — 1.  The  evil  of  sin.  Under  whatever  circumstances 
it  may  be  committed,  sin  is  directly  levelled  against  Him.  2.  The  danger  of 
dying  in  an  unconverted  state.  Will  it  be  no  aggravation  of  our  guilt  in  the  day 
of  judgment  to  have  despised  such  a  loving  and  gracious  God  ?  3.  The  obligation 
that  lies  upon  believers  to  serve  the  Lord.  What  should  you  render  unto  the 
Lord  for  aU  His  benefits  ?  Have  no  end,  no  aim,  no  wish,  but  to  please  and 
honour  the  God  of  your  salvation.  {Skeletons  of  Sermons.)  The  joy  of  God 
over  His  own  : — This  is  one  of  those  revelations  of  the  character  of  God  which  are 
sometimes  called  anthropomorphic.  And  it  is  argued  that  to  ascribe  human 
attributes  to  God  is  to  limit  Him.  But  we  may  fearlessly  rejoice  in  the  inspiring 
revelation  of  the  text,  that  society  is  necessary  to  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  nature. 
God  cannot  do  without  His  children  ;  He  finds  His  joy  in  them.  I.  It  is  the  joy 
OF  A  STRONG  Being.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  mighty."  Little  natures  are  capable 
of  little  happiness.  In  our  gladdest  hours  we  can  but  dimly  guess  what  is  the 
bliss  of  an  infinite  Being.  This  joy  God  found  in  creation,  in  which  His  might  was 
revealed.  II.  It  is  the  joy  of  a  helpful  presence.  "  In  the  midst  of  thee." 
There  is  delight  in  being  with  and  doing  for  those  we  love.  This  is  God's  joy  in 
His  providence.  III.  It  is  the  joy  of  giving.  "  He  will  save."  Not  in  receiving, 
but  in  giving,  is  found  the  highest  and  deepest  joy.  God  finds  this  blessedness  in 
the  work  of  redemption.  The  incarnation  and  atonement  are  but  the  self-giving 
of  God.  IV.  It  is  a  silent  joy.  "  He  will  rest  in  His  love  "  ;  literally,  "  He  will 
be  silent  in  His  love."  Sometimes  joy  is  too  deep  for  speech.  It  is  the  unheard 
running  of  the  still  waters.  V.  It  is  an  excellent  joy.  "  He  will  joy  over  thee 
with  singing."  Not  silent  all  the  time.  Sometimes  He  sings.  What  are  some 
of  the  notes  of  God's  song  ?  We  may  make  God  glad.  The  sweetest  words  that 
can  climb  to  heaven  are,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  He  will  stop  the 
music  of  glory,  and  hush  the  converse  of  the  angels,  to  hear  it  stealing  up 
to  His  throne.  {George  Elliott.)  He  will  rest  in  His  love. — The  Almighty 
resting  in  His  love :  —  God  rules  in  an  unquiet  world.  Yet  is  He  ever 
at  rest.  "  He  will  rest  in  His  love."  The  idea  in  the  text  is  of  Deity  in  repose — ■ 
silent— looking  calmly  on  all  the  disorders  of  the  Church  and  the  world,  as  knowing 
that  there  is  one  attribute  of  His  nature  which  will  suffice  to  rectify  all  things 
for  the  deliverance  of  His  people.  I.  The  nature  of  this  rest.  1.  It  is  the  rest 
of  a  moral  satisfaction  with  all  the  arrangements  He  had  made  for  man's  spiritual 
and  everlasting  happiness.  In  this  sense  God  rested  from  His  work  of  creation. 
But  this  contentment  of  God  with  the  results  of  His  own  doings  was  to  receive 
a  yet  higher  illustration.  It  was  great  to  make  a  soul  like  oxirs  ;  how  much  greater 
to  redeem  !  The  Almighty  has  delight  in  the  provisions  made  for  the  spiritual 
recovery  of  our  race.  Behold,  then,  the  great  Father  of  spirits  reposing  with 
delighted  tranquillity  on  the  appointments  and  provisions  of  Messiah's  kingdom. 
2.  It  is  the  rest  of  a  Divine  foreknowledge  and  purpose.  The  quietness  of  an 
Omniscient  mind  which,  seeing  the  end  from  the  beginning,  will  not  allow  itself 
to  be  moved  from  the  fixed  order  of  its  determinations.  This  abstaining  from 
interference  is  observable  in  the  general  order  of  earthly  affairs,  and  in  the  lot  of 
individual  believers.  To  all  human  seeming  things  are  left  to  take  their  course. 
This  resting  of  God  in  His  own  moral  determination  is  often  remarkably  illustrated 
in  Scriptures  as  in  our  Lord's  delay  in  going  to  sick  Lazarus.  II.  It  is  descriptivb 
OF  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  resting  in  His  lovb  as  thb 
great  means  for  the  salvation  of  mankind.  It  must  be  a  sight  of  the  goodness 
of  God,  if  anything,  that  will  lead  a  man  to  repentance.  Then  if  God  so  rest  in 
His  love,  how  should  we  rest  in  it.  How  assured  and  tranquil  should  we  feel  in 
this,  God  loves  me.  There  is  always  a  firm  footing  there.  {Daniel  Moore,  M.A.) 
The  unchangeable  nature  of  God's  love  to  man  : — God  is  not  only  lovely  and  loving. 
He  is  pure  unmixed  love  itself.  This  love  has  numerous  objects.  Among  these 
His  own  perfection  is  the  chief.  This  is  a  theme  so  sublime  that  we  are  scarcely 
able  to  form  any  conception  of  it.  A  number  taken  from  two  classes  of  His  own 
rational  creatures  are  distinguished  as  the  objects  of  His  love, — elect  angels  and 


CHAP,  m.]  ZEPHANIAH.  31 

elect  men.  In  what  of  His  love  does  God  rest  ?  I.  In  the  pkincjiplb  op  His 
LOVE.  It  is  as  impossible  that  this  love  in  itself,  or  in  the  essence  of  it,  can  ever  be 
anything  different  from  what  it  is,  or  hath  been,  as  it  is  that  God  Himself  can 
ever  be  anjrthing  different  from  what  He  is  now,  or  hath  been  from  eternity. 
Love,  as  it  exists  in  Himself,  is  unchanging  and  ever-during  II.  In  the  objects 
OP  His  love.  God  knows  not  only  how  many  He  has  chosen,  but  knows  also 
every  individual  object  of  His  choice.  There  will  be  no  voluntary  transference 
of  Divine  love  from  one  object,  or  one  class  of  objects,  to  another.  III.  He  will 
BEST  IN  THE  DEGREE  OF  His  WILL.  As  God's  love  always  has  been,  so  it  will 
always  continue  to  be,  of  the  same  extent  and  dimensions.  Grod  loves  not  His 
people  more  or  less  at  one  time  than  another.  IV.  In  the  fethts  of  His  love. 
Cannot  speak  of  the  fruits  of  His  love  in  detail.  They  embrace  a  mighty  compass. 
They  include  everything,  from  the  first  particle  of  imparted  grace  to  a  seat  with 
God  the  Lamb  on  His  thxone.  Learn — 1.  That  believers  ought  to  love  their  God 
with  the  greatest  ardovu*  and  constancy  of  which  they  are  capable.  2.  In  whatever 
manner  God  may  act  by  them,  His  love  is  neither  changed  nor  diminished. 
3.  Believers  may  be  encouraged  to  smile  defiance  at  every  attempt  to  separate 
them  from  the  love  of  God.  {Robert  Muter. )  God^s  people  comforted  : — No 
sooner  had  Zephaniah  laid  open  the  abounding  wickedness  of  Judah  than  he 
pointed  forward  to  brighter  scenes — to  the  returning  suppliants,  under  the  power 
of  the  Spirit,  ashamed  of  their  doings,  to  the  remnant  of  Israel,  which  shall  not  do 
iniquity,  nor  speak  lies.  The  text  is  consolatory.  1.  The  consolation  is  addressed 
only  to  true  Christians.  No  encouragement  is  therefore  given  here  to  open  trans- 
gressors, or  to  persistent  backsliders.  It  is  necessary  to  make  this  distinction, 
because  none  are  so  prone  to  take  to  themselves  the  promises  of  the  Gospel  as  those 
to  whom  they  clearly  do  not  belong.  2.  The  text  is  spoken  on  the  supposition 
that  the  people  of  God  will  often  be  overwhelmed  with  anxiety — that  they  shall 
"  fear,"  and  their  "  hands  shall  be  slack."  No  greater  mistake  can  be  made  than 
that  of  supposing  a  Christian's  life  is  a  period  of  continual  sunshine.  Now  illustrate 
the  groimds  of  confidence  which  all  Christians  may  have  in  the  imchanging  love 
of  their  Almighty  Redeemer.  I.  What  ake  the  marks  of  love  ?  1.  Our  love 
toward  an  object  may  be  known  by  the  direction  of  our  thoughts ;  for  on  the 
beloved  object  oxu:  thoughts  chiefly  dwell.  2.  By  our  anxiety  in  regard  to  its 
welfare.  3.  By  the  extent  of  suffering  which  we  are  willing  to  undergo  for  the 
person  beloved.  4.  By  the  prominence  given  to  the  object  beloved.  II.  This 
LOVE,  AND  THE  RELATIONSHIPS  IMPLIED  IN  IT.  There  is  a  close  relationship  between 
God  and  His  people.  He  is  their  God  in  a  peculiar  sense.  Consider  by  what  names 
He  is  called.  Mediator,  Advocate,  Captain,  Surety,  Head,  King  of  Saints,  &c. 
III.  Consider  what  Christ  has  already  done  for  His  people.  They  are  His  by 
choice,  by  purchase,  by  a  new  creation,  by  covenant.  And  we  have  the  whole  past 
experience  of  the  Christian  Church  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  text.  {James  Begg,  D.D. ) 
A  cluster  of  grapes : — These  words  were  primarily  addressed  to  the  daughter  of 
Zion,  to  Israel  the  chosen  people  ;  and  they  undoubtedly  foreshadow  blessings 
which  are  yet  to  be  realised.  Ten  times  over  in  this  chapter  God  assures  His 
people  of  what  He  will  most  certainly  do  on  their  behalf.  But  a  much  wider 
circle  than  the  chosen  race  may  appropriate  the  blessed  comfort  of  these  words. 
Twice  over  in  this  paragraph  we  are  told  that  the  Lord,  the  King  of  Israel,  is  in  the 
midst  of  His  people.  This  is  an  indisputable  fact.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  His 
Church,  so  that  it  shall  not  be  moved.  Well  would  it  be  if  each  Christian  were  to 
devote  some  portion,  however  brief,  in  eaxih  day,  to  meditation  upon  this  marvellous 
fact.  "  The  mighty  God,  the  King,  is  in  the  midst  of  me.  I  am  God-tenanted, 
God-possessed.  The  High  and  Holy  One  who  inhabiteth  eternity  has  taken  up  His 
abode  in  my  heart."  Aad  this  marvellous  indwelling — more  wonderful  than  if  an 
angel  were  to  indwell  an  emmet  or  a  humming-bird — is  not  dependent  on  frames 
or  feelings  or  aught  in  us ;  but  endures  through  all  our  changes  and  fluctuations 
unto  the  eternal  ages.  But  if  the  mighty  God  is  indeed  in  us,  why  is  there  so  much 
weakness  and  failure  in  our  lives  ?  Alas,  the  answer  is  not  far  to  seek — we  have 
limited  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  What  now  shall  hinder  us  ridding  ourselves  of  all 
which  has  hindered  Him  from  doing  His  mighty  works,  so  that  He  may  do  that 
which  He  so  much  loves,  and  which  we  so  much  need  ?  Then  we  may  expect  Him 
to  accomplish  the  four  blessed  "  I  wills  "  of  this  precious  verse.  I.  "  He  will 
save."  As  God  took  the  side  of  His  people  against  their  foes,  and  will  do  so 
again  in  the  final  struggle,  when  His  feet  shall  stand  upon  the  Moimt  of  Olives,  bo 
will  He  take  our  side  against  our  sins.     He  has  saved  us  from  the  penalty  of  sin ; 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

He  will  also  save  us  from  its  power.  Your  foes  may  be  numerous  as  the  devila 
in  hell,  strong  and  wily ;  but  He  will  save.  Your  temperament  may  be  as  sus- 
ceptible to  temptation  as  an  aspen  leaf  is  to  the  wind;  but  He  will  save.  Your 
past  years,  by  repeated  eicts  of  indulgence,  may  have  formed  habits  strong  as  iron 
bands  ;  but  He  will  save.  Your  circumstances  and  companions  may  be  most 
unfavourable  to  a  life  of  victory ;  but  He  will  save.  Difficulties  are  nought  to 
Him  ;  the  darkness  shineth  as  the  day.  II.  He  "  will  rejoice  over  thee  with 
JOY."  The  great  evangelic  prophet  gives  the  key  to  understand  this  promise 
when  he  says,  "  As  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  bride,  so  shall  thy  God 
rejoice  over  thee."  Plato  held  that  love  is  the  attraction  to  each  other  of  twin 
souls,  made  each  for  the  other,  and  moving  towards  each  other  ;  until  each  finds 
in  the  other  the  complement  and  supply  of  the  needs  of  its  own  nature.  As  we 
need  God,  so  does  God  need  xis.  There  is  something  in  us  which  satisfies  Him, 
and  without  which  His  nature  would  not  be  perfectly  content.  We  should  have 
thought  that  our  sin  would  alienate  Him  from  us  for  ever.  But  His  yearning  for 
us  is  greater  than  His  hatred  of  our  sin.  III.  "  He  will  best  in  His  love."  The 
margin  suggests  an  exquisite  alternative,  "  He  will  be  silent  in  His  love."  Of  old 
the  Psalmist  said  that  his  soul  was  silent  in  its  calm  expectancy  for  God's  salvation. 
Here  we  are  told  that  God  is  silent  in  His  brooding  tenderness.  All  the  deepest 
emotion  is  silent.  When  we  are  told,  then,  that  God's  love  will  be  a  silent  one, 
we  know  that  it  is  too  intense,  too  deep,  too  infinite  to  find  expression.  It  will 
break  silence  presently ;  but  in  the  meanwhile  be  still,  and  know  that  God  ia 
love.  IV.  "  He  will  joy  over  thee  with  singing."  It  is  much  to  hear  a  lark 
sing,  as  if  its  throat  must  be  torn  by  the  torrent  of  melody ;  more  to  hear  a  child 
sing  as  it  comes  down  a  woodland  path  in  spring,  chequered  with  sunlight  falling 
on  blue  hyacinths  and  yellow  primroses  ;  more  still  to  hear  an  angel  sing,  as  the 
lone  messenger  of  God  breaks  into  melody  to  cheer  himself  on  some  distant  journey 
from  the  Home  of  Song ;  more  still  to  have  heard  our  Saviour  sing  in  the  days  of 
His  earthly  ministry,  when  He  joined  His  disciples  in  the  Jewish  Hallel :  but  what 
will  it  not  be  when  the  great  God  HimseK  breaks  into  song,  to  celebrate  an  accom- 
plished work,  an  emancipated  world,  a  redeemed  race,  a  Bride  won  for  His  Son  ! 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  18.  I  will  gather  them  that  are  sorrowfoL  —  Comfort  to  mourners 
for  the  loss  of  solemn  assemblies : — I.  God  doth  sometimes  suffer  the  solemn 
ASSEMBLY  TO    LIE    UNDER    REPROACH.     1.  When    does    it   lie  under   reproach  ? 

(1)  When    the    presence    of     God    is    departed    from    the    public    ordinances. 

(2)  When  a  reformation  has  been  intended,  and  cannot  be  accomplished,  but 
is  stayed  and  hindered.  (3)  When  the  ways  of  Zion  mourn  and  are 
unfrequented.  (4)  When  the  members  are  scattered  and  driven  from  one 
another,  that  they  cannot  meet  together.  (5)  When  its  state  and  condition  i3 
such  as  that  no  man  seeks  it,  or  cares  for  it.  2.  Why  doth  God  suffer  it  to  Ue 
Tinder  reproach  at  any  time  ?  That  He  may  roll  away  the  reproach.  There  is  a 
sinful  reproach  and  a  penal  reproach  of  the  solemn  assembly.  Sometimes  the 
members  are  accessary  to  the  reproach.  Sometimes  they  are  exceeding  barren 
and  unfruitful  under  the  enjoyment  of  the  solemn  assembly.  Sometimes  the 
members  do  bear  themselves  out  in  their  sins  upon  their  enjoyment  of  the  solemn 
assembly.     There  is  a  bearing  of  ourselves  in  opposition  to  false  worshippers. 

II.   How  SHOULD  THE  MEMBERS  BE  AFFECTED  UNDER  REPROACH  ?      There  are  tWO 

sorts  of  members,  false  and  true.  They  will  not  be  so  affected  as  to  be  incapable 
of  the  teachings  of  God.  Nor  so  as  to  be  unthankful  for  what  they  have.  Nor 
will  they  be  so  affected  as  if  it  were  barely  their  own  concernment.  They  look 
upon  this  as  their  great  affliction.  The  saints  and  people  of  God  will  search  into 
their  own  ways,  and  turn  from  the  evil  of  those  ways  which  have  had  a  hand  in 
bringing  in  this  reproach.  What  is  there  in  this  reproach  that  the  saints  and 
people  of  God  should  be  so  much  affected  by  it  ?  I.  There  is  a  darkness  upon  the 
greatest  organ  of  light.  2.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  dishonoured.  The  whole 
generation  of  the  righteous  are  afflicted.  The  world  is  scandalised.  The  devil 
gets  up  again.  There  is  a  certain  presage  of  a  famine  of  hearing  the  Word.  And 
God  is  departed.  When  the  members  are  sensible  of  the  reproach  and  carry  it 
as  a  burthen,  the  Ix)rd  will  turn  former  sorrow  into  future  comforts.  He  will 
cause  their  after  comforts  to  run  parallel  with  their  former  trouble.  (W.  Bridge^ 
M.A.) 


INTEODUCTION  TO  HAGGAI. 

It  is  marvellous  how  much  light  has  been  thrown  by  recent  discoveries  in  the 
East  upon  many  passages  of  Old  Testament  Scripture.  The  bricks  and  inscriptions, 
the  tablets  and  monuments,  of  Assyria  and  Babylonia,  after  having  been  hidden 
from  the  knowledge  of  men  for  thousands  of  years,  have  at  last  disclosed  their 
secrets  to  us.  They  carry  us  back  through  the  long  dark  vista  of  centuries.  It 
is  possible  for  us  now  to  frame  some  adequate  idea  of  that  "  great  Babylon  " 
which  Nebuchadnezzar  boasted  that  he  had  built  for  the  house  of  the  kingdom, 
and  within  whose  walls  many  of  God's  captive  people  found  a  home  when  they 
were  carried  away  from  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  It  must  have  been  one  of  the  most 
splendid  cities  which  the  world  has  ever  seen.  In  the  centre  of  it  rose  the  temple 
of  Baal,  towering  stage  above  stage  towards  the  sky,  with  a  gigantic  image  of  the 
god  adorning  its  summit.  The  palace  of  the  king  stood  not  far  distant,  with  its 
courts  and  corridors  and  famous  hanging  gardens.  Round  the  city  ran  a  wall, 
pierced  by  a  hundred  gates  of  bronze,  and  itself  so  broad  that  two  chariots  could 
pass  one  another  without  diflSculty  on  the  roadway  which  crowned  it.  And  the 
great  river  Euphrates  flowed  through  the  midst  of  the  houses  and  palaces  and 
temples,  with  handsome  quays  and  frequent  drawbridges,  and  boats  plying 
constantly  up  and  down.  Such  was  the  golden  city  against  which  Isaiah  and 
Jeremiah  hvu-led  their  threats,  the  chosen  home  of  luxiury  and  refinement,  and 
of  a  people  who  cared  only  for  their  own  gratification.  Its  renown  filled  the 
earth.  It  exalted  its  throne  above  the  stars  of  God.  There  was  no  other  city 
half  so  proud  or  glorious.  But  it  was  doomed  to  shame  and  defeat,  as  more  than 
one  Hebrew  prophet  had  foretold.  Men  have  loved  to  think  of  Cyrus,  whom  the 
Lord  raised  up  to  do  His  own  work  of  humbling  Babylon  and  of  hberating  His 
captives  from  thraldom,  as  a  worshipper  of  one  God  only.  They  have  imagined 
that  the  chief  motive  which  prompted  him  to  attack  the  great  city  was  his  biu-ning 
desire  to  destroy  its  idols.  They  have  said  that  he  allowed  the  Jews  to  return 
to  their  own  land  because,  Uke  them,  he  had  but  one  supreme  deity — the  Ormazd, 
or  good  spirit  of  the  Zoroastrian  creed.  But  just  as  science,  according  to  the  poet, 
has  withdrawn  "  the  veU  of  enchantment  "  from  creation,  and  has  forced  its  visions 
of  beauty  to  yield  to  "  cold  material  laws,"  so  the  tablets  and  inscriptions  have 
robbed  Cyrus  of  this  great  honour  with  which  succeeding  generations  had  crowned 
him.  He  was  a  devotee,  we  are  compelled  now  to  believe,  of  the  many  gods  of 
Babylon.  His  first  care,  after  making  himself  master  of  the  town,  was  to  restore 
fiome  of  these  gods  to  the  shrines  from  which  they  had  been  removed  by  Nabonidos. 
He  prayed  for  their  help  and  blessing  on  aU  his  enterprises.  Bel  and  Nebo  and 
the  countless  divinities  of  the  Chaldean  pantheon  were  revered  by  him  with 
implicit  faith.  ^     But  he  was  tolerant,  too,  of  other  creeds.     Moreover,  he  was 

^The  following  is  part  of  the  inscription  on  the  cylinder  of  Cyrus,  lately  dis- 
covered in  Babylonia  by  Mr.  Rassam  :  "  The  gods  of  Sumer  and  Accad,  whom 
Nabonidoe,  to  the  anger  of  the  lord  of  gods  (Merodach),  had  brought  into  Babylon, 

iU 


INTRODUCTION  TO  HAGGAI. 


anxious  to  ingratiate  himself  into  the  favour  of  the  Jews,  who  formed  no  incon- 
siderable part  of  the  population  of  the  city.  Therefore  he  dealt  kindly  with 
them.  He  published  the  decree  which  permitted  them  to  go  back  to  their  native 
land  and  to  rebuild  the  ruined  Temple  of  Jehovah.  He  gave  them  many  privileges 
which  they  had  not  previously  enjoyed.  The  prophet  Haggai  was  in  Babylon, 
•we  may  be  siu-e,  that  day  when  Cjtus  marched  into  it  "  with  barmer  and  with 
music,  with  soldier  and  with  priest."  No  doubt  he  had  more  than  once  looked 
the  great  conqueror  in  the  face.  He  lived  in  the  period  of  the  Exile — lived  to  see 
its  ending,  and  to  witness  the  dawning  of  the  time  appointed  by  the  Lord  to  favour 
Zion.  He  is  the  earliest  of  those  three  prophets  whose  work  lay  after  the  long 
Captivity.  I.  I  am  to  try  to  sketch  the  prophet's  surPvOUNdings.  He  was  one 
of  those  who  had  known  fi-om  personal  experience  what  banishment  and  exile 
mean.  He  had  remembered  Jerusalem  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon.  And  he  had 
rejoiced  with  all  the  best  souls  in  the  nation  when  God  stirred  up  the  spirit 
of  Cyrus  to  perform  His  wiU.  We  can  pictm'e  him  journeying  homeward  across 
the  bleak  desert  with  the  caravans  of  pilgrims.  At  times  the  only  feeling  of  the 
travellers  was  one  of  overflowing  joy.  It  was  all  like  a  dream  to  them,  too  good 
to  be  true — like  the  rush  of  the  waters  in  the  rainy  season  into  the  dry  torrent-beds 
in  the  south  of  Palestine ;  like  the  reaper  bearing  on  his  shoulder  the  sheaves  in 
summer  which  he  had  sown  in  the  dull  days  of  winter.  But  at  other  times  there 
was  grief  mingled  with  the  gladness.  Tears  of  penitence  and  words  of  prayer 
broke  freely  forth.  They  came  "  with  weeping  and  with  supplications,"  as 
Jeremiah  says,  asking  the  way  to  Zion  with  their  faces  thitherward.  Full  of  such 
thoughts  as  these,  he  and  his  companions  made  the  long  journey  of  four  months' 
duration  across  the  stony  and  arid  desert.  Guarded  by  God,  they  escaped  the 
perils  of  the  wilderness  and  the  perils  of  robbers.  They  arrived  safely  in  Jerusalem, 
the  city  of  their  fathers,  the  home  and  seat  of  their  Lord.  These  pilgrims  were  net 
the  whole  of  Israel.  They  were  but  forty-two  thousand  men,  with  their  dependants.^ 
The  great  majority  of  the  Jews  preferred  to  remain  in  exile.  Many  of  them  had 
gained  high  positions  in  the  state  which  they  could  not  easily  resign  ;  others  had 
acquired  property  or  had  formed  connections  from  which  they  were  unable  or 
imwilling  to  part ;  numbers  were  charmed  and  detained  by  the  glory  and  greatness 
of  Babylon — its  streets,  its  pleasure-grounds,  its  storehouses,  its  busy  river.  They 
found  it  hard  to  prefer  Jerusalem,  a  town  grass-grown  and  desolate,  to  this  splendid 
city.  So  the  company  of  travellers  who  faced  the  desert,  and  made  their  way 
to  the  fatherland  which  held  their  hearts  captive,  was  by  no  means  so  large  as  it 
might  have  been.  And  their  souls  must  have  been  Uke  to  fail  them  when  they 
saw  Jerusalem  itself.  Its  walls  were  crumbled  into  ruins.  Its  houses  were  mere 
wi-ecks,  blackened  with  smoke  and  fire.  Its  Temple  was  demolished.  Yet,  sad- 
dening though  all  theii-  surroundings  were,  they  refused  at  first  to  be  discoiuraged. 
This  was  the  city,  they  rerainded  themselves,  where  David  and  Solomon  had 
reigned  ;  the  city  in  which  God  had  chosen  to  put  His  name.  They  began  bj' 
erecting  the  altar  of  bmnt-offering  ;  and  then  they  made  preparations  for  rebuilding 
the  Temple  and  the  walls.  But  now  trouble  came.  They  had  righteously  refused 
to  permit  the  Sama;  itans  to  aid  them  in  what  was  really  a  holy  work — the  Samaritans 
who  joined  to  theii-  worship  of  Jehovah  the  worship  of  heathen  gods.  Thus  they 
turned  those  Northern  neighbours  of  theirs  into  bitter  enemies,  who  annoyed  them 
perpetually,  who  strove  to  thwart  aU  their  undertakings,  who  maligned  and 
slandered  their  character  at  the  Persian  Court.  The  intrigues  of  these  unscrupulous 
foes  were  only  too  successful.  They  persuaded  Cauibyses  and  Smerdis,  who  held 
the  tlurone  after  Cyrus,  to  forbid  the  prosecution  of  the  Temple  works.  For 
fifteen  years  everything  came  to  a  standstill.  Worse  still,  during  the  long  delay 
the  zeal  of  the  people  for  the  sanctuary  of  God  grew  cold.  They  submitted  to 
what  appeared   to   them   inevitable.     They  looked  on  the  unfinished  work  and 

I  settled  in  peace  in  their  sanctuaries  by  the  command  of  Merodach,  the  great 
lord.  In  the  goodness  of  their  hearts  may  all  the  gods  whom  I  have  brought  into 
their  strong  places  daily  intercede  before  Bel  and  Nebo,  that  they  should  grant 
me  length  of  days  ;  may  they  bless  my  projects  with  prosperity,  and  may  they 
say  to  Merodach,  my  lord,  that  Cyrus  the  king  and  Cambysea  his  son  deserve  his 
favour." 

'  The  whole  company  that  returned  with  Zerubbabel  consisted  of  42,360  free 
men,  or  some  200,000  free  persons — men,  women  and  children,  together  with 
7337  male  and  female  slaves,  of  whom  200  were  "  singing  men  and  women." 


INTRODUCTION  TO  HAQQAI. 


said, "  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's  house  should  be  built."  They 
turned  aside  to  selfish  objects  and  pursuits,  erecting  rich  and  comfortable  homes 
for  themselves,  and  decorating  them  with  that  wainscot  of  cedar  which  had  been 
reckoned  hitherto  the  peculiar  ornament  of  the  sanctuary.  It  was  a  sad  declension 
after  the  hopeful  start  which  had  been  made.  What  Haggai  thought  diu-ing  this 
time  of  retrogression  we  can  have  little  difficulty  in  guessing.  Surely  it  cut  him 
to  the  heart.  Surely  he  mourned  for  the  lukewarmness  of  his  friends.  But  at 
length  a  fresh  morning  broke  and  a  happier  day.  Darius  Hystaspia  ^  ascended 
the  throne  of  Persia — Darius,  who  was  a  Zoroastrian  and  a  worshipper  of  one  God. 
His  sympathies  were  entirely  with  the  Jews.  He  promulgated  a  new  decree, 
bidding  them  resume  the  building  of  the  Temple,  and  giving  them  revenues 
for  the  purpose.  And,  contemporaneous  with  the  king's  accession,  came  the 
prophetic  activity  of  Haggai.  After  long  silence  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  impelled 
him  to  speak.  It  was  the  autumn  of  the  year  520  b.c. — the  month  of  September, 
we  may  say — and  by  December  of  the  same  year  Haggai's  work  as  a  prophet  was 
finished.  But  he  accomplished  a  great  deal  during  these  few  weeks.  God  gave 
him  a  reward  which  is  often  denied  to  men  and  women  whose  labomrs  extend  over 
a  much  longer  period  of  time.  II.  Remembering  that  these  were  the  circumstances 
in  which  he  commenced  to  speak  on  God's  behalf,  let  us  pass  briefly  in  review 
HIS  PROPHECIES  THEMSELVES.  There  have  been  some  who  have  thought  that,  when 
he  stood  up  to  deliver  his  message  to  the  people,  he  was  already  an  old  man.  He 
refers  in  his  words  to  the  glory  of  the  former  house  of  the  Lord,  the  magnificent 
Temple  of  Solomon  which  Nebuchadnezzar  had  destroyed.  And  it  has  been 
argued  that  he  was  speaking  from  his  own  recollections  of  that  fair  and  noble 
structure.  It  may  be  a  slender  foundation  on  which  to  base  an  assertion  of  any 
kind,  indeed,  we  can  have  no  certainty  about  the  matter  ;  but  I  for  one  like  to 
think  of  this  prophet  as  going  forth  to  do  God's  work  in  the  twilight  of  life,  with 
feeble  steps  and  a  face  furrowed  by  age  and  trouble  and  hair  white  as  the  snow, 
yet  with  a  childlike  faith  and  a  firm  and  resolute  heart.  Let  this  be  as  it  may, 
however,  we  know  that  he  appeared  at  a  most  critical  juncture  in  the  history  of 
the  people  ;  and  we  know,  too,  that  whether  young  or  old,  he  justified  the  choice 
which  God  had  made  of  him.^  Four  times  over  in  this  autumn  of  the  year  520 
the  burden  of  the  Lord  was  laid  upon  him.  Four  times  over  he  went  out  to 
deliver  his  short  and  pregnant  messages  to  his  countrymen.  The  earliest  occasion 
was  on  the  first  day  of  the  month  Elul,  when  the  harvest  had  been  quite  gathered 
in.  Then  Haggai  broke  the  silence,  addressing  himself  directly  to  Zerubbabel, 
the  Hebrew  ruler  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  Joshua  the  high-priest,  but  intending  to 
reach  through  them  the  whole  body  of  the  people.  In  the  name  of  the  God  of 
Israel  he  summoned  his  fellow-citizens  to  arise  and  work,  encouraged  by  the 
manifest  favour  with  which  the  new  king  regarded  them.  He  did  not  spare  their 
faults  ;  like  a  skilful  sxirgeon,  he  probed  the  wounds  of  the  little  commonwealth 
to  the  bottom.  Let  them  look  the  facts,  vmwelcome  as  they  were,  in  the  face, 
Haggai  said.  Let  them  return  to  their  first  love  and  their  first  zeal.  Let  them 
resume  without  further  delay  the  holy  Temple  work  which  they  had  laid  aside  so 
selfishly  and  sinfully  (i.  2-11).  A  month  later,  on  the  last  day  of  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles— the  most  joyous  and  gladsome  of  all  the  Hebrew  solemnities — Haggai  spoke 
again.  This  time  his  words  were  full  of  good  cheer  ;  for  his  former  message  of 
stem  rebuke  had  had  an  immediate  effect,  and  had  roused  the  people  from  their 
lethargy.  Some  of  the  builders,  he  felt,  might  contrast  the  new  Temple  with  the 
old,  to  the  disparagement  of  that  about  which  they  were  now  busy.  There  were 
among  them  grey -haired  men,  laudatores  temporis  ac^i,  who  passed  slighting  comments 
on  each  featiu-e  of  the  grooving  structm-e,  and  who  told  with  fond  regrets  of  the 
"  exceeding  magnifical  "  house  that  had  once  been  there.  Therefore  the  prophet 
urged  the  workmen  to  pursue  their  toil  with  unflagging  earnestness,  because  God 
was  with  them  in  as  real  a  sense  as  He  had  been  with  their  fathers.  He  went 
fiu^ther  still.  He  assured  them  that  the  glory  of  the  new  Temple  would  outshine 
that  of  the  old.     It  might  not  ever  be  so  splendid  outwardly.     But  the  new  sanc« 

^  That  is,  Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes. 

'  Other  conjectures  with  regard  to  Haggai  are :  that  he  was  one  of  the  men 
who  were  with  Daniel  when  he  saw  his  vision  "  by  the  side  of  the  great  river  which 
is  Hiddekel  "  ;  and  that  he  was  the  author,  along  with  Zechariah,  of  certain  of 
the  Psalms,  notably  Psalms  cxlv.-cxlviii.,  which  in  the  Septuagint  and  the  Vulgate 
bear  these  prophets'  names.     "  Haggai  "  means  "  festive." 


INTRODUCTION  TO  HAOOAI. 


tuary  was  to  be  invested  with  a  spiritual  majesty  to  which  its  predecessor  could 
not  lay  claim.  God  was  to  do  wonders  of  grace  and  power  within  its  courts.  Yet 
again,  having  performed  his  errand  and  uttered  his  brief  message,  Haggai  was 
silent — on  this  occasion  for  rather  more  than  two  months.  Then  he  spoke  a  third 
time.  A  new  fear  had  arisen  among  the  people — the  fear  that  God  was  not  about 
to  bless  them,  even  although  they  had  given  themselves  afresh  to  Him.  Dearth 
and  blight  and  disappointment  were  stiU  dogging  their  footsteps  ;  the  sky  seemed 
as  dark  and  stormy  as  before.  The  prophet  of  the  Lord  had  a  solemn  lesson 
to  teach  his  hearers  now.  By  a  reference  to  the  Levitical  law,  and  by  a  question 
put  to  the  priests,  he  reminded  the  citizens  that,  while  a  holy  thing  did  not  com- 
municate its  holiness  to  whatever  might  touch  it,  a  thing  which  was  unclean 
contaminated  all  with  which  it  came  into  contact.  The  speck  within  the  garnered 
fruit  moulders  the  whole  basketful ;  the  hand  that  is  stained  with  blood  incarnadines 
the  multitudinous  seas,  "  making  the  green  one  red."  Just  so  it  had  been  with  the 
Jews.  Their  good  deeds  had  not  compensated  for  their  lukewarmness  ;  but  on 
the  contrary,  their  lack  of  zeal  for  God,  their  sin  in  neglecting  the  Temple,  had 
spread  its  moral  pollution  over  every  work  of  their  hands.  But  yet  they  must 
not  despair.  God  would  not  deal  with  them  in  mere  righteousness  and  unbending 
justice.  Nay,  He  would  forget  all  their  ingratitude.  Because  they  were  now 
seeking  to  serve  Him,  He  would  commence  among  them  a  new  era  of  prosperity. 
"  From  this  day — the  four-and-twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  month— will  I  bless  you  '* 
— such  was  His  pitiful  and  loving  assurance.  It  had  been  all  failiure  hitherto ;  it 
was  to  be  only  peace  and  joy  and  strength  and  fruitf  lilness  henceforward  (ii.  10-19). 
Once  more  Haggai  spoke — a  little  further  on  in  the  same  day.  God  bade  him  tell 
Zerubbabel  that  he  need  feel  no  alarm  about  the  civil  liberties  of  the  people  in 
the  futvure.  Distiu-bances  and  commotions  of  no  ordinary  kind  were  impending, 
but  through  them  all  the  Jewish  prince  and  those  committed  to  his  care  would 
dwell  secure.  The  grand  words  of  the  91st  Psalm  would  be  realised  in  their  history  : 
"  A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right  hand ;  but  it 
shall  not  come  nigh  thee.  Only  with  thine  eyes  shalt  thou  behold  and  see  the 
reward  of  the  wicked.  Because  thou  hast  made  the  Lord,  which  is  my  refuge, 
even  the  Most  High,  thy  habitation,  there  shall  no  evil  befall  thee,  neither  shall  any 
plague  come  nigh  thy  dwelling"  (ii.  20-23).  That  was  Haggai's  latest  utterance. 
III.  There  was  no  need  why  he  should  remain  longer  in  the  public  view. 
He  had  finished  the  task  which  God  assigned  him,  and  had  finished  it  successfully. 
Critics  have  sometimes  found  fault  with  his  style.  They  have  said  that  there 
is  little  eloquence  or  poetry  in  it — that  it  is  bald  and  rugged  and  uninviting.  But 
work  that  is  sharp  and  stern  requires  weapons  of  a  similar  sort.  Haggai  s  short 
emphatic  sentences  are  exactly  what  was  best  suited  to  the  occasion.  They  com- 
pelled attention,  and  not  attention  only,  but  obedience  too.  They  pricked  men 
to  the  heart.  They  kindled  within  them  that  godly  sorrow  which  needeth  not 
to  be  repented  of.  The  best  results  followed  the  ministry  of  Haggai.  He  had  no 
sooner  uttered  the  first  of  his  prophecies  ere  he  saw  it  bear  fruit.  Moved  with  holy 
fear,  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  and  the  people  obeyed  the  call  of  God's  messenger. 
They  flocked  to  the  work  which  had  been  so  long  and  shamefully  neglected.  Within 
a  month  the  building  of  the  Temple  was  being  vigorously  pressed  forward.  Few, 
indeed,  of  His  ambassadors  have  had  a  harvest  so  speedy  and  so  copious  as  Haggai 
had.  Haggai  is  in  truth  one  of  the  "  last  "  who  shall  be  "  first."  How  long  he 
had  to  wait  before  God  called  him  to  utter  a  single  word  !  How  few  his  opportun- 
ities were  even  after  his  ministry  had  commenced !  How  very  quickly  his  time 
of  speech  and  action  was  drawn  to  a  close  !  Yet  he  did  a  mighty  and  far-reaching 
work.  He  quickened  a  backsliding  people  to  repentance.  He  restored  their 
souls,  and  led  them  again  in  the  ways  of  truth  and  hohness.  IV.  Finally,  let  us 
draw  from  Haggai's  prophecy  one  or  two  truths  suitable  fob  ourselves,  who 
live  at  such  a  distance  from  him.  1.  It  seems  to  me  that  here  we  get  no  little 
insight  into  the  cause  and  the  cure  of  dull  times.  The  Jews  of  the  prophet's  day 
had  to  complain  of  depression  and  hardship.  Their  harvests  had  been  poor  ; 
they  could  earn  little,  and  what  they  did  earn  leaked  imperceptibly  away.  And 
the  prea,cher  told  them  plainly  why.  It  was  because  they  had  forgotten  to  give 
to  God — to  give  Him  their  time  and  their  thought  and  their  substance.  Let  them 
contribute  heartily  to  His  cause,  and  their  troubles  would  vanish ;  from  that 
hour  He  would  bless  them  and  make  them  prosperous.  Do  not  we  require  the 
reproof  ?  2.  Haggai  teaches  us,  too,  not  to  despise  our  own  generation  and  the 
work  that  is  being  done  in  it.     He  condemned  the  men  who  spoke  of  the  glory 


INTRODUCTION  TO  HAGGAI. 


of  Solomon's  Temple  as  if  it  smrpassed  altogether  that  of  the  later  house  ;  he  told 
them  that  God  would  do  greater  things  in  the  new  sanctuary  than  in  the  old.  The 
tendency  which  he  combated  Uves  among  us  yet.  We  remember  the  deliverances 
of  the  past  ;  but  we  question  whether  there  can  be  any  such  dehverances  in  the 
present.  We  are  proud  of  the  faith  and  struggles  and  achievements  of  our  fathers  ; 
but  we  doubt  whether  their  descendants  can  ever  come  within  sight  of  them. 
And  it  is  good  to  recall  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High — years  long 
since  fled.  But  it  is  wi-ong  to  speak  as  if  God  had  departed  from  the  earth  to- 
day. He  is  active  still.  He  is  in  intimate  relations  with  mankind  even  now.  He 
fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary.  3.  This  prophet  tells  us  also  that  no  amovmt  of 
holy  services  will  cleanse  and  renew  us  if  we  be  ourselves  unholy.  The  parable 
which  he  drew  from  the  ancient  Levitical  law  has  this  for  its  moral.  Men  are 
always  prone  to  imagine  that,  if  only  they  render  to  God  an  outward  reUgion,  it 
will  atone  for  the  blemishes  and  shortcomings  and  selfishness  and  sin  of  their  lives. 
It  is  a  fatal  and  wicked  error.  Our  God  looks  beneath  the  surface  into  the  inner 
man.  He  demands  that  we  should  rend  our  hearts  and  not  om-  garments.  He 
asks  from  us  a  simple  and  true  and  earnest  faith  in  His  crucified  and  risen  Son. 
He  bids  us  welcome  His  Holy  Spirit  into  our  souls.  He  will  not  bless  us  \inless 
this  is  our  attitude  and  character.  Can  we  say  that  it  is  yours  and  mine  ? 
{Original  Secession  Magazine.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

HAGGAI. 

CHAPTER  L 

Vbbs.  1,  2.  Came  the  Word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggal — Duty  revealed: — The 
grand  subject  of  the  whole  chapter  is  duty.  Duty  revealed,  duty  postponed, 
duty  vindicated.  These  two  verses  direct  us  to  the  revelation  of  duty. 
Here  we  have — ( 1 )  The  time  of  its  revelation.  Every  duty  has  its  time,  every 
true  work  has  its  hovur.  (2)  The  organ  of  its  revelation.  "  Came  the  Word  of  the 
Lord  by  Haggai."  (3)  The  order  of  its  revelation.  Haggai  had  to  deliver  the 
message  to  men  nearest  to  him,  with  whom  he  was  most  identified,  and  the  men 
too  who  had  the  most  power  in  influencing  others.  I.  Duty  is  the  bukdhn  of 
DivxNB  BEVELATiON.  The  great  purpose  of  Haggai's  mission  was,  in  the  name  of 
God,  to  urge  his  countrymen  to  the  fulfilment  of  a  work  which  was  morally  incum- 
bent on  them,  namely,  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  What  was  the  burden  of 
Haggai's  mission  is  in  truth  the  burden  of  the  whole  Divine  revelation — duty. 
It  contains,  it  is  true,  histories  of  facts,  effusions  of  poetry,  discussions  of  doctrine  ; 
but  the  grand  all-pervading  substance  of  the  whole  is  duty ;  its  grand  voice  is 
not  merely  to  believe  and  feel,  but  to  do  ;  it  regards  faith  and  feeling  as  worthless 
unless  taken  up  and  embodied  in  the  right  act.  It  presents  the  rule  of  duty,  it 
supplies  the  helps  to  duty,  it  urges  the  motives  to  duty.  This  fact  shows  two 
things — 1.  That  the  Bible  studies  the  real  well-being  of  man.  Not  an  assemblage 
of  beliefs  and  emotions,  but  an  assemblage  of  acts  and  habits.  The  fact  shows 
— 2.  That  impractised  religion  is  spurious.  II.  Duty  is  increased  by  social 
ELEVATION.  This  is  implied  in  the  circumstance  that  Haggai  went  directly  with 
the  message  from  God  to  the  most  influential  men  in  the  state,  to  "  Zerubbabel 
the  son  of  Shealtiel,  governor  of  Judah,  and  to  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the 
high  priest."  This  fact  serves  two  purposes.  1.  To  supply  a  warning  to  men  in 
great  places.  2.  A  lesson  to  ministers.  Let  the  ambassadors  of  heaven  carry 
their  messages  first,  if  possible,  to  men  in  authority.     {Homilist. ) 

Ver.  2.  This  people  say,  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's  house 
should  be  built. — Church  extension : — The  people  said  this,  because  they 
thought  the  undertaking  too  great,  too  arduous,  too  expensive  for  a 
nation  circumstanced  as  they  were.  These  returned  captives  were  but  a 
small  remnant  of  the  population  of  the  land.  They  had  not  yet  fully 
established  themselves  in  their  own  habitations.  They  had  formidable 
enemies  around  them,  bent  upon  impeding  their  work.  They  were  labouring 
at  present  under  extraordinary  distress,  from  the  failure  of  their  vintage  and  their 
crops  ;  and  therefore,  though  they  admitted  that  the  work  was  one  needful  to 
be  done,  they  said,  "  Not  yet ;  not  in  these  days."  How  many  good  works  are 
put  by  by  being  put  off !  How  much  of  the  business  we  are  sent  into  the  world 
to  do  is  not  done,  imder  pretence  that  it  is  too  soon  to  set  about  it.  But  the 
prophet  shows  this  people  that  their  present  poverty  and  distress  were  sent  by 
God  as  a  chastisement  for  their  past  negligence,  and  a  warning  as  to  their  futiure 
course.  The  poverty  which  they  thought  to  prevent  by  not  building  the  temple, 
God  brought  upon  them  for  not  builcSng  it.  Having  thus  opened  to  them  the 
nature  of  God's  dealings  with  them,  he  calls  upon  them  to  reflect  upon  them. 

X 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

"  Consider  your  ways."  Then  he  urges  upon  them  the  immediate  duty  of  amend- 
ing their  ways — "  Go  up  to  the  mountain  and  bring  wood,  and  build  the  house  "  ; 
and  adds  also  the  promise  of  encouragement — "  And  I  will  take  pleasure  in  it, 
and  I  will  be  gloriiied,  saith  the  Lord."  The  message  and  exhortation  of  the 
prophet  were  not  in  vain.  The  message  was  given  on  the  first  day  of  the  sixth 
month,  and  on  the  four-and-twentieth  day  of  the  month  the  people  were  at  work. 
When  the  Jews  were  led,  on  account  of  feebleness  and  poverty,  to  neglect  their 
duty  in  the  restoration  of  the  temple,  God  visited  and  chastised  them  with  the 
increase  of  that  very  distress  which  was  the  excuse  for  their  sloth ;  and  though 
they  misunderstood  the  lesson,  He  withdrew  not  BQs  hand  till,  under  the  teaching 
of  the  prophet,  they  had  learnt  its  meaning.  Has  no  similar  working  of  Almighty 
wisdom  developed  itself  in  our  case  ?  When  we  have  been  led  to  forgetfuLaesa 
of  our  duty  to  God,  not  by  distress,  but  by  the  full-fed  arrogance  of  worldly 

Erosperity,  has  not  He  drawn  for  us  lessons  of  chastisement  out  of  that  which 
as  been  the  very  cause  of  our  sin  ?  Our  great  manufactm-ing  and  commercial 
towns  are  the  offspring,  the  development,  the  very  characteristic  embodiment 
of  the  sort  of  prosperity  which  God  has  permitted  a  careless  nation  to  work  out 
for  itself.  And  if  such  prosperity  be  a  blessing,  may  we  not  well  question  whether 
the  Almighty  have  not  brought  upon  us  the  last  and  worst  denunciation  of  prophetic 
word,  and  "  cursed  our  blessings  because  we  have  departed  from  His  ways  "  ? 
Now  at  length  the  conviction  seems  to  be  slowly  forcing  itself  upon  tis,  that  our 
disabiUties  are  so  great  because  in  building  up  our  social  fabric  we  have  omitted 
the  temple  of  God.  These  are  the  providential  chastisements  with  which  Grod 
corrects  a  nation,  which  has  allowed  a  population  to  grow  up  estranged  from  Him — 
untaught  in  His  Divine  law.  And  as  yet  we  seem  to  be  in  the  state  of  the  Jews 
when  God  first  visited  them  with  dearth  and  poverty  for  their  forgetf ulness  of  Him 
and  His  temple.  We  are  making  the  consequences  of  our  sinful  neglect  reason 
for  its  continuance.  We  need  all  of  us  to  have  our  spirits  stirred  within  us  to  do 
the  work  of  God  ,  yea,  even  those  who  may  think  that  they  are  already  awakened 
to  a  sense  of  their  duties.  When  the  foundation  of  the  second  temple  was  laid 
amid  general  joy  and  congratulation,  the  elders,  who  had  seen  the  first  house, 
"  wept  with  a  loud  voice."  They  were  afflicted  at  the  thought  of  the  humbled 
state  of  the  Church  of  God.  But  if  man  in  his  niggardliness  now  builds  meanly, 
God  can  give  to  His  temple  a  splendour  of  its  own.  The  glory  of  the  latter  house 
may  be  greater  than  the  glory  of  the  former.  Into  the  second  temple  came  the 
glory  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God.  And  into  our  temple  now  may  come  that 
spiritual  presence  which  will  give  it  even  greater  glory.  Then  be  strong  in  that 
which  your  duty  calls  you  to  do,  and  strong  in  that  self-denying  devotion  by  which 
alone  it  can  be  done.  And  doubt  not  that  God  will  prosper  and.  bless  the  work  so 
taken  in  hand.  {Bishop  E.  Denison,  D.D.)  Objections  to  rcligioiis  work: — 
For  about  four  months  Haggai  was  employed  in  delivering  prophetic  sermons  to 
encourage  the  people  to  rebuild  the  second  temple.  The  people  were  disheartened. 
They  prepared  their  own  houses,  they  were  ceiled,  and  painted,  and  decorated, 
but  the  Lord's  house  was  permitted  to  Ue  waste.  This  neglect  arose  from  a 
principle  prevalent  in  the  human  heart,  which  leads  men  to  fancy  that  an  exclusive 
attention  to  their  own  selfish  concerns  is  the  only  way  to  promote  their  interests  ; 
it  does  not  enter  into  their  narrow  calculation  that  the  first  interest  of  man  is  to 
glorify  God.  Indifference  to  the  cause  of  God  has  brought  many  a  multiphed 
Borrow  to  the  person,  or  comm\mity,  who  have  manifested  such  a  spirit ;  nor  has 
it  ever  been  known  that  zeal  for  God  and  love  to  His  cause  have  passed  unnoticed 
or  unregarded  by  Him.  .  .  .  Every  effort,  of  whatever  kind  it  be,  for  the  welfare 
of  the  souls  of  men,  will  be  Uable  to  objection.  If  we  wait  until  all  such  objections 
axe  satisfied,  we  shall  act  like  the  fool,  who  stood  by  the  side  of  the  stream,  waiting 
till  all  the  water  was  gone  by,  that  he  might  pass  over.  Objections  arise  from 
three  classes  of  persons.  The  profane  man  is  disgusted  at  the  enthusiasm  and 
madness  of  such  attempts.  Interested  persons,  whose  narrow  souls  are  incapable 
of  a  large  grasp,  have  some  certain  hne  of  action,  but  are  alarmed  at  every  new, 
magnificent,  and  extensive  imdertaking.  Good  and  intelligent  men  sometimes 
Buffer  their  minds  to  be  prejudiced  against  particular  forms  of  work.  Illustration 
may  be  taken  from  objections  to  the  "  Society  for  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel 
among  the  Jews."  1.  The  first  objection  made  to  the  attempts  of  this  Society 
is  this, — That,  considering  the  present  state  of  the  Jews,  the  work  of  their  conversion 
appears  so  very  arduous,  that  success  can  scarcely  be  hoped  for.  We  admit  the 
difficulty,  because  our  aim  is  not   merely  to   produce   a  change   of  sentiment 


CHAP.  I.]  HAGGAI.  3 

concerning  the  Messiah,  but  to  do  an  internal  and  spiritual  work  in  souls.  But 
as  this  is  the  work  of  God,  we  cannot  and  must  not  despair.  The  power  belongeth 
unto  God,  and  He  has  promised  to  work  by  ffis  servants.  2.  Another  objection 
is  this, — The  time  for  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  is  not  yet  come,  because  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  not  yet  brought  in.  But  Christ  has  said  it  is  not  for  us  to 
know  times  and  seasons.  If  I  do  not  know  the  time,  how  can  I  say  that  it  has  not 
come  ?  We  are  to  be  guided,  not  by  what  God  has  deUvered  as  a  prediction, 
but  by  what  He  has  enjoined  as  a  duty.  3.  Others  are  ready  to  say.  Is  there 
anjrthing  in  the  state  of  the  Christian  Church  at  present  that  flatters  us  with 
peculiar  hopes  of  success  respecting  the  Jews  ?  While  Christianity  continued 
pure  and  unsophisticated,  there  were  many  of  the  Jews  converted.  By  what 
power  were  they  converted  ?  It  was  by  that  instrument  which  God  always 
employs  in  the  conversion  of  souls,  the  pure  testimony  of  Jesus.  Wh?n  the  Gospel 
lost  its  purity  and  simplicity,  the  power  of  preaching  was  lost  also.  The  inquisition 
compelled  many  Jews  to  become  Christians  in  name.  True,  when  the  Church 
was  reformed,  little  was  done  for  the  Lord's  ancient  people.  Little  could  be 
done,  because  party  spirit,  sectarian  bigotry,  narrowness  of  mind  crippled  and 
enfeebled  all  their  efforts.  4.  It  is  said  a  difficulty  arises  because  the  Jews  find 
we  want  to  convert  them  to  some  particular  sect.  5.  It  is  said  that  the  present 
state  of  the  Jewish  nation  is  specially  unfavourable  to  the  reception  of  Christianity. 
But  these  difficulties  are  not  likely  to  vanish  of  themselves,  if  we  take  no  pains 
to  lessen  them.  6.  It  is  also  said  that  the  plans  of  this  Society  are  Utopian,  for 
where  are  their  means  ?  7.  It  is  said.  There  is  no  door  open  ;  wait  till  God  opens 
a  door  in  His  providence,  and  then  go  forward.  The  way  to  get  further  opportunity 
is  to  seize  and  use  the  present.  8.  It  is  said.  What  right  have  you  to  interfere 
with  the  religion  of  the  Jews  ?  If  we  have  a  better,  we  must  share  it  with  others. 
Other  objections  are  that  this  Society  is  actuated  by  interested  motives ;  that  the 
Jews  have  to  be  bribed  to  make  a  Christian  profession ;  that  none  but  poor  Jews 
are  turned  from  their  ancient  faith  ;  that  all  Jews  are  impostors  ;  and  that  this 
Society  uses  unjustifiable  means.  {E.  J.  Jones.)  Procrastination: — The  Lord 
was  displeased  with  this  people  for  their  demur.  They  should  have  obeyed  the 
command  given  them  at  once  and  earnestly.  The  prophet  expostulated,  and  his 
expostulation  was  not  in  vain.  I.  A  rejoinder  with  which  many  op  you  are 
FAMILIAR.  Such  and  such  things  are  presented  for  your  consideration,  and  they 
are  presented  kindly  and  intelligently.  And  you  admit  the  importance  of  the 
things.  For  example,  you  Usten  respectfully  when  the  necessity  is  set  before 
you  for  sorrow  for  your  personal  sin.  Yet,  when  you  have  admitted  this  necessity, 
you  quietly  say,  "  But  I  must  be  excused  at  present — not  now — the  time  is  not 
come."  Again,  you  give  heed  when  the  minister  points  out  the  necessity  for  the 
abandonment  of  sin.  But,  many  and  many  a  time,  when  the  effort  has  been  made 
to  lu-ge  the  actual  relinquishment  of  bad  habits — the  immediate,  continuous, 
and  permanent  abandonment  of  them,  you  have  said,  "  What  a  case  that  is  !  " 
Well,  what  then  ?  "  Ah  !  but  you  must  be  excused  at  present.  Not  now.  The 
time  is  not  yet  !  "  Again,  how  respectfully  you  hsten  when  the  minister  points 
out  the  necessity  for  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  It  is  shown  you  that  however  deep 
may  be  the  sorrow,  and  however  complete  and  entire  may  be  the  abandonment  of 
sin,  there  is  the  sin  after  all ;  there  is  the  sin,  with  its  pollution,  on  your  conscience ; 
and  there  is  the  sin,  with  its  guilt,  waiting  settlement  in  the  book  of  God's  remem- 
brance. That  guilt  is  to  be  cancelled;  that  pollution  is  to  be  cleansed.  But 
what  was  the  upshot  in  this  case  of  pleading  ?  "  We  must  be  excused  for  the 
present.  Not  now.  The  time  is  not  yet."  Again,  how  respectfully  you  have 
listened  when  the  effort  haw  been  made  to  show  the  necessity  for  co-operation  ia 
counteracting  sin.  Yet  this  has  been  met  by  the  same  procrastinating  response. 
n.  Certain  reasons  whereby  your  rejoindbr  is  justifibd.  "  The  time  is  not 
yet."  Why  not  ?  1.  The  answer  from  some  of  you  is  that  your  situations  are  especi- 
ally unfavourable  to  a  rehgious  life.  2.  Others  say  they  are  so  entirely  absorbed 
with  secular  avocations  and  with  worldly  care.  3.  Others  say,  Oh,  my  passions 
and  predilections  are  so  entirely  beyond  my  control.  4.  Others  say,  I  have 
never  yet  been  visited  by  any  overpowering  communication  from  on  high.  And 
all  the  time  you  admit  that  sin  shall  be  confessed  and  abandoned,  that  forgiveness 
shall  be  solicited,  and  that  you  should  take  your  place  amongst  those  who,  in  God's 
name,  are  attemptmg  to  counteract  sin.  III.  How  utterly  unwariuntablh, 
AND  how  utterly  UNSOUND  YOUR  JUSTIFICATION  13.  If  there  is  a  command- 
ment in  this  book  that  is  imperative,  it  is  the  commandment  to  be  sorry  for  sin. 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

If  there  is  a  duty  incumbent,  it  is  the  duty  of  abandoning  sin.  If  there  is  an 
obligation  paramount,  it  is  the  obligation  to  seek,  through  Christ,  the  forgiveness 
of  sin.  If  there  is  a  responsibility  brought  to  bear  upon  human  intelligence  by 
the  Divine  authority  at  all,  it  is  the  responsibility  to  take  your  place  on  the  Lord's 
aide.  Your  reasons  are  indefensible,  untenable.  I  pray  you  to  mark  the  untenable- 
ness,  and  to  have  done  with  them.  {William  Brock,  D.D.)  Not  yet: — The 
cause  of  God,  in  all  ages,  suffers  more  from  its  professed  friends  than  from  its  open 
foes.  It  was  the  selfishness,  sloth,  carelessness,  and  apathy  of  the  Jews  which 
caused  the  work  to  cease,  after  the  foundation  had  been  laid.  So  it  is  now.  If  I 
had  a  Church  of  two  hundred  communicants,  all  of  whom  were  constantly  meeting 
every  claim  which  they  constantly  acknowledge,  and  if  I  had  grace  to  do  the 
same,  I  should  not  be  afraid  that  any  opposition  would  be  able  to  break  our  moral 
power  over  this  community.  It  was  not  the  Samaritan  intrigue  but  the  Jewish 
apathy,  which  permitted  the  temple  to  lie  so  long  unfinished.  The  apathy,  not 
the  opposition.  The  address  of  the  prophet  is  to  those  who  admitted  the  claim, 
but  answered,  "  Not  yet."  The  work  was  to  be  done  at  some  time,  but  "  not  yet." 
This  describes  the  temper  of  thousands  who  crowd  our  Churches  in  this  day. 
Orthodox  but  inactive.  Your  inactivity  produces  disastrous  results,  from  which 
your  orthodoxy  cannot  save  you.  Correctness  of  opinion  and  ruinousness  of 
conduct  may  co-exist  in  the  history  of  the  same  individual.  A  postponement 
of  action,  in  things  that  are  imperative  at  the  present  moment,  is  a  denial  by  the 
conduct  of  that  which  the  intellect  afi&rms  and  urges.  It  sets  the  whole  life  on  a 
contradiction,  which  weakens  the  powers  and  breaks  the  influence.  1.  There  is 
the  subject  of  attention  to  one's  personal  salvation.  There  can  be  no  controversy 
as  to  that.  No  serious  attendant  on  Christian  worship  will  deny  that  it  is  a  man's 
duty  to  give  serious  attention  to  his  soul.  Yet  how  many  are  wholly  neglecting 
the  culture  of  their  soul.  They  intend  to  concern  themselves  about  this  matter, 
but  not  yet.  2.  "  The  time  is  not  come,"  causes  also  the  postponement  of  honest 
self-examination.  Every  reasonable  man  admits  that  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
that  every  man  know  all  about  himself.  Self-deception  does  no  good.  It  is  sense- 
less to  prefer  a  brief  enjoyment  of  false  security.  But  a  strictly  honest  self- 
examination  is  painful.  It  is  always  a  revelation  of  defects,  often  of  deformities. 
Self-searching  would  lead  to  repentance,  and  faith,  and  a  Christian  life.  3.  This 
same  plea  leads  to  a  postponement  of  a  public  confession  of  Jesus.  Christ  naturally 
expects  a  public  acknowledgment  of  my  friendship  for  Him.  It  is  His  due.  It  is 
my  duty.  4.  Lastly,  we  come  inside  the  Church.  Professing  Christians  all  unite 
in  iicknowledging  that  the  greatest  things  should  be  done  for  Jesus.  Why  are  not 
those  things  done  by  us  ?  Because  we  are  the  people  who  say,  "  The  time  is  not 
come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's  house  should  be  built."  There  are  three  influences 
producing  in  us  this  injurious  spirit  of  procrastination.  (1)  We  exaggerate  the 
difficulties.  (2)  Our  covetousness.  (3)  A  disposition  to  wait  until  all  things  are 
ready.  No  experience  seems  able  to  cure  men  of  this  propensity.  There  probably 
never  was  an  undertaking  of  any  magnitude  for  which  all  things  were  completely 
ready.  If  all  the  great  improvements  of  the  age  had  been  held  back  until  all 
things  were  ready,  they  never  would  have  been  brought  forward.  They  have  had 
to  fight  their  way.  How  many  evils  come  of  procrastination,  especially  to  those 
who  admit  that  what  they  put  off  must  certainly  be  done.  How  it  deadens  the 
conscience  by  blinding  the  senses,  and  blunting  the  sensibilities  !  This  spirit  of 
procrastination  sets  us  in  opposition  to  God's  plan,  which  must  be  the  best  plan. 
God's  time  is  now.  There  never  will  be  a  time  for  coming  to  Jesus  better  than 
this  time.  Do  not  put  it  off.  Let  not  selfishness,  covetousness,  or  sloth,  make 
you  postpone.  Your  return  to  God,  your  acknowledgment  of  Jesus,  your  new 
life  must  begin  in  some  now ;  oh,  for  the  sake  of  your  peace,  and  growth,  and 
everlasting  happiness,  let  it  be  this  "  now."  {Charles  F.  Deems,  D.D.)  Waiting 
for  the  right  time  : — 1.  It  is  a  fearful  though  usual  sin  in  the  Church,  when  that 
which  is  the  principal  fruit  and  end  of  all  their  deliverances,  and  a  chief  means  of 
their  happiness,  and  which  they  seemed  to  esteem  most  when  they  wanted  it,  is  most 
neglected  when  they  are  delivered,  and  have  occasion  to  testify  their  affection  and 
thankfulness  :  such  was  the  building  of  the  temple  to  this  people,  and  yet  this 
"  house  lies  waste."  2.  It  is  a  most  dangerous  way  of  sinning,  when  the  sinner 
pretends  affection  to  God,  when  he  wrongs  Him  and  His  matters  most,  and  when 
he  thinks  himself  able,  by  fair  pretences,  to  excuse,  if  not  to  justify  his  way  : 
so  did  this  people  sin,  alleging  no  disaffection,  but  that  "  the  time  is  not  come," 
Ac.     3.  As  the  Lord  may  permit  very  great  obstructions  to  be  laid  in  the  way  of 


CHAP.  I.]  HAGGAI.  6 

a  work  which  yet  He  will  carry  on ;  so  a  people,  who  do  not  openly  disaffect  the 
work,  may  sinfully  concur  in  obstructing  of  it.  This  they  do — (I)  When  they  are 
not  sensible  of  obstructions  in  the  way,  but  are  soon  hindered.  (2)  When  they 
neglect  or  pass  from  a  known  duty  upon  any  pretence  of  providence,  or  God's 
secret  wiU.  (3)  When  they  are  hindered  from  their  duty  in  advancing  the  work 
of  God  by  any  hazard  whatsoever.  (4)  When  they  look  for  times  wherein  there 
shall  be  no  difficulties,  but  aU  advantages  for  doing  God's  work  in,  and  in  expecta- 
tion of  such  times  do  lie  from  present  duty.  (5)  When  the  true  cause  of  men's 
negligence,  which  layeth  many  a  lion  in  the  way,  is  their  love  to  their  own  things 
and  private  interests.  4.  Men's  own  consciences,  when  they  speak  impartially, 
will  convince  them  of  heinous  sin,  when  they  study  to  promote  their  own  interest, 
to  the  neglect  of  God's  affairs.  5.  A  people's  sinful  negligence  in  God's  matters, 
though  times  were  never  so  perilous,  renders  them  contemptible,  whatever  their 
privileges  be,  and  provokes  God  to  bring  them  down  to  know  themselves  better. 
{Oeorge  Hutcheson.)  Duty  adjourned  : — "  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that 
the  Lord's  house  should  be  built."  They  do  not  question  the  desirableness  or  the 
obligation  of  the  work.  During  the  captivity,  we  are  told  elsewhere,  that  they 
hanged  their  "  harps  upon  the  willows,"  and  wept  when  they  "  remembered 
Zion."  Often,  perhaps,  in  those  circumstances  did  they  resolve,  should  they  ever 
be  restored,  to  rebuild  that  temple  which  was  the  glory  of  their  land  ;  but  now 
that  they  are  there  on  the  spot,  and  the  ruins  lying  before  them,  their  ardour  is 
cooled,  and  they  say,  "  The  time  is  not  come."  I.  Cowardice.  They  did  not 
say,  "  We  wiU  not  build  the  temple,  we  will  leave  it  to  remain  in  ruins,"  they  were 
too  cowardly  for  that.  Their  consciences  rendered  them  incapable  of  making 
Buch  a  decision.  Men  who  neglect  duty  are  too  cowardly  to  say,  "  We  will  never 
attend  to  it,  we  wiU  never  study  the  Scriptures,  worship  God."  1.  Sin  is  cowardice. 
2.  Sin  is  cowardice  because  conscience,  the  truly  heroic  element,  is  ever  against  it. 
II.  Selfishness.  They  set  to  work  for  their  own  private  interests.  I .  Selfishness  is 
a  perversion  of  self-love.  2.  Selfishness  is  fatal  to  self-interest.  III.  Presumption. 
"  The  time  is  not  come."  How  did  they  know  that  ?  Were  they  judges  of  times 
and  seasons  ?  Are  they  imperious  enough  to  plead  providence  as  a  patron  of  their 
disobedience  ?  "  Go  to,  now,  ye  that  say  to-day  and  to-morrow."  1.  Such  presump- 
tion is  always  guilty.  It  implies  that  we  know  better  than  our  Maker  about  times 
and  seasons.  2.  Such  presumption  is  always  perilous.  It  treads  upon  an  awful 
precipice.  {Homilist.)  Excuses  for  neglecting  religious  duty : — While  the  people 
were  taking  care  of  themselves,  and  consulting  their  own  interest,  the  building 
of  the  temple  was  neglected.  That  the  temple  was  not  built  till  the  reign  of 
Darius,  was  occasioned  by  the  fact  that  the  prefects  of  Cyrus  gave  much  annoyance 
to  the  Jews,  and  Cambyses  was  most  hostile  to  them.  But  when  liberty  was 
restored  to  them,  and  Darius  had  so  kindly  permitted  them  to  build  the  temple, 
they  had  no  excuse  for  delay.  It  is  however  probable  that  they  had  then  many 
disputes  as  to  the  time  ;  for  it  may  have  been,  that  they,  seizing  on  any  pretext 
to  cover  their  sloth,  made  this  objection, — that  many  difficulties  had  occurred, 
because  they  were  too  precipitate,  and  they  had  been  thus  punished  for  their 
haste,  because  they  had  rashly  undertaken  the  building  of  the  temple.  And  we 
may  also  suppose  that  they  took  another  view  of  the  time  as  having  not  yet  come, 
for  easily  might  this  objection  occur  to  them  :  "  It  is  indeed  true  that  the  worship 
of  God  is  to  be  preferred  to  all  other  things  ;  but  the  Lord  grants  us  this  indulgence, 
so  that  we  are  allowed  to  build  our  own  houses  ;  and  in  the  meantime  we  attend 
to  the  sacrifices.  Have  not  our  fathers  lived  many  ages  without  a  temple  ?  God 
was  then  satisfied  with  a  sanctuary  ;  there  is  now  an  altar  erected,  and  there 
sacrifices  are  offered.  The  Lord  then  will  forgive  us  if  we  defer  the  building  of 
the  temple  to  a  suitable  time.  But  in  the  meantime,  every  one  may  build  his  own 
house,  so  that  afterwards  the  temple  may  at  leisure  be  built  more  sumptuously." 
However  this  may  have  been,  we  find  it  true,  that  the  Jews  were  so  taken  up 
with  their  domestic  concerns,  with  their  own  ease,  and  with  their  own  pleasures, 
that  they  made  very  little  account  of  God's  worship.  This  is  the  reason  why 
the  prophet  was  so  greatly  displeased  with  them.  He  declares  that  they  said, 
"  The  time  is  not  yet  come  to  build  the  house  of  Jehovah."  He  repeats  here  what 
the  Jews  were  wont  to  allege  in  order  to  disguise  their  sloth,  after  having  delayed 
a  long  time,  and  when  they  could  not,  except  through  consummate  effrontery, 
adduce  anything  in  their  own  defence.  We  however  see  that  they  hesitated 
not  to  promise  pardon  to  themselves.  Thus  also  do  men  indulge  in  their  sins,  as 
though  they  could  make  an  agreement  with  God,  and  pacify  Him  with  some 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cshap.  i. 

frivolous  things.  We  see  that  this  was  the  case  then.  But  we  may  also  see  here, 
as  in  a  mirror,  how  great  is  the  ingratitude  of  men.  And  how  is  the  case  at  this 
day  ?  We  see  that  through  a  remarkable  miracle  of  God,  the  Gospel  has  shone 
forth  in  our  time,  and  we  have  emerged,  as  it  were,  from  the  abodes  below. 
Who  does  rear  up,  of  his  own  free  will,  an  altar  to  God  ?  On  the  contrary, 
all  regard  what  is  advantageous  only  to  themselves  ;  and  while  they  are  occupied 
with  their  own  concerns,  the  worship  of  God  is  cast  aside ;  there  is  no  care,  no 
zeal,  no  concern  for  it ;  nay,  what  is  worse,  many  make  gain  of  the  Gospel,  as 
though  it  were  a  lucrative  business.  No  wonder,  then,  if  the  people  have  so 
basely  disregarded  their  deliverance,  and  have  almost  obliterated  the  memory  of 
it.  As  God's  temple  is  spiritual,  our  fault  is  the  more  atrocious  when  we  become 
thus  slothful ;  since  God  does  not  bid  us  to  collect  either  wood  or  stones  or  cement, 
but  to  build  a  celestial  temple,  in  which  He  may  be  truly  worshipped.  When 
therefore  we  become  thus  indifferent,  as  that  people  were  thus  severely  reproved, 
doubtless  our  sloth  is  much  more  detestable.  The  building  of  the  spiritual  temple 
is  deferred,  whenever  we  become  devoted  to  ourselves,  and  regard  only  what  is 
advantageous  to  us  individually.  {John  Calvin.)  The  duty  of  building  the 
Lord's  house  : — These  people  were  glad  to  have  an  excuse  for  turning  away  from 
building  the  Lord's  house  to  build  houses  for  themselves.     Though  they  found 

flenty  of  time  and  means  for  adorning  their  own  houses  in  a  costly  manner,  the 
lOrd's  house  was  left  to  lie  waste.  Are  they  the  only  people  who  have  ever  acted 
after  this  fashion  ?  Have  we  not  been  equally  slack  in  doing  the  Lord's  work  ? 
We  may  not  be  called  to  build  up  the  Lord's  house  of  stone  and  mortar  ;  but  there 
is  another  work  requisite,  even  soul  work  ;  and  from  that  neither  we  nor  any 
other  Christians  can  be  spared.  Every  Christian  is  called  to  bear  his  part  in 
building  up  the  Church  of  the  Lord  spiritually,  by  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  by 
faith  and  righteousness,  by  holiness  and  love  ;  for  this  is  the  Lord's  true  Church. 
The  New  Testament  Church  is  the  congregation  of  believers.  But  any  hindrance, 
however  petty,  is  now  deemed  insurmountable — any  excuse,  however  trifling,  is 
held  to  be  perfectly  valid — if  it  is  only  to  keep  a  person  away  from  Church.  Even 
when  we  come  to  Church,  are  we  all  diligently  employed  in  building  the  house  of  the 
Lord  ?  It  is  not  of  the  bodies  of  men,  but  of  their  hearts,  and  souls,  and  minds,  that 
the  Lord's  house  is  built.  When  we  come  to  Church,  as  members  of  Christ's  congre- 
gation, we  come,  or  at  least  we  ought  to  come  to  Christ.  Moreover,  every  Christian 
ought  himself  to  be  a  temple  of  God.  He  is  so  already,  as  St.  Paul  tells  the 
Corinthians ;  and  he  ought  to  become  so  more  and  more  entirely.  This  should 
be  the  great  work  of  his  life,  to  build  himself  up  as  such,  with  the  help  of  God's 
Spirit  dwelling  in  him.  This  is  our  work — a  long  and  laborious  wrk — to  fit 
all  our  thoughts  and  feelings  for  being  built  up  into  the  house  of  God,  uy  purging 
them  from  the  untempered  mortar  of  this  world.  When  so  purged,  how  are  we  to 
cement  them  together  ?  By  good  works  ;  by  works  of  holiness  and  love.  It 
behoves  us,  one  and  all,  to  make  it  the  great  work  of  our  lives  to  build  up  the 
Lord's  house,  both  in  our  own  hearts  and  souls  and  minds,  and  in  the  congregation 
of  His  people.  We  must  be  careful  to  carry  on  both  works  together ;  for  neither 
will  prosper  without  the  other.  {Julius  C.  Hare,  M.A.)  The  waste  house: — 
One  of  the  most  palpable  effects  of  the  Fall  is  that  it  has  led  man  to  live  for  himself. 
Sin  is  essentially  selfish,  and  one  of  the  first  effects  of  redemption  is  to  make  man 
live  for  others.  Real  Christianity  always  takes  a  man  out  of  himself.  Yet  the 
Christian  carries  about  with  him  a  sinful  body,  which  is  always  craving  for  indulg- 
ence. The  Christian's  constant  danger  is  lest  his  Saviour's  glory  should  cease 
to  be  paramount  to  every  other  consideration.  Christ  must  be  first,  or  the  soul 
will  find  a  want  in  everything.  Observe  the  name  God  takes  here — "  Lord  of 
hosts."  When  God  is  about  to  ask  His  people  for  anything,  or  to  supply  His 
people  with  anything,  this  is  the  name  by  which  He  generally  addresses  them  in 
the  Old  Testament.  Observe  the  sin  of  the  people  here.  "  The  time  is  not  come 
that  the  Lord's  house  should  be  built."  It  was  not  a  denial  of  God's  claim  upon 
them,  it  was  a  putting  God  off.  Is  not  this  the  sin  of  the  present  day  ?  God  asks 
for  His  place  in  the  heart  of  the  sinner,  and  the  answer  is,  "  Not  yet."  The  sin 
of  all,  converted  and  unconverted,  is  that  of  putting  God  off.  We  have  not 
the  courage,  the  straightforwardness,  to  disallow  His  claim  altogether.  We  add 
mockery  to  our  sin  by  acknowledging  the  justice  of  a  claim  which  we  have  inwardly 
determined  shall  never  be  met.  While  we  are  dwelling  in  our  ceiled  houses, 
and  the  Lord's  house  is  lying  in  ruins,  what  is  the  consequence  even  in  this  life  ? 
The  end  of  everything  they  did,  these  people  missed.     Christ  is  the  end,  the  satisfy* 


CHAP.  I.]  HAGGAL  7 

ing  thing  in  all.  Toil  without  Him  must  end  in  vanity.  God  reminds  them  of 
their  disappointment  in  everything,  and  the  cause  of  it.  "  Because  of  Mine 
house  that  is  waste."  What  is  this  breath  wherewith  the  Lord  blows  upon 
everything  ?  The  breath  of  His  Spirit  withering  everything  we  do,  because  His 
house  is  in  ruins.  What  is  the  Divine  remedy  ?  "Consider  your  ways."  Pass 
in  review  your  heart,  yovir  life,  your  daily  history.  Set  about  the  duty  of  the 
hour,  and  put  your  heart  into  the  doing  of  it.  {F.  Whitfield,  M.A.)  The 
judgment  on  neglecting  to  buUd  the  Lord's  house  : — God  is  never  content  with  con- 
founding His  enemies.  He  does  not  confoimd  to  destroy  ;  He  confounds  in  order 
that  He  may  save.  The  courses  by  which  He  brings  this  purpose  to  pass  are 
various.  One  of  the  commonest  is  the  one  set  before  us  in  the  text.  Seeing  that 
the  motive  why  we  forsake  His  service  is  that  we  may  give  oiu-selves  up  to  our 
own  service, — seeing  that  self  is  the  mask  which  Satan  puts  on,  to  lure  us  away 
from  God,  and  that  the  baits  with  which  he  tempts  us  are  the  pleasures  of  sin 
and  the  charms  of  self-indulgence,  God  mercifully  shows  us  the  vanity  of  those 

Eleasures,  the  misery  and  deceitfulness  of  that  self-indulgence.  He  sends  some 
eavy  affliction  to  humble  our  pride,  to  prove  to  us  that,  in  leaning  on  earthly 
things,  we  lean  on  a  broken  reed.  Then,  at  the  height  of  our  distresses.  He  sends 
His  messengers  to  explain  their  meaning  and  purpose.  He  sharpens  the  stings 
of  conscience ;  He  brings  out  the  letters  of  the  law,  like  the  letters  which  the  hand 
wrote  on  the  wall  of  the  palace  of  King  Belteshazzar.  These  people  regarded  the 
earth  as  their  servant,  spread  out  beneath  their  feet  for  no  other  purpose  than  to 
do  their  bidding,  to  feed  their  wants,  and  to  pamper  their  lusts.  Wherefore  God 
vouchsafed  to  show  them  that  the  earth  was  not  their  servant,  but  His  ;  that  it 
was  not  spread  out  beneath  their  wings  to  do  their  bidding,  but  His.  If  the 
Bun  and  rain  were  locked  up  in  heaven,  the  earth  would  yield  no  increase,  notwith- 
standing aU  that  man  could  do  to  make  it.  God's  prophet  bids  the  people  "  con- 
eider  their  ways,"  and  that  all  God's  dealings  were  designed  to  prove  to  them 
how,  in  the  ways  in  which  they  were  walking,  although  they  were  to  sow  much, 
they  would  reap  little, — although  they  ate,  they  would  not  have  enough, — although 
they  drank,  they  would  not  be  filled  with  drink, — that  they  might  clothe  them- 
selves, but  none  would  be  warm, — and  that  the  wages  which  they  earned  would 
be  put  into  a  bag  with  holes.  All  this  God  did,  not  in  order  to  leave  them  in  their 
confusion,  but  in  order  to  raise  them  out  of  it.  If  they  will  arise  and  work,  and 
build  the  house  of  the  Lord,  He  will  still  take  pleasure  in  it,  and  will  be  glorified 
in  the  house  they  shall  build  for  Him.  This  message  is  also  sent  to  us.  It  is  a 
message  of  misery  ;  but  it  is  also  a  message  full  of  warnings,  a  message  of  mercy 
following  upon  warnings,  to  the  end  that  the  warnings  may  not  be  misunderstood, 
but  may  be  seen  in  their  true  light,  and  may  produce  the  effect  they  were  intended 
to  produce.  But  the  message  is  not  merely  sent  to  nations,  it  is  sent  also  to 
individuals.  No  one  ever  gave  himself  up  to  the  work  of  building  the  Lord's 
house,  without  allowing  his  heart  to  be  distracted  by  the  desire  to  build  some 
house  or  other  for  himself.  The  message  applies  to  us  in  all  its  parts.  We,  like 
them,  have  been  delivered  out  of  captivity.  We  have  been  called  to  the  work  of 
building  up  the  house  of  the  Lord  who  delivered  us, — of  building  it  up  outwardly, 
whenever  an  occasion  for  doing  so  comes  across  us, — of  building  it  up  continually 
by  joining  with  our  neighbours  in  His  worship, — and  of  building  it  up  daily  in  our 
own  souls.  As  we  are  like  the  Israelites  in  having  this  duty,  so  we  are  like  them 
in  neglecting  it.  Instead  of  doing  the  Lord's  work,  we  do  what  we  regard  as  our 
own  work.  But  if  self  is  the  lord  of  the  house  we  build,  whatever  the  materials 
may  seem  to  be,  when  the  gilding  is  rubbed  off,  they  are  found  to  be  cares,  and 
jealousies,  and  disquietudes.  Every  house  in  which  self  is  set  up  as  master,  is  a 
house  of  death.  It  may  seem  full  of  life  ;  but  it  is  the  house  of  death,  of  moral 
death,  which  is  the  first  death,  and  always  brings  the  other  in  its  train.  This  must 
be  the  condition  of  those  who  neglect  their  duty  of  building  up  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  Whatever  they  do  will  be  empty  and  unprofitable.  Those  who  build  up 
the  house  of  the  Lord  always  have  enough.  {Julius  C.  Hare,  M.A.)  National, 
religion  : — Great  as  any  man's  duties  are  which  he  is  called  to  discharge,  or  great 
as  his  sins  may  be  on  account  of  their  past  neglect,  he  is  not  left  either  without 
the  hope  of  forgiveness  or  the  promise  of  succour.  This  passage  was  intended 
as  a  rebuke  for  the  neglect  of  a  duty  seen  and  acknowledged.  That  duty  was  a 
pious  and  holy  regard  for  the  temple  and  service  of  the  Lord.  The  neglect  was 
that,  while  they  were  anxious  about  the  splendour  and  comfort  of  their  own 
dwellings,  they  suffered  the  Lord's  house  to  lie  waste.     The  fault  lay  not  with  the 


8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

people  only,  but  also  with  their  princes  and  rulers.  Taking  all  the  circumstances 
of  this  case  into  due  account,  the  following  propositions  are  offered  for  our  due 
consideration — 1.  That  rulers  and  heads  of  nations,  being  the  servants  of  God, 
and  bound  to  conform  to  His  will,  and  to  seek  above  all  things  to  promote  His 
glory,  are  as  responsible  to  God  for  all  their  ways  and  works,  both  individually, 
officially,  and  supremely,  as  any  other  person  whatsoever.  But  we  live  in  strange 
times.  Principles  of  the  most  dangerous  character,  and  utterly  subversive  of  all 
holy  feeling  and  good  government,  are  openly  broached  and  boldly  patronised 
in  the  grand  assemblies  of  the  nation.  A  double  duty  is  therefore  incumbent 
upon  all  who  wish  well  for  the  nation's  good,  and  for  the  true  welfare  of  their 
feUow-beings.  The  mutual  responsibilities  of  each,  the  governing  and  the  governed, 
must  be  plainly  and  practically  enforced,  on  the  ground  of  the  Divine  Word,  which 
is  their  proper  authority.  ( 1 )  We  maintain  that  all  men,  everywhere,  are  account- 
able to  God.  All  souls  are  in  the  hand  of  God.  Man  cannot  be  divested  of  this 
responsibility,  wherever  he  may  be  placed,  or  however  he  may  be  circumstanced. 
(2)  This  obligation  and  responsibility  rest  with  a  far  greater  weight  upon  some. 
Where  more  is  given,  more  will  be  required.  (3)  Rulers  and  heads  of  nations 
are  as  responsible  in  their  individual  capacity  as  others,  and  in  their  official  capacity 
even  more  than  others.  (4)  They  are  the  positive  servants  of  God.  Not  in  the 
saving  sense  of  the  word,  but  in  the  responsible  sense  of  the  term.  (5)  Therefore 
rulers  and  heads  of  nations  are  under  the  positive,  unvariable,  and  unchanging 
obHgation  of  seeking  above  all  things  to  promote  the  Divine  honour  and  glory. 
Nothing  can  release  them  from  these  demands  ;  nothing  can  lessen  or  alienate 
these  claims.  (6)  They  are  as  responsible  to  God  for  all  their  ways  and  works  in 
their  ruling  or  official,  as  they  and  others  are  accountable  to  God  for  all  their  doings 
in  their  merely  personal  or  individual  capacity.  It  is  often  said  that  the  ruling 
power  is  above  law,  and  therefore  accountable  to  none.  But  this  is  a  most  dangerous 
doctrine,  and  calculated  to  lead  to  the  most  lawless  licentiousness.  2.  That  they 
are  boimd,  by  every  motive  and  consideration,  both  of  alarm  and  encoiu-agement, 
seriously  to  lay  this  to  heart ;  to  consider  how  the  matter  stands  with  them  ;  and 
to  inquire  what  may  be  its  probable  termination,  both  with  themselves  and  others  ; 
whether  in  judgment  or  mercy ;  whether  in  the  gracious  approbations,  or  the 
heavy  wrath  of  Almighty  God.  (1)  Can  any  man  with  safety  neglect  the  duties 
which  God  requires  at  his  hands  ?  (2)  Must  it  not  be  a  fearful  thing  to  incvu-  the 
displeasure  of  Almighty  God  ?  His  wrath  is  like  a  consuming  fire.  (3)  Will  not 
God,  in  the  final  day  of  account,  deal  as  impartially  and  justly  with  the  mighty 
and  great  as  with  the  humble  and  mean  ?  (4)  Can  any  man  set  aside  the  Divine 
authority,  or  nullify  the  creature's  responsibiUty  ?  (5)  Will  the  Lord  ever  leave 
any  man,  who  sincerely  aims  to  do  His  will,  without  His  help  and  blessing  ? 
(6)  What  blessmgs  might  not  the  exercise  of  such  an  authority,  in  such  a  manner, 
be  the  means  of  diffusing  !  Reflections— 1.  How  needful  is  it  that  princes  and 
rulers  should  be  clearly  informed  of  what  God  requires  at  their  hands.  2.  How 
careful  they  should  be  not  to  abuse  the  power  with  which  they  are  charged  ! 
3.  How  gieat  must  be  the  guilt  of  all  who  attempt  to  hinder  such  princes  and 
rulers  in  the  conscientious  discharge  of  their  duties.  4.  How  very  far  are  we 
yet  from  that  state  of  things  which  ought  to  exist.  {R.  ShiUler.)  Temporal 
consequences  of  sin  : — In  God's  dealings  with  His  ancient  people,  we  find  the 
principles  of  His  government  in  all  ages  of  the  world.  God  took  no  greater 
interest  in  the  history  of  the  \s  orld  then  than  He  does  now.  He  did  not  interfere 
more  constantly  in  the  affairs  of  men  then  than  He  does  now.  The  only  difference 
is,  men  used  to  see  the  hand  of  God  where  we  find  no  trace  of  it  at  all.  In  all 
the  calamities  and  blessings  of  life  they  heard  the  voice  of  God.  And  God  still 
speaks  to  us  in  all  the  events  of  life.  We  can  find  many  philosophical  reasons 
for  them,  but  who  ever  hears  the  name  of  God  in  connection  with  them  ?     This 

Srsistent  denial  of  the  government  of  God  is  one  of  the  saddest  phases  of  public 
B  amongst  us.  The  prophet  tells  the  people  that  their  poverty  and  distress 
are  due  directly  to  their  selfish  care  for  themselves,  and  their  neglect  of  God's 
house.  The  underlying  principle  may  be  thus  stated — neglect  of  the  laws  and 
claims  of  God,  either  in  this  world  or  the  next,  never  results  in  any  good.  .  .  . 
In  the  particular  direction  which  God  gave  concerning  this  temple,  we  may  find 
the  principles  which  should  guide  us  in  the  erection  of  all  houses  for  His  glory 
and  worship.  We  find  a  severe  condemnation  of  that  specially  modern  custom 
of  lavifching  wealth  in  increasing  the  luxuries  and  beauties  of  our  private  dwellings 
and  public  buildings,  whilst  we  are  content  that  the  Lord  should  dwell  in  a  house 


CHAP.  1.]  HAOGAI.  9 

Bcarcely  equal  to  our  granaries  or  our  stables.  .  .  .  How  easy  it  is  to  find  inti- 
mations of  providence  against  a  work  for  which  we  are  little  disposed.  Indolence, 
Belfishness,  a  fear  of  the  trouble  and  expense,  were  the  real  causes  of  the  delay 
in  building  the  Lord's  house  in  Haggai's  time.  What  unbounded  faith  people 
have  in  providence  when  providence  seems  to  speak  on  the  side  of  their  own 
inclinations  :  but  how  deaf  men  are  to  the  voice  of  providence  when  it  contradicts 
their  own  desires  !  God  says  to  these  people,  "  Consider  your  ways."  What 
have  you  gained  by  your  neglect  of  My  house  ?  You  thought  by  so  doing  to 
escape  poverty,  yet  poverty  has  come.  Have  your  selfishness  and  niggardliness 
produced  the  results  you  expected  ?  God  says  nothing  about  the  insult  offered 
to  Himself  in  this  neglect.  This  is  the  final  argument  against  sin,  and  the  one 
which  perhaps  touches  men  most.  Sin  is  a  violation  of  God's  law  ;  but  men  care 
little  for  that.  It  is  the  basest  ingratitude  ;  but  men  care  little  for  that.  More 
Btill — ^it  is  the  most  consummate  folly.  The  man  who  does  wrong  is  not  only 
a  sinner,  he  is  a  fooL  Consider, — what  has  sin  done  for  you  T  Does  sin  answer 
your  purpose  ?  The  laws  of  Grod  are  for  this  life  as  weU  as  the  next.  The  most 
Bure  way  of  securing  prosperity  and  happiness  is  to  acknowledge  them.  The  most 
certain  way  to  bring  upon  ourselves  adversity  and  misery  is  to  live  in  defiance 
of  them.  God's  laws  vindicate  themselves  now.  Prosperity  and  happiness 
here  are  as  much  dependent  on  our  acknowledgment  of  God's  laws  as  prosperity 
and  happiness  in  the  world  to  come.  What  did  this  people's  neglect  of  God's 
house  imply,  and  how  would  this  affect  their  material  prosperity  7  1.  It 
implied  the  fear  of  a  little  expense.  But  niggardliness  never  pays.  2.  It 
exhibited  great  selfishness.  In  time  of  disaster,  who  has  the  selfish  man  to  fall 
back  upon  ?  Selfishness  won't  do  in  the  world  nowadays.  In  three  different 
ways  God  may  destroy  our  prosperity.  (1)  He  may  make  our  labour  impro- 
ductive.  (2)  He  may  take  away  the  power  to  enjoy  what  we  have  gained. 
(3)  Our  earnings  may  slip  away  as  quickly  as  they  come.  Let  me  ask  you  again, 
Wliat  do  we  gain  by  neglecting  God  ?  What  prosperity  can  we  seciure  or  enjoy 
without  His  blessing  ?  Of  what  happiness  have  we  such  a  firm  grasp  that  He 
cannot  take  it  away  from  us  ?  What  is  our  strength  if  we  provoke  the  Lord 
to  fight  against  us  ?  Is  it  wise  to  forget  God  ?  God  says.  He  that  siimeth 
against  Me  wrongeth  his  own  soul."  {B.  6.  Wilkinson.)  Indolence: — Indolence 
in  the  Lord's  work  is  a  great  sin.  Many  a  Christian  crying  out  "  Oh,  my  leanness !  '* 
had  better  be  honest  and  cry  "  Oh,  my  laziness  !  "  So  much  of  an  anomaly 
is  an  indolent  Christian  that  Dr.  Dwight  gives  the  following  testimony: — 
"  Among  all  those  who,  within  my  knowledge,  have  appeared  to  become  sincereljr 
penitent  and  reformed,  I  recollect  only  one  lazy  man.  And  this  man  became- 
industrious  from  the  moment  of  his  conversion."  {A.  J,  Gordon,  D.D.) 
Idle  Church  members  : — In  a  former  charge,  one  Sabbath,  I  took  into  the  pulpit 
the  Church  records,  and  I  laid  them  on  the  pulpit  and  opened  them,  and  said  : 
"  Brethren,  here  are  the  Church  records.  I  find  a  great  many  of  you  whose  names 
are  down  here  are  off  duty."  Some  were  afraid  I  would  read  the  names,  for  at 
that  time  some  of  them  were  deep  in  the  worst  kind  of  oil  stocks,  and  were  idle 
as  to  Christian  work.  But  if  the  ministers  of  Christ  in  Brooklyn,  and  New  York, 
and  in  all  the  cities,  to-day,  should  bring  the  Church  records  into  the  pulpit  and 
read,  oh,  what  a  flutter  there  would  be  !  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Shirking 
the  burden : — Thomas  Highat  lay  dying.  He  was  a  foreman  in  a  large  ship- 
building yard  in  Greenock.  There  was  a  long  heavy  log  of  wood  to  be  lifted, 
and  he  had  taken  his  place  along  with  the  men  under  him  to  assist  in  the  carrying. 
As  the  procession  was  moving  on,  one  mean  fellow  who  liked  to  scamp  his  work, 
dropped  his  shoulder  and  the  load  came  down  with  sudden  force  upon  the  shoulder 
of  Thomas  Highat,  who  was  not  so  tall.  There  was  serious  injury  done,  the 
doctor  pronounced  it  fatal.  As  he  lay  on  his  death-bed,  he  said  to  his  minister, 
the  Rev.  A.  Davidson,  "  I  ought  not  to  be  here  just  yet.  It  was  because  so-and-so 
didn't  stand  up  to  his  burden."  It  is  in  many  Churches  as  in  that  shipyard, 
that  some  aje  made  to  suffer  seriously  and  needlessly,  because  the  heavy  end  of  the 
work  is  left  to  them — because  certain  of  their  comrades  don't  stand  up  to  their 
burden.  Irreligious  delay  : — 1.  Men  are  always  prone  to  put  religion  off  with 
scraps  and  leavings,  and  serve  God  with  what  costs  them  nothing.  In  the  outward 
things  of  religion,  they  are  much  more  disposed  to  work  for  themselves  than  for 
God ;  and  if  they  have  time  that  cannot  be  otherwise  used,  or  funds  that  are  not 
very  current,  to  give  them  to  the  treasury  of  the  Lord,  and  if  any  larger  expenditure 
of  either  is  xu-ged,  to  plead  that  "  the  time  hs^  not  come  "  to  do  this  work.     la 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  I. 

the  inward  things  of  religion  the  same  spirit  is  shown.  The  young,  the  middle- 
aged,  and  the  old,  all  alike  procrastinate  the  great  work,  on  the  plea  that  "  the 
time  is  not  come,"  the  convenient  season  that,  like  the  horizon,  recedes  as  we 
advance  (ver.  2).  2.  Our  expenditures  on  ourselves,  whilst  we  pretend  to  have 
nothing  for  God,  will  bear  emphatic  and  fearful  testimony  against  us.  The 
carved  ceilings  and  costly  ornaments  will  have  a  tongue  in  the  day  of  judgment 
(ver.  4).  3.  No  man  ever  gains  anything  by  trying  to  cheat  God.  He  makes  a 
fool's  bargain,  bartering  a  real  good  for  a  perishing  bauble,  and  losing  at  last  even 
what  he  gained  (ver.  6).  4.  A  careful  pondering  of  God's  dealings  with  us  wiU 
often  indicate  to  us  God's  will  regarding  us.  The  events  of  life  are  the  hieroglyphics 
in  which  God  records  His  feelings  toward  us,  the  key  to  which  is  found  in  the 
Bible  (ver.  6).  5.  Obedience  to  God  is  an  advancement  of  His  glory  (ver.  8). 
6.  Disobedience  to  God  will  often,  even  in  this  life,  issue  in  disappointment  and 
disaster  (vers.  9,  10).  7.  God  has  not  abandoned  the  universe  to  the  sightless 
action  of  general  laws,  but  is  so  related  to  that  universe  as  to  be  able  to  direct  its 
laws  to  the  fulfilment  of  His  purposes,  whether  in  rewarding  the  good,  punishing 
the  evil,  or  answering  prayer,  without  deranging  or  destroying  the  normal  action 
of  those  laws  themselves  (ver.  11).  8.  True  religion  manifests  itself  in  fearing 
the  Lord,  and  in  obejang  the  voice  of  His  servant  (ver.  12).  9.  The  presence 
of  God  with  a  man  is  the  best  blessing  he  can  receive,  for  it  includes  everything 
else  (ver.  13).  10.  God  is  waiting  to  be  gracious,  and  will  meet  the  returning 
wanderer,  even  before  his  hand  has  begxm  the  actual  work  of  His  service  (ver.  13). 
11.  Every  good  impulse,  or  reviving  of  rehgion  in  the  hearts  of  men,  is  produced 
by  the  direct  power  of  God,  through  the  Holy  Spirit  (ver.  14).  12.  Obedience 
to  the  commands  of  God  will  always  end  in  a  blessing,  whilst  disobedience  will 
always  end  in  a  ciu^e,  if  not  in  time,  surely  in  eternity.     {T.  F.  Moore,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Is  it  time  for  you,  0  ye,  to  dwell  in  your  ceiled  houses,  and 
this  house  lie  waste  ? — Church  building : — The  decree  of  Artaxerxes  pro- 
hibited the  building  both  of  temple  and  city,  but  it  seems  that  the  people  had 
persisted,  spite  of  the  decree,  in  building  dwellings  for  themselves,  though  no 
progress  had  been  made  with  the  temple.  The  mission  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah 
was  to  rouse  the  people  to  the  long-neglected  work,  to  reprove  the  indolent,  and 
encourage  the  desponding.  The  excuses  of  the  people,  like  those  commonly  of 
men  who  defer  religious  duties  to  more  convenient  seasons,  were  but  marks  of  a 
secret  resolve  to  escape,  if  possible,  altogether  from  a  labour  which  must  interfere 
with  more  congenial  pursuits.  Our  text  contains  the  prophet's  expostulation, 
meeting  the  excuse  that  the  time  was  not  come  for  building  the  Lord's  house. 
The  temple  may  not  be  indispensable  in  spiritual  Christianity,  but  it  is  certainly 
valuable.  There  may  be  privileges  attached  to  it  which  we  have  no  right  to 
expect  elsewhere.  We  need  not  confound  our  case  with  that  of  the  Jews,  though 
we  address  to  Christians  the  expostulation  of  the  text,  as  if  the  change  in  dispensa- 
tion had  made  no  difference  in  its  pertinence  and  force.  Christianity,  unlike 
Judaism,  is  not  tied  to  places ;  its  ordinances  may  be  everywhere  celebrated. 
Then  what  necessity  is  there,  under  this  new  and  better  covenant,  for  structures 
devoted  to  sacred  uses,  or  what  loss  is  it  to  us  if  "  this  house  lie  waste  "  ?  It  is 
contrary  to  the  established  order  of  providence  that  miracles  should  be  employed 
where  the  result  might  be  accomplished  through  ordinary  means.  The  propaga- 
tion of  Divine  truth  has  been  entrusted  to  the  Church.  The  public  ordinances 
are  therefore  indispensable  ;  and  suitable  places  for  such  ordinances  must  be 
provided.  We  can  safely  contend  for  the  indispensableness,  under  the  existing 
dispensation,  of  sanctuaries,  or  Churches,  maintaining  that  cities  without  these 
sacred  edifices  would  be  cities  that  must  ere  long  be  wholly  sunk  in  irreligion,  and 
occupied  by  a  population  with  no  fear  of  God.  We  can  no  better  spare  our 
Churches  than  the  Jews  could  their  temple.  In  proportion  as  we  allow  any  city, 
or  any  portion  of  our  population  to  be  destitute  of  the  public  means  of  grace, 
we  fasten  on  that  city  or  population  something  of  the  same  religious  incapacity 
as  was  fastened  on  Jerusalem,  whilst  its  temple  lay  in  ruins.  The  Jews  are  not 
blamed  for  having  built  their  own  houses,  but  for  not  having,  at  the  same  time, 
built  the  house  of  God.  Wherever  there  is  a  community,  there  ought  to  be  a 
house  devoted  to  God.  (H.  Mdvill,  B.D.)  Diligence  in  the  work  of  God: — 
I  propose  to  excite  you  to  greater  diligence,  and  to  a  more  fervent  zeal  in  the  work 
and  cause  of  God.  I.  An  existing  depeession  in  the  cause  of  God.  There 
is  a  painful  imperfection  in  the  work  of  Grod  as  it  exists  in  the  present  day.     The 


CHAP.  I.]  HAGGAL  11 

cause  of  God  is  by  no  means  in  the  state  that  Christians  desire.  \Miat  are  the 
scenes  presented  to  our  view  in  lands  where  Christianity  is  professed  ?  In  our 
own  land,  what  do  we  see  ?  What  in  other  Christian  and  heathen  lands  ?  We 
are  compelled  to  confess  that  the  temple  of  God  lieth  waste.  We  are  too  apt  to 
triumph  :  we  are  prone  to  forget  the  present  state  of  things.  We  despair  not ; 
but  we  do  not  feel  enough.     II.  Temporal  gratification  may  be  pursued  to 

THE    neglect    of    THOSE    EXERTIONS    WHICH    GOD    SO    JUSTLY    DEMANDS.      These 

people  were  dwelling  in  ceiled  houses,  while  the  temple  of  God  was  in  ruins.  We 
Bee  now  wealth,  talents,  genius,  property,  fully  used  for  self-interests,  and  estranged 
from  the  cause  of  God.  Especially  may  be  noticed  neglect  of  claims  of  Christian 
missions.  Viewing  our  efforts  in  connection  with  the  claims  of  God  and  of  men, 
we  must  surely  confess  that  there  are  many  claims  not  answered,  many  duties 
not  fulfilled.  Regard  the  text.  III.  As  challenging  the  employment  of  our 
VARIOUS  talents,  AND  URGING  THE  CLAIMS  OF  GoD.  1.  Consider  the  nature  of 
those  obligations  under  which  you  are  placed  by  God,  with  regard  to  the  services 
you  are  called  te  render.  2.  Consider  the  peculiar  natiu'e  of  the  system  of  the 
Gospel  you  have  embraced.  Is  there  not  a  sentence  pronounced  on  aU  those  who 
are  \mgrateful  and  disobedient  ?  3.  Consider  that,  while  there  is  not  this  energy 
in  the  cause  of  God,  there  is  an  amount,  an  awful  amount  of  misery  resting 
on  your  fellow-men.  4.  Consider  the  prospect  of  success.  Let  then  the  vast 
importance  of  the  work,  and  the  consideration  of  the  past  neglect  of  it,  urge  you 
to  exertion.     {James  Parsons.) 

Ver.  5.  Now,  therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Consider  your  ways. — 
Preparation  for  self-amendment : — The  design  of  this  prophecy  is  to  persuade 
the  Jews  off  from  that  slothful  security  in  the  neglect  of  their  duty  which  had 
already  exposed  them  to  the  displeasiu-e  of  God.  They  had  outward  difficulties 
of  circumstance,  but  their  chief  hindrance  was  theu-  own  neglect  and  dulness, 
their  want  of  respect  for  God  and  holy  things.  It  was  this  state  of  insensibility 
that  God  sent  His  prophet  to  bring  them  out  of.  His  words  here  primarily 
import  no  more  than  that  it  was  time  for  that  rebellious  people  to  observe  and 
consider  diligently  of  all  their  labour  and  pains,  and  the  works  of  their  hands, 
and  see  what  it  all  came  to.  This,  however,  is  not  the  only  design.  They  were 
to  consider  with  a  view  to  amending  their  lives,  and  getting  free  of  those  sins 
which  were  causing  God's  displeasure.  How  much  our  case  is  like  that  of  the 
Jews  in  Haggai's  time.  The  temple  we  are  now  to  build  up,  is  the  Church  and 
body  of  Christ ;  not  with  stones  and  wood  from  the  mountains,  but  with  living 
materials,  Christ  being  the  foundation  and  chief  corner-stone.  The  building  up 
this  holy  temple  consists  in  advancing  the  credit  and  honour  of  religion  among 
men,  and  in  discountenancing,  in  the  course  of  oiu-  lives,  and  the  whole  tendency 
of  our  discoiurse,  all  vice  and  profaneness,  and  everything  that  is  inconsistent 
with  religion ;  and  this,  it  is  too  certain,  we  have  not  had  the  courage  and  the 
constancy  to  do.  We  of  this  nation,  too  generally,  have  not  been  advancing  the 
public  interest,  and  the  Protestant  cause,  as  we  ought  to  have  done.  The  prophet's 
words  are  therefore  applicable  to  us.  I.  The  person  speaking.  It  is  that  Being 
who  has  furnished  you  with  all  the  blessings  you  have  enjoyed  ;  who  has  been 
yovu:  continual  safety  and  protection.  He  can  never  lay  any  commands  on  us 
but  what  are  necessary  for  us,  and  highly  tending  to  our  oajnti  interest.  He  is 
infinitely  wise,  and  so  knows  perfectly  well  what  wiU  conduce  most  to  our  interest 
and  happiness.  Other  arguments  there  are,  perhaps  of  more  force  than  these. 
In  the  text  He  is  called  by  that  awful  title,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts,"  importing  that 
He  has  a  right  to  us  and  all  ovu:  actions,  because  He  created  us  and  aU  things. 
II.  The  advice  or  command  which  is  given.  "  Consider  your  ways."  A  very 
plain  and  easy  command.  The  original  is,  "  Set  your  heart  upon  your  ways." 
Observe,  atte  d  to,  watch  over  all  your  actions.  1.  Show  the  mischiefs  of  incon- 
sideration.  (1)  We  give  ourselves  up  by  it  to  the  most  stupid  and  insuperable 
ignorance  imaginable.  (2)  We  lay  ourselves  open  entirely  to  the  power  of  our 
lusts.  (3)  It  subjects  us  to  the  tjnranny  and  insults  of  our  great  spiritual  enemy. 
2.  Some  of  the  advantages  and  necessity  of  consideration.  The  blessed  advantages 
of  consideration  can  never  be  enumerated.  It  gives  us  strength  and  vigour  in 
the  performance  of  all  our  duties.  It  is  the  only  means  to  furnish  us  with  suitable 
arguments  and  victorious  resolutions  against  every  temptation  and  artifice  of  the 
devil.  And  as  it  suffers  us  to  omit  no  duty,  it  effectually  destroys  and  conquers 
every  beloved  lust  and  inclination.     3.  Answer  some  objections  by  the  devil 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

raised  in  our  minds  against  consideration.  (1)  It  is  exceeding  difficult  and  trouble- 
some to  be  always  upon  the  guard,  and  watching  against  ourselves.  But  the 
question  for  us  concerns  not  the  difficulty  but  the  necessity  and  the  duty.  (2)  To 
be  always  filled  with  notions  of  the  power,  justice,  and  vengeance  of  God,  must 
needs  make  us  very  melancholy.  But  enter  into  religion  aright,  and  you  will  soon 
find  that,  instead  of  melancholy,  your  souls  will  be  filled  with  the  truest  and  most 
satisfactory  joy  and  life  and  vigour.  (John  Gale,  D.D.)  The  great  import- 
ance in  lije  of  frequent  reflection  and  self-examination  : — The  faculty  of  review- 
ing our  past  lives  carries  with  it  an  evident  obligation  upon  all  men  to  exercise 
it  constantly  and  uprightly.  It  is  a  principle  that  implies  in  its  very  nature  an 
authority  over  the  whole  of  our  conduct ;  and  we  every  one  feel  ourselves  most 
intimately  b  vmd  to  obey  its  dictates.  God  our  Maker  saith  to  each  one  of 
■us  continually,  by  the  inward  voice  of  oirr  own  breasts,  "  Consider  your  ways." 
In  the  midst  of  so  many  passions  and  appetites  as  compose  our  frame  ;  so  many 
disorders  in  it  as  we  are  born  with  ;  such  powerful  temptations  as  surround  us 
on  every  side,  we  cannot  hope  that  the  carefullest  attention  to  ourselves  will 
keep  us  entirely  free  from  faults.  By  a  little  neglect  of  culture,  a  soil  so  fruitful 
of  ill  weeds  will  soon  be  covered  with  them.  The  best  inclinations  of  the  best 
minds,  if  left  to  themselves,  will  run  wild  and  degenerate.  A  duty  thus  plain 
and  necessary,  God  will  doubtless  expect  us  to  perform  very  faithfully.  What 
the  Almighty  commands,  we  shall  find  it  oiu-  interest  to  do,  never  to  omit.  The 
cowardice  of  not  searching  our  wounds  will  inevitably  make  them  fatal.  Possibly 
we  are  not  convinced  that  our  behaviour  is  of  such  infinite  and  eternal  importance. 
It  is  important  to  examine,  whether  it  be  or  not.  Perhaps  we  have  inquired,  and 
think  there  is  reason  to  doubt  of  what  we  are  commonly  taught  concerning  these 
matters.  But  when  did  we  begin  to  think,  so  ?  And  what  do  we  doubt  of  ? 
Not  surely  of  all  the  articles  of  faith,  and  all  the  obligations  of  life.  Have  we 
considered  well  what  the  undoubted  ones  are,  and  how  far  they  ought  to  influence 
our  conduct  ?  We  find  it  but  too  easy,  if  we  will,  to  judge  very  favourably  of 
almost  the  worst  actions  we  have  ever  done.  But  God  sees  everything  in  its 
true  light  and  magnitude,  and  siu-ely  then  it  is  ovu:  concern  to  see  it  so  too.  Have 
we  then  examined,  as  in  His  presence,  our  lives  and  hearts  ?  By  what  standard 
have  we  tried  their  innocence  or  guilt  ?  The  practice  of  others  can  no  more 
justify  us  than  ours  can  them.  Have  we  done  our  utmost  to  divest  our  examina- 
tion of  self-partiality,  to  enlighten  it  by  the  instruction  of  pious  and  judicious 
friends  and  books,  and  above  all,  to  direct  it  by  the  unerring  Word  of  God  ?  Our 
business  is  so  to  examine  ourselves  now,  as  to  live  more  Christianly  than  ever. 
And  whence  can  we  better  begin  than  from  what  we  owe  to  Him  that  made  us  ? 
We  owe  Him  worship,  faith  in  what  He  teaches,  obedience  to  what  He  commands. 
How  fully  soever  we  own  the  authority  of  religion,  do  we  practise  it  ?  Do  we  live 
to  any  unworthy  passion  ?  If  we  are  clear  both  of  worldliness  and  vanity,  still 
what  can  we  answer  with  respect  to  pleasure  ?  In  regard  to  other  indulgences, 
have  we  acted  as  becomes  rational  natures,  designed  to  prepare  ourselves,  by 
the  discipline  of  this  life,  for  spiritual  happiness  in  a  better  ?  Another  very 
material  head  of  examination  is  our  resentments.  Do  we  bear  ill-will  to  no  one  ? 
Again,  what  is  the  tendency  of  our  common  discourse  and  conversation  ?  Is  it 
favourable  to  religion,  to  probity,  to  decency,  to  goodwill  among  men,  or  the 
contrary  ?  Our  behaviour  must  be  regulated,  not  only  towards  our  fellow- 
creatures  in  general,  but  with  a  closer  view  to  the  more  general  relations  of  life. 
Are  we  careful  what  sort  of  example  we  set  others  to  copy  after  ?  Nor  should  we 
stop  at  considering  what  oiu:  faults  have  been  ;  that  alone  would  be  a  speculation 
of  little  use  :  we  should  proceed  to  think  what  must  follow  from  them.  Are  we 
deeply  sensible  that,  in  all  we  have  done  amiss,  we  have  provoked  a  most  holy 
God  ;  and  have  no  claim  to  pardon,  much  less  to  happiness  hereafter,  but  through 
the  mercy  procured  by  our  blessed  Redeemer?  {T.  Seeker.)  The  use  and 
benefit  of  Divine  meditation  : — Two  things  remarkable  in  the  text.  The  repetition 
and  enforcing  of  it  again  (ver.  7).  The  benefit  that  came  by  it;  it  brought 
them  to  repentance.  Doctrine — Serious  meditation  of  our  sins  by  the  Word 
is  a  special  means  to  make  men  repent.  Meditation  is  a  settled  exercise  of  the 
mind  for  a  further  inquiry  of  the  truth.  Four  things  in  meditation — 1.  An 
exercise  of  the  mind.  2.  A  settled  exercise.  Not  a  sudden  flash  of  man's  conceit, 
but  it  dwells  upon  a  truth.  3.  It  is  to  make  a  further  inquiry.  It  would  fain 
know  more  of  tnose  truths  that  are  subject  to  it.  Meditation  pulls  the  latch  of 
the  truth,  and  looks  into  every  closet,  and  every  cupboard,  and  every  angle  of  it^ 


CHAP.  I.]  HAGGAI.  13 

4.  It  labours  to  affect  the  heart.     Meditation  musters  up  all  weapons,  and  gathers 
all  forces  of  arguments  for  to  press  our  sins,  and  lay  them  heavy  upon  the  heart. 
Meditation,  having  bundled  up  all  items  against  the  soul,  and  brought  in  all 
bills  of  aocoimt,  fastens  sin  upon  the  soul,  makes  the  soul  feel  it,  so  that  it  must 
needs  be  convinced  without  any  evasion.     It  is  with  the  Word  as  it  is  with  a 
salve.     If  a  man  have  ever  so  good  a  salve,  it  will  not  heal  if  it  be  constantly 
taken  on  and  off.     Only  if  it  be  let  lie  on  will  the  salve  heal  the  wound.     What 
shall  we  think  of  them  who  are  loth  to  practise  this  duty  of  meditation,  but  keen 
enough  to  meditate  on  their  own  worldly  affairs  ?    The  poor  man  thinks  he  has 
no  time  for  this  tedious  duty ;  the  rich  man  thinks  he  needs  it  not ;  the  wicked 
dare  not  do  it ;  so  no  man  will.     The  lets  or  hindrances  of  serious  meditation 
are — 1.  Vain  company.      2.  Multitude  of  worldly  company.     He  that  over- 
employs  himself,  his  meditations  of  heaven  are  dreaming  meditations ;  his  thoughts 
dreaming  thoughts,  he  can  never  seriously  meditate  on  the  good  of  his  soul.     A 
good  meditating  mind  no  man  came  to  surfeited  with  employments.     3.  Ignorance. 
A  man  cannot  meditate  of  a  thing  he  knows  not,  nor  thou  of  thy  sins,  if  thou  be 
not  skilful  in  God's  catalogue  of  thy  sins.     4.  Averseness  of  the  heart ;  which 
consists  in  three  things — (1)  In  the  carelessness  of  the  heart.     (2)  In  runnings 
of  it.     The  heart  is  like  a  vagrant  rogue,  he  would  rather  be  hanged  than  tied  to 
his  parish.    (3)  In  the  wearisomeness  of  the  heart.    This  may  serve  for  terror  unto 
all  those  who,  for  all  this  that  has  been  spoken,  dare  sit  down  without  it.     If 
thou  wouldest  meditate  aright,  separate  yovirself  for  other  things.     Observe  the 
times  of  privacy  :  morning,  evening,  when  the  heart  is  touched  at  sermon  or 
sacrament.     Rub   up    thyself    and    thy  memory.     Rouse  up  thy  heart.     Use 
meditation  for  reprehension ;   for  men    usually  make    slight  account  of   their 
sins.     But  you  wiU  say,  How  shall  I  come  to  feel  my  burden  ?     Three  things 
are  here  to  be  discovered.     1.  The  ground  upon  which  our  meditation  must  be 
raised.     (1)  Meditate  on  the  goodness,  patience,  and  mercy  of  Grod,  that  hath 
been  abused  by  any  of  your  sins.     (2)  Meditate  on  the  justice  of  God  ;  for  He  is 
just  as  well  as  merciful.     (3)  Meditate  on  the  wrath  of  God.     (4)  Meditate  on 
the  constancy  of  God.     2.  The  manner  how  to  follow  meditation  home  to  the 
heart.     (1)  Weigh  and  ponder  aU  these  things  in  thy  heart.     (2)  Strip  sin,  and 
look  upon  it  stark  naked ;  for  sin  has  a  way  of  covering  and  disguising  itself 
with  pleasure,  profit,  ease.     (3)  Dive  into  thy  own  sovl  and  heart.     There  is  a 
tough  brawn  over  thy  heart,  that  it  feels  not  its  sins.     (4)  Anticipate  and  prevent 
thine  own  heart.     Meditate   what  thy  heart  will   one  day  wish,  if  it  be  not 
humbled  ;  and  tell  thy  soul  as  much.     3.  How  to  put  life  and  power  into  medita- 
tion.    (1)  Let  meditation  haunt  the  heart,  dog  thee  with  the  hellish  looks  of  thy 
sins,  and  follow  it  with  the  dreadful  vengeance  of  God.     (2)  Let  meditation  trace 
thy  heart,  as  it  should  haunt  thee,  so  let  it  trace  thee  in  the  same  steps.     Because 
the  heart  is  most  cunning,  and  hardest  to  be  tracked  by  its  scent,  when  the 
heart  hath  taken  up  with  abundance  of  good  duties,  and  attained  unto  sundry 
graces.     These  good  duties  and  common  graces  drown  the  scent  of  the  heart's 
wickedness.     (3)  Hale  thy  heart  before  God,  and  let  meditation  bring  it  before 
His  throne.     Make  complaint  to  God  ;  and  thy  complaint  must  be  full  of  sorrow. 
It  must  be  a  fviU  complaint  of  all  thy  sins,  and  of  all  thy  lusts.     It  must  be  with 
the  aggravation  of  all  the  circumstances  of  thy  sins,  which  may  show  them  to  be 
odious.     It  must  be   a  self-condemning  complaint.     Let  meditation,   when  it 
hath  haled  thy  heart  before  God,  there  cast  thee  down  before  Him.     Motives — 
1.  It  is  a  foUy  not  to  meditate.     2.  Thou  wotddst  be  loth  to  have  the  brand  of  a 
reprobate.     3.  Thou  wouldst  be  loth  to  rob  God  of  His  honour.     4.  Or  that  all 
the  worship  thou  givest  to  God  should  be  abominable ;  but  so  it  will  be  without 
meditation,  before  it,  and  after  it.     {W.  Fenner,  B.D.)        Consider  your  ways  : — 
Nearly  twenty  years  had  passed  away  since  a  remnant  of  God's   people  had 
returned  from  captivity.     Dviring  the  whole  of  that  time  nothing  had  been  done 
to  restore  the  temple.     Yet  the  people  had  thought  of  their  own  comfort.     They 
dwelt  "  in  ceiled  houses."     Haggai  arose  to  point  out  their  mistake.     He  cries, 
"  Consider  your  ways."     So  they  would  discover — 1.  The  reason  of  their  mis- 
fortunes.    Which  was  that  they  had  thought  of  themselves  and  had  forgotten 
God.     It  is  the  explanation  of  all  unhappiness.     If  you  wish  to  be  miserable — 
be  selfish.     Selfishness  looks  not  at  what  it  has,  but  at  what  it  has  not ;  casta 
covetous  eyes  on  what  others  have.     The  selfish  man  thinks  more  of  what  he  has 
than  what  he  is,  and  disregards  the  needs  of  others.     All  these  are  so  many  doors 
to  unhappiness.     He  that  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it.     2.  The  secret  of  blessed- 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ness.  "  Render  to  God  the  things  that  are  God's."  "  Build  the  temple,"  said 
Haggai.  Put  yourselves  in  harmony  with  God  and  His  purposes.  Philosophers 
have  discovered  that  happiness  is  not  found  when  it  is  sought  directly.  Seek  it 
obliquely.  "  Live  for  others."  But  the  doctrine  fails  because  men  are  sinful. 
To  join  them  is  to  join  them  in  their  sin,  and  sin  is  the  gate  of  all  wretchedness. 
Happiness  can  only  come  by  living  for  another,  when  that  other  is  sinless.  Live 
for  God,  and  the  secret  of  aU  blessedness  is  discovered.  This  is  the  true  "  Imitation 
of  Christ,"  whose  "  meat  and  drink  "  it  was  to  do  His  Father's  will.  (Herbert 
WindrosB. )  Lenten  thoughts  : — Lent  is  the  season  which  our  forefathers  have 
appointed  for  us  to  consider  and  amend  our  ways,  and  to  retvu-n,  year  by  year, 
heart  and  soul  to  that  Lord  and  Heavenly  Father  from  whom  we  are  daily  wander- 
ing. We  need  a  particular  time  in  which  we  may  sit  down  deliberately  and  look 
our  own  souls  steadily  in  the  face,  and  cast  up  our  accounts  with  God,  and  be 
thoroughly  ashamed  and  terrified  at  those  accounts,  when  we  find,  as  we  shall, 
that  we  cannot  answer  God  one  thing  in  a  thousand.  The  hurry  and  bustle  of 
business  is  daily  putting  repentance  and  self-examination  out  of  our  heads.  Much 
for  which  a  man  ought  to  pray,  he  forgets  to  pray  for.  Many  sins  and  failings 
of  which  he  ought  to  repent  slip  past  him  out  of  sight  in  the  hurry  of  life.  Much 
good  that  might  be  done  is  put  off  and  laid  by,  often  till  it  is  too  late.  It  may 
be  said  that  the  bustle  will  go  on  just  as  much  in  Lent  as  ever.  "  How  can  we 
give  up  more  time  to  religion  then  than  at  other  times  ?  "  There  is  a  sound 
and  true  answer  to  this.  It  is  not  too  much  more  time  which  you  are  asked  to 
give  up,  as  it  is  more  heart.  The  time  will  come  when  you  will  see  yourselves  in 
a  true  light ;  when  yom-  soul  will  not  seem  a  mere  hanger-on  to  your  body,  but 
you  will  find  that  you  are  your  soul.  Then  there  will  be  no  forgetting  that  you 
have  souls,  and  thrusting  them  into  the  background,  to  be  fed  at  odd  minutes, 
or  left  to  starve, — no  more  talk  of  giving  up  time  to  the  care  of  yoiu:  souls  ;  your 
souls  will  take  the  time  for  themselves  then — and  the  eternity  too  ;  they  will  be 
all  in  all  to  you  then,  perhaps  when  it  is  too  late !  Then  try,  for  this  brief  Lenten 
season,  the  plan  which  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  advises,  and  seek  first  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness.  You  need  not  be  idle  a  moment  more  in 
Lent  than  at  any  other  time.  You  can  get  ten  minutes  more  in  the  morning,  and 
ten  at  night.  When  there  is  a  will  there  is  a  way.  Then  make  up  your  minds  that 
there  shall  be  a  will.  Examine  yourself  and  yovu*  doings.  Ask  yourself,  "  Am 
I  going  forward  or  back  ?  "  Can  we  not  all  find  time  this  Lent  to  throw  over 
these  sins  of  ours, — to  confess  them  with  shame  and  sorrow, — and  to  try  like  men 
to  shake  them  off?  (C.  Kingslcy,  M.A.)  Of  consideration  and  meditation 
attended  with  resolution  : — I.  The  nature  of  this  religious  exercise.  Medita- 
tion seems  to  be  of  a  higher  natiu-e  than  consideration.  This  latter  is  an  operation 
of  the  mind  in  order  to  conversion  and  reformation  of  life  ;  but  the  former  is  the 
continued  work  of  those  that  are  already  changed  in  their  hearts  and  lives,  and 
have  attained  to  some  improvements  in  religion  and  godliness.  Meditation 
includes  in  it  consideration,  but  it  is  something  more,  yea,  much  more.  They 
agree  in  this,  that  they  are  both  of  them  a  serious  reflecting  and  animadverting 
on  those  matters  relating  to  religion  that  are  set  before  us,  to  the  end  that  we 
may  receive  advantage  by  fixing  our  thoughts  on  them,  and  thereby  become 
more  pious  and  holy.  Consider  the  proper  objects  of  meditation.  These  are 
ourselves ;  God ;  His  Word  ;  His  works ;  men's  actions ;  those  solemn  entertain- 
ments of  oxir  thoughts,  which  are  commonly  called  the  "  four  last  things." 
II.  The  worth  and  excellency,  the  vast  usefulness  and  advantage  of 
meditation.  1.  It  is  the  proper  employment  of  rational  minds.  2.  This  exercise 
well  ordered,  will  banish  idleness  and  vain  diversions.  3.  It  mightily  improves 
the  faculties  of  the  soul.  Knowledge,  reason,  judgment,  and  a  right  apprehension 
of  things,  with  composedness  and  consistency  of  mind,  are  the  fruits  of  it.  4.  It 
wonderfully  promotes  all  the  parts  of  devotion  and  religion.  (1)  It  fixes  the  mind, 
and  thereby  is  useful  to  preserve  in  us  a  constant  sense  of  God  in  our  souk,  and 
to  keep  up  a  steady  disposition  in  our  minds  towards  goodness  and  holiness. 
(2)  It  begets  heavenly-mindedness.  (3)  It  promotes  prayer,  which  is  the  very 
key  of  devotion,  and  the  chief  office  of  our  religion.  (4)  It  helps  all  the  duties 
of  religion  and  the  exertment  of  all  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  season- 
ing the  heart  with  savoury  and  pious  thoughts.  (5)  It  not  only  promotes 
religion,  but  also  the  comforts  and  solaces  which  attend  it.  III.  The  mischief 
OF  inconsidekation  ;  or  the  neglect  of  this  excellent  duty  of  meditation.  This 
is  the  fault  of  Christian  men,  and  that  by  which  they  generally  miscarrj', — they 


CHAP.  I.]  HAGGAI.  15 

will  not  reflect  on  their  ways.  The  complaint  is,  "  My  people  doth  not  consider." 
Men  seldom  sin  out  of  ignorance.  Want  of  consideration  is  the  great  spring  of 
all  their  disasters.  IV.  Dikections  for  the  right  managing  of  our  medita- 
tions. 1.  You  are  not  to  give  yourselves  up  to  immoderation  in  this  exercise, 
but  to  use  prudence  and  discretion.  2.  When  we  meditate  on  Divine  things  we 
should  keep  ourselves  within  due  bounds.  Many  are  too  inquisitive  and  curious 
in  their  contemplations.  They  would  be  "  wise  above  that  which  is  written." 
3.  Some  fit  place  for  meditation  should  be  chosen  :  some  retreat  from  the  noise 
and  bustle  of  the  world.  4.  When  thus  alone,  you  must  be  very  busy  ;  for  privacy 
and  solitude  are  not  commendable  unless  well  employed.  5.  Some  appropriate 
time  must  be  set  apart.  The  close  of  the  day  is  very  suitable.  The  Lord's  day 
is  arranged  to  provide  opportunity.  After  reading  or  hearing  God's  Word  a 
time  of  meditation  is  useful.  At  the  Lord's  Supper.  In  time  of  trouble  or 
distress.  And  in  times  of  great  mercy  and  deliverance.  The  proper  qualifications 
of  this  duty  are  the  following.  Prayer  must  always  accompany  meditation.  It 
must  be  accompanied  with  the  affections,  or  else  it  is  a  very  dry  and  useless 
exercise.  And  resolution  should  follow  meditation.  Meditation  must  not  only 
produce  resolution,  but  also  action.  Devout  thoughts  minister  to  religious 
endeavours  and  enterprise.  {John  Edwards.)  On  the  duty  of  considering  our 
ways: — "Lay  them  to  heart."  Ponder  them,  meditate  upon  them,  maturely 
weigh  them.  It  is  the  want  of  this  reflection  and  consideration  that  now  brings 
difficulties  and  distress  upon  us,  and  will  soon  bring  severer  judgments.  To  the 
warning  voice  of  Haggai  the  people  prudently  listened.  To  us,  however,  the 
words  would  convey  a  meaning  not  precisely  the  same  with  that  which  the  Jews 
would  collect  from  them.  To  us  the  command  would  enjoin  the  scrutiny  of 
our  lives  and  conduct,  but  it  would  bid  us  compare  them  with  the  precepts  of 
a  new  and  more  perfect  law,  the  covenant  of  grace.  But  how  few  do  consider 
their  ways  !  How  seldom  is  it  possible,  even  by  alarm,  to  bring  to  life  those 
that  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  !  Without  considering  your  ways,  without 
practical  reflection,  your  state  is  one  of  imminent  danger.  To  the  young, 
more  especially,  this  advice  is  most  necessary.  {A.  B.  Evans,  D.D.)  Self- 
examination  : — At  the  encom-aging  voice  of  their  Divine  Protector,  through  the 
prophet,  the  spirit  of  the  Jews  revives,  their  zeal  is  inflamed,  and  their  hands 
are  joyfully  given  anew  to  do  the  work  of  the  Lord.  We  may  learn  that  the 
Almighty  knows  and  observes  all  human  actions,  and  will  sooner  or  later  in  this 
Lfe,  and  certainly  in  the  next,  punish  the  negligence  of  those  who  disobey  Has 
commands.  The  text  contains  "instruction  in  righteousness."  The  power  of 
reflection  is  one  of  those  characteristics  by  which  our  nature  is  adorned.  The 
other  animals  enjoy  or  suffer  only  for  the  present.  The  exalted  spirit  of  man, 
made  in  the  image  of  supreme  intelligence,  subjects  to  his  view  the  future  and 
the  past.  As  this  power  distinguishes  us  from  all  other  animals,  it  is  most  becom- 
ing in  us  to  employ  it.  We  should  strive  to  be  acquainted  with  our  spiritual 
state,  that  we  may  know,  when  at  a  throne  of  grace,  what  we  have  to  confess, 
what  to  ask  to  be  forgiven,  wherein  to  pray  to  be  encouraged  and  strengthened. 
The  negligent  and  careless  worshipper  cannot  be  acceptable  unto  Grod.  This  self- 
examination  is  a  matter  of  some  difficulty.  I.  Illustrate  the  nature  of  this 
DUTY.  For  the  regulation  of  our  conduct  we  have  the  power  of  judging  between 
right  and  wrong :  the  knowledge  of  God  and  Has  perfections :  a  revelation  of 
the  Divine  will,  and  promised  assistance  of  God's  Spirit :  and  the  certainty  of  a 
future  state  of  retribution.  All  these  means  for  regulating  our  ways  point  out 
the  same  Une  of  conduct.  Christians  should  consider  their  ways  in  reference  to 
each  of  these  different  means  of  direction,  and  they  will  enable  them  to  ascertain 
their  state  with  regard  to  knowledge,  faith,  love,  repentance,  and  new  obedience. 

1.  Consider  your  ways  by  the  power  of  knowing  right  from  wrong.  Though  we 
be  called  into  the  "  marvellous  light  of  the  Son  of  God,"  this  original  power  of 
our  minds  is  not  extinguished,  neither  is  its  exercise  superseded.  In  many  cases 
it  must  be  our  sole  guide,  because  Divine  revelation  does  not  descend  to  minute 
particulars.     This  power  is  often  biassed  and  weakened  by  prejudice  and  passion. 

2.  Consider  your  ways  in  reference  to  God.  Consider  in  what  light  your  actions 
must  appear  to  this  all-seeing  God :  whether  they  have  been  such  as  He  had  a 
right  to  expect,  and  it  became  you  to  perform.  Compare  yoiu*  conduct  with  the 
rectitude  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  with  the  obligations  under  which  you  lie. 

3.  Consider  your  ways  in  reference  to  the  revealed  will  of  God.  As  our  judgments 
are  often  defective,  it  is  expedient  that  we  examine  ourselves  by  that  clearer 


16  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  t, 

rule  which  is  given  us  in  the  Scriptures,  in  which  are  distinctly  unfolded  the  duties 
which  we  owe  to  God,  to  society,  to  individuals,  and  to  ourselves.  4.  Consider 
your  ways  with  reference  to  immortality,  and  a  state  of  retribution.  This  life 
is  of  uncertain  continuance.  II.  Man  shuns  the  performance  of  the  duttt 
OF  CONSIDERING  HIS  WAYS.  He  is  Unwilling  to  weigh  his  actions,  because  he 
knows  that,  in  so  doing,  most  unpleasant  feelings  are  prepared  for  him.  But  is 
this  conduct  rational  or  judicious  T  From  considering  our  ways  there  arises 
perseverance  in  holiness.  A  man  must  examine  himself  that  he  may  reform. 
There  can  be  no  apology  for  setting  aside  this  work.  It  is  difficult,  indeed,  but 
it  is  commanded  by  our  God,  on  whom  our  fate  depends.  It  is  necessary  for 
promoting  that  holiness  on  which  our  happiness  must  be  founded.  Shall  we  be 
deterred  by  this  difficulty  from  taking  those  salutary  measures  which  are  essential 
to  our  everlasting  peace  ?     {L.  Adamson.) 

Ver.  6.  He  that  eameth  wages,  eameth  wages  to  put  it  into  a  bag  with  holes. 

— The  hag  with  holes : — ^The  prophet  lifted  his  warning  voice,  and  entreated 
his  sinful  brethren  to  "  consider  their  ways,"  to  solve  for  themselves  the  curious 
and  alarming  fact,  that  while  toiling  for  their  temporal  gratification,  and  sowing 
broadcast  with  liberal  hand,  the  return  for  such  labours  was  so  meagre  and  un- 
satisfactory, even  as  if  one  had  been  shortsighted  enough  to  deposit  his  hard-earned 
wages  in  a  bag  with  holes.  The  history  of  nations,  like  that  of  individuals,  is  ever 
repeating  itself.  1.  Those  persons  come  under  this  description  who  pride  them- 
selves on  the  accumulation  and  possession  of  wealth.  2.  That  man  is  dropping 
his  money  into  a  "  bag  with  holes,"  who  is  spending  any  large  proportion  of  it 
in  things  which  minister  chiefly  to  pride  and  vain  glory.  Ruskin  says,  "  A  tenth 
part  of  the  expense  which  is  sacrificed  in  domestic  vanities,  if  not  absolutely  and 
meaningly  lost  in  domestic  comforts  and  incumbrances,  would,  if  wisely  employed, 
build  a  marble  church  for  every  town  in  England."  3.  Those  persons  are  putting 
their  wealth  "into  a  bag  with  holes,"  who  are  robbing  God's  Church  of  her  lawfid 
tithes,  that  they  may  have  the  more  to  leave  to  their  children.  Inherited  wealth 
is  as  often  a  curse  as  a  blessing.  Idleness  is  a  source  of  misery,  and  there  is  no 
deadlier  bane  of  character.  The  wise  father  wiU  give  his  son  the  education  which 
will  fit  him  for  the  trade  or  the  profession  which  he  may  prefer,  and  then  allow 
him  the  privilege  of  pushing  his  own  fortune  in  the  world.  Bishop  Doane  said  of 
the  men  who  should  "  make  a  State,"  that  "  they  are  made  by  self-denial."  Instead 
of  the  selfish  question  of  the  votary  of  the  world,  "  How  much  can  I  get  out  of  this 
life  in  the  way  of  dress,  high-living,  envy,  admiration,  amusement  7  "  may  our 
endeavour  be  this,  "  How  much  shall  this  life  of  mine  (so  short  and  so  uncertain) 
get  out  of  me  in  loving  devoted  service  to  my  Lord  ?  "  (John  N.  Norton,  D.D.) 
A  bag  with  holes  (a  talk  with  children) : — In  olden  times  folk  kept  their  money  in 
bags,  and  still  people  keep  it  in  little  bags  which  we  call  purses.  '  What  is  the  good 
of  a  money-bag  if  it  is  fidl  of  holes  ?  "  Yet  the  prophet  says  that  the  people  of  his 
day  put  their  money  into  suck  bags.  He  means  that  they  tried  to  keep  something 
far  more  precious  than  money  in  this  reckless  fashion.  He  speaks  of  their  "  wages. 
We  are  always  sorry  to  lose  anything  valuable.  Yet  the  way  to  lose  anything 
is  to  put  it  in  a  bag  with  holes.  What  disappointment  therefore  is  expressed  here 
by  the  prophet  1  The  feeling  of  loss  is  all  the  keener  when  we  lose  something 
that  we  have  earned.  There  are  some  people  who  have  what  we  call  windfalls. 
Such  a  "  windfall "  has  generally,  like  fallen  apples,  a  bruise  about  it.  It  is  not  half  so 
good  as  when  we  earn  it  ourselves.  Now  these  people  in  the  text  had  earned  what 
they  lost.  The  word  here  used  for  "  wages  "  denotes  hard  earnings.  I  hope  you 
children  will  learn  in  Ufe  to  earn  wages  of  your  own.  The  best  thing  in  life  is  to 
work  for  what  we  get.  They  are  few  who  know  how  to  use  money  without  first 
knowing  how  to  earn  it.  These  people  knew  how  to  earn  money,  but  they  did 
not  know  how  to  take  care  of  it.  Half  the  battle  of  life  is  to  earn  ;  and  the  other 
half  is  to  know  where  to  place  and  how  to  use  what  we  earn.     But  I  have  seen 

5eople  who  worked  very  hard,  and  yet  at  the  close  of  life  entered  eternity  as  paupers, 
hey  took  care  of  what  we  call  money :  they  did  not  put  their  wealth  into  a  bag 
with  holes.  But  they  never  remembered  that  the  money  of  this  world  does  not 
pass  current  in  the  next.  There  is  another  kind  of  coin  necessary  for  tbe  next 
world.  To  die  rich  in  the  things  of  the  world  very  often  means  to  die  poor  with 
regard  to  the  world  to  come.  {David  Davies. )  The  ivorst  foe  of  labour  : — The 
most  persistent,  most  overpowering  enemy  of  the  working-classes  is  intoxicating 
liquor.  It  is  to  labour  a  worse  foe  than  monopoly,  and  worse  than  associated  capitaL 


CHAP.  I.]  EAOGAI.  17 

It  annually  swindles  industry  out  of  a  large  percentage  of  its  earnings.  I  proclaim 
a  strike  universal  against  strong  drink,  which,  if  kept  up,  will  be  the  relief  of  the 
working-classes  and  the  salvation  of  the  nation.  When  you  deplete  a  workman's 
physical  energy,  you  deplete  his  capital.  The  stimulated  workman  gives  out  before 
the  unstimulated  workman.  When  an  army  goes  out  to  the  ba*,tle,  the  soldier 
who  has  water  or  coffee  in  his  canteen  marches  easier  and  fights  better  than  the 
soldier  who  has  whisky  in  his  canteen.  God  only  knows  what  the  drunkard  suffers, 
in  his  body,  in  his  home,  and  above  all,  in  the  loss  of  his  soul.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage, 
D.D.)  National  improvidence  : — Objection  may  be  lu'ged  against  introducing 
social  and  poUtical  questions  into  Christian  pulpits.  Objection  cannot,  however, 
fairly  be  made  against  the  pulpit  treatment  of  that  branch  of  social  politics, 
national  improvidence.  Here,  in  Haggai's  time,  the  means  of  life  were  abundant, 
and  yet  men  were  dissatisfied.  The  national  improvidence  of  the  Jews  was  a 
punishment  of  their  neglect  of  God,  while  our  national  improvidence  is  a  hindrance 
to  our  true  approach  to  Him  as  a  nation.  See  the  enormous  waste  of  means  and 
comfort  caused  by  our  national  self-indulgence,  and  the  absolute  want,  and  almost 
starvation,  resulting  thence  to  millions  of  our  fellow- men  ;  or,  when  we  think  of  the 
growing  passion  for  destructive  drink,  must  we  not  see  a  wonderful  description 
of  our  present  state  in  this  other  thing  which  God  tells  us  to  consider,  "  Ye  eat, 
but  ye  have  not  enough ;  ye  drink,  but  are  not  satisfied  with  drink."  It  is  a 
common  but  mistaken  notion  that  Bible  teaching  generally  is  opposed  to  worldly 
notions  of  prudence.  Men  quote  our  Saviour's  words,  "  Take  no  thought  for  the 
morrow,"  without  our  Saviour's  context.  His  object  was  to  prevent  their  letting 
care  for  providing  earthly  things  cause  them  to  neglect  providing  heavenly  things. 
The  possession  of  competence  is  not  a  crime.  Our  Saviour  shows  waste  to  be 
wicked,  and  wilful  destitution  a  sin,  not  merely  as  being  an  offence  and  trouble  to 
social  politics,  but  as  an  iniquity  against  the  honour  of  God,  who,  in  ordaining 
that  man  should  eat  bread  at  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  has  laid  on  every  man  the  duty 
of  self-provision.  The  apostles  point  to  the  sin  of  improvidence  in  no  measured 
terms.  They  never  contemplate  a  state  of  things  in  which  men  shall  expect  fellow- 
men  in  every  case  of  need  to  supply  all  their  necessities.  They  teach,  as  our 
Saviour  did,  dependence  on  God,  but  not  on  man.  Consider  the  prevalence  of  this 
sin  of  improvidence.  National  improvidence  exists  in  England  without  a  parallel 
in  all  creation.  {W.  L.  Blachley,  M.A.)  A  had  investment : — I.  With  respect  to 
MUCH  OF  THE  MONEY  MEN  GAIN  we  may  Say  it  is  put  into  a  bag  with  holes.  Look  at 
one  man  who  is  a  type  of  those  who  put  earnings  into  a  bag  with  holes.  He  works 
hard.  With  the  dawn  he  arises.  He  eats  the  bread  of  carefulness.  He  is  ever 
on  the  watch  for  the  "  main  chance,"  that  is,  for  increasing  the  accumulations  of 
No.  1.  He  does  not  trouble  always  as  to  the  methods  by  which  he  gains.  He  cares 
only  to  see  his  balance  increase.  He  is  never  known  to  be  taken  with  a  fit  of 
generosity.  He  stints  himself,  and  it  may  be  his  family,  of  aU  pleasures  that  he 
may  increase  his  savings.  Thus  grubbing  and  grasping,  puflSng  and  lying,  he  makes 
the  mickle  into  muckle.  He  finds  the  pennies  become  pounds,  the  tens  grow  to 
hundreds,  and  the  hundreds  to  thousands.  He  gets  respect,  is  favoured  with 
appUcations  for  help.  But  he  has  been  putting  his  gain  into  a  bag  with  holes,  if 
he  has  wrongly  gained  his  wealth,  and  if  he  has  bowed  down  to  that,  worshipping  it 
alone.  Remember  that  he  cannot  take  it  with  him  at  death.  It  were  useless  if  he 
could.  There  are  many  who,  even  without  gaining  much,  make  themselves  slaves 
to  their  particular  Hne  of  work.  They  give  no  thought  to  the  higher  concerns  of  Ufe. 
But  all  their  Ufe  they  toil  without  content ;  they  have  murmured  and  fretted, 
envied  others,  even  misrepresented  them.  Into  a  "  bag  with  holes  "  they  have 
placed  all  they  have  so  hardly  gained.  Then  there  are  many  who  really  could 
earn  and  do  earn  much,  but  they  waste  it.  They  know  not  where  the  money  has 
gone,  and  if  they  knew  where  it  has  gone  they  would  not  confess  it  to  themselves 
or  to  others.  II.  With  respect  to  many  of  the  plkasuees  men  seek,  the  truth  of 
the  text  is  manifested.  We  say  "  many,"  because  all  pleasure  is  not  sinful,  and 
seeking  it  at  times  may  be  a  strong  duty.  Alas  !  some  spoil  lawful  and  sufficient 
recreation  by  taking  imlawful  pleasure.  They  are  certainly  putting  their  efforts 
into  a  "  bag  with  holes."  Thus  also  with  stolen,  secret  pleasures.  Souls  yield  to 
the  desires  of  the  heart,  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  because  the  thing  is  hidden  up 
they  rub  their  hands  and  say  I  have  done  no  wrong.  In  no  sinful  indulgence  caa 
we  find  a  gratification  that  shall  be  enduring.  That  deed,  the  memory  of  which 
causes  the  face  to  crimson,  has  no  quality  in  it  that  can  be  really  satisfactory. 
IIL  With  resx)ect  to  oxtb  xtnaidxd  sffokis  at  bsfobm  of  lifx,  the  truth  of  the 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

text  applies.  We  find  out  that  the  devil  is  a  bad  master,  that  the  wages  of  sin  is 
death.  We  begin  to  see  that  tliis  life  has  been  wasted,  that  we  have  lived  for  self. 
We  then  begin  to  struggle,  in  our  own  strength,  to  improve  character  and  conquer 
sins.  Perhaps  we  do  make  some  httle  progress  for  a  time.  Soon  we  discover  that 
it  has  been  only  for  a  time,  and  that  the  root  of  sin  is  still  in  our  soul.  Then  the  fact 
begins  to  stare  us  in  the  face,  that  if  we  could  avoid  all  sin  in  the  future,  if  we  could 
conquer  all  tendency  to  sin  in  our  hearts,  we  have  yet  a  great  account  of  sin  which 
is  unforgiven.  Law  must  not  be  violated  and  dishonoured.  Hence  He  takes  up, 
in  the  Person  of  Christ,  omr  sins  and  bears  them.  "  He  magnifies  the  law."  He 
then  freely  forgives  us  for  Christ's  sake.  The  whole  paet  can  be  as  though  it  had 
not  been.  All  sin  can  be  fully  expimged.  God  in  Christ  has  provided  a  way  of 
deahng  with  sin  such  as  we  cannot  imderstand,  but  which  we  can  accept.  Confucius 
said,  "  A  blemish  may  be  taken  out  of  a  diamond  by  carefully  polishing  it,  but 
if  your  words  have  the  least  blemish  there  is  no  way  to  efface  them."  This  is  true 
of  the  sinful  dispositions  of  the  soul.  Only  Christ  can  efface  them.  Our  self- 
righteousness,  which  is  effort  to  atone  in  our  own  strength,  is  like  wages  put  into  a 
bag  with  holes.  IV.  With  respect  to  attempts  of  many  to  gain  various  kinds 
OF  KNO\VLEDGE  we  may  assert  the  principle  of  the  text.  There  are  those  who  are 
incessantly  inquiring,  reading,  and  yet  who  know  but  very  little.  They  go  about, 
but  although  seeing  much,  they  retain  little.  Many  hear  abundance  of  lectures,  of 
sermons,  but  seem  to  know  httle  more.  They  read  their  Bibles,  but  they  increase 
little  in  knowledge  of  it.  Now,  just  look  back  and  see  how  much  you  have  read 
and  heard  and  known.  What  has  been  the  effect  on  the  character,  the  heart,  the 
life  ?  Has  it  not  been  put  into  a  bag  with  holes  ?  How  often  have  you  heard  of 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  and  the  infinite  love  of  God.  Has  it  had  any  effect  ?  Has 
there  been  any  effect  on  the  life  ?  Bitter  was  the  wail  of  the  mother  who  after  ten  years 
of  care  of  an  imbecile  child  said  to  me,  "  After  all  my  love  she  never  seems  to  notice 
me  more  readily  than  she  would  a  stranger."  Ah !  that  is  just  what  Jesus  has  to  say 
of  us.  His  love  has  been  thrown  away  upon  us,  it  has  been  put  in  a  "  bag  with  holes." 
{HomUetic  Magazine. )  The  bag  with  hols : — To  apply  this  figure  of  the  prophet's  to 
oui-  own  times  and  circumstances,  in  a  word  to  ourselves,  let  us  see  what  is  "  the  bag 
with  the  holes  "  into  which  honest  earnings  are  too  often  put.  I.  Extravagance 
is  such  a  bag.  I  mean  the  spending  more  on  a  thing  than  our  income  justifies. 
Bishop  Patrick  begins  a  chapter  with  a  notable  warning,  "  Consider  thine  own 
sufficiency."  Weigh  well  what  you  are  equal  to,  and  this  may  as  well  apply  to  our 
income  as  anything  else.  If  we  allow  ourselves  in  any  instance  an  expenditure,  no 
matter  what  be  the  subject  of  it,  which  is  unsuitable  to  our  circumstances  and 
inconsistent  with  oiu*  means,  there  is  no  other  name  for  this  that  I  know  of  than 
extravagance  ;  i.e.  (to  trace  the  word  to  its  derivation)  a  wandering  beyond  the 
just  Hmits  within  which  our  course  should  he.  There  is  a  certain  suitableness 
between  our  position  and  circumstances  on  the  one  hand,  and  oiur  expenses  on  the 
other,  which  good  taste  will  discern  instinctively ;  any  squandering  in  one  direction 
must  involve  poverty  in  the  other :  I  do  not  say  a  "  bag  with  holes,"  but  a  bag 
with  one  hole  will  let  out  all  the  money,  that  which  is  for  necessary  wants,  as  well 
as  that  which  is  spent  upon  the  luxiury.  Is  not  extravagance  the  fault  of  the  age  ? 
Do  not  men  of  all  classes  live  so  near  to  their  income  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to 
avoid  going  beyond  it  ?  There  are  but  two  ways  of  meeting  that  difficvdty :  we 
must  earn  more  or  spend  less.  II.  There  is  another  bag  with  holes — waste.  This, 
though  it  resembles  extravagance  in  some  respects,  is  a  different  thing,  for  extravag- 
ance is  in  superfluities;  waste  may  be  of  things  necessary.  I  fear  this  is  an  in- 
creasing fault.  I  see  it  wherever  I  go  :  waste  of  fuel  and  of  food,  waste  of  money, 
waste  of  land,  waste  of  its  produce.  Yet  He  who,  by  a  miracle  twice  repeated, 
made  bread  enough  and  to  spare  for  thousands  in  the  wilderness,  had  an  eye  to  what 
was  over  ;  and  left  us  a  memorable  lesson :  "  Gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain, 
that  nothing  be  lost."  Young  people  hardly  know  how  much  can  be  done  simply 
by  wasting  nothing.  I  have  an  honest  shepherd  near  me  who  once  offered  me  a 
loan  of  £200.  I  know  another  who  has  saved  enough  to  buy  him  a  httle  farm. 
What  was  their  secret  ?  They  wasted  nothing.  They  have  had  enough  for 
hveUhood,  enough  for  health,  for  comfort,  and  this  to  spare  when  the  day  of  feeble- 
ness and  dearth  shall  come.  Their  bag  was  not  one  with  holes.  III.  Akin  to 
extravagance  and  waste  is  excess.  This  does,  indeed,  partake  of  the  character 
of  the  other  two ;  but  it  has  this  element  in  addition,  that  it  is  extravagance  and 
it  is  waste,  both  employed  on  self,  and  both  to  the  detriment  of  self.  If  you  will 
just  call  to  mind  some  of  the  calculations  which  are  now  familiar  to  us  all  you  will 


CHAP.  I.]  EAGGAI.  19 

Bee  what  a  bag  with  holes  this  is  for  the  earnings  of  the  nation  at  large.  More  than 
100  millions  are  spent  in  the  kingdom  every  year  on  drink  !  This  is  the  great  bag 
with  holes  into  which  skilful  earnings,  hard  earnings,  costly  earnings,  are  too  apt 
to  be  put.  That  dreadful,  that  pitiable  habit  of  intemperance  is  a  solvent  which 
will  melt  down  a  fortune  however  great,  and  a  man  however  strong.  No  matter 
what  is  put  into  the  bag,  through  that  one  hole  it  disappears,  and  leaves  the  owner 
of  it  Uke  the  tattered  bag  itself.     {A.  C.  Bishop,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Consider  your  ways. — The  call  of 
Ood : — I.  The  person  who  issues  this  command.  Note  the  Divine  character  of 
the  speaker.  The  "  Lord  of  hosts."  This  name,  containing  in  it  every  perfection, 
commands  our  regard  and  challenges  our  awe.  Omnipotence,  omniscience,  and 
imlimited  authority  unite  their  beams  in  one  blaze  of  glory  in  this  truly  august 
character,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts."  II.  The  command  itself.  "  Consider  your 
ways."  Fix  your  thoughts  upon  them  with  diligence,  earnestness,  and  heart 
application.  Be  honest  with  yoiu-selves,  serious  and  particular  in  the  inquiry 
into  your  real  character  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  command  implies  that — 1.  God 
has  given  to  us  a  revelation  of  His  will  as  the  rule  of  our  duty,  and  the  standard 
by  which  we  are  to  examine  our  conduct.  The  Scriptures  form  the  directory  and 
rule  by  which  we  are  to  try  our  ways,  and  which  God  has  in  mercy  given  to  us  by 
His  own  revelation  for  this  purpose.  2.  God  hath  endowed  us  with  the  powers  of 
recollection  and  reflection.  By  these  we  can  bring  the  transactions  of  our  whole 
lives  into  present  view,  and  arrange  the  several  actions  of  them  in  their  proper 
order  and  colours.  It  is  our  wisdom  to  converse  with  our  departed  hours,  that 
we  may  learn  to  redeem  the  time-  3.  As  God  has  given  both  the  rule  and  capacity 
for  the  exercising  of  this  duty,  so  the  discharge  of  it  is  necessary  and  advantageous. 
(1)  The  frequent  and  impartial  consideration  of  oiu"  ways  has  a  tendency  to  humble 
us  before  the  footstool  of  the  all-glcarious  Jehovah,  and  to  convince  us  of  our 
weakness,  imworthiness,  meanness,  and  insignificancy.  (2)  The  diligent  and 
frequent  consideration  of  ovu*  ways  will  be  accompanied  with  this  further  advantage, 
of  leading  us  to  a  cordial,  entire  dependence  upon  God,  both  for  direction  and  assist- 
ance in  every  duty.  (3)  Compliance  with  that  required  in  our  text  will  lead  us  to 
see  and  own  that  the  salvation  of  a  sinner  is,  and  must  be,  all  of  grace  and  mercy. 
We  shall  then  no  longer  boast  of  ovu:  good  hearts,  the  integrity  of  our  conduct, 
or  oxu-  regular  duties.  We  shall  cry  for  mercy.  If  you  would  be  humble  Christians, 
dependent  upon  and  sensible  of  yomr  obligations  to  the  free  grace  of  God,  be 
frequent  and  impartial  in  the  consideration  of  your  ways.  III.  Appeal  to  eveey 
man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God.  1.  Address  the  careless  \mconcerned 
part  of  the  hearers.  2.  Those  who  have  experienced  only  some  slight  convictions 
of  sin,  and  but  a  transient  concern  about  their  salvation.  3.  Those  who  are  back- 
sliders. Invite  them  to  serious  thought  about  their  present  state  and  danger. 
4.  Those  who  are  real  believers.  How  crooked  even  their  ways  will  appear  in  the 
review!  How  slow  their  progress  in  the  path  of  duty  and  obedience.  On  the 
whole,  as  the  consideration  of  om"  ways  is  a  great  duty,  so  it  requires  our  present 
and  most  serious  attention.  The  present  now  is  the  season  that  demands  dispatch. 
To-day  we  must  hear  God's  voice,  before  disease  incapacitate,  or  death  prevent  us. 
{J.  King,  B.A.)  An  address  to  servants : — It  should  be  the  great  concern  of 
every  one  of  us  to  "  consider  oiu'  ways  "  ;  to  think  over  them  ;  to  search  and  try 
them.  Applied  to  servants,  we  treat — I.  Theib.  duties.  I.  Your  first  duty  is  to 
God.  You  must  tiu^  unto  Him  as  real  penitents,  seek  forgiveness  through  the 
merits  of  Jesus  Christ,  wash  in  His  precious  blood,  and  believe  the  promises  which 
He  has  given  in  His  Gospel.  2.  Earnest  prayer  is  a  duty  which  servants  too  often 
neglect.  Weariness  at  night,  and  late  rising  in  the  morning,  are  the  causes.  3.  The 
diligent  reading  of  the  Scriptures.  The  busiest  may  find  or  make  time  for  this 
spiritual  improvement.  4.  Attending  constantly  at  the  house  of  God.  Whenever, 
that  is,  you  can  secure  an  opportunity.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  5.  Consider 
your  duty  towards  your  employers.  Such  as  the  duty  of  fidelity  or  faithfulness ; 
a  strict  regard  for  truth  ;  obedience  ;  keeping  your  temper.  It  is  helpful  and  wise 
to  make  a  friend,  as  we  call  it,  of  your  master  and  mistress.  6.  Consider  your 
duty  to  your  fellow-servants.  You  ought  to  show  great  care,  tenderness,  and 
affection  for  the  welfare  of  each  other.  Endeavour  to  lead  your  fellow-servants 
into  the  paths  of  peace,  by  recommending,  both  by  precept  and  example,  religious 
habits.  Aid  them  according  to  the  ability  which  God  giveth  you,  when  they  are  in 
any  distress.    II.  Thbib  tbials  and  temptations.     1.  Your  early  removal  from 


20  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

your  friends.  Service  is  not  like  home,  however  comfortably  you  may  be  located. 
Home  is  home,  however  homely.  2.  If  a  Christian  servant,  the  irreligious  habits 
of  the  families  with  whom  you  dwell  is  another  trial.  3.  The  worldliness  of  your 
fellow-servants.  These  trials  bring  temptations.  And  there  are  special  moral 
temptations  for  female  servants.  III.  Their  pbivtleoes.  I.  Wants  supplied 
without  involving  personal  anxiety.  2.  Opportunity  for  receiving  the  Lord's 
Supper.  3.  Power  to  assist  in  the  Lord's  work.  (James  R.  Starey,  M.A.) 
Whither  art  thou  going  ? — Every  work,  with  every  secret  thing,  shall  reappear  at  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ,  whether  good  or  whether  evil.  A  journey  ends  somewhere ; 
each  step  of  it  is  somewhither.  Whither,  then,  are  we  each  going  ?  Of  some  changes 
you  must  be  aware,  in  some  you  have  doubtless  rejoiced.  But  what  as  to  your 
souls  ?  In  what  way  have  they  changed  ?  Are  they  fitter  for  their  end,  for  that 
for  which  God  created  them  ?  If  you  have  not  used  Gfod's  grace  in  the  last  year, 
you  are,  humanly  speaking,  less  in  the  way  to  use  it  this  next.  Would  you  prepare 
tor  anything,  which  you  care  about  in  this  life,  as  you  prepare  for  eternity  ?  You 
would  not  so  prepare  for  any  race  in  this  life.  God  has  divided  our  lives  into 
lesser  portions.  But  each  resting-place  should  give  us  pause,  and  force  us  into 
ourselves,  and  make  us  think,  for  a  time  at  least,  whether  we  have  made  ever  so 
little  progress  in  the  way,  or  have  sat  down  in  the  way,  or  have  turned  altogether 
aside  out  of  the  way.  "  Consider  your  ways."  Consider  what  you  have  been 
doing,  what  you  are  doing,  and  whither  those  doings  are  tending.  "  Set  your 
heart  upon  them,"  your  heart,  the  seat  of  your  afiFections.  How,  if  you  have  not 
done  it,  are  you  to  set  about  this  considering  yovu'  ways  ?  How  would  you  do  if 
you  suspected  that  you  were  out  of  your  way  on  this  earth  ?  You  would,  if  you 
could  see  it,  look  back  to  your  starting-point,  and  see  how,  little  by  little,  you  had 
Bwerved  from  the  right  path.  Then  look  back  to  earliest  days,  see  by  what 
lesser  or  greater  steps  thou  first  departedst  from  the  narrow  way ;  look  how 
evil  habits  strengthen  by  repetition.  "Sift  thyself  through  and  through," 
says  the  prophet,  "  and  so  sift  on."  Then  shalt  thou  make  progress,  not  if 
thou  findest  not  what  to  blame,  but  if  thou  blame  what  thou  findest.  When 
thou  didst  not  set  thy  heart  upon  thy  ways,  thou  didst  incur  daily,  well- 
nigh  countless  sin,  in  thought,  word,  desire,  deed,  yea,  and  in  omission  of 
duty.  Then  judge  thyself,  that  thou  be  not  judged  of  the  Lord.  {E.  B. 
Pusey,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Bring  wood,  and  build  the  house. — The  building  rising :  —  I.  Aw 
IMPORTANT  OPERATION  ENGAGED  IN.  "  Building  the  house."  L  Its  actual  nature. 
The  building  of  the  temple  of  God  on  Mount  Zion.  Solomon's  temple  had 
been  dismantled  and  razed  to  the  ground.  The  first  act  of  the  restored  captives 
was  to  rebuild  the  temple,  so  that  they  might  once  more  perform  Divine  worship. 
The  spiritual  import  of  it  was  the  formation  and  the  gradual  perfecting  through 
successive  generations  of  time,  of  the  spiritual  Church  of  God,  under  the  dispensa- 
tion of  the  Gospel  of  His  Son,  which  in  Scripture  is  known  by  the  similitude  of  a 
house  or  a  temple.  2.  Its  attendant  diificulties.  External  adversaries  around 
them.  Powerful  obstacles  arose  from  the  Jews  themselves.  Their  numbers  were 
scanty,  and  their  resources  were  feeble ;  some  were  depressed  and  fearful,  and 
some  were  indifferent  and  apathetic.  Subtle  objections  against  undertaking  the 
work  just  then  were  started.  Difficulties  which  common  agency  and  common 
exertion  might  well  despair  of  removing.  These  facts  suggest  the  circumstances 
attendant  on  the  erection  of  the  spiritual  temple  of  Divine  grace,  under  the  Gospel 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  work  has  to  progress  amidst  immense  difficulty  and 
opposition.  External  enmity  has  abounded,  arising  from  the  radical  depravity  and 
alienation  of  the  human  heart  against  God,  and  employing  against  His  truth  all 
the  weapons  of  tact  and  force  :  heathen  imposture,  antichristian  superstition, 
Mohammedan  fanaticism,  infidel  impiety,  worldly  contempt  and  neglect.  And  the 
professed  friends  of  the  Gospel  have  themselves  interposed  serious  difficulties  in  the 
path  of  progress  and  success.  What  injuries  have  come  through  the  corruptions 
of  the  Church  ;  by  the  divisions  of  the  Church  ;  and  by  the  indolence  of  the  Church. 
The  inertness  of  some  among  us  has  been  a  most  serious  injury  to  the  progress 
of  truth  and  righteousness.     It  has  contracted  the  resources  of  the  Church  ;  it  has 

fiven  to  the  Church  a  false  aspect,  and  a  false  reputation  in  the  eyes  of  the  world, 
t  has  damped  the  zeal  and  paralysed  the  energies  of  pious,  active,  and  devoted 
men ;  and  it  has  prevented  the  announcement  of  saving  principles  to  multitudes, 
who  thus  have  lived  in  ignorance,  have  died  in  darkness,  and  have  gone  down  in 


CHAP.  I.]  HAGGAI.  21 

despair.     IT.  An  agency  in  connection  with  which  this  opeeation  is  to  be 
CONDUCTED.     1.  It  is  instrumental  and  secondary.     The  personal  exertions  of 
the  Jews  themselves  were  demanded,  and  were  enlisted  under  the  guidance  of 
certain  men  who  had  been  specially  appointed  by  God  for  that  purpose.     The 
instrumental  and  secondary  agency,  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the 
designs  of  Divine  mercy,  under  the  Gospel  of  our  Redeemer,  consists  in  the  devoted 
labours  of  men  who  have  been  themselves  redeemed.     When  the  Saviour  had 
completed  His  own  personal  mission  among  the  sons  of  men.  He  consigned  the 
instrumentality  we  have  noticed,  mainly  to  those  whom  He  had  constituted  His 
ministers  :  some  amongst  them  to  labour  in  temporary  offices,  and  others  again 
to  be  raised  up  in  long  succession,  and  in  such  succession  to  labour  until  the  end 
of  time.     2.  It  is  an  agency  efficient  and  supreme.     The  Divine  agency,  connected 
with  the  instrumentality  of  men,  was  to  direct  them  in  their  counsels,  and  to  give 
efficiency  and  success  to  their  movements.     It  is  the  agency  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Zechariah  presents  Christ  as  the  found- 
ation-stone of  the  building,  and  as   the  architect  of  the  building.     The  Spirit 
is  presented  under  the  figure  of  the   "  seven  eyes."     Obstacles  would  remain 
undiminished,  the  "  great  mountain  "  would  always  frown  upon  us  in  equal  and 
unmitigated  power,  were  it  not  for  the  agency  asserted  and  vindicated  here.     The 
best  instrumentality  devised  and  employed  by  man,  and  operating  with  whatever 
of  industry  and  skill,  would  not  advance  one  solitary  step,  were  it  not  for  the  agency 
asserted  and  vindicated  here.     m.  A  besitlt,  in  which  this  operation,  so 
condttcted,  shall  terminate.     The  operation  shall  be  triumphantly  completed. 
The  head-stone  of  the  temple  was  brought  on.     And  we  can  securely  anticipate 
the  certain  and  appointed  consummation  of  the  efforts,  which  in  the  cause  of  God 
we  are  now,  although  inadequately,  assisting  to  promote.     There  is  to  be  the 
completion  of  the  structvu:e  of  Divine  grace.     Nothing  can  injiire  the  progress  and 
the  advancement  of  our  religion.     And  being  triumphantly  completed,  it  will 
eminently  redound  to  the  Divine  glory.     And  the  final  triumph  will  be  hailed  with 
ecstasy  and  raptiire  by  aU  holy  created  beings.     Application — 1.  What  encour- 
agement to  those  already  engaged  and  laboiuring  for  God  !     2.  What  rebuke  to 
those,  professing  the  religion  of  Jesus,  who  are  yet  indolent  and  inactive  !     3.  What 
warning  to  those  who  are  avowedly  hostile  to  God  and  to  His  truth  !     {James 
Parsons. )         The  sanctuary  buUt : — It  is  vain  to  contend  that  there  exists  an 
exact  correspondence  between  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  Church.     Yet,  as  they 
were  constituted  and  ruled  by  the  same  authority,  and  for  the  same  great  ends, 
the  history  of  the  former  cannot  be  otherwise  than  pregnant  with  instructions 
suited  to  the  condition  and  wants  of  the  latt«r.     The  principles  of  truth  and 
righteousness  are  immutable.     These  remarks  are  applicable  to  the  present  portion 
of  Jewish  history.     The  returned  captives  let  the  house  of  God  lie  waste  until  they 
had  made  ample  provision  for  themselves  and  their  families.     With  this  course 
God  was  displeased,  and  He  punished  them  in  a  manner  exactly  corresponding 
with  the  offence.     They  wanted  to  accumulate  more  of  the  world  for  themselves 
and  families.    But  God  rendered  abortive  every  labour  of  their  hands.     By  drought 
and  famine  He  dried  up  the  sources  of  tlieir  gains,  and  withered  their  hopes.    There 
is  nothing  to  render  this  case  inapplicable  to  the  Christian  Church.     The  great 
law  of  God's  providence,  in  this  respect,  is  maintained  even  down  to  the  present 
day.     1.  God  has,  from  the  beginning,  been  worshipped  in  temples  made  with 
hands.     While  the  Jews  were  passing  through  the  wilderness,  they  built  a  portable 
tabernacle  for  God's  worship.     WTien  their  migrations  were  ended,  they  built 
a  costly  and  magnificent  temple  to  the  honour  of  Jehovah.     Thus  it  has  been  in  all 
time  where  Jehovah  has  been  known.     Even  heathen  nations  have  everywhere 
had  public  edifices  devoted  to  the  rites  of  their  idolatrous  worship.     There  never 
was  a  community  that  did  not  consecrate  to  the  object  of  its  worship  some  structure. 
2.  As  respects  the  true  religion,  these  edifices  have  been  built  by  command  of  God. 
See  injunctions  given  to  Moses  and  to  Solomon.     History  records  not  one  instance 
of  the  pervading  and  sanctifying  jwwer  of  religion  in  any  community  where  the 
regular  and  stated  convocations  of  the  people  for  the  worship  of  God  had  been 
abolished.     3.  A  house  of  worship,  where  the  people  may  convene  to  make  a  public 
recognition  of  God,  and  offer  to  Him  their  homage,  is  indispensably  necessary  to  a 
diffusion  of  the  blessings  of  religion,  and  a  perpetuation  of  its  institutions.     The 
advantages  resulting  from  a  convocation  of  the  people  at  stated  periods  for  religious 
instruction  are  perfectly  obvious.     Let  the  house  of  God  go  to  decay,  let  the 
sanctuary  b«  demolished,  and  the  strongest  bonds  of  the  social  state  will  be 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

dissolved,  and  all  combinations  of  effort  or  sympathy  to  sustain  the  ordinances, 
or  propagate  the  doctrines  of  religion,  come  to  an  end.  Religion  could,  under 
these  circumstances,  have  no  organised  existence.  The  solemn  convocations  of 
the  Church  of  Christ  constitute  the  heart,  whose  pulsations  send  the  vital  fluid 
through  all  the  ramifications  of  the  system.  Let  its  Sabbath  assemblies  be  given 
up,  and  its  existence  would  speedily  come  to  an  end.  4.  The  ministrations  of  the 
house  of  God  have  a  powerful  influence  upon  the  intelligence  and  good  order 
of  the  community.  There  are  susceptibilities  to  religious  influence  which  belong 
to  man's  nature.  They  must  either  be  developed  and  trained  under  scriptural 
instruction,  or  they  must  take  on  a  character  from  some  superstitious  and  inade- 
quate culture.  The  objects  presented  before  the  mind  in  the  sanctuary,  by  an  able 
and  scriptural  ministry,  are  of  the  most  exalted  and  commanding  character. 
How  is  it  possible  that  the  constant  exhibition  of  themes  like  these  should  fail  of 
producing  an  elevation  and  expansion  of  intellect  through  all  the  grades  of  society 
that  no  other  agency  is  capable  of  producing  ?  How  great  must  be  the  moral 
power  of  the  pulpit.  The  principles  of  the  Gospel  are  all  holy.  Whence  come  the 
perpetrators  of  crimes  ?  I  have  no  recollection  of  even  one  individual  who  was 
an  habitual  worshipper  in  the  sanctuary  being  convicted  of  a  States'  prison  offence. 
There  are  still  higher  interests  to  be  secured  by  this  agency — the  interests  of  the 
soul.  In  the  house  of  prayer  there  are  peculiar  manifestations  of  the  Divine  glory. 
Here  souls  are  trained  for  heaven.  5.  The  building  destined  to  this  high  purpose 
should,  in  some  sense,  correspond  to  the  great  design  of  its  erection.  ( 1 )  It  should 
be  a  true  exponent  of  the  estimation  in  which  the  people  hold  the  institutions  of 
religion.  (2)  It  ought  to  be  rendered  as  attractive,  by  its  architectural  beauty 
without,  and  by  its  well-appointed  arrangements  within,  as  is  consistent  with  the 
sacred  and  holy  purposes  which  it  is  designed  to  subserve.  (3)  When  it  becomes 
necessary  to  erect  a  house  for  the  worship  of  God,  the  people  should  well  consider 
the  character  of  the  Being  to  whom  it  is  to  be  consecrated,  and  take  care  that  the 
structure  be  such  a  one  as  they  will  not  be  ashamed  to  present  to  Him  as  an 
expression  of  their  gratitude  and  love.  Closing  remarks — 1.  We  owe  primarily  to 
the  sanctuary  the  intelligence,  refinement,  good  order  which  prevail  in  Christian 
communities,  and  the  security  of  life  and  property  which  we  enjoy.  2.  We  do  not 
recommend  extravagant  expenditures  in  building  a  house  for  the  worship  of  our 
God.  We  would  have  everything  simple  and  chaste,  but,  if  the  ability  of  the  people 
permitted,  rich  and  commodious.  3.  To  accomplish  a  work  of  such  magnitude, 
the  utmost  harmony  is  demanded  ;  a  perfect  union  of  views  and  efforts.  Divided 
counsels  always  tend  to  weakness  and  ruin.  4.  Nothing  but  the  spirit  of  an 
enlightened  and  enlarged  liberality  will  be  equal  to  the  demands  of  such  an 
emergency,  as  the  erection  of  a  house  to  be  consecrated  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah. 
5.  The  condescension  of  God,  in  recording  His  name  in  temples  made  with  hands, 
and  in  permitting  Himself  there  to  be  sought  and  worshipped  by  His  sinful 
creatures,  ought  to  excite  our  highest  wonder,  and  gratitude,  and  love  for  ever. 
(J.  W.  Adams,  D.D.)  The  encouragement  to  build  the  Lord\i  house: — In  the 
Word  of  God  warnings  and  threats  are  always  accompanied  with  exhortations 
and  promises.  Were  it  not  so,  the  threats  would  profit  us  little.  It  is  true  that 
only  in  the  Gospel  is  the  love  of  God  made  manifest  in  its  fulness.  Only  in 
the  Gospel  do  the  promises  prevail  mightily  over  the  threatenings.  As  God  bids 
the  Jews  go  up  to  the  mountain  and  fetch  the  wood  to  build  His  house,  so  does 
He  command  us  likewise  to  go  up  to  the  mountain  for  the  same  purpose.  To 
what  mountain  ?  To  the  mountain  of  faith  ;  to  the  mountain  of  duty.  Faith 
is  a  hard  mountain  to  climb  for  all,  above  all  for  those  who  have  been  living  in 
unbelief.  Duty  too  is  a  hard  mountain  to  climb  for  all,  above  all  for  those  who 
have  been  living  in  self-indulgence.  This  is  the  reward  He  promises  us,  if  we 
will  climb  the  steep  mountain  of  faith  and  duty  to  seek  the  graces  with  which  we 
are  to  build  God's  house.  He  assures  us  He  will  take  pleasure  in  that  house,  and 
will  be  glorified  in  it.  What  a  mighty  motive  is  this  !  It  ought  to  have  great 
sway  over  every  one  of  us.  If  God  takes  pleasure  in  our  work,  that  work  must 
be  blessed  upon  ourselves  also.  God  is  infinitely  more  merciful  and  bountiful 
than  man  can  believe  or  conceive.  He  sees  the  very  first  stirrings  of  an  obedient 
spirit  in  the  heart ;  and  when  He  sees  them.  He  blesses  them,  and  strengthens 
them,  and  helps  them  forward.  No  sooner  had  Zerubbabel  and  the  remnant 
of  the  people  begun  to  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  than  the  prophet  Haggai  was 
sent  to  say,  "  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord."  He  had  been  with  them  long 
before.     He  had  shown  forth  His  wonderful  loving-kindness  in  a  number  of  waya. 


CHAP.  I.]  EAGGAI.  23 

Yet  He  sent  them  this  comforting  assurance.  Nor  is  He  less  kind,  less  gracious, 
less  bountiful,  less  merciful  to  us  who  have  become  His  children  in  Christ  Jesus. 
He  comes  to  us  from  the  very  first  by  His  Spirit.  He  has  been  with  us,  as  our 
Guide,  Teacher,  and  Director,  during  the  whole  of  our  journey  through  the  wilder- 
ness of  the  world,  from  our  childhood  upward.  It  is  through  Him  that  we  have 
been  brought,  whenever  we  have  been  brought,  into  the  assembly  of  His  people 
upon  His  holy  hill  of  Zion.  He  has  ever  and  anon  sent  His  prophets  to  us.  Yet 
when  we  do  begin  to  tiim  our  hearts  towards  Him,  as  soon  as  we  earnestly  desire 
to  obey  Him,  and  serve  Him,  He  comes  to  us  more  plainly,  more  openly,  more 
manifestly,  and  sends  us  a  message  to  cheer  us  with  the  assurance  that  He  is 
and  will  be  with  us.  This  blessed  assurance  is  vo\ichsafed  to  all  who  sincerely 
desire  and  strive  to  obey  God.  They  feel  that  they  have  a  wisdom  above  their 
own  to  guide  them,  that  they  have  a  strength  beyond  their  own  to  support  them. 
May  we  all  be  brought  to  that  state  in  which  God  will  take  pleasure  and  be  glorified 
in  us!  {Julius  C.  Hare,  M.A.)  God  glorified  in  the  building  of  Churches: — 
What  are  the  walls  which  we  raise,  unless  God  take  pleasure  in  them  ?  Just 
what  a  body  is  without  a  soul,  hopeless,  spiritless,  unprofitable.  Will  God  indeed 
be  glorified  of  men  ?  There  is  one  thing  more  strange,  it  is  that  God  should  be 
90  little  glorified  of  men.  It  would  be  profane  and  impious  to  speak  of  those 
as  glorifying  God,  who  live  with  no  "  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes."  When 
is  God  glorified  ?  1.  When  any  are  converted  to  Him  who,  heretofore,  either 
in  accordance  with  bad  principles,  or  in  contradiction  to  better  principles,  have 
been  alienated  from  Him,  or  transgressing  against  Him.  2.  When  men  accept 
the  way  of  salvation  which  He  has  prepared.  When  the  Gospel  offer  is  accepted, 
and  men  thank  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift,  God  is  glorified.  3.  When  they 
who  have  repented  do  "  works  meet  for  repentance,"  live  "  righteously,  soberly, 
and  godly,"  and  wait  for  His  heavenly  kingdom.  God  is  dishonoured  when 
any  who  profess  to  take  His  yoke  upon  them  walk  unworthily  "  of  tlie  vocation 
wherewith  they  are  called  "  ;  when  any,  who  pretend  to  be  His  friends,  are  really 
enemies  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  4.  When  men  are  saved.  This  is  the  crown  of 
all ;  and  truly  is  it  the  glory  of  God.  Whoever  is  made  meet  for  tho  heavenly 
inheritance,  will  ascribe  it  to  God  alone.  "  He  that  glorieth  will  glory  in  the 
Lord  "  ;  will  acknowledge  that  His  Spirit  influenced  tiim.  His  wisdom  guided 
him,  His  goodness  converted  him,  His  power  defended  him,  and  that  with 
anything  less  than  that  all-sufficient  hand,  he  must  have  sunk  under  the  dangers 
with  which  he  was  assailed.  (T.  B.  Summer,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  building 
the  spiritual  house  of  God  : — God's  material  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  typical 
of  the  spiritual  temple  to  be  erected  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  The  words  of 
text  are  applicable — I.  To  the  .spiritual  hoxtse  to  be  raised  m  every  indi- 
vidual's HEART.  St.  Paul,  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  says,  "  Ye  are  the  temple 
of  God ;  and  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you."  Yet  what  minister  can  look 
over  his  congregation  and  not  see  manifest  proof  that  in  the  case  of  too  many 
this  temple  is  altogether  in  ruins.  Even  where  there  is  good  reason  to  believe 
that  the  rubbish  of  sinful  habits  has  been  cleared  away,  the  foundation  been 
rightly  laid,  and  the  building  is  making  progress,  will  not  most  allow  that  the 
lets  and  hindrances  perpetually  occurring,  render  the  exhortations  of  the  prophets 
both  salutary  and  expedient?  Some  may  say,  What  can  we  do  in  this  matter? 
Is  not  the  building  of  this  spiritual  house  the  work  of  God  ?  Yes,  it  is.  But 
because  God's  material  temple  was  to  be  raised,  not  by  human  power,  but  by 
God's  Spirit,  therefore  the  people  were  urged  t  persevere  and  fear  no  obstacle  : 
and  it  is  because  God  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  do,  therefore  we  are  exhorted 
to  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  Man  can  do  nothing 
in  spiritual  things  without  God,  and  God  seldom  acts  without  being  pleased  to 
use  the  co-operation  of  man.  We  are  to  be  active  in  the  carrying  on  of  this  spiritual 
building,  that  the  Lord  may  take  pleasure  in  it,  and  that  He  may  be  glorified 
thereby.  II.  To  the  Church  of  Christ  in  our  own  land.  But  there  are  many 
living  in  our  land  without  Christian  ordinances,  and  in  a  state  of  heathenism. 
Then  there  is  a  call  to  "build  this  house."  III.  To  the  Church  of  Christ 
throughout  the  world.  Our  charity  should  indeed  begin  at  home,  but  it 
should  not  stay  there.  Missionary  exertion  has  a  refiex  effect.  If  ever  there 
was  a  Church,  or  nation,  to  which  God,  by  His  providential  dispensations,  might 
be  supposed  in  an  especial  manner  to  say,  "  Go  yo  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  Gospel,"  that  Church  and  that  nation  is  our  own.     {T.  Grantham, 


24  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

Ver.  10.  Therefore  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed  from,  dew,  and  the  earth  is 
stayed  from  her  fruit. — Nature  penalties  : — With  respect  to  the  withholding  of 
clew  and  of  produce,  we  know  that  the  prophets  took  from  the  law  what  served 
to  teach  the  people,  and  accommodated  it  to  their  own  purposes.  The  curses 
of  the  law  are  general  (Deut.  xi.  17).  It  is  therefore  the  same  thing  as  though 
the  prophet  had  said  that  what  God  had  thi-eatened  by  Moses  was  really  fulfilled. 
It  ought  not  to  have  been  to  them  a  new  thing,  that  whenever  heaven  denied  its 
dew  and  rain,  it  was  a  sign  of  God's  wrath.  But  as,  at  this  day,  during  wars, 
or  famine,  or  pestilence,  men  do  not  regard  this  general  truth,  it  is  necessary  to 
make  the  application  :  and  godly  teachers  ought  wisely  to  attend  to  this  point, 
that  is,  to  remind  men,  according  to  what  the  state  of  things  and  circumstances 
may  require,  that  God  proves  by  facts  what  He  has  testified  in  His  Word.  God 
intimates  that  the  heavens  have  no  care  to  provide  for  us,  and  to  distil  dew  so 
that  the  earth  may  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  the  earth  also,  though  called  the 
mother  of  men,  does  not  of  itself  open  its  bowels,  but  that  the  heavens  as  well 
as  the  earth  bear  a  sure  testimony  to  His  paternal  love,  and  also  to  the  care  which 
He  exercises  over  us.  God  then  shows,  both  by  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  that 
He  provides  for  us  ;  for  when  the  heavens  and  the  earth  administer  and  supply 
us  with  the  blessings  of  God,  they  thus  declare  His  love  towards  us.  So  also, 
when  the  heaven  is,  as  it  were,  iron,  and  when  the  earth  with  closed  bowels  refuses 
us  food,  we  ought  to  know  that  they  are  commissioned  to  execute  on  us  th© 
vengeance  of  God.  For  they  are  not  only  the  instruments  of  His  bounty,  but, 
when  it  is  necessary,  God  employs  them  for  the  purpose  of  punishing  us.  (John 
Calvin.) 

Ver.  12.  Obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God. — The,  voice  of  the  Lord: — 
1.  The  Word  of  God  in  the  mouth  of  His  servants  will  not  take  effect  till  His 
authority  be  seen  and  acknowledged  in  it,  and  His  servants  looked  on  as  coming 
in  His  name.  They  look  on  this  message  as  "  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and  the 
words  of  Haggai."  2.  It  will  be  a  notable  means  to  make  the  Word  effectual, 
when  beside  the  absolute  authority  of  God,  speaking  in  His  Word,  His  interest 
in  His  people  is  considered  and  believed  by  them,  and  that  He  who  speaks, 
reproves,  and  directs,  is  their  confederate  God,  whom  they  should  be  loth  to 
offend  or  disobey,  so  much  the  rather  as  His  relation  stands,  notwithstanding  their 
faults;  for  thus  is  the  Lord  named  here,  "  The  Lord  their  God."  3.  When  God 
is  seen  speaking  in  His  Word  as  a  party  to  the  sinner,  and  when  His  love  is  believed 
for  all  that,  even  in  His  reproving  it  will  make  the  guilty  and  smitten  sinner  to 
stand  in  much  awe,  will  both  break  and  melt  him,  and  will  make  him  look  on  his 
former  ways,  wherein  he  hath  lain  secure,  with  much  affrightment  and  horror; 
for  the  fruit  of  the  former  is,  "  And  the  people  feared  before  the  Lord."  4.  When 
the  awe  of  God,  speaking  in  His  Word,  in  His  majesty  and  goodness,  hath  had 
place  in  the  heart,  it  will  put  men  to  give  obedience  in  some  measure  to  what  is 
commanded  ;  for  the  people,  in  this  temper,  "  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord." 
5.  It  is  a  sweet  and  blessed  like  case,  when  men  in  power  are  patterns  and 
encouragements  unto  others,  in  submitting  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord  in  the  mouth 
of  His  servants,  and  when  a  peoiJe's  affliction  doth  not  hinder  their  respect  to 
the  commandments,  as  is  here  marked.  6.  It  may  encourage  the  servants  of  God 
to  go  on  with  their  work,  when  they  consider  what  a  great  blessing  God  can,  and 
sometimes  doth  give  to  their  endeavours  beyond  all  probability  ;  for  here,  by 
one  sermon,  all  the  people  are  set  about  a  long-neglected  work,  in  the  midst  of 
many  difficulties.  {George  Hutcheson.)  Duty  followed: — I.  Duty  followed  is 
OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  DiviNE  VOICE.  "  The  people  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
their  God,"  &c.  God  has  a  voice  to  men.  1.  His  voice  is  revealed.  He  speaks 
to  them  in  nature,  history,  the  Bible  ;  in  these  last  days,  specially,  by  His  Son. 
The  Divine  voice  is  ascertainable.  It  can  be  distinguished  from  all  other  voices 
that  fall  on  the  ear  of  the  human  soul.  2.  His  voice  is  authoritative.  Obedience 
to  this  voice  is  right,  wise,  urgent.  II.  Duty  followed  secures  the  Divinb 
FAVOUR.  "  Then  spake  Haggai  the  Lord's  messenger  in  the  Lord's  message  unto 
the  people,  saying,  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord."  This  promise  means  more 
than  presence.  He  is  with  all ;  He  fills  the  universe  ;  He  is  with  the  evil  and 
the  good.  It  means  to  bless,  to  enlighten,  guide,  support,  dignify,  and  make 
happy.  God  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  dutiful.  III.  Duty  followed  implies 
Divine  assistance  What  prompted  these  men  who  had  so  long  neglected 
duty  to  set  now  in  earnest  about  it  ?     "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Zerub- 


CHAP.  I.]  HAOOAI.  26 

babel,"  &c.  Men  will  never  give  themselves  to  duty  unless  the  Lord  stirs  them 
up.  This  He  is  constantly  doing.  By — 1.  The  admonitions  of  providence. 
2.  The  dictates  of  conscience.  3.  The  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  4.  The  strivings 
of  the  Spirit.     (Hotnilist.) 

Ver.  13.  Then  spake  Hag'ga.i,  the  Lord's  messenger,  in  the  Lord's  message 
unto  the  people. — The  message  of  Jehovah  : — This  means  in  his  official  capacity 
as  a  messenger  or  ambassador  of  Jehovah,  with  the  authority  of  Him  in  whose 
name  he  spake.  There  is  something  very  beautiful  in  the  sudden  change  of  tone 
manifest  in  the  message  of  God.  The  people  had  not  yet  begun  to  work,  but  as 
soon  as  they  showed  a  disposition  to  do  so,  the  stern  and  reproving  tone  of  God 
is  changed  for  one  of  the  most  exquisite  tenderness.  It  is  as  if  He  hastened  to 
forget  their  former  unfaithfulness,  and  to  assure  them  that,  in  spite  of  all.  He 
was  not  only  willing  to  be  with  them,  but  actually  was  with  them  as  soon  as  their 
hearts  turned  towards  Him.  This  presence  of  God  is  regarded  rightly  as  being 
the  highest  blessing  that  could  be  bestowed  on  them,  and  the  surest  guarantee 
of  success.  They  had  the  same  jealous  enemies  yet  round  them  that  had  arrested 
the  work  before,  but  God  assures  them  that  now  He  was  with  them,  and  nothing 
should  be  allowed  again  to  hinder  the  work.  {T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  The  Lord's 
messenger  proclaiming  union  : — I.  Jehovah's  messengbb.  Ministers  are  mes- 
sengers. It  is  not  every  man  that  gets  into  a  pulpit  that  is  a  messenger.  God 
only  can  appoint  messengers.  II.  The  Lord's  message.  Their  message  is  one 
of  mercy,  of  everlasting  life.  It  is  the  Gospel.  Salvation  as  the  gift  of  God. 
Not  of  works.  All  boasting  is  excluded.  III.  The  message  is  to  the  people. 
Jehovah's  elect  are  a  peculiar  people,  a  purchased  people,  a  special  people,  elect 
and  redeemed.  We  cannot  tell  who  the  elect  are.  IV.  The  special  message 
IN  THE  TEXT.  "  I  am  with  you."  Jehovah  is  always  with  His  people,  and  has 
been,  and  will  be  so  everlastingly.     {J.  J.  West,  M.  A. ) 

Ver.  14.  And  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Zerubbahel. — Stirring  up  the 
Spirit : — It  is  not  right  to  restrict  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  to  one  thing  only, 
as  some  do,  who  imagine  that  the  Israelites  were  confirmed  in  their  good  resolution, 
as  they  say,  having  before  spontaneously  obeyed  the  Word  of  God.  These 
separate,  without  reason,  what  ought  to  be  read  in  the  prophet  as  connected 
together.  For  God  roused  the  spirit  of  Zerubbabel  and  of  the  whole  people  ;  and 
hence  it  was  that  they  received  the  message  of  the  prophet  and  were  attentive 
to  his  words.  Foolishly,  then,  do  they  imagine  that  the  Israelites  were  led  by 
their  own  free  will  to  obey  the  Word  of  God,  and  then  that  some  aid  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  followed,  to  make  them  firmly  persevere  in  their  course.  But  the  prophet 
declared,  in  the  first  place,  that  his  message  was  respectfully  received  by  the 
people  ;  and  now  he  explains  how  it  was,  even  because  God  had  touched  the 
hearts  of  the  whole  people.  We  ought  to  notice  the  expression,  when  it  is  said 
that  the  spirit  of  Zerubbabel  and  of  all  the  people  was  stirred  up.  For  much 
sloth,  we  know,  prevailed,  especially  among  the  multitude.  But  as  to  Zerub- 
babel and  Joshua,  they  were  already  willing,  but  delayed  until  the  coldness 
under  which  they  laboured  was  reproved.  But  the  prophet  here  simply  means 
that  they  became  thus  obedient  through  the  hidden  impulse  of  God,  and  also 
that  they  were  made  firm  in  their  purpose.  God  does  not  form  new  souls  in  us, 
when  He  draws  us  to  His  service,  but  changes  what  is  wrong  in  us  ;  for  we  should 
never  be  attentive  to  His  Word,  if  He  did  not  open  our  ears  ;  and  there  would  be 
no  inclination  to  obey,  were  He  not  to  turn  our  hearts  ;  in  a  word,  both  will  and 
effort  would  immediately  fail  in  us,  were  He  not  to  add  His  gift  of  perseverance. 
{John  Calvin.)  The  duty  of  rulers,  ministers,  and  the  community,  to  promote 
and  increase  the  means  of  grace  : — However  vast  may  be  the  indifference  to  the 
cause  of  Christ,  and,  therein,  to  the  well-being  of  the  human  race,  it  is  a  source 
of  encouragement  to  feel  that  there  is  not  only  pervading  our  land  "  a  holy  seed, 
which  is  the  substance  "  of  the  Church,  from  whence  its  fruit-bearing  branches 
spring  ;  but  that  the  number  is  increasing — slowly,  perhaps,  but  certainly — of 
those  who,  professing  to  believe  the  Gospel,  feel  the  obligation  of  applying  its 
truths  and  its  responsibilities  to  the  guidance  of  their  conscience,  and  the  regula- 
tion of  their  practice.  L  Consider  the  necessity  of  enlarged  means  of  grace  for 
our  countrymen.  This  necessity  arises  from  the  incalculable  increase  of  our 
population.  Of  these  people,  the  immense  majority  are  congregated  in  masses  in 
the  metropolis,  and  in  the  trading  and  manufacturing  districts.     But  what  are 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

the  moral  circumstances  imder  which  they  have  arisen,  and  are  hourly  arising  ? 
Is  it  with  an  expansion  of  the  national  Church,  commensurate  with  the  wants  of 
the  nation  ?  Unhappily  not.  Where  then  is  the  basis  on  which  social  duty  is 
to  stand  ?  How  can  we  indulge  such  wild  fanaticism  as  to  expect  the  fruits  of 
honesty,  sobriety,  and  affection,  respect  for  property  or  office,  authority,  regard 
to  decorum,  peace,  and  virtue,  among  multitudes  who  are  growing  up  utterly 
unacquainted  with  the  only  tie  by  which  moral  obligation  binds  the  conscience ; 
ignorant  of  the  only  fountain  from  whence  relative  and  social  affection  flow, 
and  unhabituated  to  that  softening  influence  which  familiarity  with  the  means 
of  grace,  and  the  kind  sympathy  of  pastoral  intercourse  engender  and  maintain  ? 
Moreover,  every  agency  of  mischief  is  set  on  foot  to  corrupt  men  more  and  more, 
to  enlist  their  innate  passions,  and  to  array  their  imagined  happiness  and  interest 
in  opposition  to  all  that  is  holy,  venerable,  and  good.  Few  of  us,  perhaps,  are 
acquainted  with  the  extent  of  that  agency  of  Satan — an  evil  press — working 
amongst  us.  The  necessity  being  admitted,  upon  whom  does  the  duty  of  meeting 
it  devolve  ?  Upon  aU,  upon  every  one,  according  to  the  ability  which  God  has 
given.  I.  The  voice  of  heaven  appeals  to  the  civil  ruler.  On  him  devolves 
the  obligation  of  providing  for  the  moral  well-being  of  those  who  are  entrusted 
to  his  charge,  since  by  this  alone  can  the  ends  of  government,  peace,  order,  and 
security  be  attained.  2.  The  obligation  especially  devolves  upon  the  ministers 
of  religion.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  to  be  a  witness  for  God,  bearing  testimony 
to  man  of  the  things  of  eternity  ;  to  be  a  light  of  truth,  dispersing  the  dark 
and  troubled  desolation  of  falsehood,  superstition,  and  impiety.  3.  The  duty 
devolves  upon  "  all  the  remnant  of  the  people,"  the  whole  community  of  profess- 
ing Christians.  He  who  speaks  of  the  Church  "  as  embracing  the  clergy  alone, 
and  not  the  "  whole  congregation  of  faithful  men,"  speaks  unscripturally,  untruly, 
and  unwisely.  If  there  is  any  class  of  persons  upon  whom  this  duty  devolves 
with  more  responsibility  than  others,  it  is  upon  the  land-owners,  merchants, 
and  manufacturers,  who  derive  their  wealth  and  their  enjoyment  by  congregating 
multitudes  to  dwell  upon  their  lands,  or  to  labour  for  them.     {John  Oarbett,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  IL 

Vers.  1,  2.  Came  the  Word  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet  Haggal. — Encouraging 
the  people  : — The  recovery  of  the  Jews  from  the  disasters  attending  the  Babylonian 
Captivity  was  necessarily  slow  and  painful.  The  handful  of  patriots  who  returned 
with  Zerubbabel  were  poor,  weak,  and  despised.  They  found  Jerusalem  and 
the  temple  heaps  of  ruins,  covered  with  weeds  and  rubbish.  The  first  two  years 
witnessed  the  rebuilding  of  the  altar,  the  re-establishment  of  the  burnt  sacrifices, 
and  the  laying  of  the  foundation  of  the  second  temple  amid  the  liveliest  conflict 
of  emotions.  Just  at  this  point  a  second  oracle,  full  of  Divine  encouragement, 
came  to  Haggai.  Weak  hands  were  strengthened,  timid  hearts  were  cheered, 
religious  faith  and  patriotic  zeal  were  kindled  into  a  glow  of  enthusiasm  that  never 
failed  until  the  work  was  done.  We  note  four  considerations  by  which  the  prophet 
wrought  tliis  happy  change  in  the  temper  of  his  people.  I.  Jehovah's  abidino 
PRESENCE.  Regarded  from  a  merely  human  point  of  view  there  were  many  and 
cogent  reasons  either  for  an  abandonment  of  the  work,  or  for  its  postponement 
until  a  more  auspicious  time.  The  hostility  of  the  neighbouring  peoples  showed 
itself  in  persistent  plots  to  harass  the  returned  exiles,  in  fomenting  discords  among 
them,  and  in  discrediting  them  at  the  Persian  court.  In  comparison  with  the 
number,  wealth  and  influence  of  their  adversaries,  were  not  the  Jews  themselves 
weak  and  contemptible  ?  Only  a  few  years  had  passed  .since  their  return  to  a 
ruined  city  and  a  desolate  land.  In  their  poverty  and  distress  would  it  not  be 
audacious  folly  to  xmdertake  the  rebuilding  of  a  structure  that  had  taNed  the 
resources  of  the  kingdom  in  its  meridian  glory  and  power  ?  Had  not  this  genera- 
tion borne  burdens  enough  without  being  crushed  under  another  ?  Why  not 
relinquish  this  enormous  load  to  a  better  equipped  posterity  ?  Moreover,  since 
they  returned  from  Babylon,  had  not  the  Lord  withheld  the  legitimate  increase 
of  the  fields  and  vineyards  ?  In  these  straitened  circumstances  did  not  the  care 
of  their  families  demand  all  their  time  and  substance  ?     It  might  be  a  pardonable. 


CHAP,  n.]  HAOOAI.  27 

but  was  it  not  a  rash  enthusiasm  in  the  prophet  that  had  incited  them  to  waste 
a  month  of  laboiir  on  this  hopeless  task  ?  Religious  leaders  are  always  unreason- 
able !  These  discouraged  Jews  could  have  invented  a  hundred  excuses  for 
abandoning  the  work.  Self -justification  is  easy  when  one  is  eager  to  recede 
from  an  unwelcome  task  or  duty.  All  human  objections,  however,  are  as  chaff 
before  an  explicit  Divine  command.  The  voice  of  prophecy,  re-awakened  after 
long  silence,  had  spoken  the  authoritative  word.  However  sore  the  discipline 
to  which  their  sins  had  subjected  them,  they  were  His  people  still,  a  "  holy  seed," 
a  "  very  small  remnant"  indeed,  but  one  over  whose  preservation  He  had  watched 
with  jealous  care.  With  loving  reiteration  Jehovah  exhorts  them  to  forget  their 
own  weakness  in  joyfiol  recognition  of  His  omnipotence  ;  to  assure  themselves 
that  "  the  hope  of  Israel,  the  Saviour  thereof  in  time  of  trouble,  is  not  as  a 
Bojourner  in  the  land,  nor  as  a  wayfaring  man  that  tui'neth  aside  to  tarry  for  a 
night."  As  He  covenanted  with  them  when  they  came  out  of  Egypt,  so  "  His 
Spirit  abideth  among  them."  "  Be  strong  and  work,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ; 
for  I  am  with  you,  and  fear  ye  not."  There  is  no  better  ground  for  victorious 
confidence  than  that.  His  presence  is  infinitely  more  desirable  than  imlimited 
worldly  wealth  and  power.  We,  likewise,  face  the  depressing  problems  of  our 
own  day,  grappling  with  them  as  we  can,  only  to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  conscious- 
ness of  our  inability.  Through  repeated  failures  we  learn  that  without  Divine 
help  we  can  do  nothing.  We  are  overmatched  in  the  battle.  "  All  power  is 
given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  on  earth  ;  and  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the  world."  II.  Jehovah's  inexhaustible  resoukces.  What  if 
Jehovah's  people  are  poor,  insignificant,  despised  ?  He  who  is  in  the  midst  of 
them  is  the  rightful  owner  of  the  world's  treastu-es.  The  silver  and  the  gold 
are  His.  He  will  "  shake  all  the  nations,  and  the  costliest  things  of  all  the 
nations  shall  come"  into  His  sanctuary.  Now,  see,  when  the  people  really  trusted 
the  Lord  and  went  to  work  (Ezra  vi.  3-9),  how  wonderfully  the  prophet's  word 
was  fulfilled  ;  how  the  expense  of  rearing  the  massive  walls,  and  the  cost  of  the 
wood-work  were  defrayed  from  the  treasury  of  the  Persian  Empire  ;  how  the 
priceless  vessels  of  silver  and  gold,  that  Nebuchadnezzar  had  carried  to  Babj^on 
for  his  own  glory,  as  he  thought,  but  really  for  safe  keeping  during  the  exile, 
were  all  restored  again  ;  how  the  adversaries  of  the  Jews,  who  had  plotted  against 
them,  were  compelled  by  the  royal  decree  to  furnish  them  day  by  day  with  young 
bullocks,  rams  and  lambs  for  sacrifices,  and  with  wheat,  salt,  wine,  and  oil  as  the 
priests  had  need.  Not  only  this,  but  from  the  very  day  (Hag.  ii.  19,  20)  when 
the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  began,  Jehovah  would  bless  their  land  with  afiluence, 
instead  of  smiting  it  with  blasting,  with  mildew,  and  with  hail.  God's  work 
never  stops  for  lack  of  means  when  men  are  willing  to  obey  Him,  and  to  launch 
out  confidently  on  His  promises.  The  silver  and  the  gold  are  forthcoming,  not 
by  miracle,  but  through  natural  channels,  as  surprising  sometimes  as  actual 
miracles.  Is  the  time  ripe  for  carrying  the  Gospel  into  the  heathen  world  ?  See 
how  the  millions  are  poured  every  year  into  the  Lord's  treasury.  If  men  will 
not  give  spontaneously,  as  did  Darius,  to  the  furtherance  of  God's  purposes.  He 
compels  them  to  bring  the  best  of  their  substance,  as  the  Samaritans  were  forced 
to  do.  God  scatters  His  resoiu-ces  neither  extravagantly  nor  in  conformity  to 
the  whims  of  men.  The  law  of  parsimony  withholds  Him  from  giving  so  freely 
as  to  make  unnecessary  the  discipline  of  anxiety  and  struggle.  Even  when 
social  and  moral  reformations  are  greatly  needed  He  does  not  purchase  transient 
success  by  lavish  expenditiu-es.  Moral  results  are  not  permanently  secured  by 
material  agencies.  God  could  have  supplied  the  early  Church  with  means  enough 
to  have  freed  every  slave  in  the  Roman  Empire.  Instead,  He  pi  ejects  into 
humanity  two  lofty  ideals,  the  fatherhood  of  God  and  the  brotherhood  of  man, 
confident  that  these  ideals  will  ultimately  and  for  ever  accomplish  what  neither 
gold  nor  force  can  do.  Nor  does  He  waste  His  resources  in  perpetuating  institu 
tions  that  have  sm-vived  their  usefulness.  Local  churches,  as  well  as  individual 
saints,  are  but  temporary  factors.  "  Holy  relics "  He  suffers  with  absolute 
indifference  to  moulder  into  common  dust.  III.  Jehovah's  gracious  purposes. 
Haggai  prophesied  in  a  transition  period.  The  older  men  who  heard  him  had 
witnessed  the  wreck  of  the  Jewish  monaichy.  The  return  of  the  captives  to 
Jerusalem  was  the  glimmering  dawn  after  a  dark  and  stormy  night.  The  glory 
of  the  past  was  a  memory ;  that  of  the  future  a  dream.  Transition  periods  are 
always  charged  with  doubts  and  fears,  with  peril  and  pain.  The  sorest  trials 
are  alleviated  by  an  assmance  that  they  lead  to  higher  and  richer  experiences. 


28  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

And  yet  men  would  often  forego  these  if  they  could  thereby  escape  the  trial. 
They  cling  to  long-cherished  errors  because  they  dread  the  effort  and  pain  of 
adjusting  themselves  to  new  truths.  Hoary  abuses  linger  in  the  community, 
in  the  State,  in  the  Church,  because  men  shrink  from  the  sharp  but  transient 
evils  attending  a  crisis.  Modern  science,  philosophy,  criticism, — the  forces  that 
are  continually  precipitating  these  crises — are  not  enemies  but  friends.  God's 
purposes  do  not  move  backward.  A  new  and  better  world  always  emerges  from 
the  chaos  of  the  old.  So  long  as  God's  hand  directs  the  development  every 
transition  will  be,  not  toward  darkness  and  anarchy,  but  toward  truth  and  order. 
Haggai  encouraged  his  people  with  the  assurance  that  their  sufferings  were  not 
meaningless.  Painful  as  their  national  discipline  had  been,  it  was  but  an  unavoid- 
able step  in  the  evolution  of  a  sublime  purpose.  Not  only  did  he  assure  them 
that  Jehovah,  their  covenant-keeping  God,  was  still  in  the  midst  of  His  people  ; 
not  only  were  His  resources  inexhaustible,  and  ready  to  be  poured  out  in  their 
behalf ;  but  He  had  also  a  purpose  of  grace  concerning  them  and  the  whole 
world,  immeasurably  exceeding  the  brightest  memories  of  the  past.  Despicable 
as  this  new  house  might  appear  to  those  who  had  seen  the  splendours  of  Solomon's 
temple,  the  new  would  nevertheless  outshine  the  old.  "  Greater  shall  be  the 
latter  glory  of  this  house  than  the  former,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  Observe 
that  it  is  the  "  latter  glory  "  (R.V.)  and  not  the  "  latter  house  "  (A.V.) ;  for  whatever 
be  its  material  condition,  Jehovah  knows  of  but  one  abiding  dwelling  on  His 
holy  hill  of  Zion.  That  messianic  day,  moreover,  will  be  characterised  by  universal 
peace.  For  "  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  Peace, 
first  of  all,  between  man  and  God,  that  which  every  true  heart  yearns  for  supremely, 
but  which  is  not  found  in  the  world.  Peace  also  between  man  and  man.  Inter- 
national rivalries,  the  ambition  of  conquerors,  royal  greed  of  power  will  no  longer 
hurl  nation  against  nation  in  bloody  strife.  Peace,  finally,  between  man  and 
the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  (Isa.  xi.  6-9).  The  distrust  between  them  will  cease. 
As  nature  has  shared  in  man's  curse,  so  it  will  share  in  the  benefits  of  man's 
redemption.  IV.  Jehovah's  "  little  while."  Some  of  the  despondent  ones 
might  have  retorted,  "  Such  glowing  pictures  were  painted  by  the  older  prophets, 
but  they  are  as  far  from  realisation  as  ever."  "No,"  says  Haggai;  "  it  is  only 
one  period  more,  a  very  brief  one,  and  then  Jehovah  will  work  signs  and  wonders 
among  the  nations  to  arouse  them  from  indifference,  to  turn  them  unto  Himself, 
and  thus  prepare  for  the  golden  age."  In  a  measure  His  utterance  was  fulfilled 
at  once,  but  in  its  larger  signification  it  stiU  awaits  complete  fulfilment.  The 
centuries  after  the  Exile  were  really  a  brief  preface  to  the  messianic  period  which 
began  with  the  coming  of  Christ  into  His  temple,  and  which  still  continues.  Men 
are  impatient  at  the  moderate  pace  of  events  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  They 
wonder  why  He  does  not  force  men  into  swift  obedience  by  stupendous  displays 
of  power.  Because  love  and  obedience  are  not  wrought  by  force.  Love  conquer.^ 
the  kingdom  of  hatred  only  inch  by  inch.  Viewing  these  things  by  and  by  from 
the  side  of  eternity,  men  will  see  that  earth's  longest  periods  are  only  Jehovah's 
"  little  whiles."  The  world  is  ripening  faster  than  we  think.  Who  knows  but 
that  the  full  glory  of  the  messianic  time  may  be  close  at  hand  ?  Whether  near 
or  far,  every  man's  supreme  duty  to  God  and  to  his  fellow-man  is  so  to  live,  by 
the  Holy  Spirit's  help,  as  to  make  the  world  better,  and  thus  to  hasten  the  advent 
of  that  golden  age.  (P.  A.  Nordell,  D.D.)  God's  message  to  His  people  by 
Haggai: — 1.  The  Divine  message  often  comes  from  one  man  to  many.  It  now 
came  by  Haggai.  2.  All  temples  but  the  temple  of  nature  are  to  be  built  by 
man  himself.  God  could  have  studded  the  world  with  temples  ;  but  He  has 
honoured  human  nature  by  leaving  it  to  men.  3.  Any  postponement  of  duty 
is  opposed  to  the  will  of  God.  All  duty  requires  the  utmost  promptitude.  The 
Jews  were  now  dallying  with  duty.  The  subject  of  these  verses  is — God  requires 
human  labour  purely  for  religious  objects.  True  labour  in  every  form  should 
be  religious.  I.  This  labour  should  be  stimulated  by  the  view  of  religious 
DECADENCE.  The  temple,  once  the  glory  of  the  country,  was  now  in  ruins,  &c. 
Into  what  a  low  state  has  genuine  religion  sunk  in  our  country  !  It  is  cold,  formal, 
worldly,  conventional.  II.  That  this  labour  should  be  performed  by  the  most 
vigorous  exertion.  "  Be  strong,  0  Zerubbabel,  be  strong,  0  Joshua,  be  strong, 
all  ye  people  of  the  land."  Why  ?  1.  Because  it  is  right,  and  therefore  you  may 
throw  your  conscience  into  it.  2.  Because  it  is  worthy  of  all  your  faculties.  Call 
out  and  honour  all  the  faculties  of  your  nature.  3.  Because  it  is  urgent.  The 
highest  interests  of  your  countrymen  and  your  race  depend  upon  it.     III.  This 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  29 

labour  should  enlist  the  co-operation  of  all.  It  concerns  all — young  and 
old,  rich  and  poor.  IV.  This  labour  has  a  guarantee  of  Divtnb  assistance. 
"  For  I  am  with  you,  says  the  Lord  of  hosts."     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  3.  Who  is  left  among  you  that  saw  this  house  in  her  first  glory? — 

The  contrast  between  the  two  hotiaes  : — A  despondency,  such  aa  the  Israelites 
must  needs  have  felt,  is  very  apt  to  come  over  those  who  have  begun  to  engage 
in  a  good  work,  after  the  first  flash  of  their  zeal  has  faded  away.  When  we  are 
labouring  for  ourselves,  indeed,  our  carnal  heart  urges  us  forward  ;  but  when 
we  are  doing  anything  for  the  good  of  our  brethren,  or  in  the  service  of  God,  our 
carnal  heart  lies  like  a  heavy  drag  upon  the  wiD.  This  is  especially  the  case  at 
first.  It  is  long  before  we  grow  humble  enough  to  labour  diligently,  although 
the  fruits  of  our  labour  are  not  to  be  seen  even  by  our  own  eyes.  For  example, 
when  our  hearts  have  been  moved  to  undertake  any  work  for  the  strengthening 
or  spreading  of  Christ's  Church  on  earth,  and  when  we  have  been  thus  led  to 
look  roimd  and  consider  what  she  is,  must  not  our  hearts  faint  within  us  as  we 
think  how  she  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  her  first  glory,  in  the  time  of  the 
Holy  Apostles  ?  How  do  we  see  the  Church  of  Christ  now  ?  Is  she  not  almost 
as  nothing  in  comparison  of  her  primitive  glory  ?  The  same  question  may  be 
asked  with  regard  to  man  in  his  natural  state.  At  first  made  in  the  image  of 
God,  and  unsullied  by  sin,  how  do  we  see  him  now  ?  When  we  compare  these 
two  pictures  together  in  thought,  fallen  man,  in  his  best  and  most  flourishing 
estate,  may  seem  to  us  as  nothing  by  the  side  of  his  first  glory.  Let  us  cast 
our  eyes  on  our  own  selves.  They  who  watch  the  growth  of  the  young  must 
often  have  seen  a  time  in  their  history  which  was  like  the  teeming  and  blossoming 
of  spring.  And  they  will  also  have  seen  how  the  blossoms  have  fallen  off,  without 
leaving  any  fruit,  even  if  they  have  not  been  wholly  blighted.  The  prophet 
says,  '  And  now  be  strong."  How  were  they  to  find  strength  ?  Not  in  the 
thought  which  had  just  been  so  forcibly  put  before  them,  that  their  work  waa 
as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  first  temple.  Such  a  thought  will  never 
strengthen  a  man,  will  never  make  him  work.  Nor  will  it  strengthen  us,  and 
make  us  work,  to  call  to  mind  how  far  the  Church  of  Christ  has  fallen  back  from 
the  zeal  and  holiness  of  the  primitive  ages,  or  how  far  human  natiure  has  fallen 
from  what  it  was  in  the  Garden  of  Eden.  WTiere  are  we  to  look  for  strength  ? 
Not  to  ourselves.  Not  to  friends.  The  prophet  gives  this  assurance  from  God, 
"  For  I  am  with  you."  This  same  assurance  is  granted  to  all  who  earnestly 
desire  to  build  up  the  house  of  the  Lord,  either  in  the  world  around  them  or  in 
their  own  hearts  If  they  wiU  work,  they  shall  be  strong  ;  for  the  Lord  of  hosts 
's  with  them.  We  have  God's  covenanted  word  that  He  will  be  with  us.  God 
does  not  give  His  Spirit  like  a  gleam  of  sunshine  bursting  for  a  moment  through 
the  clouds.  His  Spirit  remaineth  with  those  to  whom  it  is  given.  He  has  re- 
mained with  the  Church  from  the  day  when  the  Father  and  the  Son  sent  Him 
down  from  heaven  ;  and  He  will  remain  with  it  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  The 
first  lesson  we  arc  to  draw  from  this  assiu-ance  is,  that  we  are  to  be  strong  and 
work.  Many  foolishly  think  that  if  the  Spirit  is  with  them,  irresistible  impulse 
will  stir  them  to  work  without  and  against  their  wiU.  It  is  through  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  they  who  work  continually  in  His  strength  do  truly  become  strong. 
The  second  lesson  is  drawn  from  the  words,  "  Fear  ye  not."  They  who  work 
and  are  strong  in  the  strength  of  God's  Spirit  abiding  with  them  may  boldly 
say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Helper :  I  will  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  me."  They 
may  even  say,  "  I  will  not  fear  myself,  what  I  can  do  to  myself,  having  thia 
Helper  against  myself."  Even  the  fear  of  God,  if  we  felt  that  His  Spu-it  remains 
with  us,  would  by  degrees  lose  all  that  is  painful  and  oppressive  and  repelling 
in  fear,  and  would  be  transfigured,  by  a  constant  living  communion  with  Him, 
into  reverent,  dutiful  love,  (jvlhis  C.  Hare,  M.A.)  Glory  of  the  new  temple  :— 
Just  as  in  the  second  year  of  the  return  from  Babylon,  when  the  foundation  for 
the  temple,  which  was  about  to  be  rebuilt,  was  laid  in  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  many 
old  men,  who  had  seen  the  temple  of  Solomon,  biu-st  out  into  loud  weeping  when 
they  saw  the  new  foundation ;  a  similar  feeling  of  mourning  and  despair  appears 
to  have  taken  possession  of  the  people  and  their  riders  immediately  after  the  work 
had  been  resumed  under  Darius,  and  doubts  arose  whether  the  new  building 
was  really  well-pleasing  to  the  Lord,  and  ought  to  be  carried  on.  The  occasion 
for  this  despondency  is  not  to  be  sought  in  the  fact  that  objections  were  made 
to  the  continuance  of  the  building,  and  that  the  opinion  prevailed  in  consequeocd 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

that  the  works  ought  to  be  stopped  till  the  arrival  of  the  king's  authority.  This 
view  not  only  has  no  support  whatever  in  our  prophecy,  but  is  also  at  variance 
with  the  account  in  the  Book  of  Ezra,  according  to  which  the  governor  and  his 
companions,  who  had  made  inquiries  concerning  the  command  to  build,  did  not 
stop  the  building  while  they  sent  word  of  the  affair  to  the  king  (Ezra  v.  5). 
Sloreover,  the  conjecture  that  the  people  had  been  seized  with  a  feeling  of  sadness, 
when  the  work  had  so  far  advanced  that  they  were  able  to  institute  a  comparison 
between  the  new  temple  and  the  earlier  one,  does  not  suffice  to  explain  the  rapid 
alteration  which  took  place  in  the  feelings  of  the  people.  The  building  could  not 
have  been  so  far  advanced  in  three  weeks  and  a  half  as  that  the  contrast  between 
the  new  temple  and  the  former  one  could  be  clearly  seen,  if  it  had  not  been  noticed 
from  the  very  first ;  a  fact,  however,  to  which  Ezra  iii.  12  distinctly  refers.  But 
although  it  had  been  seen  from  the  very  beginning  that  the  new  building  would 
not  come  up  to  the  glory  of  the  former  temple,  the  people  could  not  from  the  very 
outset  give  up  the  hope  of  erecting  a  building  which,  if  not  quite  equal  to  the 
former  one  in  glory,  would  at  all  events  come  somewhat  near  to  it.  Under  these 
circumstances  their  confidence  in  the  work  might  begin  to  vanish  as  soon  as  the 
first  enthusiasm  flagged,  and  a  time  arrived  which  was  more  favourable  for  the 
quiet  contemplation  of  the  general  condition  of  affairs.  This  explanation  is 
suggested  by  the  time  at  which  the  second  word  of  God  was  delivered  to  the 
congregation  through  the  prophet.  It  was  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  the  great 
festival  of  rejoicing.  The  return  of  this  festal  celebration,  especially  after  a 
harvest  which  had  turned  out  very  miserably  and  showed  no  sign  of  the  blessing 
of  God,  could  not  fail  to  call  up  vividly  before  the  mind  the  difference  between 
the  former  times,  when  Israel  was  able  to  assemble  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's 
house,  and  so  to  rejoice  in  the  blessings  of  His  grace  in  the  midst  of  abundant 
sacrificial  meals,  and  the  present  time,  when  the  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice  might 
indeed  be  restored  again  and  the  building  of  the  temple  resumed,  but  in  which 
there  was  no  prospect  of  erecting  a  building  that  would  in  any  degree  answer 
to  the  glory  of  the  former  temple  ;  and  when  the  prophecies  of  an  Isaiah  or  an 
Ezekiel  were  remembered,  according  to  which  the  new  temple  was  to  surpass  the 
former  one  in  glory,  it  would  be  almost  sure  to  produce  gloomy  thoughts,  and 
supply  food  for  doubt  whether  the  time  had  really  come  for  rebuilding  the  temple, 
when  after  all  it  would  be  only  a  miserable  hut.  In  this  gloomy  state  of  mind 
consolation  was  very  necessary,  if  the  hardly  awakened  zeal  for  the  building  of 
the  house  of  God  was  not  to  cool  down  and  vanish  entirely  away.  To  bring  this 
consolation  to  those  who  were  in  despair  was  the  object  of  the  second  word  of 
God,  which  Haggai  was  to  publish  to  the  congregation.  [C.  F.  Keil,  D.D.)  The 
sorrow  of  the  old  men  : — How  was  it  that  the  people  became  negligent  after  they 
had  begun  their  work  ?  Even  because  it  grieved  the  old  men  to  see  the  glory 
of  the  second  so  far  inferior  to  the  first  temple.  For  though  the  people  animated 
themselves  by  the  sound  of  trumpets,  yet  the  old  among  them  drowned  the  sound 
by  their  lamentations.  As  this  temple  was  in  no  way  equal  to  the  ancient  one, 
they  thought  that  God  was  not  as  yet  I'econciled  to  them.  Had  they  said,  that 
so  great  an  exjiense  was  not  necessary,  that  God  did  not  require  much  money 
to  be  laid  out,  their  impiety  should  have  been  openly  manifested  ;  but  when  they 
especially  wished  that  the  splendour  of  the  temple  would  be  such  as  might  surely 
pspve  that  the  restoration  of  the  Church  was  come,  such  as  had  been  promised 
by  all  the  prophets,  we  doubtless  perceive  their  pious  feeling.  We  are  thus 
reminded  that  we  ought  always  to  beware  of  the  intrigues  of  Satan,  when  they 
appear  under  the  cover  of  truth.  When  our  minds  are  disposed  to  piety,  Satan 
is  ever  to  be  feared,  lest  he  should  stealthily  suggest  to  us  what  may  turn  us  aside 
from  our  duty  ;  for  we  see  that  some  leave  the  Church  because  they  require 
in  it  the  highest  perfection.  They  are  indignant  at  vices  which  they  deem  in- 
tolerable when  they  cannot  be  corrected  ;  and  thus,  under  the  pretext  of  zeal, 
they  separate  themselves,  and  seek  to  form  for  themselves  a  new  world,  in  which 
there  is  to  be  a  perfect  Church  ;  and  they  lay  hold  on  those  passages  in  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  recommends  purity  to  the  Church,  as  when  Paul  says,  that  it 
was  purchased  by  Christ,  that  it  might  be  without  spot  or  wrinkle.  In  all  this 
there  is  some  appearance  of  piety.  How  so  ?  Because  they  would  have  God 
to  be  reverenced  so  that  they  would  have  the  whole  world  to  be  filled  with 
the  fear  of  His  majesty  ;  or  they  would  have  much  wealth  to  be  gathered, 
so  that  sumptuous  offerings  might  be  made.  But  Satan  cunningly  insinuates 
himself ;    and    hence    we    ought   to    fear    his    intrigues,    lest,   under  plausible 


CHAP,  n.]  HAQGAI.  31 

pretences,  he  should  dazzle  our  eyes.  The  best  way  of  caution  is  to  regard 
what  God  commands,  and  so  to  rely  on  His  promises  as  to  proceed  steadily 
in  our  course,  though  the  accomplishment  of  the  promises  does  not  immedi- 
ately correspond  with  our  desires;  for  God  designedly  keeps  us  in  suspense 
in  order  to  try  our  faith.  Though  then  He  may  not  as  yet  fulfil  what  He  has 
promised,  let  it  yet  be  our  course  to  attempt  nothing  rashly,  while  we  are  obeying 
His  command.  It  will  then  be  our  chief  wisdom,  by  which  we  may  escape  all 
the  crafts  of  Satan,  simply  to  obey  God's  word,  and  to  exercise  oxrr  hope  so  as 
patiently  to  wait  the  seasonable  times  when  He  will  fulfil  what  He  now  promises. 
\john  Calvin.)  Thoughts  of  the  past: — The  glorious  past  is  never  disdained. 
There  ought  not  to  be  any  past  in  the  sense  of  exhaustion  or  annihilation.  The 
past  should  be  the  most  vivid  and  graphic  influence  in  the  present.  Because  we 
have  seen  greatness  we  shall  see  glory,  should  be  the  tone  of  every  man  who 
undertakes  to  teach  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  Kingdom,  and  lead  the  enter- 
prises of  the  elect  and  consecrated  Church.  The  house,  indeed,  had  gone  down ; 
in  that  sense  it  was  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  house  in  its  first  glory.  There 
is  a  past  that  humbles  the  present,  that  makes  the  present  insignificant  and 
worthless  ;  but  the  Lord  never  regards  that  past  as  the  end  of  His  own  oppor- 
tunity ;  it  is  rather  the  occasion  of  the  beginning  of  new  revelations  of  His  omni- 
potence. The  Lord  never  stops  His  kingdom  in  its  darkest  hour  and  says,  this 
is  all.  The  Lord  never  interrupts  a  prayer  at  the  point  of  confession  ;  He  listens 
until  the  prayer  glows  with  thankfulness,  imtil  it  becomes  violent  in  sacred 
ambition,  until  it  would  seize  the  treasures  of  the  kingdom,  and  appropriate 
them  all  with  a  grateful  heart.  It  is  thus  that  God  leads  us  and  educates  us. 
He  takes  us  at  our  best  point,  not  at  our  worst.  The  Lord  promised  that  the 
house  should  assume  a  glory  to  which  the  first  glory  was  as  nothing.  Here  is 
a  principle  in  the  Divine  economy ;  it  is  a  principle  of  development,  of  progress, 
of  gradual  and  assured  consummation.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Yet  now  be  strong,  0  Zerubbabel,  saith  the  Lord ; — for  I  am  with  you. — 
The  Church  of  the  future  : — These  prophecies  of  Haggai  are  all  concerned  with  the 
rebuilding  of  the  temple  in  Jerusalem.  The  first  of  them  is  a  prophecy  of  rebuke, 
in  which  God  censures  the  people  for  devoting  aU  their  care  and  interest  to  the 
rebuilding  of  their  own  houses,  and  neglecting  the  temple,  the  site  of  which  lay 
desolate  and  bare.  But  the  second  prophecy,  "  Be  strong,  0  Zerubbabel,  saith 
the  Lord ;  and  be  strong,  0  Joshua,  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  priest ;  and  be 
strong,  all  ye  people  of  the  land,  saith  the  Lord,  and  work :  for  I  am  with  you, 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  is  of  a  different  character.  It  is  spoken  for  the  encourage- 
ment of  the  people  who  had  begun  to  be  despondent  as  they  compared  the  old 
temple,  or  their  memories  of  the  old  temple,  with  the  promise  of  the  new  that  was 
at  present  before  their  eyes.  No  doubt  it  is  a  kind  of  misfortune  to  be  born  in  a 
little  age,  to  be  born  when  there  are  none  but  little  men,  and  when  no  great  things 
seem  to  he  in  process  of  achievement  either  for  God  or  for  the  world.  Sometimes 
people  speak  as  if  the  age  in  which  we  ourselves  live  were  open  to  that  kind  of 
reproach.  We  have  no  men  now  in  the  service  of  the  State  like  Chatham  or  like 
Peel.  There  are  no  names  in  our  literature  just  now  like  the  names  of  Scott  and 
Thackeray,  or  Wordsworth  and  Termyson.  We  have  no  preachers  in  our  pulpits 
now  hke  Chalmers.  Even  science  itself  seems  to  have  fallen  in  many  departments 
on  httle  times,  and  there  are  not  the  discoveries  made  that  thrill  the  imagination 
and  give  man's  mind  a  new  sense  of  its  own  possibilities.  Now,  it  is  against 
that  kind  of  spirit  that  this  prophecy  is  directed.  It  is  not  only  a  mis- 
fortune to  be  bom  in  a  time  like  that,  but  there  is  such  a  thing  as  temptation  to 
give  way  to  a  spirit  like  that,  and  thiak  the  age  in  which  we  live  is  destitute  of 
opportxmities  when  it  is  not,  and  that  there  is  nothing  for  us  to  do  because  we  are 
not  disposed  to  set  our  minds  to  the  work  that  awaits  us.  That  kind  of  mood 
assumes  nothing,  and  it  forgets  a  great  deal.  It  forgets  that  man  has  always 
great  duties,  and  that  man  is  always  accompanied  in  his  life  through  this  world 
by  a  great  Presence,  and  that  if  he  has  faith  in  his  duties  and  faith  in  the  presence 
of  God  which  goes  along  with  him,  his  hfe  may  be  as  great  as  himian  life  has  ever 
been.  That  kind  of  despondency  and  disparagement  of  our  own  time  and  of 
the  work  that  God  has  given  us  to  do  is  a  thing  that  tends  to  fulfil  its  own  lugu- 
brious prophecies.  Where  there  is  no  faith  even  Christ  cannot  do  any  mighty 
work,  and  we  ought  to  remember  these  two  things, — that  God's  work  is  always 
waiting  to  be  done,  that  God  always  needs  us,  and  surely  also  that  if  it  is  little 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

we  can  do,  it  is  all  the  more  urgent  that  we  should  do  that  little  and  leave  nothing 
of  it  undone.  Now  look  at  the  encouragement  that  God  in  this  prophecy  gives 
to  Israel  and  to  us  when  we  think  of  the  work  to  which  He  calls  us.  First  of  all, 
there  is  the  great  encoiu-agement  contained  in  the  fact  that  God  has  made  a  covenant 
with  His  people.  "  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  According  to  the 
word  that  I  covenanted  with  you  when  ye  came  out  of  Egypt."  That  word 
carried  back  the  minds  of  the  Israelites  to  the  crossing  of  the  Red  Sea  and  to 
the  giving  of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai.  The  covenant  which  God  makes  with 
men  is  a  kind  of  relation  into  which  God  enters  with  men  by  which  His  faithful- 
ness and  love  are  pledged  to  them.  Now,  when  we  in  the  Christian  time  think 
of  the  work  to  which  God  calls  us,  think  of  our  own  powers,  think  of  our  duties, 
and  especially  when  we  are  tempted  to  despondency,  the  thing  we  have  to  remember, 
the  thing  to  which  we  have  to  go  back,  is  the  Cross  of  Christ.  The  blood  of  Christ 
is  the  blood  of  an  everlasting  covenant ;  the  death  of  Christ  is  the  pledge  that 
God  has  given  us  of  a  love  from  which  He  can  never  retreat ;  and  the  Cross  has 
in  our  religion  just  the  same  kind  of  historical  significance  that  the  deliverance 
of  Israel  out  of  Egypt  had  for  these  Jews.  It  is  something  in  which  God  has 
committed  Himself  to  us  in  a  way  from  which  He  can  never  withdraw.  And  surely, 
when  we  think  of  it,  we  can  understand  how  much  it  must  mean,  and  how  securely 
we  can  lean  upon  it.  Does  anybody  think,  can  anybody  think,  that  God  made 
that  awftil  demonstration  of  His  love  for  nothing,  or  that  He  made  it  for  some 
little  cause,  or  that  He  can  lightly,  or  at  all,  back  out  of  it  ?  And  let  appearsuicea 
in  the  Christian  Chmrch  be  never  so  mean,  let  the  things  that  we  see  with  our 
eyes  at  any  particular  time  be  as  discouraging  as  we  please  ;  suppose  the  Church 
is  a  small  handful  in  an  unfriendly  world ;  suppose  the  Church  had  to  worship 
in  no  church  instead  of  in  a  fine  building ;  suppose  it  had  to  take  xmgifted  mea 
for  leaders,  men  like  Haggai  instead  of  men  like  Isaiah;  that  does  not  alter  the 
fact  that  the  Church  is  built  upon  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  it  has  the  people 
that  God  has  made  His  own  people  by  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant, 
that  it  has  the  greatest  futvire  before  it  of  any  society  in  the  world,  that  it  has 
God  with  it  and  infinite  possibilities  of  service  put  within  its  reach.  But,  then, 
God  gives  special  promises.  Besides  recalling  to  Israel  the  memory  of  His  covenant, 
besides  recalling  to  us  the  Cross  of  Christ  and  the  infinite  faithful  promise  and 
hope  that  there  is  in  that.  He  gives  special  promises,  and  tells  them  that  the  great 
days  to  which  they  look  back  will  be  renewed,  and  far  more  than  renewed.  In 
that  old  time  when  God  called  His  people  out  of  Egypt  there  were  physical  con- 
volutions— Mount  Sinai  shook  before  the  Lord — but  now  God  says  the  time 
is  coming  that  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  dry 
land  ;  and  more  than  that,  the  thrill  will  pass  out  of  the  natural  into  the  moral 
world,  I  will  shake  the  nations,  and  the  nations  will  come  trembling  and  bring 
all  their  wealth  to  lay  it  at  the  service  of  God  and  His  house.  "  The  Desire  of 
all  nations  shall  come."  The  word  translated  "  desire  "  is  a  collective  word, 
and  it  means  "  the  desirable  things  "  of  all  the  nations  shall  come.  God  will 
stir  the  nations  and  they  will  come  to  His  house,  and  they  will  bring  along  with 
them  everything  on  which  they  set  store,  and  though  the  house  looks  a  bare, 
poor,  unfmnished,  desolate  house  at  present,  it  will  be  adorned  with  the  wealth 
of  all  peoples.  Everything  on  which  human  hearts  set  store  will  be  lavished  upon 
the  house  of  God.  And  what  does  it  mean  now  when  God  says  to  us,  "  The 
desire  of  all  nations  shall  come  "  ?  It  means  that  everything  on  which  human 
beings  set  value  will  be  bestowed,  and  ought  to  be  bestowed,  on  the  enrichment 
and  service  of  the  Church.  If  we  think  what  the  history  of  the  Church  has 
been  it  will  help  us  to  see  the  meaning  of  that  promise.     Bishop  Westcott  has 

Eointed  out  that  there  have  been  three  great  epochs  in  the  history  of  the  Christian 
hurch.  First,  there  was  the  time  when  the  great  creeds  of  the  Church  were 
constructed,  the  time  when  the  Church  devoted  itself  to  the  intellectual  under- 
standing and  interpretation  of  the  Christian  religion,  when  it  built  up  the  Christian 
doctrine  of  God,  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  the  Christian  doctrine  of 
the  Person  of  Christ,  such  as  we  find  them  in  the  great  creeds  accepted  by  all 
Christians.  What  did  that  mean  ?  That  meant  the  consecration  of  the  Greek 
genius  to  the  enrichment  and  service  of  the  Church.  Then  we  come  to  a  different 
period.  The  great  society  of  the  ancient  world  crumbled  into  pieces,  and  as 
that  old  social  order  was  dissolved  the  Christian  society  consoUdated  itself  in  its 
place,  and  a  Catholic  Church  arose,  covering  all  the  civilised  world  of  the  time— 
a  Catholic  Church — a  Church  with  one  uniform  government,  a  Church  with  one 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  33 

visible  head,  a  Church  that  gathered  into  itself  all  that  had  been  characteristic 
of  the  old  Roman  world.  And  what  did  that  mean  ?  That  meant  the  consecration 
of  the  Roman  genius  to  the  Christian  Church.  And  then,  since  the  Reformation 
we  have  had  another  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  The  Orthodox  and 
the  Catholic  have  been  succeeded  by  the  Evangelic  Church,  and  the  Evangelic 
Church  has  foimd  its  place  and  career  among  the  free,  expansive,  aggressive 
peoples  of  Northern  Europe  and  America.  And  what  is  it  these  nations  value 
most  ?  What  they  value  most  is  individual  liberty.  And  in  that  way,  age  after 
age,  as  the  Gospel  has  invaded  and  conquered  one  branch  of  the  human  race  after 
another,  the  dearest  spiritual  possession  of  that  race — its  intellect,  or  its  sense 
for  government,  or  its  apprehension  of  liberty  and  responsibility — has  been 
baptized  into  Christ,  has  been  taken  into  the  Church  and  made  part  of  its  strength 
and  of  its  beauty.  And  that  process  has  not  finished  the  prophecy,  "  The  desire 
of  all  nations  shall  come."  The  things  that  all  the  peoples  prize  will  yet  con- 
tribute to  the  strength  and  beauty  of  God's  sanctuary.  Now,  when  we  see  that 
we  see  not  only  the  promise  of  God — "  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  O  city 
of  God  " — we  see  not  only  the  promise  of  God,  but  surely  we  see  also  a  suggestion 
of  our  own  duty.  Whose  fault  is  it  that  the  Church  is  a  poor  affair  ?  Whose 
fault  is  it  that  the  Church  is  imperfect  and  bare  and  unadorned  and  unattractive  ? 
It  is  in  great  part  our  fault,  the  fault  of  those  who  are  in  the  Church  and  come 
about  it.  God  expects  our  best  for  it ;  not  the  things  we  do  not  care  for.  He 
expects  our  youth.  God  does  not  want  us  to  give  Him  the  dregs  of  a  misspent 
life  after  we  have  bestowed  the  freshness  of  our  youth  in  foUowing  our  own  passions 
and  desires.  God  expects  our  best  men,  the  most  gifted  in  head  and  heart,  in 
mind  and  affection,  to  offer  themselves  for  His  work  in  the  world.  There  are 
two  things  God  says  He  will  do,  in  particular  in  connection  with  the  Church, 
that  we  must  remember.  He  says,  "  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory."  It  looked 
a  bare  and  unpromising  place,  but  God  assures  His  people  it  will  have  a  splendour 
answering  to  its  purpose.  It  will  be  a  glorious  house  when  the  nations  bring 
their  gifts  into  it.  And  our  Church  will  be  a  glorious  place  also  when  we  bring 
into  it  everything  that  is  dear  to  us,  and  when  we  consecrate  all  that  to  our  God. 
The  Church  is  full  of  glory  when  it  is  full  of  people  who  belong  to  God  in  the  bonds 
of  the  new  covenant,  and  who  keep  back  nothing  from  Him ;  when  it  is  full  of 
people  who  are  matured  in  their  Christian  experience,  and  who  are  clear  in  their 
Christian  convictions  and  ardent  in  all  their  Christian  duties.  When  God  fills 
the  Church  with  that  kind  of  life,  with  the  presence  and  the  tokens  of  His  Spirit 
in  that  shape,  then  it  is  full  of  that  which  we  can  understand  as  glory,  full  of  all 
the  splendour  that  God  can  set  on  our  weak  human  nature.  Again,  He  says, 
"  In  this  place  will  I  give  peace."  Now,  peace  may  not  seem  a  very  great 
thing  to  mention  after  the  things  that  we  have  been  speaking  about  already. 
It  may  seem  a  little  gift  after  glory,  but  God  knows  best,  and  I  fancy  there  are 
few  things  that  do  more  to  bring  people  into  the  house  of  God,  even  at  the  present 
time,  than  just  the  hope  of  peace.  These  poor  Jews  were  harassed  with  their 
enemies,  and  it  would  be  a  comforting  thought  to  them  when  they  were  in  the 
house  of  God  that  they  were  in  sanctuary  and  in  a  safe  place.  Peace  is  a  gift 
of  God.  It  can  only  be  obtained  when  it  is  obtained  from  God.  It  can  only  be 
obtained  when  we  come  feice  to  face  with  God.     (J.  Denney,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Work :  for  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. — An  incentive  to 
work  : — When  Darius  Hystaspes  began  to  reign,  Haggai  and  Zechariah  urged  that 
the  work  of  rebuilding  the  t«mple  should  be  renewed.  The  ever-recurring  plan 
which  they  urged  on  the  people  was  that  they  should  work  because  the  Lord 
of  hosts  was  with  them.  Since  then  times  have  altered.  Religion  has  become 
a  more  personal  matter.  Its  sphere  has  been  shifted  from  temples  made  with 
hands  to  what  Milton  calls  "  the  upright  heart  and  pure."  Religion  has  been 
shifted  from  the  outward  to  the  inward  realm.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within 
you."  That  is  the  true  shrine,  from  which  influence  may  reach  out  to  wider 
realms.  And  since  the  sphere  has  changed,  the  work  of  rearing  the  temple  haa 
also  changed.  Then  the  work  was  hard,  but  it  only  tired  the  hand.  Now  the 
heart,  rather  than  the  hand,  needs  to  be  engaged.  The  tax  is  on  the  spirit  rather 
than  on  the  limbs.  To  labour  in  the  invisible  is  far  more  trying  than  in  the  visible 
realm.  The  highest  things  cannot  be  weighed  in  scales  and  set  down  in  columns. 
What  is  true  of  the  work  within  is  also  true  of  the  spiritual  work  we  attempt 
in  the  world.     It  is  invisible — wrought  in  the  hidden  chambers  of  the  heart.     It 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

is  true  that  the  fruit  sometimes  becomes  visible  in  the  life.  But  the  spiritual 
temple  we  are  seeking  to  rear  may  be  growing  in  strength  and  beauty,  and  we 
see  it  not,  or  only  catch  momentary  glimpses  of  the  growing  building.  Now  and 
then  we  are  permitted  to  see  that  our  work  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  The  higher 
the  realm,  the  less  visible  or  tangible  are  the  results.  Manual  work  is  more  visible 
than  intellectual.  Intellectual  work  is  more  visible  than  spiritual.  But  the 
thinker  accomplishes  more  than  the  artisan ;  and  the  spiritual  more  than  the 
intellectual  teacher.  This  is  the  true  incentive  to  work — "  the  Lord  is  on  our  side." 
The  conviction  that  God  is  with  us  will  make  us  work.  (IF.  Oarrett  Border.) 
Encouraging  the  people  : — The  people  had  grown  indifferent  and  neglectful  of 
God,  as  is  the  case  with  all  who  are  not  earnestly  engaged  in  religious  activities, 
giving  their  attention  to  fitting  up  and  adorning  their  own  dwellings,  while  the 
house  of  the  Lord  was  left  imbuilt.  Haggai  was  sent  to  reprove  them  for  their 
neglect,  to  call  their  attention  to  the  blighting  curse  upon  them  because  of  this 
neglect,  and  encourage  them  to  resume  the  work  on  the  temple  of  God.  The 
new  temple  was  to  be  of  the  same  dimensions  as  the  old.  But  it  was  not  to  be 
overlaid  with  gold,  or  to  have  such  imposing  accessories  for  worship.  It  seems 
that  the  ark  had  been  lost,  and  the  tables,  and  the  mercy-seat.  There  was  no 
visible  glory,  and  no  Urim  and  Thummim.  Hence  the  lamentations  of  the  ancient 
men,  who  could  make  contrasts.  We  have  narrated  here  sadness  and  rejoicing 
over  the  same  thing.  But  such  is  life  all  round  the  world.  Age  made  unfavourable 
comparisons,  while  youth,  whatever  the  comparisons,  delighted  in  the  new  and 
promiseful.  The  aged  naturally,  and  almost  inevitably,  live  in  things  behind 
them  ;  the  young  in  things  around  them,  and  before  them.  The  danger  is,  that 
echoes  of  the  past  will  mar  the  music  of  the  present,  and  that  the  music  of  the 
present  will  mar  the  echoes  of  the  past.  Haggai's  encouraging  reference  to  God 
as  with  their  fathers,  and  pledge  of  the  same  God  as  with  them,  was  to  the  people 
a  revelation  and  inspiration.  It,  however,  seemed  to  this  people  that  the  times 
had  changed.  The  prophet,  therefore,  is  sent  to  encourage  them  with  assurances 
that  God  is  with  them  in  their  work,  as  truly  as  He  was  with  their  fathers.  They 
may  miss  something  of  the  grandeur  and  glory  of  the  former  temple  ;  but  what 
of  this  if  God  is  still  their  God  ?  The  Divine  presence  would  be  in  the  new 
temple  more  manifestly  than  in  the  old.  Therefore  they  should  resume  their 
work  in  confidence  and  rest  in  peace.  We  fall  into  the  same  false  ways  of  judging. 
When  present  possessions  and  conditions  seem  to  compare  unfavourably  with 
past  possessions  and  conditions,  we  grieve  and  murmur  and  lose  heart.  Human 
lives  do  not  alwaj^s  rim  in  the  same  channels.  Change  after  change  is  the  lot  of 
universal  man.  Where  is  rest  ?  Where  is  inspiration  ?  In  the  assurance  that 
God  is  with  us  as  He  was  with  oiu-  fathers,  and  as  He  was  with  us  in  former  times. 
At  that  very  moment  when  the  Jews  were  repining  God  had  in  mind  a  temple 
whose  glory  should  far  outshine  the  old,  and  He  had  all  power  to  bring  in  this 
glory.  He  was  to  accomplish  convulsions  in  the  earth,  and  bring  in  the  "  Desire 
of  all  nations."  Five  stages  in  human  history  were  then  passed,  from  Adam  to 
Noah ;  thence  to  Abraham ;  thence  to  Moses ;  thence  to  Solomon's  temple, 
and  thence  to  the  Captivity.  Only  one  stage  remained — thence  to  the  kingdom 
of  the  Messiah.  These  halting,  hesitating  Jews  saw  not  that  kingdom,  and  hence 
they  were  heavy-hearted.  We  are  often  blind,  hence  heavy-hearted.  What  we 
need  to  remember  is  that  we  have  a  present  personal  God,  whatever  the  age  of 
the  world,  or  whatever  the  wants  of  our  lives.  Memories  of  blessing  should  make 
us  glad  instead  of  sad,  even  though  present  conditions  may  seem  less  favourable 
than  former  ones.  Everything  in  heaven  and  earth  is  under  the  control  of  God 
for  the  perfection  of  human  character,  and  for  the  world-wide  end  of  righteousness 
and  peace.  Christian  workers  ought  never  to  be  discouraged.  Whatever  the 
present  seeming,  this  world  is  not  going  from  bad  to  worse,  but  from  better  to 
better  ;  and  best  of  all,  the  best  things  await  every  true  child  of  God.  We  set 
you  in  the  midst  of  memories,  and  let  you  enlarge  upon  them.  L  Think  of  self. 
2.  Think  of  associated  lives  and  labours.  God  never  failed  those  loved  ones 
who  are  now  at  rest  and  out  of  sight.  Beacon  fires  have  blazed  on  all  the  moun  • 
tain-tops.  They  shall  burn  on  until  far  lands  have  been  lighted  up,  and  the 
new  temple  of  peace  and  truth  shall  have  completion  ;  when  He  who  was  the 
glory  of  Israel's  temple  shall  come  again  for  crowning.  {Sermoiis  by  Monday  Clvb. ) 
Encouraging  the  people  :  —  A  ruined  church  is  oftentimes  a  sad  comment  on 
religion  ;  an  imfinished  church  is  a  sadder  one.  Wliat  had  arrested  the  work 
that  began  so  auspiciously  ?     I.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  people  was  but  a  transient 


C3HAP.  n.]  HAGGAI.  86 

fervour.  Steadfastness  is  a  cardinal  virtue.  The  reward  is  to  him  that  over- 
cometh.  2.  Then  they  began  to  question  and  calculate.  Might  it  not  be  that 
the  project  was  premature  ?  The  altar  was  restored,  why  could  not  the  temple 
wait  ?  Some  said,  "  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's  house  should 
be  built."  3.  Meanwhile  there  was  the  natural  concern  as  to  temporal  affairs.  One 
by  one  the  workmen  left  the  temple  walls,  and  turned  their  energy  to  affairs  of  more 
personal  moment.  Perhaps  if  they  had  continued  to  devote  themselves  to  God's 
sanctuary,  He  might  have  devised  some  plan  for  providing  for  their  wants. 
4.  There  were  other  things  that  conspired  to  arrest  the  work.  The  adjacent  tribes 
had  set  themselves  against  it.  .  .  .  Not  until  Darius  came  to  the  throne  did 
the  Jews  pluck  up  courage  to  resume  the  work.  Haggai's  prophecies  are  brief 
and  fragmentary,  consisting  of  three  addresses  all  delivered  within  a  period  of 
three  months.  In  the  first  he  admonished  them  that  self-seeking  at  the  expense 
of  the  Lord's  work  is  a  losing  venture.  Their  own  prosperity  had  suffered.  It 
may  seem  that  Haggai  appealed  to  a  low  motive,  but  the  Jews  were  always 
sensitive  at  this  point.  They  had  ever  an  eye  to  the  main  chance,  and  they  have 
to  this  day.  The  Lord  knew  how  to  move  their  sluggish  natures.  When  Darius 
issued  an  order  endorsing  the  original  permission  to  build,  Haggai  delivered  his 
second  address.  The  resources  seemed  inadequate  to  a  great  enterprise,  and  it 
seemed  hardly  worth  while  to  build  what  must  be  an  inferior  house.  Haggai 
is  to  assure  them  that  Grod  was  with  them,  and  the  glory  of  the  latter  house  should 
surpass  that  of  the  earlier  one.  How  could  that  be  ?  (I)  Grod  would  here 
manifest  Himself  in  the  outpouring  of  His  power.  SubKme  messages  of  truth, 
announcements  of  Divine  faithfulness  in  the  fulfilment  of  old-time  shadows, 
flaming  prophecies  of  ultimate  glory  were  to  be  heard  amid  these  rising  walls. 
(2)  But,  better  still,  Messiah  Himself  was  to  worship  at  the  altar,  and  walk  among 
these  porches.  If  the  light  of  the  golden  candlesticks  was  quenched,  what 
mattered  it  ?  The  Light  of  the  World  was  here  to  shine  forth.  (3)  If  God  were  so 
minded  He  might  adorn  the  second  temple  with  wealth  incomputable.  "  The 
silver  is  Mine,  and  the  gold  is  Mine."  (4)  Still  further,  the  latter  house  was  to  be 
beautified  with  salvation.  "  For  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace."  With  such 
considerations  as  these  did  the  prophet  encourage  the  builders.  Then  came 
Haggai's  third  message.  He  began  by  admonishing  them  that  sin  disqualifies 
for  holy  service.  Then  he  touches  upon  their  sordidness  and  want  of  faith.  Let 
them  tiu:n  and  trust  God.  Still  it  holds  true  that  godliness,  obedience,  simple 
trust,  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as 
well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come  ( 1  Tim.  iv.  8).  On  the  same  day  when  this  address 
was  made  to  the  people  a  special  word  of  encoiu-agement  was  sent  through  the 
prophet  to  Zerubbabel.  Haggai's  work  was  soon  ended.  His  work  was  to 
encourage  the  builders,  and  he  did  it.  What  more  could  be  asked  of  any  man  ? 
God  has  a  commission  for  every  one.  To  heed  and  endeavour  is  to  make  an 
assured  success  of  life.  This  is  the  very  best  that  can  be  written  of  any  mortal 
man,  that  he  had  something  to  do,  and  did  it  for  God.  {D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.) 
Encouraging  the  people  : — For  sixteen  years,  just  because  of  a  little  opposition, 
the  Jews  had  left  God's  house  to  lie  waste.  In  the  first  chapter  of  this  prophecy 
Haggai  rebukes  them  for  this  neglect  in  vigorous  language.  He  accuses  them 
of  putting  off  their  duty  by  the  plea,  "  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  for  the 
Lord's  house  to  be  built  "  ;  and  points  with  sarcasm  to  the  ceiled  houses  which 
they  had  been  bmlding  for  themselves  in  Jerusalem  and  its  suburbs.  Stirred 
by  his  words,  Zerubbabel,  Joshua,  and  all  the  remnant  of  the  people  set  to  work, 
while  the  prophet  encouraged  them  by  the  message,  "  I  am  with  you,  saith  the 
Lord."  After  a  month  had  been  thus  occupied,  and  when  the  last  day  of  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles  had  arrived,  Haggai  was  sent  to  his  coimtrymen  with  another 
message.  It  is  contained  in  the  first  nine  verses  of  the  second  chapter  of  his 
prophecy.  There  is  no  rebuke  in  it,  nothing  but  mercy  and  encouragement; 
for  rebuke  had  accomplished  its  purpose,  the  people  had  willingly  offered  them- 
selves for  the  work,  and  it  was  courage  and  hope  that  they  needed  in  order  that 
they  might  conduct  it  to  a  successful  issue.  God  deals  with  us  according  to  our 
attitude  toward  ffim,  and  according  to  our  need.  If  we  chmb  the  steep  path  of 
obedience  He  sends  us  smiles,  helps,  benefactions,  so  that  the  steepness  is  forgotten, 
and  the  hearts  that  resolved  in  fear  and  weakness  are  made  to  sing  with  joy. 
There  were  three  promises  given  by  the  prophet  in  God's  name  for  the  encour- 
agement of  the  people.  I.  The  promise  of  God's  abidinq  presence.  "  Be 
strong,  for  I  am  with  you."     Their  history  had  taught  them  by  many  illustrious 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  n. 

interpositions  and  widespread  calamities  that  in  God  was  their  hope.  When 
they  continued  in  His  ordinances  with  wiUing  hearts  He  crowned  them  with 
mercies.  Blessings  of  the  field  and  blessings  of  the  flock  were  theirs,  because  He 
ordered  all  things  for  them,  and  protected  them  from  their  enemies  round  about. 
But  when  they  forsook  the  Lord,  and  turned  aside  to  idolatry,  He  visited  them 
with  His  judgments.  The  mildew  and  cankerworm,  hail  and  earthquake,  devas- 
tated their  land,  while  their  foes  rejoiced  on  every  side.  The  exile  from  which 
they  had  just  returned  had  fixed  deep  in  their  souls  the  truth  that  if  God  withheld 
His  favour  they  were  helpless  and  exposed  to  oppression  and  disaster.  So  that 
this  promise,  "  I  am  with  you,"  was  better  fitted  than  any  other  to  make  them 
strong  and  brave.  And  the  prophet  supports  the  promise  by  an  appeal  to  God's 
past  faithfulness,  and  to  His  covenant  which  could  not  be  broken.  "  According 
to  the  word  that  I  covenanted  with  you  when  ye  came  out  of  Egypt."  II.  The 
PKOMiSB  OF  MiBACULOua  INTERPOSITION.  "I  wiU  shake  the  heavens."  "I 
will  shake  all  nations."  The  Jews  had  already  encountered  opposition,  and  they 
were  likely  to  meet  with  more.  But  God,  who  possessed  all  resources,  who  had 
displayed  His  energies  at  Sinai,  would  again  rise  and  put  forth  His  power  on  their 
behalf.  God  would  not  leave  them  to  the  operation  of  ordinary  forces  and  the 
vicissitudes  of  hurrying  events.  He  would  Himself  be  the  chief  Actor,  as  in  the 
days  of  old,  when  He  brought  them  out  of  Egypt  with  a  high  hand  and  an  out- 
stretched arm.     III.  The  promise  that,  notwithstanding  appearances  to 

THE  contrary,  the  LATTER  GLORY  OF  THE  TEMPLE  SHOULD  BE  GREATER  THAN 

THE  FORMER.  The  old  men  had  wept  when  the  foundations  of  the  temple  were  laid, 
because  of  its  inferiority  to  the  temple  of  their  memory.  They  were  deceived 
partly  by  the  illusion  of  fancy  which  surrounds  what  is  past  with  a  halo,  which 
it  never  had  at  the  time,  and  partly  by  that  disposition,  common  enough  to  man, 
which  sees  nothing  in  that  which  is  passing,  and  which  is  before  their  eyes.  But 
God's  message  to  them  and  to  us  is  one  of  hope.  The  golden  age,  which  pagan 
and  heathen  nations  put  in  the  far-off  past,  God  puts  into  the  future.  "  God 
goes  forward  and  not  back,  and  is  never  so  baffled  as  to  be  compelled  to  suspend 
progress.  Let  us  not  despise  our  own  work  nor  our  own  generation.  It  also 
has  a  place  in  the  history  of  God's  work  in  the  world."  (T.  Vincent  Tymms.) 
Inspiring  anticipations  : — 1.  Men  are  always  prone  to  be  deluded  by  externals, 
and  to  suppose  that  the  absence  of  oiitward  splendour  is  indicative  of  the 
absence  of  God's  blessing,  forgetting  that  God  often  chooses  the  weak  things 
of  the  earth  to  confound  the  mighty,  that  no  flesh  may  glory  in  His  presence 
(ver.  3).  2.  The  presence  of  God  with  His  people  is  sufficient  ground  for  encourage- 
ment to  work  in  His  service,  whatever  be  the  external  difficulties,  and  suflScient 
comfort  in  distress  how  great  soever  be  the  calamity  (ver.  4).  3.  The  covenant 
of  God,  and  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  the  great  grounds  of  hope  to  His  people,  in 
engaging  in  His  service,  and  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers  may  be  pleaded 
by  the  children  (ver.  5).  4.  The  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  but  the  scaffolding 
for  God's  spiritual  temple,  to  be  thrown  down  when  their  purpose  is  accomplished 
(ver.  6).  5.  The  uncertainty  and  transitoriness  of  all  that  is  earthly  should  lead 
men  to  seek  repose  in  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  7). 
6.  The  various  changes  of  life  in  both  individuals  and  nations  are  designed  to 
lead  them  to  bring  their  choicest  offerings,  and  dedicate  them  to  God.  7.  The 
New  Testament  in  all  its  outward  lowliness  has  a  glory  in  its  possession  of  a  com- 
pleted salvation,  through  the  atoning  work  of  a  crucified  Saviour,  far  above  all 
the  outward  magnificence  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation  (ver.  9).  8.  The  kingdom  of 
Christ  makes  peace  between  God  and  man,  and  in  its  ultimate  results  will  make 
peace  between  man  and  man,  and  destroy  all  that  produces  discord  and  confusion, 
war  and  bloodshed  on  the  earth  (ver.  9).     (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  My  Spirit  remalneth  among  you;  fear  ye  not — The  patience 
of  the  Spirit : — Some,  more  especially  the  older  men  of  the  nation,  remem- 
bering the  magnificence  of  the  temple  of  Solomon,  and  contrasting  with  it  the 
meanness  of  the  present  temple,  were  continually  discouraging  the  builders  ;  so 
the  Lord  sent  His  prophets  again  the  second  t  me  to  say, — "  My  Spirit  remaineth 
among  you  :  fear  ye  not."  So  we  are  often  tempted  to  give  up  in  despair,  because 
our  efforts  seem  so  puny  and  so  weak  ;  but  God's  message  comes  to  us  to-day 
with  this  encouragement,  "  My  Spirit  remaineth  among  you."  1.  There  are 
those  who  are  continually  putting  off.  They  are  busily  engaged  in  their  own 
pursuits,  but  are  putting  off  the  demands  and  claims  of  Aunightj  God.     The 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  37 

text  ought  to  speak  to  such  some  heart -searching  and  heart-breaking  appeals. 
Is  not  the  patience  of  the  Spirit  wonderful  ?  To  think  that  the  Holj'  Spirit  of 
God  should  still  keep  on  waiting  while  we  were  saying  to  God,  "  When  I  have  a 
convenient  season  I  will  call  for  Thee."  2.  There  are  men  who  profess  to  be 
Christian  men.  But  they  seem  satisfied  with  being  sure  that  they  have  escaped 
the  damnation  of  hell.  They  are  like  the  returned  exiles  who  were  satisfied  with 
having  an  altar,  and  were  not  anxious  about  getting  a  temple.  Yet  God's  Spirit 
is  still  waiting.  Do  not  trust  in  any  fancied  security.  3.  There  are  those  who 
feel  that  unless  they  are  found  working  for  Christ  they  cannot  reasonably  hope 
that  they  have  been  saved  by  Christ.  If  God's  Spirit  is  with  us  He  reveals  to 
us  that  we  are  in  this  world  to  do  some  good  to  our  fellow-men.  If  we  are 
despondent  as  we  think  how  little  we  have  done,  the  assurance  of  the  text  is 
encouraging,  "  My  Spirit  remaineth  with  you."  Trusting  in  the  patient,  abiding, 
indwelling  Spirit,  may  we  be  more  and  more  inspired,  in  spite  of  every  temptation 
to  despondency,  to  rise  and  build  the  temple  of  our  God.  (E.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.) 
The  presence  of  GocTs  Spirit  in  the  Church  : — The  conduct  of  God  towards  His 
Church  in  ancient  time  is  an  ennobling  and  a  comforting  study ;  ennobling 
because  it  brings  His  character  before  our  view  in  a  light  in  which  we  cannot 
see  it  in  the  fields  of  nature  and  in  the  works  of  creation  ;  comforting  because  it 
brings  to  our  view  God  in  all  those  glorious  relations  which  nature  has  no  know- 
ledge of.  The  ancient  Jewish  Church  was  set  apart  by  God  for  the  purpose  of 
illustrating  those  deeper  and,  if  I  might  dare  so  to  speak,  final  aspects  of  the 
Divine  nature.  The  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  presence  and  power  in  the 
Church  is  not  less  vital  to  her  interests  than  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  the 
finished  work  of  Christ.  I.  The  promise  itself.  "  So  My  Spirit  remaineth 
among  you."  1.  The  indispensability  of  the  blessing  here  spoken  of.  "  The 
Spirit  of  God."  The  doctrine  of  spiritual  influence  was  not  so  prominently  taught, 
nor  was  it  so  clearly  understood,  imder  the  old  economy  as  we  know  it,  and  as  it 
is  taught  to  us.  There  was  so  much  that  was  external,  formal,  and  typical  that 
the  great  truth  of  the  absolute  necessity  of  spiritual  influence  was  apt  to  be  laid 
aside  and  forgotten.  That  doctrine  was  not,  however,  altogether  kept  out  of 
sight.  It  is  not  a  doctrine  exclusively  confined  to  the  Christian  economy,  as  some 
have  supposed.  We  have  a  more  full  and  copious  display  of  the  Spirit's  power 
in  the  Church  of  Christ  now  than  there  was  in  those  olden  times.  There  is  no 
single  believer  who  is  not  himself  the  possessor  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence. 
We  have  the  Holy  Spirit  not  only  as  a  Teacher,  but  as  a  Comforter.  We  all 
know  the  difference  between  the  reading  of  the  Word  of  God  without  Divino 
illumination,  and  with  it.  The  Spirit  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  brings 
them  home  to  us.  He  deadens  us  to  the  things  of  the  world,  and  quickens  us  to 
all  Divine  realities.  Without  the  Spirit  of  God  within  us  there  can  be  no  real 
holiness.  There  may  be  external  consistency.  The  Spirit  is  the  only  agent 
that  can  dive  deeply  down  into  the  secret  recesses  of  the  human  heart,  that  can 
command  the  energies  and  feelings  of  the  soul  one  by  one,  and  bring  them  all 
into  a  loving  subjection  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Revealer 
also  to  us  of  the  glories  of  our  future  inheritance.  The  things  which  the  eye 
hath  not  seen,  and  the  ear  hath  not  heard,  and  the  heart  of  man  hath  not  con- 
ceived of,  are  made  known  to  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  The  Divine  mercy  as 
displayed  in  the  giving  of  the  promise.  On  what  ground  could  that  Spirit  have 
been  given  to  the  children  of  Israel  except  on  this  ?  3.  The  adaptation  of  the 
blessing  to  all  times  and  all  circumstances.  The  gift  which  the  text  promises 
I  should  desire  most  for  the  weKare  of  this,  or  any  other  church.  As  Jehovah 
Himself  lives  ever,  so  His  Spirit  shall  follow  us  ever  through  all  th?  changing 
Bcenes  of  time.  4.  The  certainty  of  the  blessing.  We  are  told  that  this  promise 
of  the  Spirit  was  covenanted.  The  covenant  assures  us  a  new  heart  and  a  right 
spirit.  II.  The  great  truth  which  this  promise  forces  upon  our  attention. 
"  Fear  not."  "  There  is  nothing  for  you  to  fear  now  I  have  given  you  this 
promise,"  says  Jehovah.  1.  Fear  no  local  change.  2.  Fear  not  personal  apostasies 
in  the  history  of  the  Church.  3.  Fear  not,  for  the  existence  of  God's  Church 
among  you  is  of  some  importance  to  the  surrounding  locality.  (IF.  Barker.) 
The  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Church  an  antidote  to  her  fears  : — The  Lord 
showed  great  favour  to  His  Church  during  the  Old  Testament  Dispensation,  in 
the  frequency  with  which  He  revealed  to  her  His  mind  and  will,  and  in  His  special 
appearances  for  her  preservation  and  deliverance.  At  the  return  of  the  Jews  to 
their  own  land  at  the  termination  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity  the  Lord  was  very 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

gracious  to  His  Church,  against  which  He  had  had  indignation  so  long.  At  that 
time  the  prophetical,  priestly,  and  kingly  offices  were  all  filled  by  eminent  men. 
The  prophets  were  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Barachiah.  The  governor 
was  Zerubbabel,  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  the  high  priest  was  Joshua,  the  son  of 
Josedech.  By  the  instrumentality  of  the  two  prophets  who  have  been  mentioned 
the  Jews  were  encouraged  to  begin  to  rebuild  the  house  of  God,  and  to  persevere  in 
the  work  till  it  was  accomplished.  Although  the  people  began  the  work  with 
ardour,  so  soon  as  they  had  laid  the  foundation  they  began  to  be  discouraged. 
There  were  various  reasons  for  this,  such  as  the  vexatious  opposition  which  their 
enemies  carried  on  against  them,  and  the  mean  appearance  of  their  work  in  com- 
parison with  the  grandeur  of  the  former  temple  built  by  Solomon.  In  order  to 
encourage  them  to  persevere  the  Lord  sent  the  prophet  with  a  new  message, 
which  we  have  in  this  chapter  from  verse  2  to  9.  The  words  which  precede  the  text 
contain  a  supplement  by  the  translators  which  give  a  good  sense.  But  they  may 
be  read  more  forcibly  in  connection  with  the  preceding  verses  without  the  supple- 
ment, thus,  "For  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I,  the  Word  that  cove- 
nanted with  you  when  ye  came  out  of  Egypt,  so  My  Spirit  remaineth  among  you  : 
fear  ye  not."  These  words  may  be  regarded  as  the  language  of  God  in  the  Person 
of  the  Son  or  of  Christ.  In  them  Christ  assures  His  ancient  people  that  He  was 
now  graciously  present  with  them  by  His  Spirit,  and  exhorts  them  not  to  be 
afraid.  Most  important  is  the  presence  of  Qirist  by  His  Spirit  in  the  Church. 
It  is  essential  to  the  Church's  vitality,  increase,  and  general  spiritual  prosperity. 

I.    Wb  ABE   TO   MENTION   SOME   EVIDENCES   OF  THE   SpIKIT'S   REMAINING   AMONG   A 

PEOPLE,  OE  IN  THE  Chubch  OF  Cheist.  One  evidence  of  this  is — 1.  Pvu-ity  of 
doctrine  and  of  worship  enjoyed  in  the  Church.  God  has  been  pleased  to  grant 
unto  His  Church  a  supernatural  revelation  of  His  will  which  we  possess  in  the 
completed  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Church 
thus  favoured  so  to  receive  that  Word  as  to  embrace  the  whole  system  of  revealed 
truth.  The  Holy  Spirit  delights  to  dwell  only  where  truth  and  purity  reign. 
Purity  of  doctrine  and  worship  is  also  spoken  of  by  Christ  as  the  effect  of  His 
Spirit's  presence  in  the  Church,  when  He  says  of  Him,  "  He  shall  glorify  Me  for 
He  shall  take  of  Mine  and  shall  show  it  unto  you,"  and  "  He  shall  testify  of  Me, 
and  shall  lead  you  into  all  trutL"  Men  may  be  as  zealous  as  they  choose,  and 
as  fervid  and  fervent  about  their  own  devices  and  inventions  in  God's  worship 
as  they  will ;  but,  departing  from  the  rule  of  the  Divine  Word,  they  are  under 
the  guidance  only  of  their  own  spirits.  Another  evidence  is — 2.  Unity  in  the 
maintenance  of  a  scriptural  profession  and  purity  of  Church  fellowship.  As 
the  Church  of  Christ  is  a  society  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  world  for  the  service 
and  glory  of  God,  it  has  an  essential  unity  belonging  to  it ;  and  this  unity  ought 
to  be  manifested  by  it,  both  in  its  profession  of  faith  and  in  its  holy  practice,  for 
it  is  the  will  of  its  Divine  Head  who  hath  foimded  and  stablished  it,  that  is  the 
rule  in  respect  of  both.  The  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Church  causes  the 
members  of  it  to  speak  the  same  things  and  to  walk  by  the  same  rule.  We  are 
aware  that  there  are  some  who  imagine  that  such  unity  in  the  truth,  and  purity 
of  Chiurch  fellowship,  is  too  chimerical  an  idea  to  be  realised.  "  It  is  not  possible,  * 
say  they,  "  unless  we  are  to  conceive  men  to  have  only  one  mind,  and  to  be  divested 
of  volition  and  of  independence."  But  we  reply  that  all  the  sacred  writers  dis- 
prove this,  for  they  had  volition  and  independence,  and  yet  spoke  the  same  thing. 
The  state  of  the  early  Christian  Church  disproves  it,  when  "  the  multitude  of 
them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul."  3.  Power  accompanying 
God's  Word  and  ordinances.  4.  The  exercise  of  grace,  and  the  cultivation  of  a 
holy  walk  and  conversation  evidences  the  remaining  of  the  Spirit.  The  Holy 
Spirit  resides  in  every  believer  as  the  spirit  of  life,  of  light,  of  holiness,  and  of 
comfort.  He  not  only  carries  on  all  those  operations  in  the  soul  which  recover 
it  from  ignorance,  and  enmity,  and  unhappiness,  and  bring  it  to  the  knowledge, 
love,  and  enjoyment  of  God,  but  He  carries  on  the  good  work  which  He  has  begun, 
until  it  is  perfected  in  complete  conformity  to  the  Divine  image.  5.  The  abound- 
ing in  prayer.  II.  To  show  what  fears  the  Spirit's  rematnino  among  a 
PEOPLE  OR  in  the  Chuech  IS  CALCULATED  TO  REMOVE.  Generally,  the  Spirit's 
remaining  in  the  Church  may  remove  all  fears  about  the  maintenance  and  success 
of  the  Lord'  work  and  cause.  But,  more  particularly,  the  Spirit's  presence  in 
the  Church  is  fitted  to  remove — 1.  The  fear  occasioned  by  open  and  secret  enemies 
to  the  work  and  cause  of  God.  The  Jews  were  greatly  discouraged  in  building 
the  second  temple  by  the  number  and  power  of  their  enemies,  and  by  their  open 


CHAP,  n.]  HAOQAI.  39 

hostility,  secret  plots,  and  contrivances  to  defeat  them  in  the  work  in  which  they 
were  engaged.  So  great,  indeed,  was  their  power,  that  they  prevailed  for  a  season 
to  induce  Artaxerxes,  King  of  Persia,  to  put  a  stop  to  the  work  altogether.  And 
8o,  when  the  Lord's  people  have  His  Spirit  remaining  among  them,  they  have 
no  reason  to  fear  that  the  work  and  cause  of  God  shall  be  overthrown,  either  by 
temporal  or  by  spiritual  enemies.  Whatever  may  be  their  number,  influence, 
or  power,  however  great  their  malice  and  crafty  their  devices,  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  able  to  defeat  them,  for  He  is  almighty,  omniscient,  and  omnipotent,  and  He 
is  possessed  of  every  infinite  perfection.  2.  The  fears  occasioned  by  the  falling 
away  of  professed  friends.  When  the  Jews  were  engaged  in  building  the  temple 
and  city  they  were  tried  by  the  desertion  of  some  who  once  professed  themselves 
to  be  friendly,  and  this  was  followed,  as  often  happens  in  such  cases,  by  open 
opposition.  Among  those  who  acted  so  basely  the  most  conspicuous  were 
Banballat  the  Horonite,  and  Tobiah  the  servant,  the  Ammonite.  In  a  similar 
way  the  people  of  God  have  been  tried  in  all  ages.  3.  The  fears  occasioned  by 
the  removal  of  true  friends  of  the  work  and  cause  of  God.  There  are  various 
ways  in  which  the  true  and  tried  friends  of  the  cause  and  work  of  Gfod  may  be 
removed.  In  His  providence  they  may  be  placed  at  a  great  distance  from  their 
brethren,  so  that  they  cannot  be  with  them,  as  they  were  wont,  nor  so  serviceable 
to  them  as  they  used  to  be.  Sometimes  aflBiction  detains  them  for  a  long  time 
from  countenancing  and  encouraging  by  their  presence  those  who  delight  in  their 
company,  and  hold  them  in  high  esteem  for  their  steadfast  attachment  to  the 
truth  and  fidelity  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  The  removal  is  sometimes,  however, 
more  permanent,  and  the  separation  more  painful,  for  death  takes  them  away 
from  the  world  and  from  the  Church  below.  But  they  are  gone  !  And  surely 
not  without  cause  do  we  weep.  We  have  not,  we  fear,  improved  oiu"  privileges 
aright,  nor  rendered  unto  the  Lord  according  to  the  benefits  we  have  received  ; 
and  in  judgment  the  Lord  has  recalled  His  gifts.  Who,  we  well  may  ask, 
fill  their  places  ?  But  while  we  wish  to  lay  to  heart  the  Lord's  dealings,  and  justly 
fear  that  His  servants  are  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come,  we  ought  not  to 
give  way  to  desponding  fears  as  to  the  Lord's  cause  and  work.  If  the  Lord's 
Spirit  remain  among  us  we  have  no  cause  to  be  afraid.  He  is  able  to  give  a 
double  portion  of  His  Spirit  to  those  who  remain,  and  to  raise  up  Elishas  upon 
whom  the  mantle  of  Elijah  has  fallen.  We  shall  only  add — 4.  The  fear  of  sufferings 
and  of  trials  which  the  people  of  God  may  meet  with  in  their  adherence  to  the 
cause  and  work  of  the  Lord.  In  prosecuting  the  work  and  cause  of  God  His 
people  are  often  called  by  Him  in  His  providence  to  make  many  sacrifices  of  their 
own  ease  and  comfort,  and  of  their  worldly  substance  ;  they  have  also  to  bear 
much  reproach  and  scorn  for  the  truth's  sake,  not  only  from  the  world,  but  from 
those  who  bear  the  Christian  name.  These  things  are  apt  to  discourage  and 
fill  them  with  fear.  But  the  promise  and  evidence  of  the  Spirit's  remaining 
among  them  is  an  antidote  to  this  fear.  He  wiU  not  allow  any  trial  to  befall 
them  without  making  His  grace  sufficient  for  them.  His  promise  is,  "  As  thy 
days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  In  conclusion — 1.  This  subject  teaches  us  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  very  life  of  the  Church  and  people  of  God.  2.  This  subject 
teaches  us,  further,  that  the  Spirit's  presence  among  His  people  is  sufficient  to 
remove  their  fears  about  the  maintenance  of  the  Lord's  cause  and  the  continuance 
of  His  work.  So  long  as  the  Spirit  remains  among  His  people  they  may  rest 
assured  that  He  will  continue  ELis  work  and  maintain  His  cause  in  spite  of  all 
opposition  and  hindrances.  3.  Again,  this  subject  teaches  us  that  there  are  many 
sad  evidences  of  a  great  departure  of  the  Spirit  and  withdrawment  of  His  giacious 
influences  at  the  present  day.  The  withdrawment  of  the  influences  of  the  Spirit, 
and  His  departure  through  being  grieved,  is  an  evil  that  the  Church  and  people 
of  God  ought  greatly  to  fear.     (J.  Ritchie. ) 

Vers.  6-7. — ^Yet  once  .  .  .  and  I  will  sliake  the  heavens. — Divine  sJiakings : — 
What  are  these  shakings  ?  They  have  generally  been  referred  to  the  establish- 
ment of  the  New  Testament  dispensation,  from  the  text  in  Hebrews.  This 
interpretation  we  cannot  receive,  because — 1.  The  designation  of  the  interval 
before  their  commencement  as  "  yet  only  a  little  while  "  leads  us  to  look  for  a 
nearer  future  than  five  hundred  years.  2.  The  force  of  the  HiphU  participle 
here  is  properly  to  denote  a  continuance  of  shakings  for  an  indefinite  time.  3.  The 
same  phrase  in  vers.  22,  23  obviously  refers  to  something  outside  of  the  Messianic 
kingdom,  and  not  inside  of  it.     4.  The  usual  meaning  of  this  symbolical  act  is 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

that  of  a  visitation  of  vengeance  on  the  enemies  of  God,  and  not  an  unfolding  of 
Hie  dispensations  of  mercy.  And — 5.  The  future  establishment  of  the  Messiah's 
kingdom  would  not  be  as  directly  comforting  to  them  as  the  nearer  and  more 
closely  connected  even  to  which  the  prophet  alluded.  This  event  was  the  speedy 
shaking  of  the  social  and  political  systems  that  were  around  and  above  them, 
before  and  beneath  which  they  were  in  such  dread  as  to  hesitate  about  going 
forward  in  their  work.  That  this  fact  would  be  an  encouragement  to  them  is 
obvious.  They  trembled  before  the  consolidated  power  of  Persia,  and  the  craft 
of  Samaria  that  might  bring  that  power  upon  them  again  in  restraint,  if  not  in 
vengeance.  The  prophet  assures  them  that  they  need  not  tremble,  for  in  a  little 
time  this  stupendous  fabric  would  totter,  and  others  be  thrown  up  in  its  place. 
As  these  powers  were  soon  to  be  prostrated,  the  people  of  God  need  not  fear  before 
their  enemies,  that  were  so  soon  to  fall  before  them.  This  gives  the  key  to  all 
history.  God  will  allow  men  to  rear  the  loftiest  fabrics,  as  individuals  and  as 
nations,  but  He  will  shake  them  down,  that  they  may  then  seek  for  some  immov- 
able basis  on  which  to  rest.  (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  The  shaking  of  the  natioih  :— 
They  who  know  that  the  Spirit  of  God  remains  with  them,  will  not  fear  when 
God  shakes  the  earth.  What  will  a  wise  man  fear  ?  Nothing  but  that  which 
would  draw  him  away  from  God.  Least  of  all  would  he  fear  that  which  is  meant 
to  bring  him  nearer  to  God.  But  this  is  the  very  purpose  for  which  God  shakes 
the  earth,  that  He  may  burst  the  doors  of  our  earthly  prison,  and  the  chains 
which  bind  us  to  the  earth.  This  is  the  end  for  which  God  will  overthrow  a  man's 
health,  that  he  may  learn  how  fleeting  a  possession  bodily  health  is,  and  aiay 
seek  that  spiritual  health  which  will  r.bide  with  him  for  ever.  It  was  by  shaking 
the  earth  and  the  nations  that  God  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  and  established 
a  people  upon  earth  who  were  to  be  the  shrine  of  Ris  presence,  the  tabernacle 
of  His  law.  It  is  by  the  shaking  of  our  hearts  and  souls  that  the  Son  of  God  is 
made  manifest  to  us.  He  shakes  our  earthly  riches  that  we  may  be  led  to  desire 
heavenlj'  riches,  which  will  never  make  themselves  wings  and  flee  away.  This  is 
the  one  great  lesson  which  we  may  learn  from  our  text,  that  they  whom  God 
shakes,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  remains  with  them,  will  not  fear  ;  because  they  know 
that,  through  this  shaking,  the  desire  of  all  nations  will  come  to  them,  and  fill 
their  souls  with  His  glory.  (Julius  C.  Hare,  M.A.)  The  nations  shaken,  and 
the  desire  of  all  come  : — Three  things  are  foretold  in  this  remarkable  prediction. 
1.  Great  commotions  and  tribulations  in  the  earth.  2.  Wonderful  and  unexpected 
revolutions.  3.  The  glorious  and  happy  issue  of  all  these  commotions,  in  the 
final  triumph  of  Christ  and  His  Gospel.  He  is  properly  called  the  "  desire  of 
all  nations,"  because  the  whole  creation  groans  for  deliverance  from  guilt,  for  an 
interposing  Mediator,  who  can  make  atonement  for  sin,  satisfy  Divine  justice, 
and  give  peace  to  a  wounded  conscience.  To  Christ,  therefore,  and  to  His  religion, 
this  prophecy  belongs.  I.  Text  refers  to  the  period  when  Jesus  was  mani- 
fested IN  THE  FLESH.  To  prepare  the  way  for  this  grand  event,  we  may  see 
the  omnipotent  Jehovah  shaking  the  heavens,  earth,  and  seas.  II.  View  text 
A3  RECEIVING  ITS  ACCOMPLISHMENT  IN  OUR  OWN  DAY.  1.  He  is  shaking  many 
kingdoms  by  awful  judgments  and  unexpected  revolutions.  Concerning  the 
shaking  of  the  nations,  note  three  things — (1)  They  are  from  God.  (2)  To  the 
nations  visited,  the  judgments  of  God  are  in  wrath,  and  correctors  of  iniquity. 
(3)  The  effect  of  these  visitations  will  be  either  unfeigned  repentance  and  reforma- 
tion, or  utter  ruin  and  destruction.  2.  Though  the  shaking  of  the  nations  bring 
deserved  calamity  on  guilty  lands,  yet  the  final  issue  of  all  will  be  the  wide  extent 
of  our  glorious  Redeemer's  kingdom,  and  the  universal  triumph  of  His  Gospel. 
These  predictions  are  now  being  fulfilled.  All  these  present  tumults  and  desola- 
tions are  connected  with  events  which  shall  bring  peace,  and  righteousness,  and 
joy  to  the  whole  earth.  (A.  Bonar.)  The  nations  shaken  : — We  find  here  two 
things  spoken  of — 1.  The  arrival  of  Him  who  is  called  "  the  desire  of  all  nations  "  : 
and  2.  The  introductory  circumstances,  "  I  will  shake  all  nations."  The  one 
of  these  clauses  was  meant  historically  to  be  introductory  and  precursory  of  the 
other.  We  have,  in  this  verse,  a  set  of  antecedent  circumstances,  and  a  given 
result  and  fulfilment.  I.  Those  national  convulsions  which  preceded  the 
ADVENT  of  Mkssiah.  The  expression,  "  the  shaking  of  the  nations,"  is  put  to 
signify  other  things  besides  mere  national  and  mere  political  convulsions,  but  it 
clearly  includes  these.  Sometimes  it  means  those  mental  commotions  that  over- 
spread the  minds  of  individuals.  We  all  know  what  is  meant  by  a  person  being 
"  distuibed  in  thought."     "  That  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be  troubled,' 


CHAP,  n.]  BAGGAI.  41 

&c.  Sometimes  it  means  a  removal  of  religious  dispensations,  as  in  Heb.  xii. 
Apply  to  the  five  centuries  which  lay  between  the  utterance  of  this  prophecy  by 
Haggai,  and  its  fulfilment  in  the  coming  of  our  Master.  What  changes  were 
there,  both  political,  mental,  and  religious,  precursive  of  the  Christian  dispensation. 
Give  account  of  the  Medo-Persian  Empire,  of  Alexander's  conquests,  of  the  military 
power  of  Rome.  Great  thought-leaders  arose  in  this  period,  and  their  opinions 
always  bred  convulsions.  Philosophical  schools  were  always  at  enmity  with 
one  another.  Opinions  held  by  some  were  utterly  repudiated  by  others.  As  far 
as  intellect  was  concerned,  there  was  a  desperate  shaking  of  the  nations.  And 
as  to  religion,  everything  seemed  to  tell  that  Judaism  was  fast  passing  away. 
It  was  doubted  by  its  own  adherents.  II.  The  connection  of  Chkist's  advent 
"WITH  THESE  SHAKINGS.  One  great  object  of  Christ  in  coming  to  the  world  was 
the  establishment  of  peace.  He  was  to  be  the  Prince  of  Peace.  He  designed  to 
establish  a  reign  of  peace.  All  His  teachings  go  to  the  same  point.  How  is  it 
then,  that  though  eighteen  centuries  have  passed,  the  empire  of  peace  has  not 
come  ?  The  answer  is  that  the  world  has  not  accepted  the  principles  of  Christianity. 
It  is  one  thing  to  say  that  a  step  is  taken  towards  the  effectuation  of  an  object, 
and  another  to  say  that  the  object  has  been  effected,  because  there  may  be  impedi- 
ments put  in  the  way  of  the  effectuation  which,  while  they  hinder  the  fulfilment, 
by  no  means  at  all  nullify  the  statement  that  the  original  intention  was  to  produce 
that  effect.  A  second  object  of  oiu*  Master's  coming  was,  the  resolution  of  all 
those  doubts  and  misgivings  that  keep  the  minds  of  men  in  perpetual  agitation. 
If  the  Master  came  to  resolve  doubts,  why  do  doubts  still  exist  ?  Because  men 
love  darkness  rather  than  light.  Another  object  of  oiir  Saviour's  coming  was  to 
do  away  with  Judaism.  This  was  to  be  accomplished  by  an  act  of  supplantation. 
When  instead  of  a  Jewish  priest  there  came  a  real  priest ;  when  instead  of  the 
typical  sacrifice  there  came  the  real  sacrifice ;  when  instead  of  the  prostration 
of  body  there  came  the  sanctification  of  the  spirit,  the  substance  of  Judaism  was 
reached,  and  the  type  of  Judaism  might  pass  away.  Learn — 1.  That  though 
we  are  living  in  times  of  great  disturbance,  we  may  take  this  comfort,  as  convul- 
sions introduced  the  first  advent,  so  other  convulsions  may  introduce  the  second. 
2.  There  may  be  some  whose  hearts  are  disquieted,  distressed,  disturbed  by  many 
anxious  spiritual  cogitations;  and  we  tell  you  to  cease  to  be  yom:  own  master, 
and  let  God's  Bible  teach  you.  Make  it  your  comfort,  stay,  dii'ector,  instructor. 
There  is  a  time  coming  when  mystery  shall  be  dispelled,  for  it  is  written  in  the 
page  of  Scripture,  "  Then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known."  (Archibald, 
Boyd,  M.A.)  Tlie  desire  of  all  nations  shall  come. — Christ  the  desire  of  all 
nations : — As  the  prophet's  affirmation  was  not  verified  in  a  material  sense, 
Christian  commentators  of  all  schools  have  generally  agreed  that  it  must  refer  to 
the  actual  presence  of  the  Redeemer  in  the  second  temple.  The  title,  "  Desire  of 
all  nations,"  requires  some  explanation.  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  it  has 
some  respect  to  the  design  of  the  Father  in  sending  Him  into  the  world.  The 
Jews  could  not  believe  that  salvation  was  intended  for  any  but  themselves.  But 
this  fond  conceit  was  at  variance  with  their  own  Scriptures.  While  Christ  has 
not,  up  to  this  time,  been  the  actual  desire  of  all  of  every  nation,  nor  even  of  all 
of  any  one  nation,  yet  very  many  of  different  nations  have  owned  and  adored 
Him  as  their  Lord.  A  spectator  of  that  scene  at  Pentecost  could  scaicely  have 
repressed  the  feeling,  "  Surely,  the  desire  of  all  nations  has  come."  He  is  the 
oidy  being  that  has  appeared  in  the  world  of  whom  this  could  be  affirmed.  Every 
nation,  pagan,  Mohammedan,  and  Christian,  has  its  heroes  and  sages.  Within 
their  respective  countries  they  have  received  general  homage — in  some  cases, 
indeed,  a  world-wide  celebrity.  But  for  none  of  them  could  it  be  claimed  that 
he  was  the  desire  of  all  nations  in  the  sense  in  which  this  title  is  challenged  for 
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Christ  is  the  one  paramount  desire  of  those  who  have  scarcely 
anything  else  in  common.  Men  who  are  the  poles  apart  on  other  topics, — on 
questions  of  literature,  of  politics,  of  trade,  of  metaphysics,  of  Church  government, 
— use  the  same  language  when  they  bow  before  the  mercy-scat,  sing  the  same 
psalms  of  praise  to  the  Redeemer,  and  labour  with  the  same  zeal  to  make  Him 
known  to  others.  Where  He  is  concerned,  all  their  hopes  and  aspirations  coalesce, 
like  needles  pointing  to  the  same  pole.  This,  however,  seems  to  apply  only  to 
those  who  have  a  personal  knowledge  of  Christ  as  their  own  Redeemer.  Is  He, 
in  any  wider  sense  than  this,  the  desire  of  all  nations  ?  He  cannot  be  the  con- 
scious desire  of  nations  who  have  never  heard  of  Him,  but  He  may  be,  He  is, 
their  unconscious  desire.      He  is  their  desire — 1.  Inasmuch  as  they  long  for  a 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  n. 

competent  and  infallible  Teacher.  The  love  of  truth  is  natural  to  man.  There 
is  a  latent  yearning  that  is  not  to  be  pacified  until  it  finds  the  truth  which  God 
has  appointed  as  its  nutriment.  Left  to  their  blind  guides  the  nations  have 
lived  and  died,  wandering  fadly  through  the  mazes  of  error.  Worn  and  wearied 
with  perpetual  disappointments,  humanity  has  longed  for  the  advent  of  one 
who  could  resolve  its  doubts,  allay  its  fears,  and  re-inspire  its  hopes,  by  unfolding 
to  it  immortal  truth.  2.  They  long  for  a  clearer  manifestation  of  the  Deity.  Man 
must  have  a  God.  If  he  cannot  have  the  true  God,  he  will  fashion  gods  for  himself. 
Man  has  hoped,  in  some  way,  to  behold  God  as  a  sharer  of  our  humanity.  This 
universal  yearning  is  alone  met  in  the  mission  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  Christ  is  the 
desire  of  all  nations  in  His  redeeming  work.  Universal  is  the  sense  of  sin  and 
danger  :  a  feeling  of  exposure  to  penalty ;  the  dread  of  an  offended  Deity.  The 
needful  expiation  has  been  made,  once  for  all.  In  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  that  which 
will  satisfy  even  these  yearnings — the  deepest,  the  saddest,  the  most  abiding, 
the  most  universal  known  to  fallen  humanity.  Then — 1.  No  nation  can  enjoy 
true  and  permanent  prosperity  except  by  receiving  and  honouring  Him.  2.  The 
cause  of  missions  deserves  our  support  as  the  great  interest  of  earth.  If  Christ 
be  the  desire  of  all  nations,  what  is  He  to  us  individually  ?  (Henry  A.  Boardman, 
D.D.)  The  desire  of  ail  riations  : — The  ancient  Jews  regarded  this  prophecy 
as  relating  to  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  prophet 
should  describe  the  Messiah  as  the  desire  of  all  nations.  He  foresaw  a  salvation 
which  should  reach  to  the  end  of  the  earth.  I.  The  need  all  nations  had  oe" 
A  Redeemer.  No  one  can  look  abroad  into  the  state  of  the  world,  either  as  it  is 
recorded  in  history,  or  reported  by  travellers  of  the  present  day,  without  seeing 
with  grief  and  horror  their  general  ignorance  of  God  ;  their  devotion  to  idolatry ; 
their  ignorance  of  a  future  state  ;  and  their  vicious  practices,  particularly  their 
impurity  and  cruelty.  If  we  lead  you  to  the  morality  of  the  heathen,  how  dreary, 
or  how  disgusting  is  our  report !  In  these  things,  in  which  the  nations  of  the 
world  so  greatly  needed  a  Divine  instructor,  the  religion  of  Jesus  was  peculiarly 
calculated  to  supply  their  wants  ;  to  remove  their  ignorance,  to  purify  their 
hearts,  to  soften  their  ferocity.  With  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  a  change  was 
effected,  like  that  which  is  wrought  by  the  mightiest  powers  of  the  natural  world. 
Both  Jews  and  Gentiles  had  need  of  One  who  should  reconcile  them  to  God,  and 
bring  them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.     That  One  is  found  alone  in  Christ. 

II.    The   EXPECTATION   OF   A   REDEEMER  WHICH   SUBSISTED   PREVIOUS   TO   ChRISt'S 

APPEARING.  We  find  everywhere  prevailing  an  idea  of  the  need  of  a  mediator 
between  God  and  man,  either  to  reveal  the  will  of  the  former,  or  to  render  the 
prayers  and  offerings  of  the  latter  acceptable.  The  wisest  philosophers  confess 
that  the  Deity  must  Himself  reveal  His  will  if  it  is  to  be  known.  This  idea  the 
Almighty  suffered  to  be  promulgated  by  means  of  oracles,  augurie.*,  divinations. 
Everywhere  is  the  desire  to  propitiate  the  Deity  by  offerings  and  sacrifices.  As 
proofs  of  an  actual  expectation  of  this  Divine  Person,  take  the  testimonies  of 
two  Roman  historians,  Suetonius  and  Tacitus.  Both  say  that  "  some  One  coming 
out  of  Judea  should  possess  the  empire."  Some  rays  of  Divine  light  illuminated 
even  the  thickest  darkness;  some  remains  of  a  former  promise  lived  in  the  minds 
of  the  heathen  ;  some  Divine  impressions  showed  them  their  wants,  and  their 
inability  to  supply  them  ;  some  gracious  communications  instructed  them  whither 
to  look  for  deliverance  from  ignorance  and  superstition.  These  faint  gleams  were 
lost  in  that  glorious  light  which  burst  upon  the  earth  when  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness rose  to  bring  wisdom,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption.  But  they  served 
to  guide  many  a  wandering  traveller  through  the  thick  night  which  enveloped 
the  Gentile  world,  and  to  preserve  the  doctrine  of  a  Divine  providence.  How 
gloriously  did  our  blessed  Lord  relieve  all  doubts,  and  satisfy  all  expectations. 
But  the  great  things  which  have  been  revealed  kindle  in  our  hearts  a  hope  of 
future  mercies.  (T.  Bondler,  A.M.)  Christ  the  desire  and  glory  of  His  Church  : — 
I.  The  time  when  our  Lord  was  to  come.  "  It  is  a  little  while."  Yet  it  proved 
to  be  five  hundred  years.  A  short  period  compared  with  the  time  the  Church 
had  already  been  kept  waiting  for  the  Messiah.  It  was  short  in  Jehovah's  own 
Bight.  II.  A  SOLEMN  circumstance  that  IS  to  attend  the  Messiah's  coming. 
"  I  will  shake,"  &c.  What  is  this  mighty  shaking  ?  The  language  has  been 
interpreted  as  pointing  out  tho.se  political  convulsions  and  changes  which  agitated 
the  world  between  the  uttering  of  this  prophecy  and  our  Lord's  birth,  one  great 
empire  giving  way  to  another,  and  that  in  its  turn  yielding  to  a  third.  St.  Paul 
applies  it,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  to  the  uprooting  and  destruction  of  the 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGOAl.  43 

whole  Mosaic  dispensation.  We  may  put  another  interpretation  on  this  pre- 
diction. There  may  be  a  further  reference  in  it  to  those  moral  and  spiritual 
effects  which  have  ever  attended  and  followed  the  Gospel  in  its  progress  through 
the  world.  Wherever  it  has  come,  it  has  come  with  a  shaking.  It  has  startled 
the  world,  surprised  it  and  changed  it.  Let  the  Gospel  find  its  way  into  a  sinner's 
heart,  what  a  convulsion,  what  a  complete  uprooting  and  change  does  it  often 
effect  there !  III.  A  description  of  the  Lobd  Jesus  Christ.  "  The  desire  of 
all  nations."  1.  In  the  sight  of  God  He  is  desirable  for  all  nations.  2.  Some  of 
all  nations  have  desu-ed  Him.  But  we  must  look  forward  for  a  full  explanation 
of  this  title.  3.  All  nations  will  desire  this  Saviour.  Imagine  these  prophecies 
fulfilled,  let  this  glorious  scene  be  realised,  bring  before  your  minds  a  holy  and 
rejoicing  earth,  and  then  cast  your  eyes  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  its  holy  and 
rejoicing  King — what  would  you  call  Him  ?  Just  what  the  great  God,  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  calls  Him  here,  "  The  desire  of  all  nations,"  the  joy  of  the  sons  of  men, 
the  one  great  blessing,  hope,  and  comfort  of  a  regenerated  world.     IV.  The 

GLOBIOTJS     CONSEQTTENCE     OF    THE    PROMISED     ReDEMER'S    ADVENT.       "  I    will    fill 

this  house  with  glory."  "  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater  than  of 
the  former."  The  former  house  was  Solomon's.  How  was  this  magnificent 
promise  fulfilled  ?  The  promise  seemed  to  have  no  fulfilment.  At  last  an  Infant 
enters  that  temple,  brought  thither  from  a  stable  and  a  manger,  and  borne  in  a 
peasant's  arms.  Here  in  this  second  temple  God  Himself  was  manifest  in  our 
mortal  flesh.  A  twofold  application — (1)  It  shows  us  wherein  consists  the  chief 
glory  of  any  Church.  In  the  presence  and  manifestation  within  it  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  A  real  spiritual  presence.  (2)  It  tells  us  wherein  consists  the 
chief  happiness  of  every  really  Christian  heart.  {C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Christ 
the  desire  of  all  nations  : — The  Church  engages  our  thoughts  both  on  the  first 
and  second  advents  of  our  Lord.  For  we,  like  them  of  old,  are  "  waiting  for 
the  consolation  of  Israel."  We  exhibit  Messiah  as  the  desire  of  all  nations  with 
respect  to  both  His  advents.  There  are  two  kinds  of  predictions  in  the  Holy 
Writings ;  the  one  anticipating  a  dispensation  of  grace  and  mercy,  the  other 
speaking  of  awful  and  tremendous  judgments,  seasons  of  tribulation  such  as  the 
world  had  never  before  witnessed.  Though  our  Lord  was  the  Prince  of  Peace, 
yet  through  human  perversity  the  result  of  His  mission  was  a  sword,  the  kindling 
of  the  fiire  of  evil  passions,  the  setting  of  the  members  of  a  household  one  against 
another.  Whatever  we  expect  hereafter,  here  we  look  not  for  the  fulfilment  of 
ova  hopes.  Knowing  the  issue,  the  perpetual  feud  between  the  Church  and  the 
world,  the  weary  persecutions  by  which  the  faithful  have  been  harassed,  how  can 
the  bringer-in  of  such  a  dispensation  be  the  desire  of  all  nations  ?  Still  less, 
seeing  what  must  be  the  result  of  His  future  manifestation,  how  can  He  assume 
this  character  as  the  righteous  Judge  of  an  apostate  world  ?  The  distinction  may 
be  thus  made.  The  prophets  do  not  say  that  when  He  appears,  the  desires  of 
all  nations  shall  be  satisfied  ;  but  that  He  who  is  the  desire  of  all  nations  shall 
come  ;  He,  that  is,  whom  they  desire  by  anticipation.  With  respect  to  His 
first  coming,  it  is  certain  that,  from  the  Fall  downwards,  the  sons  of  men  have 
ever  looked  for  some  mighty  deliverer.  However  deeply  men  might  err  as  to 
the  object  of  faith, — however  speculative  their  notions  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
Eternal  Godhead  and  their  own  nature, — however  depraved  their  ideas  how 
they  were  to  propitiate  the  Supreme  Being, — they  could  not  avoid  the  conviction 
that,  if  they  were  to  be  saved  at  all,  it  must  be  by  the  advent  of  a  Son  of  God  in 
human  form,  as  the  connecting  link  between  the  Creator  offended,  and  the  creature 
sinning.  Such  foreshadowings  of  the  truth,  originally  impressed  upon  the  human 
mind,  the  sacred  oracles  confirm.  The  streams  of  tradition  and  Scripture  unite 
in  one  deep  channel  of  expectation.  But  how  did  He,  in  whom  these  anticipations 
centred,  fulfil  them  ?  Not  in  the  way  in  which  the  sons  of  men  imagined  He 
would.  If,  dwelling  on  the  train  of  miseries  which  the  destroyer  has  brought 
npon  the  earth,  and  unable  to  reconcile  what  they  saw  around  and  felt  within 
them  with  His  righteous  rule  whose  offspring  they  knew  themselves  to  be,  they 
yet  had  faith  to  see  that  He  in  whose  hands  their  destinies  lay,  ever  brings  good 
out  of  evil,  and  that  every  affliction  happens  to  man  as  part  of  a  discipline  of 
love,  and  will  one  day  cease  altogether — if  such  were  their  thoughts,  then  their 
fulfilment  in  God's  good  time  was  verily  assured  to  them.  The  proof  that  Christ's 
kingdom  has  been  set  up,  is  seen  in  the  rescue  of  men  from  the  bondage  of  slavery 
and  sin ;  in  the  daily,  hourly,  victories  gained  over  the  powers  of  darkness  by 
those  in  whose  weakness  His  "  strength  is  made  perfect."     The  same  deairea 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R.  [chap.  n. 

which  Messiah  so  graciously  met,  so  far  as  our  necessary  trial  admits,  at  His  first 
advent,  will  receive  their  full  and  complete  satisfaction  only  at  His  second  coming. 
One  point  more.  It  is  to  the  temple  of  the  Lord  that  the  desire  of  all  nations 
shall  come :  it  is  there  that  He  shall  take  up  His  abode.  The  words  of  Haggai 
and  Malachi  find  their  primary  accomplishment  in  the  presentation  of  the  infant 
Jesus.  But  the  true  temple  is  our  humanity.  We  know  that  He  is  with  us, 
whether  we  assemble  ourselves  together  to  worship  and  adore  Him,  to  pour  out 
the  plaints  of  our  hearts  in  holy  litanies,  to  praise  Him  "  in  psalms  and  hymns  and 
spiritual  songs,"  or  whether  we  bend  our  knees  in  the  silence  and  privacy  of  our 
closets.  Let  me  ask  you,  then,  have  you  such  desires  as  the  Lord  at  His  next 
coming  will  be  likely  to  satisfy  ?  Ye  have  seen  what  they  are.  They  are  such 
as  earth,  and  the  things  of  earth,  cannot  fill.  (G.  Huntington,  M.A.)  The  desire 
of  all  nations  : — This  is  one  of  the  most  difficult,  yet  most  interesting  texts  of 
the  Old  Testament.  Many  critics  would  rob  the  passage  of  its  Messianic  element, 
and  degrade  the  glory  of  the  temple  into  material  gifts  and  privileges.  They 
assert  that  the  translation  is  not  correct.  1.  "  The  desire  of  all  nations  "  should 
be  "  the  desirable  things  of  all  nations,"  as  the  LXX  to.  iKKeKra.  ttclvtuv  rwy 
idvQ)v.  The  prophet  describes,  say  they,  not  the  coming  of  a  person,  but  the 
contributions  made  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  second  temple  (ver.  8  ;  Isa.  Ix.  5), 
"  the  forces  of  the  Gentiles  (the  wealth  of  the  nations)  will  come  to  Thee," 
i.e.,  be  brought  to  Jerusalem.  The  Hebrew  word  Khemddth  (from  Khdmad, 
to  wish  or  desire)  signifies  wish  or  desire  (2  Chron.  xxi.  20),  and  as  applied  to 
persons  means  the  best,  the  noblest,  and  most  precious.  "  A  man  of  desires," 
i.e.,  as  the  margin,  one  desired  or  desirable  (Dan.  ix.  23,  x.  3,  11).  "  He  is  alto- 
gether lovely  "  (Song  v.  16).  Li  Heb.  the  same  word  as  here  is  used,  "  all  desires," 
or  object  of  desires.  But  if  the  term  refers  to  things,  the  glory  of  the  second 
temple  could  not  excel  the  glory  of  the  first,  for  it  wanted  many  treasures  which  the 
first  contained  (cf.  Ezra  iii.  12).  2.  It  is  objected  that  a  singular  noun  is  followed 
by  a  plural  verb  "  shall  come  "  ;  hence  the  text  should  be  altered  and  amended 
by  ancient  versions.  But  if  we  have  any  right  at  all  to  alter,  have  we  not  as  much 
right  to  change  the  verb  in  number  as  the  noun  ?  The  Vulgate  agrees  with  the 
Eng.  Ver.,  "  desideratus  cunctis  gentibus."  Why  not  take  the  word  as  a  collective 
noun,  and  understand  the  Messiah  as  concentrating  aU  excellences  in  His  person, 
in  whom  the  desires  of  all  nations  find  their  centre  and  satisfaction  ?  This  title 
seems  to  suit  prophecy  concerning  Him  (Gen.  xlix.  10) ;  and  Christ  was  called 
by  the  Jews  "  the  hope  of  Israel,"  "  the  blessing  of  Abraham  to  the  Gentiles  " 
(1  Tim.  i.  1  ;  Tit.  iL  3  ;  Acts  xxviii.  20,  xxvi.  7,  8  ;  Gal.  iii.  14).  It  is  not  likely 
that  the  gifts  of  proselytes  and  worshippers,  contributions  from  heathen  princes, 
and  the  devotion  of  surroimding  countries,  would  be  esteemed  by  Jews  greater 
glory  than  the  magnificence  of  Solomon's  temple  j  and  is  it  not  unreasonable  to 
think  that  the  prophet  would  direct  men  to  material  treasures  as  constituting 
the  "  greater  glory  "  ?  In  what  can  this  august  prediction  find  its  fulfilment 
if  not  in  the  Saviom-  of  the  world,  who  alone  could  give  the  "  peace  "  mentioned 
in  verse  9  ?  If  we  carefully  examine  its  words  and  catch  its  drift,  the  difiBculties 
may  not  all  be  cleared  away ;  but  this  sense  seems  to  be  furnished  by  collateral 
evidence,  to  agree  with  the  context,  and  is  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the 
prophet,  and  with  the  exordium  of  his  prophecy.  "  The  desire  of  all  nations  " 
we  believe  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  whom  the  Magi  from  the  East  and  the 
Greeks  from  the  West  desired  to  see.  Moral  and  physical  changes  prepared  for 
His  coming.  The  "  greater  glory  "  was  exhibited  in  the  presentation,  teaching, 
and  personal  ministry  of  Jesus.  The  nearness  of  the  time  appears  to  oppose 
this  view.  "  Yet  once,  it  is  a  little  while,"  or  yet  a  little  while,  lit.,  "  one  little," 
only  a  brief  space.  But  with  the  Lord  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day.  The 
Divine  mode  of  reckoning  is  not  like  our  own.  We  are  to  look  beyond  the  first 
to  the  second  temple — from  the  present  to  the  future — from  the  beginning  to 
the  end  of  these  grand  events.  Sacrifices  were  abolished,  the  temple  ritual  was 
completed,  and  "  peace  "  was  given  in  the  doctrine,  and  by  the  death  of  Christ. 
Hence,  God's  Spirit  remains  with  His  people  (ver.  5).  Wherever  Jesus  dwells. 
He  imparts  a  glory  surpassing  the  splendour  of  the  Shekinah  and  the  glory  of 
Solomon's  temple.  He  can  transform  the  character  and  beautify  the  soul. 
We  need  Him.  Shakings  within  must  prepare  for  His  reception.  He  has  been 
once,  and  He  will  come  a  second  time.  Do  we  desire  Him  ?  Have  we  found  Him  ? 
May  Christ  dwell  in  our  hearts  the  hope  of  glory  !  (Jos.  Wolfendale.)  The 
moral  progress  of  the  world : — I.  It  requires  great  social  ekvolutions  AMONQSr 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  45 

MANKIND.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Yet  once,  it  is  a  little  while,  and  I 
will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  dry  land."  Revolu- 
tions in  society  seem  to  me  essential  to  the  moral  progress  of  the  race.  There 
must  be  revolutions  in  theories  and  practices  in  relation  to  governments,  markets, 
temples,  churches.  How  much  there  is  to  be  shaken  in  the  heaven  and  earth  of 
Christendom  before  the  cause  of  true  moral  progress  can  advance  !  May  we  not 
hope  that  all  the  revolutions  that  are  constantly  occurring  in  governments  and 
nations  are  only  the  removal  of  obstructions  in  the  moral  march  of  humanity  ? 

II.  It  INVOLVES  THE  SATISFACTION  OF  THE  MORAL  CRAVINGS  OF  MANKIND.      "  The 

desire  of  all  nations  shall  come."  The  moral  craving  of  humanity  is  satisfied  in 
Christ,  and  in  Christ  only.  1.  Man's  deep  desire  is  reconciliation  to  his  Creator. 
2.  Man's  deep  deske  is  to  have  inner  harmony  of  soul.  Christ  does  this.  3.  To 
have  brotherly  unity  with  the  race.  Moral  socialism  is  what  all  nations  crave  for. 
Christ  does  this.  He  breaks  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition.  He  unites  all 
men  together  by  uniting  all  men  to  God.  III.  It  ensures  the  highest  mani- 
festations OF  God  to  mankind.  "  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory,  saith  the 
Lord."  1.  God  will  be  recognised  as  the  universal  proprietor.  "  Silver  is  Mine, 
and  gold  is  Mine,"  &c.  2.  God  will  be  recognised  as  the  universal  peace  giver. 
"  I  will  give  peace,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  {Homilist.)  Christ  the  world's 
desire  : — The  desire  for  a  revelation  of  God  is  a  desire  of  all  nations.  Men  have 
never  been  able  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  bare  knowledge  or  assurance  that  God 
is,  they  have  ever  yearned  for  some  conception  of  what  God  is.  What  are  all 
the  gods  of  the  heathen  but  human  answers  to  the  question,  "  What  is  God  ? " 
That  question  has,  as  yet,  found  no  true  answer.  There  is  still  a  desire  as  deep 
as  man's  need,  as  universal  as  humanity  itself,  to  know  what  God  is,  to  see  a 
revelation  of  the  Deity.  It  is  fulfilled  in  Christ.  His  mission  is  to  satisfy  the 
desire  of  all  nations  to  see  God.  Let  us  take  oiu:  place  at  the  feet  of  the  God- 
revealing  Christ.  The  desire  to  be  reconciled  to  God  is  a  universal  longing  in 
the  heart  of  man.  In  Christ  is  the  fulfilment  of  this  desire.  In  all  its  stages, 
here  and  in  heaven,  we  see  in  Christ  reconciliation  between  man  and  God,  so  that, 
as  the  way  to  the  Father,  He  satisfies  the  desire  of  all  nations.  To  all  men, 
conscious  of  these  restless  longings  and  desires,  Christ's  invitation  is,  "  Come 
unto  Me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  (Alex.  Marshall,  M.A.)  The  desire  of 
nations  : — How  was  this  prophecy  fulfilled  ?  The  second  temple  was  never 
equal  to  the  first  in  outward  appearance.  How,  then,  could  the  glory  of  the  second 
temple  exceed  that  of  the  first  ?  God  incarnate,  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  stood  in  the  second  temple,  and  that  made  its  glory  greater.  The  text 
foretells  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  says  that  coming  should  be  preceded  by  great 
commotions.  How  truly  this  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  Christ  those  who  know 
the  history  of  the  period  before  His  coming  will  understand.  It  would  seem  as 
if  neither  civil  nor  religious  benefits  could  ever  be  bestowed  upon  our  world  except 
as  preceded  by  such  commotions.  Whether  it  is  that  men  become  so  rooted 
down  in  old  prejudices  in  favour  of  existing  evils,  that  nothing  short  of  bloodshed 
and  revolution  will  tear  them  up,  or  whether  God  thus  punishes  old  errors,  and 
by  His  chastening  produces  a  reformation,  certain  it  is,  that  civil  liberty  and 
religious  progress  have  usually  dated  their  most  important  epochs  from  seasons 
of  war  and  political  disturbance.  So  let  us  regard  the  present  crisis.  Let  our 
eye  be  directed  upward  to  Him  who  rides  upon  the  storm,  and  our  prayer  to 
Him  be,  that  this,  and  every  other  which  passes  over  our  globe,  may  purify  more 
and  more,  until  earth  shall  have  the  very  atmosphere  of  heaven.  Scripture 
teaches  that  the  millennial  day  is  to  be  preceded  by  a  great  shaking  of  the  nations. 
The  text  has  an  individual  application  to  ourselves.  Christ  is,  or  ought  to  be, 
the  desire  of  every  heart.  Just  as  God  shakes  the  nations  before  the  desire  of 
nations  comes,  so  does  He  arouse  sinners  before  Christ  can  enter  into  their  hearts. 
{W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  The  desire  of  aU  nations  : — The  text  foretold  a  strange 
phenomenon.  It  declared  that  the  High  and  Lofty  One  who  inhabits  eternity 
would  be  seen  among  sinful  men.  I.  Desire,  as  referring  to  the  expectation' 
OF  THE  WHOLE  HUMAN  FAMILY.  It  is  a  fact  deserving  attention,  that  among 
the  nations  there  has  ever  existed  a  widespread,  if  not  universal  expectation  of 
a  glorious  Person,  to  be  the  renovator  of  mankind,  and  to  impress  a  new  character 
on  the  spirit,  habits,  and  morals  of  the  earth.  The  expectation  was  not  confined  to 
the  Jews.  II.  Desire,  as  referring  to  the  wants  of  the  whole  human  family. 
Wherever  a  human  being  is  found,  there  will  be  found  a  conscience,  a  moral  sense. 
Let  men  seek  by  repentance  to  atone  for  guilt,  it  is  in  vain.     Everywhere  the 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

imploring  cry  is  heard  for  some  medium,  some  mediator  between  God  and  man. 
To  the  want  produced  by  guilt,  add  that  created  by  the  corruption  which  sin 
hath  shed  through  our  nature.  III.  Desire,  as  refekrinq  to  the  happiness 
OF  THE  WHOLE  HUMAN  FAJOLY.  Jesus  alone  can  confer  true  happiness  ;  because 
the  mind  of  man  can  rejoice  only  in  truth,  and  Christ  is  "  the  truth  "  ;  because 
the  heart  of  man  can  only  be  satisfied  with  objects  worthy  of  it ;  and  because 
God  is  the  life  of  the  soul,  and  Christ  alone  reveals  this  Being,  and  reinstates  us  in 
His  favour  and  love.  [R.  Fuller,  D.D.)  Christ  the  desire  of  all  nations  : — I.  Why 
Christ  may  justly  be  called  the  "  desire  of  all  nattons."  1.  Because  of 
the  general  expectation  that  prevailed  in  the  world  previously  to  His  coming. 
2.  Because  all  mankind  required  such  a  Saviour  as  He  is,  whether  they  knew 
Him  or  not.  3.  Because  the  Lord  Jesus  is  so  attractive  in  Himself,  that  all  would 
actually  desire  Him  if  they  knew  Him.  4.  Because  many,  in  all  nations,  have 
actually  desired  Him.  5.  Because  ultimately  all  the  families  of  the  earth  shall 
be  blessed  in  Him.  II.  How  did  Christ's  presence  render  the  second  temple 
MORE  glorious  THAN  THE  FIRST  ?  In  the  second  temple  Jesus  displayed  the 
condescension,  wisdom,  power,  and  glory  of  the  Deity,  in  such  a  manner  as  far 
more  than  made  up  for  its  want  of  external  magnificence  or  internal  memorials. 
The  former  temple  had  seen  grand  men,  but  now  a  sinless  man.  There  is  yet 
another  temple  which  is  honoured  with  the  presence  of  Christ.  Christians  them- 
selves are  a  building  fitly  framed  together,  and  growing  unto  a  holy  temple  in 
the  Lord.  There  is  yet  another  temple  which  is  filled  with  the  same  glory, — 
the  temple  which  is  above,  and  in  which  believers  serve  God  day  and  night. 
(J.  F.  Osborne.)  The  desire  of  all  nations  : — Here  was  a  distinct  prophecy  of 
the  Saviour's  coming,  and  it  can  be  appropriately  referred  to  Him  alone.  That 
such  a  Divine  personage  was  looked  for  by  the  Jews  is  seen  in  the  uniform  testi- 
mony of  their  prophets.  He  was  the  "  desire  of  all  nations,"  because  He  only 
could  bestow  those  precious  blessings  which  the  world  needed.  Without  Christ 
human  nature  was  guilty,  polluted,  wretched,  lost.  He  was  to  be  the  regenerator 
of  that  nature ;  the  author  of  its  deliverance,  its  happiness,  and  its  eternal  rest. 
The  Lord  Jesus  was,  emphatically,  "  The  desire  of  all  nations,"  because  all  nations 
shall  one  day  be  made  happy  in  Him.  His  blessed  reign  is  to  be  that  of  righteous- 
ness and  peace,  and  the  song  of  universal  joy  which  shall  swell  forth  at  last  in 
harmony  with  harps  of  gold,  will  be,  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the 
kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ."  For  four  thousand  years  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  prophecy  had  been  looked  for,  and  at  last,  in  the  fulness  of  time, 
the  long-expected  Messiah  came.  He  appeared — 1.  At  the  very  period  marked 
out  for  His  birth.  2.  In  the  very  manner  which  had  been  foretold.  3.  He  came 
for  the  performance  of  the  very  work  which  had  been  before  marked  out  for  Him. 
Certain  remarkable  events  should  distinguish  the  Messiah's  coming.  (1)  All 
nations  were  to  be  shaken.  (2)  The  Jewish  temple  should  be  filled  with  His 
glory.  In  several  important  particulars  the  second  temple  was  far  inferior  to 
the  first.  It  was  not  in  riches,  nor  in  outward  splendour  that  the  superiority 
of  the  second  temple  would  consist,  but  in  the  personal  presence  of  the  Divine 
Redeemer.  He  was  the  infallible  oracle,  making  known  God's  will :  the  perfect 
sacrifice  for  sin,  faintly  shadowed  forth  by  the  mercy-seat  of  the  ark ;  the  true 
fire,  to  rekindle  the  expiring  fiame  in  the  perishing  soul.  In  that  second  temple 
the  Prince  of  Peace  appeared,  making  pm  -  ' -^-tween  God  and  man,  and  pro- 
claiming the  Gospel  of  peace,  whose  provisions  of  mercy  are  freely  offered  to  all. 
(John  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  The  advent  of  the  Lord  vshered  in  amidst  the  shaking 
of  the  nations  : — Though  heaven  be  God's  throne,  and  earth  His  footstool,  and  all 
space  His  temple,  yet,  in  condescension  to  human  weakness,  He  who  fills  immensity 
deigns  to  manifest  Himself  in  a  temple  built  by  human  hands.  I.  A  great  Person, 
THE  DESIRE  OF  ALL  NATIONS,  SHALL  COME.  There  was  no  human  probability 
that  this  part  of  the  prophecy  would  be  fulfilled.  Who  is  the  desired  object  ? 
It  can  be  none  other  than  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  Christ  may 
literally  be  said  to  be  the  desire  of  all  nations,  inasmuch  as  He  was  the  object  of 
their  earnest  expectation  :  because  to  all  He  was  and  is  most  desirable.  That  the 
promise  of  His  coming  to  the  temple  was  fulfilled,  see  the  records  of  our  Lord's 
visits  to  the  temple,  as  given  in  the  Gospels.  II.  The  preparation  fob  Christ's 
COMING.  "  I  will  shake  all  nations."  God  bids  us  look  for  the  precursors  of 
His  Son  in  the  shakings  of  nations.  This  was  prophetical,  and  has  been  exactly 
fulfilled.  When  God  is  about  to  introduce  any  great  improvement  into  His 
Church,  any  era  of  light  and  enlargement,  He  generally  precedes  it  by  one  of 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGOAI.  47 

trouble  and  commotion.  This  often  removes  serious  obstacles  to  the  establish- 
ment and  welfare  of  the  Redeemer's  Church.  III.  The  consequences  of  the 
COMINO  OF  THE  DESIRE  OF  ALL  NATIONS.  "  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory." 
This  is  prophetical.  Any  one  who  had  seen  the  temple  of  Solomon,  would  hesitate 
in  believing  that  anything  could  surpass  its  glory.  Christ  now  comes  to  His 
Church  in  remarkable  dispensations  of  providence.  As  part  of  the  Church  visible, 
we  have  a  great  deal  to  do  for  Christ,  in  endeavouring,  both  at  home  and  abroad, 
to  prepare  the  temple  for  the  advent  of  the  Lord.  (J.  G.  Lorimer. )  Christmas- 
day  sermon  : — This  text  is  a  prophecy  and  prediction  of  our  Saviour's  incarnation. 
The  Jews  indeed  pervert  this  text.  We  apprehend  it  as  a  prophetical  prediction 
of  that  great  benefit  and  mystery  of  our  religion  that  the  Christian  Church  doth 
this  day  celebrate.  I.  What  occasions  the  prophet  now  to  mention  our 
Saviour,  and  foretell  His  nativity  ?  The  mentioning  of  Christ's  incarnation 
comes  in  without  any  straining  or  impertinent  digression.  The  prophet  finds 
the  people  in  a  low  condition,  and  the  main  consolation  he  ministers  to  them  is 
this  gracious  assurance  that  the  Messias  was  ere  long  to  be  born,  and  to  come 
among  them.  This  promise  of  Christ  had  a  threefold  virtue  in  it  that  made  it 
seasonable  in  the  time  of  distress.  It  sweetened  their  sorrow  in  their  present 
affliction.  It  revived  their  hope  of  a  full  restoration.  It  prevents  and  removes 
all  doubts  and  suspicions  that  their  fear  may  forecast  against  their  deliverance. 
Shall  their  temple  be  built  again  out  of  so  great  ruins  ?  There  may  be  doubts 
whether  such  a  restoration  can  be  possible,  and  whether  God  can  be  so  good  as 
to  accomplish  it.  II.  What  is  the  nature,  condition,  and  substance  of 
this  promise  ?    Conceive  the  words  as  a  lively  description  of  our  Saviour's  coming. 

1.  Here  is  a  solemn  preparation  for  it.  "  I  will  shake  all  nations."  The  times 
before  Christ  were  troublesome  times ;  nation  dashing  against  nation,  and  aU 
subdued  by  the  Roman  Empire.  2.  There  was  a  stirring  up  of  the  nations  to 
the  expectation,  and  looking  for,  of  the  Messiah.  3.  This  shaking  foretells  a 
shaking  of  all  things  unto  a  great  alteration.  The  coming  of  Christ  wrought 
a  great  change.  (1)  In  statu  rerum.  (2)  In  moribus  dominum.  (3)  In 
modo  rituum.  4.  This  shaking  is  a  powerful  drawing  of  men  to  a  Christian 
conversion.  The  second  subject  to  consider  is  the  gracious  performance 
of  this  blessed  promise.  "  The  desire  of  all  nations  shall  come."  Christ  is 
the  desire  of  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  His  incarnation  that  great 
work  that  all  things  looked  for.     1.  He  was  the  delight  and  joy  of  His  Father, 

2.  He  was  the  desire  of  the  angels.  3.  He  was  the  desire  and  longing  of  all  creation. 
4.  The  desire  of  the  patriarchs.  5.  The  desire  of  the  nations.  Desire  implies 
longing  and  wishing  ;  attaining  and  possessing  ;  enjoyment  and  fruition.  This 
is  not  a  single  promise,  but  a  promise  pregnant.  It  includes  and  implies  other 
promises  with  it.  Here  is  a  door  set  open  for  the  Gentiles  :  it  concerns  us  nearly  ; 
it  is  the  tenm-e  we  hold  by.  All  nations  pitched  upon  one  desire  ;  all  expect 
the  same  common  salvation.  Christ's  Church  shall  be  gathered  out  of  all  nations. 
Desire  fulfilled  and  accomplished  turns  to  joy,  and  that  is  the  happy  condition 
of  the  Christian  Church.  (Geo.  Stradling,  8.T.P.)  The  presentation  of  Christ 
in  the  temple  : — Regard  Christ  as  satisfying  the  craving  of  mankind  for  a  perfect 
ideal  of  goodness.  I.  Such  a  yearning  universal.  Man  made  to  look  upward. 
Distinguished  from  lower  animals  by  capacity  for  indefinite  advance.  1.  For  this 
advance  an  ideal  is  necessary,  up  toward  which  men  may  struggle.  "  Intense 
admiration  is  necessary  to  our  highest  perfection."  Nothing  is  so  ennobling  as 
looking  up.  2.  The  absence  of  this  upward  tendency  is  a  sure  precursor  of  moral 
ruin.  Too  common  now,  especially  among  young  men.  Thou-^iht  "  fine  "  to 
crush  down  all  admiration  ;  to  carp  and  sneer  at  goo  ness.  This  lie  against 
man's  instincts  terribly  revenges  itself.  II.  The  power  of  this  instinct  proved. 
By  the  reverence  felt  by  all  nations  for  their  legislators,  philosophers,  generals. 
1.  The  abiding  power  over  the  human  mind  of  Solon  and  Lyciurgus,  Confucius, 
Buddha,  Mohammed,  shows  the  preparedness  of  the  human  heart  to  welcome 
One  whose  moral  standard  is  higher  than  its  own.  The  secret  of  this  influence  ia 
that  each  manifested  some  features  of  the  desire  of  all  nations,  some  rays  of  the 
"  light  that  lighteneth  every  man,"  s  me  fragments  of  the  truth  that  all  are 
yearning  after.  2.  Show  in  the  passionate  devotion  of  soldiers  for  their  generals. 
III.  But  all  these  come  short  of  the  true  devotion  to  the  one  perfect  ideal. 
1.  Napoleon's  estimate  of  the  superiority  of  the  influence  of  Christ.  2.  Secret  of 
this  universal  power — the  Incarnation.  The  "  desire  of  all  nations  "  must  be  at 
once  man  and  God.     Nothing  short  of  perfection  of  sympathy  and  perfection 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  holiness  will  satisfy  man's  demand.  In  Jesus  Christ,  "  the  second  Adam  ; 
the  Lord  from  heaven,"  &c.,  we  see  One  whom  we  can  love,  adore,  and  imitate. 
The  faultless  pattern  is  set  before  us  that  we  may  copy  it.  In  Christ,  our  brother- 
man,  we  see  what  God  is,  and  by  His  Spirit's  help  we  may  strive  to  copy  Him. 
{Edmund  Venables,  M.A.)  Christ  the  hope  of  the  world  : — The  words  of  the 
original  do  not  refer  at  all  to  Messiah,  but  to  the  glory  of  the  second  temple,  which 
was  then  being  erected  and  into  which  it  is  foretold  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles 
should  be  brought.  The  words  may,  however,  be  used  as  the  motto  of  a  sermon. 
Can  the  words,  "  the  Desire  of  all  nations,"  be  justifiably  employed  in  regard  to 
our  Lord  ?  None  of  the  names  of  Christ  is  more  appropriate.  The  Messiah  has 
always  been  the  Desire  of  all  nations.  More  or  less  vaguely  a  Christ  was  universally 
hoped  for  and  expected.  How  noble  a  conception  we  obtain  of  the  relation 
between  an  universal  Saviour  and  universal  need  !     I.  Christ  is  the  world's 

GRAND  IDEAL,  FOR  WHOM  IT  WAITED,  AND  IN  WHOM  IT  HOPED.      It  is  a  historical 

fact  that  all  nations  have  desired  to  see  such  a  person  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Notice  three  ideas  in  which  this  desire  to  reconcile  man  to  God  became  embodied. 

1.  There  grew  up  the  doctrine,  or  tradition,  asserting  the  union  of  God  and  man 
in  one  person.     The  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation  is  not  peculiar  to  Christianity. 

2.  The  belief  that  there  would  come  a  time  of  familiarity  between  God  and  man. 

3.  That  there  would  come,  or  had  come,  a  perfect  God-man  to  better  the  condition 
of  the  human  race  in  this  world,  and  to  teach  them  about  the  next.  Whole  races 
have  believed  that  certain  men  were  heaven-sent  prophets,  Divine  teachers. 
Heathen  records  show  that  birth  from  a  pure  virgin  has  been  attributed  to  several 
of  these  founders  of  religion.  This  is  related  both  of  Buddha  and  of  Zoroaster. 
The  story  of  Osiris  is  even  more  remarkable.  He  is  represented  as  visiting  the 
earth,  suffering  and  dying,  and  rising  again  to  become  judge  of  quick  and  dead. 
II.  Christ  is  fitly  spoken  of  as  the  '  Desire  of  all  nations,"  becatjse  His 
WORK  is  such  as  MEN  HOPED  TO  SEE  PERFORMED.  1.  The  world  hoped  that  One 
would  come  who  should  establish  justice,  peace,  and  truth  in  the  earth.  It  was 
such  a  moral  kingdom  that  Jesus  came  to  found.  2.  The  world  was  craving 
deliverance  from  powers  of  evil  to  which  they  felt  themselves  to  be  in  bondage. 
3.  Men  longed  for  some  means  of  securing  pardon  of  sin.  Consider  a  summary 
of  the  theory  of  sacrifice  among  the  heathen,  and  see  how  it  points,  in  company 
with  the  Mosaic  system,  to  the  Lamb  of  Calvary.  ( 1 )  In  this  act  they  symbolically 
offered  up  themselves.  (2)  It  was  necessary  that  the  life  of  the  victim  should  be 
taken,  and  the  blood  must  be  shed,  for  "  the  blood  is  the  life."  Life  for  life  is 
the  first  principle  of  the  theory  of  sacrifice.  (3)  The  victim  must  be  faultless 
when  brought  to  the  altar.  (4)  More  noteworthy  still  is  the  fact  that  sacrifice 
meant  the  giving  up  of  that  which  was  valued  and  beloved.  These  views  with 
regard  to  sacrifice  have  prevailed  almost  universally.  The  faultless  and  treasured 
offering  was  to  appease  the  wrath  of  heaven.  It  scarcely  needs  that  I  remind 
you  how  precisely  our  blessed  Lord  is  the  embodiment  of  this  phase  of  the  world's 
faith.  4.  The  world  longed  to  see  harmony  and  peace  restored  in  place  of  the 
discords  of  human  life,  and  in  place  of  apparent  incongruities  in  the  natural  world. 
Men  saw  so  much  around  them  that  was  problematical.  Human  life  was  so 
strange  a  puzzle.  "  There  shall  come,"  wrote  a  Persian  prophet,  a  "  righ.oous 
King,  whose  reign  shall  be  universal.  At  His  advent,  poison  and  poisonous 
weeds  and  ravenous  beasts  shall  be  expelled  from  the  earth.  He  shall  make 
streams  break  forth  in  the  desert,  and  there  shall  be  no  more  a  hot  simoom.  The 
bodies  of  men  shall  be  unsubstantial,  and  shall  cast  no  shadows.  They  shall 
need  no  food  to  sustain  their  life.  That  King  shall  cast  out  for  ever  poverty, 
sickness,  old  age,  and  death."  What  but  the  work  of  oiir  King  can  fulfil  such 
aspirations  ?  Some  argue  against  the  triumph  of  Christianity.  But  Christ 
shall  surely  triumph  ;  not  one  tittle  of  prophecy  shall  pass  till  all  be  fulfilled. 
But  not  as  we  expect  may  it  come  about.  God's  way  of  governing  the  world 
differs  very  widely  from  our  very  rational-looking  theories  of  how  it  ought  to  be 
done.  {Edwin  Dukes.)  Christ  suited  to  all  nations: — If  you  want  to  know 
what  it  is  that  makes  the  living  centre  of  Christianity,  go  and  ask  a  missionary 
what  it  is  that  he  finds  it  best  to  tell  people  that  gather  round  him.  Is  it  not 
the  one  story — the  universality  of  sin  and  the  redeeming  Christ  ?  Wherefore 
we  say  with  confidence,  and  I  wish  it  were  deeper  in  the  hearts  of  all  of  us,  that 
Christianity — not  all  the  minutiie  of  reticulations  of  the  net  in  which  we  carry  it, 
but  the  treasure  which  we  carry  in  the  net — that  our  Christianity  is  the  only 
religion  on  the  face  of  the  earth  that  has  got  stamped  upon  it  universality. 


CHAP.  II.]  HAGGAI.  49 

Mohammedanism  bears  the  stamp  of  Mahommed,  and  dissolves  before  Western 
civilisation.  It  is  needless  to  ask  whether  Buddhism  or  Brahmanism  can  live 
beyond  certain  degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude,  or  outside  certain  stages  of 
human  thought  and  progress.  They  are  all  like  the  vegetation  of  the  countries 
in  which  they  had  their  origin.  You  cannot  transplant  palm  trees  and  bamboos 
into  our  northern  latitudes.  But  the  seed  which  the  great  Sower  came  to  scatter 
is  like  the  bread-corn,  an  exotic  nowhere,  and  yet  an  exotic  everywhere,  the 
bread  of  God  that  came  down  from  heaven.  All  these  other  religions  are  like 
water  that  is  strongly  impregnated  with  the  salts  or  the  mineral  matters  which  it 
has  dissolved  out  of  the  strata  through  which  it  rises  ;  but  the  river  of  the  Water 
of  Life  that  proceedeth  from  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  has  no  taste  of 
earthly  elements  in  it,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  presumptuous  crowing  of  some  whose 
wish  is  father  to  the  thought,  it  will  flow  on  till  it  covers  the  earth,  and  every- 
thing shall  live  whithersoever  the  river  cometh.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Christ 
expected  : — 1.  There  was  spread  over  the  whole  of  creation  a  imiversal  expectation 
of  some  One  called  in  this  place  the  "  Desire  of  nations."  Three  great  wants 
were  pressing  upon  the  minds  of  men,  and  these  wants  became  fulfilled  in  the 
advent  of  our  Master.  1.  A  distinct  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  2.  Answer  to 
the  question,  "  How  can  man  be  just  with  God  ?  "  3.  Light  on  the  mystery  of 
the  future  world.  Put  these  wants  together — the  true  nature  of  God ;  the  true 
nature  of  an  expiation  ;  and  a  true  knowledge  of  immortality,  and  you  see  the 
void,  or  vacuum,  in  the  human  soul.  2.  How  far  was  this  threefold  want  met  by 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  His  advent  ?  Outside  of  Jesus  Christ  no  true  and  adequate 
knowledge  of  God  can  be  possessed.  When  Jesus  Christ  came  to  the  world  as 
Mediator  between  God  and  man.  He  fulfilled  all  the  required  conditions  of  expiation. 
The  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  the  satisfying  light  on  the  mystery  of 
immortality.  Christ  thus  met  the  world's  needs,  and  we  may  say,  the  "  Desire 
of  all  nations"  has  come.  {Archibald  Boyd,  M.A.)  And  I  will  fill  this  house 
with  glory,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. —  The  glory  of  the  'presence  of  Christ : — 
The  glory  here  spoken  of  was  not  any  external  splendour,  pomp,  and  beauty,  for 
in  this  respect  the  second  temple  fell  vastly  short  of  Solomon's.  It  must  therefore 
refer  to  the  presence  of  Christ,  His  personal  appearance  again  and  again  at  the 
temple  ;  which  was  a  greater  glory  to  it  than  any  external  ornaments  could  possibly 
be.  It  was  not,  however,  the  mere  bodil}'  presence  of  Christ,  but  the  heavenly 
doctrine  which  He  preached,  and  the  miracles  which  He  wrought  there;  the  paina 
He  took  to  rescue  the  Divine  law  from  the  corruptions  of  the  Jewish  teachers, 
and  especially  the  spiritual  blessings  which  He  so  freely  offered  to  all  who  were 
willing  to  receive  them.  It  was,  in  one  word,  the  manifestation  of  the  goodwill 
and  mercy  of  God  made  by  Him,  and  the  influence  of  His  Spirit,  which  accom- 
panied His  preaching  and  miracles,  to  turn  men  from  darkness  to  light,  and  bring 
them  to  repentance,  faith,  and  holy  obedience.  Infer,  that  the  brightest  orna- 
ment and  truest  glory  of  any  place  of  worship  is  the  spiritual  presence  of  Christ 
in  it ;  or,  the  influences  of  His  Spirit,  accompanying  the  means  of  grace,  to  make 
them  effectual  for  the  edification  and  comfort  of  the  souls  of  men.  The  thing 
to  be  anxious  about,  as  a  Christian  Church,  is,  that  we  may  have  the  special  and 
gracious  presence  of  Christ  with  us,  to  fill  His  house  with  His  glory.  The  evidences 
of  this  presence  are — regular  and  careful  attendance  upon  all  the  ordinances 
and  institutions  of  Christ ;  serious  and  devout  behaviour  ;  worship  of  the  Father 
in  spirit  and  in  truth  ;  singing  God's  praises  with  understanding  and  lively 
devotion  ;  fixing  the  attention  and  engaging  the  affections  with  Divine  truth. 
Particularly  when,  at  the  Lord's  table,  the  thoughts  are  fixed  upon  the  sufferings 
and  love  of  Christ,  and  grateful  affections  are  excited  towards  Him ;  and  when 
their  souls  are  filled  with  love  of  the  brethren.  (Job  Orton. )  Divine  agency  : — 
1.  Divine  agency  in  the  affairs  of  the  world.  "  I."  2.  Divine  order.  "  I  will 
shake."  Disturbance  precedes  repose;  war,  peace;  death,  life.  This  law  is  seen 
in  the  operations  of  nature,  in  the  government  of  nations,  in  individual  life,  and 
in  the  Church  of  God.  The  prophecy  of  the  text  was  fulfilled.  The  wars  of 
Alexander  the  Great,  of  his  successors,  and  of  Rome,  shook  the  world.  PoliticaJ, 
social,  and  religious  convulsions  prepared  the  way  for  the  Desire  of  all  nations. 
3.  Christ's  advent.  When  He  appeared  the  temple  of  Janus  was  closed.  The 
world,  weary  and  worn,  was  unconsciously  longing  for  His  presence.  The  cry 
of  all  religions  was  reconciliation  with  God.  For  this,  temples  were  erected, 
altars  built,  priests  maintained,  sacrifices  offered.  Christ  alone  is  the  Reconciler, 
Mediator,  Prince  of  Peace.     4.  Christ  the  glory  of  the  temple.     The  old  men 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

wept  at  the  inferiority  of  the  second  temple.  But  of  it  God  said,  "  I  will  fill  this 
house  with  glory."  The  Jews  say  five  signs  of  Divine  glory  were  in  the  first 
temple,  which  were  wanting  in  the  second, — Urim  and  Thummim.  Ark  of 
covenant.  Fire  upon  the  altar.  The  Shechinah.  And  the  spirit  of  prophecy. 
But  in  Christ  all  these  si^ns  of  the  Divine  glory  were  united  and  signally  mani- 
fested. Thus  by  His  coming  to  the  second  temple  Haggai's  prophecy  was  fulfilled. 
And  He  is  still  coming  in  like  manner  to  hearts,  to  churches,  and  to  nations  ; 
but  He  will  come  yet  more  gloriously.  All  changes,  revolutions,  and  convulsions 
are   preparing   the    way   for   His    triumphal   chariot.      ("  The   Study.")  The 

presence  of  the  Messias,  the  olory  of  the  second  tcmph  : — The  modern  Jews  will  by 
no  means  have  this  text  to  be  understood  of  the  Messias.  The  ancient  Jews  did 
so  understand  it.  The  Messias  is  He  whom  all  nations  had  reason  to  desire, 
because  of  those  great  blessings  and  benefits  which  He  was  to  bring  to  the  world. 
Show  how  the  several  parts  of  this  prediction  agree  to  our  blessed  Saviour,  and 
to  no  other.  I.  There  should  be  great  changes  and  commotions  in  the 
WORLD  BEFORE  His  COMING.  This  was  fulfilled  in  a  most  remarkable  manner 
between  the  time  of  this  prophecy  and  the  coming  of  our  blessed  Saviour. 
In  those  four  hundred  years  happened  greater  commotions,  and  much  more 
considerable  revolutions,  than  in  above  two  thousand  years  before,  and  in  almost 
two  thousand  since.  II.  The  world  shotjIvD  be  in  a  general  expectation 
OP  Messias  at  the  time  of  His  coming.  The  Jews  were  in  general  expectation. 
Their  tradition  was,  that  Messias  would  appear  at  the  end  of  the  second  two 
thousand  years.  Some  Jewish  doctors  determined  that  the  Messias  would  come 
within  fifty  years  of  their  time.  And  Suetonius  and  Tacitus  voice  the  heathen 
expectation.  III.  He  who  is  foretold,  was  to  come  dttring  the  contintjancb 
of  the  second  temple.  Not  long  after  Christ's  death  this  second  temple  was 
destroyed  to  the  ground.  Then  it  could  have  been  no  other  than  Jesus  who 
"  filled  this  second  temple  with  glory."     IV.  The  coming  of  Messias  was  to  bb 

THE   LAST   dispensation    OF   GOD    FOR   THE    SALVATION   OF   MEN.       "  OnCe   more  " 

implies  "  once  more  only."  The  inference  may  be  thus  expressed,  "  See  that  ye 
refuse  not  Him  that  speaketh."  What  could  God  have  done  more  for  us 
than  He  hath  done?     {J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)         The  glory  of  the  second  temple: — 

I.  Wherein  the  glory  of  the  former  house  consisted.  Properly  speaking, 
there  were  three  temples  in  Jerusalem.  From  Joshua  to  Solomon  there  was  no 
permanent  edifice.  The  tabernacle  was  fitted  to  the  needs  of  a  wandering  people. 
Nearly  five  hundred  years  passed  before  the  project  of  building  a  permanent 
house  for  worship  could  be  carried  out.  Solomon's  temple  is  familiar.  It  was 
destroyed  after  an  existence  of  over  four  hundred  years.  The  second  temple 
was  founded  by  Ezra.  The  third  was  built  by  the  munificence  of  Herod.  It 
was  strictly  no  new  house,  only  a  reparation  of  the  old.  Notice  the  magnificence 
of  the  first  temple  with  regard  to  its  materials.  The  whole  world  was  laid  under 
contribution,  so  to  speak,  for  the  erection  of  that  magnificent  edifice.  Notice 
the  contents  of  this  temple.  There  were  three  of  surpassing  magnificence — the 
ark,  the  altar,  and  the  light.  Each  of  these  was  symbolical  of  a  deeper  and  more 
recondite  truth.  Consider  its  dedication  by  the  coming  to  it  of  the  sign  of  God's 
presence — the  cloud  symbol.  One  other  fact  added  to  the  magnificence  of  the 
temple.      It   was   the   spot  where  God  chose  to  hold    communion  with   man. 

II.  Wherein  did  the  greater  glory  of  the  latter  house  consist  ?  Here 
we  find  there  is  a  passing  from  the  material  to  the  spiritual.  Things  symbolical 
and  things  material  were  in  no  respect  to  constitute  the  glory  that  belonged  to 
the  second  temple.  The  peculiar  glory  of  the  second  temple  consisted  in  this — 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  material  glory,  the  splendour  of  the 
former  house,  was  all  eclipsed  in  this  consideration,  that  to  the  second  temple 
came  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  It  was  in  the  second  temple  that  the  world's 
peace  was  made.  In  the  first  temple  the  voice  of  prophecy  was  heard,  but  in 
the  second  it  was  altogether  silent.  At  last  the  voice  of  prophecy  came.  The 
Master  said,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me,  for  He  hath  anointed  Me  to 
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  poor."  Jesus  Christ,  in  uttering  His  prophecies  in  that 
temple,  made  that  temple  still  more  glorious  by  the  character  of  those  utterances. 
His  word  came  with  power.  The  subject  teaches  the  manifest  glory  of  the  spiritual 
over  the  material.  {Archibald  Boyd.  M.A.)  The  glory  of  God's  house  : — The 
glory  of  Israel  consisted  in  God's  visibly  dwelling  in  their  midst.  The  rabbis 
remind  us  that  the  .second  temple  was  inferior  to  the  first  in  five  essential 
particulars: — 1.  The  original  ark  of  the  covenant,  containing  the  two  tables  of 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  51 

Sinai,  and  the  Mercy-seat,  were  lost.  2.  The  Sheehinah,  or  Divine  presence, 
appeared  no  more.  3.  The  Urim  and  Thummim,  connected  with  the  miraculous 
breastplate  of  Aaron,  had  vanished.  4.  The  holy  fire,  which  God  Himself  had 
kindled  upon  the  altar,  and  which  was  ever  kept  burning,  and  from  whence 
the  sacrifices  were  to  be  ignited,  was  extinguished  for  ever.  5.  The  Holy  Spirit 
of  prophecy  spake  no  longer  as  in  times  past ;  it  was  silent  for  four  hundred 
years  after  Malachi's  removal.  These  causes  conspired  to  damp  the  fervour  of 
the  people  in  the  work  of  restoration.  Haggai  was  bidden  to  acknowledge  the 
visible  inferiority  of  the  second  temple  ;  but  he  was  to  say  that  the  deficiencies 
were  only  apparent.  The  true  essentials  of  worship,  the  veritable  consciousness 
of  God's  faithful  guardianship,  the  unseen  consolations  of  His  Spirit,  should 
more  than  compensate  for  the  absence  of  the  former  tokens  of  His  proximity. 
And  to  this,  at  present,  unpretending  shrine  the  Lord  of  hosts  Himself  would 
come  ;  the  Prince  of  peace  should  adorn  it  with  His  own  life-giving  presence. 
The  dearest  aspiration  of  all  nations — for  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew 
word  translated  "the  Desire  of  all  nations" — should  be  realised  in  the  person 
of  Jesus  the  Messiah.  Here,  then,  was  true  glory;  here  was  substantial  consola- 
tion !  Here  was  consolation  amply  sufficient  to  counterbalance  the  absence, 
not  only  of  material  splendour,  but  also  of  the  gorgeous  symbolism,  the  departed 
externals  of  God  dwelling  in  their  midst.  The  consolation  offered  by  Haggai 
consisted  in  the  assurance  that  the  temple  which  they  were  rebuilding  should 
witness  the  arrival  of  the  promised  Saviour  of  the  world,  even  of  Him  who  should 
"  gather  together  in  one  all  the  children  of  God  that  were  scattered  abroad." 
Salvation,  and  not  the  symbols  and  types  thereof,  is  the  one  thing  needful. 
{Joseph  B.  McCavl.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  he  greater  than  of  the  former. 

—  The  sv/periority  of  the  latter  house  :  —  The  prophet's  declaration  that  the 
silver  is  the  Lord's  and  the  gold  is  the  Lord's  is  full  of  comfort  to  those  who  are 
disquieted  about  their  own  work,  if  they  will  receive  it  rightly.  You  who  are 
poor,  who  have  no  gold  and  no  silver  to  give,  is  it  not  a  comfort  that  God  does 
not  need  silver  and  gold  from  you  ?  Rich  as  some  may  be  in  the  eyes  of  the  world, 
and  in  their  own  eyes,  in  God's  eyes  they  are  miserably  poor,  and  only  the  poorer 
the  richer  they  deem  themselves.  If  our  riches  be  our  own,  it  is  poverty ;  if  our 
knowledge  is  our  own,  it  is  ignorance;  neither  can  be  true  unless  it  be  God's 
already.  As  the  prophet's  words  are  meant  to  cheer  those  who  are  troubled  by 
a  false  humility,  so  do  they  cast  down  our  pride,  which  always  lies  at  the  bottom 
of  such  false  humility.  What,  then,  are  we  to  give  to  God  ?  Only  the  things 
which  are  especially  our  own,  our  own  hearts  and  souls.  How  could  the  glory 
of  the  latter  house  be  greater  than  that  of  the  former  ?  It  is  declared  that  the 
Lord  of  hosts  would  "  fill  His  house  with  glory."  The  manner  in  which  this  should 
be  done  is  set  forth  thus — "  The  Desire  of  all  nations  shall  come."  Through  the 
coming  of  the  Desire  of  all  nations  what  had  waned  and  decayed  may  be  restored 
and  renewed,  until  the  glory  of  its  latter  state  is  greater  than  that  of  its  former. 
The  condition  of  man  after  the  Fall  was  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  his  first 
glory.  In  Christ  human  nature,  regenerated  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  is  raised 
to  a  far  higher  state  of  glory  than  that  from  which  man  fell.  So  too  it  is  with 
each  individual  man.  Under  the  dominion  of  natural  impulses  and  passions, 
he  may  look  with  shame  on  his  early  years ;  biit  they  who  have  been  truly  and 
effectually  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  know  how,  here  again,  the  glory 
of  the  latter  house  is  greater  than  that  of  the  former.  Such  is  the  glory  which 
we  see  in  St.  Paul's  life  after  his  conversion.  (Jvlius  C.  Hare,  M.A.)  The 
presence  of  Christ  in  the  temple  : — From  the  earliest  period  of  time  particular 
places  were  set  apart  for  the  peculiar  worship  of  God.  The  shady  grove  and  the 
elevated  mountain  were  at  first  chosen  by  most  nations  as  places  of  devotion. 
David  first  formed  the  design  of  building  the  temple.  Though  in  many  respects 
inferior,  there  was  to  be  in  the  second  temple  a  brighter  glory  than  was  in  the 
temple  of  Solomon.  It  is  the  presence  of  Chiist  in  it  which  more  than  com- 
pensated for  the  want  of  other  things.  The  great  truth  for  us  to  consider  is, 
that  the  presence  of  Christ  constitutes  the  chief  glory  of  any  Church.  How  is 
His  presence  in  a  Church  displayed,  and  the  building  rendered  glorious  by  His 
presence  ?     1.  By  the  faithful  preaching  and  the  cordial  reception  of  His  Gospel. 

2.  If  the  ordinances  of  religion  are  regularly  administered  and  properly  prized. 

3.  When  the  professors  of  religion  are  distinguished  for  holiness  and  spiritual 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

joy,  and  where  sinners  are  converted.  (H.  Kolloch,  D.D.)  The  glory  of  the 
second  temfle :  —  The  great  and  overpowering  honour  of  the  building  which 
Solomon  raised  was  this,  that  it  was  the  only  building  on  earth  erected  to  the 
true  God.  By  what  peculiarity,  then,  was  the  second  temple  distinguished  ? 
The  second  temple  was  built  by  the  children  of  the  Captivity  when  they  returned 
poor,  dispirited,  and  feeble  from  the  oppression  of  Babylon.  It  never  approached 
in  outward  magnificence  and  real  grandeur  the  original  temple.  And  the  emphatic 
glory  of  the  first  temple  was  awanting  in  the  second.  There  was  no  visible  symbol 
of  the  Divine  presence ;  no  awful  cloud  of  brightness.  There  the  Son  of  God 
was  made  manifest  in  the  likeness  of  human  flesh.  We  are  to  seek,  in  the  appear- 
ance of  the  Son  of  God  in  our  flesh,  for  the  circumstances  that  were  to  constitute 
the  superior  honour  of  the  latter  temple.  Give  the  occasions  when  our  Lord 
visited  the  temple.  And  also,  the  glory  of  the  latter  house  was  greater  than  the 
glory  of  the  former,  inasmuch  as  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  flesh  has  brought 
down  the  character  of  God  to  the  level  of  the  understanding  and  the  sympathies 
of  men.  The  cloud  of  glory  in  the  former  temple  did  not  immediately  address 
itself  either  to  the  understandings  or  to  the  hearts  of  the  people.  But  the  nature 
of  the  Godhead  has  now  been  embodied  in  human  flesh.  We  are  now  privileged 
to  look  upon  God  as  He  was  seen  in  the  person  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  We  see 
the  doings  of  the  Eternal  One  when  we  see  the  actions  of  Christ  Jesus.  And  the 
glory  of  the  latter  house  is  greater  inasmuch  as  there  the  Son  of  God  was  mani- 
fested as  the  messenger  of  mercy  and  reconciliation  to  sinners.  "  In  this  house 
will  I  give  peace."  (J.  Bannerman,  D.D.)  A  dedicatory  sermon  : — Comparing 
the  two  structures,  the  prophet  saw,  in  the  vision  of  the  future,  what  was  far 
more  glorious  than  the  splendour  of  the  former  house.  It  is  in  allusion  to  the 
advent  of  Christ  that  God  says,  "I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory."  This  was  the 
one  transcendent  event  which  made  the  second  temple  more  glorious  than  the 
first.  The  tabernacle  and  the  temple,  as  the  dwelling  place  of  God  on  earth, 
continue  still  to  be  the  central  symbols  of  all  the  higher  forms  of  human  organisa- 
tion. The  sanctuary  stands  to-day — the  visible  throne  of  the  Deity  among  men, 
the  house  of  Divine  authority  and  Divine  worship,  the  fountain  of  light  and  life, 
of  health  and  blessing,  to  all  generations.  1.  How  and  in  what  respects  does 
Christ  become  the  glory  of  the  sanctuary  ?  (1)  In  due  time  Christ  withdrew 
His  bodily  presence,  that  His  spiritual  presence  might  abound.  (2)  Christ,  in 
the  sanctuary,  survives  every  change  and  outlives  every  foe.  (3)  Christ,  in  the 
sanctuary,  draws  after  Him  the  whole  range  of  human  intelligence  and  culture. 
(4)  He  propagates  Himself  and  His  Spirit  in  the  souls  of  all  believers  ;  and  (5)  He 
adds  new  dignity  and  grandeur  to  human  souls  in  themselves,  both  for  the  present 
and  the  future  life.  2.  What  is  the  demonstration  of  this  manifested  glory  of 
Christ  in  the  sanctuary?  (1)  Every  house  of  Christian  worship  is  a  testimony 
that  God  exists,  and  that  His  promises  continue.  (2)  Every  Christian  temple 
is  a  visible  protest  against  all  forms  of  infidelity,  and  opposition  to  the  Gospel 
Bcheme  of  redemption.  (3)  It  is  a  sign  of  that  everlasting  covenant  of  peace  which 
God  has  made  with  His  people.  (4)  It  is  a  dwelling-place  of  a  spiritual  Christ  on 
earth.  (5)  It  is  a  witness  of  the  faithfulness  and  constancy  of  God's  providence 
over  His  people.  {B.  Sunderland,  D.D.)  The  glory  of  the  latter  house: — The 
temple  of  Zerubbabel  was  inferior  to  the  temple  of  Solomon  in  architectural 
beauty.  Wherein,  then,  was  its  greater  glory  ?  The  Kingdom  of  Christ  rose 
out  of  the  ruins  of  the  old  dispensation,  and  is  become  the  eternal  order  of  worship 
(see  Heb.  xii.  27,  28).  I.  The  greater  glory  of  the  Gospel  appears  in  the 
WIDER  area  it  covers.  The  tabernacle  and  temple  were  objects  of  national 
interest.  Palestine  was  the  only  bright  spot  among  all  the  countries  of  the  world, 
and  so  great  was  the  exclusiveness  that  the  light  did  not  travel  beyond  its 
boundaries,  as  if  a  wall  had  been  built  round  it  as  high  as  heaven.  It  was  the 
partition  wall  which  Jesus  came  to  break  down.  There  was  a  breadth  in  the 
teachings  of  Jesus  diametrically  opposed  to  the  prejudices  of  His  countrymen. 
We,  whose  lives  have  fallen  in  the  nineteenth  century,  can  now  survey  the  area 
of  the  latter  temple  better  than  they  could.  II.  The  greater  glory  of  the 
Gospel  appears  in  the  greater  stability  of  the  Church.  The  temple  of 
Solomon  seemed  a  permanent  building,  but  it  was  razed  to  the  ground.  The 
temple  of  Zerubbabel  gave  way  to  that  of  Herod.  Three  stages  are  visible  in 
the  development  of  the  spiritual.  God  in  creation  was  power  and  wisdom  at 
Bome  distance  from  us.  God  in  the  temple  was  nearer,  and  assumed  the  personal 
living  form  which  communed  with  the  people  from  the  Mercy-seat.     The  Spiiit 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  53 

of  God  in  us  is  the  last  stage,  when  all  manifestations  have  given  way  to  the  real 
presence.  III.  The  greater  glory  of  the  Gospel  will  appear  in  the  greater 
RESULTS.  Our  lot  is  fallen  in  the  "  last  days."  We  see  the  march  of  intellect 
and  civilisation.  We  see  kingdoms  bowing  to  the  authority  of  the  Messiah. 
A  succession  of  revolutions  has  brought  us  forward  to  the  Gospel  dispensation! 
We  see  another  temple  looming  in  the  promise,  the  temple  of  God  and  the  Lamb. 
(T.  Davies,  M.A.)  The  greater  glory  of  the  latter  hou^e  :—l.  The  absolute 
dominion  of  the  riches  and  splendour  of  the  world  belongs  unto  the  Lord,  who 
hath  all  these  things  in  His  power  to  dispose  of  as  He  pleases,  and  who  is  to  be 
eyed,  acknowledged,  and  submitted  unto  by  every  man  in  his  portion  or  lot 
according  as  He  dispenseth  it.  2.  It  may  satisfy  the  people  of  God  in  their  wants 
to  consider  that  God  hath  all  they  want  at  His  command,  and  would  not  with- 
hold it  unless  He  saw  such  a  dispensation  tending  to  their  good.  3.  When  the 
Lord  withholds  any  glory  or  splendour  from  His  people  and  work,  it  is  for  their 
advantage  and  flows  from  a  purpose  to  give  what  is  better,  if  they  had  eyes  to 
see  it ;  for  when  He  withholds  silver  and  gold,  which  they  so  much  desired.  He 
pvirposeth  that  "  the  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater  than  of  the  former." 
4.  The  spiritual  things  of  Chri^t's  kingdom  do  far  surpass  all  the  legal  adminis- 
trations in  glory,  and  do  put  more  real  splendour  on  any  place  where  they  are 
administered,  than  all  the  pomp  of  the  world  beside  can  do.  5.  As  peace  and 
reconciliation  with  God  is  the  allowance  of  Christ's  subjects,  which  outshines 
all  the  splendour  and  glory  of  the  world,  so  it  is  the  great  glory  of  the  Gospel 
administrations  that  by  them  peace  may  be  had  through  Jesus  Christ,  which 
was  attainable  by  none  of  the  works  or  ceremonies  of  the  Law  being  rested  on  ; 
therefore  instead  of  their  wonted  splendour,  and  in  opposition  to  former  adminis- 
trations, it  is  promised,  that  by  Christ's  coming,  His  death  and  doctrine,  "  in 
this  place  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  (George  Hutcheaon.)  The 
glory  of  the  second  temple  : — Fifteen  years  after  the  commencement  of  the  second 
temple  Haggai  uttered  this  prediction.  Progress  had  been  hindered  by  the 
indilTerence  or  the  despair  of  those  who  were  building  it.  Their  hands  became 
slack,  and  their  hearts  waxed  faint  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  To  furnish  a 
stimulus  and  encouragement  to  them,  Haggai  was  commissioned  to  utter  this 
prediction.  By  the  "  former  house  "  is  to'  be  understood  the  temple  erected 
by  Solomon.  The  great  and  overpowering  honour  of  the  building  which  the 
king  of  Israel  raised  was  this,  that  it  was  the  only  building  on  earth  erected  to 
the  true  God.  And  God  there  vouchsafed  to  make  visible  to  the  very  eyes  of 
flesh  a  display  of  His  uncreated  majesty  and  glory.  The  prophet  says  that  the 
"  glory  of  the  latter  house  "  of  the  second  temple  was  to  be  greater  than  the 
glory  of  the  former.  By  what  peculiar  glory,  then,  was  the  second  temple  distin- 
guished ?  In  architecture  or  material  there  could  be  no  comparison  between 
the  two.  And  the  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  was  never  to  be  seen 
in  the  "  latter  house."  1.  The  glory  was  greater  inasmuch  as  there  the  Son  of 
God  was  made  manifest  in  the  likeness  of  human  flesh.  He  was  brought  to  this 
latter  house  as  an  infant  for  presentation.  He  visited  it  as  a  youth  of  twelve. 
He  taught  in  its  courts.  He  made  public  entry  into  Jerusalem,  and  exerted 
authority  in  purifying  the  temple.  The  simple  fact  of  the  Son  of  God  assuming 
human  nature  is  calculated  to  awaken  a  feeling  of  more  profound  admiration 
and  awe  than  any  such  visible  display  of  the  Divine  Majesty  as  that  which 
dwelt  of  old  above  the  mercy-seat.  2.  As  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  flesh 
has  brought  down  the  character  of  God  to  the  level  of  the  understanding  and  the 
sympathies  of  men.  3.  As  there  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested  as  the  messenger 
of  mercy  and  reconciliation  to  sinners.  (J.  Bannerman,  D.D.)  The  future 
■glory  of  the  Church  : — The  second  temple  was  to  be  more  glorious  than  the  first. 
The  temple  spiritually  is  the  Church.  There  being  two  temples  among  the  Jews 
prefigured  the  fact  that  there  would  be  two  spiritual  temples,  two  great  churches 
among  the  Christians,  the  first  and  the  second  Christian  Church.  The  first  was 
given  to  the  apostles,  but  has  degenerated  into  mystery  and  superstition ;  the 
second  is  the  Church  meant  by  the  New  Jerusalem.  The  first  would  be  destroyed 
by  the  spiritual  Babylonians  ;  the  second  would  have  greater  glory  than  the  former, 
but  chiefly  in  this,  that  the  Lord  Himself  would  be  more  intimately  present 
therein  ;  there  He  would  be  Immanuel  (God  with  us).  Explain  in  what  this 
greater  glory  consists.  The  glory  of  a  Church  is  its  wisdom.  The  glory  of  the 
New  Church  now  forming  by  the  Lord  under  the  name  of  the  New  Jerusalem 
surpasses  the  glory  of  the  former  Church  in  the  grand  and  beautiful  character 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbat.  n. 

of  its  disclosures  on  all  subjects,  but  chiefly  on  the  following — the  Lord  ;  His 
V.'ord ;  the  life  which  leads  to  heaven  ;  death  ;  the  life  after  death.  The  chief 
glory,  or  the  chief  misfortune  of  man  in  the  religion  of  thought,  is  his  idea  of 
God.  He  is  infinite  love  and  infinite  wisdom  in  a  Divine  human  form.  The 
whole  Divine  trinity  is  in  Him,  as  a  human  trinity  is  in  a  man.  He  is  our  Father. 
There  is  in  all  forms  of  nature  a  resemblance  to  humanity.  All  nature  is  human, 
and  must  have  come  from  a  Divine  human  Creator,  a  Divine  Man  in  His  infinite 
essence  of  love,  wisdom,  and  power,  from  eternity,  whom,  therefore,  it  is  not 
incredible  to  behold  descending  as  a  Divine  Man  in  last  principles  as  the  Blessed 
Jesus.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  glorious  as  seen  in  the  light  of  the  New  Jerusalem. 
It  is  Divine  wisdom  clothed  in  human  language.  In  all  its  sacred  pages,  whether 
they  are  history,  prophecy,  parable,  or  vision,  there  is  a  spiritual  sense.  The 
outside  of  the  Scriptures  is  their  least  valuable  part,  the  lowest  step  of  the  ladder. 
The  Lord,  the  Church,  the  soul  are  everywhere  the  subjects.  For  want  of  a 
knowledge  of  the  spiritual  sense  a  large  portion  of  the  Bible  is,  to  many  readers, 
a  dead  record,  and  another  large  portion  quite  unintelligible.  Then  look  at  the 
life  which  leads  to  heaven.  In  many  professors  of  religion  the  conduct  of  life 
has  a  very  minute  place.  Much  has  been  made  of  creeds,  and  but  little  of  life. 
The  great  redeeming  powers  of  religion  have  been  held  off  by  the  prevalence  of 
the  dogma  that  good  works  do  not  contribute  to  salvation,  but  rather  tend  the 
other  way.  Religion,  having  been  severed  from  the  world,  has  made  a  sour, 
narrow  religion,  and  a  bad  world.  The  spirit  of  love  and  the  spirit  of  truth, 
like  two  guardian  angels,  should  preside  over  every  act  of  life,  and  sanctify  the 
whole.  Justice,  in  its  widest  sense,  and  religion,  are  the  same  (Micah  vi.  8). 
Never  will  the  world's  work  be  rightly  done  until  its  labourers  derive  their 
motives  from  love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  Now  we  come  to  death.  What  has 
the  old  dispensation  to  say  about  death  ?  It  speaks  hesitatingly  about  the  soul, 
as  to  whether  it  is  in  any  shape  or  not.  What  becomes  of  it  after  death  it  cannot 
tell.  The  New  Church  teaches  that  the  spirit  is  the  man  in  perfect  human  form. 
It  formed  the  body  to  itself,  and  whatever  life  the  body  had,  it  had  from  the 
spirit.  Free  from  the  body,  the  spirit  will  live  more  perfectly  than  before, 
because  it  will  be  no  longer  clogced  by  a  body  unequal  to  its  wants.  What  about 
the  life  after  death  ?  The  spiritual  world  is  an  inner  sphere  of  being,  filling  the 
natural  world  as  the  soul  does  the  body  ;  visible  to  spiritual  sight,  and  perceptible 
to  all  the  spiritual  senses,  as  the  natural  is  to  bodily  sense.  Into  the  realities 
of  that  world  we  come  when  we  awake  after  death.  (J.  Bailey,  A.M.)  The 
glory  of  the  two  houses  : — By  the  "  glory  "  is  here  meant  the  Shechinah,  or  bright 
cloud,  emblematic  of  God's  presence  and  protection,  which  hovered  over  the 
Holy  of  Holies.  I.  The  two  permanent  buildings  which  the  Jews  erected. 
David  was  grieved  because,  while  he  was  accommodated  in  a  palace  of  cedar, 
the  Divine  presence  dwelt  within  curtains.  He  made  preparations  for  a  magni- 
ficent and  durable  temple.  By  the  building  of  this  structure,  in  the  time  of 
Solomon,  an  important  promise  was  faithfully  performed.  At  the  consecration 
of  it  the  personal  Jehovah  descended  His  radiant  cloud,  which  filled  the  house 
as  an  emblem  of  His  taking  posseasion  of  it.  In  anight  vision  He  assured  Solomon 
that  He  had  chosen  this  house  as  the  home  where  His  honour.  His  glory  should 
dwell.  Solomon's  temple  subsisted  upwards  of  four  hundred  years,  when  it 
was  utterly  demolished  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon.  When  the 
captives  returned  to  Jerusalem  they  began  to  rebuild  the  temple,  but  were  dis- 
couraged and  delayed.  To  cheer  thom  Haggai  was  sent,  and  he  was  to  give 
this  assurance,  "  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater  than  of  the  former." 
II.  The  circumstances  which  fulfilled  this  prediction.  It  is  said  to  be 
clearly  proved  that  Herod  reared  his  temple  on  the  yet  standing  foundations  of 
the  temple  of  Zerubbabel.  The  superior  glory  of  the  second  temple  could  not 
have  been  any  glory  that  Herod  added  to  it ;  it  must  have  rested  on  something 
spiritual.  Haggai  explains  thus, — He  who  should  be  desired  and  expected  by 
all  nations,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles, — "  shall  come,  and  I  will  fill  this  house  with 
glory,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  Four  years  after  the  superstructure  of  Herod 
was  fully  built  upon  the  foundations  of  the  temple  of  Zerubbabel,  the  infant  Jesus 
was  introduced  into  that  temple.  The  presence  of  Christ  is  the  grand  circum- 
stance which  verified  the  prediction  of  Haggai.  Another  point  in  which  the 
glory  of  the  latter  house  was  greater  than  the  glory  of  the  former  was  the  Court  of 
the  Gentiles.  The  temple  of  Solomon  had  only  two  courts — that  of  the  priests 
and  that  of  the  Israelites.     The  Gentiles  were  considered  as  profane ;  and  unless 


OHAP.  n.]  HAGOAI.  65 

converted,  and  wholly  adopting  the  Jewish  religion,  disregarded  and  despised. 
This  outer  court  in  the  second  temple  admitted  all  men  to  a  certain  consideration 
among  the  chosen  people.  This  was  a  step  toward  the  further  admission  of 
the  nations  into  the  entire  covenant  of  peace.  (J.  Orant.)  Utility  superior 
to  beauty  : — There  is  an  oriental  proverb  to  the  effect  that  the  useful  outlasts 
the  beautiful,  and  I  remember  how  an  ingenious  author  illustrates  this  bit  of 
practical  philosophy  by  allusions  to  several  famous  works  and  names.  The  tomb 
of  Moses,  Israel's  greatest  chieftain,  has  never  been  known,  but  the  traveller 
continues  to  quench  his  thirst  at  the  Well  of  Jacob.  Solomon's  magnificent 
temple  is  gone,  but  the  same  king's  reservoirs  and  conduits  are  still  available. 
The  ancient  buildings  of  the  Holy  City  are  not  to  be  found,  but  the  Pool  of  Beth- 
esda  is  clear  and  limpid  and  refreshing  to-day.  The  columns  of  Persejolis, 
Persia's  royal  capital,  are  crumbling  into  decay,  but  its  cistema  and  aqueducts 
remain  intact.  The  golden  house  of  Nero  at  Rome  is  in  ruins,  but  the  Aqua 
Claudia  pours  into  the  city  of  the  seven  hills  its  bright  and  healthful  stream. 
Many  other  triumphs  of  grandeur  and  beauty,  that  in  their  time  commanded 
the  admiration  of  the  world,  have  disappeared,  while  humbler  works  of  utility 
of  the  same  period  survive  them.  Certain  it  is  that  in  the  service  of  Christ  use- 
fulness alone  is  immortal.  Many  a  brilliant  discourse  has  been  admired  and 
forgotten,  many  a  thrilling  solo  from  a  sacred  oratorio  has  obtained  a  few  days' 
enthusiastic  praise,  while  a  humble  preacher's  blunt  appeal,  or  an  uncultured 
singer's  simple  hymn,  has  had  enduring  results.  The  former  were  efforts  of 
human  genius,  like  the  grand  edifices  adorning  once  famous  cities  ;  the  latter 
were  the  lowly  channels  through  which  God's  "  living  water  "  reached  thirsty 
human  souls.     [J.  Orant.) 

Ver.  9.  In  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. — The  nature, 
source,  and  means  of  spiritual-  peace : — Inquire — I.  Into  the  natfre  of  the  peace 
HEKE  SPOKEN  OF.  It  includcs  peacc  with  God,  i.e.,  forgiveness,  acceptance,  recon- 
ciliation with  Him.  When  this  is  witnessed  to  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God  the 
enmity  is  removed,  or  the  will  is  subdued,  and  the  affections  are  brought  into 
captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  Peace  of  conscience,  arising  from  pardon  of 
past  sin,  and  power  over  sin.     A  peaceful,  serene,  tranquil  frame  of  mind  ;  and 

Eeace  with  all  men.  II.  The  Author  of  this  peace,  and  the  way  in  which 
[e  will  give  it.  It  is  not  ourselves.  Our  own  works  cannot  purchase  it,  nor 
reconcile  us  to  God.  It  is  not  others  ;  not  their  absolutions,  prayers,  or  advices. 
It  is  the  gift  of  God.  He  is  its  Author,  and  it  comes  from  Him  as  a  free  gift. 
III.  Who  ake  the  subjects  of  it,  or  the  persons  to  whom  He  will  give  it  ? 
It  is  purchased  by  Christ  for  all,  and  offered  to  all.  But  it  cannot  be  possessed  by 
the  wicked.  It  cannot  be  the  portion  of  the  unbeliever.  Repentance  and  faith  are 
both  the  gifts  of  God,  and  must  be  sought  in  the  use  of  prescribed  means,  such 
as  hearing  the  Word  of  God  and  praj^er.  IV.  The  place  where  He  will  give 
it,  and  the  time  when.  All  times  and  places  may  be  considered  holy  under  the 
Gospel.  Nevertheless,  when  and  where  the  Gospel  is  preached,  and  prayer 
offered  to  God,  repentance  and  faith  are  usually  given,  and  Christ  in  His  Word 
and  Spirit  is  peculiarly  present.  {J.  Benson.)  God^s  gift  of  peace: — The  Jews 
were  taught  to  entertain  new  and  more  spiritual  ideas  of  what  it  was  in  which 
the  true  glory  of  God's  house  consisted, — that  it  was  not  in  the  grandeur  of  its 
elevation,  nor  the  beauty  of  its  decorations,  nor  the  costliness  of  its  furniture, 
though  wrought  in  gold  of  Ophir,  but  in  the  presence  of  God  there,  and  in  the 
communication  of  peace  to  the  contrite  and  humble  spirit.  I.  What  is  the 
peace  here  spoken  of  ?  It  is  a  sense  of  reconciliation  with  God.  When 
paradise  was  the  abode  of  holiness,  it  was  also  the  abode  of  peace  ;  when  once 
sin  had  entered,  there  was  no  peace  to  our  first  parents,  so  long  as  the  taint  of 
their  disobedience  remained  unwashed  away.  The  peace  for  which  we  are  seeking 
is  far  removed  from  servile  fear  and  bondage,  and  hac'  in  it  the  very  spirit  of  a 
child.  There  is  peace  for  us  when  we  are  enabled  to  look  up  to  God  as  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope  through  Christ.    II.  What 

13  OUR  WARRANT  FOR  EXPECTING  THIS  PEACE  ?       WHENCE    IS   IT  TO  BE  OBTAINED  ? 

And  how  are  we  to  know  that  it  is  ours  ?  The  Gospel  is  specially  the  dis- 
pensation of  peace;  Christ  is  our  peace.  He  is  "the  repairer  of  the  breach,"  the 
way,  the  truth,  the  life,  the  door  which  leadeth  unto  the  Father.  There  are 
systems  full  of  error  which,  nevertheless,  hold  out  fair  promises  of  peace,  and 
pretend  that  they  alone  can  secure  its  possession.     The  infidel  boasts  that  he  can 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

give  peace.  Our  peace  depends  on  what  Christ  has  done  for  us,  and  has  promised 
to  do  in  us,  and  not  on  what  we  can  do  in  and  for  ourselves  ;  and  our  possession 
of  peace  depends  on  the  confidence  with  which  we  believe  His  word  and  rely  upon 
His  power.  This  is  the  teaching  which  gives  peace  to  the  troubled  conscience, 
and  we  confidently  assert  that  it  is  the  teaching  of  our  Church.  (Bishop  Shirley.) 
Spiritual  rest  in  political  strife  : — It  is  Christ  who  really  speaks  to  us,  both  out 
of  the  Old  Testament  and  out  of  the  New,  this  blessed  message  of  the  Lord,  "  In 
this  place  will  I  give  peace."  It  is  His  Spirit  which  revealed  it  to  the  prophet ; 
it  is  His  Word  which  is  uttered  in  the  Gospel ;  it  is  He  Himself  who  gives  it  to  us 
now  and  for  evermore.  "  He  is  our  peace  "  (Eph.  ii.  14).  This  was  the  glorious 
prospect  lifted  up  before  those  who,  coming  back  from  the  captivity  of  Zion, 
set  to  work  on  the  restoration  of  that  temple  which  they  had  never  forgotten 
in  a  strange  land.  There  was  much,  it  is  true,  to  sadden  them.  The  place  looked 
not  like  the  ancient  and  beautiful  house  from  which  they  had  been  driven  seventy 
years  before.  And  yet  God  told  them  to  be  strong  and  work,  for  He  was  with 
them.  "  The  latter  glory  of  this  house  shall  be  greater  than  the  former,  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts  :  and  in  this  place  I  will  give  peace."  Five  centuries  passed  away, 
and  all  the  nations  were  in  expectation  ;  and  all  the  nations  happened  by  Divine 
appointment  to  be  at  peace.  This  was  but  an  outward  thing,  however  blessed, 
compared  with  that  holy  rest  prepared  for  the  people  of  God,  and  brought  into 
the  world  by  that  eternal  Son  of  God,  in  whom  righteousness  and  peace  kissed 
each  other.  That  Son  of  God  was  made  a  human  babe,  and  the  angels  sang,  "  On 
earth  peace."  He  grew  to  manhood,  and  always,  though  with  warnings  mingled. 
He  spake  of  peace.  He  sailed  upon  the  stormy  waves,  and  said  to  them,  "  Peace 
be  still."  And  so  throughout  His  life.  It  is  His  promise  concerning  His  sanctuary. 
"In  this  place  will  I  give  peace."  I.  He  Himself  is  in  the  midst  of  us.  There 
is  a  holy  presence  here,  and  this  should  quiet  our  hearts  with  reverence  and  godly 
fear,  and  yet  fill  us  with  peace  and  joy.  We  draw  nigh  to  Him,  and  He  draws 
nigh  to  us.  We  lift  up  oiu-  hearts  to  Him  in  supplication,  and  the  peace  of  God 
which  passeth  all  understanding  will  keep  our  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ 
Jesus.  II.  He  gives  us  here  His  "  Gospel  of  peace."  Even  if  the  clergyman's 
heart  is  heavy,  the  lips  of  the  evangelist  utter  the  blessed  tidings,  and  the  word 
in  season  helps  the  soul  of  the  weary.  But  the  Gospel  is  only  a  pleasant  song 
to  us,  until  we  act  upon  it  in  penitence  and  faith  ;  but  then  obedience  is  the  path 
to  peace.  III.  He  keeps  us  secretly  in  His  tabernacle  from  the  strife  op 
tongues.  Though  His  presence,  realised  even  in  common  life,  keeps  us  peaceful 
in  the  midst  of  strife,  yet  there  is  a  special  calm  about  His  house  which  gives  us 
pause  and  refreshment  after  we  have  striven,  and  before  we  go  again  into  conflict — 
a  calm  which  bids  us,  on  the  Lord's  day  and  in  the  Lord's  house,  set  aside  all 
thoughts  of  party,  all  the  bitterness  of  controversy,  and,  instead,  pray  for  one 
another,  that  thus,  as  far  as  lieth  in  us,  we  may  live  peaceably  with  all  men.  Then, 
let  all  the  occasions  of  your  life,  all  the  changes  which  you  experience,  be  sanctified 
in  the  place  where  He,  according  to  His  promise,  is  sure  to  be  found.  Christ  is 
here,  so  here  is  liberty  and  light,  here  is  strength  and  comfort.  Christ  is  here, 
and  so  when  we  come  before  Him  with  an  "  humble,  lowly,  penitent,  and  obedient 
heart,"  He  meets  us  with  that  priceless  blessing,  "  Peace  be  imto  you."  {G.  E. 
J  elf,  M.A.) 

Vers.  1 1-14.  Ask  now  the  priests  concerning  the  law. — Human  duty : — 
I.  That  the  question  of  human  duty  is  to  be  decided  by  an  appeal  to  Divinb 
authority.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts:  Ask  now  the  priests  concerning 
the  law."  The  question,  of  coiirse,  implies  two  things.  1.  That  there  is  a  Divine 
written  law  for  the  regulation  of  human  conduct.  Though  the  law  here  refers 
to  ceremonial  institutes  which  were  contained  in  the  Levitical  code,  there  is  also 
a  Divinely  written  law  of  a  far  higher  significance — that  moral  law  which  rises 
out  of  man's  relations,  and  is  binding  upon  man  as  man,  here  and  everywhere, 
now  and  for  ever.  It  implies — 2.  That  there  are  Divinely  appointed  interpreters 
of  this  law.  "  Ask  now  the  priests."  Under  the  old  economy  there  were  men 
appointed  and  qualified  by  God  to  expound  the  law  to  the  people  ;  and  in  every 
age  there  are  men  endowed  with  that  high  moral  genius  which  gives  them  an 
insight  into  the  eternal  principles  of  moral  obligation.  The  will  of  God  is  the 
standard  of  moral  obligation.  II.  That  the  discharge  of  duty  requires  thh 
spirit  ov  obedience.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  Jews  now  to  rebuild  the  temple; 
but  that  duty  they  discharged  not  by  merely  bringing  the  stones  and  timbers 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  57 

together  and  placing  them  in  architectural  order.     It  required  the  spirit  of  con- 
secration.    The  prophet  sought  to  impress  this  upon  the  mind  of  his  fellow- 
countrymen  engaged  in  this  work  by  propounding  two   questions  referring  to 
points  in  the  ceremonial  law.     The  first  had  reference  to  the  communication 
of  the  holiness  of  holy  objects  to  other  objects  brought  into  contact  with  them. 
"  If  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his  garment,  and  with  his  skirt  do  touch 
bread,  or  pottage,  or  wine,  or  oil,  or  any  meat,  shall  it  be  holy  ?  "     In  other  words, 
whether,  if  a  person  carry  holy  flesh  in  a  lappet  of  his  garment,  and  touched  any 
food  in  the  lappet,  it  should  become  holy  in  consequence  ?     The  priests  said. 
No  !  and  rightly.     Mere  ceremonial  holiness  cannot  impart  virtue  to  our  actions 
in  daily  life  ;  cannot  render  our  efforts  in  the  service  of  God  acceptable  to  Him. 
The  second  question  was  this  :  "If  one  that  is  unclean  by  a  dead  body  touch 
any  of  these,  shall  it  be  unclean  ?  "     The  priests  answered  and  said  :  "It  shall 
be  unclean."     "  The  sum,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  of  these  two  rules,  is,  that  pollution 
is  more  easily  communicated  than  sanctification  ;  that  is,  there  are  many  ways 
of  vice,  but  only  one  of  virtue,  and  a  difficult  one.     Good  implies  perfection ;  evil 
commences  with  the  slightest  defect.     Let  not  men  think  that  living  among 
good  people  will  recommend  them  to  God,  if  they  are  not  good  themselves. 
Conclusion.     Mark — 1.  The  transcendent  importance  of  the  spirit  of  obedience, 
2.  That  man  can  more  easily  communicate  evQ  to  another  than  good.     {Homilist. ) 
If  one  that  is  unclean  toy  a  dead  body  touch  any  of  these,  shall  it  be  unclean  ? — 
The  contagion  of  evil : — The  warning  of  the  text  is  not  addressed  solely  to  those 
whose  hearts  have  always  been  estranged  from  God,  but  also  to  those  who  have 
felt  the  power  of  God,  and  whose  hearts  have  been  lifted  up  by  Him,  and  who 
have  been  enabled  to  work  for  a  time  in  His  strength.     For  even  the  latter  are 
very  apt  to  fall  back  into  the  notion  that  they  have  a  spring  of  strength  in  them- 
selves.    The  warning  is  taken  from  the  ormnances  of  the  Levitical  law.     The 
uncleanness  and  holiness  spoken  of  are  those  pronounced  to  be  such  by  that  law. 
But  the  ordinances  of  the  ceremonial  law  were  designed  to  be  types  and  witnesses 
of  moral  and  spiritual  truths.     Indeed,  the  prophet  himself  in  the  latter  part 
of  the  text  declares  this.     Thus  far  we  can  readily  go  along  with  the  text.     You 
all  know  that  if  a  man's  hand  is  covered  with  dirt,  it  will  defile  everything  it 
touches,  even  that  which  before  may  have  been  clean.     In  like  maimer  a  soul 
that  is  covered  with  any  sort  of  filth  or  pollution  must  defile  that  which  it  touches. 
As  a  jaundiced  eye  sees  the  reflection  of  its  own  jaundice  in  the  things  around 
it,  so  does  a  jaundiced  heart.     If  a  soul  is  fuU  of  impurity,  though  you  pour  in 
clean  water,  it  immediately  becomes  foul.     There  is  a  taint  of  sin  in  your  hearts 
which  runs  through  all  your  thoughts  and  feelings,  through  all  your  words  and 
deeds.     The  first  truth  we  have  seen  is,  that  they  whose  souls  are  defiled  by  some 
great  moral  impm-ity,  must  carry  that  impurity  along  with  them  into  every- 
thing they  may  take  in  hand.     Sin  is  itself  death,  spiritual  death  ;   and  the 
uncleanness  from  this  contact  also  spreads  on  everything  around.     The  second 
truth  is,  that  we  are  utterly  unable  to  bring  forth  anything,  whether  in  thought 
or  deed,  that  shall  be  perfect  in  the  sight  of  God.     Hereby  we  betray  a  secret 
corruption  of  our  nature,  the  taint  of  which  spreads  through  our  whole  lives. 
We  have  seen  that,  when  a  man  is  unclean,  he  makes  everything  he  touches  imclean. 
But  alas  !  the  converse  does  not  hold.     Though  he  were  clean,  he  would  not 
make  what  he  touches  clean.     We  have  the  power  of  defiling  ;  but  we  have  not 
the  power  of  purifying.     In  every  part  of  the  land  it  may  be  seen  how  catching 
vices  are  ;  the  plague  itself  is  scarcely  more  so.     Sins  will  produce  sins,  rapidly 
and  abundantly,  even  as  the  foulest  vermin  breed  the  most  rapidly  and  numerously. 
There  are  habitual  vices  to  which  each  age  and  class  are  prone — this  is  a  proof 
how  catching  uncleanness  is.     What  must  the  state  of  the  world  have  been  in 
the  eyes  of  Him  who  beholds  the  secrets  of  the  heart,  and  to  whom  every  impurity 
is  an  abomination  ?     As  God  abhors  all  manner  of  impurity.  He  willed  to  purge 
it  away  from  the  earth.     He  willed  to  speak  to  the  world,   "  Be  thou  clean." 
He  eent  His  Son  to  speak  that  word  to  the  world,  that  word  which  God  alone 
can  speak  effectively,  either  to  the  world  at  large,  or  to  any  individual  soul.     It 
is  by  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  that  our  souls  must  be  purified  and  washed 
from  our  sins.     By  the  offering  up  of  that  holy  body  and  blood  on  the  Cross 
a  change  was  wrought  in  the  whole  order  of  the  world.     The  prince  of  this  world 
was  judged.     These  truths  are  full  of  practical  consequences  with  regard  to  the 
whole  regulation  of  our  lives.     We  shall  fly  at  once   to  the  Purifier  when  the 
sense  of  our  impurity  oppresses  us  ;  and  we  shall  be  very  careful  in  our  choice 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  companions.  Moral  disease  being  no  less  catching  than  bodily,  you  should 
be  no  less  careful  in  shunning  vicious  companions.  It  is  indeed  the  duty  of  every 
Christian  to  go  to  those  who  are  unclean,  with  the  purpose  of  making  them  clean, 
through  the  power  of  God,  and  the  Word  of  God.  At  the  same  time,  let  us  pray 
continually  that  He,  who  alone  can  purify  our  hearts,  and  keep  them  pure,  will 
vouchsafe  to  do  so,  until  the  time  arrives  when  all  the  world  shall  enjoy  the  blessed 
vision  promised  to  the  pure  in.  heart — when  all  mankind,  being  cleansed  from 
every  idolatry  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  shall  see  God.  (J.  C.  Hare,  MA.) 
Pollution: — 1.  Ritualism  is  the  natural  religion  of  the  unsanctified  heart,  and  the 
Bame  tendencies  to  it  that  have  created  popery  in  the  New  Testament  ages,  existed 
also  in  the  Old  (vers.  11-13).  2.  Pollution  is  much  more  readily  given  and  taken 
than  purity.  One  drop  of  filth  will  defile  a  vase  of  water,  many  drops  of  water 
will  not  purify  a  vase  of  filth.  "  Evil  communications  corrupt  good  maimers  " 
(vers.  11-13).  3.  No  tithings  of  mint,  anise,  and  cummin,  will  compensate  for 
neglecting  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law.  Obedience  is  better  than  sacrifice. 
A  pure  hand  is  necessary  to  a  pure  offering  (ver.  14).  4.  Men  are  prone  to  assign 
any  other  cause  for  their  sufferings  than  their  sins,  yet  this  is  usually  the  true 
cause  (ver.  15).  5.  Disappointment  of  our  hopes  on  earth  should  make  us  lift 
our  eyes  to  heaven  to  learn  the  reason  (ver.  16).  6.  Affliction  will  harden  the 
heart  if  it  is  not  referred  to  God  as  the  author  (ver.  17).  7.  Pondering  the  past 
is  often  the  best  way  of  providing  for  the  future  (ver.  18).  8.  We  may  and  ought 
to  trust  God's  promise  to  bless  us,  even  though  we  may  see  no  visible  appearance 
of  its  fulfilment.  "  The  vision  will  surely  come  and  not  tarry "  (ver.  19). 
T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  So  is  every  work  of  their  hands,  and  that  which  they  offer  there  is  unclean. 
— Works  and  pure  hearts  : — They  who  have  imbibed  the  true  fear  of  God,  do  rightly 
serve  Him  though  they  may  bring  only  a  crumb  of  incense,  and  that  others  only 
profane  the  worship  of  God,  though  they  bring  many  oxen  ;  as  a  heathen  poet 
says,  "  An  impious  right  hand  does  not  rightly  worship  the  celestials."  The 
philosophers  ever  hold  this  principle — that  no  sacrifice  is  rightly  offered  to  God 
except  the  mind  be  right  and  pure.  But  yet  the  philosophers,  as  well  as  the 
poets,  adopted  this  false  notion,  by  which  Satan  beguiled  all  men,  that  God 
is  pacified  by  ceremonies  :  hence  have  proceeded  so  many  expiations,  in  which 
foolish  men  trusted,  and  by  which  they  thought  that  God  would  be  propitious 
to  them,  though  they  obstinately  continued  daily  to  procure  for  themselves  new 
punishments,  and,  as  it  were,  avowedly  to  carry  on  war  with  God  Himself.  The 
prophet  says  that  men  not  only  lose  all  their  labour,  but  also  contract  new  pollu- 
tion, when  they  seek  to  pacify  God  by  their  sacrifices,  unaccompanied  by  inward 
purity.  Works,  however  splendid  they  may  appear  before  our  eyes,  are  of  no 
value  or  importance  before  God,  except  they  flow  from  a  pure  heart.  The  fountain 
of  works  I  consider  to  be  integrity  of  heart,  and  the  design  and  end  is,  when  the 
object  of  men  is  to  obey  God,  and  to  consecrate  their  life  to  Him.      {John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  15.  Consider  .  .  .  from  before  a  stone  was  laid  upon  a  stone  in  the  temple 
of  the  Lord. — The  house  of  God  : — 1.  These  places  of  worship  are  strongholds  of 
the  religious  principle  of  the  community.  The  only  thing  in  the  form  of  religious 
sentiment  which  can  do  any  good  to  the  soul  is  that  which  recognises  God,  not  as  a 
mere  existence,  or  mere  abstraction,  but  as  the  author  of  life  and  blessing  to  all 
that  live.  This  religous  sentiment  may  become  a  religious  principle.  The  religious 
sentiment,  then,  embracing  the  idea  of  obligation,  is  that  which  the  service  of 
this  house  is  meant  to  inspire  and  cherish.  What  sort  of  an  obligation  must 
it  be  ?  If  there  is  a  God,  He  is  a  living  person,  standing  in  a  certain  relation  to 
us,  and  having  certain  claims  which  must  be  answered.  It  is  an  obligation  to 
lead  res{X!ctable  and  decent  Uves.  But  is  that  high  enough  to  reach  up  to  God  ? 
The  religious  sentiment  cannot  be  rightly  felt  except  in  the  Christian  way — 
by  looking  up  to  God  as  our  Father  with  childlike  confidence,  united  with  awful 
veneration.  When  a  man  feels  bound  to  form  himself  for  holiness  and  heaven, 
then  the  religious  spirit  is  intimately  connected  with  the  sweet  influences  of  the 
house  of  God.  2.  The  object  of  the  service  of  this  house  is  to  keep  before  the 
eyes  of  men  a  standard  of  character  higher  than  they  meet  with  in  common  business 
and  care.  Every  one  who  cares  to  cherish  the  religious  sentiment  in  himself 
loves  the  service  of  the  house  of  God.  Our  great  care  should  be  that  our  "  house 
for  God  "  answers  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  set  apart, — that  of  awakening 


CHAP,  n.]  BAOOAI.  69 

and  confirming  religious  principle  in  those  who  worship  within  its  walls.  Without 
this,  the  building  will  cumber  the  ground  ;  with  it,  it  will  become  in  very  deed 
the  house  of  God,  and  the  gate  of  heaven.     {W.  B.  0.  Peabody,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  I  smote  yon  with  blasting,  and  with  mildew,  and  with  hail,  In 
all  the  labours  of  your  hands.  —  Blasting  and  mildew : — Very  useful  and 
important  are  the  fungi  in  the  world's  busy  household.  They  are  working  at 
"  chemical  problems  which  have  puzzled  a  Liebig  and  a  Lavoisier,"  converting 
the  noxious  products  of  corruption  into  comely  forms  and  nutritious  substances, 
absorbing  into  living  tissues  effete  matters  which  are  fast  hastening  downwards 
to  join  the  dark  night  of  chaos  and  death.  Parasites,  most  of  them,  upon  dead 
plants,  they  economise  the  gases  which  wo\ild  otherwise  escape  into  the  atmos- 
phere and  pollute  it ;  and  conserve,  for  the  use  of  nobler  forms,  the  subtle  forces 
of  life  which  would  otherwise  pass  unprofitable  into  the  mineral  kingdom.  It 
is  one  of  the  strangest  things  in  the  world,  when  we  seriously  think  of  it,  to 
see  a  vigorous  life-full  cluster  of  fungi  springing,  phoenix-like,  from  a  dead  tree, 
exhausted  of  all  its  juices,  bleached  by  the  sun  and  rain  of  many  summers,  and 
ready  to  crumble  into  dust  at  the  slightest  touch.  Death  is  here  a  new  birth, 
and  the  grave  a  cradle.  It  is  one  of  nature's  many  analogies  of  the  human  resur- 
rection. But  the  resemblance  is  superficial  and  incomplete.  Wisely  have  the 
fungi  been  provided,  in  the  rapidity  of  their  growth,  the  simplicity  of  their 
structure,  the  variety  of  their  forms,  and  their  amazing  numbers,  for  their 
appointed  task  in  the  economy  of  nature.  Not  a  leaf  that  falls  from  the  bough, 
not  a  blade  that  withers  on  the  lea,  but  is  seized  by  the  tiny  fangs  of  some  special 
fungus  ordained  to  prey  upon  it ;  not  a  spot  of  earth  can  we  examine,  where 
vegetable  life  is  capable  of  growing,  but  we  shall  find  a  vegetable  as  well  as  an 
insect  parasite,  keeping  its  growth  in  check,  hastening  its  decay,  and  preserving 
its  remains  from  being  wasted.  And  out  of  the  eater,  too,  cometh  forth  meat. 
In  carrying  out  the  wise  and  gracious  purposes  for  which  they  have  been  designed, 
the  fungi  not  unfrequently  overstep  the  limits  of  usefulness,  and  commit  wholesale 
destruction.  They  purify  man's  atmosphere,  but  they  also  destroy  man's  food. 
If  their  ravages  could  be  confined  to  useless  plants  ;  if  they  were  employed  solely 
in  reducing  weeds  to  decay,  they  would  be  welcomed  by  man  as  among  his  greatest 
helps  and  blessings.  But  nature  knows  no  straight,  arbitrary  line  of  demarcation, 
such  as  we  draw,  between  what  is  useless  and  what  is  useful.  To  every  natural 
good  there  is  a  recoil  of  evil.  The  fungi  are  indiscriminate  in  their  attacks.  They 
seize  upon  the  corn  which  strengthens  man's  heart,  as  readily  as  upon  the  thorns 
and  briars  which  cause  him  to  eat  his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow.  In  this 
our  fallen  condition,  we  must  always  count  upon  the  blasting  and  the  mildew ; 
upon  the  years  to  be  eaten  by  the  locust,  the  canker-worm,  the  caterpillar,  and 
the  palmer-worm,  as  surely  as  upon  the  covenant  faithfulness  of  Him  who 
promised  that  seed-time  and  harvest  would  never  cease.  Nature  with  reference 
to  nature  completely  accomplishes  her  purposes ;  but  nature  with  reference 
to  man  is  not  a  perfect  means  to  an  end.  Blasting  and  mildew  were  very 
frequent  in  Bible  times  and  lands.  So  terrible  were  the  ravages  committed  by 
these  scourges,  so  sudden  their  appearance,  so  rapid  their  progress,  so  mysterious 
their  origin  and  cause,  that  they  were  universally  regarded  not  merely  as  a  visit- 
ation of  God,  but  as  a  special  product  of  God's  creative  power.  The  cause  and 
the  effect  were  confounded.  Fear  prevented  the  Israelites  from  investigating 
the  nature  of  the  phenomenon.  Modern  science  has  given  the  true  interpreta- 
tion of  the  riddle.  Blasting  and  mildew  are  conclusively  ascertained  to  be  pro- 
duced by  plants, — to  be  the  diseases  occasioned  by  the  growth  of  minute  fungi. 
Ever  since  plants  have  existed,  these  vegetable  parasites  have  preyed  upon  them. 
They  appear  in  greater  or  less  abundance  every  year.  They  are  fostered  into 
excessive  growth  by  certain  favourable  conditions  of  soil  and  climate,  and  checked 
in  their  development  by  certain  unfavourable  conditions.  They  are  the  common- 
place everyday  product  of  nature's  laws.  They  are  not  special  creations  o£ 
God,  but  the  ordinary  growths  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  The  miraculous 
element,  in  connection  with  God's  judgments,  was  their  extraordinary  develop- 
ment and  sudden  appearance  in  immediate  connection  with  Divine  threatenings. 
As  science  advances  superstition  retires,  and  the  phenomena  attributed  to  super- 
natural causes  are  found  to  have  been  produced  by  the  operation  of  physical 
law.  But  the  miracles  of  the  Bible  are  untouched  by  this  principle.  Science 
may  teach  us  the  economy  of  miracles,  but  it  cannot  persuade  us  of  their  unreality 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  impossibility.  A  brief  glance  at  the  nature  of  the  fungi  concerned  in  the 
production  of  blasting  and  mildew  may  be  interesting  and  instructive.  It  will 
teach  us  that  nothing  is  so  weak  and  small  that  the  strength  and  wisdom  of  God 
cannot  accomplish  great  ends  by  its  instrumentality.  There  are  four  diseases 
in  corn  produced  by  fungi — smut,  bunt,  rust,  and  mildew.  The  black  heads, 
covered  with  a  soot-like  dust,  noticeable  in  the  cornfields,  are  caused  by  a  para- 
sitic plant — a  true  fungus,  capable  of  reproducing  and  extending  itself  indefinitely. 
The  seed-vessels  of  this  plant  are  exceedingly  minute.  One  square  inch  of 
surface  contains  no  less  than  eight  millions ;  and  if  the  seed-vessels  be  so  small, 
what  must  the  seeds  themselves  be  ?  Bunt  is  even  more  destructive.  It  has 
an  intolerable  odour,  like  that  of  putrid  fish.  It  is  one  of  the  common  diseases 
to  which  wheat  is  subject.  It  confines  its  ravages  entirely  to  the  grain.  It  is 
rare  to  find  any  wheat-field  altogether  free  from  rust,  or  Red  Robin.  It  is  some- 
times so  abundant  that  a  person  passing  among  the  stalks  is  completely  painted 
with  its  rusty  powder.  It  is  found  upon  the  wheat- plant  at  all  stages  of  growth. 
The  term  mildew  is  vague  and  unsatisfactory.  Properly  it  should  be  applied 
to  a  disease  produced  by  a  fungus  known  to  botanists  as  Puccinia  gaminis.  It 
is  derived  from  the  Saxon  words,  Mehl-than,  meaning  "  meal-dew."  It  makes 
its  first  appearance  in  the  cornfields  in  May  or  June,  and  first  takes  possession 
of  the  lower  green  leaves,  which  become  sickly.  When  the  corn  is  nearly  or 
fxilly  ripe,  the  straw  and  the  culm  are  profusely  streaked  with  blackish  spots, 
ranging  in  length  from  a  minute  dot  to  an  inch.  These  evils  are  found  all  over 
the  world,  wherever  corn  is  grown.  All  these  blights  and  mildews  on  the  corn- 
crops  and  the  green  crops  may  well  be  called  by  God,  "  My  great  army."  Indi- 
vidually minute  and  insignificant,  by  the  sheer  force  of  untold  numbers  they  are 
mightier  for  harm  than  storms  and  earthquakes.  It  is  indeed  a  fortunate  circum- 
stance that  they  refuse  to  grow  generally  except  in  stagnant  ill-drained  places, 
and  under  peculiar  conditions  of  warmth  and  moisture  ;  for,  otherwise  if,  quick 
with  life  as  they  are,  they  were  to  germinate  wherever  they  alighted,  the  fig-tree 
would  not  blossom,  and  there  would  be  no  fruit  in  the  vines,  the  labour  of  the 
olives  would  fail,  and  the  fields  would  yield  no  meat.  (Hugh  Macmillan,  D.D.) 
Insensibility  under  material  evil : — This  insensibility,  which  prevents  people 
from  turning  to  the  Lord,  is  a  moral  evil,  and  ought  to  be  charged  on  the  guilty. 
1.  Instances  and  examples  of  this  insensibility  (Isa.  v.  24,  25,  ix.  17,  20,  21  ; 
Amos  iv.  6-11;  Jer.  v.  3;  Rev.  ix.  20,  21).  Human  nature  continues  always 
the  same.  Some  vices  have  a  local  and  temporary  prevalence.  Insensibility 
is  the  palsy  of  the  soul ;  a  stupor  that  with  respect  to  spiritual  things  seizeth 
all  its  faculties.  Hence  in  its  nature  it  is  both  immoral  and  penal ;  penal,  as 
a  judicial  stroke  on  the  minds  and  consciences  of  men  from  a  righteous  and 
provoked  God  ;  immoral,  as  a  course  of  opposition  to  His  Word  and  providence, 
comprehending  what  Scripture  means  by  stopping  the  ear,  shutting  the  eyes, 
hardening  the  neck,  pulling  away  the  shoulder,  walking  contrary  to  the  Lord, 
and  in  the  way  of  our  own  heart.  This  insensibility  is  a  reigning  principle  in 
natural  men.     Redemption  by  Christ  from   the   curse  of   the  law  secures  His 

f)eople  against  its  dominion,  and  yet  it  frequently  prevails  and  hurts  the  spiritual 
ife.  2.  Investigate  its  cause.  That  is  atheism,  which  may  be  either  gross  or 
refined.  Though  seldom  avowed,  gross  atheism  has  a  secretly  malignant  influence 
on  manners  in  the  middle  and  lower  ranks  of  society.  There  is  a  refined  atheism 
among  persons  who  profess  to  know  God,  and  in  works  deny  Him.  The  truths 
they  hold  are  not  operative  and  holy  principles.  3.  Charge  this  insensibility 
upon  the  guilty  as  a  moral  evil,  which  prevents  them  from  turning  to  the  Lord 
when  He  smites  them  with  material  evil.  ( 1 )  Those  charged  with  it  are  the  Lord's 
people.  (2)  The  charge  is  made  by  a  man  invested  with  the  authority  of  a 
prophet.  (3)  The  charge  is  made  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  (4)  He  in  whose 
name  the  charge  is  made  knew  it  to  be  just.  (5)  The  charge  was  delivered 
publicly,  in  the  hearing  and  presence  of  the  guilty.  (6)  The  charge  was  designed 
to  bring  former  misconduct  to  remembrance,  and  to  encourage  them  to  present 
duty.  Application — 1.  Sinners  are  destroyers  of  their  own  comfort.  2.  The 
course  of  nature  fulfiUeth  the  purpose  and  performeth  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 
3.  The  Lord  hath  kind  intentions  in  smiting  His  people.  4.  Sensible  and  material 
things  are  uncertain  property.  (A.  Shanks.)  Material  evil  the  scourge  of 
moral  evil : — There  are  no  dispensations  prosperous  or  adverse,  with  which  we 
are  favoured  or  chastised,  but  in  the  Word  of  God  everytliing  may  be  found 
that  is  necessary  to  assist  our  exercise  and  regulate  our  behaviour  under  them. 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  61 

When  people  refuse  to  hear,  they  are  sometimes  smitten  on  a  tender  part,  and 
constrained  to  feel.  1.  Deal  with  material  evil :  such  as  blasting,  mildew,  and 
hail.  2.  Deal  with  moral  evil.  This  must  be  sin.  Such  as — (I)  Love  to  the 
world.  (2)  Neglect  of  temple-building.  (3)  A  notion  that  material  powers  act 
of  themselves,  independent  of  God.  This  is  a  branch  of  atheism,  and  a  virtual 
denial  of  the  Divine  overruling  providence.  3.  Show  the  efficiency  of  God 
in  scourging  with  the  one  for  the  other.  (1)  The  Lord  hath  determined  to  smite 
and  afflict  with  these  evils.  (2)  The  Lord  createth  this  evil,  and  giveth  its  com- 
mission. Till  He  have  occasion  for  its  service,  it  doth  not  exist.  (3)  The  Lord 
hath  appointed  and  always  observeth  the  seasons  of  smiting.  The  scourge  is 
neither  taken  up  nor  laid  down  at  random.  (4)  Places  where  the  evil  is  collected 
and  inflicted  are  marked  out  by  the  justice  of  God.  (5)  A  portion  of  evil  is 
measured  out  and  allotted  for  each  body  of  the  executioners.  Consider — 1.  Moral 
evils  among  us  have  a  striking  resemblance  to  those  which  prevailed  among  the 
Israelites  in  the  days  of  Haggai.  2.  The  Lord  would  be  just  were  He  to  smite 
us,  as  He  smote  them.  We  have  given  Him  provocation.  Our  light  is  clearer, 
our  privileges  are  richer,  and  our  iniquities  exceed  theirs  in  number  and  aggrava- 
tion. Material  evil  is  still  at  the  Lord's  call,  and  ready  to  fulfil  His  Word. 
{Ibid. )  Temporal  chastisements : — The  scope  of  the  second  part  of  this 
sermon  is  to  show  that  however  God  will  put  difference  betwixt  workers,  and 
knoweth  who  are  sincere  and  who  are  not,  yet  to  encourage  them  to  be  diligent 
in  it,  as  being  a  work  which  He  approves  in  itself,  and  which  He  will  reward  with 
temporal  blessing,  and  a  change  of  His  former  dispensations.  1.  Though  the 
Lord's  dispensations  be  visible  and  felt  by  all,  yet  the  right  considering  and 
understanding  of  them  is  a  work  of  much  difficulty,  and  to  which  men  need  serious 
stirring  up,  especially  to  take  up  the  right  cause  of  them.  2.  Famine  and  scarcity 
is  one  of  the  public  scourges  whereby  the  Lord  chastises  the  sinful  contempt 
and  negligence  of  His  people  in  His  work  and  service ;  and  He  will  be  conspicuous 
in  inflicting  of  it.  3.  As  it  is  the  usual  plague  accompanying  common  judgments 
that  they  do  not  work  upon  the  hearts  of  men,  to  draw  them  nearer  God,  but 
rather  harden  them  ;  so  such  an  impenitent  disposition  when  God  strikes,  is  a 
ground  of  further  controversy ;  therefore  He  marks  by  the  way  their  stupidity. 
'  Yet  ye  turned  not  to  Me,  saith  the  Lord."  4.  However  temporal  things  are 
not  to  be  looked  on  as  the  chief  reward  of  serving  God,  nor  as  absolutely  promised, 
nor  yet  are  they  to  be  so  much  looked  to  under  the  Gospel,  as  the  Church  of  the 
Jews  might  under  their  pedagogy ;  yet  in  this  the  promise,  even  concerning 
these  things,  holds  good,  that  following  God  hath  the  promise  of  this  life,  in  so 
far  as  it  is  for  the  followers'  good  ;  that  God's  changing  adversity  into  prosperity 
when  a  people  set  about  His  work,  should  be  a  confirmation  to  their  faith,  and 
strengthen  their  hands  ;  that  whatever  adversity  come  on  the  Church,  it  is  not 
to  be  fathered  on  God's  work,  as  if  it  had  been  the  cause  of  her  woe  ;  that  as 
neglecters  of  God's  work  are  real  losers  in  their  own  affairs,  and  will  prove  so 
in  the  end,  so  followers  of  His  work  have  a  real  advantage  in  it ;  and,  in  a  word, 
that  God's  work  is  never  followed  without  a  blessing  evidenced  some  way  or 
other  to  the  godly's  satisfaction.  5.  It  is  a  profitable  study  to  remark  the  advant- 
ages of  following  God,  and  to  study  encouragement  in  that  duty.  So  much 
are  we  taught  by  the  Lord's  exciting  them  to  consider  the  change  of  His  dealing, 
as  trysting  with  the  very  day  of  their  amending  their  fault.  6.  God  is  so 
sovereign  and  absolute  a  Lord  of  all  things,  and  hath  times  and  seasons,  blessings 
and  cursings  so  in  His  hands,  as  He  may  undertake  to  do  things,  whereof  there 
is  no  visible  probability  or  certainty  in  the  second  causes,  and  can  certainly 
perform  them  :  therefore  doth  He  undertake  to  bless  them,  when  second  causes 
and  the  season  could  speak  no  such  thing.  7.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  God  only 
to  know  future  contingent  events,  which  depend  on  times  and  seasons,  and 
uncertain  second  causes,  and  their  influences,  but  only  by  immediate  revelation ; 
this  is  held  forth  as  God's  prerogative,  by  His  extraordinary  prophet,  to  foretell 
in  the  midst  of  winter,  what  the  succeeding  harvest  shoiild  produce.  {Oeorge 
Hutcheson. ) 

Ver.  19.  From  this  day  will  I  bless  yoiL — The  birthday  of  blessing  : — The  cause 
of  much  ill  success  in  life  is  often  to  be  found  in  the  want  of  zeal  for  God's  house. 
The  temple  was  a  type  of  that  Church  of  which  every  individual  believer  is  a 
living  stone.  From  the  day  when  the  foundation  of  that  temple  is  laid,  the 
promise  of  the  text  is  ours.     When  is  the  foundation  day  from  which  the  blessing 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

dates  ?  In  one  sense  it  is  from  everlasting,  for  God's  people  are,  in  purpose, 
part  of  the  building  from  before  all  time.  But  the  day  of  conversion  is  the  day 
on  which  is  laid — as  far  as  our  experience  is  concerned — the  foundation  of  our 
salvation.  I.  A  specified  day.  This  blessed  day  goes  by  different  names  in 
Scripture.  A  day  of  espousals  :  the  day  in  which  Jesus,  our  heavenly  Bridegroom, 
wins  the  heart  of  His  bride.  A  day  of  power.  It  is  a  mighty  act  to  convert  a 
einner,  infinitely  beyond  the  power  of  man,  and  glorifying  even  to  the  omnipotence 
of  God.  The  "day  of  salvation."  This  name  describes  itself.  1.  This  day 
often  has  a  cloudy  dawning.  The  day  of  grace  begins  before  there  is  actual  light. 
Just  before  the  light  breaks  in,  the  power  of  darkness  makes  its  most  desperate 
resistance.  2.  The  day  has  often  a  secret  dawning.  There  are  those  who  cannot 
Bay  exactly  when  or  how  they  were  converted.  Foolishly  they  fear  they  can 
never  have  been  converted  at  all,  as  they  are  unable  to  say  it  was  then,  and  it 
was  there.  3.  Sometimes  this  day  has  an  early,  and  sometimes  a  long-delayed 
dawn.  God  has  no  fixed  age  at  which  to  convert.  4.  This  day,  like  all  others, 
has  a  silent  dawn.  It  is  seen,  but  not  heard.  5.  The  dawning  of  this  day,  like 
the  dawning  of  all  other  days,  is  irresistible.  If  it  is  the  work  of  God,  it  must 
stand.  6.  The  dawn  is  but  the  commencement  of  the  day.  The  morning  is  the 
noon  in  childhood  ;  the  noon  is  but  the  dawn  fully  developed.  II.  A  declared 
BLESSING.  It  includes  all  spiritual  blessings  ;  pardon,  peace,  &c.  It  rests  on 
all  our  temporal  affairs.  It  extends  to  all  future  things.  (Archibald  O.  Brown.) 
Promises  to  bless  encouragements  to  uorh  : — 1.  Concerning  the  great  Promiser, 
the  following  considerations  are  interesting.  ( 1 )  He  is  Jehovah.  (2)  The  Promiser 
is  the  God  of  the  people  to  whom  the  promises  are  made.  (3)  The  Promiser  is 
strong  and  faithful  round  about.  (4)  The  Promiser  is  Lord  of  elements  and 
seasons.  2.  Concerning  the  good  things  which  the  Lord  our  God  promises. 
Comprehended  in  the  term,  "  bless."  Includes — (1)  The  removal  of  material  evils. 
(2)  Means  of  fertility  and  plenty.  (3)  A  blessing  with  the  means.  (4)  A  blessing 
upon  the  possession  and  use  of  those  good  things  which  the  Lord  produces  by 
the  means.  3.  The  people  whom  the  Lord  promiseth  to  bless.  (1)  They  were 
His  own  people.  (2)  A  people  for  whom  the  Promiser  had  lately  done  great 
things.  (3)  A  people  who  had  been  negligent  and  slothful  in  the  work  which 
the  authority  of  the  Promiser  required,  and  gratitude  to  their  Redeemer  bound 
them  to  perform.  (4)  A  people  whose  negligence  had  been  chastised.  (5)  A 
people  who  were  now  learning  to  do  well.  4.  The  day  on  which  the  Lord  promiseth 
to  bless  His  people.  (1)  A  specified  day.  (2)  The  day  on  which  they  turned 
to  the  Lord,  and  began  to  build.  (3)  The  day  on  which  the  promise  began  to  be 
performed.  Learn — 1.  For  the  good  things  of  this  life  the  people  of  God  have 
His  covenant  and  promises.  2.  Operations  of  material  power  are  operations 
of  God.  3.  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  done  great  things  for  the  house 
of  His  name.  4.  Building  the  house  of  the  Lord  is  connected  with  blessing. 
(A.  Shanks.)  The  benediction  of  Haggai  : — These  are  the  words  of  Haggai, 
whom  the  Lord  raised  up  in  his  old  age  for  the  purpose  of  calling  His  people 
from  the  sin  of  religious  indifference  to  the  earnest  performance  of  duty.  As 
God's  prophet,  it  was  his  duty  to  expostulate,  to  trace  the  connection  between 
sinful  neglect  and  its  effects,  to  picture  in  dark  but  true  colours  the  woes  of  the 
people,  but  also  to  pronounce  the  promise  of  benediction  and  peace.     I.  The 

PROMISE  asserts  THAT  IN  GOD  AND  FROM  GOD  IS  THE  BLESSEDNESS  OF  HiS  PEOPLE. 

\.  There  is  nothing  we  can  satisfactorily  substitute  for  the  blessing  of  God. 
2.  If  we  have  it  we  need  fear  no  evil  from  any  other  source.     II.  The  promise 

DIRECTLY  REFERS  TO  TEMPORAL  BLESSING,  BUT  INCLUDES  SPIRITUAL.       The  picture 

presented  is  descriptive  of  the  people's  estate.  We  ought  to  connect  the  goodness 
and  love  of  God  with  all  the  material  blessedness  of  life,  as  well  as  with  the  higher 
spiritual  side  of  it.  There  is  no  department  of  life  from  which  God  need  be  shut 
out.  But  the  promise  certainly  includes  the  higher  blessings  belonging  to  spiritual 
life  and  development.     III.  The  promise  is  given  as  the  result  of  obedience, 

THE  sincerity  OF  WHICH  PRACTICAL  PROOF   HAS    BEEN   SUPPLIED.       We  must  not 

try  to  drive  a  bargain  with  God.  The  service  our  Lord  wants  is  the  service  of 
faith  and  love.  Let  that  be  rendered  and  the  blessing  may  tarry,  but  come  it 
will,  and  just  because  it  has  tarried  it  may  be  all  the  richer  and  better.  IV.  Thk 
PROMISE  IS  FIXED  AND  CONTINUOUS.  "  From  this  day."  That  is  definite  enough. 
The  benediction  had  been  stored  up — now  it  was  to  fall  like  the  refreshing  rain 
over  all  the  land.  And  the  blessing  is  to  be  continuous.  To-day,  and  every 
succeeding  day,  I  will  bless  you.     The  promise  is  most  reliable.     From  the  words 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGGAI.  63 

of  the  promise  we  look  to  Him  who  made  it.  He  is  able  to  fulfil  it.  {Adam  Scott.) 
The  day  of  dedication  to  God  is  the  day  of  blessing  : — I.  The  promise — blessing. 
This  blessing  of  the  Lord  conveys  a  promise  that  He  would  not  only  withdraw 
the  evils  under  which  they  suffered,  and  send  fertility  and  plenty,  but  also  poiir 
down  on  them  the  Spirit  of  His  grace.  Esau  was  blessed  with  outward  prosperity. 
Jacob  had  the  full  blessing,  spiritual  and  temporal.  He  whom  God  blesses  is 
blessed  here  and  hereafter,  in  body  and  in  soul.  II.  The  time  of  it — "  from 
this  day  "  ;  that  is,  from  the  day  the  foundation  of  the  temple  was  laid.  On  this 
the  prophet  lays  great  stress.  Who  has  not  noticed  a  turn  of  providence  in 
favour  of  those  who  have  retm-ned  into  the  way  of  duty  ;  and  that,  from  that 
very  day,  God  has  blessed  them  ?  Indeed,  this  is  an  unchangeable  law  in  God'a 
government  of  the  world.  III.  The  reason  of  this  promise  of  the  Lord. 
It  seems  that  the  people  busied  themselves  with  their  own  temporal  affairs,  pur- 
posing to  build  the  temple  when  they  could  better  afford  it.  God  frustrated  their 
selfish  policy,  by  sending  blasting  and  mildew  in  their  fields,  and  causing  their 
money  to  waste  away  insensibly,  as  though  it  had  been  put  into  a  bag  with  holes. 
But  when  they  reversed  their  mode  of  proceeding,  from  that  very  day  God  blessed 
them.  God  ordinarily  proceeds  to  deal  with  men  as  they  deal  with  Him.  They 
who  freely  offer  to  Him  their  goods  to  carry  on  His  work  are  blessed  by  Him  with 
increase.  IV.  This  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  typical  of  the  Church  of 
Christ,  of  which  He  is  the  foundation  and  the  superstructure.  In  this 
spiritual  house  we  are  all  more  immediately  interested  than  in  the  building  of  the 
material  temple.  As  Christians,  we  are  all  members  of  this  spiritual  building. 
Are  we  building  on  Christ,  the  only  foundation  ?     {Alfred  Jones,  T.A.) 


Vers.  20-23.  And  I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  kingdoms. — The 
of  calamities  : — These  are  the  concluding  words  of  the  prophecies  of  Haggaf. 
The  Old  Testament  is  one  continual  declaration  and  showing  forth  of  this  truth, 
that  sin,  when  it  has  conceived,  brings  forth  death,  and  aU  the  family  of  death. 
On  the  contrary,  the  godly,  who  give  themselves  up  to  doing  the  Lord's  will, 
still  find  that  God  blesses  them, — with  peace ;  with  all  manner  of  spiritual 
graces  ;  with  the  light  of  His  countenance  ;  and,  may  be,  with  worldly  prosperity. 
Whenever  God  executes  judgment  it  must  be  against  evil.  Nothing  but  evil 
can  move  the  wrath  of  God.  Nor  does  God  ever  shake,  or  overthrow,  or  destroy 
anything,  except  by  reason  of  evil.  The  natural  man  imagines  a  God  who  cares 
not  about  the  life  or  death  of  His  creatures,  who  merely  creates  them  to  show 
forth  His  power  and  His  skill.  This  image  is  altogether  different  from  the  true 
God,  as  He  has  revealed  Himself  to  mankind  in  His  Word,  and  by  the  incarnation 
of  His  only-begotten  Son.  The  true  God  has  no  pleasure  in  the  ebb  and  flow 
of  life  and  death.  He  wills  life,  not  death.  The  only  thing  God  wills  to  destroy 
is  sin — not  the  sinner,  but  the  sin.  When  He  destroys  the  sinner,  it  is  solely 
for  the  sake  of  the  sin.  The  works  of  destruction  spoken  of  in  the  text  are  a 
part  of  that  warfare  which  God  is  continually  waging  against  sin  and  all  manner 
of  evil,  and  accordingly  agree  in  their  spirit  and  purpose  with  the  barrenness 
and  blasting  and  mildew  sent  upon  the  Israelites,  because  they  had  neglected 
their  appointed  work  of  building  the  house  of  the  Lord.  When  God  takes  in 
hand  a  work  of  destruction,  it  is  never  purely  and  entirely  a  work  of  destruction. 
Whenever  God  executes  judgment,  mercy  is  always  going  along  with  judgment. 
Were  not  this  God's  purpose.  He  would  be  giving  up  the  victory  to  the  spirit  of 
evil,  and  death  would  triumph  over  life.  This  then  is  the  end  and  purpose  of 
Haggai's  prophecy.  It  speaks  of  terrible  and  awful  things ;  but  it  ends  with 
words  of  comiort  and  peace.  It  says  that,  while  the  nations  around  Judea  were 
to  be  shaken  and  disturbed  by  wars  and  divers  disasters,  and  while  many  were 
to  perish,  Zerubbabel  would  establish  the  remnant  of  God's  people  in  the  land 
of  their  fathers ;  and  so,  we  know,  he  did.  The  coming  of  Zerubbabel,  which 
is  spoken  of  as  the  coming  of  the  desire  of  all  nations,  whereby  the  house  of  the 
Lord  was  to  be  filled  with  glory,  was  a  type  of  a  threefold  fulfilment,  one  of  which 
has  already  taken  place  once  for  all ;  one  of  which  has  been  continually  taking 
place  ever  since,  and  is  continually  taking  place  at  this  day ;  and  one  of  which 
will  take  place  hereafter :  and  all  these  fulfillments  are  accompanied  by  signs 
more  or  less  like  those  foretold  in  the  text,  as  ordained  to  attend  the  coming  of 
Zerubbabel.  Thus  the  coming  of  Zerubbabel  was  a  type  of  Christ's  coming  in  the 
flesh.  Zerubbabel  was  not  really  the  Desire  of  all  nations,  but  Christ  was.  Zerub- 
babel could  not  fill  God's  house  with  glory,  but  Christ  did  fill  it  with  an  infinite. 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,    n 

undying,  heavenly  glory.  .  .  .  Whenever  God  has  purposed  to  raise  His  Church 
to  a  higher  stage  of  power  and  glory,  the  world  has  been  shaken  by  the  new  life 
which  has  entered  and  taken  possession  of  it.  The  heart  of  the  Christian  will 
not  fail  when  he  sees  the  shaking  of  the  nations,  or  of  the  powers  of  heaven.  He 
will  not  be  troubled  or  disquieted  by  fears,  as  though  evil  were  about  to  gain 
victory  over  good.  Our  Lord's  promise  is,  that,  from  amid  the  clouds  and  the 
storm,  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  forth  with  power  and  great  glory. 
(J.  G.  Hare,  M.A.)        Terrible  revolutions  : — These  verses  remind  us — I.  That 

the    BEVOLUTIONS     AMONGST    MANKIND     ARE     SOMETIMES     VERY    TERRIBLE.       Here 

we  read  of  the  "  shaking  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,"  the  "  crash  of  thrones," 
the  "  destruction  of  kingdoms,"  the  "  overthrow  of  chariots,"  &c.     What  the 
particular  revolutions  referred  to  here  are,  cannot  be  determined.     Such  revolu- 
tions imply  the  existence  and  prevalence  of  two  antagonistic  moral  principles  in 
the  world — good  and  evil.     These  are  the  Titanic  chieftains  in  all  the  battles, 
the  elemental  forces  in  all  the  convulsions  of  the  world.     It  is  truth  against  error, 
right  against  wrong,  liberty  against  thraldom,  virtue  against  vice.      II.   That 
God  has  to  do  even  with  the  most  terrible  of  these  revolutions.     "  I 
will  shake  the  heavens,  I  will  overthrow  the  throne,"  &c.      "  I   will   destroy 
the  strength,"  &c.      Inasmuch   (1)   As  God  is  eternally  against  the  false  and 
the  wrong  and  the  tyrannic.  He  may  be  said  to  be  Author  of  these  revolutions. 
Inasmuch  (2)  As  He  can  prevent  them,  He  may  be  said  to  be  the  Author  of  these 
revolutions.     He  does  not  originate  them,   but  He  permits   them.     He  could 
annihilate  all  wicked  doers  by  a  volition,  He  allows  them  to  fight  themselves 
often  to  death  in  battling  against  the  right  and  the  true.     "  The  Lord  sitteth 
upon  the  flood."     He  sits  in  serene  majesty,  controlling  all  the  fury  of  the  battling 
forces.     He  "  holds  the  winds  in  His  fist."     III.  That  the  good  man  is  safe  in 
THE  most  tremendous  REVOLUTIONS  OF  TIME.     "  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  will  I  take  thee,  0  Zerubbabel,  My  servant,  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  saith 
the  Lord,  and  will  make  thee  as  a  signet :  for  I  have  chosen  thee,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts."     What  is  here  said  of  Zerubbabel  suggests  three  thoughts.     (1)  That 
good  men  sustain  the  highest  office.     Zerubbabel  was  not  only  a  servant,  but  a 
chosen  servant."     He  was  selected  for  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  temple.     It 
suggests  (2)  That  good  men  will  receive  the  highest  distinction.     "  I  will  make 
thee  as  a  signet."     A  signet  indicates,  (a)  Worth.     It  was  a  ring  with  a  seal  on 
it,  worn  on  the  finger,  as  an  ornament  of  great  value.     Good  men  are  elsewhere 
represented  as  God's  jewels.     A  signet  indicates,  [h)  Authority.     The  signet  of 
an  Eastern  monarch  was  a  sign  of  delegated  authority.     A  good  man  is  invested 
with  the  highest  authority — the  authority  to  fight  against  wrong  and  to  promote 
right,  at  all  times  and  in  every  place.     It  suggests  (3)  That  good  men  will  always 
be  safely  kept.     Jehovah  says  this  to  Zerubbabel.     Amidst  all  evil,   "  God   is 
my  refuge  and  strength,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble."     (Homilist.)        The 
safety  of  God's  people  amidst  the  coming  commotions  : — L  Great  political  convulsions 
may  be  expected  in  the  future,  as  well  as  in  the  past,  because  the  same  reason 
exists  for  them  ;  the  ungodly  nature  of  existing  political  forms  (ver.  21).     2.  Wars, 
revolutions,  and  tumults  of  nations  are  all  working  out  God's  designs  of  mercy 
to  the  world,  by  means  of  His  Church  (ver.  22).     3.  Amidst  all  the  convulsions 
of  human  history,  the  people  of  God  are  safe,  the  gates  of  hell  can  never  prevail 
against  the  Church.     The  past  in  this  respect  is  prophet  of  the  future  (ver.  23). 
4.  The  best  protection  for  any  nation,  the  surest  guarantee  for  its  political  exist- 
ence, is  a  living,  working  Church  in  its  midst,  for  as  long  as  the  stream  of  national 
life  carries  the  vessel  in  which  Christ  is  carried,  that  stream  shall  flow  on  in  safety. 
Sodom  shall  stand  as  long  as  a  righteous  Lot  is  found  in  it  (ver.  23).     The  general 
drift  of  this  prophecy  by  Haggai  may  now  be  perceived.     His  specific  work  was 
to  urge  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.     This  work  was  important,  because  the 
temple  was  the  seat  of  the  theocracy,  and  the  theocracy  was  the  existing  form 
of  the  great  work  of  redemption.     To  erect  that,  and  thus  prepare  for  the  re- 
inauguration  of  the  temple-worship,  was  the  great  work  of  the  restoration.     To 
urge  them  to  this  work,  the  prophet  tears  away  their  subterfuges  and  excuses ; 
shows  them  how  they  had  already  suffered  by  its  neglect ;  develops  to  them 
the  real  greatness  of  the  work,  in  spite  of  its  outward  littleness,  as  a  necessary 
link  in  the  great  purposes  of  redemption  ;  and  guarantees  the  safety  of  the  theo- 
cratic people  amidst  all  the  convulsions  that  were  to  come  on  the  earth.     All 
these  predictions  have  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter,  proving  that  Haggai  was  what 
he  claimed  to  be,  a  true  prophet  of  Jehovah.     (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  n.]  HAGOAI.  65 

Ver.  23.  Will  make  thee  a  signet:  for  I  have  chosen  thee. — God's  accept- 
ance of  Zerubbabel  : — This  text  acquaints  us  with  God's  gracious  purpose  to 
magnify  Zerubbabel,  and  to  put  honour  upon  him.  Consider  it  in  a  three- 
fold notion.  I.  As  a  prophecy.  Directed  to  Zerubbabel,  acquainting  him 
with  the  future  events  in  the  world,  and  what  shall  betide  him,  and  his  people 
under  him.  It  is  the  privilege  of  His  Church,  and  chosen  ones ;  they  have  those 
arcana  imperii  made  known  unto  them.  It  is  His  care  for  them  to  settle,  and 
support  them  against  future  events.  II.  As  a  promise.  It  betokens  good  to 
him.  It  is  a  reward  assured  to  Zerubbabel  for  what  he  had  done.  He  had  been 
zealous  for  his  God,  for  His  temple  and  worship ;  a  promise  of  his  future  advance- 
ment. In  a  mystical  sense  the  text  is  understood  of  Christ.  The  text  is  a  Royal 
Charter  made  to  Zerubbabel.  Here  is  the  time  set ;  "  in  that  day."  The  person 
to  be  advanced;  "Zerubbabel,  My  servant."  The  author  of  the  advancement; 
that  is  God.  The  advancement  itself  ;  "  I  will  make  thee  a  signet."  The  ground 
and  reason ;  "  for  I  have  chosen  thee."  The  ratification  of  this  promise ;  it  is 
sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  living  God.  Apply  this  text  to  ourselves.  I.  It 
is  our  comfort  that  we  may  do  so,  that  we  stand  in  such  terms  with  God,  that  the 
promises  to  His  ancient  people  may,  with  good  warrant,  be  applied  and  transferred 
to  us.  2.  Is  it  not  a  blessing  and  comfort  that  we  have  a  Zerubbabel  to  be  prince 
and  captain  of  this  people  of  God  ?  (By  Zerubbabel  the  preacher  here  refers 
to  Charles  I.)    (Geo.  Stradiing,  a.T.P.) 


INTKODUCTION  TO   ZECHAEIAH. 

Wb  must  think  of  the  prophet  Zechariah  as  living  and  preaching  among  surround- 
ings the  same  as  those  with  which  Haggai,  his  companion  in  responsibiUty  and 
tribulation  and  honour,  was  familiar.  The  captivity  in  Babylon  had  come  to  an 
end.  The  mighty  empire,  which  for  seventy  years  had  enslaved  God's  people,  had 
fallen  before  Cjnrus.  The  king  had  authorised  and  invited  the  Hebrew  exiles  to 
return  to  Jerusalem  and  rebuild  the  house  of  the  Lord.  But  yet  the  sanctuary 
was  unbuilt ;  no  place  of  habitation  had  been  found  for  the  God  of  Jacob.  An 
unworthy  timidity,  and  a  sad  failiure  of  trustfulness,  and  an  overweening  regard 
for  self  combined  to  promote  this  lamentable  result.  It  was,  then,  fully  fifteen 
years  after  the  band  of  exiles  had  arrived  in  Jerusalem  that  Haggai  and  Zechariah 
were  raised  up  to  kindle  within  their  countrymen  a  worthier  spirit.  Side  by  side 
these  two  servants  of  the  King  stood,  strengthening  each  other's  hands  in  God ; 
side  by  side,  until  the  slumberous  eyes  had  been  opened,  and  the  forgetful  hearts 
led  back  to  the  path  of  duty,  and  the  Temple  raised  out  of  its  ruins.  Then  Haggai 
laid  down  the  burden  of  the  prophet,  and  was  gathered  to  his  fathers ;  and 
Zechariah  bore  witness  for  God  alone.  I.  What  we  know  of  Zechariah  himself 
may  be  rapidly  told.  He  was  priest  as  well  as  prophet.  His  grandfather's  name 
and  his  own  are  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Nehemiah  (Neh.  xii.  16),  in  the 
catalogue  given  there  of  the  members  of  the  priestly  class.  He  was  the  head  of 
one  of  the  famihes  that  ministered  about  God's  altar,  no  less  than  a  preacher  of 
the  Lord.  He  united  the  two  offices  just  as  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  had  done  in 
former  days.  The  patriotic  zeal  of  the  prophet  for  the  honour  of  his  country  and 
the  glory  of  God  was  Unked  in  Zechariah  with  that  tender  affection  which  every 
true  priest  must  have  felt  for  the  shrine  in  which  it  was  his  blessedness  to  be  a 
servant.  Sprung  from  ancestors  who  for  centuries  had  gone  in  and  out  of  the 
sacred  courts,  he  would  have  been  strangely  unmindful  of  the  best  traditions  of 
his  family  if  he  had  not  been  very  jealous  for  the  worship  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel. 
God  had  called  him  to  a  task  which  a  pious  priest  could  not  but  welcome,  and  to 
which  he  could  only  surrender  himself  with  enthusiasm.  He  was  quite  a  young 
man  when  he  stood  up  first  to  deliver  the  Divine  message.  He  tells  us  that  he 
was  the  son  of  Berechiah  and  the  grandson  of  Iddo.  The  Book  of  Ezra,  in  its 
account  of  the  matter,  makes  no  mention  of  the  father,  and  speaks,  indeed,  as  if 
the  prophet  were  sprung  immediately  from  Iddo  (Ezra  v.  1,  vi.  14).  Probably 
Berechiah  died  at  an  early  age,  before  he  had  time  to  make  for  himself  a  name 
with  strangers  like  Ezra,  though  his  memory  could  not  but  be  cherished  and  per- 
petuated by  his  own  son.  It  was  in  the  care  of  his  grandfather  that  Zechariah 
returned  to  Jerusalem  from  his  alien  home  by  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates.  He 
could  not  be  more  than  a  mere  child  when  the  great  deliverance  took  place.  For, 
years  after,  when  he  became  God's  ambassador,  he  was  still  too  young  to  exercise 
the  priestly  functions.  Nehemiah  informs  us  that  he  did  not  rank  among  "  the 
chief  of  the  fathers  "  during  all  the  days  of  the  high-priest  Joshua  ;  not,  indeed, 
until  Joiakim,  Joshua's  son  and  successor,  was  put  in  charge  of  the  worship  of 

iii 


JNTBODUCTION  TO  ZECHARIAH. 


Jehovah ;  then  only  Zechariah  was  enrolled  among  those  who  made  sacrifice  and 
intercession  for  the  people.  He  was  a  prophet  before  he  was  a  priest.  If  Haggai 
were  an  old  man  before  his  ministry  commenced,  Zechariah's  was  begun  in  the 
days  of  his  youth  ;  God  has  room  and  work  in  His  kingdom  alike  for  the  veteran 
and  for  the  child.  And  nothing  is  pleasanter  than  to  see,  as  in  this  instance,  the 
old  and  the  young  taking  part  together  in  duties  that  are  holy  and  heavenly.  And 
sometimes  the  young  are  inclined  to  disparage  the  work  of  their  elders  ;  they  are 
too  self-confident ;  they  imagine  that  there  are  no  thoughts  so  large  as  their  own, 
and  no  arms  so  strong,  and  no  hearts  so  fervent.  It  is  better  when  the  two  join 
hands  frankly,  as  Haggai  and  Zechariah  did,  and  Peter  and  Mark,  and  Paul  and 
Timothy ;  and  recognise  cordially  and  ungrudgingly  that  each  has  his  own  place. 
Probably  many  years  lay  between  Zechariah's  first  exercise  of  the  prophetical 
office  and  his  last.  The  chapters  that  close  his  book  are  very  ditTerent  both  in 
manner  and  in  matter  from  those  with  which  it  opens— so  different  that  many 
have  concluded  that  they  could  not  have  been  penned  by  him  at  all.  But  it  may 
make  the  difference  easier  of  compreliension  if  we  suppose  these  later  chapters 
to  belong  to  Zechariah's  age  while  the  others  are  the  utterance  of  his  youth.  A 
man  speaks  in  his  maturity  in  phrases  and  tones  which  he  did  not  employ  when 
he  was  younger  ;  he  has  passed  into  another  atmosphere.  Such  was  Zechariah, 
who  testified  for  God  in  a  time  of  declension  and  darkness.  It  was  a  difficult 
work.  But  I  can  well  believe  that,  when  the  prophet's  heart  grew  weary  and 
doubtful,  he  would  encovurage  himself  by  the  strong  consolations  proclaimed  in 
the  very  name  he  bore — a  name  which  many  a  Hebrew  father  gave  to  his  child. 
It  spoke  of  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord.  Zechariah  means,  "  he  whom  Jehovah 
remembers."  II.  Passing  to  look  at  the  contents  of  his  message,  we  find  that 
the  prophecy  divides  itself  into  three  parts,  the  fiirst  inclusive  of  the  six  opening 
chapters,  the  second  of  the  seventh  and  eighth,  the  third  embracing  the  remainder 
of  the  Book.  After  a  short  introduction,  in  which  the  author  calls  upon  his  country- 
men to  repent  of  their  indolence,  jind  selfishness  and  sin,  the  first  section  of  the 
prophecy  is  commenced.  It  is  a  striking  and  beautiful  section.  It  describes 
the  history  of  one  very  remarkable  night,  that  which  lay  between  the  23rd  and 
24th  days  of  the  month  Sebat,  a  month  corresponding  with  our  February.  The 
year  was  the  same  as  that  in  which  Haggai  began  and  ended  his  brief  but  fruitful 
ministry — the  second  year  of  Darius  Hystaspis.  During  this  night,  while  Zechariah 
slept,  God  presented  to  his  gaze  one  strange  heaven-drawn  picture  after  another. 
Vision  succeeded  vision,  clear  and  vivid,  till  there  were  eight  of  them  in  all.  And 
when  the  last  had  gone  the  prophet  awoke,  comforted  in  his  own  heart,  and 
having  learned  much  regarding  the  destiny  of  the  nation  that  was  dear  to  him  ; 
it  had  been  the  most  blessed  night  he  had  ever  known.  The  second  part  of 
Zechariah's  prophecy — that  which  occupies  the  seventh  and  eighth  chapters- 
was  not  uttered  until  two  summers  and  winters  had  passed  away.  During  this 
interval  the  Jews  had  set  themselves  zealously  and  devotedly  to  the  restoring  of 
God's  neglected  house  ;  and  they  had  not  lacked  tokens  of  His  favour  and  grace. 
But  a  question  had  sometimes  been  discussed  among  them  which  tliey  were  anxious 
to  have  settled.  And  to  whom  could  they  go  with  more  propriety  or  with  greater 
likelihood  of  success,  some  of  them  thought,  than  to  the  prophet  in  whom  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  was,  and  who  had  already  been  inspired  to  address  to  them  such 
good  and  comfortable  words  ?  So,  in  December  of  the  year  518  B.C.,  a  deputation 
came  to  Zechariah  from  Bethel,  one  of  the  cities  to  which  the  captives  had  returned, 
to  propound  to  him  their  difficulty.  It  concerned  the  national  fast-days,  which 
they  had  kept  four  times  a-year  during  their  exile  in  Babylon — days  on  which 
they  had  wept  when  they  remembered  Zion,  captured  and  shamed  and  down- 
trodden. Should  they  still  observe  them  now  that  the  restoration  had  taken  place  ? 
Perhaps  God  did  not  mean  them  to  mourn  any  longer,  and  would  be  displeased 
if  they  did  not  manifest  gladness  because  of  the  great  things  He  had  done  for 
them.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  might  still  be  His  desire  that  the}-  should  humble 
themselves  and  sit  in  dust  and  ashes,  for  their  Church  and  nation  wore  feeble  and 
of  small  account.  Zechariah  answered  his  questioners  in  words  which  carry  us 
back  to  some  of  the  noblest  sentences  of  Isaiah  (Isa.  Iviii.),  and  forward  to 
some  of  the  searching  and  spiritual  utterances  of  Christ  (Matt.  vi.  16-18).  He 
told  them  that  God  preferred  obedience  to  fasting,  faith  and  holiness  to  sackcloth 
and  a  sad  countenance.  He  reminded  them  that  it  was  their  failure  to  fulfil  the 
weightier  precepts  of  His  law  which  had  lain  at  the  root  of  all  their  miseries.  He 
bade  them  pay  most  heed  to  judgment  and  righteousness  and  truth.     And,  to 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ZECHARIAH. 


nerve  them  for  duties  so  high  and  broad  and  deep,  he  drew  aside  the  veil  from  the 
future.  God,  he  said,  would  make  them  glad  according  to  the  d^ys  wherein  they 
had  seen  evil.  He  would  bless  Jerusalem  as  He  had  done  in  former  times.  Old 
men  and  women  would  move  quietly  along  its  streets,  or  would  sit  out  in  the  sun- 
shine, talking  of  the  many  strange  events  which  had  happened  since  they  were 
young,  and  none  would  alarm  or  disturb  them  ;  while  troops  of  happy  children, 
pla3dng  together  fearlessly  the  games  they  loved  so  well,  would  make  the  thorough- 
fares resound  with  their  irrepressible  mirth  and  gaiety.  And  where  would  be  the 
necessity  for  days  of  mourning  then  ?  Their  fasts  would  be  changed  into  feasts  ; 
their  "  winter  of  discontent "  made  glorious  summer.  That  was  the  reply  ; 
and  would  not  Sherezer  and  Regem-melech  and  the  rest  go  back  to  Bethel  with 
hearts  lightened  and  glad  ?  We  come  to  the  closing  section  of  the  Book.  It 
may  have  been  uttered,  as  I  have  hinted,  many  years  later,  when  the  active  work 
of  Zechariah's  life  was  almost  over,  and  when  at  length  it  was  ringing  to  evensong. 
No  detailed  analysis  of  these  six  chapters  can  be  given  here.  Let  it  be  said, 
however,  that  they  have  a  distinctly  Messianic  character.  They  speak  of  a  King 
who  was  to  come  to  Zion  in  future  days,  a  meek  and  lowly  King,  but  One  invested 
with  singular  majesty  too,  for  He  would  set  free  the  captives  of  Israel,  and  would 
overthrow  the  enemies  of  His  people.  Then  the  image  changes,  and  it  is  a 
Shepherd  to  whom  the  citizens  of  Jerusalem  are  pointed  forward.  But  they 
who  ought  to  be  the  sheep  of  His  pasture  deliberately  reject  Him,  and  heap  con- 
tumely upon  Him,  and  go  after  a  fooUsh  shepherd  who  cannot  profit  them.  It  is 
a  sad  picture  ;  and  the  prophet's  voice  grows  tremulous  and  indignant  as  he 
paints  it.  But,  before  he  ends  his  message  his  accents  are  happier  again.  He 
sees  Jerusalem  lifted  proudly  on  high  as  the  capital  of  the  land.  He  sees  Jehovah 
Himself  dwelling  in  her  as  her  Ruler  and  Prince.  He  sees  everywhere  a  noble 
purity  in  the  ascendant.  There  is  to  be  no  distinction  of  secular  and  sacred,  of 
clean  and  unclean  ;  for  all  things,  the  commonest  objects  of  life,  are  consecrated 
to  the  Lord.  When  the  priest  puts  the  collar  on  his  horse,  and  goes  to  his  day's 
work  or  his  day's  recreation,  he  will  be  as  truly  at  one  with  God  as  when  he  enters 
the  Holy  of  Holies  with  the  censer  in  his  hand  and  the  fair  mitre  on  his  head 
and  the  jewels  of  the  breastplate  glittering  in  the  sun.  Is  it  not  a  splendid  ideal  ? 
Would  that  it  were  nearer  its  realisation  even  now,  after  all  these  centuries  of  the 
Gospel  !  III.  I  have  said  that  the  concluding  chapters  of  the  Book  have  been 
made  the  subject  of  keen  discussion.  Many  opinions  have  been  expressed  regard- 
ing their  authorship ;  many  doubts  have  been  thrown  on  the  belief  that  Zechariah 
spoke  and  penned  them.  It  has  been  urged  that  they  are  altogether  different 
in  tone  and  contents  from  the  chapters  which  precede  them.  There  we  wero 
called  to  look  on  one  significant  vision  after  another  ;  here  there  are  no  visions, 
only  direct  predictions,  warnings  of  judgment,  promises  of  succour  and  salvation. 
There  the  unbuilt  Temple  was  always  present  to  our  thoughts  ;  here  the  Temple 
has  vanished  altogether  from  view.  There  everything  was  of  the  profoundest 
interest  and  importance  to  the  Jews  of  the  prophet's  day ;  here  it  is  difiBcult  to 
believe  that  these  Jews  could  be  moved  and  stirred  by  much  to  which  they  are 
bidden  listen — it  seems  to  deal  with  events  remote  from  their  time,  with  hostile 
nations  and  powers  that  had  been  formidable  to  their  fathers,  but  had  ceased  to 
vex  and  trouble  them.^  The  Book  of  Job  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  are  not 
less  divinely  precious  to  our  souls  because  we  cannot  be  sure  what  human  hand 
it  was  that  penned  them.  But  in  this  case  there  is  no  sufficient  cause  why  we 
should  alter  our  old  beliefs.  We  may  still  regard  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah  as 
a  unity.  Criticism  itself,  after  discovering  many  stumbling-blocks  and  throwang 
out  many  conjectures,  is  coming  back  to  that  conviction.^  If  the  preacher  were 
far  advanced  in  life  before  he  published  the  truths  contained  in  this  division  of 
the  Book,  there  would  be  no  need  for  him  to  refer  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  ; 
the  work  had  long  been  accomplished  ;  the  headstone  had  been  laid  years  ago, 
with  shoutings  of  "  Grace,  grace  unto  it."  And  as  for  the  references  to  nations, 
which  were  not  then  annoying  the  chosen  people,  or  able  to  annoy  them,  these 

^  With  Assjnria,  for  example,  and  with  Egypt. 

*  "  The  manifest  acquaintance  on  the  part  of  the  writer  of  Zech.  ix.-xiv.  with 
so  many  of  the  later  prophets  seemed  so  convincing  to  De  Wette  that,  after  having 
in  the  first  three  editions  of  his  Introduction  declared  for  two  authors,  he  found 
himself  compelled  to  change  his  mind,  and  to  admit  that  the  later  chapters  must 
belong  to  the  age  of  Zechariah." — Dr.  Smith,  Dictionary  of  the  Bible. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ZECHARIAH, 


too  can  be  explained  in  em  intelligible  and  satisfactory  way.*  Then  it  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  there  are  strong  arguments  which  tend  to  show  that  this 
section  could  scarcely  have  an  earlier  date.  It  is  filled  with  allusions  to  the  later 
writings  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  appears  to  have  come  from  a  man  who  was 
familiar  not  only  with  the  more  ancient  of  those  who  had  preceded  him  as  God's 
heralds  and  ministers,  but  with  one  like  Ezekiel,  who  had  been  a  contemporary 
of  the  Exile.  Altogether,  while  "  it  is  not  easy  to  say  which  way  the  weight  of 
evidence  preponderates,"  we  may  lawfully  continue  to  think  of  Zechariah  as  the 
author  from  beginning  to  end  of  the  prophecy  which  has  been  called  by  his  name. 
IV.  Only  a  few  words  can  be  added  about  the  lessons  of  the  Book  for  ourselves  ; 
indeed,  these  lessons  are  so  many  and  so  weighty  that  it  is  hard  to  select  among 
them.  1.  Let  the  first  part,  that  in  which  those  wonderful  visions  are  recorded, 
speak  to  us  of  the  blessedness  of  being  in  alliance  and  friendship  with  God,  the 
wretchedness  of  being  opposed  to  Him.  It  was  intended  to  comfort  the  feeble 
Jews,  and  to  tell  them  that  greater  was  He  who  was  for  them  than  all  who  were 
against  them.  Their  adversaries  were  both  crafty  and  powerful ;  but  they  must 
never  dream  that  the  way  of  the  ungodly  could  prosper,  or  envy  the  success  of 
the  wicked.  That  success  was  destined  to  be  shortlived.  2.  The  second  part 
of  the  prophecy,  that  in  which  Zechariah  answered  the  question  about  days  of 
fasting,  should  remind  us  of  the  nature  of  true  religion.  Seasons  of  solemn 
humiliation  and  of  solemn  festival  are  good  if  they  give  outward  expression  to 
the  penitence  and  the  joy  of  the  heart ;  they  are  bad  whenever  they  degenerate 
into  observances  of  routine  and  custom,  and  whenever  they  are  severed  from  a 
living  and  practical  piety.  Above  all  things  God  desires  us  to  be  in  earnest ; 
beyond  all  things  He  abhors  hypocrisy — the  show  and  semblance  of  religion 
sundered  from  its  reality.  3.  Finally,  let  us  fix  thought  and  affection  on  the 
Messiah  presented  to  our  view  in  the  closing  division  of  the  Book.  Let  us  mourn 
because  our  sins  have  pierced  God's  good  Shepherd — mourn  and  be  in  bitterness, 
as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and  as  one  is  in  bitterness  for  his  first-born. 
Let  us  ever  be  thankful  for  the  "  fountain  filled  with  blood,  drawn  from  Immanuel's 
veins,"  which  has  been  opened  to  wash  away  our  uncleanness.  And  let  us  see 
that  the  King,  who  rides  forth  in  lowly  majesty,  is  King  of  our  hearts  and  lives. 
Behold,  He  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks ;  let  us  hear  His  voice  and  open  to 
Him  ;  then  He  will  come  in,  and  sup  with  us,  and  we  with  Him.  {Original 
Secession  Magazine.) 

The  prophet  and  his  mission. — Zechariah  was  a  common  name  among  the 
Jews.  Of  the  personal  history  of  this  Zechariah  we  know  nothing.  There  la  . 
no  evidence  to  connect  him  with  the  man  mentioned  in  Matt,  xxiii.  35.  His 
family  seems  to  have  returned  from  Babylon  with  the  first  expedition  in  the 
reign  of  Cjtus.  He  was  very  young  at  the  time  of  his  return.  He  had  seen  the 
arresting  of  the  erection  of  the  Temple  by  the  successful  machinations  of  the 
Samaritans  in  the  Persian  Court,  and  the  depressed  tone  of  the  national  character 
during  the  time  that  followed  this  arrest.  He  had  witnessed  the  growth  of  that 
selfish  greed  for  their  own  individual  interests,  and  their  neglect  of  the  interests 
of  reUgion,  that  was  so  mournful  a  characteristic  of  this  period.  He  had  also 
seen  the  creeping  feebleness  with  which  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  Temple  was 
undertaken  and  prosecuted,  when  the  edict  of  permission  was  again  issued  by 
Darius  Hystaspis.  Now,  as  the  Temple  was  to  them  the  grand  symbol  of  revealed 
religion,  indifference  to  it  was  an  undoubted  symptom  of  backsliding  and  spiritual 
declension.  It  was  therefore  necessary  that  they  should  be  stirred  up  to  the 
discharge  of  their  duty  as  to  the  Temple,  and  awakened  to  a  proper  estimate  of 
that  great  plan  of  mercy  to  the  world,  of  which  the  Temple  and  the  theocracy 
were  but  symbols,  in  order  that  their  zeal  might  have  at  once  a  right  motive  and 
a  right  direction.  Hence  Haggai  was  first  raised  up  to  rouse  them  to  activity 
in  building  the  Temjile,  and  two  months  later  Zechariah  followed,  to  take  up  the 
same  theme,  and  unfold  it  yet  more  richly  to  the  minds  of  the  people,  by  connecting 

1  "  Although  Assyria  was  now  merely  a  part  of  the  Persian  Empire,  it  was  yet 
that  part  of  it  which  had  the  most  important  connection  with  Judah.  And  as 
regards  Egypt,  not  only  had  captive  Jews  been  deported  into  Egypt,  but  the 
relation  of  Egypt  as  an  unwilling  vassal  to  Persia  made  the  position  of  Judah 
precarious  in  the  extreme  during  the  lifetime  of  Zechariah." — Dr.  Marcus  Dods, 
The  Post-Exilian  Prophets. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ZECHARIAH. 


the  poor  and  passing  present,  with  the  magnificent  and  enduring  future.  The 
scope  of  the  prophecy,  then,  is  to  produce  a  genuine  revival  of  religion  among  the 
people,  and  thus  encourage  them  in  the  right  way  to  engage  in  the  rebuilding  of 
the  Temple.     (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 

Summary  of  the  contents  of  the  Book. — 1.  The  Word  of  God  which 
introduces  the  prophetic  labours  of  Zechariah  (chap.  1.  vers.  1-6).  2.  A 
series  of  seven  visions  which  Zechariah  saw  in  the  night,  on  the  twenty-fourth 
day  of  the  eleventh  month,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius  (chap.  1,  ver.  7,  to 
chap,  vi.,  ver.  8).  3.  A  symbolical  transaction  which  brought  the  visions  to 
a  close  (chap.  vi.  vers.  9-15).  4.  The  communication  to  the  people  of  the 
answer  of  the  Lord  to  a  question  addressed  by  certain  Judsens  to  the  priests  and 
prophets,  as  to  the  necessity  of  keeping  certain  fast  days  (chaps,  vii.,  viii.).  5.  A,, 
prophecy  of  threatening  import  concerning  the  land  of  Hadrach,  the  seat  of  ■EKe 
ungodly  world-power  (chaps,  ix.-xi.).  6.  A  burden  concerning  Israel  (chaps, 
xii.-xiv.).  All  the  parts  of  the  Book  hang  closely  together  ;  and  the  differences 
which  exist  between  the  first  two  prophecies  and  the  last  two,  and  which  have 
led  some  writers  to  ascribe  them  to  two  different  prophets,  are  not  worthy  of 
notice.  It  is  clear  that  though  the  prophecies  of  this  Book  have  their  foundation 
in  the  building  of  the  second  Temple,  it  is  impossible  that  they  refer  solely  to  that 
event,  or  to  those  times.  They  point  onward  to  the  close  of  the  present  dispensa- 
tion. They  fit  only  into  events,  and  into  times,  not  even  yet  reached.  Only  as 
we  bear  this  in  mind  throughout  the  entire  Book  shall  we  be  able  clearly  to  under- 
stand it,  and  be  preserved  from  a  labjrrinth  of  perplexity.  And  we  must  guard  ] 
against  the  mistake  into  which  so  many  have  fallen,  of  applying  the  revelations^ 
of  the  future  glories  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  to  the  Church  of  Christ.  The  pro- 
phecies of  this  Book  relate  to  the  Jewish  nation  and  their  Messiah ;  and  to  the 
Kingdom  of  God  to  be  set  up  among  them  at  His  second  coming  in  glory,  and 
which  is  to  rule  the  world.     {Frederick  Whitfield,  M.A.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 

ZECHARIAH. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Yeb.  2.  The  Lord  hath  been  sore  displeased  with  your  fathers.  —  A  call  to 
repentance  : — The  prophet  being  to  carry  comfortable  tidings  to  this  people, 
begins  with  the  doctrine  of  repentance,  inviting  them  not  to  obstruct  their  own 
mercy  by  impenitency ;  and  to  make  way  for  this  doctrine,  he  points  out  to  them 
the  greatness  of  God's  displeasure  against  their  fathers  for  their  sin,  as  might 
be  seen  in  the  horrible  calamities  that  did  come  upon  them,  which  might  teach 
their  children  not  to  expect  exemption  if  they  followed  their  way.  Doctrine — 
1.  A  people  are  prepared  and  fitted  for  favourable  manifestations  of  God  by  repent- 
ance, and  mercies  are  sweetest  and  most  comfortable  unto  penitents,  therefore  the 
Lord  permits  this  doctrine  to  the  following  visions,  as  the  only  way  to  fit  people 
for  them,  and  make  them  truly  comfortable  to  them.  2.  No  privilege  bestowed 
on  any  people  will  exempt  them  from  sharp  corrections  when  they  sin  ;  for  albeit 
the  Jews  were  the  only  people  of  God  at  that  time,  yet  "  the  Lord  hath  been  sore 
displeased  with  your  fathers,"  which  is  also  a  warning  to  them.  3.  Though  the 
Lord  do  not  chastise  any  of  His  chosen  and  regenerate  people  in  pure  wrath  or 
beyond  the  bounds  of  moderation,  yet  His  fatherly  displeasure  may  be  very  hot 
and  sad  in  its  effects,  and  His  displeasure  against  a  visible  Church,  which  hath 
abused  mercy,  very  grievous,  and  therefore  ought  to  be  seriously  laid  to  heart ; 
therefore  He  calls  them  to  consider  how  "  the  Lord  hath  been  sore  displeased,  or 
had  displeasure  on  displeasure."  4.  Albeit  examples  of  God's  anger,  especially 
when  they  are  near,  ought  to  be  effectual  documents  to  others,  exciting  to  tremble 
and  repent,  yet  such  is  the  stupidity  of  men,  that  notwithstanding  any  such 
warnings,  they  will  be  ready  to  adventure  on  the  same  sins,  which  God  hath  so 
remarkably  punished  ;  therefore  they  need  stirring  up  to  see  and  make  use  of 
God's  anger  against  their  fathers,  the  effects  whereof  were  very  visible  to  them. 
{George  Hutcheson.)  The  prophet's  exordium  : — Its  object  is  to  show  the  un- 
changing permanence  of  God's  Word,  by  contrasting  it  with  the  transitory  nature 
of  their  fathers  and  the  prophets,  and  it  may  thus  be  set  forth  more  fully.  Let 
the  fate  of  your  fathers  be  a  warning  to  you  that  you  avoid  the  disobedience  to 
the  word  of  Jehovah,  which  brought  upon  them  evils  so  desolating.  For  where 
are  they  now  ?  Once  they  ruled  and  worshipped  here  as  you  do.  But  where 
are  they  now  ?  Some  lie  in  slaughtered  heaps,  when  the  banner  of  Judah  was 
trampled  in  the  dust,  and  her  bravest  sons  cut  down  like  grass  before  the  mower's 
scythe,  by  the  fierce  cohorts  of  the  Assyrian.  Some  lie  buried  in  the  ruins  of 
the  holy  city,  which  they  sought  to  defend  from  the  spoiler.  Some  are  sleeping  by 
the  flashing  waters  of  the  Euphrates,  after  weeping  out  a  weary  life  beneath  the 
willows  that  bend  in  the  land  of  the  stranger.  Whilst  some,  in  the  feebleness 
of  tottering  age,  have  returned  to  lay  their  bones  in  the  soil  that  is  hallowed  by 
the  memories  and  hopes  of  Israel.  And  why  has  this  been  their  mournful  history  7 
Because  they  refused  to  listen  to  the  warnings  of  the  prophets.  Hence  even  the 
prophets  themselves  were  taken  away.  They  warned,  and  wept,  and  prayed, 
but  met  only  with  stoning,  reviling,  and  hate.  They  toUed  on  to  stey  the  coming 
judgments,  but  when  their  efforts  were  disregarded  by  the  people,  God  in  mercy 
took  them  away  from  the  evil  to  come.     Then  the  last  barrier  was  removed. 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  the  torrent  of  wrath  came  dire  and  pitiless  in  its  rush  of  fury  and  swept  them 
away  in  its  flood.  Now  as  your  fathers  and  the  prophets  alike  have  passed 
away  according  to  My  word  ;  as  neither  the  wickedness  of  the  one,  nor  the  piety 
of  the  other,  could  arrest  My  threatened  judgments,  beware  lest  a  like  evil  come 
upon  you,  that  your  prophets,  being  disregarded,  be  also  withdrawn,  and  the 
judf^ments  you  are  daring  come  upon  you  for  your  disobedience.  This  appropriate 
introduction  was  probably  followed  with  exhortations  to  build  the  temple,  and 
restore  the  worship  of  God,  that  are  not  recorded,  as  their  interest  was  local 
and  temporary.  Inferences — 1.  Whilst  God  is  love,  and  whilst  the  preachers 
of  the  Gospel  must  preach  this  glorious  truth,  they  must  not  conceal  the  fact 
that  God  is  a  consuming  fire,  and  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day.  It  is  a  sign 
of  sickly  piety  when  men  are  willing  to  hear  nothing  of  the  wrath  of  God  against 
sin  (vers.  1,  2).  2.  If  men  expect  God  to  return  to  them  in  prosperity,  they  must 
return  to  Him  in  penitence.  The  flower  averted  from  the  sun  must  turn  toward 
it,  to  catch  its  genial  smile  (ver.  3).  3.  What  we  have  to  do  for  God  in  life 
should  be  done  quickly,  for  life  is  rapidly  passing ;  to  evil  and  good  alike  come 
the  swift  shadows  of  the  sunset  (ver.  5).  4.  What  a  man  sows,  he  shall  also  reap, 
and  the  seedlings  of  life  on  earth  shall  be  harvested  in  heaven  or  in  hell  (ver.  6). 
(T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Tiim  ye  unto  Me  .  .  .  and  I  will  turn  unto  you.  —  The  Divine 
order  of  all  true  'progress  : — The  first  step  is  at  all  times  to  turn  to  the  Lord  ;  the 
second  follows,  "  turn  you  now  from  your  evil  ways,  and  from  your  evil  doing." 
The  motive  and  the  power  to  forsake  evil  must  be  found  in  himself.  Once  know 
Jesus  and  His  love,  experimentally,  and  you  possess  a  motive  for  holiness,  greater 
far  than  either  heaven  or  earth  can  furnish.  It  is  the  expulsive  power  of  a  new 
affection.  And  yet,  as  in  all  advance,  there  is  reciprocal  action.  The  first  step 
must  ever  be  to  Jesus.  When  the  man  is  in  Christ  he  possesses  the  power.  But 
in  turning  away  from  evil,  new  light  and  life  are  thrown  back  upon  the  starting- 
point.  We  see  truth  more  clearly,  and  embrace  it  more  earnestly.  Thus  there 
is  growth  in  grace.  To  every  step  of  faithfulness  on  our  part  the  Lord  adds  new 
light ;  and  this  light  is  reflected  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  becomes  more 
known,  more  loved;  and  this  produces  its  effect  in  more  likeness  to  Him.  (T. 
Whitfield,  31. A.)        The  importance  of  repentance: — Urged  from — I.  The  Divine 

DISPLEASURE    TOWARDS    THE    IMPENITENT    MEN    OF    THE    PAST.       "The    Lord   hath 

been  sore  displeased  with  yoiu-  fathers."  "  They  had  shown  a  mournfully  strong 
and  inveterate  propensity  to  depart  from  God  and  from  His  ways.  They  had 
needed  incessant  repetitions  of  Divine  admonitions,  entreaties,  promises,  and 
threatenings ;  and  many  a  time  all  had  proved  unavailing.  Jehovah  bound 
them  to  Himself  with  cords  of  love.'  But  '  they  brake  the  bands  asunder, 
and  cast  away  the  cords  from  them.'  They  chose  their  own  ways.  They  thus 
provoked  Him  to  anger.  Their  fathers  had  by  their  sins  brought  that  heavy 
seventy  years'  judgment  upon  themselves."  Now  the  displeasure  of  God  to 
sinners  of  the  past  is  here  referred  to  in  order  to  induce  the  Jews  to  repent  of  the 
selfish  negligence  which  they  had  evinced  concerning  the  building  of  the  temple 
(Hag.  iv.  5-7).  II.  From  God's  assurance  of  a  welcome  to  all  that 
TRULY  REPENT.  Proved — 1.  By  His  invitation  to  the  impenitent.  "  Come  now  let 
us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord,"  &c.  &c.  2.  By  the  experience  of  mankind. 
Manasseh,  David,  Saul,  Bunyan,  and  millions  more  returned  to  Him,  and  He 
not  only  received  them,  but  rejoiced  over  them.  III.  From  the  transitoriness 
OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  By  the  "  fathers  "  are  meant  those  with  whom  God  was  dis- 
pleased. An  argument — I.  For  the  wicked  to  repent.  2.  For  faithfulness,  and 
for  persevering  zeal.     For  we  shall  all  soon  have  finished  our  mission.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  5.  Your  fathers,  where  are  they  ?  and  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever  ? — 
The  mortality  of  God's  instruments  : — 1.  The  mortality  of  the  instruments  which 
God  employs  for  carrying  on  His  cause  in  the  world.  At  the  time  these  words 
were  spoken,  the  patriarchs  of  antiquity,  the  seers  of  after  times,  the  evangelical 
Isaiah,  the  plaintive  Jeremiah,  the  vehement  Ezekiel,  all  had  been  gathered 
to  the  tomb.  There  is  no  exemption  from  the  stroke  of  mortality  for  the  most 
valuable  instruments  of  God's  service.  Their  death  subserves  the  Divine  pur- 
poses, and  the  interests  of  men,  as  well  as  (heir  lives.  The  removal  of  ministers 
makes  way  for  a  greater  variety  of  gifts  and  graces  to  be  exercised  in  the  ministry 
itself ;  and  thus  that  irrepressible  love  of  novelty  which  seems  to  be  one  of  the 


CHAP.  I.]  ZECHARIAH.  3 


instincts  of  our  nature  is  provided  for.     How  glorious  does  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
appear,  in  carrying  on  His  cause,  not  only  in  spite  of,  but  in  the  very  midst  of, 
and  even  by,  the  ravages  of  death.     It  is  a  bright  manifestation  of  His  power,  to 
work  by  such  feeble,  fallible,  mortal  creatures  as  we  are  ;  it  is  a  still  brighter 
display  of  His  wisdom  and  power  to  make  even  their  death  subserve  His  cause. 
There  is  much  in  this  view  of  our  subject  at  once  to  encourage  the  timid  and  to 
repress  the  vain.     Christ  can  do  much  with  the  weakest  instrument ;  and  He 
can  do  altogether  without  the  strongest.     2.  What  there  is,  and  how  much,  which, 
when   these  instruments   are   removed,   survives   the  wreck  of  mortality,   and 
perpetuates  itself  through  the  time  to  come.     It  was  the  proud  boast  of  Horace, 
*'  I  shall  not  all  die,  much  of  me  will  escape  death  "  ;  and  it  has  proved  true. 
What  remains  of  these  men  ?     (1)  Not  only  their  graves,  but  their  own  immortal 
selves,  their  deathless  spirits.     To  be  absent  from  the  body  is  to  be  present  with 
the  Lord.     We  are  already  come  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.     They 
are  assembled  in  the  presence  of  their  Lord,  rejoicing  with  ineffable  delight  in 
their  mutual  recognition,  in  their  subUme  intercourse,  in  their  joint  adoration. 
(2)  Their  names,   their  character,   and  their  examples  still  survive.     Eminent 
piety,  combined  with  eminent  usefulness,  retains,  like  the  rose,  its  beauty  and 
its  fragrance  after  death.     In  their  characters  and  examples  we  have  the  best 
part  of  themselves.     The  remembrance  of  departed   piety  is  sometimes  more 
serviceable  than  even  the  contemplation  of  it  was  while  it  was  yet  living.    (3)  The 
principles  on  which  these  worthies  acted  survives.     These  they  derived  from 
the  Bible,  and  not  from  any  human  theories  of  civilisation,  philosophy,  or  philan- 
thropy.    Your  fathers   when   they  died  left  you  an  unmutilated   Bible.     Not 
a  single  promise  lies  interred  in  their  graves.     But,  in  some  cases,  the  Bible  is 
professed,  while  its  truths  are  denied ;  it  is,  in  a  certain  way,  held  in  gross,  while 
it  is  rejected  in  detail.     Our  fathers  dealt  not  in  vague  generalities,  philosophical 
speculations,  or  in  evasive  reserves.     (4)  Though  the  founders  of  the  Society 
(London  Missionary)  have  long  since  departed,  the  cause  itself  survives.     3.  The 
means  to  be  employed  to  carry  on  the  work  begim  by  our  forefathers.     Some 
fear  the  cause  of  missions  will  not  live.     Others  think  public  attention  will  be 
diverted  from  the  cause  by  the  siurpassingly  great,  various,  and  absorbing  events 
of  the  times  in  which  we  live.     It  is  a  most  remarkable,  instructive,  and  impressive 
feature  of  the  times  that  there  is  a  conspicuous  parallelism  between  political 
convulsion  and  social  disorganisation  on  the  one  hand,  and  moral  action  and 
reformation  on  the  other,  between  the  destructive  and  the  constructive  forces, 
between  the  shaking  and  crumbling  of  the  things  that  were  ready  to  vanish  away 
«md  the  rising  up  of  those  things  which  cannot  be  shaken  and  are  intended  to 
remain.     Shall  we  suffer  this  passing  age  to  draw  off  our  attention  from  the  cause 
of  Christian  missions  ?     That  would  be  to  lose  our  interest  in  the  cause,  when 
all  things  seem  preparing  the  world  for  its  full  and  final  triumph.     4.  We  must 
unite  appropriate  and  adequate  means  to  our  confidence  of  final  success.     (1)  A 
more  intelligent  apprehension,  a  deeper  conviction,  and  a  more  solemn  sense, 
on  the  part  of  the  whole  Church,  of  the  design  of  God  in  its  erection  and  con- 
tinuance in  this  world,  as  His  witness  and  instrument  for  the  conversion  of  the 
nations.     In  so  far  as  the  Church  is  a  missionary  Church,  she  is  a  true  Chiu-ch. 
What  is  the  duty  of  the  whole  Church  is  the  duty  of  every  section  and  part  of 
it.    But  the  Church  has  not  yet  done,  and  is  not  even  now  doing,  her  duty.    (2)  If 
our  zeal  be  the  offspring  of  our  piety,  there  is  necessary  for  the  continuance  and 
extension  of  the  missionary  enterprise,   an  increase   of  spiritual  religion.     We 
want  intelligence  warmed  with  holy  enthusiasm  :  a  religion  of  life,  of  power, 
of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind  ;  a  religion  combining  something  of  the  enthusiasm 
of  prophets,  the  zeal  of  apostles,  the  self-denial  of  pilgrims,  and  the  constancy 
of  martyrs.     Eminent  piety  is  essential  to  eminent  usefulness.     (J.  Angel  James.) 
Lessons  from  the  death  of  our  fathers  : — The  death  of  our  fathers  reminds  us^ 
1.  Of  our  own  mortality.     2.  Of  oxu-  own  obligations.     3.  Of  our  fathers'  prin- 
ciples.    4.  Of  our  prospects  of  reunion  with  them.     5.  Of  the  grandeur  of  immor- 
tality.    {G.  Brooks. )        Prophetical  succession  : — I.  The  law  of  human  mortality 
AND  SUCCESSION  IS  FULL  OF  SUGGESTION.     Death  is  the  law  of  all  life,  vegetable 
and  animal,  as  well  as  human.     Had  man  not  sinned,  the  mortality  of  his  human 
body  would  probably  have  been  the  same.     The  death  to  which  sin  doomed 
man  was  spiritual,  not  fleshly  death.     He  could  scarcely  have  remained  per- 
manently in  a  world  subject  to  the  conditions  of  this.     The  death  of  the  body 
is  sorrowful  enough,   because  of  our  human   affections  and  sensibilities.     The 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

prophets  die.  Even  their  high  vocation  does  not  exempt  them  from  the  law 
of  death.  It  may  be  that  God  would  teach  us  that  He  can  do  His  work  without 
the  best  and  greatest.  Instead  of  Stephen  God  raises  up  Paul.  A  prophet's 
work  may  seem  indispensable  to  an  age,  yet  he  dies.  II.  Is  there  not  high 
BBNKFIT  IN  THE  PROPHETICAL  SUCCESSION  ?  If  the  wise  and  experienced  die, 
they  give  place  to  the  young  and  ardent,  who,  with  fresh  impulse  and  newer 
lights,  enter  into  their  wealth  of  wisdom.  Else  might  the  prophet  become  a 
stereotype.  The  wisest  may  outlive  their  wisdom,  and  the  most  useful  their 
usefulness.  Sometimes  the  greatest  are  the  greatest  hindrance.  Every  generation 
rises  to  higher  and  broader  spiritual  conception  than  its  predecessor.  Whether 
is  the  greater  evil,  the  mistakes  of  impetuous  youth,  or  the  paralysis  of  incapable 
age  ;  the  zeal  without  knowledge  of  experience,  or  the  knowledge  without  zeal  of 
over-caution ;  the  Radical  revolutionist,  who  would  make  all  things  new,  or  the 
Conservative  revolutionist,  who  stands  still  in  the  stream  of  advancing  thought 
and  spirituality — the  one  too  fast  for  his  age,  and  the  other  too  slow  ?  Have  we 
not  a  great  law  of  compensation  in  the  succession  of  God's  prophets,  especially 
as  the  generations  overlap  each  other,  and  the  Church  possesses  both  at  the  same 
time  ?  {Henry  Alton,  D.D.)  On  the  instructions  to  he  derived  from  recalling  the 
memory  of  our  fathers  : — It  is  a  tribute  which  we  owe  to  the  memory  of  our  earthly 
parents,  to  recall  them  occasionally  to  our  thoughts.  The  hope  of  this  was  a 
source  of  consolation  to  them  amidst  the  cares  of  hfe.  1.  By  meditating  on  the 
fate  of  our  fathers,  we  are  reminded  that  we  too  must  die.  It  is  a  fortunate 
circumstance  in  the  nature  of  man,  that,  though  his  Maker  hath  formed  him  a 
mortal  being,  the  idea  of  his  dissolution  doth  not  continually  haunt  his  mind.  2.  We 
learn  what  are  the  objects  that  are  most  worthy  of  pursuit.  The  good  which  our 
fathers  have  done  remains  for  ever.  It  remains  to  embalm  their  memory,  and 
to  exalt  their  name.  3.  We  learn  to  imitate  our  fathers.  The  grave  of  a  good 
man  is  a  scene  of  much  instruction  and  improvement.  4.  We  become  reconciled 
to  our  own  departure.  The  region  beyond  the  grave  is  not  a  solitary  land.  There 
your  fathers  are,  and  thither  every  other  friend  shall  follow  you  in  due  season. 
Therefore  let  your  hearts  be  glad,  let  your  glory  rejoice,  let  your  bodies  also  rest 
in  hope.  God  will  show  you  the  path  of  hfe.  (W.  Moodie,  D.D.)  "  Your 
fathers,  where  are  theyP" — Primarily,  these  words  were  intended  to  carry  along 
with  them  a  warning  import  to  those  to  whom  they  were  originally  addressed, 
as  to  the  folly  of  following  on  in  the  footsteps  of  those  of  their  ancestors  who  had 
been  taken  away  from  all  connection  with  time  in  the  midst  of  careless  inconsidera- 
tion.  The  prophet  does  not  pronounce  as  to  where  the  fathers  were.  He  knew 
that  their  bodies  were  consigned  to  death's  dark  domain,  and  reduced  to  inanimate 
matter.  But  where  are  their  immortal  spirits  ?  The  prophet  leaves  it  as  an  open 
question,  "  Where  are  they  ?  "  We  may  have  forebodings,  but  we  are  not  the 
arbiters  by  whom  any  case  may  be  decided.  It  must  be  left  in  the  hand  of 
Him  to  whom  alone  the  right  belongs  to  pronoimce,  and  who  will  "  judge  righteous 
judgment."  Think  now  of  those  of  our  fathers  who  lived  and  died  in  the  faith 
of  the  Gospel.  1.  They  are  not  where  they  once  were.  2.  They  are  not  where 
we  are.  3.  They  are  where  they  desired  to  be.  4.  They  are  in  the  place  for 
which  they  made  preparation.  5.  They  are  where  they  never  would  have  been, 
but  for  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  as  their  Representative  and  Substitute.  6.  They 
are  where  they  will  be  for  ever.  7.  They  are  where  they  will  be  very  glad  to  see 
us.  It  may  be  added,  and  we  shall  be  very  glad  to  see  them.  {T.  Adam.)  Our 
fathers : — I.  The  people  addressed.  The  visible  Church,  who  lived  in  the 
typical  land  of  promise,  and  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.  It  was 
declared  or  delivered,  by  the  prophet  from  God,  toward  the  close  of  the  Babylonish 
captivity  and  exile.  The  fathers"  are  represented  as  including  those  with 
whom  the  Lord  had  been  sore  displeased,  and  the  people  addressed  are  their 
descendants  in  the  flesh,  who  inherited  from  their  births  their  evil  nature,  were 
encompassed  with  their  high  privileges,  and  laden  with  their  proportionate  responsi- 
bilities. The  "  prophets  "  appear  to  signify  those  really  sent  of  God,  who  spake 
His  true  Word,  and  no  vision  out  of  their  own  hearts.  II.  The  intention  or 
OBJECT  OF  THE  QUESTIONS  PROPOSED.  The  inquiry  is  not  after  the  existence  of 
the  absent  "  fathers."  It  doth  not  touch  the  truth  of  the  immortality  of  the 
souls  of  the  prophets.  It  regards  the  mortal  existence  of  both  the  fathers  and  the 
prophets  on  earth.  The  inquiry  calls  a  fact  to  the  recollection  of  the  people 
addressed,  which  relates  to  their  immediate  or  remote  ancestors.  "  Where 
tu-e  they  ?  "     Not  with  you  now,  to  influence  you.     The  Church  is  suffering  the 


CHAP.  I.]  ZECHARIAH. 


loss  of  the  benefit  of  their  labours.  The  questions  are  put  for  the  health  and  profit 
of  the  souls  of  the  hearers,  or  for  their  greater  condemnation,  if  they  will  not 
receive  warning.  III.  The  permanent  use  of  the  record,  as  God  speaks  by 
IT  TO  rrs,  and  in  our  circumstances.  We  have  been  a  highly  favoured  people, 
and  we  have  long  possessed  manifold  means  and  privileges,  of  a  religious  and 
spiritual  nature ;  and  in  many  cases,  it  is  trusted,  have,  through  distinguishing 
and  sovereign  grace,  derived  from  the  use  of  them  profit  unto  eternal  salvation. 
Let  us  make  these  inquiries  matter  of  admonition  for  comfort  and  profit. 
{William  Borrows,  M.A.)  The  invisible  world  : — The  difficulty  of  giving  a  sort 
of  general  reply  to  the  question  contained  in  the  text,  is  much  diminished  by  this 
particular  fact,  that  the  Scripture  itself  has  assigned  a  fixed  and  determinate  place 
in  the  world  of  spirits  to  the  soul  of  every  human  being.  Consider — I.  The  cash 
OF  those  who  have  died  without  penitence  and  faith.  1.  Those  who  have 
died  without  repentance  are  gone  to  a  state  in  which  the  wicked  are  no  longer  the 
prosperous.  In  this  world  guilt  is  often  successful,  at  least  for  a  season.  2.  The 
impenitent  and  unbelieving  are  gone  to  a  state  in  which  they  have  no  longer  any 
hopes  of  escape,  or  means  of  approach  to  God.  3.  Our  impenitent  fathers  are 
gone  into  a  state  in  which  God  is  known  only  as  the  God  of  vengeance.  II.  Thb 
CASE  of  those  who  HAVE  DIED  PENITENT  AND  BELIE  VINO.  1.  They  are  no  longer 
in  a  state  of  trial  and  affliction.  2.  They  are  gone  into  a  world  where  temptation 
never  enters.  3.  Where  doubt  and  despondency  never  come.  4.  Where  then: 
infirmities  and  corruptions  cannot  follow  them.  Application — (1)  If  such  are 
the  glories  of  the  one  state  we  have  been  contemplating,  and  such  the  miseries 
of  the  other,  what  thanks  are  due  to  that  Redeemer  who  has,  of  His  own  unmerited 
mercy,  and  by  the  sacrifice  of  His  own  life,  rescued  us  from  the  anguish  of  perdition, 
and  thrown  open  to  us  the  gates  of  the  mansion  of  God  ?  (2)  Remember  that, 
v^ry  shortly,  the  question  we  are  to-day  putting  about  others  will  be  put  about 
ourselves.  Another  generation  shall  soon  arise  who  will  ask,  with  regard  to  you 
and  me,  "  Your  fathers,  where  are  they  ?  "  (J.  W.  Cunningham,  A.M.)  Im- 
•provement  of  death : — I.  Some  general  observations.  1.  No  distinction  which 
men  wear  in  society  can  possibly  exempt  them  from  the  stroke  of  death. 
2.  Although  our  ancestors  have  departed  this  life,  we  are  not  altogether  to  entomb 
them  in  oblivion.  Many  reasons  may  be  assigned  why  we  should  preserve  them  in 
recollection.  To  many  of  them  we  were  bound  by  the  ties  of  natural  affection. 
To  others  we  are  allied  by  official  connection.  We  have  entered  into  their  labours. 
The  monuments  of  their  industry  lessen  our  toil.  3.  Though  these  distinguished 
deceased  have  left  this  world,  they  are  still  in  some  state  of  conscious  existence. 
Probably  the  souls  of  the  departed  enter  at  once  either  into  bliss  or  woe.  II.  The 
best  improvement  we  can  make  of  prominent  persons'  deaths.  1.  By  a 
serious  remembrance.  Not  merely  of  their  persons,  but  of  their  characters,  and 
the  labours  in  which  they  Avere  engaged  during  their  mortal  sojourn.  2.  Diligent 
inquiry,  as  to  whether  we  have  reaped  any  solid  advantage  from  the  ministrations 
in  which  they  were  engaged ;  and  as  to  the  manner  in  which  we  treated  the 
servants  of  God  while  they  were  fulfilling  their  course.  3.  Imitation  of  their 
holy  example.  There  is  always  a  limitation  we  must  put  when  speaking  of  human 
example:  "  so  far  as  he  followed  Christ."  4.  Earnest  prayer  in  connection  with 
bereavements.  5.  By  preparation  to  follow  the  devoted  servants  of  God  to  the 
place  where  they  now  dwell.  6.  Cherishing  a  devout  expectation  of  reunion 
with  the  departed  servants  of  God,  in  a  world  of  future  glory  and  perfection. 
(J.  Clayton.)  The  death  of  the  old  : — 1.  The  first  thing  that  the  words  suggest 
is  obviously  the  great  law,  under  which  we  receive  and  possess  existence — that 
we  must  die  ;  the  law  of  mortality,  under  which  we  were  bom.  We  will  not  enter 
into  the  curious  question,  whether  man  would  have  died  if  he  had  not  sinned. 
It  is  better  to  look  at  death  in  its  moral  and  spiritual  aspect.  It  is  thus  continually 
represented  to  us  in  Scripture.  It  is  not  a  part  of  God's  plan ;  it  is  a  thing  engrafted 
upon  His  original  constitution.  Death  is  the  shadow  of  sin.  This  great,  black, 
dark  substance,  that  we  call  sin,  comes  in  between  man  and  the  bright  light  of 
God's  countenance,  and  casts  its  shadow  over  man.  That  shadow  is  death. 
Death  is  but  the  sjnuptom  of  a  spiritual  disease  ;  it  is  not  so  much  the  grand 
disease  of  our  nature,  as  it  is  the  symptom  of  a  deeper-seated  disease.  And  God 
applies  His  remedy  to  the  core  of  the  disorder.  He  redeems  from  sin.  2.  Apply 
remarks  specially  to  the  death  of  a  very  aged  person.  Note  the  amazing  power 
of  the  principle  of  life  in  man.  It  is  so  wonderful  to  think  that  a  human  body, 
with  its  nice  and  delicate  organisation,  should  go  on  sleeping  and  waking,  toiling 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

and  working,  without  intercession  and  without  rest,  for  ninety  or  a  hundred  years. 
What  a  thing  it  would  be  if  any  man  constructed  a  piece  of  mechanism  that  should 
go  on  in  that  way  !  But  the  individual  man,  though  he  is  a  wonderful,  complex 
machine,  considered  in  himself,  is  only  one  little  wheel  in  a  greater  and  a  larger 
structure,  that  is,  the  whole  species ;  and  the  species — such  is  the  wonderful  power 
of  life — death  cannot  touch.  However  we  may  talk  about  death,  the  power  of 
vitality  is  greater ;  even  in  man,  and  in  the  present  world,  life  is  stronger  than 
death.  Another  thought  is,  that  though  there  be  this  wonderful  power  of  vitality, 
old  age  in  general  is  not  in  itself  very  desirable.  In  general,  very  great  age  is  only 
an  additional  affliction  put  to  the  ordinary  ills  of  life.  Nature  does  a  great  deal, 
independent  of  religion,  to  bring  men  to  be  willing  to  die.  But  where  there  is 
religion,  and  a  "  good  hope  through  grace,"  and  a  trust  in  the  Divine  mercy,  the 
language  and  feeling  of  a  man  often  is,  "  I  would  not  live  alway."  The  very  aged 
man  stands  alone.  He  outlives  his  friends  ;  and  what  is  worse,  he  outlives  the 
capacity  of  forming  new  attachments.  The  fact  is,  that  second  childhood  is 
very  much  like  the  first.  The  child  is  interesting  but  to  a  few.  The  aged  cannot 
very  well  sympathise  with  new  hearts  and  new  persons,  new  modes  of  thought  and 
feeling.  How  different  it  is  with  God  !  Generation  after  generation  cometh,  and 
He  has  His  fresh  and  young  affection  for  every  generation  as  it  comes.  And  every 
generation  may  come  to  Him,  and  look  up  to  Him,  with  the  same  cordiality  and 
the  same  confidence  as  the  first.  The  last  thought  is,  that  we  are  struck  by  the 
death  of  a  very  aged  person  being  uncommon.  We  speak  of  it  as  extraordinary. 
It  throws  us  back  upon  the  general  law,  that  men  do  not  all  die  at  one  particular 
time.  There  is  no  day,  no  fixed  date,  up  to  which  all  men  are  to  live,  and  beyond 
which  none  can  survive.  If  a  fixed  date  for  each  individual  had  been  assigned, 
the  punishment  of  sin  would  have  been  made  imendurable.  It  is  a  most  beneficent 
dispensation  that  there  is  no  fixed  date.  But  the  price  to  pay  is  that  we  must  be 
prepared  to  see  death  occur  at  all  ages.  2.  There  are  limits  to  human  probation 
and  the  Divine  forbearance.  You  will  see  this  by  referring  to  the  context.  Your 
fathers  and  the  prophets  are  dead  ;  their  probation  terminated.  The  agents 
and  the  objects  of  the  Divine  mercy  equally  die.  There  is  something  very  affecting 
in  this.  Zechariah  says,  "  Remember,  you  are  living  under  the  same  law.  Pro- 
bation has  limits  ;  forbearance  has  limits."  3.  The  power  and  perpetuity  of 
God's  truth,  in  contrast  with  the  mortality  of  man.  This  is  seen  by  connecting  the 
words  that  follow.  The  prophet  lives  in  his  utterances.  A  true  thought  is  a 
Divine  and  immortal  thing.  What  has  come  from  the  breast  and  bosom  and 
mind  of  God,  and  has  been  uttered,  lives,  and  there  is  power  in  it.  Men  change, 
their  feelings  change,  their  minds  alter,  their  sensibilities  and  sympathies  pass  away ; 
but  the  Gospel  is  fresh  to  every  generation.  The  Word  of  God,  in  its  substantial 
essence,  continues,  and  is  the  life  and  food  of  the  Church.  (Thomas  Binney.) 
An  inquiry  after  dead  relations: — By  "fathers"  is  meant  fathers  of  our  flesh, 
the  active  instruments  in  the  hand  of  God  of  our  being,  the  secondary  causes  of  our 
being.  "  Where  are  they  ?  "  Are  they  here  ?  No.  Are  they  anywhere  ?  Yes. 
We  know  where  their  bodies  are.  Their  souls  are  somewhere.  '  The  prophets, 
do  they  live  for  ever  ?  "  No.  (1)  They  may  not,  if  they  would.  They  come 
within  the  compass  of  the  universal  decree.  They  are  made  up  of  the  same 
ingredients,  they  have  the  same  demeritorious  cause  of  death  as  others,  namely. 
Bin.  And  their  Lord  and  Master  will  do  without  them,  as  He  does  without  others. 
(2)  They  would  not,  if  they  might.  Two  things  put  the  saints  in  general,  and 
ministers  in  particular,  upon  a  desire  to  be  gone ;  the  happiness  they  shall  then 
be  instated  in,  and  the  troubles  and  miseries  they  shall  then  be  freed  from.  Do 
the  prophets  live  for  ever  ?  Yes.  Though  not  in  their  persons,  they  do  in  their 
successors.  Though  not  in  this  world,  yet  in  a  better.  If  prophets  and  righteous 
men  did  not  in  the  other  world  live  for  ever,  the  joys  and  glories  of  that  world 
could  not  be  said  to  be  perfect.  In  the  other  world  they  must  needs  live  for  ever, 
for  otherwise  the  virtue  and  efficacy  of  Christ's  blood  and  righteousness  would 
be  very  much  lessened.  They  must  needs  live  for  over,  for  the  Church  of  Christ 
in  the  other  world  will  still  retain  the  same  names  and  honourable  titles  of  Christ's 
body,  spouse,  and  subjects  as  they  have  here.  He  cannot  be  a  Father  without 
children;  a  King  without  subjects;  a  Bridegroom  without  a  bride;  a  Relate 
without  a  correlate.  What  can  put  an  end  to  their  living  in  those  upper  regions 
of  glory  ?  Sin  cannot.  Death  cannot.  Devils  cannot.  And  to  be  sure,  God 
will  not.  (Benjamin  Hands.)  Our  mortal  character  : — Not  a  year  passes  away, 
hardly  a  week  or  a  day,  without  some  striking  monition  of  our  uncertain  tenore 


CHAP.  I.]  ZECHARIAH. 


of  earthly  existence.  1.  These  inquiries  of  the  text  seem  to  furnish  a  strong 
intimation  of  the  mortal  character  of  ovir  present  existence.  The  prophet  bade 
the  Jews  look  back,  and  consider  what  had  become  of  their  fathers.  The  great 
and  the  good,  the  noble  and  the  mighty,  the  teacher  and  the  taught,  the  prophet 
and  the  people,  have  "  gone  the  way  of  all  the  earth."  There  is  no  exception  of 
age  or  station,  of  occupation  or  condition,  to  this  appointment  of  the  Most  High, 
in  consequence  of  the  transgressions  of  men.  There  is  something  painfully  affecting 
in  the  ravages  of  death.  The  fact  is  painful  and  humbling,  more  especially  as 
it  is  the  undeniable  proof  of  the  fallen  character  of  our  race — of  that  native 
corruption  which  has  descended  from  Adam,  who,  though  created  "  in  the  likeness 
of  God,"  "  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,"  and  that  a  sinful  and  degraded  one. 
2.  But  is  the  contemplation  of  death  only  painful  and  humiliating  ?  Is  there 
not  a  light  to  irradiate  the  tomb  ?  May  we  not  regard  the  inquiries  of  the  text  aa 
the  language  of  faith  and  hope  ?  Siu*ely  the  dark  valley  will  open  into  the  bright- 
ness of  eternal  home.  We  "  sorrow  not "  as  those  "  who  have  no  hope."  A 
glorious  prospect  is  opened  beyond  the  tomb.  Those  who  have  departed  in  the 
Lord  are  in  His  safe  keeping.  Our  fathers  are  not  taken  away  for  ever.  They  are 
only  removed  before  us,  and  anticipate  us  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  Lord's  presence. 
The  hope  of  immortality  has  cheered  many  a  believing  soul  amid  the  pains  of  life 
and  the  sufferings  of  death.  3.  Looking  back  upon  the  Christian  life  of  our 
fathers,  we  should  follow  their  faith,  and  act  up  to  their  teaching,  and  pray  that  a 
double  portion  of  their  spirit  may  rest  upon  us.  We  are  responsible  for  the  teaching 
of  Divine  truth  with  which  we  have  been  blessed.     {John  8.  Broad,  M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  But  My  words. — The  dying  men  and  the  undying  Word : — The  text 
comes  from  the  first  of  Zechariah's  prophecies.  In  it  he  lays  the  foundation 
for  all  that  he  has  subsequently  to  say.  He  points  to  the  past,  and  summons 
up  the  august  figures  of  the  great  pre-exilic  prophets,  and  reminds  his  contem- 
poraries that  the  words  which  they  spoke  had  been  verified  in  the  experience 
of  past  generations.  He  declares  that,  though  the  hearers  and  the  speakers  of 
that  prophetic  Word  had  glided  away  into  the  vast  unknown,  the  Word  remained, 
lived  still,  and  on  his  lips  demanded  the  same  obedience  as  it  had  vainly  demanded 
from  the  generation  that  was  past.  I.  The  mortal  hearers  and  speakers 
OF  THE  ABIDING  WoRD.  A  familiar  theme.  Look  at  it  from  the  special  angle, 
to  bring  into  connection  the  eternal  Word,  and  the  transient  vehicles  and  hearers 
of  it.  All  the  past  hearers  and  speakers  of  the  Word  had  that  ^^'ord  verified  in 
their  lives.  Not  one  of  them  who,  for  the  brief  period  of  their  earthly  lives,  came 
in  contact  with  that  Divine  message,  but  realised,  more  or  less  consciously,  the 
solemn  truth  of  its  promises  and  threatenings.  Wherever  they  are  now,  their 
earthly  relation  to  that  Word  is  a  determining  factor  in  their  condition.  "  Where- 
fore we  should  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  the  things  that  we  have  heard." 

II.  The  ABIDING  Word  which  these  hearers  and  speakers  have  had  to 
DO  AViTH.  Just  as  reason  requires  some  unalterable  substratum  below  all  the 
fleeting  phenomena  of  the  changeful  creation, — a  God  who  is  the  rock-basis  of 
all, — the  staple  to  which  all  the  links  hang — so  here  we  are  driven  back  and  back, 
by  the  very  fact  of  the  transiency  of  the  transient,  to  grasp  for  a  refuge  and  a 
stay,  the  permanency  of  the  permanent.  It  is  blessed  for  us  when  the  lesson 
that  the  fleeting  of  all  that  can  flee  away,  reads  to  us,  is  that,  beneath  it  all,  there  is 
the  Unchanging.  Zechariah  meant  by  the  "  Word  of  God  "  simply  the  prophetic 
utterances  about  the  destiny  and  the  punishment  of  the  nation.  We  ought  to 
mean  by  "  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever,"  not  merely  the 
written  embodiment  of  it  in  this  book,  or  that  primarily,  but  the  personal 
Word,  the  Incarnate  Word,  the  everlasting  Son  of  the  Father.  It  is  His  perpetual 
existence  rather  than  the  continuous  power  of  the  truth  which  is  the  declaration 
of  Himself,  that  is  mighty  for  our  strength  and  consolation  when  we  think  of  the 
transient  generations.  Christ  lives.  Therefore  we  can  front  change  and  decay  in 
all  around  calmly  and  triumphantly.  Since  we  have  this  abiding  Word,  let  us 
not  dread  changes,  however  startling  and  revolutionary.  Jesus  Christ  does  not 
change.  There  is  a  human  element  in  the  Church's  conception  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
still  more  in  their  working  out  of  the  principles  of  the  Gospel  in  institutions  and 
forms,  which  partakes   of  the  transiency  of  the  men  from  whom  they  come. 

III.  The    PRESENT    GENERATION    AND     ITS     RELATION    TO    THE    ABIDING    WOBD. 

Zechariah  did  not  hesitate  to  put  himself  in  line  with  the  mighty  forms  of  Isaiah, 
Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Hosea.     He,  too,  was  a  prophet.     Some  simple  exhorta- 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.  ' 

tions.     1.  See  to  it  that  you  accept  that  Word.     Open  not  only  your  minds  but 

your  hearts  to  it.     Hold  it  fast.     In  this  time  of  unrest  make  sure  of  your  grasp  of 

the  eternal  central  core  of  Christianity,  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  the  Divine-human 

Saviour  of  the  world.     Accept  Him,  hold  Him  fast,  trust  to  His  guidance  in  present 

day  questions.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  fleeting  hearers  and  speakers  and  the 

undying  Word : — I.  The  passing  away  of  hearers  and  speakers  alike.     An 

ingenious  exposition  of  the  words  of  text  suggests  that  they  are  a  brief  dialogue,  a 

kind  of  duel  between  the  prophet  and  his  hearers,  in  which  the  first  question  is  his 

sword-thrust  at  them,  and  the  second  is  their  return  to  him.     In  it  they  parry 

and  return  the  prophet's  thrust.     I  prefer  to  regard  the  questions  as  continuous  ; 

the  remonstrance  of  the  prophet  based  upon  the  fact  that  hearers  and  speakers 

alike  drift  away  into  the  unseen  land,  and  are  no  more  heard  of.     It  is  a  very 

familiar  and  commonplace  thought.     Try  to  individualise  the  thought  that  is  here. 

Reflect  how  surely,  steadily,  stealthily,  constantly  hearers  and  speakers  of  the 

immortal  Word  are  drifting,  drifting  into  the  dark.     Did  you  ever  stand  in  some  old 

cathedral,  or  ruined  church,  where  for  centuries  the  Word  of  God  had  been  preached  ? 

And  did  there  never  come  over  you,  with  a  strange  rush  of  feeling,  the  thought, 

"  Where  are  all  the  men  and  women  that  bowed  their  knees  here,  beneath  the 

vanished  roof  of  this  place  ?  "     II.  The  contrast  between  the  fleeting  hearers 

and  speakers  and  the  abiding  Word.     There  is  nothing  so  transient  as  the  words 

that  are  spoken  by  Christian  teachers.     Even  where  the  Word  takes  root  in  men's 

hearts,  how  swiftly  the  speaker  of  it  passes  and  is  forgotten.     No  workers  so  soon 

have  their  work  covered  with  oblivion  as  preachers.     In  another  way,  too,  the 

prophets  fade  and  perish  ;  inasmuch  as  new  circumstances  arise  about  which  they 

know  nothing ;  new  phases  of  thought  which  antiquate  their  teachings ;  new 

difficulties  in  which  their  words  have  no  counsel ;  .  new  conflicts  in  which  they 

can  strike  no  blow.     Yet,  in  all  this  mingled  and  fleeting  human  utterance, 

does   there   not   lie   an    immortal    and    imperishable    centre,   even    the    Word 

of   the   living   God  ?     Much    ingenuity    is    expended    nowadays    in    trying    to 

discriminate  between  the  permanent  and  transient  in  Christian  teaching.     The 

enduring  Word  is  that  story  of  Christ's  incarnation,  death  for  our  sins,  resurrection 

and  ascension,  which  by  the  Gospel  is  preached  unto  you.     Therefore  we  have  to 

look  beyond  the  dearest  of  human  teachers,  and  those  to  whom  we  owe  most. 

"  They  truly  were  not  suffered  to  continue  by  reason  of  death,"  but  this  Man  (Christ) 

continueth  ever  our  Friend,  our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.     III.  The  witness  of 

PAST  generations  TO  THE  IMMORTAL  WoRD.     They  that  heard  and  he  that  spake 

have  passed  into  the  silent  land  ;  but  they  passed  not  thither  until  they  had  found, 

in  some  measure,  that  both  the  warnings  and  the  promises  that  had  been  uttered 

were  God's  truth,  and  not  man's  dreams.     God's  Word  has  leaden  feet,  but  steady, 

and  slow,  and  certain,  it  overtakes  the  wrong-doer.     Do  you  take  care.     The 

generations  that  are  gone  found  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  true  ;  and  if  you 

reject  His  Word,  you  too  may,  before  you  die,  find  out,  what  you  will  certainly  find  out 

when  you  are  dead,  that  He  speaks  no  vain  things.     IV.  The  practical  effects 

OF  these  solemn  thoughts.     I  want  to  urge  upon  my  brethren  in  the  ministry 

that  they  should,  in  all  their  utterances,  try  to  realise  that  they  are  prophets, 

dying,  with  a  message  to  dying  men.     There  is  a  great  deal  of  modern  preaching 

clever,    eloquent,    cultured,    ingenious,    which   seems   to  have   utterly  forgotten 

that  it  has  got  a  message  of  forgiveness  and  of  cleansing  by  the  blood  of  Christ  to 

proclaim  to  men.     And  how  these  thoughts  should  influence  hearers  !     How  you 

would  listen  if  you  knew  that  this  was  your  last  sermon  !     (Ibid.)         The  eternity/ 

of  Ood's  Word  contrasted  with  the  mutability  of  man  : — When  Zechariah  wrote,  the 

Jews  had  just  returned  from  the  Babylonish  captivity,  and  already,  in  spite  of  that 

severe  warning,  they  were  going  back  into  their  old  habits,  and  bringing  upon 

themselves  fresh  displays  of  the  wrath  of  God.     Both  judgments  and  mercies 

either  leave  us  better  or  worse.     They  lead  us  to  repentant  watchfulness,  or  else 

harden  our  hearts  into  utter  carelessness  and  wilful  sin.     We  might  naturally 

have  expected  that  the  lessons  of  a  long  captivity  would  have  cured  the  Jewish 

people  of  their  old  disease,  but  sin  is  of  too  deep  and  treacherous  a  character  for 

external  circumstances  to  uproot  it.     The  sin  of  idolatry  had.  indeed,  been  cast 

out,  but  the  sins  of  luxury  and  pride,  self-righteousness  and  dogmatism,  worldliness 

and  unbelief,  had  taken  its  place,  and  the  forecast  of  their  hitnre  possession  of  the 

Jewish  mind  appears  as  soon  as  the  Jews  returned  from  captivity.     Haggai  and 

Zechariah  were  commissioned  by  God  to  reprove  the  selfish  and  worldly  spirit  of  the 

people.     Here  the  prophet  enforces  his  exhortation  by  two  considerations.     I.  The 


CHAP.  I.]  ZECHARIAH.  9 

mutable  nature  of  man,  passive  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  thoroughly  dependent 
on  God.  It  is  the  height  of  folly  for  man  to  oppose  God,  who  has  all  power  to 
punish  sin.  AU  men  must  die.  The  Word  they  bring  is  eternal  as  God  is  eternal, 
but  they  themselves  must  perish.  Zechariah  would  say,  "  If  such  be  the  destiny 
of  man,  it  is  yours.  Soon  you  must  fade  and  fall.  Turn  ye  from  your  fruitless 
and  evil  ways,  and  think  not  that  ye  can  resist  God."  2.  The  warning  is  enforced 
by  considerations  drawn  from  the  unchangeable  nature  of  the  Divine  Word.  The 
prophets  had  died,  but  the  certainty  and  stability  of  their  prophecies  had  been 
vindicated  by  an  express  fulfilment.  For  the  Word  of  God  is  eternal  and  imchange- 
able.     Are  you  then  profiting  by  it  as  you  ought  ?    {Joseph  Maskdl.) 

Vers.  7-11.   I  saw  by  night.  —  The    night    vision:  —  The    anointed  One  of 
God  and  His  kingdom  are  the  centre  and  axis  about  which  the  fiery  wheel  of 
all  Zechariah's  revelations  and  imagery  turns.     The  vision  in  our  text  is  both 
beautiful  and  consoling.     Consider — I.  The  timh  when  it  was  seen.     1.  The 
time.     "  By  night."     Primarily  he  meant  natural  night,  while  men  slept.     At  that 
season  the  Lord  came  to  him,  opening  the  prophet's  spiritual  eyes,  and  causing 
to  pass  before  him,  like  a  pictured  scene  in  bright  and  glowing  colours,  a  sublime 
and  cheering  vision.     The  words  "  by  night "  may  remind  us  of  the  circum- 
stances of  the  time  at  which  the  vision  was  given.     Apply  the  words,  by  way  of 
accommodation,  to  the  spiritual  night  of  Christendom.     For  night  in  a  spiritual 
sense  is  only  dreadful  when  we  are  deprived  of  spiritual  vision,  when  the  eyes 
of  the  understanding  are  darkened.     It  is  night,  when  with  sufferings  upon  us,  we 
do  not  recognise  the  hand  that  inflicts  them.     There  is  another  kind  of  spiritual 
night  more  fearful  still.     David  feared  it  when  he  said,  "  Hide  not  Thy  face  from 
me,  lest  I  be  like  unto  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit."     Yet  even  here  there 
may  be  vision  in  the  darkness,  and  this  is  a  favour  indeed.     II.  What  did  the 
PBOPHET  BEHOLD  ?     It  was  a  precious  vision.     Afterwards  he  hears  the  explana- 
tion of  it.     The  vision  was  fraught  with  consolation  and  promise.     Zechariah 
beholds  a  man  ;  that  man  is  Christ,  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant.     The  times  of 
Zechariah  needed  a  helper  in  the  character  of  a  man,  and  a  "  man  of  war  "  ;  for 
it  was  a  season  of  war  and  tumults.     Zechariah  beholds  Him  upon  a  red  horse. 
And  Christ,  like  a  man  riding  upon  a  horse,  stands  ready  to  fly  with  speed  to 
the  help  and  defence  of  His  people.     The  prophet  speaks  of  the  myrtle-trees. 
True  believers  are  trees  which  Christ  Himself  has  planted  ;  trees  of  righteous- 
ness, fast  rooted  in  the  ground  of  His  merits,  and  thriving  by  the  grace  of  His 
Holy  Spirit.     Such  are  all  the  children  of  God  here  on  earth.     The  man  among 
the  myrtle-trees  "  stood  "  ;  the  Lord  abides  among  His  people.     {F.  W.  Krum- 
macher,  D.D.)        Behind  Him  were  there  red  horses,   speckled,  and  white. — 
Zechariah's  vision  of  the  horses : — I.    The  name   of  this  paeabolic  vision. 
"  The  Word  of  the  Lord."     Thought  is  invisible,  and  must  be  clothed  in  some 
form  of  words.     God's  greatest  thought  about  men  was  revealed  to  us  by  His 
Son  in  human  flesh.     II.  The  time  when  the  prophet  received  this  "  Word 
OF  THE   Lord."     "  In  the  night."     God  has  often  chosen  the  night-season  to 
reveal  His  mind  to  His  servants.     At  night  men  are  more  free  from  impressions 
from  the  outside  world.     The  darkness  and  stillness  of  night  throw  the  mind  in 
upon  itself.     III.  The  meaning  of  the  symbolic  word.     1.  The  "  red  horses  " 
symbolise  coming  war.     2.  White  horses  symbolise  victory.     3.  Speckled  horses 
set  forth  the  variety  of  the  Divine  dealings,  of  that  mingling  of  mercy  and  judg- 
ment which  had  been  intended  to  lift  them  up  to  a  high  level  among  the  nations 
of   the   world.     Lessons — (1)  The   Church  triumphant  is  intended  to  minister 
to  the  comfort  of  the  Church  militant.     (2)  The  child  of  light  walking  in  dark- 
ness is  under  the  guidance  of  the  angels  of  light.     (3)  God's  silence  at  sin  is  not 
God's  forgiveness  of   sin.     {A  London  Minister.)        The  vision  of  horses: — I 
understand  that  all  these  horses  had  riders.     There  were,  then,  a  troop  of  horse- 
men ;  but  the  prophet  says  that  one  appeared  as  the  chief  leader,  who  was  accom- 
panied by  others.     These  horsemen  had  returned  from  an  expedition  ;  for  they 
had  been  sent  to  review  the  whole  world  and  its  different  parts.     He  therefore 
says  that  they  had  returned  from  their  journey,  and  also  that  the  whole  earth 
was  quiet,  that  men  enjoyed  peace  and  tranquillity  everywhere.     It  seemed  a 
very  unbecoming  and  strange  thing  that  the  faithful  alone  should  be  oppressed 
with  adversities,  while  others  lived  in  peace  and  enjoyed  their  pleasures.     There 
follows  at  length  an  answer  from  God.     I  regard  this  as  the  object — that  horse- 
men were  presented  to  the  prophet  that  he  might  know  that  God  does  not  remain 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

shut  up  in  heaven,  and  neglect  the  affau-s  of  men,  but  that  He  has,  as  it  were, 
swift  horses,  so  that  He  knows  what  things  are  everywhere  carried  on.  The 
prophet  here  ascribes  to  God  the  character  of  a  chief  sovereign,  who  inquires 
respecting  all  the  affairs  of  men.  It  is,  indeed,  certain  that  all  things  were  fully 
known  to  Him  before  He  created  angels,  but  God  assumes  the  character  of  man 
in  order  that  He  may  more  familiarly  instruct  us.  .  .  .  As  God  did  not  intend 
to  exhibit  in  full  light  what  He  afterwards  in  due  time  taught,  the  vision  appeared 
in  the  night.  And  to  the  same  purpose  is  what  he  says  respecting  the  angels, 
that  they  were  in  a  dark  or  deep  place,  and  that  they  were  among  the  myrtles. 
Some  think  that  their  being  in  a  deep  place  and  thick  shade  designates  the  state 
of  the  people,  being  that  of  sorrow  and  of  joy  ;  for  though  quietness  in  part  was 
restored  to  the  people,  yet  much  darkness  and  much  perplexity  remained  in 
their  affairs.  There  was  one  angel  more  eminent  than  the  rest,  and  in  this  there 
is  nothing  unusual,  for  when  God  sends  forth  a  company  of  angels,  He  gives  the 
lead  to  some  one.  If  we  regard  this  angel  as  Christ,  the  idea  is  consistent  with 
the  common  usage  of  Scripture,  for  Christ,  we  know,  is  the  head  of  the  angels. 
With  regard  to  the  different  colours,  the  prophet,  no  doubt,  understood  that 
they  designated  the  offices  allotted  to  angels,  as  some  convey  God's  benefits, 
and  others  come  armed  with  scourges  and  swords.  The  design  of  the  vision 
is  not  doubtful ;  it  is,  that  the  Jews  might  be  assured  that  the  distresses  which 
they  at  present  endiu-ed  would  not  be  perpetual,  that  there  was  a  hope  of  the 
temple  and  the  city  being  rebviilt,  because  God  had  returned  into  favour  with 
the  people.  The  prophet  teaches  at  the  same  time  that  the  building  of  the 
temple  was  not  to  be  expected,  but  as  an  instance  of  God's  gratuitous  favour, 
and  this  doctrine  ought  also  to  be  extended  to  the  state  of  the  Church  at  all 
times,  for  whence  comes  it  that  the  Church  remains  safe  in  the  world  except 
that  God  indulges  us  according  to  His  infinite  goodness  ?  {John  Calvin. ) 
The  rider  in  the  myrtle  grove  : — By  the  myrtle  grove  is  signified  the  covenant 
people,  the  nation  of  Israel,  and  by  its  being  in  a  low  place  is  indicated  their 
then  depressed  and  sad  condition.  In  the  Hebrew  mind  the  idea  of  modest 
beauty  and  freshness  was  associated  with  the  myrtle  ;  and  hence  we  find  this 
introduced  as  symbolical  of  the  Chvu-ch  vmder  the  reign  of  the  Messiah,  when 
"  instead  of  the  briar," — the  symbol  of  the  world  under  the  curse — "  shall  come 
up  the  myrtle-tree."  The  Jewish  nation,  though  at  that  time  in  a  state  of  depres- 
sion and  affliction,  was  fair  in  the  sight  of  God,  was  destined  to  endiu-e  and  flourish, 
and  was  ere  long  to  be  visited  by  Him  in  mercy  and  restored  to  prosperity.  This 
is  specially  indicated  here  by  the  standing  among  the  myrtle-trees  of  the  mounted 
rider.  He  is  described  as  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  ;  no  other  than  God  manifest 
in  human  form  ;  the  same  Being  who,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  came  to  our  world 
as  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant.  For  the  consolation  and  encouragement  of  the 
people,  the  prophet  had  to  tell  them  that,  depressed  as  was  their  condition,  the 
Angel  of  the  Lord,  the  Leader,  the  Protector,  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  was  still 
in  the  midst  of  them.  He  was  ready  to  ride  forth  in  their  defence,  and  to  send 
judgment  on  their  adversaries.  This  was  indicated  in  the  vision  by  His  being 
mounted  on  a  red  horse,  the  symbol  of  war  and  bloodshed.  The  Angel  of  the 
Lord  is  with  them  also  as  their  Intercessor  with  God.  Hence  He  appears  in  this 
vision  as  making  intercession  for  them,  beseeching  God  to  have  pity  on  Jerusalem 
and  the  cities  of  Judah  ;  and  now  that  the  time  of  chastisement  was  at  an 
end,  that  He  would  be  gracious  to  them,  and  grant  them  full  restoration  and 
establishment  in  their  own  land.  And  through  Him  also  came  the  comforting 
answer  to  the  people.  In  this  vision  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  speaks  directly  and 
immediately  to  the  invisible  God ;  but  to  the  prophet  He  speaks  through  the 
angel  interpreter.  God  declares  His  zeal  for  His  people.  His  indignation  against 
their  enemies,  and  His  determination  to  do  good  unto  His  people,  and  enrich 
them  with  His  bounty.  He  is  not  an  indifferent  spectator  of  what  happens  to 
them.  He  watches  over  them  with  a  constant  jealousy,  solicitous  for  their  well- 
being,  and  ready  to  resent  all  attempts  to  injure  them.  His  own  He  will  never 
forsake.  When  the  deepest  abyss  of  calamity  seems  to  be  reached  by  them, 
when  the  darkest  ho\ur  of  their  sorrow  throws  its  shadows  over  them,  the  Angel 
of  the  Lord,  He  who  ever  encamps  round  them  that  fear  Him,  will  suddenly 
appear  on  their  side,  and  will  deliver  them  from  all  their  enemies.  ( W.  L.  Alex- 
ander, D.D.)  The  man  among  (he  myrtles: — As  the  Jewish  people  are  usually 
regarded  by  the  prophet  in  their  theocratic  character,  as  the  form  in  which  the 
Chiurch  then  existed,  the  general  doctrines  of  these  visions  are  applicable  to  the 


CHAP.  1.]  ZECHARIAH.  11 

Church  in  every  form  in  which  she  exists.  Some  of  the  doctrines  as  set  forth 
in  this  vision  are — 1.  The  Church  is  externally  an  humble  and  lowly  thing, 
neglected,  often  despised  by  the  gay  and  wicked  world,  a  grove  of  m5Ttles,  rather 
than  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  (ver.  8).  2.  She  has,  however,  an  unseen  glory  that 
the  world  knows  not  of ;  for  Christ  dwells  in  her  midst,  full  of  love,  invested 
with  all  power,  sending  His  angel-messengers  to  do  His  work,  and  preparing 
everything  for  her  final  triumph  (vers.  8,  9).  3.  The  hour  of  darkest  desolation 
to  the  Church,  and  of  haughtiest  triumph  to  her  enemies,  is  often  the  very  hour 
when  God  begins  His  work  of  judgment  on  the  one  and  returning  mercy  on  the 
other  (ver.  11).  4.  Christ  intercedes  for  His  people  when  they  need  it  most, 
and  His  intercession  is  always  prevalent  (vers.  12,  13).  5.  God  will  have  all 
OTir  hearts,  for  He  is  jealous  of  sharing  His  glory  with  another  (ver.  14).  6.  God 
often  uses  instruments  to  chastise  His  people,  which,  when  He  has  done  with 
them.  He  breaks  and  casts  into  the  fire  (ver.  15).  7.  The  Church  of  God  shall 
yet  triumph  over  every  obstacle  and  vanquish  every  foe  (ver.  16).  8.  The  pro- 
mises and  threatenings  of  God,  though  slow,  are  sure.  They  have  eternity  for 
the  range  of  their  fulfilment  (ver.  17).  9.  The  head  of  the  Church  is  at  once 
human  and  Divine.  He  is  called  here  "  a  man  "  (ver.  8),  and  the  "  Angel  of 
Jehovah  "  (ver.  12).  But  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  is  a  Divine  Person — even  Gesenius 
admits  this,  and  the  Babylonish  Talmud  declares  that  "  this  man  is  no  other 
than  the  Holy  One."  But  if  Divine  and  human.  He  must  be  God  and  man  in 
one  person.  (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  The  second  vision: — The  next  vision  was 
full  of  comfort.  As  the  Utile  group  of  returned  exiles  looked  nervously  out  on 
the  mighty  world-empires,  which  surrounded  and  threatened  them,  they  were 
filled  with  alarm.  How  could  they  cope  with  them  ?  There  were  Bishlam, 
Mithredath,  Tabeel,  and  the  rest  of  their  companions,  of  the  nations  whom 
Nebuchadnezzar  had  settled  in  Samaria ;  Rehum  the  chancellor,  and  Shimshai 
the  scribe,  so  ready  in  their  use  of  the  pen  to  exert  influence  on  the  great  kings 
beyond  the  river,  to  make  the  work  of  temple-building  cease  ;  and  the  reactionary 
influences  at  work  in  the  far-distant  court,  always  adverse  to  the  resuscitation 
of  a  subdued  nation,  like  the  Jews,  which  had  given  such  proofs  of  inveterate 
independence.  Beneath  the  irresistible  pressure  of  these  hostile  forces  the  work 
of  temple-building  had  already  ceased  for  fifteen  years,  and  there  was  every 
fear  that  the  new  resolve  to  arise  and  build  would  meet  with  similar  opposition 
and  a  similar  fate.  There  was  singular  appropriateness,  therefore,  in  the  prophet's 
vision.  "  Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and,  behold,  four  horns."  In 
the  language  of  a  pastoral  people  like  the  Jews,  the  horn  naturally  represents 
the  pride  and  power  of  the  ravager  and  oppressor  of  the  flock.  The  number 
"  four  "  reminds  us  of  the  cardinal  points  of  the  compass,  and  indicates  that, 
wherever  the  people  turned,  there  were  foes,  which  were  sworn  to  resist  their 
attempt  to  renew  their  national  life.  On  the  north,  Chaldea,  Assyria,  and 
Samaria ;  on  the  south,  Egypt  and  Arabia ;  on  the  west,  Philistia ;  and  on 
the  east,  Ammon  and  Moab.  And  it  is  probable  that  the  Spirit  of  God  looked 
beyond  these  to  the  four  great  Gentile  monarchies,  which  have  occupied,  and 
still  occupy,  the  "  Times  of  the  Gentiles,"  and  which  were  represented  in  the 
four  metals  of  Daniel's  vision,  or  in  the  four  great  beasts,  which  one  after  another 
emerged  from  the  sea.  As  yet  Babylon  and  Medo- Persia  alone  had  arisen  ; 
Greece  and  Rome,  the  latter  including  the  kingdoms  of  modern  Europe,  were 
to  come.  We  must  not  forget  that  God  Himself  gave  these  world-powers  their 
authority.  He  says,  in  Isaiah,  "  I  was  wroth  with  My  people ;  I  profaned  Mine 
inheritance,  and  gave  them  into  thine  hand  "  (Isa.  Tlvii.  6,  7).  And  in  Daniel 
He  lifts  the  veil  and  shows  that  the  world-rulers  represent  not  flesh  and  blood 
merely,  but  malign  and  mighty  spirits  that  actuate  and  inspire  them  (Dan.  x. 
13-20).  As  long  as  God's  people  are  perfect  in  their  loyalty  and  obedience 
towards  Him,  they  need  fear  the  power  of  no  adversary  whatsoever ;  but  when 
there  is  a  break  in  the  holy  connection  which  binds  Him  and  them  in  an  inviolable 
safety,  it  seems  as  though  all  the  forces  of  evil  are  set  free  to  bear  down  on  and 
ravage  them,  until  their  chastisement  is  completed,  and  they  return  to  their 
first  love.  If  we  were  asked  to  name  the  four  horns  which  are  ravaging  the  Church 
in  the  present  day,  we  should  not  hesitate  to  say  that  they  are  priestcraft,  worldli- 
ness.  Christian  science,  and  spiritualism.  In  every  life  there  are  similar  experi- 
snces.  Sometimes,  when  we  lift  up  our  eyes,  we  find  ourselves  begirt  with  opposi- 
tion and  threatened  by  hostile  powers.  Think  of  the  martyr-host  who  have 
witnessed  for  God  in  every  age,  and  who  could  reiterate  the  words  of  the  greatest 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

Sufferer  of  all.  "  Many  bulls  have  compassed  Me,  strong  bulls  of  Bashan  have 
beset  Me  round  about ;  they  gape  upon  Me  with  their  mouth  as  a  ravening  and 
a  roaring  lion."  Ignatius,  who  complains  that  his  custodians  were  like  "  ten 
leopards,  who  only  wax  worse  when  they  are  kindly  treated  "  ;  Blandina,  the 
girl  slave  ;  Germanicus,  the  noble  youth ;  the  Waldenses,  whose  wrongs  roused 
Cromwell's  wrath  and  Milton's  muse  ;  the  Netherlands,  in  their  long  conflict  with 
Philip,  when  the  leaders  saw  their  homes  covered  again  by  the  ocean  from  which 
their  ancestors  had  redeemed  them  ;  Madame  Guyon,  beset  by  husband,  mother- 
in-law,  servants,  and  priests  ;  Samuel  Rutherford,  and  hundreds  of  his  time, 
harried  by  the  fiercest  and  most  insatiable  hate  ;  WiUiam  Tjmdale,  the  cele- 
brated translator  of  the  English  Bible  ;  John  G.  Paton,  beset  with  savages— 
these  are  specimens  of  a  multitude,  which  no  man  can  number,  of  every  nation, 
and  kindred,  and  people,  who  have  seen  the  vision  of  the  four  horns.  But  there 
is  something  beyond ;  and  surely  it  is  not  without  significance  that  the  prophet 
says,  "  The  Lord  showed  me  four  carpenters"  (or  smiths,  R.V.).  We  have 
no  difficulty  in  descrying  the  sources  of  alarm  for  ourselves  ;  but  we  need  a 
Divine  hand  to  reveal  our  assured  deliverance.  "  And  Elisha  prayed  and  said. 
Lord,  I  pray  Thee  open  his  eyes,  that  he  may  see.  And  the  Lord  opened  the 
eyes  of  the  young  man  and  he  saw  ;  and,  behold,  the  moimtain  was  full  of  horsea 
and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  Elisha."  For  Babylon,  the  "  carpenter  "  was 
Cyrus  ;  for  Persia,  Alexander ;  for  Greece,  the  Roman  ;  for  Rome,  the  Gaul. 
Very  different  from  each  other,  very  ruthless  and  unsparing ;  but  very  well 
adapted  for  their  work.  Commenting  on  this  passage,  the  late  C.  H.  Spurgeon 
said  :  "  He  who  wants  to  open  an  oyster  must  not  use  a  razor  ;  for  some  works 
there  needs  less  of  daintiness  and  more  of  force  ;  providence  does  not  find  clerks, 
or  architects,  or  gentlemen,  to  cut  off  horns,  but  carpenters.  The  work  needs 
a  man  who,  when  he  has  work  to  do,  puts  his  whole  strength  into  it,  and  beata 
away  with  his  hammer,  or  cuts  through  the  wood  that  lies  before  him  with  might 
and  main.  Let  us  not  fear  for  the  cause  of  God  ;  when  the  horns  become  too 
troublesome,  the  carpenters  will  be  forthcoming  to  fray  them."  Remember 
how  in  every  age  He  has  found  His  appropriate  messenger.  Athanasius  frayed 
Arianism,  and  Augustine  Manich  seism  ;  Luther  frayed  the  power  of  the  pope 
in  Germany,  and  rough  Hugh  Latimer  in  England ;  Wesley  and  Whitefield 
frayed  the  religious  indifference  of  the  last  century.  When  Haldane  went  to 
Geneva,  he  frayed  the  scepticism  which  was  destroying  the  Helvetian  and  Gallic 
Churches.  The  Lord  knows  where  to  find  His  servants,  and  when  the  pre- 
destined hour  strikes,  there  will  stand  the  workman  ready.  Oh,  child  of  God  ! 
there  have  been  many  horns  engaged  in  scattering  thee.  Year  after  year  they 
have  wrought  sad  havoc  in  thy  plans,  and  cost  thee  bitter  tears.  But  thine 
Almighty  Friend  is  greatly  displeased  that  they  have  hurt  thee  more  than  His 
purposes  of  chastisement  required,  and  He  has  resolved  that  they  shall  be  frayed. 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  God's  government  of  the  world: — Amongst  the  various 
manners  in  which  God  revealed  Himself  to  men  of  old,  visions  were  perhaps  the 
most  frequent  and  impressive.  He  appears  to  the  prophet  in  six  distinct  visions. 
The  visions  were  marked  by  these  four  characteristics.  They  were  (1)  Mental. 
Unlike  all  other  creatures  on  the  earth,  man  has  an  inner  visual  organ  ;  he  can 
see  with  his  mind.  This  is  seen  in  poets,  such  as  Milton,  Spenser,  &c.  Alle- 
gorists,  such  as  Bunyan,  &c.  They  were  (2)  Symbolic.  Strange  and  grotesque 
objects  were  seen.  These  objects  were  all  symbolic  ;  they  had  a  spiritual  sig- 
nificance. They  were  (3)  Divine.  All  men,  unless  they  are  utterly  destitute 
of  the  poetic  sentiment,  have  visions  sometimes,  not  only  sleeping  but  waking 
visions.  But  seldom,  perhaps,  are  these  visions  Divine.  They  were  (4)  Pro- 
phetic. They  point  here  to  the  future  of  God's  moral  kingdom  upon  the  earth. 
Men  of  lofty,  sanctified  genius,  often  in  their  visions  have  a  glance  of  "things 
that  are  to  come."  This  vision  seems  to  give  us  a  glance  into  God's  moral  govern- 
ment of  the  world.  It  takes  us  behind  the  veil  of  phenomena,  and  shows  ua 
principles  and  agencies  that  move,  fashion,  and  control  all.  I.  It  is  carried  on 
in  connection  with  mysterious  agencies.  What  did  the  prophet  see  ?  "I 
saw  by  night,  and  behold  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse,  and  He  stood  among 
the  myrtle-trees  that  were  in  the  bottom  :  and  behind  Him  were  there  red  horses, 
speckled,  and  white."  Who  are  these  ?  Unfallen  angels  and  sainted  men. 
These  by  millions  stand  near  His  throne,  prompt  to  obey  His  behests.  In  rela- 
tion to  these  agents  two  thoughts  are  suggested — 1.  That  they  are  under  the 
command  of  a  transcendent  mind.     Most  expositors  regard  the  man  on  the  red 


CHAP.  I.]  ZECHARIAH.  13 

horse,  and  who  stood  among  the  myrtle-trees,  as  no  less  a  personage  than  the 
Angel  of  the  Covenant,  the  Great  Messiah.  This  same  man  appeared  to  Abraham 
in  the  plains  of  Mamre,  to  Jacob  before  his  meeting  with  Esau,  to  Moses  at  the 
burning  bush,  to  Joshua  at  Jericho,  with  the  sword  drawn  in  His  hand.  Here 
He  is  on  the  "  red  horse,"  emblem  of  war.  He  is  a  great  moral  chieftain. 
Another  thought  suggested  is — (1)  That  there  are  varied  orders.  "  Behind  Him 
were  there  red  horses,  speckled,  and  white."  This  is  the  troop  that  followed 
the  man.  When  the  eyes  of  Elisha's  servant  were  opened,  he  beheld  a  "  mountain 
full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  Elisha."  Horses  are  emblems 
of  force  and  fleetness.  In  Christ's  army  there  are  hosts,  mighty  in  power  and 
swift  in  motion.  "  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits  ? "  How  infinitely- 
varied  are  God's  ministers — varied  in  kind  and  measure  of  faculty,  in  experience, 
attainment,  and  aspect  too — thrones,  principaUties,  powers,  and  dominions. 
In  relation  to  these  agents  it  is  suggested — 2.  That  the  whole  world  is  their  sphere 
of  action.  "  These  are  they  whom  the  Lord  hath  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  through 
the  earth."  (1)  They  "  go  to  and  fro  "  through  the  earth.  They  are  ever  journey- 
ing ;  some  are  swift  as  lightning  in  their  speed  ;  some  of  them  are  "  full  of  eyes," 
and  see  all  things.  (2)  They  know  the  state  of  the  world.  "  We  have  walked 
to  and  fro  through  the  earth,  and,  behold,  all  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and  is  at 
rest."  "  At  rest,"  not  in  the  rest  of  righteousness,  not  in  the  repose  of  good- 
ness, but  in  carnal  security  and  sin.  Another  fact  suggested  in  relation  to  God's 
government  in  the  world  is — II.  That  it  has  not  only  difficttlties,  but  an 
INTERPEBTEE  ALSO.  "  Then  Said  I,  0  my  lord,  what  are  these  ?  "  1.  The 
diflGiculties  of  God's  government.  What  are  these  ?  The  prophet  understood 
not  these  strange  appearances  ;  and  in  amazement  he  exclaims.  What  are  these  ? 
What  thoughtful  man  has  not  asked  such  a  question  as  this  concerning  the  Divine 
government  over  and  over  again  ?  "  What  are  these  ?  What  are  these  ele- 
ments, forces,  laws,  existences,  events  ?  What  are  they  ?  Are  they  messengers 
of  mercy  or  justice  ?  0  my  lord,  what  are  these  ?  "  We  are  aU  moving  in 
mystery.  2.  The  interpreter  of  God's  government.  Who  answered  the  question  ? 
"  The  man  that  stood  among  the  m3rrtle-trees  answered  and  said.  These  are 
they."  Some  other  creature,  the  angel  that  talked  with  them,  was  asked  first; 
but  the  answer  came  not  from  him,  but  from  the  man,  Christ  Jesus.  In  Rev. 
V.  2,  "  a  strong  angel  "  is  represented  as  crying  with  a  loud  voice  concerning 
the  mysteries  of  God's  government,  inquiring  who  was  able  to  "  loose  the  seals  "  ; 
but  no  one  was  found  in  heaven,  in  earth,  or  under  the  earth  worthy  to  "  open 
and  read  the  book."  There  was  only  One  found.  "It  was  the  Lamb  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne."     Christ  is  the  only  interpreter  of  God.     He  is  the  Logos. 

III.    That  IT  IS   ESPECIALLY  CONCEENED   IN  THE   INTERESTS   OF  HiS  PEOPLE.       His 

people  are  supposed  to  be  here  represented  by  the  "  myrtle-trees."  The  Jewish 
Church  at  this  time  was  not  like  a  forest  of  stately  cedars,  but  a  grove  of  myrtles, 
fragile  and  obscure.  1.  These  seem  to  be  the  centre  of  Divine  operations  on 
the  earth.  Now,  in  the  myrtle-trees  is  the  "  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse."  And 
in  the  myrtle-trees  were  the  "  red  horses,  speckled,  and  white,"  the  whole  troop 
was  there.  The  "  myrtle-trees  "  seemed  to  be  the  centre  of  all  the  agents.  From 
it  they  started  on  their  mission,  and  to  it  they  returned.  The  true  Church  is 
the  temple,  the  residence  of  God  Himself.  2.  The  object  of  special  intercession. 
"  Then  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  answered  and  said,  0  Lord  of  hosts,  how  long  wilt 
Thou  not  have  mercy  on  Jerusalem,  and  on  the  cities  of  Judah,  against  which 
Thou  hast  had  indignation  these  threescore  and  ten  years  ?  "  The  duration 
of  their  captivity  in  Babylon.  Who  is  the  angel  that  makes  this  appeal  ?  It 
was  He  that  "  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  "  If  any  man  sin,  he 
hath  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."  3.  The  subjects 
of  the  Divine  commimication.  "  The  Lord  answered  the  angel  that  talked  with 
me,  with  good  words  and  comfortable  words."  The  prophet  is  here  commis- 
sioned to  proclaim — (1)  God's  zeal  on  behalf  of  Jerusalem.  "  Cry  thou  saying. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  (2)  His  displeasure  for  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem. 
"  I  am  sore  displeased  with  the  heathen."  His  merciful  purpose  was  to  bestow 
blessings  on  Jerusalem.     "Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord,"   &c.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  14-17.  I  am  jealous  for  Jerusalem. — Mercy  mingled  with  chastise- 
ment : — "  Jealousy  is  that  particular  uneasiness  which  arises  in  our  minds  from 
the  fear  that  some  rival  may  rob  us  of  the  affection  of  one  whom  we  greatly  love, 
or  from  suspicion  that  he  has  already  done  it."     God's  jealousy,  or  zeal,  denotes 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

His  distrust  of  His  creatures.  His  eminent  care  of  His  people,  and  His  readiness 
to  punish  such  as  injure  them.  He  is  peculiarly  jealous  for  everything  whereby 
He  maketh  Himself  known.  Comparatively  speaking,  God  may  be  said  to  be  but 
a  little  displeased  with  His  people,  whatever  be  the  manner  of  His  dealing  with 
them  in  this  world.  Their  aflflictions  are  only  temporary  and  of  short  duration. 
They  are  also  designed  for  their  profit,  and  overruled  for  promoting  their  best 
interests.  And  though  the  troubles  that  afflict  the  just  be  great  and  many  in 
number,  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  out  of  them  all.  Let  us  take  the  comfort  which 
the  good  words  spoken  to  Israel  are  designed  to  yield,  amid  all  the  trials  and 
afflictive  dispensations  of  providence  with  which  we  may  be  visited  in  this  life. 
You  may  be  in  darkness  and  in  doubts,  perplexed  on  every  side,  and  encompassed 
with  difficulties,  but  still  you  need  not  despair.  The  Lord  is  jealous  for  you  with 
a  great  jealousy.  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the 
morning.     {Matthew  Fraser.) 

Ver.  16.  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  mercies. — Returning  mercies : — 
Jerusalem  and  Zion  are  laid  waste,  it  is  true,  but  not  in  anger,  so  much  as  in 
chastising  love.  God  still  loves  them,  and  is  jealous  of  any  estrangement  of  their 
affections  from  Him,  and  when  estranged  He  chastises  them  to  bring  them  back. 
This  was  His  object  in  using  the  heathen  as  instruments  of  chastisement,  but  the 
spirit  in  which  they  executed  this  office  provoked  His  wrath.  He  designed  only 
to  inflict  a  slight  chastisement,  but  they  rioted  in  the  sufferings  of  His  people  with 
wanton  cruelty.  They  mocked  their  sorrows  and  taunted  them  with  their 
abandonment.  Hence  God  will  punish  these  heathen,  and  will  bestow  mercy 
on  His  people,  cause  the  temple  to  be  built,  the  city  to  be  enlarged,  and  prosperity 
to  return  to  the  land.  {T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  The  Divine  absence  and  return  : — 
1.  God  seems  to  absent  Himself  sometimes  from  those  for  whom  He  hath  great 
blessings  in  store.  By  absenting  Himself  is  meant  only  the  withdrawing  His 
countenance,  or  sunshine  of  His  favour,  when  the  clouds  of  adversity  or  trouble, 
either  spiritual  or  temporal,  sit  uneasy  on  His  chosen  servants.  At  such  times  He 
seems  to  "  hide  His  face  from  them."  Afflictions  in  this  life  are  like  eclipses  of 
celestial  bodies,  the  noblest  planet  never  suffers  any,  for  when  we  say  the  sun  is 
eclipsed,  it  is  we  are  more  properly  so,  we  want  his  cheerful  light  and  influences, 
whilst  he  himself  is  not  diminished  one  ray.  The  moon  is  sometimes  really 
eclipsed,  and  labours  under  the  want  of  a  borrowed  light.  Thus  Divinest  consti- 
tutions never  suffer.  The  lunar  populace  are  more  really  affected  by  that  obscurity 
which  can  never  hurt  a  being,  placed  so  near  Divinity.  But  if  such  an  one  hath 
been  obscured,  then  this  proposition  must  be  granted,  that  God  Almighty  doth 
sometimes  seem  to  absent  Himself  from  those  whom  He  best  loves.  Joseph, 
David,  and  even  the  Son  of  God  Himself,  had  more  than  an  ordinary  share  of 
this  world's  frowns.  The  reason  for  such  experiences  may  respect — ( 1 )  God  Himself. 
He  may  permit  this  for  His  own  Divine  sake,  that  He  may  be  glorified  by  all  that 
happens  to  the  children  of  men ;  that  the  wise  man  may  see  that  he  hath  no  reason 
to  glory  in  his  wisdom,  nor  the  mighty  man  in  his  strength,  but  that  all  things 
by  God's  providence  come  alike  sometimes  to  all.  (2)  In  respect  of  those  whom 
He  loves,  God  may  sometimes  afflict  them  either  by  way  of  admonition  or  trial. 
God  is  that  wise  and  tender  physician  who  never  administers  any  uneasy  medicine 
but  when  He  sees  there  is  an  occasion  for  it.  All  the  dispensations  of  His  providence 
are  the  results  of  Divine  wisdom  and  unchangeable  love ;  therefore  they  ought 
most  to  suspect  themselves  who  have  the  least  share  of  severe  favours.  God 
may  design  to  make  trial  of  the  patience,  virtue,  faith,  hope,  or  charity  of  any 
one  of  His  servants.  (3)  The  like  reason  not  only  regards  the  sufferer,  but  all 
others  who  are  witnesses  and  spectators  of  their  sufferings.  That  they  may  see 
the  advantages  of  religion  above  all  other  supports  and  consolations,  how  useful 
and  effectual  it  is.  2.  Such  absenting  of  Himself  is  but  for  a  while,  as  seems  best 
to  His  goodness  and  wisdom  "I  am  returned"  denotes  the  speediness  and 
certainty  of  God's  returning  with  mercies.  The  fountain  of  honour  can  never  be 
impoverished  or  impaired  by  making  the  first  overtures  of  tenderness  and  recon- 
ciliation. He  is  in  great  haste  for  an  accommodation  ;  He  condescends  much 
to  our  infirmities.  It  is  His  nature  and  property  to  have  mercy  and  forgive. 
3.  When  He  doth  return  it  is  with  all  the  tenders  of  love  and  compassion.  Not 
with  forgiveness  only,  or  any  one  species,  but  with  all  the  instances  of  mercy. 
Nor  doth  it  at  all  interfere  with  His  constancy  and  justice,  because  it  always 
supposes  conditions  performed  ;  at  least  in  His  foreknowledge,  that  His  mercy 


CHAP.  I.]  ZECHARIAH.  15 

will  move  us  to  repentance.  Upon  which  account  His  mercy  is  sometimes 
termed  His  justice.  His  mercy  never  obstructs  His  justice,  but  all  His  attributes 
are  one  simple  essence,  and  proceed  in  an  eternal  and  unchangeable  method. 
Learn  that  if  the  mercies  of  God  toward  us  are  so  great,  we  ought  to  be  tender 
and  compassionate  one  towards  another.     {Samud  Prat,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  My  cities  through  prosperity. — Zion's  prosperity  : — Jehovah's  tender  care 
of  His  living  Church  seems  to  be  a  prominent  topic  with  the  prophet  Zechariah, 
Amid  all  the  visitations  Zion  has  experienced  from  her  God  in  consequence  of 
her  departures.  His  heart  has  been  set  upon  her  eternal  interests,  and  He  never 
can  change  His  mind  concerning  her.  I.  The  claim  which  Jehovah  lays  to 
His  Chut.ches,  "  My  cities."  They  are  associated,  or  organised  bodies,  not 
promiscuous  multitudes.  Distinguished  they  may  be  from  each  other  by  a  variety 
of  names,  and  a  variety  of  circumstances ;  but  God  says  to  them  all,  "  Ye  are  My 
cities."  They  are  all  chartered  cities.  Their  charter  is  unchanging,  covenant  love. 
It  is  written,  signed,  sealed,  and  preserved  by  their  covenant  God.  What  is 
the  wording  of  the  charter  ?  "I  will  be  their  God,  they  shall  be  My  people." 
God's  Churches  are  classified.  Separated  from  one  another,  not  only  in  their 
peculiar  localities,  and  their  peculiar  features  of  discipline,  but  in  minor  points  of 
order  and  regulation.  Each  one  should  know  and  keep  his  proper  position.  And 
they  are  all  consecrated  cities,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  Cities  are  generally 
noted  for  their  liberties  and  privileges.  And  so  "  if  the  Son  make  you  free,  you 
shall  be  free  indeed."  Our  privileges  are  most  valuable  and  innumerable.  These 
cities  were  all  designed  and  also  founded  by  Jehovah,  and  He  rules  over  them  all. 
n.  Their  prosperity — which  must  come  from  Himself.  "  Shall  yet  be 
spread  abroad."  The  prosperity  of  a  city  is  seen  in  its  population,  its  commerce, 
and  the  healthiness  of  its  air.  A  sign  of  prosperity  in  a  Church  is  found  in  the 
number  of  spiritual  births.  III.  Their  comfort.  "  The  Lord  shall  yet  comfort 
Zion."  Her  tranquillity  is  preserved  in  spite  of  all  that  sin  and  Satan  can  do; 
and  her  honourable  associations  are  kept  up  and  maintained.  That  will  be 
comfort  for  Zion.  IV.  The  grand  first  cause  of  all,  electing  love.  The 
Lord  "  shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem."     (Joseph  Irons.) 

Vers.  18-21.  Behold  four  horns. — The  mission  of  the  Church's  enemies : — 
Three  things  there  are  which  this  age  of  ours  hath  brought  forth :  malignant 
enemies,  special  instruments  of  their  ruin,  and  great  endeavours  for  reforma- 
tion. Accordingly  here  are  three  visions :  a  vision  of  four  horns  (vers. 
18,  19) ;  a  vision  of  four  carpenters  (vers.  20,  21) ;  a  vision  of  a  man  with  a 
measuring  line  in  his  hand  (chap.  ii.  ver.  1).  The  description  of  the  Church's 
enemies  under  the  vision  of  four  horns.  1.  Their  number  or  multitude;  they  are 
four  horns  according  to  four  parts  of  the  world.  2.  Their  power  and  strength. 
The  horn  in  Scripture  denotes  strength.  3.  Their  mischievous  and  malignant 
practice  ;  "  They  scattered  Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem."  In  the  second  vision 
is  the  description  of  those  special  instruments  that  are  raised  up  for  their  destruc- 
tion, under  the  simihtude  of  four  carpenters  or  smiths.  Their  work  is  to  scatter 
the  horns,  and  to  cast  out  the  Gentiles.  The  third  vision  presents  the  endeavours 
for  reformation,  under  the  similitude  of  "  a  man  with  a  measuring  line  in  his  hand  "  ; 
which  is  described  in  two  ways :  from  the  instrument  thereof,  a  man,  an  excellent 
man,  possibly  alluding  to  Zerubbabel  the  governor ;  and  from  the  exactness 
thereof, — he  doth  work  by  line.  Attend  to  three  doctrines.  1.  When  God 
intendeth  any  good  and  salvation  to  His  Churches,  He  doth  first  suffer  many 
potent,  malicious  enemies  to  rise  against  them.  Was  it  not  so  with  Israel  when 
God  intended  to  bring  them  out  of  Egypt  ?  Then  their  taskmasters  arose  and 
doubled  their  work.  This  is  God's  way  still.  But  what  reason  is  there  that  God 
should  suffer  His  people  to  be  thus  handled,  oppressed,  scattered,  by  cruel  enemies  ? 
Good  reason.  So  many  enemies,  so  many  schoolmasters.  Our  enemies  are  our 
observers,  and  their  observation  is  our  preservation.  Hereby  they  are  occasioned 
to  honour  God  ;  they  are  weaned  from  the  world  ;  they  are  more  useful  in  their 
places,  and  even  beneficial  to  their  enemies  ;  they  carry  the  truths  of  God  into 
other  parts  ;  they  receive  a  fuller  and  clearer  testimony  of  their  own  graces  ;  their 
enemies  themselves  are  the  more  convinced  ;  the  saints  are  kept  from,  and  cured 
of,  divisions  among  themselves  ;  hereby  the  servants  of  God  may  see  and  know  by 
experience,  that  it  is  better  to  serve  God  than  man  ;  and  the  servants  of  God 
learn  the  right  use  of  the  rod,  both  in  Church  and  State.     Then  let  no  man  be 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  r. 

stumbled  or  offended  at  God's  present  proceedings  in  the  world,  as  if  they  were 
very  mysterious.  2.  Though  God  suffers  the  enemies  of  His  Church  to  be  many 
and  great.  He  will  raise  up  proportionate  strength  against  them.  Three  enemies 
there  are  by  whom  you  are  most  molested,  the  flesh,  the  devil,  the  world.  The  flesh 
brings  forth  three  great  evils.  Ignorance  in  the  understanding ;  in  opposition 
to  that  Jesus  Christ  is  called  our  Prophet.  Rebellion  in  the  will ;  in  opposition 
to  that  Jesus  Christ  is  called  our  King.  Guiltiness  that  arises  from  ignorance  and 
rebellion ;  in  opposition  to  that  Jesus  Christ  is  called  our  Priest.  The  devil,  our 
Becond  enemy,  is  armed  with  all  weapons  of  hostility  against  us.  Whatever  terms 
or  titles  of  strength  and  power  there  is  in  Satan,  there  is  somewhat  in  Jesus  Christ 
that  answereth,  yea,  that  over-answereth  all.  The  third  enemy,  the  world,  is 
described  in  Rev.  xiii.  1.  Our  text  speaks  but  of  four  horns,  here  are  ten.  So  that, 
whatever  your  enemies  are,  there  is  strength  enough  in  Jesus  Christ  to  subdue  their 
strength.  Why  is  Christ  thus  furnished,  but  for  His  Church  and  people  ?  He  is 
the  Ix)rd-keeper  of  all  our  comforts  ;  the  Lord-treasurer  of  all  our  graces  ;  and 
the  great  magazine  of  all  our  ammunition.  The  application  of  this  doctrine 
looks  two  ways  :  to  the  saints  by  way  of  consolation  and  encouragement ;  to  the 
carpenters,  God's  workmen,  by  way  of  direction  and  exhortation.  ( W.  Bridge,  M.A.) 
Horns  and  workmen  : — This  second  vision  may  be  regarded  as  supplementary  of 
the  first.  There  the  restoration  of  Judah  was  indicated  generally ;  here  some 
of  the  means  by  which  that  was  to  be  effected  are  presented.  Though  enemies 
from  all  quarters,  and  on  every  side,  might  assail  the  people  of  God,  the  Lord, 
their  protector,  would  raise  up  for  them  adequate  defence,  would  bring  into  action 
powers  sufficient  to  discomfit  and  cast  down  all  their  oppressors,  however  many 
or  strong.  What  was  thus  showed  for  the  comfort  of  the  people  of  God  in  the 
old  time  is  no  less  for  the  comfort  and  encouragement  of  the  Church  in  all  ages  and 
places.  "  The  sum  of  the  whole  is,  though  the  Church  may  not  be  exempt  from 
many  troubles,  yet  the  Lord  has  in  His  hand  resources  by  which  He  can  restrain 
all  assaults  of  the  wicked,  however  impetuously  and  violently  they  may  be  impelled 
against  the  Church."  The  Angel  of  the  Lord,  the  Divine  Redeemer,  abides  for 
ever  with  that  Church  which  He  has  piu-chased  with  His  own  blood.  And  exalted 
as  He  is  to  the  throne  of  His  glory,  and  having  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth. 
He  can  send  forth  at  any  time  agencies  by  which  the  power  of  the  Church's  enemies 
shall  be  broken,  and  all  their  forces  routed.  It  behoves  the  Church,  then,  to  have 
faith  in  her  exalted  head,  and  patiently  to  wait  for  Him.  In  due  time  He  will 
interpose  on  her  behalf  when  she  is  afflicted  ;  He  will  scatter  and  discomfit  all 
her  adversaries,  and  will  "  cause  her  righteousness  to  go  forth  as  brightness, 
and  her  salvation  as  a  lamp  that  burneth."  (W.  L.  Alexayider,  D.D.)  The 
vision  of  the  four  horns  : — Some  consider  the  four  horns  represent  the  four  kingdoms 
of  Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome.  Others  look  on  them  as  types  of  the  whole 
of  the  enemies  of  Israel  coming  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth.  The  same 
general  truths  are  taught  in  either  case.  1.  That  while  the  world-powers  continue, 
and  the  Chmrch  of  God  lives  in  their  midst,  the  latter  will  be  subjected  to  opposition 
and  persecution.  2.  That  whatever  number  of  foes  the  Church  may  have,  God 
will  take  care  to  provide  her  with  an  equal  number  of  friends.  3.  That  though 
there  will  ever  be  conflict  between  God's  Church  and  her  enemies,  there  will  never 
be  defeat  but  on  one  side.  The  strongest  force  must  ultimately  gain  the  day. 
We  can  account  for  the  existence  of  the  Church  only  from  the  fact  that  "  God  is  in 
the  midst  of  her."  {A  London  Minister.)  The  purpose  of  this  vision  : — I.  For 
INSTRUCTION.  The  progress  of  the  wicked  in  their  enmity  against  the  Church, 
is  but  the  prologue  to  the  Church's  deliverance.  First,  the  horns  arise  and  play 
their  part ;  and  this  brings  on  the  hammermen  to  act  their  part.  II.  For  admoni- 
tion :  that  God's  people  be  not  offended,  or  dismayed,  when  they  see  things  go 
contrary  to  their  deliverance.  At  such  times  let  us  calm  ourselves — 1.  With  a 
consideration  of  the  just  aggravation  of  our  own  sins,  our  disunion  and  security 
that  opened  the  door  to  let  in  the  misery.  2.  With  the  consideration  of  the 
character  of  the  horns.  It  is  the  nature  of  a  beast  to  do  as  they  do,  to  push  and 
scatter.  A  brute  will  be  a  brute.  A  devil  will  be  a  devil.  But  beasts  are  not 
made  to  rule  over  men.  And  the  devil  is  the  gaoler  of  the  wicked,  not  our  ruler. 
3.  As  the  constitution,  so  the  complexion  of  the  last  times  is  indeed  the  worst; 
so  no  better  is  to  be  expected  for  a  time,  but,  though  the  several  hammers  make 
at  first  but  a  confused  noise,  and  the  pieces  of  the  building  lie  in  the  dust,  yet, 
ere  long,  the  new  building  is  reared,  and  the  Great  Master  of  the  house  comes  in  and 
dwells  among  us  in  it.     III.  For  bxuortation.     1.  Let  us  not  judge  by  sense^ 


CHAP.  I.]  ZECHARIAH.  17 

but  by  faith.  2.  Judge  not  by  present  action,  but  by  their  productive  tendency. 
3.  Judge  not  by  the  meanness  of  means,  but  by  the  might  of  the  hand  that  useth 
them.  (N.  Homes. )  Destroyers  and  builders  : — The  enemy  came  upon  the 
land,  came  upon  the  hills  of  Judah  and  of  Israel,  laid  waste  the  city  of  Jerusalem, 
destroyed  the  temple,  scattered  the  people,  broke  up  their  happy  homes,  and  carried 
them  into  captivity.  These  are  the  horns  of  which  the  text  speaks.  Wise  men 
were  raised  up,  skilful  workers,  men  willing  and  able  to  rebuild  Jerusalem,  restore 
the  temple,  and  re-establish  the  worship  of  Jehovah  there.  These  be  the  carpenters 
spoken  of  in  the  text.  The  first  class  is  characterised  by  the  fury  of  the  beast, 
and  the  second  by  the  wisdom  and  skill  of  the  7nan.  I.  Thbeb  abb  the  destroyers 
— THERE  IS  THE  POWER  OF  THE  DESTROYER.  The  powcr  opposed  to  God  and  His 
pmrpose  is  in  Scripture  often  described  under  the  symbol  of  a  beast.  The  prophet 
Daniel  saw  four  beasts  coming  forth  in  succession  to  do  their  destructive  work. 
This  symbol  teaches  us  that  the  power  opposed  to  God  is  from  below,  from  the 
abyss.  The  persecutions  that  raged  against  the  Chiurch  in  other  ages  were 
eruptions  from  the  bottomless  pit,  real  boiling  volcanic  floods  sent  forth  from  the 
mouth  of  "  that  old  serpent,  called  the  devil  and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole 
world."  Such  is  infidelity,  and  the  criticism  which  merely  destroys,  and  the 
philosophy  which  ignores  God.  The  power  opposed  to  God  and  goodness  is 
coarse,  rude,  vulgar — the  power  of  a  beast.  What  will  a  beast  do  if  turned  into  a 
flower  garden  ?  So  the  power  of  evil  is  rude  and  coarse.  Whenever  men  begin 
to  sneer  at  religion,  at  faith,  at  holiness,  at  Christianity,  that  moment  they  become 
coarse.  The  deepest  and  subtlest  wisdom,  the  wisdom  that  can  create,  the  wisdom 
that  can  construct  and  build  up,  is  not  necessary  for  the  destroyer's  work.  The 
rude,  clumsy  power  of  the  reasonless  beast  will  answer  for  that  purpose.  The  power 
of  the  destroyer  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  nature  of  things.  The  beasts  of  Bible 
symbol  are  aU  monsters.  Not  one  of  them  is  harmonious  or  proportionate.  Here 
is  one — he  has  the  body  of  a  leopard  to  begin  with,  the  feet  of  a  bear,  the  hungry 
mouth  of  a  lion  ;  he  has  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  on  each  of  the  heads  in 
flaming  letters  is  inscribed  the  name  of  blasphemy.  What  a  dreadful  apparition 
that  must  have  been  to  St.  John  !  The  power  of  evil  being  out  of  harmony  with 
the  laws  of  nature,  we  can  never  fall  into  the  order  of  God's  universe  while  we  are 
moved  by  the  power  of  evil.  II.  The  skilful  workers.  These  men  have  a 
Divine  vocation,  and  are  inspired  of  God — endued  of  Him  for  their  work.  Ther& 
are  very  many  Divine  vocations  in  this  world.  There  is  the  preacher,  the  student 
of  nature,  the  statesman,  the  teacher,  private  Christians.  These  belong  to  the 
class  of  true  workers.  And  God's  pmpose  shall  at  last  be  realised  ;  the  work  of 
the  skilful  ones  shall  prosper.  Refer  to  the  building  of  the  first  temple  at  Jerusalem. 
It  was  an  idea  early  started,  again  and  again  lost  sight  of,  but  at  last  fully  realised. 
There  is  an  old  saying,  that  in  this  world  every  man  has  believed  in  his  best 
moments  that  there  is  a  golden  age  which  belongs  to  humanity.  Man  never 
believes  in  his  present  degradation  ;  he  believes  that  it  was  never  intended  the 
world  should  remain  as  it  is.  And  I  am  glad  there  are  so  many  brave  Christian 
people  in  this  great  city  who  are  determined  by  God's  grace  to  do  all  that  they 
can  to  realise  this  ancient  idea.  The  prophets  saw  it,  and  it  kindled  their  souls 
into  rapture.  {Thomas  Jones. )  Four  horns  and  four  carpenters  : — This  vision 
presents  to  us  the  cause  of  right  in  the  earth.  I.  That  the  cause  of  right  on  the 
earth  has  strong  antagonists.  Here  are  four  horns,  four  mighty  powers,  all  of 
which  are  in  dead  hostihty  to  the  covenant  people.  They  are  represented  as 
those  who  have  "  scattered  Judah,  so  that  no  man  did  lift  up  his  head."  The 
enemies  of  the  true  scatter  and  crush.  Though  Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome 
have  long  since  passed  away,  the  horns,  or  the  mighty  powers  of  evil,  are  still  here, 
and  are  at  work.  What  are  they  ?  Reigning  materialism  is  a  horn  ;  practical 
atheism  is  a  horn  ;  intolerant  superstition  is  a  horn ;  and  dominant  selfishness 
is  a  horn.  II.  That  the  cause  of  truth  upon  the  earth  has  Divine  defenders. 
Here  are  four  carpenters,  or  smiths,  who  appear  to  "  fray  them,  and  to  cast  out 
the  horns  of  the  Gentiles."  Mark,  the  defenders  were — (1)  Men,  not  angels.  God 
eaves  man  by  man.  Who  were  the  first  apostles  ?  (2)  Working  men.  Toilers, 
labourers.  It  is  man  as  man,  not  philosopher,  poet,  king,  millionaire,  that  has 
to  battle  for  the  right.  The  greatest  moral  victories  have  been  won  by  men  in  the 
lower  walks  of  life.  (3)  They  were  skilled  men.  These  men  had  a  trade  ;  they 
were  craftsmen ;  they  had  been  trained  to  the  work  they  \mdertook.  There  is  a 
skill  required  in  order  to  strike  effectively  at  the  errors  and  wrongs  of  hfe.  Stupid 
men,  however  good  their  intentions,  accomplish  but  little,  if  anything,  in  the 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

noble  cause.  A  man  to  convert  souls  must  have  as  much  aptitude  for  the  work  as 
the  carpenter  has  to  shape  the  wood  to  his  purpose,  or  the  smith  to  work  the 
metals.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  20.  And  the  Lord  shewed  me  four  carpenters. — The  counterbalancing  of 
agencies  : — Evil  agencies  are  counterbalanced  by  good — for  there  is  a  Divine 
providence  always  at  work  in  this  world.  The  prophet  saw  "  four  horns,"  repre- 
senting the  powers  by  which  Judah  had  been  scattered  ;  but  at  the  same  time 
he  saw  "  four  carpenters,"  the  instruments  raised  up  by  God  to  accomplish  a 
Divine  work.  I.  The  wokld  is  made  for  the  Church.  Men  read  the  history 
of  nations  without  the  slightest  reference  to  the  Church  of  the  living  God.  They 
look  at  passing  events  and  circumstances  without  believing  that  they  are  the 
development  of  a  Divine  providence  at  work  in  the  world.  It  may  be  thought 
that  the  world  was  made  for  unfallen  man.  Was  it  not  rather  made  to  be  the 
scene  of  man's  trial  and  probation  ?  It  is  a  fact  that  the  world  was  mapped 
out  with  a  peculiar  reference  to  the  locality  and  home  of  the  Church.  The  world 
was  made  for  Christ,  and  therefore  for  the  Church.  The  world  was  made  to  be 
the  school  for  unfallen  intelligences.     It  was  made  to  be  the  tabernacle  of  God. 

II.  The  work  going  on  in  the  world  is  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  plan. 
There  is  a  charm  in  history,  since  it  not  only  annihilates  the  distances  of  time 
and  space,  but  transports  us  to  other  scenes  and  periods.  If  you  are  a  devout 
student  of  history  you  will  see  a  Divine  hand  prescribing  the  limits  of  conquest 
and  the  extent  of  a  nation's  duration.  There  is,  then,  eternal  order  underlying 
the  world's  disorder,  and  a  Divine  will  subordinating  all  human  wills.  The  great 
chapters  of  the  world's  history  have  all  been  written  beforehand.  We  have 
only  seen  parts  of  the  plan,  some  of  the  first  chapters — strange  and  startling. 

III.  The  work  of  God  in  this  world  is  under  Divine  supervision  and  angelio 
inspection.  From  some  brief  hints,  it  would  appear  as  if  the  government  of 
the  world's  provinces  had  been,  in  some  measure,  intrusted  to  the  management 
of  angels  in  former  times.  IV.  Evil  agencies  are  counterbalanced  by  good. 
In  the  natural  world  there  are  opposite  forces,  and  laws  that  seem  antagonistic, 
but  these  agencies  are  counterbalanced.  We  have  darkness  and  light — we  have 
night  and  day.  All  the  forces  in  this  world  are  adjusted  by  Divine  wisdom,  and 
thus  the  balance  of  the  universe  is  preserved.  There  are  opposite  powers  in 
the  world.  There  is  Satan,  and  there  is  Christ.  "  For  this  purpose  was  the  Son 
of  God  manifested,  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  There  is  sin ; 
and  yet  sin  is  counteracted  by  grace.  There  is  flesh,  and  there  is  spirit.  The 
one  seems  to  be  the  adversary  of  the  other.  Is  the  law  in  our  members  always 
to  bring  us  into  captivity  to  sin  ?  No.  Flesh  itself  is  to  be  transfigured,  to  be 
consecrated  and  hallowed.  There  is  death  in  the  world.  All  men  die,  though 
Christ  has  died ;  all  men  shall  rise,  because  Christ  has  risen.  Thus  evil  agencies 
are  counterbalanced  by  good.  If  there  are  powers  hostile  to  the  Church  and  to 
us,  there  are  powers  that  are  directly  opposed  to  them,  and  that  are  at  work  for 
us,  for  said  the  prophet,  "  The  Lord  shewed  me  four  carpenters."  {H.  J.  Bevia.) 
Four  carpenters  : — I.  The  truth  exhibited  in  this  vision.  1.  The  champions 
of  the  Church  are  as  numerous  as  its  assailants.  2.  They  are  more  powerful 
than  its  assailants.  3.  They  are  seasonably  provided.  II.  The  ground  on  which 
this  truth  rests.  On  the  love,  power,  promises,  and  dispensations  of  God. 
(0.  Brooks.)  ZechariaJi  s  vision: — "When  God  makes  the  prophet.  He  does 
not  unmake  the  man."  Each  sacred  writer  preserves  his  individuality.  Character 
and  circumstance  leave  their  impress  on  the  inspired  productions.  Zechariah 
was  moulded  by  the  peculiarities  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived.  He  was  raised 
up  to  incite  the  Jews'  zeal  in  building  the  temple.  His  mind  overflowed  with  it. 
He  could  think  of  nothing  else.  Hence  we  cannot  marvel  that,  when  he  pro- 
phesied, he  used  architectural  figures.  At  one  time  he  sees  a  "  man  with  a 
measuring  line,"  and  anon  he  says,  "  The  Lord  shewed  me  four  carpenters." 
1.  God's  works  are  often  unobserved.  "  The  Lord  shewed  me."  The  seer  did 
not  behold  them  at  first.  Only  when  Divine  help  was  afforded  did  he  become 
aware  of  them.  Are  there  not  thousands  who  resemble  him  ?  As  regards  nature 
it  is  80.  "  Eyes  have  they,  and  they  see  not."  What  is  true  of  creation  is  true 
with  double  emphasis  and  touching  revelation.  The  Bible  is  dull  and  uninteresting 
to  some.  Others  delight  in  it.  Why  the  difference  ?  The  last  have  Divine 
teaching.  2.  God's  works  are  creative.  "  Carpenters."  These  are  constructive 
agents.     Building,  not  demolishmg,  is  their  proper  work.     In  seeking  our  own 


CHAP,  n.]  ZECHARIAH.  19 

spfritual  and  moral  welfare,  we  cannot  too  often  remember  this  important  principle 
— the  true  method  of  destroying  is  by  creating.  Get  good  into  your  heart,  and 
it  will  cast  out  evil.  3.  God's  works  are  compensative.  "  Four."  Observe  the 
number.  It  corresponds  with  the  number  of  Israel's  foes.  There  is  more  of 
equality  in  men's  conditions  than  is  often  supposed.  A  grand  law  of  compensa- 
tion is  in  operation.  "  God  hath  set  one  thing  over  against  the  other.  As 
regards  riches  and  poverty,  adversity  and  prosperity,  there  is  compensation. 
Everywhere  evil  is  counterbalanced  by  good.  Our  mercies  outweigh  our  miseries. 
{T.  R.  Stevenson.)  The  four  carpenters  : — The  Hebrew  word  means  workman 
in  iron,  brass,  and  stone,  as  well  as  wood.  They  are  here  the  workmen  of  God. 
The  horn  is  the  instrument  of  power.  The  four  horns  are  the  symbols  of 
persecutors,  of  violence  and  oppression,  of  the  destroyers  of  the  people  and  State. 
How  were  they  to  be  crushed,  put  to  fear,  destroyed  ?  That  the  prophet  could 
never  have  found  out  for  himself.  The  Lord  showed  him  four  carpenters.  They 
were  to  fray  (frighten)  the  horns.  It  would  be  heart-breaking  if  there  were 
nothing  for  us  but  to  realise  the  evils  we  have  brought  on  ourselves  ;  if  we  were 
left  only  to  all  that  we  could  see  of  our  troubles.  But  there  is  a  revelation  for 
us,  and  an  interpretation  of  the  revelation  too.  The  four  horns  were  met  by 
four  carpenters.  It  was  a  declaration  to  Zechariah  that  there  existed — ready 
to  act  out  of  the  unseen  world,  whether  by  energising  human  means,  or  not — a 
system  of  counterpoises,  and  counter-influences,  and  means  of  salvation,  with 
Divine  intentions  concerning  them,  all  of  which  were  there,  though  man  saw 
them  not.  God  revealed  the  workers  of  the  spirit-world.  Zechariah  saw  four 
horns ;  it  was  the  human  apprehending  the  terrible  ;  and  the  terrible  is  not 
ignored  by  God  ;  it  is  emphasised,  it  is  explained.  God  puts  their  evil  work 
against  His  people  side  by  side  with  the  work  that  He  will  do  in  their  behalf. 
There  was  a  matching  of  four  against  four.  All  evil  meets  its  match  in  every 
part  when  God  comes  forth  to  work.  If  there  be  bad  influences  against  you 
and  yours,  God  can  bring  counter-influences  against  them,  and  He  can  break 
the  spell  of  evil  already  done.  Why  need  you  ever  despair  of  restoration,  of  help, 
of  salvation,  be  your  cause  never  so  low  ?  The  "  Son  of  God  has  come  that  He 
might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devLL"     {P.  B.  Power,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vers.  1-4.  A  man  with  a  measuring  line  In  his  hand. — The  man  with  a 

measure  : — The  prophet  asks  where  the  man  is  going,  and  the  answer  given  is — 
"  to  measure  "  ;  and  then  he  shows  what  would  be  the  measure  of  Jerusalem, 
that  it  would  hereafter  extend  beyond  the  walls,  as  that  compass  would  not 
contain  the  vast  number  of  the  people.  "  God  will  extend,"  he  says,  "  far  and 
wide  the  holy  city ;  it  will  no  longer  be  confined  as  before  to  its  own  walls,  but 
will  be  inhabited  through  aU  its  villages."  There  is  then  no  doubt  but  that 
God  intended  here  to  bear  witness  respecting  the  propagation  of  His  Church, 
which  was  to  foUow  a  long  time  afterwards,  even  after  the  coming  of  Christ. 
For  though  Jerusalem  became  wealthy  and  also  large  in  its  compass,  and, 
as  it  is  well  known,  a  triple  city,  and  heathen  writers  say  that  it  was  among  the 
first  of  the  cities  of  the  East  when  Babylon  was  still  existing,  yet  this  prophecy 
was  not  verified  in  the  state  of  Jerusalem,  for  it  was  not  inhabited  without  its 
walls,  nor  did  it  spread  through  the  whole  of  Judaea.  We  hence  conclude  that 
the  spiritual  Jerusalem  is  here  described  which  differs  from  all  earthly  cities. 
Here  is  described  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  which  is  surrounded  by  no  walls,  but 
is  open  to  the  whole  world,  and  which  depends  not  on  its  own  strength,  but  dwells 
safely  though  exposed  on  aU  sides  to  enemies  ;  for  the  prophet  says,  not  without 
reason,  "  through  the  villages  shall  Jerusalem  be  inhabited  "  ;  that  is,  it  shall 
everywhere  be  inhabited,  so  that  it  will  have  no  need  of  defence  to  restrain  or 
hinder  enemies  to  come  near ;  for  a  safe  rest  shall  be  given  to  it,  when  every  one 
shall  quietly  occupy  his  own  place.  Though  few  returned  from  exile,  God  waa 
yet  able  to  increase  the  Chm-ch,  and  to  make  it  a  vast  multitude,  and  this  waa 
certain  and  decreed,  for  it  was  shown  by  the  vision  that  however  unequal  they 
were  to  their  enemies,  God  was  still  sufficiently  strong  and  powerful  to  defend 


20  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

them  ;  and  that  however  destitute  they  were  of  all  blessings,  God  was  still  rich 
enough  to  enrich  them,  provided  they  relied  on  the  blessing  which  He  had 
promised.  (John  Calvin.)  The  optimism  of  faith  : — Zechariah  was  the  most 
uniformly  hopeful  of  all  the  prophets.  He  was  a  young  man.  His  little  book  is 
the  work  of  a  youthful  imaginative  mind,  richly  endowed  with  poetic  gifts,  as 
well  as  steeped  in  the  diviner  fount  of  inspiration.  He  saw  all  things  bathed  in 
the  glory  of  the  morning.  The  time  in  which  he  wrote  was  near  the  end  of  the 
Babylonian  captivity.  The  prophet  draws  one  picture  after  another  of  the 
glorious  things  which  were  nigh.  Here  the  prophet  sees  a  young  man  going  with 
a  measuring  line  in  his  hand,  and  asks  "  Whither  ?  "  "  To  measure  Jerusalem," 
is  the  answer,  and  straightway  he  marches  on.  Then  the  angels  appear,  and  one 
Bays  to  the  other,  "  Go  after  that  young  man,  and  tell  him  that  his  measuring 
line  is  too  short.  Jerusalem  will  expand  beyond  all  boundaries  and  all  measure- 
ments, because  of  the  number  of  people  in  it.  Tell  him  that  he  is  going  to  measure 
the  immeasurable."  This  allegory  contains  these  two  Gospel  truths.  1.  Faith 
realises  that  which  does  not  exist.  2.  These  Divine  things  which  faith  realises 
are  so  great  that  even  faith  cannot  measure  them.  I.  Faith  realises  that 
WHICH  IS  TO  BE.  This  young  man  was  going  to  do  an  apparent  absurdity.  He 
was  going  to  measure  a  city  which  had  not  yet  been  built.  All  the  practical, 
materialistic,  matter-of-fact  people  of  the  world  would  call  that  the  very  climax 
of  folly.  The  Gospel  of  common  sense  says,  Let  us  have  no  illusions.  Give  us 
facts,  for  anything  which  is  not  built  upon  facts  is  foolishness.  Our  religion 
indulges  throughout  in  this  foolishness,  if  foolishness  it  may  be  called.  Faith 
realises  the  city  that  is  not  yet  built,  grasps  coming  events  as  though  they  were 
already  present.  All  the  best  and  greatest  men  and  women  that  have  ever  been 
upon  this  earth  have  lived  and  moved  and  had  their  being  in  what  was  called  a 
world  of  dreams,  a  world,  that  is,  of  fair,  sweet  hopes,  of  treasures  and  of  glories 
that  had  not  yet  been  created.  Illustrated  by  Abraham,  David,  &c.  It  is  the 
source  and  secret  of  all  our  strength  and  confidence,  that  where  other  eyes  see 
only  imperfections,  we  see  a  city  of  God  which  He  will  most  assuredly  build. 
II.  These  Divine  things  which  faith  realises  before  they  come  into  exist- 
ence ARE  so  great  that  EVEN  FAITH  CANNOT  MEASURE  THEM.       The  angel  Spcaks 

to  the  young  man,  to  rebuke  him  for  the  presumption  of  thinking  that  he  can 
measure  the  city — it  is  immeasurable.  We  cannot  measure  anything  that  God 
builds.  You  cannot  gauge  moral  influences  or  tabulate  spiritual  forces.  There 
is  no  plummet  that  can  sound  the  depths  of  love  Divine.  You  could  have 
measured  Giant  Goliath,  but  you  could  not  have  measured  the  faith  and  the 
courage  of  the  young  man  who  came  up  to  meet  him  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
Illustrated  from  the  company  carried  by  the  Mayflower ;  or  by  comparing  the  French 
Revolution  with  the  beginning  of  missionary  enterprise.  You  cannot  measure 
the  Church,  the  Church  of  Chi-ist.  It  is  infinitely  broader,  larger,  stronger,  than 
the  most  flattering  statistics  show.  (J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.)  The  man 
with  the  measuring  line  : — It  was  natural  enough.  We  dream  of  what  occupies 
our  waking  thoughts  ;  and  i)robably  Jerusalem  was  full  of  surveyors,  engaged 
in  mapping  out  the  new  streets  and  walls.  1.  The  pessimist  comes  with  his 
measuring  line,  and  draws  the  plan  of  the  city  within  the  narrowest  possible 
boundaries.  He  justifies  his  forecast  by  quoting  such  a  text  as  "  Fear  not,  little 
flock  "  ;  or  "  Strait  is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way  that  leadeth  unto  life, 
and  few  there  be,  that  find  it."  Sometimes  he  fears  that  he  will  not  enter,  at 
other  times  he  doubts  all  others  but  himself.  2.  The  bigot  comes  with  his  measuring 
line  and  insists  that  the  city  walls  must  coincide  with  his  shibboleth,  and  follow 
the  tracings  of  his  creed.  3.  The  experimentalist  is  apt  to  refuse  to  consider  as 
Christians  those  who  have  not  experienced  exactly  the  same  doubts,  fears,  ecstasies, 
deliverances,  and  cleansings  which  he  himself  has  felt.  4.  The  universalist  goes 
to  the  other  extreme,  and  practically  builds  his  walls  around  the  entire  race  of 
man,  including  within  their  circumference  every  member  of  the  human  family. 
It  is  not  for  us  to  fix  the  boundaries,  or  insist  on  our  conceptions.  These  are 
secret  things  which  belong  to  the  Lord  our  God.  So  shall  it  be  with  the  saved. 
We  have  no  right  to  include  in  their  ranks  any  who  know  not  God,  and  obey 
not  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  who  have  loved  darkness  rather  than  light, 
because  their  deeds  were  evil.  But  apart  from  these,  there  will  be  a  multitude 
which  no  man  can  number,  out  of  every  nation  and  of  all  tribes,  and  peoples, 
and  tongues;  as  stars  in  the  midnight  sky,  or  the  sand-grains  on  the  seashore. 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A)         An  interesting  future  of  the  world  :—l.  Thb  ruTtnui 


CHAP,  n.]  ZECHARIAH.  21 

nrcRBASB  OF  GOOD  MBN  ON  THE  BABTH.     Two  remarks  are  suggested  concerning 
the  extent  of  genuine  religion.     It  is — 1.  Measurable  only  by  the  Divine.     Who 
had  the  "  measuring  line  "  ?     Not  a  mere  man,  not  any  created  intelligence, 
but  the  God-man,  the  Messiah.     Men  cannot  measure  the  growth  of  piety  in  the 
world.     They  attempt  it,  but  make  fearful  mistakes.     They  deal  in  statistics, 
they  count  the  number  of  churches  in  the  world  and  the  number  of  professed 
worshippers.     But  piety  cannot   be  measured  in  this   way.     Have  you  scales 
by  which  to  weigh  genuine  love  ?     Any  numbers  by  which  to  count  holy  thoughts, 
aspirations,  and  volitions  ?     Any  rules  by  which  to  gauge  spiritual  intelligence  ? 
Have  you  any  plummet  by  which  to  fathom  even  the  depths  of  a  mother's 
affections  ?     No  one  but  God  can  weigh  and  measure  the  holy  experiences  of 
holy  souls.     II.  The  future  security  of  good  men  on  the  earth.     Who  shall 
penetrate  a  massive  wall  of  fire  ?     But  that  wall  is  God  Himself,  omnipotent 
in  strength.     Omnipotence  is  the  Guardian  of  the  good.     III.  The  future  glory 
OF  THE  GOOD  MEN  ON  THE  EARTH.     Good  men  are  the  recipients  and  the  reflectors 
of  the  Divine  glory.     They  are  the  temples  for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  dwell  in,  and 
they  reveal  more  of  Him  than  the  whole  material  universe.     Holiest  souls  are 
His    highest   manifestations.     (Homiliat. )        The   true   glory   of   the   Church : — 
1.  Although  Zion  has  not  yet  lengthened  her  cords  and  widened  her  stakes  to 
her  appointed  limits,  yet  the  measuring  line  has  gone  forth  that  gives  her  boimds 
to  be  the  habitable  earth.     Hence,  if  this  future  extension  was  a  motive  to  the 
Jew,  in  his  work  of  rearing  the  temple  of  wood  and  stone,  much  more  is  it  to  us 
in  our  work  of  erecting  the  great  spiritual  temple  on  the  foundation,  Jesus  Christ 
(vers.   1-4).     2.  We  learn  here  the  true  glory  of  the  Church.     It  is  not  in  any 
external  pomp  or  power,  of  any  kind;   not  in  frowning  battlements,  either  of 
temporal  or  spiritual  pretensions  ;  not  in  rites  and  ceremonies,  however  moss- 
grown  and  venerable  ;  not  in  splendid  cathedrals  and  gorgeous  vestments,  and 
the  swell  of  music,  and  the  glitter  of  eloquence,  but  in  the  indwelling  glory  of 
the  invisible  God.     Her  outward  rites  and  ceremonies,  therefore,  should  only  be 
like  what  the  earth's  atmosphere  is  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  a  pure,  transparent 
medium  of  transmission  (ver.   5).     3.   The  punishment  of  the  wicked  as  truly 
declares  the  glory  of  God  as  the  salvation  of  the  righteous  (ver.  8).     4.  The  wicked 
shall  ultimately  be  the  slaves  of  their  own  lusts  ;   those  appetites  and  passions 
which  were  designed  to  be  merely  their  obedient  servants,  shall  become  their 
tormenting  and  inexorable  tyrants  (ver.  9).     5.  The  incarnation  of  Christ  and 
His  indwelling  in  the  Church  are  grounds  of  the  highest  joy  (ver.  10).     6.  Christ 
is  a  Divine  Saviour.     In  vers.   10,   11,  we  have  one  Jehovah  sending  another, 
and  the  Jehovah  sent  is  identified  with  the  angel  of  the  covenant,  who  was 
to  come  and  dwell  in  the  Chiu-ch,  whom  we  know  to  be  Christ.     Hence,  unless 
there  are  two  distinct  Jehovahs,  one  Divine  and  the  other  not,  Christ,  the  Jehovah- 
angel  of  this  passage,  is  Divine.     7.  The  Church  of  God  shall  cover  the  earth, 
and  become  in  fact,  what  it  is  in  right,  the  mightiest  agency  in  human  history. 
Though  now  feeble  and  despised,  she  shall  one  day  include  many  nations,  and 
every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  is  Lord,  to  the  glory 
of  God  the  Father  (ver.  11).     8.  Delay  of  punishment  is  no  proof  of  impunity. 
God  often  seems  to  be  asleep,  but  He  is  only  awaiting  the  appointed  time  ;  in 
the  end,  when  all  seems  as  it  was  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  the  herald 
cry  shall  go  forth.  Be  silent,  O  earth,  for  Jehovah  is  aroused  to  His  terrible 
work,  and  the  day  of  His  wrath  is  come.     Let  men  kiss  the  Son  whilst  He  is  yet 
in  the  way,  before  His  anger  is  kindled  but  a  little,  and  they  perish  before  Him 
like  stubble  before  the  whirlwind  of  flames.     [T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)        The  man 
with  the  measuring  line  : — In  this  vision  God  presented  to  the  prophet,  and  thi-ough 
him  to  the  nation  at  large,  the  prospect  and  the  assurance  of  the  restoration  of 
Jerusalem,  and  the  re-establishment  of  the  Jewish  state  as  it  had  been  before 
the  captivity.     The  city  should  not  only  be  rebuilt,  but  greatly  extended  :  the 
temple  should  be  restored,  and  the  worship  of  Jehovah  resumed  ;  His  presence 
should  be  with  His  people,  and  they  should  enjoy  His  protection  ;  and  whilst 
they  were  thus  blessed,  judgment  should   come   upon   those  nations   that  had 
oppressed  them,  and  they  should  have  supremacy  over  those  by  whom  they 
had  been  enslaved.     All  this  was  literally  fulfilled.     But  even  in  these  promises 
there  seems  to  be  a  reference  to  things  of  still  higher  import,  and  of  spiritual 
significancy.  .  .  .  Who  can  such  a  speaker  be  but  that  Being  who  in  the  fulness 
of  time  appeared  in  ovu*  world,  uniting  in  His  one  person  the  human  and  the 
Divine  natures  ?     May  we  not  say,  then,  that  there  is  here  a  promise  of  blessing 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n. 

to  the  Chxirch  through  the  advent  of  the  Redeemer  ?  Then  certainly  was  glory 
brought  to  the  t«mple  of  the  Lord.  The  Church  of  God,  under  the  latter  dispensa- 
tion, may  take  to  herself  as  her  own  the  comfort  and  encouragement  which  those 
promises,  given  to  the  Church  in  the  old  times,  were  intended  to  convey.  Security, 
protection,  glory,  grace,  blessing,  extension,  and  final  triumph  are  all  assured 
to  her  by  the  promise  of  Him  whose  word  cannot  fail.     (W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Run,  speak  to  this  young  man. — Young  men: — The  Lord  said  to 
me,  "  Run,  speak  to  this  yoimg  man,"  and  I  asked — I.  "  Lord,  which  onb  ?  " 
First,  this  one.  He  is  the  son  of  godly  parents,  he  was  nursed  in  the  lap  of  piety, 
and  cradled  in  prayer.  He  is  in  the  general  acceptation  of  the  word  a  good  fellow. 
The  home  is  all  the  brighter  when  he  is  in  it.  The  parents  all  the  happier  for  his 
presence.  "  Is  he.  Lord,  the  only  one  ?  "  No,  "  speak  to  this  young  man."  Ah, 
I  see  him  now.  His  experience  has  been  a  very  different  one  from  the  last.  No 
prayers  ever  arose  on  his  behalf ;  no  holy  influences  ever  surrounded  him  ;  his 
earliest  remembrances  are  oaths.  "  Are  there  any  more.  Lord,  I  have  to  speak  to  ?  " 
"  Yes,  this  one."  He  is  a  young  man  of  considerable  mental  ability,  who  is  fast 
making  his  way  in  the  world.  A  bright  future  seems  to  be  opening  up  before  him. 
Sitting  at  his  right  hand  I  see  another  I  have  to  address.  He  is  of  a  very  different 
stamp  of  character.  I  thought  I  heard  him  say  just  now,  "  Well,  thank  goodness, 
I'm  no  money-grub.  I  don't  care  so  much  about  getting  on  in  life  as  seeing  life." 
His  motto  is,  "  begone  dull  care  "  ;  aye,  by  any  means  so  long  as  it  goes.  II.  Why 
SHOULD  I  SPEAK  TO  HIM  ?  To  this  qucstion  three  answers  at  once  came.  1.  Speak 
to  him  because  danger  awaits  him.  The  very  least  we  can  do  for  a  man  in  peril  is  to 
arouse  him  to  a  sense  of  danger  if  he  be  ignorant  of  it.  Humanity  itself  will  dictate 
this.  Never  mind  frightening  the  crew,  better  do  that  than  all  be  lost,  through 
want  of  warning.  2. 1  am  bound  to  speak  to  you,  because  one  wrong  step  will  lead 
to  many.  3.  Speak,  for  if  you  do  not  there  are  many  that  will.  No  one  knows 
the  temptations  that  surround  young  men,  but  a  yoimg  man.  If  there  are  but 
few  to  lead  him  right,  there  are  plenty  to  lead  him  astray.  Godless  companions  will. 
Then,  too,  he  has  the  attractive  preacher  called  the  world,  who  like  some  fair  siren 
seated  on  a  rock  by  the  deadly  pool,  smiles  but  to  deceive.  "  Speak  to  him,"  still 
my  Lord  says,  "  for  if  you  do  not  Satan  will."  III.  Why  should  I  run  ?  1.  Be- 
cause he  is  running.  Sinners  never  creep  to  ruin.  Slow  as  the  tortoise  are  we  on 
the  road  to  heaven  ;  swift  as  the  bounding  stag  to  hell.  The  road  to  perdition 
is  downhill  all  the  way.  The  natural  heart  which  is  so  heavy  a  load  heavenward, 
lends  a  tremendous  impetus  to  our  downward  course.  2.  Because  time  is  running. 
Time  is  a  ship  that  never  casts  anchor — an  eagle  that  is  ever  on  the  wing — a  shuttle 
that  always  flies — an  ocean  that  never  ebbs.  3.  Run,  because  opportunities  are 
running.  4.  Run,  because  death  is  running.  The  grim  despot  is  after  every 
one  of  us,  nothing  can  turn  his  course,  he  laughs  all  bribes  to  scorn,  and  every 
moment  he  gains  upon  us  ;  his  scythe  swings  with  the  speed  of  the  lightning  flash, 
and  never  grows  blunt  in  its  work.  5.  Run,  because  hell  is  ruiming.  We  read 
in  the  Book  of  Revelation  that  death  rode  forth  on  a  white  horse  and  hell  followed 
after,  to  every  impenitent  sinner  the  two  go  together.  IV.  And  when  I  catch 
him  up.  Lord,  what  shall  I  say  to  him  ?  Son  of  pious  parents,  with  many  a 
noble,  amiable  quality,  let  me  say  this  word  to  you,  "  Your  morality  will  not  save 
you."  Unless  you  are  "  born  again,"  you  will  be  as  much  lost  as  if  you  never 
possessed  any.  Young  man,  you  who  have  had  nought  but  evil  example  from 
infancy,  to  you  let  me  speak.  Do  not  think  that  frees  you  from  responsibility. 
Your  parents'  sins  will  not  exonerate  you  from  yours.  If  they  led,  you  have 
willingly  followed.  Remember,  too,  you  can  no  longer  plead  ignorance  as  to  the 
way  of  salvation,  for  you  have  just  heard  it,  if  never  before.  Young  man,  so 
occupied  in  getting  on  in  this  world,  I  will  just  ask  you  one  question,  and  leave  you 
to  give  the  answer.  It  is  this,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  his  own  soul,  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?  " 
(A.  0.  Broum.)  What  to  say  to  a  young  man: — 1.  Tell  him  he  has  a  wicked 
heart.  2.  He  ought  to  become  a  Christian.  3.  He  should  improve  the  season  of 
youth.  4.  He  should  beware  of  evil  company.  5.  He  should  attend  to  Bible 
reading  and  to  prayer.  (0.  Brooks.)  The  young  man's  mission: — Zechariah  is, 
of  all  the  prophets,  most  remarkable  for  the  simple,  practical  purpose  with  which 
he  employs  the  grandest  prophetic  symbols.  The  text  is  the  speech  of  one  angel 
to  another  angel  in  regard  of  a  young  man  who,  in  symbolic  action  significant  of 
Israel'B  redemption  and  enlargement,  was  going  forth  with  a  measuring  line  to  take 


CHAP,  n.]  ZECHARIAH.  23 

the  length  and  breadth  of  Jerusalem.  Using  the  text  simply  as  an  accommodation, 
it  may  have  a  twofold  direction.  I.  To  myself,  as  preaching  to  yottng  men.  It 
is  an  earnest  exhortation  unto  the  Christian  minister  to  labour  especially  with  young 
men.  The  conversion  of  young  men  is  so  important — 1..  Because,  in  most  cases, 
if  not  converted  while  they  are  young,  they  will  never  be  converted.  Divine  grace, 
in  its  very  sovereignty,  operates  according  to  the  laws  of  our  moral  and  intellectual 
nature.  Youth  is  the  most  favourable  period  for  religious  impressions.  2.  Be- 
cause of  the  peculiar  power  of  young  men  to  accomplish  great  things  for  God  and 
their  generation.  Young  men  are  hopeful ;  young  men  are  brave ;  young  men 
are  fertile  in  invention  :  and  thus  young  men  are  strong  in  all  qualities  that  secure 
earthly  success.  The  foundations  of  all  true  greatness  must  be  laid  in  early  life. 
The  energy  of  youth  is  the  world's  mightiest  influence ;  and  that  influence  is 
especially  needful  in  the  Church.  II.  To  you,  as  young  men  and  Chkistians. 
The  words  set  forth  the  means,  objects,  and  manner  of  a  great  Christian  duty. 
1.  The  means.  "  Speak."  Use  that  grand  power  of  articulate  utterance ;  it  is 
almost  man's  finest  gift.  Language  is  reason,  walking  forth  with  tremendous 
energy  amid  the  vital  interests  of  the  race.  Consider  the  wonderful  title  of  the 
Divine  Son — the  Word.  2.  The  objects  of  your  labour.  Consider  some  distinct 
classes  of  young  men  with  whom  you  are  called  earnestly  to  labour.  (1)  Strangers 
who  have  just  come  into  your  sphere.  (2)  The  young  man  beginning  to  associate 
with  evil  companions.  The  pitiful  idler.  The  fashionable  young  man.  The 
spendthrift.  The  dishonest  employer.  The  openly  profane  and  impure  man. 
Corruptors  of  youth,  &c.  (3)  The  sceptical  young  man.  (4)  The  young  men  whose 
lives  are  already  practically  immoral.  The  profane  man.  The  Sabbath-breaker. 
The  dishonest.  The  impure.  3.  The  manner  of  their  labour.  "  Run."  The 
extent  of  your  influence  over  others  will  depend  not  so  much  upon  your  talents 
as  your  discretion.  Be  earnest,  thoroughly  in  earnest — (1)  Because  these  young 
men  are  in  imminent  and  deadly  peril.  (2)  Because  the  work  itself  is  all- 
important.  (C.  Wadsworth.)  SymTpathy  with  young  men : — At  the  annual  meet- 
ing of  the  Central  Y.M.C.A.,  at  Exeter  Hall,  London,  the  recently  consecrated 
Bishop  of  Sierra  Leone  said  that  he  had  been  connected  with  the  Y.M.C.A.  for 
about  twenty  years,  and  gave  the  following  reason  for  becoming  a  member  and 
subsequently  taking  a  great  interest  in  young  men  :  "  When  I  was  quite  a  young 
man  I  had  some  papers  put  into  my  hand  dealing  with  infidelity.  They  troubled 
me  considerably,  and  I  did  not  know  whom  to  go  to  for  advice  and  sympathy. 
At  last  I  went  to  a  minister  of  the  Word,  thinking  that  surely  he  would  sympathise 
with  me.  But  instead  of  doing  that  and  praying  with  me,  he  took  the  papers  and 
threw  them  into  the  fire  and  sent  me  away.  This  discouraged  me  so  much  that  I 
dared  not  tell  my  trouble  to  any  one  else,  but  at  length  I  took  my  difficulties  to  God, 
and  He  gave  me  an  answer,  as  He  has  always  done  when  I  have  gone  to  Him  with 
my  troubles.  That  day  I  asked  God  to  give  me  a  heart  of  love  and  sympathy  for 
young  men.  The  Y.M.C.A.  extends  a  mutual  sympathy  to  young  men  which  ia 
most  helpful  and  much  appreciated."  Speaking  to  young  men  : — "  Mr.  Birch, 
who  did  much  work  in  the  Free  Trade  Hall  in  Manchester,  was  on  one  occasion 

foing  from  Cork  to  Dublin,  and  at  a  small  wayside  station  near  the  Curragh  Camp 
e  saw  a  number  of  young  officers  en  route  for  a  ball  in  Dublin,  who  entered  the 
carriage  in  which  Mr.  Birch  was  travelling.  Soon  the  cigars  were  produced,  and 
one  of  them,  looking  at  Mr.  Birch  with  a  serio-comic  face,  said,  '  I  hope  you  do  not 
object  to  smoking,'  and,  without  waiting  for  permission,  they  lighted  up.  Mr. 
Birch  took  out  his  Bible,  and  said  to  the  young  man  who  had  addressed  him, 
'  Do  you  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  ?  '  '  Shut  up ! '  exclaimed  the  officer.  '  Because,' 
continued  Mr.  Birch,  '  if  you  do  not  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  will  be 
lost.'  '  Do  you  hear  that  old  stupid  ?  '  said  another  of  the  officers  ;  '  what  shall 
we  do  to  him  ?  '  Quickly  the  preacher  of  the  Gospel  turned  to  the  second  speaker, 
and  said,  '  Do  you  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  for,  if  you  do  not,  yoii  will  be  lost.' 
'  Sit  on  him,'  suggested  one.  '  Shove  him  out  of  the  window,'  proposed  another. 
'  That  would  not  alter  the  fact,'  said  the  intrepid  servant  of  God.  Just  then  the 
train  began  to  slow  down,  and  there  was  a  general  cry  of  '  Oh,  let  us  get  out !  Let 
us  change  carriages  !  '  '  Your  getting  out  will  not  alter  the  fact,'  again  said  Mr. 
Birch.  '  Well,  good-bye,  old  fellow  !  '  shouted  the  officers,  as  they  jumped  from 
the  carriage.  '  Good-bye,'  was  the  response  ;  '  but  remember  that  does  not  alter 
the  fact.  If  you  do  not  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  will  be  lost.'  Four 
years  had  passed  away,  and  the  evangelist  was  travelling  in  England,  when  a  tall, 
military-looking  gentleman  entered  the  carriage.     As  soon  as  he  caught  sight  of 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Mr.  Birch,  he  leaned  forward,  and  said,  '  Excuse  me,  but  I  think  we  have  met 
before.  Do  you  remember,  some  years  ago,  a  party  of  young  men  entering  the 
compartment  of  a  train  in  which  you  were  travelling  to  Dublin  ?  I  was  the  young 
fellow  who  sat  next  you.  We  went  to  oiur  ball  that  evening  ;  but,  despite  all  our 
gaiety,  I  was  conscious  of  that  awful  sentence  ringing  in  my  ears,  "  If  you  do  not 
believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  will  be  lost."  I  drank:  heavily  that  night,  but  the 
champagne  did  not  revive  me  ;  and  at  an  early  hour  I  left  the  baU-room,  and  went 
to  my  hotel,  where,  in  the  solitude  of  my  own  room,  I  knelt  down  and  cried  to  God 
for  mercy.  Since  that  night  I  have  been  a  Christian,  and  have  striven  to  bring 
those  under  my  command  to  know  and  to  love  the  Savioiu-.'  "     {John  Robertson.) 

Ver.  5.  I  will  be  tmto  her  a  Trail  of  fire. — Zion'a  protection : — I.  The  pkopls 
THAT  SHALL  BE  THUS  DEFENDED.  It  is  Jerusalem  that  is  to  be  defended ; 
and  that  will  include  three  things  :  the  temple,  the  habitations  of  the  people, 
and  the  people  themselves.  The  people  of  God  are  spoken  of  as  the  temple  of 
Cod.  Do  we  belong  to  the  temple  of  the  Lord  ?  If  we  belong  to  the  temple 
of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  be  our  only  foundation.  There  are 
two  things  that  make  the  Lord  Jesus  the  foundation — 1.  As  being  the  end  of  the 
law  for  righteousness.  He  brings  in  everlasting  righteousness.  2.  As  being  the 
end  of  sin.  He  is  spiritually,  legally,  properly,  and  entirely  the  end  of  sin  ;  His 
blood  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  As  is  the  foundation  in  character,  so  the  building 
must  accord  in  character  with  the  foundation.  The  foundation  is  one  of  free  grace. 
Therefore  we  are  not  only  justified  by  grace,  but  saved  by  grace.  The  first  feature 
given  to  this  building  is  mercy.  Then  it  is  a  free-grace  building.  The  third  feature 
is  certainty.  We  may  be  upon  the  right  foundation,  and  yet  not  rightly  built. 
God's  people  are  spoken  of  as  a  city ;  they  have  habitations  which  require  to 
be  defended.  Take  these  habitations  as  the  truths  of  the  Gospel,  wherein  God's 
people  dwell.  Electing  grace ;  predestination ;  Christ's  righteousness ;  the  atone- 
ment ;  God's  promises  may  all  be  spoken  of  as  habitations.  II.  The  defence. 
Notice  the  forms  under  which  the  Lord  represents  Himself  as  round  about  His 
people :  all  indicative  of  two  things,  destruction  to  the  adversary,  safety  to  the 
friend.  The  Lord  is  round  His  people  as  a  hedge  ;  and  as  mountains  ;  and  as  a 
guard  of  fire,  such  as  men  use  to  protect  from  wild  beasts.  III.  The  glory  in 
the  midst.  He  is  in  the  midst,  the  living  God,  the  life-giving  God.  He  is  the 
glory  in  the  midst  by  being  the  temple  in  the  midst.  {James  Wells.)  Protected 
hy  Ood  : — In  one  of  the  great  cities  of  the  Continent  the  regalia  are  not  kept  behind 
iron  bars  as  in  the  Tower  of  London,  but  lie  upon  an  open  table.  It  might  appear 
that  any  ruthless  hand  could  wrench  any  jewel  or  diamond  from  the  glittering 
array  ;  and  yet  no  man  dare  put  out  his  hand  to  take  one,  because  that  table  is 
charged  with  a  strong  current  of  electricity.  You  cannot  see  the  protection,  but 
there  it  is.  And  so  if  a  man  will  only  live  in  daily  and  hourly  commimion  with 
Christ,  the  devil  can  no  more  touch  him  than  a  thief  can  touch  those  jewels. 
( F.  B.  Meyer. )  The  wall  and  glory  of  Jerusalem  : — In  this  chapter  is  a  vision  of  a 
man  with  a  measuring  line  in  his  hand,  to  show  that  the  Lord  was  now  in  readiness 
to  build  and  restore  the  city  and  temple.  Two  great  discouragements  the  people 
)net  with — danger  and  scorn.  The  Lord  here,  by  a  gracious  promise,  fortifieth 
them  against  the  fear  of  both.  Against  the  fear  of  danger,  by  promising  to  be 
their  protection  ;  and  against  the  fear  of  scorn,  by  promising  to  be  their  glory. 
The  Lord  is  to  His  people  whatever  good  they  want.  "  I  will  be  a  wall."  1.  A 
wall  of  partition,  to  separate  the  Church  from  the  world.  2.  A  wall  of  conjunction, 
uniting  the  parts  together  in  one  common  interest.  3.  A  wall  of  protection  and 
defence.  The  Lord  doth  as  a  wall  protect  His  Church — (1)  In  a  way  of  promise. 
(2)  In  a  way  of  power.  (3)  In  a  way  of  providence.  (4)  In  a  way  of  grace. 
His  protection  is  like  that  of  a  wall.  It  is  near,  adequate,  and  impregnable. 
Consider  the  city  walled,  the  subject  of  His  defence.  The  Church  is  His  property, 
His  rest.  His  peculiar  treasure.  The  Lord  is  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  His  people — 
1.  By  His  spiritual  residence  and  gracious  presence  with  them.  2.  By  His  holy 
ordinances.  3.  In  glorious  privileges  and  immunities  belonging  to  every  citizen 
of  the  New  Jerusalem.  What  folly,  then,  and  what  wickedness,  to  oppose  the 
Church  of  God,  briars  to  contend  with  flames !  We  need  not  make  use  of  carnal 
wisdom  and  sinful  means  for  protection.  Envy  not  the  glory  of  the  world. 
Above  all,  hold  fast  God  and  His  presence.  God  will  be  with  you  while  you  are 
with  Him.  If  God  be  thus  your  glory,  let  your  glorying  be  in  Hira  alone.  {T. 
Hannam.)        The  fi^loiy  in  the  midst  of  her. — Inward  glory  and  outward  defence:— 


CHAP,  n.]  ZECIIARIAU.  25 

Speak  of  the  bearing  of  the  text  upon  our  individual  lives.  1.  If  we  choose,  we 
may  have  the  Divine  glory  in  the  deepest  heart  of  us.  The  "  glory  "  of  the  Old 
Testament  was  that  material  but  supernatural  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence 
which  gleamed  above  the  mercy-seat  in  the  most  holy  place.  That  little  house 
on  the  temple  hill  was  nothing  in  sanctity  in  comparison  with  the  temple  of  the 
Christian  heart.  The  true  habitation  of  God  is  man.  Spirit  dwells  in  spirit  in  a 
profounder  sense  than  it  does  in  space,  or  in  the  material  creation.  Have  you  got 
the  glory  in  the  centre  of  your  being  ?  We  may  all  have  the  indwelling  of  the 
glory  of  God  if  we  will.  2.  If  God  be  for  glory  within,  He  will  be  a  fiery  rampart 
round.  He  is  not  only  a  wall,  but  a  wall  of  fire.  His  protection  is  not  merely 
of  the  passive  sort  which  shields  from  evil,  but  active  and  preserving.  3.  If  God 
ia  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  us,  we  do  not  want  any  other  walls.  God  is 
everything  that  we  need,  and  do  not  find  anywhere  else ;  and  having  Him, 
we  do  not  want  anything  else.  But  the  lives  of  most  of  us  do  not  much  look  as 
if  we  believed  that  the  only  necessary  thing  was  God,  and  that,  having  Him,  we 
required  nothing  else.  Let  us  cast  all  our  self-confidences  down,  and  rest  ourselves 
on  Him,  and  Him  alone.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The  city  without  widls  : — 
Zechariah  was  the  prophet  of  the  returning  exiles,  and  his  great  work  was  to 
hearten  them  for  their  difiicult  task,  with  their  small  resources  and  their  many 
foes,  and  to  insist  that  the  prime  condition  to  success,  on  the  part  of  that  portion 
of  the  nation  that  had  returned,  was  holiness.  And  that  exuberant  promise  was 
spoken  about  the  Jerusalem  over  which  Christ  wept  when  He  foresaw  its  inevitable 
destruction.  When  the  Romans  had  cast  a  torch  into  the  Temple,  and  the  streets 
of  the  city  were  rimning  with  blood,  what  had  become  of  Zechariah's  dream  of  a 
wall  of  fire  round  about  her  ?  Then,  can  the  Divine  fire  be  quenched  ?  Yes. 
And  who  quenched  it  ?  Not  the  Romans,  but  the  people  that  lived  within  that 
flaming  rampart.  "  If  God  spared  not  the  natural  branches,  take  heed  lest  He 
also  spare  not  thee."  I.  "  I  will  be  a  wall  of  fiee  bound  about  hee."  I  need 
not  dwell  on  the  vividness  and  beauty  of  that  metaphor.  These  encircling 
flames  will  consume  all  antagonism,  and  defy  all  approach.  But  let  me  remind 
you  that  the  conditional  promise  was  intended  for  Judea  and  Jerusalem,  and  was 
fulfilled  in  literal  fact.  So  long  as  the  city  obeyed  and  trusted  God  it  was  impreg- 
nable, though  all  the  nations  stood  round  about  it  like  dogs  round  a  sheep.  The 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  has  passed  over,  with  all  the  rest  that  characterised 
Israel's  position,  to  the  Christian  Church,  and  to-day,  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
agitations  of  opinion  and  all  the  vauntings  of  men  about  an  effete  Christianity 
and  dead  churches,  it  is  as  true  as  ever  it  was  that  the  living  Church  of  God  is 
eternal.  If  it  had  not  been  that  there  was  a  God  as  a  wall  of  fire  round  about 
the  Church  it  would  have  been  wiped  off  the  face  of  the  earth  long  ago.  If  nothing 
else  had  killed  it,  the  faults  of  its  members  would  have  done  so.  The  continuance 
of  the  Church  is  a  perpetual  miracle,  when  you  take  into  account  the  weakness 
and  the  errors  and  the  follies  and  the  stupidities  and  the  narrownesses  and  the 
sins  of  the  people  who  in  any  given  day  represent  it.  It  does  not  become  any 
Christian  ever  to  have  the  smallest  scintillation  of  a  fear  that  the  ship  that  bears 
Jesus  Christ  can  fail  to  come  to  land,  or  can  sink  in  the  midst  of  the  waters.  But 
do  not  let  us  forget  that  this  great  promise  does  not  belong  only  to  the  Church  as  a 
whole,  but  that  we  have  each  to  bring  it  down  to  our  own  individual  lives,  and 
to  be  quite  sure  of  this,  that  in  spite  of  all  that  sense  says,  in  spite  of  all  that 
quivering  hearts  and  weeping  eyes  may  seem  to  prove,  there  is  a  wall  of  fire  round 
each  of  us,  if  we  are  keeping  near  Jesus  Christ.  Only,  we  have  to  interpret  that 
promise  by  faith  and  not  by  sense,  and  we  have  to  make  it  possible  that  it  shall 
be  fulfilled  by  keeping  inside  the  wall,  and  trusting  to  it.  As  faith  dwindles, 
the  fiery  wall  burns  dim,  and  evil  can  get  across  its  embers,  and  can  get  at  us. 
II.  A  Globy  "  IN  the  midst  "  OF  ITS.  The  one  is  external  defence  ;  the  other 
inward  illumination,  with  all  that  light  symbolises — knowledge,  joy,  purity.  There 
is  even  more  than  that  meant  by  this  great  promise.  For  notice  that  emphatic 
little  word  "  the  " — the  glory,  not  a  glory — in  the  midst  of  her.  Now,  you  all  know 
what  "  the  glory  "  was.  It  was  that  symbolic  Light  that  spoke  of  the  special 
Presence  of  God,  and  went  with  the  children  of  Israel  in  their  wanderings,  and 
sat  between  the  cherubim.  There  was  no  "  shekinah  " — as  it  is  technically 
called — in  that  second  Temple.  But  yet  the  prophet  says,  "  the  glory  "  — the 
actual  presence  of  God — "  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  her,"  and  the  meaning  of  that 
great  promise  is  taught  us  by  the  very  last  vision  in  the  New  Testament,  in  which 
the  seer  of  the  Apocalypse  says,  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  did  hghten  it  "  (evidently 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

quoting  Zechariah),  "  and  the  Lamb  is  the  b'ght  thereof."  So  the  city  is  lit  as  by 
one  central  glow  of  radiance  that  flashes  its  beams  into  every  comer,  and  therefore 
"  there  shall  be  no  night  there."  Now,  this  promise,  too,  bears  on  churches  and 
on  individuals.  On  the  Church  as  a  whole  it  bears  in  this  way — the  only  means 
by  which  a  Christian  community  can  fulfil  its  fimction,  and  be  the  light  of  the  world, 
is  by  having  the  presence  of  God,  in  no  metaphor,  the  actual  presence  of  the  illumin- 
ating Spirit  in  its  midst.  The  same  thing  is  true  about  individuals.  For  each 
of  us  the  secret  of  joy,  of  purity,  of  knowledge  is  that  we  be  holding  close  com- 
munion with  God.  III.  Jerusalem  shall  be  wiTHorrT  walls."  It  is  to  be 
like  the  defenceless  villages  scattered  up  and  down  over  Israel.  There  is  no  need 
for  bulwarks  of  stone.  The  wall  of  fire  is  rovmd  about.  The  more  a  Christian 
community  is  independent  of  external  material  supports  and  defences  the  better. 
Luther  tells  us  somewhere,  in  his  parabolic  way,  of  people  that  wept  because  there 
were  no  visible  piUars  to  hold  up  the  heavens,  and  were  afraid  that  the  sky  would 
fall  upon  their  heads.  No,  no,  there  is  no  fear  of  that  happening,  for  an  unseen 
hand  holds  them  up.  A  Church  that  hides  behind  the  fortifications  of  its  grand- 
fathers' erection  has  no  room  for  expansion ;  and  if  it  has  no  room  for  expansion 
it  will  not  long  continue  as  large  as  it  is.  It  must  either  grow  greater  or  grow, 
and  deserve  to  grow,  less.  The  same  thing  is  true  about  ourselves  individually. 
Zechariah's  prophecy  was  never  meant  to  prevent  what  he  himself  helped  to  further, 
the  building  of  the  actual  walls  of  the  actual  city.  And  our  dependence  upon 
God  is  not  to  be  so  construed  as  that  we  are  to  waive  our  own  common  sense 
and  our  own  effort.  We  have  to  build  ourselves  round,  in  this  world,  with  other 
things  than  the  "  wall  of  fire,"  but  in  all  our  building  we  have  to  say,  "  Except 
the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  bmld  it."  "  Except  the  Lord 
keep  the  city,  the  watchers  watch  in  vain."  But  yet  neither  Jerusalem  nor  the 
Church  nor  the  earthly  state  of  that  believer  who  lives  most  fully  the  life  of  faith 
exhausts  this  promise.  It  waits  for  the  day  when  the  city  shall  descend,  "  like  a 
bride  adorned  for  her  husband,  having  no  need  of  the  sun  nor  of  the  moon,  for  the 
glory  .  .  .  lightens  it."     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  6-9.  I  have  spread  you  abroad,  &c. — Soul-exile : — This  is  a  call  of 
Jehovah  to  the  Jews  in  Babylonian  captivity  to  return  to  their  own  land. 
These  words  may  illustrate  the  moral  exile  of  humanity.  The  point  suggested  is, 
the  reluctance  of  the  exile  to  return.  This  reluctance  is  seen — I.  In  the  earnest- 
ness OF  THE  Divine  appeal.  "  Return,"  is  the  word.  "  Flee  from  the  land  of 
the  north."  It  is  the  land  of  corruption  and  tyranny.  II.  In  the  potency  of 
THE  Divine  reasons.  Reasons  for  retiurn  are — 1.  The  greatness  of  their  separa- 
tion. 2.  The  tender  interest  of  God  in  them.  3.  The  opposition  of  the  Almighty 
to  their  enemies.  Conclusion — Why  should  sinners  be  so  reluctant  to  return  to 
God  ?  What  made  the  Jews  so  reluctant  to  break  away  from  Babylon  ?  Was  it 
indolence  ?  Was  it  love  of  the  world  ?  Was  it  old  association  ?  Do  not  all 
these  act  now,  to  prevent  sinners  from  coming  out  of  moral  Babylon  T    (HomUist.) 

Ver.  7.  Deliver  thyself,  0  Zion,  that  dwellest  with  the  daughter  f  ' 
Babylon. — Separation  from  the  world,  the  duty  and  privilege  of  a  Christian: — 
Zechariah  prophesied  at  Jerusalem  after  the  return  of  the  Jews  from  their 
captivity  in  Babylon  ;  and  one  great  object  of  his  ministry  was  to  stir  them 
up  to  a  more  lively  sense  of  the  peculiar  duties  and  privileges  which  their 
deliverance  brought  with  it.  In  the  text  he  is  addressing  that  part  of  the 
nation  which  were  still  remaining  in  the  land  of  Chaldea.  As  their  dis- 
persion had  been  the  effect  of  God's  righteous  displeasure,  so  the  way  now  opened 
for  their  return  was  no  less  clearly  an  evidence  of  His  returning  mercy  and  favoiur. 
But  many  were  unwilling  to  return  ;  the  real  cause  of  their  so  deciding  was  their 
indifference  to  religion,  their  distrust  of  God's  Word,  and  their  backwardness  to 
obey  Him  and  to  show  themselves  His  servants.  To  them  came  the  admonition 
of  the  text.  Can  we  make  application  of  this  passage  to  present  times,  and  point 
out  its  spiritual  sense  ?  The  world  is  now,  to  Christians,  what  Babylon  was  then 
to  the  Jews.  By  the  world,  is  meant  this  world,  in  respect  to  its  moral  state  ; 
to  its  habits,  maxims,  and  practices ;  to  its  principles,  fashions,  and  ways  :  the 
world  as  it  is  now  corrupted  through  the  depravity  of  man.  By  Christians  is 
meant  all  who  are  so  called  ;  all  who,  by  name  and  profession,  are  Christians. 
They  are  born  and  grow  up  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  sin  and  iniquity.  From 
their  earliest  infancy  they  are  surrounded  by  its  examples,  exposed  to  its  allure- 


CHAP,  n.]  ZECHARIAH.  27 

ments,  and  made  familiar  with  its  practices.  What  they  are  taught  to  admire 
and  covet  most,  are  the  things  of  the  world.  But  they  belong,  not  to  the  world, 
but  to  Christ.  They  are  professedly  the  subjects  of  that  spiritual  kingdom 
which  Christ  has  established  in  the  world.  They  cannot  possess  and  enjoy  their 
privileges  while  living  in  the  world.  The  Jews  must  return  home  to  Judea 
before  they  could  rejoice  as  Jews.  And  what  must  Christians  do,  if  they  would 
rejoice  as  Christians  ?  They  must  arise,  and  turning  their  backs  on  the  world, 
must  comply  with  the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel.  "  Come  out  and  be  separate." 
It  is  one  part  of  the  salvation  of  the  Gospel,  that  it  "delivers  us  from  this  present 
evil  world."  If  persons  would  sincerely  come  to  Christ  for  deliverance.  He  would 
surely  set  them  free.  The  persons  with  whom  we  would  plead  are  those  who, 
under  the  garb  of  a  Christian  profession,  manifestly  retain  a  worldly  spirit,  and 
by  their  conformity  to  the  fashions  and  follies  of  the  world,  betray  its  influence 
over  their  hearts.  Consider — 1.  The  inconsistency  of  such  a  state  with  your 
profession  of  Christianity.  2.  The  shamefxilness  of  it.  3.  The  danger  of  your 
present  state.  If  you  walk  not  as  a  Christian  now,  you  will  never  be  owned  as  a 
Christian  at  last.  4.  The  happiness  which  will  result  from  complying  with  the 
admonition  in  the  text.     {E.  Cooper. ) 

Ver.  8.  He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  Hia  eye. — The  Divine 
interest  in,  His  people  : — 1.  While  we  disown  the  reference  of  the  former  portion  of 
the  vision  to  Gospel  times,  and  to  the  spiritual  or  New  Testament  Jerusalem, 
we  are  very  far  from  disowning  the  applicability  to  the  latter  of  what  is  said  in  the 
former.  Whatever  sayings  are  here  respecting  the  extension,  the  security,  and  the 
glory  of  the  literal  Jerusalem  are  equally  true  of  the  spiritual  and  heavenly. 
2.  The  people  of  God  may  now,  as  well  as  of  old,  and  even  more  emphatically, 
appropriate  the  Divine  assurance,  "  He  that  toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple  of 
His  eye."  He  identifies  Himself  with  His  people,  and  His  own  interests  with  theirs. 
What  a  spring  of  consolation  to  believers  in  every  hour  of  darkness  !  3.  We  ought 
to  be  earnest  in  persuading  God's  people  to  "  come  forth,"  and  "  flee  "  from  the 
mystical  Babylon.  (Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  A  figure  of  speech  with  a  gracious 
meaning : — It  is  expressive  of —  1 .  Intimate  union.  2.  High  appreciation.  3.  Earnest 
attention.  4.  Intense  sympathy.  5.  Watchful  care.  (O.Brooks.)  The  Church 
and  unjust  criticism : — In  a  religious  paper  there  appeared  a  symposium  on 
"  The  Church  and  the  Kingdom  of  God."  In  it  we  are  told  that  "  one  of  the 
most  dangerous  of  current  heresies  is  the  identification  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
with  the  Church."  "  The  kingdom  of  God  can  never  embody  itself  in  an  institu- 
tion." "  I  am  reluctantly  coming  to  believe  that  Christianity,  as  it  is  organised,  is 
the  most  serious  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  realisation  of  the  Christianity  of  Christ." 
Similar  criticisms  fill  the  air  everywhere.  These  strictiu-es  must  be  met.  1.  The 
first  thing  to  be  said  in  reply  is,  that  although  the  kingdom  of  God  is  spuritual, 
nevertheless  it  and  the  external  organisation  which  we  call  the  Chm-ch  are  practic- 
ally identical.  There  is  very  little  of  the  real  spirit  of  the  kingdom  outside  of  that 
institution.  When  men  become  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  God's  kingdom  they 
are  generally  ready  to  go  into  the  Church.  The  reason  they  stay  outside  is  because 
they  have  not  caught  that  spirit.  Where  are  the  much- talked- of  philanthropies, 
charities,  establishments,  colleges,  seminaries,  asylums,  homes,  refuges,  founded 
by  men  or  societies  outside  of  the  Church  of  God  ?  When  sceptics  and  other 
devotees  of  the  world  give  a  thousandth  part  as  much  for  the  advancement  of 
morality,  and  the  elevation  of  mankind,  as  members  of  the  Church  give,  then  it 
will  be  time  enough  to  lampoon  the  Church.  2.  Spirit  in  this  world  needs  body 
through  which  to  work.  Man  is  a  spirit,  but  he  can  do  nothing  here  without  a 
body.  It  is  so  with  God's  kindgom ;  it  is  a  spiritual  kingdom,  but  it  must  be 
embodied  in  an  institution  for  its  propagation.  When  one  becomes  so  spiritual 
that  he  wants  soul  to  work  without  body,  and  God's  kingdom  to  advance  in  the 
world  without  a  temporal  organisation,  he  is  altogether  too  ethereal  for  this 
mundane  sphere.  He  ought  to  take  on  his  wings  and  go.  What  if  Jesus  does  use 
the  word  "  chiu-ch  "  only  twice  ?  He  founded  the  Church,  and  evidently  instructed 
His  disciples  to  rear  it  with  scrupulous  care.  And  if  Churches  are  "in  a  struggle 
to  keep  themselves  going,"  what  of  it  ?  Would  that  prove  they  were  utterly 
useless  ?  That  sort  of  talk  will  not  help  on  God's  kingdom.  The  work  is  slow, 
it  is  true ;  that  is  partly,  at  least,  because  it  is  a  prodigious  undertaking.  To 
cleanse  this  planet  from  sin.  What  audacity  for  finite  beings  to  attempt  such  an 
infinite  enterprise  !    But  the  Church  is  accomplishing  much  when  it  merely  exists 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

in  this  world.  But  it  really  looks  as  if  the  Church  was  doing  something  more  than 
simply  existing.  Who  can  measure  the  influence  of  the  Church  upon  society, 
business,  legislation  ?  If  politics  is  so  bad  with  Christianity,  what  would  it  bo 
without  it  ?  Who  can  measure  the  abysmal  depths  to  which  all  Christian  govern- 
ments and  peoples  would  plunge  without  the  upholding  and  preserving  influence 
of  the  Church  ?     (F.  B.  Perry.) 

Vers.  10-13.  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  In  the  midst  of  thee. — TTie  restorer  of 
Israel  and  Judah  : — Note  that  the  name  of  "  the  Lord,"  or  "  Jehovah,"  is  applied 
to  two  distinct  persons;  to  Him  who  sends,  and  to  Him  who  is  sent.  Note  also 
that  in  this  prophecy  the  future  restoration  of  the  Jews  is  spoken  of,  as  well  as 
their  settlement  at  Jerusalem  after  the  Babylonish  captivity.  The  words  of  the 
text  evidently  relate  to  the  future  restoration.  A  period  is  yet  to  come,  of  glory 
to  God,  and  of  prosperity  to  the  people  of  Israel  and  Judah  ;  and  that  the  Son  of 
God,  the  Messiah,  will  dwell  among  them,  acknowledged  and  honoured  as  the  Lord 
of  hosts.  Note  some  of  the  circumstances  which  will  mark  that  season  of  the 
fulfilment  of  God's  promises  to  His  people.  1.  The  conversion  of  the  people  of 
Israel  and  Judah.  2.  The  restoration  of  all  the  tribes  to  their  own  land.  3.  The 
people  of  God  will  be  restored  to  their  native  land  in  the  midst  of  wars  and  tumults. 
Their  return  will  be  preceded  by  violent  convulsions,  and  by  a  season  of  disaster 
and  tribulation,  such  as  the  world  has  never  yet  witnessed.  4.  The  first  and  most 
remarkable  circumstance  in  the  condition  of  God's  people  after  their  settlement 
in  their  own  land,  is  His  immediate  presence  among  them.  5.  God  will  make 
a  new  covenant  with  them.  It  will  involve  a  much  higher  degree  of  religious 
knowledge.  6.  The  pardon  of  sin  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  promises  under  the 
new  covenant.  7.  The  consequence  of  this  abundant  pardon  and  superior  know- 
ledge is  the  greater  practice  of  virtue.  This  superior  degree  of  purity  and  holiness 
in  the  people  of  God,  is  the  gift  of  God  Himself,  the  effect  of  that  abundant  effusion 
of  the  Spirit  which  will  adorn  the  Church  under  His  own  immediate  care.  8.  The 
advantages  will  not  be  confined  to  Israel,  but  will  flow  out  to  other  peoples. 
9.  Jews  and  Gentiles  being  united  as  one  body  of  faithful  worshippers,  a  pure  and 
holy  service  will  be  paid  to  God  in  Jerusalem.  The  people  will  enjoy  all  worldly 
and  spiritual  blessedness.  Let  us  seek  to  attain  a  share  of  these  coming  blessings. 
(T.  Bawdier,  A. 31.)  The  joy  of  the  Divine  presence  : — 1.  No  diflBculty  or  strait 
can  take  away  from  the  Church  the  true  cause  of  her  joy,  nor  excuse  her  for  not 
rejoicing  in  it,  for  when  the  Jews  are  now  a  contemptible  handful,  deserted  by  their 
brethren,  vexed  by  their  enemies,  and  some  of  themselves  conspiring  against  them, 
yet  she  is  called  to  this  duty,  "  Sing,  and  rejoice."  2.  The  Lord's  own  presence  in 
and  with  His  people,  is  His  choice  and  matchless  gift,  which  He  is  willing  to  give 
before  any  other  thing,  and  which,  as  He  will  not  disdain  to  bestow  in  His  people's 
lowest  condition,  so  it  is  a  gift  that  should  occasion  much  joy  and  refreshment  to 
them.  3.  As  the  Lord's  presence  with  His  own  chosen  people  is  perpetual,  and  will 
bring  intimate  familiarity  and  love ;  so  Himself  will  be  at  all  the  pains  to  make  up 
this  union,  He  will  not,  by  sin  putting  Him,  as  it  were,  away  for  a  time,  be  provoked 
to  stay  away,  and  will  have  this  communion  still  upon  the  growing  hand  till  they 
come  to  full  fruition,  for  He  will  dwell  constantly  and  familiarly  "  in  the  midst  of 
thee."  4.  It  is  the  great  ground  of  the  Church's  encouragement,  and  the  foimtain 
of  all  other  manifestations  of  God,  that  the  Son  of  God  became  man,  that  her 
Redeemer  is  God,  that  He  came  and  dwelt  in  our  nature,  and  was  like  us  in  all  things 
without  sin ;  and  that  we  may  tryst  with  God  in  the  man  Christ,  and  know  our 
tender-hearted  Surety  to  be  also  God  over  all  blessed  for  ever,  and  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost.  This  incarnation  of  Christ  is  it  which  this  promise  ultimately 
points  at  as  the  ground  of  their  joy.  "  Sing,  for  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst 
of  thee,  saith  Jehovah."  (George  Hutrheson. )  The  joy  of  the  millenninl  Ch  nrch : — 
The  words  point  to  the  bright  periods  when  Messiah's  kingdom  shall  so  extend  as 
to  embrace  "  many  nations."  Three  remarks  are  suggested  concerning  this  joy. 
I.  It  is  RIGHTEOUS.  It  is  uot  Only  Divinely  authorised,  but  commanded.  "  Sing 
and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion."  Often  we  are  informed  by  religious  teachers 
that  joy  is  a  privilege,  but  seldom  told  that  joy  is  a  duty.  It  is  as  truly  a  sin  against 
heaven  to  be  spiritually  gloomy  and  sad,  as  to  be  socially  false  and  dishonest. 
"  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion."  Similar  commands  are  found  elsewhere 
on  the  pages  of  Holy  Writ.  "  Break  forth  into  joy,  sing  together  "  (Isa.  lii.  9). 
"  Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion  "  (Isa.  xii.  6).  Gratitude  is  joy  ; 
and  ought  not  gratitude  to  fill  every  soul  ?     Admiration  is  joy ;  and  ought  not 


CHAP,  n.]  ZECHARIAH.  29 

every  soul  to  be  filled  with  admiration  of  the  Divine  excellence  ?  Love  is  joy ; 
and  ought  we  not  to  love  all  creatures  with  the  love  of  benevolence,  and  the  Creator 
with  the  love  of  adoration  ?  II.  It  is  reasonable.  But  here  are  reasons  suggested 
for  this  joy.  What  are  they  ?  1.  The  presence  of  God.  "  Lo,  I  come,  and  I  will 
dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith  the  Lord."  The  highest  happiness  of  an  intelligent 
creature,  is  the  presence  of  the  object  it  supremely  loves.  "  In  Thy  presence  is 
fulness  of  joy."  2.  The  increase  of  the  good.  "  Many  nations  shall  be  joined  to 
the  Lord  in  that  day."  Is  not  this  a  good  reason  for  joy — to  see  the  clouds  of 
error  in  the  human  sky  breaking,  dissolving,  vanishing,  and  the  Sun  of  Truth  rising, 
spreading,  and  penetrating  the  whole  earth  with  its  lifegiving  beams  ?  Is  not  this  a 
sublime  reason  for  lifegiving  joy — "  Many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord,"  as 
the  branches  are  joined  to  the  roots  of  the  tree,  as  the  members  of  the  body  are 
joined  to  the  head  ?  3.  The  restoration  of  the  Jews.  "  For  the  Lord  shall  inherit 
Judah  His  portion  in  the  holy  land,  and  shall  choose  Jerusalem  again."  III.  It  is 
KEVERENTiAL.  "  Be  silent,  0  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord :  for  He  is  raised  up  out 
of  His  holy  habitation."  "  The  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple,  let  all  the  earth  keep 
silence  before  Him."  The  profoundest  emotions  of  the  soul  are  always  mut«. 
Superficial  feelings  are  noisy  and  chattering.  The  shallow  stream  rattles  amongst 
the  hills.  The  deep  river  rolls  by  imheard.  Deep  joy  is  silent  as  the  stars.  It  is 
so  with  the  godly  soul.  In  the  presence  of  the  supremely  beautiful,  it  is  filled  with 
a  joy  that  cannot  speak.  If  we  are  loyal  subjects  of  the  great  spiritual  empire,  we 
might  well  be  happy.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  12.  Tlie  Holy  Land. — Those  holy  fields  : — There  is  no  place  on  the  face 
of  the  globe  so  attractive  as  Palestine.  There  is  no  abatement  of  the  interest 
which  the  peoples  of  the  world  have  always  taken  in  it.  I.  What  makes  it 
ATTRACTIVE  ?  How  comcs  it  that  this  land  has  such  a  hold  upon  the  hearts  of 
men  of  varying  religions  and  different  races  ?  Is  it  because  of  the  excellence  of 
its  government  ?  Is  it  because  of  the  might  and  power  of  its  arms  ?  Is  it  because 
of  its  size,  its  colossal  proportions  ?  11.  Its  connection  with  Jesus  Christ. 
The  Holy  Land  is  endeared  to  the  hearts  of  men  because  the  Son  of  God  walked 
its  streets,  and  made  it  for  ever  sacred  by  His  holy  life  and  sacrificial  death.  There 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  made  known  to  perishing  man  the  love  of 
God  for  a  lost  world.  III.  The  Holy  Land  is  striking  and  interesting  in 
MANY  OF  its  ASPECTS.  Its  climate  is  the  most  remarkable  in  the  world.  Its 
position  is  not  less  striking.  In  ancient  days  it  was  believed  to  be  the  very  centre 
of  the  earth.  And  so  it  is  in  a  higher  and  better  sense.  It  was  there  the  great 
mystery  of  the  Incarnation  was  enacted.  Mount  Calvary  is  the  central  point 
of  the  world's  religious  life  and  thought.  If  ever  that  universal  brotherhood  of 
man,  for  which  the  world  longs,  is  to  be  realised,  it  will  come  in  proportion  as 
men  climb  Mount  Calvary,  and  meet  in  love  at  the  Cross  of  Christ.  {Charles  Leech, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Be  silent,  0  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord,  for  He  is  raised  up  out  of 
His  holy  habitation.  —  Flesh  silevced  hy  God's  arising  : — 1.  The  vision  itself. 
The  man  with  a  line  in  his  hand.  2.  The  interpretation  of  the  vision.  Jerusalem 
shall  be  built,  and  the  city  shall  be  inhabited.  3.  A  threefold  apostrophe  that 
the  Lord  infers  from  this — (1)  Directed  to  the  Jews  that  yet  continued  in  Babylon. 
The  Lord  calls  them.  It  is  barrenness  and  lowness  of  spirit  not  to  accept  deliver- 
ance. "  Deliver  thj'self."  (2)  The  news  is  to  the  enemies  that  were  their  neigh- 
bours. (3)  To  both.  Let  the  enemies  silence  their  murmurings,  silence  their 
slanders.  Let  the  saints  silence  their  frettings,  silence  their  doubtings.  In  the 
words  of  text  are  two  things.  I.  A  proposition.  "  The  Lord  is  raised  up  out 
of  His  holy  habitation."  The  expression  "  habitation  of  His  holiness  "  is  used 
two  ways  in  Scripture.  It  is  sometimes  put  for  heaven  ;  sometimes  for  the 
temple,  the  place  of  God's  presence  among  His  people,  manifested  in  ordinances. 
How  is  God  said  to  be  "  raised  up  "  ?  It  is  such  a  rising  as  is  after  an  awaking 
out  of  sleep.  But  how  can  God  be  said  to  sleep  7  The  cessation  of  acts  of  pro- 
vidence is  God's  sleep.  The  putting  of  them  forth  is  God's  arising,  awaking. 
The  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  this, — When  the  Lord  doth  appear  for  His  people 
as  a  return  of  their  prayers,  when  the  Lord  ariseth  gloriously  for  them,  for  their 
deliverance,  and  their  enemies  overthrow,  then  it  is  said,  "  The  Lord  is  raised  up 
out  of  His  holy  habitation."  Two  observations — The  great  comfort  of  the  saints 
in  all  their  straits  and  difficulties  lies  in  this,  when  they  see  God  ariseth  for  them. 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Experiments  of  God's  rising  in  acts  of  providence  are  great  grounds  to  His  people 
to  stay  their  faith,  that  God  will  go  on,  He  will  bring  His  work  to  perfection. 
Open  this  under  three  heads — 1.  There  is  a  time  when  God  seems  to  sleep.  2.  The 
great  labour  of  the  saints  in  all  their  straits  is  to  awaken  God,  that  God  may 
arise.  We  knock  at  heaven's  gate  ;  we  environ  God  ;  beleaguer  God  by  our 
prayers ;  we  as  it  were  wrest  mercy  out  of  His  hands.  3.  The  consolations  of 
the  saints  must  needs  be  very  great  from  the  arisings  of  God  for  them  in  His 
providential  dealings.  When  the  Lord  doth  arise,  whatsoever  standeth  in 
opposition  must  fall.  When  God  ariseth,  He  overruleth  the  spirits  of  men,  so 
as  they  shall  effect  and  accomplish  the  end.  When  God  ariseth.  He  hath 
abundance  rise  with  Him.  When,  by  our  spiritual  eyes,  can  we  discern  that 
God  is  raised  up  ?  1.  Prayer  is  God's  way  by  which  He  is  raised  up.  2.  When 
the  Lord  defeateth  the  counsels  of  the  enemy,  tmrns  their  plots  upon  their  heads. 
3.  When  the  Lord  takes  away  the  heart  of  His  enemies.  4.  When  the  Lord  acteth 
the  spirits  of  His  people  unto  high  and  noble  and  invincible  resolutions.  5.  When 
the  Lord  goes  on  in  ways  of  mercy,  and  draws  out  His  loving-kindness.  The 
experiments  (experiences)  which  the  saints  have  of  the  rising  of  God  are  a  sure 
pledge  to  their  faith  that  He  will  go  on  ;  He  will  not  leave  the  work  till  He  hath 
Drought  it  to  perfection.  The  inference  is, — then  "  be  silent  all  flesh  before 
Him."  Some  men  keep  silence  in  policy,  because  they  would  not  discover  them- 
selves till  a  convenient  time.  But  all  the  people  of  God  that  would  approve 
themselves,  must  keep  silence  in  duty.  There  is  a  silence  of  shame,  and  a  silence 
of  fear  and  astonishment.  The  Lord  says  to  these  Jews,  silence  your  doubtings, 
and  silence  your  frettings.  (W.  Strong.)  God  raised  up  out  of  His  holy  habita- 
lion  : — I.  The  sense  of  the  phrase.  Expressions  concerning  the  locality  of 
the  Divine  presence  arose  out  of  the  circumstances  of  His  dwelling  in  the  tabernacle 
of  Moses  ;  of  His  resting  when  the  camp  rested,  and  marching  before  them  when 
they  advanced.  When  God  thus  arose.  He  came  forth  from  His  holy  habitation. 
When  God  is  spoken  of  in  human  language,  local  and  bodily  ideas  must  enter 
into  it.  The  conception  of  our  minds,  as  to  the  operations  of  God,  are  aided  by 
such  phraseology.  It  may  be  applied  generally  to  the  dispensations  of  providence. 
When  wickedness  prevails,  when  error  spreads,  when  the  Church  is  wasted,  thea 
the  Almighty  is  represented  as  shutting  His  eyes,  ttirning  away  His  face,  with- 
holding His  hand,  and  resting  in  His  holy  place.  But  when  He  makes  Himself 
manifest  in  judgment  or  mercy,  when  He  has  nations  to  punish  or  to  bless,  when 
His  Church  calls  for  protection  and  help,  then  He  is  "  raised  up  out  of  His  holy 
habitation,"  and  "  all  flesh "  is  commanded  to  "  keep  silence  "  before  Him. 
IL  The  occasions  which  procure  this  interposition  of  God.  L  He  is  raised 
up  by  the  incorrigible  vices  of  men.  When  wickedness  abounds,  for  a  time  He 
appears  to  disregard  it,  or  He  interposes  by  gentle  corrections  ;  but  there  is  a 
limit  to  His  patience  and  forbearance.  2.  Pride  and  oppression  raise  Him  up 
out  of  His  habitation.  "  Those  kingdoms  that  walk  in  pride  He  will  abase." 
Every  power  that  is  opposed  to  the  laws  of  God  must  be  overthrown ;  and  the  more 
proud  and  oppressive  it  is,  the  more  certain,  speedy,  and  marked  is  its  downfall. 
3.  God  is  raised  up  for  the  manifestation  of  His  truth.  To  every  people  God 
originally  gave  a  saving  system,  and  all  nations  might  have  preserved  it.  That 
they  have  not,  is  a  proof  of  human  depravity.  Had  it  not  been  for  special  inter- 
positions from  God,  the  truth  would  have  wholly  perished  ;  and  with  it  all  the 
hopes  of  the  world  must  have  ended  for  ever.  Here  is  the  mercy  of  God.  4.  God 
is  raised  up  by  the  prayers  of  His  saints.  Prayer  moves  Him  that  moves  the 
universe.  Everything  encourages  prayer.  That  which  is  our  privilege  is  made 
our  duty.  You  know  the  eflScacy  of  prayer.  It  is  prayer  that  calls  down  His 
visitations,  interests  Him  in  your  cause,  and  secures  to  you  grace  to  help  in  every 
time  of  need.  Nor  less  essentially  is  it  connected  with  every  plan  for  the  spread 
of  His  Gospel,  and  the  prosperity  of  His  Church.  5.  The  performance  of  His 
promise  to  Messiah  raises  God  up  from  His  holy  habitation.  He  had  said,  "  I 
shall  give  Thee  the  heathen  for  Thine  inheritance."  This  decree  is  not  yet  fully 
accomplished.  God  has  been  raised  up  partly  to  accomplish  it;  but  He  will  ere 
long  put  forth  His  power  in  a  still  more  glorious  manner.  Even  now  is  He  raised 
up  for  this  purpose.  III.  The  impression  these  extraordinary  dispensations 
should  make.  Silence  is  commanded  ;  but  silence  in  such  a  case  is  the  result 
of  powerful  mental  impression.  L  It  is  the  effect  of  deep  and  intense  interest. 
2.  Reproof  produces  silence.  3.  Satisfaction  produces  silence.  All  flesh,  as  well 
as  the  Church,  is  commanded  to  keep  silence  before  God.     IV.  But  is  thb  wholb 


CHAP,  m.]  ZECHARIAH.  31 

TO  I8SUH  IN  EMOTION  ?  Certainly  not.  God  is  raised  up  out  of  ffis  place,  to 
raise  us  up  from  ours.  We  are  to  be  fellow-helpers  to  the  truth.  It  is  our 
encouragement  that  God  is  "  raised  up  out  of  His  holy  habitation  "  ;  and  this 
will  render  us  inexcusable  if  we  refuse  to  co-operate.  If  God  is  thus  raised  up, 
we  have  many  encouragements  to  exertion.  We  have  the  Divine  sanction. 
Prayer  must  be  heard.  We  shall  not  want  co-operation.  We  cannot  want 
success.     We  shall  be  inexcusable,  if  we  refuse  to  espouse  His  cause,     (i?,  Watson.) 


CHAPTER  in. 

Vebs.  1-7.  And  he  shewed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest  standing. — Joshua 
the  priest : — We  learn  from  the  Book  of  Ezra  (ii.  36-39)  that  among  the 
exiles  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel  from  Babylon,  were  Joshua  or  Jeshua, 
and  4289  priests.  But  they  were  in  a  sorry  plight  —  their  character  is 
described  by  the  prophet  Malachi ;  and  it  was  in  sad  contrast,  as  he  suggests, 
to  the  original  type  of  the  priesthood  represented  in  Phinehas.  As  a  judgment 
on  the  priesthood,  the  whole  body  had  fallen  under  great  reproach  (Mai.  ii.  9). 
The  sense  of  shame  becomes  more  acute  when  we  stand  before  the  Angel  of  the 
Lord.  "  He  shewed  me  Joshua,  the  high  priest,  standing  before  the  Angel  of  the 
Lord."  In  the  world's  twilight  much  may  pass  muster  which,  in  the  light  of 
that  sweet,  pure  face,  must  be  utterly  condemned.  Garments  which  served  us 
well  enough  in  the  short,  dark  winter  days  are  laid  aside  when  spring  arrives  ; 
they  wiU  not  bear  the  searching  scrutiny  of  the  light.  In  the  ordinary  life  of  our 
homes,  we  are  less  particular  of  our  attire  than  when,  on  some  special  occasion, 
wo  have  to  undergo  the  inspection  of  stranger  eyes.  Thus  we  are  prone  to  compare 
ourselves  with  ourselves,  or  with  others,  and  to  argue  that  the  habit  of  our  soul 
is  not  specially  defiled.  Alas  !  we  reason  thus  in  the  dark.  But  when  the  white 
light  of  the  throne  of  God  breaks  on  us,  we  cry  with  Job  :  "  If  I  wash  myself  with 
snow-water,  and  make  my  hands  never  so  clean,  yet  wilt  Thou  plunge  me  in  the 
ditch,  and  mine  own  clothes  shall  abhor  me."  The  more  we  know  of  God,  the 
more  we  loathe  ourselves  and  repent.  What  is  to  be  done  under  such  circum- 
stances 7  Renounce  our  priesthood  ?  Disclaim  its  God-given  functions  ? 
No  :  remain  standing  before  the  Angel.  He  knows  all — we  need  not  shrink 
from  His  searching  eyes — but  He  loves  infinitely.  He  has  power  to  make  our 
iniquity  pass  from  us,  and  clothe  us  with  change  of  raiment — that  white  linen 
which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints.  It  is  at  such  moments,  however,  that  our 
great  adversary  puts  forth  his  worst  insinuations.  "  Satan  standing  at  his  right 
hand  to  be  his  adversary."  Since  he  was  cast  out  of  his  first  estate,  he  has  been 
the  antagonist  of  God,  the  hater  of  good,  and  the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  He 
discovers  the  weak  spots  in  character,  and  thrusts  at  them  ;  the  secret  defects  of 
the  saints,  and  proclaims  them  upon  the  house-tops  ;  the  least  symptom  of  dis- 
loyalty, inconstancy,  and  mixture  of  motive,  and  flaunts  it  before  God's  angels. 
He  is  keen  as  steel,  and  cruel  as  heU.  Ah,  it  is  awful  to  think  with  what  implaca- 
bility he  rages  against  us  !  When  we  pray,  he  is  quick  to  detect  the  wandering 
thought,  the  mechanical  repetition  of  well-worn  phrases,  the  flagging  fervour. 
When  we  work  for  God,  he  is  keen  to  notice  our  desire  to  dazzle  our  fellows,  to 
secure  name  and  fame,  to  use  the  Cross  as  a  ladder  for  our  own  exaltation  instead 
of  our  Master's.  "  Is  this,"  he  hisses,  "  the  kind  of  service  which  Thy  chosen 
servants  offer  Thee  ?  "  And  when,  like  Job,  we  do  bear  trial  patiently  and  nobly, 
the  great  adversary  suggests  that  we  do  it  from  a  selfish  motive — "  Doth  Job 
serve  God  for  nought  ?  "  Satan  cannot  reach  the  Son  of  God  now,  save  through 
the  members  of  His  body ;  but  he  misses  no  opportunity  of  thrusting  at  Him, 
as  he  accuses  them.  Let  us  notice  the  intervention  and  answer  of  the  Angel  of 
the  Covenant.  1.  It  is  spontaneous  and  unsought.  Before  Joshua  had  time  to 
say,  "  Shelter  me,"  his  faithful  Friend  and  Advocate  had  cast  around  him  the 
assurance  of  His  protection,  and  had  silenced  the  adversary.  "  The  Lord  rebuke 
thee,  O  Satan."  As  the  Aaronic  Priest,  He  died  ;  but  as  the  Melchizedek  Priest, 
He  ever  lives  to  make  intercession  on  our  behalf ;  and  as  the  torpedoes  of  the 
enemy  are  launched  against  us.  He  catches  them  in  the  net  of  His  intercession, 
and  makes  them  powerless  to  hurt.     Before  we  call,  He  answers.     2.  It  is  founded 


32  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

on  electing  grace.  For  He  says  :  "  The  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke 
thee."  Before  ever  He  chose  hor,  He  must  have  foreseen  all  that  she  would 
become,  her  backslidings  and  rebellions,  her  filthy  garments,  her  wounds  and  bruises 
and  putrefying  sores ;  but,  notwithstanding  all.  He  set  His  heart  upon  her.  Satan 
cjuld  allege  nothing  which  the  Advocate  had  not  weighed  in  the  balances  of  His 
Divine  prescience.  He  had  realised  the  very  worst  before  making  His  final  choice. 
Yes,  thou  gr  at  adversary,  thou  canst  not  tell  our  Lord  worse  things  about  us  than 
He  knows  ;  and  notwithstanding  all.  He  loves,  and  will  love.  3.  Moreover,  it 
has  already  done  too  much  to  go  back.  The  point  of  the  metaphor  which  follows 
is  very  reassuring.  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  You  have 
been  writing  all  the  morning  at  your  desk,  answering  letters,  assorting  papers 
and  manuscripts,  destroying  much  that  there  was  no  need  to  keep.  After  two 
or  three  hours  of  work,  there  is  a  heap  of  papers  which  you  wish  to  destroy,  and 
you  place  them  in  your  stove  or  fireplace,  the  fire  kindles  on  them,  and  they  begin 
to  blaze.  Suddenly,  to  your  dismay,  j'ou  remember  that  there  was  a  cheque  or 
note  amongst  them,  or  a  letter  with  an  address,  or  a  paper  which  has  cost  you 
hours  of  work.  As  quick  as  thought  you  rush  to  the  kindling  flames,  and  snatch 
away  the  paper,  and  attempt  to  stay  the  gnawing  edge  of  flame.  But  what  an 
appearance  the  paper  suggests  !  It  is  yellow  with  smoke,  charred  and  brittle 
round  the  edges,  scorched  and  hot,  here  and  there  are  gaps — it  is  a  brand  plucked 
out  of  the  fire.  Would  you  have  snatched  it  out  if  you  had  not  valued  it  ?  And, 
after  you  have  taken  such  pains  to  rescue  it,  is  it  likely  that  you  will  thrust  it  back 
to  destruction  ?  And  would  Jehovah  have  snatched  Israel  out  of  Babylon,  and 
expended  so  much  time  and  care  over  her,  if  at  the  end  He  meant  to  destroy  her  ? 
The  fact  of  His  having  done  so  much,  not  only  proved  His  love,  but  implied  its 
continuance.  What  depths  of  consolation  are  here  !  As  we  look  back  on  our 
lives,  we  become  aware  of  the  narrowness  of  our  escape  from  dangers  which  over- 
whelmed others.  We  have  been  involved  in  companionships  and  practices  which 
have  ruined  others  irretrievably  ;  but  somehow,  though  we  are  charred  and 
blackened,  we  have  escaped  the  ultimate  results.  We  have  been  plucked  out  of 
the  burning.  What  can  we  infer  from  so  gracious  an  interposition,  except  that 
we  have  been  preserved  for  some  high  and  useful  purpose  ?  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Help  and  opposition  : — I.  The  position  of  the  High  Priest.  1.  He  stands  before 
the  Angel  of  the  Lord.  2.  He  stands  before  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  as  an  accused 
person.  3.  He  stands  before  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  as  an  accused  person,  to  pray. 
II.  The  opposition  of  Satan.  1.  It  was  prompt.  2.  It  was  directed  against 
Joshua  as  the  high  priest.  3.  It  assumed  the  form  of  accusation  against  Joshua. 
4.  It  was  intended  to  interrupt  or  thwart  Joshua  in  his  prayer.  {G.  Brooks.) 
Joshua  and  Satan  : — Israel  was  then  what  Christendom  is  now ;  and  the  prophet 
in  this  chapter  muse  be  considered  as  instructing  not  the  house  of  Jacob  alone, 
but  the  whole  family  of  God  in  Christ.  The  vision  of  Zcchariah  is  a  solemn  picture 
of  what  is  now  going  on.  Taking  the  vision  to  refer  to  the  Christian  Church, 
inquire  into  the  truths  which  it  involves,  and  how  it  tallies  with  external  events. 
Trace  its  reality  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Gospel.  Illustrate  from  the  manifesta- 
tion of  Christ  to  the  Gentile  world.  The  Church  ever  comes  before  us  as  a  community 
enlarging  its  borders,  absorbing  into  itself  human  belief,  supplanting  other  modes 
of  worship.  But  there  is  another  side  of  the  picture.  The  Clui.stian  history  is 
full  of  the  opposition  and  violence  with  which  the  onward  march  of  the  Cross  has 
been  uniformly  encountered.  The  lives  of  Christian  missionaries  are  ever  lives  of 
risk  and  pain.  Such  is  the  external  history  of  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel. 
Where  lies  the  cause  that  after  eighteen  hundred  years  Christianity  has  not  con- 
quered a  majority  of  the  human  race  ?  The  cause  of  Christianity  is  the  cause  of 
Christ.  The  resistance  of  the  devil  has  been  partly  open,  but  his  resistance  has 
been  secret  and  stealthy  :  it  has  mainly  sought  to  undermine  rather  than  cast 
down  ;  to  weaken  from  within  rather  than  assail  from  without.  A  chief  cause 
of  the  slow  progress  of  the  Gospel  among  men  has  been,  the  want  of  unity.  This  is 
seen  in  sectarian  separation,  and  in  diversity  of  doctrine.  The  history  of  the  world, 
of  the  Church,  yea,  of  every  individual  soul,  is  but  the  outward  result  of  the  mystic 
vision  of  Joshua  the  high  priest,  and  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist 
him.  {J.  R.  Woodford,  M.A.)  Joshua  the  high  priest  before  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah : — This  vision  is  of  less  obvious  interpretation  than  the  preceding,  perhaps 
for  the  reason  that  its  truth  lies  nearer  the  deepest  throbbings  of  the  human  heart. 
A  sense  of  sin  and  a  feeling  of  hopeless  ill-desert  are  among  the  deepest  emotions 
of  a  heart  that  has  been  touched  by  the  Holy  Spirit.     This  is  the  ever-recurring 


CHAP,  ni.]  ZECHARIAR.  33 

state  of  the  heart  both  individually  and  collectively,  because  it  rests  on  the  ever- 
during  relations  that  connect  man  with  God.  A  sense  of  sin  fairly  awakened 
produces  despair  if  we  axe  thrown  back  on  the  resources  of  reason.  We  cannot 
hope  in  God,  for  we  tremble  before  His  justice.  Thus  it  was  with  the  Jewish 
Church  at  this  time.  They  felt  that  they  had  sinned,  and  hence  had  no  ground 
in  themselves  to  hope  for  God's  favour.  They  knew  that  their  priests  had  also 
been  unfaithful,  and  hence  they  had  no  hope  in  them.  Why,  then,  go  forward  with 
the  temple,  when  both  priest  and  people  must  defile  rather  than  hallow  its  courts  ? 
These  were  the  suggestions  of  Satan,  to  deter  them  from  their  work.  God  will  not 
accept  so  vile  and  faithless  a  heart,  so  lame  and  mutilated  a  service  as  you  render 
Him,  says  the  tempter,  therefore  you  had  better  abandon  it  all,  and  enjoy  sin  at 
least,  if  you  cannot  enjoy  holiness.  This  brings  us  to  the  heart  of  the  vision. 
It  is  designed  to  show  the  people  of  God  that  their  personal  demerit  is  no  ground 
for  distrusting  the  mercy  of  God,  for  He  receives  them  not  because  of  their  own 
righteousness,  but  that  of  Another ;  and  that  at  this  particular  period  the  im- 
worthiness  of  the  priesthood  was  no  reason  for  their  destruction  and  the  overthrow 
of  the  temple,  as  they  were  typical,  and  the  end  of  their  instruction  was  not  yet 
served.  {T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  Christ  the  advocate  of  His  Church  and  people: — 
This  part  of  the  vision  has  respect  to  Joshua  and  his  accuser.    It  exhibits  Joshua — 

1.  With  respect  to  his  condition.  View  him — 1.  In  his  office.  High  priest. 
One  part  of  his  duty  was  to  consult  the  Divine  will  in  matters  of  difficulty.  Another 
part  was  to  intercede  on  behalf  of  the  nation.  Possibly  he  was  now  before  God, 
confessing  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  pleading  for  that  pardon  which  a  God  of 
mercy  is  ever  ready  to  bestow.  2.  In  what  place  was  Joshua  executing  his  office  ? 
The  temple  was  not  built,  and  the  particular  place  is  not  named.  He  was  "  standing 
before  the  Angel  of  the  Lord."  This  was  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Angel  of  the 
Covenant.  II.  His  enemy.  Satan  means  adversary.  Look  at — 1.  The  actings 
of  the  adversary.  Satan  stood  at  Joshua's  right  hand.  But  why  ?  To  resist 
him.  But  he  might  do  this  either  by  tempting  Joshua  or  by  accusing  him.  The 
right  hand  was  the  usual  place  for  accusers  in  public.  2.  What  were  his  motives 
for  accusing  Joshua  ?  His  motives  as  a  tempter  we  can  well  understand  ;  but 
what  were  his  motives  for  accusing  Joshua  of  negligence  in  the  work  of  God  ?  Did 
Satan  then  wish  that  the  work  of  God  should  go  on  vigorously  ?  III.  His  advocate. 
Jehovah  Himself.  The  Lord's  defence  of  Joshua  is  grounded — 1.  In  His  lov& 
toward  the  Church.  2.  On  His  past  mercy  to  Joshua.  The  defence  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  makes  for  His  people  now  is  substantially  the  same  as  it  was  then. 
Past  mercies  are  grounds  of  Christian  confidence,  and  should  be  viewed  as  pledges 
of  future  blessings.  TV.  The  apparel  or  Joshua.  "Filthy  garments."  Probably 
the  garments  worn   in  the   time  of  captivity.     1.   His   dress   was  unsuitable. 

2.  Suitable  apparel  was  provided  for  him.  "  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of 
raiment."  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  to  all,  and  upon  all,  them  that  believe. 
Ask — (1)  Are  we  attending  to  our  duties  ?  (2)  Are  we  sensible  of  our  defects  ? 
(3)  Are  we  confiding  in  an  Almighty  Advocate?  (J.  G.  Breay,  B.A.)  The 
great  contention: — I.  Joshua's  ministry  and  defence.  L  He  stood  to  minister 
before  the  Lord.  Whereby  we  learn — (1)  That  as  ministers  of  the  Lord  have  their 
mission  from  Him,  so  they  ought  to  receive  instruction  from  Him.  (2)  Having 
received  instructions,  they  ought  with  all  readiness  to  obey  them.  (3)  That  they 
axe  always  in  the  eye  of  God,  to  counsel  them  in  their  duties,  to  search  them  in 
their  performances,  to  hear  them  in  their  petitions,  to  protect  them  in  their  dangers. 
2.  He  stood  as  a  defendant,  as  one  accused,  to  answer  for  himself  and  others. 
The  sins  of  the  age  were  then  general,  such  as,  neglect  of  building  the  temple, 
marrying  strange  wive-s,  &c.  II.  Satan,  and  his  work  against  Joshua.  1.  He 
withstands  us  as  a  tempter.  If  we  do  our  duty,  Satan  is  at  our  right  hand  to 
hinder  us ;  if  we  do  not  our  duty,  he  is  there  to  accuse  us.  He  stands  at  the  working 
hand.  Usually,  the  more  work  the  more  temptation,  and  the  more  public  the 
work  the  more  sharp  and  eager  the  temptation.  2.  He  opposes  as  an  accuser. 
He  resisted  Joshua  by  stirring  up  the  Samaritans  to  hinder  the  building  of  the 
temple.  He  resisted  him  in  his  ministry,  by  accusing  him  of  his  failings.  What 
these  were  we  may  guess.  ( 1 )  He  ministered  not  in  the  priest's  robes,  but  in  filthy 
garments.  (2)  He  delaj'^ed  the  building  of  the  temple.  (3)  His  sons  were,  some 
of  them,  defiled  with  strange  wives.  III.  The  advocate — the  Lord.  Christ 
is  the  Church's  Advocate.  Satan  is  at  our  right  hand ;  Christ  is  at  God's  right 
band.  Joshua  does  not  plead  his  own  cause  ;  he  answers  by  his  Counsel,  his 
Advocate  pleads  for  him.     IV.    The  double  foundation  of  this  victory. 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iil 

1 .  God's  gracious  election.  "  The  Lord  which  hath  chosen  Jerusalem,  rebuke  thee." 
The  doctrine  of  adoption  by  free  grace  is  the  strongest  weapon  that  we  can 
wield  against  the  malice  of  Satan.  2.  Joshua's  past  deliverance.  "  Is  not  this  a 
brand  plucked  from  the  fire  ?  "  Past  mercies  are  pledges  of  more.  If  God  snatch 
out  of  the  fire,  He  will  bring  unto  His  tem.ple  :  if  He  lay  a  foundation,  He  will 
bring  forth  the  head-stone.  [Bishop  Reynolds.)  The  vision  of  Joshua  : — 1.  The 
representative  characters  of  the  high  priest  and  of  Satan.  Joshua  represents 
the  Jewish  nation,  especially  the  godly  people  in  it.  His  f.lthy  garments  were 
emblematic  of  the  moral  defilement  of  the  nation,  and  of  their  low  and  poor 
condition.  Satan  is  the  representative  of  all  evil  forces.  He  represents  the 
majority  of  this  world,  but  the  minority  of  the  universe.  2.  The  motives  which 
at  this  time  brought  them  into  God's  presence.  It  is  implied  that  the  high  priest 
was  there  to  plead  for  his  nation.  Satan  was  there  to  oppose  this  restoration  to 
God's  favour, — to  bring  forward  reasons  why  it  should  not  be  granted.  3.  The 
reason  why  the  promise  and  the  symbol  should  have  their  perfect  fulfibnent. 
One  life,  or  one  act  in  a  life,  is  sometimes  of  such  a  nature  or  character  as  to  send 
down  a  blessing  to  future  ages  ;  it  seems  to  gather  within  itself  all  the  wisdom  or 
all  the  goodness  of  the  past,  and  to  bring  them  all  into  a  centre  of  blessing  for  the 
present  and  the  future.  The  life  of  God's  Son,  and  especially  His  death  upon  the 
Cross,  gathered  up  all  that  had  been  shadowed  forth  in  the  prophets  and  priests 
of  old.  His  perfect  life  and  sinless  death  and  intercession  were  svireties  that 
the  promise  given  to  the  Hebrew  people,  through  Joshua,  should  certainly  be 
fulfilled.  The  vision  embodies  the  blessed  results  of  Divine  forgiveness  through 
the  life  and  death  of  Christ,  which  are  so  beautifully  set  forth  by  the  greatest 
of  Old  Testament  prophets,  Isaiah  (see  chaps,  xi.  and  xii.).  Learn — (1)  Evil 
spirits  may  plead  with  God  against  men,  as  the  good  plead  for  them.  Many 
human  beings  send  up  desires  against  the  prosperity  and  happiness  of  their  fellow- 
men.  2.  The  man  who  would  be  a  benefactor  of  his  fellow- creatures  must  be  an 
intercessor  for  them.  3.  The  elect  of  God  are  those  who  fulfil  the  conditions  of 
fellowship  with  God.  Divine  forgiveness  springs  from  Divine  grace,  but  the 
proof  that  it  has  reached  us  must  be  found  in  the  fact  that  we  fulfil  the  only 
conditions  upon  which  it  is  granted.  (Outlines  by  a  London  Minister.)  God's 
method  of  salvation  : — L  Joshua,  before  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  represents  a  sinful 
people.  (1)  Sin  is  impurity.  What  dress  is  to  the  body,  moral  character  is  to 
the  soul.  Impure  garments  are  the  symbol  of  sin.  Iniquity  is  described  by  the 
most  loathsome  objects  in  nature — an  infant  uncared  for  ;  the  vomit.of  the  dog  ; 
the  wallow  of  swine  ;  the  exhalations  of  the  sepulchre.  A  Greek  philosopher 
said,  "  Evil  destroys  us  like  a  wild  beast."  2.  God  saves  through  instrumentality. 
There  are  two  classes  :  the  good,  who  stand  by  all  beneficent  influences ;  and 
Satan,  all  that  hinders  good,  evil  spirits,  bad  men,  corrupt  hearts.  The  day  of 
Gospel  grace  is  neither  day  nor  night.  It  is  a  conflict  of  contending  forces.  We 
live  between  Ebal  and  Gerizim.  Every  one  who  undertakes  anything  good  will 
find  agencies  obeying  the  command,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  assisting.  And  He 
will  find  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand, — the  place  of  power — to  resist  him. 
Eeflections — 1.  We  observe  the  same  method  of  work  in  the  natural  world,  and  in 
civil  society,  as  in  the  Church.  All  are  the  work  of  one  God.  2.  Why  does  God 
permit  sin  ?  He  works  by  the  balance  of  contending  elements  everywhere. 
3.  The  position  of  an  unsaved  sinner  is  as  when  a  chief  falls  wounded  between 
two  contending  armies  :  both  fight  for  him.  For  which  does  he  fight  ?  (J.  3. 
Fulton.)  Joshua  : — The  Church  is  a  holy  priesthood.  Regard  Joshua  as 
representing  the  humble,  penitent  believer.  I.  Joshua  in  his  difficultibs. 
Standing  before  the  /ingel  of  the  Covenant  No  careless  person,  but  a  poor  sinner 
seeking  to  stand  before  the  Lord  Christ.  Satan  is  near  him  as  his  accuser.  When 
the  sinner  awakened  stands  before  the  Angel  Jehovah,  how  often  does  the  devil, 
by  doubts  and  insinations,  seek  to  turn  him  aside.  So  the  Angel  Jehovah  becomes 
his  helper.  II.  The  Lord's  account  of  Joshua.  Scorched,  but  delivered  bv 
power,  the  sinner  saved  by  grace.  The  powerful  hand  of  the  Lord,  by  His  Word, 
in  His  providence,  by  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  heart,  has  arrested  and 
plucked  him  from  the  burning.  III.  The  relief  at  hand.  The  ^\ngel  of  the 
Covenant  answers  Satan's  accusations.  Joshua  had  special  holy  garments  pro- 
vided for  him.  But  even  these  were  filthy  and  polluted.  He  must  be  stripped 
and  re-clothed.  IV.  The  happy  results.  The  pure  mitre  conspicuously  a  part 
of  the  priest's  dress.  The  angel,  &c.,  stood  by  to  help  and  comfort,  to  put  Satan 
to  flight,  to  counsel  and  to  direct,  to  be  his  guide  as  well  as  his  deliverer.     We 


CHAP,  ni.]  ZECHARIAH.  35 

now  stand  before  the  Angel  Jehovah,  the  messenger  of  light  and  life  and  glory, 
when  we  come  into  His  house  of  prayer;  and  we  must  stand  before  Hira  when  He 
Cometh  with  clouds,  and  every  eye  shall  see  Him.  {E.  Auriol,  M.A.)  Joshua 
the  high  priest : — The  visions  of  Zechariah  were  intended  to  encourage  the  re- 
building of  the  temple.  The  resumption  and  successful  prosecution  of  the  work 
upon  the  temple  devolved  not  less  upon  the  ecclesiastical  than  upon  the  civil 

{)ower.  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  must  co-operate.  The  former  was  ready ;  the 
atter  needed  to  be  extricated  from  the  Slough  of  Despond.  1.  At  the  opening  of 
the  vision  the  prophet  saw  Joshua  standing  to  be  judged  before  the  Angel  of  God. 

(1)  And  he  was  clothed  in  filthy  garments.  The  best  of  human  kind  is  not  perfect. 
The  contrition  of  Joshua  was,  therefore,  becoming  in  him,  and  all  the  more  because 
of  his  official  position.  Before  the  all-searching  eyes  his  garments  were  mere 
shreds  and  tatters.     And  therein  he  was  indeed  a  just  representative  of  the  people. 

(2)  Satan  stood  at  his  right  hand  to  resist  (i.e.,  accuse)  him.  There  is  no  lack  of 
accusers.  God's  people  are  always  at  the  bar  of  judgment,  and  alas,  they  have 
little  enough  to  say  for  themselves.  Guilty  is  the  plea.  2.  Next  in  the  vision 
the  Lord  Himself  appeared  to  vindicate  Joshua.  He  stands  as  the  champion 
of  His  people  ;  His  ear  is  ever  open  to  their  cry.  He  is  the  champion  of  all  the 
weak  and  humble.  (1)  In  this  instance  He  rebuked  Satan  ;  not  because  there 
was  no  truth  in  His  charge  that  Joshua  was  vmworthy  to  minister  at  Cod's  altar, 
or  have  part  in  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  but  because  of  other  considerations, 
which  made  his  accusations  null  and  void.  (2)  The  Lord  having  rebuked  Satan, 
eaid  to  His  own  attendant  angels :  "  Take  away  from  Joshua  his  filthy  garments." 
Thus  does  He  unclothe  His  people  of  their  filthy  rags,  and  make  them  worthy 
to  minister  before  Him.  He  is  a  great  forgiver.  Thus  the  Lord  encouraged 
Joshua,  and  qualified  him,  despite  his  personal  unworthiness,  to  offer  sacrifices 
and  join  with  Zerubbabel  in  the  re-building  of  the  temple.  And  thus  does  He 
stand  at  the  heavenly  tribunal  as  the  vindicator  of  the  least  of  His  little  ones. 
3.  Then,  in  the  vision,  the  prophet  saw  Joshua  arrayed  in  garments  white  and 
clean.  "  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of  raiment."  Nor  was  this  enough. 
■'  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head."  Thus  was  he  encouraged  to  exercise 
anew  and  with  increased  dihgence  the  functions  of  his  priestly  office.  4.  The 
vision  closes  with  the  words  of  a  solemn  compact  or  covenant,  for  the  sealing  of 
Joshua's  restoration  to  service.  The  promise  of  perpetual  blessing  is  conditioned 
on  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given.  A 
covenant  would  scarcely  be  a  covenant  were  there  no  stone  of  remembrance. 
Here  the  stone  had  seven  eyes  in  it.  "  Branch  "  interprets  it.  Under  this  title 
the  Messiah  was  frequently  mentioned.  Thus  the  name  of  Christ  Himself  is  set 
as  the  seal  of  His  covenant  with  Joshua  and  his  people.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.) 
Joshua  the  high  'priest : — Joshua  appears  to  Zechariah  in  his  di'eam, — Israel's 
representative,  clothed  not  in  the  splendid  priestly  attire,  with  its  immaculate 
purity  and  costly  jewels,  but  in  garments  worn  and  soiled,  symbolical  of  the 
nation's  sins.  Before  the  humiliated  priest  is  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  and  at  His 
right  hand  is  Satan.  The  question  is,  which  shall  conquer,  the  Angel  or  the 
adversary  1  But  not  long  is  the  question  unanswered.  Joshua  is  as  a  brand 
plucked  from  the  burning.  Israel,  despite  her  sins  and  her  familiarity  with  the 
tempter,  shall  be  saved  and  forgiven.  Then,  when  reclothed,  the  faithful  monitor 
iirges  upon  Joshua  the  necessity  of  obedient,  whole-souled  service.  And  then 
comes  the  promise  of  the  greater  High  Priest,  the  Branch  of  David,  the  Messiah 
Himself,  and  the  stone  of  the  new  theocracy,  with  its  seven  eyes  running  to  and 
fro  throughout  the  world,  and  finally  the  millennial  peace,  when  Israel  shall  sit  in 
peaceful  forgetfulness  of  all  her  tribulations,  under  her  own  vine  and  fig-tree. 
The  dream  yields  important  lessons.  1.  The  representative  function  of  the 
priesthood.  Joshua  stood  for  Israel.  The  soiled  clothes  in  which  he  appeared 
indicated  that  both  the  priesthood  and  the  people  were  leading  lives  which  were 
not  altogether  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  will,  and  from  other  sources  we  know 
that  the  priests  of  that  day  were  given  over  to  worldliness  and  materialism.  While 
the  priest  can  hardly  fail  to  take  somewhat  of  the  tone  of  his  life  and  character 
from  the  people  to  whom  he  ministers,  it  is  also  true  that,  because  of  his  high 
position  as  a  moral  teacher  and  guide,  he  is  under  peculiar  obligations  to  give  the 
tone  to  his  people,  and  determine  in  a  large  measure  by  his  own  words  and  life 
the  standard  of  their  lives.  2.  The  truth  of  angelic  influence  and  guardianship. 
Joshua  between  the  Angel  and  the  adversary.  The  human  soul  facing  the  right 
and  the  wrong.    But  the  Angel  prevails.     The  temptation  may  be  a  mighty  one, 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hl 

the  guilt  may  be  great,  but  Satan  is  never  allowed  to  go  unchallenged.  No  child 
of  humanity  is  ever  left  alone  under  the  power  of  evil.  He  may  sometimes  feel 
alone.  He  may  get  so  low  in  the  pit,  may  become  so  hardened  in  sin,  that  he 
loses  all  sense  of  God's  presence,  and  feels  that  there  is  no  help  for  him  in  this 
world  or  the  next.  But  God  cannot,  even  for  an  instant,  leave  one  of  His  children 
wholly  alone  with  the  powers  of  evil.  3.  Another  lesson  is,  that  man's  extremity 
is  God's  opportunity.  The  occasion  of  this  vision  was  doubtless  the  discourage- 
ment of  some  of  the  more  thoughtful  Israelites,  on  account  of  their  national  sins. 
The  exciting  experiences  since  the  return  had  tended  to  hold  their  minds  to  material 
interests,  and  make  them  forget  their  spiritual  obligations.  Notwithstanding 
the  tendency  to  formalism  under  an  established  order  of  things,  it  is  probably 
true  that  religion  reaches  its  highest  spiritual  ideals  under  conditions  which  are 
not  liable  to  frequent  changes.  But  God  does  not  forsake  His  children.  He  is 
\vith  them  always  in  the  form  of  a  searching  and  rebuking  conscience.  When  the 
nation  or  the  individual  begins  to  feel  deep  down  in  his  heart  that  a  great  wrong  has 
been  done  against  God  and  conscience  and  truth,  then,  and  not  till  then,  is  the  way 
open  for  forgiveness  and  restoration.  Note  the  last  scene  of  the  vision.  Strange 
enough,  we  find  coupled  with  this  revelation  of  the  Divine  heart  the  prophecy  of 
the  Messiah,  who  Himself  was  that  Divine  heart  made  flesh,  and  clothed  with  the 
features  of  humanity.  Under  Him  shaU  the  iniquity  of  the  land  be  removed  and 
the  millennium  shall  dawn.     {Monday  Cltib  Sermons.)        Joshtia  the  high  priest: — 

I.  A  GEEAT  ADVERSARY  OF  God'S  PEOPLE  BROUGHT  BEFORE  T7S.      It  is  strange  hoW 

every  good  work  meets  with  resistance  in  this  world.  He  who  would  effect  reforms, 
especially  in  religion,  has  to  stand  alone,  at  least,  at  first,  with  none  enlightened 
or  brave  enough  to  give  their  support.  "  I  am  sometimes,"  wrote  Robertson, 
"  tempted  to  doubt  whether  any  one  who  tries  to  open  people's  eyes  in  religion 
is  to  be  reckoned  as  a  sublime  martyr  or  an  egregious  fool.  The  cross,  or  the  cap 
and  bells  ?  Certainly,  had  it  not  been  for  One,  I  should  say  the  cap  and  beUs." 
Paul  was  accounted  a  fool  for  Christ.  WickUffe,  Luther,  and  all  great  reformers 
have  borne  the  same  antagonism,  and  many  prophets  have  cried  out,  "  Who  hath 
believed  our  report  ?  " 

"  Truths  would  you  teach,  or  save  a  sinking  land  ? 
All  fear,  none  aid  you,  and  few  understand." 

Even  in  such  a  work  as  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  it  was  so.  And  the  Bible 
lifts  the  veU  and  lets  us  see  that  behind  the  human  actors  there  are  malignant 
forces  at  work, — a  truth  which,  though  mysterious,  is  sustained  by  history  and 
experience.  II.  Opposed  to  the  adversary  is  the  faithful  and  unchanging 
God.  While  there  is  such  conflict  before  truth  and  godliness  prevail,  yet  the 
victory  is  sure.  God's  servants  have  to  wrestle  with  principalities  and  powers, 
but  greater  is  He  who  is  for  them  than  all  who  can  rise  up  against  them.  1.  God's 
interposition  is  a  restraining  of  evil.  "  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  0  Satan."  He 
wounds  the  head  of  the  dragon  ;  puts  checks  upon  the  forces  which  threaten  the 
Church  and  cause  of  Christ ;  turns  the  weapons  forged  against  her  into  instruments 
of  retribution  to  her  enemies.  2.  God  encourages  and  aids  His  servants.  Joshua 
is  forgiven,  clothed  in  festal  garments,  crowned  with  a  clean  mitre,  assured  of 
success,  and  promised  future  freedom  of  approach.  There  is  enough  of  encourage- 
ment for  those  who  take  the  Lord's  side,  if  only  they  will  use  it.  III.  The  promisb 
OF  A  Divine  Saviour  and  King.  Every  book  of  the  Old  Testament,  either  by 
word  or  type,  predicts  a  coming  Christ  who  is  now  arrayed  in  the  attributes  of 
God,  and  now  represented  as  a  suffering  but  conquering  Servant.  It  was  a  promise 
which  had  many  partial  fulfilments  in  God's  anointed  servants  before  He  was 
incarnated  in  Jesus.  But  Jesus  was  the  Christ  of  whom  others  were  only  figures 
and  signs.  He  was  the  Branch  extolled  by  Isaiah,  and  predicted  by  Zechariah. 
The  vision  still  points  to  a  future  in  whicn  all  prophetic  hopes  will  be  fulfilled. 
{T.  Vincent  Tymms.)  The  hinder er  rebuked  : — I.  Satan  the  adversary  of  thjb 
awakened  sotJL.  L  The  person  who  is  resisted.  This  is  the  exact  picture  of 
an  awakened  soul :  he  comes  and  stands  before  Christ,  clothed  with  his  filthy 
garments,  conscious  that  in  '  imself  he  is  lost,  but  resting  on  the  Saviour's  power 
and  willingness  to  save.  Wherever  we  see  a  soul  living  in  sin  and  departure  from 
God,  there  we  may  see  the  work  of  Satan.  But  wherever  we  behold  a  soul  for- 
saking sin,  and  seeking  to  live  a  holy  and  consistent  life,  there  we  behold  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Consequently,  when  Satan  rises  up  to  resist  the  sinner  he 


CHAP,  in.]  ZECHARIAH.  37 

rises  up  to  resist  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  The  manner  of  Satan's  resistance.  There 
is  allusion  to  the  customs  of  ancient  courts  of  justice,  in  which  the  accuser  always 
stood  at  the  right  hand  of  the  accused.  How  does  he  resist  him  ? — ( 1 )  Before  God, 
bringing  forward  his  sins,  and  demanding  the  awful  sentence  of  violated  law. 
(2)  Before  himself  ;  troubling  the  sinner's  conscience,  and  striving,  by  every  wile, 
to  keep  him  from  Christ,  and  by  suggesting  the  greatness  of  our  sins.  (3)  Satan 
keeps  the  sinner  from  the  Saviour,  by  suggesting  to  him  his  unworthiness,  and 
the  uselessness  of  expecting  mercy.  4.  Satan  hinders  by  suggesting  that  Christ 
is  unwilling  to  save,  since  you  have  so  often  spurned  and  rejected  Him.  5.  And 
by  suggesting  that  repentance  is  too  late.  II.  The  Lord  Jbsus  Christ  as  the 
BBBUKER  OF  THE  ADVERSARY.  He  is  the  high  priest  within  the  veil,  the  sinner's 
Advocate.  Notice  the  manner  in  which  Satan  is  silenced.  Two  ways — 1.  God's 
Bovereignty.  "  The  Lord  hath  chosen  Jerusalem."  God's  choice  is  without 
repentance.  2.  The  so\il  Satan  desired  to  have  was  already  beyond  his  reach. 
"  Plucked  out  of  the  fire."  (.4.  W.  Snape,  M.A.)  The  good  man  an  inter - 
ceder  : — Regarding  the  vision  as  a  sjnmbolical  revelation  of  Joshua,  in  his  repre- 
sentative aspect  as  the  high  priest  of  the  Jewish  people  then  existing,  we  feel 
authorised  to  infer  from  it  two  or  three  ideas  touching  the  intercessory  functions 
of  good  men  while  on  earth.   I.  That  the  good  man,  in  his  rNTEBCESsoRY  functions 

ON   EARTH,   HAS  TO   BBAB  BEFORE  GOD   THE  MORAL  IMPERFECTIONS   OF  HIS  RACE. 

Joshua  had  on  "  filthy  garments."  This  was  evidently  intended  to  represent 
the  corrupt  state  of  the  Jewish  people.  The  seventy  years'  captivity  had  not 
purified  them ;  for  now,  instead  of  setting  themselves  to  the  work  of  rebuilding 
the  house  of  the  Lord,  they  were  taken  up  with  their  own  personal  concerns, 
and  excusing  themselves  by  saying,  "  The  time  is  not  come."  Here,  then,  is  a 
characteristic  feature  of  a  good  man's  intercession  while  on  earth.  He  has  to  bear 
the  imperfections  of  his  fellow-creatures  before  God.  And  does  not  this  bene- 
volent feeling  lie  at  the  basis  of  aU  moral  excellence  ?  There  is  not  a  saint  nor 
an  angel  in  heaven,  we  suppose,  who  does  not  desire  the  progress  of  kindred  spirits  ; 
and  what  is  this  but  intercession  ?  But  that  which  distinguishes  the  intercession 
on  earth  is,  that  we  have  to  remember  the  moral  corruption  of  our  race.  In 
heaven  there  is  no  defilement.  All  there  are  either  clad  in  the  robes  of  pristine 
holiness,  or  in  garments  washed  and  made  white  by  the  cleansing  influences  of 
redemptive  love.  But  here  all  are  in  "  filthy  garments," — garments  stained  by 
sensuality,  worldliness,  idolatry,  falsehood,  and  dishonesty.  Here  the  pious 
parent  has  to  appear  before  God  for  sinful  children,  the  minister  for  sinful  people, 
and  the  pious  sovereign  for  a  sinful  nation.  II.  That  the  good  man  in  his  inter- 
cessory function  on  earth  has  to  contend  with  a  mighty  spiritual  antagonist. 
The  existence  of  some  mighty  spirit  or  spirits,  who  are  determined  foes  of  truth, 
virtue,  and  the  happiness  of  man,  is  rendered  more  than  probable  by  a  number 
of  considerations,  independent  of  the  testimony  of  the  Bible.  Such,  for  example, 
as  the  general  belief  of  the  race,  the  conflicting  phenomena  of  the  moral  world, 
the  unaccoimtable  opposite  impressions  of  which  all  are  conscious.  Now, 
this  enemy  stood  up  to  resist  Joshua  in  his  intercessions.  And  who  will  say 
that  he  is  not  now  specially  active  with  the  good  man  when  he  draws  near  to 
God  ?  In  how  many  ways  may  he  hinder  our  prayers  ?  Sometimes  he  may 
suggest  to  us,  even  in  the  very  time  of  oiu:  prayers,  doubts  as  to  the  existence  of 
God ;  we  may  be  tempted  to  ask.  Are  we  sure  that  there  is  a  God  ?  May  not  the 
idea  be  a  delusion,  for  who  has  ever  seen  or  heard  Him  ?  Or,  granting  His  exist- 
ence, he  may  suggest  whether  He  would  condescend  to  attend  to  the  affairs  of 
an  individual.  Or  granting  that  He  does  exist,  and  that  He  attends  to  the 
prayers  of  some,  Satan  may  suggest  that  I  am  too  worthless  for  His  notice,  that 
it  is  presumptuous  for  me  to  address  His  awful  Majesty ;  I  am  too  great  a  sinner 
ever  to  be  attended  to.  This,  again,  is  a  peculiarity  of  om*  intercessory  functions 
on  earth.  In  heaven,  we  presume,  no  enemy  will  intrude  on  our  devotions,  no 
Satan  wiU  stand  up  to  resist  as  we  appear  before  God.  No  power  there  to  darken 
our  faith  with  cloudy  doubts,  nor  to  cool  the  ardour  of  our  devotions  !  III.  That 
the  good  man,  in  his  interciessory  functions  on  earth,  has  the  special  assist- 
ance OF  A  Divine  Helper.  Whilst  Satan  stood  up  against  Joshua  there  was 
One  who  stood  up  for  him ;  the  Lord — called  also,  "  the  Angel  of  the  Lord." 
The  scene  illustrates  two  thoughts  concerning  the  help  rendered.  1.  It  was 
rendered  sympathetically.  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  ?  "  &c.  Consider  the  suffering 
to  which  they  have  been  subject.  Christ  is  full  of  sympathy.  2.  The  help  was 
rendered  effectually.     The  old  "  filthy  garments,"  the  emblem  of  impurity  and 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nt 

guilt,  were  taken  away,  and  he  was  clothed  in  other  garments  ;  that  is,  their 
guilt  was  removed,  they  were  restored  from  their  degradation.  And  the  "  mitre," 
the  emblem  of  dignity,  was  put  on  their  head.  They  were  raised  once  more 
to  the  glory  of  an  independent  nation.  See  (1)  That  if  you  would  effectually 
help  your  race  you  must  appear  before  God  as  an  intercessor.  Other  means 
are  to  be  employed.  Promote  general  knowledge,  advance  the  arts,  help  on  com- 
merce, above  all,  diffuse  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  ;  but,  in  connection  with  all,  you  must 
appear  before  God  as  Joshua  did  for  Israel.  It  is  in  this  way  you  will  change 
the  world's  "  filthy  garments,"  and  get  for  it  the  "  raiment "  of  purity  and  the 
"  mitre  "  of  honour.  (2)  That  if  you  would  effectually  appear  before  God  you 
must  have  the  help  of  Jesus  Christ.  Ever  as  we  attempt  to  approach  the  ever- 
lasting Father  in  devout  thought  and  worship,  do  we  not  find  some  opposing 
force  like  this  Satan,  or  rather,  this  Satan  himself,  "  standing  "  at  our  right  hand 
to  "resist"  us?  What  is  to  be  done?  Are  we  to  retire? — cease  all  endeavour 
to  commune  with  the  loving  parent  of  our  souls  ?  God  forbid  !  Our  doom  is 
sealed  in  midnight  and  anguish  should  this  be  so.  There  is  no  happiness  for  any 
finite  spirit  but  that  which  flows  from  intercourse  with  the  eternal  Fountain  of 
good.  Oiu*  only  hope  is  in  getting  Him — the  great  Mediator — with  us,  who  shall 
repel  our  foe,  drive  him  from  our  presence  with  the  words,  "  The  Lord  rebuke 
thee,  O  Satan."  {Homilist.)  By  nature  and  by  grace : — The  Jewish  Church 
is  represented  by  its  head,  the  high  priest  Joshua  ;  various  objections  are  brought 
against  it,  but  the  Lord  overrules  them  all,  declaring  His  will,  that  it  shall  be 
restored  to  His  favoiu-,  notwithstanding  its  past  guilt  or  present  degradation. 
This  transaction  represents  to  us  the  way  in  which  every  true  child  of  God  becomes 
a  partaker  of  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life.  I.  The  Chris- 
tian's WOEFUL  CONDITION  BY  NATURE.  1.  He  is  exposed  to  condemnation.  It 
is  the  condition  of  us  all.  Conscience  acknowledges  this.  The  Christian,  in 
himself,  has  no  reply  to  the  accusations  of  Satan.  2.  He  is  an  object  of  God's 
abhoiTcnce.  Indicated  in  Joshua's  filthy  garments,  offensive  in  the  Lord's  sight. 
3.  He  is  on  the  very  brink  of  destruction.  A  brand  actually  in  the  fire.  II  His 
HAPPY  ESTATE  BY  GRACE.  In  Spite  of  every  hindrance,  Joshua  is  accepted — the 
Christian  is  saved.  1.  His  conviction  is  quashed.  It  is  not  urged  that  there 
are  no  groimds  for  condemning  him.  The  charges  are  tacitly  allowed  to  be  true. 
But  at  the  critical  moment  there  is  an  arrest  of  judgment.  The  accuser  is  for- 
bidden to  proceed, — "  the  Lord  rebuke  thee."  There  is  no  ground  for  this  exemp- 
tion, save  the  Lord's  free  and  immerited  choice.  2.  He  is  clothed  afresh,  through 
the  merits  of  the  Saviour,  and  with  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  filthy 
raiment  of  guilt  is  what  we  cannot  lay  aside,  but  Christ  took  it  away.  And 
He  brought  in  an  everlasting  righteousness.  3.  He  is  effectually  saved  from 
ruin.  Inquire  whether  this  all-important  change  has  taken  place  in  you.  (J. 
Jowett,  M.A.)  The  Lord,  the  Defender  of  His  people: — Here  is  represented 
unto  the  prophet  Christ,  who  is  the  Lord,  taking  the  defence  of  Joshua,  and  by 
His  intercession  (acting  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord)  pleading  that  Satan  may  be 
rebuked,  confounded,  and  restrained  in  his  malicious  and  cruel  design  to  destroy 
them  whom  God  had  chosen,  and  them  who,  having  been  almost  consumed  in 
trouble,  were  miraculously  plucked  out  and  preserved  from  total  ruin.  Doctrine 
1.  Christ,  in  His  office  of  mediation  and  intercession,  is  the  strong  refuge  of  the 
Church  against  Satan,  who  is  sufficient  to  oppose  all  his  machinations,  being 
Himself  God  equal  with  the  Father,  zealous  for  and  affectionate  to  His  people 
and  their  weal,  and  the  Father  being  engaged  to  help  Him  and  His  by  virtue 
of  the  covenant.  2.  Albeit  the  ground  of  Satan's  accusation  of  the  Lord's  people 
before  God,  and  in  their  own  consciences,  may  be  true  and  just,  yet  his  insatiable 
and  cruel  malice  in  prosecuting  that  controversy  to  their  destruction,  and  casting 
out  of  God's  favour,  is  so  far  from  being  Christ's  allowance,  that  it  is  hateful 
imto  Him,  and  will  be  effectually  suppressed  by  Him.  This  is  imported  in  His 
intercession — "  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,"  or  restrain  thy  malice,  and  make  void 
thy  intention.  3.  The  Lord's  election  of  and  free  love  toward  His  people  is 
that  whereby  they  are  allowed  to  answer  Satan's  temptations,  which  otherwise 
might  be  heavy  \ipon  them.  And  where  the  Lord  hath  chosen  and  purposed 
to  do  good  unto  a  people  He  will  also  have  a  care  of  their  ministers  for  their 
sake.  This  we  are  taught  from  Christ's  first  reason  of  intercession — "  The  Lord 
that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem,  rebuke  thee."  God  having  chosen  them,  Satan's 
bill  (how  true  soever)  could  not  be  heard  to  destroy  them,  or  to  reject  Joshua 
their  minister.     4.  Though  the  people  of  God  may  be  cast  into  painful  and  hard 


CHAP,  in.]  ZECHARIAH,  39 

trouble,  and  may  be  kept  in  it  till  it  come  to  some  extremity  that  they  may  be 
purged,  yet  shall  they  certainly  be  rescued  and  brought  out  again ;  for  so  was  it 
with  Joshua,  and  this  remnant,  "  a  brand  pluckt  out  of  the  fire."  a  stick  half  burnt, 
and  yet  thought  worth  the  pulling  out.  5.  As  the  former  afflictions  of  the  Lord's 
people  do  so  endear  them  to  Christ's  heart  that  He  will  not  hear  Satan's  accus- 
ations, so  His  eminent  appearing  for  them  in  trouble  is  a  pledge  that  He  will 
not  destroy  them,  but  perfect  His  work  notwithstanding  Satan's  machinations ; 
or  this  is  the  force  of  the  second  reason  of  Christ's  intercession,  "  Is  not  this 
a  brand  pluckt  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  As  if  He  had  said, — Should  My  anger  smoke 
yet  against  My  people  who  are  already  almost  consumed  by  it,  and  whereof  they 
yet  bear  the  marks  ?  Should  I  not  make  an  end  of  pleading  with  frail  flesh  ? 
And  shall  I  prove  so  foolish  a  builder  as  when  I  have  appeared,  in  bringing  them 
out  of  consuming  trouble,  giving  them  a  remnant  to  escape,  I  should  again  forsake 
them,  and  let  all  My  pains  be  in  vain?  {George  Hutcheson.)  Joshua  the  high 
priest : — Sin  in  act  or  in  heart  takes  all  the  meaning  and  joy  out  of  God's  richest 
promises  and  gifts.  So  it  prevented  the  Israelites  from  appropriating  the  former 
gracious  words  until  its  baleful  influence  was  removed  by  the  fourth  vision  of  our 
lesson.  It  is  a  vision  of  free  forgiveness  for  the  nation.  Joshua,  the  high  priest, 
represents  Jerusalem  and  the  people.  BUs  filthy  garments  are  symbols  of  their 
sins,  and  his  clean  raiment  is  a  pledge  of  their  pardon.  I.  The  adversary.  Who 
was  the  great  opponent  of  those  afflicted  Hebrews  ?  Was  it  the  nations  around  ? 
Or  was  God  Himself  against  them  ?  The  vision  reveals  their  true  enemy.  It 
was  neither  of  these,  but  the  great  adversary  of  souls ;  he  who  tempted  Christ, 
the  prince  of  darkness.  The  foe  of  man  is  Satan,  not  man ;  much  less  God,  who 
so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son  to  save  it.  The  very  names 
of  this  enemy  betray  his  character.  The  Hebrew  word  Satan  means  "  adversary." 
And  here,  exemplifying  his  name,  he  is  standing  at  Joshua's  right  hand  "  to  be 
his  adversary."  When  did  he  ever  do  a  deed  or  suggest  a  thought  reaUy  to  help 
or  bless  a  man  ?  The  assaults  of  Satan  are  well  timed.  It  was  when  Joshua 
stood  in  foul  raiment,  symbol  of  the  moral  uncleanness  of  the  people,  and  when 
the  bright  hopes  of  the  returning  exiles  were  fading  away,  that  Satan  seized  the 
opportunity  to  accomplish  their  ruin.  The  days  of  sin,  failure,  despair  find  him 
at  hand  to  do  his  fatal  work.  God's  past  dealings  with  us  are  a  pledge  of  the  future, 
an  assurance  of  final  victory.  II.  Pabdon.  How  vivid  and  repugnant  sin  must 
have  become  under  such  a  symbol.  The  garments  were  not  coarse,  or  old,  or 
worn  and  soiled  with  use,  but  filthy.  By  such  striking  symbolism  God  taught 
His  chosen  people  to  hate  sin.  This  was  no  euphemistic  language  softening  and 
covering  the  wrong-doing,  but  rather  a  proclamation  of  it.  Sin  masked  under  the 
forms  of  fashion  or  elegance  is  doubly  dangerous.  With  garments  so  filthy,  but 
one  thing  can  be  done.  They  cannot  be  covered  up.  The  blackest  spots  cannot 
be  sponged  off — as  men  try  to  do  with  their  guilt ;  for  every  thread  of  the  clothing 
is  defiled.  Moreover,  the  wretched  man  seems  powerless  to  remove  the  unclean 
garments.  In  fact,  they  are  part  of  him,  they  are  his  Ufe,  his  character,  himsell 
God  must  work  the  deed  which  shall  free  him  from  the  burden  of  his  sins.  "  Take 
away  the  filthy  garments  and  clothe  him  in  fair  raiment,"  "  I  have  caused  thine 
iniquity  to  pass  from  thee."  III.  Subsequent  life.  Pardon  was  never  intended 
to  be  the  end  of  effort  or  of  progress.  Accordingly,  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  does  not 
pardon  Joshua  and  dismiss  him  ;  but  rather  pardons  and  then  hastens  to  declare 
solemnly :  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts :  If  thou  wilt  walk  in  My  ways,  and  if 
thou  wilt  keep  My  charge,"  then  thou  sbalt  have  the  honour  of  priesthood,  with  its 
authority  and  its  free  access  into  God's  presence.  After  pardon  comes  obedience. 
The  order  caimot  be  reversed.  Joshua's  previous  efforts  to  obey  were  vain. 
Only  with  the  consciousness  of  forgiveness  can  there  be  full  and  unconstrained 
obedience.  But  after  one  is  pardoned,  walking  in  God's  ways  is  the  condition 
of  further  blessing.  Not  that  God  who  has  forgiven  once  is  unwiUing  to  forgive 
again.  He  is  love,  and  His  mercies  are  everlasting.  But  a  man  cannot  wilfully 
and  constantly  transgress  God's  law,  and  continually  and  lightly  seek  forgiveness. 
Upon  the  high  priest  there  was  an  especial  obhgation  to  careful  obedience.  He 
was  in  a  sense  God's  representative.  His  office  carried  with  it  wide  influence 
for  good  or  evil.  Before  God,  indeed,  all  are  under  the  same  supreme  law  of  right. 
But  towards  their  fellowmen,  some  are  under  heavier  obligations  than  others. 
The  obhgation  rests  most  heavily  on  the  representative  of  God,  the  teacher  or 
preacher  whose  influence  is  wider  than  that  of  one  in  a  humbler  sphere,  and  whose 
opportunity  to  help  and  guide  is  greater.     Our  opportunity  to  serve  man  is  the 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

measure  of  our  responsibility  to  man.  A  larger  promise  limited  to  no  man  or 
family  is  now  introduced  by  the  emphatic  words,  '  Hear  now,  .  .  .  for  behold." 
It  is  an  old  promise  renewed.  From  earliest  ages  the  hopes  of  all  godly  Jews 
had  centred  about  one  dim  future  figure,  ever  expected,  ever  receding.  Moses 
spoke  of  Him  as  a  prophet,  the  highest  ideal  in  his  mind.  David  sang  of  Him  as  a 
righteous  king,  the  loftiest  conception  of  man  in  that  age.  The  coming  One  was 
pictured  as  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  and  as  a  sprout  growing  up  out  of  dry  ground 
from  the  stump  of  the  fallen  house  of  David.  But  still  He  was  the  hope  of  Israel. 
The  lowly  names  by  which  He  was  known  became  transformed  into  titles  of  honour 
and  glory.  "  Behold  I  will  bring  forth  My  servant,  the  Branch."  That  promise 
has  been  fulfilled  to  us.  And  when  we,  like  Zechariah,  would  urge  as  a  motive 
for  action  God's  greatest  gift,  we  must  speak  of  that  same  Servant,  of  His  life  and 
death  and  resurrection.  Wonderful  power  in  human  life  !  His  name  brought 
fresh  zeal  and  courage  into  the  feeble  remnant  under  Joshua  and  Zerubbabel 
twenty-five  hundred  years  ago.  It  has  never  lost  its  power.  This  great  promise 
of  the  Branch,  pledge  of  the  continued  care  and  favour  of  Jehovah,  is  naturally 
accompanied  by  more  definite  promises  of  immediate  help.  The  seven  eyes  of 
Jehovah,  which  run  to  and  fro  through  the  whole  earth  and  are  the  symbol  of 
perfect  watchfulness,  shaU  be  directed  to  each  stone  of  the  temple  now  building 
under  great  difficulties.  More  than  that.  He  will  "  engrave  the  graving  thereof," 
He  will  give  the  stone  its  beauty.  He  will  both  watch  and  work  with  His  people. 
Man's  work  is  ever  incomplete.  In  spiritual  matters,  no  less  than  in  temporal, 
our  work  needs  and  certainly  receives  its  vitaUsing  and  beautifying  power  from 
Him  who  transforms  the  elements  into  flower  and  fruit.  Peace  and  prosperity 
complete  the  picture  of  the  future  of  the  forgiven  people.  Every  one  shall  call 
his  neighbour  to  come  and  sit  under  his  fig-tree.  Righteousness  and  peace  with 
God  were  doubtless  included  in  this  favourite  Hebrew  thought,  but  temporal 
peace,  with  all  its  glorious  blessings,  was  the  chief  element  in  the  anticipated 
reign  of  the  Messiah.  Some  of  the  loftiest  conceptions  of  the  Jewish  religion  are 
found  in  these  verses.  Each  is  a  shadow  of  a  vastly  greater  and  more  inspiring 
truth  which  is  familiar  to  the  Christian.     {0.  R.  Hovey,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire? — A  firebrand: — The  fire 
meant  here  is  the  fire  of  sin.  Sin  is  a  fire  which  destroys  the  comfort  of  man- 
kind here,  and  all  the  joy  of  mankind  hereafter.  Nothing  can  be  more  suitable 
to  burn  in  a  fire  than  a  "  brand."  It  is  not  a  branch  just  taken  from  the  tree, 
fresh  and  full  of  sap  ;  it  is  a  brand — dry,  sere  timber,  fit  for  the  burning.  And 
what  does  this  indicate  but  man's  natural  heart,  which  is  so  congenial  to  the 
fire  of  sin  ?  As  the  firebrand  fits  with  fire,  so  does  the  sinner  fit  in  with  sin.  We 
read  of  a  brand  "  in  the  fire."  Not  lying  on  a  heap,  but  burning  and  blazing 
in  the  fire.  Does  not  this  portray  our  condition  ?  We  began  very  early.  Dis- 
obedience to  parents,  angry  tempers,  petty  falsehoods, — these  were  the  first 
catchings  on  fire  of  the  brand.  We  have  blazed  away  merrily  since  then.  What 
with  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  or  pride,  or  unbelief,  or  some  other  form  of  departing 
from  the  living  God,  how  many  are  like  the  firebrand,  blazing  and  flashing  in  the 
flame  !  There  is,  however,  a  fair  side  to  the  picture.  We  have  here  a  "  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire."  Siimers  these,  who  though  they  have  still  within  them 
the  propensity  to  sin,  are  no  longer  in  the  fire  of  sin.  They  have  been  taken 
away  from  it.  They  sin  through  infirmity,  but  wilful  sin  they  do  not  commit. 
The  fire  that  once  burned  within  them  has  been  quenched.  They  are  rescued 
from  that  fire  which  once  threatened  their  everlasting  destruction.  They  are 
brands  still ;  but  brands  no  longer  in  the  fire.  The  force  of  the  passage  seems  to 
lie  in  the  words,  "  plucked  out  of."  The  Christian  does  not  escape  by  his  own 
free  will.  He  is  plucked  out  of  his  peril.  To  be  plucked  out  there  needs  a  hand 
quick  to  rescue.  Every  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  a  trophy  of  the  strength  as 
well  as  of  the  mercy  of  God.  The  question  of  the  text  will  bear  three  renderings. 
I.  The  sense  of  wonderment.  Is  not  this,"  &c.  The  words  are  spoken  of 
Joshua,  the  high  priest.  There  was  such  astonishment  at  his  preservation  that, 
with  hands  upHfted,  the  question  was  asked,  "  Is  not  this  man  just  like  a  fire- 
brand snatched  from  among  the  glowing  coals  ?  "  This  marvel  is  not  confined 
to  Joshua.  Was  there  ever  a  man  saved  by  grace  who  was  not  a  wonder  ?  Out 
of  the  state  of  our  natural  depravity  we  have  been  plucked,  so  that  every  man 
who  is  delivered  from  its  sway  may  well  say, — "  Am  not  I  a  brand  plucked  out 
of  the  fire  ? "    Each  Christian  knowing  his  own  heart,  and  having  a  special  acquaint- 


CHAP,  ni.]  ZECHABIAH.  41 

ance  with  his  own  peculiar  setting  sin,  feels  as  if  the  conquest  of  his  own  sin  by 
the  grace  of  God  were  a  more  illustrious  trophy  of  that  grace  than  the  conquest 
of  a  thousand  others.  There  are  instances  so  uncommon  that  they  excite 
surprise  in  the  minds  of  all  who  hear.  In  the  cases  of  extraordinary  conversion, 
one  of  the  first  is  the  salvation  of  the  extremely  aged.  Exceptional,  too,  is  the 
conversion  of  people  who  have  been  accustomed  to  hear  the  Gospel  from  their 
youth  up,  who,  though  not  perhaps  absolutely  aged,  have  nevertheless  been  re- 
ceiving Gospel  privileges  without  any  result.  Over  in  the  Bankside,  I  am  told, 
when  a  man  is  first  put  inside  a  boiler,  while  the  rivets  are  being  fastened,  he  cannot 
stop  long,  the  noise  is  so  dreadful,  but  after  a  time  the  boiler-maker  gets  so  used 
to  the  horrible  din  that  he  can  almost  go  to  sleep  inside.  And  so  it  really  is  under 
any  ministry  where  the  people  get  Gospel-hardened.  There  have  been  cases  of 
gross  sinners  in  which  this  marvel  has  been  still  more  exciting.  Can  we  pass 
over  the  case  of  some  who  have  given  themselves  up  to  sin,  to  work  it  with  greedi- 
ness ?  There  is  a  wonder  which  I  do  see,  but  not  often.  It  is  when  a  self-righteous 
religious  man  gets  saved.  II.  Take  the  text  by  way  of  ikquiby  ob  hope. 
When  a  sinner's  eye  is  suflFused  with  tears,  and  a  sigh  breaks  forth,  "  Alas  !  woe 
is  me  !  "  you  may  say,  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  for  the 
tear  of  sorrow  for  sin  is  a  blessed  omen  of  mercy's  dawning.  The  sigh  of  penitence 
and  the  prayer  of  the  seeking  are  evidences  of  grace.  When  the  poor  soul  at 
last,  driven  by  necessity,  throws  itself  flat  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  and  rests  its 
hope  wholly  and  alone  on  Jesus,  then  we  may  say  of  it,  "Is  not  this  a  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  And  when,  in  the  midst  of  many  a  conflict  and  soul 
struggle,  the  heart  still  flings  away  its  idols,  and  hopes  to  love  Christ,  and  vows 
in  His  strength  to  be  devoted  to  His  service,  we  may  say  again  with  pleasure,  "  Is 
not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  I  would  invite  you  to  think  over 
the  signs  of  grace,  and  if  you  see  them  in  yourselves  you  may  be  able  to  answer 
this  question  with  joy  III.  And  what  a  question  of  defiance  this  is.  Do 
you  not  catch  the  idea  of  the  text  ?  There  stood  Joshua,  there  stood  the  angel 
of  the  Lord,  and  here  stood  the  adversary.  The  angel,  in  effect,  replies  to  the 
adversary:  "  If  God  has  plucked  him  out  of  the  fire,  you  can  never  put  him  in 
again."  It  is  a  defiance  full  of  majesty  and  grandeur.  It  reflects  a  gorgeous 
lustre  on  the  past.  If  God  has  chosen  him,  dost  thou  think  to  undo  the  Divine 
decree  ?  God  hath  snatched  him  from  the  fixe,  determined  to  save  him.  God 
has  done  that  which  is  the  earnest  and  the  token  of  his  perfect  safety.  Then, 
beloved  in  Christ,  dread  not  all  the  temptations  that  may  attack  you.  God 
wiU  not  leave  His  purpose  half  accomplished.  He  will  not  be  disappointed. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  resetted  brand: — This  is  the  Divine  description  of  a 
justified  and  converted  man.  The  words  present  at  once  to  our  view  the  sinner's 
worthless  character  by  nature,  his  dangerous  and  dreadful  condition  while  in 
this  natural  state,  and  the  fulness  of  unmerited  grace  and  love  of  which  he  has 
been  made  the  subject.  Joshua  was  here  the  representative  of  all  the  true  people 
of  God.  Like  him,  they  are  aU  "  brands  plucked  out  of  the  fire."  Against  them 
all  the  same  power  of  Satan  is  employed  to  resist  them.  In  behalf  of  them  all 
the  same  boundless  grace  is  exercised  on  the  part  of  the  Lord  God.  The  rescued 
brand  forms  the  subject  of  our  discoiu-se.  1.  How  unprofitable  and  worthless 
in  himself.  A  brand  !  Useless  for  any  purposes  of  man ;  having  no  value 
annexed  to  it  in  his  estimation.  Is  not  every  unrenewed  sinner  precisely  this  in 
the  sight  of  God  ?  As  a  fallen  creature  man  cannot  be  profitable  in  the  eye  of 
Grod.  No  creatttre  can  ever  render  anything  to  the  Creator  which  shall  merit  a 
continuance  of  blessings  bestowed  by  Him.  2.  How  dangerous  the  condition  in 
which  this  brand  was  found.  The  fire  from  which  he  was  plucked  refers  to  those 
everlasting  burnings  which  are  his  heritage  in  a  world  of  recompense.  All  earthly 
woes  are  temporary.  These  sorrows  are  unchangeable  and  eternal.  Under  this 
tremendous  load  the  unconverted  sinner  now  Ues,  condemned  and  perishing, 
as  a  brand  burning  in  the  fire.  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.  None  can 
appreciate  the  dangers  of  an  unconverted  soul,  but  they  who  have  been  plucked 
from  the  fires  in  which  it  is  still  consuming.  3.  How  glorious  and  worthy  of 
praise  is  that  Divine  power  which  can  pluck  this  brand  from  the  fire,  and  trans- 
form it  into  an  eternal  monument  of  love,  and  a  vessel  of  everlasting  holiness  I 
In  the  midst  of  the  ruin  of  the  world,  and  the  guilt  of  man,  Grod  proposes  to  the 
ungodly  a  reconciliation  to  Himself.  4.  How  infinite  is  the  extent  of  that  love, 
of  which  this  brand  is  the  object !  The  foimdation  of  all  our  hope  is,  that  Grod'f 
love  is  infinite  and  free.     His  love  can  pardon  the  greatest  and  most  multifdied 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

transgrestions.  5.  How  precious  is  the  Christian's  ground  of  hope,  the  glorious 
union  of  Divine  power  and  Divine  love,  in  the  work  of  his  salvation  !  The  same 
hand  which  plucked  us  from  the  fire  will  carry  us  to  the  temple.  The  man  who 
has  found  peace  with  God  has  no  enemy  in  the  universe  to  fear.  6.  How  inestim- 
able is  this  privilege  of  being  the  objects  of  God's  unchangeable  love  !  {S.  H.  Tyng, 
D.D.)  Danger  and  deliverance: — I.  The  danger.  The  brand  is — 1.  Fit  for 
the  fire.  2.  Scorched  by  the  fire.  3.  Destined  to  the  fire.  4.  Unable  to  deliver 
itself  from  the  fire.  II.  The  deliverance.  1.  Its  author.  2.  Its  completeness. 
3.  Its  permanence.  4.  Its  benefits.  III.  The  exclamation.  I.  With  regard 
to  the  speaker,  it  expresses  triumph.  2.  With  regard  to  the  enemy  of  souls,  it  hurls 
defiance.  3.  With  regard  to  the  spectators,  it  challenges  admiration.  4.  With 
regard  to  the  person  delivered  from  the  danger,  it  demands  gratitude.  {(?.  Brooks.) 
A  suggestive  question : — Under  the  form  of  an  interrogation,  the  language  of  the 
text  is  capable  of  being  differently  understood.  1.  It  may  be  considered  as  con- 
veying a  seasonable  reproof  to  an  insulting  enemy.  It  is  as  if  Grod  said.  Amidst 
all  his  imperfections  and  failings,  thou  hast  nothing  to  do  with  him.  I  claim  a 
property  in  him,  and  will  assert  it.  2.  As  expressive  of  exultation  and  triumph. 
"  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  I  rejoice  in  him  as  such.  He  is  a 
pattern  of  My  long-suffering,  a  monument  of  My  grace.  3.  The  expression  carries 
with  it  the  force  of  an  afi&rmation.  It  is  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire.  I.  To 
WHOM  MAY  THIS  LANauAGE  BE  APPLIED  ?  To  all  who  are  finally  saved.  There 
are  some  to  whom  it  is  more  immediately  applicable.  I.  Such  as  great  and 
heinous  transgressions,  when  converted  from  the  error  of  their  way  and  turned 
effectually  to  God.  2.  Old  and  accustomed  sinners  may  be  viewed  in  the  same 
light,  when  they  are  brought  to  repentance  and  to  believe  in  Jesus.  3.  There 
are  some  whose  cases  were  despaired  of  by  their  friends.  4.  Pardoning  mercy 
has  in  some  instances  followed  upon  an  overwhelming  sense  of  guilt  and  distressing 
apprehensions  of  Divine  wrath.     II.  Notice  the  propriety  of  the  description. 

1.  A  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  was  once  a  brand  fit  for  the  fire.  2.  A  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fu-e  was  very  near  being  consumed.  3.  A  brand  plucked  out 
of  the  fire  retains  some  evidence  of  the  dangerous  situation.  4.  The  brand  plucked 
out  of  the  fire  is  no  way  instrumental  to  its  own  deliverance.  There  it  must  lie 
and  burn  if  some  kind  hand  do  not  snatch  it  thence.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The 
sinner  rescued  from  perdition  : — Reverse  this  question,  and  ask.  Is  this  a  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  The  text  was  a  sort  of  challenge  to  Satan  to  deny  the 
riches  of  Divine  grace  in  the  salvation  of  the  Israelitish  Church,  now  rescued 
from  the  furnace  of  Babylon.  It  was  a  question  put  concerning  them  figuratively, 
for  the  whole  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  for  every  individual  member  of  it. 
Bring  the  question  home,  "  Am  I  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  burning  ?  "  Consider 
the  importance  of  being  able  to  come  to  a  clear  decision  upon  this  point.  I.  Yomt 
DANGER  AS  SINNERS.  A  State  of  siu  is  a  state  of  imminent  danger.  1.  Sin  is 
destrojnng  your  bodies,  and  will  at  last  destroy  your  souls.  2.  Every  sinner  is 
in  danger  of  the  law  of  God.  3.  The  terrors  of  a  guilty  conscience  are  a  fire. 
II.  The  WONDROUS  deliverance  effected.  1.  The  sinner  is  delivered  by 
Divine  grace  from  that  dreadful  sentence,  which  is  literally  destruction  begun  in 
the  heart.  2.  The  deUverance  signifies  to  be  rescued  from  the  raging  violence, 
the  destructive  power  of  sin  in  our  heart.  3.  This  deliverance  signifies  to  be 
rescued  from  the  burning  stings  of  inward  guilt.  III.  The  act  of  deliverance. 
"  Plucked  out."     1.  Here  is  exhibited  God's  own  sovereign  will  and  purpose. 

2.  The  act  of  rescue  points  to  the  direct  personal  interposition  of  the  Saviour. 

3.  The  deUverance  is  to  be  viewed  in  its  individual  application  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
IV.  The  different  emotions  this  Divine  and  miraculous  deliveranch 
should  excite.  1.  Exultation.  Admire  the  grace  of  God  in  yoiu-  salvation. 
2.  Confidence.  Learn  to  trust  both  for  yom-selves  and  for  others.  What  cannot 
Divine  grace  do  !  [The  Evangelist.)  The  brand  flunked  out  of  the  fire  : — It  is 
a  "brand," — nothing  better;  dry,  sapless,  lifeless,  profitless;  and  such  is  man. 
If  a  brand  and  lifeless,  then  powerless.  Can  a  brand  quicken  itself  to  life  ?  How 
can  it  live  ?  It  has  lost  the  principle  of  life.  All  our  efforts  to  restore  ourselves 
to  the  dignity  we  have  lost,  and  to  the  state  from  which  we  are  fallen,  are  utterly 
abortive.  How  little  men  know  their  spiritual  powerlessness,  because  they  will 
not  make  trial  of  it.  But  the  brand  is  also  worthless  ;  it  is  only  fit  to  be  cast 
into  the  fire  ;  it  has  no  utility.  And  such  is  man.  It  may  seem  a  hard  thing, 
but  God  says  it,  that  the  natural  man  is  at  best  enmity  against  God.  And  if 
enmity  against  God,  is  not  his  moral  nature  loath'some  T     It  is  a  brand  "  out  of 


CHAP,  in.]  ZECHARIAU.  43 

the  fire  "  ;  it  is  black  and  scorched.  So  is  every  sinful  son  of  man.  The  soiil 
that  sinneth,  it  shall  die.  A  "  brand  "  is  fitted  for  the  flames.  It  is  combustible  ; 
it  is  dried  up,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  ignite  into  flame.  And  so  sin  assimilates  man 
to  hell,  makes  him  more  susceptible  of  "  the  worm  that  dieth  not,  and  the  fire 
that  is  not  quenched."  The  '  brand  "  is  already  scorched  in  the  fire.  It  has 
been  in  the  fire  ;  it  has  been  "  plucked  out  of  the  fire."  What  is  hell  ?  Sin 
unmitigated,  unabated  by  the  fear  of  God,  and  unassuaged  by  any  kindlier 
feeling  or  appliance,  sin  consummated,  sin  left  to  itself.  Leave  a  man  to  himself, 
and  he  needs  no  other  hell.  But  there  is  hope  for  this  brand.  It  is  "  plucked 
out  of  the  fire."  Was  it  not  grace,  sovereign  grace  that  rescued  it  ?  What  is 
there  in  a  brand  that  God  should  expect  anything  from  it  in  return  ?  Yet  it  is 
taken  out  of  the  fire  that  it  might  be  transformed  into  a  tree  of  righteousness, 
the  planting  of  the  Lord,  that  He  might  be  glorified.  What  a  blessed  change 
passes  on  the  sinner  whom  God  delivers  !  {HugTi  Stowdl,  M.A.)  A  rescued 
brand : — Here  Satan  is  presented  to  om*  view  as  the  accuser  of  the  brethren. 
He  does  his  work  in  the  coiirt  of  conscience  ;  at  the  bar  of  public  opinion ;  and 
before  the  Divine  Judge.  Here  Satan  accused  Joshua  to  one  who  was  his  Advocate 
as  well  as  his  Judge.  Christ  rebukes  Satan ;  alleges  God's  election ;  and  points 
to  Joshua  as  a  trophy  of  power,  guided  by  sovereign  mercy.     L  A  vivid  ant> 

IMPEESSIVE   DESCKIPTION   OF  JoSHTJa's   ORIGINAL  CHARACTER  AS  A  SINNER.      "  A 

brand."  A  piece  of  wood  which  has  been  purposely  prepared  for  burning.  A 
sinner,  as  a  brand,  is  one  in  every  way  fitted  for  destruction.  The  wicked  have 
a  suitableness  to  the  place  and  the  experience  assigned  to  them  by  God.  There 
is  an  adaptation  of  desert,  and  of  character.  Their  experience  results  from  their 
character.  They  have  in  themselves  the  causes  of  misery — a  deranged  system. 
They  war  with  everything,  and  therefore  are  warred  against  by  everything. 
II.  An  account  of  the  situation,  under  law,  and  in  actual  experience, 
IN  which  Joshua  had  been.  "  In  the  fire."  1.  The  brand  is  one  plucked  out 
of  the  fire,  then  it  must  have  been  in  it.  2.  By  fire,  understand  the  destruction 
and  misery  which  are  the  fruit  of  sin.  3.  The  sinner  is  already  under  condemna- 
tion ;  spiritually  dead ;  he  feels  the  elements  of  misery  in  his  breast.  He  feels 
the  oppressiveness  of  the  thought  of  God.  He  draws  pain  from  without.  He 
already  suffers  as  a  sinner.  III.  A  description  of  the  character  which  Joshua 
NOW  sustained.  "  A  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire."  Such  a  brand  has  on  it 
the  marks  of  burning.  The  believer  retains  marks  of  his  once  lost  condition. 
In  his  conscience,  which  still  accuses.  In  his  heart,  where  are  the  remains  of 
spiritual  derangement  and  death.  In  his  body,  which  is  mortally  affected.  In 
his  moral  character,  which  is  disfigured.  In  his  very  righteousness,  which  is 
imputed.  In  his  life,  which  is  derived.  Brands  plucked  from  the  burning  shall 
be  the  eternal  character  of  believers.  IV.  The  agency  through  which  Joshua 
was  delivered.  It  was  not  by  himself.  The  brand  retains  the  burning  flame. 
Salvation  is  wholly  of  God — of  grace  :  in  its  origin  ;  its  purchaser ;  its  applica- 
tion. Man  takes  offence  at  this,  being  self-righteous.  The  believer  rejoices  in 
this.  God  has  thus  the  glory  of  salvation.  V.  The  manner  in  which  God 
rescued  Joshua.  He  plucked  him  out  of  the  fire.  Indicative  of  haste — we 
thus  rescue  a  precious  manuscript,  accidentally  thrown  into  the  fire.  God 
is  in  haste,  for  man's  guilt  is  increasing ;  his  depravity  is  deepening ;  he  is 
descending  with  time's  flight ;  his  fate  is  awful !  {James  Stewart. )  A  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire  : — Satan  is  represented  in  the  context  as  an  accuser 
of  his  brethren.  He  brings  serious  charges  against  Joshua,  the  high  priest.  He 
never  committed  a  greater  folly.  The  Lord  never  fails  to  come  to  the  defence 
of  the  redeemed.  The  Lord  represents  Joshua  as  a  trophy  of  sovereign  grace. 
"  Is  not  this  a  brand  pluckt  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  I.  If  this  figure  means  anything, 
IT  means  that  unsaved  sinners  are  in  the  fire.  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  pluckt 
out  of  the  fire  ?  "  We  are  accustomed  to  think  of  hell  as  something  in  the  future. 
There  is  a  sense  in  which  this  is  true,  but  it  is  not  all  the  truth.  It  is  not  at  death 
that  bad  men  enter  into  hell ;  they  are  there  already.  II.  If  this  imagery  means 
anything,  it  means  that  unsaved  sinners  have  a  natural  affinity  for  thb 
FLAME  THAT  CONSUMES  THEM.  A  brand  is  a  piece  of  wood  that  readily  catches  fire. 
The  sinner  is  meet  for  destruction.  See  how  eagerly  men  yield  themselves  to  the  sins 
which  consume  them.     III.  If  this  imagery  means  anything,  it  means  that 

RESCUE  from  the  DEVOURING  ELEMENT  IS  ONLY  POSSIBLE  BY  DiVINE  INTERPOSITION 

— "  Is  not  this  a  brand  pluckt  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  A  brand  in  the  fire  will  remaia 
there  until  it  is  utterly  consumed  unless  it  is  taken  out.     Salvation  is  a  Divine  act. 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

"  By  grace  are  ye  saved."     IV.  Ir  this  imagery  means  anything,  it  means 

THAT    SAVED    SINNERS    RETAIN    THE    MARKS    OF    THE    BURNING.       Forgiven,  saved, 

but  scarred.     Even  in  heaven  there  will  be  evidences  of  the  flame.     V.  If  this 

IMAGERY  MEANS  ANYTHING,  IT  MEANS  THAT  DELAY  IN  THE  MATTER  OF  RESCUE 

IS  INFINITELY  PERILOUS.  Plucked  out  of  the  fire.  There  is  no  estimating  the 
possibility  of  sin.  There  is  enough  latent  fire  in  any  unregenerate  heart  to  effect 
its  ruin.  The  flame  which  is  smouldering  in  the  concealed  places  of  human  life 
may  be  even  more  ominous  than  that  which  blazes  forth  under  the  open  heavens. 
These  facts  should  have  a  twofold  influence.  1.  They  should  serve  to  awaken 
alarm  in  the  unsaved,  and  arouse  the  saved  to  the  intensest  solicitude  and  zeal 
for  their  rescue.  The  human  brand  is  not  a  dead  piece  of  wood.  He  has  reason, 
judgment,  sensibility,  will.  He  needs  to  be  made  to  realise  his  peril.  2.  There 
is  no  time  for  dallying.     The  service  is  urgent.     (B.  D.  Thomas.) 

Vers.  4,  6.  Take  away  the  filthy  garments  from  him. — Removal  of  guUt : — 
Zechariah  was  shown  the  state  and  condition  of  God's  Church  in  his  day,  and 
the  change  wrought  upon  that  Church ;  a  change  that  must  be  wrought  on 
all  that  belong  to  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  and  which  is  wrought  by  Divine  power 
and  grace  alone.  Here  is  a  scenic  representation  of  Gospel  truth.  "  Joshua  was 
clothed  in  filthy  garments."  Why  did  he  so  appear,  and  in  such  a  presence  t 
That  his  condition,  and  yours,  and  mine,  in  the  presence  of  a  Holy  God,  may  be 
likened  to  filthy,  polluted,  unclean,  defiled  garments.  "  Satan  stood  at  his  right 
hand  to  resist  him."  This  alludes  to  the  prevailing  custom  of  placing  an  accused 
person  before  a  bar  of  justice,  and  bringing  his  accuser  upon  his  right  hand  to 
prefer  the  charge  against  him.  Satan  is  the  "  accuser  of  the  brethren."  Having 
rebuked  Satan,  our  Advocate  addresses  Himself  to  them  that  stood  by.  "  Take 
away  the  filthy  garments  from  him."  This  is  the  Old  Testament  description 
of  the  removal  of  guilt,  the  manifestation  of  salvation  by  grace.  We  must  in  this 
manner  go  to  God  in  our  filthy  garments.  Wait  not  to  try  to  change  your  heart, 
as  you  would  your  raiment.  Prayer  is  necessary,  but  prayer  is  no  qualification  ; 
repentence  is  necessary,  but  repentance  does  not  quahfy  for  God's  mercy.  Come, 
poor  self-condemned  sinner,  just  as  you  are.  The  filthy  garment  is  removed  from 
every  one  whose  heart  is  moved  by  God's  grace,  though  he  know  it  not.  What  is 
represented  by  the  change  of  raiment  ?  The  clothing  with  righteousness  of  our 
blessed  Redeemer.  The  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  a  robe  long 
enough  to  cover  the  sinner  completely,  it  is  as  broad  as  the  law  of  God  ;  those  that 
are  enrobed  in  it  need  fear  no  stormy  blast,  either  through  their  journey,  or  at  their 
journey's  end.  .  .  .  There  is  nothing  to  be  compared  in  importance,  to  us  all, 
with  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  full,  perfect,  and  complete  Saviour  of  our 
souls.  {A.  Ileitiett,  M.A.)  So  they  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head,  and 
clothed  him  with  garments. — The  mitre  of  'priesthood  : — This  book  was  wiitten 
in  the  midst  of  a  process  of  reconstruction.  The  people,  or  at  least  a  handful 
of  the  people  of  Israel,  had  come  back  from  Babylon  to  a  ruined  city,  but  by 
the  guidance  and  leadcr.ship  of  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  and  those  prophets  of 
God,  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and  Malachi,  the  little  handful  or  remnant  of  the  people 
commenced  to  reconstruct  their  state,  their  city,  and  temple.  It  was  of  little 
use  to  build  the  temple  while  the  priesthood  was  so  degraded  as  Malachi  tells 
us  it  was.  The  priests  offered  upon  the  altar  of  God  contemptible  sacrifices 
— they  were  content  to  bring  to  it  the  halt,  the  lame,  the  blind,  such  as  they 
would  not  bring  to  their  governor.  They  looked  upon  the  whole  service  they 
rendered  as  hardly  worth  their  care  and  energy,  so  ill  were  they  repaid.  You 
will  notice  at  the  end  of  the  chapter  we  read  that  Joshua  and  his  fellows  were 
men  for  a  sign,  that  is,  they  were  types  of  the  spiritual  priesthood  of  the  present 
time.  We  may  not  exercise  our  priestly  office  any  more  than  we  exercise  our 
royal  prerogative ;  yet  in  God's  sight  we  have  a  spiritual  faculty  of  standing 
between  God  and  man,  speaking  to  God  for  man  and  to  man  for  G!od.  Is  it  not 
a  fact  that  there  are  men  and  women  here  who  are  priests,  but  they  need  to  be 
reconstructed,  who  are  called  to  exercise  this  spiritual  prerogative,  but  they 
have  not  a  fair  mitre  upon  their  head  ?  "  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  hia 
head."  I.  We  consider  the  persons  thus  adorned,  lest  any  here  might  suppose 
that  they  could  not  claim  the  fair  mitre.  You  will  see  it  is  Joshua  who  receives 
the  fair  mitre,  the  person  who  at  first  stands  before  us  clothed  with  filthy  gar- 
ments. Filthy  garments  always  indicate  some  slur  upon  the  character,  some 
stain  on  the  white  robe  of  the  dress  of  the  soul.     It  may  be  that  you  are  sensible 


CHAP,  ni.]  ZECEARIAH.  45 

that  your  robe  is  soiled,  and  as  you  come  to  the  searching  light  of  God's  angel 
— the  angel  of  God's  presence — you  are  more  than  ever  conscious  of  the  wrinkles 
in  your  white  robe.  When  you  first  came  to  the  Cross  of  Christ  you  washed 
your  robes  and  made  them  white  in  His  blood,  but  you  have  failed  to  keep  them 
so.  The  father  sits  down  at  the  family  altar,  takes  the  old  Bible  and  turns  over 
its  leaves,  but  all  the  time  that  he  essays  to  act  as  priest  of  the  family  he  ia  con- 
scious that  diu'ing  the  past  twenty-four  hours  he  has  soiled  his  garments  by 
impure  thoughts  or  wrong  imaginations.  It  may  be  that  some  young  man  here, 
who,  indeed,  is  a  true  child  of  God,  has  allowed  the  sin  of  foul  impurity,  of  imclean 
desire,  to  stain  his  robes ;  some  housewife  here  has  yielded  to  that  to-day  which 
soils  her  garments.  But  even  you,  in  your  filthy  garment,  may  yet  by  the  grace 
of  Grod  receive  the  fillet,  the  mitre.  You  will  notice  not  only  was  Joshua  clothed 
with  these  filthy  garments,  but  he  was  the  object  of  Satan's  accusation ;  Satan 
stood  beside  and  indicated  his  disgrace.  Do  you  not  suppose  the  great  accuser 
still  does  this  ?  When  just  now  you  bowed  in  prayer  and  your  thoughts  were 
wandering  to  your  pleasure  or  business,  Satan  saw  it  and  said,  "  Christ,  do  You 
notice  there  is  not  one  in  all  those  people  truly  in  prayer  ?  "  And  when  your 
minister  speaks  and  his  motives  are  vanity  or  pride,  again  the  evil  spirit  stands 
to  accuse  us ;  he  says  to  Christ,  "  Here  is  Thy  chosen  servant,  but  it  would  be 
better  for  me  to  cast  him  out  of  Thy  hand  and  find  another  to  do  Thy  work 
better."  And  so  there  is  never  a  negligence,  a  sin,  or  a  fault  but  what  Satan 
catches  it  and  casts  it  upon  Christ,  because  he  can  wound  Christ  best  by  showing 
up  our  filth  and  sin.  You  will  notice  also  that  Joshua  was  like  a  charred  brand  : 
you  know  how  a  piece  of  wood  put  in  the  fire  will  soon  blacken  and  be  consumed ; 
a  precious  letter,  a  bank-note,  or  cheque,  by  mistake  has  been  taken  by  your 
servant  to  your  waste-paper  basket  and  put  into  the  furnace,  and  when  taken 
out  it  is  so  blackened,  yeUow,  or  charred,  as  to  be  almost  undecipherable  ;  and 
I  suppose  I  am  speaking  to  plenty  of  men  here  who  have  the  marks  of  fire  upon 
them.  But  though  charred  as  you  are.  He  will  pluck  you  from  the  burning,  and 
is  prepared  this  very  night  to  adorn  yoiir  brow  with  this  fillet,  this  mitre  of  His 
Holy  Spirit  which  wiU  equip  you  to  exercise  your  power  as  a  priest  of  God.  II.  I 
ought  to  mark  the  preparatory  process,  because  one  has  often  found,  in  talking 
to  people  about  the  blessed  Holy  Spirit,  that  there  has  not  been  any  deep  pre- 
paratory previous  work,  and  it  is  quite  impossible  for  you  to  receive  the  appoint- 
ing of  the  Holy  Ghost  imless  you  have  submitted  yourself  to  the  previous  work 
of  that  same  Spirit.  Whilst  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Pentecost  is  more  especially  the 
Spirit  of  power,  He  is  also  the  Spirit  of  cleansing,  pm-ification,  and  sanctifica- 
tion.  There  is  a  previous  process,  but  with  God  that  process  need  not  take  long. 
This  process  is  indicated  in  the  vision  thus  :  "  He  said.  Behold,  I  have  caused 
thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee,  and  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of  raiment." 
And  we  are  told  at  the  close  of  the  chapter  that  God  can  put  away  the  iniquity 
of  man  in  a  single  day.  Imagine  all  the  sin  rising  over  England,  Scotland,  and 
Wales  to-day  ;  this  little  island  surrounded  by  om:  four  seas  ;  imagine  and 
remember  God  says  He  can  put  away  the  sin  of  a  land  in  one  day,  and  that  day 
was  when  Jesus  died.  If  the  Lord  dm-ing  His  three  hours'  crucifixion  was  able 
to  expiate  and  put  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  how  long  will  it  take  for  Him  to 
expiate  the  sin  which  is  already  expiated  ?  Will  you  allow  Him  now,  the  great 
High  Priest,  to  put  away  your  filthy  garments,  to  cause  your  guilt  to  leave  you, 
and  to  give  you  instead  the  sense  of  God's  forgiveness  ?  That  is  not  all.  The 
"  garment,"  if  you  compare  it  with  the  epistles  especially,  stands  more  for  habit 
of  life,  and  when  Paul  talks  about  garments  he  means  divesting  the  life  of  certain 
evil  habits  which  have  too  long  clung  to  it.  The  word  "  habit  "  is  used  for  an 
article  of  ladies'  dress,  and  the  habit  is  the  dress  of  the  soul  that  clings  to  it,  and 
there  must  come  a  moment  in  a  man's  life  when  he  stands  before  the  angel  of 
God,  when  certain  habits  which  he  once  permitted  are  shown  to  be  altogether 
unworthy  of  his  Christian  character,  and  he  puts  off  the  works  of  the  flesh.  You 
see  things  in  a  different  light.  I  feel  that  the  man  who  does  not  drop  habit  after 
habit,  indulgence  after  indulgence,  is  not  growing ;  just  as  a  tree  may  tell  us  its 
age  by  the  rings  of  wood,  so  we  can  mark  the  growth  of  a  man  by  what  he  has 
dropped.  I  am  not  here  to  tell  you  what  to  give  up,  it  is  not  my  pm-poee  to  add 
commandments  to  the  decalogue,  but  to  say  that  a  man's  growth  is  determined 
by  what  he  is  prepared  to  renoimce.  He  does  not  think  it  hard  to  renounce 
them,  because  he  is  receiving  so  much  more  ;  he  drops  the  less  to  take  the  better. 
Just  as  when  we  come  to  the  moment  of  death  I  do  not  suppose  we  shall  think 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ni. 

about  dying,  because  the  radiant  light  of  that  world  beyond  will  attract  us,  and 
reaching  out  our  two  hands  towards  it,  before  we  know  we  have  died,  we  shall 
have  passed  into  heaven.  So  now  we  are  attracted  always  by  the  heavenly 
vision.  0  Christ,  cause  these  habits,  associations,  indulgences,  which  have 
been  rotting  our  heart  and  holding  us  back,  cause  these  things  to  pass.  Then 
there  is  a  change  of  raiment :  you  must  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  make  no  pro- 
vision for  the  flesh,  but  put  on  the  perfect  character  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is 
the  deep  truth  that  we  do  not  all  remember,  I  think ;  we  are  more  anxious  for 
the  negative  than  the  positive  ;  more  taken  up  with  what  we  give  up  than  with 
what  we  take  on.  You  see  here  is  Joshua  :  when  I  began  to  speak,  he  stood 
there  clothed  with  soiled  garments,  and  Satan  stands  beside  him ;  but  the  scene 
is  altered  now,  the  filthy  garments  have  been  dropped.  He  has  been  bathed 
in  water,  and  he  is  clothed  with  fair  and  beautiful  robes,  the  emblem  of  some 
soul  here.  Satan  has  vanished,  there  is  no  further  record  of  his  accusing  Joshua, 
because  Christ  had  rebuked  him  ;  and  when  Christ  throws  the  aegis  of  His  pro- 
tection round  a  soul,  then  Satan  sneaks  away.  Christ  has  said,  "  I  have  chosen 
this  man,  plucked  him  as  a  brand  from  the  fire,  and  am  not  likely  to  cast  him 
back.  Avaunt."  And  ashamed  and  disappointed  he  sneaks  away.  And  so 
the  soul  that  stood  ashamed  and  downcast,  knowing  every  sneer  of  the  devil 
was  true,  now  looks  into  the  face  of  the  blessed  Angel — Christ — and  says,  "  O 
Advocate,  Priest  of  God,  0  most  blessed  lover  of  my  soul,  what  can  I  render 
to  Thee  for  Thine  advocacy  and  intercession,  by  virtue  of  which  the  very  tempter 
is  vanquished  ?  "  III.  Still,  though  Satan  is  gone,  Joshua  wants  the  crown 
of  the  priesthood,  the  insignia,  the  mitre  of  the  priesthood.  The  mitre, 
you  know,  as  worn  by  the  bishop,  is  golden.  It  is  an  emblem  of  the  ancient  idea 
of  the  cloven  tongues  of  fire,  but  is  a  faint  rendering  of  the  Greek,  for  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost  the  fire  came  as  a  glow  of  light  or  fire  into  the  room,  and  then  there 
was  distributed  a  flame  upon  each  meekly  bowed  head.  But  still  the  mitre 
is  the  emblem  of  the  ancient  thought.  The  mitre,  fillet,  or  turban,  if  you  com- 
pare this  with  Leviticus  and  Numbers,  and  these  again  with  the  epistles,  stands 
without  doubt  for  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  for  the  bishop  alone,  but 
for  every  one  of  us.  You  cannot  do  priestly  work  until  you  have  got  it ;  you 
cannot  plead  with  God  as  intercessor,  and  cannot  speak  to  men  with  power  until 
you  have  got  your  fair  mitre.  You  may  have  your  clean  robe,  but  if  you  have 
no  mitre,  you  are  unable  to  act  as  priest.  The  Lord  Jesus  for  thirty  years  had 
a  stainless  robe  of  purity  and  beauty,  and  as  He  walked  on  the  hills  round  Nazareth 
in  intercourse  with  His  Father,  there  was  in  Him  neither  spot  nor  blemish  ;  yet 
I  think  I  shall  be  within  the  confines  of  preaching  the  Word  of  God  when  I  say 
that  in  a  sense  our  Lord  had  not  the  fair  mitre  upon  His  head  until  He  went  down 
into  the  Jordan  and  was  baptized,  thus  identifying  Himself  with  man  ;  then 
having  fulfilled  all  righteousness,  as  He  came  up  out  of  the  water,  beneath  that 
blue  sky,  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  the  fitting  emblem  of  a  dove's  wing,  came  upon 
Him,  and  the  fair  mitre  abode  upon  His  head.  He  went  forth  into  Galilee  and 
said,  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me."  So  when  He  left  the  Church  of  God 
He  blessed  them  and  said  in  effect,  "  Peter,  John,  and  the  rest  of  you,  tarry  in 
Jerusalem  until  you  get  your  fair  mitre  "  ;  and  though  they  have  been  cleansed 
with  fellowship  with  Him,  and  by  His  most  precious  blood,  they  waited  together 
in  the  upper  room,  until  that  mystic  sign  to  which  I  have  alluded — the  fair  mitre 
— was  put  upon  the  head  of  one  hundred  and  twenty,  and  upon  many  since  then. 
Many  a  soul  I  have  had  to  do  with  has  spent  long  years  ^vith  white  robes,  but 
without  the  fair  mitre.  You  must  have  the  anointing  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  Pentecost  if  you  are  to  do  the  Church's  work  in  the  world.  It  is  noticeable 
that  Zechariah  said,  "  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head."  Zechariah, 
you  have  no  right  to  say  that — an  angel  should  do  it ;  you  are  a  prophet,  and 
Joshua  is  a  priest,  and  there  used  to  be  antagonism  between  the  prophets  and 
the  priesthood  ;  but  Zechariah  said,  "  Let  them  put  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head," 
and  they  did.  The  prophet  and  priest  are  united  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  How 
can  you  have  it  ?  Not  by  agonising,  not  by  wrestling  and  struggling,  but  by 
first  receiving,  because  Jesus  Christ,  the  angel  of  Jehovah,  waits  to  give  it. 
There  is  nothing  He  wants  more  to  give  you  than  this.  You  ask  me  how  you 
know  when  you  have  got  it  ?  I  will  tell  you.  You  receive  it  by  faith  ;  you 
received  forgiveness  without  emotion  ;  you  must  not  gauge  your  reception  by 
emotion,  or  you  will  be  disappointed :  emotion  must  not  be  trusted.  You  receive 
it  by  faith ;  you  may  receive  it  now,  at  any  moment.     The  indication  you  have 


CHAP,  in.]  ZECHARIAH.  47 

got  it  is  not  emotion :  it  is  two  things.  First,  a  new  sense  of  the  sweetness  of 
the  presence  of  Jesus;  for  the  Holy  Spirit  never  reveals  Himself,  but  always 
reveals  Christ.  Secondly,  a  quiet  power  over  other  men.  These  are  "  men 
for  a  sign,"  and  I  close  with  one  most  precious  promise  :  "  Hear  now,  0  Joshua, 
the  high  priest,  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  My  ways,  and  if  thou  wilt  keep  My  charge  " 
— I  give  this  as  a  parting  message, — "then  thou  shalt  also  judge  My  house,  and 
shalt  also  keep  My  courts,  and  I  will  give  thee  places  of  access  among  these  that 
stand  by."  This  is  not  got  by  wrestling,  but  by  trusting ;  so  will  you  be  brought 
within  the  inner  circle  of  Christ's  presence.  "  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon 
his  head."     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  The  Angel  of  the  Lord  protested  nnto  Joshua. — A  charge  to 
young  ministers  : — I,  What  the  great  Head  of  thb  Chubch  eequeres  of  you. 
1.  Personal  piety,  "  Walk  in  My  ways."  This  phrase  denotes  the  whole  of 
practical  and  experimental  godliness.  There  can  be  no  true  piety  without  a 
previous  scriptural  conversion,  a  moral,  universal,  spiritual  change  ;  a  change  of 
the  principles,  of  the  mind,  of  the  affections,  of  the  heart,  of  the  conduct,  and  of  the 
life,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  obtained  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  Every 
unconverted  minister  is  an  intruder  into  the  sacred  office.  The  dignity  of  your 
office  does  not  discharge  you  from  all  the  obligations  to  personal  holiness  ;  but  it 
binds  those  obligations  upon  you  with  superadded  weight  and  force.  Then  be 
men  of  integrity.  Cultivate  a  devotional  spirit.  Be  clothed  with  humility. 
Be  grave  and  serious.  Be  cheerful,  but  take  care  that  cheerfulness  does  not 
degenerate  into  levity.  The  piety  of  some  ministers  has  serious  blemishes,  againsb 
which  you  will  do  well  to  guard  yourselves.  Such  as  envy,  which  is  the  vice  of 
little  minds.  Or  a  disposition  to  retail  slanders.  In  order  to  maintain  your 
personal  piety  it  will  be  necessary  for  you  every  day  to  renew  your  acts  of  dedica- 
tion to  God.  2.  A  faithful  discharge  of  your  ministerial  and  pastoral  functions. 
Your  office  may  be  called  "  the  charge  of  the  Lord,"  because  you  received  it  from 
Him,  and  are  acco\mtable  to  Him  for  the  discharge  of  its  functions.  In  order  to 
keep  this  charge,  you  should  well  understand  its  nature.  It  is  Christian  theology 
which  you  have  to  teach  to  mankind ;  and  you  cannot  teach  it  to  others  unless 
you  well  understand  it  yoiu-selves.  It  is  the  well-informed,  well-instructed  divine 
who  alone  can  adorn  the  sacred  profession  and  edify  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Avoid  a  controversial  style  of  preaching,  for  that  is  generally  unprofitable,  and 
impopular  too.  You  should  be  faithfid,  zealous,  and  laborious  preachers,  ever 
ready  to  declare  "  the  whole  counsel  of  God."  3.  In  this  charge  is  implied  the  faith- 
ful performance  of  pastoral  duties.  The  exercise  of  a  pure  discipline  over  the 
societies  (Chiu-ches)  entrusted  to  yoiu"care.  A  Church  without  discipline  is  Uke  a 
garden  without  a  fence.  The  due  administration  of  pastoral  advice  and  counsel 
is  another  of  our  duties.  II.  The  import  of  those  promises  made  to  you. 
Dignity  and  authority  in  the  Church  of  God  is  here  promised  to  faithful  minister?. 
Continuance  in  office  is  another  promise.  And  it  is  further  promised  that  they 
ehaU  at  length  be  translated  to  nobler  stations  in  the  heavenly  world,  where  they 
shall  become  companions  of  angels.  Allow  me  to  charge  you  then  to  give  attention 
to  all  these  things.  I  have  not  exhorted  you  to  pursue  unattainable  objects  ; 
they  are  all  well  within  your  reach.  Redeem  the  time.  And  "  be  thou  faithful 
unto  death."  (Edward  Grindrod.)  God's  promise  to  Joshua: — The  design  of 
God's  promises  is  to  quicken  us  to  diligence  in  the  work  which  He  hath  given  us  to 
do.  I.  What  is  required  of  Joshua  ;  or  how  he  was  to  behave.  He  was  to 
"  walk  in  God's  ways,  and  keep  His  charge  "  ;  which  signifies  a  general  care  to  be 
religious  himself,  and  a  faithful  performance  of  the  duties  of  his  particular  station. 
n.  What  is  promised  to  Joshua  in  consequence  of  so  doing.  1.  That  he 
should  be  continued  in  his  office.  2.  At  length  he  should  be  preferred  to  a  nobler 
station,  in  which  he  should  be  the  companion  of  angels.  It  does  not  mean  that 
angels  should  guard  and  preserve  him  in  all  his  goings  and  undertakings.  The 
most  natural  and  easy  sense  of  the  words  is,  that  they  refer  to  a  future  stat«,  and 
mean  that  Joshua  should  at  length  be  joined  to  the  angels  in  heaven.  Most  of  the 
Jewish  writers  paraphrase  thus,  "  I  will  raise  thee  from  the  dead,  and  place  thee 
among  the  seraphims."  This  is  a  most  delightful  and  instructive  idea  of  the 
heavenly  world — walking  among  the  angels.  Heaven  is  the  stated  abode  of  these 
glorious,  wise,  and  happy  spirits,  who  are  superior  to  men  ;  therefore  they  are 
called  "  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven."  God  intends  that  all  His  faithful  servants 
on  earth  should  at  length  dwell  and  walk  with  them.     Reflect  what  an  honour 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m. 

and  happiness  this  will  be.     Consider  what  excellent  beings  they  are  in  themselves. 
And  consider  them  as  those  who  have  been  ministers  of  God  to  the  world,  the. 
Church,  and  oxu-selves.     Application — (1)  Reflect,  for  our  caution,  on  the  counter- 
part of  this,  or  the  future  state  of  those  who  forsake  the  ways  of  God.     (2)  Let 
UB  be  excited  to  the  duties  required  in  the  text,  by  the  gracious  promise  contained 
in  it.     {Job  Orton. )        Cleansing,  obedience,  service  : — Let  the  Christian  notice 
well  God's  order  in  these  verses.     It  is  cleansing  first,  then  obedience,  next  service. 
All  through  the  Bible  the  cleansing  is  with  a  view  to  the  other  two ;  and  if  these 
two  fail  to  be  seen  in  the  Christian's  character  he  will  lose  the  first,  for  all  practical 
purposes.     A  cleansed  soul  will  be  a  holy  soul.     A  cleansed  soul  will  be  an  obedient 
one,  and  will  love  to  serve.     Then,  Christian,  "  work  out  your  own  salvation  " 
by  putting  no  hindrance  in  the  way  of  "  God  working  within  you  both  to  will 
and  do."     Live  upon  Christ,  and  let  nothing  come  between  your  continued  eating 
the  flesh  and  drinking  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  Man.     This  is  hving  upon  Christ ; 
and  if  your  soul  lacks  it  your  obedience  and  your  service  will  cease.     The  measure 
of  blessing  to  another's  soul  will  be  the  measiure  of  Christ  living  in  your  own ; 
and  the  measure  of  Christ  living  in  you  will  be  the  measure  of  your  love  to  Him, 
and  your  own  personal  assurance  of  His  love  to  you.     You  must  translate  the 
generally  acknowledged  fact  of  His  love  into  a  living  fact  in  your  own  experience. 
And  remember  that  the  measure  in  which  you  think  about  Christ,  and  in  which 
your  thoughts  about  Him  have  power  over  your  personal  character  and  your  daily 
life,  is  the  measure  of  your  religion.     This,  and  no  more  than  this,  is  the  extent 
to  which  you  are  a  Christian.     This,  and  no  more  than  this,  is  the  extent  to  which 
there  will  be  any  reality,  any  power,  any  real  blessing  in  yoiu-  service  to  others,  or 
anything  pleasing  to  God  in  yoiu:  obedience.     May  God  make  you  real — stamp 
Divine  reality  on  everything  within  you,  and  in  all  your  outward  life  !     {F.  Whit- 
field, M.A.)        A  -place  of  access  : — "  I  will  give  thee  a  place  of  access."     We  owe 
this  beautiful  promise  to  the  Revised  Version  (Zech.  iii.  7),  for  in  the  Authorised 
Version  the  text  has  quite  a  meaningless  rendering.     "  I  will  give  thee  place  to 
walk  among  these  that  stand  by."     The  immediate  reference  of  the  promise  is,  ol 
course,  to  Joshua,  the  high  priest.     It  was  his  privilege  and  his  duty,  clothed  in 
white  linen,  to  enter  the  most  holy  place  once  a  year,  there  to  make  atonement  for 
the  sins  of  the  people.     Instead,  however,  of  this  great  office  being  fulfilled,  the 
prophet  sees  Joshua  clothed  in  filthy  garments — the  type  of  his  own  sins  and  of  those 
people  of  his  "  standing," — with  Satan  at  his  right  hand  to  be  his  "  adversary." 
It  appeared  impossible  that  such  a  high  priest,  or  such  a  nation,  should  ever  be 
permitted  to  draw  near  the  living  God.     Then  comes  the  symbolic  action  of  the 
prophetic  vision.     The  filthy  garments  are  taken  away  by  command  of  God, 
from  Joshua,  and  are  replaced  by  "  rich  apparel,"  the  mitre  of  high  priestly  office 
is  set  on  his  head,  and  the  promise  is  made — made  both  to  him  and  to  his  people— 
*'  I  will  give  thee  a  place  of  access."     In  spite  of  Israel's  unworthiness  and  sin, 
God  Himself  would  permit  Has  people  to  draw  near  to  Him.     Such  were  the 
original  scope  and  meaning  of  these  words.     "  I  will  give  thee  a  place  of  access." 
How  little  we  realise  the  great  privilege  of  this  great  promise  !     To  say  that  we  can 
draw  near  to  God  is  only  to  utter  one  of  the  commonest  of  all  truisms  ;  but  familiar 
as  the  truth  may  be  to  us,  let  us  never  forget  that  there  was  a  time  when  it  would 
have  been  regarded  as  the  strangest  and  most  incredible  of  all  truths.     A  Jew  was 
never  permitted  in  his  own  person  to  come  near  to  God  ;  he  had  to  approach  the 
Most  High  from  a  distance,  and  even  the  high  priest  himself  was  only  allowed 
the  privilege  of  '*  a  place  of  access  "  once  in  each  year.     Such  were  the  awful 
holiness  and  the  ineffable  majesty  of  the  Most  High,  and  such  the  terrible  sin  and 
guilt  of  man,  that  no  human  soul  dared  to  draw  near  the  consuming  fire.     God  was 
a  God  "  far  off  "  and  not  "  nigh  "  to  a  Jew.     There  was  no  "  place  of  access  " 
opened  for  all  the  world.     We  do  not  wonder,  therefore,  at  the  exaltation  and 
rapture  with  which  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  dwells  on  what  Christ 
had  done,  in  opening  a  "  new  and  living  way  "  to  God,  even  into  the  holy  place,  by 
His  blood,  and  on  the  fact  that  His  sacrifice  for  sin  makes  it  now  possible  for  the 
sinful  and  guilty  with  "  boldness  to  enter  into  the  Holiest."     It  was  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promise  of  the  text,  "  I  will  give  thee  a  place  of  access."     And  this  is  the 
astonisfxing  privilege  of  every  child  of  man  to-day.     Howsoever  unworthy  and 
sinful  he  may  be,  still  through  the  blood  of  Jesus,  he  may  freely  draw  near  to  God. 
He  may  stand  in  the  presence  of  the  Eternal.     He  may  speak  face  to  face  with 
God,  and  hear  God  speak  to  him.     "  In  Christ  Jesus,"  to  use  St.  Paul's  words,  "  we 
that  once  were  far  off  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ."     ((?.  W.  Barrett.) 


CHAP,  ni.]  ZECHARIAH.  49 

Ver.  7.  I  will  give  tbee  places  to  walk  among  those  that  stand  by. — 
The  right  of  entry : — The  prophet  has  just  been  describing  a  vision  of  judgment 
in  which  the  high  priest,  as  representative  of  the  nation,  stood  before  the  angel 
of  the  Lord  as  an  unclean  person.  He  is  cleansed,  and  clothed,  and  a  fair  priestly 
garment,  with  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  written  on  the  front  of  it,  put  upon  him. 
And  then  follow  a  series  of  promises,  of  which  the  climax  is  the  one  that  I  have 
read.  "  I  will  give  thee  a  place  of  access,"  says  the  Revised  Version,  instead 
of  "  places  to  walk  "  ;  "I  wUl  give  thee  a  place  of  access  among  those  that  stand 
by "  ;  the  attendant  angels  are  dimly  seen  surrounding  their  Lord.  And  so 
the  promise  of  my  text  is  that  of  free  approach  to  God,  of  a  life  that  is  like  that 
of  the  angels  that  stand  before  His  face.  So,  then,  the  words  suggest  to  us — 
L  What  a  Christian  life  may  be.  There  are  two  images  blended  together 
in  the  great  words  of  my  text :  the  one  is  that  of  a  king's  coiurt,  the  other  is  that 
of  a  temple.  With  regard  to  the  former,  it  is  a  privilege  given  to  the  highest 
nobles  of  a  kingdom — or  it  was  in  old  days — to  have  the  right  of  entree,  at  all 
moments  and  in  all  circumstances,  to  the  monarch.  With  regard  to  the  latter 
the  prerogative  of  the  high  priest,  who  is  the  recipient  of  this  promise  as  to  access 
to  the  Temple,  waa  a  very  restricted  one.  Once  a  year,  with  the  blood  that  prevented 
his  annihilation  by  the  brightness  of  the  Presence  into  which  he  ventured,  he 
passed  within  the  veil,  and  stood  before  that  mysterious  Light  that  coruscated 
in  the  darkness  of  the  Holy  of  Holies.  But  this  High  Priest  is  promised  an  access 
on  all  days  and  at  aU  times ;  and  that  He  may  stand  there,  beside  and  like  the 
seraphim.  This  Priest  passes  within  the  veil  when  He  wilL  Or,  to  put  away 
the  two  metaphors,  and  to  come  to  the  reality  far  greater  than  either  of  them, 
we  can,  whensoever  we  please,  pass  into  the  Presence  before  which  the  splendours 
of  an  earthly  monarch's  covurt  shrink  into  vulgarity,  and  attain  to  a  real  reception 
of  the  light  that  irradiates  the  true  Holy  Place,  before  which  that  which  shone  in 
the  earthly  shrine  dwindles  and  darkens  into  a  shadow.  Our  lives  may  on  the 
outside  thus  be  largely  amongst  the  things  seen  and  temporal,  and  yet  all  the 
while  penetrating  through  these,  and  lajdng  hold  with  their  true  roots  on  the 
Eternal.  Our  Master  is  the  great  Example  of  this,  of  whom  it  is  said,  not  only 
in  reference  to  His  mysterious  and  unique  union  of  natiu-e  with  the  Father  in 
His  Divinity,  but  in  reference  to  the  humanity  which  He  had  in  common  with  us 
all,  yet  without  sin,  that  the  Son  of  Man  came  down  from  heaven,  and  even  in 
the  act  of  coming,  and  when  He  had  come  was  yet  the  Son  of  Man  which  U  in 
heaven.  Such  a  conversation  in  heaven,  and  such  association  with  the  bands 
of  the  blessed,  is  possible  even  for  a  life  upon  earth.  H.  Let  us  consider  this 
promise  as  a  pattern  for  us  op  what  Christian  life  should  be,  and,  alas  ! 
so  seldom  is.  There  is  no  greater  sin  than  living  beneath  the  possibilities  of  our 
lives,  in  any  region,  whether  religious  or  other  it  matters  not.  Sin  is  not  only 
going  contrary  to  the  known  law  of  God,  but  also  a  falling  beneath  a  Divine  ideal 
which  is  capable  of  realisation.  And  in  regard  to  our  Christian  life,  if  God  has 
jBung  open  His  temple-gates  and  said  to  us,  "  Come  in,  My  child,  and  dwell  in 
the  secret-place  of  the  Most  High,  and  abide  there  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty, 
finding  protection  and  communion  and  companionship  in  My  worship,"  there 
can  be  nothing  more  insulting  to  Him,  and  nothing  more  fatally  indicative  of 
the  alienation  of  oiu:  hearts  from  Him,  than  that  we  should  refuse  to  obey  the 
merciful  invitation.  What  should  we  say  of  a  son  or  a  daughter,  living  in  the 
same  city  with  their  parents,  who  never  crossed  the  threshold  of  the  father's 
house,  but  that  they  had  lost  the  spirit  of  the  child,  and  that  if  there  was  no  desire 
to  be  near  there  could  be  no  love!  So,  if  we  will  ask  ourselves:  "  How  often 
do  I  use  this  possibility  of  communion  with  God,  which  might  irradiate  all  my 
daily  life  ?  "  LEI.  Again,  my  text  suggests  to  us  what  every  Christian  life 
WILL  hereafter  PERFECTLY  BE.  Some  commentators  take  the  words  of  my 
text  to  refer  only  to  the  communion  of  saints  from  the  earth,  with  the  glorified 
angels,  in  and  after  the  resurrection.  That  is  a  poor  interpretation,  for  heaven 
is  here  to-day.  All  that  here  has  been  imperfect,  fragmentary,  occasional, 
interrupted,  and  marred  in  our  communion  with  God,  shall  one  day  be  complete.' 
And  then,  oh  !  then,  who  can  tell  what  undreamed  of  depths  and  sweetnesses 
of  renewed  communion  and  of  intercourses  begun,  for  the  first  time  then,  between 
"  those  that  stand  by,"  and  have  stood  there  for  ages,  will  then  be  realised  ? 
IV.  Lastly,  notice,  not  from  my  text,  but  from  its  context,  how  any  life 
MAY  become  THUS  PRIVILEGED.  The  promise  is  preceded  by  a  condition  :  "  If 
thou  wilt  walk  in  My  ways,  and  if  thou  wilt  keep  My  charge,  then  ...  I  will 

4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

give  thee  access  among  those  that  stand  by."  If  we  are  keeping  His  command- 
ments, then,  and  only  then,  shall  we  have  access  with  free  hearts  into  His  presence. 
But  to  lay  down  that  condition  seems  the  same  thing  as  slamming  the  door 
in  every  man's  face.  But  let  us  remember  what  went  before  my  text,  the  experi- 
ence of  the  Priest  to  whom  it  was  spoken  in  the  vision.  His  filthy  garments 
were  stripped  off  him,  and  the  pure  white  robes  worn  on  the  great  Day  of  Atone- 
ment, the  sacerdotal  dress,  was  put  upon  him.  It  is  the  cleansed  man  that  has 
access  among  "  those  that  stand  by."     (.4.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8-10.  They  are  men  wondered  at. — Christians  a  wonder  : — Joshua  and 
his  fellow-worshippers  were  wondered  at,  both  by  the  idolatrous  Chaldeans  and 
the  unbelieving  Jews,  for  their  faith  in  the  Divine  predictions  during  the  period 
of  their  captivity ;  that  Jerusalem  should  be  rebuilt,  the  temple-worship  restored, 
a  d  that  they  should  return  again  to  their  o^vn  land.  Good  men  are  not  less  an 
object  of  wonder  now  than  they  were  then.  There  is  something  in  their  principles 
and  pursuits  which  men  in  general  cannot  easily  understand,  and  they  know  not  to 
what  cause  it  should  be  ascribed.  1.  Ministers  of  the  Gospel  are  often  a  wonder 
both  to  themselves  and  others.  It  is  wonderful  that  God  should  condescend  to 
employ  weak  and  sinful  creatures  in  so  sacred  a  work  as  publishing  articles  of 
peace  between  heaven  and  earth.  Infinite  wisdom  saw  fit  to  lodge  this  treasure 
in  earthen  vessels,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  might  be  of  God,  and  not  of 
us.  Considering  likewise  the  mean  opinion  which  good  men  entertain  of  them- 
selves, the  treatment  they  are  likely  to  meet  with,  the  difi&culties  and  trials  to 
which  they  will  necessarily  be  exposed,  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  they 
should  be  induced  to  engage  in  th  -  work  of  the  ministry.  Yet  it  is  wonderful 
how  such  are  carried  through  their  work,  and  enabled  to  persevere,  notwith- 
standing all  the  discouragements  they  meet  with,  from  within  and  from  without. 
The  success  that  at  any  time  attends  the  ministry  may  very  properly  be  regarded 
as  matter  of  astonishment.  2.  The  same  sort  of  singularity  attaches  to  all  real 
Christians  who  walk  in  newness  of  life,  and  exemplify  the  genuine  spirit  of  the 
Gospel.  (1)  They  are  a  wonder  unto  angels.  They  are  struck  with  amazement 
at  the  love  of  God,  manifested  to  such  sinful  and  unworthy  creatures.  (2)  They 
are  a  wonder  unto  devils,  who  cannot  but  be  surprised  to  see  the  spiritual  temple, 
which  is  to  endure  throughout  eternal  ages,  rising  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  Fall.  The 
fallen  spirits  wonder  to  see  all  their  plots  frustrated  and  their  evil  designs  overruled 
for  the  Divine  glory.  (3)  Real  Christians  are  a  wonder  to  themselves.  What 
reason  can  be  rendered  for  such  distinguishing  grace  and  love  ?  The  conversion 
and  salvation  of  a  sinner  is  a  more  surprising  work  than  the  creation  of  a  world. 
(4)  They  are  a  wonder  to  one  another.  (5)  They  are  a  wonder  to  the  world.  Nor 
is  it  strange  that  it  should  be  so,  since  they  are  followers  of  Him  whose  kingdom 
is  not  of  this  world.  3.  There  is  something  in  the  ver)'  nature  of  religion  that  is 
mysterious  and  strange.  (1)  The  manner  in  which  grace  is  implanted  in  the 
soul  is  so.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  upon  the  heart  is  one  of  the  deep  thing's  of  God. 
(2)  The  way  in  which  grace  operates  is  equally  wonderful.  The  Christian's  life 
is  a  hidden  one.  (3)  The  fruits  which  grace  produces  in  the  life  of  a  true  believer 
are  not  less  remarkable.  Those  who  walk  by  sight  cannot  understand  how  others 
walk  by  faith.  How  then  can  the  Christian  be  ashamed  of  his  high  calling,  even 
though  it  should  make  him  a  gazing  stock  to  angels  and  to  men  ?  Thou  art  now  a 
wonder  ti  the  world,  believer,  but  what  a  wonder  wilt  thou  be  in  that  solemn  and 
decisive  day,  when  Christ  will  come  "  to  be  glorified  in  His  saints  and  admired 
in  all  thorn  that  believe."  (B.  Beddome,  31. A.)  My  servant  the  Branch. — 
The  world's  grants  and  God's  provisions  : — I.  The  world  wants  a  moral  helper,  and 
in  the  Gospel  one  "s  provided.  Morally,  man  is  enslaved,  diseased,  exiled,  lost  to 
the  great  uses  and  purprses  of  his  being.  God  has  provided  a  great  Helper,  here 
called  His  "  servant  the  Branch."  In  Isaiah  we  have  these  words,  "  Behold  My 
servant  whom  I  uphold  ;  Mine  elect,  in  whom  M}-  soul  delighteth."  He  is  the 
"  Branch,"  God  is  the  Root,  and  all  holy  souls  are  branches,  deriving  their  life, 
beauty,  and  fruitfulness  from  Him  ;  but  Christ  is  the  "  Branch,"  the  oldest  Branch, 
the  largest  I'ranch,  the  -trongcst  Branch,  the  most  fruitful  Branch.  &c.  He  is  the 
Branch  on  which  there  hang  clusters  of  perennial  fruits  for  the  "  healing  of  the 
nations."  II.  The  world  wants  Divine  guardianship,  and  in  the  Gospel  it  is 
provided.  "  Behold  the  stone  that  I  have  laid  before  Joshua  ;  upon  one  stone 
shall  be  seven  eyes."  What  is  here  meant  by  the  "  stone  "  ?  Not  the  foundation- 
stone  of  the  temple,  which  was  now  being  rebuilt,  for  that  had  been  laid  long 


CHAP,  in.]  ZECHARIAH.  61 

before.  "  The  stone,"  says  Keil,  "  is  the  symbol  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  is  laid 
by  Jehovah  before  Joshua,  by  God's  transferring  to  him  the  regeneration  of  His 
house  and  the  keeping  of  His  courts  (before  lip -hire  in  a  spiritual  sense,  as  in  1  Kings 
ix.  6,  for  example).  The  seven  eyes  which  watch  with  protecting  care  over  this 
stone  are  not  a  figurative  representation  of  the  all-embracing  providence  of  God  ; 
but,  in  harmony  with  the  seven  eyes  of  the  Lamb  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of 
God  (Rev.  V.  6),  and  with  the  seven  eyes  of  Jehovah  (Zech.  iv.  10),  they  are  the 
sevenfold  radiationof  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  (after  Isa.  xi.  2),  which  show  themselves 
in  vigorous  action  upon  this  stone,  to  prepare  it  for  its  destination."  Perhaps  the 
meaning  is,  that  upon  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  here  symbolised  by  the  stone, 
God's  eyes  are  fixed  (engraven)  with  deep  and  settled  interest.  "  The  eye  ii  the 
natural  hieroglyphic  for  knowledge  ;  and  '  seven  '  as  every  reader  of  the  Bible  ia 
aware,  is  the  number  used  to  denote  completeness,  perfection.  Seven  eyes  denote 
the  perfection  of  observant  knowledge  ;  and  as  the  '  eyes  of  Jehovah  '  mean 
Jehovah's  observation  and  knowledge,  His  '  seven  eyes  '  express  the  perfection  of 
both — omniscient  observation."  Two  thoughts  are  suggested — 1.  God  has  a, 
special  interest  in  Christ  and  His  followers.  His  eyes  are  on  the  "  stone,"  there 
in  all  their  completeness,  seven.  He  has  a  general  interest  in  the  universe,  but  a 
special  interest  here.  2.  God  has  a  settled  interest  in  Christ  and  His  followers. 
The  eyes  are  said  to  be  engraven  on  the  stone,  not  written  in  mere  ink.  III.  The 
world  wants  moral  ptjrtfication.  In  the  Gospel  it  is  provided.  The  iniquity 
of  the  land  of  the  Jews  was  multiform,  aggravated,  immeasurable  ;  but  in  one  day 
provision  should  be  made  for  its  removal ;  the  day  on  which  Christ  died  upon 
the  Cross.  "  Christ  came  to  put  away  sin  hy  the  sacrifice  of  Himself."  IV.  The 
world  wants  spiritual  repcse.  In  the  Gospel  that  is  provided.  Mr.  Henry  says, 
"  When  iniquity  is  taken  away — 1.  We  reap  precious  benefits  and  privileges  from 
our  justification;  and  2.  We  repose  in  a  sweet  tranquillity,  and  are  quiet  from 
the  fear  of  evil."  (Homilist.)  For  behold  the  stone  that  I  have  laid  before 
Joshua. — The  stone  before  Joshua  : — That  stone  was  Christ.  Take  the  clauses 
of  the  verse  in  succession.  1.  Behold  the  stone  which  I  have  laid  before  Joshua. 
"  He  that  built  all  things  is  God."  He  built  the  temple  of  nature.  More  august 
and  glorious  far  is  the  temple  spoken  of  here.  Its  foundation-stone  was  laid  by 
God  Himself  in  Zion.  He  laid  it  when  the  great  Antitype  Himself  came,  and  gave 
His  life  a  ransom  for  many.  He  laid  it  anew,  in  the  Zion  above,  when  Christ 
was  exalted  on  His  mediatorial  and  priest!}'  throne,  a  name  given  Him  that  is 
above  every  name.  He  shall  finally  consecrate  and  glorify  it  as  the  "  head-stone 
of  the  comer,"  on  the  great  day,  in  presence  of  the  Church  triumphant.  2.  "  Upon 
one  stone  shall  be  seven  eyes."  Observe,  it  is  "  one  stone."  One  Mediator. 
"  By  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified."  Sej  that 
me  stone  laid  by  the  Divine  Builder  !  The  sun  needs  no  glittering  taper  to  add  to 
its  light ;  the  ocean  needs  no  tiny  drop  to  add  to  its  volume.  Let  the  giant  deed  of 
Christ's  doing  and  dying  stand  forth  in  all  its  peerless,  solitary  grandeur.  What 
mean  the  seven  eyea  ?  Seven  was  a  sacred  number  with  the  Jews,  probably 
from  being  first  associated  with  tlie  seven  days  of  Creation.  It  would  seem  to 
denote — (1)  Christ's  fulness  or  perfection.  How  applicable  to  Him  "  in  whom 
dwelleth  all  the  fulne  s  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  "  Out  of  His  fulness  have  all  we 
received,  and  grace  for  grace."  (2)  The  "  seven  eyes  "  point  to  Christ's  provi- 
dential government  of  the  Church  and  the  world.  What  a  blessed  truth  is  this 
universal,  constant  sovereignty  of  Jesus  !  The  roll  in  which  are  inscribed  the 
world's  destinies  is  in  His  hands.  More  comforting  still  is  it  to  think  of  Christ's 
individual  providence,  the  care  He  takes  of  each  separate  member  of  His  Church. 
This  stone,  with  its  seven  eyes,  has  an  eye  for  each.  But  the  words  "  seven  eyes  " 
may  admit  of  the  rendering  "  seven  fountains."  The  "  eye,"  among  Orientals,  is 
often  the  metaphor  for  the  well-spring.  The  Arabs  call  the  fountain  to  this  day, 
the  ■'  eye  of  the  desert."  Render  then,  "  Upon  one  stone  shall  be  seven  fountains." 
This  one  stone,  the  Rock  of  Ages,  was  smitten  by  the  rod  of  justice,  and  lo  !  seven 
fountain-streams  flow  from  its  cleft  side.  Foimtains  of  pardon,  righteousness, 
peace,  sanctification,  comfort,  grace  here,  life  and  glory  hereafter.  All  the  fountains 
from  one  source.  3.  "  I  will  engrave  the  engraving  thereof."  Carvings  on  stone 
were  frequent  in  ancient  times.  In  Nineveh,  Babylon,  Egypt,  it  was  the  old 
method  of  inscribing  a  nation's  annals.  These  "  stone  libraries  "  are  dug  up  fresh 
as  they  were  chiselled  and  entombed  many  thousand  years  ago.  Once  engraven 
on  the  heart  of  love,  you  are  on  His  heart  for  ever.  An  alternative  rendering 
of  this  metaphor  is,  "  I  will  open  the  openings  thereof."     "  I,"  says  God,  "  will 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

unlock  the  fountains  in  that  sealed  stone,  that  the  waters  of  salvation  may  gush 
forth."  He  opens  the  fountains  every  time  His  glorious  Gospel  is  proclaimed. 
4.  "  And  I  will  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one  day."  This  doubtless  points 
onwards  to  the  day  of  days.  In  the  Mosaic  and  ceremonial  dispensation  of  the 
Jews,  iniquity  was  typically  removed.  But  all  was  a  shadow,  till  the  true  Anti- 
typical  Surety  and  Scapegoat  Himself  came  to  remove  iniquity  "  in  one  day," 
by  having  the  sins  of  His  people  laid  on  His  guiltless  head.  It  was  a  momentous 
"  one  day,  '  the  day  waited  for  by  all  time.  The  stone  was  smitten,  the  fountain 
was  unsealed.  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Jesus  Christ,  the  stone  whereon  are  seven 
eyes  : — The  text  is  highly  figurative  language.  I.  The  description  of  thi3 
"  STONE."  Joshua  may  be  the  representative  of  the  whole  priesthood,  or  of  the 
Church  at  large.  We  take  the  latter  idea.  Therefore  the  stone  is  laid  before 
Joshua, — or  the  Church  of  God.  1.  The  stone.  By  which  I  understand  Christ. 
A  precious  stone.  Precious  to  the  Father,  to  angels,  to  the  fully  redeemed,  and  to 
us.  A  precious  stone,  because  God  has  chosen  it  as  the  foundation  of  His  Church. 
It  is  a  comer-stone.  He  is  a  foundation-stone.  He  is  a  tried  stone.  2.  The 
situation  of  the  stone.  It  is  not  a  stone  of  human  production.  It  was  laid  in  God's 
everlasting  love.  In  the  Old  Testament  rites  and  types  and  shadows.  In  prophecy. 
It  is  to  be  laid  before  the  Church  even  now.  3.  The  Builder.  It  is  the  "  stone 
that  /  have  laid."  God  in  Trinity  is  the  builder.  The  Father  is  the  builder  of 
the  Church  designedly.  The  Son  is  the  builder  of  the  Church  really.  The  Spirit 
is  the  builder  of  the  Church  efficiently.  IL  The  byes  fixed  xtpon  this  "  stone." 
"  Seven  eyes."  Some  refer  this  to  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  Grod.  Prefer 
to  take  it  as  the  eyes  of  all,  friend  and  foe,  that  are  placed  upon  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  1.  The  eye  of  the  Father  is  upon  this  stone  :  in  eternal  council,  when  the 
everlasting  stipulations  for  the  salvation  of  the  Church  were  entered  into.  2.  The 
eye  of  the  Spirit  was  upon  Him.  The  Spirit  of  God  taketh  the  things  of  Christ 
and  revealeth  them  unto  the  soul.  3.  The  eyes  of  angels  are  fixed  on  Christ.  4.  The 
eyes  of  all  the  saints  in  heaven  are  fixed  on  Christ.  5.  So  are  the  eyes  of  the  Church 
on  earth.  6.  And  the  eyes  of  the  wicked,  on  earth  and  in  hell.  III.  The  enqravino 
OF  this  stone.  The  names  of  the  Lord's  people  are  said  to  be  written  on  stones, 
or  in  books.  Our  names  are  written  on  the  palms  of  Christ's  hands,  denoting 
our  security.  Upon  His  shoulders,  to  denote  the  support  that  we  receive  from 
Him.  On  His  heart,  explanatory  of  His  love.  IV.  The  removal  of  the  Church's 
sin.  By  God  the  Father,  through  the  Mediator.  God  has  imputed  all  our  sins 
to  Jesus  Christ,  and  removed  them  in  one  day.  {T.  Bagnall- Baker,  M.A.)  The 
corner-stone  of  the  Church : — Christ  is  promised  as  He  who  is  represented  by  the 
t«mple,  and  who  is  the  ground  and  corner-stone  of  His  own  Church,  and  the  rock 
on  which  she  is  built,  bearing  all  the  burden  of  the  fabric,  concerning  whom  is  pro- 
mised that  God's  infinite  providence  shall  be  about  Him  and  His  Church,  Himself 
endued  with  perfect  wisdom  to  see  to  and  care  for  all  His  members,  and  that  by 
the  effects  and  rays  of  the  glory  of  God  shining  in  Him,  He  shall  draw  all  eyes  to 
Him,  and  keep  them  on  Him  ;  as  also  that  He  shall  be  so  polished  and  adorned 
by  God,  as  shall  be  marvellous  to  the  world.  Doctrine — 1.  Christ  the  Mediator 
is  not  only  a  part  of  the  spiritual  building,  making  up  one  Christ  mystical  with  all 
His  members,  and  the  eminent  and  most  excellent  part  of  it,  but  the  very  foundation 
of  His  Church's  being,  upon  whom  all  the  Church  and  every  particular  member 
thereof  is  and  must  be  built,  and  without  whom  they  cannot  subsist ;  for.  He  is 
"  the  stone  laid  before  Joshua."  2.  As  Christ  in  His  office  of  mediation  is  a  means 
of  the  Father's  appointment,  by  Him  to  derive  happiness  to  the  Church,  and  estab- 
lish her  in  it ;  so  whoever  despise  and  reject  Him,  yet  the  Father  will  have  Him 
high  and  eminent  in  that  building.  3.  As  Christ  hath  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge  employed  for  seeing  to  the  condition,  and  finding  out  the  way  of 
happiness  for  His  people,  in  every  case  and  exigency,  signified  by  seven  eyes 
(which  is  a  number  of  perfection)  engraven  on  that  one  stone  :  and  as  the  vigilant 
providence  of  God  is  always  intent  upon  Christ  as  Mediator,  and  for  His  sake 
upon  the  welfare  of  His  Church  and  kingdom  as  being  His  chief  delight,  signified 
also  by  seven  (or  many)  eyes  fixed  over  that  one  stone,  so  also  is  Christ,  tw  Mediator, 
God-man,  revealing  the  Father  in  Himself,  and  as  the  support  and  upholder  of 
His  Church,  so  glorious  and  excellent  as  may  draw  all  to  admire  Him,  and  to  fix 
their  expectation  on  Him,  as  the  only  choice  and  refuge  of  lost  sinners,  and  will 
do  so  to  all  the  elect,  which  is  also  signified  by  seven  eyes  fixed  on  that  one  stone, 
admiring  Him,  and  having  all  their  expectation  from  Him.  4.  The  beauty,  excel- 
lency, and  furniture  of  Christ  the  Mediator,  is  Divine  and  rare,  and  He  is  tbft 


CHAP,  m-l  ZECHARIAH.  53 

ornament,  glory  and  storehouse  of  all  the  spiritual  building,  being,  as  God,  the 
brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person  (Heb.  i.  3). 
His  humanity  also  being  adorned  with  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  without  measure,  and 
with  all  Divine  perfections  in  so  far  as  the  human  nature  is  capable  ;  withal  Hia 
suflFerings  for  His  people  (as  so  many  ciirious  engravings)  speak  not  a  little  His 
beauty  to  those  who  have  interest  therein.  This  is  signified  by  our  Lord's  engraving 
the  graving  of  this  stone,  polishing  it  as  a  precious  jewel,  and  adorning  it  by  His  art. 
Two  benefits  are  promised  to  flow  from  Christ  the  Priest  to  His  people ;  the  first 
whereof  is,  remission  and  purging  away  of  sins  by  the  sacrifice  upon  the  Cross, 
once  for  all,  which  needs  not  to  be  repeated  as  the  Jewish  sacrifices  were.  This  is 
promised  to  the  whole  elect  and  mystical  body  of  Christ,  figured  by  the  Jews 
and  their  promised  land,  beside  what  pecviliar  relation  it  may  have  to  them  and 
their  land,  that  their  sins,  being  taken  away  by  Christ,  should  not  hinder  Him  to 
favour  them,  nor  the  land  for  their  sake  ;  but  should  be  looked  on  in  due  time,  not 
as  polluted,  nor  possessed  and  overrun  by  enemies.  (1)  Remission  and  removal 
of  sins  is  the  choice  mercy  of  Christ's  people,  and  the  rise  of  other  mercies.  "  I 
will  remove  iniquity,"  is  the  fruit  of  Christ's  coming  to  the  world,  and  of  His  glory 
as  Mediator.  (2)  Sin  is  pardoned  and  removed  only  by  the  virtue  and  merit  of 
Christ's  one  sacrifice,  only  once  offered,  and  not  to  be  repeated  on  any  pretext 
whatever ;  for,  iniquity  is  removed  "  in  one  day."  (3)  Christ's  own  peculiar 
and  given  people  of  the  Father,  are  they  upon  whom  the  privilege  of  pardon  and 
eanctification  is  conferred,  and  on  whose  behalf  Christ  offered  up  Himself  to 
procvire  these  benefits,  for  it  is  the  iniquity  "  of  that  land  "  (a  type  of  the  elect 
Church)  that  is  removed.  ( Oeorge  Hutchison. )  Behold,  I  will  engrave  the  graving 
thereof,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. — No  engraving  without  wound  : — That  is,  of 
the  stone,  upon  which  were  to  be  seven  eyes,  and  which  intends  the  Messiah,  the 
foundation  laid  in  Zion.  To  engrave  is  to  pierce  and  cut.  When  He  became  a 
Man  of  Sorrows,  when  He  said,  "  Reproach  hath  broken  My  heart,"  then  was  this 
Scriptvu'e  fulfilled.  As  there  is  no  engraving  without  wounding,  so  to  engrave  is 
to  embellish  and  beautify.  And  He  was  made  perfect  through  suffering.  The 
richest  display  of  His  graces  ;  the  acquirement  of  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit ; 
the  dominion  He  exercises  in  our  nature  ;  the  prerogative  of  judging  the  world 
in  righteousness  ;  and  the  praises  He  will  inhabit  through  eternal  ages — all  these 
resulted  from  His  sufferings.  "  Because  He  was  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  Cross,  therefore  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name 
above  every  name."  To  a  person  imacquainted  with  the  process,  the  pruning  of 
the  tree  ;  the  cleaving  of  the  ground  with  the  ploughshare  ;  the  operation  of  the 
chisel  on  the  stone  would  look  like  an  effort  to  injure  or  destroy.  But  look  at 
the  thing  afterwards.  Behold  the  vine  adorned  with  purple  clusters.  Survey 
the  field,  yielding  the  blade,  the  ear,  the  full  com  in  the  ear.  Examine  the  carved 
work,  when  the  sculptor  has  achieved  his  design,  and  fixed  it  in  its  proper  place  ! 
Christians  are  sometimes  perplexed  and  discouraged  because  of  their  trials. 
They  know  not  what  God  is  doing  with  them.  They  fear  He  is  angry,  and  going 
to  crush  and  destroy.  But  they  are  His  workmanslup.  He  is  preparing  them  for 
their  destination  in  the  temple  of  His  grace.  These  trials  are  applied  to  qualify 
and  advance  them.  They  will  all  perfect  that  which  concemeth  them.  Howard 
was  taken  by  the  enemy  and  confined  in  prison.  There  he  learned  the  heart 
of  a  captive.  "  It  is  good  for  me,"  says  David,  "  that  I  have  been  aflSicted." 
{WiUiam  Jay.) 

Ver.  10.  Under  the  vine  and  under  the  fig-tree. — Messiah's  times : — Thus 
inspiration  characterises  the  reign  of  the  Messiah.  It  was  to  be  distinguished 
by  three  things.  1.  Enjoyment.  The  very  image  is  delightfxil.  Vines  and  fig- 
trees  were  much  prized  in  the  East.  They  afforded  at  once  delightful  fruit  for  the 
taste,  and  refresMng  shade  from  the  heat.  Persons  therefore  regaled  themselves 
under  their  branches  and  leaves, — and  thus  the  expression  in  time  came  to  signify 
happiness.  And  blessed  are  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound.  Wherever 
the  Gospel  came  it  was  received  as  good  news,  glad  tidings,  and  it  was  said  of  the 
receivers,  that  they  walked  not  only  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  but  in  the  comforts 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  Liberty.  Slaves  and  captives  did  not  sit  under  their  vines 
and  fig-trees.  Nor  did  proprietors  in  time  of  war.  They  were  liable  to  the  sur- 
prises of  the  enemy.  Then  they  disappeared  from  these  loved,  but  no  longer  safe, 
retreats.  In  Messiah's  days  "  Israel  shall  be  saved,  and  Judah  shall  dwell  securely." 
What  have  His  subjects  to  fear  ?     Their  souls  shall  dwell  at  ease.     They  are  free 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

indeed.  They  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God.  3.  Benevolence.  "  Ye  shall  caU 
every  man  his  neighbour  under  the  vine,  and  under  the  fig-tree."  There  is  nothing 
like  selfishness  here.  They  are  anxious  that  others  should  partake  of  their  privileges. 
There  is  no  envy  here ;  there  is  no  room  for  it.  Here  is  enough  for  all.  If  we  are 
Christians  indeed,  our  happiness,  instead  of  being  impaired  by  the  experience  of 
others,  will  be  increased  by  it.  Let  me  invite  all  that  come  within  my  reach  to 
that  mercy  which  I  have  found.  ( William  Jay. )  The  times  of  Gospel  peace : — A 
second  benefit  is  the  taking  away  of  all  trouble,  and  the  fear  of  trouble,  which  sin 
procures  ;  and  the  giving  of  peace,  represented  by  peoples  walking  abroad,  and 
daring,  in  the  open  fields  under  shades,  to  invite  and  caU  one  another  to  feasts  and 
enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  peace  ;  which  promise  is  spiritually  performed  to  all 
the  elect  when  they  are  assured  that  God  is  at  peace  with  them  ;  and  is  sometimes 
outwardly  performed  to  the  Church,  when  it  is  for  her  good,  beside  what  Israel 
may  expect  when  they  shall  tiu:n  to  Christ.  Doctrine — I.  True  and  sound  peace 
comes  only  from  Christ,  and  from  the  sense  of  the  pardon  of  sin  through  His  blood, 
which  those  who  have  fled  to  Christ  ought  to  take  as  their  allowance  to  rest  con- 
fidently upon,  whatever  danger  there  be,  and  feed  upon  as  the  choicest  of  dainties 
and  feasts.  2.  As  outward  peace  and  tranquillity  in  the  visible  Church  and  nation, 
where  it  is  a  great  mercy  if  it  be  well  improven  ;  so  it  shall  not  be  wanting  when 
it  is  for  her  good  :  for  this  promise  is  put  in  her  charter  for  that  also,  and  left  in 
the  hand  of  her  wise  and  tender  Guide,  to  dispense  it  as  He  sees  may  be  for  her  profit, 
being  the  "  Lord  of  Hosts,"  to  make  it  forthcoming  for  her  when  He  pleaseth. 
3.  As  it  is  a  token  of  a  blessed  and  thorough  peace,  when  with  outward  and 
foreign  enemies  God  removes  intestine  dissensions ;  and  as  amity  among 
the  inhabitants  of  a  nation,  especially  in  the  Church,  is  a  blessing  and  favour 
in  its  own  kind  ;  so  true,  spiritual  peace  ought  to  be  entertained  and  im- 
proved by  mutual  godly  society,  and  communication  of  conditions  and 
experiences  for  common  edification.  This  is  signified  to  us  in  that  peace, 
whether  inward  or  outward,  is  described  by  "  calling  every  man  his  neighbour," 
living  in  amity,  and  inviting  to  mutual  feasts  and  banquets.  (George  Hutcheson.) 
The  stone  with  seven  eyes: — The  prophet  Zechariah,  for  the  length  of  his  piophecy, 
has  rather  more  than  a  usual  number  of  allusions  to  Christ.  Among  these  is  the 
one  contained  in  the  passage  before  us.  The  language  is  metaphorical,  and  derived 
from  the  aits  of  architecture  and  engraving.  I.  The  stone  \\ith  seven  byes. 
It  is  generally  allowed  that  this  refers  directly  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Some, 
however,  understand  it  of  Zerubbabel.  But  if  it  be  allowed  to  lefer  to  him  primarily, 
yet  only  as  a  type  of  Christ ;  for  it  is  the  same  person  who  is  styled  "  the  Branch  " 
in  the  preceding  verse,  in  chapter  vi.  12,  and  in  other  places  where  Christ  is  un- 
doubtedly intended.  1.  There  are  numerous  allusions  to  Clirist  under  the  metaphor 
of  a  stone  (Exod.  xvii.  6  ;  1  Cor.  x.  4;  Psa.  cxviii.  22;  Matt.  xxi.  42  ;  Eph.  ii.  20). 
2.  Upon  this  stone  were  to  be  seven  eyes.  Seven  appears  to  have  been  a  sacred 
number  among  the  Jews,  and  one  denoting  perfection.  Hence  we  read  of  the 
"  seven  golden  candlesticks  " — "  the  Lamb  with  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes  " 
— the  "  seven  Spirits  of  God  " — the  "  book  with  seven  seals  " — the  "  seven 
lamps" — the  "seven  phials" — and  here,  of  the  "stone  with  seven  eyes." 
Eyes  are  explained  by  commentators  to  signify  intelligence  and  wisdom.  Eyes 
of  the  liord  are  to  be  understood  of  His  omniscience.  "  The  ways  of  man  are 
before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  He  pondereth  all  his  goings  "  (Prov.  v.  21).  "  The 
eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good  "  (chap.  xv.  3). 
"  He  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  He  not  see  ? "  (Psa.  xciv.  9).  Now,  as  seven  in 
the  Scriptures  denotes  perfection,  we  are  doubtless,  by  the  expression  in  this  place, 
to  understand  that  the  attributes  or  qualities  signified  by  it  are  infinitely  perfect, 
forasmuch  as  they  are  ascribed  to  God.  It  is  then,  at  least,  an  exhibition  of  one 
of  the  attributes  "of  the  infinite  Jehovah.  Let  this  be  borne  in  mind,  for  we  shall 
soon  see  Jesus  Christ  possessing  this  attribute.  3.  By  these  eyes  "  being  upon  this 
Btone  "  some  suppose  that  we  arc  to  understand  the  e>es  of  the  Father  beholding 
the  Son.  But  may  we  not  rather  suppose  that  the  seven  eyes  being  upon  the 
stone  were  designed  to  signify  that  the  perfections  represented  by  them  should  be 
imparted  to  and  become  identified  with  it  ?  And  may  not  this  be  what  is  intended 
by  the  expression,  "I  will  engrave  the  graving  thereof,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts"  ? 
And  may  we  not.  then,  suppose  that  this  is  an  exhibition,  by  a  most  beautiful  figure, 
of  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  The  engraver  was  "  the  Lord  of 
hosts."  And  says  John,  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  anions  us  (and 
■we  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father),  full  of  grace 


CHAP,  m.]  ZECHARIAH.  65 

and  truth  "  (John  i.  14).  The  things  engraved  on  this  stone  were  the  infinite  per- 
fections of  the  Godhead.  II.  The  work  to  be  ACcoMrusnED.  "  I  will  remove 
the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one  day."  The  whole  stupendous  work  of  human  re- 
demption centres  in  one  single  point ; — it  was  effected  by  one  single  act,  and  that 
act  the  work  of  one  single  day.  The  one  act  which  secures  it  is  the  sacrificial  offering 
of  Himself.  The  day  on  which  it  was  effected  was  the  day  on  which  Christ  suffered, 
"  the  just  for  the  unjust."  VlTiatever,  therefore,  was  said  by  way  of  promise, 
whatever  was  revealed  by  prophecy,  or  whatever  was  exhibited  by  the  rites  of  the 
Jewish  economy,  all  pointed  to  and  centred  in  the  death  of  Christ.  Ihe  whole 
scheme  of  human  redemption  was  consummated  by  the  one  offering  of  Christ 
upon  the  Cross  !  0  my  soul,  what  a  day  of  interest  was  that  to  the  world  !  We 
have  heard  of  a  day  on  which  a  world  was  involved  in  the  waters  of  a  flood.  We 
have  heard  of  a  day  on  which  whole  cities  were  reduced  to  heaps  of  smoking  ruins. 
We  have  heard  of  a  day  on  which  one  decisive  battle  determined  the  fate  of  empires  ; 
yea,  and  we  have  heard  of  a  day  on  which  the  tyrannical  yoke  of  foreign  usurpation 
was  broken,  and  the  sweet  sound  of  liberty  heard  throughout  this  vast  republic. 
But  what  are  all  these  in  comparison  of  that  day  when  all  heaven,  in  breathless 
silence,  paused  and,  with  an  interest  commensurate  with  the  importance  of  the 
work,  beheld  the  achievement  of  "  the  Shepherd,  the  Stone  of  Israel "  ?  III.  The 
EFFECTS  ASTHCH  FOLLOW.  "  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  shall  ye  call  every 
man  his  neighbour  under  the  vine  and  under  the  fig-tree."  Here  is,  then — 1.  A  spirit 
of  general  benevolence.  This  is  a  legitimate  fruit,  or  one  of  the  effects  of  the  great 
atonement  applied  to  the  heart  of  man.  The  first  step  towards  the  restoration 
of  society  to  proper  principles  of  feeling  and  action  is  to  remove  that  principle 
which  first  disorganised  society,  and  which  still  promotes  enmity  and  separation 
between  man  and  man.  As  love  is  the  ruling  principle  of  the  soul,  all  sordid  views 
and  selfish  interests  are  excluded  fiom  the  heart  of  the  Christian,  and  he  looks 
abroad  upon  all  mankind  with  a  heart  flowing  with  benevolence.  He  rejoices 
in  the  prosperity  of  the  prosperous,  and  tenderly  sympathises  with  those  who  are 
in  adversity.  In  a  word,  he  has  learned  to  call  every  man  his  neighbour.  But 
wherever  this  principle  is  foxmd  in  the  heart  it  carmot  remain  inactive.  Hence — 
2.  A  spirit  of  association.  It  is  not  enough  for  the  true  Christian  that  he  has 
peace,  order,  and  happiness  within  the  sanctuary  of  his  own  breast,  nor  yet  that 
he  feels  a  spirit  of  general  benevolence  towards  all  mankind.  The  language  of 
his  heart  is,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  me  ?  " 
The  principle  of  which  he  is  possessed,  and  by  which  he  is  actuated,  ever  prompts 
him  to  "  every  good  word  and  work."  Eating  together  was  by  the  ancients 
considcied  a  mark  of  peculiar  respect.  It  was  a  ceremony  used  not  only  as  a 
testimony  of  mutual  friendship,  but  also  for  the  confirmation  of  covenants,  in 
the  transaction  of  civU  and  religious  affairs.  The  place  chosen  and  sanctioned 
by  custom  for  these  prrrposes  was  the  shade  of  the  vine  and  of  the  fig-tree.  The 
fruit  of  these  was  much  depended  upon  both  for  nourishment  and  comfort. 
Beneath  their  shade,  therefore,  was  an  appropriate  place  for  the  interchange  of 
friendsliips,  and  especially  for  the  purpose  of  devotion.  When,  therefore,  any- 
one invited  his  neighbour  under  the  vine  and  under  the  fig-tree,  it  was  a  testimony 
of  his  love,  and  the  expression  of  a  desire  that  his  neighbour  might  with  him  par- 
take of  all  the  temporal  and  spiritual  blessings  of  which  he  himself  was  a  partaker. 
But  viewing  these  expressions  in  their  more  immediate  reference  to  the  effects  of 
the  great  atonement,  they  very  clearly  designate  the  spirit  by  which  every  true 
Christian  is  actuated  towards  marrkind.  It  was  this  spirit,  in  all  its  infinite  per- 
fection and  fulness,  which  moved  the  Father  to  "give  His  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  believeth  on  Him  might  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  It  was 
the  same  love  that  moved  the  Son  to  "  give  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might  redeem 
us  from  all  iniquity,"  and  that  He  might "  break  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition  " 
which  separated  man  from  God,  and  man  from  man  ;  "  and  in  himself  of  twain 
to  make  one  new  man,  so  making  peace."  It  is  the  existence  and  operation 
of  this  spirit,  in  the  hearts  of  the  ministers  of  Christ,  which  stimulates  them 
to  "  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature  " — to  invite 
and  entreat  sirmers  to  be  "  reconciled  to  God."  It  is  the  existence  and 
operation  of  this  spirit  which  leads  Christians  to  unite  their  efforts  and  put 
forth  their  energies  in  the  cause  of  man.  Improvement — 1.  That  the  Christian 
hath  a  strong  formdation  for  his  faith.  In  the  first  part  of  this  subject 
we  have  seen  that  Jesus  Christ,  by  both  prophets  and  apostles,  is  laid 
in  Zion  for  a  "  sure  foundation."     He  therefore,  who  believes  in  Him  witti  a 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tv. ' 

heart  \into  righteousness,  shall  not  be  confounded.  2.  We  learn  from  this  subject 
the  great  privilege  of  the  children  of  God.  Whatever  obstacles  lay  in  the  way 
of  our  salvation,  on  account  of  original  sin,  was  "  removed  in  one  day  "  by  the 
death  of  Christ.  3.  Finally,  we  learn  from  this  subject  the  duty  of  every  Chris- 
tian. Was  it  said  that  in  the  day  when  iniquity  should  be  removed  "  every  " 
(Christian) "  man  should  call  his  neighbour  under  the  vine  and  under  the  fig-tree  '  T 
This  prophecy,  then,  clearly  points  out  the  duty  of  every  lover  of  Christ.  Think 
not  that  this  duty  belongs  exclusively  to  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel.  {Noah  Levings.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

VxBS.  I-I4.  Behold  a  candlestick  all  of  gold. — The  candelahrum  and  olive- 
trees  : — That  by  the  candelabrum  was  symbolised  the  Israelitish  community, 
the  people  of  the  theocracy,  may  be  regarded  as  generally  conceded.  But  Israel 
was  itself  a  symbol  and  type  ;  it  was  the  visible  manifestation  of  that  invisible 
spiritual  community,  the  Chturch  of  the  living  God,  which  embraces  the  faithful 
of  all  ages  and  places.  But  the  hght  which  the  Church  possesses  is  not  from 
herself  ;  it  is  light  commiinicated  and  sustained  by  influences  from  above.  Hence 
in  the  vision  the  lamps  were  supplied  with  oil,  not  by  human  ministration,  but 
through  channels  and  pipes  from  the  olive-trees  which  stood  beside  and  were 
over  the  candelabrum.  Oil  is  the  proper  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence. 
This  is  the  oil  by  which  the  Church  is  sustained,  is  made  to  shine,  and  is  enabled 
to  accomplish  the  work  she  has  to  do  in  the  world.  Apart  from  the  Divine  Spirit 
the  Church  is  dark  and  cold  and  feeble  ;  but  through  the  visitation  of  the  Spirit 
she  is  animated  and  invigorated,  becomes  luminous  and  glorious,  and  is  crowned 
with  success  as  she  labours  to  erect  God's  temple  on  earth.  They  were  taught 
by  this  vision  not  to  be  discouraged,  for  it  was  not  by  human  might  or  power 
that  the  work  was  to  be  done,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  Through  His  grace 
the  light  should  be  sustained  in  them ;  their  hands  should  be  strengthened  for 
their  work ;  and  ere  long  they  should  see  the  consummation  of  that  which  had 
been  so  auspiciously  begun.  God  sustains  His  Church  by  His  grace.  But  this 
grace  comes  to  men  through  certain  appointed  media.  This  was  symbolised  in 
the  vision  by  the  fruit-bearing  branches  of  the  olive-trees,  and  by  the  conduits 
and  pipes  through  which  the  oil  was  conveyed  to  the  lamps.  The  branches 
represented  the  sacerdotal  and  civil  authorities  in  Israel,  {W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.) 
Man  as  a  student  of  the  Divine  revelation  and  a  doer  of  Divine  work  : — I.  As  a 
STUDENT  or  THE  DiviNB  KEVELATiONS.  "  I  have  lookcd,  and  behold  a  candle- 
stick all  of  gold,"  &o.  The  ideal  Church  is  aU  this.  The  candlestick  may,  I 
think,  fairly  represent  the  Bible,  or  God's  special  revelation  to  man :  that  ia 
golden,  that  is  luminous,  that  is  supernatiu-ally  supplied  with  the  oil  of  inspiration. 
In  fact,  in  the  passage  the  interpreting  angel  designates  this  candlestick,  not  as 
the  Church,  but  as  the  "  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zerubbabel."  I  make  two  remarks 
concerning  this  revelation — 1.  It  has  in  it  sufficient  to  excite  the  inquiry  of  man 
as  a  student.  "  What  are  these,  my  lord  ?  "  What  wonderful  things  are  in  this 
Bible  !  2.  It  has  an  Interpreter  that  can  satisfy  man  as  a  student.  The  angel 
to  whom  the  prophet  directed  his  inquiry  promptly  answered.  The  prophet 
here  displays  two  of  the  leading  attributes  of  a  genuine  student  of  the  Divine — 
(1)  Inquisitiveness.  He  inquires  ;  and  because  he  inquires  he  receives  an  answer. 
The  Bible  is  an  unmeaning  book  to  the  great  mass  of  mankind,  because  they  do 
not  inquire  into  its  significance.  Truth  is  only  got  by  genuine  inquiry.  (2)  Ingenu- 
ousness. The  first  reply  of  the  interpreting  angel  to  the  prophet  was,  "  Knowest 
thou  not  what  these  things  mean  ?  '  and  he  said,  "  No,  my  lord."  At  once  he 
confesses  his  ignorance.  The  man  who  develops  these  two  attributes  in  relation 
to  God's  Word  has  a  Divine  Interpreter  at  his  side,  namely,  the  Spirit  of  God, 
who  will  lead  us  into  all  knowledge.  This  passage  sets  man  before  us — II.  As  a 
DOBB  OF  THE  DiVTNB  WILL.  Man  has  not  only  to  study,  but  to  work  ;  not  only 
to  get  Divine  ideas,  but  to  work  them  out.  The  work  of  the  prophet  was  to 
convey  a  message  from  God  to  Zerubbabel,  and  the  message  he  conveyed  was  a 
message  to  work.  Man  is  to  be  a  "  Worker  together  "  with  God.  I  ofifer  two 
remarks  concerning  man  as  a  worker  out  of  the  Divine  wilL     1.  That  though  his 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHAEIAH.  67 

difficulties  may  appear  great,  his  resources  are  infinite.  Zerubbabel,  in  rebuilding 
the  temple,  had  enormous  difficulties.  Those  difficulties  hovered  before  him  as 
mountains.  But  great  as  they  were,  he  was  assured  that  he  had  resources  more 
than  equal  to  the  task.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts."  2.  That  though  his  efforts  may  seem  feeble,  his  success 
will  be  inevitable.  (1)  The  feebleness  of  human  efforts  is  here  implied,  (a)  It  is 
common  to  despise  small  things.  (6)  It  is  fooUsh  to  despise  small  things.  All 
great  things  were  small  in  their  beginnings,  (c)  It  is  contemptible  to  despise 
small  things.  Truly  great  souls  never  do  so.  (2)  The  success  of  feeble  efforts  is 
here  guaranteed.  The  temple  should  certainly  be  completed.  So  it  will  be  with 
every  true  work  to  which  a  true  man  puts  his  hand  in  the  name  of  Gk)d.  It  will 
be  finished;  there  will  be  no  failures,  success  is  inevitable.  {Homilist.)  Tht 
golden  candlestick : — 1.  The  Church  of  God  is  composed  of  the  most  precious 
human  material  in  the  world.  The  man  who  walks  day  by  day  with  the  "  King 
Eternal,  Immortal  and  Invisible,"  is  of  far  more  value  to  the  world,  and  is  regarded 
by  God  as  of  more  worth,  than  the  man  of  the  greatest  intellectual  attainments. 
2.  The  Church  is  a  light-giver,  because  its  power  to  give  light  is  sustained  from  a 
source  outside  itself.  The  life  of  the  Church  of  God  is  not  self-sustaining.  God 
is  the  sustaining  power  by  which  the  Church  is  kept  alive,  and  only  as  she  is 
supplied  from  Him  with  the  holy  oil  of  the  Divine  Spirit  can  she  give  out  that 
light  which  is  the  life  of  men.  The  most  perfect  machinery  without  this  life- 
sustaining  force  is  useless  to  accomplish  the  Divine  purpose  of  making  the  Church 
a  blessing  to  the  world.  This  mysterious  living  principle  is  due  to  a  life  at  the 
back  of  all  that  is  apprehended  by  the  senses,  a  life  which  some  call  "  the  efficient 
cause,"  but  which  we  think  it  more  reasonable  to  call  the  "living  God."  3.  Be- 
cause of  this  all-sufficient  sovu-ce  of  hfe  we  are  assured  that  small  beginnings 
in  the  kingdom  of  God  will  issue  in  great  results.  There  is  no  such  thing  in 
nature  as  instantaneous  result.  The  blade  comes  before  the  ear.  The  law  of  the 
spiritual  kingdom  is  to  begin  with  the  small  and  end  with  the  great.  Connection 
with  the  source  of  life  ensxires  growth  unto  perfection.  {Outlines  by  a  London 
Minister.)  The  vision  of  the  candlestick  : — 1.  The  temple  here  represents  the 
Church  to  be  enlightened  by  Christ,  she  being  in  herself  but  dark,  and  void  of 
light  and  comfort,  till  He  come  and  appear  in  her,  and  for  her,  and  make  her 
light.  2.  The  ministry  appointed  of  Christ  for  the  direction,  edification,  and 
comfort  of  the  Church  are  here  represented  by  the  candlestick,  who  should  be 
pure,  that  they  may  be  precious  in  His  sight  as  gold,  and  who  ought  to  shine  by 
purity  and  hohness  of  life,  and  be  instrumental  in  making  the  Church  a  shining 
light  in  a  dark  world.  3.  The  bowl  upon  the  top  of  the  candlestick  which  immedi- 
ately receives  the  oil  doth  fitly  represent  Christ  as  Mediator,  the  head  and  store- 
house of  the  Church,  to  whom  is  intrusted  all  fulness  of  gifts  and  graces  for  the 
Chmrch's  behoof.  4.  The  variety  and  sufficiency  of  gifts  communicate  by  Christ, 
for  the  good  and  salvation  of  the  Church  is  represented  by  seven  lamps,  aU  tending 
to  one  common  end  of  burning  and  shining.  5.  The  way  of  deriving  grace  from 
Christ  to  His  servants,  by  ordained  and  sanctified  means,  especially  by  His 
covenant;  our  dependence,  and  the  bands  of  communion  betwixt  ffim  and  Hia 
people,  is  represented  by  seven  pipes  going  betwixt  the  bowl  and  the  lamps. 
{George  Hutcheson.)  The  candlestick  : — In  order  to  make  God's  meaning  clearer 
the  prophet  was  granted  the  vision  of  the  candlestick  (lampstand),  the  gist  of 
which  was  that  the  wick,  though  necessary  to  the  light,  played  a  very  inconsider- 
able part  in  its  production.  It  had  no  illuminating  power  ;  it  could  only  smoke, 
and  char,  and  smoulder.  At  the  best  it  could  only  be  a  medium  between  the 
oil  in  the  cistern  and  the  fire  that  burnt  on  its  serried  edge.  Thus  Zerubbabel 
might  be  weak  and  flexible  as  a  wick,  but  none  of  his  deficiencies  could  hinder 
him  finishing  the  work  to  which  he  had  been  called,  if  only  his  spirit  was  kindled 
with  the  Divine  fire,  and  fed  continually  by  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  candlestick  was  evidently  fashioned  on  the  model  of  that  in  the 
temple,  the  shape  of  which  is  still  preserved  to  us  on  the  Arch  of  Titus.  According 
to  the  R.V.,  there  were  seven  pipes  to  each  lamp.  Nor  was  this  all.  On  either 
side  of  this  massive  candlestick  stood  an  olive-tree,  from  the  heart  of  which,  by  a 
golden  pipe,  the  oil  was  continually  being  poured  into  the  reservoir  ;  so  that, 
even  though  it  might  be  limited  in  its  containing  power,  there  could  be  no  failure 
in  its  ability  to  meet  the  incessant  demands  of  the  lamps.  So  far  as  the  Jews 
were  concerned,  the  meaning  of  the  vision  was  obvious.  They  were  represented 
in  the  candlestick,  of  which  the  many  lamps  and  the  precious  metal  of  its  composi- 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

lion  set  forth  their  perfection  and  preciousness  in  the  thought  of  God.  Their 
function  was  to  shed  the  light  of  His  knowledge  on  the  world,  as  it  lay  under  the 
power  of  darkness ;  whilst,  to  aid  them  in  fulfilling  this  mission,  Divine  supplies 
would  be  forthcoming  from  a  celestial  and  living  source,  and  brought  to  them 
through  the  golden  pipes,  of  which  one  represented  Joshua  the  priest,  and  the 
other  Zerubbabel  the  prince.  These  men,  therefore,  were  but  mediums  for  Divine 
communications.  Their  sufficiency  was  not  of  themselves,  but  of  God.  The  mission 
of  If^rael  would  be  realised,  not  by  them,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God  through  them. 
They  might  seem  altogether  helpless  and  inadequate  ;  but  a  living  fountain  of  oil 
was  prepared  to  furnish  them  with  inexhaustible  supplies     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  6.  Not  by  might,  nor  toy  power. — The  Word  of  the  Lord  to  Zerubbabel: — 
Dwell  upon  the  very  remarkable  interpretation  of  the  vision  given  by  God  Himself 
in  the  words  of  the  text.     I.  The  false  grounds  of  confidekce  which  abe  to 
BE  REJECTED.     Summed  up  in  the  words   "  might  and  power,"   including  all 
earthly  means  and  human  instrumentality.     We  must  beware  of  substituting 
temporal  means  and  mortal  instruments  for  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  or  the  glory 
of  God.     Nothing  short  of  the  almighty  power  of  God  can  open  the  blind  tyes 
or  awaken  the  dead  affections  of  the  natural  man  to  see  and  embrace  the  Gospel. 
If  we  may  not  trust  to  the  strength  of  reason,  or  the  force  of  truth,  neither  may 
we  to  the  powers  of  oratory.      TTie  gifts  of  oratory  or  eloquence  are  lovely  and 
excellent,  but  trusted  in,  or  gloried  in,  they  become  snares  and  stumbling-blocks, 
drawing  away  the  heart  and  affections  from  Christ,  and  converting  our  acts  of 
worship  into  an  idolatrous  service.     Every  Christian,  too,  has  a  sphere  of  influence 
with  which  to  serve  and  honour  God,  and  to  help  and  strengthen  others.     But 
this  must  not  be  rested  in.     Religion  must  be  a  personal  concern,  a  deed  of  con- 
tract, a  life  of  communion  between  the  soul  and  God.     And  there  are  those  who 
imagine  that  they  love  the  truth  because  they  love  some  of  those  who  profess  it. 
The  power  of  affection  on  the  minds  of  such  persons  is  almost  unbounded.     But 
a  religion  based  on  such  grounds  is  not  to  be  trusted.     Wlien  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  not  the  Author  of  the  work  it  cannot  stand  trial,  even  in  this  world ;  it  can 
never  issue  in  the  salvation  of  the  soul.     II.  The  only  source  of  spiritual 
prosperity.     The  work  and  efficiency  of  the  Spirit  of  God.     In  three  things 
this  work  is  distinguished.     1.  In  transforming  the  character.     2.  In  overcoming 
the  world.     3.  In  glorifying  the  grace  of  God.     (J.  31.  Wilde,  B.A.)        Force — 
spiritiud  and  material : — We  have  need  to  study  the  Christian  dynamics.     Good 
arrangements,  good  instructions,  good  intentions,  are  all  well ;  but  what  can 
they  avail  without  a  sufficient,  continuous  force  ?     Let  us  take  a  lesson  from  the 
angel  who  spoke  to  the  prophet.     Zechariah's  object  was  to  instruct  the  Jews 
on  their  return  from  captivity,  and  to  cheer  them  on  in  the  work  of  rebuilding 
the  temple.     They  were  not  to  be  appalled  by  obstacles  ever  so  formidable,  for 
the  work  was  of  God,  and  God  was  able  to  remove  mountains  of  difficulty  ourt 
of  the  way.    No  adversary  would  be  able  to  injure  them.     It  is  easy  to  pass  from 
this  to  New  Testament  teaching.     The  foundation  of  the  Church  has  been  laid; 
it  grows  up  slowly  but  surely,  a  Holy  Temple  in  the  Lord.     The  work  proceeds 
slowly  because  it  is  arduous  in  its  o\\-n  nature,  obstructed  by  many  adversaries. 
Zerubbabel's  temple  was  finished  in  about  twenty  years  ;  but  a  building  which 
is  spiritual  needs  much  more  time  than  one  which  is  constructed  of  wood  and  stone. 
The  affections  and  dispositions  of  men  cannot  be  shaped  as  material  things  may 
be ;  and  just  because  the  Church  is  a  structure  so  noble,  a  habitation  of  God  in 
the  Spirit,  its  progress  is  difficult,  and  in  comparison  with  the  works  of  man  it  is 
slow.     It  has  also  been  hindered  by  the  mistakes  and  dissensions  of  the  builders  ; 
but  in  the  end  the  same  Prince  who  laid  its  foundations  will  certainly  fuiish  it. 
He  will  say,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  in  His  completed  Church  He  will  fill  the  whole 
earth  with  His  glory.     We  speak  of  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel  and  the  con- 
struction of  the  Church:    the  one  movement  is  diffusive,  the  other  formative; 
both  agree  in  one,  and  both  are  of  the  Lord.     The  propagation  of  the  Gospel  is 
not  only  for,  but  also  by,  Christ.     He  publishes  the  testimony  through  all  the 
earth,  and  saves  sinners.     The  construction  of  the  Church  is  also  by  Christ  from 
first  to  last,  and  the  builders,  from  Paul  and  Apollos  downwards,  are  nothing 
without  Him.     And  oh  !  with  what  patience  and  with  what  wisdom  does  He 
preside  over  His  vast  and  complex  work.     Christ  is  always  building  His  people 
together,  healing,  reconciling,  moulding,  blending,  compacting  them  together  as 
living  stones  that  form  the  One  Temple  of  the  One  Holy  Ghost.     We  have  said 


CHAF.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  69 

that  there  is  much  opposition  to  this  work.  So  it  has  always  been,  and  especially 
at  critical  emergencies,  mountains  have  threatened  to  fall  upon  and  to  destroy 
the  work  of  God.  Moses  went  down  to  Egypt  to  redeem  Israel ;  then  was  the 
power  of  Pharaoh  as  a  great  mountain  against  him.  And  as  the  people  escaped 
the  mountain  seemed  to  come  nearer,  the  Egyptian  army  pursued  and  threatened 
to  destroy  them.  Hezekiah  revived  religion  in  Judah ;  then  came  the  power 
of  Assyria,  and  as  a  great  mountain  impended  over  Jerusalem.  The  heathen 
army  invested  the  city,  and  Hezekiah  had  no  power  of  resistance,  and  he  spread 
the  matter  before  the  Lord,  and  in  one  night  the  angel  of  death  removed  the 
mountain  and  laid  the  Assyrian  host  still  and  dead.  The  Messiah  came,  not  to 
condemn  but  to  save  the  world ;  then  the  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and 
the  rulers  took  counsel  together  against  the  Lord  and  His  anointed.  Herod, 
Caiaphas,  Pilate,  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  priests,  elders,  and  populace  all  joined 
in  one  desperate  resistance.  The  acts  of  the  Apostles  were  all  performed,  in  spite 
of  mountains  of  obstruction,  by  the  power  from  on  high  that  rested  upon  them. 
So  they  carried  the  Gospel  to  Europe,  and  planted  it  in  Macedonia  and  Greece 
and  Italy,  and  long  afterwards  missionaries  of  apostolic  spirit  bore  it  onward 
through  the  dense  forests  of  Helvetia,  Gaul,  and  Germany,  and  penetrated  to 
the  distant  shores  of  Britain.  The  rage  of  the  heathen  threatened  to  devour 
them,  but  the  Lord  stood  with  them,  and  before  His  face  the  mountains  melted 
away.  We  have  great  mountains  against  us  still ;  huge  masses  of  heathenism 
which  resist  our  missions.  The  scepticism  which  becomes  every  day  more  pro- 
nounced. (There  is  something  else  to  do  than  wring  our  hands  and  pour  out 
lamentations  on  the  ear.  Let  us  have  the  faith  that  removes  mountains,  and, 
oppose  and  deride  us  who  may,  let  us  be  of  good  courage  and  build.  In  order  to 
this,  mark  well  what  the  energy  is  which  surmounts  or  removes  obstacles.  Not 
might,  nor  power  of  mortal  man.  It  would  have  been  as  vain  for  the  Jews  of 
Zerubbabel  to  cope  with  the  power  of  Darius,  or  for  the  Apostles  and  early 
Christians  to  grapple  with  the  power  of  the  Roman  emperor,  or  for  a  few  labourers 
to  attack  a  mountain  in  the  Alps  with  their  spades  and  try  to  reduce  it  to  a  plain. 
And  equally  impossible  it  is  for  us  to  remove  the  more  intellectual  or  spiritual 
obstructions  in  the  way  of  the  Gospel  by  merely  human  persuasion  and  argument. 
The  removal  of  such  mountains  as  we  encounter  is  a  thing  possible  only  with  God. 
It  was  not  before  Moses,  Hezekiah,  Peter  or  Paul,  Columba  or  Boniface,  Zwingle 
or  Luther,  that  mountains  became  plain,  but  before  Jesus  Clirist.  Zechariah 
had  a  vision  of  the  continuous  supply  of  the  Spirit  as  of  holy  oil  flowing  through 
golden  pipes  from  two  olive-trees  or  branches.  By  this  we  understand  the  kingly 
and  priestly  institutions  which  were  represented  at  the  time  by  Zerubbabel  the 
prince  and  Joshua  the  high  priest.  In  Jesus  Christ,  our  exalted  Saviour,  the 
kingship  and  priesthood  are  united.  He  is  the  Priest  upon  a  throne,  and  from 
the  Father  through  Jesus  Christ  proceeds. to  the  Church  a  constant  supply  of  the 
Spirit.  This  is  the  present  truth  for  us  ;  if  we  believe  it,  why  do  we  give  way  to 
languor  or  discouragement  ?  If  we  have  strength,  learning,  money,  let  us  con- 
secrate it  to  the  Lord.  But,  knowing  that  these  cannot  prevail,  let  us  lift  our 
eyes  to  the  Lord  Himself,  and  cast  our  care  upon  Him.  Let  me  encoiu'age  all 
Christian  teachers  and  preachers  to  persevere  in  this  confidence,  imdaunted  and 
unwearied.  The  holy  Temple  on  the  rock  will  be  finished,  and  the  headstone 
brought  forth  with  shoutings.  Indeed,  no  man  can  ruiderstand  all  the  symmetry 
of  our  Lord's  plan  till  it  is  completed ;  but  then,  it  will  be  seen  how  He  has  over- 
ruled all  the  persecutions,  martyrdoms,  and  controversies  for  higher  ends,  and 
has  made  even  the  rending  of  the  outward  frame  of  the  Church  of  God  a  means 
of  preserving  and  purifying  its  inward  life.  What  bursts  of  admiration  when  all 
is  finished  !  What  shouts  of  praise,  grace,  grace  !  No  shout  of  human  names 
or  party  distinctions  will  be  attempted  in  that  bright  day.  All  is  due  to  the 
grace  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Gho.st,  to  whom  be  glory  in 
the  Church.  [D.  Fraser,  D.D.)  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord: — The  message  which 
this  vision  was  uxtended  to  convey  was  an  assurance  of  God's  presence  and  readi- 
ness to  help,  and  of  utter  dependence  on  Him.  The  prophet  was  greatly  puzzled 
by  this  vision.  The  interpretation  was  given  in  such  form  as  would  be  likely  to 
make  it  most  effective  for  the  enterprise  in  hand.  I.  Rulers  and  people  must  under- 
stand at  the  outset  that  as  God's  chosen  they  were  utterly  dependent  on  Him.  It 
is  true  for  every  man  in  every  age.  Not  with  a  strong  right  arm  can  we  make 
our  spiritual  livelihood ;  not  with  a  mighty  intellect  can  we  plan  and  execute 
the  purposes  of  a  holy  life.     The  Spirit  of  the  livmg  God  must  quicken,  energise, 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

inspire.  2.  The  vision  was  interpreted  to  mean  that  difficulties  should  not  block 
the  way.  AU  hindrance  shall  disappear.  God  shall  touch  it  with  His  almighty 
hand.  Nothing  is  too  hard  for  Him.  3.  The  vision  gave  assurance  of  the  ultimate 
completion  of  the  temple.  The  work  had  languished  for  years.  But  as  to  the 
final  issue  there  was  no  shadow  of  doubt.  A  day  of  great  things  was  coming,  if 
the  present  did  seem  to  be  a  day  of  small  things.  Remember  that  we  live  in  the 
dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  The  Church  is  the  organism  through  which  the  Spirit 
is  working  towards  the  restitution  of  all  things.  The  Church  is  the  one  great 
power  in  history.  Its  influence  is  inexplicable  on  any  except  supernatural 
groimds.  At  every  point  of  Christian  faith  and  life  we  are  dependent  on  its 
influence.  Our  life  begins  with  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  in  the  new  birth.  Our 
eanctification  is  through  the  Spirit.  A  symmetrical  character  comes  in  no  other 
way.  Our  success  in  Christian  service  is  conditioned  in  the  same  way.  (Z).  J. 
BurreU,  D.D.)  The  need  of  Odd's  Spirit: — This  scene  has  a  natural  application 
to  the  Divine  working  among  men,  and  suggests  the  need  of  God's  Spirit.  The 
human  spirit  should  be  the  temple  of  God.  Its  foundations  are  laid  in  the 
capacities  of  the  soul  made  in  His  image.  Sin  opposes  the  work,  worldliness 
hinders  it.  How  shall  it  be  completed  ?  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by 
My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  I.  We  need  God's  Spirit,  bbcattsk  through 
THE  Spirit  the  Deity  reveals  Himself  most  clearly.  (W  first  necessity  is 
to  know  God.  1.  Some  of  the  Divine  attributes  are  revealed  in  nature.  Wisdom, 
power,  glory  everywhere,  but  not  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible.  Scripture 
declares  that  since  the  foundation  of  the  world  His  invisible  attributes  are  clearly 
seen,  being  imderstood  by  the  things  that  are  made.  Mark  the  reservation, — 
His  attributes,  not  Himself.  He  is  ever  hidden  within  impenetrable  isolation. 
Nature  leaves  us  crying,  "  Show  us  the  Father."  2.  God  was  revealed  in  Christ. 
Because  men  could  never  by  searching  find  out  the  Almighty,  the  Word  which 
was  with  God,  and  was  God,  became  flesh  and  dwelt  amongst  us,  revealing  Him 
even  to  our  senses.  The  incarnation  shows  that,  while  the  Deity  is  an  Infinite 
Spirit  pervading  immensity.  He  is  yet  a  person.  He  has  feeling,  and  thought, 
and  will,  as  we  have.  Taking  to  Himself  a  body  like  ours.  He  manifests  every 
quality  which  makes  earthly  friends  real.  Very  God  was  with  men  in  human 
body  and  human  soul.  3.  God  is  revealed  by  His  Spirit.  When  Jesus  ascended, 
the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  began,  a  closer  and  fuller  Divine  manifestation. 
The  incarnation  was  not  an  immediate  revelation  of  God.  By  the  Holy  Ghost 
God  enters  directly  into  our  spirits  ;  we  know  Him,  commune  with  Him,  without 
any  earthly  faculty  called  in  to  interpret.  Neither  did  the  incarnation  complete 
the  revelation.  The  fullest  manifestation  of  God  to  man  began  at  Pentecost. 
The  office  of  the  Spirit  is  not  to  supersede  the  revelation  through  Christ,  but  to 
disclose  its  meaning  and  apply  its  power.  Nature  shows  God  above  us  ;  Christ 
is  God  with  us  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  is  God  in  us.     II.  We  need  God's  Spirit,  be- 

CAFSB  THROUGH  THE  SPIRIT  THE  MOST  POWERFUL  DlVTNB  INFLUENCE  IS  EXERCISED 

UPON  MEN.  God  does  not  merely  reveal  Himself  to  the  soul.  He  also  acts  upon  it. 
1.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  was  needed  to  write  the  Scriptures.  Holy  men  of 
God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  put  before  their  intellect 
deep  things  which  it  was  quickened  to  apprehend.  Their  affections  were  exalted 
to  delight  in  the  infinite  grace  imveiled  to  them.  Their  conscience  was  purified 
to  behold  and  adore  the  Divine  holiness.  What  they  saw  and  felt  they  were 
moved  to  declare  to  the  world.  It  is  this  supernatural  influence  upon  the  writers 
which  has  given  the  Bible  its  authority  and  power.  By  this  influence  the  Scrip- 
tures are  understood.  Only  He  who  illuminated  the  writer  can  enlighten  the 
reader.  Spiritual  things  are  spiritually  discerned.  Critical  acumen  without 
spiritual  insight  cannot  understand  the  book.  2.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  is 
needed  in  regeneration  and  sanctification.  The  plainest  truths  of  the  character 
of  God  will  not  of  themselves  renew  the  soul.  The  intellect  discerns  them,  the 
heart  feels,  the  conscience  trembles,  the  will  may  struggle  to  obey,  but  all  this 
does  not  give  life.  There  must  bo  added  a  Divine,  a  creative  touch,  which  shall 
send  a  new  energy  into  every  faculty,  thrilling  through  the  will  itself,  and  quicken- 
ing all  to  the  sacred  activities  of  a  regenerated  soul.  This  creative  act  separates 
the  new  life  in  its  feeblest  beginning.s,  at  a  world-wide  distance  from  the  most 
admirable  exhibitions  of  the  old  life.  Wonderful  and  awful  is  the  entrance  of 
G6d  into  the  human  soul.  Under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  the  Spirit  was 
sent  to  exceptional  individuals  for  exceptional  purposes  ;  it  is  the  mission  of  the 
Comforter  to  abide  permanently  in  every  believer,   bringing  him  into  personal 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  61 

union  with  God,  and  making  him  like  God.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  not  dreams 
and  visions,  signs  and  wonders,  but  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness, 
goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance," — healthy  every-day  virtues  that  make 
kind  husbands,  patient  mothers,  dutiful  children,  upright  citizens,  and  pure 
officials.  3.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  is  needed  in  Christian  work.  The  Almighty 
uses  human  agents.  Heathen  abroad  and  unbelievers  at  home  are  to  be  saved 
through  the  efforts  of  Christians.  The  most  powerful  Divine  influence  is  given 
them  to  accomplish  this.  We  do  not  always  realise  that  the  Almighty  is  working 
more  efficiently  in  His  present  manifestation  through  the  Spirit  than  He  has  ever 
wrought  in  any  other  method.  He  who  gives  grace  to  receive  the  truth  also 
gives  grace  to  speak  it.  The  understanding  mind,  the  earnest  heart,  the  wise 
tongue,  these  are  the  gift  of  the  Spirit.  All  the  Christian  power  comes  from  this 
help.  Through  our  study,  our  pleading,  our  prayer  must  breathe  that  holy 
presence  which  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  This  lesson  has  a  special 
promise  to  feeble  churches  and  discouraged  Christians.  It  shows  that  all  human 
opposition  is  of  no  account  in  the  sight  of  God.  He  gives  power  to  the  weak, 
and  grace  to  the  faulty  to  do  His  work.  {Monday  Clvb  Sermons.)  The  might 
of  the  Spirit : — What  is  the  secret  of  the  immense  and  amazing  victory  of  Christi- 
anity ?  It  lies  in  the  out- poured  Spirit  of  Pentecost.  It  was  that  which 
made  the  might  of  weakness  irresistible ;  it  was  that  which  gave  to  the  feeble 
seedling  its  imperishable  vitality.  Nor  is  it  only  that  Christianity  is  still  preached  ; 
it  is  still  no  dead  doctrine,  but  a  living  force  to  those  who  truly  receive  it.  Is 
there  nothing  for  men  who  are  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God  to  do  now  ?  Look  at 
the  universal  worldliness  around  us ;  look  at  the  passionate  Mammon  worship ; 
at  the  reckless  competition  ;  at  the  desecration  of  Sundays  in  the  mere  voluptuous 
wantonness  of  pleasure.  0  Grod,  give  us  saints ;  0  God,  pour  out  the  Spirit 
of  Thy  might !  {Dean  Farrar.)  The  tuorld-conquering  Spirit  : — The  work  of 
the  early  Churches,  and  that  of  the  Churches  of  this  age,  agree  in  principle  and 
purpose.  The  difficulties  and  forms  of  opposition  are  substantially  the  same. 
They  are  more  moral  than  intellectual.  1.  The  prevalent  worldly  spirit.  2.  The 
careless  spirit  manifest  in  another  direction.  There  is  an  intellectual  indiffe  ence 
to  Christianity.  But  the  majority  of  those  who  are  indifferent  to  Christianity 
do  not  lay  claim  to  any  such  difficulties.  They  are  simply  and  utterly  carekss. 
3.  The  sceptical  spirit  that  lifts  its  voice  around  us.  Then  wherein  lies  our  power  ? 
Is  it  in  intellectual  subtleties  of  reasoning  ?  No  intellectual  power  can  touch 
the  root  of  man's  alienation  from  God.  It  lies  in  supernatiu'al  power:  a  power 
which,  springing  from  the  Divine  heart,  lays  hold  of  our  hearts  and  permeates 
them  with  His  own  energy,  infusing  our  intellectual  powers  with  His  own  strength. 
With  increased  supernatural  power — the  power  of  the  Spirit — we  shall  yet  come 
against  the  world  spirit,  the  careless  spirit,  the  sceptical  spirit,  and  cast  them 
down,  and  the  sea  of  everlasting  love  shall  roll  on  until  "  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  {R.  F.  Bracey/)  The 
spiritual  work  of  the  Church: — 1.  It  is  with  the  spiritual  nature  of  man  the  Chiu-ch 
has  to  do.  (1)  Her  purpose  is  not  political.  A  great  and  important  factor  she 
certainly  is  in  all  true  political  progress  ;  but  she  was  not  instituted  to  promote 
either  Republicanism  or  Imperialism.  (2)  Her  purpose  is  not  to  effect  great 
social  and  moral  reforms.  These  reforms  are  certain  results  of  her  progress. 
Wherever  she  becomes  a  power  the  character  of  the  people  is  purified,  the  tone 
of  life  is  raised.  (3)  Her  purpose  is  not  only  to  secure  the  world's  belief  in  her 
creed.  2.  In  man's  spiritual  nature  she  has  to  effect  the  most  radical  changes — 
the  greatest  transformations.  Conversion  must  be  wrought.  There  must  be  a 
change  in  the  spirit's  condition,  the  spirit's  relations,  and  the  spirit's  aspirations. 
The  accomplishment  of  this  work  requues  a  special  power,  a  spiritual  power. 
L  It  cannot  be  done  by  the  might  and  power  of  the  sword.  Or — 2.  By  the 
power  of  law.  "  You  caimot  make  men  moral  by  acts  of  parliament."  Or— 
3.  By  the  might  and  power  of  reason.  Your  premises  may  be  admitted,  your  - 
arguments  conclusive,  and  your  pulpits  distinguished  for  logical  force,  but  men 
may  remain  as  stones,  and  our  churches  as  deserts.  Or — 4.  By  the  might  and 
power  of  sympathy.  Sympathy  can  touch  the  heart  as  no  other  human  force 
can.  But  sympathy  fails  to  convert  and  renew.  The  essential  power  is  in  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  only.  1.  This  Spirit  is  greater  than  the  forces  in  opposi- 
tion. (1)  Greater  than  the  human  spirit  which  has  to  be  won.  (2)  Greater  than 
the  spirit  of  evil,  united  with  the  human  spirit,  that  has  to  be  conquered.  2.  This 
Spirit  infuses  a  new  life.     He  creates.     3.  This  Spirit  effects  the  change  in  perfect 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

barraony  with  man's  freedom.  The  Church  is  in  the  greatest  power  when  she  is 
most  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Filled  with  the  Spirit,  she  can  be  confident 
of  success,  although  her  members  be  few  and  the  opposing  forces  strong.  The 
Church's  truest  friends  are  those  who  are  the  most  spiritual,  and  who  most  earnestly 
seek  the  Spirit's  power  in  her.  (Rombeth.)  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord: — This 
message  of  God  is  addressed  to  Zerubbabel,  as  the  former  was  addressed  to  Joshua. 
In  this  fact  the  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  vi.jon  is  to  be  accounted  for. 
Joshua  represented  the  nation  spiritually,  and  the  nation  had  sinned.  So  the 
message  to  him  is  a  message  of  mercy,  and  forgiveness,  and  promise.  Zerubbabel 
was  the  civil  ruler,  and  represented  the  nation's  might  and  resources  and  means 
of  defence.  So  he  is  bidden  net  to  rely  upon  these,  as  he  was  prone  to  do,  but 
to  rely  upon  God.  Two  thoughts  are  prominent.  I.  The  completed  temple 
WAS  SYMBOLISED.  Zechariah  saw  a  golden  candlestick.  What  did  it  mean  ? 
The  candlestick  which  in  old  time  had  been  made  by  Moses  and  set  up  in  the 
tabernacle,  and  which  afterwards  was  removed  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  had 
been  removed  out  of  its  place  because  of  the  infidelities  and  sins  of  the  people. 
There  was  no  tabernacle  now  where  God  dwelt,  no  temple  with  its  mercy-seat 
and  golden  candlestick.  But  there  it  stood  in  its  perfect  and  incomparable 
beauty  before  the  eyes  of  the  prophet  as  the  symbol  of  a  restored  temple,  with  its 
lamp  and  altars  of  sacrifice  and  incense  and  songs  of  joyful  worship.  It  was  a 
picture  of  what  was  to  be,  a  prediction  of  a  futme  which  in  God's  gracious  purpose 
was  near  at  hand.  II.  The  complete  restoration  of  national  life.  Israel 
was  meant  to  be  the  light  of  the  world,  as  the  Christian  Church  is  in  a  more  perfect 
manner.  When  the  chosen  nation  fell  into  sin,  and  had  to  be  punished  by  the 
desolation  of  temple,  city,  and  land,  the  world  was  darkened,  and  the  lamp  which 
God  had  lighted  before  the  nations  was  put  out.  Restored  worship  and  a  revived 
nation  meant  a  rekindling  of  this  lamp.  To  illustrate  these  ideas  and  apply  them 
to  daily  dangers  and  duties.  (Matt.  v.  14-16;  Mark  iv.  21,  22;  Luke  xii.  35; 
Phil.  ii.  15  ;  Rev.  i.  20,  ii.  5.)  III.  The  means  of  restoration  was  declared. 
"  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
(1)  Man  is  prone  to  rely  upon  the  material.  Never  was  this  more  manifest  than 
to-day.  Man  believes  in  himself,  in  his  resources,  in  his  mastery  over  the  world. 
He  boasts  of  what  his  science  has  discovered,  of  what  his  hands  have  wrought. 
"  Look,"  he  says,  "at  the  bridges  which  span  mighty  livers,  at  the  tunnels  I 
have  bored  through  the  earth.  See  how  I  can  control  the  electric  spark,  and 
make  it  light  up  great  cities,  and  send  my  messages  to  the  ends  of  the  earth." 
But  the  power  which  really  does  all  these  things  is  God's.  One  object  of  the 
Bible  is  to  correct  the  short-sightedne.ss  of  man,  which  fails  to  see  through  modes 
of  operation  to  the  Divine  Mover  and  Sustainer  of  the  universe,  and  so  to  teach 
us  not  to  trust  in  our  own  strength,  or  in  the  strength  of  human  allies,  or  the  forces 
of  wealth,  nor  yet  to  be  afraid  of  failure  in  God's  work,  because  consciously  weak 
and  poor  and  girt  about  with  dangers.  The  vision  is  equally  fitted  to  humble 
us  in  the  hour  of  triumph,  and  to  inspire  courage  in  the  hour  of  apparent  failure 
and  in  the  day  of  small  beginnings.  (2)  The  material  often  fails.  Success  marks 
man's  life,  yes,  but  failure  also.  A  frost  undermines  his  bridges,  and  they  are 
rolled  into  the  torrent.  The  forces  of  nature  often  rise  up  to  defy  man.  In  the 
events  of  life  unforeseen  accidents  frustrate  his  plans,  and  pour  mockery  on  his 
devices.  The  Jews  had  broken  down  in  their  attempts  to  rebuild  the  temple. 
They  began  well,  and  laid  the  foundations  thereof  with  rejoicing,  but  reverses 
followed,  and  they  gave  it  up.  We  must  not  in  our  life  rely  upon  self.  It  is  not 
in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps.  (3)  God  works  for  us  when  we  work  for 
Him.  "  By  My  Spuit,  saith  the  Lord."  This  truth  was  wondrously  illustrated 
in  the  history  of  the  Hebrew  people.  But  that  which  happened  to  them  was  an 
ensample  to  us.  He  is  with  us  if  we  are  with  Him,  and  we  may  boldly  say,  "  The 
Lord  of  ho.sts  is  with  us,  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge."  (4)  God  never  fails. 
What  He  promises  to  do  He  does — does  perfectly,  and  does  at  the  right  time. 
Let  us  look  up.  Let  us  trust  in  Him.  (T.  Vincent  Tymma.)  The  true  source 
of  power : — We  recognise  the  lesson  which  this  vision  furnishes,  namely,  that 
God  is  in  His  Church  and  in  the  world,  and  that  His  government  in  both  is  en- 
forced and  supported  by  the  adoption  of  his  own  agencies.  And  furthermore,  we 
learn  that  there  is  order  and  unanimity  in  the  employ  of  such  agencies.  In  the 
symbol  there  is  unity,  order,  co-operation,  and  maintenance.  Vegetable  life  is 
maintained  through  a  system  of  organisation.  The  whole  system  of  human  life 
is  carried  on  by  the  same  principle.     The  great  truth  laid  down  in  our  subject 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  C3 

is  that  of  co-operation.     The  golden  pipes  of  the  candlestick  co-operate  with  the 
oil  in  giving  light  to  the  lamps.     It  is  not  the  mere  outward  forms  and  institutions 
by  which  only  the  Church  is  to  preserve  her  God-hke  character,  and  to  diffuse 
her  good  and  saving  influence  upon  the  world,  but  by  the  Divine  Spirit  acting 
through  these,  uniting  them  to  Himself  in  one  grand  scheme  of  co-operation.     The 
means  are  required,  but  they  must  be  made  subservient  to  the  Divine  will,  and 
co-operate,  in  their  dependency  and  trust,  with  the  omnipotence  and  guidance 
of   the   Almighty.     Consider,  then,   the   true   source — I.    Of   power.     "  Power 
belongeth  unto  God."     To  Him  we  ascribe  all  might.     This  is  the  one  and  only 
Bource  of  our  power,  personally  or  nationally.     We  have  our  instrumentalities, 
we  have  our  Church  and  national  appliances  for  building  up  and  enlarging  all 
that  is  right  and  beneficial ;  but  we  wait  for  the  fire  from  heaven  to  kindle  it. 
II.  Of  corRAGE.     Courage  lies  not  in  dexterity,  but  in  the  heart,  in  the  mind. 
It  is  shown  by  a  cool  obedience,  by  a  steadiness  of  manly  purpose.     Com-age  that 
is  true  is  the  power  of  mind  over  matter.     But  in  order  to  trace  out  its  source  we 
must  look  above  mind  to  that  Divine  Spirit  who  acts  upon  the  mind.     III.  Of 
coNQtrEST.     The  noblest  battle  is  against  sin,  and  the  noblest  conquest  is  that  of 
self.     Hence  as  the  foes  of  God,  of  ovirselves,  and  of  truth  accumulate  upon  our 
life-path,  may  we  meet  them  with  a  power,  a  courage,  and  a  conquest  embodied 
in  the  words, — "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts."     [W.  D.  Horwood.)         The  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — The  primary 
allusion  of  these  words  requires  no  explanation.     The  typical  import  is  not  less 
apparent  than  the  primary  reference.     That  by  the  law  of  types  is  not  mere,  not 
accidental  resemblance,   but  similarity  designed,  as  well  as  complete  and  un- 
questionable.    Man  was  created  to  be  the  temple  of  God.     That  temple  is  now 
in  ruins.     The  grand  end  of  Christianity  is  to  restore  that  temple,  to  clear  away 
the  rubbish  that  conceals  its  glory.     From  the  contemplation  of  existing  ruin, 
glance  at  the  ideal  of  future  restoration, — its  ampUtudes,  its  completeness,  its 
perpetuity.     How  can  the  vision  be  realised  ?     If,  looking  at  the  disproportion 
of  the  agency,  there  comes  over  the  heart  the  painful  impression  of  inadequacy, 
and  the  corresponding,  the  contingent  apathy  of  despair,  then  listen  to  the  spirit- 
stirring  voice  of  the  text,  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts."     We  are  not  to  conclude  that  weakness  is  at  all  necessarily 
connected  with  this  influence  of  the  Spii'it.     The  laws  that  determine  the  nature 
and  regulate  the  action  of  this  power  of  the  mind.     It  must  be  cognate  in  kind  to 
that  on  which  it  acts.     Again,  mind  is  responsible  ;  and  to  be  so  must  be  free. 
Anything  therefore  that  moves  it  must  not  interfere  with  its  liberty  of  choice 
or  its  freedom  of  judgment.    Again,  mind  is  infinitely,  constitutionally  diversified. 
Its  idiosyncrasies  are  endless,  and,  under  the  influence  of  a  spiritual  power,  we 
have  reason  to  expect  full  tolerance  of  such  varieties,  and  that  no  attempt  will 
be  made  to  reduce  all  into  dull  uniformity.     We  are  not  to  interpret  the  text  as 
teaching  that  the  Spirit  is  to  act  independently  of,  and  unconnected  with,  human 
agency.     The  power  of  coercion,  our  Gospel  leaves  to  error  or  secularised  systems. 
The  philosophy  of  the  Cross,  nevertheless,  continually  associates  Divine  power 
and  human  agency.     In  its  moral  canons  and  apparatus,  the  energy  of  God  does 
not  supersede  the  activity  of  man  ;  nor  is  the  activity  of  man  efficient  without 
the  energy  of  God.     These  remarks  lead  to  the  proposition  of  the  text,  that  no 
human,    no   created   instrumentality,    which   acts   independently   and   alone,    is 
adequate  to  the  restoration  of  the  fallen  temple;  but  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts  provides  the  sole  efficient  energy  for  the  conversion  of  the  world.     I 
recognise  the  adaptation  of  truth,  scriptural  truth,  to  the  nature  and  necessities 
of  man.     That  adaptation  is  universal.     Biblical  truth  is  entirely  accommodated 
to  our  condition  and  character.     Let  truth  be  admitted  to  the  heart  and  it  must 
conquer.     Undoubtedly  it  must.     But  a  prior  question  exists,  how  is  it  to  obtain 
admission  there  ?     The  avenues  are  blocked  up  by  sin.     1.  Now  it  is  fair  to  reason 
for  the  truth  of  a  principle  from  the  necessary  inconsistencies  of  its  opposite, 
to  urge  anomalies  irreconcilable,  except  on  the  supposition  of  the  accuracy  of  the 
assertion  before  us.     Consider  then  these  anomalies.     It  will  be  generally  granted 
that  in  similar   circumstances    uniformity  of   cause  will   be   accompanied    with 
uniformity  of  result.     If,  accordingly,  in  the  evangelical  plan  no  power  beyond  the 
human  is  at  work,  similar  external  energy  will  issue  in  similar  results.     Yet  such 
is  not  our  experience.     If  dependent  on  human  power,  the  Gospel  will  be  most 
successful  when  preached  by  the  most  eloquent  men.     The  skill  of  an  advocate 
often  compensates  for  the  hoUowness  of  the  cause.     But  if  the  measure  of  real 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

ministerial  success  be  the  conversion  of  souls  to  God,  the  most  logical  and  eloquent 
preachers  of  the  Gospel  are  not  the  most  successful.  Again,  the  Bible  contains 
a  system  of  pure  ethics.  We  might  expect  the  most  cordial  reception  of  this 
system  from  the  purest  moralists  when  and  where  it  is  ever  propounded.  All 
lustory  attests  the  reverse.  2.  Another  train  of  illustration  luifolds  itself  in 
analogy.  The  emblems  of  conversion  are  not  more  numerous  and  varied  than 
they  are  one  in,  indirectly  but  really,  tracing  all  the  results  of  the  Gospel  to  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  What  we  want  is  a  ministry  thrilled  into  life  by  God's 
Spirit,  and  thrilling  men  into  vigorous,  healthy,  sustained  life,  by  the  same  Spirit, 
superinduced  by  faith  and  prayer.  3.  Coincident  with  this  conclusion  is  the 
experience  of  the  Church,  not  only  in  its  more  ordinary  and  routine  movements, 
but  in  its  epochs  that  stand  out  in  bold  relief.  Consider  then  the  history  of  the 
modern  revived  Chiu^ch.  Consider  the  relative  success  of  the  preaching  of  our 
Lord  and  of  His  apostles.  Conclude  by  appeal  to  scriptiu-al  assertion.  The 
Spirit  then  is  the  power  with  which  the  Church  is  to  be  armed.  {Thomas  Archer, 
D.D.)  Independence  of  Christianity  : — God's  first  and  greatest  object  is  His 
own  glory.  This  is  true  in  the  general  of  the  great  acts  of  God,  this  is  equally 
true  in  the  minutiae  of  them.  God  is  jealous  of  His  own  honour  ;  He  will  not 
suffer  even  His  Church  to  be  delivered  in  such  a  way  as  to  honour  men  more  than 
God  ;  He  will  take  to  Himself  the  throne  without  a  rival.  I.  Not  by  might. 
"  Might "  properly  signifies,  the  power  of  a  number  of  men  combined  together. 
"  Power  "  signifies  the  prowess  of  a  single  individual.  Treat  might  as  meaning 
might  collectedly.  1.  Collected  might  in  human  armies.  The  Church  can 
neither  be  preserved,  nor  can  its  interests  be  promoted  by  human  armies.  The 
progress  of  the  arms  of  a  Christian  nation  is  not  the  progress  of  Christianity. 
2.  Might  may  signify  great  corporations  or  denominations  of  men.  There 
never  ought  to  have  been  any  denominations  at  all.  They  may  do  some  good, 
but  they  do  a  world  of  mischief.  Whenever  a  denomination  begins  to  get  too 
great,  God  will  cut  away  its  horns,  and  take  away  its  glory,  till  the  world  shall 
say,  "  It  is  not  by  might  nor  by  power."  II.  Nor  by  poweb,  that  is,  individual 
strength.  The  greatest  works  that  have  been  done  have  been  done  by  the  ones. 
Take  any  church,  there  are  multitudes  in  it,  but  it  is  some  two  or  three  that  do 
the  work.  Individual  effort  is,  after  all,  the  grand  thing.  Learning  is  useful, 
so  is  eloquence ;  but  God  does  not  work  by  these  His  great  works.  III.  By  the 
Bpibit  of  God.  What  a  magnificent  change  would  come  over  the  face  of 
Christendom  if  Gk)d  were  on  a  sudden  to  pour  out  His  Spirit  as  He  did  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost.  The  grand  thing  the  Church  wants  at  this  time  is  God's  Holy 
Spirit.  Whatever  faults  there  may  be  in  our  organisation,  they  can  never 
materially  impede  the  progress  of  Christianity,  when  once  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  is  in  our  midst.  Be  in  earnest  in  praying  for  this.  All  we  want  is  the  Spirit 
of  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  work  beyond  human  ability  : — I.  As  implyinq 
SOME  urpoRTANT  PKOPOSiTiONS.  1.  That  many  things  which  it  is  our  duty  to 
attempt  evidently  lie  beyond  human  powers.  2.  We  have  reason  to  expect 
that  God  will  grant  the  necessary  aid  while  we  use  the  means  which  are  in  our 
power.  3.  God  communicates  spiritual  aid  in  a  manner  concealed  from  human 
observation.  4.  These  invisible  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  do  not  supersede 
human  agency,  nor  alter,  in  general,  the  connection  between  cause  and  effect. 
6.  God  uses  men  and  means  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  no  doubt  to  whom  the 
accomplishment    is    owing.     II.    As    sugoestinq    some    useful   admonitions. 

1.  The  words  convey  instruction.  They  throw  great  light  on  events  which  have 
occurred,  for  which  historians  have  not  been  able  to  assign  an  adequate  reason. 

2.  A  lesson  of  reproof.  Some  lay  great  stress  on  human  means  and  do  not  look 
for  the  influences  of  the  Spirit.  3.  A  lesson  of  encouragement.  We  are  too  apt 
to  despise  "  the  day  of  small  things."  God  acts  by  degrees.  The  kingdom  of 
God  is  as  a  mustard-seed,  but  that  can  grow  into  a  great  tree.  (C.  Jerram,  M.A.) 
The  triumph  of  the  Divine  kingdom  : — So  much  is  in  the  hands  of  providence 
that,  in  general,  we  can  only  conjectiure  what  may  be  the  result.  In  proportion 
as  events  are  dependent  on  the  will  of  God,  they  are  uncertain  to  us.  I.  Thb 
Most  High  has  cleably  promised  in  His  Word,  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
SHALL  ultimately  PREVAIL  OVER  THE  EARTH.  The  rcligious  history  of  the  world 
presents  a  threefold  aspect.  1.  We  may  regard  man  in  the  state  into  which  he 
was  plunged. by  the  first  transgression  ;  obnoxious  to  the  wrath  of  the  Most  High, 
and  distant  from  Him.  Men  divide  into  two  classes  : — those  who  forget  God 
altogether,  and  the  Jews  to  whom  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God.     2.  To 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  65 

the  head  of  the  Jewish  people  it  was  promised,  "  In  Thee  shall  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth  be  blessed."  3.  These  promises  formed  part  of  the  joy  set  before 
the  Redeemer,  by  which  He  was  stimulated  in  BQs  work  of  seK-denial.     II.  God 

HAS  ENJOINED  IT  AS  A  DUTY  ON  HiS   ChUBCH   TO   ENDEAVOUR   TO   PROMOTE  THIS 

END.  The  inspired  writers  derived  this  notion  from  two  sources.  1.  Express 
commands.  2.  The  principle  on  which  those  commands  went.  The  appointment 
of  a  Christian  ministry  implies  this  duty.  III.  The  Most  High  has  communi- 
cated TO  THE  Church  adequate  means  for  accomplishing  this  end.  We 
do  not  now  need  the  aid  of  miracles.  Our  power  lies  in  the  presence  and  impulse 
of  the  Spirit  of  truth.  IV.  We  may  anticipate  the  period  when  the  kingdom 
SHALL  BE  FULLY  ESTABLISHED.  Somc  hopeful  signs  are — 1.  An  increasing  respect 
for  the  Word  of  God.  2.  A  more  general  appeal  to  the  great  converting  principle 
of  the  Word  of  God.  3.  A  imiversal  endeavour  to  pay  the  debt  of  obligation  to 
the  diffusion  of  the  Word  of  God.  4.  Much  success  has  already  attended  the 
labours  of  Christians,  and  this  shows  how  Gk)d  smiles  on  the  rising  energies  of 
His  Church.  5.  The  hopeful  state  of  the  Church  as  the  administrator  of  truth 
in  the  present  day.  If  the  Spirit  of  the  Christian  religion  live  in  our  minds,  we 
shaU  want  no  exhortation  to  advance  a  cause  like  this.  (IF.  Wilson,  A.M.)  The 
necessity  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  aid  : — The  sentiment  here  recorded  refers  to  the 
building  of  the  second  temple.  When  the  prophet  contemplated  the  difficulties 
that  lay  in  the  way  of  the  accomplishment  of  this  great  design,  the  magnitude 
of  the  work,  the  obstacles  to  be  overcome,  and  the  insignificance  of  man's  best 
energies,  he  was  ready  to  despair.  But  the  assurance  came  to  him  that  the  work 
should  certainly  be  accomplished,  but  not  by  man's  might,  only  in  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  I.  A  negative  proposition.  "  Not  by  might,"  can  any 
design  be  brought  to  a  successful  issue.  Illustrate  by  recalling  some  of  the  great 
occurrences  which  have  taken  place  in  the  history  of  the  world,  and  which  declare 
this  incontrovertible  truth.  Historj'  of  TjTe,  Babylon,  Assyrian  attack  on  Israel, 
degradation  of  Rome,  story  of  Spanish  Armada,  French  Revolution,  &c.  II.  An 
affirmative  proposition,  niustrate  some  instances  of  the  success  which  attends 
spiritual  exertions  sustained  amid  prayers,  and  blessed  by  the  presence  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Noah,  the  only  righteous  man  in  the  world  at  that  period  of 
prevailing  sin.  Success  of  Joshua  when  Moses'  hands  were  held  up.  Success 
of  the  Apostles.  Reformation  of  Luther.  Triumphs  of  missionaries.  This 
principle  of  dependence  on  the  Spirit  applies  to  our  reading  the  Word  of  God, 
and  to  the  mode  of  a  sinner's  acceptance  before  God.  (John  Cumming,  D.D.) 
The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — The  primary  application  of  these  words  was  to  the 
Jews  who  were  engaged  upon  the  great  work  of  rebuilding  their  temple.  Because 
they  could  not  depend  upon  themselves,  the  Lord,  in  these  words  addressed  to 
Zerubbabel,  opened  a  better  resource.  It  was  not  "  by  might  nor  by  power  " 
that  they  were  to  succeed,  but  "  by  His  Spirit."  Now  the  Spirit,  whereby  God 
helped  the  Jews  in  their  necessity,  was  the  very  same  Spirit  which,  from  the 
commencement,  has  been  concerned  in  aU  that  regards  the  well-being  of  man, 
and  the  government  of  this  lower  world.  He  "  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters." 
Upon  the  world  thus  created  through  the  eternal  Spirit,  the  work  of  redemption 
was  to  be  carried  out  and  accomplished.  We  do  not  marvel  that  the  Lord  Jesus, 
on  entering  upon  the  great  work  of  His  ministry,  received  a  visible  communica- 
tion of  that  same  Spirit ;  and  through  that  same  Spirit  He  offered  Himself  a 
sacrifice  unto  God.  The  Holy  Spirit  does  not  now  descend  for  miraculous  opera- 
tions in  the  Church.  But  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  perpetual  promise. 
And  it  is  necessary  for  the  whole  Christian  commmiity.  I.  The  influence  of 
THE  Spirit  in  bringing  about  the  acceptance  of  the  Gospel  The  Apostles 
and  first  missionaries  had  to  encounter  difficulties  of  every  shape  and  character. 
Where  did  they  get  the  wisdom  which  their  adversaries  were  not  able  to  gainsay 
or  confute  ?  How  were  they  enabled  to  speak  those  gracious  words  which  never 
failed  ?  It  was  through  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  do  not  confine  these  marvellous 
ihterpositions  of  the  Spirit  to  apostolical  times.  The  Spirit  has  always  accom- 
panied the  Word  with  power.  II.  The  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  carry- 
ing   FORWARD    the    WORK    OF    SANCTIFYING    AND    LIKENESS     UNTO     GoD.       After 

our  conversion  we  must  count  upon  many  a  long  and  weary  day  of  trial  and 
temptation,  and  spiritual  conflict,  and  heart -distress.  If  we  would  take  a  deeper 
insight  into  the  things  of  God,  we  must  ask  the  Holy  Spirit  to  take  of  the  things 
of  Jesus  and  show  them  unto  us.  Our  enemies  may  be  overcome,  because 
greater  is  He  who  is  with  us  than  all  who  can  be  against  us.     It  is  promised  that 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

we  shall  be  "  strengthened  with  might  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  man."  And  the 
consolation  of  a  Christian  man's  heart  comes  direct  from  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  And  what  is  true  concerning  the  individual  is  true  concerning  the  great 
Christian  body.  When  the  Church  is  despised  and  persecuted  and  everywhere 
spoken  against,  God  puts  forth  His  interposing  arm,  delivers  His  people,  and 
comforts  them,  confirming  the  truth  of  His  ancient  word,  "  Not  by  might,  nor 
by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  {E.  Robins,  M.A.)  The 
might  and  power  of  God's  Spirit  demonstrated : — Our  subject  is,  the  Spirit's  in- 
fluence on  the  human  mind.  I.  The  necessity  of  spiritual  influence.  Con- 
sidering the  varied  moral  effects  of  the  fall,  we  may  ask,  can  any  less  powerful 
agent  tban  the  Spirit  of  God  re-organise  our  faculties,  and  adduce  harmony,  loveli- 
ness, and  order,  out  of  the  confusion  that  prevails  within  us  ?  No  one  can  savingly 
know  the  truth  and  be  really  holy,  but  as  taught  of  God  and  sanctified  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  II.  The  nature  of  spiritual  influence.  We  are  not  called 
upon  to  explain  the  mode  or  manner  of  the  Spirit's  operation  on  the  human  mind. 
The  fact  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose.  The  value  of  the  agency  will  correspond 
with  the  nature  of  the  agent.  Agreeable  to  His  high  and  essential  excellence 
will  be  the  Holy  Spirit's  work.  The  Spirit's  work  should  not  be  thought  of  as 
miraculous.  Influence  only  of  an  ordinary  and  necessary  kind  do  we  contend 
for,  and  that  only  in  an  ordinary  way,  and  the  use  of  ordinary  means.  It  is — 
1.  Quickening  in  its  nature,  "  The  Spirit  that  quickeneth."  2.  It  is  enlightening. 
3.  It  is  renewing.  4.  It  is  sanctifying.  5.  It  is  consoling.  6.  It  is  assuring. 
III.  The  evidence  of  spiritual  influence.  The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits, 
80  also  is  the  Holy  Ghost.  His  fruits  are  "  love,  joy,  peace,"  &c.  An  immediate 
effect  of  supernatural  agency  will  be,  a  deep  and  humbling  conviction  of  sin. 
Another  will  be, — a  ceaseless  restlessness  till  mercy  and  forgiveness  be  obtained. 
A  third  will  be, — a  supreme  valuation  of  Jesus  Christ.  A  fourth  will  be, — a 
prevailing  desire  to  be  holy.  {W.  Mudge.)  A  law  of  Divine  operations  among 
men  : — A  rule  upon  which  the  eternal  God  acts  in  the  affairs  of  His  people.  The 
law  is  this, — that  not  human  energy  nor  resources  but  the  Spirit  produces  good  ; 
that  not  man  but  God  gives  success.  Recall  some  illustrations  of  this  law. 
1.  In  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  given.  The  builders  of  the  second  temple 
were  disheartened  and  hindered.  Their  power  was  gone  ;  they  were  taught  to 
look  to  the  Divine  power  which  would  work  through  them.  2.  In  the  operations 
of  the  third  Person  in  the  Trinity  upon  the  Church.  Its  progress  has  always 
been  due,  not  to  human  might  and  power,  but  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The  effect 
of  the  truth  upon  the  heart  of  man  is  not  of  man,  it  is  of  God.  4.  The  advance- 
ment of  Divine  life  in  the  soul  is  in  accordance  with  the  same  rule.  It  becomes 
then  the  duty  of  believers  to  depend  on  the  Holy  Spirit  at  all  times  for  success. 
Reliance  on  the  Holy  Spirit  for  producing  spiritual  effects  is  the  rule  for  Christians. 
To  lose  sight  of  this  rule  brings  a  blight  upon  efforts  however  earnest.  This 
reliance  will  act  in  a  twofold  way  ;  it  will  hinder  any  resting  or  boasting  in  lawful 
human  resources  ;  and  it  will  give  encouragement  where  there  is  little  human 
resource.  Faith  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  will  inspirit  men,  will  shed 
new  light  upon  their  humble  path,  will  put  new  vigour  into  their  exertions,  and 
will  make  them  bold  for  God  according  to  their  measure,  their  capacity,  and  their 
means.  And  a  pressing  necessity  arises  for  continual  prayer  that  the  Spirit  may 
be  given.  While  you  seek  more  of  the  Spirit  for  yoiu'sclf,  pray  earnestly  that  the 
gift  may  be  bestowed  on  others.  (Forster  6.  Simpson,  B.A.)  The  Word 
of  the  Lord  to  Zcrubbabel : — The  vision  seen  by  the  prophet  Zechariah  in  this 
chapter  is  evidently  descriptive  of  the  spiritual  character  and  strength  of  the 
Church  of  God,  shining  with  a  communicated  light,  and  sustained  by  a  communi- 
cated strength  perpetually  supplied.  We  dwell  on  the  interpretation  of  it.  We 
are  told — I.  The  false  grounds  of  confidence  which  are  to  be  rejected.  "  Might 
and  power  "  include  all  earthly  means  and  human  instrumentality.  The  powers 
of  reasoning,  the  exhibition  of  truth,  or  the  force  of  argument,  are  not  to  be 
despised  or  neglected.  It  is  the  trusting  to  them,  the  resting  in  them,  or  the 
boasting  of  them,  that  is  to  be,  and  must  be,  utterly  rejected  if  we  would  look 
for  the  favour  and  blessing  of  Almighty  God.  If  we  may  not  trust  to  the  strength 
of  reason,  or  the  force  of  truth,  neither  may  we  to  the  powers  of  oratory. 
The  gifts  of  oratory  or  eloquence  are  lovely  and  excellent,  but  trusted  in, 
or  gloried  in,  they  become  snares  and  stumbling-blocks,  drawing  away  the 
heart  and  affections  from  Christ,  and  converting  our  acts  of  worship  into  an 
idolatrous  service.      Every  Christian  has  his  own  peculiar  sphere  of  influence 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  67 

with  which  to  serve  and  honour  God.  But  all  brought  under  such  influence 
must  beware  lest  they  rest  in  it  and  go  no  farther.  Religion  must  be  a  personal 
concern.  Then  there  are  those  who  imagine  that  they  love  the  truth,  because 
they. love  tho8<i  who  profess  it.  A  religion  based  on  such  grounds  is  not  to  be 
trusted.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  is  not  the  author  of  the  work,  it  cannot  stand 
trial,  even  in  this  world.  2.  The  only  source  of  spiritual  prosperity.  There  are 
three  particulars  in  which  the  work  of  the  Spirit  may  be  distinguished.  In  trans- 
forming the  character.  In  overcoming  the  world.  In  glorifying  the  grace  of 
God.  3.  The  certainty  of  these  effects  of  the  Spirit's  work  issuing  in  the  glory 
of  the  grace  of  God.  That  which  God  only  can  effect,  to  God  only  can  be  attri- 
buted. To  bring  man  back  again  to  His  own  likeness  is  God's  own  work,  for  the 
manifestation  of  His  almighty  power,  the  revelation  of  His  infinite  love,  and  the 
perfection  of  His  eternal  praise  ;  when,  the  holy  temple  completed,  the  top-stone 
shall  be  brought  forth  with  shoutings  of,  "  Grace,  grace  unto  it."  {J.  M.  Wilde, 
B.A.)  Opposition  to  the  Gospel  in  every  age: — The  opposition  made  to  the 
building  of  the  temple  in  that  age  may  be  considered  as  emblematical  of  the 
opposition  made  to  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  hearts  of  men  and  in  the 
world.  By  the  "  Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  we  may  understand  Divine  power  generally, 
or  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  proposition  to  illustrate  is,  that  the  existence  and  pre- 
valence of  religion  in  the  heart  and  in  the  world  are  not  owing  to  human  power 
but  wholly  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  it  were  the  result  of  human  power,  then — 
1.  Men  of  great  learning  and  talents  would  be  the  first  to  embrace  the  Gospel. 
Their  talents  and  learning  seem  to  qualify  them  in  a  peculiar  manner  for  investi- 
gating the  evidences  of  the  truth  of  religion.  We  reasonably  expect  that  they 
will  be  the  first  to  receive  with  meekness,  humility,  and  gratitude,  every  doctrine 
which  the  Bible  reveals.  How  different  the  actual  facts  are  !  The  majority  of 
men  of  talents  and  learning  have  either  rejected  the  Bible  or  treated  it  with  scorn. 
And  the  comparatively  ignorant  and  unlearned  have  become  "  wise  unto  salvation." 
How  shall  we  account  for  this  difference  ?  Never,  without  taking  into  account 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  If  religion  in  the  heart  were  by  might  and  by 
power,  then  those  who  are  decent  and  moral  would  be  the  first  to  embrace  the 
Gospel.  To  all  the  duties  of  the  second  table  they  pay  strictest  attention.  To 
such  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  Gospel  would  be  exceedingly  acceptable. 
Then  there  are  persons  who  seem  utterly  careless  and  dead  ;  to  all  appearance 
they  are  the  children  of  perdition.  And  yet,  contrary  to  all  expectation,  we  see 
the  decent  formalist  passing  smoothly  to  perdition  ;  while  the  wicked  and  profane 
are  often  "  plucked  as  brands  from  the  burning."  3.  If  religion  were  by  might 
and  power,  then  those  who  hear  the  ablest  preachers  would  always  be  the  best 
Christians.  But  facts  do  not  correspond  with  expectations.  Some  of  the  ablest 
preachers  have  laboured  witb  little  success ;  while  others,  greatly  their  inferiors, 
have  been  "  wise  in  winning  souls."  As  the  existence  and  prevalence  of  religion 
in  the  heart  is  wholly  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  so  the  existence  and  prevalence 
of  religion  in  the  world  must  be  the  fruit  of  the  same  agency.  The  arguments 
which  illustrate  the  one  also  illustrate  the  other.  The  progress  of  religion  in 
the  world  is  just  the  progress  of  religion  in  a  multitude  of  hearts.  Look  at  the 
state  of  the  world  when  the  Apostles  of  Christ  were  first  sent  forth  to  preach  "  the 
Gospel  of  the  blessed  God."  The  men  who  were  sent  to  preach  were  few  in 
number,  without  learning,  without  wealth,  without  influence,  without  eloquence. 
What  rendered  their  work  so  successful  ?  Only  the  power  of  the  "  Spirit  of  the 
Lord."  In  process  of  time  superstition  almost  extinguished  the  light  of  the 
Gospel.  Corruption  spread  so  rapidly,  and  diffused  itself  so  widely,  that  in  a 
little  time  nothing  remained  of  Christianity  but  the  name.  Would  the  reformation 
have  been  such  a  power  and  blessing  to  the  world  without  the  presence  of  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  ?  The  success  of  modern  missions  is  not  due  to  instrumentality, 
but  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  the  instrumentality.  Then  let  us  pray  for  the 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  upon  ourselves  and  upon  our  missionaries. 
This  is  a  matter  of  imspeakable  importance.  And  let  us  feel  a  deeper  interest 
in  the  salvation  of  our  own  souls  and  the  souls  of  others.  Let  us  be  more  generally, 
more  fervently,  more  perseveringly,  employed  in  prayer  for  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord. 
( W.  S.  Smart. )  God's  work  in  man  : — In  the  work  of  God  in  the  heart,  and  for 
the  work  of  God  in  our  lives,  we  require  the  operation  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  Man 
is  continually  seeking  and  claiming  for  Himself  independence.  But  they  are 
happy,  and  they  alone  are  happy,  who  can  commit  all  their  ways  unto  the  Lord 
their  God.     Whether  we  are  converted  or  unconverted,  we  must  be  inhabited 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

by  some  spirit.     I.  Thb  neckssity  foe  a  spiritttal  agknoy.     This  arises — 
1.  From  man's  wants  on  earth.     He  needs  life.     By  nature  he  is  dead,  "  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins."     How  is  spiritual  life  to  be  obtained  ?    It  must  be  the  effect 
of  God's  sovereign  mercy,  by  the  operation  of  His  Holy  Spirit.     But  man  wants 
light  as  well  as  life.     He  is  dark  by  nature.     By  the  fall  his  imderstanding  became 
darkened,  and  he  requires  to  have  that  understanding  renewed,  before  he  can  in 
any  wise  comprehend  the  plain  and  simple  truth  which  concerns  his  everlasting 
peace.    Men  continue  walking  in  that  same  darkness  in  which  they  were  originally 
created.     None  but  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  enlightens  man.     But  if  man  wants 
light  and  life,  so  also  does  he  require  love,  because  by  nature  he  is  at  enmity  with 
God.     "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."     Again,  man  requires  health, 
for  he  is  spiritually  sick.     This  also  comes  by  the  Spirit.     Man  requires  confidence 
in  God,  for  by  nature  he  distrusts  God.     2.  We  require  the  Holy  Spirit  for  our 
admission  into  heaven.     (1)  There  must  be  a  title  to  heaven.     How  is  this  ob- 
tained ?    We  are  regenerated  by  the  Spirit.     We  are  adopted  into  God's  family 
by  the  application  of  the  blood  of  Christ  to  the  conscience  by  that  same 
Spirit.     (2)  There   must   be   meetness   for   heaven.     This  does  not  depend  on 
our    outward     circumstances,    but    upon    the    inward    working    of    the    Holy 
Ghost.     It  is  the  same  Spirit  that  supplies  oui  daily  want  of  grace.     II.  Thb 
RESULTS  WHICH  FOLLOW  FROM    THIS    SPIRITUAL  AGENCY.      There    is    Security 
for  us  amid  all  the  trials  and  temptations  of  this  life.     The  subject  suggests  to 
us  the  greatest  encouragement  in  the  midst  of  oiu-  many  difficulties.     The  road 
to  everlasting  life  is  beset  with  difficulties.     Who  shall  be  able  to  overcome  these 
"  many  adversaries  "  ?     None  but  they  who  have  the  Spirit  of  God  working  with 
them.     Address  those  who  are  disheartened  in  the  endeavour  to  live  the  Christian 
life.     Do  not  attempt  to  serve  God  with  a  half-hearted  service ;  the  failure  will 
be  as  complete  in  itself  as  it  will  be  miserable  and  wretched  to  you.     Be  decided, 
if  you  are  really  seeking  to  be  God's  children.     Are  any  of  you  trying  to  hinder 
the  work  of  God  in  others  ?     Remember,  there  is  One  above  who  sees  all  the 
malice,  perceives  all  the  enmity,  and  considers  that  any  opposition  offered  to  His 
children  is  offered  to  Himself.     {H.  M.  VUliers,  M.A.)        God's  modes  of  working  : 
— When  Zerubbabel  was  ready  to  bend  before  the  interruption  of  his  work,  his 
heart  was  greatly  encoiu*aged  to  persevere  in  the  arduous  undertaking  by  the 
assurance  that  through  God's  special  interposition  and  grace  the  work  should  be 
carried  forward  to  a  happy  and  honourable  termination,  till  at  last  he  should 
bring  forth  "  the  headstone  thereof  with  shouting,  Grace,  grace  unto  it."      The 
expression  "  Not  by  might,"  &c.,  intimates  that  God  will  carry  on  and  complete 
His  work,  as  He  had  begim  their  deliverance  from  Babylon,  not  by  external 
force,  but  by  the  internal  influence  of  His  Spirit  upon  the  minds  of  men.     I.  Ob- 
servations FOR  illustrating  THE  TEXT.     1.  It  is  usual  for  God  to  bring  most 
important  and  stupendous  results  out  of  causes  apparently  trivial  and  unim- 
portant.    2.  The  words  of  text  imply  God's  accomplishment — of  the  most  gracious 
designs  by  the  weakest  and  most  insignificant  instruments.     3.  That  it  is  our 
duty  to  attempt  many  things  which  evidently  lie  beyond  human  power.     4.  God 
will  grant  the  necessary  aid  while  we  employ  the  means  that  are  in  our  power. 
II.  Practical  inferences  from  the  subject.     1.  That  ministers  should  preach 
the  Gospel  with  an  humble  and  confidential  dependence  on  the  co-operation  of 
the  Spirit  to  crown  their  labours  with  success.     2.  This  subject  administers  re- 
proof to  those  who  pervert  it  into  an  argument  for  carnal  sloth  and  seciu'ity. 
3.  Learn  not  to  despise  the  day  of  small  things.     As  in  the  natural,  so  in  the  moral 
world,  the  progress  of  God's  power  is  often  hid  from  our  view ;  but  still,  is  it 
making  no  advancement  T     The  Spuit  of  God  is  again  moving  on  the  face  of 
the   deep,   preparatory  to  a  new  creation.      {James  Hay,  D.D.)         The  only 
power  that  can  set  the  world  right : — An  infidel,  who  was  also  a  well-known  socialist 
marked  down  by  the  police,  entered  a  meeting  of  the  Salvation  Army  in  Switzer- 
land to  make  satirical  remarks  for  a  Constantinople  paper,  but  during  the  meeting 
he  was  moved  by  the  power  of  God,  and  at  the  close,  with  tears  running  down  his 
cheeks,  he  said,  "  Ah,  I  believed  in  dynamite  to  set  the  world  right,  out  now  I 
see  there's  another  power,  and  the  only  one."       The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  : — It  was 
the  mission  of  Zechariah  to  stimulate  the  courage  of  God's  people,  to  kindle  again 
the  enthusiasm  for  the  temple  and  the  theocracy  with  which  they  had  set  out 
from  Babylon.     Opposition  from  their  foes,  the  enormity  of  the  task  of  restoring 
the  temple,  and  the  necessity  of  providing  homes  for  themselves,  had  broken 
their  courage,  and  diverted  them  from  contemplation  of  their  great  spiritual 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHABIAH.  69 

destiny.  They  must  be  brought  again  to  the  deep  theocratic  feeling  cherished 
among  their  fathers  of  old.  The  Lord's  message  to  Israel  through  Zechariah 
was  commimicated  to  the  prophet  in  a  series  of  eight  visions.  It  was  a  hard 
lesson  for  these  retvumed  exiles,  this  lesson  of  impUcit  trust  in  God.  The  nation 
was  just  awaking  out  of  a  long  night,  in  which  God  seemed  to  have  abandoned 
them.  They  were  Uttle  practised  in  seeing  the  invisible.  Like  Ehsha's  servant, 
they  needed  to  have  their  eyes  opened  to  perceive  the  mountains  of  Jerusalem 
"  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  "  round  about  the  Lord's  chosen.  The  tendency 
of  our  times  is  away  from  aU  special  reliance  on  the  Spirit  of  God.  Relatively, 
we  have  too  great  faith  in  secondary  causes.  To  build  a  temple,  you  need  only 
a  competent  architect,  a  good  contractor,  and  a  good  force  of  masons.  If  opposi- 
tion is  threatened,  simply  provide  yourself  with  a  sufficient  poUce  force.  Such 
is  men's  creed  now.  We  glorify  organisation.  We  deify  law.  We  apotheosise 
the  practical.  We  are  witnessing  a  revival  of  the  heretical  belief  in  salvation 
by  works.  If  it  was  necessary  for  James  to  say,  "  Faith,  if  it  hath  not  works, 
is  dead,  being  alone,"  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  say,  Worl^  if  it  hath  not  faith,  is 
dead,  being  alone.  We  give  up  our  inspiration  for  institutions.  We  lose  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  elaborately  designed  methods  for  His  operation.  The  intellectual, 
the  practical,  the  spiritual ;  this  is  the  order  of  importance  according  to  the 
judgment  of  many  contemporaries.  Few  things,  therefore,  could  be  of  more 
importance  to  the  religious  life  of  to-day  than  this  message  of  Zechariah  to  the 
returned  exiles.  However  tnily  and  clearly  seers  and  prophets  may  still  appre- 
hend God,  the  life  of  thousands  goes  on  nowadays  in  practical  atheism.  And 
the  infection  has  spread  to  the  churches.  Witness  the  almost  frantic  efforts 
of  some  among  them  to  keep  themselves  ahve.  Having  insensibly  withdrawn 
from  the  soiu-ces  of  vital  piety  their  only  recourse  is  the  process  of  artificial  respira- 
tion. We  need  schooling  in  the  science  of  spiritual  dynamics  and  economics. 
That  this  thought  may  assume  greater  definiteness,  let  me  specify  some  of  the 
lessons  which  the  vision  of  Zechariah  has  for  us.  I  mention,  out  of  many,  three — 
I.  The  propeb  relation  of  God's  Spieit  to  the  Chxtech  is  a  vital  one.  Philo- 
sophically considered,  the  main  conceptions  of  God  which  have  been  current 
in  the  religious  progress  of  the  race  are  two :  God  as  transcendent  above  the 
world,  and  God  as  immanent  in  the  world.  The  one  erects  a  throne  for  the  Ruler 
of  the  imi  verse  somewhere  above  the  sky,  and  worships  Him  from  afar.  It 
reached  its  extreme  form  among  the  Deists  of  the  last  century,  who  denied  all 
interference  on  the  part  of  God  in  the  affairs  of  the  world.  It  was  the  dominant, 
though  not  the  only  conception  of  God  among  the  Jews  before  the  coming  of 
Christ,  which  helps  to  account  for  the  formality  and  barrenness  of  their  rehgion. 
Nothing  so  robs  religion  of  its  transforming  and  sustaining  power  as  the  drawing 
of  its  sanctions  from  some  distant  sphere,  and  the  deferring  of  its  rewards  to  some 
future  age.  The  other  conception — that  God  is  immanent  in  the  world — finds 
its  best  exposition  in  the  hterature  of  Pantheism,  and  has  had  expression  and 
adherents  ever  since  the  time  of  the  Vedic  hymns.  It  reaches  its  extreme  form 
in  the  view,  still  current,  which  denies  to  God  personahty,  and  identifies  Him  with 
the  forces  which  upbear  and  impel  the  world.  Both  these  conceptions  are  found 
— though  not  in  their  extreme  forms — in  the  Bible.  The  New  Testament  doctrine 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  may  be  regarded  as  the  evangelical  counterpart  of  the  philo- 
sophical doctrine  of  immanence.  The  New  Testament  teaching  here  is  summarised 
for  us  in  the  fulfilment,  in  Acts  ii.  17,  of  the  prophecy  of  Joel.  God  would  no  longer 
be  confined  above  the  sky,  or  by  the  walls  of  a  single  building,  or  by  the  lines 
which  separate  the  nations.  He  would  come  out  into  the  open,  so  to  speak, 
and  be  seen  everywhere.  He  would  make  every  place  sacred  by  His  presence. 
The  universe,  and  no  longer  a  booth  of  skins  or  a  house  of  cedar,  would  be  His 
dwelling-place  This  (fispensation  of  the  Spirit  began  on  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
In  it  the  Gospel  assumes  its  imiversal  character  and  fxmction.  But  the  New 
Testament  does  not  say  that  the  Holy  Spirit  abides  in  the  world  and  world  forces 
in  such  a  sense  as  to  become  one  with  them.  In  the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
God  is  still  a  person  different  from  us  and  from  His  world,  but  He  is  no  longer 
remote.  With  Paul  we  are  thrilled  with  the  awe  of  a  great,  tender  reverence 
when  we  reflect  that  "  He  is  not  far  away  from  any  one  of  us  ;  for  in  Him  we  live 
and  move  and  have  our  being."  I  know  of  no  more  bhghting  heresy  than  the 
practical  denial  among  us  of  this  New  Testament  and  Old  Testament  teaching 
concerning  the  presence  of  God's  Spirit  in  His  world,  in  His  Church,  as  a  vital 
blessed  and  mighty  equipment  for  Hfe's  battles  and  duties.     II.  Groo's  Spieit 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

IS  THE  Church's  only  proper  equipment  for  service.  The  presence  of  Grod's 
Spirit  for  defence  and  for  aggression  was  the  burden  of  Zeohariah's  message  to 
Zerubbabel.  God  is  our  defence.  It  is  said  that  William  Penn  was  the  only 
colonist  in  America  who  left  his  settlement  wholly  improtected  by  fence  or  arms, 
and  that  his  was  the  only  one  which  was  unassailed  by  the  Indian  tribes.  The  first 
Christians  depended  in  a  peculiar  manner  upon  the  Holy  Spirit  for  protection  and 
leadership,  and  with  the  result  that  they  were  delivered  from  the  hands  of  persecutors. 
History  affords  no  more  striking  enforcement  of  Zechariah's  message :  "  Not 
by  might  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  III.  God's 
Spirit,  appropriated  by  prayer,  is  now  intended  to  operate  through 
ALL  BELIEVERS.  In  the  time  of  Zechariah,  God's  Spirit  wrought  His  will  by 
means  of  special  representatives.  The  oUve- trees  supplied  the  oil  to  the  candelabrum. 
Only  the  anointed  ones  were  in  full  measure  supphed  with  the  Spirit.  But  when 
Joel's  prophecy  was  fulfilled  the  Lord  poured  out  His  Spirit  upon  all  flesh.  It 
was  a  new  epoch  in  the  spiritual  progress  of  mankind.  God  wills  now  to  operate 
directly,  without  mediation,  upon  the  hearts  and  minds  of  all  beUevers.  What 
matters  it,  however,  if  while  we  are  within  reach  of  strength  we  elect  to  continue 
in  all  our  old  weakness  ?  The  nearness  of  God  does  not  ensure  that  we  shall, 
in  spite  of  ourselves,  personally  feel  the  thrill  and  joy  of  His  strength.  ^(Prayer 
is  a  condition  to  this.  Through  prayer  the  very  air  about  us  may  be  charged 
with  God,  so  as  to  bear  us  up  hke  eagles  in  electric  clouds.  Closer  than  our  breath 
is  God  with  His  Almighty  Spirit  and  grace.  Before  Frankhn's  experiment  for 
harnessing  the  lightning  the  air  was  as  full  of  electricity  as  it  is  to-day,  but  men 
did  not  know  how  to  appropriate  it.  A  battery  may  be  charged  with  electrio 
fire,  but  you  must  make  your  connections  to  get  the  power.  We  need  to  gear 
our  personal  hves  and  our  chvirch  work  on  the  Power  which  moves  the  world. 
Then  shall  we  see  a  revolution  in  spiritual  commerce  and  economics  which  will 
speedily  bring  in  the  completed  kingdom  that  was  the  hope  of  Zechariah  and  the  » 
inspiration  of  His  message  to  Zerubbabel.  We  make  this  connection  by  prayer. 
Pray  in  faith,  and  there  shall  quiver  along  every  fibre  of  yoiu:  being  a  thrill  of 
the  life,  light,  and  might  of  God.     {E.  M.  Poteat.) 

Vers.  7-9.  Who  axt  thou,  0  great  mountain. — The  temple  of  God  built 
amidst  diffictUties  : — I.  The  seeming  difficulties  in  our  Lord's  way.  Solomon 
raised  his  goodly  structure  in  quiet.  Joshua  and  Zerubbabel  had  difficulty  after 
difficulty  to  overcome.  Tiu-n  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  What  difficulties  were  there  in 
His  way  when  He  first  undertook  to  build  God's  temple  in  heaven  !  He  had — 1.  To 
introduce  sinners  into  heaven  ;  to  bring  those  near  to  God,  who  were  among  the 
farthest  from  Him.  2.  He  had  to  prepare  sinners  for  heaven.  The  Lord  the 
Redeemer  has  to  work  to  the  very  last  against  the  bias  of  nature,  and  the  power 
of  nature's  lusts.  Consider  how  many  of  such  men  He  has  to  work  on  and  change 
before  His  task  can  be  completed.  He  has  to  bring  "  many  sons  unto  glory." 
Remember  where  this  work  is  to  be  done.  In  a  world  where  there  is  everything 
to  obstruct,  and  really  nothing  to  aid  it.  It  is  to  be  accomplished  too  against  aU 
the  powers  of  darkness.  It  cannot  be  done  in  an  hour,  or  a  day,  or  a  year.  II.  Thb 
ease  and  completeness  with  which  the  Redeemer  overcomes  the  difficulties 
BEFORE  Him.  This  is  more  strongly  expressed  in  the  abrupt  language  of  the 
original,  than  in  our  translation  "Who  art  thou  ?  "  There  is  no  surprise  or  ignorance 
implied  in  this  question.  There  is  something  like  derision  and  contempt  in  it. 
The  question  expresses  at  once  His  own  dignity,  and  the  insignificance  in  His  sight 
of  the  obstacles  opposed  to  Him  ;  His  own  almighty  power  and  their  uttqr  im- 
potence. Here  lies  one  of  the  hardest  lessons  we  have  to  learn  in  practical  Chris- 
tianity— to  see  the  difficulties  of  salvation,  and  not  be  discouraged  by  them  ;  to 
see  the  hills  before  us  and  around  us,  and  yet  to  feel  sure  that  the  Lord  will  carry 
us  over  them.  III.  The  means  ^VHEREBY  the  Lord  Jesus  carries  on  His  great 
WORK.  Christianity  has  been  established  in  the  world  without  the  world's  aid, 
by  means  which  have  seemed  most  unlikely  to  establish  it.  Its  very  existence  in 
the  world  at  this  moment  is  one  of  the  greatest  moral  wonders  the  world  ever  saw. 
The  Lord  Jesus  fits  us  for  heaven  by  means  of  His  Spirit.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by 
power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  sailh  the  Lord  of  hosts."  Observe  then  here  how  jealous 
God  is  for  the  honour  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  looking  to  the  Lord  Jesus  as  our 
sanctifier,  we  must  not  overlook  the  Holy  Spirit.  Ho  sanctifies  us  by  this  Spirit. 
IV.  The  effect  which  will  be  produced  by  the  completion  of  Christ's  work. 
Good's  present  dealings  with  our  world  will  not  go  on  for  ever.     There  is  a  day 


OTAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  71 

coming  when  all  His  purposes  of  mercy  towards  it  will  be  accomplished.     The 
completion  as  spoken  of  under  the  figure  of  bringing  forth  and  putting  on  the  top 
or  headstone  of  a  building.     This,  in  Eastern  countries,  was  generally  done  with 
much  ceremony,  and  in  the  presence  of  many  beholders.     With  such  a  prospect 
before  us,  well  may  we  ask  with  this  prophet,  "  Who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small 
things  ?  "     As  for  the  Church  of  Christ,  let  us  learn  to  be  ashamed  of  oiu:  fears 
concerning   it.     (C.    Bradley,    M.A.)        Salvation   secure: — Treat   the    text   as 
designed  to  encourage  the  behever  in  the  assurance  of  his  final  salvation,  in  strong 
confidence  of  continuing  and  upholding  power,  to  be  vouchsafed  to  him.     I.  The 
HONOUB  OF  God  is  concerned  in  a  persuasion  of  our  finai.  safety.     1.  In  all 
spiritual  temples  the  command  to  build,  and  the  means  to  build,  and  the  lajdng  the 
foundation  for  the  building,  originate  solely  with  God  Himself.     How  unhkely 
then  that  God  should  forsake  the  work  of  His  own  hands.     God  is  the  author 
of  that  spiritual  temple  which  is  to  be  raised  from  the  ruins  of  our  degraded 
humanity.     Man  is  as  powerless  to  work  a  change  in  his  own  spiritual  affections 
as  he  is  to  fix  a  new  sun  in  the  heavens,  or  to  divert  the  course  of  the  trackless 
deep.     2.  The  honour  of  God  is  concerned  in  the  accomphshment  of  this  work, 
by  the  multiplied  succours  which  He  has  provided  for  carrying  it  on.     We  discover 
a  constant  regard  to  a  law  of  progiession.     Whether  God  be  ripening  a  blade  of 
grass,  or  forming  a  world  from  the  shapeless  void,  there  is  to  be  a  beginning,  a 
continuance,  and  an  end.     The  building  up  of  the  soul  into  a  holy  temple  in  the 
Lord  is  no  exception  to  this  law.     God  will  take  His  own  time,  and  work  in  His 
own  way.     II.  The  building  of  this  temple  will  redound  to  the  glory  of 
Christ.     Zerubbabel  is  a  type  of  Christ.     1.  There  is  a  promise  on  the  part  of 
Christ  to  His  people,  that  He  will  work  in  them  all  neediul  grace  to  keep  them 
faithful  imto  the  end.     2.  Christ  is  concerned  in  our  final  victory,  because  the 
believer's  triumphs  form  an  integral  part  of  His  own.     Conclusion — (1)  Be  as 
confident  with  regard  to  the  completion  of  the  work  as  if  it  were  altogether  of  God. 
(2)  Be  as  diligent  in  working  out  that  accomplishment  as  if  it  were  altogether  your 
own.     {Daniel  Moore,  M.A.)        The  building  of  the  sfiritual  temple: — Zerubbabel^ 
is  a  type  of  a  far  greater  builder  than  himself)  and  the  temple  of  Zerubbabel  is  a 
shadow  of  a  far  nobler  temple.     Zerubbabel  is  a  type  of  Him  "  whom  God  hath 
exalted  from  among  the  people,"  to  build  His  spiritual  temple  ;  and  the  temple  of 
Zerubbabel  is  a  type  of  that  Church,  which  is  "  built  on  the  foundation  of  the 
Apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  corner  stone  " ;  of 
which  every  true  Christian  is  a  Uvely,  that  is,  a  living  stone  ;  and  in  which  all  are 
builded  together,  for  a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit.     Each  converted 
Christian  is  a  temple  of  God  by  the  Spirit,  and  like  the  temple  of  Zerubbabel,  is 
honoured  by  the  indwelling  God  as  His  abode.    Christians  are  spoken  of  in  Scripture 
as  living  stones  of  one  great  spiritual  temple  (as  well  as  each  being  a  separate 
temple).     The  manner  in  which  the  separate  stones  of  Solomon's  temple  were 
prepared  was  striking  and  remarkable.     While  that  temple  was  in  building,  no 
sound  of  axe  or  hammer  was  heard.     Of  the  glorious  temple  to  the  Lord — a  temple 
built  of  ransomed  and  purified  souls,  of  deathless  and  sinless  bodies — our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  chief  builder.     And  He  "  will  not  fail  nor  be  discoiuraged,"  until 
He  has  erected  His  spiritual  building  on  God's  eternal  hill  of  Zion.    But  He  uses 
instruments.     He  has  His  fellow-labomrers.     He  directs  their  work     The  whole 
plan  is  in  His  mind.     To  His  ministers  he  gives  "  diversities  of  operations  "  by  the 
same   Spirit.     It  is  the  conviction  that  our  great  Master  is  with  His  servants, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  that  supports  and  cheers  them  under  difficulties 
that  would  otherwise  overwhelm  them.     (W.  Weldon  Champneys,  M.A.)        His 
bauds  shall  also  finish  it. — The  founder  and  finisher  of  the  temple  : — Zerubbabel 
is  very  little  more  than  a  grotesque  name  to  most  Bible  readers.     He  was  a 
prince  of  the  blood  royal  of  Israel,  and  the  civil  leader  of  the  fixst  detachment  of 
returning  exiles.     The  words  of  the  text  are,  in  their  plain  original  meaning, 
the  prophetic  assurance  that  the  man,  grown  an  old  man  by  this  time,  who  had  been 
honoured  to  take  the  first  spadeful  of  soil  out  of  the  earth,  should  be  the  man  "  to 
bring  forth  the  headstone  with  shoutings  of  grace,  grace  unto  it !  "     I  take  them  to 
be  a  Messianic  prophecy.     This  Zerubbabel  was  a  prophetic  person.     What  was 
true  about  him  primarily  is  thereby  shown  to  have  a  bearing  upon  the  greater  Son 
of  David  who  was  to  come  thereafter,  and  who  was  to  build  the  Temple  of  the 
Lord.     I.  There  is  here,  a  large  truth  as  to  Christ,  the  true  temple- 
builder.     "  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,"  &c.     All  the  letters  are  from  Him,  and  He 
imderlies  everything.     That  is  true  about  Creation,  in  the  broadest  and  in  the  most 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

absolute  sense.  "  He  is  the  beginning,  and  in  Him  all  things  consist."  He  is  the 
Beginner  and  the  Finisher  of  the  work  of  redemption,  which  is  His  only,  from  its 
inception  to  its  accomplishment.  Jesus  makes  a  new  beginning  ;  He  presents  a 
I^erfectly  fresh  thing  in  the  history  of  human  nature.  Just  as  His  coming  was  the 
introduction  into  the  heart  of  humanity  of  a  new  type,  the  second  Adam,  the  Lord 
from  heaven,  so  the  work  that  He  does  is  all  His  own.  He  does  it  all  Himself. 
The  text  declares  that  all  through  the  ages  His  hand  is  at  work.  "  Shall  also  finish 
it  " — then  he  is  labouring  at  it  now.  We  have  to  think  of  a  Christ  who  is  working 
on  and  on,  steadily  and  persistently.  A  work  begun,  continued,  and  ended  by  the 
same  immortal  hand  is  the  work  on  which  the  redemption  of  the  world  depends. 

II.  We  HAVB  HEBE  THE  ASStTEANCB  OF  THE  TKITTMPH  OF  THE  GoSPEL.       There  were 

many  who  were  ready  to  throw  cold  water  on  the  works  of  Zerubbabel.  The  text 
js  the  cure  for  all  hopeless  calculations  by  us  Christian  people,  and  by  other  than 
Christian  people.  When  we  begin  to  count  up  resources,  and  to  measure  these 
against  the  work  to  be  done,  there  is  little  wonder  that  good  men  and  bad  men 
sometimes  concur  in  thinking  that  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  has  very  little  chance 
of  conquering  the  world.  That  is  perfectly  true,  unless  you  take  Him  into  the 
calculation,  and  then  the  probabilities  are  altogether  different.  He  renews  and 
purifies  the  corrupted  Church,  and  He  lives  for  ever.  When  Breimus  conquered 
Rome,  and  the  gold  for  the  city's  ransom  was  being  weighed,  he  clashed  his  sword 
into  the  scale  to  outweigh  the  gold.  Christ's  sword  is  in  the  scale,  and  it  weighs 
more  than  the  antagonism  of  the  world  and  the  active  hostility  of  hell.     III.  Heris 

IS  ENCOURAGEMENT  FOR  DESPONDENT  AND  TIMID  CHRISTIANS.       JeSUS  Christ  is  HOt 

going  to  leave  you  halfway  across  the  bog.  That  is  not  His  manner  of  guiding 
us.  He  began  and  He  will  finish.  If  the  seed  of  the  kingdom  is  in  our  hearts. 
He  will  watch  over  it,  and  He  will  bless  the  springing  thereof.  Be  of  good  cheer, 
only  keep  near  the  Master,  and  let  Him  do  what  He  desires  to  do  for  us  all. 
IV.  Hebe  is  a  strikino  contrast  to  the  fate  which  attends  all  human 
WORKERS.  Few  of  us  are  happy  enough  to  begin  and  finish  any  task,  beyond 
the  small  ones  of  our  daily  life.  Authors  die  with  half  finished  books.  No  man 
starts  an  entirely  fresh  line  of  action ;  he  inherits  much  from  the  past.  No  man 
completes  a  great  work  that  he  imdertakes.  Coming  generations,  if  it  is  one  of  the 
great  historical  works  of  the  world,  work  out  its  consequences  for  good  or  evil. 
We  have  to  be  contented  to  do  our  little  bit  of  work  that  will  fit  in  along  with  that 
of  a  great  many  others.  How  many  hands  does  it  take  to  make  a  pin  ?  We 
have  to  be  content  to  be  parts  of  a  mighty  whole.  Multiplication  of  joy 
comes  from  division  of  labour.  So  let  us  do  our  httle  bit  of  work,  and 
remember  that  whilst  we  do  it,  He  is  doing  it  in  us  for  whom  we  are  doing  it, 
and  let  us  rejoice  to  know  that  at  the  last  we  shall  share  in  the  "  joy  of  our  Lord," 
when  He  sees  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  is  satisfied.  (.4.  Madaren,  D.D.) 
Reasons  against  pessimism  : — Those  Hebrew  prophets  were  thorough  optimists. 
No  matter  how  great  the  desolation  which  was  around  them,  no  matter  how 
deep  the  degradation  into  which  the  people  had  fallen,  no  matter  how  dark 
the  prospect,  they  told  of  a  glory  to  follow.  Their  words  are  charged  with 
hope.  They  summoned  languid,  desponding  souls  to  courageous  action.  They 
never  hung  their  harp  upon  the  willows.  In  the  presence  of  error,  evil,  idolatry 
there  is  no  quailing,  no  craven  cry  of  fear,  but  a  tone  of  almost  contemptuous 
defiance.  Can  the  force  of  contempt  go  further  ?  "  Moab  is  my  washpot," — 
I  will  wash  my  hands  in  Moab.  "  Over  Edom  I  will  fling  my  old  shoe."  It 
is  so  here.  This  young  Zechariah  is  perhaps  the  most  hopeful  of  all  the  prophets. 
He  calls  upon  the  daughter  of  Zion  to  sing  and  rejoice.  The  holy  city,  which 
has  been  despoiled,  shall  become  so  vast  that  no  angel  can  measure  it,  and  God 
shall  be  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  it,  and  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  it.  In  this 
chapter  he  seeks  to  encourage  Zerubbabel  in  the  great  work  of  rebuilding  the 
temple.  A  mighty  mountain  of  hindrance  bars  his  way.  But  by  this  most 
suggestive  vision  the  prophet  assures  him  that  he  shall  be  aided  in  his  work 
by  the  mysterious  energy  of  God.  Perhaps  there  never  was  an  age  when  the 
servants  of  Christ  were  more  exposed  to  dejection,  or  when  it  was  more  incumbent 
upon  them  to  maintain  an  undaunted  and  confident  spirit.  Pes.simism  is  in 
the  air.  It  fills  our  literature  with  a  wailing  cry.  As  Goethe  said:  "Men  write 
as  if  they  were  all  ill,  and  the  whole  world  a  lazaretto."  There  is  a  deep  under- 
tone of  sadness  in  the  life  of  our  times.  The  culture  of  the  age  is  mournful. 
One  may  well  ask.  Is  this  "  merrie  England  "  ?  The  number  of  suicides  in 
this  country  during  the  past  thirty  years  has  risen  from  65  per  million  to  T9. 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHABIAE.  73 

In  London  it  is  85,  in  Paris  422.  Now,  pessimism  is  the  legitimate  outcome 
of  unbelief.  If  man  is  a  bubble,  soon  to  be  pricked  by  death,  how  can  he  be 
glad  ?  Men  are  congratulating  the  world  that  faith  is  dying  ;  but  they  will 
find,  if  it  dies,  that  some  other  things,  which  they  would  fain  keep,  have  dis- 
appeared too.  But  if  pessimism  is  proper  to  unbelief,  it  ought  to  have  no  place 
in  the  minds  of  Christian  men.  What  are  the  reasons  against  pessimism  ? 
What  reasons  have  we  for  declaring  that  it  will  be  laid  low  ?  I.  First  of  all, 
IT  IS  ALIEN  TO  HUMAN  NATUKE.  The  fundamental  principle  of  pessimism  is 
that  evil  is  an  essential  element  of  human  nature.  It  is  original  and  permanent. 
The  world  is  corrupt  in  its  nature.  The  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God  is  that 
sin  is  an  intrusion.  We  are  often  told  that  the  Scripture  view  of  man  is  too 
dark.  It  is  the  only  bright  view  of  the  subject.  That  which  regards  sin  as 
natural  is  horrible,  and  forbids  hope.  Sin  is  neither  the  "  essence  of  the  creature 
nor  the  act  of  the  Creator."  So  terrible  is  it  when  it  culminates,  that  it  would 
be  fearful  to  regard  it  as  the  mere  outcome  of  the  natiu-al  working  of  the  human 
heart.  What  a  vivid  picture  is  that  which  our  Lord  gives  of  the  state  of  man  ! 
The  human  heart  is  a  house,  and  living  in  it,  ordering  it,  is  "  a  strong  man  armed." 
Yes,  sin  is  a  mighty  tyrant,  but  it  is  only  a  lodger.  It  occupies  the  city  of 
Alansoul,  but  it  has  crept  in  and  it  can  be  cast  out.  Is  not  this  evident  from 
a  survey  of  the  effects  of  evil  ?  It  is  manifestly  foreign  to  human  nature,  for 
it  runs  right  athwart  the  interests,  and  cuts  deep  into  the  powers  of  that  nature, 
sapping  its  strength,  and  draining  its  very  life-blood.  It  is  a  wrong  inflicted 
upon  the  soul,  not  the  intended  outcome  and  expression  of  the  souL  It  is  a  great 
hurt,  a  violation  of  law,  a  break  in  the  harmony  of  life,  a  discord  in  its  music, 
a  derangement  of  its  order.  The  effects  of  sin  are  eloquent  of  its  nature.  It 
spoils,  rends,  tears,  maims,  perverts.  It  is  off  "  the  course  of  nature."  Human 
nature  has  fallen  among  thieves,  which  have  robbed,  wounded  it  and  left  it 
half  dead.  Sin  is  not  the  essence  of  man  ;  it  is  an  alien  thing,  it  is  a  foreign 
power.  Men  feel  it  has  to  be  accounted  for,  that  it  is  not  according  to  the  con- 
stitution of  things.  A  belief  in  a  fall  runs  through  the  religions  of  the  world. 
Archdeacon  Wilson  has  well  said :  "  The  problem  about  evil  which  has  attracted 
the  mind  of  man  has  always  been  enunciated  as  the  origin  of  evil.  Did  any 
one  ever  write  an  essay  or  vex  his  mind  over  the  origin  of  good  ?  It  is  in  the 
constitution  of  om-  minds  to  ask  for  a  reason  for  anything  that  is  rare,  exceptional, 
or  anomalous.  Why  does  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  take  place  ?  What  is  the  cause 
of  thunderstorms  ?  But  we  do  not  often  ask  why  the  sun  gives  light.  Can 
it  be  that  evil  is  so  rare  a  phenomenon  ?  No  ;  the  pessimist  will  not  admit, 
and  the  optimist  will  not  assert,  that  evil  is  so  rare  an  interference  that  we  are 
driven  to  account  for  it  because  of  its  rarity.  It  is  not  because  it  is  rare,  but 
because  we  instinctively  feel  it  is  an  intruder,  however  common  it  may  be.  We 
ask  for  the  cause  of  sickness,  common  as  it  is.  Health  is  the  normal  state  ; 
disease  the  abnormal.     Sin  is  an  interference,  a  fall."     II.  Another  reason 

AGAINST  PESSIMISM,  AND  A  GROUND  FOR  HOPE,  IS  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  THE  WILES 
AND  DECEPTIONS  THAT  EVIL  MUST  PRACTISE  BEFORE  IT  CAN  SUCCEED.       It  pretends 

to  be  what  it  is  not.  It  palms  itself  off  as  something  else.  Sin  only  keeps  its 
place  by  deception.  It  is  "  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light."  It  wears  the 
garb  of  goodness,  and  declines  to  be  unclothed.  Nor  does  it  wholly  possess 
the  human  soul.  The  noblest,  most  authoritative  power  of  the  soul  may  be 
cowed  and  silenced,  but  it  never  consents  heartily  to  the  sway  of  evil.  Conscience 
is  often  like  a  discrowned  king,  whose  commands  are  slighted,  but  it  does  not 
run  with  the  multitude  of  the  passions  to  do  evil.  It  stands  solitary,  apart, 
issuing,  however  vainly,  its  protests.  Hence  sin  and  fear  go  together.  The 
mountain  shakes  and  trembles,  as  Sinai  at  the  voice  of  God.  "  Conscience 
doth  make  cowards  of  us  all."  Nor  are  the  forces  of  evil  so  compact,  so  massive, 
so  welded  together  as  they  seem.  It  is  well  to  follow  the  counsel  which  the 
angel  gave  to  the  fearful  Gideon — "  But  if  thou  fear  to  go  down,  go  thou  with 
Phurah  thy  servant  down  to  the  host,  and  thou  shalt  hear  what  they  say,  and 
afterwards  shall  thine  hands  be  strengthened  to  go  down  to  the  host."  An  un- 
defined fear  pervades  the  ranks  of  evil.  There  are  vague  presages  of  approaching 
disaster.  HI.  But  let  us  hasten  on  to  consider  the  ohihf  reason  against  pessim- 
ism, THE  HIGHEST  GROUND  FOR  CHERISHING  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE  TEXT.    The  vision 

recorded  in  this  chapter  is  most  beautiful  and  suggestive.  The  prophet  sees  a 
golden  candelabrum,  like  that  which  had  been  in  the  old  temple,  but  much 
grander.     It  has  a  bowl  on  the  top  of  it,  and  beneath  are  seven  lamps  and  seven 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

pipes  to  the  lamps,  and  on  each  side  of  the  bowl  stands  an  olive-tree.  Thh 
PROPHET  IS  TAUGHT  THAT  HIS  HELP  IS  IN  GoD.  As  the  lamp  was  Supplied,  not 
by  human  agency,  but  direct  from  the  living  trees,  so  he  is  to  learn  that  evil 
tstU  be  overthrown  and  righteousness  exalted,  "  not  by  might,  nor  by  power, 
but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  advent  of  Jesus  Christ  into 
this  world  was  the  coming  of  one  stronger  than  the  strong  man  armed.  It 
was  the  introduction  of  a  new  spiritual  energy,  a  life-giving,  restoring  force. 
His  whole  work,  and  the  consequent  descent  of  His  Spirit,  show  that  God  is 
on  the  side  of  man,  and  that  the  evils  which  have  enslaved,  defiled,  degraded 
him  shall  be  overcome.  Truth,  purity,  love  are  on  the  throne  of  the  universe. 
"  The  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  be  glad."  And  further,  we  are  reminded 
that,  as  we  seek  to  overcome  the  mountains  of  evil  which  are  in  this  world,  we 
can  only  be  qualified  for  our  work  as  we  receive  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
To  trust  in  our  own  strength,  to  place  our  dependence  in  men  or  means,  to  rely 
on  ecclesiastical  organisations  and  auxiliaries,  will  entail  inevitable  weakness 
and  defeat.  I  read  the  other  day  of  an  Italian  miser,  who  died  near  San  Remo 
worth  £120,000,  who  for  years  went  without  stockings  because  he  grudged  paying 
for  the  washing  of  them.  Some  Christian  workers  are  guilty  of  a  similar  penuri- 
ousness  with  regard  to  the  spiritual  treasures,  the  "  unsearchable  riches,"  which 
are  at  their  disposal.  Let  us  not  be  straitened  in  ourselves,  for  we  are  not  strait- 
ened in  God.  Let  us  be  of  good  cheer,  and  cultivate  a  bold,  buoyant  optimism. 
And  let  us  be  clear  as  to  what  is  implied  in  the  hope  of  the  overthrow  of  evil 
and  the  establishment  of  righteousness.  It  is  not  implied  that  the  millennium 
will  be  here  in  a  fortnight,  or  that  the  progress  of  goodness  is  steady  and  uniform. 
Dalliance  with  the  world  may  enfeeble  the  churches,  and  they  may  be  shorn 
of  their  strength.  Everything  depends  on  the  extent  to  which  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  prevails  among  men.  The  great  mountain  of  evil  is  a  crumbling  mounlnin. 
Some  of  us  have  quailed  before  that  mountain.  Sin  seems  so  fixed  and  strong. 
The  characteristic  evils  of  our  nature  seem  so  inveterate.     {J.  Lewis. ) 

Ver.  10.  Who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things  ?  —  Great  results 
from  small  beginnings : — This  has  ever  been  a  watchword  among  Christians ; 
small  beginnings  are  not  to  be  despised.  Apply — I.  To  the  institutions  of 
RELIGION.  Four  reasons  why  we  should  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things. 
1.  Because  often  the  mightiest  effects  are  produced  from  them,  as  in  the  world  of 
nature ;  in  the  world  of  literature ;  in  the  world  of  politics.  So  in  grace.  What 
is  it  and  what  will  it  be  ?  Yet  what  was  its  origin  ?  2.  Because  God's  power 
can  make  the  feeblest  mighty  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  work.  3.  We  never 
know  what  God  intends  to  do  by  our  understanding.  Prescience  is  not  ours.  Not 
having  it,  we  cannot  see  what  God  will  do.  4.  In  matters  of  religion,  what  ia 
comparatively  little  is  abstractedly  great.  Then  if  you  want  to  do  much  for  God, 
do  not  generalise  so  much.  Do  not  be  discoiiraged  by  seeing  how  many  are 
unsaved,  look  at  the  one  saved.  II.  To  personal  and  private  reugion.  Re- 
ligion is  often  small  in  its  commencement — sometimes  rapid,  sudden  conviction, 
but  ordinarily  more  slow.  This  day  of  small  things  may  be  despised  by  scorn ; 
by  opposition ;  by  neglect.  First  impressions  are  sacred  ;  treat  them  as  such. 
The  day  of  small  things  is  not  despised  by  those  who  best  know  its  value ;  the 
Father  of  Mercies  ;  the  Son  ;  Angels ;  or  Satan.  It  is  the  pledge  of  greater 
days  that  are  coming.  Apply  to  ministers  ;  parents  ;  Sabbath-school  teachers  ; 
the  lately  awakened.  {J.  Summerfield,  A.M.)  Small  beginnings: — Despond- 
ency paralyses  exertion,  but  hope  stimulates  and  supports  it.  Despondency 
is  never  so  likely  to  be  felt  as  at  the  commencement  of  an  imdertaking, 
when  there  are  few  to  support  it  and  many  to  oppose  it ;  when  the  beginning 
is  so  small  as  to  excite  the  apprehensions  of  its  &iends  and  the  derision  of  its 
enemies.  The  Jews  who  returned  from  the  Babylonish  captivity  felt  this  when 
they  applied  themselves  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  "  Small  beginnings 
are  not  to  be  despised."  Consider  this  sentiment — I.  In  application  to  pubug 
institutions.  The  age  In  which  we  live  Is  happily  and  honourably  distinguished 
by  a  spirit  of  religious  zeal.  So  many  are  the  associations  throughout  our  country, 
for  humane  and  pious  purposes  of  every  form,  that  charity,  where  it  has  but  a 
solitary  offering,  is  almost  bewildered  in  its  choice.  Those  only  who  have  known 
by  experience  what  it  is  to  originate  a  new  institution,  especially  if  it  be  out  of 
the  ordinary  routine  of  Christian  effort,  can  form  an  adequate  idea  of  the  labour, 
patience,  and  heroism  which  are  requisite  to  carry  it  to  maturity,  amidst  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECUARIAH.  76 

doubts  of  the  sceptical,  the  mistakes  of  the  ignorant,  the  misrepresentations  of  the 
slanderous,  and  the  cold  and  selfish  calculations  of  the  lukewarm.  But  still, 
small  beginnings  are  not  to  be  despised.  1.  The  most  wonderful  effects  have 
resulted  from  causes  apparently  very  small.  Illustrate  from  the  natural,  intel- 
lectual, and  political  world,  and  in  the  world  of  grace.  Trace  the  cause  of  Pro- 
testantism to  its  commencement.  Contemplate  the  progress  of  Methodism.  Or 
note  the  beginnings  of  great  missionary  societies,  or  the  Bible  Society.  2.  We 
should  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things,  because  the  power  of  God  can  still 
render  the  feeblest  instruments  productive  of  the  greatest  results.  The  feeblest 
preacher  may  be  the  honoured  instrument  of  conversion,  when  the  most  eloquent 
has  preached  in  vain.  3.  However  discouraging  appearances  may  be,  we  never 
know  what  God  really  intends  us  to  do,  or  to  do  by  us.  We  can  never  look  to 
the  result  of  our  actions  in  their  influence  upon  others.  No  man  who  devotes 
himself  to  the  cause  of  religious  benevolence  can  say  what  use  God  intends  to 
make  of  hin},  but  it  is  often  far  greater  than  he  is  aware.  Illustrate  by  Robert 
Raikes,  or  Wesley.  4.  In  religion,  what  may  seem  little  by  comparison,  is,  when 
viewed  positively  and  absolutely,  immensely  great.  We  may  offend  against  the 
injunction  of  the  text  by  inattention.  We  do  not  advocate  an  indiscriminate 
precipitate  zeal.  Or  by  scorn.  If  the  object  of  a  scheme  be  good,  if  the  means 
appear  adapted  to  the  end,  let  it  not  be  contemned  because  it  is  at  present  iu 
the  infancy  of  its  age,  and  of  its  strength.  All  that  is  sublime  in  Christianity 
was  once  confined  to  a  little  circle  of  poor  men  and  women.  Neglect  is  another 
way  of  sinning  against  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  text.  Especially  let  those  who 
are  the  principal  agents  in  schemes  of  benevolence  beware  of  despising  the  day 
of  small  things.  Let  them  not  too  soon  sink  into  a  state  of  depression.  If  they 
have  fears,  they  should  conceal  them,  and  exhibit  only  their  hopes.     II.  Apply 

THB  SENTIMENT  OF  THE  TEXT  TO  PERSONAL  RELIGION.       1.   Religion  is  often  Small 

in  its  commencement.  This  is  not  always  the  case.  Sometimes  a  transforma- 
tion of  character  takes  place,  as  complete  as  it  is  rapid.  But  the  usual  process 
of  this  great  change  is  much  more  slow.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  grain 
of  mustard  seed.  There  are  many  ways  in  which  the  small  beginning  of  personal 
religion  may  be  despised.  It  may  be  ridiculed  as  the  fanaticism  of  a  weak  mind, 
or  the  enthusiasm  of  a  heated  imagination,  or  the  whim  of  a  capricious  taste. 
Ridicule  is  not  unfrequently  coupled  with  direct  opposition.  Men  who  find 
laughter  avails  nothing  are  very  likely  to  exchange  it  for  wrath.  Neglect,  how- 
evei",  is  that  which  comes  more  immediately  within  the  spirit  of  this  part  of  the 
subject.  The  first  appearances  of  religion  in  the  soul  do  not  always  receive  from 
others  the  prompt,  affectionate,  and  skilful  attention  which  they  demand  and 
deserve.  First  impressions,  unless  carefully  watched,  like  the  young  buds  of 
fruit-trees  in  the  spring,  will  soon  fall  off  from  the  mind  and  come  to  nothing. 
2.  Reasons  why  the  day  of  small  things  ought  not  to  be  despised.  It  is  not 
despised  by  those  who  best  know  its  importance.  It  is  not  neglected  or  con- 
temned by  the  Eternal  Father  Angels  do  not  despise  it.  The  beginnings  of 
religion  lead  on  to  great  and  glorious  attainments.  Our  subject  has  its  special 
admonition  to  ministers,  and  to  parents,  and  to  Sunday-school  teachers,  and  to 
Christians  generally.  (John  Angel  James.)  The  day  of  small  things  : — I.  Some- 
thing ABOUT  God.  These  words  show  us  that  humility  is,  if  I  may  say  so,  a 
portion  of  the  Divine  character.  He  does  not  despise  "  the  day  of  small  things." 
It  is  impossible  to  find  lowliness  in  the  Divine  nature  in  its  essence,  because  there 
is  nothing  upon  which  to  base  it.  The  life  of  God  is  a  necessary  life.  There  is 
room  for  this  virtue  in  the  Divine  actions,  though  not  in  the  Divine  essence.  Note 
the  absence  of  ostentation  in  all  God's  works  of  nature  or  of  grace.  Note  the 
condescension  of  Divine  providence.  Not  only  in  its  prime,  in  its  perfection, 
in  its  maturity,  in  its  grand  completeness,  does  God  take  delight  in  the  soul, 
but  in  the  nascent  form  of  undeveloped  life,  the  very  fovmdation  of  the  spiritual 
structure.  He  does  not  despise  first  beginnings  ;  it  is  even  true  that  in  the  "  day 
of  small  things "  God  especially  acts.  II.  Something  about  small  things. 
We  despise  little  things,  and  think  them  beneath  us.  Our  thoughts  and  measure- 
ments are  so  different  from  God's  thoughts  and  measurements.  And  this  results 
from  pride,  which  makes  us  think  so  many  things  beneath  us,  not  worthy  of  care 
and  of  finish.  It  arises  also  from  a  certain  ignorance  of  the  value  of  little  things. 
The  text  implies  that  they  are  important.  I.  Because  our  life  is  made  u  of  little 
things.  2.  In  their  effect  upon  our  spiritual  life,  because  they  require  so  muoh 
effort,    m.  Something  about  oubselybs.     1.  It  teaches  us  hope.    God  doea 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  iv. 

not  despise,  because  He  sees  in  His  eternal  mind  the  results.  2.  We  learn  patience 
from  it.  3.  It  must  fill  us  with  emulation.  This  will  make  us  persevere  and 
long  to  make  progress.  (W.  H.  Hutchinga,  M.A.)  The  regard  of  Ood  for  small 
beginnings,  physical  and  spiritual : — It  was  but  a  small  and  feeble  remnant  that 
returned  from  the  captivity  in  Babylon  to  rebuild  Jerusalem  and  the  temple. 
Their  spirits  broken  by  slavery,  their  cohesion  imperfect,  their  resources  limited, 
their  well-wishers  few ;  the  adversaries  arrogant  and  numerous,  the  diflBcultiea 
manifold  and  dispiriting.  It  was  as  if  a  fraction  of  a  swarm  of  bees  were  striving 
to  rebuild  their  hive  under  the  ceaseless  attacks  of  a  cloud  of  malignant  wasps  or 
hornets.  Their  souls  were  exceedingly  filled  with  contempt  by  the  scorn  of  San- 
ballat,  who  cried  aloud,  "  What  do  these  feeble  Jews  ?  Will  they  revive  the  stones 
of  the  temple  out  of  the  heaps  of  burned  rubbish  ?  If  a  fox  shall  go  up  even  he 
shall  break  down  their  stone  wall."  Now  this  contempt  of  Sanballat  well  repre- 
sents the  scorn  with  which  the  great  world  regards  all  religious  beginnings  both 
in  individual  lives  and  in  society.  The  notion  which  prevails  so  widely  as  to  the 
hopes  of  Christians  might  be  expressed  thus  :  "  These  aspirations  of  yours  after 
union  with  the  Infinite  and  Everlasting  Cause,  after  an  indestructible  life  in  God, 
are  too  absurd.  Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  heavens,  and  consider  their  magnificence, 
look  upon  the  illimitable  vastness  of  that  celestial  machinery,  the  number  of  those 
worlds  on  worlds,  which  shine  through  the  eternal  darkness  ;  and  then  look  down 
on  yourselves,  and  at  mankind,  a  cloud  of  ephemeral  insects  passing  away.  Who 
can  believe  that  such  '  minims  of  nature  '  have  any  permanent  relation  with 
the  imiverse,  much  less  with  its  Maker  ?  Face  the  inevitable,  and  do  not  shrink 
from  the  nothingness  which  is  your  doom."  The  one  all-sufficing  answer  to 
these  degrading  counsels  is  to  be  found  in  the  words  of  the  prophet  of  the  restora- 
tion. "Who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things  ?  "  The  law  of  the  Divine 
action  is  evolution  from  small  beginnings,  the  development  of  all  organic  growths 
from  germs,  and  the  gradual  transformation  of  lower  into  higher  forms  of  being. 
Suppose  the  seeds  of  all  the  flora  of  the  world  in  all  its  latitudes  could  be  offered 
to  our  view  in  one  panoramic  vision.  Who  could  suppose,  apart  from  experience, 
that  out  of  such  a  collection  of  black  or  grey  or  yellow  dots,  or  tiny  cones,  or 
coloured  berries,  could  spring  the  cloud-piercing  forests  of  the  tropics,  or  of  the 
American  Andes,  and  all  the  radiant  glories  of  the  flowers,  shrubs,  and  trees  of 
the  temperate  zones  ?  Who  could  believe  that  such  a  marvellous  universe  of 
lovely  form  and  lovelier  colour  lay  hid  under  the  appearance  of  such  insignificant 
beginnings  ?  Extend  the  thought  to  the  world  of  birds,  to  the  development  of 
their  airy  figures  and  varied  plumages,  and  places  of  abode,  and  modes  of  living, 
all  springing  from  invisible  vital  germs  concealed  in  eggs  throughout  all  their 
uncountable  millions  of  millions  ;  and  finally  enlarge  the  conception  by  taking 
in  the  whole  animal  world  similarly  developed.  Who  after  such  a  review  could 
rationally  despise  the  day  of  small  things  ?  It  is  a  world  unceasingly  renewed 
from  invisible  points  of  life — points  of  life  developed  under  a  Divine  pervading 
power  into  the  imiverse  of  wonders  that  we  see  around  us.  The  visible  and 
materia]  is  a  type  of  the  unseen.  "  First  the  seed,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full  corn 
in  the  ear.  So  is  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  this  leads  us  directly  to  the  Divine 
lessons  inculcated  by  the  prophet  in  the  name  of  the  living  God  :  "  Who  hath 
despised  the  day  of  small  things  ?  " — the  lessons  learned  from  God  Himself,  and 
His  own  loving  procedure — (1)  Of  respect  for  all  early  growths  in  the  days  of 
their  feebleness  ;  (2)  Of  toleration  for  all  the  defects  of  their  early  stages  ;  and 
(3)  Of  patience  with  undeveloped  natures.  1.  The  old  Latin  proverb  teaches  ua 
that  "  great  reverence  is  due  to  the  young."  Oftentimes  there  is  very  little 
of  this  shown  to  them.  Many  of  the  most  unpleasant  qualities  of  childi-en  are 
frequently  the  direct  result  of  the  infainouB  treatment  which  they  receive  from 
their  elders.  Try  to  be  a  sun  to  your  planets,  not  raining  down  on  them  only 
the  cold  light  of  instruction  and  reproof,  but  the  warmer  rays  of  a  beneficent 
friendship.  Wise  words  cannot  take  the  place  of  loving  deeds.  Flowers  must 
have  sunshine.  Souls  must  have  tenderness.  If  you  "  despise  the  day  of  small 
things  "  here,  you  despise  the  foundations  of  the  future  structiu-es  of  the  temple 
of  the  Lord.  2.  In  the  same  manner  respect  the  beginnings  of  early  religion. 
Many  adult  Christians  appear  to  have  no  faith  in  the  reality  and  value  of  early 
piety.  Let  us  never  despise  the  day  of  small  things,  but  understanding  our  Lord's 
regard  for  elementary  faith  and  love,  never  be  detected  in  breaking,  as  imworthy 
of  reliance,  the  bruised  reed  of  childhood,  or  quenching  the  tiny  spark  on  its 
smoking  flax.     3.  In  the  same  manner  we  have  to  learn,  if  ourselves  established 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHAPJAH.  77 

Christians,  to  understand  and  sympathise  with  the  imperfect  development  of 
character  in  the  earlier  stages  of  adhesion  to  the  Son  of  God.  It  would  be  delight- 
ful if  all  Christians  were  suddenly  struck  into  perfection,  as  a  disc  of  gold  is  struck 
with  some  heroic  image  on  one  side,  and  with  St.  George's  victory  over  the  dragon 
on  the  other.  But  it  is  not  so.  The  plant  of  righteousness  is  a  growth.  The 
temple  slowly  rises.  The  formation  of  the  Divine  likeness  is  both  a  creative  and 
an  imitative  process.  Children  are  childish  in  both  worlds.  But  who  hath 
despised  the  immature  stages  of  development  ?  It  is  as  if  you  enter  a  sculptor's 
studio.  You  see  here  an  almost  shapeless  lump  of  clay ;  there  a  mass  beginning 
to  put  on  the  human  form ;  there  a  bust  beginning  to  speak  with  the  lines  of 
nobleness  or  beauty ;  there  a  piece  of  marble  undergoing  the  first  rougher  process 
of  assimilation  ;  there  an  artist  at  work  with  hammer  and  chisel,  striking  frequent 
blows  with  passionate  ardour,  as  said  Michael  Angelo,  as  if  he  would  "  set  free 
the  imprisoned  angel " ;  there  the  master-hand  at  work  on  his  final  touches, 
which  are  to  breathe  soul  into  the  stone,  and  beauty  and  life  into  the  dead  material, 
and  to  impress  on  it,  perhaps,  a  likeness  which  shall  transmit  to  future  ages  the 
countenance  which  overawed  or  delighted  contemporary  generations.  Even  so 
in  the  Church  you  see  souls  in  all  stages  of  progress  imder  the  Supreme  Artist's 
touch.  Learn,  then,  to  tolerate  the  defects  of  incipient  development.  We  know 
not  what  we  shaU  be,  and  we  &ee  not  what  others  will  be.  Simon,  the  passionate 
fisherman  of  Bethsaida,  became  the  steadfast  and  devoted  Rock,  or  Petra,  on 
which  Christ  has  built  His  Church.  The  Son  of  thunder  became  the  Apostle  of 
love.  The  ferocious  and  murderous  Saul  became  the  gentle  and  all-embracing 
father  of  the  Gentile  Churches.  God  only  knows  what  He  will  bring  out  of  any- 
thing. Man  can  bring  light  out  of  the  blackest  coal,  and  the  colours  of  the 
rainbow  in  the  aniline  dyes  are  extracted  from  gas-tar.  And  so  God  can  convert 
carbon  into  the  diamond,  and  souls  swarming  with  many  devils,  into  the  "  sons 
and  daughters  of  the  Lord  Almighty."  How  hopeful  as  well  as  tolerant  should 
such  a  retrospect  make  us  in  relation  to  the  unfinished  individualities  around  us. 
We  must  see  the  "  end  of  the  Lord  "  before  we  judge  of  His  work.  There  is  but 
one  Eye  that  sees  the  end  from  the  begimiing,  and  that  is  the  eye  of  the  Eternal. 
That  which  is  last  to  our  thought  is  first  to  Him.  The  evolutionary  prospect  is 
ever  before  Him,  and  in  looking  at  each  creature  He  sees  what  that  creature  shall 
become  in  all  the  stages  of  its  future  eternity.  We  know  not  what  we  shall  be  ; 
but  we  know  that  to  despise  small  things  now  is  to  contradict  the  processes  of 
Divine  thought,  and  to  flout  the  methods  of  Divine  procedure.  Each  soul  is 
the  subject  of  a  work  which  will  never  end,  under  the  hand  of  the  Omnipotent 
Designer.  And  that  which  will  satisfy  us,  when  we  awake  in  His  likeness,  and 
will  satisfy  Him  when  He  rests  with  delight,  and  sees  His  work  to  be  "  very  good," 
in  the  endless  Sabbath,  will  also  satiate  the  desires  of  His  tmder- workmen.  Oh, 
what  will  be  the  heaven  of  such  a  man  as  St.  Paul  ?  It  is  this  vision,  in  its  different 
degrees  of  glory,  which  the  Omniscient  Mind  sees  beforehand  for  all  God's  servants 
in  the  eternal  futm-e ;  and  it  is  because  He  sees  it,  that  He  warns  us  never  to 
"  despise  the  day  of  small  things  "  ;  because  each  soul  is  what  God  sees  it  to  be, 
not  only  now,  but  in  its  future  development.  {Edward  White.)  God's  blessing 
on  the  day  of  small  things: — 1.  God's  great  mind,  so  infinitely  above  om-  level,  does 
not  perceive  all  the  distinctions  we  are  wont  to  make  between  what  we  denominate 
great  and  small.  To  a  person  greatly  elevated,  all  below — people  and  buildings 
— appears  equally  small,  even  so  Jehovah  is  too  high  to  perceive  the  various 
grades  of  greatness  and  littleness  into  which  we  are  accustomed  to  divide  the 
affairs  of  life.  2.  It  has  ever  been  God's  plan  to  work  from  apparently  small 
beginnings  ;  had  He  chosen  He  could  have  commanded  great  things  at  once 
into  existence,  but  He  has  said,  "  A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousand,"  &c. 
(Isa.  Ix.  22).  The  great  Saviour  came  into  the  world  as  a  weak  babe  :  His  great 
kingdom  commenced  with  twelve  men,  most  of  whom  were  unlearned.  Mark  the 
insignificant  beginnings  of  modern  missions,  of  Sunda}^  Schools,  or  of  our  Christian 
Endeavour  Movement !  Truly,  "  God  chose  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  that 
He  might  put  to  shame  them  that  are  wise  ;  and  God  chose  the  weak  things  of 
the  world  that  He  might  put  to  shame  the  things  that  are  strong,"  &c.  (1.  Cor. 
i.  27).  3.  Those  who  despise  the  day  of  small  things  will  never  accomplish  gieat 
works.  It  is  dangerous  and  disastrous  to  make  light  of  the  small  beginnings 
of  evil,  sin,  or  bad  habits.  The  modern  scientific  theory  of  germs  may  be  used 
as  an  apt  illustration,  showing  how  the  neglect  of  even  infinitesimal  atoms  is 
the  cause  of  bo  much  fatal  disease.     4.  The  tenderness  of  God  comes  out  in  His 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

regard  for  the  small  and  weak.  "  A  bruised  reed  He  will  not  break,  and  smoking 
flax  shall  He  not  quench,  till  He  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory  "  (Matt, 
xii.  20).  Our  Lord  often  referred  to  the  small  beginnings  of  His  kingdom,  com- 
paring them  to  "  seeds,"  "a  grain  of  mustard  seed,"  "a  little  leaven"  (Matt.  xi.). 
The  day  of  small  things  is  the  day  of  precious  things,  but  we  are  not  to  be  satisfied 
until  it  becomes  the  day  of  great  things.  5.  Small  things  marked  the  beginning 
of  the  work  in  the  hand  of  ZerubbabeX  so  small  was  the  foundation  in  the  eyes 
of  those  who  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  former  temple,  that  "  they  wept  with  a 
loud  voice  "  (Ezra  iii.  12)  at  the  comparison  ;  but  God  assured  them  that,  in  the 
latter  end,  its  glory  should  be  greater,  inasmuch  as  the  Messiah  Himself  would 
stand  within  its  walls,  and  His  Gospel  be  proclaimed  therein  (Acts  v.  42). 
6.  There  is  great  comfort  here,  for  all  depressed  builders  of  the  spiritual  temple. 
The  work  progresses  so  slowly  that  we  are  often  discouraged.  But  let  the  work 
of  grace  be  ever  so  small  in  its  beginnings,  the  plummet  is  in  good  hands.  The 
great  Master-Builder  will  surely  accomplish  that  which  He  begins.  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  finisher  as  well  as  the  author  of  our  faith  (Heb.  xii.  2).  7.  "  God's  blessing 
on  it "  is  the  secret  of  all  success.  Work,  great  or  small,  without  this  is  utter 
failure.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Zech. 
iv.  6).  {E.  J.  B.)  Folly  of  despising  small  things  : — Value  of  little  things  may 
be  seen  in — I.  God's  providentiai,  deaungs  with  His  Church.  Give  illustra- 
tions from  both  Old  Testament  and  New,  from  the  Reformation,  and  from  modem 
missionary  societies.  II.  In  the  development  op  the  inner  life.  1.  In  the 
training  of  children.  2.  In  the  formation  of  habits ;  both  good  and  bad.  Con- 
clusion— (1)  God  is  with  the  Church  still.  Then  there  is  hope  in  our  small 
beginnings.  (2)  Patiently  work,  biding  God's  time.  (3)  Find  encouragement 
in  temptation  in  this,  that  "  He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,"  and  if  faith 
be  weak,  remember  that  a  child  may  as  really  (though  not  as  firmly)  hold  a  staflf 
as  a  strong  man.  (J.  0.  Pilkington,  M.A.)  The  day  of  small  things : — No 
doubt  many  of  the  Jews  had  looked  with  a  sort  of  contempt  on  the  apparently 
insignificant  beginning  which  had  been  made  towards  restoring  the  religion  of 
their  fathers,  and  had  discoiu-aged  one  another  by  insinuating  that  what  com- 
menced with  so  much  feebleness  was  never  likely  to  reach  a  successful  termina- 
tion. They  might  have  known  better.  Just  because  there  seemed  to  be  but 
little  proportion  between  the  agency  and  the  end,  they  decided  at  once  that  success 
was  hardly  to  be  looked  for,  and  that  it  was  useless  to  persevere  in  an  endeavour 
so  palpably  hopeless.  These  Jews  have  been  imitated  by  men  of  every  age. 
Much  of  the  evil  that  exists  in  the  world  may  be  traced  to  the  despising  "  the  day 
of  small  things."  I.  The  reasons  which  lie  against  such  despising.  God 
is  wont  to  work  through  instruments  or  means,  which  in  human  calculation  are 
disproportioned  to  the  ends  which  He  designs  to  accomplish.  He  does  not  always 
take  what  appears  to  us  a  mighty  agency,  when  a  mighty  result  is  to  be  achieved. 
There  is  in  us  all  a  tendency  to  ascribe  to  second  causes  what  ought  to  be  ascribed 
directly  to  the  First.  It  is  by  the  day  of  small  things  that  God  ordinarily  inter- 
poses those  great  revolutions  and  deliverances  which  alter  the  whole  state,  whether 
of  nations  or  of  individuals.  God  ordmarily  commences  with  what  appears 
inconsiderable.  II.  Certain  cases  in  which  the  "  day  of  small  things  "  is 
despised,  with  the  consequences  that  are  thence  likely  to  ensue.  We 
are  likely  to  make  light  of  small  things.  Take  the  case  of  the  slave  of  bad  habits. 
Few  plunge  immediately  into  evil.  Most  men  begin  by  deviating  from  the  right 
in  some  one  small  particular.  And  it  is  this  small  beginning  which  it  is  perilous 
to  despise.  Observe  the  ordinary  course  followed  by  God  in  His  spiritual  opera- 
tions on  unconverted  men.  They  are  not  for  the  most  part  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  operations  of  their  own  minds.  There  is  a  small  beginning  of  influence 
which  it  is  perilous  to  despise.  {Henry  Melvill,  B.D.)  SmaU  things  : — I.  What 
are  we  to  understand  by  the  "  DAY  OF  SMALL  THINGS  "  7  It  is  the  course  of  God 
that  the  beginning  shall  be  small  to  lead  to  great  effects.  We  see  this  in  creation, 
in  providence,  and  in  grace.  In  many  a  yoimg  and  tender  heart  there  has  been 
just  a  thought,  then  a  misgiving,  then  a  desire,  then  a  prayer.  And  that  was 
just  the  day  of  small  things  :  it  was  the  first  dawning  of  a  bright  day.  When 
God  begins  the  work,  He  carries  it  on  in  His  own  way,  therefore  perseverance  is 
the  great  mark  of  effectual  calling.  Think  of  those  who,  though  not  young  in 
years,  are  the  weak  in  faith.  They  are  always  wavering  between  hopes  and 
fears.  Wherever  we  look  we  may  see  a  "  day  of  small  things."  II.  Who  hath 
DBSFISBD  IT  7     God  does  not.     Jesus  will  not  despise  them.     Take  care  lest  you 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  79 

should  be  foiind  despising  it.  Apply  to  ministers,  parents,  teachers.  The  gradual 
work  in  souls  is  little  discernible,  but,  when  duly  reflected  on,  it  is  as  clearly  to 
be  traced  out  as  any  other.  (J.  U.  Evans.)  The  significance  of  apparent 
trifles : — I.  Illustrations  from  nattjre.     1.  The  seed.     2.  The  mountain  rivulet. 

3.  The  spark.  4.  The  child.  II.  Illustrations  from  providence.  1.  Scriptural, 
as  Joseph,  Moses,  David,  Esther.  2.  General,  as  Cromwell,  Napoleon,  III.  Illus- 
trations from  the  history  of  the  Church.  1,  Introduction  of  the 
Gospel.  2.  Reformation.  3.  The  religious  denominations.  4.  Benevolent  and 
religious  institutions.  {0.  Brooks.)  The  day  of  small  things  : — It  is  a  "  day 
of  small  things  "  with  you  as  regards  your — L  Conviction  of  sin.  How  easy 
it  is  to  know  ourselves  to  be  sinners,  how  hard  to  feel  oiirselves  to  be  such.  We 
distress  ourselves  because  it  seems  to  us  as  if  we  could  not  repent.  But  beware 
of  imagining  that  a  certain  number  of  tears,  a  certain  standard  of  repentance 
is  to  qualify  you  for  the  blessings  of  Christ's  salvation.  Try  yourself  thus, 
"  How  do  I  feel  with  regard  to  sin  ?  Have  I  any  desire  to  be  rid  of  it  in  its  power, 
as  well  as  in  its  consequences  7  Do  I  feel  any  real  degree  of  hatred  towards  it  ? 
Do  I  desire  to  hate  it  ?  "  If  you  can  answer  in  the  affirmative,  this  is  a  sure 
proof  that  God's  Spirit  has  not  forsaken  you.  The  Spirit's  office  is  to  convince 
of  sin.  n.  Faith.  Your  cry  is,  "  Lord,  I  believe,  help  Thou  mine  unbelief." 
You  have  no  doubts  as  to  the  power  of  Christ's  work ;  but  you  can  scarcely 
believe  there  is  salvation  for  you.  Many  are  in  darkness  and  disquietude  through 
lack  of  faith.  It  may  be  a  "  day  of  small  things  "  as  regards  your  faith  in  God's 
providence.  HI.  Christian  graces  and  the  practical  influence  of  religion 
ON  THE  LIFB.  This  again  is  a  source  of  deep  humiliation  and  much  disquietude 
to  you.  Be  not  discouraged.  The  work  of  grace  is  gradual  ;  you  cannot 
sow  the  seed  and  have  blossom  and  fruit  in  a  day.  IV.  Spiritual  peace  ash 
jot.  It  cannot  be  presumption  to  claim  what  God  bestows,  what  Christ  has 
purchased.  V.  Religious  knowledge.  You  find  many  difficulties  in  the 
Bible.  As  yet  you  seem  to  understand  only  "  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ."  How  then  are  you  to  go  on  to  perfection  ?  The  Spirit,  to  teach  and 
enlighten,  as  well  as  to  sanctify  and  comfort  you,  is  covenanted  to  you.  You 
shall  grow  in  knowledge  as  in  grace.  (John  C.  Miller. )  The  day  of  small  things 
not  to  he  despised  : — In  this  message  God  reproved  those  who  had  regarded  the 
new  temple  with  contempt,  and  those  also  who  thought  that  they  were  unable  to 
finish  it.  He  informed  them  that  the  work  was  His,  that  it  was  to  be  ( ffected 
not  by  human  might  nor  power,  but  by  His  Spirit.  Zerubbabel  should  finish  it, 
and  those  who  had  despised  the  feeble  commencement  of  the  work  should  witness 
its  completion.  I.  In  all  God's  works  there  is  usually  a  "  day  of  small 
THINGS."  There  is  a  season  in  which  His  work  makes  but  a  very  small  and 
unpromising  appearance.  Illustrate  from  the  beginnings  of  the  Christian  Church, 
ana  from  the  work  of  grace  in  the  hearts  of  individuals.  II.  Many  persons 
DESPISE  "the  day  OF  SMALL  THINGS."  God's  enemies  did  so  in  Zechariah's 
time.  The  friends  of  God  do.  They  think  too  little  of  it ;  they  undervalue 
it,  and  they  are  by  no  means  sufficiently  thankful  for  it,  and  therefore  may  be 
said,  comparatively  speaking,  to  despise  it.     Illustrate,  times  of  religious  revival 

fenerally  begin  with  persons  of  no  social  standing,  and  so  revivals  are  often 
espised.  Even  Christians  too  lightly  esteem  the  work  of  God  in  their  own 
hearts.  III.  Reasons  vthy  it  ought  not  to  be  despised.  1.  Such  conduct 
tends  to  prevent  its  becoming  a  day  of  great  things.  2.  Because  the  inhabitants 
of  heaven,  whose  judgment  is  according  to  truth,  do  not  despise  it.  3.  Because 
our  Saviour  does  not  despise  it.      "  The   smoking  flax  He   will  not   quench." 

4.  Our  Heavenly  Father  does  not  despise  it.  5.  Because  it  is  the  commencement 
of  a  day  of  great  things.  Apply — (1)  By  asking  every  individual  present,  is  it 
with  you,  in  a  religious  sense,  even  so  much  as  a  "  day  of  small  things  "  ?  Beware 
how  you  deny  or  underestimate  what  God  has  done  for  you.  (2)  There  is  an 
opposite  error.  Instead  of  despising  the  day,  some  professors  make  too  much 
of  it,  and  are  too  satisfied  with  it.  They  conclude  too  hastily  that  the  work  of 
grace  is  begun  in  their  hearts,  and  flatter  themselves  that  it  will  go  on,  without 
their  attention.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Weak  grace  encouraged: — It  is  not  easy 
to  determine  what  is  small.  Things,  at  first  apparently  trivial  and  uninteresting, 
often  become  very  great  and  momentous.  It  is  so  in  nature,  in  science,  in  political 
affairs,  in  moral  concerns.  What  inference  should  we  derive  hence  ?  A  philo- 
sopher will  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things ;  a  statesman  will  not ;  a  moralist 
will  not — and  shovild  a  Christian  ?     Apply  the  question  entirely  to  the  subject 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

of  religion.  1.  The  work  of  grace  in  the  soul  is  frequently  small  in  its  commence- 
ment. The  Christian  is  a  soldier,  and  the  beginning  of  his  career  is  naturally 
the  day  of  small  things.  The  Christian  is  a  scholar  ;  and  when  he  enters  the 
school,  it  is,  of  course,  a  "  day  of  small  things" ;  he  begins  with  the  rudiments. 
2.  Three  reasons  why  the  day  of  small  things  is  not  to  be  despised.  (I)  Our 
Saviour  does  not  despise  it.  He  received  and  blessed  the  weak.  (2)  Because 
such  a  day  is  precious.  Real  grace  is  infinitely  valuable.  It  is  the  work  of  God  ; 
the  image  of  God  ;  the  glory  of  God ;  the  delight  of  God.  A  little  grace  is  too 
precious  to  be  despised.  (3)  Because  it  will  be  a  day  of  great  things.  The  child 
will  become  a  man,  contemn  not  his  infancy.  Divine  grace  shall  assuredly 
increase.  What  is  sown  in  weakness  shall  be  raised  in  power.  Conclude  with 
a  question — Is  it  even  a  day  of  small  things  with  you  ?  With  an  admonition. 
Do  not  overlook  or  undervalue  imperfect  religion,  whether  in  yourselves  or  others. 
If  you  are  upright  in  heart  you  will  be  in  most  danger  of  despising  it  in  yourselves. 
You  are  in  some  danger  with  regard  to  others.  You  may  think  too  little  of  a 
real  work  of  grace.  You  may  suppose  God  has  done  nothing,  where  He  has  been 
doing  much.  With  a  caution.  Let  not  the  subject  cause  remissness  in  duty. 
Those  who  have  "  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gi-acious,"  will  cry  "  evermore  give  us 
this  bread."  More  is  attainable.  More  is  desirable.  There  are  two  reasons 
why  you  should  seek  growth  in  grace  ;  one  is  taken  from  usefulness,  and  the  other 
from  comfort.  [William  Jay.)  The  day  of  small  things  : — Contempt  for  small 
beginnings  is  one  of  the  most  ordinary  displays  of  the  human  disposition,  in  all  de- 
partments of  affairs,  but  especially  in  things  connected  with  sacred  interests.  Divers 
of  the  great  powers  and  influential  sj-stems,  good  or  evil,  that  have  had  a  mighty 
effect,  have  in  their  apparently  insignificant  origin  been  despised.  Individuals 
appointed  to  be  of  the  greatest  importance  in  the  world  have  often  experienced 
contempt  in  the  beginning  of  their  career.  This  is  true  of  David,  and  it  is  in  a 
sense  true  of  the  Son  of  Man.  The  vain  world  has  always  been  peculiarly  dis- 
posed to  an  unhesitating  contempt  of  the  small  beginnings  of  Divine  operations, — 
to  attribute  meanness  to  what  had  a  relation  to  infinite  greatness.  The  Christian 
cause  itself,  in  its  early  stage,  was  an  object  of  extreme  scorn;  every  ignominious 
epithet  was  connected  with  the  name  of  a  Christian.  So  fared  the  great  Reforma- 
tion. We  comment  on  the  tendency  in  men  to  indulge  contempt  for  good  things, 
in  the  littleness  and  weakness  of  their  beginnings  and  early  operations.  The 
case  with  our  world  is,  that  man,  having  lost  his  original  goodness,  was  to  be  under 
an  economy  of  disciphne,  for  his  correction  and  practical  restoration  ;  but  that 
the  operation  for  this  was  not  to  be  sudden,  but  by  various  processes,  commencing 
in  an  apparent  littleness  of  agency,  power,  and  scope,  so  as  to  appear,  in  human 
judgment,  incompetent  to  a  great  purpose.  Why  has  the  Sovereign  Wisdom 
appointed  it  so  ?  It  is  a  higher  discipline  for  the  servants  of  God,  as  agents  in 
a  good  cause,  as  it  brings  their  principle  of  obedience  under  a  more  plain,  une- 
quivocal proof.  It  tends  to  keep  them  under  a  direct,  pressing  conviction  that 
all  the  power  is  of  God.  They  will  also  have  a  stronger  sense  of  the  value  of  the 
good  that  is  so  hardly  and  so  slowly  accomphshed.  Can  we  expose  the  error 
and  injustice  of  this  disposition  to  despise  small  beginnings  ?  It  comes  from  not 
duly  apprehending  the  preciousness  of  what  is  good,  in  any,  even  the  smallest 
portion  of  it.  Any  essential  good,  in  the  highest  sense,  is  a  thing  of  inexpressible 
value  :  especially  so  in  an  evil  world,  where  it  is  scattered  among  baser  elements. 
Again,  in  the  indulgence  of  this  disposition,  it  is  left  out  of  sight,  how  much,  in 
many  cases,  was  requisite  to  be  previously  done,  to  bring  the  small  beginning  into 
existence  at  all :  it  did  not  start  into  existence  of  itself.  Though  small,  it  may 
have  been  the  result  of  a  large  combination.  Another  thing  is  that  we  are  apt 
to  set  far  too  high  a  price  on  our  own  efforts  and  services.  Far  enough  from 
Bmall,  truly,  have  been  our  labours,  expenditures,  sacrifices,  self-denials,  incon- 
veniences, pleadings,  perhaps  praj'^crs.  Our  self-importance  cannot  endure  that 
80  much  of  our  agency,  ours,  should  be  consumed  for  so  small  a  result.  A  tenth 
part  of  the  pains  should  have  done  as  much.  It  is  not  an  equivalent ;  and  it  is 
a  hard  doom  to  woik  on  such  terms.  Again,  we  overmeasure  our  brief  span  of 
mortal  existence.  Wc  want  all  that  is  done  for  the  world  to  be  done  in  our  time. 
We  want  to  contract  the  Almighty's  plan  to  our  own  limits  of  time,  and  to  pre- 
cipitate the  movement,  that  we  may  clearly  see  the  end  of  it.  In  all  this  there 
is  the  impiety  of  not  duly  recognising  the  supremacy  of  God.  The  grand  essential 
of  religion — faith— is  wanting;  faith  in  the  unerring  wisdom  of  the  Divin© 
scheme  and  determinations:  faith  in  the  goodness  of  God.     With  such  faith  let 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  81 

us  look  on  the  "  day  of  small  things,"  and  remonstrate  against  the  tendency  to 
despise  it ;  whether  it  be  in  good  men,  from  impatience,  and  a  very  censurable 
self-importance ;  or  in  worldly  men,  from  irreligion.  Look  into  the  natviral 
world,  as  having  an  analogy  emblematical  of  a  higher  order  of  things.  In  nature 
we  see  many  instances  of  present  actual  littleness  containing  a  powerful  principle 
of  enlargement :  such  as  the  seed  of  a  plant,  the  germ  of  a  flower,  the  acorn  of 
the  oak.  In  fire  there  is  a  mysterious  principle  of  tremendous  power.  Does  the 
parent  despise  the  day  of  small  things  in  his  infant  ?  Turn  to  the  kingdom  of 
God  on  earth,  the  promotion  of  which  is  the  cause  of  God.  There  the  small  things 
are  to  be  estimated  according  to  what  they  are  to  become.  But  what  things, 
as  yet  comparatively  small,  come  under  this  description  ?  We  answer ;  all 
things,  judiciously  and  in  good  faith,  attempted  to  promote  the  best  cause,  that 
is,  to  diminish  the  awful  sum  of  human  depravity  and  misery.  Efforts  to  diminish 
ignorance.  The  topic  includes  the  progress  of  genuine  Christianity.  Looking 
abroad,  we  can  but  think  it  a  "  day  of  small  things  "  for  Christianity.  But  what 
is  it,  that,  on  this  account,  shall  be  despised  ?  Is  it  Christianity  itself,  or  is  it 
God  who  sent  it  ?  We  may  be  confident  that  when  God  makes  or  causes  a 
beginning  of  a  good  work,  it  is  intended  for  progress  and  expansion.  Now  to 
remonstrate  and  warn  against  "  despising."  To  a  decidedly  irreligious  con- 
temner, we  might  say,  "  Beware  what  you  do  ;  for  if  the  thing  be  of  God  you 
are  daring  Him  by  your  contempt."  There  is  also  admonition  to  those  who  are 
too  apt  to  fall  into  something  like  what  the  text  describes, — not  from  hostility 
to  religion  and  general  improvement,  but  from  want  of  faith, — from  indolence, 
cowardice,  or  mere  worldly  calculation, — reckoning  on  things  without  reckoning 
on  God.  To  undervalue  is  in  a  certain  sense  to  "  despise."  Shall  there  not  be 
an  admonition  to  examine  whether  pride,  or  sluggishness,  or  covetousness  have 
not  something  to  do  with  it  ?  In  some  cases,  it  partly  proceeds  from  the  less 
blamable  cause  of  a  gloomy,  apprehensive,  disconsolate  constitution  of  mind, — 
looking  on  the  dark  side, — dismayed  by  difficulties, — prone  to  fear  the  most 
and  hope  the  least,  dwelling  on  remembered  and  recorded  failures  more  than 
on  successes.  But  there  may  be  the  interference  of  pride.  A  man  shall  have 
such  a  notion  of  himself,  and  of  a  good  cause,  as  to  deem  it  imbefitting  his  dignity 
to  connect  or  concern  himself  with  it.  It  is  not  of  an  order,  or  in  a  state,  to  reflect 
any  honour  on  a  man  of  his  high  sentiments,  refined  habits,  or  consideration  in 
society.  With  some  men  a  good  work  or  design  is  of  "  small  "  account,  when 
it  has  not  the  quality  for  rousing  the  sluggish  temperament,  nothing  to  excite 
gaze  and  wonder.  Ckjvetousness  is  one  of  the  most  decided  practical  "  despisings." 
Most  truly  does  a  man  treat  the  good  things  as  contemptibly  small,  when  he 
deems  them  not  worth  his  money,  that  is,  money  which  he  could  afford.  We 
would  rather  refer  to  such  as  were  not  positively  enemies,  whose  "  despising," 
in  a  mitigated  sense  of  the  word,  was  from  little  faith,  self-sparing,  false  prudence, 
worldly  calculation.  They  have  lived  to  see  that  the  good  cause  can  do  without 
them,  and  that  there  were  more  generous,  liberal,  magnanimous  spirits  to  be  found 
in  the  community.  Well,  at  all  events,  the  good  cause  of  God,  of  Christ,  of  human 
improvement,  is  certain,  is  destined  to  advance  and  triumph.  It  may  at  last 
be  seen  that  the  whole  course  of  the  world,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  was 
"  a  day  of  small  things,"  as  compared  with  the  sequel — only  as  a  brief  introduction 
to  an  immense  and  endless  economy.  {John  Foster.)  Christian  appreciation 
of  little  things  : — Zerubbabel  was  taught  of  the  Lord  to  hold  in  due  esteem  even" 
the  imperfect  commencement  already  made,  and  to  regard  with  a  degree  of  assur- 
ance and  satisfaction  the  feeble  results  his  hands  had  already  wrought.  This 
is  but  one  of  the  vmcounted  instances,  both  in  Scripture  and  in  nature,  of  the 
affectionate  interest  with  which  God  regards  "  little  things."  It  is  not  quite 
easy  and  natural  for  us  to  think  of  God  as  putting  all  the  skill  of  His  thought  and 
interest  of  His  heart  in  the  small  matters  of  His  providence  and  His  workmanship. 
In  all  oiu"  at1emr>ts  to  fig\;re  and  localise  Him,  we  resort  instantly  and  spontane- 
ously to  words  that  represent  immensity  of  height,  and  breadth,  and  circuit.  It 
is  not  the  drop,  but  the  ocean — not  the  pebble,  but  the  mountain  that  seems  to 
us  redolent  of  Divine  suggestion,  and  freighted  with  Divine  presence.  This 
tendency  prompts  us  to  see  God  in  the  flashing  of  the  lightning,  and  to  hear  Him 
in  the  peaJirie  of  the  thunder,  but  makes  us  d"af  to  Him  in  th?  pattering  of  the 
ram.  the  sighing  of  the  wind,  and  the  twittering  of  the  sparrow.  Happ}?^  is  the 
Iran  and  the  prophet  that  has  the  ear  to  detect  the  Divineness  that  lodges  in  the 
little  quiet  voices  of  God's  works  and  providences.  It  is  only  when  we  pass  into 
6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rv. 

the  New  Testament  that  we  get  the  best  assurances  of  God's  distributed  regard, 
and  of  BGs  detailed  interest  and  affection.  It  is  the  genius  of  the  (Jospel  to  try 
and  convince  men  of  God's  fatherly  concern  for  us.  But  fatheriy  concern  always 
particularises  and  individualises  :  and  so  in  the  Gospel  there  is  not  much  about 
the  sky,  but  a  great  deal  about  the  ground  :  not  much  about  masses  of  men,  but 
about  individual  men.  God  feeds  the  bird,  paints  the  lily,  clothes  the  grass. 
"  Even  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  aU  numbered."  Christ's  history,  from 
the  Baptism  to  the  Ascension,  is  mostly  made  up  of  little  words,  little  deeds, 
little  prayers,  little  sympathies,  adding  themselves  together  in  unwearied  succes- 
sion. One  reason  why  we  have  no  more  continuous  and  solid  comfort  in  our 
Christian  life  is,  that  we  are  looking  and  feeling  after  great  joys,  and  neglecting 
and  failing  to  economise  the  multitude  of  little  blessings  that  are  within  reach, 
and  that,  if  husbanded  and  cultivated,  would  go,  in  most  cases,  to  compose  a  life 
quite  substantially  delightful  and  quite  solidly  comfortable.  It  is  not  well  to 
pray  for  great  joys.  There  is  something  disturbing  and  unsettling  in  them. 
It  is  a  great  deal  better  to  pray  that  we  may  have  our  hearts  let  into  an  apprecia- 
tion of  our  everyday  joys,  and  into  an  appreciation  of  the  goodness  of  God  in 
that  these  everyday  joys  come  to  a  very  quiet  but  very  steady  expression.  We 
•  want  a  Christian  genius  for  infusing  sublimity  into  trifles.  Some  one  has 
said,  "  It  is  better  that  joy  should  be  spread  over  aU  the  day,  in  the  form  of 
strength,  than  that  it  should  be  concentrated  into  ecstasies,  full  of  danger, 
and  followed  by  reactions."  Our  lives  would  be  more  fruitful  if  we  let  our  hearts 
feel  the  incessant  droppings  of  heavenly  mercy.  The  constant  dropping  of  God's 
little  goodnesses  seems  designed,  not  so  much  for  their  own  sakes,  but,  like  the 
constant  dropping  of  the  rain,  that  they  may  be  to  us  a  kind  of  heavenly  fertility, 
soaking  in  at  the  soul's  pores,  and  sinking  down  around  the  roots  of  our  manly 
Christian  purposes,  nourishing  those  purposes,  becoming  absorbed  into  them, 
and  so  quickening  them,  building  them  up,  and  pushing  them  on  to  fructification. 
What  capacity  even  the  most  commonplace  living  has  for  affording  us  discipline. 
A  good  angel  really  hides  in  every  provocation  and  petty  exasperation.  The 
little  tests  that  are  given  to  our  temper,  our  faith,  our  affection,  our  consecration, 
are  more  efficacious  than  the  larger  and  more  imposing  ones.  They  take  us  when 
we  are  off  our  guard.  There  is  something  in  great  occasions  that  nerves  us  to 
powers  of  endurance  not  properly  our  own.  We  ought  to  show  great  respect 
for  little  opportunities  of  service  and  patent  continuance  in  small  well-doings. 
[Charles  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  Duty  in  relation  to  the  little  : — I.  It  is  seldom 
WISE  TO  DESPISE  "  THE  DAY  OF  SMALL  THINGS."  This  is  shown  by  history  and  obser- 
vation. Look  at  nature.  Into  the  hand  of  an  infant  may  be  put  an  acorn  which 
shall  be  the  parent  of  many  forests.  The  Wye  and  the  Severn  may  be  turned 
whithersoever  you  please  at  their  source,  and  a  child  may  step  over  them.  Afc 
their  outset  they  are  indebted  to  the  very  smallest  possible  rill,  and  even  to  the 
tears  of  rushes.  Look  at  men.  Rembrandt  painted  in  a  smithy  ;  Pascal  traced 
his  Euclid  with  chalk ;  Wilkie  drew  his  first  rough  sketch  on  the  white-washed 
walls  of  his  father's  rooms  with  a  burnt  stick ;  and  it  was  with  a  burnt  stick  ou 
his  father's  barn  door  that  one  of  Wales's  most  celebrated  preachers  learned  to 
write.  Luther  was  but  the  son  of  a  miner,  Carey  a  shoemaker,  and  Morrison  a  last 
1)  aker  !  And  who  can  help  going  back  to  the  humble  company  of  the  Galilean 
fisherman  who  afterwards  turned  the  world  upside  down.  Sydney  Smith  made 
sport  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  because  the  first  collection  on  its  behalf 
was  only  £13,  2s.  6d.  ;  and  to  come  to  a  recent  Lancashire  political  movement, 
who  can  forget  the  Anti-corn  law  league's  "  day  of  small  things  "  and  sub- 
sequent grand  success  ?  II.  It  IS  generally  wrong  to  despise  "  the  day  op 
SMALL  things."  1.  There  is  a  heartlessness  in  it.  It  is  during  "  the  day  of  small 
things  "  that  men  need  sympathy  and  help.  Johnson  in  composing  his  dictionary, 
and  many  others  in  all  fields  of  labour.  '  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  At 
one  point  in  a  man's  history,  a  kind  word,  a  sympathising  look,  and  a  cordial 
grasp  of  the  hand  will  be  felt  to  be  of  more  service  than  any  amount  of  money 
at  a  subsequent  stage  in  his  career.  2.  There  is  a  cowardice  in  it.  The  cowardice 
of  sneering  at  honest,  well-meant  efforts  on  a  small  scale.  3.  There  is  an  injustice 
in  it.  The  injustice  of  withholding  encouragement  and  praise  from  men  who  so 
act  as  to  deserve  success,  whether  they  succeed  or  not.  Blessed  is  the  man  who 
btill  believes  that  "  wisdom  is  better  than  folly,  though  it  fail  to  bring  him  bread 
during  t'  e  reign  of  fools."  The  right — the  Christian  thing  should  take  precedence 
of  all  calculations  as  to  the  scale  of  operations.     The  right  must  be  weighed  in  its 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  83 

own  scales — tested  by  its  own  standard.  The  extreme  importance  of  not  "  despis- 
ing the  day  of  small  things  "  in  regard  to — 1.  The  formation  of  bad  and  irreligious 
habits.  2.  The  formation  of  religious  habits,  and  the  cherishing  of  religious 
impressions  and  convictions.  3.  The  p-esent  attainmen's  and  spiritual  stature  of 
professing  and  real  Christians.  4.  The  final  prevalence  of  Christianity  throughout 
the  world.  (Homilist. )  Day  of  small  things — A  talk  with  children  : — We  are 
all  inclined  to  underestimate  the  importance  of  little  things  whenever  we  see 
them.  We  should  not  despise  them — 1.  Because  small  things  are  often  too  power- 
ful to  be  despised.  Our  enemies  are  microbes,  not  lions.  The  discoveries  of 
science  are  chiefly  in  the  direction  of  showing  the  terror  of  small  things.  2.  Because 
of  the  exceeding  beauty  of  small  things.  Illustrate  by  the  revelations  of  the 
microscope.  Their  beauty  teaches  us  that  God  has  taken  care  to  make,  not  only 
big  things,  but  even  the  smallest  things  exquisitely  beautiful.  He  is  such  a  perfect 
worker  that  He  would  not  do  anything  imperfectly.  And  with  us,  careful  atten- 
tion to  little  things  will  help  to  form  a  noble  character  for  life.  If  you  become 
negligent  and  slovenly  in  school  you  will,  by  and  by,  be  slovenly  in  life.  There 
is  no  knowing  what  httle  things  may  become  as  time  unfolds.  You  httle  children, 
learn  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  love,  and  you  may  turn  out  a  great  reformer,  or 
such  an  one  as  Luther,  Knox,  Wesley,  Spm-geon,  or  Florence  Nightingale.  Then 
never  treat  small  opportunities  with  indifference,  but  consider  that  every  great 
thing  has  come  from  a  little  beginning,  and  that  a  great  life,  as  a  rule,  consists 
of  many  little  things  well  done.  (Davvd  Davies.)  Small  things  (to  children) : — 
You,  my  children,  are  living  in  the  day  of  small  things,  the  day  of  little  sorrows 
and  little  joys  and  little  sins  and  little  thoughts  and  words,  but  do  not  despise 
the  day  of  small  things.  The  greatest  results,  both  of  good  and  evil,  come  from 
small  beginnings.  There  is  an  old  fable  that  the  trees  of  the  forest  once  held 
a  meeting,  to  complain  of  the  injuries  which  the  woodman's  axe  had  done  them. 
All  the  trees  determined  that  none  of  them  would  give  any  wood  to  make  a  handle 
for  their  enemy  the  axe.  The  axe  went  travelling  up  and  down  the  forest,  begging 
the  oak  and  the  elm,  the  cedar  and  the  ash,  to  give  him  wood  enough  for  a  handle, 
but  they  all  refused.  At  last  the  axe  begged  for  just  enough  wood,  only  a  little 
bit,  to  enable  him  to  cut  down  the  brambles,  which  were  choking  the  roots  of  the 
trees.  Well,  they  agreed  to  this,  and  gave  him  a  little  wood,  but  no  sooner  had 
the  axe  got  a  handle  than  the  cedar  and  the  oak,  the  ash  and  the  elm,  and  all  the 
trees  were  cut  down.  So  is  it  with  sins  and  bad  habits.  They  begin  with  a 
very  small  beginning;  the  tempter  whispers,  "  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?  "  and  then, 
if  you  yield  to  them,  they  cut  you  down  and  destroy  you.  Remember  that  one 
single  worm  can  kill  a  whole  tree.  Never  think  sin  is  a  trifle  ;  it  may  seem  small 
to  you,  but  it  is  none  the  less  dangerous.  A  scorpion  is  a  very  small  reptile,  but 
it  can  sting  a  lion  to  death.  There  are  plenty  of  ruined  men  and  women,  who 
began  as  children  by  being  too  idle  to  get  up  betimes  in  the  morning,  and  to  do 
their  work.  If  you  want  to  get  rid  of  the  weeds  in  yoiu-  garden,  pull  them  up 
when  they  are  young ;  don't  give  them  time  to  grow  strong  and  run  to  seed.  If 
you  want  to  grow  up  to  be  good  men  and  women,  try  to  get  the  better  of  bad 
habits  whilst  you  are  young.  One  of  the  labours  of  Hercules  was  to  kill  the 
hydra,  a  horrible  monster  with  one  hundred  heads.  A«  fast  as  one  head  was 
cut  off  two  more  grew  in  its  place  vmless  the  wound  was  stopped  with  fire.  We 
have  aU  got  some  kind  of  a  monster  like  the  hydra  to  fight  with.  Perhaps  your 
monster  is  bad  temper,  or  laziness,  or  untruthfulness.  You  must  fight  against 
your  monster,  and  cut  off  its  head.  And  you  must  get  the  wound  biu-nt  with 
fire,  that  the  heads  may  not  grow  again.  I  mean,  that  you  must  pray  to  God 
to  help  you,  and  to  send  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  your  assistance.  Little 
sins  seem  like  trifles  to  us.  Well,  a  grain  of  sand  seems  a  very  little  thing  too, 
yet  millions  of  grains  of  sand  form  a  desert,  and  bury  the  traveller  beneath  them. 
When  we  do  wrong  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  ourselves  we  think  it  a  small  matter, 
and  look  forward  to  having  our  own  way.  But  we  find  in  time  that  what  we  get 
by  owe  sin  crushes  us  at  last.  In  the  early  days  of  Rome  the  governor  of  the 
citadel,  the  strongest  part  of  the  town,  had  a  daughter  called  Tarpeia.  ^Vhen 
the  Sabines,  a  neighbouring  tribe,  came  to  attack  Rome,  Tarpeia  promised  to 
open  the  gates  to  the  enemies  of  her  people.  As  a  reward  she  asked  for  what 
the  Sabines  carried  on  their  left  hands,  meaning  their  golden  bracelets.  When 
the  treacherous  woman  had  let  them  in  the  king  of  the  Sabines  not  only  threw 
his  bracelet  upon  Tarpeia,  but  also  his  heavy  shield,  which  was  carried  on  the 
left  hand.     His  followers  did  the  same,  and  Tarpeia  was  crushed  beneath  the 


8i  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


shields  and  bracelets.  So  it  is  with  sin.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  Again 
little  words  seem  trifles,  but  they  are  very  important.  Such  words  as  "  I  shan't," 
"  I  won't,"  "  I  don't  care,"  have  made  many  a  parent's  heart  sad,  and  spoilt 
many  a  promising  life.  (H.  Wilmot  Baxton,  M.A.)  Small,  but  enougli : — 
In  Sir  Henry  M.  Stanley's  account  of  his  African  experiences  he  t«lls  of  his  first 
encounter  with  a  pigmy  tribe  that  used  poisoned  arrows.  With  contemptuous 
smiles  the  young  men  drew  out  the  tiny  darts,  flung  them  away,  and  continued 
answering  the  savages  with  rifle-shots.  Wlien  the  day's  fight  was  over  the  wounds, 
which  were  mere  pmictures,  were  syringed  with  warm  water  and  bandaged,  but 
soon  the  poison  began  to  be  felt,  and  all  who  were  wounded  either  died  after 
terrible  suffering,  or  had  their  constitutions  wrecked  or  were  incapacitated  for 
a  long  time.  So  the  smallest  sin  does  its  work  in  the  heart  and  life,  sooner  or 
later.  SmaU,  hut  growing : — When  the  father  of  William  the  Conqueror  was  depart- 
ing to  the  Holy  Land  he  called  together  the  peers  of  Normandy,  and  requued 
them  to  swear  allegiance  to  his  young  son,  who  was  a  mere  infant.  ^Vhen  the 
barons  smiled  at  the  feeble  babe  the  king  promptly  replied  to  their  smile  :  "  He 
may  be  little  now,  but  he  will  grow."  And  he  did  grow.  That  same  baby  hand 
ere  long  ruled  the  nation  with  a  rod  of  iron.  The  same  may  be  said  of  evil  in  its 
tiniest  form:  "  It  is  little,  but  it  will  grow."  Once  let  the  smallest  sin  gain  the 
upper  hand,  and  it  will  destroy  the  whole  life.  No  influence  is  smaU : — The  great 
tendency  in  many  Christians  of  circumscribed  lives  is  to  believe  that  their  influence 
is  small.  TeU  them  that  they  have  a  large  influence  over  the  people  among  whon; 
they  live,  and  they  will  at  once  dispute  it  and  perhaps  blush  at  the  thought 
of  their  having  any  perceptible  degree  of  influence.  And  this  is  true  of  many 
Christians  of  acknowledged  piety,  ability,  and  clean  records.  And  it  is  because 
of  this  feeling  that  not  a  few  of  these  good  people  do  not  put  forth  that  effort  to 
reach  and  help  others  which  they  easily  might.  They  are  afflicted  with  a  modesty 
which  underrates  the  real  measure  of  their  power  and  possible  ministry.  Better 
realise,  Christian  brother,  that,  however  weak  and  narrow  your  ability  may  seem 
to  you  to  be,  your  influence  is  never  small,  but  always  large.  You  cannot  make 
it  otherwise  if  you  would.  An  eminent  preacher  says  :  "  Do  not  fear  that  yom* 
influence  be  small ;  no  influence  is  small :  but  even  if  it  were,  the  aggregate  of 
small  influences  is  far  more  irresistible  than  the  most  vigorous  and  heroic  of 
isolated  efforts."  Did  you  ever  think  of  the  influence  which  the  odour  of  a  little 
bed  of  flowers  has  ?  Everything  around  that  bed  is  influenced  by  it ;  every  one 
coming  near  it  is  consciously  affected  by  it.  Do  not  excuse  yourself  from  duty 
of  any  sort  on  the  plea  of  having  no  influence.  {G.  H.  Wetherbe.)  A  little 
ivoman  and  a  big  war  : — When  Mrs.  Stowe,  who  -WTote  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin," 
visited  the  White  House,  President  Lincoln  bent  over  her,  saying:  "  And  this  is 
the  little  woman  who  made  this  big  war  ?  "  The  freeing  of  the  serfs  in  Russia 
was  the  result  of  thoughts  aroused  by  the  reading  of  the  novelist's  story,  so  the 
Czar  told  Turgenef.  The  resolution  of  a  moment : — At  Toulon,  Napoleon,  looking 
out  of  the  batteries,  drew  back  a  step  to  let  some  one  take  his  place.  The  next 
moment  the  new-arrived  was  killed.  That  step  brought  the  French  Empire, 
and  made  possible  the  bloody  role  of  its  victories  and  defeats.  The  rout  at  Water- 
loo turned  on  a  shower  of  rain  hindering  Grouchy's  advance.  The  resolution 
of  a  moment  with  some  men  has  been  the  turning-point  of  infinite  issues  to  a 
world.  (J.  C.  Geikie.)  Great  results  from  small  beginnings  : — A  little  babe  is 
born  in  a  poor  miner's  home  at  Eiselben,  Saxony,  November  1483.  Few  notice  his 
birth,  but  in  1519  Martin  Luther  shakes  the  foundation  of  the  papal  throne,  and 
saves  Europe  from  gross  ignorance  and  superstition.  August  25th,  1759,  William 
Wilberforce  was  born  at  Hull.  Who  imagined  that  this  small  babe  would  one 
day  become  the  savioiur  of  the  slaves,  and  that  on  August  15th,  1838,  800,000 
African  bondsmen  would  rend  the  air  with  cries  of  "  Freedom's  come  "  ?  Nothing 
should  be  despised : — Down  at  Greenock  there,  on  an  ordinary  working  man's 
hob,  there  is  a  kettle  boiling.  Kettles  have  boiled  in  Scotland  millions  of  times 
before.  Listen  to  the  lid.  "  Rat-a-tat !  "  Listen  !  Don't  judge  it  I  The 
ears  of  a  genius  are  suddenly  fixed  on  the  sound  of  the  lid  that  is  raised  by  the 
bubbling  of  the  boiling  water.  What  have  you  there  ?  You  have  the  birth  of 
the  giant  steam  forces  that  are  abroad  on  the  world  to-day.  Don't  be  hasty 
either  about  men  or  method — about  workers  or  work ;  you  never  know  what  it 
is  to  grow  to,  if  God  be  in  it.  Over  in  an  American  State  there  is  a  kite  flying 
as  the  thimder-cloud  is  coming  across  the  sky,  and  there  is  a  man  holding  the 
string  like  a  silly  schoolboy.     "  Oh,  what  an  undignified  thing,"  you  say.     And 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECHARIAH.  85 

he  has  a  key  in  his  hand.  He  is  tapping  away  at  the  bottom  there,  when  suddenly 
a  spark  is  seen.  What  are  you  going  to  say  about  it  ?  A  small  thing,  yet  per- 
haps one  of  the  mightiest  events  that  ever  took  place  in  this  world.  It  is  the 
birth  of  electricity — the  birth  of  the  electric  forces  that  bind  the  Antipodes  to 
our  shores.  Ah,  be  careful !  When  God  is  in  it  you  do  not  know  what  is  to 
come  out  of  it.  But  these  men,  though  chosen  by  God,  have  got  no  extra  intellect. 
They  have  no  extra  learning,  and  would  have  been  passed  by  even  for  a  Socialif  tic 
propaganda.  It  was  not  likely  that  these  men  should  carry  the  banner  of  the 
Cross  as  they  did.  "  Only  a  little  chit  of  a  boy,"  the  elder  said  at  a  Scottish 
communion ;  "  only  one  chit  of  a  boy  joined  us  this  communion  "  ;  and  he 
thought  the  minister  was  wasting  his  time,  night  after  night,  with  that  little  chit 
of  a  boy.  But  in  that  Scottish  parish  there  was  never  such  a  communion,  never 
such  a  joining  of  the  Church ;  for  that  little  boy  was  Robert  Moffat,  Africa's 
missionary.  Never  despise  anything,  for  you  never  know  to  what  it  will  grow. 
{John  Robertson.)  The  day  of  small  things  : — This  very  sweet  and  evangelical 
minor  prophet  bore  his  burden  of  prophecy  after  the  retiu-n  from  the  Babylonish 
Captivity.  The  second  temple,  erected  in  his  time,  was  of  no  esteem  in  the  sight 
of  the  people,  few  and  poor  as  they  were,  whose  fathers  had  boasted  to  them  of 
the  glory  of  the  first  temple.  But  the  prophet  cheers  them  as  his  fellow-prophet 
Haggai  did,  who  said,  "  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater  than  of  the 
former !  "  In  this  despised  temple  the  people  would  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  had 
sent  His  servant  to  them.  Man  is  never  so  apt  to  err  as  in  coming  to  hasty 
conclusion  with  regard  to  God's  dealing  with  him.  I.  Otjbs  is  a  day  of  small 
THINGS.  1 .  We  live  in  a  small  world.  Many  worlds  that  surround  us  in  space  greatly 
exceed  ours  in  size.  We  stand,  as  it  were,  upon  an  atom  of  God's  material  creation. 
2.  Oiu-  bodies  are  small  portions  of  this  world.  Over  these  alone  we  have  immediate 
control,  and  that  in  a  very  partial  degree.  3.  Our  faculties  are  few.  We  have 
but  five  senses  of  the  body  and  five  of  the  mind.  These  are  at  our  command 
in  a  hrait-  d  and  imperfect  manner.  4.  Our  knowledge  of  matter  is  small.  Natiu-e 
is  ever  sparing  in  her  revelations.  5.  Our  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Mind  is  small. 
II.  This  day  should  not  be  despised.  Why  should  it  ?  It  is  ours.  No  one 
despises  his  own.  Despise — 1.  Not  small  opportunities  of  obtaining  rehgious 
knowledge.  This  is  the  chief  knowledge.  Its  smallest  morsels  are  more  precious 
than  pearl-dust.  Religious  knowledge  is  useful  for  two  Uves — a  guide  for  both 
worlds.  2.  Not  small  opportunities  of  doing  good  for  Christ.  We  have  not  all 
abundance  of  wealth  to  enrich  God's  sanctuary.  Few  have  ten  talents  to  occupy 
tintil  He  comes.  3.  Not  small  sins  in  their  earUest  stage.  However  small,  they 
are  deviations  from  the  right  path ;  the  lines  containing  a  small  angle,  if  produced 
far,  become  far  asunder.  As  large  rivers  spring  from  small  sources,  so  small  sins 
soon  grow  to  be  large.  Sinning  is  strengthened  by  habit,  and  increases  in  its 
onward  course.  4.  Not  small  chastisements  for  sin.  6.  Not  small  rehgious 
impressions.  You  may  never  get  stronger  ones  to  start  with.  By  being  timely 
cherished  they  will  grow  in  strength.  Why  we  should  not.  Because  oiur  present 
day  is  but  the  infancy  of  our  being.  Our  brief  time  will  give  birth  to  an  eternity  ; 
a  dwarf  will  be  the  parent  of  a  giant.  We  shall  have  to  give  an  accoimt  of  how 
we  spend  it.  Why  should  we  differ  from  others  with  regard  to  the  day  of  small 
things  ?  God  despises  not  small  things ;  if  He  did.  He  would  not  have  created 
so  many  of  them.  Nor  does  the  Chiurch  ;  it  receives  the  weakest  in  the  faith,  and 
performs  the  smallest  duties.  Nor  does  the  Evil  One,  with  his  mahcious  craftiness. 
(J.  Bowen  Jones,  B.A.) 

Vers.  11-14.  What  are  these  two  olive  trees.  —  The  candlestick  and  the 
olive  trees  : — In  the  parable  of  Zechariah  we  have  the  picture  of  a  lamp  supplied 
not  by  a  liitsited  quantity  of  oil  contained  in  metal  or  earthenware  vessels,  but 
by  an  unlimited  unfailing  quantity  from  a  living  source.  It  was  not  part  of  the 
produce  of  an  olive  harvest  that  kept  the  candlestick  burning  brightly;  for  that 
supply  would  in  course  of  time  have  been  exhausted  :  even  tlie  whole  crop 
of  olives  of  one  year  would  in  course  of  time  have  failed.  And  what  a  beautiful 
symbol  of  the  bountifulness  and  enduringness  of  grace  this  is  !  We  do  not  get 
a  limited,  carefully  measured  supply  from  Christ,  but  an  unlimited,  ever-flowing 
fulne.ss.  He  will  supply  all  our  need;  not  according  to  our  own  sense  of  need, 
but  according  to  His  riches  in  glory.  Christ  came  not  that  we  might  have  a 
bare  life,  snatched  from  the  condemnation  of  the  law,  but  that  we  might  have 
more  abundant  life  than  man  originally  possessed  in  his  unfallen  state.     It  is 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

not  pardon  and  acquittal  only  that  He  gives  us,  but  righteousness  and  peace 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Where  our  sin  abounds  His  grace  doth  much  more 
abound.  God  carefully  measiu-es  His  afflictive  dispensations,  and  sends  trials 
and  sorrows  in  small  doses,  as  it  were  ;  just  as  the  apothecary  measures  out  in 
a  carefully  graduated  medicine-glass  the  bitter  or  poisonous  medicines  that  are 
necessary  to  cure  our  sicknesses.  But  God  pours  His  joys  and  blessings  into  our 
souls  in  such  lavish  bountifulness  that  there  is  not  room  in  them  to  contain  them. 
He  wishes  not  only  that  His  joy  may  be  in  us,  but  that  our  joy  may  be  full.  The 
two  olive  trees  that  feed  the  visionary  candlestick,  one  on  each  side,  may  be  said 
to  represent  the  twofold  character  of  Christ's  personality, — His  Divine  and  human 
natures.  Another  idea  implied  in  the  symbol  of  the  text  besides  this  of  exhaustless 
abundance  is  spontaneity  —  freeness.  The  olive  trees  pour  their  oil  into  the 
lamps  freely  as  well  as  fully.  The  oil  that  feeds  the  candlestick  has  not  to  be 
first  gathered  in  the  berries,  extracted  in  the  oil-press,  manufactured  by  the  art 
of  man,  sold  by  the  merchant,  bought  and  earned  by  the  sweat  of  the  face.  Not 
in  this  roundabout,  laborious,  artificial  way,  but  directly,  by  a  spontaneous, 
natural  process,  do  the  olive  trees  contribute  of  their  fulness  to  the  supply  of 
the  lamps ;  and  thus  it  is  that  the  grace  of  God  is  freely  given  to  us.  Not  by 
laborious  mechanical  arts  and  efforts,  but  by  a  living  faith,  a  simple  trust,  do 
we  obtain  the  supplies  of  our  spiritual  need  from  Christ.  We  have  not  to  work 
for  them,  but  only  to  freely  receive  them  as  they  are  freely  offered  to  us.  How 
striking  is  the  contrast  between  the  way  in  which  we  get  the  fruits  of  sin  and  the 
tree  of  life  !  We  stretch  out  our  hand  to  pluck  the  forbidden  fruit.  We  take 
it  ourselves,  in  defiance  of  God's  command  — by  force,  by  deceit,  by  trouble,  by 
methods  that  cost  us  toil  and  pain.  But  God  gives  to  us  to  eat  of  the  tree  of 
life.  We  have  not  to  stretch  forth  the  hand  to  pluck  it ;  it  is  given  into  our 
hand,  into  our  mouth.  God's  unspeakable  gift  is  freely  bestowed.  The  olive 
trees  that  feed  the  lamp  of  your  faith  and  love  are  planted  in  no  earthly  soil, 
and  are  dependent  upon  no  eartlily  means  of  culture.  They  grow  without  your 
toil  or  care  in  heavenly  light  and  air.  Their  harvests  are  regulated  by  the  un- 
changing laws  of  God's  covenant  of  grace.  Your  Father  is  the  husbandman. 
Your  Saviour  has  finished  the  whole  work  of  grace,  and  you  do  not  require  to 
add  to  it.  The  less  you  interfere  with  its  working  the  better.  The  Kingdom 
of  Heaven  is  indeed  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the  ground,  and  should 
sleep  and  rise  night  and  day,  and  the  seed  should  spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth 
not  how.  For  the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  itself — first  the  blade,  then  the 
ear,  and  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear.  He  who  is  the  author  of  your  faith 
will  be  the  finisher  of  it ;  and  having  begun  the  good  work  of  grace  in  you.  He 
will  carry  it  on  and  complete  it ;  and  therefore  the  more  poor  in  spirit  you  are, 
the  more  empty  and  destitute,  the  more  will  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  be  yours, 
the  more  room  and  freedom  will  it  have  to  work  out  in  you  the  good  pleasure 
of  God's  goodness  as  the  work  of  faith.  {Hugh  Macmillan,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  The 
consecration  of  the  people  : — The  picture  that  the  prophet  saw  is  set  before  us 
with  distinctness,  and  the  meaning  of  the  symbol  is  not  obscure.  The  signi- 
ficance of  the  central  figure — the  candlestick  or  candelabrum,  all  of  gold, — the 
prophet  knows  perfectly.  Concerning  that  he  asks  no  questions.  Is  the  meaning 
equally  clear  to  all  of  us  ?  The  golden  lampstand  always  symbolises  the  Church. 
Tne  Church  is  represented,  not  as  the  light  of  the  world,  but  as  the  receptacle 
or  support  of  the  light.  The  light  is  Divine.  The  candelabrum  all  of  gold  was 
to  the  prophet  the  symbol  of  the  Church  of  God  in  its  latter-day  glory.  To  him 
the  Jewish  Church  and  the  Jewish  nation  were  not  twain,  but  one.  That  sharp 
discrimination  which  we  make  between  things  sacred  and  things  secular,  the 
devout  Jew  did  not  make  at  all.  Between  politics  and  religion  he  drew  no  line. 
It  must  be  admitted  that  this  old  Hebrew  conception  is  a  little  nobler  and  finer 
than  the  theory  of  life  that  generally  prevails  among  us.  We  have  come  to  make 
a  broad  distinction  between  that  part  of  life  which  is  sacred,  and  that  part  which 
is  secular.  The  complete  divorce  between  the  Church  and  the  State  which  exists 
among  us  is  the  result  of  sectarian  divisions.  That  a  practical  unity  is  one  day 
to  be  realised  I  have  no  doubt.  It  can  never  be  realised  until  the  different 
sects  all  learn  to  exalt  that  which  is  essential  above  that  which  is  secondary. 
The  things  that  are  essential  are  the  values  of  character,  righteousness,  purity, 
and  love  ;  the  things  that  are  secondary  are  rites  and  forms  and  dogmas.  When 
the  Church  of  God  shall  be  one  it  will  be  possible  to  bring  it  into  the  closest  rela- 
tions with  the  State.     The  prophet  did  need  to  inquire  concerning  the  two  olive 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZECUARIAH.  87 

trees  growing  on  either  side  of  the  candelabrum,  connected  with  it  by  golden 
pipes  and  pouring  a  perennial  supply  of  golden  oil,  piu:e  and  precious,  into  the 
golden  bowl — what  did  they  symbolise  ?  The  oil  thus  provided  must  be  taken 
to  represent  the  Divine  inspiration,  which  is  the  power  that  moves  and  the  life 
that  energises  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  the  world.  It  is  the  immanent  and  perennial 
grace  of  Him  "  whose  light  is  truth,  whose  warmth  is  love."  The  two  olive 
trees  are  the  "  two  anointed  ones,"  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua — the  two  men  in  whom 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  dwelling ;  the  men  who  were  working  together  to  rebuild 
the  temple,  and  fully  restore  the  worship.  They  were  the  living  sources  of  in- 
spiration and  help  to  the  restored  and  glorified  kingdom.  We  have  no  kings  or 
priests.  All  who  believe,  says  Peter,  are  a  royal  priesthood.  The  grace  that  was 
specialised  in  the  old  time  is  generalised  in  the  new.  The  right  of  standing  before 
the  Lord,  receiving  His  messages,  and  transmitting  His  truth  and  love  and  power, 
is  not  restricted  to  a  few  ;  it  belongs  to  all  faithful  and  loyal  souls.  {W.  Gladden.) 
Model  religious  teachers  : — This  is  not  another  vision,  but  an  explanation  of  the 
one  recorded  in  the  preceding  verses.  Take  the  "  two  anointed  ones  "  as  types 
of  model  religious  teachers.  I.  They  have  a  high  order  of  life  in  them.  They 
are  represented  by  the  olive  branches.  Few  productions  of  the  vegetable  kingdom 
are  of  such  a  high  order  as  those  of  the  olive.  Its  fatness  was  proverbial  ( Jud.  vii. 
9) ;  it  is  an  evergreen,  and  most  enduring.  In  short,  it  is  marked  by  great  beauty, 
perpetual  freshness,  and  immense  utility.  It  was  one  of  the  sources  of  wealth 
in  Judea,  and  its  failure  was  the  cause  of  famine.  The  emblems  of  a  true  teacher 
are  not  dead  timber  or  some  frail  vegetable  life,  but  an  olive  tree.  Religious 
teachers  should  not  only  have  life,  but  life  of  the  highest  order.  They  should  be 
full  of  animal  spirits,  full  of  creative  genius,  full  of  fertile  thought,  full  of  Divine 
inspiration.  II.  They  communicate  the  most  peeciotjs  elements  of  know- 
ledge. They  "  empty  the  golden  oil  out  of  themselves."  It  has  been  observed 
by  modem  travellers  that  the  natives  of  olive  countries  manifest  more  attachment 
to  olive  oil  than  to  any  other  article  of  food,  and  find  nothing  adequate  to  supply 
its  place.  Genxiine  religious  teachers  feed  the  lamp  of  universal  knowledge  with 
the  most  golden  elements  of  truth.  They  not  only  give  the  true  theory  of  morals 
and  worship,  but  the  true  theory  of  moral  restoration.  What  are  the  true  genuine 
religious  teachers  doing  ?  They  are  pouring  into  the  lamps  of  the  world's  know- 
ledge the  choicest  elements  of  truth.  III.  They  live  near  to  the  God  of  all 
TRUTH.  "  Then  said  he,  These  are  the  two  anointed  ones  that  stand  by  the 
Lord  of  the  whole  earth."  They  "  stand"  ;  a  position  of  dignity,  "  stand,"  a 
position  of  waiting — waiting  to  receive  infallible  instructions,  ready  to  execute 
the  Divine  behests.  All  true  religious  teachers  live  consciously  near  to  God. 
(Homilist.)  The  two  olive  trees  : — Consider — 1.  That  by  the  two  olive  trees 
it  is  not  clear  to  understand  only  the  graces  of  God  poured  out  on  His  Church. 
That  is  indeed  signified  by  oil  in  such  Scripture  as  Psa.  xlv.  7.  Here  the  resolution 
is  concerning  the  trees  that  furnished  the  oil.  Nor  yet  are  we  to  understand 
them  of  a  fountain  of  boimty  in  God ;  for  there  can  be  no  reason  given  why  that 
should  be  compared  to  two  trees,  and  be  said  to  "  stand  before  the  Lord."  But 
by  them  we  are  to  understand  Christ  anointed  in  His  priestly  (which  includes  His 
prophetical)  and  kingly  office,  who  was  chief  in  this  work,  and  in  furnishing  all 
instruments  ;  who  furnishes  His  Church,  and  serves  His  Father  in  the  work 
of  redemption,  and  is  cared  for  by  Him.  2.  That  the  angel,  answering  both  the 
prophet's  questions  in  one,  leads  us  to  understand  the  one  by  the  others  so  far 
as  is  needful ;  and  therefore  we  may  conceive  that  either  that  of  the  branches 
is  not  touched  as  needless,  or  pointing  out  only  the  fit  ways  of  communicating 
Himself  to  His  people's  capacity,  the  pipes  not  being  able  to  receive  the  oil  of 
the  whole  tree  at  once,  or  that  branches  only  now  furnishing,  imported  Christ's 
commimicating  Himself  in  a  small  measure  in  this  typical  work  of  building  the 
temple  in  respect  of  what  He  had  and  was  to  communicate  in  the  building  of 
His  Church  under  the  Gospel ;  or  if  we  will  stretch  it  further,  it  may  take  in 
Joshua  and  Zerubbabel,  the  one  anointed  priest,  the  other  a  successor  of  their 
anointed  kings,  who,  however,  as  instruments  in  the  work,  they  were  resembled 
by  the  burning  lamps,  getting  furniture  from  the  bowl,  yet  in  respect  of  their 
office  among  that  people,  and  their  influence  upon  all  instruments  of  building 
the  temple,  they  were  types  of  Christ,  and  so  might  be  represented  by  two  little 
branches,  resembling  Him,  the  great  olive  tree  ..."  standing  before  the  God 
of  the  earth,"  as  being  instrumental  to  keep  in  life  in  the  Chiu^ch  when  all  power 
shall  be  opposite  to  her.     {George  Htitcheson.)         The  two  anointed  ones  : — Who 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

are  these  ?  They  refer  to  some  standing  channel  of  blessing  from  God,  and  are 
alluded  to  again  in  Rev.  xi.  3,  4,  in  terms  that  cannot  be  mistaken.  Without 
entering  at  length  into  the  reasons  for  this  opinion,  we  simply  affirm  that  they 
refer  to  a  duality  of  giacious  manifestation  from  God,  corresponding  to  a  duality 
of  necessity  in  the  nature  of  man.  There  are  two  grand  evils  to  be  overcome, 
guilt  and  pollution,  and  they  demand  two  standing  sources  of  blessing,  the  one 
to  remove  the  guilt  by  atonement,  the  other  to  remove  the  power  of  sin  by  giving 
a  higher  power  of  holiness.  These  two  sources  are  embodied  in  two  official  forms, 
the  only  two  that  were  connected  with  the  theocracy  as  permanent  elements, 
the  sacerdotal  and  regal  orders.  This  duality  marked  all  the  manifestations  of 
God,  for  it  rested  on  a  deep  necessity  of  human  natxu-e,  and  it  was  then  embodied 
in  the  persons  of  Joshua  and  Zerubbabel.  Since,  then,  they  were  so  essential 
to  the  theocracy,  the  people  need  not  suppose  that  God  would  aJlow  them  to 
perish,  but  would  continue  them  in  existence  until  He  should  come  who  was  a 
priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  Learn — 1.  That  the  Church  is  the  same  under 
both  dispensations,  for  the  promises  made  to  her  then  are  only  fulfilling  now, 
showing  that  then  and  now  she  was  the  same  Church.  The  candlestick  is  the 
same,  though  the  tubes  may  be  changed;  and  the  Church  is  the  same,  though 
her  official  channels  be  totally  altered.  2.  God  has  provided  an  unfailing  source 
of  strength  for  His  people.  Their  supply  comes  not  from  a  dead  reservoir  of 
oil,  but  a  living  olive  tree,  that  is  ever  drawing  from  the  rich  earth  its  generous 
furnishings,  and  then  distilling  them  by  seven  pipes,  a  perfect  number,  to  those 
who  are  to  be  burning  and  shming  lights.  3.  The  whole  work  of  religion  in  the 
heart  of  the  individual,  and  throughout  the  world,  is  of  grace.  Christ  is  at  once 
the  comer-stone  and  the  cope-stone  of  the  Church  ;  and  as  He  was  greeted  with 
"  shoutings  of  grace  "  when  He  came  the  first  time,  much  more  shall  He  when 
He  comes  the  second  time,  without  sin  imto  salvation.  4.  We  are  prone  to  judge 
of  God's  work  by  man's  standard  ;  and  because  we  see  but  a  narrow  stream  from 
the  fountain,  doubt  or  deny  the  river.  5.  It  is  not  only  unwise,  it  is  wicked,  to 
be  disheartened  because  of  the  external  feebleness  of  the  Church,  compared  with 
the  work  she  has  to  do  and  the  enemies  she  has  to  encounter.  God  is  her  strength, 
her  glory,  and  her  hope,  and  to  despair  of  her  is  to  deny  God.  6.  The  doctrine 
and  discipline  of  the  Church,  the  truth  and  power  that  God  has  lodged  in  her 
organisation  and  in  her  ordinances,  are  still  the  standing  channels  through  which 
the  Spirit  pours  the  oil  of  grace  and  strength,  and  hence  should  both  be  kept 
pure  and  unclogged.  {T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  Do  not  arrest  the  inflow  of  spiritual 
influences  : — Beware,  also,  that  nothing  chokes  the  golden  pipes  of  obedience 
to  His  kingliness,  and  trust  in  His  priesthood  ;  else  the  entrance  of  the  golden 
oil  will  be  arrested.  They  may  soon  become  stopped  by  neglect,  inattention,  or 
disuse.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Two  olive  trees : — The  prophet  manifests  great  con- 
cern to  understand  v/hat  is  meant  by  these  two  olive  trees.  I.  The  univeksal 
DomNiON  OF  THE  LoRD  Jesu3  Christ.  "  The  Lord  of  the  whole  earth."  Not 
to  be  understood  in  an  abstract,  but  in  a  relative  sense.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the 
last  Adam,  and  He  came  and  acquired  universal  dominion  on  behalf  of  His  people. 
He  obtained  universal  dominion  by  prevailing  with  God.  This  He  did  by  His 
obedient  life.  Whatever  perfection — whether  of  love,  or  holiness,  or  wisdom, 
or  integrity — you  may  name,  the  Saviour  possessed  them  all.  And  "  the  Lord 
is  well  pleased  for  His  righteousness'  sake.  '  This  righteousness,  this  obedient 
life  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  hath  prevailed  with  God's  law,  hath  prevailed  with  justice. 
This  is  one  step  towards  the  Saviour's  universal  dominion,  God's  unexceptional 
approbation  of  His  righteousness,  God's  deep  and  eternal  interest  in  His  righteous- 
ness. When  the  Saviour  came  to  die,  was  there  in  the  whole  universal  Church 
one  sin  that  He  did  not  conquer  ?  Was  there  one  demand  of  justice  that  He  did 
not  meet  ?  See  some  of  the  symptoms  of  this  dominion  while  the  Saviour  was  in 
the  world.  He  cast  out  devils, — there  is  power  over  hell.  Need  I  remind  you  of  sin  ? 
Why,  He  pardoned  one  and  another.  Then  diseases, — what  disease  was  ever  too 
hard  for  Him  ?  Then  the  sea, — He  walks  on  it.  Whatever  dominion  He  possesses. 
He  will  give  to  you.  II.  The  representatives  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament 
Churches.  The  two  anointed  ones.  In  the  Book  of  Revelation  called  the  "  two 
witnesses."  These  represent  the  Old  Testament  Church  and  the  New  Testament 
Church.  In  this  passage,  then,  is  given  Christ's  entire  dominion;  the  river  of  the 
Gospel ;  the  Old  and  New  Testament  Churches  sweetly  united  in  the  same  theme  ; 
a  clear  note  of  time  when  these  wonders  were  to  be  mediatorially  accomplished ; 
and  the  faithfxilness  of  the  Old  and  of  the  New  Testament  Churches.    {Jarries  Wella.) 


CHAP,  v.]  ZECHARIAH.  89 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vers.  1-4.  And  I  turned  .  .  .  and  looked,  and  behold  a  flying:  roll. — The 
flying  roll : — The  object  of  this  discovirse  is  to  present  to  you  the  Scriptures  as  a 
phenomenon  of  the  world  around  us.  Consider  them  as  an  appearance  in  the 
circle  of  oiur  observation,  a  fact  in  the  history  of  our  race,  and  ask,  what  account 
i^  to  be  given  of  it  ?  The  attention  of  our  age  is  taken  up  much  and  wisely  with 
the  study  of  phenomena.  We  may  interpret  the  Scriptiu-es  in  one  way  or  another  ; 
we  may  study  or  neglect,  revere  or  despise  them  ;  we  may  consider  them  to  be  the 
dictates  of  observation,  or  below  the  level  of  human  intelligence ;  we  may  call 
them  a  word  of  delusion,  or  the  Word  of  God  ;  but  in  the  extremest  varieties  of 
opinion  no  one  can  escape  from  this, — that  they  are  a  leading  phenomenon  in  the 
history  of  civilisation  and  religious  thought,  in  the  aspect  of  the  moral  world  as 
it  now  stands  and  moves  before  us.  In  the  text  an  angel  speaks  in  vision  to  one 
of  the  last  of  the  prophets,  and  asks,  as  if  in  the  very  spirit  of  modern  research, 
"  What  seest  thou  ?  "  The  prophet  raises  his  eyes  and  sees  a  winged  book,  "  a 
flying  roll."  It  is  of  gigantic  dimensions.  It  is  of  restless  speed.  It  "  goeth  forth 
over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth."  It  was  the  roll  of  the  Lord's  judgments — a 
consuming  fire.  In  this  respect  the  Bible  corresponds  with  it  only  in  one  of  its 
parts,  but  in  that  part  perfectly :  in  its  testimony  against  unrighteousness,  its 
sentence  upon  those  who  love  and  practise  dishonour,  its  "  fiery  law."  Dealing 
with  the  "  flying  roll  "  more  generally,  what  are  the  points  that  we  discover  in  it  ? 
1.  The  extraordinary  dimensions  of  the  book,  "  its  length  twenty  cubits,  and  its 
breadth  ten."  What  a  space  does  the  Bible  fill  in  the  gaze  of  mankind,  though  it 
can  be  carried  about  in  the  hand  of  the  feeblest  wayfarer  !  Do  we  not  speak  taruly 
of  its  wonderful  dimensions  when  it  holds  on  its  ample  pages  such  a  widely 
scattered  wisdom, and  is  discernedfrom  so  far?  2.  Its  preservation  and  continuance 
through  so  long  a  sweep  of  time.  This  is  remarkable  even  at  a  first  glance.  Since 
faithful  Abraham  came  out  from  Chaldsea  vast  tribes  and  strong  nations  have 
risen  to  renown  and  passed  away  into  silence.  Fovmders  of  states  have  not  so  much 
as  secured  the  name  of  what  they  founded.  Dispensers  of  religion  have  left 
neither  a  priest  for  their  successor  nor  a  shrine  for  their  monument.  Oracles  of 
wisdom  have  grown  forgotten  as  well  as  dumb.  Genius  and  learning  have  gone 
down  into  the  dust,  and  there  is  not  a  finger-track  of  an  inscription  upon  it  for 
their  posterity  to  read.  Whole  literatures  have  disappeared,  their  tongues  having 
ceased,  and  their  characters  become  illegible  or  blotted  entirely  out.  But  here  is 
writing,  from  many  hands,  and  in  a  long  series  of  instructions,  dating  as  far  back 
as  the  school  lessons  of  human  improvement.  It  has  defied  time.  It  has  repelled 
decay.  The  linen,  or  the  parchment,  or  whatever  frail  material  it  was  confided 
to,  held  fast  its  trust,  while  brazen  trophies  were  melted  down  and  marble  columns 
were  pulverised.  The  temple  of  the  Lord  protected  its  archives  ;  though  its  huge 
stones  were  unable  to  hold  themselves  together,  and  its  sacred  vessels  served  at 
last  but  for  the  ornaments  of  a  heathen  triumph.  3.  Its  spread.  It  is,  indeed, 
a  "  flying  roll."  The  Scriptures  move  rap'dly.  They  are  not  only  preserved, 
but  incredibly  multiplied.  They  were  addressed  for  the  most  part  to  one 
people,  and  they  now  speak  to  all  people.  They  were  written  in  their  own  peculiar 
tongues,  and  now  they  call  all  tongues  their  own.  Have  they  not  "  gone  forth 
over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  "  ?  They  are  among  the  studies  of  learned  men, 
who  find  there  a  wisdom  higher  than  all  else  they  know ;  while  the  ignorant  and 
the  simple,  reading  as  they  run,  are  made  wise  to  life  everlasting.  4.  The  honour 
with  which  they  have  been  received  as  they  have  flown  along.  They  are  recog- 
nised in  the  public  worship  of  most  of  the  civilised  tribes  now  under  heaven.  They 
are  enshrined  in  cathedrals.  They  are  revered,  at  least  with  all  outward  forms 
of  homage,  in  the  courts  of  the  proudest  empires.  They  are  sworn  upon  when 
the  most  solemn  vows  by  which  we  can  be  bound  are  to  be  attested.  The  patient 
fingers  of  holy  recluses  could  for  centuries  find  no  better  task  than  to  copy  them  ; 
and  countless  presses  are  now  perpetually  busy,  that  they  may  be  distributed  over 
the  globe.  The  rarest  genius  and  the  profoundest  learning  are  employed  upon  the 
illustration  of  them.  It  may  be  objected  that  we  have  said  nothing  of  the  dis- 
respect and  derision  with  which  the  Scriptures  are  regarded  by  multitudes,  and 
have  always  been.  We  may  admit  this,  but  press  the  consideration,  that  they 
have  withstood  even  this  trial.  Familiarity  and  levity  have  not  subjected  them 
to  contempt.    Nothing  could  better  show  how  deeply  they  are  seated  in  the 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

veneration  of  mankind.  5.  Their  influence,  their  surprising  power.  There  may  be 
a  high  repute  without  any  true  efficiency.  But  that  roll  of  the  Divine  covenants 
has  always  been  of  a  Divine  force.  It  has  acted  upon  communities,  wherever  it 
has  been  introduced,  so  as  to  accomplish  the  most  astonishing  consequences. 
Are  you  inquiring  what  overthrew  many  of  the  massy  oppressions,  the  enormous 
abuses,  of  the  elder  times  ?  It  was  its  paper  edges  that  smote  upon  all  that  dark 
strength,  and  before  those  thin  leaves  buttress  and  battlement  went  down.  How 
much  has  it  done  for  individual  minds.  6.  Their  immeasurable  superiority,  as 
mere  traditions,  above  everything  that  has  been  handed  down  to  us  from  the 
ancient  world.  There  is  in  their  contents  a  deep  spring  of  instruction,  such  as 
the  old  generations  nowhere  furnish,  and  the  coming  ones  are  not  likely  soon  to 
exhaust.  Your  own  minds  will  surely  leap  to  the  inference :  the  finger  of  God 
was  here.  You  may  be  perplexed  with  many  passages  in  your  Bible.  You  may 
slight  some  things  as  imimportant,  and  repel  others  as  imcongenial.  You  may 
think  you  discern  great  blemishes  and  errors  here  and  there.  But  what  of  that  ? 
It  should  throw  no  mistrust  over  the  spontaneous  conclusion  :  the  finger  of 
God  was  here.  Yes,  the  Divine  providence  ordained  and  protected  this  charter 
of  man's  truest  liberty  and  highest  good.  Let  us  look  thoughtfully  at  it,  then, 
as  it  flies  on  its  holy  errand.  {N.  L.  Frothingham. )  The  fltjing  roll : — The 
import  of  this  vision  is  threatening,  to  show  that  the  object  of  the  prophet  was  to 
produce  genuine  repentance.  The  parts  are  significant.  A  roll,  probably  of 
parchment,  is  seen,  30  by  15  feet,  the  exact  dimensions  of  the  temple  porch ;  where 
the  law  was  usually  read,  showing  that  it  was  authoritative  in  its  utterance,  and 
connected  with  the  theocracy.  Being  a  written  thing,  it  showed  that  its  contents 
were  solemnly  determined  beyond  all  escape  or  repeal.  It  was  flying,  to  show 
that  its  threats  were  ready  to  do  theu-  work,  and  descend  on  every  transgressor. 
It  was  unroUed,  or  its  dimensions  could  not  have  been  seen,  to  show  that  its  warn- 
ings were  openly  proclaimed  to  all,  that  none  might  have  an  excuse.  It  was 
written  on  both  sides,  to  connect  it  with  the  tables  of  the  law,  and  show  its  com- 
prehensive character.  One  side  denounced  perjury,  a  sin  of  the  first  table,  the 
other  stealing,  a  sin  of  the  second ;  and  both  united  in  every  case  where  a  thief 
took  the  oath  of  expurgation  to  acquit  himself  of  the  charge  of  theft.  This  hovering 
curse  would  descend  in  every  such  case  into  the  house  of  the  offender,  and  consume 
even  its  most  enduring  parts,  until  it  had  thoroughly  done  its  work  of  destruction. 
The  immediate  application  of  this  vision  was  to  those  who  were  neglecting 
the  erection  of  God's  house  to  build  their  own,  and  thus  robbing  God 
and  forswearing  their  obligations  to  Him.  On  such  the  prophet  declares  a 
curse  shall  descend  that  will  make  this  selfish  withholding  of  their  efforts  in  vain, 
for  the  houses  they  would  build  should  be  consumed  by  God's  wrath.  The  teaching 
of  this  vision  is  that  of  the  law.  It  blazes  with  the  fire,  and  echoes  with  the  thimder 
of  Sinai,  and  tells  us  that  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.  We  learn  thus  a  lesson  of 
instruction  to  those  who  have  succeeded  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  the 
authorised  exjKtunders  of  God's  will  under  the  New.  It  is  needful  to  tell  the  love 
of  God,  to  unfold  His  precious  promises,  and  to  utter  words  of  cheer  and  encourage- 
ment. But  it  is  also  needful  to  declare  the  other  aspect  of  God's  character.  There 
is  a  constant  tendency  in  the  human  heart  to  abuse  the  goodness  of  God  to  an 
encouragement  of  sin.  Hence  ministers  of  the  Gospel  must  declare  this  portion 
of  God's  counsel  as  well  as  the  other.  They  must  declare  to  men  who  are  living 
in  neglect  of  duty,  that  withholding  what  is  due  to  God,  either  in  heart  or  life, 
is  combined  robbery  and  perjury.  For  those  who  thus  sin,  Grod  has  prepared 
a  ministry  of  vengeance.  There  is  something  most  vivid  and  appalling  in  this 
image  of  the  hovering  curse.  It  flies  viewless  and  resistless,  poising  like  a  falcon 
over  her  prey,  breathing  a  ruin  the  most  dire  and  desolating,  and  when  the  blind 
and  hardened  offender  opens  his  door  to  his  ill-gotten  gains,  this  mystic  roll,  with 
its  fire-tracery  of  wrath,  enters  into  his  habitation,  and,  fastening  upon  his  cherished 
idols,  begins  its  dread  work  of  retribution,  and  ceases  not  until  the  fabric  of  his 
guilty  life  has  been  totally  and  irremediably  consumed.  (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 
The  flying  roll : — I.  The  man  who  is  marked  as  a  special  transoressok  la 
MARKED  ALSO  FOR  SPECIAL  JUDGMENT.  The  curse  Went  "  forth  over  the  face 
of  the  whole  earth,"  but  it  was  to  cut  off  the  thief  and  the  false  swearer.  In  the 
Hebrew  nation  there  were  many  sinners,  but  t'lere,  as  everywhere  else,  there  were 
sinners  who  had  not  yet  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity,  and  there  were 
others  who  had  passed  all  bounds,  whose  transgressions  were  so  great  as  to  make 
them  marks  upon  which  the  lightnings  of  God's  displeasure  must  fall.     II.  Escafi 


CHAP,  v.]  ZECHARIAH.  91 

FROM  THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  TJNREPENTED  SIN  IS  IMPOSSIBLE.  It  is  not  necessary 
that  the  sin  should  reveal  itself  in  action  to  ensure  the  entail  of  the  certain  penaltj'. 
If  it  never  passes  the  boundary  of  the  inner  man  there  will  be  a  reaction  upon  the 
man's  spirit  as  certainly  as  night  follows  day,  and  more  so  because,  though  God 
has  suspended  the  laws  of  nature,  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  He  has  ever  inter- 
posed to  prevent  the  consequences  of  sin,  unless  the  siimer  has  come  under  the 
power  of  another  law, — the  law  of  forgiveness  by  confession  and  repentance. 
However  hidden  the  transgression,  the  curse  will  fijad  out  its  most  secret  hiding- 

Elace.  III.  Theft  and  perjury  include  all  other  sins.  The  son  who  forges 
is  father's  name  includes  in  that  one  act  every  other  crime  that  he  can  commit 
against  him  except  that  of  taking  his  life.  He  only  needs  occasion  to  reveal  his 
readiness  for  any  other  act  of  dishonour  toward  his  parent.  The  man  who  deliber- 
ately appeals  to  God  to  uphold  him  in  his  false  statements  forges  the  name  of 
the  Eternal  Himself,  and  seeks  to  turn  the  God  of  truth  into  the  Father  of  lies. 
IV.  The  special  sins  of  some  bring  suffering  upon  many.  The  curse  went 
forth  "  over  the  whole  earth,"  or  land.  It  is  a  truth  proclaimed  by  God  and  verified 
by  experience,  that  many  may  suffer  by  the  sin  of  the  few  to  whom  they  are  in  no 
way  related.  See  this  principle,  and  its  bright  reverse,  illustrated  by  St.  Paul  in 
Rom.  v.  18.  {Outlines  by  London  Minister.)  The  flying  roll : — The  thi-eatenings 
here  are  directed  against  the  defects  and  transgressions  of  the  Jewish  people  at  that 
time.  God  gives  them  to  understand  by  this  vision  that  whilst  it  was  His  purpose 
to  make  His  promise  good,  in  the  establishment  of  His  Church,  He  would  by  no 
means  connive  at  their  sins  and  corruptions,  but  would  visit  them  with  present 
punishment,  and  with  future  extirpation,  if  they  persisted  in  their  unbelief  and 
rebellion.  I.  The  sins  more  especially  condemned.  1.  Theft  and  sacrilege. 
2.  Perjury  and  false  swearing.  II.  The  punishment  threatened.  Partly 
personal  and  partly  domestic.  1.  A  personal  judgment  is  denounced.  Every 
one  shall  receive  his  reward  and  punishment  according  to  his  sins,  and  according 
to  the  sentence  of  the  roll.  2.  It  was  to  extend  to  his  relative  and  domestic  interests. 
"  It  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief."  "  It  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his 
house."  "  And  shall  consume  it  with  the  timbers  thereof,  and  the  stones  thereof." 
This  subject  may  well  teach  heads  of  families  a  lesson  of  religious  caution,  lest  by 
an  undue  anxiety  for  their  own  worldly  success,  or  that  of  their  children,  they 
frustrate  their  most  cherished  purposes,  and  entail  a  curse  rather  than  a  blessing. 
We  shall  do  well  to  remember  that  no  external  evil  which  may  befall  a  particular 
class  of  mankind,  in  consequence  of  the  faults  of  their  progenitors,  renders  any 
individual  of  that  class  less  acceptable  to  God,  if  he  turn  from  his  wickedness  and 
repent.  But  the  very  curse  may  become  a  blessing,  if  it  operate  to  warn  an  in- 
dividual against  the  sin  by  which  it  was  brought  down  upon  him.  On  the  other 
hand,  let  no  children  of  religious  parents  suppose  that  the  piety  of  a  long  line  of 
ancestors  will  avail  in  their  behalf,  unless  they  are  themselves  the  possessors  of 
religious  principle.  And  since  all  are  exposed  to  an  infinite  danger  on  account  of 
sin,  how  deep  should  be  our  gratitude  to  that  Divine  Redeemer,  who  bore  the  curse 
for  us,  that  we  might  escape  the  impending  penalty,  and  inherit  the  unspeakable 
blessings  of  His  salvation.  {S.  Thodey. )  The  flying  roll — Divine  retribution  : — 
I.  As  following  sin.  1.  The  particular  sins  which  retribution  pursues.  (1)  Theft 
and  sacrilege.  (2)  Perjury  and  false  swearing.  The  sins  here  mentioned  are  not 
mere  specimens,  but  root  or  fountain  sins.  The  "  flying  roll  "  of  Divine  retribution 
followed  sin  with  its  curses.  There  is  a  curse  to  every  sin,  and  this  is  not  vengeance, 
but  benevolence.  It  is  the  arrangement  of  love.  2.  The  way  in  which  just  retribu- 
tion pursues  them.  (1)  Openly.  The  roll  is  spread  open,  and  is  written  in 
characters  that  are  legible  to  all.  Divine  retribution  is  no  secret  to  man.  It  is 
not  some  intangible,  hidden,  occult  thmg.  It  is  open  to  all  eyes.  Every  man 
must  see  the  "  flying  roll,"  not  only  in  the  history  of  nations  and  communities, 
but  in  his  own  domestic  and  individual  life.  The  "  flying  roll  "  hovers  over  every 
sin.  (2)  Rapidly.  Retribution  is  swift.  It  is  a  "  flying  roU."  Retribution 
follows  sins  swifter  than  the  sound  of  the  swiftest  thunder-peal  follows  the  lightning- 
flash.  (3)  Penetratingly.  "  I  will  bring  it  forth,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  it 
shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief,  and  into  the  house  of  him  that  sweareth 
falsely  by  My  name."  Wherever  the  sinner  is,  it  will  find  him  out.  No  mountain 
so  high,  no  cavern  so  deep,  no  forest  so  intricate  and  shadowy  as  to  protect  him 
from  His  visitation.  It  serves  to  illustrate  retribution.  II.  A.s  abiding  WITH 
SIN.  "  It  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  house."  Not  only  does  it  rule  the  house 
of  the  siimer,  "  it  remains  in  the  midst  of  it "  like  a  leprosy,  infecting,  wasting, 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV8TBAT0R.  [chap.  r. 

consuming,  destroying.  It  abides  in  the  house  to  curse  everything,  even  the 
timber  and  the  stones.  Guilt,  not  only,  like  a  ravenous  beast,  crouches  at  the  door 
of  the  sinner,  but  rather,  like  a  blasting  mildew,  spreads  its  baneful  influence  over 
the  whole  dwelling.  The  sin  of  one  member  of  a  family  brings  its  curse  on  the 
others.  The  sins  of  the  parents  bring  a  curse  upon  the  children.  {Homiliat.) 
Judgment  with  consolation : — The  angel  shows,  in  this  chapter,  that  whatever  evila 
the  Jews  had  suffered,  proceeded  from  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  ;  and  then 
he  adds  a  consolation — that  the  Lord  would  at  length  alleviate  or  put  an  end  to 
their  evils,  when  He  had  removed  afar  off  their  iniquity.  Interpreters  have 
touched  neither  heaven  nor  earth  in  their  explanation  of  this  prophecy,  for  they 
have  not  regarded  the  designs  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Some  think  that  by  the  volume 
are  to  be  understood  false  and  perverted  glosses,  by  which  the  purity  of  doctrine 
had  been  vitiated  ;  but  this  view  can  by  no  means  be  received.  There  is  no  doubt 
but  that  God  intended  to  show  to  Zechariah  that  the  Jews  were  justly  punished, 
because  the  whole  land  was  full  of  thefts  and  perjuries.  As  their  religion  had  been 
despised,  as  well  as  equity  and  justice,  he  shows  that  it  was  no  wonder  a  curse 
had  prevailed  through  the  whole  land,  the  Jews  having  by  their  impiety  and  sins 
extremely  provoked  the  wrath  of  God.  This  is  the  import  of  the  first  part.  And 
then,  as  this  vision  was  terrible,  there  is  added  some  alleviation  by  representing 
iniquity  in  a  measure,  and  the  mouth  of  the  measure  closed,  and  afterwards  carried 
to  the  land  of  Shinar,  that  is,  into  Chaldea,  that  it  might  not  remain  in  Judea. 
Thus,  in  the  former  part  the  prophet's  design  was  to  humble  the  Jews,  and  to 
encourage  them  to  repent,  so  that  they  might  own  God  to  have  been  justly  angrj' ; 
and  then  he  gives  them  reason  to  entertain  hope,  and  fully  to  expect  an  end  to 
their  evils,  for  the  Lord  would  remove  to  a  distance,  and  transfer  their  iniquity  to 
Chaldea,  so  that  Judea  might  be  pure  and  free  from  every  wickedness,  both 
from  thefts  and  acts  of  injustice,  by  which  it  had  been  previously  polluted.  {John 
Calvin.)  Tliis  is  the  curse  that  goeth  forth  over  the  face  of  the  whole 
earth. — The  Lord's  curse  : — This  type  is  expounded  to  signify  the  Lord's  curse 
going  forth  to  do  execution  in  all  the  land  of  Judah,  and  to  cut  off  sinners  against 
the  first  and  second  tables  of  the  Law.  Doctrine — 1.  Whatever  be  the  particular 
punishment  inflicted  by  God  for  sin,  yet  this  is  seriously  to  be  laid  to  heart,  that 
every  such  punishment  hath  in  its  bosom  a  curse,  till  the  sinner,  awakened  thereby, 
flee  to  Christ,  who  became  a  curse,  that  His  own  may  inherit  a  blessing.  2.  The 
Lord  is  an  impartial  avenger  of  sin,  when  it  is  persevered  in  without  repentance  ; 
and  when  other  means  are  ineffectual.  He  will  not  spare  to  cut  off  the  desperate 
sinner  ;  for  the  curse  goes  forth  "  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,"  or  land  ; 
and  "  every  one  shall  be  cut  off,"  without  exception,  who  are  guilty.  3.  The  Lord 
will  not  spare  but  indifferently  punish  sin,  whether  against  the  first  or  second 
tables,  in  avoiding  of  both  which  the  Lord's  people  are  to  testify  their  sincerity. 
This  is  signified  by  "  cutting  off  every  one  that  stealeth,  and  every  one  that 
sweareth."  4.  When  a  people  are  delivered  out  of  sore  troubles,  and  yet  their 
lusts  are  not  modified,  they  ordinarily  prove  covetous,  false,  and  oppressing,  as 
labouring  by  all  means  to  make  up  these  things  that  trouble  hath  stript  them  of ; 
therefore  is  there  a  particular  threat  against  every  one  that  stealeth,  it  being  a  rife 
sin  at  their  return  from  captivity,  for  they  went  every  man  to  his  own  house  (Hag. 
i.  9),  were  cruel  oppressors  (Neh.  v.  1-3),  yea,  and  robbed  God  of  tithes  and  offerings 
(Mai.  iii.  8).  5.  Covetous  and  false  men,  in  their  bargains  with  men,  will  make 
no  bones  of  impiety  and  perjury,  if  that  may  help  to  gain  their  point ;  for  with  the 
former  is  joined  "  everyone  that  sweareth,"  which  is  expounded,  ver.  4,  to  be 
"swearing  falsely  by  God's  name."  {George  Hutcheson.)  It  shall  remain  in 
the  midst  of  his  house. — A  curse  in  the  family : — As  certain  as  the  ordinances 
of  nature,  is  the  law  that  ill-gotten  gain  will  bring  a  curse.  The  following  is  a 
startling  illustration  of  the  truth,  gathered  from  the  history  of  a  riural  town  : — 
"  In  178G,  a  youth,  then  residing  in  Maine,  owned  a  jack-knife,  which  he,  being  of 
a  somewhat  trading  disposition,  sold  for  a  gallon  of  West  India  rum.  This  he 
retailed,  and  with  the  proceeds  purchased  two  gallons,  and  eventually  a  barrel, 
which  was  followed  in  due  time  with  a  large  stock.  In  a  word,  he  got  rich,  and 
became  the  squire  of  the  d  strict,  through  the  possession  and  sale  of  the  jack-knife, 
and  an  indomitable  trading  industry.  He  died,  leaving  property,  in  real  estate  and 
money  value,  worth  eighty  thousand  dollars.  This  was  divided  by  testament 
among  four  children,  three  boys  and  a  girl.  Luck,  which  seemed  the  guardian 
angel  of  the  father,  deserted  the  children;  for  every  folly  and  extravagance  they 
could  engage  in  seemed  to  occupy  their  exclusive  attention  and  cultivation.     The 


CHAP,  v.]  ZECHAEIAH.  93 

daughter  married  unfortunately,  and  her  patrimony  was  soon  thrown  away  by 
her  spendthrift  of  a  husband.  The  sons  were  no  more  fortunate,  and  two  died  in 
dissipation  and  in  poverty.  The  daughter  also  died.  The  last  of  the  family, 
for  many  years  past,  has  lived  on  the  kindness  of  those  who  knew  him  in  the  days  of 
prosperity,  as  pride  would  not  allow  him  to  go  to  the  poor-farm.  A  few  days  ago  he 
died,  suddenly  and  unattended,  in  a  barn,  where  he  had  laid  himself  down  to  take  a 
drunken  sleep.  On  his  pockets  being  examined,  all  that  was  found  in  them  was  a 
small  piece  of  string  and  a  jack-knife  !  So  the  fortune  that  began  with  the  imple- 
ment of  that  kind  left  its  simple  duplicate.  We  leave  the  moral  to  be  drawn  in 
whatever  fashion  it  may  suggest  itself  to  the  reader  ;  simplj-^  stating  that  the  story 
is  a  true  one,  and  all  the  facts  well  known  to  many  whom  this  relation  will  doubtless 
reach."  (A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.)  A  plajue  in  the  house  : — How  terribly  those 
words  have  been  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  people  and  families  we  have  known  !  It  has 
seemed  as  though  there  were  a  plague  in  the  house.  The  fortune  which  had  been 
accumulated  with  such  toil  has  crumbled  ;  the  children  turned  out  sources  of 
heartrending  grief  ;  the  reputation  of  the  father  has  become  irretrievably  tarnished. 
"  There  is  a  plague  spread  in  the  house  ;  it  is  a  fretting  leprosy,  it  is  unclean." 
No  man  can  stand  against  that  curse.  It  confronts  him  everywhere.  It  touches 
his  most  substantial  effects,  and  they  pulverise,  as  furniture  eaten  through  by 
white  ants.     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  5-11.  And  this  is  a  woman  that  sitteth  in  the  midst  of  the  ephah. — 
The  woman  in  the  ephah  : — This  vision,  like  the  preceding,  is  of  a  warning  character, 
and  somewhat  more  obscure  in  its  symbolical  apparatus.  A  dim  outline  rises 
to  the  eye  of  the  prophet,  to  which  the  angel  calls  his  attention,  but  which  he 
cannot  at  first  distinctly  make  out.  The  angel  tells  him  that  it  is  an  ephah, 
a  very  common  dry  measure,  containing  about  three  pecks.  He  then  sees  a 
mass  of  lead,  containing  about  a  hundredweight,  lifted  up  above  the  measure, 
and  on  looking  more  closely  he  sees  a  woman  in  the  measure.  This  woman 
is  then  violently  thrust  down  into  the  measure,  and  the  mass  of  lead  laid  upon 
its  mouth,  after  which  two  winged  women  carry  it  away  into  the  land  of  Shinar, 
where  it  was  to  be  permanently  deposited  in  a  house  prepared  for  it  there.  The 
general  meaning  of  this  is  to  show  that  when  the  measure  of  the  people's  wicked- 
ness became  full,  then  their  punishment  should  come,  and  they  should  again  be 
carried  into  the  land  of  their  enemies  in  exile,  not  for  seventy  years,  but  for  a  long 
time.  As  the  flying  roll  symbolised  the  certainty  and  completeness  of  their 
punishment,  so  this  vision  indicated  its  swiftness  and  mode.  The  ephah  is  selected 
simply  as  a  common  dry  measure,  to  symbolise  the  thought  that  there  is  a  certain 
measure  of  sin  beyond  which  the  people  cannot  go  with  impunity.  The  woman 
sitting  in  it  represents  the  Jewish  people,  by  a  common  figure.  The  phrase, 
"  this  is  their  appeai'ance  (Heb.  eye)  in  all  the.  land  "  (ver.  6),  simply  means,  this 
represents  that  to  which  the  people  are  looking,  or  tending,  namely,  to  fill  up 
the  measure  of  their  sin,  and  when  they  have  done  that,  God  will  lay  upon  them 
their  punishment.  When  the  prophet  perceives  the  woman  in  the  measure, 
he  is  told  that  this  is  (represents)  wickedness,  even  that  of  the  Jewish  people. 
Henderson  thinks  that  the  wickedness  here  represented  was  idolatry,  and  that 
the  vision  predicted  the  removal  of  idolatry  from  Palestine  to  Babylon.  But 
there  is  no  reason  at  all  to  limit  it  thus,  but  rather  the  contrary.  Idolatry  had 
not  been  a  sin  of  the  Jews  for  a  century,  and  would  hardly  be  represented  as 
an  existing  thing,  as  this  vision  does.  It  did  not  exist  in  the  land,  and  so  could 
not  be  removed  out  of  it.  Moreover,  it  was  not  removed  to  Babjdon,  in  any  sense, 
literally  or  figuratively,  and  did  not  remain  there  as  the  vision  declares  (ver.  11), 
for  the  Mohammedan  occupants  of  that  region  were  not  idolaters.  Hence  the 
explanation  that  refers  it  to  the  entire  wickedness  of  the  Jewish  people  of  all 
kinds,  is  more  consistent  with  the  preceding  vision,  and  gives  a  better  sense.  The 
mass  of  lead  symbolises  the  heavy  judgments  that  God  was  holding  over  them, 
and  which  at  the  fulness  of  time  He  would  allow  to  fall.  Accordingly,  the  wicked 
woman  is  thrust  down  into  the  small  measiu-e,  crushed  and  doubled  together, 
and  the  heavy  weight  laid  upon  her  to  keep  her  thus  prostrate.  Then  there 
appear  two  winged  messengers,  with  outstretched  pinions,  as  if  the  wind  was 
raising  them  up,  and  their  wings  were  strong  for  flight  like  those  of  the  stork. 
There  were  two,  because  it  required  two  persons  to  lift  such  a  measure.  They 
symbolised  the  messengers  of  God's  wrath  that  should  desolate  Judea,  and  banish 
the  people.     They  were  to  carry  it  into  Shinar,  which  is  here  the  symbol  for  an 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  r. 

enemy's  country,  and  not  the  exact  country  to  which  they  were  to  be  exiled. 
There  it  was  to  be  put  in  a  house,  shut  up,  and  this  house  to  be  built  strondy 
and  securely  for  a  permanent  habitation,  to  show  that  this  exile  would  not  be, 
like  the  first,  a  brief  sojourn,  but  a  long,  weary,  and  enduring  banishment  from 
the  land  of  their  fathers  ;  when  their  resting  should  not  be  on  God,  or  on  the  rock 
Christ  Jesus,  but  "  on  their  own  base  "  ;  they  should  be  left  to  themselves,  weighed 
down  like  lead  with  judicial  blindness,  stupidity,  darkness,  and  hardness  of  heart. 
The  vision  predicted  what  happened  four  hundred  years  afterwards,  when  the 
measure  of  their  iniquity  being  full  by  the  rejection  and  murder  of  the  Messiah, 
their  hearts  being  gross,  and  their  care  heavy,  the  hour  of  vengeance  came.     Then 
appeared  the  Roman  eagles,  and  aft«r  the  most  desperate  struggle,  the  Jewish 
nation  was  crushed,  and  scattered  to  the  four  winds,  wandering  in  enemies' 
countries,  not  resting  on  the  promise  of  God,  but  weighed  down  with  leaden 
obstinacy,  and  resting  on  their  own  works  and  righteousness.     Learn — 1.  Every 
individual,  and  every  nation,  has  a  measure  of  sin  ;  and  until  that  measure  is 
filled  up,  God's  longsuffering  will  wait  for  repentance  and  reformation.     2.  There 
hangs  above  every  sinner  a  crushing  weight  of  wrath,  poised  and  ready  to  descend 
with  overwhelming  destruction.     3.  If  the  measure  is  filled  up,  the  weight  shall 
fall,  and  crush  the  sinner  with  its  ponderous  mass  of  punishment.     4.  The  finally 
impenitent  shall  be  driven  from  God  into  gloomy  exile,  and  left  to  himself,  "  to 
rest  on  his  own  base,"  to  be  subject  to  the  thrall  of  his  own  lawless  lusts  that 
he  has  so  long  pampered  into  strength,  and  to  reap  as  he  has  sowed,  through  a 
long  and  Hmitless  banishment.     (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)         Vision  of  the  ephah  : — 
There  are  some  portions  of  Old  Testament  prophecy  which,  at  first,  appear  un- 
meaning.    But  upon  closer  examination  they  are  found  to  contain  important 
lessons,  profitable  for  all  times.     Such  a  prophecy  is  Zechariah's  vision  of  the 
ephah.     Look — 1.  At  the  symbol  as  seen  by  the  prophet.     The  ephah  was  a  well- 
known  Jewish  measure,  represented  by  our  word    '  bushel."     The  prophet  saw 
such  a  measure  moving  forth  as  if  it  were  a  thing  of  life,  and  in  the  midst  of  it 
sat  a  woman  with  a  talent  of  lead  lifted  up  before  her.     The  whole  picture  was 
a  composite  symbol,  in  which  were  prominent  the  measure,  the  woman,  and  the 
talent  of  lead.     2.  The  meaning  of  the  symbol.     In  ver.  8  the  Hebrew  emphatic- 
ally declares — "  This  is  the  wickedness."     The  most  obvious  suggestion  is,  that 
form  of  wickedness  most  likely  to  ensnare  and  ruin  the  people  to  whom  Zechariah 
prophesied.      The    symbols    point    most    naturally   to    the   sin   of   unrighteous 
traffic,  the  root  and  essence  of  which  is  covetousness  (1  Tim.  vi.  10 ;  Col.  iii.  6). 
Why  a  woman  rather  than  a  man  appears  in  the  symbol  is  somewhat  difficult 
to  say,  but  probably  because  of  her  power  as  a  temptress.     The  ensnaring  images 
which  have  been  most  prominent  in  the  great  systems  of  idolatry  have  borne 
the  female  form.     This   woman's   throne  was  an  empty  measure,  and  her  sign 
an  uplifted  talent  of  lead,  thus  aptly  representing  the  sin  of  those  who  would 
"  swallow  up  the  needy,  and  cause  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail "  (Amos  viii.  4-6). 
This    iniquity    of   unrighteous    traffic    appears    to    have    ever  been  a  besetting 
sin  of  the  Jewish  people.     The  preceding  oracle  of  this  prophet  (vers.  1-4)  was 
directed  against  thieves,  and  those  who  swore  falsely  by  Jehovah's  name ;  and  the 
obscure  expression  in  ver.  16  (lit.,  "  this  is  their  eye  in  all  the  land  ")  is  perhaps 
best  explained  as  alluding  to  the  fact  that  in  all  the  land  the  eyes  of  thieves, 
extortioners,  and  false  swearers,  turned  longingly  towards  this  tempting  goddess 
of  covetousness.     3.  The  removal  of  this  ephah  to  the  land  of  Shinar  indicates 
some  kind  of  retribution  which  will  visit  this  form  of  wickedness.     The  woman 
was  cast  down  into  the  empty  measure,  and  the  leaden  weight  was  cast  upon  her 
mouth  (or  on  the  mouth  of  the  ephah),  and  ephah,  woman,  and  talent  were  hfted 
up,  and  carried  off  into  a  foreign  land ;  and  the  removal  was  effected  by  two 
women,  who  had  wings  like  the  stork,  and  who  were  helped  by  the  force  of  the 
wind.     This  part  of  the  vision  sets  forth  God's  penal  judgment  upon  this  sin  and 
its  devotees.     Among  the  various  elements  of  this  judgment  we  note  the  following 
— (1)  Such  wickedness  as  this  composite  symbol  represented  cannot  abide  in  the 
holy  land  of  Israel,  or  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.     There  must  be,  and  there 
will  be,  a  renewal.     (2)  The  instruments  of  this  woman's  sin  are  made  to  contribute 
to  lier  punishment.     Her  being  cast  into  the  ephah,  with  the  leaden  stone  upon 
her  mouth,  suggests  the  image  of  a  covetous  soul,  cramped  and  crushed  into 
the  narrow  world  of  self,  with  nothing  else  to  know  or  talk  about  than  weights 
and  measures.     Thus  sold  to  covetousness  one  makes  his  own  place,  and  goes 
to  it ;  his  heaven  is  made  his  hell.     He  is  made  to  live  inside  his  own  little  half- 


CRAT.  v.]  ZECHARIAH.  95 

bushel,  and  talk  of  nothing  else  than  talents,  stocks,  bonds,  comer  lots,  &c.  (3)  By 
an  irreversible  law  such  natures  are  taken  out  of  the  fellowship  of  the  pure  and 
good,  and  removed  far  from  them,  by  others  of  their  own  kind.  The  world  will 
love  his  own,  and  when  selfish  interests  are  at  stake,  men  and  women  of  an  adulter- 
ous and  sinful  generation  aim  to  help  those  who  have  helped  them.  So  this  one 
woman  was  taken  up  and  carried  away  by  her  like — aiders  and  abettors  in  un- 
righteous traflSc.  When  the  angel  had  cast  her  into  the  ephah  and  put  the  stone 
upon  her  mouth,  these  other  women  came  to  her  rescue,  and,  for  a  season  at  least, 
remove  her  to  a  more  congenial  place.  The  stork  is  mentioned  probably  for  no 
other  reason  than  for  being  a  well-known  bird  of  passage,  having  notably  large 
wings,  and  abounding  in  the  land  of  Shinar,  in  the  Euphrates  valley.  The  money- 
lovers  of  this  world  move  rapidly  in  each  other's  selfish  interest,  as  if  borne 
upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.  4.  The  land  of  Shinar  is  to  be  understood  as  the 
opposite  of  the  land  of  Israel,  which  in  chapter  ii.  12  is  called  "  the  holy  land." 
It  was  the  Babylonian  plain,  where  the  descendants  of  Noah  settled  aft«r  the 
flood,  and  builded  the  city  and  tower,  which  was  the  occasion  of  their  being  con- 
fused and  scattered  by  the  curse  of  Jehovah  (Gen.  xi.  2).  It  was  a  land  of 
idolatry,  whither  the  Jewish  people  had,  according  to  Zechariah  ii.  6,  been 
scattered  as  by  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  So  this  vision  symbolised  the  penal 
scattering  abroad  into  an  imclean  land  of  all  whose  eye  admired  the  goddess 
of  weights  and  measures  more  than  Jehovah.  The  great  moral  lesson  of  the 
vision  is  therefore  a  warning  against  covetousness  and  unrighteous  traffic.  Where 
the  love  of  money  is  so  strong  as  to  employ  "  balances  of  deceit,"  and  make  "  the 
ephah  small  and  the  shekel  great,"  there  will  come  curse  and  exile.  The  covetous 
man  will  suffer  in  ways  he  little  dreams  of,  and  the  very  instruments  of  his  sin 
may  be  turned  into  modes  of  punishment.  He  who  wiU  serve  Mammon  must 
leave  the  house  and  land  of  the  Lord,  and  so  all  those  Jews  who  loved  the  wages 
of  unrighteousness  might  expect  sooner  or  later  to  be  again  scattered  as  by  the 
winds  of  heaven.  Their  aiders  and  abettors  might  come  to  their  help,  and  even 
build  for  them  a  house  in  the  foreign  land ;  but,  like  the  tower  of  Babel,  built 
by  selfish  ambition  in  the  plain  of  Shinar,  even  that  liouse  will  be  likely  to  prove 
a  ciu'se.  This  process  of  separating  and  removing  the  lovers  of  this  world  from 
truth  and  holiness  is  ever  going  on  in  the  development  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Judas  loved  silver,  and  was  cut  off  and  went  to  his  own  place.  Demas  forsook 
the  Apostle  Paul  from  love  of  the  world.  John,  the  apostle,  speaks  of  those 
who  went  out  from  the  godly  because  they  were  not  of  them  (1  John  ii.  19),  and 
Jude  significantly  mentions  the  sensual,  having  not  the  Spirit,  as  they  who  separate 
themselves,  or  make  separations.  So,  by  the  necessary  antagonism  of  opposite 
natures,  the  covetous  must  remove  from  the  holy  ;  for  the  narrow-minded,  self- 
centred  worldling  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  (Milton  S.  Terry,  D.D.) 
The  woman  in  the  ephah  : —  The  question  of  the  angel,  and  the  answer  of  the 
prophet,  suggest — 1.  That  the  medium  of  Divine  thought  may  be  obscure  to 
human  understanding.  2.  That  which  we  are  to  communicate  to  others  must 
be  seen  clearly  by  ourselves.  3.  That  what  is  difficult  to  one  servant  of  God  may 
be  clear  to  another.  The  vision  probably  refers  to  the  general  sin  of  the  nation, 
which  reached  its  height  in  the  rejection  of  Messiah,  after  which  the  nation  was 
entirely  removed  from  the  land.     It  suggests — I.  That  time  is  needed  for  a 

NATION  TO  COMPLETE  ITS  DESTBUCTION,  AS  WELL  AS  FOB  ITS  CONSTRUCTION.       The 

ephah  is  a  measure  of  considerable  size ;  the  idea  conveyed  is  that,  when  it  ia 
fuU,  it  is  lifted  up  and  carried  away.  The  filling  takes  time,  and  the  nation  to 
which  the  vision  pointed  did  not  all  at  once  fill  up  the  measiu-e  of  its  iniquity. 
Wickedness  is  allowed  to  go  on  unchecked  for  a  certain  period,  but  only  to  give 
space  for  repentance.  II.  Sin  first  imprisons  the  sinner,  and  then  separates 
HIM  from  the  Divine  presence.  A  talent  of  lead  shuts  the  woman  into  the 
ephah,  which  is  then  borne  into  the  land  of  Shinar.  This  foretells  the  constant 
dwelling  of  the  Jews  among  the  Gentile  nations.  The  man  who  finds  himself 
in  a  condemned  cell  is  really  shut  in  and  banished  from  his  own  choice.  So  it 
was  with  the  Jewish  nation,  and  so  it  is  with  every  man  who  rejects  God's  plan 
of  regenerating  him.  He  is  self-imprisoned  and  self-banished.  III.  Those  who 
REJECT  God's  plan  of  restoration  will  be  left  to  their  own.  God  offeied 
to  the  Jewish  nation  a  sure  foundation  upon  which  to  rebuild  their  national  gieat- 
ness  (see  Isa.  xxviii.  16).  This  they  would  not  accept.  Therefore  they  were 
banished  from  their  land,  and,  in  the  words  of  this  prophecy,  "  set  there  upon 
their  own  base."     They  were  left  to  be  their  own  national  architects  and  defenders. 


96  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

and  the  history  of  their  bitter  sufferings  for  many  centuries,  and  their  present 
inability  to  gather  themselves  into  a  national  whole,  shows  how  ill  they  succeed 
who  prefer  their  own  way  to  that  which  God  offers  to  them.  This  truth  applies 
equally  to  every  man  who  rejects  the  only  foundation  upon  which  his  character 
can  be  rebuilt  into  its  original  greatness.  {Ovilines  by  London  Minister.)  A 
'inaterialistic  community : — Utter  mercenariness  is  an  abhorrent  object  to  an 
angel's  eye.  The  prophet  still  looks,  and  what  does  he  see  ?  The  meaning 
of  the  new  scene  may  be  easily  discovered.  The  ephah,  with  the  woman  in  it, 
i .  carried  away  between  earth  and  heaven,  i.e.  through  the  air.  Women  carry 
ii  because  there  is  a  woman  inside  ;  and  two  women,  because  two  persons  are 
required  to  carry  so  large  and  heavy  a  measure,  that  they  lay  hold  of  it  on  both 
fc  ides.  These  women  have  wings,  because  it  passes  through  the  air  ;  and  a  stork's 
■■.ings,  because  these  birds  have  broad  pinions,  and  not  because  the  stork  is  a 
bird  of  passage  or  an  unclean  bird.  "  The  wings  are  filled  with  wind,  that  they 
iiiay  be  able  to  carry  their  biu-den  with  greater  velocity  through  the  air.  The 
women  denote  the  instruments  or  powers  employed  by  God  to  carry  away  the 
tinners  out  of  His  congregation,  without  any  special  allusion  to  this  or  the  other 
historical  nation.  This  is  all  that  we  have  to  seek  in  these  features,  which  only 
serve  to  give  distinctness  to  the  picture." — Thiel  and  Delitzsch.  I.  Such  a  com- 
munity is  ENCASED  BY  THE  MATERIAL.  This  womau,  the  emblem  of  the  worldly 
Jews,  was  not  only  "  in  the  midst  of  the  ephah,"  but  was  closely  coniiiied  there. 
"  He  cast  the  weight  of  the  lead  upon  the  mouth  thereof."  To  an  utteil}'  worldly 
man  matter  is  everything.  He  is  utterly  shut  out  from  the  spiritual ;  there  is 
no  glimpse  of  it,  no  mterest  in  it.  Like  the  woman  in  the  ephah,  he  is  encompassed 
by  that  which  shuts  him  in.  The  bright  heavens  and  the  green  fields  of  the 
spiritual  world  are  over  and  around  him,  but  they  are  nothing  to  him.  He  is 
in  the  ephah.  (1)  Your  secular  scientist  is  in  the  ei^hah.  He  sees  nothing  but 
matter,  believes  in  nothing  but  matter.  (2)  Your  sensuous  religionist  is  in  this 
e;;hah.  He  judges  after  the  flesh.  (3)  Yoiu:  man  of  the  world  is  in  this  ephah. 
J\l\  his  ideas  of  wealth,  dignity,  pleasure  are  material.  II.  Such  a  community 
is  being  disinherited  by  the  material.  This  woman  in  the  ephah,  emblem 
of  the  worldly  Hebrew,  is  borne  away  from  Palestine,  her  own  land,  into  a  foreign 
region.  Materialism  disinherits  man.  His  true  inheritance  as  a  spiritual  existent 
ij  "  incorruptible,  undefiled,  that  fadeth  not  away."  But  materialism  carries 
him  away  from  it,  away  to  the  distant  and  the  gross.  (1)  The  process  was  rapid. 
No  bird  so  fleet  with  wing  and  foot  as  the  stork,  and  with  this  fleetness  this  woman 
in  the  ephah  was  borne.  How  rapidly  do  animalism  and  worldliness  bear  away 
the  spirit  of  man  from  the  realm  of  spiritual  realities,  from  a  love  of  the  true 
and  the  beautiful !  (2)  The  process  was  final.  "  And  he  said  unto  me,  To  build 
it  an  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar :  and  it  shall  be  established  and  set  there  upon 
her  own  base."  "  To  be  carnally  minded  is  death.  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh 
iliall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  Wliat  ruined  Simon  Magus  ?  The  world. 
"v\Tiat  ruined  Demas  ?  The  world.  And,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  shall 
gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  8.  And  he  said,  This  l8  wickedness. —  Worldliness : — This  is  the  ruin 
of  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands.  It  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  insure  a  man's 
])erdition  that  he  either  "steal"  or  "swear  falsely."  A  man  may  be  a  thorough 
worldling,  without  the  practice  of  these  or  any  gross  iniquities.  Whatever 
shuts  God  out  from  His  place  in  the  heart  as  the  object  of  fear  and  love, 
and  from  His  place  in  the  conscience  as  the  authoritative  regulator  of  the  life, 
that,  be  it  what  it  may,  is  the  ruin  of  the  man.  In  the  parable  of  the  marriage 
feast,  the  men  who  decHncd  the  invitation,  and  went  away  to  their  farms  and 
to  their  merchandise,  aie  not  charged  with  any  selfish  and  fraudulent  dealings 
in  the  management  of  their  farms  or  the  prosecution  of  their  merchandise.  What 
was  their  sin  ?  Worldliness.  They  preferred  the  world  to  God.  They  declined 
the  blessings  of  the  Gospel  for  something  more  to  their  taste.  They  chose  the 
world  and  the  thiuM  of  the  world — no  matter  in  how  innocent  a  form — even  the 
sweets  of  domestic  life  itself — to  God  and  the  things  of  God.  And  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  these,  as  their  chosen  portion,  they  "  had  their  reward."  Thus  it  was 
of  old  ;  thus  it  is  still.  Let  no  man  deceive  himself  by  fancying  it  necessary 
to  his  forfeiture  of  the  blcssi.-i'Ts  of  God's  salvation,  that  he  give  him.';elf  up  to 
the  practice  of  dishonesty  and  of  open  vice.  If  his  heart  is  in  the  world,  with 
the  world  he  must  have  his  portion.     Let  Christians  be  on  their  guard  against 


CHAP.  VI.]  ZECHARIAH.  97 

"  the  love  of  this  present  world."  It  is  an  insinuating  and  perilous  principle. 
In  proportion  as  it  gains  upon  the  heart,  it  tends  to  enfeeble  the  energies,  and 
deaden  the  sensibilities,  of  the  Divine  life  in  the  soul.  God  wiU  not  have  a  divided 
heart.     "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon."     {Bcdph  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  VL 

Ybbs.  1-8.  Behold  there  came  four  chariots  out  firom  between  two 
mountains. — The  four  chariots  : — The  general  meaning  of  this  vision  is  very 
clear.  The  enemies  of  the  Church  shaU  be  punished,  is  the  motto  of  the 
picture,  and  the  purport  of  the  vision.  The  immediate  application  of  the  truth 
was  to  the  existing  circumstances  of  the  Jewish  Church,  but  it  contains  a 
general  proposition  or  law  of  the  Divine  procedme  that  is  now  in  fulfilment,  and 
wiU  so  continue  until  the  restitution  of  all  things  spoken  of  by  the  holy  prophets 
since  the  world  began.  Following  the  preceding  vision,  which  denounced  wrath 
on  the  Jews,  it  declares  that  after  the  Jews  have  been  punished,  God  will  destroy 
their  enemies,  who  will  also  be  the  enemies  of  the  Church.  Now,  as  the  threatened 
punishment  of  the  Jews  is  not  yet  completed,  so  this  punishment  which  was  to 
follow  that  completion  is  also  incomplete,  and  the  main  fulfilment  yet  to  come. 
We  have  therefore  in  this  vision  an  instance  of  what  has  been  called  the  con- 
tinuous fjlfilraent  of  prophecy.  This  takes  place  when  the  prophecy  is  not  so 
much  a  simple  prediction  of  facts,  as  the  annunciation  of  a  great  principle  of 
Divine  procedure,  in  the  garb  of  existing  and  well-known  facts,  but  yet  equally 
applicable  to  other  facts  all  along  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  man.  Thus 
the  most  abstract  and  formulated  statement  of  the  essence  of  this  vision  is,  the 
enemies  of  the  Church  shall  be  punished.  Its  immediate  application  was  to 
Babylon  and  Egypt,  the  existing  representatives  of  the  ancient  enmity  of  the 
serpent's  seed,  but  this  application  is  of  course  a  single  one,  that  does  not  exclude 
the  future  examples  of  this  principle  of  the  Divine  government  that  may  and 
must  arise.  This  is  wholly  different  from  the  old  double  sense  of  prophecy,  and  is 
a  most  obvious  and  reasonable  canon  of  interpretation.  How  striking  the  fulfil- 
ment of  this  threatening,  when  we  remember  the  circumstances  under  which  ifc 
was  made.  Could  the  haughty  nobles  of  Babylon,  in  the  gorgeousness  of  its  magni- 
ficence and  the  pride  of  its  power,  have  heard  the  threatening  of  this  obscure 
Jew,  amidst  the  ruins  of  Jerusalem,  with  what  derision  and  contempt  would  they 
have  treated  the  threat !  The  anathema  that  was  so  feebly  uttered  against  the 
mightiest  and  richest  city  in  the  world,  to  the  eye  of  sense  seemed  like  the  ravings 
of  lunacy.  Yet  that  feeble  whisper  was  the  uttered  voice  of  Jehovah,  and  the 
elements  of  ruin  in  their  remotest  lurking-place  heard  the  summons,  and  began 
to  come  forth.  Slowly  and  silently  did  they  come  up  to  this  dread  work,  and  yet 
surely  and  resistlessly,  untQ  the  glory  of  these  high  palaces  was  dimmed,  and  the 
magnificence  of  these  gardens  and  temples  was  covered,  and  now  the  winds  whistle 
through  the  reeds  of  the  Euphrates,  w'lere  Babylon  then  sat  in  her  pride  ;  and 
loneliness,  desolation,  and  death  are  stationed  there  the  sentinel  witnesses  of  the 
truth  that  His  word  returns  not  to  Him  void,  that  His  Spirit  is  quieted  in  the  land 
of  the  north.  The  same  is  true  of  Egypt,  and  later  on  of  Greece  and  Rome.  So 
it  will  be  with  guilty  and  godless  Europe.  Learn — 1.  That  the  history  of  the 
world  is  all  arranged  and  conducted  in  reference  to  the  destinies  of  the  Church, 
and  the  agencies  that  control  that  history  go  forth  from  the  seat  of  the  Church's 
great  head,  the  unseen  temple.  2.  God  has  in  operation  every  species  of  agency, 
human  and  angelic,  animate  and  inanimate,  needful  for  the  accomplishment 
of  His  purposes,  and  will  send  these  forth  at  the  proper  time.  Political  changes 
and  revolutions  are  only  the  moving  of  the  shadow  on  the  earthly  dial-plate  that 
marks  the  mightier  motions  going  forward  in  the  heavens.  (T.  V.  Moore,  D  D.) 
The  supremacy  of  God  : — The  entire  vision  was  designed  to  teach  a  great  general 
lesson — the  lesson  of  the  universal  supremacy  and  superintendence  of  the  "  God 
of  Israel  "  over  aU  the  agencies  of  nature,  and  all  the  varying  movements  of  progress 
or  retrogression,  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  of  peace  and  war,  amongst  the 
nations;  and  to  teach  it  with  a  special  application  to  themselves,  as  His  chosen 
people,  and  to  those  adjoining  or  more  distant  countriea  by  which  their  condition 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

had  been,  or  might  hereafter  be,  beneficially  or  injuriously  affected.  It  called 
upon  them  to  put  their  trust  in  the  wisdom,  power,  and  love  of  their  own  Jehovah, 
— the  governor  among  the  nations  ; — in  one  word,  to  "  have  faith  in  God." 
Let  us  learn  the  lesson.  Amidst  all  the  convulsions  and  revolutions  that  are 
agitating  Europe,  let  us  not  only  acknowledge  but  rejoice  in  the  supremacy  of  the 
infinitely  wise,  and  good,  and  mighty.  All  "  the  winds  "  are  His.  He  "  holds 
them  in  His  fist."  The  zeph)T  and  the  hurricane  are  alike  His  agents.  All 
influences — in  every  department  of  creation,  and  in  the  hearts  and  wills  and  words 
and  actions  of  men  of  every  kindred  and  tongue  and  people  and  nation,  are  imder 
His  absolute  control.  "  None  can  stay  His  hand,  or  say  unto  Him,  What  doest 
Thou  ?  "  Let  us  trust  in  Him,  own  Him,  pray  to  Him, — deprecating,  on  behalf 
of  our  country,  and  of  oiu*  guilty  world,  merited  wrath, — and  imploring,  especially, 
that  all  events  may  result  in  glory  to  His  name.  [Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 
God's  government  of  the  world  : — This  is  the  last  in  the  series  of  visions,  which 
amount  in  all  to  seven,  during  that  one  night.  This  is  not  more  easy  of  interpreta- 
tion than  the  preceding  ones.  The  objects  which  were  now  revealed  to  the  prophet's 
vision  are  various  and  strange.  ( I )  He  sees  four  chariots.  It  does  not  say  whether 
they  were  chariots  of  war  bearing  the  warrior  out  to  battle,  or  home  in  triumph, 
or  whether  they  were  chariots  used  for  private  or  public  conveyances.  (2)  He 
saw  these  four  chariots  proceeding  from  two  mountains.  These  were  not  moun- 
tains of  earth  or  stone,  but  mountains  of  brass  ;  mountains,  therefore,  having 
peculiar  solidity  and  strength.  (3)  He  saw  these  chariots  drawn  by  horses  of 
different  colour.  I  take  the  vision  to  illustrate  God's  government  of  the  world, 
and  it  illustrates  four  facts  concerning  that  government.  I.  Variety.  This  is 
suggested  by  the  colour  of  the  steeds  that  bear  on  the  chariots  of  His  plans.  The 
"  red  horses,"  emblem  of  war  and  bloodshed.  The  "  black,"  emblem  of  calamity, 
distress,  and  mourning.  The  "  white,"  emblem  of  gladness  and  prosperity.  The 
*'  grisled  "  and  "  bay,"  or  piebald,  a  mixture  of  events,  prosperity  and  adversity, 
friendship  and  bereavement,  sorrow  and  joy,  &c.  Has  not  this  variety  char- 
acterised the  providence  that  is  over  man  from  the  beginning  until  thi.s  hour  ? 
It  is  not  only  seen  in  every  page  of  the  history  of  nations  and  Churches  and  families, 
but  in  the  history  of  individuals.  The  experience  of  every  man  is  more  changeable 
than  the  weather.  There  is  a  constant  alternation, — the  red,  the  black,  the  white, 
the  mixed.  These  changes  are  useful.  1.  They  break  the  monotony  of  life. 
They  tend  to  keep  the  heart  of  humanity  on  the  alert.  There  is  but  little  oppor- 
tunity for  moral  sleep.  2.  They  create  a  desire  for  a  state  of  certainty.  They 
prompt  a  search  for  a  "  city  that  hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is 
God."  This  is  not  oiu'  rest.  II.  Immutability.  These  chariots  move  between 
two  "  mountains  of  brass."  Though  they  are  borne  by  a  variety  of  steeds,  and 
move  rapidly  towards  every  point  of  the  compass,  and  bear  a  variety  of  events 
wherever  they  go,  they  are  overshadowed  and  hedged  in  by  the  immutable  in 
mountains  of  brass.  God's  immutable  counsels  of  decrees  keep  all  the  motions 
and  commotions,  all  the  convulsions  and  revolutions  of  the  world  in  their  place. 
As  the  ocean  amidst  all  its  ebbings  and  flowings,  rage  and  fury,  is  bound  to  obey 
the  moon,  which  remains  serenely  settled  in  her  orbit,  so  all  the  agitations  of 
the  earth  are  bound  to  obey  the  immutable  decrees  of  Heaven.  Thank  God  1 
that  in  this  changing  world  of  ours  there  are  mountains  of  brass,  things  that 
cannot  be  shaken.  "  All  flesh  is  grass,  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for 
ever."  III.  Universality.  These  chariots,  borne  by  these  varied  coloured 
steeds,  rolled  towards  every  point  of  the  globe,  some  to  the  north  and  some  to  the 
south.  They  walked  "  to  and  fro  through  the  earth."  Not  a  spot  unvisited 
or  ignored.  God's  providence  embraces  all,  matter  and  mind,  great  and  small, 
good  and  evil.  Hence  we  should  bow  with  resignation  under  all  our  sorrows, 
and  shout  with  gratitude  in  all  our  enjoyments.  IV.  Supremacy.  "  These 
are  the  four  spirits  of  the  heavens,  which  go  forth  from  standing  before  the  Lord 
of  all  the  earth."  He  is  at  the  head  of  all.  No  evil  spirit  moves  without  His 
permission  and  control ;  no  good  spirit  without  His  inspiration  and  guidance. 
He  is  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth.  How  great  must  He  be  who  manages  all  things  ! 
{Hornilitt.)  These  are  the  four  spirits  of  the  heavens.  — Four  spirits 
of  the  heavens: — Eminent  interpreters  translate  the  words  "celestial  spirits," 
and  thus  present  us  at  once,  in  our  own  customary  theology,  with  angels. 
There  is  difficulty  here,  however.  In  the  first  place,  "  spirits  of  the  heavens  " 
is  a  very  unwonted  designation  for  angels  in  Scripture.  I  know  not  that  it  has  a 
parallel.     And  secondly,  if  angels  are  intended,  how  come  we  to  have  four  ?     Their 


CHAP.  VI.]  ZECHARIAH.  SJ> 

number  is  "  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  "  ;  and  iinless  they  are  mentioned 
in  connection  with  something  else  that  leads  and  limits  to  the  number  four,  it  is 
difficult,  by  any  analogy,  to  account  for  it.  Let  me  illustrate  the  remark  from 
another  passage — "  And  after  these  things  I  saw  four  angels  standing  on  the 
four  corners  of  the  earth,  holding  the  four  winds  of  the  earth,  that  the  wind  should 
not  blow  on  the  earth,  nor  on  the  sea,  nor  on  any  tree  "  (Rev.  vii.  1).  Here  we 
have  "four  angels."  But  we  at  once  see  why  they  are  four.  They  are,  in  the 
vision,  employed  in  "  holding  the  four  winds  of  the  earth."  Now  the  four  winds, 
from  the  four  cardinal  points — understood  as  representing  and  embracing  all  the 
intermediate  points,  and  thus  signifying  the  winds  in  general — was  a  style  of 
expression  familiar  to  the  ancients  as  ourselves.  The  word  rendered  "  spirits," 
as  most  if  not  all  of  you  are  aware,  signifies  also  winds.  The  question  then  is, 
whether  what  are  called  "  the  four  winds  of  the  earth,"  in  the  Book  of  Revelation, 
be  not  the  same  as  what  are  here  called  the  "  four  spirits,"  or  winds,  "  of  the 
heavens."  I  am  strongly  tempted  to  think  that  we  have,  in  this  vision,  one 
symbol,  or  emblem,  explained  by  another.  "  The  four  winds  "  are  an  emblem — 
a  most  natural  and  appropriate  one — of  all  the  powers  and  agencies  by  which 
the  earth  can  be  affected  ;  especially  agencies  of  judgment — of  wars  and  desola- 
tions, arising  from  the  contending  elements  of  human  passions  and  Satanic 
malignity.     [Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-15.  And  set  them  upon  the  head  of  Joshua. — The  matchless  man 
in  history : — The  crowning;  the  work,  and  the  position  of  Joshua  spoken 
of  in  these  verses,  are  obviously  employed  to  symbolise  some  coming  man 
who  would  be  matchless  in  all  history.  Concerning  this  matchless  man,  we  are 
taught — I.  That  He  is  one  whom  heaven  commands  the  people  to  honour. 
The  prophet  is  commanded  to  go  to  certain  men  of  the  more  distinguished  who 
had  returned  from  Babylon,  representative  men  it  may  be.  He  was  to  take 
these  men,  whose  names  are  here  given,  to  the  house  of  another  distinguished 
man,  here  caUed  Josiah,  the  son  of  Zephaniah.  From  that  house  silver  and  gold 
were  to  be  taken,  with  which  crowns  were  to  be  made,  and  placed  upon  the  head 
of  Joshua,  the  son  of  the  high  priest.  By  general  consent  of  expositors,  this  was  a 
mere  symbolical  transaction — a  transaction  pointmg  to  some  gieat  man  whom 
heaven  will  require  all  men  to  crown  with  the  highest  dignity.  Here  is  a  character 
symbolised  by  the  name  of  Joshua,  to  whom  the  people  are  called  upon  by  God 
Himself  to  render  honour.  Who  is  this  man  ?  The  man  Christ  Jesus  !  "  When 
He  bringeth  in  the  first- begotten  into  the  world  He  saith.  Let  all  the  angels  of  God 
worship  Him."  II.  That  His  pedigree  was  strikingly  singttlar.  "  Thus  speaketh 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying,  Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch  ;  and  He  shall 
grow  up  out  of  His  place,  and  He  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  He  came 
down  from  heaven  and  tabernacled  on  this  earth,  which  was  not  His  place.  A 
great  soul,  dominated  by  a  supreme  sympathy  with  the  Supremely  Good,  can 
grow  anywhere,  in  its  place  or  out  of  it.  It  can  subordinate  the  most  hostile 
external  elements  and  forces  for  its  own  will  and  interests.  III.  That  He  is 
ONE  whose  mission  IS  SUBLIMELY  GLORIOUS.  "  He  shall  build  the  temple  of 
the  Lord,"  &c.  Zerubbabel  was  now  engaged  in  the  work  of  rearing  the  material 
temple  at  Jerusalem ;  and  a  more  glorious  work  than  this  is  not  given  to  man, 
viz.  to  promote  the  public  worship  of  God.  IV.  That  He  is  one  whose  position 
and  functions  are  transcendently  exalted.  He  is  on  a  throne.  I.  As  a 
priestly  King.  2.  As  a  glorious  Reconciler.  The  Mediator  between  God  and  man. 
The  reconciliation,  the  atonement.  V.  That  He  is  one  whose  power  to 
attract  others  to  His  enterprise  is  immi^nsely  great.  The  Gentiles  were 
to  be  themselves  stones  in  the  building,  and  agents  in  the  rearing  of  it.  (Homilist.) 
The  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch. — On  Christ's  name,  the  Branch : — 
The  text  and  context  are  a  remarkable  prophecy  of  the  coming  of  the 
promised  Messiah  in  the  flesh,  who  is  described  by  His  natures.  His  offices  of 
Priest  and  King,  and  His  work  in  building  the  spiritual  temple  of  the  Lord. 
1.  Some  observations  upon  the  occasion  and  reason  of  this  name,  the  Branch, 
given  to  the  promised  Messiah,  before  His  coming  in  the  flesh.  (1)  The  original 
word,  "  tsemach,"  does  not  signify  "  the  East,"  as  some  have  imagined,  but  always, 
"  the  Branch."  There  are  also  other  Hebrew  words  expressing  Jesus  Christ  by  this 
His  name,  the  Branch.  (2)  A  man's  offspring  are,  by  a  very  just  metaphor, 
called  his  branches,  becaiise  they  proceed  from  him,  as  branches  or  sprouts  from  a 
root.     Jesus  Christ  is  said,  in  Isa.  xi.  1,  to  be  a  "  Branch  out  of  the  root  of  Jesse." 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi 

(3)  Jesus  Chiist  is  metaphorically  called  a  Branch,  respecting  some  family  He 
was  to  spring  from  in  His  human  nature,  and  this  was  the  family  of  David,  the 
son  of  Jesse.  (4)  When  the  kings  of  David's  family,  and  their  kingdom,  which 
was  then  the  Church  of  God,  were  greatly  declined,  sore  oppressed  and  much 
weakened,  this  promise  to  David,  that  Christ  was  to  come  as  a  Branch  from  him, 
was  presented  to  their  faith,  that  they  might  expect  the  greatest  blessings  to 
themselves,  and  to  the  Church  of  God,  by  the  means  of  this  Branch  of  David's 
family.  (5)  After  the  return  from  captivity,  the  encouragement  and  hope  of  the 
Church  were  foiinded  upon  the  coming  of  this  Branch  of  David.  2.  Scriptures 
of  the  New  Testament  where  He  is  designed  the  Branch  (Luke  i.  78).  For  '  day- 
spring"  the  margin  has  sun-rising  or  branch  (Matt.  ii.  23).  Nazareth  had  its 
name  from  a  branch,  which,  though  not  the  same  word  as  in  our  text,  yet  is  of  the 
same  signification.  3.  The  Scripture  account  of  Jesus  Christ,  imder  the  name 
and  designation  of  the  Branch.  (1)  He  was  to  be  the  true  and  eternal  God.  "  The 
Lord  our  Righteousness."  (2)  The  Branch  of  the  Lord  (Isa.  iv.  2).  Son  of  God 
the  Father,  by  an  eternal,  incomprehensible,  and  incommunicable  generation. 
(3)  Really  and  truly  man,  and  of  the  lineage  and  posterity  of  David.  (4)  Both 
God  and  man,  without  any  change  of  one  nature  into  another,  or  confusion  of  the 
one  with  the  other,  and  all  this  in  one  person.  (5)  He  was  to  be  Jehovah's  servant 
for  the  redemption  of  lost  sinners.  "  He  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant." 
He  came,  "  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister."  (6)  This  Branch  was,  in  a 
peculiar  manner,  of  God's  bringing  forth  and  raising  up.  God  the  Father  foimd 
Him  out,  and  called  Him  to  the  work  of  saving  sinners.  (7)  He  was  for  a  time  to 
be  very  low  and  contemptible,  to  be  cut  down,  and  to  grow  up  to  the  greatest 
height.  This  was  to  be  specially  true  of  His  birth.  (8)  The  Branch  was  to  sustain 
and  execute  pffices  for  the  building  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  both  as  Prince  and 
Saviour.  (9)  It  was  to  be  a  righteous  Branch,  a  Branch  of  righteousness.  Applica- 
tion— \.  Learn  the  advantage  of  studying  the  Old  Testament.  2.  Be  restless 
in  your  endeavours,  until  this  Branch,  this  man,  be  excellent,  desirably  glorious 
and  precious  to  you,  and  in  your  esteem.  3,  Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the 
Branch.  Behold  Him  in  His  person,  in  His  natures.  4.  Come  and  take  up 
your  dwelling  under  the  shadow  of  this  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch. 
{James  Robe,  M.A.)  The  Branch  : — The  words  are  addressed  to  Joshua  the 
priest,  but  they  represent  the  Divine  Saviour.  I.  The  beauty  of  this  "Branch." 
What  is  it  that  most  especially  constitutes  the  beauty  of  the  Divine  character  ? 
Not  justice  by  itself ;  not  mercy  by  itself ;  but  the  marvellous  union  of  both, 
the  harmony  between  these  Divine  attributes,  by  which  God  can  be  "  a  just  God 
and  a  Saviour."  That  union  has  been  discovered  perfect  and  complete  in  the 
person  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  God- man- mediator,  so  in  Him  is  the  very  perfection 
of  beauty.  It  is  indeed  said  of  Him,  "There  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire 
Him  "  ;  but  these  expressions  refer  to  the  meanness  of  His  birth,  and  to  the 
prejudices  of  His  nation.  II.  The  shadiness  of  this  Branch.  The  term  brings 
to  our  minds  the  exposed  state  of  the  sinner,  in  the  "  weary  land  "  of  this  world. 
He  stands  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God.  He  wants  "  shade  " — something  that 
will  interpose  between  him  and  the  intense  heat  from  above,  and  afford  him  a 
protection  from  it.  By  whatever  emblem  the  precious  blood  and  perfect  righteous- 
ness of  Christ  are  represented  to  us  in  Scripture,  the  idea  always  conveyed  is  that 
of  security  against  the  effects  of  Divine  wrath,  consequent  on  human  transgression. 
The  shade  of  the  "righteous  Branch"  is  the  interposing  mediation  of  our  exalted 
Redeemer.  The  shade  of  this  Branch  is  extending  itself  every  day.  III.  Thb 
FRUiTFULNESS  OF  THIS  BRANCH.  The  two  figures  are  united  in  Canticles.  "  I 
eat  down  under  His  shadow  with  great  delight,  and  His  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste." 
In  Revelation  is  described  the  tree  of  life,  which  bare  twelve  manner  of  fruit,  and 
whose  leaves  were  not  for  shade  only,  but  also  for  healing.  IV.  The  strength 
OF  this  Branch.  "  He  shall  bear  the  glory."  He  shall  bear  the  weight  of  all  the 
cares  and  concerns  of  His  whole  Church,  both  small  and  great,  even  of  every  indi- 
vidual, however  important  or  insignificant;  and  He  shall  be  found  both  able  and 
willing  to  support  them  all.  And  He  "  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree." 
(F.  Elwin.)  The  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch: — There  is  a  difference  between 
the  manner  in  which  the  prophets,  before  and  after  the  captivity,  spoke  of  the 
Messiah.  To  the  prophets  after  the  captivity,  the  invasion  of  the  Babylonian 
armies,  the  destruction  of  their  city  and  temple,  and  the  very  return  of  the  Jews 
were  all  past  events.  The  fulfilling  hand  of  the  faithful  Inspirer  of  foregoing 
predictions  had  swept  them  all  aside  ;  and  nothing  remained  to  turn  their  attention 


CHAP.  VI.]  ZECHARIAH.  101 

from  that  near  approach  of  the  Messiah  of  which  they  all  speak  in  terms  so  remark- 
ably explicit.  Among  other  types  and  figures  of  heavenly  things  which  the 
Jewish  prophets  used,  are  personal  types,  of  which  the  text  is  an  example.  Here 
Joshua  is  expressly  made  the  type  of  Him  who  was  both  King  and  Priest.  This 
could  not  apply  to  Joshua  himself,  seeing  that  he  was  only  a  priest.     I.  The 

EMPHATIC  APPELLATION  GIVEN  TO  THE  MESSIAH, — THE  BRANCH.     The  verb  whence 

the  word  is  derived  signifies  "  to  grow,"  "  to  sprout."  It  is  specially  applied 
to  trees,  some  of  which  in  part  decayed,  and  that  to  the  very  roots,  will  often  send 
forth  new  shoots,  which  shall  surpass,  in  greatness  and  fruitfulness,  the  original 
stock.  This  expression,  as  applied  to  Christ,  is — 1.  Eminently  prophetical 
(Isa.  xi.  1).  The  stem  of  Jesse  was  decayed.  At  the  time  of  its  lowest  depression, 
the  Branch,  the  Messiah,  shot  forth.  2.  As  descriptive  of  His  personal  progress 
to  glory  and  dominion.  Of  the  progress  of  His  religion  in  the  world.  And  of  the 
work  of  Christ  in  the  heart.  3.  As  indicating  the  secret  and  mjrsterious  mode  of 
His  operations.  The  metaphor  is  taken  from  vegetation,  the  process  of  invisible 
influence  which  out  of  rude  elements  frames  the  stately  tree,  and  from  a  bud 
develops  the  goodly  branch.  There  is  an  unseen  principle  at  work,  and  that 
principle  is  the  working  of  God  Himself.  We  see  this  in  the  progress  of  our 
Saviour  from  suffermgs  to  glory.  And  in  the  progress  of  His  religion  in  our  world. 
II.  The  great  work  to  which  the  Messiah  was  appointed.  "  He  shall  build 
the  temple  of  the  Lord."  A  parallel  may  be  presented  between  the  material 
temple  and  the  spiritual  house.  In  conclusion  notice — the  union  of  the  kingly 
and  priestly  offices  in  Christ.  {R.  WcUson.)  The  man  whose  name  ia  the  Branch  : 
— I.  The  person  herb  spoken  of.  Who  is  this  wondrous,  mysterious  man  T 
Not  certainly  Joshua,  the  high  priest,  on  whose  head  the  crowns  were  to  be  placed. 
For  the  message  is  addressed  to  Joshua,  as  concerning  some  one  else.  Joshua, 
the  crowned  high  priest,  is  the  type  of  another,  greater  than  himself,  to  whom 
he  and  all  others  are  to  look  for  blessing.  These  words  seem  to  point  to  one 
already  known,  to  one  whose  name  is  familiar.  And  so  it  is.  Isaiah  had  borne 
testimony  regarding  Him  (Isa.  xi.  2-9,  xxiii.  6,  6,  xxxiii.  15,  16).  Is  not  this 
the  substance  of  the  Lord's  message  to  every  generation  of  the  sons  of  men  ?  Is  not 
this  the  great  central  message  of  the  Book  of  God,  and  of  every  faithful  messenger 
of  His  ?  Must  not  this  be  the  keynote  of  o\u:  preaching  ?  The  Branch  is 
none  other  than  the  Messiah,  our  blessed  Redeemer,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
It  tells  of  one  who  has  taken  our  nature.  Our  Redeemer  is  man.  But  not  man 
alone.  He  is  the  God-man.  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  Man,  a  Divine,  and  therefore 
an  all-sufficient  Saviour.  II.  His  work.  "  He  shall  build  up  the  temple  of  the 
Lord.  This  work  was  entrusted  to  Zerubbabel,  but  he  was  only  a  type  of  the  true 
temple-builder.  For  the  true  temple  is  the  spiritual  temple,  the  temple  into 
which  aU  believers  are  built,  and  of  which  Jesus  Christ  is  the  foundation-stone. 
And  this  Builder  is  also  the  Owner,  the  Ruler,  a  Priest,  a  Royal  Priest.  The  head- 
ship of  Christ  is  a  personal  matter ;  the  great  question  for  each  one  is,  Am  I  a  loyal 
subject  of  the  Church's  Head  and  King  ?  Is  He  the  ruler  of  my  life  ?  It  is  also 
said,  "  He  shall  be  a  Priest  upon  His  throne."  What  you  and  I  need  is  a  priest 
to  remove  guilt,  to  make  atonement  for  sin,  to  satisfy  Divine  justice,  and  reconcile 
us  to  God.  "  Him  hath  God  exalted,  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance 
to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins."     (William  Findley,  M.A.) 

Yet.  13.  He  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  He  shall  bear  the  glory. 
— Christ  glorified  as  the  Builder  of  the  Church : —  Heaven  singeth  evermore. 
And  this  world  is  singing  too.  The  tune  to  which  heaven  and  earth  are 
set  is  the  same.  And  mark  how  the  music  of  the  Church  is  set  to  the  same  tune 
as  that  of  heaven  and  earth,  "  Great  God,  Thou  art  to  be  magnified."  Is  not 
this  the  unanimous  song  of  all  the  redeemed  below  ?  In  the  text  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  alluded  to.  The  context  runs,  "  Behold  the  man  whose  name  is 
the  Branch" — a  title  ever  applied  to  Messiah.  I.  The  temple.  It  is  the  Church 
of  God.  All  Christians  constitute  the  Church.  I  mean  all  them  that  love  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity  and  truth,  for  these  make  up  the  one  universal  Church. 
This  Church  is  called  the  "  temple  "  of  God,  and  Christ  is  said  to  be  its  builder. 
The  temple  was  the  place  where  God  specially  dwelt.  It  is  true  that  God  is  every- 
where, but  in  a  special  manner  He  dwelt  in  the  temple.  If  you  would  find  God, 
He  is  everywhere  in  creation.  If  you  would  know  what  is  the  secret  place  of 
the  Most  High,  you  must  go  where  you  find  the  Church  of  true  believers,  for  it  is 
here  He  makes  His  continual  residence  known.    The  temple  was  the  place  of  clearest 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

manifestation.  He  who  would  see  God  the  best  of  all,  must  see  Him  in  His 
temple.  The  Church  is  like  the  temple  in  that  it  is  a  place  of  worship.  As  there 
was  only  one  temple,  so  there  is  only  one  Church.  II.  Christ  is  the  Chttkch's 
ONLY  BUILDER.  Make  a  parallel  between  Christ's  building  the  Church,  and 
Solomon's  building  the  first  temple.  In  this  Solomon  fails  to  be  a  type  of  Christ. 
Christ  builds  the  temple  Himself.  And  Jesus  Christ  excels  Solomon,  for  He 
provides  all  the  materials.  III.  Glorify  Christ.  The  glory  which  He  shall 
have  will  be  a  weighty  glory,  an  undivided  glory.  He  shall  have  all  the  glory. 
Practical  application — Are  we  built  up  upon  Christ  ?  Then  let  us  evermore 
honour  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Builder  of  the  spiritual  temple : — This 
passage  relates  to  the  dispensation  of  the  Gospel,  when  it  would  be  proved  that 
Jesus  Christ  by  His  person  and  work  did  actually  rebuild  the  spiritual  temple, 
which  fell  into  ruins  by  the  disobedience  of  our  first  parents.     I.  The  BUXLDrNO. 

I.  The  ruinous  state  of  the  temple.  2.  Whose  temple  it  is.  "  The  Lord's."  3.  The 
builder  of  this  temple  is  Christ.     4.  The  agent  employed  is  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  The  glory  of  our  salvation  belongs  unto  the  L  ird.  In  redeeming  u8 
from  sin ;  in  justifying  our  souls  ;  and  in  preserving  us  for  glory.  III.  The 
nature  of  His  government.  He  rules  in  heaven,  having  accomplished  His 
work.  He  rules  over  the  world  generally.  He  rules  over  the  Church  collectively. 
And  over  each  believer  in  particular.  He  rules  in  the  Word,  in  the  Gospel,  and 
in  every  Christian  duty.  IV.  His  priestly  office.  He  lives  as  a  priest  to 
make  intercession.  By  appearing  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.  By  presenting 
His  sacrifice  and  righteousness.  By  declaring  His  will  of  our  final  glory.  V.  The 
nature  of  the  counsel  there  spoken  of.  Some  explain  it  as  between  the 
Father  and  the  Son  ;  or  between  the  altar  and  the  throne  ;  or  between  Christ 
and  His  Church ;  or  between  Jew  a,nd  Gentile  ;  or  between  the  soul  and  God. 
(T.  B.  Baker.)  The  temple  : — I.  The  temple.  1.  Because  the  Church  is  con- 
secrated to  the  service  of  God.  2.  Is  hallowed  by  His  residence.  3.  Is  honoured 
by  His  self- manifestation.  II.  The  builder.  Because  He — 1.  Prepares  the 
materials.       2.  Employs    the    workmen.       3.  Superintends    the   workmanship. 

III.  The  glory.  1.  From  the  unlikelihood  of  the  materials.  2.  From  the 
magnitude  of  the  obstacles.  3.  From  the  diversity  of  the  workmen.  4.  From 
the  perfection  of  the  work.  (G.  Brooks.)  Christ,  the  Builder  and  Ruler  of  the 
temple  : — Of  the  man  here  spoken  of  it  is  affirmed  that  "  His  name  is  the  Branch, 
and  that  He  shall  grow  up  out  of  His  place."  The  Branch  that  was  to  grow  out 
of  the  root  of  Jesse  was  to  be  more  than  man  ;  for  who  could  bear  that  wondrous 
name,  "  The  Lord  our  Righteouness,"  but  the  Lord  Himself  ?  The  text  refers 
to  One  who  should  combine  in  His  own  person  the  fulness  of  Divinity  with  all  that 
is  essential  to  the  constitution  of  our  nature.  I.  The  work  here  ascribed  to 
Christ.  "  He  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  The  prophet  was  com- 
manded to  make  two  crowns,  and  set  them  on  the  head  of  Joshua.  Under  the 
Levitical  economy  the  high  priest  wore  a  crown,  and  in  ancient  times  the  crown 
was  the  badge  of  royalty.  Joshua  was  thus  a  striking  type  of  Him  who  is  at  once 
the  High  Priest  and  the  King  of  Zion.  As  the  person  of  Joshua  typified  that  of 
Christ,  so  the  work  to  which  Joshua  was  called  was  typical  of  that  which  Christ  was 
to  accomplish.  The  temple  Christ  was  to  build  is  the  Church  universal,  consisting 
of  all  who  in  every  age  and  nation  are  washed  and  justified  and  sanctifie  1  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.  Why  the  Church  is  called 
a  temple  is  not  difficult  to  perceive.  It  is  so  called  in  allusion  to  the  sacred 
edifice  which,  by  Divine  command,  was  erected  in  Jerusalem.  That  edifice  was 
dedicated  to  the  service  of  God,  and  so  are  all  who  believe  in  Jesus.  In  the  Jewish 
temple  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  reveal  His  glory ;  and  so  He  does  in  the  Church, 
but  more  spiritually  and  more  fully.  He  manifests  Himself  to  all  that  love  and 
serve  Him.  The  Jewish  temple  was  regarded  as  God's  residence,  for  the  visible 
emblem  of  His  glory  dwelt  between  the  cherubime.  And  is  not  His  life-giving 
presence  with  His  Church  on  earth  ?  Has  He  not  promised  to  be  alwaj's  with  His 
people  ?  In  the  one  temple  were  observed  the  rites  which  He  was  pleased  to 
institute;  in  the  other.  He  is  worshipped  in  spirit  and  truth.  Of  this  temple 
Jesus  is  the  builder.  Before  a  structure  can  be  reared  the  foundation  must  bo 
laid  ;  and  Christ  has  laid  the  foundation  of  His  Church,  virtuall}',  in  the  counsels 
of  eternity,  when  He  undertook  to  accomplish  the  work  of  our  redemption  ;  actually, 
in  the  fulness  of  time,  when  He  obeyed  and  sulTeved  in  our  stead.  He  is  Himself 
the  rock  on  which  His  Church  is  built.  On  Himself  as  foundation  God  rears 
the  sijiritual  temple.     This  He  does  by  the  instrumentality  of  His  Word,  and  by 


CHAP.  VI.]  ZECHARIAH.  103 

the  agency  of  His  Spirit.  The  soul,  when  united  to  the  Saviour,  undergoes  a 
thorough  change  of  character  as  well  as  of  condition.  Christ  imparts  His  virtues 
to  the  soul  that  rests  on  Him  as  the  foundation  of  its  hope.  Christ  sanctifies  it 
by  His  Word  and  Spirit,  and  thus  it  becomes  a  living  stone,  reflecting  the  glory  of 
Christ  Himself.  Such  is  the  way  in  which  Christ  carries  on  the  work  that  is  here 
ascribed  to  Him.  As  one  sinner  after  another  is  converted,  one  living  stone 
after  another  is  added  to  the  temple  which  He  is  building.  Amid  all  the  uproax 
and  turmoil  of  this  ungodly  world,  this  work  is  silently  but  surely  going  on.  How 
glorious  shall  the  temple  be,  when  the  last  living  stone  shall  complete  the  harmony 
of  its  vast  proportions  !  Then,  purified  from  every  soil,  and  resplendent  with  the 
beauties  of  righteousness  and  holiness,  it  shall  stand  out  before  the  universe  the 
noblest  monument  of  the  Divine  perfections.  What  a  signal  honour  to  be  fellow- 
workers  with  Christ  in  speeding  on  this  blessed  consummation !  II.  Chkist  beaks 
THE  GLORY  AS  THE  BtTLER  IN  THE  TEMPLE.  It  is  to  His  glory  in  this  respect  that 
the  text  more  especially  refers.  There  is  a  very  obvious  and  important  distinction 
between  His  government  of  the  universe,  and  His  headship  over  the  Church. 
The  Church  is  a  society  of  a  special  natvire,  requiring  special  laws  and  institutions 
for  its  government  and  guidance.  It  is  a  kingdom  not  of  this  world,  though  in 
this  world.  The  glory  which  Christ  bears  as  ruler  in  the  temple  is  represented 
in  Scripture  as  the  fruit  of  His  sufferings.  This  honour  was  secured  to  Him  in 
the  covenant  of  redemption,  as  the  stipulated  reward  of  obedience  unto  death. 
Application. — 1.  Relating  to  the  duty  of  individuals.  To  yield  submission  to 
Christ's  authority.  2.  Relating  to  the  duty  of  a  Church — or  any  particular 
society  of  professing  Christians.  Is  it  not  a  Church's  duty  to  have  respect  in  all 
things  to  Christ's  authority — to  regulate  its  procedure  by  the  principles  and  the 
precepts  of  His  Holy  Word  ?  {David  Couper. )       Christ,  the  Builder  of  the  Church : — 

1.  The  persot^  spoken  of.  Observe  the  circumstances  of  the  prophecy,  and  see 
how  undeniably  they  all  point  to  Christ,  the  High  Priest  of  good  things  to  come, 
by  a  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle.  II.  The  work  assigned  Him.  "  To 
build  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  The  true  and  spiritual  Church  of  God,  which  is 
spread  over  all  ages  and  all  nations,  which  consists  of  all  believers,  all  faithful 
men  and  sanctified  persons  throughout  the  world,  gathered  out  of  the  vast 
multitudes  of  mankind,  and  brought  into  one  mystical  body.  It  is  the  glory  of 
the  Son  of  God  to  be  the  builder  of  this  temple.  The  Redeemer  builds  the  temple 
of  the  Lord  by  the  virtue  going  forth  continually  from  His  kingly  and  priestly 
offices.  III.  An  appropriate  reward.  Two  particulars  are  mentioned,  possess- 
ing each  a  deep  interest  in  connection  with  the  missionary  work  ;  the  one  holding 
forth  our  encouragement,  and  the  other  our  duty.  He  whom  we  serve  is  invested 
with  the  government;  and  He  shall  bear  the  glory.  Then  let  us — 1.  Beware  of 
building  without  Christ.  2.  Give  all  the  glory  to  Christ.  3.  Contribute  with 
a  self-denying  liberality  of  our  labour  and  our  substance  for  the  work  of  building 
the  temple  of  the  Lord.  (J.  Scholefield,  M.A.)  Christ  the  Branch,  ani  the 
Builder  of  the  spiritual  temple  : — Our  text  is  a  prophecy  set  forth  and  highly 
adorned  with  metaphor.  The  text — 1.  Announces  the  Saviour  by  a  singular 
yet  significant  title.  "  Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch."  2.  It 
predicts — the  allotment  to  Him,  and  the  accomplishment  by  Him  of  a  most 
important  and  magnificent  work.  "  He  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord." 
3.  It  recognises — the  great  Builder's  right  to  have  all  the  praise,  whilst  it  assigns 
to  Him  a  well-deserved  reward.  "  He  shall  bear  the  glory."  Two  inferences — 
(1)  The  cause  of  real  religion  is  in  the  hands  of  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  .A.11  success  in 
the  prosecution  of  any  important  part  of  the  glorious  work  of  building  up  the 
temple  of  the  Lord  must  be  looked  for  and  derived  from  the  great  Master-Builder. 
(Josiah  Bedford.)  The  spiritual  temple  of  Jehovah: — I.  Every  true  belibvbb 
is  a  temple  of  God.  1.  A  temple  is  the  residence  of  Jehovah  ;  and  in  this  view 
every  true  believer  is  a  temple  of  the  living  God.  It  is  the  prominent  design  of  the 
Gospel  to  enthrone  Jehovah  in  the  affections,  dispositions,  and  habits  of  men. 

2.  A  temple  is  consecrated  to  the  service,  the  worship,  and  the  glory  of  God. 
In  this  sense  every  true  believer  is  a  spiritual  temple  of  the  Lord.  Christian 
believers  are  represented  in  Scripture  as  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds,  as 
built  up  spiritual  houses,  as  consecrated  in  every  part  to  the  service  and  glory  of 
God.  3.  A  temple  is  the  scene  of  Divine  manifestation ;  and  in  this  sense  also 
every  true  believer  is  a  spiritual  temple  of  the  Lord.  Every  true  believer  exhibits 
in  his  own  person,  in  his  principles,  in  his  habits,  in  his  privileges,  and  in  his 
bright  hopes,  a  manifestation  of  God,  a  practical  exemplification  of  the  Saviour'i 


104  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

work,  a  public  and  accredited  testimony  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrines  of  Scripture, 
as  imprinted  on  liis  mind,  as  brought  to  bear  with  powerful  effect  on  his  life. 
II.  The  gloky  of  Christ  in  building,  beautifying,  and  completing  thjs  temple. 
1.  Christ,  by  His  mediatorial  interposition,  has  paved  the  way  for  the  erection 
of  the  temple  of  God.  2.  The  glory  of  building  the  temples  by  His  Holy  Spirit 
beloncrs  also  to  Him.  Christ,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  begins,  carries  forward,  and 
compFetes  the  building  of  the  spiritual  edifice.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  Gospel  dis- 
pensation that  it  is  complete  in  all  its  parts.  Under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  the  process  of  eanctification  is  carried  forward.  3.  The  glory  belongs  to 
Christ  because  He  has  provided  those  means  by  which,  under  the  ministry  of 
grace,  the  temple  is  built.  4.  The  glory  belongs  to  Christ,  inasmuch  as  He  con- 
.stantly  superintends  the  Churches,  takes  a  tender  interest  in  all  their  concerns, 
sympathises  with  them  in  all  their  vicissitudes,  and  completes  the  purposes  of 
God  ultimately  in  regard  to  them.  This  subject  displays  ( 1 )  In  a  very  interesting 
and  pleasing  manner  the  glory  of  our  great  Redeemer.  (2)  It  tends  also  to 
elevate  our  conceptions  of  the  Christian  character.  There  is  something  in  the 
very  idea  of  a  temple  that  is  associated  with  holy  and  sacred  pursuits,  with  holy 
»nd  hallowed  enjoyments.  {^Robert  Burns,  D.D.)  The  liviruj  temple : — To 
understand  this  Scripture  we  must  consider  when  the  prediction  was  uttered,  and 
to  what  it  primarily  refers.  To  relieve  the  anxious  mind  of  Joshua,  the  high 
priest,  and  to  animate  his  soul  with  the  prospect  of  happier  days,  the  prophet 
Zechariah  is  sent  with  a  special  message  from  the  Lord,  to  assure  Joshua  that  the 
temple  should  be  built ;  that  his  fears  were  without  foundation ;  that  his  prayera 
should  be  answered,  and  his  utmost  wishes  accomplished.  An  outward  sign  waa 
given.  Two  crowns  were  placed  on  the  head  of  Joshua,  as  emblems  of  priesthood 
and  royalty  ;  and  were  then  to  be  deposited  in  the  temple,  as  memorials  of  what 
God  had  determined  to  accomplish  in  future  times.  Thus  the  Jews  were  led  to 
contemplate  a  more  durable  and  glorious  temple  than  that  which  they  were  then 
building.  In  the  language  and  symbols  of  prophecy,  they  were  told  that  the 
Messiah,  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  would  be  much  more  to  this  spiritual  building, 
than  Joshua  was  to  their  external  temple.  He  would  be  Priest  and  King,  Redeemer 
and  Lawgiver,  Prince  and  Saviour.  When  He  humbled  Himself  to  appear  in  the 
nature  of  man.  He  seemed  to  be  no  more  than  a  feeble  stem  from  the  root  of  Jesse. 
Yet  this  tender  plant  sprung  up  and  spread  forth  its  branches,  and  became  a 
sheltering  to  the  weary,  and  still  flourishes  with  imdecayed  vigour ;  the  leaves 
whereof  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations ;  and  the  fruit  thereof  sweet  to  the  taste. 
In  various  passages  of  the  New  Testament,  believers  in  Jesus  are  declared  to  be 
the  temples  of  God  ;  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  living  temples,  built  up  a  spiritual 
house,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God,  through  Christ.  I.  Con- 
sider EVERY   REAL  CHRISTIAN  AS  THE   LIX^NG   TEMPLE   OF  THE   LoRD.      Observe 

this  dignified  and  distinguished  character  here  ascribed  to  the  righteous  :  each 
one  of  them  is  a  temple  of  the  Lord.  A  soul,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  suggests 
the  sublime  ideas  of  solemn  consecration  to  His  honour  of  worship  and  sacrifice, 
of  the  Divine  residence,  and  of  peculiar  manifestations  ;  such  manifestations 
as  discover  a  present  Deity,  and  render  His  glory  in  us  evident  to  our  souls. 
1.  Believers  m  Jesus  are  temples  of  the  Lord,  because  they  are  separated  from 
idolatry  and  impurity,  are  consecrated  to  sacred  purposes,  and  are  dedicated  to 
the  honour  of  Him  whom  they  worship.  2.  Believers  in  Christ  are  the  temples 
of  God,  because  they  offer  up  to  Him  dutiful  worship  and  acceptable  sacrifice. 
Not  sacrifices  of  propitiation  or  atonement,  but  sacrifices  of  daily  thankoffering 
for  the  mercies  of  God,  and  the  blessings  of  His  great  salvation.  Every  faculty 
and  affection  of  the  Christian  soul  may  be  considered  as  engaged  in  the  service  of 
this  living  temple.  3.  Believers  in  Christ  are  the  temples  of  the  Lord,  because  in 
them  He  resides  to  manifest  His  jlory ;  and  them  He  blesses  with  all  the  satisfj'ing 
consolations  of  His  presence,  va  every  renewed  person  much  of  the  image  of 
God  is  displayed  ;  the  power  of  God  in  forming,  from  such  unlikely  materials, 
a  new  creature,  or  a  new  creation  •  the  holiness  of  God,  in  stamping  upon  every 
child  of  the  family  some  lineaments  of  their  Father's  image ;  and  the  sovereign 
mercy  of  God,  in  rescuing  from  deepest  ruin,  and  imparting  the  noblest  hopes 
and  happiness,  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  His  grace.  In  all  saints,  so  far  as  they 
are  sanctified,  we  may  trace  some  resemblance  of  God.  God  is  said  to  dwell 
in  His  people  as  His  temple,  when  He  manifests  His  glory  to  them,  and  admits 
them  to  delightful  intercourse  with  Himself.  This  honour  have  all  the  saints ; 
but  it  is  enjoyed  by  them  in  very  different  degrees,  according  to  the  measure  o£ 


CHAP,  vl]  ZECHARIAH.  J  05 

their  faith.  11.  This  TurPLE  is,  in  all  bespects,  the  workmanship  of  thh 
ADORABLE  REDEEMER.  He  who  is  the  Branch,  builds  the  temple — 1.  In  His 
mediation  between  God  and  man.  2.  He  lays  the  foundation  of  that  living 
temple  by  bestowing  that  living  faith  which  unites  us  to  Himself,  and  interests 
us  in  all  the  blessings  of  His  mediation.  3.  He  not  only  lays  the  foundation  of 
the  spiritual  temple,  but  He  rears  the  superstructure  by  His  grace  and  Spirit. 
Every  grace  and  duty  of  religion  is  a  living  stone  in  that  temple  which  every 
believer  is  rearing  unto  God  on  earth.  All  these  graces  and  duties  are  intimately 
connected,  and  by  their  union  the  spiritual  building  is  rendered  fair  and  useful. 
4.  The  Almighty  Builder  carries  on  to  perfection  the  good  work  which  He  has 
begun.  By  His  dispensations  He  carries  forward  the  perfections  of  His  people. 
He  carries  on  to  perfection  by  the  ordinances  of  His  grace.  By  the  powerful 
energy  and  gracious  influences  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  working  in  them  to  will  and 
do  of  His  good  pleasure.  III.  The  cheering  and  animating  promise,  "  Hb 
SHALL  BEAR  THE  GLOBY."  This  is  now  fulfilling  on  earth,  and  shall  be  fulfilled 
for  ever  in  heaven.  Amidst  meditations  on  God's  gracious  ways  with  them,  at 
every  new  survey,  saints  feel  their  hearts  warmed  with  gratitude,  and  they  say, 
"  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us."  "  He  hath  built  the  temple,  and  He  shall  bear  the 
gloiy."  {A.  Bonar.)  The  Church  the  temple  of  Ood  : — This  is  a  prophecy  of 
tho  Messiah.  The  prophet  puts  two  crowns  on  the  head  of  Joshua  the  high  priest, 
and  then  speaks  to  him,  not  only  as  the  raiser  up  of  the  desolated  temple,  but  as  a 
type  of  an  enthroned  Saviour,  the  builder  of  a  spiritual  and  far  more  glorious 
structure.  "  Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch,"  &c.  I.  The  Chxtech 
IS  God's  temple.  By  the  Church  is  meant  all  that  the  w  ord  imports  in  its  highest 
and  its  widest  sense — aU  God's  real  servants,  all  His  believing  and  pardoned 
and  sanctified  people  of  all  ages  and  places.  When  God  builds.  His  habitation 
shall  have  a  name  and  character  of  its  own — it  is  a  temple.  View  the  Church 
simply  as  God's  house,  then  we  look  on  it  as  something  which  God  dwells  in,  and 
rests  in,  and  delights  in.  View  it  as  God's  temple,  then  a  sacredness  comes  over  it. 
The  house  becomes — 1.  A  consecrated  place,  a  place  appropriated  and  set  apart 
for  holy  purposes.  2.  The  idea  of  worship  and  devotion  is  connected  with  thia 
term.  It  implies  not  only  that  God  designs  His  people  to  show  forth  His  praise 
in  heaven,  but  that  they  do  show  it  forth  there  ;  they  answer  there  the  end  for 
which  they  are  taken  there  :  God  is  served,  and  worshipped,  and  magnified  by 
them.  II.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Builder  of  this  temple.  Elsewhere  spoken 
of  as  the  foundation  or  chief  corner-stone,  He  is  here  described  as  the  great  Builder. 
No  one  figure  can  suffice  to  set  forth  His  importance.  Therefore  they  apply 
figure  after  figure  to  Him.  They  do  not  heed  what  we  deem  incongruities  and 
contradictions.  Three  things  the  builder  of  a  temple  has  to  do.  1.  To  form 
the  plan  of  it.  He  has  to  settle  in  his  mind  what  its  form  and  size  shall  be,  and 
of  what  materials  it  shall  consist.  2.  A  builder  has  to  prepare  his  materials. 
At  least  the  buUder  of  a  temple  has.  He  does  not  find  them  prepared  for  him  by 
nature,  the  wrought  stone  in  the  quarry,  and  the  carved  beam  in  the  forest.  Nor 
can  they  prepare  themselves.  And  we,  brethren,  are  not  naturally  fit  for  heaven, 
nor  can  we  make  ourselves  or  one  another  fit  for  it.  3.  A  builder  has  to  join 
his  materials  together,  to  put  each  one  of  them  into  the  place  for  which  it  is 
prepared.  And  this  also  is  the  work  of  Christ.  III.  The  text  beaks  us  oxrr  in 
asserting  that  it  really  is  a  very  glorious  building.  It  does  not  expressly 
say  this,  but  it  implies  it.  There  is  to  be  a  glory  result  to  Christ  from  it,  and  this 
glory  is  doubtless  to  proceed  in  part  from  something  excellent  and  magnificent 
in  the  buUding  itself.  What  a  subject  opens  itself  to  us  here !  Does  beauty 
make  a  building  glorious,  a  noble  plan  and  excellent  workmanship  ?  Ob,  what 
80  beautiful  as  the  Church  of  the  first-bom  ?  Bear  in  mind  two  facts  in  reference 
to  the  glory  of  this  temple.  1.  It  ia  such  that  it  satisfies  Christ  Himself.  2.  Thia 
temple  has  occupied  the  Mighty  Jehovah  far  longer  than  any  of  His  works.  From 
this  fact  also  we  infer  its  gloriousness.  IV.  The  Lobd  Jesus  will  have  all  thb 
GLOBY  OP  this  TEMPLE.  Two  reasons  why  Christ  is  so  little  honoured  on  earth 
aa  the  author  of  His  people's  salvation.  The  greatness  of  the  salvation  is  not 
known,  and  we  do  not  see  how  entirely  the  work  is  His.  God's  design  in  thia 
building  was  His  own  honour.  Is  Christ  the  Builder  of  God's  temple  ?  Then 
this  text  calls  on  all  of  us  really  to  regard  Him  as  such.  And  if  the  Church  is  the 
temple  of  the  Lord,  then  we  should  cherish  in  our  minds  a  high  reverence  and  loTS 
for  it.    {C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Ver.  13.  A  Priest  upon  His  tlirone.  —  The  Priest  of  the  world  and  King  of 
men  : — It  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  prophetic  development  from  the 
beginning  that  the  external  circumstances  of  the  nation  at  the  moment  should 
supply  the  mould  into  which  the  promise  is  run.  Here,  the  kingless  band  of 
exiles  are  heartened  for  their  task  by  the  thought  of  the  Priest-King  of  the  nation, 
the  Builder  of  an  imperishable  dwelling-place  for  God.  I.  The  true  hope  of 
THE  WORLD  IS  A  PRIEST.  The  idea  of  priesthood  is  universal.  It  has  been  dis- 
torted and  abused  ;  it  has  been  made  the  foundation  of  spiritual  tyranny.  The 
priest  has  not  been  the  teacher  nor  the  elevator  of  the  people.  Yet  there  the 
office  stands,  and  wherever  men  go,  by  some  strange  perversity  they  take  with 
them  this  idea,  and  choose  from  among  themselves  some  who  shall  discharge 
for  their  brethren  the  double  office  of  representing  them  before  God,  and  of  repre- 
senting God  to  them.  That  is  what  the  world  means,  with  absolute  and  entire 
unanimity,  by  a  priest — one  who  shall  be  sacrificer,  intercessor,  representative ; 
bearer  of  man's  worship,  channel  of  God's  blessing.  This  is  the  result  of  the 
universal  consciousness  of  sin.  Men  feel  that  there  is  a  gulf  between  them  and 
God.  The  Jewish  people,  who  have  at  all  events  taught  the  world  the  purest 
theism,  and  led  men  up  to  the  most  spiritual  religion,  had  this  same  institution 
of  a  priesthood  for  the  very  centre  of  its  worship.  What  is  the  priest  whom 
men  crave  ?  The  first  requisite  is  oneness  with  those  whom  he  represents.  We 
have  a  Priest  "in  all  things  made  like  unto  His  brethren."  The  next  requisite 
is  that  the  priests  should  possess,  at  all  events,  a  symbolic  purity — expression 
of  the  conviction  that  a  priest  must  be  cleaner  and  closer  than  his  fellows.  And 
we  have  a  Priest  who  is  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled."  And  again,  as  in  nature 
and  character,  so  in  function,  Christ  corresponds  to  the  widely  expressed  wants 
of  men,  as  shown  in  their  priesthoods.  They  sought  for  one  who  should  offer 
gifts  and  sacrifices  on  their  behalf.  They  sought  for  one  who  should  pass  into 
the  awful  Presence,  and  plead  for  them  while  they  stood  without.  They  sought 
for  a  man  who  should  be  the  medium  of  Divine  blessings  bestowed  upon  the 
worshippers,  and  we  know  who  hath  gone  within  the  veil  for  us.  "  We  have 
a  great  High  Priest,  that  is  passed  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God."  II.  The 
Priest  of  the  world  is  the  King  or  men.  "  He  shall  be  a  Priest  upon  His 
throne."  In  Israel  these  two  offices  were  jealously  kept  apart.  The  history  of 
the  world  is  full  of  instances  in  which  the  struggles  of  the  temporal  and  spiritual 
power  have  caused  calamities  only  less  intolerable  than  those  which  flowed  from 
that  alliance  of  priests  and  kings  which  has  so  often  made  monarchy  a  grinding 
tyrannjs  and  religion  a  mere  instrument  of  statecraft.  Our  Priest  does  rule. 
The  "  kingdom  of  Christ  "  is  no  unreal  fanciful  phrase.  The  foundation  of  His 
rule  is  His  sacrifice.  Men  will  do  anything  for  him  who  does  that  for  them.  EUs 
rule  is  wielded  in  gentleness.  Priestly  dominion  has  ever  been  fierce,  suspicious, 
t5Tannous.  The  sway  of  this  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest  is  full  of  tender- 
ness. The  end  of  His  rule  is,  that  His  subjects  may  be  made  free  in  obedience. 
III.  The  Priest-Kino  of  men  builds  among  men  the  temple  of  God.  Christ 
is  Himself  the  true  temple  of  God.  Christ  builds  the  temple.  Christ  builds 
this  temple  because  He  is  the  temple.  By  His  incarnation  and  work  He  makes 
our  communion  with  God  and  God's  dwelling  in  us  possible.  Christ  builds  the 
t«mple,  and  uses  us  as  His  servants  in  the  work.  Christ  builds  on  through  all 
the  ages,  and  the  prophecy  of  the  text  is  yet  unfulfilled.  Its  fulfilment  is  the 
meaning  and  end  of  all  history.  In  one  of  the  mosques  of  Damascus,  which 
has  been  a  Christian  Church,  and  before  that  was  a  heathen  temple,  the  portal 
bears,  deep  cut  in  Greek  characters,  the  inscription,  "  Thy  kingdom,  O  Christ,  is 
an  everlasting  kingdom,  and  Thy  dominion  endureth  throughout  all  generations." 
Those  words  are  graven  over  the  temple  which  Christ  rears.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Christ — Priest  and  King  : — I.  Notice  this  significant  designation  of  thb 
Lord  Jesus — "  The  Branch."  The  family  of  David  was  like  a  decayed  tree, 
the  stump  of  which  alone  remains  ;  but  from  so  lowly  and  unlikely  an  origin, 
a  shoot  or  scion  would  emanate,  which  would  again  become  a  noble  forest  tree, 
and  perpetuate  the  memory  and  influence  of  the  royal  line.  Certainly  David's 
race  had  reached  a  low  ebb  when  Joseph  went  up  from  Galilee,  out  of  the  city 
of  Nazareth  into  Judea,  to  the  city  of  David  which  is  called  Bethlehem,  to  be 
enrolled  with  Mary  his  espoused  wife,  because  they  were  of  the  house  and  lineage 
of  David.  Through  a  branch  the  fulness  of  the  root  is  carried  to  the  fruit,  which 
swells  in  ruddy  beauty  on  its  extremity,  and  presently  falls  into  the  hand  of  the 
wayfarer  :  so  Jesus  is  the  blessed  channel  of  communication  between  the  fulness 


CHAP.  VI.]  ZECHARIAH.  107 

of  God  and  the  thirsty  wastes  of  human  need.  II.  The  combination  in  Christ 
OF  THE  PRIESTLY  AND  KINGLY  OITICES.  "  He  shall  be  a  Priest  upon  His  throne." 
Man's  nature  demands  a  priest.  Conscious  of  sin  and  defilement,  he  rears  an 
altar  wherever  he  pitches  his  tent ;  and,  selecting  one  of  his  fellows,  he  separates 
him  from  the  ordinary  duties  of  life,  and  bids  him  stand  as  mediator  and  priest 
between  God  and  himself.  It  was  thus  that  Micah  addressed  the  young  man, 
the  Levite  of  Bethlehem-Judah,  when  he  said,  "  Dwell  with  me,  and  be  unto 
me  a  father  and  priest ;  and  I  will  give  thee  ten  pieces  of  silver  by  the  year,  and 
thine  apparel,  and  thy  victuals."  If  an  argument  were  needed  to  prove  the 
unity  of  the  human  family,  it  surely  would  be  suggested  by  the  universal  dis- 
tribution of  temples  and  altars  over  the  world,  as  though  men  were  everywhere 
alike  in  this — that  they  know  themselves  to  be  sinful,  and  desire  to  find  some 
way  of  propitiating  and  approaching  the  Almighty.  In  the  Levitical  system, 
and,  above  all,  in  Jesus  Christ,  God  has  met  this  universal  craving  of  the  human 
heart.  Man  also  requires  a  king.  God  had  designed  to  meet  this  need  by  Him- 
self being  Israel's  King,  that  they  should  not  be  "  like  other  nations,"  but  a  peculiar 
people  unto  Him.  How  remarkable  it  is  ih.s$,  the  Kingship  of  Jesus  should  have 
been  so  accentuated  in  His  trial !  It  was  the  centre  around  which  the  storm 
raged.  Pilate  challenged  His  claims  :  "  Art  Thou  a  king,  then  ?  "  and  Jesus 
asseverated  them  :  "  Thou  sayest  that  I  am — a  king."  The  faded  purple  robe 
flung  over  His  shoulders,  the  reed  in  His  hand,  the  mocking  bending  of  the  knee, 
the  crown  of  thorns  on  His  brow,  were  but  the  grotesque  and  heartless  mockery 
of  His  claims.  And  since  He  has  passed  into  the  glory.  He  is  stiU  the  Priest-King. 
Not  Aaron,  but  Melchizedek,  is  the  true  type  of  our  Saviour  now.  As  Aaron, 
He  made  atonement  and  propitiation  for  sin ;  but  as  Melchizedek,  He  has  sat 
down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God.  "  This  Melchizedek  was  king 
of  Salem,  and  priest  of  the  Most  High  God."  As  priest,  Jesus  pleads  the  merit 
of  His  blood  ;  as  king.  He  exerts  power  on  our  behalf.  As  priest.  He  pacifies 
the  guilty  conscience ;  as  king,  He  sends  thrills  of  His  own  victorious  life  into 
our  spirits.  As  priest.  He  brings  us  nigh  to  God  ;  as  king.  He  treads  our  enemies 
under  His  feet.  It  is  of  great  importance  to  us  aU  to  think  of  our  Saviour  in 
this  dual  aspect.  On  the  one  hand,  we  get  all  the  benefit  of  His  cross  and  passion ; 
on  the  other,  all  the  benefit  of  His  resurrection  and  session  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  May  it  not  be  that  the  weakness  of  thy  Christian  life  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  thou  hast  viewed  Him  only  in  the  light  of  Calvary,  r.nd  hast  not,  with  Stephen, 
seen  Him  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  High — a  prince  as  well  as 
a  Saviour — a  Saviour  because  a  prince  ?  He  accounts  Himself  absolutely  respon- 
sible to  achieve  the  uttermost  salvation  of  those  who  trust  in  Him.  If  there  is 
some  sin  which  defies  thee,  at  least  it  shall  not  be  too  strong  for  Him.  And  if 
the  outflow  of  His  delivering  power  towards  thee  seems  restrained  and  ineffective, 
be  sure  that,  in  some  one  particular,  which  He  will  be  quick  to  show  thee,  if  only 
thou  art  \villing  to  be  informed,  there  has  been  a  failure  to  yield  Him  the  obedience 
which  is  due  to  Him  as  thy  king.  III.  As  the  Priest-King,  Christ  builds 
THE  temple  of  God.  Twicc  over  this  is  affirmed  ;  but  what  untold  comfort 
the  assurance  must  have  brought  when  first  addressed  to  that  little  band  of  exiles ! 
Their  temple  site  was  strewn  with  ruins  :  it  seemed  almost  hopeless  to  contend 
with  those  heaps  of  rubbish,  impossible  to  rear  a  fabric  worthy  of  the  past  and 
adequate  for  the  futiu*e  ;  but  these  words  must  have  greatly  heartened  them. 
As  the  hand  of  inspiration  drew  aside  the  vail,  they  beheld  another  and  greater 
than  either  Joshua  or  Zerubbabel,  working  with  them  and  for  them,  and  bearing 
the  chief  responsibifity  in  all  the  toils  and  labours  of  their  new  erection — He ; 
not  they.  They  would  work  with  new  energy  and  courage,  knowing,  as  they 
did,  that  they  were  fellow-workers  with  God.  What  difficulty  could  daunt, 
what  enemies  thwart  or  frustrate,  the  work  of  His  right  hand  ?  If  these  words 
should  be  read  by  any  who  are  losing  heart  because  of  the  difficulties  presented 
by  their  parish,  their  church,  or  the  souls  of  their  charge,  let  them  be  reassured, 
as  they  behold  the  trowel  in  the  hands  of  the  Priest-King ;  and  let  them  be  svure 
that  He  will  succeed.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  A  Priest  upon  His  throne: — 
As  the  enthroned  king,  Jesus  reigns  over  His  church  as  the  vicegerent  of  God. 
He  as  king  reigns  over  the  intellects,  the  hearts,  the  wills,  the  bodies  of  all  who 
yield  allegiance  to  Him.  He  distributes  to  all  His  people  the  gifts  of  God  accord- 
ing to  His  will.  At  His  hand  every  good  and  perfect  gift  must  be  sought,  and 
from  His  hand  received.  He  giveth  gifts  to  men  through  the  power  of  His 
delegated  authority  received  from  the  triune  God.     He  is  the  true  Joseph  reigning 


108  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  vi. 

over  the  kingdom  of  the  true  Pharaoh.  As  Pharaoh  raised  Joseph  from  his 
prison,  and  made  him  ruler  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt,  so  the  eternal  Father 
has  raised  Jesus  from  His  cross  and  tomb  to  enthrone  Him  at  His  own  right 
hand  in  the  heavenlies.  As  Pharaoh's  commission  to  Joseph  was  "  Thou  shalt 
be  over  my  house,  and  according  to  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  be  ruled,"  so 
Christ  is  revealed  to  us  as  being  over  God's  house  as  its  delegated  king.  As 
Pharaoh's  gifts  were  distributed  by  Joseph  to  the  needy  Egyptians,  so  God's 
good  gifts  of  grace  come  to  us  through  the  kingly  ministry  of  Jesus.  It  is  from 
Jesus  seated  on  the  throne  of  grace  as  the  priest  upon  His  throne  that  we  are 
bidden  to  seek  pardoning  mercy  and  aiding  grace  in  every  time  of  need.  This 
revelation  of  Jesus  as  being  the  giver  of  grace  as  Heaven's  enthroned  king, 
is  one  that  does  not  receive  the  recognition  it  demands.  This  is  of  course  a  necessity 
in  all  those  theological  systems  in  which  the  continuous  priestly  ministry  of  our 
ascended  Lord  is  denied  or  ignored.  But  even  where  His  ministry  of  priestly 
intercession  is  recognised  He  is  not  seen  to  be  the  priest  sitting  on  His  throne. 
That  all  the  blessings  of  the  kingdom  of  the  incarnation  come  to  us  through 
His  intercession  is  confessed.  But  men  fail  to  see  that  these  blessings  are  given 
to  ns  by  Him  as  the  bountifiil  king  of  that  kingdom.  Nay,  not  unfrequently 
men  shrink  in  dread  from  the  statement  that  every  good  and  perfect  gift  coming 
from  the  Father  of  Light  is  given  to  us  not  only  by  the  hand,  but  according  to 
the  wiU,  of  the  ascended  Lord.  Yet  unless  this  truth  be  grasped  Jesus'  media- 
torial ministry  is  not  fully  confessed.  That  He  is  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant 
is  a  matter  of  faith.  '  There  is  one  God,  and  one  mediator  between  God  and 
men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus."  Now  His  mediation  means  that  through  Him, 
"  the  Word  made  flesh,"  we  draw  nigh  to  Grod  in  worship  and  God's  gifts  of  grace 
come  to  us.  This  truth  does  not  involve  the  idea  that  God  has  ceased  person- 
ally  to  reign  and  to  give  gifts.  The  recognition  of  Jesus'  delegated  sovereignty 
does  not  involve  the  denial  of  God's  essential  sovereignty  sa  an  ever-living  fact. 
When  by  Pharaoh's  authority  Joseph  ruled  Egypt  this  was  not  the  virtual  abdi- 
cation of  his  power  by  Pharaoh ;  nay,  it  was  the  strengthening  of  his  dynasty 
and  the  perfecting  of  his  rule.  Between  him  and  Joseph  there  was  perfect  oneness 
of  conviction  as  to  the  policy  to  be  adopted  in  that  crisis  of  his  nation's  life.  In 
raising  Joseph  to  his  high  position,  and  giving  him  liberty  of  action,  he  was  but 
carrying  out  in  the  most  effective  way  the  policy  his  own  wisdom  approved. 
So  the  enthronement  of  Jesus  as  man,  as  king  of  the  Church,  is  not  the  dethrone- 
ment of  God.  For  the  sovereignty  of  the  Sou  of  Man  is  a  delegated  sovereignty, 
and  its  glory  must  exalt  the  throne  of  Him  whose  delegate  He  is.  The  wisdom 
and  the  love  of  the  only  Potentate  is  revealed  in  the  king  He  has  enthroned. 
And  still  more  is  this  seen  to  be  true  when  we  remember  the  absolute  union  of 
thought  and  action  that  there  is  between  them.  What  our  King  hears  He  speaks. 
"  What  the  Father  doeth  that  doeth  the  Son  likewise."  In  an  union  so  close 
there  is  no  place  for  conflict  of  action  or  variance  of  will.  Not  by  constraint 
but  by  union  Jesus  in  His  delegated  sovereignty  rules  according  to  the  will  of 
God.  He  is  a  throned  king,  and  gives  His  gifts  according  to  His  own  free  will. 
But  even  in  His  free  rule  He  is  the  minister  of  the  Father's  pleasiu-e  because  of 
His  absolute  conformity  with  the  will  of  God.  With  full  assent  of  mind  then 
grasp  the  truth  of  Jesus'  delegated  sovereignty.  See  Him  throned  by  God  in 
the  Church  as  the  giver  of  His  supernatural  gifts.  See  in  the  revelation  of  Jesus 
as  enthroned  in  Heaven,  and  hence  ruling  over  His  Church  in  Paradise  and  on 
earth,  the  fulfilment  of  Zechariah's  glorious  vision.  Gazing  by  faith  on  Jesus 
at  God's  right  hand,  in  Him,  "  Behold  the  Man  whose  name  is  the  Branch,"  who 
has  "  built  the  temple  of  the  Lord,"  and  who  in  it  "  bears  the  glory,"  and  "  as 
a  priest  upon  His  throne  "  sits  and  rules.  (G.  Body,  M.A.)  Of  Christ's  offices 
in  general : — There  are  three.  1.  The  office  of  a  prophet.  He  builds  the  Church 
by  the  Word  of  the  Gospel,  which  it  is  His  work  to  promulgate  as  a  prophet. 
2.  The  office  of  a  priest.  To  expiate  the  sins  of  His  people,  to  purchase  peace 
for  them,  and  to  manage  their  cause  with  God.  3.  That  of  a  king :  for  He  has 
a  throne,  which  denotes  His  kingly  office.  He  is  "  a  priest  upon  His  throne," 
denoting  the  reward  of  His  sufferings.  In  Him  the  glory  of  all  these  offices  is 
to  meet.  The  text  affords  foundation  for  the  following  doctrine — Christ,  as 
our  Redeemer,  executeth  the  offices  of  prophet,  priest,  and  king,  both  in  His 
estate  of  humiliation  and  exaltation.  I.  Thb  verity  or  bkaltty  of  thesb 
omcss  IN  Christ.  1.  From  plain  scripture  testimony.  (1)  To  His  having 
or  being  possessed  of  these  offices.     (2)  To  His  executing  these  offices.     2.  From 


CHAP,  vn.]  ZECEARIAH.  109 

His  name  Christ,  or  Messiah,  the  anointed  one.  The  unction  signified — (1)  His 
being  set  apart  to  the  mediatory  work.  (2)  His  being  fully  furnished  with  gifts 
and  qualifications  suitable  to  these  offices,  in  respect  of  His  human  nature,  to 
which  the  Spirit  was  given,  not  by  measure,  but  in  fulness.  11.  The  necessity 
OF  His  EXERCISING  THESE  OFFICES.  This  will  be  clear  if  we — 1.  Consider  our 
misery  by  sin,  ignorance,  guilt,  and  bondage.  We  were  ignorant  of  the  way 
of  returning  to  God  again ;  and  therefore  Christ  as  our  prophet  must  teach  us ; 
our  priest  must  make  atonement  for  us  j  our  king  must  bring  us  back  again, 
leading  captivity  captive.  2.  Consider  the  salvation  which  the  elect  were  to 
be  made  partakers  of.  3.  Consider  Christ  as  mediator  of  the  covenant,  who 
behoved  to  deal  with  both  parties,  in  order  to  bring  them  together.  4.  Consider 
the  work  of  conversion ;  what  the  soul  needs.  5.  Consider  oiu:  daily  necessities. 
6.  Consider  the  promises,  which  are  the  stay  and  staff  of  the  Christian's  life,  without 
which  they  could  never  bear  up.  HI.  When  did  Christ  execute  these  offices  ? 
As  He  was  the  Redeemer  of  the  Church  in  all  ages  so  did  He  execute  these  offices 
in  all  ages  of  the  Church.  But  more  especially  after  His  incarnation,  and  that 
in  His  twofold  state  of  humiliation  and  exaltation.  These  three  offices  are  not 
to  be  divided,  especially  when  they  are  executed  in  a  way  that  is  effectual  for 
the  salvation  of  the  subjects  thereof.  Wherever  He  executes  one  of  these  offices 
in  a  saving  way.  He  executes  them  all.  Inferences — 1.  How  great  and  glorious 
is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  meet  to  bear  all  these  offices  at  once,  and  exercise 
them  at  once,  so  as  one  does  not  mar  or  clash  with  another !  2.  Let  this  commend 
Christ  to  you  as  a  fuU  and  a  suitable  Saviour.  3.  You  cannot  take  Christ  as  a 
Redeemer,  if  you  take  Him  not  in  all  His  offices.  4.  Employ  this  mighty  Redeemer 
in  all  the  offices  wherewith  He  is  invested,  and  which,  as  mediator.  He  exercises 
for  the  benefit  of  the  ruined  race  of  mankind.     {T.  Boston,  D.D,) 


CHAPTER  VIL 


Vers.  1-3.  When  they  had  sent  onto  the  house  of  God  Sherezer,  and  Regem- 
melech,  and  their  men  to  pray  before  the  Lord. — The  left  ones  in  captivity  : — 
It  must  be  observed  that  though  all  had  not  so  much  courage  as  to  return  to 
their  own  country  as  soon  as  leave  was  given  them,  they  were  not  yet  gross  despisers 
of  God,  and  wholly  destitute  of  all  religion.  It  was  indeed  no  light  fault  to  remain 
torpid  among  the  Babylonians  when  a  free  return  was  allowed  them  ;  for  it  was 
an  invaluable  kindness  on  the  part  of  God  to  stretch  forth  His  hand  to  the  wretched 
exiles,  who  had  wholly  despaired  of  a  return.  Since  then  God  was  prepared 
to  bring  them  home,  such  a  favour  could  not  have  been  neglected  without  great 
ingratitude.  But  it  was  yet  the  Lord's  will  that  some  sparks  of  grace  shoiild 
continue  in  the  hearts  of  some,  though  their  zeal  was  not  so  fervid  as  it  ought 
to  have  been.  All  then  are  not  to  be  condemned  as  unfaithful,  who  are  slothful 
and  want  vigour  ;  but  they  are  to  be  stimulated.  For  they  who  indulge  their 
torpor  act  very  foolishly,  but  at  the  same  time  they  ought  to  be  pitied,  when 
there  is  not  in  them  that  desirable  alacrity  in  devoting  themselves  to  God  which 
they  ought  to  have.  These  men  remained  in  exile,  but  did  not  wholly  renounce 
the  worship  of  God  ;  for  they  sent  sacred  offerings,  by  which  they  professed 
their  faith  ;  and  they  also  inquired  what  they  were  to  do,  and  showed  deference 
to  the  priests  and  prophets  then  at  Jerusalem.  It  hence  appears,  that  they 
were  not  satisfied  with  themselves,  though  they  did  not  immediately  amend 
what  was  wrong.  There  are  many  now,  who,  in  order  to  exculpate  themselves, 
or  rather  to  wipe  away  (as  they  think)  all  disgrace,  despise  God's  word,  and  treat 
lis  with  derision.  {John  Calvin.)  Rdiqious  beliefs  and  religiotis  services  : — 
I.  Religious  beliefs  that  are  right.  There  are  three  beliefs  implied  in  this 
commission  entrusted  to  Sherezer.  1.  The  efficacy  of  prayer..  They  were  sent 
to  pray  before  the  Lord,  or,  as  in  the  margin,  "  to  in  treat  the  face  of  the  Lord." 
That  men  can  obtain  by  prayer  to  the  Supreme  Being  what  they  could  not  obtain 
without  it,  is  one  of  the  fundamental  and  distinctive  faiths  of  humanity.  2.  In 
the  intercession  of  saints.  These  men  were  sent  to  pray  before  the  Lord,  not 
merely  for  themselves  but  for  others.  3.  The  special  ability  of  some  men  to 
solve  the  religious  questions  of  others.     This  Sherezer  and  Regemmelech  appealed 


no  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

unto  the  "  priests  which  were  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  to  the  prophets. 
Baying,  Should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month,  separating  myself,  as  I  have  done  these 
so  many  years  ?  "  They  wanted  a  certain  religious  question  answered,  and 
they  appealed  to  a  certain  class  of  religious  men  who  they  believed  had  the  power 
to  do  so.  II.  Religious  services  that  are  wrong.  The  Jews  had  performed 
religious  services ;  they  had  "  fasted,"  they  had  "  mourned  in  the  fifth  and 
seventh  month,  even  those  seventy  years."  This  was  right  enough  so  far  as  the 
form  is  concerned ;  but  in  spirit  the  service  was  wrong,  hence  here  is  the  reproof. 
1.  Their  services  were  selfish.  Mark  the  reproof.  "  Did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  Me  ?  " 
Was  it  not  from  selfish  motives  that  ye  did  all  this  ?  Was  it  not  with  a  view 
of  obtaining  My  release,  and  securing  My  favour  ?  2.  Selfish  motives  the  Almighty 
had  always  denounced.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  4-9.  Did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  Me,  even  to  Me  ? — Rebuke  of  mere  cere- 
monies : — God  had,  through  successive  ages,  exhorted  the  Jews  to  true  repentance, 
and  condemned  their  dissimulation,  that  they  might  not  think  that  true  religion 
was  made  up  of  fasting  and  of  similar  things.     Fastings  being  of  themselves 
of  no  moment,  a  beginning  ought  to  be  made  with  true  religion  and  spiritual 
worship.     When  this  question  about  the  fast  was  raised  by  the  captives,  much 
disputing  prevailed  among  the  people.     The  Jews  ever  reverted  to  their  old 
ways,  being  blindly  attached  to  their  frigid  ceremonies,  and  thinking  in  this 
manner  to  propitiate  God,  so  the  prophet  derides  their  preposterous  labour  and 
toil.     "  See,"  he  says,  "  the  only  question  now  is,  whether  there  should  be  fasting, 
as  though  this  were  the  principal  thing  before  God  ;  in  the  meantime,  godliness 
is  neglected,  and  real  calling  on  God  ;  the  whole  of  spiritual  worship  is  also  esteemed 
by  you  as  nothing,  and  no  integrity  of  life  prevails :  for  ye  bite  one  another, 
plunder  one  another,  wrong  one  another,  and  are  guilty  of  lying  ;  ye  heedlessly 
close  your  eyes  to  such  vices  as  these ;  and  at  the  same  time,  when  fasting  is 
neglected,  ye  think  that  the  whole  of  religion  falls  to  the  ground.     These  are 
your  old  ways,  and  such  were  commonly  the  thoughts  and  doings  of  your  fathers  ; 
and  it  appears  evident  that  ye  trifle  with  God,  and  that  ye  are  full  of  deceits, 
and  that  there  is  not  in  you  a  particle  of  true  religion.     For  God  formerly  spoke 
loudly  in  your  ears,  and  His  words  were  not  obscure  when  He  exhorted  you  by 
His  prophets ;  He  showed  to  you  what  true  repentance  was,  but  effected  nothing. 
Is  it  not  then  quite  evident  that  ye  are  now  acting  deceitfully,  when  ye  so  care- 
fully inquire  about  fasting  ?  "     This  reproof  was  needful,  in  order  more  sharply 
to  stimulate  them  ;  it  was  wholly  necessary  to  discover  their  hypocrisy,  that 
they  might  not  be  too  much  pleased  with  external  performances.     (John  CcUmn.) 
Fasting : — A  question  about  the  propriety  of  continuing  the  stated  fasts  under 
the  altered  circumstances  of   the  people  brings  a  delegation  to  the  prophet  to 
solve  this  doubt.     The  date  of  this  transaction  was  two  years  after  the  symbolic 
visions  of  the  preceding  portion.     But  the  Jewish  people  needed  something  more 
than  information  in  regard  to  the  continuance  of  this  fast.     The  whole  doctrine 
of  fasting  had  become  overlaid  with  an  incrustation  of  formalism  and  superstition 
that  needed  to  be  broken  up.     Fasting  had  become  not  a  means  but  an  end, 
a  mere  form,  as  it  is  in  Mohammedan  and  papal  countries  at  this  day,  and  had 
attached  to  it  an  opus  operatum  that  wholly  destroyed  its  real  value.     They 
thought  that  God  must  bless  them,  indeed  was  bound  to  bless  them,  if  they  rigidly 
observed  these  outward  rites,  whatever  was  their  inward  character.    Thus  formal- 
ism acted  in  the  time  of  the  restoration,  precisely  as  it  act«d  in  every  subsequent 
period  of  the  Church  ;  and  before  a  mere  question  of  ritual  observance  could 
be  settled,  it  was  important  that  their  minds  should  be  set  right  on  the  deeper 
questions  of  their  spiritual  relations  with  God.     The  prophet,  instead  of  answering 
the  question  about  the  fast  of  the  fifth  month,  proceeds  to  rebuke  them  for  their 
selfish  and  stupid  will-worship,  and  their  ignorance  in  regard  to  the  whole  subject 
of  fasting,  not  only  as  to  this,  but  as  to  all  the  stated  fasts  that  they  had  been 
observing.     (T.   V.   Moore,  D.D.)         The  self-cenlredness  of  fasting: — It  is  not 
enough  to  fast.     That  may  be  a  trick  ;  there  may  be  a  way  of  doing  it  which 
robs  it  of  all  its  virtue  and  of  all  its  significance.     God  takes  our  ceremonies  to 
pieces  and  says  aloud.  What  is  the  meaning  of  all  this — your  church-going  and 
hymn-singing,   and  apparently  decent  observance  of  religious  ordinances  ?     Is 
it  in  reality  unto  Me,  or  it  is  unto  yourselves  ?     Fasting  is  not  postponed  feasting. 
Yet  this  is  what  it  has  been  turned  into  many  times.     Fasting  has  become  a 
proceaa  by  which  we  have  got  ready  for  eating.     We  have  kept  as  it  weiv,  on 


OHAP.  vn.]  ZECHARIAH.  Ill 

one  side  all  the  things  we  have  abstained  from,  and  then,  when  the  fasting  day 
was  over,  we  transferred  the  whole  of  them  to  the  table  and  gorged  ourselves 
with  the  very  things  we  had  fasted  from.  That  is  not  fasting.  When  you  fast 
from  your  bread,  you  must  give  your  bread  away — "  Is  it  not  to  deal  thy 
bread  to  the  hungry  ?  "  Fasting  is  not  to  lock  the  cupboard  where  the  bread 
is,  and  to  say.  We  shall  not  want  you  to-day,  but  to-morrow  about  this  time 
we  shall  be  prepared  for  the  feast.  No,  the  loaf  must  be  given  away,  and  there 
must  not  be  left  one  crust  in  the  house.  When  we  feast  the  poor,  we  truly  fast 
ourselves.  God  will  not  have  any  other  fasting.  As  for  cnvu-ch-going,  what 
18  the  meaning  of  it  ?  Is  it  to  relieve  the  tedium  of  a  dull  night  ?  Is  it  to  hear 
something  that  will  titillate  the  senses  or  momentarily  please  the  fancy  ?  Is 
it  to  get  rid  of  something  at  home  ?  Or  does  it  express  the  spirit  of  adoration, 
the  necessity  of  the  soul's  immortality  ?  Is  it  a  coming  to  God  because  He  is 
God  ?  Is  it  worship,  or  a  form  of  entertainment  ?  The  Lord  thus  searches 
into  our  ceremonies  and  says.  What  do  they  mean  ?  So  also  with  oiu:  feasting  : 
the  criticism  of  God  is  not  partial :  the  judgment  of  heaven  attends  our  banquet- 
ing and  asks  questions  whilst  the  foaming  goblet  is  in  our  hands.  "  And  when 
ye  did  eat,  and  when  ye  did  drink,  did  not  ye  eat  for  yourselves,  and  drink  for 
yourselves  ?  "  (vii.  6).  But,  0  Thou  loving  God,  Thou  art  also  our  Creator,  and 
are  we  not  so  made  that  we  cannot  get  away  from  ourselves  ?  The  Lord  answers. 
Yes,  you  are  so  made :  but  you  forget  there  is  a  second  creation,  a  miracle  called 
incarnation,  and  following  upon  that  a  sacrament  called  Pentecost,  the  Whit- 
tide  of  the  Spirit's  descent,  so  that  a  man  shall  be  himself,  yet  no  longer  himself, 
yea  another  self ;  God  wiil  give  him  another  heart  If  any  man  be  in  Clirist  Jesns, 
he  is  not  his  old  self  one  whit,  but  a  new  creature,  with  new  aspirations,  new- 
necessities,  new  desires,  with  the  restlessness  which  leads  to  contentment,  with 
the  ambition  that  despises  the  constellations  because  they  are  too  small  for  its 
religious  capacity.  You  are  right  when  you  say,  you  cannot  get  away  from 
yourselves,  your  prayers  are  selfish  unless  you  take  great  heed  to  them  ;  but 
if  you  be  rooted  in  Christ,  living  branches  in  the  living  Vine,  wh}"-  then  j'ou  shall 
perform  this  miracle  of  being  yourself  and  yet  not  yourself  ;  of  the  earth,  yet 
of  the  heaven  ;  standing  upon  the  earth,  yet  having  a  celestial  citizenship  and 
franchise.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fast  : — The 
inquiry  of  the  text  concerns  the  fast  of  the  fifth  month,  which  was  observed 
as  a  sad  remembrance  of  the  destruction  of  the  city  and  temple  of  Jerusalem. 
The  exiles  had  three  other  fasts.  Did  they  really  serve  any  religious  end  and 
purpose  ?  Did  not  the  people  content  themselves  with  a  mere  external  show 
and  performance,  without  any  inward  affliction  and  humiliation  of  their  soiils, 
in  order  to  a  real  repentance  ?  Did  they  not  still  go  on  in  their  sins,  nay,  and  add 
to  them  on  these  occasions,  fasting  for  strife  and  debate  and  oppression  ?  Were 
they  not  worse  rather  than  better  for  them  ?  And  therefore  God  had  no  regard 
to  them.  Notwithstanding  the  outward  solemnities  of  fasting  and  prayer,  there 
was  nothing  of  a  religious  fast ;  "  Did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  Me,  even  unto  Me  ?  " 
The  prophet  Isaiah  calls  a  true  fast,  the  fast  which  God  hath  chosen,  and  an 
acceptable  day  to  the  Lord.     I.  In  general,  what  is  it  to  fast  unto  God  ? 

1.  A  truly  religious  fast  consists  in  the  afflicting  of  our  bodies  by  a  strict  abstinence. 

2.  In  the  humble  confession  of  our  sins  to  God,  with  shame  and  confusion  of  face. 

3.  In  an  earnest  deprecation  of  God's  displeasure,  and  humble  supplications  to 
Him  that  He  would  avert  His  judgments,  and  turn  away  His  anger  from  us.  4.  In 
intercession  with  God  for  such  spiritual  and  temporal  blessings  upon  ourselves 
and  others  as  are  needful  and  convenient.  5.  In  alms  and  charity  to  the  poor, 
that  our  humiliation  and  prayers  may  find  acceptance  with  God.     IT.  In  pakti- 

CTJLAB   WHAT   IS    THE    DUTY    OF   A    DAY   OF    SOLEMN    NATIONAL    REPENTANCE    AND 

humiliation  ?  Apply  the  above  five  essentials  of  a  true  fast  to  the  particular 
circumstances  of  the  day.  (J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  True  and  mistaken  fasting  : — 
The  prophet  expostulates  with  the  people  concerning  their  monthly  fasts,  whether 
they  did  indeed  deserve  that  name,  and  were  not  rather  a  mere  show  and  pretence 
of  a  religious  fast.  It  is  necessary  to  consider  the  original  and  occasion  of  these 
monthly  fasts.  When  carried  into  captivity,  the  Jews  appointed  four  amiual 
fasts.  (Zech.  viii.  19.)  The  question  is, — Did  these  fasts  truly  serve  to  any 
religious  end  and  purpose  ?  Were  not  the  people  rather  worse  than  better  for 
them  ?  They  were  sensible  of  the  judgments  of  God  which  were  broken  in  upon 
them,  but  they  did  not  turn  from  their  sins,  but  persisted  still  in  their  obstinacy 
and   disobedience.     These    fasts    could    not    therefore    be   acceptable   to   God. 


112  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

1.  What  is  it  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fast  ?  1.  A  truly  religious  fast  con- 
sists in  the  afflicting  of  our  bodies  by  a  strict  abstinence  that  so  they  may  be  fit 
and  proper  instruments  to  promote  and  help  forward  the  grief  and  trouble  of 
our  minds.  2.  In  the  humble  confession  of  our  sins  to  God  with  shame  and  con- 
fusion of  face,  and  with  a  hearty  contrition  and  sorrow  for  them.  3.  In  an  earnest 
deprecation  of  God's  displeasure,  and  humble  supplications  to  Him  that  He  would 
avert  His  judgments  and  turn  away  His  anger  from  us.  4.  In  intercession  with 
God  for  such  spiritual  and  temporal  blessings  upon  ourselves  and  others  as  are 
needful  and  convenient.  5.  In  alms  and  charity  to  the  poor,  that  our  humilia- 
tion and  prayers  may  find  acceptance  with  God.     II.  What  is  our  duty  on  a 

DAY  appointed   FOR   SOLEMN   HUMILIATION  AND   REPENTANCE   THROUGHOUT  THE 

NATION  ?  1.  We  should  humble  ourselves  before  God  every  one  for  his  own 
personal  sins  and  miscarriages,  whereby  he  hath  provoked  God,  and  increased 
the  public  guilt,  and  done  his  part  to  bring  down  the  judgments  and  vengeance 
of  God  upon  the  nation.  There  cannot  be  a  general  reformation  without  the 
reformation  of  particular  persons  which  do  constitute  and  make  up  the  generality. 

2.  We  should  heartily  lament  and  bewail  the  sins  of  others,  especially  the  great 
and  crying  sins  of  the  nation.  This  hath  been  the  temper  and  practice  of  good 
men  in  all  ages.  Illustrate  by  Jeremiah,  Lot,  David,  Daniel,  Ezra,  &c.  We  should 
lament  and  bewail  the  general  prevalence  of  impiety  and  vice  which  has  diffused 
itself  through  all  ranks  and  degrees  of  men,  magistrates,  ministers,  and  people. 

3.  We  should  earnestly  deprecate  God's  displeasure,  and  make  our  humble  sup- 
plications to  Him,  that  He  would  be  graciously  pleased  to  avert  those  terrible 
judgments  which  hang  over  us,  and  which  we  have  just  cause  to  fear  may  fall  on 
us ;  and  that  He  would  be  entreated  by  us  at  last  to  be  appeased  towards  us,  and 
to  turn  from  the  fierceness  of  His  anger.  4.  We  should  pour  out  our  most  earnest 
supplications  for  the  preservation  of  their  majesties'  sacred  persons.  6.  Our 
fasting  and  humiliation  should  be  accompanied  with  our  alms  and  charity  to  the 
poor  and  needy.  6.  We  should  prosecute  our  repentance  and  good  resolutions 
to  the  actual  reformation  and  amendment  of  our  lives.  This  is  the  proper  fruit 
and  effect  of  all  our  humiliation  and  good  resolutions.  Without  this,  all  our 
fasting  will  signify  nothing.     (Archbishop  Sharp.) 

Ver.  7.  Should  ye  not  hear  the  words  which  the  Lord  hath  cried  by  the 
former  prophets.  —  Ood's  Word  by  former  prophets:  —  Doctrine  —  1.  External 
performances  of  external  duties  of  religion  are  nothing  in  God's  sight,  where 
there  is  not  study  of  obedience  to  all  His  revealed  will,  nor  will  howling  under 
misery  avail,  while  wickedness  is  kept  under  their  tongue.  2.  The  Lord  in  all 
ages  is  uniform  and  like  Himself  in  approving  and  enjoining  of  duty,  and  in 
disliking  of  sin,  yesterday  and  to-day,  the  same  for  ever :  for  the  Lord  here 
requires  the  same  He  required  of  their  fathers.  3.  The  longer  the  Lord  by 
His  Word  hath  been  pressing  duty  upon  His  people,  they  ought  to  heed  it  the 
more,  lest  judgment  prove  the  sadder  ;  for.  He  presseth  a  doctrine  that  had  been 
long  since  cried,  to  be  so  much  the  rather  heard.  4.  The  Lord's  chastising  a  people 
for  sin  and  disobedience,  doth  not  warrant  them  to  look  on  their  deliverance  from 
chastisement,  as  a  full  assurance  of  their  being  reconciled,  as  if  their  strokes  had 
made  up  all ;  but  being  delivered  they  are  to  make  conscience  of  obedience, 
otherwise  the  controversy  still  stands,  whatever  deliverance  they  get,  and  they 
may  expect  to  smart  again.  Therefore,  after  all  their  captivity,  they  must  hear 
and  obey.  5.  It  may  help  us  to  take  heed  to  what  God  says  in  a  sad  time,  when 
we  consider  that  if  it  had  been  hearkened  unto,  it  might  have  prevented  much 
misery ;  for  so  is  this  doctrine  commended,  it  was  cried  "  when  Jerusalem  was 
inhabited,  and  in  prosperity,"  &c.  ;  that  so  the  thoughts  of  their  former  prosperity, 
which  had  ended  in  sad  desolation,  might  let  them  see  the  ill  of  former  neglect, 
and  stir  them  up  to  be  more  serious.     (Oeorge  Uutcheson.) 

Ver.  12.  Yea,  they  made  their  hearts  as  an  adamant-stone. — The  disease 
and  cure  of  the  hard  heart :  —  A  man  does  not  become  profligate  or 
altogether  wicked  at  once.  One  vice  makes  way  for  another.  The  people 
in  Zechariah's  time  had  arrived  at  such  a  prodigious  height  of  vice,  that  it  is 
said,  "  Yea,  they  made  their  hearts  as  an  adamant-stone."  Adamant  is  the 
hardest  of  all  stones  :  it  is  found  by  the  best  chemists  to  be  indissolvable.  The 
similitude  is  proper  to  exhibit  the  real  state  of  the  human  heart ;  which  cannot 
be  melted,  or  reduced  to  the  genuine  image  of  Jesua,  by  human  art  or  power. 


CHAP,  vil]  ZECHARIAH.  113 

I.  The  disease  of  the  haud  heart.  1.  Of  the  symptoms  or  nature  of  it.  It 
discovers  itself  in  a  wayward  temper,  a  pride  and  stoutness  of  heart  against  God, 
particularly  the  calls  of  His  providence,  and  the  admonitions  of  His  holy  Word. 
This  is  the  genuine  character  of  wicked  men.  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts. 
They  extinguish  the  remains  of  natural  conscience.  In  an  inflexibility  against 
the  word  of  truth,  and  the  ordinances  of  religion.  The  inflexible  adamantine 
heart  defeateth  the  gracious  designs  of  the  Gospel.  It  is  inflexible  to  the  motions 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  And  this  is  the  crowning  sin.  He  knocks  by  the  motions 
of  His  Holy  Spirit,  yet  the  hard  heart  refuseth  to  give  Him  admittance.  2.  The 
different  kinds  of  this  disease.  (1)  There  is  a  natural  hardness  :  a  part  of  that 
natural  corruption,  that  original  guilt  and  inbred  poison  of  our  nature.  (2)  There 
is  an  acquired  hardness  of  heart.  There  are  those  who  voluntarily  strengthen 
themselves  in  their  natmral  disobedience,  and  reject  the  counsel  of  God  against 
themselves.  How  careful  we  should  be  to  form  our  hearts  for  the  Redeemer; 
to  open  those  gates  that  the  truths  of  the  Gospel  may  be  admitted.  (3)  There 
is  a  penal  hardness  of  heart.  There  is  a  degree  above  voluntary  hardness,  as 
voluntary  hardness  implieth  something  above  natural.  In  Scripture  God  is  said 
to  harden  men's  hearts  in  two  ways — by  leaving  them  in  their  natural  state  ; 
and  by  giving  up  to  a  reprobate  mind.  (4)  This  hardness  is  either  in  part  or  in 
whole.  Some  complain  of  hardness  and  insensibility,  as  the  present  frame  and 
temper  of  the  soul.  What  contributes  so  much  to  hardness  of  heart  in  believers 
is,  their  giving  too  great  scope  to  carnal  delights.  These  may  be  tasted,  but  a 
large  draught  intoxicates.  (5)  This  hardness  of  heart  is  severely  felt  by  the 
genuine  disciples  of  Jesus.  It  is  neither  felt  nor  complained  of  by  carnal  and 
wicked  men.  But  to  be  past  feeling  is  a  sure  symptom  of  death,  as  well  spiritual 
as  natural.  There  is  no  life  without  feeling.  Learn — (1)  From  this  view  of  the 
human  heart,  the  character  of  the  real  Christian.  (2)  That  nothing  short  of  the 
teachings  of  the  Holy  Spirit  have  ever  proved  sufficient  to  affect  the  heart  with  a 
practical  sense  of  the  vileness  of  sin  and  its  own  hardness.  (3)  Learn  what  that 
sacrifice  is  which  is  most  acceptable  and  pleasing  to  God.  3.  The  causes  of  this 
spiritual  malady.  (1)  Ignorance.  The  blind  mind,  the  obstinate  will,  and  hard 
heart,  inseparably  accompany  each  other.  (2)  Unbelief.  The  most  powerful 
arguments  and  most  engaging  motives  of  our  holy  religion  are  brought  from 
things  unseen.  Unless  we  feel  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  neither  the  joys 
of  heaven  nor  the  terrors  of  utter  darkness  will  properly  work  on  our  fears  or 
encourage  our  hopes.  (3)  Custom  in  sinning  hardens  the  heart.  (4)  Hypocrisy. 
This  dangerous  character  appears  to  consist  of  two  branches:  dissimulation, 
by  which  we  deceive   others;  and   formality,  by  which    we   deceive  ourselves. 

(5)  Pride.     As  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh.     Pride  is  at  the  bottom  of  every  vice. 

(6)  The  deceitfulness  of  sin.  Sin  deceiveth  by  general  invectives.  By  delays. 
By  coming  plumed  in  the  feathers  of  profit,  or  pleasure,  or  honours,  or  preferments. 
By  presenting  herself  in  a  coat  of  many  colours,  especially  in  making  her  address 
in  all  the  charms  of  sensual  pleasures.  She  attacks  the  soul  in  Jacob's  voice, 
and  in  an  angel's  form.  Sin,  by  continuance,  increases  upon  the  soul.  In  hardened 
sinners,  vice  prompts  men  to  presume  upon  impunity.  II.  The  cttre  of  this 
SPIRITUAL  MALADY.  1.  Scrious  and  frequent  mediations  on  the  perfections  of  the 
Divine  nature,  especially  His  glory  and  power.  2.  Faith  in  the  great  doctrines 
of  the  Gospel  is  a  sovereign  remedy  for  the  most  inveterate  disorders  of  the  soul. 
3.  Faith  in  Gospel  ordinances  is  another  sovereign  remedy.  4.  Faith  in  the  great 
atonement  made  by  our  exalted  High  Priest  is  another  absolutely  necessary  in- 
gredient in  the  cure  of  the  adamantine  heart.  The  dignity  and  infinite  excellence 
of  this  sacrifice  will  appear  from  its  Divine  appointment ;  from  the  nature  of  the 
sacrifice  itself ;  from  its  noble  and  infinitely  precious  fruits ;  from  those  vast 
multitudes  who  have  been  saved  by  this  sacrifice.  6.  Another  ingredient  towards 
the  cure  of  the  hard  heart  is  a  proper  knowledge  of  the  guilt  and  demerit  of  trans- 
gression. The  smallest  deviation  from  the  Divine  law  is  entailed  with  the  curse. 
(J.  Johnston.)  The  guilt  of  hardness  of  heart : — There  are  periods  in  the  life  of 
every  person  who  hears  the  Gospel  in  which  his  attention  is  called,  in  an  especial 
manner,  to  the  subject  of  religion;  and  one  of  the  most  common  discoveries 
made  at  these  times  is  this — that  the  heart  is  insensible, — that  there  is  in  it  no 
corresponding  emotions  to  the  magnitude,  or  to  the  admitted  importance  of  the 

freat  truths  which  have  now  become  the  subject  of  special  attention.     Insensi- 
ility  upon  the  subject  of  religion  is  inexcusable.     Notice  that  you  are  not  destitute 
of  sensibility  and  BUBceptibility.     You   are  not  incapable  of  feeling.     Religion 
8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

does  not  indeed  consist  in  emotion.  It  consists,  first,  in  a  right  belief,  then  right 
feeling,  then  right  purpose,  then  right  action.  Yon  are  not  destitute  of  those 
susceptibilities  to  which  the  truths  of  the  Gospel  make  their  appeal.  Nothing  is  so 
adapted  to  excite  these  constitutional  susceptibilities  as  the  great  truths  of  religion. 
Consider  the  subjects  of  immortality,  the  being  and  character  of  God.  God  is  love. 
Then  why  do  you  not  love  Him  whom  you  should  love  supremely  ?  We  are 
capable  of  reverence,  and  God  is  the  most  venerable  being  in  the  universe.  There 
is  in  Him  independence,  eternal  existence,  majesty,  power,  dominion,  sovereignty, 
the  terribleness  of  wrath,  greatness  of  mercy,  all  of  vhich  qualities  are  capable 
of  inspiring  the  soul  of  man  with  the  profoundest  feeling  of  reverence.  "  Fearful," 
said  Moses  of  God,  "  fearful  in  praises."  Consider  the  great  work  of  redemption. 
God  from  His  holy  throne  looking  down  upon  a  lost  race.  God  meeting  the 
demands  of  His  own  justice,  and  in  order  to  sustain  the  principles  of  His  moral 
government,  condescending  to  be  Himself  the  victim  of  the  law,  and  a  sacrifice 
to  its  penal  demands.  Will  you  tell  me,  you  who  confess  to  this  charge  of  religious 
insensibility,  will  you  tell  me  why  you  have  never  sympathised  with  the  Divine 
compassion  ?  You  have  looked  upon  that  scene  of  the  Father  giving  up  His  only 
begotten  Son  to  save  a  lost  race,  and  you  never  felt  that,  you  never  admired, 
never  loved,  never  thanked,  net^er  praised  Him  for  it !  It  is  not  that  God  has 
made  you  so,  not  that  religion  is  not  calculated  to  enlist  your  feelings  on  its  behalf, 
there  must  be  some  other  cause.  Your  hardness  of  heart  is  the  result  of  apostasy. 
It  is  the  issue,  the  fatal  issue  of  a  process,  directly  and  completely  adapted  to  the 
end,  and  incessantly  practised  up  to  the  present  moment.  Who  is  it  that  is  now 
complaining  of  moral  insensibilities  ?  Is  it  that  person  who  has  cherished  the 
teachings  of  maternal  kindness,  and  the  sentiments  inspired  from  time  to  time 
by  the  solemn  admonitions  of  providence,  and  the  more  solemn  warnings  of  life  ? 
Oh,  no  !  I  apprehend  a  fair  review  of  your  life  will  take  away  your  surprise  at 
any  present  hardness  of  heart.  You  have  the  power  of  commanding  your  thoughts, 
of  fixing  your  attention  on  any  subject.  You  can  then  command  your  thoughts, 
control  the  current  of  your  thoughts,  and  the  attention  of  your  mind,  keep  your 
mental  eye  fixed  upon  all  that  is  pure,  lovely,  noble,  vast,  glorious,  upon  God, 
the  human  soul,  immortality,  redemption,  the  great,  the  vast  interests  of  the  human 
race.  Keep  your  thoughts  up,  and  your  soul  will  go  up  ;  keep  yoiu:  thoughts 
high,  and  your  character  will  be  elevated  ;  keep  your  thoughts  high,  and  your 
hopes  will  be  pure,  elevating,  high.  I  am  not  speaking  of  this  life  only,  I  go  beyond 
that.  You  will  notice,  in  regard  to  your  own  mind,  that  some  subjects  approve 
themselves  to  you,  by  the  operation  of  the  passions.  The  passions  have  their 
own  objects,  and  when  they  are  at  work  in  the  soul,  they  bring  into  the  imagination 
those  thoughts  and  visions  which  are  apt  to  feed  themselves.  Bodily  appetites 
have  their  passions,  and  they  control  the  trains  of  thought.  What  I  wish  to  observe 
is,  that  the  passions,  the  appetites,  the  senses,  the  general  conversation  of  life, 
the  character  of  the  literature  of  the  day,  all  tend  to  make  you  worldly  and  sinful 
and  not  religious.  They  do  not  suggest  the  great  truths  of  religion,  nor  tend  to 
keep  them  before  the  mind.  Spiritual  subjects  must  be  kept  before  you  by  an 
effort  of  your  will ;  your  thoughts  must  be  raised  by  meditating  upon  the  Divine 
•will.  The  hardness  of  heart  which  you  may  be  feeling  to-night,  runs  back  through 
the  history  of  your  life,  and  could  be  traced  to  a  period  quite  remote  from  the 
present.  The  text  is  true,  "  You  have  made  your  heart  as  an  adamant-stone." 
What  a  comparison  this  is  to  make  !  Like  an  adamant-stone  all  moral  culture  is 
lost  upon  it.  {E.  N.  Kiik.)  Gospel  hardened: — I  was  on  a  visit  lately  at  a 
country  village.  The  first  morning  I  was  there,  I  was  awakened  very  early  by 
tlio  sound  of  a  horn  blowing,  which  continued  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour. 
It  disturbed  me  every  morning,  at  the  same  hour,  and  on  speaking  of  it  to  my 
friends,  they  assured  me  that  I  would  soon  get  accustomed  to  it.  and  it  would 
then  cease  to  disturb  me.  And  so  it  proved.  I  could  soon  sleep  on  undisturbed, 
though  the  horn  blew  as  usual.  In  a  spiritual  sense  I  think  this  is  the  most 
dangerous  state  into  which  a  man  can  fall.  When  they  1  ear  the  Gospel  preached 
to  them  at  first,  they  s  em  to  waken  out  of  a  sleep,  and  get  disturbed  and  uncom- 
fortable ;  but  if  they  do  not  take  advantage  of  what  they  hear,  they  get  accustomed 
to  it,  and  by  and  by  can  listen  to  any  Gospel  sermon  without  being  moved  by  it. 
Such  a  man's  state  is  worse  than  at  the  first,  for  God's  Spirit  has  ceased  to  strive 
with  him.     {Christian  Herald.) 

Ver.  13.  I  would  not  hear,   salth  the  Lord  of  hosts. — Ood  refusing  to  hear 


CHAP,  vin.]  ZECHARIAH.      -  116 

prayer: — I.  Thb  nbgliobncb  of  mbn.  1.  They  do  not  hear  the  dispensationa 
of  God  in  His  providence.  2.  They  do  not  hear  the  invitations  of  God  by  His 
servants.  3.  They  do  not  hear  the  commands  of  God  in  His  Word.  II.  Thb 
JUDGMENT  OF  GoD.  1.  He  will  not  hear  the  cry  of  the  lost,  as  expressive  of 
regret.  2.  He  will  not  hear  the  cry  of  the  lost,  as  expressive  of  disappointment. 
3.  He  will  not  hear  the  cry  of  the  lost,  as  expressive  of  fear.  4.  He  will  not  hear 
the  cry  of  the  lost,  as  expressive  of  despair.     {O.  Brooks.) 


CHAPTER  VIIL 


Vers.  1-6.  I  am  returned  onto  Zion,  and  will  dwell  !n  the  midst  of 
Jerusalem. — The  blessed  community  of  men  yet  to  appear  on  the  earth: — I.  Here 
is  a  community  specscally  rNTERESTTNo  to  the  great  God.  "Again  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  to  me,  saying.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts; 
I  was  jealous  for  Zion  with  great  jealousy,  and  I  was  jealous  for  her  with 
great  fury."  The  rendering  of  Dr.  Henderson  is  worth  citation :  "  And  the 
word  of  Jehovah  was  communicated  to  me,  saying :  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of 
hosts :  I  have  been  jealous  for  Zion  with  great  zeal,  yea,  with  great  indignation 
have  I  been  jealous  for  her."  Jerusalem  was  a  city  on  which  God  had  chosen 
"to  put  His  name";  there  was  His  temple,  the  ark,  the  mercy-seat,  and  the 
memorials  of  His  power  and  goodness  in  the  history  of  Israel.  This  city  had 
been  destroyed  by  the  Babylonian  invaders.  Instead  of  losing  interest  in  His 
persecuted  people.  His  feelings  were  intense  concerning  them.  The  Eternal  is 
interested  in  all  the  works  of  His  hand,  interested  in  men  even  in  their  state 
of  infidelity  and  rebellion ;  but  specially  interested  in  those  whom  He  regards 
as  His  people.  "  Unto  that  man  will  I  look  who  is  of  a  broken  and  contrite 
spirit,  and  who  trembleth  at  My  Word."  11.  Here  is  a  commvmity  in  which 
THE  Almighty  specially  besides.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  am  returned  unto 
Zion,  and  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem."  Jerusalem  was  in  a  very  particular 
sense  the  dwelling-place  of  God  (Exod.  xxix.  45 ;  Lev.  xxii.  12).  There  are  two 
senses  in  which  the  Almighty  dwells  with  good  men.  1.  By  His  sympathy. 
The  loving  mother  dwells  with  her  loved  child ;  yes,  though  separated  by  con- 
tinents and  seas.  Jehovah's  sympathies  are  with  His  children.  2.  By  His 
presence.  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  III.  Here  is  a  community 
distinguished  by  reality  and  elevation.  1.  Reality.  "  And  Jerusalem 
shall  be  called  a  city  of  truth."  What  is  moral  reality  ?  A  practical  corres- 
pondence of  the  sympathies  and  life  with  eternal  facts.  All  whose  thoughts, 
affections,  and  conduct  are  not  in  accord  with  the  immutable  moral  laws  of  God, 
live  in  fiction,  "  walk  in  a  vain  show  "  ;  and  in  this  state,  most  if  not  all  communities 
are  found.  Alas  !  "  The  city  of  truth  "  is  not  yet  established,  it  is  in  a  distant 
future.  It  is  distinguished  by — 2.  Elevation.  "  And  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  the  holy  moimtain."  Where  are  the  communities  of  men  now  found  in  a 
moral  sense  ?  Down  in  the  hazy,  boggy,  impure  valleys  of  carnalities  and  false- 
hoods. But  this  community  is  up  on  the  holy  mountain,  it  is  in  a  place  of  high 
moral  exaltation.  IV.  Here  is  a  community  in  which  the  very  aged  and  the 
YOUNG  LIVE  LN  SOCIAL  ENJOYMENT.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  There  shall 
yet  old  men  and  old  women  dwell  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  and  every  man  with 
his  staff  in  his  hand  for  very  age."  Beautiful  city  this  !  The  children  not  filthy, 
half-starved,  diseased  Arabs  in  crowded  alleys,  but  bright  creations  gambolling 
in  the  sunny  streets.  V.  Here  is  a  community  whose  establishment,  though 
tNCREDiBLB  TO  MAN,  IS  CERTAIN  TO  GoD.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  If 
it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of  the  people  in  these  days,  should  it 
also  be  marvellous  in  Mine  eyes  ?  "  As  if  the  Almighty  had  said.  The  creation  of 
such  a  social  state  amongst  you  may  appear  an  impossibility;  but  it  is  not 
so  to  Me.  {Homilist.)  Jerusalem  shall  he  called  a  city  of  truth.  —  TJie 
Church  the  city  of  truth  : — This  declaration  originally  referred  to  the  re-building 
of  Jerusalem,  and  the  re-establishment  of  true  religion  among  the  Jews  after  the 
Babylonish  captivity.  It  had,  however,  a  more  particular  and  \iltimate  reference 
to  the  final  conversion  and  restoration  of  Israel  and  Judah.  when  the  glory  of  the 
latter  days  should  arrive.    L  Thb  chabactbbistics  by  which  thb  Chuboh  or 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.   vm. 

Christ,  ob  His  genuine  disciples,  are  distingihshbd,  as  herb  denominatbd, 
THE  CITY  OF  TRUTH.  1.  It  may  be  called  this,  because  it  is  founded  on  Christ, 
who  is  Himself  the  truth  (Eph.  ii.  19,  20).  2.  Because  in  it,  and  by  them,  the 
truth  is  believed.  Faith,  in  opposition  to  unbelief,  is  that  which  chiefly  dis- 
tinguishes the  spiritual  citizens  of  Zion,  from  the  children  of  the  world  and  sin. 
The  children  of  Zion  dwell  in  the  city  of  truth.  Truth  is  the  object  of  their  faith — 
the  truth  revealed  by  God  for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  3.  Because  the  truth  is 
obeyed  in  it.  Were  true  Christians  distinguished  from  other  men  merely  by  their 
speculative  opinions,  it  would  be  of  little  importance,  comparatively,  whether 
they  believed  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  or  not.  But  Christians  are  characterised 
by  the  obedience  of  faith.  Through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  belief  of  the 
truth,  their  hearts  and  consciences  are  made  to  bend  to  the  authority  of  the  Divine 
law,  which  is  "  holy  and  just  and  good."  They  are  gradually  purified  more  and 
more  through  obeying  the  truth.     II.  The  qualities  of  its  worship,  as  entitling 

IT  TO  THE  APPELLATION  OF  THE  HOLY  MOUNTAIN,  OR  THE  MOUNTAIN  OF  HOLINESS. 

It  was  on  Mount  Moriah  that  the  temple  stood,  so  this  mountain  of  the  Lord  may 
figuratively  signify  the  worship  of  God  as  established  there.  With  the  most 
emphatic  propriety,  the  worship  of  the  Christian  Church  may  be  designated  the 
mountain  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  the  Holy  Mountain,  on  account — 1.  Of  its 
exalted  nature.  In  this  respect  it  rises  above  every  other  kind  of  service,  as  the 
lofty  mountain  above  the  lowly  plain.  For,  in  worshipping  God  as  the  God  of 
salvation,  all  the  most  elevated  and  noble  faculties  of  the  soul  are  brought  into 
action,  and  made  to  bear  on  the  sublimest  and  most  perfect  objects.  2.  On 
account  of  its  holy  character.  It  is  the  service  of  God,  and  therefore  must  partake 
of  qualities  which  correspond  to  His  natm-e,  which  is  the  perfection  of  holiness. 
Likeness  to  God's  image,  to  a  certain  extent,  is  indeed  essential  to  the  enjoyment 
of  fellowship  with  Him.  3.  On  account  of  its  piu-ifying  influence.  Assimilation 
of  character  is  one  of  the  commonest  and  most  natural  effects  of  friendship.  What 
a  piurifying  effect,  therefore,  should  not  the  exercise  of  Christian  worship  have 
on  the  character  of  the  citizens  of  Zion.  Christian  devotion  is  the  pvu"e  bulwark 
of  Christian  virtue.    III.  The  characters  of  Christians  as  the  city  of  truth, 

AND  OF  their  WORSHIP  AS  THE  HOLY  MOUNTAIN,  MUST  BE  ASCRIBED  TO  THE  EFFECT 

OP  THE  Divine  presence  in  the  midst  of  them.  While  Israel  was  captive  the 
city  of  Jerusalem  was  inhabited  by  the  profane  and  idolatrous.  The  people 
returned  with  a  better  spirit,  and  the  service  of  the  temple  was  restored  when  its 
walls  were  rebuilt.  The  heart  of  man  had  become  the  seat  of  profaneness  and 
sin.  The  spiritual  descent  of  the  God  of  grace  and  of  mercy  into  the  hearts  of 
sinners  has  changed  this  scene,  has  emancipated  the  slaves  of  sin  from  their  galling 
thraldom.  The  character  of  true  Christians  is  the  glorious  work  of  Jehovah, 
the  effect  of  His  return  to  their  hearts.  Nor  is  it  less  true  that  the  holiness  of 
their  worship  is  owing  to  His  presence.  It  is  the  realised  presence  of  His  majesty 
that  makes  it  solemn,  and  the  actual  manifestation  and  experience  of  His  grace 
that  renders  it  pure.  {D.  Dickson,  D.D.)  A  city  of  truth : — No  other  city 
bears  that  name  :  the  lie  would  be  too  great  even  for  modern  speculators.  There 
must  always  surely  be  some  lie  that  men  cannot  tell.  By  the  "  City  of  Truth  " 
understand  the  home  of  truth,  the  address  of  truth  ;  every  citizen  has  an  address, 
that  is,  a  place  where  his  friends  may  find  him,  where  his  letters  may  reach  him. 
Jerusalem  is  to  be  called  the  City  of  Truth  :  every  man  is  a  truth-speaker,  because 
every  man  is  a  truth-lover.  A  lie  could  not  live  in  this  Jerusalem  which  the 
prophet  has  painted  ;  the  lie  would  be  no  use.     Put  a  very  bad  man  into  the  com- 

{)any  of  very  good  men,  and  the  man  is  unhappy  ;  he  does  not  understand  the 
anguage,  he  feels  that  he  is  a  long  way  from  home  ;  he  would  be  glad  if  the  door 
would  open  and  he  could  find  a  way  of  escape ;  he  says,  This  is  not  my  native  air ; 
I  do  not  understand  these  people ;  what  are  they  talking  about  ?  I  have  no  interest 
in  their  subjects ;  they  do  not  speak  my  language ;  they  do  not  discuss  the  topic 
I  like  best :  I  would  God  I  were  out  of  their  society  !  It  is  just  the  same  if  we 
personify  falsehood,  and  send  the  impudent  audacious  visitor  into  the  city  of 
truth.  Every  man  would  look  on  with  amazement ;  sensitive  spirits  would 
shrink  back  in  fear  and  horror  and  shame  ;  no  hospitality  would  be  offered  to  the 
trespasser.  The  liar  has  only  to  look  upon  a  flower,  and  the  flower  is  blighted. 
A  false  hand  has  only  to  touch  a  little  child,  and  the  little  child  shrinks  into  old  age 
by  reason  of  inexpressible  horror  and  fear.  The  liar,  therefore,  would  not  find  a 
residence  in  Jerusalem.  No  owner  of  houses  would  have  him.  The  time  will 
come  when  the  liar  will  be  imeasy,  simply  because  ho  is  false ;  the  stars  will  fight 


CHAP,  vm.]  ZECHARIAH.  117 

against  him,  the  earth  will  try  to  vomit  him  into  some  lower  realm  of  creation, 
and  all  pure  things  will  not  hate  him  in  the  sense  of  inflicting  upon  him  all  the 
penalties  of  animosity,  but  will  turn  away  from  him  with  unutterable  disgust. 
There  is  no  city  of  truth  now.  When  we  read  the  prophecies  of  the  ancient  bards 
and  seers  of  Israel,  we  are  to  imderstand  that  they  are  looking  on  through  centuries, 
and  are  gathering  flowers  from  the  gardens  that  are  to  be,  and  singing  songs  that 
will  be  sung  in  the  far-away  but  assured  time.  What  city  now  could  live  if  it  were 
true  ?  What  society  could  exist  three  days  if  it  were  frank  ?  Who  would  insure 
human  friendship  beyond  a  very  limited  number  of  months  if  man  were  to  speak 
to  man  exactly  what  he  thinks  of  him  ?  An  official  robe  may  be  a  lie  ;  a  civic 
banquet  may  be  an  aggregation  of  falsehoods ;  what  is  called  business  may  be  a 
baptised  way  of  swindling  one  another.  Is  there  any  likelihood  of  a  city  now 
becoming  a  city  of  truth  ?  Not  until  it  is  burned  down,  and  rebuilt,  and  built 
upon  the  foundation-stone  of  righteousness ;  not  until  Jesus  Christ  Himself  is 
the  chief  corner-stone ;  not  until  everything  gives  way  before  the  presence  and 
persuasiveness  of  the  infinite  Gospel  of  Christ.  Herein  every  city  must  be  its 
own  judge.  When  we  speak  of  the  city,  what  do  we  mean  ?  Some  outline  of 
stone  and  brick  and  thoroughfare  ?  Not  at  all.  The  city  is  only  bad  because  the 
citizens  are  not  good.  When  the  individual  citizens  are  honest  men  the  total 
city  will  be  a  city  of  truth.  Imagine  a  beautiful  pictvure ;  a  pilgrim,  with  a  staff 
in  his  hand,  and  with  sandals  on  his  feet,  has  set  out  upon  what  he  is  told  will  be  a 
long  journey,  and  after  he  has  travelled  many  days  he  says  to  some  fellow-traveller 
or  wayside  friend.  Where  is  the  City  of  Truth  ?  Perhaps  the  inquiry  wiU  awaken 
amusement  in  the  man  who  hears  it ;  perhaps  it  wiU  awaken  real  pleasure,  ajid 
the  man  will  answer  with  a  beaming  face  and  an  eloquent  tongue.  There  is  the 
home  of  reality,  sincerity,  uprightness,  genuineness ;  see,  over  here,  towering 
like  a  church,  the  whole  outlme  beautiful  with  the  sky  that  bends  over  it  like  a 
benediction.  How  is  it  that  when  men  form  themselves  into  cities  they  live  upon 
comprorni:;es,  concessions,  mutual  understanding,  and  elaborate  legal  documents 
which  nobody  can  understand  ?  If  we  could  understand  our  legal  documents 
we  could  not  live  together  three  months.  Yet  men  speak  of  the  difficulty  of 
understanding  the  Bible  !  The  lawyers  must  not  speak  of  this,  for  they  are  the 
very  creators  of  mystery :  doctors  must  not  speak  of  this,  for  they  live  in  Latin, 
and  without  Latin  nobody  would  believe  them  capable  of  treating  the  simplest 
disease ;  if  they  called  water  "  water  "  some  other  doctor  would  be  sent  for ; 
and  even  merchantmen  must  not  be  too  sever?  against  the  mysteries  of  the  Bible, 
for  they  have  their  terminology,  their  significant  alphabetic  signs,  and  their 
masonic  tokens,  which  they  can  be  exchanging  with  one  another  whilst  the 
customer  is  looking  at  them,  and  the  customer  may  be  innocently  "  commissioned  " 
— if  there  is  such  a  word  as  that ;  if  there  is  not,  let  us  now  make  it ;  the  customer 
becomes  the  subject  of  a  remunerative  "  commission,"  and  yet  knows  nothing 
about  it,  because  all  the  signs  are  pre-arranged,  and  the  whole  calculation  proceeds 
without  the  client's  consent.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  holy  mountain  city  : — 
What  is  its  characteristic  ? — it  shall  be  called  ..."  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  the  holy  mountain."  Mountains  make  towns ;  mountains  support  hotels. 
Did  not  some  simpleton  say,  What  a  cm-ious  thing  it  is  that  rivers  always  come 
near  towns  ?  Some  men  do  speak  upside  down  ;  they  are  not  wholly  to  be  blamed, 
every  man  has  not  every  gift :  but  the  fact  is  just  the  contrary,  it  is  the  town  that 
goes  near  the  river.  The  Thames  never  came  near  London,  but  London  built 
itself  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames.  And  why  did  the  Thames  become  so  very 
important  ?  Because  it  is  so  very  clean  ?  I  will  leave  that  to  the  popular  judg- 
ment. But  because  the  Thames  is  a  fine  high-road  to  the  sea,  and  the  sea  beats 
upon  the  farthest  shores,  offers  a  still  broader  highway  for  the  transit  of  the 
commerce  of  the  world.  As  with  rivers,  so  with  mountains.  Men  get  as  near  some 
mountains  as  they  can.  They  have  not  yet  built  upon  the  top  of  the  Matterhorn, 
but  they  would  if  they  could.  I  am  not  aware  that  there  is  a  hostelry  upon  the 
summit  of  Mont  Blanc,  but  I  have  no  doubt  there  are  men  who  would  put  a  hostelry 
there  to-morrow  if  they  had  the  ability  to  do  so.  From  some  mountains  you  must 
build  at  a  certain  distance.  They  do  not  permit  familiarities.  Sometimes  we  have 
to  calculate  the  quality  and  read  the  history  of  a  mountain  before  we  build  near 
it.  Vesuvius  must  be  calculated  with,  must  be  consulted  ;  because  Vesuvius 
is  a  mountain  of  proverbially  fitful  temper,  and  when  Vesuvius  does  speak  we  do 
not  want  to  be  present.  But  there  are  mountains  in  the  Bible  that  men  would  live 
upon ;  they  are  green  to  the  very  top,  their  summits  are  paradises,  if  not  in  the 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

poor,  narrow,  horticultural  sense,  yet  in  some  ideal  sense  of  uplifting,  as  if  they 
would  bring  us  nearer  heaven  than  any  other  mountains  ever  brought  us.  What 
Bhall  be  said  of  Lebanon  and  Tabor  and  Hermon  ?  What  shall  be  said  of  hills 
ehaggy  with  forests,  strong  with  rocks,  rich  with  honey,  garnished  and  carpeted 
with  choicest  flowers  7  When  the  pilgrim  asks  his  way  to  the  city  of  truth,  tlie 
guide  will  point  him  to  the  mountain  and  say,  The  city  nestles  under  yonder  hill, 
and  that  hill  is  a  benediction,  a  defence,  and  a  stairway  to  loftier  elevations  stilL 
There  are  some  men  who  do  not  see  mountains,  who  do  not  care  for  moimtains, 
who  cannot  interpret  mountains,  and  who  consequently  prefer  what  they  call 
tablelands ;  they  like  to  see  a  great  stretch  of  sky.  Other  men  could  not  live 
without  high  hiUs,  they  say  the  air  gets  purified  somehow  by  circulating  rovmd 
these  great  elevations  ;  besides,  they  love  to  climb.  Man  is  surely  a  climber  by 
nature.  What  is  that  singular  instinct  in  him  which  leads  him  to  look  up  ?  When 
did  the  ox  look  up  ?  When  did  the  beasts  of  the  field  count  the  stars  of  twilight 
as  they  leaped  within  the  vision  of  man  ?  Surely  it  belongs  to  man,  singularly, 
to  look  up,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  term,  significantly,  devoutly,  wonderingly, 
and  hopefully.  Sometimes  it  comes  into  us  that  we  must  have  wings,  faculties 
we  have  not  yet  discovered,  and  if  we  could  but  discover  them  we  should  flee  away 
to  some  pre-natal  clime,  to  some  other  birthplace,  to  some  long  ago  and  forsaken 
home.  There  are  other  men  who  cannot  be  satisfied  until  they  have  put  down 
in  memorandum  books  the  names  of  the  mountains  they  have  seen.  tVTio  gave 
the  mountains  these  names  ?  The  mountains  do  not  know  them  ;  the  mountains 
are  not  dogs  to  be  called  by  names.  Others  want  to  see  the  mountains  as  they 
stood  before  man  was  made.  Thus  we  have  a  variety  of  nature  to  deal  with — 
the  prosaic,  the  poetical,  the  hermitage -loving  spirit  that  jearns  for  solitude  and 
boundlessness  and  the  eloquence  of  silence  ;  and  the  other  nature  that  pines  for  the 
city,  the  gaslighted  thoroughfare,  the  rattle  and  the  tumult  of  public  life.  When 
the  spirit  of  the  living  God  comes  into  us  we  shall  all  love  mountains,  we  shall  say 
with  the  poet,  "  God  made  the  country,  and  man  made  the  town,"  and  in  that  time 
of  spiritual  uplifting,  wlien  all  our  faculties  are  aglow  with  Divine  fire,  mounta.in8 
will  be  ways  to  heaven,  and  all  things  growing  upon  their  verdurous  sides  shall  be 
hints  and  tokens  of  the  eternal  paradise.  Religion  always  works  this  mystery 
in  a  man's  nature  ;  it  elevates  his  taste,  it  dignifies  his  imagination,  it  gives  nerve 
and  pith  to  every  faculty  he  has.  No  man  can  be  a  Christian  in  reality  and  remain 
a  little  narrow-minded  creature.  No  small  mind,  in  the  sense  of  a  mind  that 
loves  smallness,  can  ever  love  Christ.  Every  Christian  is  a  great  man.  We  may 
of  course  have  to  redefine  the  term  "  great,"  and  have  to  make  many  who  are 
first  last,  and  many  who  are  last  first,  but  if  elevation  of  thought,  purity  of  desire, 
radiance  of  hope,  dawning  immortality,  and  all  the  moral  inspiration  belonging 
to  it — if  these  enter  into  greatness,  then  no  man  ever  called  Jesus  "  Lord  "  without 
entering  into  the  possession  and  the  enjoyment  of  that  blessed  inheritance.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Old  men  and  old  women,  .  .  .  boys  and  girls.  —  Inhabitants 
of  the  holy  city  : — What  a  lovely  civic  picture,  what  a  charming  representa- 
tion !  Dear  old  travellers,  sweet  old  mothers,  each  with  a  staff  in  hand  and 
leaning  upon  it  for  very  age,  and  these  making  their  way  through  groups  of  romping 
boys  and  girls  full  of  laughter  and  glee  and  young  joy.  We  cannot  part  with 
this  word  "  playing."  Whoever  thought  the  word  '  playing  "  was  in  the  Bible  ? 
Always  have  great  suspicion  of  any  boy  or  girl  who  cannot  play.  See  the  picture, 
let  it  pass  like  a  panorama  before  your  eyes  :  old  men,  old  women,  little  boys,  little 
girls,  children  of  every  age,  crowding  the  glad  city,  which  is  the  city  of  truth,  and 
which  is  dignified  by  the  presence  of  the  holy  mountain.  If  all  were  old  the  city 
would  be  depressed,  if  all  were  children  the  city  would  be  defenceless,  but  having 
old  and  young  we  have  also  the  middle  line,  the  average  line,  the  active  business 
energetic  element,  and  there  you  have  a  complete  city.  It  would  have  been  a  poor 
picture  if  the  Lord  in  distributing  His  gifts  had  given  to  one  man  five  talents,  and 
to  another  one  ;  the  whole  pith  of  the  story  would  have  been  lost.  Who  does  not 
see  that  but  for  the  middle  man  in  that  parable  there  would  have  been  no  parable 
at  all  ?  The  leap  from  one  to  five  is  too  much  ;  contrasts  may  be  too  startling  ; 
they  may  be  so  startling  as  to  be  tragical,  and  so  tragical  as  to  be  discouraging ; 
but  the  king  gave  to  one  man  five  talents,  to  another  two,  and  to  another  one  : 
preachers  are  eloquent  upon  the  first  and  the  last,  and  forget  in  too  many  instances 
that  it  is  the  average  man  that  represents  society.  "  Boys  and  girls  playing  in 
the  streets."     Many  parents  are  too  dainty  to  allow  their  children  to  play  in  the 


CHAP,  vin.]  ZECHARIAH.  119 

streets ;  there  propriety  draws  a  line.  Poor  propriety,  it  is  always  drawing  lines  : 
that  is  about  the  only  thing  it  can  do.  Whoever  saw  a  boy  or  a  girl  who  would 
not  play  whenever  an  opportunity  occurred  ?  Children  must  be  made  to  feel  that 
playing  is  religious.  All  children  should  just  be  as  merry  as  possible.  Both 
tMjys  and  girls  should  be  really  glad,  frolicsome,  playful,  and  therefore  simply 
natural  and  human.  Any  young  thing  that  does  not  play  is  a  paradox.  Why 
do  not  men  relax  their  strenuous  business  life  sometimes,  and  be  boys  again  ? 
Especially  why  do  not  fathers  of  families  be  boys  among  their  own  sons  and 
daughters  ?  How  commonsense  is  the  Bible  !  How  graphic  in  its  pictorial 
delineations,  how  rational  in  its  conceptions  of  human  necessities,  and  therefore 
how  likely  to  become  the  right  book  when  it  comes  to  speak  of  inner  mysteries, 
and  upper  possibilities,  and  further  issues,  and  ultimate  destiny.  Is  it  possible 
for  boys  and  girls  to  be  Christians  ?  Certainly ;  and  almost  impossible  for  any- 
body else  to  be  Christians.  The  Church  has  been  fruitful  of  mistakes,  but  probably 
hardly  any  mistake  has  been  greater  than  the  discouragement  of  the  young  in  this 
matter  of  giving  themselves  to  Jesus  Christ.  There  have  been  men  who  have 
said  to  children  affectionately.  You  cannot  understand  these  things  yet,  you  must 
wait  a  while.  I  undertake  to  pronoimce  that  instruction  to  be  imsoimd  and  untrue. 
We  are  not  saved  because  we  understand.  If  so,  then  salvation  is  of  works,  for 
understanding  is  an  intellectual  work,  and  men  are  saved  by  cleverness,  by  ability, 
by  mental  penetration,  because  they  see  certain  things  through  and  through. 
I  will  not  be  saved  so :  let  me  be  saved  because  Jesus  wants  to  save  me,  loves  me, 
and  teUs  me  that  when  we  get  together  by  and  by  in  the  long  days  of  eternity 
He  will  tell  me  all  about  it.  The  church  should  be  full  of  boys  and  girls.  At 
present  there  are  signs  that  boys  and  girls  are  being  made  more  and  more  welcome 
to  the  Church.  These  signs  should  be  gratefully  hailed,  for  they  are  the  signs  of  a 
deepening  and  widening  Christian  life.  We  cannot  characterise  all  boys  and  girls 
as  good,  but  surely  there  is  a  time  when  all  boys  and  girls  want  to  be  good.  This 
is  the  time  to  claim  them  for  Christ.  Jesus  Himself  took  children  very  early ; 
they  were  children  that  could  not  walk,  they  were  "  brought  " — mark  that  word, 
for  it  indicates  a  good  deal  that  is  not  expressed — to  Him,  and  He  said,  "  Suffer 
the  little  children  to  come  unto  Me,  and  forbid  them  not ;  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom 
of  heaven."  Boys  and  girls,  there  is  one  difficulty:  people  are  extremely  fond 
of  us  when  we  are  babies  ;  they  would  die  for  us  then,  or  nearly  so  ;  they  would 
sit  up  all  night,  they  would  expend  their  tenderest  affection  upon  us,  but  when  we 
are  seven  years  of  age,  and  from  that  to  fourteen,  we  are  looked  upon  somewhat 
coldly ;  then  we  shoot  up  into  young  men,  and  seem  to  recover  part  of  the  attention 
lavished  upon  us  when  we  were  babies.  There  is  a  zone  of  young  life  where  young 
life  has  very  much  to  take  care  of  itself  under  the  guidance  of  the  schoolmaster — 
that  sweet  friend,  that  dear,  dear  soul  that  would  do  anything  for  us  !  Then 
be  it  ours  to  see  that  the  young,  when  very  young,  are  made  to  feel  that  there  is 
something  that  cannot  be  seen,  something  better  than  fatherhood  and  motherhood 
as  known  upon  the  earth.  Never  burden  a  child  with  religious  teaching.  Never 
let  a  child  Imow  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  Catechism.  Never  make  the  Bible 
a  task-book,  sajdng.  You  must  commit  to  memory  such  and  such  verses,  or  suffer 
my  displeasure.  Never  associate  penalty  or  suffering  of  any  kind  with  the  Bible, 
with  the  Sabbath  Day,  or  with  church-going.  In  due  time  the  Catechism  will 
have  its  place,  and  Bible-learning  wiU  have  its  place,  and  church-going  will  have 
its  place,  but  do  not  turn  these  early  into  burdens  or  penalties  or  associate  with 
them  the  darkness  of  a  shadow.  Let  the  Sabbath  Day  be  a  day  of  jubilee,  wedding 
day,  resurrection  day ;  a  time  when  the  joy  bells  ring  their  merry  peals  to  call 
all  men  to  the  Father's  house,  where  there  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare. 
(Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Children  in  the  streets : — The  image  here  presented  is  one 
of  great  force  and  beauty.  The  city  rises  before  us  as  the  glow  of  sunset  begins 
to  steal  over  Olivet,  and  the  lengthening  shadows  begin  to  warn  the  laboiu^r  home. 
The  streets  are  not  silent  or  deserted,  as  they  have  hitherto  been,  but  there  sits 
the  old  man  gazing  on  the  scenes  of  peaceful  beauty  before  him,  while  the  aged 
companion  of  his  earher  years  sits  by  his  side,  to  enjoy  with  him  the  freshening 
breeze  that  comes  cool  and  sweet  from  the  distant  sea,  while  before  them  and 
around  them  are  the  merry  shout,  the  joyous  glee,  and  glad  gambols  of  happy 
childhood,  whose  ringing  echoes  mingle  sweetly  with  the  tinkle  of  the  bells  and 
the  lowing  and  bleating  of  the  flocks  that  come  softly  from  the  hills  as  they  hie  them 
homeward  to  the  nightly  fold.  There  is  an  exquisite  beauty  in  this  picture  that 
would  strike  a  Jewish  mind  with  peculiar  force,  to  which  the  promise  of  old  age 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

and  posterity  was  one  of  the  richest  that  could  be  made.  Indeed,  the  presence 
of  the  two  extremes  of  life  is  one  of  the  usual  signs  of  prosperity.  When  war, 
famine,  pestilence,  or  anarchy,  have  been  raging,  there  are  but  few  of  either  class, 
for  their  feebleness  makes  them  the  earliest  victims.  Hence,  in  the  streets  of 
Jerusalem,  there  were  but  few  of  either  in  her  desolation,  for  even  those  who  did 
remain  abstained  from  coming  forth  their  houses  through  fear.  But  the  time 
was  coming  when  security  would  be  so  general,  that  old  and  young  would  meet  in 
the  peaceful  streets  without  fear  of  molestation  or  injury.  {T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 
The  human  society  in  the  city  of  God : — The  dear  old  capital,  the  centre  of  their 
reverential  affections,  and  seat  of  their  worship,  beautiful  for  situation  and  holy 
for  its  history,  wiU  put  on  its  thriving  look  again,  and  be  the  same  blessed  home  to 
them  that  it  was  before.  Observe  that  this  Jerusalem  was  the  city  of  God — 
a  city  that  He  has  fashioned  and  filled  after  His  own  design,  just  as  He  wished 
it  to  be.  This  future  Jerusalem  was  no  mere  mortal  metropolis,  built  by  human 
ambition,  or  populated  by  some  sordid  colony.  It  was  to  be  modelled  after  a 
heavenly  pattern.  It  was  to  embody  the  Divine  ideal  of  a  perfect,  pure,  and  happy 
state.  There  is  no  mistake,  then,  in  the  city's  composition,  and  no  accident  in  its 
arrangements.  If  the  Lord  does  not  mean  to  have  old  men  and  old  women  in  it, 
they  will  not  be  seen  there ;  if  boys  and  girls  are  found  playing  in  the  streets  of  it, 
we  may  be  sure  they  did  not  stray  in  as  vagrants,  or  get  dropped  there  as  foundlings ; 
they  are  there  by  the  express  appointment  of  the  Father  of  all  the  families  of  the 
earth.  We  may  take  these  sentences,  therefore,  as  a  graphic  outline  of  what  God 
would  have  a  Christian  state  of  society  to  be,  not  in  heaven,  but  in  this  world. 
In  the  scriptural  imagery  of  symbolism,  Jerusalem  is  a  type  of  the  Christian  Chiu-ch. 
Where  the  Gospel  of  Christ  has  done  its  perfect  work,  where  Christianity  has 
realised  itself  in  social  institution,  and  has  penetrated  all  our  private  and  public 
life  with  its  practical  regulation,  there  the  whole  of  our  being  will  come  vmder  its 
control ;  all  its  periods,  from  childhood  to  old  age,  will  take  the  stamp  and  bear 
the  fruit  of  this  holy  and  gracious  power  in  the  heart ;  every  capacity  will  be 
invigorated  to  its  best  exercise  by  Christian  faith ;  our  common  work  will  be 
better  and  safer  and  happier  work  for  being  done  in  the  name  of  Christ  and  for  the 
sake  of  Christ ;  done  by  a  Christian  will,  with  a  Christian  purpose,  in  a  Christian 
spirit,  with  Christian  hands  and  brain  and  feet.  Our  faith  is  really  the  bread  of  our 
life.  The  Church  is  meant  to  open  straight  into  your  homes.  The  man  and  the 
children  in  the  street,  as  the  text  says,  should  be  the  constant  signs  and  witnesses 
of  the  kingdom  of  God  within  them — men  about  their  business,  children  at  their 
play,  so  toiling  and  trafficking,  or  so  playing,  as  to  make  it  plain  that  the  stamp 
of  the  regeneration  is  upon  them,  the  image  of  Christ  within  them.  There  is 
nothing  in  our  domestic  habits  too  small  to  bear  this  stamp  and  seal  of  the  law  of 
Christ,  nothing  too  commonplace  to  be  a  test  of  sanctification.  ...  In  these 
villages  and  cities  there  are  many  men  who  treat  the  whole  system  of  positive 
Christianity,  both  doctrine  and  ordinance,  with  indifference.  They  live  by  the 
side  of  Christian  institutions  very  much  as  they  would  live  by  neighbours  speaking 
another  language,  and  following  different  pursuits.  What  can  break  up  this 
strange  and  heathenish  unconcern  ?  It  is  due  largely  to  the  impression  men  have 
that  religion  lies  aside  of  life,  and  apart  from  its  vital  interests.  Religion  is  regarded 
as  a  class-concern,  or  a  periodical  and  occasional  concern,  at  anyrate  a  partial 
and  narrow  concern.  It  lays  hold  on  a  peculiar  and  exceptional  faculty  in  the 
mind.  It  comes  to  some,  and  not  to  others,  and  those  others  must  be  excused. 
There  is  much  of  this  sentiment  abroad,  and  it  kills,  in  not  a  few,  all  effort  to  be 
Christians.  Nothing  will  be  more  convincing,  in  exploding  this  error,  than  a 
daily  demonstration,  in  our  own  persons  and  conduct,  of  the  opposite  truth. 
Turn  and  look  into  the  face  of  Christ  as  He  walks  the  world  in  the  majesty  and 
beauty  of  His  holiness.  Is  there  anything  that  looks  like  a  class-piety  there  ? 
Do  you  gather  from  anything  He  says,  that  His  followers  are  to  have  two  divided 
lives,  serving  mammon  a  part  of  their  time  and  God  a  part,  the  world  with  their 
busy  energies,  and  God  only  with  some  sentimental  states  brought  out  at  special 
seasons  ?  Analyse  the  very  essence  and  marrow  of  the  Christian  life.  What 
are  the  parts  of  it  ?  Faith,  hope,  charity.  Is  any  one  of  them  a  class-possession  ? 
Christianity  intends  that  every  man  and  woman  and  boy  and  girl  shall  be  the 
better  for  it,  and  every  corner  and  instant  in  the  character  and  life  of  each  shall  be 
the  better.  It  would  make  strong  men  more  manly,  pure  women  more  pure, 
light-hearted  children  lighter-hearted,  because  the  love  of  Christ  casts  all  fear 
out.     We  must  expand  our  ideas,  and  give  them  life,  by  convictions  of  the  "  way 


CHAP,  vin.]  ZECHAEIAH.  121 

of  coming  "  to  Christ,  and  being  made  one  with  Him  in  this  world.  It  is  a 
very  simple  road.  Theology  becomes  only  a  blind  guide  when  it  complicates  and 
mystifies  it,  and  puzzles  the  imsophisticated  mind  with  metaphysical  cross-examina- 
tion. Do  you  want  to  be  a  Christian  ?  Then  you  have  already  begun  to  be  one — 
but  you  have  only  begun.  The  greatest  part  of  salvation  on  our  part  is  in  the 
being  wilhng  to  be  saved.  (Bishop  Huntington. )  And  the  streets  of  the  city  shall 
be  full  of  boys  and  g^irls  plajring  in  the  streets  thereof — Children  for  evermore  : — 
The  prophet  is  speaking  of  the  restoration  of  the  temporal  Jerusalem,  of  the 
return  of  her  inhabitants  when  the  long  night  of  their  captivity  by  Babylon's 
streams  is  over.  His  words  may  be  taken  as  prophetical  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem. 
In  the  golden  city  there  will  be  children — children  for  evermore  1 

"  Oh,  there's  nothing  on  earth  half  so  holy 
As  the  innocent  heart  of  a  child." 

It  would  seem  to  us  as  if  there  could  be  no  heaven  without  the  children  :  and  as  if 
we  could  not  wish  those  that  are  in  heaven  to  grow  up.  Shall  there  be  no  sweet 
childlike  voices  bearing  their  part  in  the  "  Song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb  "  ?  The 
children  of  the  heavenly  city  are  described  as  '  playing."  Children  are  children 
all  the  world  over.  And  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  eternal  world,  we  meet  with 
children  there — real  children,  happy  children,  "the  streets  of  the  city  shall  be 
fuU  of  boys  and  girls  playing  in  the  streets  thereof."  (C.  L.  Balfour.)  Children 
in  the  city  of  God  : — I.  Boys  and  gibls  may  be  in  the  city  of  God.  They  may 
know  about  Christ.  They  may  be  justified  in  Christ.  They  may  be  converted 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  may  love  Christ.  They  may  imitate  Clirist — who  spent 
a  great  part  of  His  time  in  performing  children's  duties.  II.  Those  boys  and 
GEBLS  WHO  ARE  IN  THE  CITY  OF  GoD  ABE  VERY  HAPPY.  They  are  when  they  look 
back ;  when  they  look  forward ;  when  they  look  down ;  when  they  look  up.  They 
are  happy  now.  They  shall  be  happy  hereafter.  III.  BoYS  and  girls  who  abb 
God's  children  are  very  safe.  They  are  in  the  streets  of  a  city,  walled  and 
eternal.  Neither  God,  the  devil,  wicked  men,  poverty,  diseases,  nor  death,  will 
harm  them  there.  IV.  Boys  and  girls,  who  are  God's  children,  must  not 
GO  OUT  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GoD  TO  SEEK  AMUSEMENT.  To  be  Very  foud  of  amusement 
is  not  good.  Duties  in  variety  may  often  afford  amusement.  {James  Stewart.) 
Recreations,  false  and  true : — The  man  who  imagines  that  his  instincts  for 
healthy  recreation  must  be  either  ignored  or  destroyed  if  he  is  to  live  a 
Christian  life  is  deluded  by  a  dangerous  untruth.  I  prefer  the  word  "  recreation  " 
to  the  word  "  amusement."  The  latter  may  be  no  more  than  idle  rest,  the  former 
is  definite  in  its  promise  of  renewal.  There  appear  to  be  two  somewhat  different 
sets  of  considerations  which  claim  our  notice  according  as  one  ortheotherimmediate 
purpose  in  Christian  life  presses  with  emphasis.  If  self- protection  is  our  main  idea, 
some  things  do  not  show  themselves  within  range  of  vision,  which  are  not  only 
visibly  present,  but  well  up  toward  the  front,  if  our  main  thought  is  aggression, 
conquest,  possession  of  the  whole  world  of  human  life  for  Christ.  That  cannot 
be  a  "recreation"  which  results  in  mental  and  moral  and  spiritual  languor. 
Dissipation  is  the  true  name  for  that.  The  thing  is  poison  to  him,  whatever  it  may 
be  to  others,  and  he  must  refuse  it.  Take  the  case  of  the  children  of  our  Church 
and  homes,  still  retaining  for  the  present  the  idea  of  protection,  safety.  We 
know  that  the  circle  of  social  relation,  and  that  of  Church  relation,  are  not  botmded 
by  the  same  line.  Even  if  Christian  parents  were  more  wisely  careful  in  the 
matter  of  their  children's  choice  of  friends  than  they  sometimes  show  themselves 
to  be,  it  is  not  as  far  possible  to-day  as  it  was  thirty  years  ago  to  exclude  the 
*'  currencies  "  of  the  world  :  and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  guard  against  the 
penetrative  power  of  current  literature,  let  our  will  and  our  watch  be  ever  so 
resolute.  By  what  attitude,  with  regard  to  amusements,  can  our  young  people 
be  sent  forth  most  safely  into  the  multitude  of  men  and  the  tumult  of  life  ?  My 
strong  conviction  is  that  we  should,  in  full  frankness,  teach  them  to  distinguish 
between  things  that  differ.  They  will  understand  that  evil  is  evil,  and  that  good 
is  good.  We  need,  then,  set  up  no  jealous  bar  against  this  or  that  recreation, 
or  any  amusement  which  is  really  such,  and  for  all  their  life  they  will  be  capable 
of  judging  the  wrong  and  right  of  things,  also  of  the  expediency  of  this  or  that, 
in  a  way  which  the  most  complete  gwcwt-papal  Index  would  never  afford.  Take 
dancing.  Late  hours  so  spent  afford  no  recreation.  Indiscriminate  companion- 
ships, indelicacy  of  dress,  wastefulness  in  dress,  never  under  any  circumstances 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

can  be  right.  Brand  the  wrong  as  evil,  claim  your  children's  verdict,  and  it  will 
be  given  without  hesitation,  and  then  see,  if  you  Uke,  whether  those  things  need 
intrude.  They  seem  ridiculously  non-essential.  There  are  games  which  have 
been  and  are  largely  abused  for  purposes  of  gambhng,  and  which  have  been 
eschewed  or  regarded  as  objectionable  on  that  account.  Gamblers  are  ready  to 
turn  every  occasion  into  an  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  their  vice.  To  say 
that  chess,  or  whist,  or  biUiards  is  wrong,  because  betting  and  gambling  have  been 
connected  by  some  men  with  the  game,  is  scarcely  a  sensible  conclusion.  The 
theatre  is  often  unquestionably  poisonous  and  corrupting.  But  is  it  true  beyond 
all  doubt  that  evil  is  essential  to  the  theatre  ?  Has  the  theatre,  distinguishing 
it  from  the  dfama,  ever  had  a  fair  chance  ?  The  very  presence  of  this  power  to-day, 
to  say  nothing  of  former  generations  and  other  lands,  shows  surely  that  there  is  not 
only  an  instinct  to  act,  but  a  desire  to  see  dramatic  portrayal,  such  portrayal 
being  an  aid  to  the  understanding  and  realising  of  a  conception  admittedly  the 
fruit  of  a  genius  which  is  a  worthily-used  Divine  gift.  Must  this  necessarily 
injure  the  man  or  woman  who  attempts  the  task,  and  the  society,  in  the  midst  of 
which  such  means  are  organised  ?  Is  the  case  of  musical  performance  essentially 
different  ?  Mendelssohn's  Elijah  is,  in  the  music  of  it  as  well  as  in  the  libretto, 
a  magnificent  drama.  Is  an  organised  dramatic  portrayal  necessarily  an  evil  7 
I  cannot  think  it.  But  the  principle  of  cautious  self-protection  and  avoidance 
is  not  the  whole,  or  the  highest  part,  of  Christian  life  and  duty.  The  attitude 
of  aggression  is  a  true  and  necessary  one,  and  aggressive  Christianity  has  a  voice 
and  a  work  in  this  sphere  of  amusements  and  recreations.  In  the  matter  before 
us  isolation  is  not  security,  and  victory  is  the  only  safety.  Watch  as  we  may, 
warn  as  we  may,  if  we  do  not  rescue  such  amusements  from  evil  surroundings, 
the  temptation  they  present  will  again  and  again  overwhelm.  Forms  of  recreation 
are  not  the  outcome  of  chance,  they  are  a  response  to  something  which  is  part 
of  us.  If  the  i)eople  who  organise  the  standing  institutions  receive  no  support 
from  good  people  in  any  attempts  to  respond  in  worthy  ways  to  the  demand  for 
amusement,  they  will  be  tempted  to  degrade  their  provision  to  a  lower  level. 
We  must  offer  recreative  substitutes  for  that  which  we  condemn.  We  have 
to  win  and  conquer  and  possess  the  world  for  Christ,  and  not  be  content  to  say  a 
thing  is  \^Tong  without,  at  all  events,  an  attempt  to  set  it  right.  It  is  neither 
Christian  nor  heroic  to  hand  down  difficulties  to  our  children  without  an  endeavour 
to  grapple  with  them.  ...  To  many  devout  Christians  the  very  necessity 
for  considering  such  subjects  as  have  occupied  us,  is  almost  a  pain.  They  have 
never  felt  unrest.  They  can  scarcely  understand  the  besetment  by  which  others 
say  they  are  assailed.  The  fact  is  that,  a  generation  ago,  the  majority  of  people 
did  not  occupy  their  minds  with  matters  which  we  could  not  evade  if  we  would. 
I  think  even  conflict  is  healthier  than  stagnation.  Work  and  play  are  as  necessary 
parts  of  our  life  as  worship.  The  greatness  of  the  Gospel,  the  glory  of  God  in 
Jesus  Christ,  is  its  power  of  salvation  to  the  uttermost.  (D.  Jones  Hamer. )  Boys 
and  girls  playing  in  the  streets  of  the  city : — God  has  a  city  still.  In  it  live  all  who 
love  Him  and  serve  Him.  Tliey  are  walled  about  with  God's  love  and  care. 
They  have  the  temple  of  His  presence.  Like  Jerusalem,  it  is  a  city  of  peace ; 
it  is  pleasant  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth.  The  Heavenly  Father 
would  have  His  city  full  of  boys  and  girls,  playing  in  the  streets.  I.  Why  God 
woxiLD  HAVE  THEM  IN  His  CITY.  1.  Because  He  loves  them  so  much.  The 
Heavenly  Father  wiU  never  have  the  children  shut  out  from  anything  that  He  has 
provided  for  the  people.  He  does  not  forget  any  little  one.  He  does  not  think 
that  you  are  too  young,  or  too  ignorant,  or  too  weak.  His  city  will  not  be  right 
unless  you  are  there.  And  He  wants  you  now.  2.  Because  it  is  dangerous 
outside  the  city.  There  were  in  the  old  days  wild  beasts  prowling  about, — jackals 
and  hyenas  ;  and  perhaps  a  fierce  old  lion  came  down  from  the  hills  to  see  what  he 
could  find.  And  outside  the  city  to-day  there  is  the  old  lion  that  goes  about 
"  seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  And  there  are  many  robber  bands  that  strip 
people  of  everything,  and  make  slaves  of  them  to  hard  masters,  and  even  kill 
them.  Sins  like  drunkenness,  and  vice,  and  dishonesty,  I  mean.  II.  How  may 
WE  GET  INTO  THIS  CITY  ?  Its  gates  are  shut  to  keep  out  all  enemies,  and  the  watch- 
men with  spears  keep  guard  above  the  battlements.  A  long  way  off  from  the  city 
there  stands  a  man  looking  and  longing  to  enter  it.  Why  does  he  not  come  in  ? 
He  has  been  an  enemy  of  the  King,  a  rebel  against  His  laws.  He  could  never 
get  in  there,  at  the  gate  of  the  law.  Then  I  see  that  thej'  are  making  a  new  gate. 
Over  it  they  have  written  the  words,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me  I  will  in  no  wise 


CHAP,  vm.]  ZECHARIAH.  i23 

cast  out."  No  watchmen  or  archers  guard  it.  But  there  is  One  with  such  tender 
love  and  compassion  that  none  could  ever  shrink  from  Him.  It  is  the  King's 
Son.  Forth  from  this  gate  come  messengers,  offering  free  pardon  for  all. 
The  King's  Son  has  borne  their  punishment, — suffered  in  their  stead, — that 
He  might  bring  them  all  into  the  city  of  God.  And  now,  whoever  will,  may 
come.  III.  What  are  the  boys  and  girls  Dorsro  in  God's  city  ?  They  are 
playing ;  they  are  very  happy.  The  moment  children  get  imhappy  they  leave 
off  playing.  1.  They  are  happy  because  their  sins  are  forgiven,  and  they  know 
that  God  loves  them.  2.  They  are  happy  because  of  the  wall  that  is  about  them, 
the  wall  of  God's  love  and  care.  Have  you  ever  heard  of  the  old  woman  who  always 
used  to  pray,  "  O  God,  be  a  wall  about  us  "  ?  It  was  in  the  dreadful  days  of 
Napoleon  Buonaparte.  He  was  driven  back  from  Russia,  and  fierce  Russian 
soldiers  were  following  him.  Everybody  was  greatly  frightened,  thinking  that 
the  soldiers  would  come  upon  them  and  take  all  that  they  had,  and  perhaps  kQl 
them.  But  when  this  old  woman  heard  of  it,  she  said,  "  0  God,  be  a  wall  about 
Tis !  "  Her  neighbours  laughed,  and  even  her  little  gi'andson  said,  "  What  does 
grandmother  mean  by  talking  about  God  being  a  wall  about  us  ?  "  "Ah,"  said 
the  old  woman,  "  you  will  see,  you  will  see  ;  He  can  take  care  of  us  and  be  a  wall 
about  us."  The  soldiers  had  to  march  close  by  her  house,  but  in  the  evening  she 
prayed  to  God,  and  went  to  bed  as  usual.  In  the  night  the  soldiers  passed ;  but 
they  did  not  see  her  dwelling.  There  came  a  very  heavy  fall  of  snow,  and  it 
drifted  against  the  hedge  of  the  cottage  garden  so  high  that  the  soldiers  could  not 
see  it,  and  all  passed  along  without  knowing  that  there  was  a  house  there.  Thus 
God  really  built  a  wall  about  her.  He  sent  down  the  light  snow  from  heaven 
and  piled  it  up  for  her  defence.  3.  They  are  happy  because  they  can  play  in  the 
city.  If  God  had  not  told  Zechariah  to  say  this,  I  am  afraid  some  people  would 
have  thought  of  something  very  different.  They  would  have  said,  the  children 
must  be  very  quiet ;  they  must  be  seen  more  than  heard  ;  they  must  always  be 

foing  up  to  the  temple,  and  always  praying,  and  singing  hymns.  But  when  God 
rought  the  boys  and  girls  back  to  His  city,  the  streets  were  to  be  full  of  them, 
"  playing  in  the  streets  thereof."  Because  they  were  in  the  Holy  City,  they  were 
not  to  try  to  be  men  and  women  ;  they  were  to  be  boys  and  girls  still,  full  of  fun 
and  fond  of  playing,  and  loving  to  run  and  shout.  (Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  The 
children  of  the  king  : — Zechariah's  heart  is  plainly  in  the  sight  he  describes.  Glad- 
ness grows  in  him  as  he  watches  in  vision  the  children  at  play,  and  hears  their 
ringing  laughter.  And  his  spirit  is  the  spirit  of  the  Bible,  which  everywhere  shows 
the  v/armest  interest  in  the  joys  of  children.  Who  of  the  world's  teachers  but 
Chiist  took  children  in  their  arms,  laid  hands  on  them,  and  blessed  them  ?  He 
thinks  His  praise  imperfect  when  there  are  no  little  voices  in  the  choir.  The 
religion  of  Christ  has  quite  changed  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  men  about  children. 
How  do  children  fare  where  the  Bible  is  not  known  ?  You  owe  your  childhood, 
all  its  kindness  and  happiness,  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  lover  of  chQdren.  Jerusalem 
was  the  city  of  God  on  earth,  and  the  picture  of  the  city  of  God  in  heaven.  In 
heaven  there  shall  be  a  mighty  multitude  of  happy  children.  Illustrations  may 
be  borrowed  from  the  last  two  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Revelation,  which  is  the 
book  of  God's  city.  I.  The  glory  of  the  city.  1.  There  is  perfect  safety 
in  it.  2.  It  contains  everything  needed  for  life  and  joy.  3.  The  King  is  the  centre 
of  the  city.  Near  the  Rhine  stands  the  city  of  Caiisruhe,  or  Charles'  Rest,  so 
called  after  its  founder.  It  has  the  shape  of  an  outspread  fan,  and  all  the  streets 
branch  out  from  the  palace,  in  front  of  which  stands  the  bronze  statue  of  the 
grand  duke.  II.  The  citizens  of  the  city.  A  city  derives  its  glory  more  from 
the  people  than  from  the  places  in  it.  III.  The  gate  of  the  city.  You  do  well 
to  ask,  "  Shall  I  get  into  the  city  ?  "  Penitence  is  necessary.  Those  only  who 
have  loved  holiness  on  earth  can  enter  into  the  city  of  holiness.  Thank  God  that 
the  day  of  mercy  is  not  past,  and  that  the  gate  of  mercy  still  stands  open ;  and 
enter  in  by  hearty  faith  in  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  {James  Wells.)  The  new 
humanity : — This  charming  word  picture  is  a  representation  at  once  vivid  and 
sublime  of  the  new  human  race.  It  sets  before  us  a  city  in  the  time  of  prosperity 
and  peace.  In  time  of  peace  children  crowd  in  the  open  spaces,  and  engage  in 
gleeful  play.  The  spiritual  idea  is — men  and  women  of  the  Gospel  age — their 
characteristics  as  represented  by  the  city  street  scene.  Old  photographs  of  new 
people.  I.  The  new  humanity  is  characteejsed  by  youthfulness.  Child- 
hood is  peculiar  to  Christianity.  God's  religion  is  the  only  one  that  makes  a 
speciality  of  children.     Jesus  made  children  a  type  of  believers.     "  Of  such  is  the 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

kingdom  of  heaven."  Childlikeness  is  characteristic  of  Christians  in  a  state  of 
grace  and  in  a  state  of  glory.  1.  In  a  state  of  grace.  Children  are  humble,  obedient, 
forgiving,  contented,  hopeful,  loving.  So  are  Christians.  2.  In  a  state  of  glory. 
Christianity  reveals  a  future  state,  where  the  good  are  ever  young.  Heaven  is 
the  land  of  the  living.  Religion  a  life  of  eternal  juvenility  transfigiured  with 
eternal  glory.  I.  The  new  HtrMANiTy  is  characterised  by  enjoyment. 
"  Playing."  All  young  life  is  playful — the  colt,  kitten,  lamb,  child.  The  Gospel 
is  a  system  to  make  men  glad.  Joy  is  a  duty.  God  is  our  best  friend — our  Father. 
Chiistians  possess  the  secret  of  happiness — relation  to  Him.  Externally,  all  may 
be  forbidding,  but  there  are  hidden  springs  within.  The  Christian,  though  poor, 
is  rich.  III.  The  new  htxmanity  is  characterised  by  safety.  "In  the  streets." 
1.  God's  affection  for  them  proves  this.  He  has  loved  man  best  of  all.  His  affec- 
tion is  means  to  an  end.  All  the  attributes  of  God  work  for  His  love.  2.  Grod's 
sacrifice  for  them  proves  this.  God  willingly  sent  forth  His  Son.  3.  God's  work 
in  them  proves  this.  His  resources  are  boimdless,  and  His  purposes  imalterable. 
To  commence  is  to  consummate.  He  who  is  Alpha  is  also  Omega.  4.  His  pro- 
mises to  them  prove  this.  "  We  severally  and  jointly  promise  to  pay," — so 
reads  the  prorrvissory  note.  The  Trinity  are  personally  and  collectively  pledged 
to  save  the  believer.  We  can  trust  them.  The  bridge  of  God's  promises  grips  the 
Rock  of  Ages.  IV.  The  new  humanity  is  characterised  by  mtjxtituie. 
"  Pull."  Jesus  will  save  a  multitude  untold.  1.  The  plan  in  operation  proves 
this.  "  Power  of  God."  "  Mighty  through  God."  2.  Divine  promises  to  Christ 
prove  this.  "  Ask  of  Me,  and  I  will  give  Thee  the  heathen  for  Thine  inheritance." 
3.  The  expectations  of  Christ  prove  this.  "  Many  shall  come,"  &c.  Apply — 
(1)  Seek  the  new  nature.  (2)  Live  the  new  life.  (3)  Then  will  come  the  new 
song  in  the  new  Jerusalem.     {B.  D.  Johns.) 

Ver.  6.  Should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  Mine  eyes  ?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. — 
The  limits  of  the  marvellous : — Here  is  a  prophetic  picture  of  a  time  of  peace 
and  prosperity.  To  the  man  of  his  time  the  prophet's  picture  seemed  wholly 
incredible.  They  were  not  prepared  for  such  an  optimistic  view  of  things.  The 
scene,  however  desirable,  seemed  utterly  incredible.  Then  to  their  despairing 
mood  comes  this  soul-inspiring  message  from  God :  "  If  it  be  marvellous  in  the 
eyes  of  the  remnant  of  this  people  in  those  days,  shall  it  also  be  marvellous  in 
My  eyes  ?  "  There  is  no  room  for  marvelling  when  God  is  taken  into  account. 
Many  things  that  are  marvels  to  men  are  but  the  orderly  and  ordinary  carrying 
out  of  God's  pui poses  and  plans.  The  miracles  of  Jesus  were  not  miracles  to  Him. 
They  were  the  spontaneous  exercise  of  His  ordinary  healing  and  restorative 
powers.  Finite  minds  have  a  tendency  to  be  crushed  by  consternation  in  the 
presence  of  the  marvellous,  except  they  have  learned  to  see  God  in  all  events. 
The  only  steadying  and  strengthening  principle  of  human  life  is  God,  and  faith 
in  His  wisdom  and  power.  These  disheartened  captives  were  in  a  despairing 
mood.  Hope  had  deserted  them.  They  had  given  up  their  work  in  despair. 
When  the  prophet  assured  them  that  the  work  would  be  completed,  that  Jerusalem 
would  be  restored,  and  that  peace  and  security  would  yet  be  enjoyed  within  its 
walls,  they  shook  their  heads  incredibly.  They  said :  "  It  is  too  good  to  be  true." 
They  failed  to  take  God  into  account,  and  hence  were  crushed  and  disheartened. 
God  comes  to  them  and  says :  "  It  may  seem  incredible  to  you,  but  it  is  not 
incredible  to  Me."  And  God  comes  to  us  all  in  the  same  way,  and  tells  us  that 
we  are  not  to  limit  His  power  or  to  doubt  His  love.  He  is  behind  all  events, 
making  them  work  out  His  own  gracious  purpose.  The  true  solution  of  the 
marveUous  is  found  in  the  recognition  of  God.  Illustrate  by  two  men  who  are 
bent  on  making  the  world  brighter  and  better.  One  yields  to  despair  because 
he  has  been  limited  to  means  and  agencies.  The  other  clings  to  the  belief  that 
a  remedy  may  be  found  for  the  ills  of  society,  because  he  sees  God  overhead, 
and  recognises  His  power  to  regenerate  society.  The  same  is  true  of  our  own 
personal  experience,  especially  of  the  higher  experiences  of  the  Christian  life. 
The  timid  heart  often  shrinks  from  claiming  the  perfect  peace  that  God  promises 
to  them  that  love  and  trust  Him.  The  true  answer  to  our  marvelling  mood  is 
that  God  will  do  it.  He  will  lift  the  worried,  fretting  soul  up  out  of  its  own 
feebleness.  The  same  principle  holds  good  in  those  strange  and  bewUdering 
experiences  that  so  often  stirprise  and  perplex  the  believer.  But  the  hand  of 
God  may  be  recognised  in  the  times  of  doubt  and  darkness.  No  matter  what 
form  the  trial  may  take,  the  way  out  of  it  is  the  same.     And  in  the  matter  of  service 


CHAP,  vin.]  ZECUAEIAH.  1{?5 

there  are  many  things  that  surprise  and  perplex  us.  We  are  often  sadly  perplexed 
at  our  failures,  and  sometimes  we  are  greatly  surprised  at  our  successes.  Such 
a  view  of  God,  as  an  ever-present  factor  in  all  human  experiences,  cannot  fail  to 
enlarge  our  lives,  and  to  lift  us  up  above  the  countless  petty  perplexities  and 
annoyances  that  tend  to  fret  and  worry  the  life.  We  thus  learn  to  look  at  life 
as  a  whole,  taking  in  its  entire  plan  and  scope,  as  seen  and  known  by  God.  We 
need  this  view  of  God  also  to  steady  us  and  strengthen  our  faith  as  we  look  abroad 
upon  the  spiritual  life  of  Christendom.  We  look  for  fruit,  and  behold  there  is 
barrenness.  What  marvellously  slow  progress  the  Church  is  making  !  But  God 
is  the  same  God  still,  and  therefore  we  are  not  to  yield  to  despair,  and  cease 
to  labour  and  to  pray.  The  Churches  may  be  dead,  but  God  still  lives.  We  may 
strengthen  oui-  faith  and  encourage  our  drooping  hearts  by  remembering  Grod's 
gracious  dealings  with  ourselves  in  early  life.  He  came  to  our  desolate  hearts, 
and  filled  us  with  His  o\va  fulness,  and  made  us  sing  for  joy.  God,  who  wrought 
such  wonders  in  us,  can  do  the  same  in  His  Church.  {Samiid  Macnaughton,  M.A.) 
Things  marvellous  to  men  not  marvellous  to  God : — This  is  a  wonderful  age,  not 
merely  in  the  number  of  strange  and  vmprecedented  things  happening  in  it,  and 
in  the  strange  and  unprecedented  character  that  belongs  to  it  as  a  whole,  but 
also  in  the  prominence  of  ^vonder  as  an  element  in  the  view  which  it  takes  of  itself. 
It  is  wonderful,  because  it  is  an  age  full  of  wonder.  It  does  not  seem  as  if  there 
ever  could  be  a  time  which  so  stood  off,  as  it  were,  and  looked  at  itself,  in  which 
so  many  men  lived  under  a  continual  sense  of  the  strangeness  of  their  own  circum- 
stances. You  will  see  how  important  such  an  element  must  be  in  the  character 
of  an  age  which  possesses  it,  if  you  remember  what  it  is  to  an  individual.  A 
child  who  thinks  himself  singular  and  different  from  other  children  grows  up 
under  the  power  of  that  thought  more  than  any  other  which  is  in  his  mind  about 
himself.  Whatever  kind  of  effect  is  produced  by  it,  this  is  an  element  in  the 
life  and  growth  of  every  man — this  wonder  at  the  age  he  lives  in,  at  the  world, 
at  men,  at  himself — this  wonder  that  everywhere  pervades  our  wonderful,  our 
wondering  age.  I.  Wonderfulness  of  life.  "SVhat  is  the  reason  that  this 
sense  of  the  wonderfulness  of  life,  this  sense  of  the  strangeness  and  mystery 
everywhere,  has  such  a  different  effect  upon  different  men  that  it  brings  one  man 
peace  and  another  man  tumult,  that  it  brings  to  one  man  hope  and  despair  to 
another  ?  No  doubt  the  reason  lies  deep  in  the  essential  differences  there  are 
between  our  natures,  and  cannot  be  wholly  stated.  One  cause  of  the  difference, 
and  not  the  least  one,  lies  here  :  in  the  difference  of  our  ideas  as  to  whether  there 
is  any  Being  who  knows  what  we  are  reminded  every  hour  we  do  not  know  ; 
whether  there  is  any  Being  in  whose  eyes  this  age,  so  strange  to  us,  is  not  strange 
and  bewildering,  but  perfectly  natural  and  orderly  and  clear.  We  are  too  ready 
to  think  that  God  is  surprised  with  this  endless  surprising  strangeness  that  comes 
into  our  human  life.  Our  only  hope  lies  in  knowing  that  there  is  One  whom 
nothing  disappoints  and  nothing  amazes.  Wonder  is  so  much  a  part  of  ourselves, 
and  such  a  constant  experience,  that  we  can  hardly  leave  out  wonder  from  the 
thought  of  any  high  nature.  In  the  strong  remonstrance  with  which  Zechariah 
met  the  incredulity  of  the  people  there  is  the  substance  of  what  I  have  been 
saying.  "  It  is  all  strange  to  you,"  God  by  His  prophet  seems  to  say  ;  "  but  does 
that  prove  it  will  be  strange  to  Me  ?  You  miist  not  limit  My  knowledge  by  your 
wonder."  Where  we  are  ignorant,  God  is  wise ;  where  we  are  standing  blindly 
in  the  dark.  He  is  in  the  light ;  where  we  wonder.  He  calmly  knows.  God  knows : 
this  should  bring  us  comfort,  in  a  sense  of  safety  and  of  enlargement.  II.  The 
SENSE  of  danger.  Where  does  so  much  of  the  sense  of  danger  and  the  sense 
of  unsafety  in  life  come  from  ?  It  is  from  the  half-seen  things  that  hover  upon 
the  borders  of  reality  and  unreality ;  from  things  which  evidently  are  something, 
but  of  which  we  cannot  perfectly  make  out  just  what  they  are.  It  is  not  clear, 
sound,  well- proved  truths  which  frighten  men  for  the  stability  of  their  faith  ; 
it  is  the  ghostly  speculations,  the  vaguely  outlined,  faint  suggestions  that  hover 
in  the  misty  light  of  dim  hypothesis,  that  make  the  dim  uneasy  sense  of  danger 
that  besets  the  minds  of  so  many  believers.  Behind  all  my  conceptions,  and  all 
other  men's  conceptions,  of  what  things  are,  and  how  things  came  to  be,  there 
always  must  be  the  first  fact  about  things,  about  what  they  are,  and  how  they 
came  to  be  ;  and  that  fact  must  coriespond  exactly  with  the  knowledge  which 
is  in  the  supreme  intelligence  of  Him  who  knows  all  things  accurately  and  com- 
pletely. If  my  conception  of  that  fact,  however  it  was  reached,  differs  to-day 
from  His  knowledge  of  the  fact,  danger  must  be  in  the  persistence  of  that  difference, 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

and  safety  in  its  being  set  right.  Ignorance  is  alwajrs  dangerous ;  knowledge  is 
never  dangerous.  He  who  believes  truth  only  as  the  way  to  God,  he  who  regards 
opinions  as  valueless  except  as  they  agree  with  the  infallible  judgments  of  God, 
and  so  bring  him  who  holds  them  into  sympathy  with  God  and  keep  him  there, 
he  is  the  man  for  whom  all  life  is  safe,  and  whose  faith  faces  the  changing  thoughts 
and  destinies  of  the  world,  however  astounding  they  may  seem,  without  a  thought 
of  fear.  III.  The  sense  of  freedom.  Such  a  man  is  also  free.  The  safety  of 
life  and  the  enlargement  or  freedom  of  life  must  go  together.  No  man  is  safe 
who  is  not  free  ;  no  man  is  free  who  is  not  safe.  Our  effort,  our  action,  our  whole 
life  in  the  thought  and  will  is  limited  by  that  which  we  account  possible.  The 
conception  of  what  is  possible  enlarges  and  widens  as  the  quality  of  any  being's 
life  becomes  higher ;  and  so  the  loftier  being  is  able  freely  to  attempt  things 
which  the  lower  being  is  shut  out  from  if  he  lives  only  in  the  contemplation  of 
his  own  powers  and  nevers  looks  beyond  himself.  Freedom  to  attempt  belongs 
to  the  larger  vision.  If  He  who  sits  at  the  centre  of  everything,  and  sees  the 
visions  of  the  universe  with  the  perfect  clearness  of  its  Maker — if  God  can  really 
speak  so  that  we  can  hear  Him,  and  say,  "  It  is  impossible  to  you,  but  it  is  not 
impossible  to  Me ;  it  is  marvellous  in  your  eyes,  but  it  is  not  in  Mine  "  ;  if  He 
can  say  that  of  any  task  that  is  overwhelming  men  with  its  immensity,  that 
word  of  His  must  snap  our  fetters,  must  set  free  the  little  strength  of  all  of  us  to 
strike  our  little  blows,  must  enlarge  our  lives,  and  send  them  out  to  bolder  ventures 
with  earnestness  and  hope.  IV.  The  essence  of  faith.  It  seems  to  me  as  if, 
through  all  these  ages  of  Christendom,  God  had  been  trying  to  teach  the  Christian 
world  to  enlarge  its  notions  of  the  possibility  of  faith  by  the  perpetual  revelations 
of  His  own.  God  must  be  teaching  us  all  that  faith  is  the  essential  relation  of 
the  human  soul  to  His  soul-faith,  the  deep  rest  of  the  child's  life  upon  the  Father's 
love-faith,  the  reception  by  man  of  the  word  of  God,  which  comes  to  him  in  voices 
as  manifold  as  the  nature  of  God  Himself, — that  faith,  a  thing  so  deep,  essential, 
and  eternal,  is  not  to  be  conditioned  on  the  permanence  of  any  one  of  the  temporary 
forms  in  which  it  may  be  clothed.  The  fearful  believer  says,  "  I  do  not  see  how 
it  can  be,  it  is  so  strange  " ;  but  God  answers  him  out  of  all  the  richness  of  Christian 
history,  "  If  it  be  marvellous  in  your  eyes,  should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  Mine  ?  " 
Apply  this  truth  to  the  personal  life ;  for  there,  most  of  all,  a  man  needs  the 
enlargement  that  comes  of  always  feeling  the  infinite  knowledge  that  God  is 
about  him,  encompassing  his  ignorance  with  Himself.  How  easily,  with  our 
self-distrust  and  spiritual  laziness,  we  shut  down  iron  curtains  about  ourselves, 
and  limit  our  own  higher  possibilities  I  This  is  truest  in  religious  things. 
(Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  I  will  save  My  people  from  the  East  country,  and  from  the  West 
country. — A  twofold  Divine  restoration  : — I.  A  Divine  tempokal  restoration. 
The  reference  here  is  to  those  Jews  who  had  been  scattered  abroad  over  various 
countries  through  the  Babylonian  Captivity  and  other  disastrous  causes.  The 
point  is,  that  the  restoration  here  promised  is  a  temporal  restoration  to  their  own 
land  and  country.  God  is  constantly  restoring  His  people  to  those  temporal 
blessings  they  have  lost.  He  restores  oft^n — 1.  To  lost  health ;  2.  To  lost  property ; 
3.  To  lost  social  status.  In  all  His  people's  distresses  He  bids  them  look  to  Him. 
II.  A  Divine  spiritual  restoration.  This  may  mean,  I  will  become  their  God 
in  good  faith  or  in  reality,  both  on  their  side  and  on  Mine.  This  is  incomparably 
the  most  important  restoration.  1.  Man  may  lose  his  God,  and  be  "  without  God 
in  the  world."  2.  The  loss  of  God  is  the  greatest  loss.  A  man  separated  from 
God  is  like  a  branch  separated  from  the  root,  a  river  from  the  fountain,  a  planet 
from  the  sun.  3.  Restoration  to  God  is  the  transcendent  good.  He  who  can 
say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  portion,"  possesseth  all  things.  This  restoration  the 
Almighty  is  effecting  now  in  the  world.  "  He  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world 
unto  Himself."  (Homilist.)  And  I  will  bring  them,  and  they  shall  dwell  in 
the  midst  of  Jerusalem. — The  future  of  the  Jews: — The  terms  of  this  prediction 
carry  us  beyond  any  facts  at  that  time  existing,  and  refer  to  events  then  future. 
It  predicts  a  return  of  the  Jews  from  the  West  as  well  as  the  East,  whilst  at  this 
time  the  only  dispersion  existing  was  toward  the  East  in  Babylon.  Hence  an 
universal  dispersion  is  implied  in  this  universal  restoration,  the  terms,  from  East 
to  West,  being  inclusive  of  the  entire  earth.  This  general  dispersion  did  not 
occur  until  the  final  fall  of  Jerusalem,  since  which  there  has  been  no  general 
restoration  of  the  Jews,  either  in  a  literal  or  a  figurative  sense.     Henoe  the  main 


CHAP.  \Tir.]  ZECHABIAH.  127 

facts  predicted  are  yet  future.  That  they  include  a  literal  restoration  of  the 
Jews  to  their  own  land  is  probable,  but  that  this  is  the  main  purport  of  the  pro- 
phecy is  just  as  improbable.  There  is  something  more  than  a  mere  political 
restoration  required  by  the  general  drift  of  the  prophecy,  which  is  spiritual,  not 
temporal,  and  which  therefore  demands  a  spiritual  reunion  to  the  spiritual  theo- 
cracy, or  the  blood-bought  and  blood-washed  Church  of  Grod.  And  this  is  par- 
ticularly demanded  by  the  covenant  formula  of  ver.  8,  "  They  shall  be  My  people, 
and  I  will  be  their  God,"  which  is  always  the  exponent  of  spiritual  blessings, 
and  the  fact  is  put  beyond  all  question  by  the  explanatory  addendum,  "  in  truth 
and  righteousness,"  which  expressly  afl&rms  that  this  restoration  and  union  are 
not  to  be  outward,  visible,  and  temporal,  but  inward,  invisible,  and  spiritual. 
They  will  be  a  sincere  and  justified  people,  as  He  will  be  a  true  and  pardoning 
God.     (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 

Vers,  9,  10.    For  before  these  days  there  was  no  hire   for   man.  —  Socidy 

before  the  temple  was  built : — A  neglected  temple  always  means  a  ruined 
society.  These  words  are  not  to  be  applied  locally  or  parochially ;  they  express 
an  eternal  and  unchangeable  principle  :  a  neglected  God  is  a  frowning  heaven, 
a  frowning  heaven  is  a  desolated  earth.  We  must  more  and  more  insist  upon 
the  importance  of  the  religious  spirit  in  its  relation  to  policy  and  commerce  and 
agriculture,  and  the  whole  mechanism  and  build  and  meaning  of  society.  Unless 
we  cultivate  our  own  spirituality  to  a  high  degree  we  may  soon  be  tempted  to 
forego  this  argument,  or  allow  ourselves  to  be  victimised  into  the  belief  that  it  is 
not  an  argument  but  a  sentiment.  The  first  thing  which  the  Christian  man  has 
to  do  is  to  keep  up  his  spirituality  to  the  very  highest  point.  By  keeping  up 
spirituality  I  mean  the  cultivation  of  that  insight  which  sees  more  than  surface, 
more  than  so-called  phenomena;  that  penetrating  insight  that  sees  behind  all 
these  things  a  Spirit,  a  Providence,  ruling,  moulding,  and  directing  all  things. 
We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight :  Lord,  increase  our  faith  !  We  see  nothing  as  it 
really  is  ;  the  reality  is  beyond  the  appearance.  Why  be  satisfied  with  the  door  ? 
smite  it  that  it  may  fly  open,  and  let  the  opening  door  be  an  invitation  to  enter 
and  partake  of  the  hospitality  of  God.  Always  in  Biblical  history,  when  men 
turned  from  God,  God  turned  away  from  them  :  "  Therefore  it  has  come  to  pass  : 
therefore  I  scattered  them  with  a  whirlwind  among  all  nations  :  he  that  honoureth 
Me  I  will  honour,  he  that  despiseth  Me  I  will  lightly  esteem."  This  is  not  arbitrary, 
this  is  not  the  changeable  rule  of  a  changeable  court ;  this  is  simply  the  utterance 
of  an  eternal  necessity.  The  sun  says.  He  that  will  not  have  me  shall  have  dark- 
ness and  death.  Is  the  sun  cruel  ?  Nay,  the  sun  is  clement  and  pitiful  by 
announcing  that  fact ;  the  sun  offers  its  dower  of  light  and  warmth  and  comfort. 
So  when  we  speak  in  Gospel  words  about  the  wicked  being  driven  away  in  his 
wickedness,  and  about  man  neglecting  to  build  the  temple,  and  therefore  having 
no  harvest  to  reap,  we  are  not  delivering  the  arbitrary  decrees  of  some  fancy- 
created  Jove;  we  are  announcing  the  law  of  the  universe,  whoever  made  it. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  A  Divine  call  to  a  Divine  work  : — The  call  is  lu-ged  on 
two  considerations — I.  The  wretchedness  consequent  on  the  neglect  of 
DUTY.  They  were  then  destitute  of  three  elements  essential  to  the  well-being  of 
any  people.  1.  Industry.  "  There  was  no  hire  for  man,  nor  any  hire  for  beast." 
The  people  were  purposeless,  lazy,  and  in  a  state  of  general  lethargy  and  collapse. 
No  great  project  inspired  their  interest,  engrossed  their  attention,  enhsted  and 
marshalled  their  powers.  The  lack  of  industry  is  a  ciu-se  to  any  people  ;  it  is  an 
injury  to  health,  as  well  as  an  obstruction  to  material  and  social  progress.  Another 
element  of  well-being  of  which  they  were  destitute  was — 2.  Peace.  "  Neither  was 
there  any  peace  to  mm  that  went  out  or  came  in  because  of  the  affiction."  The 
lack  of  earnest  occupation  naturally  led  to  intestine  broils  and  contentions. 
Nothing  is  more  natural  and  more  common  than  for  people  without  employment 
to  wrangle  and  dispute  with  one  another.  Men  who  are  full  of  business  have 
no  time  to  quarrel.  3.  Social  unity.  "  For  I  set  all  men  every  one  against  his 
neighbour."  II.  The  improvement  which  ensues  on  the  resumption  of 
DUTY.  "  But  now  I  will  not  be  unto  the  residue  of  this  people  as  in  the  former 
days,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  For  the  seed  shall  be  prosperous,"  &o.  This 
means,  but  now,  as  you  have  resumed  the  work  and  rebuilt  the  temple,  I  will 
bless  you.  There  are  three  blessings  here  promised.  1.  Temporal  prosperity. 
"  For  the  seed  shall  be  prosperous,"  &c.  Material  natiu:e  is  in  the  hands  of  God, 
and  He  can  at  any  moment  make  it  a  cirrse  or  a  blessing  to  men.     Here  He  promises 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vih 

to  make  it  a  blessing.  2.  Social  usefulness.  On  the  resumption  of  the  great 
duty  which  Heaven  had  enjoined  on  these  refnnied  captives  they  should  be  a 
blessing.  3.  Divine  favour.  Where  there  was  Divine  displeasme  there  would  be 
Divine  favour.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  II,  12.  But  now  I  will  not  be  unto  the  residue  of  this  people  as  in  the 
former  days- — The  danger  of  resistance  to  the  Divine  messages  : — It  is  a  decisive 
evidence  of  soimd  wisdom  to  profit  by  the  faults,  the  errors,  and  the  calamities 
of  other  men.  Two  sources  from  whence  we  ordinarily  obtain  knowledge  and 
caution.  The  first  is,  our  own  experience,  by  which  we  too  frequently  buy  know- 
ledge at  a  very  high  cost.  The  second  is,  the  experience  of  those  who  Lave  lived 
before  us  ;  and  this  knowledge  is  as  good  in  its  quality,  and  obtained  at  a  much 
easier  rate  than  the  former.  In  Scripture  we  have  many  histories  of  individuals 
and  histories  of  communities.  I.  A  message  from  God  to  the  childeen  of 
MEN.  1.  The  immediate  agent  by  whom  the  communication  is  made — the  Spirit 
of  God.  It  \i  this  Holy  Spirit  who  is  the  author,  the  immediate  author,  of  all 
communications  from  God  to  man.  It  should  give  a  great  solemnity  to  all  that 
is  addressed  to  us,  to  recollect  that  it  comes  to  us  by  the  immediate  agency  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  2.  There  are  instruments  appointed  for  the  communication  of  this 
message.  "  By  the  prophets."  The  ministration  of  fellow-men — ancient  prophets, 
apostles,  evangelists,  pastors,  and  teachers.  3.  The  nature  of  the  communication 
thus  made.     It  is  a  message  of  instruction,  conviction,  consolation,  and  warning. 

II.    The  RESISTANCE   AND  OPPOSITION   WHICH  IN    EVERY  AGE   HAS  BEEN   MADE   TO 

THE  MESSAGE.  Mark  the  varied  forms  in  which  this  opposition  is  here  described. 
When  is  it  that  resistance  may  be  said  to  be  made  to  the  Spirit,  in  the  Word  ? 
1.  When  men  estrange  themselves  from  the  means  of  grace  and  salvation,  and 
place  themselves  beyond  the  reach  of  those  means,  it  may  be  justly  feared  that 
they  are  in  the  state  of  those  who  refuse  to  hearken.  How  many  do  place  them- 
selves in  such  situations  !  2.  When  men  perversely  act  in  direct  contradiction  to 
the  light  they  have  received.  All  sin  is  heinous  in  the  sight  of  God.  But  that  is 
especially  heinous  which  is  committed  in  direct  opposition  to  the  light  we  have 
received,  whether  that  light  have  been  communicated  by  the  instructions  of  an 
earlier  age,  by  the  ministrations  of  the  prophets,  or  by  means  of  any  of  the  various 
institutions  which  have  been  set  on  foot  in  our  day.  3.  Where  there  is  a  determina- 
tion to  persevere  in  a  course  of  sin,  against  the  remonstrance  of  conscience  and 
the  Word  of  God.  This  is  surely  pulling  away  the  shoulder,  and  stopping  the  ears, 
and  hardening  the  heart.  4.  When  to  the  impiety  of  unbelief  is  added  the  iniquity 
of  scorn  and  contempt,  and  when  ridicule  is  poured  by  men  of  determined  minds 
on  things  sacred.  III.  The  tremendous  consequences  to  which  such  conduct 
INEVITABLY  EXPOSES.  To  the  Wrath  of  God ;  the  Divine  displeasure.  Here 
presented  as  "  great  wrath  "  ;  and  "  great  wrath  from  the  God  of  armies,  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  Lessons — 1.  Admire  and  adore  the  condescension,  patience,  and  grace 
of  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  Condescension  in  that  He  visits  our  world  with  the 
messages  of  mercy,  and  brings  home  to  our  ears  and  to  our  hearts  the  sounds  of 
reconciliation  and  salvation.  Patience,  in  that  He  still  visits  us  and  waits  to  be 
gracious  ;  still  strives  in  the  hearts  of  the  unregenerate — still  visits  His  people 
with  the  dews  of  the  heavenly  grace.  2.  This  subject  alTords  a  clear  demonstration 
of  the  depravity  of  human  nature.  If  I  could  find  no  other  proof  of  human 
depravity,  I  should  find  it  in  this  enmity  of  man  to  all  that  is  good  and  gracious. 
3.  Learn  the  debt  of  gratitude  you  owe  to  the  Son  of  God.  For  you  would  still 
have  gone  on  in  the  way  of  enmity  if  He  had  not  visited  you.  It  was  the  sove- 
reignty of  (;od's  distinguishing  grace  which  gave  you  eyes  to  see  and  ears  to  hear 
and  hearts  to  feel.  4.  We  tremble  for  some  of  you.  Because  you  have  heard  these 
things  again  and  again ;  you  have  seen  the  Cross  of  Christ  reared  in  your  midst — 
and  some  of  you  are  still  stopping  your  ears  and  hardening  your  hearts ;  instead 
of  yielding  up  to  the  convictions  of  your  minds,  you  are  struggling  against  them. 
(George  Clayton.)  I  will  cause  the  remnant  of  this  people  to  possess  all 
these  things. — A  goodly  heritage  : — Wherever  there  is  the  teaching  of  tlie  Holy 
Spirit  it  is  sure  to  convince  men  personally,  in  their  own  consciences,  souls,  and 
experiences,  of  their  need  of  God's  Christ.  I.  The  possessions.  The  people 
will  be  distinguished  by  that  which  they  are  to  possess.  1.  The  city  of  freedom, 
the  new  Jerusalem.  There  is  no  sense  in  wliich  in  this  possession  freedom  is  not 
implied.  The  Jerusalem  that  is  above  all  is  free  for  us  all.  The  first  feature  is 
freedom  from  sin.     2.  This  Jerusalem  shall  be  a  city  of  truth.     This  truth,  that 


CHAP,  vm.]  ZECHARIAH.  129 

from  first  to  last  we  are  saved  entirely  by  the  grace  of  God.  This  grace  is  entirely 
by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  second  thing  to  be  careful  upon  is  that  regeneration 
is  one  part  of  the  work  of  grace.  3.  This  city  is  called  "  the  mountain  of  the  Lord." 
So  called  because  the  Lord  is  there.  TI.  How  the  people  aee  brought  to  possess 
THESE  things.  The  Jews  in  their  return  from  captivity,  and  coming  back  to  their 
land,  and  the  Lord  making  the  land  fruitful,  are  the  things  indicated  here.  It 
was  on  Christ's  account, — that  was  the  deep  foundation  reason  why  they  came 
back  from  captivity  at  all.  And  how  is  it  you  return  to  Zion  ?  It  is  because 
God  chose  you  in  Jesus  Christ  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  By  virtue  of 
the  secret  relationship  existing  between  you  and  Jesus  Christ  you  are  brought  to 
possess  these  things.     {James  Wells.) 

Ver.  13.  So  I  will  save  you. — Man's  need  and  God's  provision  : — I.  Man  in  his 
NATURAL  AND  FALLEN  STATE.  "  As  ye  Were  a  curse  among  the  heathen."  Sinners 
are  under  the  curse  of  God.  Mankind  in  general,  as  transgressors,  all  whose  sins 
are  unpardoned,  are  under  the  curse  of  God.  Those  who  are  in  their  natural  and 
carnal  state  are  a  curse  to  themselves.  The  dispositions  which  they  cherish,  the 
practices  which  they  adopt,  injure  their  health,  blast  their  reputation,  often  ruin 
their  circumstances,  and  lead  to  sorrow  and  wretchedness  and  death.  And  sinners 
are  a  curse  to  others.  They  diffuse  evil,  they  propagate  mischief,  they  are 
corrupters.  II.  The  gracious  purpose  of  God  in  reference  to  man,  as  made 
KNOWN  in  the  Gospel.  "  So  will  I  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing."  This 
salvation  has  been  procured  for  man  by  the  atonement  and  intercession  of  Christ. 
This  salvation  is  free  to  all,  without  any  exception,  without  any  limitation.  This 
ealvation  can  only  be  experienced  by  those  who  exercise  "  repentance  toward  God, 
and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  III.  The  gracious  and  delightful 
besult  of  this  design  in  connection  with  the  children  of  men.  "  Ye  shall 
be  a  blessing."  Those  who  are  saved  inherit  the  blessing  of  God.  Those  who  are 
saved  are  a  blessing  to  themselves.     (J.  H.  Bumby.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour.  —  Truth  :— 
Concisely  stated,  the  doctrine  of  the  text  is,  think  truth,  love  truth,  speak  truth, 
and  do  truth — live  in  its  atmosphere,  make  it  your  ruling  principle.  Let  the 
clear  light  which  it  sheds  out  throw  a  radiance  on  your  course,  so  that  your  life 
be  transparent  as  a  summer-day.  The  charm  of  truth  is  the  charm  of  simplicity. 
He  who  knows  the  value  of  truth,  and  strives  to  exhibit  it,  bears  the  mark  of 
God  :  he  cannot  be  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  text  contains  two  affirm- 
ative and  two  negative  precepts — speak  the  truth,  execute  judgment,  and  do  not 
imagine  evil  in  your  hearts,  do  not  love  a  false  oath.  I.  Presumedly  innocent 
INROADS  UPON  THE  DOMAINS  OF  TRUTH.  1.  There  IS  innuendo  and  insinuation. 
The  wise  look  which  says  so  much,  and  commits  itself  to  little.  2.  Common 
prattle  and  gossip,  meddling,  as  it  generally  does,  with  the  more  intimate  concerns 
of  third  persons,  seldom  respects  the  limits  of  truth.  Nowhere  is  caution  more 
needful  than  in  ordinary  conversation.  3.  Promises  are  lightly  and  readily  given, 
and  often  as  lightly  and  readily  broken.  4.  Lack  of  firmness  necessitates  sacrifice 
of  truth.  One  does  not  like  to  be  singular,  one  does  not  like  to  be  disagreeable. 
6.  In  speaking  of  one's  self  or  friends,  the  temptation,  not  always  resisted,  is  to 
throw  them  out  in  the  best  light  and  make  great  persons  of  them,  that  it  may 
be  seen  how  grand,  how  clever  we  are,  and  how  choice  is  the  circle  of  our  acquaint- 
ance. 6.  The  species  of  falsehood  commonly  called  "  fibs,"  "  white  lies,"  or  in 
the  slang  diction  of  the  college,  "  crams."  7.  The  unconscientious  workman's 
dallying  with  his  work  is  a  sin  against  truthfulness.  11.  Flagrant  breaches 
OF  THE  law  op  TRUTH.  Open  and  deliberate  lies,  intentional  and  heartless 
deception.  In  opposition  to  all  falsehood,  whether  of  the  lighter  or  heavier 
sort,  whether  respectable  or  vulgar,  whether  in  deed,  word,  or  gesture,  whether 
by  omission  or  addition,  the  Word  of  God  says,  "  Speak  every  man  truth  to 
his  neighbour."  III.  How  does  Scripture  enforce  this  ?  By  what  revela- 
tions ;  by  what  further  precepts  ?  1.  The  wrongfulness  and  fate  of  untruth 
are  clearly  explained.  2.  What  more  would  you  have  to  recommend  truth  than 
that  it  is  assimilation  to  the  Divine  character  T  He  is  a  "  God  of  truth,  and 
without  iniquity."  "  Just  and  right."  If  our  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds  were 
regulated  by  the  standard  of  truth  this  would  be  heaven  upon  earth.  Be  satisfied 
of  a  man's  integrity,  siu-e  that  he  ever  means  to  do  the  right,  and  would  scorn 
to  act  meanly,  and  you  may  make  that  man  your  friend.     To  work  the  world 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

out  into  a  society  of  friends,  to  transform  it  into  a  brotherhood,  is,  in  brief,  the 
aim  of  Christ.  That  ideal  is  the  reality  of  heaven.  (.4.  Haiclins  Jones.)  An 
universal  revival  of  religion : — I.  The  essential  pre-requisites.  Four  pre- 
requisites or  preparatories  for  an  universal  revival  of  genuine  religion.  1.  There 
must  be  truthfulness  in  speech.  "  These  are  the  things  which  ye  shall  do  ;  Speak 
ye  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour."  Truthful  speech  is  somewhat  rare  in 
all  social  circles,  and  in  all  departments  of  life.  Fallacious  statements  abound 
in  markets,  senates,  courts,  and  even  families.  Truthful  speaking  involves  two 
things — ( 1 )  Sincerity.  To  speak  a  true  thing  insincerely  is  not  to  speak  truthfully. 
A  man  must  conscientiously  believe  that  what  be  speaks  is  true,  before  he  can 
be  credited  with  veracity.  Truthful  speaking  involves — (2)  Accuracy.  A  man 
may  speak  with  sincerity,  and  yet  from  ignorance  or  mistake  may  not  speak 
according  to  fact ;  and  unless  he  speaks  according  to  fact  he  can  scarcely  be  said 
to  speak  truthfully.  His  speech  unintentionally  conveys  falsehood.  Hence  truth- 
ful speaking  requires  a  strong  sense  of  right,  and  an  adequate  acquaintance  with 
the  subjects  of  the  speech.  2.  There  must  be  rectitude  in  conduct.  "  Execute 
the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  gates."  In  the  East  the  courts  of  justice 
were  held  at  the  gates  of  the  city  ;  and  perhaps  the  primary  reference  here  is  to 
the  pronouncing  of  judgment  on  cases  that  were  righteous  and  tended  to  peace. 
But  rectitude  of  life  is  even  more  important  and  urgent  than  rectitude  in  judg- 
ment. 3.  There  must  be  benevolence  in  feeling.  "  T^et  none  of  you  imagine 
evil  in  your  hearts  against  his  neighbour."  We  must  not  only  keep  our  hands 
from  evil,  but  we  must  watch  over  our  hearts,  that  they  imagine  not  any  evil 
against  our  neighbour.  4.  There  must  be  abhorrence  of  falsehood.  "  Love  no 
false  oath."  II.  The  signal  manifestations.  It  is  suggested  that  where 
th^se  pre-requisites  are  found,  i.e.  where  a  revival  takes  place,  three  things 
are  manifest.  1.  An  increased  pleasure  in  religious  ordinances.  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts  ;  the  fast  of  the  fourth  month,  and  the  fast  of  the  fifth, 
and  the  fast  of  the  seventh,  and  the  fast  of  the  tenth,  shall  be  to  the  house 
of  Judah  joy  and  gladness,  and  cheerful  feasts."  "  The  fast  of  the  fourth 
month  was  on  account  of  the  taking  of  Jerusalem  (Jer.  xxxix.  2,  lii.  5-7) ; 
that  of  the  tenth  was  in  commemoration  of  the  commencement  of  the  siege 
(Jer.  lii.  4).  The  Jews  are  distinctly  informed  that  these  fasts  should  be  turned 
into  festivals  of  joy." — Henderson.  The  first  sign  of  a  true  revival  of  religion 
in  an  individual  or  a  community  is  a  new  and  happy  interest  in  the  ordinances 
of  religion.  Another  sign  is — 2.  A  deep  practical  concern  for  the  spiritual  interests 
of  the  race.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ;  It  shall  yet  come  to  pass  that  there 
shall  come  people,  and  the  inhabitants  of  many  cities  :  and  the  inhabitants  of 
one  city  shall  go  to  another,  saying,  Let  us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  Lord, 
and  to  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  I  will  go  also."  There  will  be  a  mutual  excitation 
amongst  the  people  to  seek  the  one  true  and  living  God.  "  Let  us  go  speedily 
to  pray  before  the  Lord."  "  Speedily,"  there  is  no  time  to  be  lost ;  religion  is 
for  all,  and  for  all  an  urgent  duty.  Another  sign  is — 3.  An  universal  desire  to  be 
identified  with  the  people  of  God.  "  In  those  days  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  ten 
men — a  definite  number  for  an  indefinite  multitude,  indicating  many  rather  than  a 
few — shall  take  hold  out  of  all  languages  of  the  nations,  even  shall  take  hold  of  the 
skirtof  him  that  is  a  Jew."  Conclusion — When  will  this  universal  revival  of  religion 
take  place  ?  The  signs  are  scarcely  visible  anywhere.  We  can  only  hasten  it  by 
attending  to  the  pre-requisites.  (Homilist.)  lying  and  false  oaths  : — Honesty 
and  policy  cannot  live  in  the  same  heart.  Who  can  make  anything  of  the  liar  ? 
He  is  the  worst  of  all  men.  He  has  lost  the  higher  qualities  of  manhood,  yet  the 
base  deceiver  can  shudder  when  he  sees  a  poor  drunken  man  who  may  be  a  saint 
compared  with  himself.  The  liar  cannot  be  converted,  unless  it  be  by  the  whole 
force  of  the  Unity.  He  is  hollow,  he  has  killed  his  conscience,  he  has  sold  hia 
honour.  Never  allow  a  liar  to  come  into  your  house.  The  liar  is  a  composite 
sinner  ;  he  sins  all  round,  or  would  sin  in  any  direction  and  every  direction  if  it 
would  serve  his  purpose  so  to  do.  Have  faith  in  every  man  that  loves  trutli. 
Though  he  fall  seven  times  a  day  he  shall  stand  at  eventide.  Any  sins  that  lie 
along  the  line  of  passion  are  nothing  as  compared  with  sins  of  deliberation,  plan, 
scheme,  thoroughly  wrought  out,  purposed.  I  have  known  many  a  soul  over- 
borne by  gusts  from  the  bottomless  pit,  not  wanting  moral  beauty  and  fine  quality, 
but  I  have  never  known  a  liar  that  was  worth  being  touched  by  the  point  of  the 
longest  instrument  ever  fashioned  by  human  hands.  Lying  is  so  subtle,  too.  It 
is  not  vulgar  deception  in  all  cases.     There  is  a  falsehood  that  is  calculation. 


CHAP.  vin.J  ZECHARIAH.  IGl 

a  very  fine  process  of  putting  things  together  and  totalling  them  up  into  certain 
results  and  considering  whether  those  results  are  worth  realising.  Lying  may 
be  speechless.  It  is  a  mistake  to  say  that  lies  are  always  "  told  "  :  lies  are  acted, 
lies  are  suggested,  lies  are  inferential.  Christ  came  to  give  us  the  spirit  of  truth. 
Truth  is  a  spirit.  It  is  not  a  mere  way  of  stating  facts.  A  man  may  contradict 
himself  in  his  statement  of  facts  and  be  true  at  the  soul.  Verbal  discrepancies 
are  nothing :  the  meaning  of  the  heart  is  everything.  When  an  honest  soul 
corrects  itself  there  s  nobility  in  the  very  act  of  self-correction ;  you  see  the 
candour,  you  appreciate  the  withdrawal  or  the  addition  or  the  modification  of 
former  statements,  as  the  case  may  be.  A  truthful  man  never  thinks  of  his  own 
consistency ;  a  truthful  man  cannot  be  inconsistent.  So-called  inconsistency  in 
his  case  is  accidental,  superficial,  transient,  explicable.  The  man's  consistency 
is  in  his  soul :  what  he  means  to  be,  that  he  is.  Of  all  liars  perhaps  the  youug 
liar  is  the  worst.  It  ought  not  so  to  be.  The  boy,  the  young  man,  should  not 
lie.  He  should  be  so  heroic  and  fearless  as  even  to  blurt  out  the  truth  when  he 
does  not  tell  it  in  sequential  order.  It  should  not  occur  to  his  young  soul  to 
falsify.  Yet  if  one  were  to  write  the  history  of  young  hearts  in  any  family  and 
in  any  city,  society  could  not  live  ;  we  would  fly  away  from  one  another  as  men 
fly  from  suddenly  disclosed  serpents.  "  Love  no  false  oath,"  saith  the  text. 
*'  False  oath  " — what  ironies  there  are  in  expression  !  "  False  balance  " — what 
an  affront  to  geometry  !  "  False  oath  " — what  an  offence  to  righteousness  ! 
*'  False  prophet  " — what  a  shock  to  the  spirit  of  the  sanctuary  !  "  False  brethren  " 
— who  can  live  ?  The  Bible  grows  upon  our  conscience  and  our  whole  moral 
nature  by  the  sublimity  of  its  criticisms  and  the  loftiness  of  its  spiritual  appeals. 
The  Bible  will  have  truth  everywhere,  because  it  will  first  have  truth  in  the  soul. 
Do  not  treat  the  symptoms  of  yoiu-  case  :  get  at  the  radical  disease.  It  is  poor 
curing  that  is  done  by  mere  plasters.  Only  the  cure  that  starts  from  the  centre 
and  works  out  towards  the  circumference  brings  with  it  summer  redness  to  the 
cheek,  summer  brightness  to  the  eyes.  God  condemns  sin  and  all  evil  things  in 
detail  because  they  are  ruinous  to  the  man.  They  are  spoiling  the  work  of  God's 
hands,  they  are  overturning  the  purpose  of  God's  heart.  The  sinner  is  a  suicide. 
"  He  that  sinneth  against  Me,"  saith  the  Scripture,  "  wrongeth  his  own  soul." 
Think  of  a  man  committing  plunder  upon  his  own  nature,  stealing  from  himself 
every  element  that  makes  him  a  man  !  I  have  known  liars  that  succeeded  for 
a  few  months  ;  I  have  before  my  mind  at  this  moment  three  liars,  all  under  five- 
and-twenty  years  of  age,  who  lied  and  robbed  and  did  evil  with  both  hands,  and 
to-night  they  are  refuse  ;  they  are  avoided  by  all  who  know  the  rottenness  and 
pes  ilence  of  their  character.  Thus  sin  takes  a  man  down  line  by  line,  faculty  by 
faculty.  Sin  sucks  the  Divine  juice  out  of  a  man.  You  cannot  allow  one  evil 
thought  to  pass  through  your  sensitive  brain  without  leaving  that  brain  weaker 
and  poorer.  The  temptation  came  and  left  ruin  behind.  The  temp  ation  itself 
is  not  sin  unless  it  is  yielded  to,  but  if  the  temptation  have  hospitality  one  moment 
in  the  brain  it  takes  off  some  fine  film,  some  subtle  veil  through  which  the  brain 
saw  somewhat  of  God.  The  poet  can  drink  himself  into  idiocy  ;  the  genius,  the 
master  magician  of  words,  can  so  treat  his  body  that  his  soul  will  not  think  for 
him.  It  will  give  up  and  abandon  the  altar  where  once  it  burned.  God  sees 
therefore  that  sin  ruins  the  man.  The  sinner  himself  goes  down.  The  things 
are  not  only  hateful  to  God,  they  are  ruinous  to  the  people  who  practise  them. 
You  cannot  over-eat  yourself,  and  pray  ;  you  cannot  soak  your  body  in  evil 
1  quids,  and  then  sing,  you  can  sound  the  notes,  but  the  subtle,  spiritual,  Divine 
music  is  gone.    When  fire  has  left  the  altar  what  is  the  altar  ?   {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  Therefore  love  the  truth  and  peace. — The  love  of  the  truth : — This 
solemn  admonition  may  seem  to  derive  additional  weight  from  the  considera- 
tion that  it  is  almost  the  concluding  message  which  the  prophet  Zechariah 
delivered  to  his  countrymen.  (Probably  only  the  first  eight  chapters 
were  written  by  Zechariah.)  The  admonition  was  well  suited  to  the  particular 
condition  of  the  Jews  at  that  time.  The  warning  is  even  more  applicable  to  wa, 
baptized  Christians.  As  Christians  it  is  expected  of  us  that  we  should  "love  the 
truth  and  peace."  Attend  especially  to  the  love  for  religious  "  truth."  Many 
take  for  granted  that  it  signifies  little  whether  they  embrace  the  truth  or  not. 
Keligion  is  not  a  matter  which  comes  much  into  their  thoughts.  It  is  a  common 
sentiment,  that  if  a  person  is  but  sincere  in  his  religion,  it  signifies  little  what 
that  religion  is,  true  or  false  ;  if  he  is  but  sincere  and  in  earnest,  he  is,  they  think, 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

equally  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God.  Others  cannot  be  said  to  "  love  the  truth," 
in  that  they  do  not  put  their  hearts  and  minds  to  it,  but  satisfy  themselves  with 
Bhallow  and  imperfect  views  on  the  greatest  and  most  concerning  of  all  subjects. 
1 .  Those  who  have  no  care  for  religious  truth.  It  is  a  dictate  not  merely  of  religion, 
but  even  of  natiu-al  piety  and  common  sense,  that  we  should  make  such  inquiry 
as  we  can  mto  the  truth  of  our  spiritual  condition.  2.  Those  who  think  sincerity 
eufficient.  Persons  who  think  one  belief  is  as  good  as  another,  strike  at  the  very 
foundations  of  all  religious  truth.  3.  Those  who  do  not  put  their  minds  and 
hearts  to  the  truth.  Their  religion,  though  good  so  far  as  it  goes,  is  yet  of  a  very 
shallow  and  imperfect  character.  Let  not  serious  and  thoughtful  minds  be 
frightened  at  the  name  of  bigotry,  or  any  other  term  of  reproach,  but  steadily 
cherish  in  themselves  a  substantial  love  of  God's  holy  truth,  always  remembering 
that  the  truth  will  stand,  and  nothing  else  will.  There  is  a  good  kind  of  bigotry, 
when  we  resolve  to  stand  firm  on  faith  and  obedience,  in  faith  relying  on  God's 
Word,  and  in  obedience  on  His  will,  however  made  known  to  us.  (Sermons  by 
Contrib.  "  Tracts  for  the  Times.")  Love  to  the  truth  and  peace  : — Unperverted 
love  is  one  of  the  noblest,  most  useful,  and  comprehensive  affections  of  the  heart. 
Essential  to  the  moral  nature  of  man.  it  is,  as  refined  by  the  energies  of  the  Spirit, 
and  suitably  exercised,  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  the  sum  of  religion,  and  our  assimila- 
tion to  the  God  of  love.  No  arguments  can  be  necessary  to  prove  that  truth  is 
better  than  error,  and  peace  than  contention.  In  order  that  the  returned  captives 
might  at  once  express  their  gratitude  for  the  past,  and  insure  continued  and 
increasing  prosperity,  the  prophet  delivers  the  injunction  in  the  text,  "  Therefore 
love  the  truth  and  peace."  It  is  not  restrictively  the  truth  of  judgment,  nor  the 
speaking  of  truth  between  man  and  man,  but  religious  truth  in  general,  or  the 
mind  and  will  of  God  made  known  to  them  in  the  law  and  by  the  prophets,  which 
the  house  of  Jacob  are  here  required  to  love :  and  therefore,  agi'ceably  to  the 
economy  under  which  she  is  placed,  the  truth  to  be  loved  by  the  Christian  Church 
is  the  entire  system  of  evangelical  doctrine,  or  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  The 
peace  which  is  to  be  loved  in  conjunction  with  the  truth,  is  that  good  understanding 
and  spirit  of  conciliation,  which  ought  to  characterise  the  embodied  friends  of 
religion.  I.  Truth  and  peace  abb  subjects  of  high  importance  in  themselves 
AND  TO  THE  Church  OF  Christ.  That  evangelical  truth  is  highly  important,  and 
ought  to  be  dearly  valued,  will  be  conceded  by  all,  the  moment  we  think  of  it  as 
God's  revealed  wi\l  to  men  for  salvation.  With  the  true  knowledge  of  it,  eternal 
life  is  closely,  inseparably  connected.  In  a  general  view,  it  is  the  only  appointed 
and  approved  means  of  the  world's  moral  transformation.  To  the  individual 
believing  sinner,  it  is  the  blessed  instrument  of  his  illumination  and  progressive 
sanctity.  An  accurate  comparison  of  it  with  truth  of  every  other  kind  would 
only  serve  to  establish  its  glorious  superiority.  We  learn  the  unspeakable  value 
of  the  truth  from  the  wonderful  concern  that  the  God  of  truth  nimself  has  had 
and  uniformly  manifested  about  it.  The  supereminent  importance  of  evangelical 
truth  might  be  demonstrated  from  the  evil  nature,  the  ruinous  consequences  of 
error.  But,  in  connection  with  truth,  peace  also  is  of  high  importance  in  itself 
and  in  the  Church.  Peace  of  any  kind,  and  particularly  peace  in  the  household 
of  faith,  if  built  upon  right  principles,  will  be  dearly  valued  by  every  wise  and 
good  mind.  In  proportion  as  the  friends  of  religion  live  peaceably  among  them- 
selves, they  are  just  what  it  becomes  them  to  be.  Peace  of  the  right  kind  has 
a  most  benign  influence  on  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  Church.  II.  It  may  bb 
the  attainment  of  the  Church  to  have  the  possession  of  the  truth  and 
peace  at  the  same  time.  Absolutely,  or  without  any  exception,  this  has  rarely 
or  ever  been.  Still  in  some  happy  degree  it  may  be  the  attainment  of  the  Church 
in  her  aggregate  state.  Christendom,  it  must  be  confessed,  furnishes  at  present 
no  very  favourable  specimen  of  the  point  in  hand.  But  this  neither  disproves 
our  position,  nor  forbids  the  hope  that  it  shall  yet  be  realised.  III.  Thouoh 
both  are  very  precious,  truth  is  yet  entiti,ed  to  the  first  and  pre-eminent 
consideration  of  the  Church.  Rightly  do  we  associate  truth  with  the  very 
idea  of  the  Church.  We  cannot  think  of  what  the  Church  owes  to  the  truth,  and 
not  insist  that,  next  to  its  Divine  Author,  it  merits  her  first  consideration.  To 
it  she  owes  her  very  existence.  In  forming,  however,  a  comparative  estimate 
between  truth  and  peace,  it  would  not  be  right  to  exalt  truth  at  the  expense  of 
peace.  Everything  bland  in  language,  and  courteous  in  demeanour — everything 
comprised  in  the  meekness  of  wisdom  and  the  gentleness  of  Christ — every  attain- 
able degree  of  patience  and  candour  in  research — these  and  a  thousand  other 


CHAP,  vin.]  ZECHAEIAH.  133 

things  are  to  be  offered,  and  willingly  offered,  at  the  shrine  of  holy  concord.  It 
is  possible  to  give  away  too  much,  even  for  precious  peace.  Such  a  case  would 
occur  if  amity  were  purchased  by  the  surrender  of  any  saving  truth.  For  the 
sake  of  internal  tranquillity,  tlie  Church  may  and  ought  to  give  away  much  of 
her  own  ;  but  she  has  no  right  to  barter  the  truth  of  God  for  peace  with  man. 
On  the  other  hand,  however,  so  inestimably  precious  is  truth,  that  more  than 
its  worth  cannot  be  given  for  it.  Such  views  are,  indeed,  in  letter  and  spirit  at 
variance  with  a  given  species  of  modem  liberality.     IV.  The  best  and  stjkest 

PEACE    EN   THE   ChTJECH  IS   THAT  WHICH  HAS   TBTTTH    FOE   ITS    FOTJNDATIOK.      The 

precedence  of  truth  is  not  a  mere  arbitrary,  but,  if  we  would  enjoy  true  peace, 
a  necessary  distinction.  Truth  is  as  essential  to  the  being  of  peace  as  the  cause  to 
the  effect,  and  must  precede  it,  as  the  foundation  must  be  laid  before  the  super- 
Btructnre.     V.  The  great  things  which  the  Lobd  hath  done  for  the  Church, 

OB  ENGAGES   TO   DO,   LAY  HER   UNDER  SACRED   OBLIGATIONS   TO   LOVE   THE   TRUTH 

AND  PEACE.  Obviously  the  text  assumes  the  form  of  deduction.  Learn  from 
this  subject — 1.  The  moral  nature  of  the  true  glory  of  the  Church.  2.  That 
genuine  love  to  the  truth  and  peace  would  be  a  presage  of  good  to  the  Church. 
3.  That  the  ministers  of  religion  have  a  most  honourable  and  delightful  employ. 
In  a  ministerial  sense,  peace-makers  between  God  and  man,  and  so  also  between 
man  and  man.  Our  vocation  gives  scope  to  all  our  powers  and  oiu:  unwearied 
exertions.  4.  This  subject  gives  us  right  to  insist  that  the  members  of  our  associa- 
tion should  be,  without  exception,  the  sincere  and  ardent  lovers  of  truth  and 
peace.  (Robert  Muter,  D.D.)  On  reading  works  of  fiction  : — When  the  use  and 
love  of  fiction  is  so  general,  it  would  be  of  little  avail  to  speak  against  it.  God 
has  made  the  imagination  part  of  our  nature  for  wise  purposes,  no  doubt ;  and 
so  long  as  those  purposes  are  ascertained  and  kept  in  view,  there  cannot  be  much 
danger.  The  mind  cannot  be  always  on  the  stretch.  If  fiction  is  occasionally 
used  to  refresh  weary  powers,  to  lift  up  into  the  world  of  fancy  for  a  time,  one 
who  is  tired  of  walking  on  the  dusty  road  of  existence,  such  an  indulgence  is  not 
to  be  blamed  ;  nor  is  it  inconsistent  with  that  love  of  truth  which  is  essential  to 
the  mind  of  a  man  as  well  as  the  character  of  a  Christian.  But  there  is  danger  of 
excess  in  this  indulgence  ;  these  luxuries  cannot  be  the  daily  bread  of  the  mind. 
The  effect  of  these  fictions  on  the  mind  exactly  resembles  the  effect  of  rich  and 
stimulating  food  on  the  body.  That  caution  is  necessary  may  be  seen  from  the 
tendency  of  this  taste  for  fiction  to  become  excessive  and  engrossing.  And  fact 
proves  it  to  be  an  unhealthy  taste,  and  one  which  cannot  be  indulged  without 
injury  to  the  mind.  There  is  no  danger  that  the  taste  for  reading  true  history 
will  ever  become  excessive  : — it  is  healthy  in  itself,  and  indicates  right  action  in 
the  mind.  The  taste  for  fiction  dislodges  and  removes  better  tastes  from  the 
mind.  Let  your  taste  for  fiction  be  so  much  indulged  that  you  can  no  longer 
relish  reading  for  improvement,  and  the  injury  is  done  ;  the  mind  is  no  longer 
healthy.  There  is  another  danger,  arising  from  the  fact,  that  the  mind  is  passive, 
perfectly  passive,  in  this  kind  of  reading.  In  reading  for  improvement  the  mind 
is  active.  In  reading  for  amusement  the  mind  is  not  in  action.  It  originates 
no  trains  of  thought ;  it  gains  no  new  strength,  nor  power  of  action  ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  subsides  into  a  luxurious,  dreamy  state,  very  much  resembling  that 
produced  by  narcotics,  and  which,  fascinating  though  it  is,  destroys  aU  moral 
and  intellectual  energy,  and  makes  self-indulgence  the  ruling  principle  within. 
There  is  little  force  in  the  common  saying,  that  good  moral  instruction  can  be 
given  in  a  fictitious  form.  Nobody  doubts  this  ;  but  there  is  another  question. 
Can  such  instruction  be  taken  in  a  fictitious  form  ?  Emotions  which  do  not  lead 
to  action  grow  less  and  less  every  time  they  are  repeated.  Tears  are  shed,  as 
usual,  for  they  cost  nothing,  but  the  heart  grows  cold.  Fictions  only  produce 
a  fictitious  benevolence.  A  reader  of  fiction  becomes  the  sure  victim  of  the 
immoral  and  unprincipled  author  whom  he  reads.  His  moral  and  religious  sensi- 
bility wiU  be  impaired.  Of  course  all  writers  of  fiction  are  not  immoral.  If  there 
are  not  many  writers  of  this  description,  if  the  majority  are  of  a  higher  order, 
still  the  very  best  of  them  will  do  injury,  because  they  will  create  a  taste  for 
fiction  which  can  only  be  fed  by  fiction.  When  the  works  of  the  best  writers  are 
exhausted,  the  reader  will  resort  to  others  less  worthy  ;  he  will  not  perceive  the 
degenerating  change  that  goes  on  within  him ;  he  will  not  be  conscious  that  his 
moral  sense  is  dead  and  all  his  soul  in  ruins.  This  imconsciousness  of  danger  is 
one  of  the  most  fearful  things  in  all  diseases  of  the  mind  and  heart.  If  any  one 
would  know  the  signs  of  danger,  I  say,  that  if  he  has  lost  the  taste,  or  never  formed 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

the  taste  for  reading  for  improvement,  there  is  injury  already  done.  If  he  finds 
that  it  gives  him  no  ple-asure  to  exert  his  powers,  that  improvement  alone  has  no 
attractions,  that  he  turns  to  his  fiction  like  the  intemperate  man  to  his  glass,  then 
the  charge,  "  Love  the  truth,"  should  be  a  serious  sound  to  him.  It  reminds 
him  of  a  perverted  taste,  of  a  neglected  duty  ;  and  of  a  change,  too,  which  must 
be  made  before  the  purposes  of  life  can  be  fulfilled.     {W,  B.  0.  Peabody,  D.D.) 

Vers.  20-22.  Let  us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  Lord.  — Nations  meeting  for 
prayer : — A  scene  like  this  has  never  yet  been  witnessed  upon  the  earth.  The 
prophecy  was  partially  fulfilled  when,  from  the  time  of  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple 
to  the  coming  of  the  Saviom-,  a  more  than  usual  number  of  Gentile  proselytes 
from  the  nations  aro\md  sought  admission  into  the  Jewish  Church,  and  attended 
the  annual  festivals.  I.  The  object  of  this  gathering  of  the  nations.  "  To 
pray."  The  time  is  coming  when  the  nations  will  crowd  to  the  feast  of  devotion. 
The  result  of  the  awakening  of  the  nations  will  be  a  universal  movement  for  con- 
centrated prayer.  II.  The  UNivEESAUTy  of  this  gathering  of  the  nations  for 
PRAYER.  They  are  described  as  many  cities,  strong  nations,  and  all  languages. 
Isaiah,  UTapt  in  the  vision  of  the  future,  beholds  all  the  tribes  of  mankind,  in- 
stigated by  one  common  and  irresistible  impulse,  flocking  along  the  road  to  Zion, 
panting  to  be  within  its  holy  walls,  and  to  pour  out  their  prayers  in  her  courts. 
III.  The  promptitude  of  their  decision.  This  heaven-originated  movement 
for  universal  prayer  will  be  felt  to  be  a  matter  demanding  immediate  attention. 
"  Let  us  go  speedily."  When  the  Spirit  is  poured  out  from  on  high,  all  the  speed 
and  promptitude  with  which  men  pursue  inferior  ends  will  be  consecrated  to 
religion.  Universal  man  will  feel  it  his  first  duty  to  serve  God.  IV.  The  personal 
character  of  this  movement.  No  mighty  movement  takes  place  among  masses 
of  mankind  until  individuals  have  been  moved.  The  world  is  but  the  aggiegate 
of  single  individuals.  Every  individual  must  act  his  part.  If  men  smother  the 
enkindled  fires  of  ardent  devotion  in  their  own  breasts,  till  they  see  the  zeal  of  others 
manifested,  that  day  of  prayer  for  all  nations  will  never  dawn.  Every  man  is  to 
invite  to  prayer,  and  at  the  same  time  resolve  for  himself.  Then  seek  to  be  dis- 
tinguished as  a  devotional  Christian — a  man  of  prayer.  Then  you  will  seek  the 
society  of  men  like-minded  with  yourself,  and  thus  the  holy  flame  will  be  borne 
onward,  tiU  every  soul  is  enkindled,  the  Church  revived,  and  the  world  saved. 
{Evangelical  Preacher.)  God  everywhere  for  those  who  seek  Him  : — 1.  We  are  here 
reminded  of  our  high  and  distinguishing  privileges,  as  subjects  of  the  Christian 
economy,  in  relation  to  the  outward  institutions  of  religion,  and  all  that  is  com- 
manded in  the  worship  and  service  of  God.  When  we  would  offer  our  devotions 
in  His  presence,  we  need  no  longer  travel  from  one  city  to  another,  ascending  to 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  Wherever  we  seek  Him,  He  is  equally  near,  and  equally 
accessible.  Great  and  important  purposes  were  once  attained  by  the  selection  of  a 
definite  abode,  wherein  to  place  the  sensible  demonstrations  of  His  majesty.  It 
was  in  accordance  with  the  infantile  condition  of  the  human  mind  on  the  great 
subject  of  religion.  It  repressed  the  tendency  to  mingle  with  the  idol-worship  of 
the  surrounding  nations.  It  secured  the  permanency  of  the  ordinances  of  the  true 
God,  till  the  coming  of  Messiah.  By  the  final  cessation  of  such  services,  soon  after 
the  death  of  Jesus,  it  marked  that  the  Messiah  had  appeared,  that  the  fulness 
of  the  times  had  been  accomplished.  2.  We  are  led  to  reflect  upon  that  singular 
and  elevated  relation  we  now  personally  sustain  to  Him  who  was  once  known  and 
worshipped  only  under  the  appellation  of  the  God  of  Abraham.  We  have  come 
to  the  family  and  household  of  the  saints.  This  incorporation  of  the  idolatrous 
heathen  %vith  the  seed  of  the  promise — this  accession  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  Church — 
while  it  presents  a  subject  of  gratitude  and  wonder,  is  fitted  also  to  expand  our 
sentiments  and  to  confirm  our  faith ;  and  it  leads  us  to  anticipate  a  day  when 
the  Gospel  shall  universally  prevail.  3.  An  interesting  and  attractive  picture 
of  a  period  of  spiritual  prosperity.  (1)  The  period  thus  described  is  marked  by 
the  diffusion  of  the  spirit  of  prayer.  (2)  Under  the  aspect  of  unity  and  mutual 
co-operation.  (3)  Signalised  by  the  prevalence  of  activity,  energy,  and  zeal. 
"  Let  us  go  speedily.  Let  us  go  to  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts."  (4)  The  last  character- 
istic of  the  period  so  depicted  is  the  inseparable  and  intimate  connection  of  all  its 
other  features  with  the  decisiveness  of  individual  piety.  "  /  will  go  also."  4.  Apply 
these  reflections  to  purposes  of  immediate  and  practical  utility.  (R.  8.  M'AU, 
LL.D.)  Spiritual  prosperity  described  : — The  text  is  part  of  the  answer  given 
to  the  question  asked  in  chap.  vii.  2,  3.     L  There  are  many  false  notions  abroad 


CHAP,  vhl]  ZECHARIAH.  135 

respecting  religious  prosperity — crowded  Churches — forms  in  the  aisles — full 
exchequer ;  such  things  are  taken  by  some  as  a  sure  sign  of  a  Church's  vitality. 
Flying  here  and  there — doing  this,  that,  and  the  other  in  three  minutes,  and  making 
a  great  noise,  are  looked  upon  by  some  as  signs  of  saintship,  and  indications  of 
true  religious  prosperity.  And  they  may  be,  but  not  necessarily  so;  because 
outward  manifestation  is  not  always  a  sign  of  true  strength.  But  we  have  true 
signs,  unmistakable  signs,  described  in  the  text.  I.  Delight  ts  prayer.  "  Let 
us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  Lord."  1.  Thus  there  is  a  gathering  together. 
It  is  a  regular  prayer- meeting,  and  it  is  in  answer  to  united  prayer  that  blessings 
come.  Illustrations  :  Day  of  Pentecost.  Liberation  of  Peter.  And  it  is  only 
when  Churches  feel  the  importance  of  this  that  a  true  revival  comes,  2.  Not  only 
must  we  pray,  but  we  must  seek  the  Lord  as  well — give  God  no  rest  until  He 
answers  prayer.  II.  Harmony  and  co-operation.  "  And  the  inhabitants  of 
one  city  shall  go  to  another,  saying,"  &c.  When  will  the  different  Churches  of 
the  different  denominations  learn  the  importance  of  imited  prayer  ?  When  shall 
we  have  done  with  our  little  differences  and  distinctions,  and  kneel  as  one  family 
round  the  throne  ?  God  speed  the  day.  m.  A  spirit  of  zeal.  "  Let  us  go 
speedily."  1.  There  will  be  no  lagging  behind.  It  is  not.  Let  us  have  a  prayer- 
meeting  to-morrow ;  let  us  turn  unto  the  Lord  soon  ;  but,  Let  us  do  it  now. 
IV.  Personal  dedication.  "  I  wiU  go  also."  \.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for 
people  to  ask  others  to  do  what  they  don't  like  to  engage  in  themselves.  How 
inspiring  it  is  to  hear  the  exhortation,  "  Do  this,  and  I  will  do  it  too."  "  You  go 
and  pray  before  the  Lord  ;  I  will  accompany  you."  When  this  spirit  is  actuatinrr 
the  members  of  a  Church,  the  result  will  be  Burely  seen — in  the  earnestness 
and  goodwill  which  exist — sinners  saved — church-roll  increasing — joy  in  heaven — 
comment  of  the  world.  "  Behold  how  good  and  pleasant  a  thing  it  is  for  brethren 
to  dwell  together  in  unity."  (Christian  World  Fulfil,)  Revival : — Suggesting 
the  benefits  of  a  spiritual  revival.  1.  That  the  possession  of  religious  life  awakens 
interest  in  others.  "  And  the  inhabitants,  &c.,  shall  go,"  &c.  2.  That  a  revived 
religious  life  sets  value  on  prayer.  "  Let  us  go  to  pray  before  the  Lord."  3.  This 
revived  Ufe  realises  the  importance  and  value  of  time.  "  Let  us  go  speedily." 
4.  Revived  life  constrains  us  to  seek  companionship.  "  Let  us  go."  Christians 
are  gregarious.  6.  Revived  spiritual  life  ensures  a  powerful  influence  over  our 
companions.     They  said,  "  We  will  go  with  you."     {J.  H.  Snell.) 

Ver.  23.  We  will  go  with  you,  for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you. — 
A  wise  and  good  resolution :  —  The  kingdom  of  God  was  to  be  no  longer 
confined  to  one  nation  or  people  ;  but  multitudes  in  different  climates,  and 
the  most  distant  parts  of  the  earth,  should  submit  to  Christ  as  their  ruler, 
and  trust  Him  as  their  Saviour.  The  term  "  Jew "  in  this  coimection  is 
descriptive  of  character  rather  than  of  person,  and  is  to  be  understood  of  any 
one  who  is  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  there  is  no  guile  ;  any  humble  and  sincere 
believer,  who  adorns  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things.  In  the  days 
here  predicted  such  characters  shall  be  highly  esteemed.  I.  The  resolution — 
"  We  will  go  with  you."  This  language  implies — 1.  Approbation  and  affec- 
tionate regard.  When  grace  opens  the  eyes  of  a  sinner,  and  takes  possession  of 
his  heart,  those  persons  and  things  are  contemplated  with  delight,  which  before 
were  the  objects  of  aversion  and  scorn.  2.  Earnest  desire  and  a  holy  determina- 
tion, if  permitted,  to  associate  with  the  people  of  God.  The  same  disposition  of 
mind  which  causes  us  to  cleave  to  the  Lord  makes  us  of  one  heart  with  His  people. 
3.  It  implies  an  union  of  interests  as  well  as  of  affection.  True  religion  teaches 
us  to  renounce  all  other  interests  and  attachments,  to  forsake  our  own  people 
and  o\ir  father's  house,  and  cast  in  our  lot  with  the  people  of  God.  4.  A  holy 
ambition  to  learn  of  the  people  of  God  and  to  imitate  their  example.  Congeniality 
of  sentiment  and  feeling  is  the  foundation  of  religious  union,  and  where  that 
union  subsists  there  will  be  a  desire  after  a  nearer  assimilation.  5.  Fellowship 
and  commimion  in  Gospel  worship  and  discipline  are  also  included.  To  those  who 
properly  consult  their  own  interest  and  the  glory  of  God,  fellowship  with  the 
saints  will  not  only  be  an  article  of  faith,  but  an  object  of  fervent  desire.  One 
of  the  ancient  fathers  thought  it  a  greater  honour  to  be  the  member  of  a  Christian 
Church  than  head  of  the  Roman  Empire.  This  will  not  otdy  contribute  to  our 
safety,  by  providing  a  defence  against  apostasy,  but  also  to  our  comfort  and  use- 
fulness ;  for  communion  with  the  saints  is  oftentimes  a  step  towards  communion 
with  God.     II.  The  ground  of  the  resolution.     "  For  we  have  heard  that  God 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. ' 

is  with  you."     We  have  heard  from  the  Divine  Word,  wherein  this  blessing  is 

fjromised  and  declared.  We  have  heard  it  from  yourselves.  You  have  acknow- 
edged  His  protection  and  the  consolation  arising  from  the  Divine  presence.  We 
have  heard  it  from  others,  who  observed  how  your  faces  shone  when  you  came 
down  from  the  mount.  God  is  naturally  and  necessarily  present  with  all  His 
creatures ;  but  He  is  in  a  gracioxis  and  special  manner  present  with  His  own 
people.  He  draws  near  and  manifests  Himself  imto  them  as  He  does  not  unto 
the  world.  They  experience  the  care  of  His  providence,  and  enjoy  the  smiles 
of  His  coxmtenance.  He  walks  with  them  through  the  wilderness.  He  communes 
with  them  by  the  way,  He  puts  His  everlasting  arms  underneath  them,  and  they 
doubt  not  of  their  interest  in  His  favour,  "fiien  they  can  glory  in  tribulation, 
bid  defiance  to  the  powers  of  darkness,  and  look  death  in  the  face  without  feax. 
We  may  hence  learn — 1.  That  seclusion  from  all  society  is  neither  the  Christian's 
duty  nor  his  privilege.  2.  As  the  presence  of  God  with  His  people  is  the  principal 
inducement  for  others  to  join  themselves  to  their  society,  how  solicitous  should 
they  be  to  improve  this  sacred  privilege,  by  seeking  much  communion  with  God. 
The  ways  of  Zion  would  not  so  often  mourn,  if  Zion's  God  were  more  frequently 
in  the  midst  of  her.  When  primitive  believers  were  edified,  walking  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Churches  were  greatly 
multiplied  (Acts  ix.  31).  3.  Young  converts  will  learn  from  hence  that  it  is 
their  duty  to  unite  in  Christian  society,  when  the  Word  and  ordinances  are  faith- 
fully administered.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Christian  attraction : — I.  The 
ATTBACTOBS.  They  are  called  Jews.  Generally  a  very  despised  people.  Were 
all  the  countries  to  come  to  learn  of  them  ?  Yes,  to  learn  of  them  the  knowledge 
of  "Him  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal."  Jesus  Christ,  His  disciples,  the  writers 
of  the  New  Testament,  &c.,  were  all  Jews.  The  word  Jew  is  not  used  here  so  as 
to  distinguish  Israelites  from  Gentiles,  so  much  as  saints  from  sinners  ;  the  Church 
of  God,  whose  memb  rs  may  be  derived  from  any  nation,  as  they  may  live  in  any 
period.  II.  The  subjects  of  this  attraction.  "  Ten  men,"  &c.  This  marks 
the  number  and  also  the  variety  of  the  proselytes  or  converts.  It  means  simply 
a  large  and  not  a  definite  number.  Among  the  Jews  ten  was  the  number  of 
perfection.  When  they  would  render  a  number  countless,  they  did  it  by  attaching 
the  word  ten.  By  the  ignorance  of  some,  and  the  sneers  of  others,  and  the  bigotry 
of  still  more,  the  people  of  God  are  now  often  improperly  diminished.  If  there 
be  a  sense  in  which  they  may  be  considered  a  few,  there  is  a  sense  also  in  which 
they  are  many,  very  many.  A  time  is  coming  when  a  "  nation  shall  be  born  in  a 
day."  Whatever  croakers  may  think  or  do,  there  are  better  days  for  the  world 
before  us,  than  the  world  has  ever  yet  seen.  Variety  is  indicated  as  well  as 
number.  "  Out  of  the  languages  of  the  nations."  The  Jewish  religion,  though 
of  Divine  origin,  never  could,  in  the  nature  of  things,  have  become  a  general 
or  universal  religion.  There  is  nothing  in  Christianity  that  is  local,  nothing  that 
is  restrictive.  It  regards  man,  not  so  much  circumstantially  considered,  aa 
essentially.  It  regards  man  in  his  grand  wants.  The  Gosj^el  provides  for  the 
whole  of  these  wants.  III.  The  groxtkds  op  the  attraction.  The  Divine 
presence.  As  to  His  essential  presence  God  is  with  all  His  creatures.  God'a 
presence  in  the  way  of  promise  or  privilege  means  something  distinguishable  from 
the  perfection  of  His  nature.  God  is  surely  with  such  persons  as  He  was  not 
once  ;  surely  He  is  with  such  persons  as  these,  as  He  is  not  now  with  others. 
IV.  The  medium  ov  this  attraction.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  their  state  and 
privilege.  Nothing  can  affect  us  unless  it  be  known.  Though  others  may  make 
known  their  religion,  they  must  principally  make  it  kno\vn  themselves ;  and  for 
this  purpose  they  must  not  only  be  religious,  but  they  must  appear  religious. 
Never  be  ashamed  of  your  religion.  If  you  have  any  religion,  it  will  not  be  easy 
to  conceal  it ;  it  will  break  out  some  way  or  other.  Repentance  will  get  into  the 
eye,  and  be  seen  in  tears.  Meekness  will  sit  in  a  man's  face,  and  smile  like  a  fine 
morning  in  May.  It  is  not  easy  to  restrain  powerful  emotion.  Practically  make 
known  your  religion  to  others :  actions  speak  louder  than  words.  Let  your 
tempers  tell ;  let  your  humility  under  applause  tell ;  let  yom-  liberality  with  growing 
wealth  tell ;  let  your  patience  under  affliction  tell ;  let  your  readiness  to  forgive 
injuries  tell.  Let  all  these  tell  whose  you  are,  what  you  are,  whence  you  are  bom, 
and  whither  you  are  bound.  V.  The  effect  of  the  attraction.  Knowledge  is 
necessary  to  influence,  but  all  knowledge  is  not  influential.  Uninfluential  know- 
ledge is  worse  than  none.  The  knowledge  of  these  people  was  effective  :  it  con- 
Btraiaod  them  to  "  lay  hold,"  &c.     This  is  a  simple  and  striking  expression.     It 


CHAP,  vin.]  ZECHARIAH.  137 

reminds  of  the  little  child  pulling  at  his  mother's  clothes.  Man  is  a  social  creature 
as  soon  as  he  comes  under  the  power  of  religion :  the  social  principle  will  be  sanctified 
as  well  as  other  things ;  and  the  man  will  now  be  able  easily  enough  (though 
jou  could  not  pull  him  away  before)  to  give  up  the  scenes  of  vice  and  vanity. 
Conclusion — 1.  See  what  it  is  that  makes  people  valuable,  and  which  should 
render  them  interesting  and  inviting  to  us.  2.  Think  of  those  who,  instead  of 
feeling  the  Divine  presence  an  attraction,  feel  it  to  be  a  repulsion.  3.  If  such 
advantages  are  derivable  from  connection  with  the  pious,  be  you  concerned  to 
obtain  imion  with  them.  4.  Let  your  religion  be  not  only  impressive  but  attractive. 
Some  professors  have  so  much  of  the  repulsive  about  them  that  it  is  not  likely 
any  person  will  ever  "  take  hold  of  their  skirts,  saying,  We  will  go  with  you."  Whit- 
field says,  "  God  lives  with  some  that  I  shoiild  not  live  with,  and  that  I  could  not 
live  with."  {WiUiam  Jay.)  Our  obligations  to  the  Jews : — So  far  from  joining 
in  the  illiberal  scorn,  too  generally  poured  by  men,  called  Christians,  on  the 
dispersed  Jews,  I  feel  for  them  as  I  should  for  a  father,  who  had,  indeed,  disgraced 
himself,  and  whose  conduct  could  not  even  be  palliated ;  but  who,  after  afi,  was 
still  a  father.  I.  Explain  and  illustratb  this  wonderful  prophecy.  The 
God  of  the  Jews,  long  unknown,  except  to  that  obscure  and  oppressed  people, 
is  now  the  professed  object  of  worship  throughout  the  mightiest  and  most  dis- 
tinguished nations  in  the  world  !  This  is  a  fact  which  cannot  be  denied  or  doubted. 
Such  an  extraordinary  revolution  has  taken  place ;  and  the  prophecy  of  oiur  text 
was  suited  to  excite  the  expectation  of  it.  But  in  what  way,  and  by  what  means 
and  instruments  was  it  effected  ?  Unless  these  also  accord  with  the  prediction, 
the  fulfilment  must  be  allowed  to  be  imperfect  and  dubious.  From  the  text  we 
see  that  whatever  means  should  be  employed  by  the  Jews,  compulsion  was  not 
one  of  them ;  the  conduct  of  the  persons  concerned  was  perfectly  voluntary  and 
the  effect  of  conviction.  Even  the  persuasion  and  fascination  of  oratory,  as 
separated  from  the  conviction  of  the  understanding  and  conscience,  producing 
the  outward  profession,  would  not  be  an  unequivocal  completion  of  the  prophecy. 
The  instances  of  Gentiles  converted  to  Judaism,  before  the  coming  of  Christ, 
can  by  no  means  be  considered  as  fulfilling  this  prophecy.  But  reflect  on  the 
events  which  followed  the  crucifixion,  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  our  Divine 
Redeemer,  the  "  Light  of  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  His  people  Israel."  Not 
only  did  the  apostles,  and  especially  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  attract  the 
attention  of  immense  multitudes  among  the  heathen,  by  faithful  preaching ;  by 
stupendous  miracles,  as  benevolent  as  powerful ;  by  a  holy  example ;  by  patient 
sufferings,  "  not  counting  their  lives  dear  unto  themselves  " ;  and  by  indefatigable 
labours,  without  any  other  recompense  from  man  than  additional  sufferings; 
not  only  did  evangelists  and  subordinate  ministers  prosper,  but  Jews,  converted 
to  Christianity,  though  not  ministers,  though  obscure  in  station  and  of  slender 
abilities,  by  an  union  of  \miversal  conscientiousness,  cheerfulness  in  poverty, 
patience  under  persecution  and  in  the  most  distressing  circumstances,  and  meek- 
ness, with  persevering  benevolence,  amidst  all  manner  of  provocations  and  injuries, 
won  over  multitudes  of  the  idolaters  to  "go  with  them."  At  what  other  time,  or  in 
what  other  way,  has  this  prophecy  been  actually  fulfilled  ?     II.  The  accomplish- 

MBNT  OF  the  PROPHECY  HAS  LAID  US  UNDER    OBLIGATIONS  TO  THE  JeWS  WHICH 

EXCEED  ALL  CALCULATION.  We  "  owe  eveu  our  own  selves  "  to  the  Jews ;  in 
addition  to  the  common  debt  of  goodwill,  and  compassion,  and  liberal,  active 
love,  which  we  owe  to  men  in  general.  Shall  we  then  make  only  feeble  and  heart- 
less exertions,  where  the  salvation  of  the  Jewish  people  is  concerned  ?    III.  A  still 

MORE  SIGNAL  FULFILMENT  OF  THE  PROPHECY  IN  THE  TEXT  WILL  MOST  CERTAtNLY 

TAKE  PLACE,  AND  AT  NO  VERY  REMOTE  PERIOD.  In  the  final  event  the  nation 
of  Israel  shaU  be  restored  from  their  dispersions,  placed  under  the  government 
of  their  promised  Messiah,  and  (as  far  as  I  can  judge)  reinstated  in  their  own  land. 
{Thomas  Scott.)  Purpose  of  Ood  regarding  the  Jews  : — Curious  inquky  into 
the  future,  and  confident  prediction  as  to  times  and  seasons,  are  both  to  be 
eschewed.  The  former  is  unprofitable ;  the  latter  is  most  presumptuous.  But 
we  must  not  run  from  one  extreme  to  another.  It  is  as  much  our  duty  now  to 
"  discern  this  time,"  as  it  was  the  duty  in  our  Lord's  day  to  discern  that  time. 
We  ought  to  look  behind  us,  around  us,  before  us,  and  anticipate  the  next  act  of 
the  world's  mighty  drama.  The  dispensation  of  Gentile  mercy  has  now  lasted 
for  nearly  2000  years.  But  it  is  not  designed  to  be  eternal.  We  have  plainly 
laid  down  for  us  in  Holy  Scripture  the  signs  which  shall  mark  its  closing  in,  when 
God  shall  turn  Himself  to  the  Jew  again.     And  we  are  as  much  bound  to  look  at 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

these  aigns  now  as  the  Jew  was  in  his  day.  These  signs  are  four  in  number.  Two 
given  by  our  Lord  Himself,  and  two  by  the  prophet  Daniel.  1.  "  This  Gospel 
of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all  nations  ; 
and  then  shall  the  end  come  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  14).  Our  Lord's  second  sign  is  a  painful 
one.  "  Iniquity  shall  abound  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  12).  Daniel's  first  sign  is,  "  Many  shall 
run  to  and  fro."  His  second  is  like  unto  it.  "  Knowledge  shall  be  increased." 
Let  us  look  around  us,  behind  us,  before  us ;  do  we  see  anything  like  the  fulfil- 
ment of  these  predicted  signs  ?  He  must  be  blind  indeed  who  does  not  see  the 
first  sign  advancing  rapidly  to  its  fulfilment,  in  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  published 
to  all  nations.  There  are  now  afloat  in  the  world  about  two  hundred  million 
copies  of  a  translated  Bible.  This  enormous  circulation  is  seconded  by  corre- 
sponding preaching.  But  the  world  is  not  yet  converted  ?  No,  for  Christ's  sign 
is  not  its  conversion,  but  His  Gospel  preached  as  a  witness.  The  Christian  Church 
is  now  gathering  the  first-fruits  of  the  earth.  Everyone  has  the  fulfilment  before 
him  of  Daniel's  sign,  "  Many  shall  run  to  and  fro."  In  this  the  prophet  gives 
us  exactly  the  characteristic  of  the  present  age.  Daniel's  second  sign  is  equally 
manifest  in  our  time.  It  is  the  amazing  progress  of  science  which  has  enabled 
us  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  powers  of  nature.  With  all  this  running  to  and  fro, 
and  all  this  advance  of  knowledge,  is  the  world  to  go  on  improving  in  its  spiritual 
and  moral  character  ?  Our  Lord's  last  sign,  "  iniquity  shall  abound,"  afi&rms  the 
contrary.  And  His  apostle  explains  in  detail  the  meaning  of  His  Master's  words 
(2  Tim.  iii.  1-4).  There  are  too  many  signs  that  these  perilous  times  are  already 
upon  us.  Never  in  the  experience  of  civilised  Christendom  has  crime  been  so 
audacious  as  now.  As  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  seem  closing  in,  the  Jew  is  coming 
again  into  prominence.  May  we  then  expect  that  the  Jew  will  come  up  once  more 
as  a  nation,  to  act  his  part  in  the  world's  great  drama  ?  Distinguished  expositors 
tell  us  that  the  prophecies  respecting  the  Jews  have  all  been  fulfilled  in  the  past, 
and  no  prophecy  whatever  respects  the  Jews  in  the  futm'e.  When  were  the 
solemn  words  of  the  text  fulfilled  ?  Judah  returned  from  Babylon,  indeed,  but  it 
was  to  remain  in  the  midst  of  the  nations,  a  humbled  and  despised  people.  But 
they  shall  be  fulfilled  when,  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  the  Jews  shall  be  as  life  from 
the  dead  to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  a  world's  love  and  gratitude  and  devotion 
shall  be  their  spontaneous  and  most  abundant  recomiJense.  {William  Tail,  D.D.) 
Uniting  with  God's  people : — The  passage  seems  primarily  to  refer  to  the  general 
conversion  of  GentQe  nations.  We  consider  the  text  as  it  may  apply  to  those 
who,  having  been  awakened  to  a  sense  of  their  ruined  condition,  resolve  to  con- 
secrate themselves  to  God  and  His  people.  I.  What  is  implied  in  God  being 
WITH  His  people  ?  1.  God's  essential  presence  is  everywhere.  2.  God's  glorious 
presence  is  in  heaven.     3.  His  terrible  presence  is  felt  in  the  abodes  of  the  lost. 

4.  His  providential  presence  is  seen  in  the  government  and  regulation  of  the  world. 

5.  His  presence  referred  to  in  the  text  is  His  gracious  presence.  He  is  with  His 
Church  in  the  exercise  of  His  love  and  favour.  As  their  Head,  Friend,  Prophet, 
Mediator,  and  King.  II.  The  evidences  of  God's  presence.  External  splendour, 
great  wealth,  a  multitude  of  members,  are  not  evidence.  1.  Scriptural  doctrine 
is  an  evidence.  2.  So  is  purity  of  ordinances.  3.  So  is  brotherly  love.  4.  When 
Divine  changes  are  produced  in  the  power  of  the  Gospel.  5.  When  the  reproach  of 
the  Cross  is  endured.  III.  The  influence  the  presence  of  God  in  the  Church 
shall  produce  on  those  who  are  without.  "  We  will  go  with  you,"  &c.  This 
resolution  implies — 1.  Dissatisfaction  with  their  present  condition.  2.  Earnest 
desire  to  be  united  with  God's  people.  {J.  Burns.)  The  supernatural  in  religion  : 
— By  supernatural  is  meant  that  which  is  above  nature,  above  and  beyond  what 
natural  causes,  coupled  with  human  agency,  might  produce.  The  reason  why 
effort  is  made  to  take  the  supernatural  out  of  religion  is  that  already  God  is  taken 
out  of  the  universe.  Having  already  taken  an  intelligent,  reasoning,  personal 
God  out  of  the  universe,  as  a  matter  of  course  everything  supernatural  must  come 
out  of  tho  Bible,  and  out  of  the  character  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  there  is 
nothing  anywhere  above  nature,  and  above  the  power  of  human  agency.  This  is 
the  philosophy — this  is  the  religion  that  modem  rationalism  proposes  to  give  to 
mankind.  But  in  taking  all  that  is  supernatural  out  of  religion,  it  takes  away 
religion  itself.  The  supernatural  may  be  predicated  of  religion  in  two  distinct 
senses.  1.  Historical.  Every  system  of  religion  that  has  claimed  the  assent  of 
the  human  mind,  and  the  acceptance  of  the  human  heart,  has  claimed  a  super- 
natural origin.  This  claim  arises  out  of  a  law  of  mind.  The  effect  must  be  in 
harmony  with  the  cause.     The  supernatural  of  the  Christian  religion  is  evinced 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECHARIAH.  139 

in  the  two  great  branclies  of  evidence — miracles  and  prophecy.  2.  Another 
depart  in  religion  is  more  important.  Its  intrinsic  character  as  it  now  is.  All 
that  is  supernatural  in  religion,  whether  it  be  considered  historically  or  intrinsically, 
arises  out  of  the  being  or  presence  of  God  in  it,  or  with  it.  If  there  is  a  God  He 
may  surely  do  that  which  is  above  nature  itself ;  for  if  He  created  all  things, 
that  act  of  creation  was  something  above  natiu-e.  God  is  the  author  of  nature, 
the  author  of  its  laws,  and  of  its  being.  The  great  underlying  cause  of  the  super- 
natural, historically  and  intrinsically  in  religion,  is,  God  present  with  His  people. 
The  idea  of  the  Divine  coming  down  to  mankind  and  communing  with  men  runs 
through  every  form  of  religion.  If  there  be  a  God,  He  is  somewhere,  in  some 
relationship  ;  He  is  with  or  without  the  power  of  fellowship.  If  He  be  without 
it.  He  is  below  the  lowest  living  creatures  He  has  made.  If  He  be  with  it.  He  is 
above  all.  He  can  speak  to  an  archangel ;  He  can  speak  to  my  heart.  There  is 
only  one  possible  reason  why  God  should  withdraw  Himself  from  men,  and  that 
reason  is  sin.  God's  presence  among  His  people  will  be  manifested,  will  assert 
itself.  There  are  several  ways  in  which  the  presence  of  God  among  His  people 
indicates  itself.  1.  In  the  superior  knowledge  of  God  that  prevails  among  His 
people.  How  come  we  to  have  a  more  accurate  knowledge  of  God  than  the  pagan 
nations  ?  2.  There  is  an  indication  of  God's  presence  among  His  people  in  their 
superior,  intellectual,  moral,  and  religious  condition.  Compare  Christian  and 
pagan  nations  in  this  regard.  3.  There  is  a  manifestation  of  God's  presence 
with  His  people  in  the  direct  impression  that  is  made  upon  the  consciousness 
of  men.  In  the  olden  time,  God  revealed  Himself  under  visible  forms.  God  has 
been  educating  the  race  away  from  its  dependence  on  the  senses.  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Chiist  formed  a  point  of  transition.  Now,  there  is  a  manifestation  of  God 
to  the  human  consciousness,  so  that  when  God  comes  into  my  soul  I  can  recognise 
Him,  and  know  that  it  is  God  who  is  coming  in.  4.  God's  presence  among  His 
people  is  manifested  in  the  works  of  power  accomplished.  "  No  man  can  do  these 
miracles  which  Thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  Him."  5.  God  manifests  His 
presence  and  power  in  the  singular  experience  that  He  gives  to  human  souls. 
Take  as  a  practical  lesson  from  this  subject,  that  our  greatest  need  is  God,  God  in 
Jesus  Christ,  God  by  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  within  us,  shining  out  of  the  eye  and 
out  of  the  life,  and  God  living  in  us,  so  that  we  form  part  of  the  Divine  life,  so 
that  it  shall  shine  out  of  us.  0  for  the  presence  of  God  to  be  more  and  more 
distinctly  apprehended  among  His  people.  [Dr.  Kynett.)  Admission  of  the 
Gentiles  : — The  form  of  this  prophecy  is  highly  dramatic.  The  scope  of  it  is  to 
predict  the  introduction  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  theocracy,  and  the  consequent 
enlargement  of  the  Church.  This  is  described  by  a  bold  and  beautiful  personifica- 
tion. To  seize  the  hem  of  the  garment  is  a  gesture  of  earnestness,  importvmity,  and 
perseverance,  which  is  emphatic  were  it  done  by  only  a  single  person,  but  when 
done  by  ten  persons,  it  becomes  significant  of  an  intensity  of  anxiety,  and  a  depth 
of  conviction,  of  the  very  highest  grade.  When  this  prediction  was  uttered 
nothing  seemed  more  hopelessly  improbable  than  its  fulfilment.  The  Jews  were 
a  poor,  despised,  obscure  tribe  in  the  heart  of  Syria,  whose  existence  was  only 
known  to  the  mighty  world  by  their  fiu'nishing  a  trophy  to  the  victorious  arms 
of  Babylon.  Greece  was  just  rising  in  the  firmament  of  human  history,  and  as 
she  ascended  to  her  brilliant  zenith,  her  track  was  marked  by  the  sweeping  of 
the  phalanxes  of  Alexander,  and  the  legions  of  Antiochus,  over  the  hills  and  valleys 
of  Judaea.  And  yet  this  prophecy  remained  unfulfilled.  At  length  the  time 
arrived,  and  there  came  to  Jerusalem  "  men  out  of  every  nation  under  heaven  "  ; 
see  Acts  ii.  Learn,  that  all  true  piety  is  instinct  with  the  missionary  spirit,  desire 
for  the  salvation  of  others.     {T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Vbes.  1-8.  The  burden  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord. — The  dark  and  bright  side 
of  God's  revelation  to  mankind  : — I.  The  dark  side  of  the  Divine  Word.  Notice 
two  things — 1.  In  this  aspect  it  is  here  called  a  "  burden."  The  word 
"  burden  "  is  almost  invariably  used  to  represent  a  calamity.  Thus  we  read  of 
the  burden  of  Babylon,  the  burden  of  Moab,  the  burden  of  Damascus,  the  burden 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

of  Tyre,  the  burden  of  Ejypt,  &c.  2.  In  this  aspect  it  bears  upon  wicked  men. 
The  doomed  peoples  are  here  mentioned.  They  are  in  "  the  land  of  Hadrach." 
Whether  Hadrach  here  means  the  land  of  Syria  or  the  common  names  of  the  kinga 
of  S)Tria,  it  scarcely  matters  ;  the  people  of  the  place  of  which  Damascus  was 
the  capital  were  the  doomed  ones.  Besides  the.se,  there  are  the  men  of  "  Hamath," 
a  country  lying  to  the  north  of  Damascus  and  joining  the  districts  of  Zobah  and 
Rehub.  And  still  more,  there  are  "Tyrus"  and  "  Zidon,"  places  about  which 
we  often  read  in  the  Bible,  and  with  whose  history  most  students  of  the  Bible 
are  acquainted.  "  Ashkelon,"  "  Gaza,"  and  "  Ekron,"  are  also  mentioned. 
These  were  the  chief  cities  of  the  Philistines,  and  the  capitals  of  different  districts. 
All  these  peoples  were  not  only  enemies  of  the  chosen  tribe,  but  enemies  of  the 
one  true  and  living  God.  History  tells  us  how,  through  the  bloody  conquests 
of  Alexander  and  his  successors,  this  "  burden  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  "  fell  with 
all  its  weight  upon  these  people.  Observe — (1)  That  the  Bible  is  heavy  with 
black  threatenings  to  the  wicked.  (2)  That  these  black  threatenings  will  inevit- 
ably be  fulfilled.  All  the  threatenings  here  against  the  land  of  Hadrach,  Hamath, 
T}rrus,  Zidon,  Gaza,  Ekron,  Ashkelon,  and  the  Philistines  were  fulfilled.  II.  Thb 
BRIGHT  SIDE  of  the  Divine  Word.  There  is  a  beam  of  promise  here  (vers.  7,  8). 
The  following  is  Dr.  Keil's  translation  of  these  verses :  "  And  I  shall  take  away 
his  blood  out  of  his  mouth,  and  his  abominations  from  between  his  teeth,  and 
he  will  also  remain  to  ovur  God  and  will  be  as  a  tribe  prince  in  Judah,  and  Ekron 
like  the  Jebusite.  I  pitch  a  tent  for  My  house  against  military  power,  against 
those  who  go  to  and  fro,  and  no  oppressor  will  pass  over  them  any  more,  for  now 
have  I  seen  with  My  eyes."  The  promise  in  these  words  seems  to  be  twofold — 
1.  The  deprivation  of  the  power  of  the  enemy  to  injure.  The  Bible  promises 
to  the  good  man  the  subjection  of  all  his  foes.  2.  Divine  protection  from  all 
their  enemies.  The  Bible  promises  eternal  protection  to  the  good.  {Homilist.) 
Prophetic  fulfilments  : — 1.  Every  fulfilled  prophecy  is  a  distinct  proof  of  the 
truth  of  the  Bible — of  its  having  been  "  given  by  inspiration  of  God."  Prophecy 
is  a  miracle.  We  generally  apply  the  word  miracle  to  supernatural  manifesta- 
tions of  power;  but  it  is  equally  applicable  to  supernatural  manifestations  of 
knowledge.  Knowledge  of  futurity  belongs  only  to  God.  Jehovah  frequently 
appeals  to  such  foreknowledge  of  the  future  as  one  of  His  distinctive  attributes. 
The  accomplishment  of  Divine  predictions  stands  out,  incontestably,  in  the 
records  of  ancient  history.  2.  The  true  value  of  the  evidences  of  revelation 
arises  from  the  value  of  what  is  revealed.  Were  it  of  trivial  importance,  that 
would  be  itself  a  strong  presumptive  proof — almost,  indeed,  a  conclusive  one — 
that  what  professed  to  be  a  revelation  had  no  real  title  to  be  so  regarded.  That 
which  revelation  does  make  known  has  in  it  to  us  a  value  beyond  the  powers  of 
man  or  angel  to  estimate.  It  "  shows  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation."  This  is 
its  great  discovery.  It  is  no  mere  republication  of  the  lessons  of  nature.  It  is 
not  a  mere  volume  of  precepts.  It  does  confirm  all  that  nature  teaches.  It 
does  set  before  us  a  perfect  code  of  morals.  But  it  does  more:  it  addresses  us 
not  as  creatures  merely,  but  as  sinners.  It  makes  provision  for  us  in  this  capacity — 
for  our  deliverance  from  the  guilt,  condemnation,  and  punishment  of  sin,  and 
our  restoration  to  the  favour,  the  image,  the  enjoyment  of  God  ;  and  that  for 
the  eternity  of  our  being.  It  is  this  that  stamps  every  proof  of  the  divinity 
of  the  Bible  with  such  importance, — every  species  of  evidence,  and  every  variety 
of  each  species.  The  investigation  of  the  evidence  is  what  every  man  in 
his  sane  mind  should  feel  to  be  the  most  momentous  inquiry  in  which  he  can 
possibly  be  engaged.  3.  The  past  fulfilment  of  prophecy  should  establish  our 
faith  in  God  "  regarding  all  that  is  yet  future  ;  and  especially  our  "  faith  in 
God  "  as  still  in  all  His  providential  administration,  having  His  eye  upon  the 
Church.  His  entire,  extensive,  and  complicated  administration  is  ever  working 
out  the  development  of  the  plan  of  salvation.  4.  The  enemies  of  God  and  of  His 
people  have  cause  to  tremble.  He  will  not  leave  either  Himself  or  His  people 
unavenged.  He  that  "  toucheth  them  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye."  It  may 
at  times  be  difficult  to  see  on  which  side  lies  His  favour  ;  in  seasons  when  "  the 
ungodly  prosper  in  the  world,"  while  "  waters  of  a  full  cup  are  wrung  out  "  to  the 
faithful.  In  such  seasons,  love  seems  to  be  hidden,  and  even  as  inverting  the 
order  of  its  manifestations,  and  tempting  the  Christian  to  say — "  How  doth  God 
know  ?  And  is  there  knowledge  in  the  Most  High  ?  "  But  when  the  whole 
comes  to  be  set  by  God,  and  seen  by  men  in  the  light  of  the  final  judgment,  all 
will  be  clear.     The  distinction,  then,  between  His  people  and  His  enemies,  will 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECHARIAH.  141 

be  fully,  finally,  and  irreversibly  marked  ;  an  everlasting  separation  made,  and 
the  "great  gulf  fixed  between  them."  {Ralph  Wardlaiv,  D.D.)  National 
jtidgments  : — 1.  The  condition  of  all  men  is  laid  open  to  the  eye  of  God,  and  He 
will  appoint  judgment  or  mercy  according  to  that  condition  (ver.  I).  2.  Worldly- 
wisdom  is  at  last  greatly  inferior  to  that  wisdom,  the  beginning  of  which  is  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  (ver.  2).  3.  However  secure  nations  or  men  may  think  them- 
selves in  sin,  their  sin  will  be  sure  to  find  them  out.  Never  has  sin  more  proudly 
entrenched  herself  than  in  godless,  but  magnificent  Tyre.  Never  has  every 
element  of  earthly  prosperity  seemed  more  completely  under  control  than  in  her 
case.  And  yet  they  were  all  swept  like  chaff  before  the  whirlwind  of  the  wrath 
of  God,  when  the  time  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  threatenings  had  come.  Hence 
though  nations  now  trample  on  law  and  right,  and  seem  long  to  flourish  in  their 
sin,  let  not  the  child  of  God  be  impatient.  Let  him  remember  that  two  hundred 
years  passed  away  after  the  utterance  of  these  threatenings  against  Tyre,  and 
8he  seemed  stronger  than  ever,  and  yet  when  the  day  of  doom  had  dawned,  the 
galleys  that  left  her  on  their  stated  voyages  the  peerless  queen  of  the  seas,  when 
they  retiu-ned  found  her  but  a  bare  and  blackened  rock,  a  lonely  monument  of  the 
truth,  that  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.  If  then,  God  thus  executes  His  threats, 
even  on  a  mighty  commonwealth,  in  spite  of  His  delay,  let  not  the  fact  that  judg- 
ment against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily  cause  the  hearts  of  the 
sons  of  men  to  be  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil.  Let  men  remember  that  it  is  a 
falsehood  to  violate  a  threatening  as  much  as  to  violate  a  promise,  and  that  God 
will  not  make  Himself  a  liar  to  save  man  in  his  sins  (vers.  3-7).  4.  Amidst  all 
the  tumults  of  nations,  the  true  people  of  God  are  safe,  being  guarded  by  the  arm 
of  Almightiness  (ver.  8).     {T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  Thy  King  cometh  unto  thee ;  He  13  just  and  having  salvation. — Palm 
Sunday  : — This  prophecy  was  generally  recognised  by  the  Jews  as  referring  to  the 
Messiah.  First  of  all,  prophecy  spoke  only  of  Messiah's  glory.  It  was  not  until 
the  era  of  the  Captivity  that  we  find  Christ  spoken  of  as  the  Man  afflicted  and 
stricken,  the  Hind  pursued  by  the  buffaloes  and  dogs,  the  Eang  lowly,  and  riding 
upon  an  ass.  When  the  prophet  declared  that  Messiah  should  come  riding  upon 
an  ass,  it  was  taken  as  an  indication  that  He  should  be  a  prophet-King.  In  the 
Talmud  it  is  said  for  this  reason  that  to  dream  of  an  ass  is  to  dream  of  the  coming 
of  salvation.  To  the  Gentiles  this,  like  other  features  of  our  Lord's  work,  was  a 
constant  subject  of  mockery.  The  Persian  King,  Sapor,  promised  the  rabbis  that 
when  their  Messiah  came  who  should  ride  upon  an  ass,  he  would  send  Him  a  horse. 
It  was  a  common  scoff  among  the  Mohammedans  that  whereas  Mohammed  was 
"  the  rider  upon  a  camel,"  Christ  was  "  that  rider  upon  an  ass."  Christ  only 
entered  Jerusalem  riding  on  an  ass,  to  bring  before  us  a  necessary  illustration  of  His 
character  and  office.  1.  Though  He  was  King  of  kings,  yet  He  is  the  Lowly  One. 
The  Hebrew  word  expresses  the  condition  of  a  man  who  has  been  brought  low  by 
affliction  and  sorrow,  possessing  in  himself  the  fruit  of  this  sorrow  in  lowfiness 
and  submission  of  mind.  In  tms  sense  the  word  is  used  of  Moses,  the  "  meekest 
of  men."  Messiah  is  "  stricken  and  afflicted."  Our  Lord  applies  this  character 
to  Himself,  "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heaxt."  And  this  trait  must  especially 
distinguish  all  who  follow  Him  into  His  kingdom.  2.  Lowliness  not  only  expressed 
the  character  of  the  King,  but  the  character  also  of  the  kingship.  The  victory  of 
Messiah  is  to  be  over  the  very  things  which  are  esteemed  mighty  in  the  world. 
As  in  nature,  the  brute  force  of  the  beast  is  conquered  by  the  skill  of  man,  and  the 
forces  of  matter  overcome  by  the  power  of  mind,  so  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  all 
powers  of  body  and  mind  are  subdued  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit  which  is  made 
perfect  in  human  weakness.  All  through  the  history  of  Israel,  God's  hand  had 
thus  been  made  manifest  in  the  casting  down  of  strongholds.  When,  therefore, 
Jerusalem  rejected  the  Messiah,  she  became  like  the  fallen  powers  which  were 
before  her,  a  power  of  this  world,  aiming  at  success  by  the  world's  methods,  looking 
forward  to  the  world's  splendour,  and  receiving  the  world's  downfall  for  her 
reward.  She  knew  not  the  day  of  her  visitation.  Let  us  not  indulge  only  in 
pity  for  the  fallen  city  which  opposed  itself  so  madly  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
The  world — even  the  Christian  world — is  very  far  from  this  suojection  to  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  When  we  see  how  faintly  Christian  principles  as  yet  influence 
the  policies  of  nations,  our  impatient  spirit  is  filled  with  dismay.  We  are  ready 
to  believe  that  Christianity  has  gained  extension  at  the  cost  of  intension,  that  men 
have  been  made  Christians  at  the  cost  of  Christianity,  and  that  it  had  been  better 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  tx. 

if  the  conversion  of  Europe  had  been  slower  rather  than  speedier.  If  it  be  so, 
what  remedy  is  there  so  effective  and  so  apposite  as  the  intension  of  Christian 
claims  upon  ourselves,  individually  and  now,  the  realisation  now  of  the  severe 
claim  which  Christianity  makes  upon  the  will  and  the  life  of  each  of  us  ?  A  coimtry 
is  conquered  by  the  capitulation  of  one  castle  after  another ;  even  so  Christ's 
kingdom  comes" by  the  yielding  up  of  individual  hearts.  What  a  glorious  triumph 
we  can  make  for  Christ  in  our  hearts  to-day  !  With  hearts  bowed  down  in  lowliest 
sense  of  sin,  emptied  of  all  self-trust,  filled  with  the  sense  of  God's  love  and  passion 
for  the  world,  we  shall  be  ready  then  to  receive  the  lowly  King,  and  to  be  made 
partakers  of  the  kingly  spirit.  {H.  H.  Gower.)  The  ideal  monarch  of  the  world  : 
— I.  Here  is  a  monarch,  the  advent  of  whom  19  A  matter  for  rapturous  joy. 
"  Rejoice  greatly,  0  daughter  of  Zion ;  shout,  0  daughter  of  Jerusalem."  Christ's 
advent  to  the  world  was  announced  by  the  gladsome  music  of  angelic  choirs. 
"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  &c.  Why  rejoice  at  His  advent  7  Because  He  will 
— 1.  Promote  all  the  rights  of  mankind.  2.  Remove  all  the  calamities  of  mankind. 
II.  Here  is  a  monarch  the  dignity  op  whom  is  ttnapproached.  "  Thy  King 
cometh  imto  thee."  "  Thy  King."  Thou  hast  never  yet  had  a  true  king,  and 
there  is  no  other  true  king  for  thee :  this  is  "  thy  "  King.  1.  The  King  who  alone 
has  the  absolute  right  to  rule  thee.  Thou  art  His,  His  property.  All  thy  force, 
vitality,  faculty,  belong  to  Him.  2.  The  King  who  alone  can  remove  thy  evils 
and  promote  thy  rights.  III.  Here  is  a  monarch  the  character  of  whom  is 
TJNBXCEPTioNABLY  GOOD.  1.  He  is  rightcous.  "  He  is  just."  The  little  word 
"  just  "  comprehends  all  virtues.  He  who  is  just  to  himself,  just  to  his  Maker, 
just  to  the  universe,  is  the  perfection  of  excellence,  is  all  that  Heaven  requires. 
2.  He  is  humble.  "  Lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass."  Where  there  is  not  genuine 
humility  there  is  no  true  greatness  ;  it  is  essential  to  true  majesty.  Pride  is  the 
offspring  of  littleness,  it  is  the  contemptible  production  of  a  contemptible  mind. 
IV.  Here  is  a  monarch  the  mission  of  whom  is  transcendently  beneficent. 

1.  It  is  remedial.  "  Having  salvation."  Salvation  !  What  a  comprehensive 
word,  deliverance  from  all  evil,  restoration  to  all  good.  Any  one  can  destroy ; 
God  alone  can  restore.  2.  It  is  specific.  "  And  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  from 
Ephraim,"  &c.  He  will  put  an  end  to  the  "  chariot,"  the  "  horse,"  the  "  battle- 
bow,"  of  war,  and  "  speak  peace  "  to  the  nations.  Peace  !  This  is  what  the 
nations  have  always  wanted.  War  has  been  and  still  is  the  great  curse  of  the 
nations.  V.  Here  is  a  monarch  the  reign  of  whom  is  to  be  universal.  The 
language  here  employed  was  universally  understood  by  the  Jews  as  embracing 
the  whole  world.  He  claims  universal  dominion,  He  deserves  it,  and  will  one  day 
have  it.    Leam — 1.  The  infinite  goodness  of  God  in  offering  the  world  such  a  King. 

2.  The  amazing  folly  and  wickedness  of  man  in  not  accepting  this  Divine  offer. 
( Homiliat. )  The  personal  and  official  character  of  Messiah : — I.  Royal  dignity. 
"  Thy  king  cometh  unto  thee."  The  designation  is  emphatic.  "  Thy  king,"  as 
if  they  had  never  had  another.  That  royalty  was  to  pertain  to  the  coming  Messiah 
might  be  shown  from  many  predictions.  He  was  to  '  sit "  on  the  throne  of  David 
for  ever.  His  being  a  king  was  anything  but  an  objection  to  the  Jews.  But  the 
kind  of  royalty  was  not  at  all  to  their  minds.  His  kingdom  was  not  to  be  "  of 
this  world."  Its  throne  was  not  to  be  in  this  world.  He  was  bom  of  royal  lineage 
— born  a  King ;  though,  strictly  speaking.  His  mediatorial  reign  did  not  commence 
till,  having  finished  His  work  on  earth,  the  Father  said  to  Him,  "  Sit  1  hou  at  My 
right  hand,  until  I  make  Thy  foes  Thy  footstool."  II.  The  righteousness  of 
His  character  and  administration.  "  He  is  just."  The  designation  is  to  be 
understood  as  at  once  personal  and  official :  for,  indeed,  were  there  not  the  former, 
there  could  be  little  reason  to  count  upon  the  latter.  This  attribute  is  frequently 
ascribed  to  Him,  as  characterising  Himself  and  His  government.  Jehovah  calls 
Him  "My  righteous  servant."  His  throne  is  founded  in  the  very  charter  of  righteous- 
ness. And  His  whole  administration  is  conducted  on  the  principles  of  the  purest 
and  most  unbending  righteousness.  III.  His  saving  grace  and  power.  "  Having 
salvation."  Salvation  was  the  very  object  of  His  coming.  "  The  Son  of  Man  is 
come  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  The  very  design  of  His  atonement  was  to 
render  salvation  consistent  with  the  claims  of  righteousness:  so  that  Jehovah 
might  be  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour."  When  He  had  completed  His  work.  He 
was  to  "have  salvation,"  not  only  as  being  Himself  delivered  from  death,  but  as 
possessing  for  bestowal  on  mankind  all  the  blessings  of  "  salvation  " — beginning 
in  pardon  and  ending  in  "  life  eternal."  IV.  The  humiuty  and  meekness  of  His 
charactbb.     "  Lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass." 


caiAP.  rx.]  ZECHARIAH.  143 

This  attribute  of  character  distingxiished  His  entire  course  ;  all  His  intercourse 
with  men — with  His  friends,  and  with  His  enemies.  Even  His  triumphs  were 
lowly — "  riding  upon  an  ass  "  ;  and  not  one  that  had  been  trained  for  the  use 
of  royalty,  but,  as  would  appear,  a  rough  unbroken  colt.  Although  the  ass  was 
not  the  very  mean  and  despised  animal  there  that  it  is  with  us,  yet  comparatively 
it  was  so.  The  horse  was  the  animal  used  in  war ;  and  consequently,  in  the 
triumphal  processions  of  kings  and  conquerors  ;  and  on  such  occasions,  arrayed 
in  costly  and  elegant  caparisons.  V.  The  mode  and  means  of  the  extension  op 
THE  Kingdom  correspond  with  its  SPDarriXAL  natuek.  "  I  will  cut  off,"  &c. 
This,  at  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  was  literally  true  respecting  The  civil  and 
military  power  of  the  Jewish  people.  At  the  very  time  when  they  were  looking 
for  a  Messiah  who  was  to  break  the  yoke  from  off  their  neck,  establish  their  temporal 
freedom  and  power,  and  lead  them  on  to  universal  conquest,  their  power  waa 
finally  overthrown  and  destroyed,  their  temple  and  city  laid  in  ashes,  and  them- 
selves scattered  abroad  among  all  nations.  Yet  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah 
grew  and  prospered.  This  itself  showed  its  true  nature.  It  was  not,  as  the  Jews 
anticipated,  to  be  a  Jewish  kingdom.  It  was  to  have  subjects  among  all  peoples. 
And  these  subjects  were  not  to  be  gained  for  Him  with  the  sword  of  steel,  but  by 
the  "  Sword  of  the  Spirit,"  which  is  the  Word  of  God.  His  kingdom  consisted 
of  all,  wherever  His  truth  spread,  whom  that  truth  made  free — spiritually  free. 
All  thus  made  free  come  under  wiUing  and  happy  subjection  to  His  gracious 
sceptre.  Force  never  made  one  subject  of  the  King  of  Zion.  VI.  Another 
characteristic  of  His  reign — "  peace."  "  And  He  shall  speak  peace  to  the 
heathen."  This  is  a  feature  of  His  reign  frequently  celebrated.  By  His  gospel 
He  speaks  peace  to  sinners  of  mankind.  There  is  no  exception.  VII.  The  extent 
of  His  reign.  The  language  employed  here  was  universally  understood  by  the 
Jews  as  embracing  the  whole  world.  In  due  time,  "  the  kingdoms  of  this  world 
shall  become  the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  of  His  Christ."  {Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 
The  Saviour  King  : — To  us  who  read  this  prophecy  in  the  light  of  its  fulfilment  in 
the  advent  and  work  and  glory  of  Christ,  all  is  plain  and  clear.  Not  so  much  by 
our  Lord's  particular  act  in  riding  into  Jerusalem  on  the  occasion,  and  in  the 
manner  described  by  the  evangelists,  as  by  that  which,  by  this  act,  was  symbolised 
and  indicated,  namely.  His  advent  to  empire.  His  coming  to  get  for  Himself  a 
kingdom.  His  appearing  as  the  Saviour  and  ICing  of  His  Church,  and  His  gathering 
to  Himself  a  people  from  among  the  nations,  has  this  prediction  been  fulfilled. 
He  came  in  poverty  and  humiliation  to  lay  the  foundation  of  His  kingdom  in 
obedience  and  sacrifice.  It  was  from  the  field  of  sorrow  and  of  suffering  that  He 
ascended  to  the  throne.  The  crown  came  after  the  Cross  ;  the  humiliation  preceded 
the  glory.  All  things  have  been  put  under  His  feet,  all  power  and  authority  have 
been  given  Him  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  in  the  universe  He  reigns  supreme.  But 
it  is  because  He  was  "  obedient  unto  death  "  that  He  has  been  thus  "  highly 
exalted."  His  kingdom  rests  on  His  propitiatory  work  ;  and  it  is  in  view  of  this, 
though  then  perhaps  but  dimly  seen,  that  the  prophet  here  calls  upon  Zion  to 
behold  and  hail  her  King.  And  now  that  He  hath  ascended  to  the  throne  of  His 
glory,  the  "  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom  "  are  to  be  proclaimed  to  all  nations, 
and  men  of  every  tongue  and  clime  are  to  be  invited  to  behold  their  King,  and 
submit  to  His  righteous  and  benignant  sway.  {W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  The 
lowly  King  Messiah  : — The  theocracy,  or  Church,  is  called  to  rejoice  because  of 
the  coming  of  her  King.  The  kingly  office  of  the  Messiah,  which  was  conferred 
upon  Him  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  work  of  redemption,  is  often 
alluded  to  as  ground  for  rejoicing.  Here  is  given  the  character  of  the  King, 
and  the  extent  of  His  kingdom.  1.  He  is  "  just."  The  righteousness  referred 
to  is  not  His  priestly,  but  His  kingly  righteousness,  that  rigorous  justice  of  His 
reign  in  virtue  of  which  no  good  should  be  unrewarded,  and  no  evil  unpunished. 
In  the  unequal  allotments  of  the  present,  when  the  good  so  often  suffer,  and  the 
bad  so  often  escape,  it  is  surely  ground  for  rejoicing  that  the  King,  under  whose 
rule  this  dispensation  is  placed,  is  just,  and  will  render  to  every  man  according 
to  his  work.  2.  He  is  "  endowed  with  salvation."  The  word  employed  is  a 
difficult  one.  It  is  usually  taken  in  a  secondary  sense,  as  expressing  not  simply 
the  reception  of  a  salvation,  but  its  possession  as  a  gift  that  was  capable  of  being 
bestowed  upon  others.  The  meaning  then  would  be,  that  God  was  with  Him,  in 
spit«  of  all  His  lowliness,  sustaining  Him  in  the  mighty  work  He  had  undertaken, 
and  that  this  protection  was  bestowed  upon  Him  not  as  an  individual,  but  as  a 
King,  a  representative  of  His  people,  so  that  He  would  not  only  enjoy  it  Himself, 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

but  possess  the  power  of  bestowing  it  upon  others.  Hence,  while  His  inflexible 
justice  might  make  us  tremble  in  our  sin,  the  fact  that  He  was  also  endowed 
with  a  free  salvation,  and  a  salvation  which  He  could  bestow  as  a  kingly  right, 
would  remove  these  fears,  and  enable  us  to  rejoice  in  this  coming  King.  3.  He 
was  to  be"  lowly."  If  the  usual  sense  of  the  Word  be  given,  the  Church  would  be 
summoned  to  rejoice  because  of  the  humiliation  of  her  King.  And,  however 
incongruous  such  a  ground  of  rejoicing  may  seem  to  be  to  men  generally,  the 
heart  that  is  crushed  with  penitence  or  grief  will  comprehend  the  reason  of  this 
summons.  Had  this  august  King  been  as  sorrowless  as  He  was  sinless,  had  He 
been  a  robed  seraph,  or  a  crowned  monarch,  the  poor  and  suffering  could  never 
have  approached  Him  with  confidence,  for  He  could  not  have  sympathised  with 
them  in  their  sorrows.  But  when  He  comes  to  us  as  One  who  can  be  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  we  welcome  Him  with  joy,  and  understand 
why  we  are  called  to  rejoice,  because  He  comes  to  us  as  the  lowly  King.  Surely 
a  suffering  child  of  God  can  understand  how  blessed  a  thing  it  is  to  have  a  Saviour 
King  who  has  known  Himself  what  it  is  to  suffer.  4.  He  was  to  be  externally 
in  poverty,  "  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a  foal,  the  son  of  the  asses."  This  is 
a  prediction  of  poverty,  for  although  in  earlier  times  kings  rode  on  asses,  after  the 
time  of  Solomon  they  were  never  so  used,  horses  having  taken  their  place.  The 
employment  of  the  horse  in  war  also  made  the  use  of  the  ass  an  indication  of 
peace  as  well  as  of  poverty.  The  exact  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  in  the  entrance 
of  Christ  into  Jerusalem,  was  merely  a  specific  illustration  of  the  general  prediction, 
not  the  entire  object  of  the  prediction  itself.  Its  range  was  much  broader  than 
this  single  event,  and,  indeed,  would  have  been  substantially  fulfilled  had  this 
event  never  occurred.  The  specific  fulfilment,  however,  rivets  the  prophecy  more 
absolutely  to  Christ.  (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  How  comes  the  King  ? — The 
Caesars  of  the  world  have  come  upon  strong  palfreys,  prancing,  snorting ;  from 
their  nostrils  there  has  come  fire,  and  their  bits  have  been  wet  with  foam ;  how  comes 
the  King  ? — "  lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass." 
The  more  King  for  that !  Some  men  need  their  own  furniture  to  set  them  off ; 
some  persons  would  be  nothing  but  for  their  entourage  :  the  things  that  are  round 
about  them  seem  to  be  so  admirable  that  surely  they  must  be  admirable  them- 
selves : — such  the  loose  but  most  generous  reasoning  of  some  men  in  some  cases. 
"  Lowly  " — "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  Why  this  colt,  the  foal  of  an  ass  ? 
To  rebuke  the  horses  of  heathenism  : — "  The  Lord  wiU  cut  off  the  chariot  from 
Ephraim,  and  the  horse  from  Jerusalem  "  :  they  are  signs  of  pomp,  self-sufficiency, 
conscious  dignity,  as  who  should  say,  we  made  ourselves,  and  we  are  the  builders 
of  the  great  Babylons  of  the  earth.  The  Lord  will  not  have  it  so  with  His  Son, 
•with  His  Church,  with  His  kingdom.  Only  meekness  has  an  eternal  province. 
It  is  so  always  and  everywhere,  if  you  would  but  learn  it.  It  is  so  at  school. 
The  boy  who  is  going  to  do  everything  with  a  wave  of  his  hand  will  do  nothing; 
the  boy  who  does  not  care  anything  about  the  examination  until  the  night  before 
it  comes  off  and  then  gathers  himself  together  in  tremendous  impotence,  comes 
back  the  next  night  a  sadder  but  a  wiser  boy.  It  is  so  in  business,  it  is  so  in  the 
pulpit,  it  is  so  along  the  whole  line  of  human  action :  pretence  means  failure. 
But  there  must  not  be  mere  meekness  of  manner ;  the  tiger  is  sometimes  asleep. 
There  is  a  spurious  meekness ;  there  are  persons  that  have  no  voices  at  all,  auid 
when  they  speak  they  are  supposed  to  be  so  gentle  and  so  modest  and  so  unassum- 
ing. Not  they  !  It  is  for  want  of  hoof,  not  want  of  will ;  they  would  crush  you 
if  they  could.  This  meekness  is  a  quality  of  the  soul,  this  is  the  very  bloom  of 
greatness,  this  is  the  finest  expression  of  power.  Meekness  is  not  littleness,  insig- 
nificance, incompetency ;  meekness  is  the  rest  that  expresses  the  highest  degree 
of  velocity.  "  Riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass."  All  the 
rabbis  have  allegorised  this  ass  with  painful  tediousness.  They  in  very  deed 
have  tried  to  read  meanings  into  the  words,  but  they  were  so  obviously  incon- 
gruous that  they  never  got  into  the  words.  Take  it  as  a  type  of  your  King's 
meekness,  take  it  as  an  assurance  that  His  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.  This 
world  hates  all  meekness.  Mammon  never  listened  to  a  prayer  ;  Mammon  hates 
even  read  prayers  ;  Mammon  has  a  distaste  for  theological  conception  ;  Mammon 
never  sung  a  hymn  or  a  psalm  ;  Mammon  never  bowed  his  knees  in  tender,  holy 
adoration.  The  eyes  of  Mammon  are  greed,  the  hands  of  Mammon  are  felons, 
the  desire  of  Mammon  is  possession,  though  it  may  be  purchased  with  blood. 
This  world,  therefore,  will  not  have  true  meekness,  e;eiitlene38,  pitifiilness  ;  the 
world  will  have   pomp  and  show  and  magnificence  and   royalty, — one  day  its 


CHAP.  K.]  ZECHARIAH.  146 

heart  will  sicken  at  the  sight  of  its  own  idols.  These  are  the  lines  that  have 
sudden  endings.  Truth  encircles  the  universe  :  all  lies,  however  glibly  told, 
suddenly  disappear  in  the  pit.  Jesus  Christ  then  comes  to  set  up  a  kingdom 
that  is  moral,  subjective,  spiritual ;  a  kingdom  that  is  clement,  redeeming, 
sympathetic  ;  a  kingdom  that  rests  upon  unseen  but  immovable  bases.  Whatever 
He  touches  He  elevates.  Take  the  principle,  and  do  not  vex  the  mind  or  distract 
the  piety  with  worthless  detail :  the  principle  is  this,  that  when  Jesus  Christ 
comes  into  the  world  He  comes  as  no  other  king  ever  came,  that  He  may  do  a 
work  which  no  other  king  ever  dreamed.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  coming 
of  the  King  of  Zion  : — I.  Contemplate  Messiah  in  His  title,  as  a  King.  There 
are  many  senses  in  which  we  may  contemplate  Christ  as  a  King.  1.  He  has  all  the 
ancestral  honours,  titles,  and  high-born  qualifications  of  a  king.  He  was 
descended  of  a  stock  of  heavenly  royalty  ;  He  was  the  first-born  of  every  creature. 
2.  Christ  gave  out  laws  and  principles  of  government  as  a  King.  His  sermon 
on  the  Mount  is  a  beautiful  unfolding  of  the  principles  of  spiritual  rule,  the  righteous 
awards  which  would  characterise  His  future  administration.  Chi'ist  then  is  a 
King.  He  defines  the  terms  of  our  obedience  ;  He  lays  down  the  maxims  of  the 
spiritual  realm  ;  He  declares  what  worship  He  will  accept,  and  in  what  way 
alone  His  presence  can  be  approached.  3.  Christ  protects,  defends,  and  counsels 
His  subjects  as  a  King.  In  the  primitive  condition  of  society  monarchs  were 
for  the  most  part  chosen  on  account  of  their  possessing,  in  the  estimation  of  then* 
subjects,  some  special  kingly  qualities.  He  who  was  the  first  to  go  forth  with 
their  armies,  He  who  would  redeem  them  from  the  power  of  the  oppressor,  lie 
who  was  valiant  in  fight,  prompt  in  action,  prudent  in  counsel,  apt  to  rule,  He 
by  one  consent  would  be  allowed  to  be  advanced  to  the  throne ;  and  in  this 
sense,  Christ  ever  vindicated  His  claim  to  be  the  King,  and  "  Head  over  all  things 
to  His  Church."  And  He  is  King  over  all  His  spiritual  subjects  to-day.  For 
all  the  purposes  of  guidance,  help,  comfort,  and  protection.  He  still  reigns.  4.  And 
Christ  bestows  honours,  and  gifts,  and  recompenses,  as  a  King.  Christ  gives  as  a 
King — pardons  full  and  free,  grace  rich  and  abounding,  crowns  bright  and  glorious. 
II.  Contemplate  Messiah  in  His  chakacter — He  is  just.  The  word  is  to 
be  taken  in  its  largest  and  highest  sense,  as  comprehensive  both  of  the  unblemished 
sanctity  of  His  personal  character,  and  the  perfect  righteousness  which  would 
distinguish  His  spiritual  government.  In  all  His  dispensations  of  grace  and 
goodness,  Christ  is  ever  just.  III.  Contemplate  Messiah  in  His  power — 
HAVING  salvation.  He  has  that  which  is  to  procure  salvation.  His  salvation 
saves  from  a  great  danger,  it  frees  from  a  great  condemnation  ;  it  was  bought  at 
a  great  price  ;  it  admits  to  great  and  glorious  prerogatives.  Note  also  the  mild 
and  gentle  manner  of  Christ's  spiritual  administration.  "  He  is  lowly."  (Daniel 
2Ioore,  M.A.)  The  lowly  King  : — I  do  not  intend  to  expound  the  whole  text 
at  any  length,  but  simply  to  dwell  upon  the  lowliness  of  Jesus.  Yet  this  much  I 
may  say  :  Whenever  God  would  have  His  people  especially  glad  it  is  always 
in  Himself.  If  it  be  written  :  "  Rejoice  greatly,"  then  the  reason  is,  "  Behold, 
thy  King  cometh  unto  thee  !  "  Our  chief  source  of  rejoicing  is  the  presence  of 
King  Jesus  in  the  midst  of  us.  Whether  it  be  His  first  or  His  second  advent,  His 
very  shadow  is  delight.  His  footfall  is  music  to  our  ear.  That  delight  springs 
much  from  the  fact  that  He  is  ours.  "  Rejoice  greatly,  0  daughter  of  Zion.  .  .  , 
Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee."  Whatever  He  may  be  to  others,  He  is 
thy  King,  and  to  whomsoever  He  may  or  may  not  come.  He  cometh  unto  thee. 
He  comes  for  thy  deliverance,  thine  honour,  thy  consummated  bliss.  He  keeps 
thy  company  ;  He  makes  thy  house  His  palace,  thy  love  His  solace,  thy  nature 
His  home.  He  who  is  thy  King  by  hereditary  right,  by  His  choice  of  thee,  by 
His  redemption  of  thee,  and  by  thy  willing  choice  of  Him,  is  coming  to  thee ; 
therefore  do  thou  shout  for  joy.  The  verse  goes  on  to  show  why  the  Lord  our 
King  is  such  a  source  of  gladness :  "  He  is  just,  and  having  salvation."  He 
blends  righteousness  and  mercy  ;  justice  to  the  ungodly,  and  favom-  to  His  saints. 
He  has  worked  out  the  stern  problem — how  can  God  be  just,  and  yet  save  the 
sinful  ?  He  is  just  in  His  own  personal  character,  just  as  having  borne  the  penalty 
of  sin,  and  just  as  cleared  from  the  sin  which  He  voluntarily  took  upon  Him. 
Having  endured  the  terrible  ordeal,  He  is  saved,  and  His  people  are  saved  in  Him. 
He  is  to  be  saluted  with  hosannas,  which  signify,  "  Save,  Lord  "  ;  for  where  He 
comes  He  brings  victory  and  consequent  salvation  with  Him.  He  routs  the 
enemies  of  His  people,  breaks  for  them  the  serpent's  head,  and  leads  their  captivity 
captive.  We  admire  the  justice  which  marks  His  reign,  and  the  salvation  which 
lO 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

attends  His  sway  ;  and  in  both  respects  we  cry :  "  Blessed  is  He  that  cometh 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  !  "  Moreover,  it  is  written  of  Him  that  He  is  lowly, 
which  cannot  be  said  of  many  kings  and  princes  of  the  earth  ;  nor  would  they 
care  to  have  it  said  of  them.  Thy  King,  0  daughter  of  Jerusalem,  loves  to  have 
His  lowliness  published  by  thee  with  exceeding  joy.  His  outward  state  betokens 
the  humility  and  gentleness  of  His  character.  He  appears  to  be  what  He  really 
is  :  He  conceals  nothing  from  His  chosen.  In  the  height  of  His  grandeur  He  is 
not  like  the  proud  monarchs  of  earth.  The  patient  ass  He  prefers  to  the  noble 
charger ;  and  He  is  more  at  home  with  the  common  people  than  with  the  great. 
In  His  grandest  pageant,  in  His  capital  city.  He  was  still  consistent  with  His 
meek  and  lowly  character,  for  He  came  "  riding  upon  an  ass."  He  rode  through 
Jerusalem  in  state  ;  but  what  lowliness  marked  the  spectacle  !  It  was  an  extem- 
porised procession,  which  owed  nothing  to  Garter-king-at-arms,  but  everything 
to  the  spontaneous  love  of  friends.  An  ass  was  brought,  and  its  foal,  and  His 
disciples  sat  Him  thereon.  Instead  of  courtiers  in  their  robes,  He  was  surrounded 
by  common  peasants  and  fishermen,  and  children  of  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  : 
the  humblest  of  men  and  the  youngest  of  the  race  shouted  His  praises.  Boughs 
of  trees  and  garments  of  friends  strewed  the  road,  instead  of  choice  flowers  and 
costly  tapestries ;  it  was  the  pomp  of  spontaneous  love,  not  the  stereotyped 
pageantry  which  power  exacts  of  fear.  With  half  an  eye  every  one  can  see  that 
this  King  is  of  another  sort  from  common  princes,  and  His  dignity  of  another  kind 
from  that  which  tramples  on  the  poor.  According  to  the  narrative,  as  well  as 
the  prophecy,  there  would  seem  to  have  been  two  beasts  in  the  procession.  I 
conceive  that  our  Lord  rode  on  the  foal,  for  it  was  essential  that  He  should  mount 
a  beast  which  had  never  been  used  before.  God  is  not  a  sharer  with  men  ;  that 
which  is  consecrated  to  His  peculiar  service  must  not  have  been  aforetime  devoted 
to  lower  uses.  Jesus  rides  a  colt  whereon  never  man  sat.  But  why  was  the 
mother  there  ?  Did  not  Jesus  say  of  both  ass  and  foal,  "  Loose  them  and  bring 
them  unto  Me  "  ?  This  appears  to  me  to  be  a  token  of  His  tenderness  ;  He  would 
not  needlessly  sever  the  mother  from  her  foal.  I  like  to  see  a  farmer's  kindness 
when  he  allows  the  foal  to  follow  when  the  mare  is  ploughing  or  labouring ;  and 
I  admire  the  same  thoughtfulness  in  our  Lord.  He  careth  for  cattle,  yea,  even 
for  an  ass  and  her  foal.  He  would  not  even  cause  a  poor  beast  a  needless  pang 
by  taking  away  its  young ;  and  so  in  that  procession  the  beast  of  the  field 
took  its  part  joyfully,  in  token  of  a  better  age  in  which  all  creatures  shall  be  de- 
livered from  bondage,  and  shall  share  the  blessings  of  His  unsuffering  reign.  Our 
Lord  herein  taught  His  disciples  to  cultivate  delicacy,  not  only  towards  each 
other,  but  towards  the  whole  creation.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Palm  Sunday 
lessons  : — To-day  is  this  prophecy  fulfilled  in  yo\ir  ears.  For  once  the  Man  of 
Sorrows  was  honoured  on  the  earth,  for  once  the  despised  and  rejected  of  men 
was  welcomed  as  a  King,  a  Deliverer,  a  Prophet.  But  what  did  that  proces- 
sion on  the  Mount  of  Olives  really  mean  T  It  was  a  procession  of  sacrifice.  As 
the  Paschal  Lamb  was  brought  out  solemnly  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  so 
now  the  true  Paschal  Lamb  was  brought  out  to  die.  He  was  welcomed  by  the 
Jews  as  the  conqueror  of  the  Romans  ;  they  did  not  understand  that  He  was 
the  conqueror  of  sin  and  death.  They  greeted  Him  as  King  of  Jerusalem,  they 
did  not  know  that  He  was  King  of  heaven  and  earth.  How  soon  the  feelings 
of  the  people  changed,  how  short-lived  were  their  praises.  Let  us  learn  our 
lesson  from  the  palms.  Many  people  are  willing  to  receive  Jesus  as  a  King  and 
a  Deliverer,  who  reject  Him  as  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  If  He  were  to  tell  you  to 
sit  down  on  His  right  hand,  to  be  proud  of  your  religion,  to  condemn  others, 
to  believe  yourselves  righteous,  then  you  would  cry,  "  Hosannah."  But  if  He 
tells  you  to  learn  of  Him  for  He  is  meek,  to  judge  not,  to  take  the  lowest  seat, 
that  ihe  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  that  you  must  forgive  your  enemies, 
that  blessed  are  they  that  mourn, — then  you  cry,  "  Away  with  Him,  crucify 
Him."  Learn  from  this  to  avoid  a  form  of  religion  which  is  only  lip-service  ; 
it  is  very  easy  to  talk  about  sacred  things,  but  pious  talk,  remember,  is  not  religion. 
We  must  show  forth  our  faith  not  only  with  our  lips  but  in  our  lives.  Jesus 
is  leading  us,  as  He  led  the  people  on  Palm  Sunday,  towards  Jerusalem,  the  vision 
of  peace,  and  none  shall  enter  there  but  those  who  follow  Him.  {H.  J.  Wilmot 
Buxton.)  The  coming  of  the  King  of  Zion  : — The  prophet  speaks  not  of  one 
event  merely,  but  of  the  whole  of  our  Lord's  gracious  conduct  to  His  people. 
The  children  of  Zion  are  called  to  be  joyful  in  their  King  ;  for  He  is  ever  coming 
to  them  "  just  and  having  salvation,"  and  by  virtue  of  the  blood  of  the  ever- 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECHARIAH.  147 

lasting  covenant  bringing  the  prisoners  out  of  the  pit,  and  leading  them  all  to 
a  city  of  rest.     I.  The  character  ttndeb  which  otjb  Kino  is  presented  to 
us.     1.  He  is  just.     It  is  not  punitive  justice  that  is  here  intended,  but  right- 
eousness.    (1)  This  character  is  illustrated  by  His  Divinity.     He  is  just,  per- 
fectly and  unchangeably — perfectly  because  He  is  God  ;  unchangeably,  because 
essentially.     It  is  His  nature  to  be  just,  and  therefore  He  cannot  be  otherwise. 
There  is  a  holiness  in  the  creature  ;   but  there   is   a   peculiar  holiness  in  God. 
(2)  This  character  is  illustrated  by  His  incarnation.     AH  that  moral  perfection 
which  is  in  God  shone  forth  from  Him.     His  nature  was  spotless  ;  and  even 
His  enemies  gave  witness  to  the  immaculate  pimty  of  His  life  on  which  keen- 
eyed  envy  itself  could  fix  no  charge.     The  human  natiu-e  of  Christ  was  spot- 
less, because  the  Divine  nature  into  which  it  was  impersonated  was  perfectly 
holy.      No  heresy  can  be  more   pestilent  than  the  assertion  that  the  holinesa 
of  Christ  consists  in  acts  and  habits,  and  not  in  nature.     That  only  which  was 
perfectly  uncontaminated   could    be   united  in  one   person  with   that  which  is 
ineffably  holy.     (3)  By  His  death.     As  a  sacrifice  for  sin.     In  this  we  see  the 
most  illustrious  proof  of  His  essential  holiness,  and  His  love  of  justice.     (4)  By 
His  work  in  the  heart  of  men.     His  kingdom  is  in  the  heart.     Whatever  rule 
He  has  over  the  outward  conduct  originates  there.     His  work  is  to  restore  man, 
and  exhibit  him  again  as  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.     (5)  By  His  conduct 
towards  His  Church.     "  A  sceptre  of  righteousness  is  the  sceptre  of  Thy  king- 
dom."    By  this  sceptre  He  tries  and  governs  His  visible  Church.     He  is  Judge 
in  His  Church  even  now,  though    the   judgment  which  He  administers  is  not 
without  mercy.     2.   He  has  salvation.     (1)  He  has  it  meritoriously.     To  save 
is  an  act  to  which  the  benevolence  of  His  Godhead  disposes  Him  ;  and  "  judg- 
ment is  His  strange  work."     But  guilty  man  is  not  merely  an  object  of  bene- 
volence.    He  is  a  subject  of  moral  government.     What  reason  of  joy  there  is 
in  this  consideration  !     The  salvation  which  we  need,  and  which  all  need,  is  in 
His  hands.     He  has  purchased  the  right  to  bestow  it.     The  work  is  virtually 
accomplished,  and  nothing  remains  for  us  but  to  apply  to  Him,  and  avail  our- 
selves of  that  which  He  has  done  on  our  behalf.     (2)  Salvation  is  the  subject 
of  His  ofiicial  administration.     Does  He  give  the  Word  ?     It  is  the  promise  and 
the  rule  of  salvation.     Does  He  collect  a  Church,  and  denominate  it  His  body  ? 
His  Spirit   fills  it,  to  discover  the  want  of  salvation,  and  reveal  the  means  of 
obtaining  it :  to  inspire  desire,  to  assist  our  efforts,  to  realise  within  us  all  that 
the  external  Word  exhibits  to  faith  and  hope.     Does  He  perpetuate  the  ministry 
of  the  Gospel  ?     He  is  with  His  servants  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  to  make 
them  the  means  of  conveying  this  salvation.     Does  He  appoint  His  Sabbaths 
for  ordinances  ?     In  these  the  Church  is  made  the  deposit  and  source  of  salva- 
tion to  the  world.     The  very  sacraments  are  signs  and  seals  of  salvation.     II.  The 
SPIRITUAL  nature  OF  His  KINGDOM.     Tbis  is  strongly  indicated  by  the  circum- 
stances connected  with  His  public  and  royal  entry  into  Jerusalem.      This  event 
was  intended  to  call   off   His  disciples  and  us   from  the  vain  notion  of  a  civil 
monarchy.     They  thought  He  was  then  assuming  it ;  but  even  then  we  see  Him 
rejecting  it.     There  is  a  tendency  in  man  to   look  even  now,  as  formerly,  for 
something  more  than   a  spiritual  kingdom  ;  a  kingdom  of  visible  power,   and 
glory,  and  splendour.     He  entered  this  to  show  that  He  was  a  King :    but  He 
disappointed  their  expectation  in  the  very  circumstances  of  this  event,  in  order 
to  show  that   His   kingdom  was   not   of  this  world.     He  rode  upon  an  ass,  to 
denote  that  He  was  a  peaceful  sovereign.     He  returned  by  night  to  the  Mount 
of  Olives,  which  He  certainly  would  not  have  done,  had  He  been  about  to  estab- 
lish a  civil  reign.     Children  celebrated  His  praises,  not  the  men.     The  true  glory 
of  Christ's  kingdom  is,  that  it  erects  its  dominion  in  the  human  mind  and  heart  ; 
spreads  its  light  and  power  over  all  the  faculties  and  principles  of  our  nature  ; 
ordaining  the  praise  of  God  out  of  the  mouth  ;  so  that  everyone  who  is  brought 
tinder  its  influence  becomes  the  instrument  of  instructing  others,  and  subduing 
them  to  the  service  of  the  same  Saviour.     III.  The  extent  of  this  spiritual 
DOMINION  OF  Christ.     1.  His  dominion  is  to  extend  "  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from 
the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth."     2.  The  state  of  mankind,  it  is  true,  is  deeply 
affecting.     It  is  a  state  of  wretchedness  and  danger.     They  are   "  prisoners," 
cast  into  a  "  pit  wherein  is  no  water."     Allusion  is  to  the  ancient  punishment 
of  criminals,  who  were  sometimes  thrown  into  a  pit,  and  left  to  die  of  thirst ; 
and  sometimes,   after  enduring  the  torments  of  thirst,  were  brought  forth  to 
execution.     3.    Then   there   follows  an  address  to   the   prisoners.     "  Turn  you 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

to  the  stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope."  Only  a  few  had  returned  from  Babylon. 
Zechariah  addresses  those  who  were  left  behind.  In  how  much  higher  sense 
than  the  Jews  are  we  prisoners  of  hope.  Let  such  prisoners  think  of  the  blood 
of  the   covenant   of  deliverance   which   has   been  shed.     (R.    Watson.)  The 

coming  King  : — "  Rejoice,  then,  0  Zion,"  city  of  God,  built  not  of  stones,  but 
of  souls  of  men.     "  Shout,  ye  daughters  of  Jerusalem,"  once  as  the  stones  of 
the  desert,  but  now  a  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham.     From  yon  sepulchre  thy  King 
cometh,  triumphant  over  death,  and  sending  forth  over  all  the  world  the  message 
of  reconciliation  !     Redeemed  from  bondage,  we  stand  within  the  city  of  God, 
the  visible  Church.     But  how  much  has  still  to  be  done  ere  the  temple  of  God 
be  fully  built — ere  Christ  be  reflected  in  His  members  on  earth  !     How  many 
things  have  we  each  to  deplore  !     The  distracting  effect  of  worldly  business, 
want  of  energy,  of  love,  of  prayer.     Hence  little  work  for  Him,  and  little  fruit 
from  that  work,  and   little  comfort.      Let  us  dwell  on  the  truth,   "  Thy  King 
cometh."     1.  In  view  of  the  fact  commemorated  to-day.     His  work  of  redemp- 
tion was  complete  and  efifectual  (2  Cor.  v.  14).     He  took  life  unto  the  dominion 
of  death.     Even  while  the  disciples  mourned.  He  was  carrying  on  a  work  of  grace 
( 1  Pet.  iii.  19).     He  died  that  He  might  rise  again  for  our  justification.     2.  He 
cometh  to  each  soul,  bringing  help.     In  times  of  darkness  or  depression,  when 
trials  seem  heavy,  or  our  work  arduous,  He  reminds  us  that  though  we  see  Him 
not,  we  are  not  beyond  His  care.     3.  He  cometh  to  establish  His  kingdom,  to 
bring  perfected  salvation  to  those  who  wait  for  Him.     {James  F.  Montgomery, 
D.D.)        Joy  in  the  King  unrealised : — I  have  read  in  one  of  George  MacDonald's 
novels  of  a  bom-blind  lamplighter.     He  illuminated  the  city  at  night ;  but  had 
no  sense  of  what  he  was  doing.     So  has  it  been  with  the  land  of  Israel.     She 
has  presented  the  portrait  to  the  gallery ;  she  has  heard  the  plaudite  of  the  spec- 
tators ;  and  she  has  refused  to  join  in  them.     In  all  history  there  is  nothing 
Fo  unique.     It  is  the  enemies  of  this  land  that  have  crowned  her  world-king ; 
it  is  the  Gentiles  that  have  come  to  His  light.     The  lamplighter  has  been  blind 
to  the  beauty  of  the  throne  she  has  illumined.     Palestine  has  lit  up  the  scene  ; 
she  has  listened  to  the  crowd  shouting  their  applause  ;  and  she  has  wondered 
why.     She  has  been  like  a  deaf-mute  in  a  concert-room.     She  has  struck  by 
accident  the  notes  of  a  harp,  and  by  accident  they  have  burst  into  music.     The 
audience  has  cheered  the  performance  to  the  echo  ;  but  the  performer  knows 
not   her   triumph.     {0.    Matheson. )        The   Prince   of   peace : — This   prediction 
is  of  the  literal  kind,  and  it  was  literally  and  most  exactly  fulfilled  in  Jesus  of 
Nazareth.     The  prophet  doth  not  coldly  inform  Jerusalem  that  her  King  should 
come  to  her,  and  that  when  He  did  come  she  ought  to  rejoice.     Wrapped  into 
future  times,  he  seems  to  have  been  present  at  the  glorious  scene.     Standing 
upon  IMount  Olivet,  he  hears  the  hosannahs  of  the  di.sciplcs,  and  beholds  the 
procession  approach  towards  the  gates  of  Jerusalem.     Religion,  then,  hath  its 
joys  ;  a  prophet  calleth  us  to  exult  and  shout.     The  reason  assigned  why  Jeru- 
salem was  called  upon  to  rejoice,  was  the  approach  of  her  King.     The  prophets 
had   promised   her   a   king    who   should   overcome    her   enemies,    and   triumph 
gloriously.     When   the    King   came,    Jerusalem   despised    His   appearance,    and 
soon  nailed  a  spiritual  monarch  to  a  cross.     Righteousness,  salvation,  and  humility 
distinguish  the   person   and   reign   of  Messiah.     Righteousness   leads   the   way. 
This  is  the  name  whereby  He  shall  be  called — "  The   Lord  our  righteousness." 
Salvation  is  the  next  sign  and  token  whereby  to  know  the  King  of  Zion.     He 
was  to  execute  that  part  of  the  regal  office  which  consisteth  in  rescuing  a  people 
from  their  oppressors.     And  if  tidings  of  salvation  are  not  tidings  of  joy,  what 
tidings  can  be  such  ?     What  is  deliverance  from  a  temporal  adversary  compared 
with  the  salvation  of  the  whole  world  from  the  oppression  of  the  spiritual  enemy, 
from  sin,  and  sickness,  and  sorrow,  and  pain,  and  death,  and  hell  ?     This  was 
the  salvation  which  Jesus  undertook  to  effect ;  and  His  miracles  declared  Him 
equal  to  the  mighty  task.     Different  to  other  kings  the  King  Messiah  was  to 
be  in  His  appearance  and  demeanour.     He  is  "  lowly."     He  appeared,  in  His 
first  advent,  in  a  state  of  humiliation.     The  nature  of  His  undertaking  required 
it,  and  their  own  law  and  prophets  are  clear  upon  the  subject.     The  types  and 
prophecies  are  as  positive  for  His  humiliation,  as  they  are  for  His  exaltation  : 
nor  could  any  one  person  accomplish  them  all,  without  being  equally  remark- 
able for  lowlii>cs8  and   meekness,   glory  and    honour.      {Bishop  Horne.)         His 
dominion  shall  be  flrom  sea  even  to  sea. — The  final  triumph  of  Christianity  : — 
I.    This    triumph    is    assured    by    the    promisbs    of    the    Bible.      They  leave 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECHABIAH.  143 

no  room  for  doubt.  II.  The  Divine  origin  and  character  of  Chris- 
tianity RENDER  IT  CERTAIN.  Christianity  itself  is  on  trial.  If  it  faild 
to  subjugate  the  world  ;  if  it  encounters  systems  of  error,  false  philosophies, 
hostile  forces,  effete  civihsations,  which  it  is  inadequate  to  transform  and  vitali^o 
with  its  Divine  life — then  it  will  be  demonstrated  that  it  is  not  of  God,  and  it.s 
high  claims  are  false.  A  partial  and  temporary  success  will  not  sufl&ce.  lu 
must  conquer  every  race  and  clime  and  generation  and  form  of  evil  and  opposi- 
tion in  all  the  world,  or  be  itself  defeated  and  driven  from  the  field.     III.  The 

MEASURE  OF  SUCCESS  WHICH  IT  HAS  ALREADY  ACHIEVED  IS  A  GUARANTEE   OF  ITS 

COMPLETE  ULTIMATE  TRIUMPH.  Christianity  is  not  without  its  witnesses  and 
signal  triumphs  in  human  history.  There  is  nothing  comparable  with  it.  It 
has  shown  itself,  on  actual  trial  of  1800  years,  to  be  "  the  wisdom  of  God  and 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  It  has  subdued  kingdoms  and  changed  the 
face  of  the  world.  Idolatry,  superstition,  false  philosophy,  cannot  stand  before 
it.  It  saves  "  the  chief  of  sinners."  It  elevates  the  most  degraded  people. 
Nothing  in  the  heart  of  man,  or  in  society,  can  withstand  its  power.  It  is  moving 
steadily  and  rapidly  on  to  final  conquests.  "  Christianity  thus  stands  com- 
mitted to  the  achievement  of  universal  dominion.  Its  Founder  puts  it  forth 
into  history  as  the  universal  religion,  foreordained  to  universal  prevalence." 
(/.  M.  Sherioood,  D.D.)  Universal  bloom: — As  it  has  been  positively  demon- 
strated that  the  Arctic  region  was  once  a  blooming  garden  and  a  fruitful  field, 
those  regions  may  change  climate  and  again  be  a  blooming  garden  and  a  fruitful 
field.  Ptofessor  Heer,  of  Zurich,  says  the  remains  of  flowers  have  been  found 
in  the  Arctic,  showing  it  was  like  Mexico  for  climate  ;  and  it  is  found  that  the 
Arctic  was  the  mother  region  from  which  all  the  flowers  descended.  Professor 
Wallace  says  the  remains  of  all  styles  of  animal  life  are  found  in  the  Arctic,  includ- 
ing those  animals  that  can  live  only  in  warm  climates.  Now,  that  Arctic  region 
which  has  been  demonstrated  by  flora,  and  fauna,  and  geological  argument  to 
have  been  as  full  of  vegetation  and  life  as  our  Florida,  may  be  turned  back  to 
its  original  bloom  and  glory,  or  it  wiU  be  shut  up  as  a  museum  of  crystals  for 
curiosity  seekers  to  visit.  But  Arctic  and  Antarctic  in  some  shape  will  belong 
to  the  Redeemer's  realm. 

Ver.  11.  By  the  blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have  sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the 

pit  wherein  is  no  water. — The  delivered  'prisoners  : — Enlarge  on  the  Gospel 
promise  in  immediate  connection  with  the  text.  It  calls  on  the  daughter  of 
Zion  to  rejoice  in  the  (ioming  of  the  Saviour.  It  describes  His  character ;  the 
nature  of  His  kingdom  ;  the  means  by  which  it  shall  be  spread  ;  and  the  extent 
of  it.  The  deliverance  of  the  Jews  from  captivity  was  a  step  towards  the  coming 
of  Messiah,  and  the  earnest  of  it.  Just  as,  through  the  remembrance  of  His 
covenant  with  Israel  by  blood,  God  delivered  the  Jewish  Church,  so  through 
the  "  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant"  does  He  deliver  His  people  under  the 
Gospel.  I.  The  prisoners  and  their  prison-housb.  "  Thy  prisoners."  This 
most  aptly  describes  the  state  of  those  who  are  convinced  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
of  their  lost  and  undone  condition,  and  who  are  looking  only  for  wrath.  The 
prison-house  of  such  is  described  as  "  the  pit  wherein  there  is  no  water  "  ;  i.e.  no 
comfort,  no  peace.  No  way  of  escape  is  apparent,  and  if  the  prisoner  remain  in 
it,  he  dies.  But,  though  the  pit  is  deep  and  horrible,  yet  the  prisoner's  voice 
can  be  heard,  when  he  calls  for  deliverance  ;  and  his  voice  is  never  unheeded. 
Therefore  let  all  prisoners  cry  mightily  unto  Him  that  is  able  to  save.  II.  The 
WAY  OF  DELIVERANCE.  Justicc  must  be  Satisfied  ere  the  mouth  of  the  pit  can  be 
opened.  This  is  implied  in  the  expression — "  the  blood  of  the  covenant."  Jesus 
covenanting  to  shed  His  blood  for  their  ransom — the  Father  covenanting  to  accept 
this  ransom,  and  to  set  the  prisoners  free  on  account  of  it.  Enlarge  on  this 
covenant  as  a  covenant  of  promise,  the  greatness,  the  freeness,  the  sureness. 
How  is  this  belief,  this  trust  in  the  promise,  brought  about  ?  Faith  by  hearing, 
hearing  by  the  Word — the  Spirit  of  God  applying.  (John  D.  Lawe,  M.A.)  The 
blood  of  the  covenant : — 1.  The  deeper  any  of  the  people  of  God  be  in  trouble,  they 
lie  nearer  His  heart  and  help  :  and  He  would  have  them  look  on  the  comforts 
of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  the  covenant,  as  especially  intended  for  them,  there- 
fore doth  He  apply  the  general  comforts  of  Chiist's  kingdom  to  the  distressed 
Jews.  2.  As  the  afflictions  of  the  Lord's  people  may  be  very  bitter,  and  so  ordered 
as  they  may  be  trials  indeed  ;  so  there  will  be  special  notice  taken  of  them  when 
their  rods  become  so  insupportable  that  there  is  no  subsisting  under  them ;  for 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

He  eyes  them,  when  they  axe  prisoners  "  in  a  pit,  wherein  is  no  water,"  as  some- 
time they  may  be.  3.  God  entering  in  a  covenant  with  His  people,  condescends 
to  take  in  all  their  outward  necessities,  and  engages  to  have  a  care  of  them  in 
these  as  well  as  in  things  spiritual ;  and  so  all  their  mercies  come  by  covenant ; 
for  it  is  by  "  the  covenant  that  the  prisoners  are  sent  forth."  4.  The  mercies  of 
the  Church  are  not  only  rich  and  refreshful  in  themselves,  and  in  their  original, 
that  they  come  through  a  covenant  of  love,  but  in  their  purchase,  that  they  are 
bought,  and  the  covenant  concerning  them  made  sure  by  the  blood  of  the  Son 
of  God.  "  By  the  blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have  sent  forth  thy  prisoners." 
5.  The  Lord  minds  His  covenant,  and  through  and  for  Christ  makes  the  promises 
of  it  forthcoming  for  His  people's  good,  when  they  have  broken  it  on  their  part ; 
for,  though  for  their  perfidiousness  they  were  scattered,  yet  the  covenant  stands 
to  bring  them  back.  {George  Hutcheson.)  What  Christ  has  done  for,  and  what 
Be  is  to  His  people  : — Though  this  passage  may  refer  to  many  temporal  blessings 
bestowed  upon  God's  ancient  Church  ;  yet  its  spiritual  significance  is  immediately 
connected  with  the  kingdom  of  Messiah.  I.  The  euined  state  of  the  Chuech. 
"  Prisoners  in  a  pit  wherein  is  no  water."  1.  The  degradation  of  this  state.  2.  The 
pollution  of  this  state.  3.  The  misery  of  this  state.  4.  The  hopelessness  of  our 
state.  II.  The  means  op  accomplishing  ouk  salvation.  1.  God  is  the  Author 
of  redemption.  2.  Redemption  was  etfected  by  the  blood  of  the  covenant.  3.  By 
the  covenant  blood  the  circumstances  of  the  Church  are  altered.  III.  The  present 
state  of  God's  redeemed  people  according  to  their  names.  "  Prisoners 
of  hope."  1.  Until  delivered  they  are  actually  prisoners — to  sin,  Satan,  the  law  ; 
and  they  are  delivered  also  from  the  bondage  of  a  corrupt  and  stubborn  will. 
Under  the  Gospel  dispensation  every  vessel  of  mercy  is  delivered  by  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  is  brought  into  a  lively  hope  of  eternal  glory  by  faith  of  the 
operation  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Then  this  hope  is  in  Christ.  3.  This  hope  is  according 
to  the  Word.  4.  It  is  a  sure  hope  of  eternal  life.  5.  It  is  a  present  security  to 
the  soul.  IV.  Christ  is  a  stronghold  to  all  His  people.  1.  From  error 
and  unbelief.  2.  From  sin  and  Satan.  3.  To  God  they  turn  generally.  4.  To 
God  in  Christ  especially.  "  I  will  render  unto  thee  double."  (I)  Pardon  and 
righteousness.  (2)  Great  peace  of  mind.  (3)  Full  assurance  of  understanding. 
(4)  Joy  here,  and  certainty  of  glory  hereafter.  (5)  Salvation  of  soul  and  body, 
from  sin,  death,  and  hell.     (T.  B.  Baker.) 

Ver.  12.  Turn  you  to  the  strong'hold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope. — Imprisoned  hy 
hope  : — In  ver.  8  is  the  assurance  that  the  Divine  blessing  specially  rests  on  Israel 
returned  to  Jerusalem.  On  this  assurance  is  baaed  an  earnest  plea,  addressed 
to  the  Jews  who  were  still  remaining  in  Babylon,  unwilling  to  break  up  their 
associations,  and  share  with  their  countrymen  in  restoring  the  ancient  nation. 
Zechariah  pleads  with  them  to  return  to  the  Lord's  land.  "  Jehovah  has  begun 
to  bless  us,  come  back  and  share  with  us."  The  prophet  fixes  on  one  of  their 
excuses,  which  was  a  serious  self-delusion.  He  noticed  that  the  hope  of  returning 
"  some  day,"  was  keeping  them  from  making  a  present  decision,  and  responding 
at  once  to  the  claims  of  duty.  Family  ties,  increasing  wealth,  business  relations, 
were  making  their  return  to  Jerusalem  only  a  hope — a  hope  with  which  they  were 
deceiving  themselves.  Not  one  of  these  men  had  refused  to  return.  They 
intended  to  retiurn,  and  quite  hoped  to  retmn.  But  they  procrastinated.  They 
believed  in  the  "  unknown  morrow,"  in  what  might  happen  some  day.  Pro- 
crastination includes  hope,  and  in  that  lies  the  subtle  slavery  of  it.  But  it  is  a 
hope  that  imprisons  :  it  keeps  a  man  easy-minded  while  he  is  neglecting  his  duty. 
This  is  the  infinite  sadness  of  it.  I.  As  regards  the  eternal  salvation  of 
our  souls,  we  all  have  hope.  Only  in  very  exceptional  cases,  and  those  usually 
of  disease,  is  hope  quite  lost.  \.  None  of  us  are  without  some  knowledge  of  our 
spiritual  state  and  condition.  2.  None  of  us  are  without  occasional  impressions 
of  the  solemnity  of  our  spiritual  condition.  3.  Even  in  calmest  moments  none 
of  us  are  without  an  anxious  desire  to  secure  the  settlement  of  our  eternal  interests. 
4.  None  of  us  have  settled  it,  that  we  mean  to  be  among  the  lost.  None  of  us 
expect  to  perish  everlastingly.  All  have  hope.  II.  As  regards  personal 
salvation,  many  of  us  are  imprisoned  by  our  hope.  The  figure  of  the  text 
is  taken  from  the  peril  of  a  country  when  its  enemy  is  either  passing  close  by  it, 
or  marching  through  it.  Conquering  Alexander  was  pushing  his  way  from 
Phoenicia  to  Egypt,  and  Judaea  lay  right  on  his  route.  The  people  in  the  villages 
might  imprison  themselves  by  the  hope  that  Alexander  would  not  come  their 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECEARIAH.  161 

way.  And  this  hope  would  keep  them  from  seeking  the  shelter  of  the  stronghold. 
All  wise  people,  in  such  a  time  of  peril,  would  flee  from  danger  to  the  security 
of  the  walled  city.  We  are  saved  by  hope,  but  it  must  be  well-grounded  hope. 
When  the  ancient  Israelite  had  accidentally  slain  a  man,  it  was  imprisoning  and 
imperilling  for  him  to  hope  that  the  Avenger  of  Elood  had  not  yet  heard  of  it, 
and  was  not  yet  upon  his  track.  There  was  not  one  moment  to  lose.  At  once, 
delayed  by  no  hopes,  or  possibilities,  or  excuses,  he  must  be  away,  flying  to  the 
city  of  refuge  that  was  nearest  at  hand.  Men  do  die  in  their  sms.  We  hope  that 
we  shall  not  be  among  them.  But  unless  that  hope  rests  on  some  good  and  sure 
foundations,  we  are  imprisoning  ourselves  in  our  hopes.  Look  at  some  of  these 
imprisoning  hopes,  and  see  if  any  of  them  can  reveal  ourselves  to  ourselves,  and 
be  a  gracious  means  of  arousing  us  out  of  false  security.  1.  An  idea  very  fre- 
quently cherished  is  this — the  next  world  will  provide  a  milder  estimate  of  our 
ein  than  is  formed  in  this  world.  It  is  strange  how  we  let  a  notion  of  that  kind 
cling  to  us.  "  Things  may  be  better  in  the  next  life.  Nobody  knows."  It 
must  be  an  imprisoning  hope,  for  a  man's  life,  motives,  and  conduct  must  surely 
look  better  under  the  earth-shadows  than  when  they  are  pushed  out  into  the 
full  sunlight  of  God.  In  the  light  of  God,  Job  said,  "  I  abhor  myself."  2.  Another 
idea  is,  that  opportunities  for  repentance,  for  turning  away  from  sin,  and  for 
seeking  the  Saviour,  will  one  day  be  sure  to  come  to  us,  though  we  may  miss  them 
now.  We  think  God's  time  of  mercy  for  us  has  not  yet  come,  and  there  is  nothing 
for  us  to  do  just  now  but  wait  for  it,  as  the  lame  man  in  the  "  Bethesda  porch  " 
waited  for  the  moving  of  the  water.  Only  we  never  think  of  ourselves  as  helpless. 
We  are  quite  sure  that  when  the  moving  of  the  water  does  come,  we  shall  be 
perfectly  able  to  step  down  at  once  and  secure  our  healing.  But  what  a  self- 
delusion  that  is  !  If  we  do  not  secure  the  opportunities  of  salvation  that  come 
to  us  now,  on  what  ground  do  we  hope  that  we  shall  seize  some  opportunity  that 
may  come  by  and  by  ?  Does  the  power  of  decision  grow  with  the  weakening 
years  ?  Siirely  it  is  an  imprisoning  hope  that  keeps  us  from  responding  to  the  offers 
of  Divine  grace  now,  for     now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation." 

III.    As   EEGARDS    PERSONAL   SALVATION,   THERE   IS   REALLY   NO   HOPE   UNTIL  WB 

HAVE  GIVEN  TIP  HOPE.  This  is  a  fact  of  actual  and  repeated  experience.  There 
is  no  hope  for  us  until  we  have  come,  in  the  sincerity  of  personal  conviction  and 
humiliation,  to  say,  "  Myself  I  cannot  save,  myself  I  cannot  help."  The  very 
first  thing,  and  the  all-essential  thing  is  sweeping  away  those  refuges  of  lies,  our 
false,  our  imprisoning,  hopes.  In  various  ways  God  breaks  down  our  self-con- 
fidences.    There  is  no  hope  in  God  until  hope  in  self  is  abandoned.     IV.  When 

FALSE  IMPRISONING  HOPES  ARE  GONE,  WE  MAY  FLEE  AT  ONCE  TO  THE  STRONGHOLD. 

Then  the  soul  is  fairly  roused  and  set  upon  seeking  safety  at  once.  Then  the 
intensest  interest  is  felt  in  the  message  of  Gospel  salvation.  Then,  we  may  ran 
at  once  into  the  safe  hiding-place  of  God's  salvation,  and  there  find  a  hope  that 
will  not  make  us  ashamed.  Be  not  then  hindered  by  doubts,  or  imprisoned  by 
hopes  ;  there  is  a  duty  to  be  done  now.  "  Flee  to  the  mountain,  lest  ye  be 
consumed."  (Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)  Good  news  for  prisoners  of  hope  :-^Theie 
is  a  change  in  the  phraseology  of  the  remaining  chapters  of  this  book.  Not  now 
the  Word  of  the  Lord,  but  the  burden  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  By  this  term  we 
are  prepared  for  tidings  of  sorrow  and  disaster,  which  are  about  to  fall  on  the 
nations  addressed.  These  burdens  lay  heavily  on  the  soul  of  the  prophet,  who  was 
probably  already  advanced  in  years  when  he  aimounced  them.  When  Zechariah 
wrote  this  prophecy,  the  early  troubles  of  the  returned  remnant  in  the  recon- 
struction of  temple,  city,  and  state  were  at  an  end ;  but  they  were  hemmed 
in  and  pressed  by  Tyre  on  the  north,  and  by  Ashkelon,  Gaza,  and  Ekron  on  the 
south.  It  was  for  their  encouragement,  therefore,  that  he  foretold  an  approaching 
invasion,  before  which  their  strong  and  hostile  neighbours  would  be  swept  away. 
Though  Tyre  had  built  herself  a  stronghold  on  an  apparently  impregnable  island, 
and  heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  fine  gold  as  the  mire  of  the  streets ;  and 
though  her  counsellors  were  famous  for  their  wisdom — the  Lord  would  dispossess 
her,  smiting  her  power  in  the  sea,  and  devouring  her  palaces  with  fire.  And 
the  devastation  which  would  befall  Damascus  and  Hadrach  (a  part  of  Syria), 
would  extend  southwards  till  the  worst  fears  of  Gaza,  Ashkelon,  and  Ekron  would 
be  reahsed  in  their  utter  destruction.  Philistia  would  be  as  a  young  lion  deprived 
of  its  prey,  whilst  the  chosen  city  would  be  defended  by  unseen  angel  forces. 
"  I  will  encamp  about  Mine  house  as  a  garrison,  that  none  pass  through  or  return; 
and  no  oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any  more  ;  for  now  have  I  seen  with 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R.  [chap.  nc. 

Mine  eyes."     All  these  predictions  were  literally  fulfilled  within  a  few  years  by 
the  invasion  of  the  third  of  the  great  world-conquerors,  Alexander  the  Great. 
Syria,  New  Tyre,  and  the  old  seaboard,  including  the  cities  of  Philistia,  fell  under 
his  arms ;  but  both  in  going  and  returning,  he  spared  Jerusalem,  being  much 
impressed  by  a  dream,  in  which  he  was  warned  not  to  approach  the  city,  and  by 
a  solemn  procession  of  priests  and  Levites,  headed  by  Jaddua,  the  high  priest. 
In  Eastern  lands,  liable  to  long  spells  of  drought,  it  is  customary  to  hew  cisterns 
out  of  che  soUd  rock  for  the  storage  of  water,  that  provision  may  be  made  against 
the  failure  of  the  rains.     These  aboiind  in  Palestine.     "  They  hewed  out  for 
themselves  cisterns."     It  seemed  to  the  prophet  as  though  Israel  might  be  com- 
pared to  a  terrified  peasantry,  sheltering  in  some  dark,  dry,  moimtain  cistern, 
far  up  from  the  valleys,  dreading  every  day  lest  their  hiding-place  might  be 
discovered,  and  themselves  dragged  forth  to  dye  with  their  blood  the  green  sward. 
I.  Thus,  in  eveey  age  God's  people  have  been  ikprisoned.     You  may  have 
been  caught  in  the  snare  of  this  world's  evil.     You  have  no  sympathy  with  it, 
yet  somehow  you  have  become  involved  in  the  snares  and  toils  of  malign  com- 
binations.    You  have  no  desire  for  them — they  chafe  and  try  you — but  you 
cannot  get  off.     It  seems  as  though  some  evil  spirit  has  lassoed  you,  not  indeed 
in  your  sovd,  but  in  your  home  and  circumstances.     Or  perhaps  you  have  been 
led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will.     There  is  no  doubt  about  your  sonship  ;  in 
your  better  moments,  God's  Spirit  witnesses  clearly  with  yours  that  you  have 
been  born  again  ;  and  yet,  during  long  and  sad  periods  of  experience,  you  seem 
the  bound  slave  of  the  great  enemy  of  souls  ;  swept  before  strong  gusts  of  passion. 
Or,  perhaps,  you  have  faUen  into  deep  despondency,  partly  as  the  result  of  ill- 
health,  and  partly  because  you  have  looked  off  the  face  of  Christ  to  the  winds 
and  waves.     The  clear-shining  of  His  love  is  obscured,  and  at  times  it  is  difficult 
to  believe  in  anything  but  the  pressure  of  your  own  dark  thoughts.     II.  All 
SUCH  ARE  prisoners,  BUT  THEY  ABE  PRISONERS  OF  HOPE.     There  is  a  sure  and 
certain  hope  of  their  deliverance.     The  clouds  might  more  easily  succeed  in 
imprisoning  the  sun  than  any  of  these  dark  conditions  permanently  hold  one  of 
God's  children.     They  belong  to  the  light  and  day  ;  and,  though  they  see  it  not, 
Hope,  as  God's  angel,  is  standing  near,  only  waiting  His  signal  to  open  the  prison 
door.     The  prisoner,  on  whom  the  sentence  of  capital  punishment  has  been  passed, 
and  who  has  no  strong,  wise  friends  to  interfere  on  his  behalf,  may  well  abandon 
hope  as  he  passes  within  the  massive  walls  of  the  fortress.     But  where  justice 
and  truth  are  on  his  side,  when  he  has  been  the  victim  of  craft  and  guile,  if  there 
be  friends  to  espouse  his  cause,  though  he  be  incarcerated,  bound  with  chains 
on  the  Devil's  Island,  and  though  the  weary  years  pass  over  him,  yet  he  is  a 
prisoner  of  hope,  and  shall  come  forth  again  into  the  hght  of  day.     All  God's 
children  are  prisoners  of  hope.     III.  Their  hope  rests  on  the  blood  of  the 
COVENANT.     "  Because  of   the   blood  of   thy  covenant,  I   have   sent   forth  thy 
prisoners  out  of  the  pit."     When  God  entered  into  covenant-relationship  with 
Abraham,  the  sacred  compact  was  ratified  by  the  mingled  blood  of  an  heifer  of 
three  years  old,  a  she-goat  of  three  years  old,  a  ram  of  three  years  old,  a  turtle 
dove,  and  a  young  pigeon.     And,  in  after  years,  when  beneath  the  beetling  cUffs 
of  Sinai,  Moses  acted  as  mediator  between  God  and  the  children  of  Israel,  he  sent 
young  men,  because  the  order  of  priesthood  was  not  established,  which  offered 
burnt-offerings  and  sacrificed  peace-offerings  of  oxen  imto  the  Lord  (Gen.  xv.  9  ; 
Exod.  xxiv.  7,  8).     Similarly,  when  the  new  covenant — the  provisions  of  which 
are  enumerated  in  Heb.  viii. — was  ratified,  it  was  in  the  blood  of  Jesus.     As  He 
took  the  cup,  He  said :  "  This  is  My  blood  of  the  new  covenant,  which  is  shed 
for  many  unto  the  remission  of  sins."     "  And  for  this  cause  He  is  the  Mediator 
of  a  new  covenant."     The  shedding  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God  indicates 
that  God  has  entered  into  a  covenant  relationship  with  Him,  and  all  whom  He 
represents,  who  are,  by  faith,  members  of  His  mystical  body,  the  Church.     On 
His  side.  He  promises  to  be  a  God  to  us,  and  to  take  us  to  be  His  people  ;  on  our 
side,  Christ  promises,  on  oiu-  behalf,  that  we  shall  be  a  people  for  His  own  possession, 
zealous  of  good  works.     This  covenant  embraces  all  who  have  believed,  shall 
believe,  and  do  believe  in  Jesus.     It  embraces  thee,  if  thou  dost  at  this  moment 
simply  believe  in  Him  as  thine,  and  art  willing  to  be  evermore  His.     IV.  Because 

OF  the  BLOOD  OF  THE  COVENANT,  GOD  WILL  SEND  FORTH  EACH  OF  HiS  IMPRISONED 

ONES  OUT  OF  THE  PIT.  That  blood  binds  Him  to  interpose  on  their  behalf.  That 
they  might  have  strong  consolation.  He  has  confirmed  His  Word  by  an  oath. 
Suppose  two  men  were  bound  in  the  closest,  tenderest  friendship,  not  needing 


CHAP,  ix.l  ZECHABIAH.  153 

to  exchange  blood  from  each  other's  veins,  as  the  manner  of  some  is,  because 
heart  had  ah-eady  exchanged  with  heart ;  and  suppose  one  of  these,  travelling 
in  Calabria  or  Anatolia,  was  captured  by  brigands  and  carried  into  some  mountain 
faistness,  threatened  with  death  unless  ransomed  by  an  immense  sum  of  money  : 
can  you  imagine  his  friend  at  home,  in  the  enjoyment  of  opulence  and  liberty, 
settUng  down  in  circumstances  of  ease,  and  allowing  his  brother  to  suffer  hus 
miserable  fate,  with  no  effort  for  his  deliverance  ?  It  is  impossible  to  imagine 
such  a  thing  !  With  tireless  perseverance  he  would  leave  no  stone  unturned, 
and  the  captive  might  rely  on  every  possible  effort  being  made  for  his  deUverance. 
So  it  is  with  God.  Whatever  be  the  sad  combination  of  disaster  which  has  over- 
taken us.  He  is  bound  by  the  Holy  Covenant,  sealed  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  to 
spare  no  effort  till  our  soul  is  escaped  as  a  bird  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler,  until 
the  snare  is  broken,  and  we  are  escaped.  So,  child  of  Grod,  if  you  have  made 
Jesus  your  King,  He  is  sure  to  succovu-  you.  Behold  thy  King  cometh,  0  prisoner 
of  hope  !  Is  not  this  the  reason  why  some  of  us  are  not  delivered  ?  We  should 
be  glad  enough  to  accept  dehverance,  but  are  not  prepared  to  pay  the  price.  We 
have  not  observed  the  Divine  order,  and  crowned  Jesus  King  of  our  hearts  and 
lives.  We  are  wishful  that  He  should  be  our  Saviour,  but  not  altogether  prepared 
to  accept  Him  as  King.  He  is  first  King  of  Righteousness,  before  He  is  Priest 
after  the  order  of  Melchizedek :  and  it  is  only  when  we  confess  with  our  mouths 
Jesus  as  Lord,  that  we  shall  be  saved.  But  do  not  fear  Him.  He  is  lowly,  and 
rides  upon  a  colt,  the  foal  of  an  ass.  No  prancing  steed,  no  banner  flaunting  in 
the  breeze,  no  long  train  of  warriors.  0  prisoners  of  hope,  lift  up  your  heads  ! 
your  salvation  is  come  out  of  Zion.  Turn  you  to  the  stronghold  !  Take  up 
your  abode  in  the  stronghold  of  God's  care  and  love,  in  the  fortress  of  His  righteous- 
ness, in  the  keep  of  His  covenant.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  sinner's  refuge  : — 
God's  children  have  a  place  of  refuge,  and  the  reason  why  others  have  not  is, 
they  flee  from  it  instead  of  fleeing  to  it.  I.  Consider  the  reuef  provided. 
"A  stronghold."  Not  any  stronghold  we  may  fancy,  or  prepare  for  ourselves, 
though  the  imagination  of  man  is  very  fruitful  in  inventions  of  this  kind.  When 
conscience  is  alarmed,  anything  is  sought  to  that  will  afford  a  little  present  ease. 
The  physician  of  souls  is  neglected,  and  physicians  of  no  value  are  applied  to. 
Such  has  been  and  still  is  the  conduct  of  sinful  men.  Some  fly  to  the  absolute 
and  uncovenanted  mercy  of  God ;  some  to  their  Church  privileges,  and  others 
to  their  good  works  and  religious  performances.  What  refuge  does  Scripture 
provide  ?  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower,  the  righteous  runneth 
into  it  and  is  safe."  The  perfections  of  God,  His  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness, 
are  all  engaged  for  the  protection  of  His  people.  The  covenant  of  grace,  with 
its  glorious  provisions  and  extensive  promises,  is  as  a  stronghold  :  here  the 
righteous  find  safety  in  a  time  of  danger,  and  comfort  in  a  time  of  trouble.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  especially  is  the  refuge  of  poor  sinners,  and  to  Him  the  pre- 
ceding verse  evidently  refers.  He  is  both  the  foundation  on  which  the  befiever 
builds,  and  the  fortress  in  which  he  hides.  II.  What  is  implied  in  our  seeking 
THIS  RELIEF  ?  1.  It  supposes  that  by  nature  we  are  turned  another  way,  having 
not  only  an  indifference,  but  a  dislike  to  the  true  way  of  salvation.  We  choose 
to  lie  under  the  sentence  of  condemnation  and  death,  rather  than  come  to  Christ 
for  justification  and  life.  Either  we  do  not  seek  after  salvation,  or  we  do  not  seek 
it  in  God's  way.  Men  by  nature  are  without  Christ,  having  no  hope,  and 
without  God  in  the  world.  2.  It  implies  a  principle  of  grace  implanted  in  us,  by 
which  the  mind  is  renewed  and  directed  to  the  Saviour.  This  removes  the 
darkness  of  the  imderstanding,  the  perverseness  of  the  will,  and  the  carnality  of 
the  affections  ;  so  that  we  are  led  to  form  different  sentiments,  and  pursue  a 
different  path  from  what  we  trod  before.  A  wounded  conscience  wants  ease  and 
rest.  3.  It  implies  the  total  renunciation  of  all  other  refuges  as  insufficient  and 
vain.  The  things  in  which  we  formerly  trusted,  and  in  which  we  gloried,  are 
now  darkened,  withered,  and  consumed.  4.  There  is  now  a  joining  ourselves  to 
the  Lord  in  an  everlasting  covenant  never  to  be  forgotten.  Being  turned  to  the 
Saviour,  there  is  a  cleaving  imto  Him  with  fuU  purpose  of  heart.  The  soul  that 
has  fled  for  refuge,  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us,  will  keep  his  hold,  and 
never  wish  to  turn  back  any  more.  Where  there  is  a  real  closing  with  Christ, 
there  will  also  be  a  cleaving  unto  Him.  III.  The  characters  addressed. 
"  Prisoners  of  hope."  1.  They  are  considered  as  prisoners.  Satan's  prisoners. 
Enslaved  by  their  own  corruptions  and  lusts.  2.  They  are  prisoners  of  hope. 
All  men  are  so  in  some  sense,  while  life  continues,  and  the  sentence  is  not  executed 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

upon  them.     Vessels  of  wrath,  till  they  are  filled  with  wrath,  may  be  made  vessels 
of  mercy.     Let  not  the  yoimg  presume,  nor  the  aged  despair.     Some  are  more 
especially  prisoners  of  hope.     (1)  Those  who  enjoy  the  means  of  grace,  and  to 
whom  the  Gospel  is  preached  in  its  purity  and  power.     (2)  There  is  hope  of  such 
as  have  frequent  convictions  of  sin,  some  desires  after  God,  and  whose  consciences 
retain  a  degree  of  tenderness,  so  that  they  neither  neglect  private  duties  nor  are 
wholly  unaffected  by  the  preaching  of  the  Word.     (3)  Those  also  are  prisoners 
of  hope  whose  chains  have  been  broken,  but  who,  through  imwatchfulness,  have 
been  led  captive  by  the  enemy.     Suffer  the  word  of  exhortation.     0  ye  distressed 
sinners    and    afflicted,  deserted    saints,    suppress    your   rising    fears    and   your 
despondent  thoughts.     An  open  and  effectual  door  is  set  before  you,     (B.  Beddome, 
M.A.)         Hope  in  the  'prison: — L   A  command.     "Turn  you."     When  God 
calls  a  sinner  to  turn,  he  must  turn.     Being  bom  again  refers  to  the  first  turn, 
but  there  are  the  after-turns  in  the  experience  of  the  called  Christian,  and  when 
grace  begins  a  work  in  the  soul,  grace  never  stops.     II.  The  THiNa  commanded. 
Turn  you  to  the  stronghold."     "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower,  the 
righteous  runneth  into  it  and  is  safe."     III.  The  tjnction  of  the  Gospel.     "  Ye 
prisoners  of  hope."     (J.  J.  West,  M.A.)        Prisoners  of  hope: — There  are  three 
classes  of  prisoners  in  the  moral  universe  without  hope,  and  there  are  three  classes 
of  prisoners  with  hope.     1.  The  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate.     2.  Men 
and  women  who  have  lived  amid  Gospel  privileges.     3.  The  men  and  women  in 
this  city  who  are  just  as  certain  to  be  damned  as  they  live  and  walk  on  the  face 
of  the  earth  to-day.     There  are  prisoners  with  hope.     1.  The  men  and  women 
of  earth  who  have  taken  up  their  cross  to  follow  Christ.     Prisoners  of  hope,  now 
hemmed  in  by  the  environments  of  earth,  but  soon  to  be  God's  freemen  in  heaven. 
2.  The  man  who  says,  "  God  knows  my  heart,  I  wish  I  were  a  better  man." 
There  is  hope  at  the  Cross  for  the  weakest  man  in  the  world.     Then  do  not  be  a 
prisoner  without  hope,  be  a  prisoner  with  hope.     {Sam.  P.  Jones.)        Prisoners 
of    hope : — This    passage    unquestionably    has    to    do    with    oiur    Lord    Jesus 
Christ   and  His  salvation.      If  you  begin  to  read  at  the  ninth  verse  you  will 
see  that  we  have,  from  that  place  on  to  our  text,  much  prophetic  information 
concerning  our  Lord  and  His  kingdom.     We  read,  first,  something  about  His 
own  manner  of  triumph, — His  way  of  conducting  Himself    in    His    kingdom  : 
"  Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion  ;  shout,  0  daughter  of  Jerusalem  :  behold, 
thy  King  cometh  unto  thee:  He  is  just,  and  having  salvation;  lowly,  and  riding 
upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass."     The  King  of  the  kingdom 
of  grace  is  not  high  and  lofty,  haughty  or  proud,  but  condescends  to  men  of  low 
estate.     We  have  not  to  set  before  you  a  Pharaoh  or  a  Nebuchadnezzar  ;  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  is  a  King  of  quite  another  kind.     The  next  verse  goes  on  to  describe 
the  weapons  by  which  He  wins  His  victories  ;   or  rather,  it  tells  us  what  they 
are  not.     Not  by  carnal  weapons  will  Christ  ever  force    His  way   amongst  the 
sons  of  men,  for  He  says,  "  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraim,  and  the  horse 
from  Jerusalem,  and  the  battle-bow  shall  be  cut  off."     Mohammed  may  conquer 
by  the  sword,  but  Christ  conquers  by  the  sword  which  cometh  out  of  His  mouth, 
that  is,  the  Word  of  the  Lord.     His  empire  is  one  of  love,  not  of  force  and  oppression. 
The  same  verse  reveals  to  us  more  concerning  the  nature  of  Christ's  kingdom : 
"  He  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  heathen  :  and  His  dominion  shall  be  from  sea 
even  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth."     There  have  been 
universal  monarchies  in  the  past,  but  there  shall  never  be  another  till  Christ 
shall  come  again.     Four  times  has  God  foiled  those  who  have  attempted  to  assimie 
the  sovereignty  of  the  world ;  but  in  due  time   there  shall  come  One  who  shall 
reign  over  all  mankind.     I.  A  Divine  deliverance.     This  must  be  a  matter 
of  personal  experience ;  and  therefore  I  should  like  that  every  one  whom  I  am 
now  addressing  should  say  to   himself  or  herself,  "  Do  I  know  anything  about 
this  Divine  deliverance  in  my  own  heart  and  life  ?     If  I  do  not,   I  have  grave 
cause  to  fear  aa  to  my  condition  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  but  if  I  do,  let  me  be  full 
of  praise  to  God  for  this  gieat  mercy,  that  I  have  a  share  in  this  Divine  deliver- 
ance :  '  As  for  thee  also,  by  the  blood   of   thy  covenant  I  have  sent  forth  thy 
prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water.'  "     Do  all  of  you  know  anything 
about  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water  ?     1.  Regarding  it  as  a  state  of  spiritual  distress, 
do  you  imderstand  what  it  means  to  be  in  such  a  comfortless  condition  ?     It 
was  a  common  custom,  in  the  Eeist,  to  put  prisoners  into  deep  pits  which  had 
been  dug  in  the  earth.     The  sides  were  usually  steep  and  perpendicular,  and 
the  prisoner  who  was  dropped  down  into  such  a  pit  must  remain  there  without 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECHARIAH.  165 

any  hope  of  escape.  According  to  our  text,  there  was  no  water  there,  and  appar- 
ently no  food  of  any  kind.  The  object  of  the  captors  was  to  leave  the  prisoner 
there  to  be  forgotten  as  a  dead  man  out  of  mind.  Have  you  ever,  in  your  experience, 
realised  anything  like  that  ?  There  was  a  time,  with  some  of  us,  when  we  suddenly 
woke  up  to  find  that  all  our  fancied  goodness  had  vanished,  that  all  our  hopes 
had  perished,  and  that  we  ourselves  were  in  the  comfortless  condition  of  men 
in  a  pit,  without  even  a  single  drop  of  water  to  mitigate  our  burning  thirst.  You 
need  to  know  it,  for  this  is  the  condition  into  which  God  usually  brings  His  children 
before  He  reveals  Himself  to  them.  2.  The  condition  of  being  shut  up  in  a  pit 
wherein  is  no  water  is  not  only  comfortless,  but  it  is  also  hopeless.  How  can 
such  a  prisoner  escape  ?  He  looks  up  out  of  the  pit,  and  sees  far  above  him 
a  little  circle  of  light ;  but  he  knows  that  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  climb  up 
there.  Perhaps  he  attempts  it ;  but,  if  so,  he  falls  back  and  injures  himself. 
He  lies  fallen  as  a  helpless,  hopeless  prisoner.  3.  A  man,  in  such  a  pit  as  that, 
is  not  only  comfortless  and  hopeless,  but  he  is  also  in  a  fatal  condition.  Without 
water,  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep  pit,  he  must  die.  Many  of  God's  children  have 
known  this  experience  to  the  fullest  possible  extent ;  and  all  of  them  have  been, 
in  some  measure,  brought  into  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water.  But  concerning 
those  who  have  believed  in  Jesus,  our  text  is  true,  and  God  can  say,  "  I  have 
sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water."  Are  you  out  of 
the  pit  ?  Then  it  is  certain  that  you  came  out  of  it  not  by  yoiur  own  energy 
and  strength,  but  because  the  Lord  delivered  you.  Divine  power,  and  nothing 
but  Divine  power,  can  deliver  a  poor  law-condemned  conscience  from  the  bondage 
under  which  it  groans.  There  is  this  further  comfort,  that  if  He  has  set  us  free 
we  are  free  indeed.  It  is  only  God  who  can  deliver  a  bondaged  coniscience  ;  but 
when  it  is  delivered  by  Him,  it  need  not  be  afraid  of  being  dragged  back  to  prison 
any  more.  But  how  has  He  done  this  great  work  ?  This  is  one  of  the  principal 
clauses  of  our  text :  "  As  for  thee  also,  by  the  blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have 
sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water."  The  people  of  God 
are  set  free  from  their  bondage  by  the  blood  of  the  covenant.  I  trust  that  you 
will  never  be  weary  of  hstening  to  the  doctrine  of  substitution.  If  you  ever 
are,  it  will  be  all  the  more  necessary  that  you  keep  on  hearing  it  untQ  you  cease 
to  be  weary  of  it.  That  doctrine  is  the  very  core  and  essence  of  the  Gospel.  "  The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  alL"  "  With  His  stripes  we  are  healed." 
Xothing  can  give  the  soul  repose  when  it  is  about  to  meet  its  God,  except  the 
knowledge  that  Christ  was  made  a  curse  for  us  that  we  might  be  blessed  in  Him. 
No  prisoners  are  set  free  except  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  ;  and,  as  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  is  Godward,  the  means  of  our  coming  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water, 
so  it  is  the  knowledge  of  Christ  as  suffering  in  our  stead  that  sets  the  captive 
free.  I  hope  I  am  not  addressing  any  who  wiU  remain  for  a  long  time  in  the 
pit  wherein  is  no  water.  I  did  so  myself,  but  I  blame  myself  now  for  having 
done  so.  II.  A  Divxne  invitation  given.  Do  you  catch  the  thought  that 
is  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  these  words  ?  You  have  been  taken  out  of  the 
pit,  and  there,  close  beside  you,  is  the  castle  of  refuge  ;  so,  the  moment  you  are 
drawn  up  out  of  the  pit,  rim  to  the  castle  for  shelter.  The  parallel  to  this  experi- 
ence is  to  be  found  in  the  40th  Psalm,  where  David  says  that  the  Lord  had  brought 
him  up  out  of  the  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay,  and  set  his  feet  upon  a  rock, 
and  established  his  goings  ;  and  now  that  you  are  delivered  from  your  prison 
pit,  you  are  to  go  and  dwell  in  the  fortress,  the  high  tower,  which  the  Lord  has 
so  graciously  prepared  for  yon.  The  promises  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  are  the 
stronghold  to  which  all  believing  men  ought  to  turn  in  every  time  of  trouble, 
and  Jesus  Christ  Himself  is  stiU  more  their  Stronghold  in  every  hour  of  need. 
Sheltered  in  Him,  you  are  indeed  surrounded  with  protecting  walls  and  bulwarks, 
for  who  is  he  that  can  successfully  assail  the  man  who  is  shielded  and  guarded 
by  the  great  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ  ?  Yet  you  will  often  feel  as  if  you  were 
stiU  in  danger.  When  you  do  so  feel,  turn  to  the  Stronghold  directly.  Do  you 
mourn  your  slackness  in  prayer,  and  does  the  devil  tell  you  that  you  cannot  be 
a  Christian,  or  you  would  not  feel  as  you  do  ?  Then,  run  to  Christ  directly.  Has 
there  been,  during  this  day,  some  slip  in  language,  or  has  there  even  been  some 
sin  in  overt  act  ?  Then,  run  to  Christ  directly ;  turn  you  to  the  Stronghold. 
So,  again,  I  say  to  you,  never  try  to  combat  sin  and  Satan  by  yourselves,  but 
always  flee  away  to  Christ.  Inside  that  Stronghold,  the  most  powerful  gims 
of  the  enemy  will  not  be  able  to  injure  you.  They  who  have  gone  the  fmthest 
in  the  Divine  life  yet  do  well  to  walk  in  Christ  just  as  they  received  Hini  at  tho 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IX. 

first,  in.  The  Divine  promise.  "  Even  to-day  do  I  declare  that  I  will  render 
double  unto  thee."  1.  First,  if  you,  who  have  been  delivered  from  the  pit  wherein 
i.s  no  water,  continually  turn  to  Christ,  you  shall  have  twice  as  much  joy  as  ever 
you  ha<l  sorrow.  The  grief  that  we  had  before  we  found  Christ  was  a  very  moun- 
tain of  sorrow,  but  how  has  it  been  with  you  since  you  came  to  Jesus  ?  Have 
you  not,  after  all,  had  twice  as  much  joy  as  you  have  had  sorrow  ?  Oh,  the 
unspeakable  delight  of  the  soul  that  has  found  peace  in  Jesus  after  having  been 
long  in  bondage  to  sm  and  Satan  !  I  think  I  have  told  you  before  that  I  heard 
Dr.  Alexander  Fletcher  once  say,  when  he  was  preaching,  that  on  one  occasion, 
passing  down  the  Old  Bailey,  he  saw  two  boys,  or  young  men,  jumping  and  leaping 
and  standing  on  their  heads,  and  going  through  all  sorts  of  antics  on  the  pave- 
ment. He  said  to  them,  "  Whatever  are  you  at  ?  "  But  they  only  clapped 
their  hands,  and  danced  more  joyously  than  before ;  so  he  said,  "  Boys,  what 
has  happened  to  you  that  you  are  so  glad  ?  "  Then  one  of  them  replied,  "  If 
you  ha!d  been  locked  up  for  three  months  inside  that  prison,  you  would  jump 
for  joy  when  you  came  out."  *'  A  very  natural  expression,"  said  the  good  old 
man,  and  bade  them  jump  away  as  long  as  they  liked.  Ay,  and  when  a  soul 
has  once  been  delivered  from  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water  it  has  a  foretaste  of 
the  joy  of  heaven.  The  possession  of  Christ  is,  indeed,  not  only  double  bliss 
for  all  its  sin,  but  much  more  than  double.  2.  More  than  that,  God  gives  His 
servants  the  double  of  all  that  they  expect.  When  we  come  to  our  Lord,  it  is 
as  it  was  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  came  to  Solomon.  She  said  that  the  half 
had  not  been  told  her ;  and  if  you  raise  your  expectations  to  the  highest  point 
that  you  can  reach,  you  who  come  to  Christ  will  find  them  far  exceeded  in  the 
blessed  realisation.  He  is  indeed  a  precious  Christ  to  all  who  believe  in  Him  ;  but 
He  is  a  himdred  times  more  precious  than  you  can  ever  imagine.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  condition  of  sinners  : — "  Prisoners  of  hope."  I.  All  sinners  are  prisoners. 
A  prisoner  implies — 1.  Criminality.  2.  Deprivation:  society,  light,  &c.  3.  Bondage. 
A  sinner  is  a  slave.  His  soul  himself  is  enslaved,  death  cannot  free  him.  Some 
of  the  prisoners  have — II.  Hope.  Some,  not  all.  None  in  hell.  But  some  on 
earth.  1.  Provision  has  been  made  for  their  deliverance.  2.  The  vilest  of  men 
have  obtained  deliverance.  3.  Deliverance  is  freely  ofFeied  to  all.  {Homilist.) 
The  place  of  hope  in  the  Gospel : — Fear  and  hope  have  two  things  in  common. 
They  are  both  prospective.  They  regard  the  futiu-e  as  possible.  We  neither 
hope  nor  fear  that  which  cannot  conceivably  affect  us.  With  these  two  points 
of  resemblance,  Hope  and  Fear  are  in  all  else  opposite  and  contradictory  to  each 
other.  Fear  is  the  apprehension  of  a  future  possible  evil.  Hope  is  the  anticipa- 
tion of  a  future  possible  good.  Human  life  is  largely  indebted  to  hope  :  almost 
all  that  redeems  it  from  gloom  and  misery  is,  if  you  look  into  it,  hope  more  than 
happiness.  Hope,  not  fruition,  is  the  happiness,  while  we  are  in  the  body,  of 
man  that  must  die.  This  hope  has  degrees.  One  man  is  full  of  it.  He  puts  his 
hand  to  nothing  without  intending,  expecting,  resolving  to  succeed.  And  the 
hope  which  cheers  also  strengthens.  Expectation  is  success — unless  the  calculation 
has  been  utterly  fanciful,  and  the  sum  wrongly  added.  Certainly  the  absence 
of  hope  is  a  bar  to  success.  Depression  is  always  weakness.  A  man  is  not  entirely 
responsible  for  it ;  health,  temperament,  nature,  may  alone  be  to  blame.  More 
often  there  is  blame  ;  a  man  has  not  braced  himself  by  early  discipline  :  he  has 
let  the  fibre  of  character  become  loose  and  feeble  ;  he  has  admitted  into  the 
memory,  into  the  conscience,  into  the  life,  something  of  that  which  is  utter  weak- 
ness— sin.  Great  things  are  never  done,  even  small  successes  are  never  achieved, 
where  there  is  no  hope.  Not  to  hope  is  not  to  have.  The  Gospel  will  have  a 
place  for  hope.  We  are  to  ask  what  it  is.  How  does  Christ  use  this  powerful 
principle  ?  He  makes  it  everything.  St.  Paul  even  says,  "  We  are  saved  by 
hope."  Of  Christ  it  is  said,  "  For  the  joy  which  was  set  before  Him,  He  endured 
the  Cross."  The  anticipation  of  a  blessed  future,  which  is  the  definition  of  hope, 
supported  our  Lord  in  working  out  our  redemption.  You  will  find  that  every- 
thing ever  done  bravely  and  effectively  in  the  strength  of  Christ  by  His  people, 
has  Deen  done  in  the  power  of  hope.  Fear  may  teach  watchfulness.  Fear  may 
keep  a  man  to  his  duty.  Fear  may  constrain  a  man  to  combat  a  sin,  or  shake 
off  a  bad  companion,  or  to  resolve  to  make  his  life  less  purposeless,  and  more 
decided  ;  but  fear,  if  it  stood  alone,  could  make  no  man  a  hero,  nor  a  martyr, 
nor  a  saint.  That  is  left  for  hope.  We  see  in  education  the  stimulus  of  hope. 
How  largely  do  we  use  it  in  every  school  system  that  is  worth  the  name  !  But 
there  is  a  use  of  hope  w^hich  is  fallacious  and  mischievous.     Hope  is  not  irrational 


CHAP.  IX.1  ZECHARIAH.  \m 

because  it  is  sanguine.  There  is  no  encouragement  in  man's  life,  or  in  God's  Word, 
for  that  kind  of  hope  which  either  dreams  of  reaping  without  sowing,  or  looks 
for  sudden  counteractions  of  influences  wantonly  indulged.  There  are  men 
whose  whole  life  is  spent  in  reckoning  upon  results  to  which  they  have  contributed 
nothing  but  hindrance.  There  are  men  who  may  call  themselves  waiters  upon 
providence,  but  whom  God  would  rather  describe  as  gamblers  in  chances.  It  is 
so  in  reference  to  the  things  of  this  life  ;  it  is  so  in  reference  to  a  more  serious 
thing — the  condition  of  the  soul,  and  the  destinies  of  eternity.  Gospel  hope 
has  for  its  object  Gospel  promise.  See  some  of  those  futm-e  good  things  which 
God  has  promised,  and  therefore  the  Christian  hopes  for.  One  of  these  is  growth, 
progress,  at  last  perfection,  in  holiness.  To  a  Christian  person  the  prospect  of 
becoming  holy  is  the  most  blessed,  most  glorious  revelation.  If  it  be  a  revela- 
tion, certainly  it  is  a  hope.  Holiness  is  sometimes  preached  as  a  duty,  not 
preached  as  a  promise.  That  is  not  God's  method.  Scriptiure  sets  holiness 
before  us  rather  as  a  gift  than  as  a  toil.  I  have  called  this  one  of  the  objects  of 
a  Christian  hope,  but  it  is  the  sum  of  all.  I  knit  into  one  the  hope  of  holiness 
and  the  hope  of  heaven.  I  know  indeed  that  many  talk  of  heaven  who  have  no 
thought  for  the  way  to  it.  Some  hope  to  meet  there  lost  friends  ;  some  dream 
pleasantly  of  the  trouble  of  conflict  ended,  and  the  repose  of  the  everlasting 
unbroken.  But  all  this  is  vague  and  unsatisfactory :  there  is  nothing  of  it  in 
the  Bible.  .  .  .  Then  love  too  well  Him  who  is  your  hope  to  count  anything 
too  difficult  to  do,  or  too  pi-ecious  to  sacrifice  for  Him  !  Saved  by  hope,  hope 
to  the  end.  Where  He  went  before,  follow  after !  (C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.) 
Sailed  hy  our  hope  : — The  j^ears  of  the  history  of  the  Church  which  have  as  yet 
resisted  most  successfully  the  efforts  of  scientific  research  are  the  earliest  years. 
The  first  century  is  the  most  obscure.  With  or  without  a  history  satisfying  to 
modern  canons,  the  Church  accomplished  in  that  time  a  spiritual  work  which, 
for  present  moral  effects,  for  power  to  attract  and  subjugate  souls  of  every  nation 
and  degree  of  culture,  for  inspiring  new  motives  of  action  to  a  languid  and  despair- 
ing world,  has  far  surpassed  any  other  change  known  to  us  in  the  history  of  man. 
If  the  question  is  asked,  as  it  often  is,  on  what  does  our  faith  in  God  and  Christ 
dei>end,  we  ought  perhaps  to  reply,  on  the  fact  that  Jesus  rose  from  the  dead, 
and  that  His  resurrection  restored  Him  as  a  living  leader  to  His  disciples,  so 
that  His  presence  welded  them  together  as  one  community,  zealous  of  good  works, 
abhorring  sin,  sure  of  eternal  life.  "  Never,"  says  Ewald,  "  in  the  whole  world 
has  a  whole  community,  through  a  course  of  many  years,  lived  so  exclusively 
with  all  its  thoughts  in  heaven,  as  that  primitive  community  of  Christianity 
without  a  visible  Christ  did  actually  live."  With  this  belief  we  must  stand  or 
fall.  Christian  exclusiveness  rests  upon  a  belief  in  the  central  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection.  The  firm  and  sturdy  belief  that  Christ  is  risen,  and  that  we  are 
risen,  will  not  be  replaced  by  Leibnitz's  immortality  of  unlimited  progress,  or  by 
the  impersonal  immortality  of  Spinoza,  which  to  the  individual  soul  is  hardly 
more  than  a  promise  of  nothingness.  "  The  impossibility  of  a  future  life  is  not 
yet  proved.  With  modern  science  immortality  remains  still  a  problem ;  and  if 
the  problem  has  not  yet  received  a  positive  solution,  neither  has  it  received  a 
negative  one,  as  is  sometimes  maintained."  {Archbishop  Thomson.)  Prisoners 
of  hope : — The  prophet  exhorts  both  those  who  had  returned  from  Babylon 
and  those  who  continued  in  Babylon  to  direct  their  eyes  to  the  Messiah,  to 
shelter  themselves  in  Him  as  their  stronghold.  I.  The  characters  described. 
"  Prisoners  of  hope."  Such  is  the  condition  of  man  in  general.  Still,  even  these 
are  prisoners  of  hope.  They  have  not  yet  crossed  the  portal  on  which  justice 
hath  graven,  "  There  is  no  hope."  Still  more  emphatically  are  they  "  prisoners 
of  hope  "  who  feel  their  bondage  and  pant  for  liberty.  II.  The  direction  here 
GIVEN.  "  Turn  ye  to  the  stronghold."  The  soul  is  invited  to  trust  in  Christ 
as  the  only  refuse  and  hope  of  the  guilty.  III.  The  promise  with  which  the 
TEXT  CLOSES.  '  I  will  render  double  unto  thee."  This  expression  is  used  in 
Scripture  to  describe  a  blessedness  exceeding  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think.  Not 
according  to  our  former  sufferings,  but  double  ;  not  according  to  the  punishment 
we  have  deserved  for  our  sins,  but  double;  not  even  the  like  blessings  as  were 
enjoyed  by  saints  of  old,  but  double.  {Stephen  Bridge,  M.A.)  Prisoners  of 
hope  : — I.  The  image  under  which  we  are  addressed.  "  Prisoners  of  hope." 
Man,  in  more  senses  than  one,  is  a  prisoner.  This  earthly  body  is,  in  one  senrn, 
his  prison.  He  is  also  a  prisoner  of  sin.  We  are  captives  of  Satan.  But  we 
are  prisoners  of  hope.     With  the  prospect  of  release  and  encouragement.     Such 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nc. 

was  the  case  with  Israel's  captives.  In  this  life  we  are  all  prisoners  of  hope. 
And  those  who  by  Divine  grace  have  been  brought  back  to  God  are  in  a  still 
more  distinct  and  peculiar  manner  the  prisoners  of  hope.  II.  The  admonitioh" 
GIVEN  IN  THE  TEXT.  The  language  is  that  of  earnest  solicitation.  Imminent 
peril  is  threatened.  The  flying  captives  who  have  escaped  their  prison  are  in 
danger  of  being  seized  and  retaken  by  the  enemy ;  and  nere  is  an  impregnable 
fortress  opened,  into  which  they  are  invited  to  turn.  We  have  no  hesitation  in 
applying  this  language  to  Christ.  (D.  Wilson,  M.A.)  Refuge  in  Ood  : — God  is 
not  content  with  merely  promising  some  refuge  for  stricken  souls,  but  fascinates 
our  faith  with  the  wealth  of  imagery  by  which  He  declares  it.  In  this  verge  He 
calls,  "  Turn  you  to  the  stronghold."  Fortified  places  were  provided  generally 
on  the  top  of  some  steep  mountain,  or  approached  only  by  a  narrow  defile  where 
one  could  withstand  a  multitude  of  assailants,  and  into  which  the  people  ran 
from  the  villages  and  fields  when  the  land  was  invaded.  In  other  passages  God 
is  represented  as  a  "  hiding-place,"  where  evil  cannot  even  find  and  attack  the 
soul  (Psa.  xxxii.  7) ;  a  pavilion,  where  safety  is  supplemented  with  comfort  and 
delight  (Psa.  xxvii.  5) ;  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land,  the  caves 
and  overhanging  cliflts  (Isa.  xxxii.  2),  beneath  which  travellers  and  cattle  escape 
the  intense  heat.  How  He  assures  us  that  our  refuge  is  not  through  human 
expediencies,  but  Divine  interposition  in  the  "  Rock  that  is  higher  than  I  '*  ! 
Indeed,  our  refuge  is  something  better  than  even  a  Divine  expediency ;  it  is  in 
God  Himself  (Psa.  Ixii.  7,  8  :  "  My  refuge  is  in  God."  Psa.  Ivii.  1  :  "In  the 
shadow  of  Thy  wings  ").     Emphasise  the  personality  of  the   Divine  comfort. 

1.  The  COMPLETENESS  OF  THIS  KEFUGE.  From  the  guilt  of  sin  through  the  Cross — 
from  the  power  of  sinfulness  in  us  through  the  Holy  Spirit ;  from  fears  of  all  sorts 
— His  promises  so  many  and  so  varied  between  us  and  anticipated  evil,  like  the 
many  stones  of  the  fortress  facing  outward  in  every  direction ;  .from  depression, 
the  cup  He  gives  us  "  running  over  " — the  spiritual  overplus  as  opposed  to  the 
depressive  occasion  in  the  flesh  or  in  the  circumstances  ;  from  the  ennui  of  secular 
pleasures  and  business.  His  revelation  lifting  oiu-  minds  to  the  contemplation  of 
the  vast  and  glorious  truths  of  both  His  earthly  and  heavenly  kingdom  ;  from 
unrest — He  will  keep  in  perfect  peace  the  mind  that  is  stayed  on  Him  ;  from  the 
weariness  of  all  selfism,  imparting  the  spirit  of  love  and  unselfish  devotion,  &c. 
II.  How  SHALL  WE  FIND  THIS  REFUGE  ?  It  is  not  far  away  ;  need  not  go  to  Rome 
for  it  (Popish  pilgrims),  nor  to  Jerusalem  (Crusaders'  expectation  of  finding  relief 
at  the  Holy  Sepulchre) :  "  The  word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy 
heart,"  &c.  1.  It  is  not  a  mysterious  refuge,  or  one  hard  to  understand.  There 
is  no  Esoterism  of  Christian  experience,  no  favoured  few,  no  especial  soul-light 
in  theological  refinements  ;  Grotius   prayed  for  the  faith  of  his  serving   man. 

2.  It  is  not  difficult  to  attain.  "  Knock,"  "  Ask,"  "  All  things  are  ready."  _  The 
great  heart  of  the  Eternal  is  close  about  us ;  no  whispering  gallery  so  quickly 
catches  sounds  as  God's  quick  intent  to  bless  catches  the  soul's  desire.  (Homiletic 
Review.)  Message  of  grace  to  sinners: — The  Gospel  of  Christ  is  a  true  friend 
to  the  penitent  sinner.  It  is  a  refuge  for  the  destitute,  a  shelter  for  the  oppressed, 
and  a  defence  in  all  "  times  of  trouble."  It  is  a  "  stronghold,"  and  all  that  flee 
into  it  are  safe.  The  words  of  the  text  apply — 1.  To  the  unawakened  sinner. 
You  are  a  prisoner,  though  unconscious  of  yoiu:  captivity.  You  are  the  prisoner 
of  Satan,  and  in  bondage  to  sin.  But  God,  who  is  a  God  of  mercy,  hath  provided 
a  great  deliverer  to  interpose  in  yom-  behalf.  He  hath  opened  the  doors  of  the 
prison-house.  At  His  command  the  chains  of  bondage  fall  off.  2.  To  the 
awakened  sinner.  When  we  perceive  a  concern  for  the  soul  in  any  one  we  thank 
God  for  His  mercies,  and  pray  that  the  work  may  be  abiding  and  prosper.  3.  To 
the  weak  believer.  Unbelief  hides  from  your  view  and  from  your  enjoyment 
the  truths  and  promises  of  the  glorious  Gospel,  and  keeps  your  soul  still  the 
prisoner  of  doubt,  lest  you  should  not  hold  out  to  the  end  of  the  journey,  and 
reach  in  safety  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  You  need  the  exercise  of  a  more  lively 
faith  in  the  free  and  finished  salvation  of  the  Cross,  and  a  more  simple  reliance 
on  the  redeeming  love  and  power  of  Christ.  Hear,  then,  the  voice  of  your  Lord 
and  Saviour,  "  Turn  to  the  stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope."  Look  more  simply 
to  Jesus.  He  is  a  complete  and  almighty  Saviour,  (C.  Davy.)  The  Messiah 
in  the  character  of  a  Redeemer  :—l.  The  pebsons  whom  He  comes  to  redeem. 
The  description  is  of  a  mixed  nature :  it  represents  a  state  in  the  main  bad,  yet 
not  so  wholly  bad  as  to  be  past  recovery.  Though  this  "  pit "  doth  not  yield 
any  water,  yet  water  may  be  brought  to  it.     The  description  points  at  those 


CHAP.  K.]  ZECHARIAH.  169 

who  feel  their  misery,  and  earnestly  look  and  long  for  deliverance.  By  "  prisoners 
of  hope  "  we  understand  all  sinners  who  are  within  reach  of  Divine  mercy,  and 
more  especially  those  who  are  suing  for  mercy,  under  the  felt  burden  of  sin  and 
misery.  And  even  they  who  have  obtained  mercy  may  come  imder  this  description. 
The  present  condition  of  believers  upon  earth  is  neither  a  state  of  perfect  liberty 
nor  of  uninterrupted  peace.  These  are  the  blessed  ingredients  which  constitute 
the  happiness  of  the  Zion  above,  but  whilst  they  sojourn  in  this  strange  land  they 
are  liable  to  various  and  painful  distresses.  There  are  other  prisons  besides  the 
pit  of  an  unconverted  state  ;  prisons  where  those  who  are  dear  to  God  may  suffer 
a  temporary  confinement.  There  they  are  "prisoners  of  hope."  II.  The  advice 
OK  COMMAND  ADDBE3SED  TO  THEM.  By  the  "  stronghold  "  is  meant  "  the  blood 
of  the  covenant,"  or  rather  the  new  covenant  itself,  ratified  and  sealed  by  the 
blood  of  Christ.  It  is  an  impregnable  defence  to  all  who  flee  to  it  for  refuge. 
How  are  we  to  turn  to  this  stronghold  ?  1.  We  must  turn  our  back  upon  every- 
thing else,  and  abandon  all  other  means  of  deliverance,  as  refuges  of  lies,  which 
will  miserably  disappoint  those  who  expect  relief  from  them.  2.  That  we  tmrn 
our  eyes  to  this  stronghold,  and  narrowly  examine  the  security  it  affords.  3.  That 
we  actually  flee  to  it,  and  improve  it  for  all  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  intended. 
m.  A  GRACIOUS  AND  BNCOTTEAGiNG  PROMISE.  1.  The  promise  itself  is  most 
gracious.  "  I  will  render  double  tinto  you."  2.  The  comfort  of  this  promise  is 
greatly  heightened  by  the  manner  of  publishing  it.  "  Even  to-day  do  I  declare." 
(J?.  Walker. )  The  prisoner  of  hope  : — The  multitudes  in  this  fallen  world  need 
some  other  place  of  refuge  than  that  which  they  have  already  discovered.  If 
they  had  already  found  peace  and  security,  there  could  be  no  necessity  for  directing 
them  to  "  turn  "  to  any  new  stronghold  or  place  of  defence.     I.  The  figure 

UNDER  WHICH  THE  TEXT  DESCRIBES  THE  GREAT  MASS  OF  MANKIND.       1.  "  Prisoners." 

Even  the  real  servant  of  God  finds  much  to  remind  him  that  he  has  not  yet  reached 
the  region  of  perfect  liberty.  As  to  the  man  of  the  world,  he  is  altogether  a  prisoner. 
2.  They  are  prisoners  of  hope."  All  who  have  fallen  from  God  are  to  be  con- 
sidered as  "  prisoners  of  hope."  To  whom  shall  we  deny  the  privileges  of  hope  ? 
While  there  is  life  there  is  hope.  II.  The  counsel  given  in  the  text.  1.  A 
stronghold  is  here  pointed  out  to  you.  By  stronghold  is  meant  every  refuge 
which  the  mercy  of  God  has  provided  for  His  guilty  creatures.  But  especially 
the  love,  the  merits,  and  the  righteousness  of  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  the  Son  of 
God,  the  Redeemer  of  a  lost  world.  2.  We  are  directed  to  turn  to  the  stronghold. 
(1)  We  must  be  persuaded  of  the  inefficiency  of  every  other.  (2)  We  must  be  per- 
suaded of  its  sufficiency  for  our  safety.  (3)  It  is  essential  that  we  actually  take 
possession  of  it.  Inferences — 1.  What  a  confirmation  do  topics  such  as  this 
lend  to  the  authenticity  of  that  faith  into  which  we  are  baptized.  2.  If  the  pro- 
vision made  in  the  Gospel  for  the  wants  and  distresses  of  human  nature  be  one 
mark  of  its  Divine  origin,  let  us  take  care  to  apply  it  to  the  use  for  which  it  is 
so  emphatically  designed.  {J.  W.  Cunningham.)  Counsel  to  prisoners: — The 
text  primarily  alludes  to  the  Jews  in  captivity.  I.  The  prisoners  of  hope. 
We  have  in  our  country  at  the  least  three  kinds  of  prisoners.  1.  Those  upon 
whom  sentence  is  passed,  and  they  are  therefore  consigned  to  further  imprison- 
ment, punishment,  banishment,  or  death.  2.  Those  who  are  guilty  of  felony 
or  misdemeanour,  but  who  have  not  yet  appeared  before  the  judge  to  have  their 
trial ;  and — 3.  Debtors  who,  in  consequence  of  adversity  or  prodigality,  have 
been  brought  into  distress  and  prison.  There  are  also  three  kinds  of  prisoners 
in  a  moral  or  spiritual  sense.  1.  Those  who  have  died  impenitent,  and  have 
received  sentence  of  eternal  death.  These  are  not  prisoners  of  hope,  their  state 
is  eternally  fixed.  They  must  be  banished  for  ever  from  God.  Thanks  be  to 
God  !  this  is  not  our  state.  2.  All  who  are  living  in  sin  are  prisoners.  Compare 
a  man  shut  up  in  prison  until  the  assizes  when  he  must  appear  before  the  judge, 
and  a  sinner  shut  up  in  the  prison  of  sin  until  death  introduces  him  into  the  presence 
of  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth.  The  sinner  is  the  bond-slave  of  Satan.  A  prisoner 
is  liable  at  any  moment  to  be  brought  to  justice  ;  and  so  is  a  wicked  man.  He 
is  yet  a  prisoner  of  hope.  3.  There  are  debtors  who  often,  in  consequence  of 
carelessness  or  prodigality,  have  brought  themselves  into  sorrow  and  confinement. 
This  is  the  case  with  backsliders.  Their  case  is  pitiable,  but  not  desperate. 
They  are  prisoners  of  hope.  II.  The  stronghold  to  which  these  prisoners 
ABE  exhorted  TO  TURN,  1.  A  stronghold  signifies  literally  a  place  of  safety  or 
defence ;  figuratively,  it  is  put  for  the  Church  of  God,  and  sometimes  for  the 
Lord  Himself.    2.  He  is  a  place  of  safety  and  defence  to  His  people.     They  are 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

shielded  from  the  curse  attached  to  a  breach  of  the  holy  and  righteous  law  of 
God.  3.  This  stronghold  is  accessible  by  all  kinds  of  sinners.  As  soon  as  ever 
they  come  to  themselves,  and  are  sensible  of  their  situation,  they  may  find  shelter 
in  the  love  of  the  Saviour.  III.  Enforce  the  exhortation.  "  Turn  you  to  the 
stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope."  1.  Confess  and  forsake  all  your  sins.  2.  It 
is  the  will  of  God  that  you  should  thus  turn  from  prison  to  liberty,  from  sin 
to  holiness.  3.  To  return  from  your  prison  will  be  your  highest  interest,  both 
in  this  world  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.  4.  If  you  refuse  to  turn  to  the  strong- 
hold you  will  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy.  5.  Turn  now  !  Delays 
are  dangerous!  {B.  Bailey.)  The  double  blessing: — In  these  words  are  to  be 
noticed — I.  The  persons.  "  Prisoners  of  hope."  Though  all  men  are  prisoners 
by  nature,  yet  all  men  are  not  "  prisoners  of  hope."  Every  natural  man  is  a 
prisoner  to  sin  and  Satan,  and  shut  up  in  unbelief ;  sin  has  dominion  over  him, 
he  lies  in  the  arms  of  the  wicked  one.  The  persons  spoken  to  in  the  words  of 
the  text  are  the  same  persons  who  are  mentioned  in  the  verse  which  precedes 
the  text.  The  people  addressed  are  a  people  who  were  sent  forth  out  of  the  pit 
wherein  is  no  water,  by  which  a  state  of  nature  doubtless  is  intended ;  which  is 
a  filthy,  dark,  wretched,  and  uncomfortable  state,  wherein  no  refreshment  can 
be  had.  These  are  called  in  the  text  "  prisoners  of  hope,"  which  they  are,  not 
only  because  they  possess  hope  as  a  grace  of  the  Spirit  in  their  hearts,  but  also 
because  it  causes  its  professors  to  hope  for  the  enjoyment  of  those  things  which 
are  promised  to  the  people  of  God  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  which  they  are  not 
yet  put  in  the  possession  of.  Though  these  people  are  sent  forth  out  of  the  pit 
of  nature,  yet  they  may  be  called  "  prisoners,"  because  their  consciences  are  not 
yet  acquitted  of  guilt.  They  are  prisoners,  but  prisoners  of  hope.  II.  The 
exhortation.  "  Turn  ye  to  the  stronghold."  Christ  undoubtedly  is  intended. 
It  is  by  turning  to  Christ,  in  a  way  of  believing,  that  guilty  consciences  can  be 
liberated,  and  joy  and  peace  experienced.  Believing  in  Christ  is  also  called  coming 
to  Him,  looking  to  Him,  turning  to  Him.  Those  who  do  this  find  themselves 
screened  from  the  curse  of  the  law ;  the  charge  of  sin  ;  the  punishment  of  it ; 
from  Satan's  rage ;  and  from  every  other  enemy.  III.  The  declaration.  "  I 
will  render  double  imto  thee."  Either  by  this  the  abundance  of  grace  and  mercy 
in  Christ  is  intended  ;  or  by  the  term  "  double  "  is  meant  the  pardon  of  their 
sins,  and  acceptance  of  their  persons ;  or  it  is  a  promise  of  God's  removing  guilt 
from  their  consciences,  and  of  His  restoring  peace,  which  also  is  a  double  blessing. 
The  whole  of  this  passage  is  a  display  of  God's  love  and  care,  which  He  exercises 
towards  all  those  who  are  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  virtue  of  which 
it  is  that  God  sends  them  forth  out  of  the  pit  of  nature,  and  then  directs  them  as 
prisoners  of  hope  to  turn  to  the  stronghold  (Christ),  and  promises  to  render  unto 
them  the  double  blessings  above-mentioned.  [S.  Barnard.)  The  prisoners 
of  hope  : — Turning  to  the  Jews  who  still  remained  in  Babylon,  Zechariah  invites 
them  to  quit  the  land  of  their  captivity  and  hasten  to  Jerusalem,  "  Turn  you  to 
the  stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope."  They  were  in  captivity,  but  that  not  an 
interminable  captivity ;  they  were  prisoners  of  hope  ;  and  were  now  invited  to 
a  place  of  refuge  and  security.  This  is  the  primary  meaning  of  the  passage  before 
us,  but  the  language  is  suitable  in  the  universal  Church  of  God.  The  invitation 
of  the  Gospel  is  here  addressed  to  "  prisoners."  "  Whosoever  committeth  sin 
is  the  servant  (slave)  of  sin."  Many  who  would  justly  spurn  at  the  thought  of 
being  the  slaves  of  any  man  are  yet  in  bondage  to  a  master  of  whose  service 
they  have  more  reason  to  be  ashamed.  All  men  are,  by  nature,  servants  of  sin 
and  children  of  wrath,  exposed  by  their  past  transgressions  of  the  law  of  God, 
and  by  the  contrariety  of  their  hearts  to  it,  to  His  just  displeasure.  ...  I  speak 
to  those  whose  conscience  tells  them  that  they  have  never  yet  earnestly  sought 
the  deliverance  that  is  provided  for  them.  You  are  indeed  prisoners,  but  you 
are  prisoners  of  hope.  To  you  the  door  of  mercy  is  still  open.  There  is  an  offer 
of  deliverance,  an  invitation  to  a  refuge,  a  place  of  safety.  Are  there  some  of 
ou  sensible  of  the  danger  of  your  state  before  Grod,  convinced  of  sin,  and  trem- 
lingly  alive  to  its  fearful  consequences  ?  Turn,  then,  to  the  stronghold.  Turn 
to  the  covenant  made  by  God  with  believers  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  sure  promise 
that  He  will  pardon,  justify,  and  deliver  from  condemnation,  sanctify,  and  keep 
\mto  eternal  life,  those  who  cast  themselves  upon  His  mercy  through  Jesus  Christ 
as  their  only  hope.  Are  some  of  you  desirous  of  turning  to  the  stronghold,  and 
yet  know  not  how  to  set  about  your  return  ?  See  the  promise  in  Isa.  xhi.  16. 
You  who  have  fled  to  the  hope  set  before  you  in  the  Gospel  may  have  strong 


I 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECHARIAH.  161 

consolation.     (M.  M.  Preston,  M.A.)         The  ground  of  Christian  confidence: — 
The  words  of  this  text  may  be  considered  as  justly  applicable  to  the  great  Messiah, 
as  highly  expressive  of  the  happiness  which  those  shall  enjoy  who  have  recourse 
to  Him  for  salvation.     I.  The  character  of  those  to  whom  the  exhortation 
IS  ADDRESSED.     They  are  "  prisoners."     Enter  into  the  feelings  of  the  ordinary 
criminal  prisoner.     Consider  the  tumults  of  soul  which  he  experiences  from  the 
review  of  his  iniquitous  deeds.     When  reviewing  the  wretched  state  of  a  prisoner 
of  this  description  the  reflection  irresistibly  strikes  us, — how  happy  this   man 
might  have  been  had  his  conduct  been  uniformly  influenced   by  the  laws   of 
righteousness.      All   men,   by  natvne,   are    prisoners.      They   have   all   become 
obnoxious  to  those  fearful  judgments  which  this  law  hath  denounced  against  its 
transgressors.     The  situation  of  the  prisoner  is  a  faint  emblem  of  the  wretchedness 
of  the  natural  man.     The  prisoner  was  confined  in  a  dark  dungeon  ;  so  do  clouds 
and  darkness  encompass  the  soul.     The  prisoner  is  loaded  with  fetters.     Every 
man,  in  his  natural  state,  is  shackled  by  the  galling  fetters  of  sin.     The  prisoner 
must  expect  to  end  his  guilty  career  by  a  disgraceful  death.     But  these  prisoners 
are  called  "  prisoners  of  hope."     Dangerous  is  the  state  of  sinful  man,  but  not 
desperate.     The  stroke  of  death  may  yet  be  averted,  and  they  may  become  heirs 
of  eternal  life.     Loaded  as  men  may  be  with  iniquities,  Omnipotence  can  easily 
release  them  from  the  oppressive  burden.     By  the  term  "  prisoners  of  hope  " 
may  also  be  meant  those  who  have  felt  a  deep  sense  of  their  misery  and  danger, 
who  earnestly  look  for  deliverance  from  the  power  and  guilt  of  sin.     Men  of  this 
description  are  in  a  most  hopeful  way.     Those  also  may  be  included  in  the  term 
who  have  already  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  merciful  and  gracious,  but  are  subject 
to  depression  of  mind.     Li  the  best  of  men  there  remains  some  portion  of  natural 
corruption.     II.  The  import  of  the  exhortation.     By  the  stronghold  is  here 
meant  the  blood  of  the  atonement,  or  the  "  blood  of  the  covenant."     Through 
this  blood  those  spiritual  consolations  are  imparted  to  men  which  are  so  necessary 
to  their  happiness.     This  stronghold  is  a  most  impregnable  defence  to  all  who 
flee  to  it  for  refuge.     The  covenant  of  grace  is  adequate  to  all  the  wants  and 
necessities  of  sinful  men.     It  is  there  is  to  be  found  imlimited  pardon  of  sin  ; 
through  it  the  Divine  acceptance  has  been  assiured  ;  through  it  grace  is  communi- 
cated to  purify  the  soul  from  every  stain  of  corruption ;  through  it  that  wisdom 
is  conferred  which  is  profitable  to  direct  in  aU  things,  and  that  power  which 
shall  enable  man  to  surmount  every  difficulty.     The  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
dwelleth  in  the  Mediator  of  this  covenant,  and  He  becometh  to  all  who  believe, 
"  wisdom    and    righteousness    and    sanctification    and    complete    redemption." 
What  is  implied  by  turning  to  this  stronghold,  the  perfect  righteousness  and 
complete  atonement  of  the  Redeemer  ?     It  means  that  we  renounce  every  mean 
or  false  security.     Many  are  the  groimds  of  false  dependence  on  which  unthinkincr, 
ignorant  men  rely.     Let  all  who  have  hitherto  relied  on  these  grounds  of  false 
dependence  henceforth  renounce  them  for  ever ;  and  let  them  betake  themselves 
to  the  finished  work  of  Jesus,  who  is  the  tried  precious  corner-stone,  the  sure 
foundation  which  Grod  hath  laid  in  Zion.     (M.  Gait,  M.A.)        Christ  a  strong- 
hold : — I.  In  what  sense,  or  on  what  account,  are  mankind  represented 
AS  prisoners  ?     The  prison  is  of  a  spiritual  description.     It  is  not  so  much  a 
place  as  a  state  of  confinement.     All  men,  by  nature,  are  under  the  curse  of 
Grod,  and  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan.     The  law,  the  justice,  the  truth,  the  power 
of  God  ;  these  are  the  walls   and   bolts   and   bars  that  confine  you.     The  evil 
dispositions  and  passions  of  men  answer  all  the  purposes  of  chains  and  bolts, 
to  disable  their  souls  from  rising  towards  heaven,  or  moving  a  step  in  the  way 
of  holiness.     II.  Why  are  some  called  prisoners  op  hope,  and  who  are  they 
THAT  may  be  so  CALLED  ?     It  implies  that  there  are  some  without  hope.     The 
devil  and  his  angels  are  such.     Such  also  are  all  those  among  men  who  have 
died  without  repentance  and  pardon ;  and  they  are  a  multitude,  we  fear,  greater 
than  any  man  can  number.     Who  are  prisoners  of  hope  ?     1.  All  who  are  alive 
upon  the  earth.     2.  Those  who  possess  the  means  of  grace  are  more  particularly 
to  be  considered  as  prisoners  of  hope.     3.  Those  who  feel  religious  impressions. 
m.  What  is  this  stronghold  ?     It  is  Christ.     I,  He  secures  us  from  the  wrath 
of  God.     2.  From  the  assaults  of  sin  and  Satan.     3.  From  worldly  confusion 
and  calamities.      IV.  What  is   implibd   in  turninq  to  this  stronghold  ? 
1.  You  must  be  thoroughly  convinced  of  Christ's  ability  to  defend  you.     2.  You 
must  forsake  all  other  refuges.     3.  In  order  to  obtain  safety  in  Christ  there  must 
be  an  actual  acceptance  of  Him,  and  a  steady  reliance  upon  Him  for  protection. 
II 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

V.  How  DO  WB  KNOW  THAT  Christ  IS  SUCH  A  STBONQHOLD  ?  1.  Consider  His 
Divine  perfections.  2.  His  Divine  appointment.  Have  you  turned  to  this 
stronghold  ?  Some  have.  Some  are  still  secure  in  Satan's  confinement.  Some 
feel  the  fetters  begin  to  gall  them,  and  they  are  sighing  for  liberty.  Be  often 
looking  back  to  your  former  imprisonment.  Adore  the  grace  that  provided 
such  a  stronghold.  And  beware  of  dishonouring  this  stronghold.  This  is  done 
when  men  think  it  a  confinement,  and  are  uneasy  under  its  restrtiints.  (S.  Lav- 
ington.)  A  stronghold  : — I  How  the  Savkjur  may  be  called  a  Strong- 
hold. A  stronghold  implies  a  place  of  safety  or  security,  and  can  only  allude 
to  Christ.  The  Psalmist  called  Him  his  castle,  his  fortress,  his  tower  of  defence, 
the  rock  of  his  might — doubtless  impressed  with  the  security  afforded  to  ihe 
weak  who  can  cleave  unto  Him.  Few  terms  can  be  more  forcible  than  the  one 
contained  in  our  text,  but  we  must  feel  our  weakness  to  appreciate  the  force  of 
the  term.  We  must  feel  the  necessity  of  our  having  a  stronghold  to  turn  unto. 
II.  To  WHOM  the  term  "  prisoners  of  hope  "  MAY  REFER.  This  evidently 
applies  to  the  whole  world.  When  Adam  sinned  he  became  a  prisoner — a  slave 
to  sin  and  evil  passions.  This  slavery  he  entailed  upon  all  his  children.  It  is 
the  evil  nature  of  man  that  holds  him  bound — it  withers  the  germ  of  life;  it 
destroys  all  the  energies  and  Divine  flowings  of  the  soul ;  it  throws  a  chain  upon 
the  creature  that  holds  him  down,  so  that  he  cannot  get  free.  We  are  prisoners 
in  the  flesh.  The  heart  of  stone  rests  within.  But  although  a  prisoner,  still  in 
hope.  Prisoners  by  sin  hope  in  Christ,  because  Christ  gave  Himself  a  ransom 
for  sinners.  The  penitent  sinner  has  hope  because  he  is  awakened  by  a  conscious- 
ness of  his  sin,  and  by  the  apprehension  of  his  danger.  III.  The  promise  con- 
tained IN  THE  text.  The  exhortation  contains  a  promise  of  infinite  magnitude  : 
"  I  will  render  double  unto  thee."  You  shall  receive  amends  for  the  trouble 
you  have  endured,  for  the  miseries  of  this  world  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared 
to  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  us.  (0.  Thompson,  M.A.)  Inspiration 
of  hope  : — In  one  of  the  great  battles  of  history  the  General  of  the  French  was 
approached  by  an  excited  officer,  who  cried,  "  The  battle  is  lost !  "  "  Yes," 
was  the  cool  reply  ;  "  but  there  is  time  to  win  another."  And  so  it  proved,  for 
the  retreating  troops  rallied,  and  pressed  forward  in  a  still  fiercer  attack  because 
of  their  temporary  repulse,  and  at  night  all  victory  rested  on  the  French  banners. 
No  defeat  is  final,  unless  you  choose  to  make  it  so.  There  is  always  time  to  win 
a  victory.  Suppose  your  temper  gets  the  better  of  you  instead  of  your  conquer- 
ing it.  Suppose  you  yield  to  the  temptation  you  meant  to  rout  so  gloriously.  Is 
that  a  reason  for  giving  up  and  throwing  down  your  arms  7  Not  a  bit  of  it. 
The  end  has  not  come  yet.  There  is  still  time  to  win  another  battle.  Make 
your  next  onset  all  the  fiercer  because  of  that  temporary  defeat.  The  hope 
cj  gain  in  dying  : — There  is  a  bird  that  mariners  call  the  "  frigate  bird,"  of  strange 
habits  and  of  stranger  power.  Men  sec  him  in  all  climes  ;  but  never  yet  has 
human  eye  seen  him  near  the  earth.  With  wings  of  mighty  stretch,  high  borne, 
h(>  .'^ails  along.  Men  of  the  far  north  see  him  at  midnight  moving  on  amid  auroral 
fires,  ^ailillg  along  with  set  wings  amid  those  awful  Hamcs,  taking  the  colour  of  the 
waves  of  light  which  swell  and  heave  around  iiim.  Men  in  the  tropics  see  him 
nt  hottest  noon,  his  plumage  all  incarnadined  by  the  fierce  rays  that  smite 
innocuous  upon  him.  Ainid  their  ardent  fever  he  bears  along,  majestic,  tireless. 
Never  was  he  known  to  s-toop  from  his  lofty  line  of  flight,  never  to  swerve.  To 
many  he  is  a  myth  ;  to  all  a  mystery.  Where  is  his  perch  ?  Where  does  he 
rest  ?  Where  was  he  brooded  ?  None  know.  They  only  know  that  above 
the  cloud,  above  the  reach  of  tempest,  above  the  tumult  of  transverse  currents, 
this  bird  of  heaven,  so  let  us  call  him,  on  self-supporting  wings  that  disdain 
to  beat  the  air  on  which  they  rest,  moves  grandly  on.  So  shall  my  hope  be. 
At  either  pole  of  life,  above  the  clouds  of  sorrow,  superior  to  the  tempests 
that  beat  upon  me,  on  lofty  and  tireless  wing,  scorning  the  earth,  it  shall 
move  along.  Never  shall  it  stoop,  never  swerve  from  its  sublime  line  of  flight. 
Men  shall  see  it  in  the  morning  of  my  life  ;  they  shall  see  it  in  its  hot  noonday  ; 
and  when  the  shadows  fall,  my  sun  having  set,  the  last  they  shall  see  of  me  shall 
be  this  hope  of  pain  in  dying,  as  it  sails  out  on  steady  wing,  and  disappears  amid 
the  everlasting  light.  (W.  H.  Murray.)  Prisoners  of  hope: — This  title  is  not  a 
fanciful  one.  To  the  Jew  it  had  a  triple  significance.  1.  He  was  under  the  yoke 
of  a  foreign  despot,  and  longed  to  regain  his  freedom.  2.  He  was  under  the  yoke 
of  an  unfulfilled  promise  of  a  coming  Messiah,  and  yearned  for  the  "  day-star  to 
arise."     3.  Ho  waa  under  the  yoke  of  the  unreahsed  prophecies  concerning  the 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECHARIAH.  163 

glory  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom,  and  the  eternal  felicity  of  His  followers.  Rightly 
apprehended,  the  words  of  the  text  are  the  true  designation  of  every  real  Christian. 
In  two  senses  out  of  the  three,  however,  they  are  not  apphcable  to  us.  We  are 
not  under  an  alien  yoke.  The  incarnation  is  not  a  hope,  but  a  historic  fact.  In 
the  third  sense  only  are  saints  to-day  "  prisoners  of  hope."  I.  We  arb  prisonebs 
TO  AN  iTNREDEEMED  BODY.  In  St.  Paul's  sense,  "  Even  we  ourselves  groan  within 
ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our  body  "  (Rom.  viii. 
23).  Observe,  then — 1.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  body  is  already  redeemed. 
Christ  by  His  contact  with  human  flesh  has  sanctified  it,  and  separated  it  from 
the  service  of  sin ;  so  that  now  we  are  exhorted  to  "  present  our  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God."  2.  There  is  another  sense  in  which  our 
bodies  are  not  redeemed.  (1)  They  are  not  yet  free  from  manifold  infirmities, — 
nervousness,  drowsiness,  debihty,  defects  in  the  organs  of  sensation.  (2)  They 
are  not  yet  redeemed  from  sensuous  appetites.  How  soon  the  sensuous  becomes 
sensual !  3.  Hope  anticipates  the  possession  of  an  immortal  body — ( 1 )  Prom 
which  every  element  of  weakness  and  infirmity  is  excluded.  (2)  In  which  carnal 
appetites  shall  have  no  place.  (3)  Which  shall  be  no  more  subject  to  death. 
II.  We  are  prisoners  to  a  limited  and  superficial  knowledge.  "Now 
I  know  in  part," — there  is  the  bondage.  "  Then  shall  I  know  even  as 
I  am  known," — there  is  the  freedom.  1.  Our  knowledge  touches  not  the 
essence,  but  only  the  phenomena  of  things.  What  they  really  are  Omni- 
science only  knows.  Names  are  but  disguises  by  which  we  hide  our  ignor- 
ance. The  more  we  learn,  the  less  we  seem  to  know.  "  There  are  two  sorts 
of  ignorance.  We  philosophise  to  escape  ignorance,  and  the  consummation  of 
our  philosophy  is  ignorance.  We  start  from  the  one,  we  repose  in  the  other." 
2.  Our  knowledge  reaches  men,  not  as  they  are,  only  as  they  appear.  All  men  are 
better  or  worse  than  they  seem  to  be.  The  invisible  part  is  the  true  man.  3.  Even 
this  knowledge  is  limited  by  the  brevity  of  Ufe  and  the  conditions  of  its  existence. 
The  most  profound  thinker  and  the  most  extensive  traveller  must  lay  aside  their 
work  at  the  summons  of  death.  4.  Since  human  knowledge  is  so  limited,  how 
irrational  for  human  beings  to  impugn  the  Divine  economy.  As  wise  for  the  mole 
to  criticise  and  condemn  the  landscape  under  which  he  burrows.  Man's  work 
is  to  trust  and  wait.  5.  Hope  anticipates  the  solution  of  the  dark  enigma  of  human 
life.  "  Then  I  shall  know  even  as  I  am  known."  Things  will  appear  as  they 
really  are.  6.  Even  this  knowledge  is  progressive.  The  finite  can  never  compre- 
hend the  infinite.  Progress  is  heaven's  law  as  well  as  earth's.  III.  We  are 
PRISONERS  TO  A  ciRCTJMSCRiBED  CHRISTIAN  FELLOWSHIP.  The  great  family  of 
our  Father  is  sadly  dismembered.  Whilst  one  in  spirit  and  faith,  our  fellowship 
is  ruptured  by — 1.  Doctrinal  divergence.  The  Jews  of  bigoted  ritualism  still 
have  no  deahngs  with  the  Samaritans  of  a  broader  faith.  2  Suspicion,  the  offspring 
of  imperfect  knowledge,  is  another  cause  of  circumscribed  fellowship.  3.  Social 
status  is  a  barrier  to  universal  Christian  fellowship.  4.  Distance  and  death  con- 
tribute to  the  limited  measure  of  fellowship  enjoyed  by  Christians.  5.  Hope 
anticipates  the  universal  and  perfect  fellowship  of  saints.  (1)  This  will  include 
all  ages ;  (2)  and  all  climes ;  (3)  and  all  classes  and  creeds.  IV.  We  are  prisoners 
TO  AN  IMPERFECT  VISION  OF  Christ.  "  Now  we  See  through  a  glass  darkly." 
There  is  the  bondage.  "  Then  face  to  face."  There  is  the  substance  of  oiu:  hope. 
Yet  note — 1.  Christ  is  really  apprehended  by  faith  even  here.  This  faith  is  a 
spiritual  sense,  akin  to  the  eye  of  the  body.  It  invests  the  invisible  Saviour  with 
a  real  personality.  2.  This  vision  is  at  best  a  dim  one.  A  reflected  view,  as 
when  one  beholds  a  face  in  a  mirror.  3.  Human  nature  in  its  present  state  is  not 
capable  of  a  more  open  vision.     {Homiletic  Magazine.) 

Vers.  13-17.  The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  defend  them.  —  Ood  works  amongst 
the  nations  in  the  interests  of  His  people : — The  double  recompense  which  the 
Lord  will  make  to  His  people  will  consist  in  the  fact  that  He  not  only  liberates 
them  out  of  captivity  and  bondage,  and  makes  them  into  an  independent  nation, 
but  that  He  helps  them  to  victory  over  the  power  of  the  world,  so  that  they  will 
tread  it  down,  i.e.  completely  subdue  it.  The  first  thought  is  not  explained  more 
fully  because  it  is  contained  implicite  in  the  promise  of  return  to  a  strong  place, 
the  double  only  is  more  distinctly  defined,  namely,  the  victory  over  Javan.  The 
expression,  "  I  stretch,"  &c.,  implies  that  the  Lord  will  subdue  the  enemies  by 
Judah  and  Ephraim,  and  therefore  Israel  will  carry  on  this  conflict  in  the  power 
of  its  Qod. — Keil.    I.  That  God  works  auokost  thk  nations  or  thb  babth. 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

Gfod  is  here  represented  as  raising  up  Zion  against  Greece.  "  And  raised  up  thy 
sons,  0  Zion,  against  thy  sons,  0  Greece."  The  hteral  reference,  it  may  be,  is 
to  the  help  which  He  would  render  the  Maccabees,  as  the  heroic  leaders  of  the 
Jews,  to  overcome  the  successors  of  the  Grecian  Alexander,  Antiochus  Epiphanes, 
and  the  other  Grecian  oppressors  of  Judah.  He  works  with  the  Jew  and  the 
Greek,  or  Gentile — the  two  great  divisions  of  mankind.  He  is  in  their  conflicts  and 
their  battles.  1.  He  works  universally  amongst  men.  He  works  with  the  "  sons  " 
of  Zion  and  the  "  sons  "  of  Greece.  He  operates  with  all,  with  the  remote  and 
the  distant,  with  the  little  and  the  great,  with  the  good  and  the  bad ;  He  is  in 
all  human  history.  All  good  He  originates,  all  evil  He  overrules.  2.  He  works 
by  human  agency  amongst  men.  "  When  I  have  bent  Judah  for  Me,  filled  the 
bow  with  Ephraim."  God  carries  out  His  purposes  with  man  by  the  agency  of 
man  ;  wicked  kings  are  BUs  tools,  obscure  saints  are  His  ministers  of  state.  He 
works  manifestly  amongst  men.  "  And  the  Lord  shall  be  seen  over  them  "  ; 
or,  as  Keil  renders  it,  "  Jehovah  shall  appear  above  them."  4.  He  works  terribly 
amongst  men.  "  And  His  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning,  and  the  Lord 
God  shall  blow  the  trumpet,  and  shall  go  with  whirlwinds  of  the  south."  "  Like 
lightning  will  His  arrow  go  forth,  and  the  Lord  Jehovah  will  blow  the  trumpets, 
and  will  pass  along  in  storms  of  the  south." — Keil.  He  is  in  the  crashings  of 
conflagrating  cities,  in  the  booming  thunders  of  contending  armies,  in  the  wild 
whirlwinds  of  battling  kingdoms ;  with  Him  there  is  "  terrible  majesty  "  as  He 
proceeds  on  His  march  in  human  history.  IL  God  works  amongst  the  nations 
of  the  earth  in  the  intebbsts  of  His  people.  1.  He  works  for  their  defence. 
"  The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  defend  them,"  or  shelter  them.  2.  He  works  for  their 
•victory.  "  They  shall  devour  and  subdue  with  sling-stones,"  &c.  "  Jehovah 
of  hosts  shall  protect  them,  and  they  shall  devour  and  tread  down  the  sUng- 
Btones,  they  shall  drink,  they  shall  be  noisy,  as  those  who  drink  wine  ;  they  shall 
be  fuU  as  the  bowl,  as  the  corners  of  the  altar." — Henderson.  The  idea  is  their 
complete  triumph  over  their  enemies.  Hengstenberg  observes  that  there  is  not 
the  least  indication  that  a  spiritual  conflict  is  intended.  Quite  true,  but  a  spiritual 
conflict  it  may  illustrate,  and  its  victory  too.  3.  He  works  for  their  salvation. 
"  And  the  Lord  their  God  shaU  save  them  in  that  day  as  the  flock  of  His  people." 
4,  He  works  for  their  glory.  "  They  shall  be  as  the  stones  of  a  crown,  lifted  up 
as  an  ensign  upon  His  land."  Or,  as  Hengstenberg  renders  it,  "  For  crowned 
jewels  shall  they  be  rising  up  upon  Hie  land."  There  is  true  glory  awaiting  the 
good.  There  is  a  crown  of  glory  laid  up  in  heaven,  &c.  6.  He  works  for  their 
perfection.  "  For  how  great  is  His  goodness,  and  how  great  is  His  beauty  !  Corn 
shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful,  and  new  wine  the  maids."  We  accept  the 
rendering  of  Keil  here,  which  is  not  only  faithful  to  the  original,  but  in  harmony 
with  the  context.  The  prophet  is  speaking  of  the  high  privileges  of  God's  people, 
and  not  of  the  excellences  of  the  Supreme.  It  is  an  exclamation  of  admiration 
of  the  high  privileges  of  the  godly.     {Homilist.) 

Vet.  16.  They  shall  he  as  the  stones  of  a  crown,  lifted  up  as  an  enslgrn 
upon  His  land.  —  The  Lord's  people :  —  Here  we  see  —  I.  The  dignity  of 
THE  Lord's  people.  They  are  "  stones,  precious  stones,"  set  in  the  "  crown  " 
of  the  King  of  kings.  God  not  only  spares,  but  pardons  and  justifies  them. 
In  His  righteousness  they  are  exalted ;  they  are  not  only  saved,  but 
eimobled.  With  kings  are  they  upon  the  throne.  II.  Here  is  also 
•THEIR  exhibition.  These  stones  of  a  crown  are  "lifted  up."  They  are 
not  to  be  concealed.  Our  Saviour  compares  them  to  a  city  set,  not  in  a 
valley,  but  on  a  hill  which  cannot  be  hid ;  and  to  a  candle,  placed,  not  under  a 
bushel,  but  on  a  candlestick,  that  it  may  give  light  to  all  that  are  in  the  house. 
Christians  need  not  be  concealed — everything  in  their  religion  will  bear  examina- 
tion, and  challenges  the  eyes  of  all,  whether  infidels  or  philosophers  or  politicians 
or  moralists.  They  ought  not  to  be  concealed — everything  in  their  religion 
is  adapted  to  do  good  ;  but  for  this  purpose  it  must  be  known.  They  cannot 
be  concealed, — their  principles  must  operate  ;  the  sun  cannot  shine  without 
showing  itself.  III.  Here  is  also  their  utility, — these  stones  of  a  crown 
are  to  be  lifted  up  "  as  an  ensign  upon  His  land."  An  oriflamme  suspended 
over  the  royal  tent,  and  designed  to  attract  and  aggregate  followers  to  the  cause 
in  which  he  is  engaged.  Their  calling,  to  hold  forth  the  Word  of  Life.  They 
are  placed  and  displaced  ;  to  reprove,  to  convince,  to  excite  and  encourage  others, 
to  seek  and  serve  God.     They  are  witnesses  for  Him ;  trophies  of  the  power 


CHAP.  IX.]  ZECHARIAH.  165 

and  greatness  and  riches  of  His  grace.     They  proclaim  what  He  is  able  and 
willing  to  do.     ( William  Jay. ) 

Ver.  17.  For  how  great  is  His  goodness,  and  how  great  is  His  beauty ! — God's  good- 
ness and  beauty  : — There  is  no  subject  of  contemplation  more  delightful  to  a  serious 
mind  than  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  The  prophet  had  been,  in  the  preceding 
verses,  describing  the  appearance  of  Christ  as  King  of  Zion,  as  just,  and  having 
salvation.  He  had  been  speaking  of  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  by  which  the 
prisoners  of  Divine  justice  are  delivered,  and  invited  to  turn  to  the  stronghold. 
He  had  described  the  salvation  which  God  should  work  out  for  His  people  by 
the  Messiah,  when  they  should  be  as  the  precious  stones  of  a  crown,  hfted  up 
on  high,  and  God  would  save  and  favour  them  as  His  jewels  and  pecuhar  treasure. 
The  prophet's  heart  was  so  affected  with  the  prospect  of  this  mercy  that  he 
breaks  out  into  the  joyful  acclamation,  "  How  great  is  His  goodness  !  "  Learn 
that  the  Divine  goodness  in  our  redemption  and  salvation  claims  our  admira- 
tion and  our  praise.  Here  too  we  see  the  "  beauty  "  of  the  Lord.  How  amicably 
His  perfections  shine  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Gospel ;  so  that  all  who  attend 
to  it  with  serious  minds  will  see  and  adore  them.  Here  we  observe  mercy  and 
truth  meeting  together,  righteousness  and  peace  greeting  each  other.  Here, 
at  the  Holy  Sacrament,  we  see  the  King  of  Zion,  the  image  of  the  invisible  God, 
in  aU  His  beauty,  and  He  appears  fairer  than  the  children  of  men,  and  altogether 
amiable  and  lovely.  Here  also  we  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord ;  with  what 
peculiar  lustre  this  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature  shines  in  our  redemption 
by  Jesus  Christ.  That  goodness  appears  great  if  we  consider  how  imiversally 
it  extends :  even  to  all  mankind.  Jesus  is  a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world.  K  we  consider  the  objects  of  it ;  mean  and  miserable  mortals,  whose 
goodness  cannot  extend  to  Him.  This  goodness  is  to  terminate  in  perfect  and 
everlasting  glory  and  felicity.  The  fountain  of  all  o\ir  comforts  and  hopes  is 
Divine  goodness.  The  streams  are  plenteous,  and  various.  They  enrich,  deUght, 
and  satisfy  the  soul,  and  they  flow  for  ever.  {Job  Orton. )  The  glory  of  Christ  : 
— This  is  manifested  throughout  all  the  Holy  Scriptures.  This  is  attested  both 
by  the  Apostles  and  by  our  Lord  Himself  (Acts  x.  43  ;  Luke  xxiv.  27  ;  John 
V.  39).  In  the  New  Testament  He  shines  like  the  sun  in  an  unclouded  atmo- 
sphere. In  the  Old,  though  generally  veiled,  He  often  biu-sts  forth  as  from  behind 
a  cloud  with  astonishing  beauty  and  splendour.  Nor  could  the  prophet  himself 
forbear  exclaiming  with  wonder  and  admiration,  "  How  great  is  His  goodness  !  " 
&c.  I.  The  goodness  of  otTR  Lord.  In  the  context  He  is  set  forth  as  the  God 
of  providence  and  of  grace.  And  in  order  to  behold  Bis  goodness  we  must  view 
Him  in  both  respects.  1.  As  the  God  of  providence.  As  all  things  were  created, 
80  are  they  upheld  and  governed  by  Hini.  To  Him  we  owe  the  preservation 
of  oiu"  corporeal  and  intellectual  powers.  We  are  continually  fed  by  His  bounty, 
and  protected  by  His  arm.  The  meanest  creature  in  the  universe  has  abundant 
reason  to  adore  Him — His  own  people  in  particular  may  discern  unnumbered 
instances  of  His  goodness  in  His  dispensations  towards  them.  His  most  afflictive 
as  well  as  His  more  pleasing  dispensations  afford  them  much  occasion  for  gratitude 
and  thanksgiving  (Psa.  cxix.  75).  2.  As  a  God  of  grace.  Jesus  is  the  one  fountain 
of  spiritual  blessings  to  His  Church  (Eph.  i.  22).  Neither  prophets  nor  apostles 
had  any  grace  but  from  Him  (John  i.  16).  To  Him  must  we  ascribe  every  good 
disposition  that  is  in  our  hearts  (Phil.  ii.  13  ;  Heb.  xii.  2).  What  reason,  then, 
have  His  faithful  followers  to  bless  His  naipe  !  With  what  gratitude  should 
they  acknowledge  His  continued  kindness  !  Though  they  have  often  turned 
back  from  Him,  He  has  not  cast  them  off.  Yea,  rather.  He  has  "  healed  their 
backshdings  and  loved  them  freely."  Surely  every  blessing  they  receive  and 
every  victory  they  gain  should  fill  them  with  admiring  thoughts  of  His  good- 
ness (2  Cor.  ii.  14).  If  we  have  just  conceptions  of  His  goodness  we  shall  be  more 
able  to  behold — II.  His  beauty.  The  world  beholds  "  no  beauty  nor  comeli- 
ness in  "  the  face  of  Jesus.  But  the  saints  of  old  "  saw  His  glory  as  the  glory 
of  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father."  This  we  also  may  see  if  we  svu:vey  Him — 
1.  In  this  Divine  character.  "  We  cannot  by  searching  find  out  the  Almighty 
to  perfection."  Little  do  we  know  of  the  greatness  of  His  majesty,  or  the  thunder 
of  His  power  (Job  xxvi.  14).  We  cannot  comprehend  His  unsearchable  wisdom. 
His  unspotted  holiness.  His  inviolable  truth  and  faithfulness.  His  glory  is  more 
than  the  feeble  language  of  mortality  can  express.  2.  In  His  human  character 
Here  we  look  at  Him,  as  the  Jews  at  Moses  when  his  face  was  veiled.    And  can 


I 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  el 

contemplate  Him  more  easily  because  He  shines  with  a  less  radiant  lustre.  But 
principally  must  we  view  Him  during  the  course  of  His  ministry.  What  marvellous 
compassion  did  He  manifest  to  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men  !  Not  one  applied 
to  Him  for  bodily  or  spiritual  health  without  obtainmg  his  request.  And  when 
many  were  hardened  in  their  sins  He  wept  over  them  (Luke  xix.  41).  His  zeal 
for  God  was  ardent  and  unremitted.  His  meekness,  patience,  fortitude  were 
altogether  invincible.  Whatever  was  amiable  and  excellent  in  man  abounded 
in  Him  (Psa.  xlv.  2).  Nor,  though  continually  tried  in  the  hottest  furnace,  was 
there  found  in  Him  the  smallest  imperfection  or  alloy  (John  xiv.  30).  3.  In 
His  mediatorial  character.  With  what  readiness  did  He  become  a  surety  for 
sinful  man  (Psa.  xl.  7,  8).  What  astonishing  condescension  did  He  manifest 
in  uniting  Himself  to  our  nature  !  How  cheerfully  did  He  go  forth  to  meet  the 
sufferings  that  were  appointed  for  Him.  His  obedience  unto  death  was  the 
fruit  of  His  love  and  the  price  of  our  redemption.  How  beautiful  is  He  now 
in  the  eyes  of  those  who  behold  His  glory  !  And  how  wiU  He  "  be  admiied  and 
glorified  by  all "  in  the  last  day  !  Satan  must  have  blinded  us,  indeed,  if  we  be 
et  insensible  to  His  charms  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  If  we  be  true  believers.  He  cannot 
ut  be  precious  to  our  souls  (1  Pet.  ii.  7).  (J.  Benson.)  How  great  is 
His  beauty.  —  The  secret  of  beauty :  —  The  last  words  of  Charles  Kingsley 
were,  "  How  beautiful  is  God  !  "  Zechariah  was  thinking  of  the  glory 
about  to  be  given  to  Israel,  about  the  prosperity  soon  to  abound  in  the  land, 
and  he  knows  that  it  is  all  the  good  gift  of  God,  so  he  cries,  "  How  great  is  His 
goodness  !  How  great  is  His  beauty  !  Corn  shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful, 
and  new  wine  the  maids."  Wise  men  who  have  thought  about  the  nature  of 
God  have  always  said  that  there  must  be  three  perfect  things  in  God.  There 
must  be  perfect  truth,  perfect  goodness,  and  perfect  beauty.  By  remembering 
this  you  may  always  teU  the  difference  between  true  and  false  ideas  about  (Jod. 
Every  man  and  every  child  who  worships  a  God  about  whom  he  has  hard, 
cruel  thoughts,  although  a  Christian  in  name,  gives  only  heathen  worship  to 
the  Most  High.  AU  through  the  Bible  God  has  been  teaching  men  that  He  is 
beautiful.  The  Jews  were  taught  to  make  their  worship  beautiful.  At  last 
Christ  came.  He  did  not  seem  to  bring  beauty  down  to  man  at  once.  The 
word  "  beauty  "  is  never  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament.  But  this  was  because 
Christ  wanted  men  to  look  deeper  for  beauty  than  on  the  face  and  form.  The 
beauty  which  Chiist  brought  was  beauty  of  the  soul,  of  the  heart,  of  the  life, 
spiritual  beauty  which  will  never  fade  away  with  age,  will  never  wither  or  decay. 
Here  in  our  flowers  to-day  can  we  not  try  to  see  the  beauty  of  God  ?  They  teach 
that  His  beauty  is  perfect  in  little  things  as  well  as  in  great.  The  tiniest  flower 
is  as  perfect  as  the  large.  And  the  beauty  is  not  for  mere  show,  but  for  comfort 
and  use.  How  often  a  flower  teaches  people  about  God  !  I  have  read  of  a  poor 
sinful  woman  pressing  a  white  flower  to  her  heart  in  an  agony  of  tears,  because 
it  came  to  her  like  the  voice  of  God,  telling  of  His  wish  for  her  to  be  pure  and 
bright.  We  would  like  to  reveal  God  to  those  around  us.  If  so,  let  us  be  God's 
flowers.  Aim  at  three  things  in  order  that  we  may  accomplish  this  our  high 
task.  1.  Let  us  have  the  beauty  of  worship.  2.  Beauty  of  worship  must  lead 
to  beauty  of  life.  3.  All  this  will  grow  into  beauty  of  character.  This  is  the 
beauty  that  lasts  for  ever.  To  get  this  will  take  time.  All  the  best  things  take 
time.  (H.  H.  Gowen.)  Beauirj : — One  by  one  the  various  traits  of  Divine 
excellence  came  before  the  mind  of  the  prophet,  and  at  last  he,  as  it  were, 
generalised  them ;  and  the  whole  vision  struck  him  as  one  of  extreme  beauty. 
The  wisdom  of  God,  His  justice.  His  purity.  His  truth,  His  love,— all  of  these, 
in  quality,  in  quantity,  and  in  harmony,  form  a  symmetric  whole,  which  deserves, 
if  anything  deserves  it,  the  epithet  '  beautiful,"  and  meets  the  highest  concep- 
tion, and  overreaches  the  highest  aspiration  which  the  human  heart  has  for  the 
element  of  beauty.  Is  beauty,  then,  a  reality  in  the  higher  spiritual  life  ?  Is 
there  in  the  inward,  invisible,  and  truly  spiritual  life  that  which  answers  to 
our  idea  of  sensuous  beauty  ?  Or  is  it  figurative  7  I  hold  that  beauty  is  first 
spiritual,  and  afterwards  natural  and  material.  I  hold  that  it  was  Divine; 
that  it  inhered  in  the  nature  of  God,  and  the  natiure  of  spiritual  existence. 
Examine  the  relation  of  beauty  to  moral  qualities.  As  God  has  created  the 
world,  beauty  is  not  a  kind  of  seasoning  scattered  upon  the  weightier  realities. 
Men  think  that  the  beauty  of  this  natural  world  is  a  kind  of  decoration.  Per- 
fectness  and  beauty  are  identical.  Maturity,  whether  it  be  of  fruit,  or  flower, 
or  what  not,  works  by  stages  towards  beauty  in  the  material  globe.     So  that 


CHAP.  X.]  ZECHARIAH.  167 

beauty  is  not  an  accident.  Still  less  is  it  the  trimming  which  God  gave  to  the 
perfected  work.  It  is  the  Divine  idea  of  a  mode  of  creation.  As  the  human 
mind  is  cultivated,  it  becomes  more  and  more  sensitive  to  this  quality.  The 
less  culture  men  have,  the  further  they  are  from  the  admiration  of  beauty ;  that 
is  io  say,  the  less  comprehensive  is  their  admiration.  When  the  human  mind 
develops  and  grows  toward  its  perfection,  it  grows  toward  the  sense  of  beauty. 
But  moral  qualities  come  under  this  law,  just  as  much  as  physical  qualities  do. 
Fulness,  fineness,  and  harmony — there  is  the  formula.  In  nature  it  is  called 
quantity,  symmetry:  and  the  equivalent  of  this  in  moral  elements  is  fulness, 
fineness,  harmony.  Whatever  elements  the  mind  produces  when  it  acts  so  as 
to  give  fulness,  fineness,  and  harmonious  proportions  to  the  product,  are  beauti- 
ful. That  is  to  say,  they  produce  the  sense  of  beauty  in  those  that  look  upon 
them,  and  tend  universally  to  do  it.  Right  things  are  commanded  in  the  Bible, 
but  it  is  not  enough  that  we  should  be  just,  conscientious,  true,  amiable,  or  bene- 
volent. There  is  to  be  fulness  in  each  of  these  elements,  and  there  is  to  be  harmony 
among  all  of  them.  And  here  is  the  formula  fulfilled  which  goes  to  make  social 
and  moral  affections  beautiful.  It  would  seem  enough  to  say  to  men,  "  Be  kind, 
be  generous,  be  benevolent "  ;  but  no.  Let  love  be  without  dissimulation.  God 
loves  a  cheerful  giver.  Give  without  grudging  one  to  another.  These  are  the 
elements  that  go  to  make  beneficence ;  that  free  it  from  wrinkles ;  that  give 
it  largeness  and  generosity.  The  growth  toward  ripeness  in  moral  experience 
is  analogous  to  development  in  physical  nature, — that  is  toward  beautifulness. 
Just  in  proportion  as  any  one  of  our  better  feelings  becomes  predominant  over 
the  others,  men  feel  that  character  is  growing  lovely,  attractive,  admirable. 
And  these  are  only  step-stone  words  that  bring  you  to  the  last  one,  "  beauti- 
ful." There  is  nothing  so  beautiful  in  this  world  as  beauty  of  character.  Appli- 
cations— 1,  All  the  world  recognises  beauty  in  the  lower  grade  of  qualities.  It 
is  the  higher  moral  experience  that  men  lack  a  knowledge  of.  Devotion  is  more 
beautiful  than  passion.  The  love  of  God  in  the  soul  is  far  more  beautiful  than 
any  love  of  man  can  be.  The  qualities  of  religion  to  which  we  are  called  are 
supreme,  not  alone  in  importance,  but  in  art  even.  They  are  essentially  and 
intrinsically  more  admirable,  more  noble,  more  beautiful  than  all  the  lower 
experiences.  2.  How  great  is  the  variety  of  spiritual  things  in  the  Christian 
life  !  and  how  few  things  are  gained  !  How  many  persons  are  there  that  are 
beautiful  in  temper  ?  How  many  whose  good-nature  is  anything  more  than 
the  mere  product  of  good  health  ?  How  little  is  the  Church  beautiful  in  its 
grace  !  3.  The  unbeautifulness  of  Christian  life  is  sadly  shown  in  the  popular 
impression  with  regard  to  religion.  Men  mostly  feel  that  religion  is  something 
that  may  be  obligatory,  but  that  there  is  nothing  attractive  about  it.  The  true 
idea  is,  that  a  man  who  goes  into  a  Christian  experience,  goes  into  a  larger  liberty, 
and  goes  into  a  larger  joy.  4.  Christians  should  at  least  be  as  sensible  to  spiritual 
beauty  as  to  physical.  AU  men  should  love  beauty  in  common  things.  5.  God 
is  bringing  all  good  men  toward  that  realm,  and  that  indescribable  experience 
which  is  hinted  at  in  the  words  of  Scripture.  The  work  which  is  going  on  in 
us,  we  do  not  ourselves  at  all  appreciate.     {Henry  Ward  Beecher.) 


CHAPTER  X 

Veb.  1.  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in  the  time  of  the  latter  rain. — The  latter 
rain : — The  rainfall  in  Palestine  is  normally  periodical ;  occasional  showers 
and  even  storms  of  rain  may  occur  at  any  season,  but  as  a  rule  it  is  at 
the  time  of  the  autumnal  and  that  of  the  vernal  equinox  that  the  rain 
for  the  year  falls.  These  two  periodic  seasons  of  rain  the  Hebrews  spoke 
of  as  the  early  and  the  latter  rain ;  and  on  the  occurrence  of  them  the  fruit- 
fulness  of  the  field  and  the  return  of  the  harvest  depended.  In  other  passages 
both  the  former  and  the  latter  rain  are  referred  to  as  indispensable  to  this.  At  an 
early  period  God  promised  to  Israel  that  He  would  "  give  the  rain  of  their  land  in 
due  season,  the  first  rain  and  the  latter  rain,  that  they  might  gather  in  their  com, 
and  their  wine  (tirosh),  and  their  oil"  (Deut.  xi.  14) ;  and  by  the  prophets  the 
sending  of  rain,  the  former  and  the  latter  in  their  season,  is  represented  as  the 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

manifestation  of  special  regard  for  His  people  by  Jehovah  (comp.  Hos.  vi.  3 ; 
Joel  ii.  23  ;  Isa.  xxx.  23  ;  Jer.  v.  24).  The  latter  rain  only  is  mentioned  here, 
probably  because  this  was  the  more  important  for  the  fructification  of  the  grain ; 
and  possibly  also,  because,  being  this,  it  might  be  regarded  as  including  or  repre- 
senting temporal  blessing  generally.  This  the  prophet  here  exhorts  the  people 
to  ask  of  the  Lord  "  at  the  time  of  the  latter  rain,"  i.e.,  at  the  season  when  it  was 
due  ;  though  God  had  promised  it  to  His  people,  it  was  fitting  and  needful  that 
they  should  pray  to  Him  for  it  at  the  time  when  it  was  required.  This  "  direction 
to  ask  "  does  not  "  simply  express  the  readiness  of  God  to  grant  their  request"  ; 
it  does  this,  for  when  God  enjoins  on  men  the  asking  for  blessing.  He  implicitly 
engages  to  give  the  blessing  asked  for  ;  but  besides  this,  and  even  more  than  this, 
there  is  intimated  here  that  the  obtaining  of  promised  blessing  is  conditioned 
by  its  being  specially  asked  of  God  in  the  season  of  need.  God's  promises  are 
given  not  to  supersede  prayer,  but  rather  to  encourage  and  stimulate  to  prayer. 
(W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  The  latter  rain  : — The  "  latter  rain  "  was  that  which 
fell  in  the  spring,  and  which  was  instrumental  in  bringing  the  com  into  the  ear 
and  filling  it ;  so  that  if  this  rain  failed,  the  husbandman  would  be  disappointed 
of  his  harvest,  notwithstanding  all  his  previous  industry,  skill,  and  anxiety.  He 
was  indeed  dependent  also  on  the  "  former  "  rain,  that  which  fell  at  the  seeding 
time ;  but  there  would  be  a  yet  more  bitter  disappointment,  for  there  would  be 
the  utter  loss  of  much  labour,  the  fruitless  expenditure  of  much  effort  and  hope, 
if  the  "  latter  rain  "  were  withheld.  And,  consequently,  there  was  even  greater 
reason  for  his  asking  rain  in  "  the  time  of  the  latter  rain  "  than  in  that  of  "  the 
former."  If  the  "  former  rain  "  were  withheld,  he  might  make  some  other  use 
of  his  capital  and  enterprise  ;  but  if  "  the  latter,"  his  disaster  scarce  admitted 
of  repair.  Take  it  metaphorically,  and  the  "  latter  rain  "  is  the  grace  needed 
for  ripening  the  believer  and  fitting  him  for  heaven.  God  may  give  "  the  latter 
rain,"  if  the  husbandman,  conscious  of  his  dependence  on  God  for  the  harvest, 
continue  meekly  to  supplicate  the  necessary  showers  ;  He  may  withhold  the  rain, 
if  the  husbandman,  calculating  on  the  ordinary  course  of  His  dealings,  grow 
remiss  in  petitioning,  and  give  up  his  fields  to  the  presumed  certainties  of  the 
season.  There  is  no  point  in  the  life  of  a  Christian  at  which  he  can  do  without  the 
supply  of  God's  grace ;  none  at  which  he  can  expect  the  supply,  if  he  be  not 
cultivatmg  the  spirit  and  habit  of  prayer.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Prayer  and 
promise  : — We  have  here  expressed  the  connection  between  prayer  and  promise 
on  the  one  hand,  and  prayer  and  the  processes  of  nature  on  the  other.  The  blessing 
of  rain,  which,  to  an  agricultural  people,  was  inclusive  of  all  other  temporal 
blessings,  and  symbolical  of  all  spiritual  ones,  was  promised ;  but  this  promise 
was  dependent  on  its  supplication  in  prayer.  Just  so  the  great  blessing  of  the 
descent  of  the  Spirit  on  an  individual  or  a  Church,  though  a  free  gift,  must  be 
obtained  by  prayer.  It  is  this  fact  that  makes  the  spirit  of  prayer  in  the  Church 
at  once  an  index  of  her  piety,  and  of  the  spiritual  blessings  she  may  expect  from 
God.  When  the  Church  pours  out  a  fulness  of  prayer,  God  will  pour  out  a  fulness 
of  His  Spirit.  The  inspired  writers  see  no  difficulty  in  the  connection  between 
prayer  and  the  processes  of  nature,  such  as  the  mole-eyed  philosophy  of  modern 
times  discovers.  The  inspired  writers  think  that  the  God  who  has  created  the 
elements  may  direct  them  according  to  His  will.  We  must  not  suppose  that 
because  God  has  begun  to  bless  us,  we  may  relax  our  prayers  and  efforts. 
The  former  rain  may  be  given,  but  we  must  also  ask  for  the  latter  rain.  We  may 
have  the  former  rain  of  conversion,  but  if  we  would  have  the  latter  rain  of  ripened 
sanctification.  we  must  continue  to  ask  of  God.  So,  also,  in  the  revival  of  religion. 
The  former  rain  may  occiu",  and  souls  be  converted,  but  if  we  would  have  the 
ripening  seed  in  active  Christians,  we  must  ask  of  God,  and  He  will  give  growth, 
greenness,  and  maturity.  (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  God  in  relation  to  the  good 
and  the  bad  : — I.  God  attends  to  the  prayers  of  good  men.  The  abundance 
of  corn  promised  in  the  last  clause  of  the  preceding  chapter  depends  upon  rain. 

1.  God  gives  rain.  A  pseudo-science  would  ascribe  "  rain  "  and  "  clouds  "  and 
"  showers  "  to  what  they  call  the  laws  of  nature.  The  Bible  directly  connects 
them  with  the  working  of  God.  "  He  watercth  the  hills  from  His  chambers  : 
the  earth  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  Thy  works"  (Psa.  civ.  13-15,  Ixv.  9-11). 

2.  The  God  who  gives  rain  attends  to  human  prayer.  But  it  is  not  absurd,  because — 
(1)  Man  is  greater  than  material  natiu-e.     (2)  Prayer  is  a  settled  law  of  the  Divine 

fovernment.      To  cry  to  the   Almighty  in  distress  is  an  instinct  of   the  soul, 
'rayer,  instead  of  interfering  with  the  laws  of  nature.  La  a  law  of  nature.     II.  Hk 


CHAP.  X.1  ZECHARIAH.  169 

ABOMINATES  THE    CHARACTER   OF  RELIGIOUS   IMPOSTORS.       "  FoF    the    idols  [the 

household  gods]  have  spoken  vanity,"  &c.  "  Thus,  under  such  misleading  guides, 
such  selfish  and  unprincipled  shepherds,  the  flock  was  driven  about  and  '  troubled.' 
They  had  '  no  shepherd,'  no  truly  faithful  shepherd,  who  took  a  concern  in  the 
well-being  of  the  flock." — Wardlaw.  Now,  against  such  impostors,  Jehovah 
says,  "  Mine  anger  was  kindled."  "  That  the  shepherds  and  the  goats,"  says 
Hengstenberg,  "  are  the  heathen  rulers  who  obtained  dominion  over  Judah 
when  the  native  government  was  suppressed,  is  evident  from  the  contrast  so 
emphatically  pointed  out  in  the  fourth  verse,  where  particular  prominence  is 
given  to  the  fact  that  the  new  rulers  whom  God  was  about  to  appoint  would  be 
taken  from  the  midst  of  the  nation  itself."  Are  there  no  religious  impostors 
now,  no  false  teachers,  no  blind  leading  the  blind,  no  shepherds  fleecing  the 
flocks  ?  III.  Hb  works  IN  ALL  FOR  His  PEOPLE.  From  Him  comes  stability. 
All  stability  in  moral  character,  in  social  order,  in  political  prosperity,  is  from 
God.  What  a  sublime  view  of  the  Almighty  have  we  here  !  (Homilist.)  Asking 
of  the  Lord  : — 1.  Mark  the  importance  of  cultivating  the  spirit  of  dependence  and 
prayer.  We  are,  as  creatures  and  as  sinners,  dependent  for  everything  we  need, 
whether  for  the  body  or  the  soul, — for  this  life  or  the  life  to  come.  It  is  fitting 
that  we  should  feel  this  dependence,  and  that  we  should  give  it  expression. 
Prayer  is  the  expression  of  it;  but  prayer  is  something  more.  It  is  "asking  of 
the  Lord."  It  is  a  precious  privilege  ;  it  is  a  sacredly  incumbent  duty.  It  is  one 
of  the  Divinely  ordered  means  for  obtaining  any  desired  good.  God's  Word 
ascribes  to  it  an  eflficacy  on  His  own  counsels  and  doings  ;  its  being  His  inducement 
to  act  in  one  way  rather  than  in  another.  2.  But  we  must  never  be  satisfied 
with  praying.  We  must  never  separate  prayer  from  action.  The  two  must  go 
together.  It  will  not  do  for  the  husbandman  to  be  ever  on  his  knees,  pleading 
that  his  fields  may  be  productive.  All  the  labour  and  all  the  skill  of  husbandry 
must  be  put  forth  by  him.  He  must  work  and  pray  :  he  must  pray  and  work. 
It  is  a  mockery  of  God  if  he  does  otherwise.  To  work  without  praying  is  un- 
godliness and  presumption  ;  to  pray  without  working  is  enthusiasm  and  hypocrisy. 
And  so  it  is  in  the  spiritual  department.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  pray  God  to 
"  work  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure."  We  have  no  right  to  expect 
that  He  will  hear  us,  or  bestow  upon  us  any  portion  of  His  gracious  influences, 
tmless,  by  the  diligent  use  of  the  means  of  spiritual  improvement,  we  are  fulfilling 
the  injunction,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  In 
vain  do  Christians  seek  the  conversion  of  Israel,  unless  they  are  putting  forth 
efforts  for  removing  the  veil  of  ignorance  and  prejudice  by  the  communication 
of  the  light  of  instruction.  And  in  vain  do  they  look  for  "  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  "  filling  the  earth,  if  all  they  do  is  praying  that  it  may.  They 
must  send  it  to  earth's  utmost  bounds.  (Ealph  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  So  the 
Lord  shall  make  bright  clouds.  —  Bright  clouds  :  —  The  water  that  a  little 
while  ago  lay  in  yonder  sluggish  pool,  is  now  raised  up  into  the  sky  by  the 
Sim's  attraction — aU  its  impurities  left  behind,  and  itself  transformed  into  a  cloud, 
which  glows  like  emerald  or  sapphire  in  the  sxinlight.  Can  you  imagine  two 
things  more  utterly  unlike  than  the  stagnant  pool  and  the  radiant  cloud  ?  Yet  it  is 
precisely  the  same  substance.  It  is  the  same  water  in  yonder  cloud,  white  and 
fleecy  as  an  angel's  wing,  that  before  made  up  the  turbid  pool.  And  what  saith 
the  Scripture  ?  "  If  the  Spirit  of  Him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell 
in  you,  He  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  shall  quicken  your  mortal  bodies 
by  His  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you."  This  body  taken  out  of  the  stagnant  pool 
of  our  fallen  humanity — taken  out  of  the  corruption  of  death  and  the  grave,  and 
now  filled  and  completely  permeated  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that  it  is  transfigured 
like  Christ  Himself.     {J.  A.  Gordon,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  The  idols  have  spoken  vanity. — The  world's  oradea : — There  are 
not  many  who  think  for  themselves  ;  and  even  those  who  are  reckoned  to  do 
so,  depend  for  the  materials  of  thinking  upon  what  they  hear,  or  see,  or  touch. 
In  the  things  of  God  this  must  be  so,  much  more  than  in  others.  God's  place 
is  to  speak,  and  ours  to  listen.  He  expects  us  to  listen,  for  He  has  a  right  to 
speak.  But  it  is  irksome  to  be  always  in  the  attitude  of  listeners  ;  at  least,  of 
listeners  to  God.  We  prefer  guessing,  or  speculating,  or  reasoning.  If  we  find 
that  we  must  have  recourse  to  some  authority  beyond  ourselves,  we  betake  our- 
selves to  any  pretender  to  wisdom, — and  above  all,  to  any  one  who  professes  to 
be  the  representative  of  the  invisible  God,  and  to  speak  in  His  name.     Hence 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

the  Gentiles  resorted  to  their  "  oracles,"  and  the  apostate  Jews  to  their  "  witch- 
crafts," and  to  the  household  gods  or  teraphim.  These  are  the  "  idols  "  referred 
to  by  Zechariah.  They  whom  you  consult  as  the  depositories  of  Divine  wisdom, 
who  pretend  to  guide  you,  and  to  utter  truth,  have  spoken  vanity  ;  they  have 
cheated  you  vinth  lies.  Such  was  Israel's  history.  They  trusted  in  faithless 
oracles.  They  became  the  dupes  of  those  to  whom  they  had  come  for  guidance 
in  the  day  of  perplexity.  Their  teraphim  spoke  vanity.  This  has  been  man's 
history  too,  as  well  as  Israel's.  He  has  chosen  another  counsellor,  instead  of 
God  ;  it  may  be  the  Church,  or  reason,  or  public  opinion.  The  world's  teraphim 
have  not  been  few ;  nor  has  their  authority  been  either  weak  or  transient. 
There  is  "  public  opinion,"  that  mysterious  oracle,  whose  sh  ine  is  nowhere,  but 
the  echo  of  whose  voice  is  everywhere.  There  is  the  standard  of  established 
custom — schools  of  literature,  and  philosophy,  or  theology.  There  is  what  is 
called  the  "  spirit  of  the  times."  There  is  the  idol  of  personal  friendships,  or 
of  admired  authors,  or  of  revered  teachers.  Mark  on  what  points  these  teraphim 
mislead  us.  They  misrepresent  the  real  end  and  aim  of  life,  assuring  us  that  the 
glory  of  the  God  who  made  us  cannot  be  that  end,  inasmuch  as  that  is  something 
quite  transcendental,  something  altogether  beyond  our  reach,  or  our  reason, 
or  our  sympathies.  Why  are  men  thus  misled  and  befooled  ?  They  have  no 
confidence  in  God  Himself ;  nor  have  they  learned  to  say,  "  Let  God  be  true, 
and  every  man  a  liar."  They  seek  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  nor  submit  themselves 
to  Him  as  their  teacher.  Men  do  not  like  the  teaching  that  they  get  from  God 
and  His  Word ;  it  does  not  suit  their  tastes.  Hence  they  choose  the  prophets 
of  smooth  things,  the  teraphim  that  utter  lies  and  vanity.  But  how  do  these 
teraphim  speak  their  vanities  ?  They  do  not  need  to  do  so  by  uttering  gross 
error.  They  mingle  the  true  and  the  false  together ;  so  that  the  true  is  neutral- 
ised by  the  false,  and  the  false  is  adorned  and  recommended  by  the  true.  And  why 
do  these  oracles  speak  thus  ?  They  are  fond  of  speaking,  and  they  like  to  be 
listened  to.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  consulted  as  an  oracle,  and  to  be  quoted 
as  an  authority.  They  have  no  high  and  sure  standard  of  their  own,  and  hence 
they  can  only  speak  according  to  their  own  foolishness.  It  is  as  the  angel  of 
light  that  Satan  is  now  the  world's  oracle,  or  rather,  the  inspirer  of  its  oracles. 
He  has  changed  his  voice  as  well  as  his  garb  and  aspect.  He  has  hidden  his 
grossness,  and  modified  his  language  to  suit  the  change.  There  are  those  who 
cleverly  substitute  philosophy  for  faith,  reason  for  revelation,  man's  wisdom 
for  God's ;  who  prove  to  us  that,  though  the  Bible  may  contain  the  thoughts  of 
God,  it  does  not  speak  His  words  ;  who  artfully  would  reason  us  into  the  belief 
that  sin  is  not  guilt,  but  only  a  disease  ;  a  mere  moral  epidemic  ;  who  maintain, 
with  the  philosophic  Buddhist,  that  incarnation,  not  death,  is  the  basis  of  Divine 
reconciliation  ;  that  the  tendencies  of  creaturehood  are  all  upward,  not  down- 
ward. As  an  angel  of  light,  all  his  snares  and  sophistries  partake,  more  or  less, 
of  light.  He  instructs  his  oracles  to  appeal  to  man's  natural  humanity ;  to  our 
intuitions  of  virtue  and  uprightness.  The  illumination  coming  from  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  is  one  thing,  and  that  proceeding  from  Satan,  as  an  angel  of  light, 
is  quite  another.  Shun  the  idols  that  speak  vanity.  Listen  to  no  voice,  however 
pleasant,  save  that  which  is  entirely  in  harmony  with  God's,     {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Out  of  Him  came  forth  the  comer:  out  of  Him  the  nail: 
out  of  Him  the  battle-bow :  out  of  Him  every  oppressor  together.  —  The 
duty  and  dignity  of  magistrates : — Laws  are  in  Scripture  called  the  founda- 
tions of  the  commonwealth.  Magistrates  are  the  pillars.  When  the  Lord  returns 
to  a  people  in  mercy,  He  doth  give  them  righteous  laws  and  gracious  rulers. 
In  this  chapter  you  have  the  Lord  returning  unto  His  own  people  in  mercy.  There 
is  a  double  visitation  of  God :  one  of  His  enemies  in  wrath  ;  the  other  of  His 
people  in  mercy.  Though  the  appearances  of  God  in  this  visitation  were  glorious, 
yet  He  makes  themselves  to  be  the  instruments  of  it.  God  doth  it,  but  He  doth 
it  by  themselves.  The  text  sets  forth  a  glorious  promise  that  God  makes  imto 
His  people  when  they  are  delivered.  1.  "  Out  of  Him  shall  come  forth  the  comer." 
The  word  employed  in  the  Hebrew  is  commonly  a  metaphor  used  for  magistrates 
and  governors.  There  are  three  things  wherein  the  analogy  doth  lie.  (I)  The 
comer-stone  laid  in  the  foundation.  It  upholds  the  building.  The  main  weight 
of  the  building  lies  in  the  comer-stone.  (2)  The  corner-stone  joins  and  couples 
the  wall.  It  is  a  uniting  stone.  (3)  The  comer-stone  adorneth  the  building. 
More  labour  is  spent  in  polishing  the  comer-stone  than  in  the  ordinary  stones 


CHAP.  X.]  ZECHARIAH.  171 

of  a  building.  2.  "  Out  of  Him  shall  come  forth  the  nail."  This  also  is  a 
metaphor  used  for  governors.     There  is  a  double  proposition  in  this  metaphor. 

(1)  The  beams  of  the  building  are  fastened  and  united  by  nails  one  to  another. 
So  that  the  comer-stone  unites  the  foundation,  and  the  nails  unite  the  roof. 

(2)  Upon  the  nails  all  the  vessels  hang :  all  the  necessary  utensils  of  the  house. 
Upon  the  magistrate,  as  a  nail,  all  the  building  of  the  commonwealth  shall  hang, 
even  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  3.  "  Out  of  Him  shall  come  forth  the 
battle-bow."  The  bow  was  an  instrument  of  war  much  in  use  in  ancient  times, 
and  therefore  is  here  put  for  all  the  weapons  of  war,  all  their  ammunition  for, 
and  all  their  discipline  of  war.  When  the  Lord  retimis  unto  them  in  mercy, 
for  their  deliverance,  they  should  have  strength  of  their  own  against  all  the 
neighbour  nations.  They  should  be  successful  in  war,  because  the  Lord  is  with 
them.  4.  "  Out  of  Him  every  oppressor,  or  exactor,  which  I  put  both  together." 
The  word  means  tax-gatherer.  Some  make  it  signify,  to  exact  a  man's  work. 
An  exactor  of  labour  and  of  tribute  are  both  fitly  to  be  understood  here  ;  for 
God  doth  not  only  deliver  His  people  from  the  power  of  the  enemy,  but  doth 
also  put  the  enemies  into  their  power ;  so  that  they  shall  rule  over  the  nations. 
This  shall  be  the  glorious  condition  of  the  Church.  You  have  then,  in  these 
words,  the  state  of  the  people  set  forth  after  their  deliverance.  1.  In  reference 
to  their  political  state.  They  shall  never  want  a  governor,  a  faithful  magistrate. 
2.  In  their  polemical  state.  They  shall  have  all  sorts  of  warlike  provisions  in 
themselves,  and  shall  be  very  successful  in  war.  Doctrine — When  the  Lord 
returns  to  His  people  in  mercy.  He  wiU  give  them  governors  that  shall  be  for 
the  supporting,  uniting,  and  adorning  of  the  commonwealth.  I.  To  sxtppobt 
THB  COMMONWEALTH.  1.  Magistrates  are  called  the  foundations  of  the  earth. 
2.  The  breath  of  your  nostrils.  3.  The  shoulders  upon  which  all  the  weight  is 
borne.  4.  The  arms  of  the  people.  But  how  may  magistrates  support  the 
commonwealth  ?  (1)  He  must  take  care  that  he  uphold  religion.  Peace  without 
godliness  is  but  a  vain,  mock  peace.     Every  magistrate  ought  to  rule  with  God. 

(2)  He  must  so  rule  that  God  may  not  break  in  in  judgment  upon  the  people. 

(3)  He  must  so  rule  as  not  to  destroy  the  foundation  of  his  authority.  (4)  He 
must  uphold  the  laws.  (5)  Magistrates  must  uphold  theu-  own  authority. 
(6)  They  must  uphold  the  people's  liberties.  (7)  They  must  defend  and  preserve 
the  property  of  the  people.  II.  To  ttnite  the  commonwealth.  How  can 
rulers  aid  in  uniting  a  people  ?  1.  Religion  is  the  great  bond  of  union ;  let  it 
be  your  great  care  that  there  be  a  imity  in  religion.  2.  Let  magistrates  take 
heed  to  agree  among  themselves.  3.  Labour  for  union  amongst  the  ministers. 
4.  Take  away  all  oppression  and  partiality  in  judgment.     {W.  Strong.) 

Ver.  5.  Because  the  Lord  is  with  them. — Jehovah  with  His  people  : — There 
is  nothing  which  so  emphatically  marks  and  so  undoubtedly  describes  the  people 
of  the  living  God  as  His  own  presence  with  them.  1.  The  Lord  is  with  His  Church 
relatively.  It  is  only  a  third  part,  and  perhaps  a  small  third.  We  might  divide 
our  own  land  into  one-third  of  open  enemies,  one-third  of  false  professors,  and 
one-third  of  real  Christians.  The  third  part  only  are  really  spiritual  characters, 
having  the  blessing  of  vital  godliness.  Tbese  shall  remain  ;  they  shall  be  "  left." 
God  is  with  them  relatively,  that  is.  He  is  with  them  in  covenant  union  eternally. 
2.  The  Lord  is  with  His  Church  experimentally.  God  has  always  been  with  His 
Chtu-ch,  as  a  body,  and  with  the  individual  members.  3.  The  Lord  is  with 
His  Church  perpetually.  It  is  His  promise,  "  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the  world."  Consider  how  this  fact  that  Jehovah  is  with  His  people, 
explains  some  mysteries.  "Because  the  Lord  is  with  them."  1.  Then  they  shall 
fight  victoriously  and  successfully.  This  explains  why  their  enemies  cannot 
destroy  them.  2.  For  this  same  reason  the  truth  of  God  must  triumph.  Note 
the  distinct  character  of  the  Church  and  their  destiny,  as  set  forth  in  this 
text.  Life  Divine  is  a  pledge  of  life  eternal.  If  God  be  with  you,  your  religion 
is  a  thing  of  life.  God's  yea  and  amen  are  stamped  upon  His  people.  {Joseph 
Irons.)  Victory,  unification,  and  blessedness  for  the  good: — I.  Victory.  This 
victory  was — 1.  Complete.  The  enemies  were  trodden  down  as  "  mire  in  the 
streets."  2.  Divine.  "  Because  the  Lord  is  with  them."  3.  Re-invigorating. 
"  I  will  strengthen  the  house  of  Judah."  They  would  be  strengthened  by  their 
victory,  not  only  in  wealth  and  security,  but  in  courage.  4.  Extensive. 
"  And  they  of  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a  mighty  man,  and  their  heart 
shall  rejoice  as  through  wine :   yea,  their  children  shall  see  it,  and  be  glad ; 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

their  heart  shall  rejoice  in  the  Lord."  "  The  prophet  had,"  says  Her 
"  occupied  himself  first  of  all  with  Judah,  the  centre  of  the  people  of  God." 
veise  6  he  proceeds  to  speak  of  Judah  and  Ephraim  together.  In  this  verse, 
and  those  which  follow,  he  fixes  his  attention  peculiarly  upon  Ephraim,  which 
looked  in  the  prophet's  day  like  a  withered  branch  that  hsA  been  severed  from 
the  vine.  He  first  promises  that  descendants  of  the  citizens  of  the  former 
kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  will  also  take  part  in  the  glorious  conflict,  and  then 
announces  the  return  of  the  ten  tribes  from  their  exile,  which  was  to  be  the  con- 
dition of  their  participating  in  the  battle.  Now,  all  these  facts  connected  with 
this  victory  apply  to  that  victory  the  grandest  of  all, — the  victory  of  aU  true 
souls  over  error  and  wrong.  II.  Unification.  "  I  will  hiss  for  them,  and 
gather  them,"  &c.  Observe — 1.  The  ease  with  which  the  re-gathering  will  be 
eifected.  "  I  will  hiss  [or  whistle]  for  them."  The  word  is  understood  as  refer- 
ring to  a  particular  whistle  used  by  the  shepherd  for  calling  his  scattered  flock 
together,  or  by  those  who  have  the  care  of  bees,  to  bring  them  into  the  hive. 
"  As  sheep  flock  together  at  the  well-known  call  of  the  shepherd,  as  bees  follow 
in  swarms  the  shrill  note  of  the  bee-master,  so  should  the  Lord,  by  His  own  means, 
gather  His  scattered  people  from  their  dispersions,  how  widely  soever  distant, 
and  bring  them  to  Himself  and  to  their  heritage."  With  what  ease  God  does 
His  work  ;  a  mere  look,  a  breath,  a  word  !  2.  The  regions  to  which  the  re-gathering 
will  extend.  '^'  And  I  will  sow  them  among  the  people," — or,  as  it  should  be 
rendered,  "  though  I  have  scattered  them  among  the  nations," — "  and  they 
shall  remember  Me  in  far  countries  [distant  regions] ;  they  shall  live  with  their 
children,  and  turn  again."  They  had  been  scattered,  not  only  through  Egypt 
and  Assyria.  It  does  not  say  that  all  Jews  shall  return,  but  a  great  multitude 
is  implied.  3.  The  scene  at  which  the  re-gathering  will  take  place.  "  I  will  bring 
them  again  also  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,"  &c.  4.  The  national  catastrophes  which 
the  re-gathering  will  involve.  "  And  he  shall  pass  through  the  sea  with  affliction, 
and  shall  smite  the  waves  in  the  sea,  and  all  the  deeps  of  the  river  shall  dry  up." 
There  is  evidently  an  allusion  here  to  their  first  deliverance  from  Egypt ;  and 
it  means  that  something  similar  to  that  event  will  occur  in  the  course  of  their 
re-gathering  (see  Exod.  xxiv.  4-14).  "  And  the  pride  of  Assyria  shall  be  brought 
down,  and  the  sceptre  of  Egypt  shall  depart  away."  The  idea  probably  is,  that 
as  "  the  haughty  boastings  of  Sennacherib,  and  the  sceptred  power  of  Pharaoh 
proved  alike  feeble  and  unavailing  against  the  might  of  Jehovah  in  former  days, 
so  should  all  the  combined  opposition  of  the  most  inveterate  enemies  prove  in 
days  to  come.  Before  Him, — when  He  had  a  purpose  to  fulfil,  or  promise  to 
His  people  to  accomplish, — all  pride  should  be  abased,  all  power  baffled,  all  counsel 
turned  to  foolishness."  Now  there  is  a  unification,  of  which  this  is  but  a  faint 
emblem — the  unification  of  the  good  of  all  ages.  "  They  shall  come  from  the  east 
and  from  the  west,  from  the  north  and  from  the  south,  and  shall  sit  down  with 
Isaac  and  with  Jacob."  What  a  blessed  union  is  this  1  III.  Blessedness. 
Here  is  the  highest  strength.  "  And  I  will  strengthen  them  in  the  Lord." 
1.  Whether  this  refers  to  their  national  strength,  their  seciurity  in  their  own 
country,  or  moral  strength, — strength  of  faith  in  Him, — or  all,  one  thing  is  clear, 
that  to  be  strengthened  in  the  Lord  is  the  highest  strength  we  can  get.  The 
greatest  blessing  of  life  is  strength :  physical  strength,  to  do  with  ease  and  to 
endure  with  patience.  Intellectual  strength,  strength  to  master  with  ease  all 
the  great  problems  of  life,  and  to  reach  a  theory  of  being  in  which  the  under- 
standing can  repose  free  from  all  disturbing  doubt.  These  strengths  are 
blessings  ;  but  moral  strength, — strength  to  resist  the  wrong,  to  pursue  the  right, 
to  serve  Almighty  God  with  acceptance,  and  to  bless  the  race  with  beneficent 
influences, — this  indeed  is  the  perfection  of  our  blessedness.  "  Be  strong  in 
the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might,"  says  Paul.  "  He  giveth  power  to 
the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength."  2.  Here 
is  the  highest  exercise.  "  They  shall  walk  up  and  down  in  His  name,  saith  the 
Lord."  (1)  All  living  men  must  walk  the  road  that  is  "  up  and  down."  Human 
life  is  made  up  of  "  ups  "  and  "  downs  "  ;  the  road  is  not  smooth  and  level,  but 
rugged  and  hilly,  sometimes  up  and  sometimes  down  :  up  to-day  and  down 
to-morrow.  (2)  This  road  can  only  be  walked  happily  by  walking  it  in  the  "  name  " 
of  the  Lord.  A  practical  recognition  of  His  presence  and  of  His  claims  to  our 
supreme  reverence  and  worship.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.   6.  I  fr\51  bring   them  again  to  place  them.  —  Unfulfilled   promises  to 


CHAP.  X.]  ZECHARIAH.  173 

Judah  and  Joseph  : — There  can  be  no  question  that  the  gradual  development 
of  the  great  principles  of  the  Reformation  has  led  to  a  corresponding  discovery 
of  the  duty  and  obhgation  of  Christians  towards  God's  ancient  people.  But 
our  interest  in  the  Jewish  question  should  be  based  upon  sound  scriptural  prin- 
ciples. If  we  confine  our  view  exclusively  to  the  hopes  which  \mfulfilled  prophecy 
presents,  we  shall  be  in  danger  of  indulging  speculations  inconsistent  with  the 
history  of  the  past,  and  irreconcilable  with  present  duty.  If  we  confine  attention 
to  the  present  aspect  of  the  Jewish  people,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  consideration 
of  prophecy,  we  descend  to  the  arena  of  political  expediency.  The  destinies 
of  the  world  are  inseparably  bound  up  with  the  Jewish  people.  In  making  any 
effort  for  the  evangelisation  of  the  Jew,  there  are  three  points  demanding  attention. 
I.  The  peesons  to  whom  we  are  directing  ottb  efforts.  In  the  text  we 
have  an  address  to  the  two  grand  divisions  of  the  nation, — Judah,  and  Joseph 
or  Israel ;  and  a  blessing  common  to  both  is  secured  by  virtue  of  the  covenant 
relation  in  which  God  stands  to  them  mutually.  "  I  am  the  Lord  their  God." 
If  we  can  find  traces  of  Judah,  and  none  of  Joseph,  probably  the  latter  are  in 
reserve,  and  sooner  or  later  will  come  into  the  enjoyment  of  the  promised  mercy. 
It  is  objected,  that  the  words  of  the  text  were  fulfilled  upon  the  restoration  of 
the  Jews  after  the  captivity  in  Babylon.  But  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah  was 
delivered  to  the  remnant  which  had  returned.  If  Zechariah  foretells  fuller 
blessings  than  any  which  had  been  enjoyed  up  to  the  period  of  the  restoration 
from  Babylon,  when  were  they  enjoyed  ?  If  the  two  divisions  or  families  of 
Israel  returned  after  the  Babylonish  captivity,  the  distinction  between  Judah 
and  Ephraim  was  at  an  end ;  and  the  conditions  of  the  national  covenant  with 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  so  far  as  the  land,  the  city,  and  the  possession  of 
the  inheritance  was  concerned,  must  have  been  accomplished.  But  the  facts 
of  the  case  do  not  correspond  with  any  of  the  leading  provisions  of  the  covenant. 
1.  Instead  of  an  increase,  there  was  a  decrease  of  population.  2.  The  extent  of 
territory  inhabited  by  Jews  after  the  captivity  was  even  more  limited  than  that 
which  had  been  apportioned  to  the  tribes  by  Joshua,  and  much  less  than  that 
which  was  promised  to  Abraham.  3.  Their  civil  polity  did  not  correspond  to 
the  promise  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  22-24;  Hos.  i.  II).  4.  If  the  return  from  Babylon 
was  a  restoration,  and  only  one  restoration  is  spoken  of  by  the  prophets,  then 
how  can  we  explain  the  full  declaration  in  our  text,  "  They  shall  be  as  though 
I  had  not  cast  them  off  "  ?  Where  are  the  myriads  of  Israelites  who  in  their 
hiding-place  have  been  in  existence,  and  have  been  multiplying,  for  all  we  know, 
eince  the  days  of  Shalmaneser  imtil  now  ?  The  little  remnant  sojourning 
in  these  western  portions  of  the  world  can  only  be  regarded  as  emigrants  from 
a  vast  and  populous  nation,  whose  locality  is  as  yet  unknown  and  unvisited  by 
us.  II.  The  grounds  for  supposing  that  any  success  will  attend  our 
EFFORTS.  We  may  assume  that  the  nation  of  Israel  has  not  lost  its  place  in  the 
Divine  purpose.  However  secretly  and  obscurely  to  us,  the  Jews  occupy  as 
important  and  influential  a  position  in  reference  to  other  nations  of  the  world 
as  in  the  days  of  old.  The  fortunes  of  Israel  have  ever  been  bound  up  with  the 
destinies  of  nations ;  and  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  this  universal  rule 
of  the  Divine  administration  has  been  or  wiU  be  departed  from.  The  Jews  have 
been  and  are  the  index  to  prophecy.  We  authenticate  chronology  and  balance 
historical  accuracy  by  reference  to  this  wonderful  people.  If,  under  the  Old 
Testament  dispensation,  the  kingdoms  of  the  Gentiles  performed  their  appointed 
coiurse  around  the  visible  centre  of  Israel,  we  must  also  believe  that  under  the 
New  Testament,  which  is  a  supplement  of  the  Old,  the  empires  of  the  world  are 
now  revolving  round  the  same  centre,  although  obscured  and  unseen.  III.  The 
privilege  of  PARTICIPATING  IN  THESE  EFFORTS.  1.  It  is  a  privilege  to  have 
the  grace  of  faith  and  prayer  continually  exercised.  Effort  for  the  good  of  Israel 
is  a  work  of  faith  from  first  to  last.  No  temporal  or  international  advantage 
can  enter  into  the  consideration  of  it ;  no  worldly  or  selfish  motive  can  be  charged 
upon  those  who  engage  in  it.  The  friend  of  Israel  walks  by  faith,  not  by  sight. 
What  encouragement  is  now  presented  in  the  results  of  work  for  the  Jews !  But 
mercy  to  Israel  is  mercy  to  the  world.  God  has  declared  His  will  concerning 
"  the  precious  sons  of  Zion."  It  is  a  privilege  to  know  that  the  truth  of  God's 
Word  is  tested  by  His  faithfulness  to  Israel.  What  is  promised  to  individuals 
is  promised  to  the  nation.  If  the  promises  (such  as  Isa.  xxiv.,  xxv.,  xxvi.  ; 
Hos.  xiii.  14  ;  1  Ck)r.  xv.  54  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  39,  &c.)  belong  not  to  the  nation,  they 
belong  not  unto  us.     It  would  be  a  strange  inconsistency  for  us  as  Gentiles  to 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

employ  these  passages  as  a  ground  of  our  hope  of  a  resurrection,  and  withhold 
them  from  the  Jewish  nation,  who  read  them  literally  as  a  promise  to  their  fathers 
(Acts  xxiii.  6,  xxir.  21,  xxvi.  6,  7).  Do  we  look  for  the  return  of  Christ  ?  Then 
let  US  reconcile  the  contemporaneous  existence  of  the  earthly  and  heavenly 
Jerusalem.  Jesus,  the  light  of  the  Gentiles,  is  the  glory  of  His  people  Israel. 
Gentile  fulness  and  Israel's  glory  will  flow  in  together.  Like  the  sudden  burst 
of  two  fountains  they  will  join  their  living  streams,  and  fill  to  overflowing  the 
long-prepared  channels,  and  flood  the  universe  with  blessing,  and  the  "  knowledge 
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  will  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea." 
{W.  R.  FremanUe,  M.A.) 

Ver.  8.  I  will  hiss  for  them,  and  gather  them;  for  I  have  redeemed  them. — 
Gathering  the  redeemed : — I.  The  persons.  "  The  redeemed."  Redeemed 
in  consequence  of  God's  everlasting  love  towards  them ;  for  had  they  not  been 
loved  of  the  Father,  they  would  never  have  been  given  to  Christ,  in  order  to 
be  redeemed  by  Him.  Redeemed  from  the  law's  curse  ;  and  from  all  iniquity ; 
from  the  wrath  to  come.  II.  The  promise.  "  I  will  gather  them."  This  implies 
that  the  redeemed  are  by  nature  in  a  scattered  state,  or  in  a  state  of  alienation 
from  God.  How  universal  is  the  departure.  "  We  have  turned  every  one  to 
his  own  way,"  which  is  a  sinful  way,  a  God-dishonouring,  and  a  soul- distressing 
way.  The  gathering  work  is  accomplished  in  regeneration,  at  which  time 
they  are  gathered  to  Christ  for  life  and  salvation :  they  are  gathered  or  folded 
together  in  Church-fellowship ;  and  shall  by  and  by  be  gathered  as  wheat  into 
the  garner.  III.  The  mean  to  be  made  use  of.  "I  will  hiss  for  them  "  ;  i.e., 
I  will  call  for  them  ;  make  the  peculiar  sound  which  they  will  heed,  as  a  shepherd 
does  to  call  his  sheep  around  him.  Shepherds  used  a  whistle.  The  Redeemer 
called  for  His  people,  by  the  prophets  of  old ;  by  John  the  Baptist ;  He  called 
them  Himself  when  He  was  here  upon  earth.  He  called  them  by  His  apostles ; 
He  calls  them  now  by  His  ministers.  {S.  Barnard.)  The  interposition  of 
mercy  : — This  passage  refers  to  God's  ancient  people,  who,  for  their  crimes,  had 
been  scattered,  but  whom  He  here  promises  shall  be  gathered  and  blessed. 
I.  The  interposition  of  mercy  realised.  "  I  have  redeemed  them."  By 
this  I  understand  the  redemption  by  the  Son  of  God.  The  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  meritorious  cause  of  all  good  to  sinful  man.  All  the  peace  and  happi- 
ness we  possess  is  due  to  this  mediation.  It  is  the  medium  of  all  spiritual  good 
to  men  individually.  II.  The  interposition  of  mercy  designed.  "  I  will 
hiss  for  them,  and  gather  them."  1.  The  end  proposed.  They  are  to  be  gathered. 
This  leads  us  to  reflect  on  their  past  condition.  2.  The  place  of  their  assembling. 
They  shall  come  to  the  Cross  of  the  Saviour,  to  receive  from  Him  all  the  blessings 
they  need.  They  shall  come  to  the  bosom  of  the  Church.  3.  The  result  of  their 
gathering  will  be  their  blessedness  and  the  Divine  honour.  4.  The  instrumentality 
God  will  employ.  "  I  will  hiss  for  them."  The  allusion  is  to  the  shepherd's 
pipe  or  whistle.  It  has  pleased  the  Lord,  in  all  ages  of  time,  to  gather  men  by 
means  of  human  agency.  III.  The  Church's  future  prosperity.  The  con- 
vulsions of  nations,  the  revolutions  of  empires  shall  but  contribute  to  the  establish- 
ment of  His  kingdom.  His  signature  is  inscribed  on  every  part  of  the  earth  ; 
all  is  His,  and  He  shall  soon  take  possession.     (  W.  Lucy. ) 

Ver.  9.  And  I  will  sow  them  among  the  people.  —  God's  sowings :  —  At 
the  end  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity  the  people  o'  God's  ancient  choice  were 
distributed  through  Parthia,  Media,  Persia,  Mesopotamia,  Cappadocia,  Pontus, 
Phrygia,  Pamphylia,  Egypt,  Libya  and  Rome,  Crete  and  Arabia.  Everywhere, 
throughout  the  great  Roman  Empire,  they  fell  into  the  ground  to  die.  So  far 
as  their  natural  life  was  concerned,  they  seemed  on  the  point  of  being  obliterated 
among  the  nations  of  the  world;  but  you  might  as  well  talk  of  the  obliteration 
of  the  seed  which  the  husbandman  casts  into  the  autumn  furrows.  They  built 
their  synagogues,  throve  in  the  quarters  assigned  to  them  in  the  great  cities, 
and  disseminated  new  conceptions  of  God,  high  ethical  standards,  a  fresh  religious 
speech,  destined  to  be  of  incalculable  service  to  the  early  preachers  of  Christ's 
Evangel.  It  was  thus  with  the  first  believers.  By  the  rough  hand  of  the  perse- 
cutor, the  rich  wheat  of  Pentecost,  which  had  lain  too  long  in  the  bin  of  the  mother 
Church,  was  scattered  abroad  throughout  the  regions  of  Judeea  and  Samaria. 
"  They  therefore  that  were  scattered  abroad  went  everywhere  preaching  the 
Word."     "  They  therefore  that  were  scattered  abroad,   upon  the  tribulatioa 


CHAP.  X.]  ZECHARIAH.  175 

that  arose  about  Stephen,  trarelled  as  far  as  Phoenicia,  and  Cyprus,  and  Antioch." 
These  spring  sowings  yielded  a  marvellous  return.  How  many  illustrations 
have  existed,  throughout  the  entire  history  of  the  Church,  of  the  efiFect  of  God's 
sowings  !  "  My  Father  is  the  Husbandman,"  said  our  Lord.  With  both  hands 
He  has  prosecuted  His  work  of  sowing.  There  was  a  grand  quality  in  the  corn 
of  the  Waldensian  Valleys,  in  the  Paulicians,  the  Hussites,  the  Lollards,  which 
was  sown  by  the  Master  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisition,  in  mockings  and 
scourgings,  in  bonds  and  imprisonment,  in  the  fires  of  martyrdom,  and  in  the 
current  of  swiftly- flowing  rivers.  But  what  harvests  it  aU  yielded  !  There 
was,  for  instance,  the  harvest  of  the  Reformation  in  Germany,  of  the  Huguenots 
in  France,  and  of  the  Puritans  in  England.     (^.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  12.  And  I  will  strengthen  them  in  the  Lord.  —  Further  and  continuing 
grace : — This  prophecy  is  closed  with  a  promise  concerning  their  way  and 
carriage  for  whom  the  Lord  doth  all  this,  that  they  shall  be  encouraged  and 
strengthened  to  be  a  holy  people,  and  to  persevere  in  faith  and  obedience,  which 
is  to  be  understood  of  the  elect  and  truly  godly  among  them,  who  yet  at  that 
time  will  be  very  many.  L  When  the  Lord  hath  done  greatest  things  for  His 
people,  it  is  yet  a  new  gift  to  give  them  the  use  thereof,  to  encourage  and  strengthen 
them  thereby,  for  it  is  a  new  promise.  "  I  will  strengthen  them."  2.  As  God 
can  easily  encourage  the  most  feeble  and  faint-hearted,  so  their  sure  grip  of  it 
is  to  have  it  laid  up  in  God  for  them,  and  by  faith  and  dependence  draw  it  forth 
as  there  is  need.  3.  Encouragement  in  God  is  only  well  improven  when  it  is 
made  use  of  to  strengthen  unto  holiness  and  perseverance,  which  is  the  only  sweet 
fruit  of  all  mercies,  rendering  them  comfortable  to  the  receiver,  when  he  is  led 
nearer  God  by  them.  "  They  shall  walk  "  in  their  duty.  4.  Holiness  is  then 
rightly  set  about,  when  we  are  constantly  in  it,  when  we  adhere  close  to  the  rule, 
when  by  faith  we  drag  furniture  out  of  God,  and  aim  at  His  glory,  and  give  Him 
the  glory  of  all  our  performances.  5.  The  Lord  needs  not  be  hindered  to  show 
Himself  gracious,  by  the  unworthiness  and  unholiness  of  His  people,  but  when 
He  is  about  to  do  them  good.  He  can  be  surety  to  Himself,  that  the  fruit  thereof 
shall  be  forthcoming  to  His  glory,  and  can  make  them  He  doth  much  for,  to  be 
such  a  people  as  His  dealing  toward  them  obliges  them  to  be,  therefore,  after 
all  the  former  promises,  the  Lord  Himself  undertakes  to  make  them  holy.  6.  The 
sweet  comfort  and  refreshment  of  the  promises  will  only  be  felt  by  those  who 
dwell  much  on  the  study  of  God  the  Promise-Maker,  and  consider  how  all-sufficient 
He  is,  and  how  worthy  to  be  credited  for  the  performance  of  what  He  promiseth. 
Therefore  doth  He  subscribe  His  name  to  all  this  prophecy.  "  Saith  Jehovah." 
(George  Hutcheson.)  Strong  in  God  : — Speaking  of  "  England's  Forgotten 
Worthies  "  of  the  sixteenth  century,  Sir.  Froude  says,  "  Wherever  we  find 
them,  they  are  still  the  same  ;  whether  in  the  courts  of  Japan  or  China,  fighting 
Spaniards  in  the  Pacific,  or  prisoners  among  the  Algerines,  founding  colonies 
that  were  by  and  by  to  grow  into  enormous  Transatlantic  republics,  or  exploring 
in  crazy  pinnaces  the  fierce  latitude  of  the  Polar  seas,  they  are  the  same  indomitable. 
God-fearing  men,  whose  life  was  one  great  liturgy.  '  The  ice  was  strong,  but 
God  was  stronger,'  says  one  of  Frobisher's  men  after  grinding  a  night  and  a  day 
among  the  icebergs  ;  not  waiting  for  God  to  come  down  and  split  the  ice  for 
them,  but  toiling  through  the  long  hours,  himself  and  the  rest  fending  off  the 
vessel  with  poles  and  planks,  with  death  glaring  at  them  out  of  the  rocks.  Icebergs 
were  strong,  Spaniards  were  strong,  and  storms,  and  corsairs,  and  rocks,  and 
reefs,  which  no  chart  had  then  noted — they  were  all  strong,  but  God  was  stronger, 
and  that  was  all  which  they  cared  to  Imow."  Walking  in  God's  name  : — 
The  Rev.  John  McNeil  says,  "  I  owe  more  than  I  can  tell  to  my  father.  He  had 
a  habit  of  which  he  never  spoke  to  us,  nor  we  to  him.  He  was  a  quarryman, 
and  I  used  to  hear  him  going  downstairs  in  the  dark  mornings,  and,  standing 
on  the  threshold  before  passing  out,  he  would  say  aloud,  '  I  go  to-day  in  God's 
name.'  Then,  strong  in  Ihat  strength,  would  trudge  off  to  the  quarry,  the  blasting 
and  risks  of  the  work.  I  can  never  forget  the  impression  this  made  upon  me, 
and  thankfully  say  to-day, '  My  father's  God  is  mine.'  "    {Christian  World  Pulpit.) 


176  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  aa. 


CHAPTER  Xl 

Vers.  1,  2.  That  the  fire  may  devour  thy  cedars,  &c. — The  fallen  cedar: — 
In  this  chapter  there  is  an  announcement  of  the  judgment  that  was  to 
come  on  the  Jewish  State  and  nation  because  of  their  ungodliness,  and 
especially  their  contemptuous  rejection  of  Him  whom  God  sent  to  be  their 
shepherd.  The  prophecy  here  is  not  in  any  way  connected  with  that  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapters,  except  as  it  may  be  regarded  as  continuing  the  account  of  God's 
dealings  with  Israel,  and  their  behaviour  towards  Him  consequent  on  the  events 
predicted  in  these  chapters.  Hitherto  the  prophet  has  been  a  bearer  of  good 
tidings  to  Zion,  tidings  of  deliverance  from  oppressors,  and  restoration  to  former 
privilege  and  felicity.  But  there  was  a  dark  side  to  the  picture  as  well  as  a  bright 
one.  All  trouble  and  conflict  had  not  ceased  with  their  restoration  to  their  own 
land  :  nor  was  their  tendency  to  rebellion  and  apostasy  from  Jehovah,  their 
Sliepherd  and  King,  finally  subdued.  Treating  Him  with  contempt.  His  favour 
should  be  withdrawn  from  them,  and  the  bonds  that  united  them  should  be  broken. 
The  iron  hand  of  foreign  oppression  should  again  be  laid  heavily  upon  them,  and 
the  ruin  of  their  State  and  desolation  of  their  land  should  mark  the  greatness  of 
their  sin  by  the  severity  of  the  penalty  it  had  entailed.  The  prophecy  begins 
with  a  picture  of  ruin  and  desolation  overspreading  the  land,  and  then  the  process 
is  detailed  by  which  this  was  brought  about  and  the  cause  of  it  indicated.  The 
description  of  the  judgment  commences  dramatically.  Lebanon  is  summoned 
to  open  her  doors,  that  the  fire  may  enter  to  consume  her  cedars  ;  the  cypress 
is  admonished  to  howl  or  wail  because  the  cedar  is  fallen,  because  the  noble  and 
glorious  trees  are  destroyed ;  the  oaks  of  Bashan  are  called  upon  to  join  in  the  wail, 
for  the  inaccessible  forest  is  laid  low.  The  cypress  is  here  called  to  lament  for  the  fall 
of  the  cedar  of  Lebanon,  the  glory  of  the  forest,  not  as  deploring  that  calamity 
80  much  as  anticipating  for  itself  a  like  fate.  That  this  description  is  to  be  taken 
literally  caimot  be  supposed  ;  the  language  is  too  forcible,  and  the  picture  too 
vivid  to  be  understood  merely  of  the  destruction  by  fire  of  a  few  trees,  even  though 
these  were  the  finest  of  their  kind.  On  the  other  hand,  there  seems  no  sufficient 
reason  for  regarding  this  description  as  symbolical  and  wholly  figurative.  The 
more  simple  and  tenable  view  is  that  which  Calvin  suggested,  namely,  that  by 
the  places  here  mentioned  is  intended  the  whole  land  of  Jud^a,  the  desolation  of 
which  is  predicted  by  the  prophet.  The  catastrophe  thus  depicted  was  brought 
about  by  the  misconduct  of  the  people,  and  especially  their  shepherds  and  rulers, 
towards  the  Great  Shepherd  of  Israel,  whom  God  sent  forth  to  feed  and  tend  the 
flock.  This  is  described  in  what  follows,  where  the  prophet  is  represented  as 
acting  as  the  representative  of  another,  and  as  such  is  addressed.  It  cannot  be 
supposed  that  the  person  addressed  is  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  or  the  Messiah,  for 
the  person  addressed  in  verse  4  is  evidently  the  same  as  the  person  addressed  in 
verse  15,  and  what  is  there  said  does  not  in  any  way  apply  to  the  Angel  of  Jehovah, 
or  the  Messiah.  Nor  can  it  be  supposed  that  the  prophet  is  here  addressed  in  his 
own  person,  for  as  it  was  no  part  of  the  prophetic  office  to  act  as  a  shepherd  of 
Israel,  it  could  not  be  to  the  prophet  as  such  that  the  command  here  given  was 
addressed.  The  only  supposition  that  can  tenably  be  made  is  that  what  is  here 
narrated  passed  as  a  vision  before  the  inner  sense  of  the  prophet,  in  which  he  saw 
himself  as  the  representative  of  another,  first  of  the  good  shepherd  who  is  sent  to 
feed  the  flock,  and  then  of  the  evil  shepherd  by  whom  the  flock  was  neglected, 
and  who  should  be  destroyed  for  his  iniquity.  (W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  The 
cedars,  fir-trees,  and  oaks  of  society  : — This  chapter,  it  has  been  said,  divides 
itself  into  three  sections.  1.  The  threat  of  judgment  (vers.  1-3).  2.  The  descrip- 
tion of  the  Good  Shepherd  (ver  .  4-14).  3.  The  sketch  of  the  foolish  shepherd 
(vers.  15-17).  Lebanon,  here,  may  be  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  kingdom 
of  Judah,  its  cedars  as  denoting  the  chief  men  of  the  kingdom.  I.  A  vakibty 
OF  DISTINCTION.  The  "  cedar  "  here,  the  "  fir-tree,"  or  cypress,  and  the  "  oaks," 
are  employed  to  set  forth  some  of  the  distinctions  that  prevailed  amongst  the 
Hebrew  people.  Now,  whilst  all  men  have  a  common  origin,  a  common  nature, 
and  common  moral  obligations  and  responsibilities,  yet  in  every  generation  there 
prevails  a  large  variety  of  striking  distinctions.  There  are  not  only  the  cedars 
and  fir-trees,  but  even  briars  and  thistles.  There  is  almost  as  great  a  distinction 
between  the  highest  type  of  man  and  the  lowest,  as  there  is  between  the  lowest 
and  the  highest  type  of  brute.     There  are  intellectual  giants  and  intellectual 


CHAP.  XI.]  ZECHARIAH.  m 

dwarfs,  moral  monarchs  and  spiritual  serfs.  This  variety  of  distinction  in  the 
human  family  serves  at  least  two  important  purposes.  1.  To  check  pride  in  the 
highest  and  despondency  in  the  lowest.  The  cedar  has  no  cause  for  boasting 
over  the  fir-tree,  or  over  the  humblest  plant :  it  owes  its  existence  to  the  same  God, 
and  is  sustained  by  the  same  common  elements.  And  what  have  the  greatest 
men — the  Shakespeares,  the  Schillers,  the  Miltons,  the  Goethes — to  be  proud  of  ? 
What  have  they  that  they  have  not  received  ?  And  why  should  the  weakest 
man  despond  ?  He  is  what  God  made  him,  and  his  responsibilities  are  hmited 
by  his  capacities.  This  variety  serves — 2.  To  strengthen  the  ties  of  human  brother- 
hood. Were  all  men  of  equal  capacity,  it  is  manifest  that  there  would  be  no  scope 
for  that  mutual  ministry  of  interdependence  which  tends  to  unite  society  together. 
The  strong  rejoices  in  bearing  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  the  weak  rejoices  in 
gratitude  and  hope  on  account  of  the  succour  received.  II.  A  comjion  calamity. 
'  Howl,  fir-tree  ;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen."  An  expression  which  implies  that  the 
same  fate  av.  aits  the  fir-tree.  There  is  one  event  that  awaits  men  of  every  type 
and  class  and  grade,  the  tallest  cedar  and  the  most  stunted  shrub,  that  is  death. 
1.  This  common  calamity  levels  all  distinctions.  "  Though  his  excellency  mount 
up  to  the  heavens,  and  his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds,  yet  he  shall  perish 
for  ever."  2.  This  common  calamity  should  de-materialise  all  souls.  Since  we 
are  only  here  on  this  earth  for  a  few  short  years  at  most,  why  should  we  live  to  the 
flesh,  and  thus  materialise  our  souls  ?  III.  A  natural  alarm.  "  Howl,  fir-tree." 
The  howl,  not  of  rage,  not  of  sympathy,  but  of  alarm.  When  the  higher  falls,  the 
lower  may  well  take  the  alarm.  If  the  cedar  gives  way,  let  the  cypress  look  out. 
This  principle  may  apply  to — 1.  Communities.  Amongst  the  kingdoms  of 
the  earth  there  are  the  "  cedar  "  and  the  "  fir-tree."  The  same  may  be  said  of 
markets.  There  are  the  cedars  of  the  commercial  world  ;  great  houses  regulating 
almost  the  merchandise  of  the  world.  2.  Individuals.  When  men  who  are 
physically  strong  fall,  let  weaker  men  beware.  When  men  who  are  moral  cedars 
— majestic  in  character,  and  mighty  in  beneficent  influences — fall,  let  the  less 
useful  take  the  alarm,  and  still  more  the  useless.  {Homilist.)  Howl,  fir- 
tree;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen. — The  cedar  and  the  fir: — The  prophecy,  of  which 
these  words  are  a  part,  had  its  fulfilment  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and 
the  dispersion  of  the  Jews  by  the  Romans.  The  text  would  become  applicable  at 
a  time  of  great  national  calamity.  By  the  cedar-tree  the  chief  men  of  a  country 
are  represented,  those  who  occupy  the  more  prominent  positions,  and  are 
conspicuous  by  station  and  influence.  When  the  cedar-tree  falls,  when  the 
princes  of  a  land  are  brought  down  by  disaster  and  death,  men  of  inferior  rank, 
who,  in  comparison  with  these  princes,  are  but  as  the  fir-tree  compared  with  the 
cedar,  may  well  tremble  and  fear,  as  knowing  that  their  own  day  of  trial  must  be 
rapidly  approaching.  These  words,  then,  are  universally  applicable  whenever 
calamity  falls  on  those  better  or  more  exalted  than  ourselves,  and  such  calamity 
may  serve  as  a  warning,  teaching  us  to  expect  our  own  share  of  trouble.  "  Howl, 
fir-tree  " — tremble,  and  be  afraid,  ye  sinful  and  careless  ones,  who,  though  planted 
in  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  bring  not  forth  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  "  The 
cedar  is  fallen," — shall,  then,  the  fir-tree  escape  ?  "If  judgment  first  begin 
at  the  house  of  God,  what  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  Gospel  of 
Christ  ?  "  Take  the  text  as  setting  forth  the  sufferings  of  the  righteous  as  an 
evidence  or  token  of  the  far  greater  which,  in  due  time,  must  be  the  portion  of  the 
wicked.  If  the  wicked  were  to  ponder  God's  deahngs  with  the  righteous,  if  the 
fir-tree  would  observe  what  was  done  to  the  cedar,  it  could  hardly  be  that  future 
and  everlasting  punishment  would  be  denied  by  any,  or  by  any  be  practically 
disregarded.  Let  our  blessed  Saviour  Himself  be  the  first  cedar-tree  on  which 
we  gaze.  "  Smitten  of  God  and  afflicted."  "  A  Man  of  Sorrows,  and  acquainted 
with  grief."  His  sufferings  only  then  assume  their  most  striking  character 
when  they  are  seen  as  demonstrations  of  the  evil  of  sin.  The  atonement  alone 
shows  me  what  sin  is  in  God's  sight.  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  was  "  made 
perfect  through  sufferings,"  but  the  same  discipline  has  been  employed,  from 
the  first,  in  regard  of  all  those  whom  God  has  conducted  to  glory.  Under  all 
dispensations  affliction  is  an  instrument  of  purification.  The  nearer  we  approach 
the  times  of  the  Gospel,  the  intenser  becomes  the  discipline  of  suffering ;  as  though 
God  has  designed  to  prepare  men  for  an  increase  in  tribulation,  with  an  increase 
of  privilege.  The  fact  is  undisputed,  that,  through  much  tribulation,  men  enter 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  No  fact  should  be  more  startling  to  those  who  are  living 
without  God,  and  perhaps  secretly  hoping  for  impunity  at  the  last.     They  cannot 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

deny  that  the  cedar  has  been  bent  and  blighted  by  the  hurricane,  whilst,  com- 
paratively, sunshine  and  calm  have  been  around  the  fir.  And  from  this  they  are 
bound  to  conclude  the  great  fact  of  a  judgment  to  come.  Suppose  it  to  he  for 
purposes  of  discipline  that  Grod  employs  suffering — what  does  this  prove  but  that 
human  nature  is  thoroughly  corrupt,  requiring  to  be  purged  so  as  by  fire,  ere  it  can 
be  fitted  for  happiness  ?  And  if  there  must  be  this  fiery  purification,  what  is  the 
inference  which  ungodly  men  should  draw,  if  not  that  they  will  be  given  up  here- 
after to  the  unquenchable  flame,  given  up  to  it  when  that  flame  can  neither 
annihilate  their  being,  nor  eradicate  their  corruption  ?  It  is  probable  enough 
that  the  wicked  may  be  disposed  to  congratulate  themselves  on  their  superior 
prosperity,  and  to  look  with  pity,  if  not  with  contempt,  on  the  righteous,  as  the 
God  whom  they  serve  seems  to  reward  them  with  nothing  but  trouble.  But 
this  can  only  be  through  want  of  consideration.  It  may  certainly  be  inferred 
from  these  words,  when  applied  in  the  modes  indicated,  that  the  present  afflictions 
of  the  righteous  shall  be  vastly  exceeded  by  the  future  of  the  wicked.  The  "  cedar 
is  fallen,"  and  the  fir-tree  is  called  upon  to  "  howl,"  as  though  it  were  about  to 
be  rent  and  shivered,  as  by  the  tempest  and  the  thunder.  The  sufferings  of  the 
righteous  might  save  the  wicked  from  future  torments,  and  that  which  prepares 
a  good  man  for  heaven  might  snatch  a  bad  one  from  hell.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Fallen  greatness : — This  word  "  cedar  "  applies  to  Jerusalem,  to  the  temple, 
to  Lebanon.  It  is  a  general  and  symbolic  term.  It  applies  to  all  great  characters, 
to  all  noble  institutions,  all  sublime  purposes.  There  was  an  abundance  of  cedar- 
wood  in  the  temple,  so  the  temple  was  often  called  The  Cedar,  and  what  the  temple 
was  Jerusalem  was.  One  element  sometimes  gives  its  character  to  everything 
into  which  it  enters.  The  eternal  doctrine  of  the  text  is  that  when  the  strong 
go  down  the  weak  should  lay  that  significant  circumstance  to  heart.  How  can 
the  fir-tree  stand  when  the  cedar  is  blown  down  ?  How  can  the  weak  defend  the 
city  when  the  mighty  men  have  failed  ?  What  can  the  poor  do  after  the  kings 
of  wealth  ?  And  if  God  can  smite  the  mighty,  can  He  not  overwhelm  the  weak 
and  the  little  ?  if  He  can  rend  the  stars,  and  hurl  the  constellations  out  of  their 
places,  what  about  our  clay  walls  and  huts  of  dust  ? — siu-ely  He  could  sweep  them 
away  as  with  the  tempestuous  wind.  And  yet  the  weak  have  a  place  of  their 
own.  Trees  have  been  blown  down  whilst  daisies  have  been  left  undistm-bed. 
There  is  a  strength  of  littleness,  there  is  a  majesty  of  weakness,  there  is  a  charter  of 
immunity  granted  to  things  that  are  very  frail.  The  whirlwind  does  not  destroy 
the  flower  that  bends  before  its  fury,  but  it  often  destroys  the  mighty  tree  that 
dares  it  to  wrestle.  How  much  we  depend  upon  the  cedar  in  all  life,  in  all  society, 
in  all  institutions  !  What  is  done  by  one  man  may  be  comparatively  insignificant 
and  may  never  be  heard  of,  and  that  self-same  thing  done  by  another  quality  of 
man  fills  the  world  with  amazement.  How  is  that  ?  Simply  because  of  the 
quality.  There  are  people  who  burrow  in  the  earth,  and  what  they  do  no  man 
cares  for,  no  man  inquires  ;  there  are  persons  who  have  lived  themselves  down 
to  the  vanishing  point  of  influence,  that  it  is  of  no  consequence  whatsoever  what 
they  think  or  do.  Other  men  can  hardly  breathe  without  the  fact  being  noted 
and  commented  upon  ;  the  pvdse  cannot  be  unsteady  without  the  whole  joiurnalism 
of  the  empire  being  filled  with  the  tidings.  The  difference  is  the  difference  between 
the  cedar  and  the  fir-tree.  What  is  impossible  in  nature  is  possible  in  humanity  : 
the  fir-tree  can  become  the  cedar,  and  the  cedar  can  become  the  fir-tree,  and  these 
continual  changes  constitute  the  very  tragedy  of  human  experience.  Let  it  be 
known  that  some  person  has  committed  a  theft  in  the  city,  and  the  theft  will  be 
reported  in  very  small  type,  it  is  really  of  no  consequence  to  cruel  society  what 
that  person  has  done  ;  but  let  a  man  of  another  sort  do  that  very  self-same  thing, 
and  there  is  no  type  large  enough  in  which  to  announce  the  fact.  It  is  not  always 
so  with  the  good  deeds — "  the  good  is  oft  interred  with  men's  bones."  There  is 
no  printer  that  cares  to  report  charity,  nobleness,  meekness,  forgiveness,  great 
exercises  of  patience  and  forbearance.  The  printer  was  not  made  to  intermeddle 
with  that  sacred  fame.  Such  reputation  is  registered  in  heaven,  is  watched  and 
guarded  by  the  angels,  and  carries  with  itself  its  own  guarantee  of  immortality. 
Yet  this  doctrine  might  easily  be  abused.  A  man  might  be  fool  enough  to  say 
that  it  is  of  no  consequence  what  he  does.  But  it  is  in  reality  of  consequence, 
according  to  the  circle  within  which  he  moves.  Every  man  can  make  his  home 
unhappy,  every  man  can  lay  a  burden  upon  the  back  of  his  child  which  the  child 
io  unable  to  sustain.  That  is  the  consummation  of  cruelty.  If  the  man  could 
but  put  a  dagger  into  himself,  and  cause  his  own  life  continual  agony,  he  might 


CHAP.  XI.]  ZECEARIAH.  179 

be  doing  an  act  of  justice,  he  might  be  trying  to  compensate  for  the  wrongs  he  has 
done  to  others  :  but  when  it  is  felt  that  everything  that  man  does  tells  upon  the 
child  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation,  so  that  the  child  cannot  get  rid  of  the 
blood  which  the  great-grandfather  shed,  then  every  man  becomes  of  importance 
in  his  own  sphere  and  in  relation  to  the  line  of  life  which  he  touches.  We  apply 
this  text  personally  and  nationally,  founding  upon  it  oiu:  lamentations  over  fallen 
greatness.  The  great  statesman  dies,  and  the  Church  at  once  becomes  filled  with 
the  eloquence  of  this  text — "  Howl,  fir-tree  ;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen," — the  lesson 
being,  that  the  great  man  has  gone,  the  great  strength  has  vanished,  and  now 
weakoess  is  exposed  to  a  thousand  attacks  ;  weakness  feels  its  defencelessness. 
Nor  ought  such  eulogy  be  limited.  Sentiment  has  to  play  a  very  serious  part  and  a 
very  useful  part  in  the  education  of  life.  When  men  cease  to  revere  greatness  they 
cease  to  cultivate  it.  There  is  a  philistinism  that  is  near  akin  to  impiety  and 
profanity.  All  men  are  not  alike,  all  men  are  not  of  one  value  ;  some  men  have  the 
genius  of  insight  and  foresight,  and  some  have  it  not ;  and  when  men  who  can  see 
the  coming  time,  and  interpret  the  time  that  now  is  into  its  largest  significances,  are 
taken  away  from  us,  then  those  of  us  who  occupy  positions  of  commonplace  may 
well  feel  that  some  tremendous  bankruptcy  has  supervened  in  history,  and  the 
world  is  made  poor  for  ever.  Yet  this  is  not  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  which  is 
always  a  spirit  of  good  cheer  and  stimulus  and  hopefulness.  We  are  not  dependent 
now  upon  men,  except  in  a  secondary  sense  ;  we  are  dependent  upon  God  alone  : — 
The  battle  is  not  yours,  but  God's  ;  they  that  be  for  us  are  more  than  all  that 
can  be  against  us  ;  our  cedar  is  the  Cross,  and  the  Cross  has  never  failed.  Rome 
boasted  that  it  had  obliterated  the  Christian  name,  but  Rome  boasted  too  soon. 
Ten  persecutions  followed  one  another  in  rapid  and  devastating  succession  ;  yet 
there  were  Christians  still  praying  in  secret,  temples  unknown  and  unnamed 
were  frequented  by  ardent  and  passionate  worshippers.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  death  of  great  men  : — Mr.  Jay  was  generally  chaste  and  dignified  in  his  com- 
position, but  occasionally  used  a  quaintness  of  expression  which  in  our  day  would 
be  called  "  sensational."  The  selection  of  his  texts  was  sometimes  ingenious — e.g., 
on  two  occasions,  after  the  death  of  Robert  Hall  and  Rowland  Hill,  his  text  was, 
"Howl,  fir-tree,  for  the  cedar  is  fallen."  He  always  took  advantage  of  public 
events,  and  thus  brought  nature  and  providence  to  his  aid  in  instructing  the  people. 
The  cedar  useful  after  it  is  fallen  .• — The  cedar  is  the  most  useful  when  dead.  It  is 
the  most  productive  when  its  place  knows  it  no  more.  There  is  no  timber  like  it. 
Firm  in  grain,  and  capable  of  the  finest  polish,  the  tooth  of  no  insect  will  touch  it, 
and  time  himself  can  hardly  destroy  it.  Diffusing  a  perpetual  fragrance  through 
the  chamber  which  it  ceils,  the  worm  will  not  corrode  the  book  which  it  protects, 
nor  the  moth  corrupt  the  garment  which  it  guards — all  but  immortal  itself,  it 
transfuses  its  amaranthine  qualities  into  the  objects  around  it.  Every  Christian 
is  useful  in  his  life,  but  the  goodly  cedars  are  the  most  useful  afterwards.  Luther 
is  dead,  but  the  Reformation  lives. 

Ver.  3.  For  their  glory  is  spoiled. — Bad  men  in  high  office : — I.  The  men 
HERE  REFERRED  TO  called  "  shephcrds,"  which  is  a  designation  of  men 
in  power,  men  who  politically  and  ecclesiastically  presided  over  the  people, 
the  leaders.  The  "  shepherds  "  have  sometimes  reached  their  positions  irrespective 
of  the  will  of  the  people.  The  "  shepherds  "  referred  to  here  had  an  ambitious 
character.  Likened  to  "  young  lions."  1.  That  a  man  in  high  office  who  has 
a  bad  character  is  of  all  men  the  most  contemptible  A  bad  character  in  a  pauper 
makes  him  contemptible  ;  but  a  bad  character  in  a  king  makes  him  ten  times 
the  more  contemptible.  2.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  all  peoples  to  promote  those 
alone  to  high  office  who  have  a  high  moral  character.  II.  Bad  men  in  high  office 
GREATLY  DISTRESSED.  "  There  is  a  voice  of  the  howling  of  the  shepherds,"  &c. 
"  The  glory  of  these  shepherds  being  spoiled,"  says  Wardlaw,  "  signifies  the 
bringing  down  of  all  their  honour  and  power  and  the  wealth  and  luxury  which, 
by  the  abuse  of  their  power,  they  had  acquired,  all  becoming  a  prey  to  the  sacking 
and  pillaging  besiegers.  The  pride  of  Jordan  lay  in  its  evergreens  and  bru-'ih- 
wood  with  which  its  banks  were  enriched  and  adorned  ;  and  these  being  the 
covert  and  habitation  of  the  young  lions,  the  two  parts  of  the  figure  are  appro- 
priate. As  the  lions  howl  and  roar  in  dismay  and  fury  when  dislodged  from  their 
refuges  and  dwelling-places,  whether  by  the  swelling  flood  sweeping  over  their 
lairs,  or  from  the  cutting  down  or  the  burning  of  their  habitations,  so  should 
the  priests  and  rulers  of  Jerusalem  be  alarmed  and  struck  with  desperation  and 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

rage,  when  they  found  their  city,  within  whose  walls  they  had  counted  them- 
selves secure  from  the  very  possil/ility  of  hostile  entrance,  laid  open  to  the  out- 
rage of  an  exasperated  enemy,  and  all  its  resources  given  up  to  plunder  and 
destruction — country  as  well  as  city  thrown  into  confusion  and  desolation  !  " 
Such  rulers  may  well  be  distressed — 1.  Because  all  the  keen-sighted  and  honest 
men  over  Avhom  they  preside  despise  them.  2.  Because  the  Righteous  Governor 
of  the  world  has  denounced  them.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Feed  the  flock  of  the  slaughter.  —  Oppressed  people  and 
their  oppressors :  —  I.  A  duty  enjoined  towards  oppressed  peoples. 
"  Feed  the  flock  (sheep)  of  the  slaughter."  These  shepherds,  these  rulers  of 
the  Hebrew  people,  "  slaughtered  "  the  people.  Their  rights,  energies,  liberties 
and  independency  are  "  slaughtered,"  their  means  of  subsistence  and  advance- 
ment are  "  slaughtered."  People  "  slaughtered "  in  these  respects  abound 
in  every  state  and  place  in  Europe.  "  Feed  "  them — 1.  With  the  knowledge 
of  their  rights  as  men.  2.  With  the  knowledge  of  the  true  methods  to  obtain 
these  rights.  Not  by  violence  and  spoliation  but  by  moral  means,  by  skilful 
industry,  by  temperate  habits,  by  economic  management,  by  moral  suasion. 
3.  With  the  knowledge  of  worthy  motives  by  which  to  obtain  these  rights. 
II.  Here  is  a  sketch  op  the  authors  op  oppression.  1.  They  are  cruel. 
"  Whose  possessors  slay  them."  2.  They  are  impious.  In  all  their  cruelties 
they  "  hold  themselves  not  guilty."  The  greatest  despots  of  the  world  have 
ever  been  ready  to  justify  themselves  to  their  own  consciences.  3.  They  are 
avaricious.  "  And  they  that  sell  them,  say,  Blessed  be  the  Lord ;  for  I  am 
rich."  A  miserable  greed  was  their  inspiration.  {Homilist.)  A  good  shepherd  : 
— I  would  give  my  life  for  these  poor  people  of  the  Soudan.  How  can  I  help 
feeling  for  them  ?  All  the  time  I  was  there,  every  night  I  used  to  pray  that 
God  would  lay  upon  me  the  burden  of  their  sins,  and  crush  me  with  it  instead 
of  these  poor  sheep.     I  really  wished  it  and  longed  for  it.     {General  Gordon.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  I  'will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the  land.  —  A  terrible 
doom,  and  an  invaluable  privilege  : — I.  A  terrible  doom.  "  For  I  wiU  no  more 
pity  the  inhabitants  of  the  land."  What  is  the  doom  ?  The  abandonment  of 
God.  1.  This  abandonment  came  after  great  kindness.  For  long  centuries 
He  had  manifested  the  greatest  kindness  to  the  Hebrew  people.  From  their 
rescue  from  Egypt  down  to  this  hour  He  had  been  merciful  to  them.  "  My 
Spirit  will  not  always  strive  with  man."  2.  This  abandonment  involved  inex- 
pressible ruin.  They  were  given  up  to  the  heathen  cruelty  of  one  another  and 
to  the  violence  of  foreigners.  If  God  abandon  us,  what  are  we  ?  This  will  bt, 
the  doom  of  the  finall}'  impenitent.  "  Depart  from  Jle."  II.  An  invaluable 
privilege.  "  I  will  feed  the  flock  of  slaughter,  even  you,  0  poor  of  the  flock." 
"  The  Lord  is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want."  "  Wlien  He  saw  the  multitudes 
He  was  moved  with  compassion  towards  them,  because  they  fainted  and  were 
scattered  abroad  as  sheep  having  no  shepherd."  "  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd," 
said  Christ.  Conclusion — Thank  God,  we  are  not  abandoned  yet.  God  is 
with  us  as  a  shepherd.  He  is  seeking  the  lost  and  feeding  those  who  are  in  His 
fold.  {Homilist.)  Abandoned: — The  saddest  spectacle  earth  can  show  is 
a  shipwrecked  life — the  terrible  loss  of  all  the  possibilities  humanity  involves. 
If  a  man  quenches  the  light  God  gives  him,  and  by  self-indulgence  and  unfaith- 
fulness so  debauches  his  spirit  that  at  last  he  is  deserted  by  every  angel  of  purity 
and  goodness,  and  becomes  imvisited  by  even  the  desire  for  any  spiritual  attain- 
}uent,  then  there  is  a  lost  soul  in  the  most  awful  sense,  whether  here  or  in  the 
\\orld  to  come.  {Dr.  MacLeod.)  And  I  took  unto  Me  two  staves. — Two 
fhcphcrdi'  stor&s  .• — In  the  next  place  is  represented  Christ's  undertaking  of 
this  charge,  and  His  going  diligently  about  it,  signified  by  two  shepherds'  staves  ; 
l!ie  first  whereof,  called  Beauty,  holds  forth  the  sweet  and  beautiful  order  of 
His  Covenant,  and  the  doctrine  thereof,  wheieby  the  Church  is  directed  in  faith, 
worship,  and  obedience  of  God.  The  second,  called  Bands,  signifies  that  policy 
in  Church  and  State  whereby  they  are  kept  one,  and  without  schisms  among 
themselves.  1.  Christ  the  Mediator  became  an  obedient  servant,  and  is  willing, 
and  takes  pleasure  to  be  employed  for  His  Church's  good  ;  and  will  have  a  tender 
consideration  of  their  case.  2.  Christ  in  His  care  over  the  visible  Church,  hath 
an  especial  eye  to  His  elect,  and  the  regenerate  in  it,  how  abject-like  soever 
they  seem  in  the  eyes  of  men,  or  in  their  outwaid  condition.     3.  Christ  is  a  faith- 


CHAP.  XI.]  ZECHAEIAH.  ISl 

ful  shepherd,  singiilar  and  incomparable  in  His  care  and  diligence  about  His 
people :  for,  saith  He,  "  I  took  unto  Me  two  staves,"  whereas  other  shepherds 
use  but  one.  4.  The  Covenant  and  doctrine  revealed  by  Christ  unto  His  Church, 
as  it  sets  forth  the  beauty  and  excellency  of  God,  so  it  is  beautiful  and  sweetly 
ordered  in  itself,  so  as  faith  and  obedience  sweetly  work  to  others'  hands,  and 
make  the  followers  thereof  to  be  beautiful  and  excellent  above  all  people ;  for 
"  the  one  staff  I  called  Beauty."  5.  As  unity  and  concord  in  a  Church  is  a  fruit 
of  Christ's  feeding  His  flock,  so  policy  and  order,  whereby  unity  is  preserved, 
is  a  rich  blessing.  "  The  other  I  called  Bands."  6.  Christ's  performances  are 
answerable  to  His  undertakings :  what  He  saith  He  doth  ;  and  His  practice 
will  never  give  His  promise  the  lie :  for  unto  His  promise,  "  I  will  feed,"  is  sub- 
joined, "  And  I  fed  the  flock."  (Oeorge  Hutckeson.)  The  staves  of  Beavty 
and  Bands  broken : — I.  Unity  from  ttnion  with  God  is  national  beauty. 
It  is  the  union  of  the  members  of  the  body  with  the  head  which  gives  to  the  entire 
frame  its  dignity  and  beauty.  A  headless  trunk  has  no  beauty,  but  when  body 
and  limbs  are  fitly  framed  together,  that  symmetry  is  attained  which  God  intended. 
The  beauty  of  a  tree  consists  in  the  union  of  branches  by  union  with  the  trunk. 
The  unity  of  the  Hebrew  nation  was  destroyed  by  their  wilful  severance  of  them- 
selves from  their  Divine  Head.  Lack  of  vmion  with  God  brought  discord  into 
the  nation  and  destroyed  their  national  beauty  (Psa.  cxxxiii.).     II.  Men  must 

have   a   SOtTL-SHEPHERD,    AND   WHEN    GOD   IS   REJECTED   THEY   MUST   HAVE   A   BAD 

ONE.  If  a  road  is  known  to  one  person  only,  any  other  man  who  offers  to  guide 
the  traveller  must  be  his  enemy.  If  a  man  is  deeply  wounded,  he  must  have 
help  from  some  one  outside  himseK,  and  the  quack  who  undertakes  to  heal 
him,  and  is  ignorant  of  the  proper  way  to  treat  him,  will  be  likely  to  be  his 
murderer.  There  is  but  one  Being  who  is  acquainted  with  the  soul's  needs ; 
if  He  is  rejected,  any  other  must  harm  the  soul.  God  claims  to  be  the  only 
Saviour.  "  There  is  none  beside  Me "  (Isa.  xlv.  21).  Christ  warned  Israel 
against  false  shepherds,  yet,  as  a  nation,  they  chose  them  and  rejected  Him, 
and  as  He  only  could  really  lead  and  feed  them,  their  choice  necessarily  issued 
in  their  ruin.  III.  SiN  disinherits  men  and  nations  of  their  God-given 
PORTION.  (Outlines  by  London  Minister.)  Beauty  and  Bands  the  two  staves 
of  the  Divine  Shepherd  : — As  long  as  sin  will  be  in  the  world  the  oppressor  and 
the  oppressed  are  siu-e  to  be  here  ;  for  it  is  in  the  nature  of  sin  to  make  men  hard, 
cruel,  and  oppressive.  The  exaltation  of  a  man  above  his  fellow-men  in  wealth, 
honour,  authority,  and  power  is  no  reason  whatever  why  he  should  despise  and 
oppress  them,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  should  be  a  reason  for  him  to  deal  kindly 
towards  them.  The  wealth  of  the  rich  man  should  be  an  inducement  to  him 
to  remember  the  poor,  and  the  strength  of  the  strong  should  be  an  inducement 
to  him  to  help  the  weak.  For  a  consolation  to  the  oppressed  in  their  sufferings 
and  a  warning  to  the  oppressor,  the  Bible  teaches  in  a  clear  manner  that  God 
will  siu-ely  visit  the  one  in  mercy  and  the  other  in  judgment ;  the  same  hand 
that  bestows  favours  graciously  and  tenderly  upon  the  oppressed  holds  the  sword 
of  vengeance  above  the  oppressor.  In  this  chapter  God  said  that  He  was  going 
to  visit  the  rulers  of  His  people  in  judgment  because  they  were  oppressing  them. 
"  Thus  said  the  Lord  my  God :  Feed  the  flock  of  slaughter ;  whose  possessors 
slay  them,  and  hold  themselves  not  guilty ;  and  they  that  sell  them  say,  Blessed 
be  the  Lord,  for  I  am  rich :  and  their  own  shepherds  pity  them  not."  How 
abominable  this  must  have  been  in  the  sight  of  God  !  After  accumulating  wealth 
through  cruelty  and  oppression  they  sanctimoniously  praised  God  for  prospering 
them.  But  while  these  unjust  and  oppressive  rulers  were  thus  justifying  them- 
selves, destruction  overtook  them.  "  For  I  will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants 
of  the  land,  saith  the  Lord,"  &c.  But  when  God  visits  the  oppressor  in  judg- 
ment He  does  not  forget  the  oppressed  in  their  poverty,  sufferings,  and  misery, 
for  He  said,  "  So  I  fed  the  flock  of  slaughter,  verily  the  poor  of  the  flock."  So 
in  the  text  we  have  a  striking  and  beautiful  picture  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  Great 
Shepherd  of  souls.  It  has  been  truly  observed  by  an  able  commentator,  that 
no  image  of  Christ  has  so  deeply  impressed  itself  upon  the  mind  of  the  Church 
as  that  of  a  shepherd,  as  is  shown  by  Christian  literature  and  art,  and  oiu*  hymns 
and  prayers.  The  Eastern  shepherd  would  never  be  seen  without  his  staff  or 
crook.  But  reference  is  made  here  to  two  staves,  and  David  says  of  the  Lord 
as  his  Shepherd,  "  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they  comfort  me."  In  our  text  there 
are  names  given  to  the  two  staves ;  one  is  called  "  Beauty,"  and  the  other 
"  Bands,"  which  are  to  be  taken  emblematically  to  show  that  the  Lord  Jesus 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

Christ  the  Divine  Shepherd  will  lead,  protect,  beautify,  and  unite  His  people  as 
one  great  and  glorious  flock.  I.  The  Lord  Jesus  Chkist  feeding  His  people. 
"  Lo,  I  fed  the  flock  of  the  slaughter,  verily  the  poor  of  the  flock."  When  their 
own  shepherds  pity  them  not,  the  Divine  Shepherd  makes  them  to  he  down 
in  peace  and  security  in  the  green  pastures  of  spiritual  blessings,  and  leads  them 
beside  the  still  waters  of  heavenly  influences.  He  Uves  for  the  sake  of  His  sheep, 
and  so  they  find  in  Him  their  true  Shepherd.  Naturally  the  objects  of  our  greatest 
care  and  anxiety  will  have  the  largest  place  in  our  affections,  and  it  is  not  easy 
for  us  to  conceive  the  tender  affection  and  close  attachment  that  would  gradually 
grow  between  the  Eastern  shepherd  and  his  sheep.  II.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
PROTECTING  AND  GUIDING  His  PEOPLE.  With  the  staves  the  shepherd  rules, 
protects,  and  guides  his  sheep.  He  uses  the  crook  to  prevent  them  from  going 
astray,  and  to  pull  them  back  from  dangerous  places.  God's  people,  like  sheep, 
are  very  prone  to  go  astray.  He  very  often  draws  them  by  His  crook  from 
temptations  and  dangers  which  they  are  not  in  the  least  aware  of.  Think  of 
a  promising  young  man,  who  has  been  brought  up  in  a  rehgious  family,  enticed 
by  bad  companions  into  the  forbidden  paths  of  sinful  pleasiu-es  ;  but  before 
he  falls  over  the  precipice  of  destruction,  the  Good  Shepherd,  through  sickness, 
or  the  death  of  a  companion  or  a  near  relation,  mercifully  draws  him  back  by 
His  crook.  The  apostle  Peter  wandered  far  astray,  but  Christ  followed  him  faith- 
fully, and  gently  brought  him  back.  The  Divine  Shepherd  dealt  in  a  similar 
manner  with  Thomas,  who  had  wandered  far  into  the  wilderness  of  doubt  and 
unbelief.  And  we  do  not  know  from  how  many  dangers  and  temptations  we 
have  been  rescued  by  the  Divine  Shepherd  with  His  crook.  III.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  beautifying  His  people.  He  will  bring  out  to  its  highest  per- 
fection the  beautiful  individuality  of  each  one  of  His  followers.  This  is  taught 
by  the  symbolic  name  of  one  of  the  two  staves,  which  is  called  "  Beauty."  God, 
under  the  old  dispensation,  through  various  means  and  ministrations,  aimed 
at  ennobling  and  beautifying  His  people ;  and  notwithstanding  all  their  faults, 
they  looked  beautiful  compared  to  the  idolatrous  nations  by  which  they  were 
surrounded.  In  the  Book  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah  they  are  called  a  "  beautiful 
flock."  Their  God,  who  is  called  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  had  made  them  beautiful 
by  saving,  protecting,  and  guiding  them,  and  richly  bestowing  His  blessings 
upon  them.  So  does  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  a  similar  way  sanctify  and  beautify 
His  people ;  from  His  love,  gentleness,  care,  faithfulness,  and  self-sacrificing 
Spirit  there  goes  forth  a  mighty  influence  silently  to  purify  their  natiure  and 
ennoble  and  beautify  their  character.  He  washes  them  in  His  own  blood,  and 
beautifies  and  adorns  them  with  His  own  heavenly  Spirit.  This  is  the  beauty 
of  holiness,  "  And  let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us."  They  are 
changed  into  the  image  of  Christ  from  glory  to  glory  by  the  influence  of  His  Spirit 
dwelling  in  them.  We  can  say  that  the  Great  Shepherd  is  perfectly  impartial 
in  the  bestowal  of  His  sanctifying  and  beautifying  influences  upon  all  God's 
erring  children,  whom  He  strives  to  gather  together  into  one  beautiful  flock. 
The  sun  is  perfectly  impartial  in  the  distribution  of  its  heat  and  hght,  which 
bring  out  the  beauty  of  the  flowers  ajid  the  trees.  One  flower  cannot  say  to 
another,  "  The  sun  has  taken  more  trouble  to  beautify  and  adorn  you  than  me," 
for  it  shines  equally  the  same  for  all.  So  Christ  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  dis- 
tributes its  purifying  and  beautifying  influences  equally  impartially  to  all.  IV.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  uniting  ELis  people.  In  the  union  of  the  human  and  the 
Divine  in  the  person  of  the  Good  Shepherd  all  men  are  virtually  united  in  Him, 
and  He  will  not  rest  satisfied  until  all  are  actually  made  one  in  Him.  This  blessed 
truth  is  implied  by  the  name  of  the  other  staff,  which  is  called  "  Bands,"  which 
teaches  that  the  Divine  Shepherd  not  only  sanctifies  and  beautifies  His  people 
individually,  but  also  unites  them  socially  into  one  great  and  glorious  company. 
As  the  shepherd  carefully  gathers  his  sheep  together  into  the  fold,  so  does  Christ 
gather  all  men  together.  Moses,  Socrates,  Plato,  Gautama,  Zoroaster,  John, 
Peter,  Paul,  Mohammed,  Luther,  Wesley,  and  others  are  all  His  under-shepherds, 
and  ultimately  He  will  bring  all  their  flocks  together.  He  has  died  for  all,  seeks 
all,  and  will  save  all.  "  And  I,  if  I  be  hfted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men 
iinto  Myself."  The  shepherd  feels  restless  and  uneasy  if  one  sheep  is  wanting 
in  the  fold.  So  Christ  the  Good  Shepherd  will  not  feel  satisfied  until  the  last 
erring  sheep  has  been  safely  brought  into  the  heavenly  fold,  and  He  will  not 
leave  the  wilderness  as  long  as  there  is  one  wandering  sheep  to  be  brought 
home.      (Z.  Mather.) 


CHAP.  XI.]  ZECHARIAH.  183 

Ver.  8.  My  soul  lothed  Uiem,  and  their  soul  also  abhorred  Me. — A  mutual 
dislike  between  Ood  and  man : — I.  This  mutual  moral  antagonism  is  mani- 
festly ABNORMAL.  It  18  not  Conceivable  that  the  all-wise  and  all-loving  Maker 
of  the  universe  would  create  beings  whom  He  would  loathe  and  who  would  abhor 
Him.  Such  an  idea  is  opposed  at  once  to  our  intuitions  and  oiu:  conclusions. 
In  the  pristine  state  of  humanity,  God  loved  man,  and  man  loved  God.  II.  This 
mutual  moral  antagonism  implies  wkong  on  man's  part.  For  Infinite  Piu-ity 
and  Righteousness  to  loathe  the  corrupt  and  the  wrong  is  not  onl}'  right,  but 
a  necessity  of  the  Divine  character.  He  abhorreth  sin ;  it  is  the  "  abominable 
thing  "  which  He  hates.  This  is  His  glory.  But  for  man  to  abhor  Him,  this 
is  the  great  sin,  the  fontal  sin,  the  source  of  all  other  sins.  III.  This  mutual 
moral  antagonism  explains  the  sin  and  wretchedness  of  the  world.  Why 
does  the  world  abound  with  falsehoods,  dishonesties  and  oppressions,  unchastities, 
cruelties,  and  impieties  ?  Because  human  souls  are  not  in  supreme  sympathy 
with  the  supremely  good,  because  they  are  at  enmity  with  God,  because  God  loathes 
sin.  IV.  This  mutual  moral  antagonism  abgites  the  necessity  fob  a  becon- 
ciuation.  The  great  want  of  the  world  is  the  reconciliation  of  man  to  the 
character  and  the  friendship  of  God.  Such  a  reconciliation  requires  no  change 
on  God's  part.  His  loathing  is  the  loathing  of  love,  love  loathing  the  wrong 
and  the  miserable.  The  change  must  be  on  man's  part.  God  was  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself.  (Homilist.)  Divine  rejection: — A  time 
comes  in  the  history  of  incorrigible  nations  and  incorrigible  individuals  when 
they  are  rejected  of  heaven.  I.  The  cattse  of  this  lamentable  event.  "  My 
soul  loatheth  them."  II.  The  bestjlt.  The  results  here  are  threefold.  1.  The 
cessation  of  Divine  mercy.  "  I  will  not  feed  you."  2.  Abandonment  to  self- 
ruin.  "  That  that  dieth,  let  it  die  ;  and  that  that  is  to  be  cut  off,  let  it  be  cut 
off."  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth 
death."  3.  Deliverance  to  mutual  tormentors.  "  And  let  the  rest  eat  every 
one  the  flesh  of  another."  All  these  results  were  realised  in  a  material  sense 
in  the  rejection  of  the  Jewish  people.  Josephus  tells  us  that  in  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  pestilence,  famine,  and  intestine  discord  ran  riot  amongst  the  God- 
rejected  people.  These  material  evils  are  but  faint  emblems  of  the  spiritual 
evils  that  must  be  realised  by  every  God-reject«d  soul.  III.  The  sign.  "  And 
I  took  My  staff,  even  Beauty,  and  cut  it  asunder,  that  I  might  break  My  covenant 
which  I  had  made  with  aU  the  people."  The  Divine  Shepherd  is  represented 
as  having  two  staves,  or  crooks ;  ordinary  shepherds  have  only  one.  Expositors 
in  their  interpretation  of  these  staves  differ  here  as  in  most  places  elsewhere  in 
this  book.  Some  say  they  indicate  the  double  care  that  the  Divine  Shepherd 
takes  of  His  people ;  some,  the  different  methods  of  treatment  pursued  by  the 
Almighty  Shepherd  towards  His  people  ;  some,  that  they  refer  to  the  house 
of  Judah  and  to  the  house  of  Israel,  indicating  that  neither  was  to  be  left  out 
in  the  mission  of  the  work  of  the  Good  Shepherd  ;  and  some,  that  the  one  called 
"Beauty" — which  means  grace — represents  the  merciful  dispensation  under 
which  the  Hebrew  people  had  been  placed ;  and  the  other  staff  called  "  Bands," 
the  brotherhood  between  Judah  and  Israel.  One  thing  seems  clear,  that  the 
cutting  of  the  sta-ff  called  "  Beauty  "  asvmder  was  a  symbol  of  their  rejection 
from  all  future  grace  and  mercy.  It  may  be  stated  as  a  general  truth,  that  all 
heaven-rejected  souls  have  signs  of  their  miserable  condition.  What  are  the 
general  signs  ?  1.  Practical  ignorance  of  God.  2.  Utter  subjection  to  the  senses. 
3.  C!omplete  devotion  to  selfish  aims.  4.  Insensibility  of  conscience.  (Homilist.) 
Abhorring  the  name  of  Ood  : — "  For  the  last  ten  years  I  (Gambetta)  have  made 
a  pledge  with  myself  to  entirely  avoid  introducing  the  name  of  God  into  any 
speech  of  mine.  You  can  hardly  believe  how  difficult  it  has  been,  but  I  have 
succeeded,  thank  Ood  I "  {Dieu  merci  !)  Thus  the  name  so  sternly  tabooed  rose 
unconsciously  to  his  lips  at  the  very  moment  when  he  was  congratulating  him- 
Belf  on  having  overcome  the  habit  of  using  it.     {E.  D,  Pressensi.) 

Vers.  10-14.  So  they  weighed  for  my  price  thirty  pieces  of  silver. — The 
goodly  price  of  Jesiis : — Satan's  dealings  with  the  human  family  may  be 
truthfully  described  as  one  gigantic  system  of  bribery  and  corruption.  He  has 
bribes  of  all  sorts,  and  of  different  kinds  and  characters,  and  he  knows  how  to 
apply  them.  He  takes  care  to  suit  his  bribe  to  the  person  who  is  being  bribed. 
With  some  of  us  wealth  is  no  particular  object.  But  even  while  we  spurn  that 
bribe  we  are  open  to  others.     Before  one  man  Satan  puts  the  possibility  of  revelling 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

in  pleasure,  before  another  a  dream  of  ambition,  before  another  literary  distinction, 
before  another  domestic  happiness.  This  system  of  bribery  and  corruption 
was  fully  shown  when  Satan  entered  the  lists  against  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 
When  the  Son  of  God,  made  man,  stood  before  the  tempter  in  the  wilderness, 
it  was  after  this  fashion  that  he  dared  to  proceed.  On  that  occasion  Satan  pre- 
sented to  the  view  of  ovu:  blessed  Master  the  very  highest  bribe  that  was  ever 
offered.  Of  all  the  assaults  which  he  made  on  our  blessed  Lord,  this  seems  to 
have  been  the  least  successful.  On  other  occasions  he  was  very  subtle  ;  he 
approached  our  Lord  very  cautiously,  but  he  made  no  headway  ;  on  each  occasion 
he  was  met  with  wisdom  and  firmness.  Satan  is  very  frugal  with  his  bribes. 
What  is  all  his  bribery  and  corruption  for  ?  How  comes  it  to  pass  that  Satan 
thus  exerts  his  malignant  skill  in  endeavouring  to  gain  an  influence  over  us  ? 
Satan's  prime  object  is,  to  carry  out  his  rebellious  purposes  in  the  very  face  of 
the  everlasting  purposes  of  Jehovah.  We,  Christians,  believe  that  in  the  end 
God  will  manifest  His  own  wisdom  by  triumphing  completely  over  Satan's 
malignant  skiU,  but  that  for  the  time  being  appearances  are  otherwise.  There 
is  no  class  of  persons  in  human  history  for  whom  we  feel  a  greater  contempt 
than  for  traitors.  We  all  despise  a  traitor.  Who  is  there  that  can  have  any 
respect  for  a  man  like  Judas  Iscariot  ?  And  yet  the  sin  that  Judas  committed 
is  the  sin  that  is  being  committed  by  the  slaves  of  Satan  still.  We  have  not, 
indeed,  the  power  of  doing  what  Judas  did.  But  as  it  is  possible  for  us  to  "  crucify" 
our  Lord  afresh,  so  it  is  possible  to  betray  Him  afresh  into  the  hands  of  His  enemies. 
How  can  this  be  done  ?  This  nature  of  ours,  what  is  it  ?  It  is  a  citadel  of  the 
living  God  ;  it  should  be  an  abode  of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  Every  one  of  you  belongs 
to  God.  If  we  refuse  to  recognise  His  right  it  is  simply  because  we  are  already 
in  our  own  hearts  traitors  against  His  love.  The  Lord  is  aware  of  his  enticements. 
So  He  says  to  us:  "  If  it  seem  good  unto  you,  give  Me  My  price."  If  you  are 
going  to  barter  My  rights  for  that  which  Satan  offers  you ;  if  you  are  going  to 
play  the  part  of  a  base  and  perfidious  traitor,  make  up  your  mind  what  your 
bargain  is  to  be ;  look  your  own  act  in  the  face.  If  men  and  women  were  to 
sit  down  and  ask  themselves  the  question:  "What  price  have  I  accepted  for  Jesus; 
for  how  great  a  consideration  have  I  agreed  with  Satan  to  make  over  my  soul 
to  his  influences,  and  to  live  the  life  that  he  would  have  me  lead  ?  "  they  would 
soon  repent  of  their  bribe.  Little  do  you  think  that  when  you  are  selling  the 
rights  of  Jesus  you  are  actually  selling  your  own  interests.  The  man  that  sells 
Jesus  sells  his  own  soul,  and  there  is  no  man  that  makes  so  bad  a  bargain  as  the 
man  who  accepts  the  devil's  bribes  for  the  betrayal  of  Jesus.  Look  at  this  miser- 
able man  Judas.  Can  you  fancy  how  he  crept  down  that  dark  street  ?  He 
felt  already  as  if  he  were  standing  on  the  very  verge  of  hell.  The  bargain  was 
struck.  And  what  a  bargain  it  was  !  It  did  not  seem  much  to  get  for  Jesus — 
thirty  pieces  of  silver.  Then  the  end  for  Judas.  It  is  the  way  the  devil's  bribe 
will  always  end.  He  makes  you  fair  promises  ;  he  takes  you  by  the  hand ;  he 
pleads  with  you  ;  he  lays  all  tempting  things  before  you  ;  but  behind  them  all 
he  has  got  the  hangman's  rope  ready,  and  the  scaffold  is  prepared,  and  the  awful 
moment  of  doom  is  drawing  nearer  and  nearer.  By  and  by  come  the  agonies 
of  remorse,  the  tenors  of  despair,  and  the  awful  horrors  of  a  lost  eternity. 
{W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  A  model  spiritual  teacher: — Why  these  words  should 
have  been  referred  to  by  Matthew,  and  applied  to  Christ  and  Judas,  I  cannot 
explain.  They  may  fairly  be  employed  to  illustrate  a  model  spiritual  teacher 
in  relation  to  secular  acknowledgments  of  His  teachings.     I.  He  leaves  thi 

SECULAR  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  TO  THE  FREE  CHOICE  OF  THOSE  TO  WHOM  HiS  SERVICES 

HAVE  BEEN  RENDERED.  "  And  I  Said  unto  them.  If  ye  think  good,  give  Me  My 
price  ;  and  if  not,  forbear."  He  does  not  exact  anything,  nor  does  he  even  suggest 
any  amount.  II.  His  spiritual  services  are  sometimes  shamefully  undbb- 
EATED.  "  So  they  weighed  for  My  price  thirty  pieces  of  silver."  Thirty  shekels. 
An  amount  in  our  money  of  about  £3,  2s.  6d.  This  was  the  price  they  put  on 
His  services,  just  the  price  paid  to  a  bond-servant  (Exod.  xxxi.).  1.  Do  not  deter- 
mine the  real  worth  of  a  spiritual  teacher  by  the  amount  of  his  stipend.  2.  Deplore 
the  inappreciativeness  of  the  world  of  the  highest  services.  EH.  His  independent 
SOUL  repudiates  inadequate  secular  acknowledgments.  "  And  the  Lord 
said  unto  me.  Cast  it  imto  the  potter  :  a  goodly  price  that  I  was  prised  at  of  them. 
And  I  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  cast  them  to  the  potter  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord."  He  felt  the  insult  of  being  offered  such  a  miserable  sum.  "  Cast 
it  iinto  the  potter,"  a  proverbial  expression,  meaning,  throw  it  to  the  tempi* 


CHIP.  XI.]  ZECHARIAH.  186 

potter.  "  The  most  suitable  person  to  whom  to  cast  the  despicable  sjim,  plying 
the  trade,  as  he  did,  in  the  polluted  valley  of  Hinnom,  because  it  furnished  him 
with  the  most  suitable  clay."  A  true  teacher  would  starve  rather  than  accept 
such  a  miserable  acknowledgment  for  his  services.  Yomr  money  perish  with  you  ! 
{Homilist.)  Mean  treatment  of  an  old  prophet  by  his  people: — Here  is  an  old 
Jewish  prophet  honourably  putting  himself  in  the  hands  of  his  congregation, 
who  is  dismissing  himself  with  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  I.  An  old  prophet's 
MAKLY  OFFER  TO  HIS  CONGREGATION.  If  you  think  good,  give  me  my  price. 
If  you  are  weary  of  me,  pay  me  off  and  discharge  me.  If  you  be  willing  to  con- 
tinue me  longer  in  your  service,  I  will  continue  ;  or  turn  me  off  without  wages — 
I  am  content.  His  spirit  is  (1)  pathetic,  (2)  submissive,  (3)  magnanimous.  11.  Thb 
Church's  miserable  acceptance  of  his  offer.  "  So  they  weighed  for  my 
price  thirty  pieces  of  silver."  They  accepted  the  offer — 1.  Immediately.  They 
took  no  time  for  consideration.  The  money  was  ready  for  dismissal.  2.  Despic- 
ably. Thirty  shekels.  3.  Dishonourably.  Dismissing  an  old  pastor  with  such 
a  paltry  sum.  Parting  with  the  man  of  God  with  a  sham  testimonial.  An  old 
prophet,  after  a  long  service  of  usefulness,  cast  upon  the  world  with  thirty  pieces 
of  silver.  4.  Studiously  mean.  "  They  weighed  thirty  pieces  of  silver."  They 
shamefully  put  the  lowest  possible  value  on  his  ministry.  See  the  extreme  want 
of  appreciation  of  good  pastoral  service.  Zechariah's  ministry  was  Divine.  What 
wretchedness  of  dealing  with  the  prophetic  shepherd  of  Israel.  Salary  is  no 
test  of  a  good  ministry.  Some  of  the  best  are  badly  paid.  The  geniuses  are 
frequently  unworthily  recognised  by  their  congregations.  Jonathan  Edwards 
was  too  poor  to  get  paper  to  pen  down  his  superhuman  thoughts  in  the  ministry. 
m.  The  prophet's  manly  disdain  of  his  people's  meanness.  "  And  the  Lord 
said  unto  me.  Cast  it  unto  the  potter,"  &c.  The  act  was — 1.  Divine.  "  And 
the  Lord  said  unto  me."  2.  Manfully  done.  3.  A  proof  of  their  meanness.  IV.  An 
old  prophet  robbed  op  his  just  claim.  1.  Scriptural  claim.  "  Thou  shalt 
not  muzzle  the  ox  that  treadeth  the  corn."  2.  Social.  For  the  "  workman  is 
worthy  of  his  hire."  3.  Equitable.  Every  class  of  people  have  power  to 
claim  their  due,  why  not  the  ministry  ?  4.  Divine.  "  Even  so  hath  the  Lord 
ordained  that  they  which  preach  the  Gospel  should  live  of  the  Gospel."  "  Who 
goeth  a  warfare  any  time  at  his  own  charges  ?  And  who  planteth  a  vineyard 
and  eateth  not  of  the  fruit,"  &c.  It  is  nothing  but  right  for  the  ministry  to 
get  and  have  their  due,  for  the  credit  of  the  Church  and  the  good  of  their  successors. 
Honesty  is  virtue  everywhere.  Conclusion — God  frequently  punishes  publicly 
mean  churches  by  presenting  them  with  shepherds  of  extreme  barbarity  and 
cruelty.  Meanness  will  be  punished.  (J.  Morlais  Jones.)  The  price  of  our 
redemption  : — The  exact  agreement  of  this  prophecy  with  the  event  it  predicts 
would  be  sufficient  to  render  this  chapter  more  than  ordinarily  interesting.  But 
it  has  a  still  greater  claim  on  our  regard,  since  it  contains  the  passage  which  I 
have  chosen  as  the  subject  of  this  discoiu-se,  than  which  no  prophecy  is  more 
clear,  no  prediction  more  close  and  circumstantial.  To  whichever  prophet  or 
to  what  particular  book  the  passage  before  us  may  be  attributed,  its  circum- 
stantial and  prophetic  description  of  an  extraordinary  event  connected  with 
man's  redemption  cannot  be  denied.  How  trifling  was  the  sum  for  which  Judas 
sold  his  immortal  soul.  What  could  be  his  motive  we  at  this  distant  hour  can 
scarcely  conceive.  It  has  been  said  to  have  been  avarice.  But  the  sum  of 
two  or  three  pounds  is  surely  too  small  a  temptation  even  for  the  most  covetous 
of  mankind  to  betray  and  deliver  to  certain  death  his  kindest  friend  and  bene- 
factor. The  Gospel  expressly  tells  us  the  crime  originated  at  the  instigation 
of  Satan.  Man's  salvation  was  bought  with  a  price.  VSTiat  that  price  was, 
let  the  service  of  the  Church  at  this  season  describe.  Not  even  for  a  moment 
can  a  sincere  disciple  of  Christ  forget  the  words  of  the  Apostle  :  "  Ye  are  not 
your  own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price  ;  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body, 
and  in  yoiu:  spirit,  which  are  God's."     (John  Nance,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Take  unto  thee  yet  the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd. — 
The  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd : — The  command  addressed  to  the  prophet 
was,  "  to  take  unto  him  yet  the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd."  "  Yet  "  means 
"  again,"  "  once  more."  "  Beauty  "  and  "  bands  "  were  also  instruments  of 
a  foolish  shepherd.  He  was  to  take  other  instruments  so  as  to  manifest  more 
visibly  and  strikingly  what  a  foolish  shepherd  is.  By  "  foolish "  imderstand 
ungodly,  unregenerate,  destitute  of  heavenly  imparted  wisdom,  and  therefore 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xa. 

in  God's  account  a  fool.  The  "  foolish  shepherd  "  is  therefore  a  natural  man 
lifted  up  by  education,  pride,  covetousness,  or  presumption  into  a  pulpit,  and 
devoid  of  spiritual  illumination  and  heavenly  wisdom.  He  has  certain  instru- 
ments which  the  prophet  was  to  take  as  emblems  of  his  character.  What  they 
were  the  Holy  Ghost  has  not  here  informed  us,  but  as  we  may  gather  them  from 
other  parts  of  Scripture  I  shall  take  the  liberty  to  put  them  into  his  hand.  1.  A 
mask.  The  thing  it  represents,  namely,  deceit  and  imposture,  is  as  old  as  the 
times  of  Jannes  and  Jambres.  To  wear  a  mask  is  to  play  a  false  part,  to  assume 
a  fictitious  character,  to  be  a  stage-player ;  for  in  ancient  times  the  actors  never 
appeared  but  in  masks,  the  features  of  which  imitated  the  persons  they  repre- 
eented.  Thus  the  foolish  shepherd  makes  the  people  his  stage,  his  holy  countenance 
being  his  mask,  and  his  false  zeal  loud  speech,  and  impassioned  rant  his  wardrobe ; 
and  thus  by  craft  and  cunning  he  entangles  the  simple  in  his  net.  2.  A  sceptre. 
The  badge  of  authority  and  power.  3.  A  pair  of  sharp  shears ;  for  we  read  that 
*'  they  clothe  themselves  with  the  wool,"  and  of  course  must  have  something 
to  get  the  wool  ofiE  with.  To  receive  what  is  volimtarily  given  is  a  different  thing 
from  clipping  off  as  much  wool  as  possible,  or  cutting  so  close  as  to  fetch  blood, 
and  take  off  a  bit  of  the  skin.  4.  A  long  whip  that  shall  reach  every  comer  of 
the  pen,  to  flog  all  that  stir  up  the  enmity  of  his  carnal  mind,  by  what  he  calls 
a  discontented  mind.  5.  A  bow,  and  a  quiver  full  of  arrows ;  to  reach  those 
at  a  distance  who  are  beyond  the  lash  of  the  whip.  Come  now  to  his  character, 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  here  drawn,  and  as  we  learn  much  from  contraries,  it 
wiU  afford  us  an  opportimity  of  seeing  from  the  contrast  what  the  wise  shepherd 
is.  (1)  The  first  thing  said  of  this  foolish  shepherd  is,  that  "  he  shall  not  visit 
those  that  be  cut  off,"  meaning  such  as,  by  a  work  of  the  law  in  their  consciences, 
are  cut  off  from  all  creature  righteousness,  all  false  refuges,  all  deceitful  homes 
and  rotten  props;  from  finding  any  good  in  self,  or  resting  on  the  testimony 
of  man.  The  margin  gives  another  rendering,  "  those  that  be  hidden."  Hidden 
from  general  view  and  observation.  These  "  cut  off,"  "  hidden  "  ones  the  foolish 
shepherd  "  does  not  visit."  (2)  "  Neither  shall  seek  the  young  one."  The  new 
born  babes,  that  desu-e  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word.  The  foolish  shepherd  neglects 
these.  (3)  "  He  does  not  heal  that  which  was  broken."  This  may  suggest 
those  who  have  lost  their  first  love,  and  backslidden  from  God.  (4)  "  He  feedeth 
not  that  that  standeth  still."  Some  of  the  Lord's  quickened  family  are  reduced 
to  such  straits  in  soul  experience  as  to  be  able  to  move  neither  forward  nor  back- 
ward. They  are  like  sheep  cast,  and  caimot  get  upon  their  legs.  Such  are  the 
four  negative  marks  of  the  foolish  shepherd  ;  the  things  that  he  does  not  do. 
There  are  two  positive  marks,  things  that  he  does  do.  "  He  shall  eat  the  flesh 
of  the  fat."  He  shall  not  take  that  which  comes,  that  which  is  offered  him,  but 
he  must  go  through  the  flock,  and  select  the  fattest  for  his  own  eating.  "  And 
ehall  tear  their  claws  in  pieces."  Sheep  are  said  to  have  claws.  And  these  they 
will  sometimes  exercise  upon  the  shepherd.  When,  then,  the  foolish  shepherd 
feels  the  scratch  of  their  claws,  he  puts  forth  all  his  strength,  and  tears  them 
in  pieces.     (J.  C.  Philpot.) 


CHAPTER  Xn. 


Vbb.  1.  The  burden  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  for  Israel.  —  TTie  burden 
and  glory  of  God's  Word  to  Israel : — God  presents  Himself  here  as  creating 
and  speaking.  It  is  to  Israel  that  His  Word  is  primarily  addressed,  for 
it  is  Israel  that  recognises  His  Word,  and  by  Israel  His  Word  is  carried  to  the 
world,  which  thus  becomes  also  Israel.  Remember  the  meaning  of  the  name, 
and  its  origin.  Prince  of  God  was  the  name  which  Jacob  got  from  that  long 
wrestling  in  the  dark — Israel,  prince  of  God,  because  he  had  power  with  God. 
The  name  denotes  the  fact  and  the  power  of  communion.  Israel  is  composed  of 
those  who  seek  God  and  cling  to  Him,  who  worship  God  in  the  spirit,  and  rejoice 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh.     I.  Thb  Cebatoe  of  THa 

HEAVENS  AND  BAETH  AND  THE  SPEBIT  OF  MAN  HAS  AN  ISEABL.      The  idea  of  Israel 

is  fellowship  with  God  and  power  with  God,  gained  in  and  by  that  fellowship. 
Is  such  an  idea  reasonable  7    We  think  it  a  poor  conception  of  God  which  represents 


CHAP,  xn.]  ZECHARIAH.  187 

Him  as  so  mighty  and  rich  that  He  does  not  care  for  fellowship  with  souls.  Do 
you  think  to  convince  me  that  God  is  wanting  in  sympathies  and  afiEections  by 
showing  that  He  is  Almighty  ?  The  argument  is  all  in  the  opposite  direction. 
Should  I  have  more  ground  to  believe  in  His  heart  if  He  were  less  than  all-powerful 
and  all-wise  ?  There  is  in  man  a  longing  after  relation  to  the  Infinite.  All  his 
history  proves  this.  Something  in  ham  cries  out  after  Grod,  and  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  have  tended  to  intensify  this  cry.  Man  is  haunted  by  a  something 
issuing  from  heaven  and  earth  that  wiU  not  let  him  rest.  It  would  have  been 
sad  if  man  had  craved  an  infinite  friend,  held  yearned  after  nearness  to  a  perfect 
and  eternal  living  One,  and  felt  no  hope,  countenance,  or  stimulus  in  the  world 
aroiind  him.  But  man  stands  in  no  such  barren  and  dead  world.  A  living 
world  is  round  him,  material,  but  fuU  of  spiritual  suggestion,  inviting  him  to 
seek  God,  and  waking  him  up  again  when  he  grows  dull  and  hard.  Will  it  be 
said  that  this  does  not  make  probable  the  idea  of  an  Israel — men  that  have  power 
with  God,  it  gives  support  to  the  idea  of  communion  with  (Jod,  but  not  to  that 
of  prayer,  an  asking  that  influences  the  Di\ine  will  ?  The  answer  is  obvious. 
Communion  with  God,  in  the  case  of  a  being  like  man,  an  imperfect,  sin-laden 
being,  must  take  largely  the  form  of  prayer.  Such  a  being,  coming  near  to  God, 
cannot  but  ask  from  Him.  And  this  asking,  so  inevitable,  cannot  be  a  futile 
thing.  K  asking  be  a  necessity  with  the  spirit  that  has  communion  with  God, 
there  must  be  room  and  need  for  it  on  the  side  of  God.  What  is  true  on  the  human 
side  is  true  on  the  Divine  side.  The  whole  doctrine  of  prayer  is  found  in  the 
spirit  of  man,  in  the  longings  and  necessities,  and  there  can  be  nothing  in  real 
contradiction  to  these.  They  who  seek  God  have  a  peculiar  affinity  with  Him. 
God  as  a  moral  being  has  moral  affinities.  It  is  not  a  lowering  or  limiting  of  God 
to  believe  that  He  has  an  Israel.  11.  God  has  a  word  foe  His  Israel.  Neither 
the  heavens  nor  the  earth  nor  the  spirit  of  man  take  the  place  of  a  word.  They 
are  each  a  revelation.  But  they  are  fuller  of  questions  than  of  answers.  The 
heart  of  man  needs  a  word.  It  is  only  in  words  that  there  is  definiteness.  One 
of  the  distinguishing  pecuharities  of  man  is  that  he  employs  words.  By  these  he 
reaches  the  fulness  of  his  being.  He  makes  his  thought  clear  to  himself,  and  gives 
it  an  outward  existence  by  words.  He  makes  all  shadowy  and  vague  things  firm 
and  abiding  by  words.  And  shall  not  God  meet  him  on  this  highest  platform  ? 
A  Word  of  God  is  a  necessity  to  the  human  souL  God  has  a  word  to  Israel  which 
makes  fellowship  close  and  confiding.  The  word  gives  man  the  necessary  clue 
to  the  interpretation  of  the  universe  and  himself.  It  is  Grod's  Word  to  Israel 
as  the  ideal  man.  Israel  is  the  ideal  and  complete  man,  and  it  is  in  proportion 
as  any  man  approaches  the  ideal  that  he  fuUy  comprehends  and  embraces  the 
message  of  God's  Word  to  Israel.  III.  God's  Word  to  Israel  is  a  burden. 
This  expression  is  often  used  by  the  prophets.  No  doubt  it  expresses,  in  the 
first  instance,  the  weight  of  obligation  and  responsibility  in  the  declaring  of  God's 
message,  but  this  rests  on  the  fact  that  the  Word  of  God  is  a  weighty  matter  for 
all  men.  1.  God's  Word  is  a  burden  by  reason  of  the  weight  of  its  ideas.  Thoughts 
that  may  be  put  into  words  are  of  all  degrees  of  weight — some  light  as  a  feather, 
some  heavy  as  a  world.  Thoughts  weigh  upon  the  mind,  even  though  they  are 
felt  to  be  precious.  The  ideas  in  God's  Word  are  the  weightiest  of  all — God,  soul, 
sin,  salvation,  renewal,  eternity.  Men  are  never  right  till  they  try  to  Uft  these 
thoughts  and  weigh  them.  They  are  no  judges  of  the  weight  of  things  till  they 
try  these.  2.  God's  Word  is  a  burden  of  momentousness  and  obligation.  There 
are  many  weighty  thoughts  that  have  little  or  no  practical  moment.  But  the 
thoughts  in  God's  Word  are  of  pressing  and  supreme  importance.  They  are  hght, 
food,  shelter,  hfe.  To  reject  them  is  ruin.  Everything  must  depend  on  how  we 
stand  to  these  words.  3.  God's  Word  is  a  burden  which  is  easier  to  bear  in  whole 
than  in  part.  The  half  or  quarter,  or  some  Httle  fraction  of  God's  Word  is  worse 
to  bear,  harder  and  heavier  than  the  whole.  A  single  truth  taken  out  of  the 
whole  may  be  quite  oppressive  and  intolerable.  It  may  crush  all  joy  and  courage 
out  of  hfe.  The  truth  about  sin  needs  the  truth  about  grace  and  redemption 
in  order  to  be  borne.  The  truth  about  duty  needs  the  Divine  promises.  Rehef 
is  to  be  foimd  not  by  throwing  off  any  truth,  out  by  taking  up  more.  The  hardest 
truths  become  pleasant  in  proper  company.  Every  truth  has  relations  to  all  the 
rest,  and  is  not  properly  itself  without  them.  Let  the  effort  be  to  take  the  whole 
truth,  and  to  take  it  as  a  whole.  Then  it  will  no  more  oppress  than  the  vast 
load  of  atmosphere  which  every  man  carries.  4.  The  Word  of  God  is  a  burden 
which  removes  every  other  load.     Thought,  conviction,  and  feehng  bring  their 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

inevitable  burden.  And  if  a  man  rejects  burdens  he  is  but  making  up  a  heavier 
burden.  If  a  man  wiU  not  have  the  burden  of  God's  Word,  then  the  whole  riddle 
of  the  universe  becomes  his  burden.  But  if  I  take  up  God's  Word,  and  actually 
carry  it  as  God's  Word,  I  have  no  further  care.  There  is  provision  for  driving 
away  every  fear  and  every  care  in  that  Word.  (J.  Leckie,  D.D.)  WWcll 
Btretcheth  forth  the  heavens,  and  layeth  the  foundation  of  the  earth. — The 
universe : — I.  That  the  universe  includes  the  existence  of  matter  and 
OF  MIND.  The  phrase  "  heavens  "  and  "  earth  "  is  used  here  and  elsewhere 
to  represent  the  whole  creation.  1.  It  includes  matter.  Of  the  essence  of 
matter  we  know  nothing ;  but  by  the  word  we  mean  all  that  comes  within  the 
cognisance  of  our  senses,  all  that  can  be  felt,  heard,  seen,  tasted.  How  extensive 
is  this  material  domain  !  2.  It  includes  mind.  Indeed,  mind  is  here  specified. 
"  And  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  man."  Man  has  a  spirit.  Of  this  he  has 
stronger  evidence  than  he  has  of  the  existence  of  matter.  He  is  conscious  of  the 
phenomena  of  mind,  but  not  conscious  of  the  phenomena  of  matter.  II.  That 
THE  UNIVERSE  ORIGINATED  WITH  ONE  PERSONAL  BEING.  It  had  an  origin.  It  is 
not  eternal.  The  idea  of  its  eternity  involves  contradictions.  It  had  an  origin  ; 
its  origin  is  not  fortuitous,  it  is  not  the  production  of  chance.  Its  origin  is  not 
that  of  a  plurality  of  creators  ;  it  has  one,  and  one  only,  "  the  Lord."     III.  This 

ONE    PERSONAL    CREATOR    HAS    PURPOSES    CONCERNING    THE    HUMAN    RACE.      The 

"  burden  "  may  mean  the  sentence  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  concerning  Israel, 
I.  No  events  in  human  history  are  accidental.  2.  The  grand  purpose  of  our  life 
should  be  the  fidfilment  of  God's  will.  IV.  His  purpose  towards  mankind 
He  is  fully  able  to  accomplish.  His  creative  achievements  are  here  mentioned 
as  a  pledge  of  the  purposes  hereafter  announced.  Every  purpose  of  the  Lord 
BhaU  be  performed.  Has  He  purposed  that  all  mankind  shall  be  converted  to 
His  Son  T     It  shall  be  done,     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  All  that  burden  themselves  with  it  shall  be  cnt  in  pieces. — Sin 

self-punishment :  —  There  is  in  this  passage  a  principle  by  which  the 
governor  of  the  world  punishes  malicious  men.  That  principle  is  this,  — 
the  reaction  of  their  efforts  to  injure  others  to  injury  of  themselves.  Jerusalem 
would  become  confusion  and  destruction  to  the  men  who  sought  its  ruin. 
1.  Jerusalem  would  become  a  "  cup  of  trembling,"  or  "  intoxication."  2.  Jeru- 
salem would  become  to  them  a  "  bm-densome  stone."  The  idea  is,  that  in 
their  endeavoiurs  to  injure  Jerusalem  they  would  crush  themselves.  I.  It 
is  WELL  attested.  It  is  attested  by  every  man's  consciousness.  Every  man 
who  attempts  to  injure  another  feels  sooner  or  later  that  he  has  injm-ed  himself. 
There  is  a  recoil  and  a  regret.  In  truth,  the  malign  passion  itself  is  its  own  punish- 
ment. In  every  malign  emotion  there  is  misery.  2.  It  is  attested  by  universal 
history.  The  conduct  of  Joseph's  brethren,  and  of  Haman,  may  be  cited  as 
illustrations  ;  but  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  towards  the  Messiah  is  an  example 
for  all  times,  most  mighty  and  impressive.  II.  It  is  manifestly  just.  What 
man  thus  punished  can  complain  of  the  righteousness  of  his  sufferings  ?  He  must 
feel,  and  feel  deeply,  that  he  has  deserved  all,  and  even  more  than  he  endures. 
III.  It  is  essentially  beneficent.  It  serves — 1.  To  guard  men  from  the  injuries 
of  others.     2.  To  restrain  the  angry  passions  of  men.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  4-9.  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  smite  every  horse  with 
astonishment. — A  good  time  for  good  people:  —  I.  It  is  a  time  when  their 
enemies  shall  be  vanquished.  "  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  smite 
every  horse  with  astonishment,"  &c.  II.  It  is  a  time  when  their  power 
SHALL  BE  AUGMENTED.  The  power  here  promised  is — 1.  The  power  of 
unity.  "  The  governors  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their  heart,  The  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  shall  be  my  strength  in  the  Lord  of  hosts  their  God."  III.  It  is  a  time 
when  they  shall  be  settled  in  their  home.  "  And  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited 
again  in  her  own  place,  even  in  Jerusalem."  Here  they  are  "  strangers  and 
pilgrims,"  and  have  "  no  abiding  city."  IV.  It  is  a  time  when  they  shall  be 
blessed  with  equal  privileges.  I.  They  were  to  have  equal  honour.  "  The 
Lord  also  shaU  save  the  tents  of  Judah  first,  that  the  glory  of  the  house  of  David 
and  the  glory  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  do  not  magnify  themselves  against 
Judah."  2.  They  were  to  have  equal  protection.  "In  that  day  shall  the  Lord 
defend  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,"  &c.  Now,  there  is  a  good  time  coming, 
when  all  good  people  shall  have  distinguished  honour  and  complete  proteotion. 


CHAP,  xn.]  ZECHARIAH.  189 

They  shall  settle  down  in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  what  a  city  is  that ! 
{Homilist.) 

Ver.  8.  In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  defend  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem. — TTie 
security  of  the  Church  in  the  midst  of  dangers  : — There  is  not  a  greater  miracle 
of  preservation  and  security  than  that  which  is  exhibited  in  the  salvation  of 
the  Church  in  her  present  condition  as  surrounded  by  spiritual  enemies.  I.  The 
PROMISE.     "  In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  defend  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem." 

I.  The  defended.  Jerusalem  denotes  the  whole  Church  of  Christ.  It  signifies 
the  Christian.  2.  The  time  of  their  defence.  "  In  that  day."  This  may  relate 
to  the  dispensation  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  should  accom- 
plish His  work  for  the  defence  and  salvation  of  our  souls.  It  may  refer  to  the 
time  of  our  conversion.  3.  The  person  defending.  "  The  Lord."  The  defence 
is  not  put  into  the  hands  of  an  angel,  or  archangel ;  it  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord. 

II.  The  pledge  given.  "  He  that  is  feeble  among  them,  at  that  day,  shall  be 
as  David."  The  word  "  feeble  "  means  that  he  cannot  save  himself  from  sin, 
Satan,  or  the  world.  "  As  David."  Look  at  the  character  of  brave,  strong, 
successful,  beloved,  elevated,  hated,  yet  saved  David.  Ill,  The  simile  dbawn. 
"  As  God."  Like  unto  God  in  spotlessness,  in  spiritual  resemblance,  in  general 
disposition,  in  immoveableness.  IV.  The  example  given.  "  As  the  angel  of 
the  Lord."  This  can  only  mean  Christ.  We  are  beloved  as  Christ  by  the  Father. 
Perfect  as  Christ — in  Christ — before  God.  Powerful  as  Christ,  since  it  is  in  the 
power  of  Christ  we  overcome.     (T.  Bagnall- Baker,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9-11.  And  I  will  poiir  upon  the  house  of  David. — The  future  out- 
pouring of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Jerusalem  : — The  text  informs  us  that  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  whom  the  Jews  crucified,  and  whom  for  hundreds  of  years  they  have 
blasphemed,  will  yet  upon  these  Jews  pour  His  Holy  Spirit,  lead  them  to  repentance, 
forgive  their  sin,  and  restore  them  to  His  favour.  I.  Ascertain  the  meaning 
OF  this  prophecy.  The  Jews  themselves  allow  that  the  passage  refers  to  the 
Messiah  ;  and  in  the  Gospel  by  St.  John  the  words  "  they  shall  look  on  me,  whom 
they  have  pierced,"  are  applied  to  Jesus  Christ.  The  work  He  promises  to  accom- 
plish is  beyond  the  power  of  any  created  being.  God  is  the  only  dispenser  of 
His  Holy  Spirit.  The  prophet  Ezekiel  tells  us  that  it  is  the  very  and  eternal 
God  who  shall  put  His  Spirit  upon  Israel.  Joel  tells  us  it  is  the  Lord  who  will 
pour  out  His  Spirit  upon  all  flesh.  The  effect  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit 
of  grace  and  supplications  is  here  described  as  true  repentance,  and  sorrow  for 
sin ;  He,  therefore,  who  can  bestow  it  must  be  the  true  and  eternal  God.  Then 
how  can  He  be  pierced  and  wounded  by  the  house  of  David  ?  To  be  pierced 
He  must  have  a  body.  Thus  the  prophet  clearly  announces  the  mystery  of  the 
incarnation.  Consider  the  persons  upon  whom  He  will  povir  out  the  spirit  of 
grace  and  supplications.  They  are  Jews ;  and  characterised  as  the  authors 
of  the  violent  death  of  Christ.  The  place  mentioned  is  the  literal  Jerusalem. 
Another  question  concerns  the  time  of  which  the  prophet  speaks.  The  day  of 
Pentecost  cannot  be  regarded  as  fulfilling  this  prediction.  No  other  time  can 
be  referred  to.  Therefore  the  text  informs  ns  that  there  is  a  time  still  coming, 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  pour  out  His  Spirit  on  the  Jews,  and  do  that 
for  which  He  has  been  exalted  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour ;  He  will  give  repentance 
unto  Israel,  and  remission  of  sins.  II.  Trace  out  some  important  inferences 
•WHICH  the  subject  SUGGESTS.  1.  The  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  the  land  of 
their  forefathers.  2.  The  national  conversion  of  Israel  is  not  to  be  by  miracle, 
without  the  use  of  means.  This  prophecy  of  Zechariah,  then,  assures  us  that 
the  day  is  coming  when  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel  shall  be  gathered 
to  the  land  of  their  fathers,  restored  to  the  favour  of  their  God,  and  be  the  monu- 
ments of  His  grace,  as  they  have  long  been  the  victims  of  His  wrath  and  righteous 
indignation.  {A.  McCavl,  D.D.)  The  promise  of  the  Spirit : — In  the  preceding 
verses  God  declares  what  He  will  do  in  the  way  of  defending  His  Church.  In 
the  text  He  declares  what  He  will  do  in  the  way  of  reviving  and  humbling  and 
purifying  His  Church.  I.  The  promise.  The  Divine  purpose  in  giving  a  promise 
is,  that  we  may  be  led  to  ask  for  its  fulfilment.  The  promise  is,  the  Holy  Spirit 
personally,  and  in  His  offices  in  the  economy  of  grace  and  salvation.  The  promise 
of  the  Spirit  is  co-extensive  with  the  earlier  promise  of  Christ.  What  Christ 
was  for  purchasing,  the  Spirit  is  for  applying — salvation.  All  other  promises 
resolve  themselves  into  this  one — the  Holy  Spirit — as  they  did  in  Christ.     In 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xO. 

this  instance  the  Spirit  is  not  promised  generally,  but  in  certain  of  His  offices 
or  operations.  He  is  promised — 1.  As  a  Spirit  of  grace.  By  grace  we  under- 
stand those  combined  excellencies  which  go  to  form  a  perfect  moral  character. 
The  Spirit  of  grace  is  the  Spirit  originating,  nurturing,  and  maturing  these.  To 
have  the  Spirit  of  grace  is  to  have  the  Holy  Ghost  producing  these  in  us — grace 
itself.  2.  As  a  Spirit  of  supplications.  Supplications  and  prayers  are  the 
immediate  fruit  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  leads,  or  shows,  the  way  to  the  Divine 
throne.  Reveals  the  blessings  of  grace.  Implants  the  eager  desire.  Gives 
prevailing  strength  to  faith.  Causes  unwearjring  importunity.  As  the  author 
of  prayer,  the  Spirit  is  here  promised.  Prayer  is  a  proof  of  the  Spirit's  presence  ; 
the  want  of  prayer  is  His  absence.  The  promise  of  the  Spirit  was  originally  made 
and  fulfilled  to  Christ  Himself.  Through  Him  it  belongs  to  aU  His  people.  This 
promise  was  fulfilled  at  Pentecost.  It  is  still  on  record,  and  its  fulfiment  is  also 
on  record.  Why  is  His  presence  not  felt  and  recognised  ?  He  has  moved  on 
congregations  of  late,  and  still,  occasionally,  individuals  feel  His  quickening 
power.     But  the   instances   are   few.     Let   us  plead  with  God  for  His  Spirit's 

firesence.  II.  The  effects  which  flow  from  the  otttpouring  of  the  Spirit. 
t  follows  necessarily  from  the  terms  of  the  promise  that  grace  and  prayer  will 
follow  upon  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise.  But  the  text  particularly  describes 
certain  results  of  the  Spirit's  presence  which  call  for  special  attention.  1.  Those 
on  whom  He  descends  shall  look  on  Christ.  It  is  the  office  of  the  Spirit  to  glorify 
Christ,  as  it  was  Christ's  to  glorify  the  Father.  The  Spirit  makes  the  heart  and 
eyes  to  turn  to  Christ,  as  the  flower  to  the  sun.  The  attention  is  then  riveted 
on  Christ.  2.  It  is  on  a  pierced  Saviour  that  the  Spirit-anointed  sinner  looks. 
His  body  pierced  with  the  scourge,  thorns,  nails,  and  spear.  His  heart  pierced 
with  many  sorrows.  His  soul  pierced  with  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty,  which 
drank  up  His  Spirit.  His  reputation  pierced  by  calumny.  His  humanity  pierced 
with  the  mortal  shaft  of  death.  3.  He  on  whom  the  Spirit  rests  looks  on  Christ 
as  pierced  by  himself.  His  sins  pierced  Him  in  all  these  senses.  He  was  repre- 
sented by  Christ's  crucifiers.  He  has,  by  his  conduct,  crucified  Him  afresh, 
and  put  Him  to  an  open  shame.  He  has  pierced  Him  in  His  people  and  cause. 
4.  When  the  Spirit  has  shown  to  a  man  Christ  pierced  by  his  sins,  that  man  mourns. 
The  sight  of  Christ  pierced  gives  him  a  new  view  of  sin.  Each  sin  has  been  an 
arrow  shot  at  God,  and  has  penetrated  the  heart  of  Christ.  This  sight  involves 
a  new  view  of  Christ's  love — mercy — compassion.  He  sees  what  kind  of  Redeemer 
he  has  been  thus  treating.  The  sight  of  Christ  pierced  gives  him  a  sense  of 
pardon.  His  sins  met  their  punishment  in  Christ.  A  pardoned  sinner  mourns. 
Lessons — 1.  The  sympathy  of  the  Spirit  with  the  Son.  He  reveals  Him  pierced, 
and  produces  mourning.  2.  Seek  the  Spirit  as  here  described.  3.  Try  your- 
selves by  these  fruits  of  His  presence.  {James  Stewart.)  The  promise  to  the 
Church  : — I.  The  promise  here  made  to  the  Church,  both  in  her  collbctivb 
FORM  ANB  EVERY  INDIVIDUAL  MEMBER.  1.  The  person  who  makes  the  promise. 
Jehovah  Himself,  the  everlasting  Father,  who  created  all  things  by  His  power. 
What  could  induce  Him  thus  to  look  upon  such  a  miserable  and  guilty  creature 
as  man  ?  He  was  under  no  obligations  to  do  so  ;  there  was  no  necessity  on  His 
part ;  there  was  nothing  amiable  in  man  to  invit«  Him.  It  was  His  own  free, 
sovereign,  unmerited  love.  2.  The  persons  to  whom  the  promise  was  made. 
By  the  "  house  of  David  "  is  here  meant  the  seed  royal,  and  by  the  "  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem  "  is  meant  the  common  people.  So  the  phrases  include  the  whole 
Jewish  nation.  They  were  typical  of  all  the  people  of  God  in  future  ages.  3.  Their 
state  prior  to  the  application  of  the  promise.  It  is  a  state  of  most  deplorable 
ignorance  ;  ignorance  of  God  in  His  character.  His  works  and  requirements  ; 
and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  mediation  ;  and  of  themselves,  their  sin, 
misery,  and  need.  4.  The  promise  itself.  "  I  will  poiu"  the  Spirit  of  grace  and 
Bupplications."  He  is  called  the  Spirit  of  grace,  because  He  is  a  gracious  Spirit ; 
because  He  is  the  author  and  worker  of  every  grace  in  the  hearts  of  believers  ; 
because  He  indites  our  supplications  ;  and  because  He  assists  us  in  the  offering 
up  of  our  supplications.  The  promise  is  made  good  in  the  experience  of  every 
real  believer,  without  respect  to  names,  or  parties,  or  denominations.  II.  Two 
LEADING  effects  INVOLVED.  "  They  shall  look  on  Him,"  &c.  Who  is  this  ? 
None  other  than  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  "  They  shall  mourn  "  :  i.e.,  they  shall 
possess  evangelical  sorrow  for  and  repentance  of  sin.  Three  things  in  real  repent- 
ance— 1.  Hearty  sorrow  for  sin.  2.  Genuine  confession  of  sin.  3.  Entire  forsaking 
of  it  as  a  principle  of  action.     {OrifJUh  Williama.)        Faith  and  repentance  pro- 


CHAP,  xn.}  ZECHARIAH.  19! 

dueed  hy  the  Spirit  heing  poured  forth  : — This  language  refers  in  the  first  instance 
to  the  Jews.  The  time  is  coming  when,  in  consequence  of  GSod  pouring  out  His 
Spirit  on  that  people,  they  shall  look  on  Him  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  mourn. 
"  Whom  they  have  pierced."  This  language  was  literally  fulfilled.  The  text 
admits  of  a  legitimate  application  to  others  besides  the  Jews.     L  Thb  nbbd 

OF  THE  OTJTPOTJEING  OF  THB  SPIRIT  IN  OEDBE  TO  FAITH  AND  BEPENTANOB.      The 

sinner  is  described  in  the  Word  as  being  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Not  only 
does  the  sinner  yet  in  his  sins  need  to  be  quickened,  the  very  people  of  God  require 
again  and  again  the  living  power  of  the  same  Spirit  who  at  first  regenerated  their 
souls.  For  even  after  he  has  been  raised  from  his  natural  deadness,  he  is  apt 
anew  to  fall  into  spiritual  slumber.  I  need  not  dwell  on  the  necessity  of  repentance. 
If  all  men  have  sinned,  it  needs  no  argument  to  prove  that  all  men  should  repent 
Those  who  would  repent  need  to  be  told  that  in  order  to  repent  they  need  power 
from  on  high.  It  is  when  the  Spirit  is  poured  out  that  sinners  are  brought  to 
genuine  repentance, — that  is,  repentance  unto  life.  Without  this,  there  will 
always  be  a  shying,  an  avoiding  of  the  humiliation  implied, — always  an  obstacle 
in  the  way — and  the  heart  will  turn  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow.  As  long  as  the 
heart  is  imtouched  by  the  Spirit  of  grace,  it  either  remains  in  a  state  of  utter 
insensibility  in  reference  to  God  and  sin  on  the  one  hand,  or,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  is  troubled  with  feelings  of  reproach  and  fear,  but  without  being  persuaded  or 
changed.  Mere  natural  reproaches  of  conscience  and  alarms  of  coming  judgments 
may  stun  the  heart  for  a  time,  but  they  cannot  break  or  melt  it.  The  very 
people  of  God  have  reason  at  times  to  mourn  over  a  narrowness  of  heart,  over 
unfitness  for  the  service  of  God,  and  an  aversion  to  spiritual  things.  But  while  they 
are  straitened  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  not  straitened.  II.  The  effects  produced 
WHEN  THE  Spirit  of  God  is  potrBED  out — 1.  By  looking  imto  a  pierced  Lord, 
we  are  to  understand  faith  in  one  of  its  liveliest  exercises.  The  believer  looks 
to  Christ  and  Hjs  wounds  with  the  eye  of  the  mind,  just  as  the  serpent-bitten 
Israelites  looked  to  the  serpent  of  brass  which  Moses  raised  by  the  command 
of  God.  Whenever  the  Spirit  is  poured  out  from  on  high,  the  instant  effect  is 
the  production  of  faith.  Faith,  indeed,  seems  to  be  the  first — always  along  with 
repentance — saving  or  spiritual  grace  of  the  Christian  character.  It  must  be 
so,  from  the  very  nature  of  things.  Our  attention  is  called  in  this  passage  to 
two  features  of  saving  faith — (1)  You  perceive  that  it  looks  to  a  "  pierced  Lord." 
Many  have  enlightened  views  of  the  nature  and  character  of  Jehovah,  who,  alas  ! 
have  none  of  that  faith  which  appropriates  salvation.  Nor  is  it  sufficient  that 
we  look  to  God  through  the  medium  of  the  operations  of  His  hands  in  the  work 
of  creation.  Faith  looks  specially  to  God  the  Mediator.  The  faith  that  saves 
is  a  faith  in  Jesus  the  appointed  Saviour.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  we  look  to  the 
Son  of  God  as  enthroned  in  heaven.  If  we  would  obtain  that  saving  power  which 
flows  from  Him,  we  must  look  to  the  wounds  by  which  He  was  pierced,  and  the 
blood  that  flows  from  them.  Never  till  we  look  to  a  pierced,  a  suffering,  a  bleeding 
Saviour,  will  we  find  our  spiritual  diseases  healed,  and  our  soul  filled  with  light 
and  comfort.  (2)  Another  characteristic  of  saving  faith  is  that  it  leads  those 
who  possess  it  to  look  to  Jesus  as  pierced  by  them.  But  what  share  had  we  in 
the  sufferings  of  Jesus  ?  Every  sinner  has  had,  in  a  sense,  a  part  in  inflicting 
the  sufferings  to  which  our  Lord  was  subjected.  You  must  learn  to  connect  your 
sins  with  the  Saviour's  sufferings.  Our  sins  are  the  true  enemies  and  murderers 
of  our  Lord.  It  was  the  accumulated  sins  of  all  and  each  of  His  people  which 
weighed  Him  down  to  the  ground  in  the  garden,  and  bowed  His  head  on  the 
Cross.  This  is  a  distinguishing  feature  of  saving  faith.  The  sinner  connects 
his  sin  with  the  sufferings  of  the  Redeemer.  When  he  thinks  of  Christ's  sufferings, 
he  thinks  how  his  sins  were  the  cause  of  their  infliction,  and  he  thinks  that  if 
Christ  had  not  borne  them  he  himself  must  have  borne  them.  He  thus  looks 
tipon  Jesus,  not  so  much  in  the  light  of  a  Saviour  for  others  as  one  suitable  to 
himself.  His  faith  thus  becomes  a  faith  in  Jesus  as  his  Saviour ;  it  embraces 
Christ,  and  appropriates  the  blessings  which  He  purchased.  2.  Another  effect 
is  mourning  or  repentance.  When  Paul  was  at  Ephesus,  he  preached  repentance 
toward  God  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  sense  of  sin  that  drives 
tis  to  the  Saviour,  and  we  come  to  the  Saviour  by  faith.  The  sinner  looks  to 
Christ  by  the  eye  of  faith,  and  as  he  does  so  he  mourns  and  repents.  A  believing 
view  of  God  is  necessary  to  full  rr-pentance.  How  should  sorrow  be  the  effect 
of  a  saving  view  of  Christ  ?  We  are  called  to  mourn  over  the  sufferings  of  our 
Lord  because  of  our  connection  with  them.     Note  some  of  the  characteristics 


192  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

of  evangelical  sorrow.     The  penitent  has  a  deep  view  of  the  evil  of  sin.     The 

penitent  mourns  over  his  sin  as  deeply  as  over  his  greatest  earthly  loss.     But 

this  sorrow  for  sin  is  not  a  sorrow  apart  from  Christ,  or  independent  of  Him  ; 

neither  is  it  a  sorrow  without  hope.     If  the  wounds  of  Jesus  cannot  but  open 

up  wounds  in  our  breast,  they  also  supply  the    balm   that   heals   the  wounds. 

(J.  3I'Cosh.)         Effects  of  an  outpouring  of  the  Spirit: — The  immediate  effects 

of  this  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  are  strikingly  set  forth.     They  are  indicated  by 

a  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication  excited  among  the  people  ;  by  their  looking 

upon  Him  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  mourning  for  their  treatment  of  Him 

in  deep  repentance  and  bitterness  of  spirit.     And  when  they  shall  thus  be  humbled 

for  their  sine,  and  shall  look  with  an  eye  of  faith  to  Him  who  is  the  only  Saviour 

of  lost  men,  God  will  show  Himself  their  reconciled  Father  and  Friend,  receive 

them  into  His  favour,  and  seal  them  heirs  of  His  kingdom.     In  directing  attention 

to  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  I  shall  assume  two  facts — 1.  That  the  influence 

of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  exerted  in  every  case  of  true  conversion.     2.  That  there 

are  times  when  this  influence  is  granted  in  greater  copiousness  and  power  than 

at  others.     1.  One  effect  of  such  a  visitation  of  mercy  is  to  impart  to  the  people 

of  God  a  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication.     Whenever  God  comes  near  to  a  people, 

and  is  about  to  display  His  power  in  the  conversion  of  sinners.  He  always  awakens 

a  spirit  of  prayer  among  His  friends  ;  causes  them  to  feel  their  dependence  and 

need  of  His  help.     At  such  times  there  is  wont  to  be  felt,  in  the  hearts  of  God's 

people,  a  deep  and  tender  concern  for  the  salvation  of  souls  perishing  in  sin.     They 

awake  from  their  slumbers.     They  mourn  over  their  past  unfaithfulness  in  duty. 

They  cast  off  the  spirit  of  worldliness  and  unbelief,  and  realise  in  some  measure, 

as  they  ought,  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.     2.  Another  effect  is  to  arrest 

the  attention  of  the  impenitent,  and  turn  their  thoughts  directly  upon  the  things 

of  their  eternal  peace.     3.  Another  effect  is  to  produce  in  the  imjienitent  a  painful 

conviction  of  sin  and  danger.     When  God  pours  out  His  Spirit,  an  invariable 

effect  is  to  convince  men  of  sin,  and  to  give  them  an  abiding  sense  of  its  great 

evil,  as  a  violation  of  His  holy  law.     4.  Another  effect  is  to  cut  off  self-confidence, 

and  produce  a  sense  of  entire   dependence  on   God  for  pardoning  mercy  and 

renewing  grace.     5.  One  other  effect  is  to  renew  the  heart  and  bring  the  sinner 

to  rejientance  and  cordial  reconciliation  to  God.     So  it  is  plain  that  the  effects 

of  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  are  all  of  the  most  desirable  and  happy  character. 

{J.  Hawes,  D.D.)         A  revival  of  religion  : — 1.  There  shall  be  a  revival  of  religion 

in  the  future  history  of  the  Chiu-ch  that  shall  gather  in  the  Jews.     2.  This  revival 

shall  be  characterised  by  the  invariable  marks  of  an  outpouring  of  the  Spirit, 

namely,  a  spirit  of   prayer   and    penitence.     3.  Prayer  is  the  barometer  of  the 

Church.     When  the  spirit  of  supplication  is  low,  there  is  but  httle  of  the  Spirit 

of  God,  and  as  soon  as  the  prayer-meeting  begins  to  fill  up  with  earnest  suppliants, 

the  Christian  may  hope  for  a  blessing.     4.  All  true  repentance  arises  from  a  sight 

of  a  dying  Saviour,  one  who  has  died  for  us.     Terror  may  produce  remorse,  only 

a  sense  of  forgiven  sin  will  ever  produce  true  repentance.     True  repentance  is 

after  all  only  love  weeping  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  the  soul  sorrowing  for  sins 

that  have  been  so  freely  forgiven.     5.  True  religion  is  a  personal  thing,  and  when 

it  takes  strong  hold  of  the  heart,  will  lead  the  soul  apart  to  solitary  wTCstling 

with  God,  and  acts  of  personal  humbUng  before  Him;  confession  of  sins  past,  and 

resolutions  of  obedience  for  time  to  come.     Grace  needs  solitary  meditation  in 

which  to  grow,  just  as  much  as  the  plant  needs  the  repose  and  darkness  of  night. 

{T.    V.   Moore,   D.D.)         The  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplications: — In  studying 

prophecy,  with  a  view  to  personal  edification,  two  things  should  be  borne  in  mind. 

Spiritual  religion  is  ever  and  invariably  the  same,  notwithstanding  the  different 

degrees    of    light    which    have    marked  different  and  successive  dispensations. 

And,  whatever  promises  of  a  purely  spiritual  nature  are  made  to  the  Jewish  nation 

may,  and  ought  to  be,  generally  and  individually  appUed  by  those  who  constitute 

the  true  household  of  faith  in  all  ages.     The  words  of  the  text  refer  ultimately 

to  the  ingathering  of  the  Jews,  and  their  conversion  to  Christianity  ;  but  they 

receive  an  intermediate  fulfilment  in  the  case  of  every  wandering  sinner,  Jew 

or  Gentile,  who  is  effectually  brought  home  to  God.     They  form  a  promise  which 

applies  to  the  believer's  experience  at  all  times  ;  a  promise  to  which  he  may 

advert,  to  his  inexpressible  consolation,  until  the  language  of  prayer  dies  on  his 

lips,  and  is  superseded  by  songs  of  never-ceasing  praise.     By  the  "  Spirit  of  grace 

and  supplications"  we  are  to  understand  that  Divine  Agent  who  helpeth  the 

infirmities  of  the  saints;   whose   influences   are  elsewhere  predicted  under  the 


CHAP,  xn.]  ZECUARIAE.  193 

metaphor  of  an  elusion  of  grace  ;  and  whose  coming  was  to  give  its  full  effect 
to  the  sacrifice  of  the  Redeemer,  and  to  assign  its  prominent  character  to  the 
Gospel  dispensation.  I.  Of  peayer  as  an  exercise  of  the  renewed  soul. 
Prayer  is  the  language  of  the  heart  addressing  itself  to  God,  either  in  habitual 
spirituality  of  desire,  in  the  way  of  silent  ejaculation,  or  by  means  of  words 
immediately  suited  to  convey  a  sense  of  its  wants  to  the  throne  of  the  heavenly 
mercy.  It  is  founded  in  a  strong  conviction  of  internal  poverty,  weakness,  and 
dependence,  and  is  drawn  forth  by  a  humble  persuasion  that  it  reaches  the  ear 
of  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth.  Spiritual  prayer  is  an  eager  and  determined  effort 
of  the  soul  to  posseis  itself  of  the  purchased  blessings  of  salvation.  Spiritual 
prayer  is  the  fragrant  incense  which  burns  on  the  consecrated  altar  of  the  believer's 
heart.  A  renovating  process  must  pass  upon  the  moral  system  ere  the  spark 
of  true  devotion  is  lighted  up.  The  man  who  is  in  willing  leagiie  with  sin  and 
Satan  cannot  pray ;  nor  can  he  who  is  absorbed  in  the  cares  of  this  passing  world ; 
nor  he  who  addresses  the  Almighty  tinder  the  impulse  of  sudden  alarm,  excessive 
grief,  or  occasional  anxiety  of  mind.  The  exercise  of  spiritual  prayer  is  habitual 
to  him  that  engages  in  it.  It  may  not  always  be  the  same  delightful  and 
refreshing  employment.  Too  frequently,  when  the  spirit  is  willing,  the  flesh 
is  weak.  In  every  age  and  period  of  the  Church  the  people  of  God  have  been 
a  praying  people.  Then  we  have  here  a  very  close  touchstone  of  self-examination. 
Are  you  in  the  habit  of  flying  to  a  throne  of  grace  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining 
relief  to  your  burdened  souls  ?  II.  The  collateral  infltjence  of  sprRiTUAL 
prayer  upon  the  experience.  1.  If  the  fervency  of  holy  feeling  in  some  measure 
subsides  when  the  Christian  withdraws  from  the  presence-chamber  of  his  Lord, 
still  a  hallowed  glow  remains  in  his  breast,  which  tells  him  that  the  Spirit  of 
grace  and  of  supplications  has  not  departed  from  him.  It  is  the  tendency  of  prayer, 
by  exciting  a  continual  apprehension  of  the  nearness  of  God,  to  produce  a  feeling 
of  sacred  awe,  a  habit  of  solemnity,  not  indeed  opposed  to  cheerfulness,  but  at 
variance  with  unhallowed  levity.  2.  Prayer  keeps  the  mind  alive  to  the  important 
realities  of  an  eternal  state.  It  loosens  that  associating  tie  which  enslaves  the 
immortal  spirit,  and  would  confine  its  everlasting  solicitudes  to  the  vanities  of 
time  and  sense.  The  prajdng  Christian  bears  away  his  spirituality  from  the 
throne  of  mercy,  and  blends  it  with  the  pursuits  of  his  temporal  vocation. 
3.  Spiritual  prayer  tends  to  purify  and  sweeten  our  intercourse  with  each  other. 
By  deepening  the  chaimel  of  humility,  it  causes  peace,  with  all  its  attendant 
virtues,  to  flow  on  in  a  gentle  and  even  course.  Prayer  is  health  to  all  who  move 
in  its  genial  atmosphere.  It  stifles  the  feelings  of  envy,  hatred,  and  uncharitable- 
ness.  III.  The  direct  results  of  prayer  as  an  appointed  means  of  grace. 
Prayer,  like  the  rod  of  Moses,  is  intended  to  strike  the  rock,  that  the  waters  may 
gush  out.  It  is  the  sinner's  application  for  blessings  that  cannot  be  denied  or 
withholden.  True  it  is  that  the  people  of  God  are  a  waiting  as  well  as  a  praying 
people  ;  they  are  often  kept  in  suspense,  because  there  is  a  suitable  time  for  prayer 
to  be  answered,  and  because  spiritual  blessings  are  never  sent  prematurely.  It 
is  likewise  true  that  the  prayer  of  faith  itself  is  sometimes  offered  up  ignorantly, 
or  under  erroneous  impressions,  and  consequently  fails  in  that  particular  point 
in  which  infinite  wisdom  saw  it  to  be  faulty.  One  piece  of  advice  let  me  offer — 
Be  not  satisfied  with  the  mere  act  of  prayer,  even  as  a  spiritual  exercise.  Be 
thankful  for  enlargement  of  heart  to  prayer,  and  for  a  heavenly  frame  of  mind, 
while  you  are  prostrate  before  God.  But  still  look  beyond  the  effort  itself. 
Watch  the  resvlt  of  your  petitions.  Infer — 1.  The  importance  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
ofl&ce  in  the  economy  of  grace.  2.  The  necessity  of  attributing  salvation  wholly 
and  solely  to  God.  3.  The  value  of  a  prayerful  disposition  viewed  as  an  earnest 
or  pledge  of  salvation.  He  who  is  drawn  to  the  Cross  shall  eventually  be  drawn 
to  the  throne.  Continue  to  wait  upon  God,  and  you  shall  not  be  forsaken. 
(W.  Knight,  M.A.)  The  Spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  : — I.  The  promisb 
of  the  text.  By  the  "  house  of  David  "  is  meant  his  descendants  after  the 
flesh,  or  the  princes  and  rulers  of  the  Jews ;  and  by  the  "  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem,"  the  rest  of  the  people.  On  these  the  Lord  promises  to  pour  out 
His  Spirit  for  their  conviction,  conversion,  and  salvation.  1.  The  Holy  Spirit  is 
here  promised  as  a  "  Spirit  of  grace."  He  is  the  author  and  giver  of  all  grace, 
of  all  goodness.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  author  of  all  preventing  grace.  We 
never  really  forsake  sin,  we  never  truly  turn  to  God  by  any  strength  or  goodness 
of  our  own.  It  is  God  who  begins,  as  well  as  perfects,  the  good  work  in  our  hearts. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  author  of  all  renewing  and  sanctifying  grace.      Every 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

attempt  to  renew  and  sanctify  our  heart  and  conduct  must,  if  we  depend  solely 
upon  ourselves,  be  altogether  in  vain.  The  Spirit  can  renew  us  in  righteousness 
and  true  hohness  after  the  image  of  Him  that  created  us,  and  make  us  new  creatures 
in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  author  of  all  quickening 
and  reviving  grace.  Our  souls  too  often  cleave  unto  the  dust ;  our  hearts  become 
cold  and  dead.  Where  are  we  to  find  a  remedy  for  this  distressing  state  of  things  ? 
In  the  same  Fountain  of  Uving  waters.  The  Spirit  must  send  us  those  refreshing 
showers  which  He  sends  on  God's  inheritance  when  it  is  weary.  And  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  the  author  of  all  comforting  and  supporting  grace.  And  do  we  not 
often  need  comfort  and  support  in  such  a  world  as  this  ?  2.  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  here  promised  as  a  "  Spirit  of  supplications."  We  know  not  what  we  should 
pray  for  as  we  ought ;  but  the  Spirit  helpc  th  our  infirmities.  This  He  does 
in  various  ways.  (1)  He  shows  us  our  need  of  supplications,  by  making  us 
acquainted  with  our  spiritual  poverty  and  wants.  Naturally*  we  are  not  at 
all  conscious  of  our  spiritual  necessities.  Though  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins, 
we  imagine  we  are  hving  unto  God.  Though  guilty  of  innumerable  transgressions, 
we  feel  not  our  need  of  pardon.  We  think  we  are  rich  and  have  need  of  nothing. 
But  the  Spirit  convinces  us  of  our  mistake.  He  leads  us  to  feel  our  need  of  Divine 
mercy  and  grace,  as  well  as  our  need  of  prayer  and  supplication  for  them.  (2)  He 
shows  us  the  encouragement  we  have  to  use  supplications.  He  takes  of  the 
things  of  Christ  and  shows  them  unto  us.  He  shows  God  in  Christ  reconciling 
the  world  unto  Himself.  He  thus  encourages  us  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace, 
and  to  use  supplications  for  the  blessings  we  need.  (3)  He  further  inclines  us, 
or  makes  us  willing  to  do  this,  by  exciting  in  us  an  earnest  desire  to  obtain  such 
blessings.  He  removes  that  apathy  and  indifference  which  we  naturally  feel, 
and  creates  in  us  that  hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness,  that  ardent 
longing  after  spiritual  benefits,  which  nothing  can  satisfy  short  of  an  actual 
participation  in  them.  Prayer,  fervent  and  persevering,  becomes  our  constant 
employment.  (4)  And  the  Spirit  assists  us  in  this  holy  and  delightful  exercise. 
He  removes  that  coldness,  deadness,  and  formality  we  are  so  apt  to  feel.  He 
gives  us  boldness  and  access  with  confidence  by  the  faith  of  Jesus.  II.  The  effects 
ATTENDING  THE  FULFILMENT  OF  THIS  PROMISE.  "  Shall  mourn,"  &c.  The  speaker 
here  is  evidently  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  application  of  the  passage  to  Christ 
proves  at  once  both  His  humanity  and  His  Divinity.  It  proves  His  humanity, 
for  He  was  pierced.  It  proves  His  Divinity ;  for  who  can  communicate  the  Spirit 
but  God  alone  ?  It  is  here  pretold  by  the  Lord,  that  when  He  would  pour  out 
His  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplications,  sinners  would  be  led 
to  look  upon  Him  whom  they  had  pierced,  and  to  mourn  bitterly  for  their  sins, 
and  especially  their  great  sin  in  rejecting  Him.  This  prophecy  was  fulfilled 
in  part  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  It  will  also  be  more  fully  accomplished  whenever 
the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  as  a  nation,  shall  take  place.  But  this  prophecy 
is  also  accomplished  whenever  sinners,  Jews  or  Gentiles,  are  now  turned  to  the 
Lord.  Notice  the  nature  of  the  sorrow  which  they  feel  on  such  an  occasion. 
1.  It  is  a  godly  sorrow.  Produced  in  their  hearts  under  the  operations  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  What  are  its  effects  ?  It  humbles  them  in  the  dust  before  God  ; 
it  softens  their  hard  and  unfeeling  heart.  It  is  also  a  bitter  sorrow,  for  it  is  said, 
"  They  shall  mourn  for  Him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son."  We  can  scarcelj' 
conceive  of  any  sorrow  of  an  earthly  nature  more  bitter  than  that  of  a  father 
when  mourning  for  his  only  son.  The  feelings  of  some  are  quicker  and  more 
susceptible  than  those  of  others.  But  whatever  differences  there  may  be,  all 
who  are  really  taught  by  the  Spirit  are  made  so  to  see  and  feel  the  evil  and 
bitterness  of  sin,  as  to  learn  in  all  sincerity  to  hate  and  forsake  it.  It  is  a  secret 
sorrow.  "The  land  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart,  and  their  wives  apart." 
And  is  not  this  always  characteristic  of  deep  and  real  sorrow  ?  Then  let  us 
ask  ourselves,  What  know  we  of  the  effects  attending  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise 
in  the  text  ?  How  important  it  is  that  we  should  have  the  Spirit  !  And  how 
earnestly  and  perseveringly  should  we  pray  for  His  gracious  and  saving  influences  ! 
(Z).  Rees.)  They  shall  look  upon  Me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall 
mourn  for  Him. — Gospel  mourning  a  fruit  of  saving  faith  : — Here  we  have  a  glorious 
privilege  mentioned,  namely,  a  view  or  manifestation  of  a  crucified  Redeemer : 
and  the  gracious  exercise  that  is  consequential  to  this  distinguishing  and  glorious 
privilege.  "  They  shall  mourn  for  Him."  From  the  words  we  observe  that 
all  whose  privilege  it  is  to  get  a  supernatural  discovery  of  a  crucified  Redeemer 
will  mourn  for  Him,  as  wounded  and  pierced  for  their  sins.     I.  The  glorious 


CHAP,  xn.]  ZECHARIAH.  195 

PRIVILEGE.  1.  Though  Christ  is  not  now  visible  to  the  bodily  eyes,  yet  such 
a  sight  of  Him  as  is  necessary  in  order  to  the  exercise  of  faith  upon  Him,  and  a 
real  participation  of  the  benefits  of  His  purchase  is  attainable  by  persons  in  this 
world.  2.  A  spiritual  and  saving  sight  of  Christ  as  crucified  is  what  all  should 
be  concerned  to  obtain  when  they  are  attending  upon  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel, 
upon  the  dispensation  of  the  Word  and  sacraments.  3.  Such  a  sight  of  Christ 
as  is  necessary  in  order  to  the  exercise  of  faith  and  repentance  is  an  effect  of  the 
gracious  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  heart  of  a  sinner.  4.  A  spiritual 
manifestation  of  Christ  is  in  a  special  manner  necessary  on  a  day  of  fasting 
and  humiliation.  5.  A  saving  manifestation  of  Christ  is  a  rare  and  distinguishing 
privilege.  6.  A  saving  manifestation  is  ever  accompanied  with  godly  sorrow 
for  sin.  II.  The  gracious  exercise.  1.  Godly  sorrow  for  sin  supposes  an 
inward  and  thorough  change  of  heart,  and  mind,  and  nature.  2.  It  is  real  sorrow. 
3.  Such  a  sorrow  as  flows  from  a  particular  conviction  of  sin.  4.  It  is  great  soitow. 
5.  It  is  evangelical  sorrow.  Application — (1)  Both  faith  and  repentance  are 
fruits  of  the  Spirit.  (2)  True  repentance  is  a  fruit  of  saving  faith.  (3)  True 
faith  is  rare.  (4)  Formality  in  religion  easily  explained.  (Z).  Wilson,  M.A.) 
True  repentance  : — Repentance  is  the  first  duty  of  a  sinner  under  a  dispensation 
of  mercy ;  prepares  for  a  right  reception  of  Christ  as  a  Savioiu- ;  and  is  a  part 
of  that  new  and  holy  course  of  Ufe  which  every  true  Christian  leads.  It  accom- 
panies every  other  exercise  of  piety,  and  terminates  only  when  we  arrive  at 
heaven.  The  text  contains  a  prediction  of  the  repentance  and  conversion  of 
the  Jewish  nation.  In  part  fulfilled  at  Pentecost,  in  part  to  be  yet  fulfilled. 
I.  The  source  from  which  true  repentance  flows.  If  true  repentance 
imply  an  entire  change  of  heart,  comprehending  a  genuine  sorrow  for  sin  as  com- 
mitted against  God,  a  hearty  forsaking  of  it,  and  an  acceptance  of  God's  mercy 
as  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  then  it  is  obvious  that  it  must  spring  from  the 
infiuences  of  Divine  grace.  Accordingly  the  source  of  it  is  thus  spoken  of,  "I 
will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the  Spirit 
of  grace  and  of  supplications."  The  allusion  is  to  the  pouring  out  of  water,  which 
is  the  usual  emblem  for  the  bestowing  of  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Refi-eshing  as  water  to  the  thirsty,  is  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  Church 
of  God.  The  peculiar  effect  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  His  operations  on  the  heart, 
is  described  in  the  titles  here  given  to  the  Holy  Ghost — "  the  Spirit  of  grace  and 
supplications," — that  is,  the  Spirit  by  whose  influence  grace  is  implanted  in  the 
mind,  and  supplications  are  addressed  to  the  throne  of  mercy.  The  Holy  Ghost 
is  promised  as  the  Spirit  of  grace,  because  all  grace  and  holiness  proceed  from 
Him.  As  the  "  Spirit  of  supplications,"  because  one  of  the  earliest  effects  of 
Divine  influences  is  prayer.  We  pray  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  by  His  sacred 
instruction  that  we  discover  our  ignorance,  poverty,  defilement,  misery,  and 
danger.  It  is  by  His  teaching  we  receive  with  faith  the  truths  and  promises 
of  the  Gospel.  The  Spirit  produces  a  return  to  God,  and  a  thorough  conversion 
of  heart  and  life.  II.  The  chief  means  by  which  repentance  is  produced. 
"  They  shall  look  upon  Me  whom  they  have  pierced."  Repentance,  generally 
speaking,  springs  from  a  view  of  a  crucified  Saviour.  The  view  of  the 
crucified  Redeemer  which  is  spoken  of  in  the  text,  cannot  be  understood  a3 
a  bodily  sight  by  the  eye  of  sense.  It  is  a  spiritual  and  rational  contem- 
plation of  Him  by  the  eye  of  penitence  and  faith.  Surely  there  is  no 
object  which  in  itself  should  so  powerfully  attract  our  notice.  If  the  very 
circumstances  of  the  spectacle  should  fix  our  attention,  still  more  should 
we  be  moved  when  we  reflect  on  the  Divine  dignity  of  the  sufferer.  But  this  is 
not  all.  You  and  I  have  had  a  share  in  this  death.  God  had  "  laid  on  Him  the 
iniquity  of  us  all."  But  what  if  aU  this  woe  and  suffering  should  be  for  om* 
salvation  !  Should  not  this  lead  us  to  regard  the  scene  with  still  more  intense 
earnestness  ?  III.  The  effects  of  the  Spirit  of  grace  thus  leading  the 
sinner  to  look  by  faith  to  Him  whom  he  has  pierced.  The  returning  Jews, 
when  they  shall  view  by  faith  their  crucified  Messiah,  will  mourn  for  their 
national  sins  in  piercing  Him,  and  for  all  their  personal  transgressions.  See 
verses  11-14.  The  spiritual  import  of  this  prediction  is  accomplished  in  every 
true  penitent.  Mourning  for  sin  will  arise  from  that  view  of  its  malignity  and 
hatefulness  which  the  Cross  of  Christ  displays.  The  genuine  sorrow  of  a  penitent 
flowii  from  the  believing  sight  of  a  pierced  Saviour.  The  law  convinces  of  sin, 
but  the  Cross  teaches  us  to  abhor  it.  1.  Apply  to  the  sincere  Christian — that 
he  may  learn  the  important  place  which  true  penitence  occupies  in  a  Christian 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

life :  the  connection  of  repentance  with  the  hopes  and  privileges  of  the  Gospel : 
and  that  the  exercise  of  evangelical  repentance  is  connected  with  a  holy  and 
circumspect  conduct.     2.  To  the  ungodly  and  impenitent.     If  any  subject  can 
ehow  them  their  obligation  to  repent,  and  afifect  their  hearts  with  a  desire  to  do  so, 
it  is  the  one  we  have  been  reviewing.     (D.  Wilson,  M.A.)        Looking  to  the  pierced 
One, : — Not  only  an  external  grace  and  favour  was  promised  to  the  Jews,  but  an 
internal  light  of  faith,  the  author  of  which  is  the  Spirit ;  for  He  it  is  who  illuminates 
our  minds  to  see  the  goodness  of  God,  and  it  is  He  also  who  turns  our  hearts. 
As  Zechariah  declares  that  the  Jews  would  at  length  "  look  to  "  God,  it  follows 
that  the  spirit  of  repentance  and  the  light  of  faith  are  promised  to  them,  so  that 
they  may  know  God  as  the  author  of  their  salvation,  and  feel  so  assm'ed  that  they 
are  already  saved,  as  in  future  to  devote  themselves  entirely  to  Him.     "  Whom 
they  have  pierced."     Here  also  the  prophet  indirectly  reproves  the  Jews  for  their 
great  obstinacy,  for  God  had  restored  them,  and  they  had  been  as  untameable 
as  wild  beasts  :  for  this  piercing  is  to  be  taken  metaphorically  for  continual  pro- 
vocation, as  though  he  had  said  that  the  Jews  in  their  perverseness  were  prepared 
as  it  were  for  war,  that  they  goaded  and  pierced  God  by  their  wickedness  as  by 
the  weapons  of  their  rebellion.     As  then  they  had  been  such,  he  says  now  that 
such  a  change  would  be  wrought  by  God  that  they  would  become  quite  different, 
for  they  would  learn  to  "  look  to  Him  whom"  they  had  previously  pierced.     John 
eays  that  this  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  Christ,  when  His  side  was  pierced  with  a 
spear  (John  xix.  37).     And  this  is  most  true  ;  for  it  was  necessary  that  the  visible 
symbol  should  be  exhibited  in  the  person  of  Christ,  in  order  that  the  Jews  might 
know  that  He  was  the  God  who  had  spoken  by  the  prophets.     The  Jews  then  had 
crucified  their  God  when  they  grieved  His  Spirit ;  but  Christ  also  was,  as  to  His 
flesh,   pierced   by  them.      And  this   is  what  John  meant — that  God   by   that 
visible  symbol  made  it  evident  that  He  had  not  only  been  formerly  provoked  in 
a  disgraceful  manner  by  the  Jews,  but  that  at  length,  in  the  person  of  His  only- 
begotten  Son,  this  great  sin  was  added  to  their  disgraceful  impiety,  that  they 
pierced  even  the  side  of  Christ.     (John  Calvin.)         Looking  to  Christ  as  pierced, 
and  mourning  for  Him  : — May  we  not  reckon  the  passage  in  which  our  text  occurs, 
as  one  of  those  of  which  the  prophets  themselves,  by  whom  they  were  uttered, 
did  not  at  first  understand  the  full  import  ?     How  should  we  be  affected  by  the 
contemplation  of  the  sufferings  and  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ?     1.  We  should 
mourn  to  think  of  what  He  had  to  endure.     A  tale  of  woe  may  touch  our  hearts 
with  sadness  although  we  may  have  no  personal  concern  with  the  individual  of 
whom  it  is  told.     If  we  saw  an  innocent  man  led  forth  to  execution,  our  hearts 
would  be  greatly  moved.     We  wonder  not  then  that  when  Jesus  was  delivered 
up  to  the  will  of  His  enemies,  when  one  so  holy,  so  meek,  so  beneficent,  was  led 
forth  to  be  crucified,  the  spectacle  could  not  be  seen  immoved.     2.  We  should 
mourn  to  think  of  the  wickedness  of  the  men  by  whom  He  was  so  treated.     Were 
the  men  of  that  generation  which  lived  when  Jesus  was  crucified,  wicked  above 
all  others  before  them,  or  after  them  ?     No  !     Though  temptation  and  oppor- 
tunity combined  to   involve  them  in  a  crime,  probably  the  greatest  ever  per- 
petrated on  earth,  they  afford  but  a  specimen  of  that  depravity,  it  may  be  less 
fully  developed,  which  we  all  have  inherited.     3.  We  should  mourn  for  our  own 
sins,  as  we  see  in  what  was  inflicted  on  our  Surety  the  exceeding  sinfulness  and 
deep  demerit  of  sin.     How  hateful  must  sin  have  been  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God, 
when  for  it  He  hid  His  face  from  His  Son,  and  gave  Him  up  to  the  pains  of  an 
accursed  death!     Notice  some  of  the  happy  effects  of  penitent  grief.     (1)  To 
yield  to  it  may  give  even  present  relief  to  the  troubled  mind.     (2)  This  sorrow 
may  have  a  beneficial  influence  on  all  our  tempers  and  affections.     (3)  This 
sorrow  may  give  evidence  of  our  interest  in  the  promises  of  pardon  and  of  peace 
with  God.     Sorrow  for  sin  cannot  be  accepted  as  a  price  for  forgiveness  ;  yet  we 
may  find  in  the  sense  of  it  some  proof  that  the  change  is  begun  which  must  be 
wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  all  to  whom  He  applies  the  redemption  which 
is  through  His  blood.     {James  Henderson,  D.D.)         Sinners  mourning  for  their 
pierced  Lord  : — What  is  true  of  a  converted  Jew,  is  true  also  of  a  converted  Gentile. 
I.  The  character  of  oddly  sorrow.     It  is  like  a  parent's  sorrow  for  the  death 
of  a  child.     This  is  a  real,  not  a  pretended  sorrow.     If  wo  look  into  our  hearts  many 
of  us  will  see  that  our  sorrow  for  sin  is  all  pretence.     This  is  a  deep,  not  a  superficial 
or  slight  sorrow.     We  may  really  mourn  for  a  friend,  and  yet  mourn  for  him  very 
little.     Not  so  when  our  children  die.     Our  grief  then  is  pungent  and  bitter. 
It  is  not  only  in  the  heart,  but  down  very  low  in  it.     It  is  a  secret  sorrow.     Most 


CHAP,  xn.]  ZECHARIAH.  197 

of  us,  when  our  hearts  are  full,  wish  to  be  alone.  Deep  emotions  of  any  kind 
send  us  to  our  chambers.  II.  One  of  the  causes  that  excite  godly  sorrow. 
"  Look  on  Me  whom  they  have  pierced."  Who  is  the  speaker  here  ?  God  Himself, 
but  Grod  in  Christ.  What  is  meant  by  "  looking  "  on  Him  ?  Outward  bodily 
actions  are  made  use  of  to  describe  inward  operations,  the  actings  of  the  mind. 
These  penitents  look  on  Him  as  "  pierced."  Some  say  the  reason  why  the  Jewa 
are  not  converted  is  that  we  do  not  suflSciently  exhibit  the  Lord  Jesus  to  them  in 
His  exaltation  and  glory.  Others  say  if  we  want  to  prize  the  Lord  Jesus  more, 
we  must  think  of  Him  more  as  enthroned  in  heaven.  We  must  not  suffer  men  to 
mislead  us.  If  we  want  life  for  our  perishing  souls,  if  we  wish  to  have  our  hard 
hearts  broken  to  pieces,  it  is  on  His  Cross,  not  on  His  throne,  that  we  must  con- 
template our  Lord.  And  these  contrite  sinners  look  on  Jesus  as  pierced  by  them. 
"  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  on  Him,"  so  we  woxmded  Him.  HI.  How 
IS  it  that  godlt  sorrow  arises  from  this  source  ?  Why  does  looking  on 
the  crucified  Lord  make  the  believer  mourn  ?  How,  I  would  ask,  can  it  be  other- 
wise, as  we  think  of  our  dying  Lord,  dying  for  us  ?  Learn  the  high  place  that  we 
ought  to  give  sorrow  for  sin  among  the  Christian  graces.  (C  Bradley,  M.A.) 
I.  The  object  or  spectacle  propounded.  Certain  it  is  that  Christ  is  here 
meant.  1.  Specify  and  particularise  the  person  of  Christ,  by  the  kind  and  most 
peculiar  circumstances  of  His  death.  Not  a  natural  but  a  violent  death.  The 
Psalmist  says,  "  They  pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet,"  which  is  only  proper  to 
the  death  of  the  Cross.  The  prophet  intimates  that  his  heart  was  pierced,  and 
this  was  peculiar  to  Christ.  2.  Sever  Christ  from  the  rest  of  His  doings  and 
sufferings,  to  see  what  that  is  which  we  specially  are  to  look  to — Christ  pierced. 
The  perfection  of  our  knowledge  in  or  touching  Christ,  is  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
pierced.  Know  this,  you  know  all.  In  the  object,  two  things  offer  themselves. 
(1)  The  passion,  or  suffering  itself.  Consider  the  degree;  for  transfixenmt  is  a 
word  of  gradation ;  expressing  the  piercing,  not  of  whips  and  scovu-ges,  or  of 
nails  and  thorns,  but  of  the  spear-point,  which  went  through  the  very  heart  itself. 
May  a  soul  be  pierced  ?  It  is  not  a  spear-head  of  iron  that  entereth  the  soul, 
but  a  metal  of  another  temper,  the  dint  whereof  no  less  goreth  and  woundeth 
the  soul  in  proportion  than  those  do  the  body.  Soul-piercing  includes  sorrow 
and  reproach.  II.  The  persons.  When  one  is  found  slain,  it  is  usual  to  inquire 
by  whom  he  came  by  his  death.  We  incline  to  lay  the  sin  of  Christ's  death  on 
the  soldiers,  the  executioners ;  on  Pilate  the  judge ;  on  the  people  who  urged  Pilate ; 
or  on  the  elders  of  the  Jews  who  animated  the  people.  The  prophet  here  says 
that  they  who  are  willed  to  "  look  upon  Him,"  are  they  who  "  pierced  Him." 
In  every  case  of  condemnation  to  death,  sin,  and  sin  only  is  the  murderer.  It  was 
not  Christ's  own  sin  that  He  died  for.  It  must  have  been  for  the  sin  of  others  that 
Christ  Jesus  was  pierced.  God  laid  on  Him  the  "  transgressions  of  us  all."  It  was 
the  sin  of  our  polluted  hands  that  pierced  His  hands  ;  the  swiftness  of  our  feet  to 
do  evil  that  nailed  His  feet ;  the  wicked  devices  of  our  heads  that  gored  His  head  ; 
and  the  wretched  desires  of  our  hearts  that  pierced  His  heart.  If  we  feel  that 
we  were  the  cause  of  this  His  piercing,  we  ought  to  have  remorse,  to  be  pierced 
with  it.  III.  The  act  or  duty  enjoined.  To  look  upon  Him.  A  request 
most  natural  and  reasonable.  To  this  look  Christ  invites  us.  "  Upon  Me." 
Our  own  profit  inviteth  us.  Our  danger  may  move  us  to  look.  In  the  act  itself  are 
three  things.  1.  That  we  do  it  with  attention.  2.  That  we  do  it  oft,  again  and 
again  ;  with  iteration.  3.  That  we  cause  our  natxu'e  to  do  it,  as  it  were,  by  virtue 
of  an  injunction.  In  the  original  it  is  a  commanding  injunction.  Look  upon  Him, 
and  be  pierced.  Look  upon  Him,  and  pierce  that  in  thee  that  was  the  cause 
of  Christ's  piercing,  sin  and  the  lusts  thereof.  As  it  was  sin  that  gave  Christ 
these  wounds,  so  it  was  love  to  ns  that  made  Him  receive  them,  being  otherwise 
liable  enough  to  have  avoided  them  all.  So  that  He  was  pierced  with  love,  no 
less  than  with  grief.  And  it  was  that  wound  of  love  made  Him  so  constantly 
endure  all  the  other.  Which  sight  ought  to  pierce  us  with  love  too,  no  less  than 
before  it  did  with  sorrow.  We  should  join  looking  with  believing.  And  believing, 
what  is  there  that  the  eye  of  bur  hope  shall  not  look  for  from  Him  ?  What  would 
He  not  do  for  us,  that  for  us  would  suffer  aU  this  ?  Our  expectation  may  be 
reduced  to  these  two  things, — the  deliverance  from  the  evil  of  our  present  misery  ; 
and  the  restoring  to  the  good  of  our  primitive  felicity.  .  .  .  Shall  we  always 
receive  grace,  even  streams  of  grace,  issuing  from  Him  that  is  pierced,  and  shall  there 
not  from  us  issue  something  back  again,  that  He  may  look  for  and  receive  from  us, 
that  from  Him  have  and  do  dailyreceive  so  many  good  things  ?  No  doubt  there  shall; 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

if  love  which  pierced  Him,  have  pierced  us  aright.  (Bishop  Launcelot  Andrewcs.) 
Looking  to  Christ  crucified : — The  words  have  reference,  in  their  primary  sense, 
to  the  house  of  David,  and  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  received  their  first 
fulfilment  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  But  the  text  invites  us  also  to  look  on  Him 
who  was  pierced  for  us,  and  mourn.  We  are  to  look  long  and  earnestly  on  Hin; 
whom  we  have  pierced,  that  by  long  looking  we  may  learn  to  mourn,  and  mourning 
much  may  love  much,  and  loving  much,  may  have  much  forgiven.  How  shall 
we  look  on  Him  whom  we  have  pierced  ?  Not  with  our  fleshly  eyes,  but  with  the 
eye  of  faith.  We  are  to  look  to  Him,  in  order  to  see  that  the  "  Lord  hath  laid  on 
Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  It  was  our  polluted  hands  that  pierced  His  hands  ; 
the  swiftness  of  our  feet  to  do  evil  that  nailed  His  feet ;  the  wicked  devices  of  our 
hearts  that  pierced  His  heart.  Yet  we  must  not  look  wholly  to  His  bodily  sufler- 
ings,  the  wounds  we  have  given  Him  have  gone  deeper,  even  to  His  .soul,  yec, 
pierced  Him  through  and  through  with  many  sorrows.  The  pangs  which  He 
suffered  on  His  spiritual  Cross  were  infinitely  more  than  those  He  suffered 
on  the  natural.  Great  as  were  His  bodily  sufferings,  from  the  prospect  of  them 
He  never  shrank.  He  ever  views  and  speaks  calmly  of  them.  Not  so  does  He 
aimounce  His  spiritual  Cross,  it  was  the  internal  Cross  which  caused  His  bitterest 
passion.  Shall  we  not  then  look  on  Him,  and  "remember  and  be  confounded, 
and  never  open  our  mouths  any  more,  because  of  our  shame,"  as  we  look  upward 
to  that  Cross  to  which  our  sins  have  nailed  Him  ?  He  was  lifted  up  on  that  Cross 
that  all  from  the  ends  of  the  world  might  look  unto  Him  and  be  saved.  It  is 
by  looking  on  Him  whom  we  have  pierced  that  we  alone  can  learn  somewhat  of  the 
deadly  bitterness  of  our  sins,  which  might  not  be  forgiven,  but  by  that  awful 
blood-shedding.  It  is  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross  alone  that  the  mystery  of  the  Cross 
is  learnt,  and  a  true  estimate  of  our  sins  gained.  (E.  A.  Suckling,  M.A.)  Jesus'" 
pierced  side  : — Out  of  the  pierced  heart  of  Jesus  proceeds  a  stream  of  tears,  of 
grace,  and  of  prayer.  For  us,  also,  as  we  look  at  the  pierced  side  of  the  Saviour, 
there  opens — I.  A  flood  of  teaes.  The  prophet  foretells  the  time  when  Israel 
at  the  sight  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows  shall  break  forth  into  deep  lamentation,  when 
the  water  which  flows  from  the  pierced  side  of  the  Saviour  shall  be  turned  into 
a  stream  of  tears,  flowing  from  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  Israel.  It  is  the 
simplest  but  certainly  also  the  most  painful  truth,  that  your  sins  and  mine  have 
brought  Jesus  to  the  Cross.  Therefore  a  glance  at  Him  must  become  a  crystal 
glass  which  reflects  our  sins  more  distinctly,  and  which  represents  us  in  our  sins 
blacker  than  the  whole  law  from  Sinai,  with  its  thunder  and  lightning,  its  curse 
and  judgment,  can  do.  II.  A  stream  of  grace.  In  ancient  Athens,  mercy 
was  represented  with  eyes  streaming  with  tears,  holding  in  her  hand  a  torn  and 
bleeding  heart.  By  God's  grace  we  have  free  access  to  the  Father.  We  liave 
a  Saviour  who  opens  the  Father's  heart  for  us,  and  we  need  no  other  Mediator. 
III.  A  FOUNT  OF  prayer.  In  these  prophetic  words  the  Lord  declares  that  He 
will  pour  out  the  Spirit  of  prayer  and  of  grace.  The  stream  of  grace  from  the 
woimds  of  the  Saviour,  which  He  causes  to  be  poured  over  us,  is  to  become  a 
fount  of  prayer,  flowing  from  our  heart  to  God's  heart.  There  has  scarcely 
ever  been  a  time  in  which  the  streams  of  Divine  grace  were  so  abundantly  poured 
forth  in  the  preached  Word,  as  well  as  in  works  of  mercy,  and  in  zeal  for  the  Lord'.s 
house,  as  in  our  days.  But  how  long  will  it  last,  if  the  Spirit  of  supplication  docs 
not  join  the  spirit  of  grace  ?  And  that  is  wanting.  Ours  is  a  prayerless  time. 
(A.  Schroter.)  Christ  pierced  by  us  (to  children): — There  can  be  no  doubt 
about  the  reference  of  these  words.  St.  John  quotes  them  in  his  Gospel,  and 
refers  them  to  Christ.  "  They  "  are  the  Jews,  and  more  particularly  the  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem.  And  the  prophet  informs  us  that  a  time  is  coming  when  the  people 
of  Jerusalem  shall  look  upon  Jesus,  and  bitterly  repent  of  having  refused  to  accept 
Him  as  their  Messiah  and  their  King.  1.  The  Jews  were,  and  still  are,  God's 
people,  though  now  they  are  God's  people  in  disgrace.  He  chose  them  out  of 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  drew  them  close  to  Himself,  and  gave  them  the 
Scriptures,  and  the  temple,  and  the  sacrifices,  and  thus  prepared  them  for  the 
coming  of  the  Messiah,  or  Christ,  who  was  promised  in  the  prophets.  But  when 
the  Messiah  did  come  they  rejected  Him.  Their  great  and  terrible  crime  brouglit 
down  God's  wrath  upon  them.  About  forty  years  after  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus 
the  Romans  came  and  laid  siege  to  Jerusalem,  killed  many  Jews,  and  burnt  the 
beautiful  temple.  We  are  expressly  told  that  this  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
was  a  i)unishment  for  the  murder  of  Christ.  From  that  time  the  Jews  have  been 
driven  out  of  their  own  land,  and  scattered  abroad  amongst  the  nations  of  tbe 


CHAP,  xn.]  ZECHARIAH.  199 

earth.  There  axe  Jews  almost  everywhere.  But  the  Bible  says  that  one  day 
they  will  be  gathered  together  into  their  own  land  again.  But  will  they  be 
Christians  when  they  return  ?  I  think  not.  They  wiU  still  reject  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  But  I  believe  that,  when  assaulted  by  enemies,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
will  come  down  from  Heaven,  and  appear  for  the  rescue  of  His  people,  to  deliver 
them.  At  that  moment  they  shall  look  on  "  Him  whom  they  pierced,"  and  the 
effect  of  their  looking  will  be  that  they  will  mourn  over  their  sin,  and  repent  of 
it,  and  become  true  followers  and  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  then 
they  will  become  the  most  successful  preachers  of  the  Gospel  that  the  world  has 
ever  seen.  2.  Now  turn  to  ourselves.  It  is  possible  to  look  on  Jesus,  who  was 
pierced,  and  to  say,  "  Well,  He  was  pierced,  and  I  am  glad  of  it,  for  He  deserved 
His  fate.  He  pretended  to  be  what  He  was  not."  That  is  what  the  Jews  now- 
adays think,  and  what  many  of  them  do  not  hesitate  to  say.  And  many  of  us 
are  inclined  to  say,  "  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  piercing  of  Jesus.  I  was  not 
there  at  the  time.  It  was  a  fearful  deed,  and  I  am  sorry  for  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus,  but  I  really  do  not  think  it  true  in  any  sense  that  /  pierced  Him !  "  Let 
us  pause  a  moment,  and  think.  The  Lord  Jesus,  who  was  the  Son  of  God  and 
Son  of  Man,  bore  upon  the  cross  the  whole  dark  load  of  human  sin.  All  the  sins 
of  all  mankind  were  gathered,  as  it  were,  into  one  rast  horrible  mass,  and  laid 
upon  Him,  the  Sin-bearer  ;  and  He  could  not  get  rid  of  it,  or  "  put  it  away  " 
except  by  dying.  By  dying  on  the  cross  He  took  it  away  from  us,  and  shook  it 
off  Himse:f.  Now  your  sin  and  mine  were  in  that  load,  and  because  our  sin  formed 
part  of  the  burden  which  was  laid  upon  Christ  we  had  something  to  do  with  His 
death.  We  helped  to  pierce  Him.  Our  sin  made  it  necessary  that  Christ  should 
die,  and  therefore  you  and  I  had  something  to  do  really  with  "  piercing  "  Christ, 
and  nailing  Him  to  His  cross.  But  unless  we  have  the  teaching  of  God's  Holy 
Spirit,  we  shall  never  think  rightly  or  feel  rightly  in  this  matter.  It  was  when 
"  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication  "  was  poured  out  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  that  they  looked  on  Him  whom  they  pierced,  and  repented  of  their 
sin.  What  a  deep  feeling  we  have  when  a  thing  is  brought  home  to  ourselves, 
and  we  are  made  to  feel  that  we  did  it.  If  we  feel  that  we  pierced  Christ  two 
things  will  happen.  (1)  We  shall  have  a  horror  of  sin.  (2)  We  shall  come  to 
understand  the  wonderful  love  of  God.  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that 
a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  gave  up  His 
life  for  us  ;  He  died  upon  the  cross  for  us ;  for  there  was  no  other  way  of  saving 
us  from  our  sins.  Surely,  if  we  have  not  got  hearts  of  stone,  we  shall  feel  thankful, 
most  thankful,  for  what  He  has  done,  and  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us. 
(Gordon  Calthrop,  31. A.)  Looking  to  Jesus  in  fenitential  sorrow : — The  legend  of 
Camillo,  the  artist  who  sold  his  soul  to  the  devil  in  order  to  gain  power  to  paint 
to  the  life  whatever  subject  he  chose,  is  full  of  suggestion.  After  a  long  life  of  sin, 
Camillo  painted  a  picture  of  the  Christ,  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  The  tender,  searching 
ej'es  were  such  a  source  of  annoyance  to  him  and  to  his  sinful  friends  that  he 
veiled  the  picture  and  went  to  a  priest  with  his  story.  Following  the  priest's 
advice,  he  unveiled  the  picture  and  let  the  eyes  of  the  Christ  search  his  soul. 
Then  he  went  out  and  made  such  reparation  as  he  was  able  to  the  lives  he  had 
wronged.  But  he  had  no  peace.  The  priest  sent  him  back  to  the  unveiled  Christ. 
Again  he  went  out,  and  ordered  a  dealer  to  buy  up  and  destroy  every  inch  of 
canvas  he  had  painted  that  would  suggest  evil  thoughts.  Still  he  had  no  peace. 
Again  and  yet  again  he  was  led  to  realise  and  to  renounce  and  to  undo  sin  after 
sin.  But  the  peace  he  longed  for  was  withheld.  At  length,  as  he  knelt  in  prayer 
before  the  Christ,  came  the  realisation  that  he  had  sinned,  not  only  against  his 
fellow-men,  but  against  Christ,  and  he  yielded  his  life  to  Him.  Then  as  the 
eyes  of  Christ  looked  into  the  sorrow  and  anguish  of  his  soul,  there  came  also  joy 
and  pea<;e.  Looking  at  Him  who  was  pierced: — When  the  late  Dr.  Andrew 
Bonar  was  sitting  in  his  study  one  day,  a  man  and  woman  entered,  to  see  him 
about  joining  the  church.  When  they  had  told  their  errand  the  doctor  said  to 
them,  "  When  any  one  comes  to  me  and  wishes  to  join  the  church,  I  generally  ask 
them  a  few  questions.  Now,  first,  how  did  you  come  to  think  of  joining  the 
chiurch  ?  "  "  Ah  !  "  said  the  woman,  "  it  was  all  through  our  little  son.  One 
night  I  was  telling  him  about  the  Jews  killing  my  Lord  Jesus,  and  how  they  nailed 
Him  to  the  cross  on  Calvary,  and,  looking  up  into  my  face,  he  asked,  '  Mother, 
was  it  your  sins  that  nailed  Him  to  the  cross  ?  '  Ah,  sir,  I  could  not  answer 
him.  There  was  a  big  lump  in  my  throat ;  and  when  he  saw  that  I  did  not  reply 
he  turned  to  his  father  and  said,  '  Father,  was  it  your  sins  that  nailed  Jesus  to 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

the  cross  ?  '  I  stole  a  look  at  my  husband,  and  I  saw  a  tear  glisten  in  his  eye — 
he  could  not  answer  either.  Then  the  little  boy  clasped  his  hands  and  said, 
'  0  Lord  Jesus,  it  must  have  been  my  sins  which  nailed  Thee  to  the  cross.' 
From  that  time,  sir,  he  has  been  a  changed  boy,  and  it  was  that  which  made  us 
think  of  joining  the  church.  {W.  Thompson.)  Looking  at  Christ: — Passing 
through  a  graveyard  with  her  parents,  a  little  girl  drew  them  after  her  to  look  at  a 
beautiful  stone  figure  of  the  Christ,  with  a  face  full  of  suffering  and  yet  of  tenderest 
pity,  leaning  upon  a  massive  marble  cross.  As  they  paused  to  look  she  held 
her  head  down  and  said  in  a  low  voice,  "  I  have  done  so  many  wrong  things, 
I  can  hardly  lift  up  my  eyes  to  look  at  Him."  It  is  just  those  who  have  done 
"  so  many  wrong  things  "  that  have  need  to  lift  up  their  eyes  and  look  at  Him. 
(Quiver.)  Penitential  sorrow : — I.  The  subjects.  Jews,  not  Gentiles.  The 
Jewish  people  had  often  been  reduced  to  this  state  of  sorrow.  When  in  Babylonian 
exile,  they  wept  when  they  remembered  "  Zion."  II.  The  cause  of  this  penitential 
sorrow.  "  I  will  pour."  The  prophet  Joel  (chap,  ii.  28)  refers  to  this  outpouring 
of  Divine  influence.  HI.  The  occasion  of  this  penitential  sorrow.  A  believing 
sight  of  Christ  produces  this  penitential  sorrow.  IV.  The  poignancy  of  this 
penitential  sorrow.  "  And  they  shall  mourn  for  Him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his 
only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  Him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his 
first-bom."  "  There  are  few  states  of  deeper  and  acuter  sorrow  than  this — that 
which  is  felt  by  affectionate  parents  when  bereft  of  those  objects  of  their  fondest 
affections.  As  to  the  poignancy  of  this  grief,  it  is  further  said,  "  In  that  day 
there  shall  be  a  great  mourning  in  Jerusalem,  as  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon 
in  the  valley  of  Megiddon,"  &c.  Perhaps  the  greatest  sorrow  ever  known  amongst 
the  Jews  was  the  sorrow  in  the  valley  of  Megiddon,  occasioned  by  the  death  of 
King  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  24).  Jeremiah  composed  a  funeral  dirge  on  the 
occasion ;  and  other  odes  and  lamentations  were  composed,  and  were  sung  by 
males  and  females.  But  true  penitential  sorrow  is  far  more  poignant  than  that 
occasioned  by  the  death  of  an  only  son  or  a  noble  king.  It  is  tinctured  with  moral 
remorse.  V.  The  univebsality  of  this  poignant  sorrow.  "  The  land  shall 
mourn,"  &c.  All  the  families  of  the  land  shall  mourn,  and  mourn  "  apart." 
Deep  sorrow  craves  loneliness.  {Homilist. )  True  mourning  for  Christ : — 
Though  this  prophecy  is  fulfilling  there  is  not  complete  fulfilment.  There 
was,  among  the  Jews,  no  such  general  grief  as  Zechariah  pictures.  They 
showed  no  signs  of  heart-broken  sorrow.  We  must  seek  fiu-ther  for  the 
moiumers  looking  on  the  pierced  One.  There  is  no  doubt  where  they  are 
to  be  found.  Christians  have  succeeded  to  the  place,  and  occupy  more  than 
the  place,  of  the  Jews  ;  it  is  ourselves  who  are  to  be  "  looking  upon  Him  whom 
we  have  pierced."  Some  great  divines  hold  that  Zechariah's  words  describe 
the  special  mourning  of  Lent  and  Holy  Week  and  Good  Friday.  In  any  case 
we  have  a  picture  of  the  effect  which  a  real  spiritual  view  of  the  cross  must  pro- 
duce upon  faithful  Christians,  and  one  which  supplies  us  with  a  test  of  oiu: 
Good  Friday  reality  and  sincerity.  It  is  a  hard  test,  but  we  must  not  flinch  from 
it.  It  is  of  God's  own  proposing ;  nay,  rather,  it  occiu-s  in  the  announcement 
of  His  most  gracious  purpose.  Compare  our  recollections  of  earthly  bereave- 
ments with  oiu-  memory  of  Christ's  death.  Can  we  say  that  we  feel  for  Christ 
at  all  as  we  feel  at  the  death  of  husband  or  wife,  father  or  mother  ?  Yet  God 
expects  us  to  feel  very  deeply.  We  know  that  Christ's  passion  ought  to  excite 
in  us  the  deepest  imaginable  sorrow.  As  there  was  never  sorrow  like  unto  His 
sorrow ;  as  there  was  never  death  like  unto  His  death ;  as  there  was  never  love 
like  unto  His  love,  so  we  cannot  wonder  if  we  are  expected  to  feel  a  grief  for  Him 
as  great  as  that  which  springs  from  the  severest  trial  of  our  human  affections. 
Yet  it  may  safely  be  said  that,  generally,  it  is  not  so.  We  fall  far  short  of  that 
which  is  to  be  the  state  of  the  citizens  of  the  true  city  of  David,  and  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Christian  Jerusalem.  {M.  H.  Ricketts.)  England's  rejection  of  Christ : — 
Let  me  set  in  order  before  you  the  greater  sin  that  we  have  committed  in  rejecting 
Jesus  than  did  the  Jews.  I.  We  have  rejected  Jesus  as  the  Head  op  the 
Church.  What  is  the  Church  ?  It  is  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all. 
The  Church  is  the  body  of  Christ,  of  which  He  is  the  head,  to  pour  into  it  con- 
tinually the  glory  of  His  own  power  and  the  excellency  of  His  own  beauty  and 
the  perfectness  of  His  own  holiness.  It  is  a  Church  embodied,  that  is  the  mystery, 
and  not  a  Church  disembodied.  A  Church  disembodied  is  only  a  fraction  of 
the  mystery  of  godliness;  the  mystery  of  godliness  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh. 
And  the  Church  was  intended  to  reveal  the  whole  excellency  and  power  of  Jesus 


CHAP,  xn.]  ZECHARIAH.  201 

seated  on  the  throne  of  God.  What  were  the  Church's  gifts  ?  The  word  of 
wisdom,  to  search  all  the  deep  things  of  God.  The  word  of  knowledge,  to  tell 
all  that  was  passing  in  all  parts  of  His  dominions  ;  the  gift  of  faith,  never  to 
doubt  that  whatever  she  desired  she  would  receive.  The  gift  of  healing,  to  go 
forth  and  show  the  power  of  Jesus  over  all  flesh,  to  forgive  sin  in  the  soul,  and 
to  heal  disease  in  the  body.  The  power  of  miracles,  to  order  in  the  things  of 
creation,  to  get  all  disorder  into  order,  and  to  command  the  various  powers  of 
nature.  To  this  the  Church  was  called ;  deny  it  who  dare  !  This  is  the  dignity 
of  the  Church,  but  we  reject  it.  The  Jews  rejected  a  man  of  flesh, — we  have 
rejected  a  Man  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  II.  Jesus  has  been  rejected  as 
THE  King  of  kings  and  Lord  op  lords.  This  is  a  title  which  He  maketh  great 
accoimt  of.  It  is  written  on  His  raiment,  and  on  His  thigh.  But  it  has  been 
denied  ;  it  is  denied  roimd  the  whole  world.  In  the  papacy  the  pope  has  taken 
the  supremacy.  In  the  Greek  Church  it  is  denied ;  the  Czar  is  the  head  of  the 
Church.  In  Britain  it  is  denied.  Who  is  King  of  kings  ? — Their  majesties  the 
people.  "  All  power  is  from  the  people."  That  is  the  baser  denial — the  basest 
of  all  denial.  Power  is  no  longer  held  as  from  Jesus,  nor  is  it  any  longer  held 
to  be  responsible  to  Him.  III.  Another  great  sin  has  been  the  rejectioit 
OF  Jesus  as  the  owner  of  all  :  as  the  merchantman,  as  the  householder,  the 
head  of  the  house,  whose  is  all  the  goods  and  chattels,  and  all  the  furniture,  and 
all  the  provision,  and  all  the  treasure  of  the  house.  There  is  not  one  man  in 
a  hundred  to  whom  the  idea  has  once  occurred,  everything  in  his  house  is  Christ's  ; 
everything  in  the  banker's  hands  is  Christ's ;  everything  in  the  funds  is  Christ's. 
There  is  not  aught  that  hath  not  the  stamp  of  His  name.  IV.  We  have  rejected 
Christ  as  the  poor  man's  friend.  Who  was  first  the  preacher  of  good  tidings 
to  the  poor  ?  Who  blessed  and  honoured  the  estate  of  poverty  ?  Who  said, 
"  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  ?  We  have 
forgotten  to  preach  Him  as  the  Bringer  of  glad  tidings  to  the  poor.  We  have 
rejected  Him  who  was  the  Redeemer  of  poverty, — who  is  its  friend  ;  and  we 
have  chosen  for  Him  demagogues  who  are  not  worthy  to  be  trusted  with  the 
lowest  of  the  goods  of  creation.  {Edward  Irving,  A.M.)  Sinners  repenting  : — 
Consider  the  language  of  the  prophet  as  denoting  a  state  of  mind  which  in  its 
great  lineaments  is  becoming  to  all  men  in  all  ages,  and  which  must  be  felt  in 
order  to  secure  the  enjoyment  of  spiritual  blessing.  I.  The  sorrow  here  embodied 
IS  TO  be  regarded  in  its  cause.  Here  sorrow  is  traced  to  one  cause.  It  is 
sorrow  on  account  of  sin.  The  sense  of  its  being,  its  guilt  and  consequence,  is 
pungently  pressed  upon  the  consciences.  Observe — 1.  The  particular  order 
of  the  sin.  Although,  in  their  relationship  to  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the 
Jews  were  of  course  peculiar,  there  is  an  important  sense  in  which  all  men  must 
be  regarded  as  participating  in  the  guilt  of  "  piercing  Him."  His  death  was  an 
atoning  sacrifice  ;  the  sins  of  men  being  the  cause  of  what  He  endvu-ed,  in  order 
to  expiate  wrath  and  to  secure  salvation.  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins," 
and  thus  it  is  that  every  sinner  becomes  an  accomplice  in  the  crucifixion  of  the 
Lord  of  glory.  Set  forth  as  Christ  has  been  to  men  in  the  institutes  and  by  the 
ministry  of  the  Gospel,  each  thought  and  each  deed  of  sin,  cherished  and  loved, 
has  been  but  striking  at  Christ  another  and  another  blow — rearing  the  Cross 
again,  fastening  the  nails  again.  2.  This  being  the  precise  natm-e  of  the  sin, 
we  must  notice  the  influence  by  which  the  guilt  of  it  is  recognised  and  felt.  The 
sinner  admits  no  guilt ;  his  heart  is  a  heart  of  stone.  The  consciousness  of  guilt 
is  ascribed  directly  to  Divine  influence,  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  11.  The 
characteristics  of  this  SORROW.  The  conviction  of  sin,  arising  from  the 
influence  of  the  Spirit  of  grace,  leads  men  to  that  mom-ning  which  constitutes 
the  theme  of  these  verses.  That  mourning  of  sorrow  will  be  found  suggested 
to  us  in  its  three  great  characteristics  of  intensity,  solitude,  and  prayerfuJness. 
in.  The  results.  One  is  pardon :  connected  with  pardon  is  sanctification. 
And  the  third  result  of  this  sorrow  for  sin  is  joy  :  nothing  can  compare  with 
the  joy  arising  from  the  hope  of  pardon  for  sin.     [James  Parsons.) 

Ver.  12.  And  the  land  shall  monm,  every  family  apart.  —  Personal  and 
family  fasting  : — On  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit  the  land  is  to  mourn,  every 
family  apart,  and  their  wives  apart.  The  duties  of  fasting  consist  of — I.  An 
EXTERNAL  AND  CIRCUMSTANTIAL  PART.  1.  A  proper  time  uiust  be  set  apart  for 
these  duties.  And  this  is  to  be  regulated  by  Christian  prudence,  as  best  suits 
the  circumstance  of  the  person  or  family.     As  to  the  quantity  of  time  to  be  spent 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

in  personal  or  family  fasting  and  humiliation,  the  duty,  I  judge,  is  to  regulate 
it,  and  not  it  to  regulate  the  duty.  None  need  be  solicitous  as  to  what  quantity 
of  time,  more  or  less,  they  spend  in  these  exercises,  so  that  the  work  of  the  time  be 
done.  2.  A  proper  place  is  to  be  chosen  where  the  person  or  family  may  per- 
form the  duty  without  disturbance  from  others  (see  Matt.  vi.  18).  3.  Abstinence 
is  included  in  the  nature  of  the  thing ;  abstinence  from  meat  and  drink,  and 
all  bodily  pleasures  whatsoever,  as  well  as  ceasing  from  worldly  business.  The 
rule  for  abstinence  from  meat  and  drink  cannot  be  the  same  for  all.  These, 
however,  are  but  the  outward  shell  of  these  duties.  II.  The  inteknal  and 
SPIBITUAL  PART.  1.  Serious  meditation  and  consideration  of  our  ways.  Such 
times  are  to  be  set  apart  from  conversing  with  the  world,  that  we  may  the  more 
solemnly  commune  with  our  own  hearts  as  to  the  state  of  matters  between  God 
and  us.  In  them  we  are  diligently  to  review  our  past  life.  2.  Deep  humiliation 
of  soul  before  the  Lord ;  the  which  was  signified  by  the  sackcloth  and  ashes  used, 
under  the  law,  on  such  occasions.  3.  Free  and  open  confession  of  sin  before  God, 
without  reserve.  4.  The  exercise  of  repentance  in  turning  from  sin  unto  God, 
both  in  heart  and  life,  the  native  result  of  deep  humiliation  and  sincere  con- 
fession. The  true  way  to  deal  with  a  hard  heart  is  to  believe  the  Gospel.  "  With- 
out faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God,"  and  therefore  impossible  to  reach  true 
humiliation,  right  confession,  and  sincere  repentance,  which  are  very  pleasing 
to  Him.  5.  Solemn  covenanting  with  God,  entering  into  or  renewing  covenant 
with  Him  in  express  words.  6.  Extraordinary  prayer,  in  importunate  addresses 
and  petitions  unto  our  covenanted  God,  for  that  which  is  the  particular  occasion 
of  our  fast.  Now  consider  personal  fasting  and  humiliation  in  particular. 
III.  The  Divine  warrant  foe  it.  1.  God  requires  it  in  His  Word,  and  that 
both  directly  and  indirectly.  2.  It  is  promised  that  the  saints  shall  perform 
this  duty.  3.  It  is  recommended  vmto  us  by  the  practice  of  the  saints  mentioned 
in  Scripture.  4.  The  duty  of  personal  fasting  and  humiliation  may  be  thus 
evinced.  (1)  There  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  religious  fasting  and  humiliation 
that  of  itself  is  public,  or  necessarily  requiring  a  plurality  of  persons  to  join  therein. 
The  preaching  of  the  Word  and  celebration  of  the  sacraments  do,  in  their  own 
nature,  require  society,  and  therefore  are  not  to  be  used  by  a  single  person  alone 
in  his  closet.  But  one  may  keep  a  fast  alone.  (2)  Extraordinary  duties  are  called 
for  on  extraordinary  emergents  and  occasions.  If,  then,  a  church  or  congregation 
is  called  to  fasting  and  humiliation  on  such  occasions,  is  not  a  particular  person 
called  to  the  same,  or  such  occasions  in  his  cave  ?  (3)  Extraordinary  duties 
to  be  performed  by  a  whole  nation,  chvu-ch,  or  congregation  cannot  soon  be  over- 
taken, because  all  bodies  are  slow  in  their  operations.  What  should  particular 
persons  do  in  such  cases  ?  Should  they  not  keep  personal  and  family  fasts  ? 
Now  consider  a  providential  call  to  personal  fasting  and  humiliation.  1.  When 
there  is  any  special  evil  actually  lying  upon  us,  the  Church,  or  our  neighbour, 
in  whom  we  have  a  special  concern  ;  whether  it  be  a  sinful  or  a  penal  evil.  And 
when  the  tokens  of  God's  high  displeasmre  are  gone  out  in  afflicting  providences, 
it  is  time  for  us  to  roll  ourselves  in  the  dust,  and  so  to  accommodate  our  spirit 
and  way  to  the  dispensation,  humbling  oiurselves  before  Him  with  fasting.  2.  When 
there  is  any  special  stroke  threatening  or  impending.  3.  When  there  is  some 
special  mercy  or  favour  to  be  desired  of  the  Lord.  Take  a  variety  of  these 
particular  cases — (1)  When  through  a  long  track  of  sirming  and  careless  walking, 
the  oase  of  one's  soul  is  left  quite  in  disorder  and  confusion.  (2)  When  one  is 
under  convictions,  entertaining  some  thoughts  to  reform.  (3)  When  the  con- 
science is  defiled  with  the  guilt  of  some  atrocious  sin.  (4)  When  one  would 
fain  get  over  a  snare  he  is  often  caught  in,  and  have  victory  over  a  lust  that  hath 
often  mastered  him.  (5)  When  one  is  under  a  dead  desertion.  (6)  When  one 
is  \mder  a  felt  and  smarting  desertion.  (7)  When  one  is  pressed  with  some  out- 
ward affliction,  whether  in  his  body,  relations,  name,  substance,  or  otherwise. 

(8)  When,  by  the  aspect  of  providence,  one  is  threatened  with  some  such  affliction. 

(9)  When  one  would  have  light  and  direction  in  some  matter  of  special  weight. 

(10)  When  duty  being  cleared  in  a  matter  of  special  weight,  it  comes  to  the  setting 
to.  (11)  When  one,  having  some  unordinary  difficulty  to  encount«r,  is  in  hazard 
of  being  ensnared  either  into  sin  or  danger.  (12)  When  one  hath  in  view  some 
solemn  approach  unto  God  ;  in  which  case  a  special  preparation  is  requisite.  .  .  . 
Now  consider  some  directions  anent  personal  fasting  and  humiliation.  1.  Make 
choice  of  a  fit  time  and  place.  2.  Make  some  preparation  for  it  the  night  before. 
3.  Rise  early  in  the  morning,  even  sooner  than  ordinary.     4.  Let  holy  thoughts 


CHAP,  xm.]  ZECHARIAH.  203 

at  once  have  access  to  your  soul.  5.  Let  your  ordinary  duties  of  prayer  and  reading 
of  the  Word  be  first  performed ;  for  extraordinary  duties  are  not  to  jostle  out 
the  ordinary.  6.  Begin  with  a  solemn  review  of  your  sins — the  sins  of  your  nature, 
of  your  childhood,  of  your  youth,  of  your  middle  age.  ...  To  recommend  the 
practice  of  these  duties  to  persons  and  families,  these  five  things  are  offered  in 
favour  thereof ;  namely,  that  the  practice  of  them  is  a  proper  means — 1.  To 
bring  strangers  to  religion  acquainted  with  it.  2.  To  recover  backsliders.  3.  To 
prevent  relapses.  4.  To  prepare  for  a  time  of  triaL  6.  To  get  matters  clear 
for  eternity.     (T.  Boston.) 


CHAPTER  Xm. 


Veb.  1.  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened,  &c. — The  Fountain 
of  Life  : — To  what  can  the  prophet  refer  but  the  exclamation  of  John,  "  Behold 
the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  I.  Explain  the  promise. 
1.  The  fountain.  This  image  holds  forth  the  Redeemer.  In  distinction  from 
creatures,  which  are  "cisterns,  broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water,"  He  may 
well  call  Himself  the  "Fountain  of  living  waters."  He  shall  possess  a  plenitude 
Himself.  The  fulness  of  the  Christian  is  derived  and  limited  :  it  is  the  fulness 
of  a  vessel.  The  vessel  is  supplied  from  the  fulness  of  a  fountain.  This  fountain 
is  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  fulness  is  original  and  boundless.  It  is  the  fulness  of  a 
spring.  2.  The  fountain  was  to  be  opened.  A  fountain  sealed  would  be  useless  ;  it 
would  only  provoke  desire.  What  would  the  Saviour's  excellencies  and  benefits 
be  to  us  if  iinattainable  and  inaccessible  ?  The  fountain  was  actually  opened 
in  His  sufferings.  The  apostles  laid  it  open  doctrinally,  in  their  preaching  and 
in  their  epistles.  3.  This  fountain  is  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.  There 
had  been  provisions  for  ceremonial  pollution,  under  the  Mosaic  economy.  The 
brazen  sea.  Ten  lavers.  See  also  the  Pool  of  Siloam.  Sin  is  uncleanness.  Its 
very  nature  is  contamination.  Sin  is  a  pollution  the  most  deep  and  diffusive. 
The  very  conscience  is  defiled.  It  is  the  "  abominable  thing."  But  there  is 
a  fountain  that  washes  out  even  the  stains  of  the  soul, — and  of  sin.  And  it  was 
opened  for  this  very  purpose.  II.  To  improve  the  truth  contained  in  the 
PROMISE.  Five  classes  have  a  relation  to  the  truth  before  us.  1.  The  ignorant. 
Such  as  cry,  "  Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace."  2.  The  presumptuous. 
Antinomian  perversion  is  worse  than  mere  ignorance.  3.  The  self-righteous, 
who  hope  to  cleanse  themselves  in  some  other  way.  4.  The  fearful.  For  it  is 
no  easy  thing  to  satisfy  the  conscience  of  awakened  sinners.  5.  Those  who  by 
faith  have  applied  to  the  Saviour,  and  who  know  by  experience  that  there  is 
indeed  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  (William  Jay.)  The 
fountain  for  sin : — I.  What  they  needed.  Two  things  :  deliverance  from  guilt 
and  condemnation,  and  deliverance  from  sin's  impurity.  These  are  the  very 
blessings  for  which  our  text  represents  provision  has  been  made.  The  fountain 
is  opened  "for  sin  and  for  uncleanness."  The  former  meaning  "guilt,"  the  latter 
"  pollution."  The  whole  context  prohibits  oiu-  regarding  the  language  as  referring 
to  anything  ceremonial.  The  guilt,  contracted,  and  requiring  remission,  is  the 
guilt  of  "  piercing,"  that  is,  of  putting  to  death  the  true,  divinely  promised  Messiah, 
and  the  "  uncleanness  "  points  to  those  unholy  and  hellish  principles  and  dis- 
positions in  the  soul  from  which  the  guilt  originated,  by  which  the  fearful  act 
was  prompted.  The  guilt  was  deep.  The  depth  of  moral  debasement  and 
violence  was  fearful  from  which  they  who  had  been  guilty  of  it  required  to  be 
purified.  II.  How  these  blessings  are  provided  for  them.  L  What  is 
the  fountain  ?  It  is  a  twofold  figure,  comprehending  the  grace  of  Christ's  Spirit 
as  well  as  the  virt'je  of  Christ's  blood,  cleansing  as  well  as  forgiveness.  These ' 
blessings  are  always  found  in  union.  Christ  died  that  sinners  might  be  both 
pardoned  and  purified  ;  and  the  two  designs  were  emblematically  indicated  by 
the  mingling  of  the  blood  and  water  that  flowed  from  His  pierced  heart.  The 
fountain  means  at  once  the  blood  of  Christ's  atonement  and  the  grace  of  Christ's 
Spirit ;  the  one  required  for  forgiveness,  and  the  other  for  regeneration  and 
cleansing :  the  two,  however,  being  inseparable  ;  the  faith  which  interests  in 
.  the  pardoning  virtue  of  the  blood,  being  the  product  of  the  giace  of  the  Spirit, 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

and  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  effecting  the  renewal  and  sanctification  of  the  soul 
by  means  of  the  doctrine  which  makes  known  the  pardoning  virtue  of  the  blood  : 
it  being  the  same  faith,  under  the  agency  of  the  same  Spirit,  which  at  once  justifies 
and  sanctifies.  And  it  is  thus  that  the  blood  is  represented  as  the  means  of 
purifying  as  well  as  of  procuring  pardon.  2.  When  was  this  fountain  opened  7 
When  Christ  died  ;  when  His  blood  was  shed  on  the  cross,  for  the  remission  of 
sins  ;  when  the  blood  and  the  water  flowed  in  union  from  His  pierced  side.  While 
strictly  and  properly,  the  fountain  was  opened  then, — it  might  be  said  to  have 
been  opened  from  the  time  when  it  came  first  to  be  needed, — from  the  time  when 
man  sinned.  It  was  then  opened  by  anticipation.  The  first  promise  opened 
it.  The  moment  man  became  a  sinner  he  needed  the  two  blessings  of  pardon 
and  sanctification.  3.  How  is  it  here  said  to  be  opened  "  in  that  day  "  ?  The 
answer  is,  that  although  there  have  now  and  then,  since  the  judgments  of  God 
overtook  the  Jewish  people  for  their  unbelief,  been  instances  of  Jews  brought 
to  acknowledge  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  and  Saviour,  and  to  obtain  salvation  by 
faith  in  Him  ;  yet  to  the  large  mass  of  that  dispersed,  and  for  the  time  divinely 
abandoned  people,  the  fountain  has  not  been  open.  It  has  been  sealed  ;  sealed 
by  themselves,  and  for  their  unbelief  judicially  sealed  by  God.  When  the  time 
of  mercy  arrives  the  fountain  shall,  in  God's  providence  and  by  God's  grace, 
be  opened  for  their  cleansing  from  their  guilt  and  their  pollution.  It  is  said  of 
them,  "  They  shall  look  on  Me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  shall  mourn."  4.  For 
what  purpose  ?  Two — the  washing  away  of  guilt,  and  the  washing  away  of 
moral  defilement.  Both  these  purposes  were  in  the  mind  of  God,  as  to  be  alike 
effected  by  the  mediation  of  the  Son.  That  the  guilt  of  sin  might  be  fully  taken 
away,  and  thus  the  sinner  escape  its  punishment,  atonement  was  necessary. 
6.  For  what  persons  ?  not  simply  for  the  restored  of  Israel, — but  for  the  "  house 
of  David  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem."  The  idea  thus  conveyed  is  that 
of  all  ranks,  from  the  royal  occupants  of  the  palace  to  the  tenants  of  the  meanest 
dwelling.  All  shall  be  stricken  through  with  the  conviction  and  alarm  ;  all  shall 
feel  the  bitterness  of  contrition  ;  all  shall  mourn.  And  for  all,  in  like  manner, 
the  fountain  shall  be  opened.  All  shall  need  it.  All  shall  have  access  to  it.  All 
shall  avail  themselves  of  it.  {Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  best  fountain: — It 
is  a  beautiful  thing  to  see  a  fountain  playing.  Fountain  in  the  text  is  the  best 
fountain.  What  is  meant  by  this  fountain  ?  It  means  the  blood  which  Jesus 
shed  when  He  hung  upon  the  cross.  It  is  in  consequence  of  what  Jesus  then 
suffered — the  blood  He  shed,  and  the  death  He  died — that  God  pardons  the  sins  of 
men,  and  saves  their  souls.  It  is  the  best  fountain — 1.  Because  it  is  easy  to  get  at. 
No  long  journey  is  needed.  You  may  find  it  everywhere.  2.  It  never  changes. 
Other  fountains  are  sometimes  in  full  play,  and  sometimes  very  feeble.  Illustrate 
by  the  Pool  of  Bethesda.  This  is  always  the  same.  3.  Because  of  its  wonder- 
ful powers.  Some  fountains  cure  diseases  and  restore  health.  This  is  designed  for 
the  souls  of  men.  This  has  a  wonderful  cleansing  power,  and  a  wonderful  healing 
power,  and  a  wonderful  preserving  power  against  the  worms  of  pride  and  selfish- 
ness that  may  imperil  our  souls,  as  they  do  the  good  ships ;  a  wonderful  beautifying 
power,  and  a  wonderful  saving  power.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Christ  otir  fountain .• 
— I.  Wherein  is  Christ  a  fotjntain  ?  When  it  is  said  Christ  is  our  fountain, 
it  holds  forth  two  things  :  1.  Fulness.  A  fountain  is  not  like  a  cistern  ;  a  cistern 
may  be  full,  but  the  fulness  of  it  may  be  emptied  ;  so  may  the  fulne.'^s  of  a  fountain 
too,  but  then  a  fountain,  or  a  spring,  fills  itself  again  immediately.  So  doth 
not  a  cistern.  A  cistern  may  be  fuU,  but  it  doth  not  rise  up  and  run  over,  aa 
a  fountain  doth,  and  that  continually.  For  this  reason  the  corrupt  nature  in  u3 
is  compared  to  a  fountain  (Jer.  vi.  7) — bubbling  up  in  vain  thoughts,  inordinate 
desires,  corrupt  affections.  Now,  in  Jesus  Christ  there  is  a  fulness,  and  it  is  a 
fountain-fulness  (Col.  i.  19),  fulness — all  fulness,  and  all  fulness  dwelling,  and 
by  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father.  What  is  He  full  of  ?  The  two  things  that 
our  poor  souls  have  most  need  of  towards  the  making  of  us  happy.  Merit  and 
righteousness  for  justification ;  and  spirit  and  grace  for  sanctification.  He 
hath  merit  enough  ;  His  merit  is  of  infinite  value,  sufficient  to  take  away  all 
Bin  (Heb.  vii.  25) — able  to  save.  He  hath  Spirit  enough,  to  sanctify  us  throughout, 
to  break  the  power  of  every  lust,  to  strengthen  us  to  every  good  word  and  work. 
He  is  such  a  fountain  as  can  open  in  us  a  fountain,  springing  up  into  eternal  life 
(John  iv.  14,  i.  16).  2.  Uses — fulness.  A  fountain  is  of  great  use.  What 
striving  was  there  in  Abraham's  time,  and  Isaac's  time,  and  Jacob's  time,  about 
wells  of  water  (Gen.  xxi.  and  xxvi.).     When  Achsah  was  to  ask  a  boon  of  bet 


CHAP,  xtn.]  ZECHARIAH.  205 

father  Caleb,  Give  me,  said  she,  springs  of  water  (Judg.  i.  15).  Were  we  to  ask 
but  one  thing  of  our  heavenly  Father,  there  were  reason  it  should  be,  Lord,  <nve 
us  a  fountain.  Why,  blessed  be  His  name,  He  hath  given  us  one.  Not  only 
springs  of  water,  useful  for  our  outward  man,  a  land  of  springs,  like  Canaan, 
but  a  Christ,  a  Christ  for  our  souls.  A  fountain  of  water  is  useful  for  three  things  : 
(1)  For  quenching  of  thirst.  How  glad  is  the  weary  traveller,  or  labourer,  of 
a  spring  of  water ;  though  it  be  but  fair  water.  Oh,  says  he,  it  hath  saved  my 
life.  The  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  when  there  was  no  water,  what  an  affliction 
was  it  to  them.  When  they  had  it,  it  was  sweet  as  honey  and  oil  (1  Cor.  x.  4). 
Now,  this  fountain  is  very  useful  for  this  purpose.  Is  thy  soul  athirst  ? — athirst 
for  peace,  pardon,  life,  salvation,  for  grace,  strength  ?  Here  is  a  fountain  for 
thee,  come  and  drink  (Isa.  Iv.  1) — bu3dng  frightens  ;  therefore,  come  freely. 
Thou  art  called  (John  vii.  37  ;  Rev.  xxii.  15).  See  the  discourse  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  with  the  woman  of  Samaria  (John  iv.  10-14).  Alas  !  the  most  of  men 
know  not  what  this  means — they  are  sensible  of  no  need,  and  therefore  of  no 
desire,  but  (Psa.  xlii.  1)  "As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water-brool^,  so 
panteth  my  soul  after  Thee,  O  God."  (2)  For  washing  away  filth.  Water 
cleanses  ;  we  could  not  teU  what  to  do  without  it — to  make  our  bodies,  our 
clothes,  comfortable.  This  fovmtain  also  is  cleansing.  Sin  defiles,  leaves  a  blot, 
a  stain,  upon  the  soul.  It  is  uncleanness.  The  gmlt  of  it  is  so  :  from  that  we 
are  washed  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  satisfying  God's  justice  and  making  atone- 
ment;  also  purging  the  conscience  (1  John  i.  7;  Rev.  i.  6;  Heb.  ix.  14). 
The  corrupt  nature,  which  is  the  root  and  principle  of  it,  is  so  (Psa.  xiv.  3). 
From  this  the  Spirit  of  Christ  washes  in  the  laver  of  regeneration  (Tit.  iii. 
4,  5;  1  Cor.  vi.  11).  (3)  For  watering  the  earth  and  making  it  fruitful.  They 
use  to  have  fountains  for  that  purpose  in  their  gardens,  to  be  ready  in  a 
dry  season  to  fetch  water  to  refresh  the  plants.  Herein  also  Christ  is  our 
fountain.  Did  He  not  water  us  every  moment,  grace  in  us  would  languish 
and  die  (Isa.  xxvii.  3,  xliv.  3,  4).  Now,  it  is  the  second  of  these  especially 
that  this  text  speaks  of — Jesus  Christ  is  a  cleansing  fountain ;  we  have  need 
of  Hiiln  as  such,  for  we  are  filthy  and  defiled.  II.  What  kind  of  fountain  is 
THE  Lord  Jesus  ?  As  a  cleansing  fountain  He  hath  these  properties.  1.  He 
is  full.  He  hath  enough  wherewithal  to  cleanse  us  ;  merit  enough,  spirit  enough. 
Under  the  law  they  had  cleansing  appointments  as  to  ceremonial  pollutions, 
but  ours  is  beyond  theirs.  They  had  blood,  but  it  was  but  the  blood  of  bulls 
and  goats,  and  that  in  a  bason  only  ;  but  we  have  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God, 
not  in  a  bason,  but  a  fountain  full  of  it.  They  had  water ;  one  particularly, 
called  the  water  of  purification,  made  of  the  ashes  of  a  red  heifer.  Open  and 
free  as  to  terms.  We  say — What  is  freer  than  a  gift  ?  He  is  the  gift  of  God 
(John  iv.  10),  the  free  gift  (Rom.  v.),  the  unspeakable  gift  (2  Cor.  ix.  15).  Though 
thou  hast  no  worthiness,  no  matter,  He  is  worthy.  Cordial  acceptance  makes 
Him  ours.  He  forgives  freely  (Isa.  xliii.  25).  2.  The  only  fountain.  Besides 
Him  there  is  no  other  (Acts  iv.  12).  We  may  think,  perhaps,  as  Naaman — "  Are 
not  Abana  and  Pharpar,  rivers  of  Damascus,  better  than  all  the  waters  of  Israel  ? 
may  I  not  wash  in  them,  and  be  clean  ?  "  (2  Kings  v.  12).  But  no  other  fountain 
will  do.  III.  The  application,  in  four  particulars.  1.  Here  is  matter  for 
thanksgiving  to  God,  who — (1)  Appointed  this  fountain  in  the  counsel  of  His 
will  from  all  eternity  (John  iii.  16).  (2)  Opened  it  in  the  fulness  of  time,  after 
it  had  been  shut  for  four  thousand  years  (Gal.  iv.  4).  (3)  Opened  it  to  us  ;  to 
us  of  this  nation,  country,  neighbourhood,  of  this  present  age  and  generation. 
We  are  within  hearing  of  the  joyful  sound.  (4)  And  specially,  that  He  hath 
brought  us  to  it  and  washed  us  in  it.  This  is  certainly  the  mercy  of  mercies, — 
"  Unto  Him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood  " 
(Rev.  i.  5).  This  is  more  than  angels  can  say.  When  ten  lepers  were  cleansed, 
only  one  returned  to  give  thanks  (Luke  xvii.).  2.  Here  is  matter  for  conviction. 
Convincing  !  Of  what  ?  Of  your  need  of  this  fountain  to  wash  in.  That  which 
is  unclean  doth  certainly  need  washing  ;  but  thou  art  unclean,  I  mean,  thy  soul, 
thy  mind,  thy  conscience  ;  inwardly,  spiritually.  I  am  sure  thou  wast  so  by 
nature  ;  born  in  guilt  and  filth  ;  like  an  infant  weltering  in  blood  and  pollution 
(Ezek.  xvi.).  And  art  thou  washed?  When,  and  how?  And  by  whom,  and 
with  what  ?  I  am  sure  that  every  sin  thou  hast  committed  hath  added  to  that 
original  pollution,  and  hath  made  thee  more  and  more  filthy  (Psa.  cvi.  39  ;  Matt. 
XV.  19,  20).  Even  vain  thoughts  (Jer.  iv.  17).  So  is  the  world  also  (Jam.  i.  27). 
Nay,  our  best  duties  have  their  pollutions  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6).     But  there  is  one  particular 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap,  xin 

kind  of  sins,  those  against  the  seventh  commandment,  that  is  especially  called 
tmclesnness.  And  have  we  been  in  no  sort  guilty  of  that,  neither  in  thought, 
word,  nor  deed?  (Philip  Henry.)  The  fountain  opened: — I.  A  fountain. 
Water  is  much  valued  in  the  East.  We  cannot  wonder  that  spiritual  blessings 
are  so  often  exhibited  to  us  in  Scripture  under  images  borrowed  from  water. 
These  images  found  their  way  at  once  to  the  understandings  and  feelings  of  Jewish 
men.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  meant  by  the  text.  He  is  represented  as  a  fountain 
for  a  particular  purpose  ;  not  for  the  thirsty  to  drink  from,  but  for  the  unclean 
to  wash  in.  Here  again  the  text  carries  us  into  eastern  climes.  Bodily  ablutjons 
are  much  more  common  there  than  among  us.  With  the  Jews,  too,  they  partook 
sometimes  of  a  sacred  character.  The  prophet  mentions  two  things,  sin  and 
uncleanness,  but  he  has  only  one  in  his  mind — sin  under  the  figure  of  uncleanness. 
Does  uncleanness  degrade  whatever  it  touches  ?  So  has  sin  degraded  us.  Is 
uncleanness  a  disgusting  and  loathsome  thing  ?  If  there  is  anything  disgusting 
in  the  universe,  it  is  sin.  When  God  calls  it  by  this  name,  He  represents  it  as  some- 
thing which  He  cannot  bear  to  look  upon.  In  the  text  is  a  remedy  for  this  hateful 
evil.  It  is  a  suitable,  a  real,  effectual  remedy  for  it.  It  is  a  fountain  that  can 
remove  uncleanness,  and  is  intended  to  remove  it.  This  fountain  is  nothing 
else  than  the  precious  blood  of  God's  own  dear  Son.  That  blood  was  shed  for 
us.  As  water  removes  uncleanness  from  the  body,  so  does  this  blood  remove 
the  guilt  of  sin  from  the  soul.  It  does  away  with  it,  frees  the  soul  from  it,  makes 
our  condition  aa  safe,  and  in  the  end  as  happy,  as  though  we  had  never  sinned. 
This  effectual  remedy  for  sin  is  here  described  as  an  abundant,  lasting  remedy. 
Thousands  may  wash  in  it,  and  it  will  be  as  everflowing  as  ever,  able  to  e'eanse 
thousands  and  thousands  more.  II.  FojLJWaoM  this  fountain  is  intended. 
For  the  Jews  first,  then  for  all  others.  1.  The  utter  insufficiency  of  all  rites  and 
ordinances  to  cleanse  the  soul  from  sin.  Who  were  these  men  ?  The  very  men 
to  whom  pertained  the  law,  with  all  its  sacrifices.  When  guilt  oppressed  or  con- 
science disquieted  them,  they  could  in  a  few  minutes  be  in  their  temple,  and 
sharing  in  its  sacrifices  and  service.  But  the  text  addresses  them  as  if  they  were 
the  verj'  heathen.  All  their  legal  ordinances  could  not  expiate  their  guilt.  I|  is  the 
same  with  our  Christian  sacraments.  God  has  ordained  them,  not  to  take  away  sin, 
but  to  keep  us  mindful  of  it,  and  of  that  blood  which  can  take  it  away.  2.  We  are 
taught  here  the  all-sufficic  cy  of  Christ's  blood  to  cleanse  the  soul.  There  is  no  guilt 
too  great  for  the  blood  of  Christ  to  wash  out,  no  sinner  whom  He  cannot  recover  and 
save.  III.  The  TIME  when  this  fountain  shall  be  opened  to  these  sinful 
MEN.  "  In  that  day."  The  day  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion.  They  point  also  to 
a  day  yet  to  come,  when  the  Jews  as  a  nation  shall  be  brought  to  repentance  and 
the  reception  of  Christ.  Learn — 1.  There  can  be  no  real  knowledge  of  Christ 
without  repentance.  2.  Wherever  there  is  real  reix^ntance  there  also  will  God  give 
in  the  end  a  real  knowledge  of  His  salvation.  Would  that  we  might  all  learn  from 
this  Scripture  to  seek  for  ourselves  a  deeper  consciousness  of  sin,  a  more  hear  - 
felt  and  abiding  sorrow  on  account  of  it !  (C.  Bradley.)  The  fountain  for  sin 
and  uncleanness : — The  prophet  leads  us  to  consider  the  legal  uncleannesses  so  much 
and  so  fully  developed  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  leads  us  through  them  to  look 
at  the  great  disease  of  sin — the  leprosy  of  the  soul.  I.  The  great  uncleanness 
—  the  spiritual  leprosy  of  the  soul.  This  is  that  that  defileth  a  man. 
It  is  not  poverty;  it  is  not  sickness  nor  disease — however  terrible  or  however 
sinful.  That  which  defileth  a  man.  This  inward  leprosy  maketh  a  man  an 
offence  to  God.  This  evil  pervadeth  the  world,  and  yet  men  are  as  insensible 
of  it  as  if  there  were  no  truth  in  it.  II.  A  fountain  open  for  sin  and  for 
UNCLEANNESS.  The  fountain  is  the  blood  of  Jesus.  A  bubbling  fountain,  ever 
full,  ever  abundant.  III.  This  fountain  is  said  to  be  opened.  Formerly, 
this  fountain  exclusively  belonged  to  the  priests  and  to  the  Jews  ;  now,  it  is 
for  the  whole  house  of  David,  and  for  all  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  There 
it  stands,  a  fountain  without  cover,  open  and  free  for  the  very  vilest.  (J.  II.  Evans. ) 
The  fountain  opened  : — The  text  contains  one  important  prediction  which  was 
fulfilled  in  Christ.  It  relates  to  the  consequences  of  His  death,  with  regard  to 
His  people,  and  shows  of  what  great  importance  this  event  was  to  the  whole 
Christian  Church.  The  accomplishment  shows  with  what  confidence  and  comfort 
we  may  rely  on  the  great  doctrine  of  the  atonement  which  it  involves.     I.  The 

promise  of  PROVISION  TO  BE  MADE  AGAINST  THE  EFFECTS  OF  SIN.        1.  The  prophet 

speaks  of  a  fountain  to  be  opened.  A  fountain  is  properly  the  source  or  spring- 
head of  waters.     Springs  or  fountains   are  called,  "  living,"  when  they  never 


x^p.  xra.]  ZECHARIAH.  207 

ce.<se  or  intermit,  but  are  always  sending  forth  their  streams.  2.  The  blood 
of  Christ  was  shed  expressly,  by  appointment  of  God,  and  by  covenant  with 
tht  Son  of  God,  for  the  expiation  of  human  guilt,  and  for  the  cleansing  and  purifying 
of  sinful  men.  3.  There  is  an  inexhaustible  fulness  and  sufficiency  of  merit  in 
thia  blood  of  the  Redeemer  for  the  complete  expiation  of  human  sin.  In  its 
atoning  and  cleansing  properties,  the  blood  of  Immanuel  is  as  infinite  as  the  mercy 
of  God  which  it  procures  for  sinners,  and  for  the  exercise  of  which  it  prepares 
the  way.  4.  This  blood  of  Jesus  Chxist  may  be  appropriated  to  the  case  and 
wants  of  any  sinner  that  comes.  Sinners  may  apply  believingly  to  this  blood, 
and  obtain  from  it,  not  only  the  cleansing  they  require,  but  also  plenteous  forgive- 
ness, substantial  peace,  and  animating  hope.  II.  The  persons  fob  whom  this 
PROVISION  AGAINST  THE  EFFECTS  OF  SIN  IS  PEOinsED.  1.  By  this  expression 
the  prophet  intended  primarily  God's  ancient  people,  the  Jews.  But  the  Jews, 
as  the  peculiar  people  of  God,  were  a  type  of  Christians,  and  His  people  everywhere. 
It  is  no  presumption  in  us  to  conclude,  as  we  have  already  assumed,  that  this 
promised  provision  is  intended  for  us.  2.  The  double  phrase  may  denote  both 
rich  and  poor  in  God's  Church.  III.  The  timb  when  the  promise  was  to  be 
VERIFIED.  The  promise  was  actually  fulfilled  on  the  day  of  the  Saviour's  cruci- 
fixion on  Calvary.  (J.  Jaquea,  M.A.)  The  opened  fountain  : — The  application 
of  this  prophecy  to  Messiah  is  beyond  all  doubt.  It  contains  the  announcement 
of  a  divinely  appointed  and  effectual  remedy  for  the  guilt  and  misery  of  man. 
1.  The  certainty  of  this  provision.  "  There  shall  be  a  fountain."  2.  The  per- 
petuity of  this  provision.  3.  The  freeness  of  this  provision.  4.  The  sufficiency 
of  this  provision.     (W.  G.  Barrett.)         The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  a  fountain: — 

I.  In  what  SENSE  MAY  THE  LORD  JeSXJS  BE  DEPICTED  AS  THE  FOUNTAIN  OPENED  ? 

In  opposition  to  those  many  broken  cisterns  of  human  invention  to  which  men 
are  prone  to  apply.  In  opposition  to  those  rivulets,  those  brooks,  which  are 
occasionally  good,  but  which  soon  flow  away  and  are  lost.  Under  the  law  there 
were  various  lavers  prepared  for  the  purpose  of  purifying  from  ceremonial  guilt 
and  pollution.  Jesus  is  a  fountain  in  opposition  to  all  these  types  and  images. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  fountain,  because  He  Himself  in  His  own  power,  in  His 
own  essence,  contains  inexhaustible  and  perpetual  fulness.  II.  For  what 
PURPOSE  VHE  Lord  Jesus  is  this  fountain.  For  sin  and  for  uncleanness. 
All  sin  is  uncleanness.  Repeating  the  expression  gives  more  enlarged  views 
of  the  efficacy  of  faith,  and  the  grace  of  our  Lord.  For  the  pm-pose  of  giving 
comfort  and  peace  to  the  believer  the  terms  are  doubled.  This  fountain  cleanses 
not  only  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  but  also  from  the  accusi  g  and  terrifying  power 
of  sin  in  th^  conscience.  III.  To  whom  is  it  opened  ?  "  The  house  of  David 
and  inbabiiants  of  Jerusalem."  In  the  East  there  were  often  contentions 
over  founts.jns  ;  this  one  is  free  to  all.  An  open  fountain,  to  which  all  ranks, 
all  stations,  all  ages,  all  conditions,  may  repair.  (Archdeacon  Law.)  The 
fountain  opened:  —  I.  The  fountain  that  is  opened.  1.  The  plenitude  of 
Divine  gxact..  It  is  not  a  wasting  stream,  that  soon  exhausts  its  store,  but 
a  never-failiig  fountain,  ever  flowing  in  plenteous  supplies  for  every  demand. 
The  Lord  Jf-hovah  is  emphatically  styled,  "  The  God  of  all  grace.''  Millions 
have  been  ryfresbed  by  this  fovmtain,  and  still  it  is  undiminished.  There  is 
"  enough  for  all,  and  enough  for  evermore."  2.  The  freeness  of  Divine  grace. 
It  is  not  a  fountain  sealed  up,  and  forbidden ;  but  freely  opened  and  accessible 
to  all.  Nono  are  excluded  from  participating  its  richest  blessings  (Rev.  xxii.  17). 
No  personal   merit,   or   moral   worthiness,  is   required  in  its  willing  recipients. 

II.  The  period  when  it  was  opened.  "  In  that  day,"  &c.  When  this  expression 
occurs  in  the  prophetic  writings,  it  generally  refers  to  the  actual  appearing,  or 
spiritual  reign  of  the  Messiah.  But  we  ought  to  notice  respecting  this  fountain, 
that — 1.  It  was  virtually  opened  in  the  original  scheme  of  redemption.  According 
to  God's  gracious  promise  to  mankind,  Christ  is  called,  "  The  Lamb  slain  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world."  2.  It  was  actually  opened  in  the  mediatorial 
work  of  the  Redeemer.  When  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  Christ  was  mani- 
fested in  the  flesh,  to  accomplish  the  will  of  God,  and  procure  the  salvation  of 
sinners.  He  then  fully  opened  this  fountain,  by  fulfilling  all  righteousness  in 
His  own  person — becoming  the  propitiation  for  our  sins — rising  again  for  our 
justification — ascending  to  heaven  to  be  our  Advocate  with  the  Father — and 
diffusing  an  enlarged  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  it  was  ministerially  opened 
in  the  labours  and  writings  of  the  Apostles,  as  "ambassadors  for  Christ"  (1  Cor. 
L  23,  24,  30);  and  it  still  continues   open.    HI.  The  people  to  whom  it  is 


208  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xui. 

OPENED.  "  The  house  of  David,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem."  It  is  very- 
evident — 1.  This  fountain  was  primarily  opened  to  the  Jews.  To  the  Jews 
Christ  was  promised,  and  to  them  He  came  as  His  own  people,  according  to 
the  flesh.  His  personal  ministry  was  generally  confined  to  them  ;  and  He  coni- 
jnanded  His  apostles  to  open  their  commission  at  Jerusalem,  and  preach  the 
Gospel  first  to  the  "lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Irsael"  (Luke  xxiv.  46,  47). 
2.  This  fountain  is  now  graciously  opened  to  the  Gentiles.  The  blessings  of  the 
Messiah  were  not  to  be  confined  to  the  Jewish  Church.  He  was  sent  "  to  be  a 
light  of  the  Gentiles,  and  for  salvation  to  the  ends  of  the  earth."  "  By  the  grace 
of  God  He  tasted  death  for  every  man."  IV.  The  purpose  foe  which  it  is 
OPENED.  It  is  "  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness."  This  implies — 1.  A  fountain  is 
opened  for  the  expiation  of  sin.  The  death  of  Christ  was  a  perfect  sacrifice, 
by  which  an  atonement  was  made  for  the  sins  of  mankind.  2.  A  foimtain  is 
opened  for  the  destruction  of  sin.  It  must  not  only  be  sacrificially  expiated, 
but  personally  destroyed.  The  Son  of  God  effects  this  destruction  by  the  merit 
of  His  death,  and  the  operation  of  His  grace  (Titus  ii.  14).  All  sin  is  moral  un- 
cleanness, and  spreads  its  infectious  disease  through  every  power,  both  of  body 
and  soul.  The  ceremonial  purifications  under  the  law  were  emblematic  of  the 
efficacy  of  this  fountain  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14).  [Skeletons  of  Sermons.)  The  fountain 
opened : — The  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  has  never  yet  taken  place,  and  wiU 
probably  be  considerably  posterior  to  our  times.  Though  not  fulfilled  to  the 
Jews,  yet,  to  us  the  fountain  is  opened.  I.  What  is  this  fountain  ?  The  ancient 
Jews  had  their  sacrifices,  and  pmrifying  oblations.  They  have  now  been  long 
without  a  sacrifice  and  a  priesthood.  We  are  not  to  understand  that  these 
Levitical  fountains  will  be  opened  again,  as  some  have  dreamed.  The  blood 
of  animals  might  be  an  instituted  means  of  taking  away  a  ceremonial  guilt,  which 
yet  left  the  sinner  as  he  was  before,  in  regard  to  the  Governor  of  the  world  ;  but 
it  had  no  fitness  to  take  away  moral  guilt,  because  it  failed  in  the  two  great  prin- 
ciples of  a  true  atonement, — a  manifestation  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  a  demonstra- 
tion of  God's  righteous  government.  These  meet  in  Christ,  who  is  the  true 
fountain.  II.  Its  efficacy.  In  the  removal  of  "  sm  and  imcleanness."  1.  Sin 
is  the  "  transgression  of  the  law."  The  law  is  trans^essed  in  three  ways, — by  a 
violation  of  its  precepts,  by  a  neglect  of  its  injunctions,  and  by  a  defect  in  its 
observance.  Bringing  all  under  the  penalty  of  death.  2.  Uncleanness  (margin, 
"  separation  for  imcleanness  ").  Allusion  to  arrangements  in  the  Levitical  system ; 
typical  of  the  manner  in  which  sin  separates  between  the  soul  and  God.  III.  The 
DAY  WHEN  the  FOUNTAIN  IS  OPENED.  The  day  of  OUT  Lord's  crucifixion.  The 
day  when  the  Gospel  is  first  preached  in  a  heathen  land.  The  day  when  a  "  Spirit 
of  grace  and  supplication  "  is  poured  out.  Whenever  a  penitent  mourns.  In 
every  means  of  grace,  that  pardon  may  be  repeated,  and  our  sinful  nature  cleansed. 
We  need  never  attend  any  of  the  ordinances  of  religious  worship  without  receiving 
a  renewed  application  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  a  fresh  communication  of  sancti- 
fying grace.  (R.  Waison. )  The  fountain  opened  : — In  the  text  the  prophet 
anticipates  the  personal  manifestation  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  unspeakable  benefits 
to  mankind  from  His  atoning  sacrifice.  I.  The  fountain  that  is  opened. 
Fountain  is  a  metaphor.  It  represents  the  mediatorial  character  of  Christ,  as 
the  source  and  medium  of  salvation  to  the  human  race.  A  foimtain  opened 
implies — 1.  The  plenitude  of  Divine  grace.  It  is  a  never-failing  fountain,  ever 
flowing  in  plenteous  supplies  for  every  demand.  2.  The  freeness  of  Divine  grace. 
It  is  not  sealed,  but  freely  opened,  and  accessible  to  all.  II.  The  period  when 
IT  WAS  OPENED.  "In  that  day."  This  expression,  in  the  prophetic  writings, 
generally  refers  to  the  actual  appearing,  or  spiritual  reign  of  Messiah.  It  refers 
to  Christ's  assumption  of  our  nature,  and  sacrifice  for  our  sins.  1.  It  was  virtually 
opened  in  the  original  scheme  of  redemption.  2.  It  was  actually  opened  in  the 
mediatorial  work  of  the  Redeemer.  III.  The  people  to  whom  it  is  opened. 
1.  This  fountain  was  primarily  opened  to  the  Jews.  2.  It  is  now  graciously  opened 
to  the  Gentiles.  IV.  The  purpose  for  which  it  is  opened.  It  is  "  for  sin  and 
for  uncleanness."  This  implies — 1.  A  fountain  is  opened  for  the  expiation  of 
sin.  The  death  of  Christ  was  a  perfect  sacrifice,  by  which  an  atonement  was 
made  for  the  sins  of  mankind.  2.  A  fountain  is  opened  for  the  destruction  of 
sin.  The  ceremonial  purifications  under  the  law  were  emblematic  of  the  efficacy 
of  this  fountain.  (C  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  new  economy  of  grace  : — It  is  not 
to  the  advent  of  a  person,  or  to  the  occurrence  of  any  historical  event,  that  the 
prophecy  in  the  beginning  of  this  section  refers  :  what  is  announced  ia  the  estab- 


CHAP,  xm.]  ZECHARIAH.  209 

lishment  of  the  economy  of  grace,  the  bringing  in  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  free 
access  to  which  should  be  given  to  all,  small  and  great.  There  was  provision 
made  for  the  cleansing  from  sin  and  imcleanness  of  all  without  respect  of  persons ; 
the  Jew  first,  but  also  the  Greek.  The  manifestation  of  this  was  by  the  appearing 
of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  to  take  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself ; 
but  it  is  the  thing  done  rather  than  the  doer  of  it  that  is  here  announced.  It  is 
for  the  house  of  David  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  that  this  fountain  is 
said  to  be  opened.  They  seem  to  err  grievously,  however,  who  infer  from  this 
that  this  prophecy  refers  to  the  final  conversion  of  the  Jewish  people.  The 
prophets  are  wont  to  describe  the  new  dispensation  in  language  borrowed  from 
the  condition  and  usages  of  the  old,  and  we  interpret  them  aright  when  keeping 
this  in  view,  we  understand  their  descriptions,  not  as  representations  of  simple 
historical  facts,  but  as  serving  as  the  copy  and  shadow  of  the  heavenly  things, 
and  as  finding  their  fulfilment  in  crises  and  conditions  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
on  earth.  They  go  upon  the  presumption  that  the  Israel  of  God  was  never  to 
be  abolished,  that  its  continuity  was  never  to  be  interrupted,  that  though  the 
outward  national  Israel  might  be  cast  off,  because  of  their  rejection  of  the  Good 
Shepherd,  the  true  Israel,  the  reality  of  which  the  other  was  but  the  symbol, 
the  Israel  that  was  really  Israel,  should  continue  for  ever.  This  idea  our  Lord 
and  His  Apostles  adopted,  and  in  theii  teaching  and  administrations  carried  out. 
(W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  A  fountain  for  sin  : — Remission  of  sins  and  sancti- 
fication,  purging  away  the  guilt  of  sin  by  the  grace  of  God  in  forgiving  sins  through 
Christ's  blood,  and  the  virtue  of  His  blood  applied  by  the  Spirit,  and  laid  hold 
upon  by  faith,  for  purging  all  uncleanness  of  sin ;  this  is  compared  to  a  springing 
fountain  made  open  to  all,  in  opposition  to  the  small  measure  of  water  carried 
into  the  temple  for  legal  washings.  This  benefit  will  be  very  conspicuous  toward 
converted  Israel,  when  the  Redeemer  shall  turn  iniquity  from  Jacob.  1.  The 
great  and  chief  privilege  of  the  Gospel  is  remission  and  purging  of  sin,  which, 
as  they  are  only  attainable  through  faith  laying  hold  on  Christ's  blood  and  the 
grace  of  God  offered  through  Him  in  the  Gospel,  so  without  these,  no  other  advan- 
tages by  the  Gospel  will  avail  much,  or  be  comfortable.  2.  The  free  grace  of  God 
toward  lost  man,  and  the  virtue  of  Christ's  blood  is  a  treasure  inexhaustitle, 
and  which  cannot  be  overcome,  with  the  greatness  and  multiplicity  of  sin  in  those 
who  flee  unto  it,  for  it  is  a  fountain  or  spring.  3.  Pardon  and  virtue  for  purging 
of  sin  is  not  only  pm'chased,  and  the  way  to  it  made  patent,  by  the  death  of 
Chiist,  giving  access  unto  God  through  Him ;  but  is  held  forth  in  the  offer  of 
the  Gospel  and  ministry  of  the  Word,  that  none  may  pretend  ignorance,  nor  any 
who  need  it  seclude  themselves  from  so  fiee  an  offer,  "  A  fountain  opened." 
4.  As  the  greatest  must  be  in  Christ's  reverence  for  this  benefit,  even  those  who 
have  greatest  gifts  and  are  rulers  of  others,  so  the  meanest  in  the  Church,  how- 
ever they  be  not  equal  to  others  in  gifts,  yet  have  a  like  interest  with  them  in 
this  saving  benefit.  6.  When  the  Lord  pours  out  upon  His  people  the  spirit 
of  repentance  and  humiliation,  it  is  a  forerunner  of  ample  manifestations  of  the 
grace  of  God,  in  opening  up  the  treasures  of  the  Gospel  by  the  ministry  of  the 
Word,  and  in  granting  of  pardon,  and  growth  in  purity.  For,  when  "  the  land 
shall  mourn,"  "  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened."  {George  Hutcheson.) 
A  word  full  of  Gospel : — The  twelfth  chapter  of  Zechariah  is  principally  occupied 
with  the  indications  of  some  particular  day.  Thus,  we  read  again  and  again  : 
"  In  that  day  "  (ver.  3) ;  "  In  that  day  "  (ver.  4) ;  "  In  that  day  "  (ver. 
6) ;  "  In  that  day  "  (ver.  8) ;  "In  that  day  "  (ver.  9) ;  and  "  In  that  day," 
in  the  opening  of  the  thirteenth  chapter — "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain 
opened.  '  The  reference  is  not  in  reality  to  some  particular  day  ;  the  day  was 
not  the  same,  the  calendar  was  filled  with  that  particular  day,  and  yet  the  day 
was  singular  from  all  other  days  round  about  it.  In  all  the  previous  instances 
we  find  nothing  equal  to  the  music  that  is  discoverable  in  the  opening  of  the 
thirteenth  chapter.  We  read,  "  In  that  day  will  I  make  Jerusalem  a  burdensome 
stone  "  ;  "  In  that  day  I  will  smite  every  horse  with  astonishment,  and  his  rider 
with  madness  "  ;  "  In  that  day  will  I  make  the  governors  of  Judah  like  an  hearth 
of  fire  among  the  wood,  and  like  a  torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf  "  ;  "  In  that  day  shall 
there  be  great  mourning  in  Jerusalem  "  ;  but  now,  in  the  thirteenth  chapter, 
"  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness  " — 
a  fountain  of  water,  a  living  fountain,  hidden  all  the  time  in  the  rock  ;  not  a  new 
fountain,  the  fountain  was  always  there,  but  not  always  open  ;  its  existence 
was  recognised  by  many  a  ceremonial  action.     We  read  of  water  in  the  Book 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xni. 

of  Numbers  that  is  known  in  the  literal  Hebrew  as  "  the  sin-water,"  that  is  to 
say,  the  water  that  was  applied  to  the  cleansing  of  moral  and  spiritual  offences. 
We  delight  to  give  an  evangelical  interpretation  to  this  fountain.  We  call  Jesus 
Christ  the  Son  of  God,  the  fountain  that  was  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness. 
He  offered  to  make  men  clean,  He  offered  to  refresh  the  souls  of  men  with  living 
water ;  He  is  described  as  the  Water  of  earth,  or  the  Water  of  heaven.  David 
did  not  open  the  fountain,  the  fountain  was  opened  in  his  house  ;  the  very  grammar 
suggests  an  external  and  superintending  act.  In  this  living  fountain  we  recognise 
God's  supreme  miracle.  For  whom  is  the  fountain  opened  ?  For  a  special  class, 
and  for  that  class  only.  It  is  not  opened  for  Pharisees,  righteous  persons,  or 
those  who  would  carve  their  own  way  to  heaven.  This  fountain  is  opened  for 
sin  and  for  uncleanness.  Is  any  man  conscious  of  sin  ?  Here  is  the  fountain. 
Has  any  man  sat  down  by  rivers  of  water  and  taken  to  him  soap  and  nitre,  and 
tried  to  cleanse  his  life  of  sin  stains,  and  has  consciously  and  pitiably  failed  in 
his  attempt  ?  Here  is  the  fountain  opened  for  uncleanness.  Have  we  tried 
this  fountain  ?  Until  we  have  tried  it  we  cannot  condemn  it ;  until  we  have 
gone  to  it  and  sat  beside  it  and  invoked  the  spirit  of  its  Creator,  we  cannot  tell 
what  virtue  it  possesses.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  fountain  of  life  : — 

J  Old  mythology  tells  of  one  who  discovered  in  his  wanderings  a  fountain  of  peculiar 
qualities,  and  on  bathing  in  it,  found  himself  endowed  with  immortality.  In 
the  Holy  Scripture  this  fiction  is  turned  into  solid  fact.  The  Saviour's  fulness 
is  original  and  boundless ;  the  fulness  of  a  spring  always  flo  \>  ing  and  never 
diminished.  The  whole  abundance  of  God's  free  grace  is  poured  unto  us  from 
this  unfailing  source.  The  fountain  of  life  was  opened  on  the  day  when  the  Divine 
Redeemer  suffered  and  died  for  us.  During  the  brief  period  of  our  Saviour's 
ministry,  the  fountain  flowed  in  partial  streams,  but  at  His  death  it  was  fully 
and  for  ever  opened.  The  Mosaic  law  had  made  ample  provision  for  ceremonial 
pollution,  and  there  were  pools,  like  that  of  Siloam,  where  bodily  disease  might 
be  cured,  but  the  soul  must  be  washed  in  another  fountain.  The  stains  of  sin 
were  so  deep  and  so  pervading,  that  even  the  conscience  itself  was  defiled,  and 
"  the  everlasting  benediction  of  God's  heavenly  washing,"  could  alone  render 
the  soul  meet  for  His  presence  and  glory.  Such  provision,  accordingl  ,  has  been 
made,  and  a  fountain  has  been  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.  There  are 
those  who  hope  to  cleanse  themselves  by  some  methods  of  their  own.  Would  God 
have  opened  this  fountain,  if  any  other  would  have  sufficed  ?  The  fountain  stands 
open  in  the  means  of  grace;  in  the  invitations  of  God's  Word ;  in  the  nearness,  the 
power,  the  grace  of  our  adorable  Lord  and  Savioiu:.  (John  N.  Norton.)  The 
gospel  age  : — I.  It  is  a  "  day  "  for  the  abounding  of  sin  cleansing  influences. 
— To  the  Jews,  washing  from  sin  and  ceremonial  impurity  was  an  idea  with  which 
they  were  well  acquainted.  It  was  enjoined  by  the  law  (Numbers  viii.  7,  see  also 
Ezekiel  xxxvi.  25).  That  sin  and  uncleanness  are  in  the  world.  This  is  a  fact 
written  in  all  history,  patent  to  every  man's  observation  and  consciousness. 
2.  The  removal  of  sin  is  the  world's  great  necessity.  Its  existence  is  the  cause 
of  all  the  miseries  of  the  world,  physical,  social,  political,  religious.  3.  Provision 
for  its  removal  abounds.  "A  fountain  opened."  Sin  and  uncleanness  are  not 
an  essential  part  of  human  nature.  Men  have  lived  without  sin,  and  men  in 
heaven  do  now.  It  is  a  mere  stain  on  human  nature,  separable  from  it,  and  the 
means  of  separation  are  provided,  provided  in  the  Gospel.  It  is  a  fountain. 
This  implies — 1.  Abundance.  It  is  not  a  rill,  a  brook,  a  lake,  but  a  fountain. 
What  is  the  fountain  ?  Infinite  love.  This  implies— 2.  Freeness.  Flowing, 
ever  open  to  all.  This  implies — 3.  Perpetuity.  The  hottest  sun  does  not  dry 
up  the  fountain.  It  has  an  xmder  connection  with  the  boundless  deep.  II.  It 
is  a  "  day  "  in  which  idolatby  shall  be  utterly  abolished.  What  a  blessed 
age  will  that  be,  when  all  men  on  the  face  of  the  earth  shall  have  their  souls  centred 
in  love  and  devotion  on  the  one  great  and  common  Father  of  us  all !  III.  It 
is  a  "  day  "  in  which  all  false  religious  teachings  shall  cease.  "  And 
I  will  cause  the  prophets  and  the  unclean  spirits  to  pass  out  of  the  land,"  &c. 
1.  False  religious  teachers  are  great  curses  to  a  community.  This  is  implied  in 
the  promise  here  of  their  destruction.  They  deceive  souls  on  the  most  vital 
of  all  points.  2.  False  religious  teachers  may  become  objects  of  indignation 
even  to  their  nearest  relations.  Thank  God  there  is  an  age  of  reality  coming, 
an  age  when  men  will  recoil  from  shams  as  from  "  demons  vile."  3.  False  teachers 
will  on  this  "day"  be  ashamed  to  exercise  their  mission.  If  any  false  prophets 
should  continue  to  exercise  their  function,  they  will  have  to  do  it — (1)  in  secrecy ; 


CHAP,  xm.]  ZECHARIAH.  211 

(2)  and  disclaiming  their  profession.  Should  their  disclaiming  be  questioned, 
they  will  take  shelter  in  falsehood.  "  And  one  shall  say  unto  Him,  what 
are  these  wounds  in  Thine  hands  ?  Then  He  shall  answer,  Those  with  which 
I  was  wounded  in  the  house  of  My  friends."  Christ  cleanses  as  well  a^  forgives  : — 
A  criminal,  condemned  by  our  law  to  die,  can  only  be  spared  by  the  King 
empowering  the  Home  Secretary  to  reprieve  or  pardon.  Even  then  to  remove 
the  stain  that  must  always  rest  upon  that  person's  character  is  utterly  beyond 
the  power  of  them  both.  How  different  with  Jesus.  His  power  is  unlimited. 
He  not  only  is  able  to  forgive  sins,  but  He  can  cleanse  away  every  trace  of  guilt, 
and  present  us  faultless  unto  God.  The  cleansing  fountain  : — "  A  fountain," 
says  James  Bailie,  "  not  a  stagnant  pool  or  a  sluggish  canal,  but  a  torrent,  a 
waterfall.  God's  love  flows  forth  like  a  great  river  over  the  Rock  of  Ages.  Men 
bathe  in  that  fountain,  and  their  sins  are  swept  away  into  the  dead  sea  of  God's 
forgetfulness.  God  has  pardoned  transgressions,  the  very  recital  of  which  would 
have  utterly  destroyed  our  faith  in  human  nature.  One  of  the  strongest  proofs 
of  Divine  origin  of  Christianity  is  that  it  has  received  in  its  embrace  liars, 
swindlers,  and  adulterers,  and  having  cleansed  and  purified  them,  made  them 
ornaments  of  society.  The  remedy  near  at  hand : — Do  you  know  that  the  wound 
that  Hedley  Vicars  received  before  Sebastopol  was  not  necessarily  fatal  ?  It 
was  a  wound  that  was  very  common,  and  a  wound  over  which  the  surgeons  had 
complete  control,  yet  he  died.  How  was  it  ?  It  was  because,  in  the  hurry  and 
haste  of  the  march  in  the  grey  morning  from  the  heights  of  the  Crimea,  the 
tents  where  the  stores  were,  were  left  behind.  Had  there  been  a  bandage  near, 
had  there  been  lint  and  cotton-wool  near,  Hedley  Vicars  would  have  been  saved  ; 
but  he  bled  his  life  away  before  thev  could  reach  the  tents.  Ah,  David  tells  you 
to-day  that  the  tents  where  God's  supplies  are,  are  never  too  far  away.  Blessed 
be  God,  the  bandages,  and  lint,  and  healing  efiRcacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  are 
not  confined  to  Calvary,  where  it  was  shed.  Here  it  flows.  Oh,  plunge  into 
the  fountain  that  was  opened  for  sin  !  (John  Robertson.)  The  sense  of  sin  : 
— The  sense  of  sin,  we  are  told,  is  weaker  to-day  than  it  once  was.  Are  we  quite 
8ure,  if  we  could  penetrate  beneath  the  crust  of  men's  reserve  ?  An  American 
humorist  has  put  it,  but  oh  !  so  truly,  "  In  his  heart  of  hearts  no  man  can  have 
much  respect  for  himself."  In  our  heart  of  hearts,  in  our  moments  of  colloquy 
with  ourselves,  when  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  in  the  presence  of  another  whom 
we  cannot  name,  we  accuse  ourselves,  and  there  is  no  escape  from  the  accusation 
and  its  penalty.  The  sense  of  sin  may  be  outwardly  weaker,  but  you  are  always 
upon  safe  ground  if  you  appeal  to  the  condemned  conscience  that  is  in  every 
man.  We  have  seen  our  life  is  marred  by  the  presence  of  sin  ;  and  that  mournful 
fact  is  not  partial  but  universal.  Touch  the  man  and  you  touch  one  who  has 
been  seared  and  scored  by  the  presence  of  an  enemy,  and  that  enemy  is  sin. 
(E.  J.  Campbell,  B.A.) 

Ver.  6.  What  are  these  wounds  in  Thine  hands  ? — The  Christianising  of 
Christianity  : — Christ,  or  Christianity — the  system  of  thought  and  life  which 
bears  the  name  of  Christ — has  been  injured  by  its  friends,  more,  perhaps,  than 
by  its  enemies.  The  process  of  Christianising  modern  Christianity  is  a  process 
of  purification,  of  elimination,  of  dropping  what  is  inferior,  of  what  is  a  mere 
misrepresentation ;  a  process  of  exalting  those  great  spiritual  principles  that 
Christ  brought  into  the  world,  and  for  which  He  gave  His  life.  The  question  is 
aske  ',  Why  is  it  that  Christianity  has  not  j'et  conquered  the  world  ?  Christianity 
did  not  succeed  in  the  East,  its  triumphs  were  only  in  the  West,  and  we  are 
hearing  on  every  hand  to-day  that  the  forces  of  Christianity  in  the  Western 
Woild  ieem  to  be  spent.  We  are  even  told  it  is  not  holding  its  own  against  the 
adv^ancing  intelligen  e  of  Europe  and  America.  I  don't  bel  eve  these  objections 
are  true.  I  believe  real  Christianity  is  conquering  and  has  conquered.  I  believe 
that  real  Christianity  is  holding  its  own  against  this  advancing  intelligence. 
I  do  but  mention  these  objections  to  call  attention  to  the  process  that  is 
going  on  in  these  days — the  process  of  eliminating  from  this  current  popular 
Christianity  that  which  is  unreal  in  it,  and  does  not  belong  to  it.  The  first  great 
mistake  of  the  Church  was  the  association  of  Christianity  with  the  State.  Christi- 
anity ceasing  to  be  a  spiritual  religion,  and  becoming  simply  a  political  system 
allied  to  the  existing  Government.  Christianity  was  made  into  a  vast  secularised 
power.  Hardly  had  Christianity  time  to  show  what  was  in  it,  and  what  it  could 
do,  than  the  stormy  barbarisms   of  Europe   broke   upon  it,  and  a  wild  sea  of 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mi. 

taibarian  tribes  singed  and  heaved  where  once  Lhe  cultured  fields  of  the  Old  World 
Lad  been.  There  v,a;-  thu.s  destruction  of  civilisation,  and  there  could  be  no 
greater  proof  of  the  vitdity  that  was  at  the  heart  of  Christianity,  than  the  fact 
that  after  this  storm  had  spent  itself,  the  Church  was  the  onlj'  pov/er  that  raised 
its  head.  The  sight  that  met  the  Church  might  have  appalled  the  stoutest  heart. 
Half-naked  savages  were  masters  of  the  world.  As  we  look  back  on  the  conver- 
sion of  the  barbarians,  it  was  very  wonderful,  but  at  the  same  time  most  unsatis- 
factory. It  is  idle  to  blame  the  past.  It  is  the  very  genius  of  Christianity 
to  take  the  world  as  it  finds  it,  and  bring  out  of  its  evils  and  errors  some  love  of 
goodness  and  truth.  Hallam  says,  "  Had  religion  been  more  pure,  it  would  have 
been  less  permanent,  and  Christianity  has  been  saved  by  means  of  its  corruptions." 
The  corruptions  of  medievalism  encased  the  spiritual  truths  of  Christ  which  were 
too  pure  and  lofty  for  that  generation  to  receive.  The  Church  consecrated  almost 
all  the  ceremonies  of  the  barbarians,  and  absorbed  a  great  many  of  their  super- 
stitions. Medieval  Christianity  is  not  the  Christianity  of  Christ.  It  is  an  amal- 
gam ;  a  imion  of  three  things, — the  simplicity  of  Christ ;  Roman  imperialism  ; 
and  barbarian  superstitions.  There  was,  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  a  great 
protest  against  Roman  imperialism,  and  a  grave  protest  against  the  barbarian 
superstitions  ;  and  these  protests  are  going  on  to-day.  On  the  political  side  it  is 
going  on  in  all  Protestant  countries.  On  the  religious  side,  it  is  the  movement 
which  aims  to  bring  to  the  front  what  is  distinctively  Christian.  So  that  when  it  is 
said  that  Christianity  has  spent  its  force  in  the  West,  that  it  is  not  holding  its 
own  against  advancing  inteUigence,  that  missionary  triumphs  are  not  so  great 
to-day  as  in  the  apostolic  era,  we  must  remember  that  Christianity  has  not  yet 
had  time  to  free  itself  from  the  alliance  with  the  State,  nor  yet  had  time  to  free 
itself  from  barbarian  superstitions  ;  and  that  this  process  is  going  on  to-day. 
It  is  a  process  that  we  can  all  see  going  on  before  our  eyes.  {K.  C.  Aiiderson,  D.D.) 
Christ  wounded  in  the  house  of  His  friends  : — Wittingly  or  unwittingly,  through 
a  culpable  neghgence  or  haste,  Christ  is  wounded  in  His  cause,  or  in  His  spiritual 
body,  in  the  house  of  His  friends.  1.  He  is  wounded  when  Christians  grow  cold 
in  zeal,  slack  in  duty,  or  forgetful  of  their  solemn  vows.  They  show  indifference, 
ingratitude,  selfishness.  2.  \Mien  His  cause  is  injured  by  the  unbecoming  con- 
duct of  His  followers.     Scandal  in  the  Church  is  scandal  heaped  upon  His  name. 

3.  When  indifference  is  shown  by  them  to  the  success  of  the  instrumentalities  by 
which  His  cause  is  promoted.  These  instrumentalities  are  vital  with  Christ, 
as  though  His  blood  flowed  through  them,  and  His  voice  spake  by  them,  and  His 
heart  beat   in   them.     He   is   in   the  word,  the  sermon,  the  prayer,  the  praise. 

4.  By  inattention  to  the  Gospel,  with  its  messages  of  dutj',  its  invitations  and 
exhortations.  5.  By  their  lack  of  sympathy  and  co-operation  within  their  sphere, 
with  the  institutions  of  charitable  beneficence  for  the  spread  of  the  Go.^pel. 
6.  When  Christians,  instead  of  keeping  the  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace, 
treat  one  another  with  superciliousness  and  bitterness  ;  when  their  intercourse 
is  not  marked  by  that  gentleness  and  forbearance  which  the  Gospel  requires. 
Here  looks  may  be  daggers,  and  words  blows.  And  are  there  not  those  who,  by 
inconsistent  conduct,  by  neglect  of  the  ordinances  of  the  sanctuary,  by  worldli- 
ness,  by  passion,  by  unbrotherly  feehng  and  act,  dishonour  their  profession,  dis- 
regard their  solemn  vows,  and  do  injury  to  the  cause  of  Christ  ?  Is  it  not  a  fact, 
that  all  the  assaults  of  infidelity,  all  the  rage  of  profanity,  all  the  recldessness  of 
vice  and  crime,  do  far  less  to  check  the  power  of  the  Gospel  than  the  scandals 
and  offences  of  professed  disciples  ?  {E.  H.  Gillet. )  The  unkindness  of  friends : — 
I.  Who  is  the  person  mentioned  as  being  wounded  ?  No  other  than  the 
great  God,  our  Creator  and  Redeemer,  the  "Man  Christ  Jesus."  It  was  this 
mysterious  man,  this  God- man,  of  whom  the  prophet  inquires  in  the  words  of 
our  text,  "  What  are  these  woimds  in  Thy  hands  ?  "     II.  What  is  meant  by 

BEING    "  W0T7NDED    IN    THE    HOUSE    OF   HiS   FRIENDS  "  ?      This     "  fair    world  "    16 

meant  by  "  the  house  of  His  friends."  "  All  things  were  made  by  Him."  The 
house  of  His  friends  was  His  own  house  ;  He  built  it  for  them  ;  He  came  into 
it  because  He  had  a  right  to  ;  He  came  into  it  to  do  them  good,  to  save  them  from 
their  wickedness  and  woe  ;  but  they  wounded  Him,  and  cast  Him  out.  You  all 
know  the  history  of  the  Divine  Jesus,  who  was  "  wounded  for  our  transgressions." 
In  what  sense  can  they  be  called  His  "  friends  "  who  used  Him  thus  T  I  may 
call  a  man  my  friend  in  one  or  both  of  two  senses.  I.  Because  he  acts  a  friendly 
part  towards  me,  though  I  have  not  deserved  it ;  or,  2.  Because  I  act  a  friendly 
part  towards  him,  though  he  has  not  deserved  it.     A  man  may  be  a  frieod  to 


CHAP,  xni.]  ZECHARIAH.  213 

me  ;  or  I  may  be  a  friend  to  him.  Christ  calls  us  friends,  because  He  was  a  friend 
to  us,  though  we  were  no  friends  to  Him.  III.  What  is  meant  by  its  being 
MENTIONED  THAT  Hb  WAS  WOUNDED  IN  THE  HANDS  ?  By  the  feet  are  signified 
the  ways  or  goings  of  a  man,  his  moral  conduct.  By  the  hands  are  signified  the 
works  of  a  man,  or  the  deeds  of  his  life  in  general.  The  hands  are  the  instruments 
of  the  heart,  or  will,  or  mind,  or  soul.  In  the  house  of  His  friends,  Jesus  was 
taimted  with  aU  His  good  deeds.  His  hands  were  pierced,  because  He  wrought 
His  Father's  will ;  and  ffis  feet  were  nailed  because  He  chose  His  Father's  ways. 
IV.  What  think  you  of  the  Creator  and  Proprietor  of  the  world  beinq 
THUS  dealt  with  BY  His  UNGRATEFUL  CREATURES  ?  Nevertheless,  He  deigns 
to  designate  them  by  the  gracious  name  of  friends.  What  think  you  of  the  human 
beings  who  could  persecute  to  death  the  benefactor  that  was  come  to  bless  them, 
to  buy  them  with  His  blood  ?  Can  you  possibly  be  guilty  of  their  crime  ?  Every 
evil  deed  you  do  crucifies  the  Lord  of  Glory.  ( W.  H.  Henslowe,  M.A. )  WowndtA 
hy  friends  : — The  prophet  says,  that  such  would  be  the  discipline  among  the 
new  people  after  having  repented  that  each  in  his  owti  house  would  chastise  his 
sons  and  relatives  :  and  it  is  an  evidence  of  perfect  zeal,  when  not  only  judges 
perform  their  office  in  correcting  wickedness,  but  when  also  private  individuals 
assist  to  preserve  public  order,  each  according  to  his  power.  We  may  gather 
from  the  answer  what  proves  true  repentance.  "  Say  will  "  one  (it  is  put  in- 
definitely), or  it  will  be  said,  "  What  mean  these  wounds  in  Thine  hands  ?  "  Then 
He  will  say,  "  I  have  been  stricken  by  My  friends."  The  prophet  shows  that 
those  who  had  previously  deceived  the  people,  would  become  new  men,  so  as 
patiently  to  bear  correction ;  though  it  might  seem  hard  when  the  hands  are 
wounded  and  pierced,  yet  he  says  that  the  punishment,  which  was  in  itself  severe, 
would  yet  be  counted  mild,  for  they  would  be  endued  with  such  meekness  as 
wilhngly  to  bear  to  be  corrected.  Some  apply  this  to  Christ,  because  Zechariah 
has  mentioned  woimds  on  the  hands  ;  but  this  is  very  puerile  ;  for  it  is  quite 
evident  that  he  speaks  here  of  false  teachers,  who  had  for  a  time  falsely  pretended 
Grod's  name.  As  then  they  say,  that  they  were  friends  by  whom  they  were  smitten, 
they  acknowledge  themselves  worthy  of  such  punishment,  and  they  murmur  not, 
nor  set  up  any  complaint.  (Marckins,  Adam  Clarke,  and  Henderson,  agree  with 
Calvin  in  repudiating  the  notion  that  this  verse  is  to  be  understood  of  the  Cruci- 
fixion of  our  Saviour, — a  notion  commonly  entertained  by  papal  expositors. )  {John 
Calvin. )  Wounded  by  friends  : — There  is  no  wound  so  painful  as  the  wound 
inflicted  by  a  familiar  friend.  The  secret  devices  of  the  hireling  may  be  anticipated. 
The  blows  of  an  avowed  foe  can  be  healed.  The  neglect  of  the  proudly  indifferent 
can  be  endured.  But  the  slight  of  a  friend,  the  faithlessness  of  the  lover,  inflicts 
a  wound  for  which  earth  provides  no  cordial  and  no  balm.  "  Mine  own  familiar 
friend,  in  whom  I  trusted,  which  did  eat  of  my  bread,  hath  hfted  up  his  heel 
against  me."  When,  in  the  palace  of  the  High  Priest,  in  the  dim  light  of  the 
early  morning,  "  one  of  the  officers,  which  stood  by,  struck  Jesus  with  the  palm 
of  his  hand,"  the  wound  was  only  skin-deep ;  but  when  in  the  outer  court  of 
that  same  palace  a  friend  called  Peter  was  saying,  "  I  know  not  the  man,"  the 
wound  was  attended  with  an  agony.  When  the  chief  priests  and  elders  "  gave 
large  money  unto  the  soldiers  "  to  induce  them  to  give  false  witness,  the  pangs 
of  the  crucifixion  were  intensified ;  but  when  "Barnabas  also  was  carried 
away  with  dissimulation,"  our  Lord  was  crucified  afresh.  I  am  not  doubting 
the  friendship  ;  nay,  it  is  essential  to  my  purpose  that  we  should  quietly  assume 
its  sincerity  and  its  strength.  I  am  not  now  dealing  with  masked  foes,  who  wear 
the  King's  livery,  who  have  caught  the  King's  tones  and  expression,  but  who 
are  inwardly  fiercely  and  determinedly  hostile  to  His  claim  and  dominion.  No, 
I  speak  of  His  genuine  friends,  friends  as  genuine  as  Simon  Peter,  and  I  want  to 
sj^eak  of  some  of  the  ways  in  which  we  sorely  wound  Him  when  He  abides  beneath 
our  roof.  1.  We  wound  our  Lord  by  our  destructive  zeal.  Zeal  is  a  very  essential 
element  in  the  religious  life.  It  is  as  welcome  a  thing  in  the  indifferent  world 
as  a  warm  fire  on  a  winter's  night.  Zeal  is  genial  and  heartening.  It  keeps 
the  affections  fresh  and  radiant ;  it  provides  the  requisite  atmosphere  in  which 
all  the  powers  of  the  life  can  attain  their  maturity.  If  the  flame  of  zeal  be  in  any 
way  corrupted  it  works  against  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord.  If  the  fire  of  zeal 
be  kept  clean  it  is  the  friend  of  life,  if  it  become  unclean  it  is  the  friend  of  death. 
The  pure  fervour  may  so  easily  become  an  evil  fever  !  when  we  assume  we  are 
working  in  hallowed  zeal.  "  Master,  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  Thy  name, 
and  we  forbade  him,  because  he  foUowed  not  with  us."     How  friendly  was  the 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

disposition  to  the  Lord,  and  how  strong  and  decisive  the  act !     A  fiery  zeal  for 
truth  was  being  corrupted  into  a  clouded  passion  for  sect.     "  Master,  wilt  Thou 
that  we  call  down  fire  from  heaven  to  consume  them  ?  "     How  zealous,  and  yet 
how  blind  !     It  is  always  so  much  easier  to  burn  your  enemies  than  to  convert 
them.     You  know  what  kind  of  armour  is  used  by  an  illiberal  zeal.     In  the  sup- 
posed interests  of  the  Kingdom  we  use  methods  of  misrepresentation,  misinter- 
pretation, exaggeration — I  do  not  say  wilfully,  for  that  would  place  us  outside 
the  ranks  of  the  Master's  friends,  but  blinded  by  our  perverted  zeal — and  the 
issue  of  such  warfare  is  not  the  discomfiture  of  the  devil  but  the  wounding  of 
the  Lord.     We  detach  things  from  their  context.     2.  We  wound  oiir  Lord  by  our 
thoughtless  kindness.     "  Aid  they  brought  unto  H!im  little  children,  that  He 
Bhould  touch  them  :  and  the  disciples  rebuked  them."     The  disciples  acted  in 
presumed  kindness  to  their  Master,  and  yet  how  unkind  was  the  ministry  !     They 
were  protecting  the  Lord  because  He  was  tired,  saving  Him  from  the  embaiTass- 
ment  of  the  multitude.     Their  purpose  was  right ;  the  means  they  employed 
were  thoughtless.     And  it  frequently  happens  that  even  when  our  deeds  are 
right,  the  maimer  in  which  we  perform  them  is  offensive.     We  can  wound  the 
Lord  by  the  clumsy  way  in  which  we   serve  Him.     There  are  some  men  who 
boast  of  their  want  of  refinement.     We  are  responsible  to  God  both  for  the  man 
and  the  manner.     It  is  not  enough  that  we  serve  Him ;  we  must  serve  Him  in 
a  way  that  will  make  no  wounds.     "  Let  your  light  so  shine  !  "     It  is  not  enough 
that  the  light  is  shining ;  we  are  to  take  pains  that  it  shines  in  the  right  way. 
There  are  well-meaning  men  who  throw  their  kindness  at  you.     All  such  kind- 
ness wounds  the  Lord  Himself.     *'  What  are  these  wounds  in  Thine  hands  ?  " 
They  are  the  wounds  the  Master  received  from  the  clumsy  kindness  of  His  friends. 
3.  We  wound  our  Lord  by  our  faithlessness  when  in  the  warfare  of  life  the  odda 
are  against  us.     It  is  easy  to  be  His  friends  when  He  walks  along  the  palm-strewn 
ways  of  Jerusalem,  and  everybody  vies  with  everybody  else  in  acclaiming  Him 
the  King  of  Glory.     But  when  the  crowd  melts  away,  and  the  minority  is  very 
small,  it  is  so  easy  to  become  ashamed  of  the  leader  and  to  say  :  "I  know  not 
the  man."     Our  true  friends  are  revealed  when  we  are  "  down."     The  nightingale 
is  lovely,  not  because  his  song  is  sweeter  than  the  note  of  the  thrush,  but  because 
he  sings  in  the  night.     And  this  is  just  our  Lord's  friendship ;  He  is  at  His  best 
when  we  are  at  our  weakest.     If  I  am  in  company,  and  the  intercourse  is  unseemly, 
am  I  a  friend  of  the  Lord  or  a  deserter  ?     I  would  far  rather  be  called  a  prig  by 
the  men  of  the  world  than  be  known  as  a  faithless  friend  of  my  Lord.     (J.  H. 
Jowett,    M.A.)        The  wounds    of    Jesus: — The   wounds  of  Jesus   speak  more 
eloquently  than  words.     I.  Of  what  do  they  speak  to  us  ?     L  Of  the  love  of 
God.     How  full  the  Bible  is  of  messages  of  God's  love.     2.  Of  sin.     3.  Of  for- 
giveness, intercession,  and  atonement.     II.  To  whom  do  these  wounds  speak  ? 
L  To  the  children  of  God.     To  the  advanced  Christian  rij^e  for  glory.     To  him 
they  speak  of  the  heavenly  perfection  to  which  the  Captain  of  our  salvation 
attained  through  the  suffering  of  which  they  are  the  sign.     To  those  just  starting 
out  in  the  Christian  life.     To  such  they  point  to  the  path  of  suffering  for  His 
sake  ;  that  by  the  fellowship  of  suffering  we  may  also  be  united  with  Him  in  His 
glory.     To  those  who  have  been  unfaithful  and  neglectful  of  duty.     To  these 
they  speak  reproach,  that  they  have  wounded  the  Lord  afresh,  and  the  voice  of 
tender  appeal  that  they  may  repent  and  return  to  Him.     2.  To  the  doubting, 
trembling  inquirer  who  has  not  yet  accepted  the  Lord  as  his  Saviour,  and  to 
the  hardened  imbeliever.     III.  By  whom  inflicted  ?     The  text  says  they  were 
received  in  the  "  house  of  His  friends."     You  ask  how  the  friends  of  Christ  may 
wound  Him  ?     I.  By  indifference.     The  present  indifference  of  the  Chiu:ch  greatly 
wounds  the  Divine  heart  of  ovu:  Lord.     2.   By  opposition.     Many  things  that 
are  being  done  by  His  professed  followers  are  out  of  harmony  with  His  desires, 
and  therefore  must  wound   Him.     3.   By  preferring   other  persons  and  other 
things  to  Him.     He  wants  the  first  place  in  the  hearts  of  all  His  disciples,  and 
not  to  give  it  to  Him  wounds  Him.     (J.  I.  Blackburn,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  Awake,  0  sword,  against  My  Shepherd.  —  The  oword  of  Jehovah 
smiting  His  Shepherd :  —  We  have  our  Lord's  own  authority  for  applying 
this  passage  to  Himself.  I.  The  description  herb  given  us  of  Him.  In 
looking  at  the  terms  in  which  our  Lord  is  here  described,  we  are  struck  at 
once  with  the  natural  manner  in  which  they  bring  together  His  Divine  and 
human  nature.     This  mode  of  describing  Him  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the 


CHAP,  xul]  ZECHARIAH.  216 

Old  Testament.  It  seems  as  though  the  Holy  Spirit  exulted  beforehand  in  that 
union  of  the  two  natiues,  which  was  to  be  accomplished  in  His  nature,  and  wished 
the  ancient  Church  also  to  foresee  and  exult  in  it.  In  the  text,  He  is  described 
in  the  same  twofold  character.  He  is  a  man,  and  yet  "  the  man  that  is  My  fellow," 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  "  My  feUow  "  signifies  '  my  equal,"  "  my  companion." 
It  is  expressive  of  our  Lord's  Divine  equality  with  the  Father,  and  His  eternal 
existence  with  Him.  It  intimates  exactly  what  St.  John  afterwards  plainly 
declared, — "  The  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God."  But  He  is  man 
as  well  as  God.  Not,  however,  originally,  naturally  man,  as  He  was  God.  Here 
is  an  anticipation  of  a  character  He  afterwards  took  on  Him.  And  this  assumption 
of  our  nature  was  necessary  for  the  work  of  suffering  He  had  to  go  through.  In 
this  human  natxire.  He  is  set  forth  in  the  text  under  a  third  character.  He  is 
a  shepherd.  So  called  because  the  charge  of  His  people  devolves  upon  Him  ; 
because  He  performs  towards  them  a  shepherd's  part,  watching  over,  providing 
for,  and  guiding  them.  He  is  called  God's  shepherd,  because  the  flock  imder 
His  charge  is  God's  flock,  a  flock  committed  to  Him  by  God,  to  be  rendered  back 
by  Him  to  God  again.  Happy  they  who  are  fed  by  Him !  11  The  command 
uivEN  BY  Jehovah.  It  is  couched  in  figurative  and  highly  poetic  language. 
The  Lord  places  Himself  on  the  throne  of  a  king  or  magistrate.  They  who  bear 
these  offices  have  often  a  sword  near  them  as  an  emblem  of  their  authority,  and 
if  need  be,  a  ready  instrument  to  execute  any  sentence  they  may  pass  on  the 
guilty.  Here  the  Lord  describes  Himself  as  suddenly  addressing  the  sword  near 
Him,  and  calling  on  it  to  smite,  not  the  guilty  but  His  own  Son,  and  Him  as 
shepherd.  1.  We  see  in  it  that  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  were  divinely  appointed. 
The  persecuting  Jews  indeed  were  willing  agents  in  all  they  did  against  Him. 
They  did  it  voluntarily  ;  yet  they  did  "  whatsoever  God's  hand  and  God's  counsel 
had  determined  before  to  be  done."  2.  Here,  too,  we  see  that  the  sufferings  of 
our  Lord  were  most  severe.  Man  can  inflict  much  misery,  but  his  power  is  limited. 
When  God  calls  off  our  attention  from  man  as  the  author  of  our  Lord's  sufferings, 
and  directs  it  to  Himself,  we  feel  at  once  that  oxa  Lord  must  be  a  most  severe 
sufferer.  The  language  of  the  text  conveys  this  idea  forcibly.  It  is  sword — not 
a  scourge  or  a  rack.  It  is  "  smite  "  ;  strike  hard.  Mark  the  word  "awake."  It 
implies  that,  iip  to  this  hour,  the  sword  of  Jehovah  had  been  sleeping.  Now  it 
is  to  awake,  to  rise  up  in  its  vigour  and  majesty.  It  is  to  strike  in  the  greatness 
of  its  strength.  3.  The  text  represents  our  Lord's  sufferings  as  siu-prising. 
Against  whom  ?  The  very  Being  of  all  others,  whom  we  should  have  expected 
Him  to  shield  from  every  sword.  The  Being  who  is  the  nearest  and  dearest  to 
Him,  the  man  that  is  His  fellow.  To  add  to  our  surprise,  the  Lord  seems  to  afflict 
Him,  not  reluctantly,  but  willingly;  yea,  more  than  willingly,  almost  eagerly. 
He  is  well-pleased  in  this  thing  for  "  His  righteousness'  sake."     m.  The  oon- 

SEQTTENCES   WHICH   ARE  TO   FOLLOW  THE   EXECUTION   OP  THIS   COMMAND.       1.    The 

shepherd  is  to  be  smitten,  and  the  sheep,  frightened  at  the  violence  done  to  Him, 
are  to  be  scattered.  2.  The  smiting  of  this  shepherd  is  to  be  followed  by  a  signal 
interposition  of  Jehovah  in  behalf  of  the  scattered  sheep.  "  I  will  turn  My  hand 
upon  the  little  ones."  This  term  represents  to  us  the  feeble  and  helpless  con- 
dition of  our  Lord's  followers  at  the  time  of  His  crucifixion.  These  timid  disciples 
of  our  Lord  were  strangely  kept  together,  in  spite  of  their  unbelief  and  fears, 
after  His  crucifixion,  and  sheltered  from  every  danger.  And  we  know  what 
the  early  Chiu-ch  soon  became.  It  was  a  wonder  in  the  world,  itself  doing  wonders. 
Look  at  the  practical  purposes  to  which  we  may  turn  this  text.  1.  To  strengthen 
our  faith  in  Holy  Scripture.  I  do  not  allude  to  the  predictions  we  find  in  it, 
which  were  afterwards  so  exactly  fulfilled.  I  refer  rather  to  that  beautiful  har- 
mony of  thoughts  and  expression,  which  exists  between  this  verse  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  another  passage  of  the  New.  (Compare  the  passage  John  x.) 
2.  The  fearful  evil  of  sin.  There  are  moments  when  we  cannot  read  this  text 
without  an  inward  shudder — it  exhibits  the  great  Jehovah  to  us  in  a  character 
so  awful,  and  in  an  attitude  so  dismaying.  He  is  represented  as  an  offended 
Judge,  calling  for,  and  eager  for  the  sacrifice  of  His  own  dear  Son.  Evidently, 
the  evil  of  sin  is  a  reality  ;  the  Divine  justice  is  a  reality  ;  the  inflexible  unbending 
character  of  God's  law  is  a  reality  ;  his  determination  to  punish  every  breach  of 
it,  everywhere  throughout  His  wide  universe,  is  a  reality.  The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ 
proclaim.s  all  these  things  to  be  most  solemn  realities.  3.  The  perfect  safety  of  all 
who  are  indeed  resting  for  safety  on  ovu-  crucified  Lord.  You  have  nothing  to 
fear  from  this  awful  God.     In  the  greatness  of  Him  whom  He  here  commands  to 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xhl 


be  smitten  for  you,  you  may  see  the  sufficiency,  the  completeness,  and  more  than 

that, the  grandeur  and  glory  of  the  atonement  He  has  made  for  sins.    (C  Bradley.) 

Jehovah's  sword: — I.  The  commission  given  to  Jehovah's  sword.     1.  Whom 
was  it  to  smite  ?     2.  In  whose  hand  was  it  to  inflict  the  stroke  ?    II.  The  oroxtnds 
AND  reasons  of  THIS  COMMISSION.     1.  To  show  His  indignation  against  sin.     2.  To 
reconcile  justice  with  mercy  in  the  salvation  of  sinners.     III.  The  effects  and 
CONSEQITENCES  OF  IT.     1.  The  immediate  effect  was  the  scattering  of  our  Lord's 
disciples.     2.  The  ultimate  effect  was  their  restoration  and  recovery.     (0.  Brooks.) 
The  Passion  sermon  : — It  is  the  observation  of  SS.  Austine  and  Gregorie,  that  the 
four  beasts  mentioned  by  St.  John   mystically  represent  the  four  main  acts  of 
Christ,  or  works  of  man's  redemption.  His  Incarnation,  Passion,  Resurrection, 
and  Ascension.     I  have  to  do  with  a  prophecy  somewhat  dark  before  the  light 
of  the  Gospel  shone  upon  it.     "  Awake,  O  Sword,"  &c.     I.  The  speaker,  "  the 
Lord  of  hosts."     IT.  The  speech.     "  O  Sword."     As  all  the  creatures  are  God's 
soldiers,  so  when  He  employeth  them  against  man  they  are  called  His  swjrds. 
When  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  execute  His  wrath  He  never  wanteth  instruments 
or  means.     Of  the  blow  here  threatened,  God  Himself  is  the  Author.     God  never 
awaketh  His  sword  to  smite,  but  for  sin.     In  this  shepherd  there  was  no  sin  of 
His  own.     "  Against  My  Shepherd."     Popish  writers  say  that  a  shepherd  should 
have  three  things,  a  scrip,  a  hook,  and  a  whistle.     This  Shepherd  is  the  good,  the 
universal  Shepherd.     Daniel  says, — The  Messias  shall  be  slain,  but  not  for  Himself, 
"  God  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."     The  first  and  main  cause  of  the 
Shepherd's  slaughter  is,  our  sins.     "  The  man."     Hebrews  have  four  words  for 
man — Adam,  red  earth ;  Enosh,  a  man  of  sorrow ;  Ish,  a  man  of  a  noble  spirit ; 
Geber,  a  strong  man.     "  My  fellow."  for  in  Him  the  Godhead  d welleth  bodily  : 
and  yet  a  man.     God's  fellow  to  offer  an  infinite  sacrifice  for  all  mankind,  and  a 
man  that  He  might  be  Himself  the  sacrifice  killed  by  the  sword  that  is  now  awake 
to  smite  Him.     Consider  this,  and  tremble,  ye  that  forget  God.     The  Shepherd  is 
smitten ;  if  you  look  to  it  in  time,  it  may  be  for  you  ;  if  not,  a  worse  disaster 
remaineth  for  you  than  befell  these  sheep.     (D.  Featly,  D.D.)         The  character 
and  silverings  of  Christ : — I.  The  character  of  Chrtst,  as  here  represented. 
L  God's  Shepherd  (Psa.  xxiii.  1).     Great  Shepherd  (Heb.  xiii.  20).     Chief  Shepherd 
(1  Pet.  V.  4).     The  term  shepherd  is  relative,  and  refers  to  His  followers,  whom 
He  calls  His  sheep  (John  x.  16).     It  expresses  His  tender  care  over  them,  which 
is  always  proportioned  to  their  peculiar  trials,  temptations,  &c.  (Isa.  xl.  il).     He 
expresses  also  His  love  to  them,  infinitely  surpassing  the  love  of  the  sons  of  men. 
He  died  for  the  sheep  (John  x.  15).     2.  "God's  fellow — His  equal.     They  are  one 
in  essence,  intimately  and  essentially  one.     They  are  one  in  power      When  on 
earth  the  Son  did  the  works  His  Father  did.     One  in  honour  and  glory.     His 
sacrifice  was  volimtary.     As  Jehovah's  equal.   He  had  an  absolute  right  and 
propriety  in  Himself,  and  could  lay  down  His  life,  and  take  it  up  again,  when 
He  pleased  (John  x.  17,  18).     II.  The  awful  mandate  here  given  against 
God's  Shepherd  and  God's  Fellow.     "  Awake,  0  Sword,  smite  the  Shepherd  !  " 
The  command  proceeds  from  the  Eternal  Father,  whose  justice  demanded  the 
death  of  our  Lord  (Isa.  liii.  10).     Divine  justice  had  no  demands  on  Christ,  simply 
considered  as  the  Son  of  God ;  only  when  viewed  as  our  vohmtary  substitute. 
1.  The  principal  scenes  of  sorrow  were  in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane.     2.  Also  in 
the  hall  of  judgment.     3.  Calvary  was  the  place  that  witnessed  the  dreadful  deed. 
III.  T"hb  effect  to  be  produced.     "  The  sheep  shall  be  scattered."     1.  By  the 
sheep  are  meant  the  disciples  of  our  Lord.     2.  Jesus  foretold  that  His  disciples 
would  forsake  Him.     It  was  fully  accomplished  (Matt.  xxvi.  5G).     IV.  Behold 
the  tender  compassion  of  a  gracious  God.     He  promises  to  turn  His  hand  upon 
the  little  ones.     Little  ones  who  at  that  time  had  but  little  knowledge  of  human 
nature,  little  faith,  and  little  courage.     See  God's  gracious  dealings  with  the 
apostles  and  disciples  of  Christ.     Thus   He  will  deal  also  with  ail  the  faithful 
followers   of   Christ.     Improvement.     1.    Behold    in   this   awful   transaction   the 
displeasure  of  God  against  sin.     2.  As  Divine   justice   is   fully  satisfied   by  the 
tiemendous  sufTerir^gs  of  Jesus  Christ,   here  we  behold  sufTieient  ground  for  a 
sinner's  hope  of  pardon.     Jesus  hath  died;  the  sinner  may  be  forgiven  (Rom. 
iii.  25).     (T.  Hannam.)         The  character  of  Christ  as  the  Sheplierd  of  Israel: — 
That  this  text  contains  clear  and  remarkable  revelation  of  the  Saviour  no  one 
of  spiritual  discernment  can  hesitate  to  believe.     It  is  one  of  the  clearest  of  those 
prophetic  testimonies  which  declared  to  the  Church  beforehand  "  the  sufferings 
of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  follow."     I.  The  description  here  given 


CHAP.  XIII.J  ZECHARIAH.  217 

OF  THE  Samouk.  1.  My  Shepherd.  What  precise  view  of  the  Saviour's  place 
and  character  is  this  expression  intended  to  convey  ?  The  expression  significantly 
points  to  His  mediatorial  character  and  work.  It  reminds  us  that  a  people  have 
been  committed  to  His  hands — that  He  has  graciously  undertaken  on  their  behalf — 
and  that,  in  the  whole  matter  of  their  salvation.  He  is  their  head,  representative, 
surety.  Whatever  is  afiirmed  in  the  text  concerning  Him  is  affirmed  in  this 
view  of  His  character  and  work.  The  ideas  suggested  by  this  title  as  to  the 
benefits  derived  by  His  people  from  the  exercise  of  His  mediatorial  oflRces  are 
full  of  interest  and  comfort  to  the  children  of  God.  Why  is  He  designated  "  My 
Shepherd "  ?  Because  He  was  appointed  and  commissioned  by  the  Father, 
in  the  counsels  of  eternity,  to  execute  this  office.  2.  The  man.  Believers,  in 
their  zealous  regard  for  the  glory  and  honour  of  the  Divine  Redeemer,  sometimes 
lose  the  comfort  to  be  derived  from  a  believing  contemplation  of  the  man  "  Christ 
Jesus."  The  right«ousness  wrought  out  was  wrought  out  in  the  nature  of  man. 
3.  The  fellow  of  Jehovah.  The  equal  of  Jehovah.  "God  was  manifest  in  the 
flesh."  This  is  the  crowning  of  truth  in  the  doctrine  of  salvation.  II.  The  view 
OF  God's  dealings.  Our  thoughts  are  directed  to  the  immediate  infliction  of 
the  Father's  wrath.  He  pierced  Him  even  to  the  soul,  till  the  sword  of  infinite 
justice  was  satisfied  with  blood.  Learn — 1.  Every  word  in  the  text  is  comforting 
and  instructive  to  the  sheep  of  Chiust.  2.  There  is  precious  light  in  this  subject 
for  awakened  and  trembling  sinners.  3.  There  is  here  a  lesson  of  solemn  warning 
to  careless  sinners.  (Robert  Elder,  A.M.)  Messiah  smitten  : — We  know  what 
was  the  transaction  in  which  this  prophecy  was  fulfilled  ;  we  know  the  awful 
epoch  which  that  transaction  bears.  We  hasten  to  no  imaginary  scene,  but  to 
a  true  historic  one — to  an  actual  time  in  the  calendar  of  the  world's  ages.  I.  Thh 
CHARACTER  OF  THE  VICTIM.  We  pcrccive  in  His  character — 1.  Manhood,  "  found 
in  fashion  as  a  man."  Man,  as  never  man  otherwise  could  be.  Man  by  a  most 
astonishing  process  of  condescension  and  self -diminution.  2.  Mediation  is  included. 
As  the  shepherd  guards  his  flock,  and  perils  his  own  life  for  its  rescue  and  deliver- 
ance, so  we  are  considered  as  entrusted  to  the  hands  of  Christ,  that  He  may  ward 
off  every  danger  from  us  to  which  we  are  exposed.  How  far-reaching  is  His 
sympathy  !  How  touching  is  His  care.  3.  Co-equality  is  supposed.  If  He  be 
tne  associate  and  compeer  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  then  it  may  suggest  the  emulation 
of  His  honours,  the  expression  of  His  glories,  the  assimilation  of  His  deeds,  and 
the  concentration  of  His  affections.  II.  The  peculiarity  of  thh  action.  The 
"  sword  "  is  the  emblem  of  state,  of  authority,  of  power,  of  justice,  or  retributive 
execution.  1.  This  person  is  the  subject  of  Divine  complacency.  2.  This 
person  was  the  object  of  the  Divine  infliction.  The  sword  is  not  the  weapon 
of  correction,  of  momentary  chastening ;  it  is  the  instrument  of  vengeance  and 
of  wi-ath.  The  same  personage  is  the  subject  of  Divine  complacency  and  of 
Divine  infliction.  How  is  it  explained  ?  Christ  is  without  sin.  He  is  relatively 
liable  for  certain  penalties,  to  which  He  subjects  Himself  voluntarily  and  solely. 
Substitution  is  the  simplifying  principle  of  all.  We  cannot  place  the  doctrine  of 
atonement  on  any  other  than  the  vicarious  principle.  See  then — (1)  The  necessity 
for  the  atone  ment.  (2)  Mark  the  nature  of  justice.  (3)  Learn  what  is  sin.  (4)  We 
see  what  is  the  great  concert  and  covenant  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
(5)  What  must  be  the  position  of  the  unbeliever  who  rejects  the  atonement  of 
Clirist,  to  whom  all  this  is  as  strange  things,  an  idle  dream  ?  [R.  Winter  Hamilton, 
D.D.)  The  Shepherd  of  the  flock  smitten  : — Observe  that  it  is  God  the  Eternal 
Father  who  gives  the  decree  for  the  smiting  of  the  Shepherd.  "  Saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  We  have  no  sympathy  with  the  unguarded  language  of  those  who 
speak  of  God  as  an  avenging  deity,  whose  wrath  can  be  appeased  and  propitiated 
only  by  offerings  of  blood.  Love  is  a  thing  that  carmot  be  bribed.  God's  love 
needed  not  thus  to  be  purchased.  That  love  was  the  primal  cause  of  all  blessing 
to  His  creatures.  The  manifestation,  however,  of  love  on  the  part  of  a  great 
moral  Governor  must  be  compatible  with  the  exercise  of  His  moral  perfections. 
God's  justice,  holiness,  righteousness  must  be  upheld  inviolate.  While  mercy 
and  truth  go  before  His  face,  justice  and  judgment  must  continue  the  habitation 
of  His  throne.  As  the  Omnipotent,  God  could  do  anything.  So  far  as  power 
is  concerned.  He  could  easily  have  dispensed  with  any  medium  of  atonement. 
But  what  God,  as  the  Omnipotent,  could  do,  God,  as  the  holy,  just,  righteous, 
true,  could  not  do.  He  could  not  promulgate  laws  and  leave  the  transgressor 
to  mock  them  with  impunity.  Was  there,  then,  in  the  case  of  guilty  man,  any 
possible  method  by  which  the  honour  of  God's  name  and  character  and  throne 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xhl 

could  be  preserved  intact,  and  yet  the  transgressor  be  saved  ?  Reason  is 
Bilent  here.  The  principle  of  substitution — the  innocent  suffering  for  the  guilty 
— is  one  undreamt  of  in  earthly  philosophy.  The  Shepherd  has  been  smitten. 
Jhe  Divine  honoiur  has  been  upholden.  Mercy  and  truth  have  been  betrothed 
before  the  altar  of  Calvary;  God  hath  joined  them  together  for  the  salvation 
of  the  human  race,  and  that  marriage  covenant  never  can  be  disannulled. 
Justice  is  now  equally  interested  with  love  in  the  rescue  of  the  fallen.  (J.  R. 
Macduff,  D.D.)        Christ  smitten  by  the  Father  : — I.  The  person  to  be  smitten. 

1.  He  is  Jehovah's  fellow.  He  is  in  equality  with  God.  2.  He  is  man.  His 
humanity — His  manhood — are  as  distinctly  affirmed  as  His  Deity  and  His  equality 
with  God.  3.  The  title  given  to  Him  as  the  Son  of  man — the  Shepherdf. 
n.  The  swoed  which  is  to  wake  against  Him.  1.  What  is  this  sword  ?  It 
is  the  sword  of  Divine  justice.  2.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  its  awaken- 
ings ?  Every  manifestation  of  God  in  punishing  sin  is  as  nothing  compared 
with  the  manifestation  in  Christ's  sufferings.  3.  Who  demands  this  sword, 
who  calls  for  its  awakening  ?  "  The  Lord  of  hosts."  The  crucifixion  as  much 
as  the  exaltation  of  Christ  was  "  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our 
eyes."  4.  What  was  the  sword  to  awaken  to  ?  It  was  to  smite  unto  death. 
III.  The  reasons  why  it  was  said,  "  Awake,  0  sword,  against  the  victim." 
It  was  to  make  manifest  Divine  justice,  that  there  should  be  no  connivance 
with  the  enormity  of  sin.  IV.  The  effects  which  followed.  "  The  sheep 
were  scattered."  But  they  were  brought  back  again  from  their  dispersion. 
(J.  Straiten.)  The  fellow  of  Jehovah: — I.  The  terms  in  which  our  Lord 
is  described.  1.  The  man  that  is  the  fellow  of  Jehovah.  2.  Jehovah's 
Shepherd.  II.  The  command  given  in  reference  to  Him.  1.  It  relates  to 
sufferings  divinely  appointed.  2.  It  relates  to  sufferings  most  severe.  3.  It 
relates  to  sufferings  most  surprising.  III.  The  consequences  which  are  to 
follow  the  execution  of  this  command.     1.   The  dispersion  of  the  sheep. 

2.  A  signal  interposition  in  their  behalf.  {G.  Brooks.)  The  solitariness  of 
Christ's  death  : — Foiu:  things  to  consider.  1.  The  commission  given  to  the  sword 
by  the  Lord  of  hosts.  2.  The  person  against  whom  it  is  commissioned.  3.  The 
dismal  effect  of  that  stroke  ;  and  4.  The  gracious  mitigation  of  it.  Doctrine — 
That  Christ's  dearest  friends  forsook  and  left  Him  alone  in  the  time  of  His  greatest 
distress  and  danger.  (1)  Who  were  the  sheep  that  were  scattered  from  their 
Shepherd,  and  left  Him  alone  ?  They  were  those  precious  elect  souls  that  He  had 
gathered  to  Himself,  who  had  long  followed  Him,  and  dearly  loved  Him,  and 
were  dearly  beloved  by  Him.  They  had  faithfully  continued  with  Him  in  His 
temptations.  They  were  resolved  so  to  do.  (2)  But  were  they  as  good  as  their 
word  ?  Did  they  stick  faithfully  to  Him  ?  Theirs  was  not  a  total  and  final 
apostasy,  only  a  temporary  lapse.  It  was  a  very  sinful  and  sad  relapse  ;  for 
it  was  against  the  very  articles  of  agreement,  which  they  had  sealed  to  Christ 
at  their  first  admission  to  EUs  service.  So  it  was  unfaithfulness.  It  was  against 
the  very  principles  of  grace  implanted  by  Christ  in  their  hearts.  They  were 
holy,  sanctified  persons,  in  whom  dwelt  the  love  and  fear  of  Gtod.  By  these 
they  were  strongly  inclined  to  adhere  to  Christ  in  the  time  of  His  sufferings, 
as  appears  by  those  honest  resolves  they  had  made  in  the  case.  Their  grace 
strongly  inclined  them  to  their  duty ;  their  corruptions  swayed  them  the  con- 
trary way.  It  was  much  against  the  honoiu:  of  their  Lord  and  Master.  By 
this  their  sinful  flight  they  exposed  the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  contempt  and  scorn 
of  His  enemies.  As  it  was  against  Christ's  honour,  so  it  was  against  their  own 
solemn  promise  made  to  Him  before  His  apprehension,  to  live  and  die  with  Him. 
They  break  promise  with  Christ.  It  was  against  Christ's  heart-melting  expos- 
tulations with  them,  which  should  have  abode  in  their  hearts  while  they  lived. 
It  was  against  a  late  direful  example  presented  to  them  in  the  fall  of  Judas.  In 
him,  as  in  a  glass,  they  might  see  how  fearful  a  thing  it  is  to  apostatise  from 
Christ.  It  was  against  the  law  of  love,  which  should  have  knit  them  closer  to 
Christ,  and  to  one  another.  This  their  departure  from  Christ  was  accompanied 
with  some  offence  at  Christ.  3.  The  grounds  and  reasons  of  this  scattering. 
God's  suspending  wonted  influences  and  aids  of  grace  from  them.  They  would 
not  have  done  so  had  there  been  influences  of  power,  zeal,  and  love  from  heaven 
upon  them.  But  how,  then,  should  Christ  have  "trodden  the  wine-press  alone"  t 
As  God  permitted  it,  and  withheld  usual  aid  from  them,  so  the  efficacy  of  that 
temptation  was  great,  yea,  much  greater  than  ordinary.  As  they  were  weaker 
than  they  used  to  be,  so  the  temptation  was  stronger  than  any  they  had  yet 


CHAP,  xm.]  ZECHARIAH.  219 

met  withal.  It  is  called,  "  Their  hour  and  the  power  of  darkness."  That  which 
concurred  to  their  shameful  relapse,  as  a  special  cause  of  it,  was  the  remaining 
corruptions  that  were  in  their  hearts  yet  unmortified.  4.  The  issue  and  event 
of  this  sad  apostasy.  It  ended  far  better  than  it  began.  They  were  scattered 
for  a  time,  but  the  Lord  turned  His  hand  upon  them  to  gather  them.  Peter 
repents  of  his  perfidious  denial,  and  never  denied  Him  more.  All  the  rest  like- 
wise returned  to  Christ,  and  never  forsook  Him  any  more.  And  though  they 
forsook  Christ,  Christ  never  forsook  them.  Inference — 1.  Self-confidence  is 
a  sin  too  incident  to  the  best  of  men.  Little  reason  have  the  best  of  saints  to 
depend  upon  their  inherent  grace,  let  their  stock  be  as  large  as  it  will.  Shall 
we  be  self-confident  after  such  instances  of  human  fraUty  ?  2.  A  resolved 
adherence  to  God  and  duty,  though  left  alone,  without  company,  or  encourage- 
ment, is  Christ-Uke,  and  truly  excellent.  3.  Though  believers  are  not  privileged 
from  backslidings,  yet  they  are  secmred  from  final  apostasy  and  ruin.  4.  How 
sad  a  thing  it  is  for  the  best  of  men  to  be  left  to  their  own  carnal  fears  in  the 
day  of  temptation.  5.  How  much  a  man  may  differ  from  himself,  according 
as  the  Lord  is  with  him  or  withdrawn  from  him.  6.  The  best  of  men  know  not 
their  own  strength  till  they  come  to  the  trial.  7.  The  holiest  of  men  have  no 
reason  either  to  repine  or  despond,  though  God  should  at  once  strip  them  of 
all  their  outward  and  inward  comforts  together.  (John  Flavel.)  The  floch 
scattered : — I.  Thb  pbbson  heeb  eepresented  is  smitten  by  the  swoed  Off 
DiVTNB  JUSTICE.  This  is  none  other  than  the  Messiah,  the  Christ.  To  Him 
alone  can  the  language  here  used  to  describe  the  object  of  the  smiting  apply. 
No  other  being  but  He  is  at  once  man  and  the  fellow  of  Jehovah,  the  Lord  of 
hosts  ;  and  He  alone  is  the  Shepherd  whom  God  promised  to  set  over  His  people 
Israel  to  feed  them  as  a  flock.  IE.  The  stroke  inflicted  on  Htm.  This  was 
the  deadly  stroke  of  Divine  justice.  The  sword  had  long  slept  in  its  scabbard, 
but  when  the  fitting  time  arrived  God  summoned  the  sword  to  awake  and  do 
execution  on  the  appointed  victim.  There  is  but  one  event  to  which  the  command 
here  given  can  be  understood  as  pointing — the  slaying  of  Him  who,  as  God's 
Shepherd,  laid  down  His  life  for  the  sheep.  Wherefore  was  He  thus  smitten  ? 
Because,  though  Himself  sinless.  He  bore  the  sins  of  others.  The  flock  had 
gone  astray,  and  incurred  the  penalty  of  apostasy,  and  He,  the  Shepherd,  had 
come  to  give  His  life  for  theirs.  III.  The  consequence  to  the  flock  op  this 
SMITING  OP  THE  Shepheed.  It  was  twofold.  The  sheep  were  to  be  scattered, 
but  God  was  to  turn  back  His  hand  over  the  humble  and  meek  ones  of  His  flock. 
The  former  of  these  applied  to  the  dispersion  of  His  disciples  as  consequent  on 
Hia  crucifixion ;  the  other  was  realised  when  the  Lord,  having  been  raised  from 
the  dead,  showed  Himself  to  individuals  and  to  groups  of  them.  But  though 
preserved  and  rescued,  Christ's  little  flock  would  not  escape  all  trouble  and 
suffering.  God  would  bring  them  through  the  fire,  and  refine  and  piurify  them 
in  the  furnace  of  affliction.  (W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  God's  government  of 
the  world : — I.  As  bringing  penal  ruin  upon  many.  1.  The  destruction  of 
their  leader.  In  the  Bible  language  political  religious  leaders  are  represented 
as  shepherds.  It  was  applied  to  Cyrus  (Isa.  xliv.  28).  The  person  defined  is 
represented  as  "  the  man  that  is  my  fellow."  Dr.  Keil's  rendering  is,  "  the  man 
who  is  my  neighbour  " ;  and  Dr.  Henderson's,  "  the  man  who  is  rmited  to  me." 
Who  is  this  man  ?  On  this  question  there  are  different  opinions.  "  Calion 
thought  it  was  Zechariah  himself,  as  representative  of  all  the  prophets,  and  that 
the  prophecy  referred  only  indirectly  to  Christ.  Grotius,  Eichhom,  Bauer, 
and  Jahne  apply  it  to  Judas  Maccabeus,  Ewald  to  Pehak,  Hitzig  to  the  pre- 
tended prophets  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  verses."  The  expression  "  my 
fellow  "  does  not  necessarily  mean  one  who  is  equal  in  nature  and  character, 
but  rather  one  who  has  the  fellowship  of  interests  and  aims.  Evangelical  writers, 
however,  apply  the  language  to  Christ  without  much  critical  examination  and 
without  hesitation.  They  do  this  mainly  on  the  groimd  that  Christ  Himself 
quotes  the  passage  on  the  night  in  which  He  was  betrayed,  as  an  illustration  of 
what  was  immediately  awaiting  Him  (Matt.  xxvi.  31).  He  does  not  say  that  the 
prophecy  referred  to  Him,  but  merely  that  the  passage  was  about  being  illustrated 
in  His  history.  The  shepherd  was  to  be  smitten,  and  the  sheep  scattered.  This, 
indeed,  is  a  common  fact  in  the  history  of  the  world  ;  when  the  leader  is  gone  the 
fold  is  scattered.  Our  point  is  that  God  often  brings  sufferings  on  a  people  by 
striking  down  their  leader.  There  are  few  greater  calamities  that  can  befall  a 
people  than  when  nations  lose  their  shepherds  and  leaders,  or  when  churches 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [c3hap.  xin. 

lose  their  pastors.  Even  when  families  lose  their  heads  the  loss  is  incalculable. 
Here  is — 2.  The  dispersion  of  the  flock.  This  comes  to  most  communities  when 
the  true  leader  is  taken  away.  The  removal  of  a  leader  in  a  family,  a  parent, 
often  leads  to  a  scattering  of  the  children.  The  scattering  is  a  great  evil.  Unity 
is  strength  and  harmony  ;  division  is  weakness  and  disorder.  When  communities 
are  broken  up  and  dispersed  the  various  members  often  place  themselves  in 
antagonism  with  each  other,  and  rivalries,  jealousies,  and  envyings  run  riot. 
3.  The  ruin  of  multitudes.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  in  all  the  land,  saith 
the  Lord,  two-parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off  and  die ;  but  the  third  shall  be  left 
therein."  Probably  this  refers  primarily  to  the  destruction  of  two-thirds  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Judea  by  the  Roman  arms,  and  the  famine  or  the  pestUence 
and  other  destructive  influences  which  are  the  usual  concomitants  of  all  wars. 
Thus  the  afflictions  of  the  great  majority  of  the  human  race  here  represented  as 
the  two-thirds  of  a  community  come  upon  them  as  the  retribution  of  justice — 
the  Divine  sword  here  invoked.  They  are  not  disciplinary,  but  penal.  "  They 
are  cut  off  and  die."  Here  we  have  God's  government  of  the  world.  II.  Bringi^cs 
EBMEDiAL  DISCIPLINE  TO  A  FEW.  "  And  I  will  bring  the  third-part  through  tl.o 
fire,  and  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined,"  &c.  The  very  calamities  whii  !a 
were  penal,  and  utterly  ruinous  to  two-thirds  of  that  population,  were  morallj- 
disciplinary  and  improving  to  the  remaining  third.  In  the  one  case  they  vverc 
the  strokes  of  the  "  sword  "  of  justice.  In  the  other  the  calamities  were  but  fiie 
in  the  "  pot  of  the  refiner."  These  by  the  purifying  infiuence  of  trials — 1.  Pray 
and  are  heard.  "  Shall  call  on  My  name,  and  I  will  hear  them."  2.  Are  accepted 
of  God  as  His  people.  They  acknowledge  their  relationship.  "  I  will  say  it  is 
My  people,  and  they  shall  say,  the  Lord  is  my  God."  Conclusion.  This  doctrine 
stands  out  in  sublime  prominence — that  afflictions  which  are  penal  and  destructive 
to  the  many  are  remedial  and  merciful  to  the  few.     {HomUist.) 

Ver.  9.  And  I  -will  bring  the  third  part  through  the  fire. — Trials  and 
triumphs  of  the  Christian  : — This  chapter,  though  consisting  of  nine  verses  only, 
is  a  little  Gospel.  In  some  of  the  preceding  verses  are  to  be  found  all  the  particulars 
of  the  Gospel — such  as,  the  substitution  of  Christ  as  a  sacrifice  in  behalf  of  His 
offending  people,  the  satisfaction  made  to  Divine  justice  by  His  death,  the  piu-ifi- 
cation  of  the  Church  through  sanctified  afflictions,  the  blessed  privileges  and 
intercourse  they  are  allowed  to  enjoy  with  their  God  and  Father,  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  text  was  fulfilled  when  the  nation  was  destroyed  by  the 
Roman  army,  and  when,  amidst  all  the  dreadful  scenes  which  were  then  beheld. 
He  preserved  His  own  people.  This  is  the  primary  meaning  of  the  text,  but  it 
refers  also  to  the  dealings  of  God  with  all  His  people,  in  all  generations  of  the 
Church,  down  to  the  end  of  time.  The  words  describe  the  trials  and  triumphs 
of  God's  people.  The  trials  which  come  before  their  triumphs  in  some  cases, 
and  the  triumphs  which  accompany  their  trials  in  others.  I.  The  trials  of  the 
CHILDREN  OF  GoD.  "  I  will  bring  them  through  the  fire."  1.  This  implies  that 
He  will  bring  them  into  the  fire.  Afflictions  are  oiu-  lot.  They  ase  what  we 
must  expect.  We  may  resist  them,  avoid  them,  be  angry  with  them,  harden  our 
hearts  vmder  them,  ascribe  them  to  second  causes,  but  we  cannot  escape  them. 
2.  The  nature  of  afflictions.  They  are  called  "  fire,"  which  denotes  the  severity 
of  the  Divine  chastenings.  Afflictions  must  be  felt,  or  they  are  not  afflictions. 
If  we  do  not  feel,  the  end  of  these  afflictions  is  not  answered.  3.  The  end  and 
design  of  affliction.  "  I  will  bring  them  through  the  fire."  God  does  not  chastiae 
for  the  sake  of  chastising.  Fire  is  searching,  and  fire  ia  purifying.  II.  The 
TRIUMPHS  OF  the  CHRISTIAN.  L  Ultimate  deliverance.  It  is  a  happiness  to 
know  that  He  can  bring  you  through,  and  a  still  gieater  happiness  to  Imow  that 
He  will  bring  you  through.  2.  Communion  with  God.  They  that  belong  to 
God  make  their  requests  known  to  Him.  He  has  commanded  and  encouraged 
them  to  do  this.  In  this  we  may  win  a  triumph.  3.  Covenant  relation  to  God 
is  another  part  of  the  Christian's  triumph.  God  owns  them  in  adversity.  There 
is  no  backwardness  on  the  part  of  the  believer  to  own  the  relationship  when  God 
says  that  it  exists.  (IF.  Thomas.)  As  silver  is  refined: — "I  saw  in  Rome," 
says  a  modern  writer,  "  an  old  coin,  a  silver  denarius,  all  coated  and  crusted 
with  green  and  purple  rust.  I  called  it  rust,  but  was  told  that  it  was  copper, 
the  alloy  thrown  out  from  the  silver  until  there  was  none  left  within ;  the  silver 
was  all  pure.  It  takes  ages  to  do  it,  but  it  does  get  done.  Souls  are  like  that. 
Something  moves  in  them  slowly,  till  the  debasement  ia  all  thrown  out.     Some 


CHAP,  xni.]  ZECHARIAH.  221 

day,  perhaps,  the  very  tarnish  shall  be  taken  off."  Well,  there  is  this  alloy,  this 
tarnish  in  all  of  ns,  and  the  education  of  life  is  to  purge  it  all  away — by  sorrows, 
by  disappointments,  by  failures,  by  judgments — 

"  By  fires  far  fiercer  than  are  blown  to  prove 
And  purge  the  silver  ore  adulterate." 

(Great  Thotights.) 

God's  method  of  dealing  with  His  people  : — The  wisdom,  sovereignty,  and  power 
of  the  Supreme  Ruler  are  nowhere  more  clearly  and  impressively  set  forth  and 
illustrated    than   in   the   fundamental   methods  which  mark  His  government  of 
mankind.     'WTiat  these  methods  or  principles  are  it  is  not  difficult  to  determine 
from  Scripture  and  providence.     And  the  choice  of  methods  and  the  disclosure 
of  them  are  made  for  the  purposes  of  instruction  and  moral  discipline.     Among 
these    methods   are   the   following — 1.    Agencies   wholly   inadequate,   seemingly, 
to  accomplish  purposes  so  grand  and  infinite.     2.   Instruments,   "  weak "  and 
"  foolish  "  in  themselves,  chosen  to  "  confound  things  that  are  mighty  " — the 
wisdom,  philosophy,  pride,  and  wealth  of  the  world.     3.  God's  method  is  one  to 
compel  faith — the  whole  structure  of  the  Supernatural  rests  on  faith.     (1)  It  is 
true  in  regard  to  the  Scriptures.     From  Genesis  to  Revelation  we  "  see  as  through 
a  glass,  darkly."     God  gives  light  enough  to  discern  duty,  but  not  to  satisfy 
a    thousand    anxieties.     We   must   believe,    trust,    patiently    wait,    or    perish. 
(2)  Providence  is  a  book  fuU  of  painful  mysteries.     We  caimot  break  the  seals 
and  interpret.     Darkness  that  may  be  felt  encompasses  our  path  here.     We  are 
shut  up  to  faith.     4.  The  Divine  method  is  the  method  of  severe  discipline.     By 
the  way  of  the  Cross  to  the  Crown  !     Fellowship  in  suffering  the  condition  of 
joint-heirship  in  glory.     "  Whom  He  loves  He  rebukes  and  chastens."     5.  God's 
method  is  one  of  slow  gro\vth  and  development.     Light,  grace,  prosperity,  favour, 
discipline,  as  we  can  bear  it.     6.  God's  method  of  dealing  has  respect  to  that 
syst«m  of  rewards  and  pimishments  which  forms  a  part  of  His  moral  government. 
Sin  and  misery,  virtue  and  happiness,  obedience  and  reward,  are  so  conjoined 
in  this  life  that  no  man  can  mistake  the  will  of  God,  or  reasonably  doubt  that  the 
law  of  eternal  rectitude   is   bound   ultimately   to   prevail.     7.   Occasionally   by 
"  terrible  acts  of  righteousness  "  God  reveals  Himself  to  the  nations,  "  that  all 
the  earth  may  know  there  is  a  God  in  Israel."     {Homiletic  MontUy.)         I  will 
say,   It    is    My  people:    and    they    shaU    say.    The  Lord  is  my  God.  —  Inter- 
communion between  God  and  man  : — What  a  vivid  representation   this  passage 
affords  of  the  personality  of  God  !     Here  He  appears  as  One  who  thinks,  observes, 
feels,  and  purposes ;  a  far  liigher  and  juster  view  of  the  Et«rnal  Power  than  that 
which  sees  only  abstract  law  behind  and  above  Nature.     And  how  striking  is  the 
intercommmiion  here  pictured  between  the  Creator  and  His  creatures  !     Owing 
to  man  having  been  made  in  the  Divine  image,  he  is  capable  of  spiritual  intercourse 
with  his  Maker.     And  what  a  delightful  intimacy  distinguishes  this  communion  ! 
I.  The  voice  of  God — "  It  is  My  people."     1.  My  rightful  people.     The  Lord 
of  all  asserts  His  authority,  puts  forward  His  claim.     This  is  a  view  of  religion 
often  overlooked.     We  are  God's  by  right.     2.  My  loved  people.     We  hear  in  this 
utterance  the  tone  of  affection.     There  is  a  touching  tenderness  in  the  possessive 
"  my,"   in  such  expressions  as  "  my  friend,"   "  my  father,"   "  my  son,"   "  my 
husband,"    "  my  wife."     So  here,  when  the  Lord  says,   "  My  people."     3.   My 
redeemed  people.     4.  My  sealed  people.     It  is  usual  to  mark  property  with  the 
owner's  name.     It  is  by  the  renewed  character  and  the  obedient  Ufe  that  the 
Lord's  property  in  His  own  people  is  most  surely  attested.     "  The  Lord  knoweth 
them  that  are  His,"  and,  "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  the  Lord  depart 
from  iniquity."     Rehgion  may  be  regarded  as  consisting  of  man's  acknowledgment 
of  God's  revelation ;  an  acknowledgment  which  is  first  of  the  heart — when  it  is 
faith  ;  next  of  the  language — when  it  is  confession  ;  and  further,  of  the  hfe — when 
it  is  obedience.     II.  The  voice  of  man.     "  The  Lord  is  my  God."     1.  This  cry 
is  a  response  to  the  Divine  assurance.     It  is  the  faithful  echo  to  the  heavenly 
voice.     2.  The  Lord  alone  is  our  God,  whom  we  honour  supremely.     None  other 
divides  our  heart  with  Him.     3.  The  Lord  is  our  God  to  trust.     The  greatest 
and  most  pressing  need  of  man  in  this  life  is  One  upon  whom  his  weakness  and 
helplessness  can  absolutely  rely.     4.  The  Lord  is  our  God,  to  appropriate  and 
enjoy.     What  gladness  fills  the  soul  when  a  long-hoped-for  discovery  has  been 
made,  a  long-sought  treasure  found,  a  long-lost  friend  recovered!    6.  The  Lord 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

is  our  God,  to  serve  and  glorify.     6.  The  Lord  is  our  God  for  ever.     Our  God  is 
the  eternal  God.     (J.  B.  Thomson,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Vbes.  1-3.  And  thy  spoil  shall  be  divided. — A  sJcekih  on  had  men : — 'Hiree 
facts  concerning  such.  I.  They  are  capable  of  perpetrating  the  greatest 
ENORMITIES  ON  THEIR  FELLOW-MEN.  In  the  account  given  by  Joseph  us  of  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans  we  have  a  record  of  enormities  at 
which  we  might  stand  aghast.  The  particulars,  says  Dr.  Wardlaw,  here 
noted  are  such  as  usually,  it  might  be  said,  invariably  attend  the  besieging, 
the  capture,  and  the  sacking  of  cities  ;  especially  when,  as  in  this  case,  the  assailing 
army  has  been  exasperated  by  a  long,  harassing,  and  wasting  defence.  The 
entrance  of  the  unpitying  soldiery,  the  rifling  of  houses,  the  violation  of  women, 
the  indiscriminate  massacre,  and  the  division  of  the  spoil,  are  just  what  all  expect, 
and  what  require  no  comment.  And  never  were  such  scenes  more  frightfully 
realised  than  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  when  God  in  His  providence  in 
judicial  retribution  gathered  all  nations  against  the  devoted  city  to  battle. 
"  All  nations,"  a  correct  description  of  the  army  of  Titus,  the  empire  of  Rome 
embracing  a  large  proportion  of  the  then  known  world,  and  this  army  consisting 
of  soldiers  of  all  the  different  nations  which  composed  it.  And,  while  such  was 
to  be  the  destruction  brought  upon  "  the  city,"  the  desolation  was  to  extend, 
and  that  in  different  ways,  at  short  intervals,  throughout  "  the  land."  The  fact 
that  men  are  capable  of  perpetrating  on  their  fellow-men  such  enormities  show — 
1.  Man's  apostasy  from  the  laws  of  has  spiritual  nature.  2.  The  great  work  which 
the  Gospel  has  to  do  in  oiu-  world.  II.  That  whatever  enormities  they  per- 
petrate, THEY  ARE  EVERMORE  INSTRUMENTS  IN  THE  HANDS  OF  THE  WORLD'S 
GREAT  Rttlkr.  The  period  in  which  these  abominations  were  enacted  is  in  the 
text  called  the  "day  of  the  Lord,"  and  He  is  represented  as  calling  the  Roman 
armies  to  the  work.  "  I  will  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalem  to  battle  ; 
and  the  city  shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses  rifled,  and  the  women  ravished." 
God  in  His  retributive  procedure  punishes  the  bad  by  the  bad.     In  this  case — 

1.  No  injustice  is  done.  The  men  of  Jerusalem  deserved  their  fate.  They  "  filled 
up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity."  2.  There  is  no  infringement  of  free  agency. 
Good  men  might  revolt  from  inflicting  such  enormities  upon  their  fellow-creatures, 
but  it  is  according  to  the  wish  of  bad  men.  This  is  God's  retributive  method, 
to  punish  the  bad  by  the  bad.     III.  Though  instruments  in  His  hands,  God 

WILL  PUNISH  them  FOR  ALL  THEIR  DEEDS  OF  ENORMITY.       But  where  is  the  jUStice 

of  punishing  men  whom  He  employs  to  execute  His  own  will  ?  Two  facts  will 
answer  this  question.  1.  What  they  did  was  essentially  bad.  2.  What  they 
did  was  in  accord  with  their  own  wills.  He  never  inspired  them  or  constrained 
them.     He  did  but  use  them.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  And  His  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives. 
— God  in  relation  to  a  suffering  world  : — The  men  in  Jerusalem  were  in  great 
Buffering  and  imminent  peril,  and  here  is  a  figurative  representation  of  the 
Almighty  in  relation  to  them.  I.  He  observes  their  terrible  condition. 
"  And  His  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  which  is  before 
Jerusalem  on  the  east."  The  idea  suggested  here  is  that  God  observes  men 
in  all  their  calamities  and  dangers.  His  eye  is  on  them.  This  is  especially  the 
case  with  His  people.  We  are  assured  that  His  eye  is  ever  upon  the  righteous  ; 
Job  said,  "  He  knoweth  the  way  I  take."     1.  He  sees  what  we  have  to  endure. 

2.  He  sees  how  we  behave  ourselves  in  our  condition,  whether  under  our  afflictions 
we  are  trustful,  patient,  and  submissive  or  otherwise ;  whether  in  our  perils  we 
are  making  an  effort  to  escape.  "  Thou  compassest  my  path  and  my  lying-down, 
and  art  acquainted  with  all  my  ways."  II.  He  makes  a  way  for  thkir  deliver- 
ance. "  And  the  Mount  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof  toward  the 
east  and  toward  the  west,  and  there  shall  be  a  very  great  valley."  "  These 
verses,"  says  Dr.  Henderson,  "  convey,  in  language  of  the  most  beautiful  poetical 
imagery,  the  assurance  of  the  effectual  means  of  escape  that  should  be  provided 


OHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  223 

for  the  truly  pious.  We  accordingly  learn  from  Eusebius  that  on  the  breaking 
out  of  the  Jewish  war  the  Christian  Church  at  Jerusalem,  in  obedience  to  the 
warning  of  our  Saviour  (Matt.  xxiv.  16)  fled  to  Pella,  a  city  beyond  Jordan,  where 
they  lived  in  safety.  As  the  Mount  of  Olives  lay  in  their  way,  it  is  represented 
as  cleaving  into  two  halves,  in  order  to  make  a  passage  for  them."  It  is  not 
necessary  to  suppose  that  the  Mount  of  Olives  was  thus  riven  asunder.  The 
idea  is,  that  the  obstruction  to  their  escape,  though  formidable  as  a  mountain, 
should  be  removed.  The  Almighty  would  give  tnem  every  facility  to  escape 
to  the  refuge.  This  He  does  for  oiu:  suffering  race.  He  makes  a  way  for  their 
escape,  from  guilt,  ignorance,  and  misery,  which  has  been  blocked  up  by  mountains 
of  difficulties.  III.  He  provided  a  refuge  for  their  safety.  1.  The  scene 
of  refuge,  "  Azal."  An  unknown  place.  Some  spot  to  secure  them  from  danger. 
2.  The  impulse  of  flight.  3.  The  necessity  for  the  flight.  "  The  Lord  thy  God 
shall  come."  In  some  great  manifestation  of  His  power.  Conclusion.  How 
thankful  we  should  be  to  know  that  God  has  not  deserted  humanity  in  its  sina 
and  sorrows.     (HomUist.) 

Ver.  6.    It    shall    come   to    pass    in   that   day,   that   the   light   shall  not 

be   dear   nor    dark.  —  TJie    day    of    the    Lord :  —  This    phrase    denotes    not 

one  time,  but  many.     Any  signal  manifestation  of  the  Divine  government  of 

the  world,  or  any  such  event  as  made  men's  hearts  quake  within  them  for  fear, 

is  described  as  the  day  of  the  Lord.     Though  all  nature  is,  in  truth,  an  exponent 

of  the  judgment,  as  well  as  the  beneficence  of  God,  there  are  times  and  places 

in  which  His  right  hand,  as  it  were,  is  more  manifestly  bared.     There  are  times 

when  the  fervent  spirit  is  tempted  to  wish  for  one  of  the  days  of  the  Lord.     Yet 

there  are  many  reasons   why,  even  in  the  worst  times,  we  should  not  wish  to 

hasten  that  day  which  will  in  appointed  course  come  surely  and  will  not  tarry. 

Instead  of  encouraging  in  ourselves  impatience  for  some  great  day  of  the  Lord, 

let  us  rather  engrave  upon  our  minds  a  conviction  that  such  coming  will  be  at 

last  inevitable.     We  may  estimate  the  character  of  such  general  judgments  as 

are  here  alluded  to,  by  reading  the  description  of  those  of  old.     What,  then,  is 

the  sort  of  temper   or  sentiment  with  which  the  idea  of  any  great  national 

visitations  should  be  blended  in  our  minds  ?     As  citizens  we  should  be  aware 

that  crime  inevitably  brings  down  judgment.     There  is  emphatically  one  "  day 

of  the  Lord."     The  great  day  of  the  Lord,  previous  to  the  day  of  judgment,  is 

the  Gospel  dispensation,  as  commencing  with  the  first  destruction  of  the  Christian 

Church  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     {E.    Williams,  B.D.)        Mixed  providences  : — The 

day  of  the  Church's  conflict  is  mixed,  and  yieldeth  wonderful  variety  of  providence. 

Sometimes  truth  and  righteousness  getteth  the  upper  hand,  and  sometimes  the 

contrary  party,  that  foment  error  and  unrighteousnes  -.     It  is  a  doubtful  day  in  a 

twofold  regard — because  light  and  darkness  are  either  intermixed  or  alternate. 

Or  else  because  our  estate  in  respect  of  either  is  not  durable  and  fixed,  but  liable 

to  great  uncertainties.     There  is  an  intermixture  of  providences  at  the  same 

time,  and  the  Church  is  in  several  respects  both  happy  and  miserable  at  once. 

Here  things  go  well  and  there  ill.     It  is  a  rare  case  when  there  is  a  perfect  harmony 

between  our  private  condition  and  public  happiness.     Successively  there  is  a 

vicissitude  and  interchange  of  conditions.     Good  and  evil  succeed  each  other 

by  turns.     Human  affairs,  under  God,  depend  much  on  the  people's  hearts,  and 

how  uncertain  are  they  !     Inquire  the  reason  of  this,  why  the  day  of  our  conflict 

is  such  a  mixed,  doubtful  day.     Consider — 1.  The  equity  of  it.     It  is  such  a  day 

as  is  very  suitable  to  our  condition  in  the  world.     We  are  in  a  middle  place, 

between  heaven  and  hell,  and  therefore  partake  somewhat  of  both.     We  have 

mixed  principles — flesh  and  spirit.     As  long  as  sin  remaineth  in  us  we  cannot 

be  perfectly  happy.     The  flesh  needeth  to  be  weakened  by  divers  afflictions. 

As  our  principles  are  mixed,  so  are  all  our  operations.     There  is  a  mixture  of 

good  and  evil  in  all  our  services.     2.  Consider  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  God 

in  it.     He  hath  many  wise  ends  to  be  accomplished  by  these  mixed  providences. 

That  a  people  worn  out  with  long  misery  may  be  more  pliable  to  God's  purpose. 

By  such  mixed  providences  God  will  weaken  and  waste  stubborn  nature.     To 

work  us  from  earthly  things  to  things  heavenly.     To  put  a  cloud  and  veil  on 

His  proceedings.     To  prevent  the  excesses  of  either  condition,  God  tempereth 

and  qualifieth  the  one  with  the  other.     To  make  way  for  the  exercise  of  our  faith. 

Faith  is  neither  made  void  by  too  great  a  light,  nor  extinguished  by  too  great 

a  darkness.     To  win  the  heart  by  the  various  methods  of  judgments  and  mercies. 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

and  to  gain  upon  us  by  both  means  at  first.  God  doth  it  to  bring  His  people 
to  a  Christian  union  and  accord.  When  religious  interest  is  divided,  God  keeps 
the  balance  equal,  and  success  is  sometimes  cast  on  this  side,  sometimes  on 
that.  To  prevent  contempt  and  insolency  towards  those  that  are  fallen  mider 
God's  displeasure.  It  is  also  a  ground  of  patience.  Heavy  affictions  lack  not 
their  comforts  to  make  them  tolerable.  He  measureth  out  good  and  evil  with 
a  great  deal  of  wisdom  and  tenderness.  To  show  that  our  comforts  and  crosses 
are  in  His  hand  ;  and  He  doth  variously  dispense  weal  or  woe  as  our  condition 
doth  require.  Appfccation.  What  use  should  we  make  of  all  this  ?  1.  Be  suie 
you  do  not  make  an  ill  use  of  it.  This  is  done  when  we  are  not  thankful  for  our 
mercies,  because  they  are  not  full  and  perfect.  It  is  an  abuse  if  we  are  dis- 
coviraged  in  God's  service  because  of  this  uncertainty.  When  you  have  any 
respite,  or  breathing-time,  then  is  the  time  and  season  to  put  your  hand  to  the 
work.  If  there  be  uncertainties,  remember  that  never  a  great  work  is  brought 
to  pass  without  troubles.  And  change  cometh  not  until  our  condition  proveth 
a  snare  for  us.  2.  The  right  use  we  should  make  of  it.  By  way  of  caution,  take 
heed  of  human  confidences,  and  presuming  too  much  on  temporal  success  by 
means  and  instruments.  For  direction — Walk  by  a  sure  rule.  Get  a  sure 
guide.  Encourage  yourself  by  the  sure  promise  that  you  have  to  build  upon. 
A  man  wrapped  up  in  the  peace  of  God,  and  the  quiet  of  a  good  conscience,  and 
hopes  of  eternal  life,  is  fortified  against  all  encounters,  storms,  and  difficulties 
whatsoever.  {T.  Manton.)  Light  and  solace: — These  verses  present  a  sug- 
gestive description  of  human  history  as  a  whole,  and  of  each  godly  life  in  that 
history.  I.  The  mixed  character  of  our  earthly  existence.  "  The  light 
shall  not  be  clear,  nor  dark  "  ;  "  It  shall  be  one  day,  not  day,  nor  night."  That 
is,  the  lot  even  of  a  good  man  is  chequered.  Every  height  has  its  hollow.  And 
each  blessing  has  its  accompanying  affliction.  But  no  Christian  is  ever  in  absolute 
darkness.  If  the  rough  wind  be  blowing,  God  will  take  care  that  it  be  not  from 
the  east.  Observe — 1.  Through  the  trials  of  the  past  God  has  disciplined  us  into 
fitness  for  present  duties.     I^esent  trials  are  the  prophecies  of  futiure  efficiency. 

2.  Trials  are  frequently  connected  with  our  sins.  Evil  deeds  are  evil  seeds  which 
produce  a  harvest  of  bitterness.  3.  Trials  lead  us  to  long  for  heaven,  and  wean 
us  from  the  world.  II.  The  Christian's  support  under  this  mixed  experi- 
ence— "  It  shall  be  one  day  which  shall  be  known,"  &c.  This  means — 1.  Our 
condition  as  a  whole — not  one  separate  part,  but  the  whole  "  day  "  of  light  and 
dark — is  known  unto  the  Lord.  2.  Our  lot  is  ordered  for  us  by  Jehovah,  just 
according  as  the  grand  total  demands  it.  III.  The  happy  termination  of 
THIS  mixed  state  of  things — "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  at  evening  time 
it  shall  be  light."  All  doubts  and  clouds  shall  have  been  driven  away  by  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness.  Relief  shall  come  when  it  is  least  expected.  Light  is 
the  synonym  for  joy,  for  purity,  for  knowledge.  In  heaven  all  the  elements  of 
darkness  shall  be  absent.  It  shall  be  light.  (Homilist.)  Mingled  experiences: — 
I.  The  language  of  the  text  is  descriptive  of  the  present  mingled  state  of  affairs, 
both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world.  Darkness  is  the  effect  of  our  low  situation. 
There  is  nothing  really  dark  with  God— nothing  imperfect  in  the  Gospel.  The 
Gospel  is  to  our  perception  not  so  distinct  as  to  be  perfectly  clear  ;  but  it  is  not 
BO  dark  as  to  be  useless  and  unintelligible.  There  are  clouds  and  obscurities 
resting  on  the  subject  arising  from  our  weakness  and  imperfection  of  understanding. 
Illustrate — (1)  By  the  partial  distribution  of  the  Gosjiel  among  the  nations  of 
the  earth.  (2)  The  language  is  also  descriptive  of  the  imi>erfect  attainments 
of  real  Christians.  In  the  matter  of  personal  experience  it  is  but  twilight.  You 
have  faith,  but  not  "  the  full  assurance  of  faith."  You  have  hope,  but  how  few 
of  you  hope  ever  blooming  I  You  have  obedience,  but  it  is  partial,  irregular, 
imperfect.  You  have  joy,  but  it  is  meddled  with.  (3)  The  text  finds  its  illustra- 
tion in  the  inscrutable  dispensations  of  the  providence  of  God.  How  vast,  how 
profound  a  subject !     II.  The  superintending  care  of  Divine  providence 

DURING   this   chequered   AND   MYSTERIOUS   STATE   OF  THINGS.       This    intimates — 

I.   God's  superintendence  of  all  things.     2.  God's  foreknowledge  of  all  things. 

3.  The  harmony  of  Divine  providence.  4.  The  beneficial  tendency  of  the  pro- 
vidence of  God.  5.  The  language  is  a  ground  of  unlimited  resignation  and  con- 
tentment; and  6.  A  motive  for  unlimited  confidence.     III.  The  wonders  and 

OL'RIES  of  THAT  AUSPICIOUS    DAY    IN    WHICH    THIS    SINGULAR    STATE    OF    AFFAIRS 

8HALL  TERMINATE.  This  promise  contains  a  reserve  of  consolation  for  the  feeble 
Christian  against  the  hour  of   dissolution.      And  a  reserve  of  consolation  for 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  225 

the  feeble  Christian  in  seasons  of  perplexity  and  difficulty.  The  promise  contains 
also  an  assurance  of  the  final  glory,  the  millennial  reign  of  the  Son  of  God.  {Joseph 
Beaumont,  D.D.)  Dark  and  bright  periods  in  human  life  : — The  word  rendered 
"  clear  "  is  in  the  margin  "  precious,"  and  is  in  the  plural.  The  word  here 
rendered  "dark"  is  in  the  margin  "thickness."  I.  A  period  of  unmitigated 
DISTRESS.  This  period  of  unmitigated  calamity  primarily  refers,  we  have  no 
doubt,  to  those  long  centuries  of  oppression,  cruelty,  mockery,  and  scorn,  to 
which  the  Jewish  people  have  been  subjected  ever  since  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  In  the  predictions  of  Joel  (ii.  31,  iii.  15)  referring  to  the  destruction 
of  the  Holy  City  and  breaking  up  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth,  the  period  is 
referred  to  as  a  period  when  the  sun  shall  be  "  turned  into  darkness,"  and  the 
"  moon  into  blood."     Three  remarks  are  suggested  concerning  this  dark  day. 

1.  Such  a  day  is  the  hard  destiny  of  some  men.  Their  life  is  a  day  of  darkness. 
It  is  so  with  some  nations.  The  history  of  some  nations  and  tribes  is  little  less 
than  a  history  of  crushing  oppression,  bloody  revolutions  and  untold  cruelties 
and  sufferings.  2.  Such  a  day  is  deserved  by  most  men.  AH  men  are  sinners 
and  deserve  this  blackness  and  darkness  for  ever.  The  very  tendency  of  sin,  in  fact, 
is  to  quench  every  light  in  the  firmament  of  the  soul.  II.  Here  is  a  period  of 
TJNTNTERRtrPTED  JOY.  1.  Such  a  day  as  this  is  destined  to  dawn  on  every  good 
man.  Heaven  is  a  scene  of  light.  No  clouds  of  ignorance  or  suffering  obstruct 
the  rays,  nor  will  the  sun  ever  go  down.     "  The  Lord  God  is  the  light  thereof." 

2.  Such  a  day  as  this  is  destined  to  dawn  on  the  world  in  the  futvure.  (Homilist.) 
Light  and  shade  in  the  Christian  life  : — I.  The  mixed  character  of  our  earthly 
LIFE.  "  The  light  shall  not  be  clear  nor  dark."  The  lot  even  of  the  good  man 
is  chequered.  No  Christian  is  ever  in  absolute  and  unrelieved  darkness.  It 
may  be  a  long  twilight  with  him,  but  it  is  never  night.  Why  does  God  permit 
so  much  of  darkness  in  our  lot  ?  Set  forth  some  of  the  reasons  why  we  have 
so  much  of  difficulty  and  affiiction  to  contend  with.  1.  Through  the  trials  of 
the  past  God  has  disciplined  us  into  fitness  for  the  duties  of  the  present.  We 
did  not  see  this  at  first,  but  we  have  discovered  it  now.  Resistance  is  needed 
for  the  development  of  physical  vigour,  and  difficulty  is  as  much  required  for 
the  formation  of  strength  in  moral  character.  2.  Our  trials  are  frequently  con- 
nected with  our  sins.  Illustrate  from  the  history  of  Jacob.  3.  The  shades  of 
darkness  in  our  earthly  lots  lead  us  to  long  for  heaven.  If  everything  here  were 
as  we  should  wish  to  have  it,  we  should  not  desire  to  go  elsewhere ;  but  "  God 
has  provided  some  better  thing  for  us  "  in  the  world  beyond,  and  He  takes  care 
that  we  shall  not  get  wedded  entirely  to  the  concerns  of  earth.  II.  The  Christian's 
SOLACE  and  support.  Suggested  by  the  words,  "  It  shall  be  one  day  which 
shall  be  known  to  the  Lord."  1.  Our  condition  is  known  to  the  Lord.  The 
world  is  governed  by  a  Person,  and  He  imder  whose  eye  all  things  come  to  pass, 
is  our  Father.  2.  Our  lot  is  ordered  by  Jehovah.  Ova  lives  are  not  "  by  chance." 
There  is  an  order  in  them,  and  a  plan  rimning  through  them.  Then  things  that 
seem  to  be  working  against  us  must  reaUy  be  working  for  us.  III.  The  happy 
termination  of  this  mixed  state  of  things  to  the  Christian.  Relief  shall 
come,  and  that  at  the  time  when  it  is  least  expected.  If  the  day  has  been  lowering, 
we  look  for  a  deeper  darkness  than  ordinary  when  evening  comes  :  but  here, 
when  men  usually  anticipate  that  it  will  be  evening,  it  will  be  morning.  You 
have  seen  this  illustrated  very  often  in  separate  passages  of  your  lives.  These 
separate  chapters  are  only  miniatiu-es  of  life  as  a  whole,  for,  at  its  evening-time 
there  comes  to  the  Christian  the  dawning  light  of  heaven.  (W.  M.  Taylor, 
D.D.)  Mingled  light  and  darkness: — The  &st  clause  of  the  text  is  religious. 
It  does  not  refer  to  the  light  of  the  natural  heavens.  It  refers  to  all  there  is  in 
the  religion  of  man,  and  in  the  things  which  affect  him  in  the  experience  of  it. 
His  condition  is  to  be  one  of  a  mixed  character,  not  wholly  good,  and  not  wholly 
evil — not  all  light,  not  all  dark.  This  mixture  may  be  seen  in  several  particulars. 
1.  In  the  matter  of  a  believer's  holiness.  Therein  there  is  some  light,  but  it 
is  not  clear  nor  dark.  The  believer  has  some  true  conformity  to  God,  but  it 
is  not  a  perfect  conformity.  He  often  wonders  at  himself, — at  the  inconsistencies 
and  contradictions  that  he  finds  in  his  own  experience.  In  his  poor  soul  faith 
struggles  to  get  the  better  of  unbelief — the  love  of  the  world  comes  up  to  combat 
the  love  of  God.  His  heart  is  inconsistent,  his  soul  unsteady,  hb  way  devious, 
and  he  cannot  be  ignorant  that  his  holiness  is  only  of  an  imperfect  character. 
Whenever  God  spares  a  regenerated  sinner  upon  the  earth  after  the  time  of  his 
regeneration,  such  a  regenerated  sinner  will  have  this  chequered  experience. 

IS 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

2.  This  mixtuie  may  be  seen  in  the  believer's  knowledge.  There  is  a  mixtvue 
of  clearness  and  obscurity  in  the  knowledge  of  God's  people  which  nothing  could 
describe  more  perfectly  than  Zechariah  has  here  described  it.  They  have  know 
ledge,  but,  in  all  parts  of  it,  it  is  limited.  Behold  a  disciplined  believer.  He 
is  in  the  furnace.  He  knows  who  put  him  there.  He  knows  that  the  process 
will  stop  when  the  purpose  of  it  is  accomplished.  But  there  are  other  things 
he  does  not  know.  He  attempts  to  know  them,  but  he  cannot  find  them  out. 
He  asks.  For  what  particular  sin  am  I  thus  afflicted  ?  He  knows  not  why  God 
has  sent  that  particular  affliction  on  him.  Behold  a  believer  examining  his  own 
heart.  He  knows  something  about  it.  He  very  well  knows  its  deceitfulness. 
But  it  is  a  wonder  to  him  how  his  deceitfulness  will  work.  When  shall  he  ever 
be  siu-e  of  a  heart  that  has  so  often  wandered  ?  We  ought  to  remember  that 
the  imperfection  of  our  knowledge  results  from  our  creature  littleness  and  the 
imperfection  of  our  present  state ;  and  that  so  far  as  we  have  any  necessity  of 
knowing  in  order  to  be  saved,  oiu-  knowledge  may  be  as  clear  and  definite  as 
our  capacities  will  allow.  3.  The  comforts  of  God's  people  have  in  them  a  wonder- 
ful mingling  of  light  and  gloom.  It  is  not  all  clear  day  with  them.  It  is  not 
all  night.  The  alternation  of  comfort  and  depression  which  Christians  experience, 
constitutes  a  chapter  of  facts  which  shows  the  mingled  character  of  their  life, 
whether  we  can  have  knowledge  of  the  reasons  for  it  or  not.  4.  The  condition 
of  life.  We  fail  in  few  things  as  Christians  more  than  we  fail  of  fitly  noticing 
the  changes  we  pass  through  as  God  is  leading  us  on.  However  this  may  be, 
there  are  strange  minglings  of  light  and  darkness  in  our  condition.  So  fluctuating 
and  imcertain  is  the  condition  of  life  here,  that  no  mortal  can  be  found  whose 
biography  has  any  considerable  resemblance  to  his  anticipations  ;  his  life  has 
not  carried  out  the  plans  of  his  youth.  We  are  knocked  about  in  the  world. 
Our  condition  is  shifting,  fluctuating,  varying.  There  is  scarcely  a  believer 
among  us  who  is  not  compelled,  amid  this  mingling  of  light  and  darkness,  to 
recognise  the  immediate  hand  of  his  God.  Amid  all  this  mixture  of  good  and 
evil,  we  cannot  undei  stand  why  it  is  so.  How  needful  is  faith  !  After  Zechariah 
has  mentioned  the  mingled  clearness  and  obscurity  of  oiu-  state,  he  immediately 
points  us  to  One  who  can  understand  it.  "  It  shall  be  one  day  which  shall  be 
known  to  the  Lord,  not  day  nor  night."  Of  itself  it  is  of  a  mixed  character.  To 
us  it  is  mixed.  We  cannot  understand  it.  God  can.  We  can  turn  over  the 
chequered  scene  into  His  hands.  It  is  to  Him  all  one  day.  He  sees  no  darkness 
in  it.  It  is  all  alike  light — all  "one."  He  has  one  intent  in  all  the  dispensations 
that  affect  us.  When  it  is  said,  "  At  evening-time  it  shall  be  light,"  we  are  not 
to  understand  that  the  evening  or  night  shall  be  turned  into  day.  The  min  led 
character  of  the  believer's  experience  shall  pass.  Light  shall  come  at  the  end. 
This  may  find  illustration  in  all  the  features  of  the  believer's  experience.  {T.  S. 
Spencer,  D.D. )  The  mixed  experience  of  the  ChurcJi : — The  Church  has  had 
a  mixed  experience,  not  all  dark,  not  all  bright ;  now  defeat  and  now  success  ; 
now  joy,  now  grief ;  mingled  light  and  shade,  but  "  at  evening-time  "  light  has 
always  come.  So  with  each  Chri.^tian,  the  Church  in  miniature.  Tears  and  sinilee;, 
eighs  and  songs  mingle.  Wiiy  this  discipline  ?  1.  We  need  it  to  correct  mistakes 
of  natiu-e.  2.  Our  deliverance  from  sin  and  the  development  of  Christian  virtues 
are  processes  which  involve  this  mingled  experience.  .3.  Our  hold  on  God  by  faith 
and  prayer  is  made  more  steady.  "  But  it  shall  be  one  day  known  to  the  Lord." 
A  precious  compensation  is  this  assurance  that  God  knows.  God  is  working 
out  a  definite  plan.  The  golden  thread  of  His  purpose  runs  through  all  that 
to  us  seems  mixed  and  contradictory.  He  weaves  the  warp  and  woof.  Nothing 
is  confused.     "  It  shall  be  light."     (J.  Jackson  Wray.) 

Ver.  7.  At  evening -time  it  shall  be  light.  —  Aged  pcofHe^a  service:  — 
Natuie's  sunset  is  beautiful,  so  beautiful  that  every  painter  strives  in  vain  to 
catch  it  and  give  it  permanence  on  his  canvas.  But  the  sunset  of  life  transcends 
it,  as  the  reality  always  transcends  the  type,  as  the  spiiitual  always  transcends 
the  material,  as  the  heavenly  always  transcends  the  eaithly.  What  is  there  more 
beautiful  in  itself,  what  more  interesting  to  contemplate  than  snowy  age  sustained 
by  a  living  faith,  and  moving  on  toward  the  end  of  life's  journey,  calm,  serene, 
cheerful,  full  of  trust  in  God  and  the  hope  of  heaven  ?  But  why  picture  a  day 
of  storms  instead  nf  a  day  of  brightness  and  sunshine  ?  Why  a  life  of  trials  and 
Borrows  and  difficulties  ?  Herein  lies  the  chief  beauty  of  the  picture,  the  preoiouB- 
nees  of  the  promise.     Light  is  ever  most  glorious  in  contrast  with  darkness  ; 


OHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  227 

peace  most  blessed  by  contrast  with  strife.  A  peaceful,  trustful,  calm  old  age 
is  pleasing  always.  But  best  is  the  peace  after  strife,  the  trust  after  doubt,  the 
rest  after  toil.  Such  an  old  age  bespeaks  completeness.  It  is  the  maturing  of  the 
human  mind,  the  ripening  of  a  Godlike  character,  the  perfecting  of  an  immortal 
soul.  Those  lines  of  strength  and  beauty,  those  tokens  of  ripened  character, 
that  quiet  patience,  that  glowing  faith  and  hope,  that  chastened  joy — all  have 
been  imprinted  upon  the  aged  face  by  the  hand  of  experience  the  most  painful. 
Sanctified  sorrow  is  an  indispensable  element  of  heavenly  joy.  Spiritual  strength 
and  maturity  cannot  be  attained  except  through  difficulties  overcome  by  the 
grace  of  God.  Without  strife  there  can  be  no  conquest,  no  triumph.  The  promise 
of  light  at  evening-time  from  its  very  nature  implies  something  of  storm  during 
the  day.  But  is  there  light  ?  No ;  not  always.  Sometimes  the  promise  seems 
to  fail.  Not  every  troubled  and  toil-worn  life  ends  in  peace  and  hope.  Too  often 
advancing  years  only  bring  increased  darkness.  Disappointment  deepens  into 
a  perpetual  bitterness  of  spirit.  Old  age  is  marked  by  peevishness,  complaining, 
and  discontent.  It  need  not  be  so  with  any  life.  The  promise  is  to  all  a  Divine 
promise.  Whence  shall  this  light  come  ?  From  the  shining  of  the  sun  upon 
the  clouds.  And  from  the  shining  of  God's  love  upon  our  trials.  It  is  the  bright- 
ness of  His  love  that  transfigures  life,  and  fills  its  closing  years  with  light  and 
promise.  The  glory  of  the  evening  light  comes,  not  from  the  removal  of  all  clouds 
of  evil,  but  from  their  transformation.  Apart  from  difficulty  and  trial,  we  could 
never  know  the  infinitude  of  God's  love  and  power.  So  may  it  be  with  every 
soul  that  claims  this  promise  ;  the  darkness  of  the  morning,  and  the  storm  of 
the  noontide  shall  but  enhance  the  glory  of  the  evening  light.  If  to  any  of  you 
the  evening-time  still  seems  dark  and  gloomy,  let  in  this  light  unto  your  soul ; 
let  it  stream  through  your  life,  and  it  will  brighten  and  transform  everything 
with  the  likeness  of  its  own  glory.  (Oeorge  H.  Hvbbard.)  The  light  of  evening  : 
— Evening  is  the  time  for  stillness,  and  low,  quiet  tones,  and  communion  with 
things  and  persons  far  away.  So  deep  is  the  peace,  so  sweet  the  refreshment  of 
that  hour  to  one  who,  having  done  his  work  as  a  true  man,  may  rest  with  a  good 
conscience.  Enlarge  the  range  of  view.  Such  as  is  the  evening  hour  after  a  day 
of  honest  toil,  such  ought  to  be  the  latter  years  in  every  good  man's  life.  As 
comes  the  evening  to  each  mortal  day,  so  comes  an  evening,  at  last,  to  all  our 
days  together  ;  and  with  it  the  evening  light,  better  far  than  the  growing  bril- 
liancy of  the  early  hours,  or  the  set  glare  of  the  noonday  svm.  When  the  day  of 
life  has  been  a  good  and  useful  day,  not  idly  spent  or  wasted,  but  passed  in  the 
fear  of  God,  in  piety  and  honesty,  and  in  the  performance  of  duty,  then  must 
its  ending  be  calm  and  stUl.  1.  In  what  does  the  light  of  the  evening  hour 
consist  ?  In  the  evening  of  life  comes  the  final  and  distinct  realisation  of  the 
little  value  of  this  world.  A  true  man  outgrows,  step  by  step,  what  he  was  ; 
at  last,  if  he  live  long  enough,  he  outgrows  the  world.  2.  To  pass  from  this  life 
to  that  in  front,  will  be  to  go  from  ignorance  and  imperfection  unto  a  wider  know- 
ledge and  a  deeper  wisdom.  The  evening  brings  the  time  when  the  servant  of 
God  shall  see  and  know  many  of  the  secrets  of  the  universe,  and  read  through 
and  through  what  had  long  been  dark  mysteries  to  him.  How  many  things 
there  are  which  we  do  not  understand  !  3.  It  must  bring  great  peace  at  last,  to 
look  back  upon  the  life,  and  consider  its  moral  and  its  lesson.  One  thing  comes 
clearer  and  clearer  out ;  the  steady,  never-failing  presence  and  providence  of 
God.  4.  Many  have  feared  lest  they  might,  somehow,  lose  their  faith.  That  is 
the  darkest  of  all  spectres  to  a  Christian.  How  blessed  then  to  know  at  last 
that,  whatever  mistakes  are  made,  whatever  sins  are  committed,  we  are  saved 
from  that  gravest  error,  that  heaviest  and  most  hopeless  sin,  the  denial  of  the 
Catholic  faith.  {Morgan  Dix.)  Light  at  evening-time : — There  are  different 
evening-times  that  happen  to  the  Church  and  to  God's  people,  and  as  a  rule  we 
may  rest  quite  certain  that  at  evening-time  there  shall  be  light.  God  very  fre- 
quently acts  in  grace  in  such  a  manner  that  we  can  find  a  parallel  in  nature.  The 
works  of  creation  are  very  frequently  the  mirror  of  the  worlis  of  grace.  But 
sometimes  God  oversteps  nature.  In  nature,  after  evening-time,  there  cometh 
night.  But  God  is  ])leased  to  send  to  His  people  times  when  the  eye  of  reason 
expects  to  see  no  more  day,  but  fears  that  the  glorious  landscape  of  God's  mercies 
will  be  shrouded  in  the  darkness  of  His  forgetfulness.  But,  instead,  God  over- 
leapeth  nature,  and  declares  that  at  evening-time,  instead  of  darkness,  there 
shall  be  light.  Illustrate — 1.  From  the  history  of  the  Church  at  large.  Especially 
the  time  of  the  Reformation.     2.  This  rule  holds  equally  good  in  the  little  as 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

well  as  in  the  great.  We  know  that  in  nature  the  very  same  law  that  rules  the 
atom,  governs  also  the  starry  orbs.  It  is  even  so  with  the  laws  of  grace.  "  At 
evening-time  it  shall  be  light "  to  every  individual.  There  are  our  bright  days 
in  temporal  matters.  After  them  we  have  had  our  sunsets.  Times  of  trouble, 
but  they  passed  into  times  of  deliverance.  If  God  prolong  thy  sorrow.  He  shall 
mvdtiply  thy  patience.  3.  From  the  spiritual  sorrows  of  God's  own  people.  God's 
children  have  two  kinds  of  trials,  trials  temporal  and  trials  spiritual.  Illustrate 
from  the  scene  of  Bunyan's  pilgrim  meeting  ApoUyon.  4.  To  the  sinner  when 
coming  to  Christ  this  also  is  a  truth.  5.  We  shall  all  get  into  the  evening-time 
of  life.  In  a  few  more  years  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf  will  be  the  fit  companion 
of  every  man  and  every  woman.  Is  there  anjrthing  melancholy  in  that  ?  Did 
you  ever  notice  how  venerable  grandsires  when  they  write  a  letter  fill  it  full  of 
intelligence  concerning  their  children  ?  The  grey-headed  man  thinks  of  his 
children  and  forgets  all  besides.  If  he  has  served  God,  he  has  another  light  to 
cheer  him.  He  has  the  light  of  the  remembrance  of  what  good  God  has  enabled 
him  to  do.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Light  at  evening  : — It  Ls  when  the  day  is  drawing 
to  its  close  that  most  men  have  theii  hour  of  leisure.  We  know,  most  of  us,  how 
nature  looks  at  evening,  better  than  we  know  how  she  seems  in  the  busier  hours 
of  the  day.  In  our  evening  leisure  we  have  many  a  time  had  the  opportunity 
of  marking  the  sun's  gradual  withdrawal,  the  shadows  as  they  darkened  upon 
the  landscape,  the  mist  stealing  upward  from  the  river,  and  its  murmur  deepening 
upon  the  ear,  the  leaves  so  motionless,  the  silent  fields,  the  vmiversal  hush  and 
quiet.  The  one  thing  that  makes  evening  is  the  gradual  withdrawal  of  the  light. 
It  is  the  lessening  light  that  makes  the  evening-time.  "  At  the  evening-time  there 
shall  be  light,"  that  is,  light  shall  come  at  a  period  when  it  is  not  natural,  when 
in  the  common  course  of  things  it  is  not  looked  for.  It  would  be  no  surprise  that 
light  should  come  at  noonday.  If  when  the  twilight  shadows  were  falling  deeper 
and  deeper,  with  a  sudden  burst  the  noonday  light  were  to  spread  around, — that 
would  be  a  surprise.  To  state  the  promise  in  the  form  of  a  general  principle, 
great  and  signal  blessing  shall  come  just  when  it  is  least  expected.  This  special 
light  is  promised  at  the  end  of  a  day  which  should  be  somewhat  overcast  and 
dreary ;  not  one  of  unmingled  serenity,  nor  yet  of  unrelieved  gloominess.  At 
the  evening-time  there  should  be  an  end  of  the  subdued  twilight.  Then  there 
should  be  light  at  last.  When  the  Christian's  little  day  has  drawn  to  its  close ; 
when  the  Christian's  earthly  sun  has  set,  then  there  should  be  to  him  the  beginning 
of  a  day  whose  sim  shall  never  go  down,  and  whose  brightness  shall  be  lessened 
by  no  intrusion  of  the  dark.  1.  In  God's  dealings  with  His  children,  it  very  often 
happens  that  signal  blessing  and  deliverance  come  just  when  they  are  needed 
most,  but  expected  least.  Show  the  prevalence  of  this  law  in  the  Almighty's 
treatment  of  believers  individually.  How  often  the  case  has  proved  so  as  regards 
the  collective  Church.  The  least  acquaintance  with  the  history  of  the  world 
will  bring  before  us  a  host  of  instances  in  which  the  oppressed  and  persecuted, 
sometimes  the  cold  and  apathetic  Chiu-ch  of  God  found  better  days  dawn  when 
they  were  least  looked  for,  and  so  found  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  that  "  at 
evening-time  there  should  be  light."  The  humble  Christian's  life  is  the  best 
sermon  upon  this  text,  and  his  own  memory  the  best  preacher.  Illustrate  by 
times  of  conversion  and  renewal ;  seasons  of  great  trial — losses,  disappointments, 
bereavements.  Or  the  time  of  death — as  the  evening  advances,  as  the  hours 
go  on  in  which  the  light  that  had  lasted  through  the  day  might  naturally  grow 
less,  how  often  it  is  that  that  unwearied  light  does  but  beam  brighter  and  clearer  I 

St  is  not  indeed  always  so.  Such  a  thing  has  been  known  as  a  true  Christian 
ying  in  absolute  despair,  but  in  such  a  case  disease  is  unusual  and  the  mind 
unhinged.  Perhaps  with  many  Christians  the  death  is  as  the  life  was  :  the 
evening  is  what  the  day  was,  "not  clear  nor  dark."  Is  then  the  text  not  true  ? 
No,  far  from  that.  The  light  does  come  ;  and  it  comes  at  evening  :  but  evening 
is  the  close  of  day ;  and  the  light  may  perhaps  not  beam  forth  until  day  has 
entirely  closed.  Not  upon  this  side  time  may  the  blessed  promise  find  its  fulfil- 
ment. "  At  evening-time  there  shall  be  light,"  if  not  in  this  world,  then  in  a 
better.  (A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  Lux  e  Tenehris : — This  old  promise  has 
received  a  thousand  fulfilments,  is  receiving  fulfilments  every  day,  and  will  to 
the  end  of  time.  Nations  that  have  fallen  under  the  shadows  of  evening  have 
often  realised  this  truth.  When  the  foot  of  the  conqueror  w£is  about  stamping 
on  their  heart,  and  the  night  of  despair  was  settling  on  them,  deliverance  has 
come,  light  has  broken  on  the  darkness.     Churches  that  have  passed  into  twilight,. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  229 

and  about  sinking  into  the  night  of  extinction,  have  in  unnumbered  instances 
experienced  the  truth  of  the  promise.  The  world  at  large  had  a  grand  fulfilment 
of  it  in  the  advent  of  Christ.  Evening  had  settled  on  the  pagan  and  Jewish  world, 
the  lights  of  the  old  philosophies  and  religions  were  all  but  quenched,  when  the 
Divine  Logos  rose  like  a  sun  into  the  heavens.  But  we  may  mention  a  few 
instances  in  individual  life  where  fulfilments  of  the  promise  are  abundant.  I.  In 
the  PBOCHSS  OF  EBPBNTANCB.  In  passing  through  repentance,  through  the  regions 
of  a  godly  sorrow  for  sin,  what  darkness  gathers  around  the  soul.  All  the  stars  of 
hope,  and  the  lights  of  self-righteousness  are  extinguished,  and  sometimes  deep 
and  horrible  is  the  darkness  that  overcasts  the  heart.  But  then  comes  the  light, 
Christ  appears,  "  thy  sins  are  all  forgiven,"  n.  In  the  hvents  of  ltfb.  How 
often  the  good  man  in  passing  through  the  world  is  brought  into  darkness,  pur- 
poses broken,  plans  frustrated,  hopes  blasted,  and  he  knows  not  whither  to  look. 
Just  when  it  is  not  only  evening  with  him,  but  almost  midnight,  light  breaks 
forth,  his  heart  is  cheered,  his  path  is  made  clear,  and  his  energies  are  renerved. 
III.  In  the  AETicLB  OF  DissoLxmoN.  Death  is  felt  to  be  an  evening  with  man. 
"  The  valley  of  the  shadow."  Most  look  forward  to  it  as  a  terrible  night ;  but 
the  Christly,  when  the  evening  has  come  and  the  shadows  have  fallen  densely 
all  around,  have  found  the  breaking  of  the  night.  It  was  so  with  Dr.  Johnson, 
who  through  life,  it  would  seem,  looked  forward  to  the  last  hour  with  horror  and 
alarm ;  but  when  the  evening  came,  light  came,  joy  seized  bis  withered  veins, 
and  one  bright  gleam  shone  all  around  his  heart.  All  men  wish  to  die  in  the  light. 
Goethe  cried  out  in  dying,  "  More  light,  more  light "  ;  and  all  will  have  it  the 
centre  of  whose  soul  is  the  light  of  the  world.  {HomUist. )  Light  at  eventide  ;— 
What  is  true  of  the  Church  is  true  also  of  its  individual  members.  In  reference 
to  the  dark  days  which  now  and  then  fall  to  the  believer's  lot  in  his  earthly 
pilgrimage,  the  text  suggests — 1.  That  the  day  of  severe  aflSiction  shall  he 
followed  by  an  eventide  of  calm  and  renewed  confidence  in  his  Father-God. 
In  our  day  of  trial  we  are  too  prone  to  centre  all  our  thoughts  in  the  scene  immedi- 
ately around  us,  and  forget  that  our  greatest  affliction  may  be  the  harbinger  of 
the  greatest  blessing.  2.  That  the  day  of  temptation  shall  be  followed  by  an 
eventide  of  triumph  and  repose.  3.  That  the  day  of  providential  bereavement 
shall  be  followed  by  an  eventide  of  submission.  At  such  times  how  hard  it  is  to 
say  "  Thy  will  be  done  " !  4.  That  the  believer  generally  realises  the  fulfilment 
of  this  promise  in  the  evening  of  life.  ( William  Hurd. )  Light  at  sundown  .•— 
While  "  night,"  in  all  languages,  is  the  symbol  for  gloom  and  suffering,  it  is  often 
really  cheerful,  bright,  and  impressive.  As  the  natmral  evening  is  often  luminous, 
so  it  shall  be  light  in  the  evening — 1.  Of  our  Christian  sorrows.  The  night- 
blooming  assurances  of  Christ's  sympathy  fill  all  the  atmosphere  with  heaven. 
2.  In  the  time  of  old  age.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  be  young.  Mid-life  and  old  age 
will  be  denied  to  many  of  us,  but  youth — we  all  know  what  that  is.  But  youth 
wiU  not  always  last.  Blessed  old  age,  if  you  let  it  come  naturally,  and  if  it  be 
found  in  the  way  of  righteousness.  3.  In  the  latter  days  of  the  Church.  It  ia 
early  yet  in  the  history  of  everything  good.  Civilisation  and  Christianity  are 
just  getting  out  of  the  cradle.  4.  At  the  end  of  the  Christian's  life.  Life  is  a 
short  winter's  day.  Baptism  and  burial  are  near  together.  But  thanks  be  to 
God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory.  At  evening-time  it  shall  be  light.  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage,  D.D.)  Evensong: — So  saith  the  sailor,  when  tossed  about  on  a 
rocky  coast,  and  dark  clouds  cover  the  heavens  from  his  view,  and  the  lights  of 
the  shore  are  shrouded  in  mist.  So  saith  the  star-gazer,  when  a  strange  comet 
visits  the  heavens,  exciting  the  fears  of  the  ignorant,  and  evoking  the  wonder  of 
the  wise.  So  saith  the  man  of  business,  as  in  the  dim  and  dingy  city  office  he 
pores  over  doubtful  debts,  or  ponders  upon  bad  bargains,  sensitive  stocks,  dull 
markets,  baffled  spectilations.  We  ought  ever  to  keep  a  sharp  lookout  for  stars 
of  promise,  as  we  sail  over  the  ocean  of  chance  and  change  to  the  imdiscovered 
continent  of  certainty.  Let  us,  by  the  joint  light  of  revelation  and  experience, 
consider  heaven's  cheering  rays  for  earth's  darksome  seasons.  The  promise  of 
the  text  applies  to  every  stage  of  Christian  experience.  1.  At  the  evening-time 
of  retrospect  it  shall  be  light.  The  Christian  often  looks  back  in  his  pilgrimage 
to  the  land  whence  he  has  come,  not  with  feelings  of  regret  at  the  step  he  has  taken, 
but  of  thanksgiving  that  God  has  led  him  from  the  regions  of  death  to  the  realms 
of  life.  These  meditations  on  the  past  are  sometimes  disturbed  by  distressing 
doubts.  But  "  at  evening- time  it  shall  be  light."  2.  At  evening-time  of  con- 
viction it  shall  be  light.     Conviction  is  the  wrestling  of  fact  with  feeling.     We 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

do  not  always  feel  equally  convinced  of  our  acceptance  with  God.  But  God  has 
promised,  if  you  wait  patiently  on  Him,  to  renew  the  strength  of  your  languishing 
convictions.  3.  At  evening-time  of  anticipation  it  shall  be  light.  The  Christian's 
home  is  not  below,  but  above.  The  future  is  at  best  a  land  of  shadows,  the 
symbol  of  the  uncertain  and  unreal.  When  the  darkness  grows  deepest,  the  light 
begins  to  glow.  The  application  of  this  balm  of  Gilead  rests  with  each  of  you. 
(G.  Victor  Macdona.)  At  evening-time  it  shall  he  light : — I.  The  primary  api>li- 
cation  of  these  words.  The  chapter  is  eminently  prophetic.  It  refers  to  Isiat-1 
as  a  people,  to  Canaan  as  their  land,  Jerusalem  as  their  capital,  and  our  Lord 
Himself  as  their  King.  I  believe  in  the  literal  restoration  of  Israel  to  their  own 
land.  2.  The  figurative  meaning  we  may  attach  to  these  words.  The  words 
"  evening  "  and  "  light  "  are  expressive  of  two  states  :  they  are  opposite  terms, 
meaning  opposite  things.  "  Evening,"  or  darkness,  is  figurative  for  woe  or 
sorrow,  while  "  light "  stands  for  joy,  proeperity.  At  the  time  when  things 
seem  to  have  come  to  their  worst,  then  prosperity  begins  to  dawn,  and  the  dismal 
past  be  succeeded  by  a  bright  and  happy  future.  This  is  exemplified  politically 
and  religiously  in  secular  and  sacred  history.  Illustrate  from  experience  of 
Israel  in  Egypt.  From  the  condition  of  England  in  the  time  of  King  John.  Tha^ 
was  the  darkest  moment  of  English  history.  The  darkness  of  sin  brought  forth 
the  light  of  redeeming  love.  Sin  gave  cause  for  a  Saviour.  When  the  Saviuur 
came,  did  the  brightness  immediately  shine  forth  ?  No.  Again  sin  darkened 
the  world's  light.  The  Saviour's  love  only  excited  the  sinner's  hatred,  and  He 
who  loved  the  sinner  was  murdered  by  those  whom  He  loved.  But  resurrection 
mom  dispelled  the  darkness  of  crucifixion  night.  Learn  that  it  is  our  duty 
to  cheerfully  expect  the  future  to  be  happier  than  the  present.  (Campbell 
Fair. )  A  surprising  glory  : — The  prophet  refers  to  spiritual,  not  natural  light ; 
and  his  prophecy  is,  that  in  the  experience  of  the  believer  in  Christ,  when,  in  the 
natural  course  of  things  he  may  expect  spiritual  darkness,  behold  light !  1.  A 
long  and  fearful  sickness  overtakes  the  child  of  God.  A  fearful  darkness  gathers 
in  his  sick  chamber.  Wife  and  children  are  dependent  upon  him.  As  weeks 
and  months  painfully  wear  away  the  gloom  deepens.  Sun,  moon  and  stars,  one 
by  one  go  out.  When,  in  the  course  of  nature,  he  faces  death,  suddenly  the 
clouds  disperse  and  the  chastened  soul  rejoices  in  a  light  of  peace  and  joy  full 
of  heaven,  and  goes  forth,  as  it  were,  redeemed  from  the  grave.  2.  It  is  true  of 
the  whole  discipline  of  life.  The  reference  is  to  the  end  ;  at  evening,  &c.  A 
long  and  weary  pilgrimage  may  have  to  be  taken  ;  a  severe  and  oft-rejieated 
series  of  sorrows,  losses,  disappointments,  first  be  endured.  The  light  does  not 
flash  on  him  at  the  beginning ;  submission  does  not  come  with  the  first  use  of 
the  rod.  No  ;  he  must  go  through  the  scene — endure  to  the  end.  And,  if  ha 
endiu-e,  just  when  the  darkness  seems  to  be  settling  down  upon  him,  and  the  last 
ray  of  joy  and  hope  seems  about  to  be  quenched,  at  the  evening-time  it  becomes 
light  !  3.  Millions  of  deathbeds  bear  glorious  testimony  to  this  truth.  Instead 
of  a  great  darkness,  celestial  radiance  !  Instead  of  dismay,  a  peace  unspeakable  ! 
{Homiletic  Review.)  GlorioiLS  endings: — The  sacred  writers  are  always  true 
to  nature.  They  never  contradict  natural  facts.  I.  The  .\mbiguotjsness  of 
PROPHECY.  Many  of  the  prophecies  have  been  literally  fulfilled.  But  there  is 
not  a  fulfilled  prophecy  on  record  which,  prior  to  its  accomplishment,  was  not 
more  or  less  dark,  obscure,  or  enigmatical  in  its  meaning.  What  idea  could  the 
guilty  pair  in  Eden  form  of  their  promised  deliverer  from  sin  and  guilt  ?  From 
the  nature  of  prophecy  it  could  have  been  but  a  sort  of  twilight  knovvledge  of 
the  Christ  which  ancient  believers  derived  from  it.  The  entire  Old  Testament 
dispensation  was  a  day,  known  it  is  true  to  the  Lord,  but  to  His  people  it  was 
"  not  day  nor  night."  But  as  with  all  other  days  of  nature,  providence,  or  grace, 
that  also  had  an  end.  The  clouds  that  had  covered  the  horizon  of  the  moral 
world  for  long  centuries  broke  at  last.  The  evening  of  the  Old  Testament  day, 
which  witnessed  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God,  was  the  brightest  period  of  time 
that  the  world  had  seen  since  the  fall  of  man  !  Turn  to  unfulfilled  prophecy. 
How  will  it  be  realised  ;  and  when  ?  The  twentieth  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse 
has  given  occasion  to  hundreds  of  conjectures  and  theories  of  the  millennium. 
But  the  Gospel  dispensation,  in  regard  to  unfulfilled  prophecy,  is  "  neither  clear 
nor  dark," — it  is  "  not  day  nor  night."  But  "  at  evening-time  it  shall  be  light." 
Presently  all  will  be  clear,  and  the  Divine  idea  and  purpose  will  be  fully  revealed. 
II.  God's  general  administration  of  human  affairs.  It  is  often  unintel- 
ligible.    The  government  of  an  empire  is  too  intricate  to  be  understood  by  any 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  231 

but  the  emperor  himself.  We  are  confused  and  perplexed  when  we  attempt  to 
trace  out  and  explain  God's  government  of  the  world  from  its  beginning  to  the 
present  day.  We  do  not  know  often  what  He  intends  or  means  in  BUs  dealings 
with  our  race.  The  light  is  neither  clear  nor  dark, — the  light  of  providence. 
But  the  revolution  of  years  is  silently  bringing  nearer  and  nearer  the  evening- 
time  of  the  moral  world.  Then  there  will  be  adjustment  of  contrary  things. 
Then  we  may  well  be  patient,  and  trust  in  God.  (W.  H.  Luckenbach.)  Light 
at  evening-tide  : — In  recalling  the  incidents  of  his  last  year's  ministry  at  Walton, 
Mr.  Pennefather  often  spoke  of  the  fact  that  during  that  time  he  had  been  called 
to  attend  the  dying-beds  of  thirty  of  the  most  attached  members  of  his  flock, 
all  in  blessed  hope  of  a  joj^ul  resurrection.  "  Do  you  call  it  a  dark  valley  ?  " 
said  one  aged  believer  ;  "  it  is  a  very  sweet  valley  to  me  !  All  praise  !  all  praise  !  " 
"  It  is  one  thing  to  speak  of  Jesus,"  said  a  dying  woman,  "  but  it  is  another  thing 
to  have  Him  in  full  view."  Light  at  evening-time: — It  is  said  that  Mirabeau 
cried  out  frantically  for  music  to  soothe  his  last  moments  ;  that  Hobbes,  the  deist, 
said  as  he  gasped  his  last  breath,  "  I  am  taking  a  fearful  leap  into  the  dark  "  ; 
that  Cardinal  Beaufort  said,  "  What !  is  there  no  bribing  death  ?  "  Men  with 
the  Christian  light  have  met  death  in  another  way.  When  Melanchthon  was  asked 
if  there  was  anything  he  desired,  he  said,  "  No,  Luther,  nothing  but  heaven." 
Dr.  John  Owen  said  at  last,  "  I  am  going  to  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth,  or  rather, 
who  has  loved  me  with  an  everlasting  love."  John  Brown  of  Haddington  could 
say,  "  I  am  weak,  but  it  is  delightful  to  feel  one's  self  in  the  everlasting  arms." 
George  Washington  could  say,  "It  is  all  well."  Walter  Scott,  as  he  sank  in 
the  slumber  of  death,  "  Now  I  shall  be  myself  again."  Beethoven,  as  he  could 
almost  catch  the  melody  of  the  mystic  world,  "  Now  I  shall  hear."  Wesley  could 
cheerily  meet  death  with  the  words,  "  The  best  of  aU  is  God  is  with  us."  Locke, 
the  Christian  philosopher,  exclaimed  at  dying,  "  Oh,  the  depth  of  the  riches  of 
the  goodness  and  knowledge  of  God !  "  Stephen  said,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my 
spirit."  Paul,  "  having  a  desire  to  depart "  ;  and,  "  to  die  is  gain."  {F.  Hastings. ) 
The  sunset  glow  : — In  the  thought  and  in  the  speech  of  the  world  night  is  made 
the  symbol  of  the  dark  experiences  of  human  life.  It  is  common  to  speak  of 
the  day  of  prosperity  and  of  the  night  of  adversity.  Both  of  these  symbols  are 
frequently  used  in  the  Bible,  the  day  standing  for  the  bright  experiences  and 
the  night  standing  for  the  dark  experiences  of  life.  But  the  Bible  studs  the  night 
of  darkness  with  stars  of  hope  and  suns  of  promise.  "  At  evening- time  it  shall 
be  light."  That  is  grace  overstepping  and  going  beyond  Nature.  Nature's 
evening-time  is  darkness.  When  the  evening-time  comes  in  the  experiences  of 
God's  people,  and  they  fear  that  there  shall  be  no  more  day,  then  God  steps  in, 
introduces  a  principle  beyond  Nature,  and  declares,  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that 
at  evening-time  it  shall  be  light."  1.  This  is  a  promise  for  the  evening-time  of 
the  world.  The  morning  of  the  world  was  a  bright  and  glorious  sunrise.  In  the 
beginning  God  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  and  there  was  light.  And  when  He 
had  finished  His  wide  and  wise  creation,  "  God  saw  that  it  was  good."  But  soon 
the  dark  cloud  of  man's  sin  overspread  the  earth.  Light  was  shut  out.  Darkness 
reigned.  Out  of  that  darkness  the  world  has  been  gradually  emerging,  until, 
through  all  the  tears  and  tyrannies  of  the  centuries,  it  has  come  into  the  noonday 
splendour  of  the  Christian  civihsation  of  our  century.  And  it  is  distinctly 
Cnristian.  It  was  the  historian  Froude  who  said:  "AU  that  we  call  modern 
civilisation,  in  a  sense  which  deserves  that  name,  is  the  visible  expression  of  the 
transfiguring  power  of  the  Gospel."  Our  highest  literature  is  swayed  by  the 
purest  influences  of  Christianity.  The  scientific  spirit  of  research  and  investiga- 
tion, so  conspicuous  a  fact  and  so  important  a  factor  in  our  modern  life,  owes 
its  stimulation  to  the  encouragement  of  Christianity.  Christianity  has  created 
the  laboratory  as  well  as  the  library.  Christianity  is  the  parent  of  education. 
It  has  founded  schools,  established  colleges,  endowed  seminaries.  To  benighted 
lands  and  to  blighted  homes  Christianity  has  sent  the  teacher  with  the  preacher. 
Our  civic  liberties  and  our  social  order  are  based  upon  Christianity.  Burn  the 
Bible,  proclaim  "  there  is  no  God,"  write  over  yoiu:  cemetery  gates  "  Death  is 
an  eternal  sleep,"  and  there  is  no  power  in  all  this  land  that  will  stay  the  ravages 
of  that  beetle-browed  hag — infidehty's  twin-sister  in  every  age  and  in  every  land — 
Anarchism.  I  know  that  there  are  historians  of  discontent  and  prophets  of 
calamity  who  cannot  enjoy  the  splendour  of  the  world's  midday,  and  who  are 
ever  telling  us  that  the  former  times  were  better  than  these.  They  discount  all 
inventions  and  all  advancement  by  claiming  that  the  morality  of  the  present. 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

if  as  strong,  is  no  stronger  than  the  morality  of  the  past.  They  are  right  in  holding 
that  all  advancements  go  for  naught  if  the  people  are  not  better  than  they  were. 
The  test  of  the  world's  advancement  and  strength  is  not  that  the  grandson  rides 
to-day  in  the  Pullman  car,  while  the  grandfather  rode  yesterday  in  the  stage- 
coacb.  The  test  is,  Is  the  grandson  a  better  man  than  the  grandfather  was  ? 
This  world  has  not  seen  a  brighter  era  since  the  gates  of  Eden  were  closed  upon 
man  than  the  last  days  of  the  nineteenth  century.  And  the  twientieth  century 
will  be  better.  Christ  Jesus  is  to  reign  in  this  world.  He  has  not  yet  ascended  Hia 
throne.  He  is  now  on  His  Father's  throne.  When  He  went  into  Heaven  He  sat 
down  at  His  Father's  right  hand,  "henceforth  expecting  till  His  enemies  be  made 
His  footstool."  When  His  enemies  shall  be  subdued,  then,  rising  upon  them  as 
upon  His  footstool.  He  shall  ascend  His  throne  and  reign.  And  it  shall  come  to 
pass  that  in  the  evening-time  of  the  world  it  shall  be  light.  2.  The  promise  per- 
tains to  the  C!hurch  of  Grod.  The  Church  of  Grod  has  had  two  organisations  in 
the  world — the  theocratic  organisation  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  and 
the  spiritual  organisation  of  the  New  Testament  dispensation.  Through  all 
the  Old  Testament  we  can  trace  a  gradual  unfolding  of  the  Church's  life  and 
power.  This  imfolding  was  not  in  a  continuous  advance.  The  whole  history  of 
the  Old  Testament  Church  shows  a  succession  of  onward  marches,  and  then  of  quick 
retreats — progressing,  retrograding,  standing  stiU  for  a  while,  then  progressing 
once  more,  and  again  falling  back.  But  in  no  instance  did  she  fall  back  as  far 
as  she  had  been,  and  so  her  history  was,  on  the  whole,  one  of  advance  and  growth. 
So  with  the  Church  of  the  New  Testament  dispensation.  The  Church  was  born 
on  Pentecost — that  was  the  sunrise  of  the  Church,  and  it  was  glorious.  From 
Pentecost  the  disciples  went  forth  to  tell  the  story  of  Him  who  had  been  crucified, 
who  rose  and  ascended  into  heaven,  and  as  the  story  spread  the  Church  grew. 
Then  came  opposition  and  hatred  and  persecution,  but  the  Church  advanced 
through  all  until  she  entered  the  darkness  of  the  Dark  Ages.  The  heavens  were 
shut,  and  a  black  cloud  of  superstition  spread  over  the  earth.  Rome  sat  upon 
her  ebon  throne  and  stretched  her  rod  of  cruelty  across  the  nations.  It  seemed 
as  if  the  evening  time  of  the  Church  had  come.     In  that  time  every  lamp  of  pro- 

Ehecy  had  ceased  to  shine  He  who  thundered  in  the  streets  of  Rome  had  been 
urned  at  the  stake,  Savonarola  had  received  the  martyr's  crown  at  Florence, 
the  black  clouds  of  ignorance,  superstition,  and  vice  shut  out  the  sunlight  of 
God's  love  from  the  world.  It  was  evening-time,  but  God  said.  In  the  evening- 
time  it  shaU  be  light.  He  kindled  a  beacon  in  the  soul  of  a  young  monk  in  the 
monastery  at  Erfurt.  As  the  monk  mused  the  fire  biu-ned,  and  out  from  Erfiu-t 
went  Martin  Luther  to  proclaim  God's  message  ;  and  Rome  shook,  the  Vatican 
trembled,  the  gates  of  brass  were  opened,  the  rod  of  cruelty  was  sundered, 
Germany  was  delivered,  and  civil  and  religious  liberty  were  secured  to  the  world. 
There  came  a  time  in  England  when  religion  became  a  formality,  and  when  aU 
good  men  trembled  for  the  Church  and  longed  for  the  mighty  Puritans,  who  would 
crush  the  giant  forces  of  evil  beneath  their  onward  progress.  It  was  evening-time, 
and  God  had  said,  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  at  evening-time  it  shaU  be  light." 
Four  young  Oxford  students — William  Morgan,  Robert  Kentham,  Charles  and 
John  Wesley — met  for  prayer  and  Bible  study.  Thev  were  called  by  their  fellow- 
students  "  Bible  Moths,"  "  the  Holy  Club,"  and  Methodists,"  because  they 
were  so  methodical  in  all  studies  and  their  work.  One  resistance  after  another 
the  Church  has  overcome  ;  at  times  pressed  back,  but  ever  pushing  onward, 
multiplying  her  victories  and  extending  her  dominions.  No  more  hospitals, 
for  there  are  no  more  sick ;  no  more  asylums,  for  there  are  no  orphans  ;  no  more 
prisons,  for  there  are  no  criminals ;  no  more  almshouses,  for  there  are  no  poor ;  no 
more  tears,  for  there  is  no  sorrow.  The  long  dirge  of  the  earth's  lamentations  has 
come  to  an  end  in  the  triumphal  march  of  the  blessed  redeemed  Church  ;  the  New 
Jerusalem  is  with  men,  her  children  are  gathered  home,  and  across  that  city  of  a 
redeemed  humanity  earth's  grandest  outburst  of  hope  and  welcome  breaks  anti- 
phonal  from  wall  to  jasper  wall.  The  sunset  glow ;  the  evening-time  of  the 
Church,  and  at  evening-time  it  shall  be  light.  3.  This  promise  is  for  all  human 
experience.  The  great  promises  of  God,  which  apply  to  the  whole  kingdom  of 
the  redeemed,  may  be  appropriated  by  each  individual  member  of  that  kingdom. 
In  Nature  the  laws  which  control  the  great  forces  direct  the  minute  elements. 
The  law  that  rules  the  grain  of  sand  on  the  seashore  governs  the  planets  in  their 
course.  It  is  so  in  the  realm  of  grace.  "  At  evening-time  it  shall  be  light  "  to 
the  Church ;   "  at  evening-time  it  shall  be  light  "  to  every  individual  beUever. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  233 

In  the  matter  of  the  experience  of  the  believer  in  Christian  service  it  is 
true  that  "in  the  evening-time  it  shall  be  light."  The  majority  of  the 
men  who  have  lived  and  laboured  to  make  this  world  better  have  received 
the  scorn  and  obloquy  of  the  world.  John  Wesley  was  howled  down  by 
the  mob  to  whom  he  preached  ;  they  threw  bricks  at  him,  they  spat  upon 
him,  but  where  is  there  a  more  honoured  name  to-day  ?  Light  at  evening- 
time.  Wendell  Phillips  was  scorned  and  spurned  for  his  advocacy  of  the  slave. 
Boston  would  not  hear  him,  but  in  less  than  a  generation  afterward  Boston  built 
a  monument  to  his  honour,  and  men  who  would  not  defile  their  lips  with  his  name 
taught  their  children  the  pathway  to  his  tomb.  "  At  evening-time  it  shall  be 
light."  4.  The  promise  brings  its  helpful  message  to  every  beUever  in  his  season 
of  adversity  and  trouble.  Very  few  people  in  this  world  escape  the  time  of 
adversity.  The  bright,  sunshiny  day  of  prosperity  is  pretty  certain  to  have  a 
nightfall.  "  It  was  good  that  I  have  been  afflicted,"  cries  David.  "  The  Lord 
gave  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,"  exclaims  Job.  "  Sorrowful,  yet  always 
rejoicing,"  says  Pavil.  "  And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes," 
exclaims  John  in  apocalyptic  vision.  At  evening-time  it  shall  be  light.  Ten 
thousand  saints  of  God  have  fo\md  it  so  in  the  evening-time.  6.  The  text  haa 
a  message  for  old  age.  Sometimes  men  look  forward  to  it  with  trembling.  It 
is  a  mistaken  notion  that  youth  is  the  time  of  gladness  and  old  age  the  time  of 
sadness.  America's  beloved  artist,  Horatio  Greenough,  a  few  days  before  his 
death,  said :  "I  have  found  life  to  be  a  very  cheerful  thing,  and  not  the  dark 
and  bitter  thing  with  which  my  early  days  were  clouded."  At  evening-time  it 
was  light.  At  eighty  years  of  age  Albert  Barnes  stood  in  the  pulpit  of  the  First 
Presbyterian  Church  in  Philadelphia,  and  said :  "The  world  is  so  attractive  to  me 
that  I  am  very  sorry  I  shall  have  to  leave  it  so  soon."  Dr.  Guthrie,  past  eighty, 
said  :  "  You  must  not  think  that  I  am  old  because  my  hair  is  white  ;  I  never 
was  so  young  as  I  am  now."  At  evening-time  it  was  light.  New  lights  shall 
burn  when  the  old  lights  are  quenched  ;  new  candles  shall  be  lit  when  the  lamps 
of  life  are  dim.  At  the  evening-time  of  his  life  the  Christian  has  many  lights 
that  he  did  not  have  before.  There  is  the  bright  light  of  experience  ;  the  pleasing 
light  of  sweet  memories ;  the  cheering  light  of  service  done  for  God  and  humanity. 
The  scientist  tells  us  that  no  physical  force  is  ever  wasted.  We  whisper  into 
the  telephone,  and  the  vibration,  though  it  be  less  than  one  one-hundred-thousandth 
part  of  an  inch,  affects  a  diaphragm  a  thousand  miles  away,  and  our  exact  voice 
is  heard  by  the  listening  ear  in  Chicago.  So  they  tell  us  that  the  light  from  the 
farthest  fixed  star  has  been  travelling  steadily  undiminished  for  more  than  a 
million  years  to  greet  our  upturned  eye  to-night,  and  to  reassiire  us  that  "  the 
hand  that  made  it  is  Divine."  If  it  be  true  of  physical  forces,  how  much  more 
is  it  true  of  moral  and  spiritual  forces,  that  they  are  never  lost !  What  a  halo  of 
glory  this  casts  about  the  old  age  of  a  man,  out  from  whose  life  have  poured  forth 
the  streams  of  holy  and  sacred  influences  !  At  evening-time  it  shall  be  light. 
John  Bunyan  was  right  when  he  located  Christian  old  age  in  the  land  of  Beulah, 
in  full  sight  of  the  ripe  fruitage  and  the  ravishing  prospects  of  the  Celestial  City. 
The  infirmities  of  old  age  are  only  "  the  land  birds  lighting  on  the  sails,  telling 
the  weary  mariner  that  he  is  nearing  the  haven."  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
that  at  evening-time  it  shall  be  light."  6.  This  promise  is  for  the  time  of  the 
death  of  the  believer.  "  It  is  a  dark  passage  through  which  you  are  passing 
now,"  said  a  young  man  as  he  sat  beside  his  dying  mother.  And  her  whole 
countenance  Ughted  up  as  she  said  :  "  Oh  no,  my  son  ;  there  is  too  bright  a  light 
at  the  other  end  to  have  it  dark,"  and  she  passed  out,  and  up,  and  into  the  palm 
and  to  the  crown  and  to  the  throne.  At  the  evening-time  it  was  light.  Paul 
drew  near  the  end,  and  he  said  :  "  The  time  for  the  weighing  of  the  anchor  has 
come.  I  have  fought  a  good  fight ;  I  have  finished  my  course ;  I  have  kept 
the  faith  ;  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness  which 
the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day."  Take  the  promise 
with  you  into  the  future.  Remember  that  if  sorrow  camps  with  you  over-night, 
joy  Cometh  in  the  morning.     {J.  F.  Carson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Living  waters  shall  go  out  flrom  Jerusalem. — The  living  waters : — 
Like  all  his  predecessors,  Zechariah  speaks  much  of  Christ.  Some  of  his  pro- 
phecies, owing  partly  to  the  predominance  of  figurative  and  symbolical  language, 
are  difficult  and  obscure.  In  the  text  he  refers  to  Gospel  days  and  to  the  Gospel 
blessings.     He  speaks  of  the  Gospel  under  the  figure  of  living,  springing,  running 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

waters:  and  under  this  figure  he  indicates  to  us  the  beginning,  the  progressive 
course,  and  the  perpetual  extension  of  the  Gospel,  together  with  its  ultimate 
triumph,  as  seen  in  the  universal  dominion  of  the  Messiah.  1.  The  character 
of  the  Gospel.  We  must  think  of  the  world  as  a  desert,  a  vast  moral  waste,  void 
of  spiritual  beauty  and  of  moral  life ;  and  this  is  in  strict  accord  with  the  actual 
condition  of  peoples  apart  from  the  Gospel.  The  land,  the  home,  the  heart, 
unvisited  by  the  Gospel,  is  cursed  with  spiritual  barrenness  and  moral  death. 
If  we  caused  a  rivulet  of  living  water  to  flow  over  a  barren  land,  what  would  be 
the  result  ?  The  desert  land  would  soon  cease  to  be  barren.  Let  this  land  be 
ploughed,  let  the  seed  be  cast  into  it,  and  what  is  the  result  T  The  desert  becomes 
a  garden ;  the  wilderness  a  fruitful  field,  and  the  barren  land  a  forest.  So  let 
the  Gospel  waters  flow  through  the  desert  wastes  of  a  sinner's  heart,  or  through 
the  moral  wastes  of  a  country,  and  what  a  blessed  transformation  is  the  result ! 
Death  gives  place  to  life,  depravity  to  beauty,  and  barrenness  to  fertility.  It 
was  so  in  the  beginning  of  Christianity.  The  power  of  the  Gospel  has  been 
strikingly  proved  in  the  missions  to  Fiji.  2.  The  progress  of  the  Gospel.  The 
living  waters  go  out  from  Jerusalem.  Christianity  was  not  a  new  religion.  It 
was  the  development,  the  outgrowth  of  Judaism.  But  the  waters  were  to  flow 
in  every  direction,  carrying  spiritual  fertility  with  them :  everywhere  turning 
the  desolate  heritages  of  the  Gentile  world  into  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  Note 
also  the  constancy  with  which  the  living  waters  flow  ;  "  in  summer  and  winter 
shall  it  go."  The  summer  heat  usually  dries  up  the  rivulet.  The  frost  of  winter 
congeals  it ;  but  these  living  waters  shall  flow  on  through  summer  and  winter. 
How  strikingly  has  this  been  illustrated  all  through  the  Christian  centuries. 
Nothing  has  proved  able  to  arrest  or  stay  the  progiess  of  the  Gospel.  3.  The 
triumph  of  the  Gospel.  From  the  beginning  the  Lord  Christ  has  indeed  been 
King  over  all  the  earth,  but  in  the  text  there  is  associated  with  the  idea  of  kingly 
authority  that  of  willing  submission.  He  shall  then  be  universally  acknowledged 
Lord,  every  knee  to  Him  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  confess  Him.  The  day  will 
surely  come  when  men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him,  all  nations  shall  call  Him  blessed. 
[Walford  Green.)  The  course  of  the  Gospel: — I.  The  design ation  of  the 
Gospel.  Here  called  "  living  waters."  It  points  out  the  purity  of  the  Gospel. 
Not  the  stagnant  pool,  but  the  running  stream.  Holiness  to  the  Lord  is  stamped 
on  all  its  principles,  commandments,  and  rites.  It  is  a  dispensation  of  mercy, 
but  it  gives  no  indulgence  to  the  least  sin.  It  points  out  the  refreshment  which 
it  yields.  How  sweet  are  its  offers  of  pardon  to  the  awakened  conscience !  It 
points  out  also  the  fertility  which  the  Gospel  produces.  Christianity  aims  at 
forming  the  love  of  God  in  the  heart  and  conduct.  II.  The  place  from  which 
THESE  WATERS  ISSUE.  When  Christ  ordered  repentance  and  remission  of  sins 
to  be  preached  in  His  name  to  all  nations,  beginning  at  Jerusalem,  the  banks 
within  which  these  living  waters  had  flowed  were  broken  down,  and  the  stream 
began  to  rush  over  the  Gentile  world.  These  waters  flow  from  Jerusalem,  as  it 
is  by  the  Church  that  they  are  communicated.  They  are  brought  to  the  Chiurch 
not  only  that  they  may  be  improved,  but  diffused.  III.  Mark  the  course  of 
THESE  LIVING  WATERS.  The  statement  seems  to  intimate  that  the  Gospel  should 
bless  the  nations  of  the  Eastern  and  of  the  Western  world.  There  are  various 
circumstances  which  indicate  that  a  more  extensive  diffusion  of  the  Gospel  will 
soon  take  place.  IV.  The  continuance  of  the  course  of  these  living  waters. 
Their  flow  shall  neither  be  impeded  by  the  drought  of  summer  nor  the  frosts  of 
winter.  The  effects  of  the  Gospel  on  the  souls  of  disciples  are  perpetual  also. 
The  knowledge  it  gives  is  everlasting  light ;  the  peace  it  yields  is  everlasting 
consolation  ;  the  love  it  inspires  is  a  charity  that  never  fails  ;  and  the  holiness 
it  forms  is  a  well  of  living  water,  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life.  {Henry 
Belfrage,  D.D.)  The  Gospel  river  : — I.  Its  nature  and  its  rise.  1.  Its  nature. 
It  is  "  living  water."  Water  is  precious,  but  not  so  precious  as  the  Gospel. 
That  is  the  river  of  life,  the  pure  water  of  life.  2.  Its  rise.  "  It  shall  go  out 
from  Jerusalem."  The  Gospel  might  be  said  to  have  commenced  at  Jerusalem. 
"  Beginning  at  Jerusalem."  In  Peter's  sermon  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  river 
might  be  said  to  have  broken  forth.  II.  Its  diffusion  and  continuousness. 
1.  Its  diffusion.  "  Half  of  them  toward  the  former  sea,  and  half  of  them  toward 
the  hinder  sea."  It  is  to  go  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  from  its  rising  to 
its  setting.  The  Gospel  is  for  all  climes.  It  is  world-wide  in  its  provisions, 
adaptations,  and  claims.  2.  Continuousness.  "  Summer  and  winter."  In  all 
Beasons  of  human  life    individually  and  corporately.     (1)  It  is  constant  in  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  235 

fitness  of  its  supplies  for  human  wants.  Men,  through  all  changes,  in  all  places, 
and  through  all  times,  want  Divine  knowledge,  moral  purity,  heavenly  forgiveness, 
fellowship  with  the  Eternal.  The  man  will  never  be  born  who  will  not  require 
these  things.  (2)  It  is  constant  in  the  fulness  of  its  supplies  for  human  wants. 
It  is  an  inexhaustible  river.  After  countless  myriads  have  had  their  wants 
supplied  it  remains  deep  and  full  as  ever.  (3)  It  is  constant  in  the  availableness 
of  its  supplies  for  human  wants.  (Homilist.)  The  changeful  and  the  constant 
in  life : — I.  The  changes  in  this  scene  of  otjb  earthly  life.  Suggested  by 
summer  and  winter.  The  changing  seasons  of  nature  may  be  regarded  as  only 
symbols  of  the  constant  mutations  in  our  mortal  life.  1.  Human  life  has  its 
changes.  The  man  who  reaches  his  three  score  years  and  ten,  has  run  through 
all  the  seasons  ;  the  freshness  of  spring,  the  luxuriance  of  summer,  the  ripeness 
of  autumn,  and  the  dreary  desolations  of  winter.  2.  Human  institutions  have  their 
changes.  These  changes  are  useful.  (1)  They  supply  us  with  excitements  to 
action.  (2)  They  impress  us  with  the  constant  activity  of  God.  (3)  They  remind 
us  that  this  is  not  our  rest.  II.  The  constant  in  this  scene  of  oitr  earthly 
life.  "  In  summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be."  What  is  the  "  it "  here,  that  is  to 
remain  so  constant  amidst  the  changes  ?  The  preceding  part  of  the  verse  answers 
the  question:  "living  waters."  The  reference  is  undoubtedly  to  Christianity, 
which  is  the  "  water  of  life."  But  oiu-  point  is  its  constancy.  In  "  summer 
and  winter  "  it  flows  the  same.  The  changes  of  the  world  have  no  influences 
on  it :  it  continues  the  settled  amongst  the  unsettled,  the  permanent  amongst 
the  transitory,  the  immortal  amongst  the  dying.  "  Though  all  flesh  is  as  grass 
the  Word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever."  1.  It  is  constant  in  the  fitness  of  its 
supplies  for  human  wants.  Men  through  all  changes,  in  all  places,  and  through 
all  times  want  Divine  knowledge,  moral  purity,  heavenly  forgiveness,  fellowship 
with  the  Eternal.  2.  It  is  constant  in  the  fulness  of  its  supplies  for  human  wants. 
It  is  an  inexhaustible  river.  3.  It  is  constant  in  the  availableness  of  its  supplies 
for  human  wants.  {Ibid.)  Summer  and  mnter : — I.  The  changeful  in 
hitman  experience.  There  is  as  much  variety  as  in  the  difference  between 
July  and  December ;  between  aU  that  is  summerly  and  all  that  is  winterly  in 
our  English  climate.  1.  There  is  this  changefulness  in  the  experience  of  in- 
dividuals. In  the  difference  of  differing  age  :  Robustness  of  youth,  decrepitude 
of  age.  In  the  difference  of  differing  health  :  Buoyancy  of  strength,  feebleness 
of  disease.  In  the  difference  of  differing  circumstances  :  Prosperity,  anxiety, 
poverty ;  success,  failure ;  popularity,  neglect,  or  scorn.  In  the  difference 
of  differing  moods :  Joy,  sadiiess  ;  doubt,  faith.  2.  There  is  this  changefulness 
in  the  experience  of  families.  Unbroken  home  circles,  and  desolated  hearths. 
Wedding  days,  and  funerals.  The  cradle  the  centre  of  the  household,  and  anon 
the  coffin.  3.  There  is  this  changefulness  in  the  experience  of  nations.  Com- 
mercially there  is  a  summer  and  a  winter.  So  politically  ;  so  religiously.  Rome, 
Greece,  Spain,  &c.,  have  had  summer  and  winter.  We  seem  getting  towards 
winter.  But  though  all,  whether  individuals,  families,  or  nations,  thus  have 
"  in  the  changes  and  chances  of  this  mortal  life "  their  bright,  genial,  glowing 
summers,  and  their  chiU,  gloomy,  cruel  winters,  we  notice — II.  The  unchange- 
able PROVISION  God  has  made  for  man's  needs.  The  prophet  is  tellmg  of  a 
river  of  blessing  that,  though  it  roU  through  winterly  and  summerly  landscapes, 
is  itself  unchanged,  perpetually  the  same.  In  summer  and  winter  it  shall  be. 
That  river  is  surely  the  revealed  love  of  God  in  Christianity.  What  else  fulfils 
what  the  prophet  declares  about — 1.  The  fountain,  2.  The  progress,  3.  The  winter  of 
this  river  ?  God's  love  in  Christ  does.  And  that  is  the  sublimely  unchangeable 
IT,  which  remains  the  same  in  all  the  summers  and  winters  of  human  experience. 
{Vrijah  R.  Thomas.)  Christianity: — The  Bible  is  full  of  promises.  Some  of 
them  refer  to  temporal  and  some  to  spiritual  things.  Some  relate  to  the  pros- 
perity of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom.  I.  The  dispensation  of  Christianity. 
Here  are  four  things.  1.  Its  representation.  It  is  called — "  living  waters." 
This  softens,  pmrifies,  refreshes  the  soul.  It  fertilises.  It  is  described  as  "  living 
water," — water  that  springs  up.  Rising,  or  springing  up,  in  thought,  desire, 
prayer,  pursuit,  until  it  even  reaches  heaven.  All  is  vitality  where  this  living 
water  is.  It  is  the  all-healing  balm.  It  produces  a  principle  of  life  which 
strengthens  amidst  bodily  debility,  and  grows  amidst  bodily  decay.  2.  Its  origin. 
"  Go  out  of  Jerasalem."  Our  Lord  was  of  Jewish  parents  ;  the  apostles  were 
Jews  J  and  most  of  the  first  disciples  were  Jews.  In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we 
discover  how  these  "  living  waters,"  issuing  from  the  land  of  Judea,  spread 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi^. 

abroad  in  every  direction.  In  this  we  see — (1)  The  accomplishment  of  prophecy. 
(2)  The  proof  that  Christianity  can  bear  investigation.  (3)  Showing  the  goodness 
of  God  our  Saviour.  No  nation  was  ever  so  favoured  as  the  Jews.  Yet  they 
rejected  the  Messiah.  3.  The  directions  of  these  "  living  waters."  "  Half  of 
them  toward  the  former  sea  ;  and  half  of  them  toward  the  hinder  sea."  The 
meaning  is  that  these  living  waters  were  to  spread  all  abroad.  The  Jewish 
Church  was  a  local  stationary  witness  for  God.  The  Christian  Church  is  not 
local  and  stationary,  but  is  to  go  to  the  world.  No  dispensation  of  God  can  be 
final,  but  that  which  is  universal  The  blessings  procured  by  our  Saviour's 
death,  are  offered  freely  to  all  men.  4.  Its  perpetuity.  "  In  summer  and  in 
winter  shall  it  be."  The  most  unfavourable  seasons  for  rivers  are  here  mentioned  ; 
yet  they  are  not  able  to  hinder  the  flow  and  efficacy  of  these  "  living  waters." 
Earthly  rivers  may  be  frozen  by  the  cold  of  winter,  and  dried  up  by  the  heat  of 
summer  ;  not  so  with  the  river  of  life.  11.  The  glorious  results  of  Christianity. 
"  The  Lord  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth."  It  is  impossible  to  think  of  the 
introducing  of  Christianity,  without  expecting  great  results.  The  effects  of 
Christianity  are  described  in  two  ways.  1.  By  universal  subjection.  At  first 
sight  this  seems  to  announce  no  more  than  what  He  is  already.  But  we  must 
distinguish  between  right  and  acknowledgment.  The  design  of  Christianity 
is  to  make  men  feel  their  obligations  to  God.  There  is  a  difference  between 
God's  providential  and  God's  spiritual  government.  The  great  thing  to  be 
attained  is,  for  God  to  reign  in  us,  by  His  grace ;  for  Christ  to  reign  in  the  heart, 
in  the  conscience,  and  in  the  affections.  2.  By  uniformity  of  homage.  "  One 
Lord,  and  His  name  one."  Here  the  image  changes,  and  the  prophet  leads  us 
from  the  palace  to  the  temple.  "  Our  Lord  "  does  not  exclude  personal  distinc- 
tions in  the  Divine  essence.  Now  there  are  lords  many  and  gods  many.  Many 
have  idols  in  their  hearts.  The  time  is  coming  when  all  these  idols  shall  be 
utterly  destroyed.  "  His  name  one."  The  Lord  shall  be  known  by  all  the  tribes 
of  mankind,  and  in  all  places  of  His  dominion.     {Timothy  Oibson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  9.  The  Lord  shall  toe  King  over  all  the  earth. — The  Second  Advent 
of  Christ : — That  the  passage  Job  xix.  25-27  has  reference  to  Jesus  Christ,  and 
to  His  coming  to  judgment  at  the  last  great  day,  I  think  there  can  be  no  dispute. 
Unless,  then,  we  look  to  the  reappearing  of  the  Son  of  Man  upon  this  earth,  we 
stultify  the  expectation  of  the  patriarch,  we  impugn  the  inspiration  of  his 
prophecy,  virtually  esteeming  his  declaration  as  little  better  than  words  of  a 
mere  sound.  That  we  may  arrive  at  some  knowledge  of  wherein  the  reward 
of  the  Son,  after  having  made  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  consists,  let  us  search 
the  Scriptures.  In  Psa.  ii.  Jesus  is  invested  with  supreme  and  absolute  authority 
in  the  administration  of  His  inalienable  sovereignty.  But  has  Jesus,  the  Son 
of  Man,  ever  occupied  the  earth  as  here  represented  ?  "  His  own  received  Him 
not."  Has  He  ever  dashed  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel  the  heathen,  either 
the  baptized  or  unbaptized  portion  of  them  ?  It  may  be  said  that,  in  His  spiritual 
dominion,  He  may  be  said  to  occupy  the  earth  by  subjugating  the  hearts  of  His 
people,  making  them  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power.  We  need  not  make  light 
of  Christ's  spiritual  government ;  but  we  are  compelled  to  look  for  something 
more  than  a  spiritual  sovereignty  as  the  result  of  the  Father's  grant,  even  to 
the  personal  occupation  of  the  earth  as  the  seat  of  His  kingly  power.  And  the 
attitude  of  expectation  naturally  excites  watchfulness,  watchfulness  producing 
prayer,  and  prayer  holiness.  (M.  J.  Taylor,  M.A.)  Meat  out  of  the  Eater  : — 
One  day ;  one  entire  period  and  joint  of  providence.  Described  by  its  beginning 
and  progress  ;  and  by  its  end  and  close.  The  comfort  and  happiness  of  this 
glorious  evening  is  set  forth  in  three  things.  The  propagation  of  the  Gospel ; 
the  reign  of  Christ ;  the  unity  of  the  Churches.  Doctrine — That  in  the  latter 
days  there  shall  be  great  unity  in  the  Church  of  God.  And  that  this  unity  shall 
spring  from  their  acknowledging  of  the  right  Lord  and  the  right  way.  As  to  the 
unity,  observe — 1.  This  will  suit  best  with  the  quiet  and  happy  estate  of  those 
times.  God  will  usher  in  the  glorious  and  everlasting  estate  by  some  preparative 
degrees.  2.  God  will  then  make  some  visible  provision  against  the  scandal  of 
dissensions.  3.  The  misery  of  these  times  doth  seem  to  enforce  the  greater  unity. 
For  use  of  consolation,  consider  your  hopes  ;  and  know  the  reason  of  such 
providences.  For  use  of  exhortation.  It  serveth  to  exhort  and  press  you 
to  hasten,  and  set  on  these  hopes.  Promises  do  not  exclude  action,  but  engage 
to  it.    The  promises  hold  forth  unity ;  strive  after  it,  by  prayers,  and  by  endeavours. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  237 

Let  every  one  of  us  mortify  such  ill  affections  as  may  any  way  engage  us  to  a 
disturbance  and  vexatious  bitterness.  Keep  yourselves  pure  from  ill  opinions. 
You  must  as  carefully  avoid  an  error  in  judgment  as  a  vice  in  conversation.  Do 
not  impropriate  Christ  to  any  one  party  or  sort  of  professors.  Never  serve  a 
faction  or  party  to  the  prejudice  and  detriment  of  truth  and  religion.  As  far 
as  truth  and  conscience  will  give  leave,  there  should  be  a  profession  of  brotherhood, 
a  condescension  and  yielding  to  one  another  in  love ;  a  walking  together,  or 
at  least,  a  Christian  forbearance.  Abstain  from  reproaches  and  vmdue  provoca- 
tions, and  dispense  all  civil  respects  with  meekness.  Let  me  entreat  you  to  mind 
a  few  things.  Beware  of  passion  in  your  own  interests  ;  though  they  may  be 
much  shaken  and  endamaged  in  the  present  controversies,  yet  self-denying 
patience  will  be  the  best  way  to  settle  them.  Press  doctrines  of  Christ,  and 
the  main  things  of  religion.  When  you  deal  with  the  errors  of  the  time,  do  it 
with  a  great  deal  of  caution  and  wariness.  Take  heed  of  aggravating  and  greaten- 
ing  matters,  making  them  of  more  importance  than  indeed  they  are.  Former 
ages  were  possessed  with  this  spirit,  every  lesser  dissent  and  mistake  was  made 
a  heresy  or  error  in  the  faith.  Let  me  entreat  you  to  improve  your  interests 
for  brotherly  and  friendly  collations.  Rational  and  friendly  conviction  will  do 
much,  at  least  it  will  beget  a  sweet  and  brotherly  correspondence,  and  it  is  to 
be  hoped  we  shall  find  more  meekness  where  things  are  not  carried  in  the  way 
of  a  set  disputation.  {T.  Manton.)  The  coming  moral  reign  of  Ood  on  the 
earth  : — Physically,  God  reigns  everywhere.  Morally,  His  reign  depends  upon 
the  will  of  men,  and  that  will  is  hostile.  The  coming  moral  reign  is — I.  To  bb 
EXTENSIVE.  "  All  the  earth,"  or  "  land,"  may  mean  the  land  of  Judea,  but 
we  are  authorised  to  believe  that  He  will  one  day  reign  over  all  the  earth,  that 
all  souls  will  bow  to  His  influence,  as  the  ripened  fields  of  autumn  to  the  winds  of 
heaven.  II.  To  be  exclusive.  He  will  be  regarded  as  the  one  King  whose 
laws  all  study  and  obey.  The  great  question  of  all  souls  will  be,  "  Lord,  what 
wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  No  other  power  will  rule  the  soul  where  He  becomes 
the  moral  monarch.  III.  It  will  be  beneficent.  "  All  the  land  shall  be  turned 
as  a  plain  from  Geba  to  Rimmon  south  of  Jerusalem."  Taking  verses  10  and 
11,  we  gather  at  least  two  beneficent  results  of  His  moral  reign.  1.  The  removal 
of  all  obstructions  to  the  river  of  truth.  "  The  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain 
from  Geba  to  Rimmon,"  &c.  That  is  from  the  northern  to  the  southern  boundary 
of  Judea.  The  levelling  of  this  land  would  not  only  leave  Jerusalem  conspicuous 
but  allow  the  "  living  waters  "  to  have  free  flow.  2.  The  elevation  and  establish- 
ment of  the  good.  Jerusalem  is  here  represented  not  only  as  being  razed  and 
made  conspicuous,  but  as  settling  down  and  dwelling  securely.  "  It  shall  be 
lifted  up  and  inhabited  in  her  place."  There  shall  be  no  more  utter  destruction, 
Jerusalem  shall  be  safely  inhabited.  Conclusion :  Who  will  not  pray.  Let  Thy 
kingdom  come  and  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven  ?  (Homilist.) 
The  kingdom  of  Christ  upon  the  earth : — I.  The  incalculable  iimportance  op 
THIS  PROPHECY.  1.  To  the  world  at  large.  2.  To  the  Church  in  particular.  3.  To 
every  individual  of  mankind.  II.  The  blessedness  of  the  period  to  which 
IT  refers.  1.  It  will  be  a  season  of  temporal  prosperity.  2.  Spiritual  blessings 
will  most  richly  abound.  It  will  be  a  season  when  God  will  manfest  Himself 
on  earth.  Then  (1)  Seek  the  establishment  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  your  own 
souls ;  and  (2)  Seek  to  promote  its  establishment  throughout  the  world. 
(C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  One  heart  and  one  tvay  : — The  Lord  forewarns  His  people 
of  greater  sufferings  that  they  were  to  undergo  in  the  last  times.  Here  we  have 
the  judgment  itself  denounced.  A  description  of  their  miserable  condition  at 
this  time.  The  assurance  of  deliverance,  and  that  by  divers  agents.  Though 
the  trial  were  sharp,  it  should  be  short.  The  issue  should  be  happy  for  the 
evening  should  be  light.  The  author  of  their  deliverance  shall  be  Jehovah.  As 
to  the  manner  of  doing  it,  God  will  make  it  appear  to  be  His  work.  Look  at 
the  glorious  condition  of  this  Chmrch  after  this  deliverance,  and  that  in  these 

Sarticulars  —  after  this  Jerusalem  shall  be  made  eminent  and  honourable, 
erusalem  shall  be  exalted,  as  the  mother  Church.  The  blessed  and  glorious 
government  of  this  state  after  this  deliverance.  Here  is  the  fruit  and  consequence 
of  this  government,  "  Jehovah  shall  be  one,  and  His  name  one."  The  name 
of  God  is  diversely  taken  in  Scripture;  but  here  is  meant  the  religion  that  God 
has  set  forth  in  His  Word,  and  the  worship  that  He  hath  set  up  in  the  Church. 
The  meaning  of  the  promise  seems  to  be  this,  whereas  before  they  worshipped  many 
gods,  now  they  should  turn  from  dead  idols  and  serve  only  the  living  Grod. 


233  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

The  Lord  promises  that  as  all  the  idols  shall  be  taken  away,  so  all  idolatrous 
and  superstitious  worship  also.  Jehovah  one,  the  rule  of  His  worship  one,  and 
His  worship  according  to  that  rule  one.  Doctrine — When  a  people  turn  to  God 
by  repentance,  and  He  returns  to  them  in  mercy.  He  will  give  unto  them  one 
name,  that  is.  He  will  free  them  from  all  superstitions,  and  human  mixtures 
in  His  worship.  1.  In  all  ages  it  hath  been  the  main  labour  of  Satan  and  all 
the  enemies  of  the  Church,  when  they  could  not  root  out  the  worship  of  God 
wholly,  then  to  corrupt  the  simplicity  of  it  by  human  inventions,  traditions, 
and  superstitious  mixtures.  2.  When  they  turn  unto  God,  and  God  imto  them. 
He  will  free  them  from  all  these,     {W.  Strong.) 

Vers.  12-14.  And  this  shall  be  the  plague. — T?ie  punishment  of  God's 
enemies  : — This  is  a  figurative  description  of  the  pvmishment  of  sin.  The  first 
element  of  the  punishment  is  corruption,  which  is  set  forth  by  the  terrible  image 
of  a  living  death,  a  fearful  anomalous  state,  in  which  the  mouldy  rottenness  of 
death  is  combined  in  horrible  union  with  the  vivid,  conscious  sensibility  of  life. 
The  soul  of  the  sinner,  in  its  future  consciousness  of  sin,  shall  feel  its  loathsome 
corruption  as  vividly  as  now  it  would  feel  the  slow  putrefaction  of  the  body  that 
rotted  piecemeal  to  the  grave.  The  second  element  is — mutual  h*te  and  conten- 
tion (ver.  13).  The  image  is  that  of  a  panic-struck  army,  in  which  man  clutches 
and  strikes  in  frantic  fury  his  nearest  neighbour.  Hell  shall  be  hate,  in  its  fiercest 
and  hatefullest  forms.  Sin  is  now  the  cause  of  all  the  quarrels  on  earth  ;  it  shall 
be  the  cause  of  endless  quarrels  in  hell.  The  third  element  is — loss  of  the  bless- 
ings previously  enjoyed  (ver.  14).  This  is  represented  by  the  image  of  spoil. 
The  wealth  of  the  nations  that  besieged  Jerusalem  shall  be  taken  by  Judah  and 
Jerufalem,  which  are  here  combined  in  the  triumph,  as  they  were  combined  in 
the  struggle  described  in  chap.  xii.  A  fourth  element  is — the  infectious  nature 
of  sin.  It  defiles  all  that  it  touches.  It  has  defiled  the  earth  and  all  it  contains, 
BO  that  it  must  be  burned  up  ;  and  it  will  hereafter  transform  the  dwelling-place 
of  its  possessors  into  a  hell,  and  their  companions  into  fiends,  and  make  it  necessary 
that  the  very  instruments  of  enjoyment  they  have  possessed  in  life  should  be 
taken  from  them  and  destroyed.  Learn  that  the  most  fearful  punishment  of 
sinners  is  simply  to  leave  them  to  themselves.  Sin  is  but  hell  in  embryo,  hell  is 
but  sin  in  development.  {T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  The  elements  by  which  the  Divine 
government  punishes  sin  : — I.  Physical  diseases.  "  And  this  shall  be  the  plague 
wherewith  the  Lord  shall  smite  all  the  people  that  have  fought  against  Jerusalem. 
Their  flesh  shall  consume  away  while  they  stand  upon  their  feet,  and  their  eyes 
shall  consume  away  in  their  holes,  and  their  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their 
mouth."  "  This  description  of  the  plague-stricken  people,"  says  a  modern  author, 
"  is  shocking,  but  it  is  not  more  than  what  actually  occiu-s."  See  Defoe's  Plague 
of  London.  Kingsley  says,  "  What  so  terrible  as  war  ?  I  will  tell  you  what  is 
ten  times  and  ten  thousand  times  more  terrible  than  war,  and  that  is  outraged 
nature.  Nature,  insidious,  inexpensive,  silent,  sends  no  roar  of  cannon,  no  glitter 
of  arms  to  do  her  work :  she  gives  no  warning  note  of  preparation.  .  .  .  Man 
has  his  courtesies  of  war  and  his  chivalries  of  war,  he  does  not  strike  the  unarmed 
man,  he  spares  the  woman  and  the  child.  But  nature  .  .  .  spares  neither  woman 
or  child ;  .  .  .  silently  she  strikes  the  sleeping  child  with  as  little  remorse  as  she 
would  strike  the  strong  man  with  the  musket  or  the  pick-axe  in  his  hand."  One 
could  scarcely  imagine  a  more  revolting  condition  of  humanity  than  is  here  pre- 
sented, a  living  skeleton,  nearly  all  the  flesh  gone,  the  eyes  all  but  blotted  out, 
the  tongue  withered.  Physical  disease  has  ever  been  one  of  the  instruments  by 
which  God  has  punished  men  in  this  world,  pestilences,  plagues,  epidemics,  and 
BO  on.  But  it  is  not  merely  a  plague  amongst  the  people,  but  also  amongst  the 
cattle,  as  we  see  in  ver.  15.  II.  Mutual  animosity.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
in  that  day,  that  a  great  tumult  from  the  Lord  shall  be  among  them,  and  they 
shall  lay  hold  every  one  on  the  hand  of  his  neighbour."  The  idea  is,  perhaps, 
that  God  would  Ix^^lnit  such  circumstances  to  spring  up  amongst  them  as  would 
generate  in  their  minds  mutual  misunderstandings,  malignities,  quarrellings, 
and  battlings.  "  Tliey  shall  lay  hold  every  one  on  the  hand  of  his  neighbour." 
"  Every  man's  sword  shall  be  against  bis  brother."  Sin  punishes  sin,  bad  passions 
not  only  work  misery  but  are  in  themselves  miseries.  Another  element  of  punish- 
ment here  is — III.  Temporal  losses.  "  And  Judah  also  shall  fight  at  Jerusalem." 
Not  against  Jerusalem.  "  And  the  wealth  of  all  the  heathen  round  about  shall 
be  gathered   together,   gold  and  silver,   and  apparel  in  abundance."     Earthly 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  239 

property,  men  in  their  unrenewed  state  have  always  valued  as  the  highest  wood. 
To  attain  it  they  devote  all  their  powers  with  an  unquenchable  enthusiasm,  and 
to  hold  it  they  are  ever  on  the  alert,  and  their  grasp  is  unrelaxable  and  firm.  To 
have  it  snatched  from  them  is  among  their  greatest  calamities,  and  how  often 
this  occurs  in  society  !     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  16.  Shall  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  "wrorship  the  King. — The  genius 
and  inner  Tieart  of  Christianity  : — 1.  It  brings  us  into  the  possession  of  a  new  life. 
We  are  Christians,  not  because  we  avow  a  certain  creed,  or  conform  to  certain 
outward  exercises  ;  but  because  we  have  received  the  life,  the  Eternal  Life,  which 
was  with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested  to  us  in  Jesus.  And  is  it  possible  to 
restrict  the  manifestations  of  life  ?  Is  not  God's  life  always  the  same  in  its 
abundant  and  infinite  variety  ?  So  surely  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  should, 
and  must,  express  itself  in  all  the  outgoings  of  our  existence, — in  speech,  act, 
movement — equally  on  the  six  days  as  the  one  day ;  as  much  in  the  kitchen, 
or  the  shop,  as  the  Church.  If  you  are  possessed  by  the  life  of  the  Holy  One,  it 
will  as  certainly  appear  as  the  idiosyncrasy  of  your  character,  which  underlies, 
moulds,  and  fashions  your  every  gesture.  2.  Christianity  is  consecration  to  Christ. 
It  may  be  questioned  if  we  have  a  right  to  call  ourselves  Christians  unless  we 
regard  Him  as  our  Judge,  our  Lawgiver,  and  our  King,  and  are  deliberately 
obejdng  and  serving  Him.  But  if  we  are  going  to  reserve  our  religion  to  certain 
days,  places,  and  actions,  we  necessarily  exclude  Him  from  all  that  is  not  contained 
within  the  fences  we  erect.  What  right  have  we  to  suppose  that  our  Master 
Christ  will  be  satisfied  with  an  arrangement  which  asks  Him  to  accept  a  part 
for  the  whole,  a  composition  for  the  entire  debt  ?  3.  The  needs  of  the  world 
demand  an  entire  and  unbroken  religious  life.  The  world  does  not  see  us  in  our 
religious  exercises,  whether  in  ovtr  private  retirement  or  our  public  worship.  It 
has  no  idea,  therefore,  of  the  anguish  of  our  penitence,  the  earnestness  of  our 
desires  for  a  right  and  noble  life,  the  persistency  of  our  endeavours.  And  if  we 
do  not  give  evidence  of  our  religion  in  dealing  with  matters  that  the  men  of  the 
v.'orld  understand,  they  will  naturally  and  rightly  consider  that  religion  is  an 
impractical  dream,  the  child  of  superstition  and  emotion.  We  should,  therefore, 
refuse  to  maintain  the  false  distinction  between  things  that  are  sacred,  and  those 
that  are  secular.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  public  worship  of  Jehovah  : — I.  It 
IS  A  DUTY  BINDING  ON  ALL  PEOPLE.  "  The  feast  of  tabernacles  was  meant  to 
keep  them  in  mind  that,  amidst  their  abundant  harvests,  and  well-cared-for  fields 
and  vineyards,  that  as  in  the  desert,  so  still  it  was  God  who  gave  the  increase. 
It  was  therefore  a  festival  most  suitable  for  all  the  nations  to  join  in,  by  way  of 
acknowledging  that  Jehovah  was  the  God  of  Nature  throughout  the  earth,  how- 
ever various  might  be  the  aspects  of  nature  with  which  they  were  familiar. 
Besides,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  by  the  time  of  Zechariah,  and  probably 
long  before,  this  feast  had  become  a  kind  of  symbol  of  the  ingathering  of  the 
nations  "  (John  iv.  35).— Dr.  Dods.  Whilst  the  thousands  neglect  public  worship, 
not  a  few  argue  against  it,  they  say  it  is  uncalled  for  and  unnecessary.  In  reply 
to  this  we  state,  where  there  is  genuine  religion — 1.  Public  worship  is  a  natural 
development.  The  Being  we  love  most  we  crave  an  opportunity  for  extolling, 
we  want  that  all  shall  know  His  merits.  2.  Public  worship  is  a  happy  develop- 
ment. What  delights  the  soul  so  much  as  to  hear  others  praise  the  object  we 
love  the  most  ?  This  at  once  gratifies  the  religious  instinct  and  the  social  love. 
3.  Public  worship  is  a  beneficent  development.  There  is  nothing  that  tends  so 
much  to  quicken  and  ennoble  souls  as  worship,  and  nothing  gives  such  a  vital 
interest  in  one  soul  for  another,  as  public  worship.  II.  Its  neglect  exposes 
TO  terrible  calamities.  1.  The  greatness  of  the  punishment.  "  Upon  them 
shall  be  no  rain."  Now  the  absence  of  rain  involves  every  temporal  evil  you 
can  think  of,  famine,  pestilence,  loss  of  physical  enjoyment,  loss  of  health,  loss  of 
life.  2.  The  fitness  of  the  punishment.  (1)  To  the  offence.  "  The  withholding 
of  the  rain."  (2)  To  the  offender.  The  idea  of  not  having  rain  would  not, 
perhaps,  terrify  the  Egyptians,  for  they  had  the  Nile.  Hence  a  plague  i3 
threatened  to  them.  The  punishment  here  was  to  come  because  of  the  neglect 
of  public  worship.  And  this  is  punished  by — (a)  Loss  of  the  highest  spiritual  enjoy- 
ments. (6)  Hereafter,  by  the  reproaching  of  conscience,  and  the  banishment 
from  all  good.  {Homilist. )  The  worship  of  God  a  duty  and  a  privilege  : — 
Though  it  is  generally  admitted  that  Zechariah  is  the  most  obscure  of  all  the 
minor  prophets,  yet  there  were  two  topics  on  which  we  may  safely  affirm  that 


240  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0B.  [chap.  xiv. 

he  was  as  luminous,  or  more  so,  than  the  rest.  The  first  respected  the  public 
worship  of  God.  He  and  Haggai  were  conspicuously  active  in  urging  the  Jews, 
on  their  return  from  their  captivity,  to  re-build  their  temple  ;  and  when  the 
sanctuary  was  erected,  we  find  him  not  only  administering  to  the  tribes  themselves, 
but  to  the  strangers  and  foreigners  who  had  mixed  themselves  up  with  them  to 
frequent  the  house  of  God,  lest  renewed  judgment  should  break  forth  upon  them 
to  their  injury  and  ruin.  I.  Press  it  ttpon  yoxt  as  a  duty  and  privileqh.  1.  It 
is  founded  in  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  God.  He  is  our  Creator,  Preserver, 
Benefactor ;  He  is  our  Father.  We  are  the  families  of  Israel  here  addressed ;  and 
has  not  God  dealt  fraternally  with  you  as  His  children  ?  Show  your  filial  gratitude 
&c.  2.  It  is  suggested  by  the  appointment  of  Divine  ordinances.  3.  It  is  enforced 
by  the  commands  and  exhortations  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.  The  books  of 
Exodus,  Leviticus,  Deuteronomy,  and  Joshua  issued  these  precepts.  They  are 
echoed  by  the  prophets  (Psa.  xcv.  1-4,  7 ;  c.  2-5).  4.  It  is  recommended  by 
the  example  of  the  best  of  men  who  ever  lived.  We  are  to  be  followers  of  "  all 
those  who  through  faith,"  &c.,  and  ought  we  not  to  copy  them  in  this  feature  ? 
Read  the  histories  of  Moses — Joshua — Nehemiah — of  the  prophets  and  apostles — ■ 
or  select  one  conspicuous  example,  David  ;  what  was  his  principal  wish  ?  "  One 
thing  have  I,"  &c.  What  his  chief  affliction  ?  "  The  sparrow,"  &c.  What 
his  chief  joy  ?  "I  was  glad,"  &c.  What  his  prayer  for  others  ?  "0  send 
out  Thy  light,"  &c.  This  was  his  testimony,  this  his  appeal — "  Lord,  I  have  loved 
the  habitation."  "  They  continued  daily  in  the  temple,"  &c.  5.  It  is  urged 
upon  us  by  the  advantages  cormected  with  its  observance.  It  is  the  house  of 
God  which  He  has  promised  to  keep  with  His  especial  presence.  Of  Zion  He 
Bays,  "  This  is  My  rest ;  here  will  I  dwell,"  &c.  it  is  through  His  institutions 
that  light,  grace,  and  comfort  are  imparted  to  His  Church.     II.  To  show  yott 

THE   consequences   OF  THE  NEGLECT   OF  THAT  WORSHIP  WHICH  GOD   REQTTIRES. 

"  Even  upon  them  there  shall  be  no  rain."  No  doubt  there  was  a  literal  meaning 
attached  to  this  menace.  But  we  must  not  satisfy  ourselves  with  this  comment. 
In  making  a  spiritual  application  of  this  part  of  the  text,  observe  that  rain  is 
often  employed  as  a  metaphor  to  denote  the  abvmdant  communication  of  spiritual 
blessings — thus,  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  bestowments  of  His  grace  ; 
the  influences  of  the  Spirit ;  the  instructions  and  consolations  of  the  Word  of 
God.     "  My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain."     (Evangelical  Preacher.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  In  that  day  there  shall  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses,  Holiness 
unto  the  Lord. — Universal  holiness  : — This  text  may  be  a  prediction  of  the  latter- 
day  glory,  when  the  knowledge  of  Christ  shall  cover  the  whole  earth.  But  at 
all  times,  and  in  all  places,  "  holiness  becometh  the  house  of  the  Lord."  It  is 
His  royal  will  and  pleasure  that  all  who  name  His  name  should  depart  from  all 
iniquity.  This  holiness,  which  we  call  universal  holiness,  because  it  extends  to 
the  whole  man,  and  to  his  whole  conduct,  is  described  in  the  text  in  a  remarkable 
manner.  The  prophet  foretells  that  holiness  to  the  Lord  shall  be  written  on 
the  bells  and  bridles  of  the  horses.  It  was  originally  engraved  on  a  plate  of  gold, 
and  fixed  on  the  mitre  or  turban  of  the  high  priest.  In  wearing  this,  he  was  a 
type  of  Christ,  our  great  High  Priest.  The  meaning  of  writing  this  on  the  trap- 
pings of  the  horses  is,  that  religion  shall  not  be  confined  to  sacred  persons,  times, 
and  places,  as  this  inscription  originally  was  to  the  high  priest ;  but  that  all  real 
Christians,  being  a  holy  priesthood,  shall  be  religious  at  all  times  and  in  all  things  ; 
that  true  holiness  shall  extend  itself  to  the  ordinary  concerns  of  life.  The  pro- 
position we  enforce  is,  that  universal  holiness  becomes  the  profession  of  the  Gospel. 
To  be  holy  signifies,  in  Scripture,  to  be  set  apart  from  a  common  or  profane  use, 
to  God  and  His  service.  Holinese  is  the  renovation  of  our  nature  by  the  Spirit 
of  God.  The  holiness  required  by  the  Gospel  is  something  far  superior  to  what 
is  called  morality.  Holiness  supposes  the  renewal  of  the  heart.  There  is  a 
universal  change  made  in  a  real  Christian,  which  is  far  superior  to  mere  morality, 
God  Himself  is  the  author  of  holiness ;  there  is  nothing  in  our  fallen  nature  to 
produce  it.  The  principal  instrument  employed  by  the  Spirit  of  grace  in  effecting 
this  holy  change,  is  the  Word  of  the  Gospel.  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth.' 
The  holiness  of  the  Gospel  has  for  its  grand  objects,  God  and  our  neighbour. 
Religion  is  to  influence  the  common  concerns  of  life.  Holiness  is  not  to  be  con- 
fined to  sacred  things,  but  mingled  with  our  ordinary  affairs.  We  see  little 
practical  religion  among  many  nominal  Christians  and  unstable  professors.  Even 
the  moat  exemplary  have  cause  to  lament  their  deficiencies.     I.  What  should 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  241 

BB  THB   ChEISTIAN'S   TEMPER  AND   VIEWS  WITH  BBGABD   TO   HIMSELF?      Let   the 

Christian  remember  that  he  is  "  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  that  the 
temple  of  the  Lord  must  be  holy.  II.  Holiness  to  the  Lord  is  to  be  exempli- 
fied IN  THE  relative  DUTIES  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE.  In  general,  the  Christian  has  two 
things  to  regard, — to  do  no  harm,  and  to  do  much  good.  Active  benevolence 
is  a  necessary  fruit  of  holiness.  There  are  certain  situations  in  life  wherein 
persons,  being  mutually  related  to  each  other,  are  expected  more  particularly 
to  manifest  the  holiness  of  the  Gospel.  The  conjugal  state.  The  relation  of 
parents  and  children.  Of  masters  and  servants.  Then  are  we  holy  ?  A  soul 
imsanctified  can  never  gain  admittance  into  heaven,  the  residence  of  a  holy  God, 
holy  angels,  and  holy  men.  (O.  Burder.)  Holiness  : — 1.  The  holiness  here 
predicted  is  evangelical.  2.  The  holiness  here  predicted  is  conspicuous  and 
attractive.  3.  The  holiness  here  predicted  is  exemplified  in  the  lives  of  the 
ministers  of  the  Gospel.  4.  The  holiness  here  predicted  embraces  the  trans- 
actions of  ordinary  business.  6.  The  holiness  here  predicted  reaches  to  the  social 
enjoyments  of  Christian  professors.  6.  The  holiness  here  predicted  pervades 
religious  worship.  7.  The  holiness  here  predicted  purifies  the  communion  of  the 
Christian  Chiu-ch.  {(?.  Brooks.)  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  : — The  prevalence 
of  sin  in  the  world  is  a  subject  which  the  Christian  daily  reflects  upon  with  un- 
feigned sorrow  and  humiliation.  In  every  place  iniquity  aboimds.  Divine 
things  are  continually  treated  with  presumptuous  irreverence  and  disregard. 
The  mind,  however,  is  relieved  from  its  depression,  occasioned  by  the  present 
gloomy  state  of  things,  while  it  contemplates  the  prospects  of  a  brighter  day, 
which  in  God's  good  time  will  arise.  The  sure  word  of  prophecy  unfolds  to  our 
view  the  most  glorious  representation  of  the  Church  prospering  in  the  latter 
times.  Zechariah  foretells  the  general  sanctification  of  men,  and  the  consequent 
establishment  of  true  religion  in  the  world.  I.  What  is  implied  en  these 
ENCOURAGING  WORDS — "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses, 
Holiness  imto  the  Lord"?  This  appears  to  be  a  prediction  of  the  general 
prevalence  of  piu-e  and  undefiled  religion.  It  teaches  us  that  holiness  shall  become 
universal  in  its  extent,  entire  in  ite  influence,  and  unveiled  by  shame  or  fear. 
1.  Holiness  shall  hereafter  become  loniversal  in  its  extent.  It  shall  be  written 
upon  the  bells  or  bridles  of  the  horses.  It  shall  not  be  limited  to  persons  of  any 
particular  order  or  profession  ;  it  shall  extend  to  all  who  are  engaged  in  secular 
occupations  and  pm-suits.  Men  shall  then  become,  as  it  were,  priests  unto  God. 
In  God's  good  time,  the  things  of  God  will  be  exalted  to  their  just  pre-eminence  ; 
and  as  they  deserve,  will  occupy  the  attention  and  influence  the  hearts  of  men. 
Religion  will  be  everywhere  regarded  as  the  one  thing  needful.  2.  Holiness  shall 
then  become  entire  in  its  influence.  It  shall  not  be  partial  and  defective  ;  but 
perfect  and  complete.  It  shall  govern  the  whole  man,  and  regulate  all  that 
pertains  to  Him.  As  all  men  will  make  a  profession  of  religion,  so  all  who  profess 
it  will  become  truly  and  completely  religious.  Their  piety  will  not  be  limited 
to  particular  occasions.  They  will  walk  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long. 
They  shall  be  influenced  by  a  continual  sense  of  His  presence,  and  actuated  by 
an  habitual  reverence  for  His  laws.  But  not  only  shall  the  personal  holiness 
of  men  be  entire,  their  possessions,  and  everything  pertaining  to  them  shall, 
as  it  were,  be  holy  too.  "  The  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls 
before  the  altar."  At  present  we  have  to  lament  that  sacred  things  are  most 
shamefully  abused  and  profaned,  but  hereafter  the  case  will  be  reversed  ;  things 
of  a  worldly  nature  shall  be  sanctified  to  the  purposes  of  religion.  3.  Holiness 
shall  be  open  and  unreserved  in  man,  free  from  any  false  feeling  of  shame,  or 
fear  of  reproach.  II.  What  instruction  may  be  deduced  from  these  words  ? 
The  prophet  says,  "  In  that  day."  The  period  has  certainly  not  yet  arrived  ; 
nor  can  it  be  expected  till  the  mystery  of  iniquity  has  ceased  to  work.  It  is, 
however,  even  now  in  its  progress  towards  fulfilment ;  for  it  has  a  reference  to 
the  whole  period  of  the  Gospel  dispensation.  Then  what  manner  of  persons 
ought  they  to  be  who  make  a  profession  of  that  Gospel  ?  Surely  holiness  becomes 
the  house  of  God.  Every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  should  depart 
from  iniquity.  All  who  are  privileged  to  bear  the  Christian  name  are  required 
to  cultivate  extraordinary  purity  and  holiness.  1.  You  are  required  to  be  holy 
by  the  very  relation  which  you  bear  to  God.  2.  This  is  according  to  the  express 
command  of  heaven  :  "  for  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification." 
3.  This  is  the  very  end  for  which  the  Redeemer  died.  4.  The  Scriptures  represent 
this  as  an  indispensable  qualification  for  heaven.     "  Without  holiness  no  ma<n 

i6 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0B.  [chap.  xiv. 

shall  see  the  Lord."  Are  you  then  living  as  persons  truly  devoted  to  God,  and 
letting  your  conversation  be  in  all  things  as  becometh  the  Gospel  of  Christ  ? 
These  questions  are  of  supreme  importance  to  us  all ;  they  are,  as  it  were,  the 
turning-point  on  which  life  and  death,  heaven  and  hell,  depend.  (E.  Whieldon, 
M.A.)  Universal  holiness  the  object  of  Christian  hope  : — The  words  "  Holiness 
to  the  Lord,"  were  written  on  the  mitre  placed  on  the  head  of  the  Jewish  high 
priest.     They  were  intended  to  point  out  the  sacredness  of  the  office,  and  the 

Eeculiar  sanctity  of  the  priestly  character ;  but  they  referred  to  a  greater  than 
e,  even  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus.     I.  Earthly  BMPLoy- 
MENT3  SANCTIFIED.     1.  This  is  not  the  case  at  present.     Even  the  people  of  God 
find  themselves  in  much  danger  of  being  careful  and  troubled  about  many  things. 
There  is  not  now  on  the  bells  of  the  horses,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."     2.  There  is 
a  time  when  it  shall  be  so.     It  will  be  evident,  by  the  way  in  which  common  duties 
shall  be  discharged,  that  holiness  to  the  Lord  is  the  governing  principle.     All 
the  intercourse  of  society  shall  be  under  the  influence  of  Christian  principle.     In 
conducting  the  concerns  of  business,  there  will  be  no  fraud  or  deceit — no  taking 
advantage  of  the   ignorance,  the  necessities,  or  the  liberality  of  another — no 
tempting  others  to  sin,  in  order  to  make  gain  by  their  iniquity.     Many  are  the 
temptations  necessarily  arising  from  being  associated  with  those  who  fear  not 
God.     II.  Spibitual  services  beautified.     This  embraces  religion  in  the  Church 
and  in  the  family.     L  The  services  of  the  sanctuary.     Things  which  have  been 
deemed  of  small  importance  shall  be  attended  to  with  a  spirit  of  elevated  piety. 
There  is  a  prevalent  error  in  iindervaluing  the  devotional  part  of  the  service. 
The  day  is  coming,  may  God  hasten  it  on,  "  when  the  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall 
be  like  the  bowls  before  the  altar."     2.  The  religion  of  the  family.     In  private 
dwellings  a  spirit  of  devotion  shall  run  through  all  the  engagements  of  the  family. 
Look  how  much  this  is  neglected.     How  many  who  wait  on  God  in  His  house, 
do  not  serve  Him  in  their  own.     III.  The  pbofessino  Chxtbch  shall  be  purified. 
\.  Charity  in  circumstantial  matters  shall  be  exercised.     There  are  now  often 
more  disputes  about  the  way  of  worship  than  endeavours  to  attain  the  right 
spirit  of  worship.     Love  of  party  destroys  the  love  of  Christ.     2.  Agreement  in 
fundamental  truth.     There  shall  be  none  to  broach  heresy,  or  to  lessen  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but  dependence  on  His  righteousness  shall  be  universal. 
Applying  this  subject  to  ourselves  we  see — (1)  Ground  for  serious  inquiry.     Can 
we  say,  as  respects  business,  public  ordinances.  Sabbath  and  home  duties,  &c., 
that  everywhere  is  written,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord"  ?     2.  A  source  of  important 
instruction.     See  here  a  standard  for  your  daily  conduct.     Pray,  and  try  to 
attain  to  it.     No  Christian  man  is  so  happy  as  he  who  sees  and  enjoys  Christ 
in  everything.     3.  A  subject  for  fervent  prayer.     Pray  that  you  may  exhibit  in 
your  lives  the  power  of  grace  in  the  soul.     We  see  the  principles  on  which  we  ought 
to  act,  in  order  so  to  pass  through  things  temporal,  as  not  to  lose  the  things  which 
are  eternal.     We  may  have  the  world,  and  we  may  use  the  world,  but  let  us  not 
forget  that  "  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him." 
Let  it  be  our  constant  prayer  that  God  may  be  our  guard  and  our  guide  in  our 
religious  intercourse  with  our  families,  with  His  Church  and  people,  and  with 
our  own  hearts  in  our  prayer  chambers.     And  may  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  fulfil 
in  us  all  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will,  and  the  work  of  faith  with  power.     (J.  0. 
Breeny,  B.A.)        Religion  and  business : — How  to  retain  the  spirit  of  serious  piety 
in  the  busy  activities  of  life,  is  a  question  vital  to  Christian  character.     The 
practical  divorce  of  religion  and  piety  in  our  daily  affairs  is  fraught  with  peril. 
Too  many  regard  religion  as  out  of  place  in  the  thoroughfares  of  trade,  as  a  fabric 
of  too  fine  a  texture,  or  as  an  exotic  transplanted  from  a  tropical  to  a  polar  clime. 
The  easy  quietude  of  the  sanctuary  or  closet  befits  it :  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  " 
may  be  put  on  the  Bible,  but  not  on  the  ledger  ;  on  the  mitre  of  priest,  but  not 
on  the  bells  of  horses.     How  can  religion  and  business  be  properly  blended  ? 
1.  By  having  all  actions  constrained  by  holy  motives.     We  do  not,  indeed,  have 
God  as  a  distinct  object  before  us  every  moment,  but  we  do  the  work  which  He 
has  appointed  us,  in  our  special  sphere,  as  a  service  to  Him  :  "  Not  slothful  in 
business,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord."     The  blood  circulates  silently  in 
our  veins,  and  so  religion  is  a  silent,  but  vital,  force  in  our  hearts.     2.  We  are  to 
remember  that  religion  is  being  good  and  doing  good.     It  is  not  quietism  or 
asceticism,  but   a  dominant  principle  that  guides  our   thought  and  speech  and 
action.     It  is  a  reflection  of  Christ's  life  in  the  flesh.     It  shows  itself  in  minutest 
details — the  soft  step,  the  gentle  voice,  the  courteous  demeanour ;  in  honest 


CBAT.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  243 

epeeoh,  in  nobility  of  dealing  and  truthfulness  of  disposition.  True  religion, 
someone  says,  puts  no  sand  in  sugar,  alum  in  bread,  water  into  milk,  or  otter  into 
butter ;  it  keeps  the  wife  from  ill-temper  when  her  husband's  dirty  boots  soil 
the  floor,  and  keeps  him  from  having  dirty  boots  ;  it  prevents  him  from  fretting 
at  a  late  dinner,  and  keeps  her  from  having  late  dinners.  3.  Religion  is  doing 
secular  acts  from  sacred  motives  oftener  than  it  is  doing  merely  sacred  acts,  so 
called.  When  piety  stamps  our  life,  all  our  acts  are  religious.  It  is  wrong  to 
separate  toil  and  wcarship,  and  to  forget  that  motive  gives  character  to  deeds. 
An  automaton  may  do  many  of  our  acts,  but  it  has  no  moral  character.  The 
heart  makes  the  work  of  the  workman  holy.  "  An  anvil  may  be  consecrated 
and  a  pulpit  desecrated."  A  religion  that  is  not  fitted  to  week-day  work  never 
had  a  Sabbath-day  origin.  (C  H.  Buck.)  The  true  Christian  holiness: — These 
words  indicate  that  the  great  design,  and  ultimate  result,  of  the  diffusion  of  the 
Gospel  is  to  promote  holiness.  In  the  view  of  many,  salvation  is  simply  deliver- 
ance from  punishment.  But  salvation  is  a  character  as  well  as  a  condition,  and 
the  two  can  never  be  really  divorced.  Christianity  is  a  life  as  well  as  a  creed. 
The  bestowment  of  forgiveness  is  not  the  great  end  of  the  Gospel,  but  only  a 
means  to  the  higher  end  of  lifting  men  from  their  degradation  and  making  them 
in  heart  and  in  conduct,  as  well  as  in  name,  the  sons  of  God.  To  rest  in  pardon 
is  a  mean  and  contemptible  thing,  displaying  a  disposition  of  the  grossest  selfish- 
ness. When  salvation  is  really  possessed,  it  is  a  living  character,  produced  by 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  rooted  in  the  simple  faith  which  the  soul  ia 
exercising  in  Jesus  Christ.  I.  What  holiness  is.  What  precisely  do  we  mean 
when  we  say  of  a  man  that  he  is  holy  ?  We  imply  not  simply  that  he  is  virtuous, 
but  rather  that  his  virtue  has  a  special  and  peculiar  quality.  In  our  common 
speech  there  is  a  recognition  of  the  distinction  between  virtue  and  holiness.  The 
virtuous  man  regulates  his  conduct  by  moral  principles  alone,  while  the  holy  man 
maintains  a  close  and  constant  fellowship  with  the  living  God.  The  one  gives 
you  a  lofty  idea  of  his  own  excellence,  the  other  makes  you  feel  the  greatness 
and  purity  of  God.  The  scriptural  significance  of  the  term  is  *'  consecrated 
to  Jehovah."  Holiness,  so  far  as  it  is  an  inward  principle,  is  the  maintenance 
of  close  communion  with  God :  and  so  far  as  it  is  an  outward  manifestation,  it 
is  the  consecration  of  the  life  to  God.  Holiness  is  a  disposition  lying  back  behind 
all  virtues,  and  giving  to  each  of  them  its  own  distinctive  peculiarity.  Holiness 
is  an  inward,  all-regulating  principle.  II.  How  this  holiness  is  to  be  attained. 
Clearly,  it  is  not  possessed  by  every  man.  No  man  has  it  naturally,  and  as  a 
thing  of  course.  Indeed,  the  very  reverse  is  true.  Men  do  not  like  to  retain 
God  in  their  knowledge.  How  is  all  this  to  be  changed  ?  Not  by  the  individual 
himself.  From  an  unholy  soul  nothing  but  that  which  is  unholy  can  proceed. 
By  no  mere  process  of  development,  or  natural  selection,  can  the  unholy  man 
train  himself  into  holiness.  Neither  can  this  change  be  accomplished  by  means 
of  external  rites.  The  Scriptures  state  with  the  utmost  explicitness  that  we  are 
regenerated  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  we  inquire  into  the  mode  of 
His  operations,  we  get  no  reply.  If  we  ask  how  He  can  work  in  and  upon  a  man, 
while  not  infringing  on  his  free  agency,  we  are  not  told.  Though  silent  as  to 
the  mode.  Scripture  repeatedly  asserts  the  fact.  The  other  element  of  holiness 
is  consecration  to  God.  But  the  essence  of  sin  is  self-will,  and  so  it  is  impossible 
that  a  man  can  dedicate  himself  to  God  until  sin  within  him  has  been  crushed. 
In  order  to  holiness,  the  sinner  needs  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  to  be  made 
like  to  God.  But  these  are  the  very  things  which  are  to  be  accomplished  through 
his  belief  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  As  to  conse- 
cration to  Him,  the  sight  of  the  means  by  which  his  guUt  and  depravity  have 
been  removed,  produces  in  the  believer's  soul  a  deep  feeling  of  personal  indebted- 
ness to  God.  He  cannot  lay  claim  to  himself  after  God  has  redeemed  him  to 
Himself  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  His  gratitude  takes  the  form  of  self- 
dedication.  It  follows,  also,  that  we  must  seek  to  have  faith,  strong  and  abiding, 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Redeemer,  and  in  His  death  as  the  propitiation  for 
our  sins.  This  is  a  view  of  the  Cross  which  is  too  seldom  before  our  eyes. 
III.  Wheke  this  holiness  is  to  be  manifested.  It  is  to  characterise  the 
believer's  life  in  all  occupations  and  under  all  circumstances.  Under  the  New 
Testament  we  have  no  holy  places,  or  holy  persons.  To  the  Christian  there 
should  be  nothing  purely  secular.  Wherever  piety  is  genuine,  and  our  conse- 
cration xmreserved,  we  shall  seek  in  all  things  to  glorify  God.  (W.  M.  Taylor, 
£>.D.)        Holiness  on  the  hells  of  the  horses  : — The  period  to  which  these  versea 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

refer  is  still  future.     Piety  is  to  be  almost  universal,  extending  generally  to  all 
persons  and  acts.     Gather  from  the  text  what  real  piety  is.     Use  the  text  as  a 
standard.     1.  On  the  bells  of  the  horses,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  not  on  the  priest's 
mitre  only.     Common  occupations  are  to  be  performed  with  an  eye  to  God.     We 
are  to  serve  God  indirectly  in  our  callings,  as  well  as  directly  in  our  ordinances ; 
secular  things  are   to  be  conducted  on  the  same  holy  principles  of  faith  and 
obedience  as  our  sacred  services.    Horses  are  used  for  state  occasions,  for  recreation, 
for  journeying,  for  merchandise.     And  bells  on  the  horses  give  notice  of  their 
approach.     And  wherever  a  Christian  comes,  holiness  to  the  Lord  should  attend 
him.     2.  "  And  the  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls  before  the 
altar."     Lesser  things  in  the  service  of  God  should  be  attended  to,  as  well  as 
the  more  important ;  earthen  pots,  as  well  as  golden  bowls,  should  be  held  sacred. 
Where  there  is  real  holiness  people  are  not  nice  and  particular  about  ceremonial 
holiness.     The  true  worshipper  seeks  to  worship  in  spirit.     This  is  the  main 
thing.     At  the  same  time,  he  does  not  disparage  sacred  persons,  places,  days, 
and  things,  because  he  can  make  ordinary  persons,  places,  days,  and  things, 
conducive  and  helpful  to  his  spiritual  growth.     You  should  carry  your  religion 
into  your  ordinary  affairs,  but  you  should  not  carry  your  ordinary  affairs  into 
your  religious  worship,  except  for  the  sake  of  guidance  and  blessing,  and  that 
you  may  go  forth  to  conduct  them  in  a  right  manner  and  with  a  proper  spirit. 
{H.  C.  Mitchinson,  M.A.)        Holiness  to  the  Lord: — Jerusalem  and  Judah  are 
referred  to  in  a  literal  sense,  but,  as  is  common,  they  are  ultimately  referred  to 
as  a  type  of  the  universal  Church  of  the  latter  day.     In  its  real  scope  the  pre- 
diction extends  to  the  whole  world.     Everything  in  prophecy  and  providence 
unites  to  prove  that  the  entire  fulfilment  is  at  the  door.     The  term  "  holy  " 
signifies  "  set  apart,"  "  devoted."     To  be  holy  to  the  Lord  is  to  be  consecrated 
to  Him.     But  "  holiness  to  the  Lord  "  is  a  still  more  forcible  expression,  and 
denotes  consecration  in  the  abstract.     Men  will  write  "  holiness  to  the  Lord  " 
on  all  that  they  are  and  have.     This  implies  that  they  will  go  through  and  re- 
examine all  their  habits,  and  bring  all  to  the  touchstone  of  Scripture.     They  will 
consecrate  to  Him  aU  their  powers  of  body  and  mind,  all  their  time,  influence, 
and  possessions.     You  have  come  upon  the  stage  at  a  time  when  Christendom 
is  teeming  with  projects  and  institutions  to  meliorate  the  condition  of  man,  and 
to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ.     See  that  you  give  these  institutions  firm  and 
unwearied  support.     Fall  in  with  the  spirit  of  your  age.     You  ought  to  be  wholly 
for  God,  because  He  made  you  what  you  are,  and  built  the  world  you  inhabit, 
and  furnished  it  for  your  use,  and  placed  you  in  it,  and  commanded  you  to  serve 
Him  with  all  your  heart  and  soul.     You  are  not  your  own.     You  ought  to  be 
wholly  for  Christ,  because  He  died  to  redeem  you  from  eternal  fire  and  raise  you 
to  immortal  happiness.      You  must  devote  your  lives  to  the  interests  of  His 
kingdom  if  you  would  most  promote  the  happiness  of  men.     You  must  be  wholly 
devoted  if  you  would  wish  for  a  life  of  comfort.      A  divided  mind  is  an  uneasy 
mind.    Many  people  have  just  enough  religion  to  make  them  wretched.     A  heart 
and  life  consecrated  without  reserve  to  Christ,  would  bring  peace  of  conscience, 
the  strong  exercise  of  benevolent  affection,  the  satisfaction  of  a  delightful  employ- 
ment, and  crown  all  with  ecstatic  communion  with  God,  and  an  assured  hope  of 
immortality.     (E.  Dorr  Cfriffin,  D.D.)        Holiness  to  the  Lord: — The  prophets 
and  apostles  often  speak  of  a  glorious  day,  which  is  to  dawn  upon  the  Church 
in  the  latter  ages  of  the  world.     Respecting  this  glorious  day  two  things  are 
predicted  in  the  chapter  before  us.     The  true  religion  shall  then  imiversally 
prevail.     Christians  shall  make  much  greater  attainments  in  religion,  and  its 
sanctifying  influence  shall  pervade  all  the  common  concerns  and  employments 
of  life.     1.  These  expressions  of  the  text  imply  that,  when  the  day  here  predicted 
arrives,  all  the  common  business,  employments,  and  actions  of  men  shall  be 
performed  with  as  much  seriousness  and  devoutness,  as  the  most  pious  Christiams 
now  feel  when  engaged  in  the  most  solemn  duties  of  religion.     The  meaning  of 
the  prediction  evidently  is  that,  while  persons  are  engaged  in  all  the  common 
business  and  concerns  of  life,  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  whether  in  the  house 
or  by  the  way,  they  shall  feel  as  serious,  as  devout,  as  much  engaged  in  the  service 
of  God,  as  did  the  Jewish  high  priest,  when  he  wore  that  sacred  inscription  upon 
his  forehead.     2.  In  that  day,  every  house,  every  shop,  and  the  whole  world 
itself,  will  be  a  house  of  God,  a  temple  consecrated  to  His  praise.     A  temple  is  a 
place  consecrated  and  devoted  to  God  for  religious  purposes.     But  in  that  day 
every  house  will  be  such  a  place.     3.  Every  day  will  then  be  like  a  Sabbath. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECUARIAH.  245 

4.  Every  common  meal  will  be  what  the  Lord's  Supper  is  now.  5.  When  this 
day  arrives,  there  will  be  no  insincere  worshippers  found  in  God's  house,  no 
hypocritical  professors  in  His  Church.  Application.  Learn — 1.  Our  great  and 
innumerable  deficiencies.  2.  Whether  we  have  any  religion  or  not.  3.  What 
pleasures,  pursuits,  and  employments  are  really  lawful  and  pleasing  to  God. 
{E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Holiness  to  the  Lord  : — Zechariah  describes,  in  the  last 
chapters  of  his  book,  great  troubles  coming  on  the  world.  All  the  world  gathered 
round  about  Jerusalem  to  destroy  it.  The  Lord  Himself  coming  down  from 
heaven  to  deliver  the  sacred  city.  There  was  no  thought  more  pressed  upon 
the  mind  of  the  Jew  than  that  of  holiness.  It  was  the  motto  of  the  national 
life.  The  same  conception  of  universal  sanctity  was  carried  forward  from  Judaism 
to  Christianity.  I.  The  highest  state  of  man,  the  most  blessed  coNDiTioiir 
OF  THE  WORLD,  IS  HEBE  SET  BEFORE  US.  The  first  meaning  of  holiness  is  separation. 
Separation  looks  two  ways,  to  the  past  and  to  the  future.  There  is  something 
from  which  we  are  separated,  and  something  to  which  we  are  separated.  When 
we  think  of  holiness  practically,  in  respect  to  our  present  life,  we  are  apt  to  regard 
it  as  representing  an  unattainable  height.  Holiness  is  absolute  purity.  Sanctis 
fication  is  ever  represented  in  Scripture  as  though  it  were  equivalent  with  a 
positive  perfection  already  attained  in  this  life.  Holiness  describes,  not  a  realised 
height  of  nature  or  life,  but  a  law  or  condition  of  life, — a  process,  a  growth, 
springing  out  of  faith,  going  on  with  us  to  our  eternal  future.  Holiness  is  con- 
secration. II.  This  Divine  idea  of  holiness  is  universally  afplicablk. 
There  is  nothing  which  cannot  be  consecrated.  The  first  thing  in  true  conse> 
cration  is  the  act  of  the  inner  self.  We  have  none  of  us  altogether  conquered 
our  old  selfishness :  we  battle  with  it  still.  But  holiness  is  the  renunciation  of 
all  for  Christ.  And  we  have  all  an  outside  life  to  bring  under  this  law  of  entire 
surrender.  Holiness  is  not  the  condition  of  hvunan  nature,  left  to  itself,  it  is  the 
gift  of  God.  There  is  a  spurious  holiness  into  which  we  are  invited.  Outside 
sanctities  will  never  quicken  the  soul  into  new  life.  (i?.  A.  Bedford,  LL.B.,  M.A.) 
The  holiness  of  the  gospel  church : — These  words  describe  the  purity  and  holiness 
of  the  gospel  church  in  such  terms  and  notions  as  are  proper  to  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation.  Notice  the  inscription,  or  impress, — "  Holiness  to  the  Lord." 
The  things  inscribed  are  particularly  enumerated,  the  horse-bells ;  the  bowls, 
the  pots.  What  was  used  in  the  kitchens  of  the  temple ;  and  the  utensils  of 
every  ordinary  house  and  family.  Notice  the  time.  "  In  that  day."  The 
whole  state  of  things  imder  the  Gospel,  which  is  as  it  were  but  one  day.  But 
where  is  this  universal  holiness  to  be  found  ?  Prophecies  of  things  belonging 
to  our  obedience  are  to  be  often  understood  of  our  duty,  rather  than  of  the  event. 
As  to  the  event,  it  is  to  be  imderstood  comparatively,  not  absolutely.  And  the 
Gospel  state  hath  its  ebbs  and  flows  in  several  ages.  Doctrine — God  in  and  by 
the  Gospel  will  effect  an  eminent  and  notable  sanctification  both  of  things  and 
persons.  I.  That  degree  of  holiness  which  is  here  prophesied  of.  1.  All 
such  things  as  were  before  employed  against  God  should  be  then  employed  and 
converted  to  His  service,  for  the  horse-bells  shall  be  inscribed.  2.  Upon  all  the 
utensils  of  the  temple  there  shall  be  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  whether  pots  or 
bowls.  3.  The  expressions  imply  a  proficiency  and  growth  in  holiness;  for  the 
pots  of  the  kitchen  of  the  temple  shall  become  as  the  bowls  of  the  altar  for  purity 
and  holiness.  4.  As  it  is  a  progressive  holiness,  bo  it  is  also  a  diffusive  holiness, 
which  spreadeth  itself  through  all  actions,  civil  and  sacred ;  in  things  which 
belong  to  peace  and  war.  11.  Of  holiness  in  the  general.  Consider  it — 
L  Relatively.  Fom:  things  are  in  it.  An  inclination  towards  God.  From  this 
tendency  towards  God  ariseth  a  dedication  of  ourselves,  and  all  that  we  have 
to  the  Lord's  use  and  service.  From  this  dedication  there  results  a  relation  of 
the  persons  so  dedicated  to  God,  so  that  from  that  time  forth  they  are  not  their 
own,  but  the  Lord's.  There  is  another  thing,  and  that  is  the  actual  using  of 
ourselves  for  God.  We  are  vessels  set  apart  for  the  master's  use.  2.  Positive 
holiness  may  be  considered  either  with  respect  to  our  persons  or  actions.  Our 
persons,  when  we  are  renewed  by  the  Spirit,  or  there  is  an  inward  principle  of 
sanctification  wrought  in  our  hearts.  As  a  person  is  holy  by  his  principle,  so  an 
action  is  holy  by  the  rule,  when  it  agreeth  with  it  as  to  manner  and  matter  and 
end.  III.  Reasons  why  this  eminent  holiness,  both  of  persons  and  actions, 
should  take  place  in  the  Gospel,  above  the  times  of  the  law.  1.  Because 
of  our  principle,  the  new  nature  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  is 
suited  to  the  whole  will  of  God.    2.  Because  of  the  exactness  of  our  rule,  which 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

teacheth  us  how  to  walk  in  our  several  businesses  and  employments.  3.  Because 
of  our  pattern  and  example,  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  exact  in  all  His  actions 
4.  Because  of  our  obligations  to  Christ ;  partly  because  of  His  dominion  as 
the  Lord  and  Redeemer  by  right  of  purchase.  In  all  conditions  and  states  of 
life  He  hath  a  right  in  us,  therefore  in  every  state  of  life  we  should  glorify  Him. 
Partly  from  our  gratitude  to  Christ  as  Saviour  as  well  as  Lord.  Use — To  persuade 
U8  to  this  imiversal  obedience.  None  enter  upon  God's  service  but  with  a  conse- 
cration. Sundry  directions.  (1)  Undertake  nothing  but  what  will  bear  this 
inscription  upon  it.  (2)  Be  sure  to  exercise  your  general  calling,  as  a  Christian, 
in  your  particular.  Your  particular  calling  is  that  way  of  life  to  which  God  hath 
designed  you  by  your  abilities  and  education.  (3)  Turn  all  second-table  duties 
into  first-table  duties.  (4)  Go  about  your  earthly  business  with  a  heavenly  mind. 
(5)  Content  not  yourselves  with  the  natural  use  of  the  creature,  as  brute  beasts 
do,  but  see  God  in  all.  (6)  In  all  your  ways  acknowledge  God,  depending  upon 
Him  for  direction  and  success,  and  consulting  with  Him,  and  approving  thy 
heart  and  life  imto  Him.  (7)  God  should  be  worshipped  by  every  faithful  person 
in  His  own  house  in  as  God-like  a  manner  as  He  was  worshipped  by  the  Jews 
in  the  temple.  A  Christian  must  be  alike  everywhere,  at  home  and  abroad. 
{T.  Manton.)  The  bright  future  of  the  world,  the  reign  of  holiness  : — Holiness 
will  be  the  salient  feature  in  the  future  of  the  world.  The  holiness  will  be  universal. 
I.  It  will  embrace  the  affairs  of  common  life.  "  Upon  the  bells  of  the 
horses."  It  was  common  amongst  ancient  nations  to  have  bells  on  horses  for 
use  or  ornament,  or  perhaps  for  both.  It  is  said  that  in  Alexander's  fimeral 
procession  the  horses  had  gold  bells  attached  to  their  cheek  straps.  II.  It  will 
EMBRACE  ALL  DOMESTIC  CONCERNS.  "  Every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in  Judah 
shall  be  holiness  unto  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  idea  is  that  holiness  will  extend 
even  to  the  minutest  concerns  of  domestic  life,  the  members  of  families  will  be 
religious.  The  very  pots  in  which  the  priests  cooked  their  food  should  be  as 
sacred  as  the  bowls  that  caught  the  victim's  blood.  Observe — (1)  That  the 
distinction  between  the  sacred  and  secular  is  to  be  abolished,  but — (2)  not  by 
separation  from  the  world,  nor  by  making  all  things  secular,  but  by  making  all 
things  holy,by  carrying  into  all  occupations  the  spirit  and  delight  of  God's  presence. 
Holiness  to  the  Lord  is  not  to  be  obliterated  from  the  High  Priest's  mitre  so  that 
he  might  feel  as  little  solemnised  when  putting  on  his  mitre  and  entering  the 
Holiest  of  all,  as  if  he  were  going  into  his  stable  to  put  the  collar  on  his  horse  ; 
when  he  puts  the  collar  on  his  horse  and  goes  to  his  day-work  or  recreation,  ho 
is  to  be  as  truly  and  lovingly  at  one  with  God  as  when  with  incense  and  priestly 
garments  he  enters  the  Holy  of  Holies." — Dr.  Dods.  III.  It  will  embrace  all 
KELiGious  CHARACTERS.  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  no  more  the  Canaanite 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts."  "  By  Canaanite,"  says  Dr.  HeuJerson, 
"  is  meant  merchant.  The  Phoenicians  who  inhabited  the  northern  part  of  Canaan 
were  the  most  celebrated  merchants  of  antiquity.  The  word  may  fau-ly  be 
regarded  as  standing  for  mercenary  men,  men  animated  by  the  mercenary  spirit." 
Such  men  are  ever  to  be  found  in  connection  with  religion.  The  old  prophets 
bewailed  this  spirit.  It  was  found  in  the  earlier  ages  of  the  Christian  Church. 
Men  who  considered  "  gain  as  godliness,"  the  Canaanite  or  the  merchant  do  not 
necessarily  belong  to  mercantile  life  but  to  other  avocations  as  well  and  even  to 
the  priestly  life.  Perhaps  the  mercenary  spirit  is  as  rife  in  priests  and  ministers 
now  as  ever.  But  in  the  coming  age  there  will  be  no  more  the  Canaanite — the 
mercenary  man  —  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  all  will  be  holy.  (Homilist.) 
Holiness  has  to  do  with  every  part  of  our  life  : — Religion  is  one  of  the  colours  of 
life  which  mingles  most  intimately  with  all  the  other  colours  of  the  palette.  It 
is  that  which  lends  them  their  appearance  of  depth,  and  the  best  of  their  brilliance. 
If  by  a  subtle  process  it  is  taken  away,  all  become  tarnished  and  discoloured. 
(W.  Mallock.)  Holiness  applies  to  common  things  : — I  pray  my  friends  not  to 
be  so  spiritual  that  they  cannot  do  a  good  day's  work,  or  give  full  measure,  or 
sell  honest  wares.  To  my  disgust,  I  have  known  persons  professing  to  have 
reached  perfect  purity  who  have  done  very  dirty  things.  I  have  been  suspicious 
of  superfine  spirituality  since  I  knew  one  who  took  no  interest  in  the  affairs  of 
this  world,  and  yet  speculated  till  he  lost  thousands  of  other  people's  money. 
Do  not  get  to  be  so  heavenly-minded  that  you  cannot  put  up  with  the  little 
vexations  of  the  family  ;  for  we  have  heard  of  people  of  whom  it  was  said  that 
the  sooner  they  went  to  heaven  the  better,  for  they  were  too  disagreeable  to  live 
writh  below.     (C.  H.  Spuryeon.)        Holiness  in  the  common  things  of  life  : — There 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ZECHARIAH.  247 

is  a  legend  of  an  artist  who  sought  for  a  piece  of  sandal-wood  out  of  which  to 
carve  a  Madonna.  At  last  he  was  about  to  give  up  in  despair,  leaving  the  vision 
of  his  life  xmrealised,  when  in  a  dream  he  was  bidden  to  shape  the  figure  from  a 
block  of  oakwood,  which  was  destined  for  the  fire.  Obeying  the  command,  he 
produced  from  the  log  of  common  firewood  a  masterpiece.  In  like  manner  many 
people  wait  for  great  and  brilliant  opportunities  for  doing  the  good  things,  the 
beautiful  things,  of  which  they  dream,  while,  through  all  the  plain,  common  days, 
the  very  opportunities  they  require  for  such  deeds  lie  close  to  them,  in  the  simplest 
and  most  familiar  passing  events,  and  in  the  homeliest  circumstances.  They 
wait  to  find  sandal-wood  out  of  which  to  carve  Madonnas,  while  far  more  lovely 
Madonnas  than  they  dream  of  are  hidden  in  the  common  logs  of  oak  they  burn  in 
their  open  fireplace,  or  spurn  with  their  feet  in  the  woodyard.  (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.) 
Holiness  unto  the  Lord  : — Holiness  stands  for  three  things — first,  and  in  its  deepest 
conception,  separation  from  sin  or  common  use,  as  the  one  day  in  the  week,  the 
one  mountain  of  Zion  amid  the  hills,  and  the  child  Samuel  in  his  mother's  home, 
dedicated  to  the  service  of  God.  Secondly,  holiness  stands  for  consecration  or 
devotion  to  God  ;  that  which  is  not  used  for  sin  is  set  apart  for  His  holy  service ; 
that  which  is  not  used  for  ordinary  purposes  is  dedicated,  like  the  communion 
plate,  to  one  most  holy  and  sacred  purpose.  Just  as  you  would  not  use  the  chalice 
or  paten  of  the  communion  for  any  common  meal,  however  m-gently  you  were 
pressed  to  it,  so  the  holy  thing  is  set  apart  for  God.  Thirdly,  holiness  impUes 
a  growing  capacity  for  the  likeness  of  God.  The  nature  which  is  yielded  to  God 
receives  more  of  God,  and,  by  receiving  God,  becomes  changed  into  the  likeness 
of  God.  So  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  was  engraven  as  a  sacred  motto  upon  the 
golden  plate,  on  Aaron's  forehead,  and  every  one  that  saw  the  high  priest  so 
arrayed  felt  that  there  was  a  rightness,  a  holy  fitness,  that  a  man  who  was  set 
apart  for  the  service  of  God's  house  should  wear  such  a  tablet.  Probably,  if  you 
were  told  that  you  should  daily  wear  a  similar  badge,  you  would  exclaim,  "  No, 
not  so.  I  am  quite  willing  to  be  a  Christian.  I  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  as  my 
Saviour.  I  am  looking  one  day  to  stand  before  Him,  rid  of  aU  imperfections 
and  impurity,  in  the  Temple  of  God,  but  I  dare  not  assume  that  title  now.  I  am 
not  holy.  I  know  it  myself,  and  those  that  know  me  best  would  confess  it  too. 
That  inscription  and  that  golden  plate  are  not  for  me."  Then  you  are  missing 
the  point  of  Zechariah's  conception  of  this  dispensation.  Anticipating  the  time 
in  which  we  live,  he  said,  "  The  Holy  Spirit  will  be  so  brought  within  the  reach 
of  ordinary  people  that  the  sacred  inscription  which  had  been  reserved  for  the 
high  priest  will  be  inscribed  upon  the  very  bells  of  their  horses'  gear,  while  the 
utensiLs  and  vessels  which  are  devoted  to  common  use  will  become,  as  it  were, 
dignified  and  sanctified,  as  much  so  as  altar  vessels  ;  while  those  which  the  priests 
employ  for  common  purposes  will  be  as  bowls  in  which  the  blood  of  the  victim  is 
received,  and  into  which  the  priest  dips  his  hand  to  sprinkle  the  blood  on  the 
Day  of  Atonement."  Three  words  wiU  indicate  our  line  of  thought,  namely, — 
Abolition,  Inclusion,  Elevation.  I.  Abolition.  There  is  an  abolition  in  our 
present  dispensation  of  the  old  distinction  between  sacred  and  secular.  Many 
people  live  in  two  houses — of  their  sacred  and  of  their  secular  duty ;  and  though 
they  pass  from  one  to  the  other  yet  there  is  a  distinct  demarcation  between  what 
they  are  at  sacred  hours  and  at  other  times.  People  seem  to  suppose  that  religion 
can  be  put  on  and  ofif  as  a  dress ;  that  it  is  separate  from  their  real  life ;  that  it 
resembles  undigested  food,  which  is  taken  into  the  body  but  does  not  become 
part  of  their  nature,  and  is  therefore  a  burden  and  inconvenience.  Now,  this 
cannot  be  right.  If  you  consider  the  genius  of  our  religion  the  idea  of  such  a 
partition  cannot  be  admitted  for  a  moment.  What  is  the  Christian  religion  ? 
A  creed  ?  A  performance  ?  A  donning  of  a  certain  outward  behaviour  or  habit  ? 
It  is  a  hfe  ;  and  siurely  life  must  express  itself  by  speech  and  act,  and  in  all  the 
various  outgoings  of  doing  and  suffering.  The  life  of  a  flower  must  always  exhale 
sweet  fragrance ;  the  life  of  a  bird  must  always  pour  itself  forth  in  carol  and  song ; 
the  life  of  a  fish  must  always  show  itself,  whether  it  flashes  up  from  the  surface  of 
the  water  or  buries  itself  in  the  depth.  So  the  life  of  God  always  expresses  itself ;  it 
is  not  located  in  certain  acts,  but  it  pervades  a  man  as  the  spirit  of  selfishness  might 
do.  A  student's  knowledge  will  affect  his  life  at  every  turn.  An  artist  cannot  find 
enjoyment  at  one  time  in  that  which  jars  on  his  well-balanced  tastes  at  another. 
So  when  we  receive  the  new  life  of  God  it  must  pour  out  through  the  channels  of 
our  whole  being ;  or,  if  ever  we  are  inconsistent  with  it,  it  will  rebuke  and  call  us 
back,  through  confession  and  prayer,  to  the  old  standard.    You  cannot  be  religious 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xir. 

there  and  irreligious  here  ;  if  you  have  life  it  wiU  show  itself  as  much  on  Monday 
as  Sunday.  Religion  is  also  a  recognition  of  Christ's  kingship,  the  presenting 
Him  with  the  keys  of  one's  whole  being.  But  if  you  are  only  going  to  serve  Christ 
on  certain  occasions,  and  on  Sundays,  there  are  six-sevenths  of  your  time  taken 
out  from  His  holy  government.  How  can  you  call  yourself  a  slave  of  Jesus  Christ 
if  you  are  only  serving  Him  in  certain  specified  duties  and  acts,  whilst  the  residue 
of  your  life  is  spent  according  to  your  whim  ?  Is  not  that  the  way  in  which  the 
wandering  tribes  of  Siberia  acknowledge  the  Tsar  of  Russia,  whilst  they  assert 
a  good  deal  of  autonomy  of  their  own  ?  Is  not  that  detrimental  to  all  consistency, 
all  true  devotion  and  consecration  ?  Does  the  planet  ever  leave  the  sphere  of 
the  sun's  influence  ?  Religion  is  a  testimony  to  the  world.  The  world  does  not 
come  to  our  places  of  worship  or  see  us  at  our  best ;  the  world  does  not  intrude 
upon  our  domestic  privacy,  and  overhear  our  prayers.  The  world  can  only  judge 
UB  when  we  cross  its  track,  when  we  are  engaged  in  the  same  duties  as  it  is  familiar 
with,  or  vmdergoing  privations  and  discipline  it  can  appreciate.  II.  Inclusion. 
The  Jews  were  forbidden  to  buy  or  own  horses.  Horses  were  identified  with 
war,  with  proud  display  and  show.  But  here  we  note  that  instead  of  the  horses 
being  kept  outside  the  national  life,  they  are  permitted,  and,  instead  of  their 
being  under  a  ban.  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  is  written  upon  their  bells — Calvin 
says  upon  their  blinkers.  In  the  old  times  men  said  that  religion  consisted  in 
their  attitude  towards  God,  and  that  therefore  everything  which  could  not  be 
directly  used  for  His  service  must  be  viewed  with  suspicion.  Hence  the  relation- 
ships of  family  life  were  carefully  abjured  by  monk  and  nun;  and  through  the 
iliddle  Ages  especially,  when  the  ascetic  idea  dominated  men,  we  have  hardly  any 
reference  to  natural  beauty.  The  Christian  idea  is  infinitely  preferable.  You 
may  have  your  horses,  but  they  must  be  consecrated.  You  may  have  the  horse- 
bells  to  make  sweet  music,  but  see  to  it  that  they  are  inscribed  with  Holiness 
unto  the  Lord.  You  may  have  the  vessels  and  implements  of  daily  service,  but 
mind  that  every  one  of  them  is  handled  as  the  bowls  of  the  altar.  Of  course, 
if  you  feel  that  certain  things,  which  are  innocent  in  themselves,  are  getting  too 
great  a  hold  upon  you,  or  are  influencing  other  people  wrongly,  then  you  are 
DOimd  to  put  them  away.  Whatever  you  may  do  rightly  you  may  do  for  Him, 
and  whatever  you  may  do  for  Him  you  are  right  in  doing.  III.  Elevation. 
Zechaxiah  says  that  there  is  to  be  no  distinction  between  sacred  and  secular, 
but  he  does  not  say  we  are  to  level  down  the  sacred  to  the  secular.  He  does  not 
say  that  the  holy  bowls  in  which  the  victim's  blood  was  caught  are  to  be  levelled 
down  to  that  of  the  other  vessels  of  the  Temple ;  but  that  the  ordinary  vessels 
are  to  be  levelled  up  to  these.  He  does  not  say  that  the  priest  is  to  take  off  his 
plate,  and  have  no  more  reverence  for  the  worship  of  God  than  he  felt  when  he 
went  to  saddle  his  horse  for  an  afternoon's  excursion,  but  that  he  is  to  saddle  his 
horses  for  his  pleasure  ride  with  the  same  reverence  and  devotion  to  God  as 
when  he  entered  the  temple  at  the  call  of  sacred  duty.  The  whole  tendency  of 
the  present  day  is  to  make  everything  equally  secular,  but  we  must  take  care  to 
make  everything  equally  sacred.  You  must  have  your  church,  that  your  work- 
shop may  become  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  your  chiurch;  you  must  have  your 
Bible  reading,  that  all  books  may  be  read  under  the  light  that  shines  from  your 
Bible ;  you  must  have  the  Lord's  Supper,  that  you  may  eat  and  drink  always  to 
the  glory  of  God.     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MALACHL 

I.  First  of  all,  we  are  to  look  at  the  world  in  which  this  prophet's  lot  was 
OAST,  the  character  of  his  contemporaries,  the  souls  with  which  he  had  to  deaL 
Let  us  suppose  that  more  than  ninety  years,  an  entire  century  almost,  have' 
passed  away  since  Haggai  and  Zechariah  began  to  preach  in  Jerusalem  to  the 
captives   who  hawi  returned  from   Babylon.     Artaxerxes  Longimanus  sits  now' 
on  the  throne  of  Persia,  and  is  the  sovereign  lord  to  whom  the  Hebrews  in  Judea- 
pay  allegiance  and  tribute.     It  is,  we  shall  say,  the  year  425  B.C.,  for  if  that' 
be  not  the  exact  date  it  cannot  be  very  far  removed  from  it.     The  second  Temple 
has  been  finished  long  since.     It  was  not  in  vain  that  Zechariah  encouraged 
the  restored  exiles  by  visions  and  predictions  to  be  up  and  doing.     Haggai's 
declarations  that  there  was  an  intimate  union  between  liberal  giving  to  the  Lord 
and  external   prosperity  were  uttered  to  good  purpose.     At  the  call  of  God's 
ambassadors  the    people    roused    themselves  from  their  unworthy   and  selfish 
lethargy.     They  built  the  sacred  walls  and  courts  and  pinnacles  with  zeal  and 
enthusiasm ;  before  long  the  hill  of  Zion  was  crowned  again  with  the  sanctuarx 
of  Jehovah.     There  succeeded  a  brief  season  of  spiritual  life  and  earnestness 
and  joy.     The  priests  offered  sacrifice  anew,  and  made  intercession  for  the  citizens^ 
within  the  Holy  House.     But  this  genial  summer  was  short-fived.     The  generation, 
to  which  Haggai  and  Zechariah ji^ke  witlL.sa£h  effect,  died  out  ere  long;  and' 
.^heir  succeSsofs  did_npt  roanilest  their  zealousdevotioi;^   They  were  remiss  and 
negligent!     The  city  whicnTEeirTathers  had  begun  to  rebuild  they  left  incomplete 
and  half -ruinous  ;  they  took  little  delight  in  the  Temple  which  their  fathers  had 
raised.     They  withheld  from   God  those  tithes   and  offerings   which  pertained 
to  Him  ;  and  when  they  did  bring  animals  for  sacrifice  on  His  altar,  they  werej 
often  the  very  poorest  of  the  flock — sheep  and  lambs  which  they  would  have, 
been  utterly  ashamed  to  present  to  their  Persian  governor.     Their  priests  were  • 
men  like  themselves.     They  cared  not  how  slovenly  the  Temple  service  might 
be.     They  came  far  short  of  realising  the  responsibilities  of  their  office.     They 
inflicted  daily   dishonour   on  the   God  whose  servants  they  called  themselves. 
Both  priests  and  people  intermarried  freely  with  aliens,  with  those  who  were 
strangers  to  the  commonwealth  and  the  covenant,  who  were  idolatrous  in  worship 
and  sinful  in  life.     Both  were  rapidly  growing  sceptical  alike  in  thought  and 
m  speech,  questioning  many  things  which  had  hitherto  been  most  surely  believed, 
avowing  their  increduhty  boldly  and  defiantly.     It  was  a  lamentable  change. 
Ihoring  these  days  of  reaction  and  retrogression,  two  visitcH^  came  to  Jerusalem 
fiom  the  Court  of  Persia — first  one  and  then  the  other.     They  were  Jews,  full 
of  patriotism,  and  anxious  to  see  how  it  fared  with  their  kinsfolk  in  the  city  of 
their  fathers.     The  first  of  them  was  Ezra,  the  priest  and  the  scribe.     It  was 
the  midsummer  of  the  year  459  when  he  arrived.     He  was  prepared  to  find  much 
that  was  disappointing  ;  he  knew  the  difficulties  with  which  the  Hebrew  colonists 
had  had  to  contend  ;  and  he  did  not  expect  to  discover  an  ideal  State  or  a  Church 
without  spot  and  stain.   But  the  actual  condition  of  affairs  astonished  and  dismayed 

iii 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MALACHI, 


him — those  unholy  marriages  with  the  heathen  most  of  all.  When  he  learned 
the  full  extent  of  the  evil,  "  he  tore  his  outer  cloak  from  top  to  bottom  ;  he  tore 
his  inner  garment  no  less ;  he  plucked  off  the  long  tresses  of  his  sacerdotal  locks, 
the  long  flakes  of  his  sacerdotal  beard  ;  and  thus,  with  dishevelled  hair  and  half- 
clothed  limbs,  he  sank  on  the  groimd,  crouched  Uke  one  thunderstruck,  through 
the  whole  of  a  day."  ^  Then,  eager  to  usher  in  a  better  era,  he  devoted  himself 
to  the  work  of  renovation ;  like  the  Baptist,  he  commanded  all — the  ministers 
of  rehgion  and  the  citizens  as  well — to  repent  of  their  sins ;  and  his  influence 
penetrated  far  and  near.  Fourteen  years  later,  the  second  visitor  came.  This 
was  Nehemiah,  a  young  Jew  of  noble  family,  who  had  filled  the  high  post  of 
chamberlain  to  the  Persian  king.  A  deep  and  brooding  anguish  possessed  him 
when  he  thought  of  the  city  of  his  ancestors  in  her  desolation  and  shame.  He 
begged  of  his  royal  master  permission  to  return  to  his  native  country  with  power 
to  rectify  the  disorders  which  vexed  him  so  keenly.  The  request  was  granted, 
and  he  started  with  escort  and  authority  to  accomphsh  the  desire  that  lay  near 
his  heart.  Through  twelve  summers  and  winters  he  remained  in  Judea  and 
acted  as  its  governor.  One  much-needed  reform  after  another  was  carried  through. 
The  fortifications  of  the  tov/n  were  raised  from  their  ruins.  The  nobles  were 
rebuked  for  their  iniquitous  exactions.  The  Levites  and  the  singers  were  bidden 
resume  their  duties  in  the  sacred  courts.  The  gates  were  closed  against  the 
merchants  who  came  with  their  laden  asses  on  the  Sabbath  day.  It  seemed 
as  if,  through  the  efforts  of  these  two — the  aged  scribe,  full  of  passionate  love 
for  the  ancient  law,  and  the  young  noble,  who  was  both  soldier  and  statesman — 
a  revival  of  a  genuine  and  permanent  kind  had  indeed  been  brought  about.  But 
the  morning  which  had  opened  so  clear  and  fair  was  destined  to  be  overclouded 
soon.  Nehemiah  went  back  for  a  short  time  to  the  covurt  of  Artaxerxes.  He 
was  not  long  absent ;  but  during  the  brief  interval,  when  the  strong  hand  of 
the  ruler  was  withdrawn,  the  Jews  reverted  to  their  old  misdemeanours  and  sins ; 
"  all  his  fences  and  their  whole  array  "  were  blown  to  the  ground.  When  he 
returned,  matters  were  even  worse  than  they  had  been  on  his  first  arrival.  Within 
the  family  of  the  high  priest  himself  an  odious  alliance  \vith  the  heathen  had  been 
contracted ;  one  of  the  young  men  of  his  house  had  taken  to  wife  the  daughter 
of  Sanballat,  the  very  ringleader  of  the  enemies  of  Judah.  The  Temple  service 
had  fallen  again  into  dishonour  and  neglect ;  God's  tithes  were  once  more  being 
denied  Him ;  the  Sabbath  trafiic  which  had  been  so  sternly  forbidden  was  prose- 
cuted as  vigorously  and  as  unblushingly  as  ever.  It  was  a  sad  relapse.  This 
was  the  time  in  which  Malachi  was  called  to  carry  "  the  burden  of  the  Word  of 
the  Lord."  We  may  beheve  that  his  solemn  threats  and  condemnations  rang 
through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  during  that  short  absence  of  Nehemiah  at  the 
Persian  Court.  But  before  we  glance  at  what  he  had  to  say  to  his  erring  country- 
men, there  is  a  question  which  confronts  us  of  a  fundamental  sort:  Was  there 
any  Malachi  at  all — any  person  who  actually  bore  this  name,  and  who  was  known 
by  it  among  his  fellow-citizens  ?  The  question  has  more  than  once  been  answered 
in  the  negative.  "  No,"  it  has  been  said,  "  there  was  no  prophet  called  Malachi. 
For  the  v\'ord  simply  means  '  the  messenger  of  God '  ;  and  beyond  doubt  it 
was  a  kind  of  epithet,  a  kind  of  official  title,  by  which  one  of  the  servants  of  Jehovah 
in  that  time  chose  to  designate  himself.  Perhaps  it  was  the  venerable  scribe 
Ezra ;  -  or  perhaps  it  was  Nehemiah,  the  Tirshatha  himself ;  or  perhaps — who 
knows  ? — it  was  one  of  the  angels  of  light  come  down  from  the  heavenly  places 
in  the  form  of  a  man,  to  do  God's  will  and  to  proclaim  His  grave  and  heavy  warn- 
ings. You  may  search  as  carefully  as  you  please  the  lists  which  are  given  in 
the  historical  books  of  those  who,  for  one  reason  or  another,  were  notable  in  the 
Jerusalem  of  the  day  ;  and  you  will  find  no  Malachi  among  them.  Evidently 
thetj  was  none.  The  name  indicates  the  work  done  by  him  who  bore  it ;  it  is 
nut  a  personal  designation  at  all."  That  has  been  the  opinion  of  not  a  few  both 
in  older  and  more  recent  times.  But  we  may  at  once  set  it  aside.  Malachi, 
like  that  greater  preacher  of  a  futmre  age  to  whom  he  point«<l  his  contemporaries 
forward,  may  be  only  a  "  voice  "  to  us  ;  of  his  career  and  history  we  know  abso- 
lutely nothing  ;  but  he  was  unquestionably  a  real  person,  and  this  was  his  proper 
name.     It  is  not  the  habit  of  the  prophets  to  prefix  descriptive  titles  to  their 

>  Stanley,  The  Jewish  Church. 

^  Calvin  is  disposed  to  identify  Malachi  with  Ezra. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MALACHI. 


books,  or  to  speak  of  themselves  only  by  the  office  which  they  held,  or  to  write 
tinder  some  nom  de  plume.  Each  of  them  tells  us  plainly  and  frankly  his  ordinary 
name  by  which  he  was  greeted  in  the  street  and  the  market  and  the  home.  And 
Malachi,  we  may  be  certain,  is  no  exception  to  the  rule.  He  was  distinct  from 
Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  less  famous  than  they,  but  not  a  whit  less  solicitous  about 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  reformation  of  Jerusalem.  Unconsciously  he  paints 
for  us,  I  think,  a  picture  of  himself  in  his  book,  when  he  speaks  of  the  little  com- 
panies of  God-fearing  Jews  who  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting  together  in  that 
wicked  time  to  converse  one  with  another  about  what  was  holy  and  spiritual, 
and  so  to  keep  their  own  souls  aglow  when  all  around  them  was  cold  and  frozen 
and  dead ;  if  we  could  have  entered  the  upper  room  where  these  few  disciples 
assembled,  we  should  certainly  have  found  Malachi  among  them.  These  were 
his  surroundings,  then ;  this  was  the  world  to  which  he  proclaimed  the  sorrow 
and  indignation  of  the  Lord,  which  were  his  own  sorrow  and  indignation  too. 
II,  But  let  us  txirn  now  to  consider  the  prophet's  message  to  the  men  of  his 
DAY.  Living  when  "  the  world  was  very  evil,"  what  had  he  to  say  to  it  ?  He 
sets  out  with  the  declaration  that  the  conduct  of  Judah  was  without  excuse. 
If  God  had  been  a  hard  taskmaster — if  He  had  shown  Himself  strict  to  mark 
iniquity,  and  unmindful  of  loyal  service  when  it  was  given  Him — there  might 
have  been  some  justification  for  the  ingratitude  of  Jerusalem.  But  it  was  not 
so.  God  had  dealt  with  the  Jews  in  sovereign  and  marvellous  love.  No  doubt 
they  questioned  His  compassion  and  grace.  Where  could  be  the  Divine  mercy 
towards  them,  they  asked,  when  they  were  a  people  scattered  and  peeled,  few 
in  number,  and  held  in  contempt  ?  The  answer  was  a  convincing  one.  Let  them 
look  across  the  borders  of  Judah,  east  and  south  to  the  blue  mountains  that  rose 
beyond  the  Dead  Sea — to  Edom,  a  nation  near  of  kin  to  themselves,  sprung  from 
Esau  as  they  were  sprung  from  Jacob.  They  might  be  poor  and  despised ;  but 
the  condition  of  Edom  was  tenfold  sadder  and  more  hopeless.  Its  rock-hewn 
cities  were  desolate.  Jackals  and  scorpions  made  them  their  home.  No  proud 
and  warlike  people  dwelt  in  them  any  more.  And  what  was  the  reason  of  the  differ- 
ence ?  Why  should  brother-races,  starting  from  the  same  mother's  knee,  be 
separated  by  so  wide  a  gulf,  the  one  utterly  destroyed,  the  other  spared  and 
blessed  ?  The  sole  cause  was  the  love  of  God.  Jacob  He  had  loved ;  Esau 
He  had  hated — and  that  was  why  Jerusalem  survived,  whilst  Petra  was  waste 
and  lonely,  its  pride  abased,  its  glory  departed.  Freely  and  spontaneously — 
patiently  and  fervently — God  had  loved  the  Jewish  people,  and  therefore  the 
sons  of  Jacob  were  not  consumed  as  the  sons  of  Esau  had  been  (i.  1-5). 
Having  thus  reminded  the  children  of  Israel  how  unreasonable  and  thankless 
their  conduct  was  in  rewarding  God  evil  for  His  good,  disobedience  and  neglect 
in  return  for  His  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercy,  Malachi  brings  against  his 
nation  an  indictment  which  has  three  counts  in  it.  First,  he  reproves  the 
priests  for  their  scandalous  negligence  in  the  management  of  the  Temple  worship. 
The  sacrifices  which  they  offered  at  the  altar  were  despicable  and  worthless. 
They  seemed  to  imagine  that  any  animal  was  good  enough  for  God — the  lame 
or  the  bhnd  that  had  become  useless  for  work,  the  maimed  or  the  torn,  the  beast 
that  was  dying  of  disease  and  could  not  be  presented  for  sale  in  the  market,  that 
which  had  been  stolen,  and  which  they  would  have  been  afraid  to  sell.  They 
grudged  the  best  of  their  possessions  to  Him  who  had  given  them  aU.  They 
dishonoured  God  openly  in  the  sight  of  man.  Would  that  there  were  someone 
to  shut  the  doors,  he  exclaimed,  that  this  profane  and  fruitless  worship  might 
be  carried  on  no  longer  !  He  takes  no  pleasure  in  those  who  do  not  come  with 
alacrity  to  His  house.  He  loveth  a  cheerful  giver  ;  but  souls  to  whom  His  service 
is  a  weary  burden — souls  that  grudge  Him  their  best  and  richest  treasures,  and 
can  spare  Him  only  that  which  costs  them  nothing — what  delight  can  He  take 
in  them  ?  The  second  accusation  which  Malachi  pronounces  against  his  country- 
men deals  with  a  flagrant  sin  both  of  priests  and  people — the  sin  of  intermarriage 
with  aliens.  These  alliances  between  the  sons  of  Judah  and  heathen  women 
awakened  in  the  prophet,  as  they  had  awakened  in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  the 
intensest  repugnance  and  alarm.  He  recognised  clearly  the  crime  of  Jerusalem 
in  contracting  wedlock  with  "  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god."  He  felt  that 
the  offenders  had  profaned  the  covenant  of  Jehovah.  His  sentence  went  forth 
against  them  sharp  and  strong,  "  The  Lord  will  cut  off  the  man  that  doeth  this, 
the  master  and  the  scholar."     Do  we  wonder  that  His  anger  should  be  so  hot 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MALACHI. 


and  fierce  ?  Do  we  say  that  alien  blood  ran  in  the  veins  of  David  himself,  the 
very  darling  of  Israel ;  and  that  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  who  became  the  ancestress 
of  the  king  and  of  One  greater  and  diviner  than  he,  is  pictiired  to  us  in  Scripture 
as  fair  and  sweet  and  holy,  "  a  perfect  woman  nobly  planned  "  ?  But  therein 
lies  the  difference.  She  gave  up  her  heathenism  when  she  entered  a  Jewish 
home  ;  "  thy  people  shall  be  my  people,"  she  told  Naomi  in  those  musical  words 
of  hers,  "  and  thy  God  shall  be  my  God."  It  was  otherwise  with  the  wives  of 
the  men  to  whom  Malachi  spoke.  They  continued  idolatresses,  reverencing 
Moloch  and  Chemoah  and  Baal  rather  than  Jehovah.  The  prophet  saw  that 
those  who  wedded  them  exposed  themselves  to  subtle  temptation  and  ran  fearful 
risk.  He  denounced  their  conduct  as  unpatriotic.  They  were  bringing  down 
to  the  common  earthly  level  the  holy  people  whom  God  loved.  They  were 
endangering  the  separate  existence  of  the  race  which  was  meant  to  be  a  hving 
witness  against  polytheism  and  sin.  They  were  destroying  the  barriers  which 
divided  it  from  the  ungodly  world.  God,  he  declared,  was  full  of  pity  for  the 
Hebrew  wives,  who  had  been  driven  from  hearth  and  home  in  order  that  outsiders 
might  step  into  their  prerogatives  and  privileges.  The  poor,  forsaken  Jewish 
women  had  covered  His  altar  "  with  tears,  with  weeping,  and  with  crying  out." 
Ah,  surely  sin  is  an  evil  thing  and  a  bitter.  It  had  akeady  led  many  a  Jew  to 
inflict  tills  sore  anguish  on  the  wife  of  his  youth ;  and  it  must  end  in  more  trouble 
still.  For,  much  as  the  God  of  Israel  hated  putting  away,  the  strange  women 
must  go.  They  might  plead  with  clinging  entreaties,  with  wild  reproaches, 
to  be  allowed  to  remain  ;  it  might  break  the  hearts  of  those  who  loved  them 
only  too  well  to  part  with  them  ;  but  in  this  way  alone  could  the  sin  of  Jerusalem 
be  removed  and  cleansed.  Men  cannot  have  the  friendship  both  of  God  and 
of  transgressors ;  they  must  choose  between  the  two.  Unless  we  are  putting 
away  from  us  everything  that  is  of  the  earth  earthy,  as  Malachi  bade  the  Jews 
put  away  their  heathen  consorts,  we  may  well  doubt  whether  we  are  true  sons 
and  daughters  of  the  Lord  (ii.  9-16).  The  prophet's  third  charge  against 
his  countrymen,  is  that  they  had  fallen  into  a  scepticism  which  questioned  moral 
distinctions  and  scoffed  at  God's  threatenings.  Living  so  long  in  Babylon,  meeting 
so  habitually  with  men  of  other  ways  of  thinking  than  their  own,  they  had  learned 
to  cavil  and  doubt  where  they  ought  to  have  believed.  "  Where  is  the  God 
of  judgment  ?  "  they  said.  The  very  form  into  which  the  sentences  of  the  Book 
are  thrown  indicates  the  infidelity  that  was  prevalent.  The  preacher  is  continually 
repeating  the  questions  which  he  heard  among  the  people.  "  Wherein  has  God 
loved  us  ?  "  and  "  Wherein  have  we  despised  His  name  ?  "  and  "  To  what 
profit  is  it  that  we  have  kept  His  ordinance,  and  that  we  have  walked  mournfully 
before  the  Lord  of  hosts  ?  "  Where  their  fathers  had  been  content  to  exercise 
a  childlike  faith,  the  Jews  of  Malachi's  time  were  ready  to  point  to  this  stumbling- 
block  and  to  that  contradiction.  Intellectually  they  were  more  active  than 
their  fathers ;  morally  they  were  more  distrustful  and  more  presumptuous ; 
in  their  case,  as  in  many  others,  the  reason  had  been  developed  at  the  expense 
of  the  heart.  But  the  prophet  assures  them  that  the  God  of  judgment,  about 
whose  existence  and  power  they  were  so  dubious,  would  manifest  Himself  soon 
in  a  way  they  could  not  mistake.  His  servant  Nehemiah  would  come  suddenly 
to  the  Temple  to  cleanse  it ;  he  would  be  a  swift  witness  against  the  wrongdoers 
of  the  city  ;  lie  would  appear  in  the  spirit  of  Elijah — the  stern  spirit  which  made 
an  end  of  idolaters  and  transgressors  ;  he  would  enforce  the  broken  law  of  Moses. 
And,  beyond  Nehemiah,  Malachi  beholds  a  greater  still,  the  New  Testament 
Elijah,  John  the  Baptist ;  and,  beyond  John,  One  nobler  even  than  he — One 
who  could  fitly  be  named  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  who  should  deal  in  integrity 
with  His  own  true  people,  and  should  trample  the  wicked  under  foot.  Then, 
by  the  confession  of  all,  it  would  be  well  with  the  godly  ;  then,  when  they  could 
find  no  place  for  repentance,  those  who  were  so  faithless  now  would  discover 
their  error  and  foolishness.  But  these  doubts,  which  the  men  of  the  prophet's 
age  raised  and  cherished — do  they  not  linger  among  us  to-day  ?  Are  not  w© 
inclined  sometimes  to  question  in  our  hearts  whether  there  can  be  a  God,  because 
He  hides  Himself,  and  leaves  His  people  in  trouble,  and  allows  their  enemies 
and  His  to  enjoy  a  time  of  prosperity  and  success  ?  We  overlook  the  disciphnary 
value  of  adversity  and  pain  and  loss — how  they  are  often  a  hundredfold  better 
for  us  than  an  easy  and  pleasant  life.  There  are  bright  touches  in  the  prevailing 
dark  of  Malachi's  prophecy  ;  in  his  chapters  gloom  and  glory  meet  together. 
Over  against  the  hireling  priests  he  places  the  likeness  of  a  true  priest   and 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MALACHI. 


Bervant  of  Jehovah  (ii.  5-7).  A  beautiful  miniature  it  is,  and  doubtless  it  was 
drawn  from  the  life.  Then,  too,  although  in  his  time  the  evil  far  outweighs 
the  good,  the  prophet  discovers  here  and  there  a  spot  of  heavenly  brightness. 
He  speaks  of  brotherhoods  of  congenial  souls,  bearing  a  silent  witness  for  God 
by  lives  of  consecration,  Unked  by  bonds  of  prayer  and  love,  handing  down  to 
their  successors  the  truth  which  heals  and  blesses  and  saves.  "  They  that  feared 
the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another,"  &c.  We  should  be  thankful  that  never, 
even  in  the  worst  days,  has  the  King  wanted  such  quiet  and  brave  and  steadfast 
servants.  They  are  the  very  salt  of  the  earth ;  they  are  the  light  of  the  world. 
(OrigiiMd  Secession  Magazine,) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


MALACHI. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Vbb.    I.    The    burden    of  the  Word    of  the   Lord   to   Israel    by    Malachl.— 

A  Divine  burden  : — Some  burdens  are  self-imposed ;  some  laid  upon  us  by  our 
fellow-men ;  some  by  God.  The  prophets  felt  that  the  Word  of  God  was  a  burden 
upon  their  souls.  I.  It  was  a  burden  op  Divtnh  eevelation.  Words  reveal. 
A  true  word  is  a  manifestation  of  the  soul.  God  was  known  by  the  utterances 
of  these  inspired  men.  His  Word  is  now  His  choicest  revelation.  His  Word 
is  true,  faithful,  precious,  enlightening,  saving,  eternal.  II.  It  is  a  bueden  borne 
BY  THE  HOLIEST  OF  MEN.  God  spcaks  through  men.  Many  holy  men  now  feel 
that  the  Word  of  God  is  in  them.  This  biu-den  should  be  borne  by  these  holy 
men,  humbly,  prayerfully,  thankfully,  and  conscientiously.  III.  It  is  a  burden 
BORNE  FOR  THE  WORLD.  God's  Word  must  not  be  hidden.  Truth  heard  in 
the  inner  sanctuary  of  the  soul  must  be  proclaimed  upon  the  housetops.  God's 
Word  is  for  aU  nations.  Whoever  has  it,  has  this  burden  for  the  world.  He 
must  carry  it  fearfully,  distinctly,  honestly,  and  unadulteratedly.  Let  the 
churches  pray  much  for  those  who  bear  the  burden  of  the  Word.  Often  they 
are  oppressed  with  their  responsibilities.  (W.  Osborne  Lilley.)  The  burden 
of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  : — The  prophets  of  old  were  no  triflers.  They  carried 
a  burden.  The  servants  of  God  mean  business ;  they  have  something  to  carry, 
worth  carrying.  Those  who  speak  for  God  must  not  speak  lightly.  God's  true 
servants,  who  are  burdened  with  His  Word,  right  willingly  and  cheerfully  carry 
that  burden.  We  bear  a  burden  indeed,  but  we  should  be  sorry  not  to  bear 
it.  I.  Why  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord  a  burden  to  him  that  speaketh  it  ? 
It  is  a  burden  because  it  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  1.  The  Word  of  the  Lord 
becomes  a  burden  in  the  reception  of  it.  No  man  can  preach  the  Gospel  aright 
until  he  has  had  it  borne  into  his  own  soul  with  overwhelming  energy.  True 
preaching  is  artesian,  it  wells  up  from  the  great  depths  of  the  soul.  2.  The 
Word  of  God  is  a  burden  in  the  delivery  of  it.  He  that  finds  it  easy  to  preach, 
will  find  it  hard  work  to  give  an  account  of  his  preaching  at  the  last  great  day. 
To  speak  aright,  God's  Word  beneath  the  Divine  influence  is,  in  the  speaking 
as  well  as  in  the  getting  of  the  message,  the  burden  of  the  Lord.  3.  When  we 
have  preached,  the  Gospel  becomes  a  burden  in  after  consideration.  If  God 
Bends  any  of  us  to  do  good  to  our  fellow-men,  and  to  speak  in  His  name,  the  souls 
of  men  will  be  a  perpetual  burden  to  us.  II.  It  is  a  burden  because  of  what 
it  is.  What  is  it  that  the  true  servant  of  God  has  to  bear  and  preach  ?  1.  It 
is  the  rebuke  of  sin.  If  a  man  bears  the  burden  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  he 
speaks  most  to  his  people  upon  the  evil  of  which  they  are  most  guilty.  Every 
true  preacher  must  be  careless  of  man's  esteem,  and  speak  faithfully ;  but  this 
is  a  burden  to  one  of  a  tender  spirit.  2.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  gives  a  rebuff 
to  human  pride.  The  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  seem  shaped  on  purpose,  among 
other  objects,  to  bring  into  contempt  all  human  glory.  So  human  nature  does 
not  like  our  message.  And  such  preaching  becomes  the  burden  of  the  Lord. 
3.  The  true  preacher  has  to  come  into  contact  with  the  vanity  of  human  intellect. 
The  things  of  God  are  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  but  revealed  unto  babes ; 
and  the  wise  fcnd  prudent  are  indignant  at  this  act  of  Divine  sovereignty.     To 

I 


2  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

face  false  science  with  the  "  polishness  of  preaching,"  and  to  set  up  the  Cross 
in  the  teeth  of  learned  self-suflSciency,  is  a  burden  from  the  Lord.  4.  The  most 
heavy  burden  is  that  which  concerns  the  future.  We  are  heavy  at  heart  for 
the  many  who  wUl  not  turn  to  God,  but  persist  in  destroying  their  own  souls  for 
ever.  III.  It  is  a  burden  because  of  the  consequences  of  our  bearing 
IT  to  you.  Suppose  that  we  do  not  preach  the  Gospel,  and  warn  the  wicked 
man.  so  that  he  turn  not  from  his  iniquity,  what  then  ?  "  He  shall  perish,  but 
his  blood  mil  I  require  at  thy  hand."  What  will  my  Lord  say  to  me  if  I  am 
unfaithful  to  you  ?  Then  it  becomes  a  great  burden  to  me  to  preach  the  Gospel 
when  I  think  of  what  those  lose  who  will  not  have  it.  IV.  It  is  often  the  burden 
of  the  Lord,  because  of  the  way  in  which  men  treat  the  Word  of  God. 
Some  trifle  with  it.  The  preoccupation  of  human  minds  makes  it  such  a  burden 
when  we  are  in  earnest  to  reach  the  heart  and  win  the  soul.  Quite  a  number 
hear  with  considerable  attention,  but  forget  all  that  they  hear.  The  sermon 
is  all  done  with  when  they  have  done  hearing  it.  There  are  even  some  that  hear 
to  ridicule.  The  preacher  is  in  anguish  to  save  a  soul,  and  they  are  thinking 
about  how  he  pronounces  a  word.  V.  It  is  a  burden  when  the  preacher 
remembers  that  he  will  have  to  give  an  account.  There  will  come  a  time 
when  it  will  be  said,  "  Preacher,  give  an  account  of  your  stewardship."  Re- 
member the  great  Lord  of  all  true  Gospel  preachers  bore  a  far  heavier  burden 
than  we.  Since  it  is  a  burden  in  itself,  I  ask  you  not  to  make  it  any  heavier. 
You  add  to  my  burden,  if  you  do  not  aid  me  in  the  Lord's  work.  But  the  greatest 
increase  of  my  burden  comes  from  those  who  do  not  receive  the  Gospel  at  all. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Was  not  Esau  Jacob's  brother  ?  saith  the  Lord :  yet  I  loved  Jacob, 
and  I  hated  Esau,  and  laid  his  mountains  and  his  heritage  waste  for  the  dragons 
of  the  wilderness. — Jacob  :  —  From  the  fate  of  the  hunter  Esau,  we  learn 
the  peril  of  life's  low  ideals  ;  the  power  of  life's  crucial  moments  ;  the  continuity 
of  life's  irrevocable  retributions  ;  the  anguish  of  life's  fruitless  tears.  The  fortunes 
of  Jacob  are  indeed  too  eventful,  his  character  too  complex,  to  allow  any  attempt 
at  exhaustive  analysis.  But  we  may  learn  something  which  wiU  aid  us  in  our 
daily  difficult  endeavour  to  choose  the  good  and  not  the  evil,  and  to  give  our 
hearts  and  lives  to  God.  1.  "  I  loved  Jacob,  and  hated  Esau."  Does  not  our 
first  instinct  almost  rebel  against  this  appeal  ?  Do  we  not  incline  to  prefer  the 
elder,  for  all  his  frank  earthliness,  to  the  younger,  with  his  mean  servilities  and 
subterranean  shifts  ?  Yet  there  the  sentence  stands  ;  and  all  Scripture,  and 
the  long  centuries  of  human  history,  set  the  seal  of  confirmation  to  the  sacred 
verdict.  The  Aryan  has  prevailed  in  war  and  civilisation,  but  in  all  other  things 
the  Semite  conquered  his  conqueror.  More  than  any  other  nation,  the  Hebrew 
realised  the  intense  grandeur  and  infinite  supremacy  of  the  moral  law,  and  saw 
that  the  greatest  and  most  awful  aim  for  human  life  is  not  culture,  but  conduct. 
Let  us  see  why  Jacob,  who  seems  to  concentrate  all  the  worst  faults  which  we 
associate  with  the  lowest  type  of  Jewish  character,  is  yet  prefei-red  to  his  more 
gallant  and  manly  brother.  2.  Let  me  reject  at  once  two  solutions  of  it.  Some 
would  settle  it  on  the  broad  grounds  of  predestinated  election  and  arbitrary 
decree,  and  would  confuse  our  understanding  with  reasonings  high  of  freedom 
and  foreknowledge,  will  and  fate.  Others  think  it  sufficient  to  silence  us  with 
the  triumphant  assertion,  that  we  are  but  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter,  that 
God  may  treat  us  as  He  wills.  Others,  again,  argue  that  we  must  not  judge 
Jacob's  sins  as  though  they  were  sinful,  because  Scriptiu-e  records  them  without 
distinct  condemnation,  and  because  he  may  have  been  acting  under  Divine 
directions.  I  do  not  only  reject  all  such  solutions,  I  declare  the  first  to  be 
blasphemous,  and  the  second  deplorable.  God  is  no  arbitrary  tyrant,  but  a 
merciful,  loving,  righteous  Father.  And  the  moral  law,  in  its  inviolable  majesty, 
infinitely  transcends  the  wretched  "  idols  of  the  theatre  "  which  men  have  called 
theories  of  inspiration.  If  God  chose  Jacob,  it  was  because  the  true  nature  of 
Jacob  was  intrinsically  worthy  of  that  choice.  3.  According  to  the  Hebrew 
idiom,  the  strong  antithesis  of  the  text  connotes  less  than  it  asserts,  being  but 
a  more  intense  way  of  saying  that,  in  comparison  with  his  brother,  Esau  neither 
deserved  nor  received  the  approval  of  God.  A  second  abatement — though  not 
removal — of  the  difficulty  lies  in  the  fact  that  Jacob  seems  worse  to  us  because 
his  faults  were  essentially  those  of  an  Oriental,  and  are  therefore  peculiarly 
offensive  to  the  heart  of  a  true  Englishman.     And  long  may  falseness  and  mean- 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  3 

ness  be  utterly  abhorrent  to  our  Northern  character  !  But  our  special  national 
scorn  of  Jacob's  deceitfulness  does  not  make  it  one  whit  more  contemptible  than 
Esau's  animalism.  4.  Herein  lies  the  first  great  moral  of  these  two  lives.  That 
which  is  holy  is  not  to  be  cast  to  the  dogs.  Esau  lost  the  blessing  because  he 
recked  not  of  it.  Jacob  gained  it,  because  his  whole  soul  yearned  for  its  loftiest 
hopes.  Men,  on  the  whole,  do  win  what  they  will :  they  do  achieve  that  at  which 
they  resolutely  aim.  This  is  perfectly  true  in  worldly  things.  But  there  is 
one  ambition  which  is  worth  the  absorbing  devotion  of  a  human  being. 
It  is  the  ambition  of  holiness,  the  treasure  of  eternity,  the  object 
of  seeing  the  face  of  God.  5.  What  a  difference  is  made  by  different  ideals. 
Each  of  these  twin-brothers  lost  and  gained  much  more  beside  their  immediate 
wish.  Esau  the  rough  becomes  by  scornful  memorial  Edom  the  red  ;  Jacob 
the  supplanter  becomes  Israel  the  prince  with  God.  6.  Another  lesson  is,  that 
however  lofty  be  our  aims,  we  must  not,  in  order  to  hasten  them,  deflect,  were 
it  but  one  hair's  breadth,  from  the  path  of  perfect  rectitude.  Jacob  inherited 
the  blessing  because  his  faith  yearned  for  its  spiritual  promises  ;  but  because 
he  compassed  its  immediate  achievement  by  a  crime,  therefore,  with  the  blessing 
there  fell  on  him  a  retribution  so  heavy,  so  unremitted,  as  made  his  look  back 
over  life  a  bitter  pain.  7.  In  spite  of  all  which  stained  his  life,  Jacob  was  still 
a  patriarch  and  a  saint.  You  must  not  judge  of  him  as  a  whole  by  the  instances, 
so  faithfully  recorded,  of  his  guilty  plottings.  In  two  main  respects  Jacob  was 
certainly  greater,  better,  and  worthier  than  Esau.  The  sins  of  Esau's  life  were, 
eo  to  speak,  the  very  narrative  ;  the  sins  of  Jacob's  life  were  but  the  episode 
of  his  career.  8.  There  is  this  further  difference.  There  is  not  the  faintest  sign 
that  Esau  ever  repented  of  his  sin.  But  in  Jacob's  life  there  was  many  a  moment 
when  he  would  have  forfeited  the  very  blessing  to  purchase  back  the  innocence 
by  which  it  had  been  gained.  Learn  lastly,  that  the  continuity  of  godliness 
is  the  choicest  gift  of  all,  and  innocence  is  better  than  repentance.  And  we  see 
in  the  case  of  Esau's  red  pottage  and  ravenous  hour,  that  one  failure  under  sudden 
temptation  may  be  alike  the  ruin  and  epitome  of  a  man's  career,  because  the 
impulse  of  the  hour  is  nothing  less  than  the  momentum  of  the  life.  {Dean  Farrar.) 
The  sovereignty  of  Ood  in  relation  to  man's  seciUar  condition  of  life : — 1.  Some  men 
on  this  earth  seem  to  be  more  favoured  by  providence  than  others,  yet  they  are 
often  unconscious  of  it.  This  is  true  of  individuals,  and  of  nations.  2.  This 
difference  in  the  privileges  of  men  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  sovereignty  of  God. 
That  sovereignty  does  not  imply  either  partiality  on  His  part,  or  irresponsibleness 
on  man's  part.  3.  Those  whom  the  sovereignty  of  God  does  not  favour  are  left  in 
a  secularly  unenviable  condition.  They  will — (1)  Have  their  possessions  destroyed. 
(2)  Their  efforts  frustrated.  (3)  Their  enemies  prospering.  (Homilist.)  God's 
love  to  His  Chvrch : — The  first  fault  reproved  in  this  people  is  their  ingratitude, 
and  not  observing  or  esteeming  of  God's  love  toward  them,  which  therefore  He 
demonstrates.,  from  His  choosing  of  Jacob  their  father,  and  preferring  him  to 
Esau  the  elder  brother  ;  not  only  in  the  matter  of  election  to  eternal  life,  but 
in  that  God  had  chosen  Jacob  to  be  the  root  out  of  whom  the  blessed  seed  should 
come,  and  the  Church  propagated  in  his  posterity ;  and  accordingly  (as  an  eternal 
evidence  of  this  rejection  of  Esau  and  his  posterity)  the  Lord  had  given  to  him 
but  a  hilly,  barren  country,  and  had  now  cast  them  out  of  it,  and  laid  it  desolate, 
as  a  habitation  for  wild  beasts ;  whereas  the  seed  of  Jacob  had  gotten  a  fruitful 
land,  and  were  now  restored  to  it  again  after  their  captivity.  Doctrine — I.  The 
chief  and  principal  study  of  the  visible  Church,  and  the  godly  in  it,  ought  to 
be  the  love  of  God  manifested  toward  them,  as  being  that  which  God  will  not 
allow  to  be  suspected,  and  which  ought  to  oblige  them  to  Him ;  that  which  will 
be  the  sad  ground  of  a  process  when  it  is  forgotten  and  undervalued  ;  and  that 
which,  being  looked  on  when  God  reproves,  will  encourage  and  strengthen  to 
take  with  it,  and  make  use  of  it.  Therefore  doth  He  begin  this  doctrine,  and 
the  sad  challenges  with  this,  "  I  have  loved  you,  saith  the  Lord,"  that  is,  all  of 
you  in  general  have  tasted  of  respects  suitable,  and  beseeming  My  Bride  and 
the  visible  Church  ;  and  particularly  the  elect  among  you  have  tasted  of  My 
special  love.  2.  God's  love  to  His  Church  is  often  met  with  great  ingratitude, 
in  not  being  seen  and  acknowledged  as  becomes,  especially  under  cross  dispen- 
sations, in  undervaluing  the  effects  of  it,  when  they  fit  not  our  mould,  and  in 
deeds  denying  it,  while  thoughts  of  it  do  not  beget  love  to  Him  again ;  for  "  yet 
ye  say,  wherein  hast  Thou  loved  us  ?  "  3.  Election  unto  eternal  life  is  a  sufficient 
teBtimony  of  God's  love,  to  be  acknowledged  and  commended,  although  all  things 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

else  went  cross,  and  seemed  to  speak  disrespect :  for  in  this — "  The  Lord  loved 
Jacob,  and  hated  Esau,"  as  is  exponed  (Rom.  ix.  13);  and  this  is  sufficient  to 
answer  their  quarrelling.  4.  To  be  chosen  and  selected  to  be  the  Lord's  Church 
and  people,  speaks  so  much  respect  from  God  unto  a  nation,  as  may  counter- 
balance many  other  hard  lots.  5.  The  Lord's  love  will  not  be  so  clearly  seen 
and  acknowledged,  when  we  compare  some  dispensations  with  the  privileges 
bestowed  upon  us,  but  when  we  consider  our  own  original,  and  wherein  we  arc 
dealt  favourably  with  beyond  others,  as  good  as  ourselves,  if  not  better :  for 
however  Israel,  looking  on  their  many  privileges,  could  not  see  God's  love  in 
their  low  condition,  yet  it  would  better  appear  when  they  looked  back  that  "  Esau 
was  Jacob's  brother  "  (and  the  elder  too),  yet  "  I  loved  Jacob  and  hated  Esau." 
6.  The  grace  of  God  is  not  dispensed  differently  in  the  world,  upon  any  difference 
in  the  point  of  worth  among  men  :  but  grace  itseK  makes  the  difference  in  choosing 
out  one,  and  leaving  another,  as  good  in  himself,  to  his  own  ways,  according  to 
His  pleasure,  who  hath  mercy  on  whom  He  will  have  mercy,  for  Jacob  and  Esau 
are  equal,  till  love  makes  the  difference.  7.  However,  no  man  can  knov/  love 
or  hatred  by  outward  dispensations,  simply  considered  in  themselves,  yet  afflictions 
are  to  wicked  men  real  testimonies  of  God's  displeasure,  and  God's  people,  being 
at  peace  with  Him,  may  look  on  external  mercies  as  speaking  special  love ;  for 
Esau's  hilly  land,  and  the  desolation  thereof,  speaks  "  hating  of  Esau,"  not  only 
as  rejection  from  Canaan  was  a  type  of  the  rejection  from  the  Church  and  heaven, 
but  as  it  was  a  judgment  inflicted  on  a  nation  imreconciled,  whereas  (at  least) 
the  godly  in  Israel  might  look  otherwise  on  their  land  and  restitution.  {George 
Hutcheson. )  The  love  of  God  undiscerned  : — God  is  love.  This  is  true  even 
when  He  afflicts,  for  whom  He  loveth  He  chasteneth.  We  must  not  therefore 
infer  that  He  does  not  love  because  He  afflicts.  The  gardener  primes  the  grape 
which  he  values,  not  the  thistle  which  he  hates.  The  fruit-tree  that  is  highly 
prized  is  trimmed  that  it  may  bear  more  fruit :  the  forest  tree  that  is  designed 
for  the  flames  is  left  to  grow  in  impruned  luxuriance.  God  still  addresses  us 
with  the  same  touching  appeal,  "  I  have  loved  you,"  and  He  still  meets  the 
same  hard,  ungrateful  response,  "  Wherein  hast  Thou  loved  us  ?  "  Men  suffer 
many  forms  of  outward  evil  and  inward  grief  because  of  their  sins  ;  but  instead 
of  referring  them  to  the  proper  cause — their  own  wickedness — they  impiously 
accuse  God  in  their  hearts  of  being  indifferent  to  their  welfare.  They  refuse 
to  look  at  the  tokens  of  love  strewed  all  along  their  history,  and  dwell  in  obstinate 
ingratitude  on  the  evils  that  their  own  sin  has  entailed  upon  them.  And  yet 
that  history  is  crowded  with  such  tokens.  (T.  V.  Moore,  D.D.)  A  remon- 
strance : — I.  The  prophet's  eepboof.  He  is,  in  the  name  of  God,  taxing  the 
people  with  ingratitude.  There  is  no  sin  more  hateful  to  God  than  the  sin 
of  ingratitude.  Another  charge  is  that  of  neglect.  They  offer  a  polluted  sacrifice. 
All  they  want  is  a  cheap  religion.  They  are  wilUng  to  make  some  offering, 
but  not  the  best  offering.  They  would  be  glad  to  do  something  for  God,  but 
it  must  cost  them  nothing.  II.  The  threat.  There  should,  in  consequence, 
be  the  rejection  of  their  prayers,  the  rejection  of  their  persons,  and  the  rejection 
of  their  services,  and  a  transfer  of  their  privileges  to  others.  III.  Practical 
LESSONS.  1.  God's  service  is  a  real  service,  not  a  nominal  service.  Forniahty 
is  not  enough.  2.  It  is  a  sure  sign  of  want  of  grace  in  your  hearts,  when  God's 
service  is  a  weariness.  3.  Confidence  in  God  is  a  necessary  part  of  acceptable 
prayer    and    acceptable    service.     (Montagu     Villiers,    M.A.)  God'3    declared 

hatred  of  Edom  : — The  two  nations,  Israel  and  Edom.  were  utterly  opposed  in 
genius  and  character.  Edom  was  a  people  of  as  unspiritual  and  self-sufficient 
a  temper  as  ever  cursed  any  of  God's  human  creatiucs.  Like  their  ancestor 
they  were  "  profane,"  without  rejjentance,  humility,  or  ideals,  and  almost  without 
religion.  Apart,  therefore,  from  the  long  history  of  war  between  the  two  pcoj)ics, 
it  was  a  true  instinct  which  led  Israel  to  regard  their  brother  as  representative 
of  that  heathendom  against  which  they  had  to  reaUse  their  destiny  in  the  world 
as  God's  own  nation.  In  choosing  the  contra'<t  of  Edom's  fate  to  illustrate  God's 
love  for  Israel,  "  Malachi  "  was  not  only  choosing  what  would  ap})eal  to  the 
passions  of  his  contemporaries,  but  what  is  the  most  striking  and  constant  anti- 
thesis in  the  whole  history  of  Israel :  the  absolutely  diverse  genius  and  destiny 
of  these  two  Semitic  nations  who  were  nearest  neighbours,  and,  according  to 
their  traditions,  twin  brethren  after  the  flesh.  If  we  keep  this  in  mind  we  shall 
understand  Paul's  use  of  the  antithesis  in  the  passage  in  which  he  clenches  it 
by  a  quutation  from  Malachi :  "  as  it  is  written,  Jacob  have  I  loved,  but  Esau 


CHAP.  L]  MALACHI.  5 

have  I  hated."  In  these  words  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  election  of  individuals 
appears  to  be  expressed  as  absolutely  as  possible.  But  it  would  be  unfair  to  read 
the  passage  except  in  the  light  of  Israel's  history.  In  the  Old  Testament  it  is 
a  matter  of  fact  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  preference  of  Israel  to  Esau 
appeared  only  after  the  respective  characters  of  the  nations  were  manifested 
in  history,  and  that  it  grew  more  defined  and  absolute  only  as  history  discovered 
more  of  the  fimdamental  contrast  between  the  two  in  genius  and  destiny.  In 
the  Old  Testament,  therefore,  the  doctrine  is  the  residt,  not  of  an  arbitrary  beHef 
in  God's  bare  fiat,  but  of  historical  experience  ;  although,  of  course,  the  distinction 
which  experience  proves  is  traced  back,  with  everything  else  of  good  or  evil  that 
happens,  to  the  sovereign  will  and  purpose  of  God.  Nor  let  us  forget  that  the 
Old  Testament  doctrine  of  election  is  of  election  to  service  only.  That  is  to 
say,  the  Divine  intention  in  electing  covers  not  the  elect  individual  or  nation 
oEJy,  but  the  whole  world,  and  its  need  of  God  and  His  truth.  The  event  to 
which  "  Malachi  "  appeals  as  evidence  for  God's  rejection  of  Edom  is  the  deso- 
lation of  the  latter's  ancient  heritage,  and  the  abandonment  to  the  "  jackals  of 
the  desert."  {Geo.  Adam  Smith,  D.D.)  Election  : — Why  should  God  say, 
Jacob  I  loved,  Esau  I  hated  ?  Why  should  He  choose  one  nation  of  the  earth 
to  favour  beyond  all  others  ?  Is  not  that  an  arbitrary  and  unfair  exercise  of 
His  will  ?  Now,  no  doubt  that  is  the  case  if  we  only  put  on  election  the  inter- 
pretation common  among  the  later  Jews,  and  the  one  most  familiar  to  ourselves. 
We  need  to  correct  it  by  the  larger  ideas  which  St.  Paul  suggests  to  us,  and  which 
are,  at  least,  latent  in  the  Old  Testament.  For  one  thing,  let  us  remember  that 
God's  purposes  are  wider  than  anything  we  can  conceive  of,  and  that  we  have 
to  make  allowances  for  that,  whenever  we  seek  to  understand  or  criticise  His 
providential  deaUngs.  As  St.  Paul  tried  to  teach  the  Christians  in  Rome,  God 
chose  Israel  not  for  the  sake  of  Israel  alone,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  world.  To 
him  this  explains  at  once  the  apparent  arbitrariness  of  the  choice,  and  the  narrow- 
ness of  the  groove  within  which  Israel  had  moved.  God  elected  and  trained 
the  people  for  a  certain  special  end.  It  was  not  that  by  natine  they  were  specially 
fitted  for  that  end,  but  rather  that  they  were  made  to  fit  it  by  His  grace.  Here 
is  one  Semitic  people  out  of  many  showing  a  pecuUar  temperament  and  genius 
for  religion,  and  subjected  to  influences  all  of  which  tended  to  emphasise  its  peculi- 
arities and  fit  it  for  its  destiny  among  mankind.  And  its  history  can  only  be 
read  aright  in  the  light  of  some  larger  and  even  world-wide  scheme,  which  it 
was  being  prepared  to  fulfil.  But,  of  com-se,  it  is  not  only  in  Israel,  or,  indeed, 
in  any  of  the  nations  of  the  world,  that  this  apparent  arbitrariness  of  Providence 
is  to  be  seen.  It  runs  through  human  hfe.  Take  the  story  of  Jacob  and  Esau, 
as  only  referring  to  the  men  themselves,  and  we  find  that  it  is  one  that  is  con- 
stantly repeated  in  our  experience.  The  inequahty  of  human  destinies  is  one 
of  the  stock  themes  of  the  pessimist ;  one  man  is  chosen  and  another  rejected, 
and  it  is  certainly  not  of  works  but  of  Him  that  calleth.  One  of  the  most  dis- 
concerting things  in  all  our  experience  is  the  apparent  failure  of  goodness  to  secure 
its  reward.  Sometimes  it  is  the  most  unworthy  who  is  selected  for  the  crown, 
while  the  saint  is  passed  by  or  made  to  stoop  vmder  the  cross.  Then  men  enter 
for  the  race  of  life  strangely  and  even  unfairly  handicapped.  One  man  inherits 
a  physique  and  a  nervous  system  which  means  a  happy  temperament  and  un- 
usual strength  of  charact-er;  another  is  the  victim  of  congenital  weakness,  which 
dooms  him  to  much  misery  and  possibly  to  sin.  One  man  is  elected  to  conditions 
altogether  favovu-able  to  the  development  of  his  higher  self,  while  another's  cir- 
cumstances tend  constantly  to  drag  him  down.  We  have  all  experienced  at 
times  the  bafiling  and  tragic  sense  of  wrong  to  which  such  thoughts  as  these  give 
rise.  But  do  we  remember  that  most  of  our  perplexity  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
we  confine  our  views  to  the  earthly  and  material  side  of  fife  ?  We  have  to  take 
much  else  into  account  before  we  can  hope  to  face  the  prospect  which  God's  pro- 
vidence presents  with  anything  like  equanimity.  His  purposes  are  surely  not 
confined  in  their  scope  either  to  the  Uves  of  individuals  or  to  this  world  in  which 
we  now  live  in  the  flesh.  Nor  is  the  supreme  object  of  His  dealing  with  us  the 
happiness  of  many  or  of  most.  If  we  are  to  trust  all  the  indications  of  natural 
and  revealed  refigion,  God's  purpose  is  supremely  ethical.  In  His  eyes  goodness 
is  as  far  above  happiness  as  heaven  is  above  the  earth ;  and  that  even  happiness 
should  be  sacrificed  that  high  moral  ends  may  be  secured  is  something  which 
should  cause  us  no  concern.  Then,  again,  if  we  have  read  our  Bibles  to  any 
purpose,  or  even  studied  intelligently  the  average  experiences  of  men,  we  shall 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [c!hap.  i. 

know  that  no  view  of  life  which  leaves  out  of  account  its  spiritual  aspect  can 
be  either  just  or  sane.  We  cannot,  gaze  as  we  will,  see  the  end  from  the  beginning. 
Events  that  seem  most  contrary  and  cruel  in  our  experience  have  in  them  a  soul 
of  goodness  for  those  that  have  eyes  to  see.  The  wicked  may  flourish  hke  a  green 
bay-tree,  but  he  perishes  Uke  the  green  bay-tree  too  when  his  time  comes  j  and 
the  righteous  may  obtain  no  reward  but  that  of  a  good  conscience,  yet  in  the 
end  he  is  received  into  everlasting  habitations.  There  is  more  being  done  all 
round  us  to  redress  the  balance  than  we  have  any  conception  of,  but  it  is  not 
until  we  come  to  look  at  life  fiom  a  higher  standpoint  than  that  of  mere  earthly 
interests  that  we  can  see  it.  The  work  of  Providence  in  a  man's  hfe  is  not  finished 
when  the  man  himself  has  passed  away  ;  sometimes  it  is  only  just  begun.  But 
we  need  to  bear  in  mind  that  God's  election  of  a  man  or  of  a  race  is  not  always, 
as  we  think,  an  election  to  favour  or  privilege  alone.  Under  Providence  special 
privilege  means  special  responsibihties,  and  election  is  election  to  service.  Men 
and  nations  alike  are  instruments  in  God's  haiads,  and  He  makes  them  serve 
His  ends.  Where  there  is  a  special  endowment  or  fitness,  there  is  a  special  fimction 
to  be  fulfilled,  and  this  fimction  is  one  in  which  many  have  an  interest  outside 
the  individual.  We  must  learn  to  judge  therefore  in  the  Hght,  not  only  of  the 
special  endowment  given,  but  of  the  special  ends  to  be  served  by  it.  The  history 
of  Israel,  for  example,  were  almost  inexplicable  apart  from  its  results  on  the 
religion  of  mankiad.  The  key  to  it  is  to  be  found  not  in  Moses  or  the  prophets 
or  the  rabbis,  but  in  Christ.  The  people  had  been  fitted  for  a  particular  work, 
and  it  was  their  fitness  which  constituted  their  election.  This  helps  to  explain 
the  strange  one-sidedness  there  is  in  national  Hfe.  It  is  a  question  of  selection 
as  well  as  election,  the  power  or  faculty  most  regularly  employed  growing  at 
the  expense  of  the  rest.  And  to  the  religious  mind  each  nation  aUke  is  an  in- 
strument of  Providence,  and  in  them  all  is  to  be  seen  something  of  the  grand 
purpose  of  God  working  itself  out  slowly  but  surely,  through  difficulty  and  apparent 
defeat,  towards  that  best  which  is  yet  to  be.  But  we  need  to  come  a  little  closer 
to  the  subject  yet.  All  that  has  been  said  may  be  quite  true,  but  it  does  not 
dispose  of  the  difficulty  in  our  text.  There  may  be  a  great  deal  to  be  said  for  the 
doctrine  of  election  in  the  abstract ;  but  when  it  is  couched  in  such  language  as 
this,  "  Jacob  I  loved,  but  Esau  I  hated,"  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  a  sense  of  imdue 
favouritism,  and  the  thought  that  God  is,  after  all,  a  respecter  of  persons,  in  the 
sense  of  having  personal  preferences.  And  yet  we  have  only  to  look  behind  the 
words  to  see  that  the  conclusion  is  unwarranted.  As  it  is,  we  see  behind  the  words 
a  law  or  principle  which  we  must  not  ignore.  If  we  may  argue  from  human 
analogies,  it  is  but  natural  and  just  to  say  that  God  loves  those  who  love  Him. 
One  of  the  things  we  leain  most  siu-ely  fiom  Bible  history  is  that  God  does  not 
look  for  moral  perfection  in  those  to  wliom  He  grants  His  favours,  and  whom 
He  chooses  to  do  His  work.  Jacob  was  far  from  being  a  perfect  character  ;  but 
with  all  his  faults  he  had  the  supreme  virtue  of  religion,  he  had  learned  to  take 
God  into  accoimt  in  his  actions,  and  to  work  and  think  with  reference  to  His 
will.  Esau,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  type  of  those  who  are  without  God  in  the 
world — profane  persons,  who  are  blind  to  their  highest  interests,  and  five  wilfully 
on  the  lower  side  of  life.  What  wonder  that  from  such  God's  face  should  be 
turned  away  !  God  loves  those  who  love  Him,  and  the  shadow  cast  by  His  love 
is  His  hatred  of  all  that  would  lead  men  away  from  Him  and  keep  them  in  the 
dark  of  selfishness  and  sin.  As  has  been  said  already,  we  have  to  reckon  with 
man's  will  as  well  as  God's.  He  compels  no  man  to  be  either  righteous  or  sinful, 
and  the  fact  that  we  are  free  adds  a  brighter  halo  to  our  goodness,  and  deepens 
immea,surably  the  stain  of  oiu:  guilt.  We  are  always  working  either  with  God 
or  against  Him,  and  this  fact,  while  it  adds  a  new  hope  and  assurance  to  our 
efforts  after  righteousness,  makes  the  evil  that  is  in  us  point  only  to  despair. 
Judged  by  the  only  standards  we  can  use,  we  have  to  lay  the  blame  on  man  and 
not  on  God  for  whatever  is  dark  and  terrible  in  the  words,  "  Jacob  I  loved,  but 
Esau  I  hated."  A  subject  hke  this  brings  vividly  home  to  us  the  supreme  needs 
of  the  reUgious  man — faith  in  God  and  co-operation  with  Him.  It  is  often  cruelly 
enough  revealed  to  us  that  in  this  hfe — in  spite  of  the  light  of  reason — we  are 
as  those  that  grope  in  the  dark.  After  all,  the  world  is  only  in  the  making  as 
yet,  and  we  have  to  leam  to  judge  not  by  the  intricate  mass  of  scafTnlding,  rubbish 
heaps,  and  half-built  walls  that  we  see,  but  by  the  Architect's  plans.  In  spite 
of  all  the  perplexities  and  inconsistencies  which  puzzle  us  here,  we  have  to  learn 
to  look  at  the  design  which  runs  through  them  all,  and  the  purpose  which  by 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI. 


them  is  being  slowly  evolved.  Sometimes  all  we  can  do  is  to  trust  and  wait, 
to  be  sure  that  there  is  a  secret  to  this  mystery  and  a  solution  to  that  riddle,  but 
that  we  have  not  yet  eyes  to  see  them  ;  and  we  must  remember,  too,  that  faith 
will  never  sit  with  folded  hands  doing  nothing,  but  that  true  faith  always  works. 
The  greater  the  trouble  and  the  difficulty  the  more  need  there  is  for  work,  and 
the  effort  to  do  God's  will  as  far  as  it  is  known  is  the  only  means  by  which  tha.t 
will  can  be  more  clearly  understood.  {W.  B.  Selfne,  M.A.)  The  dragons 
of  the  wilderness. — The  dragons  : — Ancient  history  is  full  of  legends  concerning 
the  deadly  power  of  dragons.  The  Bible  has  many  references  to  these  imaginary 
monsters.  In  Church  history  they  are  represented  as  winged  crocodiles,  and 
regarded  as  emblems  of  sin  and  the  devil.  There  are  spiritual  dragons  now.  Con- 
sider— I.  These  dragons.  They  are  besetting  sins,  turbulent  passions,  sinful 
customs,  fascinating  vices,  evil  spirits,  &c.  II.  Where  they  dwell.  The 
wilderness.  The  world,  though  beautiful,  is  yet  cursed  by  sin.  To  the  saintly 
heart  it  is  often  a  wilderness — 1.  For  its  loneliness.  2.  For  its  barrermess.  3.  For 
its  dangers.  Dragons  lurk  there.  They  may  poiu*  forth  their  fire  and  fury 
upon  us  there  at  any  time.  Application.  Be  watcliful.  Seek  the  help  of 
the  great  dragon-slayer — Christ.  In  all  legends  of  the  slaying  of  dragons 
it  was  one  hero  that  did  it — Hercules,  Perseus,  Siegfried,  St.  Michael, 
St.  George — these  slew  the  dragons,  and  deUvered  the  people.  (W.  Osborne 
lAUey.) 

Ver.  4.  They  shall  build,  but  I  will  throw  down. — Foolish  builders : — To 
separate  our  lives  from  God  is  folly ;  to  live  in  opposition  to  Him  is  madness. 
Many  not  only  disregard  Him,  but  also  oppose  Him.  I.  Who  are  these  foolish 
BTTILDBRS  ?  1.  Those  who  seek  to  build  up  a  reputation  with  deceits.  2.  Those 
who  build  up  the  fortunes  of  their  houses  with  unrighteousness.  3.  Those  who 
build  up  a  religious  life  without  faith  in  Christ,  the  only  foundation.  4.  Those 
who  build  up  their  characters  with  evil  principles  and  deeds.  5.  Those  who  build 
up  high  positions  by  treachery  and  tyranny.  II.  Consider  the  certainty  of 
THEIR  overthrow.  Woc  be  to  the  work  that  has  Grod  against  it.  It  cannot 
stand.  Think  of  His  power,  knowledge,  and  absolute  control  of  all  things. 
Everything  that  He  does  not  smile  upon  must  perish.  History  confirms  this. 
Kingdoms  created  with  great  magnificence  and  might,  but  built  in  defiance  of 
His  laws,  have,  like  Edom,  fallen.  Theological  systems,  and  ecclesiastical 
despotisms  that  have  been  built  up  in  opposition  to  Him,  have  been  overthrown. 
Biography  also  confirms  this.  No  life  that  has  been  spent  in  opposition  to  Him, 
however  apparently  influential,  but  has  crumbled  away  like  a  falling  tower. 
When  God  says,  "  I  will  throw  down,"  none  can  save.  Experience  also  confirms 
it.  Learn  not  to  lay  a  stone  in  life  without  God.  We  should  enter  upon  no 
work  without  first  securing  His  aid  and  blessing.  We  can  only  erect  a  structure 
that  will  stand  for  ever,  as  we  build  in  God's  way,  and  under  the  influence  of  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus.     ( W.  Osborne  Lilley. ) 

Ver.  5.  The  Lord  wiU  be  magnified  from  (or  upon)  the  border  of  IsraeL — 
Each  nation  had  its  God.  The  deities  were  made  to  rival  each  other  in  the  pro- 
tection and  blessing  which  they  afforded  to  the  nations  that  worshipped  them. 
I.  This  prophetic  utterance.  Evils  abounded  when  the  prophet  lived.  The 
sins  of  the  people  were  eclipsing  God's  glory  ;  but  the  prophet  knew  that  it  would 
shine  forth  as  the  sun.  It  is  therefore  an  utterance — (1)  Of  holy  faith;  (2)  of 
firm  assurance  ;  (3)  of  exultant  expectation.  God  must  be  magnified.  It  is 
necessary — I.  For  the  furtherance  of  His  purposes.  2.  For  the  vindication  of 
His  righteousness.  3.  For  the  good  of  the  universe.  II.  How  this  xjtteranch 
was,  and  may  be  fttlfilled.  The  history  of  the  Israelites  abounds  with  con- 
firmations of  the  prophet's  words.  His  faith  would  be  strengthened  as  he 
remembered  past  dispensations.  Though  God's  ancient  people  were  dispersed, 
the  spiritual  Israel  remains.  He  has  been  magnified.  1.  In  the  redemption 
of  the  cross.  2.  In  the  interposition  of  providence  in  behalf  of  His  Church.  3.  In 
the  holy  lives  and  sufferings  of  His  people.  4.  In  the  missionary  enterprises  of 
His  Church.  III.  Where  this  should  be  fulfilled.  In  "  the  border  of  Israel." 
The  spiritual  Israel  must  ever  magnify  God.  This  is  the  duty  of  the  Church. 
1.  The  Church  should  interpret  all  events  so  as  to  do  this.  2.  It  should  do  it 
under  all  circumstances.  3.  It  should  seek  this  first  in  all  its  organisations  and 
evangelistic  efforts.     Application.     Let  this  be  our  aim  continually — to  magnify 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  1. 

God.     We  often  seek  to  magnify  otirselves.     Our  truest  greatness  is  in  making 
Him  great.     {W.  Osborne  Lilley.) 

Ver.  6.  A  son  honoureth  his  father,  and  a  servant  Ms  master. — Christian 
reverence  : — There  is  a  sin  common  among  us,  which  we  may  be  unwilling  to 
recognise,  the  fin  of  irreverence  ;  a  want  of  respect  for  the  presence,  power,  and 
majesty  of  God,  arising  from  thoughtlessness  or  practical  unbelief.  We  need 
not  attempt  to  prove  that  God  has  a  right  to  expect  from  us  the  fullest  tribute  of 
veneration  which  we  can  offer,  for  this  truth  is  a  self-evident  one.  He  is  the 
Creator  ;  we  are  the  creatures.  He  is  the  Redeemer  ;  we  are  they  whom  He  has 
purchased  to  Himself.  He  is  the  Sanctifier  ;  we  are  they  who  need  sanctification. 
He  is  Eternal,  Almighty,  Infinite  ;  we  are  mortal,  weak,  finite.  As  His  mercy 
claims  our  love,  so  do  His  power  and  goodness  claim  our  reverence.  This  con- 
clusion we  must  have  arrived  at,  if  we  had  only  the  light  of  nature  ;  it  is  fully 
sustained  by  revelation.  In  order  to  serve  God  acceptably,  we  must  serve  Him 
"  with  reverence  and  godly  fear."  But  on  this  point  we  are  lamentably  defective, 
so  that  the  reproof  addi'essed  to  Israel  in  the  days  of  Malachi  may,  with  as  great, 
or  even  greater,  appropriateness,  be  applied  to  ourselves.  Malachi's  censure 
was,  in  the  first  instance,  applied  to  the  priests.  But  as  it  was  with  the  priests, 
so  is  it  now  with  all.  We  do  not  deny  that  God  is  our  Father  and  Master.  With 
our  lips  we  acknowledge  Him,  but  our  hearts  are  far  from  Him.  We  do  not 
consider  the  force  of  our  words  when  we  confess  Him,  or  what  they  involve. 
We  speak  of  Him  as  our  Father  and  Master,  but  we  tacitly  persuade  ourselves 
that  in  His  case  the  paternal  and  domestic  relation  is  something  different  from 
what  it  is  among  ourselves  ;  that  we  are  not  His  servants  and  children  in  the 
same  sense  as  we  are  with  regard  to  such  of  our  fellow-creatures  as  hold  such  a 
connection  with  us.  And  it  is  true  God  has  this  further  claim  upon  us,  that  He 
is  our  God.  But  this  is  a  consideration  from  which  we  slu:ink,  and  so  endeavour 
to  persuade  ourselves  that  His  Godhead  rather  diminishes  than  enhances  His 
claims  upon  us  on  other  grounds.  Irreverence  in  Malachi's  days  was  shown  by 
the  character  of  the  offerings  made  to  God.  Instead  of  bringing  the  best  and 
most  perfect,  men  thought  it  sufficient  to  sacrifice  what  was  torn  and  crippled, 
what  was  cheap  and  paltry,  what  was  of  no  value  in  the  market.  They  offered 
to  God  of  that  which  cost  them  nothing.  Have  we  no  temptation  to  commit 
precisely  the  same  kind  of  sin  ?  Look  at  the  state  of  oiu:  churches  ;  and  negligence 
in  church-repairs.  It  may  be  said,  "  so  as  our  hearts  be  right,  it  matters  little 
under  what  external  circumstances  we  worship."  The  Israelites  might  have 
offered  a  similar  plea.  But  let  us  examine  whether  our  hearts  are  right,  and 
whether  we  have  as  much  reverence  for  God's  presence  in  His  house  as  we  ought 
to  have.  It  is  not  in  God's  own  house  only  that  we  show  our  indifference  to 
Him.  The  manner  in  which  we  treat  His  name.  His  day.  His  Word,  His  ministeiir. 
His  sacraments,  all  is  so  much  evidence  against  us  that  we  have  not  that  abiding 
awe  of  Him  which  is  due  to  Him.  From  what  causes  such  a  spirit  of  irreverence 
has  grown,  and  spread  till  it  has  taken  possession  of  us  ;  in  what  was  its  origin, 
and  how  it  has  been  fostered,  I  cannot  now  stop  to  express  an  opinion.  The  fact 
is  before  us,  and  the  bitter  fruits  of  our  profaneness  and  irreverence  are  ripening 
day  bj'  day.  I  do  not  say  that  oiu:  national  and  individual  irreverence  will  end 
in  open  apostasy,  but  the  tendency  is,  of  course,  that  way  ;  and  we  are  in  the 
greater  peril,  because  the  infection  has  spread  both  silently  and  universally. 
What  then  must  be  done  ?  Let  each  endeavour  to  realise  to  himself  more  fully 
than  he  has  yet  done,  the  presence  of  God  among  us.  He  is  present  in  His  Church, 
in  His  sacraments,  in  His  ministers,  in  His  poor  ;  present  among  us  everywhere, 
and  at  all  seasons.  We  must  watch  ourselves  in  little  things,  and  reflect  con- 
tinually before  whom  they  are  done.  We  must  avoid  speaking  of  religious 
subjects  before  those  who  are  likol}'  to  ridicule  them.  As  a  Father,  we  must 
pay  God  the  honour  that  is  due.  We  must  not  forget  that,  as  our  Master,  He 
claims  our  fear  as  well  as  our  love.  (F.  E.  Paget,  M.A.)  The  honour  due  to 
God  : — This  text  is  identified  with  general  and  permanent  principles,  and  it  admits 
of  a  general  and  permanent  application,  to  be  interpreted  as  a  just  pleading  by 
Jehovah  on  behalf  of  His  own  glory,  with  the  whole  family  of  man.  I.  Whencb 
THE  CLAIM  OF  GoD  UPON  THE  YOUNG  ARISES.  From  His  character  as  Father. 
The  reason  why  the  Most  High  is  thus  represented  is,  because  from  His  creative 
will  and  power  men  derive  their  being,  and  because  by  His  j^rovidential  arrange- 
ments  and    care   their  being  is  supplied  and   preserved.      Hence   His    paternal 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  9 

character  is  extensive  as  the  world  and  permanent  as  time.  It  is  designed  to  be 
recognised  by  us  as  involving  the  two  great  attributes  of  authority  and  kindness — 
authority  which  is  supreme  and  unimpeachable,  kindness  which  is  unfailing  and 
unbounded.  II.  What  the  claim  of  God  upon  you  involves.  He  claims  a 
Father's  right  to  be  honoured.  The  mode  of  address  here  implies  the  guilty 
omission  of  men  to  render  to  God  what  ia  His  due.  "  Where  is  Mine  honour  ?  " 
A  vast  proportion  of  the  human  family  have  attempted  to  banish  God  as  an  ahen 
from  the  universe  He  has  made.  1.  The  honour  which  your  Father  requires  is 
your  adoring  reverence  of  His  perfections.  2.  Your  practical  obedience  of  His 
law.  3.  Yoiu"  zealous  devotedness  to  His  cause.  III.  How  is  the  claim  of 
God  upon  you  commended  ?  He  whom  you  are  summoned  to  honour  possesses 
an  absolute  right  to  you.  1.  Your  comphance  with  the  claim  of  God  as  your 
Father  will  secure  yom-  dignity.  2.  It  will  secure  your  usefulness.  3.  It  wiU  secure 
yoiu:  happiness.  Your  consciences  will  be  perturbed  by  no  agitations.  Your 
happiness  will  be  that  arising  from  gratitude  and  from  benevolence.  The  know- 
ledge that  you  have  imparted  happiness  to  others  will  be  dehghtful.  {James 
Parsons. )  The  Father'' s  honour  : — The  claim  of  God  upon  the  confidence  and 
obedience  of  man  is  based  upon  the  imalterable  fact  that  man  is  the  son  of  God. 
For  the  answer  to  this  ceaseless  appeal  to  the  filial  instinct  of  humanity  the  world's 
Father  stands  waiting  with  tireless  patience  and  unspeakable  compassion  at 
the  door  of  every  heart.  There  is  a  stage  in  the  spiritual  development  of  most 
lives  when  this  transcendent  truth  passes  from  a  dim  instinct  into  a  radiant 
certainty,  it  is  the  stage  of  "  knowing  the  Lord."  The  instinct  of  sonship  has 
never  been  absent  from  the  race.  The  ancient  Aryans  spoke  of  the  Eternal  as 
"  Dyaus  Pitar  "  ;  the  Greeks  as  "  Zeus  Pater  "  ;  the  Latins  as  "  Jupiter  "  ; 
the  Norsemen  as  "  Thor,"  each  word  foreshadowing  with  stammering  lips  the 
Pater -noster — our  heaven  Father.  Christ  alone  revealed  the  truth  in  perfection, 
and  taught  it  in  power.  He,  the  revealer  of  the  Father's  moral  and  afifectional 
nature  in  the  hmitations  of  a  human  body.  This  new  element  infused  into  the 
thought  of  the  world  possesses  individual  hearts  but  slowly.  The  mind  perceives 
that  as  the  self-existent  primal  cause  of  all  has  conditioned  Himself  in  natm-al 
phenomena  that  all  thinkers  might  recognise  Him  as  an  InteUigence ;  so  Almighty 
Fatherhood  has  conditioned  His  moral  attributes,  His  love,  tenderness,  and 
sacrifice  in  the  workings  of  a  human  mind,  and  the  words  of  a  human  voice,  and 
the  actions  of  a  human  fife,  in  the  Incarnation.  As  he  looks  on  Jesus  he  sees 
Him  as  the  great  Sacrament  of  the  Fatherhood,  the  visible  embodiment  of  the 
all-pervading  Father-Spirit.  Just  here  comes  in  the  searching  power  of  the 
individual  apphcation  of  the  appeal  of  God  for  the  spiritual  evolution  of  man. 
"  If  I  be  a  Father,  where  is  Mine  honour  ?  "  The  test  of  knowing  the  Lord  is 
hearing  the  voice  :  ears  that  are  deafened  by  the  din  of  second  causes  hear  not 
the  voice.  The  conscious  moral  act  whereby  a  son  of  God  accepted  the  challenge, 
is  deliberate  mental  disentanglement  from  second  causes,  and  the  recognition 
of  God  in  every  concern  of  fife.  The  Father's  demand,  "  Where  is  Mine  honour  ?  " 
is  not  satisfied  without  witness,  enthusiasm,  and  loyalty.  The  duty  of  witness 
is  clear  and  inalienable.  No  son  of  God  can  claim  exemption.  As  to  enthusiasm  ; 
one  characteristic  of  the  civilised  heathenism  of  the  age  is  the  imdisguised  con- 
tempt ever  poured  upon  enthusiasm.  The  Archetypal  Man  was  an  enthusiast ; 
He  loved  the  people  with  passion,  and  He  turned  the  world  upside  down.  And 
loyalty  to  the  heavenly  citizenship,  and  the  guidance  of  the  Eternal  Spirit. 
(Canon  Wilber force,  D.D.)  A  Fatherly  expostulation : — Every  relationship 
has  its  rights  and  duties.  God's  claims  are  paramount.  As  our  Father  He  has 
a  right  to  our  veneration  and  love.  He  requires  us  to  possess  the  filial  spirit. 
I.  Consider  the  tkuth  assumed.  "  If  then  I  be  a  Father."  God's  Fatherhood 
has  been  generally  recognised.     He  has  always  acted  as  a  Father  towards  men — 

1.  In  bringing  them  into  existence.  2.  In  stamping  upon  them  His  own  image. 
3.  In  providing  for  their  needs  in  the  bounties  of  nature.  4.  In  redeeming  them 
from  sin.  6.  In  adopting  them  into  His  heavenly  family.  6.  In  arranging  hfe 
so  as  to  discipUne  them.  II.  God's  appeal  in  view  of  this  truth.  "  Where 
is  Mine  honour  ?  "  This  appeal  is  just  and  right.  It  is  our  duty  to  render  honoiur 
to  God.  This  involves — 1.  Reverence  toward  Him.  Always  to  speak  of  Him 
with  respect  and  love  ;  revering  His  ordinances  ;  worshipping  in  His  sanctuary. 

2.  Obedience  to  His  commandments.  Making  them  the  rule  of  our  hves, 
and  dehghting  in  them  as  the  expression  of  His  will.  3.  Trust  in  His  goodness. 
Beheving  that  He  will  never  err  in  the  arrangements  of  His  providence,  but 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

that  all  things  will  work  together  for  our  good.  4.  Submission  to  His  chastise- 
ments. Bearing  afifliction  as  from  His  hand.  5.  By  revealing  His  image. 
Showing  in  our  dispositions  and  deeds  that  we  are  His  children.  III.  How  thi3 
APPEAL  SHOULD  BE  RESPONDED  TO.  I.  By  serious  reflection.  2.  By  true  repent- 
ance. 3.  By  earnest  prayer  for  the  possession  of  the  spirit  of  sonship  proaiisrd  in 
Christ.  4.  By  constant  efforts  to  honour  God  in  the  future.  ( IF.  Otiborne  Lilley.) 
Of  God's  being  the  Father  and  Master  of  mankind  : — Consider — I.  How  truly 
God  is  the  Father,  and  the  Master  of  mankind.  1.  The  Father.  God  gave 
being  to  the  world  and  all  things  in  it.  St.  Paul  styles  Him  "  the  Father,  of  whom 
the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named,"  the  Head  of  the  rational  system, 
the  Father  both  of  angels  and  men,  who  all  derive  their  being  from  Him,  and 
in  the  constitution  of  their  nature  bear  some  features  and  resemblances  of  the 
great  original  from  whence  they  sprung.  God  created  man  in  His  own  image. 
It  is  evident  from  our  consciousness  and  experience,  that  we  have  such  powers 
of  perception  and  understanding,  such  a  sense  of  good  and  evil,  right  and  wrong, 
and  such  principles  of  honesty  and  goodness  in  our  nature  as  ally  and  unite  us 
to  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  give  us  a  striking  resemblance  of  Him,  in  some  of 
His  most  glorious  attributes  and  qualities.  God  is  also  to  be  considered  the 
Father  of  mankind,  as  He  has  made  an  ample  provision  for  the  improvement 
and  happiness  of  the  excellent  nature  which  He  has  given  them.  2.  The  Master. 
As  God  hath  all  power  in  Himself,  and  as  by  this  alone  the  universe  subsists, 
all  creatures  whatsoever  are  necessarily  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  Him.  There 
is  something  implied  in  the  notion  of  God's  being  the  Master  of  men,  more  than 
His  merely  exercising  an  uncontrollable  dominion  over  them.  But  God  is  a 
perfectly  holy,  righteous,  and  good  Potentate,  governing  rational  agents  according 
to  the  dictates  of  the  highest  sanctity  and  justice,  and  consulting  their  happiness 
in  all  His  administrations  towards  them.  That  He  is  the  righteous  Governor 
of  men  is  evident  from  His  having  laid  us  under  the  law  of  righteousness  in  the 
constitution  of  our  being.  The  foundation  of  God's  moral  government  over  men 
is  firmly  laid  in  His  own  nature  and  in  ours.  A  just  order  is  plainly  prevalent 
in  the  conduct  of  human  affairs,  notwithstanding  the  irregularities  and  confusions 
which  are  to  be  observed  in  them.  II.  What  is  that  dutv  ^VHICH  we  owe 
to  God  as  Father  and  Master  ?  Expressed  in  the  terms  honour  and  fear. 
1.  Honour.  No  sentiments  are  made  universal  and  better  known  to  the  mind  than 
those  of  respect,  duty,  and  submission,  which  children  entertain  for  their  parents 
in  this  world.  If  this  be  the  temper  which  becomes  us  with  resjiect  to  the  fathers 
of  our  flesh,  how  much  more  must  we  cultivate  the  same  temj)cr  towards  the 
Father  of  our  spirits.  Surely  the  devotion  of  our  minds  towards  Him  must 
rise  into  a  perfect  adoration  of  His  goodness,  accompanied  with  the  .'iincerest 
gratitude  and  love,  the  firmest  affiance  in  Him,  the  most  absolute  resignation 
to  His  wiU,  and  the  most  earnest  endeavours  to  obej^  His  laws  and  to  imitate 
His  purity  and  benignity  in  our  whole  conversation.  2.  Fear.  As  the  masters 
of  this  world  are  of  different  tempers  and  characters,  so  the  fear  of  their  subjects 
or  servants  in  regard  to  them  is  of  very  different  kinds.  God  has  nothing  in 
His  nature  resembling  the  qualities  of  the  arbitrary  or  oppressive  masters  and 
rulers  of  this  world.  His  government  is  founded  on  the  maxims  of  perfect 
wisdom,  goodness,  and  righteousness,  therefore  a  .slavish  fear  of  Him  can  be  no 
part  of  the  homage  which  His  worshippers  and  servants  are  to  pay  to  Him.  The 
only  fear  of  God  which  it  becomes  us  to  entertain,  is  a  mixed  affection  of  mind, 
made  up  of  a  high  reverence  of  His  perfections,  particularly  His  wisdom,  justice, 
purity,  goodness,  and  power  ;  an  affectionate  esteem  of  His  laws,  an  earnest 
solicitude  to  obey  those  laws,  and  a  great  dread  of  transgressing  them,  from  a 
sense  of  the  baseness  and  odiousness  of  trampling  upon  the  authority  of  our 
rightful  and  most  gracious  Lord  and  Saviour.  The  cultivation  of  these  principles, 
the  honour  and  fear  of  God,  should  be  earnestly  commended.  Let  us  not,  upon 
any  pretences,  excuse  ourselves  from  the  cultivation  of  a  becoming  temper  towards 
the  Deity,  but  cheerfully  pay  Him  all  that  honour  and  love,  that  obedience  and 
submission  which,  as  our  most  compassionate  and  indulgent  Father,  and  our 
most  gracious  and  righteous  King  and  Lawgiver,  He  claims  and  demands  from 
us.  (J.  Orr,  D.D.)  Truth  learned  from  our  human  relations: — As  we  form  our 
notions  of  the  Divine  character  and  perfections  from  our  consciousness  of  similar 
affections  in  our  own  minds,  so  all  our  ideas  of  the  relations  in  which  we  stand 
to  Deity  are  derived  from  the  relations  in  which  we  are  placed  to  our  brethren 
of  mankind.     We  could  have  no  ideas  or  conceptions  of  the  perfections  of  God 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  11 

unless  we  had  some  corresponding  and  similar  powers  in  our  own  minds.  Man 
was  formed  after  the  image  of  God  ;  and,  although  that  image  has  been  tarnished 
and  defaced  by  his  fall  and  his  transgression,  he  retains  those  capacities  and 
susceptibilities  of  soul,  which  remind  him  of  the  moral  glory  from  which  he  has 
fallen.  He  knows,  from  reflection  on  his  own  nature,  and  capacities,  what  is 
meant  by  wisdom,  power,  justice,  truth,  goodness.  When  he  views  these  qualities 
as  attributes  of  Divinity,  he  regards  them  as  free  from  every  imperfection, 
tminterrupted  in  their  operation,  and  incapable  of  change  or  decay.  In  a  similar 
manner  we  form  our  notions  of  the  relations  in  which  we  stand  to  Deity,  and  of 
the  affections  and  duties  which  these  relations  imply  and  demand.  As  we  know 
of  the  relation  of  a  father  to  his  children,  the  Scriptures  do  not  explain  the  nature 
of  the  relation,  but  urge  the  duties  which  it  implies.  In  the  very  forcible  and 
touching  appeal  of  the  text,  we  are  reminded  of  that  honour  and  obedience  which 
we  owe  to  God  as  His  children  and  servants,  and  are  pointedly  charged  with 
having  withheld  them.  Endeavour  to  state  the  nature  and  reasonableness  of 
that  claim  which  God,  as  our  Father  and  Master,  has  to  our  honoiu"  and  fear, 
and  urge  the  inquiry,  whether  the  claim  has  been  recognised  and  obeyed.  The 
first  characteristic  of  that  honour  and  fear  which  a  son  and  servant  show  to  a 
father  and  master,  is  delight  in  his  presence  and  society.  Wherever  the  filial 
relation  is  felt  and  sustained  with  the  affection  which  it  implies,  it  prompts  the 
child  to  seek  the  presence  and  company  of  his  parent.  A  servant,  too,  that  fears 
his  master  with  sincere  regard,  delights  in  his  presence.  Similar  to  this  is  that 
honour  and  fear  which  God  requires  of  those  who  profess  to  be  His  sons  and  His 
servants.  If  our  relation  to  God  be  anything  more  than  a  name.  His  presence 
will  be  the  object  of  our  most  ardent  desire,  and  communion  with  Him  the  highest 
happiness  we  shall  seek  to  know.  But  can  this  be  said  to  be  the  experience  or 
the  taste  of  many  who  call  God  their  Father  and  Master  ?  In  the  second  place, 
obedience  to  the  Divine  commandments  is  another  indication  of  that  honour 
and  fear  which  God,  as  a  Father  and  Master,  demands  of  those  who  profess  to  be 
His  sons  and  His  servants.  An  implicit  confidence  in  the  wisdom  of  his  parents 
is  one  of  the  earliest  instincts  which  nature  has  implanted  in  the  bosom  of  a  child  ; 
and  to  merit  parental  approbation  and  love  is  one  of  the  most  amiable  and  power- 
ful desires  that  influence  his  conduct.  Every  expression  of  a  father's  will  com- 
mands respect,  and  the  sweetest  music  that  falls  upon  the  ear  is  the  voice  of 
paternal  applause.  It  is  this  cheerful,  childlike,  and  affectionate  obedience 
which  oiu-  heavenly  Father  claims  from  those  who  profess  to  be  His  sons  and 
servants.  We  say.  He  is  ovir  Father — let  Him  have  our  filial  love  and  obedience. 
We  profess  to  bow  to  Him  as  our  Master  and  Lord — let  us  devote  ourselves 
unreservedly  to  His  service  and  honour.  In  the  third  place,  the  relation  should 
prompt  a  desire  after  resemblance  of  God  in  His  moral  excellence.  The  principle 
of  imitation  is  one  of  the  earliest  and  most  active  tendencies  of  our  nature.  As 
reason  advances,  the  principle  of  imitation  retains  its  power,  and  exerts  its 
influence.  Its  power  and  influence  are  chiefly  discernible  in  the  resemblance 
which  it  generates  in  the  temper  and  affections  of  the  child  to  those  of  the  parent. 
It  is  true  that  the  tendency  may  be  very  strikingly  modified  by  counteracting 
circumstances.  But  the  truth  holds  good,  that  there  is  a  strong  and  ever-operating 
tendency  in  a  son  to  imitate  his  father  ;  and  where  this  imitating  tendency  is 
exercised  by  virtue  in  the  parent,  it  is  the  source  of  the  highest  reciprocal  satisfac- 
tion and  delight.  What  the  Father  of  our  spirits  requires  of  us  is  to  elevate  and 
ennoble  this  tendency  to  imitation  by  directing  it  to  Himself.  In  the  New 
Testament  this  imitation  or  resemblance  of  God  is  repeatedly  pointed  out  as  the 
prominent  and  characteristic  distinction  of  His  children.  The  moral  excellences 
of  the  Divine  character  are  presented  as  at  once  the  sources  of  our  comfort 
and  the  objects  of  our  imitation.  Only  at  an  infinite  distance  from  the  moral 
glory  of  the  Divine  character  the  sons  of  mortality  must  for  ever  remain.  In 
every  renewed  heart  there  is  the  ardent  and  ceaseless,  and  ever  active  desire  to 
grow  in  resemblance  to  the  moral  grandeur  which  it  adores  and  loves.  In  the 
fourth  place,  acquiescence  in  the  appointments  of  His  providence,  and  submission 
to  His  chastisement,  distinguish  those  who  are  the  sons  and  servants  of  God.  In 
the  exercise  of  his  authority,  and  to  promote  the  happiness  and  preserve  the 
virtue  of  his  children,  the  father  must  sometimes  insist  on  privation  and  restraint, 
and  give  inflictions  which  he  administers  with  reluctance  and  pain.  Our 
Heavenly  Father,  who  knows  our  waywardness  and  frailty,  puts  forth  His  hand 
in  chastisement  upon  us.     He  doth  not  afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  children 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

of  men.  Then  what  is  the  state  of  mind  in  which  they  should  be  met  and  endured  ? 
Have  the  visitations  of  Providence  always  been  met  in  a  right  spirit  ?  Have  we 
not  often,  by  the  fretfulness  of  our  temper  in  the  hour  of  visitation,  evinced  the 
absence  of  the  childlike  spirit  that  becomes  those  who  profess  themselves  the 
sons  of  God  ?  (J.  Johnston.)  Obedience  the  practical  test  of  affection  : — This 
address  was  made  to  the  priests  of  the  Lord,  at  a  very  corrupt  age  of  the  Jewish 
Church.  The  whole  Church  was  exceedingly  polluted.  Every  precept  of  the 
law  was  violated  and  every  rite  of  the  sanctuarj^  perverted.  It  will  be  no  violation 
of  the  spirit  of  the  text  if  we  apply  it  to  an  impenitent  world,  embracing  thoso 
who  have  no  show  of  godliness,  as  well  as  the  whole  family  of  false  professor^;. 
We  find  in  the  lips  of  many  who  make  no  pretensions  to  a  change  of  heart,  high 
professions  of  respect  for  the  character  and  government  of  God.  They  claim 
Him  as  their  Father,  and  would  have  us  believe  that  they  respect  and  obey  His 
laws.  We  inquire  whether  men  of  this  character  yield  Him  that  filial  esteem, 
that  dutiful  subjection,  which  are  due  to  a  Father  and  a  Master.  I.  Con- 
template THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  GOD,  AND  SEE  IF  WE  CAN  DISCOVEE  HiM  DEALINO 

WITH  ALL  His  rational  creatures  as  a  Father  and  a  Master.  1.  As  a  Father 
and  Master  He  protects  them.  This  the  son  and  servant  expect.  God  keeps 
His  eye  on  all  His  intelligent  creatures,  and  puts  underneath  them  His  arm  of 
mercy.  2.  He  provides  for  all  His  creatures.  No  man  could  make  his  seed 
vegetate,  or  render  his  fields  fertile,  or  ensure  success  in  trade  independently  of 
his  Maker.  3.  He  makes  us  know  His  will.  We  have  some  lessons  from  the 
broad  sheet  of  nature  ;  but  in  His  Word  He  has  opened  all  His  heart ;  has  made 
every  duty  plain,  and  placed  it  in  the  power  of  every  son  and  servant  of  His  to 
do  His  pleasure.  4.  He  has  made  our  duties  light.  The  service  He  requires 
is  pleasant  and  easy.     5.  He  provides  for  our  future  happiness.     II.  How  will 

A  KIND  AND   DUTIFUL  SON  OR  SERVANT  TREAT  A  FATHER  OR  MASTER?       1.  The  SOn 

loves  his  father,  and  the  good  servant  his  master.  If  we  have  any  love  to  God, 
we  must  love  His  whole  character,  and  must  learn  His  character  from  the  Bible. 
The  question  is,  do  that  class  of  men  who  speak  so  highly  of  their  Maker,  love 
the  whole  of  the  Divine  character  ?  They  are  pleased  with  only  a  part  of  the 
Divine  character.  Hence  they  will  deny  such  doctrines  as  clash  with  their  views 
of  God.  If  they  loved  God  they  would  believe  what  He  says.  2.  The  good 
child  loves  the  society  of  his  father  ;  and  the  faithful  servant  loves  to  be  with 
his  master.  3.  A  good  son  and  a  faithful  servant  will  be  cheerfully  obedient. 
A  dutiful  temper  is  indispensable  in  either  of  these  stations.  Will  the  class  of 
men  addressed  in  the  text  stand  this  test  ?  Are  they  uniform  in  regard  to  their 
duty  ?  Have  they  a  tender  conscience  which  fears  to  do  wrong,  fears  to  neglect 
a  duty,  fears  to  violate  an  obligation,  dreads  the  least  deviation  from  the  most 
perfect  rectitude  ?  4.  The  son  and  servant  will  each  be  attached  to  his  father's 
or  his  master's  family.  Do  these  people  attach  themselves  to  the  family  of 
Christ  ?  Do  they  love  His  disciples  and  choose  them  as  their  intimates  ?  5.  The 
servant  and  son  are  very  jealous  of  the  honour  of  their  father  and  master.  But 
do  we  discover  this  delicacy  of  feeling  in  that  class  of  men  who  would  be  esteemed 
religious,  but  who  have  no  pretensions  to  a  change  of  heart  ?  6.  The  kind  son 
and  the  dutiful  servant  will  wish  to  have  others  acquainted  with  their  father 
and  their  master.  (D.  A.  Clark.)  Devotion  to  a  master  : — Admiral  Sir  George 
Tryon,  to  whose  fatal  error  of  judgment  (his  only  mistake  as  a  commander,  it  is 
said)  the  loss  of  the  Victoria  was  due,  was  much  beloved  and  trusted  by  his 
subordinates.  As  he  stood  on  the  bridge  of  the  fast  sinking  ship,  he  was  heard 
to  say  to  a  midshipman  standing  beside  him,  "  Go,  my  lad.  Save  yourself  while 
there's  time."  But  the  midshipman  answered,  "  I'd  rather  stay  with  you,  sir." 
And  he  did.  Christian  !  The  duties  and  trials  of  life  are  daily  testing  your 
devotion  to  a  Master  who  makes  no  mistakes.  (5.  S.  Chronicle.)  Honour 
shown  in  conduct  and  in  sentiment : — A  young  man  who  occupies  pleasant  rooms 
in  a  large  city  was  entertaining  a  guest  from  his  country  home.  "  You  see  I 
honour  my  father  and  my  mother,"  he  said,  pointing  to  two  portraits  which  hung 
in  prominent  positions  on  the  walls  of  his  sitting-room.  "  You  do  in  sentiment, 
Frank,"  answered  his  visitor  ;  "  but  if  you  will  forgive  an  old  friend  speaking 
plainly,  j'our  principles  do  not  honour  them  to  the  same  degree.  Those  portraits 
have  looked  down  on  a  good  many  card  parties  and  wine  suppers  and  wasted 
hours.  They  have  seen  neglected  the  work  which  you  came  to  the  city  to  do, 
and  your  old  habits  of  '  plain  living  and  high  thinking  '  forgotten  very  often. 
Think  it  over,  won't  you  ?  "     The  young  man,  it  may  be  said,  did  think  it  over. 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  13 

and  he  did  not  need  another  such  reminder.  Instances  of  inconsistency  between 
sentiment  and  rules  of  conduct  can  be  discovered  by  everyone  'u  persons  around 
him  easily,  in  himself  not  quite  so  easily  perhaps,  but  pretty  surely.  [Christian 
Age. )  A  life  expected  worthy  of  tJve  Divine  Master  : — A  former  queen  of  Mada- 
gascar, gathering  some  of  the  palace  officers  together,  said  to  them,  "  I  am 
aware  that  many  of  you  are  numbered  among  the  praying  people  ;  I  have  no 
objection  to  you  joining  them  if  you  think  it  right,  but  remember,  if  you  ^o  so, 
I  shall  expect  from  you  a  life  worthy  of  that  profession."  0  priests,  that  desi.iaa 
My  name. — The  priests  challenged  : — "  And  ye  say.  Wherein  have  we  despised 
Thy  Name  ?  "  This  is  the  worst  kind  of  impiety,  because  it  displays  utter  ignor- 
ance of  one's  self.  The  caution  is  not  against  open  or  violent  hostility  ;  there 
may  be  simple  ignorance,  or  unconscious  contempt,  or  that  sort  of  passivity  and 
indifference  which  amounts  to  positive  neglect.  We  go  do^vn  not  by  a  plunge, 
but  by  an  inclined  plane.  The  plane  is  lubricated,  is  well-oiled,  so  that  we  slip 
own  little  by  little,  and  hardly  know  that  we  are  slipping.  "  Ye  offer  polluted 
bread  upon  uxl^?  altar."  The  retort  is,  "  Wherein  have  we  polluted  Thee  ?  " 
In  this  way.  "  Ye  say,  The  table  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible."  There  the  error 
v/as  fundamental.  This  is  the  .-"harge  that  is  levelled  against  all  men  to-day. 
Why  patter  with  incidental  errors,  why  not  lift  up  the  impeachment  to  its  proper 
dignity,  and  charge  men  with  having  left  the  Lord,  -^th  having  turned  their  backs 
upon  the  Lord  ?     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  Ye  ofiFer  polluted  bread  upon  Mine  altar. — The  sacrament  polhited : 
— What  closeness  of  attention,  what  concentration  of  thought  does  it  not  require 
of  us,  if  we  consider  the  great  and  comprehensive  views,  which  animated  the 
Saviour  of  the  world  when  He  instituted  the  sacrament  of  the  Supper  !  Behold 
Him  prepared  to  finish  the  great  work,  which  heaven  has  given  Him  to  do.  He 
comes  to  substitute  Himself  in  the  room  of  those  victims  whose  blood  could  do 
nothing  towards  the  purification  of  guilty  man.  Wliat  shall  He  do  to  support 
Himself  in  the  prospect  of  such  tremendous  arrangements  ?  Love  formed  the 
generous  design  of  the  sacrifice  which  He  is  ready  to  offer  up  ;  and  love  will  carry 
Him  through  the  arduous  undertaking.  He  says  to  HimseK,  that  the  memory 
of  this  death,  which  He  is  going  to  endure,  shall  be  perpetuated  in  the  churches, 
even  to  the  end  of  the  world.  He  Himself  institutes  the  memorial  of  it.  Malachi 
severely  censures  the  priests  of  his  day,  because  called,  as  they  were,  to  maintain 
good  order  in  the  Church,  they  calmly  overlooked,  or  avowedly  countenanced, 
the  open  violation  of  it.  He  reproaches  them  for  this  misconduct,  by  the  example 
of  what  a  son  owes  to  his  father,  and  a  servant  to  his  master.  {James  Saurin.) 
The  table  of  the  Lord  profayied: — 1.  Let  us  state  the  parallel  between  the  altar 
of  burnt-offerings,  the  table  of  the  shew-bread,  and  the  sacramental  table  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  ;  the  offerings  which  were  presented  to  God  on  the  first,  and  those 
which  we  still  present  to  him  on  the  second.  The  viands  presented  on  both 
the  one  and  the  other  are  the  meat  of  God,  or  the  bread  of  God.  The  sacred 
ceremonies  are  destined  to  the  same  end,  and  represent  the  same  mysteries, 
namely,  the  intimate  union  which  God  wishes  to  maintain  with  His  Church  and 
people.  The  august  ceremony  of  the  holy  sacrament  is  a  mystery  of  reconcilia- 
tion between  the  penitent  sinner  and  the  God  of  mercy.  What  made  the  ancient 
Jews  profane  the  table  of  the  Lord  ?  How  came  they  to  say,  "  The  table  of 
the  Lord  is  contemptible"  ?  It  was — (1)  Because  they  formed  not  just  ideas 
of  the  end  which  God  proposed  to  Himself,  when  He  enjoined  the  observance 
of  these  solemnities.  (2)  It  arose  from  their  unwillingness  to  fulfil  the  moral 
engageir.ents  which  the  ceremonial  observance  imposed.  (3)  It  proceeded  from 
their  wanting  a  just  sense  of  the  value  of  the  blessings  communicated  by  these. 
The  sources  of  unworthy  communicating  in  the  Christian  world  are  the  same 
— want  of  illumination  ;  want  of  viitue ;  want  of  feeling.  Apply  to  those 
who,  on  reviewing  their  former  communion  services,  see  cause  to  consider 
themselves  as  chargeable  with  the  guilt  which  God  imputed  to  the  Jews 
who  lived  in  the  days  of  Malachi.  Reflect  on  the  shortness  of  the  time 
usually  devoted  to  preparation  for  partaking  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  And 
on  the  slightness  of  the  changes  which  these  solemnities  produce.  Do  not 
deceive  yourselves.  Study  to  know  and  feel  the  whole  extent  of  your  felicity, 
and  let  a  sense  of  the  Denefits  with  which  God  hath  loaded  thee,  kindle 
the   hallowed   flame  of  gratitude   in  your   hearts.      (Ibid.)  The    profession 

and    the   practice   of  religion : — 1.   These   should   always  be   in  accord.     Any 


14  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

discrepancy  between  them  is  morally  luinatural.  Our  conduct  should  accord 
with  our  creed,  our  deeds  with  our  doctrines.  These  priests  showed — (1)  A 
lawless  spirit.  (2)  A  niggardly  spirit.  (3)  A  captious  spirit.  (4)  A  thoughtless 
spirit.     (Homiliat.) 

Ver.  8.  If  ye  ofifer  the  blind  for  sacrifice,  is  it  not  evil  ? — Imperfect  sacrifice  .- 
— The  old  law  demanded  that  God  should  be  honoured  with  the  sacrifice 
of  a  man's  best.  Every  oblation  was  to  be  free  from  spot  or  blemish.  Such 
laws  had  their  symbolic  and  spiritual  meaning.  They  asserted  God's  right  as 
first  and  supreme.  They  embodied  the  law  of  sacrifice,  which  is  the  law  of  all 
holy  beings,  and  they  formed  a  test  of  the  faith  and  love  of  those  who  professed 
to  be  worshippers  of  God.  The  reality  of  the  test  was  manifest  in  the  fact  that 
there  were  those  who  sought  to  escape  the  demand.  In  their  view,  anything 
would  do  for  sacrifice.  Are  there  not  multitudes  still  whose  professed  worship 
is  nothing  more  than  a  mere  miserable  pretence  ?  Surely  our  temptations  to 
disobey  are  just  as  powerful  as  ever.  Our  business  now  is  not  with  the  blas- 
phemer or  the  infidel,  but  with  those  who  either  render,  or  fancy  that  they  render, 
God  some  service.  1.  The  appeal  of  the  text  may  be  addressed  to  all  whose  service 
does  not  include  the  sacrifice  of  the  heart.  Many  give  their  souls  to  the  world, 
• — to  what  remains  God  is  welcome.  They  are  found  in  God's  house,  but  though 
they  are  present  there  they  do  not  render  any  spiritual  worship.  What  is  this 
but  offering  the  blind  and  lame  and  sick  for  sacrifice  ;  and  is  it  not  evil  ?  Can 
it  be  that  it  is  thus  God  is  content  to  be  served  ?  Not  thus  would  even  man 
bo  satisfied.  It  is  God  only  whom  we  expect  to  please  by  a  service  that  lacks 
every  element  of  thorough  heartiness,  and  is  nothing  more  than  a  piece  of 
mechanism.  Yet  is  there  no  other  whom  it  is  so  utterly  hopeless  to  deceive. 
He  asks  the  heart,  and  He  knows  that,  despite  all  the  beauty  of  our  outward 
rites,  the  heart  is  what  we  absolutely  refuse.  But  such  religion  is  no  religion 
at  all.  2.  The  language  may  be  applied  to  those  who  purpose  to  render  to  God 
the  service  of  their  last  hours.  They  will  take  thought  for  the  present  life,  and 
the  soul,  with  all  its  immortal  interests,  they  will  leave  to  the  uncertain  con- 
tingencies of  a  future  which  may  never  be  theirs.  This  is  bringing  the  blind, 
the  lame,  the  sick  for  sacrifice;  and  is  it  not  evil  ?  We  need  not  deny  the  possi- 
bility of  death-bed  repentance  ;  we  may  not  limit  the  grace  of  God.  But  if 
not  impossible,  it  is  in  every  way  improbable  that  the  sacrifice  of  life's  last  hour 
is  what  God  will  accept.  3.  These  words  may  be  addressed  to  the  secret  disciple. 
You  will  do  just  so  much  as  is  necessary  to  ensure  your  salvation,  but  beyond 
this  nothing  more, — there  is  no  love  to  Jesus  constraining  devotion,  making 
you  rejoice  even  in  the  cross  which  you  bear  for  Him,  teaching  you,  as  with  a 
holy  ingenuity,  to  find  out  modes  in  which  you  may  glorify  Him.  And  is  not 
this  evil  ?  4.  The  question  may  be  directed  to  the  half-hearted  professor.  There 
are  many  sharing  in  our  worship  who  are  lacking  in  all  heartiness  and  fervour. 
They  do  not  disgrace  their  profession :  they  observe  with  a  certain  regularity 
the  ordinances ;  but  in  all  generous,  noble,  devoted  consecration  they  are  found 
wanting.  Let  me  address  myself  earnestly  to  you.  Does  not  the  text  describe 
your  sacrifice  ?  Everywhere  else,  if  the  heart  is  interested  at  all,  you  are  full 
of  intense  zeal.  In  religion  you  are  cold  and  indifferent.  Review  your  own 
service ;  compare  it  with  what  you  do  for  other  lords,  and  say,  does  it  not  corre- 
spcid  with  the  description  of  the  text  ?  {J.  0.  Rogers,  B.A.)  The  Divine 
appeal  : — I.  The  appeal.  1.  To  the  dictates  of  conscience.  2.  To  the  usages 
of  human  life.  II.  The  lessons  the  appeal  suggests.  1.  We  have  all  failed 
in  the  discharge  of  our  duty  to  God.  2.  Our  failure  in  the  discharge  of  our  duty 
to  God  is  incapable  of  defence.  3.  We  need  a  Saviour.  4.  Our  services  can  be 
accepted  by  God  only  through  the  mediation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  {G.  Brooks.) 
A  strange  test : — They  performed  solemn  duties  hypocritically.  Malachi  would 
show  them  their  folly  by  asking  them  to  test  their  conduct  by  the  way  in  which 
the  (Persian)  governor  of  the  land  would  regard  it.  I.  Men  often  act  towards 
God  as  they  would  not  act  towards  an  earthly  ruler.  Men  generally 
respect  human  authorities.  If  gifts  are  presented  to  them  they  are  of  the  best. 
They  humble  themselves  before  human  majesty,  and  fear  to  insult  it.  Btit  men 
act  differently  towards  God.  I.  How  many  stand  in  His  presence  and  profane 
His  name.  Let  them  offer  that  to  their  governor.  2.  How  men  treat  His 
authority  and  disregard  His  commands.  3.  How  many  pretend  to  make  sacrifices 
for  His  cause,  and  yet  give  only  that  which  is  worthless,  or  what  they  think  will 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  ■  15 

bring  the  man  equivalent  in  temporal  good.  4.  How  many  render  heartless 
homage  and  selfish  service.  Men  act  in  these  ways  sometimes  through  (1)  Spiritual 
insensibility;  (2)  self-deception ;  (3)  erroneous  conceptions  of  God;  or  (4)  covetous- 
ness.  God  has  a  right  to  all  that  we  possess.  No  earthly  governor  has  such 
a  claim  upon  us.  To  act  towards  Him  deceitfully  is  foolish,  ungrateful,  and 
ruinous.  II.  Our  conduct  towards  God  may  be  tested  by  the  way  in  which 
IT  would  be  received  by  an  earthly  ruler.  Such  rulers  are  not  always 
just.  This  is  a  test  that  is — I.  Easily  applied.  2.  One  that  the  humblest  can 
comprehend.  3.  One  that  may  reveal  much.  4.  One  that  should  be  applied 
honestly.  III.  The  displeasure  of  an  earthly  governor  may  reflect  the 
DISPLEASURE  OF  GoD.  This  is  not  always  the  case.  Rulers  have  been  displeased 
with  and  persecuted  the  most  holy.  But  the  honest  displeasure  of  a  ruler  against 
hypocritical  pretensions  and  deceitful  gifts  is  a  reflection  of  the  Divine  dis- 
pleasure. Would  thy  "governor"  be  "pleased  with  thee"?  If  not,  there  is 
— 1.  Just  cause  to  fear.  2.  Need  of  reformation.  3.  And  of  a  truer  consecration 
of  yourselves  and  your  property  to  God.  Learn — Our  holiest  acts  need  examina- 
tion. Our  sacrifices  may  be  worthless.  It  is  a  great  sin  to  act  niggardly  towards 
God.  (W.  Osborne  LiUey.)  Anything  good  enough  jar  Ood : — In  Malachi's 
time  the  people  seem  to  have  been  utterly  indifferent  as  to  God,  and  openly 
insolent.  "  Behold,"  said  they,  "  what  a  weariness  it  is !  "  They  thought  any- 
thing was  good  enough  for  God,  and  offered  Him  the  refuse  of  their  households. 
Even  the  priests  had  become  a  set  of  mercenary  hirelings,  refusing  to  do  anything 
without  reward.  This  state  of  things  was  a  result  of  living  so  long  in  the  idolatrous 
land  of  Babylon.  The  people  had  lost  their  habits  of  devotion,  and  had  become 
accustomed  to  a  life  of  listlessness  and  carelessness,  and  now  they  found  it  difficult 
to  submit  to  the  restraints  of  religion.  And  these  of  ours  are  worldly  days.  The 
general  idea  is  that  anything  is  good  enough  for  God.  A  spare  minute,  an  hour, 
when  we  can  do  nothing  else,  is  all  we  can  devote  to  God.  Notice  —  I.  The 
Christian  sacrifice.  Times  have  changed,  but  circumstances  have  not.  God 
does  not  demand  expiatory  sacrifice,  but  He  requires  spiritual.  We  are  to  render 
Him  certain  services,  and  these  services  are  the  New  Testament  sacrifices.  1.  There 
is  the  heart — penitent,  repentant,  soft.  2.  There  is  the  body — a  living  sacrifice  ; 
for  use,  for  work.  3.  Worship.  4.  Alms.  II.  The  imperfections  by  which 
these  services  are  blemished.  1.  Spiritless  worship.  The  form  without 
the  spirit.  2.  Blind  sacrifice.  How  many  crimes  have  been  committed  in  the 
name  of  zeal.  3.  Lame  offerings.  Professors  of  religion  who  live  in  conformity 
to  the  world.  4.  Sick  gifts.  Half-hearted  prayers,  languid  attendance  at  His 
house,  the  hand  working  without  the  heart,  songs  without  melody.  There  are 
preachers  who  preach  ill  and  sickly  sermons.  There  are  Sunday  school  teachers 
who  offer  sickly  lessons.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  offer  to  God  that  which  is 
diseased.  (W.  R.  F.)  The  true  sacrifice: — Malachi  begins  with  rebuking  the 
unthankfulness  of  Israel,  and  ends  with  a  threat  of  coming  and  smiting  the  earth 
with  a  curse.  Israel  gave.,  indeed,  a  melancholy  example  of  the  unthankful  heart 
of  man.  God's  law  was,  "  If  there  be  any  blemish  therein,  as  if  it  be  lame,  or 
blind,  or  have  any  ill  blemish,  thou  shalt  not  sacrifice  it  unto  the  Lord  thy  God." 
Yet  they  offered  the  blind,  the  lame,  the  sick  for  sacrifice,  and  thought  to  be 
accepted  of  God,  though  they  durst  not  have  offered  such  things  to  their  governor. 
But  this  conduct  of  Israel  is  only  a  lively  representation  of  the  way  in  which 
God,  the  giver  of  all  good  things,  is  commonly  treated  by  the  receivers  of  Hia 
bounty.  Men  have  found  Him  so  overflowing  in  kindness,  so  long-suffering,  that 
they  have  come  to  think  He  will  take  up  with  anything.  They  think  not,  that 
though  God  does  not  speak  out  He  is  watching,  and  preparing  to  reckon  with 
them.  And,  however  slow  He  may  be.  He  will  set  all  right  on  the  great  day 
when  He  will  separate  the  chaff  from  the  wheat,  and  the  tares  from  the  corn. 
Applying  to  ourselves,  let  us  remember  what  the  Lord  commands  us  to  offer. 
Paul  says,  in  His  name,  "  Present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice."  We  are  to 
serve  in  "  newness  of  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter."  The  living 
sacrifice  of  our  body  is  not  only  keeping  its  members  in  all  purity,  as  we  would 
be  members  of  Christ's  body,  but  also  giving  to  the  Lord  that  from  which  all 
purity  must  come,  a  heart  devoted  to  His  service,  and  well  instructed  for  that 
purpose  in  all  heavenly  knowledge  and  spiritual  wisdom.  See  the  particulars 
of  tne  text.  1.  "  If  ye  offer  the  blind  for  sacrifice,  is  it  not  evil  ?  "  They  had 
plenty  of  cattle  without  blemish  to  offer  to  the  Lord.  But  they  wanted  these 
for  themselves.     The  Christian  has  a  body  given  him  which  he  may  present  a 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

living  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,  without  blemish  of  sight.  In  it  he  has  an  eye  to  read 
the  Word  of  God,  an  understanding  to  receive  it :  an  eye  to  lift  up  to  heaven 
in  prayer,  an  understanding  to  offer  prayer  and  praise  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
The  eye  should  be  withdrawn  from  all  unholy  sights ;  it  should  be  single  and 
pure.  Instead  of  this,  to  what  service  is  the  eye  and  imderstanding  commonly 
devoted  !  The  true  and  living  sacrifice  of  the  body  in  this  particular  is  the  growing 
in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Never 
forget  that  growth  in  grace  and  growth  in  knowledge  go  together.  Instead 
of  using  their  eye  and  understanding  in  the  spiritual  service  of  the  Lord,  men 
waste  their  light  in  the  pursuit  of  vanity  and  sin,  until  at  last  there  comes  the 
appointed  hour  of  their  departure  from  earth.  Then  at  length — and  often  in 
vain — they  turn  their  eye  and  their  thoughts  unto  God.  2.  "  If  ye  offer  the 
lame  and  sick,  is  it  not  evil  ?  "  The  Christian  is  compared  to  a  runner,  and  hia 
life  to  a  course.  He  is  to  run  well,  so  that  he  may  obtain.  But  when  do  men 
generally  begin  to  set  themselves  to  this  race  ?  Just  as  their  course  in  this  world 
is  finishing  ;  when  their  strength  has  been  wasted  in  running  for  earthly  prizes. 
Is  not  health  the  season  for  serving  the  Lord  on  every  account  ?  Yet  many 
think  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  Lord  but  in  the  day  of  sickness.  3.  "  Offer 
it  now  to  thy  governor."  Men  will  treat  God,  their  heavenly  Sovereign,  as  they 
dare  not  treat  man,  their  earthly  sovereign.  Some  go  through  life  with  a  fixed 
purpose  of  giving  to  the  Lord  only  the  refuse.  The  man  who  bows  to  the  ground, 
and  anxiously  seeks  favour  in  the  sight  of  his  sovereign,  and  keepshimself  cor  tinually 
in  his  view  by  doing  something  which  may  please,  and  make  his  person  accepted, 
will  think  it  a  great  thing  if  he  kneel  in  the  house  of  God  for  a  short  time  once 
a  week.  Men  who  are  most  particular  in  wording  a  petition  to  be  delivered  at 
the  throne  of  their  sovereign,  and  endeavour  to  turn  and  polish  every  sentence, 
these  very  men  will  not  trouble  themselves  to  prepare  a  prayer  to  be  delivered 
at  the  footstool  of  the  throne  of  heaven.  Let  us  all  be  wise  in  this,  that  we  fully 
recognise  the  high  claims  of  God,  and  loyally,  lovingly,  worthily  try  to  meet 
them.     (R.   W.  Evans,  B.D.) 

Ver.  9.  This  hath  been  by  your  means.  —  A  solemn  charge:  —  Irreligion  is 
the  cause  of  social  chaos  and  national  ruin.  Calamities  frequently  arise  from 
spiritual  conditions.  Outward  circumstances  are  often  very  closely  linked  with 
the  inner  life.  I.  Men  have  power  to  bring  evils  upon  themselves  and 
OTHERS.  Man  is  a  centre  of  causation.  Deeds  do  not  end  in  the  doing  of  them. 
We  may  meet  them  in  the  results  of  after  years.  More  than  half  the  evils  that 
afflict  men  are  self-wrought.  God  seldom  interferes  with  the  sequences  that 
follow  our  action.  Man  is  not  the  creature  of  circumstances,  but  the  creator  of 
them.  He  is  treated  as  being  responsible  for  his  own  happiness  or  misery. 
Man  cannot  keep  the  results  of  his  actions  from  affecting  others.  One  man  has 
ruined  thousands.  Godless  parents  ruin  families  ;  hypocritical  pastors  destroy 
their  flocks  ;  depraved  senators  overthrow  a  nation.  II.  Evil-doees  seldom 
ADMIT  THIS  POINTED  CHARGE.  There  is  a  disposition  in  men  to  look  for  the  cause 
of  their  afflictions  anywhere  rather  than  in  themselves.  They  have  come  from 
fate,  from  misfortune,  from  accident,  from  the  errors  of  others,  from  the  vindictive 
anger  of  God.  Honest  confession  is  rare.  Not  to  admit  this  charge  is — 1.  Unwise. 
2.  It  will  only  increase  our  guilt.  3.  It  will  hinder  our  reception  of  mercy. 
( W.  Osborne  Lilley.) 

Vers.  10-14.  Who  is  there  even  among  you  that  would  shut  the  doors  for  nought  ? 
—  Wrong  I'orship  : — 1.  Wrong  worship  is  worse  than  no  worship  at  all.  2.  Wrong 
worship  will  one  day  be  practically  repudiated.  3.  Wrong  worship  is  sometimes 
rendered  even  by  the  religious  teachers  of  mankind.  These  priests  made  worship 
appear  contemptible  and  burdensome.  4.  Wrong  worship  evermore  incurs  the 
just  displeasure  of  heaven.  (Homilist.)  A  sordid  religion  : — I.  It  is  common. 
"  Who  is  there  even  among  you  that  would  shut  the  doors  for  nought  ?  "  II.  It 
is  GoD-DisPLEASiNG.  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  neither 
will  I  accept  an  offering  at  your  hand."  It  is  displeasing  to  Him — 1.  Because 
it  is  repugnant  to  love.  Something  like  this  a  noble  father  would  say  to  his  son 
who  paid  him  attention  only  for  what  he  could  get,  a  true  husband  would  say  to 
the  wife  who  did  the  same.  Genuine  love  sickens  at  such  service,  disdains  and 
refutes  it.  Pure  love  in  man  is  the  same  as  pure  love  in  God.  It  is  displeasing 
to  Him — 2.  Because  it  is  opposed  to  happiness.     It  is  an  eternal  law  of  mind, 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  17 

that  it  can  never  be  happy  in  self-seeking.  He  who  searches  for  happiness  as  an 
end  will  never  find  it.  It  will  always  be  to  him  a  mirage  ;  as  he  thinks  ho 
approaches  it,  it  will  vanish  into  thin  air.  God's  great  law  in  His  spiritual  universe 
is  this — that  souls  shall  only  get  happiness  as  they  pursue  goodness.  Wlien 
goodness  is  pursued  as  an  end,  full  happiness  gushes  up  at  every  step  in  the  march. 
{Homilist.) 

Yet.  11.  My  name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles. — Ood''8  name  shall 
he  great  : — Prophecy  has  a  double  sense — or  rather,  an  inferior  and  a  higher 
designation:  not  only  to  keep  the  faith  and  the  hope  of  the  Church  in  exercise 
by  the  presentation  of  a  grand  consummation,  but  to  edify,  to  warn,  to  comfort, 
and  to  instruct  the  Church.  The  prophets  were  the  ordinary  preachers  of 
righteousness.  Though  their  lessons  of  morality  and  religion  were  conveyed  in 
the  figured  strains  of  poetry,  they  were  highly  conspicuous  and  impressive.  We 
behold,  in  the  discourses  of  those  holy  men,  a  faithful  and  fearless  statement 
of  the  principles  of  piire  theology.  Malachi  closes  the  prophetic  dispensation. 
He  appears  in  the  worst  part  of  the  Jewish  history.  Darkness  came  upon  them, 
and  for  four  hundred  years  that  darkness  seemed  to  increase  in  depth.  Malachi 
gives  a  revelation  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Here  he  declares  that  God  shall 
be  magnified  and  honoured  and  worshipped  by  all  nations.     I.  The  pkophecy 

EMBRACED    THE    REVELATION     OF    God's     NAME    AMONGST    THE     GeNTILES.      God 

cannot  be  magnified  or  revered  or  worshipped  unless  He  is  kno^vn.  God  can 
only  be  known  as  He  is  pleased  to  reveal  Himself.  He  has  given  us  a  revelation 
of  Himself,  clear  and  full,  so  that  we  may  know  God.  The  name  of  God  denotes 
Himself,  His  nature,  His  moral  character,  and  all  that  can  be  made  known  of 
Him  to  the  mind  of  man.  1.  It  denotes  His  self-existence.  That  existence  is 
absolutely  eternal,  immortal,  invisible.  As  He  thus  exists.  He  exists  independ- 
ently.  All  existence,  however  varied  and  modified,  must  be  an  ema,nation  from 
Himself.  And  thus  He  appears  to  us,  arrayed  in  the  awful  attributes  of  the 
Creator  and  Governor  of  all  things.  He  is  the  parent  of  all ;  and  on  Him  all 
depends.  2.  It  denotes  the  spirituality  of  His  nature.  This  would  follow  from 
the  infinite  perfection  of  His  nature.  God  is  capable,  as  Spirit,  of  occupying 
immensity  without  displacing  matter.  A  real  Christian  carries  about  with  him 
a  solemn  sense  of  the  spiritual  presence  of  God  ;  and  he  connects  with  that 
the  presence  of  all  His  attributes — of  power  and  purity  and  love.  Wherever  we 
go  we  have  a  present  God.  3.  It  denotes  the  mysterious  existence  of  the  Trinity 
in  the  unity  of  the  godhead.  4.  It  denotes  the  harmony  of  His  attributes. 
II.  The  MAJESTY  OF  God's  government.  "  My  name  shall  be  great  among  the 
Gentiles."  It  shall  be  ma.Q;nined— it  shall  be  a  name  of  v/eight,  of  authority; 
before  it  every  name  shall  bow.  Wherever  the  name  of  Jesus  is  published,  that 
name  becomes  dominant.  The  majesty  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom  is  demon- 
strated by  its  interior  and  intellectual  design.  Human  beings  under  no  other 
government  are  ruled  by  truth,  by  interior  influences,  which  bring  the  mind  and 
the  affections  to  God.  And  the  Lord's  government  is  demonstrated  by  the  silent 
but  irresistible  agency  employed.  III.  The  celebration  of  His  worship.  The 
worship  will  be  spiritual,  but  it  v/ill  be  offered  "  in  every  place."  Spiritual  worship 
is  enlightened  :  it  is  the  result  of  knowledge  ;  it  perceives  its  object,  and  rejoices 
in  its  object ;  it  takes  hold  of  a  promise,  or  fixes  on  a  precept ;  it  must  be  the  result 
of  faith,  for  faith  sees  the  great  Invisible ;  it  must  be  the  kindling  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  There  will  be  living  offerings  ;  it  will  not  be  a  cold,  irrational  service, 
but  the  service  of  a  warm  heart ;  each  man  will  offer  himself  to  God,  and  each 
man  will  be  a  holy  and  a  purified  oblation,  kindled  by  the  fire  of  God.  And  thus 
m3T.'iads  of  spirits  everywhere,  all  over  the  world,  shall  be  ascending  in  flames 
of  pure  devotion  to  God.  (Theophilua  Lessey.)  The  name  of  Jesus  among  the 
Gentiles : — The  Rev.  Mr.  Broadhead,  returned  missionary  from  India,  related  a 
beautiful  incident  when  preaching  foreign  missionary  sermons  in  the  county  of 
Durham.  Whilst  in  India  it  was  made  known  to  him  that  not  far  from  his  residence 
there  was  an  extraordinary  piece  of  architectural  work  in  the  shape  of  a  temple, 
most  luxuriously  designed  in  white  marble.  This  edifice  was  erected  in  memory 
of  some  female,  but  one  of  the  things  that  specially  attracted  the  notice  of  the 
missionary  was  the  great  number  of  arches  which  it  contained.  On  nearing  the 
entrance  the  attendants  told  him  that  if  he  whispered  a  word  inside  the  building 
it  would  be  re-echoed  from  every  arch  proceeding  into  the  interior.  The  missionary 
breathed  out  the  word  "  Jesus,"  and  instantly  the  echoes  were  resounding  from 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

every  part  of  the  building.  The  effect  was  magnificent.  The  desire  of  every 
Christian  heart  is — 

"  Let  the  echo  fly 
The  spacious  earth  around." 

Chrisfa  influence  increasing: — Speaking  on  the  day  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  funeral, 
the  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer  said :  "  One  of  the  marks  which  distinguishes  Jesus  Christ 
from  every  human  teacher  and  reformer  is  the  fact  that  His  influence  is  ever 
increasing.  The  iafluence  of  Gladstone,  to-day  so  great,  will  diminish  year  by 
year,  but  Jesus  Christ's  influence  was  never  so  great  as  it  is  now."  Of  the  meaning 
of  the  name  of  God : — I.  The  peincipal  scriptural  acceptations  of  the  "  name." 
1.  Sometimes  it  signifies  God  Himself.  Praising  or  blessing  the  name  of  God 
is  praising  God  Himself.  By  His  name  being  "  great "  is  meant  their  acknow- 
ledging or  professing  Him  to  be  the  true  God,  and  their  adhering  to  the  worship 
of  Him  only,  in  opposition  to  all  idolatry  and  false  religions.  2.  Sometimes  it  is 
used  to  signify  His  true  religion  and  worship.  "  The  place  which  the  Lord  your 
God  shall  choose,  ...  to  put  His  name  there,"  means  the  place  where  He  shall 
appoint  His  servants  to  appear  before  Him  with  the  external  tokens  of  their 
homage  and  worship.  3.  In  other  places  of  Scripture  the  "  name"  expresses  those 
adorable  perfections  or  attributes  which  are,  as  it  were,  the  proper  denomination 
and  character  of  the  Divine  nature.  See  Exod.  xxxiv.  6.  4.  Once  more,  the 
"  name  "  signifies  the  authority  of  God,  or  His  Divine  commission.  II.  The 
event  predicted.  In  it  is  evidently  contained — 1.  To  the  Jews,  something 
comminatory.  2.  In  relation  to  the  Gentiles,  a  particular  promise ;  joined  with 
a  general  declaration  concerning  the  state  and  condition  of  the  universal  Church 
in  the  future  and  latter  ages  of  the  world.  Whatever  be  the  true  meaning  of 
these  and  the  like  prophecies  ;  whether  there  be  a  time  still  to  come,  wherein  they 
shall  be  accomplished  literally,  or  whether  they  are  intended  only  to  express  the 
natural  tendency  of  the  universal  and  sincere  practice  of  Christianity  in  the  present 
world,  and  the  real  effect  which  shall  be  obtained  by  it  in  the  world  to  come,  we 
must  not  be  too  curious  about  particular  times  and  seasons.  Learn — (I)  Our 
duty  to  promote  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  interest  of  true  virtue  among  men. 
(2)  To  justify  to  ourselves  the  various  methods  in  which  the  wisdom  of  God  has 
chosen  to  reveal  itself  to  the  world.  (3)  If  we,  under  the  clearer  light  of  the  ever- 
lasting Gospel,  still  live  corruptly,  how  much  heavier  must  be  our  punishment 
than  that  of  the  Jews.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  And  in  every  place  incense 
shall  be  offered  unto  My  name. — The  future  glory  of  Messiah's  ki)igdom  : — 
Two  phenomena  of  the  moral  world  severely  task  the  faith  of  religious 
persons.  One  is,  that  so  large  a  portion  of  the  globe  should  not  even  be  nominally 
Christian.  The  other  is,  that  (.'hristendom  itself  should  be  so  corrupt  and  so 
scantily  imbued  with  vital  godliness.  Attempts  may  be  made  to  reconcile  our 
minds  to  this  difficulty  in  the  moral  administration  of  the  world,  by  urging  that 
the  scheme  of  nature  lies  open  to  similar  objections,  and  that  much  physical 
energy  runs  to  waste  in  abortive  efforts  and  through  counteracting  forces.  But 
analof^ies  of  this  kind  are  more  ingenious  than  conclusive ;  they  silence  rather  than 
satisfy.  We  may  find  comfort  in  such  reflections  as  these — 1.  It  is  the  prerogative 
of  an  infinite  Being  to  be  deliberate  and  slow,  whereas  haste  and  precipitation 
are  the  characteristics  of  a  limited  nature.  2.  Much  may  be  going  forward  by 
secret  and  unnoticed  processes,  conducive  and  preparatory  to  the  development 
of  Messiah's  kingdom.  3.  God  has  consulted  His  own  glory  in  thus  far  contracting 
the  supply  of  His  Spirit ;  since  He  has  thereby  made  apparent  the  insufficiency 
of  moral  means,  and  the  strongest  objective  inducements,  although  accompanied 
with  common  grace,  to  overcome  the  repugnance  of  the  human  heart  to  the 
humbling  doctrines  and  self-denying  precepts  of  the  Gospel.  4.  Contrasted  with 
the  stage  of  thick  darkness  or  glimmering  twilight  between  which  the  world  has 
been  so  long  divided,  the  glory  of  that  unclouded  day  will  be  the  more  conspicuous, 
when  "  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the 
sea."  But  the  prophecies  have  a  special  virtue,  reviving  our  drooping  faith.  This 
text  contains  a  sublime  annunciation  of  that  triumphant  era  when  Messiah  "  shall 
have  dominion  from  sea  to  sea."  It  is  usual  with  the  prophets  to  describe  the 
dispensation  of  the  Gospel  by  terms  and  analogies  taken  from  the  Mosaic  ritual. 
I.  The  prediction  that  "  incense  shall  be  offered  unto  the  name  "  of 
Jehovah.  The  "  incense"  denotes  primarily  the  intercession  of  the  Saviour.  He 
hath  given  Himself  for  us,  "  an  offering  of  a  sweet-smelling  savour."     The  Word  i«. 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  19 

in  the  original,  the  past  participle  of  a  verb  which  means  to  fume,  and  may  pro- 
perly denote  any  sacrifice  which,  being  consumed  by  fire,  was  carried  up  in  smoke. 
Its  spiritual  meaning  should  not  be  restricted  to  proper  acts  of  worship,  but  should 
be  held  to  comprise  all  those  holy  works  which  are  the  produce  of  a  spiritual 
nature — those  "  sacrifices  of  righteousness  "  with  which  God  is  well-pleased. 
Then  translate  the  passage,  "  In  every  place  whatever  is  fumed  shall  be  brought 
near  unto  Thy  name," — then  what  else  is  represented  to  the  mind  save  the  uni- 
versal reign  of  evangelical  righteousness  ?  What  is  meant  by  the  phrase,  "  offered 
xmto  Thy  name  "  ?  There  is  strong  presumptive  evidence  for  believing  that  this 
denomination  of  Jehovah  is  no  meagre  expletive,  but  carries  a  direct  and  explicit 
allusion  to  Christ  the  Mediator.  This  appellation  of  God  is  strictly  associated 
with  the  character  He  sustains  in  redemption.  The  elder  patriarchs  appear  to  have 
understood  the  "  name  "  as  a  sacramental  term,  by  which  Jehovah  exhibited 
Himself  conversing  with  guilty  men  through  the  promised  Intercessor,  the  Word 
made  flesh.  II.  The  prediction  that  a  pure  offering  should  be  every- 
where PRESENTED  TO  Jehovah.  We  have  considered  the  offering  of  incense  to 
imply  the  benign  effect  of  our  Lord's  pacification,  in  rendering  the  worship  and 
service  of  mankind  acceptable  to  Jehovah,  and  surely  the  "  pure  offering  "  will 
express  the  sanctification  of  the  Church,  and  of  each  individual  believer,  and  the 
consequent  purity  of  those  offerings  which  are  brought  near  to  Jehovah  by  His 
spiritual  household.  In  this  pure  "  offering  "  see — 1.  The  extraordinary  extension 
and  pvu-ity  of  the  Church.  Contemplate  the  entire  extermination  of  the  lewd  and 
sanguinary  rites  of  paganism,  and  the  abolition  of  all  bloody  sacrifices,  through 
the  oblation  of  one  great  victim,  who  by  actually  putting  away  sin  has  annulled 
all  symbolical  immolations.  Henceforth  we  are  to  render  only  unbloody  offerings 
— the  sacrifice  of  thanksgivings.  We  are  warranted  to  contemplate  the  Catholic 
Church  as  one  magnificent  offering  to  Immanuel.  The  Church,  indeed,  teem  a 
with  nominal  Chi'istians,  self-deceivers,  and  hypocritical  pretenders.  But  from 
this  it  shall  hereafter,  even  in  its  visible  pale,  be  wholly  or  extensively  purged. 
Another  thing  constituting  the  adult  Church  "  a  pure  offering  "  will  be  this — 
that  its  worship  will  be  no  longer  debased  with  fiction  and  mummery.  The 
doctrines  of  transubstantiation,  indulgences,  masses,  penances,  purgatory,  and 
supererogation  will  fall  to  the  ground,  and  with  them  will  expire  the  adoration  of 
images,  saints,  and  angels.  And  the  universal  Chvirch  will  be  free  from  sectariaa 
distinctions.  We  may  also  anticipate  a  considerable  abridgment  of  ecclesiastical 
ordinances.  2.  The  religious  worship  of  that  brilliant  age  will  have  a  peculiar 
purity,  owing  to  the  improved  character  of  the  individual  Christians.  They  will 
have  attained  a  much  higher  illumination.  The  conscience  will  then  be  thoroughly 
pure  and  undefiled.  There  wiU  be  none  of  that  double-mindedness  and  self- 
delusion  with  which  the  purest  minds  of  this  silver  age  are  more  or  less  alloyed. 
We  are  even  led  to  expect  a  state  of  perfect  exemption  from  the  dross  of  earthliness. 
The  kingdom  of  Christ  will  be  developed  in  their  bosoms  in  all  its  purity  and 
fulness  ;  and  to  them  it  will  be  not  less  easy  than  delightful  to  have  "  their  con- 
versation in  heaven."  The  promise  of  the  text  is  most  encouraging.  What 
manner  of  persons,  then,  ought  we  to  be  ?  If  the  blessed  Trinity  is  incessantly 
employed  in  this  work  of  regeneration,  shall  we  not  help  it  forward  as  humble 
but  zealous  instruments,  with  the  best  faculties  that  we  have?  {J.  N.Pearson,  M.A.) 
A  worshipping  world : — I.  The  glorious  prediction  of  a  worshipping  world. 
We  accept  any  promise  according  to  the  known  worth  or  truthfulness  or  power  of 
him  who  gives  it.  Here  is  the  very  highest  authority,  even  that  of  God  Himself. 
The  image  is  very  significant ;  it  is  taken  from  the  wide  circuit  and  prevalency 
of  solar  hght  which  visits  every  portion  of  the  globe.  There  can  be  no  vividly  more 
glowing  nor  general  promise  of  the  widespread  power  of  the  Gospel  than  this  is. 
II.  This  Divine  time  of  general  happiness  includes  millennial  glory  for 
THE  WORLD.  The  second  image  employed  indicates  the  glorious  season  of  true 
religion  possessing  the  hearts  of  men  in  all  its  Divine  purity  and  hallowed  devotions. 
The  contrast  is  lovely  between  the  two  figures  used.  Light,  the  most  beautiful 
element  in  nature ;  perfume,  the  sweetest  of  elements ;  the  incense  of  most  pre<nous 
odoin-s  represents  the  purity  of  soul -worship  presented  to  God,  whether  in  public 
devotions  or  from  private  hearts.  We  need  not  enter  on  the  question,  whether 
this  Divine  time  shall  be  before  or  after  the  second  advent  in  glory.  The  sweet 
incense  and  pure  offering  which  Jehovah  now  demands  and  loves  are  spiritual 
devotions,  true  prayers,  praise,  obedience,  love,  and  charity.  These  are  to  ba 
found  "  in  every  place."     The  coming  glory  of  Christ  in  the  conversion  of  the 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

world  is  the  earnest  prayer  of  faith  now ;  it  is  the  glowing  object  of  Divine  hop© 
now;  it  is  often  the  warm  pulse  and  action  of  Christian  love  and  charity. 
III.  Our  imperative  duty  to  extend  the  Gospel  of  Christ  in  all  lands. 
1.  This  is  the  Christian's  duty  of  obligation.  2.  Efforts  for  the  conversion  of 
the  heathen  always  bring  down  rich  blessings  on  the  soul.  (J.  Angley,  M.A.) 
Acceptable  worship: — I.  The  worship  which  God  ordains.  All  true  worshippers 
"  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  The  first  idea  relative  to  God's 
ordination  of  worship  is,  that  human  inventions  in  the  worship  of  God  are  rejected 
as  hateful  to  Him.  Open  vice  is  not  more  evil  in  the  sight  of  God  than  the  mockery 
which  is  offered  in  human  inventions.  There  is  one  offering  that  is  pure,  and  that 
is  the  offering  of  God  in  Christ  for  us,  and  that  alone  God  will  accept.  Its  puritjr 
constitutes  its  value.  We  must  keep  an  eye  upon  the  two  natures  of  Christ,  and 
the  purity  of  both,  in  order  to  get  at  the  pure  offering.  II.  The  exaltation  op 
the  name  of  Jehovah.  In  Scripture  the  one  prominent  object  the  Lord  has  in 
view  everywhere  is  the  glory  of  His  own  name.  The  honour  of  Jehovah's  name 
is  to  be  constantly  eyed,  in  doctrines  received,  in  experience  enjoyed,  and  in 
practice  manifested  ;  and  the  interests  of  the  living  Church  are  involved  therein. 
{Joseph  Irons.)  The  universal  spread  of  the  Gospel : — For  our  Lord's  obedience 
unto  death  His  Father  appointed  unto  Him  a  kingdom,  that  all  people,  nations, 
and  languages  should  serve  Him.  The  world-wide  spread  of  Christ's  Gospel  is 
the  truth  announced  here.  I.  The  Scripture  testimony  to  the  ultimate 
UNIVERSAL  SPREAD  OF  THE  GosPEL.  This  testimony  is  full,  clear,  and  decisive. 
It  is  given  alive  under  patriarchal.  Mosaic,  and  Christian  dispensations.  II.  The 
SAME  TRUTH  IS  EVIDENT  FROM  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  CASE.  1.  The  need  of  redemp- 
tion is  universal.  All  false  religions  bear  testimony  to  the  need.  And  to  their 
own  insufficiency  to  satisfy  this  need.  2.  The  Gospel  alone  can  satisfy  this  craving 
of  mankind.  It  proclaims  the  one  oblation  by  which  Christ  hath  for  ever  perfected, 
&c.  It  shows  the  chains  of  evil  broken  by  the  great  Deliverer.  3.  The  Gospel 
is  fitted  for  universal  diffusion.  All  other  religions  are  adapted  only  for  local 
influence ;  even  the  Jewish  religion  was  suited  only  to  Palestine.  But  the  Gospel 
is  at  home  under  every  clime,  and  with  every  race  of  man.  4.  The  Gospel  implants 
the  instinct  of  universal  diffusion.  It  produces  hatred  of  sin,  and  love  to  God  and 
man.  It  impels  the  Christian  to  say  to  his  brother,  "  Know  the  Lord."  It 
finds  a  brother  where  the  Samaritan  found  a  neighbour.  It  brings  us  to  our  knees 
to  pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come."  5.  The  kingdoms  of  providence  and  grace  are 
united  under  the  same  sceptre.  The  revolutions  of  nations  ultimately  further 
the  Gospel.  III.  The  voice  of  history  confirms  the  conclusions.  Here  we 
have  God's  works  confirming  His  words.  The  witness  of  history  is  to  the  point, 
whether  we  consider — 1.  The  importance  of  the  conquests  hitherto  won  by  the 
Gospel.  Christianity  has  conquered  every  religion  with  which  it  fairly  came  in 
contact — Greek,  Roman,  Egyptian,  Persian,  Scandinavian,  Celtic,  Phoenician, 
Polynesian.  2.  The  proved  weakness  of  the  only  weapons  with  which  it  can  be 
assailed.  Persecution,  false  philosophy,  and  priestcraft.  Then — (1)  Let  us  submit 
ourselves  to  Christ's  authority.  (2)  Let  us  fervently  pray  for  the  advancement 
of  the  kingdom.  (3)  Let  us  cherish  and  promote  the  missionary  spirit.  (4)  Let 
us  contribute  liberally  and  cheerfully  of  our  substance  to  this  good  end. 
(Evangelical    Preacher.)  A    pure    offering'. — An    acceptable    sacrifice:  —  The 

world  rose  in  vision  before  Malachi,  as  one  great  altar,  burning  everywhere 
with  the  incense  of  devout  hearts,  and  covered  with  its  myriad  races,  offering 
themselves  to  God  as  a  "  pure  offering."  The  vision  must  have  comforted  him. 
The  glorious  era  which  Malachi  gazed  on  for  a  moment  has  not  yet  come.  We 
may,  however,  offer  unto  God  "  a  pure  offering."  I.  The  duty  suggested. 
From  the  earliest  ages  the  custom  of  presenting  offerings  to  God  has  prevailed. 
It  might  have  arisen  from  instructions  given  to  our  first  parents,  or  from  the 
natural  instinct  of  gratitude  or  of  fear.  The  first  family  presented  their  offerings. 
Christianity  does  not  remove  from  us  this  obligation,  though  Christ  has  offered 
Himself  without  spot  for  us.  He  offered  Himself  that  we  may  be  able  to  offer 
ourselves  through  Him.  Ourselves  are  the  best  offerings  we  can  give.  If  we  had 
no  sense  of  possession  in  ourselves  we  could  not  consecrate  ourselves  to  God. 
Every  sacrifice,  sincerely  made  for  the  world's  advancement,  is  an  offering  presented 
to  God.  II.  What  a  pure  offering  is.  Many  offerings  are  not  pure.  Men 
defile  their  offerings  by  their  own  impurity.  How  can  man  present  an  offering 
that  shall  be  pure  in  God's  sight  ?  1.  It  must  come  from  a  purified  heart.  Men's 
hearts  may  be  purified  and  yearn  after  God.     Holy  love  may  prompt  the  gift. 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  21 

Cleansing  fountains  abound  on  this  polluted  earth.  Angelic  ministries,  the  sanctify- 
ing spirit,  the  purging  flame  of  God's  truth,  the  fountain  of  forgiving  love  opened 
at  the  Cross,  are  aU  ours  to  take  away  our  guilt,  as  we  seek  to  present  our  offerings 
to  God.  2.  It  must  proceed  from  a  penitent  and  obedient  spirit.  The  disposition 
of  the  offerer  will  be  regarded  more  than  the  offering.  Gifts  separated  from  the 
inner  life  are  of  no  value  to  God.  3.  It  must  emanate  from  a  spirit  of  entire 
consecration  to  God.  Entire  consecration  purifies.  To  devote  ourselves  to 
God  is  to  separate  ourselves  from  sinful  defilements.  Offerings  ever  derive  their 
value  from  the  devoted  spirit  of  the  offerer.  Entire  consecration  is  difficult  to 
our  depraved  hearts.  All  lingering  covetousness  must  be  conquered.  III.  How 
IT  SHOULD  BE  PRESENTED.  We  should  Seek  not  to  mar  our  offering  by  the  way 
in  which  we  present  it.  It  should  be — 1.  In  faith.  Which  will  lay  hold  of 
God's  willingness  to  accept  our  gifts,  however  lowly  and  insignificant  they  may  be. 
Faith  will  lead  us  away  from  the  altar,  rejoicing  in  the  assurance  that  God  has 
accepted  our  offerings.  2.  By  Jesus  Clu-ist.  He  is  the  High  Priest  of  humanity. 
He  presents  prayers,  praises,  works  for  us..  He  presents  the  saints  themselves 
as  an  offering  without  blemish  to  God.  3.  With  sincerity.  God  looks  into  the 
heart  of  the  offerer.  Some  offerings  are  presented  only  for  the  e\'es  of  men. 
4.  With  grateful  eagerness.  All  lukewarmness  should  be  banished.  Grateful 
love  should  animate  us.  IV.  Blessings  attend  the  presentation  of  a  purh 
OFFERING.  M^e  have  a  consciousness  of  Divine  approval.  Every  time  we  present 
ourselves  as  a  pure  offering  to  God  we  receive  ourselves  back  again  from  His 
hands  with  every  spiritual  power  quickened  and  enlarged.  (W.  Osborne  Lilky.) 
The  Christian  sacrifice  : — I.  A  definition  op  the  Christian  sacrifice.  As  the 
ancient  Chiu-ch  meant  it.  Not  the  mere  sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
Christ ;  but  the  whole  sacred  action  or  solemn  service  of  the  Church  assembled. 
The  sacrifice  of  praise  and  prayer  through  Jesus  Christ,  mystically  represented 
in  the  creatures  of  bread  and  wine.  This  is  the  sacrifice  which  Malachi  foretold 
the  Gentiles  should  one  day  offer  unto  God.  Incense  denotes  the  rational  part 
of  the  sacrifice.  Mincha  the  material  part  of  it.  The  rational  part  is  prayer, 
thanksgiving,  and  commemoration.  Mincha,  the  material  part,  is  a  present  of 
bread  and  wine.  It  is  called  a  pure  offering — mincha  purum;  wherein  does  this 
"purity"  consist?  Some  think  the  meaning  is  purely  or  spiritually  offered. 
Others  say  pure,  by  reason  of  the  disposition  and  affection  of  the  offerer.  I 
prefer  to  understand,  pure  in  respect  of  Christ,  whom  it  signifies  and  represents 
a  sacrifice  without  spot  or  blemish.  Six  particulars  contained  in  the  definition  of 
the  Christian  sacrifice.  1.  That  this  Christian  service  is  an  oblation.  2.  That  it 
is  an  oblation  of  thanksgiving  and  prayer.  3.  An  oblation  through  Jesus  Christ 
commemorated  in  the  creatiu-es  of  bread  and  wine.  4.  This  commemoration 
of  Christ  is  also  a  sacrifice.  5.  The  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  in  this  mystical 
Bervice,  was  made  of  bread  and  wine  which  had  been  first  offered  unto  God,  to 
agnize  Him  the  Lord  of  the  creature.  6.  This  sacrifice  was  placed  in  commemora- 
tion only  of  Christ's  sacrifice  upon  the  Cross,  and  not  in  a  real  offering  of  His  body 
and  blood  anew.  The  sacrifice  of  Christians  is  nothing  but  that  one  sacrifice  of 
Christ  once  offered  upon  the  Cross  again  and  again  commemorated.  {Joseph 
Mede,  B.D.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Should  I  accept  this  of  your  hand?  saith  the  Lord. — Vain 
oblations  (taken  with  Isa.  i.  1.^): — Each  age  has  its  characteristic.  No  two 
are  just  alike ;  and  though  history  repeats  itself,  yet  there  is  progress.  Its  pro- 
cesses are  those  of  a  spiral.  I.  In  the  age  of  Isaiah  the  Jews  were  full  of  religi- 
osity. Sacrifices  were  not  neglected — a  multitude  were  offered.  They  brought 
the  best  of  all  kinds,  not  as  in  the  days  of  Malachi,  the  lean  and  the  poor,  but 
abundantly  they  brought  the  blood  of  bullocks,  of  lambs,  and  of  he-goats.  Clouds 
of  incense  arose ;  they  carefully  kept  the  new  moons,  the  Sabbaths,  the  assemblies, 
and  the  solemn  meeting,  not  only  all  appointed  feasts,  but  even  others  they 
observed  in  an  intense  devotion  to  the  forms  of  religion.  Why  were  their  oblations 
vain  ?  Why  were  they  not  regarded  in  their  sacrifices  and  accepted  in  their 
persons  ?  1.  As  in  the  days  of  the  Saviour,  so  now,  whilst  they  were  careful  to 
tithe,  mint,  anise  and  cummin,  they  omitted  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law, 
judgment,  mercy,  and  faith.  2.  They  were  offered  without  faith.  This  whole 
chapter  shows  such  to  be  the  case.  This  was  just  what  made  the  difference 
between  Abel's  sacrifice  and  Cain's  offering.  3.  Their  offerings  were  unaccompanied 
with  repentance ;  for  repentance  implies  confession  of  sin,  the  forsaking  it,  and 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  reformation  of  life.  II.  This  positive  sinfxtlness  is  clearly  made  orrT. 
1.  They  were  laden  with  iniquity.  2.  There  was  no  soundness  in  them,  from 
the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head.  3.  Their  rulers  were  like  the  princes 
of  Sodom,  and  themselves  like  the  men  of  Gomorrah.  4.  Their  hands  were  full 
of  blood.  The  rulers  did  not  punish  the  people,  and  reciprocally  the  people 
abetted  their  rulers  in  their  blood-guiltiness.  5.  The  times  were  full  of  evils, 
unredressed  and  unavenged.  Their  princes  had  become  companions  of  thieves 
and  bribe-takers.  III.  On  the  other  hand,  God  still  remembers  grace  and 
MERCY.  1.  There  was  still  a  remnant  left  (ver.  9).  2.  All  are  called  to  repentance 
(vers.  16,  17).  3.  Those  that  repent  shall  obtain  mercy,  but  the  contumacious 
shall  not  be  spared  (vers.  18-24).  4.  And  still  further,  God  holds  up  the  gracious 
promise  to  send  times  of  reformation  and  refreshing  (vers.  25-27).     Reflections — 

I.  Do  we  preach  and  pray,  and  is  there  no  answering  fruit — no  conversions,  and 
no  increase  of  piety  ?  2.  Can  the  reason  be  found  in  devotion  to  the  forms  of 
religion  and  the  neglect  of  its  spirit  ?  3.  Are  our  people  characterised  by  an 
absorbing  devotion  to  the  world  ?  4.  Then  to  us  as  to  Israel  is  the  call  to  repent- 
ance ;  to  us  as  to  them,  the  hope  of  forgiveness ;  to  us  as  to  them,  the  promise 
of  revival  upon  repentance  and  reformation.  God  forbid  that  we  should  merely 
possess  the  forms  of  religion  and  be  destitute  of  its  life-giving  power.  (L.  O. 
Tliomson.)  Hypocrisy  in  public  worship: — All  that  wears  the  appearance 
of  religion  is  not  sincere  piety.  This  remark  will  particularly  apply  to  those 
acts  which  constitute  what  we  call  public  worship.  For  in  privacy,  where  no 
eye  is  upon  us  but  that  of  the  Omniscient,  there  is  less  temptation  to,  and  less 
danger  of  insincerity.  Malachi  is  here  remonstrating  with  the  people  for  the 
"  iniquity  of  their  holy  things."  I.  The  crishnal  charge  he  fixes  on  this 
PROFESSING  community.  It  is  aggravated  by  three  things.  1.  By  the  salutary 
discipline  to  which  they  had  recently  been  subjected  for  their  backslidin^s  and 
rebellions  against  God.  2.  By  the  fact  that  they  thus  sinned  against  the  clearest 
knowledge.  3.  By  the  majesty  of  the  object  against  whom  their  offence  was 
directed.     We  censure  and  condemn  the  Jews,  but  "  are  we  better  than  they  "  ? 

II.  The  uses  to  be  made  or  this  remonstrance.  1.  Here  are  materials  for 
your  deepest  humiliation  and  penitence.  2.  How  incompetent  are  all  the  rites 
and  ceremonies  of  religion  to  save  the  soul  !  3.  See  the  fallacy  of  pharisaism. 
4.  How  welcome,  then,  is  the  evangelical  intelligence  which  is  brought  to  us, 
to  awaken  a  hope  of  the  acceptance  of  oiu"  persons  and  services  in  the  sight  of 
a  holy  God.     (J.  Clayton.) 

Ver.  14.  But  ciirsed  be  the  deceiver.  —  A  cursed  one  :  —  Curses  are  the 
echoes  that  sin  awakens.  All  deceivers  are  cursed.  I.  The  deceiver.  He 
may  be  a  self-deceiver,  or  a  deceiver  of  others,  or  both.  Some  may  unconsciously 
deceive  ;  others  intentionally.  It  is  the  intentional  deceiver  that  is  cursed ; 
he  who  aims  to  deceive  others.  These  abound  in — 1.  Religious  commimities. 
The  wily  priest,  the  glib  teacher  of  error,  the  hypocrite.  2.  In  the  social  circle. 
The  liar,  the  seducer,  the  false  friend.  3.  In  commerce.  The  unreliable  employee, 
the  concocter  of  lying  prospectuses,  the  swindling  merchant.  4.  In  political 
movements.  The  bribing  agent,  the  self-seeking  adventurer,  the  unscrupulous 
statesman.  Men  sometimes  turn  themselves  into  incarnate  falsehoods  for  the 
sake  of  worldl}^  success.  Tbe  advantage's  gained  are  only  seeming,  not  real. 
The  deceiver  is — (1)  Foolish.  He  injures  hiir.sclf  for  the  sake  of  uncertain  good. 
(2)  Despicable.  Society  treats  the  exposed  deceiver  with  contempt.  All  honest 
men  shun  him.  (3)  Treacherous.  He  is  like  a  splintered  staff,  a  rotten  cable, 
a  sandy  foundation,  a  spider's  web,  a  wrecker's  beacon,  a  flower-covered  bog, 
a  desert  mirage,  &c.  (4)  Jlischievous.  He  lays  traps  for  the  innocent.  He 
destroys  social  confidence.  (5)  Diabolical.  Like  Lucifer,  he  "  sins  in  wily  guise." 
He  is  a  true  son  of  the  father  of  lies.  II.  His  curse.  This  may  be  suspicion, 
discredit,  fear  of  discovery,  exposure,  stings  of  conscience,  spiritual  blindness, 
the  execrations  of  his  victims;  the  contempt  of  all  good  men;  the  displeasure 
of  the  Almighty,  hell-fires,  &c.  His  curse  is  certain.  In  a  universe  where  a  God 
of  truth  and  rigliteousness  reigns,  the  deceiver  is  sure  to  be  punished.  The  curse 
is  terrible  and  eternal.  Application  —  1.  Let  us  guard  ourselves  against  all 
deceivers.  2.  Let  us  beware  of  deceit.  3.  Better  be  deceived  than  deceive. 
(W.  Osborne  LiUey.)  And  sacriflceth  unto  the  Lord  a  corrupt  thing. — The 
■'■vvice  of  God  an  unblemished  offering  : — The  prophets  were  God's  messengers, 
commissioned  to  witness  in  His  name  against  the  sins  of  the  people.     To  under* 


CHAP.  I.]  MALACHI.  23 

stand  this  remonstrance  aright,  we  must  remember  what  were  the  laws  respecting 
the  offerings.  The  prime  of  each  offering  was  to  be  presented  to  God.  But 
these  profane  priests  thought  that  anything  would  serve  for  a  sacrifice,  though 
never  so  coarse  and  mean.  They  picked  out  the  worst  they  had,  that  which  was 
neither  fit  for  the  market  nor  for  their  own  tables,  and  offered  that  at  God's 
altar.  With  every  sacrifice  the  law  commanded  them  to  bring  a  meat-offering 
of  "  fine  flour,  mingled  with  bread  "  :  but  they  brought  "  polluted  bread,"  of 
coarse  and  refuse  material.  The  principle  illustrated  is — that  the  service  of 
God  admits  of  nothing  short  of  the  most  perfect  offering  that  can  be  presented  ; 
and  everything  below  this  affixes  upon  the  offerers  the  character  of  "  deceivers," 
and  the  condemnation  of  being  "  cursed."  I.  The  service  of  beligious  worship. 
1.  It  is  profane  service  whenever  it  is  not  intelligent,  whenever  it  is  not  founded 
on  a  right  understanding  of  the  object  of  worship.  You,  who  have  watched 
the  movements  or  the  torpidity  of  your  minds  at  the  time  of  supposed  prayer, 
will  bear  me  witness  how  often  you  have  failed  to  recognise  the  simple  being 
of  the  God  before  whom  you  bow  down.  2.  No  offering  of  worship  is  acceptable 
which  is  not  also  solemn  and  reverential.  This  it  could  not  fail  to  be  if  we 
were  possessed  by  a  just  sense  of  the  transcendent  greatness  of  Him  to  whom 
prayer  is  presented.  His  majesty  is  infinite  and  ineffable,  and  therefore  we 
stand  at  an  immeasurable  distance  from  Him.  And  yet  to  such  a  Being  we 
address  ovu'selves  in  prayer.  Do  any  of  us  detect  in  ourselves  the  vacant  gaze, 
the  roving  thought  ?  3.  Acceptable  worship  must  be  spiritual.  Why  so  ?  "  God 
is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 
They  must  so  worship  Him,  because  it  is  not  possible  that  He  should  receive 
any  other.  Do  you  assert  that  "  God  is  a  Spirit,"  then  you  contract  Him  into  the 
narrow  dimensions  of  your  own  being  if  you  give  Him  no  more  than  the  devotions 
of  the  body,  if  you  give  Him  not  the  ardent  services  of  your  soul.  4.  If  our 
worship  be  genuine,  it  will  be  marked  by  intentness  of  mind.  Languor  and 
laxness  of  the  spirit  are  s\ae  tokens  that  it  is  not  a  glad  offering,  but  an  irksome 
task.  In  all  these  cases  what  is  the  sin  which  we  charge  home  but  that  very 
ein  for  which  the  prophet  utters  his  rebuke  ?  They  have  a  better  offering  which 
they  might  offer.  They  are  capable  of  a  worship  more  worthy  of  God.  Instead, 
they  bring  the  lame,  and  the  sick,  and  the  torn,  they  "  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord 
a  corrupt  thing."  II.  The  habitual  service  of  the  life.  Here  too  the  service 
of  God  admits  of  nothing  short  of  the  most  perfect  offering  that  can  be  presented. 
Our  baptismal  covenant,  made  for  us  in  our  unconscious  infancy,  when  our  own 
reason  was  not  privy  to  the  engagement,  is  sealed  and  confirmed  in  maturer  age  ; 
and  then  it  is  that  we  deliberately  and  personally  "  vow  "  to  give  the  choice  thing 
in  our  flock.  But  where  is  he  to  be  found  that  fully  recognises  and  performs 
the  baptismal  oath  ?  The  baptised  man,  the  communicant,  and  the  parent 
for  his  child,  and  he  who  is  in  near  danger,  has  vowed,  deliberately,  imto  God, 
the  male  that  is  in  his  flock  ;  but  he  leaves  off  with  sacrificing  unto  the  Lord 
"  a  corrupt  thing."  {R.  Eden,  M.A.)  I  am  a  great  King-,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts. — Jehovah  a  Icing  :  —  What  God  is  Himself,  what  constitutes  His  essence 
no  language  can  describe.  What  God  is  to  His  creatures,  and  what  relations  He 
sustains  with  respect  to  them,  may  without  difficulty  be  stated  in  language  suffi- 
ciently intelligible.  Sometimes  God  styles  Himself  a  father,  sometimes  a  master, 
and  sometimes  a  king.  I.  Jehovah  is  a  king.  A  king  is  the  political  head 
or  supreme  ruler  of  a  kingdom.  There  are  kings  by  right,  and  kings  in  fact. 
The  king  by  right  has  claim  to  the  throne,  though  he  may  not  possess  it.  The 
king  in  fact  actually  possesses  the  throne,  though  he  may  have  no  right  to  it. 
He  alone  who  has  both  the  right  and  the  possession  can  properly  be  called  a  king. 
And  such  a  king  is  Jehovah.  His  kingdom  is  the  whole  created  universe,  and 
of  this  kingdom  He  is  in  actual  and  full  possession.  And  He  is  the  rightful 
sovereign  of  the  imiverse.  AU  men  were  bom  into  the  dominions  of  Jehovah. 
Men  cannot  cease  to  be  His  subjects  without  ceasing  to  exist.  He  possesses  all 
the  insignia  of  royalty.  He  has  a  throne,  a  crown,  royal  robes,  &c.  II.  Jehovah 
IS  A  great  king.  Great  is  the  Lord,  and  His  greatness  is  unsearchable. 
See  the  greatness,  duration,  and  stability  of  His  empire.  His  kingdom  is  an 
everlasting  kingdom.  1.  If  God  is  a  king.  He  is  under  obligations  to  make  laws 
for  His  subjects.  When  He  assumes  any  office  He  binds  Himself  to  perform  all 
the  duties  of  that  office.  The  first  and  most  indispensable  duty  of  an  absolute 
sovereign  is  to  make  laws  for  his  subjects.  It  is  as  much  his  duty  to  make  laws, 
as  it  is  their  duty  to  obey  them  when  made.     2.  He  is  under  obligations  to  make 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

the  wisest  and  best  laws  possible.  It  was  incumbent  on  him  to  consult,  not  the 
private  wishes  and  inclinations  of  individuals,  but  the  great  interests  of  his  whole 
kingdom.  3.  He  is  under  obligations  to  annex  some  penalty  to  every  violation 
of  his  law.  A  law  without  a  penalty  annexed  is  not  a  law,  that  is,  it  cannot 
answer  the  purpose  of  a  law.  4.  He  is  bound  to  enforce  his  laws,  and  to  inflict 
the  threatened  punishment  on  all  who  transgress  them.  He  must  not  bear  the 
sword  in  vain,  but  be  a  terror  to  evil-doers.  Justice  in  a  sovereign  ruler  consists 
in  treating  his  subjects  according  to  their  deserts.  He  may  be  guilty  of  injustice 
by  treating  them  better  than  they  deserve,  as  well  as  by  treating  them  worse 
than  they  deserve.  But  God  cannot  act  unjustly.  5.  We  may  learn  the  necessity 
of  an  atonement  for  sin.  Something  which  shall  maintain  the  authority  of  God's 
law,  secure  the  great  interests  of  His  kingdom,  and  answer  all  the  ends  of  govern- 
ment, no  less  effectually  than  the  infliction  of  merited  punishment  upon  trans- 
gressors. Without  such  an  atonement  God  cannot  consistently  with  justice, 
or  His  obligations  as  a  sovereign,  pardon  a  single  offender.  6.  If  Jehovah  is 
king,  sin  is  treason  and  rebellion,  and  every  impenitent  sinner  is  a  traitor  and 
a  rebel.  7.  If  Jehovah  is  king,  it  is  requisite  that  He  should  have  ambassadors, 
in  order  that  His  will  should  be  communicated  to  His  subjects.  God's  inspired 
messengers,  the  prophets  and  apostles,  were  ambassadors  extraordinary.  His 
ministers  are  His  ambassadors  to-day.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  God  a  great  king  : — 
Men  reveal  their  conceptions  of  God  by  the  kind  of  homage  they  render  to  Him. 
God  was  dishonoured  by  the  hypocritical  worship  of  His  own  people  ;  they  were 
representing  Jehovah  as  a  senseless  idol.  To  reprove  them  He  here  declares 
His  greatness.  I.  This  declaration  which  Jehovah  makes  respecting  Him- 
self. God  places  Himself  towards  us  in  various  aspects.  He  is  a  king.  He 
has  in  Himself  all  the  qualities  of  kingly  greatness.  Kings  should  be  the  greatest 
of  men.  He  has  all  the  attributes  of  a  great  king.  His  power,  authority,  majesty, 
&c.  His  dominions  are  great.  His  kingdom  is  eternal.  II.  What  lessons 
MAY  BE  LEARNT  FROM  THIS  DECLARATION.  Learn — 1.  To  Tcverence  Him.  2.  The 
importance  of  securing  His  favoiu-.  He  has  shown  us  the  way  to  secure  it — 
by  repentance,  faith,  and  obedience.  3.  To  trust  implicitly  in  His  overruling 
providence.  4.  To  submit  ourselves  to  His  government.  5.  To  expect  great 
blessings  from  His  hands.  Great  expectancy  in  His  creatures  pleases  Him. 
Great  expectations  from  Him  are  never  disappointed.  (W.  Osborne  Lilley.) 
God  is  a  great  king  : — In  one  country  abroad,  much  plagued  by  invasions  from 
heathens,  a  grand  old  custom  sprang  up  in  their  churches.  When  the  Apostles' 
Creed  was  repeated  the  noblemen  and  men-at-arms  drew  their  swords,  and  did 
not  sheathe  them  again  until  the  creed  was  over.  They  meant  it  as  a  sign  that 
"  God  was  their  king,"  and  that  they  would  show  their  earnestness  in  saying 
so,  if  need  be,  by  fighting  and  dying  for  that  God  to  whom  they  owed  all,  and 
that  Church  of  God  to  which  they  belonged.     (C.  Kingsley.) 


CHAPTER  II. 

Vers.  1-3.  And  now,  0  ye  priests,  this  commandment  is  for  you. — Spiritual 
reformation  : — 1.  The  nature  of  the  spiritual  reformation  required.  It  involves 
two  things,  a  practical  application  of  the  Word  of  God :  and  an  entire 
dedication  to  the  glory  of  God.  2.  The  urgency  of  the  spiritual  reformation 
required.  The  neglect  thereof  incurs  a  ciuse,  and  a  rebuke,  and  contempt. 
(Homiliat.)  To  give  glory  unto  My  name. — Duty  and  threatening: — I.  Thb 
DUTY  ENJOINED.  1.  Repentance  glorifies  God  as  an  omnipresent  and  omniscient 
God.  2.  Repentance  glorifies  God  as  a  just  and  holy  God.  3.  Repentance 
glorifies  God  as  a  merciful  and  gracious  God.  4.  Repentance  glorifies  God  as 
a  true  and  faithful  God.  II.  The  evil  threatened.  I.  He  will  curse  the 
personal  blessings  of  the  impenitent.  2.  He  will  curse  their  domestic  blessings. 
3.  He  will  curse  their  national  blessings.  4.  He  will  curse  their  religious 
blessings.     {0.  Brooks.) 

Ver.  2.  I  will  curse  your  blessing^s.  —  Blessings  abused  become  a  curse  : — 
Taking  into  view  the  whole  of  the  intelligent  creation,  and  the  estent  of  the 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  25 

duration  to  which  it  is  destined,  the  curse  of  God  on  those  who  wantonly 
brave  His  love  and  benevolence,  will  be  seen  to  be  a  necessary  result  of  His  good- 
ness, as  well  as  a  declaration  of  the  righteousness  of  His  character.  It  is  the 
same  Word  of  heaven  which  shows  us — now  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  now  the 
flaming  sword  of  justice.  God  does  not  lift  up  His  voice  to  say,  "  I  will  ci:rse 
your  blessings,"  till  men  have  first  abused  those  blessings,  and  provoked  Him 
to  interpose  His  vengeance.  A  reason  is  given  for  the  curse — disobedience. 
A  warning  of  its  approach  is  likewise  given  ;  and  every  successive  threatening 
is  a  new  mercy,  for  its  tendency  is  to  arrest  the  sinner  ere  it  be  too  late,  and  is 
an  interposition  which  justice  did  not  require.  A  captious  mind  may  refuse 
to  call  those  things  blessings  which  in  the  result  shall  only  augment  the  wTetched- 
ness  and  accumulate  the  pe]^dition  of  the  sinner.  But  objects  which  are  in  them- 
selves capable  of  benefiting  the  person  on  whom  they  descend,  though  an  evil 
heart  may,  by  wilful  misapplication,  turn  them  to  the  most  serious  and  fatal 
injury,  are,  nevertheless,  blessings.  God  can  curse  the  blessings  He  bestows 
in  a  variety  of  ways.  He  can  remove  them ;  He  can  render  them  ineffectual 
and  powerless;  He  can  make  them  %\xrn  to  our  hurt.  The  curse  consists  in 
continuing  vmaltered  the  blessings  He  bestows,  and  in  leaving  the  individual 
who  receives  them  to  himself.  In  point  of  fact,  the  sinner  inflicts  the  curse  upon 
himself.  The  only  part  which  God  takes  in  the  visitation  is  that  He  suffers  it 
'■""  be  so.  1.  Among  the  blessings  which  God  confers  upon  sinful  men,  the  first 
in  nature,  and  among  the  foremost  in  importance  is  time.  The  days  and  years 
which  God  may  add  to  man's  forfeited  life  are  of  inestimable  price.  They  are 
the  seed-time  for  eternity.  If  it  be  not  used  for  its  intended  purpose,  God  will 
tm'n  it  into  an  awful  ciurse.  And  does  it  not  prove  so,  when,  as  time  moves  on, 
the  heart  becomes  harder,  the  conscience  less  impressive,  love  of  the  world  more 
vehemently  impetuous,  and  when  moments  accumulate  not  so  fast  as  sins,  which 
shall  go  to  fan  the  flames  of  the  imquenchable  fire  ?  2.  Another  of  the  blessings 
from  the  hand  of  God  is  health.  This  gives  a  zest  to  every  other  gift  of  heaven, 
and  the  want  of  it  takes  away  the  charm  of  every  other  enjoyment.  It  is  an 
unspeakable  aid  in  the  pursuit  of  every  good  work  incumbent  upon  us.  Beware 
then  lest  this  blessing  be  presumed  upon  and  misused,  and  God  may  give  up  the 
disobedient  to  their  own  cmse.  Talents  and  education  are  blessings  from  the 
hand  of  God ;  they  place  the  individuals  who  possess  them  higher  in  the  scale 
of  being.  But  if  they  are  perverted  from  their  lawful  ends, — if  they  should  be 
found  enlisted  on  the  side  of  infidelity  or  worldliness, — the  blessing  will  become 
a  curse.  3.  I  might  proceed  to  speak  of  other  blessings,  of  which  the  misimprove- 
ment  wiU  fatally  transmute  into  the  cmse.  Riches,  honour,  friends,  rank,  influ- 
ences, and  the  various  interferences  which  deliver  men  from  evil,  or  avert  its 
approach,  are  all  the  good  gifts  of  God.  They  are  capable  of  a  use  of  the  most 
important  nature  both  to  ourselves  and  others.  The  perversion  of  them  will 
be  as  ruinous  in  aggi-avating  the  misery  of  the  future.  Refer  especially  to  this 
richest  of  blessings,  the  glorious  Gospel.  Even  this  crowning  gift  may,  by  the 
wilful  unbelief  and  worldliness  of  the  heart,  become  hurtful  as  it  might  have  been 
beneficial.  Can  there  be  a  more  dreadful  curse  than  when  the  very  means 
employed  for  the  soul's  conversion,  place  it  further  and  still  further  from  that 
necessary  issue  ?  {T.  Kcnnion,  M.A.)  Cursed  blessings  : — There  is  no  accom- 
modation in  Divine  righteousness.  We  never  read  that  to-day  we  may  intermit 
a  little,  the  law  shall  no  longer  be  so  rigorous  and  ruthless,  the  law  shall  be  oiled 
down  into  smoothness  so  that  it  shall  be  easy,  and  the  spirit  of  disobedience  shall 
be  less  exasperated  :  never.  The  law  never  changes.  The  moral  tone  of  the 
Bible  is  never  lowered  in  accommodation  to  human  weakness  or  human  selfish- 
ness. Nor  is  judgment  lessened  that  a  man  may  feel  the  more  comfortable  with 
himself.  There  is  wondrous  originality  in  the  way  of  putting  the  Divine  judg- 
ment before  the  consideration  of  men.  Probably  the  judgment  was  never  more 
vividly  and  powerfully  depicted  than  in  this  instance : — "I  will  curse  your  bless- 
ings "  :  what  to  you  is  a  blessing  shall  cease  to  be  such  and  shall  become  a  ciurse  : 
I  will  make  yom:  health  the  worst  disease  you  ever  had  ;  I  will  make  yon  poor 
through  your  very  wealth  ;  I  will  send  upon  the  richest  results  of  your  laboiu* 
such  a  darkness  that  you  will  flee  away  from  the  very  image  of  your  own  success. 
How  terrible  is  God  !  but  always  how  tenible  in  righteousness.  Why  does  this 
pimishment  fall  upon  the  priestly  race  or  house  ?  Simply  because  the  priest 
has  been  tmfaithful,  self-considering,  base  in  heart,  forgetful  of  his  duty  to  God 
and  his  service  to  man.     The  Lord  does  not  make  priests  for  nothing :  whatever 


23  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


the  priest  may  be,  if  he  fail  in  his  function,  God  plagues  him  by  blighting  hia 
blessings.  The  priest  may  be  a  poet,  gifted  with  fine  fancy,  able  to  sing  to  the 
world's  comforting  and  inspiration,  and  if  he  palter  with  his  gift,  if  he  prostitute 
it,  God's  judgment  will  fall  heavily  upon  him.  We  do  not  limit  the  word  "  priest  " 
to  religious  functions  or  exercises  or  responsibilities :  every  man  has  his  own 
call  of  God,  and  by  so  much  may  be  regarded  as  sustaining  a  priestly  relation 
to  the  throne  of  God.  A  man  may  be  a  merchant,  a  counsellor,  a  man  of  great 
sagacity,  a  person  qualified  to  exercise  large  and  useful  influence,  and  if  he  fail 
to  work  out  his  mission  in  life  this  punishment  falls  upon  him  :  he  has  more 
anxiety  over  his  wealth  than  he  ever  had  over  his  povertj%  and  his  very  health 
is  a  plague  and  a  temptation  to  him  all  the  day.  How  God  tightens  His  hands 
upon  the  reins !  how  He  tugs !  how  He  rules !  We  think  sometimes  He  has  given 
us  full  head,  and  we  go  at  our  own  pace,  and  suddenly  the  jaw  is  torn,  and  we 
begin  to  feel  that  we  are  servants,  not  masters  ;  that  we  are  under  providential 
guidance,  not  under  selfish  inspiration :  the  Lord  reigneth,  and  He  is  as  loving 
in  judgment  as  He  is  in  redemption.  How  will  the  Lord  curse  the  blessings  of 
the  priests  ?  "  Behold,  I  will  corrupt  your  seed."  Now,  the  house  of  Aaron 
had  nothing  to  do  with  ploughing  and  with  sowing:  why  then  corrupt  or  spoil 
or  mar  the  seed  that  was  to  be  sown  in  the  fields  ?  why  take  the  juice  out  of  it  ? 
why  deplete  its  vitality  ?  The  house  of  Levi  is  by  law  exempted  from  agricultural 
pursuits.  True  :  but  not  from  agricultural  tithes.  The  priests  lived  upon  the 
land,  as  certainly  as  the  farmers  did,  and  the  Lord  punished  the  priests  where 
they  would  most  feel  it.  After  they  had  gone  in  that  direction  they  should  feel 
the  weight  of  the  rule  of  God  where  they  could  most  sensitively  respond  to  the 
imposition.  It  is  easy  to  sow  seed :  but  are  we  quite  sure  that  no  operation 
has  been  performed  upon  the  seed  before  we  have  sown  it  ?  God  is  invisible, 
the  hand  of  God  is  intangible,  the  ministry  of  God  is  impalpable.  The  seed  looks 
the  same  as  in  the  healthiest  years  and  the  most  abundant  harvesting.  The 
farmer  says,  The  seed  is  good  :  sow  it !  If  we  had  been  gifted  with  the  piercing 
eyesight  that  sees  the  spiritual  we  should  have  known  that  only  yesternight  the 
Spirit  of  God  was  in  the  granary,  spoiling  every  seed  garnered  against  seed-time. 
Why  will  we  be  befooled  always  by  the  eyes  of  our  bodies  ?  as  if  they  could  see 
anything.  We  do  not  live  the  faith-life  that  believes  that  all  things  are  under 
the  touch  as  they  are  under  the  ownership  of  God.  God  makes  the  wine  vinegar  ; 
God  makes  us  drink  our  own  etymology.  If  we  call  for  wine,  sharp  wine,  we  shall 
have  enough  of  it ;  and  God  will  make  the  wine  sharp  and  sour  in  the  palate. 
Why  not  believe  that  all  things  are  under  the  government  and  benediction  of 
God  ?  Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air :  consider  the  lilies  of  the  field :  see  God  every- 
where. {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Blessings  made  curses: — There  is  a  text  which 
is  the  counterpart  of  this,  "  I  will  turn  the  curse  into  a  blessing."  God  does 
not  willingly  afflict.  He  never  takes  a  blessing  away  without  bestowing  a  better 
one  in  its  place,  unless  any  of  His  blessings  have  been  abused,  and  then,  when 
His  love  has  been  trampled  on,  when  in  their  headstrong  wickedness  His  creatures 
turn  against  Him  and  abuse  His  blessings,  then  He  puts  a  ciu-se  upon  them. 
Consider  some  illustrations — 1.  What  the  world  calls  wealth,  goods.  There  is 
a  solemn  irony  in  that  word  "  goods."  By  what  men  call  "  goods,"  they  do  not 
mean  truth,  things  spiritual  and  eternal,  but  they  mean  boxes,  bales,  and  bundles 
of  things  kept  in  stores.  We  need  not  disparage  wealth.  It  is  not  a  sin  for  man 
to  toil  for  it,  to  plan  for  it ;  and  yet  though  it  be  a  blessing,  how  easily  can  God 
blast  it.     How  easily  the  Lord  can  plant  thorns  in   the   rich   man's  pathway. 

2.  Home  and  domestic  relations.  No  sweeter  blessing  on  earth  than  the  encompass- 
ment  of  love.  Yet  how  many  miserable  homes  there  are.  Just  one  prodigal  son 
will  spoil  it:  just  one  vicious  habit:  some  stain  of  sin:  some  skeleton  of  disgrace. 

3.  The  blessings  of  the  Gospel.  This  Gospel  comes  to  be  the  savour  of  death  unto 
death  unless  we  obey  God's  laws,  and  follow  Him  in  humble  love.  (P.  S.  Henson, 
D.D.)  Blessings  cursed: — God  only  has  an  absolute  right  to  curse.  Men 
curse  each  other  wrongfully ;  God's  curses  are  merciful  and  righteous.  He 
blesses  readily ;  He  cur.ses  reluctantly.  The  Jews  deserved  more  evil  than  that 
which  befell  them.  I.  Men  possess  many  blessings.  1.  Natural.  Abundance 
of  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  Refreshing  variations  of  the  seasons.  Gratification 
of  our  senses  with  beauty,  fragrance,  and  music.  Stores  of  useful  minerals,  and 
medicinal  herbs.  2.  National.  Subjection  to  rightly  constituted  authority. 
Freedom  of  speech.  Commercial  prosperity.  Progressive  legislation.  Well- 
Btorcd  marts.     Liberty  of  conscience.     Wise  distribution  of  wealth  in  the  creation 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  27 

of  labour.  3.  Domestic.  Love  of  kindred.  Sympathy  of  friendship.  A  quiet 
and  peaceable  habitation.  A  bountiful  supply  of  the  necessities  of  life.  4.  Per- 
sonal. Health.  Wisdom.  Honour.  Success.  Wealth.  5.  Religious.  Pious 
associations.  Spiritual  enlightenment.  The  worship  of  the  sanctuary.  Divine 
pardon  and  purification.  The  instruction  of  men  and  books.  The  hope  of 
eternal  glory.  II.  Thbsh  blessings  may  be  cxjbsbd.  1.  God  does  this  by  per- 
mitting the  blessings  themselves  to  become  a  curse.  Abounding  luxuriance  in 
nature  has  engendered  idolatry,  sensuality,  and  sloth.  2.  God  sometimes  inflicts 
a  curse  upon  the  blessings.  The  fruitful  land  becomes  barrenness.  God  may 
curse  oiu:  blessings — (1)  That  we  may  recognise  His  hand  in  their  bestowment. 
(2)  That  we  may  seek  our  blessedness  in  Him.  (3)  That  we  may  rightly  appreciate 
their  value.  (4)  That  we  may  be  sanctified  by  the  aiHiction  which  their  loss  or 
abuse  may  occasion.  (5)  That  we  may  illustrate  His  holiness  by  the  punishment 
of  our  sins.  III.  These  blessings  are  cursed  because  of  men's  indifferencb; 
TO  God's  glory.  Persistent  indifference  to  God  will  ever  bring  His  curse.  Let 
us,  in  order  that  what  we  regard  as  blessings  may  continue  to  bless  us,  lay  God's 
glory  to  heart — 1.  By  pondering  God's  claims  until  our  hearts  are  moved.  2.  By 
fixing  oiu"  warmest  affections  upon  His  glory.  3.  By  living  a  life  of  ardent  devo- 
tion to  its  furtherance  in  the  world.  ( W.  Osborne  Lilley. )  The  blesshig  cursed  : — 
God  does  not  say  that  He  will  take  their  blessings  away  ;  He  will  let  them  remain, 
only  with  His  ban  upon  them,  and  see  what  they  will  be  worth  then.  The  bless- 
ings shall  remain,  but  they  shall  remain  scathed  and  blighted.  They  tell  us  that 
there  is  an  Eastern  fruit  which  sometimes  undergoes  a  curious  process  of  decay. 
It  looks  as  blooming  and  fresh  as  ever  to  the  eye,  but  when  you  take  it  in  your 
hand  it  crumbles  into  dust.  Now,  a  like  process  was  to  pass  upon  aU  the  com- 
forts and  advantages,  all  the  treasures  and  delights  of  these  doomed  men.  Though 
nothing  would  be  changed,  all  things  should  become  new.  The  soul  would  be 
gone  from  all  comforts  and  enjoyments.  What  are  commonly  called  good  things 
should  communicate  no  happiness,  and  tend  to  no  good.  A  tree  may  be  withered 
without  being  cut  down.  1.  Blessings  may  be  said  to  be  cursed,  if  God  deprives 
us  of  the  power  of  enjoying  them.  When  a  blind  man  looks  at  the  most  beautiful 
scene,  he  sees  nothing  of  it.  As  our  outward  senses  are  aware  of  sights  and  sounds, 
in  like  manner  our  souls  have  their  senses  (so  to  speak)  which  take  note  of  pleasm-e 
and  pain.  In  the  natural  state  of  a  healthy  mind,  it  feels  pleasure  and  happiness 
when  it  is  surrounded  with  those  things  we  call  blessings.  But  in  one  moment 
God  can  end  all  this.  Without  changing  in  the  least  our  outward  aspect,  or  our 
outward  circumstances,  God  can  make  our  souls  as  incapable  of  feeling  happiness 
in  the  possession  of  our  outward  blessings,  as  the  blind  man's  eyes  are  of  discerning 
the  light  of  day.  Amid  our  earthly  blessings  He  can  make  us  moody,  depressed, 
thankless,  miserable  beings.  And  how  often  God  does  do  this  !  A  rich  man's 
wealth  is  cursed,  when  it  remains  as  entire  and  well-invested  as  ever  ;  but  cannot 
keep  its  owner's  heart  from  being  racked  by  fears  that  he  is  to  end  in  the  work- 
house. And  such  a  case  has  many  a  time  been.  It  is  a  bitterer  thing,  it  is  a 
sorer  punishment,  a  thousandfold,  to  curse  a  blessing  than  to  take  it  away  Illus- 
trate by  Lord  Byron.  2.  If  God  suffers  them  to  have  an  evil  tendency  on  our 
souls.  St.  Paul  says,  "  The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance."  The 
blessings  God  bestows  have  a  natural  tendency,  generally  expressed,  to  lead  men 
to  think  seriously  about  their  souls,  and  earnestly  to  turn  to  Christ — to  benefit 
us  spiritually.  But  it  is  possible  they  may  have  quite  an  opposite  effect :  they 
may  do  us  harm  spiritually.  They  may  make  it  more  and  more  unlikely  that 
we  should  find  our  home  in  heaven  at  last.  Ulustrat*  from  the  mass  of  earthly 
blessings  implied  by  the  words  "wealth  and  comfort."  WTiat  is  the  right  and 
healthy  tendency  of  all  these  ?  They  should  make  us  deeply  thankful  to  Him 
who  gave  us  them  all.  They  should  fill  us  with  an  earnest  desire  to  employ  all 
that  has  so  kindly  been  given  to  us  for  God's  glory  and  the  good  of  our  fellow- 
creatures.  But  wealth  often  tends  to  make  its  possessor  proud,  arrogant,  over- 
bearing, or  idle  and  useless,  selfish  and  vicious.  Think  of  the  blessing  of  dear 
friends  and  of  a  happy  family  circle.  But  even  such  piu-e  blessings  may  become 
cursed.  The  erring  heart  may  make  an  idol  of  the  creature.  Even  spiritual 
blessings  may  be  cmrsed.  The  "  means  of  grace  "  may  have  their  tendency  so 
completely  reversed,  as  to  become  means  of  condemnation,  of  guilt,  of  perdition. 
Their  natural  and  healthful  tendency  may  in  all  cases  be  reversed,  so  that  they 
shall  turn  to  means  of  hardening  and  of  destruction.  Our  subject  even  applies 
to  the  regenerating,  comforting,  sanctifying  Holy  Spirit  of  God.     If  the  influences 


^28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  the  Spirit  are  resisted ;  if  we  harden  ourselves  against  His  gentle  working, 
and  determinedly  grieve  Him  away  and  quench  Him  ;  then  this  influence,  that 
Gk)d  gave  to  work  out  our  salvation,  turns  to  something  that  not  only  tends  to 
our  final  ruin,  but  (awful  to  think)  actually  makes  sure  of  it.  The  same  Spirit 
that  melts  one  man's  heart  hardens  another  man's,  as  the  self-same  fire  melts 
wax,  but  hardens  clay.  There  are  just  two  things,  one  of  which  Christ  must  bo 
to  each  of  us.  He  must  either  be  our  Saviour  or  our  condemnation.  Now  that 
we  know  of  redemption  through  Him,  we  must  either  accept  or  reject  Him.  He 
must  either  be  an  unspeakable  blessing,  or  a  blessing  cursed.  (A.  K.  H.  Boyd, 
D.D.)  Cursing  the  blessing  : — Instead  of  Divine  justice  being  a  violation  of 
Divine  goodness,  it  is  a  necessary  part  thereof.  Thi&  God  Hiiiit^lf  taught  man 
by  that  mysterious  disclosure  of  His  character  to  Moses.  God  "  merciful  and 
gracious,"  but  "  by  no  means  clearing  the  guilty."  A  lack  of  justice  would  be 
a  lack  of  goodness.  Love  without  equity  would  be  effeminate  indulgence.  To 
mark  Has  disapproval  of  what  is  sinful  is  as  much  to  be  expected  of  an  infinitely 
Holy  Being,  as  that  He  will  signify  His  approval  of  what  is  righteous.  But  in 
the  exercise  of  His  justice  how  conspicuous  is  His  mercy.  He  does  not  visit 
men  with  punishment  till  He  has  striven  to  recover  them  from  their  evils,  and 
not  then  till  they  have  been  distinctly  warned  of  approaching  wrath.  In  the 
context  Malachi  is  directed  to  warn  the  priests,  who  had  grieved  God  by  their 
disobedience  to  His  commandments,  that  unless  they  reformed,  and  faithfully 
did  the  will  of  God,  they  should  be  visited  with  a  curse.  Thus  a  condition  is 
interposed  before  the  curse  is  announced.  The  nature  of  the  judgment  here 
referred  to  deserves  attention.  The  Divine  Ruler  sometimes  removes  that  which 
was  a  blessing.  He  frustrates  their  plans ;  shatters  their  ideals ;  scatters  their 
wealth ;  removes  their  friends,  &c.  But  here  is  the  continuation  of  a  blessing 
with  a  cvu-se  upon  it,  so  that  it  cannot  bless.  The  very  blessings  which  have 
been  possessed  and  enjoyed  for  years  become  the  fruitful  sources  of  untold  sorrow. 
We  cannot  impugn  the  deaUngs  of  God.  There  is  a  "  need's  be  "  for  every  such 
mark  of  His  displeasure.  1.  For  His  own  sake  He  curses  the  blessing.  He  will 
be  glorified  by  man.  When  by  kind,  gentle,  wooing  measures  He  fails  to  pro- 
duce in  us  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  He  uses  severer  means.  2.  God  curses 
our  blessings  for  our  sakes.  Outward  misfortunes  direct  man's  attention  to 
his  inward  necessities.  Calamity  and  sorrow  humble  the  proud  heart,  subdue 
the  stubborn  will,  and  bring  the  wandering  spirit  to  the  bosom  of  Jesus.  {J.  Hilea 
Hitchens.)  Blessings  changed  into  a  curse: — Blessings  of  high  and  inestimable 
value  had  been  bestowed  upon  the  children  of  Israel.  Had  they  faithfully 
improved  the  blessings  bestowed  upon  them,  to  what  a  height  might  not  their 
prosperity  and  their  happiness  have  risen !  But  they  were  unfaithful  stewards 
of  the  grace  of  God.  Their  inordinate  selfishness  and  their  restless  love  of  change 
betrayed  them  continually  into  transgression.  No  sooner  were  they  established 
in  the  promised  land,  than  they  forsook  the  Lord,  and  followed  strange  gods. 
Therefore  did  the  vengeance  of  the  Highest  fall  upon  them.  Terrible  chastise- 
ments were  often  inflicted,  and  they  sank  at  last  in  utter  ruin.  A  "  curse  "  was 
sent  upon  them  that  cursed  even  the  blessings  in  which  they  were  accustomed 
to  glory.  Their  spiritual  light,  which  had  been  their  chiefest  glory,  was  per- 
verted to  inflame  their  pride.  Their  distinction  as  the  pecuhar  people  of  God 
embittered  their  contempt  and  hatred  for  other  nations.  By  habitual  trans- 
gression their  hearts  became  so  hardened  in  the  end  that  they  received  not  when 
He  came,  the  hope  of  Israel.  They  crucified  and  slew  the  Lord  of  Life.  The 
counsels  of  Divine  providence  are  the  same  in  every  age.  In  every  age  they 
punish  national  guilt  with  national  suffering.  When  the  transgressions  of  any 
people  provoke  the  Divine  vengeance  against  them,  even  the  blessings  which 
they  have  enjoyed  are  changed  into  a  curse.  The  words  of  the  text  are  capable 
of  individual  application.  In  the  fate  of  the  individual  may  be  traced  the  great 
principle  of  retribution  which  the  text  announces.  It  is  not  indeed  seen  so  clearly 
and  so  uniformly, — because  for  individuals  there  is  provided  hereafter  a  recom- 
pense of  reward.  Observe  the  accomplishment  of  the  threatening  of  the  text 
in  regard  to  the  advantages  by  which  the  lot  of  one  individual  is  distinguished 
from  that  of  another.  How  often,  when  he  layeth  not  the  Divine  commandments 
to  heart,  the  very  blessing  in  which  its  possessor  rejoiced  the  most,  becomes  the 
most  a  curse  to  him.  Apply  to  the  misuse  of  health,  wealth,  power,  intel- 
lectual gifts,  fame,  worldly  prosperity  in  general  Spiritual  Ught  is  a  benefit 
more  valuable  far  than  worldly  prosperity.     Yet,  even  spiritual  Ught,  when  we 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  29 

use  not  the  benefit  as  we  ought,  may  be  changed  into  a  curse  for^the  punishment 
of  our  sin.  Who  can  arraign  the  justice  of  the  dispensation  which  thus  bringeth 
evil  out  of  good  ?  These  benefits  belong  to  the  Lord  alone.  They  were  given  us 
at  first  of  His  free  and  unmerited  mercy.  When  we  are  worse  than  unprofitable, 
can  we  complain  if  those  joys  are  no  longer  ours  which  are  intended  for  the  faith- 
ful servants  of  God  ?  Can  we  complain  if  the  objects  around  us,  changing,  as 
we  ourselves  have  done,  their  original  purpose,  minister  to  us  evil  instead  of 
good,  whilst  we  wilfully  persevere  in  the  road  to  destruction  ?  Even  the  chastise- 
ments of  the  Lord  are  sent  in  mercy  to  rouse  the  sinner  from  his  fatal  security, 
to  save  him  from  an  anguish  more  dreadful  and  more  lasting.  Let  us  give  glory 
to  the  name  of  God,  from  whom  all  our  blessings  come.  Let  us  keep  ever  in 
view  that  only  for  piu-poses  of  wisdom  and  beneficence  He  hath  entrusted  to 
us  any  part  of  His  own  fulness.  Let  us  keep  ever  upon  the  imagination  of  our 
hearts,  that  He,  who  is  the  giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift,  is  righteous,  and 
will  demand  from  us  a  strict  accomit  of  the  manner  in  which  we  employ  the 
talents  committed  to  us,  and  "  will  render  unto  every  man  according  to  his 
deeds."  (Alex.  Brunton,  D.D.)  Transformations  : — "I  will  curse  your  bless- 
ings " — what  a  weird  and  mysterious  threat  that  is  !  What  does  it  mean  ?  Well,  I 
think  we  may  get  at  the  truth  suggested  by  it  by  recalling  three  miracles  performed 
on  water  at  three  widely  separate  dates  in  sacred  history.  The  first  of  the  three 
was  that  gruesome  miracle  wrought  in  Egypt  by  Moses,  one  of  the  plagues,  when 
he  turned  the  waters  of  Egypt  into  blood.  It  was  a  ghastly  transformation — 
one  of  the  best  blessings  of  hfe  tvirned  into  a  curse.  The  next  miracle  to  which 
I  will  refer,  performed  on  the  same  element  of  water,  was  the  first  miracle  of  our 
Lord's  ministry,  the  miracle  at  Cana  of  Gahlee,  when  He  turned  the  water  into 
wine.  I  say  it  was  changing  that  which  is  in  itself  a  blessing  into  a  still  higher 
blessing.  Then  the  third  instance  to  which  I  refer  is  an  incident  in  the  life  of 
Ehsha.  "  The  situation  of  this  city  is  pleasant,  as  my  lord  seeth,  but  the  water 
is  nought,"  they  said  to  him.  Well,  the  young  prophet  accepted  the  challenge, 
and  cast  a  handful  of  salt  into  the  wells  of  Jericho,  with  the  result  that  the  water, 
which  was  salt  before,  became  sweet  and  pleasant.  That  was  an  instance  of  a 
curse  being  turned  into  a  blessing.  Now,  you  see,  these  were  three  transformations, 
and  they  were  all  symbohcal.  Similar  transformations  are  taking  place  still  in 
human  experience.  Now  I  think  you  begin  to  see  what  is  the  drift  of  the  teaching 
of  this  text.  1.  The  blessings  and  the  curse  of  hfe.  2.  Blessings  cursed.  3.  Bless- 
ings blessed ;  and  4.  The  curse  changed  into  a  blessing.  I.  The  blessings  and 
THE  CURSE  OF  LIFE.  Life  has  its  blessings  and  it  has  its  curse.  Now,  what  are 
the  blessings  of  human  hfe  ?  Well,  the  blessings  of  human  Ufe  are  simply  the 
things  that  tend  to  make  it  blessed  or  happy.  When  God  created  man  at  the 
beginning,  we  read  that  He  blessed  him,  and  said,  "  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,"'  &c. 
In  these  words  the  Creator  indicated  that  man  had  been  made  for  happiness,  and 
He  mentioned  several  of  the  principal  soiu-ces  of  that  happiness,  such  as  the  food 
with  which  he  was  to  be  regaled  ;  his  dominion  over  the  inferior  creatures ;  and 
above  all,  his  social  instincts,  which  were  to  cause  to  rise  about  him  the  charities 
of  home.  Of  course,  there  has  been  a  great  change  since  that  sketch  was  made 
by  the  Oeator  of  man's  happy  lot,  and  yet  the  world  is  still  full  of  things  that  are 
intended  and  fitted  to  make  hfe  blessed  or  happy.  Then  higher  than  the  pleasure 
of  the  senses  is  the  pleasure  of  the  affections,  and  of  the  intellect,  and  those  are 
ministered  to  by  all  the  objects  of  love — parents,  children,  husband  and  wife,  and 
so  on,  the  Lord's  day,  the  Lord's  Word,  the  privilege  of  prayer,  the  Great  Salvation, 
such  are  some  of  what  you  might  call  the  blessings  of  hfe.  Then  what  is  the  curse 
of  hfe  ?  You  remember  when  man  had  fallen,  how  God  pronounced  upon  him  the 
ciu^e ;  and  what  was  it  ?  To  the  woman  He  said,  "  I  will  greatly  multiply  thy 
sorrow  and  thy  conception  ;  in  sorrow  thou  shalt  bring  forth  children ;  and  thy 
desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee."  There  is  the  curse ; 
it  is  pain  and  sorrow  and  subjection  and  ill-usage.  II.  Blessings  cuksed. 
Let  us  look  at  this  as  the  first  transformation,  because  it  is  the  one  mentioned 
in  the  text.  The  blessings  of  Ufe  may  be  cursed.  When  does  that  happen  T 
Well,  I  should  say  that  the  blessings  of  life  are  cursed  when  they  fail  to  yield 
the  happiness  which  they  are  naturally  fitted  to  yield.  Sometimes  I  am  sure 
you  have  all  noticed  it.  There  may  be  food  in  the  house  ;  there  may  be  money ; 
there  may  be  all  that  money  can  buy,  and  yet  somehow  happiness  is  not  there. 
I  think  it  might  almost  be  said  that  those  ages  in  which  the  means  of  happiness 
have  been  most  numerous  have  been  the  leaat  happy  epochs.     Now,  Uk&,  for 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  n. 

instance,  the  period  of  Rome's  decay.  That  was  a  period  when  wealth  was  flowing 
into  Rome  on  every  hand,  and  when  in  the  Romans  there  was  the  keenest  appetite 
for  pleasure,  and  yet  pleasure  fled  from  the  Romans.  Do  you  remember  how 
one  of  our  poeta  describes  it  in  ever  memorable  words  ? 

"  On  that  hard  pagan  world  disgust  and  secret  loathing  fell. 
Deep  weariness  and  sated  lust  made  human  hfe  a  hell. 
In  hjs  cool  hall,  with  haggard  eyes  the  Roman  noble  lay  ; 
He  drove  abroad,  in  various  guise,  along  the  Appian  way  ; 
He  made  a  boast,  drank  fierce  and  fast,  and  crowned  his  hair  with  flowers  ; 
No  easier,  nor  no  quicker  passed  the  impracticable  hours." 

That  is  a  description  of  how  the  blessings  of  the  world  may  be  turned  into  a  curse. 
But  perhaps  the  commonest  way  in  which  the  blessings  of  hfe  are  transformed 
into  a  cm-se  is  when  the  satisfaction  of  the  inferior  happiness  prevents  the  soul 
from  desiring  to  enjoy  the  superior  kinds  of  happiness.  That  often  happens. 
The  glut  of  the  soul  with  the  happiness  of  the  senses  may  prevent  it  from  appre- 
ciating the  happiness  of  the  heart  or  the  intellect  or  the  spirit.  Now,  have 
you  never  seen  this  ?  A  man  who  has  been  enjoying  hfe  in  a  humble  way  becomes 
suddenly  and  immensely  rich.  Well,  he  and  his  wife  and  daughters  begin  to 
dream  of  society,  and  with  great  efforts  they  get  their  feet  into  society,  which 
despises  them.  The  daughters  come  to  no  good  ;  the  sons  become  thriftless  and 
dissipated.  That  is  an  instance  of  the  blessings  of  hfe  being  turned  into  a  curse. 
Yes,  and  even  so  sweet  a  thing  as  human  affection  may  become  a  curse  in  this  way. 
It  may  become  so  satisfying  that  we  have  no  desire  left  for  anything  higher.  Oh, 
unhappy  transformation,  when  the  very  thing  that  our  Creator  has  given  us  for 
our  enjoyment  through  human  perverseness  is  changed  into  a  disadvantage  and 
a  loss.  III.  Blessings  blessed.  We  have  just  seen  that  what  we  call  the 
blessings  of  hfe  are  not  in  themselves  able  to  make  us  happy,  vmless  with  the 
blessing  there  be  given  a  second  blessing.  Those  things  which  naturally  tend 
to  be  blessings  only  really  are  so  when  there  is  a  certain  correspondence  between 
them  and  the  constitution  of  those  who  receive  them.  Now,  for  instance,  food 
is  one  of  the  blessings  of  hfe.  It  has  a  natural  tendency  to  make  us  happy,  but 
in  certain  states  of  the  body  it  does  not  do  so.  It  may  even  poison  the  whole 
frame.  But  when  food  is  received  into  a  healthy  body,  then  it  is  a  blessing.  Or, 
in  the  same  way,  we  may  say  that  knowledge  is  a  blessing  ;  but  it  is  not  a  blessing 
to  everybody.  What  is  the  most  golden  page  of  great  eloquence  or  wisdom  to  an 
ignorant  man  ?  Even  the  highest  blessings  require  a  certain  coiTespondence 
in  us  before  they  issue  in  what  the  Creator  intended  them  for.  0  my  people, 
it  is  a  sad  fact  that  even  the  Gospel  may  be  a  savour  of  death  unto  death.  And 
let  us  bring  this  down  to  our  own  experience.  The  Word  itself  is  a  blessing,  but 
it  is  only  blessed  to  those  who  are  in  the  right  state  of  mind  to  receive  it.  Wealth 
ministers  only  to  an  inferior  kind  of  happiness,  and,  as  I  have  just  shown,  it  is 
many  a  man's  ruin,  and  the  ruin  of  many  a  family  ;  and  yet  wealth  may  be  used 
in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  in  the  home  an  order  and  elegance  in  the  midst  of 
which  love  easily  and  naturally  floiurishes,  and  intelligence  and  culture  are  drawn 
in  almost  with  the  breath.  Do  you  not  think  that  in  this  way  the  hfe  of  a  true 
Christian  is  a  wonderful  thing  ?  The  commonest  mercies  when  received  from 
the  hand  of  the  Heavenly  Father  as  His  gifts,  become  at  the  same  time  s])iritual 
mercies.  A  true  Christian  enjoys  from  the  blessings  of  hfe  all  the  happiness 
which  others  receive,  but  at  the  same  time  he  derives  a  happiness  which  is  pecuhar 
to  himself  alone,  because  to  Him  the  blessings  of  hfe  are  doubly  and  trebly  blessed. 
IV.  The  curse  changed  into  a  blessing.  What  is  the  ciu-se  of  hfe  ?  \Vliat  was 
the  primary  curse  ?  It  was  toil,  and  that  has  been  a  terrible  curse  in  this  world. 
Millennium  after  millennium  the  slave  has  shed  tears  of  blood  under  the  rod  of 
the  oppressive  master.  And  yet  how  many  cases  might  be  adduced  in  which 
this  primary  cuise  has  been  changed  into  a  blessing!  I  am  sure  I  am  speaking 
to  many  who,  if  they  were  asked  to  say  what  is  their  greatest  blessing,  would  feel 
inchned  to  answer,  "  My  work."  Your  work  has  kept  off  your  soul  those  birds 
of  evil  which  fall  on  the  souls  of  the  indolent  and  slay  them.  It  has  developed 
your  faculties  ;  it  has  filled  your  home  with  comforts.  I  do  not  know  any  hapi'iness 
that  rivals  the  happiness  of  work  well  and  honestly  done.  That  is  the  primary 
curse  changed  into  a  blessing.  And  if  you  look  over  the  face  of  the  world  you  will 
find  the  same  thing  on  a  large  scale.  The  happiest  nations  are  not  those  hving 
in  places  where  everj-thing  is  done  for  them,  where  they  can  spend  their  time  in 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  31 

sloth,  and  yet  get  plenty  to  eat  and  drink.  Those  are  the  happiest  nations  who 
have  had  to  wring  their  substance  out  of  a  grudging  soil,  and  assert  the  dignity 
of  man  in  the  face  of  adverse  nature.  But  I  think  the  curse  turned  into  a  blessing 
is  most  easily  seen  in  those  cases  where  the  loss  of  the  inferior  happiness  has  caused 
the  soul  to  seek  the  superior  happiness.  Ill-health  has  sometimes  made  men 
famous  who  would  have  been  nothing  of  the  kind  had  not  the  arrow  drinking  their 
life-blood  caused  them  to  retire  from  the  general  herd  of  men.  It  is  a  very  sig- 
nificant fact  that  two  of  the  five  greatest  poets  of  the  world  have  been  bhnd, 
and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  both  Homer  and  Milton  had  the  inner  vision 
sharpened  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  outer  vision.  It  is  chiefly  in  the  region  of 
religion  that  we  see  this  principle  at  work.  I  know  there  are  many  here  who  love 
God  and  follow  Christ,  and  if  I  asked  them  to  say  how  this  has  come  into  their  Uves 
I  am  sure  a  very  large  proportion  would  say  that  it  was  tlirough  loss,  sorrow, 
bereavement,  affliction.  And  so  the  cm'se  of  Hfe  has  turned  out  to  be  its  greatest 
blessing.  Do  you  not  think  that  when  on  the  evening  of  the  first  day  of  his  exist- 
ence the  first  man  saw  the  sun  setting,  and  the  darkness  coming  over  the  earth, 
the  fear  invaded  his  mind  that  the  whole  frame  of  things  was  about  to  be  dissolved, 
and  that  he  was  about  to  be  struck  back  into  the  nothingness  out  of  which  he  had 
just  emerged  ?  But,  lo  !  as  the  night  enveloped  the  sky,  the  hosts  of  God  came 
forth,  the  evening  star  leading  the  way,  and  with  it  suns  and  systems  rolling 
into  fight.  That  spectacle  would  never  have  been  seen  had  not  the  darkness 
supervened.  And  in  the  same  way,  some  of  you  may  remember  that  when  the 
darkness  of  your  first  great  disappointment  or  sorrow  came,  it  seemed  to  you 
as  if  the  universe  were  dissolving,  and  you  yourself  were  being  struck  back  into  a 
nonentity.  But  you  foimd  day  by  day  that  there  had  risen  to  you  a  glory  and 
a  hope  as  much  greater  than  the  happiness  you  had  previously  experienced  as 
the  imited  fight  of  all  the  suns  that  burn  in  the  midnight  heaven  is  greater  than 
the  single  fight  of  the  lamp  that  fights  the  system  to  which  we  belong.  The  lesson 
is  this :  that  nothing  in  this  world  is  either  in  itself  absolutely  a  blessing  or  a 
curse.  There  are  those  things  which  we  call  the  blessings  of  fife  because  they  have 
the  tendency  to  happiness  ;  and  there  are  those  things  which  we  call  the  curses 
of  life  because  they  have  a  tendency  to  unhappiness.  But  I  say  nothing  in  itself 
is  absolutely  either  a  blessing  or  a  curse.  Therefore,  if  the  blessings  of  fife  are 
multipfied  in  your  lot,  if  you  are  at  present  experiencing  prosperity,  do  not  be  too 
much  upfifted  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  what  is  called  the  curse  of  life  has  been 
sent  upon  you,  if  things  are  going  against  you,  and  misfortime  is  dogging  your 
steps,  do  not  be  too  much  downcast.  The  blessings  of  fife  may  be  cursed,  and 
the  curse  of  fife  may  be  made  a  blessing,  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  that  maketh  rich, 
and  He  addeth  no  sorrow  with  it.     (J.  Stalker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-17.  That  My  covenant  might  he  with  Levi — The  minister  of  Divine 
truth:  —  I.  As  he  always  should  be.  1.  A  man  divinely  called.  2.  A 
man  of  profound  reverence.  3.  A  man  of  moral  truthfulness.  4.  A  man  of 
practical  devotion.  5.  A  man  of  the  highest  usefulness.  6.  A  man  of  the  highest 
intelligence.  II.  As  he  often  is.  The  false  minister  is  here  represented — 1.  As 
swerving  from  the  right.  2.  As  leading  the  people  astray.  3.  As  perverting  the 
truth.  4.  As  becoming  contemptible.  Gracious  heaven  raise  up  men  for  our 
pulpits,  so  high  in  culture,  so  gifted  in  faculty,  so  Chi-istly  in  love,  so  invincible 
in  duty,  so  independent  in  action  as  shall  not  only  counteract  the  downward 
tendency  to  ruin,  but  shall  attract  to  it  with  reverence  the  intellect  of  the  age. 
{Homilist.) 

Vers.  5-7.  My  covenant  was  with  him  of  life  and  peace.  —  Unspeakable 
blessings  : — The  covenant  which  God  made  with  Levi  now  belongs  to  all  men. 
The  benign  purposes  in  every  ancient  covenant  find  their  fulfilment  and 
enlargement  in  Christ.  I.  The  blessings  here  spoken  of.  I.  Life.  Physical 
life  is  a  great  possession.  Physical  life  should  not  be  wasted  nor  abused, 
but  used  as  the  basis  of  a  higher  life.  Man  has  a  higher  life — the  intellectual 
and  the  spiritual,  in  which  the  moral  faculties  and  the  consciousness  of  God  reside. 
The  spiritual  life  must  be — (1)  Quickened  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  Stimulated 
to  struggle  against  the  body  of  sin  and  death.  (3)  Grow  in  Christly  beauty 
and  symmetrical  fulness.  (4)  Find  its  sustenance  and  satisfaction  in  God. 
(5)  Untouched  by  physical  decay  and  death,  and  perfected  in  heaven.  2.  Peace. 
There  is  much  that  is  called  "  peace  "  that  does  not  come  from  God ;  as  tho 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

apathy  of  religious  indiflFerence,  the  forced  calmness  of  self-deceit,  the  spiritual 
death  of  absorbed  sensuality.  Divine  peace  is  preceded  by  conviction,  repentance, 
and  prayer.  True  peace  arises  from — (1)  A  consciousness  of  God's  favour.  (2)  An 
approving  conscience.  (3)  Firm  reliance  upon  the  promises  of  God.  This  peace 
"  passeth  understanding,"  for  it  comes  from  the  depths  of  God's  infinite  love,  if 
unshaken  by  the  varied  incidents  of  life,  and  is  eternal.  II.  How  MEN  MAY 
POSSESS  THE  BLESSINGS  HERE  SPOKEN  OF.  Men  fail  to  obtain  these  blessings 
because  of  their  wrong  conceptions  of  them ;  or,  if  they  have  right  conceptions, 
they  seek  them  in  wrong  directions.  They  try  to  find  them  in  carnal  pleasures, 
secular  pursuits,  circumstantial  creations,  and  delusive  virtues.  These  blessings 
can  only  be  found  in  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  "  the  life,"  and  "  our 
peace."  1.  Men  must  accept  the  view  which  Christ  gives  of  the  folly  of  seeking 
"  life  and  peace  "  in  fleshly  indulgence  and  worldly  good.  He  discloses  to  men's 
visions  those  life-giving  energies  and  solid  resting-places  which  the  natural  eye 
does  not  perceive.  He  stands  as  the  living  fountain  of  invisible  realities.  The 
great  facts  in  the  universe  are  the  soul  and  God.  2.  Men  must  accept  of  Christ 
as  a  living  presence  in  their  inner  life.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  was  in  God's  ancient 
Baints.  He  must  dwell  in  men  now  if  they  are  to  be  blessed  in  Him.  He  enters 
every  willing  heart,  bringing  "  life  and  peace."  3.  They  must  obey  the  voice 
of  Christ's  Spirit  within  them.  Obedience  will  stimulate  vitality  and  consolidate 
peace.  Many  suffer  spiritual  paralysis  and  unrest  because  they  do  not  follow 
the  leadings  of  Christ's  Spirit.  We  must  not  only  receive  Christ,  but  live  under 
the  influence  of  His  presence.  To  have  a  spiritual  life  glowing  with  energy,  and 
a  peace  flowing  like  a  river — broad  and  deep — through  our  souls,  we  must  listen 
for  the  voice  of  Christ's  Spirit  and  follow  it.  III.  The  importance  of  possessing 
THE  blessings  HERE  SPOKEN  OF.  1.  Because  of  their  intrinsic  value.  2.  Of  their 
adaptation  to  our  condition  and  needs.  3.  Because  they  are  freely  offered  by 
a  Being  who  understands  our  necessities,  and  who  has  made  great  sacrifices  to 
bestow  them  upon  us.  4.  Because  they  have  been  eagerly  sought  for  by  the 
wise  in  all  ages.  5.  Because,  without  them,  we  shall  wander  in  the  realms  of 
death    and    disquietude    for    ever.     (IF.    Osborne    Lilley.)  The    covenant 

of  life  and  peace  : — Most  commentators  refer  this  statement  to  Levi,  as  the  head 
of  his  tribe.  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  differing  from  them.  It  is  our  great  and 
glorious  High  Priest,  the  true  Melchisedek,  with  whom  the  covenant  of  life  and 
peace  was  made.  I.  The  head  of  the  covenant.  "  Him,"  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Mark  the  station  He  occupies  in  this  character.  He  stands  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  His  people,  to  covenant  with  the  Father  on  their  behalf,  in  their 
name.  In  their  law-place,  Jesus  stood  before  all  the  perfections  of  Deity,  account- 
able, responsible  for  them  all,  and  holding  all  their  interests  dear  as  His  own. 
Vain  mortals  are  accustomed  to  talk  about  terms  of  salvation  now ;  as  if  they 
were  left  to  the  creature  to  perform.  But  what  were  the  terms  of  the  covenant 
of  salvation  ?  Perfect  obedience,  infinite  satisfaction.  Where  was  the  use  of 
leaving  these  to  a  fallen  creature  ?  Our  glorious  Head  alone  is  capable  of  render- 
ing infinite  satisfaction.  Look  at  His  affinity.  For  whom  was  He  covenanting  ? 
His  brethren.  His  "  jewels."  These  were  the  persons ;  and  why  ?  Because 
they  stood  in  everlasting  affinity  to  Him — eternal  relation  to  Him.  II.  The 
INTERESTS  OF  THIS  COVENANT.  What  is  it  all  about  t  What  is  it  for  ?  "  Life 
and  x^f^ace."  "Sin  entered  into  the  world  and  death  by  sin."  Death,  the 
Bentcuce  of  death,  the  first  and  second  death,  is  pronounced  upon  the  soul  of 
the  sinner.  The  covenant  of  life  is  with  Christ, — life  spiritual,  life  Divine,  life 
eternal.  "  This  is  the  record — this  life  is  in  His  Son."  All  the  terms  of  this 
"  life  "  were  in  that  covenant,  which  He  entered  into  on  behalf  of  His  Church. 
"  Peace,"  amity,  concord,  agreement,  between  God  and  the  soul ;  terms  adjusted 
in  such  wise,  that  the  parties  are  perfectly  agreed.  Tranquillity  of  mind,  a  holy 
calmness.  A  settled,  composed  serenity  of  spirit, — a  believing  satisfaction  that 
God  and  my  soul  have  come  to  terms,  and  can  never  be  separated  any  more. 
III.  The  securities  of  this  covenant.  What  is  a  deed  worth  without  any  seal 
or  signature  ?  Mark  what  the  security  of  this  covenant  is.  It  ensures  salvation 
entire  and  perfect.  It  is  safely  deposited,  with  Christ  Himself.  Mark  the  blessed- 
ness which  pertains  to  this  assurance.  {Joseph  Irons.)  Making  a  covenant 
with  God  : — Doddridge,  in  his  "  Rise  and  Progress  of  Religion  in  the  Soul,"  sug- 
gested a  solemn  covenant  being  entered  into  with  God.  Samuel  Pearce  acted 
upon  it  by  writing  it  with  blood  drawn  from  his  own  body.  But  he  soon  after- 
wards fell  into  sin,  and  thus  broke  his  covenant.     Driven  into  more  close  ezamina- 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  33 

tion  of  the  question  he  was  led  to  see  that  it  was  not  his  own  blood  that  was 
needed,  but  that  of  Jesus.  Carrying  the  blood-stained  covenant  to  the  top  of 
his  father's  house,  he  tore  it  in  pieces  and  scattered  them  to  the  winds,  resolved 
henceforth  to  depend  on  the  peace-making  and  peace-keeping  blood  of  Jesus. 
{W.  Adamson.)  The  blessings  of  God's  ministry  in  His  Church: — At  first  the 
tribe  of  Levi  officiated  in  the  tabernacle,  afterwards  in  the  temple,  with  piirity 
and  profit ;  but,  in  the  days  of  Malachi,  they  had  sadly  degenerated.  I.  The 
COVENANT  MADE  BY  GoD  WITH  Lbvi.  A  covenant  of  life.  It  endured  to  the  time 
when  the  Gospel-dispensation  began.  2.  A  covenant  of  peace  ;  of  temporal 
prosperity  and  happiness.  A  due  and  fitting  sustenance  was  provided  for  the 
Levites,  without  menial  toil  or  care  of  theirs.  3.  A  covenant  of  spiritual  life 
and  peace.  The  Levites  were  distributed  throughout  the  whole  of  the  country 
to  instruct  and  guide  the  people  ;  they  were  to  show  in  all  their  religious  services 
that,  without  sacrifice,  the  sinner  could  never  obtain  pardon;  that,  without 
mediation,  guilty  man  could  never  approach  his  God.  It  was  their  special 
business  and  care  to  show  to  the  polluted  and  unclean  how  life  and  peace  could 
be  procured,  how  God  could  be  pacified  toward  them,  how  holiness  of  heart  could 
be  secured,  and  eternal  glory  obtained.  The  Levitical  priesthood,  and  the  Levitical 
covenant,  were  typical  of  the  eternal  priesthood  of  Christ  and  the  covenant  of 
grace,  and  were  introductory  to  them.  II.  The  reason  of  his  being  selected 
FOR  THE  SACRED  OFFICE.  "  For  the  fear  wherewith  he  feared  Me."  1.  He  feared 
Grod  in  a  salutary  manner,  and  thus  he  was  always  ready  to  do  His  commands. 
2.  "  The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth."  Levi  was  pious  and  reverential.  He 
had  a  rich  acquaintance  with  the  law  given  by  Moses.  3.  "  Iniquity  was  not 
found  in  his  lips."  Levi  was  prudent  and  discreet  in  his  speech  as  well  as  in 
his  actions.  4.  "  He  walked  with  Me  in  peace  and  equity."  Like  Enoch  and 
Noah,  he  took  God  for  his  constant  companion :  he  acted  uprightly  before  men. 
5.  "  I  gave  them  to  him,"  says  God.  Levi  taught  the  way  of  righteousness 
most  diligently,  by  his  significant  services  and  typical  ceremonies  ;  and  many 
became  obedient  to  the  Lord  their  God.  Such  should  be  our  clergy.  How 
exemplary  should  be  the  conduct,  how  pure  the  morals,  how  disinterested  the 
acts,  how  heavenly  the  motives,  of  those  who  have  to  watch  for  souls  and  to 
win  them  for  Christ.  III.  The  reciprocal  duties  of  minister  and  people. 
L  "  The  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge."  The  priests  were  the  guardians 
of  the  sacred  deposit ;  this  was  one  chief  cause  of  their  influence.  It  was  their 
duty  to  instruct  the  people  in  the  moral  laws,  the  judicial  precepts,  and  the  cere- 
monial rites,  in  all  that  Israel  was  bound  to  know  and  believe.  2.  "  They 
(the  people)  should  seek  the  law  at  his  (the  priest's)  mouth."  He  was  the  living 
witness  to  the  power  of  Divine  truth  in  his  own  soul,  and  the  authorised  expounder 
of  God's  Word  to  the  assembled  congregation.  3.  "  He  is  the  messenger  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts,"  and  as  such  should  be  attended  to  and  obeyed.  A  combination 
of  many  excellences  was  requisite  for  the  due  execution  of  the  "  priest's  office  "  ; 
and  so  it  is  now  with  regard  to  the  Christian  minister.  He  needs  a  double  portion 
of  the  Spirit.  Happy  is  that  country  where  the  clergy  minister  for  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  their  God,  and  where  they  strive  in  all  things  to  be  examples  to  their 
flocks.  (Emanuel  Strickland,  M.A.)  The  secret  of  success  in  the  ministry  : — 
A  parishioner  asked  a  clergyman  why  the  congregation  had  filled  up,  and  why 
the  chiu-ch  was  now  so  prosperous  above  what  it  had  ever  been  before.  "  Well," 
said  the  clergyman,  "  I  will  tell  you  the  secret.  I  met  a  tragedian  some  time  ago, 
and  I  said  to  him,  '  How  is  it  you  get  along  so  well  in  your  profession  ?  '  The 
tragedian  replied,  '  The  secret  is,  I  always  do  my  best ;  when  stormy  days  come, 
and  the  theatre  is  not  more  than  half  or  a  fourth  occupied,  I  always  do  my  best, 
and  that  has  been  the  secret  of  my  getting  on.'  "  And  the  clergyman  reciting 
it,  said,  "  I  have  remembered  that,  and  ever  since  then  I  have  always  done  my 
best."  And  I  say  to  you,  in  whatever  occupation  or  profession  God  has  put  you, 
do  your  best ;  whether  the  world  appreciates  it  or  not,  do  your  best ;  always 
do  your  best.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  character  and  work  of  God's 
ministers: — 1.  It  concerns  those  who  stand  under  any  particular  obligation  to 
Grod  to  be  much  in  studying  the  encouragements  allowed  upon  them,  that  they 
faint  not  in  His  service,  and  of  their  duty,  that  they  delude  not  themselves,  expect- 
ing privileges  when  they  mind  not  their  work,  for  this  end  is  the  covenant  of  Levi 
so  clearly  laid  before  the  priests.  2.  Faithful  priests  have  especial  need  of  a  cove- 
nant of  preservation  from  God,  being  exposed  to  much  hazard  many  times; 
and  of  the  hope  of  eternal  life,  being  often  exercised  with  sad  times  here ;  and  in 


S4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

outward  things  to  have  the  Lord  securing  their  portion  to  them.  And  for  all 
these  may  faithful  ministers  trust  God,  for  "  My  covenant  was  with  him  of  life  " 
(that  is,  preservation  here,  and  hope  of  a  better  life  hereafter),  "  and  peace  and 
prosperity."  3.  It  is  a  special  qualification  of  faithful  ministers,  and  an  evidence 
that  they  are  to  receive  a  blessing,  when  much  familiarity  with  holy  things  doth 
not  breed  contempt,  but  their  heart  is  filled  with  awe  and  reverence  of  God,  and 
they  go  about  His  worship  with  holy  reverence  and  trembling,  and  do  testify 
much  tenderness  and  zeal  against  any  wrong  done  to  God.  4.  The  practice  of 
those  who  have  gone  before,  and  by  walking  in  the  ways  of  God,  have  inherited 
the  promised  blessing,  will  be  a  ditty  against  them  who  decline,  and  look  upon 
their  duty  as  intolerable,  or  their  encouragements  as  hopeless  ;  for,  the  practice 
and  blessing  on  former  priests  are  recorded,  to  condemn  the  present  unfaithful 
ones.  5.  It  is  incumbent  to  faihful  ministers,  that  they  be  neither  dumb  nor 
liars,  that  they  oppose  themselves  faithfully  against  error,  and  be  faithful  publishers 
of  truth,  for  "  the  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth."  6.  Albeit  no  mortal  man  can 
be  so  faithful,  but  that  if  God  search  him,  he  will  not  be  able  to  stand;  yet  it 
is  not  sufficient  for  a  minister,  that  he  do  not  greatly  debord  in  his  calling,  but 
he  ought  to  carry  himself  so  as  he  may  abide  a  trial,  for  endeavoured  holiness, 
Bingleness,  and  integrity,  in  revealing  the  counsel  of  God;  for,  "Iniquity  was  not 
found  in  his  lips."  7.  Albeit  people  are  to  look  to  the  word  carried  by  ministers^ 
and  obey  God  speaking  it,  whatever  the  messenger  be  ;  yet  it  is  the  duty  of 
faithful  ministers,  to  take  heed  that  their  carriage  do  not  belie  their  doctrine, 
or  minister  occasion  to  bring  it  into  contempt ;  but  that  their  practice  may  prove 
their  own  believing  in  the  doctrine,  and  that  they  shine  in  their  private  conver- 
Bation,  as  well  as  in  their  public  station ;  for  therefore  is  the  "  wallcing  "  of  honest 
priests  marked  as  well  as  their  doctrine.  8.  As  it  is  the  duty  of  all  Christians, 
BO  especially  of  ministers,  to  be  constant  in  the  ways  of  godliness,  and  walk  in 
them,  to  be  sincere  in  them,  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  to  be  on  His  side  in  all  the 
controversies  of  their  time,  which  is  to  "  walk  with  Him,"  to  make  peace  with 
God  their  great  aim,  and  for  that  end  to  be  humble  in  their  obedience,  and  not 
rebellious  to  occasion  quarrels,  which  is  "  to  walk  with  Him  in  peace,"  and  to 
follow  the  rule  of  righteousness,  and  "  walk  in  equity,"  or  "  righteousness," 
in  all  their  ways.  9.  Albeit  the  Lord's  most  faithful  servants  may  often  see  cause 
to  complain  of  the  ill  success  of  their  labours  (Isa.  xlix.  4) ;  partly,  in  that  they  are 
sometimes  sent  out  to  harden  the  generality  of  a  people  against  God's  justice 
(Isa.  vi.  9) ;  partly,  while  they  see  not  the  fruit  that  is,  as  it  was  with  Elijah 
(1  Kings  xix.  14,  18);  and  partly,  because  the  seasons  of  the  appearing  of  fruits 
are  in  God's  hands,  yet  honest  and  faithful  ministers  will  not  want  such  fruit 
of  their  labours,  as  may  testify  God's  approbation  of  them  ;  for,  "  They  turned 
many  away  from  iniquity."  {George  Hutcheson.)  The  law  of  truth  was  in 
his  mouth,  and  iniquity  was  not  found  in  Ms  lips. — The  eloquence  of  unobtrusive 
'piety  : — I.  A  a  god  man's  convebsation  is  marked  by  a  strict  regard  for  the 
TRUTH.  "  The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth."  1.  Slander  is  a  violation  of  the 
law  of  truth.  2.  Exaggeration  is  a  violation  of  the  law  of  trrth.  Some  never 
speak  but  in  the  superlative.  Exaggeration  may  spring  from  (1)  an  enthusiastic 
temperament ;  or  (2)  a  morbid  desire  to  say  startling  things  ;  or  (3)  wilful  wanton- 
ness. 3.  Flattery  is  a  violation  of  the  law  of  truth.  4.  The  habit  of  making  excuses 
is  often  a  violation  of  the  law  of  truth.  6.  Equivocation  and  dissimulation  are 
violations  of  the  law  of  truth.  II.  A  good  man's  conversation  is  marked  by 
THE  absence  op  EVERY  FORM  OF  EVIL.  "  Iniquity  was  not  found  in  his  hps." 
1.  Idle  conversation  is  a  form  of  evil  condemned  by  the  text.  2.  Profane  conversa- 
tion is  a  form  of  evil  condemned  by  the  text.  3.  Censorious  conversation  is  a  form 
of  evil  condenmcd  by  the  text.  4.  Impure  conversation  is  a  form  of  evil  condemned 
by  the  text.  III.  A  good  man's  life  is  marked  by  close  and  peaceful  com- 
munion WITH  his  Maker.  "  He  walked  with  Me  in  peace  and  equity."  1.  There 
is  intimate  fellowship.  "  He  walked  with  Me."  This  figure  alwaj'S  implies 
close  friendship.  Enoch,  Abraham,  Noah,  &c.,  walked  with  God.  (1)  This  walk 
implies  reconciliation.  (2)  This  walk  indicates  progress.  (3)  This  walk  suggests 
constant  intercourse.  2.  This  fellowship  is  productive  of  peace.  "  He  walked 
with  Me  in  peace."  (1)  Subjectively,  peacefulness.  The  inward  disposition 
of  peace.  (2)  Objectively,  peaceablencss.  The  outward  manifestation  of  peace. 
If  there  were  more  peace  in  human  liearts  there  would  be  more  in  the  home, 
the  Church,  and  the  world.  3.  This  fellowship  is  productive  of  moral  integrity. 
"  He  walked  with  Me  in  peace  and  equity."     There  can  be  no  sustained  com- 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  S5 

munion  with  the  Holy  One  if  there  be  moral  obliquity  in  the  heart,  or  dissimulation 
or  dishonesty  in  the  hfe.  "  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not 
hear  me."  This  moral  equity  is  very  searching  and  comprehensive.  (1)  It  governs 
the  relation  between  master  and  servant  (Col.  iv.  1).  (2)  It  governs  the  relation 
between  buyer  and  seller  (Prov.  xx.  14).  IV.  The  good  man's  life  and  con- 
versation WILL  EXERT  A  SAVING  INFLUENCE  ON  OTHERS.  "  And  did  tum  many 
away  from  iniquity."  1.  It  will  act  as  a  restraint  upon  evil-doers.  This  is  the 
leaven  which  preserves  the  whole  from  corruption.  2.  It  will  act  as  an  incentive 
to  the  well-disposed.  Union  is  strength.  The  view  of  unfaltering  piety  will 
encourage  the  Nicodemuses  to  avow  their  principles.  3.  It  will  prove  to  the  world 
the  genuineness  of  religion.  {Homiletic  Magazine.)  He  walked  with  Me. — 
The  pastor's  walk  with  God: — Here  the  degenerate  ministers  of  Malachi's  time  are 
reminded  of  the  bright  ideal  of  the  priesthood  in  an  older  time.  They  had  left 
the  path  of  Divine  communion.  But  Levi  had  walked  with  God.  The  whole 
passage  refers  to  the  teaching  side  of  the  Jewish  priest's  office.  We  may  therefore 
safely  use  it  with  reference  to  the  Christian  ministry.  In  Bunyan's  allegory, 
this  passage  is  nobly  adapted  to  form  the  portrait  of  a  minister  of  the  Gospel. 
In  the  House  of  the  Interpreter,  the  pilgrim  sees  a  picture  hung  against  the  wall ; 
"  and  this  was  the  fashion  of  it.  It  had  eyes  lifted  up  to  heaven  ;  the  best  of 
books  was  in  its  hands,  the  law  of  truth  was  upon  its  lips,  and  it  stood  as  if  it 
pleaded  Avith  men."  "  He  walked  with  Me."  Here  is  a  gift  that  can  never 
come  amiss.  No  circumstances,  no  temperament,  no  path  of  duty  or  trial, 
in  the  case  of  a  Christian  pastor,  can  ever  dispense  with  this — the  personal  walk 
with  God.  None  will  forget  the  other  side  of  the  pastor's  call — that  he  must 
walk  with  men.  Times  there  have  been  in  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church 
when  it  was  needful  to  enforce  it ;  but,  it  is  hardly  so  now.  The  danger  is,  that 
the  pastor  should  mistake  his  commonplace  activities  for  the  main  power,  as 
well  as  the  main  work,  of  his  ministry.  It  is  a  grievous  danger.  God  connects 
two  things:  "He  walked  with  Me"  ;  "He  did  turn  many  from  iniquity."  As 
I  read  these  words,  a  fair  and  beautiful  ideal  rises  up  before  me,  a  vision  at  once 
delightful  and  saddening.  It  is  an  ideal  blent  of  the  elements  of  real  lives. 
Saints  and  servants  of  the  Lord,  in  the  ministry  of  oiu-  Church,  pastors  whom 
I  have  seen  and  known,  combine  to  form  it.  Men  in  whose  shelves  and  surround- 
ings there  were  countless  differences,  but  who  were  all  alike  in  carrying  with  them 
this  indefinable  impression,  that  they  walked  with  God.  Men  I  mean  of  very 
various  ages  at  the  time  of  observation,  some  crowned  with  blessed  old  age,  that 
evening  with  no  night  to  follow ;  some  in  the  full  vigour  of  ripe  experience  ; 
others  young,  and  in  the  first  efforts  of  their  life.  But  all  were  alike  in  a  pure 
and  chastened  cheerfulness,  most  open  and  natural,  yet  never  out  of  time  with 
the  peace  of  God.  And  all  were  alike  in  this,  that  it  needed  no  long  acquaintance 
to  make  it  known  that  their  dearest  friend  was  their  Master  ;  their  truest  happiness. 
His  work  ;  and  their  deepest  study.  His  Word.  Sm:ely,  if  we  will  to  walk  with 
God,  the  Lord  will  not  be  absent  from  our  right  hand.  Point  out  two  ways  in 
which  such  a  walk  will  tell  on  a  pastor's  work,  apart  from  its  duty  and  joy  for 
himseK.  L  It  will  give  him  width  and  calmness  of  view,  and  reach  of  hope,  better 
than  any  other  means.  The  pastor  who  walks  with  God  will,  on  the  one  side, 
be  as  keenly  alive  as  possible  to  the  reality  of  evil  in  himself  and  those  around 
him  ;  on  the  other  side,  he  will  be  able  to  trust  mystery  and  failure  in  the  eternal 
hand,  in  a  way  that  otherwise  could  not  be — without  moral  laxity.  2.  This 
walk  with  God  will  give  the  pastor  a  power  to  influence  others  which  he  cannot 
otherwise  have.  Such  a  ministry,  whether  in  the  pulpit  or  in  the  study,  in  the 
cottage  or  in  the  mansion,  in  the  room  of  sickness  or  of  death,  or  in  the  scene 
of  health,  will  surely  be  the  likeliest  to  be  the  means  of  turning  many  from  this 
present  evil  world  to  serve  the  living  God,  and  to  wait  for  His  Son  from  heaven. 
May  our  brethren  have  this  bright  characteristic  written  on  their  ministry  to 
the  end.  (H.  C.  G.  Moide,  M.A. )  And  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity. — 1  rue 
priestly  work  : — "  Turn  many  away  from  iniquity."  Believers  are  a  spiritual 
priesthood,  separated  and  sanctified,  and  placed  among  the  unregenerate  for  their 
Balvation.  The  saved  are  to  save  others.  I.  The  nature  of  this  work.  Men 
naturally  live  in  iniquity.  Moral  crookedness  is  innate.  Salvation  alone  brings 
uprightness.  This  is  confirmed  by  human  consciousness,  human  confessions, 
human  history,  and  Divine  declarations.  This  makes  the  work  of  the  Church 
difficult.  It  seeks  to  deliver  men — I.  By  the  persuasive  power  of  holy  living. 
2.   By  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.     3.  By  its  philanthropic  enterprises.     4.  B5 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

its  power  to  bring  down  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  men  through  prayer.  5.  By  all 
its  institutions  and  ordinances.  In  this  work  the  Church  will  need  (1)  Much 
Divine  power  and  wisdom.  (2)  Great  self-denying  zeal.  (3)  The  attracting 
energy  of  Christian  love.  (4)  Much  persevering  activity.  Those  who  turn  most 
away  from  iniquity  give  the  surest  proof  that  they  are  called  to  the  Divine  order 
of  the  priesthood.  II.  This  work  still  needs  to  be  done.  Iniquity  abounds. 
The  duty  of  the  Church  is  imperative.  III.  This  work  may  be  successfully 
ACCOMPLISHED.  Wonderful  is  the  influence  which  one  man  can  exert  upon  another 
for  good.  God  works  with  those  that  work  for  Him.  Before  the  emotions 
awakened  by  the  love  of  the  cross  iniquity  appears  in  its  true  light,  and  the  sinner 
turns  away  from  it  with  loathing.  IV.  This  word  is  glorious  in  its  results. 
1.  It  saves  men  from  the  misery  of  eternal  ruin.  2.  It  furthers  the  sublimest 
purposes  of  God  in  the  redemption  of  mankind.  3.  It  brings  to  those  who  engage 
in  it  the  sweetest  satisfaction  and  delight.  4.  It  increases  the  joy  of  Christ,  angels, 
and  men.  5.  It  ensures  to  the  workers  themselves  an  eternal  reward.  Those 
whom  they  have  blessed  by  the  deliverance  of  the  Gospel  will  bless  them  for  ever. 
{W.  Osborne  Lilley.)  Priestly  influence  : — WTiat  a  criticism  upon  moral  influence 
do  we  find  in  these  words,  namely,  "  And  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity." 
There  is  no  historic  pomp  about  the  act :  but  who  can  tell  what  moral  beauty  there 
is  in  it  ?  Prophets  and  priests  and  preachers  and  leaders  work  in  different  ways. 
Some  have  what  may  be  called,  from  a  public  point  of  view,  a  negative  or  obscure 
function,  but  their  record  in  heaven  is  that  they  turned  many  away  from  iniquity, 
by  private  expostulation,  by  unknown  pra  er — that  is,  fellowship  together  with 
the  sinner — in  communion  that  is  never  published  ;  by  influence,  by  example, 
by  tender  words,  many  are  turned  away  from  iniquity,  from  selfishness,  from 
drunkenness,  from  baseness,  from  evil  pursuits  of  every  kind.  Not  by  the  thunder 
of  eloquence,  not  by  the  lightning  of  logic  or  high  reasoning,  not  by  the  mystery 
of  metaphysics,  but  by  calm,  quiet,  loving,  tutorial  interest  in  private  life, — 
who  knows  what  triumphs  have  been  wrought  within  the  sanctuary  of  the  house  ? 
God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  our  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  :  God  knows 
how  many  lambs  we  have  tended,  how  many  straying  sheep  we  have  brought  back 
to  the  fold,  how  many  hopeless  hearts  we  have  reinspired,  to  how  many  we  have 
given  of  the  oil  of  grace.  Let  no  man,  therefore,  fail  of  heart  and  courage  because 
he  does  not  speak  from  a  public  pedestal.  His  name  may  not  be  known  far  away 
from  his  own  fireside  ;  there  are  private  priests,  there  are  household  evangelists, 
there  are  ordained  missionaries, whose  names  are  not  published  ;  there  are  women- 
shepherds  who  are  seeking  the  very  worst  sheep  ;  the  sheep  that  the  shepherds 
would  not  look  after,  the  shepherdesses  are  following  still  :  all  the  service  is 
written  down,  and  attached  to  it  is  the  commendation  of  God.  The  Lord  now 
urges  against  the  priesthood  —  The  heaviest  charge  of  all: — "Ye  have  caused 
many  to  stumble  at  the  law."  There  is  the  most  malign  influence  which  man 
can  exert  on  man.  No  longer  is  the  mere  priest  condemned,  no  longer  is  the 
laugh  expended  on  the  priest  himself ;  the  people  have  got  bej'ond  that,  they 
6ay>  If  this  is  the  priest,  what  must  the  law  be  ?  If  the  law  were  good,  surel  ■•  it 
would  save  the  priest  from  such  debasement  as  he  embodies  :  if  the  priest  can 
be  so  bad,  so  selfish,  so  worldly,  so  devil-loving,  what  must  the  law  be  ?  So  we 
go  from  the  personal  to  the  moral,  from  the  concrete  individual  instance  to  the 
written  and  eternal  law :  we  begin  by  mocking  the  messenger,  we  end  by 
trampling  under  foot  the  message.  This  has  been  woefully  true  in  the  history 
of  Christianity.     (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge. — The  priest's  lips  should 
keep  knoivhdqp  : — There  exists  a  broad  and  general  analogy  between  the  priest- 
hood of  the  Levitical,  and  the  ministry  of  the  evangelical  dispensation.s,  an 
analogy  sufficiently  distinct  and  well-defined  to  enable  us  to  argue  from  the 
one  to  the  other  in  several  most  important  particulars.  I.  The  nature  of  the 
KNOWLEDGE  WHICH  IS  REQUIRED.  When  wc  spcak  of  human  knowledge  we  are 
perplexed  by  its  variety  and  exy)ansivcncss.  Where  are  we  to  find  the  precise 
boundaries  of  the  knowledge  which  the  jiriost's  lips  should  keep  ?  To  a  vigorous 
mind,  all  nature,  and  all  history,  and  all  philosophy,  and  every  region  of  thought 
and  imagination  will  bo  one  vast  storehouse  of  materials  for  the  service  of  the 
Lord's  temple.  But  some  precise  knowledge  is  here  indicated,  as  specifically 
belonging  to  the  priest ;  a  professional  knowledge,  essential  to  the  due  discharge 
of  his  office.     Surely  it  must  bo  a  knowledge  of  God's  truth,  revealed  in  holy 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  37 

Bcripture :  the  knowledge  of  Christian  doctrine  in  all  its  parts  and  proportions, 
as  propounded  by  God  to  the  faith  of  men  for  their  salvation.  This  is  the  nucleus 
around  which  all  his  knowledge  is  to  cluster,  the  centre  to  which  all  his  other 
attainments  are  to  converge.  This  knowledge  has  a  twofold  character.  It  is 
intellectual,  and  it  is  experimental :  it  is  attained  by  the  ordinary  operations 
of  the  mind,  and  by  the  experience  of  the  heart.  The  Christian  minister  must 
be  one  who  rightly  dividcth  the  word  of  truth  ;  one  who  has  the  nice  and  accurate 
skill  to  adjust  the  several  portions  of  God's  truth  in  their  right  places  and  due 
connections  ;  to  build  symmetrically  as  a  wise  master-builder,  and  not  merely 
to  say  what  is  true,  but  what  is  true  in  its  own  place  and  proportion.  And  this 
is  not  a  skill  which  is  attained  by  every  one.  The  priest's  knowledge  must  be 
experimental ;  i.e.  learned  by  a  feeling  sense  of  the  religious  wants  and  cravings 
of  the  human  heart.  A  further  and  higher  teaching  is  required  to  give  the  true 
knowledge  of  the  Gospel ;  it  is  an  inward  feeling  of  their  adaptation  to  the  wants 
of  human  nature,  and  a  personal  experience  of  their  power  upon  his  own  heart. 
This  is  the  real  secret  of  ministerial  strength.  There  is  another  branch  of  know- 
ledge no  less  essential  to  the  due  discharge  of  the  ministerial  office — a  knowledge 
of  human  nature.  The  hearts  and  consciences  of  men  are  the  Jiaterials  upon 
which  the  Christian  minister's  labour  is  to  be  expended.  He  will  study  his  own 
heart  as  the  best  guide  to  the  knowledge  of  the  hearts  of  others.  The  most 
eminently  successful  ministers  have  been  most  proficient  in  this  loiowledge. 
II.  The  importance  of  this  knowledge.  This  is  evident  from  the  nature  of 
the  case.  The  minister  is  a  messenger :  he  must  be  conversant  with  all  things 
essential  to  a  due  execution  of  his  commission.  He  is  a  teacher  ;  and  the  people 
are  to  "  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth  "  :  he  must  therefore  be  competent  to  expound 
it.  He  is  a  referee  in  cases  of  doubt  and  difficulty  ;  he  must  be  skilled  to  deal 
with  every  such  case  which  may  come  before  him.  He  is  the  depositary  of  the 
treasure  of  the  Gospel ;  he  must  be  able  to  dispense  it  with  faithfulness.  There 
are,  at  times,  some  special  reasons  why  the  Christian  minister  should  be  "  a  scribe 
well-instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Times  which  demand,  if  not  a 
higher  tone  of  piety,  at  least  a  higher  standard  of  knowledge.  There  are  some 
peculiar  features  in  the  present  circumstances  and  position  of  the  Church.  The 
Christian  ministry  must  take  up  a  commanding  position  whence  it  may  direct 
and  control  the  progress  of  society.  (IF.  Nicholson,  31. A.)  A  minister's 
responsibility : — Even  strong  and  fearless  Martin  Luther  confessed  that  he  often 
trembled  as  he  entered  the  pulpit.  He  could  stand  before  kings  and  rulers  without 
fear  ;  but  the  responsibility  of  dealing  with  souls,  and  perhaps  settling  their 
destiny  forever  by  his  message,  was  to  him  so  serious  that  he  was  wont  to  speak 
of  "  that  awful  place  the  pulpit."  Have  none  of  us  been  betrayed  into  that  cold 
officialism  which  speaks  strongly  in  the  pulpit,  and  acts  coldly  out  of  the  pulpit  ? 
Have  none  of  us  acted  the  inconsistency  of  making  the  pulpit  holy  groimd  and 
all  outside  common?  {A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.)  An  unobtrusive  minister: — 
*'  I  remember  once  riding  on  a  coach,"  remarked  the  late  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  when 
the  coachman  observed  to  me  he  knew  a  certain  minister  (I  will  not  say  of  what 
church)  who,  for  the  last  six  months,  had  been  in  the  habit  of  riding  up  and  down 
on  the  box  of  his  coach  with  him  ;  '  and,'  says  he,  '  he  is  a  good  sort  of  man,  sir, 
a  sort  of  man  I  like.'  '  Well,  what  sort  of  a  man  is  he  ?  '  I  asked.  '  Well,  you 
see,  sir,'  he  replied,  '  he  is  a  minister  :  and  I  like  him  because  he  never  intrudes 
his  religion,  sir.  I  never  heard  him  say  a  word,  that  would  make  me  believe  him 
a  religious  man,  the  whole  six  months  he  has  ridden  with  me,  sir  ! '  "  I  am  afraid 
there  are  plenty  of  Christians  of  that  sort :  I  am  afraid  the  religion  of  such  is  not 
of  much  worth.  They  never  intrude  then-  religion  ;  I  think  the  reason  it  is  so 
unobtrusive,  is,  that  they  have  not  any  to  intrude  ;  for  true  godliness  is  one  of 
the  most  intrusive  things  in  the  world.  It  is  fire  ;  and  if  you  put  fire  down  in 
your  study,  and  give  it  most  earnest  admonition  never  to  burn,  you  will  find, 
while  you  are  administering  your  sage  advice,  that  a  conflagration  has  commenced. 
The  duty  of  the  Church  in  modern  times  : — Did  the  conception  of  the  Jewish  priest- 
hood given  in  this  verse  date  from  its  original  institution  ;  wa^s  it  part  of  the 
Mosaic  legislation,  or  does  it  merely  represent  the  ideal  of  the  priesthood  after 
the  captivity  ?  What  does  the  prophet  mean  by  "  knowledge,"  and  what  by 
"  law  "  ?  Is  it  the  ceremonial  law  only  ?  Or,  is  the  priest  enjoined  to  instruct 
the  Jews  of  the  restoration  in  the  law  of  moral  conduct  ?  An  honest  view  of 
Scripture  history  requires  us  to  make  the  wider  and  more  comprehensive  answer 
to  these  questions.     With  the  pious  Jew  there  was  no  divorce  between  religion 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  morality.  And  the  Jewish  priesthood  was  not  only  a  sacrificing,  it  was 
also  a  teaching  priesthood.  Compare  the  Jewish  priesthood  with  that  of  ancient 
Greece.  The  Greek  religion  knew  nothing  of  instruction,  or  of  preaching,  in 
connection  with  temples  or  festivals.  At  first  sight,  Malachi's  words  appear 
better  suited  to  describe  the  prophet  than  the  priest.  But  in  truth,  the  priest- 
hood, as  an  ideal,  contained  in  itself  the  prophetic  ofiice  as  well.  It  is  observable 
that  the  existence  of  organised  prophetical  schools  in  Israel  appears  just  at  those 
periods  when  the  priesthood  had  ceased  to  be  a  witness  to  the  truth.  It  was  thus 
in  the  days  of  Samuel.  The  deaiest  desire  of  Samuel's  heart  was  to  win  Israel 
back  to  God,  and  teach  them  true  worship  as  well  as  true  morality.  When  David 
is  on  the  throne,  national  order  is  restored,  the  worship  of  God  has  a  permanent 
centre,  and  the  law  of  God — moral  and  ceremonial — is  authoritatively  set  forth 
and  enforced,  then  the  prophetical  schools  fall  into  the  background,  or  even 
cease,  and  the  prophetic  office  itself  becomes  an  occasional  and  extraordinary 
channel  of  God's  grace.  Later  on,  when  religion  and  morality  were  in  danger 
of  extinction,  under  Elijah  and  Elisha  the  prophetical  schools  gained  their  moral 
and  religious  importance.  But  neither  then  did  they  imply  any  opposition  to 
the  ceremonial  law.  The  true  priest  and  the  true  prophet  are  at  one.  A  right 
view  of  the  Jewish  priesthood  is  of  importance  toward  a  just  estimate  of  the 
Christian  ministry.  You  destroy  the  moral  grandeur  of  the  Jewish  priest  if  you 
obliterate  his  prophetical  function  :  and  you  miss  the  Divine  ideal  of  the  Christian 
ministry,  if  you  see  in  it  only  a  school  of  prophets,  and  forget  that  it  is  a  teaching 
priesthood,  with  a  fixed  succession  and  a  covenanted  grace.  None  can  deny 
the  fact,  that  the  Christian  ministry  has,  to  a  very  high  degree,  remembered  and 
fulfilled  its  mission  as  a  teaching  priesthood,  as  a  witness  for  the  righteousness 
of  God.  But  while  we  admire  the  powerful  moral  influence  of  the  English  clergy 
upon  English  morality,  yet  the  very  nature  of  this  success  helps  to  throw  into 
stronger  relief  what  appear  to  be  its  shortcomings.  It  may  be  seriously 
questioned  whether  the  teaching  of  the  Christian  ministry  has  not  tended  to  be 
too  partial  in  its  bearing  upon  Christian  morals.  The  relation  of  the  individual 
soul  to  God,  the  duty  of  man  to  himself  and  to  his  Maker, — these  have  natmally 
formed  the  principal  theme  of  pulpit  exhortation.  But  in  that  large  field  of 
duty  which  has  regard  to  our  fellow-men,  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  the  teaching 
of  divines  has  been  equally  forcible  and  instructive.  It  may  be  feared  that  the 
Sunday  sermon  often  gives  little  practical  guidance  for  the  toiling  niillioas  around 
us.  The  Sunday  teaching  must  not  be  an  alien  from  the  duties  of  the  week, 
nor  leave  out  three  parts  of  life.  The  type  of  character  the  Church  tends  to 
form  is  the  foundation  for  the  highest  virtues  and  widest  usefulness.  It  aims 
at  making  a  man  more  devout  towards  God,  mindful  of  the  unseen  and  spiritual, 
self-controlled  and  master  of  the  passions,  true  and  tender  in  his  home,  forgiving 
to  his  enemy,  generous  to  the  sick  and  poor.  These  vu-tues  are  never  out  of  date. 
Our  religion  as  set  forth  in  our  Divine  Exemplar,  or  in  the  teachings  of  His  apostles, 
shows  no  one-sidedness.  The  New  Testament  sets  the  relative  duties  as  high 
as  the  personal.  Religion  is  there  made  to  consist  very  largely  in  justice  and 
benevolence.  The  principles  of  Christian  conduct  remain  the  same ;  but  their 
application  varies — love  of  God,  self-denial,  love  of  neighbour  ;  and  these  based 
upon  the  doctrines  of  the  cross  ;  exemplified  by  the  life  of  Christ ;  lit  up  with 
the  hope  of  glory.  Let  me  indicate  some  of  the  questions  which  demand  the 
religious  treatment  of  the  Christian  teacher.  1.  The  subject  of  amusements. 
2.  The  ethics  of  dress.  3.  Relation  to  the  fine  arts,  painting,  sculpture,  mu8ic> 
the  drama.  Or — 4.  The  laws  concerning  marriage  and  divorce.  5.  Or  consider 
the  painful  questions  which  arise  out  of  the  intensified  vices  of  modern  society  ; 
drunkenness,  prostitution,  bribery,  commercial  fraud.  I  do  not  fear  that  the 
Church  will  lose  in  spirituality  or  humility,  by  addressing  herself  to  problems 
like  these.     {E.  L.  Hicks.) 

Ver.  9.  I  also  made  you  contemptible. — Pvlfits  sinking  into  popular  con- 
tempt :  —  The  priesthood  of  Israel  is  referred  to.  No  greater  calamity  could 
happen  to  a  community  than  this.  I.  A  calamity  to  all  paetibs.  1.  To  the 
priests.  Few  things  are  more  painful  to  man  than  social  contempt.  It  divests 
a  man  of  esteem,  confidence,  and  influence.  2.  To  the  community.  The  highest 
educational  instrumentality  in  a  country  is  that  which  religious  ministers  are 
appointed  to  employ.  In  every  way  they  are  to  cultivate  the  spiritual  naturea 
of  their  contemporaries.     When  they  become  socially  contemptible,   they  ar* 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  39 

stripped  of  all  power  for  this.     The  hearts  of  the  people  recoil  from  them  with 

disgust.       n.   A   CALAMITY  TO   WHICH  THE  REUGIOITS  MINISTRY  IS  LIABLE.       There 

are  moral  elements  at  work  amongst  the  clergy  of  all  denominations  which  have 
a  tendency  to  bring  about  this  lamentable  state  of  things.  1.  Ignorance. 
2.  Greed.  3.  Bigotry.  4.  Sycophancy.  III.  A  calamity  that  is  manifestly 
TBANSFIEING  IN  OUB  coTTNTBY.  The  decrease  in  the  numbers  of  those  who  attend 
churches :  the  growth  of  a  literature  in  thorough  antagonism  to  the  spirit  and 
aims  of  Christianity  :  and  the  fact  that  the  great  bulk  of  the  reading  and  thinking 
men  of  England  stand  aloof  from  all  churches,  plainly  show  that  the  pulpit  of 
England  is  sinking  into  popular  contempt.  The  "  salt "  of  the  pulpit  has  lost 
its  savour,  and  it  is  being  trodden  under  foot  with  disdain  and  contempt. 
{HomUist.)  A  minister's  inconsistency  : — A  minister  of  Christ  had  been  preach- 
ing in  a  country  village  very  earnestly  and  fervently.  In  his  congregation  was 
a  young  man  who  had  been  deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  sin  under  the  sermon. 
When  the  service  was  over,  he  sought  the  minister  as  he  went  out,  in  the  hope  of 
walking  home  with  him.  They  walked  together  till  they  came  to  a  friend's  house. 
On  the  way  the  minister  talked  about  everything  except  the  subject  about  which 
he  had  been  preaching,  though  he  had  preached  very  earnestly,  even  with  tears 
in  his  eyes.  The  young  man  thought  within  himself,  '  0  !  I  wish  I  could  unburden 
my  heart  and  speak  to  him  ;  but  I  cannot.  He  does  not  say  anything  now  about 
what  he  spoke  so  fervently  in  the  pulpit."  When  they  were  at  supper  that 
evening,  the  conversation  was  very  far  from  what  it  should  have  been ;  and  the 
minister  indulged  in  all  kinds  of  jokes  and  light  sayings.  The  young  man  had 
gone  into  the  house  with  eyes  filled  with  tears,  feeling  as  a  sinner  should  feel ; 
but  as  soon  as  he  got  outside  he  stamped  his  foot  on  the  ground  and  cried  out : 
"  It  is  a  lie  from  beginning  to  end  !  That  man  has  preached  like  an  angel,  and 
now  he  has  talked  like  a  devil !  "  Some  years  after,  the  young  man  was  taken 
suddenly  ill  and  sent  for  that  same  minister  to  visit  him.     The  minister  did  not 

remember  him.     "  Do  you  remember  preaching  at  the  village  of  ?  "  said 

the  young  man.  "  I  do."  "  Yoiu:  sermon  was  very  deeply  laid  on  my  heart." 
"  Thank  God  for  that,"  said  the  minister.  "  Do  not  be  so  quick  about  thanking 
God,"  said  the  young  man.  "  Do  you  know  what  you  talked  of  that  evening, 
afterwards,  when  I  went  to  supper  with  you  ?  Sir,  I  shall  be  damned  ;  and  I 
shall  charge  you,  before  God's  throne,  with  being  the  cause  of  my  damnation. 
Oh,  that  night  I  did  feel  my  sin,  but  you  were  the  means  of  scattering  all  my 
impressions  and  driving  me  into  a  deeper  darkness  than  I  had  ever  been  in  before  !  " 
Minister  of  Christ !  this  is  a  true  narrative.  It  is  a  common  sin.  In  how  many 
thousands  of  cases  the  testimony  of  the  pulpit  has  been  undone  by  the  after 
conversation  by  the  way,  or  at  the  dinner  or  supper  table,  only  "  the  day  "  will 
declare  !  0  !  the  account  that  we  ministers  will  have  to  render  for  the  light, 
frivolous,  frothy  conversation  on  such  occasions,  by  which  immortal  souls  have 
been  sent  further  from  God  or  altogether  lost !  What  eyes  have  been  upon  us, 
secretly  taking  note  of  all  and  receiving  from  us  a  deadly  influence  !  What 
opportunities  for  God  presented  and  lost  by  our  unwatchfulness  and  frivolity  ! 
Minister  of  Christ,  aim  to  live  out  of  the  pulpit  what  you  have  preached  in  it. 
If  you  preach  Christ,  live  Christ.  What  men  hear  in  the  pulpit  let  them  see  at 
the  dinner  table  and  the  visit.  {F.  Whitfield.)  Partial  in  the  law. — An  evil 
partiality  : — The  possession  of  the  law  was  the  strength  and  glory  of  the  Jewish 
priesthood.  They  had  in  it  a  Divine  standard  of  human  action,  and  it  was 
their  duty  to  maintain  its  authority,  and  enforce  its  requirements.  Being 
selfish  and  corrupt  they  made  their  exalted  position  the  means  of  gratifying 
their  avarice  ;  the  vices  of  the  rich  were  imreproved,  the  faults  of  the  poor 
were  severely  dealt  with.  They  "knew  faces"  (Heb.).  They  were  misrepre- 
senting the  character  of  God,  bringing  the  law  of  GU>d  into  contempt,  and 
ruining  the  nation.  I.  There  may  be  partiality  in  the  law  on  the  part 
OF  those  who  administer  it  to  the  people.  All  righteous  law  is  Divine. 
The  principles  of  the  decalogue  underlie  all  just  legislation.  Administrators 
of  righteous  laws  should  feel  that  they  are  revealing  and  enforcing  Divine, 
universal,  and  eternal  realities.  There  should  be  no  respect  of  persons. 
Partiality  leads  to — 1.  Loss  of  confidence  in  constituted  authorities.  2.  Rebellion 
and  anarchy.  3.  The  increase  of  crime.  Every  Christian  minister  has  to  bring 
God's  law  into  contact  with  public  vices  and  personal  sins.  This  must  be  done 
fearlessly,  faithfully,  firmly,  and  impartially.  He  must  not  adapt  it  to  men'a 
humours.     He  must  not  modify  it  to  hinder  its  application  to  offenders  of  any 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Bocial  grade.  He  must  present  it  as  God's  unalterable  standard,  not  his  own. 
If  he  is  "  partial  in  the  law  " — (1)  He  wiU  confirm  men  in  their  sins.  (2)  He  will 
deceive  and  mislead  them.  (3)  He  will  be  accounted  responsible  for  their  destruc- 
tion. (4)  He  will  at  last  be  rejected  by  God,  and  condemned  by  the  people. 
II.  There  may  be  partiality  in  the  law  in  the  estimates  of  men  in  social 
CIRCLES.  The  world  is  a  court  of  justice.  Society  is  always  testing  reputations 
and  giving  judgments.  Men  are  oftener  governed  by  prejudice  than  by  the 
desire  to  judge  righteously.  Society  often  applies  God's  law  according  to  its 
prejudices.  Sometimes  our  application  of  the  law  is  partial.  1.  Because  the  per- 
son judged  is,  or  is  not,  of  the  same  religious  persuasion  as  ourselves.  2.  Because 
it  is  our  interest  either  to  hide  or  expose  his  faults.  3.  Because  we  are 
already  prejudiced  favourably  or  otherwise  towards  him.  4.  Because  of  his 
elevated  or  degraded  social  condition.  This  partiality  leads  to  erroneous  impres- 
sions, misrepresentations,  unjust  actions,  and  bitter  feelings.  III.  There  may 
BE  PARTiiVLiTY  IN  THE  LAW  IN  ITS  APPLICATION  TO  OURSELVES.  Men  deal  tenderly 
with  their  own  sins.  They  hold  the  mirror  of  the  law  so  as  not  to  reveal  them. 
They  are  willing  to  apply  those  commandments  that  do  not  condemn  their 
particular  vices.  Faithful  application  of  the  law  is  seldom  made.  This  is  the 
cause  of  much  ignorance  of  ourselves,  much  vanity  and  self-conceit,  much  folly 
and  self-deception,  much  cherishing  of  sin,  and  persistence  in  it.  By  an  impartial 
application  of  the  law  our  sins  are  discovered,  and  we  are  led  to  Clu'ist  that  they 
may  be  taken  away.     {W.  Osborne  Lilley.) 

Vers.  10-12.  Have  we  not  all  one  Father?  —  One  Father: — I.  God  is  not 
ONLY  THE  Creator,  but  the  common  Father  of  mankind.  This  relationship 
implies  two  things :  a  resemblance  in  nature ;  and  the  existence  of  parental 
sympathy  ;  and  also  the  obligation  of  filial  devotion.  II.  This  relationship 
IS  AN  argument  why  man  should  do  no  wrong  either  against  his  fellow-creature 
or  his  God.  The  wrong  with  which  the  Israelites  were  charged  was — 1.  A  wTong 
committed  against  mankind  ;  and — 2.  Against  God  Himself.  III.  The  per- 
petration of  wrong  exposes  the  doer  to  the  most  lamentable  results. 
This  is  only  a  shadowy  pictiu-e  of  the  evils  that  ever  flow  from  wrong.  It  is  sin 
that  kindles  and  feeds  the  flames  of  retribution.  Then  haste  the  time  when  men 
shall  realise  the  fact  that  they  are  all  children  of  one  Father,  so  that  all  wrongs 
against  one  another  shall  cease,  and  the  spirit  of  universal  brotherhood  prevail  ! 
(Homilist.)  God  our  Father  : — I  once  said  to  a  young  person,  "  Well,  Elizabeth, 
do  you  love  God  ?  "  And  what  do  you  think  her  answer  was  ?  "  Ah,  I've  been 
trying,  sir  ;  but  it's  hard,  it's  hard."  That  was  how  she  answered.  Then  I  said 
to  her,  "  I'm  afraid  you  don't  know  who  and  what  God  is.  Try  and  find  that 
out,'  I  continued,  "  and  then  I  think  you'll  love  Him  and  have  no  difiiculty  in 
doing  so."  And  it  was  just  as  I  said  it  would  be.  Elizabeth  went  home,  and 
before  she  slept  that  night  she  made  one  of  the  grandest  discoveries  any  one  ever 
made.  What  do  you  think  it  was  ?  Why,  she  discovered  that  there  was  One 
up  in  heaven  who  felt  for  her  all  a  father's  love.  She  found  out  by  reading  her 
New  Testament  that  God  was  her  Father.     {A.  Scott.) 

Ver.  11.  And  hath  married  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god. —  Unholy 
marriages  : — The  Jews  were  commanded  to  keep  themselves  separate  from  the 
heathen  nations  around  them  (Deut.  vii.  2,  4).  This  was  necessary  that  they 
might  maintain  their  position  as  custodians  of  a  peculiar  revelation,  and  as  abiding 
witnesses  of  the  existence  of  the  true  God.  But  they  often  disobeyed  this  require- 
ment, and  formed  idolatrous  connections.  This  evil  was  now  prevalent. 
Nehemiah  and  Ezra  sought  to  remove  this  evil,  and  now  Malachi  strongly  con- 
denms  it.  I.  This  evil  may  now  be  committed  literally.  Similar  religious 
sympathies  can  alone  form  a  true  basis  of  connubial  union.  Without  religion 
marriage  loses  its  sanctity,  and  is  merely  a  convenient  alliance,  a  worldly  compact, 
a  carnal  revel.  Every  woman  that  is  not  truly  devoted  to  God  is  "  a  daughter 
of  a  strange  god."  She  is  under  the  influence  of  the  god  of  this  world.  Christian 
men,  for  the  sake  of  sensual  and  worldly  considerations,  sometimes  marry  such 
idolaters.  They  do  so  when — 1.  They  marry  women  who  sacrifice  their  noblest 
feelings  for  wealth.  2.  Who  have  bound  themselves  upon  the  altar  of  fashion. 
3.  Who  sacrifice  their  holiest  impulses  for  pleasure.  4.  Who  are  devoted  to  the 
triumphs  of  ambition.  Christians  should  not  violate  their  union  with  Jehovah 
to  unite  themselves  with  idolaters.     To  do  so,  even  under  the  most  plausible 


CHAP,  n.]  MALACHI.  41 

circumstances,  is — (1)  To  disobey  a  Divine  command.  (2)  To  lose  the  Divine 
blessing.  (3)  To  incur  the  Divine  displeasure.  II.  This  evil  may  bb  committed 
SPiEiTTTALLY.  The  soul's  union  with  Jehovah  is  often  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures 
as  marriage.  God  expects  us  to  unite  ovurselves  with  Him  in  the  closest  bonds. 
From  this  celestial  marriage  spring  all  virtues  and  graces.  But  men  have  joined 
themselves  to  idols.  The  worship  of  strange  gods  has  been  most  prolific  in 
pernicious  customs,  degrading  vices,  and  dangerous  errors.  Men  marry  the 
daughter  of  a  strange  god  spiritually — 1.  When  they  join  themselves  with  popular 
customs  which  have  emanated  from  the  spirit  of  idolatry.  2.  When  they  embrace 
false  and  erroneous  systems  of  religion.  3.  When  they  associate  themselves 
freely  with  unholy  religionists.  God  requires  His  people  to  separate  themselves 
from  all  the  fascinating  forms  of  evil.  AU  unholy  unions  are  as  breaches  of  a 
marriage  covenant,  or  as  marriage  with  an  idolater.  They  are  a  voluntary 
preference  of  evil  to  God.      III.   This  evil,  whether  committed  literally 

OR    SPIRITUALLY,     WILL     PRODUCE     DISASTROUS     RESULTS.       1.     Literally.       It     wiU 

result  in — (1)  Domestic  imhappiness.  (2)  A  divided  household.  (3)  Ill-trained 
children — probably  generations  of  evil-doers.  (4)  Neglect  of  the  true  religion 
on  the  part  of  both.  One  religion  matching  with  another  not  seldom  breeds  an 
atheist,  one  of  no  religion  at  all.  2.  Spiritually.  It  will  result  in — (1)  Blindness 
in  spiritual  things.  (2)  Loss  of  the  Divine  favour.  (3)  Wandering  in  deceptive 
errors.  (4)  Loss  of  religious  influence.  (5)  Being  given  up  by  God.  Learn  to 
guard  against  uniting  ourselves  with  anything  that  will  separate  us  from  God. 
An  evil  association  has  often  been  a  devil's  chain,  binding  the  soul  to  everlasting 
wretchedness.     {W.  Osborne  LiUerj.) 

Ver.  12.  The  master  and  the  scholar. — An  interesting  relationship : — Various 
renderings  have  been  given  of  these  words.  The  meaning,  however,  from  the 
context  is  clear.  The  leaders  of  the  people  were  causing  them  to  err.  They 
had  committed  the  evil  themselves  of  casting  off  their  Jewish  wives  for  heathen 
women,  and  were  teaching  that  it  was  no  sin.  God  threatened  that  He  would 
cut  them  off  for  this,  and  those  whom  they  misled.  An  evil  teacher  works 
widespread  ruin.  But  intellectual  masterships  are  beneficial  as  well  as  evil. 
It  is  a  Divine   arrangement  that   some  minds   should  control  others.     I.   The 

RELATIONSHIP  IN  WHICH  THE  MASTER  AND  THE  SCHOLAR  STAND  TO  EACH  OTHER. 

Mastership  consists  in  superior  mental  ability,  knowledge,  culture,  and  character. 
The  possession  of  such  gifts  involves  heavy  responsibilities.  Real  mastership  may 
ever  be  distinguished  from  mere  positional  authority.  Scholars  soon  detect  the 
difference  ;  they  render  spontaneous  homage  to  the  one,  but  contenm  the  other. 
1.  The  relationship  is  one  of  mutual  benefit.  The  scholar  receives  much  from 
the  training,  instruction,  and  example  of  the  master  ;  but  the  master  also  receives 
much  from  the  scholar.  He  is  stimulated  to  mental  effort,  made  watchful  over 
his  conduct,  and  obtains  a  ready  command  of  knowledge.  2.  This  relationship 
has  much  to  do  with  the  shaping  of  the  scholar's  character  and  destiny.  The 
work  of  the  master  is  the  chief  element  in  the  formation  of  his  being.  The  minds 
that  mastered  him  in  the  formative  period  of  life  have  shaped  him,  and  will  have 
much  to  do  with  fixing  his  destiny.  Illustrate  Arnold  of  Rugby.  Masters  may 
be  great  benefactors.  They  can — (1)  Awaken  latent  energies.  (2)  Instil  noble 
and  life-giving  thoughts.  (3)  Implant  eternal  principles.  (4)  Save  the  souls  of 
their  scholars  from  everlasting  death.  3.  This  relationship  tends  to  the  general 
advancement  of  the  race  in  knowledge  and  wisdom.  The  cultiired  minds  of  one 
generation  convey,  in  this  manner,  its  accumulations  of  knowledge  and  experience 
to  that  which  follows  it.  The  yoimg  of  each  age  stand  on  a  higher  vantage  ground 
than  their  fathers.  II.  The  duties  which  arise  to  the  master  and  scholar 
FROM  THE  relationship  IN  WHICH  THEY  STAND  TO  EACH  OTHER.  Every  relation- 
ship has  its  peculiar  duties.  1.  The  master's — (1)  To  set  a  worthy  example  to  his 
scholars.  His  own  character  wiU  be  his  most  influential  lesson.  (2)  To  eagerly 
impart  knowledge  to  his  scholars.  He  holds  his  position  because  of  his  posses- 
sion of  knowledge,  and  ability  to  impart  it.  He  should  have  an  enthusiasm  to 
teach.  (3)  To  unfold  the  natures  of  his  scholars.  Each  one  should  be  separately 
studied.  (4)  To  administer  correction  to  them.  Some  will  only  learn  by  the 
rod.  (5)  To  seek  to  ensure  their  moral  and  spiritual  welfare.  To  overlook  the 
highest  capabilities  in  education  is  folly.  The  work  of  the  master  should  compre- 
hend the  whole  natiire.  2.  The  scholar's.  (1)  To  respect  his  master's  authority. 
Dierespect  leads  to  disobedience,  anarchy,  and  ignorance.     (2)  To  give  attention 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

to  his  master's  instructions.  Attention  is  generally  the  measure  of  attainment. 
(3)  To  possess  a  teachable  disposition.  He  should  seek  to  remove  prejudice, 
conceit,  and  obstinacy,  and  yield  himself  to  his  master's  guidance.  (4)  To  re- 
member that  the  results  of  his  master's  teaching  will  affect  his  future  life  in  this 
world,  and  in  the  world  to  come.  The  future  rests  upon  the  present ;  eternity, 
on  time.  He  is  placed  under  instructors  for  his  good  ;  but  neglect  may  rob  him 
of  all  benefit,  and  send  him  forth  unprepared  for  life's  struggles,  and  immeet 
for  the  solemn  realities  of  eternity.     {W.  Osborne  LiUey.) 

Vers.    13-15.     Between    thee    and    the    wife    of    thy    youth.  —  Marriage: — 

1.  As  A  SOCIAL  COMPACT.  "  She  is  thy  wife,"  here  is  the  peculiarity  of  the 
relation.  It  is  the  fountain  of  humanity  in  its  perpetuation,  and  the  source 
of  its  purest  affections,  its  dearest  charities,  and  its  richest  enjoyments.  It  is 
a  relation  of  choice,  not  of  blood.  Here  is  the  mutual  compact,  with  which,  in 
the  first  instance,  the  two  parties  themselves  have  alone  to  do.  It  is  a  social 
compact,  involving  civil  responsibilities.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  individuals 
agree  in  the  formation  of  this  union  ;  the  magistracy  of  every  state,  watching 
over  the  weal  of  the  whole,  has  a  right  to  require  a  guarantee  for  the  public,  as 
well  as  for  the  parties.  So  far  as  society  is  concerned,  and  the  public  interest 
involved,  marriage  is  exclusively  a  civil  contract.  All  other  relations  arise  out 
of  this  fiirst  alliance.  This,  being  voluntary,  and  the  root  of  all  social  ramifica- 
tions, it  becomes  necessary  that  it  should  be  formed  with  the  greatest  care,  watched 
with  the  greatest  circumspection,  and  secured  by  the  most  indestructible  bond. 
"  She  is  thy  companion."  Here  is  the  propriety  and  solace  of  the  relation.  One 
crime  alone  dissolves  the  marriage  tie,  but  many  offences  may  occur  to  render  it 
sore  bondage.  Incompatibility  of  temper  and  of  habits  will  not  fail,  first  or 
last,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  to  introduce  estrangement  into  the  heart,  and 
disorder  into  the  family.  As  thy  companion,  let  her  be  treated  as  an  equal. 
She  is  80  in  moral,  intellectual,  and  immortal  constitution — a  partaker  of  the 
same  nature,  a  possessor  of  the  same  qualities,  a  recipient  of  the  same  salvation. 
Society  depends  upon  the  participation  of  a  common  nature  and  a  commimity 
of  interests.  11.  As  A  rbligiotts  institution.  In  view  of  the  closeness  of  the 
union,  the  duties  involved  in  it  reciprocally,  the  inseparable  connection  of  it 
with  human  happiness,  such  an  alliance  can  acquire  stability  only  from  motives 
of  a  religious  character,  and  from  strength  derived  from  spiritual  aid.  But  God 
has  laid  down  express  laws  for  the  regulation  of  the  state  thus  entered  upon, 
and  watches  over  it  to  enforce  those  laws  and  to  punish  their  violation.  Con- 
sider the  religious  character  of  marriage — 1.  In  its  formation.  2.  In  its  design. 
3.  In  its  connection  with  the  altar.  4.  In  its  responsibilities.  5.  In  its  duties. 
6.  In  the  typical  use  made  of  it.  (W.  B.  Collyer,  D.D.)  The  Divine  institution 
of  marriage  : — 1.  It  implies  a  loving  imion  of  two,  and  only  two  souls,  until  death. 

2.  It  has  been  sadly  outraged  in  all  ages.  Polygamy,  crueltj%  and  mutual  unfaith- 
fulness are  outrages  on  it.  3.  The  outrage  of  this  institution  is  fraught  with 
calamitous  results.     It  is  abhorrent  to  God.     It  involves  violence.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  16.  For  one  covereth  violence  with  Ms  garment. — Evil  covered  up: — 
Sin  indulged  gathers  force  and  violence.  The  oozing  stream  from  the  bursting 
reservoir  becomes  a  torrent,  and  the  torrent  becomes  a  deluge.  Lust  leads 
to  treachery,  treachery  to  cruelty,  cruelty  to  violence.  There  is  a  terrible 
momentum  in  evil.  Impetuosity  in  sin  is  human  energy  diabolically  directed. 
The  Jews  that  had  put  away  their  wives  drove  them  from  their  houses  with 
violence,  and  though  conscious  of  the  evils  they  were  committing,  yet  appealed 
to  the  Mosaic  law  of  divorce  (Deut.  xxiv.  1),  and  sought  to  make  that  law  a 
garment  to  hide  their  sin.  But  the  prophet  reminded  them  that  God  was  cog- 
nisant of  their  sin,  and  would  reveal  it.  I.  There  is  a  disposition  in  men  to 
COVER  up  their  evtl  DOINGS.  Men  especially  seek  to  hide  acts  of  violence. 
Passion  makes  a  man  disreputable.  The  wrong-doer  must  put  himself  right  with 
society.  This  is  attempted  in  various  ways.  1.  By  appealing  to  the  Scriptures. 
Its  teachings  are  perverted,  its  examples  are  distorted,  and  its  injunctions  are 
separated  from  their  context,  and  wrongly  applied.  Truth  is  woven  into  a  gar- 
ment of  sophistries  to  hide  their  sin.  2.  By  subterfuges  and  false  explanations. 
Men  think  that  their  real  characters  are  not  known  by  their  fellow-men.  They 
try  to  make  their  vices  appear  virtues.  3.  By  sheltering  themselves  behind  the 
evil  practices  of  the  great.     The  lower  classes  make  a  garment  of  the  vices  of  the 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  '  43 

upper.  Individual  responsibility  is  forgotten.  The  moral  character  of  a  deed 
cannot  be  covered  by  prevailing  customs,  however  elegant,  nor  by  popular  vices, 
however  applauded  or  legalised.  4.  By  exercising  themselves  in  the  indulgence 
of  their  passions.  Excuses  are  the  garments  which  some  men  ever  wear.  They 
excuse  themselves — (1)  Because  passions  are  not  self-implanted.  (2)  Because  of 
their  strength.     (3)  Because  they  are  generally  yielded  to.     II.  This  DisposirioiT 

TO   COVER  TIP  EVIL  REVEALS  A   CONSCIOUSNESS   OF  GUILT.       1.   Man   is   COnScioUS  of 

moral  emotions.  His  evil  acts  trouble  him.  The  loudest  witness  to  a  man's 
guilt  is  in  himself.  2.  Man  is  conscious  of  a  sense  of  shame  in  guilt.  Years  of 
persistent  vice  can  hardly  prevent  trembling  confusion  in  the  evil-doer  when 
discovered  in  his  sin.  He  is  self-condemned  and  ashamed.  3.  This  disposition 
often  leads  to  an  increase  of  guilt.  Confession  of  sin  brings  mercy,  cleansing, 
and  peace  ;  but  the  covering  of  sin,  callousness,  Divine  displeasiu-e,  and  ruin.  It 
manifests  obstinacy  and  determined  rebellion.  Men  seek  to  cover  up  evil — ( 1 )  From 
fear  of  dishonour.  (2)  To  escape  punishment.  (3)  To  silence  conscience.  (4)  To 
avert  the  anger  of  God.  III.  This  disposition  to  cover  up  evil  is  recognised 
BY  THE  Lord  of  hosts.  Vain  are  all  subterfuges  in  an  universe  filled  with  God. 
Every  evil  is  known  by  Him  in  its  true  character.  Violence  is  not  "  expedient 
pressure  "  ;  it  is  violence.  1.  His  omniscience  seciu-es  the  detection  of  every  evil- 
doer. 2.  His  justice  secures  the  avenging  of  the  wronged.  3.  His  holiness  secures 
the  exposure  and  punishment  of  every  wrong-doer,  however  carefully  he  may 
cover  his  violence  as  "  with  a  garment."  AU  covering  of  sin  by  man  is  folly. 
God  alone  can  cover  it  by  His  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus.     (W.  Osborne  LiUey.) 

Ver.  17.  Where  is  the  God  of  judgment?  —  A  startling  question:  —  Times 
of  abounding  wickedness  have  been  times  of  unbelief.  Evil  hinders  the 
manifestaton  of  God  in  the  world.  His  laws  seem  to  have  no  execu- 
tive force  ;  His  righteousness  is  obscured ;  His  very  existence  is  questioned, — 
see  text.  This  question  may  be  asked — 1.  By  the  righteous  in  their  distress.  2.  By 
the  wicked  in  their  fancied  security.  3.  By  the  sceptic  in  his  reluctant  doubting. 
4.  This  question  will  be  answered  by  God — (1)  To  the  joy  of  the  righteous  ;  (2)  to 
the  confusion  of  the  wicked  ;  (3)  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  honest  doubter  ;  (4)  to 
the  full  vindication  of  the  Divine  justice.  Faith  is  needed.  The  laws  of  God 
execute  themselves  most  vividly  in  the  invisible  regions  of  the  soul.  Men  look 
for  God  in  the  destructive  hurricane  rather  than  in  the  stings  of  conscience  ; 
in  terrible  thunderings  rather  than  in  the  still  small  voice.  Mercy,  too,  causes 
judgment  to  linger,  but  in  the  end  every  one  will  receive  his  sentence  according 
to  ixis  deeds.  ( W.  Osborne  LiUey. )  Ood  is  a  God  of  judgment : — There  was 
lately  a  judge  in  England,  whom  I  need  not  be  afraid  to  name  as  the  honour  of 
his  robe  and  profession,  namely.  Judge  Doddridge,  whom  they  commonly  called 
"  the  sleeping  judge."  Indeed,  he  had  an  affected  drowsy  posture  on  the  Bench, 
inasmuch  that  many  persons  unacquainted  with  his  custom,  and  having  cases 
of  concernment  to  be  tried  before  him,  have  even  given  up  all  for  lost,  expecting 
no  justice  from  a  dormant  judge  ;  when  he  all  the  while  did  only  retire  himself 
within  himself,  the  more  seriously  to  consult  with  his  own  soul  about  the  validity 
of  what  was  alleged  and  proved  unto  him,  as  appeared  afterwards  by  those  oracles 
of  law  which  he  pronounced.  Wicked  men,  in  like  manner,  erroneously  suppose 
God  to  be  a  sleeping  God,  .  .  .  but  in  due  time  He  will  assuredly  confute  their 
mistake.     (Thos.  Fuller.) 


CHAPTER  ni. 

Vers.  1-6.  Behold,  I  will  send  My  messenger.  —  Messiah's  messenger : — 
The  coming  of  the  Messiah  was  in  the  time  of  the  world's  deepest  wants.  As  in 
all  instances  of  national  degeneracy,  two  special  causes  bore  their  fruit  in  Malachi'a 
time.  1.  Neglect  of  the  Divine  ordinances.  No  Divine  law  has  ever  been  given 
that  was  not  essential  to  human  well-being.  A  neglect  of  the  Divine  standard 
is  consequently  a  sin  against  one's  self.  There  is  not  a  Bible  precept  that  is 
iinreasonable,  and  therefore  it  is  unreasonable  to  give  no  heed  to  what  is  written. 
In  this  respect  the  sufferings  of  Israel  were  self-imposed.     2.  Decay  of  spiritual 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

life.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  realise  the  depth  of  wickedness  portrayed  by  the 
prophet.  The  priests  despised  the  name  of  Jehovah.  The  people  had  robbed 
God,  and  declared  it  a  vain  thing  to  serve  Him.  In  a  twofold  way  we  observe 
the  relation  of  such  a  lack  of  service  to  the  national  life.  This  sin  resulted  in 
the  alienation  of  the  hearts  of  the  children  from  their  parents.  It  is  a  mark  of 
national  decay  when  the  children  make  light  of  their  fathers,  when  they  scofE  at 
former  virtues.  Again,  sin  against  God  always  carries  with  it  wrong-doing  against 
man.  Love  cannot  be  localised  upon  men  while  withheld  from  God.  The  man 
who  cannot  truly  honour  God  will  not  truly  honour  man.  Our  deeds  declare 
our  religion.  Well  did  the  prophet  ask,  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  His  coming?  " 
Who  shall  bear  the  tests  of  His  judgment  ?  The  prophesied  coming  of  Elijah 
referred  to  John  the  Baptist.  There  is  something  subUme  in  the  rugged  character 
that  confronted  a  degenerate  nation.  He  only  who  knows  the  Divine  greatness 
and  power  can  have  courage  to  rebuke  the  self-conceit  that  resists  God.  The 
life  of  the  Baptist  interprets  the  two  great  lessons  of  the  prophecy  in  our  text 
calling  for  notice.  1.  Our  hope  rests  in  the  unchanging  God.  The  idea  of 
changeableness  in  the  one  trusted  destroys  all  faith  in  its  very  essence.  It  is 
unhuman  to  love  the  being  that  to-morrow  may  turn  against  us.  But  for  this 
Divine  characteristic  no  sinner  could  stand  in  God's  sight.  It  was  this  truth 
against  whose  bright  background  Israel's  sin  is  of  the  deepest  guilt.  2.  The 
suicide  of  imbelief.  God  added  no  terrors  to  Israel's  sufferings  in  the  fiery  day. 
They  had  but  to  remember  their  words,  "  His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children." 
Unbelief  can  stay  the  exercise  of  Divine  mercy  towards  the  individual,  but  it 
cannot  keep  back  its  own  retribution.  It  can  give  blindness  to  the  heart,  but  it 
cannot  blot  out  the  Divine  judgment.  Against  the  darlmess  of  the  prophet's 
picture  there  is  another,  of  brighter  meaning.  There  is  a  healing  power  in  the 
beams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  Light  takes  the  place  of  darkness.  The 
righteous  shall  not  be  as  flowers  to  fade  and  to  die,  but  rather,  strong  and  a 
source  of  joy,  like  the  herds  that  feed  in  richest  pastures.  Jehovah  is  that  blazing 
sun  of  glory.  Unbelief  brings  a  sunset  of  terror,  while  righteousness  is  itself 
the  sunrise  of  everlasting  joy.  (Sermons  by  Monday  Club.)  The  appearance 
of  the  Great  Deliverer  : — The  event  announced  is  the  appearance  of  that  Great 
Deliverer  who  had  for  many  ages  been  the  hope  of  Israel,  and  was  to  be  a  blessing 
to  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  Concerning  this  desire  of  nations,  Malachi  here 
delivers  no  new  prediction  ;  but,  by  an  earnest  asseveration,  uttered  in  the  name 
and,  as  it  were,  in  the  per.son  of  the  Deity,  he  means  to  confirm  that  general  expec- 
tation which  his  predecessors  had  excited.  L  The  characters  under  which  the 
person  is  described  whose  coming  is  foretold.  "  The  Lord,"  or  Proprietor.  It 
denotes  dominion.  "  The  Lord  shall  come  to  His  temple."  That  is  Jehovah's. 
Then  the  Christ  whose  coming  Malachi  announces  is  no  other  than  the  Jehovah 
of  the  Old  Testament.  From  many  texts  it  may  be  gathered  that  the  promised 
Messiah  is  described  by  the  more  ancient  prophets  as  no  other  than  the  everlasting 
God,  the  Jehovah  of  the  Israelites.  "  The  Messenger  of  the  covenant."  Not 
the  Mosaic.  Another  covenant  is  spoken  of  as  the  new  and  the  everlasting 
covenant.  Of  this  covenant,  so  clearly  foretold,  and  so  circumstantially  described 
by  the  preceding  prophets,  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  Malachi  thinks  it  unnecessary 
to  introduce  any  particular  description.  The  Messenger  of  the  covenant  is 
Jehovah's  servant,  for  a  message  is  a  service  ;  it  implies  a  person  sending,  and 
a  person  sent ;  in  the  person  who  scndeth  there  must  be  authority  to  send, — sub- 
mission to  that  authority  in  the  person  sent.  But  the  servant  of  the  Lord  Jehovah 
is  the  Lord  Jehovah  Himself ;  not  the  same  person  with  the  sender,  but  bearing 
the  same  name  because  united  in  that  mysterious  nature  and  undivided  substance 
which  the  name  imports.  The  same  person  therefore  is  servant  and  Lord. 
Another  character  of  the  Messiah  must  be  added.  He  is  the  Messenger  whom 
"  they  delight  in."  But  this  expression  here  is  ironical;  the  words  express  the 
very  reverse  of  that  which  they  seem  to  affirm.  There  is  more  or  less  of  severity 
in  this  ironical  language,  by  which  it  stands  remarkably  distinguished  from  the 
levity  of  ridicule,  and  is  particularly  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  invective  and 
rebuKe.  It  denotes  conscious  superiority,  sometimes  indignation,  in  the  person 
who  employs  it ;  it  excites  shame,  confusion,  and  remorse  in  the  person  against 
whom  it  is  employed, — in  a  third  person,  contempt  and  abhorrence  of  him  who 
is  the  object  of  it.  Irony  is  the  keenest  weapon  of  the  orator.  2.  The  particulars 
of  the  business  upon  which  the  person  announced  is  said  to  come.  It  is  reducible 
to  these — the  final  judgment,  when  the  wicked  shall  be  destroyed ;  a  pieviouB 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  46 

trial  or  experiment  of  the  different  tempers  and  dispositions  of  men,  in  order  to 
that  judgment ;  and  something  to  be  done  for  their  amendment  and  improvement. 
The  trial  is  signified  under  the  image  of  an  assayer's  separation  of  the  nobler 
metals  from  the  dross  with  which  they  are  blended  in  the  ore.  The  means  used 
for  the  amendment  and  improvement  of  mankind,  by  the  Messiah's  atonement 
for  our  sins,  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and  by  the  internal  influences  of  the 
Holy  Spirit, — all  these  means,  employed  under  the  Messiah's  covenant,  for  the 
reformation  of  men,  are  expressed  under  the  image  of  a  fuller's  soap,  which 
restores  a  soiled  garment  to  its  original  purity.  One  particular  effect  of  this 
purification  is  to  be,  that  the  "  sons  of  Levi  "  will  be  purified.  The  worship  of 
God  shall  be  purged  from  all  hypocrisy  and  superstition,  and  reduced  to  a  few 
eimple  rules,  the  natural  expressions  of  true  devotion.  "  And  then  shall  this 
offering  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  "  (that  is,  of  the  true  members  of  God's  true 
Chiu-ch)  "  be  pleasant  unto  the  Lord."  All  these  prophecies  were  fulfilled,  or 
will  yet  be  fulfilled,  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  {Bishop  Horsley.)  Messiah  and 
His  forerunner : — I.  John  the  Baptist  as  a  kind  of  connecting  link  between  the 
law  and  the  Gospel.  He  displayed  much  of  the  austerity  of  the  prophets  of  old. 
He  may  be  said  to  have  taught  that  the  law  was  about  to  be  swept  away  as  a 
covenant  of  works ;  there  was  not  to  be  introduced  any  system  but  one  of  strict 
and  self-denying  morality  As  he  preached  a  baptism  of  repentance,  and  not 
one  of  mere  ceremonial  pvu-ification,  it  became  evident  that  the  long  twilight 
of  figure  and  type  was  about  to  be  succeeded  by  the  clear  day  of  spiritual  and 
heart  work  religion.  John  occupied  a  most  singular  position :  commissioned 
neither  to  enforce  the  law  nor  to  proclaim  the  Gospel.  He  may  be  called  a  man 
of  two  worlds.  He  stood  mysteriously  between  the  law  and  the  Gospel,  being 
neither  instructed  to  marshal  the  shadows  nor  privileged  to  exhibit  the  substance. 
And  yet  with  all  this  John  was  not  ignorant  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  which  Jesus 
was  to  offer.  From  the  lips  of  John  flowed  the  first  announcement  of  an  expiatory 
sacrifice.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  Grod."  But  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  includes 
a  vast  deal  more  than  the  showing  forth  of  the  doctrine  of  the  dying  Redeemer. 
Upon  this  doctrine,  as  a  foundation,  rests  every  other ;  but  the  superstructure 
is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  foimdation.  Christ  must  be  preached  as  a  risen, 
a  living,  and  a  glorified  Saviour.  John  was  a  messenger  sent  to  prepare  Christ's 
way.  But  in  every  case  the  herald  of  an  illustrious  personage  announces  but 
part  of  the  biisiness  on  which  that  jiersonage  comes.  2.  Notice  the  titles  here 
given  to  Christ:  "  the  Lord  "  (Adonai),  and  the  "  Messenger  of  the  covenant." 
There  is  much  in  the  latter  title  which  has  to  do  with  the  offices  of  Christ.  His 
special  business  was,  enacting  a  fresh  covenant  between  God  and  the  human 
race.  The  only  covenant  God  could  make  is  one  whereby  He  promises  blessings 
and  at  the  same  time  prescribes  conditions.  The  whole  drawing  up  of  the 
covenant  must  be,  so  to  speak,  with  God.  God  proposes  it,  and  the  only  thing 
which  man  can  have  to  do  is  merely  to  embrace  it.  {Henry  Melvill,  B.D.) 
"  My  messenger'''' : — L  The  greatness  of  John  the  Baptist.  1.  The  angel  said 
he  should  be  "  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  (Luke  i.  18).  He  was  "  a  prophet, 
and  "  more  than  a  prophet."  2.  What  is  a  prophet  ?  A  teacher  ?  Yes,  but 
one  who  is  taught  directly  by  God.  He  not  only  predicts  the  future,  but  he  is 
the  revealer  of  God's  will  for  the  present.  3.  John  was  "  more  than  a  prophet." 
This  is  explained  in  three  ways.  (1)  He  was  prophesied  of.  (2)  He  was  more 
than  a  prophet  in  the  richness  of  his  illumination.  (3)  Through  his  nearness  to 
Christ — going  before  the  face  of  the  Lord.  4.  The  praise  of  Christ  is  the  purest 
indication  and  guarantee  of  the  excellence  of  His  forerunner.  IL  The  greatness 
OF  his  work.  1.  He  had  to  make  ready  the  way  of  the  Lord  in  souls,  by  preaching 
repentance.  2.  The  most  remarkable  part  of  his  office  was  that  of  pointing  out 
and  bearing  witness  to  "  the  Light."  IIL  Lessons.  L  Observe  how  God 
uses  human  agency  in  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes.  2.  The  preparation 
is  the  same  in  all  approaches  of  the  Lord.  3.  The  work  of  the  Baptist  reminds 
us  of  the  importance  of  preparation  before  Holy  Communion,  when  Christ  comes 
hiddenly  to  us.  {The  Thinker.)  Christ's  coming  : — These  words  were  spoken 
to  the  unbelieving  priests  of  Malachi's  days,  who  professed  that  they  could  see 
no  tokens  of  the  presence  of  God  among  His  people.  The  Lord  describes — I.  The 
preparation  for  His  coming.  John  the  Baptist  prepared  the  way  "  of  the 
Lord  " — 1.  By  his  singular  birth.  2.  By  his  awakening  ministry.  3.  By  direct 
testimony.  "  He  saw  and  bare  record  that  this  was  the  Son  of  God."  II.  The 
TUia  OF  His  COMING.     Suddenly,  or  immediately  after  the  preparation  of  His 


46  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

way  by  the  "  messenger."  How  remarkably  did  the  facts  agree  with  the  pre- 
diction !  III.  The  dignity  of  His  coMiNa.  No  mere  man  could  use  such 
authoritative  words.  "  He  shall  prepare  the  way  before  Me."  IV.  The  special 
BUSINESS  OF  His  coming.  "  Messenger  of  the  covenant."  ''  Equal  with  the 
Father,  as  touching  His  Godhead,"  Christ  is  at  the  same  time  "  inferior  to  the 
Father  as  touching  His  manhood,"  in  order  that  He  might  become  the  Messenger 
of  heaven  to  a  lost  world.  He  came  to  reveal  and  to  fulfil  His  own  part  in  a 
gracious  covenant  of  redemption  for  guilty  sinners.  V.  The  certainty  of  His 
COMING.  The  imbelieving  Jews  doubted  it ;  even  the  faithful  were  despondent ; 
the  prediction  is  therefore  attested  by  a  most  solemn  assurance,  "  Behold,  He 
shall  come,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  Messenger  of 
the  covenant  delighted  in  : — This  passage  cannot  speak  of  any  intervention  of  the 
Deity,  like  that  which  the  nation  of  Israel  had  often  experienced  ;  here  was  a 
prediction  of  the  Messiah  to  come.  His  Divine  nature  is  declared,  and  yet,  when 
He  is  spoken  of  as  the  Messenger  of  the  Almighty,  we  see  Him  as  distinct  from 
God  in  His  human  nature.  He  is  the  Lord  who  should  come  to  His  own  temple  ; 
and  He  is  the  Messenger  or  Servant  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  He  is  not  the  Messenger 
of  the  Mosaic  covenant.  That  had  long  previously  been  established  under  Moses, 
as  its  mediator.  Isaiah  writes  of  another  covenant,  an  "  everlasting  covenant." 
The  national  covenant  must  pass  to  give  way  to  a  better.  Of  this  new  covenant, 
to  receive  the  elect  remnant  of  the  Jews,  and  to  gather  around  them  all  the  elect 
people  of  the  Gentiles — of  this  covenant  it  is  here  said,  that  the  Messiah  to  come 
was  to  be  the  Messenger  ;  He  should  establish  the  covenant ;  He  should  be  its 
source  ;  He  should  be  its  Mediator  ;  He  should  be  the  very  substance  of  the 
covenant.  It  was  His  blood  formed  that  covenant  ;  when  He  made  an  atone- 
ment for  transgression  He  rendered  it  possible,  because  it  became  just  and  right 
that  the  Almighty  should  again  enter  into  a  covenant  of  peace  with  His  rebellious 
creatures.  Look  at  Christ  under  this  character,  the  "  Messenger  of  the  covenant," 
— Him  who  was  sent  of  God  to  establish  and  confirm  it.  He,  in  order  to  bring 
His  people  into  covenant  with  God,  has  been  their  substitute  in  suffering.  He 
would  also  secure  us  every  best  blessing.  He  has  become  our  wisdom.  He  has 
also  become  our  sanctification.  He  is  also  our  perfect  example.  He  becomes  an 
advocate  for  each  of  His  offending  people.  And  He  is  our  High  Priest,  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  The  prophet  tells  of  the  reception  which 
the  Saviour  was  to  meet.  "  Whom  ye  delight  in."  And  good  reason  have  we 
to  delight  in  this  Messenger  of  the  covenant,  if  indeed  we  have  tasted  of  His  love. 
We  may  delight  in  what  He  has  done,  what  He  does,  and  what  He  will  do  for  us. 
(Hon.  and  Rev.  B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  England's  ideal  juture,  and  our  duty  with 
regard  to  it : — In  these  words  Malachi  proclaims  to  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem  the 
ideal  future.  Every  nation  lives  in  its  past.  It  derives  inspiration  for  noble 
and  worthy  conduct,  from  the  memory  of  illustrious  heroes  whose  names  adorn 
its  roll  of  fame.  The  Jew  appealed  to  the  magnificent  episodes  in  the  earlier 
history  of  His  people,  when  God  had  signally  and  miraculously  interposed  on 
Israel's  behalf.  And  He  drew  from  this  historical  source  arguments  for  a  renewed 
faith  in  God,  for  a  purified  religious  and  national  life.  But  every  nation  in  whom 
there  still  throbs  the  pulse  of  a  vigorous  life  lives  also  in  an  ideal  future.  It 
believes  in  its  individual  destiny.  That  destiny  may  not  be  clearly  defined.  It 
does  not  need  clear  definition  to  exert  its  power  in  shaping  the  course  of  a  nation's 
history.  The  presence  of  a  great  idea  is  sufficient  of  itself  to  shed  a  guiding  light 
upon  a  nation's  onward  track.  Israel  possessed  a  great  leading  idea  with  respect 
to  its  future,  that,  namely,  of  the  coming  of  a  Messiah.  The  nation  held  this 
idea  under  different  forms  at  different  periods  of  its  history.  In  the  latest  of 
the  prophets,  in  Malachi,  there  is  a  departure  from  the  traditional  picture  of  the 
nation's  future.  Malachi  no  longer  speaks  of  the  coming  of  an  earth-born  prince. 
He  speaks  of  a  heaven- born  Messenger,  who  should  carry  into  effect  the  covenant 
long  established  between  Jehovah  and  His  people.  The  "  Messenger  of  the 
covenant,"  who  should  "  sit  as  a  Refiner  and  Purifier  of  silver,"  who  should 
separate  the  evil  from  the  good  ;  who  should,  like  a  glorious  sun  new  risen  upon 
the  world  with  healing  in  his  beams,  bring  new  life  and  invigoration  to  all  earnest 
Bouls,  to  all  who  feared  the  name  of  God.  The  moment  in  the  nation's  history 
which  this  verse  brings  before  us  is  that  when  it  is  face  to  face  with  its  apparently 
destined  future,  as  that  future  is  disclosed  by  the  inspired  voice  of  Malachi. 
The  purpose  for  which  the  prophet  draws  his  picture  is,  that  he  may  rouse  the 
conscience  of  the  different  classes  of  the  people  ;  and  lead  them  to  reconsider 


CHAP,  m]  MALACHI.  41 

seriously,  and  in  God's  sight,  their  national,  religious,  and  domestic  duties.  He 
derives  from  his  contemplation  of  the  ideal  future  of  his  nation  an  incentive 
for  present  action.  Let  us  draw  from  a  contemplation  of  the  near  future  of 
our  own  country  a  motive  and  stimulus  for  present  guidance  and  action.  1.  Con- 
trast Malachi's  vision  of  the  future  of  Israel  with  the  ideal  futiure  of  our  own 
country.  What  is  the  mightiest  force  at  present  working  in  our  national  life  ? 
It  is  the  progress  of  popular  government,  the  rule  of  the  coimtry  by  the  people 
of  the  country.  The  nineteenth  century  was  the  age  of  the  growth  of  democratic 
institutions,  of  the  spread  of  democratic  ideas.  This  is  the  one  giand  force  in 
our  national  life  which  contains  within  itself  inexhaustible  energies,  the  capacity 
for  almost  unlimited  development.  Nothing  can  successfully  oppose  its  course. 
The  tide  of  popular  development  will  sweep  forward.  It  is  destined  to  attain 
vaster  proportions.  Shall  we,  as  religious.  God-fearing  men,  loving  our  coimtry 
and  humanity,  caring  for  posterity,  fail  to  recognise  in  this  tendency  of  our  age 
the  summons  of  God  to  renewed  earnestness,  to  intensified  zeal  ?  Shall  we  say 
that  these  vast  political  movements  and  issues  have  no  voice  for  our  conscience, 
no  bearing  on  our  Chiistian  duty  and  Christian  faith  ?  The  great  Hebrew  prophet 
Malachi  rebukes  us.  2.  Look  at  our  duty  as  Christian  men,  as  Christian  workers, 
in  the  light  of  the  political  destiny  of  our  country.  We  should — (1)  Accept  it 
fearlessly,  and  with  fxill  faith  in  God.  (2)  Let  the  Christian  Church  determine 
that  the  movement  shall  be  under  the  direction  of  Christian  men.  (3)  The 
necessity  of  promoting  education  and  enlightenment  becomes  ever  more  clear. 
(4)  A  new  impetus  is  given  to  the  preacher  of  the  Gospel  by  the  contemplation 
of  this  magnificent  future  of  oiu"  country.  {A.  J.  Griffith.)  Did  Jesus  come 
again  : — What  manner  of  personage  would  He  be  did  He  condescend  to  appear 
among  us  ?  Should  we  know  Him  merely  by  His  bearing  and  character  ?  We 
must  believe  that,  as  in  Judea  of  old,  Christ  would  meet  men  with  all  considera- 
tion and  courtesy.  All,  or  almost  all,  the  good  manners  which  we  have  among 
us — courtesies,  refinements,  self-restraint,  mutual  respect — we  owe  to  Christ, 
to  the  influence  of  His  example,  and  to  that  Bible  which  testifies  of  Him.  Con- 
ceive— but  which  of  us  can  conceive  ? — His  perfect  tenderness,  patience,  sympathy, 
graciousness,  and  grace,  combined  with  perfect  strength,  stateliness,  even  awful- 
ness,  when  awe  was  needed.  He  alone,  of  all  personages  of  whom  history  tells 
us,  solved  in  His  own  words  and  deeds  the  most  difficult  paradox  of  human 
character, — to  be  at  once  utterly  conscious  and  utterly  unconscious  of  self ;  to 
combine  with  perfect  self-sacrifice  a  perfect  self-assertion.  He  condescended, 
in  His  teaching  of  old,  to  the  level  of  Jewish  knowledge  at  that  time.  We  may 
therefore  believe  that  He  would  condescend  to  the  level  of  our  modern  knowledge  ; 
and  what  would  that  involve  ?  It  would  leave  Him,  however,  far  less  than 
Himself,  at  least  Master  of  aU  that  the  human  race  has  thought  or  discovered  in 
the  last  eighteen  hundred  years.  He  might  speak  as  never  yet  man  spoke  on 
English  soil,  might  speak  with  an  authority,  originality,  earnestness,  as  well  as 
eloquence  which  might  exercise  a  fascination,  purifying  though  painful  as  a 
"  refiner's  fire  "  ;  a  fascination  equally  attractive  to  those  who  wished  to  do 
right,  and  intolerable  to  those  who  wished  to  do  wrong.  But  how  long  would 
His  influence  last  ?  As  before,  there  might  come  a  day  when  His  hearers  and 
admirers  would  become  fewer  through  bigotry,  envy,  fickleness,  cowardice,  &c. 
And  so  the  world,  the  religious  world  as  well  as  the  rest,  might  let  Him  go  His 
way,  and  vanish  from  the  eyes  and  minds  of  men,  leaving  behind  little  more 
than  a  regret  that  one  so  gifted  and  so  fascinating  should  have  proved — so  unsafe 
and  so  unsound  a  teacher.  (Canon  Charles  Kingsley.)  The  Lord  coming  to 
His  temple  : — Here  before  us  is  a  twofold  prediction.  We  have  a  forerunner  of 
Christ  announced  in  it,  and  then  Christ  Himself.  I.  A  forertjnnee  of  Christ. 
I.  His  mission  from  God.  "  Behold  I  will  send  My  Messenger  " — there  is  his 
Divine  mission.  Reference  is  to  John  the  Baptist.  Observe  the  honour  it  puts 
upon  him.  It  not  only  describes  him  as  in  the  mind  of  God  before  his  appearance, 
and  as  specially  appointed  by  God  to  his  office,  but  it  makes  him,  like  his  great 
Master  Himself,  the  subject  of  prophecy,  and  an  object  of  expectation  for  ages 
to  the  Church.  It  was  no  personal  pre-eminence  that  so  peculiarly  distinguished 
this  man.  It  was  this — he  was  nearer  to  Christ ;  he  testified  more  plainly  and 
fully  of  Him.  2.  The  work  this  forerunner  was  sent  to  perform.  "  He  shall 
prepare  the  way  before  Me."  John  came,  sustaining  the  character  and  doing  the 
work  of  the  herald  of  Christ.  The  preaching  of  the  Baptist  should  not  only  lead 
jnen  to  expect  the  Messiah,  but  should  prepare  their  hearts  to  receive  Him.     What 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


was  it  that  first  led  some  of  you  to  seek  Christ  and  welcome  Him  ?  Was  it  not 
a  consciousness  of  sin,  a  sense  of  God's  anger,  a  dread  of  merited  destruction  ? 
Now  examine  John's  preaching,  and  you  will  find  it  calculated  to  produce  juat 
these  effects.  II.  A  prediction  of  Christ.  1.  The  names  applied  to  Christ. 
He  is  "  the  Lord."  He  comes  to  "  Hjs  temple."  Thus  the  Holy  Spirit  asserts 
the  Redeemer's  Godhead.  Another  name  is  applied  to  Christ,  a  lowly  one — 
"  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant."  He  sustains  in  relation  to  the  covenant  a 
similar  character  to  that  which  John  sustained  towards  Himself.  He  is  God's 
servant,  sent  into  our  world  on  an  errand  connected  with  God's  covenant  of  grace. 
The  "  covenant "  is  the  term  applied  by  Jehovah  to  the  promises  He  has  given 
His  people  to  bless  and  save  them.  It  shows  them  the  stability  of  these  promises, 
and  the  fixed  purpose  of  God  to  perform  them.  And  Christ  is  called  the  Messenger 
of  this  covenant,  because  He  it  is  who  makes  it  known.  He,  in  His  human 
nature,  is  the  iiiistrument  employed  by  Jehovah  in  carrying  it  into  effect.  Observe 
the  happy  blending  together  in  these  two  names  of  the  Redeemer's  greatness 
and  lowliness — the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  yet  a  servant.  2.  The  appearing  of  Christ 
in  oiu-  world.  Mark  the  place — "  His  temple."  Mark  the  predicted  manner  of 
His  appearing — "  suddenly."  Mark  the  certainty  of  His  advent — "  He  shall 
come."  Put  three  questions.  (1)  What  reception  have  you  given  to  this  heaven- 
descended  Saviour  ?  (2)  With  what  feelings  and  expectations  do  you  come  up 
to  this  house  of  the  Lord  ?  (3)  How  stand  you  prepared  for  the  future  coming 
of  the  Lord  ?  (C  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  advent  of  Christ : — In  the  days  of 
Malachi  there  were  many  who,  as  the  prophet  says,  even  "  wearied  the  Lord 
with  their  words."  They  said  that  God  delighted  in  the  wicked  as  much  as  in 
the  good,  and  denied  that  He  would  ever  put  any  difference  between  them. 
"  Where,"  said  they,  "  is  the  God  of  judgment  ?  "  Notice— I.  What  the  prophet 
SAYS  RESPECTING  OUR  Lord's  ADVENT.  Jesus  is  here  described  under  the  most 
august  tiiles.  He  is  the  Lord,  the  supreme  Ruler  and  Governor  of  heaven  and 
earth.  Yet,  notwithstanding  His  equality  with  the  Father  as  God,  He  assumes 
the  form  of  a  servant,  and  comes  as  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant.  In  this 
office  He  was  an  object  of  desire  and  delight  long  before  He  came  into  the  world. 
He  was  "  the  Desire  of  all  nations."  The  circumstances  of  His  advent  were 
minutely  foretold.  L  He  was  to  be  preceded  by  a  herald  or  messenger.  This 
messenger  was  John.  The  conduct  of  the  Baptist  excited  universal  attention, 
and  very  general  admiration.  2.  The  temple  was  the  place  to  which  especially 
He  was  to  come.  3.  His  advent,  though  so  long  predicted,  was  to  be  sudden. 
The  manner  of  His  appearance  was  so  contrary  to  the  worldly  notions  entertained 
respecting  Him  that  He  was  overlooked  and  even  rejected  as  an  impostor.     II.  The 

EFFECTS    AiVHICH    THE    PROPHET    DESCRIBES    A3    ATTENDING    THE    ADVENT    OF    THE 

Saviour.  1.  As  the  characters  of  those  to  whom  He  was  to  come  were  very 
various,  so  His  advent  was  to  prove  discriminating.  To  discover  the  hidden 
dispositions  of  the  heart  was  one  intent  of  our  Lord's  coming.  This  effect  still 
follows  from  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  Men,  though  unconscious  of  it  them- 
selves, are  led  to  manifest  their  real  characters,  either  as  careless  Pharisees  or 
atheistical  scoffers  or  humble  believers.  2.  As  a  consequence  of  this  di.scriminat- 
ing  effect  of  our  Saviour's  advent  it  will  also  prove  destructive.  A  refiner's 
fire  will  consume  the  dross,  and  fuller's  soap  will  purge  the  filth  of  that  to  which 
it  is  applied.  So  will  our  Lord  eventually  destroy  many  of  those  to  whom  He 
comes.  Their  sins  are  aggravated  by  His  coming.  3.  There  are  many  whom 
the  advent  of  Christ  will  have  the  effect  of  purifying.  How  comfoi  table  it  should 
be  for  thope  who  are  enduring  trials  of  affliction  below,  to  know  that  while  they 
aie  in  the  furnace  the  Refiner  Himself  sitteth  over  them,  watching  the  process 
with  aU  due  solicitude,  and  takmg  care  that  they  shall  lose  nothing  but  their 
dross.  Two  questions.  (1)  What  reception  have  you  given  to  Christ  since  Hia 
first  coming  ?  (2)  What  preparation  have  you  made  for  His  future  advent  T 
{G.  Preston.)  The  coming  of  Messiah  :—\.  His  forerunner.  John  was  to 
"  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the  Lord,"  and  accordingly  he  aroused  their 
attention,  he  removed  their  prejudices,  ho  awakened  their  consciences,  he 
announced  the  nearness  of  Messiah's  approach,  proclaimed  the  nature  of  His 
reign,  convinced  them  of  sin,  and  showed  them  that  they  stood  in  need  of  a  much 
greater  salvation  than  deliverance  from  the  Roman  yoke.  II.  His  chakacter. 
He  is  described  in  three  way.s.  L  By  His  person— the  Lord.  The  word  used 
is  Adonai,  a  name  for  God,  but  not  an  incommunicable  one  like  the  name  of 
Jehovah ;  for  we  find  it  sometimes  applied  to  kings  and  superiors-     It  properly 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACEI.  49 

signifies  authority  and  dominion.  How  fully  does  this  apply  to  Him.  He  must 
have  had  a  previous  claim  to  dominion  before  He  acquired  this  by  obedience 
and  Buffering  unto  death.  2.  By  His  oflBce.  "  The  Messenger  of  the  covenant." 
Of  the  covenant  of  grace.  He  is  the  Mediator,  and  the  Surety,  and  the  Messenger 
of  this  covenant,  because  He  was  not  only  to  procure  its  blessings,  but  to  bestow 
them.  "Messenger  of  the  covenant"  is  His  inferior  title.  It  shows  His  infinite 
condescension  and  grace.  His  peojJe  will  never  suffer  His  glory  to  be  injured 
by  His  goodness.  3.  By  the  estimation  in  which  He  was  holden.  "  Whom  ye 
delight  in."  This  will  apply  even  to  the  carnal  Jews,  who  did  look  for  a  Messiah. 
Much  more  does  it  apply  to  spiritual  Jews  ;  He  was  desu-ed  and  delighted  in 
by  all  the  people  of  God  from  the  beginning.  III.  His  advent.  "  Suddenly 
come  to  His  temple."  He  was  now  to  come  incarnate — "  clothed  in  a  body 
like  our  own."  Two  things  are  mentioned  with  regard  to  His  advent :  the  one 
regards  the  manner  in  which  He  was  to  come.  Suddenly ;  which  may  mean 
both  "  soon  "  and  "  unawares."  The  other  regards  the  place  to  which  He  was 
to  come.  His  temple.  Fulfilled  by  His  presentation  in  the  temple,  and  subse- 
quent visits  to  it,  and  teaching  in  it.  IV.  The  awftjlness  of  His  coMiNa. 
*'  Who  may  abide  ?  "  Observe  the  awfulness — 1.  In  the  occasional  emanations 
and  displays  of  His  majesty.  2.  In  His  detection  of  characters.  3.  In  the 
calamities  which  were  to  follow  the  rejection  of  Him.  V.  The  operations  of 
His  grace.  "  liike  a  refiner's  fire,"  &c.  The  fuller's  soap  takes  stains  out 
without  destroying  the  texture  of  the  cloth,  and  gives  it  clearness  and  freshness 
of  appearance :  and  the  refiner's  fire  severs  the  dross  from  the  ore,  and  instead 
of  injuring  it,  prepares  it  for  circulation  or  use,  and  makes  it  shine.  Thus  the 
Lord  does  with  all  the  subjects  of  Divine  grace.  The  incarnation  of  oiu:  Saviour 
regards  two  classes  of  men.  To  the  one  it  is  injiurious,  and  to  the  other  beneficial. 
(William  Jay.)  The  Lord's  coming  to  Hift  temple: — Taking  John  the  Baptist 
as  only  the  precursor  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  let  us  look  at  what  is  here  predicated 
of  Him.  1.  It  is  declared,  "  He  shall  suddenly  come  to  His  temple."  "  His  " 
temple  implies  that  He  was  Ix»rd  of  the  temple.  The  Jewish  people  anxiously 
looked  forward  to  His  coming,  but  greatly  mistook  its  object.  They  little  thought 
what  a  searcher  of  heart  and  corrector  of  wrong  He  would  be.  2.  Notice  how 
He  acted  in  respect  to  His  temple  when  He  came.  (1)  One  of  His  early  acts 
was  to  cast  out  them  that  bought  and  sold  there.  (2)  Observe  His  righteous 
indignation  against  evil  wherever  He  met  with  it.  (3)  This  was  the  proximate 
cause,  no  doubt,  why  the  Jews  put  Him  to  death.  3.  Notice  the  result  of  His 
coming  as  respects  others.  (1)  It  would  subject  men's  characters  to  a  severe 
trial.  Fire  separates  between  the  gold  and  the  dross  :  and  the  fuller's  soap 
fetches  the  spots  out  of  the  stained  cloth.  How  would  this  be  done  ?  By  the 
preachmg  of  the  Word.  By  His  dealings  with  His  people.  {Stephen  Jenner,  31. A.) 
Purifying  through  the  Lord's  coming : — I.  Through  His  first  coming.  The 
prophet  Malachi  announces  the  Saviour  as  one  who  on  His  appearing  will  set  on 
foot  a  great  purifying  among  the  people  of  Israel.  Christ's  forerunner,  John  the 
Baptist,  of  whom  our  text  speaks,  alluded  to  this.  With  the  greatest  earnestness 
he  insisted  on  purification  of  heart.  The  forgiveness  of  sins,  through  faith  in 
Christ,  is  the  great  purification,  through  which  we  are  presented  pure  and  holy 
before  God.  Thus  has  Christ  laid  in  Himself  a  foundation  for  the  purifying  and 
sanctifying  of  our  entire  race.  II.  Through  His  daily,  invisible  coming  the 
Lord  exercises  His  purifying  oflSce  for  our  salvation.  What  Christ  did  in  person 
at  His  first  coming  in  the  flesh  He  does  now  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  Even  the  gold 
that  has  been  purified  needs  a  continuous  purifying.  The  stain  of  earthliness 
still  clings  too  readily  even  to  the  pure  heart,  the  flesh  always  lusts  against  the 
spirit ;  and  sin,  so  long  as  we  tarry  in  the  body,  is  a  foe  always  cleaving  to  and 
burdening  us.  Therefore  does  the  Lord  come  even  to  believing  souls  with  many  a 
crucible  of  affliction,  in  which  He  again  and  again  cleanses  the  gold  from  dross, 
that  it  may  be  fitted  for  His  temple.  But  He  often  exercises  His  purifying  office 
inwardly  by  a  gracious  coming  to  our  hearts.  He  then  comes  with  a  specially 
blessed  sense  of  His  love,  by  which  we  are  made  ashamed  and  dissolve  in  love, 
such  fire  of  love  removing  impurity.  III.  At  His  second  coming  in  glory  the 
Lord  will  destroy  all  an ti -Christian  ways,  and  all  human  pride  that  raises  itself 
against  Him.  The  day  of  His  first  coming  the  people  might  well  abide.  He  had 
veiled  His  glory  under  our  weak  flesh.  Who  would  not  rather  in  the  day  of  grace 
be  purified  by  the  inner  fire  of  Christ's  and  the  Spirit's  love  and  grace  ?  To-day 
is  the  season  of  grace,  to-morrow  perhaps  not.     (S.  C.  Kapff.) 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Ver.  2.  But  who  may  abide  the  day  of  His  coining?  —  The  coming  of  the 
Lord : — Look  at  this  subject  in  two  points  of  view.  I.  As  a  question  of 
SOLEMN  REMONSTRANCE.  That  the  Lord  has  come,  we  know ;  that  the  Lord 
will  come,  we  profess  to  believe.  The  Scripture  tells  us  much  about  that  coming, 
but  leaves  much  that  is  uncertain.  One  thing  is  clear — the  return  is  to  be  sudden. 
But  the  very  suddenness  of  that  return  teaches  us  that  when  the  time  comes 
for  the  Lord's  appearing,  then  the  time  of  preparation  is  past.  When  our  blessed 
Lord  does  come  suddenly,  He  returns  for  judgment;  no  nice  distinctions  will 
then  be  drawn  ;  party  spirit  must  then  sleep,  and  sleep  for  ever.  Then  shall  it 
be  seen  who  have  worshipped  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  A  difference,  however, 
will  be  made,  absolute  and  relative — absolute  to  the  right  or  to  the  left — relative, 
for  we  know  there  are  degrees  in  glory.  At  the  Lord's  coming  no  secret  shall  be 
hidden,  the  mere  outward  appearance  of  religion  will  be  unavailing.  Then  we 
shall  learn  who  can  abide  His  coming.  There  is  a  true  and  a  false  profession : 
and  then  the  false  profession  will  be  detected,  the  veil  of  hypocrisy  will  be  rent, 
and  the  mere  formal  hypocrite  will  be  made  known  to  all.  It  seems  that  the 
very  teacher  may  then  be  lost.  Then  search  and  see  whether  there  is  Christian 
practice  with  the  Christian  profession.  Those  who  have  crowded  together  to 
hear  the  Word  of  God  will  then  be  detected.  II.  As  an  appeal  to  our  Christian 
CONFIDENCE.  The  Apostle  says  that  some  can  stand  in  that  day.  Who  ?  The 
real  Cliristian  alone  :  the  man  who  has  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  dwelling  in 
his  heart.  What  is  j'our  preparation  for  eternity  ?  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  essential.  The  man  that  stands  now,  stands  by  faith.  The  man  that 
does  not  trust  Christ — I  care  not  what  his  morality  may  be,  I  speak  of  him  as  one 
weighed  in  the  balances  of  eternity.  (Bishop  of  Carlisle.)  Christ's  second 
coming : — I.  Remind  of  some  particulars  in  the  second  coming  of  Christ. 

1.  The  certainty  of  that  event.  That  Christ  will  come  is  a  point  on  which  we 
are  not  left  to  doubt  and  conjecture.  We  have  the  plainest  testimony  which 
words  could  give  (Acts  i.  11).  2.  The  manner  of  it.  It  will  be  glorious.  The 
first  coming  was  in  all  outward  meanness  and  humiliation.  The  second  is  to  be 
"  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour."  His  coming  will 
be  sudden.  3.  The  purpose  and  consequences  of  it.  In  His  state  of  humilia- 
tion Christ  came  as  a  Saviour  ;  when  He  comes  in  glory,  He  will  come  as  a  Judge. 
II.  Answer  the  solemn  question  of  the  text.  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of 
His  coming  ?  "  Who  will  be  able  to  bear  that  severe  and  close  inquiry  which 
will  then  be  made  into  our  lives  and  characters  ?  1.  Those  who  will  not  be  able 
to  abide.  Every  open  and  habitual  sinner.  The  worldly  man,  who  has  made 
the  world  his  god,  and  has  set  up  his  idols  in  his  heart.  The  hypocrite,  who 
has  the  form  of  godliness,  but  is  without  the  power  of  it.  The  man  who  is  self- 
righteous,  and  trusts  to  his  own  merits  and  strength.  2.  Those  who  will  abide. 
The  humble,  penitent,  believing  Christian,  a  character  widely  dififering  from 
every  other.  His  ground  of  confidence  in  that  day  will  not  be  his  innocence. 
He  will  claim  an  interest  in  the  death  of  Christ.  His  penitence,  his  uprightness, 
his  secret  striving  with  sin,  his  useful  life,  his  godly  motives  will  be  brought  in 
evidence  of  the  soundness  and  reality  of  his  faith.  The  Judge  Himself  will  own 
him  as  a  friend.  (E.  Cooper.)  Before  the  Son  of  Man: — The  coming  of  Clu-ist 
was  the  trial-test  of  the  world.  Men  never  needed  Him  more  ;  were  never  less 
prepared  to  receive  Him.  It  was  the  age  of  force.  Society  was  not  in  a  condition 
to  hear  Christ  favourably.  We  say  the  time  was  ripe  for  His  coming.  As  to 
necessity,  j^es  ;  as  to  preparation,  no.  This  was  the  "  historical  "  day  of  Christ. 
Few  were  able  to  abi'  le  it.  Few  could  stand  when  He  appeared.  I.  Rigid  require- 
ments OF  His  standard.  Christ's  coming  is  represented  as  attended  by  healing, 
comfort,  and  blessing.  An  era  of  peace  and  goodwill.  But  these  results  were  not 
immediate.  God's  promises  are  conditional.  It  is  not  easy  to  live  by  Christ's 
standard.  What  is  the  nature  of  these  requirements  ?  1.  Consecration,  which 
implies  self-surrender.     The  doctrine  of  the  Cross  is  but  faintly  understood  to-day. 

2.  Purity.  Involves  thought  of  the  heart,  speech,  actions.  Christ  raised  the 
white  standard  of  chastity  higher  than  ever  before.  3.  Non-resistance.  Must 
not  give  blow  for  blow.  Overcome  evil  with  good.  4.  Forgiveness  of  injury. 
We  are  actually  to  love  our  enemies.  Must  pray  for  them,  and  do  them  good. 
II.  Duty  of  standing  before  Him.  Christ  does  not  judge  the  world  in  person 
to-day.  Does  this  through  the  Gospel.  Christ  is  the  great  refiner  of  men.  It  is 
our  duty  to  stand  before  Him.  I.  Because  He  is  the  only  perfect  standard. 
2.  Because  it  is  the  only  way  to  secure  His  favour.     3.  Because  by  this  we  reach 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  51 

our  proper  place.  To  hate  sin,  and  love  the  sinning  one — this  is  a  Christlike 
prerogative.  To  separate  the  one  from  the  other — this  is  a  Christlike  work. 
To  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man  implies — (1)  That  your  life  is  in  harmony  with  His. 
(2)  Watching  and  prayer.  (3)  His  favour  and  Divinest  blessing.  {Henry  Schell 
Ldbingier.)  Solemn  questions : — I.  What  did  they  imply  ?  1.  A  false  security. 
Jews  thought  they  were  ready  for  Messiah.  The  prophet  sees  them  to  be  self- 
willed,  dreaming  of  their  own  notions  rather  than  desiring  God's  truth.  Religion 
only  nominal.  2.  The  coming  judgment.  3.  A  call  to  prepare.  II.  They  con- 
vince us  OF — Indifiference,  worldliness,  indolence,  self-indulgence.  We  need 
God's  caU,  the  prophet's  appeal.  Christ  is  coming :  are  we  ready  to  meet  Him  ? 
to  be  examined  and  tested  by  Him  ?  III.  How  aee  we  to  reply  ?  We  are  at 
first  struck  dumb.  None  can  stand.  So  says  conscience,  experience,  observation, 
Scriptiure.  Then  the  Gospel  message  of  forgiveness  and  salvation  comes  to  us 
in  the  person  of  Him  who  was  "  presented  in  the  temple  "  in  our  nature  unto 
God,  and  is  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  In  Jesus 
we  find  our  refuge,  our  hope,  our  holiness,  our  home.  (Homilist.)  The  day 
of  Christ's  coming : — I.  There  is  a  momentous  period  for  man  to  anticipate. 
The  distinguishing  characteristics  of  that  day  are — 1.  It  will  be  a  day  on  which 
the  Lord  will  visibly  and  personally  appear  in  the  presence  of  the  universe.  2.  It 
will  be  a  day  on  which  the  Lord,  by  His  coming,  will  perform  great  and  wondrous 
acts.  Note  the  inevitable  certainty  of  that  day.  II.  There  is  a  momentous 
QUESTION  FOR  MAN  TO  CONSIDER.     "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  His  coming  ?  " 

1.  This  inquiry  shall  be  vindicated.  Our  right  to  press  and  \irge  this  inquiry  is 
as  valid  as  was  the  right  of  the  prophets  of  old.  On  what  is  our  right  founded  ? 
(1)  On  the  nature  of  the  commission  which  we  have  received  in  the  ministry 
of  the  Lord.  (2)  Upon  a  just  estimate  of  the  value  of  your  intelligent  and  im- 
mortal spirits.  (3)  Upon  a  just  conviction  of  the  fact,  that  while  in  a  state  of 
impenitent  and  unbelieving  sin,  you  are  in  danger.  2.  This  inquiry  is  to  be 
applied.  To  the  infidel,  the  sensualist,  the  worldling,  the  Pharisee,  the  hypocrite. 
3.  This  inquiry  is  to  be  advised  upon.  (1)  To  embrace  from  the  heart  the 
appointed  method  of  preparation  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  s  coming.  (2)  To 
embrace  this  method  of  preparation  without  procrastination  or  delay.  Consider 
the  importance  of  the  matter  at  issue  ;  the  hardening  influence  of  sin,  while  there 
is  delay ;  and  the  uncertainties  of  human  life.  (James  Parsons. )  The  solemnities 
of  the  last  great  day,  and  the  characters  of  those  who  are  prepared  for  it : — These  words 
of  the  prophet  relate  immediately  to  the  first  advent.  They  naturally  lead  our 
thoughts  to  the  second  advent.  I.  Lay  before  you  some  of  the  solemnities 
OF  THAT  GREAT  DAY.  L  The  actual  coming  of  the  Lord,  or  His  appearance  in 
His  human  natiu-e.  (1)  This  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  will  be  visible  to  the 
imiversal  assembly  of  the  human  race.     (2)   It  will  be  unspeakably  glorious. 

2.  The  resurrection  of  the  dead.  The  bodies  of  the  uimumbered  millions,  who 
through  succeeding  ages  have  inhabited  the  globe,  wherever  laid,  oi  however 
consumed,  will  be  restored  to  life,  and  reunited  to  their  immortal  souls  ;  that, 
with  them,  they  may  participate  their  happiness  or  misery.  3.  The  general 
judgment.  "  The  books  shall  be  opened."  The  book  of  the  Divine  law:  of  God's 
omniscience  ;  the  book  of  life.  4.  The  assignment  of  an  endless  doom.  Our 
departure  into  everlasting  punishment,  or  our  admission  into  life  eternal.  H.  Con- 
sider THE  IMPORTANT  QUESTIONS  OF  THE  TEXT.  L  The  profane  scofFer  will  not 
be  able  to  abide  that  day.  2.  Neither  will  that  numerous  class  of  persons,  who 
live  in  the  habitual  practice  of  open  and  flagrant  sin,  be  able  to  stand  before  the 
Judge.  3.  Nor  that  more  respectable  class  who.  nevertheless,  are  wholly  devoted 
to  the  world.  4.  Nor  those  who  pay  attention  to  the  duties  of  religion  in  a  proud 
and  self-complacent  spirit.  5.  Nor  those  who  acknowledge  that  salvation  is  of 
grace,  but  forget  that  we  are  created  in  Christ  Jesus  "  unto  good  works."  They 
insist  much  on  faith,  but  are  lamentably  deficient  in  its  frui  s.  Who  then  may 
abide  the  day  of  His  coming  ?  Only  the  Christian  who  is  worthy  of  the  rame. 
The  man  absolved  by  the  Judge  is  one  who,  condemned  by  himself  for  his  trans- 
gressions, has  deeply  repented  and  sought  pardon  on  the  ground  of  Christ's 
meritorious  obedience  unto  the  death  of  the  Cross,  and  works  out  his  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling.  (John  Natt,  B.D.)  Divine  manifestations : — 
Scepticism  abounded,  but  no  moral  gloom  could  deaden  the  prophet's  faith. 
God,  whose  authority  was  contemned,  would  reveal  Himself.  I.  Divine  mani- 
festations ARE  searching.  If  God  were  fully  to  disclose  Himself  no  flesh  could 
live.     Veiled  in  material  glory,  His  ancient  saints  found  it  difficult  to  bear  His 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R.  [chap.  m. 

appearing.  The  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ,  though  veiled  in  the  weakness 
of  human  flesh,  was  not  easy  to  bear.  Men  felt  it  as  a  piercing  light.  Corrupt 
and  oppressive  rulers,  selfish  and  self-satisfied  moralists,  hypocritical  religionists, 
and  ruthless  evil-doers  could  not  bear  His  presence.  Some  could  bear  His  com- 
ing, and  stand  when  He  appeared.  They  were  those — 1.  Who  were  willing  to 
feel,  confess,  and  turn  from  their  sinfulness.  2.  Those  who  were  sincerely  waiting 
for  His  coming,  as  Simeon.  3.  Those  who  had  within  them  true  faith,  or  spiritual 
receptiveness,  as  the  Roman  centurion  and  the  Syrophenician  woman.  These 
could  bear  the  most  searching  day  in  the  world's  history,  when  the  Lord  appeared 
among  men.  II.  Divine  manifestations  are  separating.  He  is  "  like  a  refiner's 
fire."  The  appearance  of  the  Lord  on  the  earth  tested  and  separated  men. 
Society  was  then  like  seething,  molten  metal.  The  good  were  revealed  and 
refined  ;  the  bad,  like  recrement,  were  separated  from  them,  to  be  cast  away. 
In  His  presence  men  discovered  of  what  sort  they  were,  and  ranged  themselves 
for  Him  or  against  Him.  As  fire.  His  Spirit  still  tests  and  separates  men.  Fire 
has  been  by  several  nations  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  Deity.  As  a  Divine  heat, 
enkindling  shame,  disgust,  and  remorse  at  om*  failures  and  sins.  He  will  not 
consume  us,  but  our  impurities.  1.  That  we  have  much  dross  in  our  natures  need 
not  lead  us  to  despair.  2.  We  should  be  thankful  that  God  manifests  Himself 
to  us  as  a  refining  heat.  3.  We  should  seek  for  continued  manifestations  of  God 
to  our  souls.  III.  Divine  manifestations  are  cleansing  or  destroying.  He 
is  like  "  fuller's  soap."  The  fuller's  trade  was  one  well-known  in  Judaea.  White 
garments  were  worn  by  the  Jews  on  all  festive  occasions  ;  these  the  fuller  cleansed 
from  all  stains,  and  whitened  them  by  rubbing  them  with  a  kind  of  marl.  Creta 
limolia  was  probably  the  earth  most  commonly  used.  His  soap  (borith)  was 
a  vegetable  alkali  obtained  from  numerous  plants,  such  as  the  Scdsola  hnli,  the 
Ajram,  the  Gilloo,  and  a  heath  which  grows  abundantly  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Joppa.  If  a  garment  could  not  bear  the  work  of  the  fuller,  it  was  destroyed 
by  it.  So  the  coming  of  Christ  would  either  cleanse  men  or  hasten  their  destruc- 
tion. Christ  Himself  is  the  cleansing  power.  He  can  wash  out  the  most  inveterate 
stains.  None  but  He  can  cleanse  men.  If  men  will  not  bear  His  cleansing,  their 
corruptions  will  destroy  them.  All  Divine  manifestations  are  essentially  the 
same.  There  is  one  yet  in  the  future  for  mankind.  He  who  came  in  lowliness 
to  redeem  men  will  come  in  awful  majesty  to  fix  their  doom.  Who  may  abide 
that  day  of  His  coming  ?  Who  will  be  able  to  stand  then  ?  Only  those  who 
could  have  borne  His  first  advent  —  the  contrite,  the  sincere,  the  believing. 
(If.  Osborne  Lilley.)  The  coming  of  Christ  and  the  purification  of  the  Chvrch: — 
Thoughts  suggested  by  the  day.  As  Christ  was  presented  pure  in  the  temple, 
so  it  should  be  our  prayer  that  by  His  blood  and  righteousness,  and  by  the  sancti- 
fying power  of  His  Spirit,  we  may  be  presented  unto  God  by  Him,  at  the  last 
day,  pure  and  spotless.  We  will  consider — I.  The  coming  of  the  Lord.  1.  John 
the  Bajjtist  prepared  the  way  for  that  event — (1)  By  giving  warning  that  it  was 
near  at  hand.  (2)  By  calling  men  to  repent.  2.  Christ  is  called  "  the  messenger 
of  the  covenant,"  because  that  covenant  began  to  be  spoken  by  Him  (Heb.  ii.  3). 
He  who  was  also  the  prince  of  the  covenant,  condescended  to  be  its  messenger. 
3.  "  Whom  ye  delight  in."  Christ  is  called  "  the  desire  of  all  nations  "  (Hag.  ii.  7) ; 
but  especially  was  He  the  desire  of  the  Jewish  nation,  because  He  was  esjiecially 
promised  to  them,  and  was  to  be  one  of  themselves.  II.  Who  may  abide  the 
day  of  His  coming  ?  Not  the  hypocrite,  not  the  formalist,  not  the  self-righteous, 
not  the  lukewarm  Laodicean,  not  the  stony-ground  hearer  who  is  ashamed  when 
tribulation  or  persecution  because  of  the  Word  ariseth  ;  but  he  who  can  endure  the 
refiner's  fire  and  the  fuller's  soap.  III.  Christ  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and 
purifier  of  silver.  1.  By  this  process  He  will  purify  His  visible  Chiuch,  by 
sifting  and  testing  it.  2.  He  will  purify  His  own  people  by  purging  them.  3.  The 
refiner  of  silver  always  sits,  in  order  that  he  may  watch  the  silver  carefully ; 
for  if  it  be  a  minute  too  long  or  too  short  a  time  in  the  fire,  the  whole  is  spoiled, 
or  at  least  injured.  The  sign  which  tells  him  when  the  silver  is  fit  for  use  is  his 
being  able  to  see  in  it  his  own  image.  All  this  is  a  picture  of  the  manner  in  which 
Christ  purifies  His  people  by  trial,  and  of  the  end  which  He  aims  at.  ( Ven.  Archd. 
Whatcly,  M.A.)  The  appearing  of  Christ: — This  truth  was  once  brought  out 
in  an  unusual  manner  at  a  gathering  of  literary  men.  After  some  general  con- 
versation it  occurred  to  them  to  speculate  how  they  would  feel  were  certain  of 
the  illustrious  dead  suddenly  to  appear  in  their  midst.  "  Think,"  said  one,  "  if 
Homer  were  to  enter  this  room,  or  Dante  1     How  should  we  meet  them  ?  "     "Or 


CHAP,  m.]  MA  LAC  HI.  63 

suppose,"  exclaimed  another,  "  Milton  or  Shakespeare  weie  to  come  ?  "  "  We 
should  stand  in  profound  respect;  we  should  honour  the  great  seers  and  singers 
of  the  past."  "  Ah,"  added  one  who  had  not  yet  spoken,  "  and  if  Jesus  Christ 
stood  before  us  ?  "  "  That  would  be  wholly  different,"  was  the  instant  and 
united  response  ;  "  He  is  above  all.  We  should  fall  down  on  our  knees  and  do 
homage  to  God's  Son  and  man's  Saviour."  The  coming  of  Christ  not  the  same 
thing  to  all : — Did  you  ever  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpets  which  are  blown 
before  the  judges  as  they  come  to  a  city  to  open  the  assizes  ?  How  different 
the  feelings  of  the  different  people  who  hear  the  sound.  The  innocent  man  against 
whom  there  is  no  charge  hears  them  unmoved.  But  the  poor  wretch  waiting 
his  trial  in  yonder  cell,  they  tell  him  the  day  of  his  trial  has  arrived.  Soon  he 
will  stand  at  the  bar  of  justice,  and  receive  his  sentence.  So  will  it  be  when  Jesus 
comes ;  some  will  rejoice,  but  others  will  be  afraid  to  meet  Him.  (Home 
Magazine.) 

Ver.  3.  And  He  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver. — The  refiner : — 
The  sons  of  Levi  were  the  authorised  instructors  of  the  Hebrew  people. 
By  fidelity  to  their  special  work  they  fostered,  by  unfaithfulness  they 
repressed  the  higher  life  of  the  Hebrews.  They  became,  therefore,  the  sure 
gauge  of  spiritual  vigour  among  their  countrymen,  or  of  their  spiritual  decay. 
Malachi  speaks  of  the  purification  of  silver  and  gold,  the  two  most  precious  metals 
of  the  earth,  one  or  other  supplying  a  standard  of  value  among  all  nations.  Nor 
are  these  metals  inapt  symbols  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  She  has  been  the  gold 
and  silver  of  the  earth.  The  world  is  largely  indebted  to  the  Church.  Whence 
does  the  Church  derive  her  value  ?  From  her  relation  to  Christ.  The  first  Churclx 
was  gathered  in  loving  fealty  to  Christ.  The  disciples  were  His  representatives. 
The  bodily  presence  of  their  Master  and  Lord  was  visible  through  them.  The 
world  can  never  be  converted  by  the  world  :  Christ  has  given  that  great  work 
to  His  Church.  All  the  fitness  of  His  disciples  for  their  grave  and  responsible 
duties  is  derived  from  Him.  Whatever  defectiveness  may  appear,  either  in 
primitive  or  later  Churches,  the  past  nineteen  centuries  reveal  the  immense 
indebtedness  of  the  world  to  the  Church.  How  frequently  has  it  proved  the  ark 
of  the  nations,  saving  in  its  sacred  barque  the  seeds  of  future  learning  and  civilisa- 
tion. The  material,  social,  intellectual  and  moral  indebtedness  of  the  world 
to  the  Church  is  too  large  to  be  seen  by  any  eye  but  that  of  Omniscience.  But 
as  the  eye  glances  over  many  periods  of  the  Church's  history,  how  painfully 
abundant  the  evidence  that  the  gold  has  become  dim,  and  the  most  fine  gold 
changed.  The  early  Christian  Church  soon  showed  a  proneness  to  adulterate 
the  pure  truth  of  the  Gospel.  See  the  influence  of  Mosaism  and  Gnosticism. 
How  vast  and  varied  the  corruptions  which  later  ages  reveal  !  There  were  the 
AUegorists,  the  Sacerdotalists,  the  Schoolmen,  the  Ascetics  and  Mystics.  There 
have  been  many  strange  perversions  of  truth  later  than  these.  Popery  has  faced 
the  light  of  modern  civilisation,  not  to  be  extinguished,  as  our  fathers  thought, 
but  to  snatch  a  new  lease  of  life.  Nor  are  the  followers  of  Romanism  without 
powerful  auxiliaries  in  our  own  country.  Confine  our  attention  to  the  more 
obvious  evidences  of  the  need  of  purification,  chiefly  in  individual  men.  Among 
these  may  be  placed  narrow  and  defective  views  of  Divine  truth.  The  Bible  is 
more  praised  than  read.  Doctrines  and  rites,  alien  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ's  Gospel, 
have  sprung  up  within  the  visible  Church.  Men  have  denied  Christ  in  the  name 
of  Christ.  Their  words  are  the  words  of  the  Master,  but  their  spirit  has  been  the 
spirit  of  unbelief.  There  is  proof  of  the  need  of  purification  in  the  superstitious 
clinging  to  that  which  is  old,  merely  because  it  is  old  ;  the  vain  reverence  for  a 
dead  past.  A  painful  evidence  of  corruption  is  seen  in  imperfect  obedience  to  the 
truth.  Is  it  not  a  fact,  beyond  all  dispute,  that  deficiency  of  truth,  and  deficiency 
in  fidelity  to  it,  have  both  proved  serious  hindrances  to  the  spread  of  Christ's 
kingdom  on  the  earth  ?  How,  then,  shall  men  be  purified  from  these  ?  and  by 
whom  ?  The  proce  s  of  refining  originates  and  is  directed  by  Christ  Himself.  By 
His  permission  times  of  sore  trial  came  upon  the  Church  universal,  or  upon  some 
branch  of  it ;  and  the  record  of  such  times  is  full  of  instruction  and  warning  to 
men  of  other  and  less  eventful  days.  Beneath  the  eye  of  Christ  each  separate  soul 
is  cleansed.  All  power  is  His.  He  can  wisely  adopt  the  means  that,  in  His  judg- 
ment, may  be  individually  demanded  in  separating  the  gold  from  the  dross.  The 
process  of  purifying  the  precious  metals  demands  undivided  attention  and  pro- 
tracted patience.     Christ  "  sits  as  the  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver."     He  never 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iu, 

relinquishes  His  fixed  and  steady  gaze  upon  the  soul  from  which  He  seeks  to 
remove  the  earthly  dross.  The  refiner  of  gold  has  certain  tests  by  which  he  dis- 
covers the  progress  of  his  work.  At  the  beginning  of  real  change,  a  deep  orange 
colour  spreads  itself  over  the  molten  mass  in  the  cupel.  At  the  next  instant, 
a  flickering  wave  passes  rapidly  over  the  surface  ;  and  with  increasing  heat,  the 
fiery  mass  oecomes  still,  and  the  colour  pale  and  faint.  Now,  attention  is  deepened. 
Expectation  is  on  tiptoe.  In  another  second  the  supreme  moment  may  come. 
As  the  refiner's  eye  is  steadUy  fixed  upon  the  burning  metal,  its  surface  suddenly 
becomes  as  a  burnished  mirror,  and  flashes  back  his  pictured  face.  Thus,  also, 
does  Christ  watch  imweariedly.  The  process  of  change  is  very  tardy,  very 
reluctant.  The  purpose  for  which  this  purification  is  sought  demands  a  closing 
word.  Before  the  precious  metals  were  put  into  the  cupel,  they  were  full  of 
earthly  impurities  ;  were  unmalleable,  inductile,  comparatively  useless.  Being 
now  purged  from  all  dross,  they  become  the  standaid  and  representatives  of  a 
nation's  wealth.  They  are  fashioned  into  coins  bearing  the  king's  image.  They 
are  wrought  into  vessels  fitted  for  the  king's  use.  Thus  it  is  also  with  individual 
members  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Before  our  purification,  we  were  but  ill-adapted 
to  serve  our  Divine  Lord.  The  attempt  to  render  this  service  was  marred  by 
our  lack  of  holiness.  After  our  purification,  we  are  made  "  vessels  unto  honour, 
sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use,  prepared  unto  every  good  work." 
There  is  no  duty,  however  humble,  which  we  are  not  the  better  fitted  to  dis- 
charge.  There  is  no  service,  however  noble,  which  we  shall  not  the  more  accept- 
ably perform.  What  love  is  shown  by  Christ  to  His  people  in  all  this  patient 
watching  and  working  for  the  removal  of  the  dross  of  sin.  Be  patient,  there- 
fore, in  your  particular  trial,  of  whatever  sort  it  is.  (J.  Jackson  Goadhy. )  The 
refiner's  fire  : — The  state  of  the  Jewish  community  in  the  days  of  Malachi  was 
very  similar  to  what  it  was  when  our  Lord  appeared  on  the  earth.  A  proud  and 
self-righteous  pharisaism  had  supplanted  all  true  spirituality  of  worship,  and 
attention  even  to  the  outward  forms  of  piety  had  become  little  better  than  a 
name.  Manifestly  such  a  state  of  things  could  not  last,  for  unless  some  spiritual 
revolution  took  place,  reUgion  could  not  go  on  much  longer  breatliing  an  atmo- 
sphere of  universal  degeneracy.  Malachi  tells  the  people  of  a  coming  Reformer. 
But  what  is  the  character  of  this  reformer  to  be  ?  WiU  he  be  mild,  gentle,  in- 
dulgent ;  or  will  he  go  with  just  severity  to  the  root  of  all  existing  evils,  and  when 
he  begins,  will  he  make  an  end  of  abuse  and  wrong  ?  The  prophet  does  not 
hesitate  to  clothe  the  coming  One  with  attributes  of  siu'passing  glory  and  awful- 
ness,  and  to  represent  Him  as  wielding  prerogatives  of  the  most  scathing  power. 
The  figure  in  the  text  refers  to  the  process  of  refining  gold.  As  the  agency  of 
fire  separates  the  dross  from  the  precious  metal,  by  disintegrating  the  particles 
of  which  the  mass  is  composed  ;  so  Christ,  not  only  in  His  capacity  as  the  final 
Judge,  but  more  especially  in  His  character  as  the  present  embodiment  of  truth, 
and  as  the  administrator  of  the  Gospel  kingdom,  is  subjecting  the  world  to  a 
searching  fiery  test.  Malachi  deals  with  the  relation  of  the  truth  of  Christ,  and 
Christ  Himself,  to  four  aspects  of  human  affairs.  I.  The  nation.  The  difference 
between  a  nation  defiled  by  error  and  sin,  and  a  nation  purged  by  truth,  is  just 
this — the  one  is  cursed  and  repulsive ;  the  other  is  blessed  and  delightsome. 
In  every  case  where  nations  have  attempted  to  rob  God  of  His  prerogative  of 
government,  the  action  of  the  refiner's  fire  has  revealed  the  weakness  of  their 
corruptible  systems.  II.  Thk  Church.  When  Christ  refines  the  Church,  He 
tests  her  government,  her  doctrine,  and  her  discipline.  As  to  government ;  He 
is  not  indifferent  to  the  way  in  which  His  kingdom  is  administered.  Order  must 
here  be  reconciled  with  liberty.  Christ  is  most  jealous  of  His  truth.  To  say  that 
false  doctrine  does  not  necessarily  bring  with  it  moral  corruption,  is  to  say  that 
the  Christian's  understanding  is  useless  as  an  element  of  mind.  But  is  it  so  ? 
As  to  discipline,  there  is  no  Church  that  has  not  spots  in  her  feasts  of  charity. 
III.  SociBTY.  In  the  unrefined  condition  of  society  one  man  is  preying  upon 
another,  every  man  seeking  his  own  pleasure  and  indulging  his  own  passions, 
without  the  slightest  regard  to  the  welfare  of  the  community.  But  when  society 
is  refined,  men  "  speak  often  one  to  another."  They  take  an  interest  iu 
one  another.  It  is  not  then  every  man  for  himself,  but  every  man  con- 
Bidering  what  is  best  for  all  the  rest.  No  one  who  gravely  considers  the 
characteristics  of  our  time  will  deny  that  society  stands  much  in  need  of 
purification.  IV.  The  soul.  The  unrefined  soul  is  addressed  in  Mai.  iv.  2. 
But  the  address  to  the  renewed  soul  is  given  in  Mai.  iv.  2.    Our  text  goes  deeper  thaa 


CHAP,  in.]  MALACHI.  55 

nations,  churches,  or  society  :  it  deals  with  the  soul,  its  motives,  opinions,  desires. 
There  are  two  classes  of  souls  in  the  world  :  those  which  will  lose  everything  in  the 
fire,  even  themselves  ;  and  those  which  will  lose  something,  but  retain  unimpaired 
the  pure  gold  of  faith,  and  they  themselves  be  saved.  {Richard  Smyth,  D.D.) 
Christ  the  refiner  : — Malachi's  is  the  last  prophet-voice  of  the  Old  Testament 
times.  Nothing  is  known  concerning  the  man  Malachi.  He  is  only  a  name. 
Our  interest  lies  entirely  in  his  message.  The  various  aspects  under  which 
Messiah  is  presented  to  us  by  the  prophets  bear  direct  relation  to  the  immediate 
needs  of  the  people  who  are  told  about  Him.  Moses  gives  us  Messiah  the  Leader, 
who  should  permanently  take  his  place.  Isaiah  gives  us  Messiah  as  Sufferer, 
Conqueror,  Comforter,  matching  the  condition  of  Israel  as  sufiFering  and  exiled. 
Daniel  gives  us  Messiah  the  Prince,  matching  the  condition  of  the  people  as  antici- 
pating the  restoration  of  their  kingdom.  Malachi  gives  us  Messiah  the  Refiner, 
matclung  the  condition  of  the  people,  as  in  a  state  of  moral  and  religious  degrada- 
tion. It  is  well  for  us  thus  to  be  reminded  of  the  many-sidedness  of  Christ's 
adaptation  to  human  needs.  He  is  the  precise  Christ  needed  in  every  age.  And 
men  are  earnestly  seeking,  in  this  our  time,  to  find  those  sides  and  aspects  of 
Christ  and  of  Christianity  which  precisely  adapt  to  modern,  social,  and  intel- 
lectual confusions.  Whenever  and  wherever  Christ  comes,  He  comes  as  the 
refiner  and  purifier.  I.  Man  is  always  gathering  dross.  Metals  are  always 
found  mingled  with  some  sort  of  earthly  matter  that  must  be  burned  or  cleansed 
away.  Everything  man  has  to  do  with  gradually  tarnishes,  or  collects  the  dust, 
or  rusts,  or  corrupts.  We  are  always  at  work  checking  some  gathering  evil,  or 
cleansing  something  that  has  become  foul.  Whatever  human  scene  you  examine 
you  will  surely  find  this  tendency  to  deteriorate.  Take  the  sphere  of  man's  think- 
ing. It  is  constantly  observed  that  the  followers  of  all  great  philosophers,  and 
teachers,  and  thought-leaders,  always  complicate  and  deteriorate  the  systems. 
They  bring  in  the  dirt  and  the  dross.  Take  the  sphere  of  man's  religion.  All 
the  world  over,  and  aU  the  ages  through,  you  may  see  man  recalled  to  pure 
principles,  and  soon  losing  them  again  under  the  accumulating  and  debasing 
dross  of  ceremonies  and  superstitions.  Take  the  sphere  of  man's  social  relations. 
Self-interest  has  always  proved  to  be  the  dross  that  gathers  on  and  spoils  the  most 
perfect  social  schemes  man  has  ever  devised.  Take  the  sphere  of  man's  personal 
life.  The  noblest  ideals  are  unattained,  for  the  dross  of  self-indulgence  soon 
gathers,  and  in  middle  life  men  are  content  with  low  attainments.  Read  human 
history,  as  epitomised  for  us  in  the  Bible,  and  see  how  the  dross  is  always  collect- 
ing and  defiling.  Try  the  Christian  ages.  The  river  of  Christianity  scarcely 
began  to  flow  before  corruptions  mingled  with  it.  Our  apostolical  epistles  tell 
of  errors  and  heresies  and  immoralities  even  prevailing  and  defiling  in  their 
day,  and  the  next  centuries  are  a  painful  record  of  ever-increasing  degradations. 
This  would  be  but  a  depressing  side  of  truth,  if  it  had  to  stand  quite  alone.  There 
is,  however,  an  answering  truth.  II.  God  is  always  seeking  to  refine  the 
DROSS  AWAY.  This  is  the  meaning  of  God  in  history.  Precisely  what  He  has 
always  been  doing  is  this — putting  things  straight ;  clearing  away  evils  ;  redeem- 
ing men  from  their  follies  and  sins.  He  raises  up  the  Reformer,  who  will  clear 
the  gathered  dross  away,  and  liberate  the  pure  truth.  He  brings  forth  social 
leaders  who  can  bravely  resist  the  hurrying  tyranny.  Everywhere,  if  men  show 
us  hastening  corruption,  we  will  show  them  God  staying  the  corrupting  process. 
Refining,  purifj'ing,  straining,  washing,  means  no  less  than  this,  God  intends  to 
present  us  at  last  faultless  :  and  therefore  He  must  sit  as  the  refiner  and  purifier, 
and  get  the  dross  away.  This  is  prominently  illustrated  in  the  mission  of  Christ 
as  Messiah.  Egyptian  paintings  give  us  the  refiner  seated  on  his  low  stool,  steadily 
maintaining  the  fires  with  his  blow-pipe,  and  all  the  while  intently  watching  the 
silver  in  the  melting-pot,  as  it  grows  clearer  in  the  heat.  They  give  us  the  fuller, 
tramphng  the  befouled  garments,  pounding  them  with  his  stout  rod,  and  adding 
the  strong  lye,  the  "  sope  "  that  shall  draw  out  all  the  stains.  It  is  the  figure  of 
God,  manifested  in  Christ,  and  working  His  work  of  grace  through  Christ.  Christ 
was  the  refiner  of  His  own  age.  The  whip  of  small  cords  whicn  drove  the  dross 
out  of  the  temple  courts  is  typical  of  the  work  of  His  whole  life.  He  is  the 
refiner  of  every  age.  Christ  has  stern  hard  work  to  do  for  His  people.  Trying 
for  Him.  Trying  for  them.  But  most  blessed.  I  have  seen  the  man  working, 
stripped  to  the  waist,  pouring  forth  streams  of  perspiration,  at  the  great  iron 
furnaces  ;  and  I  have  not  known  which  to  sympathise  with  most,  the  man  who, 
with  his  long  rod,  was  skilfully  moving  the  iron  mass  in  the  great  flames,  getting 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

it  free  from  all  dross,  and  pure  metal  for  the  workers ;  or  that  mass  of  iron  itself, 
burning  in  the  flames,  and  turned,  now  this  way  and  now  that,  until  every  part 
has  been  fully  subjected  to  the  fierce  flame.  It  is  hard  for  us  to  suffer,  but  if  we 
saw  things  aright,  should  we  not  think  it  even  harder  for  Christ  to  make  us  suffer  ? 
{Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  Divine  refiner: — In  the  preceding  verse,  Christ  is 
a  refiner's  fire,  but  in  this  He  is  the  refiner  sitting  and  watching  the  metal  in  the 
fire.  His  position  suggests— I.  That  His  people  need  refiking.  The  dross 
of  sin  cleaves  to  the  holiest.  Nothing  cleaves  so  closely.  Christ  sees  dross  where 
we  do  not.  We  are  not  always  willing  that  it  should  be  purged  away  when  we 
do  see  it.  The  furnace  is  necessary.  II.  That  His  people  ake  being  refined. 
They  find  life  a  fiery  ordeal.  They  often  suffer  more  than  sinners.  The  heat  is 
often  very  penetrating ;  sometimes  very  hard  to  bear  with  patience.  They  do 
not  always  recognise  the  purpose  of  suffering.  The  process  goes  on  even  when 
the  results  are  not  perceived.  A  refiner's  furnace  is  the  truest  simile  of  life. 
III.  That  His  people  are  valuable  in  His  eyes.  He  watches  them  in  the 
furnace.  He  waits  for  their  perfection.  They  are  silver,  not  common  earth. 
Often  despised  by  the  world,  they  are  highly  esteemed  by  Him.  The  refiner  only 
watches  precious  metals  in  the  fire,  "  Reprobate  silver  "  may  be  consumed, 
but  every  particle  of  pure  metal  is  preserved.  Christ's  people  are  precious  to 
Him.  IV.  That  His  people  will  have  their  fiery  trials  tempered  to  their 
SPIRITUAL  requirements.  He  aims  to  make  them  spiritually  perfect.  He 
tempers  the  fire  that  He  may  separate  "  the  sin  that  He  hates  from  the  soul  that 
He  loves."  He  seeks  not  to  give  carnal  enjoyment,  but  purity.  He,  sitting 
to  watch,  manifests  solicitude,  patience,  expectancy,  and  care.  V.  That  in 
the  end  His  people  will  be  fully  purified.  His  purpose  shall  be  accom- 
plished in  them.  We  often  see  the  purification  going  on.  The  refiiner  uses 
the  silver  he  purifies.     Perfect  purity  will  bring  perfect  blessedness.     Learn — 

1.  To  trust  more  perfectly  the  watchful  care  of  your  Refiner  under  your  trials. 

2.  To  estimate  your  trials  by  the  amount  of  purifying  they  accomplish.  3.  To 
co-operate  with  the  refiner  in  His  efforts  to  purify  you.  (W.  Osborne  Lilley.) 
Christ  the  refiner : — All  the  inventions  of  two  thousand  years  have  not  relieved 
the  watcher  at  the  furnace  door  from  the  same  anxieties  and  cares  that  rested 
upon  the  alchemist  of  Israel  over  his  rude  fireplace.  What  a  beautiful  figure  the 
illustration  furnishes  of  the  plans  and  providences  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  The 
world's  great  crucible  is  ever  before  Him  ;  the  fire  of  His  judgment  ever  biirning 
beneath ;  the  confused  alloy  of  humanity  seething  and  bubbling  within  ;  the 
solvent  and  separator  of  His  truth  cast  ever  and  anon  into  the  mass ;  the  absorbent 
of  the  great  unknown  ready  to  receive  the  refuse  ;  the  purified  matter  growing 
brighter  and  brighter  ;  but  through  all  times  and  in  all  methods,  the  same  watch- 
ful oversight,  the  same  touch  of  the  practised  hand,  the  same  unfailing  Godlike 
patience,  directing  and  ensuring  final  success.  God  who  sent  His  only  Son  into 
the  world,  that  He  might  gather  out  of  the  world  a  peculiar  people  for  Himself, 
did,  by  the  sending  of  His  Son,  set  in  action  certain  laws  and  orders  that  separated 
the  evil  from  the  good,  and  that  refined  and  purified  the  good  ;  but  God  over  all, 
and  God  watching  all,  and  God  guiding  all  things,  with  untiring  love  and  patience, 
kept  those  laws  and  principles  to  their  purposes,  subjecting  generation  after 
generation  of  men  to  the  test  of  their  action,  regulating  the  nature  and  extent  of 
those  tests,  taking  the  ])urified  mass  out  of  the  fire  before  it  should  be  consumed, 
and  acting  always  upon  the  coming  of  that  critical  moment,  when  He  could  see 
His  own  image  in  the  mass  under  trial ;  sitting  and  watching,  as  holding  the  great 
results  in  His  own  hands.  There  is  a  further  side  to  the  illustration.  A  very 
beautiful  phenomenon  known  as  the  fulguration  of  the  metal,  attends  the  removal 
of  the  impurities  from  the  silver.  During  the  earlier  stages  of  the  process,  the 
film  of  oxide  of  lead,  which  has  constantly  remained  over  the  melted  surface  of 
the  mass,  is  removed  as  rapidly  as  can  be,  and  the  colour  of  the  metal  is  dark; 
but  when  the  silver  is  almost  clear  of  impurities,  the  film  of  litharge  upon  its 
surface  grows  finer  and  finer,  and  a  succession  of  beautiful  rings,  of  iridescent 
tints,  form,  one  after  another,  until  at  last  the  film  of  oxide  suddenly  mcUs  away 
and  disappears,  and  the  brilliant  surface  of  the  silver  flashes  forth  in  all  its  purity 
and  glory.  Under  the  old  methods,  the  watcher  did  not  disturb  the  crucible 
until  that  last  change  came, — until  he  could  see  his  own  image  on  the  glowing 
surface.  Then  his  work  was  done,  and  his  purpose  fulfilled.  Think  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  under  this  figure,  and  then  read  history  again.  There  is  the  mass  of 
humanity  in  the  cupel  (shallow  crucible)  of  Goa's  law,  and  here,  in  this  age,  th© 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  m 

dark  film  of  sin  is  over  the  whole  stirface,  and  there,  in  that  age,  a  ray  of  light 
breaks  forth,  and  lights  up  history's  pages,  and  another,  and  another,  until  a 
continent  is  encircled ;  and  in  these  last  days  the  heavy  film  is  breaking,  and  the 
whole  world  is  lighting  up,  because  the  end  is  drawing  near ;  and  in  the  very  last 
time  the  Son  of  Man  shall  put  forth  His  power  on  the  earth,  and  shall  call  together 
His  elect  from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,  and  then  the  darkness  shall 
suddenly  all  break  away,  and  the  true  light  shine  forth,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
shall  cover  the  earth,  and  God's  loving,  patient  watching  shall  be  over,  and  Christ 
shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied.  Men  grow  weary  imder 
the  test,  and  think  the  world  has  suffered  enough ;  but  still  God  waits  and  watches 
for  the  true  signs  of  purity,  and  sends  His  trials  and  judgments,  and  throws  in 
His  solvents  and  absorbents,  and  looks  for  His  own  image.  When  that  appears, 
then  the  end  cometh.  ( IF.  H.  Lewis. )  The  refiner's  furnace  : — Everything 
used  in  the  erection  of  the  Jewish  temple  was  to  be  flawless  and  perfect.  So  it 
was  viiih.  the  gifts  to  be  presented.  The  temple  was  the  earthly  picture  of  heaven. 
Those  who  enter  there  have  come  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  been  made  white 
in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Thus  Malachi  prophesies:  "He  shall  sit  as  a  refiner 
and  purifier  of  silver."  The  purification  of  character  is  not  an  exceptional 
experience.  Christian  melting  is  a  common  necessity.  We  are  all  made  perfect 
through  suffering.  There  is  a  work  to  be  done  in  us  which  involves  pain  and 
trial.  We  are  not  only  sculptors  working  on  a  building,  we  are  sculptures  with 
living  hearts  and  quivering  nerves,  to  whom  the  furnace  of  trial  is  a  needful  thing. 
I.  The  Divinb  hand  which  arranges  the  furnace.  Fire  is  an  element  over 
which  we  have  little  control.  Over  the  tribulation  of  which  it  is  here  the  symbol, 
we  have  less  control.  We  cannot  set  in  order  the  moral  procedure  which  issues 
in  refined  and  energised  character.  Directly  men  begin  to  choose  their  discipline 
they  become  foolish  and  vain  ascetics.  At  times  we  have  all  wished  that  there 
were  no  griefs  and  trials  here.  The  furnace  needs  ordering  for  us  all.  It  is  much 
to  know  that  oiu:  Father's  hand  is  at  work  in  all  the  events  of  our  history.  II.  The 
Divine  eye  that  watches  the  furnace.  "  He  sits."  A  refiner  of  silver  was 
asked,  "  Do  you  sit  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  I  must  keep  my  eye  steadily  fixed 
on  the  furnace,  for  if  the  silver  remains  too  long  under  the  intense  heat  it  is  sure 
to  be  damaged."  A  beautiful  illustration,  completed  when  the  silversmith-added, 
"  I  only  know  the  exact  instant  when  the  purifjdng  process  is  complete,  by  seeing 
my  own  countenance  in  the  silver."  Only  when  God  sees  His  own  image  in  the 
children  is  He  satisfied.  Therefore  the  Father  "  sits."  We  see  not  the  Invisible 
Face  behind  the  furnace,  and  we  may  be  forgiven  if  we  wonder  at  all  the  mysteries 
of  pain  and  grief.  III.  The  Divine  end  in  ordering  the  furnace.  The 
beautiful  Bible  words  have  become  hardened  coins  of  traditional  usage. 
"  Sanctification  "  is  one  of  the  words  that  have  become  conventionalised;  it 
has  been  narrowed  to  a  cheerless  type  of  goodness.  Diversity  of  character  gives 
room  for  manliness  in  spiritual  life.  Experience  does  not  alter  the  groundwork 
of  human  nature.  But  in  all  cases  tribulation  works  patience,  and  patience 
experience,  and  experience  hope.  The  end  which  our  Father  has  in  any  special 
trial  is  often  hidden  from  us.  What  furnace  should  we  ever  have  chosen  for  our- 
selves ?  The  end  will  explain  it  all.  All  is  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  His  grace, 
and  never  let  us  forget4;hat  His  grace  involves  our  good,  and  His  glory  our  happi- 
ness too.  IV.  The  Divine  grace  that  sustains  us  in  the  furnace.  In  most 
cases  the  furnace  is  gradually  heated.  There  are  beginnings  of  sorrow  and  grada- 
tions of  trial,  so  that  God  gradually  tempers  our  nature  to  the  heat  of  the  fire. 
Christian  life  is  silver.  It  is  not  wood  and  hay  and  stubble  to  be  burned ;  it  is 
silver  to  be  purified.  (IF.  M.  Statham.)  The  refiner^ s  fire: — The  process  of 
refining  is  in  the  text  made  to  illustrate  the  work  of  Christ  upon  the  heart  of  man. 
I.  The  process.  One  important  truth  is  assumed,  the  inherent  preciousness  of 
man.  Many  things  are  too  worthless  to  pay  for  refining.  When  God  undertakes 
to  refine  or  purify  man,  it  is  because  of  his  intrinsic  dignity  and  worth.  The 
Scriptures  nowhere  allow  you  to  suppose  that  they  treat  man  as  an  insignificant 
creatiure.  And  man  still  bears  about  him  in  dimness  and  defacement  the  image 
of  God.  Our  Saviour  takes  great  pains  to  impress  us  with  the  intrinsic  and  inde- 
structible grandeur  of  man.  No  word  ever  escapes  His  lips  which  tend  to  lower 
him  in  your  esteem.  He  sets  His  seal  upon  the  infinite  worth  of  man  by  taking 
his  natiu-e.  Has  not  sin  made  a  great  difference,  and  reduced,  if  not  destroyed, 
the  worth  of  man  ?  Yes,  sin  has  made  a  great  difference  in  his  character,  and  in 
the  part  he  has  played  in  the  world,  but  it  has  made  no  difference  in  the  intrinsio 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

majesty  and  grandeur  of  his  being.  He  is  still  man.  He  has  not  fallen  into 
lower  rank  of  creatureship,  nor  can  he.  If  he  could  cease  to  be  man,  his  shame 
and  misery  would  instantly  leave  him.  Unworthy  you  are,  but  not  worthless. 
If  you  were  worthless,  he  would  not  sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver.  He 
sees  the  dross,  and  He  sees  the  metal,  and  He  does  not  cast  away  the  metal  because 
of  the  dross,  but  He  seeks  to  cast  the  dross  out  of  the  metal.  "  He  shall  purify." 
Here  we  see  the  great  aim  and  purpose  of  the  Gospel.  So  far  as  man's  own  life 
and  character  are  concerned,  there  is  no  other  or  higher  end  that  the  Gospel 
can  contemplate  than  this — our  pm'ification.  In  this  the  Gospel  stands  out 
above  and  distinct  from  all  other  religions.  Most  of  the  religions  of  the  world 
have  made  men  impure,  and  many  of  them  have  enjoined  and  required  impurity 
as  an  essential  condition  of  salvation.  The  whole  scheme  of  the  Gospel  is  per- 
vaded by  the  idea  of  purity.  Our  religion  is  one  which  has  for  its  supreme  aim 
our  perfect  holiness.  Among  the  agencies,  through  means  of  which  this  purity 
is  to  be  accomplished,  one  is  that  of  trial — trial  as  if  by  fire.  One  of  the  purposes 
of  affliction  is  to  purify.  To  come  out  of  the  fire  no  better  than  we  went  into  it, 
shows  a  tenacity  of  evil  in  us  which  may  well  make  us  alarmed.  It  is  an  unspeak- 
able joy  for  the  Christian  to  know  that,  as  he  must  be  tried  in  the  fire,  he  is  to  be 
tried  under  the  eye  and  hand  and  heart  of  his  Saviour.  A  process  over  which 
He  presides  will  be  conducted  with  infinite  wisdom.  He  knows  the  nature  of 
the  evil  which  has  to  be  separated.  He  alone  knows  the  kind  of  trials  to  send. 
There  is  no  uniformity  in  the  process  of  purification  by  which  Christ  tests  and 
refines  His  followers.  Uniformity  is  the  resource  of  routine  and  ignorance  or 
despotism.  The  discipline  of  a  home  is  a  better  illustration  of  the  spirit  in 
which  Christ  acts  toward  us  than  any  other.  In  the  family  the  children  can  be 
looked  at  and  treated  in  the  light  of  their  individual  peculiarities  and  needs. 
Each  one  of  Christ's  disciples  is  taken  in  hand  by  Himself,  and  treated  for  what 
he  is  ;  and  the  Saviour  makes  no  mistakes.  He  sends  no  afiiiction  without  reason. 
It  comes  at  its  best  time,  in  the  best  way,  tarries  only  so  long  as  it  is  needed,  and 
until  its  purpose  is  accomplished.  Bodily  affliction  is  not  the  only  fire  which 
Christ  kindles  for  the  sanctification  of  His  followers.  His  fires,  and  acids,  and 
cleansing  agencies  are  innumerable.  II.  Its  purpose.  Sufferings  have  a 
purpose  as  well  as  a  cause.  The  purpose  of  affliction,  as  stated  here,  is,  that 
its  subjects  "  may  offer  unto  the  Lord  an  offering  in  righteousness."  As  a 
rule,  great  service  can  only  come  out  of  great  suffering.  The  men  of  power  and 
influence  have  been  annealed  in  a  furnace  of  trial  of  some  sort.  Shrink  not  then 
from  the  fire,  unless  you  would  shrink  from  the  service  too.  Many  a  saint  on 
earth  is  at  this  hour  just  purified,  and  ready  to  be  removed  to  the  world  where 
God  keeps  all  His  treasures.  (Enoch  Mellor,  D.D.)  Christ  the  great  disciplin- 
arian of  regenerate  souls  : — In  this  character,  sitting,  purifying,  Chiist  recognises 
THE  WORTH  OF  REGENERATE  SOULS.  He  created  them  by  His  power.  He  redeemed 
them  by  His  love.  His  work  is  to  them  even  more  valuable.  As  He  burns  up 
the  dross  of  depravity,  the  souls  become  more  precious  in  His  sight.  II.  He 
EMPLOYS  PAINFUL  INSTRUMENTALITIES.  Purifies  by  fire.  The  fire  of  truth. 
The  fijre  of  the  Spirit.  The  fire  of  trial ;  of  personal  and  relative  afflictions, — 
the  fire  of  persecution.  As  nothing  can  purify  the  gold  and  the  silver  but  fire,  so 
nothing  but  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  the  Spirit  of  providence  can  purge  the  human 
soul  of  all  the  dross  of  sin.  III.  He  is  permanently  engaged.  "  He  shall 
sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier."  IV.  He  aims  at  the  entire  consecration  to 
God.  "  That  they  may  offer  unto  God  an  offering  of  righteousness."  The 
great  work  of  every  man  is  that  of  a  priest.  Man  has  to  "offer  to  the  Lord,"  his 
Faculties,  his  being,  all  he  has  and  is,  and  to  do  all  this  in  "  righteousness." 
(Homilist.)  Christ's  cleansing  and  refining  office  in  His  Church  : — We  may  take 
these  figures  as  exhibiting  the  plain  and  manifest  features  of  our  Lord's  mission 
to  earth.  Still  He  is  among  us  as  fullers'  soap,  and  as  a  refiner's  fire,  to  cleanse 
and  to  purify  us  all.  Here  is  a  great,  continuous  office  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Wherever  He  comes.  He  is  always  "  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fullers'  soap." 
Christ  came  expressly  to  establish  sanctification,  and  seal  a  covenant,  of  which 
the  very  spirit  was  cleansing  and  purification  by  His  blood,  which  cleanseth  from 
all  sin.  And  Christ  came  also  to  give  those  purifying  graces  without  which  no 
effectual  cleansing  can  be  carried  on  or  maintained.  It  is  in  all  the  graces,  and 
motives,  and  desires,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  generates,  fosters,  and  matures  in 
our  too  often  half-reluctant  hearts,  that  the  great  Fuller  and  Refiner  of  the  Word 
carries  out  the  purpose,  the  great  mission  of  cleansing  and  refining  for  the  perfect- 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  69 

ing  of  which  He  once  graced  the  earth,  and  the  nature  of  man,  by  Hia  Incarnate 
Preaence.  What  is  the  machinery  by  which  the  Holy  Refiner  makes  His  power 
known  ?  This  refining  is  to  be  sought  for,  and  realised  if  we  would  have  any  use- 
fulness, any  ultimate  profit,  in  it.  The  Refiner  is  ever  present,  doing  the  refining 
work  Himself.  But  He  is  as  the  refiner's  fire.  In  the  furnace  of  some  kind  of 
affliction  He  refines  us — "  Purging  away  the  dross,  taking  away  all  the  tin." 
Trial  is  the  refining  agent.  The  trial  may  bear  relation  not  only  to  the  outward,  but 
also  to  the  inner  life.  Whether  then  Christ  sit  among  us  as  a  Fuller  to  cleanse,  and 
as  a  Refiner  to  purify,  is  a  question  which  concerns  us  all.  {Archdeacon  Mildmay.) 
Messiah's  Kingdom : — These  last  sentences  from  Malachi's  scroll  are  the  speci- 
fications for  the  Kingdom  of  Christ.  The  perfected  outline  of  this  character  and 
kingdom,  and  the  preparation  needed  for  the  retiu^  of  the  Lord,  is  the  theme  of 
oiu:  chapter.  I.  The  completed  pictuee  of  the  coming  Messiah.  Isaiah 
brings  before  us  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  From  Isaiah  onwards  the  lineaments  seem 
to  change,  and  the  tints  to  deepen.  We  become  familiar  with  a  martial  step  and 
warlike  notes.  II.  The  Church  is  to  be  purified  and  revived.  This  is  a 
service  which  Christ  will  constantly  render  and  require  of  His  Church, — their 
cleansing.  It  is,  as  it  were,  a  permanent  employment.  He  is  watching  the 
crucibles  and  the  scales,  like  the  silversmith  at  his  bench.  This  is  the  answer 
to  a  question  of  the  day,  "  Is  God  doing  the  best  He  can  for  this  world  ?  "  Con- 
troversy, the  shaking  and  sifting  of  small  and  great,  of  good  and  bad,  may  have 
its  wholesome  results  when  presided  over  by  the  magisterial  and  gracious  presence 
of  Christ.  III.  Society  is  to  be  judged  and  transformed.  "  And  I  will 
come  near  you  to  judgment."  When  the  Lord  comes  into  His  temple  He  appears 
also  as  a  swift  witness  against  the  iniquities  of  society.  He  is  a  swift  witness 
against  evil-doers.     IV.   Specifications  are  made  to  the  Church,  society, 

AND    the    individual,    IN    REGARD    TO    THEIR    SHORTCOMINGS.      Men    do    not    wish 

to  be  definite  in  their  faith,  or  confine  themselves  to  commended  and  well-tested 
helps  to  a  Divine  life.  But  even  an  imperfect  comprehension  of  a  great  character 
yields  more  than  an  accurate  inventory  of  an  insignificant  person  or  thing.  Much 
is  said  about  religion  not  meeting  the  needs  of  men,  but  the  truth  is  overlooked 
that  men  do  not  comply  with  the  conditions  of  Divine  help.  ( William  K.  Campbell. ) 
Christ  appearing  among  His  people  : — These  words  were  spoken  by  Malachi 
respecting  Christ  and  John  the  Baptist.  My  present  design  is  to  notice  the 
characteristics  of  a  genuine  appearance  of  Christ  among  the  people  to  revive 
His  work.  Before  Christ  personally  appeared  among  the  Jews,  He  sent  His 
messenger  to  prepare  the  way.  When  Christ  could  appear  to  revive  His  work, 
He  still  sends  a  messenger  to  prepare  His  way.  Somebody  will  be  stirred  up  to 
call  the  attention  of  the  people  to  the  real  condition  of  things,  and  the  necessity 
for  a  reformation  among  them.  When  this  has  been  done,  the  Lord  will  suddenly 
come  to  His  temple.  There  is  first  the  seeking  after  the  Lord,  then  a  calling 
upon  His  name  in  earnest  supplications  for  Him  to  revive  His  work,  and  then  His 
coming.  The  Lord's  temple  is  His  true  Church  on  earth,  of  which  the  temple  at 
Jerusalem  was  only  a  type.  What  did  Christ  do  when  He  first  appeared  among 
men  ?  Whenever  He  comes  to  revive  His  work  in  a  place,  there  is  sure  to  be 
great  need  for  it.  Much  is  wrong,  and  there  is  need  for  reformation.  When  Christ 
comes  there  will  be  a  tremendous  searching  among  the  people.  He  began  by 
upturning  the  foimdations  of  their  hopes  ;  all  their  self-righteous  expectations. 
He  brought  to  bear  upon  them  a  searching  ministry.  He  must  try  the  metal  to 
see  what  dross  is  in  it ;  he  must  see  what  chaff  there  is  in  the  wheat,  and  then 
fan  it  away.  In  such  processes,  certain  classes  of  persons  are  peculiarly  affected. 
Christ  took  in  hand  chiefly  the  Pharisees,  the  leaders  of  the  Church,  and  in  a  most 
unsparing  manner  searched  and  tried  them ;  reproved  their  errors,  contradicted 
them,  and  turned  their  false  teaching  completely  upside  down.  So  now  Christ 
does  with  all  churches  and  all  people.  Whatever  errors  and  misconceptions  they 
may  be  labouring  under.  He  must  set  Himself  to  correct.  If  He  find  them  with 
superficial  views  of  the  spirituality  of  God's  law.  He  must  correct  them.  If 
they  have  superficial  views  of  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  they  must  be 
corrected.  He  must  cast  light  on  all  dark  places,  search  the  nooks  and  corners, 
and  dispel  all  errors  by  the  powerful  light  of  truth.  He  begins  by  trying  the 
ministers.  He  needs  to  try  them,  that  they  may  be  instrumental  in  trying  others. 
He  will  search  out  the  carnal  professors  of  religion.  These  are  divided  into 
various  classes.  Sometimes  there  are  ambitious  persons  in  the  Church.  They 
wish  to  be  highly  influential.     Such  persons  are  often  searched  out  in  such  a 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

manner  as  greatly  to  expose  and  mortify  them.  Some  are  spiritually  proud,  or 
have  had  a  worldly  pride  ;  and  they  will  all  be  searched  out.  When  Christ  comes 
to  revive  His  work.  He  will  bring  iniquity  to  light  by  searching,  preaching,  and 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  will  not  only  do  this  with  the  Church ;  He 
will  also  try  the  congregation  who  are  not  professors  of  religion  ;  and  will  bring  a 
terrible  searching  to  bear  upon  them.  If  religion  is  to  be  revived,  sin  must  be 
put  away.  If  sin  is  to  be  put  away,  there  must  be  a  conviction  of  sin ;  and  if 
there  is  to  be  a  conviction  of  sin,  searching  must  be  applied.  (C.  G.  Finney.) 
Christ  as  a  spiritual  reformer  : — The  passage  points  to  Christ.  I.  He  is  glorious. 
This  appears — 1.  From  the  fact  that  a  Divine  messenger  was  sent  to  prepare  the 
way  for  Him.  2.  From  the  description  that  is  here  given  of  Him;  He  revolu- 
tionises the  thoughts,  the  emotions,  the  aims,  the  habits  of  mankind.  II.  He  is 
AWE- INSPIRING.  Unrenewed  men  will  stand  aghast  and  tremble  in  the  presence 
of  this  Reformer.  He  would  subject  their  principles  to  the  fiery  test  of  His  heart- 
Bearcliing  truth.  III.  He  is  thorough.  "  A  refiner's  fire."  "  Fullers'  soap." 
In  Christ's  reformation,  everything  that  is  wrong,  that  is  impure,  is  worked  out 
of  the  human  soul.  IV.  He  is  persistent.  "  He  shall  sit,"  &c.  He  is  intent 
upon  the  work,  and  makes  no  slight  or  passing  business  of  it.  V.  He  is  successful. 
He  will  constitute  for  men  one  day  a  "  holy  priesthood,"  a  priesthood  that  will 
render  to  the  Almighty  offerings  that  are  holy  and  acceptable  to  Him.  (Homilist.) 
Christ's  purifying  presence  : — We  do  well  to  remember  with  awe  the  day  when 
Christ  will  come  to  be  our  Judge  ;  and  yet  these  words  may  be  understood  of 
His  coming  near  a  man,  or  near  His  Church,  in  any  way.  God  never  reveals 
Himself  as  closely  approaching  sinners,  without  putting  them  to  proof  and  trial, 
more  or  less  resembling  that  by  which  metals  are  tried  in  the  fire.  Those  who, 
even  in  the  day  of  His  humiliation,  knew  or  felt  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and 
themselves  sinners,  trembled  before  Him,  and  would  fain  have  got  away  from 
His  presence.  They  could  not  "  abide  the  day  of  His  coming."  That  the 
prophet  meant  this  kind  of  continued  presence,  and  not  simply  Christ's  final 
coming,  is  probable  for  two  reasons — I.  That  he  connects  this  purifying  presence 
of  our  Lord  with  the  sending  of  His  message  to  prepare  the  way  before  Him. 
2.  That  he  speaks  of  Him  not  as  a  destroyer,  but  as  a  refiner,  especially  of  the 
priests.  This  seems  to  teU  us  of  some  unspeakable  mercy  of  His,  to  temper,  as 
it  were,  the  natural  effects  of  His  purity  coming  in  contact  with  us  sinners,  so  as 
that  He  may  be  in  us,  and  with  us,  a  fiie  not  to  consume,  but  to  refine.  The  God  of 
Purity  abides  in  man's  nature,  and  it  is  not  destroyed,  but  purified.  The  first 
coming  of  our  Lord  to  His  new  temple  should  be  connected  with  some  great 
purification,  which  was  to  take  place  in  His  Church,  the  consequence  of  which 
would  be,  that  He  would  be  fully  reconciled  to  His  fallen  people.  Notice  the 
ceremony  connected  with  the  purification  of  the  mother  of  Jesus.  She  brought 
two  turtle-doves  ;  one  for  a  burnt  offering,  as  an  acknowledgment  of  what  sinners 
deserve  at  the  hands  of  the  Almighty;  and  she  acknowledged  that  her  only 
hope  of  purification  lay  in  her  presenting  a  pure  offering.  Note  that  other 
Israelitish  mothers  offered  in  acknowledgment  and  expiation  of  the  sin  which 
they  had  communicated  to  the  infant  newly  born ;  but  this  holy  mother 
needed  not  to  make  any  such  confession.  Her  offspring  was  pure  and  untainted, 
and  had  no  occasion  to  be  expiated.  The  offering  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  differed 
infinitely  from  all  others,  in  the  worth  of  the  fiist-born,  whom  she  presented  to 
her  Godf.  (Sermons  by  Contrib.  to  "  Tracts  for  the  Times.'"'')  Christianity  as  a 
Civilisation  : — It  is  necessary  to  think  of  civilisation  in  two  lights — the  one  as 
the  condition  of  the  individual,  the  other  as  a  power  to  influence  others  standing 
apart  from  its  condition.  What  mankind  needs  is,  not  simply  an  ideal  picture 
of  an  elevated  human  life,  but  also  an  agency  that  will  rapidly  cast  men  into  the 
likeness  of  tliis  ideal  picture.  Individuals  may  have  nearly  reached  the  ideal 
maahood,  but  their  virtues  have  been  unable  to  multiply  themselves  infinitely 
in  the  outer  world.  History  is  dotted  over  with  names  of  such  piety  as  marked 
Aurclius,  Cato,  and  Xenophon.  In  seeking  for  a  desirable  civilisation,  it  is  neces- 
sary for  us  to  find  a  culture  that  will  overflow,  a  civilisation  that  possesses  the 
aggressive  power  and  genius,  that  will  open  out,  fanlike,  and  pass  from  one  to 
many,  incapable  of  rest  as  to  labour,  and  as  to  its  aspirations  and  conquests. 
Give  attention  then  to  Christian  character  as  a  civihsation.  Man  is  civilised 
whea  all  his  faculties  of  mind  and  heart  are  active  within  their  spheres,  not  falling 
short  of  nature's  law,  nor  going  beyond  it.  Under  "  faculties  "  must  be  included 
coascie.ice,   and  all  the  tender  sentiments  of  friendship,  love,  sympathy,  and 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  61 

religion,  for,  without  these,  a  character  may  possess  greatness  in  many  respects, 
but  not  that  perfect  blending  which  seems  to  give  us  the  perfect  manhood.  Edmund 
Burke  says:  "The  spirit  of  civilisation  is  composed  of  two  parts,  the  spirit  of 
a  gentleman,  and  the  spirit  of  religion."  This  is  only  another  way  of  informing 
us,  that  civilisation  is  a  life  lived  in  the  presence  of  man  and  of  God.  Paul 
describes  the  perfect  gentleman  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  In  living  up  to  such  a  picture 
we  should  all  make  a  grand  approach  to  a  civilised  life.  It  has  long  been  a  custom 
of  philosophic  minds  to  pass  in  silence  any  lessons  of  civilisation  upon  the  pages 
of  Scripture,  and  patiently  to  seek,  and  deeply  to  love  everything  in  Aristotle 
or  Plato.  Permit  me  to  assume  that  the  truly  Christian  character  is  a  highly 
civilised  character.  Hence  our  second  proposition,  that  Christianity  possesses 
in  a  large  measure  the  power  to  influence  those  standing  afar  off.  In  order  to 
produce  a  universal  manhood,  we  must  find  a  truth  that  overflows,  a  philosophy 
the  opposite  of  egotism,  a  philosophy  deeply  altruistic.  A  religion  in  which 
one  good  man  becomes  ten  good  men  is  the  only  one  that  will  offer  society  hope. 
Now  the  grand  attribute  of  Christ  and  His  method  is  this — living  for  others. 
If  there  is  one  sentence  which,  more  than  others,  may  express  the  genius  of  this 
Christ,  it  is  this  :  His  was  a  goodness  that  rolled  outward,  a  love  whose  rays, 
like  those  of  the  sun,  darted  away  from  itself.  In  the  world  of  morals,  Christianity 
is  a  love  which  from  one  heart  moves  outward  and  contemplates  nothing  less 
than  shining  upon  each  face  that  is  seen,  or  shall  be  seen  walking  the  paths  in 
this  vale.  No  Christ-like  soul  will  consent  to  walk  along  through  life,  or  to 
heaven,  without  wishing  to  drag  all  society  with  it  to  the  sublime  destiny.  Above 
all  other  systems  Christianity  is  an  aggressive  civilisation.  Let  us  now  defend 
Christianity  against  some  parts  of  its  history.  It  does  not  argue  against  a  senti- 
ment that  men  have  erred  as  to  what  path  it  should  follow.  Christ  has  stood 
so  near  the  people,  that  they  have  wreathed  the  cross  with  their  infirmities  at 
the  very  horn:  when  they  crowded  round  it  to  find  their  salvation.  And  it  is  this 
nearness  to  the  human  heart  which  has  made  Christianity  drench  with  blood 
fields  over  which  infidelity  would  have  whispered  "  peace,"  for  religion  has  always 
been  an  active,  powerful  sentiment,  and  hence  its  errors  have  been  as  active  as 
its  truths.  As  love  in  a  wrong  path,  or  itself  wronged,  may  become  an  agony 
and  a  cruelty,  but  in  its  full  hght  and  wisdom  opens  out  into  a  paradise,  so 
Christianity  escaping  from  errors  of  doctrine  and  practice,  will  either  become 
the  world's  civiUsation,  or  else  we  must  bow  in  sorrow  and  declare  the  generations 
to  come  to  be  utterly  without  hope.  Here,  then,  is  a  reform  adequate  in  its 
truths  and  in  its  motives.  What  detains  it  from  its  great  mission  ?  It  waits 
simply  for  man.  It  waits  for  the  Church  to  escape  from  the  letter  which  killeth 
to  the  spirit  which  giveth  life.  It  waits  for  the  Christian  throng  to  enter,  not  their 
sanctuary  only,  but  the  world.  (David  Swing. )  Refining  silver : — The  following 
description  of  silver  refining  is  given  by  Napier : — "  When  the  alloy  is  melted 
upon  a  cuppel  and  the  air  blown  upon  it,  the  surface  of  the  melted  metals  has 
a  deep  orange-colour  with  a  kind  of  flickering  wave  constantly  passing  over  the 
surface,  caused  by  the  combining  of  the  oxygen  with  the  impurity ;  and  these 
being  blown  off  as  the  process  proceeds,  the  heat  is  increased,  because  the  nearer 
purity  the  more  heat  is  necessary  to  keep  it  in  fusion  ;  and  in  a  little  the  colour 
of  the  fused  metal  becomes  lighter,  the  impurities  only  forming  reddish  striae 
which  continue  to  pass  over  the  surface.  At  this  stage  the  refiner  watches  the 
operation,  either  standing  or  sitting,  with  the  greatest  earnestness,  until  all  the 
orange  colour  and  shading  disappears,  and  the  metal  has  the  appearance  of 
a  highly-polished  mirror,  reflecting  every  object  around  it,  even  the  refiner,  as 
he  looks  upon  the  mass  of  metal,  may  see  himself  as  in  a  looking-glass,  and  thus 
he  can  form  a  very  correct  judgment  respecting  the  purity  of  the  metaL  If 
he  is  satisfied  the  fire  is  drawn,  and  the  metal  removed  from  the  furnace;  but 
if  not  considered  pure  more  lead  is  added  and  the  process  is  repeated."  All 
this  is  illustrative  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  the  Christian,  who,  being  put  into 
the  furnace  of  affliction,  is  often  kept  there  for  a  considerable  time,  the  heat  mean- 
while increasing  dafly  ;  but  no  sooner  is  the  end  answered,  and  the  drop  of  sin 
removed,  than  he  is  taken  out  of  the  furnace  reflecting  the  image  of  his  Lord. 
Melted  over: — I  stood  in  the  foundry-yard.  Great  piles  of  iron,  all  ready  for  melting, 
were  gathered  there.  I  noticed  one  heap  of  columns,  broken,  bent,  split,  shattered. 
I  went  into  the  foundry.  They  were  "  tapping  "  the  furnace,  and  the  molten 
metal  flowed  out  in  one  stream  of  fire,  sending  up  a  sputter  of  sparks,  whiter 
than  the  stars.     A  row  of  men,  on  whose  swarthy  faces  fell  the  strange  glare 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

of  the  fire,  stood  a  little  way  from  the  furnace  to  catch  the  iron  in  ladles,  and 
carry  it  off  to  be  run  in  the  moulds.  I  knew  these  broken  columns  would  some 
day  be  cast  into  the  furnace,  softened,  melted,  to  run  out  in  a  stream  of  fire,  and 
be  moulded  again  in  tall,  shapely  pillars.  In  no  other  way  could  they  be  of  use. 
They  must  be  melted  over.  That  very  afternoon  I  saw  a  mother  all  bent  and 
broken  by  affliction.  She  bad  parted  with  an  only  child.  Just  the  Sabbath 
before  had  the  earth  been  broken  for  that  child's  grave.  T  pitied  that  mother. 
How  keenly  her  Saviour  felt  for  her.  And  yet,  perhaps,  the  only  way  to  reach 
Bome  elements  in  that  mother's  character,  and  change  them,  was  through  affliction. 
The  character  was  not  worthless  ;  far  from  it.  It  only  needed  melting  over. 
O,  the  pain  of  that  furnace  of  suffering,  its  smart,  its  agony !  But  in  just  this  way 
is  character  sometimes  made  over,  its  qualities  shaped  into  the  strong,  stately 
pillars  sustaining  the  interests  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom.  (J.  A.  Gordon.) 
The  refiner : — The  word  translated  "  soap  "  does  not  signify  the  article  which 
is  now  called  by  that  name  ;  soap  was  not  known  in  the  days  of  Malachi.  It 
means  rather  what  we  call  "  lye  "  It  was  water  impregnated  with  alkali  drawn 
from  the  ashes  of  the  vegetable  known  as  salt-wort.  "  He  shall  sit  "  is  not  merely 
pictorial,  "  to  make  the  figure  more  striking."  It  is  the  position  which  the  refiner 
must  occupy,  because  the  process  of  purification  is  often  protracted,  and  must 
always  be  watched  with  unbroken  attention.  Recently  a  few  ladies  in  Dublin, 
who  are  accustomed  to  meet  and  read  the  Scriptures,  and  converse  upon  topics 
suggested,  were  reading  this  third  chapter  of  Malachi,  when  one  of  them  observed, 
"  There  is  something  remarkable  in  the  expression  in  the  third  verse  :  '  He  shall 
Bit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver.'  "  They  agreed  that  possibly  it  might  be 
BO,  and  one  of  the  ladies  promised  to  call  on  a  silversmith,  and  report  to  them 
what  he  said  on  the  subject.  She  went  accordingly,  and,  without  telling  the 
object  of  her  errand,  begged  to  know  from  him  the  process  of  refining  silver, 
which  he  described  to  her.  "  But,  sir,"  she  said,  "  do  you  sit  while  the  process 
of  refining  is  going  on  ?  "  "  Oh  yes,  madam,"  replied  the  silversmith  ;  "  I  must 
sit  with  my  eye  steadily  fixed  on  the  furnace,  for  if  the  time  necessary  for  refining 
be  exceeded  in  the  slightest  degree  the  silver  is  sure  to  be  injured."  At  once 
she  saw  the  beauty  and  the  comfort,  too,  of  the  expression,  "  He  shall  sit  as  a 
refiner  and  purifier  of  silver."  Christ  sees  it  is  needful  to  put  His  children  into 
the  furnace,  but  He  is  seated  by  the  side  of  it,  His  eye  is  steadily  on  the  work 
of  purifying,  and  His  wisdom  and  love  are  both  engaged  in  the  best  manner  for 
them.  Their  trials  do  not  come  at  random  ;  the  very  hairs  of  their  head  are 
all  numbered.  As  the  lady  was  leaving  the  shop  the  silversmith  called  her  back, 
and  said  he  had  still  further  to  mention  that  he  only  knew  the  process  of  purifying 
was  complete  by  seeing  his  own  image  reflected  in  the  silver.  Beautiful  figure  ! 
When  Christ  sees  His  own  image  in  His  people  His  work  of  purifying  is  accom- 
plished. Then  He  instantly  removes  the  crucible  from  the  fire.  (Charles  F. 
Deem-s,  D.D.)  The  mystery  of  suffering : — As  a  matter  of  fact,  suffering  is  the  con- 
dition in  which  every  human  life  is  hved  to  a  greater  or  less  degree.  It  embraces 
every  portion  of  our  nature,  in  pain  of  body,  in  perplexity  of  mind,  in  great  sorrow 
of  heart,  in  conflict  of  will,  in  restlessness  of  conscience,  in  desolation  of  spirit.  Life 
always  seems  to  me  to  be  like  our  Lord's  life  in  this — it  is  a  drawing  nearer,  nearer, 
nearer  to  Calvary,  a  more  and  more  living  to  conditions  of  suffering.  And  that  which 
is  an  experience  with  us  is  a  universal  experience ;  we  see  it  in  every  page  that 
tells  the  story  of  the  past.  We  see  it  wherever  we  look  round  upon  human  life 
to-day.  We  cannot  help  it ;  our  own  nature  instinctively  revolts  against  it.  In 
the  degree  in  which  we  can  see  how  the  mystery  of  suffering  can  be  reconciled 
with  the  wisdom  and  the  power  and  the  love  of  God,  in  that  degree  we  shall  be 
helped  to  be  enduring  for  oiu'selves,  and  to  be  trustful  about  others.  Suffering  is 
not  of  God  ;  it  is  contrary  to  the  ideal  will  of  God.  Tennyson  says,  "  Man  thinks 
he  was  not  made  to  die."  Man  was  no  more  made  to  suffer  than  he  was  made 
to  die.  Suffering  is  the  necessary  result  of  the  violation  of  law  ;  that  is,  suffering 
is  of  sin  ;  and  that  it  is  by  man's  resistance  to  the  loving  guidance  of  God  in  the 
laws  of  life  that  He  has  set  for  him,  that  all  suffering  has  come  into  the  world. 
We  are  right  to  hate  it ;  we  are  right  to  feel  in  the  position  of  absolute  antagonism 
to  it.  We  are  right  to  do  all  we  can  to  work  it  out  of  human  life.  It  is  not  of 
God,  and  although  it  is  not  of  God,  we  are  obliged  to  admit  this  fact,  that  God 
foreknew  how  man  would  use  the  liberty  wherewith  He  dowered  him,  that  He 
foreknew  human  sin,  and  that  therefore  He  foreknew  all  the  suffering  that  follows 
from  human  sin,  and  yet  foreknowing  this  He  created  man.     How  is  this  reconciled 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  63 

with  His  love  ?  Well,  the  answer  which  we  are  going  to  consider  in  detail  is  this : 
Because  God  foreknew  how  out  of  suffering  He  could  work  gracious  purposes 
to  men.  Now,  the  first  of  these  purposes  is  this :  sufiFering  rightly  borne  purifies 
the  character,  and  sets  it  free  from  sin.  "  He  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier 
of  silver."  It  is  to  this  corrective  aspect  of  suffering  that  the  writer  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  turns  our  attention  in  the  12th  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews.  Let  us  look  at  the  text  itself  in  its  first  application.  Malachi  is  the 
last  of  the  prophets.  His  prophecy  synchronises  with  the  later  days  of  the  reign 
of  Nehemiah.  You  remember  what  the  story  is  that  is  told  us  of  the  religious 
position  of  Judah  and  Israel  in  Jerusalem  towards  the  end  of  Nehemiah's  reign. 
He  had  come  first  of  all  from  Babylon,  and  had  rebuilt  Jerusalem,  and  had  re- 
organised its  religious  and  its  social  Kfe  ;  then  he  had  gone  back  again  to  the 
court  of  his  king,  and  an  interval  of  some  years  intervenes.  During  this  time 
Israel  falls  into  a  position  of  religious  decay.  It  is  quite  true  that  she  no  longer 
reverts  to  idolatry  b&  before  she  had  gone  through  the  stern  discipline  of  the  Baby- 
lonish Captivity.  The  temple  services  are  maintained  with  regularity,  but  there  is 
gross  carelessness  in  the  ministries.  The  lame  and  the  blind  are  brought  near  to 
God,  as  if  they  were  worthy  offerings  to  be  laid  upon  His  altar.  Side  by  side 
with  this  careless,  irreverent  worship  we  see  worldliness.  The  sons  of  Israel  are 
joining  themselves  in  marriage  alliances  with  the  Gentile  heathen  around ;  and 
then,  of  course,  with  this  worldliness  there  is  a  great  deal  of  licentiousness  of  conduct, 
and  the  saddest  feature  about  the  whole  thing  is  this — that  lies  beneath  the  religious 
declension  of  the  people — the  corruption  of  the  priesthood.  The  national  life  is 
stained  by  that  which  is  immoral  in  the  conduct  of  the  priests  in  their  daily  Ufe. 
And  one  thing  is  necessary,  if  the  national  hfe  is  to  be  purified,  if  the  worship 
which  is  to  rise  from  the  Church  of  Israel  is  to  be  acceptable  with  God — there  must 
be  purification  of  the  nation,  and  the  necessary  preliminary  to  that  is  the  purifica- 
tion of  the  priesthood.  God  says  it  shall  come,  and  it  shall  come  of  suffering  ! 
Now,  the  symbolism  is  quite  clear,  is  it  not  ?  We  see  before  us  some  refining 
furnace  ;  the  fire  is  burning,  and  there  is  cast  into  that  furnace  ore  mingled  with 
dross  and  precious  metal.  Under  the  action  of  the  fire  the  dross  is  separated 
from  the  metal.  The  refiner  is  watching  the  process  of  purification  as  it  goes  on. 
At  length  the  separation  is  complete.  Here,  then,  is  given  to  us  the  picture  of 
om:  hfe.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  are  in  that  fire ;  we  have  seen  it.  Its  flames 
are  involving  every  portion  of  our  being.  But  why  ?  Well,  the  answer  that  is 
given  is  this:  for  the  purification  of  our  nature.  It  is  true,  by  the  action  of 
suffering  that  purification  is  wrought.  Just  see  how  true  this  is  in  instances 
with  which  we  are  familiar  in  the  Bible.  Recall  to  mind,  for  instance,  the  story  of 
the  conversion  of  the  woman  who  was  a  sinner.  In  her  time  of  indifference  and 
thoughtlessness  she  is  in  the  grip  of  her  sin.  Then  she  is  brought  to  the  sorrow, 
the  exquisite  suffering  of  contrition.  Or  take,  again,  another  instance  just  as 
simple.  Look  at  that  thief  as  he  hangs  at  the  side  of  our  Lord  upon  the  Cross. 
He  is  in  a  position  of  absolute  cleaving  to  his  sin,  and  the  words  that  he  casts  in 
the  teeth  of  the  Redeemer  are  words  of  reproach.  But  as  he  hangs  there  upon  the 
Cross,  and  draws  nigh  to  the  unseen  world,  he  is  prepared  to  receive  the  ministry  of 
Him  who  is  on  the  Cross  as  the  Refiner  and  Purifier  of  silver,  and  he,  too,  through 
the  pain  of  his  body,  through  what  he  is  suffering  materially  in  mind  and  heart 
and  will,  is  turned  to  the  Christ,  and  he  who  dies  as  the  outcast  of  men  is  the  first 
accepted  penitent  to  enter  Paradise  with  Christ.  And  just  as  we  see  that  it  is 
through  suffering  continually  that  men  are  first  of  all  turned  to  God  in  initial 
conversion,  so  it  if  in  hfe.  Of  coiu-se,  the  real  convert  in  the  moment  of  his  initial 
conversion  tiurns  from  his  sin  to  God  ;  but  what  the  sin  is  from  which  he  has  to 
turn  is  only  gradually  made  clear  to  him  as  he  goes  through  hfe,  and  not  imtil  we 
are  wholly  conformed  to  the  will  of  God  in  every  detail  of  hfe  and  character  is 
the  work  of  conversion  complete,  because  imtil  this  is  so  we  have  something  from 
which  to  turn  imto  our  God.  Take  two  simple  instances.  There  is  John  as  he 
comes  before  us  naturally  in  the  New  Testament ;  Boanerges,  the  Son  of  Thunder, 
said,  "  Lord,  wilt  Thou  that  we  command  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  and 
consume  them  even  as  Ehas  did  ?  "  Here  we  see  him  a  Christian  man  but  with 
undisciplined  zeal ;  he  has  not  zeal  tempered  with  charity.  Look  again  at  him 
when  he  has  reached  extreme  old  age,  and  when  he  hes  on  his  couch  at  Ephesus, 
with  Christians  gathered  round  him ;  and  this  is  the  burden  of  his  teaching, 
"  Little  children,  love  one  another."  Thus  we  see  the  fiery  zeal  of  the  youth 
turned  into  the  ripened  tenderness  of  the  dying  saint.     Take  another  instance. 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Look  at  Simon  Peter,  what  a  strangely  human  character  his  is.  At  JBrst  a  man 
carried  away  by  his  enthusiasms.  What  a  strange  mixture  there  is  in  his  character. 
Who  shall  separate  that  strength  from  that  weakness  ?  Well,  it  is  done.  You 
pass  on,  and  you  look  at  St.  Peter  in  his  own  epistles,  and  there  you  see  quiet, 
firm  strength  without  any  bluster.  He  has  acquired  spiritual  stability.  How  ? 
In  the  discipline  of  life.  And  so  it  is  always.  God  casta  us  into  the  furnace  of 
affliction  in  order  that  He  may  deal  with  us  just  as  that  one  is  dealt  with — separates 
in  us  that  which  is  displeasing  to  Himself  from  that  which  is  true  to  our  true  human 
nature,  and  He  purifies  us.  We  are  not  siu-prised,  therefore,  when  people  say  to 
us  we  are  simply  actors  in  our  rehgious  hfe.  It  is  not  true.  If  it  were  true  that 
all  hfe  was  unified,  that  man  was  either  wholly  of  the  world  or  wholly  of  God, 
then  the  criticism  would  be  true.  But  when  a  new  higher  nature  is  awakened 
within  me,  and  becomes  within  me  a  real  yearning,  yet  the  lower  nature  co-exists 
with  it.  How  different  a  person  I  am  in  one  house  to  what  I  am  in  another.  What 
a  different  person  I  am  when  I  am  kneehng  before  God — it  may  be  in  His  sanctuary 
• — lifted  up  to  the  worship  of  the  Eucharist,  and  what  I  am  when  I  find  myself, 
well,  in  my  own  home,  it  may  be  an  hour  afterwards.  And  yet  I  am  not  a  hypocrite 
in  either  case.  The  only  thing  is  that  there  is  brought  clearly  out  before  my  eyes 
the  co-existence  in  my  character  of  contradictory  forces.  There  is  dross  and 
there  is  gold.  What  do  I  want  ?  To  be  my  true,  better  self,  which,  God  knows, 
I  long  to  be,  and  which  I  am  not  sustainedly.  What  do  I  want  ?  Why,  plainly, 
the  setting  free  of  my  higher  self  from  all  the  power  of  this  lower  self.  I  want  to 
have  the  dross  purged  out  of  my  character,  I  want  to  be  purified  within.  And 
80  this  truth  comes  before  us :  God  has  a  loving  purpose  in  consigning  me  to  this 
great  world,  to  the  conditions  of  life  in  which  we  live.  It  is  the  essential  condition, 
as  far  as  we  see,  for  the  working  out  of  us  what  is  bad  and  what  is  mean,  and  for 
the  development  within  us  of  what  is  grand  and  beautiful  and  true.  Only,  we 
must  remember  this,  if  this  is  the  piu"pose  of  suffering,  it  is  not  always  an  attained 
purpose.  Certain  characters  very  often  deteriorate  imder  the  discipline  of  suffering. 
But  there  is  just  one  essential  condition  for  the  metal  which  is  cast  into  the 
furnace :  if  it  is  to  be  separated  from  the  dross  a  current  of  air  must  be  always 
breathing  over  the  living  flame ;  if  not,  the  effect  would  be  this,  that  instead  of  fire 
separating  the  metal  from  the  ore  it  would  cause  them  to  recombine,  and  under 
conditions  of  greater  fixity,  so  that  it  would  be  more  difficult  than  it  was  before 
to  purify  it.  Is  not  this  a  wonderful  parable  ?  It  is  only  when  suffering  is  borne 
in  God,  only  when  suffering  is  borne  through  the  action  within  us  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  true  wind  of  God,  that  it  is  a  purifying  force  within  us.  And  so  the 
first  essential  condition  of  our  being  purified  by  suffering  is  this,  that  we  give 
ourselves  to  God  up  to  the  measure  in  which  it  is  possible  for  us,  in  the  submission 
to  His  will,  to  endure  suffering.  Here,  as  ever,  we  are  face  to  face  with  that 
mystery  of  will.  The  issue  in  yovu*  character  and  mine  of  suffering  conditions 
\mder  which  we  live  our  lives  depends  entirely  on  the  posture  of  the  will.  If  we 
refuse  to  give  up  our  wills  to  God  our  characters  will  deteriorate  and  not  be  purified 
or  beautified.  And  the  second  thing  is  this,  is  it  not  ?  Giving  ourselves  thus 
up  to  God,  if  we  are  called  on  to  Uve  this  hfe  of  suffering  it  ought  to  be  a  hfe  in 
which  we  have  keen  reahsation  of  the  conditions  under  which  we  suffer  in  the 
thought  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Devotion  to  the  Holy  Ghost  is  of  great  importance 
in  every  aspect  of  our  Christian  hfe,  but  it  is  of  emphatic  importance  in  connection 
with  our  hfe  of  endurance  of  God's  discipline.  If  we  try  to  meet  it  with  fixity 
of  resolution,  with  solidarity  of  purpose,  we  shall  fail,  but  if  we  throw  ourselves 
upon  God  to  enable  us  by  His  Spirit  to  endure  the  suffering  which  He  lays  upon 
us,  in  simple  abandonment  to  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  shall  be  able  patiently 
to  endure.  Lastly,  remember  this.  All  the  time  the  process  of  the  refining 
of  the  silver  is  going  on  the  Refiner  is  watching.  So  it  is  here.  We  suffer  under 
His  watching  eye ;  we  suffer  for  the  realisation  of  the  dear  Lord's  loving 
purpose.  He  knows  what  we  suffer.  He  has  a  heart  that  can  understand.  He 
does  give  me  more  than  pity.  He  can  give  me  sympathy.  He  bears  with  me  so 
patiently.  He  comforts  me  so  t«nderly;  in  my  reDelhons  He  can  forgive  me 
60  continuously.  Yes,  Lord,  yes  ;  I  can  bear  these  fiery  burdens.  Within  the 
very  flames  I  will  look  up  and  see  Thy  loving  eye  fixed  on  me,  so  that  Thou 
knowest  where  I  am,  so  that  Thou  feelcst  for  me,  so  that  Thou  givest  me  effectual 
help.  [O.  Body.)  An  offering  in  righteousness. — An  acceptable  offering: — 
This  offering  was  presented  to  God  after  the  purification  of  His  people  had  taken 
place.     An   offering   in  righteousness.     I.    Must   have   nothing   unrightkous 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  ^ 

ASSOCIATBD  WITH  IT.  God  hates  robbery  for  burnt-offering.  Righteous  getting 
must  precede  righteous  giving.  Trade  morality  is  more  acceptable  in  God's 
sight  than  spurious  temple  munificence.  II.  Must  bb  presented  under 
THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RIGHT  EMOTIONS.  God  regards  the  impulses  that  stir  the 
offerer  more  than  the  offering.  It  is  for  the  offerer's  sake  that  He  requires  an 
offering.  In  presenting  our  offerings  rightly,  we  need — 1.  The  promptings  of 
love.  2.  The  inspiration  of  gratitude.  3.  The  ardour  of  consecration.  III.  Must 
BE  OFFERED  IN  A  RIGHT  WAY.  God  has  made  known  the  right  way  of  approach 
to  Himself.  1.  The  offering  must  be  presented  with  sincerity.  Insincerity  is 
unrighteous.  The  offering  must  be  made  to  God,  and  not  to  win  the  favour, 
admiration,  or  interest  of  men.  2.  The  offering  must  be  presented  with  humility. 
Self-righteousness  is  unrighteousness.  3.  The  offering  must  be  presented  with 
faith  in  God's  revelation  of  Himself  in  Christ.  IV.  Must  be  proportionate  to 
OUR  possessions.  For  the  rich  to  give  as  the  poor  is  unrighteous.  Our  possessions 
test  us.  Our  willing  offerings  to  God  often  manifest  the  righteousness  or  unrighteous- 
ness of  our  characters  as  nothing  else  does.  God  gives  to  us  that  we  may  have  the 
joy  of  giving  to  Him.  V.  Will  be  acceptable  to  God.  1.  The  righteous  offerings 
of  His  people  are  in  accordance  with  His  own  righteous  nature.  2.  They  manifest 
the  effects  of  His  grace  upon  their  hearts.  3.  They  tend  to  spread  the  knowledge 
of  His  benevolence  in  the  earth.     {W.  Osborne  Lilley.) 

Ver.  4.  The  days  of  old. — Past  days  : — Every  age  has  its  peculiar  features. 
It  is  a  duty  to  study  the  past.  A  knowledge  of  the  past  is  often  the  basis  of  safety 
in  the  present,  and  stability  in  the  future.  I.  The  days  of  old  have  created 
THE  present  days.  Time  is  a  development,  society  a  building,  humanity  a 
growth.  No  age  can  begin  for  itself.  The  past  surrounds  us  everywhere.  "  You 
will  find  fibrous  roots  of  this  day's  occurrences  among  the  dust  of  Cadmus  and 
Trismegistus,  of  Tubalcain  and  Triptolemus :  the  top-roots  of  them  are  with 
Father  Adam  himself  and  the  cinders  of  Eve's  first  fire." — Carlyle.  You  cannot 
understand  the  present  without  a  knowledge  of  the  past.  This  is  true  politically, 
socially,  and  reUgiously.  It  is  true  of  nations  and  of  each  individual  life.  II.  The 
days  of  old  are  full  of  examples  worthy  of  imitation.  "  History  is 
philosophy  teaching  by  examples." — Bolingbroke.  Jewish  history  was  full  of 
examples  that  might  have  improved  and  instructed  the  degenerate  age  in  which 
Malachi  lived.  Good  men's  lives  are  for  all  time.  They  are  God's  gifts  to  the 
world.  They  brighten  the  days  of  old  and  make  them  influential.  We  can  best 
discover  what  those  days  were  by  the  lives  of  the  men  who  lived  in  them — 

"  There  is  a  history  in  all  men's  lives 

Figuring  the  nature  of  the  times  deceased." — Shakespeare. 

One  age  may  imitate  another.  Biographies  teach  more  powerfully  than  philo- 
sophical deductions.  III.  The  days  of  old  are  full  of  Divine  revelations. 
God  reveals  Himself  in  many  ways.  Each  age  has  its  own  revelations.  God 
revealed  Himself  to  the  world  in  past  ages  as  He  does  not  now.  The  patriarchs, 
prophets,  and  apostles  had  visions  of  His  glory  denied  to  men  of  this  generation. 
God  was  manifested  in  the  flesh  in  days  of  old.  Heaven  seemed  nearer  to  the 
earth  then.  God  expects  us  to  learn  His  will  by  His  acts  in  past  times  ;  by  the 
working  out  of  His  purposes ;  by  rewarding  the  righteous  and  punishing  the 
wicked  ;  by  revealing  His  self-sacrificing  love  in  the  cross  of  Christ.  The  Bible 
is  God's  record  of  the  "  days  of  old."  We  may  learn  what  He  will  be  to  us  in 
om-  days  by  what  He  was  to  men  then.  His  faithfulness,  mercy,  and  truth  are 
written  unmistakably  on  those  wondrous  days.  IV.  The  days  of  old  should 
BE  SURPASSED  BY  THE  PRESENT  DAYS.  Men  should  be  more  virtuous  and  pure 
as  the  days  roll  on.  Human  experience  should  lead  to  advancement  in  holiness. 
All  departures  from  the  past  are  not  in  the  line  of  true  progress.  Some  ages 
have  prided  themselves  in  their  onward  movements  when  they  have  really  been 
retrograding.  Sad  when  in  the  life  of  a  nation,  or  in  the  life  of  a  man,  the  former 
days  are  nobler  than  the  present.  Ages  should  be  stepping  stones  for  humanity 
to  rise  to  God.  Every  age  should  be  an  advance  upon  that  which  has  preceded 
it.     (W.  Osborne  Lilley.) 

Ver.  5.  I  will  come  near  to  you  to  judgment — A  Divine  threatening  : — God 
comes  near  to  men  when  He  manifests  Himself  to  their  spiritual  consciousness. 
He  may  do  this  by  His  truth,  by  the  circumstances  which  He  causes  to  siuround 

5 


66  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

them,  or  by  the  direct  action  of  His  Spirit.  He  often  comes  near  to  men  to 
enlighten,  strengthen,  help,  and  save.  He  will  come  near  to  the  wicked  to  judge 
and  punish  them.  Observe — I.  This  threatening  was  utteeed  against 
WORKERS  OF  INIQUITY.  Jerusalem  abounded  with  evil-doers.  The  wizards 
deluded  the  people  with  their  arts,  the  adulterers  lurked  in  the  twilight  for  their 
prey,  false  witnesses  perjured  themselves  for  a  bribe,  the  covetous  robbed  the 
hireling  of  his  wages  and  defrauded  the  widow,  the  stranger,  and  the  fatherless  ; 
all  fear  of  God  had  departed  from  their  eyes.  Against  these  His  anger  burned. 
The  righteous  had  nothing  to  fear  from  His  judgments.  His  nearness  was  their 
joy.  But  the  wicked  would  be  filled  with  terror  as  His  presence  flashed  through 
all  their  sheltering  deceits  upon  their  souls.  Workers  of  iniquity  may  deny  the 
existence  of  the  God  of  judgment,  but — (1)  He  is  a  witness  of  all  their  deeds. 
(2)  His  displeasure  is  awakened  against  them.  (3)  He  sends  His  servants  to 
declare  His  certain  judgment  upon  them.  II.  This  threatening  was  uttered 
BY  Him  who  is  the  sole  Judge  of  all  men.  God  alone  has  the  right  to  threaten 
judgment  on  men.     He  alone  can  judge  men  truly. 

"  What's  done  we  partly  can  compute. 
But  know  not  what's  resisted." — Burns. 

He  knows  all.  He  is  the  Creator  of  men.  The  evil-doer  has  violated  His  laws. 
His  judgment  will  be  just,  final,  and  certainly  executed.  God  threatens  before 
He  strikes.  His  judgment  will  be  individual.  He  will  come  near  to  every  man, 
and,  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  presence,  the  evil  of  every  man's  life  will  be  made 
manifest  to  himself,  and  he  will  feel  the  justice  of  the  sentence  passed  upon  him. 
The  bitterness  of  the  doom  of  the  lost  will  be  their  consciousness  that  they  have 
merited  it.  God's  judgment  on  a  man's  completed  life  will  fix  his  destiny.  God's 
eternal  supremacy,  absolute  knowledge,  inflexible  justice,  and  spotless  holiness 
constitute  Him  judge  of  all.  It  is  He  who  threatens  the  sinner.  III.  This 
threatening  will  be  certainly  fulfilled.  Obstinate  evil  workers  may 
close  their  ears  to  this  solemn  threatening,  may  make  themselves  callous  by 
sophistries,  may  harden  themselves  in  a  false  security  by  foolish  infatuations, 
may  abuse  the  Divine  mercy  that  is  reluctant  to  punish,  yet  judgment  will  certainly 
come  upon  them,  to  their  dismay  and  destruction.  1.  God's  character  ensures 
the  fulfilment  of  this  threatening.  2.  History  and  human  life  are  full  of  events 
that  foreshadow  its  fulfilment.  3.  The  consciences  of  men  in  all  countries  have, 
in  a  measure,  anticipated  its  fulfilment.  4.  The  Scriptures  constantly  reiterate 
this  threatening,  and  declare  that  it  shall  be  fulfilled.  5.  The  indication  of 
God's  administration  over  mankind  requires  its  fulfilment.  As  Luthardt  says : 
"  Divine  justice  must  have  the  last  word.  It  has  long  suffered  men — suffered 
sinners — to  speak.  But  the  last  word  will  be  its  own  ;  and  this  word  must  be 
a  word  of  retaliation,  for  it  is  the  word  of  a  Judge."     IV.  This  threatening 

SHOULD    AWAKEN    REFLECTION,    REPENTANCE,    AND    REFORMATION.       The    peril    of 

the  worker  of  evil  is  great  and  imminent.  God's  anger  abides  upon  him.  To 
the  eye  of  his  Judge  his  sins  have  no  covering.  God,  who  has  loved  him  with 
infinite  tenderness,  must  destroy  him  unless  he  repents.  Repentance  averts 
judgment.  A  reformed  life,  by  the  power  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  is  the  only 
means  of  escape  from  ruin.  To  those  who  turn  from  their  iniquities  God  comes 
near  to  comfort,  not  to  condemn.  (W.  Osborne  Lillcy.)  God's  law  of  judg- 
ment : — There  is  no  scene  in  history  more  full  of  moving  pathos  than  that  of 
Christ  wecpinc  over  Jerusalem.  The  city  was  there  right  before  His  eyes  in 
her  matchless  beauty.  "  He  who  has  not  seen  the  temple  of  Herod,"  said 
a  contemporary  rabbi,  "  does  not  know  what  beauty  is."  The  Roman  Pliny 
said,  "  By  far  the  most  glorious  city  not  of  Judfea  only,  but  of  the  whole  East, 
is  Jerusalem."  But  as  our  Lord  had  seen  through  her  religious  ritual,  so  He 
sees  through  the  splendour  of  her  situation  and  her  buildings  the  moral  horror 
beneath.  "  O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  !  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy 
children  together  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wing,  and  ye 
would  not.  Behold  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  And  so  He  pronounces 
over  them  that  solemn  prophecy  of  the  degradation  and  destruction  that  were 
to  come.  True  it  is  that  the  prophecy  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  is  also  a 
prophecy  of  the  moral  end  of  all  things.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  is  a  type 
of  that  judgment  with  which  God  shall  at  last  and  in  the  end  judge  at  their  true 
moral  value  all  Iiuman  institutions.  And  the  point  is  that  Jerusalem  was  destroyed 
because  she  rejected  Christ.     That  is  an  historical  fact.     I  mean  the  temper 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  67 

which  caused  her  final  destruction  was  simply  the  same  as  the  temper  which  caused 
her  to  reject  Christ.  She  rejected  Christ  because  of  that  narrow,  self-eatisfied 
Jewish  pride  which  refused  to  allow  her  to  admit  the  larger  light.  And  it  all 
happened  naturally :  you  can  read  it  in  the  pages  of  the  modem  historian — it 
all  happened  by  natural  laws,  natural  sequences.  And  yet  it  is — as  in  the  mind 
of  our  Lord,  so  to  the  imagination  of  all  time — the  very  type  of  what  we  mean  by  a 
Divine  judgment  upon  a  nation  for  her  sin.  I  beUeve  this  in  particular  is  our 
intellectual  vocation  and  duty  to-day,  to  reaUse  that  natural  laws  are  God's 
methods,  and  that  it  is  not  the  less  but  rather  the  more  His  working,  because  He 
works  by  ordinary  sequences,  and  by  what  we  call  natural  causes  in  the  govern- 
ment of  men  as  of  the  world.  The  old  idea  of  a  Divine  judgment  was  of  something 
arbitrary,  violent,  disconnected  ;  a  favourite  type  for  judgment  was  an  earth- 
quake, because  an  earthquake  is  something  which  cannot  be  put  into  any  con- 
nection with  any  works  of  men.  God  forbid  that  we  should  deny  that  there  are 
judgments  of  this  kind.  If  we  admit  evidence,  which  we  ought  to  do,  we  must 
admit  there  have  been  miraculous  acts  of  God,  but  this  is  not  the  normal  way 
in  which  God  acts.  What  we  have  to  learn  is  that  God  is  the  God  of  order  and 
of  law,  and  that  because  He  proceeds  by  natural  law  it  is  not  less  God,  the  moral 
Governor  of  the  world,  who  is  at  work  among  us.  A  disease  is  a  judgment, 
because  it  springs  from  our  vices.  We  are  continually  confronted  with  it :  we 
see  it ;  perhaps  at  the  particular  moment  we  may  see  it  with  special  emphasis. 
Diseases  follow  our  vices,  our  lusts.  The  duty  of  our  piety  in  this  present  day 
is  to  be  taught  by  God  to  see  into  the  hand  of  God,  to  search  out  what  are  the 
methods  by  which  these  things  happen,  to  seek  to  stanch  the  sources  of  the  evil, 
but  always  to  recognise  that  as  the  source  is  moral  so  the  only  true  and  vital  remedies. 
Our  piety  hes  in  recognising  this.  There  are  natural  judgments  that  spring  from 
moral  causes ;  these  are  God's  judgments.  "  Providence,"  a  cynic  remarks, 
"  is  to  be  observed  generally  on  the  side  of  the  strongest  battahons."  Perfectly 
true  !  But  the  moral  quahties  of  nations  and  of  individuals  have  a  remarkable 
power,  as  shown  by  history,  to  strengthen  or  to  weaken  the  battalion  in  the  long 
run.  History  is  full  of  these  things.  We  know  the  temper  of  the  French  aris- 
tocracy at  the  birth  of  the  French  Revolution.  Carlyle  has  described  it  to  us 
in  a  spirit  which  is  really  prophetic.  We  know  their  moral  bhndness,  we  know 
their  selfishness,  and  we  know  the  result.  The  French  Revolution  was  no  less  a 
Divine  judgment  upon  the  aristocracy,  upon  the  Church,  because  the  instruments 
of  it  were  very  often  reckless  and  godless  and  wicked  men  !  There  is  no  country 
which  has  for  the  traveller  a  greater  pathos  at  the  present  day  than  Spain.  And 
why  ?  Because  everywhere  we  see  amid  great  natural  beauty  the  traces  of  the 
Divine  judgment.  There  is  in  the  present  nothing  to  stir  any  hope,  any  feeling 
of  a  prospect  or  of  a  future  for  that  nation,  but  yet  the  very  soil  is  stre\vn  with  the 
marks  and  the  memory  of  great  civilisation.  We  ask,  "  Why  did  she  fall  ?  " 
And  the  history  is  written,  it  was  for  moral  quahties  that  she  fell.  They  are 
discoverable ;  you  can  put  your  finger  upon  them  and  mark  them  in  the  pages 
of  history.  No  doubt  the  world  as  it  is  at  present  presents  to  us  no  complete 
picture  of  the  moral  goremment  of  God,  but  at  the  end  we  know  we  shall  see  that 
God's  government  has  detailed  for  each  particular  institution,  as  for  each  partic- 
ular individual,  a  judgment  according  to  righteousness  and  truth.  When  human 
history  is  wound  up  there  shall  be  none  who  can  fail  to  recognise  that  God  is  a  God 
of  judgment.  But  for  the  present  it  is  not  so.  The  eyes  of  those  who  believe  in 
God  are  strained  to  see  some  indication  of  His  moral  government,  and  find  it  hard 
to  trace  them  in  the  facts  of  the  world.  Prophets  and  psalmists  call  out,  "How 
long,  0  Lord,  how  long  !  How  long,  holy  and  true  ?  "  but  meanwhile  the  attitude 
of  one  who  Ijelieves  in  the  moral  government  of  God  is  always  the  same.  He 
looks  out  upon  the  world,  and  he  expects  God  to  govern  not  only  individuals, 
but  classes,  nations,  and  institutions  by  natural  laws,  but  with  moral  results. 
This  he  expects,  and  I  ask  you.  Was  there  ever  a  time  when  there  was  greater 
need  to  remember  this  than  there  is  now  ?  In  the  government  of  nations,  in  their 
relations  to  one  another,  in  the  relations  of  classes,  in  the  structiu-e  of  society, 
in  the  deahng  with  institutions,  there  is  a  tendency  to  banish  morals  from  poUtics 
and  from  commerce,  and  it  seems  as  if,  in  spite  of  resistance,  the  tendency  were 
augmenting.  But  look  out  upon  our  commerce.  Think  of  it !  The  unblushing 
eelfishness  and  imscrupulousness  of  the  great  companies  and  trusts,  the  unblushing 
prevalence  of  bribery  under  the  name  of  commission,  the  scandalous  Ij'ing  and 
trickery  in  the  details  of  retail  trade  !     Well,  then,  if  we  beUeve  in  the  moral 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

government  of  God,  we  need  not  be  prophets,  we  need  not  be  able  to  discern  with 
any  certainty  the  tendency  of  things,  or  their  outcome,  but  at  least  we  anticipate 
and  expect  that  in  proportion  to  the  deep  and  widespread  character  of  this  moral 
hollowness  there  will  be  judgment  by  natural  law,  a  judgment  of  God.  The  chief 
way  in  which  we  can  do  any  good  socially,  or  look  out  with  fresh  ej'es  upon  the 
great  world  outside  us,  is  by  attending  to  religion  in  our  own  souls,  no  doubt. 
There,  too,  let  us  think  how  God  comes  near  to  us  in  judgment.  The  penitent 
is  ready  to  be  punished.  But  you  will  say,  "  Of  com'se,  I  know  unrepented  sin 
has  to  be  punished,  but  then  I  am  forgiven.  Do  you  talk  of  pimishing  me,  then  ?  " 
Shall  we  never  learn  that  lesson  !  Shall  we  always  go  on  thinking  and  talking 
as  if  to  be  forgiven  meant  to  be  let  oS,  as  if  Cliri.st's  atonement  was  suflcTin^ 
punishment  in  order  that  we  might  go  scot-free  ?  Christ  made  Himself  the 
sacrifice  for  our  sins  in  order  that  He  might  bring  us  nearer  to  God.  We  are 
indeed  exempted  from  that  which  is  the  truest  and  deepest  and  most  terrible 
pimishment — the  alienation  from  God,  and  ail  that  t'lat  involves,  the  gna'.^'ing 
worm,  the  devouring  fire,  which  sin  is — from  that,  indeed.  He  delivers  us  in  bringing 
us  near  to  God,  but  from  the  punishment  which  lies  in  bearing  the  couseq  enccj 
of  sin  there  is  not  one  word  in  the  New  Testament  which  would  lead  you  to  suppose 
that  you  were  to  be  exempted.  On  the  contrary.  He  has  brought  you  into  that 
new  relation  to  God  in  order  that  you  may  learn  how  to  bear  it.  For  judgment, 
whether  on  nations  or  on  individuals,  need  not  be  final  judgment.  The  great 
multitude  of  Divine  judgments  are  His  deepest  and  most  effective  corrective 
agencies.  Oh  !  let  us  learn  that  lesson.  There  is  the  piu-pose  of  God  the  Father 
with  regard  to  the  world — a  large  purpose,  an  eternal  purpose,  a  wise  purpose. 
There  is  only  one  hindrance  to  that  purpose  of  God,  but  it  is  deep  and  wide  and 
terrible  :  it  is  the  hindrance  of  sin  in  individuals,  in  classes,  in  nations.  Sin  may 
rim  to  the  point  when  it  passes  beyond  the  Divine  law,  but  God  will  do  His  utmost, 
and  among  His  most  effective  instruments  are  the  instruments  of  judgments. 
Judgments  are  intended  to  purify.  The  first  thought  of  judgment  or  of  mis- 
fortune ought,  to  the  Christian  conscience,  to  be  this,  "  It  is  given  to  cleanse  me. 
God  is  visiting  me.  I  am  to  be  purified.  He  punishes  me  because  He  has  a 
purpose  for  me.  To  feel  the  hand  of  God  is  to  know  that  I  am  to  be  dealt  with 
to  my  eternal  enrichment  and  blessedness."     {Charles  Gore.) 

Ver.  6.  For  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not ;  therefore,  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not 
consumed.  —  The  Divine  anchangenhlencss  :  —  Here,  in  the  land  of  our  exile,  we 
must  live  by  faith,  not  by  sight.  Fear  of  Him  who  is  the  unchangeable  Majesty 
is  more  suitable  for  us  whilst  we  are  here,  than  to  rejoice  and  be  glad.  We  now 
speak  of  that  glorious  and  incomparable  attribute,  the  Divine  unchangeableness. 
Changeableness  is  the  note  of  all  things  here  below :  but  He  takes  here  to  Himself 
a  more  excellent  name,  and  who  can  doubt  that  which  He  hath  spoken  ?  When 
we  seriously  reflect  on  the  unchangeableness  of  God,  we  find  that  He  is  such  a 
One,  notwithstanding  of  all  His  infinite  works  and  varieties  of  dispensations 
that  come  from  Him,  as  yet  remains  unchangeable.  All  things  remain  in  a 
circuit  of  being  and  not  being  ;  and  even  such  things,  when  they  have  a  being, 
remain  changeable.  But,  to  speak  of  God's  unchangeableness,  it  is  held  forth 
that  He  is  void  of  all  variableness  and  corruption,  and  that  He,  in  the  blessed 
purpose  of  His  goodwill,  in  void  of  an 3'^  shadow  of  changeableness ;  He  is  unchange- 
able in  His  essence,  in  respect  of  this,  that  He  is  void  of,  and  cannot  be  subject 
to,  corruption.  That  He  is  void  of  all  alteration,  and  infinitely  )ierfect,  proves 
sufficiently  His  being  both  sufficient,  and  all-sufficient.  Wherein  can  man  be 
profitable  to  God  ?  His  perfection  cannot  be  found  out.  He  is  infinite  in  His 
omnipotcncy  ;  in  His  understanding  and  knowledge  ;  and  He  is  unchangeable 
in  His  love.  Consider  the  advantages  a  Christian  may  have,  in  this  consideration, 
that  God  is  unchangeable.  1.  It  is  an  excellent  way  to  keep  the  grace  of  love 
growing  in  the  Christian.  2.  It  is  an  immutable  and  irresistible  way  to  keep  life 
in  the  exercise  of  faith.  O,  for  the  faitli  to  believe  that  God  cannot  nor  will  change 
His  immutable  purpose.  3.  The  attaining  to  much  Divine  patience  and  sub- 
mission, under  all  sad  dispensations.  4.  We  come  to  the  distinct  persuasion, 
that  the  "  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance."  5.  Ihe  mortification 
of  all  things  here  below.  6.  Miich  joy  and  satisfaction,  for  the  heirs  of  God  have 
strong  consolation.  {A.  Gray.)  The  immutability  of  God: — The  highest 
science,  the  loftiest  speculation,  the  mightiest  philosophy,  which  can  ever  engage 
the  attention  of  a  child  of  God,  is  the  name,  the  nature,  the  person,  the  work. 


CHAP,  in.]  MALACHI. 


the  doings,  and  the  existence  of  the  great  God  whom  he  calls  his  Father.  There 
is  something  exceedingly  improving  to  the  mind  in  a  contemplation  of  the  Divinity. 
No  subject  of  contemplation  will  tend  more  to  humble  the  mind  than  thoughts 
of  God.  But  while  the  subject  humbles  the  mind  it  also  expands  it.  And  the 
subject  is  eminently  consolatory.  In  contemplating  Christ,  there  is  a  balm  for 
every  wound  ;  in  musing  on  the  Father,  a  quietus  for  every  grief,  and  in  the 
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  there  is  a  balsam  for  every  sore.  One  subject  we 
treat  now — the  immutability  of  the  glorious  Jehovah.     I.  An  unchanging  God. 

1.  He  changes  not  in  His  essence.  We  cannot  tell  you  the  substance  of  what 
we  call  God.  Whatever  it  is,  we  call  it  His  essence,  and  that  essence  never  changes. 
The  substance  of  mortal  things  is  ever  changing.  AU  creatures  change.  But 
God  is  perpetually  the  same.  He  is  Spirit-pure,  essential,  etherial  spirit — and 
therefore  He  is  immutable.  His  essence  did  not  midergo  any  change  when  it 
was  united  with  the  manhood.  2.  He  changes  not  in  His  attributes.  Apply  to 
His  power,  wisdom,  justice,  truth,  goodness,  love.  Take  any  one  thing  that 
you  can  say  of  God  now,  and  it  may  be  said  not  only  in  the  dark  past,  but  in  the 
bright  future  it  shall  always  remain  the  same.  3.  He  changes  not  in  His  plans. 
Has  it  ever  been  said  that  God  began  to  build  but  was  not  able  to  finish  ?  God 
altereth  not  His  plans.  Why  should  He  ?  He  is  the  All-Wise,  and  cannot  have 
planned  wrongly.  4.  He  changes  not  in  His  promises.  I  want  immutable  things  ; 
and  I  find  that  I  have  immutable  promises  when  I  turn  to  the  Bible.  .5.  He 
changes  not  in  His  thrcatenings.  6.  He  changes  not  in  the  objects  of  His  love — 
not  only  in  His  love,  but  in  the  objects  of  it.  II.  The  proof  that  God  is 
UNCHANGEABLE.  The  Very  existence  and  being  of  a  God  seem  to  me  to  imply 
immutability.  An  argument  may  be  found  in  the  fact  of  God's  perfection. 
Another  in  God's  infinity.  From  the  past  we  may  gather  proof.  "  Hath  He 
spoken,  and  hath  He  not  done  it  ?  "  III.  The  persons  to  whom  this  unchange- 
able  God  is  a  benefit.      "  Sons  of  Jacob."     1.  The   sons  of  God's   election. 

2.  Persons  who  enjoy  peculiar  rights  and  titles.  3.  Men  of  peculiar  manifestations. 
4.  Men  of  peculiar  trials.  5.  Men  of  peculiar  character.  IV.  The  benefit  which 
the  sons  of  Jacob  receive  from  an  unchanging  God.  "  Not  consumed." 
How  can  man  be  consumed  ?  In  two  ways.  We  might  have  been  consumed 
in  holl.  We  might  have  been  left  to  our  own  devices,  and  then  where  would 
you  have  been  now  ?  Remember,  then,  that  God  is  the  same,  whatever  may 
be  removed.  There  is  one  place  where  change  cannot  put  his  finger ;  there  is 
one  Name  on  which  mutability  can  never  be  written  ;  there  is  one  heart  that 
can  never  alter.  That  heart  is  God's — that  name  is  Love.  (C.  U.  Spurgcon.) 
God's  immutahle  mercy  the  refuge  of  His  people  : — The  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  prophet, 
is  here  recalling  the  Jewish  nation  to  a  recollection  of  their  transgressions,  and 
particularly  with  regard  to  God's  own  ordinances.  In  the  words  before  us  there 
is  vast  consolation.  I.  What  Jehovah  is  in  Himself.  "  I  change  not."  It  is 
the  Lord  Jesus  who  is  spoken  of.  He  for  whom  John  Baptist  prepared  the  way. 
Our  glorious  Lord  stands  recorded  in  this  chapter  as  Jehovah,  self-existent,  one 
with  the  Father  and  the  Spirit.  Ihe  immutability  of  Christ  is  a  sweet  truth. 
It  is  frequently  mentioned  or  referred  to  in  Scripture.  2.  His  covenant,  like 
Himself,  is  eternal.  God's  mind  is  eternal.  He  who  is  so  immutable  in  Himself, 
and  in  His  own  purposes,  wiU  do  all  His  pleasure,  and  His  counsel  shall  stand. 
He  sweetly  speaks  for  the  comfort  and  peace  of  sinners,  brought  to  the  feet  of 
Jesus.  There  is  no  possibility  of  failure ;  His  infinite  wisdom  has  provided  for 
every  emergency ;  His  infinite  foreknowledge  foresees  all  the  obstacles  that 
ever  did  or  ever  wiU  arise  to  counteract  His  own  plans  ;  His  infinite  power  is 
sure  to  carry  His  plans  into  effect.  God  is  as  true  in  His  tlireatenings  as  in  His 
promises.  This  is  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the  Jewish  nation.  Whilst,  however, 
these  witnesses  stand  before  us,  to  teach  us  that  God  is  faithful,  let  us  remember 
that  the  God  who  is  thus  faithful  in  His  promises  and  in  His  threatenings  has 
been  pleased  also  in  His  Word  to  give  poor  souls  this  blessed  testimony — that 
the  seed  of  Jacob  shall  never  seek  His  face  in  vain.  {F.  Silver.)  Of  the  im- 
mutability of  God : — I.  The  nature  of  this  Divine  attribute.  1.  In  respect 
of  His  essence,  God  is  absolutely  unchangeable,  because  His  being  is  necessary, 
and  His  essence  self-existent.  2.  In  respect  of  His  perfections  God  is  absolutely 
imchangeable.  Concerning  those  perfections  which  flow  necessarily  from  His 
essence,  and  depend  not  on  His  will,  this  is  self-evident ;  because  whatever 
necessarily  flows  from  any  cause  or  principle  must  likewise  of  necessity  be  as 
invariable  as  the  cause  or  principle  from  which  it  necessarily  proceeds.     Of  this 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  nx. 

kind  are  the  power,  the  knowledge,  the  wisdom,  and  the  other  natural  attributes 
of  God.  Concerning  those  perfections,  the  exercise  whereof  depends  upon  His 
will ;  such  as  justice,  veracity,  goodness,  mercy,  and  all  other  moral  perfections, 
the  absolute  immutability  of  these  is  not,  indeed,  so  obvious  and  self-evident ; 
because  it  depends  on  the  unchangeableness,  not  only  of  His  essence,  but  of  His 
will  also.  But  in  a  Being  who  always  knows  what  is  right  to  be  done,  and  can 
never  possibly  be  deceived,  the  general  will  or  intention  must  be  unchangeable. 
3.  In  the  particular  decrees  and  purposes  of  His  will — in  His  laws,  promises, 
and  threatenings.  Having  all  power  and  all  knowledge.  He  can  never  resolve 
upon  anything  which  shall  be  either  not  possible  or  not  reasonably  to  be  accom- 
plished. All  finite  beings  are  frequently  forced  to  change  their  designs,  because 
they  find  it  impossible  to  finish  what  they  began,  or  unreasonable  to  pursue  their 
first  intention.  But  in  God  these  things  have  no  place.  He  is  unchangeable 
in  His  decrees  and  purposes,  because,  having  all  things  in  His  power,  and  compre- 
hending all  things  in  His  foreknowledge.  He  can  by  no  force  be  overruled,  by 
no  surprise  or  unexpected  accident  be  prevented.  In  His  laws  God  is  unchange- 
able, because  they  are  always  founded  on  the  same  immutable  reason,  the  eternal 
differences  of  good  and  evil,  the  original  nature  of  things,  and  universal  equity  ; 
and  they  always  t«nd  to  the  same  regular  end,  the  order  and  happiness  of  the 
whole  creation.  In  His  covenants  or  promises  God  is  unchangeable.  Because 
they  are  founded  upon  such  grounds  as  cannot  be  altered  ;  even  upon  the  original, 
fixed,  and  permanent  designs  and  intentions  of  all-wise  providence.  In  His 
thieatenings  God  is  unchangeable,  that  is  to  say,  in  such  threatenings  as  are 
not  merely  personal.  Because,  as  His  love  to  virtue  and  goodness  is  luialterable, 
BO  His  hatred  to  vice  is  irreconcilable.  And  also  because  these  threatenings 
are  often  prophetic  parts  of  the  general  scheme  of  providence.  Against  this 
unchangeableness  of  God  it  may  be  urged,  that  Scripture  frequently  represents 
Him  as  repenting  and  changing  His  purpose.  Reply,  that  while  the  declarations 
of  the  designs  and  purposes  of  God,  which  are  prophetic  of  the  great  events  of 
providence,  are  in  themselves  absolutely  fixed  and  unalterable ;  those  promises 
and  threatenings  which  are  merely  personal,  either  to  any  particular  man  or  to 
any  number  of  men,  are  always  conditional,  because  the  wisdom  of  God  thought 
fit  to  make  these  depend  on  the  behaviour  of  men  ;  and  the  unchangeableness 
characterises  the  conditions.  II.  Uses  of  this  discoukse.  1.  The  vmchange- 
ableness  of  God  is  to  good  men  at  all  times  the  greatest  possible  security  that 
they  shall  not  finally  fail  to  be  happy.  2.  The  thieatenings  of  Him  whose  nature 
and  perfections  are  unchangeable  ought  to  be  a  perpetual  terror  to  impenitent 
sinners.  3.  The  consideration  of  the  mercy  of  Him  who  is  imchangeable  in  His 
perfections  ought  to  be  a  constant  encouragement  to  such  as  are  truly  penitent, 
and  sincerely  desirous  to  amend.  4.  As  unchangeableness  is  an  excellency  and 
perfection  in  God,  so  in  man,  on  the  contrary,  to  change  his  opinion  and  manner 
of  acting,  when  there  is  just  cause  to  do  so,  is  one  of  his  greatest  commendations. 
Right  and  truth  are  to  be  followed  \mchangeably,  but  when  frail  and  fallible 
man  finds  he  has  erred  from  what  is  true  and  right  he  must  immediately  return 
to  it.  {8.  Clarke,  D.D.)  The  immutahility  of  God: — Each  property  and 
perfection  of  God's  character  and  being  produces  its  own  peculiar  effect  upon 
the  renewed  mind  ;  and,  although  no  one  by  searching  can  find  out  the  Almighty 
to  perfection,  yet  the  higher  we  soar  in  our  contemplations  of  Him  the  more  we 
eball  be  excited  to  wonder,  love,  and  adore.  The  more  we  tliink  upon  God  tha 
more  shall  we  be  constrained  to  exclaim,  "  How  incomprehensible  art  Thou  !  " 
True  religion  and  pure  and  spiritual  enjoyment  do  not  proceed  from  the  know- 
ledge of  some  of  God's  attributes  only,  nor  from  a  merely  speculative  knowledge 
of  all.  All,  when  experimentally  and  practically  considered,  are  engaged  in 
producing  piety  and  dfevotion  in  the  human  soul.  1.  The  immutability  of  God 
is  not  only  revealed  in  the  Bible,  but  is  discoverable  by  reason.  Mutability 
implies  cause.  Where  can  we  imagine  there  exists  a  cause  that  can  change  the 
being  or  attributes  of  the  Deity  ?  He  can  Himself  never  possess  a  desire  to 
change.  All  possible,  as  well  as  all  past,  present,  and  future,  sources  of  pleasure 
are  always  open  to  Him.  And  He  is  independent  for  pleasure  on  all  these.  Does 
a  power  of  producing  change  in  God  exist  in  His  creatures  ?  God,  who  is  infinite, 
must  be  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  any  external  and  finite  cause.  All  are  de- 
pendent on  Him,  but  He  is  dependent  on  none.  2.  God's  purposes  are  immut- 
able. God  foresees  from  the  eternity  past  all  the  transactions  of  the  eternity 
to  oom«.     No  sudden  event,  therefore,  can  take  Him  unawaxee,  and  so  subvert 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  71 

His  designs.  The  plans  of  men  may  be  frustrated  by  a  slight  unforeseen  accident, 
but  there  are  no  accidents  with  "  Him  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel 
of  His  own  will."  Note  the  sense  in  which  the  term  "  repentance  "  is  in  Scripture 
applied  to  God.  Divine  repentance  conveys  no  notion  of  regret  or  dissatisfaction 
with  His  past  procedure,  but  it  is  expressive  of  God's  determination  to  act  in  a 
diflferent  manner  than  before  towards  those  who  by  their  change  of  conduct  have 
rendered  necessary  a  different  mode  of  procedure  in  the  just  administration  of 
God's  moral  government.  The  immutability  of  God's  purposes  may  be  inferred 
from  the  nattrre  of  the  end,  to  promote  and  consummate  which  they  are  all  but 
means — even  the  manifestation  of  Jehovah's  all-sufficiency.  Let  the  immuta- 
bility of  Jehovah's  purpose  in  Christ  Jesus  encourage  the  Christian  labourer  to 
ceaseless  exertions  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  3.  God's  Word  is  imchangeable. 
His  moral  law,  threatenings,  and  promises  are  alike  imalterable.  The  Divine 
moral  law,  which  is  a  transcript  of  the  character  of  God,  "  holy,  just,  and  good," 
is  based  upon  eternal  and  unchangeable  principles  of  rectitude,  co-existent  with 
God  Himself,  and  must  continue  to  exist  as  long  as  God  exists.  It  is  a  great 
mistake  to  suppose  that  the  moral  law  has  been  abrogated  by  the  Gospel.  The 
work  of  Him  who  "  hath  magnified  the  law  and  made  it  honourable"  is  the  sole 
ground  of  our  restoration  to  the  favour  of  God  and  ovir  title  to  heaven.  The 
Gospel  does  not  abolish  the  behever's  obligation  to  obey  the  law.  To  demolish 
the  law  would  be  to  drag  away  the  pillar  which  supports  the  iiniversal  fabric 
of  God's  moral  government.  God's  threatenings  too  are  unalterable.  History, 
sacred  and  profane,  teems  with  fearful  proofs  of  God's  immutable  hatred  of  sin, 
and  determination  not  to  let  it  go  unpunished.  And  the  promises  of  God  are 
immutable.  They  cannot  fail  of  fulfilment.  But  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises 
is  conditional ;  and  the  condition  is  as  imalterable  as  the  promise.  There  is  an 
immutable  promise  suitable  for  every  circumstance  of  life.  How  well  calculated 
is  the  contemplation  of  the  Divine  immutability  to  promote  confidence  in  Grod. 
Our  whole  happiness  depends  upon  the  immutability  of  God.  God  is  unchange- 
able, and  is  therefore  a  firm  and  stable  refuge  to  the  believer.  {J.  James.)  The 
•unchangeableness  of  Ood  : — I.  Hh  is  xtnchangeable  in  His  Being.  Change  is 
impossible.  Created  and  dependent  beings  have  the  law  of  development  and 
decay  in  them  ;  imperfect  beings  may  become  more  or  less  perfect,  but  God, 
being  separate  from  all  these  contingencies  of  existence,  cannot  change.  2.  He 
is  unchangeable  in  His  attributes.  All  the  excellences  that  He  possesses  He  has 
possessed,  and  will  possess,  for  eVer.  His  creatures  may  understand  them  more 
or  less  perfectly,  but  there  is  no  change  in  them.  There  can  be  no  increase  or 
diminution  of  His  power,  wisdom,  holiness,  love,  &c.  3.  He  is  unchangeable  in 
His  purposes.  All  His  designs  are  from  eternity.  His  knowledge  and  power 
being  perfect,  and  His  will  having  no  variableness  in  it,  there  is  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  any  of  His  purposes  have  altered,  or  that  any  of  them  can  fail. 
Nothing  can  be  a  surprise  to  Him,  nothing  can  thwart  Him,  and  nothing  can 
suggest  an  improvement  in  His  plans.  When  He  is  said  to  repent  or  turn  aside 
from  His  purpose,  it  is  to  show  us  that  He  is  not  an  impassive  spectator  in  human 
aifairs,  and  that  men  may  expect  to  be  truly  blessed  as  they  co-operate  with 
Him  in  working  out  His  holy  wiU  in  the  earth.  History  testifies  to  God's  un- 
changeableness. His  purpose  to  bless  all  men  in  Christ,  like  a  thread  of  gold, 
runs  through  the  ages.  4.  He  is  luichangeable  in  the  principles  of  His  govern- 
ment He  reigns  over  the  whole  universe  with  calm  and  equitable  sway. 
Intellectual  beings,  myriads  of  ages  before  this  race  peopled  the  earth,  foimd 
His  reign  the  same  as  we  do  now.  He  has  ever  been  just  and  merciful,  and  ever 
will  be.  There  can  be  no  fickleness,  no  uncertainty,  with  Him.  Those  who 
maintain  their  original  righteousness,  or  having  sinned,  accept  of  His  mercy, 
are  blessed,  while  those  who  obstinately  rebel  perish.  5.  His  unchangeableness 
does  not  involve  fatalism,  impassiveness,  or  necessity.  His  designs  are  the 
outcome  of  His  wisdom  and  love  ;  He  feels  deeply  the  condition  of  His  creatures, 
making  them  conscious  of  His  favour  according  to  their  obedience  to  His  laws, 
and  aJQ  His  actions  are  free.  II.  The  Divine  infbkenob  drawn  from  this 
DECLARATION.  "  Therefore,"  &c.  At  first  sight  this  inference  is  a  strange  one. 
He  was  threatening  judgment ;  and  the  legitimate  inference  that  might  have 
been  drawn  from  His  imchangeableness  was  that  they  should  be  consumed. 
But  instead  of  this  He  draws  the  opposite,  reminding  them  that  it  was  because 
of  His  eternal  purpose  to  keep  the  seed  of  Jacob  alive  upon  the  earth,  as  a  witness 
for  Him  for  the  world's  sake,  and  not  because  of  their  faithfulness,  that  they  had 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

been  spared.  They  had  often  merited  destruction,  but  in  His  unchanging  mercy 
He  had  remembered  His  covenant  with  their  fathers,  and  His  purpose  to  bless 
the  whole  race  through  them,  and  so  they  were  not  consumed.  This  is  true  of 
the  Church  now.  Its  sure  resting-place  is  the  immutability  of  God.  It  mil 
abide,  however  evils  may  abound,  scepticism  darken,  or  superstition  deprave. 
Consider,  then — 1.  That  the  continued  existence  of  the  Church  does  not  arise 
from  its  faithfulness,  but  from  God's  unchanging  mercy  and  purpose.  2.  That 
as  the  continued  existence  of  the  Church  arises  from  God's  immutability,  there 
should  be  in  the  minds  of  the  members  deep  humility,  fervent  adoration,  and 
ardent  gratitude.  3.  That  as  the  permanence  of  the  Church  rests  upon  the 
immutability  of  God,  there  should  be,  in  the  members,  full  confidence  in  its 
stability  and  ultimate  triumph.  4.  That  this  should  lead  any  who  have  wandered 
from  the  Church  to  return  to  its  privileges  again.  5.  That  it  should  make  the 
enemies  of  the  Church  consider  the  futility  of  their  attacks  upon  it,  and  repent 
of  their  folly.  ( W.  Osborne  Lilley. )  Christ  unchangeable  : — Christ  is  like  the 
rock  in  mid-ocean,  that  never  changes,  and  braves  every  storm  ;  feeling  is  like 
the  restless,  shifting  water  that  rolls  round  it.  Christ  is  like  the  grand  old  chiu-ch 
tower  standing  foursquare  to  every  wind,  grey  witii  centuries,  a  shelter  and  a 
home  to  all  who  will  come  ;  feeling  is  like  the  bells  in  the  tower,  which  only  ring 
on  rare  occasions,  and  easily  change  their  tune  ;  most  demonstrative  on  Sunday, 
and  often  still  all  the  week  when  duty  much  needs  their  merry  music.  Christ  is  like 
the  sun,  whose  light  and  heat  are  constant ;  feeling  is  like  the  fleecy  cloud,  now 
beautiful  as  an  angel's  wing,  now  a  cold  grey  sky.  Christ  is  the  tree  of  life,  with 
root  deep  and  the  soil  firmly  gripped,  lifting  into  the  sky  leaf  and  blossom  and 
branch ;  feeling  is  a  mere  blossom,  a  child  of  the  gay  summer  time,  xmfit  for 
storm  or  winter  service.  Christ  is  the  guide  who  never  leaves  the  traveller ; 
feeling  is  the  torch  sometimes  burning  brightly,  but  very  liable  to  be  blown  out. 
He  who  trusts  mere  feeling  will  trust  a  light  most  likely  to  have  gone  out  when 
most  he  needs  guidance  and  comfort,  while  it  will  often  burn  brightly  when  it  is 
least  needed.  The  saints^  final  perseverance  secured  by  the  immutability  of  God  : — 
This  glorious  doctrine  stands — 1.  On  the  perfections  of  Jehovah.  2.  Upon  the 
covenant  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  3.  Upon  the  faithfulness  of  the  faithful  and 
eternal  Spirit.  Of  the  perfections  of  God,  His  immutability  is  here  placed  before 
us.  This  is  declared  to  be  the  security  of  the  sons  of  Jacob.  I.  "  The  sons  of 
Jacob,"  who  are  they  ?  Some  consider  the  passage  as  having  regard  to  the 
literal  Jacob,  the  literal  restoration  and  conversion  of  the  Jews.  These  "  sons 
of  Jacob"  are  God's  own  sons.  These  are  they  who,  clad  in  the  garment  of 
their  elder  brother,  do  inherit  all  blessings.  These  are  they  that  "  wrestle,"  like 
their  father  Jacob  ;  they  "  wrestle  "  in  prayer  with  God.  And  they  cannot  live 
without  Him.  More  than  that,  these  are  the  "  Israel,"  and  they  "  prevail." 
But  these  "  sons  of  Jacob  "  have  all  the  elements  of  destruction  in  them.  They 
have  the  indwelling  corruption  of  their  nature.  It  goes  with  them  where  they 
go — stays  with  them  where  they  stay.  It  defiles  all  that  they  touch,  and  aU 
that  they  think  and  all  that  they  do.  Besides  the  fountain  of  evil,  there  is  the 
actual  evil — what  a  man  does.  Both  in  sin  as  a  principle  and  in  sin  as  an  act 
there  is  in  a  "  son  of  Jacob  "  the  very  element  of  liis  own  destruction.  II.  Though 
THIS  IS  so,  they  are  NOT  CONSUMED.  Though  they  are  often  placed  in  a  hot 
fire ;  sometimes  so  hot  that  faith  seems  almost  to  be  gone.  They  are  tried  ; 
their  grace  is  tried,  their  faith  is  tried,  hope  tried,  love  tried,  every  "  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  tried,"  and  yet  they  are  not  consumed.  III.  Wherefore  are  they  not 
CONSUMED  ?  "I  am  the  Lord  ;  I  change  not."  The  description  can  only  be 
true  of  God  Himself.  He  is  unchangeable  in  His  being,  in  His  perfections,  in 
His  faithfulness,  in  His  justice,  in  His  holiness,  in  His  love.  (J.  Harington 
Evans,  M.A.)  The  unchangeableness  of  Ood  manifested  in  the  preservation  of 
Israel : — I.  A  fact  stated.  "  The  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed."  This  is 
a  remarkable  fact  concerning  the  literal  descendants  of  the  patriarch.  It  is  true 
still.  II.  The  reason  assigned.  "  I  am  the  Lord ;  I  change  not."  Had  it 
depended  upon  the  nations  of  the  earth  they  would  long  ago  have  been  consumed. 
God  had  entered  into  covenant  \vith  them,  and  given  them  great  and  precious 
promises.  And  though  they  have  broken  the  covenant,  the  Lord  on  His  part 
changes  not.  There  is  abundant  encouragement  in  this  subject  for  every  cnild 
of  God.  Abide  in  Him,  and  no  enemy  shall  be  able  to  separate  you  from  the 
love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  your  Lord.  (M.  S.  Alexander.)  The 
unchangeablenesa  of  Ood : — It  is  of  very  serious  consequence   to   man   that  he 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  73 

should  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  character  of  God.  In  order  to  improve 
ourselves  in  this  knowledge,  it  is  useful  to  fix  oiu:  attention  at  times  on  particular 
qualities  of  the  Divine  character.  By  carefully  observing  the  different  parts 
we  shall  become  better  acquainted  with  the  whole.     I.  And  first,  let  us  consider 

THIS  QUALITY  ITSELF  ;    THAT  IS,  THE   XJNCHANGEABLENESS   OF  GOD.       In  this  WOrld 

every  thing  is  changeable.  It  has  pleased  the  Almighty  that  even  the  most 
beautiful  parts  of  the  visible  creation  should  be  full  of  change.  Days  and  seasons 
follow  and  chase  away  each  other.  The  leaf  dies ;  the  grass  withers ;  the  flower 
fades  ;  "  the  mountain  falling  cometh  to  nought,  and  the  rock  is  removed  out  of 
his  place."  Man  himself,  who  marks  and  mourns  those  changes,  is  as  changeable 
as  the  rest.  The  objects  in  which  he  takes  delight,  change :  his  honom's  fade  ; 
his  pleasures  wither ;  his  riches  make  to  themselves  wings  and  flee  away ;  his 
kinsfolk  fail,  and  his  famiUar  friends  forget  him.  His  body  changes  :  the  strength 
of  his  youth  is  dried  up ;  his  beauty  consumes  away.  His  mind  changes :  the 
desires  of  yesterday  are  not  the  desires  of  to-day ;  the  piu-poses  of  youth  are 
abandoned  in  age.  But  while  man  varies,  God  is  the  same.  For  what  says  the 
Psalmist  ?  "  My  days  are  Uke  a  shadow  that  dechneth  ;  and  I  am  withered  like 
grass  ;  but  Thou,  0  Lord,  shalt  endure  for  ever  j  and  Thy  remembrance  imto  all 
generations."  "  I  am  the  Lord,  and  for  that  reason  I  change  not."  I  am  the 
Creator,  and  not  the  creature  ;  God,  and  not  man  ;  therefore  I  change  not.  Beside 
Me  there  is  none  other ;  all  else  is  vanity  of  vanities ;  the  world  passeth  away, 
and  the  lust  thereof ;  but  I  am  supreme,  self -existent,  and  eternal,  and  My 
counsel,  that  shall  stand.  If,  then,  God  is  imchangeable,  we  must  remember  that 
all  His  Divine  perfections  are  unchangeable  :  His  power.  His  wisdom.  His  holiness. 
His  goodness,  change  not.  There  is  something  so  awful — so  unhke  ourselves — in 
the  idea  of  a  Beiag  placed  far  above  all  chance  and  change  and  infirmity,  that  we 
should  be  terrified  by  the  thought  if  we  were  not  told  that  the  mercy  of  this  great 
Being  was  as  constant  and  enduring  as  His  wisdom.  His  righteousness,  and  His 
power.  But  there  is  something  else  to  be  observed  if  we  would  take  a  full  view 
of  this  subject.  The  Christian  dispensation  teaches  us  to  study  and  know,  not 
merely  the  character  of  God,  but  the  character  of  God  in  Christ.  And  it  is  in 
Him  that  the  imchanging  mercy  of  God  shines  forth  with  the  greatest  lustre. 
II.  Having  now  considered  the  unchangeableness  of  God  in  itself,  let  us  consider 

WHAT  EFFECTS  OUGHT  TO  BE  PRODUCED  ON  OUR  MINDS  BY  THE  CONTEMPLATION 

OF  IT.  And  I  begin  with  remarking  that  this  doctrine  of  God's  unchangeableness 
gives  unspeakable  value  to  the  holy  Scriptures.  It  is  the  whole  end  and  aim  of 
the  Scriptures  to  reveal  God  to  man.  Now,  if  God  were  as  changeable  as  man 
we  could  have  no  secure  reliance  on  tliis  revelation.  In  that  case  the  book  of 
Scripture  might  be  true  at  one  time  and  not  at  another.  This  is  what  actually 
happens  among  men.  There  are  few  if  any  persons  whose  habits,  or  manners, 
or  principles  do  not  vary  more  or  less  at  different  periods  of  life ;  nor  is  there 
any  government  which  does  not  more  or  less  alter  its  laws  from  time  to  time. 
And,  in  such  cases,  new  descriptions  of  character,  and  new  books  of  laws,  become 
necessary.  But  God  is  always  the  same  ;  and  therefore  the  Scriptures  are  always 
siu-e.  The  New  Testament  has  now  been  written  nearly  eighteen  hundred  years ; 
and  some  parts  of  the  Old  Testament  three  thousand.  Yet  the  Bible  is  as  faithful 
an  accoimt  of  the  Most  High  at  this  moment  as  at  first ;  and  it  will  remain  so, 
if  the  world  should  last  even  miUions  of  years  longer.  Let  us,  therefore,  with  this 
sacred  book  in  our  hands,  consider  more  particularly  what  effect  should  be  produced 
on  our  minds  by  reflecting  on  the  great  truth  dehvered  in  the  text,  "  I  am  the 
Lord,  I  change  not."  1.  First,  on  the  sinful  and  impenitent.  By  the  sinful 
and  impenitent,  I  mean  not  only  those  who  hve  in  gross  sin  or  impiety,  but  those 
also  whose  hearts  are  chiefly  set  on  the  things  of  this  hfe,  and  not  on  the  things 
of  the  hfe  to  come.  And  in  what  words  shall  I  describe  the  folly  and  danger  of 
such  persons !  I  say,  their  folly,  for,  if  God  be  unchanging,  and  every  thing  else 
fickle  and  fleeting  and  delusive,  how  exquisite  must  be  the  folly  of  seeking  our 
chief  good  anywhere  but  in  Him  !  How  exquisite  must  be  the  folly  of  casting 
ourselves,  not  on  the  favour  of  Him  who  can  give  steady  and  lasting  happiness, 
but  on  the  wretched  friendship  of  things  that  perish  in  the  using  !  These  miserable 
trifles, — which  will  certainly  fail  us  in  a  few  years, — which  may  possibly  fail  us 
this  very  day, — these  are  our  gods  ;  and  for  the  sake  of  these  we  desert  Him  who, 
if  we  did  but  choose  to  trust  Him,  would  be  "  the  strength  of  our  hearts,  and 
our  portion  for  ever."  If  we  saw  a  man  building  his  house  on  a  quicksand  we 
should  be  amazed  at  his  stupidity ;  but  how  infinitely  greater  the  infatuation  of 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

an  immortal  creature  who  builds  his  happiness  on  the  passing,  perishing  objects 
of  time  and  sense  !  That  folly  rises  to  the  most  perfect  madness  when  we  consider 
that,  if  we  have  not  God  for  our  imchangeable  friend,  we  must  have  Him  for  our 
unchangeable  enemy.  Once  more  I  present  you  with  the  offer  of  mercy  and 
reconciliation.  And  remember  that,  if  God  is  unchanging,  you  must  change,  for 
there  is  no  hope  of  a  reconciliation  with  Him  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
iniquity,  and  who  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty.  2.  In  hopes  that  this  solemn 
warning  may  not  have  been  entirely  lost  I  proceed,  secondly,  to  apply  our  subject 
to  those  who  are  seriously  alarmed  about  their  everlasting  safety ;  but  who,  when 
they  consider  the  greatness  of  the  sins  they  have  committed,  are  apt  to  fear  that 
for  them  there  is  no  forgiveness.  But  I  would  ask  you  this  question :  were  you 
at  this  moment,  with  your  bodily  eyes,  to  see  your  blessed  Saviour  extended  on 
His  Cross,  offering  Himself  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  His  enemies,  could  you  doubt 
that  His  most  precious  blood  was  able  to  wash  away  even  your  sins,  however 
heavy  and  numerous  ?  If  you  could  not  doubt  this,  then  recollect  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  3.  In  the  third  place,  let  me 
very  shortly  address  those  who  are  really  making  devotional  and  practical  religion 
the  principal  object  of  their  lives,  and  who  humbly  trust  that,  through  the  Divine 
blessing,  they  aie  gradually  increasing  in  all  godliness  and  Christian  virtue.  Such 
persons  will  find  their  advantage  in  frequent  meditation  on  the  unchangeablenesa 
of  God.  If  they  are  in  affliction  or  in  distress  of  mind,  this  will  be  their  hope  and 
stay ;  they  will  reflect  that,  though  outward  things  alter.  He  in  whom  they  have 
laid  up  their  chief  hopes  remains  the  same.     {Christian  Observer.) 

Ver.  7.  Ye  are  gone  away  from  Mine  ordinances.  —  Misused  religioius 
privileges  : — In  proportion  to  the  value  and  the  importance  of  our  privileges, 
is  apt  to  be  our  negligence,  our  carelessness,  in  improving  them.  In  religion, 
in  morals,  in  everything  concerning  man,  it  is  in  the  season  of  calm,  and  amid 
the  quietude  of  apparent  prosperity,  that  the  foot  is  readiest  to  slip.  It  is 
melancholy  to  think  how  little  value  men  in  general  set  on  the  ordinances  of 
a  pure  religion.  The  temporal  benefits  that  are  so  profusely  conferred  on  us 
by  our  Maker  have  each  and  all  of  them  a  measure  of  alloy  mixed  up  with  them, 
so  as  to  modify  and  qualify  their  sweetness.  Religion  is  the  solitary  one  of  His 
gifts  that  may  be  characterised  as  sweet  unmixed  ;  and  yet  it  is  the  one  to 
which,  by  a  great  majority  of  our  race,  the  least  value  is  attached.  The  text 
deals  with  a  class  of  persons  who,  enjoying  the  privileges  of  rehgion,  derived 
no  advantage  from  them  ;  and  it  intimates  that  the  loss  originated  in  a  fault 
of  their  own.  I.  Evils  that  are  calculated  to  render  the  ministrations 
OF  THE  Gospel  profitless.  1.  Irregular  attendance  on  those  ministrations. 
In  theory  we  admit  that  the  worship  of  God  is  the  most  important  business  of 
life.  Because  it  is  a  preparation  for  eternity  ;  it  is  labour  in  the  interest  and 
for  the  well-being  of  an  immortal  soul,  and  our  homage  is  a  debt,  a  sacred,  serious, 
solemn  debt  we  owe  to  the  Divinity.  Then  zeal,  regularity,  precise  punctuality 
in  that  service,  are  of  all  things  most  important.  Your  services,  it  is  true,  have 
nothing  of  merit  about  them  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  if  you  refuse  them  you 
need  not  expect  the  blessing  of  God.  2.  Love  to  the  world,  and  a  proiiensity 
to  worldly  thoughts.  Who  does  not  know  that,  even  while  apparently  engaged 
in  the  most  sacred  services,  the  world,  and  the  things  of  the  world,  occasionally 
pass  over  and  darken  our  spiritual  perceptions?  Who  is  there  who  has  never 
mourned  this  and  deplored  it  ?  This  tendency  to  carnal  thoughts  in  the  midst 
of  religious-seeming  services  is  one  of  the  most  serious  obstacles  that  stand  in 
the  way  of  our  improvement  from  a  preached  Gospel.  3.  The  pride  of  intellect, 
and  a  carping  taste  for  literary  criticism.  It  were  passing  strange,  indeed,  if 
the  music  of  soft  words,  the  grace  of  polished  sentences,  and  all  the  blandish- 
ments of  composition  were  excluded  from  the  pulpit,  while  on  any  other  stage 
they  are  deemed  needful  to  success.  But  there  is  peril  in  it.  It  may  lay  a 
powerful  temptation  in  the  way  of  men's  souls.  It  leads  to  a  sacrificing  of  sub- 
stance for  shadow.  Men  nowadays  must  have  the  Gospel  preached  to  them 
in  their  own  particular  fashion,  or  they  will  not  listen  to  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel  at  all.  Remember,  I  beseech  you,  that  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser 
than  men,  and  that  the  wisdom  of  God  is  stronger  than  men.  4.  The  want  ot' 
solemnity  and  reverence  in  the  sanctuary.  How  little  we  think,  in  general, 
of  the  society  in  which  we  are,  or  the  nature  of  Divine  service,  when  we  come 
up  to  the  temple  of  the  Lord.     5.  The  want  of  a  spirit  of  prayer.     The  effect 


OHAP.  m.]  MALACHI.  75 

to  be  produced  is  altogether  dependent  on  Almighty  power.  Then  how  obvious 
it  is  that  all  our  attendances  on  these  ordinances  should  be  preluded  by  prayer  ! 
We  know  that  of  ovirselves  we  cannot  profit.  We  know  that  God  has  told  us 
how  His  blessing  is  to  be  obtained.  Shall  not,  then,  the  footstool  of  His  throne 
be  approached  by  us  ?  Shall  we  not  ask  that  IHvine  strength  may  be  perfected 
in  our  weakness  ?  {W.  Craig.)  Return  unto  Me,  and  I  will  return  unto 
you.  —  God's  charge  and  caU  to  a  backsliding  people :  —  Three  things 
contained  in  these  words,  which  well  suit  our  times.  1.  A  charge  or  accusa- 
tion brought  by  God  against  His  professing  people.  All  sin  is  going 
away  from  God's  ordinances,  or  a  breach  of  His  law.  To  omit  known  duties, 
God  construes  as  a  commission  of  known  sins.  2.  A  solemn  exhortation  backed 
by  an  alluring  motive.  God  promises  mercy  when  He  might  execute  judg- 
ment. Repentance  is  that  which  sets  a  creature  right  again,  with  his  face  towards 
God,  so  that  all  his  desires  and  expectations  are  from  Him.  The  motive  is,  God's 
return  unto  us.  God  is  said  to  return  when  He  shows  His  face  and  favour, 
which  sin  has  hid.  3.  The  people's  reply.  "  Wherein  shall  we  return  ?  "  This 
was  either  in  words — "  We  are  not  conscious  of  guilt,  show  us  wherein  we  ,^,^ 
have  offended."     Or  it  is  the  language  of  their  hearts  and  hves.     I.  Show  where-     ,h, 

IN  WB  HAVE  GONE  AWAY  FKOM  GOD  AS  A  PROFESSING  PEOPLE  AND  LAND.       1.  We 

have  gone  away  from  His  truth.  As  to  the  generality  of  professors  in  the  land, 
they  scarce  know  what  are  the  foimdations  of  the  Gospel,  or  what  are  the  pillars 
of  the  reformation.  2.  We  are  gone  away  from  His  worship.  Now  families 
professing  godliness  are  prayerless,  and  there  is  a  weariness  of  ordinances. 
3.  We  are  gone  away  from  our  trust  and  confidence  in  God.  This  is  a  complaint 
every  one  may  bring  against  himself.  ,  4.  ^e  are  gone  away  from  God  in  con- 
versation. Faith  is  nothing  without  fr«it,  nor  Gospel  truth  without  Gospel 
holiness.  Are  thy  thoughts  spiritual,  thy  speech  savoury,  thy  mind  and  disposi- 
tion heavenly,  and  thy  outward  behaviour  without  offence  ?  II.  How  must  X^ 
OUR  RETURN  TO  HiM  BE  ?  1.  With  deep  humiliation.  Sense  of  sin  wiU  beget 
sorrow  and  shame  for  it.  When  God  touches  the  heart,  sin  will  become  the 
greatest  burden  we  ever  felt.  2.  With  real  reformation.  God's  anger  is  increased 
by  mock  retvims.  It  is  one  thing  to  confess  sin  with  our  mouths,  and  another 
thing  to  cast  it  out  of  our  hearts.  3.  It  should  be  with  an  eye  to  the  blood  of 
Christ.  No  mercy  is  to  be  expected  but  through  the  satisfaction  and  inter- 
cession of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  III.  The  blessing  which  is  in  God's  re- 
turn TO  us.  When  God  comes  to  a  land  or  people,  good  comes  with  Him. 
1.  He  comes  with  grace  and  pardon.  2.  He  comes  with  grace  to  sanctify  and 
renew.  3.  He  comes  with  power  and  strength  to  save  and  deliver.  4.  He  cornea 
with  love  to  delight  in  them.  IV.  Why  will  God  return  to  us  only  in  thh 
WAY  OF  OUR  RETURN  TO  HiM  ?  It  docs  not  suppose  anything  meritorious  in 
the  obedience  of  the  creature ;  nor  yet  that  the  blessings  of  grace  are  suspended 
upon  the  condition  of  duty.  1.  It  is  to  justify  His  dispensations  before  men. 
Though  duty  be  not  the  ground  of  our  claim,  it  is  the  warrant  of  our  expecta- 
tion and  our  hope.  2.  He  will  slay  presumption  and  self-confidence  in  His  own 
people.  V.  In  whom  this  vtle  frame  mentioned  in  the  text  is  pound. 
This  may  serve  by  way  of  caution,  and  by  way  of  trial.  We  speak  as  in  the 
text  when — 1.  We  rest  in  generals,  in  confessing  sin  before  God.  Sin  is  a  sort 
of  packhorse  upon  which  every  burden  is  laid.  2.  This  frame  prevails  where 
there  is  a  transferring  sin  upon  others.  It  is  easy  confessing  other  men's  sins, 
but  evangelical  repentance  begins  at  home.  3.  Men  speak  thus  when  they  con- 
fess some  sins,  but  not  the  sin  which  God  aims  at.  We  are  all  too  partial  with 
respect  to  ourselves.  4.  To  confess  sin  with  a  secret  liking  of  it  in  the  heart 
is  a  way  of  saying,  "  Wherein  shall  I  return  ?  "  It  argues  httle  to  confess  sin 
if  thou  dost  not  part  with  it.  Uses — (1)  Are  we  thus  gone  away  from  God,  and 
shall  we  not  admire  Divine  patience,  that  we  are  yet  spared,  both  oiu-  persons 
and  our  land  ?  (2)  Adore  grace.  (3)  See  what  is  the  special  duty  of  this  day. 
"  Retimi  \mto  the  Lord."  (4)  Beware  of  a  double  heart  this  day,  and  all  your 
life  after.  Seek  peace  and  truth,  but  Christ  as  the  foundation  of  both.  {John 
HiU. )  Necessity  of  our  returning  to  Ood  : — Whenever,  in  any  respect,  we  have 
wandered  away  from  the  strait  and  narrow  way  which  leadeth  imto  hfe  our 
Father  in  heaven  does  not  at  once  leave  us  to  ourselves,  but  in  His  tender  love 
and  forbearance  has  recourse  to  various  means  whereby  to  bring  us  back 
to  Himself.  This  is  plainly  the  case  with  individual  Christians ;  perhaps  it 
is  the  condition  of  mankind  universally.     Our  merciful  Father  offers  checks 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  warnings  when  He  sees  any  generally  prevailing  tendency  to  depart  from 
Him.  If,  in  any  Christian  Church,  people  have  become  self-confident,  neglectful 
of  ancient  rules,  scorning  attention  to  moral  duties,  yet  all  the  while  exulting 
in  unreal  feelings  and  fancies,  as  tokens  of  the  Divine  favour — when  such  symp- 
toms of  corruption  show  themselves,  it  is  a  great  mercy  if  our  good  Gk)d,  by  any 
chastisements,  warns  us  of  our  danger,  and  of  the  necessity  of  returning  to  Him 
whilst  yet  we  may.  Jehovah  sent  this  message  of  affectionate  compassion  to 
His  ancient  people,  "  Return  unto  Me,  and  I  will  return  \mto  you."  And  it 
was  to  be  expected  that  they  would  gladly  embrace  so  gracious  an  offer ;  that 
their  only  inquiry  would  be  in  what  way  they  could  best  prove  the  sincerity  of 
their  repentance.  But  no  such  temper  showed  itself.  Quite  otherwise.  They 
had  done  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of.  They  said, — why  may  we  not  go  on  as 
we  are ;  what  need  is  there  of  repentance  or  amendment  ?  Jesus  Christ  pressed 
on  all  who  would  foUow  Him  the  necessity  of  self-denial,  that  is,  of  doing  and 
suffering  what  is  painful  and  unpleasant  to  us,  out  of  love  to  Him.  This  we 
promised  to  do  in  our  baptism.  If  we  have  not  led  the  rest  of  our  lives  according 
to  that  beginning,  then  we  should  hear  the  voice  of  God  saying  to  us,  "  Return 
tmto  Me,  and  I  will  return  imto  you."  Retvu-n  unto  Me  in  all  self-abasement 
and  self-denial,  and  I  will  return  to  you  in  those  special  gifts  and  graces  which 
eminently  mark  the  presence  of  God's  good  Spirit.  Whatever  ovu:  condition 
in  life  may  be,  self-denial  in  matters  of  disposition  and  temper  is  so  essential 
to  the  Christian  character  that,  if  we  have  neglected  it,  we  have  indeed  \irgent 
need  to  return  to  the  Lord  in  this  respect  without  delay.  Any  tendency  to  self- 
will  is  an  evidence  that  "  the  heart  is  not  right  with  God."  In  regard  to  the  duty, 
or  privilege,  of  prayer,  we  should  ascertain  for  ourselves  whether  we  have  at 
all  wandered  away  from  the  Lord,  and  so  need  to  return  to  Him  in  true  sub- 
stantial amendment.  There  must  be  a  real  and  hearty  obedience,  otherwise  a 
return  is  no  return.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  profession  or  of  feeling  or  of  know- 
ledge, but  of  absolute  practice,  of  humble  temper  and  humble  practice. 
(Sermons  by  Contrib.  to  "  Tracts  for  the  Times.")  Coming  to  God  by  love  or 
by  fear  : — Our  life  in  this  world  is,  in  substance,  a  returning  to  God.  When  we 
were  new-born  we  were  set  in  the  path  that  leads  to  eternal  life,  and  bidden 
to  keep  in  it,  and  so  return  to  God.  Few,  if  any,  go  straight  onward  ;  most 
of  us  are  like  wayward  children,  following  the  road  for  a  while,  then  straying  ; 
anon  recovering  it,  and  then,  with  repentance,  proceeding.  So,  all  the  life 
through,  we  are  returning  to  God  ;  lapsing  here  and  there  ;  erring  and  straying 
like  lost  sheep  ;  finding  the  way  back,  we  often  wonder  how ;  and  so,  as  for 
our  general  direction,  working  a  slow  course  toward  final  safety,  through  the 
temptations  and  dangers  of  the  track  by  which  we  go.  Often  have  Christians 
to  check  themselves,  to  deplore  errors,  and  to  retrace  heedless  steps  ;  they  must 
do  this  when  they  see  or  feel  that  they  are  out  of  the  straight  path.  The  text 
asks,  "  Wherein  shall  we  return  ?  "  The  question  suggests  some  thought  on 
motives  which  may  act  to  lead  men  back  to  God.  How  shall  they  that  are  astray 
be  brought  home  ?  If  we  grow  lax,  cold,  and  hard,  how  shall  we  be  recovered  ? 
There  are  two  great  motives  that  can  keep  men  near  to  God,  and  keep  God's 
name  in  honour  in  the  world.  These  two  are  love  and  fear  :  the  love  of  God 
for  His  mercy,  the  fear  of  God  for  His  justice.  Either  of  these  may  save  a  man  ; 
either  may  keep  a  race  alive  and  strong.  With  the  heart  we  lay  fast  hold  on 
God  as  the  Father  and  the  Saviour.  God  calls  Himself  our  Fathei  ;  the  word 
includes  His  act  in  giving  us  our  being.  His  providence  which  keeps,  upholds, 
and  blesses  us  day  by  day.  God,  as  Creator,  Ruler,  and  Governor,  asks  of  us 
our  love.  He  reveals  Himself  as  God  our  Saviour.  The  symbol  of  the  mighty 
all-constraining  love  is,  and  must  ever  be,  the  Cross.  So  first  the  Lord  draws 
us  by  love.  Tlicre  are,  however,  those  in  the  world  on  whom  these  considera- 
tions have  no  effect.  In  that  case  there  remains  one,  and  but  one,  other  motive 
to  bring  them  to  God  ;  it  is  the  lower  motive  of  fear.  Not  mere  fear  of  pimish- 
ment,  nor  the  fear  of  suffering.  It  is  the  fear  of  irreparable  disaster,  of  ever- 
lasting loss.  That  men  cannot  face.  That  is  the  dread  of  dreads.  But  there 
are  those  in  whom  there  is  no  such  dread  ;  they  do  not  feel  the  love  of  God,  they 
cannot  be  shaken  by  the  fear  of  God.  What  other  motive  can  you  name  when 
both  these  fail  ?  There  is  no  answer.  Destroy  the  belief  in  the  Almighty  God 
as  a  Creator  ;  with  that  vanishes  the  belief  in  Almighty  God  as  a  providence. 
And  when  that  is  done  the  basis  on  which  love  rests  is  gone  also.  Destroy  the 
belief  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Redeemer  of  the  woild,  and  with  it  vanish 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  77 

also  the  sense  of  sin,  gratitude  for  deliverance  from  its  eflfects,  and  the  love  that 
has  filled  the  hearts  of  men  as  they  meditated  on  the  mercy  of  the  Saviour,  and 
the  sweetness  of  the  "  precious  blood  of  Christ."  Thus  all  ground  for  loving 
God  is  taken  away.  Cast  out  the  belief  in  eternal  death,  in  perpetual  penalty, 
in  irreparable  doom,  and  fear  must  vanish.  If  there  is  no  just  God  to  requite 
me,  whom  is  there  to  fear  ?  What  will  men  do  when  fallen  so  low  ?  Let  U3 
consider.  Can  love  and  fear  die  out  of  the  heart  ?  Never.  The  love  and  fear 
of  God  can  die  ;  but  love  and  fear  of  something  will  remain.  Toward  what 
shall  these  direct  themselves  ?  When  man  will  no  longer  love  God,  he  must  come 
to  loving  himself;  and  when  it  comes  to  loving  himself,  his  main  fear  is  lest,  in 
that  self-love,  he  should  be  interfered  with  or  balked.  What  would  become 
of  a  world  which  had  lost  its  own  love  and  its  fear,  which  neither  loved  the 
Redeemer  nor  feared  the  pains  of  hell  ?  One  may  be  pardoned  for  doubting 
whether  such  a  world  would  be  worth  saving  ;  and  for  questioning  whether  it 
could  be  saved.  We  therefore  teach,  as  most  necessary  for  these  times,  the 
love  of  God  and  the  fear  of  God.  {Morgan  Dix.)  Encouragement  for  the 
erring  : — God  comes  to  His  people.  His  purpose  is  to  refine,  piu^ify,  and  save  ; 
and  to.  judge  and  witness  against  wrong-doing.  God's  blessings  are  given  con- 
ditionally. Observe — I.  The  duty.  "  Retiu-n  unto  Me."  1.  The  words  imply 
distance  from  God.  The  cause  is  sin.  Sin  deepens  and  widens  the  difference 
between  God  and  man.  Sin  put  away,  God  and  man  are  one.  2.  Return  to 
a  recognisation  of  neglected  duty.  3.  Return  with  a  fixed  purpose  in  all  things 
to  conform  to  God's  will.  IT.  The  pkomise.  "  I  will  return  unto  you."  1.  God'a 
promises  are  many.  2.  God's  promises  are  great.  3.  God's  promises  are  precious. 
4.  God's  promises  are  encouraging.  To  the  weak,  afflicted,  troubled,  unfor- 
tvmate ;  yea,  to  the  erring  and  sinful.  III.  The  confibmation.  "  Saith  the 
Lord."      1.    The    authority.      "  The    Lord."      2.    The    confidence    it    inspires. 

3.  The  action  it  should  prompt.  (Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  The. 
love-hunrjer  in  God's  heart : — I.  Jehovah's  entreaty.  "  Return  imto  Me." 
Sin  is  not  only  departure  from  righteousness,  but  from  God.  God  is  man's  true 
sphere.  Those  who  have  lived  in  God  may  wander  from  Him.  Their  sad  con- 
dition may  furnish  reasons  for  their  return ;  but  the  most  powerful  is  that 
God  entreats  them  to  do  so.  This  should  affect  them  deeply.  For  it  mani- 
fests— 1.  His  condescending  pity.      2.   Forbearing  grace.      3.   Unchanging  love. 

4.  Willingness  to  receive  them  again  into  His  favoiu*.  Man's  departure  from  God 
grieves  Him.  In  order  that  the  wanderer  may  rettu-n  he  must — (1)  Reflect  upon 
his  waywardness,  its  folly  and  ingratitude.  (2)  Yield  to  the  Divme  drawings 
which  reach  him  through  the  Word  and  Spirit.  (3)  Discover  the  cause  of  his 
wanderings,  and  put  it  away.  (4)  Turn  unto  God  with  contrite  confession  and 
earnest  prayer.  The  Divine  Word  to  Him  might  have  justly  been  "  Depart," 
not  "  Return."  II.  Jehovah's  promise.  "  I  will  return  unto  you."  God 
delights  ta  fill  the  consciousness  of  man  with  His  presence.  He  reluctantly  with- 
draws Himself  from  the  wanderer.     In  God's  return  is  all  spiritual  blessedness. 

I,  All  wanderings  are  forgiven.  2.  The  soul  is  requickened  into  newness  of  life. 
3.  The  evil  effects  of  wandering  are  purged  away.  4.  The  springs  of  a  deep  and 
immortal  happiness  are  opened  in  the  soul.  5.  The  spirit  is  conscious  of  possessing 
its  true  and  eternal  rest.  God's  return  is  dependent  upon  the  wanderer's  return 
to  Him.  He  cannot  reveal  Himself  fully  to  those  who  depart  from  His  ways. 
He  may  warn  them,  chastise  them,  and  strive  with  them,  but  they  cannot  know 
what  His  presence  is  to  the  obedient  heart.  ( W.  Osborne  LiUey.)  A  fast  sermon  : 
— This  text  is  an  exhortation  to  repentance.  I.  An  accusation.  "  Ye  have 
gone  away."  They  had  gone  off  from  God's  ordinances,  and  had  not  kept  them. 
Law  may  be  broken,  either  by  omitting  the  good  required  or  doing  the  evils  for- 
bidden.    They  had  long  continued  in  these  sins  ;  "  from  the  days  of  your  fathers." 

II.  The  exhortation.  "  Return,"  &o.  Notice  the  duty.  Repentance  toward 
God  is  necessary  to  set  the  creature  right  again,  and  put  him  in  his  proper  place 
and  posture.  III.  The  rejoinder  of  the  people.  "  Ye  said,  wherein  shall 
we  return  ?  "  It  is  not  a  serious  question,  but  a  cavil.  It  suited  the  stout  and 
stubborn  genius  of  this  people,  who  would  not  yield  to  anything  that  might  infer 
then-  guilt.  The  exhortation  was  lost  upon  them,  as  if  they  needed  no  repentance 
or  reformation.  Doctrine — That  a  people  who  are  apparently  gone  off  from 
the  ways  of  God  are  not  easily  brought  to  a  sight  and  sense  of  the  necessity  of 
returning  to  Him.  This  point  is  true  of  mankind  in  general,  of  nations,  and  of 
particulaj  persons.    Men  set  up  a  false  happiness  in  their  carnal  estate.    There  is 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  m. 

something  in  us  which  is  instead  of  Christ  to  us,  when  our  affections  take  up  with 
present  things.  The  commonness  and  continuance  of  sin  takes  away  the  odious- 
ness  of  it.  Men  many  times  return  feignedly.  A  i)eople  professing  repentance 
in  the  general,  when  it  cometh  to  particulars,  wince  and  start.  That  is  but  a 
notion  of  repentance,  not  a  real  exercise  of  it,  when  we  profess  to  return  to  God, 
and  know  not  wherein  we  shoiUd  return.  Exhort  to  two  things — (1)  Take  heed 
of  the  shifts  wherewith  men  beguile  themselves.  (2)  Inquire  wherein  you  should 
return.  Find  out  the  provoking  sin.  To  do  so  you  wiU  need  much  searching 
and  self -communing.  Seek  for  information  from  God.  And  carefully  observe 
your  own  ways.  (T.  M anion,  D.D.)  A  Divine  complaint  and  a  Divine  invitation  : 
— I.  A  Divine  complaint  against  sinners.  Three  charges.  Apostasy.  Dis- 
honesty. Insensibility.  II.  A  Divine  invitation  to  sinners.  An  invitation 
to  return — 1.  To  Divine  friendship.  2.  To  honest  service.  "  Bring  all  the  tithes 
into  the  storehouse."  If  they  accede,  God  promises — (1)  To  give  them  good  in 
abundance.  (2)  To  give  them  good  in  connection  with  the  produce  of  the  earth. 
(3)  To  give  them  good  in  the  affections  of  men.  Learn — 1.  A  man  is  a  bad  man 
who  withholds  from  God  His  due.  2.  A  bad  man  becomes  good  by  surrendering 
his  all  to  God.  3.  The  more  good  a  man  has  in  himself,  the  more  good  he  has 
from  the  universe.  (Homilist).  Will  a  man  rob  God? — Robbery  of  Ood  : — 
The  ordinance  of  God  has  been  that  men  should  have  certain  things,  on 
certain  conditions,  belonging  to  them  severally,  as  their  own.  But  there  has 
always  been  a  mighty  propensity  to  break  through  this  great  law.  We  do  not 
at  all  wonder  at  the  laws  in  respect  to  property  among  men.  But  here  in  the  text 
is  another  kind  of  robbery,  which  does  sound  strangely  ;  of  which  many  may 
be  guilty,  and  little  think  of  it.  "  Rob  God," — who  could  ever  think  of  a  thing 
so  monstrous  ?  Yet  it  can  be.  In  the  next  words  the  assertion  is  made,  "  Ye 
have  robbed  Me."  All  here  on  earth  belongs  to  God.  It  is  in  the  midst  of  things 
belonging  to  Him  that  we  are  conversant,  living  and  acting.  If  all  belongs  to 
God,  then  comes  in  the  liability  to  commit  robbery  against  Him.  It  may  be,  that 
there  shall  be  no  general  habitual  sense  and  acknowledgment  of  His  sovereign 
claims  ;  no  feeling  that  all  does  so  belong.  This  is  the  comprehensive  spirit  and 
principle  of  the  wrong  toward  Him,  and  will  go  into  many  special  forms ;  this 
state  of  mind  is  a  general  refusal  to  acknowledge  His  law.  It  is  taking,  as  it  were, 
the  whole  ground  at  once  from  God,  and  assuming  a  licence  for  every  particular 
act  and  kind  of  robbery.  Robbing  God  is  also  permitting  anything  to  have 
stronger  power  over  us  than  His  will.  There  should  be  conscientious  care  to 
form  a  right  honest  judgment  of  what  is  due,  of  what  belongs  to  God.  This  guilt 
is  incurred  by  misapplying  to  other  uses  what  is  due  to  God.  A  few  plain  partic- 
ulars may  be  specified  of  what  we  cannot  withhold  from  God  without  this  guilt. 
One  is,  a  very  considerable  proportion  of  thoug't  concerning  Him.  Fear,  of  the 
deepest,  most  solemn  kind,  is  due  to  God.  We  have,  naturally,  an  awe  of  power. 
There  are  other  tributes  due,  corresponding  to  what  we  may  call  the  more  attractive 
and  gracious  attributes.  Will  a  man  refuse  the  gentler  affections — love,  gratitude, 
humble  reliance  ?  But  we  have  to  look  further,  at  the  full  breadth  of  the  declared 
law  of  God  :  the  comprehensive  sum  of  His  commands  ;  a  grand  scheme  of  the 
dictates  of  the  Divine  will,  placed  peremptorily  before  us,  and  abiding  there 
as  permanently  as  our  view  of  the  purpose  of  the  earth  or  the  starry  sky.  Each 
and  every  precept  tells  of  something  we  may  refuse  Him,  namely,  the  obedience  ; 
and  a  temptation  stands  close  by  each.  Some  seem  to  "  rob  God  "  of  nearly  all. 
And  with  so  determined  a  will,  that  there  would  seem  but  to  need  more  precepts 
for  them  to  extend  their  injustice.  Others  think  they  must  render  something, 
but  that  a  partial  tribute,  and  a  small  one,  may  suffice.  Many  appear  to  think 
that  if  they  do  not  rob  men,  there  needs  not  much  care  about  what  is  specially 
and  directly  due  to  God.  It  is  not  for  His  own  sake  that  God  requires  our  homage, 
^service,  and  obedience.  It  is  for  our  sakes.  Thus  it  will  come  to  be  found,  that 
in  robbing  God,  men  iniquitously  and  fatally  rob  themselves.  Name  one  thing 
specially  as  due  to  God — the  duty  of  promoting  the  cause  of  God  in  the  world. 
If  each  professed  servant  of  God,  and  follower  of  Christ,  could  be  supposed  to  be 
asked,  "  Will  you  have  your  individual  part  set  before  you  ?  "  he  must  be  a 
bold  man,  who  should  instantly,  and  free  from  all  apprehension,  say,  "  Yes,  I  am 
sure  of  what  it  will  testify."  {John  Foitcr.)  Robbery  of  Ood: — It  is  possible, 
and  the  sin  has  been  perpetrated.  God  says  to  these  Jews,  "  Ye  have  robbed  Me." 
In  their  case  it  referred  to  the  withholding  of  the  tithes  and  offerings  for  the  support 
of  the  temple  worship.     This  does  not  appertain  to  us  ;  but  it  is  not  the  only  way 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  79 

in  which  the  sin  can  be  committed.  Robbery  means  taking  either  by  fraud  or 
violence  that  which  belongs  to  another,  and  appropriating  it  to  our  own  use. 
I.  Apply  this  charge  of  robbing  God  to  a  lakgb  portion  of  mankind, 
GENERALLY  CONSIDERED.  To  a  pious  mind,  it  is  an  affecting  and  melancholy 
thing  to  consider  what  a  conspiracy  seems  ever  going  on  to  shut  God  out  of  His 
own  world,  to  deprive  Him  of  His  rights  in  the  homage  which  is  due  to  Him  from 
His  creatures.  Atheism  robs  Him  of  the  glory  of  His  existence;  Deism,  of  the 
glory  of  His  revelation ;  Paganism,  of  the  glory  of  His  spirituality  and  perfections ; 
Mohammedanism,  of  His  exclusive  manifestation  of  Himself  through  the  person  and 
work  of  His  own  Son,  in  regard  to  the  purposes  of  His  grace  to  our  world ;  Judaism, 
of  the  glory  of  His  relationship  to  His  only-begotten  and  weU-beloved  Son.  So 
that  we  see,  on  a  very  large  scale,  God's  rational  creation  continually  robbing  Him 
of  His  giory.  If  we  come  from  systems  to  men,  we  shall  see  that  the  same 
felony  is  continually  going  on  against  Him,  as  the  God  of  nature,  providence,  and 
redemption.  Is  not  man-worship  one  of  the  most  striking  characteristics  of  the 
age  in  which  we  live  ?  Looking  abroad  upon  society,  we  see  a  felony  continually 
going  on,  in  robbing  God  of  His  glory,  and  not  giving  Him  the  honour  that  in  all 
these  things  is  due  unto  His  name.  In  the  sphere  of  religion,  what  robbery  of  God 
there  is  in  taking  from  Him  His  Sabbaths — taking  them  from  religion,  and  giving 
them  to  pleasure  and  business.  Socinianism  deprives  Him  of  the  glory  of  the 
Divinity  of  His  Son.  Popery  corrupts  every  thing  in  religion — raising  up  a  rival 
to  God  in  the  pope,  a  rival  to  the  Bible  in  tradition,  a  rival  to  the  Saviour  in  priests, 
a  rival  to  the  Cross  in  the  crucifix.  II.  Apply  this  charge  of  robbing  God 
to  particular  classes.  1.  It  lies  against  the  man  who  is  living  without  personal, 
decided,  spiritual  religion,  whose  heart  is  not  yet  convex  ted  to  God.  The  man 
who  is  living  without  religion,  that  man  is  committing  a  wholesale  robbery  upon 
God.  He  robs  God  of  himself.  He  belongs  to  God.  His  body  does,  and  he 
takes  it  from  Him,  for  sensuality,  for  vice,  or  for  worldliness.  He  is  robbing  God 
of  the  soul,  with  all  its  faculties.  The  intellect  belongs  to  God  ;  and  yet,  though 
thousands  of  thoughts  are  streaming  off  from  that  man's  mind  day  after  day,  none 
of  these  go  to  God.  He  is  robbing  God  of  his  will,  of  his  affections,  &c.  An 
unconverted  man  robs  God  of  his  time.  The  same  remark  may  be  made  as  to 
influence ;  as  to  property.  It  is  God's  world  we  live  in.  His  ground  we  tread  upon. 
His  sun  that  shines  upon  us.  His  rain  that  falls  upon  us.  His  creatures  that  support 
U8,  His  wool  and  cotton  that  clothe  us  ;  and  we  have  no  right  to  use  any  of  His 
creatures  but  in  a  way  that,  while  it  does  us  good,  shall  at  the  same  time  glorify 
God.  III.  Apply  this  subject  to  professing  Christians.  Can  they  stand  alto- 
gether exempt  from  the  accusation  ?  Ought  not  their  life  to  be  "  a  whole  burnt- 
offering  '  to  God  ?  A  Christian  ought  to  be  a  partaker  of  that  religion  which  brings 
out  a  holy  morality  in  all  the  stations,  occupations,  and  circumstances  in  which 
he  is  placed.  Are  we  then  living  for  God  or  for  ourselves  ?  Are  there  no  pulpit 
robbers  of  God  ?  None  who,  ins  ead  of  seeking  God's  glory,  are  seeking  their 
own  ?  From  the  very  nature  of  the  ministerial  office,  self  is  the  idol  that  we  are 
in  danger  of  lifting  up,  if  not  in  the  place  of  God,  yet  side  by  side  with  Him.  What 
duty  arising  out  of  this  subject  shall  I  prescribe  ?  Restitution.  Yield  yourselves 
unto  God.  (John  Angd  James.)  Is  it  probable  ?  Is  it  possible  ?  Can  he  be 
so  disingenuous  ?  What !  rob  a  Father,  a  Friend,  a  Benefactor  !  Can  he  be  so 
daring  ?  To  rob  a  Being  so  high  and  sacred  ;  and  whose  glory  so  enhances  the 
offence !  Can  he  be  so  irrational,  so  desperate  ?  Yet,  says  God,  "  Ye  have 
robbed  Me."  And  the  charge  falls  on  those  who  are  to  be  found  in  the  house 
of  God.  Who  has  not  robbed  God  of  property  ?  Our  wealth  is  not  our  own. 
We  are  only  stewards.  It  always  looks  suspicious  when  a  gentleman's  steward 
becomes  very  rich,  and  dies  affluent.  Substance  is  entrusted  to  its  occupiers, 
for  certain  purposes  plainly  laid  down  in  the  Scripture.  Do  you  discharge  those 
claims  ?  How  much  do  some  unjustly  expend ;  in  table-luxuries,  in  costly 
dress,  in  magnificent  furniture  ?  Who  has  not  robbed  God  of  time  ?  The 
Sabbath.  Our  youth-time,  so  often  squandered  away  in  vanity,  folly,  and  vice. 
All  our  moments  and  opportunities  are  His  :  and  He  commands  us  to  redeem 
the  time.  Who  has  not  robbed  God  of  the  heart  ?  The  fear,  the  confidence, 
the  gratitude,  the  attachment  of  the  heart,  we  have  transferred  from  the  Creator, 
(Jod  over  all,  blessed  for  evermore.  And  may  not  the  same  be  said  of  our  talents — 
whether  learning,  or  the  powers  of  conversation,  or  the  retentiveness  of  memory, 
or  our  influence  over  others  ?  Let  us  not  affect  to  deny  the  charge  ;  but  let  us 
repair  to  the  footstool  of  mercy,  and  cry,  "  If  Thou,  Lord,  shouldst  mark  iniquity. 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

O  Lord,  who  shall  stand  ?  "  (William  Jay.)  Robbers  : — There  axe  many  more 
robbers  than  the  police  know  about.  Men  might  be  surprised  to  know  that  a 
robber,  sometimes,  is  concealed  in  their  own  breast.  How  wicked  to  rob  a  man 
who  has  done  us  a  kindness  ;  but  how  much  more  so  to  rob  a  God  who  loves  us 
with  everlasting  love  !  As  robbers  of  God,  consider — I.  Atheists.  Such  imagine 
there  is  no  Creating-God  ;  or  if  there  be  a  God,  that  nobody  can  discover  anything 
about  Him  ;  and  that  there  is  no  God-revealed  religion.  In  a  picture  gallery 
in  London,  I  was  shown  a  grand  painting  of  a  woman's  face,  and  asking  the  name 
of  the  artist,  my  friend  replied,  "  Though  it  is  a  valuable  picture,  the  artist's 
name  is  unknown."  I  show  you  a  picture,  the  frame  is  made  of  earth,  and  the 
picture  is  called  life.  See  the  carving  of  Divine  genius  in  the  frame,  and  behold 
the  lines  of  everlasting  love  in  the  picture  !  Can  you  say  that  no  intelligent  mind 
ever  conceived  and  no  skilful  hand  ever  formed  the  leaf,  the  fruit,  the  rose  of  that 
picture  ?  Some  atheists  admit  there  is  a  Mind  above  that  which  is  human,  yet 
they  say  that  the  God-mind  has  no  personal  sympathy  with  men.  Many  people 
live  as  if  there  were  no  God.  Is  it  not  fashionable  to  do  so  ?  Would  you  be  glad 
if  there  were  no  God  ?  Think,  God's  happiness  is  to  bless  you,  and  yet  you  rob 
Him  of  that  joy.  II.  Deists.  One  who  thinks  there  is  a  supreme  God,  but  will 
not  believe  that  He  revealed  Himself  in  Christ  Jesus.  Deist,  I  ask  you  to  behold 
God  through  Jesus.  Do  not  rob  Jesus  of  His  loving  influence,  which  is  meant  to 
bless  your  own  heart.  Can  you  find  any  other  man  who  ever  taught  the  world  a 
better  truth,  or  one  who  loved  men  more  than  Jesus  did?  {William  Birch.) 
Robbing  Ood  : — It  is  a  fearful  crime  to  rob  God,  and  yet  it  is  done  every  day, 
and  done  by  His  professed  friends  as  well  as  by  His  open  enemies.  God  is  robbed 
whenever  His  requirements  are  disregarded,  whenever  His  rights  are  resisted, 
whenever  the  demands  and  interests  of  His  kingdom  are  neglected.  Consider 
wherein  God  is  robbed  by  His  people.  1.  In  the  matter  of  affection.  "My  son, 
give  Me  thy  heart."  That  is  the  supreme  offering.  2.  In  the  matter  of  con- 
secration. God  will  have  the  whole  heart,  life,  gifts,  or  none.  3.  In  the  matter 
of  service.  God's  claim  is  absolute  upon  your  time,  influence,  prayers,  efforts, 
gifts,  means,  even  in  their  potentiality.  4.  In  the  matter  of  gratitude.  5.  In 
tithes  and  offerings.  (J.  M.  Sherwood.)  Living  by  theft : — This  is  a  kind  of 
theft  which  is  very  common.  It  does  not  affect  the  credit  of  those  who  are  guilty 
of  it.  It  is  practised  by  all  unsaved  persons,  more  or  less.  Indeed,  this  is  one  of 
the  principal  means  by  which  Satan  keeps  Christless  persons  at  their  ease.  It  is 
most  common  amongst  those  of  the  unsaved  who  are  respectable,  moral,  and, 
after  their  own  fashion,  religious  people.  Satan  teaches  them  to  live  by  theft. 
He  gets  them  to  appropriate  to  themselves  promises  and  hopes  which  do  not 
belong  to  them  :  and  by  means  of  this  stolen  pi'operty,  he  succeeds  in  keeping 
them  at  their  ease  until  he  has  ruined  them  for  ever.  (A.  J.  Gordon.)  Robbing 
God : — The  story  about  old  Stradivarius,  the  famous  violin-maker,  is  suggestive. 
He  said  that  if  his  hand  slackened  in  its  work  of  making  violins  he  would  rob 
God,  and  leave  a  blank  instead  of  good  violins.  He  said  that  even  God  would  not 
make  Antonio's  violins  without  Antonio.  The  truth  has  a  wide  application.  It 
may  be  applied  to  every  life,  and  to  every  piece  of  work  that  any  of  us  do.  One  is 
engaged  in  a  factory,  one  in  a  machine-shop,  one  in  an  office,  one  on  a  farm,  one  is 
at  school.  One  man  is  a  physician,  another  is  a  lawyer,  another  a  merchant, 
another  a  mechanic,  another  a  minister.  Whatever  our  work  is,  we  cannot  be 
faithful  to  God  unless  we  do  it  as  well  as  we  can.  To  slur  is  to  do  God's  work 
badly.  To  neglect  is  to  rob  God.  Robbing  God  : — We  do  well  to  ask  ourselves 
at  this  time  how  far  the  words  of  God  by  Malachi  apply  to  our  case  :  "  Ye  are 
cursed  with  a  curse;  for  ye  have  robbed  Me."  .  .  .  "Wherein?  In  tithes 
and  offerings."  When  we  compare  the  millions  upon  millions  lavished  upon 
vain  display,  costly  feasts,  extravagant  dress,  palatial  dwellings,  frivolous  or 
debasing  amusements,  and  worse,  on  gambling,  drinking,  and  unhallowed  lusts, 
with  the  shabby  pittance  doled  out  for  the  Gospel  at  home  and  abroad,  and  then 
ask  ourselves  how  this  must  look  in  God's  sight,  is  it  any  wonder  that  we  are 
visited  with  hard  times  ?  "I  tremble  for  my  country  (said  Thomas  Jefferson) 
when  I  remember  that  God  is  just."  Nine  hundred  million  dollars  spent  in  one 
year  for  intoxicating  liquors  ;  five  and  a  half  millions  for  missions  (not  church- 
support)  at  home  and  abroad — that  is,  one  hundred  and  sixty-four  to  one.  The 
nine  hundred  millions  are  not  only  squandered— they  would  better  be  cast  into 
the  sea  than  used  as  they  now  are  to  ruin  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men,  to  destroy 
famines,   and  to  plague  the  State.     (F.   H.  Barling.)        The  great  robbery:— 


OHAP.  m.]  MALACHI.  81 

Well,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  man  will  do  some  very  daring  deeds.  What 
magnificent  things  he  is  capable  of  1  He  may  not  be  much  to  look  at,  he  may 
not  fill  a  large  space  in  the  landscape ;  but  out  of  his  heart  and  soul  what  deeds 
of  heroism  may  come !  what  feats  of  daring  ! — achievements  that  thrill  the  whole 
world  and  move  the  heart  of  heaven  !  It  is  a  precious  heritage  that  we  have 
in  human  biography.  Man,  however,  does  not  always  employ  his  daring  soul 
in  the  right  way.  What  is  the  most  dariag  thing  ever  done  ?  Why,  surely 
it  is  here — in  that  a  man  will  rob  God.  And  it  is  not  true  courage  that  leads 
him  to  do  that ;  it  is  foolhardiness,  with  emphasis  on  the  first  syllable  of  the 
word.  It  is  the  coward  who  robs  God,  for  he  knows  not  what  he  is  doing.  But 
let  us  look  at  the  question  in  a  larger  sense,  and  see  how  we  may  be  guilty  of  this 
terrible  crime.  All  robbery  of  God  proceeds  from  our  failure  to  acknowledge  the 
one  great  fact  of  God's  sovereignty.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness 
thereof ;  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein."  "  It  is  He  that  hath  made 
us :  we  are  His  people,  and  the  sheep  of  His  pasture."  In  theory  we  acknow- 
ledge all  this ;  but  how  about  its  practical  bearing  on  our  everyday  life  ?  Have 
we  a  reverent  and  beautiful  sense  of  God's  ownership,  leading  to  the  hallowing 
of  all  our  thoughts,  deeds,  and  possessions  ?  Do  we  ever  talk  about  having 
money  of  omr  own,  forgetting  that  every  mite  of  it  is  God's  ?  We  even  go  so 
far  as  to  say  that  we  "  will  be  master  in  oiu"  own  house,"  forgetting  that  the  house 
is  not  oiu-s,  and  that  "  One  is  our  Master,  even  Christ."  What  we  need,  then, 
nowadays  is  a  clearer  sense  of  God's  sovereignty.  We  shall  not  tread  so  haughtily 
and  bear  oiu-selves  so  proudly,  we  shall  not  be  so  careless  and  irreverent  in  our 
lives,  when  we  realise  vividly  the  authority  and  presence  of  the  Lord  of  all.  What 
a  terrible  charge  the  psalmist  brings  against  certain  people  ! — "  God  is  not  in 
all  their  thoughts."  Unless  we  are  to  rob  God  of  His  right,  He  must  be  in  all 
our  thoughts,  the  great  moral  Force  in  all  our  work  and  duty,  keeping  us  in  fine 
integrity  and  honour.  In  pleasure  He  must  be  "  the  spring  of  all  our  joys,  the 
life  of  our  delights,"  and  then  we  shall  take  no  harm  whatever  pleasure  we  engage 
in.  And  in  sorrow  He  must  be  our  first  and  only  thought ;  then  "  grief  and 
fear  and  care  shall  fly  as  clouds  before  the  midday  sun."  Will  a  man  rob  God  ? 
Yes,  imless  he  have  the  fear  of  God  continually  before  him.  "  The  transgression 
of  the  wicked  saith  within  my  heart,  that  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes." 
That  is  the  message  of  every  transgression  ever  committed.  If  men  had  the 
fear  of  God  before  their  eyes  they  would  never  sin  against  Him.  An  article 
in  one  of  the  papers  a  while  ago  spoke  of  "  the  degeneracy  of  wills."  In  the 
olden  time  a  man  began  his  will  thus :  "  In  the  name  of  God,  Amen."  But 
now  we  begin  abruptly  :  "  This  is  the  last  will  and  testament."  It  is  not  simply 
that  we  are  short  of  time,  and  cannot  afford  the  roundabout  phrases  of  a  bygone 
day ;  it  is  that  we  have  not  the  sense  of  reverence  in  the  measiu-e  that  we  ought 
to  have  it — we  do  not  live  with  the  holy  dread  and  mighty  awe  of  the  great 
old  saints.  Will  a  man  rob  God  ?  Yes,  if  he  withhold  his  love,  gratitude,  and 
obedience  from  Him.  These  great  affections  of  the  heart  were  bestowed  upon 
us  that  they  might  be  given  to  some  worthy  object.  Are  they  just  to  be  spent 
upon  a  few  inferior  objects  around  us,  and  to  be  denied  to  One  in  whom  is  all 
perfect  excellence,  goodness,  and  beauty  ?  Does  not  the  love  of  God  to  us  call 
loudly  for  oiu:  love  in  return  ?  Does  not  all  the  mercy  of  the  past  lay  irresistible 
claim  to  our  fervent  gratitude  ?  Does  not  every  precept  of  God's  law  require 
our  obedience  ?  If  we  do  not  give  it,  shall  we  not  be  robbing  with  the  basest, 
boldest  robbery  Him  to  whom  oiu"  more  than  all  is  due  ?  The  man  who  robs 
God  steals  from  himself.  God  needs  nothing  of  ours  to  make  Him  any  richer  ; 
it  is  simply  for  our  own  sakes  that  He  makes  the  great  demand.  Give  your  httle 
all,  and  the  retiun  shall  be  in  full  measure,  pressed  down,  and  running  over.  With- 
hold, and  you  stand  to  gain  nothing  and  to  lose  all.     (IF.  A.  L.  Taylor,  B.A.) 

Ver.  10.  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse. — God's  storehouse : — 
The  contents  of  this  book  show  that,  in  the  time  of  Malachi,  religion  was  in  a  very 
low  condition.  The  people  robbed  God  by  keeping  back  the  tithes  and  offerings, 
and  the  priests  polluted  God's  altar.  They  offered  to  God  what  they  dared  not 
to  have  offered  to  a  human  governor,  and  what  a  human  governor  would  not 
have  accepted  at  their  hands.  And  yet  they  seemed  unconscious  of  the  evil  of 
their  conduct.  Sin  so  blinds  the  eyes  and  blunts  the  conscience  that  men  often 
do  wrong,  and  scarcely  know  that  they  are  doing  it.  But  sin  brings  its  own 
punishment.  God  blighted  their  fields  and  blemished  their  flocks,  so  that  the 
6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

land  groaned  beneath  the  curse.  And  the  only  way  to  remove  the  evil  waa  to 
turn  from  the  evil  of  their  ways.  I.  The  origin  and  meaning  of  tithes.  It 
was  the  tenth  part  of  the  produce  of  the  80U,  and  the  increase  of  the  flock,  or 
the  income  of  the  individual.  It  was  not  simply  a  Mosaic  institution.  See  Jacob's 
vow  at  Bethel.  Abraham  paid  tithes  to  Melchizedek.  God  seems  to  have 
instituted  this  claim,  to  be  a  constant  acknowledgmeat^ea^Hir  pa/rt-of-our-depend- 
ence  upon  Him  for  all  that  we  possess.  God  claims  an  absolute  ownership  of  the 
soil  and  all  its  produce,  and  He  claimed  this  constant  acknowledgment  of  His 
ownership  at  the  hands  of  men.  Tithes  were  used  at  first  to  maintain  the  ordinances 
of  religion,  and  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  poor,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow, 
who  have  ever  been  the  objects  of  God's  care.  In  addition  to  these  tithes,  there 
were  also  freewill  offerings.  Many,  of  their  own  free  will,  gave  far  beyond  the 
minimum  stipulated.  Perhaps  it  was  never  intended,  even  under  the  Jewish 
economy,  that  the  tithe  should  be  exacted  by  force.  It  is  evident  that  it  was 
often  withholden.  The  tithe  is  certainly  not  to  be  exacted  by  law  imder  the  present 
economy.  Yet  surely  less  cannot  be  expected  of  us  than  of  the  Jews.  The  earth 
is  still  the  Lord's,  and  He  demands  the  same  acknowledgment  from  us  that  He  did 
from  them.  It  is  God  that  sends  simshine  and  shower,  and  causes  the  seed  to 
germinate  and  spring  up.  Is  God  amply  repaid,  as  the  owner  of  the  land,  and  for 
His  toil,  when  you  give  Him  the  t«nth,  and  that,  perhaps,  grudgingly  ?  But  it 
is  not  simply  your  substance,  but  yourself,  also,  that  belongs  to  God.  You  are 
not  your  own.  Then  surely  there  ought  to  be  an  acknowledgment  of  His  ownership. 
Have  you  even  tithed  yourself  for  God  ?  Where  is  the  storehouse  into  which 
these  tithes  are  to  be  brought  ?  Where  is  God's  storehouse  ?  The  storehouse 
is  just  where  the  tithes  are  needed.  You  need  to  tithe  your  time  and  thought 
for  the  culture  of  your  own  heart  and  life,  if  they  are  to  be  as  a  well-kept  garden, 
beautiful  unto  God.  You  need  to  tithe  your  time  for  the  good  of  your  family, 
if  your  house  is  to  be  well  ordered,  and  your  children  trained  up  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  You  need  to  tithe  your  time,  and  thought,  and 
affection,  to  meet  the  claims  of  society — the  ignorant  and  degraded  around  you 
loudly  call  for  help.  The  storehouse  for  your  substance  may  be  found  in  the 
homes  of  the  widow,  and  the  orphan,  and  the  poor,  and  the  destitute.  II.  The 
blessing  here  promised.  Opening  the  windows  has,  no  doubt,  reference  to 
sunshine  and  showers,  which  produce  the  harvest.  But  every  good  gift  is  from 
above,  and,  therefore,  this  expression  may  symbolise  the  way  in  which  every 
blessing  is  bestowed  upon  us.  How  easy  it  would  be  for  God  thus  to  pour  down 
His  blessing  upon  us  till  there  be  not  room  enough  to  receive  it.  This  is  true  of 
temporal  blessing.  It  is  equally  true  in  relation  to  the  spiritual  blessing.  If 
we  were  to  comply  with  the  conditions  God  has  here  named,  how  easy  it  would 
be  for  Him  to  fill  this  house.  This  is  especially  true  in  relation  to  personal  blessing. 
In  Him  are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  ■  You  see  then  the  way 
in  which  God's  blessing  can  be  obtained.  You  shut  hoarven  or  you  open  it,  by 
the  attitude  you  assume  in  relation  to  God.  Se  will  ultimately  be  to  you  what  you 
persist  in  being  to  Him.  You  may,  too,  in  many  ways,  prevent  or  procure  blessings 
for  others.  (A.  Clark.)  Bringing  in  the  tithes  : — 1.  It  is  objected,  that  we  are 
not  Jews,  and  that  the  command  is,  therefore,  obsolete.  But  the  occasion  of 
tithing,  like  that  of  the  Lord's  day,  is  found  in  permanent,  unchanging  facts, 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  needs  of  man.  The  occasion  for  tithing  is  even  more 
urgent  to-day  than  of  old,  as  the  work  of  religion  is  to  be  extended  throughout  the 
globe.  2.  It  is  objected,  that  this  law  of  tithing,  like  the  laws  concerning  sacrifice 
and  circumcision,  has  been  repealed.  But  this  is  not  true.  There  is  not  a  syllable 
in  the  New  Testament  which,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  repeals  the  law  of  the 
tithe.  3.  It  is  objected,  that  every  man  is  to  give  "  as  he  purposeth  in  his  heart, 
and  as  the  Lord  hath  prospered  bim,"  and  this  is  a  virtual  repeal  of  the  tithe.  On 
the  contrary,  it  really  confirms  the  principle  of  tithing.  We  are  to  give  by  "  pur- 
pose"; that  is,  deliberately,  systematically — not  according  to  whim  or  accident. 
4.  It  may  be  said,  "  I  am  not  limited  to  a  tenth,  but,  like  Zaccheus,  I  may  give 
half,  or,  like  the  apostles,  all."  So  much  the  better.  There  is  no  objection  to 
the  rule.  "  Thank-offerings  were  always  commended."  5.  The  worst  objection  is, 
"  I  cannot  afford  it."  There  is  the  real  obstacle — selfishness.  But  "  I  want 
to  save  for  old  age."  Yes,  and  for  eternity,  too.  Do  not  save  for  your  children 
by  robbing  God.  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  tithes,  and  lose  his 
soul  ?  {M.  V.  Crouse.)  Prove  Me  now  herewith. — Ood  put  to  the  proof  : — 
Far  higher  than   the   heavens  are  above   the  earth  is  our  God  above  men  ; 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  83 

and  yet  He  speaks  to  men,  not  merely  after  the  manier  of  men,  so  far  as  that 
manner  is  good,  but  often  with  a  tenderness,  a  gentleness,  and  a  freedom  of  which 
many  men  are  utterly  incapable.  Here,  to  assist  Nehemiah  in  the  restoration 
of  the  worship  of  God,  Malachi  is  directed  to  say  to  the  people,  "  Bring  ye  all 
the  tithes  into  the  storehouse  .  .  .  and  prove  Me  now  herewith,"  &c.  The  con- 
secration of  a  tenth  of  the  produce  of  property  and  of  toil  is  of  earlier  date  than 
the  estabhshment  of  the  Mosaic  economy.  The  custom  was  adopted  by  Divine 
direction  in  the  Levitical  dispensation,  and  was  enforced  by  Divine  commandments. 
God  here  complains  of  neglect  mth  respect  to  this  said  ordinance,  which  indicated 
a  careless,  imdevout,  and  irreligious  spirit  among  the  people ;  and  on  account 
of  this,  God  had  withheld  His  blessing  and  smitten  Israel  with  a  curse.  God's 
requirements  are,  in  principle  and  spirit,  very  similar  in  all  ages,  and  the  omissions, 
and  defects,  and  faults  of  the  people  of  God  are,  in  times  even  far  distant  from 
each  other,  not  unlike.  1.  God  has  ever  connected  the  enjoyment  and  use  of 
certain  blessings  with  the  observance  of  His  ordinances,  and  with  obedience  to 
His  requirements.  We  may  trace  the  connection  of  obedience  with  our  salvation. 
The  obedience  of  the  children  of  Israel  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  their 
election.  In  like  manner  our  obedience  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the 
provision  made  for  our  redemption.  I  am  born  again,  not  because  I  have  obeyed, 
but  that  I  may  obey.  I  am  pardoned  and  justified,  not  because  I  have  obeyed, 
but  that  I  may  be  in  a  position  to  be  trained  for  obedience.  What  has  the  obedience 
of  a  child  to  do  with  his  relation  to  his  father  ?  This  obedience  does  not  earn 
or  procure,  or  in  any  sense  purchase  and  obtain  our  salvation,  but  it  is  the 
working  out  of  that  salvation,  so  far  as  our  experience  and  our  inward  conscious- 
ness and  enjoyment  of  that  salvation  are  concerned.  Let  us  therefore  distinctly 
imderstand  this  at  starting.  But  look  further,  and  look  at  certain  institutions 
and  ordinances.  Just  as  there  is  a  close  connection  between  the  enjoyment  of 
pardon, — the  deliverance  of  our  souls  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  and  the  confession 
of  our  sins  to  God,  so  there  is  a  close  connection  between  peace  of  mind,  freedom 
from  care,  and  obedience  evidenced  in  earnest,  importunate,  and  continued 
supphcation.  2.  Although  God  has  thus  connected  blessedness  with  obedience, 
and  with  the  observance  of  His  ordinances,  the  people  of  God  have  often  neglected 
them — neglected  institutions  founded  for  their  benefit,  and  neglected  Divine 
precepts  and  prohibitions  :  and  this  neglect  is  traceable  to  various  sources.  Some- 
times neglect  arises  from  ignorance.  How  can  a  man  know  the  mind  of  God 
concerning  him.  who  does  not  search  his  Bible  ?  But  a  man  may  read  the  Bible, 
and  still  be  ignorant.  Hearing  you  may  not  understand,  and  seeking  you  may 
not  find.  Neglect  arises  from  thoughtlessness  and  carelessness,  and  from  indolence.. 
3.  Such  neglect  often  brings  spiritual  adversity,  and  sometimes  exposes  to  sore 
afihction.  If  we  have  not  all  the  spiritual  blessings  which  God  has  promised, 
why  are  they  not  in  our  possession  '>  The  connection  which  God  has  ordained 
between  obedience  and  blessedness  cannot  be  severed.  Our  spiritual  adversity, 
therefore,  cannot  be  traceable  to  God.  The  cause  can  only  be  in  ourselves ;  and  it 
will  be  often  found  in  some  neglect, — not  in  the  commission  of  something  wrong, 
but  in  the  omission  of  duties  that  we  Christians  think  lightly  of.  We  have 
restrained  prayer,  therefore  our  anxiety  and  our  unrest.  We  have  not  acknow- 
ledged our  sins,  therefore  our  sense  of  guUt  and  our  fear.  We  have  neglected  the 
Scriptures,  or  forsaken  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together.  4.  Oiu"  awaking 
to  the  knowledge  that  we  have  not  all  that  God  has  promised,  should  be  immedi- 
ately followed  by  searchings  of  heart.  Here  again  the  cause  must  be  in  ourselves. 
6.  Now  say  that  neglect  is  discovered,  it  should  be  instantly  followed  by  supplying 
the  omission.  Prove  me — my  love,  my  hand,  my  faithfulness.  All  these  omissions, 
by  God's  grace,  and  the  grace  of  the  Spirit,  may  be  supplied.  {Samuel  Martin.) 
Heaven's  ivindows  : — Belief  in  a  heaven  has  been  universal  Material  good 
descends  from  the  material  heaven.  The  visible  heavens  are  the  type  of  the 
spiritual.  I.  Windows  are  for  light.  Heaven  is  filled  with  unsullied'light.  Its 
light  falls  upon  the  earth.  It  ever  gleams  upon  men  in  their  benighted  wanderings. 
II.  Windows  are  for  health.  The  atmosphere  of  heaven  is  pure.  The  inhabitants 
never  say,  "  I  am  sick."  Man's  moral  health  on  earth  is  from  the  heavenly 
influences  that  descend  upon  him.  III.  Windows  are  for  the  interchanob 
OF  sentiment,  observation,  and  the  glances  of  affection.  The  inhabitants 
of  heaven  are  interested  in  men.  Men  are  penitent,  angels  rejoice.  Men  look 
up  to  Grod,  and  He  regards  them  from  His  lofty  dwelling-place.  He  manifests 
His  love  to  their  hearts.    IV.  Windows  abb  fob  thh  exclusion  of  noxious 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  m. 

VAP0TTB3  AND  KBPTiLES.     Earth's  evils  cannot  enter  heaven.     Men  may  enter, 
but  not  their  sins.     Whatever  may  defile  other  worlds  in  God's  universe,  nothing 
can  defile  this  one.     V.  Windows  abb  foe  bhauty.     Whether  of  glass  or  of  lattice- 
work, they  ornament  earth's  palaces  and  temples.     Heaven  is  full  of  beauty. 
The  incomplete  descriptions  that  are  given  sometimes  ravish  \is.     (W.  Osborne 
LilUy.)        An  overflowing  blessing  : — Not  room  enough  in  our  hearts !     They  are 
limitless  in  their  sense  of  need.     1.  Sense  of  poverty.     God's  title-deed  expresses 
limitless  ownership.     2.   Sense  of  bereavement.     God  fills  this  with  assurance 
of  immortal  reunions.     3.  Sense  of  ignorance.     God  promises  the  Spirit  to  "  lead 
you  into  all  truth."     4.  Sense  of  sin.     "  If  sin  abound,  grace  dotn  much  more 
abound."     5.  Sense  of  uselessness  in  purpose.     Life's  energies  drained  into  self, 
as  the  Jordan  into  the  Dead  Sea,  instead  of  the  desires  flowing  out  to  bless  man- 
kind.    6.  Sense  of  little  service  with  the  best  intentions.     God  makes  a  Christian 
useful  beyond  his  ability,  his  planning,  and  his  knowledge.     (Homilctic  Monthly.) 
Giving  as  an  expression  of  gratitude  : — I  was  once  staying  with  a  woman  whose 
husband  was  sick  and  out  of  employment  when  she  received  a  letter  from  C.  H. 
Spurgeon  containing  a  five-pound  note  and  these  few  cheery  words,   "  A  little 
something  just  to  keep  the  pot  boiling."     I  changed  the  note  for  her  into  gold, 
and  taking  one  half-sovereign  up,  she  said,  "  This  must  go  into  the  green  purse," 
and  straightway  produced  from  an  underneath  pocket,  a  faded  green  purse  into 
which  the  small  yellow  coin  was  dropped.     I  asked  her  why  she  separated  her 
money  in  that  way,  and  she  answered,  "  This  is  God's  purse,  we  always  put  aside 
a  tenth."     "  But,"  said  I,  "  God  does  not  require  this  from  you  in  your  present 
circumstances."     "  No,"  was  her  answer,  and  a  beautiful  light  came  upon  her 
face,  "  He  may  not,  but  it  is  ovu-  joy  to  do  it.     See  how  good  He  has  been  !     I 
never  asked  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  help  us,  nor  did  I  even  tell  him  that  we  were  in  a 
corner.     It  would  be  selfish  to  spend  all  this  on  ourselves  ;  where  would  be  our 
gratitude  if  we  did  ?  "     {Charlotte  Skinner.)         Blessing  comes  by  giving  .• — In  the 
olden  days,  when  spring-time  came,  the  Grand  Duke  of  Venice,  with  attendant 
nobles  and  innumerable  priests,  used  to  go  to  the  last  point  of  land,  and  there, 
standing  on  the  shores  of  the  Adriatic,  throw  a  gold  jewelled  ring  into  the  ocean. 
It  was  called  "  Marrying  Venice  to  the  Sea."     In  the  same  days  when  the  Nile 
was  at  its  height,  the  dam  was  broken  connecting  the  river  with  the  canals,  and  as 
the  water  rushed  into  its  new  channels,  a  living  woman  was  thrown  into  the  mad 
stream  to  become  the  bride  of  the  Nile.     In  each  ceremony  there  was  the  idea 
that  blessing  came  by  giving  ;  the  ring  made  Venice  the  queen  of  the  seas — the 
woman  brought  fertility  to  a  whole  nation.     (Ibid.)         Proportionate  giving  .■ — 
'When  Mr.  Marshall   the   publisher  was   a   young   man  of  eighteen,  he  heard  a 
sermon  by  the  late  Rev.  Baldwin  Brown,  which  dealt  chiefly  with  the  stewardship 
of  wealth.     He  left  the  church  determined  that  henceforth  whatever  money  he  had 
got,  whether  it  was  much  or  little,  he  would  always  put  aside  one-tenth  for  the 
Lord  before  he  devoted  any  of  it  to  his  own  use.     This  he  continued  to  do  for 
some  years.     After  a  time  he  found  himself  giving  away  more  money  than  many  of 
his  friends  who  had  much  greater  incomes.     Some  of  them  expostulated  with  him, 
and,  as  his  wont  was,  he  took  the  question  to  the  Lord  in  prayer.     "  Here,"  said 
he,  "  I  have  given  away,  believing  it  to  be  my  duty,  for  purposes  which  I  regard 
as  yours,  one-tenth  of  my  income.     Am  I  doing  what  is  right  ?     Will  you  give 
me  a  sign  ?  "     In  the  year  1852  he  devised  the  first  iUustrated  programme  for 
a  public^funeral  that  had  ever  appeared  in  London — that  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington. 
Now  he  prayed  to  God  :   "  I  am  publishing  this  programme  ;  it  may  succeed, 
it  may  fail.     May  I  ask  that,  in  connection  with  the  publication  of  this  programme, 
^•ou  will  give  me  a  sign  that  will  give  me  clearly  to  understand  whether  I  am  to 
go  on  giving,  to  curtail  my  subscriptions,  or  what  I  shall  do  ?  "     Well,  it  turned 
out  that  the  programme  was  a  great  success.     And  then  comes  the  most  remark- 
able thing.     When  the  balance-sheet  caine  to  be  made  up  for  that  programme, 
Mr.  Marshall  found  to  his  astonishment  that  the  net  profits  that  he  had  realised 
amounted,  to  the  very  penny.to  the  sum  which  he  had  given  away  since  his  eighteenth 
year  !     When  he  compared  the  figures,  and  found  that  they  exactly  correspomled, 
he  felt  that  his  prayer  had  been  answered  ;  and,  as  he  put  it  in  his  own  quaint 
way,  "  I  saw  tbit  the  Lord  was  determined  never  to  be  in  debt  with  me,  so  I 
went  ahead."     Afterwards,  as  his  wealth  multiplied,  he  increased  the  proportion. 
Proportionate  giving  :—\.  That  faithful  and  proportionate  giving  will  be  rewarded 
with  superabundant  spiritual  blessing.     The  statement  does  not  require  proof, 
since  experience  has  stamped  it  already  as  an  axiom.     Other  things  being  equal. 


CHAP,  in.]  MA  LAC  HI.  85 

that  Christian  who  opens  the  broadest  outlet  for  charity  will  find  the  widest  inlet 
for  the  Spirit.  The  health  of  a  human  body  depends  upon  its  exhalations  as 
well  as  upon  its  inhalations.  It  is  reported  that  a  boy  who  was  to  personate  a 
shining  cherub  in  a  play,  on  being  covered  over  with  a  coating  of  gold-leaf,  which 
entirely  closed  the  pores  of  the  skin,  died  in  consequence,  before  relief  could  be 
afforded.  Woe  to  the  Christian  who  gets  so  gold-leafed  over  with  his  wealth,  that 
the  pores  of  his  sympathy  are  shut,  and  the  outgoings  of  his  charity  restrained  ! 
He  is  thenceforth  dead  spiritually,  though  he  may  have  a  name  to  live.  2.  That 
faithful  and  proportionate  giving  will  be  rewarded  with  abundant  temporal 
prosperity.  "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance  and  with  the  first-fruits  of 
all  thine  increase  :  so  shall  thy  bams  be  filled  with  plenty,  and  thy  presses  shall 
burst  out  with  new  wine  "  (Prov.  iii.  9,  10).  This  is  but  one  specimen  of  many 
from  the  Old  Testament.  "  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you  ;  good  measure, 
pressed  down,  and  shaken  together,  and  running  over,  shall  men  give  into  your 
bosom  "  (Luke  vi.  38).  Let  us  now  throw  light  upon  this  subject  from  a  few" 
inserted  leaves  from  a  pastor's  notebook.  One  says,  "I  knew  a  widow  of/  /.v^ 
limited  means  who  was  remarkable  for  her  liberality  to  benevolent  objects.  But 
a  sad  change  came  into  her  by  an  unexpected  legacy  which  made  her  wealthy, 
and  then  her  contributions  began  to  fall  below  the  amount  of  her  straitened 
finances.  Once  she  volunteered  :  now  she  only  gives  when  importimed,  and  then 
it  is  as  meagre  as  if  the  fountains  of  gratitude  had  dried  up.  Once  when  asked  by 
her  pastor  to  help  a  cause  dear  to  her  heart  in  her  comparative  poverty,  and  to 
which  she  gave  five  dollars  then,  now  she  proffers  twenty-five  cents.  Her  pastor 
called  her  attention  to  the  surprising  and  ominous  change.  '  Ah,'  she  said,  when 
day  by  day  I  looked  to  God  for  my  bread,  I  had  enough  to  spare  ;  now  I  have 
to  look  to  my  ample  income,  and  I  am  all  the  time  haunted  with  the  fear  of  losing 
it,  and  coming  to  want.  I  had  the  guinea  heart  when  I  had  the  shilling  means, 
now  I  have  the  guinea  means  and  the  shilling  heart.'  It  is  a  fearful  risk  to 
heart  and  soul  to  become  suddenly  rich.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  God 
lets  many  of  His  best  children  acquire  wealth  so  slowly,  so  that  it  may  not  be  a 
snare  to  them,  may  not  chill  their  benevolence  ;  that  when  wealth  comes,  the  fever 
of  ambitious  grasping  may  be  cooled,  and  that  benevolence  may  overtake  avarice." 
Now  the  only  way  to  avoid  this  peril  is  to  cultivate  two  habits,  and  let  them  grow 
side  by  side, — the  habit  of  economy  and  the  habit  of  charity.  If  one's  economy 
grows  steadily  and  alone,  it  will  tend  to  dry  up  his  charity  ;  if  one's  charity  grows 
steadily,  it  will  dry  up  his  means,  unless  balanced  by  the  other  virtue  of  economy. 
Therefore,  let  both  grow  together,  then  our  giving  will  increase  just  in  proportion 
to  our  getting.  {J.  A.  Gordon,  D.D. )  Money  and  the  blessing : — We  have  brought 
the  gifts  into  the  storehouse  ;  now  look  out  for  the  opening  of  the  heavens.  The 
first  blessing  that  will  come  will  be  one  of  prayer.  The  spirit  of  prayer  poured 
out  will  be  continuous.  Prayer  is  the  chalice  in  which  we  fetch  the  water  from 
the  rock.  It  is  the  ladder  on  which  we  climb  up  to  pick  the  grapes  hanging  over 
the  wall  of  heaven.  It  is  the  fire  that  warms  the  frigid  soul.  Prayer  is  the  lever. 
The  Divine  promise  is  the  fulcrum.  Earnest  prayer  is  always  answered.  Another 
blessing  will  be  a  spirit  of  work.  Not  a  Christian  here  but  will  be  anxious  about 
somebody' else.  The  Church  was  never  in  such  a  fair  way  for  a  blessing  as  now. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Prove  Me  now: — 1.  With  regard  to  the  pardon  of 
OUT  sin  for  Christ's  sake.  2.  With  regard  to  the  purifying  influence  of  the  Gospel. 
3.  With  regard  to  our  guidance  in  the  investigation  of  religious  truth.  4.  With 
regard  to  the  supply  of  oiu-  temporal  wants.  5.  With  regard  to  the  happiness 
of  personal  religion.  6.  With  regard  to  answers  to  prayer.  {G.  Brooks.)  Con- 
ditional blessing  : — The  Hon.  C.  Rhodes,  in  a  recent  meeting,  told  his  audience 
that  the  extension  of  British  power  in  Africa  had  been  the  one  object  of  his  hfe 
for  years.  For  this  he  had  hved  and  laboured.  To  him  would  come  the  purpose 
of  his  life,  if  in  South  Africa  he  might  see  the  British  flag  waving  over  a  free  and 
united  empire.  A  noble  ambition,  truly,  for  a  patriotic  heart,  and  worthy  of 
the  great  efforts  made  for  its  accomplishment.  The  prophet  Malachi  was  engaged 
in  a  nobler  mission  still.  Far  more  worthy,  in  conception  and  results,  was  the 
work  of  winning  an  apostate  nation  back  to  God.  It  was  no  easy  task.  The 
work  of  the  reformer  never  is.  Divine  love  and  courage  made  Malachi  a  patriotic 
saint,  and  led  him  boldly  to  attack  the  evils  of  the  sinful  nation  in  which  he  hved. 
It  is  to  one  of  his  most  courageous  messages  that  we  would  direct  attention.   I.  The 

GRAVE  ACCUSATION  MADE  BY  GOD  AGAINST  THIS  PEOPLE — "  Will  a  man  rob  God  ? 

Yet  ye  have  robbed  Me."     This  accusation  was  a  starthng  one.     Whoever  would 


86  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

hare  thought  that  men  would  rob  God  ?  They  might  rob  their  fellows,  but 
Burely  they  would  never  rob  the  Lord.  As  Malachi  uttered  these  words  they 
made  a  great  sensation.  I  imagine  all  Jerusalem  was  in  an  uproar  over  his  utter- 
ance. The  merchants  forgot  their  merchandise  as  they  discussed  it  in  the  bazaars. 
Priests  gathered  with  scribes  in  solemn  council,  and  agreed  that  the  man  who 
had  made  such  a  statement  was  mad.  Yet  this  message  was  absolutely  true. 
They  were  committing  the  awful  sin  of  robbing  God  :  and  when  the  excitement 
and  anger  had  died  down  they  were  forced  to  admit  its  truth.  Men  are  robbing 
God  in  like  manner  to-day.  God  says,  "  Ye  are  not  yoiu*  own  :  ye  are  bought 
with  a  price,"  and  yet  they  withhold  themselves  from  Him.  Is  not  that  robbery  ? 
The  Holy  Ghost  speaks,  "  Know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  ?  "  Yet  instead  of  permitting  Him  to  dwell  there,  its  rooms  are  filled 
with  sinful  guests.  Is  not  that  robbery  also  ?  You  say  these  are  strong,  stout 
words.  True  !  but  God's  messages  are  never  vague  or  uncertain.  Great  evils 
demand  powerful  remedies.  Hence  Grod  calls  robbery,  robbery,  and  sin,  sin. 
He  puts  His  finger  upon  the  plague  spot,  and  says,  "  That  is  where  you  are  wrong." 
The  cupboard  of  your  hfe  may  be  shut  to  others,  and  looks  Uke  some  fair  adorn- 
ment on  the  wall.  He  knows  the  secret  spring,  and  reveals  the  skeleton  of  thy 
sin  which  Hes  hidden  within.  "  WiU  a  man  rob  God  ?  Yet  ye  have  robbed 
Me."  II.  The  sad  result  of  such  a  sinful  couese — "  Ye  are  cursed  with 
a  curse,"  &c.  In  the  south  of  Scotland  there  stands  the  ruin  of  a  famous  abbey. 
Its  broken  columns  and  arched  windows,  its  trelHsed  doorways  and  roofless  aisles, 
its  damp  chapels  and  deserted  altar,  all  speak  sadly  of  a  former  glory  and  a  de- 

{)arted  greatness.  The  cm-se  of  man  has  fallen  upon  it.  Me  thinks,  that  as  Malachi 
ooked  upon  the  Ufe  of  his  countrymen  he  saw  only  a  ruin  which  shadowed  forth 
its  fonder  beauty  and  greatness.  Decay  was  stamped  upon  it.  Its  worship 
had  become  an  abomination.  "  Ye  offer,"  said  Jehovah,  "  polluted  bread  upon 
Mine  altar."  "  The  table  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible "  (chap.  i.  7).  God's 
covenant  wa«  despised  (i.  6).  Justice  and  judgment  were  perverted.  The  sorcerer, 
the  adulterer,  the  false-swearer,  and  the  oppressor  fattened  upon  the  woes  of 
others  (iii.  5).  Israel  was  a  moral  ruin  and  a  spiritual  desolation.  She  was 
despised  by  men  and  cursed  by  God.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  fall  beneath  God's 
curse ;  and  yet  every  soul  which  robs  God  has  that  cm-se  upon  him.  History 
tells  us  that  wherever  the  axe  of  Richard  the  Lion-hearted  swung,  the  stoutest 
mail  was  sphntered  hke  matchwood,  and  the  bravest  men  went  down.  God 
is  a  "  man  of  war  "  :  the  "  Lord  of  Hosts  "  is  His  name.  "  He  taketh  up  the 
isles  as  a  very  httle  thing."  His  strong  arm  can  make  the  choicest  defences 
a  ruined  heap.  He  shall  utterly  destroy  His  foes.  Men  shall  look  for  them, 
and  they  shall  not  be  foimd.  Hast  thou  wondered  why  thy  soul  hath  not  pros- 
pered ?  Is  God's  curse  resting  upon  thee  ?  How  can  it  prosper  when  it  is 
robbing  God  ?  III.  The  just  demand  which  God  makes — "  Bring  ye  all  the 
tithes  into  the  storehouse,  that  there  may  be  meat  in  Mine  house."  In  the  pre- 
ceding verse  you  will  notice  that  God  complains  of  robbery  from  two  sources, 
i.e.,  tithes  and  offerings.  The  tithing  God  lequires :  the  offeiings  were  freewill 
gifts  over  and  above  the  tithes.  Hence  in  this  demand  God  speaks  of  tithes 
only.  Under  the  Jewish  economj'  everything  connected  with  life  and  worship 
was  built  up  upon  one  great  principle,  i.e.,  ownership  by  God.  Whilst  they 
remained  true  it  never  failed.  The  land  was  His,  and  so  its  first-fruits,  whether 
of  corn,  fruit,  or  cattle,  had  to  be  redeemed  by  an  offering  to  Him.  The  first- 
bom  of  children  were  His,  and  they,  too,  had  to  be  redeemed.  The  same  principle 
ran  through  their  worship,  \\nienever  they  appeared  before  Him  they  brought 
an  offering.  If  they  were  too  poor  to  give  a  bullock,  they  gave  a  lamb ;  if  too 
poor  for  this,  they  brought  pigeons  or  turtle  doves.  If  to  the  tithes  there  are 
added  these  offerings,  then  a  very  modest  calculation  shows  that  every  pious 
Jew  must  have  given  about  one-seventh  of  his  entire  income  to  the  Lord.  It 
was  only  when  their  spiritual  Ufe  grew  dim  that  these  offerings  and  tithings  ceased. 
But,  says  some  one,  "  God  does  not  demand  such  things  to-day ;  we  are  not 
under  law,  but  under  grace."  True  :  but  as  Christ  is  better  than  Moses,  and 
grace  is  laden  with  richer  blessings  than  the  law,  our  generosity  ought  to  flow 
out  in  yet  larger  abundance  ;  for  the  greater  the  blessing  the  greater  the  gratitude, 
and  the  greater  the  gratitude  the  greater  the  gifts.  However  much  conditions 
change,  principles  remain.  Tithes  meant  at  least  three  things.  1.  They  meant 
money.  The  produce  of  the  field  was  the  Jews'  money.  It  might  be  com,  fruit, 
oxen,  sheep,  or  asses ;  but  it  was  in  these  that  his  wealth  consisted,  and  of  thee© 


CHAP,  in.]  MALACHI.  87 

he  gave  his  tenth  to  the  Lord.  To-day  the  coin  of  the  realm  is  the  medium  of 
circulating  wealth,  but  the  principle  of  devoting  some  portion  of  it  to  the  Lord 
is  the  same.  2.  Tithes  meant  time.  If  the  produce  represented  money,  the 
cultivation  of  it  represented  time.  The  ploughing,  harrowing,  sowing,  &c.,  which 
the  successful  farmer  had  to  do,  made  great  demands  upon  his  time.  If  you 
would  bring  all  the  tithes,  your  time  will  not  be  exempted.  Let  me  put  this 
truth  in  another  form.  Suppose  it  took  five  minutes  to  pay  a  visit  to  a  home. 
Then  if  fifty  Christians  gave  this  one- tenth  of  time  per  day  to  visitation,  they 
could  pay  no  less  than  900  visits  daily.  3.  Tithes  meant  talent.  The  man  who 
would  succeed  in  cultivation  must  use  his  talents  in  mastering  and  applying  the 
principles  of  agricidture.  God  asks  the  produce  and  the  time,  but  He  demands 
the  talents  also.  Have  you  the  talent  of  speech  ?  God  wants  it.  Of  song  ? 
He  requires  it.  Of  organisation  ?  He  asks  it.  Of  hterary  abihty  ?  He  will 
use  it.  Of  humbler  working  power  ?  He  seeks  it,  and  if  you  withhold  it  you 
are  robbing  God.     "  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  " — not  one,  but  all.     IV.  The  abun- 

DANT    BLESSING    WHICH   GoD   PROMISES    TO   THOSE    WHO    OBEY    HlM — "  A    blcssiug  \ 

that  there  shall  not  be  room  enough  to  receive  it."  The  figure  is  that  of  a  great 
flood.  Just  as  the  banks  of  a  river  are  unable  to  hold  the  waters  in  flood-time, 
so  will  God  bless  the  peison  who  obeys  Him.  He  will  fill  to  overflowing  such 
an  one  with  Divine  gifts.  The  seraphic  Fletcher  had  to  cry  out,  "  Lord,  stay 
Thy  hand."  This  blessing  means — 1.  Prosperity.  "  And  I  will  rebuke  the  de- 
vourer  for  your  sakes,  and  he  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  of  yoxu:  ground  ;  neither 
shall  your  vine  cast  her  fruit  before  the  time  in  the  field,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts  "  (iii.  11).  2.  Honoiir.  "And  all  nations  shall  call  you  blessed"  (iii.  12). 
3.  Happiness.  "  And  ye  shall  be  a  delightsome  land,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  " 
(iii.  12).  How  attractive  would  such  a  people  be.  To  such  would  men  cry, 
"  We  will  go  with  you,  for  God  is  with  you."  Too  long  has  God's  Israel  been 
satisfied  with  learmess,  barrenness,  dearth,  and  death.  Worldliness,  rationahsm, 
and  formahsm  are  eating  out  her  life.  As  it  is  with  the  Church,  so  it  is  with 
every  individual.  The  Church's  life  is  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  individuals 
who  compose  it.  Recently  I  heard  it  stated  that  means  were  being  invented  to 
stop  the  rain  from  falling  in  certain  districts.  Whether  such  a  thmg  is  possible 
I  cannot  say.  But  this  I  know,  that  imless  you  bring  all  the  tithes  into  the 
storehouse  you  will  shut  up  God's  heaven  of  blessing,  and  there  will  be  famine 
in  your  soul.  God  wants  to  bless.  {F.  Inwood.)  Tithes  brought  into  the  store- 
house : — In  this  part  of  the  Divine  Word  we  have  first  a  duty  prescribed,  and 
secondly  a  promise  containing  high  encouragement  to  its  performance.  The 
prescription  of  duty  is  expressed  in  these  words,  "  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into 
the  storehouse,  that  there  may  be  meat  in  Mine  house,  and  prove  Me  now  here- 
with, saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  and  the  promise  follows,  "  if  I  will  not  open  you 
the  windows  of  heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing,  that  there  shall  not  be  room 
enough  to  receive  it."  God's  ancient  people  had,  in  the  days  of  Malachi,  greatly 
failed  in  doing  this  duty,  and  here  God  charges  them  with  robbery  of  no  ordinary 
kind.  Tithes  were  only  a  part  of  the  contributions  of  their  worldly  substance 
which  the  Israelites  were  required  to  devote  to  the  service  of  God ;  and  as  a 
leading  part,  they  seem  to  be  employed  in  the  text  as  a  part  for  the  whole.  There 
was  very  much  required  of  them  besides  the  tithes.  They  were  to  bring  the 
first  fruits,  the  male  firstlings  of  all  clean  beasts,  and  the  redemption  price  of 
such  as  were  unclean.  It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  coercive  measures 
were  employed  to  enforce  the  fiu-nishing  of  the  various  kinds  of  offerings,  except 
by  exclusion  from  participating  in  spiritual  privileges,  which  in  many  cases  followed 
as  a  necessary  consequence  of  failure  in  this  duty.  The  kings  and  rulers  in  Israel 
are  not  reproved  for  not  employing  power  and  authority  to  enforce  the  payment 
of  tithes  or  other  offerings.  This  seems  to  have  been  left  between  God  and  the 
consciences  of  individuals.  I.  Let  us  advert  to  the  law  of  propobtion  in  this 
MATTER.  Here  it  may  be  remarked — I.  That  our  offerings  should  bear  a  proportion 
to  our  resources.  This  was  the  law  imder  the  Old  Testament,  and  it  is  so  under 
the  New.  Hence  the  apostolic  injimction,  "  Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week  let 
every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store,  as  God  hath  prospered  him  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2). 
This  truth  is  also  taught  in  these  words — "  If  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  it  is 
accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  that  he  hath  not " 
(2  Cor.  viii.  12).  2.  Remark  that  our  offerings  are  to  bear  a  proportion  to  the  exig- 
encies of  the  pubhc  cause  of  God.  These  are  different  at  different  times.  When 
the  tabernacle  was  constructed  in  the  wilderness,  which  by  God's  special  appoint- 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

ment  was  to  be  formed  in  many  of  its  parts  of  costly  materials,  a  very  large  demand 
was  made  on  the  reeourcea  of  the  leraehtes,  which  was  met  by  an  unwonted  measure 
of  liberality,  even  till  there  was  more  than  sufficient  for  the  work.  3.  There 
is  also  to  be  a  proportion  between  what  is  contributed  to  the  treasury  of  the  Lord 
and  expended  on  other  objects.  It  is  in  this  respect  that  there  is  a  very  general 
failure  in  this  duty.  God  had  to  complain  of  His  ancient  people,  by  the  prophet 
Haggai,  that  they  dwelt  in  their  ceiled  houses  while  His  house  lay  waste.  And 
perhaps  there  is  nothing  in  which  true  Christians  fail  more  than  in  the  dispro- 
portion between  what  they  give  freely  for  other  objects — not  always  necessary 
objects — and  what  they  devote  to  God  as  His  portion,  and  for  the  promotion 
of  His  cause.  4.  There  is  to  be  a  proportion  of  its  kind  between  the  offering  and 
the  glory  and  claims  of  that  Gtod  to  whom  it  is  presented.     II.  Of  the  spirit 

IN  WHICH  OFFERINGS  SHOULD  BE  PRESENTED  TO  THE  LoRD.       1.  This  will  manifest 

itself  in  giving  God  the  first  share  of  our  worldly  increase.  This  is  no  doubt 
one  thing  taught  in  the  prescription  of  the  first  fruits.  This  is  expressly  taught 
in  these  words,  "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance,  and  with  the  first  fruits 
of  all  thine  increase  "  (Prov.  iii.  9).  2.  It  is  to  be  rendered  willingly  (2  Cor.  ix.  7). 
3.  We  are  to  esteem  it  an  honoiu:  and  a  privilege  to  be  called  and  enabled  to  make 
offerings  of  our  temporal  substance  to  the  Lord.  David  felt  deeply  how  great 
an  honour  and  privilege  it  was  to  have  the  heart  and  the  ability  to  perform  this 
duty,  when  he  and  his  people  contributed  hberally  to  the  building  of  the  Temple 
(I  Chron.  xxix.  13,  14).  4.  This  should  be  rendered  as  an  expression,  though 
small,  very  small,  of  our  gratitude  to  God  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).  What  blessedness 
would  they  have  in  the  performance  of  this  duty ;  first,  in  the  purposes  of  their 
heart  regarding  it,  and  then  in  fulfilling  them,  having  fellowship  with  God  in  all. 
Though  the  immediate  and  special  subject  of  the  text  plainly  is  Uteral  tithes 
and  other  external  offerings,  these  offerings,  however  costly,  behoved  to  be  accom- 
panied with  such  offerings  as  are  spiritual,  in  order  to  acceptance  with  God.  With- 
out the  spiritual  the  hteral  could  not  be  offered  in  a  right  spirit.  This  kind 
of  tithes  must  also  be  brought  into  the  storehouse.  Here  there  are  the  offerings 
of  prayer  and  of  praise,  of  Bible  reading  and  spiritual  meditation ;  the  offerings 
of  worship  to  God  in  the  closet,  in  the  family,  and  in  the  pubhc  assembly,  as  well 
as  those  of  Sabbath  sanctification,  self-examination,  and  fasting ;  the  observance 
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  personal  and  social  vowing.  From  this  subject  learn — 
\,  One  thing  which  has  a  special  influence  in  drawing  down  an  abundant  temporal 
blessing  on  individuals  and  a  people  is  a  due  rendeiing  of  literal  offerings  to  the 
promotion  of  the  cause  of  God.  2.  One  thing  which  has  special  influence  in  draw- 
ing down  the  curse  of  God  on  the  worldly  interests  of  individuals  or  a  people 
is  the  withholding  of  a  due  measure  of  literal  offerings  fiom  God.  (Original 
Secession  Magazine.)  Systematic  giving  : — I.  The  first  proposition  that  hes  at 
the  basis  of  this  challenge  is :  there  is  a  close  connection  between  religion 
AND  prosperity.  I  do  not  mean  spiritual  prosperity,  but  prosperity  in  the 
material  things  of  life.  There  is  a  close  and  intimate  relationship  between  the 
righteousness  which  is  enjoined  upon  us  of  the  Lord  and  the  prosperity  which 
is  promised  to  foUow.  The  Old  Testament  makes  no  secret  about  it ;  it  does 
not  mince  matters.  Irrespective  of  all  appeals  to  motives  of  selfishness,  and 
the  fact  that  it  lays  itself  open  to  reproach  fiom  critical  and  C5Tiical  people,  it 
boldly  and  plainly  declares  that  if  the  children  of  Israel  will  be  obedient  to  the 
covenant  and  keep  the  commands  God  has  enjoined  upon  them,  they  shall  be 
rewarded  in  return  with  plenty,  with  prosperity,  with  an  abundance  of  happiness 
and  peace.  All  the  history  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  confirms  that  declara- 
tion, at  any  rate  from  national  standpoints.  The  nations  that  rise  to  pre-eminence 
rise  in  virtue  of  their  righteousness.  No  nation  has  ever  fallen  through  external 
forces.  It  has  fiist  of  all  been  honeycombed  and  undermined  with  inward  de- 
terioration, and  then  when  the  first  breath  came  from  without,  it  was  sufficient 
to  bring  about  its  overthrow  and  ruin.  And  England  will  never  fall  if  England 
is  true  to  the  tradition  of  godliness  and  of  honour.  When  it  comes  to  personjJ 
matters,  the  same  principle  must  apply.  But  immediately  difficulties  appear. 
We  recall  at  once  the  Book  of  Job.  We  remember  the  37th  Psalm. 
These  have  their  explanation  in  the  Providence  of  God.  But  notwithstanding 
these,  the  general  rule  holds  good  that  reUgion  tends  to  prosperity.  I  remember 
when  the  only  son  of  a  distinguished  mayor  of  one  of  the  largest  cities  in  the 
North  of  England  got  converted.  His  father  was  not  troubled  with  too  much 
eeriousnesa  in  matters  of  rehgion.    He  was  one  of  the  keenest  of  business  meui 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  89 

and  one  of  the  moBt  level-headed  fellows  in  the  country.  He  shook  hands  with 
me  as  I  sat  in  the  private  room,  and  said :  "  Mr.  Chadwick,  what  has  happened 
to  my  lad  to-night  is  worth  more  th&a.  you  think.  I  would  have  given  £100,000 
for  it."  I  thought  he  was  not  serious  imtil  I  looked  up  and  saw  the  tears  in  his 
eyes.  He  repeated  it.  "  The  commercial  value  to  the  lad  is  worth  more  than 
£100,000,"  he  said.  I  found  out  he  was  not  far  wrong.  I  have  met  with  more 
than  one  father  who  would  have  given  more  than  £100,000  if  he  could  have  guaran- 
teed his  son's  conversion,  and  it  would  have  been  cheap  at  the  price.  Godliness 
is  profitable  to  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  to  that  which  is  to  come.  I  am 
not  going  to  contend  that  every  man  who  becomes  a  Christian  will  become  a 
milHonaire  ;  I  am  not  convinced  that  being  a  millionaire  is  a  sure  indication 
of  prosperity.  Barney  Bamato  was  a  millionaire,  and  at  last  he  jumped  into 
the  sea  to  cool  his  brain  !  If  a  man  to  make  millions  sacrifices  his  soul  his  millions 
are  bought  at  too  big  a  price.  Neither  am  I  going  to  contend  that  all  Christian 
men  will  be  equally  prosperous.  If  a  man  is  bom  with  only  ninepence  to  the 
shilling,  that  is  tlu-eepence  short.  Christ  can  never  make  up  the  threepence 
short,  and  he  will  always  be  short,  converted  or  not  converted.  My  contention 
is  that  God  can  do  more  with  ninepence  than  the  devil  can  do  with  half  a  crown  ; 
and  that  there  is  nothing  in  this  world  so  calculated  to  make  the  best  of  a  man 
as  the  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  intelligently  grasped  and  enthusiastically 
lived.  Of  coiu-se,  you  will  ask  me,  what  about  the  good  men  who  do  not  get 
on  ?  Well,  there  are  lots  of  them,  and  they  are  problems.  But  I  have  never 
known  a  good  man  fail  to  get  on  because  of  his  religion.  A  great  many  people 
go  on  the  assumption  that  rehgion  can  enable  them  to  dispense  with  the  common 
piinciples  of  success.  That  can  never  be.  If  a  man  brings  cattle  to  the  market 
when  the  fair  is  over  he  will  not  succeed,  and  he  must  blame  himself  that  ho 
did  not  get  up  sooner  in  the  morning.  His  rehgion  should  be  manifested  by\\ 
promptitude,  and  not  by  pious  expressions.  Rehgion  never  makes  up  for  laziness.  U 
Rehgion  never  makes  up  for  bad  workmanship  and  lack  of  punctuality.  I  would/ 
not  give  much  for  the  rehgion  which  does  not  make  a  man  a  better  worker  andl 
a  more  punctual  workman.  It  is  not  brain  that  is  wanted,  but  things  coupled  • 
with  character.  That  which  commands  the  highest  price  in  the  market  to-day 
is  efficiency  and  trustworthiness.  It  is  the  greatest  insult  to  this  generation 
to  say  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  maintain  his  integrity  and  get  on.  He  may 
not  get  on  very  fast,  but  he  will  have  a  peaceful  life  and  be  prosperous  if  there 
is  a  God  in  heaven  and  truth  in  the  Book.  II.  There  is  a  close  connection 
BETWEEN  WHAT  A  MAN  GIVES  AND  WHAT  HE  GETS.  Some  men  will  never  lose 
less  until  they  give  more.  God  calls  for  the  whole  tithe,  not  for  a  tithe.  I  beheve 
people  who  give  much  lose  much  of  the  blessing  of  it,  because  they  give  contrary 
to  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  Bible.  They  often  give  as  the  result  of  impulse 
or  rivalry  and  competition.  God  has  never  let  go  His  right  to  the  things  material. 
Everything  a  man  gets  God  snips  a  bit  out  of  it,  to  remind  the  man  that  he  did 
not  get  it  by  his  own  skill  and  wit.  God  gave  it  to  him,  and  man  is  not  the  pro- 
prietor but  the  steward.  And  the  principle  laid  down  is  this — that  a  man  has 
got  to  settle  between  himself  and  his  God  what  the  proportion  ought  to  be  which 
he  should  give  to  God.  I  think  a  tithe  is  a  generous  maximum  for  the  poor  and 
a  mean  minimum  for  the  rich.  Unless  a  man  cultivates  a  habit  of  systematic 
giving  when  he  has  not  much  to  give,  he  wiU  give  httle  when  he  is  rich.    {S.  Chadwick. ) 

Ver.  12.  Ye  shall  be  a  delightsome  land,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  —  The 
delightsome  land  : — It  is  not  necessary  to  inquire  minutely  into  the  original  appUca- 
tion  of  these  words.  Enough  that  Christianity  belongs  to  coimtries  as  well  as 
individuals  ;  and  that  the  Church  aets  mightily  upon  every  land  to  make  it 
delightsome.  It  is  more  pertinent  to  observe  that  the  promise  follows  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  efficacy  of  prayer,  and  includes  the  full  blessing  which  God  can  pour 
out  upon  any  people.  What  then  are  some  of  the  heavenly  and  spiritual  blessings 
in  Christ  Jesus  necessary  to  make  this  land  of  ours  dehghtsome  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord  of  hosts  ?  LA  land  is  delightsome  that  is  purely  and  adequately 
SUPPLIED  with  Christ's  Gospel.  It  is  a  delightsome  land  to  the  tourist,  if  the 
scenery  be  fine  and  the  air  pure ;  to  the  economist,  if  trade  and  commerce  floiuish, 
and  social  arrangements  tend  to  the  accumulation  of  capital ;  to  the  worldly 
philanthropist,  where  employment  is  good,  pauperism  low,  laws  reasonably  fair 
and  equal,  and  the  refinements  of  civilisation  widely  spread  over  the  surface 
of  the  people.     To  the  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ  a  different  standard  everywhere 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xa. 

presents  itself.  The  spiritual  aspect  of  every  community  first  engrosses  his 
attention  and  sympathies.  To  him  the  radical  want  is  the  Gospel — the  Gospel 
with  its  humbling  discoveries  of  man's  fallen  and  lost  estate  by  nature,  and  with 
its  blessed  proclamation  of  recovery  by  Christ.  Without  this  there  is  no  pardon 
for  the  people's  sins,  no  comfort  for  their  sorrows,  no  return  to  the  image  of  God, 
or  meetness  for  death,  judgment,  and  eternity.  A  delightsome  land  we  shall 
not  be  till  the  famine  of  the  Word  of  God  has  everywhere  come  to  an  end — till 
not  only  in  city  and  town  and  hamlet,  all  that  have  ears  to  hear  may  hear,  but 
may  rest  assured  of  hearing  the  same  glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  II.  That  rightly 
FRIZES  Christ's  ordinances.  While  it  is  certainly  true  that  in  proportion 
to  the  multiplication  of  Gospel  agencies  spiritual  blessing  follows  as  a  general 
rule,  it  by  no  means  follows  to  the  degree  that  ought  to  have  been  witnessed. 
There  is  sad  neglect  of  the  great  salvation,  neglect  which  only  the  Spirit  of  God 
can  overcome — neglect  which  expresses  and  registers  itself  by  man's  treatment 
of  the  ordinances  of  salvation.  Who  can  follow  the  outwardly  devout  to  their 
dwellings,  and  record  what  proportion  refuse  to  honoxir  God  there  ?  Who  can 
pursue  them  to  their  closets,  and  see  how  many  or  how  few  walk  with  God  and 
live  in  the  presence  of  Christ  ?  III.  That  multiplies  examples  of  Christ's 
coNVBBTLNa  GRACE.  Take  away  conversion  and  you  take  away  Christianity. 
The  two  watchwords  of  evangelical  religion  are — the  atonement  and  the  new 
birth.  With  regard  to  the  mode  of  conversion,  it  is  confessedly  various.  The 
time  may  come,  which  some  anticipate,  when  conversion  shall  be  generally  noise- 
less and  gradual,  effected  in  the  early  dawn  of  life,  as  the  result  of  pious  training, 
when  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  copiously  descend  as  morning  dew,  and  leave  a  blessing 
for  all  the  coming  day.  But  to  some  conversion  must  come  as  a  wave  of  the 
sea,  with  a  shock  and  an  agitation.  There  must  be  a  struggle  between  the  old 
and  the  new — between  self  and  Christ.  The  soul  in  such  a  conflict  may  be  expected 
to  be  shaken  to  its  centre,  with  fear,  and  shame,  and  sadness,  ere  faith  come 
to  its  relief,  and  love  toward  the  Crucified  One  gain  the  victory.  The  conversions 
which  are  going  on  within  the  circle  of  Christian  influence  make  up  the  true  history 
of  the  world.  They  are  the  events  which  are  noted  in  the  register  of  God,  where 
the  ordinary  incidents  of  human  history  have  no  place.  It  is  not  the  first  birth 
of  any  man  that  glorifies  God  or  satisfies  Christ.  Without  the  second  it  is  an 
abortion  and  a  catastrophe.  IV.  That  maintains  a  high  and  general  standard 
OP  conformity  to  the  image  of  Christ.  Conversion  is  nothing  save  as  a  step 
to  sanctification.  And  sanctification  is  resemblance  to  Christ.  The  ultimate 
design  of  Christ's  mission  was  to  multiply  Himself ;  to  stamp  Himself  upon 
the  minds,  the  hearts,  and  the  lives  of  men  !  Such  a  conformity  is  indeed  defective 
in  every  case  :  still,  under  the  training  of  the  Spirit,  forms  of  moral  loveliness 
have  appeared,  and  are  appearing,  which  differ  radically  from  those  which  the 
world  saw  before  Christ,  or  which  it  is  capable  of  producing  where  His  name 
is  disowned.  Would  it  not  be  a  result  of  incalculable  blessedness,  were  the 
higher  standard  of  Christian  life  found  in  some  to  be  more  widely  diffused,  still 
more  were  a  marked  and  decisive  impress  of  Christian  piety  to  become  universal, 
or  to  approach  to  universality  ?  The  transformation  of  the  professing  Church 
into  a  visibly  living  body  would  certainly  act  on  the  world  as  life  from  the  dead. 
Regenerate  character  to  God's  noblest  work.  V.  That  assists  in  bringing 
other  lands  to  Christ.  This  was  one  attraction  of  ancient  Israel  to  God. 
He  saw  in  it  the  focus  of  blessing  ;  the  central  point  whence  the  light  of  His  glory 
was  everywhere  to  spread  till  the  whole  dark  orb  was  illuminated.  Such  is 
Christian  light  that  like  that  of  the  sun,  it  cannot  be  seen  but  by  its  own  diffused 
and  propagated  rays.  How  can  Africa,  India,  China,  the  South  Seas  ever  call 
us  blessed,  unless  we  teach  them  our  blessedness,  and  make  them  share  it  ? 
(John  Cairns,  D.D.)  A  delightsome  land: — Apply  to  our  own  land,  which 
the  people  of  all  other  lands  deem  blessed,  and  which  in  itself  is  delightsome. 
Different  views  of  a  country  are  taken  by  the  tourist,  artist,  naturalist,  economist, 
philanthropist,  and  Christian.  Compare  our  land  with  others  in  regard  to  its 
spiritual  condition  and  privileges.  1.  An  adequate  supply  of  pure  Gospel  ordin- 
ances.    2.  An  appreciative  attendance  on  the  faithful  administration  of  them. 

3.  A  gratifying  result  in  the  conversion  of  sinners  and  the  edification  of  believers. 

4.  An  earnest  effort  to  supply  the  whole  land  with  them.  6.  A  zealous  endeavour 
to  extend  to  all  lands  the  full  blessings  of  them.     {Wm.  Ormiston,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  Te  haTe  said.  It  is  vain  to  serve  God — The  service  God  demands: 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  91 

—  Those  who  were  the  immediate  objects  of  the  prophet's  ministry  had 
departed  from  the  service  of  God.  The  priests  having  broken  their 
covenant,  the  people  were  rtiined  by  their  vile  example,  and  went  back 
from  God  by  a  perpetual  backsliding.  I.  The  natuke  of  that  service  which 
God  demands.  1.  Our  service  to  God  must  be  sincere.  All  true  religion  ceases 
when  the  heart  is  not  right  with  God.  2.  Our  Christian  service  must  be  scriptural. 
3.  This  service  must  be  imiform.  There  is,  in  matters  of  true  religion,  a  balance 
power — always  keeping  its  possessor  in  happy  and  perfect  equality.  4.  In  this 
service  you  must  be  diligent.  5.  In  this  service  you  must  be  employed  until  you 
die.  Having  once  put  your  hand  to  the  plough,  you  are  not  to  look  back.  II.  The 
ADVANTAGES  OF  THAT  SERVICE.  1.  It  gives,  in  retum,  the  richest  blessings.  The 
Christian  service  gives  us  liberty,  and  liberty  of  the  highest  kind ;  for,  if  the 
Son  make  you  free,  then  are  you  free  indeed.  So  rich  are  the  blessings  this  service 
bestows,  that  we  cannot  speak  their  worth ;  and  so  numerous,  that  to  tell  their 
vast  amoimt  our  efforts  are  all  vain.  2.  Another  advantage  is  elevation  and 
honour.  3.  This  service  brings  contentment.  4.  This  service  takes  away  the 
fear  of  death.  5.  This  service  will  be  rewarded  in  heaven.  Apply  to  four 
descriptions  of  persons.  (1)  You  who  are  not  engaged  in  this  service.  (2)  Those 
who  have  just  entered  on  this  service.  (3)  Those  who  were  once  engaged  in  this 
service;  but  have  left  it.  (4)  You  who  are  old  servants  in  this  good  cause. 
{R.  Croxton.)  Bdigion  delineated  and  depreciated: — I.  Religion  delineated. 
Three  expressions  used  to  represent  it.  1.  To  serve  God.  A  great  difference  » 
between  serving  God  and  serving  man.  In  the  one  case  the  servant  benefits/ 
the  master,  in  the  other  the  sole  benefit  is  the  servant's.  In  the  one  the  service  I" 
is  estimated  by  work  actually  done  ;  in  the  other  by  work  earnestly  purposed.  ""■ 
In  the  one  there  is  a  surrender  of  freedom  ;  in  the  other  there  is  an  attainment 
of  it.  He  who  engages  to  serve  man  must  surrender  some  portion  of  his  liberty ; 
he  who  serves  God  alone,  secures  the  highest  freedom.  2.  To  keep  His  ordinance. 
This  is  only  a  branch  of  the  service,  or,  perhaps,  the  method  of  doing  it.  God 
has  ordinances  or  institutes,  some  are  moral,  some  are  ceremonial ;  the  latter 
may  cease  to  bind,  the  former  are  everlastingly  in  force.  3.  To  walk  mournfully  - 
before  the  Lord.  To  "  walk  "  before  the  Lord  is  reUgion  in  perfection,  reUgion 
in  heaven.  It  imphes  an  abiding  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence,  and 
continual  progress  in  the  Divine  will.  Walking  "  mournfully "  characterises 
the  religion  of  earth ;  it  is  associated  with  penitence,  contrition,  &c.  The  walk 
of  religion  is  only  mournful  here.  II.  Here  we  have  practical  religion 
DEPRECIATED.  "  Ye  have  said.  It  is  vain  to  serve  God,  and  what  profit  is  it," 
&c.  I.  Men  say  this  when  religion  does  not  answer  their  secular  expectations. 
Many  take  up  with  religion  in  these  days  because  of  the  secular  good  they  expect 
will  accrue  from  their  profession  of  it ;  if  the  good  come  not  they  think  it  vain. 
2.  Men  say  this  when  they  see  the  truly  religious  in  poverty  and  affliction.  Asaph 
saw  this  when  he  said,  "  I  have  washed  my  hands  in  vain."  3.  Men  say  this 
when  they  have  taken  up  religion  from  selfish  motives.  A  man  who  takes  up 
with  religion  for  the  sake  of  good  will  get  no  good  out  of  it ;  nay,  will  get  dis- 
appointment, for  "  he  that  seeketh  his  life  shall  lose  it."  No  truly  religious  man 
has  said  religion  is  vain,  he  feels  it  to  be  its  own  reward — the  highest  reward. 
In  truth,  it  is  the  only  service  on  earth  that  will  not  prove  vain.  {Homilist.) 
Is  religion  tiseless  ? — The  charge  here  is,  that  they  who  sin,  prosper.  A  similar 
complaint  common  to  all  ages.  God  takes  it  as  a  charge  against  Himself.  I.  The 
CHARGE.  Those  who  profess  to  serve  God  complain  that  there  is  no  "  profit." 
They  are  not  happy — not  blessed.  What  is  the  inference  ?  That  the  proud, 
the  self-willed,  self-confident,  self-complacent,  are  "  happy."  "  The  tempters 
of  God,"  who  practically  set  Him  at  defiance — dare  Him  to  do  the  worst — are 
delivered.  Happiness  and  visible  advantage  are  connected  with  rebellion. 
II.  Examine  the  facts.  1.  The  religion  itself  is  not  that  which  God  requires, 
and  which  He  has  promised  to  bless.  2.  The  happiness  is  only  fleshly,  imperfect. 
The  deliverance  is  present  and  temporal.  The  happiness  is  not  true — not  of 
the  whole  man.  See  the  true  servant  of  God  ;  pardoned,  spiritually  renewed, 
glorifying  God  in  body  and  spirit.  See  him  in  the  peace  and  joy  of  his  soul.  See 
him  walking  under  the  guardianship  of  providence.  Dying  in  hope.  Carried 
to  Abraham's  bosom.  Accepted  in  the  judgment.  Admitted  into  heaven. 
Will  you  say  then,  "  It  is  vain  to  serve  God,"  and  that  there  is  no  profit  in  walking 
before  Him  ?  {0.  Cubitt.)  Unacceptable  sacrifices  : — The  law  was  not  only 
a  typical  institution ;  it  was  a  system  of  government  appointed  and  administered 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

by  God  Himself.  It  contains,  therefore,  references  to  the  great  principles,  rules, 
and  characteristics  of  acceptable  obedience.  The  text  refers  to  priests,  but 
not  exclusively.  It  describes  the  union  of  formal  piety — something  must  be 
offered  ;  avarice,  producing  unwillingness  to  offer  what  God  required,  as  being 
too  costly  ;  and  cunning,  devising  an  expedient,  namely,  to  "  offer  the  torn, 
the  lame,  and  the  sick."  Thus  they  brought  an  offering,  but  it  was  unacceptable, 
and,  instead  of  a  blessing,  produced  a  curse.  Lessons — 1.  God  requires  that  we 
offer  Him  a  sacrifice.  2.  Rightly  offered.  He  accepts  the  offering,  and  blesses 
the  offerer.  3.  While  there  are  those  who  will  offer  nothing,  there  are  others  who 
seek  to  reconcile  duty  with  their  own  carnal  interests.  They  seek  not  spiritual 
preparation  for  duty,  they  present  partial,  formal  service,  while  they  live  in 
habitual  disobedience.  4.  Such  persons  are,  as  far  as  their  object  is  concerned, 
"  deceivers."  Actually  they  cannot  deceive  God.  Practically,  and  in  theur 
own  intention,  they  act  as  though  they  could.  5.  They  are  "  accursed."  God 
accepts  not  their  sacrifice.  They  have  no  positive  blessing.  If  you  would  accept- 
ably sacrifice,  you  must  give  yourselves  up  entirely  to  God.  For  this,  spiritual 
preparation  is  requisite.  You  must  have  spiritual  regeneration,  healing  your 
soul,  that  your  offering  may  be  acceptable.  Thus  prepared,  the  whole  must 
be  given,  in  holy  obedience,  holy  exercises.  Your  formal  religion  confesses  that 
something  is  necessary.  You  are  self-condemned.  Your  religion,  such  as  it 
is,  aggravates  your  guilt.  (Ibid.)  Accusing  God: — They  bring  a  twofold 
accusation  against  God,  that  they  received  no  reward  for  their  piety  when  they 
faithfully  discharged  their  duty  towards  God,  and  also  that  it  was  better  with 
the  ungodly  and  the  despisers  of  God  than  with  them.  We  hence  see  how 
reproachfully  they  exaggerated  what  they  deemed  the  injustice  of  God,  at  least 
how  they  themselves  imagined  that  He  disappointed  the  just  of  their  deserved 
reward,  and  that  He  favoured  the  ungodly  and  the  wicked  as  though  He  waa 
pleased  with  them,  as  though  He  intended  the  more  to  exasperate  the  sorrow 
of  His  own  servants,  who,  though  they  faithfully  worshipped,  yet  saw  that  they 
did  so  in  vain,  as  God  concealed  Himself,  and  did  not  reward  their  services.  That 
the  good  also  are  tempted  by  thoughts  of  this  kind,  is  no  wonder,  when  the  state  of 
things  in  the  world  is  in  greater  confusion  (Eccles.  ix.  2).  There  is  really  no  occasion 
for  indignation  and  envy  offered  to  us,  but  as  God  designedly  tries  our  faith  by 
such  confusions,  we  must  remember  that  we  must  exercise  patience.  Let  U3 
learn  to  form  a  right  judgment  as  to  what  our  life  is,  and  then  let  us  bear  in  mind 
how  many  are  the  reasons  why  God  should  sometimes  deal  roughly  with  us.  Thus 
all  our  envying  will  cease,  and  oiu-  minds  will  be  prepared  calmly  to  obey.  In 
short,  these  considerations  will  check  whatever  perverseness  there  may  be  in 
us,  so  that  neither  our  wicked  thoughts  nor  our  words  will  be  so  strong  as  to 
rise  in  rebellion  against  God.  (John  Calvin.)  The  worshipping  service  required 
of  Christians  : — The  Jews  were  required  by  the  Levitical  law  to  offer  unto  God 
the  best  of  their  flock  in  sacrifice.  This  they  did  in  their  happiest  and  piurest 
times.  In  the  age  of  Malachi  their  worship  had  greatly  degenerated.  It  had 
become,  in  fact,  a  totally  hypocritical  service.  Heavy  judgments  are  denounced 
against  them  by  the  prophet  for  this  contempt  of  God.  First,  the  rejection  of 
their  service.  Next  the  abolition  of  their  Church,  State,  and  privileges,  and  the 
transfer  of  them  to  the  Gentiles.  And  a  withering  ciu-se  upon  them,  both  individu- 
ally and  at  length  nationally,  for  their  hypocrisy.  These  things  happened  to 
them  as  examples  to  us,  the  people  of  God  under  the  new  dispensation.  God 
requires  the  best  of  us,  and  of  what  belongs  to  us.  We  stand  engaged  to  render 
this  to  Him  by  the  acceptance  of  His  covenant.  I.  The  natubk  of  the  requisi- 
tion WHICH  God  here  makes.  1.  We  must  serve  Him  with  our  best  powers. 
First  and  chiefly  the  powers  of  the  mind.  Bodily  service,  apart  from  any  interest 
taken  in  it  by  the  mind,  is  of  little  worth.  God  requires  the  "  heart."  We  must 
worship  Him  in  spirit,  for  He  is  a  Spirit.  By  the  spirit  we  are  to  understand 
the  mind  with  all  its  powers.  The  body  is  the  altar,  but  the  spirit  Ls  the  oblation. 
The  spirit  includes  memory,  judgment,  and  affections.  Bodily  service,  as  the 
offspring  and   expression    of    the   mind,   is    required,  and    is  highly  acceptable. 

2.  We  must  give  Him  the  best  season  of  life.  This  is  the  season  of  youth.  Thea 
our  powers  are  fresh  and  vigorous  ;  and  then  we  are  most  beset  by  other  suitors. 

3.  We  must  give  Him  the  best  portion  of  our  time.  Religion  must  not  be  regarded 
aa  a  relaxation,  but  prosecuted  as  a  business — the  great  business  of  life.  It  is 
termed  a  calling  and  a  work.  4.  We  must  give  to  God  the  best  of  our  talents 
and  substance.     We  ought,  as  Christians,  to  surpass  others  in  common  charity 


CHAP,  in.]  MALACHl.  93 

and  benevolence  ;  for  grace  is  to  improve  and  heighten  all  human  virtues,  as 
weU  as  to   improve  those  that  are  Divine.     IL  The   reasons  by  which  this 

BKQXnSITION  OF  OUR  BEST  XS  THE  SEEVICB  OF  GoD  IS  ENFORCED.      God  will  Only 

accept  the  best,  for  the  following  reasons — 1.  His  greatness.  God  is  a  great 
king,  for  the  extent  of  His  dominions,  the  number  of  His  servants,  and  the 
reverence  paid  to  Him  by  them.  For  the  information  He  receives  of  our  service. 
For  the  numerous  methods  in  which  He  can  express  His  displeasure.  2.  His 
goodness  enforces  His  claim.  What  have  we  that  we  have  not  received  ?  All 
the  faculties  of  our  mind  and  organs  and  members  of  our  body  we  owe  to  Him. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  our  substance.  To  Him  we  are  indebted  for  the  ability, 
the  health,  the  industry  by  which  it  was  obtained.  3.  The  credit  of  our  religion 
demands  this  service.  This  ought  to  be  dear  to  us  ;  and  it  is  to  be  maintained 
and  promoted  by  such  a  service  as  has  been  specified.  And  how  is  a  religion 
advantaged  when  a  just  picture  is  given  of  it  in  the  lives  and  tempers  of  its 
recipients  !  4.  The  evils  avoided  and  the  benefits  obtained  by  compliance  with 
the  demand,  enforce  its  obligation.  How  fearful  the  communication  of  Christ  to 
the  lukewarm  Church  of  Laodicea.  What  encouraging  promises,  in  the  Scripture, 
meet  those  who  are  careful,  diligent,  and  devout  in  the  service  of  God  !  Improve- 
ment— 1.  Let  all  see  that  they  are  properly  capacitated  for  this  service.  In  order 
to  this,  a  twofold  change  must  take  place  :  in  our  state — in  o\ix  character.  2.  Let 
us  be  thankful  for  the  existence  of  public  worship  among  us,  and  seek  after  its 
improvement  and  extension.  3.  Let  us  hail  with  a  spirit  of  religious  joy  and 
co-operation  the  approaching  diffusion  of  Gospel-worship  all  over  the  world. 
(J.  Leif child,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord.  —  The  fear  of  God  a  power- 
principle  :  —  The  events  which,  from  their  importance  and  prominence  in 
the  sacred  annals,  may  be  classed  as  marking  successive  epochs  in  the 
development  of  the  Divine  piu^pose,  were  preceded  by  periods  of  conflicting 
moral  forces  and  unpropitious  influences.  But  the  darkest  moral  night  has 
witnessed  the  birth-throes  of  giant  thoughts,  and  the  conception  of  mightiest 
schemes  for  the  furtherance  of  human  weal.  The  state  of  the  Israelitish  people 
contemporaneous  ivith  the  events  detailed  in  our  text  was  in  some  respects  the 
saddest  in  all  their  history.  But  despite  all  this  the  world  was  wheeling  into  the 
light  of  Messiah's  day.  The  apostasy  of  those  days,  and  the  signs  of  coming 
wonders  discerned  upon  the  fa<;e  of  the  spiritual  heavens,  caused  all  who  feared 
the  Lord  to  speak  often  one  to  another,  that  they  might  keep  themselves  mindful 
of  the  evil  forces  around  them,  mindful  of  the  near  approach  of  the  Ancient  of 
days,  and  that  an  effectual  door  might  be  kept  open  for  His  royal  entrance.  These 
of  themselves  were  but  a  small  and  inconsiderable  band,  yet  representatives  of 
eternal  truth,  and  inheritors  of  richest  promises.  But  God  works  His  highest 
pvirposes  and  reveals  His  deepest  thoughts  with  the  least  of  human  help.  1.  We 
have  abundant  reason  for  assuming  that  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  power- principle 
in  the  life  of  grace.  This  power  has  and  will  e\  er  be  felt  as  a  regulative  influence  in 
the  highest  and  lowest  spheres  of  existence.  It  has  asserted  itself  in  gathering  into 
available  shape  the  dissipated  strength  of  the  spiritual  and  moral  worlds,  and  in 
elevating  man  to  a  standard  of  purity,  and  to  companionship  with  the  angels 
of  God.  There  is  in  natinre  a  force  that  acts  upon  every  molecule  of  matter, 
adjusting  each  to  its  proper  place  and  relation,  and  grouping  the  whole  into 
uniformity  and  shape.  The  fear- principle  in  the  Ufe  of  grace,  in  its  regiJative 
aspect,  is  analogous  to  this  mysterious  law  of  nature.  It  gives  outline  and  motion 
to  every  thought  and  desire  that  brings  the  soul  to  God,  produces  harmony  among 
the  affections,  where  discord  reigns  ;  elevates  moral  conduct,  and  accelerates 
growth  in  the  life  of  grace.  The  fear-principle  becomes  also  a  cohesive  power. 
It  draws  into  the  firmest  compact  kindred  spirits,  and  unites  with  the  strongest 
bonds  of  sympathy  those  who  have  a  common  fear,  a  common  hope,  and  a  common 
faith.  There  is  a  sentiment  of  patriotism  binding  together  the  constituencies  of 
parties  and  nations,  that  runs  like  links  of  steel  through  the  bosoms  of  veterans 
gathered  xmder  a  common  flag — it  is  reverence  for  the  honour,  love  for  the  name 
of  comitry.  And  the  fear  of  God — reverence  for  His  law,  and  love  for  His  love — 
binds  His  people  together  in  alleeiance  more  endiuring  than  earth's  strongest  ties. 
The  fear  of  the  Lord  also  has  resistive  energy,  for  it  wages  cea<»ele8s  warfare  against 
the  evils  environing  the  individual,  or  the  community  of  faith.  The  activity 
growing  out  of  these  states  and  energies  becomes  expansive  with  the  highest  and 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

broadest  significance.     Every  day  of  the  soul's  allegiance  to  God  ita  frontiers 

became  more  invulnerable  to  attack  and  invasion.     Spiritual  growth  is  cumulative 

— as  eternal  as  the  life  of  God.     And  the  God-fear  power  is  aggressive.     2.  There 

is  a  Divine  recognition  and  support  of  the  fear- power  developed  in  the  life  of  grace. 

"  The  Lord  hearkened  and  heard."     If  the  claims  of  earthly  loyalty  are  recognised, 

and  if  they  command  support,  how  will  not  loyalty  to  the  highest  enlist  the  prowess 

of  heaven,  and  the  valour  and  prestige  of  angelic  soldiery.     3.  The  ultimate  end 

contemplated  and  achieved  in  this  God-fear  power  is  the  glorious  exaltation  of 

man  i  i  the  scale  of  being.     "  And  they  shall  be  Mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts." 

(H.  M.  Dubosp.)        Men  that  feared  the  Lord  : — I.  The  people  mentioned.     By 

the  "  fear  of  the  Lord  "  we  are  not  to  understand  slavish  fear,  which  dreads  the 

punishment  rather  than  the  sin  which  is  the  cause  of  the  punishment ;    but  a 

filial  fear  ;  a  holy  affection  in  the  soul,  whereby  it  is  incUned  to  reverence  God, 

and  to  approve  of  His  words  and  ways.     This  fear  is  a  new  covenant  blessing, 

and  the  gift  of  God.     II.  The  employment  they  were  engaged  ln.     "  They 

spake  often  one  to  another."     Of  the  love  of  God  ;  and  if  they  had  been  Christians, 

we  should  have  added,  of  the  redemption  in  Christ,  and  of  the  operation  of  the  Spirit. 

He  who  has  a  heart  for  God,  has  a  mouth  to  speak  for  Him,  as  well  as  to  Him. 

III.  The  honouk  conferred  on  them.     "  The  Lord  hearkened."     This  shows 

God's  special  regard  for  them  ;  the  notice  He  takes  of  them,  and  His  approbation 

of  them.     "  A  book  of  remembrance  was  written."     In  allusion  to  kings  that  keep 

registers  (Ezra  iv.  15).     (<Si.  Barnard.)         Godly  fear  the  distinguishing  character 

of  believers  : — Times   of   prevailing   and   abounding  wickedness   are  seasons   of 

painful  trial  to  the  people  of  God.     I.  Some  of  the  distinguishing  features 

IN  the  character  of  the  people  whom  God  claims  as  His  o^VN.     1.  They  are 

described  as  those  that  "  feared  the  Lord."     Distinguish  the  fear  of  God  which 

is  of  nature  from  that  which  is  of  grace.     The  most  wicked  and  abandoned  of  men 

have  their  seasons  of  fear.    They  cannot  shake  off  all  dread  of  Him  v>'hose  authority 

they  venture  to  question,  and  whose  laws  they  presume  to  disregard.     Could 

we  inspect  the  hearts  of  those  that  know  not  God,  we  should  cease  to  estimate  ro 

highly  their  boasted  felicity.     But  the  true  fear  of  the  Lord  arises  from  a  different 

source,  and  produces  different  effects.     It  is  that  feeling  which  is  spoken  of  in 

Scripture,  as  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  as  a  strong  confidence,  as  a  fountain  of  life. 

Those  who  possess  it  are  described  as  objects  of  the  peculiar  favour  and  gracious 

protection  of  God.     On  account  of  its  importance,  as  well  as  its  actual  effects, 

it  is  often  put  for  the  whole  of  religion,  and  considered  as  comprehending  all  its 

duties.     They  that  fear  the  Lord  are  such  as  have  not  only  the  form,  but  the 

power  of  godliness.     The  fear  of  God  dwells  and  rules  in  their  souls,  it  forms  their 

temper,  and  influences  their  conduct.     2.  "  They  thought  upon  His  name."     It  is 

a  mark  of  the  ungodly,  that  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts.     But  these  delight  to 

think  upon  a  name  endeared  to  them  as  the  name  of  Him  who  has  done  wondrously 

for   them.     In   seasons   of   painful   and   afflictive   dispensations  they  delight  to 

think  upon  God.     They  delight  to  recall  the  gracious  thoughts  of  God  towards 

them.     The  feeling  is  not  a  mere  notion  of  God,  or  a  transient  feeling  of  His  power 

and  excellency :  it  is  the  habitual  feeling  of  the  soul,  and  a  source  of  holy  comfort 

and  heavenly  peace  amidst  the  vicissitudes  of  life  :  it  gives  a  sanctity  even  to  our 

worldly  employments,  and  renders  our  ordinary  occupations  a  means  of  glorifying 

God.     True  believers  set  God  always  before  them.     3.  Those  who  "  feared  the 

Lord  "  also  "  spake  often  one  to  another."     Conversation  is  a  peculiar  gift :  it 

forms  the  chain  of  intercourse  between  man  and  man,  and  reminds  us  that  we  were 

born,  not  to  waste  our  lives  in  selfish  pleasures,  or  in  unprofitable  seclusion  from 

the  world.     The  Christian's  duty  consists,  not  in  a  life  of  separation  from  his 

fellow-creatures,  but  of  active  exertion  for  the  benefit  of  all  who  are  placed  within 

the  sphere  of  his  influence.     In  order  to  promote  these  important  purposes,  he  is 

furnished  with  the  gift  of  speech,  and  is  enabled  to  communicate  with  others  on 

their  necessities,  and  to  invite  from  them  reciprocal  love  and  friendly  intercourse. 

The  talent  only  becomes  valuable  when  it  is  employed  for  useful  purposes.     We 

do  not  say  that  the  conversation  of  Christians  will  always  be  on  the  subject  of 

religion,  but  true  religion  will  always  give  a  savour  of  grace  to  the  conversation. 

There  is  a  special  .sort  of  conversation  which  Christians  enjoy  with  each  other, 

which  is  doubtless  spoken  of  in  the  text.     They  converse  on  the  things  of  peace, 

and  things  wherewith  they  may  be  edified.     They  delight  to  speak  of  the  glories 

of  the  Redeemer,  and  the  blessedness  of  His  saints.     Believers,  in  their  social 

intercourse,  rise  superior  to  the  things  of  time,  and  converse  on  those  of  eternity. 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  9P 

II.  The  gracious  attention  with  which  these  persons  were  regarded  by 
God.     "  The  Lord  hearkened  and  heard  it."     Not  only  is  God  about  our  path, 
He  is  intimately  present  with  our  thoughts.     As  amongst  men,  things  notable 
are  recorded  in  a  book  of  remembrance,  so  in  the  Eternal  Mind  are  registered  all 
the  thoughts,  words,  and  actions  of  men.     Applications — 1.  Examine  yourselves, 
prove  yourselves  by  the  test  of  this  text.     2.  Be  watchful  against  a  trifling, 
censorious  spirit.     3.  Study  the  Scriptures,  which  present  you  with  such  excellent 
examples.     4.  Pray  for  grace.     {W.  Mayers,  M.  A.)         Men  who  feared  the  Lord  : — 
They  were  bad  times  when  the  prophet  Malachi  was  sent  forth  upon  his  message. 
Profaneness  was  gone  forth  throughout  the  land.     Men  openly  declared  it  was 
a  vain  and  improfitable  thing  to  worship  God.     Even  in  those  days  there  was  a 
remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace.     I.  The  condttct  of  these  godly 
MEN.     They  "  feared  the  Lord."     Men  may  fear  God  in  the  sense  of  trembling 
at  His  judgments.     The  fear  meant  here  is  a  holy  reverential  awe  of  God  such  as 
none  but  His  own  dear  children  entertain.     These  people  looked  up  to  Him  with 
the  deepest  veneration  as  their  Maker  and  their  Saviour.     They  "  served  Him 
acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly  fear."     They  are  said  to  have  "  thought 
on  the  Lord's  name."     To  think  upon  a  name  would  be,  in  other  cases,  to  think 
upon  an  empty  sound.     But  to  think  on  the  Lord's  name  is  a  most  profitable  and 
delightful  meditation.     For  His  name  is  His  nature  ;  what  the  Lord  is  called.  He 
is.     This  name — merciful  and  gracious — was  written  on  their  hearts  and  their 
affections.     Look  at  their  conduct.     Doubtless  their  whole   practice  was  con- 
sistent ;  but  our  attention  is  particularly  drawn  to  the  way  in  which  their  tongues 
were  occupied.     Their  communications  were  serious  and  spiritual.     They  sought 
each  other's  company  for  the  take  of  sweet  communion  and  profitable  conversation. 
Two  things  gave  value  to  all  this  holy  conversation.     It  proceeded  from  the  heart. 
They  talked  together  in  a  very  anxious  and  difficult  time.     It  is  an  easy  thing 
to  talk  religiously  when  religion  is  in  fashion.     II.  The  gracious  purposes  of 
God  respecting  them.     However  privately  their  conversations  might  be  carried 
on,  the  ear  of  God  was  open  to  it  all.     If  God  hears,  we  may  be  sure  God  does  not 
forget  the  pious  conferences  of  His  people.    "  A  book  of  remembrance  was  written." 
The  pious  conversation  of  His  servants  is  ever  fresh  in  God's  mind,  as  if  it  were 
written  in  a  book,  and  the  book  were  spread  before  Him.     What  doth  God  account 
to  be  His  jewels  ?     Not  what  men  accoimt  so.     His  jewels  are  His  people.     The 
ornament  He  prizes  is  the  "  meek  and  quiet  spirit  "  of  the  believer.     When  shall 
be  the  day  when  He  shall  make  these  jewels  up  ?     The  day  of  judgment.     He 
wni  shortly  accomplish  the  number  of  His  elect,  and  then  He  will  make  up  His 
jewels.     III.  The  effect  all  this  will  have  on  the  ungodly  world.     "  It  is 
vain  to  serve  God,"  said  that  ungodly  generation.     There  is  a  day  at  hand,  when 
another  estimate  shall  be  formed.     When  you  shall  see  the  Lord  make  up  His 
jewels,  esteeming  every  man  as  such  who  hath  feared  Him,  thought  upon  Him, 
and  confessed  Him — then   shall  you  perceive  at  last  that  there  is  a  difference 
unspeakable  between  those  who  serve  God,  and  those  who  serve  Him  not.     Con- 
clusion— Hold  up  this  text  before  those  of  you  who  profess  godliness  as  containing 
an  example  for  imitation.     You  see  how  those  ancient  saints  delighted  in  edifying 
conversation  with  each  other,  and  how  attentive  the  Lord  was  to  it.     Let  the 
text  reprove  us  and  stir  us  up.     {A.  Roberts,  M.A.)         God's  people  in  a  godless 
age  : — Malachi  gives  in  this  book  of  prophecy  a  fivefold  picture  of  God  ;  a  four- 
fold picture  of  the  sins  of  the  priesthood  ;  and  a  sevenfold  picture  of  the  sins  of 
the  people.     God  describes  Himself  as  the  sovereign  God,  who  sees  no  reason 
beyond  Himself  for  the  bestowment  of  any  blessing  which  He  chooses  to  give. 
God  is  described  as  a  God  who  makes  Himself  known  as  a  master  and  as  a  father, 
to  those  who  see  Him  as  a  sovereign,  as  the  electing  God.     God  commissions  the 
prophet  to  hold  Him  up  as  a  prayer-answering  God.     He  was  the  maker  of  an 
eternal  covenant.     He  is  the  God  who  more  than  repays  the  services  of  His  servants. 
The  first  great  sin  of  the  priests  is  the  offering  of  polluted  bread,  &c.     They  give 
to  Him  what  they  would  be  ashamed  to  give  to  their  temporal  rulers.     Then 
they  were  desirous  to  enrich  themselves  by  the  profanation  of  God's  religion. 
They  would  not  do  anything  in  God's  service  for  nought.     They  wearied  in  God's 
service.     They  were  not  only  going  astray  themselves,  but  causing  others  to  go 
astray.     The  sins  of  the  people  are  idolatry ;  impurity ;  a  self -justifying  spirit. 
Various  dreadful  crimes.     Asking  what  profit  shall  we  have  if  we  serve  God. 
Resisting  an  appealing  God.     In  the  text  we  have  God's  people  in  the  midst  of 
this  apostasy  of  priests  and  people,  in  the  midst  of  this  neglect  of  God.     Grod's 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

people  are  here  described — I.  By  their  principles.  "  They  feared  the  Lord." 
The  wicked,  or  unconverted,  are  kept  from  sin  by  fear  of  punishment.  The 
master-principle  in  the  breast  of  a  righteous  man  is  not  a  slavish  fear,  but  the 
fear  that  arises  from  the  knowledge  of  God,  as  a  forgiving  Grod — that  arises  from  a 
consciousness  that  he  has  received  incalculable  blessings  from  God.  It  is  con- 
nected with  the  consciousness  that  God  has  pardoned  your  sins,  and  has  accepted 
you  in  the  Beloved.  II.  By  their  employment.  I.  Their  external  employ- 
ment. "  They  are  speaking  to  one  another."  What  about  7  About  the  moral 
troubles  of  their  times.  In  the  darkness  of  this  world,  Christians  are  to  be  known 
by  their  speaking  to  each  other.  2.  Their  internal  employment.  They  thought 
on  the  name  of  their  God.  The  saints  spoke  of  what  they  had  been  thinking, 
and  brought  it  out  as  the  centre  of  their  union,  as  tbe  nucleus  around  which  they 
erected  themselves.  III.  Their  privileges.  God  hearkened  and  heard  those 
that  thought  and  spoke  of  Him.  He  drew  nigh  ;  and  a  book  of  remembrance  was 
written  before  Him  for  them  that  feared  Him.  It  was  the  Lamb's  book  of  life, 
in  which  the  saints  were  written  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  And  I  do  not 
think  it  was  their  names  that  were  written,  but  the  evidences  of  their  faith  were 
written.  The  book  which  contains  their  names  is  written  in  eternity ;  and  the 
book  which  contains  the  evidence  of  their  faith  was  written  in  time.  We  all 
love  to  be  thought  of  ;  it  is  a  holy  ambition  to  desire  to  be  thought  of  by  God. 
IV.  Their  hope.  "  They  shall  be  Mine,  when  I  make  up  My  jewels."  The  great 
distinction  shall  be  made  in  the  day  when  Jesus  Christ  shall  come — then  those 
who  knew  Christ,  who  loved  Christ,  who  kept  watch  for  His  appearance,  shall 
be  saved,  as  jewels  are  saved,  in  the  day  of  danger.  {N.  Armstrong.)  The 
delineation  of  God's  people  : — I.  They  feared  the  Lord.  There  are  those 
who  are  sometimes  smitten  with  feelings  of  terror  and  horror  when  their  conscience 
is  tender,  when  some  providential  circumstances  arouse  them  to  consideration. 
They  begin  to  feel,  but  it  is  temporary,  it  is  not  deep.  The  people  of  God  fear 
Him  with  the  fear  of  a  child.  As  a  child  fears  his  father,  so  the  child  of  God  fears 
God.  He  fears  not  only  His  power,  he  fears  His  character.  He  fears  lest  his 
inconsistencies  should  bring  disgrace  upon  His  name  and  upon  His  religion.  He 
feels  what  he  owes  to  God— that  he  owes  Him  everything.  The  people  of  God, 
who  fear  the  Lord,  have  a  constant  sense  of  His  presence.  That  presence  con- 
tinually controls  and  directs  them.  And  in  their  private  doings,  where  no  eye  is 
upon  them,  they  fear  the  Lord.  II.  They  spake  often  one  to  another.  That 
is,  they  held  conversation  with  each  other.  Those  who  are  God's  people  will  talk 
of  God,  they  cannot  help  it.  They  talk  of  His  honour,  His  work  of  salvation, 
and  all  the  great  redemptive  themes.  They  talk  of  the  attributes  of  Deity,  as 
brought  out  in  the  great  work  of  Christ.  They  talk  of  the  sufferings  of  God's 
people.  They  gently  reprove  each  other's  faults  and  failings,  faithfully  dealing 
with  each  other.  And  they  speak  often  one  to  another.  They  talk  without 
restraint.  Whenever  they  have  opportunity,  such  things  are  their  themes. 
III.  They  thought  upon  His  name.  The  name  of  God  is  the  "  I  am  "  !  His 
full  name  is  given  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7.  The  people  of  God  are  a  contemplative 
people.  They  study  His  character.  His  purposes.  His  grace  :  they  study  His 
attributes.  They  study  the  Word  of  God.  They  study  themselves  in  their 
relations  with  God.  (Hugh  Allen,  31. A.)  God  and  the  good  : — I.  Good  men  in 
THEIR  RELATION  TO  GoD.  1.  They  reverence  Him.  Malachi  tells  us  that  these 
old  saints  "  feared  the  Lord."  Not  a  slavish,  but  a  filial  fear,  not  a  dread  of  His 
power,  or  His  anger,  but  a  holy  awe  of  His  majesty  mingled  with  a  loving  admira- 
tion. Filial  reverence  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  true  religion.  2.  They  think  upon 
Him.  "  They  thought  upon  His  name."  The  name  of  God  was  His  revealed 
character.  His  reputation.  The  intellect  of  the  good  is  chiefly  engaged  in  the  con- 
templation of  God  as  He  is  revealed  in  nature,  history,  the  Bible,  Christ.  There  is 
no  higher  theme  of  thought  than  this,  not  even  for  angels.  3.  They  talk  about 
Him.  "  They  spake  often  one  to  another."  The  chief  theme  of  thought  will 
always  be  the  leading  subject  of  converse.  "  Out  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh." 
Souls,  though  constitutionally  social,  can  only  meet  and  mingle  on  a  subject  of 
common  interest ;  the  loftier  and  purer  the  subject,  the  closer  and  more  exquisite 
the  communion.  As  the  rays  can  only  meet  in  the  sun,  so  souls  can  only  meet  in 
true  fellowship  in  the  name  of  God.  This  is  the  platform  of  genuine  social  inter- 
course. II.  God  IN  RELATION  TO  GOOD  MEN.  1.  He  hcars  their  converse.  "The 
Lord  hearkened  and  heard  it."  All  sounds  in  the  creation  vibrate  in  the  Divine 
ear ;  the  fall  of  the  dewdrop  as  well  as  the  thunder  of  the  tempest ;  the  sighs  of 


OHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  97 

an  infant  as  well  as  the  choruses  of  eternity ;  the  oath  of  the  blasphemer  as  well 
as  the  prayer  of  the  saint.  But  He  pays  special  attention  to  the  words  of  the  good. 
They  travel  to  Him  as  the  cries  of  the  babe  to  the  heart  of  the  mother.  2.  He 
registers  their  history.  "  A  book  of  remembrance  was  written  before  Him." 
He  is  represented  as  having  recorded  what  He  observes  and  hears.  This  book 
of  remembrance  before  the  Lord  is  no  mere  figure.  The  great  imiverse  is  a  book 
in  which  every  sound  uttered,  every  word  spoken,  are  recorded.  Science  teaches 
that  every  syllable  is  printed  imperishably  in  the  surrounding  air.  Nature  photo- 
graphs not  the  mere  features  of  the  face,  nor  the  form  of  the  body,  but  every 
changing  look,  every  passing  thought,  &c.  3.  He  pledges  their  salvation  ;  which 
includes  glory  in  the  future,  and  protection  in  the  present.  His  providence  shall 
guard  them  with  all  the  carefulness  of  a  father's  heart.  {Homilist.)  Three- 
fold aspect  of  true  sainthood  : — I.  Thh  life  of  the  good,  as  it  is  manifested 
trpoN  EARTH.  "  Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord."  It  is — 1.  Loyal.  There 
is  profound  reverence  ;  a  filial,  not  a  slavish  fear.  Not  fearing  the  anger  of  God, 
but  fearing  to  offend  Him ;  not  forsaking  sin  because  it  brings  punishment,  but 
because  God  hates  it.  Such  fear  of  God  will  engender  love,  inspire  faith,  produce 
holiness,  secure  obedience.  2.  It  is  social.  "  Spake  often  one  to  another." 
True  piety  is  a  cheerful,  sympathetic  thing ;  it  does  not  destroy  our  social  instincts, 
but  intensifies  and  ennobles  them.  The  natural  tendency  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
in  the  heart  is  to  link  men  together  in  the  bonds  of  brotherhood,  to  hush  the  discord 
of  society,  and  to  lead  us  to  bear  each  other's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of 
Christ.  These  believers  spake  often  one  to  another — not  of  each  other's  failings 
— not  for  scandal  or  strife,  but  about  the  work  of  the  Lord,  and  to  each  other's 
edification.  3.  It  was  also  secret.  There  was  the  inner  as  well  as  outer,  the 
subjective  as  well  as  the  objective  life  ;  they  "  thought  upon  His  name."  They 
were  not  all  talk ;  they  were  not  hypocrites — "  talkatives  "  ; — they  had  heart 
religion.  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he  ;  and  as  he  thinks,  he  loves  and 
lives.  Our  life  must  be  of  this  sort  to  please  God,  for  He  looketh  at  the  heart. 
We  must  not  forsake  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together ;  and  our  affections 
must  be  fixed  on  things  above.  II.  The  life  of  the  good,  as  it  is  eecognised 
IN  HEAVEN.  "  And  the  Lord  hearkened  and  heard  it,  and  a  book  of  remembrance 
was  written  before  Him."  1.  It  is  known  in  heaven.  God  recognises  those  who 
fear  Him,  though  they  may  be  little  and  unknown,  they  are  loved  and  prized 
by  God.  The  Lord  is  represented  as  bending  from  His  throne,  and  listening  to  the 
sounds  that  come  from  the  earth ;  and  as  He  hearkens.  He  hears  and  recognises 
the  voice  of  His  people,  who  hold  sweet  commimion  with  each  other,  and  hallowed 
commimion  with  Himself ;  as  by  unseen  electric  wires,  with  inconceivable  swift- 
ness, holy  thoughts  and  words  fiash  to  heaven,  and  enter  the  ear  of  the  Most  High. 
Our  conversation  is  in  heaven.  2.  It  is  recorded  there.  God  blots  out  the  sins 
of  His  people  from  His  book,  but  He  keeps  a  book  of  remembrance  for  the  virtues  of 
His  saints.  We  may  forget  our  work  of  faith  and  laboiu-  of  love,  but  God  never 
forgets.  III.  The  life  of  the  good,  as  it  will  be  consummated  in  the  last 
GREAT  DAY.  This  shows — 1.  It  will  be  crowned  with  the  highest  possible  honour. 
We  shall  be  owned  as  friends,  and  children,  and  companions  of  God  for  ever.  2.  It 
will  be  crowned  with  the  highest  possible  glory.  "  Jewels  "  are  among  a  monarch's 
brightest  and  costliest  things ;  and  God  speaks  of  His  believing  servants  as  His 
"jewels."     (F.  W.  Brown.)         Oenuine  religion  : — Three  things  are  noteworthy — 

1.  The  E33ENrE  of  genuine  religion.  "They  that  feared  the  Lord."  The  men 
who  fear  God  may  b-'  divided  into  two  classes.  1.  Those  who  fear  Him  with  a 
p'avish  fear.  The  unrenewed  millions  when  they  think  of  Him  at  all  dread 
Him,  their  guilty  consciences  invest  Him  with  attributes  of  such  horror  that 
they  shudder  at  the  idea  of  Him,  they  flee  from  His  presence.  "  I  heard  Thy 
voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was  afraid."  All  that  is  superstitious  in  the  world, 
all  that  is  barbaric  in  the  religion  of  Christendom,  spring  from  this  dread  of  God. 

2.  Those  who  fear  Him  with  a  filial  fear.  The  fear  which  a  loving  child  has  for  a 
worthy  and  noble  sire.  There  is,  perhaps,  always  a  kind  of  fear  in  connection 
with  true  love.  We  fear,  not  that  the  object  will  harm  us,  but  that  we  may  harm 
or  displease  the  object.  II.  The  sociality  of  genuine  religion.  "  Spake  often 
one  to  another."  We  are  social  beings,  and  what  interests  us  most  has  the  most 
power  in  bringing  us  together.  Nothing  interests  a  religious  man  so  much  as 
religion.  Spake  no  doubt  in  language  of  mutual  instruction,  mutual  comfort, 
mutual  exhortation.  There  is  no  force  in  the  world  so  socialising  as  religion. 
in.  The  WORTH  of  genuine  religion.      See  what  God  does  with  the  genuinely 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

religious.  1.  He  specially  attends  to  them.  "  The  Lord  hearkened  and  heard 
it."  2.  He  claims  them  as  His  own.  "  And  they  shall  be  Mine,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  3.  He  appreciates  them  as  precious.  "  In  that  day  when  I  make  up 
My  jewels."  The  word  here  rendered  jewels  is  in  Exodus  (xix.  5)  rendered  peculiar 
treasure.  "  They  are  peculiarly  precious  to  Me."  He  knows  the  worth  of  their 
existence,  the  cost  of  their  restoration,  the  greatness  of  their  capabilities.  4.  He 
distinguishes  them  from  all  others.  {Homilist.)  The  Lord's  people: — The 
temptations  of  the  professing  Church  of  God  seem  to  have  been  much  the  same 
in  all  ages.  One  has  been  to  neglect  or  forsake  the  assemblies  of  the  Lord's  people 
for  worship  and  instruction.  In  old  times  there  was  the  same  tendency  to  weariness 
at  the  monotony  of  religious  exercises,  the  same  craving  for  novelty  in  the  human 
heart,  as  now.  In  Malachi's  days  the  world  did  not  look  with  favovur  on  religion ; 
the  world  regarded  religion  as  a  mean  and  useless  thing ;  the  world  had  a  good 
word  for  any  one  rather  than  for  the  humble  followers  of  God,  who  knew  and 
loved  the  truth.  But,  even  then,  there  were  those  who  were  not  ashamed  to 
meet  together,  and  encoiurage  one  another,  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  I.  Thb 
CHARACTER  OF  THE  Lord's  PEOPLE.  The  circumstanccs  of  life,  and  the  positions 
in  which  they  are  placed,  bring  out  the  real  character  of  men.  So  with  regard 
to  spiritual  things,  circumstances  manifest  the  real  character.  Times  of  trial 
and  opposition  serve  to  show  who  has  real  grace,  and  who  has  only  the  semblance 
of  it.  Tribulation  and  persecution  on  account  of  the  Word  is  in  the  Sacred 
Scriptures  compared  to  the  refiner's  fire,  which  separates  the  dross  from  the  pure 
gold.  We  ought  to  rejoice  that,  in  the  overruling  power  and  grace  of  the  great 
Head  of  the  Church,  it  is  tvu-ned  into  a  means  of  good  to  them  who  are  troubled, 
and  that  the  wrath  of  man  is  made  to  praise  Him,  in  the  manifestation  of  His  gi-ace 
in  His  people,  and  in  their  refinement  and  establishment  in  the  faith.  In  those 
trying  times  there  were  those  who  dared  to  go  against  the  prevailing  current 
of  the  world's  opinion,  and  "  spake  often  one  to  another."  '  They  feared  the 
Lord,  and  thought  upon  His  name."  Such  are  the  Lord's  people  in  every  age. 
II.  Their  prospects.  "  They  shall  be  Mine,"  &c.  God's  people  are  His  property, 
His  jewels.  In  the  day  to  which  they  are  looking  forward,  He  will  own  them  as 
His.  Not  make  them  His,  but  declare  them  to  be  His.  (G.  Maxwell,  B.A.) 
The  inner  circle  of  Church  life  : — When  Napoleon  retreated  from  Moscow,  a  large 
part  of  his  army  perished  in  the  cold  and  snow.  When  night  came,  a  body  of 
troops  would  kindle  a  little  fire  as  best  they  could,  and  then  lots  would  be  cast  for 
those  who  should  occupy  the  places  nearest  the  fire,  and  the  cold  was  so  intense 
that  those  in  the  outermost  rows  would  be  found  frozen  stiff  in  the  morning.  Now, 
in  every  Church,  there  are  those  who  form  the  very  centre — a  circle  within  a  circle — 
gathering  close  to  the  person  of  Christ.  These  enjoy  the  warmth  of  His  spiritual 
presence,  while  those  who  content  themselves  with  living  at  a  distance  from  Chiist 
are  soon  chilled  and  frozen  in  the  keen  atmosphere  of  worldliness  which  enswathes 
the  Church.  (Watchword.)  Spake  often  one  to  another. — Christian  converse  : — 
We  live  in  better  times  than  were  those  of  Malachi.  Among  us  the  influence 
of  religion  is  acknowledged  by  the  great  majority  of  those  with  whom  we 
associate.  Placed  then  in  more  favourable  circumstances,  do  we  imitate 
the  example  of  the  pious  Israelites  ?  Do  we  speak  one  to  another  of  the  God 
whom  we  worship  ?  It  is  true  that,  in  the  present  state  of  society,  religious  topics 
cannot  be  introduced  upon  every  occasion,  or  into  every  circle.  Our  Saviour 
Himself  warned  us  against  the  folly  and  the  danger  of  such  a  practice.  But  alas  ! 
by  many  religious  conversation  is  regarded  as  an  infringement  upon  the  decencies 
of  life  ;  chilled  with  obstinate  silence ;  or  almost  rebuked  with  a  sneer.     I.  To 

THOSE  WHO  FEAR  THB  LORD  IN  SINCERITY  AND  TRUTH   RELIGIOUS  C0NVERS.4.TI0N  IS 

NATURAL.  What  dwells  habitually  in  the  mind,  the  lips  will  most  frequently 
utter.  The  profession  of  each  individual,  and  his  customary  modes  of  thought, 
almost  irresistibly  appear  in  his  conversation.  Shall  the  Christian  be  the  only 
exception  to  this  general  law  ?  The  tradesman  selects  with  care,  and  addresses 
with  evident  pieference  those  to  whom  the  secrets  of  his  craft  are  known;  with 
whom  he  may  plan  the  means  of  abridging  his  labour  and  increasing  his  gains. 
And  shall  not  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ  speak  one  to  another  of  that  work  which 
their  great  Master  hath  given  them  to  do  ?  The  "  speech  "  even  of  a  licentious 
man  "  bewrayeth  "  him.  To  those  who  fear  the  Lord,  the  most  natural  subjects 
of  conversation  are  those  which  religion  supplies.  By  what  inexplicable  prejudice 
do  they  refuse  to  sjjeak  one  to  another  of  their  eternal  interests  ?  In  every  other 
pursuit  we  seek  eagerly  the  approbation  of  those  whom  we  value.     The  hope  of 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  99 

their  applause  lightens  oiir  toil.  Why  shoiild  not  the  same  amiable  feelings,  the 
same  endearing  aids,  attend  religion  also  ?  II.  Religious  conversation  is 
PLEASANT  TO  THOSE  WHO  FKAB  THE  LoRD  IN  SINCERITY.  What  is  there  sublime 
or  amiable  in  the  whole  range  of  intellectual  and  moral  speculation,  with  which 
religious  feeling  may  not  be  united,  and  on  which  the  conversation  of  the  pious 
may  not  with  propriety  and  with  advantage  dwell  ?  In  this  wide  range  there  is 
much  that,  while  it  advances  our  improvement,  may  minister  also  to  our  delight. 
The  subjects  of  religious  conversation,  in  themselves  attractive  and  delightful, 
gain  a  new  interest  from  the  relation  which  connects  them  with  their  Author, 
and  from  the  prospects  which,  through  the  Gospel,  we  are  permitted  to  entertain. 
And  our  future  destiny  endears  to  us  religious  conversation.     III.  Religious 

CONVERSATION  IS  USEFUL  TO  THOSE  WHO  FEAR  THE  LORD  IN  SINCERITY.  The  use- 
fulness of  any  employment  is  not  to  be  judged  of  by  its  conformity  to  the  laws  of 
fashion,  its  tendency  to  still  the  alarms  of  the  suspicious,  to  avoid  the  sneer  of  the 
fool ;  or  by  its  pleasing  effects  at  the  moment,  while  its  final  issue  is  bitter. 
Religious  conversation  may  still  be  useful,  although  it  may  have  been  made  at 
times  the  mask  of  hypocrisy,  or  the  tool  of  spiritual  pride.  If  the  instrument 
in  itself  is  valuable,  the  wise  and  the  pious  need  not  forego  its  exercise,  though 
knaves  have  abused,  and  fools  have  misapplied  it.  The  uses  of  conversation  in 
oiu:  intellectual  piu-suits  are  acknowledged  and  sought  with  avidity.  In  pro- 
portion to  the  importance  of  the  subjects  about  which  religious  conversation  is 
employed,  its  usefulness  increases.  Happy  would  society  be,  and  rapid  our 
improvement,  were  we  to  receive  as  a  national  law  the  precept  which  was  given 
to  Israel  of  old,  and  made  religion  at  once  a  theme  of  instruction  and  delight ! 
Of  that  time  let  us  hasten  the  approach,  so  far  as  our  influence  and  example  may 
extend.  (A.  Brunton,  D.D.)  Religious  conversation: — It  is  the  tendency  of 
our  time  to  decry  what  is  called  religious  conversation.  It  is  in  great  disrepute 
with  those  who  desire  to  be  thought  sensible  men  ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  has 
become  almost  extinct,  except  in  certain  narrow  circles,  where  it  survives  in  a 
form  by  no  means  calculated  to  attract  others  towards  it.  Many  of  those  who 
most  fail  in  making  religious  conversation  profitable,  have  yet  a  good  object  in 
view  in  their  attempts  to  cherish  it.  Many  good  motives  have  prompted  the 
endeavour  to  impart  a  more  decidedly  C!hristian  character  to  the  language  of 
society.  But  a  failure  it  has  often  been.  What  with  the  difficulty  of  expressing 
in  words  the  deepest  feelings;  what  with  the  risk  of  overstating,  and  of  mis- 
stating, impressions  which,  to  be  worth  anything,  must  be  exact,  neither  more  nor 
less  nor  other  than  the  precise  truth  ;  what  with  the  ambiguity  which  hangs 
about  so  many  characters  as  to  their  real  decision  for  good,  and  the  danger  of  saying 
before  any  that  for  which  they  may  be  unprepared  or  disinclined  ;  what  with 
the  weariness  of  mind  and  body  under  which  most  men  enter  into  society,  and 
their  consequent  indisposition  for  such  efforts  of  thought  as  are  involved  in  the 
discussion  of  what  we  call  serious  subjects  ;  what  with  the  just  delicacy  which 
teaches  them  to  refrain  from  the  obtrusion  of  private  thoughts  upon  any  heart 
but  their  own,  and  the  just  dread  too  of  seeming  to  any  to  be  other  or  better  than 
they  are  :  the  result  of  all  these,  and  numberless  other  influences,  is  generally 
the  same,  namely,  that  the  mention  of  religion  is  kept  out  of  our  daily  intercourse 
with  one  another.  Nevertheless,  the  text,  amongst  other  passages  of  Scripture, 
forbids  us  to  rest  satisfied  with  a  general  absence  of  all  reference  to  those  things 
which,  whether  in  youth  or  in  age,  are  the  only  safety,  the  only  happiness,  and 
the  only  life  of  the  soul.  "  Then."  The  context  tells  us  that  the  time  spoken  of 
was  an  evil  time.  So  prevalent  was  sin,  so  bold,  and  apparently  so  prosperous, 
that  people  were  begirming  to  say,  "  It  is  vain  to  serve  God."  What  profit  is  it 
that  we  have  tried  to  serve  Him,  and  have  walked  carefully  and  even  mourn- 
fully before  the  Lord  ?  This  was  a  very  short-sighted  and  a  very  wiong  judg- 
ment ;  but  it  is  one  which  even  good  men  are  prone  to  fall  into,  when  they  compare 
their  own  present  comfort  and  disparagement  with  the  apparent  triumph  and 
happiness  of  the  ungodly.  Mark  the  one  characteristic  of  these  people — they 
"  feared  the  Lord."  There  are  two  kinds  of  fear,  the  servile  and  the  filial ;  that 
I  kind  which  consists  in  dread,  and  that  kind  which  consists  in  awe.  It  is  a  short 
and  sufficient  description  of  the  good  in  any  congregation,  that  they  "  fear  God." 
In  times  of  difficulty  and  discouragement  they  "  spake  often  one  to  another." 
They  tried  the  experiment  of  sympathy,  of  combined  counsel,  and  combined 
action  too.  The  meaning  of  the  "  Church  "  is,  that  God  would  give  us  in  association 
I     a  strength  and  a  comfort  which  we  cannot  find  in  isolation  ;  that  He  would  have 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [chap.  in. 

us  strengthen  our  brethren,  and  be  strengthened  in  turn  by  our  brethren,  in  the 
exercise  of  united  acts  of  worship,  and  still  more  in  the  recognition  at  all  times 
of  a  tie  of  friendship  and  of  brotherhood  which  all  must  possess  who  have  indeed 
one  heavenly  Father,  one  Divine  Saviour,  and  one  Holy  Spirit.  We  do  not  half 
use  these  helps  and  strengths  with  which  God  has  provided  us.  Here  I  would 
place  the  beginning  of  religious  conversation.  Here,  in  God's  worship.  Those 
who  have  heartily  prayed  together,  praised  God  together,  listened  to  God's  Word 
together,  cannot  go  forth,  to  neglect  one  another,  to  oppress  one  another,  to  tempt 
one  another,  without  such  a  sense  of  guilt  in  doing  so  as  would  be  absolutely 
intolerable.  When  it  is  once  made  present  to  your  minds  as  a  great  object,  that  all 
should  lead  blameless  Christian  lives,  and  that  all  should  at  last  ?ee  God,  many 
other  ways  will  suggest  themselves,  besides  this,  in  which  those  who  fear  the  Lord 
may  speak  often  one  to  another.  It  may  be  done  in  the  privacy  of  true  friendship, 
when  to  one  faithful  ear  you  can  confide  something  of  your  personal  difificulties 
and  temptations,  and  exchange  that  sympathy  which  is  always  strengthening 
even  where  it  may  seem  to  be  rather  the  confession  of  weakness.  "  The  Lord 
hearkened  and  heard  it."  If  there  are  any — may  there  be  many — who  can  think 
with  comfort  of  that  record  of  words  spoken  in  His  love  and  fear,  must  not  others 
tremble  when  they  think  of  their  words  ?  Who  has  been  the  better  for  our  possess- 
ing the  gift  of  speech  ?  Let  us  judge  ourselves,  one  and  all,  for  indeed  we  have 
cause  to  do  so,  if  perhaps  in  God's  great  mercy  we  may  not  be  judged.  Let  us 
remember,  one  and  all,  who  said  that  for  every  idle  word  which  men  should  speak 
they  should  give  account  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Of  all  the  sayings  written 
down  fi'om  His  lips  in  the  book  of  God,  none  surely  is  so  terrible  in  its  sound  as 
that  which  declares,  "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words 
thou  shalt  be  condemned."  (C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  Christian  intercourse: — 
Few  persons  are  so  unhappy  as  to  be  ignorant  of  the  value  of  social  intercourse, 
and  as  not  to  have  realised  its  influence  in  heightening  the  enjoyments  of  human 
life,  and  mitigating  its  sorrows.  This  pleasure,  like  every  other,  is  refined  and 
elevated  by  the  mutual  experience  of  personal  religion.  Convinced  that  a  free 
social  intercourse,  of  a  spiritual  and  experimental  character,  among  Cliristians 
may  be  highly  subservient  to  their  advancement  in  religion,  it  is  proposed  to  offer 
a  few  remarks  adapted  to  direct  its  exercise  and  to  promote  its  cultivation.     I.  The 

RIGHT  EXERCISE  OF  SPIRITUAL  INTERCOURSE  AMONG  CHRISTIANS.       L    The  perSOUS 

with  whom  it  should  be  held.  It  should  for  the  most  part  be  restricted  to  those 
whom  we  can  regard  as  the  subjects  of  renewing  grace.  They  who  "  feared  God  " 
spake  to  one  another.  On  experimental  religion,  those  who  have  never  felt  its 
power  can  have  nothing  to  communicate  ;  nor  are  they  in  general  likely  to  feel 
any  particular  interest  in  the  views  of  those  who  have.  Free  interchange  of 
sentiment  is  not  advisable  indiscriminately  with  all  who  fear  God.  (1)  It  should 
be  cultivated  more  especially  with  those  to  whom  we  are  united  in  the  fellowship 
of  the  Gospel.  (2)  And  with  those  whose  circumstances  and  habits  are  most 
nearly  analogous  to  our  own.  This  is  true  in  reference  to  our  standing  in  the  Divine 
life,  and  to  those  of  similar  habits  and  in  the  same  stations  in  society.  (3)  Such 
intercourse  should  be  habitually  cherished  among  those  who  are  connected  by  the 
intimacies  of  domestic  association.  Such  association  presents  not  only  the  most 
frequent,  but  also  the  most  appropriate  opportunities  for  such  intercourse.     II.  The 

SUBJECTS     SUCH      INTERCOURSE      MAY     PROFITABLY     EMBRACE.         L      The     peculiar 

spiritual  or  providential  dispensations  of  which  we  may  be  the  subjects.  The 
proofs  our  own  experience  has  furnished  of  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  2.  Subjects 
which  have  been  brought  before  us  in  the  public  services  of  the  sanctuary,  or  in 
the  private  perusal  of  the  Word  of  God.  3.  The  general  state  of  religion,  more 
especially  in  our  own  neighbourhood  and  commiuiion,  and  the  means  by  which 
we  may  individually  aid  in  its  advancement.  III.  The  seasons  at  which  such 
intercourse  may  be  appropriately  entered  on.  "  Spake  often."  The  expression 
.seems  to  imply  that  they  took  every  opportunity,  in  the  ordinary  associations  of 
friendship,  to  direct  the  attention  of  each  other  to  sacred  subjects.  In  conclusion, 
some  considerations  to  enforce  the  cultivation  of  spiritual  intercourse.  1.  Such 
exercises  have  been  attended  by  evident  indications  of  Divine  approbation. 
2.  Such  intercourse  is  essential  to  the  right  exercise  of  Christian  sympathy  and 
affection.  3.  It  will  be  found  highly  conducive  to  our  own  spiritual  advantage. 
Points  in  our  experience  wo  have  thought  fatally  peculiar  we  shall  find  common 
to  others  as  well ;  we  may  gain  relief  where  they  found  it,  we  may  learn  to  shun 
the  snares  by  which  they  were  endangered,  and  to  pursue  the  means  by  which 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  101 

their  progress  in  the  Divine  life  has  been  promoted.  (Essex  B^membrancer.) 
Christian  conversation  : — I.  It  pleases  God.  It  is  plainly  indicated  that  God 
is  pleased  when  His  people  talk  to  each  other  tenderly  about  Him,  that  He  listens, 
and  not  only  listens,  but  makes  record  for  future  reward  of  all  those  who  are  so 
lovingly  loyal.  Why  are  Christians  to-day  so  dumb  ?  Love  is  not  a  dumb  or 
silent  thing.  Love  speaks.  Then  why  these  sealed  lips  ?  God  listens  while  His 
children  fondly  talk  of  Him.  He  loves  to  see  gratitude  in  our  hearts  ;  it  gieatly 
pleases  Him  to  hear  us  talking  one  to  another  about  His  goodness.  II.  It  blesses 
us.  Nothing  does  one's  own  heart  so  much  good  as  speaking  kindly  of  another. 
Expressing  love  ever  increases  it.  III.  It  blesses  others.  There  are  too  many 
dumb  Christians  ;  for  there  is  a  vast  power  for  good  in  our  tongues  if  we  will  but 
use  them  aright.  Many  a  soul  has  been  led  to  Christ  through  the  good  words 
dropped  in  Christian  conversation.  (G.  B.  F.  Hallock.)  Christian  communion 
encouraged : — I.  The  characters  indicated.  1.  They  feared  the  Lord.  There 
is  a  "slavish"  fear,  distinguished  from  "filial"  fear.  In  the  language  of  the  Old 
Testament,  the  "  fear  of  the  Lord  "  means  what  may  be  called  the  entire  religious 

Principle,  or  the  whole  of  inward  religion.  2.  They  thought  upon  the  name  of  the 
rord.  Names  are  signs  used  to  distinguish  one  person  from  another.  Usually 
they  are  arbitrary  signs.  But  "  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  expresses  the  essential 
qualities  of  His  nature.  Some  of  the  names  of  God  are  Rock,  Strength,  Shepherd, 
Father,  King.  3.  They  spake  often  one  to  another.  On  what  particular  subject 
we  must  gather  from  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  They  must  have  spoken 
of  God's  gracious  dealings  with  them  ;  of  the  oppositions  they  had  to  encounter  ; 
the  deliverances  they  had  experienced.  They  spake  often,  in  ways  of  instruction, 
admonition,  and  encouragement.  II.  The  advantages  enjoyed  by  those 
characters.  1.  Divine  approbation.  "  The  Lord  hearkened  and  heard."  He 
deigned  to  listen.  2.  Divine  security.  "  A  book  of  remembiance  was  wa-itten." 
There  was  an  imperishable  impression  of  their  case  on  the  mind  of  God  Himself. 
3.  Divine  promise.  "  They  shall  be  Mine,"  &c.  (1)  They  are  regarded  as  jewels. 
(2)  When  God  shall  "  make  up  His  jewels,"  shall  gather  them  out  from  among 
the  rubbish  and  refuse,  He  who  now  regards  them  as  His  children  will  spare  them, 
will  preserve  them  tenderly  and  effectually.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons. ) 
Religious  conversation  recommended : — I.  The  disposition  and  behavioub  of 
these  pious  persons  in  a  time  of  prevailing  irreligion.  Their  general 
character  is  that  they  "  feared  the  Lord."  As  the  general  fruit  of  that  Divine 
principle  ruling  in  their  hearts,  they  "  spake  often  one  to  another."  The  subject 
of  their  conversation  was  the  same  with  that  of  their  thoughts,  the  name  of  God 
and  His  ways.  As  agreement  in  principles  and  affections,  an  union  of  interests 
and  designs,  naturally  begets  friendship  amongst  men,  and  is  the  foundation  of 
mutual  freedom  in  communicating  their  thoughts  to  each  other,  so  true  religion 
particularly  is  the  firmest  bond  of  union,  the  strongest  and  noblest  cement  of  a 
lasting  amity.  There  is,  too,  a  good  deal  of  reason  why  good  men  should  speak 
often  one  to  another  in  a  time  of  abounding  iniquity,  because  it  is  a  means  of 
strengthening  the  good  dispositions  which  remain  in  themselves,  and  which  other- 
wise may  be  in  danger  of  being  weakened  and  of  perishing  at  last.  As  religion 
more  than  anything  else  in  the  mind  laboureth  against  opposition  both  from 
temptations  without  and  our  own  infirmities,  it  needs  and  receives  peculiar 
benefit  by  the  affectionate  counsel  of  pious  friends  ;  and  evil  communication 
doth  not  more  tend  to  corrupt  good  manners  than  good  communication  doth 
further  to  purify  and  raise  them  to  perfection.  Therefore  Christians  are  earnestly 
exhorted  by  the  sacred  writers  to  be  aiding  and  assisting  to  each  other  in  this 
respect  (Heb.  iii.  12,  13).  We  see,  then,  the  true  reason  of  Christians'  shyness 
in  speaking  one  to  another  upon  the  affairs  of  religion,  which  is  the  faulty  omission 
of  a  very  important  duty,  an  excellent  means  of  increasing  piety  and  virtue  ;  and 
it  is  no  otherwise  to  be  accounted  for  than  by  the  weakness  of  good  affections. 
Great  prudence  is  to  be  used  in  discoursing  on  religious  subjects,  and  the  tempers 
of  men  carefully  considered,  lest  an  indiscreet  freedom  be  attended  with  bad 
consequences,  and  sacred  things  be  exposed  to  the  contempt  of  the  profane. 
II.  The  distinguishing  regard  God  shows  to  them.  He  observes  them  attent- 
ively ;  they  are  at  all  times  the  objects  of  His  peculiar  care,  and  shall  at  last  be 
highly  honoured  and  happy  in  His  favour.  The  figurative  way  of  speaking  is  not 
intended  to  signify  that  God  has  any  need  of  external  evidence  or  means  of  finding 
out  the  truth  :  since  at  one  direct  view  He  beholds  the  most  remote  and  most 
secret  things.     By  Him  actions  are  weighed      He  has  a  more  perfect  knowledge 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

than  men  can  possibly  have  by  the  strictest  inquiry  they  can  make.  This  intimacy 
of  Divine  knowledge  of  our  very  thoughts  and  most  private  communications  with 
friends  is  to  religious  minds  of  the  greatest  moment  to  their  comfort  and  support 
under  their  difficulties,  and  a  powerful  motive  to  preserve  stedfastness  in  tjue 
piety.  God's  distinguishing  regard  is  shown  in  His  keeping  "  a  book  of  remem- 
brance." This  is  but  after  the  manner  of  men,  to  show  the  infallible  security 
of  the  Divine  promises  made  in  favour  of  the  righteous,  and  the  reward  which 
shall  be  adjudged  to  them,  fully  proportioned,  nay  greatly  exceeding,  all  the  good 
they  have  done.  God  hath  no  need  of  registers  which  human  governments  have 
recoiu-se  to.  God  knows  all  past  and  future  as  well  as  present  with  equal  clearness. 
The  "  book  of  remembrance  "  suggests  His  special  notice  of  the  conduct  of  His 
faithful  servants,  His  keeping  their  actions  in  mind,  and  the  undiminished  per- 
spicuity of  His  righteousness  and  goodness  in  all  His  proceedings  towards  them. 
Another  instance  of  God's  distinguishing  regard  is  the  promise  that  they  shaU 
"  be  His  when  He  maketh  up  His  jewels."  Reference  is  to  the  appointed  day 
of  account.  God  will  then  most  eminently  make  up  His  jewels,  when  He  gathers 
the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the  first-born  whose  names  are  written  in 
heaven.  There  are  some  differences  between  the  conditions  of  men  even  in 
this  world  made  by  the  interposition  of  God  Himself  as  righteous  Governor, 
which  may  be  comprehended  in  His  making  up  His  jewels.  It  is  now  that  God 
hath  such  pity  for  them  that  fear  Him  as  to  preserve  them  from  many  snares 
and  calamities  to  which  they  are  liable,  and  spare  them  as  a  father  spareth  his  son. 
{J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  The.  communion  of  saints: — However  abandoned  and 
wicked  a  people  or  nation  may  be,  nevertheless  God  has  reserved  to  Himself 
a  seed  to  serve  Him,  a  people  to  show  forth  His  glory.  The  period  to  which 
the  text  alludes  may  be  considered  emblematical  of  the  times  in  which  we  live ; 
and  it  should  be  our  object,  as  the  professed  people  of  God,  to  imitate  the  example 
of  those  who  are  so  honourably  mentioned  by  the  prophet  in  the  words  before 
us.  I.  The  description  heee  given  of  the  people  of  God.  1.  They  are  said 
to  "  fear  the  Lord."  In  order  that  we  may  fear  the  Lord  we  must  know  Him. 
The  fear  meant  is  that  reverential,  affectionate  fear  of  God  which  is  produced 
in  the  heart  of  the  believer  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  They  are  those  who  meditate 
upon  Him.  "  In  the  multitude  of  their  thoughts  within  them  His  comforts 
delight  their  soul."  3.  They  are  those  who  hold  communion  one  with  another. 
They  "  considered  one  another,  to  provoke  unto  love  and  good  works."  We 
can  imagine  them  saying,  "  Come,  all  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  and  we  will  tell  you 
what  He  hath  done  for  our  souls."  II.  The  approbation  which  God  here 
testifies  of  His  people.  1.  He  testifies  His  approbation  by  paymg  attention 
to  their  occupations.  2.  By  granting  them  a  share  in  His  remembrance.  3.  By 
promising  to  recognise  and  spare  them  at  the  final  day.  "  They  shall  be  Mine 
when  I  make  up  My  jewels."  God  even  speaks  of  them  as  His  "  sous."  Do 
we  possess  the  characteristics  which  are  here  given  of  the  people  of  God  ?  May 
God,  in  His  infinite  mercy,  place  His  fear  within  our  hearts,  and  then  the  gracious 
promise  of  the  text  shall  be  ours.  (Henry  Cleare.)  Religious  fellowship: — 
I.  Religious  fellowship  calls  into  exercise  the  highest  sympathies  of 
BEING.  While  men  converse  on  secular  subjects  the  fountain  of  their  spiritual 
nature  is  sealed.  When  the  topic  is  practical  Christianity,  the  hidden  individu- 
ality discloses  its  proportions,  and  you  become  acquainted  with  the  genuine 
nature  of  the  speaker.  Three  facts  in  relation  to  religious  men.  1.  They  have 
the  common  centre  of  attraction.  "  They  that  feared  the  Lord."  On  the 
subject  of  experimental  godliness  all  Christians  can  speak.  Assemble  round 
the  manger  of  Bethlehem  or  the  Cross  of  Calvary,  and  even  the  most  untutored 
tongue  is  stirred  to  eloquence  or  music.  2.  They  have  corresponding  spiritual 
experiences.  Every  student  of  his  own  heart  has  been  amazed  and  delighted 
to  discover  the  harmony  of  religious  feelings  which  exists  throughout  the  Church. 
3.  They  enjoy  the  inspiration  of  a  common  hoj^e.  They  speak  of  tlieir  joint 
inheritance  without  any  feeling  of  envy.  The  "  fear  "  here  is  that  which  filial 
reverence  so  properly  inspires.  The  child  of  God  fears  lest  he  should  wound 
love  so  sensitive,  or  insult  purity  so  dazzling  ;  his  fear  relates  less  to  the  power 
that  might  crush  him  than  to  the  mercy  which  has  saved  him.  II.  Religious 
fellowship  attracts  the  benignant  NOTICE  of  God.  Learn — 1.  The  prox- 
imity of  the  Divine  ear.  God  has  so  constructed  the  universe  that  every  whisper 
in  its  remotest  region  resounds  in  the  palace  of  Deity.  Wondrous  ear  !  The 
thunders  of  celestial  song,  the  plaintive  notes  of  sorrow,  the  eighings  of  secret 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  103 

worship,  the  cries  of  extremity,  and  the  doxologies  of  gratitude  all  force  their 
way  to  that  centre.  Thy  prayer  will  not  ascend  in  vain.  2.  The  Divine  record 
of  human  deeds.  "  A  book  of  remembrance."  There  is  a  registry  of  namea 
in  heaven.  Every  man  who  "  spake  "  will  find  his  name  inscribed  in  the  chronicles 
of  the  sky.  III.  Reugiotjs  fellowship  necessitates  a  contemplation  ov 
THB  SUBLIMEST  SUBJECTS.  '*  That  thought  upon  His  name."  Can  you  indicate 
a  subject  of  more  thrilling  interest  ?  Is  boundless  power  sublime  ?  The  name 
of  God  is  the  expression  of  Omnipotence.  Is  infinite  wisdom  sublime  ?  The 
name  of  God  is  the  expression  of  Omniscience.  Is  there  aught  of  sublimity  in 
inimitable  love  ?  The  name  of  God  is  the  representative  of  ever-during  and 
disinterested  affection.  There  is  no  common-place  in  religion.  The  moment 
you  mention  the  name  of  God  you  rise  into  the  loftiest  region  of  sublimity  ! 
Religious  fellowship  involves  the  highest  style  of  conversation.     IV.  Religious 

FELLOWSHIP   will   BE   DISTINGUISHED    BY   THB   MOST   GLORIOUS   RESULTS.       "  They 

shall  be  Mine."  "  I  will  spare  them."  1.  The  qualification  for  these  honours 
is  entirely  moral.  All  that  is  said  of  these  people  is,  "  They  feared  the  Lord." 
"  They  thought  on  His  name."  2.  There  is  ah  appointed  day  of  classification. 
God  has  jewels  even  amid  the  ruins  of  this  shattered  and  degraded  world.  Con- 
cerning the  fellowship  indicated,  four  facts  are  clear.  1.  It  was  cultivated  with 
much  frequency.  "  Spake  often."  2.  Its  subjects  are  undiminished  in  sublimity. 
3.  It  is  demanded  in  circumstances  no  less  exacting  than  those  indicated  in  the 
context.  4.  It  has  lost  none  of  its  attractiveness  in  the  Divine  estimation.  The 
world  may  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  your  spiritual  intercourse,  but  the  Lord  will  hearken 
and  preserve  a  memorial  of  your  godly  fellowship.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 
Christian  intercourse :  —  In  these  days  religion  is  spoken  of  controversially, 
historically,  and  politically.  But  let  religion  be  introduced  and  treated  experi- 
mentally, then  it  is  at  once  undervalued.  If  any  person  venture  to  speak  of 
the  Lord's  dealings  with  his  soul,  then  the  subject  either  excites  ridicule  amongst 
the  company,  or  draws  down  upon  the  speaker  the  contemptuous  pity  of  every 
hearer.  This  is  the  common  cotu-se  of  things,  but  it  is  not  universally  so.  Even 
in  the  days  of  the  text  there  was  a  remnant  of  those  who  loved  to  speak  of 
spiritual  things,  and  to  speak  of  them  spiritually.  I.  The  parties  described. 
Those  who  "  feared  the  Lord."  Not  with  that  slavish  fear  which  exists  in  the 
minds  of  those  who  love  sin,  indulge  in  sin,  and  then  only  tremble  when  they 
think  of  the  wages  of  sin.  Reference  is  to  those  who,  looking  upon  God  as  a 
Father,  reverence  Him  and  love  Him,  and  would  prefer  themselves  suffering 
any  loss  to  ofi^ending  One  who  had  conferred  such  inestimable  blessings  on  them. 
The  true  filial  fear  of  God  implies  a  correct  knowledge  of  God's  dealings  with 
us,  of  His  demands  upon  oxa  affections,  of  His  love  as  manifested  in  Christ,  of 
the  way  of  salvation,  and  the  necessity  of  holiness.  It  implies  also  a  willing 
obedience  to  God's  commandments,  a  thankful  acceptance  of  God's  invitations, 
and  a  grateful  endeavour  to  conform  to  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  also 
signifies  an  earnest  desire  to  do  everything  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God.  They 
who  fear  the  Lord  are  men  who,  making  a  profession  of  religion,  mean  what  they 
say  and  say  what  they  mean.  II.  Their  conduct.  "  Spake  often  one  to 
another."  Man  is  a  social  being.  Few  things  contribute  more  to  the  encourage- 
ment of  selfishness  than  solitude  ;  and  nothing  is  more  opposed  to  the  whole 
spirit  of  true  religion  than  selfishness.  If  God  has  vouchsafed  unto  us  the  light 
of  the  glorious  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  we  are  neither  nationally  nor  individually 
at  liberty  to  hide  that  light  under  a  bushel.  Enforce  the  duty  of  religious  con- 
versation. L  From  the  danger  which  naturally  follows  idle  conversation.  Idle 
words  are  sinful  in  themselves,  and  extremely  sinful  in  their  tendency.  But 
what  is  the  character  of  the  common  conversation  of  the  day  ?  2.  Our  con- 
versation is  a  t^st  of  the  state  of  the  heart.  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart 
the  mouth  speaketh."  This  is  literally  true.  Illustrate  by  the  man  of  pleasure, 
who  talks  about  his  sport  ;  or  the  politician,  who  talks  about  his  politics.  Why, 
then,  should  any  one  condemn  the  zeal  of  the  man  of  God,  who  would  speak  of 
the  Lord's  dealings  with  his  soul  ?  3.  We  have  the  positive  injunction  of  the 
Word  of  God.  "  Let  your  speech  be  always  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt." 
The  duty  is  specially  insisted  on  again  and  again  in  the  Scriptures.  The  value 
of  experimental  conversation  is  incalculable.  Yet  it  must  be  confessed  that 
silence  upon  experimental  religion  is  generally  practised.  III.  The  reward. 
The  Lord  "  noted  it  down  in  a  book  of  remembrance."  In  the  great  day, 
to  your  infinite  surprise,  you  will  find  words  recalled  to  your  mind  long  since 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

forgotten  by  yourselves,  but  fresh  as  ever  in  the  remembrance  of  that  loving  Father 
with  whom  we  have  to  do.  By  way  of  caution  let  me  say,  do  not  think  you  must 
be  safe  because  you  speak  upon  religion.  Though  every  converted  man  will 
speak  of  Christ,  not  every  one  who  speaks  of  Christ  is  converted.  Speaking 
upon  religion  without  feeling  is  nothing  less  than  hypocrisy.  It  seldom  deceives 
man.  It  never  deceives  God.  [Montagu  Villiere,  M.A.)  Discourse : — 
Even  in  the  most  degenerate  ages  God  never  suffered  the  light  of  truth  to  be 
completely  banished  from  the  earth.  We  observe  also,  that  where  and  when 
sinners  have  been  most  determined  in  their  opposition  to  God,  the  servants  of 
God  have  ever  been  most  bold  and  resolute.  1.  We  learn  from  the  words  of  the 
text  that  it  is  the  duty  of  Chi-istians  at  all  times  to  stand  by  and  support  each 
other,  especially  in  times  of  abounding  iniquity.  This  was  the  conduct  of  these 
Jewish  servants  of  God,  and  was  highly  approved  of  by  the  Almighty.  The 
progress  of  sin  has,  in  every  age,  been  advanced  by  the  determined  union  of  its 
supporters.  God  has  appointed  a  way  by  which  all  this  may  be  met  and  over- 
come, namely,  a  determined  union  amongst  all  the  followers  of  the  Lamb. 
Though  the  number  of  Christians  has  ever  been  small  in  comparison  of  the  over- 
whelming masses  of  ungodly  men,  yet  truth  and  righteousness  must  in  due  time 
prevail,  and  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters 
cover  the  seas.  There  is  no  doubt  a  decided  and  close  union  among  real  Christians, 
whether  it  is  externally  visible  or  not.  It  is  not  only  the  duty  of  all  Christians 
to  feel  a  deep  interest  in  each  other's  prosperity,  but  they  cannot  be  Christians 
without  feeling  such  an  interest ;  and  what  is  required  is,  that  this  union  be 
as  open  and  manifest  as  it  is  real  and  unalterable.  The  ministers  of  truth  are 
especially  bound  to  stand  up  for  the  cause  of  God  in  stormy  times.  Theirs  is 
the  post  of  responsibility  and  danger.  They  are  the  standard-bearers.  But 
still,  all  Christians  are  bound,  as  they  value  God  and  truth,  a  glorious  eternity, 
and  the  immortal  souls  of  their  brethren,  to  aid  their  ministerial  efforts,  by  speak- 
ing often  one  to  another  words  of  encouragement,  consolation  and  reproof. 
We  might  go  over  all  the  different  situations  in  which  a  Christian  may  be  placed, 
and  show  how  the  words  of  a  friend  may  inspire  with  comfort ;  for  as  iron 
sharpeneth  iron,  so  doth  the  face  of  a  man  the  countenance  of  his  friend.  In 
all  circumstances  it  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to  speak  one  to  another  ;  for  a 
word  fitly  spoken,  how  good  it  is  ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  means  appointed  by 
God  for  saving  souls  from  death,  and  promoting  the  sanctification  of  His  people. 
2.  God  not  merely  remembers,  but  will  reward  those  who  thus  promote  the 
salvation  of  His  people,  and  retain  their  holiness  amidst  abounding  iniquity, 
and  in  illustrating  this  point  the  great  advantage  of  holiness  will  appear. 
Decided  Christians  are  exceedingly  precious  in  the  sight  of  God.  God  gives  us 
to  believe  that  when  at  last  He  comes  down  to  exhibit  to  the  world  His  glorious 
majesty,  and  when  all  the  princes  of  many  generations  must  meet  together,  and 
all  the  potentates  of  hell  must  come  to  see  the  glorious  spectacle — nothing  fairer 
will  there  be,  nothing  more  precious  and  beautiful,  nothing  which  illustrates 
more  the  dignity  and  glory  of  His  power.  His  love,  and  His  attributes,  than  the 
members  of  the  Christian  Church,  fair  and  glorious,  without  spot  or  wTinklc, 
or  any  such  thing.  Or  take  the  other  figure.  We  all  know  how  tender  is  the 
affection  of  parents  for  their  children.  It  reigns  amongst  all  the  creatures  of 
God.  Even  the  utmost  cruelty,  the  most  base  ingratitude,  is  unable  to  quench 
a  father's  love.  And  the  eternal  Jehovah  gives  us  to  believe  that,  as  parents 
write  the  names  of  their  children  in  their  sacred  books,  so  He  writes  the  names 
of  His  on  the  palms  of  His  hands ;  they  are  ever  before  Him.  "  I  will  spare 
them  as  a  man  spareth  his  son  that  serveth  him."  The  time  is  fast  approaching 
when  the  reign  of  delusion  will  end  for  ever ;  when  this  strange  scene,  in  which 
holiness  is  oppressed  and  sin  apparently  triumphant,  shall  change,  light  coming 
out  of  darkness,  order  out  of  confusion,  the  wicked  being  driven  away  in  their 
wickedness,  the  chosen  ones  of  God  brought  forth  from  their  obscurity,  that 
they  may  shine  as  the  jewels  in  our  Saviour's  crown,  as  the  stars  for  ever  and 
ever.  (James  Begg,  A.M.)  "  Speaking  to  one  another  "  of  holy  things  .■ — These 
persons  speak  of  God  and  God's  dealings,  because  this  is  the  subject  they  are 
thinking  upon  ;  because  their  hearts  are  full  of  God  and  His  doings  ;  because 
they  reverence  and  fear  God.  How  many  thus  spoke  to  one  another  in  Malachi'a 
days  we  do  not  know.  If  it  was  the  duty  of  God's  servants,  before  the  appear- 
ing of  Christ,  thus  to  keep  up  their  hopes  and  strengthen  one  another,  ought 
not  God's  servants,  now  that  He  has  appeared,  now  to  speak  to  one  another 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  105 

about  the  performances  and  promises  of  Christ  ?  That  surely  is  our  duty.  If 
our  hearts  are  full  of  Christ,  can  we  help  talking  about  Christ  to  those  with  whom 
we  constantly  Uve  ?  The  speaking  about  God  and  Christ,  about  reUgion  and 
heaven,  I  am  recommending,  is  the  speaking  of  them  in  plain,  natural,  hearty 
language  ;  the  speaking  of  them  because  you  think  of  them,  and  feel  deeply 
their  importance.  To  speak  about  these  things  in  phrases  imitated  from  others 
is  a  vile  and  almost  profane  practice  ;  it  is  certain  to  lead  to  self-deceit,  and 
the  mistake  of  talking  for  doing,  of  sounds  for  realities,  of  lip-religion  for  heart- 
religion.  No  talking  comes  from  the  heart,  or  goes  to  the  heart,  that  is  not  plain, 
natural,  and  unforced.  Regularly  maintained  silence  is  impossible  if  you  feel 
deeply.  If  you  are  regularly  silent,  you  do  not  feel  deeply.  {T.  K.  Arnold.) 
Christian  felloivship  in  a  bacJcsliding  Church : — The  temple  was  built  when  Malachi 
wrote,  and  the  Divine  ordinances  were  established  there  ;  but  few  were  devout 
and  sincere  worshippers.  The  priests  were  given  to  secularising  tendencies ; 
many  professed  worshippers  were  guilty  of  sacrilege.  This  is  a  dark  picture. 
It  is  relieved  by  the  few  "  zealous  for  the  Lord  of  hosts."  These,  by  their 
invincible  faith  in  God,  by  the  oneness  of  their  unity,  and  by  the  holiness  and 
frequency  of  their  fellowship,  rebuked  the  infidelity  of  the  period.  I.  Tkuh 
PIETY  MAY  EXIST  IN  A  CORRUPT  Chukch.  This  ChuTch  was  corrupt.  The  priests 
were  unfaithful  to  their  sacred  trust.  The  people  were  guilty  of  treacherous 
dealing,  of  departing  from  the  Divine  ordinance,  and  of  seeking  to  justify  this 
manifold  wickedness  before  God.  But  a  few  had  genuine  piety.  1.  They  "  feared 
the  Lord."  This  was  a  filial  fear.  The  sinner  fears  God  because  of  the  penal 
consequences  of  sin.  The  fear  of  the  Christian  springs  from  different  considera- 
tions, fihal  not  slavish.  2.  They  "  thought  upon  His  name."  Here  we  have 
devout  meditation.  (1)  Pious  meditation  is  possible  to  all.  (2)  It  is  profitable 
to  all.  Om:  piety  will  be  dwarfed  if  this  duty  is  neglected.  "  His  name." 
Every  appellation  of  Jehovah  is  calculated  to  inspire  the  Christian  with  con- 
fidence and  courage.  II.  Christian  fellowship  may  be  maintained  in  a 
DEGENERATE   SOCIETY.     These   pious   Jews   had   communion   with   each   other. 

1.  They  "  spake  one  to  another  "  words  of  encouragement.  There  may  be  fellow- 
ship without  words.     There  is  a  heart  fellowship.     Then  the  countenance  speaks. 

2.  They  spake  "  often."  Then  they  must  have  assembled  often.  The  topics 
of  conversation  are  not  recorded,  but  "  out  of  the  fulness  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaketh."  III.  God  encourages  the  faithful  to  maintain  Christian 
fellowship  in  the  time  of  the  Church's  degeneracy.  1.  He  dehghts  in 
their  fellowship ;  hstens  to  and  permanently  records  their  conversation.  2.  He 
rewards  with  present  security  and  eternal  salvation.  They  are  God's  "jewels  " 
in  the  highest  sense,  who  are  faithful  when  many  in  the  Church  backslide. 
{E.  D.  Solomon. )  Christian  friendship : — I.  The  times  of  Malachi.  The 
nation  had  sunk  into  a  state  of  poUtical  degradation,  and  had  become  successively 
subject  to  the  Persians,  Syrians,  Romans.  It  is  precisely  that  poUtical  state 
in  which  national  virtues  do  not  thrive,  and  national  decay  is  sure.  Illustrate 
— Italy,  Spain.  There  was  a  want  of  unity,  manhood,  and  simple  virtues.  It 
was  a  state  in  which  there  was  no  visible  Divine  interference.  Except  this 
solitary  voice  of  Malachi,  prophecy  had  hushed  her  harp.  What  was  given 
to  Israel  in  that  period  ?  Retrospect,  in  the  sublime  past  which  God  had  given 
her  for  her  experience.  Prospect,  in  the  expectation  of  better  times.  And 
between  these  two  there  was  a  pause.  They  were  left  by  God  to  use  the  grace 
and  knowledge  aheady  given  by  Him.  This  is  parallel  to  God's  usual  modes 
of  dealing.  A  pause  after  every  revelation  until  the  next.  So  in  the  natural 
world,  so  in  human  life  ;  between  its  marked  lessons  there  is  a  pause  in  which 
we  Uve  upon  past  experience — looking  back  and  looking  on.  We  Uve  in  the 
world's  fourth  great  pause.  Miracles  have  ceased.  Prophecy  is  silent.  The 
Son  of  God  is  ascended.  Apostles  are  no  longer  here  to  apply  infallible  judg- 
ment to  each  new  circumstance  as  it  arises.  We  are  left  to  the  great  Gospel 
principles  which  have  been  already  given,  and  which  are  to  be  our  food  till  the 
next  flood  of  God's  Spirit,  the  next  revelation — that  which  is  known  as  the 
Second  Advent.  II.  The  conduct  of  different  classes  in  these  evil  times. 
1.  Some  Uved  recklessly.  2.  Others  Uved  uselessly,  because  despairingly.  3.  A 
few  compaxed  with  one  another  their  hopes,  and  sought  strength  in  Christian 
communion  and  fellowship.  This  commimion  of  saints  is  twofold  :  it  includes 
church  fellowship  and  personal  friendships.  Christian  friendship  is  a  blessing, 
as  the  interchange  of  Christian  hope  and  Christian  feeling.     And  it  is  a  mighty 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

instrument  in  guarding  against  temptation.  It  is  a  safeguard  in  the  way  of 
example,  and  also  a  standard  of  opinion.  Cultivate  familiar  intimacy  only  with 
those  who  love  God  and  good.  (F.  W.  Robertson.)  Christian  friendship: — 
To  the  majority  of  the  nation  of  Israel  God  seemed  to  have  utterly  forsaken 
His  people,  and  few  believed  Malachi  as  he  faithfully  proclaimed  God's  intention 
of  sending  a  Messenger,  a  Refiner,  a  Purifier,  in  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  who 
was  to  fulfil  the  prophecies  of  the  last  and  of  all  previous  prophets.  This  pre- 
vailing unbeUef  was  the  cause,  as  it  always  is,  of  widespread  wickedness.  Malachi's 
picture  of  his  time  is  a  dark  one.  Nevertheless,  a  remnant  was  left.  A  few  did 
believe  in  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  lived  in  preparation  for  the  Refiner's  fire. 
What  were  the  means  which,  by  God's  grace,  enabled  them  to  resist  the  tempta- 
tions of  an  unbelieving  and  a  wicked  generation  ?  Holy  friendship.  Knowing 
that  union  is  strength  in  religious  as  well  as  in  secular  things,  they  formed  close 
friendships  one  with  another,  and  often  spoke  together  of  their  hopes  and  fears. 
In  forming  friendships,  young  people  would  do  well  to  remember  that  the  friend- 
ship of  the  bad,  or  of  those  who  never  try  to  live  at  all  above  their  world,  is 
enmity  against  God.  Another  rule  is  not  to  choose  friends  on  a  low  principle 
and  from  a  low  motive.  The  best  definition  of  a  friend  is,  "  He  who  makes  you 
do  what  you  can."  It  is  by  their  unconscious  influence  that  friends  help  every 
moment  to  mar  or  make  oiu-  characters.  Our  Lord  did  not  so  much  enjoin  it 
as  take  it  for  granted  that  His  followers  would  always  strengthen  and  encoiu'age 
each  other  by  praying  and  speaking  together.  Those  who  are  Christians  in 
earnest  gradually  lead  one  another  on  to  higher  views  of  Ufe  and  duty ;  a  know- 
ledge of  their  mutual  faults  makes  them  unreserved  to  each  other  ;  they  are  not 
afraid  of  sajang  all  that  is  in  their  hearts  ;  they  make  known  to  each  other  their 
particular  difficulties  and  temptations ;  they  feel  that  they  are  engaged  in  the 
same  struggle  ;  and  each  is  often  able  to  give  assistance  to  the  other  on  one  point, 
whilst  by  others  he  may  himself  require  to  be  aided  in  his  turn.  (E.  J.  Hardy, 
M.A.)  Religious  conversation: — There  was  something,  even  in  those  times, 
which  is  worthy  of  our  imitatioiL  They  spake  of  religion,  of  God  and  duty. 
The  subject  in  which  men  have  a  common  interest  is  religion.  The  subject  is 
all-important  and  momentous.  It  is  important  as  our  inteUectual  and  immortal 
nature.  If  it  becomes  us  to  speak  often  to  one  another  on  the  business  of  this 
fleeting  life,  it  much  more  becomes  us  to  speak  often  one  to  another  on  the  busi- 
ness of  a  life  that  will  never  end.  But  notwithstanding  the  importance  of  religion, 
there  is  comparatively  little  religious  conversation.  Much  of  what  has  been 
so  termed  has  been  perverted.  It  has  been  worn  as  a  mask  by  hypocrisy.  It 
has  cherished  and  manifested  the  complacency  of  spiritual  pride.  It  has  served 
as  a  vehicle  for  denunciation  and  anathematising  to  bigotry  and  intolerance. 
It  has  fostered  the  religion  of  the  fancy,  cold  in  heart  and  powerless  in  conduct. 
Then  in  the  domestic  circle,  in  the  confidential  hour,  let  religion  have  its  place. 
Conversation  has  great  influence  upon  conduct.  But  let  us  not  forget  that  "  for 
everything  there  is  a  season."  We  are  at  all  seasons  to  be  religious  ;  but  there 
are  times  when  religious  topics  may  not  be  well  introduced.  WTiile  the  Christian 
should  watch  for  opportunities  to  advance  the  cause  of  religion,  he  should  be 
careful  not  to  expose  it  to  the  ribaldry  of  profaneness  or  the  sneer  of  folly. 
(C.  Lowell.)  Religious  conversation  an  evidence  of  the  general  Christian  temper 
and  spirit : — In  these  words  we  have  it  plainly  signified  to  us — I.  That  sbkious 

CONFBKBNCB     AMONGST    GOOD     PERSONS    IS    PECtXLIARLY    NBEDFUL    IN    THOUGHT- 

liESS  AND  IRRELIGIOUS  TIMES.  If  wc  exprcss  DO  coucern  for  the  interests 
of  piety  and  virtue  in  our  words  we  shall  be  justly  suspected  of  having  but  httle 
in  our  thoughts.  We  should  learn  to  judge  of  ourselves  by  our  common  talk, 
as  well  as  by  our  actions.  By  speaking  seriously  on  proper  occasions  we  shall 
bind  ourselves  to  act  so,  else  the  inconsistency  will  shame  us.  We  are  strangely 
apt  to  grow  languid  and  flat  in  our  good  inchnations  ;  it  is  therefore  important 
that  we  should  stir  up  each  other,  which  a  word  in  season  or  a  mere  hint  may 
do  surprisingly.  Even  where  we  can  receive  little  instruction  we  may  enjoy 
great  satisfaction  from  intimacy  of  acquaintance  with  those  who  think  and 
act  and  hope  and  expect  as  we  do.  Some  society  we  must  have.  On  seeking 
that  of  good  persons  we  shall  have  less  need  to  spend  much  of  our  time  with 
the  bad  ;  and  be  less  hiu't  by  that  portion  which  we  are  obliged  to  give  up  to 
them.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  whole  conversation  of  rehgious  persons,  when 
they  are  together,  be  on  the  subject  of  religion.  The  bare  choice  of  such  company 
and  acquaintance  is,  of  itself,  a  mutual  incitement  to  persevere  and  be  active. 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  107 

Their  discourse,  on  every  subject,  will  be  regulated  by  the  laws  of  religion.  But 
we  need  not  be  so  shy,  as  we  commonly  are,  on  the  head  of  religion.  II.  That 
God  obsbrvbs,  and  will  bbwabd  it.  He  he  rs  indeed  everything,  and  forgets 
nothing.  The  prophet  means  that  He  takes  a  gracious  notice  of  this  particul- 
arly, among  other  good  actions  of  Has  servants.  Persons  may,  by  concealing 
to  which  side  they  belong,  escape  some  little  persecution,  and  secure  some  little 
interests  ;  but  while  the  disposer  of  all  things  gives  them  their  desire  in  these 
respects.  He  sends  leanness  into  their  souls.  Our  religion  is  not  to  be  dissembled 
but  avowed.  Application  to  present  occasion.  Beneficial  as  pious  discourse 
and  consultation  is  in  general,  the  benefit  may  both  be  increased  to  ourselves 
and  to  others  by  our  uniting  into  regular  societies  for  the  more  constant  inter- 
course of  mutual  edification  and  support  of  religious  behaviour.  (Archbishop  Seeker. ) 
The  faithful  in  dark  days : — History  has  few  darker  pictures  than  the  closing 
scenes  of  the  Jewish  dispensation.  Reading  the  record,  we  watch  the  death- 
agony  of  a  world.  Judaism,  hke  all  noble  things  which  have  abased  and  degraded 
themselves,  died  a  hard  and  terrible  death.  The  heathen  world  was  full  enough 
of  suffering ;  but  its  anguish  was  unto  life,  however  sharp  the  birth  pangs  ;  the 
anguish  of  the  Jewish  state  was  unto  death,  and  fearful  were  the  throes.  Malachi 
lived  when  the  nation  was  far  advanced  on  the  apostate's  path.  The  next  great 
act  in  the  Divine  drama  would  be  the  coming  of  the  great  and  terrible  "  day  of 
the  Lord."  But  amidst  the  dissolute  and  reprobate  throng  there  were  a  few 
men  of  Divine  mould  ;  like  the  soul  in  the  flesh,  they  kept  it  from  rotting  utterly. 
In  the  darkest  hours  of  human  history  God  is  never  without  a  few  to  serve  Him  ; 
the  more  loyally,  the  more  intensely,  because  of  the  impiety  and  profligacy  around. 
There  are  but  a  few  in  any  age  that  live  after  the  divinest  pattern  ;  whose  springs 
are  all  in  God,  whose  hopes  are  all  in  heaven  ;  who  know  that  their  mission  in 
the  world  is  ministry  ;  who  live,  like  Christ,  that  they  may  bless  and  save.  Such 
have  a  communion  with  the  Lord,  and  with  each  other,  of  which  the  world  knows 
nothing.  Godliness  is  here  presented  as  the  firm  basis  of  confederation  and 
communion.  The  godly  are  truly  confederate,  and  they  alone.  There  is  no 
purer  joy  than  that  which  springs  from  the  discovery  of  hke-mindedness,  mind 
meeting  mind,  and  heart  meeting  heart  in  sympathy.  Man  yearns  to  be  con- 
federate with  man.  There  is  but  one  confederation  which  is  real  and  solid  to 
the  depths,  the  confederation  of  godly  souls  for  godly  ends.  All  other  com- 
binations perish.  In  every  evil  confederation  there  is  the  principle  of  discord. 
There  is  schism  in  every  unholy  alliance.  This  is  the  godly  enterprise  of  every 
age,  to  demonstrate  the  vital  force  of  godly  confederacy.  Such  know  what  speech 
means.  Speech,  hke  friendship,  is  essentially  holy,  and  lends  not  all  its  strength 
to  the  uses  of  sin.  Evil  cannot  speak  out.  The  faithful  can  speak  and  speak 
out ;  their  words  ring  true  as  the  metal  of  their  own  spirits.  They  speak  often 
one  to  another ;  their  speech  fans  the  flame  of  love  and  resolution,  and  lays  up 
for  the  sterner  times  of  trial  rich  stores  of  consolation  and  hope.  Nor  are  we 
left  to  guess  at  their  themes.  They  thought  upon  His  name  ;  the  reality  of 
the  existence,  and  the  reign  of  the  righteous  and  almighty  Lord.  1.  His  holy 
name.  2.  His  awful  name.  3.  His  precious  promises.  4.  His  immutable  truth. 
Thus  they  strengthened  themselves.  Thus  they  made  confederacy  and  com- 
munion ;  a  confederacy  which  did  not  perish  in  the  wreck,  but  was  prolonged 
through  ages,  and  brought  forth  out  of  its  bosom  the  promised  Messiah,  the 
Saviour  of  the  world.  {Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  Christians  in  conversation: — 
They  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  with  another.  It  is  strange,  one  has 
said,  that  what  is  every  man's  chief  concern  should  be  so  few  men's  conversation. 
How  we  shrink  from  talk  about  the  soul  and  eternity,  about  the  pilgrim  way 
and  the  celestial  city,  about  God  and  Christ !  What  a  poor  book  Bunyan's 
great  allegory  would  be,  if  the  travellers  to  Zion  never  had  opened  their  hearts 
to  each  other  as  they  paced  the  King's  high  road.  The  book  to  which  I  owe  so 
much  had  scarcely  been  worth  the  reading.  What  a  different  Ufe  Bunyan  himself 
would  have  led,  if  the  Lord's  people  had  had  nothing  to  say  to  one  another  about 
His  grace  to  them.  It  was,  you  remember,  the  talk  of  three  or  four  poor  women 
sitting  in  the  sun  on  Bedford  Street,  who  spake  aa  if  joy  did  make  them  speak, 
it  was  this  which  convinced  him  that  he  was  still  outside  the  family  and  the  fold 
of  the  Good  Shepherd.  There  may  be  listeners  of  whom  I  am  not  aware,  wlen 
I  recount  the  great  things  my  Saviour  has  done.  There  is  one  Listener  of  whom 
I  can  be  sure.  The  Lord  hearkens  and  hears,  and  a  book  of  remembrance  is 
written   before   Him.     [A.    Smellie.)        Christianity,  a  social  religion : — When 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Wesley  the  great  preacher  was  returning  to  Oxford,  tired  and  discouraged  with 
his  work,  and  with  strong  leanings  towards  a  life  of  seclusion,  he  travelled  some 
miles  to  see  a  "  serious  man."  '  Sir,"  said  this  person  in  words  which  Wesley 
never  forgot,  "  you  tell  me  you  wish  to  serve  God  and  go  to  heaven.  Remember 
you  cannot  serve  Him  alone,  you  must  find  companions  and  help  them,  the  Bible 
knows  nothing  of  solitary  religion."  Wesley  joined  the  "  Holy  Club,"  and  his 
Bubsequent  institution  of  societies  shows  how  apt  a  learner  he  was.  A  book 
of  remembrance  was  written.  —  Memory :  —  There  is  reason  to  believe  that 
memory  never  loses  anything,  but  that  it  retains,  and  may  reproduce,  when  the 
right  string  is  touched,  every  thought,  impression,  and  event  of  our  whole  past 
lives.  The  well-ascertained  phenomena  of  delirium,  insanity,  and  other  unusual 
forms  of  consciousness,  furnish  ample  demonstration  of  this  statement.  In  our 
usual  state  of  mind,  things  do  not  indeed  return  to  us  uncalled,  nor  yet  do  they 
come  at  once  when  sought,  but  obey  certain  laws  of  suggestion  or  association, 
which  retard  the  action  of  the  memory,  as  the  balance-wheel  does  the  motions 
of  a  watch.  But  in  certain  conditions  of  consciousness,  the  balance-wheel  is 
taken  off,  the  usual  laws  of  suggestion  are  suspended,  the  full  flow  of  memory 
takes  the  place  of  the  scanty  jet  of  recollection,  and  the  whole  past  rushes  spon- 
taneously upon  the  mind.  But  we  need  not  go  beyond  our  own  familiar  experience 
to  verify  this  view.  Revisit  some  scenes  of  early  life,  and  what  intensely  vivid 
remembrances  take  shape,  hue,  and  voice  !  The  past  never  dies,  though,  in 
the  common  routine  of  life,  we  have  to  a  degree  the  keys  of  memory  in  our  own 
hands,  and  may  admit  or  exclude  recollections  at  pleasure.  There  are  seasons, 
and  those  not  rare,  when,  without  the  power  of  choice,  we  are  liable  to  inimdations 
from  the  good  or  evil,  the  sweet  or  bitter,  of  the  past,  promiscuously.  In  seasons 
of  sorrow  the  past  always  utters  its  voices.  When  the  hand  of  providence  is 
heavy  upon  us,  if  the  past  has  been  stained  with  guilt,  we  need  no  inscription 
upon  the  wall  to  make  our  knees  smite  together  and  our  souls  tremble.  There 
is  nothing  more  true  to  universal  experience  than  the  self-reproaching  communings 
of  Joseph's  brethren  when  they  felt  themselves  surroxinded  by  imminent  perils 
in  a  strange  land.  A  vast  amount  of  remorse  mingles  with  human  grief,  and 
drugs  to  the  utmost  with  gall  and  wormwood  the  cup  of  sorrow.  But  compare, 
with  the  sad  retrospect  which  providence  forces  upon  the  guilty,  the  rich  remini- 
scences which  crowded  Job's  mind,  when  health,  riches,  and  children  were  all 
taken  from  him.  Most  of  all,  death,  as  it  is  passing  the  book  of  memory  over 
to  the  register  of  eternity,  rehearses  its  records  in  the  ear  fast  closing  to  the  out- 
ward world.  Is  it  within  our  power  to  lay  up  remembrances  that  will  give  peaee 
and  pleasure  ?  It  is  not  events,  but  our  own  traits  of  character  and  conduct 
alone,  that  are  capable  of  giving  us  anguish  in  the  remote  retrospect.  It  is  astonish- 
ing how  smooth  the  roughest  ways  of  providence  look  at  a  little  distance.  If 
shadows  gather  about  our  dying  bed,  they  will  be  shadows  of  our  negligencies, 
follies,  and  sins.  But  if  our  lives  have  been  faithful,  devout,  and  loving,  then 
will  the  remembrance  of  what  we  were  through  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  testimony 
of  a  good  conscience  glancing  to  and  fro  through  the  years  that  are  gone,  give 
peace  and  triumph  to  our  departing  spirits,  and  enable  us  to  feel  that  God  is  taking 
us  to  a  rest  for  which  He  had  first  fitted  us.  A  recent  German  \viiter,  in  a  fictitious 
sketch,  introduces  a  worthy  youth  as  compiling  a  book  of  pleasant  experiences 
to  be  read  for  his  comfort  at  the  hour  of  death.  Such  a  book  it  concerns  us  all 
to  write,  not  on  paper,  but  on  the  surer  and  more  lasting  tablet  of  a  memory 
that  cannot  die.  Show  the  bearing  this  view  of  memory  has  on  the  doctrine 
of  a  future  righteous  retribution.  St.  John  says:  "  I  saw  the  dead,  both  small 
and  great,  stand  before  God.  And  the  books  were  opened,"  &c.  Out  of  what 
books  can  they  be  thus  judged,  except  those  of  memory, — books  WTitten  by  them- 
selves, but  preserved  by  God,  and  opened  at  the  solemn  hour  of  death  for  their 
acquittal  or  condemnation  ?  If  the  past  is  to  be  thus  brought  to  light,  may 
not  memory  be  the  prime  minister  of  God's  retributive  justice, — the  worm  that 
never  dies,  the  fire  that  is  never  quenched,  in  the  sinner's  soul, — the  peace  of  God, 
that  passeth  understanding,  to  the  pure  and  faithful  spirit  ?  Of  the  power  of 
memory  for  good  or  evil,  we  have  in  this  life  ample  experience  from  the  torn  and 
scattered  leaves  of  its  book,  with  which  recollection  furnishes  us.  Imagine  the 
abandoned  sinner  full  in  the  presence  of  his  God,  no  sentence  passed  upon  him 
but  that  which  he  is  constrained  to  pass  upon  himself,  no  fire  let  loose  upon  him, 
but  that  which  memory  can  Idndle.  Memory  isolates  him,  makes  bam  both 
afiai.l  -.^nd  ashamed  to  trust  either  God  or  man,  bids  him  dread  the  frown  of  the 


CHAP.  UL]  MALACHI.  109 

Almighty,  and  shrink  from  the  scorn  of  his  brethren.  Pass  to  the  right  hand 
of  the  Judge.  C!ontemplate  a  truly  humble,  devout,  exemplary  Christian,  with 
the  holy  thoughts  and  good  deeds  of  a  life  of  piety  spread  out  before  him,  not 
veiled,  as  they  were  on  earth,  by  the  self-abasement  of  a  lowly  spirit,  but  sparkling 
in  heaven's  pure  sunlight,  seen  of  angels,  owned  by  the  benignant  Redeemer, 
approved  by  God  the  Judge  of  all.  Moreover,  as  liis  earthly  life  is  thus  reviewed 
in  heaven,  he  sees  not  only  each  act  itself,  but  its  happy,  glorious,  perhaps  still 
widening  and  brightening  results.  Did  he  sow  a  seed  of  humble  charity  ?  He 
sees  not  the  seed,  but  the  tree  which  has  sprung  from  it.  Did  he  cast  his  bread 
upon  the  waters  ?  He  sees  not  the  bread,  but  the  hungering  souls  whom  it  has 
nourished.  Did  he  labour,  and  pray,  and  live,  for  the  salvation  of  souls  ?  He 
sees  not  his  efforts,  but  their  fruits,  going  forth  it  may  be,  even  for  the  healing 
of  the  nations.  But  it  may  be  said,  the  best  of  men  have  been,  to  a  greater 
or  less  degree,  sinners  ;  and  if  memory  be  perfect  and  entire,  while  the  pious 
look  back  with  pleasure  on  their  good  deeds,  must  not  the  remembrance  of  their 
folly  and  sin  cloud  their  joy,  and  mingle  strains  of  sadness  with  their  songs  of 
rapture  ?  But  surely  to  the  awakened  memory  of  the  consistently  virtuous, 
in  the  world  to  come,  worthy  and  holy  thoughts  and  deeds  must  so  occupy  the 
foreground,  as  to  throw  follies  and  sins  completely  into  the  shade.  Then,  too, 
against  every  disobedient  purpose  and  act  there  will  be  wiitten  in  the  book  of 
memory  the  cancelling  vows  of  contrition  that  succeeded  it,  and  the  holy  resolutions 
that  forbade  its  repetition.  The  sins  of  the  exemplary  and  devout  will  be  to 
them  in  heaven  as  the  sins  of  our  infancy  are  to  us  now.  If  then  a  "  book  of 
remembrance  "  is  kept,  how  vigilant  the  prospect  of  its  pages  being  brought 
to  light  should  make  us — how  prayerful  against  secret  faults — how  watchful 
against  besetting  sins  !  (A.  P.  Peahody.)  The  hook  of  remembrance  : — I.  The 
saints'  eemembrancb  of  God.  1.  We  have  a  common  principle.  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  was  the  bond  that  united  those  to  whom  the  prophet  here  makes 
allusion.  2.  There  was  frequent  communion.  There  was  an  oft  and  repeated 
meeting  of  the  faithful.  We  shall  always  find  in  the  history  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  that  the  most  pious  have  ever  been  earnest  and  persevering  in  their  public 
religious  exercises.  3.  We  have  a  repeated  confession.  They  spake  of  the  things 
which  pertained  to  God.  The  only  Father-confessor  to  whom  we  should  make 
known  our  wants,  and  confess  our  sins,  is  God.  There  was  mutual  instruction. 
There  was  great  sympathy  aroused.  11.  God's  eemembrancb  of  His  saints. 
1.  Special  acts  of  piety  are  specially  remembered.  2.  The  Almighty  does  not 
pass  by  the  doings  of  men  without  any  regard  to  the  character  of  those  doings. 
Our  book  of  remembrance  is  being  written.  The  Ufe  we  lead  will  meet  us  as 
a  resurrection  of  forgotten  acts.  (H.  0.  Parrish,  B.A.)  God's  hook  of  remem- 
brance : — The  prophet  is  here  speaking  of  the  conduct  and  reward  of  those  who 
remained  faithful  to  God  at  a  time  of  great  national  apostasy.  Such  a  time 
had,  in  the  providence  of  God,  been  permitted  to  cast  its  dark  shadow  over  the 
people  of  Israel.  The  course  of  their  history  shows  that  the  recurrence  of  certain 
evils  brought  on,  as  by  natural  sequence,  a  repetition  of  punishment,  or  a  fresh 
chastisement.  Violated  law  brought  in  due  time  its  appropriate  pimishment ; 
and  in  this  way  God's  moral  government,  as  it  were,  rectified  itself  to  the  eyes 
of  men.  The  transgressor  never  got  off  with  impunity;  but  the  present  seemed 
to  be  an  exception.  The  ungodly  were  allowed  to  go  on  in  sin  without  calling 
down  any  token  of  Divine  displeasure.  They  even  prospered  in  sin,  God's 
people  had  begun  to  think  the  service  of  God  to  be  vanity.  What  profit  had 
the  righteous  man  in  walking  mournfully  before  the  Lord  ?  The  prosperity 
of  the  wicked  became  a  stumbling-block  to  the  righteous.  Those  who  continued 
faithful  to  God  were  perplexed  when  they  saw  the  success  of  sin,  and  so  they 
met  to  hold  mutual  intercourse,  and  to  impart  mutual  encouragement.  They 
would  help  each  other  to  fathom  the  providential  mystery.  Our  short-sightedness 
keeps  us  from  seeing  beyond  the  present,  otherwise  we  would  perceive  a  higher 
good  than  earthly  greatness,  and  true  success  would  be  tested  not  by  outward 
conditions,  but  by  moral  character.  I.  The  conduct  op  the  faithfxtl  at  a 
TIME  OF  apostasy.  Instead  of  envying  at  the  wicked,  and  bewailing  their  own 
condition,  they  met  for  mutual  encoiuragement,  and  for  the  defence  of  God'a 
righteous  dealings  against  blasphemers.  Their  object  was  not  only  mutual 
encouragement,  but  the  vindication  of  their  Grod  from  the  aspersions  cast  upon 
His  name.  What  a  beautiful  pictiu-e  is  this  of  Christian  fellowship  and  fidelity ; 
and  happily,  even  the  darkest  days  of  the  Church  have  been  brightened  by  examples 


no  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  a  like  kind.  Illustrate — Catacombs,  Waldenses,  Covenanters,  &c.  God  was 
subjecting  these  men  who  feared  Him  to  a  Divine  test.  They  took  their  imited 
stand  on  common  ground — the  fear  of  God.  At  the  peril  of  their  lives  they  bore 
testimony  and  were  not  ashamed.  There  are  times  when  such  men  are  specially 
needed.  Men  to  stand  up  for  the  defence  of  the  truth  ;  not  merely  devout  believers, 
but  able  apologists.  II.  The  Lord  kept  a  book  of  remembrance  for  recording 
THE  NAMES  AND  DEED3  OF  THE  FAITHFUL.  In  speaking  of  a  book,  we  do  not 
insist  on  an  actual  volume.  The  expression  is  an  accommodation  to  our  modes 
of  speech.  He  who  is  Omniscient  needs  no  book  to  keep  Him  in  mind  of  His 
people's  services.  Their  deeds  were  as  particularly  recorded  as  if  actually  written 
in  a  book.  The  object  of  this  record  is  to  form  the  basis  of  judgment.  According 
to  what  is  written  there,  so  will  men  be  rewarded  or  punished.  Nothing  will 
be  left  uimoticed  that  will  add  to  the  final  award.  As  a  guarantee  of  the  correct- 
ness of  every  entry  in  that  book,  we  are  assured  that  the  Lord  Himself  hearkens 
and  hears.  Nothing  will  escape  His  searching  scrutiny.  The  contents  of  this 
book  may  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of  moral  diary,  of  which  we  ourselves  are  the 
unconscious  recorders.  By  our  conduct  we  are  supplying  material  for  each 
impression  made  upon  it.  We  ourselves  must  be  regarded  as  the  writers.  Surely 
this  thought  is  fitted  to  impress  us  with  the  solemnity  of  life  !  The  impression 
once  made,  no  power  of  ours  can  blot  it  out.  Seek,  then,  to  do  something  that 
will  keep  the  memory  fragrant  when  you  are  gone,  something  for  which  God 
will  own  you  at  last.  III.  The  reward  pao>nsEn  to  the  faithful.  The  faithful 
are  likened  to  "  jewels,"  and  to  "  sons."  The  two  ideas  are  "  preciousnees  " 
and  "  likeness."  They  who  were  once  polluted  and  impure  are  now  as  jewels, 
clean  and  bright,  and  they  who  were  once  rebels  have  now  become  sons.  A 
jewel  is  a  precious  stone,  ranked  by  its  owner  among  his  most  valuable  possessions. 
Its  value  depends  partly  on  its  nature,  and  partly  on  the  labour  bestowed  on  it 
in  the  process  of  refinement.  What  has  God  done  for  His  people  ?  They  are 
now  the  crown- jewels  of  the  King  of  kings.  The  highest  reward  of  all  is,  that 
God's  faithful  people  will  be  owned  as  sons.  This  involves  that  God's  people 
will  be  like  Him,  and  will  be  His  heirs.  The  furnace  of  discipline  will  manifest 
the  likeness  by  consuming  the  unlikeness.  (D.  Merson,  M.A.,  B.D.)  The 
Lord's  hook  of  remembrinre  : — The  fidelity  and  steadfastness  of  man  must  rest 
on  the  fidelity  and  steadfastness  of  God.  "  He  is  faithful  who  hath  promised," 
is  a  principle  which  underlies  the  whole  relation  of  God  the  Redeemer  to  our 
race.  We  have  considered  the  condition  of  the  faithful  few  in  Malachi's  dark 
days.  The  sadder  their  estate,  the  darker  the  night  around  them,  the  more 
closely  did  they  associate  for  communion  and  concert.  The  Lord  was  not  unob- 
servant of  them.  It  was  the  Lord  for  whom  they  were  enduring,  who  nerved 
them  to  endure.  Three  main  features  of  descrij.tion.  t.  The  book  of  remem- 
brance. Probably  the  rudiment  of  this  idea  is  to  be  found  in  Ezra  vi.  1-5.  There 
was  a  roll  found,  on  a  critical  occasion,  "  in  the  place  which  is  in  the  province 
of  the  Medes,"  the  remembrance  of  which  the  Jews  would  not  willingly  let  die. 
What  concerns  us  is  the  fundamental  thought.  It  is  precisely  what  the  Lord 
declared  of  old  to  Moses,  "  I  know  thee  by  name,  and  thou  hast  found  grace  in 
My  sight."  Those  who,  like  all  these  men,  stake  all  on  fidelity  to  God,  are  the 
upper  ten  thousand  of  the  universe,  the  peerage  of  heaven,  throughout  eternity. 
God  knows  them  by  name  as  living  persons.  As  friends  He  holds  them  dear. 
God's  love  is  not  for  qualities,  abstractions,  any  more  than  man's.  He  caused 
to  be  written  in  His  book  of  remembrance,  not  a  catalogue  of  their  principles, 
but  their  names,  their  designation,  as  living  human  souls.  Trampled  in  the  mire 
on  earth,  their  names  should  be  read  out  in  heaven.  II.  The  recognition  of 
their  sonship.  Perhaps  the  saddest  thought  of  the  righteous,  in  the  midst  of 
an  ungodly  world,  springs  from  the  sense  of  their  own  imperfectness,  the  feeble- 
ness of  their  witness,  the  languor  of  their  zeal,  the  poverty  of  their  work.  The 
word  son — "  his  own  son  " — reassures.  A  father's  love  wearies  not  and  wanes 
not ;  a  child's  feeblest  efforts  please  him  better  than  a  stranger's  bravest  work. 
"  He  will  spare  them,"  in  the  furnace  of  discipline;  the  Lord  will  temper  its  fierce- 
ness. In  the  battlefield  of  life,  the  Lord  will  be  their  strength  and  their  shield. 
In  the  shadow  of  death,  His  rod  and  staff  shall  comfort  them  there.  "  They 
shall  be  Mine," — Mine  for  ever,  "  in  the  day  when  I  make  up  My  jewels."  III.  Thb 
DAY  WHEN  THB  BOOK  SHALL  BE  BROUGHT  FORTH.  "  Thou  shalt  be  recompensed 
at  the  resurrection  of  the  just "  is  God's  answer  to  the  cry  of  many  a  faithful,  patient 
epirit,  who  wins  no  recompense  on  earth  but  a  cross.     There  ia  a  life  which  can 


CHAP,  in.]  MALACHI.  Ill 

only  be  justified  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just.  There  is  a  life  which  has  its 
full  recompense  here.  "  But  thou  shalt  be  recompensed,"  man  of  many  tears, 
cares,  and  sorrows,  weary  and  heavy  laden.  Long  have  the  gems  been  buried 
in  dust  and  darkness,  encased  in  crusts  of  stone,  enveloped  in  shrouds  of  vanity. 
The  day  comes  when  the  Lord  shall  rend  the  shroud  and  crush  the  crust  to  frag- 
ments, and  reveal  His  jewels  before  the  imiversal  gaze.  (Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.) 
And  tJiat  thought  upon  His  name. — Love  to  the  name  of  the  Lord  : — In  a  time 
of  general  corruption,  when  the  priests  themselves  had  depraved  the  law, 
and  were  enemies  to  true  religion,  and  the  common  people  were  like  them,  there 
were  a  few  of  another  spirit.  Observe  their  character — such  as  "  feared  the 
Lord."  What  they  did :  "  spake  often  one  to  another."  They  delighted 
in  each  other's  good.  How  their  minds  were  employed :  "  They  thought  upon 
His  name."  They  were  concerned  for  God's  glory,  and  grieved  over  the  dishonour 
of  His  name.  What  the  Lord  did  for  them:  "  He  hearkened  and  heard."  It 
was  "  written  before  Him,"  according  to  the  custom  of  eastern  kings,  who  kept 
records  of  all  that  was  done  for  their  honour.  I.  What  is  meant  by  thinkinq 
ON  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  a  way  that  He  approves  ?  This  expression  is 
descriptive  of  the  nature  of  true  religion.  What  is  repentance  toward  God, 
but  thinking  on  His  name  with  grief  for  having  dishonoured  it.  What  is  faith 
in  Christ,  but  thinking  on  His  name  with  delight,  as  revealed  in  the  Gospel.  What 
is  love  to  God,  but  thinking  on  His  name  affectionately,  and  with  the  highest 
satisfaction.  More  especially,  it  includes  an  earnest  and  habitual  concern  for 
God's  cause  and  interest  in  the  world,  and  for  the  spread  of  the  Gospel.  1.  II 
we  think  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  a  way  that  He  approves,  all  we  do  in  religion 
wiU  be  directed  to  His  glory.  2.  We  shall  reckon  no  sacrifice  too  great  for  it. 
3.  We  shall  seek  our  own  spiritual  advantage  in  subordination  to  it.  If  we  take 
care  of  God's  honour,  He  will  take  care  of  our  peace.  II.  In  what  manner  does 
God  remember  those  who  remember  Him  and  think  upon  His  name  ?  1.  The 
Lord  generally  employs  those  who  love  His  name  as  instruments  in  promoting 
His  glory.  2.  In  seeing  His  name  glorified,  they  find  their  own  reward.  3.  Their 
labours  shall  be  remembered  for  good  in  this  life,  and  even  when  they  are  gone 
to  the  grave.  4.  At  the  last  day  the  Judge  will  read  out  their  names.  (1)  There 
is  no  true  religion  but  where  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  loved  and  adored.  (2)  No 
hope  of  being  useful  in  the  cause  of  God  without  a  portion  of  this  spirit.  {The 
Preacher. )         The  Christianas  thoughts  of  God,  and  God's  estimate  of  the  Christian  : — 

I.  What  the  Christians  of  that  day  thought  of  God.  I.  They  "  feared  the 
Lord."  In  the  Old  Testament  the  true  saints  are  described,  not  as  those  who  love 
God,  but  as  those  who  fear  Him.  In  the  New  Testament  saints  are  those  who 
lo^w.  God,  rather  than  fear  Him.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  often  used  to  express 
the  whole  of  real  religion,  both  in  the  holy  affections  which  it  communicates 
to  the  heart,  and  in  the  cheerful  obedience  which  it  produces  on  the  life.  It  should 
nevei  be  forgotten  that  everything  in  religion  is  practical.  Its  great  design  is 
to  conform  us  to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God.  2.  They  "  spake  often  one  to 
another."  No  doubt  they  frequently  conversed  about  their  recent  deliverance 
from  captivity.  Sometimes  they  might  speak  to  each  other  in  the  language 
of  caution.  It  frequently  happens  that  others  can  see  dangers  when  we  otirselves 
arc  blind  to  them.  Our  Lord  sent  forth  His  disciples,  two  by  two,  that  they 
might  caution  and  encourage  each  other.  We  are  to  bear  one  another's  bvudens  ; 
but  it  requires  much  wisdom  and  humility  to  do  this  well.  It  is  our  duty,  not 
only  to  administer  reproof  and  caution,  but  also  to  receive  them  in  the  same 
spirit.  Sometimes  they  spoke  to  each  other  in  the  language  of  encom-agement. 
By  conversation  with  our  fellow-Christians,  we  find  out  that  no  temptation  has 
taken  us  but  such  as  is  common  to  men.  God  has  chosen  all  His  people  in  the 
furnace  of  affliction.  Christian  conversation  encourages  the  heart.  But,  in 
intercourse  of  this  kind,  a  peculiar  delicacy  and  sanctity  of  feeling  must  be  main- 
tained, or  we  shall  injure  rather  than  benefit  each  other.  3.  These  people  thought 
upon  God's  jiame.  Our  Saviour  has  told  us,  that  "  where  our  treasure  is,  there 
wifl  our  hearts  "be  also."     The  bias  of  the  Christian's  affections  is  heavenward. 

II.  What  _God  thought  of  thei^.  He  hearkened  and  heard.  This  means 
God  attentively  heard  what  His  people  said  of  Him  to  each  other.  What  is 
it  to  which  the  Lord  listens  ?  He  remembers  His  people.  The  saints  are 
God's  treasure.  He  spares  them ;  rejoices  over  them ;  sanctifies  them.  He 
will  spare  them  in  the  great  day.  There  is  much  in  this  text  encouraging  to 
ministers,  and  much  suggestive  of  self-inquiry.    (George  Weight,  B.A.)       Christian 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  m. 

conversation  : — Bishop  Thompson  says,  "  Some  Christians  are  like  the  riTera  that 
flow  into  the  Arctic  Ocean — frozen  over  at  the  mouth."  Have  we  not  reason 
to  suspect  that  the  occasion  in  both  cases  is  the  same — coldness  ?  I.  Chris- 
tian conversation  pleases  God.  It  is  plainly  indicated  that  God  is  pleased 
when  His  people  talk  to  each  other  t«nderly  about  Him  ;  that  He  listens.  Why 
are  Christians  to-day  so  dumb  ?  Love  is  not  a  dumb  or  silent  thing.  Love  speaks. 
Why  this  hesitation  when  we  speak  of  religion  ?  Does  it  not  seem  strangely 
inconsistent  in  us  ?  "  The  Lord  hearkened  and  heard  it."  He  listened  while  ffis 
children  fondly  talked  of  Him.  Does  it  not  please  you  to  overhear  some  kind  word 
spoken  of  yourself  ?  Do  not  think  your  Heavenly  Father  indifferent  to  praise. 
He  loves  to  see  gratitude  in  our  hearts ;  it  greatly  pleases  Him  to  hear  us  talking 
one  to  another  about  His  goodness.  II.  Christian  conversation  blesses  us. 
Nothing  does  one's  own  heart  so  much  good  as  speaking  kindly  of  another. 
Expressing  love  ever  increases  it.  III.  Christian  conversation  blesses  otheks. 
There  are  too  many  dumb  Christians  ;  for  there  is  a  vast  power  in  our  tongues 
if  we  will  but  use  them  aright.  Who  can  estimate  the  power  of  kindly  words  to 
touch  the  heart  and  mould  the  hfe  ?  (Pulpit  Treasury.)  The  book  of  Ood.'s 
peers  : — This  book  of  remembrance,  Uke  the  jewels  referred  to  in  the  next  verse, 
was  doubtless  suggested  by  the  customs  of  ancient  courts.  The  king  used  to 
bring  out  and  display  his  jewels  on  State  occasions,  and  nearly  every  Eastern 
monarch  appointed  an  official  journalist  to  keep  a  record  of  passing  events.  He 
was  caUed  the  Court  chronicler,  and  his  business  was  to  write  the  history  of  his 
times,  especially  the  notable  names  and  incidents.  There  was  little  room  for  the 
annals  of  the  poor  or  for  anything  that  touched  the  life  of  the  common  people.  Now 
the  prophet  lifts  the  thought  above  that  Coiu-t  chronicler  and  book  to  another 
Book  which  is  written  before  the  King  of  kings,  and  he  intimates  that  the  doings 
recorded  there  belong  to  a  different  class  :  socially,  much  lower ;  morally  and 
religiously,  far  higher.  The  pages  of  that  other  book  are  not  devoted  to  the  men 
who  fill  the  exalted  stations  and  make  a  great  display  of  wealth  and  power ; 
because,  as  the  prophet  tells  us,  in  those  times  the  high  places  were  ruled  by 
injustice,  immoraUty,  and  irreligion.  But  there  were  a  few  people  whom  the 
searching  eyes  of  God  followed  with  tender  love  and  approval,  for  the  most  part 
obscure  people,  lost  in  the  crowd,  and  remote  from  the  world  of  fashion ;  people 
whom  the  Court  scribe  would  dismiss  as  so  much  dirt.  But  they  were  the  only 
objects  of  interest  to  the  greater  King,  for  they  alone  in  those  godless  times  were 
living  soberly,  righteouely,  reverently,  walking  humbly  in  the  fear  of  God,  keeping 
the  old  religious  fires  burning  and  bravely  maintaining  their  hold  on  faith  and 
prayer  through  obloquy  and  persecution.  They  were  like  the  few  in  Sardis  who 
had  not  defiled  their  garments.  Now,  T  need  not  tell  you  that  this  is  not  the 
only  mention  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  of  that  Book  of  Remembrance.  In  fact, 
we  hear  of  it  more  or  less  all  through  the  Bible.  It  appears  as  far  back  as  Moses, 
who  spoke  of  those  who  are  written  in  God's  Book ;  it  is  foimd  more  than  once 
in  the  Psalms  of  David,  who  trusts  that  his  very  tears  will  be  found  written  in 
the  Book ;  it  occurs  in  Isaiah  and  in  other  minor  prophets,  and  it  is  always  referred 
to,  I  think,  as  the  Book  which  God  keeps  to  record  the  doings  and  perhaps  the 
sufferings  also  of  His  faithful  ones  who  are  forgotten  or  despised  by  the  world. 
The  thought  is  taken  up  and  carried  on  by  our  blessed  Lord  Himself.  Jesus 
says,  "  Their  names  are  written  in  heaven  " ;  and  a  dozen  times  at  least  in  the 
Epistles  and  the  Apocalypse  there  is  mention  made  of  certain  unrecognised 
Christian  workers,  holy  women  and  others,  whose  names  are  written  in  what  is 
called  the  Book  of  Life,  or  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life.     I.  I  venture  to  say  to  you 

this  first,  THAT  THAT  BoOK  OF  REMEMBRANCE  MUST  BY  THIS  TIME  BE  A  PONDEROUS 

AND  MANY-voLUMED  LIBRARY,  if  all  the  unclironicled  workers  and  saints  have  been 
written  down  in  it,  because  they  are  a  company  which  no  man  can  number.  The 
saints  whose  names  you  find  in  the  calendar  and  who  figure  in  Church  history  are 
comparatively  few,  and  they  were  not  always  the  best  and  most  saintly  of  their 
class.  Some  of  them  got  canonised  and  admitted  to  the  calendar  by  favouritism 
of  pope  and  cardinal,  and  by  what  we  vulgarly  call  backstairs  influence,  rather 
than  by  election  and  sanction  of  God.  There  were  ten  thousand  times  more, 
and  perhaps  better,  saints  whose  names  are  only  in  heaven's  calendar ;  in  fact, 
the  real  history  of  God's  kingdom  has  never  been  written  by  any  human  pen. 
You  read  the  so-called  history  of  the  Church,  ecclesiastical  history,  as  produced 
by  the  labours  and  researches  of  a  Mosheim  or  Neandei,  and  it  is  often  exceedingly 
unedifying  reading  and  woefully  disappointing.    If  it  were  the  story  of  Christ's 


CHAP,  m]  MALACHL  113 

Church,  it  ought  to  be  in  the  main  the  story  of  lowly,  self-forgetting,  Christ-like 
men  and  women.  Instead  of  that,  you  find  the  greater  part  of  those  pages 
devoted  to  the  record  of  ambitions,  envyings,  strifes,  heresies.  You  find  there 
the  carnal,  the  secular,  and  the  worldly  themes  almost  everywhere  predominant. 
The  true  and  beautiful  story  of  the  Church  is  not  written  there  or  in  any  book 
which  is  accessible  to  us,  it  is  only  written  in  God's  Book  of  Remembrance ;  for 
surely  the  real  makers  and  builders  and  defenders  of  the  Church  have  been  in  all 
ages  the  men  and  women  who  patiently  suffered  for  it,  earnestly  laboured  for  it, 
without  thinking  of  gain  or  distinction.  Those  in  all  ages  have  kept  the  Church 
alive,  preserved  it  as  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  light  of  the  world.  And  yet  they 
are  not  even  known  by  name.  There  were  a  few  notable  men,  never  to  be 
forgotten — Cranmer,  Latimer,  Ridley,  Hooker — but  most  of  them  were  obscure 
— cobblers,  bachelors,  weavers,  unlearned  Bible  readers,  lay  preachers — and 
beneath  the  notice  of  the  scribe.  Their  names  are  written  in  letters  of  glory  in 
God's  Book  of  Remembrance.  II.  Now,  so  it  has  been  all  through  Church  history. 
I  venture  to  say  to  you,  secondly,  that  the  same  thino  substantially  is  true 
TO-DAY.  Most  of  the  noble  and  Christ-Uke  deeds — all  but  an  infinitesimal  part 
of  them — have  no  chance  whatever  of  getting  written  down  in  any  book  except 
that  unseen  book  on  which  the  unseen  hands  are  busy.  Most  of  the  brave,  humble, 
self-denjdng  fives  which  are  spent  in  the  service  of  Christ  and  humanity  find  no 
place  whatever  in  the  world's  prints.  I  should  think  you  all  know  that  it  is  not 
always  the  best  things  that  get  most  talked  about ;  it  is  not  always  the  grandest 
and  divinest  things  that  are  pushed  into  notoriety  and  reported.  A  prayer- 
meeting  is  never  reported ;  at  least,  I  have  never  seen  one  reported.  A  round 
of  visits  among  the  sick,  the  sorro\vful,  and  the  dying  —  that  never  gets  into 
print.  A  brave  confession  of  Christ  in  the  midst  of  an  unbelieving  company 
—  nobody  thinks  of  writing  that  down.  If  you  are  ambitious  to  have 
yom*  names  passed  from  mouth  to  mouth  in  the  streets,  and  printed  in  large 
type  in  all  the  public  journals,  there  are  various  ways  of  getting  it  done,  some  of 
them  not  too  creditable.  You  can  accomplish  it  by  an  extraordinary  display 
of  genius,  or  an  extraordinary  display  of  folly,  and  one  will  serve  quite  as  well 
as  the  other.  You  won't  do  it  by  keeping  the  Ten  Commandments,  but  you 
may  do  it  by  breaking  some  of  them.  III.  Now,  may  I  say  to  you,  lastly,  that 
this  cheeeing  truth  contained  in  our  text  is  given  to  be  AN  incentive 

AND  AN  INSPIRATION  TO  ALL  WHO  ARE  ENGAGED  IN  RELIGIOUS  WORK,  BUT  ESPECIALLY 
TO   THE  LESS   KNOWN  AND   TO   THE  UTTERLY  UNDISTINGUISHED  AMONG  THEM, — and 

they  always  form,  as  you  know  too  well,  the  vast  majority  ?  Most  of  you  have 
to  continue  in  well-doing  without  the  least  chance  of  flattering  human  recognition. 
A  few  leaders  in  religious  work  do  shine  a  little,  perhaps,  in  the  public  eye  ;  that 
is,  the  generals  in  a  great  army  are  sometimes  put  on  a  pedestal,  and  they  gain 
a  fittle  glory,  but  the  rank  and  file,  the  private  soldiers  who  do  the  rough  marching, 
and  most  of  the  rough  fighting  too,  there  is  very  little  glory  for  them  either  in 
ordinary  warfare  or  in  the  greater  warfare  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  It 
is  very  true  of  most  of  you,  that  if  you  are  anxious  to  gain  human  praise  for  your 
fidelity  to  Christ,  and  the  work  you  do  in  His  name,  you  wiU  be  disappointed. 
Quiet  devotion  to  the  service  of  the  Lord  Christ  does  not  fetch  the  gallery,  to 
say  the  least  of  it ;  it  does  not  bring  plaudits  from  the  pit.  It  is  human  genius 
that  wins  human  praise,  or  intellectual  cleverness,  sometimes  mere  showiness  ; 
it  is  smartness  that  secures  successes  in  the  business  world.  The  man  who  wins  a 
walking  match,  or  a  motor -race,  or  a  horse-race  will  win  a  himdred  times  more 
popular  favoiu-  for  the  time  being  than  the  man  who  spends  his  fife  as  the  Divine 
One  did  who  went  about  doing  cood.  If  in  Christ's  work  men  are  dependent  at 
all  upon  these  things  they  frequently  fall  into  dejection.  Now,  just  think  what 
it  means  to  have  your  names  and  labours  written  in  that  Book  of  Remembrance. 
Well,  it  certainly  means  tliis — though  a  vast  number  of  people  would  be  perfectly 
astounded  to  hear  it — it  means  that  an  earnest,  zealous,  Christ-loving,  Christ- 
serving  life,  and  its  works  of  patience  and  faith,  are  deemed  by  heaven  the  things 
best  worth  recording  and  best  deserving  to  be  kept  in  remembrance.  In  those 
higher  courts  they  are  not  absorbed  and  excited  with  the  things  that  we  poor 
mortals  go  mad  about.  Possibly  they  are  not  so  profoundly  interested  as  we  are  in 
the  movements  of  presidents  and  rulers,  in  the  startUng  speeches  of  politicians, 
and  in  the  prospects  of  political  parties,  and  certainly  not  in  the  revelations  of 
the  criminal  court,  the  scandals  of  high  hfe,  and  the  result  of  the  latest  pedestrian 
contest.     No  doubt  heaven  sees  all  these  things,  because  nothing  is  hid  from  the 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

all-watchful  eyes,  but  they  stir  no  buzz  of  admiration  in  angelic  circles,  you  may 
be  sure.  A  yoimg  man  in  the  city  steadfastly  resisting  its  temptations  and  keeping 
himself  undefiled  for  Jesus'  sake ;  a  maiden  bringing  her  Ufe  and  laying  it  at  the 
Master's  feet,  and  vowing  to  love  Him  first  and  best ;  a  girl  in  the  shop  or  factory 
adorning  her  Christian  profession  amidst  unchristian  workmates  ;  a  business  man 
holding  his  conscience  and  integrity  amid  all  the  shady  doings  and  imveracities 
of  the  market  and  commercial  life :  these  are  the  things  which  the  heavenly 
penmen  note  down.  We  sometimes  talk  and,  maybe,  think  that  this  Book  of 
Remembrance — I  have  often  heard  it  referred  to  in  that  way — is  kept  to  record 
the  base  and  the  evil  things:  your  own  failures,  the  inconsistencies  of  yom* 
Christian  hfe,  the  darker  things.  I  declare  this  :  the  book  is  never  once  referred  to 
in  that  way  in  the  Bible.  God  has  no  wish,  you  may  be  sure,  to  keep  a  record  of 
all  failing  and  bad  things ;  He  has  no  dehght  in  beholding,  dweUing  upon  them. 
He  tells  us,  indeed,  that  when  our  sins  are  once  forgiven  He  forgets  them ;  they 
are  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  come  into  His  mind  no  more.  No,  it  ia 
the  fair  and  the  better  things  of  the  Christian  Hfe  and  labours  that  find  a  place 
in  that  great  book.     [J.  0.  Greenhough.) 

Ver.  17.  In  that  day  when  I  make  up  My  jewels.  —  The  Lord's  jewels: — 
How  much  people  think  of  their  jewels.  Eastern  people  are  even  more  fond 
of  jewels  than  we  are,  and  Eastern  ladies  are  even  more  lavishly  decked  with  them. 
How  people  value  their  jewels  !  They  count  them  as  their  chiefest  treasure,  so 
God  uses  the  figure  to  make  us  feel  how  highly  He  thinks  of  us.  His  redeemed  ones, 
who  are  more  and  better  to  Him  than  men's  jewels  can  be  to  them.  I  once  knew 
a  lady  who  was  so  passionately  fond  of  her  jewels  that,  when  the  rest  of  the  house- 
hold went  to  church,  and  the  house  was  quiet,  she  would  go  up  to  her  bedroom, 
lock  the  door,  spread  out  aU  her  pearls  and  diamonds  upon  the  bed,  and  spend  her 
time  in  admiring  them,  one  after  another.  Poor,  foolish  woman  !  She  could 
not  take  them  with  her  through  the  grave.  Our  children  are  our  jewels  ;  the 
friends  we  love  are  our  jewels  ;  those  whom  we  try  to  bless  and  save  become  precious 
to  us  as  jewels.  Then  whom  does  God  count  among  His  jewels  ?  I.  The  penitent. 
Who  is  humble  before  God.  The  publican  in  the  temple  was  one  of  the  Lord's 
jewels.  II.  The  retxjrning.  Who  is  a  seeker  after  God.  The  prodigal  was 
one  of  the  Lord's  jewels.  III.  The  consecrated.  Wlio  is  wholly  God's.  The 
apostle  Paul  was  one  of  the  Lord's  jewels.  God  wiU  take  care  of  his  jewels  now, 
and  in  the  great  day.  See  Christ's  prayer,  "  None  of  them  is  lost."  (Robert 
Tuck,  B.A.)  Jewels: — 1.  God's  jewels — His  people.  (1)  For  their  rarity. 
(2)  Their  beauty.  (3)  Their  value.  (4)  Their  preservation.  2.  The  means  by 
which  He  collects  them.  (1)  His  word  and  ordinances.  (2)  The  dispensations 
of  His  providence.  (3)  The  influence  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  3.  The  period  when  He 
shall  make  them  up.  (1)  At  the  hour  of  death.  (2)  On  the  day  of  judgment. 
{0.  Brooks.)  The  fear  of  God  rewarded  : — The  expression  used  by  the  prophet 
conveys  to  us  a  strong  idea  of  the  pleasiu-e  which  our  Lord  will  Himself  experience 
in  executing  this  office  of  "  making  up  His  jewels."  He  will  then  "  see  of  the  travail 
of  His  soul,  and  be  satisfied."  We  trace  the  idea  of  pleasure  in  the  term  "  jewels." 
And  they  are  His  jewels,  for  He  has  bought  them  with  a  price,  and  no  less  a  price 
than  that  of  His  own  most  precious  blood.  The  idea  of  pleasure  on  His  part  in 
the  performance  of  this  work  is  completed  in  the  expression,  "  make  up  My  jewels." 
We  see  Him  rejoicing  that  the  time  is  come,  when  to  the  gift  of  grace  He  may  add 
that  of  glory  ;  and  finally  exulting  that  not  one  "  of  all  that  the  Father  hath  given 
Him  "  is  wanting  to  His  crown.  As  if  we  might  want  something  more  closely 
and  readily  applicable  than  this  figurative  language.  He  adds,  "  And  I  will  spare 
them,  as  a  man  spareth  his  own  son  that  serveth  him."  In  what  manner  are 
they  described,  who  are  to  be  the  passive  subjects  of  His  mercy  in  that  day  ?  The 
first  characteristic  is  that  they  "  feared  the  Lord."  This  fundamental  grace  of 
godly  fear  is  the  sure  and  safe  road  to  the  higher  attainments  of  love.  All  who 
will  be  His  "  jewels  "  there,  must  fear  Him  in  some  degree  here,  that  they  may 
love  Him  in  perfection  hereafter.  To  know  whether  you  fear  Him,  ask  your- 
selves, and  that  with  searching  honesty,  whether  you  shrink  from  an  evil  thought ; 
whether  you  strive  manfully  against  your  imaginations  when  they  set  in  the 
direction  of  lust,  malice,  or  covetousness ;  or  willingly  float  down  the  ciurent  to 
a  certain  distance,  only  taking  pains  to  avoid  the  last  precipice  towards  which 
it  leads.  If  you  face  Him  with  that  holy  fear,  which  is  the  result  of  a  living  faith, 
you  will  prove  it,  not  by  your  thouglits  and  actions  only,  but  by  your  words. 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  115 

"  Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spoke  often  one  to  another."  To  such  God 
says,  "  They  shall  be  Mine."  Is  yovir  conversation  such  as  to  warrant  your  enter- 
taining a  hope  that  you  have  an  interest  in  this  gracious  promise  ?  (J.  Marriot, 
A.M.)  Believers  are  the  jewels  of  Christ : — I.  God's  eegabd  for  His  people. 
They  are  described  as  God's  "  jewels,"  therefore  dear  and  valuable  to  Him  ; 
those  on  whom  He  looks  with  complacency ;  they  were  dearly  purchased,  bought 
with  a  price,  infinitely  above  aU  earthly  treasures.  He  speaks  of  them  in  an 
endearing  manner  as  "  My  jewels."  The  text  also  gives  another  token  of  Divine 
regard — His  sparing  mercy.  Every  parent  will  fully  enter  into  the  figure  here  used 
II.  The  time  appointed  for  the  manifestation  of  this  regard.  "  In  that 
day."  It  betokens  either  temporal  visitation,  the  day  of  death,  or  the  day  of 
judgment.  Probably  the  final  day  is  meant,  when  He  will  vouchsafe  a  peculiar 
manifestation  of  His  favour.  III.  The  security  by  which  this  promise  is 
CONFIRMED.  This  security  is  not  of  man,  but  of  God.  "  They  shall  be  Mine." 
(W.  Mayers,  A.M.)  Jehovah's  jewels: — I.  The  preciotis  in  principlh.  Re- 
gard for  the  greatness  of  God.  Obedience  to  the  commands  of  Grod.  Dread  of 
the  pimishment  of  God.  Trust  in  the  mercy  of  God.  Fear  of  God  is  the  foundation 
of  piety;  it  casts  out  aU  other  fear.  II.  The  precious  in  practice.  1.  Frequent 
religious  association.  They  often  met  together  apart  from  the  world.  An  ex- 
pression of  spiritual  separation  from  evil  society.  An  index  of  devotedness  to 
a  common  purpose.  2.  Concentrated  mental  action.  "  Thought  upon  His  name." 
Mind  the  greatest  thing  in  man.  The  believer  sees  God  in  all  things,  and  his 
meditation  of  Him  is  sweet.  Constant  mutual  edification — "  Speak  often,"  &c. 
Information,  counsel,  warning,  encouragement.  III.  The  precious  in  privtleqb. 
1.  Divine  attention.  "  God  hearkened  and  heard  it."  2.  Divine  remembrance. 
"  And  a  book,"  etc.     All  the  services  of  the  good  registered  for  compensation. 

3.  Divine  promise.  Tender  treatment.  "I  wiU  spare."  Great  honour.  "They 
shall  be  Mine."  Great  destructiveness.  "  Then  shall  ye  return."  {B.D.Johns.) 
The  dignity  of  the  people  of  God  : — 1.  The  people  of  God  are  dignified  with  the 
Divine  approbation.     2.  By  the  Divine  sohcitude.     3.  By  the  Divine  security. 

4.  By  the  Divine  regard.  They  are  to  ffim  as  jewels.  5.  By  a  Divine  promise 
"  I  will  spare  them."  Learn  from  this  subject  full  confidence  in  God.  He  has 
made  full  provision  for  you  in  the  obedience  and  death  of  Jesus.  He  will  take 
care  of  you  here,  and  glorify  you  with  dignity  hereafter.  Also  learn  humility ; 
for  what  maketh  you  to  differ  from  others  but  the  grace  of  God  alone  ?  {Hugh 
Allen,  M.A. )         The  making  up  of  God's  jewels  .■ — The  Lord  makes  up  His  jewels — 

1.  By  the  word  and  ordinances  of  His  gi-ace.  The  word  of  inspiration  is  the  grand 
instrument  which  the  Lord  uses  for  hewing  His  jewels  out  of  the  rock  of  corrupt 
nature,  and  bringing  them  from  the  dark  mine  of  misery  to  the  light  of  everlasting 
felicity.  It  is  an  instrument  of  great  power.  It  commands  holiness,  supplies 
motives,  and  presents  encouragements  to  the  mind.  The  exercises  of  praise  and 
prayer  are  admirably  adapted  to  refine  and  polish  the  soul  in  the  beauties  of  holiness. 

2.  By  the  operations  and  dispensations  of  His  providence.  Looking  at  providence 
on  a  comprehensive  scale,  redemption  is  its  most  striking  and  grand  display.  The 
darkest  as  weU  as  the  brightest  aspects  of  providence  are  necessary  to  the  making 
up  of  God '  s  jewels.  God '  s  own  saints  are  often  the  better  for  being  afflicted.  Trials 
are  necessary  to  purify  the  Church  from  corruptions,  to  cleanse  the  heart,  and 
rectify  the  life  of  individuals,  and  to  beautify  them  both  severally  and  collectively 
in  time,  and  make  their  character  shine  in  the  light  of  eternity.  3.  By  the  work 
and  influences  of  His  Spirit.  The  word  and  ordinances  of  grace,  aided  by  the 
operation  and  dispensations  of  providence,  can  do  nothing  to  convert  or  sanctify 
a  single  soul,  unless  the  Spirit  accompany  them  with  His  blessing.  Just  as  the 
hammer,  or  the  chisel,  or  the  saw,  or  the  file,  without  the  hand  of  the  mechanic, 
cannot  hew  a  single  jewel  out  of  the  quarry  of  nature,  or  polish  it  into  beauty, 
so  without  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  ordinances  and  providences,  powerful 
instruments  though  they  are,  carmot  convince  a  sinner  of  sin,  or  lead  him  from  the 
paths  of  error  into  the  way  of  God.  The  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  believers 
to  polish  and  fit  them  for  shining  as  jewels  in  the  mediatorial  crown  of  glory.  Let  all 
Christians  then,  make  a  right  improvement,  both  for  their  own  and  their  brethren's 
sake,  of  God's  dealings.  The  more  faith  Christians  exercise,  the  more  godly  will  they 
become  ;  and  the  more  godly  they  are  here,  the  brighter  shall  they  shine  hereafter  in 
that  world  where  everlasting  peace  reigns,  and  grace  never  declines,  where  the  sun 
of  glory  never  sets,  and  where  the  sky  of  blessedness  is  never  overcast  with  clouds. 
{John Shoolhr aid.)        The  Lord's  jewels: — L  How  may  thb  saints  be  com- 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

PARED  TO  JEWELS  ?  The  word  translated  "  jewels  "  (segullah)  signifies  a  treasure, 
a  peculiar  treasure,  as  the  Church  of  the  Jews  compared  to  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  The  saints  of  God  are  more  excellent  in  the  sight  of  God  than  all  other 
men.  They  may  be  compared  to  jewels — 1.  Because  of  their  rarity.  Jewels 
are  only  fotmd  in  certain  places,  and  only  worn  by  certain  persons.  So  the  saints 
are  said  to  be  "  a  very  little  flock."  2.  Because  they  cost  the  Lord  Jesus  very 
dear.  Jewels  are  costly  things.  Being  rare,  they  are  enhanced  in  price.  The 
Son  of  God  redeemed  these  jewels  by  His  own  blood.  This  is  a  price  of  incalculable 
value.  3.  Because  He  has  an  infinite  esteem  of  them.  They  are  His  treasure, 
and  His  affections  are  where  they  are.  Since  they  were  purchased  by  the  blood 
of  His  Son,  they  are  precious  in  His  sight  and  honourable.  He  thinks  on  them 
with  approbation,  He  speaks  of  them,  and  to  them,  with  delight.  4.  Because 
He  keeps  them  in  safety.  They  are  set  on  His  heart  and  cannot  be  taken  away. 
n.  How  SHALL  THE  LoKD  MAKE  TIP  His  JEWELS  ?  This  refers  either  to  His  work 
in  His  jewels  in  time,  or  to  His  procedure  at  the  day  of  judgment.  It  may  refer 
to  His  work  of  grace  in  taking  them  all  from  the  corrupted  mass  of  human  nature. 
He  begins  the  work  of  sanctification  in  them,  and  brings  it  to  a  glorious  issue. 
God  refines  His  people  by  His  Spirit,  by  His  word,  and  by  His  providences,  till 
they  become  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing.  In  the  last  sense  of  the 
declaration,  they  shall  be  made  up,  when  their  number  is  completed  in  the  day 
of  the  Lord.  And  they  shall  all  be  presented  perfect  in  holiness.  III.  What  is 
THE  DAY  ON  WHICH  THE  LoRD  SHALL  MAKE  UP  His  JEWELS  ?  The  great  and  notable 
day  of  the  Lord.  A  day  which  shall  be  the  end  of  time,  the  end  of  the  world,  and 
of  the  present  system  of  things.  A  day  for  which  saints  are  constantly  preparing, 
for  which  they  wait,  which  they  love,  and  to  which  they  are  hastening.  (Levwas.) 
My  jewels  : — Here  is  an  inspired  truth,  setting  forth  the  relation  subsisting  between 
God  and  His  people,  and  illustrating  His  love  for,  and  joy  in,  them.  I.  God's  own 
estimation  of  the  real  value  of  a  SINCERE  CHRISTIAN.  He  calls  them  His 
"  jewels "  or  "  His  peculiar  treasure."  All  rare  and  beautiful  and  precious 
things  in  earth  and  heaven  are  employed  as  metaphorical  of  the  value  God  puts 
upon  His  people  and  the  affection  He  bears  them.  A  Christian  man  is  more  than 
a  "  spirit,"  he  is  a  redeemed  and  regenerated  spirit.  The  value  of  a  gem  is  not 
in  its  composition,  but  in  its  crystallisation.  Even  a  diamond  is  composed  mostly 
of  carbon,  but  differs  from  the  black  coal  of  our  furnaces  only  in  this  mysterious 
transfiguration.  And  a  change  analogous  to  this  has  every  saved  soul  undergone. 
The  spiritual  man  has,  through  gracious  crystallisation,  become  a  gem,  reflecting 
Divine  light,  and  thus  fitted  for  a  diadem.  What  marvel  then  that  God  counts 
His  people  more  precious  than  the  stars,  and  calls  them  "  His  peculiar  treasure." 

II.    An    EXPLANATION    OF    God's    STRANGE    TREATMENT    OF    HiS    CHILDREN.      The 

true  believer  may  say,  "  If  I  am  thus  valued,  why  does  He  so  afflict  me  ?  "  The 
text  suggests  the  answer.  After  finding  or  purchasing  a  gem,  the  next  thing  is  to 
polish  it.  And  this  is  always  a  gentle  work.  Of  the  rarer  gems  the  ancients 
supposed  the  cutting  and  polishing  impossible.  The  large  diamonds  which  orna- 
mented the  imperial  mantle  of  Charlemagne  are  yet  preserved  as  uncut  crystals. 
It  was  only  later  that  men  learned  how  the  diamond  might  be  cut,  by  attrition  with 
another  diamond,  and  polished  on  a  wheel  charged  with  diamond  dust.  And  herein 
is  found  the  only  criterion  of  the  true  gem.  The  service  of  the  Christian's  afflictions 
is  twofold.  They  prove  and  they  polish  the  spiritual  gem.  1.  They  are  necessary 
to  prove  it.  There  are  many  counterfeits  in  religion.  Any  reliable  test  of  godli- 
ness must  have  power  to  go  beneath  the  outward  show  into  the  real  essence. 
2.  Even  when  the  piety  is  sincere,  such  afflictions  are  useful  to  develop  and  discipline 
it.  Before  the  diamond  is  set  in  a  kingly  crown  it  must  be  roughly  pressed  on  the 
diamond  wheel.  All  afflictions  are  God's  means  of  polishing.  Here  we  are  in- 
structed as  to  the  seeming  partiality  of  God's  treatment  of  different  Christians, 
for  men  may  be  equally  pious,  and  alike  dear  to  our  Heavenly  lather,  and  yet 
their  mortal  experiences  be  widely  dissimilar.  Gems  are  of  different  degrees  of 
hardness,  and  are  to  be  set  in  different  conditions.  They  require  very  variant 
cutting,  and  unequal  polishing.  So  with  the  true  people  of  God  ;  one  is  only 
smoothed  with  a  file,  while  another  must  be  pressed  on  the  grinding  wheel.  He 
will  not  grind  His  jewels  more  than  they  need.  III.  A  prediction  of  the  future 
DIGNITY  AND  GLORY  OF  THE  CHILDREN  OF  Gop.  "  In  the  day  when  I  make  up 
My  jewels."  The  reference  is  to  the  great  day  of  Christ's  coming.  The  metaphor 
is  of  a  mighty  conqueror,  who,  having  overthrown  all  enemies,  appears  laden  with 
spoil,  leading  captive  his  foes,  marching  in  triumph,  magnificent  in  regalia,  over 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  117 

the  royal  highway.  Then  God's  saints  will  be  gathered  to  Christ,  and  God's 
"  jewels  "  be  made  up  as  precious  stones  into  a  crown,  or  as  stars  into  a  constella- 
tion. In  that  great  day  of  manifestation  the  moral  rather  than  the  natural 
attributes  of  God  are  to  be  especially  glorified.  It  is  only  in  the  economy  of  grace 
that  what  we  may  term  the  Divine  affections  are  perfectly  displayed.  Let  this 
fair  picture  be  hung  in  ovir  chambers  of  imagery.  This  material  universe  is  only 
a  great  platform,  erected  temporarily  for  the  coronation  of  Immanuel,  and  the 
redeemed  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect.  "  God's  jewels," — or  as  Isaiah  has  it, 
"  God's  crown  of  glory,"  "  God's  royal  diadem."  The  richest  gems  blazing 
in  the  many  crowns  of  Immanuel  will  be  the  souls  of  Christ's  redeemed  ones — 
these  diamonds,  dug  from  the  black  caverns  of  death — these  pearls,  brought  up 
from  the  stormy  depths  of  hell — these  blood-bought,  grace- preserved,  grief- polished 
"  jewels  of  God."  {Charles  Wadsworth,  D.D.)  The  jewels  of  the  King : — 
1.  Jewels  represent  superlative  value.  Natvire's  jewels  differ  from  God's,  which 
are  conscious  and  immortal.  And  yet  by  valuable  things  God  illustrates  His 
appreciation  of  His  children.  2.  They  represent  surpassing  beauty.  Gems  are 
nature's  loveliest  gifts.  In  God's  sight  natural  pales  before  spiritual  beauty.  We 
are  only  beautiful  when  "the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  is  upon  us."  God's 
brightest  earthly  jewels  are  yet  incomplete.  When  the  cutting  and  burnishing 
are  finished,  they  are  to  shine  as  the  stars  forever.  3.  They  represent  costly  and 
self-sacrificing  toil  in  their  discovery  and  ownership.  When  a  Brazilian  slave 
finds  a  gem  of  seventeen  carats,  he  wins  his  freedom.  At  what  enormous  cost 
God  secures  a  soul !  4.  Their  worth  and  beauty  represent  the  triumphs  of  science 
and  art.  Diamonds  are  never  worn  in  the  rough.  God  develops  the  worth  and 
spiritual  beauty  of  His  children  by  the  ministry  of  suffering.  No  lapidary  ever 
knew  so  well  when  and  where  to  cut  a  crown  jewel  as  does  our  Heavenly  Father. 
5.  The  King  will  gather  His  gems  into  His  royal  palace.  God  has  long  loaned  His 
jewels  to  the  commimities  of  earth.  When  the  sun  darkens.  His  angels  are  to 
gather  them  from  every  land  and  sea.  {S.  V.  Leech,  D.D.)  The  Lord's  jewels  : — 
1.  This  title  shows  the  estimation  in  which  God  holds  His  people.  In  the  Bible,  God 
avails  Himself  of  one  good  or  beautiful  thing  to  describe  another.  The  Christian 
is  like  a  cedar  in  Lebanon,  the  most  majestic  and  beautiful  tree  in  the  forest.  Heaven 
is  a  city  of  golden  walls  and  gates  of  pearl.  So  here,  in  like  manner,  He  calls  His 
people  "  jewels."  The  emerald,  the  ruby,  and  the  diamond,  are  the  most  precious 
and  costly  things  in  nature.  These  are  the  things  which  God  takes  to  illustrate 
the  estimation  in  which  He  holds  the  good.  He  knows  the  capabilities  of  these 
immortal  souls,  that  they  can  be  "  equal  to  the  angels,"  through  the  redemption 
of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  2.  This  title,  "  jewels,"  suggests  a  reason  why  God's 
people  are  sometimes  so  exercised  by  the  providences  of  God.  When  diamonds 
and  other  gems  are  first  found,  they  are  usually  covered  with  a  dark,  rusty  coating, 
every  particle  of  which  must  be  removed.  This  process  is  long  and  expensive. 
Their  briUiancy  cannot  be  fairly  seen  without  it.  The  famous  Koh-i-noor  diamond 
was  subjected  to  repolishing  with  the  help  of  a  steam-engine  for  twenty-three 
days  and  twelve  hours  each  day.  So  it  was  with  Job,  and  Joseph,  and  Jacob, 
and  many  others  whom  God  chose  as  His  jewels.  This  disciplinary  process  is  still 
going  on  in  the  present  age,  in  innumerable  ways,  by  disease,  loss  of  property, 
family  afilictions,  &c.  Ill-treatment  at  the  hand  of  one  we  have  been  accustomed 
to  esteem  is  epecially  hard  to  endure.  But  it  is  needed.  There  is  nothing  that 
can  polish  the  diamond  like  the  diamond  itself.  Two  diamonds  are  rubbed,  the 
one  upon  the  other,  and  the  dust  thus  obtained  is  used  for  polishing.  So,  by  the 
natural  constitution  of  the  soul,  and  the  providence  of  God,  there  may  be  nothing 
so  good  for  polishing  as  afflictions  sent  upon  us  by  others.  They  may  seem  to 
have  an  opposite  effect  for  a  time  ;  may  seem  to  ruffle  our  temper,  and  make  us 
rebeUious  and  antagonistic  ;  but,  by  and  by,  through  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  like  the  vegetable  oil  that  is  mixed  with  the  diamond  dust  to  polish  the 
diamond, — the  Holy  Spirit  working  with  these  afflictions, — our  tempers  will  be 
subdued,  and  the  "  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness  "  will  be  worked  out  thereby. 
3.  This  name  which  the  Lord  applies  to  His  people  warrants  us  in  the  behef  that 
God  will  never  lose  sight  of  any  one  of  them.  To  say  that  God  would  surrender 
one  of  His  people,  permit  him  to  fall  away  and  be  lost,  is  to  declare  a  thing  which 
is  inconsistent  for  God  to  do.  But  does  any  one  say,  "  Good  !  that  just  suits  me  ; 
I  am  going  to  live  just  as  I  please,  for  I  shall  get  home  to  heaven  at  last  anyhow." 
Then  be  sure  that  you  are  one  of  His  jewels.  If  you  are  not,  the  result  may  be 
terribly  and  eternally  disastrous.   The  truth  is,  that  no  true  child  of  Grod  wiU  make 


]  18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

any  such  resolution,  or  entertain  such  a  thought.  There  are  some  who  do  wander 
away  from  God ;  not,  however,  with  a  deliberate  purpose  so  to  do,  but  because 
they  have  been  led  captive  by  the  enemy.  But  God  will  never  lose  sight  of  His 
"  jewel,"  but  will  follow  him  by  His  Spirit  and  His  providences,  making  use  of 
those  things  that  are  best  calculated  to  bring  a  rational  soul  back  again  to  the 
fold  from  whence  it  had  wandered  away.  (Homer  M''  Vay.)  God's  crown  jewels : — 
I.  Thb  name  by  which  God  calls  His  people.  "  My  jewels."  The  com- 
parison suggests — 1.  The  preciousness  of  good  people.  Jewels  are,  on  accoimt 
of  their  intrinsic  worth,  or  historic  interest,  the  most  valuable  and  highly  prized 
things  on  earth.  God  alone  can  comprehend  the  value  of  a  soul.  He  knows 
the  price  which  was  paid  for  his  ransom.  2.  Good  people  are  compared  to  jewels 
on  account  of  their  beauty.  How  the  diamond  sparkles  and  flashes  !  But  its 
beauty  is  eclipsed  when  compared  with  the  beauty  of  holiness  whirh  God  puts  upon 
all  His  saints.  That  beauty  is  not  fully  disclosed  on  earth.  3.  God's  people  are  like 
jewels  because  they  need  so  much  polishing.  While  a  single  stain  of  sin  remains 
upon  our  souls  we  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Every  trial  the 
Spirit  of  God  employs  as  a  means  of  sanctifying  us,  and  polishing  us,  to  shine 
among  the  crown  jewels  of  heaven.  II.  God  claims  a  special  PROPERTy  in  oood 
MEN.  "  They  shall  be  Mine."  x\ll  souls  belong  to  Him  by  creation  and  preser- 
vation :  but  true  believers  are  His  by  redemption.  III.  God  watches  over  His 
PEOPLE,  so  that  not  ONE  OF  THEM  IS  LOST.  "  When  I  make  up  My  jewels." 
They  are  widely  scattered  now,  but  He  will  bring  them  together  by  and  by.  On  the 
day  when  He  shall  crown  Immanuel  Lord  of  all  not  one  of  them  shall  be  missing. 
{David  Winters. )  Croivn  jewels  : — The  Lord  Jesus  has  been  gathering  up  His 
treasures  for  a  good  while,  and  on  the  great  coronation  day  of  the  judgment  He 
will,  in  the  presence  of  the  assembled  universe,  show  that  the  good  of  all  ages  are 
His  crown  jewels.  I  speak  to  you  of  the  jewel-finding,  the  jewel-grinding,  the 
jewel-setting.  You  have  noticed  the  great  difference  between  jewels.  Let 
not  a  Christian  man  envy  another  Christian  man's  experience.  You  open  the 
king's  casket,  and  you  see  jewels  of  all  sizes,  shapes,  and  colours.  Do  not  worry 
because  you  don't  have  the  faith  of  that  man,  or  the  praying  qualities  of  this,  or 
the  singing  qualities  of  another.  The  trouble  is  that  you  are  not  willing  to  be 
ordinary  gold,  you  want  to  be  gold  of  twenty-four  carats.  Notice  jewel-grinding. 
Christian  character,  like  black  spots  in  an  amethyst,  must  sometimes  be  cleared 
out  by  the  flame  ;  it  must  go  through  the  furnace.  Nearly  all  God's  jewels  are 
crystallised  tears.  You  can  tell  God's  jewel,  as  the  lapidary  tells  the  diamond.  If 
the  breath  of  temptation  comes  on  it,  and  soon  vanishes,  it  is  a  real  diamond.  Note 
the  jewel-setting.  The  lapidary  gets  the  gems  in  the  right  shape,  gathers  them 
on  his  table,  and  then  puts  them  into  head-bands,  or  hilts  of  swords,  or  into  crowns. 
The  Lord  Jesus  will  gather  up  His  people,  and  before  the  assembled  universe  their 
splendour  shall  shine  forth.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Gem  formation: — 
In  nature  there  is  hardly  a  stone  that  is  not  capable  of  crystallising  into  something 
purer  and  brighter  than  its  normal  state.  Coal,  by  a  slightly  different  arrange- 
ment of  its  particles,  is  capable  of  becoming  the  radiant  diamond.  The  slag  cast 
out  from  the  f  lu-nace  as  useless  waste,  forms  into  globular  masses  of  radiating  crystals. 
The  very  mud  on  the  road,  trampled  under  foot  as  the  type  of  all  impurity,  can 
be  changed  by  chemical  art  into  metals  and  gems  of  smrpassing  beauty.  God  can 
make  jewels  out  of  the  most  worthless  rubbish.  Let  the  cases  of  John  Newton, 
of  the  woman  that  was  a  sirmer,  of  the  thief  upon  the  cross,  of  Augustine,  of  John 
Bunyan,  of  Colonel  Gardiner,  and  of  thousands  more,  bear  witness  to  the  almighty 
power  of  the  alchemy  of  Divine  grace.  It  only  requires  a  supreme  surrender  of 
ourselves  into  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  ensure  the  Scripture  assurance,  "  They 
shall  be  Mine  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  My  jewels."  (Cyclopcedia  of  Nature 
Teachings.)  A  name  for  God's  people: — The  impiety  and  irreligion  which  eo 
strongly  marked  the  character,both  of  priests  and  people,  in  the  days  of  this  prophet, 
are  concentrated,  as  it  were,  in  verses  13-16.  Amidst  this  general  departure  from 
God,  others  existed  of  a  different  description.  Note — 1.  The  endearing  name  here 
given  to  the  people  of  God.  "  Jewels."  "  His  jewels,"  or  special  treasure.  Jewels 
are  often  purchased  at  an  immense  price.  The  people  of  God  are  "  bought  with 
a  price."  They  may  be  called  "  jewels  "  from  the  comparative  fewness  of  their 
number.  And  also  from  their  glory  and  beauty.  It  is  customary  for  the  great 
and  noble  of  the  earth  to  adorn  themselves  with  their  jewels  on  particular  occasions, 
and  so  the  Lord  glories  in  His  people,  and  sets  them  "  as  a  seal  upon  His  heait," 
and  has  them  "  graven  on  the  palms  of  His  hands."     2.  The  expression,  "  When 


CHAP,  in.]  MALACHI.  119 

I  make  up  My  jewels."  These  figurative  words  refer  to  the  care  and  attention 
of  the  jeweller  in  polishing  and  arranging  his  jewels,  so  as  to  make  them  appear  to 
the  best  advantage.  So  shall  it  be  with  the  redeemed — God's  jewels.  3.  The  time 
for  making  up  the  jewels  is  "  that  day."  Either  the  day  of  the  Christian's  death, 
or  the  day  of  final  judgment.  4.  God  says  of  His  people,  "  They  shall  be  Mine." 
Not  that  the  people  of  God  were  ever,  at  any  time,  vat  His.  The  expression  indicates 
some  special  sign  of  favour.  (Z).  Adams.)  Ood  and  good  men  : — I.  Good  men 
are  PEEcacous  to  God.  They  are  here  spoken  of  as  "  jewels."  They  are  precious 
as  loving  children  are  precious  to  their  parents.  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking 
child  ?  '  &c.  Precious.  He  knows — 1.  The  worth  of  their  existence.  2.  The 
cost  of  their  restoration.  3.  The  greatness  of  their  capabilities.  Great  as  God 
is,  a  really  true  man  is  precious  in  His  sight.  11.  Good  men  are  collected  by  God. 
"  In  that  day  when  I  make  up  My  jewels."  He  will  gather  them  together  one 
day  :  they  are  now  scattered  abroad.  By  death  He  brings  them  together  into 
a  glorious  social  state,  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem.  III.  Good  men  are  claimed  by 
God.  "  They  shall  be  Mine."  Thej'  shall  be  sure  to  love  Me  and  to  serve  the 
interests  of  My  creation — My  friends.  My  children,  &c.  {Homilist.)  My 
jewels  : — This  is  what  God  calls  His  people.  I.  Some  reasons  why  Christians 
ABB  LIKE  jewels.  1.  Because  jewels  are  very  beautiful.  God  never  made  any- 
thing that  looks  more  lovely  than  some  jewels  do.  Christians  are  beautiful,  but 
their  beauty  is  not  their  own.  When  they  learn  to  know  Jesus,  and  to  love 
and  serve  Him,  they  become  like  Him,  and  this  is  what  makes  them  beautiful. 
2.  Jewels  are  very  valuable.  Therefore  we  call  them  precious  stones.  3.  Jewels  are 
hard  to  polish.  The  men  who  polish  are  called  lapidaries,  from  the  Latin  lapis, 
a  stone.  There  are  specks  on  us  which  must  be  removed  by  polishing,  and  this 
is  always  hard  and  trying  work.  Chmrch  and  Sunday  school  may  be  regarded  as 
God's  polishing  shop.  (B.  Newton,  D.D.)  Divine  jewels  : — I.  The  dignity 
OF  THE  truly  GOOD.  If  we  are  His  people,  we  are  very  dear  to  God.  None  of 
us  can  rightly  estimate  His  wondrous  love.  God  loves  us  so  much  that  He  cannot 
do  without  us.  As  a  true-hearted  man  cares  for  his  bride,  so  the  Lord  likens  Him- 
self to  a  lover  who  graves  the  name  of  his  bride  upon  the  palm  of  his  hand.  Some 
people  are  afraid  this  wonderful  love  will  change  as  we  change.  No,  God's  love 
to  us  is  the  same  to-day  as  when  first  we  prayed.  The  Lord's  forbearance  and 
forgiveness  is  the  most  wonderful  of  His  attributes.  And  God  is  very  earnest  in 
seeking  His  jewels.  II.  The  certainty  of  the  future  glory  of  the  Lord's 
PEOPLE.  People  are  apt  to  imagine  that  because  time  moves  slowly  on,  as  if  with 
leaden  feet,  that  the  great  day  here  spoken  of  will  not  come.  But  it  is  sure  to 
come  to  every  one.  We  shall  siu-ely  see  the  King  of  kings  coming  to  judge  men 
on  the  earth.  { W.  Birch.)  Ood's  people  regarded  as  His  jewels  : — I.  The  people 
OF  God,  such  as  fear  Him,  are  His  jewels.  The  fear  of  God  is  often  put  for 
all  religion.  They  that  fear  Him  are  such  as  have  not  only  the  form,  but  the  power  of 
godliness.  Such  may  be  styled  "  jewels  "  as  rare,  and  comparatively  few :  on  account 
of  their  excellency  ;  by  reason  of  the  place  they  have  in  God's  value  and  esteem ; 
and  in  His  care :  as  He  esteems  Himself  honoured  by  them,  and  greatly  delights 
in  them.  God  caDs  them  "  My  jewels,"  as  He  is  the  efficient  or  maker  of  them: 
the  owner  and  disposer  of  them ;  and  as  they  are  set  apart  for  Himself.  II.  What 
IS  implied  in  "  MAKING  THEM  UP  "  ?  This  may  be  considered  with  reference  either 
to  their  being  at  present  dispersed  and  mixed  with  others,  or  imperfect  as  to  them- 
selves. It  may  mean  His  taking  them  out  from  the  company  of  all  others.  God 
will  collect  all  His  people  into  one  body.  Or  God's  making  them  up  may  imply, 
finishing  what  concerns  either  soul  or  body,  and  making  them  completely  happy, 
as  to  both,  to  all  eternity  He  will  free  them  from  all  the  imperfections  of  their 
present  state.  III.  There  is  a  day  coming  wherein  God  will  thus  make  up 
His  jewels.  L  The  day  of  the  saints'  dissolution.  2.  The  day  of  the  general 
resurrection.  IV.  How  they  selall  be  the  Lord's  in  that  day.  Then  they 
shall  be  proclaimed  to  be  jewels — 1.  To  testify  His  knowledge  and  approbation  of 
them.  2.  To  shame  and  silence  the  hard  censures  to  which  they  were  liable  from 
a  malignant  world.  3.  This  will  tend  to  the  greater  confusion  of  the  prince  of 
darkness.  4.  Such  a  declaration  will  invite  an  universal  regard  to  the  faithful- 
ness of  God,  in  what  He  promised  to  them,  and  engaged  to  do  for  them.     V.  Thb 

TITLE   UNDER   WHICH   GOD   IS   REPRESENTED   A3   RESOLVING   UPON   THE   HAPPINESS 

OF  His  people.  "  Saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  A  foimdation  of  hope  and  comfort. 
As  He  has  power  enough  to  engage  for  them.  As  He  hath  an  absolute  sway  over 
all  their  enemies.    It  shows  that  the  number  of  the  finally  saved  will  be  great. 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

not  small.  (D.  Wilcox.)  The  Lord^s  jewels: — The  verse  before  the  text  con- 
tains the  praise  of  a  little  company  of  Israelites  who,  in  the  midst  of  abounding 
iniquity,  feared  the  Lord,  and  thought  upon  His  name.  A  day  comes  when  all 
such  shall  be  known,  and  when  the  Lord  shall  make  up  His  jewels.  Are  jewels 
with  toil  and  danger  and  cost  torn  from  earth's  safe  keeping  ?  So  are  the  Lord's 
chosen  ones  redeemed  from  the  earth  by  the  precious  blood  of  God's  dear  Son. 
Are  they  procured  by  persevering  search  ?  So  the  Lord  left  heaven  and  came 
to  earth  to  seek  that  which  was  lost.  Are  jewels  gathered  from  all  lands  and  from 
the  isles  of  the  sea  ?  So  are  the  Lord's  chosen  people.  Do  jewels  of  earth  vary 
in  their  colour,  their  splendour,  theu-  worth  ?  So  are  there  among  the  Lord's 
people  diversities  of  gifts,  to  each  his  proper  place,  to  each  his  proper  talent,  to 
each  at  last  a  place  in  the  Savioiur's  diadem,  some  to  shine  with  meek  and  placid 
light,  some  with  stronger  and  deeper  brilliancy  ;  but  the  brightest  and  best  of  all 
the  fair  jewels  of  the  eternal  world  will  be  those  who  have  most  of  the  Saviour's 
image  in  them.  Jewels  are  safely  treasured,  carefully  deposited  in  the  secret 
casket  of  their  possessor,  to  be  brought  forth  on  the  festive  or  the  bridal  day,  and 
till  that  day  arrives  are  little  known  to  any  one  but  their  owner.  So  are  the  Lord's 
chosen  ones  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High.  But  in  the  day  when  the  Lord 
makes  up  His  jewels  each  shall  be  found  in  its  proper  setting,  each  shall  shine  with 
its  proper  lustre.  (\V.  H.  Perkins.)  God's  jewels: — More  closely  rendered, 
the  passage  is  "  They  shall  be  My  peculiar  treasure  in  the  day  I  am  preparing." 
For  one,  I  like  the  familiar  phraseology  in  our  common  version.  Christians  are 
Christ's  jewels.  They  are  purchased  by  atoning  blood  ;  at  an  infinite  price  was 
this  Divine  ownership  secured.  As  the  pearls  are  only  won  fiom  the  depths  of 
the  sea  by  the  dangerous  dive  of  the  fishers,  so  were  the  pearls  for  Messiah's  crown 
brought  up  from  the  miry  depths  of  depravity  by  the  descent  of  that  Divine  Sufferer 
who  came  "  to  seek  and  to  save  the  lost."  The  most  brilliant  and  precious  gem 
known  to  us  is  of  the  same  chemical  substance  as  the  black  and  opaque  coal  of  the 
\  mine.  Crystallisation  turns  the  carbon  into  the  diamond.  The  grace  of  the  Lord 
'  Jesus  transforms  an  opaque  soul^  as  black  by  nature  as  the  jet,  into  a  jewel  which 
reflects  the  glory  of  Christ's  countenance.  All  the  lustre  that  the  ripest  Clu-istian 
character  possesses  is  but  the  reflection  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  He  who 
lives  nearest  to  Jesus  shines  the  brightest.  The  tarnish  which  makes  some  Chris- 
tians no  more  sightly  than  a  common  pebble  of  the  mire,  comes  from  contact  with 
an  evil  world.  A  "  pearl  cast  before  swine  "  is  not  more  out  of  place  than  is  a 
professed  follower  of  Jesus  in  the  society  of  scoffers,  or  in  the  haunts  of  revelry. 
Not  all  precious  jewels  glitter  in  conspicuous  positions.  Tlie  Master  has  His  hidden 
ones  ;  there  are  costly  sapphires  beneath  coarse  raiment,  and  up  in  the  dingy  attio 
of  poverty.  That  self-denying  daughter  who  wears  out  her  youthful  years  in 
nmsing  a  poor  infirm  mother,  is  a  ruby  of  whom  the  Master  saith,  "  Thou  art  Mine 
in  the  day  when  I  gather  My  jewels."  (T.  C.  Cuyler.)  God's  estimate  of 
Christian  character : — I.  The  Christian  character  as  illustrated  by  the 
SIMILE  OF  the  text — "  Jewels."  This  is  suggestive — 1.  Of  the  beauty  of  that 
character.  God  delights  in  all  beauty,  but  most  of  all  in  that  moral  excellence 
which  adorns  HJs  people.  Let  us  seek  to  realise  this  perfection.  Flaws  in  jewels 
greatly  depreciate  their  value  and  mar  their  beauty ;  so  do  faults  in  Christians. 
2.  Of  the  strength  of  that  character.  Jewels  are  not  easily  broken,  do  not  wear, 
do  not  fade.  The  reUgion  of  true  Christians  is  not  a  fancy  or  a  fashion,  but  a 
principle,  habit,  power.  Tried  by  sorrow,  sickness,  temptation,  persecution, 
it  jrields  not.  3.  Of  the  preciousness  of  that  character.  Jewels  are  of  exceeding 
value,  so  are  God's  people.  They  are  precious  in  their  influence  upon  society, 
and  society  sometimes  knows  it.  The  saints  are  ever  precious  to  God.  Who 
shall  tell  how  much  He  loves  His  people  ?  II.  Let  us  observe  in  what  sense 
THE  SAINTS  ARE  CALLED  THE  Lord's  JEWELS.  "  My  jcwels."  1.  Because  by  Him 
they  were  rescued  from  a  condition  of  impurity  and  darkness.  A  jewel  may  well 
be  called  his  who  risked  his  life  to  secure  it.  2.  Because  to  Him  they  owe  their 
purity  and  glory.  True  saints  feel  that  Christ  has  washed  and  perfected  them, 
and  they  rejoice  to  give  Him  all  the  glory.  3.  Because  to  Him  they  owe  their 
protection  and  security.  God  takes  care  of  His  jewels  (Job  i.  10).  "  I  give  imto 
them  eternal  Ufe,  and  none  shall  pluck  them  out  of  My  hands."  III.  The  futubb 
glory  and  distinction  of  THE  RIGHTEOUS.  "They  shall  be  Mine."  \.  They 
shall  be  His  confessedly.  Now  we  return,  and  cannot  discern  between  him  that 
eerveth  God  and  him  that  serveth  Him  not,  but  God  shall  then  acknowledge  us 
openly.     He  shall  take  the  gem  that  may  have  been  comited  a  mere  ofiscouring. 


CHAP,  in.]  MALACHI.  121 

and  set  it  in  His  crown.  2.  They  shall  be  His  unitedly.  "  Make  up."  God's 
people  are  scattered  now,  but  then  they  shall  be  gathered  together.  3.  They  shall 
be  His  everlastingly.  "  Made  up."  All  trial  over,  and  their  state  for  ever  settled 
in  heaven.  (IF.  L.  Watkinson.)  The  Redeemer'' s  jewels: — Little  or  nothing  is 
known  historically  of  the  prophet  Malachi.  The  time,  the  place,  the  circumstances 
of  his  birth  are  all  imknown.  We  know  nothing  of  his  ancestors  and  nothing  of 
his  descendants,  if  he  had  any.  Like  a  meteor  he  starts  up  suddenly  in  the  horizon 
of  the  Chvu"ch,  and  after  running  a  brief  career  of  exceeding  brightness  he  dis- 
appears as  suddenly,  leaving  no  trace  behind  except  the  few  pages  of  thrilhng 
prophecy  with  which  the  Old  Testament  closes.  His  name  signifies  the  messenger 
of  Jehovah.  It  waa  a  period  of  fearful  religious  degeneracy.  But  not  all  of  the 
captives  who  returned  from  Babylon  had  corrupted  themselves  ;  there  were  some 
noble  exceptions ;  a  remnant  was  preserved,  a  few  remained  faithful  to  their 
covenant  with  Jehovah.  To  this  faithful  remnant  ova  text  refers.  I.  The  Jewels. 
Where  shall  we  search  for  them  ?  Not  above  in  the  garnished  heaven  of  sparkling 
worlds ;  not  below  in  the  mines  of  hidden  wealth  of  gold  and  silver,  where  men 
toil  hard  and  long  to  gain  what  they  deem  precious  ;  not  where  the  topaz,  the 
coral,  and  the  diamond  sparkle  ;  not  in  our  national  galleries  thronged  with  rare 
products  of  nature  and  art;  not  in  the  museums,  with  their  vast  collection  of 
valuable  antiquities ;  not  in  the  wardrobes  and  chests  where  the  rich  and  noble 
lock  up  their  lustrous  gems  and  jewels,  to  be  seen  and  worn  only  on  high  festivals. 
Not  there  must  we  look  for  Jehovah's  precious  treasures.  We  must  look  for 
them  in  souls  that  have  put  on  Christ,  men  who  have  become  partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature,  who  have  been  created  anew  after  the  image  of  His  Son.  God 
estimates  men  not  by  their  physical  structiure,  not  by  their  mental  qualities, 
not  by  their  learning  or  wealth,  but  by  their  harmony  or  disharmony  with  His  will, 
by  their  sympathy  or  want  of  sympathy  with  Hjs  character  and  authority,  by 
their  dominant  thoughts  and  feehngs  concerning  Himself.  "  They  feared  the 
Lord  " — not  that  guilty  tormenting  fear  which  drives  man  away  from  God, 
that  shudders  with  remorse  in  Has  presence,  that  trembles  beneath  His  fi'own, 
but  that  holy  fear  which  reverently  approaches  God,  that  devoutly  yearns  for 
His  felIo\vsl)ip,  and  yet  is  awed  by  a  sense  of  His  nearness,  that  fear  which  covets 
His  favour,  and  whose  highest  heaven  is  to  hve  in  the  hght  of  His  approval,  that 
fear  which  remembers  His  covenant  and  submits  to  His  kingly  authority.  "  They 
thought  upon  His  Name."  Twice  He  had  revealed  that  Name  to  their  fathers ; 
once  to  Moses  as  the  "  I  Am,"  and  once  to  Abraham  as  "  I  am  God  All-sufficient." 
To  Moses  He  proclaimed  what  He  is  in  Himself,  the  "  I  Am,"  the  Self-contained, 
the  Self-Existent,  the  Absolute,  the  Source  of  hfe  and  being.  To  Abraham  He 
proclaimed  what  He  is  to  His  people,  "  God  All-sufficient."  The  All-satisfying 
portion,  the  All  in  All.  This  Great  Name  was  ever  in  the  thought  of  the  faithful 
remnant ;  they  pondered  over  it  as  revealed  to  their  fathers ;  they  gloried  in 
its  infinite  superiority  to  the  gods  of  the  heathen.  "  They  spake  often  one  to 
another."  They  not  only  thought  about  God  in  sohtude  and  silence,  but  they 
cheered  and  strengthened  one  another  in  evil  times  by  rehearsing  together  the 
wonderful  things  which  God  had  done  for  them  and  for  their  fathers.  It  weis  no 
empty  idle  talk  ;  it  was  so  good  that  Jehovah  hearkened  and  heard.  II.  The 
COUNTING  up  of  His  jewels.  The  text  impUes  that  a  period  is  coming  when  the 
Lord  of  hosts  will  make  up  or  count  up  His  jewels.  But  why  number  them  ? 
1.  That  the  Redeemer  may  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  how  many.  Of  all 
the  works  of  God,  the  great  redemption  by  Christ  is  the  greatest  and  costhest. 
He  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power.  But  He  cannot  redeem  a  lost 
race  by  a  word  of  command  or  a  fiat  of  His  will.  To  redeem  will  cost  Him  an 
effort,  a  sacrifice,  even  the  greatest  sacrifice  that  God  can  make.  On  earth,  under 
the  pressure  of  an  infinite  sorrow.  He  was  cheered  by  a  ghmpse  of  His  future  reward. 
For  the  joy  set  before  Him  He  endured  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame.  He  shall 
see  His  seed,  a  holy  multitude  which  no  man  can  number,  and  as  He  svirveys  them 
He  will  rejoice  in  them  as  witnesses  that  He  has  not  laboured  in  vain.  2.  He 
will  count  His  jewels,  that  the  intelligent  universe  may  know  how  many,  that 
Jesus  Christ  may  give  to  hell  as  well  as  heaven,  to  demons  as  well  as  holy  angels, 
to  the  lost  as  well  as  to  the  saved,  evidence  that  redemption  has  not  been  a  failure, 
but  a  complete  success,  a  splendid  triumph.  When  He  makes  up  His  jewels  it 
wiU  be  found  that  there  are  more  men  in  heaven  than  in  hell.  Jesus  will  have  the 
majority.  The  minority  would  scarcely  satisfy  the  great  heart  of  Him  who  en- 
dured the  Gethsemane  agony  and  the  shameful  death  of  the  Cross.     3.  That  Jesua 


122  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

Christ  may  be  assured  that  all  the  faithful  are  there,  and  that  not  one  is  wanting. 
The  King  whom  the  saints  serve  has  His  book  of  chronicles  where  the  name  of  every 
faithful  one  and  all  his  noble  deeds  are  minutely  recorded  (Esther  vi.  1-3).  We 
find  frequent  allusions  to  this  book  of  records  in  the  Scriptures  (Psa.  Ivi.  8 ;  Heb. 
vi.  10 ;  Rev.  iii.  5 ;  Luke  x.  20).  When  the  Lord  of  hosts  makes  up  His  jewels 
there  will  be  something  analogous  to  the  calling  of  the  roll.  Jesus  Christ  has 
covenanted  with  the  Father  that  He  will  keep  all  those  committed  to  Him.  There 
must  be  no  ground  for  the  Father  in  that  day  to  charge  the  Son  with  unfaithfulness, 
with  having  lost  one  through  inability  or  neglect.  Jesus  Christ  has  also  covenanted 
with  us  that  whosoever  belie veth  in  Him  shall  not  peiish  but  have  eternal  life. 
There  must  be  no  room  in  that  day  for  a  single  soul  to  say,  I  believed  in  His  Name, 
and  yet  He  has  not  saved  me.  III.  The  exhibition  of  His  jewels.  Having 
called  the  roll  and  ascertained  that  all  the  faithful  ones  are  there,  He  will  exhibit 
them,  hold  them  up  as  His  most  magnificent  trophies.  His  greatest,  noblest  work. 
Some  of  us  are  old  enough  to  remember  the  first  Great  Exhibition  of  the  Industries 
of  all  Nations  in  1851.  On  the  first  entering  that  "  Palace  of  all  Nations  "  how 
impressive,  how  overwhelming  the  scene  !  We  have  had  similar  exhibitions  since 
in  Paris,  Chicago,  and  elsewhere.  Jesus  Christ  is  going  to  have  the  greatest 
exhibition  the  imi verse  has  ever  kno^^'n.  Throughout  the  centuries  He  has  been 
preparing  for  it.  In  China,  India,  and  Japan,  on  the  continents  of  Europe,  Africa, 
America,  and  Austraha,  in  the  islands  of  the  sea,  in  northern  latitudes  among 
the  Esquimaux  and  Laplanders,  God's  agents  are  building  up  characters  and 
beautifying  souls  for  the  great  exhibit.  All  nations  will  be  represented  in  that 
vast  gathering.  On  the  Cross  He  made  a  public  exhibition  of  the  enemies  He 
conquered.  Having  spoiled  principaHties  and  powers.  He  made  a  show  of  them 
openly."  But  when  He  comes  on  Has  throne  of  judgment  He  will  exhibit  His 
friends,  make  a  show  of  them  openly,  that  the  intelligent  imiverse  may  behold 
and  admire  His  workmanship  in  the  innumerable  multitude  He  has  saved  and 
sanctified,  the  jewels  He  has  burnished  and  made  to  flash  with  the  beauty  of  God. 
There  are  the  children  of  sorrow  and  afiiictious  on  whom  God  has  employed  the 
chisel,  the  hammer,  and  the  file  to  beautify  and  glorify  them.  MilHons  more  of 
all  chmates  and  coimtries,  of  all  nations  and  ages,  will  be  there.  Their  names 
may  not  be  registered  in  the  chronicles  of  earth,  or  carved  in  endiu-in^  marble, 
but  they  are  written  in  the  chronicles  of  the  King  of  saints,  and  He  will  publish 
them  in  high  places  in  the  hearing  of  the  principalities  and  powers  in  that  day 
when  He  makes  up  His  jewels.  IV.  The  aitropriating  of  them.  "  They  are 
Mine."  Under  Roman  law  when  a  man  received  into  his  family  a  stranger  and 
adopted  him  as  a  son  two  ceremonies  were  necessary ;  the  one  domestic  the  other 
legal,  the  one  private  the  other  pubUc.  The  ceremony  of  adoption  was  first 
observed  in  the  family,  where  the  stranger  was  formally  received  and  acknowledged 
as  son  in  the  presence  of  the  entire  household.  But  in  order  to  make  the  new 
relation  between  the  adopting  father  and  the  adopted  son  legal,  the  ceremony  must 
also  be  observed  publicly  in  the  presence  of  civil  authorities  and  witnesses.  The 
saints  here  on  earth  are  brought  into  the  family  of  God,  become  members  of  the 
household  of  faith,  receive  the  Spirit  of  adoption  whereby  they  cry  Abba,  Father. 
This  adoption  is  private ;  the  knowledge  of  it  is  limited  at  first  to  God  and  the 
adopted  behever.  Afterwards  it  becomes  known  only  to  a  limited  circle  of  kindred 
spirits,  to  whom  the  adopted  may  communicate  the  joyful  fact.  It  is  not  an 
event  that  the  world  cares  to  hear,  or  that  awakens  interest  in  any  beyond  the 
select  few.  But  our  text  points  to  a  period  when  there  will  be  a  public  recognition 
of  them  as  the  sons  of  God.  "  In  that  day."  This  will  not  take  place  in  this  fife, 
not  at  death,  and  not  on  the  entrance  of  each  soul  into  the  heavenly  world,  but 
at  the  general  resurrection.  Until  then  only  a  fragment  of  the  saintly  nature  will 
be  glorified.  The  Old  Testament  saints  are  not  to  be  perfected  without  us  or 
before  us ;  the  New  Testament  saints  are  not  to  be  perfected  before  the  saints 
of  the  Old  Covenant :  we  are  to  be  perfected  together.  Abel,  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Joseph,  Noah,  Moses,  &c.,  will  not  be  made  perfect  without  us.  See  how  changed, 
how  transfigured  they  all  are,  how  old  things  have  passed  away  and  all  things  have 
become  new ;  they  owe  it  all  to  Me  and  to  My  dying  love,  therefore  they  are  all 
Mine.  To-day  they  are  to  be  crowned  kings  for  ever.  (Richard  Roberts.) 
Touchstones  of  character  .-—Cornelia's  noble  answer  to  the  haughty  princess  who, 
on  one  occasion,  visited  her,  is  worthy  of  remembrance.  Proudly  displaying 
her  own  flashing  jewels,  her  royal  guest  said,  "  And  where  are  yours  7  ^  upon 
which  the  mother  of  the  Gracchi,  as  proudly  caUing  her  children,  said,  "  Theae 


OHAP.  in.]  MALACHI.  123 

are  my  jewels."  And  He  who  sits  upon  the  sapphire  throne,  and  has  round  about 
Him  a  rainbow  like  unto  an  emerald,  and  who  created  all  earth's  riches  for  His 
own  pleasvu*e,  yet  places  the  highest  value  on  the  humble  man,  who,  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus,  becomes  a  son  of  God.  1.  Jewels  are  rare.  In  comparison  with 
common  stones  there  are  very  few  of  them.  De  la  Bruyer^  says,  "  Next  to  sound 
judgment,  diamonds  and  pearls  are  the  rarest  things  to  be  met  with."  But 
rarer  still  are  the  true  children  of  God.  Not  one  man  in  fifty  the  world  over  is  a  true 
Christian.  As,  after  all  the  search  of  the  ages,  there  are  not  now  more  than  one 
hundred  great  diamonds — a  very  small  number  when  we  think  of  the  efforts 
put  forth  to  discover  them — so  those  who  live  the  life  more  abimdant  are  still 
in  a  very  meagre  minority.  2.  For  jewels  are  precious.  "  The  richest  merchandise 
of  all,"  says  Pliny,  "  and  the  most  sovereign  commodity  throughout  the  world, 
are  these  pearls."  In  recent  days,  for  the  Arabian  Pearl,  £140,000  was  offered 
and  refused  :  and  almost  fabulous  sums  have  been  paid  even  for  one  precious  stone. 
After  the  pearl,  the  ruby  is  far  and  away  the  most  valuable,  in  proportion  to  its 
size  ;  but  never  being  foimd  except  in  comparatively  small  fragments,  has  not  had 
that  halo  of  romance  associated  with  it  which  has  surrounded  some  diamonds. 
For  instance,  the  Great  Mogul  Diamond,  that  "  meteor  amongst  gems,"  which 
was  lost  in  the  Tartar  invasion,  was  valued  at  £600,000 ;  the  Regent  of  Portugal 
is  worth  £400,000;  the  Orloff,  £370,000;  the  Matan  of  Borneo,  £269,000;  the 
Koh-i-Noor,  £140,000 ;  while  from  Africa  alone  there  come  diamonds  to  the 
value  of  £5,000,000  each  year.  In  the  light  of  these  things  let  us  ponder  the 
value  God  sets  upon  His  chosen.  Nothing  is  so  excellent  in  the  eyes  of  men  but 
God  compares  His  people  to  it.  As  precious  stones  are  the  aristocracy  of  minerals. 
Christians  are  the  aristocracy  of  men.  2.  Jewels,  moreover,  are  pure.  This, 
indeed,  is  the  chief  part  of  their  value ;  for  the  degree  of  impurity  in  any  stone 
is  just  the  measure  of  its  depreciation.  The  initial  act  of  their  formation  ia 
separation.  Keep  thyself  pure,  thou  child  of  God.  4.  And  jewels  are  brilliant. 
The  only  difference  between  a  black  object  and  a  brilliant  one,  say  between  a 
coal  and  a  diamond,  is  in  their  disposal  of  light.  The  one  receives  the  light,  sucks 
it  up,  and  selfishly  keeps  it.  It  thus  becomes  black.  The  other  receives  the  light, 
but  to  reflect  it  back  again  from  a  hundred  facets.  This  is  the  brilliant.  And 
the  worldly  man,  receiving  the  blessing  of  God,  which  He  sends  upon  the  just  and 
the  unjust,  seeks  not  the  glory  of  the  Great  Giver ;  while  the  true  child  of  God, 
getting  greater  grace,  finds  his  chief  end  in  glorifying  God  and  enjoying  Him  for 
ever.  "  This  people,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  I  have  formed  for  Myself ;  they  shall 
shew  forth  My  praise."  Sometimes  we  hear  of  a  diamond  shining  in  its  own 
lustre,  which  is  very  considerable  nonsense,  for  a  diamond  has  no  lustre  of  its 
own  in  which  to  shine.  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  there  are  a  few — a  very  few — 
diamonds  which  are  phosphorescent  for  a  httle  while  in  the  dark ;  but  even  this 
cannot  be  called  the  inherent  quality  of  the  diamond ;  while  the  vast  proportion 
of  both  diamonds  and  other  jewels  only  flash  forth  in  the  "  infallible  lustre  of 
crystalline  beauty  "  when  the  light  shines  upon  them.  And  though  for  many 
years  it  was  thought  that  iridescence  resided  in  the  pearl.  Sir  David  Brewster  has 
clearly  shown  that  the  deUcate  striations  on  the  pearl's  surface  are  the  sole  cause 
of  its  radiance.  Here  the  analogy  hes  close  at  hand.  No  light  have  we,  and  no 
brilliance,  no  lustre  and  no  grace,  until  we  come  into  the  hght  of  the  Lord.  6.  And 
with  brilUance  there  is  beauty.  That  is  to  say,  in  addition  to  the  beauty  of 
brilhance,  there  is  the  beauty  of  colour  and  form.  Let  the  beauty  of  oiu*  God  be 
upon  us,  0  Lord,  let  the  beauty  of  our  God  be  upon  us  !  6.  Jewels  are  durable. 
In  a  standard  work  this  definition  is  given  :  "  A  gem  is  a  real  possession  capable 
of  affording  pleasure  to  the  wearer  and  spectator,  and  retaining  an  intrinsic  and 
marketable  value,  imdiminished  by  the  lapse  of  time."  Diamonds  outlast 
dynasties,  and  seem  as  if  nothing  will  impair  their  lustre.  So  gems,  and  not  dew- 
drops,  are  chosen  to  represent  the  righteous  who  still  hold  on  their  way.  7.  The 
seventh  quahty  of  perfection  in  jewels  is  that  they  are  useful.  They  are  used 
for  boring  through  the  rock ;  for  cutting  glass  ;  for  setting  pivots  ;  for  pointing 
watches.  But  when  thus  working  their  beauty  is  hidden,  while  it  is  the  triumph 
of  a  Christian  to  be  most  beautiful  when  most  useful.  [W.  Y.  Fvllerton.) 
Christians  rarely  combine  all  excellencies  : — It  is  a  rare  thing  for  a  Christian,  as 
it  is  for  a  gem,  to  combine  all  excellent  qualities.  Few  jewels  have  more  than 
two  or  three  marks  of  distinction.  If  large  they  are  lacking  in  lustre ;  if  pure 
they  are  probably  small ;  if  well-coloiu'ed  they  may  be  of  an  awkward  shape  ; 
if  beautifully  formed  may  not  be  very  heavy.     Perfection  in  precious  stones  ia 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  tcHAP.  m. 

almost  unknown,  and  there  are  flaws  even  in  the  lives  of  the  best  Christians. 
(Ibid.)  Varieties  of  Christian  character  : — And  if  there  are  different  shapes  in 
gems,  there  are  various  forms  of  Christian  life  and  development.  And  if  there  are 
different  colours  in  gems,  there  aj-e  also  varieties  in  the  attainments  exhibited 
in  personal  conduct.  Each  Christian  has  his  own  place  and  power,  and  all  exhibit 
the  manifoldness  of  the  grace  of  God.  The  gentle,  tender  beUevers  having  the 
graces  of  the  Spirit  most  fully  developed,  are  hke  the  pearl ;  and  you  will  remember 
that  it  is  the  pearls  which  get  the  place  of  honoiu:  at  the  entrance  to  the  New 
Jerusalem  ;  most  valuable  and  most  perfect,  others  enter  by  them.  The  enthu- 
Biastic  disciples,  full-blooded  in  their  aggressive  eagerness,  are  like  the  blushing 
ruby ;  while  some  live  so  far  above  earth  and  earthly  things,  and  so  near  the  sky 
that  they  resemble  the  deep  velvety  sapphire,  "  that  stone  like  solid  heaven  in 
its  blueness."  Others  with  spiritual  insight,  the  seers  of  the  Church,  are  akin  to 
the  most  costly  chrysoberyl  or  cat's-eye,  with  its  beautiful  moving  Une  of  light ; 
while  the  diamond,  "  fair  as  the  star  which  ushers  in  the  morn,"  is  the  apt  emblem 
of  those  who  have  clear  and  definite  views  of  truth.  Men  with  a  fresh  and  constant 
Divine  hfe  are  represented  by  the  emerald,  with  its  soft,  clear  green  ;  and  the 
royal  magnificence  of  exalted  Christian  character  by  the  purple  amethyst.  Where 
there  is  the  rapture  of  intimate  commimion  with  God,  we  think  of  the  golden 
jafiper  ;  and  of  the  opal,  "  which  hath  in  it  the  bright,  fiery  flame  of  the  carbuncle, 
the  fine  refulgent  purple  of  the  amethyst,  and  a  whole  sea  of  the  emerald's  green 
glory,  and  every  one  of  them  shining  with  an  incredible  mixture,  and  with  much 
pleasure,"  where  there  is  the  fully  developed  manhood  of  faith.  While  for  sim- 
plicity, the  onyx  ;  and  for  solidity,  the  agate  is  the  natural  symbol.  And  if 
deficient  in  aU  these  characteristics,  there  is  still  the  long  list  of  unmentioned 
jewels,  where,  without  doubt,  every  true  heart  may  find  a  place.  It  may  be 
the  blue  lapis-lazuli,  so  much  used  in  Italian  churches ;  or  the  green  malachite, 
eo  often  met  with  in  Russia ;  or  the  tiurquoise,  which  finds  its  home  in  Persia ; 
or  the  chrysohte,  now  called  peridot ;  or  the  bloodstone,  or  jade,  or  tourmaline, 
or  hyacinth,  or  cairngorm,  or  coral,  or  crystal,  or  any  other  of  the  score  still 
unnamed.  Natural  temperament  very  often  determines  the  fine  of  Christian 
development.  A  man  with  a  deUcate  constitution  is  most  hkely  to  display  the 
gentle  side  of  Christianity ;  while  the  strong  and  vigorous,  other  things  being 
equal,  should  be  most  energetic  and  enthusiastic.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  18.  And  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked. — The  characters 
of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  contrasted  : — The  time  alluded  to  by  the  prophet 
appears  to  be  the  awful  day  of  judgment.  Then  shall  ye  return,  says  he,  or 
be  converted  to  a  full  sense  of  your  neglected  duty  and  your  past  transgres- 
sions. The  delusions  of  folly  and  self-love  shall  be  removed  ;  conscience  shall 
then  no  longer  be  blinded  by  the  corruption  of  reason,  or  overpowered  by  the 
violence  of  the  passions ;  but  vice  shall  appear  in  all  its  depravity ;  guilt  shall 
be  attended  with  all  its  terrors  and  remorse  ;  and  you  "  shall  discern  the  striking 
contrast  between  the  state  of  him  that  serveth  God,  and  him  that  scrveth  Him 
not."  Without  presuming  to  enter  upon  any  imaginary  description  of  the 
difference  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  in  that  future  and  invisible 
world  to  which  we  are  all  hastening,  permit  me  to  state  some  of  the  principal 
distinctions  between  "  him  that  serveth  God,  and  him  that  serveth  Him  not," 
here,  in  this  present  life.  Consider  the  superiority  of  the  pious,  in  their  intel- 
lectual powers,  as  well  as  in  the  good  qualities  and  virtuous  endowments  of 
the  mind.  By  the  "  pious  "  understand  only  those  who  admit,  with  grateful 
adoration,  the  glorious  truths  of  revealed  religion,  and  who  endeavour  to  fulfil 
the  duties  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  from  a  steadfast  belief  in  its  holy  sanctions. 
1.  The  man  who  serves  God  may  be  said  to  possess  a  steady,  elevated,  and  com- 
prehensive mind.  His  belief  is  a  strong  and  lively  faith,  implanted  in  early 
youth,  founded  on  the  first  elements  of  reason,  cheri.shed  from  inclination,  and 
deriving  force  from  the  influence  of  sentiment  and  the  energy  of  the  passions. 
He  receives  also  that  Divine  revelation  which  graciously  instructs  him  in  the 
ways  of  His  providence  ;  enjoins  his  duty  under  various  forms,  and  prescribes 
the  reward  of  his  due  obedience.  2.  The  pious  man,  by  frequent  meditations 
on  the  Almighty  Father,  shows  a  natural  relish  for  grandeur  and  sublimity. 
The  mere  worldling  finds  his  little  passions,  his  low  thoughts  and  grovelling 
desires  completely  occupied  with  the  pleasures  and  enjoyments  which  this  present 
world  affords.     If  he  claim  any  pretensions  to  what  is  called  a  tastfe  for  the 


CHAP,  m.]  MALACHI.  125 

sublime  and  beautiful,  it  is  confined  chiefly  to  the  productions  of  art.  At  most, 
he  admires  only  parts,  not  a  whole  ;  and  looks  with  wonder  at  the  mere  creature, 
without  raising  his  thoughts  to  the  great  Creator.  The  truly  religious  man  is 
the  very  reverse  of  this.  He  can  retire,  as  it  were,  within  his  own  bosom,  as 
into  a  sanctuary,  and  converse  with  Grod.  Every  species  of  excellence  is  admired 
in  proportion  as  it  approaches  His  wisdom.  His  goodness,  or  His  power.  3.  By 
"  lifting  up  our  hearts  unto  the  Lord  "  in  the  fervour  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving 
it  is  impossible  not  to  enjoy  the  highest  sensibility  of  which  the  human  soul  is 
capable  ; — a  sensibility  very  unlike  the  sickly  offspring  of  a  "  worldly  sorrow." 
The  sensibility  cherished  by  an  habitual  intercourse  with  God,  purifies  and 
ennobles  the  mind.  4.  Akin  to  this  intellectual  enjoyment,  is  lively  and  impres- 
sive gratitude.  It  concerns  both  Divine  and  human  obligations.  5.  A  constant 
sense  of  the  benefits  which  he  receives  from  God,  prompts  the  pious  man  to 
imitate  the  Divine  love,  within  the  small  circle  of  his  power  and  abiUties.  Equally 
active  is  this  Divine  principle  in  promoting  peace,  in  teaching  forbearance,  and 
in  the  forgiveness  of  injuries.  6.  None  but  the  pious  man  can  have  a  proper 
sense  of  the  dignity  of  his  nature.  Whatever  the  condition  allotted  to  us  here, 
however  humble  and  dependent,  we  know  that  not  all  the  world  can  estrange 
us  from  our  Maker,  or  banish  us  from  the  presence  of  God.  And  nothing  but 
sin  can  render  the  sense  of  this  Divine  presence  afflicting,  or  leave  us,  in  our 
sufferings,  comfortless  or  degraded.  7.  He  who  serves  God  with  truth  and 
fidelity  will  be  endowed  with  a  larger  portion  of  fortitude  than  he  who  serveth 
Him  not.  It  was  proper  that  a  life  of  discipline  should  abound  with  difficulties 
and  dangers,  temptations  and  calamities.  They  are  the  appointed  measures  of 
our  virtue  and  obedience,  and  they  form  our  spiritual  warfare  with  the  world. 
The  pious  man  ever  regards  them  as  the  means  of  improvement  in  righteous- 
ness and  true  holiness  ;  as  such,  he  submits  to  them  with  patience  and  resigna- 
tion. Full  of  trust  and  confidence  in  the  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness,  he  learns 
"  to  suffer  as  a  good  soldier  of  Christ."  If  we  take,  therefore,  from  human  life 
this  grand  principle  of  action — a  principle  that  equally  influences  our  hopes 
and  fears — that  gives  steadiness  of  conduct,  and  fortitude  of  resolution  in  every 
situation,  and  that  combines  itself  with  all  our  nobler  passions  ;  is  it  not  easy 
to  perceive  that  we  destroy  the  strongest  support  of  moral  duty,  that  we  diminish 
the  worth  of  every  virtue,  and  poison  the  purest  source  of  happiness  in  the  human 
heart !  Contrast,  in  conclusion,  these  two  characters  in  the  text,  on  the  bed 
of  sickness,  and  in  the  hour  of  death.  (J.  Hewlett,  B.A.)  Two  classes: — 
I.  Thekb  arb  two  gebat  classes  into  which  the  whole  human  race  may 
BE  divided.  1.  They  are  distinguished  by  their  state.  2.  They  are  distinguished 
by  their  character.  II.  These  two  classes  are  now  so  intermixed  as  to 
OBSCURE  THE  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  THEM.  1.  They  are  intermingled  in  the 
family  circle.  2.  They  are  intermingled  in  the  arrangements  of  civil  society. 
3.  They  are  intermingled  in  the  house  of  God.  4.  They  are  intermingled  in  the 
membership  of  the  Church.     III.  There  is  a  period  when  the  distinction 

BETWEEN    THESE    TWO    CLASSES    SHALL    BE    RENDERED    VISIBLE.       1.     The    seasOU 

of  temporal  calamity.  2.  The  day  of  judgment.  3.  Eternity.  {G.  Brooks.) 
The  obliteration  of  moral  distinctions  : — It  is  a  sad  state  of  society  when  the  faculty 
of  moral  discrimination  is  blunted.  The  minor  prophets  were  appointed  to 
rebuke  just  such  religious  degeneracy.  1.  One  sign  of  the  practical  oblitera- 
tion of  these  vital  distinctions  may  be  seen  in  the  prevailing  depreciation  of 
sound  doctrine.  Men  try  to  mix  truth  with  error,  as  though  they  were  not 
inherently  different.  To  depreciate  the  importance  of  discovering  and  embrac- 
ing the  truth  undermines,  also,  the  true  basis  of  morals.  Sincere  convictions 
may  thus  be  urged  to  justify  crime,  as  the  Spartans  upheld  secret  theft,  and  David 
Hume  secret  adultery.  2.  Another  sign  is  found  in  the  practical  association 
of  those  that  serve  (Jod  and  those  that  serve  Him  not.  God  decrees  separa- 
tion as  the  means  of  expressing  and  impressing  these  vital  distinctions.  (1)  Many 
beUevers  are  only  secret  disciples.  Their  very  success  in  practising  Christian 
virtues  is  disastrous,  fostering  self-righteous  hopes  in  worldly  hearts,  and  leading 
men  to  confuse  worldly  morality  with  genuine  piety.  (2)  Another  thing  which 
contributes  to  the  confusion  of  godly  and  ungodly,  is  the  fact,  that  many  worldly 
men  are  professed  disciples.  Secret  believers  make  the  world  seem  more  godly ; 
imregenerate  professors  make  the  Church  seem  more  worldly,  and  so  there  ia 
double  confusion.  (3)  Whatever  relaxes  the  demand  for  godliness  of  character, 
lowers  the  standard  of  piety,  and  so  lessens  the  contrast  between  righteous  and 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Avicked.  Besides  secular  influences,  there  are  many  ecclesiastic  tendencies 
hostile  to  holy  living.  Ritualism  furnishes  one  example.  But  the  lack  of  holi- 
ness of  heart  is  the  main  cause  of  the  shght  contrast  between  the  servants  of 
God  and  of  mammon.  Most  earnestly,  therefore,  do  we  plead  in  God's  name,  for 
practical  separation  between  the  godly  and  the  imgodly.  (Arthur  T.  Pierson, 
D.D.)  Balaam  and  Saul,  or  consistent  wickedness  and  inconsistent  profession: 
— It  is  wonderful  to  remark  the  numberless  shades  of  character  among  wicked 
men  :  the  various  modes  and  ways  which  they  have  of  acting  against  God.  The 
character  of  Balaam  was  that  of  a  very  sinful  man,  in  his  mode  of  offending  God. 
Strikingly  different  to  him,  yet  equally  offending  God,  is  the  character  of  Saul, 
King  of  Israel.  The  fact  of  a  man's  being  raised  up  to  bring  about  a  certain 
end,  does  not  excuse  him  in  acting  wrongly,  if,  to  gain  that  end,  he  does  act 
wickedly.  We  do  not  know  now  what  God  intends  about  us  ;  yet  we  do  know 
we  can  act  rightly  if  we  like,  with  God's  grace.  For  instance,  Pharaoh's  con- 
duct was  doubtless  overruled  for  good — to  show  forth  His  power.  Still,  Pharaoh 
acted  calmly  and  coolly ;  he  might  have  acted  rightly  if  he  liked.  He  was 
hardened  because  he  neglected  opportunities.  In  finding  fault  with  Saul  persons 
might  say  he  could  not  help  it.  He  was  appointed  for  a  punishment.  1.  The 
announcement  of  Saul's  being  elevated  to  the  throne  of  Israel  came  upon  him 
suddenly  ;  but  seemingly  without  unsettUng  him.  2.  Saul  was  not  wanting  in 
generosity  and  a  feeling  of  gratitude.  He  was  calm,  high-minded,  generous, 
and  candid.  A  brave  man  he  was  without  doubt.  But  take  a  deeper  insight 
into  Saul's  character,  and  we  shall  find  those  deficiencies  which  he  certainly 
had.  The  first  duty  of  every  man  is  the  fear  of  God,  a  reverence  for  His  Word, 
a  love  towards  Him,  a  desire  to  obey  Him,  and  all  this  would  be  most  peculiarly 
the  duty  of  the  liing  of  Israel.  Saul  "  lacked  this  one  thing."  He  was  never 
under  an  abiding  sense  of  religion,  or  what  Scripture  calls  "  the  fear  of  God," 
however  much  he  was  sometimes  softened  and  touched.  His  imbelief  and  fear- 
lessness of  God  seem  to  have  been  shown  by  a  contempt  alike  for  prophet  and 
priest.  The  immediate  cause  of  his  rejection  was  his  impatience  at  the  arrival 
of  Samuel,  and  his  own  offering  up  of  the  sacrifice.  He  rejected  Samuel,  and 
had  recourse  to  others  instead.  There  was  no  profaneness,  nor  intentional 
irreverence  in  Saul's  conduct.  He  finished  his  sad  history  by  an  open  act  of 
apostasy  from  God  :  in  consulting  the  witch  of  Endor.  Unbelief  and  wilful- 
ness are  ever  deaf  to  the  plainest  commands,  and  produce  a  heart  hardened 
against  the  most  gracious  influences.  Balaam  offers  a  singular  contrast  with 
Saul.  The  leading  difference  was  :  the  one  was  under  a  strong,  abiding  sense 
and  influence  of  religion  and  the  fear  of  God  ;  the  other  not.  The  one  trembled 
before  a  God  he  was  forced  to  confess  ;  the  other  appeared  to  respect  a  Deity 
whom  in  heart  he  despised.  Balaam  knew  what  religion  was  ;  felt  it,  valued 
it,  was  convinced  of  it.  Saul  knew,  but  calmly  scoffed  at  and  despised 
all  he  knew.  The  one  was  the  religious  man  grossly  inconsistent ;  the  other, 
the  man  with  no  religion,  yet  wearing  it  as  a  garb.     Learn  from  this  contrast — 

1.  A  character  may  be  admirable,  nay  beautiful,  without  one  spark  of  God's 
grace,  and  therefore  all  its  moral  excellence  be  nothing  worth  ;  it  may  shine 
in  every  virtue,  amiability,  disinterestedness,  kindness,  generosity,  and  bene- 
volence. 2.  Inconsistency  in  a  professing  religious  man  is  nearly  equally  bad 
with  the  conduct  of  the  unprofessing  and  open  believer.  (E.  Monro.)  Con- 
secration to  God  : — I.  What  consecration  to  God  is.  1.  It  is  not  necessarily 
a  seclusion  from  the  fullest,  largest  life.  Long  before  the  Christian  era,  men 
saw  obscurely  the  need  of  their  turning  life  over  from  self,  from  itself,  to  the 
great  Author  of  Life.  This  impulse  wrought  itself  into  the  excesses  of  pagan 
monachism,  which  has  left  unmistakable  traces  in  oldest  historic  records  and 
in  rock-hewn  caves, — mute  witnesses  of  vigil  and  macerations  for  centuries, 
and  even  millenniums  before  the  coming  of  Christ.  Separateness  from  the  world, 
such  as  Christ  taught,  was  not  of  the  body,  but  of  the  spirit.  He  emjihasised, 
with  the  utmost  distinctness,  the  duty  of  closest  contact.  The  purifying  salt, 
the  guiding  light,  and  the  useful  talent  could  do  their  work  for  the  world  only 
at  the  shortest  range.  Sympathy  and  free  mingling  with  men  and  women  are 
a  far  closer  copy  of  Jesus  than  is  the   solitariness   of  cloister,  cave,  or  desert. 

2.  Consecration  to  God  is  full  self-surrender  to  Him,  not  self-abandonment. 
Here  is  room  for  great  mistakes.  Never  is  a  man  more  truly  master  of  himself, 
more  vigorously  alive,  more  earnestly  at  work,  than  when  he  has  given  himself 
to  God,  and  is,  henceforth,  in  the  Christian  sense,  not  his  own.     There  is  no 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI,  127 

diminution  of  being,  no  stinting  of  faculties,  no  abridgment  of  opportunitie;?. 
n.  Rbasons  fob  consecration  to  God.  1.  Refusing,  or  failing  in  this,  we 
rob  God.  Men's  faculties  find  their  rest,  and  possibilities  of  profitable  exercise, 
only  when  intentionally  and  gladly  used  for  their  Creator.  Time,  talents,  all 
that  there  is  in  and  of  life,  belong  to  God  by  virtue  of  creation  and  preserva- 
tion. 2.  Disobedience  is  followed  by  penalty.  For  this  sin  Malachi  pronounced 
a  curse  upon  Israel.  Israel  is  not  alone  in  this.  3.  The  rewards  of  obedience. 
A  general  enfranchisement  and  empowering  of  faculties  come  to  the  soul  when 
consecrated  to  Gfod.  Among  the  rewards  of  obedience,  a  prominent  place  should 
be  given  to  the  peace  of  mind  which  comes  from  harmony  with  God.  Christian 
fellowship  has  glad  rewards  for  those  consecrated  to  the  same  Master.  III.  How 
IS  THIS  CONSECRATION  MADE  ?  1.  Deliberately.  2.  Personally.  3.  Affection- 
ately. However  full  and  irrevocable  the  surrender  which  the  soul  makes  of 
itself,  it  is  made  gladly  and  lovingly.  Meanwhile,  till  the  day  of  reward  comes, 
every  burden  is  lightened,  because  borne  for  God  ;  every  sorrow  is  assuaged, 
because  faith  loves  the  hand  that  chastens  ;  every  dark  cloud  has  a  bright  lining, 
every  weariness  sings  of  coming  rest,  disappointments  point  to  the  time,  not 
far  away,  when  every  soul  shall  be  satisfied,  awaking  in  the  Divine  likeness. 
Consecration  on  earth  transfigured  and  fulfilled  in  the  glories  of  heaven. 
{Sermons  Monday  Club.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vee.  1.  All  that  do  wickedly  shall  be  stubble.  —  The  destruction  of  the 
wirked : — It  is  matter  of  alarm  and  profound  regret  that  this  awful  doctrine 
is  so  seldom  preached  in  these  days,  at  least  with  plainness  and  fidelity.  Why 
is  it  ?  Surely  not  because  the  doctrine  is  not  expressly  and  fully  taught  in  the 
Scriptures  ;  not  because  it  was  not  taught  by  Christ  Himself  diu-ing  His  ministry  ; 
nor  because  it  has  not  always  held  a  prominent  place  in  the  creeds  of  Christendom  ; 
nor  yet  because  it  is  contrary  to  reason  and  the  constitution  of  the  moral  universe. 
There  is  no  hope  for  the  finally  impenitent.  Application — 1.  Since  the  ever- 
lasting punishment  of  the  finally  impenitent  is  clearly  taught  by  Divine  revelation, 
we  are  bound  to  accept  it,  reverently,  submissively,  and  without  criticism,  how- 
ever severe  and  terrible  the  aspect  it  wears  toward  the  wicked.  2.  Being  an 
essential  doctrine  of  the  Scriptures,  we  are  imperatively  called  upon  to  give  it 
its  due  place  and  importance  in  the  ministrations  of  the  pulpit.  The  pulpit  that 
dares  to  ignore  it,  or  presumes  to  be  more  liberal  and  merciful  than  God  in  handling 
it,  incius  a  tremendous  responsibility,  3.  Christians  are  bound  to  have  respect 
to  it  in  all  their  prayers,  and  living,  and  intercourse  with  those  who  are  unrecon- 
ciled to  God.  4.  In  view  of  a  doom  so  certain,  and  so  supremely  dreadful  to 
every  unforgiven  sinner,  how  earnestly  should  every  man  "  work  out  his  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling  "  !     (J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise.  —  Sun-rising  : — There  is  only 
one  sun  in  our  system :  and  there  is  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man. 
The  vastness  of  the  sun  is  surprising,  but  Jesus  is  the  Lord  of  all.  His 
greatness  is  unsearchable.  The  beauty  and  glory  of  the  sun  are  such  that 
we  cannot  wonder  at  its  being  made  the  subject  of  adoration.  But  He  is 
fairer  than  the  children  of  men.  And  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  Him.  Con- 
sider the  inestimable  usefulness  of  this  luminary.  How  he  enlightens,  warms, 
fructifies,  adorns,  blesses.  What  changes  does  he  produce  in  garden,  wood, 
and  meadow  !  The  siui  that  ripened  Isaac's  com  ripens  ours,  and  though  he 
has  shone  for  so  many  ages,  he  is  undiminished,  and  as  all-sufficient  as  ever. 
What  an  image  of  Him  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  !  He  that 
seeth  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  and  believeth  on  Jesus,  hath  everlasting  life. 
The  ri?ing  of  the  sun  is  the  finest  spectacle  in  the  creation.  But  when  and  how 
do«8  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  ?  His  coming  was  announced  immediately 
after  the  FalL  His  approach  obscurely  appeared  in  the  types  and  services  of 
the  ceremonial  law.  In  the  clearer  discoveries  of  the  prophets,  the  morning 
was  beginning  to  spread  upon  the  mountains.     At  length  He  actually  arose — 


128  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOIi.  [chap.  ir. 

God  sent  forth  His  Son.     He  rises  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Gospel — in  spiritnal 
illnmination — in    renewed    manifestations — in    ordinances.     But    how    will    He 
arise  in  the  irradiations  of  heaven  ! — in  the  morning  of  immortality ;  making 
a  day  to  be  sullied  with  no  cloud,  and  followed  with  no  evening  shade  !     Then 
their  sun  shall  no  more  go  down.     ( William  Jay.)        The  Sun  of  Righteouav^ss  : — 
As  for  the  godly,  He  promises  to  send  Christ  unto  them,  bringing  illumination, 
righteousness,  healing,  protection,  and  increase  of  grace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.     1.  An  infallible  character  of  the  truly  godly  is  their  reverence  and  holy 
fear  (presumption  being  very  contrary  unto  piety),  and  that  not  only  of  God'a 
justice  and  terrible  judgments,  which  the  wicked  may  tremble  at,  but  also  of 
His  name  and  whatsoever  He  reveals  Himself  by  ;  His  word  being  enough  to 
make  them  tremble,  and  His  goodness  to  make  them  fear.     2.  Christ  is  the  sub- 
stance of  the  encouragement  of  the  godly,  as  being  unto  His  Church  and  children 
in  a  super-excellent  manner,  what  the  sun  is  to  this  inferior  world,  in  enlightening 
all  their  darkness,  illuminating  all  the  inferior  lights  that  shine  in  any  measure, 
making  all  hid  thins;s   patent,   rejoicing,   warning,   cherishing,   and  ripening  all 
fruits.     "  Unto  you  that  fear  My  name,  shaU  the  sun  arise."     3.  Not  only  is  every 
man  by  nature  and  without  Christ,  in  a  dark,  disconsolate  condition  till  He  come 
to  them,  but  His  manifestation  of  Himself  under  the  law  was  far  inferior  to  that 
\mder  the  Gospel,  which  is  far  more  clear,  glorious,  and  comfortable,  than  the 
legal  shadows  were  :  for  where  Christ  comes,   "  the  sun  ariseth  "  after  a  dark 
night;    and  this  especially  relates  to  His  incarnation,  which  is  sunlight  in  com- 
parison of  the  Old  Testament,  which  had  but,  as  it  were,  moonlight.     4.  That 
which  makes  Christ  especially  comfortable  to  the  godly  is,  that  He  brings  glorious 
rif^hteousness  to  them,  whereby  they  who  duist  not  appear  before  God,  become 
glorious  and  beautiful  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.     He  is  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness  " 
— glorious  righteousness — to  them.     5.  As  these  who  get  good  of  Christ  will  have 
many  sores,  and  be  made  to  feel  the  deadly  wounds  and  diseases  which  every 
one  by  nature  hath  ;  so  Christ  is  the  only  Physician  to  cure  such  sores,  and  deliver 
His   people   from  all  sickness   of  sin   and   misery.     "  He   arises   with  healing." 
(George    Hutcheaon.)        The    Sun   of   Bighteousnesa : — From    the    most   glorious 
creature,   "  the  sun,"  He  expresses  the  most  glorious  Creator,   "  Christ  Jesus," 
taking  occasion  to  help  our  understandings  in  grace  by  natural  things,  and  teach- 
ing us  thereby  to  make  a  double  use  of  the  cieatures,   corporal  and  spiritual. 
Christ  is  compared  to  the  sun — 1.  Because,  as  all  light  was  gathered  into  the  body 
of  the  sun,  and  from  it  derived  to  us,  so  it  pleased  God  that  in  Him  should  the 
fulness  of  all  excellency  dwell.     2.  As  there  is  but  one  sun,  so  there  is  but  one 
Sun  of  Righteousness.     3.  As  the  sun  is  above  the  firmament,  so  Christ  is  exalted 
up  on  high,  to  convey  His  graces  and  virtues  to  all  His  creatiu-es  here  below. 
4.  As  the  sun  works  largely  in  all  things  here  below,  so  doth  Christ.     5.  As  the 
Bun  is  the  fountain  of  light,  and  the  eye  of  the  world,  so  Christ  is  the  foimtain  of 
all  spiritual  light.     6.  As  the  sun  directeth  us  whither  to  go  and  which  way,  so 
doth  Christ  teach  us  to  go  to  heaven,  and  by  what  means  ;  what  duties  to  per- 
form, what  things  to  avoid,  and  what  things  to  bear.     7.  As  the  sun  is  pleasant, 
and  darkness  is  terrible,  so  Christ  is  comfortable ;  for  He  makes  all  at  peace  where 
He  comes  ;  and  He  sends  the  Spirit  the  Comforter.     8.  By  the  beams  of  the  sun 
is  conveyed  influence  to  make  things  grow,  and  to  distinguish  between  times 
and  seasons.      Thus  Christ,   by  His  power,   makes   all    things  cheerful,  for  He 
quickens  the  dead  and  dark  soul.     9.  The  sun  works  these  effects  not  by  coming 
down  to  us,  but  by  influence.      10.  As  the  sun  doth  work  freely,  drawing  up 
vapours  to  dissolve  them  into  rain  upon  the  earth,  so  doth  Christ.     He  freely 
draws  up  our  hearts  to  heaven.     11.  As  the  sun  shines  upon  all,  but  doth  not  heat 
all,  so  Christ  is  offered  to  all.     12.  As  the  sun  quickens  and  puts  life  irito  dead 
creatures,  so  shall  Christ,  by  His  power,  qui<^ken  our  dead  bodies,  and  raise  them 
up  again.     How  shall  we  know  whether  Christ  be  to  us  a  sun  or  not  ?     If  we  find 
that  we  feel  the  heat  and  comfort  of  a  Christian,  it  is  a  sign  that  Christ  hath 
effectually  shined  on  us.     If  Christ  have  shined  upon  any  effectually,  they  will 
walk  comely,  as  children  of  the  light.     Uses  of  this  doctrine— (1)  We  should  pity 
their  estate  that  are  still  in  darkness.     (2)  We  should  repair  to  Him,  and  conceive 
of  Him  as  one  having  excellences  suitable  to  oiu'  wants.     The  text  describes  this 
Sun  as  "  with  healing  in  His  wings,"  or  beams.     In  these  beams  there  is  a  healing 
nature.     Naturally,  we  are  all  sick  and  wounded.     We  should  take  notice  of  our 
diseases  in  time,  and  go  to  the  healing  God.     Christ  hath  a  medicine  of  His  own, 
able  to  cure  any  disease,  though  never  so  desperate,  any  person,  though  never 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  129 

80  sick.  Then  why  are  we  not  healed  ?  What  means  thia  that  we  are  subject  to 
these  infirmities  of  ours  ?  Some  of  Christ's  works  are  all  at  once  perfected,  and 
some  by  degrees,  bj'  little  and  little.  The  text  also  promises,  "  Ye  shall  go  forth, 
and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall."  "  You  shall  leap  forth."  Both  expressions 
signify  a  cheerful  moving.     We  need  to  grow  up.     What  are  means  thereunto  ? 

1.  Purge  and  cleanse  the  soul  of  weakening  matter.  Practise  the  duty  of  repent- 
ance daily.  2.  Come  at  good  food.  Digest  comfortable  truths.  3.  Use  exercise 
of  holy  duties.  Take  heed  not  to  lightly  esteem  God's  ordinance  ;  but  in  rever- 
ence use  all  means  for  the  strengthening  of  our  faith,  by  the  Word,  sacraments, 
and  prayer.  How  shall  we  know  whether  we  are  grown  ?  If  we  relish  the  food 
of  our  souls,  the  Word  of  God  ;  are  able  to  bear  great  burdens  of  the  infirmities 
of  ovu-  brethren  ;  able,  like  Samson,  to  break  the  green  cords  of  pleasure  and 
profits.  Oiu"  growth  in  grace  is  seen  in  our  performance  of  duties  :  if  they  be 
strongly,  readily,  and  cheerfully  performed.  Text  says,  "  Ye  shall  tread  down 
the  wicked."  While  the  Jews  obeyed  God,  they  were  a  terror  to  the  whole  earth. 
The  Church  treadeth,  &c.,  in  regard  of  true  judgment  and  discerning  of  the 
estates  of  the  wicked.  The  Church  tramples  on  all  things  that  rule  wicked  men. 
The  promise  of  the  text  is  finally  accomplished  at  the  day  of  judgment.  (JS, 
Sibbes.)  Sunriie: — I.  Who  is  this  Sttn  of  Righteousness  ?  1.  Jesus  Christ, 
who  is  spoken  of  as  "  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles."  2.  Light,  a  frequent  Scrip- 
ture symbol.     The  sun  possesses  some  excellent  properties  above  other  luminaries. 

3.  The  sun  possesses  the  property  of  communicating  light  to  all  the  other  heavenly 
bodies.  All  men  are  indebted  to  the  "  light  of  the  world  "  for  everything  that 
is  good.  Good  men  are  called  lights  of  the  world.  The  Sun  of  Righteousness 
is  the  great  source  of  light  and  heat  to  the  soul.  4.  Similar  effects  are  produced 
on  the  moral  world  on  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  as  are  produced 
on  the  face  of  the  earth  by  the  rising  of  the  natural  sun.  Darkness  is  dispersed, 
and  mists  and  vapour  give  way  before  his  powerful  rays.  When  Christ,  the 
true  light,  shines,  moral  darkness  is  dissipated,  and  in  proportion  as  the  true 
light  is  received,  superstition,  error,  and  ignorance  die  away.  II.  When  mat 
this  "Sun  of  Righteousness"  be  said  to  "arise"  ?  1.  When  the  prophet 
Bays  "  shall  arise,"  we  are  not  to  infer  that  He  had  never  arisen  before,  but  that 
a  more  abundant  outbeaming  of  His  light  should  be  reflected  upon  the  faithful. 

2.  "  In  the  fulness  of  time,  God  sent  forth  His  Son."     3.  He  arose  from  the  dead. 

4.  He  may  be  said  to  arise  when  He  visits  any  place  by  His  Gospel.  5.  When  He 
visits  the  souls  of  the  children  of  men  by  His  Spirit.  III.  The  manner  in  which 
He  is  SATO  to  arise.  "  With  healing  in  His  wings."  1.  Only  upon  those  who  fear 
the  Lord  :  by  penitents,  and  by  His  own  children.  2.  Penitents  fear  God,  and 
seek  His  face.  They  shall  be  made  whole,  and  saved  from  the  guilt  and  power 
of  sin.  3.  The  Lord's  children  ser^'e  Him  with  reverence  and  godly  fear,  and 
they  too  shall  be  saved  from  the  pollution  and  indwelling  of  sin.  {B.  Bailey.) 
The  Sun  of  Righteousness  : — Nature  is  replete  with  types,  shadows,  or  sjmnbols 
of  spiritual  things.  Our  Lord  is  Himself  called  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  because, 
in  many  respects.  He  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  moral  xmiverse  which  the 
sun  sustains  to  the  solar  system.  In  this  image,  or  symbol,  there  is  a  depth 
of  meaning  which  does  not  at  once  strike  the  mind  ;  and  which,  from  age  to 
age,  continually  deepens  and  expands,  as  science  reveals  more  and  more  the 
intrinsic  grandeur  and  glory  of  the  sim.  Plato  says,  "  Light  is  the  shadow  of 
God."  Scripture  says,  "  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  An 
apostle  says,  "  God  is  love."  But  yet  is  the  brightness  of  this  light  and  love 
so  veiled  and  obscured  to  mortal  vision  that  blessing,  not  blasting,  everywhere 
follows  in  the  track  of  their  influence.  The  more  we  study  the  symbolism  of 
Scripture  the  more  are  we  lost  in  admiration  of  its  richness,  its  fulness,  its 
grandeur,  and  its  beauty.  1.  The  sun  is  the  central  body  of  our  system,  by  whose 
attractive  influence  all  the  planetary  worlds  are  held  in  their  orbits,  and  so  kept 
from  wandering  into  the  outer  darkness  of  infinite  space.  By  Christ,  the  Sun 
of  Righteousness,  all  worlds  are  kept  in  society  with  God,  the  great  central  light 
of  the  universe.  For  the  Hebrew  mind,  this  little  earth  of  oiu-s  was  the  universe, 
around  which  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  revolved  as  the  appendages  and  orna- 
ments of  its  beauty.  2.  The  sim  is  the  life  of  the  natural  world.  Blot  out  the 
great  luminary  and  all  the  beautiful  forms  of  nature,  both  in  the  vegetable  and 
animal  kingdoms,  would  sink  into  one  mass  of  imiversal  decay  and  death.  The 
Sun  of  Righteousness  is  the  life  of  the  spiritual  world.  "  He  lighteth  every  man 
that  oometh  into  the  world."     3.  The  sun  is  the  only  self-luminous  body  in  our 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

system ;  from  which  all  others  derive  their  light  of  life.  So  it  is  a  symbol  of 
Him  who  is  "  the  light  of  the  world,"  the  moral  world.  It  is  given  to  Christ, 
and  to  Christ  alone,  to  have  "  light  in  Himself."  4.  The  natm-al  sim  is,  like 
the  Smi  of  Righteousness,  limited  in  the  beneficent  effects  of  its  influence.  It 
is  often  made  an  objection  to  the  religion  of  Jesus,  that  it  does  not  save  all  men. 
The  same  objection  might  be  urged  against  the  natural  sun.  Behold  the  arid 
wastes  and  barren  rocks,  on  which  its  light-giving  rays  fall  in  vain.  So  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  shines  in  vain  upon  all  whose  sins  have  rendered  their  hearts 
more  than  stony  hard.  But  for  aU  this  He  is  the  life-giving  power  of  the  moral 
world.  5.  The  Sun  of  Righteousness  is,  like  the  natural  sun,  the  soiu-ce,  or  rather 
the  occasion,  of  many  incidental  evils.  The  natural  sxm,  for  example,  in  acting 
on  the  corruptions  of  the  earth,  often  breeds  those  noxious  vapours,  or  efiBuvia, 
which  spread  pestilence  in  the  air  we  breathe.  But  is  this  the  fault  of  the  sim, 
or  of  the  corruptions  on  which  it  acts  ?  It  is  only  in  relation  to  Christ  that  men 
blame  the  physician  for  the  disease  He  came  to  cure,  and  for  the  evil  and  malig- 
nant passions  He  came  to  eradicate  or  subdue.  6.  For  many  weary,  countless 
ages  men  sought  an  answer  to  this  question  :  What  is  the  foimdation  of  the 
earth  ?  After  all  their  searching,  it  was  discovered  that  the  earth  rested  on 
nothing :  it  was  suspended  from  the  sun.  Men  have  been  seeking  the  foimda- 
tion of  society,  but  the  everlasting,  foolish  search  is  all  in  vain,  for  the  founda- 
tion of  the  moral  world  is  nowhere.  It  is  suspended  from  above.  The  Sun 
of  Righteousness  is  its  only  point  of  support  and  rest.  All  the  planetary  worlds 
are  like  a  magnificent  chandelier,  suspended  from  the  sun ;  so  are  all  social  states, 
nay,  all  moral  worlds,  upheld  and  sustained  by  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 
7.  The  sun  is,  by  virtue  of  its  transforming  power,  a  magnificent  type  or  symbol 
of  Christ.  The  Divine  power  of  Christ,  working  silently  and  unseen  through 
all  the  ages,  is  fitly  symbolised  only  by  those  stupendous  agencies  which,  with 
such  inconceivable  grandeur,  are  ever  at  work  on  the  magnificent  theatre  of 
the  material  universe.  (1)  It  is  "no  task  for  suns  to  shine."  And  yet,  by  the 
pervasive  force  of  the  sun's  rays,  aU  the  mighty  changes  of  the  earth  are  wrought, 
and  all  the  wondrous  harmonies  produced.  (2)  The  sim's  rays  are  indeed  His 
ministering  angels,  sent  forth  to  minister  to  all  things  on  earth.  (3)  Nor  is  the 
solid  globe  itself  exempt  from  the  transforming  power  of  the  sun's  rays.  All 
the  stupendous  coal  strata  of  the  globe  are  but  so  many  entombed  vegetable 
kingdoms  of  the  past,  all  of  which  were  reared  and  ruled  by  the  mighty  sun. 
It  is  not  without  significance  that  the  great  Reformer,  or  rather  the  great  Trans- 
former, of  the  moral  world  is  called  the  Sim  of  Righteousness.  8.  The  power 
of  the  sun,  by  which  all  natural  things  are  progressively  developed,  symbolises 
the  corresponding  power  or  influence  of  Christ  in  the  development  and  progress 
of  the  moral  world.  The  progress  of  Christianity  is  the  progress  of  man.  All 
real  progress  has  been  confined  to  Christian  nations.  9.  The  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness, like  the  natural  sun,  works  silently,  but  efficiently,  in  the  depths  of  His 
dominion,  and  acts  on  the  secret  springs  or  principles  of  its  inner  life.  And  a 
glance  at  the  past  is  sufficient  to  inspire  us  with  hope  for  the  future.  The  king- 
dom of  Christ,  though  once  the  least  of  all  seeds,  is  now  the  greatest  of  all  trees. 
Having  its  roots  in  faith,  its  vital  principle  is  love,  its  blossoms  are  immortal 
hopes,  and  its  fruit  eternal  life.  (J?.  Bledsoe.)  The  rising  of  the  Stm  of  Rigld- 
eousness : — I.  The  persons  to  whom  the  promise  is  made.  Those  that  fear 
the  name  of  the  Lord.  By  the  "  name  "  of  God  is  meant  the  "  character  " 
of  God.  We  have,  in  ourselves,  no  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  character  of 
God,  and  therefore  cannot  fear  His  name  until  He  send  forth  the  Spirit  of  truth 
into  our  hearts,  to  lead  us  into  all  truth.  All  the  notions  which  we  form  of  Him, 
before  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  in  us,  are  as  contrary  to  His  true  character  as  dark- 
ness is  to  light.  While  we  are  in  this  state  of  blindness  we  can  have  no  real 
fear  of  God  according  to  His  Word.  The  true  fear  springs  up  with  faith,  and 
arises  chiefly  from  the  soul  believing  some  part  of  God's  Word,  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  carries  home  to  the  sinner's  conscience  to  awaken  him.  This  fear  will 
be  marked  by  a  growing  desire  to  know  the  true  character  of  God.  And  this 
is  not  a  feeling  which  passes  away.  The  text  does  not  speak  of  those  that  have 
feared  the  name  of  God,  but  of  those  that  do  fear  it,  i.e.,  continue  to  do  so. 
It  is  not  a  passing  fright,  but  a  holy  abiding  fear.  The  marks  of  it  are  an  abiding 
sense  of  sin,  a  desire  to  be  taught  of  God,  by  searching  the  Word  of  God  in  order 
to  know  His  name,  or  true  character,  and  by  praying  for  the  teaching  of  the 
Spirit  of  truth.     II.  The  promise  itsbu'.     The  "  Sun  of  Righteousness  "  shall 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  13i 

arise  upon  them  "  with  healing  in  His  wings."  Jesus  Christ  is  to  the  soul  what 
the  natural  sun  is  to  the  earth.  The  sun  gives  Ught  and  warmth  to  the  earth, 
by  which  its  various  fruits  are  brought  forth  and  ripened.  Jesus  is  especially 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  as  being  the  fountain  of  all  righteousness  ;  of  that 
perfect  righteousness  by  which  believers  are  testified  in  the  sight  of  God.  Jesus 
fulfilled  all  righteousness  in  His  own  person  when  manifest  in  the  flesh,  and 
was  perfectly  obedient  to  the  will  of  God,  even  unto  death.  This  perfect  right- 
eousness of  Christ  is  imputed,  or  reckoned  to  believers,  through  faith,  as  if  they 
had  entirely  fulfilled  it  themselves  ;  and  thus  they  are  justified  or  made  righteous 
in  the  sight  of  God.  Jesus  is  also  the  fountain  of  the  righteousness  of  sancti- 
fication.  The  mode  in  which  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arises  upon  the  soul  of 
His  people  is,  by  pouring  into  them  more  and  more  of  the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
strengthening  their  faith,  and  enabling  them  to  see  that  Christ,  with  all  His 
blessings,  and  all  His  promises,  is  theirs.  He  thus  also  rises  with  healing  in  His 
wings,  to  heal  the  broken  hearts  of  His  people.  III.  The  happy  effect  of 
THE  FULFILMENT  OF  THE  PROMISES.  "  They  shall  grow  up,  as  calves  in  the 
stall."  The  believer  is  enabled  to  go  forth  with  peace  and  joy  on  his  way  to 
Zion.  The  blessed  effect  will  be  manifested  both  by  the  peace  shed  into  the 
believer's  soul,  and  by  his  growth  in  holiness.  The  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness will  also  greatly  promote  the  believer's  growth  in  grace.  The  growth 
in  size  of  calves,  when  fed  in  the  stall,  is  very  great ;  so  shall  the  growth  of 
believers  be  great.  Apply  subject  to  ourselves.  Are  there  not  too  many  amongst 
you  who  are  entirely  strangers  to  the  fear  of  the  name  or  character  of  God  ? 
Perhaps  you  have  hitherto  been  brought  only  to  fear  God,  and  you  walk  in  dark- 
ness. You  should  apply  to  yourselves  this  text :  let  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
rise  on  your  souls  with  healing  in  His  wings.  If  He  rises  on  your  soul  you  will 
have  peace  with  God.  {H.  Gipps,  LL.D.)  The  Sun  of  Righteousness: — This 
passage  seems  to  refer  principally  to  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord ;  the  text 
itself  may  be  safely  understood  of  His  first  coming  in  the  flesh.  It  points  out, 
primarily  at  least,  the  judgments  to  be  brought  upon  the  imbelieving  and 
impenitent  Jews.  I.  The  coming  of  Christ,  as  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
RISING  UPON  the  world.  The  most  glorious  object  in  creation  is  the  fittest 
to  represent  the  King  of  Glory.  The  sun  is  the  great  source  of  heat  and  life 
and  light ;  of  everything  that  is  beautiful  and  beneficial.  The  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness here  is  the  Lord  and  Saviom-  Christ ;  the  Lord  and  giver  of  hfe  to  His  ser- 
vants :  a  never-failing  source  of  spiritual  health  and  comfort  to  His  servants. 
Whatever  the  sun  is  in  the  material  world,  that,  and  much  more,  in  a  spiritual 
sense,  is  the  Lord  to  His  Church.  "  Sim  of  Righteousness  "  may  mean  that  He 
is  perfectly  just  and  righteous  in  Himself,  and  therefore  discovers  and  rebukes 
sin,  brings  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness  and  vice,  and  affords  in  Him- 
self a  perfect  example  of  light  and  virtue,  by  which  others  may  see  and  avoid 
their  errors  and  failings.  Or  it  may  mean  that,  by  His  own  righteousness,  "  He 
justifies  many."  This  Sun  arose  when  our  Lord  came  into  the  world.  He  again 
rose  in  His  resurrection.  He  will  again  rise  when  He  comes  in  glory.  And  He 
may  be  said  to  rise  upon  each  of  us  when  by  faith  we  receive  Him  into  our  souls. 
II.  The  SALVATION  which  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  brings  with  Him. 
"  With  healing  in  His  wings."  The  Son  of  God  came  to  earth  as  a  Saviour. 
This  character  He  maintained  through  the  course  of  His  ministry  upon  earth, 
during  which  He  went  about  doing  good.  How  did  this  Sun  of  Righteousness 
bring  healing  in  His  wings  (or,  as  we  should  rather  say,  in  His  beams  and  rays) 
at  His  rising?  1.  The  most  natural  interpretation  is,  of  the  cures  which  He 
wrought  upon  the  bodies  of  men.  2.  The  great  act  of  salvation  was  bearing 
our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  "  By  His  stripes  we  are  healed." 
This  healing  procured  the  pardon  of  our  sins,  and  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  to  enable  us  to  fulfil  the  conditions  required  of  us.  Only  by 
joining  these  two  together  can  the  salvation  be  regarded  as  complete.  Notice 
how  great  is  His  mercy  in  administering  comfort  to  the  penitent.  III.  The 
qualifications  required  of  those  to  whom  the  Son  of  God  will  prove 
A  Saviour.  "  You  that  fear  My  name."  Religious  fear  of  God  is  necessary  to 
qualify  a  man  to  receive  the  healing  grace  of  Christ.  To  the  soul  which  has  no 
fear  Christ  brings  no  healing.  This  is  the  state  of  the  true  Christian;  in  which 
his  terrors  are  never  so  great  as  to  extinguish  his  hopes,  and  his  hopes  never 
prevail  so  much  as  to  make  him  confident  and  secure.  {T.  BowcUer,  A.M.) 
Sun  of  Eighteousness : — I.  Illustrate  the  comparison  of  oub  Lord  Jesus 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctap.  iv. 

Chkist  to  a  sttn.  1.  His  unapproachable  pre-eminence.  2.  His  benign  influence. 
3.  His  relation  to  the  whole  world.  II.  Describe  His  restorative  or  remedial 
EFFICACY.  In  the  world ;  in  a  country ;  in  an  individual.  III.  Consider 
THE  PERSONS  TO  WHOM  His  EFFICACY  IS  CONFINED.  Who  are  they  ?  And  why 
are  they  the  sole  recipients  of  the  promised  blessing  ?  Consider  Christ — as  the 
centre  of  the  spiritual  world  ;  as  the  source  of  light ;  as  the  source  of  heat ;  as 
the  object  of  attraction.  (G.  Brooks.)  Parallel  betiveen  Christ  and  the  sun: — 
A  parallel  is  drawn  between  Jesus  Christ  and  the  natural  sun.  1.  Before  the 
rising  of  the  natural  sun  there  is  darkness  ;  until  Jesus  Christ  arise  or  is  appre- 
hended there  is  darkness — moral  and  spiritual  darkness.  Look  to  the  world 
before  the  coming  of  Christ:  the  heathen;  the  multitudes  around  us;  anyone 
of  the  unconverted  ;  the  place  of  outer  darkness.  2.  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  natural 
sun  does,  arose  gradually.  (1)  He  arose  in  the  Scriptures,  through  the  prophecies 
and  promises,  the  types  and  sacrifices,  until,  in  the  development  of  God's  pro- 
vidence, He  appeared  above  the  horizon.  (2)  He  arose,  in  His  own  personal 
history,  in  the  completion  of  His  work,  in  His  resurrection,  in  His  ascension, 
in  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (3)  He  rises  in  the  souls  of  His  people,  on  earth, 
in  heaven,  for  ever.  3.  Jesus  Christ,  like  the  natural  sun,  reveals  or  is  the  source 
of  light.  (1)  He  reveals  God,  perfections,  purposes,  past,  future,  creation,  provi- 
dence. (2)  He  reveals  man,  law,  way  of  salvation.  Gospel.  (3)  All  time  ;  eternity  ; 
the  invisible  worlds,  and  the  paths  to  them.  4.  Jesus  Christ,  like  the  natural 
sun,  is  the  centre  of  a  system.  Of  the  material  universe  ;  and  the  moral  and 
spiritual  universe.  Centre  and  sura  of  revealed  truth  of  the  Church.  5.  Jesus 
Christ,  like  the  natural  sun,  has  His  image  reflected,  both  in  the  material  and  in 
the  moral  universe.  6.  Is  the  source  of  enjoyment.  He  has  all  blessing ;  and 
admits  to  His  own  joy.  7.  Is  often  concealed  by  clouds.  (1)  By  a  cloud  of  guilt 
on  the  conscience.  (2)  By  a  cloud  of  corruptions.  (3)  By  a  cloud  of  misrepre- 
sentations. 8.  He  dispenses  His  influence  freely.  "  Without  money  and  with- 
out price."  9.  He  hastens  the  process  of  decay  and  corruption.  "  A  stone  of 
stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence."  (James  Stewart.)  The  Messiah  as  the  Sun 
of  Righteousfiess  : — That  the  promised  Messiah  should  be  termed  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  may  appear  characteristic  and  appropriate.  But  what  are  we 
to  understand  by  a  sun  with  wings  ?  What  by  those  wings  being  endowed  with 
the  powers  of  healing  7  WTiat  mean  we  when  we  term  the  Messiah  Sun  of 
Righteousness,  but  that  we,  being  by  nature  the  heirs  of  God's  curse,  are  through 
Christ  reconciled  to  Him  whom  we  had  offended  ?  What  mean  we  by  the  wings 
of  the  sun  ?  In  Egypt  a  sun  with  wings  was  sculptiu-ed  upon  the  gateways  and 
monuments.  Some  regard  the  sign  with  a  reference  to  the  rays  or  beams  of  the 
luminous  body  itself.  Others  interpret  it  as  representing  that  overhanging 
canopy  of  the  heavens  which  bends,  like  a  protecting  arch  above  this  lower  globe 
of  ours,  brooding  over  it,  so  to  speak,  and  sheltering  it.  Others  explain  the 
wings  as  betokening  the  swiftness  with  which  the  light  of  the  sim  traverses  illimit- 
able space.  Others  appropriate  the  term  to  the  cooling  breezes  which  in  the 
East  accompany  the  early  sunrise.  Tho.se  who  have  experienced  the  glare  and 
weariness  of  an  Eastern  day  may  be  better  qualified  than  most  of  us  to  appreciate 
those  first  hours  of  cool  and  refreshing  daylight  which  are  appropriated  to  health- 
ful exercise  and  the  enjoyment  of  nature's  loveliness.  The  period  at  which  we 
celebrate  the  rising  of  the  predicted  Sim  cannot  convey  real  and  fitting  gladness 
to  the  hearts  of  those  who  do  not  entertain  this  chastened  and  holy  fear  of  God's 
name.  The  verse  preceding  the  text  is  full  of  woe  and  alarm  for  them  that  despise 
His  loving-kindness  and  disobey  His  laws.  Apt  as  is  the  image  of  the  sun's 
rising  and  progress  through  the  heavens,  to  represent  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  and  His  increasing  influences  as  He  goes  on  His  waj'  rejoicing, 
it  is  when  He  has  reached  His  height  that  the  metaphor  fails  us  altogether. 
Slowly  and  surely  the  material  orb  sinks  at  last  in  the  darkness.  Herein  we 
are  taught  the  infinite  inferiority  of  the  sign  to  that  which  is  signified  thereby. 
(T.  Ainger,  M.A.)  The  Stin  of  Righteousness: — WTiy  was  it  that  God  per- 
mitted His  ancient  people  to  be  overwhelmed  with  such  unheard  of  calamities  ? 
We  have  reason  to  believe  it  was  simply  because  they  rejected  Christ,  and  the 
offers  of  mercy  and  salvation  through  Him.  If  God,  however,  take  vengeance 
on  the  wicked.  He  will  be  favourable  to  the  righteous,  and  spare  them  in  the 
great  day,  as  a  father  spareth  his  own  son  that  serveth  him.  I.  The  Sun  of 
Righteousness.  There  is  but  one  Sun  from  whom  proceeds  righteousness, 
and  that  must  be  the  Son  of  God.     As  Christ  is  the  source  of  all  spiritual  life 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  133 

and  light,  so  by  His  sufferings  and  death  He  hath  procured  or  merited  righteous- 
ness. He  is  theiefore  the  believer's  justifying  righteousness.  II.  His  rising 
ON  God's  people.  Christ's  face  shines  on  His  people  and  disperses  their 
sorrows,  but  His  face  is  dark  towards  sinners,  for  He  is  angry  with  the  wicked 
every  day.  In  the  spiritual  world,  when  Christ  took  on  Him  our  flesh  and 
was  born  in  Bethlehem,  then  the  light  was  come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was 
risen  upon  us !  This  Sun  still  shines ;  He  is  still  shining,  in  His  Gospel  and 
in  the  power  of  His  Word.  III.  The  effect  of  His  rising.  "  With  healing 
in  His  wings."  Understanding  this  literally,  we  may  see  how  Christ,  as  man, 
has  arisen  with  healing  in  His  wings.  How  many ;  yea,  what  multitudes  did 
His  hands  heal  of  various  maladies.  This  Sun  is  still  shining.  All  our  spiritual 
light  is  from  Him.  All  our  spiritual  healing  comes  from  the  merit  of  His  works. 
{R.  Horsfall.)  Our  sun: — I.  The  sun.  Of  all  the  things  the  eye  can  see  the 
most  Christlike  is  the  sun,  for  he  is  quite  alone  in  our  world.  Nor  rival,  nor 
helper,  nor  partner  has  he.  We  have  many  stars,  but  only  one  sun.  All  light 
is  in  and  from  the  sun.  Yet  even  this  glorious  image  of  the  light  of  the  world 
fails  in  some  ways  ;  for  the  sun  has  its  dark  spots,  but  in  Christ,  our  sim,  is  no 
darkness  at  all.  The  sun  is  the  centre  of  all  the  worlds.  Every  star  is  held  in 
its  place  by  the  attractive  power  of  the  sun.  The  sun  is  the  grand  river  in  this 
world.  Our  thoughts  wax  warm  as  we  sum  up  all  the  benefits  with  which  he  fills 
our  earth.  You  cannot  overstate  them.  Science  is  every  year  finding  fresh 
wonders  in  sunlight.  .All  kinds  of  force  come  from  the  sun.  As  the  sun  gives 
according  to  a  never-changing  law,  so  Christ  blesses  only  in  a  righteous  way. 
II.  The  sun-rising.  Sunrise  is  probably  the  grandest  sight  in  the  world.  In 
the  East  it  is  so  magnificent  as  almost  for  the  moment  to  make  one  a  Parsee,  a 
worshipper  of  the  rising  sun.  Malachi  was  in  the  twilight,  and  you  are  in  the 
daylight.  To  him  the  sun  was  beneath  the  horizon,  sure  harbinger  of  the  wished- 
for  day.  You  live  in  the  Gospel-day.  III.  The  blessings  Christ  brings  to 
MEN.  As  the  sun  destroys  only  darkness  and  its  hateful  brood,  so  Christ  destroys 
only  our  miseries,  and  brings  us  all  blessings.  1.  Healing.  The  Easterns  often 
carved  a  winged  sun  above  the  gateways  of  their  temples.  Malachi  has  a  poet's 
quick  eye  for  the  glories  of  nature,  and  perhaps  this  also  was  in  his  mind, — the 
8un  rises  like  a  bird,  with  equal  wings  wide  enough  to  cover  the  world.  Malachi's 
meaning  is,  that  as  sunlight  brings  health  to  a  diseased,  dying  world,  so  Christ 
brings  health  to  our  diseased,  dying  souls  ;  and  this  healing  comes  to  us  with  all 
the  ease,  swiftness,  gentleness,  and  freshness  of  morning  sunshine.  This  healing 
brings  health,  which  shows  itself  in  joyous  activity.  To  healing  and  health 
Christ  adds  victory.  (James  Wells,  M.A.)  The  blessings  of  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness : — I.  The  promise  which  is  made.  1.  The  metaphor  under  which  the 
coming  of  Christ  is  spoken  of.  The  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 
Malachi  assimilates  Christ's  coming  to  that  of  the  sun  rising  upon  the  earth. 
Is  He  not  well  entitled  to  this  appellation  ?  2.  The  manner  in  which  Jesus  is  to 
come  to  His  saints.  "  With  healing  in  His  wings."  It  is  a  bold  poetical  figure 
u-ed  by  the  prophet  for  the  beams  or  rays  of  the  sun;  and  such  bold  painted 
figures  are  by  no  means  uncommon  with  Eastern  writers.  II.  The  persons  to 
whom  this  promise  is  made.  "  To  them  who  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord."  This 
expression  is  used  in  Scripture  for  religion  in  general.  Without  a  certain  mixture 
of  fear,  taking  the  term  in  its  most  literal  signification,  no  worship  can  be  accept- 
able to  Jehovah.  Without  a  certain  mixture  of  fear,  no  worship  can  produce 
any  deep  or  lasting  impressions  on  the  worshipper  himself — no  sanctifying  effects 
on  his  heart  and  conscience.  The  term  may,  however,  be  limited  and  applied 
to  some  particular  classes  of  saints.  1.  To  them  who  are  spiritual  mourners. 
2.  To  them  persecuted  for  the  sake  of  religion.  3.  To  them  who  sit  in  heathen 
darkness.  4.  To  the  elect  on  the  day  of  judgment.  To  the  righteous  on  that 
day  Christ  shall  "  arise  with  healing  in  His  wings."  To  them  shall  He  come 
with  joy  and  songs  of  triumph.  (James  Watson.)  Christ  Jesus  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  : — The  great  light  which  the  Almighty  Maker  of  the  world  set  up 
in  heaven  to  rule  the  day  is  the  most  glorious  object  in  the  whole  visible  creation 
of  God.  The  worship  of  the  sun,  as  it  was  the  first,  so  it  was  assuredly  the  least 
degrading  of  all  the  idolatries  by  which  men  and  nations  have  since  been  enslaved. 
Does  the  sun  e.thibit  the  glory  of  God  ?  What,  then,  shall  we  say  of  Christ  Jesus, 
in  whom  "  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  "  ?  Seen  as  an  absolute  God, 
and  by  the  flashes  of  the  law  from  Sinai,  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire  ;  but  we 
have  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  His  saving  glory  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ. 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

"  In  Him  is  light,  and  the  light  is  the  spiritual  and  everlasting  life  of  men."  By 
rising  in  the  ancient  promise  He  dispelled  the  midnight  ignorance  and  utter 
hopelessness  of  guilty  creatures;  by  rising  in  His  own  person,  and  glorious  acts 
of  grace.  He  chased  away  the  dim  shadows  of  the  ceremonial  law;  by  rising  in 
Gospel  ordinances  He  abolished  the  night  of  error  and  delusion;  and  by  rising 
in  His  spiritual  influences  upon  the  believer's  soul  He  says,  "  Let  there  be  light, 
and  there  is  light."  The  sun  rises  gradually  over  the  earth  ;  and  so  hath  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  displayed  His  saving  light.  His  first  ray  was  cast  upon  this  fallen 
earth  when  the  promise  of  redemption  was  given  to  guilty  man  in  paradise.  The 
law  and  the  prophets  reflected  it  with  increasing  brightness  until  His  advent. 
But  it  is  only  when  that  advent  is  spiritually  and  graciously  made  to  a  soul  once 
darkened  and  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  that  the  true  and  eflicacious  light  of 
salvation  reaches  him  and  renews  him.  Upon  whom,  then,  will  this  bright  and 
radiant  Sun  arise  ?  Upon  those  who  "  fear  the  name  "  of  God.  This  fear  of 
God  is  produced  by  that  work  of  regeneration  which  the  Holy  Spiiit  effects. 
The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  gracious  and  heavenly  state ;  not  meritorious  of  any 
good  at  the  hand  of  God,  but  a  disposition  which  best  subserves  His  great  design 
of  raising  up  and  glorifying  the  riches  of  His  undeserved  love.  He  who  thus 
evangelically  fears  the  Lord  is  led  to  serious  and  solemn  self-examination.  If 
you  fear  God  there  is  a  deep,  earnest,  ardent,  unceasing  breathing  of  the  soul 
for  Christ,  a  constant  application  to  His  blood  as  its  true  Bethesda,  its  everlastingly 
appointed  house  of  mercy,  where  the  soul  may  be  made  whole.  Note  the  blessing 
which  shall  attend  those  who  fear  the  Lord.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  all  spiritual  dark- 
ness, because  sin  is  the  soul's  separation  from  God.  Christ  comes  with  spiritual 
health,  and  with  the  abundance  of  spiritual  peace :  peace  from  the  guilt  of  sin 
rising  up  to  condemn,  peace  from  the  accusations  of  conscience,  peace  from  the 
curse  of  the  law,  peace  with  the  blessed  Trinity,  and  peace  with  all  who  are  one 
with  Him.  The  material  sin  is  the  source  of  earth's  fertility.  And  how  free, 
how  common,  how  accessible  is  the  sim  of  the  natural  world,  for  all  who  live 
beneath  it!  (R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  Christ  as  a  sun: — I.  Of  the  meta- 
PHOEiCAL  REPRESENTATION  OF  Christ.  Metaphors  are  useful.  They  arrest 
the  attention  :  the  imagination  is  engaged  in  discovering  their  beauty  and  admir- 
ing their  aptitude,  while  tliey  rivet  themselves  in  the  memory  by  the  force  with 
which  they  bring  home  to  us  the  subject  they  are  intended  to  illustrate.  To 
illustrate  Christ  as  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness,"  consider  the  miserably  benighted 
state  in  which  the  human  race  were  in  the  days  anterior  to  the  Gospel  dispensa- 
tion. Jesus  Christ,  that  "  Sun  of  Righteousness,"  pure  and  spotless,  is  the  author 
of  all  righteousness,  whether  imputed  for  justification  or  imparted  in  sanctifica- 
tion.  When  Christ  rises  in  the  soul  He  enlightens,  quickens,  and  comforts. 
II.  What  is  meant  by  "  healing  in  His  wings  "  ?  The  beams  of  this  heavenly 
luminary  may  indeed  be  perceived  by  us,  but  do  they  pervade  our  hearts  and 
lives  ?  To  fear  the  name  is  to  reverence  Him  as  God  and  man  ;  to  participate 
by  faith  in  His  incarnate  sufferings  ;  to  accompany  Him  to  the  scene  of  His  cruel 
death.  It  has  its  foundation  in  a  deep  sense  of  the  enormity  of  sins,  and  a  humbling 
conviction  of  our  depravity.  {Samuel  Crowther.)  The  Sun  of  Righteotcsness 
arising  with  healing  in  His  wings  :—  I.  The  characters  spoken  of.  The  "  name 
of  the  Lord  "  signifies  the  perfections  of  the  glorious  God  of  heaven — the  great- 
ness and  goodness  of  the  Lord — God  Himself.  It  is  the  peculiar  character  of 
the  people  of  God  that  they  "  fear  His  name."  It  is  a  fear  of  offending  (jod, 
the  tenderness  of  the  child  that  fears  to  offend  its  parent.  This  fear  is  an  abiding 
principle,  and  it  is  a  practical  principle  ;   it  operates  upon  the  life.      II.   Thb 

BLESSED  PRIVILEGE  OF  THOSE  THAT  FEAR  THE  NAME  OF  GOD.       The  Sun  of  RighteOUS- 

ness  is  Immanuel,  God  with  us.  And  He  arose  at  His  birth,  because  more  con- 
spicuous in  His  ministry  ;  was  eclipsed  at  His  death,  shone  forth  brighter  after 
His  resurrection  and  ascension,  and  attained  His  meridian  splendour  when  the 
Jewish  dispensation  closed  and  the  Christian  dispensation  was  fully  estabUshed. 
But  the  promise  of  our  text  is  daily  receiving  its  fulfilment  in  the  hearts  of  God's 
believing  people.  The  promise  of  the  text,  however,  still  awaits  the  consumma- 
tion of  its  fulfilment.  (Benjamin  Maturin,  B.A.)  The  Sun  of  Righteousness  : — 
I.  The  PERSONS.  Those  that  "  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Fear  is  the  passion 
of  our  nature  opposed  to  hope,  and  by  it  the  author  of  our  being  guards  us  against 
danger.  The  "  fear  of  the  Lord  "  is  the  sublimest  i)rinciple  which  can  influence 
a  soul.  It  casts  out  all  other  fear.  Filial  and  godly  fear  is  always  accompanied 
with  love.    II.  The  blessings.     The  Messiah  should  be,  to  the  spiritual  world. 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  135 

what  the  sun  is  to  the  natural  world.  In  this  view  we  may  regard  Him  as  the 
source  of  light,  fertility,  comfort,  and  health.  {Peter  Grant.)  Christ,  the  Sun 
of  Righteousness  : — Were  I  to  adhere  to  the  textual  view  of  these  words  I  should 
be  shiit  up  to  consider  what  Christ's  coming  was  to  those  who  aheady  had  some 
true  light,  to  those  who  already  feared  God  and  thought  upon  His  name,  and 
thus  I  should  have  mainly  to  set  forth  the  superiority  of  Christianity  to  Judaism. 
But  I  shall  make  no  apology  for  giving  to  this  title  "  Sun  of  Righteousness  "  a 
wider  application,  and  for  considering  not  so  much  Christ's  rising  then  and  there 
upon  Jewish  cloudiness  and  dimness,  as  rather  His  arising  from  first  to  last  upon 
the  total  darkness  of  our  fallen  world.  I.  The  natube  of  Chbist's  light,  or 
ENLIGHTENING  POWER.  1.  This  light  is  saving  light.  In  many  parts  of  the  Old 
Testament  "  righteousness  "  is  used  in  nearly  the  same  sense  with  "  salvation." 
The  salvation  of  God,  resting  on  the  perfect  righteousness  of  God's  own  Son  as 
the  sinner's  substitute,  applied  to  believers  in  Him  for  justification,  and  in  its 
gracious  operation,  terminated  and  completed  by  their  willing  return  to  personal 
righteousness  and  holiness  of  life, — this  is  what  is  here  meant  under  the  name 
of  "  righteousness  "  ( Jer.  xxiii.  6).  We  speak  in  our  own  language  of  the  "  sun 
of  freedom  "  rising  upon  a  country,  or  of  the  "  sunshine  of  peace  "  revisiting  it. 
But  the  light  which  here  bursts  upon  a  lost  and  guilty  world  is  the  saving  light 
of  righteousness.  It  announces  to  the  condemned  the  hope  of  pardon,  and  shows 
the  way  ;  and  it  discloses  with  equal  clearness  the  means  of  deliverance  from 
the  power  and  bondage  of  corruption.  In  Christ  the  whole  salvation  is  contained, 
even  as  the  sun  reveals  himself.  In  Him  the  guilty  are  righteous  in  law ;  in  Him, 
and  as  subdued  by  His  birth,  they  are  righteous  in  fact.  2.  This  light  is  original 
light.  The  light  of  the  sun  is  unborrowed.  It  is  a  mystery  which  our  science 
has  not  yet  solved,  how  this  formtain  is  fed.  But  relatively  to  all  sources  of  light 
that  we  know,  it  is  higher  and  self -sustained.  This  images  the  nature  of  Christ's 
light,  in  contrast  with  all  the  knowledge  of  Divine  things  which  comes  to  us  from 
other  quarters.  3.  This  light  is  pre-eminent  light.  The  most  glorious  object 
in  nature  is  the  sun.  The  ancient  world  had  its  lights,  we  grant — its  poets, 
philosophers,  moralists,  law-givers.  But  what  were  they  in  regard  to  righteous- 
ness or  salvation  ?  How  much  did  they  diffuse  of  the  light  of  life  ?  Christ  was 
even  pre-eminent  above  Jewish  prophets,  who  had  known  and  revealed  God  to 
men.  They  were  but  secondary  lights.  Their  use  was  to  point  to  Him.  It  is 
needless  to  assert  Christ's  pre-eminence  over  His  own  apostles  and  ministers 
and  people.  4.  This  light  is  a  universal  light.  What  a  universal  blessing  is 
sunshine  !  What  an  emblem  of  the  Higher  Light  which  is  not  less  universal, 
though,  for  reasons  which  we  cannot  fathom,  it  is  still  beneath  the  horizon  in 
many  a  wide  region  of  the  earth.  Where  it  has  shone,  can  the  natural  sun  be  more 
unrestricted  and  free  ?  II.  The  natfee  of  Christ's  healing  influence.  By 
wings  the  prophet  means  the  rays  or  influence  of  the  sun.  In  addition  to  the 
influence  of  light  we  are  now  to  take  into  account  that  of  heat,  of  which,  too,  the 
sun  is  the  centre.  1.  Christ's  healing  power  in  relation  to  sin.  What  is  wanted 
to  moralise  the  whole  community  ?  Only  one  thing,  the  love  of  Christ  in  every 
man's  heart.  2.  Christ's  healing  extends  to  sorrow.  This  follows  from  the 
healing  of  sin.  Every  sin  has  its  own  sorrow,  its  remorse,  its  injuries  to  mind 
and  heart,  and  often  also  to  body  and  estate.  3.  The  influence  of  Christ's  sun- 
shine upon  death.  The  natural  sun  lights  all  generations  to  their  grave.  How 
is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  risen  with  healing  in  His  wings  for  all  that  sleep 
in  Him !  Oh,  the  glory  of  that  victory  over  death,  the  last  enemy,  which  the  light 
of  Christ's  immortal  countenance  shall  achieve  !  (John  Cnirns,  D.D.)  Christ 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness  : — We  with  the  early  Fathers  take  oiu:  Lord  to  be  "  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness."  The  mass  of  the  sun  being  so  vastly  greater  than  that 
of  all  the  planets  and  satellites  taken  together,  constitutes  it  a  suitable  centre 
of  light,  heat,  and  gravitation ;  and  therefore  a  striking  emblem  of  Christ.  Of 
the  many  points  of  resemblance  we  will  examine  two.  The  darkness  which 
precedes  the  dawn,  and  the  gradual  growth  of  the  light.  These  are  seen — I.  In 
the  growth  of  Christianity.  At  the  dawn  of  Christianity  there  was  a  darkness 
like  that  of  Egypt,  "  that  might  be  felt."  Darkness  is  the  symbol  of  ignorance 
and  sin.  The  intellectual  greatness  of  the  Augustan  age  is  seen  in  its  poets, 
philosophers,  &c.  ;  but  the  flowers  grew  on  a  marshy  and  rotten  soil.  Classical 
writers  confirm  St.  Paul's  testimony  in  Romans  chap.  i.  to  the  awful  moral  degrada- 
tion of  the  time.  The  "  dayspring  from  on  high  "  appears,  and  gradually  asserts 
its  power  over  the  darkness.     Christian  teachers  penetrated  where  the  Roman 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

legions  never  trod.     Persecution  did  not  arrest  the  wave.     When  the  northern 
barbarians  overwhelmed  the  Roman  Empire,  they  had  to  yield  to  a  power  greater 
than  their  own — that  of  the  Cross.     The  glory  of  the  meridian  sun  must  fill  the 
earth.     II.  In  the  geowth  of  the  Christian.     Before  conversion  our  hearts 
were  "  dark,  void,  and  formless,"  like  the  original  world.     The  spirit  of  man  is 
illumined  by  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness,"   and  chaos  becomes  cosmos.     This 
growth  is  gradual.     Three  stages  of  Christian  growth.     God  calls,  touches,  blesses  ; 
which  corresponds  in  some  sort   to  assent,  affiance,  and  assmance.     Growth  in 
religion  is  mainly  characterised  by  thought  of  ourselves  at  its  beginning,  by  con- 
eideration  for  others  as  we  advance  in  holiness,  and  by  a  desire  for  the  glory  of 
God  when  more  matured.     Is  Christ  growing  in  us  ?     We  must  be  advancing  or 
receding.     If  Christ  be  growing  in  us,  certain  effects  will  follow.     His  light  will 
cleanse  and  purify  ;  and  shining  from  us,  it  will  give  us  influence  on  others.     (J.  S. 
Pillington,  M.A.)         The  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Rigliteousness  : — All  nature  is  laid 
under  contribution  to  furnish  emblems  of  Christ  in  His  Person  and  offices.     Text 
refers  to  the  second  advent.     But  the  glory  of  the  second  will  be  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  grace  of  the  first  advent.     It  was  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
when  Christ  appeared  as  the  Light  of  the  World  revealing  pardon,  peace,  liberty, 
and  joy.     It  will  be  the  rising  in  full  meridian  splendour,  when  He  shall  appear 
the  second  time,  to  complete  the  salvation  of  His  saints  and  to  be  glorified  in 
them.     1.  What  the  sun  is  to  the  natural  world,  that  Christ  is  in  the  spiritual,  the 
source  and  centre  of  its  light  and  life.     2.  Christ  is  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 
He  is  Righteousness  embodied,  exhibited  as  a  living  reality.     He  fulfilled  all 
righteousness.     He  makes  His  people  righteous.     As  their  justification,  and  as 
their  sanctification  and  illumination.     By  His  Spirit  He  imparts  His  own  nature 
to  them,  creates  them  anew  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness.     3.  Christ  rises 
"  with  healing  in  His  wings."     The  figure  admits  of  a  natural  and  beautiful  inter- 
pretation.    On  certain  coasts  there  sets  in  with  the  rising  sun  a  balmy  breeze 
which,  because  of  its  soothing  and  salubrious  character,  the  residents  call  "  the 
healer."     Regarding  this  with  poetic  fancy  as  winged  zephyrs  of  the  rising  sun, 
the  prophet  speaks  of  the  coming  Messiah  as  a  sun  rising  with  healing  in  His 
wings.     4.   "  Grow  up  as  calves "  is  better  rendered,  "  bound  as  calves  loosed 
from  the  stall."     Liberty  and  enlargement  of  heart,  exultation  and  lightness  of 
spirit,  shall  be  to  them  on  whom  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arises.     The  expression 
"  go  forth  "  denotes  release.     We  know  the  exuberance  of  a  young  animal  set  free 
to  range  in  the  open  pasturage.     To  them  who  "  fear  His  name  "  the  rising  is 
with  "  healing  in  His  wings."     But  the  sun  in  the  heavens  can  smite,  and  scorch 
and  slay.     Oh,  that  terrible  sunstroke,  so  fatal   in  the  East !     Christ's  coming 
may  be  to  some  a  revelation  of  flaming  fire  taking  vengeance.     {A.  R.  Symonds.) 
The  Sun  of  Righteousness  : — I.   The  blessings  Christ  imparts,  like  those  of 
the  sun,  are  of  the  utmost  value.     A  sunless  landscape  is  less  dismal  than 
a  Christless  soul ;  whilst  a  Christly  soul  has  on  it  "  a  light  that  never  shone  on 
sea  or  land."     The  blessings  of  the  natm-al  sun  and  of  the  Christ  are,  in  many 
respects,  similar.     I.  They  are  enlightening.     Sunrise  means  daylight.     2.  They 
are  restorative.     "  Healing," — for  does  not  the  sun's  influence  on  drooping  flower 
and  faded  face  of  human  weakness  but  hint  Christ's  influence  on  men's  hearts 
and  lives  ?     II.  The  blessings  Christ  imparts,  like  those  of  the  sun,  come  to 
MEN  IN  A  remarkable  MANNER.     The  sunrlsc  and  these  "  wings "  combine  to 
suggest  — (1)    Certainty;     (2)    Stillness;    (3)    Gentleness;     (4)    Swiftness.      So 
Christ  blesses.     III.  The  blessings  Christ  imparts,  like  tliose  of  the  sun,  bring 

BENEFITS   that,    IN    A    LARGE    DEGREE,    ARE    UNIVERSAL.       The    SUn    shinCS    On    the 

evil  and  on  the  good.  What  spot  of  earth  docs  it  not,  directly  or  indirectly, 
reach  and  bless  ?  So  many  of  Chiist's  blessings  bless  all.  Is  there  not  through 
Him— (1)  Prolonged  probation  for  the  whole  human  race  ?  (2)  "  Means  of  grace  " 
for  multitudes  still  sinners  ?  (3)  Holy  influences  of  thought  and  character  that 
restrain  and  that  tend  to  elevate  ?  IV.  The  blessings  Christ  imparts,  like 
those  of  the  sun,  demand  special  conditions  for  their  full  appropriation. 
The  best  cultivated  soil  will  best  utilise  the  heat  and  light  of  the  sun.  So  the  soul 
that  in  steadfast  faith  and  love  turns  to  the  Christ,  and  with  intense  desires 
drinks  in  all  His  truth  and  grace,  will  be  the  soul  on  which  will  be  most  evident 
the  healing  influences  of  the  great  Sun  of  Righteousness.  (Homilist.)  A 
message  for  the  faithful : — Changed,  indeed,  are  our  days  from  those  in  which  the 
words  of  the  text  were  written.  Since  that  time  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  has 
arisen :  Elias  the  prophet  has  come  already,  and  they  have  done  to  him  all  that 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  137 

they  listed.  The  law  of  Moses,  commanded  in  Horeb  for  all  Israel,  has  been 
exchanged  for  the  voice  of  One  who  speaks  to  us  from  heaven.  And  yet  God's 
last  words,  as  here  recorded,  are  still  substantially  the  same  with  those  which  Ho 
speaks  to  us  to-day  after  the  lapse  of  more  than  two-and-twenty  centuries.  1.  What 
is  the  great  basis,  here  set  before  us,  of  all  revelation  ?  Behold,  the  day  cometh. 
Everything  is  tending  to  one  point ;  every  act,  every  word  of  ours,  is  running 
on  before  us  to  that  great  end,  the  day  of  final  reckoning.  How  difficult  it  is  to 
believe  this  ;  how  much  more  difficult  still  to  act  upon  it !  How  often  does  sin 
triumph  !  The  day  cometh  ;  a  day  revealed  by  fire  ;  a  fire  not  purifying  but 
consuming  to  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  who  do  wickedly.  And  need  we  remind 
you  who  these  are  ?  They  are  all  who  say  in  their  hearts, — not  with  their  lips 
indeed,  but  in  their  hearts, — There  is  no  God  :  all  who  live,  that  is,  as  if  there 
was  none  ;  live  without  intercourse  with  Him  ;  live  without  regard  to  His  will 
and  His  approval.  Take  with  you  imto  your  new  life  this  one  great  principle, — 
there  is  a  day  of  judgment  coming.  2.  Then  what  force  and  interest  will  this 
first  truth  give  to  that  which  follows.  He  who  is  expecting  the  coming  judgment 
can  alone  rejoice  to  hear  of  One  who  will  enable  him  to  meet  it.  "  Unto  you 
that  fear  My  name  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  with  healing  in  His  wings." 
The  prophet  is  speaking  of  a  time  when  those  who  have  served  God  in  their  genera- 
tion shall  find  to  their  eternal  comfort  that  they  have  not  served  Him  in  vain. 
This  is  the  great  blessedness  of  God's  service,  that  all  its  difficulties  and  troubles 
come  first :  they  lie  on  the  surface  ;  they  beset  its  first  entrance  ;  diminishing 
commonly,  or  made  by  use  lighter  to  bear,  as  life  advances  ;  and  all  ceasing 
absolutely  when  this  life  ends.  A  true  Cluristian  is  on  the  winning  side  in  the 
great  battle.  With  what  patience,  then,  should  he  who  is  called  to  suffer  some- 
times for  his  Christian  faithfulness  regard  those  who  thus  deal  with  him.  3.  This 
for  every  one  of  us  is  the  great  lesson,  that  we  look  well  to  our  hearts  and  lives, 
to  the  work  which  God  has  set  us  to  do,  and  to  the  spirit  in  which  we  may  do  it. 
4.  There  remains  yet  one  portion  of  these  last  words  of  God  by  His  prophets, 
which  is  scarcely  less  applicable  to  days  when  He  has  already  spoken  to  us  by 
His  Son.  "  Behold,  I  will  send  Elijah,"  &c.  The  prophetical  part  of  these 
words  has  aheady  been  fulfilled.  The  mission  of  the  Baptist  accomplished  them. 
But  the  practical  lesson  which  they  contain  is  of  unchangeable  moment.  You 
all  know  how  large  a  part  of  your  duty  is  connected,  by  God's  wise  appointment, 
with  your  parents.  God  accepts  through  them  an  obedience  which  cannot  yet 
be  paid  consciously  to  Himself.  God  makes  it  one  portion  of  your  duty  to  Him 
to  honour  and  obey  them.  Their  approval  He  would  have  you  to  regard  as  your 
highest  earthly  reward  ;  their  comfort  and  happiness  as  your  highest  earthly 
object.  (Dean  Vaughan. )  Chrises  first  coming  : — There  is  a  touch  of  sadness 
about  the  Book  of  Malachi.  His  are  parting  words,  and  they  show  how  God's 
people  had  degenerated,  had  lost  their  fervour,  and  become  content  with  a  mere 
outward  service.  Malachi  revealed  the  spiritual  state  of  the  people  to  themselves, 
denounced  their  sins,  and  warned  them  of  judgment  to  come.  But  he  does  not 
leave  them  without  hope.  It  is  the  manner  of  Hebrew  prophecy  to  blend  together 
different  events  which  have  relation  to  one  another,  and  here  we  have  words 
which  belong  to  both  comings  of  Christ.  I.  Cheist's  first  coming.  Described 
under  the  image  of  the  rising  of  the  sun.  This  implies  that  the  world  was  in  a 
state  of  darkness  before  the  Incarnation.  The  title  which  the  prophet  gives  to 
Christ,  "  the  Sim  of  Righteousness,"  marks  one  great  purpose  of  His  advent- 
iUumination.  "  Healing  in  His  wings,"  applies  to  the  work  of  Christ,  in  body 
and  soul.  As  the  rays  of  the  sun  look  like  wings  when  they  stretch  out  across 
the  heavens,  so  this  healing  work  of  Christ  extends,  by  means  of  His  mystic  body, 
the  Church,  far  and  wide  over  the  nations.  II.  Who  profit  by  it  ?  1.  Light  is 
diffusive.  2.  But  we  may  close  our  eyes  against  it,  or  hide  from  it.  3.  Christ  is 
the  sun  to  those  who  fear  His  name.  4.  Christ's  light  was  convictive,  as  well 
as  attractive.  5.  Even  our  Lord's  first  coming  was,  in  some  sense,  an  act  of 
judgment.  Lessons — 1.  Realise  the  need  of  spiritual  illumination.  2.  Question 
ourselves  how  far  the  hght  and  healing  effects  of  Christ's  coming  have  reached 
us,  and  how  far  our  daily  life  is  influenced  by  His  presence.  3.  To  be  clear  about 
the  fact  whether  He  is  a  "  &vnii  witness  "  against  us,  or  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness," 
depends  upon  ourselves  and  our  use  of  the  grace  which  is  given  to  us.  {The 
Thinker.)  Wfuit  Christ  is  made  to  believers  : — Jesus  Christ  is  made  unto  us 
of  God,  a  soul-heating,  soul-warming  sun.     I.  What  need  have  we  of  thbsb 

WARMING  INFLUENCES   FBOM  ChBIST,  THE  SuN   OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  ?      It  Is  Upon 


138  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

the  account  of  the  coldness  we  are  subject  to  in  spiritual  things.  Some  are  key- 
cold,  stone  cold  ;  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Even  such  as  are  spiritually  alive, 
are  subject  to  their  cold  fits.  The  causes  of  this  spiritual  coldness  are — 1.  Some 
inward  distemper  prevailing  in  the  soul.  2.  From  the  season ;  night-time,  and 
Avinter-time,  are  cooling  times.  When  God  withdraws,  it  is  both  night  and  winter 
to  the  soul.  3.  From  cooling  circumstances,  such  as  want  of  ordinances,  engage- 
ment with  carnal  relations.  The  effects  of  spiritual  coldness  are — (1)  Inward 
uneasiness.  (2)  Unfitness  for  action.  (3)  Unaptness  to  receive  impressions, 
by  the  Word  or  by  the  rod.  II.  How  is  hbat  and  warmth  coMMtrNiCATED  by 
Christ  to  those  that  fbar  His  name  ?  In  general,  it  is  by  His  wings.  In 
particular,  He  is  a  warming  sun  to  us — 1.  By  the  immediate  motions  and  comforts 
of  His  Holy  Spirit.  2.  By  His  Word  and  ordinances,  though  not  without  the 
Spirit.  3.  By  good  society.  And  Jesus  Christ  is  made  a  heavenly  sun,  with 
"  healing  "  in  His  wings.  Ours  is  a  sick  and  wounded  condition.  Sick  of  the 
disease  of  natural  corruption  ;  sick  of  the  wounds  of  actual  sin.  This  is — ( I )  The 
alone  healing.  (2)  It  is  all-healing.  (3)  It  is  healing  at  hand.  And  Jesus  Christ 
is  made  a  growth -furthering  sun  to  us.  "  Grow  up  as  calves."  Can  a  tree  or 
plant  grow  without  warmth  ?  And,  finally,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  a  fruit-furthering 
sun.  (Philip  Henry.)  The  inner  world  of  the  good  : — The  "  name  of  the  Lord  " 
means  Himself,  and  to  fear  Him  with  a  loving,  filial  reverence,  is  genuine  godli- 
ness. We  have  here,  in  fact,  a  picture  of  their  inner  world.  I.  It  is  a  world 
OF  solar  brightness.  The  "Sun  of  Righteousness"  rises  on  the  horizon  of  their 
souls.  There  are  souls  that  are  lighted  by  sparks  of  their  own  kindling,  and  by 
the  gaseous  blaze  springing  from  the  bogs  of  inner  depravity.  All  such  lights, 
whether  in  the  forms  of  philosophic  theories  or  religious  creeds,  are  dim,  partial, 
transitory.  The  soul  of  a  good  man  is  lighted  by  the  sun.  The  sun — ( 1 )  Throws 
his  beams  over  the  whole  heavens.  (2)  Reveals  all  objects  in  their  true  aspects 
and  proportions.  (3)  Quickens  all  into  life  and  beauty.  (4)  Is  centre,  holding 
the  whole  system  in  order.  Christ  is  the  light  of  the  good.  II.  It  is  a  world 
OP  Divine  rectitude.  "  Sun  of  Righteousness."  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is 
within."  Eternal  right  is  enthroned.  God's  will  is  the  supreme  law.  The  meat 
and  drink  of  the  godly  soul  are  to  do  the  will  of  their  Father,  who  is  in  heaven. 
Such  a  soul  is  right — (1)  In  relation  to  itself.  All  its  powers,  passions,  and  im- 
pidses  are  rightly  adjusted.  Right — (2)  In  relation  to  the  universe.  It  renders 
to  others  what  it  would  that  others  should  render  unto  it.  Right — (3)  In  relation 
to  God.  The  Best  Being  it  loves  the  most,  the  Greatest  Being  it  reverences  the 
most,  the  Kindest  Being  it  thanks  the  most.  III.  It  is  a  world  of  remedial 
influence.  "  With  healing  in  His  wings."  The  sun's  beams  are  in  Scripture 
called  His  wings.  "The  wings  of  the  morning"  (Psa.  cxxxix.).  The  soul  through 
sin  is  diseased.  Its  eyes  are  dim,  its  ears  are  heavy,  its  limbs  are  feeble,  its  very 
blood  is  poisoned.  The  godly  man  is  under  remedial  influences.  The  beams 
of  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness  "  work  off  the  disease,  repair  the  constitution,  and 
enable  it  to  run  without  being  weary,  and  to  walk  without  being  faint.  There 
is  a  proverb  among  the  Jews  that  as  "  the  sun  arises,  the  infirmities  decrease." 
The  flowers  which  drooped  and  languished  all  night,  revive  in  the  morning.  The 
late  Mr.  Robinson,  of  Cambridge,  called  upon  a  friend  just  as  he  had  received  a 
letter  from  his  son,  who  was  surgeon  on  a  vessel  then  lying  off  Smyrna.  The 
son  mentioned  to  his  father,  that  every  morning  about  svmrise  a  fresh  gale  of  air 
blew  from  the  sea  across  the  land,  and  from  its  wholesomeness  and  utility  in 
clearing  the  infected  air,  this  wind  was  called  the  Doctor.  Christ  is  the  Physician 
of  souls.  IV.  It  is  a  world  of  buoyant  energy.  "  Ye  shall  go  forth  and  grow 
up  as  calves  of  the  stall."  See  the  calf,  which  from  its  birth  has  been  shut  up  in 
the  stall,  let  forth  foi  the  first  time  into  the  green  fields  in  May,  how  full  of  buoyant 
energy,  it  leaps  and  frolics  and  frisks.  This  is  the  figure  employed  here  to  represent 
the  gladsomeness  with  which  the  godly  soul  disports  its  faculties  under  the  genial 
beams  of  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness."  Conclusion — What  a  transcendent 
good  is  religion  !  How  blessed  the  soul  that  has  come  under  its  bright,  benign, 
and  heavenly  influence.  (Homilist.)  Progress  in  the  religiovs  life: — They 
were  before  in  darkness  and  disease  ;  both  of  which  confine.  But  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  arises,  and  with  healing  in  His  wings ;  and  thus,  the  true  light 
now  shining,  and  health  being  restored,  they  become  free  and  active — they  go 
forth  and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall.  For  even  now  they  have  not  attained, 
they  are  not  already  perfect.  Nor  are  they  to  remain  what  they  are,  but  to 
increase  with  all  the  increase  of  God.     We  are  not  to  deny  what  God  has  dona 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  139 

for  our  souls.  But  though  we  must  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things,  we  are 
not  to  be  satisfied  with  it.  A  day  of  greater  things  is  attainable  :  and  if  we  do 
not  aspire  after  it,  we  have  reason  to  suspect  even  the  reality  of  our  religion. 
Spiritual  principles  may  be  weak,  but  if  they  are  Divine,  they  will  evince  it  by 
a  tendency  to  growth.  The  sacred  writers  express  this  progression  by  every  kind 
of  growth.  By  human  growth  ;  vegetable  growth  ;  and  here  we  have  animal 
growth.  No  creatures,  perhaps,  increase  so  rapidly  and  observably  as  calves, 
especially  when  they  are  well  attended  and  fed,  and  for  the  very  purpose  of 
growth.  We  have  been  reminded,  sometimes,  of  the  truth  of  this  image,  by 
the  spiritual  reality.  We  have  seen  those  who,  in  a  little  time,  have  surprised 
all  around  them,  by  their  progress  in  the  Divine  hfe.  But  many  of  us  have  reason 
to  exclaim,  "  My  leanness,  my  leanness  !  "  How  little  progress  have  we  made 
in  religious  knowledge,  experience,  practice,  and  usefulness,  though  we  have 
possessed  every  advantage,  and  long  enjoyed  the  means  of  grace.  At  present 
the  comparison  reproves  us.  But  let  it  also  excite  and  encourage.  It  not  only 
reminds  us  of  our  duty,  but  of  our  privilege.  This  growth  is  not  only  commandet^ 
but  promised.  It  is  therefore  attainable — and  we  know  the  way  to  our  resources. 
Jesus  came,  not  only  that  we  might  have  life,  but  have  it  more  abundantly. 
{William  Jay.)  '''The  Sun  has  risen"  : — The  natives  of  the  now  thoroughly 
Christianised  Samoa  Islands  have  commemorated  the  coming  of  the  Gospel 
among  them,  and  the  remembrance  of  their  friend,  John  Williams,  who  laid  down 
his  life  on  their  behalf,  by  erecting  a  church  on  the  spot  where  the  missionary 
first  landed.  The  motto  chosen  for  inscription  on  the  walls  is  simple  and  expres- 
sive, "The  Sun  has  risen."  {Missionary  News.)  Hopeful  view  of  the  future 
of  the  world  : — I  do  not  know  whether  any  of  my  hearers  have  ever  gone  up  from 
Riffelburg  to  Corner  Grat,  in  the  High  Alps,  to  behold  the  sun  rise.  Every 
mountain  catches  the  light  according  to  the  height  which  the  upheaving  forces 
that  God  set  in  motion  have  given  it.  First,  the  point  of  Monte  Rosa  is  kissed 
by  the  morning  beams,  blushes  for  a  moment,  and  forthwith  stands  clear  in  the 
light.  Then  the  Bretthorn,  and  the  dome  of  Mischabel,  and  the  Matterhorn, 
and  twenty  other  grand  mountains,  embracing  the  distant  Jung  Frau,  receive 
each  in  its  turn  the  gladdening  rays,  bask  each  for  a  brief  space,  and  then  remain 
bathed  in  sunlight.  Meanwhile  the  valleys  between  lie  down  dark  and  dismal 
as  death.  But  the  light  which  has  risen  is  the  light  of  the  morning ;  and  these 
shadows  are  even  now  lessening,  and  we  are  sure  they  will  soon  altogether  vanish. 
Such  is  the  hopeful  view  I  take  of  our  world.  "  Darkness  covered  the  earth, 
and  gross  darkness  the  people  ;  but  God's  light  hath  broken  forth  in  the  morning, 
and  to  them  who  sat  in  darkness  a  great  light  has  arisen."  Already  I  see  favoiu-ed 
spots  illumined  by  it ;  Great  Britain  and  her  spreading  colonies,  and  Prussia 
extending  her  influence,  and  the  United  States,  with  her  broad  territory  and 
her  rapidly  increasing  population,  stand  in  the  light ;  and  I  see,  not  twenty, 
but  a  hundred  points  of  light,  striking  up  in  ovu*  scattered  mission  stations,  in 
old  continents  and  secluded  isles  and  barren  deserts,  according  as  God's  grace 
and  man's  heaven-kindled  love  have  favoured  them.  And  much  as  I  was  enrap- 
tured with  that  grand  Alpine  scene,  and  shouted  irrepressibly  as  I  surveyed  it, 
I  am  still  more  elevated,  and  I  feel  as  if  I  could  cry  aloud  for  joy,  when  I  hear 
of  light  advancing  from  point  to  point,  and  penetrating  deeper  and  deeper  into 
the  darkness  which  we  are  sure  is  at  last  to  be  dispelled,  to  allow  our  earth  to 
stand  clear  in  the  light  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  {J.  M'Cosh.)  Properties 
of  light : — Light  is  purifying  ;  let  sunshine  into  a  dark  cellar,  and  it  soon  becomes 
pure.  Light  is  vivifying  ;  expose  a  withered  plant  from  a  dark  room  to  the 
sun,  and  it  colours  up.  Light  is  power  ;  all  sources  of  fuel  are  directly  from 
the  sun,  coming  in  rays  of  light.  Light  is  joyous ;  nothing  contributes  so  much 
to  making  a  brilliant  assembly  as  a  flood  of  light  upon  it.  Light  is  comforting ; 
a  dark  day  is  always  a  gloomy  day,  but  a  burst  of  sunshine  brings  a  cheer.  Light 
is  strengthening  ;  a  puny  child  may  grow  strong  if  he  can  play  in  the  sunshine. 
So  you  should  get  into  the  light  that  streams  from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 
His  presence  purifies  the  heart,  energises  the  mind,  brightens  the  life,  cheers  the 
spirits,  and  strengthens  the  whole  man.  {Sunday  Companion.)  The  Sun  of 
Righteousness : — I.  His  oneness.  In  the  miiverse  there  is  infinite  variety  and 
abimdant  repetition.  In  oui  world  many  rivers  roll  their  waters  into  many  seas  ; 
many  mountains  attract  the  many  clouds  which  are  bom  out  of  many  deeps. 
Above  and  around  us  are  many  worlds  ;  many  stars  twinkle  over  many  watchers. 
But  there  is  for  us  only  one  Sun,  unique  in  splendour  and  in  power.     There  is 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

but  one  Jesus,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.  There  is  no  other  name  given  under 
heaven,  or  among  men ;  only  one  all- meritorious  Saviour.  II.  Centralness.  Our 
solar  system  holds  its  place  in  the  mechanism  of  the  heavens  by  revolving  in 
silent  grandeur  round  the  central  sun.  That  sun  is  the  pivot  and  point  round 
which,  in  smooth,  unbroken  harmony,  the  mighty  worlds  are  ever  moving  in  their 
courses,  linked  and  ordered  by  the  law  of  gravitation ;  so  is  Jesus  the  true  centre 
of  the  soul.  Apart  from  Him,  the  soul,  like  an  erratic  meteor,  a  wandering  star, 
flies  ever  away  from  the  central  point  of  bliss,  to  be  finally  lost  and  shattered  in 
awful  night.  The  true  behever  is  bound  to  Jesus  by  the  mightier  law  of  love. 
Roimd  Him,  in  the  orbit  of  light  and  duty,  he  revolves  for  ever,  subject  to  the 
law  of  righteousness,  and  brightened  with  the  beatific  beams  of  grace.  III.  Light. 
The  moon,  bright  though  her  beams  are,  and  radiant  her  beauty,  has  no  inherent 
illuminating  power.  The  stars  that  make  obeisance  to  their  fiery  lord  borrow 
their  glory  from  this  central  source,  and  shed  a  reflected  lustre  on  the  world  below. 
The  coal  dug  out  of  its  subterranean  bed,  and  all  other  sources  of  artificial  hght, 
have  drawn  their  resources  from  this  central  reservoir.  So  with  Jesus.  "  It 
pleased  the  Father,  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell."  "  I  am  the  light  of 
the  world."  As  the  sun  chases  the  gloom,  scatters  the  clouds,  conquers  the  night, 
and  floods  the  worlds  with  day,  so  He  banishes  the  night  of  nature,  the  darkness  of 
ignorance,  the  clouds  of  doubt  and  fear,  the  gloomy  shades  of  death.  IV.  Life. 
The  sun  is  the  great  quickener.  Winter,  made  by  its  absence,  is  the  time  of  death  ; 
bird  and  beast  are  sluggish,  and  comparatively  inert ;  tree  and  plant  and  flower 
are  paralysed  by  an  icy  grasp.  With  the  returning  sun  comes  the  germinating 
seed,  the  bursting  bud,  the  swiftly  circulating  sap,  and  a  marvellous  activity 
pervades  creation.  So  Jesus  raises  dead  souls  to  life,  and  quickens  the  soul  of 
man  into  hale  and  thriving  resurrection.  "  I  am  the  Life,"  He  says.  V.  Beauty. 
The  sun  is  the  greatest  artist.  His  magic  pencil  gives  the  sky  its  peerless  blue, 
robes  nature  in  emerald  vestments,  silvers  every  lake  and  stream,  and  paints  in 
fairest  hues  the  flowers  tliat  gem  the  earth.  Spring-tide's  green,  summer's  flush, 
autumn's  gold,  and  winter's  white,  all  are  the  offspring  of  his  magic  pencil,  while 
the  sun  itself  is  more  glorious  than  they  all.  So  Jesus  Christ  is  Himself  the  "  fairest 
among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely."  He  invests  with  moral  excellence 
and  spiritual  beauty  all  that  His  love  shines  down  upon.  He  invests  the  beheving 
soul  with  the  garment  of  praise  and  the  beauty  of  hohness.  VI.  Gladness. 
"  The  sun,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  rejoices  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race."  It  is  a 
type  of  perfect  happiness.  A  happy  face  is  said  to  be  a  "  sunny  "  countenance ; 
gladness  is  oft  called  "  sunshine."  All  nature  breaks  into  song  under  the  sun's 
influence  ;  the  tiniest  insect  dances  in  his  beams  ;  the  weary  invalid  welcomes  the 
first  rosy  salutation  of  the  morning.  Jesus  is  the  joy-giver.  VII.  Perfectness. 
The  sun  is  the  great  ripener.  It  brings  all  the  processes  of  nature  to  perfection.  It 
finds  the  leaf  an  imprisoned  embryo  in  russet  husk  and  shell,  and  continues  to 
expand  and  beautify  it  until  it  flutters  in  perfect  growth  on  plant  or  tree.  It 
touches  the  green  bud,  and  never  rests  until  it  shines  upon  the  perfect  flower. 
It  nurses  the  fruit  till  it  drops  ripe  and  mellow  into  October's  lap.  It  undertakes 
charge  of  the  green  corn-blade,  and  never  ceases  until  the  golden  harvest  bends 
to  the  reaper's  sc3i;lic.  So  Jesus  is  the  Great  Perfecter ;  and  in  the  believer's 
nature  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom  is  nursed  and  nurtured  until,  as  Job  has  it, 
he  becomes  a  "  shock  of  com  ripe  for  the  gamer."  He  that  pardons  and  He  that 
sanctifies  is  all  of  one.  VIII.  Fulness.  The  sun's  resources  never  fail.  Wliat 
liberal  largess  he  has  conferred  on  the  world  !  What  harvests  he  has  ripened  ! 
What  mountain  snows  he  has  melt«d  into  crystal  streams  !  What  flowers  he 
has  painted  !  What  spirits  he  has  gladdened  since  first  his  mission  was  begun  ! 
and  yet  his  eye  is  not  dim  nor  his  natural  strength  abated  !  So  with  Jesus.  "  It 
pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell !  "  IX.  Universalness. 
"  His  going  forth  is  from  the  end  of  the  heaven,  and  his  circuit  unto  the  ends  of 
the  earth  :  and  there  is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof."  It  bronzes  the  brow 
of  the  rude  Fijian,  reddens  the  skin  of  the  Indian  warrior,  blackens  the  negro's 
swarthy  face,  and  wraps  the  world  in  its  benevolent  embrace.  "  I  am  the  ught 
of  the  world,"  says  Jesus.  His  saving  beams  have  blest  humanity  in  all  its  tribes, 
from  shivering  Esquimaux  to  sweltering  Ethiopian.  He  tasted  death  for  every 
man.  X.  Impartialness.  The  sun  makes  no  selection.  Where  it  can  shine 
it  will.  It  beautifies  the  garden,  and  smiles  upon  the  desert.  It  glorifies  the  rose, 
and  flings  a  halo  round  the  thistle.  It  flashes  on  the  crystal  lakes,  and  shimmers 
uu  the  stagnant  pool.     It  gleams  on  the  topmost  oak  leaf,  and  shines  on  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHL  141 

humblest  violet.  It  burnishes  silk  and  rags  alike.  "  Whosoever  "  is  the  wide- 
spread word  of  Jesus  too.  "  If  any  man  thirst,"  &c.  Wealthy  Nicodemue  or 
Joseph,  poor  Bartimeus  or  the  woman  by  the  well.  This  Sun  of  Righteou.sness, 
does  He  shine  on  you  ?  He  is  your  one  centre  of  life  and  light ;  the  one  source  of 
gladness,  beauty,  and  perfection.     (J.  Jackson  Wray.) 

Ver.  4.  Remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses. — Moses  defended : — Of  all  the 
books  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  first  five  books  are  the  most  vital.  The 
Pentateuch  is  not  a  branch  of  the  tree  of  revelation  ;  it  is  one  of  the  very  roots. 
If  objectors  must  attack  some  portion  of  the  Old  Testament,  let  them  assail  the 
Book  of  Kings,  the  writings  of  Solomon,  the  prophecies  of  Daniel,  the  glories 
of  Ezekiel,  the  sublimities  of  the  Book  of  Job,  for  these,  though  inspired,  are 
not  of  such  vital  importance ;  but  of  the  foundation  truths  of  Genesis,  we  say, 
"Touch  not,  handle  not."  If  the  writings  of  Moses  are  not  authentic;  if  the 
facts  therein  recorded  are  untrue  ;  if,  in  fact,  Moses  in  his  offices  and  character, 
be  a  mere  fiction  of  the  brain,  then  the  most  tremendous  results  must  necessarily 
follow.  If  such  be  the  case,  then  the  whole  of  revelation  must  be  blotted  out. 
If  the  Pentateuch  suffer  an  eclipse,  the  New  Testament  suffers  the  same.  You 
cannot  have  a  partial  eclipse.  The  Pentateuch  and  New  Testament  are  woven 
together  in  one  seamless  robe.  If  you  make  a  rend,  you  destroy  the  whole.  The 
Epistles  of  St.  Paul  are  full  of  Moses.  H  Moses  falls,  St.  Paul  falls  with  him,  and 
all  the  glorious  apostles.  He  that  rejects  the  law  must  reject  the  Gospel  also : 
for  the  law  is  om-  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ.  Moses  spake  of  Christ, 
and  testified  of  Christ.  The  man  who  rejects  Moses  must  reject  the  Lord  Himself. 
We  have  other  witnesses  to  the  authenticity  of  the  Pentateuch  than  the  inspired 
Word  of  God.  The  testimony  of  the  rocks  of  Sinai,  &c.  (Alfred  Cay,  A.K.C.) 
The  law,  its  place  and  power  : — In  our  text  Malachi,  the  last  of  the  Old  Testament- 
prophets,  shows  that  the  fear  of  the  Lord  necessarily  involves  reverential  regard 
for  His  law.  This  law  is  described  as  that  which  was  given  to  Moses  in  Horeb, 
and  the  charge  is  given  :  "  Remember  ye  the  law."  These  words  seal  up  the  Old 
Testament  revelation.  Our  text  expresses  a  necessary,  imiversal,  and  perpetual 
obhgation :  "  Remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses  My  servant,  which  I  commanded 
unto  liim  in  Horeb."  In  very  many  minds  there  are  very  hazy  notions  in  reference 
to  the  relation  of  the  Old  Testament  to  the  New,  of  the  Mosaic  to  the  Christian 
dispensation,  of  the  law  to  the  Gospel.  It  is  quite  true  that  there  are  statements 
in  the  New  Testament  which  indicate  that  some  old  things  had  passed  away, 
and  that  some  new  things  had  come.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  revelation  of 
the  Gospel  is  in  contrast  to  that  of  the  Old  Testament — not,  however,  the  contrast 
of  contradiction,  but  rather  of  fuller  and  clearer  development.  We  must  re- 
member that  the  term  "  law  of  Moses  "  is  used  in  two  senses — the  one  covering 
the  whole  Mosaic  legislation,  the  other  having  special  reference  to  what  are  called 
the  "  Ten  Commandments."  There  were  things  in  the  legislation  of  Moses  which 
were  purely  civil — which  could  apply  only  to  the  Jews  as  a  nation.  There  were 
other  things  which  were  ceremonial  —  belonging  to  a  dispensation  which  was 
symbolical,  typical,  and  preparatory.  All  these  things,  national  and  ceremonial, 
passed  away  with  the  dawn  of  the  new  dispensation.  But  there  was  one  part  of 
the  revelation  given  by  Moses — and  this  the  central  and  most  important  part — 
called  distmctively  "  the  law,"  the  moral  law,  the  ten  commandments,  which 
is  of  imiversal  and  perpetual  obhgation.  I.  The  law  is  a  glorious  revelation 
OF  THE  character  AND  WILL  OF  GoD.  God  is  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the 
universe.  He  hath  made  all  beings  and  things  by  His  almighty  power.  He 
governs  them  according  to  His  own  infinite  wisdom.  Over  material  things  and 
irrational  creatures  His  control  is  a  matter  of  forceful  operation ;  but  over  all 
orders  of  rational,  responsible  beings  His  control  is  a  moral  government.  This 
renders  an  inteUigible  revelation  necessary.  His  moral  nature  is  at  once  the 
Boiurce  and  the  standard  of  all  pirrity  and  beauty.  The  moral  law  reveals  Him 
as  the  just  and  holy  God,  pointing  out  the  way  of  duty  and  demanding  obedience. 
This  law  is  perfect.  It  reveals  God's  character,  declares  His  will,  and  discloses 
the   fundamental,    unalterable   principles   of   BUs   moral   government.     11.  The 

LAW  IS  SUITED  TO  THE  NATURE  OF  MAN,  AND  IS  FITTED  TO  SECURE  HIS  HIGHEST 

DEVELOPMENT  AND  HAPPINESS.  Man  is  a  moral,  responsible  being,  who  was 
created  in  the  image,  and  intended  for  the  service  and  glory  of  God.  1.  Likeness 
to  the  Divine  character  is  essential  to  man's  true  development.  The  moral  law 
revealing  the  purity  and  beauty  of  God,  or  declaring  His  holy  and  righteous  will. 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

sets  before  men  the  original  pattern  of  their  own  character  and  the  standard 
of  their  intended  development.  2.  Thus  we  may  say  also  that  obedience  to  the 
law  of  God  is  the  necessary  justification  of  man's  existence.  The  holy  and 
righteous  God  could  not  create  a  race  of  rebels  intending  that  they  should  exist 
to  be  disloyal  and  disobedient.  Man,  coming  imder  the  power  of  sin,  through 
rebellion  and  disobedience,  forfeited  his  right  to  existence  in  the  sight  of  God 
and  among  His  creatures.  The  law  declaring  man's  duty  justifies  his  Divine 
sentence  of  condemnation  and  death  upon  transgressors.  3.  Still  more,  it  is 
absolutely  certain  that  harmony  with  the  will  of  God  is  essential  to  man's  happiness. 
Holiness  and  happiness  are  in  their  very  nature  closely  and  inseparably  linked 
together.  III.  The  law  came  straight  from  God  to  man.  Man  was  not  left 
to  discover  or  reason  it  out  for  himself.  The  law  is  not  a  constitution  agreed 
upon  among  men  for  self-government.  This  same  law  was  given  of  God  to  Moses 
in  Horeb.  IV.  The  law  is  enforced  by  the  most  powerfitl  sanctions.  To 
it  are  attached  promises  of  blessing  and  reward,  and  threatenings  of  curse  and 
punishment.  V.  The  law  has  necessary,  universal,  and  perpetual  authority. 
1.  Necessary.  Man's  obligation  to  keep  the  law  docs  not  depend  upon  his  own 
profession  or  resolution.  Some  people  excuse  themselves  in  reference  to  a  certain 
looseness  of  conduct  by  saying  that  they  make  no  profession  of  religion,  or  that 
they  have  very  Uberal  views.  They  say  that  it  is  quite  proper  and  necessary 
that  professing  Christians  should  recognise  the  authority  of  the  law,  but  they 
contend  that  every  man  has  the  right  to  judge  for  himself.  This  is  all  wrong ; 
no  man  has  the  right  to  set  his  judgment  or  opinion  or  prejudice  or  wilfulness 
against  the  plain,  positive  precepts  of  the  Divine  law.  The  authority  of  the 
law  is  due  to  its  Divine  authorship.  2.  Thus  it  must  be  evident  that  obligation 
to  the  moral  law  is  universal.  Wherever  you  find  the  moral  faculty,  the  moral 
law  has  authority.  3.  Thus  also  the  authority  of  the  law  is  perpetual.  God 
cannot  change.  VI.  The  law  is  the  basis,  and  shall  be  the  crown  and 
GLORY  OF  the  Gospel.  The  Gospel  did  not  destroy  the  law.  It  did  not 
lower  its  standards.  It  was  not  intended  as  an  apology  for  its  severity.  The 
Gospel  honours  and  magnifies  the  law,  declaring  that  it  is  holy,  just,  and  good. 
The  law  could  not  pardon  a  transgression,  therefore  it  could  not  give  life  and 
salvation  to  guilty  sinners.  It  gave  the  knowledge  of  sin,  measured  the  extent 
of  man's  weakness  and  the  depth  of  his  fall ;  thus  it  prepared  for  the  exhibition 
of  pardoning  mercy  and  saving  grace  by  showing  the  necessity  for  it.  Then,  again, 
the  law  determined  the  plan  of  salvation  and  the  provisions  necessary,  so  that  in 
the  exercise  of  mercy  the  Divine  righteousness  might  be  preserved  and  declared, 
so  that  God  might  be  just  in  justifying  every  one  that  believeth.  Still  further, 
the  condition  of  pardon  and  salvation  under  the  Gospel — which  is  faith — is  deter- 
mined by  the  law.  What  is  faith  but  the  recognition  and  acceptance  of  the  truth 
that  Christ  in  our  behalf  made  a  full  satisfaction  to  the  law,  and  took  away  our 
guilt  and  cancelled  the  sentence  of  condemnation  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself  ? 
Thus  we  must  see  that  the  law  is  the  basis  of  the  Gospel — determining  its  plan  and 
provisions  and  conditions  of  salvation.  But  there  is  more  to  be  told.  Through 
Christ  Jesus  come  the  renewal  of  man's  nature  and  the  gift  of  hfe  and  power, 
so  that  men  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  imdei  the  carnal  mind,  and 
led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will,  are  caused  to  love  and  delight  in,  and  are 
enabled  to  obey  the  law.  The  law  is  always  the  same.  The  motives  to  obedience 
are  higher  and  the  power  stronger,  because  of  full  satisfaction  and  reconcihation, 
and  the  free  gift  of  life  and  salvation  through  the  redemption  of  Christ.  The 
crown  and  glory  of  the  Gospel  come  to  each  man  when  the  law  of  God  is  enthroned 
in  his  heart  and  manifested  in  his  life  and  conduct.  It  is  said  that  in  ancient 
times  some  laws  were  put  into  verse,  so  that  the  people  might  learn  to  sing  them. 
Through  the  grace  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  God's  law  becomes  poetry  to  us  and  His 
statutes  a  song.     (J.  K.  Wright,  B.D.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Behold,  I  will  send  you  EUjah  the  prophet.  —  McdacMs  pre- 
dictions : — Of  the  prophecies  relating  to  the  Messias  some  were  so  obscure, 
and  had  such  an  appearance  of  inconsistency,  if  ap(>lied  to  one  and  the  same 
person,  that  they  could  not  well  be  understood,  till  the  event  reconciled  and 
unfolded  them  ;  for  which  obscurity  many  good  reasons  have  been  assigned. 
But  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  as  the  time  of  Christ's  coming  drew  nearer, 
the  later  predictions  concerning  Him  should  be  more  distinct  and  plain  than 
the  former.    I.  Explain  thb  peopheciks  of  Malachi  rblatino  to  the  Messias. 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  143 

The  Jews,  after  their  deliverance  from  Babylon,  were  free  from  idolatry,  but  in 
other  respects  they  were  base  and  wicked ;  and  as  unsettled  people  go  from  one 
extreme  to  another,  they  had  exchanged  a  pagan  superstition  for  a  kind  of  religious 
libertinism  and  cold  indifference  ;  and  this  nation,  which  had  once  adored  any 
and  every  idol,  was  become  remiss  in  the  worship  of  the  true  Gk)d.  Malachi 
reproaches  the  Jews  for  their  ingratitude  to  God,  who  had  so  lately  showed  them 
so  much  favour  and  mercy.  He  accuses  them  of  irreligion  and  profaneness  ; 
he  tells  them  that  God  abhorred  their  offerings,  and  would  raise  up  to  Himself 
better  worshippers  amongst  the  Gentiles.  Then  the  prophet  proceeds  to  declare 
the  coming  of  a  very  considerable  person.  The  passage  indeed  describes  two 
persons.  The  messenger,  and  another  person  who,  being  called  the  Lord,  and 
having  a  prophet  to  go  before  Him,  must  be  one  of  the  highest  dignity.  This 
same  person  is  also  called  the  "  Angel  of  the  Covenant."  He  is  to  come  suddenly, 
and  to  come  to  His  temple.  He  should  make  and  confirm  a  covenant  between 
God  and  men.  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  His  coming  ?  How  few  will  be 
found  fit  to  appear  before  Him !  He  may  be  compared  to  fiie  which  tries  metals 
and  purges  them  from  dross,  and  to  soap  which  cleanses  garments  ;  for  He  shall 
pass  a  just  and  impartial  judgment  upon  the  lives  and  doctrines  of  His  people, 
distinguishing  false  opinions  from  the  Word  of  God,  and  false  appearances  of 
holiness  from  true  piety.  He  shall  find  religion  greatly  corrupted,  and  the  priests 
and  Levites  as  bad  as  those  whom  they  should  instruct ;  but  He  shall  correct 
all  that  is  faulty,  and  so  reform  the  worship  of  God  that  it  shall  be  again  acceptable 
to  Him.  The  day  of  His  coming  shall  be  destructive  to  the  wicked.  A  new 
Elijah  was  to  prepare  His  way.  He  was  to  make  converts  by  his  ministry,  but 
not  to  produce  a  general  messenger.  II.  The  completion  of  these  predictions. 
Jesus  fulfils  these  predictions.  He  came  suddenly ;  came  to  His  temple  ;  was 
the  messenger  of  the  covenant ;  was  a  refiner's  fire  ;  purified  the  sons  of  Levi ; 
freed  the  law  and  the  worship  of  God  from  all  defects  and  innovations,  from  all 
that  was  superfluous,  biu-densome,  and  temporary.  Jesus  Christ  arose  as  a  Sun 
of  Righteousness  with  healing  in  His  wings.  His  coming  was  truly  the  great 
and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord.  The  prophecy  of  Elijah's  coming  was  fulfilled 
in  John  the  Baptist.  He  might  be,  not  improperly,  said  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the 
people,  and  to  restore  all  things,  as  he  did  all  that  was  requisite  for  that  purpose. 
Elias  in  Malachi  was  to  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord :  to  turn  the  hearts  of  men, 
and  to  call  the  Jews  to  amendment :  not  to  cause  a  general  conversion  of  the 
Jews ;  to  convert  several  and  thereby  to  save  them  from  destruction.  John 
the  Baptist  was  like  Elias  in  his  prophetic  office  ;  in  living  in  a  corrupted  age  ; 
in  fervent  zeal ;  in  restoring  decayed  religion  ;  in  rebuking  vice  ;  in  suffering 
persecution  for  righteousness'  sake  ;  in  offending  wicked  princes  by  reproving 
them  for  their  sins ;  in  austerity  of  life,  in  habit,  and  in  dwelling  in  retired  places. 
By  the  ministry  of  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  is  that  remarkable  passage  in  Malachi 
frdfilled.  "  From  the  rising  of  the  sun,  unto  the  going  down  of  the  same.  My  name 
shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles."  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  The  herald  oj  the  day 
of  the  Lord  : — The  last  of  prophets,  who  heralds  the  day  of  the  Lord,  is  to  restore 
the  spiritual  continuity  between  the  generations  of  God's  people  ;  he  is  to  bring 
the  spiritual  fathers  of  the  race  to  recognise  in  the  men  of  his  own  age  their  spiritual 
sons  ;  he  is  to  make  the  men  of  his  own  age  welcome  with  the  affection  of  sons 
their  spiritual  progenitors.  He  is  to  restore  spiritual  continuity,  "  lest  God  come 
and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse."  For  breaches  of  spiritual  continuity,  that  is, 
religious  revolutions,  are  almost  always  disastrous.  There  are  times,  indeed, 
when  God  has  willed  nations  to  break  with  the  past.  But  such  exceptional 
moments  we  need  not  now  consider.  Breaches  of  religious  continuity  are  not 
always  permanent.  The  incoming  of  some  flood  of  new  knowledge  may  antiquate 
received  statements  of  the-  current  religious  teaching,  and  the  men  of  the  "  new 
learning  "  may  revolt  from  what  seems  like  intellectual  bondage,  and  yet  after 
all  it  may  appear  that  what  they  revolted  against  was  rather  the  parody  of  their 
faith  than  their  faith  in  its  true  character,  and  a  harmony  between  the  com- 
batants may  yet  be  arrived  at  again,  which  is  a  victory  of  the  faith,  but  not  a 
victory  to  either  side.  There  are  reformations  and  counter-reformations  ;  the  e 
are  revolts  and  reactions.  There  are  "  blindnesses  in  part  "  which  happen  to 
our  Israels,  which  may  be  necessary  to  let  loose  new  and  suppressed  forces,  and 
which  may  lead  at  last  to  reconciliation.  There  are  revolts  which  are  not  apostasies. 
But  so  it  is  not  always.  There  are  breaches  which  are  never  healed,  at  least 
in  this  world.     And  in  any  case  such  losses  of  spiritual  continuity  are  terrible 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

evils.     More  and  more,  as  we  go  on  in  life,  we  feel  our  responsibility  for  making 
the  best  of  the  heritage  which  the  past  has  bequeathed  to  us — the  heritage  of 
Christian  creed  and  character.     Verily,  we  have  entered  into  the  labours  of  other 
men.     How  are  we  to  get  the  old  religion  to  recognise  the  men  of  our  day  ?     How 
are  we  to  "  turn  "  them  from  the  one  to  the  other  ?     Let  a  man  get  at  all  into 
the  heart  the  Christian  religion,  and  he  becomes  conscious  at  once  that  what 
that  religion  corresponds  to  is  nothing  which  is  changeable  in  human  nature. 
Knowledge  grows  and  past  knowledge  is  outgrown  ;  criticism  develops,  and  its 
method  alters,  and  a  past  criticism  is  a  bygone  criticism.     But  underneath  all 
these  developments  there  does  lie  a  humanity  that  is  permanent.     The  dress, 
the  circumstances  of  a  particular  epoch  fall  easily  off  the  Christ,  and  He  stands 
disclosed  the  spiritual  Lord  of  all  the  ages.     The  consciousness  to  which  He  appeals, 
the  need  of  God,  the  desire  for  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  the  sense  of  sin,  the  cry 
for  redemption,  the  experience  of  strength  which  is  given  in  response  to  the  self- 
surrender  of  faith,  the  union  of  men  of  all  sorts  and  classes  in  the  fellowship  of 
the   Holy  Ghost — this  consciousness,   this  experience,   does  not  belong  to  any 
one  age  or  class.     It  belongs  to  us  now  as  much  as  to  the  men  of  old.     The  pledge 
that  a  Catholic  religion  is  possible  lies  in  the  recognition  (in  the  moral  and  spiritual 
departments  only)  of  a  Catholic  humanity,  which  may  be  dormant  in  superficial 
ages  and  men,   but  can  everywhere  be  awakened  by  life's  deeper  experiences 
or  the  profounder  appeals  of  the  men  of  God.     How  then  are  we  to  play  our  part, 
in  keeping  unimpaired,  or  in  restoring,  the  spiritual  continuity  of  our  age  with 
the  past  ?     1.  The  task  is  to  be  wrought  out  in  the  character  by  spiritual  discipline. 
Christianity  finds  its  chief  witness  in  life,  in  character.     All  down  the  ages  it  is 
character  which  has  been  the  chief  instrument  in  propagating  the  truth.     The 
Christian   character   is   sonship ;  something   which   is   peculiar   to   Christianity ; 
much  more  than  mere  morality,  or  abstinence  from  sin.     It  is  the  direct  product 
of  a  conscious  relation  to  the  Divine  Father,  a  fellowship  with  the  Divine  Son, 
a  freedom  in  the  Spirit.     Clu-istian  sonship  is  the  direct  outcome  of  Christian 
motives,  and  its  chief  evidence  lies  in  itself.     Certainly  the  chief  witness  for  Christ 
in  the  world  is  the  witness  of  Christian  sonship.     Here  then  is  your  first  vocation — 
realise  and  exhibit  the  temper  of  sonship.     It  is  developed  by  generous  corre- 
spondence with  the  movement  of  God's  Spirit  within  us,  by  constant  ventures 
of  faith  and  acts  of  obedience  :  it  comes  of  the  deliberate  and  regular  exercise 
of  those  faculties  of  the  spirit  to  which  Christ  most  appeals,  of  prayer,  of  self- 
discipline,  of  faith,  of  self-knowledge,  of  penitence.     The  obligation  of  keeping 
up  the  spiritual  continuity  of  the  generations,  presses  with  especial  force  on  tho 
Church's  teachers.     The  prophetic  office  of  the  Church  consists  in  the  permanent 
function  of  maintaining  an  old  and  unchanging  faith,  by  showing  its  power  of 
adapting  itself  to  constantly  new  conditions  ;  it  is  to  interpret  the  old  faith  to 
the  new  generation,  with  fidelity  to  the  old,  and  with  confidence  in  the  new.     Tho 
old  dogmas  are  to  many  men,  and  to  many  of  the  best  men,  as  an  unknown  tongue. 
The  prophetic  office  of  the  Church  is  to  interpret  the  unknown  tongue  of  old  doctrine 
till  they  speak  in  the  intelligible  language  of  felt  human  wants.     How  is  this  to 
be  done  ?     By  knowing  the  wants.     By  being  in  touch  with  the  movements. 
There  is  a  special  sense  in  which  the  task  of  maintaining  spiritual  continuity 
down  the  generations  belongs  to  the  Christian  student.     Two  things  are  nccessarj', 
as  for  the  pastor  :  the  knowledge  of  the  old,  and  the  appreciation  of  the  new. 
The  Christian  student  will  study  with  reverent  care,  irrespective  of  modern  wants, 
the  genius  of  historical  Christianity  :  making  himself  at  one  with  the  religion 
of  Christ  in  that  form  in  which  it  has  shown  itself  in  experience  most  catholic, 
most  capable  of  persistence  through  radical  changes,  least  the  product  of  any 
particular  age,  or  state  of  feeling.     So  with  frankness  and  freedom  he  will  study 
the  conditions  of  the  present.     Mostly  the  same  person  does  not  do  both  these 
things.     There  is  much  work  before  us  to  emancipate  Christianity  from  the  shackles 
of  medifeval  absolutism,  of  Calvinism,  of  mere  Protestant  reaction,  and  to  reassert 
it  in  its  largeness,  in  its  freshness,  and  in  its  adaptability  to  new  knowledge  and 
new  movements.     We  live  in  an  age  of  profound  transition,  socially  and  intellectu- 
ally.    What  is  wanted  is  for  the  same  people  to  take  measure  of  the  ancient  faith, 
and  to  discern  the  signs  of  the  times.     [Canon  C.  Core,  M.A.)        The  gift  of 
'prophecy  the  supreme  need  of  our  age  : — A  strange  and  weird  figure  is  this  of  the 
prophet  Elijah,  the  Tishbite.     A  unique  person,  with  a  unique  mission.     John 
the  Baptist  was  one  of  his  spiritual  successors,  and  the  greatest.     Athanasius, 
P'^rhaps,   was  another,  and  Martin  Luther,  and  perhaps  John  Wesley  ;  or,  at 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  145 

least,  these  latter  have  been  like  Eliseus,  catching  up  his  mantle,  baptised  with  a 
portion  of  his  spirit.  They  have  been  the  men  who  have  accomplished  the  great 
moral  and  spiritual  revelations  of  the  world.  Rough,  earnest,  strong-willed  men 
most  of  them,  not  given  to  mince  their  words  or  to  stand  upon  courtesies  ;  but 
they  have  been  the  men  to  keep  alive  the  flame  of  rehgion,  and  to  prevent  its 
dying  out.  Mark  their  ages,  and  then  compare  the  work  of  the  man  with  the 
needs  of  his  age.  There  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those  days,  and  people  say 
we  shall  never  see  giants  again.  The  individual  grows  less  as  the  world  grows 
more.  Knowledge  has  got  to  be  so  diffused,  and  the  elements  of  life  so  manifold, 
society  so  vast  and  comphcated,  that  an  Elijah  whom  all  would  recognise  aa 
a  messenger  from  God  seems  impossible.  The  age  of  prophets,  at  least  of  Ehjahs 
of  the  old  type,  has  passed  away.  Yet,  though  no  Ehjah,  there  may  be  an  Elisha  ; 
though  no  Isaiah,  yet  a  Malachi.  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  prophecy  is  the  highest 
gift  bestowed  by  Christ  upon  His  Church  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  all  who  feel  that 
our  call  is  to  proclaim  God's  truth  to  men  may  well  pray  to  be  endowed  with  a 
portion  of  it.  Whatever  spiritual  gifts  may  have  been  necessary  or  profitable 
to  the  Church  at  other  times,  I  am  persuaded  that  the  gift  of  prophecy  is  the 
most  necessary  and  profitable  now.  Men  felt  the  difference  between  a  Paul 
and  a  Philetus,  for  Paul  spoke  "in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power." 
A  man  may  well  pray  for  a  portion  of  this  power,  and  for  grace  to  use  it  in  the 
noblest  cause.  It  is  not  eloquence,  it  is  not  popularity,  it  is  not  the  power  of 
attracting  the  crowd  ;  it  is  something  impalpable,  but  most  real,  when  men  bend 
their  wills  and  hearts  and  consciences  before  the  uttered  truth.  It  is  strange 
how  even  educated  men  misread  the  signs  of  the  times.  Ths  age  wants,  and 
is  prepared  to  receive,  not  the  priest,  but  the  prophet :  not  the  man  who  claims 
to  stand  between  them  and  God,  and  says,  "  No  access  to  the  Heavenly  Father 
but  by  me  "  ;  but  the  man  who  can  teach  the  truth,  and  help  them,  in  their  blind- 
ness, and  waywardness,  and  ignorance,  to  discern  the  way  of  peace  and  righteous- 
ness. The  prophet  must  be  in  earnest,  or  men  will  not  receive  him  as  a  prophet ; 
must  himself  believe  his  message,  or  he  will  carry  no  conviction  to  his  hearers. 
We  have  a  message  able  to  stir  the  most  phlegmatic  feeling,  and  to  arouse  the 
dullest  conscience,  if  only  we  knew  how  to  deliver  it.  If  our  own  hearts  have 
found  out  the  secret,  we  can  speak  of  present  peace  and  joy  in  beheving,  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  standing  in  righteousness,  of  the  nearness  of  a  Father  to  ua 
in  our  dangers,  difficulties,  troubles.  There  are  those  who  can  speak  of  these 
things  with  a  strange  and  moving  power,  and  their  arguments  will  rise  high 
above  the  clouds  of  doubt  and  speculation,  till  they  seem  to  bring  us  almost  face 
to  face  with  God.  Such  men  are  in  very  truth  the  Lord's  prophets  ;  such  teachers 
build  on  immovable  ground  the  fabric  of  faith.  They  are  sure  and  trustworthy 
guides  ;  for  they  are  leading  men  to  God  through  grace  by  the  ways  of  holiness ; 
they  have  themselves  travelled,  or  are  now  travelling  the  road  ;  they  are  testifying 
to  us  out  of  their  own  experience  ;  they  speak  that  which  they  know.  It  is  a 
faith  thus  quickened,  and  "faith  cometh  by  hearing,"  that  vitalises  sacraments 
and  prayers  and  worship.  Without  such  faith,  all  these  things  are  dead  ;  with 
it  they  become  living,  quickening  powers.  It  is  the  spirit  of  the  prophet,  before 
all  other  gifts,  that  the  Churches  need  to  enable  them  to  evangelise  the  world. 
(Bishop  Fraser.)  And  He  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to  the 
children. — The    reconciliation    of    the    old    and    young: — I.    The    peophet   was 

THINKING  OF  WHAT  MAY  FAIELY  BE  CALLED  A  TIME  OF  TRANSITION.       The  passing 

from  one  dispensation,  or  order  of  things,  to  another.  Such  a  period  was  that 
under  Moses,  when  the  people  passed  from  a  patriarchal  to  a  national  life.  The 
bringing  in  of  the  only  begotten  Son  was  the  greatest  event  of  the  sacred  history. 
All  that  had  gone  before  seems  trivial  in  comparison  with  it.  It  was  a  change 
from  law  to  grace,  from  a  religion  limited  to  one  nation  to  a  universal  faith,  from 
a  system  of  rite  and  ceremony  to  one  of  inward  spirit.  But  all  times  of  great 
change  are  full  of  danger.  They  give  great  anxiety  to  all  thoughtful  minds. 
Ours  is  a  time  of  transition,  and  the  grave  danger  of  our  times  is,  the  possibility 
of  estrangement  between  the  fathers  and  the  children,  i.e.,  between  the  old  and 
the  young.  The  fathers  are  disposed  to  be  conservative  ;  the  older  we  get  the 
harder  we  find  it  to  receive  new  thoughts,  or  accustom  ourselves  to  new  ways. 
So  when  the  fathers  see  the  children  entering  on  new  ways,  adopting  new  methods, 
forming  new  parties,  there  is  danger  that  their  hearts  should  be  turned  away 
from  them.  And  on  the  other  hand,  the  young  are  disposed  to  that  which  is 
new ;  their  minds  are  receptive  and  plastic.     They  are  tempted  to  think  their 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

fathers'  ways  and  thoughts  are  old-fashioned,  to  underrate  the  good  of  the  past, 
and  to  leave  their  fathers  behind.  II.  OxJK  duty  in  such  a  time  of  transition. 
There  is  a  duty  peculiar  to  such  an  age.  To  fulfil  it  was  part  of  the  mission 
of  John  the  Baptist.  He  did  much  to  break  the  abruptness  of  the  transition 
from  the  one  dispensation  to  the  other.  1.  The  duty  of  the  fathers  to  the  children. 
That  "  the  fathers  should  recognise  the  new  needs,  and  the  new  powers  of  the 
children."  (1)  We  should  not  repress  their  thoughts,  though  they  may  differ 
from  ours.  Few  things  are  more  harmful  to  the  young  than  repression.  Doubt 
and  difficulty,  closed  within  the  heart,  grow  more  and  more.  Bring  them  out 
into  the  light  of  loving  sympathy,  and  they  often  almost  vanish  away.  (2)  Nor 
.shall  we  condemn.  Condemnation  has  often  made  a  searcher  after  truth  into 
a  determined  heretic.  (3)  Let  us  foster  and  encourage  the  good  rather  than 
trouble  ourselves  too  much  about  the  error.  We  are  all  too  anxious  to  root  up 
weeds.  A  vigorous  growth  in  the  corn  will  do  much  to  weaken  the  growth  of 
the  weeds.  2.  The  duty  of  the  children  to  the  fathers,  the  young  to  the  old. 
"  The  children  should  recognise  the  value  of  the  institutions  and  traditions  which 
they  inherit  from  their  fathers."  The  opinions  of  the  fathers  are  certainly  entitled 
to  respectful  consideration.  Age  should  prejudice  you  not  against  them,  but 
in  their  favour.  Be  not  swift  to  remove  the  ancient  landmarks.  III.  Our  safe- 
guard IN  such  a  time  of  transition.  There  is  a  certain  deep  interest  in  this 
as  the  last  word  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  filled  with  the  hope  of  one  who  should 
be  the  messenger  of  the  Highest ;  but  lying  close  behind  it  is  the  thought  and 
hope  of  Him  whose  way  should  be  thus  prepared.  We  think  not  of  the  herald, 
but  of  the  King  before  whose  face  he  went.  The  true  safeguard  amid  the  perils 
of  oxir  day  is  in  Christ.  The  young  may  outgrow  the  special  forms  in  which  His 
doctrine  has  been  cast,  but  they  cannot  outgrow  the  Christ.  Christ,  rightly 
regarded,  meets  the  needs  of  old  and  young.  It  is  absurd  to  talk  of  outgrowing 
Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  true  gathering  point  for  the  old  and  the  young.  (W. 
Oarrett  Harder. )  Religion  in  the  family  : — The  family  is  a  radical  and  funda- 
mental organisation  and  agency  in  human  society.  It  is  the  original  source 
of  authority,  government,  morality,  and  religion.  Without  family  ties,  family 
government  and  discipline,  family  virtue  and  piety,  the  Church  could  not  exist, 
and  society  would  quickly  relapse  into  anarchy  and  barbarism,  and  fall  to  pieces. 
Here  are  the  roots  of  godliness,  of  self-government,  of  right  development.  Is  it 
any  marvel,  then,  that  God  guards  the  family  sanctity  and  life  with  such  jealousy, 
and  lays  upon  the  marital  and  parental  relations  such  solemn  sanctions  and  obliga- 
tions ?  There  is  no  more  alarming  sign  of  the  times  than  the  decay  of  family 
religion.  And  the  decay  is  not  superficial  but  radical,  and  the  effects  are  far- 
reaching,  disastrous,  and  permanent.  Family  government  is  fearfuUy  relaxed, 
family  religious  instruction  is  almost  a  thing  of  the  past,  parental  restraints  have 
come  to  be  obnoxious,  children  have  lost  reverence  for  their  parents,  the  home 
altar,  in  ten  thousand  households,  is  broken  down,  and  the  children  even  of 
Christian  parents  grow  up  without  the  fear  of  God,  without  Christian  training 
and  restraint,  and  go  forth  into  the  world,  wholly  unprepared  to  resist  temptation, 
or  to  meet  the  responsibilities  of  life.  We  must  have  a  speedy  and  grand  revival 
of  family  religion,  or  we  are  doomed.  Nothing  else  can  stay  the  tide  of  religious 
declension,  in  faith  and  in  practice,  the  tide  of  demoralisation  that  threatens 
to  make  a  clean  sweep  of  social  integrity,  of  law  and  order,  and  self-government. 
We  must  heed  the  Divine  warning  uttered  by  Malachi,  or  God  will  smite  us  with 
a  still  more  fearful  curse.  (J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  Our  debt  to  childhood: — 
There  are  encouraging  hints  that  the  study  of  the  young  is  not  to  be  always  under- 
valued. One  is,  the  careful  observation  of  child-life  which  men  of  science  are 
beginning  to  make  simply  in  the  interests  of  science.  Lcgi.slators  also  are  beginning 
to  see  that  in  order  to  have  good  citizens  we  must  educate  the  young.  The  Church 
needs  to  establish  an  early  tutelage  of  her  children.  In  the  old  New  England 
meeting-house  all  was  stately  and  sterile,  rigid  and  unattractive,  to  the  children. 
Notice  some  of  the  advanta.es  of  the  modern  method  of  youthful  Sabbath  instruc- 
tion. 1.  Children  learn  more  in  company  than  alone.  It  is  good  to  see  truth 
through  the  eyes  of  others.  2.  There  are  elements  in  the  Church  which  are  brought 
out  by  the  effort  to  discharge  our  debt  to  the  young.  Here  is  a  field  for  lay  activity. 
It  is  an  inexplicable  fact,  that  a  teacher,  or  some  one  outside  the  family,  will 
sometimes  get  nearer  the  child's  heart  than  the  doarest  home-friend.  How  can  we 
all  co-opera  e  ?  As  this  enlarging  interest  in  childhood  is  the  hope  of  the  world, 
so  the  growth  of  this  spirit  of  helpfulness  in  individual  lives  is  the  guarantee  of  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACEL  147 

healthful  and  happy  development  of  Christian  character.  {Jesse  B.  Thomas,  D.D. ) 
Parental  responsibUities : — Malachi,  in  his  last  chapter,  prepares  the  people  for 
the  long  silence  of  revelation  by  two  words,  of  which  one  is  a  promise,  and  the 
other  a  precept.  The  command  is,  to  walk  by  the  law  of  Moses.  The  promise 
is,  that  in  due  time  the  Messiah's  forerunner,  coming  in  the  spirit  and  power 
of  Elijah,  shall  usher  in  the  solemn  yet  glorious  day  of  Christ,  by  his  preparatory 
ministry.  This  wa^  to  be  the  next  prophet  whom  the  Church  was  entitled  to 
expect.  But  his  work  was  to  be  prominently  a  revival  of  parental  fidelity  and 
domestic  piety.  The  work  upon  fathers  and  mothers  was  to  be  far  more  than 
the  removal  of  domestic  alienations.  It  was  to  embrace  a  great  revival  of  parental 
and  filial  piety,  an  awakening  of  parents'  hearts  to  the  salvation  of  their  children, 
and  the  docile  seeking  and  reception  of  parental  instruction  by  the  children. 
This  revival  of  domestic  piety  and  parental  fidelity  is  necessary  to  prevent  the 
coming  of  the  Divine  Messiah  from  being  a  woe  instead  of  a  blessing  to  men. 
God's  way  of  promoting  revival  is,  not  to  increase  the  activity  of  any  public 
and  outward  means  only,  but  to  "turn  the  hearts  of  the  parents  to  the  children." 
The  duty  of  parental  fidelity  is  equally  prominent  in  both  dispensations.  The 
Old  terminates  with  it,  the  new  opens  with  it.  This  is  the  connecting  link 
between  both.  The  fidelity  of  the  parents  ought  to  imply  the  docility  of  tho 
children.     The  duties  are  mutual.    I.  The  urgency  of  parental  RESPONSiBn-iTY 

APPEARS   HJ    a    solemn    MANNER   FROM   THE   NATURE    OF  THE  PARENTAL    RELATION 

ITSELF.  Wherever  human  society  is,  there  a  parent  is.  Every  human  existence  be- 
gins in  a  parental  relation.  The  glory  of  the  Divine  beneficence  towards  the  human 
race  appears  in  this,  that  the  parents,  without  alienating  anything  of  their  own 
immortality,  are  able  to  multiply  immortalities  in  ever-widening  and  progressive 
numbers.  Here  are  the  two  facts  which  give  so  unspeakable  a  solemnity  to 
the  parent's  relation  to  his  children.  He  has  conferred  on  them,  unasked,  the 
endowment  of  an  endless,  responsible  existence.  He  has  also  been  the  instru- 
ment of  conveying  to  this  new  existence  the  taint  of  original  sin  and  guilt.  Can 
the  human  mind  conceive  a  motive  more  tender,  more  urgent,  prompting  a 
parent  to  seek  the  aid  of  the  great  Physician,  for  dealing  with  the  spiritual  dis- 
ease which  they  have  conveyed  ?  II.  From  the  unique  and  extensive 
CHARACTER  OF  PARENTAL  AUTHORITY.  Men  will  be  held  accountable  according 
to  the  extent  of  the  powers  intrusted  to  them.  The  trust  is  that  of  immortal 
souls.  Let  the  extent  of  the  parent's  legitimate  or  unavoidable  power  over 
his  children  be  pondered.  Neither  Divine  nor  human  law  gives  the  parent  a 
right  to  force  the  tender  mind  of  the  child,  by  persecutions,  or  corporeal  pains 
or  penalties;  or  to  abuse  it,  by  sophistries,  or  falsehoods,  into  the  adoption  of 
his  opinions.  But  this  power  the  providential  law  does  confer :  the  parent 
may  and  ought  to  avail  himself  of  all  the  influences  of  opportunity  and  example, 
of  filial  reverence  and  affection,  of  his  superior  age,  knowledge,  and  sagacity, 
to  reinforce  the  power  of  truth  over  the  child's  mind,  and  in  this  good  sense  to 
prejudice  him  in  favour  of  the  parental  creed.  III.  But  this  power  has 
SUITABLE  checks  AND  GUARDS.  One  is  found  in  the  strict  responsibility  to 
which  God  holds  the  domestic  ruler.  Another  is  found  in  the  affection  which 
nature   binds  up   with   the  parental   relation.      IV.   The  parent's  influence 

FOR  GOOD   AND    EVIL  WILL    BE    MORE    EFFECTUAL   THAN   ANY   OTHER.       As  parents 

perform  or  neglect  their  duties,  the  children  usually  end  in  grace  or  impiety. 
The  parent  has  the  first  and  all-important  opportunity.  Application — 1.  The 
education  of  children  for  God  is  the  most  important  business  done  on  earth. 
2.  The  Church-membership  of  the  children  of  believers  may  be  reasonable  and 
scriptural.  (R.  S.  Dahney,  D.D.)  Family  government: — True  family  govern- 
ment is  instituted  for  the  sole  benefit  of  the  governed.  "  The  true  end  of  govern- 
ment is  to  make  the  pathway  to  vii  tue  and  morality  easy,  and  the  pathway  of 
crime  difficult  and  full  of  peril."  I.  The  vast  importance  of  family  govern- 
ment. Of  Abraham  it  was  said,  "  He  will  command  his  children."  Neglect 
of  commanding  is  seen  in  the  failure  of  Eli.  By  "  turning  the  hearts  of  the 
fathers  to  the  children,"  the  text  means  that  the  chief  duty  of  every  father  is 
to  bring  his  children  to  God.  In  every  case  where  family  government  has 
been  enforced  the  pious  parents  have  fiilly  realised  the  truth  of  the  glorious 
promise,  "  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he  will 
not  depart  from  it."  We  may  learn  the  importance  of  family  government  from 
the  teachings  of  all  the  greatest  philosophers  and  statesmen,  of  all  ages  and  climes. 
The  Greeks  and  the  Romans,  the  rulers  of  the  world,  and  our  grander  Old  Eiiglifih 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

and  Puritan  fathers,  all  taught  and  practised  family  government.  Every  pastor 
knows  that  young  converts  who  have  had  no  family  government  make  as  a 
general  thing  worthless  Church  members.  The  last  argument  on  the  importance 
of  family  government,  is  the  happiness  of  the  child.  An  ungoverned  child  is 
a  bundle  of  bad  passions,  a  seething  volcano  of  untamed  and  ungovernable 
passions,  hating  everybody,  and  hateful  to  everybody.  II.  How  shall  I  goveen 
MY  CHILD  ?  Lay  down  seven  golden  rules.  1.  Begin,  continue,  and  end  in 
prayer.  2.  Begin  early.  3.  Be  tender.  4.  Be  firm.  5.  Have  no  partiality 
among  yoiu-  children.  6.  Let  father  and  mother  be  united.  7.  Imbue  the  soul 
of  your  child  with  reverence  for  God  and  right.  A  strong  wall,  and  safe  quaran- 
tine, may  be  made  of  four  great  laws.  No  bad  company ;  no  idle  time  ;  no 
fine  clothes  ;  and  make  home  happy.  {Rufua  C.  Beveleson,  D.D.)  The  home 
school : — With  this  verse  the  Old  Testament  ends.  So  far  down  had  Malachi 
come  towards  the  Messiah,  that  the  East  was  already  growing  bright  with  His 
coming.  He  predicts  the  end  of  sacrifices,  and  the  coming  of  a  more  glorious 
era.  What  were  the  words  that,  when  the  last  record  was  ended,  were  to  come 
with  blessed  undulations  down  to  our  time  ?  See  the  text.  The  institution 
nearest  to  the  heart  of  society  is  the  family.  The  most  important  office  in  society 
is  the  parental  office.  The  sphere  of  each  family  is  small,  but  the  number  of 
these  spheres  is  incalculable.  As  each  drop  is  small,  but  the  sea  is  vast,  so  is 
it  in  society.  Families  are  the  springs  of  society.  Declension  in  religion  will 
be  found  to  be  accompanied  with  carelessness  in  the  family ;  and  the  earliest 
steps  of  religious  reformation  ought  to  take  place  in  the  family.  If  all  the  families 
of  a  nation  were  to  reform,  the  nation  would  be  reformed.  All  preparation  for 
God's  work  should  begin  in  the  household.  Many  persons  are  for  ever  running 
round  for  revivals,  careless  of  home,  neglectful  of  children,  and  seeking  their 
own  pleasurable  excitement,  frequently  in  a  kind  of  religious  carnival.  Any 
conception  of  religious  culture  and  life  that  leaves  the  family  out,  or  that  is  at 
the  expense  of  the  family,  is  fundamentally  wrong,  and  in  the  end  cannot  but 
be  mischievous.  The  divinity  of  revivals  may  be  tested  by  their  effect  on  the 
family.  If  religious  excitements  make  home  dull,  and  parental  and  filial  duties 
and  religions  tame  and  tasteless,  they  may  be  suspected  of  being  spurious,  carnal, 
worldly.  I.  Parents  are  responsible  to  Gon  and  to  human  society  for 
THEIR  CHILDREN.  It  is  a  responsibility  assumed  by  every  parent,  to  look  after 
the  welfare,  temporal  and  eternal,  of  his  child.  II.  This  responsibility  is  just. 
Because  God  has  framed  the  family  so  that  nothing  can  exceed  the  advantage 
which  parents  have  in  rearing  their  children.  They  take  the  child  before  all 
other  iniluences.  None  gains  ascendency  over  the  child  before  the  parent. 
The  parent  receives  the  child  in  a  condition  perfectly  fitted  to  be  moulded  and 
stamped.  The  child  comes  to  us  with  all  natural  adaptations  for  taking  impres- 
sions. It  is  sympathetic,  trustful,  and  imitative.  The  hardest  work  we  have 
to  do  in  this  world  is  to  correct  the  mistakes  of  parents  in  the  education  of  their 
children.  The  parent  receives  the  child  into  an  involuntary  atmosphere  of 
love,  which  is  that  summer  in  which  all  good  dispositions  must  grow.  Justice, 
and  all  other  feelings,  in  the  family,  act  in  the  sphere,  and  under  the  control, 
of  parental  love.  Nowhere  else  is  love  so  much  the  predominating  element. 
Love  is  the  atmospheric  condition  in  which  we  are  to  mould  and  teach  the  child. 
Besides,  the  family  is  sheltered  from  contact  and  temptation  and  inteiruption. 
The  family  is  the  only  institution  in  which  one  can  repel  all  invasion  and  all 
despotism  from  state  and  from  meddling  priests.  God  has  put  our  children 
into  our  hands  with  the  declaration  that  they  are  His  ;  that  they  have  in  them 
the  germ  of  immortality,  and  that  He  commits  them  to  our  charge  that  we  may 
fit  them  for  the  future  life  that  is  prepared  for  them.     III.  The  destiny  of  a 

CHILD    renders   IT   WORTHY    OF   A   PARENT'S   WHOLE   HEART,    THOUGHT,    AND   TIME. 

Your  child  is  given  to  you  to  be  brought  up  in  the  manner  best  calculated  to 
qualify  it  for  the  life  to  come.  Your  supremacy  over  it  is  absolute.  With  such 
a  charge  it  is  worth  while  to  stay  at  home.  Sometimes  mothers  think  it  is  hard 
to  be  shut  up  at  home  with  the  care  of  little  children.  But  she  who  takes  care 
of  little  children  takes  care  of  great  eternities.     IV.  When  a  child  has  qonb 

FORTH  FROM  PARENTAL  CARE,  PARENTAL  NEGLECT  CANNOT  BE  MADE  UP  TO  IT. 

Some  alleviation  there  may  be,  and  some  after-refuge,  but  there  can  be  no  com- 
plete remedy.  There  is  no  way  of  compensating  for  neglect  to  sow  the  seed 
at  the  proper  time.  The  most  precious  legacy  that  a  parent  can  give  to  a  child 
to  that  throughout  all  its  after  life  it  should  in  connection  with  everything  that 


CHAP.  IV.]  MALACHI.  149 

Ib  wise  and  tme  and  just  and  pure  and  spiritual  call  to  mind  father  and  mother. 
{H.  Ward  Beecher.)  Decay  of  family  power: — The  text  is  in  the  form  of  a 
prediction.  The  object  and  effect  ef  Elijah's  coming  mission  shall  be  what  is 
set  forth  in  the  text,  namely,  to  reform  mankind  and  bring  the  world  back  to 
those  elementary  principles  or  institutes  ordered  of  old  for  human  improve- 
ment and  salvation.  The  special  mission  of  John  the  Baptist  was  that  of  a 
reformer.  He  come  to  preach  repentance.  Degeneracy  and  corruption  were 
so  deep-seated  and  imiversal  that  it  was  necessary  to  begin  at  the  beginning  ; 
not  with  the  church  or  the  state  or  society,  but  with  the  family,  the  fountain 
of  moral  influence  ;  and  build  up  again  the  family  constitution  which  irreligion 
and  vice  had  overthrown.  We  have  here,  then,  the  Divine  plan  of  reforming 
and  saving  mankind.  This  prophetic  utterance  has  application  to  all  ages  and 
nations.  Christianity  is  God's  ordained  instrument  to  plant  and  extend  His 
kingdom  on  earth  ;  and,  contrary  to  the  teachings  of  the  schools  and  the  expecta- 
tions of  the  wise,  it  shall  not  do  this  by  the  power  of  the  state,  by  the  force  of 
law,  by  ecclesiastical  organisms,  by  the  influence  of  fraternities,  or  by  means 
of  patronage,  learning,  and  wealth,  but  by  simply  recognising  and  working  the 
original  elemental  principles  of  society ;  by  simply  "  turning  the  heart  of  the 
fathers  to  the  children,  and  the  heart  of  the  children  to  their  fathers."  The 
Gospel  seeks  to  accomplish  the  mission  of  life  by  the  power  of  family  religion 
— by  invigorating  and  purifying  the  family  constitution,  by  drawing  close 
and  sanctifying  the  bonds  of  domestic  affection  and  life,  and  if  it  fails  to  do  this 
it  fails  of  its  end.  Affection  is  the  great  family  bond  and  the  chief  element  of 
power  in  domestic  life.  And  Christianity  appeals  powerfully  to  the  affections 
of  our  nature.  There  is  a  mighty  force  in  it  to  excite  and  purify,  to  strengthen 
and  exalt  our  nature.  A  family  not  imder  a  religious  training  and  influence 
is  a  fountain  of  social  corruption.  Here  are  the  sources  of  infidelity  and  vice 
and  disorder,  of  social,  political,  and  religious  declension  and  overthrow.  Is 
there  a  widespread  corruption  of  morals  pervading  society  ?  Depend  upon 
it,  the  main  and  primary  cause  of  it  all  may  be  traced  up  to  the  family.  This 
fundamental,  elementary  justification  is  not  honoured,  but  abused  and  per- 
verted. There  are  three  iundamental  agencies  by  which  Divine  wisdom  seeks 
to  reform  and  save  the  world — the  family,  the  state,  and  the  Church.  They 
sustain  most  intimate  relations  to  each  other.  They  imderlie  all  goodness,  all 
prosperity,  all  order.  The  family  is  more  radical  than  the  others,  and  they 
cannot  exist  without  it.  It  is  a  wonderful  arrangement,  this  division  of  the 
whole  human  family  into  little  separate  communities,  each  community  a  little 
government,  a  miniature  world  by  itself — marriage  the  foundation,  love  the 
bond,  and  Divine  authority  the  governing  power.  Such  an  arrangement,  simple 
as  it  is,  touches  all  the  elementary  and  radical  principles  of  human  nature.  The 
family  power  is  the  fountain  of  all  moral  power  in  the  world.  Without  such 
an  agency  we  cannot  see  how  religion  could  ever  have  gained  a  footing  in  it. 
During  all  the  patriarch  ages  the  family  alone  preserved  the  knowledge  and 
worship  of  God.  We  cannot  estimate  the  fuU  value  of  such  an  agency.  We 
cannot  tell  all  its  vital  bearings  on  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  on  the  world  at  large. 
Where  the  family  power  is  neglected  or  perverted  religion  has  nothing  to  build 
upon.  The  only  way  to  build  up  Christ's  kingdom  is  to  make  the  family  what 
it  should  be.  The  household  must  be  sanctified.  There  is  no  agency  that  can 
be  substituted  for  the  family.  It  is  a  shallow  and  miserable  philosophy  which 
would  set  it  aside,  or  endeavour  to  improve  upon  it.  It  belongs  to  all  time, 
to  universal  humanity.     (J.  M.  Shervxmd.) 

0 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01128  5014 


DATE  DUE 

FMUiU 

)U 

;  XlW'WOIMllir..,*- 

•»«««wl»iJ»t*'4'*M 

m- 

IIMllii 

m^ 

'mmik 

m^ 

iBnr^« 

^-^ii- 

tm 

I'^SsJisBlWvP™ 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

*^K: 


