LIBRARY 

Murliffr 

TORONTO 


[Bister  No.     O 


19 


J  HS  US    C  II  R  I  ST 


/mA'A\S    />•>'    THE    SAME    sli'THOR. 

IMAGO  CHRISTI:  The  Example  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Twenty-fifth  Thousand.  Crown  Svo, 
uloth,  ^s. 

IMAGO  CHRISTI.  I'r.  -seiHation  Edition  printed 
in  it  d  and  black.  Handsomely  bound  in  pad 
ded  leather,  net,  ?s.  6d.  May  also  be  had  in 
call  and  morocco. 

THE      PREACHER     AND     HIS     MODELS. 

Vale    Lecture.-,    on    Treadling,    i8<n.      Seventh 
Thousand.     Crown  Svo,  cloth,  _ss. 

THE  FOUR  MEN  AND  OTHER  CHAPTERS. 

Eighth  Tlu.usand.     Crown  Svo,  cloth,  -js.  f.d. 


IIODDKK    AM)    STUUCIITON, 
•-•7,  I'ATEK.NOSTEK  Row. 


THE  TRIAL  AND  DEATH 


JESUS    CHRIST 


Devotional  Huston?  ot  our  Xcrfc's   passion 


JAMKS    STALKER,    M.A.,    D.I). 


CRUX    DOMINI    I'ALMA,    CHURL'S,    CYJ'RKbSUS,    OLIVA 


1 1  o  i )  i )  i  •;  R    AND    s  T  o  u  ( ;  i  r  r  o  N 

27,    I'ATERNOSTEK    ROW 


MUtCCXCIV 


«/«•</  l>y  lldzcll,  H'atsoH,  «5r-  Viney,  Ld.,  Lundon  and  Aylesbury. 


T  ()    M  Y    \V  I  K  K 


P  R  K  F  AC  E. 

KR  since  I  wrote,  in  a  contracted  form,  The 
Life  of  Jesus  Clirist,  the  desire  has  slumbered  in 
my  mind  to  describe  on  a  much  more  extended  scale 
the  closing  passages  of  the  Saviour's  earthly  history  ; 
and,  although  renewed  study  has  deepened  my  sense 
of  the  impossibility  of  doing  these  scenes  full  justice, 
yet  the  subject  has  never  ceased  to  attract  me,  as 
being  beyond  all  others  impressive  and  remunerative. 
The  limits  of  our  Lord's  Passion  are  somewhat 
indeterminate.  Krummachcr  begins  with  the  Tri 
umphal  Entry  into  Jerusalem,  Taulcr  with  the  Fcct- 
washing  before  the  Last  Supper,  and  Rambach  with 
Gcthscmanc  ;  most  end  with  the  Death  and  Burial  ; 
but  Grimm,  a  Roman  Catholic,  the  latest  writer  on 
the  subject,  means  to  extend  his  Leidensgeschiclite 
to  the  end  of  the  Forty  Days.  Taking  the  word 
"  passion  "  in  the  strict  sense,  I  have  commenced  at 
the  point  where,  by  falling  into  the  hands  of  I  IN 


enemies,  our  Lord  was  deprived  of  voluntary  activity  ; 
and  I  have  finished  with  the  Burial.  No  doubt  the 
same  unique  greatness  belongs  to  the  scenes  of  the 
previous  evening  ;  and  I  should  like  to  write  of 
Christ  among  His  Friends  as  I  have  here  written  of 
Him  among  His  Foes  ;  but  for  this  purpose  a  volume 
at  least  as  large  as  the  present  one  would  be  re 
quisite  ;  and  the  portion  here  described  has  an 
obvious  unit}'  of  its  own. 

The  bibliography  of  the  Passion  is  given  with 
considerable  fulness  in  Zocklcr's  Das  Krcuz  Christi  ; 
but  a  good  many  of  the  books  there  enumerated  may 
be  said  to  have  been  superseded  by  the  monumental 
work  of  Nebe,  l^ic  LeidcnsgcscJiicJite  n  risers  llcrni 
JCSH  ( 'hrhti  ( 2  vols.,  i8Si\  which,  though  not  a  work 
of  genius  is  written  on  so  comprehensive  a  plan  and 
with  such  abundance  of  learning  that  nothing  could 
better  serve  the  purpose  of  anyone  who  wishes  to 
draw  the  skeleton  before  painting  the  picture.  Of 
the  numerous  Lives  of  Christ  those  by  Keim  and 
Kdcrsheim  are  \\nrthy  of  special  notice  in  this  part 
of  tin-  history,  because  of  the  fulness  of  information 
Irom  classical  sources  in  the  one  and  from  Talmud- 
ical  in  the  other.  Steinmeycr  ( f.enfcnsgesc/iic/itc)  is 
\  iluable  on  apologetic  questions.  On  the  Seven 


PREFACE  ix 

Words  from  the  Cross  there  is  an  extensive  speci.il 
literature.  Schlciermacher  and  Tholuck  arc  remark 
ably  good  ;  and  there  are  volumes  by  Baring-Gould, 
Scott  I  lolland  and  others. 

In  the  sub-title  I  have  called  this  book  a  Devo 
tional  History,  because  the  subject  is  one  which  has 
to  be  studied  with  the  heart  as  well  as  the  head. 
Hut  I  have  not  on  this  account  written  in  the 
declamatory  and  interrogatory  style  common  in 
devotional  works.  I  have  to  confess  that  some  even 
of  the  most  famous  books  on  the  Passion  are  to  me 
intolerably  tedious,  because  the}-  are  written,  so  to 
speak,  in  oh's  and  all's.  Surely  this  is  not  essential 
to  devotion.  The  scenes  of  the  Passion  ought,  indeed, 
to  stir  the  depths  of  the  heart  ;  but  this  purpose  is 
best  attained,  not  by  the  narrator  displaying  his 
own  emotions,  but,  as  is  shown  in  the  incomparable 
model  of  the  Gospels,  by  the  faithful  exhibition  of 
the  facts  themselves. 

GLASGOW, 


C  O  X  T  E  X  T  S 

CHAPTER     I. 

THE    ARREST  ....... 

Matt.  xxvi.  47-56;  Mark  xiv.  43-50;  I.uk<-  xxii.  47-53;  Jdin 


CHAPTER    II. 
TIIF.    ECCLESIASTICAL    TRIAL M 

Matt.  xxvi.  57-6S;  Mark  xiv.  51-65;  I.ukc  xxii.  54-71  ;  John 
xviii.  12-14,  19-24. 

CHAPTER    III. 
THE    CHEAT    I>EMAL       .....  21) 

Matt.  xxvi.  69-75;  Mark  xiv.  66-72;  J.nkc  xxii.  54-62;  .J«'l>ii 
xviii.   15-iS.  25-7. 


CHAPTER    IV. 


CIVIL    'I  RIAL 


Matt,  xxvii.    ll;    Mark    xv  2  ;    I.nki    xxiii.   2-4;    John   xviii. 
28-^S. 


CONTEXTS 


I'Af.F. 

JKSTS    AND    HKkOI)          .......       58 

I. ukc  xxiii.  5- 12. 

(HAI'll.k    VI. 
LACK     In    I'll  All    .  .  .        -J2 

Matt.  x>;vn.  15-2;;    Mark  xv.  (1-14  ;    I.ukr  xxiii.  I  ^-25  ;  John 
\\  lii     V.  4°. 

<  I! AI'II.R    VII. 

I  HI.    (  K(  )\VN    (iK    THi  »RN>          .  85 

Matt.   xxv. i.  20- ;o;.. Mark  xv.    15-20;   I. ukc  xxiii.   25;  John 


<   IIAI'll.K    VIII. 

I  MI.   -iiii-uki  <  K    <>i     i-ii.  AH;  . 

*vii.  j.j,  J5  ;    Mark  xv.  15  ;  I.ukr  xxiii.  25;  John  xix. 


<HAl'lKk     IX. 
'A^     |>(  AkIO|      . 

Matt     xxvn.     ^    |o  ;    Art-.   I.     l.\    K, 


CONTENTS  xiii 

CHAI'TKK    X. 
VIA    DOLOROSA •     '  25 

Matt,  xxvii.  31-3;  Mark  xv.  20,  21  ;  Luke    xxiii.    20;  John 
xix.   16,  17. 

CHAI'TKK    XI. 

THK    DAUGHTERS    OF    JKRUSAI.KM .  .     137 

I. ukc  xxiii.  27-31. 

CHAI'JKK    XII. 
CALVARY        ....  .  -     150 

Matt,  xxvii.  33-8;  Mark  xv.  27.  2.S  ;  Luke  xxiii.  32,  33;  John 
xix.   lS-22. 


CHAl'TKR    XIII. 

THK  (ikuurs  ROUND  THK  CKO.>S  . 

Matt,  xxvii.  39-44,  55,  56  ;  Mark  xv.  29-32  ;   Luke  xxiii.  35-7, 
49  ;  John  xix.  23-5. 


CHAP  IKK    XIV. 

THK    FIRST    WORD    FROM    THK    CROSS       .  .     I7-S 

Luke  xxiii.  34. 


CONTENTS 


THE    SECOND    \VOKD    FROM    THE    CROSS  .  .  .     KJO 

Luke  xxiii.  39-43. 

CHAP'IEK    XVI. 

Nil.    THIRD    WORD    FROM    THE    CROSS      ....     204 
John  xix.  25-27. 

CHAPTER    XVII. 

I  HI.    FOTK  III    WORD    FRo.M     I  HI,    CROSS  .  .  .     217 

Matt,  xxvii.  4'>-y  ;   Mark  xv.  34-6. 


nil.  MI  in   WORD   FROM  THE  CROSS     ....   231 

.Mm  xix.  2S. 

CHAPTER    XIX. 

THE    MX  Ml    WORD    I  ROM    THE    CROSS      ....     243 
J"lin  xix.  30. 

CHAPTER    XX. 

•HIE    M.VE.V1H    WORD    I  ROM    THE    CROSS  .  .  .254 

I. like  xxiii.  46. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTKK    XXI. 

PAGE 

THK    SKiNS 268 

Matt,  xxvii.  50-4  ;  Mark  xv.  38,  39  ;  Luke  xxiii.  44,  45,  47. 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

THK    Dh.M)    CHRIST          ....  .    283 

John  xix.  31-7. 

CHAPTKk    XXIII. 
THi:    lU'KIAI,  ........    297 

Matt,  xxvii.   57-61  ;  Mark  xv.  42-7;  Luke  xxiii.  50-6;  John 
xix.  38-42. 


CHAPTER     I. 
TIIK   AKRKST 

S  \l*K  stud}-  of  the  closing  scenes  of  the  life  of  our 
^  J  Lord  begins  «it  the  point  where  He  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  representatives  of  justice  ;  and  this  took 
place  at  the  gate  of  Gethscmanc  and  at  the  midnight 
hour. 

On  the  eastern  side  of  Jerusalem,  the  ground  slopes 
downwards  to  the  bed  of  the  Brook  Kcdron  ;  and  on 
the  farther  side  of  the  stream  rises  the  Mount  of 
Olives.  The  side  of  the  hill  was  laid  out  in  gardens 
or  orchards  belonging  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  ; 
and  Gethscmanc  was  one  of  these.  There  is  no 
probability  that  the  enclosure  now  pointed  out  to 
pilgrims  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  is  the  actual  spot,  or 
that  the  six  aged  olive  trees  which  it  contains  are 
those  to  the  silent  shadows  of  which  the  Saviour 
used  to  resort  ;  but  the  scene  cannot  have  been  far 
away,  and  the  piety  which  lingers  with  awe  in  the 
traditional  site  cannot  be  much  mistaken. 

The    agon)'  in    Gethscmanc    was   just    over,  when 


"In,"  as  St.  Mattluw  s;iys,  "Judas,  one  of  the  twt-lvc, 
came,  and  with  him  a  gicat  multitude."  '1  hey  had 
conic  down  from  the  eastern  gate  of  the  city  and 
were  approaching  tlie  entrance  to  the  garden.  It  was 
full  moon,  and  the  black  mass  was  easily  visible, 
moving  along  the  dusty  road. 

The  arrest  of  Christ  was  not  made  by  two  or  three 
common  officers  of  justice.  The  "  great  multitude" 
has  to  be  taken  literally,  but  not  in  the  sense  of  a 
disorderly  crowd.  As  it  was  at  the  instance  of  the 
ecclesiastical  authorities  that  the  apprehension  took 
place,  their  servants  the  Levitical  police  of  the 
temple  were  to  the  front.  Hut,  as  Jesus  had  at  least 
eleven  resolute  men  with  Him,  and  these  might  rouse 
incalculable  numbers  of  His  adherents  on  the  way  to 
the  city,  it  had  been  considered  judicious  to  aslj^from 
the  Roman  governor  a  division  of  soldiers,*  which,  at 
the  time  of  the  Passover,  was  located  in  the  fortress  of 
Antonia,  overlooking  the  temple,  to  intervene  in  any 
emergency.  And  some  of  the  members  of  the 
Sanhedrim  had  even  come  themselves,  so  eager  were 
they  to  see  that  the  design  should  not  miscarry. 
I  his  composite  force  was  armed  with  swords  and 
staves—  the  former  weapon  belonging  perhaps  to  the 
Roman  soldiers  and  the  latter  to  the  temple  police 

*  S7Tfi,*i  -    roln.rs,  tenth  part  ol  legion.    Sr<-  Kamsay,  K.A.,  381. 


THE   ARREST  3 

-  and  they  carried  lanterns  and  lurches,  probably 
because  they  expected  to  have  to  hunt  for  Jesus  and 
His  followers  in  the  recesses  of  His  retreat.  Alto 
gether  it  was  a  formidable  body  :  they  were  deter 
mined  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure. 

I. 

The  leader  of  them  was  Judas.  Of  the  general 
character  of  this  man,  and  the  nature  of  his  crime, 
enough  will  be  said  later  ;  but  here  we  must  note 
that  there  were  special  aggravations  in  his  mode 
of  carrying  out  his  purpose. 

He  profaned  the  Passover.  The  better  day,  says 
the  proverb,  the  better  deed.  Hut,  if  a  deed  is  evil,  it 
is  the  worse  if  it  is  done  on  a  sacred  day.  The 
Passover  was  the  most  sacred  season  of  the  entire 
year  ;  and  this  very  evening  was  the  most  sacred  of 
the  Passover  week.  It  was  as  if  a  crime  should  in 
Scotland  be  committed  by  a  member  of  the  Church 
on  the  night  of  a  Communion  Sabbath,  or  in  Kngland 
on  Christmas  Day. 

He  invaded  the  sanctuary  of  his  Master's  devotions. 
Gcthsemanc  was  a  favourite  resort  of  Jesus  ;  Judas 
had  been  there  with  Him,  and  he  knew  well  for  what 
purpose  He  frequented  it.  Hut  the  respect  due  to  a 
place  of  prayer  did  not  deter  him  ;  on  the  contrary, 
he  took  advantage  of  his  Master's  well-known  habit. 


.,       Tin:  HUM.  AM>  i>i:.iTii  or  JESUS  CHRIST 

Hut  the  crown  in--  profanation,  for  which  humanity 
will  never  furtive  him,  was  the  siim  by  which  he  had 
agreed  to  make  his  Master  known  to  His  enemies. 

J-> 

It  is  probable  that  he  came  on  in  front,  as  if  he  did 
not  belong  to  the  band  behind  ;  and,  hurrying  towards 
Jesus,  as  if  to  apprise  Him  of  His  danger  and  condole 
with  Him  on  so  sad  a  misfortune  as  His  apprehension, 
he  filing  himself  on  His  neck,  sobbing,  "Master, 
Master!"  and  not  only  did  he  kiss  Him,  but  he  did 
so  repeatedly  or  fervently  :  so  the  word  signifies.* 
As  li.iv^  as  there  is  true,  pure  love  in  the  world,  this 
act  will  be  hated  and  despised  by  everyone  who  has 
ever  ^ivcn  or  received  this  token  of  affection.  It  was 
a  sin  against  the  human  heart  and  all  its  charities. 
Hut  none-  can  feel  its  horror  as  it  must  have  been  felt 
by  Jesus.  That  ni^ht  and  the  next  day  His  face  was 
marred  in  many  ways  :  it  was  furrowed  by  the  bloody 
sweat  ;  it  was  bruised  with  blows  ;  the}'  spat  upon  it  ; 
it  was  rent  with  thorns:  but  nothing  went  so  close  to 
His  heart  as  the  profanation  of  this  kiss.  As  another 
said,  who  had  been  similarly  treated  :  "  It  was  not  an 
enemy  that  reproached  me,  then  I  could  have  borne 
it  ;  lu-itlu-r  was  it  he  that  hated  me  that  did  magnify 
himself  against  me,  then  I  would  have  hid  myself 
from  him  ;  but  it  was  thou,  a  man  mine  equal,  my 

KUT«r/>«'Ar;rrri/.     It  is  used  nl    tin-   woman  \vlio  was   a  sinner, 
\vlii-n    sli«-    kissr<|  tin-   Irrt   <>i  the    Saviour. 


guide  and  mine  acquaintance  ;  we  took  sweet  counsel 
together,  and  walked  to  the  house  of  God  in  com 
pany."*  Before  the  kiss  was  given,  Jesus  still  received 
him  with  the  old  name  of  Friend  ;  but,  after  being 
stung  with  it,  Me  could  not  keep  back  the  annihilating 
question,  "Judas,  bctraycst  thou  the  Son  of  man 
with  a  kiss  ?  " 

The  kiss  was  the  sign  of  disciplcship.  In  the 
East,  students  used  to  kiss  their  rabbis  ;  and  in  all 
likelihood  this  custom  prevailed  between  Christ  and 
His  disciples.  When  we  become  His  disciples,  we 
may  be  said  to  kiss  Him  ;  and  ever}'  time  we  renew 
the  pledge  of  our  loyalty  we  may  be  said  to  repeat 
this  act.  We  do  so  especially  in  the  Lord's  Supper. 
In  our  baptism  He  may  be  said  to  take  us  up  in  His 
arms  and  kiss  us  ;  in  the  other  sacrament  we  obtain 
the  opportunity  of  returning  this  mark  of  affection. 

II. 

Probably  Judas,  being  ahead  of  the  band  he  was 
leading,  went  somewhat  into  the  shadows  of  the 
garden  to  reach  Jesus  ;  and  no  doubt  it  was  expected 
that  Jesus  would  try  to  get  away.  Hut,  instead  of 
doing  so,  He  shook  Himself  free  from  Judas  and, 
coming  forward  at  once  into  the  moonlight,  demanded, 
"  Whom  seek  ye  ?  " 

"    1'salin  Iv.   12-14. 


6       ////:  TRIAL  AM)  /)/:.////  o/-\//:.sr.s  CHRIST 

At  this  they  \verc  so  startled  that  they  reeled  back 
and,  stepping  one  on  another,  fell  to  the  ground. 

Similar  incidents  are  related  of  famous  men.  '1  he 
Roman  Marius,  for  instance,  was  in  prison  at 
Minturn.e  \\hen  Sylla  sent  orders  that  he  should  be 
put  to  death.  A  Gaulish  slave  was  sent  to  dispatch 
him  ;  but,  at  the  .sight  of  the  man  who  had  shaken 
the  world,  and  who  cried  out,  "  Fellow,  darcst  thou 
to  slay  Cains  Marius?"  the  soldier  threw  down  his 
weapon  and  fled.* 

There  are  main'  indications  scattered  through  the 
Gospels  that,  especially  in  moments  of  high  emotion, 
there  was  something  extraordinarily  subduing  in  the 
aspect  and  voice  of  Christ. f  On  the  occasion,  for 
example,  when  lie  cleaied  the  temple,  the  hardened 
profaners  of  the  place,  though  numerous  and  powerful, 
fled  in  terror  before  Him.  .And  the  striking  notice 

J"> 

of  Him  as  He  was  going  up  to  Jerusalem  for  the  last 
time  will  be  remembered:  "  Jesus  went  before  them, 
and  the\'  were  ama/ed  ;  and,  as  they  followed,  thcv 
were  afraid." 

On  this  oecasion  the  emotion  of  (iethsemanc  was 
upon  Him  the  rapt  sense  of  victory  and  of  a  mind 
.steeled  to  go  through  with  its  purpose — and  perhaps 
there  remained  on  His  face  some  traces  of  the  Agony, 

Other  instances  in  Siiskind,  /Vv\/V///\.w lnilt\  in  t<><: 
S«-c  fiilli-r  details  in  hna^n  ('/in'sf/,  last  rhapt'T. 


THE  .IRK ESI  7 

which  scared  the  onlookers.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
suppose  that  there  was  anything  preternatural,  though 
part  of  the  terror  of  His  captors  may  have  been  the 
dread  lest  lie  should  destroy  them  by  a  miracle. 
Evidently  Judas  was  afraid  of  something  of  this  kind 
when  he  said,  "Take  Him  and  lead  Him  away 
safely." 

The  truth  is,  they  were  caught,  instead  of  catching 
Him.  It  was  a  mean,  treacherous  errand  they  were 
on.  They  were  employing  a  traitor  as  tin  ir  guide. 
They  expected  to  come  upon  Christ,  perhaps  when 
He  was  asleep,  in  silence  and  by  stealth;  or,  if  He 
were  awake,  they  thought  that  they  would  have  to 
pursue  Him  into  a  lurking-place,  where  they  would 
find  Him  trembling  and  at  bay.  They  were  to 
surprise  Him,  but,  when  He  came  forth  fearless,  rapt 
and  interrogative,  He  surprised  them,  and  compelled 
them  to  take  an  altogether  unexpected  attitude.  He 
brought  all  above  board  and  put  them  to  shame. 

How  ridiculous  now  looked  their  cumbrous  pre 
parations — all  these  soldiers,  the  swords  and  staves, 
the  torches  and  lanterns,  now  burning  pale  in  the 
clear  moonlight.  Jesus  made  them  feel  it.  lie  made 
them  feel  what  manner  <>f  spirit  they  were  of,  and 
how  utterly  they  had  mistaken  His  views  and  spirit. 
"Whom  seek  ye?"  He  asked  them  again,  to  compel 
them  to  see  that  thcv  were  not  taking  Him,  but  that 


s        mi:  TRIM.  .I.M)  in-:. ITU  <>/•' j/-:scs  CIIKI+T 

}  le  was  giving  I  limself  up.  I  Ic  was  completely  master 
of  the  situation.  Singling  out  the;  Sanhcdrists,  who 
probably  at  that  moment  would  rather  have  kept  in 
the  background,  He  demanded,  pointing  to  their 
excessive  preparations,  "Be  ye  come  out  as  against 
a  thief,  with  swords  and  staves?  When  I  was  daily 
with  y.  m  in  the  temple,  ye  stretched  forth  no  hands 
against  Me."  He,  a  solitary  man,  though  He  knew 
how  many  were  against  Him,  had  not  been  afraid: 
He  taught  daily  in  the  temple  -in  the  most  public 
place,  at  the  most  public  hour.  But  they,  numerous 
and  powerful  as  they  were,  yet  were  afraid,  and  so 
they  had  chosen  the  midnight  hour  for  their  nefarious 
purpose.  "This  is  your  hour,"  He  said,  "and  the 
power  of  darkness.'  This  midnight  hour  is  your 
hour,  because  ye  are  sons  of  night,  and  the  power  ye 
\\ield  against  Me  is  the  power  of  darkness. 

So  spake  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  !  So  will 
He  speak  on  that  day  when  all  His  enemies  shall  be 
put  under  His  feet.  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  lie  be  angry, 
and  ye  perish  from  the  way  when  His  wrath  is 
kindK-d  but  a  little.  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put 
their  trust  in  1  lim." 

III. 

\Ve  cannot  recall  to  mind  too  often  that  it  was 
the  victory  in  the  (.arden  that  accounted  for  this 


Till:   ./A'A'A'.ST 


triumph  outside  tlic  g«'ite.  1  he  irresistible  dignity 
and  strength  here  displayed  were  gained  by  watching 
and  prayer. 

Tin's  however,  is  made  still  more  impressively 
clear  by  the  fate  of  those  who  did  not  watch  and 
pray.  On  them  everything  came  as  a  blinding  and 
bewildering  surprise.  They  were  aroused  out  of 
profound  slumber,  and  came  stumbling  forward 
hardly  yet  awake.  \Yhcn  hands  were  laid  on  Jesus, 
one  of  the  disciples  cried,  "  Shall  we  smite  with  the 
sword?"  And,  without  waiting  for  an  answer,  he 
struck.  But  what  a  ridiculous  blow!  I  low  like  a 
man  half-awake  !  Instead  of  the  head,  he  only  smote 
the  ear.  This  blow  would  have  been  dearly  paid  for 
had  not  Jesus,  with  perfect  presence  of  mind,  inter 
posed  between  Peter  and  the  swords  which  wen- 
being  drawn  to  cut  him  down.  "  Suffer  ye  thus  far," 
He  said,  keeping  the  soldiers  back;  and,  touching 
the  car,  He  healed  it,  and  saved  His  poor  disciple. 

Surely  it  was  even  with  a  smile  that  Jesus  said  to 
Peter,  "  Put  up  again  thy  sword  into  his  place  ;  for 
all  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with  the 
sword."  Inside  the  scabbard,  not  outside,  was  the 
sword's  place  ;  it  was  out  of  place  in  this  cause  ;  and 
those  who  wield  the  sword  without  just  reason,  and 
without  receiving  the  orders  of  competent  authority, 
are  themselves  liable  to  give  life  for  life. 


io        Till:    TRIAL    ,l.\n   DF.ATH   OF  JESCS   C1IIUST 

Hut  it  was  with  the  high-strung  eloquence  with 
which  lie  had  spoken  to  His  enemies  that  Jesus 
further  showed  Peter  ho\v  inconsistent  was  his  act. 
It  was  inconsistent  with  his  Master's  dignity  ;  "  For," 
said  He,  "if  I  asked  My  Father,  lie  would  presently 
give  Me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels  ; "  and 
what  against  such  a  force  were  this  miscellaneous 
band,  numbering  at  the  most  the  tenth  part  of  a 
legion  of  men?  It  was  inconsistent  with  Scripture: 
"How  then  shall  the  Scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that 
thus  it  must  be?"  It  was  inconsistent  with  His 
own  purpose  and  His  Father's  will:  "The  cup 
which  My  Father  hath  given  Me,  shall  I  not 
drink  it  ?  " 

Poor  Peter  !  On  this  occasion  he  was  thoroughly 
like  himself.  There  was  a  kind  of  rightncss  and 
nobleness  in  what  he  did  ;  but  it  was  in  the  wroncf 

o 

place.  If  he  had  only  been  as  prompt  inside 
Gcthscmanc  to  do  what  he  was  bidden  as  outside  it 
what  he  was  not  bidden!  How  much  better  if 
he  could  have  drawn  the  spiritual  sword  and  cut 
off  the  ear  which  was  to  be  betrayed  by  a  maid 
servant's  taunt  !  Peter's  conduct  on  this  occasion, 
as  often  on  other  occasions,  showed  how  poor  a  guide 
enthusiasm  is  when  it  is  not  informed  with  the  mind 
and  spirit  of  Christ. 


THE   ARRF.ST 


IV. 

Perhaps  it  was  by  the  recollection  of  how  deeply 
lie  had  vowed  to  stick  by  Christ,  even  if  he  should 
have  to  die  with  Him,  that  Peter  was  pricked  on  to 
do  something.  The  others,  however,  had  said  the 
s-imc  thing.  Did  they  remember  it  now  ?  It  is  to  be 
feared,  not :  the  apparition  of  mortal  danger  drove 
everything  out  of  their  minds  but  the  instinct  of  self- 
preservation.  Sometimes,  in  cases  of  severe  illness, 
especially  of  mental  disease,  the  curious  effect  may 
be  observed — that  a  face  into  which  years  of  culture 
have  slowly  wrought  the  stamp  of  refinement  and 
dignity  entirely  loses  this,  and  reverts  to  the  original 
peasant  type.  So  the  fright  of  their  Master's  arrest, 
coming  so  suddenly  on  the  prayerlcss  and  unprepared 
disciples,  undid,  for  the  time,  what  their  years  of 
intercourse  with  Him  had  effected;  and  they  sank 
back  into  Galilean  fishermen  again.  This  was  really 
what  they  were  from  the  arrest  to  tin:  resurrection. 

Here  again  their  conduct  is  in  absolute  contrast 
with  their  Master's.  As  a  mother-bird,  when  her 
brood  is  assailed,  goes  forward  to  inert  the  enemy,  or 
as  a  good  shepherd  stands  forth  between  his  Hock  and 
danger,  so  Jesus,  when  His  captors  drew  nigh,  threw 
Himself  between  them  and  His  followers.  It  was 
partly  with  this  in  view  that  lie  went  so  boldly 


u      ////•:  'i RIAL  .i.\/>  i>i-:.  i  in  or  JESUS  rv/A'/.s/ 

cut  and  concentrated  attention  on  Himself  by  the 
challenge,  "Whom  seek  ye?"  \\'hen  they  replied, 
"  Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  lie  said,  "  I  am  He  :  if  therefore 
ye  seek  Me,  let  these  go  their  way."  And  the  fright 
into  which  they  were  thrown  made  them  forget  1 1  is 
followers  in  their  anxiety  to  secure  Himself. 

This  was  as  He  intended.  St.  John,  in  narrating 
it,  makes  the  curious  remark,  that  this  was  done  that 
the  saving  might  be  fulfilled  which  He  spake,  "Of 
them  which  Thou  gavcst  Me  have  1  lost  none."  This 
saying  occurs  in  1 1  is  great  intercessory  prayer,  offered 
at  the  first  Communion  table;  but  in  its  original 
place  it  evidently  means  that  I  le  had  lost  none  of 
them  in  a  spiritual  sense,  whereas  here  it  seems  to 
have  only  the  sense  of  losing  an>'  of  them  by  the 
swords  of  the  soldiers  or  by  the  cross,  if  they  had 
been  arrested  with  Him.  Hut  a  deep  hint  underlies 
this  surface  meaning.  St.  John  suggests  that,  if  any 
.of  them  had  been  taken  along  with  Him,  the  likcli- 
Iv.od  i\  that  they  would  have  been  unequal  to  the 
:  they  would  have  denied  Him,  and  so,  in  the 
s.uldcr  sen>e,  \\ould  have  been  lost. 

Jc-us,  knowing  too  well   that  this  was  the  state  of 
tin-  case,  made  for  them   a  way  of  escape,  and  "  they 
c    Him   and    tied."      It  was   perhaps   as  well, 
t'.r  thry  n  light   have  done   worse.      Yet  what:  an  anti 
climax   to  the  asseveration   which  everyone  of   them 


THE   ARREST  \$ 

had  made  that  very  evening,  "  If  I  should  die  with 
Thee,  I  will  not  deny  Thee  in  any  wise  !  "  I  have 
sometimes  thought  what  an  honour  it  would  have 
been  to  Christianity,  what  a  golden  leaf  in  tin- 
history  of  human  nature,  had  one  or  two  of  them 
— say,  the  brothers  James  and  John  —  been  strong 
enough  to  go  with  Him  to  prison  and  to  death.  \Ve 
should,  indeed,  have  missed  St.  John's  writings  in  that 
case — his  Revelation,  Gospel  and  Kpistles.  Hut  what 
a  revelation  that  would  have  been,  what  a  gospel, 
what  a  living  epistle  ! 

It  was  not,  however,  to  be.  Jesus  had  to  go 
unaccompanied  :  "  I  have  trodden,  the  winepress 
alone  ;  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  Me." 
So  they  "bound  Him  and  led  Him  away." 


T11K    ECCLESIASTICAL    TRIAL 

OYKK  the  Kcdron,  up  the  slope  to  the  city, 
through  the  gates,  along  the  silent  streets,  the 
procession  passed,  with  Jesus  in  the  midst;  mid 
night  stragglers,  perhaps,  hurrying  forward  from  point 
to  point  to  ask  what  was  ado,  and  peering  towards 
the  Prisoner's  face,  before  they  diverged  again  to 
wards  their  own  h<>mes.*  He  was  conducted  to  the 
residence  of  the  high  priest,  where  His  trial  ensued. 

J'Csus  had  to  undergo  two  trials — the  one  ecclesi 
astical,  the  other  civil  ;  the  one  before  Caiaphas  the 

*  Here  would  tome  in  the  curious  little  notice  in  St.  Mark: 
"And  there  followed  Him  a  certain  young  man,  having  a  linen 
cloth  cast  about  his  naked  body  ;  and  the  young  men  laid  hold 
on  him  ;  and  he  left  the  linen  cloth  and  fled  from  them  naked"; 
<*i  whi<  h  I  have  not  commented,  not  well  knowing,  in  truth, 
what  to  make  of  it.  It  may  be  designed  to  show  the  rudeness 
of  the  soldiery,  and  the  peril  in  which  any  follower  of  Jesus 
would  have  been  had  he  been  caught.  Some  have  supposed 
that  the  young  man  was  St.  Mark,  and  that  this  is  the  painter's 
signature  in  an  obscure  corner  of  his  picture.  (See  Holzmann 
in  Hiinil.iimnifnttir  :;itm  .\eiien  Testament.}  In  the  first  volume 
of  the  l:r/,,i*iti>r  there  is  a  paper  on  the  subject  by  Dr.  Cox,  but 
it  do-  s  not  throw  much  light  on  it. 

14 


15 

high    priest,    the    other     before     I'oiitius     Pilate    the 
governor. 

The  reason  of  tin's  was,  that  Jiuhea  was  at  that 
time  under  Roman  rule,  forming  a  portion  of  the 
Roman  province  of  Syria  and  administered  by  a 
Roman  official,  who  resided  in  the  splendid  new 
seaport  of  (\esarca,  fifty  miles  away  from  Jerusalem, 
but  had  also  a  palace  in  Jerusalem,  which  he 
occasionally  visited. 

It  was  not  the  policy  of  Rome  to  strip  the  coun 
tries  of  which  she  became  mistress  of  all  power.  She 
flattered  them  by  leaving  in  their  hands  at  least  the 
insignia  of  self-government,  and  she  conceded  to 
them  as  much  home  rule  as  was  compatible  u  ith 
•  the  retention  of  her  paramount  authority.  She  was 
specially  tolerant  in  matters  of  religion.  Thus  the 
ancient  ecclesiastical  tribunal  of  the  Jews,  the-  Sanhe 
drim,  was  still  allowed  to  try  all  religious  c]iicv'ti<  ns 
and  punish  offenders.  Only,  if  the  sentence  chai.od 
to  be  a  capital  one,  the  case-  had  to  be  re-tried  by  the 
governor,  and  the  carrying  out  of  the  sentence,  if  it 
was  confirmed,  devolved  upon  him. 

It  was  at  the  instance  of  the  ecclesiastical  authori 
ties  that  Jesus  was  arrested,  and  they  condemned 
Him  to  death  ;  but  they  were  not  at  liberty  to  carry 
out  their  sentence:  they  had  to  take  Him  before 
Pilate,  who  chanced  at  the  time  t<>  be  in  the  citv, 


if.     TIII:  TRIAL  .-/.v/>  nr.ATii  or  JESUS  CIIKI*T 

and  he  tried  the  case  over  again,  they  of  course  being 
the  accusers  at  his  bar. 

Not  only  were  there  two  trials,  but  in  each  trial 
there  \vcre  three  separate  stages  or  acts.  In  the  first, 
or  ecclesiastical  trial,  Jesus  had  first  to  appear  before 
Annas,  then  before  Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrim 
during  the  night,  and  again  before  the  same  body 
after  daybreak.  And  in  the  second,  or  civil  trial,  He 
appeared  first  before  Pilate,  who  refused  to  confirm 
the  judgment  of  the  Je\vs  ;  then  Pilate  attempted  to 
rid  himself  of  the  case  by  sending  the  Culprit  to 
Herod  of  Galilee,  who  happened  also  to  be  at  the 
time  in  Jerusalem  ;  but  the  case  came  back  to  the 
Roman  governor  again,  and,  against  his  conscience, 
he  confirmed  the  capital  sentence. 

lUit  let  me  explain  more  fully  what  were  the  three 
acts  in  the  ecclesiastical  trial.* 

Jesus,  \ve  arc  informed  by  St.  John,  was  taken  first 
to  Annas.  This  was  an  old  man  of  seventy  years, 
who  had  been  high  priest  twenty  years  before.  As 
many  as  five  of  his  sons  succeeded  him  in  this  office, 
which  at  that  period  was  not  a  life  appointment,  but 
was  generally  held  only  for  a  short  time  ;  and  the 
reigning  high  priest  at  this  time,  Caiaphas,  was  his 
son-in-law.  Annas  was  a  man  of  very  great  consc- 

*  On  the  Sanhedrim  and  the  high  priests  see  Schiirer,  The 
Jc:d\l;  J',-iifi/f  in  tli<-  Time  uf  Christ,  div.  ii.,  vol.  i. 


17 


qucncc,  the  virtual  head  of  ecclesiastical  affairs, 
though  Caiaphas  was  the  nominal  head.  He  had 
come  originally  from  Alexandria  in  Kgypt  on  the 
invitation  of  Herod  the  Great.  He  and  his  family 
were  an  able,  ambitious  and  arrogant  race.  As  their 
numbers  multiplied,  they  became  a  sort  oi  ruling 
caste,  pushing  themselves  into  all  important  offices. 
They  were  Sadducces,  and  were  perfect  types  of  that 
party  —cold,  haughty,  worldly.  They  were  intensely 
unpopular  in  the  country  ;  but  they  were  feared  as 
much  as  they  were  disliked.  Greedy  of  gain,  they 
ground  the  people  with  heavy  ritual  imposts.  It  is 
said  that  the  traffic  within  the  courts  (A  the  temple, 
which  Jesus  condemned  so  sternly  a  few  days 
before,  was  carried  on  not  only  with  their  connivance 
but  for  their  enrichment.  If  this  was  the  case, 
the  conduct  of  Jesus  on  that  occasion  ma}'  have 
profoundly  incensed  the  high-priestly  caste  against 
Him. 

IinUrd,  it  was  probably  the  depth  of  his  hatred 
which  made  Annas  wish  to  see  Jesus  in  the  hands 
of  justice.  The  wary  Sadducec  had  in  all  likelihood 
taken  a  leading  part  in  the  transaction  with  Judas 
and  in  the  sending  out  of  the  troops  for  Christ's 
apprehension.  He,  therefore,  waited  out  of  bed  to 
see  what  the  upshot  was  to  be  ;  and  those  who  took 
Jesus  brought  Him  to  Annas  first.  But  whatever 

2 


is        /•///•:    TKl.ll.    AXD   DEATH   OF  JESL'S    CHRIST 

interrogation    Annas    may   have    subjected    Him    to 
\vas  entirely  informal.* 

It  allowed  time,  however,  to  get  together  the 
Sanhedrim.  Messengers  were  dispatched  to  scour 
the  city  for  the  members  at  the  midnight  hour, 
because  the  case  was  urgent  and  could  not  brook 
d.-lay.  None  knew  what  might  happen  if  the  multi 
tude,  when  it  awoke  in  the  morning,  found  the 
popular  Teacher  in  the  hands  of  His  unpopular 
enemies.  Hut,  if  the  trial  were  all  over  before  day 
break  and  Jesus  already  in  the  strong  hands  of  the 
Romans  before  the  multitude  had  learnt  that  anything 
was  going  on,  there  would  be  nothing  to  fear.  So 
the  Sanhedrim  was  assembled  under  cloud  of  night  ; 
and  the  proceedings  went  forward  in  the  small  hours 
of  the  morning  in  the  house  of  Caiaphas,  to  which 
Jesus  had  been  removed. 

This  was  not  strictly  legal,  however,  because  the 
letter  of  the  law  did  not  allow  this  court  to  meet 
by  night.  On  this  account,  although  the  proceedings 
\\ere  complete  and  the  sentence  agreed  upon  during 
tin-  night,  it  was  considered  necessary  to  hold  another 
sitting  at  daybreak.  This  was  the  third  stage  of  the 
trial  ;  but  it  was  merely  a  brief  rehearsal,  for  form's 
sake,  of  what  hail  been  already  done.f  Then-fore,  we 

Tliis,  many  think,  is  \vluit  is  given  in  St.   John. 
:    Many  think  that  this  is  what  is  given  in  St.  Luke. 


THE  ECCLESIASTICAL    TRIM.  19 

must    return    to    the    proceedings    during    the    night, 
which  contain  the  kernel  of  the  matter. 

Imagine,  then,  a  large  room  forming  one  side  of 
the  court  of  an  Oriental  house,  from  which  it  is 
separated  only  by  a  row  of  pillars,  so  that  what  is 
going  on  in  the  lighted  interior  is  visible  to  those 
outside.  The  room  is  semicircular.  Round  the  arc 
of  the  semicircle  the  half-hundred  or  more  *  members 
sit  on  a  divan.  Caiaphas,  the  president,  occupies  a 
kind  of  throne  in  the  centre  of  the  opposite  wall.  In 
fiont  stands  the  Accused,  facing  him,  with  the  jailers 
on  the  one  side  and  the  witnesses  on  the  other. 

How  ought  any  trial  to  commence?  Surely  \\ith 
a  clear  statement  of  the  crime  alleged  and  with  the 
production  of  witnesses  to  support  the  charge.  Hut, 
instead  of  beginning  in  this  way,  "  the  high  priest 
asked  Jesus  of  His  disciples  and  of  His  doctrine." 

The  insinuation  was  that  lie  \\as  multiplying 
disciples  for  some  secret  design  and  teaching  them 
a  secret  doctrine,  which  might  be  construed  into  a 
project  of  revolution.  Jesus,  still  throbbing  with  the 
indignity  of  being  arrested  under  cloud  of  night,  as 
if  He  were  anxious  to  escape,  and  by  a  force  so  large 
as  to  suggest  that  He  \\.is  tin  head  of  a  revolutionary 
band,  replied,  with  lofty  self-consciousness,  "  Why 


*  The  lull  number  was  seventy-one,  including  the  president. 


;o       ///A    TRIAL    .L\!)   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIS? 

askcst  tlK.u  Me?  Ask  them  that  heard  Me  what  I 
have  said  unto  them  ;  behold,  they  know  what  I  said." 
\Vhy  had  they  arrested  Him  if  they  had  yet  to  learn 
what  He  had  said  and  done?  They  were  trying  to 
make  Him  out  to  be  an  underground  schemer  ;  but 
they,  with  their  arrests  in  secrecy  and  their  midnight 
trials,  were  themselves  the  sons  of  darkness. 

Such  simple  and  courageous  speech  was  alien  to 
that  place,  which  knew  only  the  whining  of  sup 
pliants,  the  smooth  flatteries  of  sycophants,  and  the 
diplomatic  phrases  of  advocates  ;  and  a  jailer,  perhaps 
seeing  the  indignant  blush  mount  into  the  face  of  the 
high  priest,  clenched  his  fist  and  struck  Jcsv-;  on  the 
mouth,  asking,  "  Answerest  Thou  the  high  priest 
so?"  Poor  hireling!  better  for  him  that  his  hand 
had  withered  ere  it  struck  that  blow.  Almost  the 
same  thing  once  happened  to  St.  Paul  in  the  same 
place,  and  he  could  not  help  hurling  back  a  stinging 
epithet  of  contempt  and  indignation.  Jesus  was 
betrayed  into  no  such  loss  of  temper.  But  what 
shall  be  said  of  a  tribunal,  and  an  ecclesiastical 
tribunal,  which  could  allow  an  untried  Prisoner  to  be 
thus  abused  in  open  court  by  one  of  its  minions? 

The  high  priest  had,  however,  been  stopped  on  the 
tack  which  he  had  first  tried,  and  was  compelled  to 
do  what  he  ought  to  have  begun  with— -to  call 
witnesses.  Hut  this,  too,  turned  out  a  pitiful  failure. 


THE  ECCLESIASTICAL    TRIM.  21 


They  had  not  had  time  to  get  a  charge  properly 
made  out  and  witnesses  cited  ;  and  there  was  no  time 
to  wait.  Evidence  had  to  be  extemporised  ;  and  it 
was  swept  up  apparently  from  the  underlines  and 
hangers-on  of  the  court.  It  is  expressly  said  by  St. 
Matthew  that  "  they  sought  false  witness  against 
Jesus  to  put  Him  to  death."  To  put  Him  to  death 
was  what  in  their  hearts  they  were  resolved  upon, 
they  were  only  trying  to  trump  up  a  legal  pretext, 
and  the}'  were  not  scrupulous.  The  attempt  was, 
however,  far  from  successful.  The  witnesses  could 
not  be  got  to  agree  together  or  to  tell  a  consistent 
story.  Many  were  tried,  but  the  fiasco  grew  more 
and  more  ridiculous. 

At  length  two  were  got  to  agree  about  some-thing 
they  had  heard  from  Him,  out  of  which,  it  was 
hoped,  a  charge  could  be  constructed.  They  had 
heard  Him  say,  "I  will  destroy  this  temple  that  is 
made  with  hands,  and  within  three  days  I  will  build 
another  made  without  hands."  It  was  a  sentence  of 
His  early  ministry,  obviously  of  high  poetic  meaning, 
which  they  were  reproducing  as  the  vulgarrst  prose  ; 
although,  even  thus  interpreted,  it  is  difficult  to  sec 
what  they  could  have  made  of  it  ;  because,  if  the 
fust  half  of  it  meant  that  He  was  to  destroy  the 
temple,  the  second  promised  to  restore  it  again. 
'1  he  hi"th  priest  saw  t<><»  well  that  they  were  making 


22     Tin:  TRIAL  j.vT)  in-..\rn  or  jrsrs  CHRIST 

nothing  «•!'  it  ;  and,  starting  up  and  springing  forward, 
he  demanded  of  Jesus,  "  Answerest  Thou  nothing? 
What  is  it  which  these  witness  against  Thee?"  He 
affected  to  believe  that  it  was  something  of  enormity 
that  had  been  alleged  ;  but  it  was  really  because  he 
knew  that  nothing  could  be  founded  on  it  that  he 
gave  way  to  such  unseemly  excitement. 

Jesus  had  looked  on  in  absolute  silence  while  the 
witnesses  against  I  lim  were  annihilating  one  another  ; 
nor  did  He  now  answer  a  word  in  response  to  the 
high  priest's  interruption.  He  did  not  need  to  speak  : 
silence  spoke  better  than  the  loudest  words  could 
have  done.  It  brought  home  to  His  judges  the 
ridiculousness  and  the  shamcfulncss  of  their  position. 
Mven  their  h  irdened  consciences  began  to  be  uneasy, 
as  that  c.ilm  Face  looked  clown  on  them  and  their 
procedure  with  silent  dignity.  It  was  by  the  un 
easiness  which  he  was  feeling  that  the  high  priest 
was  made  so  loud  and  shrill. 

In  -horl,  he  had  been  beaten  along  this  second  line 
quite  as  completely  as  he  had  been  along  the  first. 
Hut  he  had  still  a  last  card,  and  no\v  he  played  it. 
Returning  to  his  throne  and  confronting  Jesus  with 
theatrical  solemnity,  he  said,  "  I  adjure  Thee  by  the 
living  God  that  Thou  tell  us  whether  Thou  be  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  ("KM!."  That  is  to  say,  he  put  Him 
on  oath  to  tell  what  He  claimed  to  be;  for  ainoncr 


THE  rc(  r.r.siAsrrc.u.  TRIAL  2; 

the  Jews  the  oath  was  pronounced   by  the  judge,  nut. 
by   tile    prisoner. 

This  was  one  of  the  great  moments  in  the  life  of 
Christ.  Apparently  He  recognised  the  right  of  the 
high  priest  to  put  Him  on  oath  ;  or  at  least  He  saw 
that  silence  now  might  be  construed  into  the  with 
drawal  of  His  claims.  He  knew,  indeed,  that  the 
question  was  put  merely  for  the  purpose  of  incrimi 
nating  Him,  and  that  to  answer  it  meant  death  to 
Himself.  Hut  He  who  had  silenced  those  by  whom 
the  title  of  Messi:ih  had  been  thrust  upon  Him,  when 
the}- wished  to  make  Him  a  king,  now  claimed  the 
title  when  it  was  the  signal  for  condemnation. 
Decidedly  and  solemnly  He  answered,  "  Yes,  I  am  "  ; 
and,  as  if  the  crisis  had  caused  within  Him  a  great 
access  of  self-consciousness,  He  proceeded,"  Hereafter 
shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on  the  right  hand 
of  power  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  *  For 
the  moment  the}'  were  His  judges,  but  one  day  He 
would  be  their  Judge;  it  was  only  of  His  earthly 
life  that  they  could  dispose,  but  He  would  have  to 
dispose  of  their  eternal  destiny. 

It  has  often  been  said  that  Christians  have  claimed 
for  Christ  what  He  never  claimed  for  Himself;  that 
He  never  claimed  to  be  anv  more  than  a  man,  but 


•   St-c  1'salin  ex.  I,  and  Dan.  vii.  i  }. 


2.\        JHi:    TRIAL    AM)   DEATH   OF  JKSC5    rV/AV.ST 

the}-  have  made  Him  a  God.  But  this  ^rc.it  state 
ment,  made  upon  oath,  must  impress  every  honest 
mind.  Kvcry  effort  has,  indeed,  been  made  to  deplete 
its  terms  of  their  importance  and  to  reduce  them  to 
the  lowest  possible  value.  It  is  argued,  for  example, 
that,  \vhen  the  his^'h  priest  asked  if  He  were  "  the  Son 
of  God,"  he  meant  no  more  than  when  he  asked  if 
lie  were  "the  Christ."  But  what  is  to  be  said  of 
Christ's  description  of  Himself  as  "sitting  on  the 
ri^ht  hand  of  power  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven"?  Can  lie  who  is  to  be  the  Jud^e  of  men, 
searching  their  hearts  to  the  bottom,  estimating  the 
value  of  their  performances,  and,  in  accordance  with 
these  estimates,  fixing  their  eternal  station  and  decree, 
be  a  mere  man?  The  greatest  and  the  wisest  of  men 
are  well  aware  that  in  the  history  of  every  brother 
man,  and  even  in  the  heart  of  a  little  child,  there  are 
^ecrets  and  mysteries  which  they  cannot  fathom.  No 
mere  man  can  accurately  measure  the  character 
of  a  fellow-creature;  he  cannot  even  estimate  his 
own. 

How   this   ^reat   confession    lifts    the    whole  scene! 

e  IK;  lon-cr  these  small  men   and   their  sordid 

pn>(  -edm-s;   but  the  Son  of  man  bearing  witness  to 

Hinwlf  in   the  audience  of  the  universe.      How  little 

what   the  Jewish  judges  will   say  about 

Him!      1  Ins  -reat  confession   reverberates  down    the 


ages,  ami  the  heart  of  the  world,  as  it  hears  it  from 
His  lips,  says,  Amen. 

The  high  priest  had  achieved  his  end  at  last.  As 
a  high  priest  was  expected  to  do  when  he  heard 
blasphemy,  he  rent  his  clothes,  and,  turning  to  his 
colleagues,  he  said,  "  What  need  have  we  of  witnesses  ? 
behold,  now  ye  have  heard  His  blasphemy."  And 
they  all  assented  that  Jesus  was  guilty,  and  that  the 
sentence  must  be  death. 

Sometimes  good-hearted  Bible-readers,  in  perusing 
these  scenes,  are  troubled  with  the  thought  that  the 
judges  of  Jesus  were  conscientious.  Was  it  not  their 
duty,  when  anyone  came  forward  with  Messianic 
pretensions,  to  judge  whether  or  not  his  claim  was 
just?  and  did  the}'  not  honestly  believe  that  Jesus 
was  not  what  He  professed  to  be?  Xo  doubt  the}' 
did  honestly  believe  so.  We  must  ascend  to  a  much 
earlier  period  to  be  able  to  judge  their  conduct 
accurately.  It  was  when  the  claims  of  Jesus  were 
first  submitted  to  them  that  they  went  astray.  He, 
being  such  as  I  Ie  was,  could  only  have  been  welcomed 
and  appreciated  by  expectant,  receptive,  holy  minds. 
The  ecclesiastical  authorities  of  Jud.i-a  in  that  age 
were  anything  but  expectant,  receptive  and  holy. 
They  were  totally  incapable  of  understanding  Him, 
and  saw  no  beauty  that  the}*  should  desire  Him.  A^ 


26        Till-:    TRIAL    A.\D   DEATH   OE  JESTS    CHRIST 

He  often  told  them  Himself,  being  such  as  they  were, 
they  eouKl  not  believe.  The  fault  lay  not  so  much 
in  \\hat  they  did  as  in  what  the}-  were.  Hcing  in  the 
wrong  path,  they  went  forward  to  the  end.  It  may 
be  said  that  they  walked  according  to  their  light  ; 
but  the  light  that  was  in  them  was  darkness.  Their 
proceedings,  however,  on  this  occasion  will  not  tend 
to  soften  the  heart  of  anyone  who  looks  into  them 
carefully.  They  had  hardly  the  least  show  of  justice. 
There  was  no  regular  charge  or  regular  evidence, 
and  no  thought  whatever  of  allowing  the  Accused  to 
bring  counter-evidence  ;  the  same  persons  were  both 
accusers  and  judges  •  the  sentence  was  a  foregone 

Jo  o 

conclusion  ;  and  the  entire  proceedings  consisted  of 
a  series  of  devices  to  force  the  .Accused  into  some 
statement  which  would  supply  a  colourable  pretext 
for  condemning  I  lim.* 

Hut  it  was  by  what  ensued  after  the  sentence  of 
condemnation  was  passed  that  these  men  cut  them 
selves  off  forever  from  the  sympathy  of  the  tolerant 
and  generous.  A  court  of  law  ought  to  be  a  place  of 
dignity;  when  a  great  is  ,ue  is  tried  and  a  solemn 
judgment  parsed,  it  ought  to  impress  the  judges 
themselves  ;  even  the  condemned,  when  a  death 

Kvrn  J-M.  the  Jewish  historian,  calls  it  a  murder;  but  he 
•«   not   Ix-lu-vr    that    there    uas  an  actual    trial;    and    in    this 
K<lrr>h«.-im    agrees  with   him. 


THE  ECCLESIASTICAL    TRIAL  27 

sentence  has  been  passed,  ought  to  be  hedged  round 
with  a  certain  awe  and  respect.  Hut  that  blow 
inflicted  with  impunity  at  the  commencement  of  the 
trial  by  a  minion  of  the  court  was  too  clear  an  index 
of  the  state  of  mind  of  all  present.  There  was  no 
solemnity  or  greatness  of  any  kind  in  their  thoughts  ; 
nothing  but  resentment  and  spite  at  Him  \\lio  had 
thwarted  and  defied  them,  lessened  them  in  the 
public  estimation  and  stopped  their  unholy  gains.  A 
perfect  sea  of  such  feelings  had  long  been  gathering 
in  their  hearts  ;  and  now,  when  the  opportunity  came, 
it  broke  loose  upon  Him.  They  struck  Him  with 
their  sticks;  they  spat  in  His  face;  they  drew  some 
thing  over  His  head  and,  smiting  Him  again,  cried, 
"Christ,  prophesy  who  smote  Thee."*  One  would 
wish  to  believe  that  it  was  only  by  the  miserable 
underlings  that  such  things  were  done  ;  but  the 
narrative  makes  it  too  clear  that  the  masters  led  tin- 
way  and  the  servants  followed. 

There  are  terrible  things  in  man.  There  are  some 
depths  in  human  nature  into  which  it  is  scared}-  safe 
to  look.  It  was  by  the  very  perfection  of  Christ  that 
the  uttermost  evil  of  His  enemies  was  brought  out. 
There  is  a  passage  in  "  Paradise  Lost,"  where  a  band 
of  angels,  sent  out  to  scour  Paradise  in  search  of  Satan, 

*  In  allusion  to  His  claim  to  be  the  Messianir  Prophet.  The 
Koman  soldiers,  on  the  other  hand,  ridiculed  His  » laiin  to  be  a  King. 


2S        THE    TRIAL   AND    HFATH   OF  JFSl'S    CHRIST 


who  is  hidden  in  the  garden,  discover  him  in  the 
shape  of  a  toad  "squat  at  the  car  of  Kvc."  Ithuricl, 
one  of  the  band,  touches  him  with  his  spear,  whereat, 
surprised,  he-  starts  up  in  his  own  shape,— 

'•  for  no  falsehood  can  endure 
Touch  of  celestial  temper,  but  returns 
(  M  force  to  its  own  likeness.'' 

Hut  the  touch  of  perfect  goodness  lias  often  the 
opposite  effect  :  it  transforms  the  an^el  into  the  toad, 
which  is  evil's  own  likeness. 

Christ  was  now  ^ettini;  into  close  t^rips  with  the 
enemy  He  had  come  to  this  world  to  overcome  ;  and, 
as  it  clutched  Him  for  the  final  wrestle,  it  exhibited 
all  its  ugliness  and  discharged  all  its  venom.*  The 
claw  of  the  dragon  was  in  His  flesh,  and  its  foul 
breath  in  His  mouth.  \\  e  cannot  conceive  what  such 
insult  and  .dishonour  must  have  been  to  His  sensitive 
and  rc^al  mind.  But  He  rallied  His  heart  to  endure 
and  not  to  faint  ;  for  lie  had  come  to  be  the  death 
of  sin,  and  its  death  was  to  be  the  salvation  of  the 
world. 


"  I  h'-  central    figure    is    the    holiest    Person    in    history  ;   but 

round    Him    stand    or   strive   the    most    opposed    and    contrasted 

moral  types.   .   .   .   The  men  who  touch  Him  in  this  supreme  hour 

iKt'irv    do    so    only    to    have   their   essential    characters 

d;st  In*!-. I.'      KAIKHAIKN, 


THK    GKKAT    DKNIAL 

^T^O  tlic  ecclesiastical  trial  of  our  Lord  there  is  a 
-*-  side-piece,  over  which  \vc  must  linger  before 
proceeding  to  the  civil  trial.  At  the  very  hour  when 
in  the  hall  of  the  high  priest's  house  Christ  was 
uttering  His  great  confession,  one  of  His  disciples 
was,  in  the  court  of  the  same  building,  pouring  out 
denial  after  denial. 

I. 

When  Jesus  was  bound  in  Gcthscmanc  and  led 
away  back  to  Jerusalem,  all  His  disciples  forsook 
Him  and  fled.  They  disappeared,  I  suppose,  among 
the  bushes  and  trees  of  the  garden  and  escaped  into 
the  surrounding  country  or  wherever  they  thought 
they  would  be  safe. 

lint  two  of  the  Twelve— St.  Peter  and  St.  John, 
who  tells  the  story — soon  rallied  from  the  first 
panic  and  followed,  at  a  distance,*  the  band  in 


THE    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH   OP  JESUS   CHRIST 


\vhosc  midst  their  Master  was.  Keeping  in  the 
shadow  of  the  trees  by  the  roadside,  keeping  in  the 
shadow  of  the  houses  in  the  streets,  they  stole  after 
the  moving  mass.  At  last,  when  it  got  near  its 
destination— the  palace  of  the  high  priest — they 
hurried  forward  ;  and  St.  John  went  in  with  the 
crowd  ;  but  somehow,  probably  through  irresolution, 
St.  Peter  was  left  outside  in  the  street  ;  and  the  door 
was  shut. 

To  understand  what  follows,  it  is  necessary  to 
describe  more  in  detail  the  construction  of  such  a 
house  as  the  high  priest's  palace  ;  for  it  was  very 
unlike  most  of  our  houses.  A  Western  house  looks 
into  the  street,  but  an  Oriental  into  its  own  interior, 
having  no  opening  to  the  front  except  a  great  arched 
gateway,  shut  with  a  heavy  door  or  gate.  When 
this  door  is  opened,  it  discloses  a  broad  passage, 
penetrating  the  front  building  and  leading  into  a 
squire,  paved  courtyard,  open  to  the  sky,  round 
which  the  house  is  built,  and  into  which  its  rooms, 
both  upstairs  and  downstairs,  look.  A  similar  ar 
rangement  is  to  be  seen  in  some  large  warehouses 
in  our  own  cities,  or  you  may  have  seen  it  in  large 
hotels  on  the  Continent.  It  only  requires  to  be 
added  that  on  the  side  of  the  passage,  inside  the 
outer  g.-uc,  there  is  a  room  or  lodge  for  the  porter 
or  portress,  who  opens  and  shuts  the  gate;  and  in 


/7//;   GREAT   DEMAL 


-' 


the  gate  there  is  a  little  wicket  by  which  individuals 
can  be  let  in  or  out. 

When  the  band  conducting  Jesus  appeared  in  front 
of  the  palace,  no  doubt  the  portress  opened  the  large 
i;.itc  to  admit  them  and  then  shut  it  again.  They 
passed  under  the  archway  into  the  court,  which  they 
crossed,  and  then  entered  one  of  the  apartments 
overlooking  the  courtyard.  Hut  the  police  and  other 
underlings  employed  in  the  arrest,  their  work  being 
now  done,  stayed  outside,  and,  as  it  was  midnight 
and  the  weather  was  cold,  they  lighted  a  fire  there 
under  the  open  sky  and,  gathering  round  it,  began  to 
warm  themselves. 

As  has  been  said,  John  went  in  through  the  gate 
with  the  croud,  but  Peter  was  somehow  shut  out. 
John,  who  seems  to  have  occupied  a  higher  social 
position  than  the  rest  of  the  Twelve,  was  known  to 
the  high  priest,  and,  therefore,  probably  was  ac 
quainted  with  the  palace  and  knew  the  servants  ; 
and,  when  he  noticed  that  Peter  had  be»  n  left 
out,  he  went  to  the  portress  and  got  her  to  let  him 
in  by  the  wicket-gate. 

It  was  a  friendly  act  ;  and  yet,  as  the  event  proved, 
it  was  unintentionally  an  ill  turn  :  John  led  Peter  into 
temptation.  The  best  of  friends  ma)f  do  this  some 
times  to  one  another  ;  for  the  situation  into  which 
one  man  may  enter  without  peril  ma}'  be  dangerous 


3-'        '////-    TRIAL   AM)    1)1: AT II  OF  Jl-lSl.'S    CHRIST 

to  another.  One  man  may  mingle  freely  in  company 
which  another  cannot  enter  without  terrible  risks. 
There  are  amusements  in  which  one  Christian  can 
take  part,  though  they  would  ruin  another  if  lie 
touched  them.  A  mind  matured  and  disciplined  may 
read  books  which  would  kindle  the  fire  of  hell  in  a 
mind  less  experienced.  There  arc  always  two  things 
that  £o  to  the  making  of  a  temptation  :  there  is  the 
particular  set  of  circumstances  to  be  encountered  on 
the  one  hand,  and  there  is  the  peculiar  character  or 
history  of  the  person  entering  into  the  situation  on 
the  other.  \Vc  need  to  remember  this  if  we  arc  to 
defend  cither  ourselves  or  others  against  temptation. 

II. 

John  no  doubt,  as  soon  as  he  got  Peter  inside  the 
door,  hurried  away  across  the  court  into  the  hall 
where  Jesus  was,  to  witness  the  proceedings. 

Not  so  Peter.  lie  was  not  familiar  with  the  place 
as  John  was  ;  and  he  had  the  shyness  of  a  plain  man 
at  the  sight  of  the  inside  of  a  great  house.  Besides,  he 
was  under  fear  of  being  recognised  as  a  follower  of 
Christ  and  apprehended.  Now  also  the  unlucky  blow- 
he  had  made  at  Malchus  at  the  gate  of  Gcthsemanc 
had  to  be  paid  for,  because  it  greatly  increased  his 
chance  of  detection. 

1I<    remained,  therefore,  just   inside  the  great  door, 


watching  from  the  shadows  of  the  archway  what  was 
going  on  inside,  and,  without  knowing  it,  himself 
being  watched  by  the  portress  from  hc-r  coignc  of 
vantage.  He  was  ill  at  ease;  for  lie  did  not  know 
what  to  do.  He  did  not  dare  to  go,  like  John,  into 
the  judgment-hall.  Perhaps  he  half  wished  he  could 
get  out  into  the  street  again.  lie  was  in  a  trap. 

.At  last  he  strolled  forward  to  the  group  round  the 
fire  and,  sitting  down  among  them,  commenced  to 
warm  himself.  It  was  a  miscellaneous  group  there 
in  the  glare  of  the  fire,  and  no  notice  was  taken  of 
him.  He  took  his  place  as  if  he  were  one  of  them. 

It  was,  however,  a  dangerous  situation  in  another 
sense  than  he  supposed.  It  was  of  bodily  peril  he 
was  in  terror  ;  he  did  not  anticipate  danger  to  his 
soul  ;  yet  this  was  very  near.  It  is  always  dangerous 
when  a  follower  of  Christ  is  sitting  amonir  Christ's 


enemies  without  letting  it  be  known  what  he  is. 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel 
of  the  ungodly,  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners, 
nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful."  It  is  more 
than  probable  that  when  IVtcr  sat  down  the  air  was 
ringing  with  jest  and  laughter  about  Jesus  ;  but 
he  did  not  interrupt  :  he  kept  silence  and  tried  to 
look  as  like  one  of  the  scorners  as  he  could.  But 
not  to  confess  Christ  is  the  next  step  to  denying  Him. 
Temptation,  as  is  its  wont,  came  suddenly  and  from 

3 


THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 


the  most  unexpected  quarter.  As  has  been  said, 
when  he  was  skulking  beneath  the  archway,  his 
movements  were  noted  by  the  portress.  They  were 
suspicious,  and  she,  with  a  woman's  cleverness,  divined 
his  secret.  Accordingly,  when  she  was  relieved  at 
her  post  by  another  maid,  she  not  only  pointed  him 
out  to  this  companion  and  communicated  to  her  what 
she  thought  about  him,  but,  in  passing  to  her  room,  she 
went  up  to  the  fire  among  the  soldiers  and,  looking 
him  straight  in  the  face,  said,  with  a  malicious  twinkle 
in  her  eye,  This  is  one  of  the  Xazarenc's  followers. 

Peter  was  taken  completely  by  surprise.  It  was 
as  if  a  mask  had  been  torn  from  his  face.  In  a 
moment  the  instinct  of  terror  seized  him  ;  perhaps, 
too,  the  instinct  of  shame  at  being  thought  a  disciple 
of  Him  they  were  mocking.  Indeed,  there  was  a 
further  shame:  how  could  he  confess  himself  the 
disciple  of  the  Master  whom  he  had  heard  blas 
phemed  without  protest?  lie  had  denied  his  Master 
in  act  before  he  denied  Him  in  word;  and  the  pre 
ceding  act  made  the  word  also  necessary.  "  I  do  not 
know  what  you  mean,"  he  said,  with  a  surly  frown  ; 
and  away  she  tripped  laughing,  having  done  her 
work  quite  successfully. 

None  pursued  the  subject.  But  Peter  was  uneasy, 
and  took  the  earliest  opportunity  of  escaping  from 
the  fireside.  He  went  away  into  the  archway,  in- 


Till-:   CRT.  AT  DEM. 1 1.  35 

tending  apparently,  if  he  could,  to  get  out  ui"  the 
place  altogether.  Hut  here  the  trap  was  closed  ;  for 
the  other  maid,  whose  attention  had  been  directed 
to  him,  and  who  may  have  been  laughing  from  a 
distance  at  her  neighbour's  sail}',  was  standing  at 
the  door  of  her  lodge,  with  two  or  three  men  ;  and, 
pointing  him  out  to  them  as  he  came  forward,  she 
said,  "  That  is  one  of  the  Xa/.arcne's  followers." 

Poor  Peter!  felled  to  the  ground  a  second  time  by 
the  touch  of  a  woman's  hand.  Hut  how  often  has  the 
saucy  tongue  and  jeering  laugh  of  a  woman  made  a 
man  ashamed  of  the  highest  and  holiest  !  Peter  flung 
at  her  an  angry  oath  and,  turning  on  his  heel,  went 
back  again  to  the  fire. 

He  was  now  completely  panic-stricken,  and  lost  all 
self-control.  He  was  boiling  with  conflicting  emo 
tions  and  could  not  keep  quiet.  Assuming  an  air  of 
defiance  and  indifference,  he  plunged  into  the  con 
versation,  speaking  loudly  to  throw  off  suspicion,  but 
really  defeating  his  own  object  ;  for  he  drew  attention 
on  himself,  and  they  scanned  him  the  more  narrowly 
the  more  excited  he  became.  A  relative  of  Malchus, 
whose  ear  he  had  cut  off,  recognised  him.  His  loud 
country  voice  and  rough  Galilean  accent  aroused  the 
suspicions  of  others.  To  bait  such  a  pretender  was  a 
welcome  diversion  in  the  idle  night,  and  soon  they 
were  all  in  full  cry  after  the  quarry. 


36        ////I    7Vv'/.-/A    .'/A7J   DEATH   OF  JESL'S    CHRIST 

Peter  was  thoroughly  lost ;  like  «i  bull  in  the  arena 
attacked  and  stabbed  on  every  side,  he  became 
blind  with  rage,  terror  and  shame  ;  and,  pouring  out 
denials,  he  added  to  them  oaths  and  curses  hurled  at 
his  adversaries. 

The  latter  element  was,  no  doubt,  the  resurrection 
of  an  old  fisherman's  habit,  long  since  dead  and 
buried.  Peter  was  just  the  man  likely  to  be  a  profane 
swearer  in  his  youth — the  headlong  man  of  temper, 
who  likes  to  say  a  thing  with  as  much  emphasis  and 
exaggeration  as  possible.  This  is  a  sin  whose  power 
is  generally  broken  instantly  at  conversion.  While 
there  arc  sins  which  linger  on  for  years  and  require 
to  be  crucified  by  inches,  profane  swearing  often  dies 
an  instantaneous  death.  Hut  even  in  this  case  it  is 
difficult  to  get  quit  of  the  evil  past.  In  Peter  this 
sin  may  have  seemed  to  die  at  his  conversion  ;  for 
years  it  had  been  dead  and  buried  ;  yet,  when  the 
favourable  moment  came,  lo  and  behold,  there  it  was 
again  in  vigorous  life.  Old  habits  of  sin  are  hard  to 
kill.  \Yc  seem  to  have  killed  and  buried  them  ;  but 
do  you  not  sometimes  hear  a  knocking  beneath  the 
ground?  do  you  not  feel  the  dead  thing  turning  in  its 
coffin,  and  see  the  earth  moving  above  its  grave? 
This  is  the  penalty  of  the  days  given  to  the  flesh. 
Till  ID'S  dying  day  the  man  who  has  been  a  drunkard 
or  a  fornicator,  a  liar  or  a  swearer,  will  have  to  keep 


77/7:    (, R /•:.//     /)/•:. \/.  I L  37 

watch  and  ward  over  the  graveyard   in  which  he  lias 
buried  the  past. 

Yet  there  was  a  kind  of  method  in  the  madness  of 
Peter's  profanity.  When  he  wanted  to  prove  that  he 
was  none  of  Christ's,  he  could  not  do  better  than  take 
to  cursing.  They  did  not  credit  his  assertions  that 
he  had  no  connection  with  his  Master,  but  they  could 
not  help  believing  his  sins.  Nobody  belonging  to 
Jesus,  the}'  knew,  would  speak  as  Peter  was  doing. 
It  is  one  of  the  strongest  testimonies  to  Jesus  still, 
that  even  those  who  do  not  believe  in  Him  expect 
cleanness  of  speech  and  of  conduct  from  1 1  is  followers, 
and  arc  astonished  if  those  who  bear  His  name  do 
things  which  when  done  by  others  are  matters  of 
course. 


\Vhilc  Peter  was  in  the  midst  of  this  outbreak  of 
denial  and  profanity,  suddenly  he  saw  the  eyes  of  his 
tormentors  turned  away  from  him  to  another  object.* 
It  was  Jesus,  whom  His  enemies  had  condemned  in 
the  neighbouring  judgment-hall,  and  whom  they  were 

It  is  to  St.  Luke  we  owe  the  account  here  given  of  IVter's 
awakening;  but  he  also  refers  to  the  crowing  of  the  cock,  the 
only  cause  mentioned  by  the  other  Kvang'-li.sts.  There  is  no 
difficulty  in  understanding  that  such  a  psychological  crisis  may 
have  been  due  to  two  lines  of  suggestion. 


3*      mi-:  TRIM.  .L\D  DEATH  or  JESCS  CHRIST 

n(j\v  leading,  amidst  blows  and  reproaches,  across  the 
courtyard  to  the  guard-room,  where  He  was  to 
be  kept  for  two  or  three  hours  till  a  subsequent 
stage  of  His  trial  came  on.  As  Jesus  stepped  down 
out  of  the:  hall  into  the  courtyard,  His  car  had 
caught  the  accents  of  His  disciple,  and,  stung  with 
unutterable  anguish,  He  turned  quickly  round  in  the 
direction  whence  the  sounds  proceeded.  At  the  same 
moment  Peter  turned,  and  they  looked  one  another 
full  in  the  face.  Jesus  did  not  speak  ;  for  a  single 
syllable,  even  of  surprise,  would  have  betrayed  His 
disciple.  Xor  could  J  Ic  linger  ;  for  the  soldiers 
were  hurrying  Him  on.  But  for  a  single  instant 
their  eyes  met,  and  soul  looked  into  soul. 

\Vh<»  shall  say  what   was  in  that  look  of  Christ?* 

*   Mrs.  Browning's  sonnets  on  this  subject  must  be  quoted  in 
full : 

"  T\vo  sayings  of  tin-   Holy  Scriptures  beat 
Like  pulses  in  the  Church's  brow  and  breast ; 
And  by  them  we  find  rest  in  our  unrest, 
And,  heart-deep  in  salt  tears,   do  yet  entreat 
God's   fellowship,   as   if  on   heavenly  seat. 
Tin-  first   is  JKSUS  \VKPT;   whereon   is  prest 
Full  many  a  sobbing  lace,  that  drops  its  best 
And  sweetest  waters  on  the  record  sweet. 
And  OIK-  is  where  the  Christ,  denied  and  scorned, 
LOOKKD  ri-oN   PI;TI;R.     Oh  to  render  plain, 
IU    h.-lp  of   having  loved  a  little  and  mourned, 
'I  hat  1-H.k  nl   sovran   love  and  sovran  pain, 


y///:  r.RKAT  DI-.M.I;.  :>0 

There  may  be  a  world  in  a  look.  It  may  be  more 
eloquent  than  a  whole  volume  of  words.  It  may 
reveal  far  more  than  the  lips  can  ever  utter.  One 

Which  He,  who  could  not  sin  yet  suffered,  turned 
On  him  who  could  reject  but  not  sustain. 

"The  Saviour  looked  on   IV-ter.     Ay,  no  word, 
No  gesture  of  reproach  ;  the  heavens  serene, 
Though  heavy  with  armed  justice,  did  not  lean 
Their  thunders  that  way  ;  the  forsaken   Lord 
Looked  only  on  the  traitor.     None  record 
What  that  look  was  ;  none  guess  ;  for  those  who  have  seen 
Wronged  lovers  loving  through  a  death-pang  keen, 
Or  pale-cheeked  martyrs  smiling  to  a  sword, 
Have  missed  Jehovah  at  the  judgment  call. 
And  Peter  from  the  height  of  blasphemy  - 
'  I  never  knew  this  man  ' — did  quail  and  fall, 
As  knowing  straight  THAT  GOD;  and  turned  free, 
And  went  out  speechless  from  the  face  of  all, 
And  filled  the  silence,  weeping  bitterly. 

"  I  think  that  look  of  Christ  might  seem  to  say  : 
'Thou,  lYter  !  art  thou  a  common  stone 
Which  I  at  last  must  break  My  heart  upon, 
For  all  God's  charge  to  His  high  angels  may 
Guard  My  feet  better?     Did   I  yesterday 
Wash  thy  feet,   My  beloved,  that  they  should  run 
Quick  to  destroy  Me  'neath  the  morning  sun  '? 
And  do  thy  kisses,   like  the  rest,  betray  ? 
The  cock  crows  coldly.     Go,  and  manifest 
A  late  contrition,  but  no  bootless  fear! 
For,  when  thy  final  need  is  dreariest, 
Thou  shalt  not  be  denied,  as  I  am  here  ; 
My  voice  to  God  and  angels  shall  attest, 
ttccausc  I  KNOW  tin's  man,  let  him  be  clear'  " 


I 


THE    TRIAL   AXD    DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 


soul  may  give  itself  away  to  another  in  a  look.  A 
look  may  beatify  or  plunge  in  the  depths  of  despair. 

The  look  of  Jesus  was  a  talisman  dissolving  the 
spell  in  which  Peter  \vas  held.  Sin  is  always  a  kind 
of  temporary  madness  ;  and  it  was  manifestly  so  in 
this  case.  Peter  was  so  bewildered  with  terror,  anger 
and  excitement  that  he  did  not  know  what  he  was 
doing.  But  the  look  of  Jesus  brought  him  to  him 
self,  and  immediately  he  acted  like  a  man.  He 
made  at  once  for  the  exit  with  impetuous  speed.* 
And  now  nothing  stood  in  his  way:  he  got  past 
the  maid  and  her  companions  without  trouble.  For, 
indeed,  the  trap  of  temptation  is  only  an  illusion. 
To  a  resolute  man  it  presents  no  obstacles. 

But  further,  the  look  of  Christ  was  a  mirror  in 
which  Peter  saw  himself.  lie  saw  what  Christ 
thought  of  him.  The  past  came  rushing  back.  He 
was  the  man  who,  in  a  great  and  never-to-be-forgotten 
moment,  had  confessed  Christ  and  earned  II  is  hearty 
recognition.  He  was  the  man  who,  a  few  hours  ago, 
had  vowed,  above  all  the  rest,  that  he  never  would 
deny  his  Master.  And  now  lie  had  deserted  Him 
and  wounded  Him  to  the  heart  in  His  utmost  need. 
He  had  placed  himself  among  His  enemies  as  one  of 


*  This  may  be  the  meaning  of  fVt/iuXcuV  ;  but  it  is  much  dis 
puted.  Oth<-r  interpretations  arc  :  (l  )  =  tW/inXXf  KXm'fii/,  lie  began 
to  weep;  (2)  with  head  covered  in  mourning. 


THE   GREAT  DF.M.M.  41 

themselves  ami,  with  oaths  and  curses,  trodden  II is 
saered  n:ime  beneath  his  feet.  lie  had  put  off  the 
disciple  ami  reverted  to  the  rudeness  of  his  godless 
youth.  He  was  a  perjured  traitor.  All  this  was  in 
that  look  of  Christ. 

But  there  was  far  more  in  it.  It  was  a  rescuing 
look.  If  an}'  friend  had  met  Peter  rushing  out  from 
the  scene  of  his  sin,  he  might  well  have  been  terrified 
for  what  might  happen.  Where  was  he  rushing  to  ? 
Was  it  to  the  precipice  over  which  Judas  plunged 
not  many  hours  afterwards?  Peter  was  not  very  far 
from  that.  Had  it  been  an  angry  look  he  saw  on 
Christ's  face  when  their  eyes  met,  this  might  have 
been  his  fate.  But  there  was  not  a  spark  of  anger 
in  it.  There  was  pain,  no  doubt,  and  there  was 
immeasurable  disappointment.  But  deeper  than  these 
— rising  up  from  below  them  and  submerging  them 
there  was  the  Saviour's  instinct,  that  instinct  which 
made  Him  reach  out  His  hand  ami  grasp  Peter  when 
he  was  sinking  in  the  sea.  With  this  same  instinct 
He  grasped  I  lim  now. 

In  that  look  of  an  instant  Peter  saw  forgiveness 
and  unutterable  love.  If  he  saw  himself  in  it,  he 
saw  still  more  his  Saviour  such  a  revelation  of  the 
heart  of  Christ  as  he  had  never  yet  known.  Ik-  saw 
now  what  kind  of  Master  he  had  denied  ;  and  it 
broke  his  heart.  It  is  this  that  alwavs  breaks  the 


42        Till-.    TRIAL   AM')    DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

heart.  It  is  not  our  sin  that  makes  us  weep  ;  it  is 
when  \vc  sec  what  kind  of  Saviour  we  have  sinned 
against.  He  wept  bitterly;  not  to  wasli  out  his  sin, 
but  because  even  already  he  knew  it  had  been  washed 
out.  The  former  weeping  is  a  pelting  shower  ;  this 
is  the  close,  prolonged  downpour,  which  penetrates 
deep  and  fertilises  the  plants  of  the  soul  at  their  very 
roots. 

Indeed,  this  was  the  real  beginning  of  all  the  good 
St.  Peter  was  to  do  in  the  world.  But  we  will  not 
speak  of  this  now.  Let  our  last  thought  be  of  Him 
who,  in  the  crisis  and  extremity  of  1 1  is  own  suffering, 
when  lie  heard  His  name  not  only  denied  but 
mingled  with  oaths  and  curses,  yielded  not  one 
moment  to  the  resentment  which  such  an  act  of 
treachery  might  have  occasioned,  but,  forgetting  His 
own  sorrows  and  overmastered  with  the  instincts  of 
the  Saviour,  threw  into  a  look  such  a  world  of  kind 
ness  and  of  love  that,  in  an  instant,  it  lifted  the  falling 
disciple  from  the  gulf  and  set  him  on  the  rock  where 
he  ever  afterwards  stood,  himself  a  rock  in  the  con 
stancy  of  his  faith  and  the  vigour  of  his  testimony. 


THK     CIVIL     TRIAL 

T  X  the  chapter  before  last  we  saw  the  Sanhedrim 
•1  pass  a  death  sentence  on  Jesus.  Gladly  would 
they  have  carried  it  out  in  the  Jewish  fashion — by 
stoning.  But,  as  was  then  explained,  it  was  not  in 
their  power :  their  Roman  masters,  while  conceding 
to  the  native  courts  the  power  of  trying  and  punish 
ing  minor  offences,  reserved  to  themselves  the  pre 
rogative  of  life  and  death  ;  and  a  case  in  which  a 
capital  sentence  had  been  passed  in  a  Jewish  court 
had  to  go  before  the  representative  <>f  Rome  in 
the  country,  who  tried  it  over  again,  and  might  either 
confirm  or  reverse  the  sentence.  Accordingly,  after 
passing  sentence  on  Jesus  themselves,  the  Sanhcdrists 
had  to  lead  Him  away  to  the  tribunal  of  the  governor. 


The  representative  of  Imperial  Rome  in  Palestine 
at  this  time  was  Pontius  Pilate.  The  position  which 
he  held  may  perhaps  be  best  realised  by  thinking  of 

43 


41        Till-:    TRIM.    AM)    DEATH    OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

one  of  our  cnvn  subordinate  governors  in   India  ;   with 
the  difference,  however,  that   it  was  a  heathen,  not  a 
Christian  power,  that   Pilate  represented,  and   that  it 
was  the  spirit  of  ancient   Rome,  not  that  of  modern 
England,  which   inspired   his  administration.      Of  this 
spirit  -the  spirit   of   worldlincss,  diplomacy  and   ex 
pediency — he  was  a  typical  exponent  ;  and  we  shall 
see  how  true  to  it  he  proved  on  this  momentous  day.* 
Pilate  had  occupied  his  position  for  a  good  many 
years  ;  yet  he  neither  liked  his  subjects  nor  they  him. 
The    Jews    were    among    the    most     intractable    and 
difficult  of  all  the  states  which  the  officials  of  Rome 
had  to  manage.     Mindful  of  the  glory  of  their  ancient 
history,  and    still    cherishing    the    hope   of   universal 
empire,  they  were  impatient  of  the  yoke  of  subordina 
tion  ;  they  were  constantly  discovering  in  the  conduct 
of  their  rulers  insults  directed  against  their  dignity  or 
their  religion  ;  they  complained  of  the  heavy  taxation 
and  pestered   their  rulers  with   petitions.      Pilate  had 
not    got    on    at    all    well   with    them.     Between    him 
and   tin  in  there    was   no  sympathy.      He  hated  their 
fanaticism.      In    his  quarrels  with   them,  which  were 
frequent,    he    had     freely    shed     their    blood.     They 
aeeusrd  him  of  corruption,  cruelty,  robber}',  and   mal 
administration  of  every  description. 


( )n    Pilate  there  is  an  essay  of  extraordinary  subtlety  and 
power  in  raiidli.sh's  Scripture  Characters. 


- 


The  residence  of  the  governor  was  not  in  Jeru 
salem,  in  which-  no  one  accustomed  to  the  pleasures 
of  Rome — its  theatres,  baths,  games,  literature  and 
society — could  desire  to  live,  but  in  the  new  coast 
city  of  C'.'L-sarca,  which  in  its  splendour  and  luxury 
was  a  sort  of  small  imitation  of  Rome.  Occasionally, 
however,  the  governor  had  to  visit  the  capital  for 
business  reasons  ;  and  usually,  as  on  this  occasion,  he 
did  so  at  the  time  of  the  Passover. 

When  there,  he  took  up  his  residence  in  what  had 
formerly  been  the  royal  palace  while  Judaea  still  had 
a  king.  It  had  been  built  by  Herod  the  Great,  who 
had  a  passion  for  architecture  ;  and  it  was  situated  on 
the  hill  to  the  south-west  of  the  one  on  which  the 
temple  stood.  It  was  a  splendid  building,*  rivalling 
the  temple  itself  in  appearance,  and  so  large  as  to  be 
capable  of  containing  a  small  army.  It  consisted  of 
two  colossal  wings,  springing  forward  on  either  side, 
and  a  connecting  building  between.  In  front  of  the 
latter  stretched  a  broad  pavement  ;  and  here,  in  tin- 
open  air,  on  a  raised  platform,  was  the  scene  of  the 
trial  ;  because  the  Jewish  authorities  would  not  enter 
the  building,  which  to  them  was  unclean.  Pilate  had 
to  yield  to  their  scruples,  though  probably  cursing 
them  in  his  heart.  Hut,  indeed,  it  was  quite  common 

•  An  eloquent  account  in  Keim  (vi.,  p.  80.  Knglish  tr.),  who 
gives  the  authorities  :  "  in  part  a  tyrant's  stronghold,  and  in  part 
a  iairy  pleasure-house. " 


46        THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

for  the  Romans  to  hold  courts  of  justice  in  the  open 
;iir.  The  front  of  the  palace,  all  round,  was  supported 
by  massive  pillars,  forming  broad,  shady  colonnades  ; 
and  round  the  building  there  extended  a  park,  with 
walks,  trees  and  ponds,  where  fountains  cast  their 
sparkling  jets  high  into  the  sunshine  and  flocks  of 
tame  doves  plumed  their  feathers  at  the  water's  edge. 

Through  the  huge  gateway,  then,  of  this  palatial 
residence,  the  Jewish  authorities,  with  their  Prisoner 
in  their  midst,  came  pouring  in  the  early  morning. 
Pilate  came  out  to  receive  them  and  seated  himself 
on  his  chair  of  state,  with  his  secretaries  beside  him, 
and  behind  him,  no  doubt,  numbers  of  bronzed 
Roman  soldiers  with  their  stolid  looks  and  upright 
spears.  The  Accused  would  have  to  ascend  the 
platform,  too;  and  over  against  Him  stood  His 
accusers,  with  Caiaphas  at  their  head. 

What  a  spectacle  was  that  !  The  heads  of  the 
Jewish  nation  leading  their  own  Messiah  in  chains 
to  deliver  Him  up  to  a  Gentile  governor,  with  the 
petition  that  He  should  be  put  to  death!  Shades  of 
the  heroes  and  the  prophets,  who  loved  this  nation 
and  boasted  of  it  and  foretold  its  glorious  fate,  the 
hour  of  destiny  has  come,  and  this  is  the  result  ! 

It  was  an  act  of  national  suicide.  But  was  it  not 
more  ?  Was  it  not  the  frustration  of  the  purpose  and 
thr  promise  of  God  ?  So  it  certainly  appeared  to  be. 


THE    CIVIL    TRIAL  47 

Yet  He  is  not  mocked.  Even  through  human  sin  His 
purpose  holds  on  its  \vny.  The  Jews  brought  the  Son 
of  God  to  Pilate's  judgment-seat,  that  both  Je\v  and 
Gentile  might  unite  in  condemning  Him  ;  for  it  \vas 
part  of  the  work  of  the  Redeemer  to  expose  human 
sin,  and  here  was  to  be  exhibited  the  tic  plus  ultra 
of  wickedness,  as  the  hand  of  humanity  was  lifted 
up  against  its  Maker.  And  yet  that  death  was  to 
be  the  life  of  humanity  ;  and  Jesus,  standing  between 
Jew  and  Gentile,  was  to  unite  them  in  the  fellowship 
of  a  common  salvation.  "  Oh  the  depth  botli  of  the 
wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !  How  unsearchable 
arc  His  judgments,  and  His  ways  past  finding  out !  " 

II. 

Pilate  at  once  demanded  what  was  the  accusation 
which  they  brought  against  the  Prisoner. 

The  reply  was  a  characteristic  one,  "  If  He  were 
not  a  malefactor,  we  would  not  have  delivered  Him 
up  unto  thee."  This  was  as  broad  a  hint  as  they  could 
give  that  they  desired  the  governor  to  \\aive  his  right 
to  re-try  the  case,  accepting  their  trial  of  it  as  suffi 
cient,  and  content  himself  with  the  other  half  of  his 
prerogative — the  passing  and  the  execution  of  the 
sentence.  Sometimes  provincial  governors  did  so, 
cither  through  indolence  or  out  of  compliment  to  the 
native  authorities  ;  and  especially  in  a  religious  cause, 


4S        •////•;    TRIAL    AM)    DI'.ATll    OF  JKSl  "S    CHRIST 

which  a  foreigner  could  not  he  expected  to  under 
stand,  such  a  compliment  might  seem  a  boon  which 
it  was  not  unreasonable  to  ask. 

Hut  Pilate  was  not  in  a  yielding  mood,  and  re 
torted,  "  Take  ye  Him  and  judge  Him  according  to 
your  law."  This  was  as  much  as  to  say  :  If  I  am  not 
to  hear  the  case,  then  I  will  neither  pass  the  sentence 
nor  inflict  the  punishment  ;  if  you  insist  on  this  being 
a  case  for  yourselves  as  ecclesiastics,  then  keep  it  to 
yourselves  ;  but,  if  you  do,  you  must  be  content  with 
such  a  punishment  as  the  law  permits  you  to  inflict. 

To  them  this  was  gall  and  wormwood,  because  it 
was  for  the  life  of  Christ  they  were  thirsting,  and 
they  well  knew  that  imprisonment  or  beating  with 
rods  was  as  far  as  they  could  go.  The  cold,  keen 
Roman,  as  proud  as  themselves,  was  making  them 
feel  the  pressure  of  Rome's  foot  on  their  neck,  and 
he  enjoyed  a  malicious  pleasure  in  extorting  from 
them  the  complaint,  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put 
any  man  to  death." 

Forced  against  their  will  and  their  expectation  to 
formulate  a  charge,  they  began  to  pour  forth  many 
vehement  accusations  ;  out  of  which  at  length  three 
emerged  with  some  distinctness — first,  that  He  was 
perverting  the  nation  ;  second,  that  Me  forbade  to 
pay  the  imperial  tribute  ;  and  third,  that  He  set 
Himself  up  as  a  king. 


THE   (  H'lL    TRIAL  ^ 

It  will  be  observed  that  the)'  never  mentioned  the 
charge  on  which  they  had  condemned  Him  them 
selves.  It  was  for  none  of  these  three  things  that 
they  had  condemned  Him,  but  for  blasphemy.  They 
knew  too  well,  however,  that  if  they  advanced  such 
a  charge  in  this  place,  the  likelihood  was  that  it 
would  be  sneered  out  of  court.  It  will  be  remembered 
how  a  Roman  governor,  mentioned  in  the  life  of  St. 
Paul,  dealt  with  such  a  charge  :  "  Gallio  said  unto  the 
Jews,  If  it  were  a  matter  of  wrong  or  wicked  lewdncss, 
()  ye  Jews,  reason  would  that  I  should  bear  with 
you  ;  but,  if  it  be  a  question  of  words  and  names, 
and  of  your  law,  look  ye  to  it  ;  for  I  will  be  no 
judge  of  such  matters.  And  he  clravc  them  from 
the  judgment-seat."  *  And,  although  of  course  Pilate 
could  not  have  d.ired  to  exhibit  the  same  cynical 
disdain  for  what  he  would  have  called  Jewish  super 
stition,  yet  they  knew  that  it  was  in  his  heart. 

Hut  their  inability  to  bring  forward  the  real  charge 
put  them  in  a  false  position,  the  dangers  of  which 
they  did  not  escape.  They  had  to  extemporise 
crimes,  and  the}'  were  not  scrupulous  about  it. 

Their  first  charge — that  Jesus  was  perverting  the 
nation  t — was  vague.  Hut  what  are  we  to  say  of  the 
second — that  He  forbade  to  pay  the  imperial  tribute? 

*  Arts  xviii.  14-16. 

t   l&vut,  lint  Au<if  :   tlicy  wrrr  sju-aking  to  a  hrathrn. 

•I 


SO        THE    TRIAL    AXD    DEATH   OF  JF.Sl'S   CHRIST 

\Vhcn  we  remember  His  reply  that  very  week  to  the 
question  whether  or  not  it  was  lawful  to  pay  tribute 
— "  Render  unto  Cajsar  the  thing's  which  are  Cajsar's, 
and  unto  God  the  things  which  arc  God's  " — it  looks 
very  like  a  deliberate  falsehood.*  There  was  more 
colour  in  their  third  statement — that  He  said  lie  was 
Christ  a  King  for  lie  had  at  their  tribunal  solemnly 
avowed  Himself  to  be  the  Christ.  Yet,  in  this  case, 
also,  they  were  \\  ell  aware  that  to  the  car  of  a  Roman 
the  claim  that  He  was  a  king  would  convey  a  different 
meaning  from  that  conveyed  to  their  cars  by  the 
claim  to  be  the  Christ.  Indeed,  at  bottom  their 
objection  to  Him  was  just  that  He  did  not  sufficiently 
claim  to  be  a  king  in  the  Roman  sense.  The}'  were 
eagerly  looking  for  a  king,  of  splendour  and  military 
renown,  to  break  the  Roman  yoke  and  make  Jeru 
salem  the  capital  of  a  worldwide  empire  ;  and  it 
was  because  the  spirit  and  aims  of  Jesus  were  alien 
to  such  ambitions  that  they  despised  and  hated 
Him. 

Pilate  understood  perfectly  well  with  whom  he  was 
dealing.  He  could  only  be  amused  with  their  zeal 
for  the  payment  of  the  Roman  tribute.  One  of  the 
Evangelists  says,  "  He  knew  that  for  envy  they  had 
delivered  Him."  How  far  he  was  already  acquainted 

Keim  calls  it  "a  very  flagrant  lie." 


'////•;   Cll'lL    TRIAL  51 

with  the  career  of  Jesus  we  cannot  tell.  He  had  been 
governor  all  the  time  of  the  movement  inaugurated 
by  the  Baptist  and  continued  by  Christ,  and  he  can 
hardly  have  remained  in  entire  ignorance  of  it.  The 
dream  of  his  wife,  which  we  shall  come  to  soon, 
seems  to  prove  that  Jesus  had  ahead}'  been  a  theme 
of  conversation  in  the  palace  ;  and  perhaps  the  tedium 
of  a  visit  to  Jerusalem  may  have  been  relieved  for 
the  governor  and  his  wife  by  the  story  of  the  young 
Enthusiast  who  was  bearding  the  fanatic  priests. 
Pilate  displays,  all  through,  a  real  interest  in  Jesus 
and  a  genuine  respect.  This  was  no  duubt  chiefly 
due  to  what  he  himself  saw  of  His  bearing  at  his 
tribunal  ;  but  it  may  also  have  been  partly  due  to 
what  he  had  already  heard  about  Him.  At  all  events 
there  is  no  indication  that  he  took  the  charges  against 
Jesus  seriously.  The  two  first  he  seems  never  to 
have  noticed;  but  the  third— that  He  was  setting 
Himself  up  as  a  king,  who  might  be  a  rival  to  the 
emperor — was  not  such  as  he  could  altogether  pass 
by. 

III. 

Pilate,  having  heard  the  accusations,  took  Jesus 
inside  the  palace  to  investigate  them.  This  he  did, 
no  doubt,  for  the  purpose  of  getting  rid  of  the 
importunity  of  His  accusers,  which  was  extreme. 


Till:    TRIAL   A.\D   DEATH   OE  JESL'S    CHRIST 


And  Jesus  made  no  scruple,  as  they  had  done,  about 
entering  the  palace.  Shall  we  say  that  the  Jews  had 
rejected  Him,  and  He  was  turning  to  the  Gentiles— 
that  the  wall  of  partition  had  no\v  fallen,  and  that  He 
was  trampling  over  its  ruins? 

In  the  silence,  then,  of  this  interior  hall  He  and 
Pilate  stood  face  to  face — He  in  the  prisoner's  lonely 
place,  Pilate  in  the  place  of  power.  Yet  how 
strangely,  as  we  now  look  back  at  the  scene,  are  the 
places  reversed  !  It  is  Pilate  who  is  going  to  be  tried 
—  I'ilate  and  Rome,  which  he  represented.  All  that 
morning  Pilate  was  being  judged  and  exposed  ;  and 
ever  since  he  has  stood  in  the  pillory  of  history  with 
the  centuries  gazing  at  him.*  In  the  old  pictures  of 
the  Child  Christ  by  the  great  masters  a  halo  proceeds 
from  the  Babe  that  lights  up  the  surrounding  figures, 
sometimes  with  da/./.ling  effect.  And  it  is  true  that 
on  all  who  approached  Christ,  when  He  was  in  the 
world,  there  fell  a  light  in  which  both  the  good  and 
the  evil  in  them  were  revealed.  It  was  a  search-light, 
that  j>enetrated  into  every  corner  and  exposed  every 
wrinkle.  Men  were  judged  as  they  came  near  Him. 
Is  it  not  so  still?  \Ve  never  show  so  entirely  what  is 
in  u->  as  bv  the  wav  in  which  we  are  affected  bv 


*  "  Sorratrs,  quuni  oir.iuurn  sapientissime  sanctissimeque  vixis- 
s<-t,  ita  in  judirio  <  ;i[>:ti.s  pro  s<-  dixit,  ut  non  supplex  aut  reus, 
s»-d  ir.;ii_'i«5tcr  nut  <l":r.iii!is  vidi-rctur  judicum."— ClCEKO. 


53 


Christ.  We  arc  judging  ourselves  and  passing 
sentence  on  ourselves  for  eternity  by  the  way  in 
which  we  deal  \vith  Him. 

Pilate  asked  Him,  "Art  Thou  the  King  of  tin- 
Jews?"  referring  to  the  third  charge  brought  against 
Him.  The  reply  of  Jesus  was  cautious;  it  was 
another  question:  "  Saycst  thou  this  of  thyself,  or 
did  others  tell  it  thee  of  Me?"  I  le  desired  to  learn 
in  what  sense  the  question  was  asked — whether  from 
the  standpoint  of  a  Roman  or  from  that  of  the  Jews  ; 
because  of  course  His  answer  would  be  different 
according  as  He  was  asked  whether  He  was  a  king 
as  a  Roman  would  understand  the  word  or  according 
as  it  was  understood  by  the  Jews. 

Hut  this  answer  nettled  Pilate,  perhaps  because  it 
assumed  that  l*e  might  have  more  interest  in  the  ease 
than  he  cared  to  confess  ;  and  he  said  angrily,  "  Am  1 
a  Jew  ?  Thine  own  nation  and  the  chief  priests  have 
delivered  Thee  unto  me."  If  he  intended  this  to  sting, 
the  blow  did  not  fail  of  its  mark.  Ah,  tingling  shame 
and  poignant  pain  !  Hisown  nation  His  own  beloved 
nation,  to  which  He  had  devoted  His  life  --had  given 
Him  up  to  the  Gentile.  lie  felt  a  shame  for  it  before 
the  foreigner  such  as  a  slave  on  the  block  may  feel 
before  her  purchaser  for  the  father  and  the  family 
that  have  sold  her  into  disgrace. 

Je^us  at  once  proceeded,  however,  to  answer  Pilate's 


54        THE    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


question  on  both  sides,  both  on  the  Roman  political 
and  then  on  the  Jewish  religious  side. 

First,  lie  answered  negatively,  "  My  kingdom  is 
not  of  this  world  !  "  He  was  no  rival  of  the  Roman 
emperor.  If  He  had  been,  the  first  thing  He  must 
have  done  would  have  been  to  assemble  soldiers 
about  Him  for  the  purpose  of  freeing  the  country 
from  the  Roman  occupation,  and  the  very  first  duty 
of  these  soldiers  would  have  been  to  defend  the 
person  of  their  king;  but  it  could  be  proved  that  at 
His  arrest  there  had  been  no  fighting  on  His  behalf, 
and  that  He  had  ordered  the  one  follower  who  had 
drawn  a  sword  to  sheathe  it  again.  It  was  not  a 
kingdom  of  force  and  arms  and  worldly  glory  lie 
had  in  view. 

Vet,  even  in  making  this  denial,  Jesus  had  used  the 
words,  "  My  kingdom."  And  Pilate  broke  in,  "  Art 
Thou  a  king  then?"  "Yes,"  replied  Jesus;  "  to  this 
end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the 
world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth." 
Tin's  was  His  kingdom  the  realm  of  Truth.  It 
differs  widely  from  that  of  C;esar.  Cajsar's  empire  is 
over  the  bodies  of  men  ;  this  is  over  their  hearts. 
The  strength  of  Ca-sar's  empire  is  in  soldiers,  arms, 
citadels  and  navies  ;  the  strength  of  this  kingdom  is 
in  principles,  sentiments,  ideas.  The  benefit  secured 
by  C  ifsar  to  the  citi/ens  is  external  security  for  their 


THE   CIl'lL    TRIM.  55 


persons  and  properties  ;  the  blessings  of  Christ's 
kingdom  arc  peace  of  conscience  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  empire  of  Cajsar,  vast  as  it  was,  yet  was 
circumscribed  ;  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  without 
limits,  and  is  destined  to  be  established  in  every  land. 
Cojsar's  empire,  like  every  other  earthly  kingdom, 
had  its  day  and  passed  out  of  existence  ;  but  the 
kingdom  of  Truth  shall  last  for  evermore. 

It  has  been  remarked  that  there  was  something 
Western  rather  than  Oriental  in  this  sublime  saying 
of  Christ.  What  a  noble-minded  Jew  longed  for 
above  all  things  was  righteousness  ;  but  what  a 
noble-minded  Gentile  aspired  after  was  truth.  There 
were  some  spirits,  in  that  age,  even  among  the 
heathen,  in  whom  the  mention  of  a  kingdom  of 
truth  or  wisdom  would  have  struck  a  responsive 
chord.  Jesus  was  feeling  to  sec  whether  there  was 
in  this  man's  soul  any  such  longing. 

He  approached  still  nearer  him  when  He  added 
the  searching  remark,  "  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth 
hcarcth  My  voice  ;  "  for  it  was  a  hint  that,  if  he  loved 
the  truth,  he  must  believe  in  Him.  Jesus  preached 
to  His  judge.  Just  as  the  prisoner  Paul  made  Felix 
the  judge  tremble,  and  Agrippa  the  judge  cry  out, 
"  Almost  thou  persuadcst  me  to  be  a  Christian,"  so 
Jesus,  with  the  instinct  of  the  preacher  and  the 
Saviour,  was  feeling  for  Pilate's  conscience.  He  who 


fishes  f«.r  the  souls  of  men   must   use  many  angles  ; 
and   on   this  occasion   Jesus  selected    a  rare  one. 

There  will  always  be  some  who,  though  common 
appeals  do  not  touch  them,  yet  respond  to  this 
delicate  appeal.  Is  truth  a  magic  word  to  you?  do 
you  thirst  for  wisdom?  There  arc  those  to  whom 
the  prizes  which  the  majority  strive  for  arc  as  dross. 
The  race  for  wealth,  the  pride  of  life,  the  distinctions 
of  society— you  laugh  at  them  and  pity  them.  But 
a  golden  page  of  a  favourite  poet,  a  thought  newly 
minted  in  the  plowing  heat  of  a  true  thinker's  mind, 
a  p:cgtvmt  word  that  sets  your  fancy  ranging  through 
eternity,  a  luminous  doctrine  that  rises  on  the  intel 
lectual  hori/on  like  a  star, —  these  are  your  wealth. 
You  feel  keenly  the  darkness  of  the  world,  and  are 
perplexed  by  a  hundred  problems.  Child  and  lover 
of  wisdom,  do  you  know  the  King  of  Truth?  This 
is  lie-  who  can  satisfy  your  craving  for  light  and 
lead  you  out  of  the  ma/e  of  speculation  and  error. 

But  is  it  trui%,  as  He  says  here,  that  everyone  who 
is  of  the  truth  heareth  His  voice?  Is  not  the  world 
at  present  full  of  men  and  women  who  are  in  search 
of  truth,  yi  t  pass  Christ  by?  It  is  a  very  strong 
word  Hi-  u-i 's  ;  it  is,  "every  one  who  lias  been  born 
of  the  truth."  Have  you  actually  clambered  on 
Truth's  knees,  and  clung  to  her  neck,  and  fed  at  her 
breast  ?  There  are  many  who  seek  truth  earnestly 


Till:    (I I'll.    TRI.IL  57 

\\ith 'the  intellect,  but  do  not  desire  it  to  rule  their 
conduct  or  purify  their  heart.  But  only  those  who 
seek  truth  with  their  whole  bc-ing  are  her  true  chil 
dren  ;  and  to  these  the  voice  of  Christ,  when  it  is 
discerned,  is  like  the  sunrise  to  the  statue  of 
Memnon  or  as  the  call  of  spring  to  the  responsive 
earth. 

Alas!  Pilate  was  no  such  man.  He  was  incapable 
of  spiritual  aspiration  ;  he  was  of  the  earth  earthy  ; 
he  sought  for  nothing  which  the  eye  cannot  sec  or 
the  hand  handle.  To  him  a  kingdom  of  truth  and  a 
king  of  truth  were  objects  of  fairyland  or  castles  in 
the  air.  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  he  asked  ;  but,  as  he 
asked,  he  turned  on  his  heel,  and  did  not  wait  f<  r 
an  answer.  lie  asked  only  as  a  libertine  might  ask, 
What  is  virtue?  or  a  tyrant,  What  is  freedom? 

lUit  he  was  clearly  convinced  that  Jesus  w;is 
innocent.  Me  judged  Him  to  be  an  amiable  enthu 
siast,  from  whom  Rome  had  nothing  to  fear.  So  he 
went  out  and  pronounced  II is  acquittal  :  "  I  find  in 
Him  no  fault  at  all." 


CIIAPTKR   V. 

JKSUS     AND     HEKOD 

I  )I1,ATK  had  tried  Jesus  and  found  Him  innocent  ; 

1  and  so  lie  frankly  told  the  members  of  the 
Sanhedrim,  thereby  reversing  their  sentence,  \\hat 
ought  to  have  foil*  >wed  ?  Of  course  Jesus  ought  to 
have  been  released  and,  it  necessary,  protected  from 
the  feeling  of  the  Jews. 

\\'hy  was  this  not  what  hippened?  An  incident 
in  the  life-  of  Pilate,  narrated  by  a  secular  historian, 
may  best  explain.  Some  years  before  the  trial  of 
Jesus  IM1  ite,  ii'  wly  settled  in  the  position  of  governor 
<>f  JudaM,  resolved  to  remove  the  headquarters 
of  the  Roman  army  from  (\Tsarea  to  Jerusalem  ; 
and  the  soldiers  entered  the  Holy  City  with  their 
standards,  each  of  which  bore  the  image  of  the 
emperor.  To  the  Jewish  mind  these  images  were 
idolatrous,  and  their  presence  in  Jerusalem  was  looked 
upon  as  a  gross  insult  and  desecration.  The  foremost 

men    of    tlie    city    poured    down    to   Ca-sarea,    where 

IMlnte  was  staying,  and  besought  him  to  remove  them. 


JESi'S  AM)   HEROD  59 


lie  refused,  and  for  five  days  the  discussion  went  on. 
At  length  he  was  so  irritated  that  he  ordered  them 
to  be  surrounded  by  soldiers,  and  threatened  to  have 
them  put  to  death  unless  they  became  silent  and 
dispersed.  They,  however,  in  no  way  dismayed, 
threw  themselves  on  the  ground  and  laid  bare  their 
necks,  crying  that  they  would  rather  die  than  have 
their  city  defiled.  And  the  upshot  was  that  Pilate 
had  to  yield,  and  the  army  was  withdrawn  from 
Jerusalem.* 

Such  was  the  governor,  and  such  were  the  people 
with  whom  lie  had  to  deal.  lie  was  no  match  for 
them,  when  their  hearts  were  set  on  anything  and 
their  religious  prejudices  roused.  In  the  present  case 
they  did  with  him  exactly  as  the)'  had  done  on  that 
early  occasion.  He  declared  Jesus  innocent,  and 
thereupon  the  trial  ought  to  have  been  at  an  end. 
Hut  they  raised  an  angry  clamour— "  they  were  the 
more  fierce,"  says  St.  I. like  and  began  to  pour  out 
new  accusations  against  the  Prisoner. 

Pilate  had  not  nerve  enough  to  resist.  He  weakly 
turned  to  Jesus  Himself,  asking,  "  Ilearest  Thou  not 
what  these  witness  against  Thee?"  Hut  Jesus 
"answered  to  him  never  a  word."  He  would  not, 
by  a  single  syllable-,  give  sanction  to  any  prolongation 

*  Joseph  us,  "Ant.,"  XVI 1 1.,  3,  I. 


«o       ////.     TKI.ll.    AKD    DEATH   OF  JESUS    C7/A7.S/' 

of  the  proceedings  :  "  insomuch  that  the  governor 
marvelled  greatly."  Flustered  and  irresolute  himself, 
he  could  not  comprehend  this  majestic  composure. 
The  stake  of  Jesus  in  the  proceedings  was  nothing 
less  than  His  life  ;  yet  He  was  the  only  calm  person 
in  the  whole  assemblage. 

Suddenly,  however,  amidst  the  confusion  a  way 
nt"  escape  from  his  embarrassing  situation  seemed  to 
'.pen  to  Pilate.  They  were  crying,  "He  stirreth  up 
the  people,  teaching  throughout  all  Jewry,  beginning 
from  Galilee  to  this  place."  The  mention  of  Galilee 
was  intended  to  excite  prejudice  against  Jesus, 
because  Galilee  was  noted  as  a  hotbed  of  insurrection. 
lUit  it  set  agoing  a  different  train  of  thought  in  the 
mint!  of  Pilate,  who  asked  anxiously  if  He  was  a 
Galilean.  It  had  flashed  upon  him  that  Herod,  the 
ruler  of  Galilee,  was  in  the  city  at  the  time,  having 
come  for  the  Passover  celebration  ;  and,  as  it  was  not 
an  unu-ual  procedure  in  Roman  law  to  transfer  a 
prisoner  from  the  territory  \\here  lie  had  been  arrested 
to  nis  place  of  origin  or  of  domicile,  it  seemed  to  him 
a  happy  inspiration  to  send  Jesus  to  be  tried  by  the 
ruler  of  the  province  to  which  He  belonged,  and  so 
get  rid  altogether  of  the  case.*  lie  acted  at  once 

It  may  be  questioned  whether  it  was  for  trial  he  sent  Jesus 
to  Herod  <>r  only  for  advice,  as  Festus  caused  St.  Pauls  case 
to  }>c  heard  by  Agrijtpa. 


ji:srs  AM)  IH-: Ron  61 

on  this  idea  ;  and,  under  the  escort  of  Pilate's  soldiers, 
Jesus  and  His  accusers  were  sent  away  to  the  ancient 
palace  of  the  Maccabees,  in  which  Herod  used  to 
reside  on  his  visits  to  the  Holy  City. 

Thus  was  Jesus,  on  this  day  of  shame,  tossed,  like 
a  ball,  from  hand  to  hand — from  Annas  to  Caiaphas, 
from  Caiaphas  to  Pilate,  from  Pilate  to  Herod,  with 
more  to  follow  ;  and  these  weary  marches  *  in  chains 
and  in  the  custody  of  the  officers  of  justice,  with  His 
persecutors  about  Him,  arc  not  to  be  forgotten  in  the 
catalogue  of  His  sufferings. 

I. 

There  arc  several  Hcrods  mentioned  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  it  must  be  made  clear  which  of 
them  this  was. 

The  first  of  them  was  he  who  slew  the  babes  of 
Bethlehem,  when  the  infant  Saviour  was  carried  away 
to  Kgypt.  He  was  called  Herod  the  Great,  and 
reigned  over  the  whole  country,  though  only  by  per 
mission  of  the  Romans.  At  his  death  his  dominions 
were  divided  among  his  sons  by  the  foreigner,  who 
thus  more  effectually  brought  the  country  under  con 
trol  ;  for  the  smaller  the  si/.e  of  subject  states  the 


•  Call»-<l    "die    da'nge    des    Duklers,"   in   derma n    devotional 
literature. 


(>2       Till:    TRIAL    A.\D    DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

more  absolute  is  the  power  of  the  su/cniin.  Jud.ta 
was  given  to  Archclaus  ;  but  it  was  soon  taken  from 
him,  to  be  administered  by  the  Romans  themselves 
through  their  procurators,  of  whom  Pilate  was  one. 
Galilee  and  Pcnea  were  given  to  another  son,  Antipas  ; 
and  a  region  more  to  the  north  to  a  third,  Philip. 
Our  present  Herod  is  Antipas. 

He  was  a  man  of  some  ability  and  at  the  outset 
of  his  career  gave  promise  of  ruling  well.  Like  his 
father,  he  had  a  passion  for  architecture,  and  among 
his  achievements  in  this  line  was  the  building  of  the 
city  of  Tiberias,  well  known  in  connection  with  modern 
missions.  Hut  he  took  a  step  which  proved  fatal 
when  he  entered  into  an  intrigue  with  Ilcrodias,  the 
wife  of  his  own  brother  Philip.  She  left  her  husband 
to  come  to  him,  and  he  sent  away  his  own  wife, 
the  daughter  of  Aretas,  the  king  of  Arabia  Petraja 
Ilcrodias  was  a  much  stronger  character  than  he; 
and  she  remained  at  his  side  through  life  as  his  evil 
genius.  Hcttcr  aspirations  were  not,  however,  wholly 
extinguished  in  him  even  by  this  fall.  When  the 
Baptist  began  to  fire  the  country,  he  took  an  interest 
in  his  preaching,  and  invited  him  to  the  palace,  where 
he  heard  him  gladly,  till  John  said,  "  It  is  not  lawful 
lor  thee  to  have  her."  I-'or  this  the  great  preacher 
uas  east  into  prison  ;  but  even  then  Herod  frequently 
sent  for  him.  Manifestly  he  was  under  reliirious 


jrsrs  ./.v/>  iii'.Ron  r>3 

impression.  lie  admired  the  character  and  the 
teaching  of  John.  It  is  said  "he  did  many  things." 
Only  he  could  not  and  would  not  do  the  one  thing 
needful  :  Hcrodias  still  retained  her  place.  Naturally 
she  feared  and  hated  the  man  of  God,  who  was 
seeking  to  remove  her  ;  and  she  plotted  against 
him  \\ith  implacable  malignity.  She  was  only  too 
successful,  making  use  of  her  own  daughter — not 
Antipas',  but  her  first  husband's — for  her  purpose. 
On  the  king's  birthday  Salome  danced  before  Herod 
and  so  intoxicated  him  with  her  skill  and  beauty, 
that,  heated  and  overcome,  he  promised — the  promise 
showing  the  man-  to  give  her  whatever  she  might 
ask,  even  to  the  half  of  his  kingdom  ;  and  when  the 
young  witch,  well  drilled  by  her  mother  in  the  craft 
of  hell,  asked  the  head  of  the  man  of  God,  she  was 
not  refused. 

This  awful  crime  filled  his  subjects  with  horror, 
and  when,  soon  afterwards,  King  Arctas,  the  father 
of  his  discarded  wife,  invaded  the  country,  to  revenge 
his  daughter's  wrong,  and  inflicted  on  him  an  igno 
minious  defeat,  this  reverse  was  popularly  regarded 
as  a  divine  punishment  for  what  he  had  done.  His 
own  mind  was  haunted  by  the  spectres  of  remorse, 
as  we  learn  from  the  fact  that,  when  he  heard  of  the 
preaching  of  Jesus,  his  first  thought  was  that  this  was 
John  the  Baptist  risen  from  the  dead.  Indeed,  from 


C>.\        Til!'.    TRIM.    .-/.V/>    DEATH    OI-"  JESl'S    CHNIST 

this  point  he  seems  to  have  rapidly  deteriorated. 
Keeling  the  aversion  of  the  minds  of  his  subjects,  he 
turned  more  and  more  to  foreign  customs.  His  court 
became  distinguished  for  Roman  imitations  and 
affectations.  The  purveyors  of  pleasure,  who  in  that 
age  hawked  their  wares  from  one  petty  court  to 
another — singers,  dancers,  jugglers  and  the  like — 
were  welcome  at  Tiberias.  The  fibre  of  his  character 
was  more  and  more  relaxed,  till  it  became  a  mere 
mass  of  pulp,  read}'  to  receive  every  impression  but 
able  to  retain  none.  His  annual  visits  to  Jerusalem 
even,  at  Passover  time,  were  inspired  less  by  devotion 
than  by  the  hope  of  amusement.  In  so  large  a 
concourse  there  would  at  any  rate  be  acquaintances 
to  see  and  news  to  hear  ;  and  who  could  tell  what 
excitement  might  turn  up? 

II. 

1 1  is  reception  of  Jesus  was  thoroughly  characteristic. 

Had   he   had   the  conscience  even   of  a   bad   man,   he 

might  have  been  abashed  to  see  the  Baptist's   Friend. 

Once    he    had    been    moved    with   terror    at    the   mere 

rumour  of  Jesus  ;  but  that  was  all  past  ;  these  emotions 

had    been    wiped    out    by   newer   ones    and    forgotten. 

was  "exceeding  glad"  to  see   Him.      First,  it  was 

an    excitement  ;  and   this   was    something   for   such   a 

1  lien,  it   was  a  compliment   from   the    Roman; 


indeed,  \ve  are  told  that  Pilate  and  he  had  aforetime 
been  at  enmity,  but  by  this  attention  were  made 
friends  again.  His  delight,  however,  arose  chiefly 
from  the  hope  that  lie  might  see  Jesus  working  a 
miracle.  For  two  or  three  years  his  own  dominions 
had  been  ringing  with  the  fame  of  the  Miracle- 
worker,  but  Ilerod  had  never  seen  Him.  Now  was 
his  chance  ;  and  no  doubt  entered  his  mind  that  Jesus 
would  gratify  his  curiosity,  or  could  count  it  anything 
but  an  honour  to  get  the  opportunity  of  displaying 
His  skill. 

Such  was  Herod's  estimate  of  Christ.  He  put  Him 
on  the  level  of  a  new  dancer  or  singer  ;  he  looked  on 
His  miracles  as  a  species  of  conjuring  or  magic  ;  and 
he  expected  from  Him  the  same  entertainment  as 
he  might  have  obtained  from  any  wandering  professor 
of  magical  arts. 

At  once  he  addressed  Him  in  the  friendliest  manner 
and  questioned  Him  in  many  words.  Apparently  he 
quite  forgot  the  purpose  for  which  Pilate  had  sent 
Him.  He  did  not  even  wait  for  any  replies,  but  went 
rambling  on.  He  had  thought  much  about  religion, 
and  he  wished  Jesus  to  know  it.  He  had  theories 
to  ventilate,  puzzles  to  propound,  remarks  to  make. 
A  man  who  has  no  religion  may  yet  have  a  great 
deal  to  say  about  religion  ;  and  there  are  people  who 
like  far  better  to  hear  themselves  talking  than  to  listen 


<v>      TIII-:  TRIM.  -?.v/>  />/:./"/'//  or. 


to   any  speaker,   however  wise.      No    mouth   is  more 
voluble  than  that  of  a  characterless  man  of  feeling. 

III. 

Herod  at  last  exhausted  himself,  and  then  he- 
waited  for  Christ  to  speak.  But  Jesus  uttered  not 
a  word.  The  silence  lasted  till  the  pause  grew 
awkward  and  painful,  and  till  Herod  grew  red  and 
angry  ;  but  Jesus  would  not  break  it  with  a  single 
syllable. 

For  one  thing,  the  entire  proceedings  were  irrelevant. 
Jesus  had  been  sent  to  Herod  to  be  tried;  but  this 
had  never  been  touched  upon.  Had  Jesus,  indeed, 
desired  to  deliver  Himself  at  all  hazards,  this  was 
a  rare  opportunity;  because,  if  He  had  yielded  to 
Herod's  wishes  and  wrought  a  miracle  for  his  gratifi 
cation,  no  doubt  He  would  have  been  acquitted  and 
sent  back  loaded  with  gifts.  But  we  cannot  believe 
that  such  an  expedient  was  even  a  temptation  to 
Him.  Never  had  lie  wrought  a  miracle  for  His 
own  behoof,  and  it  is  inconceivable  that  He  should 
have  stooped  to  offer  any  justification  of  the  estimate 
of  Himself  which  this  man  had  formed.  Jesus  was 
Herod's  subject;  but  it  was  impossible  for  Him  to 
look  upon  him  with  respect.  How  could  He  help 
feeling  disdain  for  one  who  thought  of  Himself  so 
basely  and  treated  this  great  crisis  so  frivolously? 


JESl'S   AND   HEROD  67 

To  one  who  knew  Herod's  history,  how  loathsome 
must  it  have  been  to  hear  religious  talk  from  his  lips  ! 
There  was  no  manliness  or  earnestness  in  the  man. 
Religion  was  a  mere  diversion  to  him. 

To  such  Christ  will  always  be  silent.  Herod  is  the 
representative  of  those  for  whom  there  is  no  serious 
ness  in  life,  but  who  live  only  for  pleasure.  There 
are  man}'  such.  Not  only  has  religion,  in  any  high 
and  serious  sense,  no  attraction  fur  them,  but  they 
dislike  everything  like  deep  thought  or  earnest  work 
in  any  sphere.  As  soon  as  they  are  released  from 
the  claims  of  business,  they  rush  off  to  be  excited 
and  amused  ;  and  the  one  thing  they  dread  is  volitude, 
in  which  they  might  have  to  face  themselves.  In 
certain  classes  of  society,  where  wurk  is  not  necessary 
to  obtain  a  livelihood,  this  spirit  is  the  predominant 
one  :  life  is  all  a  scene  of  gaiety  ;  one  amusement 
follows  another  ;  and  the  utmost  care  is  taken  to 
avoid  any  intervals  where  reflection  might  come  in. 

Religion  itself  may  be  dragged  into  this  circle  of 
dissipation.  It  is  possible  to  go  to  church  with  sub 
stantially  the  same  object  with  which  one  goes  to  a 
place  of  amusement — in  the  hope  of  being  excited,  of 
having  the  feelings  stirred  and  the  ajsthetic  sense 
gratified  or,  at  the  least,  consuming  an  hour  which 
might  otherwise  lie  heavy  on  the  hands.  With 
shame  be  it  said,  there  are  churches  enough  and 


f>S        Till-:    1RIAL    .L\/)    I)  I'..  ITU    or  JESl'S    CHRIST 

preachers  enough  ready  to  meet  this  state  of  mind 
half-way.  With  the  fireworks  of  rhetoric  or  the 
witchery  of  music  or  the  pomp  of  ritual  the  per 
formance  is  seasoned  up  to  the  due  pitch  ;  and  the 
audience  depart  with  precisely  the  same  kind  of 
feeling  with  which  they  might  leave  a  concert  or  a 
theatre.  Very  likely  it  is  accounted  a  great  success  ; 
but  Christ  has  not  spoken  :  lie  is  resolutely  mute  to 
those  who  follow  religion  in  this  spirit. 

Sometimes  the  same  spirit  takes  another  direction  ; 
it  becomes  speculative  and  sceptical  and,  like  Herod, 
"  questions  in  many  words."  When  I  have  heard  some 
people  propounding  religious  difficulties,  the  answer 
which  has  risen  to  my  lips  has  been,  Why  should  you 
be  able  to  believe  in  Christ?  what  have  you  ever 
done  to  render  yourselves  worth}'  of  such  a  privilege? 
you  are  thinking  of  faith  as  a  compliment  to  be  paid 
to  Christ  ;  in  reality  the  power  to  believe  in  Him  and 
His  words  is  a  great  privilege  and  honour,  that 
requires  to  be  purchased  with  thought,  humility  and 
self-denial. 

We  do  not  owe  an  answer  to  the  religious  objec 
tions  of  everyone.  Religion  is,  indeed,  a  subject  on 
which  everyone  takes  the  liberty  of  speaking  ;  the 
most  unholy  and  evil-living  talk  and  write  of  it 
nothing  doubting  ;  but  in  reality  it  is  a  subject  on 
very  few  are  entitled  to  be  heard.  We  may 


know  beforehand,  from  their  lives,  what  the  opinions 
of  many  must  be  about  it  ;  and  we  know  what  their 
opinions  are  worth. 

It  may  be  thought  that  Jesus  ought  to  have 
spoken  to  Ilcrod  —  that  He  missed  an  opportunity. 
Ought  He  not  to  have  appealed  to  his  conscience  and 
attempted  to  rouse  him  to  a  sense  of  his  sin  ?  To 
this  I  answer  that  His  silence  was  itself  this  appeal. 
I  lad  there  been  a  spark  of  conscience  left  in  Herod, 
those  Kyes  looking  him  through  and  through,  and 
that  divine  dignity  measuring  and  weighing  him, 
would  have  caused  his  sins  to  rise  up  out  of  the 
grave  and  overwhelm  him.  Jesus  was  silent,  that 
the  voice  of  the  dead  Baptist  might  be  heard. 

If  we  understood  it,  the  silence  of  Christ  is  the 
most  eloquent  of  all  appeals.  Can  you  remember 
when  you  used  to  hear  Him  when  the  words  of 
the  Hook  and  the  preacher  us<-d  to  move  you  in 
church,  when  the  singing  awoke  aspiration,  when 
the  Sabbath  was  holy  ground,  when  the  Spirit  of 
God  strove  with  you?  And  is  that  all  passed  or 
passing  away?  Does  Christ  speak  no  more?  11 
a  man  is  lying  ill,  and  perceives  da}'  by  day 
everything  about  him  becoming  silent  his  wife 
avoiding  speech,  visitors  sinking  their  voices  to 
a  whisper,  footsteps  falling  and  doors  shutting 
noiselessly — he  knows  that  his  illness  is  becoming 


7o        Till:    TRIAL    ,1.\/)    DEATH    OF  JESl'S    CHRIST 


critical.  When  the  traveller,  battling  with  the  snow- 
stunn,  sinks  clown  at  last  to  rest,  he  feels  cold  and 
painful  and  miserable  ;  but,  if  there  steals  over  him  a 
soft,  sweet  sense  of  slumber  and  silence,  then  is  the 
moment  to  rouse  himself  and  fight  off  his  peace,  if  he 
is  ever  to  stir  again.  There  is  such  a  spiritual  insen 
sibility.  It  means  that  the  Spirit  is  ceasing  to  strive, 
and  Christ  to  call.  If  it  is  creeping  over  you,  it  is 
time  to  l>e  anxious  ;  for  it  is  for  your  life. 

IV. 

How  fir  I  lerod  understood  the  silence  of  Jesus  we 
c  mnot  tell.  It  is  too  likely  that  he  did  not  wish  to 
understand.  At  all  events  he  acted  as  if  he  did  not : 
he  treated  it  as  if  it  were  stupidity.  lie  thought 
that  the  reason  why  Jesus  would  not  work  a  miracle 
was  because  lie  could  not:  a  pretender's  powers 
generally  forsake  him  when  lie  falls  into  the  hands 
of  the  police.  Jesus  he  thought,  was  discredited  ; 
Hi-  Messianic  claims  were  exploded;  even  His  fol 
lowers  must  ITOW  be  disillusioned. 

So  he  thought  and  so  he  said  ;  and  the  satellites 
routul  his  throne  chimed  in  ;  for  there  is  no  place 
where  a  great  man's  word  is  echoed  with  more  parrot- 
ike  precision  than  in  a  petty  court.  And  no  doubt 
tlx-y  considered  it  a  great  stroke  of  wit,  well  worthy  of 
applause  when  Herod,  before  sending  Him  back  to 


JESL'S  AXD  HEROD  71 


Pilate,  cast  uvcr  His  shoulders  a  gorgeous  robe — 
probably  in  imitation  of  the  white  robe  worn  at 
Rome  by  candidates  for  office.  The  suggestion  was 
that  Jesus  was  a  candidate  for  the  throne  of  the 
country,  but  one  so  ridiculous  that  it  would  be  a 
mistake  to  treat  Him  with  anything  but  contempt. 
Thus  amidst  peals  of  laughter  was  Jesus  driven  from 
the  presence. 


HACK     TO     P I  LATE 

"  I^IIK  sending  of  Jesus  to  Herod  had   not,  as  Pilate 
-*•      h  id  hoped,  finished  the  case,  and  so  the  Prisoner 
was  brought  back  to  the  imperial  palace. 

Herod  had  affected  to  treat  Jesus  with  disdain; 
but  in  reality,  as  we  are  now  aware,  he  had  himself 
been  tried  and  exposed.  .And  Jesus  returned  to  do 
the  same  thini;'  for  Pilate — to  make  manifest  what 
manner  of  spirit  he  was  of;  though  Pilate  had  no 
conception  that  this  was  i^oin^  to  happen:  he  was 
only  annoyed  that  a  case  of  which  he  thought  he  had 
Ljot  rid  was  thrown  on  his  hands  attain.  He  hid 
reluctantly  to  resume  it,  and  he  carried  it  through 
to  the  end  ;  but,  before  this  point  \vas  reached,  his 
t  h  iracter  was  revealed,  down  to  its  very  foundations, 
in  the  li-ht  of  Christ. 

Herod'-  spirit  was  that  of  frivolous  \\orldliness  — 
the  worldliness  which  tries  to  turn  the  whole  of  life 
into  a  pastime  or  a  joke  ;  Pilate's  was  that  of  strenu 
ous  \vorldline>.*  —the  worldliness  which  makes  self  its 

72 


n.-icK  TO  rii..in:  74 

aim  and  subordinates  everything  to  success.  ( )1  the 
two  this  is  perhaps  the  more  common  ;  and,  therefore, 
it  will  be  both  interesting  and  instructive  to  watch 
its  self-revelation  under  the  search-light  of  Christ's 
proximity. 

I. 

Pilate  might  perhaps  have  been  justified  in  sus 
pending  the  release  of  Jesus  till  after  he  received 
Him  back  from  Herod  ;  because,  although  he  had 
himself  found  no  fault  in  Him,  his  ignorance  of 
Jewish  laws  and  customs  might  have  made  him 
hesitate  about  his  own  judgment  and  wish,  before 
absolutely  settling  the  case,  to  obtain  the  opinion  of 
an  expert.  When,  however,  he  learned  that  the 
opinion  of  Ilerod  coincided  with  his  own,  there  was 
no  further  excuse  for  delay. 

Accordingly  he  plainly  informed  the  Jews  *  that 
he  had  examined  the  Prisoner  and  found  no  fault  in 
Him;  he  had  also  sent  Him  to  Ilerod  with  a  like  re 
sult.  "  Therefore,"  he  continued.  Therefore — what? 
"Therefore1,"  you  expect  to  hear,  "  I  dismiss  Him  from 
the  bar  acquitted,  and  I  will  protect  Him,  if  need  be, 
from  all  violence."  This  would  have  been  the  only 

*  "On  tin:  return  of  Jesus  from  Ilernd. the  Sanhedrims  do  not 
seem  to  have  been  pr<  sent.  l'il.it<  had  to  call  them  together, 
presumably  from  the  temple." — KDKKSIIKI.M. 


Till-:    TRIAL    .l.\D   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


conclusion  in  accordance  with  logic  and  justice. 
Pilate's  conclusion  was  the  extraordinary  one  : 
"Therefore  I  will  chastise  Him  and  release  Him." 
He  would  inflict  the  severe  punishment  of  scourging 
as  a  sop  to  their  rage,  and  then  release  Him  as  a 
tribute  to  justice. 

\Yas  a  more  unjust  proposal  ever  made?  Yet  it 
was  thoroughly  characteristic  of  the  man  who  in  ide 
it  as  well  as  of  the  system  which  he  represented.  The 
spirit  of  imperial  Rome  was  the  spirit  of  compromise, 
manoeuvre  and  expediency  ;  as  the  spirit  of  govern 
ment  has  too  often  been  elsewhere,  not  only  in  the 
State  but  also  in  the  Church.  Pilate  had  settled 
scores  of  cases  on  the  same  principle — or  no  principle  ; 
scores  of  officials  were  conducting  their  administration 
throughout  the  vast  Roman  empire  in  the  same  way 
at  that  very  time.  Only  to  Pilate  fell  the  sinister 
distinction  of  putting  the  base  system  in  operation 
in  the  case  where  its  true  character  was  exposed  in 
the  light  of  history. 

P)iit  ought  we  not  to  believe  that  in  all  other  cases, 
however  obscure  the  victims,  the  spirit  manifested  by 
Pilate  has  been  equally  displeasing  to  God?  In  our 
Lord's  picture  of  the  Last  Judgment  one  striking  trait 
is  that  all  are  astonished  at  the  reasons  assigned  for 
their  destiny.  Those  on  the  right  hand  arc  credited 
with  feeding  Christ  when  He  was  hungry,  giving 


BACK    TO  PILATE  75 


Him  drink  when  He  was  thirsty,  and  so  forth  ;  and 
they  ask  in  surprise,  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  hungry 
and  fed  Thee,  or  thirsty  and  gave  Thee  drink?  In 
like  manner  those  on  the  left  arc  accused  of  seeing 
Christ  hungry  but  neglecting  to  feed  Him,  of  seeing 
Him  thirsty  and  refusing  to  give  Him  drink,  and  so 
forth  ;  and  they  ask,  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  hungry 
or  thirsty  and  ministered  not  to  Thee?  You  perhaps 
think  they  say  so  to  conceal  the  sins  of  which  they 
arc  conscious?  Not  at  all.  They  arc  really  as 
tonished  :  they  think  their  identity  has  been  mistaken 
and  that  they  arc  about  to  be  punished  for  sins 
they  have  never  committed.  They  arc  only  aware  of 
having  neglected  a  few  children  or  old  women  not 
worth  thinking  about.  But  Christ  says,  Each  of 
these  stood  for  Me,  and,  when  you  neglected  or  in 
jured  them,  you  were  doing  it  unto  Me.  Thus  may 
all  life  at  the  last  prove  far  more  high  and  solemn 
than  we  now  imagine.  Take  care  how  you  touch 
your  brother  man  ;  you  may  be  touching  the  apple 
of  God's  eye  :  take  care  how  you  do  an  injustice  even 
to  a  child  ;  you  may  find  out  at  the  last  that  it  is 
Christ  you  have  been  assailing. 

II 

Pilate  had  cut  himself  loose   from   principle  when 
he  declared   Jesus   to   be   innocent    and   yet    ordered 


;6        ////•.    I  RIAL    .\M>    Itl'.ATll    O1-*  JESUS    <III\1:T 

Him  to  be  chastised.  He  thought,  however,  that  lie 
could  guide  his  course  safely  enough  to  the  point  at 
which  he  aimed.  \Yc  arc  to  see  how  completely  he 
failed  and  at  last  .suffered  total  shipwreck.  Hands 
were  stretched  out  towards  him,  as  he  advanced, 
some  to  save  him,  some  to  do  the  reverse  ;  but  the 
impulse  of  his  own  false  beginning  carried  him  on  to 
the  fatal  issue. 

The  first  hand  stretched  out  to  him  was  a  loving 
and  helpful  one  :  it  was  the  hand  of  his  wife.  She 
sent  to  tell  him  of  a  dream  she  had  had  about  his 
Prisoner  and  to  warn  him  to  have  nothing  to  do 
with  "  that  just  man." 

Difficulties  have  been  made  as  to  how  she  could 
know  about  Christ  ;  but  there  is  no  real  difficulty. 
Probably,  while  Jesus  was  away  at  Herod's,  Pilate 
had  entered  the  palace  and  told  his  wife  about  the 
singular  trial  and  about  the  impression  which  Jesus 
had  made  upon  his  mind.  When  he  left  her,  she  had 
fallen  asleep  and  dreamed  about  it  ;  for,  though  our 
version  makes  her  say,  "  This  night  I  have  dreamed 
about  Him,"  the  literal  translation  is  "this  day"; 
and  of  course  there  might  be  many  causes  why  a 
lady  should  fall  asleep  in  the  daytime.  Her  dream 
had  been  such  as  to  fill  her  with  a  vague  sense  of 
alarm,  and  her  message  to  her  husband  was  the 
result. 


RACK    TO   r  11. ATE  77 


This  incident  has  taken  a  strong  hold  of  the 
Christian  imagination  and  given  rise  to  all  kinds  of 
guesses.  Tradition  has  handed  down  the  name  of 
Pilate's  wife  as  Claudia  Procula  ;  and  it  is  said  that 
she  was  a  proselyte  of  the  Jewish  religion  ;  as  high- 
toned  heathen  ladies  in  that  age  not  infrequently 
became  when  circumstances  brought  the  Old  Testa 
ment  into  their  hands.  The  Greek  Church  has  gone 
so  far  as  to  canonise  her,  supposing  that  she  became 
a  Christian.  Poets  and  artists  have  tried  to  reproduce 
her  dream.  Many  will  remember  the  picture  of  it  in 
the  Dore  Gallery  in  London.  The  dreaming  woman 
is  represented  standing  in  a  balcony  and  looking  up 
an  ascending  valley,  which  is  crowded  with  figures. 
It  is  the  vale  of  years  or  centuries,  and  the  figures 
are  the  generations  of  the  Church  of  Christ  yet  to  be. 
Immediately  in  front  of  her  is  the  Saviour  Himself, 
bearing  His  cross;  behind  and  around  Him  are  His 
twelve  apostles  and  the  crowds  of  their  converts  ; 
behind  these  the  Church  of  the  early  centuries,  with 
the  great  fathers,  Polycarp  and  Tertullian,  Athanasius 
and  Gregory,  Chrysostom  and  Augustine  ;  further 
back  the  Church  of  the  Middle  Ages,  with  the  majestic 
forms  and  warlike  accoutrements  of  the  Crusaders 
rising  from  its  midst  ;  behind  these  the  Church  of 
modern  times,  with  its  heroes  ;  then  multitudes  upon 
i.Miltitudes  that  no  man  can  number  pressing  forward 


78         '////•:    TRIAL    AM)   I) i: AT  11   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

in  broadening  ranks,  till  far  aloft,  in  the  white  and 
shining  heavens,  lo,  tier  on  tier  and  circle  upon  circle, 
with  the  angels  of  God  hovering  above  them  and  on 
their  flanks  ;  and  in  the  midst,  transfigured  to  the 
brightness  of  a  star,  the  cross,  which  in  its  rough 
reality  He  is  bearing  wearily  below. 

Of  course  these  are  but  fancies.  In  the  woman's 
anxiety  that  no  evil  should  befall  the  Innocent  we 
may,  with  greater  certainty,  trace  the  vestiges  of  the 
ancient  Roman  justice  as  it  may  have  dwelt  in  the 
noble  matrons,  like  Volumnia  and  Cornelia,  whose 
names  adorn  the  pristine  annals  of  her  race  ;  while 
the  wife's  solicitude  to  save  her  husband  from  a  deed 
of  sin  associates  her  with  the  still  nobler  women  of 
all  ages  who  have  walked  like  guardian  angels  by  the 
side  of  men  immersed  in  the  world  and  liable  to  be 
coarsened  by  its  contact,  to  warn  them  of  the  higher 
laws  and  the  unseen  powers.  We  can  hardly  doubt 
that  the  hand  of  God  was  in  this  dream,  or  that 
it  was  outstretched  to  save  Pilate  from  the  doom 
to  which  he  was  hastening. 


III. 

Another  hand,  however,  was  now  stretched  out  to 
him  ;  and  he  grasped  it  eagerly,  thinking  it  was  going 
to  save  him  ;  when  it  suddenly  pushed  him  down 


R.K'K    TO   r  I  LATE  79 

towards  the  abyss.  It  was  the  hand  of  the  mob  of 
Jerusalem. 

Up  to  this  point  the  actors  assembled  on  the  stage 
of  Christ's  trial  were  comparatively  few.  It  had  been 
the  express  desire  of  the  Jewish  authorities  to  hurry 
the  case  through  before  the  populace  of  the  city  and 
the  crowds  of  Passover  strangers  got  wind  of  it.  The 
proceedings  had  accordingly  gone  forward  all  night  ; 
and  it  was  still  early  morning.  As  Jesus  was  led 
through  the  streets  to  Herod  and  back,  accompanied 
by  so  many  of  the  principal  citizens,  no  doubt  a 
considerable  number  must  have  gathered.  But  now 
circumstances  brought  a  great  multitude  on  the  scene. 

It  was  the  custom  of  the  Roman  governor,  on  the 
Passover  morning,  to  release  a  prisoner  to  the  people. 
As  there  were  generally  plenty  of  political  prisoners 
on  hand,  rebels  against  the  detested  Roman  yoke, 
but,  for  that  very  reason,  favourites  and  heroes  of  the 
Jewish  populace,  this  was  a  privilege  not  to  be  for 
gotten  ;  and,  while  the  trial  of  Jesus  was  proceeding 
in  the  open  air,  the  mob  of  the  city  came  pouring 
through  the  palace  gates  and  up  the  avenue,  shouting 
for  their  annual  gift. 

For  once  their  demand  was  welcome  to  Pilate,  for 
he  thought  he  saw  in  it  a  way  of  escape  from  his  own 
difficulty.  •  lie  would  offer  them  Jesus,  who  had  a  few 
days  before  been  the  hero  of  a  popular  demonstration, 


So      '////•:  FAY. //.  -/.v/)  ni'.A'iii  o/'\//-:.sr.s  CHRIST 

and  as  an  aspirant  to  the  Mcssiahship  would,  he 
imagined,  be  the  very  person  they  should  want. 

It  was  an  utterly  unjust  tiling  to  do  ;  because,  first, 
it  was  treating  Jesus  as  if  He  were  already  a  con 
demned  man,  whereas  Pilate  had  himself  a  few 
minutes  before  declared  Him  innocent  ;  and,  secondly, 
it  was  staking  the  life  of  an  innocent  man  on  a  guess, 
which  might  be  mistaken,  as  to  the  fancy  of  the  mob. 
No  doubt,  however,  Pilate  considered  it  kind,  as  he 
felt  sure  of  the  disposition  of  the  populace  ;  and,  at 
all  events,  the  chance  of  extricating  himself  was  too 
good  to  lose. 

The  minds  of  the  mob  it  turned  out,  however, 
were  prc-occupicd  with  a  favourite  of  their  own. 
Singularly  enough  his  name  also  appears  to  have 
been  Jesus  :  "Jesus  Barabbas "  is  the  name  he  bears 
in  some  of  the  best  manuscripts  of  the  gospel  of 
St.  Matthew.*  I  le  was  "  a  notable  prisoner,"  who  had 
been  guilty  of  insurrection  in  the  city,  in  which  blood 
had  been  spilt,  and  was  now  lying  in  jail  with  the 
associates  whose  ringleader  he  had  been.  A  bandit, 
half  robber  half  insurrectionary  leader,  is  a  figure 
which  easily  lays  hold  of  the  popular  imagination. 

Sec  Keim's  note.  VVestcott  and  Hort  reject  it.  Some  have 
further  .seen  an  impressive  coincidence  in  the  name  Barabbas, 
interpreting  it  "son  ol'  the  lather."  Jesus  was  by  no  means  a 
rare  name. 


ll.lf'K    T<)    /'//..///•  Si 

1  hey  hesitated,  however,  when  Pilate  proposed  Jesus; 
and  Pilate  seems  to  have  sent  for  the  other  prisoner, 
that  they  might  sec  the  two  side  by  side  ;  for  they 
could  not,  he  thought,  hesitate  for  a  moment,  if  they 
had  the  opportunity  of  observing  the  contrast. 

But  this  brief  interval  was  utilised  by  the  Sanhcdrists 
to  persuade  the  multitude.  It  must  be  remembered 
that  this  was  not  the  Galilean  crowd  by  which  Jesus 
had  been  brought  in  triumph  into  the  city  a  few 
days  before,  but  the  mob  of  Jerusalem,  with  whom 
the  ecclesiastical  authorities  had  influence.*'  The 
priests  and  scribes,  then,  mingled  among  them  and 
used  every  artifice  they  could  think  of.  Probably 
their  most  effective  argument  was  to  whisper  that 
Jesus  was  obviously  the  choice  of  Pilate,  and  there 
fore  should  not  be  theirs. 

If  Pilate  actually  placed  the  two  Jcsuscs  side  by 
side  on  his  platform,  what  a  sight  it  was!  The 
political  desperado,  stained  with  murder,  there  ;  the 
Healer  and  Teacher,  who  had  gone  about  continually 
doing  good,  the  Son  of  man,  the  Son  of  God,  here. 
Now  which  will  you  have — Jesus  or  Barabbas  ?  And 
the  cry  came  ringing  from  ten  thousand  throats, 
"  Barabbas  !  " 


*  Hence  the  contrast,  common  in  popular  preaching,  l>rt\vrrn 
the  multitude  crying  "  Hosannah  "  and  the  same  multitude  crying 
"Crucify"  is  incorrect. 

6 


THE    TRIAL    AXD   DP. ATI!  OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


To  Jesus  what  must  that  have  meant  !  These 
were  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  whom  lie  had 
longed  to  gather  as  a  hen  gathcrcth  her  chickens 
under  lier  wings  ;  they  were  the  hearers  of  His  words, 
the  subjects  of  His  miracles,  the  objects  of  His  love  ; 
and  they  prefer  to  Him  a  murderer  and  a  robber. 

This  scene  has  often  been  alleged  as  the  self- 
condemnation  of  democracy.  ]  rox  popnli  vox  Dei, 
its  flatterers  have  said  ;  but  look  yonder  :  when  the 
multitude  has  to  choose  between  Jesus  and  Barabbas, 
it  chooses  Barabbas.  If  this  be  so,  the  scene  is 
equally  decisive  against  aristocracy.  Did  the  priests, 
scribes  and  nobles  behave  better  than  the  mob  ?  It 
was  by  their  advice  that  the  mob  chose. 

It  is  poor  sport,  on  cither  side,  to  pelt  opponents 
with  such  reproaches.  It  is  better  far  to  learn  holy 
fear  from  such  a  scene  in  reference  to  ourselves,  to 
our  own  part}'  and  to  our  country.  What  arc  we  to 
admire'?  Whom  are  we  to  follow?  In  what  arc  we 
to  seek  salvation?  Certainly  there  arc  great  ques 
tions  awaiting  the  democracy.  Whom  will  it  choose 
—the  revolutionist  or  the  regenerator?  And  to  what 
will  it  trust — cleverness  or  character?  What  spirit 
will  it  adopt  as  its  own  —  that  of  violence  or  that  of 
Which  means  will  it  employ — those  which 
work  from  without  inwards,  or  those  which  work 
from  v>  ithin  outuard.s  ?  What  end  will  it  seek  — the 


HACK    TO   PILATE 


kingdom  of  incut  and  drink,  or  tlio  kingdom  which  is 
righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 
But  such  questions  arc  not  for  the  democracy  alone. 
All  classes,  all  parties,  ever)'  generation  and  every 
country  have,  from  time  to  time,  to  face  them.  And 
so  has  the  individual.  Perhaps  all  the  great  choices 
of  life  ultimately  resolve  themselves  into  this  one — 
Jesus  or  Barabbas  ? 

IV. 

To  Pilate  the  choice  of  Barabbas  must  have  been 
not  only  a  surprise,  but  a  staggering  blow.  "  What 
then,"  he  asked,  "  shall  I  do  with  Jesus  ?  "  Probably 
he  expected  the  answer,  Give  us  Him  too;  and 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  he  would  willingly  have 
complied  with  such  a  request.  But,  instead  of  this, 
there  came,  quick  as  echo,  the  reply,  "  Crucify 
Him  !"  and  it  was  more  a  command  than  a  request. 

He  was  now  made  sensible  that  what  he  had 
considered  a  loophole  of  escape  was  a  noose  into 
which  he  had  thrust  his  head.  He  might,  indeed, 
have  intimated  that  he  had  only  given  them  the 
prerogative  to  save  one  of  the  two  lives,  not  to  take 
cither  of  them  away.  Hut  virtual!}'  he  had  put  both 
prisoners  at  their  disposal.  In  this  way,  at  .all 
events,  the  mob  interpreted  the  situation  ;  and  he 
did  not  venture  to  contradict  them. 


Ho  was,  however,  deeply  moved,  and  he  did  ;i 
very  unusual  tiling  :  calling  for  a  basin  of  water,  he 
washed  his  hands  before  them  all  and  said,  "  I  am 
innocent  from  the  blood  of  tin's  just  Person  ;  sec  ye 
to  it."  This  was  an  impressive  act  ;  yet  its  imprcs- 
sivcncss  was  too  theatrical.  He  washed  his  hands 
when  he  ought  to  have  exerted  them.  And  blood 
docs  not  come  off  so  easily.  He  could  not  abnegate 
his  responsibility  and  cast  it  upon  others.  Public  men 
frequently  think  they  can  do  so  :  they  say  that  they 
bow  to  the  force  of  public  opinion,  but  wash  their 
hands  of  the  deed.  But  if  their  position,  like  Pilate's, 
demands  that  they  should  decide  for  themselves  and 
take  the  consequences,  the  guilt  of  sinful  action 
clings  to  them  and  cannot  be  transferred.  This 
whole  scene,  indeed,  is  a  mirror  for  magistrates,  to 
show  them  down  what  dark  paths  the}-  may  be 
pushed  if  they  resign  themselves  to  be  the  mere  tools 
'>f  the  popular  will.  Pilate  ought  to  have  opposed 
the  popular  will  at  whatever  risk  and  refused  to  do 
the  deed  of  which  he  disapproved.  But  such  a 
course  would  have  involved  loss  to  himself ;  and  this 
was  the  real  reason  for  his  conduct. 

The  populace  felt  their  triumph,  and  in  reply  to 
his  solemn  dissociation  of  himself  from  Christ's  death 
sent  back  the  insulting  cry,  "  His  blood  be  on  us  and 
on  our  children."  Pilate  was  afraid  of  the  guilt,  but 


HACK  TO  r ii. ATI:  85 

they  were  not.  Well  mi^ht  the  heavens  have 
blackened  above  them  at  that  word,  and  the  earth 
shuddered  beneath  their  feet  !  Profaner  ery  was 
never  uttered.  But  they  were  mad  with  rai'e  and 
reckless  of  everything  but  victory  in  the  contest  in 
which  they  were  engaged.  Still,  their  words  were 
not  forgotten  in  the  quarter  to  which  they  were 
directed  ;  and  it  was  not  loni^  before  the  curse  which 
they  had  invoked  descended  on  their  city  and  their 
race.  Meanwhile  they  gained  their  end  :  the  will  of 
1'ilatc  was  breaking  do\vn  before  their  \\ell-directcd 
persistency. 


CHAPTER   VII. 
THE   CROWN    OF  THORNS 

PILATE  had  failed  in  his  attempt  to  save  Jesus 
from  the  hands  of  His  prosecutors,  whose  rage 
against  their  Victim  was  only  intensified  by  the 
struggle  in  which  they  had  engaged  ;  and  there  was 
no  course  no\v  open  to  him  but  to  hand  Jesus  over 
to  the  executioners  for,  at  least,  the  preliminary 
tortures  of  crucifixion. 

It  is  not  in  accordance  with  modern  Christian 
sentiment  to  dwell  very  much  on  the  physical  suffer 
ings  of  Christ.  Once  the  feeling  on  this  subject  was 
very  different :  in  old  writers,  like  the  mystic  Tauler, 
for  example,  every  detail  is  enlarged  upon  and  even 
exaggerated,  till  the  page  seems  to  reek  with  blood 
and  the  mind  of  the  reader  grows  sick  with  horror. 
\Ve  rather  incline  to  throw  a  veil  over  the  ghastly 
details,  or  we  uncover  them  only  so  far  as  may  be 
necessary  in  order  to  understand  the  condition  of  His 
mind,  in  which  we  seek  His  real  sufferings. 

I  he  sacred  body  of  our  Lord  was  exposed  to  many 

bo 


THE  r/v-o/r.v  or  TIIOR.\S  s; 

shocks  and  cruelties  before  the  final  and  complicated 
horrors  of  the  crucifixion.  First,  there  was  His  agony 
in  the  garden.  Then  — not  to  speak  of  the  chains  laid 
on  Him  when  lie  was  arrested --there  was  the  blow 
on  the  face  from  the  servant  of  the  high  priest.  After 
His  condemnation  by  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  in 
the  middle  of  the  night  they  "  did  spit  in  1 1  is  face  and 
buffeted  Him  ;  "  and  others  smote  I  lim  with  the  palms 
of  their  hands,  saying,  •'  Prophesy  unto  us,  Th«.u 
Christ.  Who  is  he  that  smote  Thee  ?"  The  present 
is,  therefore,  the  fourth  access  of  physical  MifU  ring 
which  He  had  to  endure. 

First,  they  scourged  Him.  This  was  done  by  the 
Roman  soldiers  by  order  of  their  master  Pilate, 
though  the  governor,  in  all  likelihood,  retired  from 
the  scene  while  it  was  being  inflicted.  It  took  place, 
it  would  appear,  on  the  platform  where  the  trial  had 
been  held,  and  in  the  eyes  of  all.  The  victim  uas 
stripped  and  stretched  against  a  pillar,  or  bent  over 
a  low  post,  his  hands  being  tied,  so  that  he  had  no 
means  of  defending  himself.  The  instrument  ol 
torture  was  a  sort  of  knout  or  cat-o'-ninc-tails,  with 
bits  of  iron  or  bone  attached  to  the  ends  of  the  thongs. 
Not  only  did  the  blows  cut  the  skin  and  draw  blood, 
but  not  infrequently  the  victim  died  in  the  midst 
of  the  operation.  Some  have  supposed  that  Pilate, 
out  of  consideration  f-jr  Jesus,  may  have  moderated 


ss      'nil-:  TRIAL  AM)  DEATH  or  JESUS  CIHUST 

cither  the  number  or  the  severity  of  the  strokes  ;  but, 
cm  the  other  hand,  his  plan  of  releasing  Him  depended 
on  his  being  able  to  show  the  Jews  that  He  had 
suffered  severely.  The  inability  of  Jesus  to  bear  His 
own  cross  to  the  place  of  execution  was  no  doubt 
chiefly  due  to  the  exhaustion  produced  by  this 
infliction  ;  and  this  is  a  better  indication  of  the  degree 
of  severity  than  mere  conjecture. 

After  the   scouririnir  the  soldiers  took    Him    awav 

o        J"> 

with  them  to  their  own  quarters  in  the  palace  and 
called  together  the  whole  band  to  enjoy  the  spectacle. 
Kvidcntly  the}-  thought  that  lie  was  already  con 
demned  to  be  crucified  ;  and  anyone  condemned  to 
crucifixion  seems,  after  being  scourged,  to  have  been 
handed  over  to  the  soldiery  to  be  handled  as  they 
pleased,  just  as  a  hunted  creature,  when  it  is  caught, 
is  flung  to  the  dogs.  .And,  indeed,  this  comparison 
is  only  too  appropriate  ;  because,  as  Luther  has 
remarked,  in  those  days  men  were  treated  as  only 
brutes  are  treated  now.  To  us  it  is  incomprehensible 
how  the  \\hole  band  should  have  been  called  together 
merely  to  gloat  over  the  sufferings  of  a  fellow-creature 
and  to  turn  His  pain  and  shame  into  brutal  mockery. 
This,  however,  was  their  purpose  ;  and  they  enjoyed 
it  as  schoolboys  enjoy  the  terror  of  a  tortured  animal. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  these  were  men  who  on 
the  field  of  buttle  were  inured  to  bloodshed  and  at 


Tin-: 


Rome  found  their  chief  delight  in  watching  the  sports 
of  the  arena,  where  gladiators  butchered  one  another 
to  make  a  Roman  holiday. 

Their  horseplay  took  the  form  of  a  mock  coro 
nation.  They  had  caught  the  drift  of  the  trial 
sufficiently  to  know  that  the  charge  against  Jesus 
was  that  He  pretended  to  be  a  king;  and  lofty  pre 
tensions  on  the  part  of  one  who  appears  to  be  mean 
and  poor  easily  lend  themselves  to  ridicule.  Ik-sides, 
in  their  minds  there  was  perhaps  an  amused  scorn 
at  the  thought  of  a  Jew  aiming  at  a  sovereignty 
above  that  of  C.'esar.  Foreign  soldiers  stationed  in 
Palestine  cannot  have  liked  the  Jews,  who  hated 
them  so  cordially  ;  and  this  may  have  given  an  edge 
to  their  scorn  of  a  Jewish  pretender. 

They  treated  Him  as  if  they  believed  Him  to  br 
a  king.  A  king  must  wear  the  purple.  And  so  they 
got  hold  of  an  old,  cast-off  officer's  cloak  of  this 
colour  and  threw  it  over  His  shoulders.  Then  a  king 
must  have  a  crown.  So  one  of  them  ran  out  to  the 
park  in  which  the  palace  stood  and  pulled  a  fru 
twigs  from  a  tree  or  bush.  These  happened  to  be 
thorn)'  ;  but  this  did  not  matter,  it  was  all  tin- 
better  ;  they  were  plaited  into  tin-  rude  semblance-  of 
a  crown  and  crushed  down  on  His  head.  Io  com 
plete  the  outfit,  a  king  must  have  a  sceptre.  And 
this  they  found  without  difficulty  :  a  n-<-d,  probably 


<,o        Till:    TRIAL    AND    DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

used  as  a  walking-stick,  being  thrust  into  His  right 
hand.  Thus  was  the  mock  king  dressed  up.  And 
then,  as  on  occasions  of  state  they  had  seen  sub 
jects  bow  the  knee  to  the  emperor,  saying,  "Aw, 
Gi'sdr!"  so  they  advanced  one  after  another  to  Jesus 
and,  bending  lo\v,  said,  "Hail,  King  of  the  Jews!" 
Hut,  after  passing  with  mock  solemnity,  each  turned 
and,  with  a  burst  of  laughter,  struck  Him  a  blow, 
using  for  this  purpose  the  reed  which  He  had 
dropped.  And,  though  I  hardly  dare  to  repeat  it, 
they  covered  His  face  with  spittle! 

What  a  spectacle  !  It  might  have  been  expected 
that  those  who  were  themselves  poor  and  lowly,  and 
therefore  subject  to  the  oppression  of  the  powerful, 
would  have  felt  sympathy  and  compassion  for  one 
of  their  own  station  when  crushed  by  the  foot  of 
tyranny.  Hut  there  is  no  cruelty  like  the  cruelty  of 
underlings.  There  is  an  instinct  in  all  to  wish  to  see 
others  cast  down  beneath  themselves  ;  and,  especially, 
if  one  who  has  aimed  high  is  brought  low,  there 
is  a  sense  of  personal  exultation  at  his  downfall. 
Such  are  the  base  passions  which  lie  at  the  bottom 
of  men's  hearts  ;  and  the  dregs  of  the  dregs  of  human 
nature  were  revealed  on  this  occasion. 

What  must  it  have  been  to  Jesus  to  look  on  it — to 
have  it  thrust  on  His  sight  and  into  contact  with  His 
very  person,  so  that  He  could  not  get  away?  What 


THE   CROWN  OF   THORNS  91 


must  it  have  been  to  Him,  \vith  His  delicate  bodily 
organism  and  sensitive  mind,  to  be  in  the  hands  of 
those  rude  and  ruthless  men?  It  was,  however, 
necessary,  in  order  that  He  might  fully  accomplish 
the  work  which  He  had  come  to  the  world  to  per 
form.  He  had  come  to  redeem  humanity — to  go 
down  to  the  very  lowest  depths  to  seek  and  to  save 
the  lost;  and,  therefore,  He  had  to  make  close  ac 
quaintance  with  human  nature  in  its  worst  specimens 
and  its  cxtrcmest  degradation,  lie  was  to  be  the 
Saviour  of  sinners  as  bad  and  degraded  as  even  these 
soldiers;  and,  therefore,  He  had  to  come  in  contact 
with  them  and  see  what  they  were. 

Thus  have  I  passed  as  lightly  as  was  possible  over 
the  details  ;  nor  would  my  readers  wish  me  to  dwell 
on  them  further.  But  it  will  be  profitable  to  linger 
on  this  spot  a  little  longer,  in  order  to  le.irn  the 
lessons  of  the  scene. 

First,  notice  in  the  conduct  of  the  tormentors  of 
Jesus  the  abuse  of  one  of  the  gifts  of  God.  In  the 
conduct  of  the  Roman  soldiers  fioin  first  to  last  the 
most  striking  feature  is  that  at  every  point  they 
turned  their  work  into  horseplay  and  merriment. 
Now,  laughter  is  a  gift  of  God.  It  is  a  kind  of  spice 
which  the  Creator  has  given  to  be  taken  along  with 
the  somewhat  unpalatable  food  of  ordinary  life.  It 


92         '////;    TRIAL    AM)   DEATH    ()/-'  JKSt'S    CHRIST 

is  a  kind  of  sunshine  to  enliven  the  landscape,  which 
is  otherwise  too  dull  and  sombre.  The  power  of 
seeing  the  amusing  side  of  things  immensely  lightens 
the  load  of  life  ;  and  he  who  possesses  the  gift  of 
evoking  heart)-  and  innocent  mirth  may  be  a  true 
benefactor  of  his  species.* 

But,  while  laughter  is  a  gift  of  God,  there  is  no 
other  gift  of  His  which  is  more  frequently  abused 
and  converted  from  a  blessing  into  a  curse.  When 
laughter  is  directed  against  sacred  things  and  holy 
persons  ;  when  it  is  used  to  belittle  and  degrade  what 
is  great  and  reverend  ;  when  it  is  employed  as  a 
weapon  with  which  to  torture  weakness  and  cover 
innocence  with  ridicule  then,  instead  of  being  the 
foam  on  the  cup  at  the  banquet  of  life,  it  becomes 
a  deadly  poison.  Laughter  guided  these  soldiers 
in  their  inhuman  acts  ;  it  concealed  from  them  the 

*  A  ministerial  friend  told  me  that  he  once,  in  the  hearing  of 
I  >r.  Andrew  Bonar,  made  reference  to  some  tilings  in  the  life 
of  St.  1'anl  which  seemed  to  him  to  betray  on  the  part  of  the 
apostle  a  sense  of  humour.  He  was  not  very  sure  how  Dr. 
Bonar  might  take  such  a  remark,  and  at  the  close  he  asked 
if  lie  agreed  with  him.  "Not  only/'  was  the  reply,  "do  I 
agree  with  yon,  but  I  go  further:  I  think  there  are  distinct 
traces  of  humour  in  the  sayings  and  the  conduct  of  our  Lord;" 
and  he  proceeded  to  quote  examples.  Everyone  is  aware  how 
Ih.  Bonar  himself  knew  how  to  combine  with  the  profotmdest 
reverence  and  saintliness  a  strain  of  delightful  mirth  ;  and  the 
absent  «•  of  this  is  the  trreat  delect  of  his  otheruise  charming 
autobiography. 


true  nature  of  \vhat  they  were  doing  ;  and  it  wounded 
Christ  more  deeply  than  even  the  scourge  of  Pilate. 

A  second  thing  to  be  noticed  is  that  it  was  against 
the  kingly  office  of  the  Redeemer  that  the  opposition 
of  men  was  directed  on  this  occasion.  It  was  different 
on  a  former  occasion,  when  lie  was  abused  at  the 
close  of  the  ecclesiastical  trial.  Then  it  was  His 
prophetic  office  that  was  turned  into  ridicule  :  "  when 
they  had  blindfolded  Him,  they  struck  Him  on  the 
face  and  asked  Him,  saying,  Prophesy  who  is  it  that 
smote  thcc."  Here,  on  the  other  hand,  the  ridicule 
was  directed  against  Him  entirely  on  the  ground  of 
His  claiming  to  be  a  king.  The  soldiers  considered 
it  an  absurdity  and  a  joke  that  one  apparently  so 
mean,  friendless  and  powerless  should  make  any  such 
pretensions. 

Man>-  a  time  since  then  has  the  same  derision  been 
awakened  by  this  claim  of  Christ.  He  is  the  King 
of  nations.  Hut  earthly  kings  and  statesmen  have 
ridiculed  the  idea  that  His  will  and  His  law  .should 
control  them  in  their  schemes  and  ambitions.  Even 
where  His  authority  is  nominally  acknowledged,  both 
aristocracies  and  democracies  are  slow  to  recognise 
that  their  legislation  and  customs  should  be  regulated 
by  His  words.  He  is  King  of  the  Church.  Andrew 
Melville  told  King  James  :  "  There  are  two  kings  and 
two  kingdoms  in  Scotland  ;  there  is  King  James,  the 


04        THE    TRIAL   AM)   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

head  of  this  commonwealth,  and  there  is  Christ  Jesus, 
the  King  of  the  Church,  whose  subject  James  VI. 
is,  and  of  whose  kingdom  he  is  not  a  king,  nor  a 
lord,  nor  a  head,  but  a  member."  The  entire  history 
of  the  Scottish  Church  has  been  one  long  struggle  to 
maintain  this  truth  ;  but  the  struggle  has  frequently 
been  carried  on  in  the  face  of  opposition  almost  as 
scornful  as  that  which  assailed  Jesus  in  Pilate's  palace. 
Most  vital  of  all  is  the  acknowledgment  of  Christ's 
kingship  in  the  realm  of  the  individual  life  ;  but  it 
is  here  that  His  will  is  most  resisted.  In  words  we 
acknowledge  allegiance  to  Him  ;  but  in  which  of  us 
has  the  victory  over  the  flesh  been  so  complete  that 
His  full  claim  has  been  conceded,  to  have  the  arrange 
ment  of  our  business  and  our  leisure  and  to  dictate 
what  is  to  be  done  with  our  time,  our  means  and 
our  services  ? 

A  third  lesson  is  to  recognise  that  in  what  Jesus 
bore  on  this  occasion  lie  was  suffering  for  us. 

Of  all  the  features  of  the  scene  the  one  that  has 
most  impressed  the  imagination  of  Christendom  is 
the  crown  of  thorns.  It  was  something  unusual,  and 
brought  out  the  ingenuity  and  wantonness  of  cruelty. 
Ik-sides,  as  the  wound  of  a  thorn  has  been  felt  by 
everyone,  it  brings  the  pain  of  the  Sufferer  nearer  to 
us  than  any  other  incident.  But  it  is  chiefly  by  its 
symbolism  that  it  has  laid  hold  of  the  Christian  mind. 


K  cRoirx  or 


When  Adam  and  Eve  were  driven  from  the  garden 
into  the  bleak  and  toilsome  world,  their  doom  was 
that  the  ground  should  bring  forth  to  them  thorns 
and  thistles.  Thorns  were  the  sign  of  the  curse  ;  that 
is,  of  their  banishment  from  God's  presence  and  of 
all  the  sad  and  painful  consequences  following  there 
from.  And  docs  not  the  thorn,  staring  from  the 
naked  bough  of  winter  in  threatening  ugliness,  lurking 
beneath  the  leaves  or  flowers  of  summer  to  wound 
the  approaching  hand,  tearing  the  clothes  or  the  flesh 
of  the  traveller  who  tries  to  make  his  way  through 
the  thicket,  burning  in  the  flesh  where  it  has  sunk, 
fitly  stand  for  that  side  of  life  which  we  associate 
with  sin — the  side  of  care,  fret,  pain,  disappointment, 
disease  and  death?  In  a  word,  it  symbolises  the 
curse.  But  it  was  the  mission  of  Christ  to  bear  the 
curse  ;  and,  as  He  lifted  it  on  His  own  head,  lie  took 
it  off  the  world.  lie  bore  our  sins  and  carried  our 
sorrows. 

Why  is  it  that,  when  we  think  of  the  crown  of 
thorns  now,  it  is  not  only  with  horror  and  pity,  but 
with  an  exultation  which  cannot  be  repressed  ?  Be 
cause,  cruel  as  was  the  soldiers'  jest,  there  was  a 
divine  fitness  in  their  act  ;  and  wisdom  was,  even 
through  their  sin,  fulfilling  her  own  intention.  There 
are  some  persons  with  faces  so  handsome  that  the 
meanest  dress,  which  would  excite  laughter  or  disgust 


</>         ///A.    7"AV.  //.    J.V/>    DE.ITH    or  J  ESI 'S    T//AVS7 


if  worn  by  others,  looks  well  on  them,  and  the  merest 
shreds  of  ornament,  stuck  on  them  anyhow,  arc  more 
attractive  than  the  most  elaborate  toilets  of  persons 
less  favoured  by  nature.  And  so  about  Christ  there 
was  something  which  converted  into  ornaments  even 
the  things  flung  at  Him  as  insults.  When  they 
called  Him  the  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners, 
though  they  did  it  in  derision,  they  were  giving  Him 
a  title  for  which  a  hundred  generations  have  loved 
Him  ;  and  so,  when  they  put  on  His  head  the  crown 
of  thorns,  they  were  unconsciously  bestowing  the 
noblest  wreath  that  man  could  weave  Him.  Down 
through  the  ages  Jesus  passes,  still  wearing  the  crown 
of  thorns  ;  and  His  followers  and  lovers  desire  for 
Him  no  other  diadem. 

Fourthly,  this  scene  teaches  the  lesson  of  patience 
in  suffering. 

1  remember  a  saint  whom  it  was  my  privilege  to 
visit  in  the-  beginning  of  my  life  as  a  minister. 
Though  poor  and  uneducated,  she  was  a  person  of 
very  unusual  natural  powers  ;  her  ideas  were  singu 
lar!}'  original,  and  she  had  a  charming  pleasantness 
of  wit.  Though  not  very  old,  she  knew  that  she  was 
doomed  to  die  ;  and  the  disease  from  which  she  was 
suffering  was  one  of  the  most  painful  incident  to 
humanity.  Often,  I  remember,  she  would  tell  me, 
that,  when  the  torture  was  at  the  worst,  she  lay 


thinking  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Saviour,  and  said 
to  herself  that  the  shooting  pains  were  not  so  bad 
as  the  spikes  of  the  thorns. 

Christ's  sufferings  are  a  rebuke  to  our  softness  and 
self-pleasing.  It  is  not,  indeed,  wrong  to  enjoy  the 
comforts  and  the  pleasures  of  life.  God  sends  these  ; 
and,  if  we  receive  them  with  gratitude,  they  may  lift 
us  nearer  to  Himself.  But  we  are  too  terrified  to  be 
parted  from  them  and  too  afraid  of  pain  and  poverty. 
Kspccially  ought  the  sufferings  of  Christ  to  brace  us 
up  to  endure-  whatever  of  pain  or  reproach  we  may 
have  to  encounter  for  His  sake.  Main'  would  like 
to  be  Christians,  but  are  kept  back  from  decision  by 
dread  of  the  laughter  of  profane  companions  or  by 
the  prospect  of  some  worldly  loss.  But  we  cannot 
look  at  the  suffering  Saviour  without  being  ashamed 
of  such  cowardly  fears.  If  the  crown  of  thorns  now 
becomes  Christ  so  well  as  to  be  the  pride  and  the 
song  of  men  and  angels,  be  assured  that  any  twig 
from  that  crown  which  we  may  have  to  wear  will  one 
day  turn  out  to  be  our  most  dazzling  ornament. 


w 


CIIAPTKR    VIII. 
TIIK   SHIP\VK1-:CK   01-    PILATE 

K  have  lingered  Ion--  at  the  judgment-seat  of 
Pilate.  Far  too  long.  Pilate  has  detained 
us.  lie  knew  perfectly  well,  the  first  glance  he 
bestowed  on  the  case,  what  it  was  his  duty  to  do. 
Hut,  instead  of  acting  at  once  on  his  conviction,  he 
put  off.  Of  such  delay  good  seldom  comes.  Pilate 
gave  temptation  time  to  assail  him.  He  resisted  it, 
indeed  ;  he  fought  hard  and  long  against  it  ;  but  he 
ought  never  to  have  given  it  the  chance.  And  he 
miscrablv  succumbed  in  the  end. 


When  Pilate  delivered  Jesus  over  to  be  scourged, 
it  looked  as  if  he  had  surrendered  Him  to  the  cross  ; 
anil  >o  in  all  probability  the  Jews  thought,  because 
scourging  was  the  usual  preliminary  to  crucifixion. 
He,  however,  had  not  yet  abandoned  the  hope  of 
saving  JC.MIS  :  he  was  still  secretly  adhering  to  the 
proposal  he  had  made,  to  chastise  Him  and  then  let 


THE  SHIPWRECK   or 

Him  go.  Perhaps,  if  he  retired  into  the  palace  \vhiir 
the  scourging  was  taking  place,  his  wife  may  have 
urged  him  to  make  a  further  effort  on  behalf  of  that 
Just  Man. 

At  all  events  he  came  out  on  the  platform,  round 
which  the  Jews  were  still  standing,  and  informed 
them  that  the  case  was  not  finished  ;  and,  as  Jesus, 
whose  scourging  was  now  over,  came  forward,  he 
turned  round  and,  pointing  to  Him,  exclaimed  with 
deep  emotion,  "  Behold  the  Man." 

It  was  an  involuntary  expression  of  commiseration,* 
an  appeal  to  the  Jews  to  recognise  the  unreasonable 
ness  of  proceeding  further  :  Jesus  was  so  obviously 
not  such  an  one  as  they  had  tried  to  make  Him  out 
to  be  :  at  all  events  He  had  suffered  enough. 

But  the  Christian  mind  has  in  all  ages  felt  in 
these  words  a  sense  deeper  than  Pilate  intended.  As 
Caiaphas  was  uttering  a  greater  truth  than  he  knew 
when  he  said  it  was  expedient  that  one  should  die 
for  the  whole  people,  so  in  uttering  this  exclamation 
the  governor  was  an  unconscious  prophet.  Preachers 

*  Perhaps  also  of  admiration.  Pilate  had  never  before  seen 
so  impressive  a  specimen  of  humanity  ;  and  the  contrast  between 
the  sweetness  and  majesty  of  His  appearance  and  the  indignities 
which  He  had  suffered  drew  from  him  this  involuntary  exclama 
tion.  One  recalls  Shakespeare's  words  about  Brutus  : 

"  His  life  was  fj<  ntl<\   and  th<-  rlcmcnts 
So  mixrd   in  him,  that  natun-  mijjht  stand  up 
And  say  to  all  th»*  world,  This  w.u>  a  Man!" 


loo      Till-:    TRIAL    AM)    DEATH   ()T  JliSi'.S   CllKIST 

in  every  subsequent  age  have  adopted  his  words  and, 
pointing  to  Jesus,  cried,  "  Behold  the  Man  !  "  Painters 
have  chosen  this  moment,  when  Jesus  came  forth, 
bleeding  from  the  cruel  stripes  and  wearing  the  purple 
robe  and  the  crown  of  thorns,  as  the  one  in  which 
to  portray  the  Man  of  Sorrows  ;  and  many  a  priceless 
canvas  bears  the  title  Eccc  Homo. 

From  Pilate's  lips  there  fell  two  words  which  the 
world  will  never  forget — the  question,  "  What  is 
truth?"  and  this  exclamation,  "  Behold  the  Man!" 
And  the  one  may  be  taken  as  the  answer  to  the  other. 
When  the  question,  "What  is  truth?"  is  put  with 
deep  earnestness,  what  does  it  mean  but  this  ? — Who 
will  make  God  known  to  us  ?  who  will  clear  up  the 
mystery  of  existence?  who  will  reveal  to  man  his 
own  destiny?  And  to  these  questions  is  there  any 
answer  but  this  :  "  Behold  the  Man  "?  lie  has  shown 
to  the  sons  of  men  what  the}'  ought  to  be  ;  His  is 
the  perfect  life,  after  which  ever}-  human  life  ought 
to  be  fashioned  ;  lie  has  opened  the  gates  of  immor 
tality  and  revealed  the  secrets  of  the  other  world. 
And,  what  is  far  more  important,  lie  has  not  only 
shown  us  what  our  life  here  and  hereafter  ought  to 
be,  but  how  the  ideal  ma}'  be  realised.  lie  is  not 
only  the  image  of  perfection  but  the  Saviour  from  sin. 
Therefore:  ought  the  world  to  turn  to  Him  and 
"behold  the  Man." 


THE  SHIPWRECK   or  r II. ATE  101 

II. 

Pilate  hoped  that  the  sight  of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus 
would  move  the  hard  hearts  of  His  persecutors,  as  it 
had  moved  his  own.  Hut  the  only  response  to  his 
appeal  was,  "Crucify  Him,  crucify  Him."  It  is  to  be 
noted,  however,  that  these  cruel  words  now  came 
from  "the  chief  priests  and  officers."  Apparently  the 
common  people  were  moved  :  they  might  have  yielded, 
if  their  superiors  had  allowed  them.  Hut  nothing 
could  move  those  hard  hearts;  indeed,  the  sight  of 
blood  only  inflamed  them  the  more  ;  and  they  felt 
certain  that  by  sheer  persistence  they  omld  break 
down  Pilate's  opposition. 

lie  was  at  his  wits'  end  and  replied  to  them  angrily, 
"Take  ye  Him  and  crucify  Him  ;  for  I  find  no  fault 
in  Him";  meaning  probably,  that  he  was  willing  to 
yield  the  Prisoner  up  to  their  will,  if  they  would  take 
the  responsibility  of  executing  Him;  if,  indeed,  In- 
had  in  his  mind  any  clear  meaning  and  was  not 
merely  uttering  an  exclamation  of  annoyance. 

They  perceived  that  the  critical  moment  had 
arrived,  and  at  last  they  let  out  the  true  reason  for 
which  they  desired  His  death  :  "  \Ve  have  a  law,  and 
by  our  law  I  le  ought  to  die,  because  I  le  made  I  limsclf 
the  Son  of  God  ?  " 

This  was  the  ground  on  which  they  had  condemned 
Him  themselves,  though  up  t<»  this  point  they  had 


102       Till:    TRIAL    AM)    DEATH   OF  JESl'S   CHRIST 

kept  it  concealed.  They  had  not  mentioned  it, 
because  they  thought  that  Pilate  would  jeer  at  it.  It 
had  on  him,  however,  a  very  different  effect.  All  the 
morning  he  had  been  feeling  uneasy  ;  and  the  more 
he  saw  of  Jesus  the  more  did  he  dislike  the  part  he 
was  playing.  But  now  at  length  the  mention  of  His 
claim  to  be  the  Son  of  God  caused  his  fears  to  take 
a  definite  and  alarming  shape.  It  revived  in  his  mind 
the  stories,  with  which  his  own  pagan  religion  was 
rife,  of  gods  or  sons  of  the  gods  who  had  sometimes 
appeared  on  earth  in  disguise.  It  was  dangerous 
to  have  to  do  with  them  ;  for  any  injury  inflicted  on 
them,  even  unconsciously,  might  be  terribly  avenged. 
He  had  discerned  in  Jesus  something  mysterious  and 
inexplicable:  what  if  He  were  the  son  of  Jehovah, 
the  native  deity  of  Palestine,  as  Castor  and  Pollux 
were  sons  of  Jupiter?  and  might  not  Jehovah,  if  He 
were  injured,  blast  the  man  who  wronged  Him  with 
a  curse  ?  Such  was  the  terror  that  flashed  through 

ir> 

his  mind  ;  and,  taking  Jesus  once  more  inside  the 
palace,  he  asked  Him,  with  a  mixture  of  awe  and 
curiosity,  "  Whence  art  Thou?" 

Jesus  gave  him  no  answer,  but  again  retired  into 
the  majestic  silence  which  at  three  points  already 
had  marked  His  trial.  In  the  whole  conduct  of  the 
Saviour  in  His  sufferings  there  is  nothing  more 
sublime  than  these  pauses  ;  but  it  is  not  easy  at  every 


mi:  sninriwcK  or  /•//..  r/v:  to;> 

point  to  gauge  the  state  of  mind  to  which  they  were 
due.  \\'hy  was  Jesus  silent  at  tin's  point?  Some 
have  said,  because  it  was  impossible  to  answer  the  ques 
tion.  He  could  not  have  said  either  Yes  or  No  ;  for, 
if  lie  had  said  that  God  was  His  Father,  Pilate  would 
have  understood  the  statement  in  a  grossly  pagan 
sense  ;  and  yet,  to  avoid  this,  I  le  could  not  say  that  1  le 
was  not  the  Son  of  God.  So  it  was  best  to  say  nothing. 

The  true  explanation,  however,  is  simpler.  Jesus 
would  say  nothing  about  whether  He  was  the  Son  of 
God  or  not,  because  He  did  not  wish  to  be  released  on 
this  ground.  Not  as  a  son  of  God,  but  as  an  innocent 
man,  which  Pilate  had  again  and  again  acknowledged 
Him  to  be,  was  He  entitled  to  be  set  free;  and  His 
silence  called  upon  Pilate  to  act  on  this  acknow- 
ledgmcnt. 

The  judge  was  more  than  ever  astonished  ;  and  hr 
was  irritated  a  little  at  being  thus  treated.  "  Speakcst 
Thou  not  unto  me?"  he  asked,  (lushing;  "knowcst 
Thou  not  that  I  have  power  to  crucify  Thee  and  have 
power  to  release  Thee?"  Poor  man!  it  was  to  be 
seen  before  man}'  minutes  had  pa-s>  d  how  much 
power  he  had.  And  what  was  this  power  of  which 
he  boasted  ?  1  le  spoke  as  if  he  had  arbitral"}'  discretion 
to  do  whatever  he  pleased.  No  just  judge  would  make 
such  a  claim  :  justice  takes  from  him  the  power  to 
follow  his  own  inclination  if  it  he  unjust.  It  was  of 


io4      THE    TRIAL   ,1.\D  DF.ATII   ()!•  JESl'S   CHKl^T 


this  Jesus  reminded  him  when  He  now  answered  with 
quiet  dignity,  "Thou  couldest  have  no  power  at  all 
against  Me,  unless  it  were  given  thee  from  above."* 
1  le  reminds  him  that  the  power  he  wields  is  delegated 
by  I  leaven,  and  therefore  not  to  be  used  according  to 
his  own  caprice,  but  according  to  the  dictates  of  justice. 
Vet  He  added,  "Therefore  he  that  delivered  Me  unto 
thee  hath  the  greater  sin."  lie  acknowledged  that 
Pilate  was  in  a  position  in  which  he  was  compelled  to 
try  the  case  :  he  hail  not  taken  it  up  at  his  own  hand, 
as  the  Jewish  authorities  had  done. 

Thus  Jesus  recognised  all  the  difficulties  of  His 
judge's  position  and  was  willing  to  make  for  him 
every  allowance.  This  was  I  le  whom  Pilate  had,  a 
few  minutes  before,  given  over  to  torture.  Was  there 
ever  such  sublime  and  unselfish  clemency?  Could 
there  have  been  a  more  complete  triumph  over 
resentment  and  irritation  ?  If  the  silence  of  Christ 
was  sublime-,  no  less  sublime,  when  lie  did  speak, 
were  1  I  is  words. 

III. 

Pilate  felt  the  greatness  and  the  magnanimity  of 
his  Prisoner,  and  came  forth  determined  at  all  hazards 
to  set  Him  free.  The  Jews  saw  it  in  his  face.  And 
at  length  they  brought  out  their  last  weapon,  which 

\Ye   arc    much  tempted   on   account   of    the    "  therefore  "    to 
explain  '•  iVoni  above"  as  relVrrin^  to  the  Jewish  tribunal. 


THE  SHIPWRECK   or  ril.ATE  105 

they  had  been  keeping  in  reserve  and  Pilate  had  been 
fearing  all  the  time  :  they  threatened  to  complain 
against  him  to  the  emperor  ;  for  this  was  the  meaning 
of  what  the}'  no\v  cried  :  "  If  thou  let  this  man  go, 
thon  art  not  Ca-sar's  friend  :  whosoever  maketh 
himself  a  king  speaketh  against  Ca-sar." 

There  was  nothing  which  a  Roman  provincial 
governor  so  much  dreaded  as  a  complaint  lodged 
against  him  at  Rome.  And  in  Pilate's  case  such  an 
accusation,  for  more  reasons  than  one,  would  have  been 
specially  perilous.  The  imperial  throne  was  occupied 
at  the  time  by  one  who  was  a  most  suspicious  master. 
Til".Tius  seemed  to  delight  in  humiliating  and  dis 
gracing  his  subordinates.  Besides,  at  this  very 
period  he  was  peculiarly  dangerous.  A  diseased 
body,  the  punishment  of  vices  long  indulged,  had 
made  his  mind  gloomy  and  savage  ;  in  fact,  he  was 
little  better  than  a  madman  —  morose,  suspicious  and 
malicious.  Nor  was  an}' charge  so  likely  to  inflame 
him  as  the  one  which  the}'  proposed  to  lay  against 
I'ilatc.  It  was  \vrll  known  at  Rome  that  the  hope  of 
a  Messiah  was  spread  throughout  the  Mast  ;  and  any 
provincial  governor  supposed  to  be  favouring  or  even 
conniving  at  tin:  claims  of  such  a  pretender  would 
certainly  be  recalled,  probably  exiled,  and  possibly 
executed.  Amiens  Cti'Sitr/'s,  "  Ca-sar's  friend,"  \\as 
one  of  the  most  coveted  titles  of  a  man  in  Pilate's 


iof,    Tin:  TRIM.  ./AY)  DEATH  o/' jrsrs  C//K/ST 

position  ;  and  to  be  accused  of  acting  as  no  friend  of 
Cajsar's  could  act  was  the  most  serious  of  all  dangers. 
But  there  was  something  else  which  lent  point  to 
the  threat  of  the  Jewish  authorities  :  Pilate  well  knew 
that  his  administration  could  not  bear  the  light  of  an 
investigation  such  as  would  inevitably  follow  a  com 
plaint  from  liis  subjects.  It  is  a  curious  tiling  that 
in  a  secular  writer  of  that  age  we  find  an  account  of 
another  occasion  on  which  this  same  threat  was  held 
over  Pilate  ;  and  the  writer  who  mentions  it  adds  : 
"lie  was  afraid  that  if  a  Jewish  embassy  were  sent 
to  Rome,  they  might  discuss  the  many  maladministra 
tions  of  his  government,  his  extortions,  his  unjust 
d'.-crecs,  his  inhuman  punishments."*  Such  had  been 
the  character  of  Pilate's  past  life  ;  and  now,  when  he 
was  going  to  do  a  humane  and  righteous  act,  it  stayed 
his  hand.  There  is  nothing  which  so  frustrates  good 
resolutions  and  paralyzes  noble  efforts  as  the  dead 
weight  of  past  sins.  Those-  who  are  acquainted  with 
secret  and  discreditable  chapters  of  a  man's  history 
are  able,  wielding  this  knowledge  over  his  head,  to 
say,  Thou  shalt  not  do  this  good  act  which  thou 
\vishest  to  do,  or,  Thou  shalt  do  this  evil  and 
shameful  thing  which  we  bid  thce.  There  are 
companies  in  which  men  cannot  utter  the  fine,  high- 


THE  SHIPWRECK    ()/•    PILATE  107 

sounding  things  they  would  say  elsewhere,  because 
there  arc  present  those  who  know  how  their  lives 
have  contradicted  them.  What  is  it  that  mocks  the 
generous  thought  rising  in  our  minds,  that  silences 
the  noble  word  on  our  lips,  that  paralyzes  the  forming 
energy  of  our  actions  ?  Is  it  not  the  internal  whisper, 
Remember  how  you  have  failed  before  ?  This  is  the 
curse  of  past  sin  :  it  will  not  let  us  do  the  good  we 
would. 

But,  if  a  man  has  thus  committed  himself  by  an 
evil  past,  what  is  he  to  do?  What  ought  Pilate  to 
have  done?  There  is  only  one  course.  It  is  to 
summon  together  the  resources  of  his  manhood,  defy 
consequences,  and  do  the  right  forthwith,  come  what 
may.  One  step  taken  in  loyalty  to  conscience,  one- 
word  of  confession  spoken,  and  in  a  moment  the 
power  of  the  tyranny  is  broken,  and  the  spellbound 
man  is  free  to  issue  forth  from  the  inglorious  prison 
of  the  past. 

Alas,  Pilate  was  not  equal  to  any  such  effort.  For 
the  sake  of  righteousness,  for  the  sake  of  this  im 
pressive  and  innocent  but  obscure  and  friendless 
Galilean,  to  face  a  complaint  at  Rome  and  run  tin- 
risk  of  exile  and  poverty  the  man  of  the  world's 
philosophy  could  not  ri>e  to  any  Mich  height.  He 
belonged  to  the  world,  whose  fashion  and  favour, 
pleasures  and  comforts  were  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  ; 


loS      THE    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH  OF  JESTS    CHRIST 

and,  when  lie  heard  the   menace  of  his  subjects,  lie 
surrendered   at  discretion. 

Thus  Jewish  passion  and  persistency  triumphed. 
Pilate  resisted,  but  he  was  forced  to  yield  inch  by 
inch.  lie  wished  to  do  ri^ht  ;  he  felt  the  spell  of 
Jesus  ;  and  it  irritated  him  to  have  to  ;j;o  against  his 
conscience,  but  his  subjects  compelled  him  to  obey 
their  wicked  will.  Yet  the  true  reason  of  his  failure 
was  in  himself --in  the  shallowncss  and  worldlincss 
of  his  own  character,  which  this  occasion  laid  bare  to 
the  very  foundations.* 

IV. 

There  was  little  more  to  do.  The  mind  of  Pilate 
was  very  savage  and  his  heart  very  sore.  I  le  had 
been  beaten  and  humiliated  ;  and  he  would  gladly 
inflict  some  humiliation  on  his  opponents,  if  he  could 
find  a  way.  lie  ascended  the  judgment-seat,  "in  a 

*  It  is  a  striking  illustration  of  the  irony  of  history  that  Pilate 
was  overtaken  by  tin-  very  fate  to  escape  which  he  abandoned 
Jesus.  Soon  after  the  Crucifixion  his  subjects  lodged  a  complaint 
against  him  at  Rome.  lie  was  recalled  from  his  province  and 
never  returned.  Ultimately,  it  is  said,  he  terminated  his  existence 
with  his  own  hand,  "  wearied  out  with  miseries."  Many  legends 
in  subsequent  centuries  clustered  about  his  name.  Several 
spots  were  supposed  to  be  haunted  by  his  restless  and  despairing 
spirit,  notably  a  spring  in  Switzerland  on  the  top  of  Mount 
1'ilatus,  which  was  thought  to  have  derived  its  name  from  him  ; 
lint  this  is  more  than  doubtful. 


THE  s////'ii'/\'/-:cK  or  I'll.. lit-:  109 

place  that  is  called  the  Pavement,  hut  in  the  Hebrew 
Gabbatha" — an  act  similar  in  significance,  I  suppose, 
with  our  judges'  habit,  before  pronouncing  a  death 
sentence,  of  putting  on  the  black  cap.  Pointing  to 
Jesus,  he  exclaimed,  "Behold  your  King!"  It  was 
as  much  as  to  say  that  he  believed  this  really  to  be 
their  Messiah — this  poor,  bleeding,  mishandled  Man. 
He  was  trying  to  cut  them  with  a  taunt.  And  he 
succeeded  :  smarting  with  pain  the}'  shouted,  "  Away 
with  I  lim  !  away  with  Him  !  crucify  Him  !  "  "  What," 
lie  proceeded,  "shall  I  crucify  your  King?"  And, 
borne  away  with  fur}',  they  responded,  "  We  have  no 
king  but  C.'L-sar."  What  a  word  to  come  from  the 
representatives  of  a  nation  to  which  pertained  "the 
adoption  and  the  glory  and  the  covenants  and  the 
giving  of  the  law  and  the  service  of  God  and  the 
promises!"  It  was  the  renouncement  of  their  birth 
right,  the  abandonment  of  their  destiny.  Pilate  well 
knew  what  it  had  cost  their  proud  hearts  thus  to 
forswear  the  hopes  of  their  fathers  and  acknowledge 
the  right  of  their  conqueror  ;  but  to  compel  them  to 
swallow  this  bitter  draught  was  some  compensation 
for  the  cup  of  humiliation  they  had  compelled  him 
to  drink.  And  he  took  them  at  their  word. 


CHAPTER    IX. 
JUDAS     I  S  C  A  K  I  O  T 

'  I  ^O  the  civil  trial  of  our  Lord  there  is  a  sad 
^  appendix,  as  \ve  have  already  had  one  to  the 
ecclesiastical  trial.  Christ's  great  confession  in  the 
palace  of  the  high  priest  was  accompanied  by 
the  great  denial  of  Peter  outside  ;  and  the  proceed 
ings  in  the  court  of  Pontius  Pilate  were  accompanied 
by  the  final  act  of  the  treachery  of  Judas.  Only  in 
the  latter  case  \ve  arc  not  able  with  the  same  accuracy 
to  fix  the  circumstances  of  time  and  place. 

I. 

Judas  is  one  of  the  darkest  riddles  of  human  history. 
In  the  Vision  of  Hell  the  poet  Dante,  after  traversing 
the  circles  of  the  universe  of  woe,  in  which  each 
separate  kind  of  wickedness  receives  its  peculiar 
punishment,  arrives  at  last,  in  the  company  of  his 
guide,  at  the  nethermost  circle  of  all,  in  the  very 
bottom  of  the  pit,  where  the  worst  of  all  sinners  and 
the  basest  of  all  sins  are  undergoing  retribution.  It 
is  a  lake  not  of  fire  but  of  ice,  beneath  whose  trans- 

1 10 


parent  surface  are  visible,  fixed  in  painful  postures, 
the  figures  of  those  who  have  betrayed  their  bene 
factors  ;  because  this,  in  Dante's  estimation,  is  the 
worst  of  sins.  In  the  midst  of  them  stands  out,  vast 
and  hideous,  "  the  emperor  who  sways  the  realm  of 
woe" — Satan  himself;  for  this  was  the  crime  which 
lost  him  Paradise.  .And  the  next  most  conspicuous 
figure  is  Judas  Iscariot.  He  is  in  the  mouth  of  Satan, 
being  champed  and  torn  by  his  teeth  as  in  a  ponderous 
engine. 

Such  was  the  mediaeval  view  of  this  man  and 
his  crime.  But  in  modern  times  opinion  has 
swung  round  to  the  opposite  extreme.  Ours  is  an 
age  of  toleration,  and  one  of  its  favourite  occupations 
is  the  rehabilitation  of  evil  reputations.  Men  and 
women  who  have  stood  for  centuries  in  the  pillory 
of  history  are  being  taken  down  ;  their  cases  arc 
re-tried  ;  and  they  arc  set  up  on  pedestals  of  admira 
tion.  Sometimes  this  is  done  with  justice,  but  in 
other  cases  it  has  been  carried  to  absurdity.  Nobody, 
it  would  appear,  has  ever  been  very  bad  ;  the  criminals 
and  scoundrels  have  been  men  whose  motives  have 
been  misunderstood.  Among  those  on  whose  behalf 
the  attempt  has  thus  been  made  to  reverse  the  verdict 
of  history  is  Judas  Iscariot.  Kighteen  centuries  had 
agreed  to  regard  him  as  the  meanest  of  mankind,  but 
in  our  century  he  has  been  transmuted  into  a  kind 


112      /'//A'    TRIAL    AM)    Di.AIll   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

of  hero.  The  theory  is  of  German  origin  ;  but  it  \v;is 
presented  to  the  English  public  by  DC  Ouinccy,  who 
adorned  it  with  all  the  persuasiveness  of  his  mere 
tricious  genius. 

It  is  held  that  the  motive  of  Judas  was  totally 
different  from  the  one  hitherto  supposed:  it  was  not 
filthy  lucre.  The  smallness  of  the  price  for  which  he 
sold  his  Master — it  was  less  than  four  pounds  of  our 
money,  though  the  value  of  this  sum  was  much  greater 
then — proves  that  there  must  have  been  another 
motive.  The  traditional  conception  is  inconsistent 
with  Christ's  choice  of  him  to  be  a  disciple  ;  and  it  is 
irreconcilable  with  the  tragic  greatness  of  his  repent 
ance.  His  view  of  Christ's  enterprise  was  no  doubt 
of  a  material  cast  :  he  expected  Christ  to  be  a  king,  and 
hoped  to  hold  a  high  place  in  1 1  is  court :  but  these  ideas 
were  common  to  all  the  disciples,  who  to  the  very  end 
were  waiting  to  see  their  Master  throw  off  the  cloak 
of  His  humble  condition  and  take  to  Himself  His 
great  power  and  reign  ;  only  they  left  the  time  and 
the  means  in  their  Master's  hands,  not  venturing 
to  criticise  His  proceedings.  Judas  was  not  so 
patient.  He  was  a  man  of  energy  and  practicality, 
and  he  allowed  himself  to  believe  that  he  had  discerned 
a  defect  in  the  character  of  his  Master.  Jesus  was 
too  spiritual  and  unworldly  for  the  enterprise  on 
which  he  had  embarked — too  much  occupied  with 


JUD.-1S  ISC  A  RIOT  113 

healing,  preaching  and  speculating.  These  would 
be  well  enough  when  once  the  kingdom  was  esta 
blished  ;  but  He  was  losing  His  opportunities.  His 
delay  had  turned  against  Him  the  authoritative 
classes.  One  vast  force,  indeed,  was  still  on  His 
side — the  enthusiasm  of  the  populace — but  even  of 
it  He  was  not  taking  advantage.  \Yhcn,  on  Palm 
Sunday,  He  was  borne  into  the  capital  by  a  crowd 
throbbing  with  Messianic  expectation,  He  seemed 
to  have  in  His  hand  what  Judas  supposed  to  be  tin- 
object  of  His  life;  but  He  did  nothing,  and  the 
crowd  dispersed,  disappointed  and  disheartened. 
What  Jesus  required  was  to  be  precipitated  into  a 
situation  where  He  would  be  compelled  to  act.  He- 
lacked  energy  and  decision  ;  but,  if  He  were  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  the  authorities,  who  were  known 
to  be  seeking  His  life,  He  could  hesitate  no  longer. 
When  they  laid  hands  on  Him,  IK-  would  of  course 
liberate  Himself  from  them,  and  His  miraculous 
j)ower  would  exhibit  itself  in  forms  so  irresistible 
as  to  awaken  universal  enthusiasm.  Thus  would  His 
kingdom  be  set  up  in  magnificence  ;  and  the  man 
whom  the  king  would  delight  to  honour  would  Miivly 
be  the  humble  follower  by  whose  shrewdness  and 
audacity  the  crisis  had  been  brought  about. 


ii4     '/'///•:  TRIAL  AXD  i)i:.i'in  or  jr.sus  CHRIST 


II. 

Even  if  this  were  the  true  history  of  Judas,  his 
conduct  would  not,  perhaps,  be  as  innocent  as  it 
looks.  In  the  course  of  His  life  our  Lord  had  fre 
quently  to  deal  with  persons  who  attempted,  from 
what  appeared  to  themselves  to  be  good  motives,  to 
interfere  with  His  plans  to  precipitate  Him  into 
action  before  His  time  ur  tu  restrain  Him  when  His 
time  had  come -and  He  always  resented  such  inter 
ference  with  indignation.  Kvcn  His  own  mother  was 
not  spared  when  she  played  this  part.  To  do  God's 
will  exactly,  neither  more  nor  less,  neither  antici 
pating  it  nor  lagging  behind  it,  was  the  innermost 
principle  of  the  life  of  Jesus;  and  He  treated  any 
interference  with  it  as  a  suggestion  of  the  Evil 
One. 

Still  the  theory  will  not  hold  water.  The  Scrip 
tures  know  nothing  of  it,  and  it  is  inconsistent  with 
the  tone  of  moral  repulsion  in  which  they  speak  of 
Judas.  Besides,  they  assign  a  totally  different  motive. 
They  affirm  that  Judas  was  a  thief  and  stole  out  of 
the  bag  from  which  Jesus  gave  to  the  poor  and 
supplied  His  own  wants— a  sacrilege  which  most 
thieves  would  have  scorned.  It  is  in  entire  ac 
cordance  with  this  that  the  word  with  which  he 
approached  the  Sanhedrim  was,  "  How  much  will 


yc  give  me?"  That  he  was  willing  to  accept  so 
little  proves  ho\v  strong  his  passion  was. 

It  is  altogether  impossible  that  a  character  of  this 
kind  can  have  been  combined  with  the  generous 
although  mistaken  enthusiasm  which  the  theory 
attributes  to  him.*  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
passion  of  avarice  may  easily  have  been  nourished 
by  brooding  with  disappointment  on  Messianic 
visions;  and  the  theory  of  1  )e  Ouincey  may  supply 
important  hints  for  unravelling  the  mystery  of  his 
career. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  at  one  time  the  life 
of  Judas  seemed  full  of  promise.  Jesus,  who  was  so 
strict  about  permitting  any  to  follow  Him,  would  not 
have  chosen  him  into  the  apostolic  circle  unless  he 
had  exhibited  enthusiasm  for  His  person  and  His 
cause.  He  well  knew,  indeed,  that  in  his  motive's 
there  was  a  selfish  alloy  ;  but  this  was  the  case  with 
all  His  followers;  and  fellowship  with  Himself  was 
the  fire  in  which  the  alloy  was  to  be  purged  out. 

In  the  other  apostles  this  process  actually  took 
place:  they  were  refined  by  fellowship  with  Him. 
Their  worldliness,  indeed,  remained  to  the  end  of  His 
earthly  career,  but  it  was  growing  less  and  less  ;  and 

*  Hannn,  in  The  Last  Day  of  our  Lord's  J'asswn.  attempts  to 
Combine  both  motives,  but  \vithont  beinij  able  rc-.illy  to  unite 
ili'Mn  ;  they  remain  as  distinct  as  oil  and  water. 


Ii6      THE    TRIAL   A\D   DEATH   OF  JESTS    CHRIST 

other  tics,  stronger  than  their  hopes  of  earthly  glory, 
\vcrc  slowly  but  surely  binding  them  indissolubly  to 
His  cause.  In  Judas,  on  the  contrary,  the  reverse 
process  took  place  :  what  was  <^ood  in  him  grew  less 
and  less,  and  at  last  the  sole  bond  which  held  him  to 
Christ  was  what  he  could  make  out  of  the  connection. 

When  the  suspicion  first  dawned  on  him  that  the 
hope  of  a  Messianic  kingdom  was  not  to  be  fulfilled, 
the  inner  man  of  Judas  underwent  a  critical  change. 
Tin's  happened  a  year  before  the  end,  on  the  occasion 
when  Christ  resisted  the  attempt  of  His  followers  to 
take  Him  by  force  and  make  Him  a  king,  and  when 
man\-  of  His  disciples  went  back  and  walked  no  more 
with  Him.  At  that  time  Jesus  warned  Judas  against 
the  evil  spirit  which  he  was  allowing  to  take  posses 
sion  of  his  mind  by  the  strong  saying,  "  Have  1  not 
chosen  you  twelve  ?  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil."  But 
the  disciple  did  not  heed  the  warning.  Perhaps  it 
was  at  this  stage  that  he  commenced  to  steal  from 
the  bai;  which  he  carried.  He  felt  that  he  must  have 
.some  tangible  reward  for  following  Christ,  and  he 
justified  his  peculation  by  saying  to  himself  that 
what  he  was  taking  was  infinitely  less  than  he  had 
been  led  to  expect.  He  regarded  himself  as  an 
ill-used  man. 

l"nder  the  practice  of  this  secret  sin  his  character 
could  not  but  rapidly  deteriorate.  Jesus  dropped  a 


117 


word  of  warning  now  and  then  ;  hut  it  had  the 
reverse  of  the  desired  effect.  Judas  knew  that  Jesus* 
knew  ;  and  he  grew  to  hate  Him.  This  was  by  far 
the  worst  aspect  of  the  ease.  The  other  disciples 
were  becoming  more  and  more  attached  to  their 
Master,  because  they  felt  increasingly  how  much  they 
owed  Him  ;  but  Judas  did  not  feel  that  he  owed  Him 
anything  :  on  the  contrary,  his  feeling  was  that  he 
had  been  betrayed.  Why  should  he  not  betray  in 
turn  ?  There  may  even  have  been  an  clement  of 
scorn  in  selling  Christ  for  so  little. 

More  than  one  of  the  Kvangelists  seem  to  connect 
the  treachery  of  Judas  directly  with  the  scene  at 
Bethany  in  which  Mary  anointed  Jesus  with  costly 
ointment.  Apparently  this  beautiful  act  brought  all 
the  evil  in  his  heart  to  such  a  head  that  an  outbreak 
could  no  longer  be  deferred.  II  is  spite  found  vent  in 
the  angry  contention  that  the  money  ought  to  have 
been  given  to  the  poor.  It  was  a  large  sum,  off 
which  he  could  have  taken  an  unusually  large  slice  of 
boot}'.  But  probably  there'  was  more  in  the  occasion 
to  incense  Judas.  To  him  this  feasting  and  anointing, 
at  the  moment  when  the  crisis  of  Christ's  fortunes 
had  obviously  come,  appeared  sheer  folly  ;  as  a 
practical  man  he  despised  it.  It  was  manifest  that 
the  game  was  up  ;  a  leader  loitering  and  dreaming  in 
this  fashion  at  the  crisis  of  his  fate  was  doomed.  It 


US       Till-:    TRIAL    A\D   DEATH   OF  J1WS   CHRIST 

was  time  to  get  out  of  the  ship,  for  it  was  clearly 
sinking  ;  but  he  would  do  so  in  such  a  way  as  to 
gratify  his  resentment,  his  scorn  and  his  love  of 
money  all  at  once. 

Thus  the  master-passion  of  Judas  was  nourished 
from  potent  springs.  Hut,  indeed,  avarice  in  itself  is 
one  of  the  most  powerful  of  motives.  In  the  teaching 
of  the  pulpit  it  may  seldom  be  noticed,  but  both  in 
Scripture  and  in  history  it  occupies  a  prominent 
place.  It  is  questionable  if  anything  else  makes  so 
man\'  ill  deeds  to  be  done.  Avarice  breaks  all  the 
commandments.  Often  has  it  put  the  weapon  into 
the  hand  of  the  murderer  ;  in  most  countries  of  the 
world  it  has  in  every  age  made  the  ordinary  business 
of  the  market-place  a  warfare  of  falsehood  ;  the 
bodies  of  men  and  the  hearts  of  women  have  been 
sold  for  gold.  \Vhy  is  it  that  gigantic  wrongs 
flourish  from  age  to  age,  and  practices  utterly  in 
defensible  are  continued  with  the  overwhelming 
sanction  of  society?  It  is  because  there  is  money 
in  them.  .Avarice  is  a  passion  of  demonic  strength  ; 
but  it  ma}-  help  us  to  keep  it  out  of  our  hearts  to 
remember  that  it  was  the  sin  of  Judas. 

III. 

The  repentance  of  Judas  is  alleged  as  the  sign  of 
a  superior  spirit.  Certainly  it  is  an  indication  of  the 


yr/X/.S    FSCARIOT  119 

goodness  which  he  once  possessed,  because  it  is  only 
by  the  light  of  a  spark  of  goodness  tliat  the  darkness 
of  sin  can  be  perceived  ;  and  the  more  the  conscience 
lias  been  enlightened  the  severer  is  the  reaction  when 
it  is  outraged.  Those  who  have  in  any  degree 
shared  the  company  of  Christ  can  never  afterwards 
be  as  if  they  had  not  enjoyed  this  privilege  ;  and 
religion,  if  it  docs  not  save,  will  be  the  cruellest 
clement  in  the  soul's  perdition. 

It  is  not  certain  at  what  point  the  reaction  in  the 
mind  of  Judas  set  in.*  There  were  man}*  incidents 
of  the  trial  well  calculated  to  awaken  in  him  a  revul 
sion  of  feeling.  At  length,  however,  the  retributive 
powers  of  conscience  were  thoroughly  aroused — those 
powers  which  in  all  literature  have  formed  the  theme 
of  the  deepest  tragedy  ;  which  in  the  Bible  are  typi 
fied  by  Cain,  escaping  as  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond 
from  the  cry  of  his  brother's  blood  ;  which  in  (iivek 
literature  are  shadowed  forth  by  the-  terrible  figures  of 
the  Kumcnidcs,  with  gorgon  faces  and  blood-dropping 
eyes,  following  silently  but  remorselessly  those  upon 
whose  track  the}'  have  been  set  ;  and  which  in 
Shakspcare  are  represented  in  the  soul-curdling 

*  II,  as  St.  Matthew  seems  to  indit  -ate,  Jii'l.is  disappeared 
fiom  the  scene  long  before  the  end  of  the  trial,  this  is  strongly 
against  the  theory  of  I)e,  (Juinrey,  according  to  which  he  must 
have  stayed  to  the  last  moment,  hoping  to  sec  Jesus  assrrt 
Himself. 


120       '/•///•;    TRIAL   AM)   DEATH    or  JLSi'S    CHRIST 


scenes  of  Macbeth  and  RicJi^ni  ///.  He  was  seized 
with  an  uncontrollable  desire  to  undo  what  he  had 
done.  The  money,  on  which  his  heart  had  been  set, 
was  now  like  a  spectre  to  his  excited  fancy.  Every 
coin  seemed  to  be  an  eye  through  which  eternal 
justice  was  gazing  at  his  crime  or  to  have  a  tongue 
crying  out  for  vengeance.  As  the  murderer  is  irresis 
tibly  drawn  back  to  the  spot  where  his  victim  lies,  he 
returned  to  the  place  where  his  deed  of  treachery  had 
been  transacted  and,  confronting  those  by  whom  lie 
had  been  employed,  handed  back  the  money  with 
the  passionate  confession,  "  I  have  betrayed  innocent 
blood."  But  he  had  come  to  miserable  comforters. 
With  cynical  disdain  they  asked,  "  What  is  that  to 
us  ?  Sec  them  to  that."  They  had  been  cordial 
enough  to  him  when  lie  had  come  before,  but  now, 
after  the  instrument  has  served  their  turn,  they  fling 
it  contemptuously  aside.  The  miserable  man  had  to 
turn  away  from  the  scorn  of  the  partners  of  his  guilt  ; 
but  he  could  keep  the  money  no  longer  it  was 
burning  in  his  hands  -and,  before  escaping  from  the 
precincts,  he  flung  it  down.  This  is  said  to  have 
happened  in  that  part  of  the  temple  which  could  be 
entered  only  by  the  priests  ;  *  and  he  must  either 
have  made  a  rush  across  the  forbidden  threshold  or 
availed  himself  of  an  open  door  to  fling  it  in.  Not 

lM>   TO)    J'((CO. 


Jl'D.lS  ISCAK1OT  \2i 

only  did  he  desire  to  be  rid  of  it,  but  a  passionate 
impulse  urged  him  to  leave  with  the  priests  their 
own  share  of  the  guilt. 

Then  he  rushed  away  from  the  temple.  Hut 
where  was  he  going  ?  ( )h  that  it  had  been  in  him 
to  flee  to  Christ— that,  breaking  through  all  obstacles 
and  rules,  he  had  rushed  to  Him  wherever  He  was  to 
be  found  and  cast  himself  at  His  fiet  !  What  if  the 
soldiers  had  cut  him  down  ?  Then  he  would  have 
been  the  martyr  of  penitence,  and  that  very  day  lie 
would  have  been  with  Christ  in  Paradise.  Judas 
repented  of  his  sin  ;  he  confessed  it  ;  he  cast  from 
him  the  reward  of  iniquity  ;  but  his  penitence  lacked 
the  element  which  is  most  essential  of  all — he  did  not 
turn  to  (lod.  True  repentance  is  not  the  mere-  horror 
and  excitement  of  a  terrified  conscience  :  it  is  tin- 
call  of  God  ;  it  is  letting  go  the  evil  because,  the  good 
has  prevailed  ;  it  includes  faith  as  well  as  fear. 

IV. 

The  manner  of  his  end  is  also  used  as  an  argument 
in  favour  of  the  more  honourable  view  of  Judas.  Tin- 
act  of  suicide  is  one  which  has  not  infrequently  been 
invested  with  a  glamour  of  romance,  and  to  go  out 
of  life  the  Roman  way,  as  it  is  called,  has  been  con 
sidered,  even  by  Christians,  an  evidence  of  unusual 
strength  of  mind.  The  very  reverse  i^,  however,  the 


122       Till:    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH   OF  JKSUS   CHRIST 

true  character  of  suicide  :  except  in  those  melancholy 
cases  where  the  reason  is  impaired,  it  must  be  pro 
nounced  the  most  contemptible  act  of  which  a  human 
being  is  capable.  It  is  an  escape  from  the  burdens 
and  responsibilities  of  existence  ;  but  these  burdens 
and  responsibilities  are  left  to  be  borne  by  others,  and 
along  with  them  is  left  an  intolerable  heritage  of 
shame.  From  a  religious  point  of  view  it  appears 
in  a  still  worse  light.  Not  only  does  the  suicide,  as 
even  heathen  writers  have  argued,  desert  the  post 
of  duty  where  Providence  has  placed  him,  but  he 
virtually  denies  the  character  and  even  the  exis 
tence  of  God.  lie  denies  His  character,  for,  if  he 
believed  in  His  mercy  and  love,  he  would  flee  to 
instead  of  from  Him;  and  he  denies  His  existence, 
for  no  one  who  believed  that  he  was  to  meet  God 
on  the  other  side  of  the  veil  would  dare  in  this  dis 
orderly  way  to  rush  into  His  presence. 

'1  he  mode  of  Judas'  suicide  was  characteristically 
base.  Hanging  docs  not  appear  to  have  been  at  all 
usual  among  the  Jews.  In  the  entire  Old  Testament 
there  is  said  to  occur  only  a  single  case  ;  and,  strange 
to  sny,  it  is  that  of  the  man  who,  in  the  principal 
art  of  his  life  also,  was  the  prototype  of  Judas. 
Ahithophcl,  the  counsellor  and  friend  of  David, 
betrayed  his  master,  as  Judas  betrayed  Christ ;  and 
he  came-  to  the  same  ignominious  end. 


jrn.is  isc.  -i  RIOT  \2$ 

It  would  seem,  further,  that  the  hanging  of  Judas 
was  accompanied  with  circumstances  of  unusual  horror. 
This  we  gather  from  the  account  in  the  beginning  of 
Acts.*  The  terms  employed  are  obscure  ;  but  they 
probably  signify  that  the  suicidal  act  was  attended 
by  a  clum.sy  accident,  in  consequence  of  which  the 
body,  being  suspended  over  a  precipice  and  suddenly 
dropped  by  the  snapping  of  the  rope,  was  mangled 
in  a  shocking  manner,  which  made  a  profound 
impression  on  all  who  heard  of  it.t 

.And  this  sense  of  his  end  being  accursed  was 
further  accentuated  in  the-  minds  of  the  earl}'  Chris 
tians  by  the  circumstance  that  the  money  for  which 
he  had  sold  Christ  was  eventually  used  for  the  purchase 
of  a  graveyard  for  burying  strangers  in.  The  priests, 
though  the}'  picked  up  the  coins  from  the  floor  over 
which  Judas  had  strewn  them,  did  not,  scrupulous 
men,  consider  them  good  enough  to  be-  put  in  the 
sacred  treasury;  so  the}'  applied  them  to  this  purpose. 
The  public  wit,  hearing  of  it,  dubbed  the  place  the 
Field  of  Blood  ;  and  thus  the  cemetery  became  a 
kind  of  monument  to  the  traitor,  of  which  he  took 


'  St.  Matthew  knows  best  tin-  Ix^inninfr,  s*  I-"k<-  tin-  end 
of  tin;  story. 

+  DC  (Jtiitirey's  interpretation  of  the  words  as  a  description 
of  mental  anguish  must  be  felt  by  every  reader  of  tli«:  brilliant 
essay  to  be  forced  and  unnatural. 


124       Till-:    TRIAL   AM)   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

possession  as  the  first  of  the  outcasts  for  whom  it  was 
designed. 

The  world  has  agreed  to  regard  Judas  as  the  chief 
of  sinners  ;  but,  in  so  judging,  it  has  exceeded  its 
prerogative.  Man  is  not  competent  to  judge  his 
brother.  The  master-passion  of  Judas  was  a  base- 
one;  Dante  may  be  right  in  considering  treachery 
the  worst  ot  crimes  ;  and  the  supreme  excellence  of 
Christ  affixes  an  unparalleled  stigma  to  the  injury 
inflicted  on  Him.  But  the  motives  of  action  arc  too 
hidden,  and  the  history  of  every  deed  is  too  com 
plicated,  to  justify  us  in  saying  who  is  the  worst  of 
men.  It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  those  whom  human 
opinion  would  rank  highest  in  merit  or  saintliness 
will  be  assigned  the  same  positions  in  the  rewards 
of  the  last  day  ;  and  it  is  just  as  unlikely  that 
human  estimates  are  right  when  they  venture  to 
assign  the  degrees  of  final  condemnation.  Two 
things  it  is  our  duty  to  do  in  regard  to  Judas  : 
first,  not  so  to  palliate  his  sin  as  to  blunt  the  healthy, 
natural  abhorrence  of  it  ;  and,  secondly,  not  to  think 
of  him  as  a  sinner  apart  and  alone,  with  a  nature 
so  different  from  our  own  that  to  us  lie  can  be  no 
example.  But  for  the  rest,  there  is  only  one  verdict 
which  is  at  once  righteous,  dignified  and  safe  ;  and  it 
is  contained  in  the  declaration  of  St.  Peter,  that  he 
"  went  to  his  own  place." 


CHAPTER    X. 

VIA      IHJLOIUKSA 

\  \  TV.  have  finished  the  first  part  of  our  theme— 
*  *  the  Trial  of  Jesus  —and  turn  no\v  to  the  second 
and  more  solemn  part  of  it — His  Death.  The  trial 
had  been  little  better  than  a  mockery  of  justice  :  on 
the  part  of  the  ecclesiastical  authority  it  \vas  a  foregone 
conclusion,  and  on  the  part  of  the  civil  authority 
it  was  the  surrender  of  a  life  acknowledged  to  be 
innocent  to  the  ends  (A  selfishness  and  policy.  IUit 
at  last  it  was  over,  and  nothing  remained  but  to 
carry  the  unjust  sentence  into  execution.  So  the 
tribunal  of  Pilate  was  closed  for  the  day  ;  the  precincts 
of  the  palace  were  deserted  by  the  multitude  ;  and 
the  procession  of  death  was  formed. 

I. 

Persons  condemned  to  death  in  modern  times  are 
allowed  a  few  weeks,  or  at  least  days,  to  prepare  for 
eternity;  but  Jesus  was  crucified  I  he  same  day  on 
which  He  was  condemned.  There  was  a  merciiul 


126       THE    TRIAL    A.\D    DEATH   OF  JFSl'S   CHRIST 

law  of  Rome  in  existence  at  the  lime,  ordaining  that 
ten  days  should  intervene  between  the  passing  of 
a  capital  sentence  and  its  execution  ;  but  cither  this 
\vas  not  intended  for  use  in  the  provinces  or  Jesus 
was  judged  to  be  outside  the  scope  of  its  mercy, 
because  He  had  made  Himself  a  king.  At  all  events 
lie  was  hurried  straight  from  the  judgment-scat  to  the 
place  of  execution,  without  opportunity  for  preparation 
or  farewells. 

Of  course  the  sentence  was  carried  out  by  the 
soldiers  of  Pilate.  St.  John,  indeed,  speaks  as  if 
IMlatc  had  simply  surrendered  Him  into  the  hands 
of  the  Jews,  and  they  had  seen  to  the  execution. 
But  this  only  means  that  the  moral  responsibility 
was  theirs.  The}'  did  everything  in  their  power  to 
identify  themselves  with  the  deed.  So  intent  were 
they  on  the  death  of  Jesus,  that  they  could  not  leave 
the  work  to  the  proper  parties,  but  followed  the 
executioners  and  superintended  their  operations.  The 
actual  work,  however,  was  performed  by  the  hands  of 
Roman  soldiers  with  a  centurion  at  their  head. 

In  this  country  executions  arc  now  carried  out  in 
private,  inside  the  walls  of  the  prison -in  which  the 
criminal  has  been  confined.  Not  many  years  ago, 
however,  they  took  place  in  public  ;  and  not  many 
generations  ago  the  procession  of  death  made  a  tour 
of  the  public  streets,  that  the  condemned  man  might 


VIA    1)01.0 ROSA  u; 

come  under  the  observation  and  maledictions  of  as 
many  of  the  public  as  possible.  This  also  was  the 
manner  of  Christ's  death.  Both  among  the  Jews  and 
the  Romans  executions  took  place  outside  the  gate 
of  the  city.  The  traditional  scene  of  Christ's  death, 
over  which  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  is  built, 
is  inside  the  present  walls,  but  those  who  believe  in 
its  authenticity  maintain  that  it  was  outside  the  uall 
of  that  date.  This,  however,  is  extremely  doubtful  ; 
and,  indeed,  it  is  quite  uncertain  outside  which  gate 
of  the  city  the  execution  took  place.  The  name 
Calvary  or  Golgotha  probably  indicates  that  the  spot 
was  a  skull-like  knoll  ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  think 
that  it  was  a  hill  of  the  si/e  supposed  by  designating 
it  Mount  Calvary.  Indeed,  there  is  no  hill  near  any 
gate  corresponding  to  the  image  in  the  popular 
imagination.  In  modern  Jerusalem  there-  is  a  street 
pointed  out  as  the  veritable  I'in  I^olorosa  along  which 
the  procession  passed  ;  but  this  aKo  is  more  than 
doubtful.  Like  ancient  Rome,  ancient  Jerusalem 
is  buried  beneath  the  rubbish  of  centuries.*  From 
the  scene  of  the  trial  to  the  supposed  site  of  the 
execution  is  nearly  a  mile.  And  it  is  quite  possible 
that  Jesus  may  have  had  to  travel  as  far  or  farther, 
while  an  ever-increasing  multitude  of  spectators 
gathered  round  the  advancing  procession. 

*   Interesting  details  in  Rosss  f  t<idlc  of  C/tristitini/y. 


I2S      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


One  special  indignity  connected  with  the  punish 
ment  of  crucifixion  was  that  the  condemned  man 
had  to  carry  on  his  back  through  the  streets  the 
cross  upon  which  lie  was  about  to  suffer.  In  pictures 
the  cross  of  Jesus  is  generally  represented  as  a  lofty 
structure,  such  as  a  number  of  men  would  have  been 
needed  to  carry  ;  but  the  reality  was  something  totally 
different  :  it  was  not  much  above  the  height  of  a 
man,*  and  there  was  just  enough  of  wood  to  support 
the  bod\r.  But  the  weight  was  considerable,  and  to 
carry  it  on  the  back  which  had  been  torn  with  scourg 
ing  must  have  been  excessively  painful. 

Another  source  of  intense  pain  was  the  crown  of 
thorns,  if,  indeed,  He  still  wore  it.  \Ve  are  told  that 
before  the  procession  set  out  towards  Golgotha  the 
robes  of  mockery  were  taken  off  and  His  own  garments 
put  on  ;  but  it  is  not  said  that  the  crown  of  thorns 
was  removed. 

Most  cruel  of  all,  however,  was  the  shame.  There 
was  a  kind  of  savage  irony  in  making  the  man 
carry  the  implement  on  which  he  was  to  suffer  ; 
and,  in  point  of  fact,  throughout  classical  literature 
this  mode  of  punishment  is  a  constant  theme  of 
savage  banter  and  derision,  f 


*  A  soldier  was  able  to  reach  up  to  the  lips  of  Christ  on  the 
cross  with  a  sponge  on  a  reed. 

t  See  Horace,  S.  ii.  7,  47  ;   K.  i.  I (>,  48. 


120 


1  here  is  evidence  th.it  the  imagination  of  Jesus 
had  occupied  itself  specially  bcfoiehand  with  this 
portion  of  His  sufferings.  l-ong  before  the  end  lie 
had  predicted  the  kind  of  death  He  should  die;  but 
even  before  these  predictions  had  commenced  He 
had  described  the  sacrifices  which  would  have  to  be 
made  by  those  who  became  His  disciples  as  cross- 
bearing— as  if  this  were  the  last  extreme  of  suffering 
and  indignity.  Did  lie  so  call  it  simply  because  Hi.-, 
knowledge  of  the  world  informed  Him  of  this  as 
one  of  the  greatest  indignities  of  human  life?  or  was 
it  the  foreknowledge  that  He  Himself  was  to  be  one- 
da}'  in  this  position  which  coloured  His  language? 
\Vc  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  latter  was  the  case-. 
And  now  the  hour  on  which  His  imagination  had 
dwelt  was  come,  and  in  weakness  and  helplessness 
He  had  to  bear  the  cross  in  the  sight  of  thousands 
who  regarded  Him  with  scorn.  To  a  noble  spirit 
there  is  no  trial  more  severe  than  shame  —to  be-  the 
object  of  cruel  mirth  and  insolent  triumph.  Jesus 
had  the  lofty  and  refined  self-consciousness  of  one 
who  never  once  had  needed  to  cringe  or  stoop.  He 
loved  and  honoured  men  too  much  not  to  wish  to 
be  loved  and  honoured  by  them;  He  had  enjoyed 
days  of  unbounded  popularity,  but  now  His  soul 
was  filled  with  repioaeh  to  the  uttermost  ;  and  He 
could  have  appropriated  the  words  ol  the  I'salm,  "  I 


I  jo       Till:    TRIAL    AXD    DEATH    C)T  JI-.Sl'S    CHRIST 

am    a   worm    and   no    man  ;  a    reproach    ol    men  and 
despised   of  the    people." 

The  reproach  of  Christ  is  all  turned  into  glory 
now  ;  and  it  is  very  difficult  to  realise  how  abject  the 
reality  was.  Nothing  perhaps  brings  this  out  so  well 
as  the  fact  that  two  robbers  were  sent  away  to  be 
executed  with  Him.  This  has  been  regarded  as  a 
special  insult  offered  to  the  Jews  by  Pilate,  who 
wished  to  show  how  contemptuously  he  could  treat 
One  whom  he  affected  to  believe  their  king.  But 
more  likely  it  is  an  indication  of  how  little  more 
•Christ  was  to  the  Roman  officials  than  any  one  of  the 
prisoners  whom  they  put  through  their  hands  day 
by  day.  Pilate,  no  doubt,  had  b.en  interested  and 
puzzled  more  than  usual  ;  but,  after  all,  Jesus  was 
only  one  of  many;  His  execution  could  be  made 
part  of  the  same  job  with  that  of  the  other  prisoners 
on  hand.  And  so  the  three,  bearing  their  crosses, 
issued  from  the  gates  of  the  palace  together  and  took 
the  Dolorous  \Vay. 


Though  He  bore  His  own  cross  out  of  the  palace 
of  Pilate,  He  was  not  able  to  cany  it  far.  Kithcr  He 
sank  beneath  it  on  the  road  or  He  was  proceeding 
with  such  slow  and  faltering  steps  that  the  soldiers, 
impatient  of  the  delay,  recognised  that  the  burden 


VIA    DUI.OKOSA  iji 

iiiii^t  be  removed  from  His  shoulders.  The  severity 
of  the  scourging  was  in  itself  sufficient  to  account  for 
this  breakdown  ;  but,  besides,  we  are  to  consider  the 
.sleepless  night  through  which  He  had  passed,  with 
its  anxiety  and  abuse  ;  and  before  it  there  had  been 
the  agony  of  Gcthscmanc.  No  wonder  His  exhaus 
tion  had  reached  a  point  at  which  it  was  absolutely 
impossible  for  Him  to  proceed  farther  with  such  a 
burden. 

One  or  two  of  the  soldiers  ink-Jit  have  relieved 
Him;  but,  in  the  spirit  of  horseplay  and  mischief 
which  had  characterised  their  part  of  the  proceedings 
from  the  moment  when  Christ  fell  into  their  hands, 
they  laid  hold  of  a  casual  passer-by  and  requisitioned 
his  services  for  the  purpose.  lie-  was  coming  in  from 
the  region  beyond  the  pile  as  they  were  going  out, 
and  they  acted  under  the  sanction  of  military  law 
<  <r  custom. 

To  the  man  it  must  have  been  an  extreme  annoy 
ance  and  indignity.  Doubtless  he  was  bent  on  business 
of  his  own,  which  had  to  be  deferred.  His  family  or 
his  friends  might  be:  waiting  for  him,  but  he  w..s  turm  d 
tlie  opposite  way.  To  touch  the  instrument  of  death 
was  as  revolting  to  him  as  it  would  be  to  us  to  handle 
the  hangman's  rope  ;  perhaps  more-  so,  because  it  was 
Passover  time,  and  this  would  make  him  ceremonially 
unclean.  It  was  a  jest  of  the  soldiers,  and  he  was 


IJ2       Till:    'I RIAL    AM)   DEATH   OF  JKSl'S    f7/AV.Sr 

their  laughing-stock.  As  he  walked  by  the  side  of 
the  robbers,  it  looked  as  if  he  were  on  the  way  to 
execution  himself. 

This  is  a  lively  image  of  the  cross-bearing  to  which 
the  followers  of  Christ  are  called.  \Vc  are  wont  to 
speak  of  trouble  of  any  kind  as  a  cross  ;  and  doubtless 
any  kind  of  trouble  may  be  borne  bravely  in  the  name 
of  Christ.  Hut,  properly  speaking,  the  cross  of  Christ 
is  what  is  borne  in  the  act  of  confessing  Him  or  for 
the  sake  of  His  work.  When  anyone  makes  a  stand 
for  principle,  because  he  is  a  Christian,  and  takes  the 
consequences  in  the  shape  of  scorn  or  loss,  this  is  the 
cross  of  Christ.  The  pain  you  may  feel  in  speaking 
to  another  in  Christ's  name,  the  sacrifice  of  comfort 
or  time  you  may  make  in  engaging  in  Christian  work, 
the  self-denial  you  exercise  in  giving  of  your  means 
that  the  cause  of  Christ  may  spread  at  home  or  abroad, 
the  reproach  you  may  have  to  bear  by  identifying 
yourself  with  militant  causes  or  with  despised  persons, 
because  you  believe  they  arc  on  Christ's  side — in  such 
conduct  lies  the  cross  of  Christ.  It  involves  trouble, 
discomfort  and  sacrifice.  One  may  fret  under  it,  as 
Simon  did  ;  one  may  sink  under  it,  as  Jesus  did 
Himself;  it  is  ugly,  painful,  shameful  often;  but  no 
disciple  is  without  it.  Our  Master  said,  "He  that 
takcth  not  his  cross  and  lolloucth  after  Ale  is  not 
\\orthv  of  Me." 


III. 

The  one  tiling  which  makes  Simon  an  imperfect 
type  of  the  cross-bearer  is  that  we  arc  uncertain 
whether  or  not  he  bore  the  burden  voluntarily.  The 
Roman  soldiers  forced  it  on  him  ;  but  was  it  force- 
work  and  nothing  else? 

Some  have  supposed  that  he  was  an  adherent  of 
Christ;  but  it  is  extremely  improbable  that,  just  at 
the  moment  when  the  soldiers  needed  someone  for 
their  purpose,  one  of  the  very  few  followers  of  Jesus 
should  have  appeared.  The  tone  of  the  narrative 
seems  rather  to  indicate  that  he  was  one  who  happened 
to  be  there  by  mere  chance  and  had  nothing  to  do 
with  the  proceedings  till,  against  his  will,  he  was  made 
an  actor  in  the  drama. 

He  is  said  by  the  Evangelist  to  have  been  a 
Cyrcni.m,  that  is,  an  inhabitant  of  Cyrcne,  a  city 
in  North  Africa.  Strangers  from  this  place-  are 
mentioned  among  those  who  were  present  soon  after 
at  the  Feast  of  Pentecost,  when  the  I  Inly  Spirit 
descended  on  the  Church  in  tongues  of  fire.  And 
the  probability  is  that  Simon  had,  in  a  similar  way, 
come  from  his  distant  home  to  the  Passover.* 

*  Many  Jews,  indeed,  \vho  h;id  once  been  inhabitants  04 
Cyrene  lived  in  Jerusalem  old  people,  probably,  who  liad  conn- 
to  lay  their  bones  in  holy  ground  ,  for  we  learn  from  an  incidental 


134       THE    TRIAL    AXD    DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

lie  had  come  on  pilgrimage.  Perhaps  he  w  is  a 
devout  soul,  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel.  In 
far  Cyrenc  he  m:iy  have  been  praying  for  the  coming 
of  the  Messiah  and,  before  setting  out  on  this  journey, 
pleading  for  a  season  of  unusual  blessing.  God  had 
heard  and  was  going  to  answer  his  prayers,  but  in  a 
way  totally  different  from  his  expectations. 

For  apparently  this  rencontre  issued  in  his  salvation 
and  in  the  salvation  of  his  house.  The  Evangelist 
calls  him  familiarly  "  the  father  of  Alexander  and 
Rufus."  Evidently  the  two  sons  were  well  known  to 
those  for  whom  St.  Mark  was  writing  ;  that  is,  they 
were  members  of  the  Christian  circle.  And  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  the  connection  of  his  family 
with  the  Church  was  the  result  of  this  incident  in 
the  father's  life.  St.  Mark  wrote  his  Gospel  for  the 
Christians  of  Rome  ;  and  in  the  Kpistlc  to  the 
Romans  one  Rufus  is  mentioned  as  resident  there 
along  with  his  mother.  This  may  be  one  of  the  sons 
of  Simon.  And  in  Acts  xiii.  i  one  Simeon  — the  same 
name  as  Simon — is  mentioned  along  with  a  Lucius 
of  Cyrcnc  as  a  conspicuous  Christian  at  Antioch  :  he 
is  calKd  Niger,  or  Black,  a  name  not  surprising  for 
one  who  had  been  tanned  bv  the  hot  sun  of  Africa. 


notice  in  the  Acts  that  they  had  a  synagogue  of  their  oun  in  the 
city  ;  and  Simon  may  have  been  one  of  these.  But  the  other  is 
the  more  likely  case. 


/'/./    DOLOROSA 


There  are  Alexanders  mentioned  elsewhere  in  the 
New  Testament  ;  but  the  name  was  common,  and 
there  is  not  much  probability  that  any  of  them  is 
to  be  identified  with  Simon's  son.  Still,  putting  the 
details  aside,  we  have  sufficiently  clear  indications 
that  in  consequence  of  this  incident  Simon  became 
a  Christian. 

Is  it  not  a  significant  fact,  proving  that  nothing 
happens  by  chance?  Had  Simon  entered  the  city 
one  hour  sooner,  or  one  hour  later,  his  after  history 
might  have  been  entire!}'  different.  On  the  smallest 
circumstances  the  greatest  results  ma}*  hinge.  A 
chance  meeting  may  determine  the  weal  or  woe  of 
a  life.  Doubtless  to  Simon  this  encounter  seemed 
at  the  moment  the  most  unfortunate  incident  that 
could  have  befallen  him — an  interruption,  an  annoy 
ance  and  a  humiliation  ;  yet  it  turned  out  to  be  the 
gateway  of  life.  Thus  do  blessings  sometimes  come 
in  disguise,  and  out  of  an  apparition,  at  the  sight 
of  which  we  cry  out  for  fear,  may  suddenly  issue  the 
form  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Hut  it  was  not  Simon's 
own  salvation  only  that  was  involved  in  this  singular 
experience,  but  that  of  his  family  as  well.  How 
much  may  follow  when  Christ  is  revealed  to  any 
human  soul  !  The  salvation  of  those  yet  unborn 
may  be  involved  in  it  -of  children  and  children's 
children. 


i;/>      Till:    TRIM.   AM)   DEM  11    OF  JESUS    CY/AV.S /' 

But  think  how  blessed  to  Simon  would  appear  in 
after  days  the  cross-bearing  which  was  at  the  time  so 
bitter  !  Xo  doubt  it  became  the  romance  of  his  life. 
And  to  this  day  who  can  help  envying  him  for  being 
allowed  to  give  his  strength  to  the  fainting  Saviour 
and  to  remove  the  burden  from  that  bleeding  and 
smarting  back  ?  So  for  all  men  there  is  a  day  coming 
when  any  service  they  have  done  to  Christ  will  be  the 
memory  of  which  they  will  be  most  proud.  It  will 
not  be  the  recollection  of  the  prizes  we  have  won, 
the  pleasures  we  have  enjoyed,  the  discomforts  we 
have  escaped,  that  will  come  back  to  us  with  delight 
as  we  review  life  from  its  close  ;  but,  if  we  have 
denied  ourselves  and  borne  the  cross  for  Christ's  sake, 
the  memory  of  that  will  be  a  pillow  soft  and  satisfying 
for  a  dying  head.  In  that  day  we  shall  wish  that 
the  minutes  given  to  Christ's  service  had  been  years, 
and  the  pence  pounds  ;  and  every  cup  of  cold  water 
and  every  word  of  sympathy  and  every  act  of  self- 
denial  will  be  so  pleasant  to  remember  that  we  shall 
\\ish  thry  had  been  multiplied  a  thousandfold. 


TIIK    DAUC.IITKKS   OF   J  KK  I 'SALKM 

'TTMIKRK  art-  many  legends  clustering  round   this 
-*-      portion  of  our  Lord's  history. 

It  is  narrated,  for  example-,  that,  when  the  divine 
Sufferer,  burdened  with  the  cross,  was  creeping  alon^ 
feebly  and  slowly,  He  leaned  against  the  door  of  a 
house  which  stood  in  the  way,  when  the  occupii  r, 
striking  a  blow,  commanded  Him  to  hurry  on;  to 
which  the  Lord,  turning  to  His  assailant,  replied, 
"  Thou  shalt  £(>  on  and  never  stop  till  I  come  a^ain  ;" 
and  to  this  day,  unable  to  find  either  rest  or  death, 
the  miserable  man  still  posts  over  the  earth,  and  shall 
continue  doin^  so  until  the  Lord's  return.  This  is 
the  legend  of  the  Wandering  Jew,  which  assumed 
many  forms  in  the  lore  of  other  days  and  still  plays 
a  somewhat  prominent  part  in  literature-.  It  is,  1 
suppose,  a  fantastic  representation,  in  the  person  of 
an  individual,  of  the  tragic  fate  o!  the  Jewish  race, 
which,  since  the  day  \\hen  it  laid  violent  hands  on 
the  Son  of  (iod,  has  had  no  rest  for  the  si  Ac  of  its  foot. 

'J7 


ijS       Till-:    TRIAL    AM)   DEATH    OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

To  another  story  of  the  /  ria  Do'orosa  as  distin 
guished  a  place  has  been  given  in  art  as  to  the  legend 
of  the  Wandering  Jew  in  literature.  Veronica,  a  lady 
in  Jerusalem,  seeing  Christ,  as  lie  passed  by,  sinking 
beneath  His  burden,  came  out  of  her  house  and  with 
a  towel  washed  away  the  blood  and  perspiration  from 
His  face.  And  lo  !  when  she  examined  the  napkin 
with  which  the  charitable  act  had  been  performed, 
it  bore  a  perfect  likeness  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows. 
Some  of  the  greatest  painters  have  reproduced  this 
scene,  and  it  may  be  understood  as  teaching  the 
lesson  th;it  even  the  commonest  things  in  life,  when 
employed  in  acts  of  mercy,  are  stamped  with  the 
image  and  superscription  of  Christ. 

In  Roman  Catholic  churches  there  may  generally 
be  seen  round  the  walls  a  series  of  about  a  dozen 
pictures,  taken  from  this  part  of  our  Lord's  life.  They 
are  denominated  the  Stations  of  the  Cross,  because 
the  worshippers,  going  round,  stop  to  look  and  medi 
tate  on  the  different  scenes.  In  Catholic  countries 
the  same  idea  is  sometimes  carried  out  on  a  more 
imposing  scale.  On  a  knoll  or  hill  in  the  neighbour 
hood  of  a  town  three  lofty  crosses  stand  ;  the  road 
to  them  through  the  town  is  called  Via  Cah\wii,  and 
at  intervals  along  the  way  the  scenes  of  our  Lord's 
sad  journey  arc  represented  by  large  frescoes  or 
bas-reliefs. 


mi:  i).  i  L  'Gil  TEKS  or  JI-:R i  •  .s.  / LEM 


Hut  we  really  know  for  certain  of  only  two  incidents 
of  the  / 'id  Dolorosa — that  in  which  our  Lord  was 
relieved  of  His  cross  by  Simon  the  Cyrcnian  and 
that,  which  we  are  now  to  consider,  of  the  sympa 
thetic  daughters  of  Jerusalem. 


The  reader  of  the  history  of  our  Lord  in  its  last 
stages  is  sated  with  horrors.  In  some  of  the  scenes 
through  which  we  have  recently  accompanied  Him 
we  have  seemed  to  be  amon^  demons  rather  than 
men.  The  mind  lon^s  for  something  to  relieve  the 
monstrous  spectacles  of  fanatic  hate  and  cold-blooded 
cruelty.  Hence  this  scene  is  most  welcome,  in  which 
a  blink  of  sunshine  falls  on  the  path  of  woe-,  and  we 
are  assured  that  we  need  not  lose  faith  in  the  human 
heart. 

It  was,  indeed,  a  surprising  demonstration.  It 
would  hardly  have  been  credited,  had  it  not  the  re  bet  n 
made  manifest,  that  Jesus  had  so  .strong  a  hold  upon 
any  section  of  the  population  of  Jerusalem.  In  tin- 
capital  lie  had  always  found  the  soil  very  unrcccptivc. 
Jerusalem  was  the-  headquarters  of  rabbinic  learning 
and  priestly  arrogance  the  home  of  the  Pharisee  and 
the  Sadducee,  \\l-o  guided  public  opinion  ;  and  there, 
from  first  to  last,  He  had  made  few  adherents.  It  was 
i,i  the:  provinces,  especially  in  Galilee,  that  He- had  been 


1 40      THE    TRIAL    A\l)   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

the  idol  of  the  populace.  It  was  by  the  Galilean 
pilgrims  to  the  Passover  that  He  was  convoyed  into 
the  capital  with  shouts  of  Ilosanna  ;  but  the  inhabi 
tants  of  the  city  stood  coldly  aloof,  and  before  Pilate's 
judgment-scat  they  cried  out,  "  Crucify  Him,  crucify 
Him!" 

Yet  now  it  turns  out  that  He  has  touched  the  heart 
of  one  section  at  least  even  of  this  community  : 
"There  followed  Him  a  great  company  of  people  and 
of  women,  which*  also  bewailed  and  lamented  Him." 
Some  have  considered  this  so  extraordinary  that  they 
have  held  these  women  to  be  Galileans  ;  but  Jesus 
addressed  them  as  "daughters  of  Jerusalem."  The 
Galilean  men  who  had  surrounded  Him  in  His  hour 
of  triumph  put  in  no  appearance  now  in  His  hour 
of  despair;  but  the  women  of  Jerusalem  broke  away 
from  the  example  of  the  men  and  paid  the  tribute 
of  tears  to  His  youth,  character  and  sufferings.  It 
is  said  that  there  was  a  Jewish  law  forbidding  the 
showing  of  any  sympathy  to  a  condemned  man  ; 
but,  if  so,  this  demonstration  was  all  the  more  credit 
able  to  those  who  took  part  in  it.  The  upwelling  of 
their  emotion  was  too  sincere  to  be  dammed  back 
by  barriers  of  law  and  custom. 

It   is   said    there  is   no    instance  in   the   Gospels  of 

'I  lit-  participle  refers  to  the;  women  alone. 


nu:  />,/rr;///v:A\s  f >/ \//: AY x, //./,-.]/  ,.,, 

a  wom;;n  being  an  enemy  of  Jesus.  No  woman 
deserted  or  betrayed,  persecuted  or  opposed  Him. 
Hut  women  followed  Him,  they  ministered  to  Him 
of  their  substance,  they  washed  His  feet  with  tears, 
they  anointed  His  head  with  spikenard;  and  now, 
when  their  husbands  and  brothers  were  hounding 
Him  to  death,  they  accompanied  Him  with  weeping 
and  wailing  to  the  scene  of  martyrdom.* 

It  is  a  great  testimony  to  the  character  of  Christ 
on  the  one  hand  and  to  that  of  woman  on  the 
other.  Woman's  instinct  told  her,  however  dimly 
she  at  first  apprehended  the  truth,  that  this  was 
the  Deliverer  for  her.  Hecausc,  while  Christ  is  the 
Saviour  of  all,  He  has  been  specially  the  Saviour 
of  woman.  At  His  advent,  her  degradation  being  far 
deeper  than  that  of  men,  she  needed  Him  more  ;  and, 

*  ''How  slow  we  have  been  to  ask  our  s/\/ff  nu  -tubers  to 
help  us! — although  we  read  of  deaconesses  in  the  early  Church, 
and  although  we  do  not  read  of  a  single  woman  who  was  unkind 
and  unfaithful  to  the  Saviour  while  here  upon  earth.  Men  \\<-re 
diabolic  in  their  cruelty  to  Him,  but  never  did  a  woman  betray 
Him,  mock  Him,  desert  Him.  nor  spit  in  His  lace.  Many  of 
them  cheered  Him  on  His  way  to  the  Cross,  washing  His  leet 
\\ith  tears  before  men  pierced  them  with  nails,  anointing  His 
Iwad  with  precious  perfume  in  anticipation  of  the  thorns  \\itli 
which  men  crowned  Him.  They  wept  with  Him  on  the  uay 
to  Calvary,  and  were  true  to  Him  to  the  very  end.  And  are 
they  not  devoted  and  true  to  Him  still'.'  \Vhy,  then,  have  we 
been  so  long  in  tailing  lor  their  .sei  vices '.''-  K  Ilinr.iut 
I-.VA.N-,.  D.I). 


142       '///A'    TRIAL    AM)    DEATH    ()!•'  Jl'.Sl'S    CHRIST 


wherever  His  gospel  has  travelled  since  then,  it  has 
been  the  signal  for  her  emancipation  and  redemption. 
His  presence  evokes  all  the  tender  and  beautiful 
qualities  which  arc  latent  in  her  nature  ;  and  under 
His  influence  her  character  experiences  a  trans 
figuration.* 

It  has,  indeed,  been  contended  that  there  was  no 
great  depth  in  the  emotion  of  the  daughters  of  Jeru 
salem  ;  and  \ve  need  not  deny  the  fact.  Their  emotion 
was  no  outburst  of  faith  and  repentance,  carrying 
with  it  revolutionary  effects,  as  tears  may  sometimes 
be.  It  was  an  overflow  of  natural  feeling,  such  as 
might  have  been  caused  by  any  pathetic  instance  of 
misfortune.  It  was  not  unlike  the  tears  which  may 
be  still  made  to  flow  from  the  eyes  of  the  tender 
hearted  by  a  moving  account  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  ;  and  we  know  that  such  emotions  are  some 
times  far  from  lasting.  Our  nature  consists  of  several 
strata,  of  which  emotion  is  the  most  superficial  ;  and 
it  is  not  enough  that  religion  should  operate  in  this 
uppermost  region  :  it  must  be  thrust  down,  through 
emotion,  into  the  deeper  regions,  such  as  the  con 
science  and  the  will,  and  catch  hold  and  kindle 
there,  before  it  can  achieve  the  master}"  of  the  entire 
being. 

*   Brace,  Gesta  (.Tiristi. 


////•:  AU/Y.V/'/V-.VI'.S  or  JUKI:*. I/./-M 


But  this  response  of  womanhood  to  (  ,'hii.st  was 
a  beginning  ;  and  therein  lay  its  .significance.  It  was 
to  Him  a  foretaste  of  the  splendid  devotion  which 
He  was  yet  to  receive  from  the  womanhood  of  the 
world.  It  was  as  welcome  to  Him  in  that  hour  of 
desertion  and  reproach  as  is  the  sight  of  a  tuft  of  grass 
to  the  thirsty  traveller  in  the  desert.  The  sounds 
of  sympathy  flowed  over  His  soul  as  grateful Iv  as 
the  gift  of  Mary's  love  enveloped  His  senses  when 
the  house  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment. 

Thus  in  the  /  'id  /)<>/<>/ (>s<r  Jesus  experienced  two 
alleviations  of  His  suffering:  the  strength  of  a  man 
relieved  His  body  of  the  burden  of  the  cross,  and  the 
pain  of  His  soul  was  cooled  by  the  sympathy  of 
women.  Is  it  not  a  parable  a  parable  of  what  men 
and  women  'can  do  for  Him  still  ?  Christ  needs  the 
strength  of  men  —  the  strong  arm,  the-  vigorous  hand, 
the  shoulders  that  can  bear  the  burden  ot  His  cause  ; 
He  seeks  from  men  the  mind  whose  originality  can 
plan  what  needs  to  be  done-,  the  resolute  uill  that 
pushes  the  work  on  in  spite  of  opposition,  the  liberal 
hand  that  gives  ungrudgingly  what  is  required  for 
the  progress  and  success  of  the  Christian  enUrprisc. 
From  women  he  seeks  sympathy  and  tears.  I  he}' 
can  give  the  sensibility  which  keeps  tin-  heart  of  the 
world  from  hardening  ;  the  secret  knowledge  which 
finds  out  the  objects  of  Christian  compassion  and 


144       THE    TRIAL    A\D    DEATH    OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

wins  their  confidence;  the  enthusiasm  which  burns 
like  a  fire  at  the  heart  of  religious  work.  The  influence 
of  women  is  subtle  and  remote;  but  it  is  on  this 
account  all  the  more  powerful  ;  for  they  sit  at  the 
very  fountains,  where  the  river  of  human  life  is 
springing,  and  where  a  touch  may  determine  its 
entire  subsequent  course. 

II. 

It  has  been  allowed  to  condemned  men  in  all  ages 
to  speak  to  the  crowds  assembled  to  witness  their 
death.  The  dying  speech  used  in  this  country  to  be  a 
regular  feature  of  executions.  Even  in  ages  of  per 
secution  the  martyrs  were  usually  allowed,  as  they 
ascended  the  ladder,  to  address  the  multitude  ;  and 
these  testimonies,  some  of  which  were  of  singular 
power  and  beauty,  were  treasured  by  the  religious 
section  of  the  community.  It  is  nothing  surprising, 
therefore,  that  Jesus  should  have  addressed  those  who 
followed  Him  or  should  have  been  permitted  to  do 
so.  No  doubt  lie  was  at  the  last  point  of  exhaustion, 
but,  when  lie  was  relieved  of  the  weight  of  the  cross, 
He  was  able  to  rail)'  strength  sufficient  for  this  effort. 
Pausing  in  the  road  and  turning  to  the  women, 
whose  weeping  and  wailing  were  filling  His  ears,  He 
addressed  Himself  to  them. 

l!is    words    .'M'c:,    in    the    first    place,   a    revelation    oi 


Tin:  D.icr.ini.Ks  or  JL R r.s. ALI.M  145 

Himself.  They  show  what  was  demonstrated  again 
and  again  during  the  crucifixion — how  completely  He 
could  forget  His  own  sufferings  in  care  and  anxiety 
for  others.  His  sufferings  had  already  been  extreme  ; 
His  soul  had  been  filled  with  injustice  and  insult  ;  at 
this  very  moment  His  body  was  quivering  with  pain 
and  His  mind  darkened  with  the  approach  of  still 
more  atrocious  agonies.  Vet,  when  I  Ie  heard  behind 
Him  the  sobs  of  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  there- 
rushed  over  His  soul  a  wave  of  compassion  in  which 
for  the  moment  His  own  troubles  were  submerged. 

\Ve  see  in  His  words,  too,  the  depth  and  fervour 
of  His  patriotism.  When  lie  saw  the  tears  of  the 
women,  the  spectacle  raised  in  His  mind  an  image  of 
the  doom  impending  over  the  city  whose  daughters 
they  were.  Jerusalem,  as  has  been  already  said,  had 
always  been  extremely  unresponsive  to  Him  ;  she 
hid  played  to  Him  an  unmotherly  part.  None  the 
less,  however,  did  He  feel  fur  her  the  love  of  a  loyal 
son.  He  had  shown  this  a  few  days  before,  when,  in 
the  midst  of  His  triumph,  He  paused  on  the  brow 
of  Olivet,  where  the  city  came  into  view,  and  burst 
into  a  flood  of  tears,  accompanied  with  such  a  lyric 
cry  of  affection  as  has  never  been  addressed  t<>  any 
other  city  on  earth.  Subsequently,  sitting  with  His 
disciples  over  against  the  temple,  He  showed  how 
well  He  foreknew  the  terrible  fate  which  hung  over 

lu 


146       THE    TRIAL    AM)    DEATH   OT  JESUS    CHRIST 


the  capital  of  His  country,  and  how  poignantly  lie 
felt  it.  The  city's  doom  was  nigh  at  hand  :  less  than 
half  a  century  distant  :  and  it  was  to  be  unparalleled 
in  its  horror.  The  secular  historian  of  it,  himself  a 
Jew,  says  in  his  narrative  :  "  There  has  never  been 
a  race  on  earth,  and  there  never  will  be  one,  whose 
sufferings  can  be  matched  with  those  of  Jerusalem  in 
the  days  of  the  siege."  It  was  the  foresight  of  this 
which  made  Jesus  now  say,  "  Daughters  of  Jerusalem, 
weep  not  for  Ale,  but  weep  for  yourselves  and  for 
your  children." 

His  words,  still  further,  reveal  His  consideration 
fur  women  and  children.  The  tears  of  the  women 
displayed  an  appreciation  and  sympathy  for  Him 
such  as  the  men  were  incapable  of ;  but  well  did 
lie  deserve  them,  fur  His  words  show  that  He  had  a 
comprehension  of  women  and  a  sympathy  with  them 
such  as  had  never  before  existed  in  the  world.  With 
the  force  of  the  imagination  and  the  heart  lie  realised 
ho\v,  in  the  approaching  siege,  the  heaviest  end  of 
tlv;  misery  would  fall  on  the  female  portion  of  the 
population,  and  how  the  motliers  would  be  wounded 
through  their  children.  In  that  country, where  children 
were  regarded  as  the  crown  and  glory  of  womanhood, 
the  currents  of  nature  would  be  so  completely  reversed 
by  the  madness  of  hunger  and  pain  that  barrenness 
would  be  esteemed  fortunate  ;  and  in  a  country  where 


THI:  I).IL-C;HTI-:RS  or 


length  of  days  had  been  considered  the  supreme 
blessing  of  life  they  would  long  and  cry  for  sudden 
and  early  death. 

So  it  actually  turned  out.  An  outstanding  feature 
of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  according  to  the  secular 
historian,  was  the  suffering  of  the  women  and  children. 
Besides  using  every  other  device  of  warfare,  the 
Romans  deliberately  resorted  to  starvation,  and  the 
inhabitants  endured  the  uttermost  extremities  of 
hunger.  So  frenzied  did  the  men  become  at  last 
that  every  extra  mouth  requiring  to  be  filled  became 
an  object  of  delirious  suspicion,  and  the  last  morsels 
were  snatched  from  the  lips  of  the  women  and  children. 
One  is  tempted  to  quote  some  of  the  stories  of  Joscphus 
about  this,  but  they  are  so  awful  that  it  would  be 
scarcely  decent  to  repeat  them. 

This  was  what  the  quick  sympathy  of  Jesus  enabled 
Him  to  divine;  and  His  compassion  gushed  forth 
toward-;  those  who  were  to  be  the  chief  sufferers. 
Women  and  children-  how  irreverently  they  have 
been  thought  of,  how  callously  and  brutally  treated, 
since  history  began  !  Yet  they  arc  always  the  majority 
of  the  human  race.  Praise  be  to  Him  who  lifted 
them,  and  is  still  lifting  them,  out  of  the-  dust  of 
degradation  and  ill-usage,  and  \\  ho  put  in  on  their 
behalf  the  plea  of  justice  and  m<  ivy  ! 

Finally,  there   was   in   the   words    addressed    to   the 


I4'S       Till-:    TRIAL    AM)   DLATH   ()/•'  JKSL'S   CHRIST 


daughters  of  Jerusalem  an  exhortation  to  repentance. 
When  Jesus  said,  "  Weep  for  yourselves  and  for 
your  children,"  Me  was  referring  not  merely  to  the 
approaching  calamities  of  the  city,  but  to  its  guilt. 
This  was  indicated  most  clearly  in  the  closing  words 
of  His  address  to  them  — "  For  if  they  do  these  things 
in  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry?" 

lie  could  speak  of  Himself  as  a  green  tree.  lie 
was  young  and  Me  was  innocent  ;  to  this  the  tears 
of  the  women  testified  ;  there  was  no  reason  why 
I  le  should  die  ;  yet  God  permitted  all  these  things 
to  happen  to  Him.  The  Jewish  nation  ought  also 
to  have  been  a  green  tree.  God  had  planted  and 
tended  it  ;  it  had  enjoyed  even"  advantage  ;  but, 
when  lie  came  seeking  fruit  on  it,  lie  found  none. 
It  was  withered  ;  the  sap  of  virtue  and  godliness  had 
gone  out  of  it  ;  it  was  dry  and  ready  for  the  burning  ; 
and,  when  the  enemy  came  to  apply  the  firebrand, 
why  should  God  interpose?  Thus  did  Jesus  attempt 
once-  more  to  awaken  repentance.  Me  wished  to 
thrust  the  impressions  of  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem 
do\\n  from  the  region  of  feeling  into  a  deeper  place. 
The}-  had  given  Him  tears  of  emotion;  Me  desired, 
besides  these,  tears  of  contrition  ;  for  in  religion 
nothing  is  accomplished  till  impression  touches  the 
conscience. 

Whether    an)r  of   them    responded    in    earnest    we 


Tin:  /).  1  1  Y.Y/yy.Yi'.s  or  jr.iu  'S.  \  u:.\i  14  ) 

cannot  tell.  Not  m;my,  it  is  to  be  feared.  Nor  ean 
we  tell  whether  by  repentance  tile  destruction  of  the 
Jewish  state  mii;ht  still  have  been  averted.  At  all 
events,  the  fire  of  invasion  soon  fell  on  the  dry  tree, 
and  it  was  burnt  up.  And  since  then  those  who 
\v®uld  not  weep  for  their  sins  before  the  stroke  of 
punishment  fell  have  had  to  weep  without  ceasing. 
Visitors  to  Jerusalem  at  the  present  day  are  conducted 
to  a  spot  called  the  Place  of  Wailing,  where  every 
Friday  representatives  of  the  race  weep  for  the 
destruction  of  their  city  and  temple.*  This  has  gone 
on  for  centuries  ;  and  it  is  only  a  symbol  of  the1  cup 
of  astonishment,  filled  to  the  brim,  which  has  during 
man}'  centuries  been  held  to  the  lips  of  Israel. 

Sin  must  be  wept  for  some  time—  if  not  before 
punishment  has  fallen,  then  after;  if  not  in  time, 
then  in  eternity.  This  is  a  lesson  for  all.  And  has 
not  tint  final  word  of  Jesus  a  meaning  for  us  even 
more  solemn  than  it  had  for  those  to  whom  it  was 
first  addressed  "  If  these  things  be  done  in  a  green 
tree,  what  shall  be  done.'  in  the  dry?"  li  wot'  and 
anguish  fell,  as  they  did,  even  on  the  Son  of  (iod, 
when  lie  was  bearing  the  sins  of  the-  world,  what  will 
be  the  portion  of  lliosr  who  have  to  bear  their  own  ? 


•   Striki'.;-   il«-s<  ripti'in  in    I'.aiint',  (iniiM.   '/'//,- 
I'    73 


CHAPTER    XII. 

CALVARY 

ANYONE  writing  on  the  life  of  our  Lord  must 
many  a  time  pause  in  secret  anel  exclaim  to 
himself,  "  It  is  high  as  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do? 
deeper  than  hell,  what  canst  thou  know?"  But  we 
have  now  arrived  at  the  point  where  this  sense  of 
inadequacy  falls  most  oppressively  on  the  heart. 
To-day  we  arc  to  sec  Christ  crucified.  But  who  is 
worthy  to  look  at  this  sight  ?  \Vho  is  able  to  speak 
of  it  ?  "  Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me  ; 
it  is  high  ;  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  In  the  presence 
of  such  a  subject  one  feels  one's  mind  to  be  like 
some  tiny  creature  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea — as 
incapable  of  comprehending  it  all  as  is  the  crustacean 
of  scooping  up  the  Atlantic  in  its  shell. 

This  spot  to  which  we  have  come  is  the  centre 
of  all  things.  Here  two  eternities  meet.  The  streams 
of  ancient  history  converge  here,  and  here  the  river  of 
modern  history  takes  its  rise.  The  eyes  of  patriarchs 
and  prophets  strained  forward  to  Calvary,  and  now 
150 


the  eyes  of  all  generations  and  »>f  all  races  look  back 
to  it.  This  is  the  end  of  all  roads.  The  seeker  after 
truth,  who  has  explored  the  realms  of  knowledge, 
comes  to  Calvary  and  finds  at  last  that  he  has  reached 
the  centre.  The  wear)'  heart  of  man,  that  lias  wan 
dered  the  world  over  in  search  of  perfect  sympathy 
and  love,  at  last  arrives  here  and  finds  rest.  Think 
how  many  souls  every  Lord's  I  ),iy,  assembled  in 
church  and  clvipel  and  meeting-house,  are  thinking 
of  Golgotha !  how  man)'  eyes  are  turned  thither  every 
da\'  from  beds  of  sickness  and  chambers  <>1  death! 
''  Lord,  to  whom  can  we  go?  Thou  hast  the  words  i.f 
eternal  life." 

Though,  therefore,  the  theme  is  too  high  for  u>, 
yet  we  \\ill  venture  forward.  It  is  too  high  for 
human  thought  ;  yet  nowhere  else  is  the  mind  MI 
exalted  and  ennobled.  At  Calvary  poets  have  sung 
their  sweetest  strains,  and  artists  seen  their  sublimest 
visions,  and  thinkers  excogitated  their  noblest  ideas. 
The  crustacean  lies  at  the  bottom  of  tin-  ocean,  and 
the  world  of  waters  rolls  above  it  ;  il  cannot  in  its 
tiny  shell  comprehend  these  leagues  upon  leagues 
of  solid  translucent  vast  ness;  and  \vt  the  ocean  fills 
its  shell  and  cause;  its  little  body  to  throb  with 
perfect  happiness.  And  so,  though  we  cannot  take 
in  all  the  meaning  of  the  scene  before  which  we 
stand,  yet  we  can  fill  mind  and  hent  with  it  to  the 


I52       THE    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH    OE  JESUS    CHRIST 

brim,  and,  as  it  sends  through  our  being  the  pulsations 
of  a  life  divine,  rejoice  that  it  has  a  breadth  and 
length,  a  height  and  depth,  which  pass  understanding. 

I. 

The  long  journey  through  the  streets  to  the  place 
of  execution  was  at  length  ended,  and  thereby  the 
weary  journey  ings  of  the  Sufferer  came  to  a  close. 
The  soldiers  set  about  their  preparations  for  the  last 
act.  But  meanwhile  a  little  incident  occurred  which 
the  behaviour  of  Jesus  filled  with  significance. 

The  wealthy  ladies  of  Jerusalem  had  the  practice 
of  providing  for  those  condemned  to  the  awful 
punishment  of  crucifixion  a  soporific  draught,  com 
posed  of  wine  mixed  with  some  narcotic  like  gall 
or  myrrh,*  to  dull  the  senses  and  deaden  the  pain. 
It  was  a  benevolent  custom  ;  and  the  cup  was  offered 
to  all  criminals,  irrespective  of  their  crimes.  It  was 
administered  immediately  before  the  frightful  work 
of  nailing  the  culprit  to  the  tree  commenced.  This 
draught  was  handed  to  Jesus  on  1 1  is  arrival  at 
Golgotha.  Exhausted  with  fatigue  and  burning  with 
thirst,  He  grasped  the  cup  eagerly  and  lifted  it  without 
suspicion  to  His  lips.  Hut,  as  soon  as  lie  tasted  it 

One  Kvangelist  says  gall,  another  myrrh,  and  on  this 
difference  harmonists  and  their  antagonists  have  spent  their  time; 
hut  smelv  it  is  not  worth  while. 


and   felt   tin-   fumes  of  the   stupefying  in;;redk  nt.    He 
laid   it  down   and   would   not  drink. 

It  was  «i  simple  act,  yet  full  of  heroism.  I  [e  was 
in  that  extremity  of  thirst  when  a  person  will  drink 
almost  anything  ;  and  He  was  face  to  face  with  out 
rageous  torture.  In  subsequent  times  many  of  His 
own  faithful  martyrs,  on  their  way  to  execution,  gladly 
availed  themselves  of  this  merciful  provision.  Hut 
He  would  not  allow  His  intellect  to  be  clouded.  His 
obedience  was  not  yet  complete;  His  plan  was  not 
fully  wrought  out;  He  would  keep  His  taste  for 
death  pure.  I  have  heard  of  a  woman  dying  of  a 
frightful  malady,  who,  when  she  was  prosed  by  those 
witnessing  her  agony  to  take  an  intoxicating  draught, 
refused,  saying,  "  Xo,  I  want  to  die  .sobi  r."  She  had 
caught,  I  think,  the  spirit  of  Christ. 

I  his  is  a  very  strange  place  in  which  to  alight  on 
the  problem  of  the  use  and  abu^c  of  tl.o-e  products 
of  nature:  or  art  which  induce  intoxication  or  stupe 
faction.  Roots  or  juices  with  such  properties  have 
been  known  to  nearly  all  rates,  the  savage  as  well 
as  the  civilised;  and  tiny  have  played  a  great  pait 
in  the  life  of  mankind.  Their  history  is  one  of  the 
most  curious.  They  are  associated  \\ith  the  mysteries 
of  false  religions  and  with  the  phenomena  of  heathen 
prophecy  and  witchcraft  ;  acting  on  the  mind  through 
the-  senses,  the)'  open  up  in  it  a  region  of  mystery. 


THE    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH   or  JESCS    CHRIST 


horror  ami  gloomy  magnificence  of  which  the  normal 
man  is  unconscious.  They  have  always  been  a  favourite 
resource  of  the  medical  art,  and  in  modern  times,  in 
such  forms  as  opium  and  other  better-known  intoxi 
cants,  they  have  created  some  of  the  gravest  moral 
problems. 

On  the  wide  question  of  the  use  of  such  substances 
as  stimulants  we  need  not  at  present  enter  ;  it  is  to 
their  use  for  the  opposite  purpose  of  lowering  con 
sciousness  that  this  incident  draws  attention.  That 
in  some  cases  this  use  is  both  merciful  and  permissible 
will  not  be  denied.  The  discovery  in  our  own  day,  by 
one  of  our  own  countrymen,  of  the  use  of  chloroform 
is  justly  regarded  as  among  the  greatest  benefits  ever 
conferred  on  the  human  race.  When  the  unconscious 
ness  thus  produced  enables  the  surgeon  to  perform 
an  operation  which  might  not  be  possible  at  all 
without  it,  or  when  in  the  crisis  of  a  fever  the  sleep 
induced  by  a  narcotic  gives  the  exhausted  system 
power  to  continue  the  combat  and  saves  the  life,  we 
can  only  be  thankful  that  the  science  of  to  day  has 
such  resource's  in  its  treasury. 

On  the  oilier  hand,  however,  there  are  grave  offsets 
to  these  advantages.  Millions  of  men  and  women 
resort  to  such  substances  in  order  to  dull  the  nerves 
and  cloud  the  brain  during  pain  and  sorrow  which 
God  intended  them  to  face  and  bear  with  sober 


C'.lI.l'.lRY 


courage,  as  Jesus  endured  Hi.,  on  the  cross.  On  the 
medical  profession  rests  the  responsibility  of  so  using 
the  power  placed  in  their  hands  as  not  to  destroy 
the  dignity  of  the  most  solemn  passages  of  life.*  It 
will  for  ever  remain  true  that  pain  and  trial  are  the 
discipline  of  the  soul  ;  but  to  reel  through  these 
crises  in  the  drowsy  forgctfulncss  of  intoxication  is 
to  miss  the  best  chances  of  moral  and  spiritual 
development.  Men  and  women  are  made  perfect 
through  suffering  ;  but  that  suffering  may  do  its  work 
it  must  be  felt.  There  is  no  greater  misfortune  than 
to  bear  too  easily  the  strokes  of  (jod.  A  bereave 
ment,  for  example,  is  sent  to  sanctify  a  home  ;  but 
it  may  fail  of  its  mis.sion  because  the  house-hold  is 
too  busy,  or  because  too  manv  are  coming  and 
going,  or  because  tongues,  mistakenly  kinel  and 
garrulous,  chatter  God's  messenger  out  of  doors.  It 
is  natural  that  physicians  and  kinel  friends  should  try 
to  make  sufferers  forget  their  grief.  lUit  the}'  ma)' 
be  too  successful.  Though  the  practice  of  the  ladies 
of  Jerusalem  was  a  benevolent  one,  the  gift  mixed  by 
their  charitable  hands  appeared  to  our  Lord  a  cup 
of  temptation,  and  He  resolutely  put  it  aside. 

*  The  distinction  between  the  legitimate  and  tin-  illegitimate 
use  is  not  very  easy  to  draw  ;  hut  there  is  an  obvious  difference 
between  destroying  pain  for  an  ulterior  purpose  aud  destroying  it 
merely  to  save  the  feeling  of  the  sufferer. 


1^6       THE    TRIAL   AM)    DEATH   OF  JESUS    CIIIUST 

II. 

All  \v;is  no\v  ready  for  the  last  act,  and  the  soldiers 
started  their  ghastly  work. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  harrow  up  the  feelings 
of  my  readers  with  minute  descriptions  of  the  horrors 
of  crucifixion.*  Nothing  would  be  easier,  for  it  was 
an  unspeakably  awful  form  of  death.  Cicero,  who 
was  well  acquainted  with  it,  says  :  "  It  was  the  most 
cruel  and  shameful  of  all  punishments."  "  Let  it 
never,"  lie  adds,  "  come  near  the  body  of  a  Roman 
citizen  ;  nay,  not  even  near  his  thoughts  or  eyes  or 
cars."  It  was  the  punishment  reserved  for  slaves  and 
fur  revolutionaries,  whose  end  was  intended  to  be 
marked  by  special  infamy. 

The  cross  was  most  probably  of  the  form  in  which 
it  is  usually  represented— an  upright  post  crossed  by 
a  bar  near  the  top.  There  were  other  two  forms — 
that  of  the  letter  y  and  that  of  the  letter  X — but, 
as  the  accusation  of  Jesus  is  said  to  have  been  put 
up  over  1 1  is  head,  there  must  have  been  a  projection 


*  On  the  details  of  crucifixion  there  is  an  extremely  interesting 
and  learned  excursus  in  Zockler's  Das  I\rcnz  ('hristi  (  Beilage 
III.).  Cirero's  VYrrine  Orations  contain  a  good  deal  that  is 
valuable  to  a  student  of  the  Passion,  especially  in  regard  to 
scourging  and  crucifixion.  Crucifixion  \vas  an  extremely  common 
form  of  punishment  in  the  ancient  world;  but  ''the  cross  of  the 
God-Man  lias  put  an  end  to  the  punishment  of  the  cross, " 


above  llic  baron  which  1 1  is  arms  were  outstretched. 
The  arms  were  probably  bound  to  the  cross-beam, 
as  without  this  the  hands  would  have  been  torn 
through  by  the  weight.  And  for  a  similar  reason 
there  was  a  piece  of  wood  projecting  from  the 
middle  of  the  upright  beam,  on  which  the  body 
sat.  The  feet  were  either  nailed  separately  or 
crossed  the  one  over  the  other,  with  a  nail  through 
both.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  body  was  affixed 
before  or  after  the  cross  was  elevated  and  planted  in 
the  ground.  The  head  hung  free-,  so  that  the  dying 
man  could  both  see  and  speak  to  those  about  the 
cross. 

In  modern  executions  the  greatest  pains  are  taken 
to  make  death  as  nearly  as  possible  instantaneous, 
and  any  bungling  which  prolongs  the  agony  excites 
indignation  and  horror  in  the-  public  mind.  Ihit  the 
most  revolting  feature  of  death  by  crucifixion  was 
that  the  torture  was  deliberately  prolonged.  The 
victim  usually  lingered  a  whole  day,  sometimes  two 
or  three  days,  still  retaining  consciousness  ;  while  the 
burning  of  the  wounds  in  the  hands  and  it  et,  the 
uneasiness  of  the  unnatural  position,  the  oppression 
of  overcharged  veins  and,  above  all,  the  intolerable 
thirst  were  constantly  increasing.  Jesus  did  not 
suffer  so  long  ;  but  He  lingered  f<>r  four  or  five  hours. 

I  will   not,  however,   proceed   further   in  describing 


I5S       THE    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH   OF  JESL'S   CHRIST 


the  sickening  details.  How  far  all  these  horrors  may 
have  been  essential  elements  in  His  sufferings  it  would 
be  difficult  to  say.  Apart  from  the  prophecies  going 
before  which  had  to  be  fulfilled,  was  it  a  matter  of 
indifference  what  death  He  died?  Would  it  have 
served  equally  well  if  He  had  been  hanged  or  beheaded 
or  stoned  ?  We  cannot  tell.  Only,  when  we  know  the 
secret  of  what  1 1  is  soul  suffered,  we  can  discern  the 
fitness  of  the  choice  of  the  most  shameful  and  painful 
of  all  forms  of  death  for  His  body.* 

The  true  sufferings  of  Christ  were  not  physical,  but 
internal.  Looking  on  that  Face,  we  see  the  shadow 
of  a  deeper  woe  than  smarting  wounds  and  raging 
thirst  and  a  racking  frame — the  woe  of  slighted  love, 
of  a  heart  longing  for  fellowship  but  overwhelmed 
with  hatred  ;  the  woe  of  insult  and  wrong,  and  of 
unspeakable  sorrow  for  the  fate  of  those  who  would 
not  be  saved.  Nor  is  even  this  the  deepest  shadow. 
There  was  then  in  the  heart  of  the  Redeemer  a  woe 
to  which  no  human  words  arc  adequate.  He  was 
dying  for  the  sin  of  the  world.  He  had  taken  on 
Himself  the  guilt  of  mankind,  and  was  now  engaged 
in  the  final  struggle  to  put  it  away  and  annihilate  it. 
On  the  cross  was  hanging  not  only  the  body  of  flesh 
and  blood  of  the-  Man  Christ  Jesus,  but  at  the  same 

/tickler  maintains  that  crucifixion,  while  the  most  shameful, 
was  not  absolutely  the  most  painful  form  of  death. 


time  His  mystical  body  — that  body  of  which  He  is 
the  head  and  His  people  are  the  members.  Through 
this  body  also  the  nails  \vcre  driven,  and  on  it  death 
took  its  revenue.  His  people  died  with  Him  unto 
sin,  that  they  might  live  for  evermore. 

This  is  the  mystery,  but  it  is  also  the  glory  of  the 
scene.  Till  He  hung  on  it,  the  cross  was  the  symbol 
of  slavery  and  vulgar  wickedness  ;  but  lie  converted 
it  into  the  symbol  of  heroism,  self-sacrifice  and  salva 
tion.  It  was  only  a  wretched  framework  of  coarse 
and  blood-clotted  beams,  which  it  was  a  shame  to 
touch  ;  but  since  then  the  world  has  gloried  in  it  ; 
it  lias  been  carved  in  every  form  of  beauty  and  ever}' 
substance  of  price  ;  it  has  been  emblazoned  on  the 
flags  of  nations  and  engraved  on  the  sceptres  and 
diadems  of  kings.*  The  cross  was  planted  on  Golgotha 

*  The  appreciation  of  the  significance  of  the  Cm^s  has  pone 
on  in  two  lines— the  Artistic  and  the  I>octrinal  -both  of  which 
are  followed  out  with  varied  learning  in  X«ickl«  i's  Krcnz  ('/ir/sti. 

The  Knglish  reader  may  \\ith  great  satisfaction  tract-  the 
artistic  development  in  Mrs.  Jameson's  History  »f  our  Lord  as 
exemplified  in  \\'orks  of  Art,  where  the  follouing  scheme  is  given 
of  the  varieties  of  treatment : — 

"Symbolical,  when  the  abstract  personifications  of  the  sun 
and  moon,  earth  and  ocean,  an-  present. 

"  Sacrificially  symbolical i  \\lien  the  Kuch.iristic  cup  is  seen 
below  the  Cross,  or  the  pelican  feeding  her  young  is  placed 
above  it. 

"Simply  doclrinalt  \\hen  the  Virgin  and  St.  John  stand  on  each 
side,  as  solemn  witnesses  ;  or  our  Lord  is  drinking  the  cup.  some- 


160       Till-:    TRIAL    AM)   DEATH    <>!•   JLSL'S    CHRIST 

a  dry,  dead  tree  ;  but  lo  !  it  has  blossomed  like  Aaron's 
rod  ;  it  has  struck  its  roots  deep  do\vn  to  the  heart 
of  the  world,  and  sent  its  brandies  upwards,  till  to-day 

times  literally  so  represented,  given  Him  of  the  Father,  while 
the  lance  opens  the  sacramental  font. 

"  Historically  ideal,  as  when  the  thieves  are  joined  to  the  scene, 
and  sorrowing  angels  throng  the-  air. 

"Historically  dc;>otional,  as  when  the  real  features  of  the  scene 
are  preserved,  and  saints  and  devotees  are  introduced. 

"  Legendary,  as  when  we  see  the  Virgin  fainting. 

"  Allegorical  and  fantastic,  as  when  the  tree  is  made  the 
principal  object,  with,  its  branches  terminating  in  patriarchs 
and  prophets,  virtues  and  graces. 

''Realistic,  as  when  the  mere  event  is  rendered  as  through  the 
eyes  of  an  unenlightened  looker-on. 

"These  and  many  other  modes  of  conception  account  for  the 
great  diversity  in  the  treatment  of  this  subject  ;  a  further  variety 
being  given  by  the  combination  of  two  or  more  of  these  modes 
of  treatment  together;  for  instance,  the  pelican  may  be  seen 
above  the  Cross  giving  her  life's  blood  for  her  offspring;  angels 
in  attitudes  of  despair,  bewailing  the  Second  Person  of  the 
Trinity ;  or,  in  an  ideal  sacramental  sense,  catching  the  blood 
from  His  wounds-  the  Jews  below  looking  on,  as  they  really 
did,  with  contemptuous  gestures  and  hardened  hearts  ;  the  cen 
turion  acknowledging  that  this  was  really  the  Son  of  God,  while 
the  group  of  the  fainting  Virgin,  supported  by  the  Marys  and 
St.  John,  adds  legend  to  symbolism,  ideality,  and  history." 

In  the  study  of  the  doctrinal  development  nothing  is  so  im 
portant  as  the  exegesis  of  the  New  Testament  statements  about 
the  Cross;  and  this  has  been  done  in  a  masterly  way  by  Dr. 
Dale  in  his  work  on  the  Atonement.  What  may  be  called  the 
Philosophy  of  the  Cross  (to  borrow  a  happy  phrase  of  McCheyne 
Edgar's)  came  late.  It  is  usualU"  reckoned  to  have  commenced 
with  AiHelm  ;  and  since  the  Kef<  rm  >tion  every  great  theologian 


it  fills  the  earth,  and  the  nations  rest  beneath  its 
shadow  and  eat  of  its  pleasant  fruits.* 

III. 

At  length  the  ghastly  preparations  were  completed  ; 
and  in  the  greedy  eyes  of  Jewish  hatred  the  Saviour. 

has  added  his  contribution.  Yet  tin-  \vork  is  by  no  menus 
completed.  Indeed,  ;it  tin-  present  (lav  there  is  no  greater 
desideratum  in  theologv  than  a  philosophy  of  tin-  Cross  which 
would  thoroughly  satiety  the  religious  mind.  Shallow  theories 
abound;  but  tin- Church  of  Christ  \\ill  never  be  able  to  rest  in 
any  theory  whi-'h  does  not  do  justice,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the 
tremendously  strong  statements  of  Scripture  on  the  subject  and. 
on  the  other,  to  her  own  consciousness  of  unique  and  infinite 
obligation  to  the  dying  Saviour.  Perhaps  the  most  satisfactory 
e.\|  re^sion  o|  the  Christian  consciousness  on  the  subject  is  to  IM- 
found  in  the  hymns  of  the  Church,  from  the  Te  I  )i-um  down 
through  Scotus  Krigena  and  Kulbeit  of  Chartres  to  (ierhardt 
and  Toplady.  See  Sch. ill's  Christ  in  >V*,/;'. 

A  third  line  of  developni' nt  mi^ht  be  traced— tin*  Practical 
in  martyrologv.  the  history  of  mis-inns,  asceticism,  and  the  like; 
and  the  spokesman  of  this  branch  of  the  truth  is  ;i  Kempis, 
who,  as  /ockler  says,  t'-aches  his  disciples  to  know  poverty  and 
humility  as  the  roots  of  the  tree  of  the  ( "ro-~s,  labour  and  penitence 
as  its  bark,  righteousness  and  mercy  as  its  two  principal  branches, 
truth  and  doctrine  as  its  precious  leaves,  chastity  and  obedience 
as  its  blossoms,  temperance  ;nid  discipline  as  its  fragrance,  and 
salvation  and  eternal  life  as  its  glorious  fruit. 

*  When  the  Northern  nations  became  Christian  they  trans 
ferred  to  the  Cross  tin-  nobler  ideas  embodied  in  the  mystic  tree 
Igdrasil  ;  and  one  of  the  commonest  ideas  of  the  mystical  writers 
of  the  Middle  Ages  is  the  identification  of  the  Cross  as  both  the 
true  tree  of  life  and  the  true  tree  of  knowledge. 

1  I 


if,2      '/'///•;    'HUM.    AM)    DEATH    UP  JKSUs    CHRIST 

whom  they  had  hunted  to  death  with  the  ferocity  of 
bloodhounds,  was  exposed  to  full  view.  But  the  first 
triumphant  glance  of  priests,  Pharisees  and  populace 
met  with  a  violent  check  ;  for  above  the  Victim's 
head  they  saw  something  which  cut  them  to  the 
heart. 

The  practice  of  affixing  to  the  apparatus  of  exe 
cution  a  description  of  the  crime  prevails  in  some 
countries  to  this  day.  In  the  Life  of  Gilmour  of 
Mongolia  there  is  a  description  of  an  execution  which 
he  witnessed  in  China  ;  and  in  the  cart  which  con 
veyed  the  condemned  man  to  the  scene  of  death 
a  board  was  exhibited  describing  his  misdeeds.  The 
custom  was  a  Roman  one  ;  and,  besides,  there  was 
generally  an  official  who  walked  in  front  of  the 
procession  of  death  and  proclaimed  the  crimes  of  the 
condemned.  No  mention,  however,  of  such  a  func 
tionary  appears  in  the  Gospels  ;  nor  does  the  inscrip 
tion  appear  to  have  been  visible  to  all  till  it  was 
affixed  to  the  cross.  It  was  fastened  to  the  top  of 
the  upright  beam  ;  and  Pilate  made  use  of  this 
opportunity  to  pay  out  the  Jews  for  the  annoyance 
they  had  caused  him.  lie  had  parted  from  them  in 
anger,  for  they  had  humiliated  him  ;  but  he  sent  after 
them  that  which  should  be  a  drop  of  bitterness  in 
their  cup  of  triumph.  When  they  were  still  at  his 
judgment-seat,  his  last  blow  in  his  encounter  with 


C.IU'.IKY  if.  3 


them  had  been  to  pretend  to  be  convinced  that  Jesus 
really  was  their  king.  This  insult  he  no\v  prolonged 
by  wording  the  inscription  thus:  "This  is  Jesus,  the 
King  of  the  Jews."  It  was  as  much  as  to  say,  This 
is  what  becomes  of  a  Jewish  king  ;  this  is  what  the 
Romans  do  with  him  ;  the  king  of  this  nation  is  a 
slave,  a  crucified  criminal  ;  and,  if  such  be  the  king, 
what  must  the  nation  be  whose  king  he  is  ? 

So  enraged  were  the  Jews  that  they  sent  a  depu 
tation  to  the  governor  to  entreat  him  to  alter  the 
words.  No  doubt  he  was  delighted  to  see  them  ;  for 
their  coming  proved  how  thoroughly  his  sarcasm  had 
gone  home.  He  only  laughed  at  their  petition  and, 
assuming  the  grand  air  of  authority  which  became 
no  man  so  well  as  a  Roman,  dismissed  them  with  the 
words,  "  What  I  have  written  I  have  written." 

This  looked  like  strength  of  will  and  character  ; 
but  it  was  in  reality  only  a  covering  lor  weakness. 
He  had  his  will  about  the  inscription  a  trifle;  but 
they  had  their  will  about  the  crucifixion.  He  was 
strong  enough  to  browbeat  them,  but  he  was  not 
strong  enough  to  deny  himself. 

Yet,  though  the  inscription  of  Pilate  was  in  his 
own  mind  little  more  than  a  revengeful  jest,  there 
was  in  it  a  Divine  purpose.  "What  I  have  written 
I  have  written,"  he  said  ;  but,  had  he  known,  he 
mi'-ht  almost  have  .said.  "  Wh.it  I  have  uritten  (i»»d 


'////•:    TRIAL    AND    DKITII   O/-\//;.S7.T.S    CHRIST 


has  written."  Sometimes  and  at  some  places  the 
atmosphere  is  so  charged  and  electric  with  the  Divine 
that  inspiration  alights  and  burns  on  everything  ;  and 
never  was  this  more  true  than  at  the  cross.  Pilate 
had  already  unconsciously  been  almost  a  prophet 
when,  pointing  to  Jesus,  he  said,  "  Behold  the  Man  '' 
— a  word  which  still  preaches  to  the  centuries.  And 
now,  after  being  a  speaking  prophet,  he  becomes,  as 
has  been  quaintly  remarked,  a  writing  one  too  ;  for 
his  pen  was  guided  by  a  supernatural  hand  to  indite 
the  words,  "  This  is  Jesus,  the  King  of  the  Jews." 

It  added  greatly  to  the  significance  of  the  inscription 
that  it  was  written  in  Hebrew  and  Greek  and  Latin. 
What  Pilate  intended  thereby  was  to  heighten  the 
insult  ;  he  wished  all  the  strangers  present  at  the 
Passover  to  be  able  to  read  the  inscription  ;  for  all 
of  them  who  could  read  at  all  would  know  one  of 
these  three  languages.  But  Providence  intended 
something  else.  These  are  the  three  great  languages 
of  the  ancient  world — the  representative  languages. 
Hebrew  is  the  tongue  of  religion,  Greek  that  of 
culture,  Latin  the  language  of  law  and  govern 
ment  ;  and  Christ  was  declared  King  in  them  all. 
On  His  head  are  many  crowns.  He  is  King  in 
the  religious  sphere  the  King  of  salvation,  holiness 
and  love  ;  He  is  King  in  the  realm  of  culture — the 
treasures  of  art,  of  song,  of  literature,  of  philosophy 


belong  to  Him,  and  shall  yet  be  all  poured  at  His 
feet  ;  lie  is  Kin^  in  the  political  sphere — Kmi;  of 
kin^s  and  Lord  of  lords,  entitled  to  rule  in  the  social 
relationships,  in  trade  and  commerce,  in  all  the  ac 
tivities  of  men.  \Vc  see  not  yet,  indeed,  all  things 
put  under  Him;  but  every  day  we  see  them  more 
and  more  in  the  process  of  bcin;^  put  under  Him. 
The  name  of  Jesus  is  travelling  everywhere  over  the 
earth  ;  thousands  are  learning  to  pronounce  it  ; 
millions  are  read)-  to  die  for  it.  And  thus  is  the 
unconscious  prophecy  of  Pilate  .still  bein_;  fulfilled. 


CHAPTER    XIII. 
THE    GROUPS    ROUND    Till':    CROSS 

T  X  the  last  chapter  we  sa\v  the  Son  of  .Man  nailed 
^  to  the  cursed  tree.  There  lie  hung  for  hours, 
exposed,  helpless,  but  conscious,  looking  out  on  the 
sea  of  faces  assembled  to  behold  His  end.  On  the 
occasion  of  an  execution  a  cro\vd  gathers  outside 
our  jails  merely  to  sec  the  black  flag  run  up  which 
signals  that  the  deed  is  done;  and  in  the  old  days 
of  public  executions  such  an  event  always  attracted 
an  enormous  crowd.  Xo  doubt  it  was  the  same  in 
Jerusalem.  \Ylun  Jesus  was  put  to  death,  it  was 
Passover  time,  and  the  city  was  filled  with  multitudes 
of  strangers,  to  whom  an}7  excitement  was  welcome. 
Ik-sides,  the  case  of  Jesus  had  stirred  both  the  capital 
and  the  entire  country."* 

The  sight  which  the  crowd  had  come  to  see  was, 
we  no\v  know,  the  greatest  ever  witnessed  in  the 
universe.  Angels  and  archangels  were  absorbed  in 

'  Keim  strangely  surmises  that  there  was  no  great  crowd ; 
but  this  is  impossible. 

1 66 


it  ;  millions  of  men  and  women  arc  looking  hack  to 
it  to  day  and  ever)'  day.  Hut  what  impressions  did 
it  make  on  those  who  saw  it  at  the  time?  To  ascer 
tain  this,  let  us  look  at  three  characteristic  groups 
near  the  cross,  whose  feelings  were  shared  in  varying 
decrees  by  many  around  them. 


I.c  ok,  first,  at  the  ^r>up  nearest  the  cross  -  that 
of  the  Roman  i-oldiers. 

In  the  Roman  army  it  seems  to  have  been  a  rule 
that,  when  executions  were  carried  out  by  soldiers 
the  effects  of  the  criminals  fell  as  perquisites  to  those 
who  did  tile  work.  Thmr.'.h  main'  more  soldiers  were 
probably  present  on  this  occasion,  the  actual  details 
of  fixing  the  beam,  handling  the  hammer  and  nails, 
hoisting  the;  apparatus,  and  so  forth,  in  the  ca^e  (.1 
Jesus,  fell  to  a  quaternion  ot  them.  lo  these  It  air, 
therefore,  belonged  all  that  was  on  Him;  and  they 
could  at  once  proceed  to  divide  the  spoil,  because 
in  crucifixion  the  victim  was  stripped  before  beiiuj 
affixed  to  the  cross— a  trait  of  revolting  shame.'  A 
lar^c,  loose  upper  garment,  a  head  dress  perhaps, 
a  girdle  and  a  pair  of  sandals,  and,  la^t  of  all,  an 

•  As  hourv.r,  th<-  J«us  would  li.tvc  nl.,.-.  d-d  t<>  this, 
K«l«T-li«-im  ar^iK-^  l»nt  m.t  .  «.n\  in.  in^ly  tliat  tln-r«-  must  hav<- 
been  at  l«-a^t  a  sli^lit  cnM-riny. 


i6S      THE    TRIAL   AM)   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

under  garment,  such  as  Galilean  peasants  were  wont 
to  wear,  which  was  all  of  a  piece  and  had  perhaps 
been  knitted  for  Him  by  the  loving  finders  of  His 
mother — these  articles  became  the  boot}'  of  the 
soldiers.  They  formed  the  entire  property  which  Jesus 
had  to  leave,  and  the  four  soldiers  were  His  heirs.  Yet 
this  was  He  who  bequeathed  the  vastest  legacy  that 
ever  has  been  left  by  any  human  being — a  legacy 
ample  enough  to  enrich  the  whole  world.  Only  it 
was  a  spiritual  legacy — of  wisdom,  of  influence,  <  f 
example. 

The  soldiers,  their  ghastly  task  over,  sat  down  at 
the  foot  of  the  cross  to  divide  their  booty.  The}" 
obtained  from  it  not  only  profit  but  amusement  ;  for, 
after  dividing  the  articles  as  well  as  they  could,  they 
had  to  cast  lots  about  the  last,  which  they  could  not 
divide.  One  of  them  fetched  some  dice  out  of  his 
pocket — gambling  was  a  favourite  pastime  of  Roman 
soldiers — and  they  settled  the  difficulty  by  a  game. 
Look  at  them  chaffering,  chattering,  laughing;  and, 
above  their  heads,  not  a  yard  a\vay,  that  Figure. 
What  a  picture!  The  Son  of  God  atoning  for  the 
.-ins  of  the  world,  whilst  angels  and  glorified  spirits 
croud  the  walls  of  the  celestial  city  to  look  down  at 
the  spectacle  ;  and,  within  a  yard  of  1  I  is  sacred  1'erson, 
the  soldiers,  in  absolute  apathy,  gambling  for  these 
poor  shreds  of  clothing  !  So  much,  and  no  more,  did 


THE  r.Rorrs  /onr.v/)  rur  runs*  in, 

they  perceive  ol  the  stupendous  drama  tiny  were 
\\ithin  touch  of.  For  it  is  not  only  necessary  t<>  have 
a  threat  sight  to  make  an  impression  ;  quite  as  neces 
sary  is  the  seeing  eye.  There  are  those  to  whom  this 
earth  is  sacred  because  Jesus  Christ  has  trodden  it; 
the  .sky  is  sacred  because  it  lias  bent  above  Him; 
history  is  sacred  because  His  name  is  in.-cribed  on 
it  ;  the  daily  tasks  of  liie  are  all  sacred  because  they 
can  be  done  in  His  name.  Hut  are  there  not  multi 
tudes,  even  in  Christian  lands,  who  live  as  if  Christ 
had  never  lived,  and  to  whom  the  question  has  never 
occurred,  What  difference  does  it  make  to  us  that 
Jc.sus  died  in  this  world  of  which  we  are  inhabitants? 

II. 

Look  now  at  a  second  ^roup,  much  more  numerous 
than  the  first,  consisting  oi  the  members  of  the 
Sanhedrim. 

After  condemning  Jesus  in  their  own  court,  they 
had  accompanied  Him  through  sla;^e  alter  sta^e  ol 
His  civil  trial,  until  at  last  they  .seemed  His  con 
demnation  at  the  tribunal  of  I'ilatc.  When  at  last 
He  was  handed  over  to  the  executioners,  it  mi;.;ht 
have  been  expert"  d  that  the}'  Would  have  be  i  n  tired 
of  the  lengthy  proceedings  and  ;.',lad  to  »  scape  ln-in 
the  scene.  Hut  their  passions  had  been  thoroughly 
, noised,  and  tin  ir  thirst  for  revenue  \\.i.s  so  deep  that 


170       THE    TRIAL    AM)    DEATH    OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

they  could  not  allow  the  soldiers  to  do  their  own 
work,  but,  forgetful  of  dignity,  accompanied  the  crowd 
to  the  place  of  execution  and  stayed  to  glut  their 
eyes  with  the  spectacle  of  their  Victim's  sufferings. 
1C ven  after  lie  was  lifted  up  on  the  tree,  they  could 
not  keep  their  tongues  off  Him  or  give  Him  the 
dying  man's  privilege  of  peace  ;  but,  losing  all  sense 
of  propriety,  they  made  insulting  gestures  and  poured 
on  Him  insulting  cries.  Naturally  the  crowd  followed 
their  example,  till  not  only  the  soldiers  took  it  up, 
but  even  the  thieves  who  were  crucified  with  Him 
joined  in.  So  that  the  crowd  under  His  eyes  became 
a  sea  of  scorn,  whose  angry  waves  dashed  up  about 
His  cross. 

The  line  taken  was  to  recall  all  the  great  names 
which  lie  had  claimed,  or  which  had  been  applied 
to  Him,  and  to  contrast  them  with  the  position 
in  which  He  now  was.  "The  Son  of  God,"  "The 
Chosen  of  God,'  "The  King  of  Israel,"  "  1  he  Christ," 
"  The  King  of  the  Jews,"  "Thou  that  drstroycst  the 
temple  and  bulkiest  it  in  three  days" — with  these 
epithets  they  pelted  Him  in  every  tone  of  mockery. 
They  challenged  Him  to  come  down  from  the  cross 
and  they  would  believe  Him.  This  was  their  most 
persistent  cry  He  had  saved  others,  but  Himself  lie 
could  not  save.  They  had  always  maintained  that 
it  was  by  the  power  of  devils  He  wrought  His 


Tin:  c,Rui-i>$  ROCM)  Tin:  rviv/s.s  171 

miracles;  but  these  evil  powers  arc  dangerous  to 
palter  with  ;  they  may  lend  their  virtue  for  a  time, 
but  at  last  tiny  appear  to  demand  their  price  ;  at  the 
most  critical  moment  they  leave  him  who  has  trusted 
them  in  the  lurch.  This  was  what  had  happened  to 
Jesus;  now  at  last  the  wizard's  wand  was  broken  and 
lie  eould  charm  no  more. 

As  the\-  thus  poured  out  the  gall  which  had  long 
been  accumulating  in  their  hearts,  they  did  not  notice 
that,  in  the  multitude  of  tin  ir  words  the}1  were  using 
the  very  terms  attributed  in  the  twenty-second  Psalm 
to  the  enemies  of  the  holy  Sufferer:  "lie  trusted 
in  (jod;  let  Him  deliver  Him  now,  if  lie  will  have 
Him;  for  He  said,  I  am  the  Son  ol  (jod."  Cold 
blooded  historians  have  doubted  whether  the}'  could 
have  made-  such  a  .slip  without  noticing  it  ;  but, 
strange  to  say,  there  is  an  exact  modern  parallel. 
When  one  of  the  Swiss  reformers  was  pleading  before 
the  p.ipal  court,  the  president  interrupted  him  \\ith 
the.  very  words  of  Caiaphas  to  the  Sanhedrim  :  "  ll< 
hath  spoken  blasphemy  :  what  further  need  have  we 
of  witnesses?  What  think  ye?"  and  they  all  answered, 
"  lie  is  worth}'  of  d.-ath  "  ;  without  noticing,  till  he 
reminded  them,  that  the}'  were  quoting  Scripture.* 

Jesus  might  have  answered  the  cries  of  1 1  is  enemies  ; 

*   Su>kiiid,  J>assiun.\\(huli',  in  /»<'. 


172      THE    TRIAL    AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 


because  to  one  hanging  on  the  cross  it  was  possible 
not  only  to  hear  and  see,  but  also  to  speak.  However, 
He  answered  never  a  word — "when  He  was  reviled, 
He  reviled  not  again,"  "as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers 
is  dumb,  so  He  opened  not  His  mouth."  This  was 
not,  however,  because  He  did  not  feel.  More  painful 
than  the  nails  which  pierced  His  bod}'  were  these 
missiles  of  malice  shot  at  His  mind.  The  human 
heart  laid  bare  its  basest  and  blackest  depths  under 
His  very  eyes;  and  all  its  foul  scum  was  poured 
over  Him. 

\\  as  it  a  temptation  to  Him,  one  wonders,  when 
so  often  from  every  side  the  invitation  was  given 
Him  to  come  down  from  the  cross?  This  was 
substantially  the  same  temptation  as  was  addressed 
to  Him  at  the  opening  of  His  career,  when  Satan 
urged  Him  to  cast  Himself  from  the  pinnacle  of  the 
temple.  It  had  haunted  Him  in  various  forms  all 
His  life  through.  And  now  it  assails  Him  once  more 
at  the  crisis  of  His  f,itc.  They  thought  His  patience 
was  impotence  and  His  silence  a  confession  of  defeat. 
\Vhy  should  He  not  let  His  glory  blaze  forth  and 
confound  them?  How  easily  He  could  have  done 
it!  Yet  no;  He  could  not.  They  were  quite  right 
when  the}'  said,  "He  saved  others,  Himself  He 
cannot  save."  Had  He  saved  Himself,  He  would 
not  hav<-  been  the  Saviour.  Y<  t  the  pov\er  that  keut 


Him  on  the  cross  was  ;i  far  mightier  one  than  \\ould 
have  been  necessary  to  leave  it.  It  was  not  by  the 
nails  through  His  hands  and  feet  that  He  was  held, 
nor  by  the  ropes  with  which  His  arms  were  bound, 
nor  by  the  soldiers  watching  Him;  no,  but  by 
invisible  bands— by  the  cords  of  redeeming  love  and 
by  the  constraint  of  a  Divine  design. 

Of  this,  however,  His  enemies  had  no  inkling. 
The}'  were  judging  Him  by  the  most  heathenish 
standard.  They  had  no  idea  of  power  but  a  material 
one,  or  of  glory  but  a  selfish  ore.  The  Saviour  of 
their  fancy  was  a  political  deliverer,  not  One  who 
could  save  from  sin.  And  to  this  day  Christ  hears  the 
cry  from  more  sides  than  one,  "Come  down  from  tin- 
cross,  and  we  will  believe  Thee.''  It  comes  from  the 
spiritually  shallow,  who  have  no  sense  of  their  own 
unworthiness  or  of  the  majesty  and  the  rights  of 
a  hoi}'  God.  The}'  do  not  understand  a  theology  of 
sin  and  punishment,  of  atonement  and  redemption  ; 
and  all  the  deep  significance  of  His  death  has  to  be 
taken  out  of  Christianity  before  they  will  believe  it. 
It  comes,  too,  from  the  morally  cowardly  and  the 
worldly  minded,  who  desire  a  religion  without  the 
cross.  If  Christianity  were  only  a  creed  to  believe, 
or  a  worship  in  whose  celebration  tin-  a-sthetic  faculty 
might  take  delight,  or  a  private  path  by  which  a  man 
might  pilgrim  to  heaven  unnoticed,  they  would  be 


174       TlllC    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH   OF  JKSUS    CHRIST 


delighted  to  believe  it  ;  but,  because  it  means  con 
fessing  Christ  and  bearing  His  reproach,  mingling 
with  His  despised  people  and  supporting  His  cause, 
they  will  have  none  of  it.  None  can  honour  the  cross 
of  Christ  who  have  not  felt  the  humiliation  of  guilt 
and  entered  into  the  secret  of  humility. 

III. 

Let  our  attention  now  be  directed  to  a  third  group. 
And  again  it  is  a  comparatively  small  one. 

As  the  eyes  of  Jesus  wandered  to  and  fro  over  the 
sea  of  faces  upturned  to  His  own — faces  charged 
with  every  form  and  degree  of  hatred  and  contempt — 
was  there  no  point  on  which  they  could  linger  with 
satisfaction  ?  Yes,  among  the  thorns  there  was  one 
lily.  On  the  outskirts  of  the  crowd  there  stood  a 
group  of  Ilis  acquaintances  and  of  the  women  who 
follov.-ed  Him  from  Galilee  and  ministered  unto 
Him.  Let  us  enumerate  their  honoured  names,  as 
far  as  they  have  been  preserved — "  Mary  Magdalene, 
and  Mary  the  mother  of  James  and  Joscs,  and  the 
mother  of  Zebedce's  children." 

Their  position,  "  afar  off,"  probably  indicates  that 
they  were  in  a  state  of  fear.  It  was  r.ot  safe  to  be 
too  closch'  identified  with  One  against  whom  the 
authorities  cherished  such  implacable  feelings  ;  and 
they  may  have  been  quite  right  not  to  make  themselves 


////.  f.A'or/'.s  i«>t'.\i>  i in:  ( 

too  conspicuous.  Apart  from  the-  danger  to  which 
tiny  might  he  exposed,  they  had  a  whole  tempest 
of  trouble  in  their  hearts.  As  yet  they  knew  not  the 
Scriptures  that  He  must  rise  again  from  the  dead  ;  and 
this  collapse  of  the  cause  in  which  they  had  embarked 
their  all  for  time  and  for  eternity  was  a  bewildering 
calamity.  They  had  trusted  that  it  had  bi  en  He- 
who  should  have  redeemed  Israel,  and  that  lie  would 
live  and  reign  over  the  redeemed  race  forever.  And 
there  lie  was,  perching  before  their  eyes  in  defeat 
and  shame.  Their  faith  was  at  the  very  last  ebb. 
Or  say,  rather,  it  survived  only  in  the  f<  rm  of  love. 
Bewildered  as  were  their  ideas,  He  had  as  firm  a 
hold  as  ever  on  their  hearts.  They  loved  Him  ;  the}' 
suffered  with  Him;  they  could  have  died  f<  .r  Him. 
Max*  we  not  believe  that  the  eyes  of  Jesus,  as  long 
as  they  were  able  to  sec-,  turned  often  away  from  the 
brutal  soldiers  beneath  His  feet,  and  from  the  sea 
of  distorted  faces,  to  this  distant  group  ?  In  some 
respects,  indeed,  their  aspect  might  be  more  trying 
to  Him  than  even  the  hateful  faces  of  His  enemies  ; 
for  sympathy  will  sometimes  break  down  a  strong 
heart  that  is  proof  against  opposition.  \  et  this 
neighbourly  sympathy  and  womanly  love  must,  on  the 
whole,  have  been  a  profound  comfort  and  support. 
He  was  sustained  all  through  His  sufferings  by  the 
thou-'ht  of  tin-  multitudes  without  number  who  would 


'/'///•:    TRIAL    AM)    Dl'.ATlI    OF  JESUS 


benefit  from  what  He  was  enduring  ;  but  here  before 
His  eyes  was  an  earnest  of  His  reward,  in  whieh 
He  saw  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  was 
satisfied. 

In  these  three  groups,  then,  we  sec  three  pre 
dominant  states  of  mind — in  the  soldiers  apathy,  in 
the  Sanhedrim  antipathy,  in  the  Galileans  sympathy. 

Has  it  ever  occurred  to  you  to  ask  in  which  group 
you  would  have  been  had  you  been  there  ?  This  is 
a  searching  question.  Of  course  it  is  easy  now  to 
say  which  were  right  and  which  were  wrong.  It  is 
always  easy  to  admire  the  heroes  and  the  causes  of 
bygone  days  ;  but  it  is  possible  to  do  so  and  yet 
be  apathetic  or  antipathetic  to  those  of  our  own. 
Kvcn  the  Roman  soldiers  at  the  foot  of  the  cross 
admired  Romulus  and  Cincinnatus  and  Brutus,  though 
they  had  no  feeling  for  One  at  their  side  greater  than 
these.  The  Jews  who  were  mocking  Christ  admired 
Moses  and  Samuel  and  Isaiah.  Christ  is  still  bearing 
His  cross  through  the  streets  of  the  world,  and  is 
hanging  exposed  to  contempt  and  ill-treatment  ;  and 
it  is  possible  to  admire  the  Christ  of  the  Bible  and 
yet  be  persecuting  and  opposing  the  Christ  of  our 
own  century.  The  Christ  of  to-day  signifies  the 
truth,  the  cause,  the  principles  of  Christ,  and  the 
men  and  women  in  whom  these  are  embodied.  We 


arc  cither  helping  or  hindering  those  movements  on 
which  Christ  has  set  His  heart;  often,  without  being 
aware  of  it,  men  choose  their  sides  and  plan  and 
speak  and  act  cither  for  or  against  Christ.  This  is 
the  Passion  of  our  own  day,  the  Golgotha  of  our  own 
city. 

Hut  it  comes  nearer  than  this.  The  living  Christ 
Himself  is  still  in  the  world  :  I  Ic  comes  to  every  door; 
llis  Spirit  strives  with  every  soul.  And  lie  .still 
meets  with  these  three  kinds  of  treatment  apathy, 
antipathy,  sympathy.  As  a  magnet,  passing  over  a 
heap  of  objects,  causes  those  to  move  and  spring  out 
of  the  heap  which  are  akin  to  itself,  so  redeeming 
love,  as  revealed  in  Christ,  passing  over  the  surface  ol 
mankind  century  after  century,  lias  the  power  so  to 
move  human  hearts  to  the  very  depths  that,  kindling 
with  admiration  and  desire,  they  spring  up  and  attach 
themselves  to  Him.  This  response  may  be  called 
faith,  or  love,  or  spirituality,  or  what  you  please;  but 
it  is  the  very  test  and  touchstone  of  eternity,  for  it 
is  separating  men  and  women  1mm  the  mass  and 
making  them  one  forever  \\ith  the  life  and  the  !<>\c 
«.f  Cod. 


CIIAPTKR    XIV. 
THE    FIRST   WORD    FROM    THE    CROSS  * 

IX  last  chapter  we  saw  the  impressions  made  by 
the  crucifixion  on  the  different  groups  round 
the  cross.  On  the  soldiers,  who  did  the  deed,  it  made 
no  impression  at  all  ;  the}-  were  absolutely  blind  to 
the  wonder  and  glory  of  the  scene  in  which  they  were 
taking  part.  On  the  members  of  the  Sanhedrim,  and 
the  others  who  thought  with  them,  it  had  an  extra 
ordinary  effect  :  the  perfect  revelation  of  goodness 
and  spiritual  beauty  threw  them  into  convulsions  of 
angry  opposition.  Kven  the  group  of  the  friends 
of  Jesus,  standing  af  ir  off,  saw  only  a  very  little  way 
into  the  meaning  of  what  was  taking  place  before 
their  eyes  :  the  victory  of  their  Master  over  sin, 
death  and  the  world  appeared  to  them  a  tragic 
defeat.  So  true  is  it,  as  I  said,  that,  when  something 
grand  is  to  be  seen,  there  is  required  not  only  the 
object  but  the  seeing  eye.  The  image  in  a  mirror 

*   "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do.  ' 


"/'///•:  /•7/\'.s7"  ii'oKit  i-'Kn.M  ////•:  rAv/s.s  170 

depends  not  only  on  the  object    reflected   but  on   the 
quality  and  the  configuration  of  the  glass. 

\\'e  wish,  however,  to  see  the  scene  enacted  on 
Calvary  in  its  true  shape  ;  and  where  shall  we  look? 
There  was  one  mind  there  in  which  it  was  mirmnd 
with  perfect  fidelity.  If  we  could  sec  the  imai;e  of 
the  crucifixion  in  the  mind  of  Jesus  Himself,  this 
would  reveal  its  true  meaning. 

Hut  in  what  way  can  we  ascertain  how  it  appeared 
to  Him,  as  from  His  painful  .station  He  looked  forth 
upon  the  scene?  The  answer  i*  to  be  fouir.l  in  the 
sentences  which  I  le  uttered,  as  He  hung,  before  His 
senses  were  stilled  by  the  mists  of  death.  These  arc- 
like  windows  through  which  we  can  see  what  wa.s 
passing  in  His  mind.  They  are  mere  fragments,  of 
course  ;  yet  the)'  are  charged  with  eternal  significance. 
Words  are  always  photographs,  more  or  less  true, 
of  the  mind  which  utters  them  ;  these  wen-  the-  truest 
words  ever  uttered,  and  He  who  uttered  them  stamjxrd 
on  them  the  image  of  Himself. 

They  are  seven  in  number,  and  it  will  be  to  our 
advantage  to  linger  on  them  ;  they  are  too  precious 
to  be  taken  summarily.  The  sayings  of  the-  dying 
are  always  impressive.  \Vc  never  forget  the  de.ilhhcd 
utterances  of  a  parent  or  a  bosom  fi  lend  ;  the  last 
words  of  famous  men  are  treasured  for  ever.  In  Scrip- 
tun-  Jacob,  Joseph,  Moses,  and  other  patriarchal  men 


I  So      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESTS   CHRIST 


are  represented  as  having  risen  on  their  deathbeds 
far  above  themselves  and  spoken  in  the  tones  of  a 
higher  world  ;  and  in  all  nations  a  prophetic  impor 
tance  has  been  attached  to  the  words  of  the  dying. 
Now,  these  are  the  dying  words  of  Christ  ;  and,  as  ail 
His  words  arc  like  gold  to  silver  in  comparison  with 
those  of  other  men,  so  these,  in  comparison  with  the 
rest  of  His  words,  are  as  diamonds  to  gold. 

In  the  First  Word  three  things  are  noticeable—  the 
Invocation,  the  Petition,  and  the  Argument. 

I. 

It  was  not  unusual  for  crucified  persons  to  speak 
on  the  cross  ;  but  their  words  usually  consisted  of 
wild  expressions  of  pain  or  bootless  entreaties  for 
release,  curses  against  God  or  imprecations  on  those 
who  had  inflicted  their  sufferings.  When  Jesus  had 
recovered  from  the  swooning  shock  occasioned  by  the 
driving  of  the  nails  into  His  hands  and  feet,  His  first 
utterance  was  a  prayer,  and  His  first  word  u  Father." 

Was  it  not  an  unintentional  condemnation  of  those 
who  had  affixed  Him  there?  It  was  in  the  name  of 
religion  they  had  acted  and  in  the  name  of  God  ;  but 
which  of  them  was  thus  impregnated  through  and 
through  with  religion  ?  which  of  them  could  pretend 
to  a  communion  with  God  so  close  and  habitual? 


'////.   /•VA'.sy  //V>AV>  /-von.!/  ////:  rA'o.ss  iSi 

Kvidcntly  it  was  because  prayer  was  the  naturaj 
language  of  Jesus  that  at  this  moment  it  leapt  to  His 
lips.  It  is  a  suspicious  case  when  in  any  trial,  especi 
al!}'  an  ecclesiastical  one,  the  condemned  is  obviously 
a  better  man  than  the  judges. 

The  word  "Father,"  further,  proved  that  the  faith 
of  Jesus  was  unshaken  by  all  through  which  Hi-  had 
passed  and  by  that  which  He  was  now  enduring. 
\Vhen  righteousness  is  trampled  underfoot  and  wrong 
is  triumphant,  f.iith  is  tempted  to  ask  if  there  is  really 
a  God,  loving  and  wise,  seated  on  the  throne  of  the 
universe,  or  whether,  on  the  contrary,  all  is  the-  play 
of  chance.  When  prosperity  is  turned  suddenly  into 
adversity  and  the-  structure  of  the  plans  and  hopes 
of  a  life  is  tumbled  in  contusion  to  the  ground,  even 
the  child  of  God  is  apt  to  kick  against  the-  I)ivine 
will.  Great  saints  have  been  driven,  by  the  pressure 
of  pain  and  disappointment,  to  challenge  God's 
righteousness  in  words  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  a 
man  to  utter.  Hut,  when  the  fortunes  of  Jesus  weie 
at  the  blackest,  when  I  Ic  was  baited  by  a  raging 
pack  of  wolf-like  enemies,  and  when  He  was  .sinking 
into  unplumbed  abysses  of  pain  and  desertion,  He- 
still  said  "  Father." 

It  was  the  apotheosis  of  faith,  and  to  all  time  it 
will  serve  as  an  example  ;  because  it  was  gloriously 
vindicated.  If  ever  the  hand  of  the  Creator  seemed 


iS2       THE    TRIAL    AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

tp  be  withdrawn  from  the  rudder  of  the  universe,  and 
the  course  of  human  affairs  to  be  driving  down  head 
long  into  the  gulf  of  confusion,  it  was  when  lie  who 
was  the  embodiment  of  moral  beauty  and  worth  had 
to  die  a  shameful  death  as  a  malefactor.  Could  good 
by  any  possibility  rise  out  of  such  an  abyss  of  wrong? 
The  salvation  of  the  world  came  out  of  it  ;  all  that  is 
noblest  in  history  came  out  of  it.  This  is  the  supreme 
lesson  to  God's  children  never  to  despair.  All  may 
be  dark  ;  everything  may  seem  going  to  rack  and 
ruin  ;  evil  may  seem  to  be  enthroned  on  the  scat 
of  God  ;  yet  God  livcth  ;  He  sits  above  the  tumult 
of  the  present  ;  and  lie  will  bring  forth  the  dawn 
from  the  womb  of  the  darkness. 


The  prayer  which  followed  this  invocation  was  still 
more  remarkable  :  it  was  a  prayer  for  the  pardon  of 
His  enemies. 

In  the  foregoing  pages  we  have  seen  to  what  kind 
of  treatment  He  \vas  subjected  from  the  arrest  onwards 
-how  the  minions  of  authority  struck  and  insulted 
Him,  how  the  high  priests  twisted  the  forms  of  law 
to  ensnare  Him,  how  Herod  disdained  him,  how 
Pilate  played  fast  and  loose  with  His  interests,  how 
the  mob  howled  at  Him.  Our  hearts  have  burned 
with  indignation  as  one  depth  of  baseness  has  opened 


beneath  another  ;  and  \ve  have  been  unable  to  refrain 
from  using  hard  language.  The  comment  of  Jesus 
on  it  all  was,  "Father,  forgive  them." 

Long  ago,  indeed,  He  had  taught  men,  "  Love  your 
enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them 
that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them  which  dcspitcfully 
use  you  and  persecute  you."  But  this  morality  of 
the  Sermon  on  the-  Mount  Ivul  been  considered,  as 
the  world  still  inclines  to  consider  it,  a  beautiful 
dream.  There  have  been  many  teachers  who  have 
said  such  beautiful  things  ;  but  what  a  difference 
there  is  between  preaching  and  practice  !  When 
you  have  been  delighted  with  -the  sentiments  of  an 
author,  it  is  frequently  well  that  you  know  no  more 
about  him  ;  because,  if  you  chance  to  become- 
acquainted  with  the  facts  of  his  own  liie,  you  ex 
perience  a  painful  disillusionment.  Have  not  students 
even  of  our  own  Knglish  literature  in  \vry  recent 
times  learned  to  be  afraid  to  read  the-  biographies  of 
literal'}'  men,  lest  the  beautiful  structure  of  sentiments 
which  they  have  gathered  from  their  writings  should 
be  shattered  by  the-  truth  about  tlu  msclves  ?  Hut 
Jesus  practi-cd  what  He  taught.  He  is  the  one 
teacher  of  mankind  in  whom  the  sentiment  and  the 
act  completely  coincide.  His  doctrine  was  the  very 
highest:  too  high  it  often  seems  for  this  world.  Hut 
how  much  more  practical  it  appears  when  we  see  it  in 


1 84      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH    OF  JESL  :s    CHRIST 


action.  ITc  proved  that  it  can  be  realised  on  earth 
when  on  the  cross  Me  prayed,  "  Father,  forgive  them." 

Few  of  us,  perhaps,  kno\v  what  it  is  to  forgive.  \Yc 
have  never  been  deeply  wronged  ;  very  likely  many 
of  us  have  not  a  single  enemy  in  the  world.  But 
those  who  have  arc  aware  how  difficult  it  is  ;  perhaps 
nothing  else  is  more  difficult.  Revenge  is  one  of  the 
sweetest  satisfactions  to  the  natural  heart.  The  law 
of  the  ancient  world  was,  at  least  in  practice,  "  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  and  hate  thine  enemy." 
Even  saints,  in  the  Old  Testament,  curse  those  who 
have  persecuted  and  wronged  them  in  terms  of 
uncompromising  severity.  Had  Jesus  followed  these 
and,  as  soon  as  He  was  able  to  speak,  uttered  to  His 
Father  a  complaint  in  which  the  conduct  of  His 
enemies  was  branded  in  the  terms  it  deserved,  who 
would  have  ventured  to  find  fault  with  Him?  Even 
in  that  there  might  have  been  a  revelation  of  God  ; 
because  in  the  Divine  nature  there  is  a  fire  of  wrath 
against  sin.  But  how  poor  would  such  a  revelation 
have  been  in  comparison  with  the  one  which  lie 
now  made.  All  His  life  lie  was  revealing  God  ;  but 
now  His  time  was  short  ;  and  it  was  the  very  highest 
in  God  He  had  to  make  known. 

In  this  word  Christ  revealed  Himself;  but  at  the 
same  time  He  revealed  the  Father.  All  His  life  long 
the  Father  was  in  Him,  but  on  the  cross  the  divine 


life  and  character  flamed  in  His  human  nature  like 
the  fire  in  the  burning  hush.  It  uttered  itself  in  the 
words,  "  Father,  forgive  them  "  ;  and  what  did  it  tell  ? 
It  told  that  God  is  love. 


The    expiring  Saviour  hacked    up    His   prayer    for 
the  forgiveness  of  His  enemies  with   the  argument 
"  For  the}'  know  not  what  they  do." 

This  allows  us  to  see  further  still  into  the  divine 
depths  of  His  love.  The  injured  arc-  generally  alive 
only  to  their  own  side  of  the  cast-  ;  and  they  see  only 
those!  circumstances  which  tend  to  plan-  the  conduct 
of  the  opposite  party  in  the  worst  li^ht.  Hut  at  the 
moment  when  the  pain  inflicted  by  His  enemies 
was  at  the  worst  Jesus  was  seeking  excuses  for  their 
conduct. 

The  question  has  been  raised  how  far  the  excuse 
which  lie  made  on  tlu-ir  behalt  applied,  ('oiild  it 
be  said  of  them  all  that  they  knew  not  what  they 
were  doini;  ?  I  )id  not  Judas  know?  did  not  the  hii;h 
priests  know?  did  not  II (rod  know?  Apparently 
it  was  primarily  to  the  soldiers  who  did  the  actual 
work  of  crucifixion  that  Jesus  referred  ;  lx-c.iuse  it 
was  in  the  very  midst  of  their  work  that  the  words 
were  uttered,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  narrative  oi 
St.  Luke.  The  soldier--,  the  rude  uninstructed  iiMru 


1 86      77//f    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

mcnts  of  the  government,  were  the  least  guilty  among 
the  assailants  of  Jesus.  Next  to  them,  perhaps,  came 
Pilate  ;  and  there  were  different  stages  and  degrees 
down,  through  Herod  and  the  Sanhedrim,  to  the 
unspeakable  baseness  of  Judas.  But  St.  Peter,  in 
the  beginning  of  Acts,  expressly  extends  the  plea  of 
ignorance  so  far  as  to  cover  even  the  Sanhcclrists — 
"  And  now,  brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance 
ye  did  it,  as  did  also  your  rulers " — and  who  will 
believe  that  the  heart  of  the  Saviour  was  less  com 
prehensive  than  that  of  the  disciple? 

Let  us  not  be  putting  limits  to  the  divine  mercy. 
It  is  true  of  every  sinner,  in  some  measure,  that  he 
knows  not  what  he  docs.  And  to  a  true  penitent, 
as  he  approaches  the  throne  of  mercy,  it  is  a  great 
consolation  to  be  assured  that  this  plea  will  be  allowed. 
Penitent  St.  Paul  was  comforted  with  it  :  "  God  had 
mercy  on  me,  because  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief." 
God  knows  all  our  weakness  and  blindness  ;  men 
will  not  make  allowance  for  it  or  even  understand 
it  ;  but  lie  will  understand  it  all,  if  we  come  to  hide 
our  guilty  head  in  IT  is  bosom. 

Of  course  this  blessed  truth  may  be  perverted  by 
an  impenitent  heart  to  its  o\vn  undoing.  There  is 
no  falser  notion  than  that  expressed  in  the  French 
proverb,  Tout  comprendre  cst  tout  pai'doi liter  (To 
understand  everything  is  to  pardon  everything),  for 


Tin:  /y/v'sr  U'ORD  I-RO.M  ////;  r/v-ovs          is; 

.t  means  that  man  is  the  mere  creature  of  circum 
stances  and  has  no  real  responsibility  for  his  actions 
Flow  far  our  Lord  was  from  this  way  of  thinking  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  He  said,  "Forgive  them." 
He  knew  that  they  needed  forgiveness;  which  implies 
that  they  were,  guilty.  Indeed,  it  was  His  vivid 
apprehension  of  the  danger  to  which  their  guilt 
exposed  them  that  made  Him  forget  His  own 
sufferings  and  fling  Himself  between  tin  in  and  their 
fate. 

It  h  ;s  been  a-ked,  \\V.s  this  prayer  answered? 
were  the  crucifiers  of  Jesus  forgiven?  .To  this  it  may 
be  replied  that  a  prayer  for  forgiveness  cannot  be 
answered  without  the  co-ojxiration  of  those  prayed 
for.  Unless  they  repent  and  seek  pardon  for  them 
selves,  how  can  God  forgive  them?  The  prayer  of 
Jesus,  therefor,-,  meant  that  time  should  be  granted 
them  for  repentance,  and  that  they  should  be-  plied 
with  providences  and  with  preaching,  to  awaken  their 
consciences.  To  punish  so  appalling  a  crime  as  the 
crucifixion  of  His  Son,  (i<.d  might  have  caused  the 
earth  to  open  on  the  spot  and  swallow  the  sinners  up. 
Hut  no  judgment  of  the-  kind  took  place.  As  Jc  -  us 
had  predicted,  Jerusalem  perished  in  indescribable 
throes  of  agony  ;  but  not  till  forty  ye  ITS  after  His 
death;  and  in  this  interval  the  pouring  out  of  the 


iSS       Till:    TRIAL   AM)   DEATH   OF  Jl-^US   CHRIST 

Spirit  at  Pentecost  took  place,  and  the  apostles  began 
their  preaching  of  the  kingdom  at  Jerusalem,  urgently 
calling  the  nation  to  repentance.  Nor  was  their  work 
in  vain  ;  for  thousands  believed.  Even  before  the 
scene  of  the  crucifixion  terminated,  one  of  the  t\vo 
thieves  crucified  along  with  Jesus,  who  had  taken  part 
in  reviling  Him,  \vas  converted  ;  and  the  centurion 
who  superintended  the  execution  confessed  Him  as 
the  Son  of  God.  After  all  was  over,  multitudes  who 
had  beheld  the  sight  went  away  smiting  their  breasts.* 
\Yc  have  no  reason  to  doubt,  therefore,  that  even  in 
this  direct  sense  the  prayer  received  an  abundant 
answer. 

But  this  was  a  prayer  of  a  kind  which  may  also 
be  answered  indirectly.  Besides  the  effect  which 
prayer  has  in  procuring  specific  petitions,  it  acts 
rellexly  on  the  spirit  of  the  person  who  offers  it, 
calming,  sweetening,  invigorating.  Although  some 
erroneously  regard  this  as  the  only  real  answer  that 
prayer  can  receive,  denying  that  God  can  be  moved 
by  our  petitions,  yet  we,  who  believe  that  more  things 
are  wrought  by  prayer,  ought  not  to  overlook  thi.s. 
By  praying  that  His  enemies  might  be  forgiven,  Jesus 
was  enabled  to  drive  back  the  spirits  of  anger  and 
revenge  which  tried  to  force  their  way  into  His  bosom, 


*  Luke  xxiii.  48. 


Tin:  /-v/v's/   /roAY)  i-' ROM  ////:  r/ooss          ^9 

and  preserved  undisturbed  the  serenity  of  His  soul, 
'lo  ask  (jod  to  forgive  them  \vas  the  triumphant 
ending  of  Jlis  own  effort  to  forgive  ;  and  it  is  impo.s- 
sible  to  forgive  without  a  delicious  scn>e  of  deliverance 
and  peace  being  shed  abroad  in  the  forgiving  heart. 

May  we  not  add  that  part  of  the  answer  to  this 
prayer  has  been  its  repetition  age  after  age  by  the 
persL-euted  and  wronged?  St.  Stephen  led  the  way. 
in  the  article  of  death  praying  meekly  after  the 
fashion  of  his  Master,  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their 
charge."  Hundreds  have  followed.  .And  day  by  day 
this  prayer  is  diminishing  the  sum  of  bitterness  and 
increasing  the  amount  oi  love  in  the  world. 


CHAPTER    XV. 

Till-;  SECOND  WORD  FROM  TIIH  CROSS* 
I. 

T  T  is  not  said  by  whose  arrangement  it  was  that 
-•-  Jesus  was  hung  between  the  two  thieves.  It  may 
have  been  done  by  order  of  Pilate,  who  wished  in 
this  way  to  add  point  to  the  witticism  which  he  had 
put  into  the  inscription  above  the  cross  ;  or  the 
arrangement  may  have  been  due  to  the  Jewish 
officials,  who  followed  their  Victim  to  Golgotha  and 
may  have  persuaded  the  soldiers  to  give  Him  this 
place,  as  an  additional  insult  ;  or  the  soldiers  may 
have  done  it  of  their  o\vn  accord,  simply  because  He 
was  obviously  the  most  notable  of  their  prisoners. 

The  likelihood  is  that  there  was  malice  in  it.  Yet 
there  was  a  divine  purpose  behind  the  wrath  of  man. 
Again  and  again  one  has  to  remark  how,  in  these 
last  scenes,  every  shred  of  action  and  every  random 
word  aimed  at  Jesus  for  the  purpose  of  injuring  and 
dishonouring  Him  so  turned,  instead,  to  honour,  that 


*    "To-day  shall  thou  be  \\ith  Ale  in  Paradise," 
190 


THE    sAYO.Y/;    ll'OHl)    1 KO.M    I  III.    rA'Oss  i<)i 

ill  our  eyes,  now  looking  back,  it  shines  on  Him  like 
a  star.  As  a  fire  catches  the  lump  of  dirty  coal  or 
clot  of  filth  that  is  filing  into  it  and  converts  it  into  a 
mass  of  liLjht,  so  at  this  time  there  was  that  about 
Christ  which  transmuted  the  very  insults  hurled  at 
Him  into  honours  and  charged  even  the  incidents  of 
1 1  is  crucifixion  \\hich  \\eie  most  trivial  in  themselves 
with  unspeakable  meaning.  The  crown  of  thorns 
the  purple  robe,'  Pilate's  Kcce  Homo,  the  inscrip 
tion  on  the  cross,  the  savage  cries  of  tlu-  passers-by 
and  other  similar  incidents,  full  at  the  time-  <>i  malice, 
are  now  memories  treasured  by  all  who  love  the 
Saviour. 

So  His  position  between  the  thieve^  was  ordained 
by  Clod  as  well  as  by  men.  It  was  Ili.s  ri'^ht  posi 
tion.  The}1  had  called  Him  l«n;j;  before  "a  friend  oi 
publicans  and  .sinners;'1  and  now,  by  crucifying  Him 
between  the  thieves,  the}'  put  the  same  id(  a  into 
action.  As,  however,  that  nickname  has  beo>me  a 
till'-  of  everlasting  honour,  s<>  has  this  insulting  deed. 
Jesus  came  to  the  world  to  identify  Himself  \\ith 
sinners;  their  cause  was  His,  ami  I  le  \\rappid  up  His 
fate  with  theirs;  He-  had  lived  amoiii;  them,  and  it 
was  meet  that  He  should  die  amon^  them.  Fo  this 
day  He-  is  in  the  mid>t  of  them  ;  and  the  strange 
behaviour  of  the  two  between  \\hom  He  hun^  that 
da\'  was  a  prefi^urcmcnt  of  what  has  been  hapjx-nin^ 


192       THE    TRIAL   AXD   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


every  day  since  :  some  sinners  have  believed  on 
Him  and  been  saved,  while  others  have  believed  not  : 
to  the  one  His  gospel  is  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  to 
the  other  it  is  a  savour  of  death  unto  death.  So  it 
is  to  be  till  the  end  ;  and  on  the  great  day  when  the 
whole  history  of  this  world  shall  be  wound  up  He 
will  still  be  in  the  midst  ;  and  the  penitent  will  be 
on  the  one  hand  and  the  impenitent  on  the  other. 

But  it  was  not  in  one  way  only  that  the  divine 
wisdom  overruled  for  high  ends  of  its  own  the  humili 
ating  circumstance  that  Jesus  was  thus  reckoned 
with  the  transgressors.  It  gave  Him  an  opportunity 
of  illustrating,  at  the  very  last  moment,  both  the 
magnanimity  of  His  own  character  and  the  nature 
of  His  mission  ;  and  at  the  moment  when  He  needed 
it  most  it  supplied  Him  with  a  cup  of  what  had 
always  been  to  Him  the  supreme  joy  of  living— the 
bliss  of  doing  good.  As  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal 
Son  is  an  epitome  of  the  whole  teaching  of  Christ,  so 
is  the  salvation  of  the  thief  on  the  cross  the  life  of 
Christ  in  miniature. 

II. 

Both  thieves  appear  to  have  joined  in  taunting 
Jesus,  in  imitation  of  the  Sanhedrists.  This  has, 
indeed,  been  doubted  or  denied  by  those,  of  whom 
there  have  been  many,  who  have  experienced  difli- 


rnr.  sr.mxn  iron/)  /--AYM/  rni:  CKOSS         i,,? 

cully  in  understanding  how  so  complete  a  revolution 
as  the  conversion  of  the  penitent  thief  could  take 
place  in  so  short  a  time.  Two  of  the  Kvangclists 
say  that  those  crucified  with  Him  reviled  Him;  hut 
it  is  just  possible  grammatically  to  explain  this  as 
referring  only  to  one  of  them  ;  because  sometimes  an 
action  is  attributed  to  a  class,  though  only  one  person 
of  the  class  has  clone  it.*  The  natural  interpretation, 
however,  is  that  both  did  it.  It  is  likely  enough, 
indeed,  that  the  one  who  did  not  repent  began  it, 
and  that  the  other  joined  in,  less  «f  his  own  accord 
than  in  imitation  of  his  reckless  associate.  Very 
probably  this  was  not  the  first  time  that  he  had 
been  dragged  into  sin  by  the  same  attraction.  His 
companion  ma}'  have  been  his  evil  genius,  who  had 
ruined  his  life  and  broughl  him  at  last  to  this 
shameful  end. 

It  was  an  awful  extreme  of  wickedness  to  be 
engaged,  so  near  their  own  end,  in  hurling  oppro 
brious  words  at  a  fellow-sufferer.  ( )f  course,  the 
very  excess  of  pain  made  crucified  persons  reekless  ; 
and  to  be  engaged  doing  anything,  esjx-cially  any 
thing  violent,  helped  to  make  them  forget  their 
agony.  It  mattered  not  who  or  u  hat  was  the  object 
of  attack  ;  they  were  reduced  to  the  condition  of 

*   So  Augustine  ami  many 


194       Till:    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JF.SUS   CHRIST 


tortured  animals  ;  and  the  trapped  brute  bites  at 
anything  which  approaches  it.  This  was  the  state 
of  the  impenitent  thief.  But  the  other  drew  back 
from  his  companion  with  horror.  The  very  excess  of 
sin  overleaped  itself  ;  and  for  the  first  time  he  saw 
how  vile  a  wretch  he  was.  This  was  brought  home 
to  him  by  the  contrast  of  the  patience  and  peace 
of  Jesus.  His  brutal  companion  had  hitherto  been 
his  ideal  ;  but  now  he  perceives  how  base  is  his 
ferocious  courage  in  comparison  with  the  strength 
of  Christ's  serene  endurance. 

The  desire  to  explain  away  the  suddenness  of  the 
conversion  has  led  to  all  sorts  of  conjectures  as  to 
the  possibility  of  previous  meetings  between  the  thief 
and  Christ.  It  is  quite  legitimate  to  dwell  on  what 
he  had  seen  of  the  behaviour  of  Jesus  from  the 
moment  when  they  were  brought  into  contact  in  the 
crucifixion.  He  had  heard  Him  pray  for  the  for 
giveness  of  His  enemies;  he  had  witnessed  His 
demeanour  on  the  way  to  Calvary  and  heard  His 
words  to  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  ;  the  very  cries 
of  His  enemies  round  the  cross,  when  they  cast  in 
His  teeth  the  titles  which  He  had  claimed  or  which 
had  been  attributed  to  Him,  informed  him  what  were 
the  pretensions  of  Jesus  ;  perhaps  he  may  have  wit 
nessed  and  heard  the  trial  before  Pilate.  Hut,  when 
we  attempt  to  go  further  back,  we  have  nothing  solid 


to  found  upon.  Had  he  ever  heard  Jesus  preach  ? 
Had  he  witnessed  any  of  His  miracles?  How  much 
did  he  know  of  the  nature  of  His  Kingdom,  of  which 
he  spoke?  Guesses  may  be  made  in  ansucr  to  such 
questions,  but  they  cannot  be  authenticated.  I  should 
be  inclined  with  more  confidence  to  look  further  back 
still.  He  may  have  come  out  of  a  pious  home;  he 
may  have  been  a  prodigal  led  astray  by  companions, 
and  especially  by  the  strong  companion  with  \\hom 
he  was  now  associated.  As  there  was  a  weeping 
mother  at  the  foot  of  the-  cross  of  Jesus,  there  may 
have  been  a  heart-broken  parent  at  the  foot  of  that 
other  cross  also,  whose  prayers  were  yet  going  to  be 
answered  in  a  way  surpassing  her  wildest  hopes. 

The  question  of  the  possibility  of  sudden  conversion 
is  generally  argued  with  too  much  excitement  on  both 
sides  to  allow  the  facts  to  be  recognised.  Among  us 
there  ma}',  in  one  sense,  be  said  to  be  no  Mich  thing. 
Suppose  anyone  reading  this  page,  who  may  know 
that  he  has  not  yet  with  his  whole  heart  and  soul 
turned  to  God,  were  to  do  so  before  turning  the 
next  leaf,  would  this  be  a  sudden  conversion  ?  Why, 
the  preparation  for  it  has  been  going  on  for  years. 
What  has  been  the  intention  of  all  the  religious 
instruction  which  you  have  received  from  your  child 
hood,  of  the  prayers  offered  on  your  be-half,  of  the 
appeals  which  have  mov.  d  you,  of  the  ^trivmgs  <f 


196      THE   TRIAL   AND   DEATH  OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


God's  Spirit,  but  to  lead  up  to  this  result  ?  Though 
your  conversion  were  to  take  place  this  very  hour, 
it  would  only  be  the  last  moment  of  a  process  which 
has  gone  on  for  years.  Yet  in  a  sense  it  would  be 
sudden.  And  why  should  it  not  ?  What  reason  is 
there  why  your  return  to  God  should  be  further 
postponed  ?  There  are  two  experiences  in  religion 
which  require  to  be  carefully  distinguished  :  there  is 
the  making  of  religious  impressions  on  us  by  others 
from  the  outside — through  instruction,  example, 
appeal  and  the  like  ;  and  there  is  the  rise  of  religion 
within  ourselves,  when  we  turn  round  upon  our 
impressions  and  make  them  our  own.  The  former 
experience  is  long  and  slow,  but  the  latter  may  be 
very  sudden  ;  and  a  very  little  thing  may  bring  it 
about. 

Another  way  in  which  it  is  possible  to  minimise 
the  greatness  of  this  conversion  is  by  questioning  the 
guilt  of  the  man.*  When  he  is  called  a  thief,  the 
name  suggests  a  very  common  and  degraded  sinner  ; 
but  it  is  pointed  out  that  "  robber "  would  be  the 
correct  name,  and  that  probably  he  and  his  com- 


*  Schleicrmachor  makes  much  of  this  ;  and,  indeed,  does 
everything  in  his  power  to  minimise  the  moral  miracle.  The 
whole  sermon  is  a  specimen  of  his  worst  manner,  when  he  rides 
away  on  some  side  issue  and  fails  to  expound  the  great  central 
lessons  of  a  subject. 


THE  Sl-lCOM)    H'OKl)   FROM    I  Hi:    CRUsS  197 

panion  may  have  been  revolutionaries,  whose  opposi 
tion  to  the  Roman  rule  had  driven  them  outside  the 
pale  of  society,  where,  to  win  a  subsistence,  they  had 
to  resort  to  the  trade  of  highwaymen  ;  but  in  that 
country,  tyrannised  over  by  a  despotic  foreign  power, 
those  who  attempted  to  raise  the  standard  of  revolt 
were  sometimes  far  from  ignoble  characters,  though 
the  necessities  of  their  position  betrayed  them  into 
acts  of  violence.  There  is  truth  in  this  ;  and  the 
penitent  thief  may  not  have  been  a  sinner  above  all 
men.  But  his  own  words  to  his  companion,  "  \\  e 
receive  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds,"  point  the  other 
way.  His  memory  was  stained  with  acts  for  which 
he  acknowledged  that  death  was  the  lawful  penalty. 
In  short,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  either  that  he 
was  a  great  sinner  or  that  he  was  suddenly  changed. 
And  therefore  his  example  will  always  be  an  en 
couragement  to  the  worst  of  sinners  when  they 
repent.  It  is  common  for  penitents  to  be  afraid 
to  come  to  God,  because  their  sins  have  been  too 
great  to  be  forgiven  ;  but  those  who  are  encouraging 
them  can  point  to  cases  like  Manasseh,  anil  Mary 
Ma-idalcnc,  and  the  thief  on  the  cross,  and  assure 

*•> 

them    that    the    mercy    which    sufficed  f>r    tlu-se    is 

sufficient  for  all:  "The  blood  of  JCMI^  Christ,  God's 
Son,  cleanscth  us  from  all  sin." 

The  fear  of  those  who  ende;ivuur   to  minimise   the 


1 98      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   O I-  JESUS   CHRIST 


wonderfulness  of  this  conversion  is  lest,  if  it  be  allowed 
that  a  man  of  the  worst  character  could  undergo  so 
complete  a  change  in  so  short  a  time  on  the  very 
verge  of  the  other  world,  men  may  be  induced  to  put 
off  their  own  salvation  in  the  hope  of  availing  them 
selves  of  a  death-bed  repentance.  This  is  a  just  fear  ; 
and  the  grace  of  God  has  undoubtedly  been  sometimes 
thus  abused.  But  it  is  an  utter  abuse.  Those  who 
allow  themselves  to  be  deceived  with  this  reasoning 
believe  that  they  can  at  any  moment  command 
penitence  and  faith,  and  that  all  the  other  feelings 
of  religion  will  come  to  them  whenever  they  choose 
to  summon  them.  But  docs  experience  lead  us  to 
believe  this  ?  Arc  not  the  occasions,  on  the  contrary, 
very  rare  when  religion  really  moves  irreligious 
men  ? 

'•  We  cannot  kindle  when  we  will 

The  fire  that  in  the  soul  resides  ; 
The  spirit  breatheth  and  is  still  — 
In  mystery  the  soul  abides." 

Nor  is  it  by  any  means  a  uniform  experience  that 
the  approach  of  death  awakens  religious  anxiety. 
The  other  thief  is  a  solemn  warning.  Though  face  to 
face  with  death  and  in  such  close  proximity  to 
Jesus,  he  was  only  hardened  and  rendered  more 
reckless  than  ever.  And  this  is  far  more  likely  to 
be  the  fate  of  anyone  who  deliberately  quenches 


THE  SECOM)  ii'uiu)  i-'Ro.M  mi-: 


the  Spirit  because  he  is  trusting  to  ;i  death-bed 
repentance. 

Vet  we  will  not  allow  the  possible  abuse  of  the 
truth  to  rob  us  of  the  glorious  testimony  contained 
in  this  incident  to  the  ^race  of  God.  \Vc  set  no 
limits  to  the  invitation  of  the  Saviour,  "Him  that 
comcth  unto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  How 
ever  late  a  sinner  may  be  in  coming,  and  however 
little  time  he  ma}'  have  in  which  to  come,  let  him 
only  come  and  he  will  not  be  cast  out.  There  is 
no  more  critical  test  of  theologies  and  theologians 
than  the  question  what  message  they  have  to  a  dyini; 
person  whose  sins  are  unforgiven.  If  tin-  salvation 
which  a  preacher  has  to  offer  is  only  a  cour.se  of 
moral  improvement,  what  can  he  ha\v  to  say  in 
such  a  place?  \Vc  may  be  sure  that  our  ^nsju-l  is 
not  the  gospel  of  Him  who  comforted  the  penitent 
thief,  unless  we  are  able  to  offer  even  t<>  a  dyin^ 
sinner  a  salvation  immediate,  joyful  and  complete. 

I  low  complete  the  revolution  was  in  the  penitent 
thief  is  shown  by  his  own  word-..  St.  I*. ml  in  one 
place  sums  up  Christianity  in  two  things  -repent 
ance  towards  God  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jc MIS  Christ* 
And  both  of  these  we  see  in  this  penitent's  words. 
His  repentance  towards  God  is  brought  out  by  what 
he  said  to  his  companion.  "  1  >••  -t  ir>t  thou  fear 
God?"  he  a.sked.  Hi-  had  himself  forgotten  God,  no 


200      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


doubt,  and  put  Him  f;ir  a\vay  in  the  sinful  past. 
But  now  God  was  near,  and  in  the  light  of  God 
he  saw  his  own  sinfulness.  lie  confessed  it,  doing 
so  not  only  in  his  secret  mind  but  audibly.  Thus 
he  separated  himself  from  it,  as  he  did  also  from  the 
companion  who  had  led  him  astray,  when  he  would 
not  come  with  him  on  the  path  of  penitence.  Not 
less  distinctly  do  His  words  to  the  Saviour  manifest 
his  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  They  arc  simple 
and  humble  :  all  he  dared  to  expect  was  that,  when 
Christ  came  into  His  kingdom,  He  would  remember 
him.  But  they  recognised  the  glory  of  Christ  and 
expressed  trust  in  Him.  At  the  moment  when  the 
religious  teachers  of  the  nations  thought  that  they 
had  for  ever  destroyed  Christ's  claims,  and  even  His 
own  disciples  had  forsaken  Him,  this  poor  dying 
sinner  believed  in  Him.  "  How  clear,"  exclaims 
Calvin,  "  was  the  vision  of  the  eyes  which  could  thus 
sec  in  death  life,  in  ruin  majesty,  in  shame  glory,  in 
defeat  victory,  in  slavery  royalty.  I  question  if  ever 
since  the  world  began  there  has  been  so  bright 
an  example  of  faith."  Luther  is  no  less  laudatory. 
"  This,"  says  he,  "  was  for  Christ  a  comfort  like  that 
supplied  to  Him  by  the  angel  in  the  garden.  God 
could  not  allow  His  Son  to  be  destitute  of  subjects, 
and  now  His  Church  survived  in  this  one  man. 
Where  the  faith  of  St.  Peter  broke  off,  the  faith  of 


the  penitent  thief  commenced."  And  another  *  asks, 
"  Did  ever  the  new  birth  take  place  in  so  strange  a 
cradle?" 


It  is  worth  noting  that  it  was  not  by  words  that 
Jesus  converted  this  man.  He  did  not  address  the 
penitent  thief  at  all  till  the  thief  spoke  to  Him.  The 
work  of  conviction  was  done  before  He  uttered  a 
word.  Vet  it  was  His  work;  and  how  did  He  do 
it?  As  St.  Peter  exhorted  i^'dly  wives  to  convert 
their  heathen  husbands,  when  he  wrote  to  them, 
"Likewise,  ye  wives,  be  in  subjection  to  your  own 
husbands,  that,  if  any  obey  not  the  Word,  they  also 
may,  without  the  Word,  be' won  by  the  Conversation 
f /.<*.,  behaviour)  of  the  wives,  while  they  behold  your 
chaste  conversation  coupled  with  fear."  It  was  by 
the  impression  of  His  patience,  His  innocence,  His 
peace,  and  His  magnanimity,  that  Jesus  converted 
the  man;  and  herein  IK:  has  left  us  an  example 
that  we  should  follow  in  His  steps. 

Hut  His  words,  when  He  did  speak,  added  im 
mensely  to  the  impression.  Tiny  were  lew,  but 
everyone  of  them  expressed  the  Saviour. 

The  robber  was  thinking  of  some  date  far  off  \\hen 


202       THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


Christ  might  intervene  in  his  behalf,  but  Christ  says, 
"  To-day."  This  was  a  prophecy  that  he  would  die 
that  day,  and  not  be  allowed  to  linger  for  days,  as 
crucified  persons  often  were  ;  and  this  was  fulfilled-. 
But  it  was,  besides,  a  promise  that  as  soon  as  death 
launched  him  out  of  time  into  eternity,  Christ  would 
be  waiting  there  to  receive  him.  "  To-day  thou 
shalt  be  with  Me."  All  heaven  is  in  these  two  last 
words.  What  do  we  really  know  of  heaven,  what  do 
we  wish  to  know,  except  that  it  is  to  be  "with  Christ  "  ? 
Yet  a  little  more  was  added — "  in  Paradise."  Some 
have  thought  that  in  this  phrase  Christ  was  stooping 
to  the  conceptions  of  the  penitent  thief  by  using 
a  popular  expression  for  some  happy  place  in  the 
other  world.*  At  least  the  word,  which  means  a 
garden  or  park  and  was  applied  to  the  abode  of  our 
first  parents  in  Eden,  could  not  but  call  up  in  the 
consciousness  of  the  dying  man  a  scene  of  beauty, 
innocence  and  peace,  where,  washed  clean  from  the 
defilement  of  his  past  errors,  he  would  begin  to  exist 
again  as  a  new  creature.  Even  Christians  have 
believed  that  the  utmost  that  can  be  expected  in 
the  next  world  by  a  soul  with  a  history  like  the 
robber's  is,  at  least  to  begin  with,  to  be  consigned 


*  ''  In  Biblical  Hebrew  the  word  is  used  for  a  choice  garden  ; 
but  in  the  LXX.  and  the  Apocalypse  it  is  already  used  in  our 
sense  of  Paradise." — EDEKSIII-JIM. 


•/•///•:  */-:cn.\/)  iroiti)  ntou  "////:  CKOSS        203 

to  the  fires  of  purgatory.  Hut  far  different  is  the 
grace  of  Christ  :  great  and  perfect  is  His  work,  and 
therefore  ours  is  a  full  salvation. 

This  second  word  from  the  cross  affords  a  rare 
glimpse  into  the  divine  glory  of  the  Saviour  ;  and 
it  is  all  the  more  impressive  that  it  is  indirect.  The 
thief,  in  the  most  solemn  circumstances,  spoke  to 
Him  as  to  a  King  and  prayed  to  Him  as  to  a  God.* 
And  how  did  He  respond?  Did  He  say,  "Pray  not 
to  Me;  I  am  a  man  like  yourself,  and  I  know  as 
little  of  the  unknown  country  into  which  we  are  both 
about  to  enter  as  you  do"?  This  is  \\hat  He- ought 
to  have  answered,  if  He  was  no  more  than  some- 
make  Him  out  to  be.  Hut  He  accepud  the-  homage 
of  His  petitioner;  He  spoke  of  the  world  unseen  as 
of  a  place  native  and  familiar.  IK-  gave  him  to 
understand  that  He  possessed  as  much  influence 
there  as  he  attributed  to  Him.  Tin's  great  siniu-r 
laid  on  Christ  the  weight  of  his  soul,  the  \\eigl.t 
of  his  sins,  the  weight  of  his  eternity  ;  and  Christ 
accepted  the  burden. 

*  Tin-  v.orel  "Lord"  in  the  jobbers  .sjieeih  us  however, 
unauthentic. 


CHAPTER    XVI. 
THE   THIRD   WORD    FROM    THE    CROSS  * 

T  N  the  life  of  our  Lord  from  first  to  last  there  is  a 
-*•  strange  blending  of  the  majestic  and  the  lowly. 
When  a  beam  of  His  divine  dignity  is  allowed  to 
shine  out  and  dazzle  us,  it  is  never  long  before  there 
ensues  some  incident  which  reminds  us  that  He  is 
bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh  ;  and,  con 
trariwise,  when  He  does  anything  which  impressively 
brings  home  to  us  His  humanity,  there  always  follows 
something  to  remind  us  that  He  was  greater  than  the 
sons  of  men.  Thus  at  His  birth  He  was  laid  in  a 
manger  ;  yet  out  on  the  pastures  of  Bethlehem  angels 
sang  His  praise.  Long  afterwards  He  was  asleep  in 
the  end  of  the  boat,  and  so  overcome  with  fatigue  that 
He  needed  to  be  awakened  to  realise  His  danger; 
but  immediately  I  le  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  waves, 
and  there  was  a  great  calm.  When  He  saw  the  grief 
of  Martha  and  Mar}',  "Jesus  wept";  but  only  a  few 
minutes  afterwards  He  cried,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth," 


\Voman,  behold  thy  son  .  .   .   Behold  thy  mother." 
204 


THE  THI in i)  U'OKD  rito.M  Tin: 


and  He  was  obeyed.  So  it  was  to  the  very  last.  In 
studying  the  Second  Word  from  the  cross  we  saw  1  lim 
opening  the  gates  of  Paradise  to  the  penitent  thief; 
to-day  the  Third  Word  will  show  Him  to  us  as  the  Son 
of  a  woman,  concerned  in  His  dying  hour  for  her 
bodily  sustenance. 

I. 

The  eye  of  Jesus,  roving  over  the  multitude  whose 
component  parts  have  been  already  described,  lighted 
on  His  mother  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  In 
the  words  of  the  great  mediaeval  hymn,  which  is 
known  to  all  by  its  opening  words,  Sttitnif  mater,  and 
from  the  fact  that  it  has  been  set  to  music  by  such 
masters  as  Palestrina,  Haydn  and  Rossini, 

"  Beside  the  cross  in  tears 

The  woeful  mother  stood, 
Bent  'neatli  the  weight  of  years, 

And  viewed   His  flowing  blood; 
Her  mind  with  grief  was  torn, 

Her  strength  was  ebbing  last, 
And  through  her  heart  forlorn 

The  sword  of  anguish   passed." 

When  she  carried  her  Infant  into  the-  temple  in  the 
pride  of  young  motherhood,  the  venerable  Simeon 
foretold  that  a  sword  would  pierce  through  her  own 
soul  also.  Often  perhaps  had  she  wondered,  in  happy 
days,  what,  this  mysterious  predictimi  might  me.m. 


206       THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


But  now  she  knew,  for  the  sword  was  smiting  her, 
stab  after  stab. 

It  is  always  hard  for  a  mother  to  see  her  son  die. 
She  naturally  expects  him  to  lay  her  head  in  the 
grave.  Especially  is  this  the  case  with  the  firstborn, 
the  son  of  her  strength.  Jesus  was  only  thirty-three, 
and  Mary  must  have  reached  the  age  when  a  mother 
most  of  all  leans  for  support  on  a  strong  and  loving 
son. 

Far  worse,  however,  was  the  death  He  was  dying 
— the  death  of  a  criminal.  Many  mothers  have  had 
to  suffer  from  the  kind  of  death  their  children  have 
died,  when  it  has  been  in  great  agony  or  in  otherwise 
distressing  circumstances.  But  what  mother's  suffer 
ings  were  ever  equal  to  Mary's?  There  He  hung 
before  her  eyes  ;  but  she  was  helpless.  His  wounds 
bled,  but  she  dared  not  stanch  them  ;  His  mouth  was 
parched,  but  she  could  not  moisten  it.  These  out 
stretched  arms  used  to  clasp  her  neck  ;  she  used  to 
fondle  these  pierced  hands  and  feet.  Ah  !  the  nails 
pierced  her  as  well  as  Him;  the  thorns  round  His 
brow  were  a  circle  of  flame  about  her  heart ;  the  taunts 
flung  at  Him  wounded  her  likewise. 

But  there  was  worse  still — the  sword  cut  deeper. 
Had  not  the  angel  told  her  before  His  birth,  "  He 
shall  be  great,  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the 
Highest,  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  Him  the 


Tin-:  THIRD  iroiu)  I-'ROM  Tin:  rv\v>ss         207 

throne  of  His  father  David  ;  and  He  shall  reign  over 
the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever;  and  of  His  kingdom 
there  shall  be  no  end  "  ?  Tin's  greatness,  this  throne, 
this  crown,  this  kingdom  -where  were  they?  Once 
she  had  believed  that  she  rcallv  was  what  the  annel 

*•  J"» 

had  called  her — the  most  blessed  of  women  -when 
she  saw  Him  lying  in  her  lap  in  His  beautiful  infancy, 
when  the  Shepherds  and  the  Magi  came  to  adore 
Him,  and  when  Simeon  and  Anna  recognised  Him 
as  the  Messiah.  After  that  ensued  the  long  period 
of  His  obscurity  in  Nazareth.  He  was  only  the 
village  carpenter;  but  she  did  not  weary,  for  He  was 
with  her  in  their  home  ;  and  she  was  confident  that 
the  greatness,  the;  throne,  the  crown,  the  kingdom 
would  all  come  in  good  time.  At  last  His  hour 
struck  ;  and,  casting  down  His  tools  and  bidding  her 
farewell,  lie  went  forth  out  of  the  little  valley  into 
the  great  world.  It  is  all  coming  now,  she  said. 
Soon  the  news  arrived  of  the  words  of  grace  and 
power  He  was  speaking,  of  the  multitudes  following 
Him,  of  the  nation  being  roused,  and  of  the  blind,  the 
lame,  the  diseased,  the  bereaved  who  blessed  Him  for 
giving  jo}'  back  to  their  lives,  and  blessed  her  who 
had  borne  Him.  It  is  all  coming  to  pass  she  said. 
Hut  then  followed  other  news  of  reaction,  of  opjx>si- 
tion,  of  persecution.  HIT  heart  sank  within  her.  She 
could  not  .stay  when:  .^he  was.  She  left  Na/.anth  and 


208      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


went  away  trembling  to  sec  what  had  happened. 
And  now  she  stands  at  the  foot  of  His  cross.  He  is 
dying  ;  and  the  greatness,  the  glory,  and  the  kingdom 
have  never  come. 

What  could  it  mean  ?  Had  the  angel  been  a 
deceiver,  and  God's  word  a  lie,  and  all  the  wonders 
of  His  childhood  a  dream?  \Vc  know  the  explanation 
now  :  Jesus  was  about  to  climb  a  far  loftier  throne 
than  Mary  had  ever  imagined,  and  the  cross  was 
the  only  road  to  it.  Before  many  weeks  were  over 
Mary  was  to  understand  this  too  ;  but  meantime 
it  must  have  been  dark  as  Egypt  to  her,  and  her 
heart  must  have  been  sorrowful  even  unto  death. 
The  sword  had  pierced  very  deep. 

II. 

There  were  other  women  with  Mary  beneath  the 
cross— two  of  them  Marys,  like  herself.*  As  an 
ancient  father  f  has  said,  the  weaker  sex  on  this 
occasion  proved  itself  the  stronger.  When  the 
apostles  had  forsaken  their  Master  and  fled,  these 
women  were  true  to  the  last.  Perhaps,  indeed,  their 
sex  protected  them.  Women  can  venture  into  some 
places  where  men  dare  not  go ;  and  this  is  a  talent 

*   It    is    not    certain    whether   John    xix.    25    describes   three 
women  or  four.     Is  the  second  Salome,   Johns  mother? 
t  Chrysostom. 


Till:    THIRD    /To/vY)   l-'KO.M    THE   CWte.'i  2«) 

which   many  women  have  used   for  rendering  services 
to  the  Saviour  which  men  could  not  have  performed. 

But  there  was  one  there  who  had  not  this  pro 
tection,  and  who  in  venturing  so  near  must  have 
taken  his  life  in  his  hand.  St.  John,  I  suppose,  is 
included  with  the  rest  of  the  apostles  in  the  sad 
statement  that  they  all  forsook  their  Master  and  fled. 
But,  if  so,  his  panic  can  only  have  lasted  a  moment. 
He  was  present  at  the  very  commencement  of  the 
trial  ;  and  here  he  still  is  with  his  Master  at  the 
last — the  only  one  of  all  the  Twelve.  Perhaps,  indeed, 
the  acquaintance  with  the  high-priest,  which  availed 
him  to  get  into  the  palace  where  the  trial  took  place, 
may  still  have  operated  in  his  favour.  But  it  wa.s 
most  of  all  his  greater  devotion  that  brought  him 
to  his  Master's  side.  He  who  had  leaned  on  His 
breast  could  not  stay  away,  whatever  might  l>e  the 
danger.  And  he  had  his  reward  ;  for  he  was  per 
mitted  to  render  a  last  service  to  Jesus  amidst  His 
agony,  and  he  received  from  Him  a  token  of  con 
fidence  which  by  a  heart  like  his  must  have  IMJCII  fell 
to  be  an  unspeakable  privilege  and  honour. 


It  is  most  of  all,  howevrr,  with  the  impression 
made  by  the  situation  on  Jesus  Himself  that  we  wish 
to  acquaint  ourselves. 

14 


210       7V IE    TRIAL   AM)   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 

lie  looked  on  His  mother  ;  and  it  was  with  an 
un preoccupied  eye,  that  was  able  to  disengage  its 
attention  from  every  other  object  by  which  it  was 
solicited.  He  was  suffering  at  the  time  an  extremity 
of  pain  which  might  have  made  Him  insensible  to 
everything  beyond  Himself.  Or,  if  He  had  com 
posure  enough  to  think,  a  dying  man  has  many  things 
to  reflect  upon  within  his  own  mind.  Christ,  we 
know,  had  a  whole  world  of  interests  to  attend  to  ; 
for  now  He  was  engaged  in  a  final  wrestle  with  the 
problem  to  which  His  whole  life  had  been  devoted. 
The  prayer  on  behalf  of  His  enemies  does  not  surprise 
us  so  much,  for  it  may  be  said  to  have  been  part 
of  His  office  to  intercede  for  sinners  ;  nor  His  address 
to  the  penitent  thief,  for  this  also  was  quite  in 
harmony  with  His  work  as  the  Saviour.  But  we  do 
wonder  that  in  such  an  hour  He  had  leisure  to  attend 
to  a  domestic  detail  of  ordinary  life.  Men  who  have 
been  engaged  in  philanthropic  and  reformatory 
schemes  have  not  infrequently  been  unmindful  of 
the  claims  of  their  own  families  ;  and  they  have 
excused  themselves,  or  excuse  has  been  made  for 
them,  on  the  ground  that  the  public  interest  pre 
dominated  over  the  rights  of  their  relatives.  Now 
and  then  Jesus  Himself  spoke  as  if  He  took  this 
view:  He  would  not  allow  His  plans  to  be  interfered 
with  even  by  His  mother.  But  now  He  showed  that, 


///A'    THIRD    \\-()R!)    I- ROM    IHI-:    (  AV/S.S  21  i 

though  He  could  not  but  n.  fuse  her  unjust  interfer 
ence,  He  had  never  for  a  moment  forgotten  her 
just  claims  or  her  true  interests.  In  spite  of 
His  greatness  and  in  spite  of  His  work,  He  .still 
remained  Mary's  Son  and  bore  to  her  an  undying 
affection. 

]  he  words  He  spoke  were,  indeed,  few;  but  they 
completely  covered  the  case.  Kvery  word  He  uttered 
in  that  position  was  with  great  pain;  therefore  He 
could  not  say  much.  Besides,  their  \vry  fewness 
imparted  to  them  a  kind  of  judicial  dignity  ;  as  has 
been  said,  this  was  Christ's  last  will  and  testament. 
To  His  mother  He  said,  "  Woman,  behold  thy  sun,"* 
indicating  St.  John  with  His  eyes  ;  and  to  the  disciple 
lie  merely  said,  "  Behold  thy  motlv  r."  It  w.is  .simple, 
yet  comprehensive;  a  plain,  almost  U'gal  direction, 
and  yet  overflowing  with  love  to  both  Mary  and 
John. 

It  is  supposed  that  Joseph,  the  husband  <•!  the 
Virgin,  had  died  before  our  Lords  public  career  began, 
and  that  in  Na/.areth  the  weight  of  the  household 
had  fallen  on  the  shoulders  of  Jesus.  No  doubt, 
during  His  years  of  preaching,  He  would  tenderly 
care  for  His  mother.  But  now  He  ton  uas  leaving 


*  "Woman"  may  m«-an  sa«lly  i  pr«>l.-j.(i,  .illy),    "'lli-Mi  IM.M   no 
son  noxv." 


212       THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


her,  and  the  widow  would  be  without  support.  It 
was  for  this  He  had  to  provide. 

He  had  no  money  to  leave  her  ;  His  earthly  all, 
when  He  was  crucified,  consisted  of  the  clothes  He 
wore  ;  and  these  fell  to  the  soldiers.  But  it  is  one  of 
the  privileges  of  those  who,  though  they  may  be  poor 
themselves,  make  many  rich  with  the  gifts  of  truth, 
that  they  thereby  win  friends  who  are  proud  and 
eager  to  serve  them  or  theirs.  In  committing  His 
mother  to  St.  John  Jesus  knew  that  the  charge  \vrould 
be  accepted  not  as  a  burden  but  a  gift. 

Why  she  did  not  go  to  the  home  of  one  of  her 
other  sons  it  is  impossible  to  say.  They  were  not 
yet  believers,  though  soon  afterwards  they  became 
so  ;  but  there  may  have  been  other  reasons  also,  to 
us  unknown. 

At  all  events,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  kind  and  con 
siderate  was  the  selection  of  St.  John  for  this  office. 
There  arc  indications  in  the  Gospels  that  St.  John 
was  wealthier,  or  at  least  more  comfortable  in  his 
circumstances,  than  the  rest  of  the  Apostles  ;  and 
this  may  have  weighed  with  Jesus  :  He  would  not 
send  His  mother  where  she  would  feel  herself  to  be 
a  burden.  It  is  highly  probable  also  that  St.  John 
was  unmarried.  But  there  were  deeper  reasons. 
There  \vas  no  arm  on  which  His  mother  could  lean 
so  confidently  as  that  of  him  who  had  leaned  on 


THE    THIRD    /fY)AY)    / 'A'o.l/    '////•;   f/OOsS  213 

her  Son's  breast.  St.  1'cter,  with  his  hot  temper  and 
rough  fisherman's  ways,  would  not  have  been  nearly 
so  eligible  a  choice.  John  and  Mar}'  were  kindred 
spirits.  They  were  especially  one  in  their  intense 
affection  for  Jesus.  They  would  never  tire  of  speaking 
to  one  another  about  Him.  He  honoured  both  of 
them  in  each  other's  eyes  by  giving  them  t<»  one 
another  in  this  way.  If  He  gave  Mary  a  great  gift 
in  giving  her  St.  John  for  a  son,  lie  gave  him  no  less 
a  gift  by  giving  him  such  a  mother  ;  for  Mary  could 
not  but  be  an  ornament  to  any  home,  liesides,  did 
He  not  make  St.  John  in  a  (mite  peculiar  sense  His 
own  brother  by  substituting  him  in  II  is  own  stead 
as  the  son  of  Mary  ? 

The  Kvangclist  says  that  from  that  hour  John  took 
her  to  his  own  home.  Many  have  understood  this  to 
mean  that  he  at  once  gently  withdrew  her  from  the 
spot,  that  she  should  not  be  agitated  by  seeing  the 
death-throes  of  her  Son,  though  he  himsrlf  returned 
to  Calvary.  It  is  said  by  tradition  th.it  they  lived 
together  twelve  years  in  Jerusalem,  and  that  he 
refused  to  leave  the  city,  even  for  the  purpose  ol 
preaching  the  gospel,  as  long  as  Mary  survived. 
Only  after  her  death  did  he  depart  <MI  those  mis 
sionary  travels  which  landed  him  in  Kphesti-  and 
its  neighbourhood,  v,  i:h  whieh  his  later  history  i-^ 
<•< mneett  d. 


THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIS  I 


IV. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  read  the  lesson  of  this  touching 

o 

scene.  From  the  pulpit  of  His  cross  Jesus  preaches 
to  all  ages  a  sermon  on  the  fifth  commandment. 

The  heart  of  the  mother  of  Jesus  was  pierced  with 
a  sword  on  account  of  His  sufferings.  It  was  a  sharp 
weapon  ;  but  Mary  had  one  thing  on  which  to  steady 
up  her  soul  ;  it  kept  her  calm  even  in  the  wildest 
moment  of  her  grief — she  knew  He  was  innocent. 
He  had  always  been  pure,  noble  and  good  ;  she  could 
be  proud  of  Him  even  when  they  were  crucifying 
Him.  Many  a  mother's  heart  is  pierced  with  anguish 
on  account  of  a  son's  illness,  or  misfortunes,  or  early 
death  ;  but  she  can  bear  it  if  she  is  not  pierced  with 
the  poisoned  sword.  What  is  that  ?  It  is  when  she 
has  to  be  ashamed  of  her  child — when  he  is  brought 
to  ruin  by  his  own  misdeeds.  This  is  a  sorrow  far 
worse  than  death. 

How  beautiful  it  is  to  sec  a  mother  wearing  as  her 
chief  ornament  the  good  name  and  the  honourable 
success  of  a  son  !  You  who  still  have  a  mother  or 
a  father,  let  this  be  to  you  both  a  spur  to  exertion 
and  a  talisman  against  temptation.  To  some  is 
accorded  the  rarer  privilege  of  being  able  to  support 
their  parents  in  old  age.  And  surely  there  is  no 


TIIK    THIRD    n'O.'U)   I-ROM    THE    CRO.^S  215 

sweeter  memory  in  the  world  than  the  recollection 
of  having  been  allowed  to  do  this.  "  If  any  widow 
have  children  or  nephews,  let  them  learn  first  to  show 
piety  at  home  and  to  requite  their  parents  ;  for  that 
is  good  and  acceptable  before  God.  .  .  .  But  if  any 
provide  not  for  his  own,  and  specially  for  those  of 
his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse 
than  an  infidel."  * 

But  this  sermon,  delivered  from  the  pulpit  of  the 
cross,  has  a  wider  range.  It  informs  us  th.it  our 
Saviour  has  a  concern  for  our  temporal  as  well  as 
for  our  eternal  interests.  Kven  on  the  cross,  where 
He  was  expiating  the  sin  of  the  world,  He  was 
thinking  of  the  comfort  of  His  widowed  mother.  Let 
the  needy  and  the  deserted  take  courage  from  this, 
and  cast  all  their  care  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for 
them.  It  is  often  an  astonishment  to  see  how  widows 
especially  are  helped  through.  When  they  are  left, 
with  perhaps  a  number  of  little  children,  it  seems 
incomprehensible  how  they  can  get  on.  Yet  not 
infrequently  their  families  turn  out  better  than  those 
where  the  father  has  been  spared.  One  reason  is 
perhaps,  that  their  children  feel  from  the  first  th.it 
the}-  must  take  a  share  of  the-  responsibility,  and  this 
makes  men  and  women  of  them.  But  the  chief  reason 

'    i    Tim.  v.  6,  8. 


21 6      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 


undoubtedly  is  that  God  fulfils  His  own  promise  to 
be  a  Father  to  the  fatherless  and  a  Husband  to  the 
widow,  and  that  they  have  not  been  forgotten  by 
Him  who  in  the  hour  of  His  absorbing  agony 
remembered  Mary. 


CHAPTER    XVII. 
THK    FOURTH    WORD    FROM    TMK    CROSS* 

I  "M  IK  Seven  \\'ords  from  the  Cross  may  be  divided 
*•  into  two  groups.  In  the  first  three  -namely, 
the  prayer  for  His  crucificrs,  the  word  to  the  penitent 
thief,  and  the  directions  about  His  mother  -our  Lord 
was  dealing  with  the  interests  of  others  ;  in  the  last 
four,  to  which  we  now  pass,  He  was  absorbed  in  His 
own  concerns.  This  division  is  natural.  Many  a 
dying  man,  after  arranging  his  affairs  and  saying  his 
farewells,  turns  his  face  to  the  wall,  to  encounter  death 
and  be  alone  with  God.  It  was  highly  characteristic 
of  Jesus,  however,  before  turning  to  His  own  tilings, 
first  to  mind  the  things  of  others. 

Hetween  these  two  groups  of  sayings  there  seems 
to  have  elapsed  a  long  interval.  From  the  sixth  hour 
to  the  ninth  Jesus  was  silent.  And  during  this  interval 
there  was  darkness  overall  the  land.  Of  what  precise 
nature  this  atmospheric  effect  may  have  Ix-en  it  is 
impossible  at  this  distance  to  say.  Hut  the  Kvangelists, 

*    ••  My  Cn.ll.  My  ('.<.<!.  why  liast  Thou  f..r^.ik«-i,  MI-  ' 


218      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

three  of  whom  mention  it,  evidently  consider  it  to 
have  indicated  in  some  sense  the  sympathy  of  nature 
with  her  Lord.  It  was  as  if  the  sun  refused  to  look 
on  such  a  deed  of  shame.  It  may  be  supposed  that 
by  this  weird  phenomenon  the  noises  round  the  cross 
were  in  some  degree  hushed.  At  length  the  silence 
was  broken  by  Christ  Himself,  who,  in  a  loud  voice, 
gave  utterance  to  the  Fourth  Word  from  the  cross. 
This  was  a  word  of  astonishment  and  agony,  yet  also 
of  victory. 

I. 

Of  what  nature  had  been  the  meditations  of  our 
Lord  during  the  three  hours  of  silence?  Had  He 
been  in  an  ecstasy  of  communion  with  His  heavenly 
Father?  Not  infrequently  has  this  been  vouchsafed 
to  dying  saints.  And  it  has  sometimes  enabled  them 
completely  to  overcome  physical  suffering.  Martyrs 
have  occasionally  been  so  exalted  at  the  last  as  to  be 
able  even  to  sing  in  the  flames.  It  is  with  awe  and 
astonishment  we  learn  that  the  very  opposite  of  this 
was  the  state  of  mind  of  Jesus.  The  word  with  which 
He  burst  out  of  the  trance  of  silence  may  be  taken 
as  the  index  of  what  was  going  on  in  His  mind  during 
the  pR  ceding  hours  ;  and  it  is  a  cry  out  of  the  lowest 
depths  of  despair.  Indeed,  it  is  the  most  appalling 
sound  that  ever  pierced  the  atmosphere  of  this  earth. 
Familiar  as  it  is  to  u-,  it  cannot  be  heard  by  a  sensitive 


TIII-:  rocKTii  U'ORD  FROM  ////:  TA-O.S.S        zi«» 

car  even  at  this  day  without  causing  a  cold  shudder 
of  terror.  In  the  entire  Bible  there  is  no  other 
sentence  so  difficult  to  explain.  The  first  thought 
of  a  preacher,  on  coming  to  it,  is  to  find  some  excuse 
for  passing  it  by  ;  and,  after  doing  his  utmost  to 
expound  it,  he  must  still  confess  that  it  is  quite 
beyond  him.  Yet  there  is  a  great  reward  in  grappling 
with  such  difficult  passages  ;  for  never  does  the  truth 
impress  us  so  profoundly  as  when  we  are  made  to  feel 
that  all  the  length  which  we  are  able  to  go  is  only 
into  the  shallows  of  the  shore,  while  beyond  our  reach 
lies  the  great  ocean. 

Kven  in  Christ's  own  mind  the  uppermost  thought, 
when  He  uttered  this  cry,  was  one  of  astonishment. 
In  Gcthscmanc,  we  are  told,  "  He  was  sore  ama/.ed." 
And  this  is  obviously  the  tone  <  >f  this  uttemnce  also. 
We  almost  detect  an  accentuation  of  the  "Thou" 
like  that  in  the  word  with  which  the  murdered 
Cc'rsnr  fell.  All  His  life  Jesu^  had  been  accus 
tomed  to  find  Himself  forsaken.  The  me:nbeis  of 
His  own  household  early  rejected  Him.  So  did  His 
fellow-townsmen  in  Na/.areth.  Ultimately  the  nation 
at  large  followed  the  same  course.  The  multitudes 
that  at  one  time  followed  Him  wherever  He  went 
and  hung  upon  His  lips  eventually  took  offence  and 
went  away.  At  last,  in  the  crisis  of  His  fate,  one  of 
His  nearest  followers  bet  raved  Him  and  the  rest 


220      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

forsook  Him  and  fled.  But  in  these  disappointments, 
though  He  felt  them  keenly,  He  had  always  had  one 
resource :  He  was  always  able,  when  rejected  of  men, 
to  turn  away  from  them  and  cast  Himself  with  con 
fidence  on  the  breast  of  God.  Disappointed  of  human 
love,  He  drank  the  more  deeply  of  the  love  divine. 
He  always  knew  that  what  He  was  doing  or  suffering 
was  in  accord  \vith  the  will  of  God  ;  His  feelings  kept 
constant  time  with  the  Divine  heart ;  God's  thoughts 
were  His  thoughts  ;  He  could  clearly  discern  the 
divine  intention  leading  through  all  the  contradictions 
of  His  career  to  a  sublime  result.  Therefore  He 
could  calmly  say,  even  at  the  Last  Supper,  with 
reference  to  the  impending  desertion  of  the  Twelve, 
"  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  now  come,  that  ye 
shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall 
leave  Me  alone  ;  and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because 
the  Father  is  with  Me."  Now,  however,  the  hour  had 
come;  and  was  this  expectation  fulfilled?  They 
were  scattered,  as  He  had  predicted,  and  lie  was  left 
alone  ;  but  was  He  not  alone  ?  was  the  Father  still 
with  Him  ?  His  own  words  supply  the  answer  :  "  My 
God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?" 

II. 

Although  the  state   of  mind   of  our  Lord  on  this 
occasion   was  so  different  from  what  we  know  to  have 


been  His  habitual  mood,  yet  it  does  not  stand  abso 
lutely  isolated  in  His  history.  \Ve  know  of  at  least 
two  experiences  somewhat  resembling  it,  and  these 
may  in  some  decree  help  us  to  its  explanation.  The 
first  overtook  Him  on  the  occasion  of  the  visit  of 
certain  Greeks  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  week  of 
His  life.  They  had  desired  to  see  Him;  but,  when 
they  were  introduced  by  Andrew  and  Philip,  Jesus, 
instead  of  being  exhilarated,  as  might  have  been 
expected,  was  overcome  with  a  spasm  of  pain,  and 
groaned,  "  Now  is  My  soul  troubled,  and  what  shall 
I  say?  Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour."  The  sight 
of  these  visitors  from  the  outside  world  made  Him 
feel  how  grand  and  how  congenial  to  Himself  would 
have  been  a  worldwide  mission  to  the  heathen,  such 
as  He  might  have  undertaken  had  His  life  been 
prolonged  ;  but  this  was  impossible,  because  in  the 
flower  of  I  I  is  age  He  was  to  die.  The  other  occasion 
was  the  Agon}'  of  Gcthsemane.  A  careful  and 
reverent  study  will  reveal  that  this  incident  was 
the  effort  by  which  the  will  of  Christ  r«»>e  into 
unity  with  the  will  of  His  Father.  It  belongs  to 
the  very  essence  of  human  nature  that  it  must  grow 
from  stage  to  stage;  and  the  perfection  of  our  Lord, 
just  because  it  was  human,  had  to  realise  itself  on 
every  step  of  a  ladder  of  develojunent.  He  was 
always  both  perfect  on  the  stage  which  He  had 


222      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

reached,  and  at  the  same  time  rising  to  a  higher  stage 
of  perfection.  Sometimes  the  step  might  be  more 
easy,  at  other  times  more  difficult  ;  the  step  which  I  Ic 
had  to  take  in  Gethsemane  was  supremely  difficult  ; 
hence  the  effort  and  the  pain  which  it  cost.  It 
seemed,  however,  in  Gethsemane  as  if  He  had  finally 
conquered,  and  it  might  have  been  expected  that  the 
mood  of  weakness  and  darkness  could  not  come  back. 
Yet  it  was  to  be  permitted  to  return  once  more  ;  and 
on  the  cross  the  attack  was  far  more  violent  and 
prolonged  than  on  either  of  the  preceding  occasions. 
Keeping  in  mind  the  light  which  these  two  previous 
accesses  of  the  same  mood  may  cast  on  this  one,  let 
us  draw  near  reverently  and  sec  how  far  we  may  be 
able  to  penetrate  into  the  mystery.  ^ 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  there  was  a  physical 
clement  in  it.  He  had  now  been  a  considerable  time 
on  the  cross  ;  and  every  minute  the  agony  was  in 
creasing.  The  wounds  in  His  hands  and  feet,  exposed 
to  the  atmosphere  and  the  sun,  grew  barked  and 
hardened;  the  blood,  impeded  in  its  circulation, 
swelled  in  heart  and  brain,  till  these  organs  were  like 
to  burst  ;  and  the  slightest  attempt  to  move  the  body 
from  the  one  intolerable  posture  caused  pains  to  shoot 
along  the  quivering  nerves.  Bodily  suffering  clouds 
the  brain  and  distorts  the  images  formed  on  the 
mirror  of  the  mind.  Kvcn  the  face  of  God,  reflected 


THE  l-'OL'iu'll   U'altl)  i-jto.M   ////.    (  AYAV*         22^ 

there,    may    be    turned    to  a    shape  of  terror   by   the 
fumes  of  physical  trouble. 

The  horror  of  mortal  suffering  may  have  been 
greater  to  Jesus  than  to  other  men,  because  of  the 
fineness  and  sensitiveness  of  His  physical  organiza 
tion.  His  bod}'  had  never  been  coarsened  with  sin, 
and  therefore  death  was  utterly  alien  to  it.  The 
stream  of  physical  life,  which  is  one  of  the  precious 
gifts  of  God,  had  poured  through  His  frame  in 
abundant  and  sunny  tides.  Hut  now  it  was  being 
withdrawn,  and  the  countcrflow  had  set  in.  The 
unit}'  of  a  perfect  nature  was  being  violently  torn 
asunder;  and  lie  felt  Himself  drifting  away  from 
the  living  world,  which  to  Him  had  been  so  full  of 
God's  presence  and  goodness,  into  the  pale,  cold 
regions  of  inanity.*  He  did  not  belong  to  death  ;  yet 
He  was  falling  into  death's  grasp.  No  angel  came 
to  rescue  Him;  God  interposed  with  no  miracle  to 
arrest  the  issue  ;  He  was  abandoned  to  His  f.itc. 

There  was  more,  however,  it  is  easy  to  see,  in  the 
agony  which  prompted  this  cry  than  the  merely 
physical.  If  in  Gcthscmanc  we  have  the  effort  of 
the  will  of  Jesus,  as  it  raised  itself  into  unit}'  with 
the:  will  of  the  Father,  we  here  seethe  effort  of  His 
mind  as,  amidst  the  confusion  ami  contradictions  of 

*  Some  <»f  the  Fathers  thought  of  tin*  separation  of  the  divine 
from  the  human  nature  as  taking  pla<  <•  now. 


224      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


the   cross,   it   finally   rose   into   unity  with  the   mind 
of  God.     This   intellectual  character   of  His  pain   is 
indicated  by  the  word  "  Why."     It  is  always  painful 
when   the  creature  has  to  say  Why  to  the  Creator. 
\Ve  believe  that  He  is  Sovereign  of  the  world  and 
Guide    of  our    destiny,  and    that   He   urges   forward 
the  course  of  things  in  the  reins  of  infinite  wisdom 
and  love.     But,  while  this  is  the  habitual  and  healthy 
sense  of  the  human  mind,  especially  when  it  is  truly 
religious,  there  are  crises,  both  in   the  great   and  in 
the  little  world,  when  faith  fails.     The  world  is   out 
of  joint  ;   everything    appears  to  have    gone  wrong  ; 
the  reins  seem  to  have  slipped  out  of  the  hands  of 
God  and  the  chariot  to  be  plunging  forward  uncon 
trolled  ;   the  course  of  things  seems   no  more   to  be 
presided  over  by  reason,  but  by  a  blind,  if  not  a  cruel 
fate.     It  is  then  that  the  poor  human  mind  cries  out 
Why.    The  entire  book  of  Job  is  such  a  cry.    Jeremiah 
cried    \Vhy    to  God  in    terms  of  startling  boldness 
In    mortal    pain,   in   bewildering  disappointments,  in 
bereavements  which  empty  the  heart  and  empty  the 
world,  millions  have  thus  cried  Why  in  every  age.     It 
seems  an  irreligious  word.     When  Jeremiah  says,  "  O 
Lord,  Thou  hast  deceived  me  and  I  was  deceived," 
or  when  Job  demands,   "  Why  died    I   not  from  the 
womb  ?  why  did    I   not   give    up  the    ghost  when    I 
came  out  of  the  belly  ?  "  it  sounds  like  the  voice  of 


a  blasphemer.  Hut  indeed  it  is  into  the  m..st  earnest 
and  delicate  souls  that  this  despair  is  likeliest  to 
slip.  The  ignorant,  the  frivolous  and  the  time-serving 
are  safe  from  it  ;  for  they  are  well  enough  satisfied 
with  things  as  they  are.  Callous  minds  learn  to  he 
content  without  explanations.  Hut  the  more  deeply 
pious  a  mind  is,  the  more  jealous  must  it  be  for  justice 
and  the  &lory  of  God  ;  the  appearance  of  unwisdom 
in  the  government  of  the  world  shocks  it  ;  to  be  able 
to  trace  the  footsteps  of  God's  care  is  a  necessity  of 
its  existence.  Hence  its  pain  when  these  evidences 
disappear.  Now,  all  the  contradictions  and  con 
fusions  of  the  world  were  focussed  on  Golgotha. 
Injustice  was  triumphant  ;  innocence  was  scorned 
and  crushed  ;  everything  was  exactly  the  reverse  of 
what  it  ou^ht  to  have  been.  And  all  the  millions  of 
Whys  which  have  risen  from  aj^oni/.cd  souls,  jealous 
for  the  honour  of  God  but  perplexed  by  Hi*  provi 
dence,  were  concentrated  in  the  Why  of  Christ. 

How  nct'ir  to  us  lie  is!  Never  perhaps  in  His 
whole  life  did  He-  so  completely  identify  Himself 
with  His  poor  brethren  of  mankind.  Fur  here  He 
comes  down  to  stand  by  our  side  not  only  when  we 
have  to  encounter  pain  and  misfortune,  bereavement 
and  death,  but  \\hen  we  are  enduring  that  pain  which 
is  beyond  all  pains,  that  horror  in  wlio.se  presence 
the  brain  rccla,  and  faith  and  love,  the  eyes  of  life, 


226       THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


are  put  out — the  horror  of  a  universe  without  God 
a  universe  which  is  one  hideous,  tumbling,  crashing 
mass  of  confusion,  with  no  reason  to  guide  and  no 
love  to  sustain  it. 

Can  we  advance  a  step  farther  into  the  mystery? 
The  deepest  question  of  all  is  whether  the  desertion 
of  Jesus  was  subjective  or  objective — that  is,  whether 
He  had  only,  on  account  of  bodily  weakness  and  a 
temporary  obscuration  of  the  inward  vision,  a  sense 
of  being  abandoned,  or  whether,  in  any  real  sense, 
God  had  actually  forsaken  Him.  Of  course  we  are 
certain  that  God  was  infinitely  well  pleased  with 
Him — never  more  so,  surely,  than  when  He  was  sacri 
ficing  Himself  to  the  uttermost  on  behalf  of  others. 
But  was  there,  at  the  same  time,  any  outflashing 
against  Him  of  the  reverse  side  of  the  Divine  nature — 
the  lightning  of  the  Divine  wrath  ?  Calvary  was  an 
awful  revelation  of  the  human  heart,  whose  enmity 
was  directed  straight  against  the  perfect  revelation 
of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ.  There  the  sin  of  man 
reached  its  climax  and  did  its  worst.  What  was 
done  there  against  Christ,  and  against  God  in  Him, 
was  a  kind  of  embodiment  and  quintessence  of  the 
sin  of  the  whole  world.  And  undoubtedly  it  was 
this  which  was  pressing  on  Jesus ;  this  was  "  the 
travail  of  His  soul."  He  was  looking  close  at  sin's 
utmost  hideousness  ;  He  was  sickened  with  its  con- 


Tin:  roi'Rin  IVORD  nto.w  ////.  r  vo 


tact;  He  was  cru-hed  with  its  brutality  —  crushed  to 
death.  Vet  this  human  nature  was  His  own;  lie 
was  identified  with  it  bone  of  its  bone,  flesh  of  its 
flesh  ;  and,  as  in  a  reprobate  family  an  exquisitely 
delicate  and  refined  sister  may  feel  the  whole  weight 
of  the  debt  and  shame  of  the  household  to  lie  on 
herself,  so  He  felt  the  unworthincss  and  hopelessness 
of  the  race  as  if  they  were  His  own  ;  and,  like  the 
scapegoat  on  whose  head  the  sins  of  the  community 
were  laid  in  the  old  dispensation,  He  went  out  into 
the  land  of  forsakenness. 

1  hus  far  we  may  proceed,  feel  in-.;'  that  we  have 
solid  ground  beneath  our  feet.  Hut  many  have 
ventured  farther.  Kven  Luther  and  Calvin  allowed 
themselves  to  say  that  in  the  hours  which  preceded 
this  cry  our  Lord  endured  the  torments  of  the  damned. 
.And  Rambach,  \\hose  ^Icditations  <•>/  ///<•  Sufferings 
of  Christ  have  fed  the  piety  of  (iermany  for  a  hundred 
years,  says  :  "God  was  now  dealing  with  Him  not  as 
a  loving  and  merciful  father  with  his  child,  but  as 
an  offended  and  righteous  jud^c  with  an  evildoer. 
The  heavenly  Father  now  regards  His  Son  as  the: 
greatest  sinner  to  be-  found  beneath  the  sun,  and 
discharges  on  Him  the  whole  weight  of  His  wrath." 
Hut,  if  we  were  to  make  use  of  such  lan^ua^e,  we. 
should  be  venturing  beyond  our  depth.  Mm  h  to  b.- 
preferred  is  the  mode.st  comment  of  the  holy  and 


228      Till-:    TRIAL   A  A' I)   DEATH   Ob"  JESUS   CHRIST 


learned  Bcngcl  on  our  text  :  "In  this  fourth  \vord 
from  the  cross  our  Saviour  not  only  says  that  He  lias 
been  delivered  up  into  the  hands  of  men,  but  that 
He  has  suffered  at  the  hands  of  God  something  un 
utterable."  Certainly  there  is  here  something  unutter 
able.  We  have  ventured  into  the  mystery  as  far  as  we 
arc  able ;  but  we  know  that  we  arc  yet  only  in 
the  shallows  near  the  shore  ;  the  unplumbed  ocean 
lies  beyond. 

III. 

It  may  appear  an  affectation  to  speak  of  this  as 
in  any  sense  a  cry  of  victory.  Yet,  if  what  has  just 
been  said  be  true,  this,  which  was  the  extreme  moment 
of  suffering,  was  also  the  supreme  moment  of  achieve 
ment.  As  the  flower,  by  being  crushed,  yields  up 
its  fragrant  essence,  so  He,  by  taking  into  His  heart 
the  sin  of  the  world,  brought  salvation  to  the  world. 

In  point  of  fact,  all  history  since  has  shown  that 
it  was  in  this  very  hour  that  Christ  conquered  the 
heart  of  mankind.  Long  before  He  had  said, 
"  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all 
men  unto  Me."  And  the  correctness  of  this  antici 
pation  is  matter  of  history.  Christ  on  the  cross  has 
ever  since  then  been  the  most  fascinating  object 
in  the  eyes  of  mankind.  The  mind  and  heart  of 
humanity  have  been  irresistibly  attracted  to  Him, 


THE    FOl'RTH    /TO/vY)    l-'ROM    Till'.    CKOSS  220 

never  weary  of  studying  Him.  And  the  utterance  of 
this  cry  is  the  culminating  moment  to  which  the 
inquiring  mind  specially  turns.  Theology  has  its 
centre  in  the  cross.  Sometimes,  indeed,  it  has  been 
.shy  of  it,  and  has  divagated  from  it  in  wide  circles  ; 
but,  as  soon  as  it  becomes  profound  and  humble 
again,  it  always  returns. 

Yes,  when  it  becomes  humble!  Penitent  souls  are 
drawn  to  the  cross,  and  the-  deeper  their  penitence 
the  more  are  they  at  home.  The)'  stand  beside  the 
dy'ng  Saviour  and  s.iy.  This  is  what  we-  ought  to  have 
suffered  ;  our  life  was  forfeited  by  our  guilt  ;  thus  our 
blood  deserved  to  flow  ;  we  might  justly  have  been 
banished  forever  into  the  desert  of  forsakenness.  Hut, 
as  the}'  thus  make  confession,  their  forfeited  life  is 
given  back  to  them  for  Christ's  sake,  the  peace  ol 
(iod  is  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts,  and  the  new  life 
of  love  and  service  begins.  The  supreme  Christian 
rite  briivs  us  to  this  verv  spot  and  to  this  verv 

;*•>  .-          i 

moment  :  "This  is  My  blood  of  the  New  Testament, 
shed  for  man)'  lor  the  remission  of  sins." 

It  was  not,  however,  merely  in  this  profound  sense 
that  this  fourth  word  of  tin-  dying  Saviour  was  a  cry 
of  victorv.  It  was  so,  also,  because  it  liberated  Him 
from  His  depression.  It  has  been  said  that  when, 
at  His  encounter  with  the  (in  eks,  He  groaned, 
"Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour,"  He  immediately 


230      THE    TRIAL  AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


checked  Himself  with  "  Father,  glorify  Thy  name"; 
likewise  that  in  Gcthsemanc,  when  lie  prayed,  "  If  it 
be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me,"  He  hastened 
to  add,  "  Nevertheless,  not  My  will,  but  Thine  be 
done";  but  that  on  this  occasion  the  cry  of  despair 
\vas  followed  by  no  word  of  resignation.  This, 
however,  is  a  mistake.  The  cry  itself,  though  an 
utterance  of  despair,  yet  involved  the  strongest  faith. 
See  how  He  lays  hold  of  the  Eternal  with  both  hands: 
"My  God,  My  God!"  It  is  a  prayer:  a  thousand 
times  He  had  turned  to  this  resource  in  days  of  trial  ; 
and  Me  docs  so  in  this  supreme  trouble.  To  do  so 
cures  despair.  No  one  is  forsaken  who  can  pray, 
"  My  God."  As  one  in  deep  water,  feeling  no  bottom, 
makes  a  despairing  plunge  forward  .and  lands  on 
solid  ground,  so  Jesus,  in  the  very  act  of  uttering  His 
despair,  overcame  it.  Feeling  forsaken  of  God,  He 
rushed  into  the  arms  of  God  ;  and  these  arms  closed 
round  Him  in  loving  protection.  Accordingly,  as 
the  darkness,  which  had  brooded  over  all  the  land, 
disappeared  at  the  ninth  hour,  so  His  mind  emerged 
from  eclipse;  and,  as  we  shall  see,  His  last  words 
were  uttered  in  His  usual  mood  of  serenity. 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 
THK    FIFTH    WORD    KKo.M    TIIK    CROSS* 

Till*,  fourth  word  from  the  cross  \vc  looked  upon 
both  as  the  climax  of  the  struggle  which  had 
gone  on  in  the  mind  of  the  divine  Sufferer  during 
the  three  hours  of  silence  and  darkness  \vhich  preceded 
its  utterance  and  as  the  liber. ition  of  His  mind  from 
that  -truckle.  This  view  seems  to  be  confirmed  by 
the  terms  in  which  St.  John  introduces  the-  Fifth  Word 
— "After  this,  Jesus,  knowing  th  it  all  things  were 
now  accomplished,!  that  the  Scripture  ini^ht  be 
fulfilled,  saith,  I  thirst." 

The  phni.se,  "that  the  Scripture.-  mi^ht  be  fulfilled," 
is  usually  connected  with  the  words,  "  I  thirst,"  as  if 
the  meaning  were  that  He  had  said  this  fifth  word 
in  fulfilment  of  some  prediction  that  He  would  do  so; 
and  the  Old  Testament  is  ransacked,  without  much 
result,  for  the  prophetic  words  which  may  b--  supposed 

•   ••  I  tliir.-t." 

t  TfTt  Aform     the  very  word  of  Jesus  I  liinscll      "  It  is  finished 
\vhirh  may  possibly  have  In-m  fourth. 


234      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

'I. 

This  was  the  only  cry  of  physical  pain  uttered  by 
our  Lord  on  the  cross.  As  was  remarked  in  a  previous 
chapter,  it  was  not  uncommon  for  the  victims  of 
crucifixion,  when  the  ghastly  operation  of  nailing 
them  to  the  tree  began,  to  writhe  and  resist,  and  to 
indulge  either  in  abject  entreaties  to  be  saved  from 
the  inevitable  or  in  wild  defiance  of  their  fate.  But 
at  this  stage  Jesus  uttered  never  a  word  of  complaint. 
Afterwards  also,  in  spite  of  the  ever-increasing  pain, 
1  le  preserved  absolute  self-control.  Me  was  absorbed 
either  in  caring  for  others  or  in  prayer  to  God. 

It  is  a  sublime  example  of  patience.  It  rebukes 
our  softness  and  intolerance  of  pain.  How  easily  we 
are  made  to  cry  out ;  how  peevish  and  ill-tempered 
\ve  become  under  slight  annoyances  !  A  headache,  a 
toothache,  a  cold,  or  some  other  slight  affair,  is 
supposed  to  be  a  sufficient  justification  for  losing 
self-control  and  making  a  whole  household  uncom 
fortable.  Suffering  docs  not  always  sanctify.  It 
sours  some  tempers  and  makes  them  selfish  and 
exacting.  This  is  the  besetting  sin  of  invalids — to 
become  absorbed  in  their  own  miseries  and  to  make 
all  about  them  the  slaves  of  their  caprices.  But  many 
triumph  nobly  over  their  temptation  ;  and  in  this 
they  are  following  the  example  of  the  suffering 
Saviour.  There  arc  sick-rooms  which  it  is  a  privilege 


Tin:  FIFTH  \\aiu)  FROM  77/7;  CROSS          235 

to  visit.  You  may  know  that  the  place  is  a  scene  of 
excruciating  pain  ;  but  on  the  pillow  there  lies  a  sweet, 
patient  face;  the  voice  is  cheerful  and  thankful  ;  and, 
instead  of  being  self-absorbed,  the  mind  is  full  of 
unselfish  thoughts  for  others.  I  recall  the  description 
given  by  a  friend  of  one  such  invalid's  chamber,  which 
used  to  be  filled  with  the  most  beautiful  cheerfulness 
and  activity.  At  a  certain  time  of  year  you  might 
sec  in  it  quite  an  exhibition  of  specimens  of  needle 
work  and  other  pretty  things,  prepared  f«>r  the 
children  of  a  mission-school  in  India.  Hy  thinking 
of  the  needs  of  those  children  far  away  the  invalid 
not  only  kept  her  own  sufferings  at  bay,  but  created 
for  herself  delightful  connections  with  Clod's  work 
and  God's  people.  Yet  she  was  one  who  might 
easily  have  asserted  the  right  to  do  nothing,  and  have 
taxed  the  patience  and  the  services  of  those  by  whom 
she  was  surrounded. 

Hut  there  is  another  lesson  besides  patience  in 
this  word  of  Christ.  He  only  uttered  one  word  of 
physical  pain;  but  lie  did  utter  one.  llis  sell- 
control  was  not  proud  or  sullen.  There  is  a  silence 
in  suffering  that  is  mere  doggedness,  when  we  screw 
our  courage  to  the1  .^ticking-place  and  resolve  that 
nobody  shall  hear  any  complaint  from  us.  \\  e 
succeed  in  being  silent,  but  it  is  with  a  bad  grace  : 
there  is  no  love  or  patience  in  our  hearts,  but  only 


234      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

'  I. 

This  was  the  only  cry  of  physical  pain  uttered  by 
our  Lord  on  the  cross.  As  was  remarked  in  a  previous 
chapter,  it  was  not  uncommon  for  the  victims  of 
crucifixion,  when  the  ghastly  operation  of  nailing 
them  to  the  tree  began,  to  writhe  and  resist,  and  to 
indulge  cither  in  abject  entreaties  to  be  saved  from 
the  inevitable  or  in  wild  defiance  of  their  fate.  But 
at  this  stage  Jesus  uttered  never  a  word  of  complaint. 
Afterwards  also,  in  spite  of  the  ever-increasing  pain, 
lie  preserved  absolute  self-control.  He  was  absorbed 
either  in  caring  for  others  or  in  prayer  to  God. 

It  is  a  sublime  example  of  patience.  It  rebukes 
our  softness  and  intolerance  of  pain.  Mow  easily  we 
are  made  to  cry  out ;  how  peevish  and  ill-tempered 
we  become  under  slight  annoyances  !  A  headache,  a 
toothache,  a  cold,  or  some  other  slight  affair,  is 
supposed  to  be  a  sufficient  justification  for  losing 
self-control  and  making  a  whole  household  uncom 
fortable.  Suffering  docs  not  always  sanctify.  It 
sours  some  tempers  and  makes  them  selfish  and 
exacting.  This  is  the  besetting  sin  of  invalids — to 
become  absorbed  in  their  own  miseries  and  to  make 
all  about  them  the  slaves  of  their  caprices.  But  many 
triumph  nobly  over  their  temptation  ;  and  in  this 
they  are  following  the  example  of  the  suffering 
Saviour.  There  arc  sick-rooms  which  it  is  a  privilege 


Till:   FIFTH    \\ORl)   FROM    T11F    CKOSS  235 

to  visit.  You  may  know  that  the  place  is  a  .scene  of 
excruciating  pain  ;  but  on  the  pillow  there  lies  a  sweet, 
patient  face;  the  voice  is  cheerful  and  thankful  ;  and, 
instead  of  being  self-absorbed,  the  mind  is  full  of 
unselfish  thoughts  for  others.  I  recall  the  description 
given  by  a  friend  of  one  .such  invalid's  chamber,  which 
used  to  be  filled  with  the  most  beautiful  cheerfulness 
and  activity.  At  a  certain  time  of  year  you  might 
see  in  it  quite  an  exhibition  of  specimens  of  needle 
work  and  other  pretty  tilings,  prepared  for  the 
children  of  a  mission-school  in  India.  By  thinking 
of  the  needs  of  those  children  far  away  the  invalid 
not  only  kept  her  own  sufferings  at  bay,  but  created 
for  herself  delightful  connections  with  God's  work 
and  God's  people.  Yet  she  was  one  who  might 
easily  have  asserted  the  right  to  do  nothing,  and  have 
taxed  the  patience  and  the  services  of  those  by  whom 
she  was  surrounded. 

But  there  is  another  lesson  besides  patience  in 
this  word  of  Christ.  lie  only  uttered  one  word  of 
physical  pain;  but  lie  did  utter  one.  llis  self- 
control  was  not  proud  or  sullen.  There  is  a  silence 
in  suffering  that  is  mere  doggcdncss,  when  we  screw 
our  courage  to  the  sticking-place  and  resolve  that 
nobody  shall  hear  any  complaint  from  us.  \\  e 
succeed  in  being  silent,  but  it  is  with  a  bad  grace  : 
there  is  no  love  or  patience  in  our  hearts,  but  only 


236       THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESTS    CHRIST 

selfish  determination.  This  is  especially  a  temptation 
when  anyone  has  injured  us  and  \ve  do  not  wish 
to  let  him  sec  how  much  we  have  suffered,  lest 
he  should  be  gratified.  Jesus  was  surrounded  by 
those  who  had  wantonly  wronged  Him  ;  not  only 
had  the}'  inflicted  pain,  but  they  had  laughed  and 
mocked  at  His  sufferings.  He  might  have  resolved 
not  on  any  account  to  show  His  feelings  or  at  least 
to  ask  any  kindness.  It  is  sometimes  more  difficult 
to  ask  a  favour  than  to  grant  one  ;  it  requires  more 
of  the  spirit  of  forgiveness.*"  But  not  only  did  Jesus 
ask  a  favour  :  lie  expected  to  receive  it.  Shamefully 
as  He  had  been  treated  by  those  to  whom  lie  had 
to  appeal,  He  believed  that  there  might  still  be  some 
remains  of  goodness  at  the  bottom  of  their  hearts. 
All  His  life  He  had  been  wont  to  discover  more 
good  in  the  worst  than  others  believed  to  exist,  and 
to  the  last  He  remained  true  to  His  o\vn  faith.  The 
maxim  of  the  world  is  to  take  all  men  for  rogues 
till  the  reverse  has  been  proved.  Especially  when 
people  have  enemies,  they  believe  the  very  worst  of 
them  and  paint  their  characters  without  a  single 
streak  of  any  colour  but  black.  To  those  from  whom 
we  differ  in  opinion  we  attribute  the  basest  motives 
and  refuse  to  hear  any  good  of  them.  But  this  is 

*   "  To  be  in  too  great  a   hurry  to  discharge  an  obligation   is 
itself  a  kind  of  ingratitude."     LA   KornKForc..\ru>. 


Mot  the  way  of  Christ  :  He  believed  there  were  .some 
drops  of  the  milk  of  human  kindness  even  in  the  hard 
hearted  Roman  soldiers  ;  and  1  le  was  not  disappointed.* 

II. 

It  is  impossible  to  hear  this  pathetic  cry,  so 
expressive  of  helplessness  and  dependence,  without 
recalling  other  words  of  our  Lord  to  which  it  stands 
in  marked  contrast.  Can  this  be  He  who,  standing 
in  Jerusalem  not  long  before,  surrounded  with  a  great 
multitude,  lifted  up  His  voice  and  cried,  "  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink"?  (an  it 
be  He  who,  standing  at  the  well  of  Jacob  with  the 
Samaritan  woman  and  pointing  to  the  springing 
fountain  at  their  feet,  said,  u  Whosoever  drinketh 
of  this  water  shall  thirst  again  ;  but  whosoever 
drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  .shall  never 
thirst  ;  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  shall  be  in  him 
a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life"? 
Can  He  who  in  words  like  these  offered  to  quench 
the  thirst  of  the  world  be  the  same  who  now  whispers 
in  mortal  exhaustion,  "  I  thirst"? 

It   is  the  same  ;  and   this  is  a  contrast  which   runs 

*  Hofmann  says  that  Jesus  refused  the  intoxicating  draught, 
before  the  crucifixion  he^ati,  that  His  sensi-s  ini^ht  he  kept  cl<  ar  ; 
and  that  now  He  accepted  the  refreshing  di aught  fur  the  .*>ainc 
purpose. 


2;,S      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

through  Mis  whole  life,  the  contrast  between  imvard 
wealth  and  outward  poverty.  Me  was  able  to  enrich 
the  whole  world,  yet  Me  had  to  be  supported  by  the 
contributions  of  the  women  who  followed  Him  ;  Me 
could  say,  "  I  am  the  bread  of  life,"  yet  He  sometimes 
hungered  for  a  meal  ;  Me  could  promise  thrones  and 
many  mansions  to  those  who  believed  on  Mim,  yet 
Me  said  Himself,  "  Foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds 
of  the  air  have  nests,  yet  the  Son  of  man  hath  not 
where  to  lay  Mis  head." 

In  a  materialistic  age,  when  in  so  many  circles 
money  is  the  measure  of  the  man,  and  when  people 
are  so  excessively  concerned  about  what  they  shall 
cat  and  what  they  shall  drink  and  wherewithal 
they  shall  be  clothed,  it  is  worth  while  to  bear  this 
contrast  in  mind.  Seldom  have  the  noblest  speci 
mens  of  humanity  been  those  who  have  been  able 
to  wallow  in  luxury  ;  and  the  men  who  have  enriched 
the  world  with  the  treasures  of  the  mind  have  not 
infrequently  been  hardly  able  to  procure  daily  bread. 
Our  older  boys  may  have  seen  on  some  of  their 
school-books  the  name  of  Hcync.  Mis  is  an  immortal 
name  in  classical  scholarship  ;  but  when  he  was  a 
student,  and  even  when  he  was  enriching  the  literature 
of  his  country  \vith  splendid  editions  of  the  ancient 
writers,  he  was  literally  starving,  and  had  sometimes 
to  subsist  on  skins  of  apples  and  other  refuse  picked 


////    rn-" m  u'oRD  n\(>M  /-///•:  r/vv^s          2^ 

up  from  the  streets.  Our  o\vn  Samuel  Johnson,  to 
whose  wisdom  tlic  whole  globe  is  now  a  debtor,  when 
engaged  on  some  of  his  greatest  works,  had  not 
shoes  in  which  to  go  out,  and  did  not  know  where 
his  dinner  was  to  come  from.  It  would  be  easy  from 
history  to  multiply  instances  of  those  who,  though 
poor,  yet  have  made  many  rich. 

The  inference  is  not,  that  one  must  be  poor  exter 
nally  if  one  desires  to  be  inwardly  rich.  The  materially 
poor  arc  not  all  spiritually  rich  by  any  means  ;  mul 
titudes  of  them,  alas,  are  as  poverty-stricken  in  mind 
and  character  as  in  physical  condition.  Perhaps  one 
might  even  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  as  a  rule  the 
inwardly  rich  enjoy  at  least  a  competent  p<  rtion  of 
the  good  things  of  this  life;  for  intelligence  and 
character  have  even  a  market  value.  Money,  too, 
can  be  made  subservient  to  the  highest  aims  of  the 
soul.  But  \\hat  it  is  essential  to  remember  is,  that 
the  inward  is  the  true  wealth,  and  that  we  must  seek 
and  obtain  it,  even,  if  necessary,  at  the  sacrifice  of 
the  outward.  If  life  is  not  to  be  impoverished  and 
materialised,  some  in  every  age  must  make  the  choice 
between  the  inward  and  the  outward  wealth  ;  and  no 
one  is  worthy  to  be  the  servant  of  scholarship,  art 
or  religion  who  is  not  prepared  for  the  choice  should 
it  fall  to  him.  It  is  by  the  possession  of  intelligence, 
generosity  and  spiritual  power  that  we  enter  into  the 


24o      Till-:    TRIAL    .L\J>   DI..UH   OF  JE*US    UIR1*T 

higher  ranks  of  manhood  ;  and  the  most  Christlikc 
trait  of  all  is  to  have  the  will  and  the  ability  to 
overflow  in  influences  and  activities  which  sweeten 
and  elevate  the  lives  of  others. 

III. 

It  would  appear  that  some  of  those  round  the  cross 
were  opposed  to  granting  the  request  of  Jesus. 
Misunderstanding  the  fourth  word*  they  supposed 
He  was  calling  for  Llijah  ;  and  they  proposed  not  to 
help  Him  even  with  a  drink  of  water,  in  order  to 
see  whether  or  not  Klijah  would  come  to  the  rescue. 
But  in  one  man  the  impulse  of  humanity  was  too 
strong,  and  he  gave  Jous  what  He  desired.  \Ve 
almost  love  the  man  for  it,  and  we  envy  his  office. 

But  the  Saviour  is  still  saying,  "I  thirst."  How 
and  where?  Listen!  "I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave 
Me  drink."  "  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  athirst  and 
gave  Thee  drink?"  "Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  unto 
one  of  the  least  r,f  these  My  brethren,  ye  did  it  unto 
Me."  Wherever  the  brothers  and  sisters  of  Jesus 
are  .Buffering,  -itting  in  lonely  rooms  and  wishing  that 
somebody  would  come  and  visit  them,  or  lying  on 
beds  of  pain  and  needing  somebody  to  come  and  case 
the  pillow  or  to  reach  the  cup  to  the  dry  lips,  there 
Christ  is  saying,  "  I  thirst." 

•  "  Eli,  Eli,"  etc. 


////•    Firm    ll'Oh'l)    /'AYM/    THE    CAY/sS  2,1 

Perhaps  lie  is  saying   it   in  vain.      There  arc  multi 
tudes   of    professing   Christians    who   never   from   end 
to  end  of  the  year  vi-it  any  poor  person.      The)'  never 
thread  the  obscure   streets  or  ascend  the  ^rimy  stairs 
in    search  of   dod's   hidden    ones.      They   have   never 
acquired    the    art    of   (hecrin^    a    dark    home    with    a 
flower,  or  a  hymn,  or  a  diet,  or  the  totn  h  of  a  sympa 
thetic  hand  and  the  smile  of  a  healthy  face.       It  would 
completely    alter    the    Christianity    of    many    if    they 
could  l>e;.Mn    to  do   the>e    lowly  servicr-,  ;    it   would   put 
reality   into   it,   and    it    would   brint;   into    the    heart    a 
joy  and   exhilaration   hitherto   unknown.      For  Christ 
sees   to    it    tli.it    none   u  ho   thus   serve    Him    lose   their 
reward.        An     American    friend    told    me   that    once, 
when   travelling   on   the  continent  of   Kuropc,  he   fell 
in  with  a  fellow-countryman  on  hoard  a  Rhine  steamer. 
'1  hey   talked    about    America   and    soon    confided    la 
each    other    from    which    parts    of    the   country    they 
came,  v.  ith  other  fragments  of  personal  detail.      They 
continued   to  travel   for   some  day--,   together,  and   my 
informant  wa:-.   so  overwhelmed   with    kindness  by  his 
companion  that  at    last  he  ventured  to  a>k  the  reason. 
"  Well,"  rejoined  the  other,  "  when  the  War  was  ^oin^ 
on,  I  was   serving    in  your   native  state  ;   and  one  day 
our  march   lay  through   the  tov/n   in  v.  hiVh   you  have 
told   me  you   were   born.      The   inarch   had   l><-cn  very 
prolong  d  ;     it    was    a    day    of    intense-    lu  at  ;    I     was 

1 6 


242       THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


utterly  fatigued  and  felt  on  the  point  of  dying  for 
thirst,  when  a  kind  woman  came  out  of  one  of  the 
houses  and  gave  me  a  glass  of  cold  water.  And  I 
have  been  trying  to  repay  through  you,  her  fellow- 
townsman,  the  kindness  she  showed  to  me."  Does 
it  not  remind  us  of  the  great  word  of  the  Son  of  God, 
"  Whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these  little 
ones  a  cup  of  cold  water  only  in  the  name  of  a 
disciple,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  shall  in  no  wise 
lose  his  reward  "  ? 

But  is  this  not  enough  ?  Docs  anyone  wish  to  get 
still  nearer  to  Christ  and  hold  the  cup  not  only  to 
Him  in  the  person  of  His  members  but  to  His  own 
very  lips?  Well,  this  is  possible  too.  Jesus  still  says, 
"  I  thirst."  He  thirsts  for  love.  I  le  thirsts  for  prayer. 
He  thirsts  for  service.  He  thirsts  for  holiness.  When 
ever  the  heart  of  a  human  being  turns  to  Him  with 
a  genuine  impulse  of  penitence,  affection  or  consecra 
tion,  the  Saviour  sees  of  the  travail  of  His  *oul  and  is 
satisfied. 


rn.AITKR     XIX. 
THK    SIXTH    WORD    FROM    TI  IK    CROSS* 

T  IKK  the  Fifth,  tin:  Sixth  Word  from  the  Cross 
-•— '  is,  in  the  Greek,  literally  a  >ingle  word  ;  and  it 
has  been  often  affirmed  to  be  the  greatest  single 
word  ever  uttered.  It  may  be  .said  to  comprehend 
in  itsdf  the  salvation  of  the  world  ;  and  thousands 
of  human  souls,  in  the  agony  of  conviction  or  in  tin- 
crisis  of  death,  have  laid  hold  of  it  as  the  drowning 
sailor  grasps  the  life-buoy. 

Sometimes  it  has  been  int<  i  preted  as  merely  the 
last  sign  of  ebbing  life:  as  it  the  meaning  wen,  It  i-> 
all  over;  this  long  agony  of  p.iin  and  weakness  is  done 
at  last.  Hut  the  dying  words  ,,f  J(  ,us  \\rre  not 
spoken  in  this  tone.  The  Fif;h  \\'ord,  we  are  ex 
pressly  told,  was  uttered  with  a  I< -ud  voice;  .so  was 
the  Seventh  ;  and,  although  this  i->  not  exprevsly 
stated  about  the  Sixth,  the  likelihood  is  th.it.  in  thi-- 
respect,  it  resembled  the  other  two.  It  u.ts  not  .1 
cry  of  defeat,  but  of  victory. 


244       Till-:    TRIAL   AND   DEATH    OF  JESTS   CHRIST 

Both  the  suffering  of  our  Lord  and  His  work  were 
finishing  together  ;  and  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that 
lie  was  referring  to  both.  Suffering  and  work  are 
the  two  sides  of  every  life,  the  one  predominating 
in  some  cases  and  the  other  in  others.  In  the  ex 
perience  of  Jesus  both  were  prominent  :  He  had  both 
a  great  work  to  accomplish  and  He  suffered  greatly 
in  the  process  of  achieving  it.  But  now  both  have 
been  brought  to  a  successful  close  ;  and  this  is  what 
the  Sixth  Word  expresses.  It  is,  therefore,  first,  the 
Worker's  Cry  of  Achievement  ;  and,  secondly,  the 
Sufferer's  Cry  of  Relief. 

I. 

Christ,  when  on  earth,  had  a  great  work  on  hand, 
which  was  now  finished. 

This  dying  word  carries  us  back  to  the  first  word 
from  His  lips  which  has  been  preserved  to  us  :  "  Wist 
ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business?" 
Even  at  twelve  years  of  age  He  already  knew  that 
there  was  a  business  entrusted  to  Him  by  His  Father 
in  heaven,  about  which  His  thoughts  had  to  be 
occupied.  We  cannot  perhaps  say  that  then  already 
He  comprehended  it  in  its  whole  extent.  It  was  to 
gro\v  upon  Him  with  the  development  of  His  man 
hood.  In  lonely  meditations  in  the  fields  and  pastures 
of  Nazareth  it  seized  and  inspired  His  mind.  As 


He  cultivated  the  life  of  prayer,  it  In  came  more  and 
more  His  settled  purpose.  The  more  lie  became 
acquainted  with  human  nature,  and  with  the  character 
and  the  needs  of  His  own  a.;e,  the  more  clearlv  did 
it  rise  before  Him.  As  lie  heard  and  re. id  the 
Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  He-  saw  it  hinted 
and  foreshadowed  in  type  and  symbol,  in  rite  and 
institution,  in  law  and  prophets.  There  Hi-  found 
the  programme  of  II  is  life  sketched  out  beforehand; 
and  perhaps  one  of  His  uppermost  thoughts,  when 
He  said,  "It  is  finished,"  was  that  all  which  had 
been  foretold  about  Him  in  the  ancient  Scriptures 
had  been  fulfilled. 

After  His  public  life  commenced,  the  sense  of 
bciiiij  charged  with  a  task  which  He  had  to  fulfil 
was  one  of  the  master  thoughts  of  His  liie.  It  was 
written  on  His  very  face  and  bodily  ^ait.  He  never 
had  the  easy,  indeterminate  air  ot  one  who  docs  not 
know  what  He  means  to  do  in  the  world.  "I  have 
a  baptism,"  He  would  say,  "  to  In-  bapti/cd  with,  and 
how  am  I  straitened  till  it  b-  accomplished."  In 
a  rapt  moment,  at  the  well  of  Sychar,  alter  Hi- 
interview  \\  ith  the  Samaritan  woman,  when  His 
disciples  proffered  Him  food,  He  put  it  away  from 
Him,  saying,  "I  have  meat  to  cat  that  ye  know  not 
of,"  and  He  added,  "My  meat  is  to  do  the  \\ill  of 
Him  that  s  nt  Me  and  to  finish  His  \\oik."  On  His 


246      TJIK    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


last  journey  to  Jerusalem,  as  lie  went  on  in  front 
of  His  disciples,  they  were  amazed  and,  as  they 
followed,  they  were  afraid.  His  purpose  possessed 
Him  ;  He  was  wholly  in  it,  body,  soul  and  spirit. 
He  bestowed  on  it  every  scrap  of  power  He  possessed, 
and  every  moment  of  His  time.  Looking  back  now 
from  the  close  of  life,  lie  has  not  to  regret  that  any 
talent  has  been  either  abused  or  left  unused.  All 
have  been  husbanded  for  the  one  purpose  and  all 
lavished  on  the  work. 

What  was  this  work  of  Christ?  In  what  terms 
shall  we  express  it?  At  all  events  it  was  a  greater 
work  than  any  other  son  of  man  has  ever  attempted. 
Men  have  attempted  much,  and  some  of  them  have 
given  themselves  to  their  chosen  enterprises  with 
extraordinary  devotion  and  tenacity.  The  conqueror 
has  devoted  himself  to  his  scheme  of  subduing  the 
world  ;  the  patriot  to  the  liberation  of  his  country  ; 
the  philosopher  to  the  enlargement  of  the  realm  of 
knowledge  ;  the  inventor  has  rummaged  with  tireless 
industry  among  the  secrets  of  nature  ;  and  the  dis 
coverer  has  risked  his  life  in  opening  up  untrodden 
continents  and  died  with  his  face  to  his  task.  Hut 
none  ever  undertook  a  task  worthy  to  be  compared 
with  that  which  engrossed  the  mind  of  Jesus. 

It  was  a  work  fc>r  (iod  with  men,  and  it  was  a  work 
for  men  with  God. 


THE   SIXTH    iroitl)   I-' RDM    THE   TAV>vS 


!47 


The  thought  that  it  was  ;i  work  for  God,  with 
which  God  had  charged  Him,  was  often  in  Christ's 
mouth,  and  this  consciousness  was  one  of  the  chief 
sources  of  His  inspiration.  "I  inu-t  work  the  work 
of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it  is  clay,"  He  would 
say;  or,  "Therefore  doth  my  Father  lo\v  Me,  because 
I  do  always  those  things  which  please  Hi:n."  .And, 
at  the  close  of  His  life-work,  He  said,  in  words  closely 
related  to  those  of  our  text,  "  I  have  glorified  Thee 
on  the  earth,  I  have  finished  the  work  which  Thou 
gavcst  Me  to  do."  This  was  Hi-;  task,  t«>  glorify 
God  on  the  earth  to  make  known  the  Father  to 
the  children  of  men. 

I'ut  ju^t  as  obviously  was  it  a  work  f<  >r  mm  with 
God.  This  was  stamped  on  all  His  words  and  on 
the  entire  tenor  of  His  life.  He  was  bringing  men 
back  to  God,  and  lie  had  to  remove  the  obstacles 
which  stood  in  the  way.  He  had  to  roll  away  the 
stone  from  the  sepulchre  in  whirh  humanity  was 
entombrd  and  call  the  dead  to  coin«-  forth.  Hi-  had 
to  press  His  \\eight  against  the  huge  iron  gates  t,l 
human  guilt  and  doom  and  force  them  opm.  He  had 
done  so;  and,  as  He  said,  "It  is  finished,"  He  was 
at  the  same  time  saying  to  all  mankind."  Behold,  I 
have  set  before  you  an  open  door,  and  no  m.m  can 
shut  it." 

The   more  difficult   ami   prolonged   .my  '.ask  i->,  the 


248       THE    TRIAL    AM)    DEATH    OF  JESUS    CHRIST 


greater  is  the  satisfaction  of  finishing  it.  Everyone 
knows  what  it  is,  after  accomplishing  anything  on 
which  a  great  deal  of  labour  has  been  bestowed  or 
the  accomplishment  of  which  has  been  delayed,  to 
be  able  to  say,  "  There,  it  is  finished  at  last."  In  the 
more  signal  efforts  of  human  genius  and  energy  there 
is  a  satisfaction  of  final  achievement  which  warms 
even  spectators  with  sympathy  at  the  distance  of 
hundreds  of  years.  What  must  it  be  to  the  poet, 
after  equipping  himself  by  the  labours  of  a  lifetime 
with  the  stores  of  knowledge  and  the  skill  in  the  use 
of  language  requisite  for  the  composition  of  a  "Divine 
Comedy"  or  a  "Paradise  Lost,"  and  after  wearing  him 
self  lean  for  many  years  at  his  task,  to  be  able  at  last, 
when  the  final  line  has  been  penned,  to  write  Finis 
at  the  bottom  of  his  performance  ?  What  must  it 
have  been  to  Columbus,  after  he  had  worn  his  life 
out  in  seeking  the  patronage  necessary  for  his  under 
taking  and  endured  the  perils  of  voyaging  in  stormy 
seas  and  among  mutinous  mariners,  to  see  at  last  the 
sunlight  on  the  peak  of  Daricn  which  informed  him 
that  his  dream  was  true  and  his  life  work  accomplished  ? 
When  we  read  how  William  Wilberforce,  the  champion 
of  Slave  Emancipation,  heard  on  his  deathbed,  a  few 
hours  before  he  breathed  his  last,  that  the  British 
Legislature  had  agreed  to  the  expenditure  necessary 
to  secure  the  object  to  which  he  had  sacrificed  his  life, 


what  he-art  can   refuse  its  tribute  of  sympathetic  joy 

as  it  thinks  of  him  expiring  with  the  shouts  of 
emancipated  millions  in  his  ears?  These  are  feeble 
suggestions  of  tlie  triumph  with  which  ('hrist  saw, 
fallen  behind  Him,  His  accomplished  task,  as  He 
cried,  "  It  is  finished." 


If  Jesus  had  during  life  a  vast  work  on  hand  which 
He  was  able  on  the  cross  to  say  He  had  fmi.shrd.  IK 
was  in  quite  as  exceptional  a  decree  a  sutlt  rer  ;  yet 
on  the  cross  He  was  able  to  say  that  His  suffering 
also  was  finished. 

Suffering  is  the  reverse  side  of  work.  It  is  the 
shadow  that  accompanies  achievement,  as  his  shadow 
follows  a  man.  It  is  due  to  the  resistance  offered  to 
the  worker  by  the  medium  in  which  he  toils. 

'1  he  life  of  Jesiis  \vas  one-  «i  ijre.it  suffering,  because 
He  had  to  do  His  work  in  an  extremely  n  set. ml 
medium.  His  purpose:  was  so  beneficent,  and  Hi-, 
passion  for  the  <^ood  of  the  world  so  obvious,  that  it 
iniu;ht  have  been  expected  that  IK;  would  me  t  \\ith 
nothing  but  encouragement  and  furtherance.  He  \\.is 
so  religious  that  all  the  religious  forces  might  have  been 
expected  to  second  His  efforts  ;  IK-  was  s< .  patriotic 
that  it  would  have  been  natural  if  His  nativr  country 
had  welcomed  Him  uith  oprn  arms;  He-  \\.is  so 


250      THE   TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 


philanthropic  that  He  ought  to  have  been  the  idol 
of  the  multitude.  But  at  every  step  He  met  with 
opposition.  Everything  that  was  influential  in  His 
age  and  country  turned  against  Him.  Obstruction 
became  more  and  more  persistent  and  cruel,  till  at 
length  on  Calvary  it  reached  its  climax,  when  all  the 
powers  of  earth  and  hell  were  combined  with  the  one 
purpose  of  crushing  Him  and  thrusting  Him  out  of 
existence.  And  they  succeeded. 

But  the  mystery  of  suffering  is  very  insufficiently 
explained  when  it  is  defined  as  the  reaction  of  the 
work  on  the  worker.  While  a  man's  work  is  what 
he  does  with  the  force  of  his  will,  suffering  is  what 
is  done  to  him  against  his  will.  It  may  be  done  by 
the  will  of  opponents  and  enemies.  But  this  is  never 
the  whole  explanation.  Above  this  will,  which  may 
be  thoroughly  evil,  there  is  a  will  which  is  good  and 
means  us  good  by  our  suffering. 

Suffering  is  the  will  of  God.  It  is  His  chief 
instrument  for  fashioning  His  creatures  according  to 
His  own  plan.  While  by  our  work  we  ought  to  be 
seeking  to  make  a  bit  of  the  world  such  as  He  would 
have  it  to  be,  by  our  suffering  He  is  seeking  to  make 
us  such  as  I  Ic  would  have  us  to  be.  I  fe  blocks  up 
our  pathway  by  it  on  this  side  and  on  that,  in  order 
that  we  may  be  kept  in  the  path  which  He  has 
appointed.  I  le  prunes  our  desires  and  ambitions  ; 


THE  SIXTH    iron  I)    rRO.M    THE   CROSS  251 

He  humbles  us  and  makes  us  meek  and  acquiescent. 
By  our  work  we  help  to  make  a  well-ordered  work), 
but  by  our  suffering  He  makes  a  sanctified  man  ;  and 
in  His  eyes  this  is  by  far  the  greater  triumph. 

Perhaps  this  is  the  most  difficult  half  of  life  t<»  man 
age.  While  it  is  by  no  means  easy  to  accomplish  the 
work  of  life-,  it  is  harder  still  to  bear  suffering  and  to 
benefit  by  it.  Have  you  ever  seen  a  man  to  whom 
nature  had  given  great  talents  and  grace  great  virtues, 
so  that  the  possibilities  of  his  life  seemed  unbounded, 
while  lie  had  imagination  enough  to  expatiate  over 
them:  a  man  \\ho  might  have  been  a  missionary, 
opening  up  dark  countries  to  civilisation  and  the 
gospel  ;  or  a  statesman,  swaying  a  parliament  with 
his  eloquence  .and  shaping  the  destinies  of  millions 
by  his  wisdom;  or  M  thinker,  \\restling  with  tin- 
problems  of  the  age,  sou  ing  the  seeds  of  light,  and 
raising  for  himself  an  imperishable  monument  :  but 
who  was  laid  hold  of  by  some  remorseless  di-ea-e 
or  suddenly  crushed  by  some  accident  ;  sn  that  all 
at  once  his  schemes  were  upset  and  his  life'  narrowed 
to  petty  anxieties  about  his  health  and  shifts  to 
avoid  the  evil  day,  which  could  not,  however,  be  long 
postponed?  And  did  it  not  seem  to  you,  :»s  you 
watched  him,  to  be  far  harder  for  him  to  accept  this 
destiny  \\ith  a  good  grace  and  \\ith  cheerful  sub 
mission  than  it  uoule!  have  been  to  accomplish  the 


252       THE    TRIAL    AXD    DEATH   OF  JEM'S    CHRIST 

career  of  enterprise  and  achievement  which  once 
seemed  to  lie  before  him  ?  To  do  nothing  is  often 
more  difficult  than  to  do  the  greatest  things,  and  to 
submit  requires  more  faith  than  to  achieve. 

The  life  of  Christ  was  hemmed  and  crushed  in  on 
every  hand.  Evil  men  were  the  proximate  cause 
of  this;  but  He  acknowledged  behind  them  the  will 
of  God.  He  had  to  accept  a  career  of  shame  instead 
of  glory,  of  brief  and  limited  activity  instead  of 
far-travelling  beneficence,  of  premature  and  violent 
death  instead  of  world-wide  and  everlasting  empire. 
But  lie  never  murmured;  however  bitter  any  sacrifice 
might  be  on  other  grounds,  lie  made  it  sweet  to 
Himself  by  reflecting  that  it  was  the  will  of  His 
Father.  When  the  worst  came  to  the  worst,  and 
He  was  forced  to  cry,  "If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup 
pass  from  Me,"  lie  was  swift  to  add,  "  Nevertheless 
not  Aly  will,  but  Thine,  be  done."  And  thus  on 
step  after  step  of  the  ladder  His  thoughts  were 
brought  into  perfect  accord  with  His  Father's,  and 
His  will  with  His  Father's  will. 

At  last  on  the  cross  the  cup  out  of  which  He  had 
drunk  so  often  was  put  into  His  hands  for  the  last 
time.  The  draught  was  large,  black  and  bitter  as 
never  before.  But  lie  did  not  flinch.  He  drank  it 
up.  As  He  did  so,  the  last  segment  of  the  circle 
of  His  own  perfection  completed  itself;  and,  while, 


////•:  >7.v77/  iron i >  I'lto.M  -i in:  cwtss         ^ 

flinging  the  cup  away  after  having  exhausted  tin- 
last  drop,  He  cried,  "It  is  finished,"  the  echo  came 
back  from  heaven  from  those  who  saw  with  wonder 
and  adoration  the  perfect  round  of  His  completed 
character,  "  It  is  finished." 

Though  these  two  sides  of  the  life  of  Christ  arc 
separable  in  thought,  it  is  evident  that  they  constitute 
together  but  one  life.*  The  work  He  did  involved 
the  suffering  which  He  bore  and  lent  t<>  it  meaning 
and  dignity.  On  the  other  hand,  the  suffering  per 
fected  the  Worker  and  thus  conferred  greatness  on 
llis  work.  In  His  crowning  task  of  atoning  for  the 
sin  of  the  world  it  \\  as  as  a  MI  Merer  that  He  ac 
complished  the  will  <'f  (jod.  .And  now  both  are 
finished;  and  henceforward  the  world  has  a  new 
possession  :  it  has  had  other  perfect  things  ;  but 
never  before  and  never  since  has  it  had  a  perfect  life. 


•   Sonirtitm-s  tln-y  ;irc  ••xjirt-ssi-d   by  saying   tli.it    lil'c 
:i  Mission  and  a  Discipline. 


CHAPTER   XX. 
THE   SEVENTH    WORD    FROM    THE  CROSS* 

WHILE  all    the    words    of   dying    persons    are 
full  -of  interest,   there    is    special    importance 
attached    to    the    last    of   them.      This    is    the  Last 
Word    of  Jesus ;  and   both    for    this  reason  and    for 
others  it  claims  particular  attention. 

A  noted  Englishman  is  recorded  to  have  said, 
when  on  his  deathbed,  to  a  nephew,  "Come  near 
and  see  how  a  Christian  can  die."  Whether  or  not 
that  was  a  wise  saying,  certainly  to  learn  how  to 
die  is  one  of  the  most  indispensable  acquirements 
of  mortals  ;  and  nowhere  can  it  be  learnt  so  well 
as  by  studying  the  death  of  Christ.  This  Last  Word 
especially  teaches  us  how  to  die.  It  will,  however, 
teach  us  far  more,  if  we  have  the  wit  to  learn  :  it 
contains  not  only  the  art  of  dying  but  also  the  art 
of  living. 

I. 

The  final  word  of  the  dying  Saviour  was  a  prayer. 

*  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit." 
254 


Tin-:  si-.ri-iK 


Not  all  the  words  from  the  cross  were  prayers. 
One  was  addressed  to  the  penitent  thief,  another  to 
His  mother  and  His  favourite  disciple,  and  ;i  third 
to  the  soldiers  whe  were  crucifying  Him  ;  hut  prayer 
was  distinctly  the  language  of  His  dying  hours  It 
was  not  by  chance  that  His  very  last  word  was  a 
prayer  ;  for  the  currents  within  Him  were  all  flowing 
God  wards. 

While  prayer  is  appropriate  for  all  times  and 
seasons,  there  are  occasions  when  it  is  singularly 
appropriate.  At  the  close  of  the  day,  when  we  arc- 
about  to  enter  into  the  state  of  sleep,  which  is  an 
image  of  death,  the  most  natural  of  all  states  of 
mind  is  surely  prayer.  In  moments  of  mortal  peril, 
as  on  shipboard  when  a  multitude  are  suddenly 
confronted  with  death,  an  irresistible  impulse  presses 
men  to  their  knees.  At  the  communion  table,  when 
the  bread  and  the  wine  arc-  circulating  in  silence, 
every  thoughtful  person  is  inevitably  occupied  with 
prayer.  Hut  on  a  death-bed  it  is  more  in  it^  place 
than  anywhere  el-e.  Then  we  are  perforce  partiiu; 
with  all  that  is  earthly  with  relatives  and  friends, 
with  business  and  property,  with  the  comforts  of 
home  and  the  face  of  the  earth.  How  natural  to 
la}'  hold  of  what  alone  we  can  keep  hold  of;  and 
this  is  what  prayer  does;  for  it  lays  hold  of  (iod. 

It    is    so    natural    to   pray    then   that    pra\  er    might 


256      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

be  supposed  to  be  an  invariable  clement  of  the  last 
scenes.  But  it  is  not  always.  A  death-bed  without 
God  is  an  awful  sight  ;  yet  it  does  occur.  The 
currents  of  the  mind  may  be  flowing  so  powerfully 
earthward  that  even  then  they  cannot  be  diverted. 
There  arc  even  death-beds  where  the  thought  of 
God  is  a  terror  which  the  dying  man  keeps  away  ; 
and  sometimes  his  friends  assist  him  to  keep  it 
away,  suffering  none  to  be  seen  and  nothing  to  be 
said  that  could  call  God  to  mind.  Natural  as  prayer 
is,  it  is  only  so  to  those  who  have  learned  to  pray 
before.  It  had  long  been  to  Jesus  the  language  of 
life.  ITc  had  prayed  without  ceasing— on  the 
mountain-top  and  in  the  busy  haunts  of  men,  by 
Himself  and  in  company  with  others — and  it  was 
only  the  bias  of  the  life  asserting  itself  in  death 
when,  as  He  breathed  His  last,  lie  turned  to  God. 

If,  then,  we  would  desire  our  last  words  to  be 
words  of  prayer,  we  should  commence  to  pray  at 
once.  If  the  face  of  God  is  to  shine  on  our  death 
bed,  we  must  now  acquaint  ourselves  with  Him 
and  be  at  peace.  If,  as  we  look  upon  the  dying 
Christ  or  on  the  dying  saints,  we  say,  "  Let  me 
die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end 
be  like  his,"  then  we  must  begin  now  to  live  the 
life  of  the  righteous  and  to  practise  its  gracious 
habits. 


II. 

The  last  word  of  the  living  Saviour  was  a  quota 
tion  from  Scripture. 

This  was  not  the  first  time  our  Lord  quoted 
Scripture  on  the  cross:  His  ^reat  cry,  "My  God, 
My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?  "  was  likewise 
borrowed  from  the  Old  Testament,  and  it  is  possible 
that  there  is  Scriptural  allusion  in  others  of  the  Seven 
Words. 

If  prayer  is  natural  to  the  lips  of  the  dyin^,  so  is 
Scripture.  For  different  seasons  and  for  different 
uses  there  is  special  suitability  in  different  laii^u- 
ai^cs  and  literatures.  Latin  is  the  lan^ua^e  of  law 
and  scholarship,  French  of  conversation  and  diplomacy, 
German  of  philosophy,  Kn^lish  of  commerce.  Hut 
in  the  most  sacred  moments  and  transactions  of  life 
there  is  no  laniHia^c  like  that  of  the  Hible.  K-jx.-ciully 
is  this  the  case:  in  everything  connected  with  death. 
On  a  tombstone,  for  example,  how  irrelevant,  as  a 
rule,  seem  all  other  quotations,  but  how  perfect  is  the 
fitness  of  a  verse  from  Scripture  .And  on  a  deathlxd 
there  are  no  words  which  so  well  become  the  dying 
lips. 

This  is  strikingly  illustrated  by  the  following  extract, 
guaranteed     as     authentic,    from    a    private    diary  : 
"  1   remember,  when   I  was  a  student,  visiting  a  dying 

17 


258      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


man.  He  had  been  in  the  university  with  me,  but 
a  few  years  ahead  ;  and,  at  the  close  of  a  brilliant 
career  in  college,  he  was  appointed  to  a  professorship 
of  philosophy  in  a  colonial  university.  But,  after  a 
very  few  years,  he  fell  into  bad  health  ;  and  he  came 
home  to  Scotland  to  die.  It  was  a  summer  Sunday 
afternoon  when  I  called  to  see  him,  and  it  happened 
that  I  was  able  to  offer  him  a  drive.  His  great  frame 
was  with  difficulty  got  into  the  open  carriage  ;  but 
then  he  lay  back  comfortably  and  was  able  to  enjoy 
the  fresh  air.  Two  other  friends  were  with  him  that 
tljty — college  companions,  who  had  come  out  from  the 
city  to  visit  him.  On  the  way  back  they  dropped 
into  the  rear,  and  I  was  alone  beside  him,  when  he 
began  to  talk  with  appreciation  of  their  friendship 
and  kindness.  '  But,'  he  said,  '  do  you  know  what 
they  have  been  doing  all  day  ?  '  I  could  not  guess. 
'  Well,'  he  said,  '  they  have  been  reading  to  me  Sartor 
Resartus  ;  and  oh  !  I  am  awfully  tired  of  it.'  Then, 
turning  on  me  his  large  eyes,  he  began  to  repeat,  '  This 
is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that 
Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  of 
whom  I  am  chief ; '  and  then  he  added  with  great 
earnestness,  '  There  is  nothing  else  of  any  use  to  me 
now.'  I  had  not  opened  the  subject  at  all  :  perhaps 
I  was  afraid  to  introduce  it  to  one  whom  I  felt  to  be 
so  much  my  superior  ;  but  I  need  not  say  how  over- 


'////:  SEl'EMll   H'OKD   I'ROM    TllF.    CA'OSS         259 

joyed  I  was  to  obtain  such  a  glimpse  into  the  very 
clcptlis  of  a  great,  true  mind."  Sartor  Rfiartus  i^ 
one  of  the  best  of  books  ;  there  are  few  to  be  so 
heartily  recommended.  Vet  tlicre  are  moments  in 
life— and  those  immediately  before  death  arc  among 
them— when  even  such  a  book  may  be  felt  to  be 
irrelevant,  and,  indeed,  no  book  is  appropriate  except 
the  one  which  contains  the  words  of  eternal  life. 

It  is  worth  noting  from  which  portion  of  the  Old 
Testament    Jesus    fetched    the    word    on    which     Hi 
stayed  up  His   soul   in  this   supreme  moment.     '1  he 
quotation  is  from  the  thirty-first   1'salm.     The  other 
great   word    uttered  on    the    cross    to    which    I    have 
already    alluded    was    also    taken    from    one    ol    the 
Psalms— the    twenty-second.       This    is    undoubted! 
the  most  precious  of  all  the  books  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment.      It  is  a  book  penned  as  with  the  life-blo< 
its  authors  ;  it  is  the  record  of  humanity's  prof.undest 
sorrows  and  sublimest  ecstasies  ;  it  is  the  most  perfect 
expression  which  has  ever   been  given  to  experience  ; 
it  has    been    the    raJc-inccinn  of  all   the  saints  ;  and 
to    know    and    love    it    is   one    of    the    best    signs   of 

spirituality. 

Jesus     knew    where    to    go    in    the    Hible 
language     that     suited     Him;     for    He    had     Ix-rn    . 
diligent   student   of  it   all    His  days.      He  heard   it 
the  home    of    His  childhood  ;   He    l.stened    to    it    in 


2bo      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


the  synagogue;  probably  He  got  the  use  of  the 
synagogue  rolls  and  hung  over  it  in  secret.  He  knew 
it  through  and  through.  Therefore,  when  He  became 
a  preacher,  His  language  was  saturated  with  it,  and 
in  controversy,  by  the  apt  use  of  it,  He  could  put  to 
shame  those  who  were  its  professional  students.  But 
in  His  private  life  likewise  He  employed  it  in  every 
exigency.  He  fought  with  it  the  enemy  in  the 
wilderness  and  overcame  him  ;  and  now,  in  the 
supreme  need  of  a  dying  hour,  it  stood  Him  in  good 
stead.  It  is  to  those  who,  like  Jesus,  have  hidden  God's 
Word  in  their  hearts  that  it  is  a  present  help  in  every 
time  of  need  ;  and,  if  we  wish  to  stay  ourselves  upon 
it  in  dying,  we  ought  to  make  it  the  man  of  our 
counsel  in  living. 

It  is  worth  observing  in  what  manner  Jesus  made 
this  quotation  from  the  Psalter  :  He  added  something 
at  the  beginning  and  He  omitted  something  at  the 
close.  At  the  beginning  He  added,  "  Father."  This 
is  not  in  the  psalm.  It  could  not  have  been.  In 
the  Old  Testament  the  individual  had  not  begun  yet 
to  address  God  by  this  name,  though  God  was  called 
the  Father  of  the  nation  as  a  whole.  The  new 
consciousness  of  God  which  Christ  introduced  into 
the  world  is  embodied  in  this  word,  and,  by  prefixing 
it  to  the  citation,  He  gave  the  verse  a  new  colouring. 
We  may,  then,  do  this  with  the  Old  Testament  :  we 


may  put  New  Testament  meaning  into  it.  Indeed, 
in  connection  with  this  very  verse  we  have  a  still 
more  remarkable  illustration  of  the  same  treatment. 
Stephen,  the  first  martyr  of  Christianity,  was  in  many 
respects  very  like  his  Master,  and  in  his  martyrdom 
closely  imitated  Him.  Thus  on  the  field  of  death  la- 
repeated  Christ's  prayer  for  His  enemies — "Lord,  lay 
not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  .Also,  he  imitated  this 
final  word,  but  he  put  it  in  a  new  form,  "  Lord  Jesti>, 
receive  my  spirit;"  that  is,  he  addressed  to  Christ 
the  dyiiiLj  prayer  which  (  hrist  Himself  addressed  to 
the  Father.*  The  other  alteration  \\huh  Jesus  made 
was  the  omission  of  the  word-,  "lor  Thou  hast 
redeemed  me."  It  would  not  have  been  fitting  f<-r 
Him  to  employ  them.  Hut  we  will  not  omit  them; 
and  if,  like  Stephen,  we  address  the  prayer  t«.  Christ, 
how  much  richer  and  more  pathetic  are  the  words  to 
us  than  they  were  even  to  him  who  first  penned  them. 

*   The  first   business  of  the   interpret. -r  «»!   Scripture  i*  t«. 
nut  precisely  what  every  verse  <M    par.i^i  upli   meant   .it   the  time 
and  pla<-e   when-  it   was   written;   ami   there   is  endle-s   pr-.tit    in 
the  exa<  t   determination  <•(   this  original  appliruti<m.      Hut,  whilst 
the   interpreter's   task    begins,    it    «ln«-s    imt    «-n«l    with    this.      '1  h«- 
lli!)le  is   a  Ix.ok   for  every  K'-m-rali-.M  ,   and   the  linlm  t:«»:i    «•!    th'- 
message  \vhii-li   it  is   intendrd  to  mnvey  in  the   pres.-nt  <!ay  i^  ;i 
truly  the  task  of  tin-  interpreter.      'I  h-  r.-  is  a  sp<-.  i.-s  <>\  eve^-si 

S<,metinies     arr.i^ititi;:     t«i    Itsell     the    sole    title    to     |,e    ...nM-lefe.! 

scientific,  by  which  the  jjard.-n  «.l  S  nj.ti:r.-  is  tr.mMiiuted  ml" 
an  herNariiini  d  \\ithered  specimens. 


262      THE    TRIAL  AND   DEATH   OF   IESUS   CHRIST 


III. 

It  was  about  His  spirit  that  the  dying  Saviour 
prayed. 

Dying  persons  arc  sometimes  much  taken  up  with 
their  bodies.  Their  pain  and  trouble  may  occasion 
this,  and  the  prescriptions  of  the  physician  may 
require  close  attention.  Some  display  a  peculiar 
anxiety  even  about  what  is  to  happen  to  the  body 
after  the  life  has  left  it,  giving  the  minutest  instruc 
tions  us  to  their  own  obsequies.  Nut  infrequently 
the  minds  of  the  dying  are  painfully  occupied  with 
their  worldly  affairs  :  they  have  their  property  to 
dispose  of,  and  they  are  distracted  with  anxieties 
about  their  families.  The  example  of  'Jesus  shows 
that  it  is  not  wrong  to  bestow  attention  on  these 
things  even  on  a  deathbed;  for  His  fifth  word,  "I 
thirst,"  had  reference  to  1 1  is  own  bodily  necessities; 
and,  whilst  hanging  on  the  cross,  He  made  provision 
for  His  mother's  future  comfort.  But  His  supreme 
concern  was  His  spirit  ;  to  the  interests  of  which  He 
devoted  His  final  prayer. 

What  is  the  spirit  ?  It  is  the  finest,  highest, 
sacredest  part  of  our  being.  In  modern  and  ordinary 
language  we  call  it  the  soul,  when  we  speak  of  man 
as  composed  of  body  and  soul  ;  but  in  the  language 
of  Scripture  it  is  distinguished  even  from  the  soul 


as  the  most  lofty  and  exquisite  part  of  the  inner  man. 
It  is  to  the  rest  of  our  nature  what  the  flower  is  to 
the  plant  or  what  the  pearl  is  to  the  shell.  It  is  that 
within  us  which  is  specially  allied  to  God  and  eternity. 
It  is  also,  however,  that  which  sin  seeks  to  corrupt 
and  our  spiritual  enemies  seek  to  destroy.  N«>  doubt 
these  an:  specially  active:  in  the  article  of  death  ;  it 
is  their  last  chance  ;  and  fain  would  the\'  sei/.e  tin- 
spirit  as  it  parts  from  the  body  and,  dra^im;  it 
down,  rob  it  of  its  destiny.  Jesus  km  \\  that  He  was 
launching  out  into  eternity;  and,  plucking  His  spirit 
away  from  these  hostile  hands  which  were  ea:;c  r  to 
sei/.e  it,  He  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  God.  '1  lure 
it  was  safe.  Strong  and  secure  are  the  hands  ol  the 
Klcrnal.  They  are  soft  and  loving  too.  With  what 
a  passion  of  tenderness  must  they  have  received  the 
spirit  of  Jesus.  "  1  have  covered  thee,"  said  dod  to 
His  servant  in  an  ancient  prophecy,  "  in  the  shadow 
of  My  hand  ;  "  and  now  Jesus,  escaping  from  all  the 
enemies,  visible  and  invisible,  by  whom  He  w.i-, 
beset,  sought  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy. 
Tin's  is  the  art  of  dyin-  ;  but  i-  it  ""*  • 
art  of  living?  The  spirit  of  -very  son  of  Adam  i^ 
threatened  by  dan-< -rs  at  death  ;  but  it  is  threatened 
with  tin  in  also  in  life.  As  has  been  said,  it  is  our  Homel 
and  our  pearl;  but  the  flower  may  be  <  ru-h 
the  pearl  maybe  lost  lon^  before  death  am\  es. 


264      THE   TRIAL  AND  DEATH  OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


flesh  lustcth  against  the  spirit."  So  does  the  world. 
Temptation  assails  it,  sin  defiles  it.  No  better  prayer, 
therefore,  could  be  offered  by  a  living  man,  morning 
by  morning,  than  this  of  the  dying  Saviour.  Happy 
is  he  who  can  say,  in  reference  to  his  spirit,  u  I  kno\v 
whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  Pie 
is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him 
against  that  day." 

IV. 

This  last  word  of  the  expiring  Saviour  revealed 
His  view  of  death. 

The  word  used  by  Jesus  in  commending  His  spirit 
to  God  implies  that  He  was  giving  it  away  in  the 
hope  of  finding  it  again.  He  was  making  a  deposit 
in  a  safe  place,  to  which,  after  the  crisis  of  death  was 
over,  lie  would  come  and  recover  it.  Such  is  the 
force  of  the  word,  as  is  easily  seen  in  the  quotation 
just  made  from  St.  Paul,  where  he  says  that  he  knows 
that  God  will  keep  that  which  he  has  committed  to 
Him  -using  the  same  word  as  Jesus — "against  that 
day."  '  Which  day?  Obviously  some  point  in  the 
future  when  he  could  appear  and  claim  from  God 
that  which  he  had  entrusted  to  Him.  Such  a  date 


*  Christ's   \vord   is  Tra^ariOf^di,   and  St.  Paul's,  2  Tim.  i.    12, 
rjv  7r<j/m$///o;i'  fiov,  according  to  the  best  n  ading. 


mi:  sr:rr-:.\Tii  iroitD  i  KOM  •/•///•:  CA-OS.S       265 

was  also  in  Christ's  eye  when  He  said,  "  Father,  into 
Thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  Death  is  a 
disruption  of  the  parts  of  \\hich  human  nature  is 
composed.  One  part  -the  spirit— was  going  away 
to  God  ;  another  was  in  the  hands  of  men,  who  were 
wreaking  on  it  their  wicked  will  ;  and  it  was  on  its 
way  to  the  house  appointed  for  all  living,  lint  Jesus 
was  looking  forward  to  a  reunion  of  the  separated 
parts,  when  they  would  again  find  each  other,  and 
the  integrity  of  the  personal  life  be  restored. 

The  most  momentous  question  which  the  dying 
can  ask,  or  which  the  living  can  ask  in  the  prospect 
of  death,  is,  "  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ?"  docs 
he  all  die?  and  does  he  die  forever?  There  is  a 
terrible  doubt  in  the  human  heart  that  it  may  be  sU  ; 
and  there  have  never  been  wanting  teachers  \\h«.  have 
turned  this  doubt  into  a  dogma.  They  hold  that 
mind  is  only  a  form  or  a  function  of  matter,  and  that. 
therefore,  in  the  dissolution  of  the  bodily  materials, 
man  dissolves  and  mixes  with  the  material  universe. 
Others,  while  holding  fast  the-  distinction  betucen 
mind  and  matter,  have  taught  that,  as  th<-  b- -dy 
returns  to  the  dust,  the  mind  returns  to  the  •/<  «  an 
of  being,  in  which  its  personality  is  lost,  as  the  drop 
is  in  the  sea,  and  there  can  be  no  reunion.  I  here 
is,  however,  something  high  and  sacred  \\ithin  u-. 
that  rebels  against  the-.e  doctrine--  ;  and  the  In-st 


266      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


teachers  of  the  race  have  encouraged  us  to  hope  for 
something  better.  Still,  their  assurances  have  been 
hesitating  and  their  own  faith  obscure.  It  is  to 
Christ  we  have  to  go:  lie  has  the  words  of  eternal 
life.  lie  spoke  on  this  subject  without  hesitation 
or  obscurity  ;  and  His  dying  word  proves  that  tie 
believed  for  Himself  what  He  taught  to  others.  Not 
only,  however,  has  He  by  His  teaching  brought  life 
and  immortality  to  light :  He  is  Himself  the  guarantee 
of  the  doctrine  ;  for  He  is  our  immortal  life.  Be 
cause  we  arc  united  to  Him  we  know  we  can  never 
perish  ;  nothing,  not  even  death,  can  separate  us 
from  His  love;  "Because  I  live,"  He  has  said,  "ye 
shall  live  also." 

It  may  be  that  in  a  very  literal  sense  we  have  in 
the  study  of  this  sentence  been  learning  the  art  of 
dying  :  these  may  be  our  own  dying  words.  They 
have  been  the  dying  words  of  many.  When  John 
Huss  was  being  led  to  execution,  there  was  stuck 
on  his  head  a  paper  cap,  scrawled  over  with  pictures 
of  devils,  to  whom  the  wretched  priests  by  whom  he 
was  surrounded  consigned  his  soul  ;  but  again  and 
again  he  cried,  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend 
my  spirit."  These  were  also  the  last  words  of  Polycarp, 
of  Jerome  of  Prague,  of  Luther,  of  Melanchthon,  and 
of  many  others.  Who  could  wish  his  spirit  to  be 


carried  away  to  God  in  a  more  glorious  vehicle  ?  lint, 
whether  or  not  we  may  use  this  prayer  in  death,  let 
us  diligently  make  use  of  it  in  life.  Close  not  the 
book  without  breathing,  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands 
I  commend  my  spirit." 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

THE   SIGNS 

THERE  arc  indications  that  to  some  of  those 
\vho  took  part  in  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  His 
death  presented  hardly  anything  to  distinguish  it  from 
an  ordinary  execution  ;  and  there  were  others  who 
were  anxious  to  believe  that  it  had  no  features  which 
were  extraordinary.  But  God  did  not  leave  His  Son 
altogether  without  witness.  The  end  of  the  Saviour's 
sufferings  was  accompanied  by  certain  signs,  which 
showed  the  interest  excited  by  them  in  the  world 
unseen. 

I. 

The  first  sign  was  the  rending  of  the  veil  of  the 
temple.  This  was  a  heavy  curtain  covering  the 
entrance  to  the  Holy  Place  or  the  entrance  to 
the  Holy  of  Holies — most  probably  the  latter.  Both 
entrances  were  thus  protected,  and  Joscphus  gives  the 
following  description  of  one  of  the  curtains,  which 
will  probably  convey  a  fair  idea  of  cither:  five  ells 
high  and  sixteen  broad,  of  Babylonian  texture,  and 

268 


wonderfully  stitched  of  blue,  white,  scarlet  and  purple 
—  representing  the  universe  in  its  four  elements- 
scarlet  standing  for  fire  and  blue  for  air  by  their 
colours,  and  the  white  linen  for  earth  and  the  purple 
for  sea  on  account  of  their  derivation,  the  one  from 
the  flax  of  the  earth  and  the  other  from  the  shellfi-h 
of  the  sea. 

1  he  fact  that  the  rent  proceeded  from  top  to 
bottom  was  considered  to  indicate  that  it  was  made 
by  the  finger  of  God  ;  but  whether  any  physical  means 
may  have  been  employed  \ve  cannot  tell.  Some  have 
thought  of  the  earthquake,  which  took  place  at  the 
same  moment,  as  being  connected  with  it  through 
the  loosening  of  a  beam  or  some  similar  accident.* 

At  critical  moments  in  history,  when  the  minds 
of  men  are  charged  with  excitement,  even  slight 
accidents  ma}' assume  remarkable  significance.!  Sikh 

*  "May  this  phenomenon  account  I'nr  the  early  conversion  ol 
so  many  priests  recorded  in  Acts  vi.  7  ?"-  Km  KSIII:IM. 

4  Shakspeare  is  very  lond  ol  describing  th«-  portents  by  \\lmh 
remarkable  events  arc  foreshadowed.  Thus,  Jn/ats  (  'f\iir, 
A*  t  1.,  Scene,  ii.  :  - 

"  (  »    '    u  .TO. 

I   h.ivc  s« -i-ii   t>-m|*- ,t ..  \sh>i    t!i>-  s.  «.Mmi;  wiixl-. 
I  I.tv«-  rivc.l  tin-  knotty  < 


I'.ui   m-vt-r  till  to-ni^lit, 

Di.l   I   i;o  thr(.ui;h  a  l--r 

A  LuiniDou  bl.ivc     yuu  know    him  «ril  !>y  M^ht  — 


270      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


incidents  occur  at  turning-points  of  the  life  even  of 
individuals.*  They  derive  their  significance  from  the 
emotion  with  which  the  minds  of  observers  happen 
at  the  time  to  be  filled.  No  doubt  the  rending  of  the 
temple  veil  might  appear  to  some  a  pure  accident, 
while  in  the  minds  of  others  it  crystallised  a  hundred 
surging  thoughts.  But  we  must  ascribe  to  it  a  higher 
dignity  and  a  divine  intention. 

Like  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  in  the  wilderness, 


Held  up  his  left  hand,  which  did  flame  and  burn 
Like  twenty  torches  joined  ;  and  yet  his  hand, 
Xot  sensible  of  fire,  remained  unscorched. 
Besides— I  ha'  not  since  put  up  my  sword— 
Against  the  Capitol  I  met  a  lion, 
Who  glared  upon  me  and  went  surly  by, 
Without  annoying  me      And  there  were  drawn 
Upon  a  heap  an  hundred  ghastly  women, 
Transformed  with  their  fear,  who  swore  they  saw 
Men,  all  in  fire,   walk  up  and  down  the  streets. 
And  yesterday  the  bird  of  night  did  sit 
Even  at  noonday  upon  the  marketplace, 
Hooting  and  shrieking.     When  these  prodigies 
Do  so  conjointly  meet,   let  not  men  say, 
1  These  are  their  reasons— they  are  natural,' 
For  I  believe  they  are  portentous  things 
Unto  the  climate  that  they  point  upon." 

See  also  Act  II.,  Scene  ii.,  and  Act  V.,  Scene  i.  ot  the  same 
play  ;  Macbeth,  Act  II.,  Scene  ii.  ;  Hamlet,  Act  I.,  Scene  i.  Such 
impressions  are  not,  however,  even  in  modern  times,  confined  to 
poetry  alone.  Historical  instances  will  suggest  themselves  to 
every  reader. 

*  Some  of  the  most  interesting  I  have  read  occur  in  a  brief 
memoir  of  the  founder  of  the  Bagster  Publishing  Company  issued 
on  the  centenary  of  its  opening. 


Tin:  .sy/v.v.s  2-, 

it   had  a  double  face— one  of  judgment  and  another 
of  mercy. 

It  betokened  the  desecration  of  the  shrine  and  the 
exodus  of  the  Deity  from  the  temple  whose  day  « .f 
opportunity  and  usefulness  was  over.  And  it  is  curi..us 
to  note  how  at  the  time  not  only  the  Christian  but 
even  the  Jewish  mind  was  big  with  this  thought.  Tin -re 
is  a  Jewish  legend  in  Joseph  us,  which  is  referred  to 
also  by  the  Roman  histnri.m  Tacitus,  that  at  the 
Passover  some  years  after  this  the  east  door  of  the 
inner  court  of  the  temple,  which  was  so  heavy  that 
twenty  men  were  required  to  close  it,  and  was,  besides, 
at  the  moment  strongly  locked  and  barred,  suddenly 
at  midnight  flew  open  ;  and,  the  following  Pentecost, 
the  priests  whose  duty  it  was  to  guard  the  c<«urt  by 
night,  heard  first  a  rushing  noise  as  of  hurrying  frrt 
and  then  a  loud  cry,  as  of  many  voices,  saying,  "  Let 
us  depart  from  hence." 

Nor  was  it  only  in  Palestine  that  in  that  age  the 
air  was  charged  with  the  impression  th.it  a  turning- 
point  in  history  had  been  reached,  and  th.it  the 
ancient  world  was  parsing  away.  Plutarch  *  heard  a 
singular  story  of  one  Kpithcrses  from  the  rhetorician 
/Kmilianus,  who  had  it  from  the  man's  father.  On 
a  certain  occasion  this  Kpitherses  happened  t<»  lx%  a 

•    1 >,•    ( )><i,  itlonim    />,•/<;/:/.    <|M<>tr<|    l.y    iliulinrr   in   Ins   coin- 
inrntiiry,   ///  In,: 


272       THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

passenger  on  board  a  ship  which  got  becalmed  among 
the  Echinades.  As  it  stood  near  one  of  the  islands, 
suddenly  there  came  from  the  shore  a  voice,  loud 
and  clear,  calling  Thamus,  the  pilot,  an  Egyptian, 
by  his  name.  Twice  he  kept  silence  ;  but,  when 
the  call  came  the  third  time,  he  replied ;  whereupon 
the  voice  cried  still  louder,  "  When  you  come  to  the 
Paludcs,  proclaim  that  the  great  Pan  is  dead."  Pan 
being  the  god  of  nature  in  that  ancient  world,  all 
who  heard  were  terrified,  and  they  debated  whether 
or  not  they  should  obey  the  command.  At  last  it 
was  agreed  that  if,  when  they  came  to  the  Paludcs, 
it  was  windy,  they  were  not  to  obey,  but,  if  calm, 
they  would.  It  turned  out  to  be  calm  ;  and,  accord 
ingly,  the  pilot,  standing  on  the  prow  of  the  vessel, 
shouted  out  the  words  ;  whereupon  the  air  was  filled, 
not  with  an  echo,  but  the  loud  groaning  of  a  great 
multitude  mingled  with  surprise.*  The  pilot  was 
called  before  the  Emperor  Tiberius,  who  strictly 
enquired  into  the  truth  of  the  incident. 

Such  was  the  meaning  of  the  rending  of  the  veil 
on  its  dark  side :  it  denoted  that  the  reign  of  the  gods 
was  over  and  that  Jerusalem  was  no  longer  to  be 
the  place  where  men  ought  to  worship.  But  it  had 
at  the  same  time  a  bright  side  ;  and  this  was  the  side 
for  the  sake  of  which  the  incident  was  treasured  by 

ifjia   6avfJ.acrp.(a. 


the  friends  of  Jesus.  It  meant,  as  St.  Paul  says,  that 
the  wall  between  Jew  and  (ientile  hat!  been  broken 
down.  It  meant,  as  is  set  forth  in  tin-  in  >ble  argument 
of  the  Kpistle  to  the  Hebrews,  that  the  system  of 
ceremonies  and  intermediaries  by  which  under  the 
Old  Testament  the  worshipper  mi^ht  approach  (iod 
and  yet  was  kept  at  a  distance  from  Him  had  Urn 
swept  away.  The  heart  of  (iod  is  now  hilly  revealed, 
and  it  is  a  heart  of  love  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  tin- 
heart  of  man,  liberated  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  from 
the  conscience  of  sin,  as  it  could  never  be  by  the 
offering  of  bulls  and  i;<>ats,  can  joyfully  venture  into 
the  divine  presence  and  L;O  out  and  in  with  tin- 
freedom  of  a  child.  "Having  therefore,  brethren, 
boldness  to  enter  into  the  holii>t  by  the-  bl...,«l  of 
Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which  He  hath 
consecrated  for  us,  through  the  veil  that  is  to  say, 
His  flesh  ami  having  a  Hi^h  Priest  over  the  house 
of  (iod,  let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  In-art  in  full 
assurance-  of  faith."  ' 

II. 

The-  second  M'«^M  was  the  resurrection  of  certain 
of  tin-  deael  "The  Craves  were  oprneil,  and  many 
boilies  of  the-  saints  which  slept  arose  ami  came  out 


274      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

of  the  graves  after  His  resurrection,  and  went  into 
the  holy  city  and  appeared  unto  many." 

Whether  or  not  the  rending  of  the  veil  in  the 
temple  was  connected  with  the  earthquake,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  this  second  sign  was.  The  graves 
in  Palestine  were  caves  in  the  rocks,  the  mouths  of 
which  were  closed  with  great  stones.  Some  of  these 
stones  were  shaken  from  their  places  by  the  earth 
quake  ;  and  the  bodies  themselves,  which  lay  on 
shelves  or  stood  upright  in  niches,  may  have  been 
disturbed.  But  in  some  of  them  a  greater  disturbance 
occurred  :  besides  the  external  shaking  there  took 
place  within  them  a  motion  of  the  life-giving  breath 
of  God. 

In  the  minds  of  many  devout  scholars  this  miracle 
has  excited  suspicion  on  several  accounts.  They 
say  it  is  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  Scripture  else 
where,  according  to  which  Christ  was  the  firstfruits 
of  them  that  slept.  If  these  dead  bodies  were  re 
animated  at  the  moment  of  this  earthquake,  they, 
and  not  He,  were  the  firstfruits.  To  this  it  is 
answered  that  St.  Matthew  is  careful  to  note  that 
they  came  out  of  their  graves  "after  His  resur 
rection  "  ;  so  that  St.  Matthew  still  agrees  with  St. 
Paul  in  making  Christ  the  first  to  rise.  But,  then, 
it  is  asked,  in  what  condition  were  they  between 
their  rcanimation  and  their  resurrection  ?  The  Evan- 


Relist  appears  to  state  that  tlu-y  rose  from  death  {it 
life  at  the  moment  of  the  earthquake,  hut  did  not 
emerge  from  the  tomb  till  the  third  day  afterwards, 
when  Christ  had  risen.  Is  this  credible?  or  is  it 
an  apocryphal  marvel,  which  has  been  interpolated 
in  the  text  of  St.  Matthew?  The  other  Kvan-clists. 
while,  alon;4  with  St.  Matthew,  narrating  the  rending 
ot  the  veil,  do  not  touch  on  this  incident  at  all. 
1  he  whole  representation,  it  is  argued,  lacks  the 
sobriety  which  is  characteristic  of  the  authentic 
miracles  of  the  Gospels  and  broadly  separates  them 
from  the  ecclesiastical  miracles,  about  which  there 
is  generally  an  air  of  triviality  and  ;.,rmti--(juciu^s. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  indication  in  the 
oldest  and  best  manuscript-,  of  St.  Matthew  that 
this  is  an  interpolation  ;  and  many  <>1  the  acute^t 
minds  have  felt  thi^  trait  t<»  be  thoroughly  con 
gruous  and  suitable  to  its  pla»v.  If,  tlu-y  contend, 
He  who  had  just  died  on  Calvary  was  \\hat  He 
Ljave  Himself  out  and  we  believe  Him  t<»  lx-,  His 
death  must  have  excited  the-  profuundest  commotion 
in  the  kingdoms  of  the  dead.  The  world  of  living 
men  and  women  \\as  insensible  to  the-  character  ol 
the  event  which  was  taking  pi. ice  before  its  i  \'e>  ; 
but  the  world  unseen  was  agitated  as  it  never  had 
been  before  and  never  was  to  be  a^ain.  I',  was  not 
unnatural,  but  the  reverse,  that  .some  of  the  dead, 


276      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


in  their  excitement  and  eagerness,  should  even  press 
back  over  the  boundaries  of  the  other  world,  in 
order  to  be  in  the  world  where  Christ  was.  The 
question  where  they  were  or  what  they  were  doing 
between  their  rcanimation  and  resurrection  is  a 
triviality  not  worth  considering.  At  all  events,  they 
rose  after  their  Lord  ;  and  was  it  not  appropriate 
that  when,  after  the  forty  days,  He  ascended  to 
heaven,  there  to  be  received  by  rejoicing  angels  and 
archangels,  He  should  not  only  appear  in  the  flesh, 
but  be  accompanied  by  specimens  of  what  His  resur 
rection  power  was  ultimately  to  do  for  all  believers? 
If  it  be  asked  who  the  favoured  saints  were  to  whom 
this  blessed  priority  was  vouchsafed,  we  cannot  tell. 
The  dust,  however,  was  not  far  away  of  many  whom 
the  Lord  might  delight  to  honour  —  patriarchs, 
like  Abraham  ;  kings,  like  David  ;  prophets,  like 
Isaiah. 

But  the  true  significance  of  this  sign  is  not  de 
pendent  on  such  speculations.  Kvcn  if  it  should 
ever  be  discovered,  as  it  is  not  in  the  least  likely  to 
be,  that  this  story  was  interpolated  in  St.  Matthew, 
and  we  should  be  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  it 
was  invented  by  the  excited  fancy  of  the  primi 
tive  Christians,  even  then  we  should  have  to  ask 
what  caused  them  to  invent  it.  And  the  only  pos 
sible  answer  would  be,  that  it  was  the  force  of  the 


Tin:  >/A,.YS 

conviction  burning  within  them  that  by  His  death 
and  resurrection  Christ  had  opened  the  -ates  of 
death  to  all  the  saints.  This  was  the  -lorious  faith 
which  was  be-otten  by  the  experiences  of  those 
never-to-be-forgotten  days,  whether  the  M-ht  of  these 
resurrected  saints  played  any  part  or  not  in  maturin.; 
it  ;  and  it  is  now  the  faith  of  the  Church  and  the  faith 
of  mankind. 

This   may  well    be   called    the   rending    of   another 
veil.      If  in    the  ancient  world    there  was  a  veil  on  the 
face  of  Cod,  there  was  a  veil    liken  Ce  on    the   face  of 
eternity.*      The   home  of  the   soul    was   hidden    fn  >m 
the    children    of    men.       They    va-uely    .surmised    it, 
indeed  ;     they    Could     never    believe    that    they    were 
wholly    du.st.      Hut,    apart    from    Christ,    the    specula 
tions   even   of    the    wi--cst   as    to    the   other   \\orld    are 
hardly   mure   correct    or   certain    than    mi:;ht    be    the 
speculations  of  infants  in   the  womb  as  to  the  condi 
tion   of  this  world. t      Christ,  on    the   r-intrarv.  always 
spoke   of   the   world    invisible    with    the    freedom   and 
confidence   of   one  to  u  hom   it   was    native  and   uel! 

*  S«i  tlx-  i^noraixr  ol  imnxn  t.ihty  is  i-\pr«-ssly  iai!<d  in  !l;»- 
beautiful  pavsa^e.  Isa.  xxv.  7. 

+  Sir  Tlx. mas  Brov.r.r.  //!•,///./.;/•///,/.  «  h.,p.  iv.  :  "\  di.,!nKix- 

between  t\vo  infants  in  the  \vi»mb  r«ini'«Tii:ni,'  ihr  ^lali  .,(  (hj^ 

\v«irld  iTiii^ht  handsomely  illustrate  mir  i^iinram  »•  <•(  t!u-  m-jct. 
wh'Tc.  iii'-thinks,  we  «fi||  dis.  ,,Mr-"  1.1  !'!.i»<.s  d«-i',  .md  aic  but 
embryo  philosophers. " 


278      THE   TRIAL  AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


known  ;  and  His  resurrection  and  ascension  afford 
the  most  authentic  glimpses  into  the  realm  of  im 
mortality  which  the  world  has  ever  received. 

In  this  sign,  indeed,  it  is  with  the  death  and  not 
with  the  resurrection  that  this  authentication  is  con 
nected.  But  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  allied  in 
the  most  intimate  manner  with  His  death.  It  was 
the  public  recognition  of  His  righteousness.  Since, 
however,  He  died  not  for  Himself  alone,  but  as  a 
public  person,  His  mystical  body  has  the  same  right 
to  resurrection,  and  in  due  time  it  will  be  made  mani 
fest  that,  He  having  discharged  every  claim  on  their 
behalf,  death  has  now  no  right  to  detain  them. 

III. 

The  first  sign  was  in  the  physical  world  ;  the 
second  was  in  the  underworld  of  the  dead  ;  but  the 
third  was  in  the  common  world  of  living  men.  This 
was  the  acknowledgment  of  Christ  by  the  centurion 
who  superintended  His  crucifixion. 

Whether,  like  the  preceding  signs,  this  third  one 
is  to  be  connected  with  the  earthquake  is  a  question. 
Probably  the  answer  ought  to  be  in  the  affirmative. 
The  sensation  produced  by  an  earthquake  is  like 
nothing  else  in  nature  ;  and  its  first  effect  on  an 
unsophisticated  mind  is  to  create  the  sense  that  God 
is  near.  Probably,  therefore,  the  earthquake  was  felt 


279 


by  the  centurion  to  be  the  divine  A  men  to  the 
thoughts  which  had  been  rising  in  his  mind,  and  it 
gave  them  a  speedy  and  complete  delivery  in  his 
confession. 

'1  his  confession  \vas,  ho\vever,  the  result  of  his 
observation  of  Jesus  throughout  His  whole  trial  and 
the  subsequent  proceedings  ;  and  it  is  an  eloquent 
tribute  to  our  Lord's  behaviour.  The  ccnturi«m  may 
have  been  at  the  side  of  Jesus  from  the  arrest  to  the 
end.  Through  those  unparalleled  hours  he  had  ob 
served  the  rage  and  injustice  of  His  enemies;  and 
he  had  marked  ho\v  patient,  unretaliating,  gentle  and 
magnanimous  lie  had  been.  He  had  heard  Him 
praying  for  1 1  is  crucifiers,  comforting  the  thief  on  the 
cross,  providing  for  His  mother,  communing  with 
God.  More  and  more  his  interest  was  excited  and 
his  heart  stirred,  till  at  last  he  was  standing  opposite 
the  cross,*  drinking  in  every  syllable  and  devouring 
every  movement;  and,  when  the  final  prayer  uas 
uttered  and  the  earthquake  answered  it,  his  rising 
conviction  brimmed  over  and  he  could  not  withhold 
his  testimony. 

St.  Luke  makes  him  say  only.  "This  was  a 
righteous  man,"  while  the  others  ivjMirt.  "  This  uas 
the  Son  of  God."  Hut  St.  Luke's  may  include  theirs  ; 


-So       THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OE  JESUS    CHRIST 

because,  if  the  centurion  meant  to  state  that  the 
claims  of  Jesus  were  just,  what  were  His  claims? 
At  Pilate's  judgment-scat  he  had  heard  it  stated  that 
Jesus  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  perhaps  he 
had  heard  Him  make  this  claim  Himself  in  reply  to 
Pilate's  question.  This  name,  along  with  others  like 
it,  had  been  hurled  at  Jesus,  in  his  hearing,  by  those 
standing  round  the  cross. 

But  what  did  he  mean  when  he  made  this  acknow 
ledgment  ?  It  has  been  held  that  all  which  he,  a 
heathen,  could  imply  was  that  Jesus  was  a  son  of 
God  in  the  sense  in  which  the  Greeks  and  Romans 
believed  Hercules,  Castor  and  other  heroes  to  be  sons 
of  their  deities.  This  may  be  near  the  truth  ;  but 
his  soul  was  moved,  his  mind  was  opened  ;  and,  once 
in  the  way,  he  could  easily  proceed  further  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ.  Tradition  says  that  his  name 
was  Longinus,  and  that  he  became  bishop  of  Cappa- 
docia  and  ultimately  died  a  martyr. 

Have  we  not  here  the  rending  of  a  third  veil  ? 
There  is  a  veil  on  the  face  of  God  which  requires  to 
be  removed  ;  and  there  is  a  veil  on  the  face  of  eternity 
which  requires  to  be  removed  ;  but  the  most  fatal 
veil  is  that  which  is  on  the  heart  of  the  individual 
and  prevents  him  from  seeing  the  glory  of  Christ. 
It  was  on  the  faces  of  nearly  all  the  multitude  that 
day  assembled  round  the  cross.  It  was  on  the  faces 


of  the  poor  soldiers  ^amblin^  within  ;i  few  feet  <»f  the 
dying  Saviour  ;  in  their  case  it  was  a  veil  of  insensi 
bility.  It  was  on  the  faces  of  the  ecclesiastics  and 
the  mob  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  in  their  ca-e  it  was  a 
thick  veil  of  prejudice.  The  greatest  M-ht  evrr 
witnessed  on  earth  was  there  beside  them  ;  but  they 
were  stoncblind  to  it. 

The  '^lory  of  Christ  is  still  the  greatest  si-ht  whi*  h 
anyone  can  see  between  the  cradle  and  the  -rave. 
And  it  is  now  as  near  everyone  of  us  as  it  \\  as  to  the 
crowd  on  Calvary.  Some  see  it  ;  for  the  veil  upon 
their  faces  is  rent  ;  and  they  are  transfixed  and  trans 
formed  b\-  the  si^ht.  Hut  others  are  blinded.  HM\V 
near  one  may  be  to  Jesus,  how  much  mixed  up  with 
His  cause,  how  well  informed  about  His  lite  and 
doctrine,  and  yet  never  see  His  ;j,iory  or  know  Him 
as  a  personal  Saviour!  It  is  said  that  people  may 
spend  a  lifetime  in  the  midst  of  perfect  scenery  and 
yet  never  awake-  to  its  charm  ;  but  by  comes  a  painter 
or  poet  and  drinks  the  beaut}'  in,  till  he  is  into\i<  .tied 
with  it  and  puts  it  into  ;i  glorious  picture  or  a  deathle^- 
soiiLj.  So  can  some  remember  a  time  \\lnii  J(  MIS, 
though  in  a  sense  well  ki;own,  uas  nothing  to  them  ; 
but  at  a  certain  point  a  veil  s<  emed  to  rend  and  an 
entire  change  supervt  in  d  ;  and  (\<r  sin<  c  then  tin- 
world  is  full  of  Him  :  His  name  st-<  ms  v.  ritt«n  on  tin- 
stars  and  amoni;  the  flowers;  He  is  their  fir-t  thought 


282      THE    TRIAL  AXD  DEATH  OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


when  they  wake  and  their  last  before  they  sleep  ;  Me 
is  with  them  in  the  house  and  by  the  way  ;  He  is 
their  all  in  all. 

This  is  the  most  critical  rending  of  the  veil; 
because,  when  it  takes  place,  the  others  follow.  When 
we  have  our  eyes  opened  to  see  the  glory  of  Christ, 
we  soon  know  the  Father  also  ;  and  the  darkness 
passes  from  the  face  of  eternity,  because  eternity  for 
us  is  to  be  forever  with  the  Lord. 


THK    DKAD    CHRIST 

T   1   was  not   usual   to  remove  bodies  from   the  cross 
^     immediately  after  their  death.     They  were  allowed 
to    hani;,    exposed    to    the    weather,    till    they    rotted 
and  fell   to    pieces  ;  or  they  mii;ht   be  torn   by   birds 
or   beasts  ;    and    at    last    a    fire    was    perhaps   kindled 
beneath    the  cross   to   rid    the   place   of  the   remains. 
Such  was   the    Roman   custom;   but   amon«^   tin-  Jews 
there    was    more    scrupulosity.       In    their    law    there 
stood   this  provision:    "If    a   man   have  committed   a 
sin    worth}'   of  death,   and    he    be    put    to   death,    and 
thou  hanj*   him  on   a  Iree,   his   body   shall   not    remain 
all    ni;dit   upon   the   tree,  but    thoii   shall    in   any   wise 
bur}-  him   that  da}-     for  he  that  is   handed  is   aecurM-d 
of  ( iody  ;    that   thy    land    !>••    not    defiled    which    the 
Lord     thy    (iod     invelh     thee     for    an     inheritance." 
Whether    or  not    the*    Jews  always    tried    to  j.jct    this 
provision  observed  in   executions  carried   out  in   their 

•   D.ut.  xxi.  22,  .'3. 


284      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH    OF  JESL'S    CHRIST 

midst  by  their  Roman  masters,  we  cannot  tell  ;  but 
it  was  natural  that  they  should  do  so  in  reference 
to  executions  carried  out  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  holy  city  and  at  Passover  time.  In  the  present 
instance  there  was  the  additional  reason,  that  the 
morrow  of  the  execution  of  Jesus  was  a  high  day — 
it  was  the  Sabbath  of  the  Passover — a  kind  of  double 
Sabbath,  which  would  have  been  desecrated  by  any 
unclean  thing,  like  an  unburied  corpse,  exposed  to 
view.  The  Jews  were  extremely  sensitive  about 
such  points.  At  any  time  they  regarded  themselves 
as  unclean  if  they  touched  a  dead  body,  and  they 
had  to  go  through  a  process  of  purgation  before 
their  sense  of  sanctity  was  restored.  But  on  the 
occasion  of  a  Passover  Sabbath  they  would  have 
felt  it  to  be  a  desecration  if  any  dead  thing  had 
even  met  their  eyes  or  rested  uncovered  on  the 
soil  of  their  city.  Therefore  their  representatives 
went  to  the  Roman  governor  and  begged  that  the 
three  crucified  men  should  be  put  to  death  by 
clubbing  and  their  bodies  buried  before  the  Sabbatli 
commenced. 

The  suggestion  has  often  been  made  that,  behind 
this  pretended  scrupulosity,  their  real  aim  was  to 
inflict  additional  pain  and  indignity  on  Jesus.  The 
breaking  of  the  bones  of  the  body,  by  smashing  them 
with  clubs,  was  a  peculiarly  horrible  form  of  punish- 


7V//C 


ment  sometimes  inflicted  by  the  Unmans.*  It  was 
nearly  as  cruel  and  degrading  as  crucifixion  itself;  and 
it  was  an  independent  punishment,  not  conjoined  with 
crucifixion.  Hut  the  Jews  in  this  case  attempted  to 
get  them  united,  that  Jesus,  besides  being  crucified, 
might,  so  to  speak,  die  yet  another  death  of  the  m<»t 
revolting  description.  The  Kvangclist,  however, 
throws  no  doubt  on  the  motive  which  they  put  To 
ward  —  namely,  that  the  Passover  Sabbath  might  be 
saved  from  desecration  —  and,  although  their  insatiable 
hatred  may  have  made  them  suggest  clubbing  as  the 
mode  by  which  His  death  should  be  hastened,  we 
need  not  question  that  their  scruples  were  genuine. 
It  is  an  extraordinary  instance  of  the  game  of  self- 
deception  which  the  human  conscience  can  play. 
Here  were  people  fresh  iroin  the  greatest  crime  c\er 
committed  their  hands  still  reeking,  one  might  say. 
with  the  blood  of  the  Innocent  and  their  consciences, 
while  utterly  untouched  with  reinnrse  for  tin's  crinx  , 
are  anxious  about  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  and 
the  ceremonial  defilement  of  the  soil.  It  is  the  m<  -t 
extraordinary  illustration  \\hich  hi-t..ry  records  of 
how  x.eal  for  what  may  be  called  the  body  of  M  ligimi 


•    '•  Cntti/Hi^ii<nt.   as   it  was   rall«-«,   mns 
l«-Ks  of  tin-   siitfi-r.-r  with    a    ln-.ixy    rii:ill»-i. 

CV//7V/,    II.,    4.'^. 


286       THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   Oh"  JESUS   CHRIST 

may  be  utterly  destitute  of  any  connection  with  its 
spirit.  It  is  surely  a  solemn  warning  to  make  sure 
that  every  outward  religious  act  is  accompanied  by  the 
genuine  outgoing  of  the  heart  to  God,  and  a  warning 
that,  if  we  love  not  our  brother,  whom  we  have  seen, 
neither  can  we  be  lovers  of  God,  whom  we  have  not 
seen. 

Pilate  hearkened  to  the  request  of  the  Jews,  and 
orders  were  given  to  the  soldiers  to  act  accordingly. 
Then  the  ghastly  work  began.  They  broke  the  legs 
of  the  malefactor  on  the  one  side  of  Jesus,  and  then 
those  of  the  other  on  the  opposite  side.  The  penitent 
thief  was  not  spared  ;  but  what  a  difference  his 
penitence  made  !  To  his  companion  this  was  nothing 
but  an  additional  indrgnity  ;  to  him  it  was  the 
knocking-off  of  the  fetters,  that  his  spirit  might  the 
sooner  wing  its  way  to  Paradise,  where  Christ  had 
trystcd  to  meet  him. 

Then  came  the  turn  of  Jesus.  But,  when  the 
soldiers  looked  at  Him,  they  saw  that  their  work 
was  unnecessary  :  death  had  been  before  them  ;  the 
drooping  head  and  pallid  frame  were  those  of  a  dead 
man.  Only,  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  one 
of  them  thrust  his  spear  into  the  body,  making  a 
wound  so  large  that  Jesus,  when  He  was  risen,  could 
invite  the  doubting  Thomas  to  thrust  his  hand  into 


it  ;   and,  as   the  weapon  was  drawn   forth   again,  there 
came  out  after  it  blood  and  water. 

St.  John,  who  was  on  the  spot  and  saw  all  this 
taking  place,  seems  to  have  perceived  in  the  scene 
an  unusual  importance;  for  lie  adds  to  his  report 
these  words  of  confirmation,  a-,  if  he  were  seal  in <r  an 
official  document,  "  And  lie  that  saw  it  bare  n  o  id  ; 
and  his  record  is  true  ;  and  he  knoweth  that  he  -aith 
true,  that  ye  might  believe."  Why  should  he  intenupt 
the  flow  ol  his  narrative  to  add  these  \\ords  of 
assurance ? 

Some  have  thought  that  he  was  moved  t«>  do  M> 
by  a  heresy  which  sprang  up  in  the  early  Church 
to  the  effect  that  Christ  was  not  really  hiuuan  :  His 
body,  it  was  said,  was  only  a  phantom  b"dy,  and 
therefore  His  death  was  only  an  apparent  death.  In 
opposition  to  such  a  notion  St.  John  diucts  attention 
to  the  realistic  details  which  prove  so  coin  lusivcly 
that  thi.s  was  a  real  man  and  that  1  It  died  a  real 
death.  Of  course  that  ancient  heresy  h.is  long  ceased 
to  trouble;  there  are  none  now  u  ho  deny  that  JCMIS 
was  a  man.  Yet  it  is  curious  how  the  tendency  ever 
and  anon  reappears  to  evaporate  the  facts  of  His 
life.  At  the  present  hour  then-  an-  eminent  Chiisti.m 
teachers  in  Kurope  who  are  treating  the  resurrection 
of  the  Lord  in  very  much  the-  same  way  as  these 
c.irlv  Docct.i-  treated  His  death-  as  a  kind  of  figure 


2S8      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


of  speech,  not  to  be  understood  too  literally.  Against 
such  the  Church  must  lift  up  the  crude  facts  of  the 
resurrection  as  St.  John  did  those  of  the  death  of 
the  Saviour.*  In  our  generation  teachers  of  every 
kind  arc  appealing  to  Christ  and  putting  Him  in  the 
centre  of  theology  ;  but  we  must  ask  them,  What 
Christ?  Is  it  the  Christ  of  the  Scriptures  :  the  Christ 
who  in  the  beginning  was  with  God  ;  who  was 
incarnated  ;  who  died  for  the  sins  of  the  world  ;  who 
was  raised  from  the  dead  and  reigns  for  evermore  ? 
\Ve  must  not  delude  ourselves  with  words  :  only  the 
Christ  of  the  Scriptures  could  have  brought  us  the 
salvation  of  the  Scriptures. 

What  excited  the  wonder  of  St.  John  is  supposed 
by  others  to  have  been  the  fulfilment  of  two  passages 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scripture  which  he  quotes. 
It  appeared  to  be  a  matter  of  mere  chance  that  the 
soldiers,  contrary  to  the  intention  of  the  Jews,  refrained 
from  breaking  the  bones  of  Jesus  ;  yet  a  sacred  word, 
of  which  they  knew  nothing,  written  hundreds  of 
years  before,  had  said,  "A  bone  of  Him  shall  not 
be  broken."  It  seemed  the  most  casual  circumstance 


*  The  words  that  follow  in  this  paragraph  are  a  reminiscence 
of  a  singularly  eloquent  and  powerful  passage  in  a  speech  of 
Dr.  Maclaren,  of  Manchester,  delivered  last  year  in  Edinburgh. 


TIU:  ni:.m 

that  the  soldier  plunged  the  sj)e;ir  into  the  side  of 
Jesus,  to  make  sure  that  He  was  dead;  yet  an  ancient 
oracle,  of  which  he  knew  nothing,  had  said,  "  Thcv 
shall  look  on  Him  whom  they  pierced."  Thus,  by 
the  overruling  providence  of  God,  the  soldiers,  going 
with  rude  unconcern  about  their  work,  were  uncon 
sciously  fulfilling  the  Scriptures  ;  and  those  who  both 
saw  what  they  had  done  and  knew  the  Scriptures 
recognised  the  Divine  finger  pointing  out  Jesus  as 
the  Sent  of  God. 

The  first  of  these  texts  is  generally  supposed  *  to 
be  taken  from  the  account  in  Kxodus  of  tin-  institu 
tion  of  the  Passover,  and  originally  it  refers  to  the 
paschal  lamb,  which  was  to  IK-  eaten  whole,  the 
breaking  of  its  bones  being  forbidden.  St.  John's 
idea  is  that  Christ  was  to  be  the  paschal  lamb  of 
the  New  Dispensation,  and  that  there-fore  Providence 
took  care  that  nothing  should  be  done  to  destroy 
His  resemblance  to  the  type,  as  would  have  hap|>cnctl 
if  His  bones  had  been  broken.  The  Passover  was 
the  great  event  of  the  year  in  all  the  generations  of 
Jewish  history.  It  was  intended  to  carry  the  minds 
of  God's  people  back  to  the  wonderful  scenes  of 
divine  grace  and  power  in  which  their  existence  as 


*   \YrisB,    houwrr,    supposes    I'salin    xxxiv.     2'>    to    lx*    llir 
reference. 


29o      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


a  nation  had  begun,  when  God  liberated  them  from 
their  bondage  and  led  them  out  of  Egypt  with  a 
mighty  hand.  The  centre  of  the  solemnity  was  the 
slaying  and  eating  of  the  paschal  lamb.  This  re 
minded  them  of  how  in  Egypt  the  blood  of  this 
lamb,  sprinkled  on  the  lintels  and  doorposts  of  their 
huts,  saved  them  from  the  visit  of  the  destroying 
angel,  who  was  passing  through  the  land  ;  and  how, 
at  the  same  time,  the  flesh  of  the  lamb  was  eaten 
by  the  people,  with  their  loins  girt  and  staves  in 
their  hands,  and  supplied  them  with  strength  for 
their  adventurous  journey.  Thus  through  all  ages 
it  impressed  on  them  two  things — that  the  sins  of 
the  past  required  to  be  expiated,  and  that  strength 
had  to  be  obtained  from  above  for  the  new  stage 
of  their  history  on  which  at  the  annual  Passover 
they  might  be  supposed  to  be  entering.  In  the 
same  way,  in  the  New  Dispensation,  arc  our  minds 
ever  to  revert  to  the  marvellous  revelation  of  the 
grace  and  saving  power  of  God  in  which  Christianity 
originated  ;  and  in  the  very  midst  is  the  Lamb  slain, 
who  is  both  the  expiation  of  the  sins  that  arc  past 
and  the  strength  requisite  for  the  conflict  and  the 
pilgrimage.  "  If  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in 
the  light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanscth  us  from 
all  sin." 


nr-:,in          .  20I 


The  other  words  of  prophecy  which   appeared    to 
St.   John  to  be  fulfilled  on   this  occasion  were,  "  They 
shall   look  on   Him    whom  they  pierced."     They  are 
from  a  passage  in   Zcchariah,  which  is  so  remarkable 
that    it    may   be   quoted   in   full-"  And    I    will    pour 
out  on  the  house  of  David  and  upon   the  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications, 
and    they    shall     look     upon     Me    whom     they    have 
pierced,    and    they    shall    mourn     for     Him.     as    one 
mourncth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness 
for  Him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  firsUx.rn." 
Jehovah  speaks  figuratively  of  the  opposition  shown 
to    Himself  and   His  servants  as  piercing   Him    with 
pain,  just  as  we  say  of  an   insult  that   it  cuts  to  the 
heart.      But   in   the  death   of  JCMIS  the  figure-  became 
a  fact  :  against  the  sacred   person  of  the  Son  of  God 
the    spear    was    lifted    up,    and    it    was    driven    home 
without  compunction.      Kvidcntly  St.  John   thinks  of 
this  rather  as  the  act  of  the  Jewish  people  than  of  the 
Roman    soldier.      But  the  prophecy  sjx-aks   not   only 
of  the  people  piercing  God.   but   of  their  looking  at 
their  own  work  with  shame  and  tears.      At    Pentecost 
this    began    to    l>e    fulfilled  ;    and    in    every   age    since 
there   have    been    members  of  the   Jewish    race    who 
have    .acknowledged    their    guilt    in    the    transaction. 
The  full  acknowledgment,  however,  still  lingers  ;  but 
the  conversion  of  God's  ancient  people,  when  it  comes, 


292      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH  OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


must  begin  with  this.  Indeed,  every  human  being 
to  whom  his  own  true  relation  to  Christ  is  revealed 
must  make  the  same  acknowledgment.  It  was  the 
heart  not  of  a  few  soldiers  or  of  the  representatives 
of  a  single  people,  but  of  the  human  race,  that  hardened 
itself  against  Him.  It  was  the  sin  of  the  world  that 
nailed  Him  to  the  tree  and  shed  His  blood.  Every 
sinner  may  therefore  feel  that  he  had  a  hand  in  it ; 
and  it  is  only  when  we  see  our  own  sin  as  aiming  at 
the  very  existence  of  God  in  the  death  of  His  Son 
that  we  comprehend  it  in  all  its  enormity. 

There  have  been  many  who  have  found  the  reason 
for  St.  John's  wonder  in  the  fact  that  out  of  the 
wounded  side  there  flowed  blood  and  water. 

From  a  corpse,  when  it  is  pierced — at  least,  if  it  has 
been  some  time  dead — it  is  not  usual  for  anything  to 
flow.  But  whether  St.  John  reflected  on  this  or  not 
we  cannot  tell.  What  fascinated  him  was  simply  the 
fact  that  the  piercing  of  the  body  of  the  Saviour 
made  it  a  fountain  out  of  which  sprang  this  double 
outflow.  When  the  rock  in  the  wilderness  was 
smitten  with  the  rod  of  Moses,  there  issued  from  it 
a  stream  which  was  life  to  the  perishing  multitude  ; 
but  in  the  double  stream  coming  from  the  side  of 
Jesus  St.  John  saw  something  better  even  than  that ; 
because  to  him  the  blood  symbolised  the  atonement, 


////:  nr.. -in  ry/Av.w  ,,,3 

and  the  water  the  Spirit  of  Christ  ;  and  in  these  two 
all  (;ur  salvation  lies.*  So  we  sing  in  the  most  precious 
of  all  our  hymns, — 

Let  the  water  and  the  blood 
From  Thy  living  side  which  flowed 
He  of  sin   the  double  cure — 
Cleanse  me  from  its  guilt  and  power. 

Although,  however,  St.  John  did  not  perhaps 
speculate  on  the  reason  why  this  double  outflow  took 
place  from  the  wounded  side,  others  have  occupied 
themselves  with  the  question. 

Some  t  have  considered  the  phenomenon  altogether 
abnormal,  and  endeavoured  to  explain  it  from  the 
peculiarity  of  our  Lord's  humanity.  Though  He  di<-d, 
He  was  not,  like  other  men,  to  see  corruption;  His 
body  was  to  escape  in  a  few  hours,  transfigured  ami 
glorious,  from  the  grasp  of  death.  This  transforming 
process,  which  issued  in  His  resurrection,  began  as 
soon  as  lie  was  dead;  and  the  spear-thrust,  breaking 
in  on  it,  so  to  speak,  revealed  something  altogether 
unique  in  the  constitution  of  His  body. 

Others,  keeping  within  the  limits  of  ascertained 
fact,  have  given  a  totally  different  yet  a  peculiarly 
interesting  explanation.  They  have  directed  attention 

•  On  the  syrnlx>lism  of  this  phenomenon  sec  the  excursus  in 
\Vestcott's  Gospel  of  St.  John.  pp.  284-8' 
t  Kg.,  Lan-r,  ili.ir.i-  fri-tii-ally 


294      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OP  JESUS   CHRIST 

to  the  suddenness  of  Christ's  death.  It  was  usual 
for  crucified  persons  to  linger  for  days  ;  but  lie  did 
not  survive  more  than  six  hours.  Yet  immediately 
before  dying  He  again  and  again  cried  with  a  loud 
voice,  as  if  His  bodily  force  were  by  no  means 
exhausted.  Suddenly,  however,  with  a  loud  cry  His 
life  terminated.  To  what  could  this  be  due?  It  is 
said  that  sometimes,  under  the  pressure  of  intense 
mental  and  physical  agony,  the  heart  bursts  ;  there 
is  a  shriek,  and  of  course  death  is  instantaneous.  We 
speak  of  people  dying  of  a  broken  heart — using  the 
phrase  only  figuratively — but  sometimes  it  can  be  used 
literally  :  the  heart  is  actually  ruptured  with  grief. 
Now,  it  is  said  that,  when  this  takes  place,  the  blood 
contained  in  the  heart  is  poured  into  a  sac  by  which 
it  is  surrounded  ;  and  there  it  separates  into  •  two 
substances—  a  clotty  substance  of  the  colour  of  blood 
and  a  pure,  colourless  substance  like  water.  And,  if 
the  sac,  when  in  this  condition,  \verc  pierced  by  a 
spear  or  any  other  instrument,  there  would  flow  out 
a  Lirgc  quantity  of  both  substances,  which  would  by 
an  unscientific  spectator  be  described  as  blood  and 
water. 

It  was  by  an  English  medical  man  that  this  theory 
was    first   propounded    fifty  years    ago,*   and    it    has 

*  Stroud  in  his  treatise  On  the  1'hysiail  Cause  of  the  Death  of 
Christ. 


THE 


been  adopted  by  other  medical  nu-n,  equally  famous 
for  their  scientific  eminence  and  Christian  character, 
such  as  the  late  Professor  Bobbie  and  Sir  James 
Simpson.  The  latter  well  brings  out  the  point  and 
the  pathos  of  this  view  of  the  Saviour's  death  in  these 
words:*  "It  has  always  appeared—  to  my  medical 
mind  at  least  —  that  this  view  of  the  mode  by  which 
death  was  produced  in  the  hum. in  body  of  Christ 
intensifies  all  our  thoughts  and  ideas  regarding  the 
immensity  of  the  sacrifice  which  He  made  for  our 
sinful  race  upon  the  cross.  Nothing  can  be  more 
striking  and  startling  than  the  passivencss  with  uhich, 
for  our  sakes,  God  as  man  submitted  His  incarnate 
body  to  the  horrors  and  tortures  of  the  crucifixion. 
Hut  our  wonderment  at  the  stupendous  sacrifice 
increases  when  we  reflect  that,  whiUt  thus  enduring 
for  our  sins  the  most  cruel  and  a^onisiiv.;  form  of 
corporeal  death,  He  was  ultimately  slain,  not  by  the 
effects  of  the  anguish  of  His  corporeal  frame,  but  by 
the  effects  of  the  mightier  an-uish  of  His  mind  ;  the 
fleshly  walls  of  His  heart— like-  the  veil,  as  it  were,  in 
the  temple  of  His  body  -becoming  rent  and  riven, 
as  for  us  He  poured  nut  His  soul  unto  death  -the 
travail  of  His  soul  in  that  awful  hour  thus  standing 
nut  as  unspeakably  more  bitter  ami  dreadful  th.m 
even  the  travail  <f  His  body." 

•   Given  in  llaiu.as  'I he  /--/  />••'/  "J  "'"'  /<"'/  '  ''"-"""• 


296      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

In  this  chapter  we  have  been  moving  somewhat  in 
the  region  of  speculation  and  conjecture,  and  we  have 
not  rigidly  ascertained  what  is  logically  tenable  and 
what  is  not.  This  is  a  place  of  mystery,  where  dim 
yet  imposing  meanings  peep  out  on  us  in  whatever 
direction  we  turn.  We  have  called  the  scene  the 
Dead  Christ.  But  who  docs  not  see  that  the  dead 
Christ  is  so  interesting  and  wonderful  because  He  is 
also  the  living  Christ  ?  He  lives  ;  He  is  here  ;  He  is 
with  us  now.  Yet  the  converse  is  also  true — that  the 
living  Christ  is  to  us  so  wonderful  and  adorable 
because  He  was  dead.  The  fact  that  He  is  alive 
inspires  us  with  strength  and  hope  ;  but  it  is  by  the 
memory  of  His  death  that  He  is  commended  to  the 
trust  of  our  burdened  consciences  and  the  love  of  our 
sympathetic  hearts. 


THE    BURIAL 

'"TT^HERE  is  a  hard  and  shallow  philosophy  which 
•*•  regards  it  as  a  matter  of  complete  indifference 
what  becomes  of  the  body  after  the  soul  lias  left  it 
and  affects  contempt  of  all  funeral  ceremonies.  But 
the  instincts  of  mankind  are  wiser.  In  ancient  limes 
it  was  considered  one  of  the  worst  of  misfortunes 
to  miss  decent  burial  ;  and,  although  this  sentiment 
was  mixed  with  superstition,  there  was  beneath  it 
a  healthy  instinct.  There  is  a  dignity  of  the  body  as 
well  as  of  the  soul,  especial!}'  when  it  is  a  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  there  is  a  majesty  about  death 
which  cannot  be  ignored  without  loss  to  the  livinj/.." 
It  is  with  a  sense-  of  pain  and  humiliation,  as  if  a 
dishonour  were  beinij  done  to  human  nature,  that 
we  see  a  funeral  at  which  everything  betokens  hurry, 
shabbiness  and  slovenliness.  On  the  contrary,  the 

4  Tin-  most  hr.-nitiful  thiu«  rvi-r  saul  .ili-.nt  th«-  l-dM-sof  tin- 
dead  is  in  th<-  Shorter  C.itn  -hism  :  "Ami  lh«-ir  I*-|M-«*.  t*-inn 
still  united  tu  Christ,  do  rest  in  th«  ir  Craves  till  the  u-Mjirr*  ti«.u 


298      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


satisfaction  is  not  morbid  with  which  we  sec  a  funeral 
conducted  with  solemnity  and  chaste  pomp.  And, 
when  someone  falls  whose  career  has  been  one  of 
extraordinary  achievement  and  beneficence,  and  who 
has  become 

On  fortune's  crowning  slope 
The  pillar  of  a  nation's  hope, 
The  centre  of  a  world's  desire, 

then,  as  the  remains  are  borne  amidst  an  empire's 
lamentation  to  rest  "  under  the  cross  of  gold  that 
shines  over  river  and  city,"  and  the  tolling  bells  and 
echoing  cannon  sound  over  hushed  London,  and  the 
silent  masses  line  the  streets,  and  the  learned  and* 
the  noble  stand  uncovered  around  the  open  grave, 
it  would  be  a  diseased  and  churlish  mind  which  did 
not  feel  the  spell  of  the  pageant. 

Thus  ought  the  great,  the  wise  and  the  good  to 
be  buried.  How  then  was  He  buried  whom  all 
now  agree  to  call  the  Greatest,  the  Wisest  and  the 
Best  ? 

I. 

The  three  corpses  were  taken  down  towards 
evening,  before  the  Jewish  Sabbath  set  in,  which 
commenced  at  sunset.  Probably  the  two  robbers 
were  buried  on  the  spot,  crosses  and  all,  or  they 
were  hurriedly  carried  off  to  some  obscure  and 


THE   nCRI.il. 


299 


accursed  ditch,  where  the  remains  of  criminals 
\vere  wont  to  be  unceremoniously  thrust  under 
ground. 

This  would  have  been  the  fate  of  Jesu.s  too,  had 
not  an  unexpected  hand  interposed.  It  was  the 
humane  custom  of  the  Romans  to  give  the  corpse* 
of  criminals  to  their  friends,  if  tlu-y  cho^c  to  ask 
for  them  ;  and  a  claimant  appeared  for  the  b<xly  of 
Jesus,  to  whom  Pilate  was  by  no  means  loath  to 
grant  it. 

This  is  the  first  time  that  Joseph  of  . \iirn, ithea 
appears  on  the  stage  of  the  gospel  history  ;  and  of 
his  previous  life  very  little  is  known.  Kven  the 
town  from  which  he  derives  his  appellation  is  not 
known  with  certainty.  The  fact  that  he  owned  a 
garden  and  burying-placc  in  the  environs  of  Jeru 
salem  does  not  necessarily  indicate  that  he  was  a 
resident  there  ;  for  pious  Jews  had  all  a  desire  to 
be  buried  in  the  precincts  of  the  sacred  city  ;  and. 
indeed,  the  whole  neighbourhood  is  still  honeycombed 
with  tombs. 

Joseph  was  a  rich  man  ;  and  this  may  have 
availed  him  in  his  application  to  Pilate.  Those  who 
possess  wealth  or  social  position  or  distinguished 
talents  can  serve  Christ  in  ways  which  are  not 
accessible  to  His  humbler  followers.  Only,  before 
such  gifts  can  be  acceptable  to  Him,  tho  e  to  whom 


300      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS    CHRIST 


they  belong  must  count  them  but  loss  and  dung  for 
His  sake. 

Joseph  was  a  councillor.  It  has  been  conjectured 
that  the  council  of  which  he  was  a  member  was  that 
of  Arimathca  ;  but  the  observation  that  he  "  had 
not  consented  to  the  counsel  and  deed  of  them," 
which  obviously  refers  to  the  Sanhedrim,  makes  it 
more  than  probable  that  it  was  of  this  august  body 
he  was  a  member.  No  doubt  he  absented  himself 
deliberately  from  the  meeting  at  which  Jesus  was 
condemned,  knowing  well  beforehand  that  the  pro 
ceedings  would  be  utterly  painful  and  revolting 
to  his  feelings.  For  "  he  was  a  good  man  and  a 
just." 

We  are,  however,  told  more  about  him  :  "  he 
waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God."  This  is  a  phrase 
applied  elsewhere  also  in  the  New  Testament  to  the 
devout  in  Palestine  at  this  period  ;  and  it  designates 
in  a  striking  way  the  peculiarity  of  their  piety. 
The  age  was  spiritually  dead.  Religion  was  re 
presented  by  the  high-and-dry  formalism  of  the 
Pharisees  on  the  one  hand  and  the  cold  and  worldly 
scepticism  of  the  Sadducces  on  the  other.  In  the 
synagogues  the  people  asked  for  bread  and  were 
offered  a  stone.  The  scribes,  instead  of  letting  the 
pure  river  of  Bible  truth  flow  over  the  land,  choked 
up  its  course  with  the  sand  of  their  soulless  commcn- 


THE   WAY.//.  -.01 

t;iry.  Vet  there  arc  good  people  even  in  the  worst  of" 
times.  There  were  truly  pious  souls  sprinkled  up  and 
down  Palestine.  They  were  like  lights  shining  here 
and  there,  at  great  intervals,  in  the  darkness.  They 
could  not  but  feel  that  they  were  strangers  and 
foreigners  in  their  own  age  and  country,  and  they 
lived  in  the  past  and  the  future.  The  prophets,  on 
whose  words  they  nourished  their  souls,  fun-told  a 
good  time  coming,  when  on  those  uho  sat  in  darkness 
there  would  burst  a  great  light.  For  this  letter  time, 
then,  they  were  waiting.  They  were  waiting  to  hear 
the  voice  of  prophecy  echoing  once  more  through  the 
land  and  waking  the  population  from  its  spiritual 
slumber.  They  were  waiting,  alx>ve  all,  for  the 
Messiah,  if  they  might  dare  to  hope  that  lie  would 
come  in  their  days. 

Such  were  the  souls  among  which  both  John  and 
Jesus  found  their  auditors.  All  such  must  have  wel 
comed  the  voices  of  the  Baptist  and  his  Successor  as  at 
least  those  of  prophets  who  were  striving  earnestly  to 
deal  with  the  evils  of  the  time.  But  whether  Jesus  was 
He  that  should  come  or  whether  they  should  look 
for  another,  some  of  them  stood  in  doubt.  Among 
these  perhaps  was  Joseph.  He  was,  it  is  said,  a 
disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly,  for  fear  of  the  Jews, 
lie  had  faith,  but  not  faith  enough  to  confess  Christ 
and  take  the  consequences.  Kven  during  the  trial  of 


302      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 

Jesus  he  satisfied  his  conscience  by  being  absent  from 
the  meeting  of  the  Sanhedrim,  instead  of  standing  up 
in  his  place  and  avowing  his  convictions. 

Such  he  had  been  up  to  this  point.  But  now  in 
the  face  of  danger  he  identified  himself  with  Jesus. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  what  it  was  that  brought  him 
to  decision.  It  was  the  excess  of  wickedness  in  his 
fellow-councillors,  who  at  length  went  to  a  stage  of 
violence  and  injustice  which  allowed  him  to  hesitate 
no  longer.  Complete  religious  decision  is  sometimes 
brought  about  in  this  way.  Thus,  for  example,  one 
who  has  been  halting  between  two  opinions,  or,  at 
all  events,  has  never  had  courage  enough  openly  to 
confess  his  convictions,  may  be  some  day  among  his 
fellow-workmen  or  shopmen,  when  religion  comes  up 
as  a  topic  of  conversation  and  is  received  with 
ridicule,  Christ's  people  being  sneered  at,  His  doctrines 
denied,  and  He  Himself  blasphemed.  But  at  last 
it  goes  too  far  :  the  silent,  half-convinced  disciple 
can  stand  it  no  longer  ;  he  breaks  out  in  indignant 
protest  and  stands  confessed  as  a  Christian.  In  some 
such  way  as  this  must  the  change  of  sentiment  have 
taken  place  in  the  mind  of  Joseph.  He  had  to  defy 
the  entire  Sanhedrim  ;  he  was  putting  himself  in 
imminent  peril  ;  but  he  could  hold  in  no  longer  ;  and, 
casting  fear  behind  his  back,  he  went  in  "  boldly " 
to  Pilate  and  begged  the  body  of  Jesus. 


THE 


Boldness  in  confessing  Christ  is  apt  to  have  two 
results. 

On  the  one  hand,  it  cows  adversaries.  It  is  not 
said  that  Joseph  got  himself  into  trouble  by  his  action 
on  this  occasion,  or  that  the  Sanhedrim  immediately 
commenced  a  persecution  against  him.  The}-  were, 
indeed,  in  a  state  of  extreme  excitement,  and  they 
were  seventy  to  one.  But  sometimes  a  single  lw>ld 
man  can  quell  much  more  numerous  opposition 
than  even  this.  It  is  certain  that  the  consciences  of 
many  of  them  were  ill  at  ease,  and  they  were  by  no 
means  prepared  to  challenge  to  argument  on  tin- 
merits  of  the  case  a  quiet  and  resolute  man  with  tin- 
elevation  of  whose  character  the}-  were  all  acquainted. 
It  is  one  of  the  great  advantages  of  those  who  stand 
up  for  Christ  that  the}'  have  the  consciences  even 
of  their  adversaries  on  their  nde. 

The  other  effect  of  boldness  in  confessing  Chri-' 
is  that  it  brings  out  confession  fr«»m  others  who  have 
not  had  in  their  own  breast  enough  of  lire  to  make 
them  act,  but  are  heated  up  to  the  necessary  tem 
perature  by  example.  It  seems  clear  that  in  this 
way  the  example  of  Joseph  evoked  the  loyally  of 
Nicodemus. 

Nicodcmus  was  of  the  same  rank   as  Jo^'  ph,  being 


304      THE    TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim  ;  and  he  was  a  secret 
disciple.  This  is  not  the  first  time  that  he  appears 
"on  the  stage  of  the  Gospel  history.  At  the  very 
commencement  of  the  career  of  Jesus  he  had  been 
attracted  to  Him  and  had  gone  so  far  as  to  seek  a 
private  interview  ;  the  account  of  which  is  one  of 
the  most  precious  component  parts  of  the  Gospel 
and  has  made  tens  of  thousands  not  only  believers  in 
Christ  but  witnesses  for  Him.  It  had  not,  however, 
as  much  effect  on  the  man  to  whom  it  was  originally 
vouchsafed,  though  it  ought  to  have  had.  Nicodemus 
ought  to  have  been  one  of  the  earliest  followers  of 
the  Lord ;  and  his  position  \vould  have  brought 
weight  to  the  apostolic  circle.  But  he  hesitated  and 
remained  a  secret  disciple.  On  one  occasion,  indeed, 
he  spoke  out  :  once,  when  something  intolerably 
unjust  was  said  against  Jesus  in  the  Sanhedrim,  he 
interposed  the  question,  w  Doth  our  law  judge  any 
man  before  it  hear  him  and  know  what  he  docth  ? " 
But  with  the  angry  answer,  "  Art  thou  also  of 
Galilee  ? "  he  was  shouted  down  ;  and  he  held  his 
peace.  Doubtless,  like  Joseph,  he  absented  himself 
from  the  meeting  of  the  Sanhedrim  at  which  Jesus  was 
condemned  ;  but  the  injustice  done  was  so  flagrant 
that  he  was  ready  to  make  a  public  protest  against 
it.  He  might  not,  however,  have  had  the  courage  of 
his  convictions,  had  not  Joseph  shown  him  the  way. 


Tin:  ni'Ri.M.  305 

'Yet  tin's  must  be  praised  in  Nicodcmus,  that  he 
was  a  growing  and  improving  man.  Though  he  hung 
back  for  a  time,  he  came  forward  at  last  ;  and  better 
late  than  never.  It  was  a  happy  hour  for  him  when 
he  was  brought  into  contact  with  Joseph.  There  are 
many  circles  of  friends  where  all  are  internally  con 
vinced  and  leaning  to  the  right  side,  and,  if  only  one 
would  come  boldly  out,  the  others  would  willingly 
follow.  The  hands  of  Joseph  and  Xicodemus  met  and 
clasped  each  other  round  the  body  of  their  Redeemer. 
There  is  no  love,  or  friendship,  or  fellowship  like  that 
of  those  who  arc  united  to  one  another  through  their 
connection  with  Him. 

III. 

.Art  has  described  the  burial  of  our  Lord  with 
great  fulness  of  detail,  drawing  largely  on  the  imagina 
tion.  It  has  divided  it  into  several  scenes.* 

There  is,  first,  the  Descent  from  the  Cross,  jn  which, 
besides  Joseph  and  Nicodemus,  St.  John  at  least,  and 
sometimes  other  men,  arc-  repre- ented  as  extracting 
the  nails  and  lowering  the  body;  while  beneath  tin- 
cross  the  holy  women,  among  whom  the  Virgin 
Mary  and  Mary  Magdalene  are  prominent,  receive 

•  On  thosi*  and  similar  drtails  s»-r  T!:t  I. iff  of  our  /#nt  ,u 
t'.rf tn/'/i/n;/  in  ll'orks  of  Art,  by  Mrs  Jaini-son  (completed  t-v 
Lady  Kastlak.-i. 

20 


306      THE   TRIAL   AND   DEATH   OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


the  precious  burden.  Many  readers  will  recall  the 
most  famous  of  such  pictures,  that  by  Rubens  in 
the  Cathedral  at  Antwerp — an  extremely  impressive 
but  too  sensuous  representation  of  the  scene  of  busy 
affection — wherein  the  corpse  is  being  let  down 
by  means  of  a  great  white  sheet  into  the  hands  of 
the  women,  who  receive  it  tenderly,  one  foot  resting 
on  the  shoulder  of  the  Magdalene. 

Then  there  is  what  is  called  the  Picta,  or  the 
mourning  of  the  women  over  the  dead  body.  In  this 
scene  the  holy  mother  usually  holds  the  head  of  her 
Son  in  her  lap,  while  the  Magdalene  clasps  His  feet 
and  others  clasp  His  hands.  Next  ensues  the  Pro 
cession  to  the  Sepulchre  ;  and,  last  of  all,  there  is 
the  Entombment,  which  is  represented  in  a  great 
variety  of  forms. 

On  these  scenes  the  great  painters  have  lavished 
all  the  resources  of  art  ;  but  the  narrative  of  the 
Gospels  is  brief  and  unpictorial.  The  Virgin  is  not 
even  mentioned  ;  and,  although  others  of  the  holy 
women  are  said  to  have  been  there,  it  is  not  suggested 
that  they  helped  in  the  labour  of  burial,  but  only 
that  they  followed  and  marked  where  He  was  laid. 
Joseph  and  Nicodcmus  arc  the  prominent  actors, 
though  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  were 
assisted  by  their  servants  ;  and  the  soldiers  may  have 
lent  a  hand  in  disentangling  the  body. 


It  was  in  ;i  new  sepulchre,  which  Joseph  had  had 
hewn  out  of  the  rock  fur  himself,  in  order  that  after- 
death  he  might  lie  in  the  sacred  shadow  of  the  city 
of  God,  that  the  Lord  was  laid.  No  corpse  had  cur 
been  placed  in  it  before.  This  was  a  great  gift  to 
give  to  an  excommunicated  and  crucified  man  ;  and 
it  was  a  mo.^t  appropriate  one  ;  for  it  was  meet  that 
the  pure  and  stainless  One,  who  had  come  to  make- 
all  things  new  and,  though  dead,  was  not  to  see 
corruption,  should  rest  in  an  uncle-filed  sepulchre. 
Similarly  appropriate  and  suggestive  was  the  new 
linen  cloth,  which  Joseph  bought  expressly  for  the 
purpose  of  cnv.'inding  the  body.  Nor  was  Nicodcmu-> 
behind  in  affection  and  sacrifice.  lie  brought  "a 
mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes,  about  an  hundred  pound 
weight."  This  may  appear  an  enormous  quantity, 
but  custom  was  very  lavish  in  such  gifts ;  at  the 
funeral  of  Herod  the  Great,  for  example,  the  spices 
were  carried  by  five  hundred  bearers. 

The  tomb  was  in  a  garden  another  touch  of 
appropriateness  and  beauty.  The  spot  does  not  -cuii 
to  have  been  far  from  the  place  of  execution  ;  but 
whether  it  was  as  near  as  it  is  rcpre-cntrd  to  have 
been  in  the  traditional  site  may  well  b  •  doubled. 
The  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  include 
its  precincts  both  the  Lord's  tomb  and  the  hole  in 
the  rock  in  which  stood  His  cross  ;  and  the  two  arc 


308      THE    TRIAL   AND  DEATH  OF  JESUS   CHRIST 


only  thirty  yards  apart*  But  it  is  highly  question 
able  whether  the  identification  of  cither  is  possible. 
Still,  this  may  be  said  to  be  the  most  famous  bit  of 
the  entire  surface  of  the  globe.  Christendom  accepted 
the  tradition,  which  dates  from  the  time  of  Constantino, 
and  since  then  pilgrims  have  flocked  to  the  spot 
from  every  land.  It  was  for  the  possession  of  this 
shrine  that  the  Crusades  were  undertaken,  and  at  the 
present  day  the  Churches  of  Christendom  fight  for 
a  footing  in  it. 

We  may  have  no  sympathy  with  the  practice  of 
pilgrimages  and  little  interest  in  the  identification 
of  holy  places  ;  but  the  holy  sepulchre  cannot  but 
attract  the  believing  heart.  It  was  a  practice  of  the 
piety  of  former  days  to  meditate  among  the  tombs. 
The  piety  of  the  present  day  inclines  to  more  cheerful 
and,  let  us  hope,  not  less  healthy  exercises.  But 
every  man  with  any  depth  of  nature  must  linger 
sometimes  beside  the  graves  of  his  loved  ones  ;  every 
man  of  any  seriousness  must  think  sometimes  of 
his  own  grave.  And  in  such  moments  what  can 
be  so  helpful  as  to  pilgrim  in  spirit  to  the  tomb  of 
Him  who  said,  "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life  "  ? 

In  comparison  with  the  great  ones  of  the  earth 
Jesus  had  but  a  humble  funeral  ;  yet  in  the  character 


Many  interesting  details  in  Ross's  Cradle  of  Christianity. 


V 


of  those  who  did  Him  the  la.st  honours  it  could  not 
have  been  surpassed  ;  and  it  was  rich  in  love,  which 
can  well  take  the  pi, ice  of  a  threat  deal  of  ceremony. 
So  at  last,  stretched  out  in  the  new  tomb,  wherein 
man  had  never  lain,  enwrapped  in  an  aromatic  bed 
of  spices  and  breathed  round  by  the  fragrance  of 
flowers,  with  the  \\hite  linen  round  Him  and  the 
napkin  which  hid  the  wounds  of  the  thorns  about 
His  brow,  while  the  iacat  stone  which  foimcd  the 
door  stood  between  Him  and  the  world,  He  lay  down 
to  rest.  It  was  evening,  and  the  Sabbath  drew  on  ; 
and  the  Sabbath  of  His  life  had  come.  Hi>  work 
was  completed  ;  persecution  and  hatred  could  not 
reach  Him  any  more;  He  \\as  where  the  wicked 
cease  from  troubling  and  the  weary  are  at  rest. 


by 


T>Y    THK    SAMK    AUTHOR. 
Twenty-fifth  Thousand.     In  Crown  St'o,  C/o//»,  5-. 

IMAGO     CHRISTI: 

THE     EXAMPLE    OF    JESUS    CHRIST. 

M,:y  a.'sn  If  //.;./,  Prttfnt.!tu>n  F.JHU-tn  frinic.l  in  re.f  .:»/./  ..'.v*.  .:•?./ 
Handsomely  l\>un>l  in  /Vn/.://  I.e.  it  her  J\:.!.!t\l,  ~f.  O./.  >/<.',  .."/./  ;>i  C  ',:.',' 
<;/;</  .\ftjrvfis. 

NOTKT.S  or  Tin:  PKF.SS. 

MR.  SiTRr.ros  says  :  "This  is  a  delightful  hook,  up^n  a  glorious 
subject,  by  one  who  is  better  qualified  to  writ'-  it  than  any  ether 
man.  With  Mr.  Stalker's  '  Life  of  Christ  '  we  wen-  greatly  pleased, 
and  therefore  we  were  prepared  to  welcome  anything  from  his  pen 
upon  a  kindred  subject.  Our  highest  expectations  arc  exceeded  ; 
this  is  an  immortal  book." 

"The  execution  is  full  of  ingenuity,  and  th<-  I-  ok  e..n  he  recom- 
mended  as  a  devout  and  thoughtful  commentary  <>n  practical  Chri-ti.-m 
lit.  in  many  phases.  Mr.  Malkcr  has  bn>ad  sympatliies  and  a  watch- 
lul  eye,  a  lid  speaks  in  a  tone  that  will  commend  its.  ll  t<>  all  Jm 
readers.'1-  Sntnniny  I\<:'n:c. 

"  Mr.  Stalker  certainly  [.r-.v  s  that  tin-  subject  is  a  fruitful  our. 
He  shows  that  the  activity  «>t  Christ  was  <•!  a  m»tr  vari«-<l  kind  than 
jn-ihaps  we  arr  apt  to  imagine-.  He  exhibits  Hun  in  the  In-mr,  in 
the  Slat--,  in  society,  as  a  friend,  as  a  worker,  as  a  Mill'  rer.  a-.  .1 
philanthropist,  as  a  'controversialist,  as  a  man  of  |r.  ling,  ..n>l  MI  on  ; 
and  on  all  these  subject-;  h--  has  mm  li  that  is  int<  rrr.lini-  and  uuuh 
that  is  iustructiv<;  to  say."  .S<o/-  »:<in. 

"'Iliis  work    supplies  a   real   d«    idei.itum   in   tln-.l   gical   literature- 
Dividintr    the    eirclr    of     human    life    int"    segments,    •-.».  !i    «-f    xvhuli 
represents  an  extensive  sphere  «,f  experience  an.l  -l.ity.    the   author 
foll-.ws  our  Lord  through  them   our  after  an-.th'-r,  and   -.1 
II.-  conducted  Himself  in  •  .•   h.     Th«-  pau'es  are  l-rao.n  lights,  guiduur 
us  in  our  life's  journey;  an.l  no   onr  can    p.  -r.:v   thnn  \\ilh.-.il    I 
profoundly   impr.-ss.  d  with   th«-  wealtli  <.f  the  (  Josjich   in  counvK  ••! 
perfection  as  to  human  condi:.  t  "      Clin  !i>in. 

"Wi'l  -ii.?ain  the  .-uithor',  ah  •-a.lv  l.ii-h  r.-pMl.sli. 
a    li'    T-.--V    -t  •'         T  • 


.    <»r-V 


•Christ     as    a     I'M  a.  h-  r  '    and     •  (  !,n    •     .1 

p.-ssibl.;    to   commend    t--.    hi/:,  y   t'..-    \v  rk    uln.h    tl;»-    - 

bestowed  on  th«  v  two  them.  s.      It  i^  a  volume  alive  with  u>t<  i'  .1 


.OMM.N  :    HOhDI.U    \    sr«»l'«.|||i»%V.    .'7.    I' MM".. 


BY    THE    SAME    AUTHOR. 

EigJilJi  Thousand.     Crown  Svo,  C/of/i,  2s.  6d. 

THE     FOUR     MEN. 

NOTICES    OF    THE  PRESS. 

"As  a  guide  to  self-knowledge  his  book  ought  to  be  in  the  hands 
of  every  young  man  who  has  not  lost  faith  in  religion,  and  has  some 
aspiration  to  attain  to  the  highest  type  of  manhood." — Christian. 

"There  is  a  manly  and  godly  tone  about  the  teaching  of  the  book 
which  makes  it  interesting.  Easy  to  read  and  likely  to  be  useful. 
Young  men  especially  would  be  sure  to  be  captivated  by  it." — Record. 

"  The  subjects  are  such  as  attract  young  men ;  and  it  need  scarcely 
be  said  that  they  are  treated  in  a  lively,  lucid,  and  vigorous  manner." 
— Expositor. 

"More  thoughtful,  suggestive  addresses  than  the  eight  gathered  in 
the  compass  of  this  dainty  volume  it  would  be  hard  to  find." — Queen. 


BY    THE    SAME    AUTHOR. 
Seventh  Thousand.      Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  $s. 

THE    PREACHER    AND    HIS    MODELS. 

The  Yale  Lectures  on  Preaching,  1891. 

NOTICES   OF  THE  PRESS. 

"This  volume,  like  all  for  which  \ve  are  indebted  to  the  pen  of  Dr. 
Stalker,  ought  to  be  in  the  library  of  every  Christian  minister,  and  of 
all  who  arc  preparing  to  be  Christian  ministers.  Local  preachers 
also  would  do  well  to  purchase  and  ponder  it." — Methodist  Times. 

"  Dr.  Stalker  sets  Isaiah  and  Paul  before  the  preacher  as  models 
for  his  imitation,  and  descants  on  this  and  kindred  parts  of  ministerial 
work  with  much  force  and  earnestness,  and  at  the  same  time  with 
careful  sobriety.  He  happily  avails  himself  of  a  considerable  personal 
experience  and  a  wide  range  of  reading,  and  treats  his  subject  in  an 
interesting  as  well  as  stimulating  manner.  The  volume  is  one  of 
great  excellence." — Scotsman. 

"They  are  vigorous  and  inspiriting,  the  ambition  which  they 
stimulate  is  not  a  base  ambition,  and  both  as  example  and  as  precept 
they  are  not  unworthy  of  study.'' — Saturday  Review. 

"  Dr.  Stalker  takes  a  broad,  intelligent  view  of  the  subject,  and 
discusses  it  in  forceful,  felicitous  language,  and  in  a  judicial,  earnest, 
and  thoroughly  religious  spirit." — Primitive  Methodist  Magazine. 


LONDON:    HODDER   &   STOUGHTON,    27,    PATERNOSTER   Row. 


