By 

R.  A.  TORREY 


"We  believe  that  if  every  preacher 
and  church  worker  would  read  this 
book  and  study  it  and  let  the  Spirit  use 
the  suggestions  as  He  will,  it  would 
revolutionize  our  churches  and  be  the 
means  through  which  God  could  give 
us  a  great  revival."-— Btf^/w/  Messenger 


THE  IHIOLY 
IPIRDT 

Who  He  Is,  and 
What  He  Does 


17th  Printing 


^J^eavts 


^{i 


ire 

Light  on 
Successful  Soul  V^inning 

VANCE  HAVNER 

In  this  book  Vance  Havuer,  who  for  a 
decade  has  been  traveling  the  country's 
highways  and  byways  re-kindling  the 
fires  of  evangelism,  does  not  mince  his 
words  in  challengmg  present-day  pagan- 
ism. He  finds  too  many  ''saints  in  the 
Lord"  idling  by  the  way,  too  many 
churches  standing  like  deep  freezers 
with  steeples  on  top,  preferring  to  ap- 
pease rather  than  oppose  heterodoxy, 
materialism,  and  evil. 

All  who  read  these  chapters  will  be 
inspired  to  help  stir  up  the  dying 
embers  of  faith  with  the  bellows  of  the 
Gospel,  re-light  the  fires  that  warmed 
the  hearts  of  the  early  Christians,  have 
the  "saints"  as  wildly  joyful  over  the 
rescue  of  a  sinner  as  a  baseball  fan 
over  the  victory  of  his  team,  give  three 
cheers  for  the  Gospel,  shout  hallelu- 
jahs, praise  God  for  His  love  and  mercy 
— ^that  is  Vance  Havner's  theme. 

S2.00 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive 
in  2010 


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/liolyspiritwliolieiOOtorr 


The  Holy  Spirit 

Who  He  Is  and  What  He  Does 

and 

How  to  Know  Him  in  All  the  Fulness 
of  His  Gracious  and  Glorious  Ministry 


By 
R.  A.  TORREY,  D.D. 

Author  of  "Soul-lVinning  Sermons ;  "  "The  Pfir^or/ 
and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit"  etc. 


NEW  YORK 

Fleming  H.  Rcvcll  Company 

LONDON        AND        BDINBURCH 


Copyright,  MCMXxvii,  by 
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 


New  York:'  i58  Fi'ifth  Avenue 
LoTidon:.99  Anerley  Road 


PREFACE 

THE  chapters  in  this  book  are  really  addresses  on 
the  Holy  Spirit  that  I  have  given  in  the  various 
cities  in  which  I  have  held  meetings  during  the 
last  twenty-five  years.  Of  course,  the  addresses  have 
grown  and  been  modified  as  I  have  gone  from  city  to  city. 
They  have  been  greatly  blessed  of  God  in  bringing  multi- 
tudes of  believers  into  a  larger  Christian  experience  and 
life,  in  stirring  up  and  equipping  many  for  intelligent 
service  and  directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  conversion,  I 
presume,  of  a  very  goodly  company  in  Japan,  China, 
Australia,  India,  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  Germany, 
and  in  various  states  of  the  Union.  After  Mr.  Moody 
had  heard  the  addresses  in  the  earlier  form  in  which  they 
were  given,  he  insisted  that  I  should  give  them  in  every 
place  I  visited,  and  the  demand  for  their  publication  has 
increased  as  the  years  have  gone  by. 

Nearly  two  years  ago,  I  brought  out  a  volume  entitled 
Soul-Winning  Sermons,  containing  all  the  sermons  that  I 
ordinarily  preached  in  the  night  meetings  wherever  I  con- 
ducted a  series  of  meetings  covering  four  weeks.  I  in- 
tended to  bring  out  also  a  companion  volume,  containing 
the  morning  or  afternoon  addresses  that  I  give  to  Chris- 
tians in  a  four-weeks  series,  but  these  addresses  are  for 
the  most  part  devoted  to  two  lines  of  teaching — teaching 
concerning  prayer  and  teaching  concerning  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  His  Work.  When  this  latter  book  was  well 
under  way,  it  seemed  wise  to  divide  it  into  two  volumes : 

S 


6  PREFACE 

one  devoted  entirely  to  the  subject  of  Prayer,  and  the  other 
devoted  entirely  to  the  related  subject  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
and  His  Work.  The  volume  on  Prayer,  entitled  The  Power 
of  Prayer  and  the  Prayer  of  Power,  came  out  almost 
simultaneously  with  the  volume,  Soiil-lVmning  Sermons. 
Since  then  I  have  been  so  almost  incessantly  engaged,  both 
winter  and  summer,  in  conducting  evangelistic  meetings 
and  Bible  conferences,  and  in  writing  other  books  for 
which  the  publishers  could  not  wait,  that  I  have  been  un- 
able to  bring  out  the  volume  on  the  Holy  Spirit  until  now. 

The  substance  of  these  addresses  may  be  found  in 
books  of  mine  already  published,  and  when  people  have 
asked  me  if  they  could  not  get  the  addresses  in  printed 
form  I  have  replied :  "  You  can  find  the  substance  of 
them  in  my  book,  The  Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  or  in  my  other  book.  What  the  Bible  Teaches." 
But  many  who  have  secured  those  books  have  said :  "  We 
want  the  addresses  in  the  form  that  you  give  them  in  your 
meetings,  with  the  illustrations  that  you  use  and  the  ap- 
plications and  personal  appeals  that  you  make."  So  here 
they  are,  and  it  is  hoped  that  God  may  use  them  in  the 
printed  form  even  as  He  has  so  wonderfully  used  them 
when  spoken  from  the  platform. 

In  the  present  book  there  is  no  attempt  to  treat  this 
great  subject  in  a  thorough  and  comprehensive  way  and 
in  all  its  manifold  bearings.  If  one  desires  to  find  such 
treatment  of  the  subject  he  is  referred  to  my  book.  The 
Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  which  it  is  at- 
tempted to  give  an  exhaustive  treatment  of  this  important 
subject.  The  aim  of  this  book  is  altogether  practical; 
viz.,  to  produce  immediate  results  of  definite  personal 
blessing  in  the  heart  and  life  and  service  of  every  one 
who  reads  it. 


PREFACE  7 

Anyone  who  has  this  volume  and  the  books,  Soul-Win- 
ning Sermons  and  The  Power  of  Prayer  and  the  Prayer 
of  Power,  and  my  smaller  book,  Getting  the  Gold  Out  of 
the  Word  of  God,  has  practically  all  the  sermons  and  ad- 
dresses that  I  give  in  any  evangelistic  campaign  of  ordi- 
nary length.  However,  not  all  the  sermons  that  I  preach 
in  my  longer  series  of  meetings — covering,  for  example, 
three  continuous  months  each  (as  in  Liverpool  and  in 
Philadelphia),  or  covering  five  continuous  months  (as  in 
London), — are  in  print,  nor  even  in  manuscript  form. 

R.  A.  '1. 


CONTENTS 

I.  The  Personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit  .      .11 

II.  The  Holy  Spirit  Convincing  Men  oe  Sin  .    41 

III.  The   Regenerating   Work   oe   the   Holy 

Spirit 66 

IV.  How  to  Be  Fully  and  Forever  Satisfied    .    88 

V.  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  :  What 

It  Is  and  What  It  Does 107 

VI.  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit:  Who 

Needs  It  and  Who  Can  Have  It.      .      .  136 

VII.  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit:  How 

TO  Obtain  It 154 

VIII.  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit:  How 

TO  Obtain  It  Right  Now      .      .      .      .175 


I 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

WE  begin  herewith  a  series  of  studies  of  the  person 
and  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  shall  begin  this 
series  by  considering  what  the  Bible  has  to  say 
about  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  person.  It  is  impossible  to 
rightly  understand  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  to  get 
into  right  relation  with  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself  and  thus 
know  His  blessed  work  in  our  own  souls,  without  first 
coming  to  know  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  person.  One  of  the 
most  fruitful  sources  of  error  and  misconception,  of  un- 
wholesome enthusiasm  and  false  fire  and  fanaticism,  in  the 
treatment  of  this  whole  subject,  is  from  trying  to  know 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  before  we  first  come  to  know 
the  Holy  Spirit  Himself.  So  my  subject  today  is,  "  The 
PersonaHty  of  the  Holy  Spirit." 

To  many  of  you  doubtless  that  will  seem  like  a  rather 
abstract,  abstruse,  and  impractical  subject  to  take  up  with 
a  popular  audience.  I  do  not  blame  you  if  you  think  so, 
for  I  can  remember  very  distinctly  the  time  when  I  so 
thought.  I  recall  the  first  popular  address  that  I  ever 
heard  upon  the  subject  of  the  personality  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  It  was  given  by  the  late  Dr.  James  H.  Brooks,  of 
St.  Louis,  that  giant  of  Bible  teaching.  It  was  given  in 
St.  Paul,  Minnesota.  As  I  say,  it  was  the  first  popular 
address  that  I  had  ever  heard  on  that  subject.  Of  course 
I  had  heard  lectures  upon  the  subject  in  the  theological 

11 


12  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

seminary,  but  this  was  an  address  before  a  popular  au- 
dience. When  Dr.  Brooks  had  finished  his  address  I  said 
to  myself,  "  Well,  Dr.  Brooks  has  proved  his  point,  the 
Holy  Spirit  certainly  is  a  person ;  but  what  difference  does 
it  make  anyhow  whether  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Divine  Per- 
son, or  whether  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Divine  Influence 
which  God  the  Father,  Who  doubtless  is  a  person,  sends 
into  our  hearts  ?    It  is  divine  anyhow." 

But  I  afterward  came  to  find  out  that  it  made  all  the 
difference  in  the  world.  I  discovered  from  the  study  of 
the  Word  of  God,  and  from  my  own  experience  and  the 
experience  of  others,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  personality 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  only  fundamental,  but  vital  and 
immeasurably  practical.  Any  one  who  does  not  know 
the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  person  has  not  attained  unto  a 
complete  and  well  rounded  Christian  experience.  Any 
one  who  knows  God  the  Father,  and  God  the  Son,  and 
does  not  know  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  has  not  attained  unto 
the  Christian  conception  of  God,  nor  to  a  fully  Christian 
experience. 

I.  The  Importance  oe  the  Doctrine  oe  the 
Personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
1.  In  the  first  place,  the  doctrine  of  the  personality  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  of  the  highest  importance  from  the 
standpoint  of  worship.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  person,  and 
a  Divine  Person,  and  He  is ;  and  if  you  or  I  do  not  know 
Him  as  such,  if  we  think  of  the  Holy  Spirit  merely  as  an 
impersonal  influence  or  power,  as  so  many  do,  then  we  are 
robbing  a  Divine  Person  of  the  worship  which  is  His  due, 
of  the  love  which  is  His  due,  and  of  the  faith  and  confi- 
dence and  surrender  and  obedience  and  worship  which  are 
His  due.     May  I  stop  just  here  to  ask  each  one  of  you, 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    13 

"  Do  you  worship  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  "    Theoretically  we  all 
do  every  time  we  sing  the  long  metre  Doxology : 

"  Praise  God  from  whom  all  blessings  flow, 
Praise  Him  all  creatures  here  below. 
Praise  Him  above,  ye  heavenly  hosts. 
Praise  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost." 

Theoretically  we  all  do  every  time  we  sing  the  Gloria  Patri : 

"  Glory  be  to  the  Father, 
And  to  the  Son, 
And  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning, 
Is  now. 

And  ever  shall  be. 
World  without  end.    Amen." 

But  it  is  one  thing  to  do  a  thing  theoretically,  and  it  is 
quite  another  thing  to  actually  do  it.  It  is  one  thing  to  sing 
words,  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  reaHze  the  meaning  and 
the  force  of  the  words  that  you  sing. 

I  had  a  very  striking  illustration  of  this  some  years  ago. 
I  was  going  to  a  Bible  Conference  in  New  York  State.  I 
had  to  pass  a  city  four  miles  from  the  grounds  where  the 
Conference  was  held.  I  had  a  relative  living  in  that  city 
and  on  the  way  to  the  Conference  I  stopped  to  call  upon 
my  relative,  who  went  with  me  to  the  Conference.  This 
relative  was  a  Christian,  she  was  much  older  than  I,  and 
had  been  a  Christian  much  longer  than  I,  and  a  member  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church  at  that,  brought  up  on  the  Shorter 
Catechism,  and  thoroughly  Orthodox.  I  spoke  that  morn- 
ing at  the  Conference  on  the  Personality  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  When  the  address  was  over  and  we  were  waiting 
on  the  veranda  of  the  hotel  for  the  trolley  to  take  us  back 
to  the  city,  my  relative  turned  to  me  and  said,  "  Archie, 


14  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

I  never  thought  of  It  before  as  a  person,"  Well,  I  had 
never  thought  of  "  It "  as  a  person,  but  thank  God  I  had 
come  to  know  Him  as  a  Person. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  It  is  of  the  highest  importance 
from  a  practical  standpoint  that  we  know  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  a  Person.  If  you  think  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  so  many 
even  among  Christian  people  do  today,  as  a  mere  in- 
fluence or  power,  then  your  thought  will  constantly  be, 
"How  can  I  get  hold  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  use  it?'* 
But  if  you  think  of  Him  in  the  Biblical  way,  as  a  Person 
of  Divine  majesty  and  glory,  your  thought  will  be,  "  How 
can  the  Holy  Spirit  get  hold  of  me  and  use  me  ? "  Is 
there  no  difference  between  the  thought  of  man,  the 
worm,  using  God  to  thresh  the  mountain,  or  God  using 
man,  the  worm,  to  thresh  the  mountain?  The  former 
conception,  the  conception  of  man  using  God  to  thresh 
the  mountain,  is  heathenish ;  it  does  not  differ  essentially 
from  the  African  fetish  worshipper  who  uses  his  god. 
The  latter  conception,  the  thought  of  God  the  Holy 
Spirit  getting  hold  of  us  and  using  us,  is  lofty,  Christian, 
sublime. 

Furthermore,  if  you  think  of  the  Holy  Spirit  merely  as 
an  influence  or  power  that  you  are  to  get  hold  of  and  use, 
your  thought  will  necessarily  be,  "  How  can  I  get  more 
of  the  Holy  Spirit?"  But  if  you  think  of  Him  in  the 
Biblical  way,  as  a  Person,  your  thought  will  be,  "  How 
can  the  Holy  Spirit  get  more  of  me  ?  " 

The  former  conception,  the  conception  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  as  a  mere  influence  or  power  that  you  and  I  are 
to  get  hold  of  and  use,  leads  inevitably  to  self-confidence, 
and  self-exaltation,  and  a  parade  of  self.  If  you  think 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  an  influence  or  power  that  you  are 
to  get  hold  of  and  use,  and  then  fancy  that  you  have 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    15 

received  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  inevitable  result  will  be  that 
you  will  strut  around  as  if  you  belonged  to  a  superior 
order  of  Christians.  How  much  we  see  of  that  sort  of 
thing.  I  remember  a  woman  who  once  came  to  me  at 
the  Northfield  Bible  Conference  at  the  close  of  an  ad- 
dress and  she  said  to  me,  "  Brother  Torrey,  I  want  to 
ask  you  a  question,  but  before  I  do,  I  want  you  to  under- 
stand that  /  am  a  Holy  Ghost  woman."  My,  it  made  me 
shudder,  it  sent  a  chill  over  me.  It  did  not  sound  like  it. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  you  think  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  Biblical  way,  as  a  Divine  Person  of  infinite  majesty, 
Who  comes  to  dwell  in  our  hearts  and  take  possession  of 
us  and  uses  us  as  He  wills,  not  as  we  will,  it  leads  to  self- 
renunciation,  self-abnegation,  self-humiliation.  I  know 
of  no  thought  that  is  more  calculated  to  put  one  in  the 
dust  and  keep  one  in  the  dust,  than  this  great  Biblical 
truth  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  Divine  Person  coming  to 
take  up  His  dwelling  in  our  hearts,  and  to  take  posses- 
sion of  our  lives  and  to  use  us  as  He  in  His  infinite 
wisdom  sees  fit. 

3.  In  the  third  place.  The  doctrine  of  the  Personality 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  of  the  highest  importance  from  the 
standpoint  of  experience.  Thousands  and  tens  of  thou- 
sands of  Christian  men  and  women  can  testify  to  an 
entire  transformation  of  their  experience  and  of  their 
service  through  coming  to  know  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a 
Person.  This  address  upon  the  Personality  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  which,  for  substance,  I  have  given  in  almost  every 
city  in  which  I  have  ever  held  a  series  of  meetings,  is  in 
some  respects  seemingly  upon  the  most  abstruse  and 
technical  subject  that  I  ever  attempt  to  handle  before  a 
popular  audience,  and  yet,  notwithstanding  that  fact, 
more  men  and  women  have  come  to  me  at  the  close  of 


16  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

this  address,  and  more  have  written  to  me  afterwards 
concerning  it,  testifying  of  personal  blessing  received, 
than  of  any  other  address  which  God  has  ever  permitted 
me  to  give. 

II.  Four  Lini^s  of  Proof  of  the  Personality  of  the 
Holy  Spirit 

There  are  four  separate  and  distinct  lines  of  proof  of 
the  Personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

1.  The  first  line  of  proof  of  the  Personality  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  that,  All  the  distinctive  marks  or  character- 
istics of  personality  are  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
Bible.  What  are  the  distinctive  marks  or  characteristics 
of  personality  ?  Knowledge,  feeling  and  will.  Any  being 
who  knows  and  feels  and  wills  is  a  person.  Oftentimes 
when  you  say  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Person,  people 
understand  you  to  mean  that  the  Holy  Spirit  has  hands, 
and  feet,  and  fingers,  and  toes,  and  eyes,  and  ears,  and 
nose,  and  mouth,  and  so  on.  No,  not  at  all.  These  are 
not  the  marks  of  personality ;  these  are  the  marks  of  cor- 
poreity.   The  marks  of  personality  are,  knowledge, 

FEELING  AND  WILL,  AND  ANY  BEING  WHO  KNOWS, 
THINKS,    FEELS,   AND    WILLS,    IS   A   PERSON    WHETHER    HE 

HAVE  A  BODY  OR  NOT.  You  and  I,  if  our  earthly  life  ends 
before  the  Lord's  return,  will  cease  to  have  bodies  for  the 
time  being ;  we  will  be  "  absent  from  the  body,  and  at 
home  with  the  Lord"  (2  Cor.  5:8),  but  we  shall  not 
cease  to  be  persons ;  we  will  be  persons  still,  even  though 
we  have  no  body.  I  repeat  it,  the  marks  of  personality 
are  knowledge,  feeling  and  will,  and  any  being  who 
knows  and  feels  and  wills  is  a  person.  Now  all  these 
marks,  the  marks  of  personality,  are  ascribed  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  Bible. 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    17 

(1)  Turn  in  your  Bibles  to  1  Cor.  2: 11,  "For  what 
man  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man 
which  is  in  him?  even  so  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no 
man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God."  Here  knowledge  is  as- 
cribed to  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit,  in  other 
words,  is  not  a  mere  illumination  that  comes  to  your 
mind  and  mine,  whereby  our  minds  are  enlightened  and 
strengthened  to  see  truth  that  they  would  not  otherwise 
discover.  No,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Person  who  Himself 
knows  the  things  of  God  and  reveals  to  us  what  He 
Himself  knows. 

(2)  Now  turn  to  1  Cor.  12: 11  (R.  V.)  :  "  But  all  these 
worketh  the  one  and  the  same  Spirit,  dividing  to  each  one 
severally  even  as  He  will."  The  thought  is  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  not  merely  a  Divine  Power  that  we  get  hold  of 
and  use  according  to  our  will,  but  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
a  Divine  Person  Who  gets  hold  of  us  and  uses  us  ac- 
cording to  His  will.  This  is  one  of  the  most  fundamental 
truths  in  regard  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  must  ever 
bear  it  in  mind  if  we  are  to  come  into  right  relations  with 
Him  and  continue  in  right  relations  with  Him.  Coimt- 
less  earnest-minded  Christians  are  going  astray  at  this 
point.  They  are  trying  to  get  hold  of  some  divine  power 
which  they  can  use  according  to  their  will.  I  thank  God 
from  the  depth  of  my  heart  that  there  is  no  divine  power 
that  I  can  get  hold  of  to  use  according  to  my  will.  What 
could  I  do  in  my  foolishness  and  ignorance  with  a  divine 
power?  What  evil  I  might  work!  But  while  I  thank 
God  that  there  is  no  divine  power  that  I  can  get  hold  of 
and  use  in  my  foolishness  and  ignorance  according  to  my 
will,  I  am  still  more  glad  that  there  is  a  Divine  Person 
Who  can  get  hold  of  me  and  use  me  according  to  His 
infinitely  wise  and  loving  will. 


18  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

(3)  Now  turn  to  Romans  8:  27,  "  And  He  that  search- 
eth  the  hearts  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit, 
because  He  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  according 
to  the  will  of  God."  What  I  wish  you  to  note  here  is  the 
expression,  "  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,"  The  Greek  word 
here  translated  "  mind  "  is  "  phronema,"  and  it  is  a  com- 
prehensive word  that  has  in  it  all  three  ideas  of  knowl- 
edge, feeling  and  will.  It  is  the  same  word  which  is  used 
in  the  seventh  verse  of  this  chapter,  where  we  read,  "  The 
mind  of  the  flesh  is  enmity  against  God,"  where  the 
thought  is  that  not  merely  the  thought  of  the  flesh  is 
enmity  against  God,  but  the  whole  moral  and  intellectual 
life  of  the  flesh  is  enmity  against  God, 

(4)  We  now  turn  to  a  most  remarkable  passage, 
Romans  15:30,  "Now  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  for  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit, 
that  ye  strive  together  with  me  in  your  prayers  to  God 
for  me."  What  I  wish  you  to  notice  particularly  in  this 
verse  are  these  five  words,  "  The  love  of  the  Spirit."  It 
is  a  wonderful  thought.  It  teaches  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
not  a  mere  blind  influence  or  power,  no  matter  how 
beneficent,  that  comes  into  our  hearts  and  lives,  but  that 
He  Himself  is  a  Divine  Person,  loving  us  with  the  ten- 
derest  love,  I  wonder  how  many  of  us  have  ever  thought 
much  regarding  "  the  love  of  the  Spirit "?  I  wonder  how 
many  of  us  ministers  who  are  here  today  have  ever 
preached  a  sermon  on  "  The  Love  of  the  Spirit."  I  won- 
der how  many  of  you  have  ever  heard  a  sermon  on  "  The 
Love  of  the  Spirit."  I  wonder  how  many  of  you  have 
ever  thanked  the  Holy  Spirit  for  His  love.  E\ery  day 
of  your  life  you  kneel  down  before  God  the  Father,  at 
!east  I  hope  you  do,  and  say,  "  Heavenly  Father,  I  thank 
Thee  for  Thy  great  love  that  led  Thee  to  give  Thy  Soa 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    19 

Jesus  Christ  to  come  down  into  this  sinful  world  and  to 
die  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary  in  my  place."  Every  day 
of  your  life  you  kneel  down  and  look  up  into  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ  the  Son  and  say,  "  Thou  blessed  Son  of  God, 
I  thank  Thee  for  that  great  love  of  Thine  that  led  Thee 
to  come  down  to  this  world  in  obedience  to  the  Father 
and  to  die  in  my  place  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary." 

But  do  you  ever  kneel  down  and  look  up  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  say  to  Him,  "  Holy  Spirit,  I  thank  Thee  for 
Thy  great  love  to  me  "  ?  And  yet  we  owe  our  salvation 
as  truly  to  the  love  of  the  Spirit  as  we  do  to  the  love  of 
the  Father  and  the  love  of  the  Son.  If  it  had  not  been 
for  the  love  of  God  the  Father  to  me,  looking  down  upon 
me  in  my  lost  estate,  yes,  anticipating  my  fall  and  ruin 
and  sending  His  own  Son  down  to  this  world  to  die  upon 
the  cross  in  my  place,  I  would  have  been  a  lost  man  today. 
If  it  had  not  been  for  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son 
coming  down  to  this  world  in  obedience  to  the  Father, 
and  laying  down  His  life,  a  perfect  atoning  sacrifice  on 
the  cross  of  Calvary  in  my  behalf,  I  would  have  been  a 
lost  man  today.  But  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  love  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  me,  leading  Him  to  come  down  to  this 
world  in  obedience  to  the  Father  and  the  Son,  to  seek  me 
out  in  my  lost  condition,  following  me  day  after  day,  and 
week  after  week,  and  month  after  month,  and  year  after 
year,  following  me  when  I  would  not  listen  to  Him,  when 
I  deliberately  turned  my  back  upon  Him,  when  I  insulted 
Him,  following  me  into  places  where  it  must  have  been 
agony  for  that  Holy  One  to  go,  following  me  day  after 
day,  week  after  week,  month  after  month,  year  after  year, 
until  at  last  He  succeeded  in  bringing  me  to  my  senses 
and  bringing  me  to  realize  my  utterly  lost  condition,  and 
revealing  the  Lord  jesus  to  me  as  just  the  Saviour  Whom 


20  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

I  needed  and  induced  me  and  enabled  me  to  receive  the 
Lord  Jesus  as  my  Saviour  and  Lord;  if  it  had  not  been 
for  this  patient,  long-suffering,  never-wearying  love  of 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  me,  I  would  have  been  a  lost  man 
today.  If  you  get  nothing  else  from  this  address  today, 
let  these  words  sink  into  your  mind  and  heart,  "  Th^ 
love:  of  the:  Spirit." 

(5)  Turn  now  to  a  passage  in  the  Old  Testament, 
Neh.  9 :  20,  "  Thou  gavest  also  thy  good  Spirit  to  instruct 
them,  and  withheldest  not  thy  manna  from  their  mouth, 
and  gavest  them  water  for  their  thirst."  Here  both  in- 
telligence and  goodness  are  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 
This  passage  does  not  add  anything  to  the  thoughts  that 
we  have  already  had ;  I  have  brought  it  in  merely  because 
it  is  from  the  Old  Testament.  There  are  those  who  say 
that  the  doctrine  of  the  Personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  in  the  New  Testament  but  not  in  the  Old  Testament; 
but  here  we  find  it  as  clearly  in  the  Old  Testament  as  in 
the  New.  Of  course,  we  do  not  find  it  as  frequently  in 
the  Old  Testament  as  in  the  New,  for  this  is  the  dispen- 
sation of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  the  doctrine  of  the  Person- 
ality of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  there  in  the  Old  Testament. 

There  are  many  who  say  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Trin- 
ity is  not  in  the  Old  Testament,  that  while  it  is  in  the  New 
Testament  it  is  not  in  the  Old  Testament.  But  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Trinity  is  in  the  Old  Testament  in  the  very 
first  chapter  of  the  Bible.  In  Genesis  1 :  26  we  read, 
"  And  God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  Our  image,  after 
Our  likeness."  Here  the  plurality  of  the  persons  in  the 
Godhead  stands  out  clearly.  God  did  not  say,  "  I  will," 
or,  "  Let  me  "  "  make  man  in  my  own  image."  No,  He 
said,  "  Let  its  make  man  in  Our  image,  after  Our  like' 
ness"    The  three  persons  in  the  Trinity  are  found  in  the 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    21 

first  three  verses  in  the  Bible,  "  In  the  beginning  God 
created  the  heaven  and  the  earth ;"  here  we  have  God  the 
Father.  "  And  the  earth  was  without  form,  and  void, 
and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep.  And  the 
Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters ;"  there 
you  have  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  And  God  said,"  there  you 
have  the  Word,  "  Let  there  be  light :  and  there  was  light." 
Here  we  have  the  three  persons  of  the  Trinity  in  the  first 
three  verses  of  the  Bible. 

In  actual  fact  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  found  many 
hundreds  of  times  in  the  Old  Testament.  In  the  Hebrew 
Bible  it  occurs  in  most  of  the  places  where  you  find  the 
word  "  God "  in  your  English  Bible,  for  the  Hebrew 
word  ordinarily  used  for  God  in  the  Old  Testament  is  a 
plural  noun ;  literally  translated  it  would  be  "  Gods,"  and 
not  "  God."  In  the  very  passage  to  which  the  Unitarians 
and  Jews,  who  reject  the  Deity  of  Christ,  refer  so  often 
as  proving  conclusively  that  the  Deity  of  Christ  cannot 
be  true,  namely,  Deut.  6:4,  the  very  doctrine  that  they 
are  seeking  to  disprove  is  found ;  for  Deut.  6 : 4,  literally 
translated,  would  read,  "  Hear,  O  Israel :  Jehovah  our 
Gods  is  one  Jehovah." 

Why  did  the  Hebrews,  with  their  unquestionable  and 
intense  monotheism,  use  a  plural  name  for  God?  This 
was  the  question  that  puzzled  the  Hebrew  grammarians 
and  lexicographers  of  the  past,  and  the  best  explanation 
that  they  could  arrive  at  was  that  the  plural  for  God  here 
used  was  "  the  pluralis  majestatis,"  that  is,  the  plural  of 
majesty.  But  this  explanation  is  entirely  inadequate.  To 
say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  the  pluralis  majestatis  in  the 
Old  Testament  is  a  figure  of  very  doubtful  occurrence — ■ 
I  have  not  been  able  to  find  any  place  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment where  it  is  clear  that  the  pluralis  majestatis  is  used — 


22  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

but  in  addition  to  that,  even  if  it  were  true  that  the 
pluralis  majestatis  does  occur  in  the  Old  Testament,  there 
is  another  explanation  for  the  use  of  a  plural  name  for 
God  that  is  far  nearer  at  hand  and  far  more  adequate  and 
satisfactory,  and  that  is,  that  the  Hebrew  inspired  writers 
used  a  plural  name  for  God,  in  spite  of  their  intense 
monotheism,  because  there  is  a  plurality  of  persons  in 
the  one  Godhead. 

(6)  Now  turn  to  Eph.  4 :  30,  "  And  grieve  not  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  re- 
demption." Here  grief  is  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 
In  other  words,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  a  mere  blind,  im- 
personal influence  or  power  that  comes  to  dwell  in  your 
heart  and  mine.  No,  He  is  a  Person,  a  Person  Who  loves 
us,  a  Person  Who  is  holy  and  intensely  sensitive  against 
sin,  a  Person  Who  recoils  from  sin  in  what  we  would  call 
its  slightest  forms  as  the  holiest  woman  on  earth  never 
recoiled  from  sin  in  its  grossest  and  most  repulsive  forms. 
And  He  sees  whatever  we  do,  He  hears  whatever  we  say. 
He  sees  our  every  thought,  not  a  vagrant  fancy  is  allowed 
a  moment's  lodgment  in  our  mind  but  what  He  sees  it ; 
and  if  there  is  anything  impure,  unholy,  immodest,  un- 
charitable, untrue,  false,  censorious,  bitter,  or  unChrist- 
like  in  any  way,  in  word  or  thought  or  act.  He  is  grieved 
beyond  expression.  This  is  a  wonderful  thought,  and  it 
is  to  me  the  mightiest  incentive  that  I  know  to  a  careful 
walk,  a  walk  that  will  please  this  indwelling  Holy  One  in 
every  act  and  word  and  thought. 

How  many  a  young  man  is  kept  back  from  doing 
things  that  He  would  otherwise  do,  by  the  thought  that 
if  he  did  do  that  his  mother  might  hear  of  it  and  she 
would  be  grieved  beyond  expression.  How  many  a  young 
man  who  went  over  to  France  in  the  late  war,  and  was 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    28 

surrounded  by  the  awful  temptations  that  encompassed 
our  young  men  on  every  hand  at  that  time  and  at  that 
place,  in  some  hour  of  fierce  temptation  stood  at  the  door 
of  a  house  that  no  self-respecting  man  ought  ever  to  enter, 
and  just  as  his  hand  v^^as  on  the  door-knob  and  he  was 
about  to  open  the  door,  the  thought  came  to  him,  "  If  I 
should  enter  there  mother  might  hear  of  it,  and  if  she  did 
it  would  nearly  kill  her,"  and  he  has  turned  away  without 
entering.  But  Hsten,  there  is  One  holier  than  the  holiest 
mother  that  you  or  I  ever  knew,  One  Who  loves  us  with 
a  more  tender  love  than  our  own  mother  loves  us,  and 
He  sees  everything  we  do,  not  only  in  the  daylight  but 
under  the  cover  of  the  night;  He  hears  every  word  we 
utter,  every  careless  word  that  escapes  our  lips ;  He  sees 
every  thought  we  entertain,  yes,  every  fleeting  fancy  that 
we  allow  a  moment's  lodgment  in  our  mind,  and  if  there 
is  anything  unholy,  impure,  immodest,  uncharitable,  inde- 
corous, unkind,  harsh,  bitter,  censorious,  or  unChristlike 
in  any  way,  in  act  or  word  or  thought.  He  sees  it  and  is 
grieved  beyond  expression.  Oh,  how  often  there  has 
come  into  my  mind  some  thought  or  imagination,  from 
what  source  I  do  not  know,  but  it  is  a  thought  I  ought 
not  to  entertain,  and  just  as  I  was  about  to  give  it  lodg- 
ment the  thought  has  come,  "  The  Holy  Spirit  sees  that 
and  will  be  grieved  by  it,"  and  the  thought  has  gone. 

Bearing  this  thought  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our  mind 
will  help  us  to  solve  all  the  questions  that  perplex  the 
young  believer  in  our  day.  For  example,  the  question, 
"  Ought  I  as  a  Christian  to  go  to  the  theatre  or  the 
movies?"  Well,  if  you  go  the  Holy  Spirit  will  go,  too, 
for  He  dwells  in  the  heart  of  every  believer  and  goes 
wherever  the  believer  goes.  Were  you  ever  in  a  theatre 
or  moving  picture  show  in  your  life  where  you  honestly 


24  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

thought  the  atmosphere  of  the  place  would  be  congenial 
to  the  Holy  Spirit?  If  not,  do  not  go.  Ought  I  as  a 
Christian  go  to  dances?  Well,  here  again,  if  you  go  the 
Holy  Spirit  will  surely  go.  Were  you  ever  at  a  dance  in 
all  your  life  where  you  really  believed  the  atmosphere  of 
the  place  would  be  congenial  to  the  Holy  Spirit?  Shall 
I  as  a  Christian  play  cards?  Were  you  ever  at  a  card 
party  in  your  life,  even  the  most  select  little  neighbour- 
hood gathering,  or  even  at  a  home  gathering  to  play  cards, 
where  you  thought  the  atmosphere  of  the  place  would  be 
congenial  to  the  Holy  Spirit?  If  not,  do  not  play.  So 
with  all  the  questions  that  come  up  and  that  some  of  us 
find  so  hard  to  settle,  this  thought  of  the  Holy  Spirit  will 
help  you  to  settle  them  all,  and  to  settle  them  right  (if 
you  really  desire  to  settle  them  right  and  not  merely  to 
do  the  thing  that  pleases  yourself,  even  though  it  may 
grieve  the  Holy  Spirit). 

2.  The  second  line  of  proof  of  the  Personality  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  that.  Many  actions  are  ascribed  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  only  a  person  can  perform.  There  are  many 
illustrations  of  this  in  the  Bible,  but  I  will  limit  our  con- 
sideration today  to  three  instances. 

(1)  Turn  to  the  second  chapter  of  1  Corinthians.  In 
the  tenth  verse  we  read,  "  But  unto  us  God  revealed  them 
through  the  Spirit:  for  the  Spirit  searcheth  all  things, 
yea,  the  deep  things  of  God."  Here  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
represented  as  searching  the  deep  things  of  God.  In 
other  words,  as  we  have  already  said  under  our  previous 
heading,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  a  mere  illumination 
whereby  our  minds  are  illumined  and  made  strong  to 
apprehend  truth  that  they  would  not  otherwise  discover, 
but  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Person  Who  Himself  searches 
into  the  deep  things  of  God  and  reveals  to  us  the  things 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    25 

which  He  discovers.  Such  words,  of  course,  could  only 
be  spoken  of  a  person. 

(2)  Now  turn  to  Romans  8:26,  "And  in  like  manner 
the  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmity:  for  we  know  not 
how  to  pray  as  we  ought ;  but  the  Spirit  Himself  maketh 
intercession  for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  ut- 
tered." Here  the  Holy  Spirit  is  represented  as  doing 
what  only  a  person  can  do,  that  is,  He  is  represented  as 
praying.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  not  merely  an  influence  that 
comes  upon  us  and  impels  us  to  pray,  nor  is  He  a  mere 
guidance  to  us  in  offering  our  prayers.  No,  no;  He  is 
Himself  a  Person  Who  Himself  prays. 

Every  believer  in  Christ  has  two  Divine  Persons  pray- 
ing for  him  every  day :  first,  the  Son,  our  "  Advocate  with 
the  Father,"  Who  "  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
us  "  up  yonder  at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  the  glory 
(1  John  2:  1  and  Heb.  7:25)  ;  second,  the  Holy  Spirit 
Who  prays  through  us  down  here  on  earth.  Oh,  what  a 
wonderful  thought,  that  each  and  every  believer  in  Christ 
has  two  Divine  Persons  praying  for  him  every  day. 
What  a  sense  it  gives  us  of  our  security — I  do  not  believe 
the  Devil  will  ever  get  us. 

When  I  started  around  the  world  in  1901,  I  sent  out 
five  thousand  letters  to  people  whom  I  had  learned  knew 
how  to  pray,  asking  them  if  they  would  pray  for  Mr. 
Alexander  and  me  every  day  as  we  went  around  the 
world.  One  of  the  hardest  tasks  I  ever  had  in  my  life 
was  signing  those  letters,  signing  my  name  five  thousand 
times,  but  it  paid,  for  soon  letters  came  back  by  the  thou- 
sands from  these  persons  saying  that  they  would  pray  for 
us  every  day.  When  Mr.  Alexander  and  I  reached  Mel- 
bourne, Australia,  ten  thousand  people  had  taken  it  up 
and  were  praying  for  us  every  day,  and  when  we  reached 


26  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

England  no  less  than  forty  thousand  people  were  prayinjj; 
for  us  every  day.  Who  could  not  preach  under  such 
circumstances,  and  is  it  any  wonder  that  the  marvellous 
results  followed  that  did  follow?  I  wish  they  were  all 
praying  for  me  still;  but,  while  I  would  be  glad  to  have 
those  forty  thousand  people  praying  for  me  every  day,  if 
I  had  to  choose  between  having  forty  thousand  of  the 
godliest  men  and  women  on  earth  praying  for  me  every 
day,  or  to  have  those  two  Persons,  Christ  the  Son,  our 
Advocate  with  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  our  Com- 
forter, praying  for  me  every  day,  I  would  choose  the  two 
rather  than  the  forty  thousand. 

(3)  Now  turn  to  two  closely  related  passages.  John 
14 :  26,  "  But  the  Comforter,  even  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom 
the  Father  will  send  in  My  name.  He  shall  teach  you  all 
things,  and  bring  to  your  remembrance  all  that  I  have 
said  unto  you."  Here  the  Holy  Spirit  is  represented  as 
doing  what  only  a  person  could  do,  namely,  teaching.  We 
have  the  same  thought  in  John  16:  12-14:  "I  have  yet 
many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them 
now.  Howbeit  when  He,  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  is  come, 
He  shall  guide  you  into  all  the  truth:  for  He  shall  not 
speak  from  Himself;  but  what  things  soever  He  shall 
hear,  these  shall  He  speak :  and  He  shall  declare  unto  you 
the  things  that  are  to  come.  He  shall  glorify  Me:  for 
He  shall  take  of  mine,  and  shall  declare  it  unto  you." 
Here  again  the  Holy  Spirit  is  represented  as  a  living, 
personal  teacher.  It  is  our  privilege  today  to  have  the 
Holy  Spirit,  a  living  Person,  as  our  teacher. 

Every  time  we  study  our  Bible  it  is  possible  for  us  to 
have  this  Divine  Person,  the  Author  of  the  Book,  to  in- 
terpret it  to  us,  and  to  teach  us  its  real  and  its  innermost 
meaning.     It  is  a  precious  thought.     How  many  of  us 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    27 

have  often  thought  when  we  heard  some  great  human 
teacher  whom  God  has  especially  blessed  to  us,  "  Oh,  if 
I  could  only  hear  that  man  every  day,  then  I  might  make 
some  progress  in  my  Christian  life."  But  listen,  we  can 
have  a  teacher  more  competent  by  far  than  the  greatest 
human  teacher  that  ever  spoke  on  earth  for  our  teacher 
every  day,  and  that  peerless  teacher  is  the  Holy  Spirit. 

3.  The  third  line  of  proof  of  the  Personality  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  that,  An  office  is  predicated  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  could  only  be  predicated  of  a  Person.  Look, 
for  example,  at  John  14:  16,  17.  Here  we  read,  "And 
I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another 
Comforter,  that  He  may  abide  with  you  for  ever;  even 
the  Spirit  of  truth;  Whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  be- 
cause it  seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him:  but  ye 
know  Him;  for  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in 
you."  Here  the  Holy  Spirit  is  represented  as  another 
Comforter  who  is  coming  to  take  the  place  of  our  Lord 
Jesus.  Up  to  this  time  our  Lord  Jesus  had  been  the 
friend  always  at  hand  to  help  them  in  every  emergency 
that  arose.  But  now  He  was  going,  and  their  hearts  were 
filled  with  consternation,  and  He  tells  them  that  while  He 
is  going  Another  is  coming  to  take  His  place.  Can  you 
for  a  moment  imagine  our  Lord  Jesus  saying  this  if  the 
other  who  is  coming  to  take  His  place  were  a  mere  im- 
personal influence  or  power? 

Can  you  imagine  our  Lord  Jesus  saying  what  He  says 
in  John  16 : 7,  "  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the  truth ;  It  is 
expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away:  for  if  I  go  not  away, 
the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you ;  but  if  I  depart,  I 
will  send  Him  unto  you,"  if  that  which  was  coming  to 
take  His  place  were  not  another  Person  but  a  mere  in- 
fluence or  power?    In  that  case,  is  it  for  a  moment  con- 


28  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

ceivable  that  our  Lord  could  say  that  it  was  expedient 
for  Him,  a  Divine  Person,  to  go  and  a  mere  influence  or 
power,  no  matter  how  divine,  come  to  take  His  place? 
No!  No!  What  our  Lord  said  was  that  He,  on^ 
Divine  Person,  was  going,  but  that  another  Per- 
son, JUST  as  Divine  as  He,  was  coming  to  take  His 

PLACE. 

This  promise  is  to  me  one  of  the  most  precious  prom- 
ises in  the  whole  Word  of  God  for  this  present  dispensa- 
tion, the  thought  that  during  the  absence  of  our  Lord, 
until  that  glad  day  when  He  shall  come  back  again, 
another  Person  just  as  Divine  as  He,  just  as  loving  and 
tender  and  strong  to  help,  is  by  my  side  always,  yes, 
dwells  in  my  heart  every  moment  to  commune  with  me 
and  to  help  me  in  ev£ry  emergency  that  can  possibly  arise. 

I  take  it  for  granted  that  you  know  that  the  Greek 
word  translated  "  Comforter  "  in  these  verses  means  far 
more  than  Comforter.  It  means  Comforter  plus  a  great 
deal  beside.  The  Greek  word  so  translated  is  "  Para- 
kletos."  This  word  is  a  compound  word,  compounded 
of  the  word  "  Para,"  which  means  "  alongside,"  and 
"  Kletos,"  which  means  "  one  called  " :  so  the  whole  word 
means,  "  One  called  to  stand  alongside  another,"  one 
called  to  take  his  part  and  help  him  in  every  emergency 
that  arises. 

It  is  the  same  word  that  is  translated  "  Advocate  "  in 
1  John  2:1,  "If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate 
(Parakleton)  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  right- 
eous." But  the  word  "  Advocate  "  does  not  begin  to  give 
the  full  force  of  the  word.  Etymologically  the  word 
"  Advocate  "  means  about  the  same  as  the  word  "  Para- 
kletos."  Advocate  is  really  a  Latin  word  transliterated 
into  the  English;  the  word  is  compounded  of  two  words» 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    29 

"  ad,"  meaning  "  to,"  and  "  vocatus,"  which  means  "  one 
called ;"  that  is  to  say,  Advocate  means  one  called  to 
another  to  take  his  part,  or  to  help  him.  But  in  our 
English  usage  this  word  Advocate  has  obtained  a  nar- 
rower and  more  restricted  sense.  The  Greek  word,  as  I 
have  already  said,  means  "  One  called  alongside  another," 
and  the  thought  is  of  a  helper  always  at  hand  with  His 
counsel  and  His  strength  and  any  form  of  help  that  is 
needed. 

Up  to  this  time  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  had  been  their 
Paraclete,  the  friend  always  at  hand  to  help.  Whenever 
they  got  into  any  trouble  they  simply  turned  to  Him.  For 
example,  on  one  occasion  they  were  perplexed  on  the 
subject  of  prayer  and  they  said  to  the  Lord,  "  Lord,  teach 
us  to  pray,"  and  He  taught  them  to  pray.  On  another 
ocasion  when  Jesus  was  coming  to  them  walking  on  the 
water,  when  their  first  fear  was  over  and  He  had  said, 
"  It  is  I,  be  not  afraid,"  then  Peter  said  unto  Him,  "  Lord, 
if  it  be  Thou,  bid  me  come  unto  Thee  upon  the  water." 
And  the  Lord  said,  "  Come."  Then  Peter  clambered  over 
the  side  of  the  fishing-smack  and  commenced  to  go  to 
Jesus,  walking  on  the  water.  He  got  along  fine  for  a  few 
moments,  and  then  seemingly  he  turned  around  to  see  if 
his  companions  saw  how  well  he  was  doing,  thus  he  took 
his  eyes  off  the  Lord  and  saw  the  wind  and  the  waves, 
and  no  sooner  had  he  gotten  his  eyes  off  the  Lord  than 
he  began  to  sink,  and  he  cried  out,  "  Lord,  save  me,"  and 
Jesus  reached  out  His  hand  and  held  him  up.  Just  so, 
when  they  got  into  any  other  emergency  the  disciples 
turned  to  the  Lord  and  He  delivered  them.  But  now  He 
was  going  and  consternation  filled  their  hearts,  and  the 
Lord  said  to  comfort  them,  "  Yes,  I  am  going,  but  another 
;ust  as  Divine  as  I,  just  as  loving  and  tender  as  I,  just  as 


30  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

able  to  help  in  every  emergency  that  may  arise,  is  coming 
to  take  my  place,"  and  this  other  Paraclete  is  with  us 
wherever  we  go,  every  hour  of  the  day  or  night.  He  is 
always  at  our  side.    Precious  and  wondrous  thought ! 

If  this  thought  gets  into  your  heart  and  stays  there, 
you  will  never  have  another  moment  of  fear  as  long  as 
you  live.  How  can  we  fear  under  any  circumstances  if 
we  really  believe  that  He  is  by  our  side?  You  may  be 
surrounded  by  a  howling  mob ;  I  have  been,  an  Irish  mob 
and  a  Chinese  mob,  but  what  of  it,  if  He  walks  between 
you  and  the  mob?  That  thought  will  banish  all  fear.  I 
had  some  years  ago  a  striking  illustration  of  this  in  my 
own  experience  that  I  shall  never  forget.  I  was  speaking 
at  a  Bible  Conference  on  a  lake  in  New  York  State.  I 
had  a  cousin  who  had  a  cottage  four  miles  up  the  lake 
and  I  went  up  there  and  spent  my  rest  day  with  him. 
The  next  day  he  brought  me  down  in  his  steam  launch  to 
the  pier  where  the  Conference  was  held.  As  I  stepped 
off  the  launch  onto  the  pier  he  said  to  me,  "  Come  back 
again  tonight,  Archie,  and  spend  the  night  with  us,"  and  I 
promised  him  I  would.  But  I  did  not  realize  what  I  was 
promising.  That  night,  when  my  address  was  over,  as  I 
went  out  of  the  hotel  and  started  on  my  walk,  I  found  that 
I  had  taken  a  large  contract.  The  cottage  was  four  miles 
away,  but  a  four-mile  walk  or  an  eight-mile  walk  was 
nothing  to  me  under  ordinary  circumstances,  but  a  storm 
was  coming  up  and  the  whole  heaven  was  overcast.  Fur- 
thermore, the  path  led  along  a  blufif  bordering  the  lake, 
and  the  path  was  near  the  edge  of  the  bluff.  Sometimes 
the  lake  was  perhaps  not  more  than  ten  or  twelve  feet 
below,  at  other  times  some  thirty  or  forty  feet  below.  I 
had  never  gone  over  the  path  before  and  found  that  it  led 
right  along  the  edge  of  the  bluff;  besides  that,  there  was 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    81 

no  starlight  and  I  could  not  see  the  path  at  all.  There 
had  already  been  a  storm  that  had  gulleyed  out  deep 
ditches  across  the  path  into  which  one  might  fall  and 
break  his  leg.  I  could  not  see  these  ditches  except  when 
there  would  be  a  sudden  flash  of  lightning,  when  I  would 
see  one,  and  then  it  would  be  darker  and  I  blinder 
than  ever. 

As  I  walked  along  this  path,  so  near  the  edge  of  the 
bluff  with  all  the  furrows  cut  through  it,  I  felt  it  was 
perilous  to  take  the  walk  and  thought  of  going  back ;  but 
the  thought  came  to  me,  "  You  promised  that  you  would 
come  tonight  and  they  may  be  sitting  up  waiting  for  you," 
so  I  felt  that  I  must  go  on.  But  it  seemed  creepy  and 
uncanny  to  walk  along  the  edge  of  the  bluff  on  such  an 
uncertain  path  which  I  could  not  see,  and  could  only  hear 
rising  from  the  foot  of  the  bluff  the  sobbing  and  wailing 
and  the  moaning  of  the  lake  as  it  was  moved  by  the  fast 
approaching  storm.  Just  then  the  thought  came  to  me, 
"  What  was  it  you  told  the  people  there  at  the  Conference 
about  the  Holy  Spirit  being  a  Person  always  by  our  side  ? 
Does  He  not  walk  by  your  side  now  ?  "  Then  I  at  once 
realized  that  the  Holy  Spirit  walked  between  me  and  the 
edge  of  the  bluff,  and  that  four  miles  through  the  dark 
was  four  miles  without  fear,  a  gladsome  instead  of  a 
fearsome  walk. 

I  once  threw  this  thought  out  in  the  Royal  Albert  Hall 
in  London,  one  dark  dismal  afternoon.  There  was  a 
young  lady  in  the  audience  who  had  an  abnormal  fear  of 
the  dark.  It  simply  seemed  impossible  for  her  to  go  into 
a  dark  room  alone.  After  the  meeting  was  over  she  hur- 
ried home  and  rushed  into  the  room  where  her  mother 
was  sitting  and  cried,  "  Oh,  mother,  I  have  heard  the  most 
wonderful  address  this  afternoon  I  ever  heard  in  my  life. 


32  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

about  the  Holy  Spirit  always  being  by  our  side  as  our 
ever-present  helper  and  protector.  Mother,  I  shall  never 
be  afraid  of  the  dark  again."  But  her  mother  was  a 
practical  English  woman,  and  said  to  her,  "  Well,  let  us 
see  how  real  that  is.  Now,  go  up-stairs  to  the  top  floor, 
into  the  dark  room,  and  shut  the  door  and  stay  in  there 
alone  in  the  dark."  The  daughter  wrote  me  the  next 
day,  "  I  went  bounding  up  the  stairs,  went  into  the  dark 
room,  closed  the  door  and  it  was  pitch  dark,  and  Oh,  it 
was  dark,  utterly  dark,  but  that  room  was  bright  and 
glorious  with  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit." 

In  this  thought  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  Person  ever 
present  with  us,  is  also  a  cure  for  insomnia.  Did  any  of 
you  ever  have  insomnia?  I  did.  For  two  dark,  awful 
years.  Night  after  night  I  would  go  to  bed  almost  dead, 
it  seemed  to  me,  for  sleep,  and  I  thought  I  would  cer- 
tainly sleep  as  I  could  scarcely  keep  awake;  but  scarcely 
had  my  head  touched  the  pillow  when  I  knew  I  would  not 
sleep,  and  I  would  hear  the  clock  strike  twelve,  one,  two, 
three,  four,  five,  six,  and  then  it  was  time  to  get  up.  It 
seemed  as  though  I  had  not  slept  at  all,  though  I  have  no 
doubt  I  did;  for  I  believe  that  people  who  suffer  from 
insomnia  sleep  far  more  than  they  think  they  do,  else  we 
would  go  insane  or  die,  but  it  seemed  as  if  I  did  not  sleep 
at  all.  This  went  on  for  two  long  years,  until  I  thought 
that  if  I  could  not  get  sleep  I  would  lose  my  mind.  And 
then  I  got  deliverance.  For  years  I  would  retire  and  fall 
asleep  about  as  soon  as  my  head  touched  the  pillow.  But 
one  night  I  went  to  bed  in  the  Bible  Institute  in  Chicago, 
where  I  was  then  stopping.  I  expected  to  fall  asleep 
almost  immediately,  as  had  become  my  custom,  but 
scarcely  had  my  head  touched  the  pillow  when  I  knew  I 
was  not  going  to  sleep.    Insomnia  was  back.    If  you  have 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    33 

ever  had  him  you  will  always  recognize  him.  It  seemed 
as  if  Insomnia  was  sitting  on  the  footboard  of  my  bed 
looking  like  an  imp,  grinning  at  me  and  saying,  *'  I  am 
back  for  two  more  years." 

"  Oh,"  I  thought,  "  two  more  years  of  this  awful  in- 
somnia." But  that  very  morning  I  had  been  teaching  to 
our  students,  in  the  lecture-room  on  the  floor  below,  the 
Personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  thought  came  to 
me  almost  immediately,  "  What  was  that  you  were  telling 
the  students  down-stairs  this  morning  about  the  Holy 
Spirit  being  a  Person  always  with  us  ?  "  And  I  said  to 
myself,  "Why  don't  you  practice  what  you  preach?" 
And  I  looked  up  and  I  said,  "  Oh,  Thou  blessed  Spirit  of 
God,  Thou  art  here;  if  Thou  hast  anything  to  say  to  me 
I  will  listen."  And  He  opened  to  me  some  of  the  sweet 
and  precious  things  about  Jesus  Christ  that  are  found  in 
the  Word  of  God,  filling  my  soul  with  calm  aad  peace  and 
joy,  and  the  next  thing  I  knew  I  was  asleep,  and  the  next 
thing  I  knew  it  was  tomorrow  morning.  And  whenever 
Insomnia  has  come  around  since  and  sat  on  my  foot- 
board, I  have  done  the  same  thing  and  it  has  never  failed. 

In  this  thought  of  the  Holy  Spirit  being  a  Personal 
friend  always  at  hand,  is  also  a  cure  for  all  loneliness.  If 
the  thought  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  an  Ever-present  Friend, 
always  at  hand,  once  enters  your  heart  and  stays  there, 
you  will  never  have  another  lonely  moment  as  long  as 
you  live. 

My  life  for  the  larger  part  of  the  last  twenty-five  years 
has  been  a  lonely  life.  I  have  often  been  separated  from 
my  family  for  months  at  a  time,  sometimes  I  have  not 
seen  my  wife  for  two  or  three  months  at  a  time,  and  for 
eighteen  months  I  did  not  even  once  see  any  member  of 
my  family  except  my  wife.     One  night  I  was  walking 


34  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

the  deck  of  a  steamer  in  the  South  Seas  between  New 
Zealand  and  Tasmania.  It  was  a  stormy  night.  Most 
of  the  other  passengers  were  below,  seasick,  and  none  of 
the  officers  or  sailors  could  walk  with  me,  for  they  had 
their  hands  full  looking  after  the  boat.  Four  of  the  five 
members  of  my  family  were  on  the  other  side  of  the 
globe,  seventeen  thousand  miles  away  by  the  nearest  route 
that  I  could  get  to  them,  and  the  one  member  of  my  fam- 
ily who  was  nearer  was  not  with  me  that  night.  As  I 
walked  the  deck  all  alone  I  got  to  thinking  of  my  four 
children  seventeen  thousand  miles  away  and  was  about 
to  get  lonesome,  when  the  thought  came  to  me  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  by  my  side,  and  that  as  I  walked  up  and 
down  the  deck  in  the  night  and  in  the  storm  He  took 
every  step  with  me,  and  all  my  loneliness  was  gone. 

I  gave  expression  to  this  thought  some  years  ago  in  the 
City  of  St.  Paul,  and  at  the  close  of  the  address  a  physi- 
cian said  to  me,  "  I  wish  to  thank  you  for  that  thought. 
I  am  often  called  at  night  to  go  out  alone  through  dark- 
ness and  storm  far  into  the  country,  and  I  have  been  very 
lonely,  but  I  will  never  be  lonely  again,  for  I  will  know 
that  every  step  of  the  way  the  Holy  Spirit  is  beside  me 
in  my  doctor's  gig." 

In  this  same  precious  truth  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a 
Personal  Friend  always  at  hand  there  is  a  cure  for  a 
broken  heart.  Oh,  how  many  broken-hearted  people  there 
are  in  the  world  today.  Many  of  us  have  lost  loved  ones, 
but  we  need  not  have  a  moment's  heartache  if  we  only 
know  "  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  There  is 
perhaps  here  today  some  woman  who  a  year  ago,  or  it 
may  be  only  a  few  months  or  a  few  weeks  ago,  or  pos- 
sibly a  few  days  ago,  had  by  her  side  a  man  whom  she 
dearly  loved,  a  man  so  strong  and  wise  that  she  was  freed 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    35 

from  all  sense  of  responsibility  and  care,  for  all  the  bur- 
dens were  upon  him.  How  bright  and  happy  were  the 
days  of  his  companionship !  But  the  dark  day  came 
when  that  loved  one  was  taken  away,  and  how  lonely 
and  empty  and  barren  and  full  of  burden  and  care  life 
is  today.  Listen,  woman,  there  is  One  Who  walks  right 
by  your  side  today,  Who  is  far  wiser  and  stronger  and 
more  loving  and  more  able  to  guide  and  help  than  the 
wisest  and  strongest  and  most  loving  husband  that  ever 
lived ;  ready  to  bear  all  the  burdens  and  responsibility  of 
life  for  you,  yes,  ready  to  do  far  more,  ready  to  come  in 
and  dwell  in  your  heart  and  fill  every  nook  and  corner  of 
your  empty  and  aching  heart,  and  thus  banish  the  loneli- 
ness and  all  the  heartache  forever. 

I  said  this  one  afternoon  in  St.  Andrew's  Hall  in  Glas- 
gow. At  the  close  of  the  address,  when  I  went  out  into 
the  reception-room,  a  lady  who  had  hurried  out  to  meet 
me,  approached.  She  wore  a  widow's  bonnet,  her  face 
bore  the  marks  of  deep  sorrow,  but  now  there  was  a  happy 
look  in  her  face.  She  hurried  to  me  and  said,  "  Dr.  Tor- 
rey,  this  is  the  first  anniversary  of  my  dear  husband's 
death  (her  husband  was  one  of  the  most  highly  esteemed 
Christians  in  Glasgow),  and  I  came  to  St.  Andrew's  Hall 
today  saying  to  myself,  *  Dr.  Torrey  will  have  something 
to  say  that  will  help  me.'  Oh,"  she  continued,  "  you  have 
said  just  the  right  word.  I  will  never  be  lonesome  again, 
never  have  a  heartache  again.  I  will  let  the  Holy 
Spirit  come  in  and  fill  every  aching  corner  of  my  heart." 
Eighteen  months  passed,  I  was  back  in  Scotland  again, 
taking  a  short  vacation  on  the  Lochs  of  the  Clyde,  on  the 
private  yacht  of  a  friend.  One  day  we  stopped  off  a 
point,  a  little  boat  put  off  the  point  and  came  alongside 
the  steam  yacht.     The  first  one  who  clambered  up  the 


36  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

side  of  the  yacht  and  over  the  rail  and  onto  the  deck  was 
this  widow.  Seeing  me  standing  on  the  deck  she  hurried 
across  and  took  my  hand  in  both  of  hers  and  with  a  radi- 
ant smile  on  her  face  she  said,  "  Oh,  Dr.  Torrey,  the 
thought  you  gave  me  in  St.  Andrew's  Hall  that  afternoon 
stays  with  me  still,  and  I  have  not  had  a  lonely  or  sad 
hour  from  that  day  to  this." 

But  it  is  in  our  Christian  work  that  the  thought  comes 
to  us  with  greatest  power  and  helpfulness.  Take  my  own 
experience:  I  became  a  minister  of  the  gospel  simply  be- 
cause I  had  to,  or  be  forever  lost.  I  do  not  mean  that  I 
am  saved  by  preaching  the  gospel ;  I  am  saved  simply  on 
the  ground  of  the  atoning  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
alone;  but  my  becoming  a  Christian  and  accepting  Him 
as  my  Saviour  turned  upon  my  preaching  the  gospel. 
For  several  years  I  refused  to  come  out  as  a  Christian 
because  I  was  unwilling  to  preach,  and  I  felt  that  if  I 
became  a  Christian  I  must  preach.  The  night  that  I  sur- 
rendered to  God  I  did  not  say,  "  I  will  accept  Christ,"  or 
"  I  will  give  up  my  sins ;"  I  said,  "  I  will  preach." 

But  if  there  was  ever  a  man  who  by  natural  tempera- 
ment was  utterly  unfitted  to  preach,  it  was  I.  I  was  an 
abnormally  bashful  boy,  and  a  stranger  could  scarcely 
speak  to  me  without  my  blushing  to  the  roots  of  my  hair. 
When  I  went  away  from  home  visiting  with  other  mem- 
bers of  my  family,  I  could  not  eat  enough  at  the  table,  I 
was  so  frightened  to  be  among  strangers.  Of  all  the 
tortures  I  endured  at  school  there  was  none  so  great  as 
that  of  reciting  a  piece.  To  stand  on  the  platform  and 
have  the  scholars  looking  at  me,  I  could  scarcely  endure 
it;  and  even  when  my  own  father  and  mother  at  home 
asked  me  to  recite  the  piece  to  them  before  I  went  to 
school,  I  simply  could  not  recite  it  before  my  own  father 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    37 

and  mother.  Think  of  a  man  like  that  going  into  the 
ministry.  Even  after  I  was  a  student  in  Yale  College, 
when  I  would  go  home  on  a  vacation  and  my  mother 
would  have  callers  and  send  for  me  to  come  in  and  meet 
them,  I  could  not  say  a  word.  After  they  were  gone  my 
mother  would  say  to  me,  "  Archie,  why  didn't  you  say 

something  to  Mrs.  S or  Mrs.  D ?"  and  I  would 

say,  "  Why,  mother,  I  did."  And  she  would  reply,  "  You 
did  not  utter  a  sound."  I  thought  I  did,  but  it  would  get 
no  further  than  my  throat  and  stick  there.  I  was  so 
bashful  that  I  never  even  spoke  in  a  church  prayer- 
meeting  until  after  I  entered  the  theological  seminary. 
Then  I  thought  that  if  I  were  to  be  a  preacher  I  must  at 
least  be  able  to  speak  in  my  own  church  prayer-meeting. 
I  made  up  my  mind  that  I  would.  I  learned  a  piece  by 
heart,  I  remember  some  of  it  to  this  day,  but  I  think  I 
forgot  some  of  it  when  I  got  up  to  speak  that  night.  As 
soon  as  the  meeting  was  open  I  grasped  the  back  of  the 
settee  in  front  of  me  and  pulled  myself  up  to  my  feet  and 
held  on  to  it  lest  I  should  fall.  One  Niagara  went  rush- 
ing up  one  side  and  another  down  the  other,  and  I 
tremblingly  repeated  as  much  of  my  little  piece  as  I  could 
remember,  and  then  dropped  back  into  the  seat.  At  the 
close  of  the  meeting  a  dear  old  maiden  lady,  a  lovely 
Christian  woman,  came  to  me  and  said,  "  Oh,  Mr.  Torrey, 
I  want  to  thank  you  for  what  you  said  tonight.  It  did  me 
so  much  good,  you  spoke  with  so  much  feeling."  Feel- 
ing ?  The  only  feeling  I  had  was  that  I  was  scared  nearly 
to  death.  Think  of  a  man  like  that  going  into  the 
ministry. 

My  first  years  in  the  ministry  were  torture.  I  preached 
three  times  a  day.  I  committed  my  sermons  to  memory, 
and  then  I  stood  up  and  twisted  the  top  button  of  my 


38  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

coat  until  I  had  twisted  the  sermon  out,  and  then  when 
the  third  sermon  was  preached  and  finished  I  dropped 
back  into  the  haircloth  settee  back  of  the  pulpit  with  a 
great  sense  of  relief  that  that  was  over  for  another  week. 
But  then  the  dreadful  thought  would  at  once  take  posses- 
sion of  me,  "  Well,  you  have  got  to  begin  tomorrow 
morning  to  get  ready  for  next  Sunday."  Oh,  what  a 
torment  life  was.  But  a  glad  day  came,  a  day  when  the 
thought  which  I  am  trying  to  teach  you  now  took  posses- 
sion of  me,  namely,  that  when  I  stood  up  to  preach,  that, 
though  people  saw  me,  that  there  was  Another  whom  they 
did  not  see,  but  Who  stood  by  my  side,  and  that  all  the 
responsibility  was  upon  Him  and  all  I  had  to  do  was  to 
get  just  as  far  back  out  of  sight  as  possible  and  let  Him 
do  the  preaching.  From  that  day  to  this,  preaching  has 
been  the  joy  of  my  life;  I'd  rather  preach  than  eat. 
Sometimes  when  I  rise  to  preach,  before  I  have  uttered 
a  word,  the  thought  of  Him  standing  beside  me,  able  and 
willing  to  take  charge  of  the  whole  meeting  and  do  what- 
ever needs  to  be  done,  has  so  filled  my  heart  with  exultant 
joy  that  I  can  scarcely  refrain  from  shouting. 

Just  so  in  your  Sunday  School  teaching.  Some  of  you 
worry  about  your  Sunday  School  class  for  fear  you  will 
say  something  you  ought  not  to  say,  or  leave  unsaid  some- 
thing you  ought  to  say,  and  the  thought  of  the  burden  and 
responsibility  almost  crushes  you.  Listen !  Always  re- 
member this,  as  you  sit  there  teaching  your  class :  There 
is  One  right  beside  you  Who  knows  just  what  ought  to 
be  said  and  just  what  ought  to  be  done.  Instead  of  carry- 
ing the  responsibility  of  the  class  let  Him  do  it,  let  Him 
do  the  teaching. 

One  Monday  morning  I  met  one  of  the  most  faithful 
laymen  I  ever  knew,  and  a  very  gifted  Bible  teacher.    This 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    39 

Monday  morning  as  I  called  upon  him  at  his  store  he  was 
greatly  cast  down  over  the  failure  in  his  class,  or  what  he 
regarded  as  failure.  He  unburdened  his  heart  to  me,  and 
I  listened.  Then  when  he  had  finished  I  said  to  him, 
"  Mr.  Dyer,  did  you  not  ask  God  to  give  you  wisdom  as 
you  went  before  that  class  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  did."  Then 
I  said,  "  Did  you  not  expect  Him  to  give  it  ?  "  He  re- 
plied, "  I  did."  Then  I  said,  "  What  right  have  you  to 
doubt  that  He  did  ?  "  He  answered,  "  I  never  thought  of 
that  before.    I  will  never  worry  about  my  class  again." 

Just  so  in  your  personal  work.  When  I  or  someone 
else  urges  you  at  the  close  of  the  meeting  to  go  and  speak 
to  someone  else.  Oh,  how  often  you  want  to  go,  but  you 
do  not  stir.  You  think  to  yourself,  "  I  might  say  the 
wrong  thing.  I  might  do  more  harm  than  good."  Well, 
you  will  say  the  wrong  thing  if  you  say  it.  Yes,  if  you 
say  it  you  certainly  will  say  the  wrong  thing,  but  trust 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  do  the  talking  and  He  will  say  the 
right  thing  through  you.  Let  Him  have  your  lips  to 
speak  through.  It  may  not  appear  to  be  the  right  thing 
at  the  time,  but  sometime  you  will  find  that  it  was  just 
the  right  thing. 

One  night  in  Launceston,  Tasmania,  as  Mrs.  Torrey 
and  I  went  away  from  the  meeting  my  wife  said  to  me, 
"  Archie,  I  wasted  the  whole  evening.  I  have  been  talk- 
ing to  the  most  frivolous  girl  you  ever  saw.  I  don't  think 
she  had  a  serious  thought  in  her  head,  and  I  spent  the 
whole  evening  with  her."  I  replied,  "  Clara,  how  do  you 
know  that  you  wasted  the  evening  ?  Did  you  not  ask  God 
to  guide  you  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Did  you  not  expect  Him 
to?"  "Yes."  "Well,  leave  it  with  Him."  The  very 
next  night  at  the  close  of  the  meeting  the  same  seemingly 
utterly  frivolous  young  woman  came  up  to  Mrs.  Torrey, 


40  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

/eading  her  mother  by  the  hand,  and  said,  "  Mrs.  Torrey, 
won't  you  speak  to  my  mother?  You  led  me  to  Christ 
last  night,  now  please  lead  my  mother  to  Christ." 

But  I  must  close.  There  is  another  line  of  proof  of 
the  Personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  we  have  no  time 
to  dwell  upon  it. 

To  sum  it  all  up :  The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Person.  Theo- 
retically we  probably  all  believed  that  before,  but  do  you 
in  your  real  thought  of  Him,  in  your  practical  attitude 
toward  Him,  treat  Him  as  a  Person?  Do  you  really 
regard  the  Holy  Spirit  as  just  as  real  a  person  as  Jesus 
Christ,  just  as  loving,  just  as  wise,  just  as  tender,  just  as 
strong,  just  as  faithful,  just  as  worthy  of  your  confi- 
dence and  your  love,  and  surrender  as  He?  Do  you 
think  of  Him  as  a  Divine  Person  always  at  your  side? 
The  Holy  Spirit  was  sent  by  the  Father  into  this  world 
to  be  to  the  disciples  of  our  Lord  in  this  present  dispen- 
sation, after  our  Lord's  departure  and  until  His  return, 
to  be  to  you  and  me,  just  what  Jesus  Christ  had  been  to 
His  disciples  during  the  days  of  His  personal  companion- 
ship with  them  on  earth.  Is  He  that  to  you?  Do  you 
know  "  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  "  the  com- 
panionship of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  partnership  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  com- 
radeship of  the  Holy  Spirit?  To  put  it  all  into  a  single 
word,  I  say  it  reverently,  the  whole  object  of  this  address 
is  to  introduce  you  to  my  Friend,  the  Holy  Spirit. 


II 

THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN 

YESTERDAY  afternoon  we  studied  together  about 
the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  Person,  the  Holy  Spirit 
Himself.  Today  we  begin  a  study  of  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  shall  begin  our  study  of  His 
work  just  where  He  begins  His  work  in  most  of  us. 
Will  you  please  turn  in  your  Bibles  to  John,  the  sixteenth 
chapter,  the  seventh  to  the  eleventh  verses: 

"  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the  truth :  It  is  expedient  for 
you  that  I  go  away:  for  if  I  gc  not  away,  the  Comforter 
will  not  come  unto  you ;  but  if  I  go,  I  will  send  Him  unto 
you.  And  He,  when  He  is  come,  will  convict  the  world 
in  respect  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment: 
of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  Me;  of  righteousness, 
because  I  go  to  the  Father,  and  ye  behold  Me  no  more; 
of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of  this  world  hath  been 
judged." 

In  these  verses  we  are  told  that,  It  is  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  "  Convict  the  world  in  respect  of  sin,  and 
of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment." 

I.  The;  Holy  Spirit  Convicting  the  World  of  Sin 
First  of  all,  It  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  convict 
men  of  sin.    That  is  to  say,  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  show  men  their  error  concerning  sin  in  such  a 

41 


42  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

way  as  to  produce  a  deep  sense  of  personal  sinfulness. 
This  is  where  the  work  of  salvation  begins  in  most  men, 
they  are  brought  to  realize  that  they  are  sinners  and  that, 
therefore,  they  need  a  Saviour,  and  then  they  are  ready 
without  much  urging  to  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  their  Sav- 
iour, when  He  is  presented  to  them  as  just  the  all- 
sufficient  Saviour  they  so  sorely  need. 

One  of  the  great  needs  of  the  present  day  is  conviction 
of  sin.  The  average  man  has  no  realization  of  the  aw  ful- 
ness of  sin,  nor  of  the  fact  that  he  himself  is  a  great  sin- 
ner before  God.  If  men  and  women  can  be  brought  to 
a  realization  of  what  great  sinners  they  are  before  God, 
most  of  their  doctrinal  difficulties  about  the  Deity  of 
Christ  and  about  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement  through 
the  shed  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  will  take  care  of  them- 
selves; for  nothing  but  a  Divine  Saviour  Who  has  re- 
deemed them  hy  shedding  His  blood  to  pay  the  penalty 
of  their  sins  will  satisfy  the  longings  of  their  own  hearts. 
This  is  one  of  the  greatest  lacks  in  much  of  our  so-called 
"  revival  work  "  today,  the  lack  of  a  deep  sense  of  sin  on 
the  part  of  those  who  come,  or  profess  to  come,  to  Jesus 
Christ. 

Now  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  thus  convict 
men  of  sin,  to  bring  them  to  a  realization  of  their  sinful- 
ness, and  of  their  lost  condition,  and  of  their  great  guilt 
before  God.  Neither  you  nor  I  can  convince  any  man  of 
sin.  As  we  shall  see  later,  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  us  to  do 
the  work,  that  is.  He  does  the  work  through  us,  but  we  of 
ourselves  cannot  do  it.  He  must  do  it.  The  human  heart 
is  "  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked  " 
(Jer.  17:9),  and  there  is  nothing  in  which  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  the  human  heart  comes  out  more  dearly  than 
in  the  blindness  of  every  one  of  us  to  our  own  sinfulness. 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      43 

We  are  very  sharp-sighted  as  regards  the  sins  and  short- 
comings of  others,  but  very  bhnd  to  our  own.  And  the 
world  is  so  blind  to  its  sinfulness  that  no  one  but  the 
Holy  Spirit  can  ever  convince  the  world  of  sin,  that  is, 
can  ever  bring  men  to  see  how  sinful  they  are.  No  mat- 
ter how  great  our  natural  powers  of  reasoning  and  per- 
suasion may  be,  we  cannot  produce  real  conviction  of  sin 
by  all  our  arguments  and  all  our  pathetic  stories.  We  can 
get  men  to  cry  by  telling  pathetic  stories  (and  by  singing 
songs  about  "Tell  Mother  I'll  Be  There"),  but  mere 
shedding  of  tears  over  pathetic  stories  and  touching  songs 
is  not  conviction  of  sin.    Real  conviction  o^  sin  can 

ONI.Y  BK  PRODUCED  BY  THE  HoLY  SpIRIT. 

Here  is  where  many  of  us  make  our  greatest  mistake 
both  in  our  preaching  and  in  our  personal  work ;  we  try  to 
convince  men  of  sin,  we  try  to  do  the  Holy  Spirit's  work, 
we  try  to  do  what  He  alone  can  do,  and  of  course  we  fail. 

I  had  a  very  striking  illustration  of  this  some  years  ago 
in  our  own  church  in  Chicago.  One  night  one  of  our 
very  best  workers  came  to  me  in  the  after-meeting  and 
said,  "  I  have  a  man  over  here,  an  engineer  on  the  Pan- 
handle Railroad.  I  want  you  to  talk  with  him.  I  have 
been  talking  with  him  for  two  straight  hours  and  have 
made  no  impression  upon  him.  Won't  you  come  and 
speak  with  him  ? "  I  went  over  and  she  introduced  me 
to  the  man,  and  I  sat  down  beside  him  and  began  to  use 
the  Word  of  God  to  produce  conviction  of  sin,  but  all  the 
time  looking  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  carry  His  own  Word 
home.  I  had  not  talked  with  him  ten  minutes  when  the 
man  was  under  deep  conviction  of  sin  and  down  on  his 
knees  crying  to  God  for  mercy.  While  I  had  talked  with 
him  this  lady  who  had  been  talking  with  him  for  two 
bours  had  listened.    As  a  rule  that  is  a  very  unwise  thing 


44  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

to  do,  for  one  worker  to  listen  while  another  talks  with 
an  inquirer;  for  men  will  not  open  their  hearts,  nor  will 
they  get  the  real  help  they  need  while  a  third  party  is 
listening.  But  this  woman  had  a  purpose  in  doing  it,  and 
it  was  all  right  in  this  instance.  When  the  man  had  gone 
out  the  worker  turned  to  me  and  said,  "  Mr.  Torrey,  that 
is  very  strange."  I  said,  "  What  is  strange  ?  "  She  re- 
plied,  "  Do  you  know  that  you  used  exactly  the  same 
passages  of  Scripture  in  dealing  with  that  man  that  I 
used,  and  I  talked  with  him  two  hours  and  made  no  im- 
pression, and  you  talked  with  him  not  more  than  ten 
minutes  and  he  was  under  conviction  of  sin  and  crying 
to  God  for  mercy  ?  " 

Now,  really,  there  was  no  mystery  about  it,  nothing 
strange  about  it.  What  was  the  explanation  ?  I  believe  it 
was  this,  that  that  worker  for  once  had  made  a  mistake 
that  she  seldom  made,  that  of  trying  to  do  the  Holy 
Spirit's  work,  trying  to  convince  of  sin  the  man  with 
whom  she  was  dealing.  And  when  she  came  to  me  and 
said,  "  I  have  talked  with  this  man  two  hours  and  made 
no  impression  upon  him,"  the  thought  came  to  me  at 

once,  "If   Miss  W ,  one  of  my  best  workers,  has 

talked  with  this  man  for  two  hours  and  made  no  impres- 
sion, what  is  the  use  of  my  trying  to  talk  with  him  " ; 
and  in  a  sense  of  utter  helplessness  I  had  cast  myself 
upon  God,  upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  do  the  work,  and  He 
had  done  it. 

Oh,  let  us  never  forget  that  it  is  impossible  for  us  to 
convince  any  man  or  woman  of  sin,  and  in  all  our  preach- 
ing and  in  all  our  personal  work  let  us  constantly  look  to 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  do  the  work  through  us;  and  let  us 
also  be  sure  that  we  are  in  such  relations  to  God  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  can  do  His  work  through  us. 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      45 

But  while  we  cannot  convince  men  of  sin,  while  it  is 
utterly  impossible  for  us  to  do  it,  thank  God,  the  Holy 
Spirit  can  do  it.  And,  if  we  would  put  ourselves  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Holy  Spirit  for  Him  to  use  us  as  He  will, 
and  if  we  would  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  convince  men 
of  sin  through  us,  and  if  we  would  be  more  careful  to  be 
in  such  relations  vnth  God  that  the  Holy  Spirit  can  work 
through  us,  we  would  see  far  more  conviction  of  sin 
than  we  do. 

When  I  was  pastor  of  the  Moody  Church  in  Chicago, 
we  had  a  committee  of  the  church,  composed  of  some- 
thing like  twenty-five  members,  consisting  of  the  elders 
and  deacons  and  other  officers  of  the  church,  who  met 
together  for  supper  every  Friday  night,  and  after  supper 
went  over  the  roll  of  the  church,  keeping  a  constant 
watch-care  of  the  members  of  the  church,  and  discussed 
the  various  business  matters  of  the  Church.  At  one  of 
these  Friday  night  meetings,  after  we  had  been  discussing 
various  important  matters,  one  of  our  elders  said,  "  Breth- 
ren, I  am  not  at  all  satisfied  with  the  way  things  are  going 
in  our  church.  We  are  having  many  professed  conver- 
sions, and  we  are  having  many  accessions  to  the  Church, 
but  I  do  not  see  the  conviction  of  sin  that  I  would  like  to 
see,  and  I  propose  that,  instead  of  discussing  business  mat- 
ters any  further  tonight,  we  spend  the  time  in  prayer,  and 
that  we  meet  on  other  nights  also,  to  cry  to  God  to  send 
His  Holy  Spirit  among  us  in  convicting  power."  The 
whole  committee  saw  the  wisdom  of  the  suggestion,  and  it 
was  immediately  adopted ;  and  the  remainder  of  that  meet- 
ing was  spent  in  prayer,  and  for  a  number  of  nights  we 
met  together  for  prayer,  to  pray  definitely  for  the  convict- 
ing power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  work  of  the  church. 

Not  long  after  that,  one  Sunday  night,  when  I  arose  to 


46  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

preach  I  looked  around  to  my  left  and  saw  sitting  in  the 
front  seat  underneath  the  gallery,  right  beside  one  of  my 
deacons,  a  large,  well-dressed  man,  rather  over-dressed, 
with  a  great  big  diamond  shining  from  his  shirt  front. 
Something  about  the  man's  appearance  led  me  to  say  to 
myself,  "  I  believe  that  man  is  a  sporting  man."  It  turned 
out  later  that  he  was.  His  mother  kept  a  sporting-house 
in  Omaha  and  he  himself  was  in  Chicago  at  that  time, 
gambling.  I  said  to  myself  as  I  saw  him  sitting  there 
beside  the  deacon,  "  Deacon  Young  has  been  fishing  to- 
day."— It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  deacons  in  your  church 
who  go  fishing  on  Sunday,  fishing  for  souls. — Every  now 
and  then  as  I  preached  I  would  look  around  at  that  man. 
His  eyes  were  riveted  upon  me,  he  was  evidently  deeply 
interested.  When  I  went  down-stairs  to  the  after- 
meeting,  I  noticed  that  Deacon  Young  had  brought  him 
down  to  the  after-meeting,  and  when  I  went  into  an  inner 
room  for  a  Httle  closer  dealing  with  individuals,  I  saw 
that  Deacon  Young  brought  him  in  there.  We  were  a 
long  time  dealing  with  souls  that  night,  and  about  eleven 
o'clock  I  had  just  finished  dealing  with  the  last  one  I  ex- 
pected to  speak  to,  when  Deacon  Young  came  over  to  me 
and  said,  "  I've  got  a  man  over  here  I  want  you  to  talk 
with."  I  went  over;  it  was  this  big  sporting  man.  He 
was  greatly  agitated.  "  Oh,"  he  groaned  as  Deacon  Young 
introduced  me  to  him,  "  I  don't  know  what's  the  matter 
with  me.    I  feel  awful." 

Then  he  went  on  to  tell  me  this  story.  He  said,  "  My 
mother  keeps  a  sporting-house  in  Omaha,  and  I  am  here 
gambling  in  Chicago.  This  is  the  first  time  that  I  was 
ever  in  a  Protestant  service  in  my  life.  I  started  out  this 
afternoon  to  go  down  to  Cottage  Grove  Avenue  to  meet 
some   friends  down  there,  and  to   spend  the  afternoon 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      47 

gambling.  But  I  was  passing  by  Washington  Square  over 
yonder  and  some  of  the  young  men  of  your  church  were 
holding  a  meeting  in  the  open  air.  Among  them  I  saw  a 
man  named  Forbes  whom  I  had  known  in  a  life  of  sin, 
and  I  said  to  myself,  '  I  wonder  what  Forbes  is  doing  in 
a  meeting  like  this/  and  I  stopped  to  listen  to  what  he 
might  have  to  say.  I  was  not  much  impressed  and  started 
down  the  street  to  go  to  Cottage  Grove  Avenue.  I  had 
gone  about  two  blocks  when  some  mysterious  power  took 
hold  of  me  and  brought  me  back  to  that  meeting.  When 
the  meeting  was  over  this  gentleman  (pointing  to  Deacon 
Young)  got  hold  of  me  and  took  me  to  your  Yoke  Fel- 
lows' meeting  for  supper,  and  to  the  meeting  that  fol- 
lowed the  supper,  and  then  took  me  to  the  meeting 
up-stairs,  and  then  brought  me  down  here."  And  then  he 
uttered  a  groan,  "  Oh,  I  don't  know  what's  the  matter 
with  me.  I  never  felt  like  this  before.  I  feel  awful," 
and  he  trembled  like  a  leaf  and  groaned.  I  said,  "  I'll  tell 
you  what's  the  matter  with  you.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  con- 
victing you  of  sin."  And  that  powerful  man,  shaking  and 
trembling  with  deep  emotion,  that  man  who  had  never 
been  in  a  Protestant  service  before  in  all  his  life,  got 
down  on  his  knees  and  cried  to  God  for  mercy,  and  went 
out  with  the  joyous  realization  that  his  sins  were  all 
forgiven. 

Oh,  that  is  what  we  want  to  see  in  our  meetings.  That 
is  what  we  can  see  if  we  only  realize  our  own  utter  in- 
ability to  convince  men  of  sin,  and  believe  in  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  do  it,  and  look  to  Him  to  do  it,  and 
depend  upon  Him  to  do  it,  and  count  upon  Him  to  do  it, 
and  be  sure  that  we  ourselves  are  in  such  relations  to  God 
that  He  can  do  it  through  us. 

Let  me  give  you  another  illustration  of  the  convicting 


48  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Another  Sunday  night,  when 
I  arose  to  preach  in  the  Moody  Church,  as  I  looked  up 
into  the  gallery  to  my  left,  I  saw,  almost  directly  over 
where  the  other  man  had  sat,  another  very  loudly-dressed 
man.  He,  too,  had  a  great  diamond  shining  from  his 
shirt  front,  and  I  said  to  myself,  "  Ah,  there  is  another 
sporting  man."  It  turned  out  that  he  was  a  travelling 
man,  but  he  was  also  a  sporting  man.  As  I  preached,  he 
listened  with  the  closest  attention  and  kept  moving 
farther  and  farther  to  the  front  edge  of  his  seat,  his  eyes 
fastened  on  me.  In  the  midst  of  my  sermon,  with  no  in- 
tention whatever  of  drawing  the  net  at  that  time,  but 
merely  to  drive  a  point  home,  I  said,  "  Who  will  take 
Jesus  Christ  right  now  ?  "  The  words  had  scarcely  left 
my  lips  when  he  sprang  to  his  feet  and  his  voice  rang  out 
through  the  church  like  a  pistol  shot,  "  I  will."  I  stopped 
preaching  right  then  and  there — I  was  not  there  to  save 
sermons,  but  to  save  souls — and  I  gave  the  invitation  to 
all  who  would  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  their  Saviour  right 
then  and  there  to  rise  to  their  feet,  and  all  over  the  house 
men  and  women  and  young  people  sprang  to  their  feet. 

I  remember  one  man  especially,  an  old  colonel  from 
New  York  City,  belonging  to  one  of  the  richest  families 
in  New  York  City,  but  whose  family  had  sent  him  out 
to  Chicago  to  drink  himself  to  death,  and  that  was  exactly 
what  he  was  doing  in  one  of  the  Chicago  hotels.  He  was 
present  at  our  service  that  night,  a  man  over  seventy 
years  of  age.  He  was  one  of  the  first  men  on  his  feet, 
with  the  tears  running  down  his  rugged  cheeks,  and  he 
too  accepted  Christ  that  night. 

But  the  Holy  Spirit  has  power,  not  merely  to  convict 
of  sin  men  and  women  who  have  wandered  far  from  God, 
such  as  I  have  just  described;  He  has  power  to  produce 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      49 

the  deepest  conviction  of  sin  in  the  hearts  of  people  of 
culture  and  refinement,  men  and  women  living  upright 
lives,  men  and  women  of  most  attractive  and  winsome 
personality. 

I  was  sitting  one  day  in  my  office  in  the  Bible  Institute 
in  Chicago,  waiting  for  the  dinner-bell  to  ring,  when 
there  came  a  rap  at  my  door.  "  Come  in,"  I  said,  and 
there  entered  an  old  Scotch  gentleman  of  the  finest  type. 
He  was  a  man  over  eighty  years  of  age.  I  showed  him 
to  a  chair  and  almost  immediately  he  burst  into  tears. 
Then  he  said  to  me :  "  You  do  not  know  me  but  I  know 
you.  I  come  constantly  to  hear  you  preach,  and  I  have 
come  around  today  to  ask  you  if  you  think  there  is  any 
hope  for  a  sinner  who  has  sinned  so  greatly,  and  contin- 
ued so  long  in  sin,  as  I  have."  Seldom  have  I  seen  a  man 
under  deeper  conviction  of  sin  than  this  elderly  gentle- 
man who  had  always  lived  an  upright  life;  but  who  had 
never  accepted  Christ.  I  took  my  Bible  and  showed  him, 
on  the  one  hand,  what  the  Bible  had  to  say  about  him  and 
his  exceeding  sinfulness,  and  what  it  had  to  say,  on  the 
other  side,  about  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
Who  came  down  into  this  world  to  save  him,  and  upon 
Whom  all  his  sins  had  been  laid,  and  in  Whose  atoning 
death  he  might  then  and  there  find  pardon,  and  Who  had 
risen  again  and  was  now  a  living  Saviour  "  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost  "  anyone  who  came  to  God  through  Him. 
And  this  fine  old  Scotch  gentleman  knelt  with  me  in 
prayer  and  accepted  the  Ivord  Jesus  as  his  own  Saviour 
and  went  out  of  my  office  rejoicing  in  the  knowledge  that 
his  sins  were  all  forgiven. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  attending  a  Bible  Conference  in 
Atlanta  in  the  Baptist  Tabernacle.  At  the  close  of  one 
of  my  addresses,  a  prominent  Baptist  preacher,  a  scholarly 


50  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

man,  asked  for  a  private  interview  with  me.  This  min- 
ister was  a  graduate  of  a  leading  Southern  university. 
After  graduating  from  the  university  he  had  taken  a 
course  at  the  Louisville  Theological  Seminary,  and  after 
that  had  gone  to  Chicago  University  for  post-graduate 
study  and  had  made  so  fine  a  record  there  that  he  had 
been  sent  to  Germany  to  represent  the  University  there. 
He  was  now  pastor  of  a  leading  Baptist  church  in  Geor- 
gia. He  said  to  me :  "I  have  a  difficult  problem  on  hand 
and  I  wish  your  advice,  I  am  the  pastor  of  a  church  in 
a  university  town.  My  congregation  is  largely  made  up 
of  university  professors  and  their  families  and  university 
students.  They  are  charming  people.  Some  of  them  put 
me  to  shame  by  the  beauty  of  their  lives."  "  Now,"  he 
continued,  "  if  I  had  a  congregation  such  as  they  have  in 
the  Pacific  Garden  Mission  in  Chicago  of  down-and-outs 
and  bums  and  men  like  that,  it  would  be  easy  to  convict 
them  of  sin  (that  is  where  he  was  mistaken),  but  my 
problem  is  how  to  convict  of  sin  people  of  the  beautiful 
character  and  conduct  that  constitute  my  audiences." 
"  You  cannot  do  it,"  I  replied,  "  but  the  Holy  Spirit  can." 
Oh,  is  not  that  what  we  need  to  see  in  our  meetings 
here?  Is  that  not  what  we  need  to  see  in  our  regular 
services  in  our  churches  ?  Is  that  not  what  we  most  need 
to  see  over  all  our  land  today  in  all  our  efforts  to  lead 
men  to  a  better  life, — deep  conviction  of  sin  wrought  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost?  Well,  He  can  do  it;  He 
alone  can  do  it.  He  can  do  it  just  as  well  today  as  He 
ever  could;  and  He  will  if  we  only  look  to  Him  to  do  it. 
It  was  He  that  did  it  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  when  three 
thousand  men  and  women  were  pricked  in  their  heart  and 
cried  aloud  to  the  apostles,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what 
shall  we  do?"    If  Peter  had  preached  that  same  sermon 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      61 

the  day  before  Pentecost,  the  day  before  the  Holy  Spirit 
came,  there  would  have  been  no  such  results ;  but  now  he 
and  the  hundred  twenty  "  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy 
Spirit"  (Acts  2:4),  and  he  preached,  and  the  others  did 
personal  work,  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  and 
therefore  those  wonderful  results  followed.  Oh,  we  to- 
day need  to  believe  in  the  Holy  Spirit  and  believe  in  His 
power  to  convict  men  of  sin,  and  we  need  to  realize  our 
utter  dependence  upon  Him  and  to  cast  ourselves  upon 
Him,  and  look  to  Him  to  do  His  glorious  work;  and 
then  He  surely  will  do  it. 

Now  will  you  notice  just  what  sin  it  is  of  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  convicts  men.  Let  me  read  it  to  you  again. 
"  And  He,  when  He  is  come,  will  convict  the  world  in 
respect  of  sin  ...  of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on 
me."  The  sin  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit  convicts  men  and 
women  is  the  sin  of  unbelief  in  Jesus  Christ:  not  the  sin 
of  drunkenness,  not  the  sin  of  stealing,  not  the  sin  of 
adultery,  not  the  sin  of  murder,  nor  of  any  other  immor- 
ality or  crime,  but  just  the  sin  of  not  believing  on  the 
Son  of  God,  not  believing  on  Jesus  Christ. 

This  was  the  sin  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit  convicted  the 
three  thousand  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  The  Apostle 
Peter  had  just  said  in  Acts  2 :  Z6,  "  Therefore  let  all  the 
house  of  Israel  know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that 
same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and 
Christ."  Then  we  read  in  the  thirty-seventh  verse,  "  Now 
when  they  heard  this  (that  is,  had  heard  that  the  One 
whom  they  had  rejected  was  both  Lord  and  Christ),  they 
were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and  said  unto  Peter  and  to 
the  rest  of  the  apostles.  Men  and  brethren,  What  shall  we 
do  ?  "  Yes,  this  is  the  sin  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit  con- 
vinces men  and  women  today,  the  sin,  the  awful  sin,  of 


62  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

rejecting  Him,  of  not  believing  in  Him,  Whom  God  hath 
made  our  Divine  "  Lord  and  Christ," 

Now  that  is  the  very  sin  of  which  it  is  most  difficult  to 
convince  men.  The  average  unbeliever  does  not  look 
upon  his  unbelief  in  Jesus  Christ  as  sin  at  all.  Often- 
times he  is  proud  of  his  unbelief,  instead  of  being 
ashamed  of  it ;  and  he  looks  upon  it  as  a  mark  of  intel- 
lectual superiority.  He  struts  around  and  says,  "  Oh,  I 
am  an  agnostic,"  or,  "  Oh,  I  am  a  Unitarian,"  or,  "  Oh,  I 
am  a  sceptic,"  or,  **  Oh,  I  am  an  infidel."  Oftentimes 
they  are  all  the  more  proud  of  it  because  it  is  about  the 
only  mark  of  intellectual  superiority  that  they  possess. 
If  it  is  not  quite  as  bad  as  that,  and  people  are  not  proud 
of  their  unbelief,  at  the  very  worst  they  regard  it  as  a 
mere  misfortune  and  they  will  say,  "  Oh,  I  can't  believe. 
I  do  wish  I  could  believe,  but  I  can't.  Won't  you  please 
pity  me  because  I  can't  believe  ?  "  But  when  the  Spirit 
of  God  comes  to  a  man,  he  does  not  look  upon  unbelief 
in  Jesus  Christ  as  a  mark  of  intellectual  superiority, 
neither  does  he  look  upon  it  as  a  mere  misfortune:  he 
sees  clearly  that  it  is  the  worst,  the  most  decisive,  the 
most  daring,  and  the  most  damning  of  all  sins,  and  while 
he  may  bitterly  regret  his  dishonesty  or  his  impurity,  or 
whatever  other  sins  of  which  he  may  have  been  guilty,  he 
sees  and  feels  that  the  most  awful  of  his  sins  is  the  sin 
of  rejecting  the  glorious  Son  of  God.  He  sees  that  no 
sin  he  can  possibly  commit  against  a  fellow  man  can 
match  in  enormity  the  sin  of  rejecting  Him  Whom  God 
has  clearly  shown,  by  raising  Him  from  the  dead,  to  be 
His  own  eternal  Son ;  and  Him  Who  gave  up  heaven  and 
all  its  glory  to  come  down  to  earth  with  all  its  shame  to 
bear  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  cross.  But  you  and 
I  cannot  make  men  see  that ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  can,  and 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      53 

this  is  the  sin  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit  convicts  men,  the 
sin  of  unbeHef  in  Jesus  Christ. 

II.   The  Holy  Spirit  Convicting  the  World  of 
Righteousness 

But  the  Holy  Spirit  not  only  convicts  men  of  sin,  He 
also  "  Convicts  the  world  ...  of  righteousness ;"  not  of 
our  righteousness,  for  we  have  none,  but  of  Jesus  Christ's 
righteousness,  attested  by  His  resurrection  from  the  dead 
and  by  His  ascension  to  the  Father,  and  the  righteousness 
which  God  has  provided  for  us  in  Jesus  Christ. 

There  are  two  things,  and  two  things  only,  that  anyone 
needs  to  see  in  order  to  be  saved:  First,  he  needs  to  see 
his  own  sin  and  consequent  need ;  Second,  he  needs  to  see 
the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  righteousness 
which  God  has  provided  for  him  in  Christ ;  and  it  is  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  show  men  both  these  things. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  revivals  in  the  history  of 
the  Church,  one  in  which  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
was  most  clearly  and  wonderfully  manifested,  was  the 
Ulster  Revival  in  the  North  of  Ireland  in  the  years  1859 
and  1860.  Rev.  William  Gibson,  the  Moderator  of  the 
General  Assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  of  Ireland, 
in  the  year  1860,  has  written  a  very  full  history  of  that 
revival,  and  in  it  he  relates  many  instances  of  conversion. 
They  were  all  typical:  men  and  women  were  brought 
under  overwhelming  conviction  of  sin;  sometimes  this 
conviction  of  sin  lasted  for  days  (that,  of  course,  was 
unnecessary  if  Christ  had  been  properly  presented  at 
once)  ;  then  after  days  of  deep  and  awful  conviction  the 
light  would  break  in  upon  men  and  they  would  get  a 
wonderful  view  of  Jesus  Christ  and  just  believe  on  Him, 
and  enter  into  a  clear  experience  of  forgiveness  of  sin. 


54  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

and  of  wonderful  joy  in  the  Lord.  It  was  simply  the 
Holy  Spirit  convincing  men  of  sin,  and  also  convincing 
them  of  righteousness. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  at  the  meeting  of  the  Men's 
Brotherhoods  of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  of 
America,  held  at  Pittsburgh.  I  spoke  upon  the  subject 
of  prayer,  and  in  my  address  used  as  an  illustration  the 
Ulster  Revival.  A  gentleman,  a  member  of  the  church 
where  the  meetings  were  held,  had  sent  his  limousine  to 
my  hotel  to  take  me  to  the  meeting,  but  he  had  not  come 
himself;  but  just  sent  his  chauffeur.  When  I  went  out 
of  the  meeting  that  afternoon  to  hurry  to  another  meet- 
ing, the  gentleman  himself  was  at  the  door  and  said,  "  I 
am  going  to  ride  back  with  you."  We  had  scarcely  gotten 
into  the  automobile  when  he  turned  to  me  and  said,  "  I 
was  converted  in  that  Ulster  Revival  of  which  you  were 
speaking.  I  was  a  mere  lad.  I  was  out  in  the  field  and 
I  was  ridiculing  the  revival,  and  suddenly  I  was  struck  to 
the  ground  and  fairly  wallowed  in  the  furrow,  over- 
whelmed with  the  sense  of  my  sinfulness.  And  then,  as 
I  wallowed  there  in  the  furrow,  I  was  given  a  wonderful 
view  of  Jesus  Christ  dying  for  my  sins,  and  I  believed  on 
Him  and  was  saved  before  I  arose  out  of  the  furrow." 

Oh,  that  is  what  we  need  here  in  these  meetings,  men 
and  women  brought  under  overwhelming  conviction  of 
sin  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  then  the  Holy  Spirit  revealing 
Christ  to  them,  convincing  them  of  righteousness,  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  and  the  righteousness  which  God 
has  provided  for  us  in  Jesus  Christ. 

The  story  is  told  of  a  faithful  Scotch  minister  who 
was  travelling  through  Scotland  and  stopped  one  night  at 
an  inn.  The  innkeeper  came  to  him  and  asked  him  if  he 
would  conduct  family  worship.    He  replied  that  he  would 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      65 

if  the  innkeeper  on  his  part  would  bring  to  the  worship 
all  the  guests  in  the  house,  and  all  the  servants.  This 
the  innkeeper  agreed  to  do.  When  they  were  gathered  in 
the  big  room  for  the  service  the  minister  turned  to  the 
innkeeper  and  said,  "  Are  all  the  servants  here  ?  "  "  Yes," 
replied  the  innkeeper.  "  All  ? "  persisted  the  minister. 
"  Well,  not  all.  All  but  one.  There  is  one  girl  who 
works  down  in  the  kitchen  washing  the  pots  and  kettles, 
who  is  so  dirty  that  she  is  not  fit  to  come  to  the  meeting." 
The  minister  replied,  "  We  will  not  go  on  with  the  service 
until  she  comes,"  and  he  insisted  and  the  innkeeper  went 
for  this  servant  and  brought  her  in.  This  faithful  man 
of  God  became  greatly  interested  in  this  poor,  neglected 
creature;  and  when  the  others  were  passing  out  of  the 
room  he  asked  her  if  she  would  not  stay  for  a  few  min- 
utes. And  when  everyone  had  gone  he  said  to  her,  "  I 
want  to  teach  you  a  prayer  for  you  to  offer :  *  Lord,  show 
me  myself.'  Will  you  offer  it  every  day  ?  "  She  replied 
that  she  would.  The  next  day  the  minister  left,  but  a 
short  time  afterward  came  back  again  and  asked  the  inn- 
keeper about  this  girl.  The  innkeeper  replied,  "  She  is 
spoiled,  she  is  no  good  at  all.  She  is  weeping  all  the 
time,  weeping  day  and  night,  and  can  hardly  attend  to  her 
work."  The  minister  asked  to  see  her  again,  and  when 
she  came  in  the  minister  said,  "  Now  I  want  to  teach  you 
another  prayer.  '  Lord,  show  me  thyself.'  Now  pray 
that  prayer  every  day." 

The  minister  left  and  a  few  years  afterward  was 
preaching  one  Lord's  Day  morning  in  a  church  in  Glas- 
gow. At  the  close  of  the  service  a  neat,  trim  looking 
young  woman  came  up  to  him  and  said,  "  Do  you  recog- 
nize me  ?  "  He  replied,  "  No,  I  do  not."  She  said,  "  Do 
you  recall  holding  a  service  in  an  inn  and  speaking  to  one 


66  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

of  the  servants  afterward,  and  teaching  her  to  pray  the 
prayer,  '  Lord,  show  me  myself,'  and  afterward  teaching 
her  the  other  prayer,  '  Lord,  show  me  Thyself '  ?  "  "  Oh, 
yes,"  he  said,  "  I  remember  that."  "  Well,"  she  said,  "  I 
am  that  girl.  And  when  you  taught  me  that  first  prayer 
and  went  away,  and  I  asked  God  to  show  me  myself.  He 
gave  me  such  a  view  of  my  vileness  and  my  sin  that  I 
was  overwhelmed  with  grief  and  could  scarcely  sleep  at 
night  or  work  by  day  for  thinking  of  my  sins.  Then," 
she  said,  "  when  you  came  back  and  taught  me  the  second 
prayer,  *  Lord,  show  me  Thyself,'  God  gave  me  such  a 
view  of  Himself,  of  His  love  and  of  Jesus  Christ  dying 
on  the  cross  for  me,  that  all  the  burden  of  my  sin  rolled 
away  and  I  became  a  happy  Christian."  Yes,  those  are 
the  two  things  that  each  one  of  us  needs  to  see — our  own 
sin,  and  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  show  us  that, 
and  the  righteousness  of  Christ  and  the  righteousness  that 
God  has  provided  for  you  and  me  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  it 
is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  show  us  that  also. 

ni.  Thh;  Holy  Spirit  Convincing  mz  World  op 
Judgment 

But  there  is  still  a  third  thing  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
convicts  men,  and  that  is  of  judgment,  attested  by  the 
judgment  of  the  prince  of  this  world,  the  Devil.  There 
has  perhaps  never  been  a  day  in  the  whole  history  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  on  earth  when  the  world  needed 
more  to  be  convinced  of  "  judgment,"  than  today.  The 
average  man  has  but  little  faith  that  there  is  to  be  a  future 
judgment.  Indeed,  a  large  number  of  our  church  mem- 
bers, and  even  of  our  preachers,  have  lost  all  realization 
of  future  judgment  and  of  a  future  awful  hell.  A  great 
many  of  our  churches,  and  not  a  few  of  our  superficially 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      67 

orthodox  preachers,  have  really  given  up  all  belief  in  such 
a  hell  as  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Bible  taught,  and  even  those 
preachers  who  do  still  believe  in  it  theoretically  seldom,  if 
ever,  preach  it. 

When  the  question  was  being  discussed  of  inviting  me 

to  the  city  of  D ,  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  Secretary  of  that 

city  said,  "  We  do  not  want  Dr.  Torrey  to  hold  evangel- 
istic services  in  D ,  for  he  will  preach  hell,  and  we  do 

not  wish  to  have  hell  preached  here  in  D ."    Now  he 

had  sized  me  up  exactly  right.  I  certainly  would  preach 
hell,  for  Jesus  Christ  preached  it,  and  God,  in  our  day 
as  well  as  in  all  other  days,  greatly  blesses  the  preaching 
of  His  truth.  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  when  I  actually 
did  go  to  that  city,  that  same  secretary  was  about  the 
most  faithful  supporter  that  I  had  in  the  city.  But  his 
remark  at  that  time  shows  the  attitude  that  many  take 
today  on  this  subject.  Many  think  that  while  the  doctrine 
of  eternal  punishment  is  true,  that  it  ought  not  to  be 
taught  because  it  is  not  what  men  like  to  hear  today ;  just 
as  though  what  men  liked  to  hear  is  what  they  ought  to 
hear.  Very  frequently  the  truth  that  men  least  like  to 
hear  is  the  truth  that  they  most  need  to  hear. 

When  I  was  holding  meetings  in  the  city  of  Philadel- 
phia, in  the  North  Armory,  I  preached  two  sermons  on 
hell.  A  few  nights  afterward,  as  I  was  going  out  of  the 
armory  to  get  into  the  carriage  to  take  me  to  my  home 
about  three  miles  away,  I  saw  a  Presbyterian  minister 
who  had  a  church  near  my  home  going  out  of  the  armory, 
and  I  invited  him  to  get  into  the  carriage  with  my  daugh- 
ter and  myself  and  we  would  take  him  home.  After  we 
had  ridden  some  distance,  this  minister  turned  to  me  and 
said,  "  Dr.  Torrey,  one  of  my  elders  asked  me  a  question 
the  other  day.    He  asked  me  if  I  believed  in  hell  the  way 


68  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

you  preached  it.  I  replied,  '  Have  you  any  reason  for 
suspecting  that  I  don't  ? '  *  No,'  he  said,  '  I  have  no 
reason  for  suspecting  that  you  don't,  but  do  you  ?  '  Then 
I  rephed,  *  Yes,  I  do.  I  believe  every  word  that  Dr. 
Torrey  preached  on  the  subject.'  Then  my  elder  said, 
'  Then  why  don't  you  preach  it  ? ' "  Yes,  why  don't  we 
preach  it?  We  certainly  need  to  preach  it.  The  world 
needs  to  hear  it,  and  God  blesses  the  preaching  of  it. 

Now  when  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  to  men  they  believe 
in  "  judgment."  I  doubt  if  any  minister  ever  had  more 
difficulties  with  the  doctrine  of  future  punishment  as 
taught  in  the  Bible  than  I  did.  I  would  come  up  to  this 
doctrine  time  and  time  again,  and  would  back  off  every 
time  I  came  up  to  it.  In  my  early  ministry  I  succeeded 
in  convincing  myself  that  the  Bible  did  not  teach  ever- 
lasting punishment,  that  while  it  taught  that  there  would 
be  a  hell,  and  an  awful  hell,  and  a  hell  that  might  last 
through  centuries  or  even  thousands  of  years,  that  at  last 
"  somehow,  somewhere,  somewhen,"  all  men,  and  even 
the  Devil  himself,  would  be  brought  to  repentance  and 
hell  would  therefore  cease  to  be.  So  I  believed  and  so  I 
taught.  But  the  time  came  when  I  could  no  longer  recon- 
cile the  teachings  of  the  Bible  with  this  position,  and  so 
I  gave  it  up,  and  theoretically  I  believed  in  an  everlasting 
hell;  but  even  after  that,  every  time  I  came  up  to  the 
doctrine,  as  I  say,  I  would  back  off,  it  seemed  as  if  I 
could  not  possibly  have  it  that  way.  But  one  night,  after 
I  had  gone  to  Chicago  I  was  waiting  upon  God  that  I 
might  know  the  Holy  Spirit  in  a  fuller  way  than  I  had 
ever  known  Him  before,  that  I  might  be  "  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit "  in  a  more  thorough-going  way  than  I 
ever  had  been  before.  And  that  night  God  heard  my 
prayer,  and  such  a  filling  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  such  a 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      59 

being  taken  possession  of  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  I  had 
never  known  before,  came  to  me,  and  with  that  new  in- 
filling of  the  Holy  Spirit  there  came  such  a  revelation  of 
the  infinite  majesty  and  glory  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  won- 
drous Son  of  God,  and  such  a  revelation  of  the  awfulness 
of  the  sin  of  rejecting  such  a  glorious  Saviour  as  that, 
that  I  saw  at  once  that  if  men  would  not  accept  this, 
glorious  Saviour,  then  all  the  most  terrible  statements  to 
be  found  in  the  Word  of  God  as  to  the  future  eternal 
destiny  of  those  who  would  not  accept  Jesus  Christ,  were 
demanded  by  the  very  necessities  of  the  case,  and  from 
that  day  to  this  I  have  never  had  the  slightest  difficulty 
with  the  doctrine  of  future  punishment  taught  in  the 
Bible.  The  Holy  Spirit  Himself  had  convinced  me  of 
judgment.    God  grant  that  He  may  you  also. 

IV.  The;  Holy  Spirit  Convinces  the  World  Only 

Through  Believers  in  Jesus  Christ 
To  sum  it  all  up  then ;  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  convict  men  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judg- 
ment. It  is  not  our  work,  but  His.  But  please  notice 
very  carefully  that,  while  it  is  The  Holy  Spirit  Who 
convicts  men  oe  sin,  and  oe  righteousness,  and  oe 

JUDGMENT,  He  does  IT  THROUGH  US,  «.  e.,  THROUGH 
THOSE    WHO   ALREADY   BELIEVE   ON   JESUS    ChriST.      This 

thought  comes  out  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  verses: 
"  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the  truth :  It  is  expedient  for 
you  that  I  go  away ;  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter 
will  not  come  unto  you;  but  if  I  go,  I  will  send  Him  unto 
you  (that  is,  to  believers).  And  He,  when  He  is  come 
(that  is,  come  unto  you,  come  unto  believers),  will  con- 
vict the  world  in  respect  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness, 
and  of  judgment,"  that  is  to  say,  the  Holy  Spirit  comes 


60  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

to  the  believer,  and  through  the  beUever  to  whom  He 
comes  convinces  the  unsaved.  As  far  as  we  are  told  in 
the  Bible,  the  Holy  Spirit  has  no  way  of  getting  at  the 
unsaved  except  through  the  channel  of  those  who  are 
already  saved;  He  comes  to  the  believer  and  through  the 
believer  convinces  the  unsaved  of  sin.  What  a  solemn 
thought  that  is.  If  we  realized  that  the  Holy  Spirit  could 
only  reach  the  unbeliever  through  us,  us  who  are  already 
saved,  would  we  not  be  more  careful  to  present  to  the 
Holy  Spirit  an  unchoked  channel  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
work  through? 

Every  conversion  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles 
was  through  human  instrumentality,  not  one  single  con- 
version is  recorded  there  that  was  not  by  human  in- 
strumentality. Take,  for  example,  the  conversion  of 
Cornelius.  If  there  was  ever  a  miraculous  conversion  it 
was  that!  Why,  we  are  told  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  that  an  angel  appeared  to  Cornelius 
and  spoke  to  him,  but  the  angel  did  not  tell  Cornelius 
what  to  do  to  be  saved.  On  the  contrary,  the  angel  said 
to  him,  "  Send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  one  Simon, 
whose  surname  is  Peter;  who  shall  tell  thee  words 
whereby  thou  and  all  thy  house  shall  be  saved  "  (Acts 
11:13,  14).  In  other  words,  not  even  an  angel  could 
show  him  the  way  of  life,  it  must  be  a  saved  fellow-man, 
and  a  Spirit-filled  fellow-man,  who  did  it. 

Take  the  conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus.  If  ever  there 
was  a  miraculous  conversion  it  was  certainly  that,  when 
the  risen  and  ascended  Lord  Jesus  Himself  appeared  to 
him,  he  actually  saw  Jesus  in  the  glory,  but  the  Lord 
Jesus  did  not  tell  him  what  to  do  to  be  saved.  Paul 
cried,  "What  shall  I  do.  Lord?"  (Acts  22:10).  And 
the  Lord  said  unto  him,  "  Arise  and  go  into  Damascus, 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      61 

and  there  it  shall  be  told  thee  of  all  things  which  are  ap- 
pointed for  thee  to  do."  The  Lord  did  not  tell  him  what 
to  do  to  be  saved,  "  a  certain  "  man  "  named  Ananias  " 
had  to  be  brought  upon  the  scene,  and  Ananias  told  him 
what  to  do,  saying,  "  Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  (Acts 
9: 10;  22: 16). 
As  far  as  God  tells  us  in  His  Word,  The  HoIvY  Ghost 

HAS  NO  WAY  OF  GEJTTING  AT  THE  UNSAVED  WORLD  EXCEPT 

THROUGH  US  WHO  ARE  ALREADY  SAVED.  This  IS  exceed- 
ingly solemn.  Oh,  if  we  only  realized  it,  would  we  not 
be  more  careful  to  present  to  the  Holy  Spirit  an  unob- 
structed channel  for  Him  to  work  through !  Do  you 
take  that  in?    Does  it  mean  you? 

You  wives  who  have  unconverted  husbands.  You  are 
praying  for  their  conversion,  you  are  praying  that  God 
will  send  His  Holy  Spirit  to  convict  them  of  sin  and  show 
them  their  need  of  Christ ;  but  the  Holy  Spirit  can  get  at 
them  only  through  some  saved  person,  and  most  likely 
only  through  you,  for  you  are  the  nearest  to  them.  And 
many  and  many  a  man  is  lost  because  his  wife  is  such  an 
obstructed  channel  that  the  Holy  Spirit  cannot  work 
through  her,  and  so  her  husband  is  lost  forever. 

One  time  when  Mr.  Moody  was  holding  meetings  in 
Philadelphia  a  lady  came  to  him  and  asked  him  to  pray 
for  her  husband.  He  replied,  "  No,  I'll  not  pray  for  your 
husband."  "  What !  "  she  exclaimed,  "  not  pray  for  my 
husband  ?  Do  you  not  pray  for  the  unsaved  ?  "  "  Yes, 
I  do,  but  I  will  not  pray  for  your  husband."  "  Why 
not  ?  "  she  asked.  "  Because,"  Mr.  Moody  replied,  "  I 
believe  you  yourself  are  the  greatest  obstacle  there  is  in 
the  way  of  the  conversion  of  your  husband."  The  woman 
was  greatly  provoked  and  went  to  her  husband  after  she 


62  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

got  home  and  said,  "  Mr.  Moody  insulted  me  this  after- 
noon." "  What,"  replied  her  husband,  "  Mr.  Moody  in- 
sulted you?  I  thought  Mr.  Moody  was  a  gentleman,  I 
did  not  suppose  he  would  insult  any  lady."  "  Yes," 
she  replied,  "  Mr.  Moody  insulted  me  this  afternoon." 
"  What  did  Mr.  Moody  say  to  you  ?  "  her  husband  asked. 
"  He  said  I  was  the  greatest  obstacle  there  was  in  the 
way  of  your  conversion."  "  Well,  ain't  you  ?  "  said  her 
husband.  And  some  of  you  wives  here  today  who  are 
trying  to  get  people  to  pray  for  the  conversion  of  your 
husband,  you  who  are  deeply  concerned  for  the  conver- 
sion of  your  husband,  you  yourself  are  the  greatest  ob- 
stacle there  is  in  the  way  of  the  conversion  of  your  hus- 
band. The  Holy  Spirit  has  no  way  of  getting  at  your 
husband  except  through  you,  and  unless  you  get  thor- 
oughly right  with  God  yourself  and  become  an  unob- 
structed channel  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit  can  work, 
your  husband  will  be  lost  forever. 

When  I  was  holding  meetings  in  Omaha,  the  pastor  of 
the  leading  IMethodist  Church  in  the  city  became  deeply 
concerned  about  the  salvation  of  one  of  the  most  promi- 
nent members  of  his  congregation,  a  leading  business 
man,  and  he  called  upon  him  at  his  store.    The  gentleman 

invited  Dr.  S up  to  his  private  office,  and  Dr.  S 

commenced  to   talk   to  him  about  his   soul.     The  man 

listened  and  then  said,  "  Dr.  S ,  what  do  you  want 

me  to  be  like?  Do  you  want  me  to  be  like  my  wife,  she 
is  a  member  of  your  church?  Do  you  want  me  to  be  like 
her?  I  have  seen  her  greatly  excited  over  a  whist  drive. 
I  have  never  seen  her  nearly  so  excited  over  a  prayer- 
meeting  in  all  her  life  as  I  have  seen  her  over  a  whist 
drive.    Do  you  want  me  to  be  like  her  ?  " 

But  then  again  there  are  many  of  us  who  will  not  even 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      63 

offer  ourselves  at  all  to  the  Holy  Spirit  as  an  instrument 
for  Him  to  work  through.  Oh,  how  many  there  are  here 
in  this  audience  today  whose  lips  the  Holy  Spirit  is  trying 
to  get  the  use  of,  but  you  will  not  give  Him  the  use  of 
your  lips.  He  is  trying  to  reach  someone  through  you, 
but  you  will  not  allow  Him  to. 

I  once  read  of  a  young  lady  who  died  in  New  York 
City.  A  Presbyterian  minister  was  invited  to  conduct  the 
funeral  services;  he  was  not  her  own  pastor;  I  do  not 
know  why  her  own  pastor  was  not  invited.  This  minister 
who  was  to  conduct  the  services  went  first  to  her  own 
pastor  and  asked  him,  "  Was  Mary  a  Christian  ?  "  Her 
pastor  replied,  "  I  do  not  know.  Three  weeks  ago  I  had 
a  very  solemn  impression  that  I  ought  to  speak  to  Mary 
about  her  soul,  but  I  put  it  off,  I  said,  '  Mary  is  in  my 
congregation  every  Sunday  and  I  can  speak  to  her  when 
I  will,'  and  I  put  it  off  and  now  Mary  is  dead  and  I  do 
not  know  whether  Mary  was  a  Christian  or  not."  He 
next  went  to  her  Sunday  School  teacher  and  asked  her 
Sunday  School  teacher,  "  Was  Mary  a  Christian  ?  "  The 
Sunday  School  teacher  replied,  "  I  do  not  know.  Two 
weeks  ago  I  had  a  profound  impression  that  I  ought  to 
speak  to  Mary  about  her  soul,  but  I  put  it  off.  I  said, 
*  Mary  is  in  my  class  every  Sunday  and  I  can  speak  to 
her  when  I  will,'  and  I  put  it  off.  And  now  Mary  is 
dead  and  I  don't  know  whether  Mary  was  a  Christian  or 
not."  He  next  went  to  her  own  mother  and  said  to  her, 
"  Was  Mary  a  Christian  ?  "  "I  do  not  know.  A  week 
ago  I  had  a  deep  impression  that  I  ought  to  speak  to 
Mary  about  her  soul,  but  I  put  it  off.  I  said,  '  Here  is 
Mary  in  the  house  with  me  all  the  time.  I  meet  her  three 
times  a  day  at  the  table.  I  can  speak  to  her  when  I  will,' 
and  I  put  it  off,  and  now  Mary  is  dead  and  I  do  not  knovf 


64  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

whether  Mary  was  a  Christian  or  not."  Three  pairs  of 
lips  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  trying  to  get  the  use  of,  the 
three  pairs  of  lips  that  one  would  naturally  think  would 
be  most  easily  at  His  disposal,  her  minister's,  her  Sunday 
School  teacher's  and  her  mother's,  and  not  one  of  the 
three  would  let  the  Holy  Spirit  have  the  use  of  their  lips, 
and  so  Mary  died  unsaved.  When  I  got  back  from  going 
around  the  world  and  spent  a  month  with  my  church  in 
Chicago,  I  related  this  incident  one  Sunday  morning. 
There  was  in  my  audience  a  young  woman  who  had  a 
class  of  girls  from  about  fourteen  years  of  age  up.  What 
I  said  made  a  deep  impression  upon  her,  and  when  she 
went  before  her  class  that  Sunday  afternoon  she  spoke 
to  every  member  of  her  class  about  accepting  Christ. 
Among  those  who  did  accept  Christ  was  a  girl  fourteen 
years  of  age,  if  I  remember  correctly,  apparently  per- 
fectly well  and  strong.  Before  the  next  Sunday  came 
round  that  girl's  body  was  lying  out  in  the  cemetery. 
Oh,  how  fortunate  that  that  young  woman  that  morning 
gave  her  lips  to  Jesus  Christ  to  use.  Have  you  given 
yours?  And  are  you  listening  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
show  you  to  whom  to  go?  And  are  you  depending  upon 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  through  you?  And  are  you  an 
unobstructed  channel? 

Let  me  beseech  you,  every  one  of  you  that  professes 
to  be  a  Christian,  to  put  your  lips  today  at  the  Holy 
Spirit's  disposal  for  Him  through  you  to  convict  whom- 
soever He  will  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of 
judgment.  And  be  sure  that  you  are  fully  surrendered 
to  God  and  that  you  have  thoroughly  put  out  of  your 
life  everything  that  would  hinder  the  Holy  Spirit  work- 
ing through  you,  and  that  you  are  an  unobstructed 
channel   for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  through;  and  be 


HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  MEN  OF  SIN      65 

listening,  listening  sharply,   for  the  Holy  Spirit's  direc- 
tions as  to  whom  to  speak. 

When  Mr.  Alexander  and  I  were  holding  meetings  in 
Brighton,  England,  in  the  great  Dome,  one  afternoon  one 
of  our  workers  went  away  from  the  afternoon  meeting 
and  went  imo  a  restaurant  for  tea  before  coming  back 
to  the  night  meeting.  While  he  was  sitting  at  the  table 
he  had  a  deep  impression  that  he  ought  to  speak  to  the 
waiter  about  his  soul,  but  he  put  it  off.  It  seemed  to  him 
as  if  it  would  be  a  strange  thing  to  speak  to  a  man  who 
was  waiting  upon  him  about  accepting  Christ.  He 
finished  his  meal  and  went  outside,  but  his  impression 
that  he  should  have  spoken  to  that  waiter  was  so  deep 
that  he  waited  outside  for  the  waiter  to  come  out,  intend- 
ing to  talk  to  him  then.  When  he  had  waited  there  for 
some  time,  the  proprietor  of  the  restaurant  came  out  and 
began  to  put  up  the  shutters,  and  asked  him  what  he  was 
waiting  for.  He  replied,  "  I  am  waiting  to  speak  to  that 
man  that  waited  upon  me  at  the  table."  The  proprietor 
said,  "  You  will  never  speak  to  that  man  again.  Immedi- 
ately after  serving  you  he  went  up  to  his  room  and  blew 
his  brains  out."  Oh,  men  and  women,  we  live  in  a  solemn 
world,  and  we  need  to  be  very  careful  how  we  walk.  We 
need  to  be  ready  for  God  to  use  us  any  moment,  and  to 
respond  to  His  call.  The  Holy  Spirit  alone;  con- 
vinces MEN  OF  SIN,  AND  OE  RIGHTEOUSNESS,  AND  01? 
JUDGMENT;  BUT  HE  DOES  IT  THROUGH  US — ^HCver  for- 
get that. 


Ill 

THE  REGENERATING  WORK  OF  THE  HOLY 
SPIRIT 

YESTERDAY  we  were  studying  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  convicting  men  of  sin.  We  saw 
that  it  was  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  convict 
men  of  sin  and  of  righteousness  and  of  judgment.  Today 
we  shall  study  further  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I.  The  Holy  Spirit  Bearing  Witness  to  the  Truth 
Regarding  Jesus  Christ 

Turn  first  of  all  to  Jno.  15:26,  27:  "But  when  the 
Comforter  is  come,  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the 
Father,  even  the  Spirit  of  truth,  which  proceedeth  from 
the  Father,  He  shall  hear  witness  of  Me:  and  ye  also 
bear  witness  because  ye  have  been  with  Me  from  the 
beginning."  Here  we  see  that  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  bear  witness  concerning  Jesus  Christ.  All  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  centres  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is 
His  work  to  magnify  Christ  to  us,  to  glorify  Christ  by 
taking  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  declaring  them  unto 
us  (cf.  ch.  16:14). 

It  is  only  through  the  direct  testimony  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  individual  heart  that  any  man  ever  comes 
to  a  true  and  living  and  saving  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ 
(cf.  1  Cor.  12:3).  No  amount  of  listening  to  the  testi- 
mony of  men  regarding  Jesus  Christ,  and  no  amount  even 

66 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     67 

of  studying  what  the  Scriptures  have  to  say  about  Christ 
Jesus,  will  ever  lead  anyone  to  a  true  and  living  and 
saving  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  unless  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  living  Spirit  of  God,  takes  the  testimony  of  men,  or 
takes  the  testimony  of  the  written  Word,  and  interprets 
it  directly  to  our  hearts. 

It  is  true  that  the  Holy  Spirit's  testimony  regarding 
Jesus  Christ  is  found  in  the  Bible.  In  fact,  that  is  exactly 
what  the  whole  Bible  is,  the  Holy  Spirit's  testimony  to 
Jesus  Christ.  The  whole  testimony  of  the  Book  centres 
in  Jesus  Christ.  As  we  read  in  Rev.  19 :  10,  "  The  testi- 
mony of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  But  while  that 
is  true,  unless  the  living  Spirit,  Who  lives  and  works 
today,  takes  His  Own  testimony  as  it  is  found  in  the 
written  Word,  the  Bible,  and  interprets  it  directly  to  the 
heart  of  the  individual  and  makes  it  a  living  thing  in  the 
heart  of  the  individual,  he  will  not  come  to  a  real,  living, 
saving  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ. 

If,  therefore,  you  wish  men  to  get  a  true  view  of  Jesus 
Christ,  such  a  view  of  Him  that  they  will  believe  on  Him 
and  be  saved,  you  must  seek  for  them  the  testimony  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  you  must  put  yourself  in  such  relations 
to  God  that  the  Holy  Spirit  can  bear  His  testimony 
through  you.  No  amount  of  mere  argument  and  persua- 
sion on  your  part  will  ever  bring  anyone  to  a  living  knowl- 
edge of  Jesus  Christ. 

And  if  you  wish  to  have  a  true  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ  yourself,  it  is  not  enough  that  you  study  the  Word 
and  what  the  Spirit  of  God  has  said  about  Jesus  Christ  in 
the  Word:  you  must  seek  for  yourself  the  testimony  of 
the  Spirit  of  God  directly  to  your  own  heart  through  His 
Word,  and  put  yourself  in  such  relations  to  God  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  can  bear  His  testimony  directly  to  your  heart. 


68  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

The  attitude  that  you  must  take  toward  God  in  order  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  may  bear  His  testimony  to  Jesus  Christ 
directly  to  your  heart  is  the  attitude  of  absolute  surrender 
to  the  will  of  God ;  for  Peter  is  recorded  as  saying  in 
Acts  5 :  32,  "  We  are  witnesses  of  these  things ;  and  so  is 
the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey 
Him"  And  we  read  these  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Himself  in  Jno.  7:17,  "If  any  man  willeth  to  do  His 
•mil,  he  shall  know  of  the  teaching,  whether  it  is  of  God, 
or  whether  I  speak  from  Myself." 

This  explains  why  it  is  that  one  may  read  the  Gospel 
of  John  time  and  time  again  and  not  come  to  a  saving 
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  though  that  Gospel  was 
written  for  the  specific  purpose  of  bringing  men  to  a 
saving  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  writer  himself 
tells  us  in  the  twentieth  chapter  and  the  thirty-first  verse, 
"  These  are  written  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God;  and  that  believing  ye  may  have 
life  in  His  name."  But  if  the  same  man  will  surrender 
his  will  to  God  before  beginning  to  read  the  Gospel,  and 
will  ask  God  each  time  he  reads  to  send  His  Holy  Spirit 
to  interpret  to  his  heart  the  things  that  he  reads,  he  can- 
not read  the  Gospel  through  even  once,  without  coming 
to  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and 
through  believing  "  have  life  in  His  Name." 

I  have  seen  this  illustrated  many  a  time.  One  Sunday 
night  as  I  was  going  out  of  the  inquiry  meeting  in  the 
Moody  Church  a  young  man  was  waiting  for  me  in  the 
vestibule.  I  think  he  had  already  been  a  Church  member. 
He  said  to  me,  "  Mr.  Torrey,  I  don't  believe  anything. 
Can  you  tell  me  how  to  believe  ?  "  "  Don't  you  believe 
anything  at  all  ?  Don't  you  believe  there  is  a  God  ?  '* 
"  Yes,"  he  said,  "  I  believe  there  is  a  God,  but  I  am  in 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     69 

doubt  about  everything  else."  "  All  right,"  I  said,  "  if 
you  believe  there  is  a  God  you  ought  to  surrender  your 
will  to  God,  then  begin  at  the  first  chapter  of  John,  first 
verse,  read  a  few  verses  at  a  time,  not  too  many,  and  pay 
close  attention  to  what  you  read  and  each  time  before  you 
read  pray  this  prayer,  '  Oh  God,  show  me  what  of  truth 
there  is  in  these  verses  I  am  about  to  read,  and  what  Thou 
showest  me  to  be  true  I  promise  to  take  my  stand  upon/ 
And  read  on,  day  after  day  consecutively  until  you  get 
through  the  Gospel.  Will  you  do  it  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  re- 
plied, "  I  will."  "  One  thing  more,  when  you  get  through 
the  Gospel,  come  and  report  to  me."  About  two  weeks 
after  when  I  went  out  of  prayer-meeting  one  night  I  met 
him  in  the  vestibule  again.  He  said,  "  I  have  come  to 
report."  I  said,  "  What  is  your  report  ? "  He  said, 
"  Don't  you  know?  "  "  Yes,"  I  replied,  "  I  think  I  do." 
"  Well,"  he  said,  "  my  doubts  are  all  gone.  I  do  believe 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and  I  do  believe 
in  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God."  Why  did  he  now 
believe  when  he  did  not  believe  before,  although  he  had 
read  the  same  book  through  time  and  time  again?  He 
believed  now  because  he  had  put  himself  in  such  a  relation 
to  God  that  the  Holy  Spirit  could  bear  His  testimony 
through  His  Own  written  Word. 

This  also  explains  why  it  is  that  one  who  has  been  long 
in  the  darkness  concerning  Jesus  Christ  so  quickly  comes 
to  see  the  truth,  when  he  surrenders  his  will  to  God.  It 
explains  an  experience  that  pretty  much  every  thoughtful 
worker  has  had:  You  sit  down  beside  an  inquirer  who 
really  desires  to  know  the  truth  and  be  saved,  and  you 
take  your  Bible  and  show  him  from  some  of  the  plainest 
statements  of  the  Word  just  what  one  must  do  to  be 
saved,  namely,  to  believe  on  Jesus  Christ;  and  you  take 


70  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

the  truth  about  Jesus  Christ's  atoning  death  and  about 
His  resurrection,  and  about  His  being  a  Deliverer  from 
the  power  of  sin  today,  and  you  show  it  to  him  from  some 
of  the  plainest  statements  of  the  Bible  along  those  lines ; 
and  you  make  the  way  of  life  as  plain  as  day  and  you  go 
over  it,  and  over  it,  and  over  it ;  but  still  the  inquirer  does 
not  see  it  at  all  but  sits  there  dumb,  puzzled,  perplexed, 
bewildered,  and  he  very  likely  tells  you,  "  I  cannot  see  it." 
Yet  you  have  made  it  as  plain  as  day.  That  is,  to  you  it 
is  as  plain  as  day.  But  it  is  not  plain  to  him  and  some- 
times you  are  tempted  to  think  that  the  inquirer  is  in- 
tellectually stupid.  Not  at  all.  He  is  perfectly  clear 
about  other  things.  And  then  you  go  on  and  on,  and  you 
go  over  it  again  and  again,  and  suddenly  a  new  light  comes 
into  the  inquirer's  face  and  he  exclaims,  "  I  see  it — I  see 
it,"  and  he  believes  on  Jesus  Christ  and  is  saved  right 
then  and  there.  Now  what  has  happened?  Simply  this, 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  has  borne  His  testimony  directly  to 
that  inquirer's  heart. 

So  in  all  our  dealing  with  inquirers  we  must  not  only 
make  sure  that  we  give  them  the  right  Scripture  to  show 
them  their  need  of  a  Saviour  and  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
just  the  Saviour  they  need,  we  must  see  to  it  also  that 
we  are  looking  to  the  Spirit  of  God  to  bear  His  witness 
to  Jesus  Christ  through  us  and  that  we  are  in  such  a  rela- 
tion to  God  that  the  Holy  Spirit  can  bear  His  witness  to 
Jesus  Christ  through  us. 

Take  what  occurred  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The 
Apostle  Peter  bore  his  testimony  to  Jesus  Christ,  and 
gave  the  testimony  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit,  through  Peter's  testimony  and  that  of 
the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  bore  His  testimony  to 
Jesus  Christ,  and  so  men  saw  and  believed,  and  in  that 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     71 

day  "  there  were  added  unto  them  about  three  thousand 
souls."  Now,  if  the  Apostle  Peter  had  given  just  the 
same  testimony  the  day  before  and  had  given  just  the 
same  Scriptures  the  day  before  (that  is,  the  day  before 
Pentecost,  the  day  on  which  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given), 
there  would  have  been  no  such  results;  but  the  time  had 
come  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  do  His  work  and  Peter  had 
been  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  "  when  Pentecost  was 
fully  come,"  and  now  not  only  did  Peter  give  his  testi- 
mony, but  the  living  Spirit  of  God,  Who  had  taken  pos- 
session of  Peter,  gave  His  testimony,  and  men  saw  and 
believed. 

Mr.  Moody  used  to  put  it  in  this  graphic  way.  He 
said :  "  Peter  said,  '  Therefore  let  all  the  house  of  Israel 
know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus, 
whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and  Christ '  (Acts 
2 :  36) ,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  said,  *  Amen,'  and  men  saw 
and  believed." 

At  one  time  when  I  was  superintendent  of  the  Bible 
Institute  in  Chicago  I  lived  in  the  Bible  Institute,  and 
every  night  I  would  try  to  get  home  from  my  own  meet- 
ings before  the  students  got  home  from  the  various  places 
they  had  gone  to  help  in  the  work,  and  I  would  meet 
them  on  the  stairway  and  we  would  talk  over  the  experi- 
ences of  the  night  together.  One  night  a  large  company 
of  them  came  back  from  the  Pacific  Garden  Mission  full 
of  enthusiasm  and  joy.  "  Oh,"  they  said,  "  Mr.  Torrey, 
we  had  a  wonderful  time  at  the  Pacific  Garden  Mission 
tonight.  Crowds  of  men  came  to  the  altar,  all  kinds  of 
drunkards  and  outcasts,  and  were  saved."  The  next  day 
I  met  Harry  Monroe,  who  was  at  that  time  in  charge  of 
the  Pacific  Garden  Mission.  I  said,  "  Harry,  the  boys 
tell  me  you  had  a  wonderful  time  at  the  Pacific  Garden 


72  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Mission  last  night."  He  replied,  "  Mr.  Torrey,  do  you 
want  to  know  the  secret  of  it?  I  just  held  up  Jesus 
Christ  and  it  pleased  the  Holy  Spirit  to  illumine  the  face 
of  Jesus  as  I  held  Him  up  and  men  saw  and  believed." 
I  thought  that  was  a  beautiful  way  of  putting  it. 

And  so  when  you  and  I  preach,  or  when  we  do  per- 
sonal work  or  teach,  we  should  hold  up  Jesus  Christ  as 
He  is  presented  in  the  Scriptures  and  then  look  to  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  illumine  His  face,  and  to  be  very  sure  we 
are  in  such  a  relation  to  God  and  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
so  dependent  upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  counting  upon 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  do  His  work,  that  He  can  do  it,  and 
then  men  will  see  and  believe. 

Let  me  repeat  it  in  order  that  we  may  be  sure  that  you 
get  it,  if  you  wish  men  to  see  the  truth  about  Jesus  Christ 
do  not  depend  upon  your  own  powers  of  expression  or 
persuasion,  or  upon  your  own  knowledge  of  Scripture 
and  just  how  to  use  it,  but  cast  yourself  upon  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  a  realization  of  your  utter  helplessness,  and  look 
to  Him  to  bear  His  testimony  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  see  to 
it  also  that  those  you  are  dealing  with  put  themselves  in 
such  an  attitude  toward  God  that  the  Holy  Spirit  can 
testify  to  them,  and  see  to  it  also  that  you  are  in  such  a 
relation  to  God,  so  fully  surrendered  to  Him,  so  separated 
from  all  that  hinders  His  work,  that  He  can  bear  His 
testimony  through  you.  In  the  Holy  Spirit's  testimony  to 
Jesus  Christ  lies  the  cure  for  all  ignorance  concerning 
Christ,  and  all  scepticism  concerning  Christ. 

II.  Thi^  H01.Y  Spirit  Regenerating  Men 
Now  let  me  call  your  attention  to  another  wonderful, 
gracious  and  glorious  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    Turn  in 
your  Bibles  to  Jno.  3:3-5:  "Jesus  answered  and  said 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     73 

unto  him  (that  is,  unto  Nicodemus),  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  thee.  Except  one  be  born  again  (or,  "  anew,"  or, 
"from  above"),  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Nicodemus  saith  unto  Him,  How  can  a  man  be  born 
when  he  is  old?  can  he  enter  a  second  time  into  his 
mother's  womb  and  be  born?  Jesus  answered,  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  one  be  born  of  water  and 
the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God." 
Here  we  are  told  that  men  are  born  of  the  Spirit,  or  born 
anew  through  the  Holy  Spirit's  power. 

Exactly  the  same  truth  is  set  forth  in  a  way  that  may  en- 
able some  of  you  to  grasp  it  more  readily,  in  Titus  3:5: 
"  Not  by  works  done  in  righteousness,  which  we  did  our- 
selves, but  according  to  His  mercy  He  saved  us,  through 
the  washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Spirit/'  Here  we  are  taught  that  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  renew  men,  or  to  make  men  anezv,  or  (to  use  the 
common  theological  expression)  to  regenerate  men. 

What  is  Regeneration  ?  We  have  two  definitions  of 
"  Regeneration,"  or  "  the  New  Birth,"  in  the  Bible.  You 
will  find  the  first  of  these  definitions  in  Eph.  2:1:  "  And 
you  did  He  make  alive,  when  ye  were  dead  through  your 
trespasses  and  sins."  Regeneration  is,  then,  the  imparfa- 
tion  of  life  to  men  who  are  morally  and  spiritually  dead 
because  of  their  trespasses  and  sins.  Every  man  and 
woman  and  child  of  us,  no  matter  how  excellent  in  char- 
acter or  how  religious  our  parents  may  have  been,  was 
born  into  this  world  spiritually  dead.  We  are  by  nature 
moral  and  spiritual  corpses.  In  regeneration  we  are  made 
alive;  God  imparts  to  us  His  Own  life.  Now  it  is  the 
Holy  Spirit  by  Whom  God  imparts  to  us  this  life.  Re- 
generation is  His  work. 

Of  course  the  Word  of  God  is  the  instrument  that  the 


74  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Holy  Spirit  uses  in  imparting  life.  That  we  are  taught  in 
1  Pet.  1 :  23 :  "  Having  been  begotten  again,  not  of  cor- 
ruptible seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  through  the  word  of 
God,  which  liveth  and  abideth."  And  we  are  told  the 
same  thing  in  Jas.  1 :  18:  "Of  His  own  will  begat  He  us 
with  the  word  of  truth,  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of  first- 
fruits  of  His  creatures."  We  see  plainly  in  both  of  these 
passages  that  the  Word  of  truth,  the  Word  of  God,  the 
Word  contained  in  the  Bible,  is  the  instrument  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  uses  in  regeneration,  but  it  is  only  as  the 
Holy  Spirit  use:s  the  Word  that  Regeneration  re- 
sults. The  mere  written  Word  will  not  produce  the  New 
Birth,  no  matter  how  faithfully  preached  or  faithfully 
given  in  personal  work,  unless  the  living  Spirit  of  God 
makes  it  a  living  thing  in  the  hearts  of  those  to  whom  we 
preach  or  with  whom  we  are  dealing.  This  comes  out 
very  plainly  in  another  statement  of  the  Apostle  Paul's 
found  in  2  Cor.  3:6:  "  The  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit 
giveth  life."  What  does  this  mean?  It  is  often  taken  in 
these  days  of  superficial  and  careless  thinking,  and  care- 
less Bible  study,  to  mean  that  the  literal  interpretation  of 
Scripture  (which  these  men  call  "the  letter"),  that  is, 
taking  the  Scripture  to  mean  just  what  it  says  by  apply- 
ing the  usual  laws  of  grammar  and  diction,  kills,  but  that 
some  spiritualizing  interpretation,  some  interpretation  that 
makes  the  Word  mean  something  it  evidently  was  not 
intended  to  say,  that  gives  life.  This  is  one  of  the  fa- 
vourite tricks  in  misinterpreting  the  Scriptures  employed 
by  those  who  are  determined  not  to  take  the  Bible  as 
meaning  what  it  says ;  and  they  call  all  those  of  us  who 
insist  on  interpreting  the  Bible  to  mean  what  it  says, 
"  deadly  literalists."  There  never  was  a  more  unwar- 
ranted misconstruction  of  Paul's  words,  or  the  words  of 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     75 

anyone  else,  than  that.  Paul  did  not  have  the  remotest 
thought  of  teaching  anything  of  that  kind.  If  there  ever 
was  a  "deadly  literalist "  (if  literalism  is  really  deadly), 
it  was  the  very  man  who  wrote  these  words.  Paul  was 
always  insisting  upon  the  exact  force  of  every  word  used. 
Paul  would  build  a  whole  argument  on  a  word,  or  on  a 
part  of  a  word,  on  the  number  of  a  noun,  or  on  the  case 
of  a  noun,  or  on  the  tense  of  a  verb.  No,  Paul  did  not 
mean  anything  of  that  kind. 

What  did  he  mean?  Well,  the  way  to  discover  what 
any  man  really  means  by  what  he  says  or  writes  is  to 
read  what  he  says  or  writes  in  the  connection  in  which  it 
is  said.  In  this  case  the  connection  shows  beyond  the 
possibility  of  honest  doubt  exactly  what  Paul  meant.  In 
the  third  verse  of  this  same  chapter  Paul  draws  a  con- 
trast between  the  Word  of  God  written  on  parchment  or 
on  paper  with  pen  and  ink,  or  graven  on  tables  of  stone 
as  in  the  case  of  the  Ten  Commandments,  and  the  Word 
of  God  written  as  he  puts  it  by  "  the  Spirit  of  the  living 
God;  not  in  tables  of  stone,  but  in  taHes  that  are  hearts 
of  flesh,"  and  what  Paul  therefore  sajs  is,  that  the  mere 
"  letter  "of  the  Word,  the  Word  written  or  printed  in  a 
book,  kills,  i.  e.,  brings  condemnation  and  death ;  but  that 
the  Word  of  God  written  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God 
in  our  hearts  ("  on  tables  that  are  hearts  of  flesh  "),  that 
brings  life.  This,  of  course,  is  only  to  say  in  other  words 
what  we  have  already  said  above,  that  it  is  only  as  the 
living  Holy  Spirit  takes  today  to  the  heart  of  the  indi- 
vidual the  Word  of  God  and  writes  it  on  the  heart,  are 
men  made  alive,  or  born  again.  No  amount  of  giving  the 
Bible,  the  written  Word,  in  sermon,  or  personal  work,  or 
teaching,  will  ever  lead  to  a  man  being  born  again.  If  we 
wish  to  see  men  born  again  through  our  preaching,  or 


76  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

through  our  personal  work,  or  through  our  teaching,  we 
must  realize  our  dependence  upon  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
look  to  Him,  and  count  upon  Him,  to  carry  the  truth  that 
we  preach  or  give  out  in  personal  work  or  in  teaching, 
home  to  the  heart,  and  see  to  it  that  we  ourselves  are  in 
such  a  relation  to  God  that  the  Holy  Spirit  can  do  His 
regenerating  work  through  us. 

We  have  a  second  God-given  definition  of  Regener- 
ation in  2  Pet.  1:3,  4 :  "  Seeing  that  His  divine  power 
hath  granted  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and 
godliness,  through  the  knowledge  of  Him  that  called  us 
by  His  Own  glory  and  virtue ;  whereby  He  hath  granted 
unto  us  His  precious  and  exceeding  great  promises ;  that 
through  these  ye  may  become  partakers  of  the  diinne 
nature,  having  escaped  from  the  corruption  that  is  in  the 
world  by  lust."  God's  definition  of  Regeneration  here 
is,  the  impartation  of  a  new  nature,  "  the  diznne  nature," 
God's  Own  nature,  to  us. 

We  are  all  born  into  this  world  with  a  corrupt  nature, 
corrupt  in  its  thoughts,  corrupt  in  its  affections,  corrupt 
in  its  will. 

1.  First  of  all,  Every  one  of  us,  no  matter  how  fine  our 
ancestry,  or  how  pious  our  parents,  are  born  into  this 
world  with  a  mind  that  is  blind  to  the  truth  of  God.  As 
Paul  puts  it  in  1  Cor.  2 :  14,  "  The  natural  man  receiveth 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  for  they  are  foolish- 
ness unto  him:  neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are 
spiritually  discerned." 

2.  In  the  second  place.  We  are  all  of  us  born  into  this 
world  with  afifections  that  are  corrupt,  that  is,  with  aflfec- 
tions  set  upon  things  that  displease  God.  We  love  the 
things  we  ought  to  hate,  and  we  hate  the  things  we  ought 
to  love. 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     77 

3.  And,  in  the  third  place,  We  are  all  of  us  born  into 
this  world  with  a  will  that  is  perverse.  As  Paul  puts  it 
in  Rom.  8:7,  "  The  mind  of  the  flesh  (that  is,  "  the  mind 
of  "  the  natural  and  unregenerate  man)  is  enmity  against 
God;  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  in- 
deed can  it  be."  We  are  all  of  us  born  into  this  world 
with  a  will  that  is  perverse,  a  will  that  is  set  upon  pleas- 
ing self,  and  not  set  upon  pleasing  God.  Now,  what 
pleases  self  may  not  be  something  corrupt  or  criminal  or 
vile  or  immoral.  What  pleases  us  may  be  something  re- 
fined, something  of  a  high  character;  it  may  not  be  get- 
ting drunk  or  stealing  or  lying  or  committing  adultery  or 
doing  any  evil  or  vile  or  base  thing ;  it  may  be  culture  or 
music  or  art  or  some  other  high  and  refined  thing;  but 
pleasing  self  is  the  very  essence  of  sin,  whether  the  thing 
that  pleases  self  is  something  very  high  or  something  very 
low.  And  any  will  that  is  set  upon  pleasing  self  is  a  will 
in  rebellion  against  God :  it  is  "  enmity  against  God." 
There  is  only  one  right  attitude  for  the  human  will,  and 
that  is  an  attitude  of  absolute  surrender  to  God,  and  the 
whole  aim  of  life  should  not  be  to  please  self  at  all,  but  to 
please  God  in  all  things. 

So  then  we  are  all  born  into  the  world  with  this  nature 
that  is  intellectually,  affectionally  and  volitionally  corrupt. 
What  occurs  in  the  New  Birth?  We  are  given  a  New 
Nature. 

1.  We  are  given  a  new  intellectual  nature,  a  new  mind, 
a  mind  which  instead  of  being  blind  to  the  truth  of  God 
is  open-eyed  to  the  truth  of  God.  How  often  I  have  seen 
that.  I  have  seen  a  man  come  into  a  meeting  like  this,  an 
utter  infidel.  I  have  a  man  in  mind  at  this  moment,  a 
man  who  had  not  been  inside  a  church  for  fourteen  years, 
and  who  was  a  rank  and  verv-  bitter  infidel.     But  this 


78  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

man  was  induced  to  come  and  hear  me  preach.  The 
Spirit  of  God  wrought  through  me  that  night  and  through 
a  personal  worker  who  dealt  with  him  in  the  after- 
meeting,  and  that  man  was  born  again  then  and  there, 
and  that  thoroughly  darkened  mind  became  illuminated  at 
once,  and,  instead  of  the  things  "  of  the  Spirit  of  God  " 
being  any  longer  "  foolishness  unto  him  "  they  became  as 
clear  as  day,  and  within  a  week  he  was  bringing  others 
into  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.  He  brought  his  own  wife 
to  meeting  the  following  Sunday  night  and  led  her  into 
the  light ;  and  within  a  year  he  was  preaching  the  Gospel. 
2.  But  we  are  not  only  given  a  new  intellectual  nature, 
Zije  are  also  given  a  new  affectional  nature.  We  get  new 
tastes  instead  of  the  old  tastes,  new  loves  instead  of  the 
old  loves.  Instead  of  loving  any  longer  the  things  that 
displease  God  we  now  love  the  things  that  please  God. 
The  things  we  once  hated  we  now  love,  and  the  things 
we  once  loved  we  now  hate.  How  clearly  that  was  illus- 
trated in  my  own  experience.  As  I  look  back  upon  my 
life  before  I  was  born  again  I  can  hardly  believe  what  I 
know  to  be  true  about  my  own  affections  and  about  my 
likes  and  my  dislikes,  before  I  was  born  again.  In  those 
days  I  hated  the  Bible.  I  read  it  every  day,  but  it  was  to 
me  about  the  most  stupid  Book  I  read,  I  would  rather 
have  read  last  year's  almanac  any  day  than  to  have  read 
the  Bible.  But  when  I  was  born  again  my  heart  was 
filled  with  love  for  the  Bible  and  today  I  would  rather 
read  the  Bible  than  any  other  book  or  all  books  put  to- 
gether. I  so  love  it  that  sometimes  I  think  I  will  not  read 
any  other  book  but  the  Bible.  In  those  former  days, 
before  I  was  born  again,  I  loved  the  card-table,  the  the- 
atre, the  dance,  the  horse-race,  the  champagne  supper,  and 
I    hated    the   prayer-meeting   and   the    Sunday   services. 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     79 

Today  I  hate  the  dance  and  the  card-table  and  the  theatre 
and  the  horse-race,  and  I  love  the  gathering  together  of 
God's  people  and  the  services  of  God's  house  on  the 
Lord's  Day.  It  is  just  as  Paul  puts  it  in  2  Cor.  5:  17, 
"If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creation :  the  old 
things  are  passed  away;  behold,  they  are  become  new." 

3.  But  in  the  Nezv  Birth  we  are  not  only  given  a  new 
intellectual  nature  and  a  new  affectional  nature,  we  are 
given  a  new  volitional  nature,  that  is,  we  are  given  a 
new  will.  When  one  is  born  again  his  will  is  no  longer 
set  upon  pleasing  self:  his  will  is  set  upon  pleasing 
God.  There  is  nothing  else  in  which  he  so  delights  ai 
he  delights  in  the  will  of  God.  What  he  himself  de- 
sires is  nothing  to  him:  what  pleases  God  is  everything 
to  him. 

We  see,  then,  that  the  New  Birth  is  the  impartation  of 
a  new  nature,  God's  Own  nature,  to  men  who  are  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit  Who  im- 
parts this  nature.  As  we  have  already  said,  the  Word  of 
God  is  the  instrument  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  in  imparting 
this  new  nature.  This  comes  out  in  the  very  verse  we 
have  already  quoted  as  containing  God's  definition  of  the 
New  Birth,  2  Pet.  1:4,"  Whereby  He  hath  granted  unto 
us  His  precious  and  exceeding  great  protnises;  that 
through  these  (that  is,  through  His  precious  and  exceed- 
ing great  promises,  that  is,  through  the  written  Word) 
ye  may  become  partakers  of  the  divine  nature."  Yes, 
always  the  written  Word  is  the  instrument  through  which 
the  new  nature  is  imparted  to  men,  but  it  is  only  Aa 
the;  Holy  Spirit  uses  the;  instrume:nt,  the  written 
Word,  that  The  New  Birth,  the  impartation  oi^ 
God's  Own  nature  to  us,  results. 

So  we  see  again  that  if  we  wish  to  be  bom  again  our- 


80  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

selves,  it  is  not  enough  to  read  the  Bible,  though  that  is 
the  instrument  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  in  regeneration,  we 
must  put  ourselves  in  such  an  attitude  toward  God,  by 
the  surrender  of  our  will  to  God,  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
may  use  the  written  Word  and  make  it  a  living  thing  in 
our  hearts  and  thus  impart  God's  nature  to  us,  and  thus 
we  be  born  again.  We  see  also  that  if  we  wish  others  to 
be  born  again  through  our  preaching  or  personal  work 
or  teaching,  or  whatever  it  may  be,  we  must  see  to  it  we 
not  only  give  them  the  written  word  and  give  them  the 
right  passages  from  the  Word,  but  that  we  are  in  such  g 
right  relation  toward  God,  and  that  we  so  realize  our  de- 
pendence  upon  the  Holy  Spirit  for  Him  to  do  the  work, 
and  that  we  so  count  upon  Him  to  do  the  work,  that  He 
can  do  His  regenerating  work  through  us. 

The  mere  letter  of  the  Gospel  will  merely  bring  con^ 
demnation  and  kill,  unless  accompanied  by  the  Holy 
Spirit's  power.  The  ministry  of  many  a  perfectly  ortho- 
dox preacher  or  teacher  is  a  ministry  of  death ;  indeed 
one  of  the  deadest  things  on  earth  is  dead  orthodoxy. 
His  ministry  is  a  ministry  of  death  because  while  he  gives 
the  Word,  he  gives  it  "  with  enticing  words  of  man's 
wisdom  and  not  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of 
power"  (1  Cor.  2:4).  No  amount  of  preaching,  no 
matter  how  orthodox  it  may  be,  no  amount  of  mere  study 
of  the  Word,  will  regenerate  unless  the  Holy  Spirit 
works.  It  is  He,  and  He  alone  that  makes  a  man  a  new 
creature.  But  thank  God  He  is  ever  ready  to  do  this, 
when  the  conditions  are  supplied  which  are  necessary  if 
He  is  to  do  His  work.  We  are  all  dependent  upon  Him, 
if  there  are  to  be  real  results,  real  regeneration. 

Just  as  we  are  utterly  dependent  upon  the  work  of 
Christ  for  us  in  justification  so  we  are  utterly  dependent 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     81 

upon  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  us  for  regeneration. 
The  whole  work  of  regeneration  can  be  described  in  this 
way :  the  human  heart  is  the  soil,  the  Word  of  God  is  the 
seed,  we  preachers  and  teachers  and  personal  workers  are 
the  sowers.  We  go  to  the  granary  of  the  Bible  and  take 
from  it  that  portion  of  seed  we  wish  to  sow ;  we  preach 
it  or  teach  it  or  use  it  in  personal  work;  but  if  it  all 
stopped  there  there  would  be  no  real  result,  there  would 
be  no  New  Birth.  But,  if  as  we  preach  or  teach  or  do 
personal  work,  we  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  do  His 
work.  He  will  quicken  the  seed  as  we  sow  it,  and  it  will 
take  root  in  the  hearts  of  those  to  whom  we  speak,  and 
the  human  heart  will  close  around  it  by  faith,  and  a  new 
creation  will  be  the  result. 

I  am  often  asked  if  I  believe  in  sudden  conversion.  I 
believe  in  something  far  more  wonderful  than  sudden 
conversion.  I  believe  in  sudden  regeneration.  Conver- 
sion is  an  outward  thing;  it  means  merely  turning 
around:  One  is  faced  one  way,  faced  away  from  God; 
he  turns  around  and  faces  the  other  way — he  faces  toward 
God.  That  is  conversion.  But  regeneration  goes  down 
to  the  very  depths  of  the  human  heart  and  spirit.  It  is  a 
radical  transformation  of  the  innermost  man,  an  imparta- 
tion  of  life,  and  the  impartation  of  a  new  nature.  An 
outward  conversion,  if  it  is  to  be  real  and  lasting,  must  be 
the  result  of  an  inward  regeneration.  A  man  may  be 
converted  a  hundred  times,  but  he  cannot  be  born  again 
but  once ;  for,  when  one  is  born  again,  when  God  imparts 
His  Own  nature  to  a  man,  he  stays  born  again ;  as  John 
puts  it  in  1  Tno.  3:9,  "  Whosoever  is  begotten  of  God  is 
not  doing  sin  (that  is,  not  making  a  practice  of  sin),  but 
His  seed  (that  is,  God's  seed,  God's  Own  nature)  abideth 
in  him:  and  he  cannot  be  sinning  (that  is,  making  a  con- 


82  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

tinuous  practice  of  sin),  because  he  is  begotten  of  God." 
Yes,  I  believe  in  sudden  regeneration,  a  sudden,  thorough 
transformation  of  the  inmost  man. 

Why  do  I  believe  in  it?  Because  this  Book  teaches  it 
and  because  I  have  seen  it  over  and  over  again.  How 
could  I  doubt  it  when  I  had  sitting  beside  me  week  after 
week  and  year  after  year  on  the  platform  of  the  Moody 
Church  in  Chicago,  as  my  assistant  pastor,  a  man  who,  up 
to  the  time  he  was  forty-two  years  of  age  was  one  of  the 
most  desperate  and  notorious  sinners  that  ever  lived,  a 
man  who  at  the  age  of  nine  was  a  drunkard,  and  utterly 
incorrigible  all  through  his  school  days,  a  man  who  en- 
tered the  United  States  Navy  at  the  age  of  fifteen  and 
went  through  the  Civil  War  and  learned  all  the  vices  of 
the  navy,  and  who  at  the  close  of  the  war  went  into  the 
regular  army  and  learned  all  the  vices  of  the  army,  and 
spent  a  good  deal  of  that  time  while  with  the  army  at 
Fort  Leavenworth  in  the  guard-house,  and  was  there 
elected  the  leader  of  a  gang  of  desperados  that  were  con- 
fined in  the  army  guard-house  at  that  time,  a  man  who 
was  ordered  out  of  the  city  of  Omaha  by  the  mayor  and 
chief  of  police  for  almost  killing  the  bully  of  Omaha  in 
a  fight,  a  man  who  rode  down  the  streets  of  Omaha  in  a 
cab  with  a  revolver  in  each  hand  firing  the  revolvers  out 
of  both  windows  as  he  sped  down  the  street,  a  man  who, 
in  spite  of  the  money  he  inherited  from  his  father,  was 
outlawed  from  the  town  where  he  lived  in  Iowa,  but  who 
came  back  to  that  same  town  one  night,  went  into  a  Gos- 
pel meeting  and  knelt  at  the  altar  and  accepted  Jesus 
Christ  and  was  transformed  into  the  best  friend  I  ever 
had  in  my  life,  a  man  I  loved  as  I  never  loved  any  other 
man,  a  man  of  whom  if  anybody  should  ask  me  who  was 
the  most  Christlike  man  I  ever  met  in  my  life,  I  would 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     83 

reply  without  hesitation,  "  Rev.  William  S.  Jacoby " — 
the  dearest  man  I  ever  knew;  he  is  now  with  Christ  in 
the  glory.    Yes,  I  believe  in  sudden  regeneration. 

If  I  did  not  believe  in  sudden  regeneration,  I  would 
quit  preaching,  for  what  would  be  the  use  of  it  all? 
What  use,  for  example,  of  my  preaching  to  such  a  con- 
gregation as  I  used  to  preach  to  every  Sunday  night  in 
the  Moody  Church  in  Chicago,  when  that  building  was 
packed  of  a  Sunday  night  with  the  motley  crowds  who 
gathered  there.  There  were  some  of  the  finest  Christians 
in  Chicago  there,  there  were  university  students,  medical 
students,  law  students,  lawyers,  doctors,  and  prominent 
business  men  and  earnest  Christian  men  and  women  were 
there,  but  there  were  also  "  jail  birds  "  there,  criminals 
just  out  of  Joliet  State  Prison,  infidels,  outlaws,  de- 
praved men  of  pretty  much  every  nation  on  earth.  What 
would  be  the  use  of  preaching  to  a  crowd  like  that,  if  it 
were  not  for  the  regenerating  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit? 
But,  believing  as  I  did  in  the  regenerating  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  I  always  arose  to  preach  with  a  heart  full 
of  hope  and  expectation;  for  I  never  knew  any  night 
where  the  Spirit  of  God,  God's  Holy  Dove,  would  light. 

Take,  for  example,  one  specific  Sunday  night.  There 
had  come  into  the  audience  that  night,  long  before  the 
meeting  began,  a  man  so  intoxicated  that  the  moment  he 
was  given  a  seat  he  went  to  sleep.  He  was  not  turned 
out,  for  we  had  given  our  ushers  instructions  never  to 
turn  out  any  man  no  matter  how  drunk,  unless  he  insisted 
on  making  a  disturbance,  and,  if  they  were  compelled  to 
turn  him  out,  to  follow  him  out  and  deal  with  him  and, 
if  possible,  lead  him  to  Christ.  This  man  did  not  make 
a  disturbance,  except  possibly  he  snored  a  little.  As  I 
rose  to  preach  that  night,  I  offered  a  prayer  before  I 


84  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

preached,  as  I  usually  do ;  but  I  offered  that  night  a  differ- 
ent prayer  from  any  I  ever  offered  before,  and  I  have 
never  offered  the  same  prayer  but  once  since  (and  that 
was  when  this  man  asked  me  to  offer  it  again).  I  am 
sure  God  put  it  on  my  lips  that  night ;  for  I  knew  nothing 
about  this  man.  The  prayer  I  offered  was  this,  "  Oh 
God,  if  there  is  any  man  here  in  Chicago  Avenue  Church 
tonight  who  has  run  away  from  New  York  or  from  any 
other  Eastern  city,  and  has  left  his  wife  and  children 
there  to  starve,  and  is  drinking  himself  to  death  here  in 
Chicago,  save  that  man  tonight."  Though  I  had  never 
heard  of  this  man  before,  when  I  offered  the  prayer  I  had 
described  that  man's  case  exactly.  He  had  not  only  run 
away  from  an  Eastern  city,  but  from  New  York,  and  he 
had  left  his  wife  and  children  there  to  starve,  and  he  was 
drinking  himself  to  death  in  Chicago.  Just  as  I  offered 
that  prayer  he  awakened  from  his  slumber,  and  he  heard 
my  words  and  they  sank  into  his  heart.  When  he  left 
that  building  he  could  think  of  nothing  else.  As  he 
afterwards  described  it  to  me  and  others,  that  night  he 
wet  his  pillow  with  his  tears  and  God  saved  him.  He 
got  up  a  regenerated  man.  Dear  man,  how  well  I  re- 
member him!    I  can  see  his  face  yet. 

That  very  same  night  there  was  a  man  sitting  up  in  the 
gallery  to  my  left  who  was  a  competent  railroad  engineer, 
but  who  had  been  blacklisted  by  every  railroad  running 
into  Chicago  because  of  his  intemperate  habits.  As  I 
preached  that  night  the  Holy  Spirit  carried  my  words 
home  to  that  man's  heart  and  he  believed  on  Jesus  Christ 
and  was  saved,  and  born  again.  As  I  finished  preaching 
one  of  my  elders  stepped  up  to  him  and  said  to  him, 
"  Are  you  saved  ?  "  The  man  replied,  "  I  am."  He  said, 
**When  were  you  saved?"     He  said,  "About  five  min- 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     85 

utes  ago  as  that  man  was  preaching."  The  next  day  that 
man  went  down  to  the  office  of  the  vice-president  of  the 
Chicago  and  Eastern  Illinois  Railroad.  How  an  engineer 
that  was  blacklisted  by  every  railroad  running  into  Chi- 
cago ever  got  into  the  office  of  the  vice-president  of  the 
Chicago  and  Eastern  Illinois  Railroad,  I  do  not  know; 
but  he  certainly  did.  He  said  to  the  vice-president,  "  I  am 
a  competent  railroad  engineer,  but  I  have  been  blacklisted 
by  every  railroad  running  into  Chicago  for  getting  drunk, 
but  last  night  I  was  converted  up  in  the  Moody  Church." 
The  vice-president  sprang  from  the  table,  went  to  the 
door  and  locked  it  and  said,  "  I  believe  in  that  sort  of 
thing,  let  us  pray."  And  so  the  vice-president  of  the 
.railway  and  the  engineer  that  was  blacklisted  by  every 
railroad  running  into  Chicago,  knelt  and  prayed  together. 
When  they  got  up  from  the  floor  the  vice-president  said 
to  him,  "  Everything  I  say  on  this  road  goes.  I  will  give 
you  a  letter  to  the  foreman  of  the  round-house  at  Dan- 
ville.   He  will  give  you  an  engine." 

Oh,  yes,  I  believe  in  sudden  regeneration,  and  believing 
in  the  regenerating  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the 
written  Word,  knowing  that  He  has  power  by  quickening 
the  words  sown  in  the  human  heart  to  make  men  and 
women  all  over,  I  never  despair  of  any  man  or  woman  on 
earth,  and  I  expect  to  keep  on  preaching  and  teaching  the 
mighty  Word  of  God  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as 
long  as  I  have  strength  enough  to  stand  on  my  feet  and 
preach.  Yes,  if  God  sees  fit  to  put  me  on  a  sick  bed 
before  I  pass  into  eternity  or  before  the  Lord  comes,  I 
expect  to  preach  Jesus  Christ  to  men  there  on  the  sick 
bed  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  I  expect  to  see 
men  and  women  and  children  born  again.  Is  it  any 
wonder  that  I  would  not  give  up  preaching  the  Gospel 


36  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

to  be  President  of  the  United  States  or  to  occupy  any 
throne  on  earth  ? 

This  doctrine  of  the  New  Birth  is  a  glorious  doctrine. 
It  is  true  it  sweeps  away  false  hopes.  It  comes  to  the 
man  who  is  trusting  in  his  morality  and  says,  "  Morality 
is  not  enough.  You  must  be  born  again."'  It  comes 
to  the  man  who  is  trusting  in  reform,  in  turning  over  a 
new  leaf,  and  says,  "  Reform  is  not  enough,  no  matter 
how  thorough  it  may  be.  You  must  be  born  again.'' 
It  comes  to  the  man  or  woman  who  is  trusting  in  educa- 
tion and  culture  and  says,  "  Education  and  culture  are 
not  enough — you  must  be  born  again."  It  comes  to  the 
man  or  woman  who  is  trusting  in  his  or  her  amiability  of 
character,  in  his  kindness  of  heart  and  generosity  in  giv- 
ing, and  says,  "  Amiability  of  character,  kindness  of  heart 
and  generosity  in  giving  are  not  enough.  You  must  be 
BORN  again.""  It  comes  to  the  one  who  is  trusting  in  the 
externalities  of  religion,  in  the  fact  that  he  goes  to  church 
regularly  and  has  been  baptized  and  united  with  the 
Church,  and  partakes  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  regularly 
reads  his  Bible  and  says  his  prayers ;  and  says,  "  All  the 
externalities  of  religion  are  not  enough.     You  must  be 

BORN  AGAIN." 

Yes,  the  doctrine  of  the  New  Birth  sweeps  away  all  the 
false  hopes  such  as  a  multitude  of  you  here  this  morning 
are  building  upon,  and  tells  you  a  better  way,  the  only 
way.  But  while  it  sweeps  away  false  hopes,  it  brings  in  a 
new,  a  better,  a  living  hope.  It  comes  to  each  and  every 
one  of  us  and  says,  "  You  may  be  born  again."  It 
comes  to  the  one  who  has  no  taste  for  the  things  of  God 
and  therefore  thinks  there  is  no  hope  for  him,  and  says. 
"  You  may  be  born  again."  It  comes  to  the  one  who  is 
down  in  sin  of  one  kind  or  another,  the  one  who  is  stru^- 


REGENERATING  WORK  OF  HOLY  SPIRIT     87 

gling  hard  but  futilely  to  break  away  from  sin  and  says, 
'*  You  may  be  born  again  and  lose  all  your  love  for  sin 
and  thus  the  power  of  sin  be  utterly  broken."  It  comes 
to  the  one  who  has  wandered  so  far  from  God  and  com- 
mitted so  many  sins  that  he  thinks  there  is  no  hope  for 
him,  that  there  is  nothing  to  look  forward  to  but  an 
eternal  hell,  an  eternal  continuance  of  the  hell  he  is 
already  in,  and  that  is  getting  worse  every  day,  the  one 
full  of  utter  and  hopeless  despair,  and  says,  "  You  may 

Bt  BORN  AGAIN  ;  YOU  MAY  B^  MADE  ALL  OVER  ;  YOU  MAY 
BECOME  A  CHIED  OE  GoD,  AND  A  PARTAKER  OE  HiS  OWN 

Holy  and  Glorious  Nature."    Hallelujah! 

Oh,  men  and  women,  have  you  been  born  again?  I 
do  not  ask  you  whether  you  are  church  members;  I  do 
not  ask  whether  you  have  been  baptized ;  I  do  not  ask 
whether  you  go  regularly  to  the  Lord's  Supper ;  I  do  not 
ask  you  whether  you  are  giving  as  much  of  your  income 
to  the  church  and  to  the  poor  as  you  should  give ;  I  do  not 
ask  you  whether  you  go  to  prayer-meeting  regularly,  and 
say  your  own  prayers  regularly  every  day  and  study  your 
Bible  regularly;  I  ask  you,  have  you  been  born  again, 
have  you  become  a  partaker  of  God's  Own  nature?  If 
not,  you  may  be  today.    The  Spirit  oe  God  is  able  and 

He  is  ready  to  MAKE  YOU  ALL  OVER,  TO  IMPART  TO  YOU 

God's  Own  Nature  through  His  Word  ie  you  will 
ONLY  LET  Him  do  it. 


IV 

HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  AND  FOREVER 
SATISFIED 

OUR  subject  this  afternoon  is,  How  to  be  Fully 
and  Forever  Satisfied. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  tells  us  how 
each  one  of  us  can  be  fully  satisfied  and  satisfied  for  ever. 
Turn  in  your  Bibles  to  John  4:14:  "  But  whosoever 
drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never 
THIRST:  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  become 
in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life." 
There  is  a  matchless  music  in  these  words.  I  remember 
how,  as  a  boy,  before  I  had  any  thought  of  becoming  a 
Christian  myself,  I  would  come  back  to  this  verse  again 
and  again,  and  read  it  over  and  over.  There  was  to  me 
a  fascination  in  those  words  that  almost  no  other  utter- 
ance of  our  Lord  possessed.  I  did  not  understand  their 
meaning  at  all,  but  they  seemed  to  me  like  a  marvellous 
strain  of  music  from  some  far  away,  heavenly  world. 
But  when  I  came  to  understand  their  meaning  and  to 
experience  for  myself  the  great  truth  they  set  forth,  there 
was  in  them  a  preciousness  that  I  cannot  put  into  words. 

You  will  recall  the  circumstances  under  which  the  words 
were  spoken.  Our  Lord  Jesus  had  been  taking  a  long  and 
tiresome  journey  afoot,  covering  the  entire  day.  He  had 
started  out  in  the  early  morning  with  His  disciples,  and 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  89 

they  had  trudged  along  the  whole  day  through,  appar- 
ently without  anything  to  eat,  and  about  sunset  had  reached 
the  outskirts  of  the  village  o£  Sychar.  It  was  formerly 
thought  that  the  "  sixth  hour  "  was  noon-time,  but  it  was 
later  discovered  that  in  Ephesus,  where  John  wrote  this 
Gospel,  time  was  reckoned  as  it  is  with  us  today, — from 
midnight  till  noon,  and  from  noon  till  midnight, — and  the 
sixth  hour  was  therefore  six  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  So 
"  about  the  sixth  hour  "  was  six  o'clock  in  the  evening. 
Our  Lord  was  as  truly  a  real  man,  as  He  was  "  very  God 
of  very  God ;"  dusty,  tired,  hungry,  thirsty,  He  sank  upon 
the  well-curb.  The  disciples  went  into  the  town  near-by 
to  get  something  to  eat,  but  apparently  He  was  too  tired 
to  accompany  them.  In  a  little  while,  as  He  sat  thus  upon 
the  well-curb,  looking  up  the  road.  He  saw  a  woman  of 
evil  character  coming  toward  the  well  to  draw  water.  Im- 
mediately a  new  thirst  took  possession  of  Him — not  a 
thirst  for  water  for  His  body,  but  a  thirst  for  the  salvation 
of  that  outcast  woman's  soul.  As  soon  as  she  approached 
within  speaking  distance  Jesus,  seeking  an  approach  to  her 
soul,  said :  "  Give  Me  to  drink ;"  not  so  much  that  He 
wished  water  for  His  thirsty  body  (though  He  sorely 
needed  that),  as  that  He  wished  to  win  that  woman  from 
her  sins  into  the  possession  of  eternal  life,  which  He  alone 
could  give.  Instead  of  letting  down  the  jug  she  carried 
into  the  well  to  draw  water,  she  meanly  and  contemptu- 
ously said :  "  How  is  it  that  Thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest 
drink  of  me,  which  am  a  Samaritan  woman?  "  Our  Lord 
does  not  notice  the  insult,  but  replies :  "  If  thou  knewest 
the  gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  Me 
to  drink;  thou  wouldest  have  asked  of  Him,  and  He 
would  have  given  thee  living  water."  Immediately  the 
woman  said  to  Him :  "  Sir,  Thou  hast  nothing  to  draw 


90  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

with,  and  the  well  is  deep:  from  whence  then  hast  Thou 
that  living  water  ?  "  Pointing  down  into  that  well,  at 
which  so  many  generations  of  men  and  cattle  had  slaked 
their  thirst,  Jesus  replied :  "  Every  one  that  drinketh  of 
this  water  shall  thirst  again." 

How  true  that  is  of  every  earthly  fountain  of  satis- 
faction or  joy ;  no  matter  how  deeply  one  drinks,  he  soon 
thirsts  again.  For  example,  drink  as  deeply  as  you  will 
of  the  fountain  of  wealth,  you  are  not  satisfied  for  long: 
you  soon  thirst  again.  Drink  of  the  fountain  of  worldly 
fame  or  honour  or  power,  how  long  will  you  be  satis- 
fied ?  You  soon  thirst  again.  Drink  as  deeply  as  you  will 
of  the  fountain  of  worldly  pleasure,  you  will  not  be  satis- 
fied for  long :  you  soon  thrist  again.  Drink  as  deeply  as  you 
will  of  the  fountain  of  human  knowledge,  of  the  fountain 
of  science,  or  philosophy,  or  literature,  or  at  the  fountain 
of  music  or  of  art,  you  soon  thirst  again.  Yes,  drink  even 
of  that  most  nearly  divine  of  all  human  fountains,  the  foun- 
tain of  human  love,  you  soon  thirst  again.  Not  one  of 
these  things  fully  satisfies,  neither  do  they  satisfy  for  long. 

Then  our  Lord  added  the  wonderful  words  of  our 
text :  "  Whosoever  shall  drink  of  the  water  that  I  shall 
give  him  shall  never  thirst ;"  or  to  translate  more  liter- 
ally :  "  shall  not  thirst  forever ;"  "  But  the  water  that  I 
shall  give  him  shall  become  in  him  a  well  of  water, 
springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  I  would  that  each 
one  of  us  could  sit  and  ponder  those  words  in  silence  by 
ourselves  till  their  full  meaning  and  full  force  took  entire 
possession  of  our  minds  and  hearts.     Drink  and  keep 

ON  DRINKING  OF  THE  WATER  THE  LORD  JESUS  GIVES  AND 
YOU  WILI.  BE  EULIvY  AND  FOREVER  SATISFIED. 

But  what  is  the  water  that  our  Lord  Jesus  gives?  If 
you  look  at  the  commentanes  on  John  4:14,  you  will  find 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  91 

a  great  many  different  answers  to  this  question.  But  the 
Bible  itself  answers  the  question  and  tells  us  plainly  just 
what  this  water  is  that  the  Lord  Jesus  gives.  You  will 
find  this  answer  in  John  7 :  37-39 :  "  Now  on  the  last 
day,  that  great  day  of  the  feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried, 
saying.  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and 
drink.  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  as  the  Scripture  hath 
said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water. 
(But  this  spake  He  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe 
on  Him  were  to  receive.  For  the  Spirit  was  not  yet 
given:  because  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified)." 

Here  we  are  told  that  The  water  which  Jesus 
Christ  gives  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  Whom  He  gives  to 
those  who  believe  on  Him  and  who  ask  Him  for  the 
Gift  (cf.  vs.  10).  Any  one  who  really  receives  the  Holy 
Spirit  as  an  indwelling  presence  will  be  fully  and  forever 
satisfied,  and  that  is  the  only  possible  way  to  be  fully 
and  forever  satisfied. 

It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  your  source  of  joy  within 
yourself ;  to  have  your  joy,  not  in  your  environment, 
nor  in  your  circumstances,  nor  in  your  possessions,  but 
to  have  your  fountain  of  joy  within  your  own  heart.  If 
our  joy  is  in  our  environment  or  in  our  possessions  we 
cannot  by  any  possibility  be  always  happy ;  for  sometimes 
our  environment  is  just  what  we  would  have  it  to  be, 
and  sometimes  it  is  just  what  we  would  not  have  it  to 
be.  When  our  environment  is  pleasant,  then  we  are 
happy,  but  when  it  is  unpleasant  we  are  miserable.  If 
our  joy  is  in  our  possessions, — that  is,  in  our  possessions 
outside  of  ourselves — we  cannot  by  any  possibility  be 
always  happy,  for  sometimes  we  have  them,  and  some- 
times we  lose  them.  When  we  have  them  we  are  happy, 
but  when  they  are  gone  we  are  utterly  miserable.     We 


92  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

are  happy  when  we  are  rich,  but  we  are  miserable  when 
we  are  poor.  We  are  happy  when  we  are  well,  but  we 
are  miserable  when  we  are  sick.  We  are  happy  when 
men  speak  well  of  us,  but  we  are  miserable  when  they 
speak  evil  of  us.  We  are  happy  when  we  have  our 
friends  with  us,  but  plunged  into  the  depths  of  sorrow 
and  despair  when  they  are  taken  from  us  by  death. 

But  if  our  source  of  joy  is  in  our  own  hearts,  a 
fountain  springing  up  within  us,  then  we  are  entirely 
independent  of  our  surroundings,  our  circumstances,  our 
possessions  or  lack  of  possessions.  We  are  joyful  when 
we  are  rich  and  equally  joyful  when  we  are  poor;  we 
are  joyful  when  things  go  just  right,  and  equally  joyful 
when  they  go  "  dead  wrong;"  we  are  joyful  when  we  are 
well,  but  equally  joyful  when  we  are  sick;  we  are  joyful 
when  men  speak  well  of  us,  but  equally  joyful  when  they 
speak  all  manner  of  evil  against  us;  we  are  joyful  when 
we  have  our  friends  with  us,  but  equally  joyful  when 
the  dearest  friend  we  have  on  earth  is  taken  from  us; 
indeed,  the  joy  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God  seems 
oftentimes  to  well  up  with  even  greater  power  in  the 
moments  of  deepest  bereavement.  In  that  dark  hour  that 
comes,  sooner  or  later,  to  every  one  of  us,  when  for  the 
last  time  we  look  into  the  face  of  some  dearly  loved  one 
lying  cold  and  still  in  death,  what  possible  comfort  is 
there  in  anything  that  this  world  can  give?  Is  there  any 
surcease  for  our  sorrow  in  such  an  hour  to  be  gained  by 
going  to  the  theatre,  the  opera,  the  card-party,  the  dance  ? 
No,  those  things  would  only  add  to  our  sorrow.  We  do 
not  think  of  going  to  them  at  such  an  hour.  But  from 
this  fountain  within  us,  which  the  indwelling  Spirit  has 
become,  gushes  up  at  such  a  time  as  that  "  joy  unspeak- 
able and  full  of  glory," 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  93 

How  well  I  remember  such  an  experience  in  a  time  of 
apparently  overwhelming  sorrow  that  came  to  my  wife 
and  to  me  years  ago.  We  had  a  lovely  daughter,  about 
nine  years  of  age,  a  most  winsome  child.  One  Saturday 
afternoon  Mr.  Jacoby,  the  redeemed  man  of  whom  I 
spoke  to  you  yesterday,  came  to  our  house,  as  he  did 
every  Saturday  afternoon,  to  take  the  children  with  him 
out  to  Lincoln  Park.  When  they  returned  that  evening 
about  six  o'clock,  our  little  Elizabeth  said :  "  I  don't  think 
I'll  eat  any  supper  tonight;  I  don't  feel  real  well."  We 
thought  little  of  it,  considering  it  simply  a  bilious  attack. 
But  the  next  morning  when  she  came  down  to  breakfast 
she  said :  "  I  don't  think  I'll  go  to  church  this  morning ; 
my  head  aches."  We  still  thought  it  was  simply  a  bilious 
attack.  But  Monday  morning,  when  she  came  to  the 
breakfast-table,  she  said :  "  I  don't  feel  real  well  yet ;  I 
don't  think  I'd  better  go  to  school  today."  It  seemed 
rather  long  for  a  bilious  attack  to  stay  with  a  child,  and 
yet  it  seemed  nothing  serious.  She  was  around  the  house 
all  day,  not  feeling  really  well,  but  apparently  not  very 
sick.  Tuesday  morning,  when  she  arose,  she  said :  "  I  am 
well  today  and  I'm  going  to  school."  But  she  added :  "  I 
have  a  strange  feeling  in  my  throat ! "  Her  mother 
looked  into  her  throat  and  saw  the  tell-tale  white  patch, 
and,  of  course,  we  sent  for  a  physician  at  once.  When 
he  came  and  had  carefully  examined  the  child  he  said: 
"  There  is  nothing  to  be  anxious  about.  It  is  not  diph- 
theria; it  is  only  tonsilitis.  But  I  will  keep  a  close 
watch."  The  next  morning  he  came  again  and  gave  her 
another  examination,  and  then  said :  "  Well,  it  is  diph- 
theria, but  not  a  serious  case  at  all.  There  is  nothing  to 
be  alarmed  about." 

The  other  children  were  sent  away  from  home,  so  that 


94  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

they  might  not  be  exposed.  Our  Elizabeth  seemed  to  be 
better  all  that  day.  That  night  I  slept  down-stairs  to 
avoid  exposing  others  whom  I  might  have  to  meet  during 
the  following  day,  and  her  mother  stayed  up-stairs  with 
the  little  child.  The  next  morning,  long  before  daylight, 
her  mother  ran  to  the  top  of  the  stairs,  calling :  "  Archie, 
come  up,  quick !  "  I  rushed  up-stairs  and  saw  Elizabeth 
choking.  I  ran  at  once  for  the  physician.  He  came  back 
with  me ;  but  Elizabeth  was  apparently  very  much  better. 
The  choking  had  all  passed  away;  indeed,  she  seemed 
well  on  the  road  to  recovery.  The  doctor  said :  "  For 
some  reason  or  other  I  don't  feel  like  administering  anti- 
toxin; but  keep  a  close  watch  on  her,  and  if  she  gets  any 
worse  telephone  me  at  the  Medical  College  and  I  will 
leave  my  classes  and  come  at  once."  But  she  seemed  to 
rapidly  grow  better  rather  than  worse;  indeed,  she  said 
to  her  mother :  "  Mother,  I  am  well ;  I  want  to  get  up 
and  dress."  In  the  meantime,  a  trained  nurse  had  come, 
and  her  mother  came  down-stairs  to  talk  with  me.  We 
were  very  happy  in  the  thought  that  our  little  girl  had 
been  spared  to  us,  and  I  had  written  letters  to  Mr. 
Moody  and  other  friends  saying  how  the  crisis  was  past 
and  Elizabeth  was  well  on  the  road  to  recovery. 

Suddenly,  right  in  the  midst  of  our  talk  with  one 
another,  the  nurse  ran  to  the  top  of  the  stairs  and  called : 
"  Come  up,  quick !  "  We  rushed  up-stairs.  Elizabeth's 
eyes  were  closed.  She  was  breathing  rapidly,  not  chok- 
ing, but  the  little  heart  was  giving  out.  There  was  no 
time  to  send  for  the  doctor.  I  dropped  on  my  knees  to 
pray.  I  had  hardly  time  to  begin  when  the  spirit  of  our 
little  one  had  taken  its  flight  from  the  mortal  body.  It 
was  so  sudden,  so  unexpected,  it  was  almost  crushing. 
The  health  officers  came  in  and  ordered  that  we  should 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  96 

bury  the  body  at  once.  Of  course,  no  one  was  allowed  to 
come  to  the  funeral.  We  had  to  have  the  service  all 
alone,  with  the  exception  of  the  presence  of  Mr.  Jacoby, 
who  insisted  on  coming  and  accompanying  us  to  the 
grave.  Even  her  brother  and  little  sisters  could  only 
stand  across  the  street  and  look  at  the  house  where  lay 
the  body  of  their  sister,  whom  they  would  never  see 
again  until  the  resurrection.  We  carried  the  little  body 
to  the  cemetery.  It  was  raining  pitilessly,  and  as  the  little 
body  was  lowered  into  the  grave  and  the  rain  poured  upon 
the  box  that  contained  the  casket,  my  wife  turned  to  me 
and  said :  "  Archie,  I  am  so  glad  that  Elizabeth  is  not  in 
that  box ! " 

When  we  returned  home  the  health  officers  demanded, 
very  wisely,  that  after  being  fumigated  we  should  leave 
the  house  to  them  and  go  to  a  strange  hotel  for  the  night. 
All  that  night  there  was  the  most  prolonged  thunder- 
storm, except  one,  that  I  ever  passed  through.  It  seemed 
to  be  one  unceasing  flash  of  lightning  and  crash  of  thun- 
der, and  we  could  not  sleep. 

The  next  morning,  as  I  went,  thoroughly  worn  out,  to 
the  Bible  Institute  to  meet  my  classes,  as  I  passed  around 
the  corner  of  Chestnut  Street  and  La  Salle  Avenue,  I 
could  contain  my  grief  no  longer.  There  was  no  one  on 
the  street,  and  I  cried  aloud :  "  Oh,  Elizabeth !  Eliza- 
beth !  "  And  just  then  this  fountain  that  I  had  in  my 
heart  broke  forth  with  such  power  as  I  think  I  had  never 
experienced  before,  and  it  was  the  most  joyful  moment 
that  I  had  ever  known  in  my  life ! 

Oh,  how  wonderful  is  the  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost!  It 
is  an  unspeakably  glorious  thing  to  have  your  joy,  not  in 
things  without  you,  not  even  in  your  most  dearly  loved 
friends,  but  to  have  within  you  a  fountain  ever  springing 


96  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

up,  springing  up,  springing  up,  always  springing  up,  thre€^ 
hundred  and  sixty-five  days  in  every  year,  springing  up 
under  all  circumstances  into  everlasting  life. 

It  is  also  a  great  thing  that  you  can  have  a  fountain 
that  you  can  take  with  you  wherever  you  go.  A  good 
many  years  ago  I  was  walking  along  the  Winchester  Road 
in  Northfield  with  George  Needham,  the  celebrated  evan- 
gelist. We  went  over  the  state  line  into  New  Hampshire. 
On  our  return,  when  we  had  reached  a  place  about  five 
minutes  north  of  where  the  Auditorium  now  stands,  we 
passed  by  a  hill.  Mr.  Needham  said  to  me :  "  Torrey,  I 
believe  that  if  we  go  up  to  the  top  of  that  hill  we  will 
get  a  fine  view."  So  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill  we  went, 
and  it  was  a  wonderful  view !  At  our  feet  lay  the  North- 
field  Seminary  grounds  in  all  their  beauty.  Then  across 
the  road,  the  meadows  leading  down  to  the  Connecticut 
River,  that  ran  like  a  broad  silver  band  between  the 
gentle  slopes  of  green  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  Then 
one  tier  of  hills  and  then  another  a  little  higher,  then 
another,  then  another — five,  six,  seven  tiers,  ending  in 
the  Green  Mountains  in  the  distance,  and  all  bathed  in 
the  golden  light  of  the  setting  sun !  It  was  a  scene  of 
marvellous  beauty.  I  turned  to  Mr.  Needham  and  said: 
"  I  am  going  to  buy  this  hill  and  build  a  house  right 
where  we  are  standing !  "  So  the  next  day  I  went  to  the 
farmer  who  owned  the  land;  he  named  his  price,  and  I 
paid  it.  The  following  spring  I  began  to  build  my  house. 
My  friends  who  drove  along  the  foot  of  the  hill  would 
call  to  me,  and  when  I  would  go  down  would  say :  "  What 
are  you  building  'way  up  there  for  ?  "  I  would  reply : 
"  Because  I  wish  to  see  out."  "  But,"  they  said,  "  you 
will  have  no  water  up  there !  " 

That  is  where  they  were  mistaken;  for  before  a  spade 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  97 

was  put  into  the  ground  to  dig  the  foundations,  in  walk- 
ing over  the  place  with  the  farmer  from  whom  I  had 
purchased  it,  I  noticed  a  little  depression  in  the  ground, 
perhaps  fifty  or  seventy-five  feet  from  where  I  had  in- 
tended to  build  the  house.  I  said  to  the  farmer :  "  I  think 
if  we  should  dig  there  we  would  strike  water."  He  re- 
plied :  "  I  don't  know ;  it  looks  as  if  you  might."  I  sent 
for  a  well-digger.  He  dug  a  hole  four  or  five  feet  across 
and  eight  feet  deep — and  the  water  came  bubbling  in. 
There  were  soon  five  feet  of  water  in  that  eight-foot-deep 
well,  and  such  water!  Clear  as  crystal — so  clear  that 
when  you  looked  into  the  well,  even  when  there  were 
five  feet  of  water  in  it,  it  looked  sometimes  as  if  there 
were  none,  the  water  was  so  clear  and  transparent.  And 
water  soft  and  cold  and  pure  and  never- failing!  We  had 
many  dry  seasons  after  that  and  many  another  well  ran 
dry;  but  not  our  well,  up  on  the  hillside.  There  was 
always  plenty  of  water  in  that  spring  and  many  would 
come  there  to  drink. 

But  there  was  one  grave  trouble  with  that  well — a. 
fatal  fault — I  could  not  take  it  with  me  when  the  call 
came  for  me  to  go  elsewhere.  During  the  Spanish- 
American  War  I  was  with  the  soldiers  at  Chickamauga 
Park,  and  we  had  a  prolonged  drought;  for  weeks  and 
weeks  no  rain ;  and  with  sixty  thousand  troops  marching 
and  counter-marching,  and  artillery  wagons  running 
across  the  field,  the  dust  filled  the  air  day  and  night — dust 
thirty  feet  high !  We  ate  dust,  we  drank  dust  we  slept 
dust,  and  we  drempt  dust!  And  no  water  anywhere  fit 
to  drink.  There  was  a  well  to  which  the  of^cers  of 
Major-General  Brooks'  command  had  access,  and  it 
looked  good  and  tasted  good,  but  drink  it  and  in  a  short 
time  you  would  be  flat  on  your  back.     And  oh,  how 


98  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

thirsty  I  got,  and  how  often  I  would  think  of  that  well 
of  mine  up  on  the  hill  at  Northfield!  But  it  did  me  no 
good,  for  it  was  many  hundreds  of  miles  away. 

Then  the  call  came  for  me  to  go  to  China,  and  while 
in  China  we  decided  to  visit  Canton.  Cholera  was  raging 
in  Canton  at  the  time.  People  were  fleeing  from  the 
city  in  fright.  When  we  boarded  the  boat  at  Hong-Kong 
to  go  up  to  Canton,  they  said  to  us :  "  Be  sure  and  drink 
no  water  on  the  boat.  A  member  of  the  French  Legation 
went  up  last  week  and  drank  water  on  that  boat.  He  was 
at  breakfast  with  his  family,  but  died  with  cholera  before 
lunch,"  I  remembered  the  warning  on  the  way  up,  but 
after  a  few  days  in  Canton,  when  we  were  going  back 
on  the  steamer,  as  I  sat  down  to  dinner  I  read  on  the 
menu  card :  "  Corned  beef  and  cabbage."  That  looked 
good  to  an  American  who  had  been  eating  all  kinds  of 
foreign  concoctions.  Without  thinking  of  what  it  would 
do  for  me,  I  ordered  corned  beef  and  cabbage.  But  I 
soon  found  what  it  would  do  for  me !  In  the  evening  I 
began  to  get  very  thirsty.  I  was  about  to  start  for  the 
water-tank  when  I  remembered  the  warning :  "  Be  sure 
and  drink  no  water  on  the  boat.  A  member  of  the  French 
Legation  went  up  last  week  and  drank  some  water  on 
the  boat.  He  was  with  his  family  at  breakfast  and  died 
with  cholera  before  lunch ! "  So  I  drank  some  of  the 
various  soft-drink  concoctions  as  long  as  I  dared,  and 
then  lay  all  night  suffering  from  thirst  and  thinking  of 
the  well  on  the  hillside  at  Northfield,  so  many  thousands 
of  miles  away.  But  I  had  another  Well  that  I  had 
brought  with  me,  and  while  my  body  thirsted,  my  soul 
was  satisfied:  the  Holy  Spirit  within  was  springing  up, 
springing  up,  springing  up,  into  everlasting  life  and  joy! 

Please  note  another  thing:  when  one  has  this  fountain 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  99 

of  satisfaction  and  joy  within  him,  he  is  entirely  inde- 
pendent of  the  world's  sources  of  joy.  What  does  he 
care  for  the  dance,  or  the  card-party,  or  the  theatre,  or 
any  other  kind  of  earthly  satisfaction?  Who  would  go 
to  an  old  green,  slimy  pool  to  drink  when  he  had  right 
at  hand  a  clear  crystal  spring?  Oh,  the  world  with  its 
allurements  has  no  power  over  the  one  who  has  this 
fountain  within ! 

I  often  think  there  is  little  use  in  telling  young  Chris- 
tians: You  must  not  dance;  you  must  not  play  cards; 
you  must  not  go  to  the  theatre;  you  must  not  do  this, 
that  and  the  other  thing.  There  is  a  far  better  way:  Ge^ 
them  to  receive  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  let  Him  have  full 
right  of  way  within,  and  they  will  have  no  desire  for 
such  things — they  will  stay  away  from  the  theatre  and 
the  dance,  and  the  rest,  not  merely  because  they  ought, 
but  because  they  will  not  desire  to  go.  Who  that  knows 
of  a  clear,  crystal  spring  will  sneak  off  to  some  green, 
slimy  pool  to  drink  ? 

When  Mr.  Moody  was  holding  meetings  in  Philadel- 
phia, a  lady  came  to  him  one  day  at  the  close  of  one  of 
his  meetings  and  said :  "  Mr.  Moody,  I  don't  like  you ! " 
"  Why  ?  "  he  asked.  "  Because  you  are  so  narrow."  "  I 
didn't  think  I  was  narrow,"  Mr.  Moody  replied ;  "  why 
do  you  think  I  am  narrow  ?  "  "  Because  you  don't  believe 
in  the  dance,  you  don't  believe  in  cards,  you  don't  believe 
in  the  theatre,  you  don't  believe  in  anything  nice !  "  "  Let 
me  tell  you  something,"  he  said,  "  I  go  to  the  theatre 
whenever  I  want  to."  "  What !  "  she  exclaimed,  "  you 
go  to  the  theatre  whenever  you  want  to?  Oh,  I  do  like 
you,  Mr.  Moody !  You  are  much  broader  than  I  thought." 
"  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  I  go  to  the  theatre  whenever  I  want 
to,  I  don't  want  to  !  " 


100  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Some  days  later  another  lady  came  to  him  and  said: 
"  Mr.  Moody,  I  did  not  understand  what  you  meant  when 
you  said  you  went  to  the  theatre  whenever  you  wanted  to, 
but  I  understand  now.  I  was  converted  in  your  meetings 
and  a  few  days  ago,  after  my  conversion,  my  husband 
asked  me  to  go  to  the  theatre  with  him.  I  did  not  care 
to  go,  but  went  to  please  him.  We  had  hardly  taken  our 
seats  when  the  curtain  rose  and  just  a  little  while  after 
the  curtain  rose  something  was  said  on  the  stage  that 
grated  on  this  new  life  that  I  had  in  my  heart.  I  turned 
to  my  husband  and  whispered :  *  Husband,  I  can't  stand 
this  !  *  He  whispered  back :  *  Stay  through  this  play  and 
I  will  never  ask  you  to  come  again.'  I  straightened  up 
and  the  play  went  on  for  a  little  while  longer,  and  again 
something  was  said  or  done  on  the  stage  that  grated  on 
this  new  life  in  my  heart.  Again  I  turned  to  my  hus- 
band and  whispered :  '  Husband,  I  really  can't  stand  this ; 
I  must  go ! '  My  husband  whispered  back :  '  Don't  make 
a  scene.  Stay  through  this  play  and  I'll  never  ask  you 
to  come  again.'  Again  I  straightened  up  and  tried  to 
endure  it.  But  soon  something  else  was  said  or  done 
that  jarred  upon  this  new  life  that  I  had  in  my  heart,  and 
I  turned  to  my  husband  and  said :  '  Husband,  I  really 
can't  stand  it  any  longer ! '  He  whispered  back :  '  Don't 
make  a  fool  of  yourself  ! '  I  replied :  *  Husband,  I  have 
been  making  a  fool  of  myself  for  thirty  years,  and  I  am 
not  going  to  make  a  fool  of  myself  any  longer! '  And  I 
got  up  and  left." 

Oh,  if  you  have  this  fountain  within,  you  will  not  want 
these  things.  The  pure  crystal  spring  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  heart  will  make  it  impossible  for  you  to  seek  to 
slake  your  thirst  at  the  green,  slimy  pools  of  this  world's 
pleasures. 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  101 

But  someone  will  ask:  Why  is  it,  then,  that  so  many 
Christians  do  run  after  these  things?  The  answer  is 
very  simple:  It  is  either  because  they  never  have  really 
received  the  Holy  Spirit  as  an  indwelling  fountain  of  life 
and  joy  and  satisfaction,  which  is  doubtless  true  of  many 
professing  Christians;  or  else  the  fountain  has  become 
choked.  You  know  it  is  quite  possible  to  choke  a 
fountain. 

I  was  born  in  the  city  and  brought  up  in  the  city. 
Occasionally,  in  the  summer,  our  family  would  take  a 
vacation  in  the  country.  But  in  the  heart  of  the  great 
city  was  where  we  lived.  When  I  became  ten  years  of 
age  I  was  thoroughly  tired  of  the  city,  as  any  healthy 
boy  would  be.  My  two  brothers,  who  were  both  older 
than  I,  were  also  tired  of  the  city,  and  we  went  to  our 
father  and  said :  "  Father,  buy  a  home  in  the  country." 
He  was  born  in  the  country  and  was,  I  suspect,  more 
tired  of  the  city  than  we  were,  and,  though  he  was  only 
forty-three,  he  made  up  his  mind  that  he  would  retire 
from  business  and  would  buy  a  home  in  the  country. 
He  went  to  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  about  twenty  miles  from 
where  he  was  born.  Oftentimes,  as  a  young  man,  he 
had  noticed  a  beautiful  place  on  Seneca  Lake  where  he 
thought  he  would  like  to  live  when  he  had  money  enough 
to  make  it  possible.  It  was  just  outside  Geneva,  across 
the  lake,  the  grounds  running  down  to  the  lake.  But,  on 
reaching  Geneva,  he  found  that  the  owner  did  not  wish 
to  sell  the  place.  He  went  to  an  old  friend,  an  elder  in 
the  Presbyterian  Church,  Captain  Joe  Lewis,  and  said : 
"  Joe,  I  came  out  here  to  buy  the  Swan  place  but  they 
don't  wish  to  sell  it.  I  am  greatly  disappointed ! " 
"  Reuben,"  he  replied,  "  I  think  I  know  a  place  that 
would  suit  you — the  Colonel  Sherrill  place.     The  colonel 


102  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

was  killed  in  the  war,  and  his  widow  wishes  to  sell  the 
place."  He  took  my  father  out,  and  they  soon  agreed 
upon  the  terms  and  my  father  bought  the  place. 

Geneva  is  a  beautiful  city  lying  at  the  foot  of  Seneca 
Lake,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  sheets  of  water  in  the 
world,  forty-two  miles  long  and  from  two  to  five  miles 
wide.  The  man  who  had  originally  built  the  place  had 
spent  a  great  deal  of  money  upon  it.  It  was  half  a  mile 
from  the  lake  and  part  of  the  city  lay  between  the  place 
and  the  lake.  But  the  man  wished  to  see  up  the  lake.  So 
he  had  three  hundred  teams  to  work  for  many  weeks 
building  an  artificial  hill,  so  that  they  could  see  over  the 
lake  and  up  the  lake  twenty  miles.  Then  he  laid  out  his 
lawns  and  gardens  and  sent  to  different  parts  of  this 
country  and,  I  think,  also  to  England,  to  get  large  trees  to 
set  out.  But  when  the  trees  were  set  out  and  the  house 
and  barns  and  stables  built,  and  the  orchards  planted, 
though  he  could  see  twenty  miles  up  the  lake  the  man  was 
not  satisfied,  because  of  the  water  supply.  There  was  a 
good  well,  but  it  was  a  long  ways  from  the  house,  and  he 
wished  to  have  a  well  near  at  hand  where  he  could  pump 
water  through  the  house.  He  sent  for  well  diggers  and 
set  them  to  digging  a  well  not  very  far  from  the  house. 
They  dug  and  dug  and  dug;  it  seemed  as  if  they  never 
would  strike  water.  But  one  day  they  struck  water  and 
struck  altogether  too  much.  They  struck  a  "  gusher  "  and 
the  water  came  pouring  in  until  they  were  afraid  it  would 
undermine  the  foundations  of  the  house.  He  sent  for  the 
fire  department ;  they  pumped  the  well  out,  and  while  still 
pumping  they  lowered  a  man  in  a  basket  down  into  the 
well  with  a  rag  carf)et  in  his  hand.  He  found  the  great 
orifice  where  the  water  was  pouring  in  and  shoving  the 
rag  carpet  in  stopped  the  flow  of  water.    Then  they  piled 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  103 

in  rocks  on  top  of  it,  and  the  well  was  perfectly  safe. 
But  it  was  also  perfectly  useless. 

One  day,  standing  by  that  expensive  hole,  the  man  said 
to  himself :  "  I  put  a  lot  of  money  into  that  hole  and  I  am 
going  to  have  that  water  I  "  They  took  out  the  rocks  that 
had  been  piled  in,  then  curbed  the  well  up  with  stone  from 
the  bottom  to  the  top ;  and  then  he  sent  for  the  fire  depart- 
ment again.  Again  they  lowered  the  man  into  the  well. 
In  one  hand  he  held  a  cord  with  which  to  pull  a  bell  to 
signal  them  when  he  got  hold  of  the  carpet.  He  took  hold 
of  the  carpet  with  one  hand  and  with  the  other  rang  the 
signal,  and  they  pulled  him  up,  dragging  the  carpet  with 
him.  And  the  water  poured  in  again,  but  now  it  was 
perfectly  safe. 

For  years  we  drank  of  that  well,  and  wonderful  water 
it  was.  But  in  the  course  of  time  my  father  and  mother 
died,  and  the  place  passed  into  other  hands.  I  never  re- 
visited the  place  after  my  father's  funeral  for  twenty-two 
years ;  I  did  not  want  to  see  it.  But  one  time  I  had  to  pass 
through  Geneva  to  go  to  Cornell  University  to  speak  at  a 
meeting  there.  On  returning  through  the  place  I  thought 
I  would  get  off  and  visit  the  old  place.  The  station  of  the 
Lehigh  Valley  railroad  was  right  on  our  old  place,  about 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  back  from  where  the  house  had  stood. 
A  street-car  line  passed  right  over  the  spot  where  the 
house  had  been  located.  I  got  off  and  looked  to  see  if  I 
could  find  anything  that  reminded  me  of  the  old  home. 
The  house  had  been  taken  down,  brick  by  brick  and  stone 
by  stone.  Many  of  the  finest  trees  had  been  cut  down. 
The  lawns  and  gardens  and  orchards  were  now  laid  out 
in  city  lots.  I  thought  at  first  I  was  to  find  nothing  that 
Wlonged  to  the  old  home.  But  passing  by  a  house  I 
tioticed   a   well   right   in    front   of   the    front   porch.      I 


104  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

thought  to  myself :  "  What  a  strange  place  to  have  a  well, 
right  in  the  front  yard  and  in  front  of  the  porch;"  and 
then  it  occurred  to  me  that  it  was  the  old  well !  Leaving 
the  old  home  place,  I  went  down  town.  The  Presby- 
terian minister  met  me  on  the  street.  "  Oh,"  he  said, 
"  have  you  been  up  to  the  old  place  ?  "  I  replied :  "  I 
have."  He  said :  "  You  didn't  find  anything  of  the  old 
place  left,  did  you?"  "Yes,"  I  said,  "just  one  thing — 
the  old  well.  But  what  a  strange  place  for  a  well — right 
in  front  of  your  front  porch !  I  should  think  they  would 
fill  it  up."  He  replied:  "They  will  never  fill  that  well 
up — it's  the  best  water  in  Geneva ! "  Do  you  see  the 
point? — the  best  water  in  Geneva!  and  yet  it  had  been 
plugged  up  for  a  long  time  with  an  old  rag!  If  you 
have  ever  received  the  Holy  Spirit  as  an  indwelling 
source  of  joy,  you  have  had  in  your  heart,  not  "  the  best 
water  there  is  in  Geneva,"  but  the  best  water  there  is  in 
the  universe.  And  in  many  of  you  the  well  is  plugged 
up  by  some  old  rag  of  sin  or  worldly  conformity.  Let's 
pull  out  the  old  rags  today !    What  do  you  say  ? 

When  I  was  holding  meetings  in  Melbourne,  Australia, 
I  used  this  illustration  one  day  at  a  meeting  for  business 
and  professional  men  in  the  town  hall.  There  was  a 
Church  of  England  clergyman  in  my  audience  who  had 
known  the  joy  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  earlier  life  in 
England,  but  in  coming  out  to  Australia  the  fountain  had 
become  choked.  As  he  heard  me  that  day  a  great  unrest 
came  into  his  heart ;  he  longed  for  the  old  joy.  He  spent 
the  whole  afternoon  at  the  Cathedral  in  prayer  (the 
Cathedral  was  kept  open  all  day  for  prayer).  But  when 
night  came  on  he  had  not  got  the  old  rag  out  yet.  He 
called  upon  Father  Kent,  a  godly  Anglican  clergyman, 
and  told  him  of  his  trouble,  and  Father  Kent  helped  him 


HOW  TO  BE  FULLY  SATISFIED  106 

to  get  the  old  rag  out,  and  he  was  filled  with  even  greater 
joy  than  he  had  known  before.  He  came  to  me  the  next 
day  and  told  me  of  the  experience.  When  we  went  to 
Geelong  to  hold  meetings  there,  this  man,  whose  parish 
was  fifteen  miles  from  Geelong,  brought  a  wagon-load 
of  people  down  every  night  to  the  meeting  and  took  them 
back  again  after  the  meeting  was  over.  He  was  the  most 
useful  worker  we  had  in  Geelong. 

Oh,  if  you  have  ever  known  this  joy  and  have  lost  it, 
find  out  today  what  it  is  that  stops  the  well  and  have  it 
out,  and  you  will  know  not  only  as  great  but  very  likely 
a  greater  joy  than  you  knew  before. 

When  I  was  holding  meetings  in  Bristol,  England,  in 
the  Coulston  Hall,  I  spoke  one  afternoon  on  this  same 
subject.  At  the  close,  as  I  stepped  into  my  carriage  to 
go  to  my  hotel,  another  Anglican  clergyman  came  up  and 
said :  "  I  am  going  to  ride  to  the  hotel  with  you,"  and 
stepped  into  the  carriage  with  me.  We  had  not  gone  far 
when  he  said :  "  I  once  knew  this  joy  of  which  you  have 
been  speaking  today,  but  the  fountain  is  now  plugged,  and 
I  know  what  plugs  it — it  is  a  plug  of  tobacco!  I  am 
going  to  give  it  up  today." 

What  is  it  that  stops  the  fountain  in  your  heart?  Do 
you  know?  If  so,  put  it  away  today.  But  perhaps  you 
do  not  know  what  it  is.  You  know  you  once  had  that 
joy  and  you  know  you  have  lost  it.  Well,  you  can  know. 
Ask  God  to  show  you  what  it  is  that  stops  the  fountam 
and  promise  Him  that  if  He  will  show  you  what  it  is, 
you  will  give  it  up.  He  will  show  you  if  you  are  really 
sincere. 

But  perhaps  some  of  you  never  knew  the  joy  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  You  can  know  that  wondrous  joy  today. 
The  Lord  Jesus  stands  here  today,  all  unseen,  but  never- 


106  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

theless  here,  holding  out  the  golden  goblet  that  contains 
the  living  water,  and  saying :  "  Whosoever  drinketh  of 
the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst ;  but  the 
water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  become  in  him  a  well  of 
water,  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  Will  you 
drink  ? 

Further  back  in  the  chapter  the  Lord  Jesus  says  (in 
vs.  10)  :  "  If  thou  knowest  the  gift  of  God  and  who  it  is 
that  saith  to  thee.  Give  me  to  drink,  thou  wouldest  have 
asked  of  Him,  and  he  would  have  given  thee  living 
water."  Just  ask  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  be  sure,  when 
you  ask,  that  you  really  mean  it,  and  that  you  really  long 
for  the  Holy  Spirit  at  any  price,  and  that  your  will  is 
fully  surrendered  to  God,  for  He  gives  the  Holy  Spirit 
"  to  them  that  obey  Him  "  (Acts  5 :  32). 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT: 
WHAT  IT  IS  AND  WHAT  IT  DOES 

THE  address  of  this  afternoon,  and  the  addresses  of 
the  days  immediately  to  follow,  are  the  outcome 
of  an  experience,  and  that  experience  was  the 
outcome  of  a  study  of  the  Word  of  God.  After  I  had 
been  a  Christian  for  some  years,  and  after  I  had  been  in 
the  ministry  for  some  years,  my  attention  was  strongly 
attracted  to  certain  phrases  found  in  the  Gospels  and  in 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  in  the  Epistles,  such  as 
"  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  "  filled  with  the  Spirit," 
"  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  upon  them,"  "  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,"  "  endued  with  power  from  on  high,"  and  other 
closely  allied  phrases.  As  I  studied  these  various  phrases 
in  their  context,  it  became  clear  to  me  that  they  all  stood 
for  essentially  the  same  experience ;  and  it  also  became 
clear  to  me  that  God  had  provided  for  each  child  of 
His  in  this  present  dispensation  that  they  should  be 
this  "baptized  with  the  Spirit,"  or,  "filled  with  the 
Spirit." 

As  I  studied  the  subject  still  further,  I  became  con- 
vinced that  they  described  an  experience  which  I  did  not 
myself  possess,  and  I  went  to  work  to  secure  for  myself 
the  experience  thus  described.  I  sought  earnestly  that  I 
might  "  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  I  went  at  it 
very  ignorantly.     I  have  often  wondered  if  anyone  ever 

107 


108  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

went  at  it  any  more  ignorantly  than  I  did.  But  while  I 
was  ignorant,  I  was  thoroughly  sincere  and  in  earnest, 
and  God  met  me,  as  He  always  meets  the  sincere  and 
earnest  soul,  no  matter  how  ignorant  he  may  be;  and 
God  gave  me  what  I  sought,  I  was  "  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit."  And  the  result  was  a  transformed  Chris- 
tian life  and  a  transformed  ministry. 

Then  I  began  to  tell  others  of  what  I  had  found  in  the 
Word  of  God,  first  in  very  small  circles,  then  in  larger 
circles,  then  in  much  wider  circles,  and  at  last  it  was  my 
privilege  to  tell  it  literally  around  the  globe,  I  have  often 
thought,  in  connection  with  my  own  experience,  of  our 
Lord's  own  promise  to  the  apostles,  found  in  Acts  1:8: 
"  But  ye  shall  receive  power,  after  that  the  Holy  Ghosf 
is  come  upon  you:  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me 
both  in  Jerusalem  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and 
unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth";  for  it  has  been 
my  privilege  to  declare  the  truth  in  the  very  remotest 
inhabited  spot  there  is  on  this  globe  from  the  place  where 
I  myself  was  "  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit." 

You  will  find  the  substance  of  all  I  have  to  say  this 
afternoon,  in  three  verses  in  the  Bible,  Acts  1:4,,  5,  8 : 
"And  being  assembled  together  with  them  (He)  com- 
manded them  that  they  should  not  depart  from  Jerusa- 
lem, but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father,  which,  saith 
He,  ye  have  heard  of  Me.  For  John  truly  baptized  with 
water;  but  ye  shall  he  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  not 
many  days  hence.  .  .  .  But  ye  shall  receive  power,  after 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you:  and  ye  shall  be 
witnesses  unto  me  both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea, 
and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the 
earth."  What  I  wish  you  to  notice  particularly  just  now, 
in  these  verses,  is  these  words,  "  baptize:d  with  The 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      109 

Holy  Ghost/^  What  a  peculiar  expression  it  is !  What 
does  it  mean  ?  We  all  know  what  it  means  to  be  baptized 
with  water:  we  have  seen  people  thus  baptized.  But 
"  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  what  does  it  mean  ? 

What  I  have  to  say  on  the  general  subject  of  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  come  under  five  heads : 

First:  What  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  Is. 

Second:  What  the  Results  of  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  Are. 

Third:  The  Necessity  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  or.  Who  Needs  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Fourth:  The  Possibility  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  or  Who  Can  Be  Baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Fifth:  How  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  Is  to 
Be  Obtained. 

I.  What  is  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit? 

The  first  question,  then,  that  we  should  consider  is, 
"What  is  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit?"  The 
Bible  makes  this  very  plain,  if  we  study  the  various  pas- 
sages that  speak  of  the  subject,  and  study  them  in  their 
context. 

1.  In  the  first  place,  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  a  definite  experience  of  which  one  may  know  whether 
he  has  received  it  or  not.  This  is  clear  from  Acts  1 : 4,  5 : 
"And  being  assembled  together  with  them  (He)  com- 
manded them  that  they  should  not  depart  from  Jerusa- 
lem, but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  father,  which,  saith 
He,  ye  have  heard  from  Me.  For  John  indeed  baptized 
with  water ;  but  ye  shall  be  baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
not  many  days  hence/*  It  is  clear  as  day  from  these 
verses  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  definite 
experience  of  which  a  man  may  know  whether  he  has 


110  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

received  It  or  not,  for  if  not,  how  could  the  disciples 
possibly  know  when  the  days  of  waiting  were  over  and 
the  days  to  begin  their  ministry  had  begun? 

The  same  thing  is  clear  from  Acts  19:2  also:  "He 
said  unto  them,  Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since 
ye  believed  ?  "  or,  as  it  is  in  the  Revised  Version,  "  Did  ye 
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  when  ye  believed?  "  "  And  they 
said  unto  him,  No,  we  did  not  so  much  as  hear  whether 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  given."  Paul  had  come  down  to 
the  City  of  Ephesus,  and  had  found  there  a  small  group 
of  disciples,  twelve  in  number.  There  was  something 
about  these  twelve  disciples  that  did  not  altogether  sat- 
isfy Paul.  We  are  not  told  just  what  it  was.  It  may 
have  been  that  there  was  not  that  abounding  joyfulness 
about  them  that  one  expects  to  find  in  Spirit-filled  Chris- 
tians. It  may  be  that  Paul  was  troubled  by  the  fact  that 
there  were  only  twelve  of  them,  thinking  that  if  they 
were  Spirit-filled,  there  would  certainly  have  been  more 
than  twelve  of  them  by  this  time.  Whatever  it  was  that 
disturbed  Paul,  he  went  right  to  the  root  of  the  difficulty 
at  once  by  putting  to  them  the  question  that  we  have  just 
read,  "  Did  ye  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  when  ye  be- 
lieved ?  "  Evidently  Paul  expected  a  definite  "  Yes,"  or 
a  definite  "  No  "  in  answer  to  that  question.  In  point  of 
fact  he  got  a  definite  "  No."  They  said  "  No,  we  did  not 
so  much  as  hear  whether  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given." 
They  did  not  say  what  our  Authorized  Version  makes 
them  say :  "  We  have  not  so  much  as  heard  whether  there 
be  any  Holy  Ghost."  I  suppose  there  are  Christians 
today  who  are  as  ignorant  as  that,  they  do  not  even  know 
that  there  is  such  a  person  as  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  these 
disciples  knew  that  there  was  a  Holy  Spirit.  They  knew, 
furthermore,  that  there  was  a  definite  promise  of  the 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      HI 

baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  they  did  not  know  that 
that  promise  had  as  yet  been  fulfilled.  Paul  assured 
them  that  it  had,  and  saw  to  it  at  once,  even  before  that 
meeting  broke  up,  that  they  all  took  the  steps  whereby 
they  were  all  definitely  and  immediately  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  right  then  and  there  without  any  "  tarry- 
ing meetings  "  or  anything  of  that  sort. 

There  is  much  talk  in  these  days  about  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  much  prayer  for  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  that  is  altogether  vague  and  indefi- 
nite. You  will  go  to  a  meeting  and  men  will  stand  up 
and  pray  that  they  may  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
but  oftentimes,  if  after  the  meeting  is  over  you  should 
go  to  them  and  ask,  "Did  you  get  what  you  asked? 
Were  you  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  "  there  is  quite 
a  strong  probability  that  they  would  hesitate,  and  even 
stammer,  and  say,  "  Well,  well,  /  hope  so."  But  there 
is  none  of  that  indefiniteness  in  the  Bible.  The  Bible  is 
the  most  definite  book  that  was  ever  written.  That  is 
one  of  the  reasons  why  I  love  it.  The  Bible  is  definite 
about  salvation;  so  definite  that  if  a  man  is  saved,  and 
knows  his  Bible,  and  you  put  to  him  the  question,  "  Are 
you  saved,"  he  will  reply,  in  all  humility  and  yet  with 
equal  confidence,  "Yes,  God  in  His  infinite  mercy  and 
condescension  has  saved  even  me."  The  Bible  is  just  as 
definite  about  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit ;  so  defi- 
nite that  if  a  man  has  been  "baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,'*  and  knows  his  Bible,  and  you  put  to  him  the 
question,  "Have  you  been  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  ?  "  he  will  reply,  in  all  humility  and  yet  with  equal 
confidence  and  positiveness,  "  Yes,  God  in  His  infinite 
mercy  and  condescension  has  seen  fit  to  baptize  even  me 
with  His  Holy  Spirit." 


112  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Of  course,  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  man  may  be  a 
saved  man  and  yet,  by  reason  of  his  ignorance  of  the 
Bible,  not  have  assurance  of  salvation,  i.  e.,  he  may  not 
knozv  that  he  is  saved.  We  have  all  met  many  such  men 
and  women.  But  it  is  his  privilege  to  know  (1  Jno. 
5:  13).  And  so  it  is  also  quite  possible  that  a  man  may 
have  been  "  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost "  and  yet, 
through  ignorance  of  the  Bible,  not  know  the  name  of 
the  experience  which  he  has  received.  I  have  met  such 
men  and  women  as  that.  I  remember  a  man  who  came 
to  me  once  at  an  "  International  Christian  Workers'  Con- 
vention "  at  Washington,  D.  C.  He  was  a  well-known 
man — a  man  known  all  over  the  country;  a  man  that  I 
presume  every  one  of  you  would  know  at  least  by  name 
if  I  should  mention  it.  At  the  close  of  an  address  that 
I  gave  on  "  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  this 
man  came  to  me  and  said,  "  Is  that  what  you  call  it,  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit?  I  never  heard  the  name 
before,  but  I  have  received  what  you  have  been  talking 
about,  and  I  can  tell  you  just  where  I  received  it."  But, 
while  this  is  all  true,  it  is  possible  for  us  to  know  whether 
or  not  we  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
Baptism  with  the  Hoi.y  Spirit  is  a  Definite  experi- 
ence oE  which  one  may  know  whether  he  has 

RECEIVED  it  or  not. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  distinct  from  and  additional 
to  His  regenerating  work.  In  other  words,  it  is  one  thing 
to  be  born  again  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  quite  another 
thing  to  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  very 
evident  from  Acts  1:5:  "Ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  not  many  days  hence."  It  is  evident  from 
these  words  that  the  apostles  had  not  as  yet  been  baptized 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      113 

with  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  were  to  be  "  not  many  days 
hence."  But  the  men  to  whom  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
spoke  these  words  were  already  regenerate  men.  We 
know  that  they  were  regenerate  men  because  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  had  pronounced  them  to  be  regen- 
erate men.  In  John  15:3,  our  Lord  had  said  sometime 
before  to  these  very  same  men,  "  Already  ye  are  clean 
because  of  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you." 
Now,  what  does  "  clean  because  of  the  word "  mean  ? 
Turn  to  1  Peter  1 :  23,  and  you  will  get  your  answer : 
"  Having  been  begotten  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed, 
but  of  incorruptible,  through  the  word  of  God,  which 
liveth  and  abideth."  It  is  evident  from  these  words  that 
"clean  through  the  Word"  (or  "because  of  the  Word," 
as  the  Revised  Version  reads)  means  "begotten  again," 
or  born  again,  "  through  the  Word."  So  these  men  were 
already  born  again,  but  they  were  not  as  yet  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  They  were  to  be  "  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit "  not  many  days  hence. 

The  same  thing  is  evident  from  Acts  8 :  12-16.  In 
verse  12  we  are  told  that  "  when  they  believed  Philip 
preaching  the  good  tidings  concerning  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  they  were  baptized, 
both  men  and  women."  Now  certainly,  in  that  large  com- 
pany of  baptized  believers,  who  had  "  believed  Philip 
preaching  good  tidings  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God, 
and  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,"  and  who  ""  had  been  bap- 
tized into  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  (v.  16),  there 
were  at  least  some  who  were  regenerate  men  and  women. 
Whatever  may  be  the  correct  mode  of  baptism,  by 
sprinkling,  immersion,  or  pouring,  these  disciples  had, 
beyond  question,  been  baptized  in  the  right  way,  for 
Philip,  an  officially  appointed  officer  in  the  church,  had 


114  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

administered  the  baptism,  and  as  I  have  said,  it  is  clear 
that  some,  at  least,  of  this  company  of  properly  baptized 
believers  were  regenerate  men.  But  when  we  come  down 
to  verses  15  and  16,  we  read,  "  Peter  and  John,  when 
they  were  come  down,  prayed  for  them  that  they  might 
receive  the  Holy  Ghost:  for  as  yet  He  was  fallen  upon 
none  of  them:  only  they  were  baptized  into  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus."  So  we  see  clearly  that  these  regenerate 
men  had  not  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  though 
they  had  been  properly  "baptized  into  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus."  They  were  regenerate  men  but  they  were 
not  baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

So  it  IS  AS  CLEAR  AS  LANGUAGE  CAN  POSSIBLY  MAKB 
IT,  THAT  IT  IS  ONE  THING  TO  BE  BORN  AGAIN  AND  SOME- 
THING FURTHER,  SOMETHING  ADDITIONAL,  TO  BE  BAPTIZED 

WITH  THE  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  clear  and  undeniable, 
therefore,  that  one  may  be  a  regenerate  man  and  yet  not 
as  yet  have  received  the  baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Let  us  bow  to  the  clear  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God 
even  if  it  does  not  agree  with  our  preconceived  theories. 

Now,  if  a  man  is  regenerate,  he  is  saved.  This  is  not 
a  question  of  salvation  at  all.  If  he  should  die  he  would 
go  to  heaven.  But  though  he  is  saved  he  is  not  yet  fitted 
for  God's  service.  He  has  not  as  yet  all  that  he  might 
have,  and  ought  to  have. 

Let  me  make  it  clear,  still  further,  that  every  believer 
has  the  Holy  Spirit  in  some  sense;  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
dwells  in  every  one  that  is  born  again.  This  appears 
clearly  from  Romans  8:9,  as  well  as  from  many  other 
passages  of  Scripture.  Let  me  read  Romans  8 : 9  to 
you:  "But  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he 
is  none  of  His."  Now  the  words  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ " 
in  this  verse  do  not  mean  a  Christlike  spirit.    The  words 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      116 

are  a  name  for  the  Holy  Spirit;  that  is  clear  from  the 
context.  And  what  we  are  told  here  is  that  if  any  man 
hath  not  the  Holy  Spirit  (Who  is  here  called  the  Spirit 
of  Christ),  he  is  none  of  His.  So  it  is  dear  that  every 
regenerate  man  has  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  in  many  a 
believer  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  away  back  in  some  hidden 
sanctuary  of  his  person,  away  back  of  conscious  experi- 
ence. So,  just  as  it  is  one  thing  to  have  a  guest  in  your 
house  living  in  some  remote  corner  of  the  house  where 
you  scarcely  know  that  he  is  there,  and  quite  another 
thing  to  have  that  guest  taking  entire  possession  of  the 
house,  just  so  it  is  one  thing  to  have  the  Holy  Spirit 
dwelling  away  back  of  consciousness  in  some  hidden 
sanctuary  of  our  being,  and  quite  another  thing  to  have 
that  Holy  Spirit  taking  entire  possession  of  the  house. 
In  other  words,  it  is  one  thing  to  have  the  Holy  Spirit 
merely  dwelling  in  us  but  we  not  conscious  of  His 
dwelling,  and  quite  another  thing  to  be  filled,  or  baptized, 
with  the  Holy  Spirit.  So  we  may  put  it  with  perfect 
accuracy  in  this  way:  Every  regenerate  person  has  the 
Holy  Spirit,  but  not  every  regenerate  person  has  what 
the  Bible  calls  "  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  or  "  The 
baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  or  "  the  Promise  of  the 
Father." 

Let  me  say,  still  further,  that  one  may  he  baptised  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  at  the  very  time  he  is  born  again.  That 
is  exactly  what  occurred  in  the  case  of  the  household  of 
Cornelius.  Cornelius  and  his  household  and  friends  were 
listening  to  the  first  gospel  sermon  they  had  ever  heard 
in  their  lives,  and  Peter  had  come  to  the  climax  of  his 
sermon,  in  Acts  10 :  43,  where  he  says :  "  To  Him  (t.  e., 
to  the  Lord  Jesus)  bear  all  the  prophets  witness,  that 
through  His  name  everyone  that  believeth  on  Him  shall 


116  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

receive  remission  of  sins,"  and  no  sooner  had  Peter  said 
it  than  they  all  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus  and  were  born 
again,  and  right  then  and  there,  before  Peter  could  finish 
his  sermon,  we  read,  "  While  Peter  yet  spake  these 
words,  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  on  all  them  that  heard  the 
"Word.  And  they  of  the  circumcision  that  believed  were 
amazed,  as  many  as  came  with  Peter,  because  that  on  the 
Gentiles  also  was  poured  out  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
For  they  heard  them  speak  with  tongues  and  magnify 
God."  So  we  see  that  they  were  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  the  very  moment  that  they  believed  and  were  born 
again.  Now  in  a  normal  order  of  the  Church,  I  believe 
that  this  would  be  the  common  experience;  but  alas!  the 
Church  is  not  in  a  normal  order  today.  A  very  large 
portion  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  today  is  exactly 
where  the  believers  in  Samaria  were  before  Peter  and 
John  came  down  and  '^  prayed  for  them  that  they  might 
receive  the  Holy  Spirit "  because  "  as  yet  He  was  fallen 
upon  not  one  of  them."  They  are  just  where  the  twelve 
disciples  in  Ephesus  were  before  Paul  visited  Ephesus  ; 
baptized  with  the  baptism  of  repentance,  forgiven  and 
saved,  but  not  yet  baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  every  believer's 
privilege  and  birthright,  through  the  crucified,  risen  and 
ascended  Saviour.  Jesus  Christ,  when  He  ascended  up 
on  high,  prayed  for  His  Church  (Jno.  14:15-17),  that 
is,  for  the  whole  body  of  believers,  and  received  for 
them,  as  we  are  told  in  Acts  2 :  ZZ,  "  the  promise  of  the 
Holy  Spirit "  and  poured  forth  the  Holy  Spirit  upon 
His  Church  as  a  body,  but  many  members  of  the  true 
Church,  that  is,  many  saved  men  and  women,  have  not 
claimed  for  themselves  their  birthright;  and  so,  while  the 
baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  theirs,  i.  e.,  it  belongs  to 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      117 

them,  they  do  not  as  yet  have  the  baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  experimental  possession. 

We  may  say,  further  still,  that  it  is  by  "the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit "  that  the  individual  believer,  as  we 
are  told  in  1  Cor.  12:13,  is  "baptized  into  the  Body" 
of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  living,  active,  efficient  member  of 
that  Body;  but  many  believers  have  not  claimed  this 
"  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  and  therefore  are  not 
possessors  of  those  gifts  (see  1  Cor.  12:4-11)  that 
qualify  them  to  be  members  of  the  Body  in  the  sense  in 
which  Paul  is  describing  the  Body  in  the  twelfth  chapter 
of  First  Corinthians.  They  are  potentially  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  but  not  experimentally  so  baptized,  but 
they  may  be  at  once. 

In  any  event  the  passages  that  we  have  read,  and  many 
others  that  we  might  read,  make  it  clear  to  any  one  whose 
mind  is  subject  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  who  therefore 
simply  desires  to  know  what  the  Word  of  God  teaches 
and  is  not  the  slave  of  a  theory,  that  one  may  be  born 
again  and  yet  not  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Furthermore,  from  our  own  observation  and  experience 
today,  we  must  all  know  that  if  the  baptism,  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  means  anything  definite,  as  it  certainly  did 
in  Bible  days,  as  set  forth  in  both  the  Acts  and  in  the 
Epistles,  then  there  are  many  people  in  the  Church  today 
who  we  have  a  right  to  believe  are  born  again  and  thus 
saved,  who  are  not  as  yet  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  the  baptism,  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ahvays  connected  with  and 
primarily  for  the  purpose  of  testimony  and  service.  This 
is  evident  from  the  passage  where  our  Lord  Jesus  made 
the  original  promise  of  the  baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
Acts  1:8:  "  But  ye  shall  receive  power,  when  the  Holy 


118  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Spirit  is  come  upon  you:  and  ye  shall  he  my  witnesses 
both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and 
unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth."  The  same  thing 
is  evident  from  the  twelfth  chapter  of  First  Corinthians, 
where  the  whole  subject  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  treated  at  length  and  in  detail.  We  will  not  take 
time  to  read  the  passage  now,  although  we  shall  have  oc- 
casion to  read  much  of  it  later.  There  is  not  one  single 
passage  in  the  Bible,  either  in  the  Old  Testament  or  the 
New  Testament,  where  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  spoken  of,  where  it  is  not  connected  with  testimony  or 
service,  I  made  this  statement  some  years  ago  in  speak- 
ing to  a  large  class  of  theological  students.  At  the  close 
of  the  lecture  two  students  came  up  to  me  and  said,  "  Did 
we  understand  you  to  say,  Mr.  Torrey,  that  there  was  not 
a  single  passage  in  the  Bible,  where  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  mentioned,  where  it  is  not  connected  with 
testimony  or  service  ?  "  "  Yes,"  I  replied,  "  that  is  ex- 
actly what  I  said."  "Well,"  they  said,  "we  doubt  it,'' 
I  replied,  "  You  have  a  perfect  right  to  doubt  it,  but  now 
go  and  search  your  Bible  and  bring  me,  if  you  can,  one 
single  passage  in  the  Bible  where  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  definitely  mentioned  or  referred  to,  where 
it  is  not  connected  with  testimony  or  service."  They 
went  to  work  to  search  for  the  passage.  I  think  they 
must  be  searching  for  it  yet,  for  they  have  never  brought 
it  to  me;  and  they  never  will,  for  it  is  not  to  be  found 
anywhere  in  the  Bible.  I  have  gone  through  my  Bible  on 
this  subject,  time  and  time  again  since  I  made  that  remark 
to  those  students,  and  without  the  slightest  fear  of  suc- 
cessful contradiction  I  repeat  the  statement  already  made, 
that  there  is  not  a  single  passage  in  the  Old  Testament  or 
New  Testament  where  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      119 

Is  spoken  of  or  referred  to  where  it  is  not  connected  with 
testimony  or  service. 

The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  primarily  for 
the  purpose  of  making  us  individually  holy.  Please  note 
carefully  my  words  and  grasp  exactly  what  I  say.  I  do 
not  say  that  it  is  not  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make 
us  holy,  for  it  is  His  work  to  make  us  holy,  and  it  is  only 
through  His  work  that  any  one  of  us  can  become  holy. 
I  do  say,  however,  that  it  is  not  the  primary  purpose  of 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  us  holy.  The 
primary  purpose  of  the  Baptism  zvith  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  to  equip  us  and  fit  us  for  service.  This  will  be- 
come still  clearer  when  we  come  to  study  the  next  part 
of  our  subject:  the  Results  of  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

Neither  is  it  the  primary  purpose  of  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  us  personally  happy.  Note  again 
carefully  what  I  say.  I  do  not  say  that  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  will  not  make  us  happy,  if  we  receive  it. 
I  have  never  known  anyone  yet  who  was  "  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit "  into  whose  heart  a  new  and  more  won- 
derful joy  did  not  come,  but  I  am  saying  that  this  is  not 
the  primary  purpose  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  primary  purpose  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  not  to  make  us  happy  but  to  make  us  useful  for  God. 
I  am  glad  that  this  is  so,  for  while  ecstacies  are  all  right 
in  their  place,  and  while  I  know  something  about  them  in 
my  own  experience,  yet  in  a  world  such  as  you  and  I  live 
in,  where  there  is  this  awful  tide  of  men,  women  and 
children  sweeping  on  unsaved  to  a  hopeless  eternity,  I 
would  rather  go  my  entire  life  through  without  one  single 
touch  of  ecstasy  or  rapture,  and  have  power  to  do  my 
part  to  stem  this  awful  tide  and  save  at  least  some,  than 


120  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

to  have  indescribable  raptures  every  day  of  my  life  and 
have  no  power  to  save  the  lost. 

I  wish  to  be  very  clear  and  very  emphatic  at  this  point, 
for  here  is  where  a  multitude  of  people  in  our  day  are 
going  astray.  Men  and  women  go  off  to  "  Bible  Con- 
ferences," to  "  meetings  for  the  deepening  of  the  spiri- 
tual life,"  and  to  "  tarrying  meetings,"  and  all  that  sort 
of  thing,  and  they  come  back  and  tell  you  what  a  won- 
derful experience  they  have  had,  what  raptures  they  have 
passed  through,  and  how  they  have  been  "baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,"  and  I  have  watched  carefully  a  good 
many  of  these  people;  and  many  of  them  are  of  no  more 
use  to  their  pastors  or  their  churches  than  they  were 
before.  And  some  of  them  are  of  far  less  use  than  they 
were  before  and  are  sometimes  a  positive  nuisance.  They 
have  no  more  love  for  souls  than  they  had  before,  make  no 
more  effort  for  the  salvation  of  the  lost  than  they  did  be- 
fore, and  win  no  more  souls  to  Christ  than  they  did  before ; 
and  I  am  therefore  sure  that  whatever  experience  they 
may  have  received  they  have  not  had  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  along  the  lines  so  plainly  laid  down  in  God's 
own  Word.  So  I  repeat  it  again,  the^  Baptism  with  The; 
Holy  Spirit  is  always  connected  with,  and  is  pri- 
marily FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OE,  EQUIPMENT  FOR  TESTIMONY 
AND  SERVICE :  IT  IS  TO  MAKE  US  USEFUL  FOR  GOD  IN  THE 
SALVATION  OF  SOULS  AND  NOT  MERELY  TO  MAKE  US  HAPPY. 

n.  The  Results  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit 

This  leads  us  to  the  second  question:  What  are  the 
Results  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit?  The  re- 
sults of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  as  set  forth  in 
the  Word  of  God  are  many- fold,  but  they  can  all  be 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      121 

summed  up  in  one  word,  and  that  word  is  power.  This 
comes  out  in  the  passage  to  which  I  have  already  re- 
ferred, Acts  1:8:  "Ye  shali,  receive  power,  when  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you:  and  ye  shall  be  my  wit- 
nesses both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in  Sa- 
maria, and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth." 

Just  as  surely  as  anyone  is  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  he  will  have  power,  power  for  the  work  to  which 
God  has  called  him.  Just  as  surely  as  anyone  here  this  af- 
ternoon meets  the  conditions  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  is  therefore  "  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit," 
there  will  come  a  new  power  into  his  life  and  service. 

There  needs,  however,  a  word  of  caution  to  be  said 
at  this  point,  and  not  only  to  be  said,  but  to  be  made  clear 
and  to  be  emphasized,  and  that  word  of  caution  is,  this 
power  will  not  manifest  itself  in  the  same  way  in  every 
individual.  That  thought  is  developed  at  considerable 
length  in  1  Cor.  12,  the  classical  passage  on  the  whole 
subject  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Let  me 
read  you  verses  4  to  13 :  "  Now  there  are  diversities  of 
gifts,  but  the  same  Spirit.  And  there  are  diversities  of 
administrations,  but  the  same  Lord.  And  there  are  di- 
versities of  workings,  but  the  same  God,  Who  worketh 
all  things  in  all.  But  to  each  one  is  given  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  to  profit  withal,  for  to  one  is  given 
through  the  Spirit  the  zvord  of  wisdom;  and  to  another 
the  word  of  knowledge,  according  to  the  same  Spirit;  to 
another,  faith,  in  the  same  Spirit;  and  to  another,  gifts 
of  healings,  in  the  one  Spirit;  and  to  another,  workings 
of  miracles;  and  to  another  prophecy;  and  to  another  dis- 
cernings  of  spirits;  and  to  another  diverse  kinds  of 
tongues;  and  to  another,  interpretation  of  tongues;  but  all 
these  worketh  the  one  and  the  same  Spirit,  dividing  to  each 


122  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

one  severally  as  He  will.  For  as  the  body  is  one,  and  hath 
many  members,  and  all  the  members  of  the  body,  being 
many,  are  one  body ;  so  also  is  Christ.  For  in  one  Spirit 
were  we  all  baptized  into  one  body,  whether  Jews  or 
Greeks,  whether  bond  or  free ;  and  were  all  made  to  drink 
of  one  Spirit." 

Now  what  strikes  one,  or  what  ought  to  strike  one, 
most  forcibly  in  this  passage,  is  the  word  "  diversities " 
so  often  repeated,  and  also  the  words  "  to  another "  so 
often  repeated.  And  the  thought  is  as  clear  as  language 
can  make  it,  and  very  much  emphasized,  that  while  there 
is  **  one  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit "  there  is  a  wide 
variety  of  manifestations  of  that  one  Baptism  with  that 
one  and  same  Spirit;  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  results  in  one  gift  in  one  person  according  to  the 
line  of  service  to  which  he  is  called,  and  quite  another 
gift  to  another  person,  according  to  the  line  of  service  to 
which  he  is  called. 

Now  that  is  the  point  at  which  a  multitude  of  people 
go  astray.  They  hear  of  some  person  who  was  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  for  His  own 
wise  reasons  imparted  to  that  person  some  special  gift 
for  the  special  service  to  which  he  was  called,  and  they 
think  that  if  they  are  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  they 
must  have  precisely  the  same  gift  that  this  other  person 
had.  But  that  is,  as  we  see,  entirely  unscriptural ;  indeed, 
it  is  clearly  anti-scriptural. 

It  was  at  this  point  that  I  was  tempted  to  go  astray 
when  I  first  began  the  study  of  this  subject,  a  great  many 
years  ago.  I  noticed  that  in  the  second  chapter  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles,  and  in  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  those  who  were  baptized  with  the 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     123 

Holy  Spirit  "spake  with  tongues,"  and  I  wondered  if 
everyone  who  was  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  would 
not  speak  with  tongues.  And  as  I  did  not  see  anyone 
speaking  with  tongues  today,  I  wondered  if  this  gift  was 
not  confined  to  the  Apostolic  Age.  But  one  day  my  at- 
tention was  called  to  First  Corinthians  the  twelfth  chap- 
ter, and  I  read  the  verses  which  I  have  just  read  to  you, 
and  discovered  that  while  there  was  "  one  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,"  there  was  a  vast  variety  of  manifesta- 
tions of  that  one  baptism,  and  that  it  was  distinctly  said 
that  to  one  was  given  "  divers  kinds  of  tongues,"  but  to 
others  an  entirely  different  gift;  and  I  also  discovered 
that  speaking  with  tongues  was  way  down  at  the  bottom 
of  the  list.  And  then  my  attention  was  fixed  upon  the 
closing  verses  of  the  chapter,  verses  28  to  31,  where  I 
read :  "  And  God  hath  set  some  in  the  church,  first  apos- 
tles, secondly  prophets,  thirdly  teachers,  then  miracles, 
then  gifts  of  healing,  helps,  governments,  divers  kinds 
of  tongues."  Here  again  "  tongues "  was  at  the  very 
bottom  of  the  list.  Then  I  went  on  and  read :  "  Are  all 
apostles  ?  are  all  prophets  ?  are  all  teachers  ?  are  all  work- 
ers of  miracles?  Have  all  the  gifts  of  healing?  do  all 
speak  with  tongues f"  And  therefore  I  saw  that  Paul 
clearly  taught  that  there  were  among  the  believers  in  this 
wonderfully  gifted  church,  of  which  he  had  plainly  de- 
clared in  the  thirteenth  verse  that  every  one  of  them  was 
baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  some  at  least  who  did  not 
speak  tvith  tongues.  So  I  saw  that  the  teaching  that 
speaking  with  tongues  was  the  inevitable  and  invariable 
result  of  being  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that 
any  one  who  had  not  spoken  with  tongues  had  not  been 
baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  was  utterly  unscriptural 
and  anti-scriptural. 


124  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

But  then  I  was  tempted  to  fall  into  another  error,  of  a 
somewhat  similar  character.  I  had  read  the  testimony  of 
John  Wesley,  and  of  Charles  G.  Finney,  and  D.  L. 
Moody,  and  others,  and  I  noted  how  all  these  men,  when 
they  were  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  obtained  the 
gift  of  an  evangelist,  and  I  was  tempted  to  say  to  myself, 
anyone  who  is  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  will  have  the 
gift  of  an  evangelist.  Now  that  is  just  as  unscriptural 
as  to  say  that  every  one  who  is  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  speak  with  tongues.  If  God  has  called  a  man 
into  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  and  he  is  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  then  doubtless  he  will  have  the  gift  of 
an  evangelist,  but  if  God  has  called  him  to  some  other 
work  he  will  have  some  other  power  or  gift,  which  will 
fit  him  for  the  work  to  which  God  has  called  him. 

This  mistake,  that  every  one  who  is  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  will  have  power  as  an  evangelist,  leads  to 
three  great  evils.  The  first  great  evil  to  which  it  leads 
is  the  evil  of  disappointment,  and  sometimes  even  of 
despair.  Many  a  man  has  heard  an  address  upon  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  not  carefully 
guarded  at  this  point,  and  he  gets  the  impression  that 
the  inevitable  and  invariable  result  of  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  gift  of  an  evangelist,  and  then  this 
man  seeks  for  himself  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  meets  the  conditions  of  that  baptism,  and  conse- 
quently really  is  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  God 
has  not  called  him  to  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  and 
therefore,  of  course,  God  does  not  empower  him  with 
the  gift  of  an  evangelist,  and  the  man  is  perplexed  and 
bewildered  and  sometimes  is  in  despair,  wondering  if  he 
really  has  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I  recall  a  very  striking  illustration  of  this.    A  Scotch* 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      126 

man,  a  ship-plater,  receiving  large  wages  over  in  Scot- 
land, heard  an  address  on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.  He  got  the  impression  that  the  result  of  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  was  in  every  instance  power 
as  an  evangelist,  and  he  sought  for  himself  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  obtained  it.  Then  he  heard 
that  there  were  spiritually  destitute  fields  in  America,  up 
in  the  Northwest,  and  he  made  up  his  mind  to  go  there 
and  preach  the  gospel;  and  at  a  great  financial  sacrifice 
he  sold  out  everything  and  came  out  to  Minnesota.  But 
God  had  not  at  that  time  called  him  to  be  an  evangelist, 
and  he  found  no  openings,  and  he  was  nearly  in  despair. 
He  not  only  wondered  whether  he  had  been  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  he  even  got  to  doubting  his  salvation. 
While  in  this  distressed  state  of  mind,  one  Sunday  morn- 
ing, he  dropped  into  the  church  in  Minneapolis  of  which 
I  was  at  that  time  pastor,  and  that  very  morning  I  spoke 
on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  made  clear 
what  I  am  trying  to  make  clear  to  you  today,  that  while 
"  there  is  one  Baptism  "  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  is  a 
wide  diversity  of  manifestations  of  that  one  baptism ;  and 
chat  the  gift  of  an  evangelist  is  not  by  any  means  the 
invariable  result  of  that  baptism.  He  saw  the  truth  and 
put  himself  in  God's  hands  for  God  to  choose  the  field 
of  service  and  to  qualify  him  for  the  service  to  which 
God  had  called  him. 

Very  soon  there  came  to  him  an  opening  to  go  down 
into  some  destitute  parts  of  Wisconsin,  doing  Sunday 
School  missionary  work.  He  went,  and  there  the  great 
thing  happened.  When  he  had  thus  given  up  dictating 
to  the  Holy  Spirit  what  gift  should  be  bestowed  upon 
him,  and  left  it  entirely  with  the  Holy  Spirit  in  His 
sovereign  will  to  decide,  and  went  out  to  do  the  work 


126  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

that  God  opened  to  him,  the  very  gift  that  he  had  sought 
came  upon  him.  He  did  receive  the  gift  of  an  evangelist, 
and  town  after  town  was  quite  overturned  by  the  power 
of  the  gospel  as  presented  by  him. 

The  second  mischief  that  results  from  this  error  that 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  will  always  result  in 
power  as  an  evangelist,  is  the  error  of  presumption. 
Many  a  man  has  heard  an  address  upon  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  that  is  not  carefully  guarded  at  this  point, 
and  has  gotten  the  impression  that  the  one  invariable 
result  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  power  as 
an  evangelist,  and  so  he  says  to  himself,  "  All  I  need  to 
become  an  evangelist  is  to  receive  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  Now  that  is  not  true.  It  is  very  far  from 
the  truth.  In  order  to  be  an  evangelist  the  first  thing  a 
man  needs  is  a  call  from  God  to  that  specific  work.  If 
God  in  His  infinite  wisdom  has  not  called  a  man  into  that 
work,  but  into  some  other  work,  he  certainly  will  not  get 
power  as  an  evangelist,  even  though  he  is  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  The  second  thing  a  man  needs  in  order 
to  be  an  evangelist  is  such  a  knowledge  of  the  Word  of 
God  that  he  has  something  to  preach  that  is  worth  listen- 
ing to.  If  a  man  has  a  call  of  God  to  the  work  of  an 
evangelist,  and  has  obtained  such  a  knowledge  of  the  Word 
of  God  that  he  has  something  to  preach  that  is  worth 
listening  to,  and  then  is  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  he 
will  have  power  as  an  evangelist,  but  otherwise  he  will 
not  have  power  as  an  evangelist.  One  of  the  most  un- 
fortunate things  in  evangelistic  work  today  is  that  so 
many  men  have  rushed  into  the  work  whom  God  never 
called  into  it,  who  have  no  message  that  is  worth  while. 

The  third  mischief  that  results  from  this  error  is  the 
worst  of  all,  and  that  is  the  mischief   of  indifference. 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     127 

Many  a  person  comes  to  a  meeting  like  this  and  hears  an 
address  on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  gets 
the  impression  that  the  one  result  of  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  gift  of  an  evangelist,  and  this 
person  knows  that  God  has  not  called  him  to  the  work  of 
an  evangelist.  For  instance,  here  is  a  woman,  with  a 
family  of  five  or  six  or  even  more  children.  Now  that 
woman  knows,  or  at  least  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  she  has 
sense  enough  to  know,  though  some  don't,  that  God  has 
not  called  her  to  be  an  evangelist,  that  her  work  is  at 
home  with  her  children ;  and  when  she  hears  this  address 
she  says  to  herself,  "  My  minister  may  need  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  evangelist  may  need  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Y.  M.  C,  A.  Secretary 
may  need  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  I  don't; 
for  God  has  not  called  me  to  be  an  evangelist.  My  work 
is  here  at  home  with  my  own  children."  But  if  a  mother 
gets  the  right  conception  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  Bible  conception,  namely,  that  it  is  to  fit  be- 
lievers in  Jesus  Christ  not  only  for  the  work  of  an  evan- 
gelist, but  for  any  other  function  to  which  God  may  call 
us  in  His  Church,  and  that  there  is  no  other  function  in 
the  Church  that  God  has  more  honoured  than  the  func- 
tion of  sanctified  motherhood,  then  this  woman  will  say, 
"  Evangelists  may  need  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
my  pastor  may  need  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
but  I  must  have  it  in  order  that  I  may  have  power  to 
bring  my  own  children  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition 
of  the  Lord." 

Before  leaving  this  part  of  my  subject,  I  wish  to  call 
your  attention  to  the  fact,  and  to  emphasize  the  fact,  that 
IT  IS  THK  Holy  Spirit  Himself  Who  decides  what 
The:  particular  gift  or  manifestation  shall  be  in 


128  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

ANY  GIVEN  INSTANCD.  This  IS  very  plain  from  1  Cor. 
12:11:  "For  all  these  worketh  the  one  and  the  same 
Spirit,  dividing  to  each  one  severally  even  as  He  will." 
Here  we  are  distinctly  taught  that  it  is  not  for  us  to 
choose  some  gift  and  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  impart 
to  us  that  self-chosen  gift.  It  is  not  for  us  to  choose  for 
ourselves  some  field  of  service  and  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  qualify  us  for  the  field  of  service  which  we  have 
chosen.  No,  emphatically  no!  It  is  for  us  to  put  our- 
selves entirely  at  the  disposal  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for 
Him  to  choose  the  gift  and  for  Him  to  qualify  us  with 
the  gift  which  He  has  chosen;  for  Him  to  choose  the 
field  of  service,  and  for  Him  to  qualify  us  for  the  field 
of  service  which  He  Himself  has  chosen.  Oh,  how  many 
go  astray  at  this  point!  They  have  chosen  for  them- 
selves some  particular  gift,  it  may  be  speaking  with 
tongues,  it  may  be  the  gift  of  an  evangelist,  or  some 
other  gift,  and  then  they  meet  the  conditions  of  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  then,  though  they  may 
not  be  definitely  conscious  of  it,  they  try  to  dictate  to  the 
Holy  Spirit  what  gift  he  shall  impart  to  them.  I  have 
kjiown  people  who  have  waited  for  weeks  or  months,  or 
even  years,  for  their  self-chosen  gift  of  speaking  with 
tongues. 

I  recall  a  man  whom  I  knew  intimately  in  Chicago,  a 
man  who  was  very  useful  in  his  church  and  very  gifted 
in  prayer.  While  I  was  away,  going  around  the  world 
preaching  the  gospel,  this  man  got  under  the  influence 
of  those  people  who  over-emphasize  "  speaking  with 
tongues.'*  He  gave  up  all  his  work  and  gave  all  his 
time,  when  he  was  not  engaged  in  his  business,  to  "  wait- 
ing for  his  Pentecost,"  by  which  he  meant  waiting  until 
he  should  be  enabled  by  the  Spirit  to  speak  with  tongues. 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     129 

After  two  long  years  of  waiting,  the  last  I  knew  of  him 
he  was  still  absolutely  useless,  "  waiting  for  his  Pente- 
cost." No,  No,  No,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  sovereign  in  the 
whole  matter  (1  Cor.  12: 11),  and  it  is  not  for  you  nor 
for  me  to  dictate  to  Him  what  gift  He  shall  impart  to  us 
when  we  are  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  for  us 
to  leave  that  entirely  with  Him,  and  just  put  ourselves 
unreservedly  at  His  disposal,  for  Him  to  choose  the  field 
of  service,  and  for  Him  to  qualify  us  for  the  work  to 
which  He  has  called  us,  and  to  impart  to  us  the  gift  that 
fits  us  for  that  work,  whether  it  be  speaking  with  tongues 
or  something  entirely  different  which,  according  to  the 
repeated  teaching  of  the  Scriptures,  is  far  more  impor- 
tant than  the  least  desirable  of  all  gifts,  that  of  "  speaking 
with  tongues." 

But  having  given  and  emphasized  this  word  of  caution, 
let  me  repeat  what  I  said  some  time  ago,  that  jiist  as 
surely  as  anyone  here  today  is  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  they  imll  have  a  power  in  their  service  that  they 
never  had  before;  they  will  have  power  for  the  work  to 
which  God  has  called  them.  I  could  stand  here  by  the 
hour  and  repeat  instances  which  have  come  under  my 
own  personal  observation,  of  men  and  women  and  young 
people  who  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
who  did  "  receive  power."  Let  me  give  you  three  illus- 
trations from  life  that  I  think  will  prove  helpful. 

The  first  is  of  a  minister  who  was  the  first  one,  as 
far  as  I  know  definitely,  that  it  was  my  privilege  to  lead 
into  a  like  experience  to  my  own.  I  had  gone  from 
Chicago  to  New  Britain,  Conn.,  more  than  a  thousand 
miles,  to  deliver  just  one  address.  A  thousand  miles  and 
back  is  a  long  ways  to  go  to  deliver  one  address,  and  yet 
I  shall  never  cease  to  rejoice  that  I  travelled  that  two 


130  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

thousand  miles  to  deliver  that  address.  It  was  at  a  State 
Convention  of  the  Young  People's  Society  of  Christian 
Endeavour,  held  in  an  armory.  Perhaps  three  thousand 
young  people  were  present,  and  some  older  ones.  I 
spoke  upon  the  subject  of  Personal  Work,  and  as  I  drew 
my  address  to  a  close  I  said,  "  In  order  to  do  efficient 
Personal  Work  one  must  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,"  and  said  a  few  words  of  explanation  of  what  I 
meant  by  being  "  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  When 
the  convention  closed  a  minister  came  to  me  on  the  plat- 
form and  said,  "  I  haven't  this  power  that  you  have  been 
talking  about  tonight,  but  I  want  it.  Will  you  pray  for 
me  ?  "  I  replied,  "  Why  not  kneel  down  and  pray  right 
here  now  ?  " 

It  is  a  good  deal  to  ask  of  a  Congregational  minister  in 
staid  old  New  England,  where  the  Congregationalists 
boast  that  they  are  the  University  denomination,  and  they 
are  (for  almost  all  the  leading  universities  in  New  Eng- 
land were  founded  originally  by  the  Congregationalists) 
— I  say,  it  is  a  good  deal  to  ask  of  a  Congregational  min- 
ister in  staid  old  New  England,  to  kneel  down  on  a  plat- 
form while  three  thousand  young  people  are  breaking  up 
and  leaving  the  armory  in  disorder,  to  seek  a  blessing 
from  God  like  an  old-fashioned  Methodist  inquirer  at 
the  mourners'  bench ;  but  this  minister  was  in  earnest,  and 
he  said,  "  I  will."  We  placed  two  chairs  together  in  a 
corner  of  the  platform  where  we  were  not  likely  to  be 
much  observed,  and  knelt  down  to  pray.  I  prayed  and 
then  he  prayed  that  he  might  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Then  we  arose  and  after  a  few  words  we  had  to 
separate,  he  to  hurry  to  his  train  and  I  to  hurry  to  mine. 

Some  time  passed  by  and  I  was  in  Washington,  D.  C, 
at  a  Christian  Workers'  Convention.    The  night  I  reached 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     131 

there  I  was  standing  in  the  rotunda  of  the  hotel  where 
I  was  stopping,  and  an  assistant  pastor  of  the  Fourth 
Congregational  Church  in  Hartford,  Conn."  saw  me  and 
hurried  to  me  and  said,  "  Do  you  remember  that  min- 
ister that  you  prayed  for  at  New  Britain,  Conn.  ? "  I 
said,  "  Yes,  I  do."  He  said,  "  Have  you  heard  from  him 
since?"  "No,"  I  said.  "Let  me  tell  you  about  him," 
he  said.  "  He  has  gone  back  to  his  church  a  transformed 
man.  He  is  pastor  of  a  large  country  church  in  Con- 
necticut, and  since  that  night  you  prayed  for  him  his 
evening  congregations  fill  his  church,  which,"  this  man 
added,  "  is  a  very  unusual  thing  in  a  country  church  in 
Connecticut.  But  that  is  not  the  best  of  it,  there  are 
conversions  at  every  service,  and  a  very  large  proportion 
of  the  conversions  are  the  young  men  of  the  community." 
Now  is  not  that  what  we  want?  Not  the  sending  off  for 
some  evangelist  to  come  at  rare  intervals  and  have  some 
great  stirring  of  the  community,  but  the  power  of  God 
upon  the  regular  pastors  of  our  churches,  preaching  in 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  every  Sunday  night,  and 
conversions  right  along  ?  Well,  that  is  what  we  can  have, 
and  the  secret  of  it  is  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Some  years  passed  by  and  one  hot  summer  afternoon 
1  was  speaking  at  Mr.  Moody's  conference  in  Northfield, 
Mass.  I  was  speaking  on  Psalm  62 :  11 :  "  God  hath 
spoken  once,  twice  have  I  heard  this,  that  power  belong- 
eth  unto  God."  As  I  came  down  from  the  platform  a 
number  of  Methodist  ministers  from  Alabama  gathered 
around  me.  They  said,  "  Did  we  understand  you  to  say 
that  if  any  minister  did  not  have  power  and  results  in  his 
work  it  was  his  own  fault  ?  "  "  Well,"  I  replied,  "  breth- 
ren, I  am  not  sure  that  that  is  just  what  I  said,  but  that 
h  about  what  I  believe."     "  But/'  one  of  them  urged. 


132  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

"  suppose  your  whole  official  board  is  against  you.    What 

can  you  do  then  ?  "     Mr.  G ,  the  Assistant  Pastor  of 

the  church  in  Hartford,  was  there  again,  and  he  broke 
in,  "Mr.  Torrey,  may  I  say  something?"  "Certainly," 
I  replied. 

He  said,  "  Do  you  remember  that  Congregational  min- 
ister that  you  prayed  with  at  New  Britain,  Connecticut  ?  '* 
"  Yes,"  I  said,  "  I  remember  him  well."  He  continued, 
"  Did  you  know  that  he  had  changed  his  church  ?  "  "  No, 
I  did  not."  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  he  did,  last  February." 
(This  was  August.)  "  He  had  a  call  from  a  church  in 
the  suburbs  of  Boston.  All  his  spiritually  minded  friends 
advised  him  not  to  accept  the  call,  for  all  the  ruling  mem- 
bers of  the  church  were  against  aggressive  evangelistic 
effort.  But  in  spite  of  all  the  advice  of  his  spiritually 
minded  friends,  he  somehow  felt  led  to  accept  the  call, 
and  he  went  there  last  February.  There  have  already 
been  fifty-nine  conversions,  and  thirty-eight  of  them  are 
business  men  of  the  community."  Oh,  brethren,  is  not 
that  what  we  want?  Well,  that  is  the  sort  of  thing  we 
can  have.  The  secret  of  it  is  in  our  being  "  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Spirit." 

Let  me  give  you  a  second  illustration.  I  had  been  at 
Montreal,  Canada,  attending  an  Inter-provincial  Conven- 
tion of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association.  In  my 
last  address  I  had  spoken  on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Sometime  after  I  got  back  to  Chicago,  I  received 
a  letter  from  a  young  man,  a  member  of  one  of  tht 
churches  in  Montreal.    He  wrote,  saying: 

"  Dear  Mr,  Torrey  : 

"  I  was  at  your  last  meeting  at  the  Y.  M,  C.  A.  convention 
in  Montreal,  and  heard  you  speak  on  the  baptism  with  the 
Holy   Spirit.     I  went  away  to  my  home   and  sought  that 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      133 

baptism  for  myself  and  obtained  it.  I  am  Chairman  of  the 
Lookout  Committee  of  the  Young  People's  Society  of  Chris- 
tian Endeavour  of  our  church,  I  got  together  the  other 
members  of  our  committee,  and  found  that  two  of  them 
had  been  at  the  same  meeting,  and  had  already  obtained  the 
baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Then  we  prayed  for  the  other 
members  of  the  committee  and  they  were  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit;  and  now  we  are  going  out  into  the  church 
among  the  young  people,  and  the  young  people  are  coming 
to  Christ  right  along." 

Brethren,  is  not  that  what  we  want?  Is  not  that  what 
we  want  in  our  young  people's  societies?  Not  this  ever- 
lasting getting  up  and  quoting,  parrot-like,  some  passage 
of  Scripture;  not  this  everlasting  getting  up  at  the 
monthly  "  Consecration  Meeting "  and  professing  to  be 
wholly  surrendered  to  God  when  you  know  you  are  not; 
but  the  young  people  of  our  churches  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  going  out  among  the  other  young  people 
of  the  churches  and  communities,  and  leading  them  to 
Christ.  Well,  this  is  what  we  can  have.  The  whole 
secret  of  it  is  having  our  young  people  "baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit." 

Now,  just  one  more  illustration,  and  to  me  in  some 
respects  the  best  of  all.  I  was  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  at- 
tending a  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  State  Con- 
vention. I  was  over  speaking  at  the  meeting  of  "  the 
Women's  Auxiliary."  As  I  came  down  from  the  plat- 
form and  passed  out  the  door,  a  gentleman  and  his  wife 
were  waiting  for  me.  They  said,  "Are  you  going  over 
to  the  main  meeting  ? "  I  said,  "  Yes."  They  said, 
"  Are  you  going  to  walk  ?  "  I  said,  "  Yes."  "  Can  we 
walk  with  you  ?  "  "  Yes,"  I  said,  "  if  you  will  walk  fast." 
As  we  went  down  the  stairs  they  began  at  once  to  tell  me 
how  they  had  never  heard  me  before,  but  that  they  had 


134  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

read  the  report  of  an  address  that  I  had  delivered  at 
Boston,  on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  they 
said,  "  We  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit." 
Then  the  man  did  the  talking.  He  was  Superintendent 
of  one  of  the  prominent  Sunday  Schools  of  the  city,  and 
since  he  had  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  God  had 
revolutionized  the  Sunday  School.  I  heard  from  other 
sources  that  even  the  pastor  of  the  church  was  trans- 
formed. When  he  had  finished  telling  what  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  had  meant  to  him  (and  had  also 
meant  a  transformed  church),  then  his  wife  broke  in 
and  she  said,  "And,  Mr.  Torrey,  the  best  part  of  it  is 
that  I  have  been  able  to  get  into  the  hearts  of  my  own 
children,  which  I  was  never  able  to  do  before," 

Oh,  brethren,  is  not  that  what  we  want?  Is  not  that 
what  we  must  have?  the  power  to  get  into  the  hearts  of 
our  own  children,  and  to  lead  them  to  Christ?  I  think 
one  of  the  saddest  things  in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
today  is  to  see  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  Christian 
fathers  and  mothers,  fathers  and  mothers  who  have  been 
pillars  in  the  church,  growing  up  not  to  follow  in  the 
footsteps  of  their  fathers  and  mothers ;  growing  up  some- 
times quite  godless,  not  in  the  church  on  the  Lord's  Day, 
not  in  the  Sunday  School,  but  off  joy-riding,  or  golfing, 
or  on  hiking  parties,  or  playing  tennis,  or,  God  only 
knows  what.  Oh,  the  condition  today  of  the  children  of 
earnest  and  godly  and  active  Christian  fathers  and 
mothers,  is  appalling!  What  all  of  us  fathers  and 
mothers  need,  first  of  all,  is  power  to  get  into  the  hearts 
of  our  own  children.  And  we  can  have  that  power. 
Acts  1 : 8  tells  us  how :  "  Ye  shall  receive  power,  when 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you." 

Oh,  men  and  women  and  young  people  who  belong  to 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      136 

Christ!  Are  we  having  in  our  service  for  Christ  the 
power  that  we  might  have  and  ought  to  have?  We  are 
living  in  a  world  where  we  are  surrounded  by  perishing 
men,  women  and  children  on  every  hand.  And  there  is 
a  solemn  responsibility  upon  every  one  of  us,  to  do 
everything  that  is  in  our  power,  at  any  cost,  to  see  that 
these  men  and  women  and  children  are  saved.  And 
there  is  a  way  in  which  any  one  of  us  can  have  power 
for  that  work.  It  is  by  being  definitely  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Shall  we  not  decide  today  that,  cost  what 
it  may,  we  will  pay  the  price  of  that  baptism  and 
obtain  it? 


VI 

THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT:  WHO 
NEEDS  IT  AND  WHO  CAN  HAVE  IT. 

WE  saw  yesterday  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  a  definite  experience  of  which  one  may 
know  whether  he  has  received  it  or  not. 

We  saw,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  distinct  from  and 
additional  to  the  regenerating  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

We  saw,  in  the  third  place,  that  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  always  connected  with  and  is  primarily  for 
the  purpose  of  testimony  and  service. 

We  saw,  in  the  fourth  place,  that  the  one  great  result 
of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  power  in  the  work 
to  which  God  calls  each  one  of  us ;  that,  while  this  power 
might  manifest  itself  in  a  great  variety  of  ways  according 
to  the  different  lines  of  service  to  which  God  has  called 
us,  there  would  always  be  power  in  the  service  of  anyone 
who  had  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

We  come  today  to  the  very  important  question  of  the 
Necessity  and  Possibility  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  or  to  put  it  in  another  way,  Who  Needs  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  Who  Can  Have  It  ? 

I.  Who  Nee^ds  the;  Baptism  with  the;  Hoi,y 
Spirit? 
We  take  up,  first,  the  question  of  Who  Needs  the  Bap- 

136 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      137 

tism  with  the  Holy  Spirit?  The  Bible  answers  this  ques- 
tion very  plainly. 

Turn  first  of  all  to  Luke  24:49.  We  will  begin  back 
at  the  forty-fifth  verse  to  get  the  connection :  "  Then 
opened  He  their  minds,  that  they  might  understand  the 
Scriptures ;  and  He  said  unto  them,  Thus  it  is  written  that 
Christ  should  suffer,  and  rise  again  from  the  dead  the 
third  day;  and  that  repentance  and  remission  of  sins 
should  be  preached  in  His  name  unto  all  the  nations,  be- 
ginning from  Jerusalem.  Ye  are  witnesses  of  these 
things.  And,  behold,  I  send  forth  the  promise  of  my 
Father  upon  you:  but  tarry  ye  in  the  city,  until  ye  be 
clothed  with  power  from  on  high." 

Here  our  Lord  gives  a  very  definite,  distinct  and  posi- 
tive commandment  to  those  to  whom  He  was  speaking, 
that  they  should  not  undertake  the  work  to  which  He 
had  called  them  until  they  had  received  the  all-necessary 
preparation  for  that  work  of  which  He  speaks  here  as 
"  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  you,"  and  further  on, 
as  a  being  "  clothed  with  power  from  on  high,"  and  by 
comparison  of  Scripture  with  Scripture  we  find  that  this 
"  promise  of  the  Father,"  this  being  "  clothed  with  power 
from  on  high,"  is  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Now,  to  whom  were  these  words  spoken?  To  the 
eleven  apostles.  And  who  were  those  apostles?  It  is 
oftentimes  said  that  they  were  uneducated  men,  and  from 
that  supposed  fact  an  argument  is  adduced  for  an  unedu- 
cated ministry.  But  no  argument  by  any  possibility  could 
oe  more  mal-apropos  than  that,  for  whatever  the  apostles 
were  they  were  not  uneducated  men.  They  had  taken 
more  than  a  three-years'  course  in  the  best  theological 
seminary  that  ever  existed  upon  earth,  and  in  which  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  was  the  sole  but  all-sufficient 


138  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Teacher.  They  had  been  eye-witnesses  of  our  Lord's 
wondrous  life  on  earth,  eye-witnesses  of  His  miracles, 
eye-witnesses  of  His  death,  eye-witnesses  of  His  resur- 
rection from  the  dead,  and  they  were  about  to  be  eye- 
witnesses of  His  ascension,  as  He  was  taken  up  into 
heaven  bodily,  right  before  their  eyes,  "  and  a  cloud  re- 
ceived Him  out  of  their  sight."  And  what  were  they  to 
do?  Simply  to  go  and  tell  a  perishing  world  what  their 
own  eyes  had  seen  and  what  their  own  ears  had  heard 
from  the  lips  of  the  Son  of  God  Himself.  Were  they  not 
already  fully  prepared  to  go  ?  With  our  modern  ideas  of 
preparation  for  the  ministry  we  should  say  they  were  the 
most  fully  and  perfectly  prepared  and  equipped  men  who 
ever  undertook  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel.  But  our  Lord 
Jesus  here  says :  You  are  not  adequately  prepared  at  all ; 
there  is  another  preparation  so  all-necessary  that  you  must 
not  stir  one  step  until  you  have  obtained  it.  That  prepara- 
tion is  the  receiving  of  "  the  promise  of  the  Father,"  the 
being  "  endued  with  power  from  on  high,"  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  And  till  you  receive  it,  do  not 
undertake  that  ministry."  The  word  translated  "  tarry," 
means  literally  "  sit  down " :  "  Sit  down,  until  ye  be 
clothed  with  power  from  on  high."  This  is  exceedingly 
solemn.  If  our  Lord  would  not  permit  the  men  whom 
He  Himself  had  chosen  and  ordained  for  this  work  to 
undertake  that  work  until  they  had  received  a  definite 
enduement  of  power  from  on  high  for  that  service, 
namely,  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  what  is  it  for 
ordinary  mortals  like  you  or  me  to  undertake  that  service 
until  we  are  thus  baptized  by  the  Holy  Spirit  and  know 
it  ?    It  is  the  most  daring  presumption. 

One  of  the  gravest  mistakes  that  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  making  today  is  in  the  way  in  which  we  set  men 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     139 

apart  for  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel.  We  take  a  man 
who  is  "hopefully  pious,"  send  him  for  four  years  to  a 
college,  then  three  or  four  years  to  a  theological  seminary, 
and  then,  if  he  has  succeeded  in  coming  out  of  these  in- 
situation  with  a  fair  modicum  of  faith  left,  we  say,  "  You 
are  now  fitted  to  undertake  the  ministry,"  and  we  lay  our 
hands  upon  him  and  set  him  apart  for  this  solemn  work. 
But  is  he  prepared?  He  certainly  is  not,  if  that  is  all  he 
has.  It  would  be  a  great  thing  if  to  every  candidate  for 
the  ministry,  before  ordaining  him,  we  should  put  to  him 
the  question :  "  Are  you  sure  you  have  been  clothed  with 
power  from  on  high?  Are  you  sure  you  have  been  bap- 
tized with  the  Holy  Spirit?"  And  if  he  were  not  sure, 
we  should  say  to  him :  "  Sit  down,  until  you  are  clothed 
with  power  from  on  high." 

But  this  is  not  all;  nor,  solemn  as  it  is,  is  it  the  most 
solemn  part.  Turn  in  your  Bibles  to  Acts  10 :  38 :  "  God 
anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with 
power;  who  went  about  doing  good,  and  healing  all  that 
were  oppressed  of  the  devil;  for  God  was  with  Him." 
To  what  definite  experience  does  this  refer  in  the  life  of 
our  Lord  as  recorded  in  the  Gospels  ?  Turn  to  the  Gospel 
of  Luke,  the  third  chapter,  twenty-first  and  twenty-second 
verses,  and  you  will  get  your  answer :  "  Now  it  came  to 
pass,  when  all  the  people  were  baptized,  that  Jesus  also 
having  been  baptized,  and  praying,  the  heaven  was  opened 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  descended  in  a  bodily  form,  as  a  dove 
upon  him,  and  a  voice  came  out  of  heaven,  Thou  art  my 
beloved  Son ;  in  Thee  I  am  well  pleased."  Now  turn  to  the 
next  chapter,  the  fourth,  and  the  first  verse, — nothing  in- 
tervening but  the  genealogy  of  His  mother :  "  And  Jesus, 
full  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  returned  from  the  Jordan."  Now 
turn  to  the  fourteenth  and  following  verses,  the  story  of 


140  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

His  temptation  being  all  that  intervenes,  and  read  again: 
"  And  Jesus  returned  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Gali- 
lee, and  fame  went  out  concerning  Him  through  all  the 
region  round  about,  and  He  taught  in  their  synagogues, 
oeing  glorified  of  all.  And  He  came  to  Nazareth,  where 
He  had  been  brought  up:  and  He  entered,  as  His  custom 
was,  into  the  synagogue  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and  stood 
up  to  read.  And  there  was  delivered  unto  Him  the  book 
of  the  prophet  Isaiah.  And  He  opened  the  book  and 
found  the  place  where  it  was  written:  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  me,  because  He  anointed  me  to  preach  good 
tidings  to  the  poor :  He  hath  sent  me  to  proclaim  release 
to  the  captives,  and  recovery  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set 
at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised,  to  proclaim  the  acceptable 
year  of  the  Lord.  And  He  closed  the  book,  and  gave  it 
back  to  the  attendant,  and  sat  down :  and  the  eyes  of  all  in 
the  synagogue  were  fastened  on  Him." 

From  these  verses  we  learn  that  it  was  at  the  Jordan 
that  our  Lord  was  endued  with  power  from  on  high,  that 
He  was  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  after  that,  and 
not  till  after  that.  He  began  His  public  ministry. 

And  who  was  our  Lord  ?  He  was  "  The  only  begotten 
Son  of  God."  He  was  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  He  was 
"  very  God  of  very  God,"  He  had  been  supernaturally 
conceived  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  He  was  at 
the  same  time  man,  and  as  a  man  setting  an  example  to 
you  and  me  to  follow  in  His  steps.  He  never  undertook 
the  public  ministry,  for  which  He  came  into  this  world, 
until  He  had  been  definitely  "  endued  with  power  from  on 
high,"  Now  listen:  If  our  Lord  Jesus,  though  He  had 
been  supernaturally  conceived  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  though  He  was  the  Word  of  God  made  flesh. 
though   He   "was   God,"    (Jno.    1:1),   though  in   Him 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      141 

"  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily "  (CIos. 
2:9),  did  not  permit  Himself  to  undertake  His  public 
ministry  until  He  was  definitely  "  endued  with  power 
from  on  high,"  what  is  it  for  ordinary  mortals,  such  as 
you  and  I  are,  to  undertake  service  for  Him  until  we  also 
are  thus  endued  and  know  it?  To  we,  it  appears  like 
THt  MOST  DARING  PRESUMPTION;  yes,  Something  even 
beyond  that.  In  view  of  what  the  Lord  required  of  His 
apostles,  and  still  more  in  view  of  what  He  required  of 
Himself,  I  dare  not  undertake  service  for  Him  until  I, 
too,  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  know  it. 
But  even  that  is  not  all.  If  you  will  turn  to  Acts 
8: 12-17,  you  will  find  that  the  apostles,  when  they  came 
to  a  new  church  that  had  just  been  gathered,  the  very 
first  thing  they  always  saw  to  was  that  all  the  members  of 
this  new  church  "  might  receive  the  Holy  Spirit."  And 
if  you  will  turn  to  Acts  19: 1-6,  you  will  find  that  the 
Apostle  Paul,  when  he  came  to  a  community  where  there 
was  a  young  church,  and  where  he  discovered  something 
about  it  that  was  not  satisfactory,  the  first  thing  that  he 
inquired  into  was  whether  they  had  definitely  "  received 
the  Holy  Spirit." 

In  the  LIGHT  O^  ALL  THESE  ^ACTS,  WE  ARE  ABUN- 
DANTLY   WARRANTED    IN    SAYING    THAT    EVERY    CHILD   OP 

God  IS  UNDER  the  most  solemn  obligation  to  see  to 

IT  THAT  HE  DEFINITELY  RECEIVES  THE  HOLY  SpIRIT,  NOT 
MERELY  AS  A  REGENERATING  POWER  AND  AS  AN  INDWELL- 
ING PRESENCE,  BUT  AS  A  DEFINITE  ENDUEMENT  WITH 
POWER,    BEFORE    HE   UNDERTAKES    SERVICE   OF   ANY    KIND 

FOR  God. 

Let  me  say  further  that,  no  matter  how  definitely  one 
may  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  needs  a 
new  filling  with  the  Holy  Spirit  for  each  new  emergency 


142  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

of  Christian  service.  We  are  told  of  the  Apostle  Peter  in 
Acts  2 : 4  that  he  was  definitely  "  filled  with  the  Holy- 
Spirit  "  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  But  in  Acts  4:8  we 
are  also  told  that  "  Peter  "  was  again  "  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit."  The  tense  of  the  verb  used  in  the  original 
(that  is,  in  the  Greek),  shows  conclusively  that  the  filling 
spoken  of  here  was  a  new  filling  that  took  place  right 
then  and  there.  But  we  are  again  told  in  Acts  4:  31  that 
"  When  they  had  prayed,  the  place  was  shaken  wherein 
they  were  gathered  together :  and  they  were  all  filled  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  they  spake  the  Word  of  God  with 
boldness."  Here  again  the  tense  of  the  verb  used  in  the 
original,  that  is,  in  the  Greek,  shows  conclusively  that  it 
was  a  filling  that  took  place  right  then  and  there.  And 
we  are  definitely  told  that  Peter  was  one  of  the  "  all " 
who  were  then  and  there  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

So  here  are  three  separate  occasions  on  which  Peter 
Was  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  So  then  it  is  as  clear 
as  day  that  one  needs  repeated  fillings  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  no  matter  how  definitely  and  wonderfully  he  may 
have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  past.  We 
need  to  he  filled  again  and  again,  filled  anew  for  each  new 
emergency  of  Christian  service.  I  am  often  asked  if  I 
have  received  "  The  Second  Blessing."  I  certainly  have, 
— and  the  third  and  the  fourth  and  the  fifth  and  the  three 
hundredth  and  the  three  hundred  and  fortieth,  and  I  am 
looking  for  the  three  hundred  and  forty-first  today.  One 
of  the  commonest  mistakes  today,  and  one  of  the  gravest, 
is  that  many  people  are  trying  to  work  today  in  the  power 
of  some  baptism  with  the  Spirit  that  they  received  a  year 
ago,  or  two  years  ago,  or  five  years  ago,  or  ten  years  ago, 
as  the  case  may  be.  Don't  make  that  mistake.  However 
definitely  you  may  have  been  "  baptized  with  the  Holy 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     14S 

Spirit "  in  the  past  you  need,  you  must  have,  a  new  in- 
filling for  each  new  emergency  of  Christian  service.  And 
you  must  seek  it  in  God's  appointed  way — by  prayer 
(Luke  11 :  13),  definite  prayer  for  a  definite  blessing. 

A  good  many  years  ago,  when  I  was  the  president  of 
the  International  Convention  of  Christian  Workers,  we 
held  a  meeting  in  the  city  of  Detroit.  I  think  it  was  our 
third  annual  gathering.  I  had  a  friend  who  had  been  led 
out  into  an  experience  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  infilling  that 
he  had  never  had  before  through  a  well-known  teacher  in 
this  country.  He  asked  that  I  put  this  teacher  on  the 
program  of  the  Detroit  Convention.  This  I  did.  But  to 
my  dismay,  when  I  reached  Detroit  I  found  that  he  was 
circulating  a  paper  of  his  in  which  he  took  the  ground 
that  when  one  was  once  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
that  ended  it ;  there  was  nothing  more  to  seek.  When  he 
himself  came  to  speak,  his  utterances  were  utterly  without 
power.  He  himself  most  manifestly  needed  a  new  filling 
with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

During  the  World's  Fair  in  Chicago,  in  1893,  Mr. 
Moody  brought  together,  in  Chicago,  some  of  the  most 
renowned  and  most  able  Bible  teachers  and  Gospel  preach- 
ers from  all  parts  of  the  world.  He  said :  "  For  years  I 
have  been  going  to  the  world;  now  the  world  is  coming 
to  me,  and  I  am  going  to  see  that  they  get  the  Gospel 
through  the  best  preachers  in  their  different  languages 
that  I  can  secure."  He  brought  famous  men  from  Eng- 
land, Scotland,  Ireland,  France,  Germany,  Austria,  Rus- 
sia and  other  lands.  Among  others,  he  brought  a  man 
who  had  been  wonderfully  used  in  his  own  country.  He 
took  this  man  first  to  Northfield,  and  then  brought  him 
on  to  Chicago.  When  he  v/as  giving  his  first  lecture  in 
the  lecture-room  o^  the  Bible  Institute  in  Chicago,  Mr. 


144  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Moody  said  to  me :  "  I  want  you  to  hear  this  man  ano 
give  me  your  opinion  of  him."  So  when  the  crowd  had 
gathered  we  slipped  into  a  back  seat  where  we  would  not 
be  seen.  After  listening  for  a  while,  Mr.  Moody  slipped 
out  and  beckoned  me  to  follow.  We  went  up  to  his  office 
and  sat  down.  Mr.  Moody  turned  to  me  and  said: 
"  What  do  you  think  of  him  ? "  I  replied :  "  I  have 
nothing  I  wish  to  say."  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  have  some- 
thing I  wish  to  say :  I  would  give  every  penny  it  cost  me 
to  bring  him  to  this  country  if  he  were  back  home  again. 
He  has  lost  his  unction !  " 

Oh,  it  is  an  awful  thing  to  lose  one's  unction!  Mr. 
Moody  used  to  say  that  he  would  rather  die  than  to  lose 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  work.  But  we  cer- 
tainly shall  lose  our  unction  unless  we  seek  a  new  filling 
with  the  Spirit  for  each  new  emergency  of  Christian 
service. 

I  am  often  asked:  "Would  you  call  these  new  fillings 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  '  fresh  baptisms  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  ? ' "  No,  I  would  hot.  I  would  not  for  two  rea- 
sons :  First  of  all,  because  there  is  something  initiatory  in 
the  very  thought  conveyed  by  the  word  "  baptism :"  and 
second,  because  these  new  fillings  are  never  called  "  bap- 
tisms "  in  the  Bible,  and  it  is  always  wise  to  hold  fast  to 
Bible  terminology.  In  the  Bible  the  expression  "  bap- 
tized with  the  Holy  Spirit "  is  always  limited  to  the  first 
experience  of  the  individual.  But  I  would  much  rather 
that  people  would  speak  of  "  fresh  baptisms  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  '*  because  they  recognized  that  one  cannot  go 
in  the  power  of  a  baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  received 
some  time  before,  but  needs  a  new  filling  for  each  new 
emergency  of  Christian  service,  than  that  they  be  such 
sticklers  for  exact  terminology  that  they  lose  sight  of  the 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      146 

imperative  need  of  new  fillings  with  the  Spirit  for  each 
new  emergency  of  Christian  service.  In  other  words,  I 
would  rather  have  the  right  thing  by  the  wrong  name  than 
the  wrong  thing  by  the  right  name. 

II.  Who  Can  Have;  the  Baptism  with  the;  HoIvY 
Spirit  ? 

We  come  now  to  the  very  practical  and  immeasurably 
important  question:  Who  can  have  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit?  Some  years  ago  I  was  speaking  at  a  con- 
vention in  the  state  of  Kansas,  and  a  woman  who  was 
one  of  the  leaders  in  church  work  in  that  state  and  who 
was  also  in  a  high  position  in  the  educational  work  of  the 
state,  sent  me  a  little  note  in  which  she  said :  "  You  have 
spoken  about  the  necessity  of  being  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Will  you  kindly  tell  me  who  can  be  thus 
baptized  ?  The  church  to  which  I  belong  teaches  that  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  was  confined  to  the  days  of 
the  apostles."  Well,  who  can  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit?  We  are  not  left  to  speculate  about  that,  God 
Himself  answers  the  question  in  the  plainest  possible 
words.  Turn  in  your  Bibles  to  Acts  2 :  39,  and  you  will 
get  God's  own  answer  to  this  all  important  question: 
"  For  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children,  and 
to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  call." 

What  is  the  "  promise  "  to  which  Peter  refers  in  this 
verse?  Doubtless  many  of  you  know  that  there  are  two 
differing  interpretations  of  this  verse.  One  interpretation 
is  that  "  the  promise  "  of  this  verse  is  the  promise  of 
salvation  and  that  the  verse  therefore  sets  forth  the  Cove- 
nant privilege  of  believers  to  have  their  children  saved. 
Now,  no  one  believes  in  the  Covenant  privilege  of  belie v- 


146  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

ers  to  have  their  children  saved  more  firmly  than  I  do. 
but  is  that  the  meaning  of  this  verse? 

The  other  interpretation  is  that  "  the  promise  "  of  this 
verse  is  the  promise  of  the  "gift  of,"  (or,  to  put  it  in 
other  words,  "  the  baptism  with ")  the  Holy  Spirit." 
Which  of  these  two  interpretations  is  correct? 

There  are  two  laws  of  interpretation  universally  ac- 
cepted by  all  rational,  or  really  intelligent,  interpreters  of 
the  Word.  The  first  law  is  called  "  the  law  of  the  usus 
loquendi."    The  other  law  is  "  the  law  of  context." 

The  law  of  the  usus  loquendi  (or,  to  use  plain  English, 
which  is  far  better  than  Latin,  "the  law  of  usage"),  is 
that  when  you  find  a  word  or  phrase  in  the  Bible  and  you 
wish  to  know  exactly  what  it  means,  the  thing  to  do  is 
not  to  run  for  a  dictionary  to  get  the  definition  of  the 
word  or  phrase,  for  the  dictionary  was  not  written  by 
Bible  scholars.  The  thing  to  do  is  to  take  your  concor- 
dance and  look  up  every  place  in  the  Bible  where  that 
word  or  phrase  is  used  and  interpret  its  meaning  by  its 
usage.  The  exact  meaning  of  words  is  seldom  determined 
by  etymology;  it  is  determined  by  usage. 

Now,  what  is  the  usage  of  this  phrase,  "the  promise," 
in  the  Bible,  especially  what  is  the  usage  in  this  particular 
book  in  the  Bible  in  which  this  verse  is  found?  Turn 
back  to  Acts  1 : 4  and  5 :  "  He  charged  them  not  to  depart 
from  Jerusalem,  but  to  wait  for  the  promise  of  the 
Father,  which,  said  He,  ye  heard  from  me:  for  John  in- 
deed baptized  with  water:  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  not  many  days  hence.'*  What  "  the  prom- 
ise "  is  here  we  are  not  left  to  guess.  We  are  told  that 
"  the  promise  "  is  "  the  promise  "  of  being  "  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit."  Now  turn  to  Acts  2 :  33 :  "  Being  there- 
fore by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted  and  having  received 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      147 

of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  He  hath 
poured  forth  this  which  ye  see  and  hear."  Here  again  we 
are  told  that  "  the  promise  of  the  Father  "  is  "  the  prom- 
ise of  the  Holy  Spirit "  which  had  just  been  poured  forth 
on  that  very  day  when  every  one  of  the  apostolic  com- 
pany had  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  other 
words  the  meaning  of  the  expression  is  precisely  the  same 
here  as  it  was  in  the  first  chapter.  Now,  six  verses 
further  down  we  come  to  the  verse  we  are  now  studying. 
Can  anyone  tell  me  any  reasonable  rule  of  interpretation 
by  which  this  peculiar  expression  can  mean  one  thing  in 
Acts  1 : 4  and  5,  precisely  the  same  thing  in  the  next  place 
where  it  occurs,  that  is,  Acts  2:33,  and  something  en- 
tirely different  in  the  next  place  where  it  occurs,  only  six 
verses  further  down?  Beyond  any  possible  intelligent 
question,  the  phrase  "  the  promise  of  the  Father,"  in  Acts 
2:^p,  refers  to  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  The 
law  of  the  usus  loquendi,  even  if  it  stood  alone,  would 
settle  the  question,  but  it  does  not  stand  alone. 

Let  us  now  apply  the  law  of  context.  The  law  of  con- 
text is  this:  That  when  you  find  a  passage  of  Scripture 
of  which  there  are  two  or  more  possible  interpretations 
and  you  wish  to  know  which  one  of  the  several  different 
interpretations  is  the  correct  interpretation,  you  should 
look  at  the  passage  in  its  context,  that  is,  in  the  light  of 
what  goes  before  it  and  in  the  light  of  what  comes  after 
it.  Many  a  passage  in  the  Bible,  if  it  stood  alone,  might 
mean  one,  two,  three,  four  or  even  more  things.  But 
standing  where  it  does,  it  can  mean  but  one  of  the  two  or 
more  things. 

Now  let  us  apply  the  law  of  context  here.  Let  us  read 
what  goes  immediately  before — vs.  38 :  "  Peter  said  unto 
them,  Repent  ye  and  be  baptized,  every  one  of  you,  in  the 


148  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

name  of  Jesus  Christ,  unto  the  remission  of  your  sins: 
and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  For  to 
you  is  the  promise,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all  that 
are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call 
unto  Him."  Here  Peter  in  the  preceding  verse  declares 
exactly  what  the  promise  is  to  which  he  refers.  He  says : 
"  Ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  For  to  you 
is  the  promise,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all  that  are 
afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call  unto 
Him."  The  promise,  then,  is  unmistakably  the  promise 
of  the  "  gift  of  "  (or,  to  use  the  synonymous  phrase,  "  the 
baptism  with  ")  "  the  Holy  Spirit."  The  two  laws  there- 
fore agree  and  they  both  determine,  beyond  the  possibility 
of  intelligent  question,  that  the  promise  of  Acts  2:  ^9  is 
the  promise  of  the  gift  of,  or  baptism  with,  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Let  us  then  read  the  verse  in  the  light  of  this 
settled  fact :  "  For  to  you  is  the  promise," — that  is,  to  the 
people  whom  he  was  addressing,  who  were  for  the  most 
part  Jews.  Thus  far  there  is  nothing  in  it  for  you  or 
me,  for  we  were  not  there,  and  we  are  not  Jews.  But 
Peter  did  not  stop  there :  "  And  to  your  children,"  that  is, 
to  the  next  generation  of  Jews,  or,  if  you  will,  to  all 
coming  generations  of  Jews,  and  that  does  not  take  many 
of  us  in.  But,  thank  God,  Peter  did  not  stop  there,  but 
added :  "  And  to  all  that  are  afar  off."  That  does  take  us 
in,  for  we  are  the  Gentiles  who  were  "  once  afar  off,  but 
are  now  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ  "  (Eph.  2 :  13). 
But  lest  there  be  any  doubt  about  it,  Peter  does  not  stop 
even  there,  but  adds:  " Bven  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  call  unto  him"  (R.  V.)  ;  that  is  the  call  not 
merely  to  service,  but  the  call  to  salvation.  We  are  thus 
here  told  in  plain  words,  the  meaning  of  which  is  unmis- 
takable,  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is   for 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      149 

every  child  of  God,  in  every  age  of  the  Church's  history 
The  Baptism  with  the  HoIvY  Spirit  is  the:  birth- 
right OF  EVERY  BEEiEvER  IN  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  true 
that  not  every  believer  has  claimed  his  brithright,  but  it 
is  his,  promised  by  God  and  provided  by  God,  through  a 
crucified,  risen  and  ascended  Saviour,  and  if  you  have 
not  claimed  your  birthright,  it  is  your  own  fault,  and  you 
may  claim  it  today. 

Some  years  ago  we  had  for  a  month  a  Ministerial  In- 
stitute in  the  Bible  Institute  of  Chicago.  Ministers  were 
gathered  there  from  very  many  different  states  of  our 
Union,  and  for  a  month  we  studied  the  Word  of  God 
together.  At  the  closing  session  of  the  Institute,  I  spoke 
on  the  "  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  and  emphasized 
the  necessity  of  it  if  we  were  to  do  acceptable  service  for 
God.  At  the  close  of  the  meeting  a  minister  from  the 
state  of  Texas  came  to  me  and  said :  "  The  church  to 
which  I  belong  teaches  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  only  for  the  apostles.  What  do  you  think  ?  " 
I  replied :  "  I  don't  care  what  the  church  to  which  you 
belong  teaches,  nor  what  the  church  to  which  I  belong 
teaches ;  the  only  question  with  me  is,  What  does  the  Word 
of  God  teach?"  He  said :"  That  is  right."  "  Well,"  I 
said,  "  take  it  and  look  at  it,"  and  I  handed  him  my  Bible 
open  at  Acts  2 :  39,  and  asked  him  to  read.  And  he  read : 
*'  For  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children,  and 
to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  call."  I  said :  "  Has  He  called  you  ?  Are  you 
a  saved  man?"  He  replied:  "I  am."  "Then  is  the 
promise  for  you  ? "  He  replied :  "  It  must  be."  He 
claimed  it.  He  went  back  to  his  pastorate  in  Texas,  a 
transformed  man.  For  years  I  received  letters  from  him 
telling  me  how  God  was  blessing  him  in  his  work. 


150  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

It  is  for  you,  too,  if  you  will  claim  it  and  meet  the 
conditions  of  receiving  it. 

Let  me  illustrate  this  point  again:  I  was  at  one  of  the 
early  Y.  M,  C.  A.  conventions  of  the  Students  of  South- 
ern Colleges  and  Universities,  held  at  Knoxville,  Ten- 
nessee,  on   the   university  grounds.     The   meeting  was 

presided  over  by  Dr.  ,  a  very  prominent  and  highly 

honored  and  much  loved  rector  of  the  Protestant  Epis- 
copal Church.  I  spoke  on  the  closing  Sunday  morning 
upon  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  Episcopal 
rector  and  I  roomed  in  the  same  building,  and  on  that 
hot  July  afternoon  we  drew  our  chairs  up  in  front  of  the 
building  for  a  talk  together.  He  turned  to  me  and  said : 
"  I  was  greatly  interested  in  what  you  had  to  say  this 
morning,  and  if  your  interpretation  of  Acts  2:39  is  cor- 
rect you  have  gained  your  case.  But  I  question  your 
interpretation  of  Acts  2 :  39.  Let  us  talk  it  over."  And 
we  did.  Some  years  later  I  was  at  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  Stu- 
dent Convention  at  Northfield,  Massachusetts,  and  this 
Episcopal  rector  was  also  present.  One  Sunday  after- 
noon I  entered  Stone  Hall,  where  the  meetings  were  held 
in  those  days,  by  the  back  door,  just  as  this  Episcopal 
rector  was  entering  through  the  front  door,  and  we  met. 
As  he  saw  me  approaching,  he  hurried  toward  me  with 
extended  hand,  and  said :  "  You  were  right  about  Acts 
2 :  39,  at  Knoxville ;  but  I  think  I  can  tell  you  something 
better  than  that,  I  think  I  have  nov^^  the  right  to  say  that 
I  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  I  thank 
God  that  I  was  right.  Not  because  it  was  at  all  important 
that  I  should  be  right,  but  because  the  doctrine  is  such  a 
glorious  one.  Oh,  to  be  able  to  go  round  this  globe  and 
face  audiences  of  thousands — Americans,  English,  Scotch, 
Irish,  Germans,  Scandinavians,  Russians,  French,  Swiss, 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     151 

Hindus,  Japanese,  Chinese,  and  others,  as  I  have  done, 
and  to  be  able  to  tell  them  all,  with  the  absolute  certainty 
that  you  have  God's  own  immutable  word  supporting  you 
when  you  tell  them,  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  for  every  one  of  them.  What  marvellous  scenes  I  have 
seen,  as  believers  in  many  lands  have  seen  this  truth  and 
claimed  for  themselves  the  wondrous  blessing  of  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit ;  yes,  and  what  marvellous  re- 
sults have  followed  in  many  lands. 

But  this  glorious  truth  has  its  solemn  side.  If  each  one 
of  us  may  be — ^and  beyond  a  question  we  may — ^baptized 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  then  there  rests  upon  us  the  most 
solemn  obligation  to  be  thus  baptized.  It  is  not  merely  a 
matter  of  privilege;  it  is  a  matter  of  most  solemn  duty. 
If  you  and  I  pay  the  price  of  this  blessing  it  will  be  ours 
and  souls  will  be  won  to  Christ  who  will  not  be  thus  won 
if  we  do  not  pay  the  price  and  therefore  do  not  obtain  the 
blessing ;  and  if  we  do  not  pay  the  price  and  therefore  do 
not  obtain  the  blessing,  we  shall  be  responsible  before  God 
for  everyone  that  might  have  been  saved  who  was  not 
saved  because  we  did  not  pay  the  price  and  therefore  did 
not  obtain  the  blessing. 

Beloved  brethren,  I  oftentimes  tremble  for  myself  and 
for  others  who  are  in  the  ministry.  And  by  the  ministry 
I  do  not  mean  merely  the  ministry  as  ordinarily  defined, 
as  including  only  ordained  ministers.  I  use  it  in  the 
broader  sense  applying  to  all  believers,  for  we  are  all 
called  to  minister  the  Gospel  in  some  way.  It  may  not 
be  by  preaching;  it  may  be  in  quiet,  humble,  personal 
work.  I  say  I  tremble  for  myself  and  for  my  brethren 
in  the  ministry.  Why  ?  Because  we  are  preaching  error  ? 
Oh,  no,  I  do  not  mean  that  now.  It  is  true  there  are 
many  in  these  days  who  claim  to  be  preaching  the  truth 


162  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

who  are  preaching  in  reality  the  most  pernicious  and  de- 
structive error,  and  I  do  tremble  for  them :  I  would  rather 
take  my  chance  before  the  bar  of  God  as  a  bootlegger 
than  to  take  my  chance  there  as  one  who  is  called  to 
preach  the  Gospel,  but  who,  instead,  was  preaching  error 
— damnable  and  destructive  error.  But  that  is  not  what 
I  refer  to  now. 

Do  I  mean  that  I  tremble  for  those  who  are  not  preach- 
ing error,  but  are  not  preaching  the  truth?  For  you  all 
know  it  is  quite  possible  for  a  man  never  to  preach  a 
word  of  error  and  yet  not  preach  the  saving  truth.  There 
are  many,  many  ministers  nowadays  from  whose  lips  a 
heterodox  word  has  never  escaped,  and  yet  they  are  not 
preaching  the  truth.  They  are  preaching  on  all  kinds  of 
extraneous  and  unimportant  questions.  Take  any  daily 
paper  that  announces  the  subjects  to  be  preached  upon  in 
any  of  our  great  cities,  and  your  heart  will  certainly  be 
heavy  with  sadness  if  you  are  at  all  thoughtful.  In  one 
of  our  American  cities  some  time  ago  these  three  sub- 
jects were  announced  in  the  same  newspaper  by  different 
prominent  preachers  in  that  city :  "  The  Wit  of  an  Irish- 
man," "The  Football  Match,"  "My  Mother-in-Law." 
Horrible !  Think  of  it !  Standing  in  the  sacred  desk,  the 
place  of  such  marvellous  opportunity  and  possibility  of 
power  for  God,  and  preaching  on  subjects  like  that !  Yes, 
I  do  tremble  for  these  faithless  and  foolish  shepherds. 

But  that  is  not  what  I  mean  now.  What  I  mean  is 
this :  I  tremble  for  those  who  are  preaching  the  Gospel — 
preaching  the  Gospel  in  its  simplicity,  in  its  purity  and  in 
its  fullness,  but  preaching  it  "  with  enticing  words  of 
man's  wisdom,"  and  not  "  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit 
and  of  power"  (1  Cor.  2:4).  Oh,  a  man  may  preach 
the  most  sound  and  most  able  orthodoxy  and  preach  his 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      168 

audience  right  into  hell !  The  deadest  thing  on  earth  is 
dead  orthodoxy!  It  is  not  enough  that  we  preach 
THE  Gospel,  not  enough  that  we  preach  it  in  its 

SIMPLICITY,  ITS  PURITY,  ITS  FULLNESS,  BUT  WE  MUST 
PREACH  IT  IN  THE  POWER  OE  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT,     And  we 

can  do  this  only  insofar  as  we  are  definitely  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  insofar  as  we  are  definitely  filled 
again  and  again  with  His  glorious  power  for  each  new 
emergency  of  Christian  service.  I  repeat  again,  if  we 
pay  the  price  of  this  blessing  and  are  therefore  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  filled  again  and  again  with  His 
Divine  power  as  we  preach,  there  will  be  souls  won  to 
Christ  through  our  ministry,  whether  it  be  through  the 
ministry  of  public  preaching  or  the  ministry  of  personal 
work,  who  will  not  be  thus  won  if  we  do  not  pay  the 
price  and  therefore  do  not  obtain  the  blessing,  and  there- 
fore if  we  do  not  pay  the  price  of  this  blessing  and  con- 
sequently do  not  obtain  it,  we  shall  be  responsible  before 
God  for  every  one  who  might  have  been  saved  but  who 
was  not  saved  because  we  did  not  pay  the  price  and  there- 
fore did  not  obtain  the  blessing.  We  must  be,  we  must 
he,  WE  MUST  BE  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Tomorrow  we  shall  take  up  the  price  of  obtaining  this 
blessing.  Or,  to  put  it  in  other  words,  we  shall  take  up 
the  question  of  just  what  each  one  of  us  must  do  to  make 
it  sure  that  we  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit; 
and,  if  we  have  already  been  thus  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  how  we  may  be  filled  again  and  again  with  His 
glorious  presence  and  power. 


VII 

THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT: 
HOW  TO  OBTAIN  IT 

WE  have  seen  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  a  definite  experience  of  which  one 
may  know  whether  he  has  received  it  or  not; 
that  it  is  a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  distinct  from  and  in 
addition  to  His  regenerating  work;  that  is  is  always  con- 
nected with  and  is  primarily  for  the  purpose  of  testimony 
and  service  and  that  the  one  great  result  of  that  baptism 
is  power  in  the  work  to  which  God  calls  us.  We  have 
also  seen  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  abso- 
lutely necessary  for  acceptable  service  and  effective  work 
for  God.  And  we  also  saw  yesterday  that  it  is  the  privi- 
lege of  every  believer  in  every  age  of  the  Church's  his- 
tory to  have  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  that  a 
most  solemn  responsibility  rests  upon  every  one  of  us  to 
obtain  it  at  any  cost.  We  have  seen  that  if  we  pay  the 
price  of  this  blessing  and  therefore  obtain  it  there  will  be 
souls  won  to  Christ  through  our  work  who,  if  we  do  not 
pay  the  price  of  this  blessing  and  therefore  do  not  obtain 
it,  will  not  be  thus  won ;  and  that  therefore  if  we  do  not 
pay  the  price  of  this  blessing  and  therefore  do  not  obtain 
it,  we  shall  be  responsible  before  God  for  every  one  who 
might  have  been  won  but  was  not  won  because  we  did 
not  pay  the  price  and  therefore  did  not  obtain  the  blessing. 
This  brings  us  face  to  face  with  the  all-important  ques- 

154 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      166 

tion,  "  What  must  we  do  in  order  that  we  may  obtain 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  "  It  is  a  question  of 
tremendous  importance ;  but  it  is  a  question  that  is  very 
plainly  answered  in  the  Word  of  God.  There  is  a  very 
plain  path  laid  down  in  God's  Word,  consisting  of  a  few 
simple  steps  that  anyone  can  take,  and  it  is  absoIvUTi:ly 

CERTAIN   THAT  ANY  ONt  WHO  TAKES  THESE  STEPS   WII.L 

BE  "baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit/' 

That  is  a  very  positive  statement  and  I  would  not  dare 
be  thus  positive  if  the  Word  of  God  were  not  equally 
positive,  but  when  the  Word  of  God  definitely  and  dis- 
tinctly says  that  if  you  do  certain  things  there  will  be  a 
certain  result,  what  right  have  we  to  tone  down  the  posi- 
tiveness  of  God's  Word  and  say  that  if  we  do  certain 
things  there  will  "  probably  "  be  a  certain  result  ? 

If  any  one  should  come  to  me  and  ask  me,  "  Can  you 
tell  me  what  to  do  right  now  and  here,  and  guarantee  that 
if  I  do  it  I  will  be  saved  at  once?  "  Without  the  slightest 
hesitation  I  would  reply,  "  I  can."  I  can  tell  any  one 
what  to  do  right  now  and  guarantee  that  if  they  do  it^ 
they  will  be  saved  instantly.  If  I  could  not  tell  you  that, 
I  would  not  be  fit  to  be  preaching  the  Gospel.  And  just 
so,  if  any  one  should  come  to  me  and  say,  "  Dr.  Torrey, 
can  you  tell  me  what  to  do  right  here  and  now  and  guar- 
antee that  if  I  will  do  it,  I  will  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  ?  ",  without  the  slightest  hesitation  I  would  reply, 
"  I  can."  I  can,  because  the  Bible  tells  us  in  the  plainest 
possible  terms  that  very  thing.  It  tells  us  that  if  we  do 
certain  things  which  are  clearly  defined  in  the  Bible,  we 
"  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  What  right, 
then,  have  we  to  qualify  God's  statement  and  say  that  if 
we  do  certain  things  we  shall  probably  receive  the  gift  of 
(or,  the  baptism  with)  the  Holy  Spirit? 


156  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

It  is  oftentimes  said  that  Dr.  Torrey  is  a  very  dogmatic 
preacher.  I  trust  that  the  charge  is  true.  I  aim  to  be  a 
dogmatic  preacher.  I  aim  to  be  just  as  dogmatic  as  this 
Book.  I  do  not  think  that  I  have  attained  to  that  as  yet, 
but  that  is  my  aim,  and  if  this  Book  says  in  the  most  posi- 
tive and  dogmatic  terms  that  if  you  do  certain  things  you 
shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  I  do  not  hesitate  to 
affirm  without  the  slightest  fear  that  my  affirmation  will 
prove  untrue,  that  any  one  here  who  does  these  certain 
things,  who  takes  these  certain  steps,  will  be  immediately 
"  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit." 

The;re^  is  a  plain  path,  consisting  of  seIvEn  very 
simple  steps,  which  any  one  here  can  take  today, 
and  it  is  absolutely  sure  that  any  one  who  takes 
those  seven  steps  will  enter  into  the  blessing. 
You  will  find  all  seven  steps  in  Acts  2 :  38.  I  shall  later 
refer  to  other  passages  that  throw  more  light  upon  this 
passage  and  make  some  of  the  steps  clearer,  but  they  are 
all  in  this  passage. 

Let  me  read  the  passage :  "  Then  Peter  said  unto  them, 
Repent  ye,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you,  in  the  name 
of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  remission  of  your  sins ;  and  ye 
shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 

Now,  Peter's  statement  here  is  just  as  positive  as  mine. 
He  says  if  we  do  certain  things,  the  result  will  be  that  we 
"  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  What  right, 
then,  have  we  to  say  that  if  we  do  these  things,  perhaps 
we  may  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost?  There  is  no 
perhaps  about  it.    We  certainly  shall. 

The  First  Step,  The  first  two  steps  are  found  in  the 
word  "  Repent."  What  does  repentance  mean  ?  Doubt- 
less many  of  you  have  been  told  time  after  time  that 
Repentance  is  a  Change  of  Mind.     When  you  were  told 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      167 

that,  you  were  told  the  exact  truth.  But  a  change  of 
mind  about  what  ?  A  change  of  mind  about  three  things : 
a  change  of  mind  about  God,  a  change  of  mind  about 
Jesus  Christ,  a  change  of  mind  about  sin.  What  the 
change  of  mind  is  about  in  any  given  instance  must  be 
determined  by  the  context.  As  determined  by  the  context 
in  this  case,  the  change  of  mind  is  primarily  about  Jesus 
Christ.  In  the  thirty-sixth  verse  we  read :  "  Let  all  the 
house  of  Israel  therefore  know  assuredly,  that  God  hath 
made  Him  both  Lord  and  Christ,  this  Jesus  whom  ye 
crucified,"  and  we  read  in  verse  thirty-seven :  "  Now 
when  they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart, 
and  said  unto  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  *  Breth- 
ren, what  shall  we  do  ? ' ",  and  then  we  read  verse  thirty- 
eight  :  "  And  Peter  said  unto  them,  *  Repent  ye  '  " — ^that 
is,  change  your  mind  about  Jesus  Christ,  change  from 
that  attitude  of  mind  that  rejected  Christ  and  crucified 
Christ  to  that  attitude  of  mine  that  accepts  Jesus  Christ 
as  Saviour  and  Lord.  This,  then,  is  the  first  step  toward 
receiving  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit — accept  Jesus 
Christ  as  Saviour  and  Lord. 

First  of  all,  Accept  Jesus  as  Saviour.  Have  you  thus 
accepted  Him?  If  I  should  go  down  from  this  platform 
and  go  to  you  as  you  sit  there  in  the  seats,  one  after 
another,  and  put  to  you  the  question,  "  Have  you  received 
Jesus  Christ  as  your  Saviour  ?  "  I  think  that  most  of  you 
would  reply,  "Yes,  I  have."  But  suppose  I  should  put 
to  you  a  second  question,  "  Upon  what  are  you  resting  as 
the  ground  of  your  acceptance  before  God  ?  " — I  am  sure 
some  of  you  would  answer  me  something  like  this,  "  Why, 
I  go  to  church,  I  read  my  Bible,  I  have  been  baptized,  I 
have  joined  the  church  (or,  been  confirmed,  as  the  case 
may  be),  I  go  regularly  to  church,  I  partake  of  the  com- 


168  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

munion,  I  give  a  tenth  of  my  income  to  the  church  or  thb 
poor,  and  I  am  trying  to  Hve  just  as  near  right  as  I  know 
how."  Well,  if  that  is  what  you  are  resting  upon  as  the 
ground  of  your  salvation,  you  are  not  saved.  All  those 
things  are  your  works;  good  things  in  their  place,  but 
every  one  of  them  your  own  works,  and  God  tells  us 
plainly  in  His  Word,  in  Romans  3 :  20,  "  By  the  works 
of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  His  sight  " ;  there- 
fore if  these  are  the  things  you  are  trusting  in  as  the 
ground  of  your  acceptance  before  God,  you  are  not  justi- 
fied, you  are  not  saved. 

But  if  I  should  go  to  some  of  you  and  put  to  you  the 
question,  "  Are  you  saved  ? "  you  would  reply  at  once, 
"  Yes,  I  am,"  and  if  then  I  should  put  to  you  the  second 
question,  "  On  what  are  you  resting  as  the  ground  of 
your  salvation  ? ",  you  would  reply  something  like  this : 
"  I  am  not  resting  upon  anything  I  have  done  or  any- 
thing I  am  ever  going  to  do,  /  am  resting  entirely  upon 
zvhat  Jesus  Christ  did  when  He  bore  my  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  cross.  If  that  is  true,  then  you  are  saved, 
and  you  have  taken  the  first  step  toward  receiving  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.    The:  First  step.  Then, 

TOWARD  RECEIVING  THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HoivY  SPIRIT 
IS  THAT  WE  REST   ENTIRELY   UPON   THE   FINISHED   WORK 

OF  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross  of  Cai^vary,  upon  His 

ATONING  death  FOR  US,  AS  THE  S0I,E  GROUND  OF  OUR 
ACCEPTANCE  BEFORE  GoD. 

This  thought  comes  out  again  and  again  in  the  Bible. 
We  find  it,  for  example,  very  plainly  stated  in  Galatians 
3:2.  In  this  passage,  Paul  says :  "  This  only  would  I 
learn  from  you,  Received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of 
the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  ?  "  What  does  Paul 
mean  by  this  ?    On  one  occasion  Paul  was  passing  through 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      159 

Oalatia  and  was  detained  there  by  some  physical  infirm- 
ity. We  are  not  told  what  it  was;  presumably  it  was 
some  trouble  with  his  eyes.  But  that  does  not  matter  for 
our  present  purpose.  At  all  events,  he  was  not  so  ill  that 
he  could  not  preach  and  he  did  preach  to  these  Galatians. 
He  preached  to  them  that  Christ  had  redeemed  us  from 
the  curse  of  the  law  by  becoming  a  curse  in  our  place 
(Gal.  3: 13),  and  that  by  simple  faith  in  Him  Who  died 
in  their  place,  all  their  sins  were  forgiven  and  they  were 
justified  from  all  things  (2  Cor.  5:21;  Acts  13:38,  39). 
The  Galatians  believed  this  proclamation  of  the  Gospel 
and  put  their  trust  in  the  atoning  death  of  Jesus  Christ 
on  the  cross  as  their  ground  of  acceptance  before  God, 
and  God  immediately  set  His  seal  to  their  faith  by  giving 
them  as  a  conscious,  experimental  possession,  the  Holy 
Spirit.  But  after  Paul  had  gone  away,  certain  men  came 
down  from  Jerusalem  who  mixed  up  the  Jewish  law 
with  the  simple  Gospel  of  Christ  and  told  these  people, 
these  believers  in  Galatia,  that  merely  believing  in  Jesus 
Christ  was  not  enough,  that  in  addition  to  that,  if  they 
were  to  be  saved,  they  must  be  circumcised  according  to 
the  law  of  Moses.  (Just  as  the  Seventh  Day  Adventist 
people  come  along  nowadays  and  tell  young  Christians 
that  it  is  not  enough  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
that  in  addition  to  that,  they  must  keep  the  seventh  day 
Sabbath  according  to  the  law  of  Moses.  It  is  the  same 
old  controversy,  only  breaking  out  at  a  new  point.) 

These  young  believers  in  Galatia  were  all  upset.  They 
did  not  know  whether  they  were  saved  (or,  justified)  or 
not.  This  reaches  the  ears  of  the  Apostle  Paul  and  he  is 
very  indignant.  Nothing  makes  true  Christian  workers 
more  indignant,  nor  more  righteously  indignant,  than  to 
have  false  teachers  come  along  and  try  to  upset  young 


160  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

converts  and  get  them  confused.  So  he  wrote  this  epistle 
to  the  Galatians  to  show  the  Galatian  believers  the  truth 
and  expose  the  error  of  these  Judaizers.  I  am  glad  that 
these  Judaizers  came  down,  for,  while  they  upset  these 
Galatian  believers  for  a  while,  the  ultimate  outcome  was 
good,  for  it  gave  rise  to  this  wonderful  epistle  to  the 
Galatians,  w^hich  is  the  greatest  exposition  of  the  doctrine 
of  justification  by  faith  that  is  to  be  found  in  the  Bible, 
even  greater  on  this  one  point  than  the  epistle  to  the 
Romans. 

First  of  all,  Paul  called  the  attention  of  the  young  be- 
lievers in  Galatia  to  the  fact  that  Abraham  himself  was 
justified  before  he  was  circumcised,  that  "  Abraham 
(simply)  believed  God"  and  his  simply  believing  God 
was  "counted  unto  him  for  righteousness"  (Gal.  3:6). 
He  showed  them  that  after  Abraham  was  thus  justified 
by  simple  faith,  he  was  circumcised,  not  in  order  to  he 
justified,  but  as  "a  seal  of  the  faith  that  he  had  zuhile  he 
was  still  in  uncircumcision"  (Romans  4:  11,  R.  V.). 

Then  Paul  exposes  the  error  of  these  Judaizers  in  a 
second  way.  He  appeals  directly  to  the  experience  of  the 
believers  in  Galatia.  He  says  to  them,  in  effect,  "  You 
received  the  Holy  Spirit,  did  you  not,  as  a  definite  ex- 
perience?" "Yes,  Paul,  we  did."  "Well,  then,"  he 
says  in  substance,  "  let  me  ask  you  a  question  ?  How  did 
you  receive  the  Holy  Spirit — *by  works  of  the  law '  (that 
is,  by  keeping  the  Alosaic  law)  or  by  *  the  hearing  of 
faith  *  (that  is,  by  simply  believing  God's  testimony  about 
Jesus  Christ,  that  He  had  borne  their  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  cross  and  by  simply  trusting  God  to  forgive 
their  sins  because  Jesus  Christ  had  died  in  their  place)  ?  " 
And  they  replied,  "  Why,  of  course,  Paul,  we  received 
the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  '  hearing  of  faith.'  "    And  that  is 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      161 

the  way  every  one  of  us  must  receive  Him.  This,  then,  is 
the  very  first  step,  the  most  fundamental  step  of  all  in 
receiving  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  rest  abso- 
lutely on  the  finished  work  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross 
as  the  sole  ground  of  our  acceptance  before  God.  When 
we  do  thus  receive  Jesus  Christ,  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  becomes  our  birthright. 

Some  years  ago  an  engineer  on  the  Rock  Island  Rail- 
road was  converted  in  the  Moody  church  in  Chicago. 
Not  long  after  this,  one  of  the  well-instructed  members 
of  the  church  was  crossing  the  Rock  Island  Railroad 
tracks  in  the  south  part  of  Chicago  and  this  engineer 
came  down  the  track  on  a  switch  engine.  He  saw  this 
other  man  about  to  cross  the  track  and  slowed  down  the 
engine  and  said,  "  John,  don't  you  want  to  take  a  ride  ?  " 
He  replied,  "  Yes,"  and  climbed  up  into  the  cab  with  the 
engineer.  They  had  not  gone  very  far  when  Mr.  Mor- 
rison began  to  draw  the  young  convert  out.  After  the 
young  convert  had  talked  some  time,  Mr.  Morrison  said 
quietly  to  him,  "  You  have  a  different  religion  from 
mine."  "  What,  John,"  he  said,  "  a  different  religion 
from  yours?  I  thought  we  had  the  same  religion." 
"  No,"  Mr.  Morrison  replied,  "  you  have  a  different  re- 
ligion from  mine.  You  have  a  religion  of  two  letters.  I 
have  a  religion  of  four  letters."  "  What  do  you  mean, 
John  ?  "  the  man  asked.  John  replied,  "  Your  religion  is 
D-O,  DO ;  you  are  all  the  time  talking  about  w!:at  you  do. 
My  religion  is  D-O-N-E,  done,  I  am  trusting  to  what 
Jesus  Christ  has  done,  when  He  bore  my  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  cross."  That,  let  me  repeat,  is  the  first  step 
toward  receiving  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  that 
we  rest  entirely  and  absolutely  not  on  anything  we  do, 
but  upon  what  Jesus  Christ  has  already  done,  in  dying 


162  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

in  our  place  upon   the  cross   of   Calvary   (Gal.  3:13; 
2  Cor.  5:21). 

Se;cond  Step 

The  second  step  is  also  in  the  word  "  repent,"  a  change 
of  mind  about  sin,  a  change  of  mind  from  that  attitude  of 
mind  that  loves  sin  or  indulges  in  sin,  to  that  attitude  of 
mind  that  renounces  sin.  The  second  step,  then,  toward 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  renounce  all  sin. 
Here  again  we  touch  on  one  of  the  most  vital  points  in 
receiving  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Holy 
Spirit  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  must  make  a  clean-cut 
choice  between  the  Holy  Spirit  and  unholy  sin.  We  can- 
not have  both.  It  is  just  at  this  point  that  many  people 
fail  of  the  blessing.  They  read  books  on  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  go  to  conferences  and  listen  to 
various  speakers,  they  go  to  "  tarrying  meetings,"  they 
pray  long  alone  for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  but 
with  no  results.  Why  is  it?  Because  they  are  holding 
on  to  some  sin. 

Men  and  women  oftentimes  come  to  me  and  say,  "  I 
have  been  praying  for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
for  a  year,"  or  two  years,  or  three  years  or  five  years,  as 
the  case  may  be.  A  missionary  came  up  to  me  one  day 
in  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  in  New  York,  at  the 
close  of  the  sermon,  and  said  to  me,  "  I  have  been  praying 
for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  for  twenty  years. 
I  have  been  twenty  years  a  missionary  in  Persia  and  I 
have  never  had  a  convert."  Think  of  it!  a  missionary 
twenty  years  and  not  a  convert.  Then  this  minister  said, 
"  What  is  the  matter  ?  "  When  a  man  comes  to  me  and 
tells  me  he  has  been  praying  for  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  gets  no  answer  and  asks  what  the  trouble 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      163 

is,  I  generally  look  him  right  square  in  the  eye  and  say, 
"  My  brother,  it  is  S-I-N,  sin."  And  to  you  here  this 
morning  who  have  been  praying  for  a  long  time  for  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  receiving  nothing,  in 
all  probability  the  trouble  with  you  is  sin;  and  if  I  could 
look  down  right  into  your  heart  right  now,  just  as  God 
is  looking  right  down  into  your  heart  at  this  present 
moment,  I  could  put  my  finger  on  the  specific  sin  that  is 
shutting  you  out  of  the  blessing.  Oftentimes  it  is  what 
we  are  pleased  to  call  "  a  small  sin  "  that  shuts  us  out  of 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  reality  there  are 
no  small  sins.  There  are  sins  about  small  things,  but 
every  sin  is  an  act  of  rebellion  against  God,  no  matter 
how  small  the  thing  is  in  itself  and  no  act  of  rebellion 
against  God  is  a  small  thing.  Suppose  your  little  child 
in  a  fit  of  anger  throws  a  book  on  the  floor  and  you  say 
to  the  child,  "  Pick  up  that  book."  Now  that  certainly  is 
a  small  thing  in  itself,  but  suppose  the  child  says,  "  I 
won't ! "  Is  it  a  small  thing  now  ?  And  every  sin,  no 
matter  how  small  the  thing  is  in  itself,  is  saying  "  I 
won't "  to  God,  and  seen  in  this  light,  every  sin  is  an 
appalling  thing, 

Mr.  Finney  somewhere  tells  of  a  woman  in  the  central 
part  of  New  York  state,  who  became  greatly  concerned 
about  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  the  meet- 
ings were  over  at  night,  she  would  go  to  her  room  and 
pray  long  into  the  night  and  lose  necessary  sleep,  and  her 
friends  were  afraid  she  would  go  insane.  But  there  came 
no  answer  to  her  prayers.  One  night  she  came  home  from 
the  meeting  and  went  up  to  her  room.  As  she  knelt  there 
in  prayer  for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  some 
little  matter  of  head  adornment  came  up  before  her, 
something  that  probably  would  not  trouble  anybody  here, 


164  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

but  which  was  a  matter  of  controversy  between  her  and 
God,  and  as  she  knelt  there,  she  put  her  hand  to  her  head 
and  took  out  the  pins,  threw  them  across  the  floor  and 
said,  "There!  go!"  and  instantly  the  Holy  Ghost  fell 
upon  her.  Now,  what  was  it  that  shut  her  out  of  the 
blessing?    Pins?    No,  controversy  with  God — sin. 

If  there  is  anything  that  always  comes  up  when  you 
get  nearest  to  God,  that  is  the  thing  to  deal  with.  You 
know  that  with  many  of  us  there  are  things  we  do  and 
that  we  have  persuaded  ourselves  are  perfectly  right,  but 
that  every  time  when  we  get  nearest  to  God,  every  time 
of  especial  spiritual  interest,  these  things  come  up  to 
trouble  our  conscience.  Now,  if  there  is  anything  of 
that  kind  that  comes  up  every  time  you  get  nearest  to 
God,  that  is  the  thing  to  deal  with. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  attending  a  Bible  conference  at 
Dr.  Broughton's  Tabernacle  in  Atlanta,  Ga.  One  after- 
noon when  I  was  to  speak  on  this  subject,  a  minister 
came  in  and  took  a  seat  over  on  the  right  hand  side  of 
the  tabernacle.  As  he  was  taking  his  seat.  Dr.  Broughton 
nudged  me  and  whispered,  "  Don't  look  now,  or  he  will 
think  we  are  talking  about  him,  but  that  man  who  is 
taking  his  seat  is  the  pope  of  our  denomination  in  north 
Georgia.  Everything  he  says  goes,  but  he  is  not  with  us 
at  all  in  this  matter.  I  am  glad  he  is  here."  As  I  spoke 
that  afternoon,  I  would  occasionally  look  over  toward 
that  man.  He  was  listening  very  intently.  When  the 
meeting  was  over  and  I  had  gone  out  into  the  vestibule 
of  the  church,  that  man  was  waiting.  He  came  up  and 
said,  "  I  did  not  stand  up  this  afternoon  when  you  asked 
people  to  stand  up."  I  replied,  "  I  noticed  you  did  not." 
"  I  thought,"  he  said,  "  that  you  said  that  only  those 
should  stand  who  could  say  that  they  were  fully  sur- 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      166 

rendered  to  God."  I  answered,  "  That  was  exactly  what 
I  did  say."  "  Well,"  he  answered,  "  I  could  not  say  that." 
"  All  right,  then  you  did  perfectly  right  in  not  getting  up. 
I  did  not  want  you  to  lie."  "  Say,"  he  continued,  "  you 
hit  me  pretty  hard  this  afternoon."  I  replied,  "  That  is 
what  I  am  here  for."  "  You  said  that  if  there  is  any- 
thing that  always  came  up  when  we  got  nearest  to  God, 
that  was  the  thing  to  deal  with.  Well,  there  is  something 
that  always  comes  up  when  I  get  nearest  to  God.  I  am 
not  going  to  tell  you  what  it  is.  I  think  you  know."  I 
replied,  "  I  think  I  do  "—I  could  smell  it.  "  Well,"  he 
said,  "  I  just  wanted  to  tell  you,  that's  all."  This  was  on 
Friday.  I  left  that  evening  for  Augusta,  Georgia.  The 
following  Tuesday  I  was  coming  back  through  Atlanta  on 
my  way  to  Chicago.  The  train  stopped  a  few  minutes  in 
the  station  and  I  got  off.  Dr.  B  rough  ton  was  waiting  in 
the  station  to  speak  to  me.  He  said,  "  I  wish  you  could 
have  been  in  our  Baptist  preachers'  meeting  yesterday 
morning.  That  man  from  north  Georgia  came  into  our 
meeting  and  got  up  and  said,  *  Brethren,  we  have  been  all 
wrong  about  this  matter,'  then  he  told  what  he  had  done 
[he  had  put  away  his  sin],  then  he  said,  'Brethren,  I 
have  a  more  definite  experience  now  than  I  had  when  I 
was  converted.' "  A  more  definite  experience  than  you 
had  when  you  were  converted  is  awaiting  you  this  morn- 
ing, if  you  will  only  put  away  your  sin. 

Third  Step 
The  third  step  is  also  in  this  verse,  "Be  baptised  in 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  remission  of  your  sins.'* 
'TutRt  MUST  be:  an  open  confe^ssion  before  the  WORr.D 

OE  OUR  RENUNCIATION   OE   SIN   AND  OE  OUR  ACCEPTANCE 

OE  Jesus  Christ.    The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is 


166  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

not  for  the  secret  believer,  but  for  the  one  who  comes  out 
openly  and  confesses  before  the  world  his  renunciation  of 
sin  and  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ.  As  Mr.  Alexander 
and  I  went  around  the  world,  there  were  hundreds  of  peo- 
ple who  had  been  trying  to  be  secret  disciples  for  years 
who  came  out  and  made  a  public  confession  of  Christ  in 
our  meetings  and  who  received  blessing  through  that  act. 
Of  course,  God's  appointed  way  of  confession  of  our 
renunciation  of  sin  and  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
baptism,  and  it  is  in  the  very  act  of  baptism  with  water 
that  many  receive  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  be- 
cause that  is  where  they  make  an  open  confession  of 
renunciation  of  sin  and  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ.  I 
never  felt  the  importance  of  baptism  before  as  I  did 
when  I  was  in  India.  I  found  that  there  were  in  India 
large  numbers  of  men  who  really  believed  the  truth  about 
Jesus  Christ,  who  did  not  hesitate  to  say  that  they  be- 
lieved in  His  Deity  and  in  His  atonement,  but  who  would 
not  be  baptized.  Their  reason  was  that  being  baptized  in 
India  meant  great  losses  to  many.  For  example:  A  stu- 
dent in  the  University  of  Calcutta  came  to  me  when  I 
was  holding  meetings  in  Calcutta.  He  said  to  me,  "  I 
believe  everything  that  you  have  preached."  I  said, 
"  Why  don't  you  come  out,  then,  and  confess  Christ  in 
baptism?"  He  said,  "Because  if  I  did,  it  would  cost 
me  everything  I  have  in  the  world.  I  am  a  student  of 
law  in  the  university  here  in  Calcutta.  I  have  not  com- 
pleted my  education.  My  father  is  a  rich  man  in  south- 
ern India  and  I  am  heir  to  a  fortune;  but  if  I  should 
come  out  and  be  baptized,  my  father  would  cut  me  ofl 
without  an  ana.  There  is  nothing  I  could  do.  I  cannot 
work,  for  I  belong  to  the  Brahmin  caste.  I  cannot  prac 
tise  law,  because  I  have  not  yet  completed  my  coursc< 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     167 

What  shall  I  do  ?  "  I  replied,  "  Do  what  God  tells  you 
to  do,  be  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ."  After 
some  thought  and  some  reasoning  with  him,  he  said,  "  I 
will."  I  was  leaving  Calcutta,  so  I  could  not  baptize 
him,  but  he  went  to  Dr.  Charles  Cuthbert  Hall,  of  Brook- 
lyn, New  York,  who  was  at  that  time  lecturing  in  India 
on  the  Haskel  Foundation,  and  asked  him  to  baptize  him. 
Dr.  Hall  consented.  The  young  man  sent  to  his  father 
in  southern  India,  telling  him  he  was  to  be  baptized.  His 
father  came  up  to  witness  the  ceremony  and  as  soon  as 
his  son  was  baptized,  he  cut  him  off  without  an  ana.  I 
tell  you,  baptism  means  something  in  India.  It  means 
something  everywhere.  If  you  have  not  been  baptized, 
either  as  a  child  or  as  an  adult,  be  baptized,  make  an  open 
confession  of  your  renunciation  of  sin  and  of  your  ac- 
ceptance of  and  identification  with  Jesus  Christ  in  God's 
appointed  way. 

But  if  you  have  been  baptized,  even  then  there  should 
be  that  for  which  baptism  stands,  an  open  confession  of 
your  renunciation  of  sin  and  acceptance  of  and  identifi- 
cation with  Jesus  Christ. 

But  some  one  may  ask,  "  Suppose  one  is  a  Friend,  or, 
as  they  are  commonly  called,  a  Quaker,  who  do  not  be- 
lieve in  the  outward  sacraments  of  either  the  Lord's 
Supper  or  baptism?  Are  they  never  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit?"  To  this  I  would  say  that  some  of  those 
that  I  have  known  who  gave  the  clearest  evidence  of 
being  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  belonged  to  the 
Friends,  but  I  am  here  to  expound  the  Word  of  God,  and 
this  is  what  the  Word  of  God  says. 

The  Fourth  Step 
Now  let  us  turn  to  Acts  5 :  32  and  there  we  will  find 


168  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

the  fourth  step :  "  And  we  are  witnesses  of  these  things ; 
and  so  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  Whom  God  hath  given  to  them 
that  obey  Him."  The  fourth  step,  as  set  forth  in  this 
verse,  is  obEdie;nce.  We  are  told  in  this  verse  that  God 
gives  the  Holy  Spirit  "  to  them  that  obey  Him."  This 
step  is  really  found  in  Acts  2 :  38,  for,  as  we  saw  in  study- 
ing that  verse,  we  must  accept  the  Lord  Jesus,  not  only  as 
our  Saviour,  but  as  our  Lord,  and  that  involves  obedi- 
ence, but  I  have  taken  you  to  this  verse  also,  as  this  verse 
to  some  of  you  will  make  it  more  clear. 

Let  me  repeat,  the  fourth  step  is  obedience.  But  what 
is  obedience?  Some  one  will  say,  it  is  doing  what  God 
tells  you  to  do.  Yes.  But  how  much  that  God  tells  you 
to  do.  One  thing  ?  two  things  ?  three  things  ?  No,  every- 
thing! There  is  a  denomination  that  greatly  emphasizes 
obedience,  as  well  they  might,  for  it  is  constantly  em- 
phasized throughout  the  entire  Bible;  but  this  particular 
denomination  makes  obedience  to  consist  in  just  one  thing, 
that  is,  one  certain  ceremonial  act.  No,  that  is  not  the 
whole  of  obedience.  Obedience  is  not  merely  doing  one, 
two  or  three  things  that  God  commands,  but  doing  every- 
thing that  He  commands.  The  heart  of  obedience  is  in 
the  will.  The  whole  essence  of  obedience  is  the  surren- 
der of  the  will  to  God.  It  is  coming  to  God  and  saying, 
"  Oh  God,  here  I  am.  Thou  hast  bought  me  with  a  price 
and  I  acknowledge  Thine  ownership.  Send  me  where 
Thou  unit,  do  with  me  what  Thou  wilt,  use  me  as  Thou 
wilt."   This  is  one^  of  the  most  fundamental  things 

IN  RFCFIVING  the  baptism  WITH  THE  HOEY  SpIRIT,  THE 
UNCONDITIONAI,  SURRENDER  OF  THE  WIEI/  TO  GoD. 

More  people  miss  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  at 
this  point,  and  more  people  enter  experimentally  into  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  at  this  point  than  at  almost 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      1«9 

any  other.  There  are  many  who  go  a  long  ways  in  the 
matter  of  sacrificing  for  Christ,  they  even  go  so  far  as 
to  go  as  foreign  missionaries  and  leave  home  and  friends 
and  all  the  comforts  of  their  own  land,  to  go  through 
sacrifice  and  suffering  on  the  foreign  field,  who  still  stop 
short  of  full  surrender  to  God  and  so  stop  short  of  the 
blessing.  Man  after  man  and  woman  after  woman  told 
me  in  India,  men  and  women  who  had  gone  so  far  as  to 
go  to  the  danger  and  discomfort  of  that  trying  climate, 
men  and  women  who  had  given  up  home  and  friends  and 
comforts  of  countless  kinds  and  pretty  much  everything 
that  most  of  us  hold  dear,  to  go  as  foreign  missionaries, 
but  nevertheless  they  had  not  made  a  full  surrender  to 
God  as  yet.  Thank  God  many  of  them  did  then,  and 
therefore  were  then  and  there  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.  There  is  absolutely  no  use  of  your  praying  for 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  nor  of  going  to  "  tarry- 
ing meetings,"  nor  any  other  kind  of  meetings,  if  you 
will  not  surrender  your  will  to  God,  holding  absolutely 
nothing  back.  You  will  not  receive  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  though  you  pray  for  it  to  the  crack  of  doom 
unless  you  make  an  absolute  surrender  of  your  will 
to  God. 

Many  are  afraid  to  make  a  full  surrender  to  God. 
They  fear  that  if  they  should  make  a  full  surrender  to 
God,  that  God  would  require  of  them  some  hard  thing, 
or  even  some  absurd  thing.  Who  is  your  God,  anyway? 
He  certainly  is  not  the  God  of  the  Bible.  The  name  of 
God  in  the  Bible  is  love,  "  God  is  love ;"  and  absolute 
surrender  to  God  is  simply  absolute  surrender  to  infinite 
love.  Is  there  anything  to  be  dreaded  in  that?  And 
God's  love  is  not  only  wiser  than  that  of  any  earthly 
father,  but  more  tender  than  that  of  any  earthly  mother. 


170  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Some  years  ago,  at  one  of  the  Northfield  conferences,  a 
gentleman  came  to  me  and  said,  "  You  must  speak  on  the 
subject  of  full  surrender.  A  good  many  of  the  men  and 
women  over  at  East  Hall  (one  of  the  school  buildings  at 
which  many  attendants  at  the  conference  were  stopping) 
are  greatly  troubled  on  the  subject  of  full  surrender. 
They  are  afraid  that  if  they  make  a  full  surrender  to 
God,  that  God  will  require  some  hard  thing  of  them,  or 
even  some  absurd  thing.  The  women  are  afraid  that  if 
they  tell  God  they  will  make  a  full  surrender  to  Him,  He 
will  take  away  their  husbands  or  do  some  other  dreadful 
thing,  and  the  men  are  afraid  of  some  other  things." 
That  afternoon  I  took  up  the  subject  of  full  surrender 
and  repeated  what  this  man  had  said.  Then  I  said  to 
them,  "  Who  is  your  God,  anyway,  that  you  are  afraid  to 
make  a  full  surrender  to  Him?  He  certainly  is  not  the 
God  of  the  Bible,  for  the  name  of  the  God  of  the  Bible  is 
LOVE.  Absolute  surrender  to  God  is  simply  putting  your- 
self into  the  hands  of  Infinite  Love.  God's  love  is  not 
only  wiser  than  that  of  any  earthly  father,  but  more 
tender  than  any  earthly  mother." 

Then  I  used  this  illustration :  "  Suppose  when  I  get 
back  to  Chicago,  my  son  (who  was  then  perhaps  ten  years 
of  age),  as  soon  as  he  hears  my  ring  at  the  front  door- 
bell, should  come  running  down-stairs  and  open  the  door 
and  throw  himself  into  my  arms  and  say,  *  Father,  I  am 
so  glad  you  are  back.  We  have  so  greatly  missed  you 
since  you  were  away.  I  want  to  make  this  a  red-letter 
day  to  celebrate  your  homecoming.  I  am  not  going  to 
have  any  will  of  my  own  at  all  today;  I  am  going  to  do 
just  what  you  tell  me  to  do  at  every  turn.  Please  sit 
down.  Father,  and  make  me  out  a  program  for  the  whole 
day,  telling  me  just  what  to  do  at  every  hour  of  the  day.' 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     171 

Now,"  I  said,  "  suppose  my  son  said  that  to  me,  what 
do  you  think  I  would  do  ?  Do  you  think  I  would  call  for 
my  wife  to  bring  me  a  sheet  of  paper  and  then  sit  down 
and  say,  *  Clara,  what  are  the  things  that  Reuben  most 
dislikes  to  do  ? '  and  then  make  him  out  a  program  for  the 
day,  putting  in  all  the  things  he  most  disliked  to  do? 
Don't  you  know  that  I  would  not  do  that?  Don't  you 
know  that  I  would  make  that  the  brightest,  happiest  day 
that  Reuben  A.  Torrey,  Jr.,  ever  knew  in  all  his  life?" 
And  just  so  it  is  with  God.  When  we  make  an  absolute 
surrender  of  our  wills  and  all  we  have  to  Him,  He  brings 
into  play  all  the  resources  of  infinite  wisdom  and  grace 
and  power,  to  fill  our  lives  with  sunshine.  He  may  ask 
of  us  things  that  we  would  not  of  ourselves  have  chosen 
to  do,  but  if  He  does,  those  things  will  be  the  very  hap- 
piest things  that  we  have  to  do.  For  years  I  held  back 
from  full  surrender  to  God,  indeed  from  becoming  a 
Christian  at  all,  because  I  was  afraid  that  God  would 
command  me  to  preach  the  Gospel ;  and  I  was  determined 
to  be  a  lawyer.  And  God  did  tell  me  to  preach  the  Gos- 
pel. But  today  I  would  rather  preach  the  Gospel  than  do 
anything  else  I  know.  And  so,  if  any  of  you  are  hold- 
ing back,  make  a  full  surrender  of  your  will  to  God  and 
God  will  bring  into  play  all  the  resources  of  infinite  wis- 
dom and  love  and  power  to  fill  your  lives  with  sunshine. 

However  that  may  be,  you  will  not  receive  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit  until  you  do  thus  make  a  full 
surrender  to  God,  until  you  come  to  Him  and  say  from 
the  depths  of  your  heart  and  really  mean  it,  "  Heavenly 
Father,  here  I  am.  I  am  Thy  property.  Thou  hast 
bought  me  with  a  price  and  I  acknowledge  Thine  owner- 
ship. Send  me  where  Thou  wilt,  do  with  me  what  Thou 
wilt,  use  me  as  Thou  wilt."     Through  not  doing  this. 


172  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

thousands  today  are  missing  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  through  doing  it,  thousands  upon  thousands 
have  entered  into  blessing. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  attending  a  Bible  Conference  at 
Grove  City,  Pa.  One  day  a  Presbyterian  minister  came 
to  me  and  asked  if  he  might  have  a  private  conversation 
with  me.  I  made  an  appointment  with  him,  and  at  the 
time  appointed  we  met.  This  man  was  one  of  the  leading 
Presbyterian  ministers  in  all  that  part  of  the  state,  a  man 
greatly  honoured  and  beloved.  When  we  met,  he  told  me 
this  experience ;  he  said,  "  Some  time  ago  three  young 
men  from  my  church  went  to  one  of  the  Student  Con- 
ferences at  Northfield.  They  heard  you  speak  on  The 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  they  came  back, 
they  called  upon  me  in  my  study  and  said,  *  Pastor,  we 
think  we  have  heard  of  something  at  Northfield  about 
which  you  do  not  know.' "  It  seemed  to  me  that  that 
was  a  rather  presumptuous  thing  for  young  men  in  their 
position  to  do  with  a  pastor  in  his  position.  But  notice 
the  quality  of  the  man.  He  said  to  them,  "  Young  men, 
if  you  have  something  that  I  have  not,  and  I  ought  to 
have,  I  want  to  know  about  it."  Then  they  told  him 
what  they  heard  at  Northfield  about  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Then,"  he  continued,  "  when  they  had 
gone,  I  took  my  hat  and  walked  out  into  the  woods  and 
sat  down  on  a  log  and  looked  up  to  God  and  said,  *  Oh 
God,  if  these  young  men  have  something  that  I  have  not 
and  that  I  ought  to  have,  I  want  it  right  now,  and  the 
best  I  know,  I  make  a  full  surrender  of  all  I  am  and  all 
I  have  to  Thee.'  Immediately,"  he  continued,  "  there 
came  stealing  into  my  heart  such  a  sense  of  peace  and 
joy  as  I  had  never  known  before."  Oh,  a  filling  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  brings  to  you  not  only  a  peace  and  joy 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      178 

you  never  knew  before,  but  a  power  in  God's  service  such 
as  you  scarcely  dreamed  was  possible,  is  awaiting  the 
moment  when  you  make  a  full,  unreserved,  unconditional, 
whole-hearted  surrender  of  all  you  have  and  all  you  are 
to  God. 

Many  years  ago  I  was  speaking  in  the  city  of  Washing- 
ton, D.  C,  at  an  International  Convention  of  Christian 
Workers  on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  God  was 
wonderfully  present  that  night.  As  I  closed  my  address 
and  we  joined  in  prayer,  the  Holy  Spirit  manifested  His 
presence  in  a  wonderful  way.  As  I  came  down  from  the 
pulpit,  the  Chaplain  of  the  United  States  Senate  came  to 
me  and  said,  "  I  never  experienced  anything  like  this 
before.  It  seemed  to  me  that  if  I  had  opened  my  eyes,  I 
could  have  fairly  seen  the  Holy  Spirit  in  this  place  to- 
night." But,  while  many  had  really  entered  into  the 
blessing,  some  had  not;  and  we  were  there  dealing  with 
inquirers  for  about  two  hours.  About  eleven  o'clock 
some  one  came  to  me  and  said,  "  Do  you  see  that  young 
woman  over  on  the  right,  with  whom  Miss  Bertha 
Wright,  of  Ottawa,  Canada,  is  dealing?  Well,  she  is  in 
great  agony.  Miss  Wright  has  been  dealing  with  her 
for  two  hours.  Won't  you  go  over  and  speak  to  her  ?  " 
I  went  over  and  stepped  into  the  pew  just  back  of  her 
and  leaned  over  and  said,  "  What  is  your  trouble  ?  "  She 
replied,  "  I  came  from  Baltimore  for  just  one  purpose, 
and  that  was  that  I  might  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  I  cannot  go  back  to  Baltimore  until  I  am." 
"  Is  your  will  fully  surrendered  to  God  ?  "  "I  do  not 
think  it  really  is."  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  it  will  do  no  good  to 
pray  unless  your  will  is  fully  surrendered  to  God.  Will 
you  just  surrender  your  will  right  now?"  She  replied, 
"  I  cannot."    "  Are  you  willing  that  God  should  lay  your 


174  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

will  down  for  you?"  "Yes,"  she  replied.  "Then,"  I 
said,  "  ask  Him  to  do  it." 

She  bowed  her  head  on  the  back  of  the  pew  in  front 
of  her  and  said,  "  Oh  God,  empty  me  of  my  self-will. 
Bring  my  will  into  full  surrender  to  Thine.  Lay  my  will 
down  for  me.  I  ask  it  in  Jesus'  name."  Then  I  said, 
"  Is  it  done  ?  "  She  said,  "  Yes,  it  must  be.  I  have  asked 
God  for  something  according  to  His  will  and  I  know  He 
has  heard  me  and  I  have  what  I  have  asked  (1  Jno. 
5: 14,  15).  Yes,  it  is  done,  my  will  is  laid  down."  Then 
I  said,  "  Now  ask  Him  for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit."  Again  she  bowed  her  head  on  the  back  of  the 
seat  in  front  of  her  and  prayed,  "  Oh  God,  baptize  me 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  right  now.  I  ask  it  in  Jesus'  name," 
and  instantly  it  was  done,  when  her  will  was  laid  down. 

God  is  waiting  this  very  moment  to  baptize  any  of  you 
who  never  were  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  before  and 
to  fill  some  of  you  anew  that  have  been  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  before,  the  moment  that  you  will  lay  your 
will  down  and  then  look  to  Him  to  baptize  or  fill  you  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Go  to  your  rooms,  get  alone  with  God 
somewhere  and  do  it  at  once. 


VIII 

THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT: 
HOW  TO  OBTAIN  IT  RIGHT  NOW 

WE  saw  yesterday  that  there  was  a  plain  path 
consisting  of  seven  simple  steps  that  any  one 
could  take,  and  that  it  was  absolutely  certain 
that  any  one  who  took  those  steps  would  enter  into  the 
blessing.  Yesterday  we  took  up  the  first  four  steps.  The 
first  step  was,  to  rest  upon  the  finished  work  of  Christ 
as  the  sole  ground  of  our  acceptance  before  God.  The 
second  step  was  that  we  renounce  all  sin  and  put  every 
known  sin  out  of  our  lives.  The  third  step  was,  an  open 
confession  before  the  world  of  our  renunciation  of  sin 
and  of  our  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  fourth  step 
was,  absolute  surrender  to  God,  that  we  come  to  God  and 
say  to  Him  from  our  hearts,  "  Heavenly  Father,  here  I 
am.  Thou  hast  bought  me  with  a  price,  I  acknowledge 
Thine  ownership,  now  send  me  where  Thou  wilt,  do  with 
me  what  Thou  wilt,  use  me  as  Thou  wilt."  At  this  point 
we  closed  yesterday. 

I.  Ths  Fifth  Step 
You  will  find  the  fifth  step  in  John  7:  37-39:  "  Now  on 
the  last  day,  the  great  day  of  the  feast,  Jesus  stood  and 
cried,  saying,  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  mt 
and  drink.  He  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  Scripture  haa 
said,  out  of  his  body  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water 

175 


176  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

But  this  spake  He  of  the  Spirit,  which  thev  that  believe 
on  Him  were  to  receive." 

Here  again  we  have  the  first  step  upon  which  we  dwelt 
yesterday,  namely,  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  "  He  that  be- 
lieveth  on  me."  But  we  have  also  a  fifth  step  in  the 
word  "  thirst,"  "  if  any  man  thirst."  Our  Lord  Jesus 
doubtless  had  in  mind  when  He  uttered  these  words 
Isaiah  44 :  3,  "  For  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is 
thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground :  /  will  pour  my 
Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  my  blessing  uoon  thine  off- 
spring." Note  carefully  the  words  "  upon  him  that  is 
THIRSTY."  The  fifth  step,  then,  is  thirst.  Do  you  know 
what  it  means  to  be  thirsty,  were  you  ever  real  thirsty? 
I  have  been,  when  I  was  with  the  troops  at  Chickamauga 
Park  during  the  Spanish-American  War.  where  60,000 
soldiers  were  gathered  together  and  where  there  was  no 
rain  for  many  days,  and  the  air  was  full  of  dust  thirty 
feet  high  day  and  night,  and  we  ate  dust  and  drank  dust 
and  slept  dust  and  dreamt  dust,  and  no  water  fit  to  drink ; 
I  surely  knew  what  it  meant  to  be  thirsty.  Again,  when 
I  was  in  Southern  China  in  1902,  the  cholera  was  raging 
and  one  needed  to  exercise  the  utmost  care  in  regard  to 
what  water  he  drank,  I  knew  what  it  meant  to  be  thirsty 
then.  When  a  man  really  thirsts,  it  seems  as  if  every 
pore  in  his  body  had  just  one  cry,  "  Water,  water,  water." 
Now  apply  this  to  the  matter  in  hand.  When  a  man 
thirsts  spiritually,  his  whole  being  has  just  one  cry,  "  The 
Holy  Spirit,  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Holy  Spirit,  O  God, 
give  me  the  Holy  Spirit." 

Just  as  long  as  we  think  we  can  get  on  some  way  with- 
out the  definite  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  we  are  not 
going  to  have  it.  Just  as  long  as  we  are  seeking  to  ac- 
complish by  new  tricks  of  oratory,  or  by  a  skillful  use  of 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      177 

words,  or  by  all  sorts  of  psychological  and  other  trick 
methods  to  influence  people,  we  are  not  going  to  have  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit;  but  when  we  come  to  the 
place  that  we  realize  our  utter  need  of  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  if  we  are  to  do  effective  service  for  God, 
and  long  for  it  at  any  cost,  then  it  will  be  ours,  and  not 
till  then. 

Let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean  by  two  ministers.  The 
-first  one  heard  me  speaking  at  the  State  Convention  of 
the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  of  New  York  State,  at  Jamestown,  N.  Y. 
I  spoke  upon  this  same  subject  upon  which  I  am  speak- 
ing to  you  today,  and  said  very  many  of  the  same  things 
I  am  saying  now  and  said  yesterday.  This  minister, 
coming  out  of  the  hall  with  another  minister,  said  to  him, 
"That  kind  of  teaching  (that  is,  the  kind  I  have  just 
been  giving  you)  leads  either  to  fanaticism  or  to  despair." 
He  did  not  ask  whether  it  was  scriptural  or  not.  He 
could  not  deny  that  it  was  scriptural,  and  he  was  con- 
demned by  it,  and  tried  to  escape  the  condemnation  of 
his  own  conscience  by  this  smart  remark.  Now  such  a 
man  as  that  is  not  going  to  receive  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

But  take  another  minister.  This  was  at  Northfield  at 
one  of  Mr.  Moody's  conferences.  I  had  spoken  on  Sat- 
urday night  on  "  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
What  It  Is  and  What  It  Does,  Its  Necessity,  and  Who 
Can  Have  It."  I  was  to  speak  on  that  Sunday  morning 
on  "  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  How  to  Get  It." 
Early  in  the  morning,  this  minister  came  around  to  the 
house  where  I  was  stopping,  and  said,  "  Mr.  Torrey,  I 

have  come  from  (naming  a  city  in  New  Jersey 

where  he  was  pastor)  to  Northfield  for  just  one  purpose, 
the  purpose  of  being  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 


178  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

/  would  rather  die  than  go  back  to  my  church  without  it.'* 
I  said  to  him,  "  My  brother,  you  are  going  to  have  it." 
The  following  Monday  morning  he  had  to  leave  by  an 
early  train,  but  he  came  around  to  see  me  before  he  went, 
and  said,  "  I  want  to  tell  you  I  have  received  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit." 

Do  you  thirst  ?  Do  you  long  for  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  whatever  it  may  involve  and  whatever  it  may 
cost?  It  may  cost  you  a  good  deal.  It  may  take  you  out 
of  a  nice,  comfortable  place  here  in  America  to  China  or 
to  India  or  the  heart  of  Africa. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  at  the  International  Christian 
Workers*  Conference  at  Hartford,  Conn.  At  the  close 
of  one  of  my  addresses  on  this  subject,  the  pastor  and 
assistant  pastor  of  the  church  came  to  me  and  asked  me 
to  pray  with  them  that  the  visitor  for  the  church  might 
be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit;  and,  when  the  crowd 
had  gone  we  knelt  together  and  prayed  that  she  might 
be  thus  baptized.  A  year  later  one  of  the  pastors  said  to 
me,  "  I  hardly  know  whether  we  would  have  asked  you 
to  pray  that  our  church  visitor  might  be  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  if  we  had  known  what  it  meant,  for  we  have 
lost  her.  She  has  gone  as  a  foreign  missionary,"  and  it 
may  take  some  of  you  from  a  place  of  ease  and  comfort 
to  a  place  of  hardship  and  sacrifice,  if  you  really  are  bap- 
tized with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Do  you  want  the  Holy  Spirit 
at  any  cost  ?  If  you  do  not,  there  is  no  good  whatever  in 
your  praying  that  you  may  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
nothing  will  come  of  your  prayer. 

Before  I  leave  this  part  of  the  subject  let  me  say  that 
the  desire  for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  must  be 
a  pure  one.  You  must  desire  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  for  the  glory  of  God  and  not  for  your  own  glory. 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     179 

You  must  desire  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
order  that  you  may  honour  God  with  more  effective 
service  and  not  merely  that  you  may  get  a  new  power  or 
a  new  influence,  or  it  may  be  a  larger  salary. 

One  of  the  most  solemn  passages  in  the  Bible  on  this 
whole  subject  brings  this  out  in  a  very  solemn  way.  You 
will  find  it  in  Acts  8 :  20-22,  "  Peter  said  unto  him,  thy 
money  perish  with  thee  because  thou  hast  thought  that  the 
gift  of  God  may  be  obtained  with  money.  Thou  hast 
neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter:  for  thy  heart  is  not 
right  in  the  sight  of  God.  Repent  therefore  of  this  thy 
wickedness,  and  pray  God  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thine 
heart  may  be  forgiven  thee."  Simon,  the  magician,  had 
seen  the  power  that  Peter  and  John  had  because  they  had 
been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  he  desired  a  simi- 
lar power  for  himself.  He  was  willing  to  pay  large 
money  for  it  and  offered  it,  but  his  unholy  desire,  intense 
though  it  was,  only  brought  denunciation  and  not  a  bless- 
ing on  his  head.  Be  very  careful  at  this  point.  Get 
alone  with  God  and  ask  God  to  search  you  and  show 
you  whether  your  desire  for  this  wonderful  blessing 
is  a  pure  desire,  in  order  that  you  may  glorify  God 
as  you  ought,  or  a  selfish,  unholy  desire,  simply  in 
order  that  you  may  get  greater  joy  or  greater  power  for 
yourself. 

II.  The  Sixth  Step 
You  will  find  the  sixth  step  in  a  very  familiar  passage 
of  Scripture,  Luke  11 :  13,  "  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know 
how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children:  how  much 
more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
them  that  ask  Him."  That  is  the  sixth  step,  just 
ASK  Him.     That  is,  ask  God  definitely  for  the  definite 


180  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The.  sixth  ste^p  is  defi- 
KiTE  PRAYER  EOR  THIS  DEFINITE  BLESSING.  There  are 
many  in  these  days,  and  they  are  often  well  known  men, 
excellent  men,  too,  who  tell  us  that  we  ought  not  to  pray 
for  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  they  reason  it  out  very  speciously. 
They  say  "  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given  to  the  Church  as  an 
abiding  possession  at  Pentecost"  (that  is  true),  and  then 
they  ask  "  why  pray  for  what  you  have  already  got  ?  " 
To  this  the  late  Dr.  A.  J.  Gordon  replied  conclusively, 
"  Jesus  Christ  was  given  to  the  world  as  an  abiding  gift 
at  Calvary  (which  is  certainly  true,  see  John  3:  16),  He 
was  given  to  the  world  as  a  whole,  but  each  individual  in 
the  world  must  appropriate  this  gift  for  himself.  Just 
so  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given  to  the  whole 
Church  at  Pentecost,  but  it  was  given  to  the  Church  as 
a  whole,  and  each  individual  member  of  the  Church  must 
appropriate  the  gift  for  himself,  and  God's  way  of  ap- 
propriation is  prayer." 

But  these  brethren  often  go  still  further,  and  they  say 
"  every  individual  believer  in  Christ  has  the  Holy  Spirit," 
and  that  is  true  also,  as  we  saw  a  few  days  ago.  We  are 
told  definitely  in  Romans  8:9,  "If  any  man  have  not 
the  Spirit  of  Christ  (and  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ  "  here  does 
not  mean  a  Christlike  spirit  as  it  is  so  often  misinter- 
preted, but  is  a  name  of  the  Holy  Spirit),  he  is  none  of 
His ;"  so  it  is  clear  that  every  believer  has  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  some  sense.  And  these  brethren  go  on  and  say  if  then 
every  believer  already  has  the  Holy  Spirit  why  pray  for 
Him  ?  To  which  the  all-sufficient  answer  is,  that  it  is  one 
thing  to  have  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling  in  us  (as  He  does 
in  every  believer)  way  back  in  some  hidden  corner  of  our 
being  where  we  are  not  distinctly  conscious  of  His  pres- 
ence, and  quite  another  thing  and  a  far  more  glorious  thing 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     181 

to  have  this  indwelling  Spirit  take  entire  possession  of  the 
house  that  He  inhabits,  as  He  does  when  one  is  baptized 
(or,  filled)  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Anyway,  against  all  these  specious  reasonings  of  men 
we  put  the  plain,  unquestionable  utterance  of  Jesus 
Christ,  Luke  11 :  13,  "If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how 
to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children:  how  much  more 
shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them 
that  ask  Him." 

Some  years  ago  I  was  on  a  program  of  the  International 
Christian  Workers'  Convention  at  Boston,  to  speak  on  the 
subject  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  on  the  last 
evening  of  the  convention.  One  of  the  men  came  to  me 
at  the  noon  hour  (a  most  excellent  brother)  and  he  said, 
*'  I  notice  you  are  on  the  program  this  evening  to  speak 
on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  I  said,  "  Yes." 
Then  he  said,  "  I  think  that  is  the  most  important  sub- 
ject on  the  program."  I  replied,  "  I  think  it  is  impor- 
tant." "  Be  sure  to  tell  them,"  he  continued,  "  not  to 
pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit."  "  My  brother,"  I  replied,  "  I 
will  tell  them  to  do  the  very  thing  that  you  tell  me  to  tell 
them  not  to  do ;  for  God  has  said,  *  how  much  more  shall 
your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that 
ask  Him.' "  "  Oh,  yes,"  he  said,  "  but  that  was  before 
Pentecost."  "All  right,"  I  said,  "how  about  Acts  4:  31, 
was  that  before  Pentecost  or  after  ?  "  He  replied,  "  It 
was  certainly  after."  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  take  it  and  read 
it — And  when  they  had  prayed  the  place  was  shaken 
where  they  were  assembled  together;  and  they  were  all 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  they  spoke  the  word  of 
God  with  boldness."  "How  about  Acts  8:15,  16,  was 
that  before  or  after  Pentecost?"  "Well,"  he  said,  "it 
was  certainly  after   Pentecost."     I   said,  "  Take  it  and 


182  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

read  it."  He  read,  "  Peter  and  John  when  they  were 
come  down,  prayed  for  them,  that  they  might  receive  the 
Holy  Ghost:  (for  as  yet  He  was  fallen  upon  none  of 
them :  only  they  were  baptized  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus)."  So  you  may  go  right  through  your  Bible,  and 
after  Pentecost  as  well  as  before  Pentecost  you  will  find 
both  by  explicit  statement  and  by  illustrative  example 
that  men  and  women  were  "  baptized,"  or  were  "  filled 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  when  they  prayed. 

But  with  me  this  is  not  a  mere  matter  of  mere  exegesis. 
If  it  were,  I  would  believe  it  whether  I  had  experience  or 
not,  for  when  I  find  a  thing  written  in  the  Bible  I  believe 
it,  experience  or  no  experience,  for  I  do  not  believe  in 
trying  to  bring  the  Bible  down  to  the  level  of  our  experi- 
ence but  in  bringing  our  experience  up  to  the  level  of  the 
Bible.  But  with  me  this  is  a  matter  of  definite  and  abso- 
lutely certain  experience.  I  know  that  God  baptizes  men 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  as  they  pray,  and  that  He  fills  those 
that  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  anew  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  as  they  pray,  just  as  definitely  as  I  know 
that  water  quenches  thirst  and  that  food  satisfies  hunger. 
I  know  it  from  my  own  personal  experience.  How  often 
as  I  have  prayed  alone,  or  as  I  have  prayed  in  the  com- 
pany of  like-minded  believers,  the  Holy  Spirit  has  fallen 
upon  us  just  as  definitely  and  consciously  as  I  have  heard 
the  rain  falling  on  the  roof  of  a  building  or  felt  it  pouring 
down  over  my  whole  body. 

Let  me  give  you  one  illustration.  Some  years  ago  the 
ministers  of  Chicago  were  holding  daily  noon  prayer- 
meetings  in  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  building  in  Chicago  as  a 
preparation  for  an  expected  visit  of  Mr.  Moody  to  that 
city.  It  was  my  privilege  to  preside  at  those  prayer- 
meetings.     One   noon  in   the   midst   of   the   meeting  a 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      183 

Baptist  minister  sprang  to  his  feet  and  said,  "  Brother 
Torrey,  what  we  need  here  in  Chicago  is  an  all-night 
prayer-meeting  of  the  ministers."  *'  Very  well,"  I  re- 
plied, "  if  the  ministers  of  Chicago  desire  an  all-night 
prayermeeting,  if  they  will  come  up  to  the  Chicago  Ave- 
nue Church  (the  Moody  Church)  next  Friday  night  at 
ten  o'clock,  we  will  have  a  prayer-meeting  and  if  God 
keeps  us  there  all  night  we  will  stay  all  night,  we  will  stay 
as  long  as  God  keeps  us."  That  night  at  ten  o'clock, 
perhaps  six  or  seven  hundred  gathered  in  the  prayer- 
meeting  room  of  the  Chicago  Avenue  Church.  They 
were  not  all  ministers.  There  were  many  other  Christian 
workers,  as  well  as  some  Christian  women. 

Were  you  ever  in  a  meeting  where  the  devil  made  a 
dead  set  to  spoil  the  meeting?  Well,  that  was  the  kind 
of  a  meeting  that  we  had  at  first.  For  example,  three 
men  got  down  near  the  door  at  the  far  end  of  the  room 
by  three  chairs  and  commenced  to  pound  and  shout  and 
shriek  in  a  pretense  of  prayer,  and  when  someone  ex- 
postulated with  them,  saying  that  things  should  "  be  done 
decently  and  in  order,"  they  swore  at  the  man  who  ex- 
postulated with  them.  A  little  later  a  man  sprang  to  his 
feet  over  at  my  left  and  proclaimed  that  he  was  Elijah. 
The  man  was  not  to  blame,  he  was  a  lunatic.  There  were 
seven  of  whom  I  knew  in  the  United  States  at  that  time 
who  claimed  to  be  Elijah,  and  he  was  one  of  the  seven. 
Some  of  the  more  timid  ones  began  to  think,  "  Well,  if 
this  is  the  kind  of  a  meeting  it  is  going  to  be,  I  am 
going  home."  But  the  great  bulk  of  us  were  there  for 
a  blessing  and  we  were  determined  to  stay  until  we 
got  it. 

About  midnight  God  gave  us  complete  victory.  All  the 
discordant  elements  were  eliminated ;  and  oh !  what  pray- 


184  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

ing  there  was  from  that  time  on  up  to  a  little  after  two 
in  the  morning.  I  think  I  had  never  heard  such  praying 
before  and  have  seldom  heard  such  praying  since.  At 
2:  15  (I  know  the  time,  for  I  had  taken  out  my  watch  a 
few  moments  before),  we  were  all  on  our  knees,  and 
suddenly  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  upon  us.  No  one  could 
speak,  no  one  could  pray,  no  one  could  sing.  All  you 
could  hear  was  the  subdued  sobbing  of  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory.  It  seemed  to  me  as  I  knelt  there  that 
if  I  had  looked  up  I  would  fairly  have  seen  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  that  place.  This  was  early  Saturday  morning. 
The  following  morning,  Sunday  morning,  at  the  close  of 
my  morning  service,  one  of  my  deacons  came  to  me,  he 
could  hardly  speak  yet,  and  grasped  my  hand  and  whis- 
pered, "  Brother  Torrey,  I  will  never  forget  yesterday 
morning  to  the  latest  day  of  my  life." 

But  it  was  not  all  mere  emotion,  no,  thank  God,  no. 
Men  went  out  from  that  meeting  in  the  early  morning 
hours  to  different  places  with  the  power  of  God  resting 
upon  them.  One  business  man  went  down  to  Missouri 
on  an  early  morning  train.  After  he  had  transacted  his 
business  he  asked  the  proprietor  of  the  hotel  if  there  was 
any  meeting  going  on  in  that  town.     He  replied,  "  Yes, 

Brother  W ,  there  is  a  protracted  meeting  going  on 

up  at  the  Cumberland  Presbyterian  Church."  The  man 
was  a  Cumberland  Presbyterian  himself,  and  he  went  up 
to  the  church.  After  the  meeting  was  opened,  he  arose 
in  his  seat,  he  was  a  well  known  man  in  his  denomination, 
and  asked  the  minister  if  he  could  say  a  few  words.    The 

minister   replied,    "  Certainly,    Brother    W ."     That 

man  poured  out  his  soul,  and  a  little  after  I  heard  that 
there  were  fifty-eight  people  converted  while  he  was 
speaking.     Another   young   man,    Emil    Lindfield,    who 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     185 

afterwards  died  as  a  very  successful  missionary  in  South 
Africa,  went  in  the  early  morning  hours  to  Baraboo,  Wis- 
consin, and  I  soon  heard  from  Baraboo  that  there  had 
been  thirty-eight  young  men  and  boys  converted  while 
he  spoke.  And  a  little  while  later,  I  received  a  letter  from 
a  Methodist  minister  in  Wisconsin,  near  Milwaukee,  ask- 
ing me  if  we  had  a  young  man  named  Samuel  J in 

our  Institute.  He  said  that  a  young  man  had  appeared 
in  their  midst,  a  perfect  stranger,  and  said  that  he  was 

Samuel  J ,  of  the  Bible  Institute  of  Chicago,  that  he 

had  been  speaking  in  the  schoolhouses,  Methodist  Church 
and  Soldiers'  Home  and  that  there  were  conversions 
wherever  he  spoke.  This  man  also  had  gone  out  early 
that  morning  and  up  to  that  section  with  the  Spirit  of 
God  resting  upon  him. 

As  I  went  around  the  world,  in  1902  and  the  years 
that  followed,  in  pretty  much  every  field  that  I  visited, 
Japan,  China,  New  Zealand,  Australia,  England,  Scot- 
land and  Ireland,  and  other  lands,  I  met  with  men  or 
women  who  had  gone  out  from  that  meeting  with  the 
power  of  God  resting  upon  them.  Yes,  and  we  today 
can  go  out  from  this  meeting  to  the  uttermost  parts  of 
the  earth,  with  the  power  of  God  resting  upon  us,  to 
accomplish  mighty  things  for  Him.  Yes,  beyond  the  pos- 
sibility of  honest  question,  God  does  baptize  men  and 
women  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  fill  anew  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  those  who  have  already  been  thus  baptized,  as 

THEY  PRAY. 

II.  Thej  Seventh  Step 
We  have  now  come  to  the  seventh  and  last  step,  in 
some  respects  the  simplest  of  all  and  yet  to  many  the 
most  difficult  of  all,  and  also  the  place  where  more  people 


186  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

miss  the  blessing  than  almost  anywhere  else.  You  will 
find  this  step  set  forth  in  the  words  of  Christ  in  Mark 
11:24:  "Therefore  I  say  unto  you,  what  things  soever 
ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive  them,  and 
ye  shall  have  them."  The  seventh  step  is  faith.  Simply 
expecting  from  God  what  you  ask,  THE  Baptism  with 
THE  Holy  Spirit.  No  matter  how  definite  any  prom- 
ise of  God's  Word  may  be,  we  never  realize  it  in  our 
own  experience  until  we  believe  it.  For  example,  we 
are  told  in  James  1:5,  "  If  any  of  you  lacketh  wisdom, 
let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and 
upbraideth  not;  and  it  shall  be  given  him."  Now  that 
is  certainly  unqualifiedly  positive,  nothing  could  possibly 
be  more  positive.  But  James  did  not  stop  there,  he 
went  on  to  say,  "  But  let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  doubt- 
ing: for  he  that  doubteth  is  like  the  surge  of  the  sea 
driven  by  the  wind  and  tossed.  For  let  not  that  man 
think  that  he  shall  receive  anything  of  the  Lord."  Just 
so  it  is  in  this  matter,  God's  promise  is  definite  enough, 
but  unless  we  believe  the  promdse  and  confidently  expect 
God  to  do  what  He  has  so  definitely  promised  to  do,  our 
prayer  will  bring  no  result.  Here  is  where  a  countless 
multitude  of  earnest  seekers  for  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  fail  of  obtaining  the  blessing,  they  do  not 
confidently  expect.  They  meet  the  other  conditions,  they 
pray  definitely  and  earnestly,  but  they  do  not  confidently 
expect  and  therefore  they  do  not  get. 

But  there  is  a  faith  that  goes  beyond  expectation. 
There  is  a  faith  that  puts  cut  its  hand  and  takes  on  the 
spot  the  very  thing  it  asks  of  God.  That  comes  out  in 
the  Revised  Version  of  Mark  11:24:  "Therefore  I  say 
unto  you,  all  things  whatsoever  ye  pray  and  ask  for, 
believe  that  ye  have  received  them,  and  ye  shall  have 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      187 

them."  (The  American  Standard  Revision  has  gone  back 
to  the  translation  of  the  Authorized  Version,  "  believe 
that  ye  receive  them,"  but  without  warrant  in  the  Greek 
text.  Indeed,  they  say  themselves  in  the  margin,  *  Greek, 
received,'  well  if  that  is  the  Greek  why  do  they  not  put 
it  into  the  text,  for  we  ought  to  know  exactly  what  Jesus 
Christ  said).  This  change  in  the  Revised  Version  greatly 
bothered  me  when  it  first  appeared.  I  got  one  of  the 
earliest  copies  of  the  Revised  New  Testament,  You  will 
remember  that  the  New  Testament  came  out  before  the 
Old  did,  and  I  secured  one  of  the  very  earliest  copies.  1 
started  in  at  the  first  chapter  of  Matthew,  at  the  first 
▼erse,  and  noted  every  change  in  the  Revised  Version 
from  "  the  Authorized  Version,"  and  compared  them 
both  with  the  best  Greek  text,  and  noted  every  change 
in  the  margin  of  my  own  Bible  with  my  own  hand.  I  do 
not  need  to  do  that  any  longer;  for  the  Oxford  Publish- 
ing Company  has  published  a  Bible,  the  Two  Version 
Bible,  in  which  the  changes  are  indicated  in  the  margin. 
I  got  on  very  nicely  for  the  most  part,  and  saw  in  how 
many  instances  the  Revised  Version  was  from  a  better 
Greek  text  than  "  the  Authorized  Version,"  or  a  more 
accurate  translation,  or  a  more  modern  rendering  of  the 
words  and  therefore  in  more  easily  understandable 
English.  But  one  day  I  came  to  Mark  11 :  24,  and  I  read 
the  Authorized  Version,  "  What  things  soever  ye  desire 
when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive  them  and  ye  shall 
have  them."  That  was  plain  enough;  then  I  turned  to 
the  Revised  Version  and  read,  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye 
pray  and  ask  for  believe  that  ye  have  received  them  and 
ye  shall  have  them."  I  said  to  myself,  what  nonsense, 
what  a  confusion  of  the  tenses,  "believe  that  ye  have 
received  them,"  past  tense,  "  and  ye  shall  have  them," 


188  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

future  tense,  in  other  words,  "  believe  that  you  have  re- 
ceived "  and  "  you  shall  have  what  you  have  already  got." 

Then  I  turned  to  the  Greek  text,  and  I  found  out  that 
whether  it  was  sense  or  nonsense,  the  Revised  Version 
was  the  right  rendering  of  the  Greek  text,  only  it  should 
have  used  the  aorist  instead  of  the  perfect  tense.  "  Well," 
I  said,  "  it  must  be  so,  but  what  does  it  mean,"  and  for 
the  life  of  me  I  could  not  tell  and  I  did  not  discover  for 
years.  But  some  years  later  I  said  to  my  people  in  Min- 
neapolis, "  I  am  going  to  take  you  through  the  First  Epis- 
tle of  John,  verse  by  verse.  I  will  study  the  verses  during 
the  week  and  will  give  to  you  on  the  Lord's  Day  what  I 
find  during  the  week,  and  if  I  find  anything  in  First  John 
that  does  not  agree  with  my  theology,  I  will  change  my 
theology  at  that  point."  Well,  I  got  on  very  nicely  until 
I  got  to  the  last  chapter,  although  I  did  have  to  change 
my  theology  at  some  points.  One  day  in  my  study,  I 
came  to  1  John  5 :  14,  15,  "  And  this  is  the  confidence  that 
we  have  toward  Him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according 
to  His  will,  He  heareth  us:  and  if  we  know  that  He 
heareth  us  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have 
the  petitions  which  we  have  asked  of  Him."  And  then 
I  understood  Mark  1 1 :  24.    Do  you  see  it  ? 

I  see  that  some  of  you  do  and  some  of  you  do  not. 
Well,  I  will  explain  it  so  that  every  child  here  can  under- 
stand it.  When  you  come  to  God  in  prayer,  the  first 
question  to  ask  is,  "  Is  that  petition  that  I  asked  of  God 
*  according  to  His  will'f"  If  it  is  definitely  promised  in 
His  Word,  then,  of  course,  you  know  it  is  "  according  to 
His  will."  Now  then  read  1  John  5 :  14,  "  And  this  is  the 
confidence  that  we  have  toward  Him,  that,  if  we  ask 
anything  according  to  His  will,  He  heareth  us."  Then 
saying  to  yourself,  "  I  asked  this  definite  thing,  I  know 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      189 

it  is  according  to  God's  will  because  it  is  definitely  prom- 
ised in  His  Word,  therefore  according  to  1  John  5 :  14  I 
know  that  He  has  heard  me."  Then  read  the  fifteenth 
verse,  "  And  if  we  know  that  He  heareth  us  whatsoever 
we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  which  we 
have  asked  of  Him,"  and  claim  the  thing  as  yours,  not 
because  you  feel  it  but  because  God  so  definitely  says  so 
in  His  Word. 

Now  apply  this  to  the  matter  of  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  You  have  taken  all  the  other  six  steps,  and 
you  have  come  to  God  and  asked  Him  definitely  to  bap- 
tize you  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (or,  to  fill  you  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  the  case  may  be).  Then  ask  yourself,  "  Is 
this  petition  of  mine  according  to  His  will?  "  You  know 
that  it  is  because  Acts  2:39  and  Luke  11:13  say  so. 
Then  read  1  John  5 :  14,  "  This  is  the  confidence  that  we 
have  toward  Him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to 
His  will,  He  heareth  us."  Then  say,  "  I  asked  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit,  I  know  that  is  according  to  His 
will  because  God  says  so  in  Luke  11 :  13  and  Acts  2:  39, 
therefore,  I  know  He  has  heard  me."  Then  read  the  fif- 
teenth verse,  "  and  if  we  know  that  He  heareth  us  what- 
soever we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  which 
we  have  asked  of  Him."  The  petition  I  asked  was  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  I  know  He  has  heard  me, 
I  know  I  have  what  I  asked,  I  know  I  have  the  Bap- 
tism WITH  THE  Holy  Spirit.     And  what  you  thus 

TAKE  UPON  NAKED  EAITH  IN  THE  WORD  OE  GoD, 
YOU  SHAI^I,  AFTERWARDS  HAVE  IN  ACTUAL  EXPERIMENTAL 
POSSESSION. 

Let  me  give  you  a  concrete  illustration.  Mr.  F.  B. 
Meyer,  of  London,  and  I  had  gone  together  to  a  Students' 
Conference  at  Lake  Geneva,  Wisconsin.     He  spoke  that 


190  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

night  on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  he 
finished  he  said,  "  If  any  of  you  wish  to  speak  to  Mr. 
Torrey  or  myself  about  this  matter,  we  will  stay  and  talk 
with  you  after  the  meeting  is  over."  A  young  man  came 
to  me  who  had  just  graduated  from  the  Illinois  College. 
He  said,  "  I  heard  of  this  blessing  a  month  ago  and  I 
have  been  praying  for  it  ever  since  but  I  do  not  get  it, 
what  is  the  matter  ?  "  I  said,  "  Is  your  will  laid  down,  is 
your  will  fully  surrendered  to  God  ?  "  He  replied,  "  No, 
I  don't  think  it  is."  I  said,  "  Well,  your  praying  will  do 
no  good  until  your  will  is  laid  down.  Will  you  lay  your 
will  down  now  ? "  He  said,  "  I  cannot."  Then  I  said, 
"  Are  you  willing  that  God  should  lay  it  down  for  you  ?  " 
He  said,  "  I  am."  Then  I  said,  "  Let  us  kneel  down  and 
ask  God  to  do  it."  I  put  two  chairs  side  by  side,  and  we 
knelt  down  by  them.  I  opened  my  Bible  to  1  John  5 :  14. 
15  and  laid  it  open  on  the  chair  in  front  of  the  young 
man.  "  Now,"  I  said,  "  ask  God  to  lay  your  will  down 
for  you."  He  prayed,  "  Heavenly  Father,  lay  my  will 
down  for  me,  empty  me  of  my  self-will,  bring  my  will 
into  absolute  surrender  to  Thine  own,  I  ask  it  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus."  I  said,  "  Is  it  done  ?  "  He  said,  "  It 
must  be,  I  have  asked  something  according  to  His  will 
and  I  know  He  has  heard  me  and  I  know  He  has  done 
what  I  ask  of  Him."  I  said,  "  All  right.  What  is  it  you 
want  ? "  He  replied,  "  I  want  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit."  I  said,  "  Ask  for  it."  Again  he  prayed, 
"  Heavenly  Father,  baptize  me  with  the  Holy  Spirit  right 
now.  I  ask  it  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  I  asked, 
"  Is  it  done  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  don't  feel  it."  I  said,  "  That 
is  not  what  I  asked  you.  Read  again  the  verse  before 
you,"  and  he  read,  "  This  is  the  confidence  we  have  in 
Him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will,  He 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT      191 

heareth  us."  I  said,  "  Was  what  you  asked  something 
according  to  His  will?"  He  said,  "It  was,  Luke  11 :  13 
and  Acts  2 :  39  say  so."  Then  I  said,  "  What,  then,  do 
you  know  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  know  He  hears  me."  "  All 
right,  read  the  next  verse,"  and  he  read,  "  And  if  we 
know  He  heareth  us  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that 
we  have  the  petitions  that  we  have  asked  of  Him."  I 
said,  "  What  do  you  know  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  know  that  I 
have  the  petition  that  I  have  asked  of  Him."  I  said, 
"  What  is  the  petition  that  you  asked  of  Him  ?  "  He  said, 
"The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  I  said,  "What 
do  you  know  ? "  He  replied,  "  /  know  that  I  have  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit;  I  don't  feel  it,  but  God 
says  so."  We  got  up ;  I  had  a  few  more  words  with  him 
and  he  went  to  his  tent  and  I  went  to  mine. 

The  next  morning  I  took  the  boat  for  an  early  train 
to  Chicago.  I  came  back  a  few  days  later;  I  saw  this 
young  man  down  in  the  audience,  and  standing  on  the 
platform  I  looked  over  to  him  where  he  was  sitting  in 
the  amphitheatre  and  said,  "  Did  you  really  receive  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  ? "  He  did  not  need  to 
answer,  for  his  face  told  the  story.  But  he  did  answer, 
that  he  had.  Two  or  three  years  later  I  told  this  incident 
at  a  meeting  of  the  Methodist  ministers  in  Chicago,  and 
an  inquisitive  brother  asked  me,  "  Well,  what  became  of 
the  young  man  ? "  I  had  to  reply,  "  I  do  not  know." 
But  within  two  weeks,  as  I  was  sitting  in  my  office  in  the 
Bible  Institute  of  Chicago,  there  came  a  rap  at  my  door. 
I  said,  "  Come  in."  A  fine-looking  young  fellow  walked 
in.  He  said,  "  Do  you  recognize  me  ?  "  I  replied,  "  I 
know  I  have  seen  you  somewhere,  but  I  cannot  place 
you."  Well,  it  was  this  young  man.  He  was  now  in  the 
Chicago  Theological  Seminary.    A  few  days  later  a  group 


192  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

of  students  from  the  Chicago  Theological  Seminary  came 
over  to  invite  me  to  speak  at  the  seminary  on  the  Day  of 
Prayer  for  Colleges.  I  asked  them  how  this  young  man 
was  getting  on,  and  they  told  me  he  was  getting  on  in  a 
wonderful  way,  that  although  he  was  only  a  middler  in 
the  seminary,  the  seminary  had  already  given  him  a 
church  up  in  Wisconsin,  which,  they  added,  was  a  very 
unusual  thing,  but  they  said  something  better  still,  "  He 
is  having  conversions  all  the  time." 

When  The  Day  of  Prayer  came,  I  went  over  to  the 
seminary  and  spoke  on  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  them.  After  I  had  left 
the  room  they  began  praying  in  English,  French,  Nor- 
wegian, Swedish,  Danish  and  German — no  supernatural 
gift  of  tongues,  these  were  the  native  languages  of  the 
different  students — and  President  Fiske,  President  of  the 
seminary  at  that  time,  wrote  to  the  Boston  Congregation- 
alist  that  they  had  a  perfect  Pentecost;  and  it  all  came 
through  this  young  fellow  who  took  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  by  naked  faith  in  the  simple  Word  of 
God,  at  Lake  Geneva,  and  any  one  in  this  auditorium 
this  morning  can  take  it  the  same  way  right  now. 

IV.   Three  Questions 

Now  there  are  some  very  important  questions  that 
some  of  you  would  like  to  ask  me,  so  I  am  going  to  ask 
them  for  you. 

1.  The  first  question  that  some  of  you  will  want  to 
ask  is,  MUST  WE  know  not  that  we  have  the  Baptism 
WITH  THE  Holy  Spirit  before  we  take  up  our  work? 
Yes,  we  certainly  should.  But  how  know?  There  are 
two  ways  of  knowing  things :  First,  by  the  plain  state- 
ment of  God's  Word,  and  Second,  by  experience;  and 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     193 

knowing  by  God's  Word  is  a  surer  way  of  knowing  than 
knowing  by  experience.  Our  experiences,  or  at  least,  our 
feelings,  come  and  go,  according  to  what  we  are  eating 
or  the  state  of  our  health;  but  the  Word  of  God  always 
remains  the  same;  and  as  we  have  just  seen,  you  can 
know  by  the  naked  Word  of  God  right  today  that  you 
have  received  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Whether 
you  have  felt  it  or  not,  you  can  claim  it  by  simple  faith 
in  the  inerrantly  inspired  Word  of  God. 

2.  But  some  of  you  will  desire  to  ask  a  second  ques- 
tion. May  we:  not  havh:  to  wait  For  some  time  for 
THE  Baptism  with  the  Hoey  Spirit  just  as  the 
Apostles  had  to  wait  ten  days  between  the  day  when 
the  Lord  Jesus  gave  the  promise  and  Pentecost?  In 
answer  to  this  question,  I  would  ask,  "  Have  you 
never  noticed  that  the  Bible  tells  us  just  why  the  dis- 
ciples had  to  wait  ten  days?"  Read  Acts  2:1,  2  and 
you  will  find  out  just  why  the  disciples  had  to  wait  ten 
days :  "  And  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come 
(the  Greek  is,  *  was  being  fulfilled'),  they  were  all  with 
one  accord  in  one  place.  And  suddenly  there  came  a 
sound  from  heaven  as  of  the  rushing  of  a  mighty  wind, 
and  it  filled  all  the  house  where  they  were  sitting."  In 
other  words,  the  Holy  Ghost  could  not  come  upon  them 
until  the  day  of  Pentecost  had  fully  come.  Way  back  in 
the  Old  Testament  types,  yes,  way  back  in  the  eternal 
counsels  of  God,  the  Day  of  Pentecost  was  set  for  the 
imparting  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  gather- 
ing of  the  Church;  and  He  could  not  be  given  therefore 
until  the  Day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come.  But  now  the 
Day  of  Pentecost  has  fully  come  and  there  is  no  need 
OP  tarrying  now.  Was  there  any  waiting  after  Pente- 
cost?   Read  Acts  4: 31,  "  And  when  they  had  prayed  the 


194  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

place  was  shaken  wherein  they  were  gathered  together; 
they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost." 

Was  there  any  waiting  in  the  household  of  Cornelius? 
They  were  listening  to  the  first  gospel  sermon  they  had 
ever  heard  and  Peter  reached  the  climax  of  his  sermon, 
Acts  10:43,  "To  Him  (that  is,  to  the  Lord  Jesus)  give 
ftll  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  His  name  every 
one  that  believeth  on  Him  shall  receive  remission  of 
sins,"  and  instantly  they  all  believed  and  immediately  the 
Holy  Ghost  fell  upon  them,  right  then  and  there.  Was 
there  any  waiting  in  the  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus?  We 
read  in  Acts  9: 17,  "And  Ananias  departed,  and  entered 
into  the  house  (that  is,  the  house  where  Saul  of  Tarsus 
was  waiting  in  his  blindness)  ;  and  laying  his  hands  on 
him  said.  Brother  Saul,  the  Lord,  even  Jesus,  who  ap- 
peared unto  thee  in  the  way  which  thou  camest,  hath  sent 
me,  that  thou  mayest  receive  thy  sight,  and  be  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost."  And  he  took  him  and  baptized  him, 
then  prayed  with  him,  and  immediately  he  was  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  we 
read  two  verses  farther  down,  "  And  straightway  in  the 
synagogues  he  proclaimed  Jesus,  that  He  is  the  Son  of 
God.  And  all  that  heard  him  were  amazed  and  said,  is 
not  this  he  that  in  Jerusalem  made  havoc  of  them  which 
called  on  this  name?  .  .  .  But  Saul,  increased  the  more 
in  strength,  and  confounded  the  Jews  which  dwelt  at 
Damascus,  proving  that  this  is  the  Christ." 

They  did  have  to  wait  at  Ephesus,  but  simply  because 
the  fault  was  entirely  in  themselves,  they  did  not  know 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  yet  given;  but  when  Paul  told 
them  He  had  been  given  and  they  took  the  necessary 
steps,  they  were  all  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  right 
then  and  there,  before  the  meeting  broke  up.     So  you 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     196 

may  have  to  wait,  but  if  so,  the  reason  of  waiting  will 
)flot  be  in  God  but  in  yourself.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that 
every  child  of  His  who  has  not  already  been  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  should  be  so  baptized  today,  but  you  may 
delay  the  blessing  by  not  resting  upon  the  finished  work 
of  Christ  as  the  sole  ground  of  your  acceptance  before 
God,  or  by  not  putting  away  every  known  sin,  or  by  not 
openly  confessing  your  renunciation  of  sin  and  your  ac- 
ceptance of  Christ  before  the  world,  or  by  not  making  a 
full  surrender  to  God,  or  by  not  desiring  the  blessing  at 
any  cost,  or  by  not  definitely  praying,  or  by  not  expect- 
ing and  claiming  it  right  here  now.  But  if  you  do  have 
to  wait  ten  days  or  even  ten  minutes,  the  trouble  will  be 
entirely  with  you  and  not  with  God.     Any  onk  op  you 

MAY   B^   BAPTIZED    WITH    THE    HOEY    SfIRIT   BEFORE   YOU 

LEAVE  THIS  BUILDING,  or  if  you  have  already  been  thus 
baptized,  be  filled  anew. 

3.  But  there  is  a  third  question  that  some  of  you  will 
wish  to  ask,  and  it  is  a  very  important  one,  and  that  is 
this:  Will  there  be  no  manifestation  of  the  Bap- 
tism  WITH   THE  Holy   Spirit  when   we  are  thus 

BAPTIZED,  AND  WILL  EVERYTHING  BE  JUST  THE  SAME  AS 
IT  WAS  BEFORE,  AND  IF  IT  IS,   WHAT   IS  THE  GOOD  OF  IT 

ANYWAY?  Yes,  indeed,  there  will  be  a  manifestation; 
but  please  notice  two  things :  First,  the  character  of  the 
manifestation;  Second,  the  time  of  the  manifestation. 

First,  let  us  take  up  The  Character  of  the  Manifesta- 
tion, or.  How  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  Will 
Manifest  Itself  in  Your  Case.  Some  of  you  possibly 
expect  the  manifestation  to  be  "  the  gift  of  tongues,"  or 
"  speaking  in  tongues,"  and  expect  no  other ;  but,  as  we 
saw  the  other  day,  such  expectation  is  entirely  unscrip- 
tural  and  such  dictation  to  the  Holy  Spirit  is  contrary  to 


396  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

the  plain  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God.  But  some  of  you 
will  expect  an  entirely  different  manifestation.  Very 
likely  you  have  read  the  story  of  the  experience  of  John 
Wesley,  and  Charles  G.  Finney,  and  D.  L.  Moody.  All 
of  these  tell  very  nearly  the  same  story.  Mr.  Finney  put 
it  about  this  way,  that  when  he  was  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  great  waves  like  electricity  swept  over  him, 
and  he  had  to  pray  to  God  to  withhold  his  hand  lest  he  die 
from  very  ecstasy  on  the  spot.  Mr.  Moody,  though  he 
seldom  told  it,  had  a  somewhat  similar  experience.  Now 
many  of  you  expect  something  like  that.  I  do  not  deny 
the  reality  of  these  experiences.  The  word  of  men  like 
Charles  G.  Finney  and  D.  L,.  Moody  is  to  be  believed; 
and  there  is  another  reason  why  I  do  not  deny  them, 
which  I  probably  would  better  not  mention.  But  I  chal- 
lenge any  one  to  show  me  anywhere  in  the  Bible  one 
single  record  of  any  such  an  experience.  I  am  inclined 
to  think  that  the  apostles  had  them;  but  if  they  did  they 
kept  them  to  themselves,  and  I  am  glad  they  did,  for  if 
any  one  of  them  had  described  such  an  experience  that  is 
what  we  would  all  have  been  looking  for. 

What  was  the  manifestation  in  every  case  recorded  in 
the  Bible?  Some^  ne;w  powi:r  in  service.  On  the  Day 
of  Pentecost,  they  spoke  with  the  tongues  of  the  different 
people  who  were  there  present,  spoke  "  the  mighty  works 
of  God  "  in  those  tongues  (Acts  2:6,  8,  11).  They  were 
understood  by  the  people  there  present,  resulting  in  a 
great  number  of  definite  conversions  of  people  who  heard 
them  speaking  in  the  tongues  in  which  they  were  born. 
The  "  speaking  with  other  tongues  "  on  this  occasion  had 
not  the  slightest  resemblance  to  the  "  speaking  with 
tongues  "  of  which  some  boast  today. 

In  the  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  there  was  no  record  of 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     197 

his  speaking  in  tongues  at  that  time,  although  we  have 
reason  to  know  that  Paul  did  at  some  times  alone  by 
himself  speak  with  tongues,  but  he  declared  that  in  the 
public  assembly,  "  I  had  rather  speak  five  words  zuith  my 
understanding,  that  by  my  voice  I  might  teach  others 
also,  than  ten  thousand  words  in  a  tongue "  (1  Cor. 
14:19).  What  was  the  manifestation  in  Paul's  case? 
Turn  to  Acts  9:  17-22,  and  you  will  find  the  manifesta- 
tion was  simply  this,  that  he  proclaimed  Jesus  as  the 
Christ  with  irresistible  power;  and  That  wir^iy  be  thej 

ESSENTIAI,  CHARACTER  OE  THE  MANIFESTATION  IN  YOUR 
CASE,  NEW  POWER  IN  THE  WORK  THAT  GOD  HAS  CALLED 
YOU  TO  DO. 

Now  let  US  look  at  THE  Time  oE  The  manifestation. 
When  will  the  manifestation  comet  After  we  take  The 
Baptism  with  the  Spirit  on  simple  faith  in  the 
naked  Word  of  God.  God's  order  is  this :  First,  God's 
Word,  God's  promise;  Second,  our  faith  in  the  Word  of 
God,  simply  because  God  says  it ;  Third — experience. 
The  human  heart  tries  to  change  God's  order  and  have 
First,  the  Word,  the  promise  of  God;  Second,  experience; 
and  then  Third,  faith.  But  that  is  not  faith  at  all.  Take 
the  case  of  Abraham.  God  told  Abraham  that  he  was  to 
be  a  father  of  many  nations.  Abraham  had  no  reason 
for  believing  it  other  than  the  Word  of  God.  In  itself  it 
was  incredible ;  he  was  100  years  old  and  his  wife  nearly 
that.  They  were  both  beyond  the  age  of  having  children, 
but  the  record  is  that  "  Abraham  believed  God,"  and 
"  God  reckoned  "  Abraham's  simple  faith  in  the  unsup- 
ported Word  of  God  (just  because  God  said  it)  "  for 
righteousness."  Abraham  had  no  thrills  then!  No,  just 
God's  Word,  that  and  that  alone.  He  had  thrills  enough 
when  the  child  was  born,  and  he  saw  Isaac  with  his  own 


i98  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

eyes,  because  he  believed  God's  naked  Word.    The  one 

THING   THAT   GOD   DEMANDS   OF    MEN    IS    THAT    MEN    BE- 

UEVE  WHAT  He  says  just  BECAUSE  He  SAYS  IT;  that's 
faith.  Whenever  you  require  some  feeling  or  some  ex- 
perience before  you  believe  God's  Word,  you  are  making 
God  a  liar. 

Take  my  own  experience.  I  had  been  a  minister  for 
some  years  before  I  came  to  the  place  where  I  saw  that 
I  had  no  right  to  preach  until  I  was  definitely  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  went  to  a  business  friend  of  mine 
and  said  to  him  in  private,  "  I  am  never  going  to  enter 
my  pulpit  again  until  I  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  know  it,  or  until  God  in  some  way  tells  me  to 
go."  Then,  just  as  far  as  I  could,  I  shut  myself  up  alone 
in  my  study  and  spent  the  time  continually  on  my  knees 
asking  God  to  baptize  me  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  the 
days  passed,  the  devil  tried  to  tempt  me  by  saying,  "  Sup- 
pose Sunday  comes  and  you  are  not  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  what  then  ?  "  I  replied,  "  Whatever  comes, 
I  will  not  go  into  my  pulpit  and  preach  again  until  I  have 
been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  know  it,  or  God 
in  some  way  tells  me  to  go;  even  though  I  have  to  tell 
my  people  that  I  have  never  been  fit  to  preach."  But 
Sunday  did  not  come  before  the  blessing  came.  I  had  it 
more  or  less  definitely  mapped  out  in  my  mind  what 
would  happen;  but  what  I  had  mapped  out  in  my  mind 
did  not  happen.  I  recall  the  exact  spot  where  I  was 
kneeling  in  prayer  in  my  study.  I  could  go  to  the  very 
spot  in  that  house  at  1348  N.  Adams  St.,  Minneapolis. 
It  was  a  very  quiet  moment,  one  of  the  most  quiet  mo- 
ments I  ever  knew;  indeed,  I  think  one  reason  I  had  to 
wait  so  long  was  because  it  took  that  long  before  my  soul 
could  get  quiet  before  God.     Then  God  simply  said  to 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     199 

me,  not  in  any  audible  voice,  but  in  my  heart,  "  It's  yours. 
Now  go  and  preach."  Oh,  if  I  had  only  known  my  Bible 
better.  He  had  already  said  it  to  me  in  His  Word  in 
1  John  5:  14,  15;  but  I  did  not  then  know  my  Bible  as 
well  as  I  know  it  now,  and  God  had  pity  on  my  igno- 
rance and  said  it  directly  to  my  soul.  You  do  not  need 
to  have  it  said  directly  to  your  soul;  for  I  have  shown  it 
to  you  this  morning  in  His  Word. 

I  went  and  preached,  and  I  have  been  a  new  minister 
from  that  day  to  this.  I  was  then  the  pastor  of  a  very 
small  and  obscure  church,  though  I  had  taken  two  degrees 
at  Yale  and  had  studied  at  two  German  universities.  But 
from  that  time  my  field  began  to  wonderfully  enlarge  until 
at  last  I  had  preached  the  gospel  around  the  world  and 
had  seen  I  suppose  hundreds  of  thousands  converted  to 
Christ. 

Some  time  after  this  experience  (I  do  not  recall  just 
how  long  after),  while  sitting  in  my  room  one  day,  that 
very  same  room,  I  recall  just  where  I  was  sitting,  before 
my  revolving  bookcase,  I  do  not  know  whether  I  was 
thinking  about  this  subject  at  all,  I  do  not  remember,  but 
suddenly,  as  near  as  I  can  describe  it,  though  it  does  not 
exactly  describe  it,  I  was  struck  from  my  chair  on  to  the 
floor  and  I  found  myself  shouting  (I  was  not  brought  up 
to  shout  and  I  am  not  of  a  shouting  temperament,  but  I 
shouted  like  the  loudest  shouting  Methodist)  "  glory  to 
God,  glory  to  God,  glory  to  God,"  and  I  could  not  stop. 
I  tried  to  stop,  but  it  was  just  as  if  some  other  power 
than  my  own  was  moving  my  jaws.  At  last,  when  I  had 
succeeded  in  pulling  myself  together,  I  went  down-stairs 
and  told  my  wife  what  had  happened.  But  that  was  not 
when  I  was  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  was  bap- 
tized with  the  Holy  Spirit  when  I  took  Him  by  simple 


200  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

faith  in  the  naked  Word  of  God,  and  any  one  of  you  can 
be  thus  baptized  today,  yes,  you  can  be  thus  baptized 
before  you  leave  this  building  this  afternoon.  God  grant 
that  you  may  be.  What  I  am  trying  to  get  you  to  do 
more  than  all  else  is  just  to  get  you  to  believe  God's 
Word  without  any  other  guarantee  and  to  take  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit  by  simple  faith  in  God's  Word. 

Let  me  tell  you  one  more  incident  before  I  close.  July 
8,  1894,  I  was  at  a  Students'  Convention  at  Northfield, 
Mass.  The  preceding  night  I  had  spoken  in  Stone  Hall 
upon  "The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit;  What  It  Is, 
What  It  Does,  Who  Needs  It,  and  Who  Can  Have  It," 
and  now  the  closing  Sunday  morning  service  was  being 
held  in  the  Congregational  Church,  and  I  was  speaking 
on  "  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  How  To  Obtain 
It."  I  said  very  much  what  I  have  said  to  you  this  after- 
noon and  yesterday  afternoon.  As  I  finished,  I  took  out 
my  watch  and  saw  that  it  was  exactly  twelve  o'clock.  I 
turned  to  that  great  body  of  students  and  said,  "  Mr. 
Moody  has  invited  us  to  go  up  on  the  mountain  this  after- 
noon at  three  o'clock  to  pray  that  we  may  receive  the 
Holy  Spirit.  It  is  now  exactly  twelve  o'clock,  it  is  three 
hours  to  three  o'clock,  some  of  you  cannot  wait  three 
hours  and  you  do  not  need  to.  Go  to  your  room  in  the 
hotel,  go  to  your  room  in  the  buildings,  go  to  your  tent, 
go  out  into  the  woods,  go  anywhere  where  you  can  get 
alone  with  God  and  have  this  matter  out  with  God." 

That  afternoon  at  three  o'clock  we  all  met  up  in  front 
of  Mr.  Moody's  mother's  house,  she  was  still  living  then. 
Then  we  went  down  through  the  lane  and  through  the 
gate,  456  of  us  in  all,  Paul  Moody  counted  us  as  we  went 
through  the  gate.  Four  hundred  and  fifty-six  men  from 
Yale.  Harvard  Amherst  Dartmouth  and  other  Eastern 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT     201 

colleges,  and  went  up  the  mountain  side.  After  we  had 
gone  some  distance,  Mr.  Moody  said,  "  I  think  we  do  not 
need  to  go  any  farther,  let  us  stop  here."  He  sat  down 
on  a  stump,  others  sat  down  on  logs,  or  on  the  ground. 
Mr.  Moody  said,  "  Before  we  go  to  God  in  prayer,  have 
any  of  you  anything  to  say  ?  "  One  after  another  of  those 
men  arose,  I  should  think  about  seventy-five  in  all  (as  I 
recall  it),  and  said  in  substance,  "Mr.  Moody,  I  could 
not  wait  until  three  o'clock,  I  have  been  alone  with  God 
and  I  believe  I  have  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit." 
When  these  testimonies  were  over,  Mr.  Moody  said,  "  I 
can  see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  kneel  down  right 
here  now  and  ask  God  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  come 
upon  us  just  as  definitely  as  He  came  upon  the  Apostles 
on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  Let  us  pray."  We  knelt  in 
prayer,  some  of  us  lay  on  the  ground  on  our  faces  (there 
were  no  women  present;  all  men),  and  we  began  to  pray. 
As  we  had  gone  up  the  mountain  side  clouds  had  been 
gathering  over  the  mountain,  and  as  we  began  to  pray, 
the  clouds  broke  and  the  raindrops  began  to  fall  upon  us 
through  the  overhanging  pine  needles.  But  another  cloud 
had  been  gathering  over  Northfield  for  ten  days,  a  cloud 
big  with  the  grace  and  power  of  God.  As  we  began  to 
pray  our  prayers  seemed  to  pierce  that  cloud,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  fell  upon  us. 

Men  and  women,  if  I  am  any  judge,  a  cloud  has  been 
gathering  over  this  building  for  some  days,  a  cloud  big 
with  the  grace  and  power  of  God.  Why  not  pierce  that 
cloud  with  our  prayers  right  now? 


Printed  in  the  United  States  oi  America 


About  the  author: 

Fearless,  quick,  imaginative, 
R.  A.  Torrey  kneeled  to  pray  in  a 
Chicago  camp  meeting  and  started  a 
revival  that  swept  across  North 
America,  Europe,  and  the  Orient. 
He  was  the  preaching-partner  of 
Torrey  and  Alexander,  the  globe- 
encircling  evangelistic  team. 

Once,  in  Australia,  a  man  built  like 
a  prize-fighter  said  to  Torrey,  "I  am 
not  a  Christian,  but  I  am  moral,  up- 
right, honorable,  and  blameless  .  .  . 
and  I'd  like  to  know  what  you  have 
against  me."  Torrey  looked  the  man 
straight  in  the  eye  and  replied,  "I 
charge  you,  sir,  with  high  treason 
against  Heaven's  King." 


tvfflmMMtwvff^iWiff'viuiBMwmm' 


I 


I 


AMONG  THE  WORKS  OF 


R.  A.  TORREY 


Publishers 


■A 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

WHO  HE  IS,  AND  WHAT  HE  DOES 

This  series  of  sermons  is  botK  instructive  and  uplifting, 
compelling  one  to  submit  himself  to  the  control  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

$2.00 


HOW  TO  WORK  FOR  CHRIST 

From  beginning  to  end,  this  is  an  intensely  practical  volume, 
written  in  characteristically  clear,  terse,  pointed,  forceful 
style. 

$4.00     i 


WHAT  THE  BIBLE  TEACHES 

A  veritable  Scripture  encyclopedia  is  this  established  work, 
in  which  the  author's  aim  is  to  let  the  Bible  speak  for  itself 
on  matters  pertaining  to  God,  Christ,  the  Holy  Spirit.  Man. 
Angels,  and  Satan. 

$4.00 
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 


