KEY  TO  THE 
NARY  PROBLEM 


ANDREW  MURRAY 


\    STUPIA    IN    / 

Presented  to 
THE  LIBRARY 

of 
VICTORIA  UNIVERSITY 

Toronto 
by 

Ecumenical  Forum 


THE  KEY 


THE  MISSIONARY  PROBLEM 


EMMANUEL1 


PRINTED    BY 

MORRISON    AND    GIBB    LIMITED 
EDINBURGH 


of  Commentation 


WITH  all  my  heart  I  commend  this  volume  to  the  perusal, 
the  thought,  and  the  prayers  of  all  ministers  of  Christ 
and  His  flock.  It  is  an  appeal  to  the  inmost  soul  of  the 
pastor,  and  at  the  same  time  a  suggestion  for  the  most 
practical  possible  application  of  his  activities. 

The  great  Christian  -who  writes  it  puts  his  main  pro 
positions  ii'ith  an  urgency  which,  just  here  and  there,  as 
it  seems  to  me,  invites  the  recollection  of  other  sides  of 
truth.  His  contention  that  the  missionary  enterprise  of 
the  Church  is  its  supreme  call,  seems  in  places  to  become 
an  assertion  that  it  is  Us  one  real  call.  But  no  deep- 
sighted  reader  will  really  mistake  those  places.  And 
every  reader  who  has  indeed  his  eyes  towards  the  will  of 
God,  will  rise  from  the  perusal,  or  rather  kneel  down 
after  it,  a»leingt  "  Lord,  ID) tai  wouldest  Thou  have  me 
to  do?" 

EANDLEY  DUNELM. 

Mh  January  1902, 


Eobe  of  ftjjrfet  constrafnetj  us " 


"Oli!  if  ire  could  make  this  missionary  problem  a 
personal  one,  if  we  could  Jill  the  hearts  of  the  people 
with  a  personal  love  for  the  Saviour  who  died  for 
them,  the  indifference  of  Ofiristendom  ivould  disappear, . 
and  the  kingdom  of  Christ  would  appear." 


CONTENTS 


CHAP.  PAOB 

I.    THE   ECUMENICAL   MISSIONARY   CONFERENCE   .  ,              1 

IT.    FOREIGN   MISSIONS— 

A  TEST  OF  THE  STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH        .  ,           20 

III.  THE   MORAVIAN   CHURCH  AND   LOVE  TO   CHRIST  ,           36 

IV.  THE   CHURCH    MISSIONARY   SOCIETY 

AND   THE  DEEPENING   OF  THE  SPIRITUAL  LIFE  .           68 

V.    THE   CHINA   INLAND   MISSION 

AND  THE  POWER   OF   BELIEVING   PRAYER      ,  .           95 

VI.    THE   CHURCH   OF   PENTECOST  AND   THE   HOLY   SPIRIT  116 

VII.    THE   MISSIONARY   PROBLEM    A   PERSONAL   ONE  : 

EVERY   BELIEVER   A   SOUL-WINNER    .                 .  .         135 

VIII.    A   MISSIONARY  MINISTRY  ....         151 

IX.    A   CALL  TO  PRAYER  AND   HUMILIATION              .  .         170 

X.    A    PROPOSAL— A   WEEK    OF   PRAYER      .                .  .188 

WEEK   OF   PRAYER   FOR  FOREIGN   MISSIONS      .  201 


fjl 


THE  KEY  TO  THE  MISSIONARY 
PROBLEM 

CHAPTEE    I 

SKje  Ecumenical  JHfsstonarg  Conference 

IT  was  my  privilege  to  be  invited  to  speak  at 
the  great  Ecumenical  Missionary  Conference 
held  at  New  York  in  April  1900.  The  circum 
stances  of  our  country,  in  which  war  had  just 
broken  out,  were  such  that  I  did  not  feel  at  liberty 
to  leave.  When  an  urgent  letter  from  Mr.  Moody, 
pressing  me  to  come,  and  after  the  Conference  to 
stay  over  for  the  Northfield  gatherings,  reopened 
the  question,  I  still  was  kept  from  going. 

But  the  invitation  gave  occasion  to  much  thought 
and  prayer.  Had  I  a  message  for  that  meeting  ? 
Would  I  be  able  to  give  that  message  so  clearly 
as  to  make  it  worth  while  to  go  all  that  distance  ? 
Would  it  be  possible,  amid  the  great  variety  of  sub- 


2  THE   KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

jects,  to  secure  quiet,  time,  and  undivided  attention  foi 
that  which  appeared  to  me  the  one  thing  needful  ? 

It  was  amid  such  questionings  that  the  thought 
that  had  long  occupied  my  mind  became  clearer, 
and  that  I  felt  that  the  one  point  on  which 
I  could  have  wished  to  speak  was  this :  How  the 
Church  could  be  roused  to  know  and  do  our 
Lord's  will  for  the  salvation  of  men?  I  had 
read  with  much  interest  the  volume  that  had  been 
issued  in  preparation  for  the  Conference:  I  had 
received  the  impression  that  while,  and  very  natur 
ally,  the  chief  attention  was  directed  to  the  work 
in  the  field,  the  work  at  home,  in  the  fitting  of 
the  Church  for  doing  its  part  faithfully,  hardly 
had  the  place  given  it  which  its  importance  de 
mands.  There  is  no  more  spiritual  and  mysterious 
truth  than  that  Christ  our  Head  is  actually  and 
entirely  dependent  upon  the  members  of  His  body 
for  carrying  out  the  plans  which  He,  as  Head,  has 
formed.  It  is  only  spiritual  men,  and  a  Church  ia 
which  spiritual  men  have  influence,  that  is  capable 
of  rightly  carrying  out  Christ's  commands.  The 
clearest  argument,  the  most  forcible  appeals,  avail 
little,  where  this  is  not  understood  and  aimed 
at  as  the  true  standard  of  Christian  devotion. 
I  do  feel  very  deeply  that,  to  the  friends  of 
missions,  striving  to  take  large  views  of  the  pur 
pose  of  God  and  His  kingdom,  there  is  no  question 


THE    ECUMENICAL    MISSIONARY    CONFERENCE          3 

of  more  urgent  importance  than  this :  How  is  the 
Church  to  be  reached  and  led  on  to  place 
herself,  with  every  member  and  with  all  her 
powers,  at  her  Lord's  disposal  for  the  work 
for  which  He  has  destined  her  and  depends 
on  her  ?  In  the  Preliminary  Eeport  of  which  I 
spoke,  the  subject  was  hardly  alluded  to. 

When  I  received  the  two  volumes  of  the  Eeport 
of  the  Conference,  I  naturally  turned  at  once  to 
see  in  how  far  and  in  what  way  the  question  had 
been  dealt  with.  I  found  many  important  sugges 
tions  as  to  how  the  interest  in  missions  may  be 
increased.  But,  if  I  may  venture  to  say  it,  the  root- 
evil,  the  real  cause  of  so  much  lack  of  interest,  and 
the  way  in  which  that  evil  should  be  met,  was 
hardly  dealt  with.  While  indirectly  and  implicitly 
it  was  admitted  that  there  was  something  wrong 
with  the  greater  part  of  professing  Christians,  the 
real  seriousness  and  sinfulness  of  the  neglect  of  our 
Lord's  command,  as  indicating  a  low  state  of  reli 
gious  life,  and  the  problem  as  to  what  the  mis 
sionary  societies  could  do  to  effect  a  change,  cer 
tainly  did  not  take  that  prominent  place  which  I 
thought  they  deserved. 

1.  Of  the  suggestions  made  for  securing  for  mis 
sions  their  due  place  in  the  work  of  the  Church, 
and  in  the  heart  of  believers,  the  first  dealt  specially 
with  the  ministry.  In  an  address  on  The  Pastor 


4  THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

in  relation  to  the  Foreign  Field,  Dr.  Pentecost 
opened  with  these  words — 

"  To  the  pastor  belongs  the  privilege  and  the  responsi 
bility  of  solving  the  foreign  missionary  problem.  Until 
the  pastors  of  our  Churches  wake  up  to  the  truth  of  this 
proposition,  and  the  foreign  work  becomes  a  passion  in 
their  own  hearts  and  consciences,  our  Boards  may  do 
what  they  can,  by  way  of  devising  forward  movements  or 
organising  new  methods  for  exploiting  the  Churches  for 
money,  yet  the  chariot  wheels  of  foreign  missions  will 
drive  heavily." 

He  then  went  on  to  prove  that  every  pastor 
holds  his  office  under  Christ's  commission,  and  can 
only  fulfil  it  when, 

"  As  a  missionary  bishop,  he  counts  the  whole  world 
his  fold.  The  pastor  of  the  smallest  church  has  the 
power  to  make  his  influence  felt  around  the  world.  No 
pastor  is  worthy  of  his  office  who  does  not  put  himself 
into  sympathy  with  the  magnificent  breadth  of  the  great 
commission,  and  draw  inspiration  and  zeal  from  its  world 
wide  sweep.  The  pastor  is  not  only  the  instructor,  but 
the  leader  of  his  congregation.  He  must  not  only  care 
for  their  souls,  but  direct  their  activities.  If  there  are 
churches  that  give  not  and  pray  not  for  foreign  missions, 
it  is  because  they  have  pastors  who  are  false  and  recreant 
to  the  command  of  Christ.  I  am  almost  warranted  in 
saying  that,  as  no  congregation  can  long  resist  the  en 
thusiasm  of  a  really  enthusiastic  pastor,  so,  on  the  other 
hand,  no  congregation  can  rise  above  cold  indifference 
or  lack  of  conviction  on  this  matter  on  the  part  of  the 
pastor." 


THE    ECUMENICAL    MISSIONARY    CONFERENCE          5 

The  address  closed  with  the  sentence  with  which 
it  began — 

"  To  the  pastor  belongs  the  privilege  and  the  respon 
sibility  of  solving  the  foreign  missionary  problem." 

Dr.  Cuthbert  Hall  spoke  on  The  Young  Men 
of  the  Future  Ministry — how  fire  them  with  the 
missionary  passion  ? 

"The  passion  of  a  Christlike  love  for  lives  develops 
in  the  soul  of  a  Christian  disciple  from  the  presence  in 
himself  of  powers  and  activities  that  reflect  the  mind  of 
Christ.  These  are :  a  clear  vision  of  what  the  world 
is  and  needs ;  a  deep  feeling  of  compassion  towards  the 
world;  active  effort  for  the  world,  even  to  giving  His 
life  a  ransom  for  many.  Out  of  this  triad  of  powers 
issued  the  passion  of  His  love  of  human  lives — the  bound 
less,  fathomless,  deathless  love  of  Christ  for  man.  The 
minister  of  Christ  may  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men 
and  of  angels,  may  have  all  knowledge,  may  have  a  faith 
that  could  remove  mountains — if  he  have  not  the  pas 
sion  of  a  Christlike  love,  he  has  not  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  he  is  none  of  His. 

"  The  problem  of  the  divinity  school  is  this  :  not  how  to 
train  an  occasional  man  for  the  foreign  field,  but  how  to 
kindle  the  missionary  passion  in  every  man  that  passes 
through  the  school,  that  he  may  thereby  become  an  able 
minister  of  Christ.  The  primary  and  essential  thing  is 
that  there  shall  be  within  the  school  a  sacred  altar  of 
missionary  passion,  whereat  the  torch  of  every  man  shall 
be  kindled,  and  the  lip  of  every  man  shall  be  touched 
with  the  living  coal.  For  the  sake  of  the  man  who 
possibly  has  gifts  for  service  abroad,  the  divinity  school 
should  be  hot  with  zeal  for  evangelisation,  should  bo 


6  THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

charged  with  solemn  anxiety  for  the  world's  condition, 
so  that  no  man  can  live  within  its  walls  without  facing 
for  himself  the  solemn  question,  Is  it  Christ's  will 
for  me  that  I  go  forth  to  serve  Him  in  the  regions 
beyond  ? 

"  As  for  the  man  who  shall  enter  the  pastorate  at  home, 
he  requires  the  missionary  passion  to  make  him  great  in 
sympathy,  apostolic  in  his  view  of  Christ  and  Chris 
tianity.  To  overcome  the  resistance  of  ignorance  and  pre 
judice,  to  awaken  the  attention  of  apathetic  minds,  which 
are  blinded  to  the  large  question  of  the  world's  evangelisa 
tion,  to  educate  the  Church's  intelligence,  to  raise  at 
home  the  supplies  that  shall  maintain  the  work  of  God 
abroad,  the  pastor  needs  nothing  less  than  the  missionary 
passion.  But  the  man  who  is  thus  to  conquer  must 
first  himself  be  conquered  and  set  on  fire  of  Gtod. 

"  The  study  of  missions  is  slowly  rising  to  the  rank  of 
a  theological  discipline.  But  the  study  of  missions  as  a 
discipline  of  the  divinity  school  cannot  by  itself  bring  to 
pass  that  setting  on  fire  of  the  future  ministry  with  the 
missionary  passion.  I  see  other  forces  at  work  which 
make  for  that  glorious  end.  I  see  developing  a  new  con 
ception  of  the  ministry  that  must  attract  toward  it  many 
of  the  most  gifted  and  consecrated  of  our  young  men. 
In  many  a  college  to-day  are  found  the  very  flower  of 
our  youth,  to  whom  the  ministry  appears  not  as  a  reserved 
and  gloomy  world  of  ecclesiastical  technicalities,  but  as 
the  King's  own  highway  to  joyful  and  abundant  service. 
I  see  a  spirit  developing  among  our  young  men  that 
portends  a  vast  accession  of  missionary  enthusiasm  for 
the  ministry  of  the  future.  Personal  consecration  for 
personal  service  is  a  conception  of  living  that  grow?  more 
and  more  attractive  to  a  multitude  of  our  finest  minds, 


THE   ECUMENICAL   MISSIONARY    CONFERENCE         7 

Chit  of  this  class  of  minds  shall  be  gathered  the  ministry 
of  the  future.  It  shall  be  a  Christ-filled  ministry,  be 
holding  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ, 
worshipping  Him  with  the  enthusiasm  of  an  absolutely 
fearless  affection,  and  presenting  Him  as  the  only  Name 
under  heaven  whereby  men  can  be  saved.  It  shall  be 
i  missionary  ministry,  full  of  passion  to  redeem,  clear-eyed 
lo  discover  the  ongoing  of  Christ's  work,  faithful  in  its 
stewardship  at  home  and  abroad,  apostolic  in  its  assurance 
that  Christ  has  ordained  it  to  bear  much  fruit,  apostolic 
in  its  eagerness  to  spread  far  and  wide  the  gospel  of  the 
risen  and  ascended  Lord,  apostolic  in  its  hope  that  the 
mseen  and  crowned  Saviour  shall  surely  come  again." 

Other  speakers  emphasised  as  strongly  the  re 
sponsibility  of  pastors.  Kev.  J.  F.  Daly,  of  the 
Tree  Church  of  Scotland,  said — 

"  Until  the  clergy  are  afire,  it  is  useless  to  expect  the 
Itity  to  be  so.  There  is  not  a  single  instance  of  a 
minister  really  interested  in  foreign  missions,  praying  and 
vorking  for  them,  who  has  not  met  with  an  encourag 
ing  response  at  length  from  a  certain  number  of  his 
people"  (vol.  i.  p.  132). 

D.  Brewer  Eddy  of  the  Yale  Band  said — 

"  The  importance  of  leadership  must  be  emphasised. 
Let  us  put  to  usury  that  talent  which  sets  others  to  work. 
You  are  the  leaders.  We,  six  millions  of  young  people  in 
this  land,  are  willing  to  follow  you,  if  you  will  guide  us. 
This  is  the  responsibility  of  the  pastor.  The  most  definite 
impression,  perhaps,  of  the  Yale  Band  is  this :  that  the 
praise  or  the  responsibility  and  blame  for  present  condi 
tions  in  our  Missionary  Boards  must  be  laid  at  the  doors 


THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

of  the  pastors.  ...  If  you  base  your  appeal  on  grounds 
of  pastor's  pride,  or  of  individual  church  benevolence,  or 
of  denominational  loyalty,  our  young  people  will  return  a 
reward  commensurate  with  the  grounds  from  which  such 
an  appeal  is  made.  But  come  to  us  with  the  deepest 
spiritual  note  you  can  sound,  with  a  message  from  the 
very  life  of  the  Master  we  are  learning  to  love  more  and 
more,  and  we  six  millions  will  follow  you  to  the  best  of 
our  ability  "  (vol.  i.  p.  182). 

Mr.  S.  Earl  Taylor  said  — 

"  Until  our  pastors  are  ready  to  back  this  enterprise. 
there  will  never  be  a  missionary  spirit  adequate  to  the 
needs  of  the  generation.  Where  the  pastor  helps,  almos*. 
any  plan  will  succeed  ;  where  he  is  opposed,  scarcely 
anything  will  succeed.  While  godly  pastors  in  all  parts 
of  the  country  have  been  helping  the  students  as  ther 
have  worked  in  the  churches,  we  are  told  here  and  ii 
Great  Britain  that  the  greatest  obstacle  in  arousing  the 
home  church  is  the  pastor,  who  is  afraid  his  salary  will 
be  cut  down  "  (vol.  i.  p. 


The  Hon.  S.  B.  Capen— 

"  There  is  one  condition  absolutely  essential  to  success, 
While  I  believe  we  must  expect  our  Christian  men  to 
have  a  large  share  in  planning  for  this  better  organisa 
tion,  we  shall  still  need  devoted  pastors  to  lead  in  its 
execution.  The  pastors  are  to  be  the  leaders  still  in  this 
mighty  work,  and  a  consecrated  pastor  will  always  mean 
a  consecrated  church.  In  this  new  epoch  of  missionary 
work  the  pastors  of  this  generation,  if  they  only  will, 
may  be  the  leaders  in  this  holy  war  for  righteousness  in 
all  the  earth  "  (vol.  i.  p.  189). 


THE   ECUMENICAL   MISSIONARY   CONFERENCE          9 

Eev.  D.  S.  MacKay — 

"  A  special  appeal,  to  be  effective,  must  have  not  only 
behind  it,  but  in  it,  pulsating  through  it,  the  persuasive 
personality  of  the  local  pastor.  To  scatter  a  few  leaflets 
in  the  pews,  and  simply  call  attention  to  them,  is  one  of 
the  surest  ways  by  which  a  pastor  can  kill  a  special 
appeal.  The  effectiveness  of  the  appeal  depends,  in  the 
last  instance,  on  the  pastor  who  with  loving  zeal  sends 
home  the  plea.  I  do  not  deprecate  in  any  way  the  help 
fulness  of  missionary  agents  from  time  to  time  in  our 
pulpits,  but  it  is  the  fidelity  of  the  local  pastor,  translat 
ing  the  special  appeal  into  an  individual  message  to  his 
own  people,  that  is,  after  all,  the  secret  of  success  in  the 
commissariat  of  foreign  missions  "  (vol.  i.  p.  192). 

The  responsibility  all  these  speakers  throw  upon 
the  ministry  is  something  very  serious,  and  raises 
questions  of  the  deepest  interest.  As  to  what  place 
a  pastor  is  to  give  missions  in  his  preaching,  there  may 
be  difference  of  opinion.  Eev.  J.  F.  Daly  said — 

"  In  the  Church  I  represent  we  have  drawn  up  a 
scheme  which  secures  to  each  congregation  a  visit  from 
a  missionary  on  a  Sunday  once  in  six  years.  Good 
organisation  should  secure:  (1)  A  visit  of  a  missionary 
once  in  three  years  on  a  Sunday ;  (2)  a  visit  of  a  presby- 
terial  deputation — say  minister,  elder,  and  a  lady,  if 
possible — the  year  following ;  and  a  sermon  on  missions 
by  the  pastor  the  year  after  that.  A  committee  of 
presbytery  should  be  appointed  to  see  these  arrangements 
carried  through.  Under  these  auspices  a  large  public 
missionary  meeting  should  be  held  annually  at  some 
Influential  centre  in  the  district,  and  addressed  by  several 


10          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

missionaries.     But  even  with  all  such  ideal  organisation 
there  are  still  classes  who  may  be  overlooked." 

Bishop  Hendrix  said — 

"Andrew  Fuller,  when  alarmed  at  the  spiritual  lethargy 
of  his  church,  preached  a  sermon  on  the  duty  of  the 
Church  to  give  the  gospel  to  the  world;  and  as  he 
broadened  their  intellectual  life,  and  quickened  their 
zeal,  and  stirred  their  purpose,  he  followed  it  up  the 
following  Sabbath  with  a  sermon  on  the  duty  of  the 
Church  to  give  the  gospel  to  the  world.  The  third 
Sabbath  the  same  theme  was  presented  from  his  desk, 
and  then  men  began  to  inquire :  '  Then,  if  the  gospel  can 
save  the  world,  can  it  not  save  our  own  children,  our  own 
community  ? '  and  from  that  missionary  sermon  there 
sprang  one  of  the  most  memorable  revivals  in  the  history 
of  any  church." 

It  is  one  thing  for  a  minister  to  be  an  advocate 
and  supporter  of  missions :  it  is  another  and  very 
different  thing  for  him  to  understand  that  they  are 
the  chief  end  of  the  Church,  and  therefore  the  chief 
end  for  which  his  congregation  exists.  It  is  only 
when  this  truth  masters  him  in  its  spiritual  power, 
that  he  will  be  able  to  give  the  subject  of  missions 
its  true  place  in  his  ministry.  As  he  sees  how 
every  believer  is  called  to  witness  to  Christ's  love 
and  claim,  how  the  healthy  spiritual  life  depends 
on  the  share  the  believer  takes  in  work  for  his 
Lord,  how  he  has  to  lead  the  congregation  on  to 
make  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom  the  highest 
object  of  its  corporate  existence,  he  will  feel  how 


THE    ECUMENICAL    MISSIONARY    CONFERENCE       11 

nothing  can  enable  it  to  carry  this  out  but  a  definite 
consecration  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  and  the 
love  of  Christ.  And  as  he  then  thinks  of  all  the 
ignorance  and  worldliness  and  unbelief  that  he  has 
to  contend  with,  he  will  learn  that  his  missionary 
enthusiasm  must  be  nothing  less  than  the  enthusiasm 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  filling  him  with  an  intense  love 
to  Christ,  an  intense  faith  in  His  power,  an  intense 
desire  to  lead  all  His  disciples  to  give  their  lives 
to  making  Jesus  King  over  the  whole  earth. 

The  more  earnestly  we  study  missions  in  the 
light  of  the  pastors'  responsibility,  the  more  we 
shall  see  that  everything  depends  upon  the  personal 
life  being  wholly  under  the  power  of  love  to  Christ, 
as  the  constraining  power  of  our  work.  With  the 
pastor,  at  least,  it  will  be  found  that  the  missionary 
problem  is  a  personal  one. 

2.  Next  to  the  influence  of  the  Pastor  and  Pulpit 
in  arousing  the  interest  in  missions,  the  second  place 
was  given  to  the  Pen  and  the  Press.  The  necessity 
of  preparing,  and  circulating,  and  securing  the  study 
of  mission  literature  was  forcibly  put  from  various 
points  of  view. 

"  Information  is  the  fuel  without  which  the  fire  cannot 
burn.  Fuel  is  not  fire,  and  cannot  of  itself  create  fire  ; 
but  where  there  is  fire,  fuel  is  indispensable  to  keep  it 
burning,  or  to  make  it  burn  with  greater  intensity. 

"  An  informed  Church  will  be  a  transformed  Church 


12          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

Possibly  one  of  the  greatest  factors  in  the  development  of 
missionary  interest  is  the  systematic  study  of  missions." 

And  the  address  closes  with  this  weighty  paragraph: 

"  Missionary  influence  is  twofold  in  its  influence.  The 
torch  we  hold  up  for  others,  illuminates  our  own  path. 
The  Church  is  watching,  and  working,  and  praying  for 
immortal  souls,  Our  representatives  are  out  in  the 
thickest  of  the  battle.  It  is  a  struggle  between  the 
forces  of  life  and  death.  Are  we  so  swathed  in  our  en 
vironment  that  we  care  for  no  tidings  of  this  contest  with 
heathenism  and  the  forces  of  darkness?  If  we  are  in 
earnest  to  plant  the  Church  of  Christ  in  the  ends  of  the 
earth,  let  us  hear  the  report  of  progress  arid  pass  it  on." 

"Ignorance  is  the  source  of  weakness  in  missionary 
effort.  Know,  and  you  will  believe.  Know,  and  you 
will  pray.  Know,  and  you  will  help  in  the  front  rank." 

"  A  word  on  the  demand  that  missionary  publications 
should  be  interesting  and  attractive,  like  the  so-called 
1  popular '  magazines.  What  makes  any  publication  popular  U 
Why  is  it  that  during  the  recent  campaigns  in  South 
Africa  crowds  of  people  jostled  one  another  before  the 
bulletin  boards  of  the  War  Office  ?  Unquestionably  the 
intensity  of  the  interest  felt  is  because  of  the  issues 
involved,  affecting  British  prestige  and  power.  IF  Chris 
tians  were  as  loyal  to  their  King,  IF  they  had  a  like 
eagerness  for  the  establishment  of  His  sovereignty  over 
the  regions  which  He  claims,  then  would  messages 
from  the  battle-line  be  scanned  with  avidity.  No  tidings 
of  this  sort  would  be  counted  dull.  Just  here  lies  the 
difficulty  in  reference  to  missionary  publications.  They 
will  command  the  attention  of  those  only  who  are  at  one 
with  Christ  in  His  world-wide  redemptive  work.  Given 


THE    ECUMENICAL   MISSIONARY    CONFERENCE       13 

a  Church  whose  members,  in  fact  as  well  as  in  profession, 
are  seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  they  will 
demand,  and  will  have,  fresh  and  full  tidings  of  the 
progress  of  that  kingdom  throughout  the  earth.  IF  once 
a  quickened  love  for  our  Lord  and  His  kingdom  fill  the 
hearts  of  His  people,  reports  from  the  field  of  contest  will 
be  welcomed  with  eager  acclaim." 

Rev.  Dr.  Eankin — 

"  When  we  have  made  our  magazines  as  good  as  we 
can,  what  nextl  Then  the  pastors  should  come  and  tell 
the  people  of  this  literature.  They  should  put  it  before 
them  with  such  earnestness  that  they  feel  that  this  is 
something  they  cannot  neglect.  Let  our  pastors  confer 
with  good  women  of  the  Churches,  and  let  these  take  the 
magazines  out  among  the  people.  Let  our  pastors  glory 
in  the  mission  literature.  Let  them  feel  that  it  is  in 
advance  of  everything  in  telling  the  story  of  what  is 
transpiring  in  the  earth." 

Dr.  A.  W.  Halsey — 

"  It  was  said  of  the  late  Keith  Falconer  by  one  of  his 
instructors,  that  he  approached  the  world  of  ideas  as  great 
observers  approach  the  world  of  nature:  with  wonder, 
with  reverence,  with  humility.  In  some  such  spirit 
must  the  pastor  approach  the  study  of  missionary  litera 
ture.  As  you  study  the  literature  of  missions,  the  con 
viction  deepens  that  though  you  are  reading  the  lives 
of  Christians  of  many  denominations  and  varied  attain 
ments,  engaged  in  a  great  variety  of  work  in  different 
lands,  yet  the  one  fact  that  confronts  you  is  that  these 
missionaries  believe  in  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
The  pastor  who  neglects  such  literature  robs  his  people  of 
their  birthright  and  '  wrongs  his  own  soul.'  " 


14          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

3.  The  third  great  means  of  wakening  interest 
was  that  of  personal  influence  exercised  through 
organisation.  Much  was  well  said  of  the  import 
ance  of  having  children,  girls,  boys,  young  people, 
women,  all  separately  gathered  under  the  influence 
of  leaders  who  could  guide  aright  their  training  for 
the  love  and  service  of  the  kingdom ;  and  much, 
too,  of  the  power  woman  is  already  exercising,  and 
must  exercise  still  more  largely,  in  receiving  and 
passing  on  the  wonderful  love  of  Jesus  Christ  within 
the  Churches  of  the  home  lands,  to  train  and  pre 
pare  the  future  Church  for  giving  itself  to  its  work. 
Take  this  passage  by  Mrs.  T.  B.  Hargrove — 

"The  Church  is  truly  but  thinking  the  thoughts  of 
Christ  after  Him  when  she  recognises  the  importance  of 
the  child  in  the  development  of  His  kingdom  on  earth, 
for  did  He  not  give  children  the  chief  place  in  the 
new  dispensation,  and  affirm  that  the  only  way  a  man 
might  understand  God's  truth  was  in  getting  back  to 
his  child-way  of  thinking.  Truly,  of  children,  and  of 
men  and  women  of  childlike  natures,  is  His  kingdom 
here  and  hereafter  to  be  made  up. 

"The  young  people's  societies  of  the  Church  are  so 
many  training  schools  where  the  workers  of  the  future 
are  being  prepared  to  take  the  places  of  the  veterans  of 
to-day.  Much  time  can  be  saved  and  greater  efficiency 
secured  if  our  girls  uninterruptedly  pursue  the  same 
methods  of  work,  and  labour  for  the  same  direct  ends  in 
their  young  people's  societies,  as  will  engross  their  atten 
tion  as  missionary  workers  in  after  years.  A  gentleman 


THE   ECUMENICAL   MISSIONARY    CONFERENCE       15 

walking  over  a  beautifully-kept  farm  one  day  with  his 
friend,  the  owner,  and  admiring  the  skill  and  care  every 
where  manifested,  centred  his  attention  upon  the  magni 
ficent  sheep,  and  with  great  earnestness  asked  how  he 
had  succeeded  in  rearing  such  flocks.  The  simple  answer 
was,  '  I  take  care  of  my  lambs,  sir.'  Did  not  the  great 
Shepherd  of  Israel  bid  His  people  follow  the  same  rule  1 
How  shall  we  take  care  of  the  lambs  ?  By  keeping  both 
juvenile  and  young  people's  societies  under  the  care  of 
good  shepherds.  They  must  have  our  very  best ;  if  the 
choice  must  come  between  superior  and  inferior  leaders 
for  adult  or  young  people's  work,  always  give  the  young 
people  the  preference.  The  crying  need  of  the  women's 
foreign  missionary  societies  to-day,  all  over  this  broad 
land  in  every  Church,  is  well-qualified  superintendents  of 
juvenile  and  young  people's  societies.  Women  are  needed 
for  this  duty  who  love  children  and  young  people  for 
their  own  sake,  and  for  Christ's  sake :  women  of  much 
experience,  but  young  in  heart ;  women  who  feel  them 
selves  commissioned  of  Christ  to  '  feed  My  lambs ' ;  women 
who  count  not  time  dear  to  themselves  if  by  any  means 
they  may  win  souls  for  the  Master.  But  these  earnest 
intelligent  superintendents  need  help.  The  adult  societies 
must  look  upon  the  juvenile  and  young  people's  societies 
as  a  mother  upon  her  daughters  :  she  must  not  leave 
them  exclusively  to  the  care  of  the  lady  managers.  Each 
adult  member  must  look  after  the  children  and  young 
girls  near  and  dear  to  herself,  and  seek  to  lead  them  from 
juvenile  to  young  people's,  and  from  young  people's  to 
the  adults'  societies.  Oh  that  the  work  of  foreign 
missions  were  really  on  the  hearts  of  our  women !  No 
weariness  or  toil  is  spared,  or  self-denial  counted,  when 
the  heart  is  really  enlisted. 


16          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

"Each  lady  superintendent  should  make  it  her  first 
aim  to  inspire  in  every  individual  child  real  love  for 
Christ  and  for  the  heathen.  Perhaps  the  training  of 
the  young  in  their  homes,  in  the  schools  and  societies,  is 
more  defective  just  here  than  in  any  other  one  point. 

"  Hearts  truly  won  for  Christ  in  the  juvenile  society, 
and  tended  lovingly  and  intelligently  in  the  young 
people's  society,  will,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases, 
bring  into  our  adult  organisations  Marys  whose  alabaster 
boxes  of  precious  perfume  will  be  broken  at  the  Master's 
feet,  and  their  fragrance  reach  to  the  uttermost  parts  of 
the  earth. 

"  The  nineteenth  century  has  brought  to  woman  many 
open  doors,  but  none  is  of  greater  moment  than  this  door, 
old  as  motherhood,  but  presented  by  this  century  under 
another  phase :  the  training  of  young  minds  and  hearts 
in  the  avenues  of  public  service  for  Christ,  and  for  the 
world  He  died  to  redeem.  Let  each  Christian  woman 
choose  as  her  motto,  '  I  cannot  live  without  the  highest 
use  of  life ' ;  and  let  each  realise  that  one  of  life's  highest 
uses  is  the  development  into  noble  Christian  womanhood 
and  manhood  of  the  young  people  of  our  Churches,  and 
address  herself  thereto"  (vol.  i  pp.  135,  136). 

There  is  a  great  deal  of  much  value  in  connection 
with  organisation  that  will  be  found  in  the  Eeport, 
to  which  I  cannot  here  refer.  What  I  have  quoted 
is  enough  to  show  how  much  will  have  to  be  done 
before  the  Church  has  fully  availed  itself  of  this 
wonderful  power. 

The  above  three  headings  will,  I  think,  be  found 
to  cover  all  that  was  said  in  reference  to  the  rousing 


THE   ECUMENICAL   MISSIONAKY    CONFERENCE       17 

of  the  Church  to  carry  out  her  Lord's  command. 
If  our  students  could  be  trained  in  an  atmosphere 
of  missionary  enthusiasm,  and  our  pastors  brought 
to  believe  that  the  great  aim  of  the  existence  of 
their  congregations  is  to  make  Christ  known  to  every 
creature;  if  our  people  could  be  got  to  read  and 
take  an  interest  in  the  news  of  the  kingdom  and 
its  extension ;  if  we  could  so  get  our  Christian  men 
and  women  of  devotion  to  organise  our  young  people, 
that  their  training  in  the  missionary  service  were 
part  of  their  education  in  the  love  of  Christ  and  the 
life  of  godliness ; — there  would  be  reason  to  hope 
that  the  work  would  be  accomplished,  and  within 
thirty  years  every  man  and  woman  in  the  world 
have  the  gospel  brought  within  their  reach,  and 
actually  offered  to  them. 

But  throughout  all  the  addresses  there  is  the 
secret  admission  that  in  all  these  respects  there 
is  reason  for  anxiety.  The  complaints  as  to  the 
lack  of  the  missionary  ideal  and  passion  in  very 
many  pastors  and  students,  the  lack  of  interest  in 
the  majority  of  members  in  the  tidings  of  this 
great  war,  the  need  and  the  call  there  is  for 
many,  many  more,  to  come  and  shepherd  the  young 
into  the  life  of  missionary  devotion, — all  prove 
that  at  the  back  of  all  these  needs  is  a  deeper  need. 
There  is  need  of  a  great  revival  of  spiritual  life,  of 
true  fervent  devotion  to  our  Lord  Jesus,  of  entire 


18          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

consecration  to  His  service.  It  is  only  in  a  Church 
in  which  this  spirit  of  revival  has  at  least  begun, 
that  there  is  any  hope  of  any  very  radical  change 
in  the  relation  of  the  majority  of  our  Christian 
people  to  mission  work. 

I  confess  that  I  had  hoped  that  this  question,  as 
the  one  of  paramount  importance  in  view  of  the 
possibility  of  carrying  out  Christ's  command  at  once, 
would  have  engaged  the  attention  of  the  Conference. 
When  the  Student  Volunteer  Movement  issued  their 
Appeal  to  the  Churches,  announcing  the  watchword 
they  had  adopted,  "  The  Evangelisation  of  the  World 
in  this  Generation,"  their  message  met  with  a  most 
cordial  welcome  and  response.  Must  we  now  wait 
for  them  to  come  a  second  time,  and  ask  the 
Church  to  consider  what  the  great  hindrance  is  that 
holds  Christ's  people  back  from  coming  forward  and 
meeting  the  emergency  with  the  enthusiasm  which 
He  has  a  right  to  claim  ?  Is  it  not  time  that  some 
representative  body  appeal  to  all  fellow-Christians, 
and  call  for  an  inquiry  into  the  nature  and  extent 
of  the  disease  that  is  so  paralysing  the  Church,  and 
the  conditions  of  restoration  to  health  and  strength  ? 
To  know  what  is  wrong,  with  confession  and  humilia 
tion  to  turn  from  it  to  the  loving  Lord,  would  bring 
new  life  to  the  Church,  and  altogether  new  power 
to  the  work  that  has  to  be  done. 

It  is  under  the  impression  of  thoughts  like  these 


THE   ECUMENICAL   MISSIONARY    CONFERENCE       19 

that  I  feel  led  to  write  this  little  book.  I  know 
that  it  is  no  easy  task  humbly,  wisely,  lovingly,  and 
yet  faithfully  and  effectually,  to  speak  of  what 
appears  lacking  or  sinful  in  the  Church.  And  yet 
I  am  sure  that  there  are  many  who  would  wel 
come  help  in  answering  the  question :  Is  there  any 
prospect,  any  real  possibility,  of  such  a  revival  in 
the  Church  that  proof  will  be  given  that,  as  a  whole, 
and  in  every  congregation  where  the  full  gospel  is 
preached,  her  only  aim  will  be  to  carry  the  gospel 
to  every  creature  ?  And  if  so,  what  is  the  path 
that  will  lead  to  this  great  change,  and  what  are 
the  steps  to  be  taken  by  those  who  lead  the  missions 
of  the  Church  ? 

May  God  by  His  Holy  Spirit  guide  us  to  the 
vision  of  His  will  concerning  His  Church,  to  the 
faith  in  His  power  and  promise,  and  to  the  obedience 
that  will  walk  in  any  path  He  opens  up. 


CHAPTEE    II 

Jfaretgn  jHtestons: 
of  tije  State  of  tlje 

IN  the  previous  chapter  the  question  has  been 
raised,  What  can  be  done  so  to  quicken  the 
spiritual  life  of  the  Church  that  the  missionary 
cause  shall  have  all  that  hearty  sympathy  and 
support  which  it  claims  ?  In  seeking  to  answer 
that  question  our  first  duty  is  to  form  an  accurate 
estimate  of  what  its  real  relation  to  mission  work  is. 
Let  us  devote  this  chapter  to  considering  the  state 
of  the  Church.  We  take,  as  the  basis  of  our  study, 
passages  from  an  address  of  Mr.  Mott's  at  the  Con 
ference.  The  frequent  use  of  the  word  IF  points  us 
to  that  in  which  the  Church  has  failed  in  her  duty, 
suggests  what  the  state  is  in  which  she  should  and 
could  be  found,  invites  to  an  inquiry  into  the 
cause  of  failure,  and  leads  us  to  ask  what  the  cure 
for  such  a  condition  is. 

"  The  Moravians  have  done  more  in  proportion  to  their 

ability  than  any  other  body  of  Christians.     IF  members 

20 


A    TEST    OF    THE    STATE    OF   THE    CHURCH         21 

of  Protestant  Churches  in  Great  Britain  and  America 
gave  in  like  proportion,  then  missionary  contributions 
would  aggregate  £12,000,000,  or  a  fourfold  increase. 
And  IF  they  went  out  as  missionaries  in  corresponding 
numbers,  we  would  have  a  force  of  nearly  400,000  foreign 
workers,  which  is  vastly  more  than  the  number  of  mission 
aries  estimated  as  necessary  to  achieve  the  evangelisation 
of  the  world  in  this  generation.  The  question  is,  What  has 
there  been  in  connection  with  the  work  which  is  not 
reproducible  ? 

"  The  world- wide  proclamation  of  the  gospel  awaits 
accomplishment  by  this  generation,  IF  it  shall  have  the 
obedience  and  determination  to  attempt  the  task.  We 
are  not  justified  in  saying  that  there  is  a  single  country 
on  the  face  of  the  earth  where  the  Church,  IF  she 
seriously  desires,  cannot  send  ambassadors  of  Christ  to 
proclaim  His  message. 

"  Contrast  the  one  hundred  and  thirty-five  millions  of 
members  of  Protestant  Churches  with  the  few  thousands 
constituting  the  despised  sect  which  on  the  day  of  Pente 
cost  began  the  work.  As  we  recall  the  achievements  of 
that  infant  Church,  can  we  question  the  ability  of  the 
Christians  of  our  day,  IF  they  were  unitedly  to  resolve  to 
accomplish  it,  in  this  present  generation,  to  give  all  man 
kind  an  opportunity  to  know  Christ,  the  Saviour  and  Lord  ? 

"The  money-power  of  the  Church  is  enormous.  IF 
only  one-fourth  of  members  of  Protestant  Churches  gave 
but  one  cent  a  day,  it  would  yield  over  twenty-five 
million  pounds,  as  contrasted  with  the  less  than  four 
million  pounds  of  the  past  year. 

"The  Bible  Societies  are  not  less  than  eighty  in 
number.  IF  the  work  is  properly  promoted,  before 
this  generation  closes,  each  inhabitant  of  Asia  and 


22          THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

Africa  will  be  able  to  read  or  hear  in  his  own  tongue 
of  the  wonderful  works  of  God. 

"The  various  Christian  young  people's  organisations 
include,  in  North  America  alone,  fully  six  million 
members.  These  young  people  themselves,  IF  properly 
educated  and  guided,  are  able  to  raise  each  year  a  sum 
large  enough  to  support  all  the  foreign  missionaries 
required  to  accomplish  the  evangelisation  of  the  world. 

"  Sunday  schools  contain  over  twenty  million  scholars. 
IF  these  were  trained  to  give  a  penny  per  week,  it  would 
yield  an  amount  greater  than  the  present  total  missionary 
gifts  of  Christendom. 

"  There  are  now  probably  two  hundred  thousand  soldiers 
at  the  Cape.  We  have  all  been  impressed  by  the  exhibition 
of  the  unity  and  power  of  the  British  Empire ;  we  have 
been  deeply  moved  by  the  example  of  the  republics,  as 
we  have  seen  old  men  and  boys  going  out  to  fight  the 
battles  of  their  country;  and  yet,  when  it  is  suggested 
that  all  Protestant  Christendom  unite  in  sending  out 
fifty  thousand  missionaries,  it  is  impracticable  and 
visionary:  it  would  be  too  severe  a  strain  on  the 
resources  of  the  Church. 

"Was  it  not  Bishop  Thoburn  who  said  that  IF  this 
Conference  and  those  whom  it  represents  will  do  their 
duty,  within  the  first  decade  of  the  new  century  ten 
millions  of  souls  might  be  gathered  into  the  Church  of 
Christ  1  And  was  it  not  Dr.  Chamberlain  who  affirmed 
the  possibility  of  bringing  India  under  the  sway  of  Christ 
within  the  lifetime  of  some,  at  least,  in  this  assembly  1 " 

In  an  address  of  Mr.  Eobert  Speer  we  read — 
"  The  aim  of  foreign  missions  is  to  make  Jesus  Christ 
known  to  the  world.     The  Church  could  do  the  work,  IF 
it  would,  if  this  aim  ruled  its  spirit.     I  was  glad  to 


A    TEST    OF    THE    STATE    OF    THE    CHURCH         23 

read,  on  the  first  page  of  our  programme,  those  dying 
words  of  Simeon  Calhoun  : '  It  is  my  deep  conviction,  and 
1  say  it  again  and  again,  that  IF  the  Church  of  Christ 
were  what  she  ought  to  be,  twenty  years  would  not  pass 
away  till  the  story  of  the  cross  would  be  uttered  in  the 
ears  of  every  living  man.' " 

And — to  quote  only  one  more  instance — Rev.  W. 
Perkins,  Secretary  of  the  Wesleyan  Missionary 
Society,  London,  said — 

"  Great  as  are  the  results  of  Foreign  Missions,  over  which 
we  rejoice  and  give  thanks,  they  would  have  heen  a  hund 
redfold  greater,  IF  the  Church  had  been  what  she  ought 
to  be  in  the  two  great  matters  of  prayer  and  beneficence." 

\Ve  all  know  the  force  of  the  word  IF.  It 
suggests  the  cause  from  which  certain  effects 
follow.  It  points  to  the  conditions  needed  to 
ensure  the  results  we  desire.  In  the  passages 
we  have  quoted,  and  in  different  forms  of  expres 
sion  frequently  recurring  in  missionary  literature, 
we  find  the  same  thought  incessantly  repeated :  it 
tells  us  how  certainly  and  speedily  the  evangelisa 
tion  of  the  world  would  be  accomplished,  were  it 
not  for  the  failure  of  the  Church  in  doing  the  part 
that  has  been  assigned  her  by  God. 

It  avails  little  that  these  statements  are  made : 
let  us  see  what  the  lessons  are  we  ought  to  learn, 
and  what  can  be  done  to  roll  away  the  reproach 
resting  on  us  as  a  Church  of  Christ.  These  IFS 
suggest,  as  we  have  said,  four  questions:  Is  the 


24          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

Church  really  at  fault,  and  wherein  ?  Was  it 
possible  for  her  to  have  done  what  is  claimed  ? 
What  was  the  cause  of  the  failure  ?  How  is 
deliverance  from  the  evil  to  be  found  ? 

1.  These  IFS  all  indicate  something  wrong  in 
the  Church  in  reference  to  Christ's  command  to 
evangelise  the  world.  Note  the  words  we  have 
emphasised  in  the  type,  and  the  indictment  they 
contain.  The  Church  has  not  "the  obedience 
and  determination  to  attempt  the  task  "  to  pro 
claim  the  gospel  within  this  generation  to  every 
creature.  She  does  not  "  seriously  desire  "  to 
proclaim  the  gospel  in  every  country  on  the  face 
of  the  earth.  The  Christians  of  our  day  are  not 
"  unitedly  resolved  to  accomplish  it."  Were  the 
Church  of  our  day  doing  the  work,  or  proving 
herself  ready  to  do  it,  there  would  be  no  need  of 
this  repeated  appeal  to  the  IF.  One-fourth  of  the 
members  of  Protestant  Churches  are  not  ready  to 
"  give  one  halfpenny  a  day."  We  are  not  ready  to 
see  that  the  work  of  Bible  circulation  is  "properly 
promoted."  The  Christian  young  people  of  America 
are  able  to  raise  the  money  sufficient  for  all  the 
missionaries  needed  to  evangelise  the  world,  but  the 
Church  is  not  "  properly  guiding  and  educating  " 
them  for  this.  Sunday  scholars  could  do  so  much 
— they  are  not  being  trained  to  it.  Protestant 
Christendom  counts  it  "  impracticable  and  vision- 


A    TEST    OF    THE    STATE    OF    THE   CHURCH         25 

ary "  to  give  fifty  thousand  men  to  the  foreign 
work  for  the  service  of  Christ  Jesus  and  His 
kingdom :  it  would  be  "  too  great  a  strain  on  the 
resources  of  the  Church."  The  Conference  and  the 
Churches  it  represents  are  not  ready  to  "do  their 
duty."  The  Church  is  not  willing  "  to  make  Jesus 
known  to  the  world."  This  aim  does  not  "  rule  its 
spirit."  In  this  matter  the  Church  of  Christ  is  not 
"  what  she  ought  to  be." 

These  charges  against  the  Church  were  not 
brought  by  infidels  or  enemies,  but  by  some  of  the 
Church's  most  faithful  servants.  They  were  uttered 
in  presence  of  thousands  of  missionaries  and  mission 
friends.  If  untrue,  they  would  have  been  denied 
and  refuted.  But  no  one  could  deny  them.  In 
this  matter,  however  devotedly  a  small  part  of  the 
Church  is  doing  its  utmost,  in  the  great  majority  of 
its  members  it  is  not  what  it  should  be.  It  does 
not  desire  truly  to  have  Christ  made  known  to  every 
creature  as  speedily  as  possible.  This  aim  does  not 
rule  its  spirit — it  is  not  prepared  to  do  its  duty. 

The  charge  is  unutterably  solemn,  is  simply 
awful.  It  will  not  do  to  listen  and  then  lay  it 
aside  and  forget.  Everyone  who  loves  Christ's 
Church,  who  loves  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord,  who  loves 
the  souls  that  are  perishing  through  this  neglect, 
ought  to  pause  and  consider  what  it  means.  That 
Christ  should  have  given  His  life  in  serving  us,  and 


26          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

asked  us  to  give  our  life  in  serving  Him;  that 
Christ  should  have  given  His  dying  love  into  our 
hearts,  and  asked  us  to  bear  it  and  impart  it  to 
others;  that  Christ  should  in  His  love  have  died 
for  all,  and  have  rendered  Himself  dependent  on  us 
to  let  them  know  of  that  love ;  that  Christ  should 
have  endured  the  agony  of  the  cross  for  the  joy  of 
winning  and  saving  the  perishing,  and  should  have 
counted  on  our  love  to  delight  in  making  Him 
happy  and  bringing  Him  His  reward ;  and  that  the 
great  majority  of  those  who  profess  to  owe  every 
thing  to  His  dying  love,  should  be  utterly  indifferent 
either  as  to  gratifying  Him  or  blessing  their  fellow- 
men  by  winning  them  to  that  love — surely  it 
cannot  be  true  that  His  love  has  ever  been  a  reality 
to  them,  or  they  could  not  so  neglect  their  calling. 
Or  it  must  be  that  they  have  never  been  taught 
aright  what  they  have  been  redeemed  for:  the 
Church,  in  calling  them  to  seek  salvation  for  them 
selves,  must  have  kept  hidden  from  them  the  great 
purpose  for  which  they  were  redeemed — that  they 
should  live  to  save  others.  But,  whatever  be  the 
cause,  here  is  the  solemn  fact, — a  Church,  purchased 
by  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  to  be  His  messenger 
to  a  dying  world,  for  the  greater  part  failing  entirely 
in  understanding  or  fulfilling  its  calling.  No  words 
can  express,  no  mind  can  grasp,  the  terrible  mean 
ing  and  consequences  of  the  failure  and  condem- 


A    TEST    OF    THE    STATE    OF    THE    CHUKCH         27 

nation  involved  in  the  simple  IFS  of  which  we 
speak. 

2.  And  let  us  not  think  that  it  is  owing  to  some 
fatal  necessity,  some  natural  impossibility,  that  it  is 
so.  These  IFS  point  to  what  is  the  Church's 
actual  destiny.  Dreamers  speak  of  impossibilities, 
and  calculate  what  might  be  done  if  they  came 
true.  We  are  listening  to  men  who  are  speaking 
words  of  soberness  and  truth.  These  IFS  suggest 
what  is  certainly  and  divinely  possible.  They 
point  us  to  the  Church  of  Pentecost. 

"  To  evangelise  the  world  in  this  generation  is  possible," 
they  say,  "  in  view  of  the  achievements  of  the  Christians  of 
the  first  generation.  They  did  more  to  accomplish  the 
work  than  has  any  succeeding  generation.  In  studying 
the  secret  of  what  they  accomplished,  one. is  led  to  the 
conclusion  that  they  employed  no  vitally  important 
method  which,  cannot  be  used  to-day,  and  that  they 
availed  themselves  of  no  power  which  we  cannot  utilise." 

The  mighty  power  of  God  and  His  Holy  Spirit 
are  ours  as  theirs.  The  power  of  His  dying  love 
in  the  heart ;  of  a  triumphant  faith  in  Christ ;  of 
simple,  bold,  personal  testimony ;  of  patient  suffering ; 
of  absolute  passionate  consecration ;  the  heavenly 
power  that  overcomes  the  world  and  makes  us  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us — all 
these  belong  to  us  as  much  as  to  them. 

"  It  is  possible  to  evangelise  the  world  in  this  genera 
tion,  in  view  of  recent  missionary  achievements  of  the 


28          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

Church.  The  most  striking  example  is  that  of  the 
Moravians.  If  the  members  of  Protestant  Churches  went 
out  in  numbers  corresponding  to  those  they  have  sent  out, 
we  would  have  a  force  of  nearly  400,000  foreign  workers, 
which  is  vastly  more  than  the  number  estimated  as 
necessary  to  achieve  the  task." 

The  Moravian  Church  is  one  of  the  smallest  in 
number  and  poorest  in  means  of  all  the  Churches. 
What  it  has  done  is  a  proof  that  the  whole 
Church,  when  once  she  rouses  herself  to  her  call 
ing,  most  assuredly  can  accomplish  the  work. 
In  view  of  the  opportunities  which  the  Church 
has  in  the  open  doors  in  every  country  of  the  world, 
of  the  enormous  resources  the  Church  possesses  in 
the  wealth  of  her  members,  in  the  numbers  of 
workers  over  which  the  Church  has  disposal,  and 
the  faith  that  to  send  them  out  would,  instead  of 
weakening  it,  bring  quickening  and  strength,  it  is 
absolutely  within  the  power  of  the  Church  to  bring 
the  gospel  to  every  creature  within  this  generation. 
Let  us  take  time  to  come  under  the  full  power  of 
this  great  thought,  suggested  to  us  by  those  who  are 
pleading  with  us.  It  will  give  force  to  what  has 
been  said  in  regard  to  the  terrible  failure  of  the 
Church.  It  will  prepare  us  for  discovering  how  to 
deal  with  the  evil. 

3.  These  IFS  invite  us  to  an  inquiry  as  to 
the  causes  of  the  terrible  failure.  How  comes  it 
that  the  Church  of  Christ  has  been  so  utterly 


A  TEST  OF  THE  STATE  OF  THE  CHUKCH    29 

unfaithful  ?  Does  not  our  Protestant  Christendom 
profess,  and  that  honestly,  to  acknowledge  Christ  aa 
its  Lord,  and  God's  holy  word  as  the  law  of  its  life  ? 
Is  it  not  our  boast  that  we  are  in  the  true  succes 
sion  of  the  Pentecostal  Church,  the  heir  of  all  its 
promises  and  powers  ?  Are  we  not  the  children  of 
the  Reformation,  in  possession  of  the  great  truths 
that  every  living  man  has  a  right  to  God's  word  as 
taught  him  by  God's  Spirit,  and  a  free  access, 
through  Christ,  to  God's  pardoning  grace  ?  And  is  it 
not  the  very  sum  and  centre  of  our  profession,  that 
we  acknowledge  Jesus  as  Master  and  Lord,  and 
have  given  ourselves  to  do  what  He  says  ?  And 
how  comes  it  that,  in  the  very  thing  on  which 
Christ's  glory  most  depends,  on  which  His  heart  of 
love  is  most  set,  the  Church  should  have  failed  to 
realise  or  fulfil  its  destiny  ? 

It  would  be  easy  to  mention  many  causes 
that  co-operate  in  producing  this  unfaithfulness. 
But  they  may  all  be  summed  up  in  the  one  answer : 
The  low  spiritual  state  of  the  Church  as  a  whole. 
The  control  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  power  and 
fulness  over  the  life  of  believers  is  essential  to  the 
health  and  strength  of  the  Church.  Scripture 
teaches  us  how  easy  it  is  for  a  Church  and  ita 
members  to  have  a  sound  creed,  a  faithful  observ 
ance  of  religious  services  and  duties,  a  zeal  for  the 
extension  of  the  Church  and  for  works  of  philan- 


30          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

thropy  which  are  within  the  range  of  human 
nature,  while  that  which  is  definitely  spiritual, 
supernatural,  and  Divine  is  to  a  large  extent  lack 
ing.  The  spirit  of  the  world,  the  wisdom  and  the 
will  of  man  in  the  teaching  of  the  word  and  the 
guidance  of  the  Church,  make  it  very  much  like 
any  human  institution,  with  little  of  the  power  of 
the  heavenly  world  and  the  endless  life  to  be  seen 
in  it.  In  such  a  Church  missions  may  have  a 
place,  though  not  the  place  nor  the  power  which  is 
needed  for  fulfilling  the  command  of  Christ.  The 
passion  of  love  to  Christ  and  to  souls,  the  enthu 
siasm  of  sacrifice  for  men,  and  of  faith  in  the 
omnipotent  Power  that  can  quicken  the  dead,  is 
wanting. 

Among  the  chief  symptoms  of  this  sickly  state 
are  worldliness  and  lack  of  prayer.  If  there  is  one 
thing  that  Christ  and  Scripture  insist  on,  it  is  that 
His  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,  that  the  spirit 
of  the  world  cannot  understand  the  things  of  God, 
that  separation  from  the  world  in  fellowship  and 
conduct,  and  surrender  to  the  Spirit  which  is  from 
heaven,  is  essential  to  the  faithful  following  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  The  one  universally  admitted  fact — 
that  the  majority  of  Christians  care  and  give 
nothing  for  missions,  that  a  large  number  give  but 
little  and  not  from  the  highest  motives,  is  simply  a 
proof  of  the  worldliness  in  which  most  Christians 


A  TEST  OF  THE  STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH    31 

live,  and  which  the  Church  either  does  not  seek,  or 
is  not  able,  to  cast  out.  It  needed  Christ  to  come 
from  heaven  to  save  men  out  of  the  world:  it 
needs  nothing  less  than  the  Spirit  of  heaven  in 
Christ's  disciples  to  free  them  from  the  spirit  of  the 
world,  to  make  them  willing  to  sacrifice  all  to  win 
the  world  for  Christ.  It  needs  the  same  Spirit, 
through  which  Christ  gave  His  life  for  the  world, 
to  revive  His  Church  to  win  the  world  for  God. 

Lack  of  prayer  is  another  symptom  of  this  sickly 
state.  A  worldly  spirit  in  the  Christian  hinders 
his  praying  much.  He  looks  at  things  in  the  light 
of  the  world.  He  is  not  at  home  in  the  heavenly 
places.  He  does  not  realise  the  dark  power  of  sin 
in  those  around  him,  or  the  urgent  need  of  a  direct 
Divine  interposition.  He  has.  little  faith  in  the 
efficacy  of  prayer,  in  the  need  of  much  and  unceas 
ing  prayer,  in  the  power  there  is  in  him  to  pray  in 
Christ's  name  and  prevail.  True  beneficence,  the 
giving  from  devotion  to  Christ  and  for  Him,  and 
true  prayer,  the  asking  and  counting  upon  Him  to 
bless  the  gift  and  bestow  His  Spirit  in  His  work, 
are  the  proof  that  the  worldly  spirit  is  being  over 
come,  and  that  the  soul  is  being  restored  to  spiritual 
health.  IF  the  Church  is  to  be  what  she  ought  to 
be,  and  to  do  what  her  Lord  asks  her  to  do  for  the 
evangelisation  of  the  world,  this  sickness  and  failure 
must  be  acknowledged,  and  deliverance  sought. 


32          THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

4.  These  IFS  urge  us  to  ask  how  such  deliver 
ance  can  be  found.  What  is  to  be  the  cure  of  this 
diseased  state  ?  A  sickly  man  cannot  do  a  healthy 
man's  work.  To  help  carry  Christ's  cross  to  the 
world  needs  the  vigour  of  full  spiritual  health. 
How  is  this  to  be  found  ? 

In  all  return  to  God  for  true  service  and  new 
blessing  the  first  step  is  always — Confession.  The 
leaders  of  the  Church's  mission  work,  who  ought  to 
know  the  tremendous  needs  of  the  world,  who 
understand  the  meaning  and  urgency  of  our  Lord's 
command,  who  feel  the  utterly  inadequate  provision 
the  Church  is  making  for  His  work — on  them  rests 
the  solemn  duty  of  lifting  up  their  voice  and 
making  God's  people  know  their  sin.  It  is  possible 
that  we  are  all  so  c  ccupied  with  our  special  fields  of 
labour,  and  the  thought  of  how  much  is  being  done, 
that  the  extent  and  guilt  of  what  is  not  being  done 
is  comparatively  lost  sight  of.  The  latest  statistics 
tell  us  that,  at  the  close  of  the  century,  the  total  of 
communicants  from  among  the  heathen  as  the  fruit 
of  mission  work  is  1,300,000,  and  of  the  "native 
Christian  community,  or  the  number  of  souls  in 
nominal  adherence  to  Christianity  and  within 
direct  touch  of  gospel  agencies,"  is  4,400,000  (Dr. 
Dennis  in  Eep.  E.  M.  C.  vol.  ii.  p.  423).  With  a 
thousand  million  of  heathen  and  Mohammedans,  we 
are  thus  in  real  contact  with  less  than  five  millions 


A  TEST  OF  THE  STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH    33 

as  against  995  millions  still  unreached.  Until 
Christians  are  led  to  listen,  and  think,  and  pray  for 
opened  eyes  to  look  upon  these  fields,  "  white  unto 
the  harvest,"  intrusted  to  them,  they  never  will 
recognise  the  greatness  of  the  work,  their  own 
unfitness,  or  the  urgent  need  of  waiting  for  a 
Divine  power  to  fit  them  for  the  task. 

As  we  take  in  this,  we  shall  feel  and  confess  how 
little  the  Church  has  done,  and  the  guilt  and  shame 
resting  on  the  body  of  Christ  will  become  the  Lord's 
burden  on  us.  We  rejoice  and  give  thanks  for  the 
15,460  foreign  missionaries  who  are  now  in  the  field 
labouring  among  the  four  million  of  the  native  Chris 
tian  community.  But  what  efforts  are  being  made 
to  reach  the  one  thousand  million  ?  They  are  dying 
at  the  rate  of  over  thirty  million  a  year — within 
thirty  years  they  will  have  passed  away  into  the 
darkness.  What  prospect  is  there  that  they  will  be 
speedily  reached  ?  Every  society  complains  of  lack 
of  funds.  We  are  told  that  of  Church  members 
one-third  neither  gives  nor  cares  for  the  kingdom ; 
that  another  third  gives  and  does  and  cares  but 
little,  and  that  not  from  the  right  motive;  and 
that  even  of  the  remaining  third — it  is  really 
less  than  a  third — only  a  small  proportion  are 
doing  their  very  utmost,  and  giving  and  praying 
with  their  whole  heart.  The  disobedience  of  the 
Church  in  the  great  majority  of  her  members, 
3 


34          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

her  neglect  of  her  Lord's  work,  her  refusal  to 
listen  to  the  appeals  to  come  to  His  help — is  not 
this  a  sin  and  a  guilt  greater  than  we  think  ?  If 
the  Church  is  really  to  waken  up  out  of  her  sleep, 
is  not  the  one  thing  needed,  that  those  to  whom 
God  has  given  the  charge  of  His  mission  work  in  the 
world,  in  their  pleadings  lay  before  the  people  the 
utter  disproportion  between  what  is  being  done  and 
what  ought  to  be  and  can  be  done,  and  press  home 
the  guilt  and  the  shame  of  it  until  an  increasing 
number  bow  before  God  in  confession  and  humiliation, 
and  in  a  cry  for  pardon  and  mercy  as  earnest  as 
when  they  sought  their  own  salvation  ? 

With  the  appeal  to  men  there  must  be  the  appeal 
to  God.  The  work  is  His :  He  cares  for  it.  The 
power  is  His :  He  gives  it.  The  Church  is  His : 
He  waits  to  use  it.  The  world  is  His :  He  loves  it. 
He  can  make  His  people  willing  in  the  day  of  His 
power.  He  will  hear  the  cries  of  His  servants  who 
give  Him  no  rest.  He  delights  to  prove  His  faith 
fulness  in  fulfilling  His  promises.  Things  cannot  go 
on  as  they  are,  if  the  world  is  really  to  be  evangelised 
in  this  generation.  More  than  five  years  are  already 
past  since  the  watchword  was  publicly  sounded:  in 
this  generation  every  creature  must  have  the  gospel 
offered  to  him.  Unless  there  come  over  the  Church 
a  great  change,  and  she  give  herself  to  the  work 
in  a  way  she  has  not  yet  done,  the  work  cannot 


A   TEST   OF   THE   STATE   OF   THE   CHURCH         35 

be  accomplished.  But  it  can,  if  God's  people  will 
fall  upon  their  face  before  Him  to  confess  their  sin 
and  the  sin  of  their  brethren.  Let  them  ask  God 
to  reveal  the  cause  of  all  the  failure,  and  take  the 
message  to  His  Church.  Let  them  preach  the  great 
truth,  that  as  the  winning  of  the  world  to  God  is 
the  supreme,  the  one,  end  of  the  Church's  existence, 
so  the  love  of  souls,  the  surrender  of  the  whole  life 
to  Christ,  for  His  use  in  the  winning  of  souls,  is  the 
duty,  is  the  only  healthy  life,  for  every  believer. 
There  are  tens  of  thousands  of  God's  children  who 
are  not  unwilling,  yea,  rather,  who  are  secretly  long 
ing,  to  serve  their  Lord,  but  know  not  how,  or  have 
not  the  courage  to  do  so. 

The  time  will  then  come  when  we  shall  no  longer 
have  to  say,  IF  the  Church  were  what  she  ought 
to  be,  but  shall  find  our  joy  and  strength  in  guid 
ing  a  prepared  people  in  that  arduous  but  blessed 
path  of  bearing  Christ's  cross  to  every  man  on  God's 
earth,  and  wrestling  with  the  hosts  of  hell  to  make 
way  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ  the  conqueror. 


CHAPTEE    III 

JSorabian  Cfjurci) 
ant  iLofa  to  ffifjrfet 


T  ET  me  quote  again  the  words  of  Mr.  Mott  — 

"^  "  The  most  striking  example  of  achievement  on  the 
home  field,  in  the  interest  of  foreign  missions,  is  that  of 
the  Moravians.  They  have  done  more,  in  proportion  to 
their  ability,  than  any  other  body  of  Christians.  IF 
members  of  Protestant  Churches  in  Great  Britain  and 
America  gave  in  like  proportion,  then  missionary  contri 
butions  would  aggregate  over  £12,000,000,  or  a  fourfold 
increase.  And  If  they  went  out  as  missionaries  in 
corresponding  numbers,  we  would  have  a  force  of  nearly 
400,000  foreign  workers,  which  is  vastly  more  than  the 
number  of  missionaries  estimated  as  necessary  to  achieve 
the  evangelisation  of  the  world.  The  question  is,  What 
is  there  in  connection  with  the  work  which  is  not 
reproducible  ?  " 

In  the  Conference,  the  Secretary  of  the  Board 
of  Missions  of  the  Moravian  Church  in  the  United 
States,  Kev.  P.  de  Schweinitz,  summed  up  the  work 
of  the  Church  in  these  words  — 

"  Even  to-day  the  Moravians  have  for  every  fifty-eight 

34* 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  37 

communicants  in  the  home  cnurches  a  missionary  in  the 
foreign  field,  and  for  every  member  in  the  home  churches 
they  have  more  than  two  members  in  the  congregation 
gathered  from  among  the  heathen.  .  .  .  Now,  what  was 
the  incentive  for  foreign  missionary  work  which  has 
produced  such  results?  While  acknowledging  the  su 
preme  authority  of  the  great  commission,  the  Moravian 
Brethren  have  ever  emphasised  as  their  chief  incentive 
the  inspiring  truth  drawn  from  Isaiah  liii.  10-12  :  making 
our  Lord's  suffering  the  spur  to  all  their  activity.  From 
that  prophecy  they  drew  their  missionary  battle-cry  :  '  To 
win  for  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  the  reward  of  His 
sufferings.'  We  feel  that  we  must  compensate  Him  in  some 
way  for  the  awful  sufferings  which  He  endured  in  working 
out  our  salvation.  The  only  way  we  can  reward  Him  is  by 
bringing  souls  to  Him.  When  we  bring  Him  souls,  that 
is  compensation  for  the  travail  of  His  soul.  In  no  other 
way  can  we  so  effectively  bring  the  suffering  Saviour  the 
reward  of  His  passion  as  by  missionary  labour,  whether 
we  go  ourselves  or  enable  others  to  go.  Get  this  burning 
thought  of  '  personal  love  for  the  Saviour  who  redeemed 
me '  into  the  hearts  of  all  Christians,  and  you  have  the 
most  powerful  incentive  that  can  be  had  for  missionary 
effort.  Oh,  if  we  could  make  this  missionary  problem 
a  personal  one !  if  we  could  fill  the  hearts  of  the  people 
with  a  personal  love  for  this  Saviour  who  died  for 
them,  the  indifference  of  Christendom  would  disappear, 
and  the  kingdom  of  Christ  would  appear." 

If  the  appeal  to  the  example  of  the  Moravian 
Brethren  is  to  exercise  any  influence,  and  the  Church 
to  be  roused  to  follow  in  their  footsteps,  we  must 
find  out  what  the  principles  were  that  animated 


38          THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

them,  whence  the  power  that  enabled  them  to  do 
so  much,  and,  specially,  what  the  way  in  which  God 
fitted  them  for  doing  that  work.  We  cannot  have 
like  effects  without  like  causes.  As  the  conditions 
of  their  success  are  discovered,  the  cause  of  failure  in 
the  Church  of  to-day,  and  the  path  to  restoration, 
can  be  found.  A  short  summary  of  the  history 
of  the  Moravian  Church  will  be  found  full  of 
instruction.1 

Its  Origin. — Moravia  and  Bohemia  are  two  pro 
vinces  in  the  north-west  of  the  Austrian  Empire, 
bordering  on  Saxony.  In  the  seventh  and  eighth 
centuries  they  received  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel 
first  from  the  Greek,  later  from  the  Roman  Church. 
As  the  former  allowed  the  preaching  in  the  native 
tongue,  and  gave  them  the  Bible  in  their  own 
language,  there  arose  divisions  which  were  the  cause 
of  unceasing  conflict.  Gradually  the  Eoman  Church 
got  the  upper  hand,  and  from  the  beginning  of  the 
fifteenth  century,  when  John  Huss  was  burnt  for 
preaching  the  gospel  (1415),  the  country  was  the 
scene  of  terrible  persecutions.  In  course  of  time 
those  who  remained  faithful  to  the  gospel  gathered 
together  in  a  village  in  the  north-east  of  Bohemia, 
in  the  valley  of  Kunwald,  where  they  were  allowed 

1  The  full  history  of  the  ancient  Church  of  the  Brethren  (1400- 
1700)  will  be  found  in  "The  History  of  the  Church  known  as  the 
Unitas  Fratrum,  founded  by  the  Followers  of  John  Huss,"  by  E. 
de  Schweinitz,  Bishop.  Bethlehem,  Pa. 


THE   MORAVIAN    CHURCH  39 

for  a  time  to  live  in  comparative  peace.  Here,  in 
1457,  they  were  known  as  "The  Brethren  of  the 
Law  of  Christ."  When  their  Church  was  constituted, 
they  assumed  the  name  of  "  The  United  Brethren." 
Its  Discipline. — One  of  the  brightest  jewels  of 
the  United  Church  was  its  discipline.  It  was  not 
their  doctrine,  but  their  life ;  not  their  theory,  but 
their  practice,  that  gave  them  such  power.  When 
the  Eeformers  became  acquainted  with  them  later, 
Bucer  wrote — 

"You  alone,  in  all  the  world,  combine  a  wholesome 
discipline  with  a  pure  faith.  When  we  compare  our 
Church  with  yours,  we  must  be  ashamed.  God  preserve 
to  you  that  which  He  has  given  you." 

Calvin  wrote — 

"  I  congratulate  your  churches  that  the  Lord,  in  addi 
tion  to  pure  doctrine,  has  given  them  so  many  excellent 
gifts,  and  that  they  maintain  such  good  morals,  order, 
and  discipline.  We  have  long  since  recognised  the  value 
of  such  a  system,  but  cannot  in  any  way  attain  to  it." 

And  Luther  said — 

"Tell  the  brethren  that  they  shall  hold  fast  that 
which  God  has  given  them,  and  not  relinquish  their 
constitution  and  discipline." 

And  what  was  their  discipline  ?  "  In  every 
detail  of  their  lives — in  business,  in  pleasure,  in 
Christian  service,  in  civil  duties — they  took  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  as  a  lamp  to  their  feet.'' 


40          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

They  counted  the  service  of  God  the  one  thing 
to  live  for,  and  everything  was  made  subservient 
to  this.  Their  ministers  and  elders  were  to  keep 
watch  over  the  flock,  to  see  that  all  were  living 
to  the  glory  of  God.  All  were  to  be  one  brother 
hood,  helping  and  encouraging  one  another  in  a 
quiet  and  godly  life. 

Its  Sufferings. — During  the  following  half-cen 
tury  they  lived  here  in  comparative  peace,  though 
elsewhere  persecution  continued.  But  with  the 
new  century  the  Pope  and  the  King  combined 
against  them,  and  in  1515,  just  as  the  Keformation 
was  dawning  in  Germany,  it  almost  looked  as  if 
they  would  be  extinguished.  With  intervals  of 
toleration,  the  troubles  ever  continued,  until  in 
1548  a  Eoyal  Edict  drove  thousands  to  Poland, 
where  they  established  a  large  and  prosperous 
Church.  With  a  new  King  in  1556  peace  re 
turned,  and  the  Brethren's  Church  was  again  firmly 
established,  and  divided  into  the  three  provinces 
of  Bohemia,  Moravia,  and  Poland.  By  the  end 
of  the  century  the  Church  had  given  a  Bible  to  the 
people,  and  had  fostered  education  to  such  a  degree 
that  the  Bohemian  schools  had  a  name  in  Europe, 
and  the  people  were  accounted  the  best  educated 
people  in  the  world.  In  1609  they  obtained  the 
Bohemian  Charter,  for  the  first  time  giving  full 
religious  liberty,  and  in  1616  published  their 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  41 

Order  of  Discipline,   with   the   full  account  of  the 
institution  of  the  Church. 

Its  Suppression. — With  the  accession  of  Fred 
erick  II.  everything  suddenly  changed.  The  Day  of 
Blood  at  Prague,  in  1620,  witnessed  the  execution 
of  27  of  the  leading  nobles.  During  the  six  years 
that  followed,  Bohemia  was  a  field  of  blood,  and 
36,000  families  left  the  country.  The  population 
dwindled  from  3,000,000  to  1,000,000.  The 
Church  of  the  Brethren  was  broken  up  and  scat 
tered.  During  the  whole  century  those  who  stayed 
in  the  country  had  to  worship  God  in  secret,  and 
formed  what  was  called  "  The  Hidden  Seed."  When 
we  take  up  the  thread  again,  in  1722,  just  a 
hundred  years  will  have  elapsed,  during  which 
God  only  knows  what  was  suffered.  And  yet 
even  during  that  period  hope  was  not  altogether 
dead.  Comenius,  the  last  bishop  of  the  Church  in 
Moravia,  wrote  in  1660 — 

"Experience  clearly  teaches  that  particular  Churches 
are  sometimes  destroyed  by  the  hand  of  God  stretched 
out  in  wrath ;  yet  does  this  come  to  pass  in  such  a  way 
that  other  Churches  are  either  planted  in  their  stead, 
or  the  same  Churches  rise  in  other  places.  Whether 
God  will  deem  her  worthy  to  be  revived  in  her  native 
land,  or  let  her  die  there,  and  resuscitate  her  elsewhere, 
we  know  not.  .  .  .  According  to  His  own  promise,  the 
gospel  will  be  brought,  by  those  Christians  who  have 
been  justly  chastened,  to  the  remaining  peoples  of  the 


42          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

earth ;  and  thus,  as  of  old,  our  fall  will  be  the  riches  of 
the  world." 

In  1707  similar  words  were  spoken  by  George 
Jaeschke,  one  of  the  few  witnesses  to  the  truth 
at  that  time.  He  was  the  father  of  Michael 
Jaeschke,  and  grandfather  of  Augustin  and  Jakob 
Keisser,  who  with  their  wives  and  children  formed 
the  first  party  led  out  to  Herrnhut.  On  his 
deathbed,  at  the  age  of  eighty-three,  he  spoke — 

"  It  may  seem  as  though  the  final  end  of  tho  Brethren's 
Church  had  come.  But,  my  beloved  children,  you  will 
pee  a  great  deliverance.  The  remnant  will  be  saved. 
I  do  not  know  whether  this  deliverance  will  come  to 
pass  here  in  Moravia,  or  whether  you  will  have  to  go 
out  of  Babylon;  but  I  do  know  it  will  transpire  not 
very  long  hence.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  an  exodus 
will  take  place,  and  that  a  refuge  will  be  offered  on  a 
spot  where  you  will  be  able,  without  fear,  to  serve  the 
Lord  according  to  His  holy  word." 

A  Place  of  Refuge.1 — The  Lord  had  provided 
for  His  people  a  place  of  refuge,  where  the  Church 
of  the  Brethren  would  be  renewed.  It  was  in 
1722  that  Christian  David  received  from  Count 
Zinzendorf  permission  to  bring  refugees  from  Mor 
avia  to  his  estate  in  Saxony.  Christian  David 
had  been  born  a  Eoman  Catholic,  but  could  find 
no  rest  in  his  Church.  As  a  soldier  in  Saxony 

1  See  A  Short  History  of  the  Moravian  Church.    By  J.  E.  Hutton. 
Moravian  Publishing  Office. 


THE   MORAVIAN    CHUHCH  43 

he  found  Christ  from  the  teaching  of  a  godly 
Lutheran  pastor.  He  returned  to  Moravia  to 
preach  the  Saviour  he  had  found,  and  spoke  with 
such  power  that  an  awakening  followed.  Perse 
cution  was  immediately  roused,  and  the  preacher 
went  to  find  a  refuge  for  the  persecuted.  When 
he  had  obtained  Zinzendorf  s  permission,  he  returned 
and  led  out  his  first  band  of  ten,  with  whom  he 
reached  Berthelsdorf  in  June  1722.  Time  after 
time  this  devoted  servant  of  the  Lord  went  back 
to  preach  the  gospel,  and  to  lead  out  those  who 
were  willing  to  forsake  all.  In  this  way  it  was 
not  long  before  some  200  had  gathered,  many  of 
them  of  what  had  been  called  "  the  Hidden  Seed," 
the  true  descendants  of  the  old  Brethren.  The 
spot  allotted  to  them  had  been  called  Hutberg 
— the  Watch  Hill.  They  called  their  new  settle 
ment  Herrnhut — the  Lord's  Watch.  They  took 
the  word  in  its  double  meaning.  The  Watch  of 
the  Lord  over  them ;  the  Watch  of  the  Lord  to  be 
kept  by  them  in  prayer  and  waiting  for  His  leading, 
was  to  be  their  safety. 

The  New  Leader. — Such  was  the  material  God 
had  gathered  at  Herrnhut  to  build  a  house  for 
Himself.  Let  us  turn  for  a  moment  to  the  man 
whom  He  had  prepared,  as  a  wise  master-builder, 
to  superintend  the  work.  Count  Zinzendorf  was 
born,  May  1700,  of  godly  parents.  His  father 


44          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

had  on  his  dying  bed  taken  the  child,  then  only 
six  weeks  old,  in  his  arms,  and  consecrated  him 
to  the  service  of  Christ.  "Already  in  my  child 
hood,"  wrote  Zinzendorf,  "  I  loved  the  Saviour,  and 
had  abundant  intercourse  with  Him.  In  my  fourth 
year  I  began  to  seek  God  earnestly,  and  determined 
to  become  a  true  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  At 
Franke's  school  at  Halle,  at  the  age  of  twelve, 
he  often  met  missionaries,  and  his  heart  was  touched 
with  the  thought  of  work  for  Christ  among  the 
neathen.  Among  the  boys  at  school  he  founded 
the  "Order  of  the  Mustard  Seed."  They  bound 
themselves :  1,  to  be  kind  to  all  men ;  2,  to  seek 
their  welfare ;  3,  to  seek  to  lead  them  to  God 
and  to  Christ.  As  an  emblem  they  had  a  small 
shield,  with  an  Ecce  Homo,  and  the  motto,  "His 
wounds  our  healing."  Each  member  wore  a 
ring,  on  which  was  inscribed,  "  No  man  liveth 
unto  himself."  Before  leaving  Halle  he  entered 
with  an  intimate  friend  into  a  covenant  for 
the  conversion  of  the  heathen,  especially  such 
as  would  not  be  cared  for  by  others.  From 
Halle  he  went  to  Wittenberg,  where  he  held 
prayer-meetings  for  the  other  students,  and  often 
spent  whole  nights  in  prayer  and  study  of  the 
Bible. 

It   was    about    this    time    that    he    visited    the 
picture  gallery  in  Diisseldorf.     There  he  saw  the 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  45 

Ecce  Homo  of  Steinberg,  with  the  words  under 
neath — 

"All  this  I  did  for  thee, 
What  hast  thou  done  lor  Me?" 

His  heart  was  touched.  He  felt  as  if  he  could  not 
answer  the  question.  He  turned  away  more  deter 
mined  than  ever  to  spend  his  life  in  the  service  of 
his  Lord.  The  vision  of  that  Face  never  left  him. 
Christ's  love  became  the  constraining  power  of  his 
life.  "  I  have,"  he  exclaimed,  "  but  one  passion — 
'tis  He,  and  He  only."  It  was  His  dying  love  that 
fitted  Christ  for  the  work  God  had  given  Him  as 
the  Saviour  of  men.  It  was  the  dying  love  of  Christ 
mastering  his  life  that  fitted  Zinzendorf  for  the 
work  he  had  to  do. 

The  Revival  of  the  Church. — When  Zinzendorf 
settled  on  his  estate,  he  devoted  himself  to  the 
spiritual  welfare  of  his  tenants.  With  three  like- 
minded  friends  he  formed  the  "  League  of  the  Four 
Brethren."  The  object  was  to  proclaim  to  the 
world  the  "universal  religion  of  the  Saviour  and 
His  family  of  disciples,  the  heart-religion  in  which 
the  Saviour  is  the  central  point."  He  joined  the 
pastor  of  the  congregation  in  preaching,  in  meet 
ings  for  prayer  and  singing.  He  lived  for  Christ 
and  the  souls  He  had  died  to  save. 

In  offering  the  Moravian  exiles  a  refuge  on  his 
estate,  he  had  simply  thought  of  giving  them  a 


46         THE   KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

home,  in  which,  as  his  tenants,  they  should  earn 
their  livelihood  and  be  free  in  the  exercise  of  their 
religion.  When  it  was  known  that  Herrnhut  was 
an  asylum  for  the  persecuted,  all  sorts  of  religious 
refugees  came  to  seek  a  home  there.  The  spirit 
of  discord  speedily  entered,  and  there  was  danger 
of  its  becoming  the  seat  of  sectarianism  and 
fanaticism.  Zinzendorf  felt  that  the  time  was 
come  for  him  to  intervene.  He  had  faith  in  the 
uprightness  and  earnestness  of  the  Moravian 
settlers.  He  gave  himself  to  personal  loving  deal 
ing  with  the  leaders. 

Many  of  them  had  felt  deeply  the  sin  and  pain 
of  division,  and  had  been  praying  that,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  the  spirit  of  true  fellowship  might 
be  restored.  With  many  tears  and  prayers,  in  the 
love  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Count 
pleaded  with  those  who  had  erred.  There  was 
one  point  on  which  the  Moravian  Brethren  (they 
were  more  than  200  out  of  the  300)  would  not 
give  way.  They  were  unwilling  to  be  taken  up  in 
the  Lutheran  Church,  but  insisted  on  having  the 
discipline  of  the  old  Moravian  Church  maintained. 
The  Count  was  afraid  that  this  might  give  rise  to 
prejudice  and  misapprehension  in  the  Church 
around ;  but  he  felt  that  their  claim  was  just, 
and  resolved  at  any  risk  to  yield  to  them.  The 
principles  and  discipline  of  the  old  Church  were  to 


THE   MORAVIAN   CHURCH  47 

be  restored.  Zinzendorf  drew  up  the  Statutes, 
Injunctions,  and  Prohibitions,  according  to  which 
they  were  to  live. 

On  12th  May  1727  (just  four  years  after  the 
first  arrivals),  a  memorable  day  in  the  history  of 
the  Brethren,  he  called  them  all  together  and  read 
them  the  "  Statutes "  that  had  been  agreed  on. 
There  was  to  be  no  more  discord.  Brotherly  love 
and  unity  in  Christ  were  to  be  the  golden  chains 
that  bound  all  together.  All  the  members  shook 
hands  and  pledged  themselves  to  obey  the  Statutes. 
That  day  was  the  beginning  of  new  life  in 
Herrnhut. 

The  diary  says — 

"  This  day  the  Count  made  a  covenant  with  the  Lord. 
The  Brethren  all  promised,  one  by  one,  that  they  would 
be  the  Saviour's  true  followers.  Self-will,  self-love, 
disobedience — they  bade  these  farewell.  They  would 
seek  to  be  poor  in  spirit ;  no  one  was  to  seek  his  own 
profit  before  that  of  others;  everyone  would  give  him 
self  to  be  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  By  the  mighty 
working  of  God's  grace  all  were  not  only  convinced,  but, 
as  it  were,  carried  along  and  mastered." 

On  the  12th  of  May  1748  the  Count  wrote — 

"To-day,  twenty-one  years  ago,  the  fate  of  Herrnhut 
hung  in  the  balance,  whether  it  was  to  become  a  sect, 
or  to  take  its  place  in  the  Church  of  our  Saviour.  The 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  after  an  address  of  three  or 
four  hours,  decided  for  the  latter.  The  foundation 


48          THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

principle  was  there  laid  down,  that  we  were  to  lay  aside 
the  thought  of  being  Reformers,  and  to  look  to  ourselves. 
What  the  Saviour  did  after  that  up  to  the  winter  cannot 
be  expressed.  The  whole  place  was  indeed  a  veritable 
dwelling  of  God  with  men,  and  on  to  13th  August  it 
passed  into  continual  praise.  It  then  quieted  down,  and 
entered  the  Sabbath  rest." 

The  12th  of  May  has  been  called  the  birthday 
of  what  is  henceforth  to  be  known  as  The  Renewed 
Church;  the  13th  of  August  was  its  baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  After  the  Statutes  had  been 
adopted,  and  all  had  bound  themselves  to  a  life  of 
obedience  and  love,  the  spirit  of  fellowship  and 
prayer  was  greatly  increased.  Misunderstandings, 
prejudices,  secret  estrangements,  were  confessed  and 
put  away.  Prayer  was  often  in  such  power  that 
those  who  had  only  given  external  adhesion  were 
convicted,  and  either  changed  or  inwardly  com 
pelled  to  leave.  The  Count  had  had  to  leave  home 
for  a  time,  and  on  his  return  brought  with  him, 
4th  August,  a  copy  that  he  had  found  of  the  History 
of  the  Moravian  Brethren,  giving  the  full  account 
of  the  ancient  discipline  and  order.  This  caused 
great  joy.  It  was  taken  as  a  token  that  the  God 
of  their  fathers  was  with  them.  As  one  of  them 
wrote :  "  Under  the  cloud  of  our  fathers  we  were 
baptized  with  their  spirit ;  signs  and  wonders  were 
seen  among  us,  and  there  was  great  grace  on  the 
whole  neighbourhood."  The  whole  next  night  was 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHUKCH  49 

spent  by  the  Count  and  the  Brethren  in  prayer, 
with  a  great  gathering  in  the  hall  at  midnight. 
The  following  days  all  were  conscious  in  the 
singing-meetings  of  a  strange  overwhelming  power. 
On  Sunday,  10th,  Pastor  Eothe  was  leading  the 
afternoon  meeting  at  Herrnhut,  when  he  was 
overpowered  and  fell  on  his  face  before  God.  The 
whole  congregation  bowed  under  the  sense  of  God's 
presence,  and  continued  in  prayer  till  midnight. 
He  invited  the  congregation  to  the  Holy  Supper 
on  the  next  Wednesday,  the  13th. 

As  it  was  the  first  communion  since  the  new 
fellowship,  it  was  resolved  to  be  specially  strict 
with  it,  and  to  make  use  of  it  "  to  lead  the  souls 
deeper  into  the  death  of  Christ,  into  which  they 
had  been  baptized."  The  leaders  visited  every 
member,  seeking  in  great  love  to  lead  them  to 
true  heart-searching.  In  the  evening  of  Tuesday, 
at  the  preparation  service,  several  passed  from 
death  to  life,  and  the  whole  community  was  deeply 
touched. 

"  On  the  Wednesday  morning  all  went  to  Berthelsdorf. 
On  the  way  thither,  any  who  had  felt  estranged  from 
each  other  afresh  bound  themselves  together.  During 
the  singing  of  the  first  hymn  a  wicked  man  was  power 
fully  convicted.  The  presentation  of  the  new  communi 
cants  touched  every  heart,  and  when  the  hymn  was  sung 
it  could  hardly  be  recognised  whether  there  was  more 
singing  or  weeping.  Several  brethren  prayed,  specially 
4 


50          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

pleading  that,  as  exiles  out  of  the  house  of  bondage,  they 
knew  not  what  to  do,  that  they  desired  to  be  kept  free 
from  separation  and  sectarianism,  and  besought  the  Lord 
to  reveal  to  them  the  true  nature  of  His  Church,  so  that 
they  might  walk  unspotted  before  Him,  might  not  abide 
alone  but  be  made  fruitful.  We  asked  that  we  might  do 
nothing  contrary  to  the  oath  of  loyalty  we  had  taken  to 
Him,  nor  in  the  very  least  sin  against  His  law  of  love. 
We  asked  that  He  would  keep  us  in  the  saving  power  of 
His  grace,  and  not  allow  a  single  soul  to  be  drawn  away 
to  itself  and  its  own  merits  from  that  Blood-and-Cross 
Theology,  on  which  our  salvation  depends.  We  celebrated 
the  Lord's  Supper  with  hearts  at  once  bowed  down  and 
lifted  up.  We  went  home,  each  of  us  in  great  measure 
lifted  up  beyond  himself,  spending  this  and  the  following 
days  in  great  quiet  and  peace,  and  learning  to  love." 

Among  those  present  in  the  church  when  the 
communion  was  held  were  a  number  of  children. 
One  writes :  "  I  cannot  attribute  the  great  revival 
among  the  children  to  anything  else  but  that 
wonderful  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the 
communion  assembly.  The  Spirit  breathed  in  power 
on  old  and  young.  Everywhere  they  were  heard, 
sometimes  at  night  in  the  field,  beseeching  the 
Saviour  to  pardon  their  sins  and  make  them  His 
own.  The  Spirit  of  grace  had  indeed  been  poured 
out." 

The  Brethren  frequently  went  out  into  the 
neighbourhood  to  hold  fellowship  with  other 
Christians,  and  make  Christ  known  to  all  who 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  51 

would  come.  When  one  of  them  at  this  time  was 
cast  into  prison  for  doing  so,  it  caused  great  joy 
that  they  were  found  worthy  to  suffer  for  His  sake. 
The  Prayer  Watch. — On  the  22nd  August  the 
diary  says — 

"To-day  we  considered  how  needful  it  is  that  our 
Church,  which  is  as  yet  hut  in  its  infancy,  and  has  in 
Satan  such  a  mighty  enemy,  should  guard  itself  against 
one  who  never  slumbers  day  nor  night,  and  have  an 
unceasing  holy  watch  kept  against  him.  We  resolved, 
therefore,  to  light  a  freewill  offering  of  intercession  which 
should  hum  night  and  day,  leaving  the  matter  for  the 
present  to  God's  working  in  the  hearts  of  the  Brethren. 
By  the  26th  the  plan  had  ripened,  and  twenty-four 
Brethren  and  twenty-four  sisters  engaged  each  to  spend  an 
hour,  as  fixed  for  them  by  lot,  in  their  own  room,  to  bring 
before  God  all  the  needs  and  interests  of  those  around 
them.  The  number  was  soon  increased.  But,  as  in 
Herrnhut,  we  wished  to  leave  everything  to  free  grace 
and  have  nothing  forced,  we  agreed  that  when  anyone, 
from  poverty  of  spirit  or  special  business,  could  not  spend 
the  whole  hour  in  prayer,  he  might  instead  praise  God  in 
spiritual  songs,  and  so  bring  the  sacrifice  of  praise  or  of 
prayer  for  himself  and  all  saints.  These  watchers  unto 
prayer  met  once  a  week,  when  all  news  that  had  been 
received  from  far  or  near  concerning  the  need  of  persons, 
congregations,  or  nations  was  communicated,  to  stir  them 
to  praise  for  answers  given,  or  lead  to  more  hearty  and 
definite  prayer. 

"  In  one  of  the  villages  around  we  heard  of  those  who 
wished  to  come  and  share  in  the  revival.  We  instructed 
these  in  our  discipline  in  love  and  humility." 


52          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

Missions.  —  In  the  course  of  the  following 
months  some  of  the  Brethren  were  continually 
going  to  places  near  and  more  distant,  preaching 
the  love  of  Christ ;  and  their  thoughts  were  con 
tinually  occupied  with  the  object  for  which  God 
had  so  blessed  them.  The  Count  stood  in  com 
munication  with  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  did  not 
fail  to  communicate  what  he  heard.  At  a  meeting  on 
10th  February  1728  "he  spoke  specially  of  distant 
lands — Turkey,  Morocco,  and  Greenland.  Of  Green 
land  he  said  that  to  all  human  appearances  it  looks 
impossible  to  get  an  entrance ;  but  he  believed 
that  the  Lord  would  give  our  brethren  grace  and 
power  to  visit  these  countries.  It  was  a  day  of  the 
Spirit's  breathing  upon  us." 

The  following  four  years  were  times  of  continual 
revival.  The  careful  watch  kept  by  the  elders  and 
superintendents,  the  faithful  dealing  with  individual 
souls  according  to  personal  needs,  the  jealous  main 
tenance  of  the  spirit  of  brotherly  love,  the  continual 
watching  unto  prayer,  the  going  forth  of  brethren 
into  the  neighbouring  and  more  distant  regions  with 
the  reports  brought  them,  made  the  assemblies  of 
the  Brethren  times  of  great  joy  and  blessing.  They 
were  the  time  of  preparation  for  the  mission  work 
that  was  now  to  begin. 

It  came  in  this  way.  In  1731  the  Count 
Zinzendorf  had  gone  to  Copenhagen  to  be  present  at 


THE   MORAVIAN    CHURCH  53 

the  crowning  of  the  King  of  Denmark.  One  of  the 
nobles  there  had  a  slave  from  the  West  Indies  in 
his  service  named  Anton.  From  him  Zinzendorf 
heard  of  the  state  of  the  slaves  in  the  West  Indies, 
specially  St.  Thomas,  a  Danish  possession.  He 
also  met  two  Greenland  converts  of  the  Danish 
missionary  Egede.  When  he  returned,  the  account 
he  gave  of  his  meeting  these  men  from  heathen 
lands  called  forth  the  deepest  interest.  Two  of 
the  Brethren  had  their  hearts  touched ;  and  in  the 
evening,  as  the  singing  bands  were  passing  the 
home,  and  the  Count  said  to  a  friend  that  he 
believed  that  messengers  to  West  Indies  and  Green 
land  would  be  found  among  these  brethren,  they 
felt  encouraged  to  offer  themselves.  When  this 
became  known,  two  others  came  forward  for  Green 
land.  A  visit  from  Anton,  the  slave,  deepened  the 
impression ;  and  the  account  of  what  the  slaves 
suffered,  which  they  also  might  have  to  suffer,  only 
made  the  fire  burn  more  strongly.  If  it  was  difficult 
to  find  access  to  the  plantations  to  teach  the  slaves, 
they  were  ready  to  sell  themselves  as  slaves  so  as  to 
reach  to  the  poor  heathen  souls. 

But  it  was  not  till  a  year  later,  August  1732,  that 
the  two  first  missionaries  left.  The  instructions  with 
which  they  were  sent  out  were  all  comprised  in  the 
one  sentence — to  see  and  be  led  of  the  Spirit  in  all 
things.  They  set  off  on  foot,  with  nothing  but  a 


54          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

few  shillings  in  their  purse,  but  strong  in  the  faith 
of  God  and  His  care.  The  next  year,  two  left  for 
Greenland.  In  1734,  eighteen  left  again  for  Santa 
Cruz,  and  in  the  following  year  twelve  more,  to 
attempt,  by  colonisation  and  industrial  mission,  to 
help  the  negroes.  And  though  this  experiment  cost 
many  precious  lives,  and  was  not  a  success,  the 
Brethren  did  not  lose  courage,  but,  as  the  tidings  of 
death  came,  ever  sang  the  psalm  of  sowing  with 
tears,  and  out  of  the  death  of  the  seed  reaping  the 
abundant  harvest. 

I  could  wish  to  give  a  short  account  of  the 
wonderful  blessing  that  marked  their  work  in  the 
West  Indies,  but  space  forbids.  I  must  just  note 
one  more  point  in  their  history.  In  1741  an  event 
took  place  that  completed  the  organisation  of  the 
Church  of  the  Brethren,  and  set  its  seal  to  that 
which  is  their  chief  characteristic — devotion  to  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Leonhard  Dober  had  for  some  years 
been  the  chief  elder  (the  title  is  really  the  Eldest) 
of  the  Church.  He  and  others  felt  that  his  special 
gifts  fitted  him  more  for  other  work.  But  as  the 
Brethren  in  synod  looked  round,  they  felt  how 
difficult  it  would  be  to  find  a  suitable  person  to  fill 
his  place.  At  once  the  thought  was  suggested  to 
many  to  ask  the  Saviour  to  be  the  Eldest  of  His 
little  Church,  and  in  answer  to  prayer  they  received 
the  assurance  that  He  would  accept  the  charge. 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  55 

Their  one  desire  was  that  He  would  do  all  that  the 
chief  elder  had  hitherto  had  to  do — would  take 
them  as  His  special  possession,  concern  Himself 
about  every  member  individually,  and  care  for  all 
their  needs.  They  promised  to  love  and  honour 
Him,  to  give  Him  the  confidence  of  their  hearts, 
to  know  no  man  as  head  in  the  things  of  the 
Spirit,  and  as  children  to  be  guided  by  His  mind 
and  will.  Of  the  day  on  which  this  decision 
was  made  known  and  accepted  at  Herrnhut,  one 
writes — 

"On  the  13th  jS"ovember  was  the  inauguration  day  of 
our  dear  and  tenderly  beloved  Sovereign  and  Eldest.  It 
was  resolved  that  in  honour  of  our  Lord  having  then 
condescended  to  accept  this  special  charge  of  the  Church 
of  His  Blood  and  Cross,  there  should  be  a  special  pro 
clamation  of  His  pardoning  grace  to  all  who  had  wandered 
away  or  had  fallen.  The  impression  was  so  deep  that  at 
first  deep  stillness  fell  upon  all,  which  soon  changed  into 
tears  of  wonder  and  of  joy." 

It  was  a  new  and  open  profession  of  the  place 
they  had  always  desired  that  Christ  should  have, 
not  only  in  their  theology  and  their  personal  life, 
but  specially  in  their  Church.  The  Church  had 
now  attained  its  majority. 

Not  long  after  this  date  there  came  a  time  of 
eif ting,  in  which  the  Brethren  appeared  to  be  enter 
ing  upon  a  path  that  might  lead  to  danger.  But 
He  to  whose  guidance  the  unconditional  surrender 


56          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

had  been  made,  did  not  forsake  them,  and  saved 
them  from  the  threatened  evil.  And  the  pro 
clamation  of  Christ  as  their  only  Head  became  the 
living  expression  of  their  hearts'  desire  that  He 
alone  should  be  all  in  all. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  main  object  for  which 
the  story  of  the  Moravian  Church  has  been  told. 
It  has  been  appealed  to  as  an  example.  Just  re 
call  what  we  heard.  In  proportion  to  its  member 
ship,  the  men  it  supports  and  sends  out,  the  money 
it  provides,  the  converts  it  has  gathered,  far  exceed 
what  any  Church  has  done.  In  the  first  twenty 
years  of  its  existence  it  actually  sent  out  more 
missionaries  than  the  whole  Protestant  Church  had 
done  in  2  0  0  years.  If  other  Churches  were  to  pro 
vide  men  and  means  in  the  same  proportion,  it  is 
believed  there  would  be  all  that  is  needed  to  carry 
the  gospel  to  every  creature.  And  if  we  ask  Jiow 
it  came  that  this  little  Church,  the  least  of  all, 
has  thus  outdone  all  its  older  and  larger  sisters, 
the  answer  appears  to  be  this :  It  alone  of  all  the 
Churches  has  actually  sought  to  carry  out  the  great 
truth,  that  to  gather  in  to  Christ  the  souls  He 
died  to  save  is  the  one  object  for  which  the 
Church  exists.  It  alone  has  sought  to  teach  and 
train  every  one  of  its  members  to  count  it  their 
first  duty  to  Him  who  loved  them,  to  give  their 
life  to  make  Him  known  to  others. 


THE   MORAVIAN   CHURCH  57 

This  answer  at  once  leads  to  the  further  question  : 
What  was  it  that  led  and  fitted  this  little  Church,  at 
a  time  when  it  counted  but  300  members,  thus 
to  see  and  carry  out  these  great  truths  ?  It  is 
only  as  we  get  some  insight  into  this  that  we 
can  find  out  what  is  needed  if  other  Churches  are 
to  profit  by  the  example.  The  closing  sentence 
in  Mr.  Mott's  appeal  to  the  example  of  the 
Moravians  was  :  "  The  practical  question  is,  What 
has  there  been  in  connection  with  the  work  already 
accomplished  which  is  not  reproducible  ?  "  The 
grace  of  God  that  wrought  it  in  them  is  still 
exceeding  abundant  with  faith  and  love,  which  are 
in  Christ  Jesus. 

If  we  think  of  Zinzendorf,  whom  God  had  so 
wonderfully  prepared  to  train  and  guide  the  young 
Church  in  the  path  of  missions,  we  see  at  once 
what  the  great  moving  power  was.  What  marked 
him  above  everything  was  a  tender,  childlike, 
passionate  love  to  our  Lord  Jesus.  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Origin  and  Inspirer  of  all  mission  work,  pos 
sessed  him.  The  dying  love  of  the  Lamb  of  God 
had  won  and  filled  his  heart ;  the  love  which  had 
brought  Christ  to  die  for  sinners  had  come  into 
his  life ;  he  could  live  for  nothing  else  but  to  live 
and,  if  need  be,  die  for  them  too.  When  he  took 
charge  of  the  Moravians,  that  love,  as  his  teaching 
and  his  liymns  testify,  was  the  one  motive  to  which 


58          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

he  appealed,  the  one  power  he  trusted  to,  the  one 
object  for  which  he  sought  to  win  their  lives. 
What  teaching  and  argument  and  discipline,  how 
ever  needful  and  fruitful  they  were,  never  could 
have  done,  the  love  of  Christ  did.  It  melted  all 
into  one  body;  it  made  all  willing  to  be  corrected 
and  instructed ;  it  made  all  long  to  put  away 
everything  that  was  sin ;  it  inspired  all  with  the 
desire  to  testify  of  Jesus ;  it  made  many  ready  to 
sacrifice  all  in  making  that  love  known  to  others, 
and  so  making  the  heart  of  Jesus  glad. 

If  the  dying  love  of  Christ  were  to  take  the 
place  in  our  Churches  and  their  teaching,  in  our 
own  hearts  and  fellowship  with  each  other,  which 
it  had  in  theirs,  which  it  has  in  God's  heart  and 
in  Christ's  redemption,  would  it  not  work  a  mighty 
change  in  our  mission  work  ? 

Along  with  this  love  to  Christ,  or  rather,  as  the 
fruit  of  it,  there  was  in  Zinzendorf  an  intense  sense 
of  the  need  and  the  value  of  fellowship.  He 
believed  that  love,  to  be  enjoyed  and  to  grow  strong, 
and  to  attain  its  object,  needs  expression  and  com 
munication.  He  believed  that  the  love  of  Christ  in 
us  needs  fellowship  with  each  other  for  its  main 
tenance  in  ourselves,  as  well  as  for  the  securing 
of  God's  great  purpose  in  it — the  comforting  and 
strengthening  of  our  brethren.  So  he  was  prepared 
to  take  up  the  strangers  God  brought  to  him,  and 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  59 

give  himself  wholly  to  them.  His  reward  waa 
great.  He  was  able  to  give  himself  into  thein,  and 
to  find  himself  multiplied  in  each  one.  What  he 
said  later,  "  I  know  of  no  true  Christianity  without 
fellowship,"  was  the  principle  that  begat  that  intense 
unity  which  gave  the  strength  of  the  leader  and 
the  whole  body  to  each  of  its  members.  In  our 
modern  religion  there  is  a  reticence  in  speaking 
of  our  personal  relationship  to  Jesus  which  often 
causes  great  loss.  We  forget  that  the  majority  of 
men  are  guided  more  by  sentiment  than  by  intellect : 
the  heart  is  the  great  power  by  which  they  are 
meant  to  be  inlluenced  and  moulded.  It  is  a  ques 
tion  whether  we  might  not  take  a  lesson  here  from 
Zinzendorf. 

A  minister  with  his  congregation,  a  teacher 
with  his  class,  a  leader  in  a  prayer-meeting  or 
an  Endeavour  Society,  often  labours  to  influence 
by  instruction  and  encouragement,  while  he  forgets 
that  the  hearts  crave  love,  and  that  nothing  can  so 
help  to  build  up  the  young  or  the  feeble  Christian 
life  as  the  warm  fellowship  of  love  in  Christ.  There 
are  thousands  of  Christians,  wishing  to  serve  their 
Lord,  but  not  knowing  how,  who  are  just  waiting  to 
find  gatherings  where  they  can  be  helped  to  meet 
under  a  sense  of  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  and 
His  love — where  they  can  be  helped  to  confess  that 
love,  and  then  to  yield  themselves  to  it  in  the  faith 


60          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

that  it  will  constrain  and  enable  them  to  do  any 
thing  their  Lord  needs  them  to  do. 

At  the  Conference  it  was  well  said  by  one — 
"The  importance  of  leadership  must  be  emphasised. 
Let  us  put  to  usury  that  talent  which  sets  another  to 
work.  The  leader  must  use  definiteness  and  persistence. 
The  leader  must  uplift  ideals.  To  be  the  leader  is  the 
responsibility  of  the  pastor.  Come  to  us  with  the  deepest 
spiritual  note  you  can  sound,  and  we  will  follow  you." 
And  by  another  :  "  We  shall  need  devoted  pastors  to  lead 
in  the  execution  of  this  work.  The  pastors  are  still  the 
leaders.  If  they  only  will,  they  may  be  the  leaders  in 
this  holy  war  for  righteousness  in  all  the  earth."  And 
by  still  another  :  "  Men  become  interested  not  so  much 
in  abstract  ideas  as  in  individuals  who  represent  their 
ideas.  Victories  are  won  because  men  follow  some  leader 
whom  they  have  learnt  to  love." 1 

Zinzendorf  was  indeed  a  mighty  leader,  in  whose 
footsteps  we  still  may  follow.  Every  pastor  may 
learn  from  him  the  great  secret,  that  the  more 
intensely  the  fire  of  God's  love  burns  in  the  heart, 
the  more  surely  will  it  burn  through  into  those 
around  us.  It  is  the  high  privilege  of  every  leader 
to  know  that  God  can  give  him  such  power  over 
others,  that  their  love  to  him  can  open  their  hearts  for 
receiving  more  of  the  life  and  love  and  power  of  God 
than  they  could  have  without  him.  This  is  God's 
way,  to  dispense  His  blessings  through  single  men. 

1  See  p.  4  :  "The  pastor  is  not  only  the  instructor,  but  the  leader 
of  his  congregation.  He  must  not  only  care  for  their  souls,  but 
direct  their  activities." 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  61 

As  each  leader  in  his  circle  realises  his  privilege  of 
getting  himself  filled  with  the  missionary  fire,  the 
love  and  devotion  to  Christ  Jesus,  and  lives  up  to 
it,  missionary  work  at  home  will  enter  upon  a  new 
era.  Life  and  love,  passing  from  the  living,  loving 
Christ,  through  a  living,  loving  disciple,  will  com 
municate  life  and  love  to  those  who  otherwise  are 
cold  and  helpless. 

Thus  much,  then,  of  the  leader  God  had  chosen, 
and  the  lessons  he  is  meant  to  teach.  What  of  the 
followers  God  had  provided  for  him  ?  What  was 
there  that  specially  fitted  them  to  take  the  lead 
among  the  Churches  of  the  Reformation  which 
they  have  done  ?  Let  their  history  give  the 
answer.  There  was  first  of  all  that  detachment 
from  the  world  and  its  hopes,  that  power  of  en 
durance,  that  simple  trust  in  God,  which  afflic 
tion  and  persecution  are  meant  to  work.  These 
men  were  literally  strangers  and  pilgrims  on 
earth.  They  were  familiar  with  the  thought  and 
spirit  of  sacrifice.  They  had  learnt  to  endure 
hardship,  and  to  look  up  to  God  in  every 
trouble. 

It  is  this  spirit  which  is  still  needed  in  the 
Church.  A  disregard  of  what  the  world  deems 
necessary  or  desirable ;  a  self-denial  that  counts 
all  but  loss  for  the  sake  of  knowing  Christ  and 
making  Him  known ;  a  trust  in  God  that  looks  not 


62          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONAKY    PROBLEM 

only  to  His  aid  in  special  emergency,  but  for  His 
guidance  at  every  step  and  His  power  in  every 
work; — these  were  certainly  the  elements  that 
went  far  to  form  Zinzendorfs  "  Warrior  Band,"  and 
that  still  make  good  soldiers  of  Christ. 

Add  to  this  the  discipline,  of  which  they  had 
inherited  the  general  impression  from  their  ancestors, 
and  to  which  they  were  led  to  yield  themselves 
so  completely  at  Herrnhut.  It  rooted  in  the  view 
that,  to  the  Christian,  religion  is  the  all-important 
thing.  Everything  was  secondary  to  the  one  great 
consideration — to  know  and  do  the  will  of  God,  to 
walk  in  the  footsteps  of  Jesus  Christ.  For  the  sake 
of  this  they  were  ready  to  submit  to  the  care  and 
correction  of  all  those  appointed  to  watch  over 
them.  Believing  literally  in  the  command,  "  Exhort 
one  another  daily,"  they  were  willing  to  be  reproved 
or  warned  as  often  as  there  was  sin,  either  of 
omission  or  commission.  When  they  were  sent  out, 
they  were  ready  to  help  each  other,  to  depend  upon, 
to  yield  to  each  other.  Their  fellowship  made  them 
strong :  the  highest  in  rule  begged  of  his  brethren 
to  tell  of  what  they  might  see  amiss,  and  was  will 
ing  to  confess  the  slightest  shortcoming.  The  spirit 
of  subjection  to  one  another,  of  which  Scripture 
speaks  so  often,  brought  its  rich  blessing  in  sancti 
fying  and  strengthening  the  whole  life.  To  intro 
duce  the  same  discipline  in  our  day  may  appear 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  63 

impossible  :  the  same  spirit  of  watchful  care  of,  and 
loving  subjection  to,  one  another  is  still  within  the 
reach  of  any  circle  that  will  seek  for  it,  and  will 
still  be  a  wonderful  preparation  for  effective  work 
in  God's  kingdom. 

But  there  was  something  more  than  this 
which  gave  their  fellowship  its  wonderful  power. 
It  was  the  intensity  of  their  united  and  personal 
devotion  to  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Lamb  of  God,  who 
had  purchased  them  with  His  blood.  All  their 
correction  of  each  other,  and  their  willing  confession 
and  giving  up  of  sin,  came  from  this  faith  in  the 
living  Christ,  through  whom  they  found  "  within  their 
heart  the  peace  of  God  and  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  sin."  This  faith  led  them  to  accept  and 
jealously  to  keep  their  place  as  poor  sinners,  saved 
by  His  grace,  every  day.  This  faith — cultivated, 
strengthened  every  day  by  fellowship  in  word  and 
song  and  prayer — became  the  food  of  their  life. 
This  faith  filled  them  with  such  joy  that  their 
hearts  rejoiced,  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  diffi 
culties,  in  the  triumphant  assurance  that  their 
Jesus,  the  Lamb  who  had  died  for  them,  and  was 
now  loving  and  saving  and  keeping  them  hour  by 
hour,  could  conquer  the  hardest  heart,  was  willing 
to  bless  the  vilest  sinner.  In  this  spirit  they  met 
together  for  near  five  years,  from  the  time  of  the 
first  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  to  the  time  the  first 


64          THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

missionaries  went  out,  worshipping  the  Son  of  God, 
offering  themselves  to  Him,  and  waiting  for  Him 
to  make  known  what  He  would  have  of  His 
Church,  each  one  holding  himself  in  readiness  to  go 
or  do  what  his  Lord  should  show.  Let  a  congrega 
tion,  or  a  prayer-meeting,  or  a  Christian  circle  seek 
to  have  somewhat  of  this  spirit  uniting  the  mem 
bers,  while  all  continue  in  prayer  that  the  Lord 
would  show  each  one  His  blessed  will  for  them,  and 
you  have  the  beginning  of  a  spirit  that  will  spread. 
And  as  different  congregations  combine  in  making 
the  worship  and  faith  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  devotion 
to  Him  the  centre  of  their  missionary  interest,  the 
number  of  those  who  are  ready  to  go  forth  will 
speedily  increase. 

There  is  one  thing  more  we  must  not  omit  to 
notice — the  mighty  moving  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
answer  to  prayer.  We  have  had  the  Count's  testi 
mony  of  how  confident  he  was  that  the  birth  of  the 
new  Church,  12th  May  1727,  was  the  work  of  the 
Spirit.  We  have  read  of  the  overwhelming  sense 
of  the  Holy  Spirit's  presence  in  which  it  received 
its  baptism  from  on  high.  Many  a  time  after  this 
during  the  following  four  years  the  diary  testifies 
of  special  experience  of  the  deep  movings  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  This  was  mostly  when  they  were 
gathered  in  prayer  before  their  Lord,  the  Slain 
Lamb.  The  prayer  watch  they  appointed,  so  as  to 


THE   MORAVIAN    CHURCH  65 

keep  up  day  and  night  a  continual  sacrifice  of 
supplication,  proves  how  they  understood  Heaven's 
first  law  to  be,  that  the  measure  of  blessing  and 
power  will  depend  upon  the  measure  of  prayer. 
They  saw  and  rejoiced  exceedingly  in  the  Lamb 
upon  the  Throne — how  could  they  but  trust  Him 
to  fill  the  mouths  and  hearts  so  widely  opened  to 
Him  ? 

As  at  Pentecost,  united  prayer,  rewarded  with  the 
gift  of  the  Spirit,  was  the  entrance  into  the  life  of 
witness  and  victory,  so  at  Herrnhut  too.  It  is  the 
law  of  all  mission  work.  If  the  example  of  the 
Moravian  Brethren  is  to  stir  us  to  jealousy,  if  we 
are  to  learn  from  them  what  it  is  to  believe  that 
we  only  exist  to  win  for  Jesus  the  souls  He  died  to 
save,  and  to  train  our  members  to  the  thought  that 
everyone  must  be  ready  for  His  service,  we  must 
learn  the  lesson  of  much  prayer  and  of  a  definite 
surrender  to  have  our  whole  life  under  the  leading 
of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

When  we  point  to  the  example  of  the  Brethren, 
the  question  is  sometimes  asked  whether  they  have 
retained  their  first  fire,  whether  their  missionaries 
and  members  are  living  on  a  higher  spiritual  level 
than  the  Churches  around  them.  The  answer  is 
very  simple.  Like  every  other  Church,  the 
Brethren  have  had  their  times  of  decline  and  re 
vival.  They  were  too  closely  one  with  the  Church 
5 


66          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

around  them  not  to  suffer  with  it  when  the  cold 
of  winter  came.  The  force  of  our  appeal  is 
not  weakened  but  strengthened  by  this  fact.  Its 
point  is  this :  The  three  great  principles  taught  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  in  a  time  of  His  mighty  working, — 
that  the  Church  exists  only  for  extending  the  king 
dom,  that  every  member  must  be  trained  to  take 
part  in  it,  and  that  the  personal  experience  of  the 
love  of  Christ  is  the  power  that  fits  for  this :  to 
these  principles  the  Brethren  have  remained  true, 
and  it  is  in  this  respect  that  their  example  speaks 
to  us  with  such  power. 

The  Church  of  Christ  owes  more  to  the  Church 
of  the  Brethren  than  is  generally  known.  From 
her  John  Wesley  received  that  joyful  assurance  of 
acceptance  which  gave  his  preaching  such  power, 
and  fitted  him  as  God's  instrument,  not  only  to 
found  the  Wesleyan  Church,  but  to  take  such  a 
part  in  the  revival  of  evangelical  religion  in  Eng 
land.  To  the  Brethren  William  Carey  owed  part 
of  his  inspiration  for  the  missionary  cause.  When 
pleading  with  his  brethren,  he  backed  his  proposals 
by  the  experience  of  the  Moravians,  and  laid  upon 
the  table  early  numbers  of  their  Periodical  Accounts. 
His  companion,  William  Ward,  recorded  the  pro 
found  impression  produced  on  his  mind  by  these 
Accounts,  and  exclaimed,  "  Thank  you,  Moravians ! 
you  have  done  me  good.  If  I  am  ever  a  missionary 


THE    MORAVIAN    CHURCH  67 

worth  a  straw,  I  shall,  under  our  Saviour,  owe  it  to 
you."  The  story  of  the  wondrous  grace  of  God  in 
the  Church  of  the  Brethren  may  still  show  us  the 
path,  and  inspire  the  courage,  to  seek  and  find  new 
blessing  for  the  world. 


CHAPTEK    IV 


ffiljurcfj  jHissionarg  Societj 
ant*  tfje  Eeepening  of  tfje  Spiritual  iLife 


nnHE  remarkable  blessing  vouchsafed  to  the 
-*-  Church  Missionary  Society,  by  which,  within 
the  short  period  of  twelve  years,  its  income  was 
raised  from  two  to  three  hundred  thousand  pounds, 
and  the  number  of  the  labourers  more  than  trebled, 
was  more  than  once  referred  to  in  the  Conference 
meetings.  Mr.  Eugene  Stock  spoke  as  follows  :— 

"  In  the  year  1887  the  Church  Missionary  Society, 
under  special  circumstances,  came  to  the  resolution,  in  the 
teeth  of  its  Finance  Board,  to  refuse  no  candidate  who 
appeared  to  be  God-called,  on  financial  grounds.  On 
this  ground,  not  excitement,  not  gush  —  I  believe  I  may 
truly  say  that  —  but  on  the  plain,  simple,  business 
principle  that  if  God  calls  a  man,  the  Lord  will  allow  him 
to  go,  and  the  Lord  will  find  the  money  ;  and  we  have 
a  right  then  if,  as  far  as  man  can  judge,  this  man  or  this 
woman  is  called  of  God  to  go,  we  have  a  right  to  say, 
*  0  Lord,  we  look  to  Thee  to  enable  us  to  send  this  man 
or  this  woman.'  Now,  if  anyone  had  said  to  us  on  that 

68 


THE    CHUKCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  69 

memorable  day,  when  we  were  all  on  our  knees  in  prayer 
on  this  subject — we  didn't  know  what  we  were  doing,  it 
was  no  credit  to  us  at  all — but  if  anyone  had  said  to  us, 
*  You  will  treble  your  force  in  thirteen  years,'  the  answer 
would  have  been,  *  Impossible ! '  And  if  anybody  had 
gone  on  and  said,  '  Well,  but  you  will,'  then  the  answer 
would  have  been,  c  There  will  be  no  money  to  send  them ; 
it  is  impossible.'  But  the  impossible  thing  has  been 
done,  the  staff  has  been  trebled,  and  the  money  has  been 
found.  God  sent  it. 

"  Let  me  remind  you  of  this :  I  do  not  care  what 
Christian  enterprise  it  is,  I  do  not  care  what  Christian 
work  it  is,  if  it  be  a  work  such  as  saying  a  word  in  season 
to  your  brother,  in  your  bank,  in  your  office,  in  your 
store — it  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  do,  is  it  ?  If  it  be  to 
say  a  kindly  word  for  Jesus  to  that  young  girl  whom  you 
know,  who  is  going  to  be  ruined  and  you  want  to  rescue 
her  from  danger — it  is  not  an  easy  thing,  is  it  ?  Some 
would  say,  'I  cannot.'  Now,  whether  it  be  a  little 
thing  like  that,  or  whether  it  be  the  great  work  of  all  the 
boards  and  societies  in  America  going  in  for  a  policy  of 
faith  in  the  Lord,  I  want  you  to  write  upon  any  of  these 
enterprises  three  mottoes.  First — imagine  it  written 
in  letters  of  fire  across  this  hall,  '  With  men  it  is  im 
possible/  That  is  true.  Secondly,  { With  God  all  things 
are  possible.'  Isn't  that  true?  What  is  the  third? — 
1  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth.' 

"  Perhaps  you  will  hardly  believe  it  when  I  tell  you 
what  our  constituency  is.  Not  one-fourth  of  the  Church 
of  England,  not  more  than  one-fourth  of  our  congrega 
tions,  give  any  support  to  the  Church  Missionary  Society, 
and  yet,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  are  the  largest  society, 
although  we  represent  but  a  section  of  the  Church. 


70          THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

Why  is  that  1  It  is  because  of  the  enthusiasm  of  praying 
people.  It  is  because  of  the  enthusiasm  of  those  who  be 
lieve  that,  outside  of  all  organisations,  the  gospel  of  Christ 
is  the  power  of  God  and  of  salvation.  We  hold  to  the 
rightful  independence  of  any  Christians  to  band  themselves 
together  to  teach  the  gospel  as  the  Lord  shall  teach  them." 

When  we  speak  of  what  has  been  done  by  the 
Moravian  Church  or  the  Church  of  Pentecost,  the 
force  of  the  two  examples  is  often  lost  in  the 
thought  that  these  belong  to  the  past.  The  C.M.S. 
gives  its  witness  as  to  what  God  is  doing  under  our 
very  eyes  in  awakening  His  people  to  do  what 
otherwise  appeared  impossible,  and  enabling  them 
to  give  men  and  money  to  an  extent  unknown 
before.  If  we  are  really  to  profit  by  this  lesson, 
and  to  labour  that  the  whole  Church  give  to  God 
what  He  asks  for  the  extension  of  His  kingdom, 
let  us  inquire  what  the  path  was  by  which  the 
C.M.S.  was  led  to  the  great  increase  of  blessing 
and  of  labour. 

The  Centenary  History  of  the  Society  tells  the 
story.  It  proves  that,  as  much  as  we  need  to  pray 
for  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  missionaries 
and  their  work,  we  need  to  pray  for  the  leaders  of 
mission  work,  and  for  the  Churches  which  support 
them,  that  all  devising  of  means  and  methods,  that 
all  appeals  for  men  and  money,  that  all  meetings 
for  awakening  interest  or  uniting  in  prayer,  may  be 


THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY   SOCIETY  7l 

in  true  dependence  on  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  In  the  long  run  the  spiritual  tone  of  the 
missionaries  and  the  mission  congregations  abroad 
cannot  be  higher  than  that  of  the  home  Church 
out  of  which  it  is  born.  As  this  truth  comes  into 
full  prominence,  it  will  be  felt  that  no  less  impor 
tant  than  the  efforts  of  Mission  Societies  or  Boards 
on  behalf  of  the  heathen,  and  the  messengers  sent 
out  to  them,  that  the  work  may  be  in  Divine  power, 
is  the  work  of  quickening  and  elevating  the  Church 
at  home  with  its  members  and  ministers,  that  their 
interest  and  aid  in  the  work  may  equally  be  in  the 
power  of  the  Spirit. 

The  principal  lesson  the  C.M.S.  History  teaches 
is  that  its  great  forward  movement  was  intimately 
connected  with  a  deep  revival  of  the  spiritual 
life,  and  the  teaching  of  a  higher  standard  of 
devotion  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  only  way  to 
waken  true,  deep,  spiritual,  permanent  missionary 
interest,  is  not  to  aim  at  this  itself,  so  much  as  to 
lead  believers  to  a  more  complete  separation  from 
the  world,  and  to  an  entire  consecration  of  them 
selves,  with  all  they  have,  to  their  Lord  and  His 
service. 

The  History1  traces  the  movement  back  to  1882, 

1  The  History  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society ,  by  Eugene 
Stock,  3  vols.  A  wonderful  and  intensely  interesting  record  of 
God's  leading  and  blessing.  There  is  an  admirable  abridgment 
;u  a  shilling  volume,  One  Hundred  Years,  A  Short  History. 


72          THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

when  Mr.  Moody's  visit  to  Cambridge  resulted  in 
the  powerful  conversion  of  a  number  of  students. 

"  There  are  now  devoted  clergymen  and  laymen,  both 
at  home  and  abroad,  who  owe  '  their  own  selves '  to  that 
visit  of  Mr.  Moody's.  The  C.M.S.  owe  a  whole  succes 
sion  of  missionaries  to  the  influences  of  that  period.  .  .  . 
One  of  the  most  important  events  of  the  period  was,  both 
a  fruit,  indirectly,  of  Moody's  work,  and  a  fruitful  parent 
of  other  and  larger  movements.  This  was  the  going 
forth  of  the  famous  '  Cambridge  Seven '  to  China.  The 
influence  of  such  a  band  of  men  going  to  China  as 
missionaries  was  irresistible.  No  such  event  had  occurred 
before,  and  no  event  of  the  century  has  done  so  much  to 
arouse  the  minds  of  Christian  men  to  the  claims  of  the 
field  and  the  nobility  of  the  missionary  vocation.  The 
gift  of  such  a  band — for  truly  it  was  a  gift  from  God — was 
a  just  reward  to  Mr.  Hudson  Taylor  and  his  colleagues 
for  the  genuine  unselfishness  with  which  they  had  always 
pleaded  the  cause  of  China  and  the  world,  and  not  of 
their  own  particular  organisation,  and  for  the  deep 
spirituality  which  had  always  marked  their  meetings. 
And  that  spirituality  marked  most  emphatically  the 
densely-crowded  meetings  in  different  places  at  which 
these  seven  men  said  farewell.  They  told,  modestly  and 
yet  fearlessly,  of  the  Lord's  goodness  to  them,  and  of  the 
joy  of  serving  Him;  and  they  appealed  to  young  men, 
not  for  their  Mission,  but  for  their  Divine  Master.  No 
such  missionary  meetings  had  ever  been  known  as  the 
farewell  gathering  at  Exeter  Hall  on  4th  February  1885. 
We  have  become  familiar  since  then  with  meetings  more 
or  less  of  the  same  type,  but  it  was  a  new  thing  then. 
In  many  ways  the  C.M.S.  owes  a  deep  debt  of  gratitude 
to  the  C.I.M.  and  the  Cambridge  Seven.  The  Lord 


THE    CHUKCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  73 

Himself  spoke  through  them,  and  it  was  by  His  grace 
that  the  Society  had  ears  to  hear." 

The  next  influence  which  the  History  mentions 
is  that  of  Keswick.  Special  reference  is  made  to 
the  accession  of  Dr.  Handley  Moule  to  the  ranks  of 
the  Keswick  speakers.  In  1884  he  had  written 
publicly  expressing  an  opinion  unfavourable  to  its 
teaching,  as  presented  in  a  book  by  Rev.  E.  Hopkins. 
A  little  later  he  wrote  again,  saying  that,  after 
meeting  Mr.  Hopkins,  he  was  now  convinced  that 
the  teaching  was  not  inconsistent  with  his  own 
views,  and  not  liable  to  the  criticisms  then  current. 

"  Then  followed  this  striking  and  touching  confession  : 
— 'Never,  I  say  it  earnestly  and  deliberately,  have  I 
heard  teaching  more  alien  from  Perfectionist  error,  more 
justly  balanced  in  its  statement  of  possibilities  and  limits. 
And  then,  never  have  I  been  so  brought  personally  face 
to  face  with  the  infinitely  important  reality  of  self- 
surrender  to  the  Lord,  and  the  promises  of  His  Divine 
action  as  the  Keeper  of  the  spirit  committed  to  Him ;  an 
action  which  only  intensifies  the  holy  work  of  watching 
and  prayer.  ...  Of  personal  details  I  must  not  speak ; 
it  is  enough  to  say  that  those  few  days  were  a  crisis  never 
to  be  forgotten  in  the  spiritual  life  of  at  least  one  much- 
needing  Christian.' " 

And  later  he  wrote — 

"  1  was  brought,  not  many  years  ago,  amidst  much 
misgiving  and  unjustified  prejudice,  to  listen  for  myself 
to  what  was  said  at  a  meeting  conducted  by  Mr.  Evan 
Hopkins.  '  He  who  searcheth  the  hearts '  found  me  out 


74          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

indeed  that  evening,  and  then,  too,  He  showed  me,  then 
and  there,  something  of  His  most  gracious  power  to 
conquer  and  to  keep,  in  answer  to  the  *  confidence  of  self- 
despair,'  in  a  way  not  known  by  me  experimentally 
before.  Who  am  I  that  I  should  speak  of  it  ?  But  how 
can  I  be  silent  ? " 

There  is  one  more  event  must  be  noticed,  to 
understand  how  God  was  preparing  the  way  for  the 
accomplishment  of  His  plans.  For  the  first  few 
years  of  its  existence,  Keswick  had  no  direct  con 
nection  with  missions.  When  Mr.  Eeginald  Ead- 
cliffe  pleaded  for  their  admission  to  the  programme, 
all  he  could  obtain  was  the  loan  of  the  tent  on  the 
Saturday.  At  the  next  year's  meeting  an  appeal 
from  a  C.M.S.  missionary,  asking  for  Christian 
ladies  with  private  means  to  come  as  missionaries 
to  the  Holy  Land,  touched  many  hearts.  By 
another  year  the  Chairman  of  the  Convention  had 
grasped  and  enunciated  the  great  principle  "  that 
Consecration  and  the  Evangelisation  of  the  World 
ought  to  go  together,"  and  missionary  meetings  were 
included  in  the  official  programme.  At  the  Satur 
day  meeting  of  that  year  a  £10  note,  sent  in  by  a 
young  man  "  to  help  to  send  out  a  Keswick 
missionary,"  helped  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the 
fund  from  which  Keswick  missionaries  have  been 
sent  forth,  and  missionaries  in  connection  with 
different  societies  supported. 


THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY   SOCIETY  75 

We  now  return  to  the  History  of  the  Society. 
The  year  1885  is  spoken  of  as  a  memorable  one. 
In  January  1885  the  usual  Annual  Conference  of 
the  Association  Secretaries  was  held  at  the  Church 
Missionary  Home. 

"At  that  Conference  the  spiritual  character  of  the 
meetings  held  hy  Mr.  Hudson  Taylor  and  his  Cambridge 
recruits  was  referred  to,  and  the  idea  was  thrown  out  of 
arranging  special  gatherings  simultaneously  in  different 
centres,  to  plead  the  claims,  not  of  the  Society,  but  of  the 
Divine  Lord  and  Saviour  to  the  entire  obedience  and 
devotion  of  His  servants.  The  suggestion  was  not 
warmly  welcomed  at  first.  There  was  a  not  quite  un 
natural  feeling  that  it  was  rather  beneath  the  dignity  of 
the  '  grand  old  Society '  to  copy  the  China  Inland 
Mission !  But  it  was  this  suggestion  that  bore  fruit  in 
the  February  Simultaneous  Meetings  in  1886  and  1887." 

A  weekly  prayer-meeting  was  begun  in  the 
Church  Missionary  Home.  Doubts  were  entertained 
whether  it  would  be  possible  to  keep  it  up  regu 
larly.  But  now  the  historian  writes — 

"But  who,  after  fourteen  years'  experience,  would 
stop  it  now  ?  What  should  we  do  without  it  ?  Only  in 
eternity  shall  we  know  what  the  Society  owes  to  the 
Thursday  prayer-meetings." 

In  the  same  month,  a  few  weeks  after  the  great 
farewell  meeting  in  Exeter  Hall  to  the  Cambridge 
band,  another  meeting  for  men  was  held  there, 
gathered  by  the  Y.M.C.A.  to  give  the  C.M.S.  the 
opportunity  for  pleading  the  cause  of  missions. 


76          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

"In  one  respect  the  meeting  marked  the  commence 
ment  of  a  new  aim  in  missionary  meetings.  For  the 
first  time  the  Society's  name  did  not  head  the  bills. 
The  heading  was,  'The  Claims  of  the  Heathen  and 
Mohammedan  World.'  A  small  thing  in  itself,  but  it 
was  the  token  of  a  revolution.  From  that  time  the 
C.M.S.  has  striven  to  raise  its  meetings  above  the  level 
of  an  aim  to  collect  money  for  a  Society ;  and  the  whole 
missionary  cause  in  the  world  has  been  lifted  by  that 
simple  change  on  to  a  higher  platform.  But  let  it  not 
be  forgotten  that  the  example  had  already  been  set  by 
Mr.  Hudson  Taylor  and  the  China  Inland  Mission. 
From  them  the  C.M.S.  learned  the  lesson. 

"  We  must  not  leave  Exeter  Hall  without  hearing  a 
few  of  Dr.  Moule's  words.  For  that  meeting  was  one  of 
the  most  memorable  in  the  whole  history  of  the  Society, 
and  he  tells  us  why :  '  There  never  is  a  missionary  meet 
ing  but  it  is  or  ought  to  be  full  of  the  presence  of  the 
Lord.  But  is  not  this  meeting  ?  Do  we  not  all  feel  it  1 
What  has  gathered  us  together  here  1  No  mere,  however 
sacred,  annual  invitation,  which  we  expect,  but  the  move 
ment  of  the  Spirit  of  God  visibly  in  the  world  and  in  the 
Church.  We  are  indeed  at  a  time  when  God  is  making 
Himself  felt  in  the  spirit,  in  the  life,  in  the  faith,  in  the 
work  of  men,  making  Himself  felt,  not  with  new  energy, 
for  it  is  always  the  same,  but  in  ways  in  which  we  can 
not  but  trace  His  blessed  hand  with  peculiar  clearness. 
I  believe  this  is  a  very  great  evening ;  it  may  be  a  very 
great  evening  for  many  souls  here  to-night.  It  is  a  great 
evening  for  many  a  missionary  field ;  of  that  I  am  sure. 
It  is  a  great  evening  for  the  worn-out  heart,  and  many  a 
faithful  missionary  will  thank  God  in  his  distant  work 
as  he  hears  of  to-night.  I  believe  it  is  a  great  evening 


THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  77 

for  our  dear  Church  Missionary  Society,  and,  if  possible, 
for  our  yet  dearer  Church  of  England,  dearer  to  us, 
nearer  to  our  hearts,  more  satisfying  to  our  thoughts, 
with  every  accession  that  we  have  of  the  knowledge  of 
our  Lord  and  of  His  grace  and  of  His  power  for  His 
service ;  dear  to  us,  satisfying  to  us,  in  its  mighty 
doctrine,  in  its  holy  order,  in  its  blessed  fixity  of  prin 
ciple,  when  that  is  rightly  appealed  to  in  its  own  words, 
and  in  its  glorious  largeness  and  liberty  of  heart. 

" '  But,'  he  went  on,  '  we  are  not  here  to-night  to 
praise  the  Church  of  England,  nor  the  C.M.S.  We  are 
in  the  presence  of  our  King ;  let  us  concentrate  our 
thoughts  upon  Him  and  upon  His  will. 

"  '  Dear  friends,  I  would  speak  myself  in  the  sense  of 
His  divine  presence,  the  presence  which  is  peace,  but 
which  is  awful  solemnity  too,  and  remembering  for  the 
speaker,  as  well  as  for  the  hearers,  that  His  demand 
upon  every  one  of  His  servants  is  "  surrender  at  dis 
cretion  " — no  conditions,  no  terms,  nothing  but  the 
yielding  of  our  will  and  of  our  life  to  Him  to  do  His 
will  in  the  strength  of  His  might.  You  know,  in  the  old 
feudal  days,  when  the  vassal  did  his  homage  to  his  lord, 
he  did  this  ;  he  put  his  hands  together,  and  put  them 
within  the  hands  of  his  lord,  in  token  of  absolute  sub 
mission  to  his  will  and  readiness  for  activity  in  his  work. 
That  is  the  only  true  position  for  a  Christian's  hands, 
the  hands  and  heart  and  will,  the  spirit  and  life — the 
only  true  position ;  not  one,  but  both,  quite  within  the 
hands  of  the  Sovereign,  the  infinitely  more  than  feudal 
Lord,  the  Despot,  the  glorious,  absolute,  unconstitu 
tional  Despot  of  His  servants,  the  infinitely  trustworthy, 
infinitely  sovereign  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Oh,  let  me  seize 
this  moment  to  say  what  I  had  not  meant  to  say,  that 


78          THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

this  comes  as  a  personal  appeal  to-night  to  every  one  of  us 
here  by  the  fact  of  the  meeting,  comes  to  you  young  men 
who  are  here  in  such  masses  and  multitudes,  not  merely 
because  you  are  here  for  a  great  and  interesting  occasion ; 
you  are  here  before  the  unseen,  the  real,  the  personal 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  here  to  you ;  He  is  now  speak 
ing  to  you  through  this  meeting  as  His  voice ;  and  you 
will  have  to  say  something  to  Him,  whatever  it  is,  in 
reply, — as  to  whether  for  His  service,  whether  at  home  or 
abroad,  whether  in  the  commonest  round  of  the  most 
ordinary  life  till  you  die,  or  whether  in  the  high  places 
of  the  field,  you  are  prepared  to  live  as  those  that  have 
put  their  hands  in  His,  and  have  recognised  distinctly 
that  the  centre  of  your  life  is  shifted  off  self  on  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  that  you  have  distinctly  laid  down  under 
neath  His  feet  all  those  desires  to  attract  notice  for 
self's  sake,  to  get  praise,  even  the  least  item,  that  shall 
terminate  in  self.  You  belong  to  Him  if  you  are  His ; 
you  are  to  live  aa  those  that  belong  to  Him.  All  your 
gains  of  every  kind  are  to  go  into  your  Master's  purse, 
and  He  is  to  decide  where,  and  how,  and  how  long  you 
are  to  serve/ 

"  Let  it  be  remembered  that  this  speech  was  delivered 
only  six  months  after  that  crisis  in  the  speaker's  spiritual 
history  which  was  described,  in  his  own  words,  in  our 
84th  chapter.  Can  we  not  hear  in  the  utterance  of 
March  the  echo  of  what  he  tells  us  he  had  learned  in 
September  ? — the  echo  heard  also  in  the  exquisite  hymn 
he  wrote  at  that  very  time — 

"  My  glorious  Victor,  Prince  Divine, 
Clasp  these  surrendered  hands  in  Thine 
At  length  my  will  is  all  Thine  own, 
Glad  vassal  of  a  Saviour's  throne  1 " 


THE   CHURCH   MISSIONARY   SOCIETY  79 

11  But  the  great  subject  of  thought  and  prayer  as  the 
year  1885  was  running  out  its  course  was  the  coming 
campaign  of  Simultaneous  Meetings,  which,  having  been 
at  first  fixed  for  November,  but  pushed  aside  by  the 
General  Election,  was  now  to  be  undertaken  in  February 
1886.  The  scheme,  at  first  coldly  received  by  the 
C.M.S.  circle,  had  gradually  won  its  way  to  general 
acceptance;  and  no  less  than  one  hundred  and  sixty 
clergymen  and  laymen  had  promised  to  be  among  the 
deputations  to  the  various  centres. 

"Every  effort  was  made  by  letters,  papers,  and 
articles  in  the  periodicals  to  instruct  the  C.M.S.  circle 
regarding  the  object  of  the  campaign,  namely,  not  to  make 
collections  for  the  C.M.S.,  not  to  push  the  Society  as 
such  at  all,  but  to  arouse  the  consciences  of  Christian 
people  to  their  solemn  duty  to  their  Lord  and  His  cause, 
whatever  the  particular  agency  they  might  want  to  use 
and  to  help.  An  extract  from  one  article  in  the  Intelli 
gencer  will  illustrate  the  point : — 

"  *  We  earnestly  hope  that  the  speakers,  one  and  all, 
will  deliberately  and  fearlessly  take  the  highest  ground 
in  their  speeches.  The  occasion  is  not  one  for  even  such 
passing  pleasantries  as  may  legitimately  and  even  advan 
tageously  relieve  the  ordinary  meeting.  Questions  of 
geography,  commerce,  etc.,  will  be  quite  out  of  place.  So 
will  everything  controversial.  Mere  descriptions  of  the 
native  peoples,  their  social  customs  and  religious  rites, 
will  fail  utterly  of  the  great  object  in  view.  The  attitude 
of  the  speakers  before  the  audience  should  be  such  as 
might  be  expressed  in  the  words,  "I  have  a  message 
from  God  unto  thee."  The  evangelisation  of  the  world 
— the  greatest  of  all  works  in  the  light  of  eternity — how 
is  it  to  be  compassed  ?  what  are  its  claims  upon  us  ? — this 


80          THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

is  the  theme  for  our  speakers  on  this  occasion.  Such  a 
theme  does  not  preclude  the  personal  narrative  of  a 
missionary,  or  actual  illustrations  of  any  kind  from  the 
field.  We  lately  heard  a  lady  medical  missionary  of  the 
Church  of  England  Zenana  Society  tell  in  the  simplest 
way  the  story  of  her  own  work  at  a  drawing-room  meet 
ing.  She  preached  no  sermon ;  she  delivered  no  "  dis 
course  " ;  it  was  plain  narrative,  with  a  very  few  words 
of  appeal  at  the  end.  But  the  tone  and  spirit  and 
language  and  grouping  of  facts  were  such,  that  we  have 
rarely,  if  ever,  seen  so  deep  an  impression  apparently 
produced.  The  feeling  at  the  end  was  not,  "  That  was 
a  nice  speech,"  or  "  How  well  she  did  it ! "  or  "  She  seems 
a  very  excellent  and  earnest  person,"  or  even,  "  Keally, 
it  must  he  a  useful  Society.  I  think  I  must  subscribe." 
But  it  was — "  Truly  this  is  the  Lord's  work,  marvellous 
in  our  eyes ;  and  yet  He  calls  us  to  share  in  it ;  not  one 
of  us  is  exempt ;  and,  God  helping  us,  we  will  from  this 
day  work  and  pray  and  testify  to  others  as  we  have 
never  done  before."  We  do  not  want  great  displays  of 
eloquence  at  our  February  meetings,  but  we  want  that.' 

"The  February  Simultaneous  Meetings  were  held  in 
one  hundred  and  seventy  towns  in  England  and  Wales ; 
London  and  Ireland  being  deferred  to  be  taken  separ 
ately.  At  a  preliminary  conference  Mr.  Blackwood  said 
that,  as  in  planning  the  meetings  we  were  in  sympathy  with 
the  Divine  purpose,  we  might  be  assured  of  the  Divine 
presence,  go  forward  depending  on  Divine  power,  and 
expect  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise.  The  week 
was  an  unfortunate  one  in  one  respect,  namely,  that  all 
the  Bishops  were  meeting  at  Lambeth,  so  that  most  of 
them  could  take  no  personal  part.  But  several  did  con 
trive  to  do  so,  and  others  wrote  sympathetic  letters. 


THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  81 

Archbishop  Benson,  in  particular,  promised  his  'daily 
prayers  through  the  week  for  the  Simultaneous  Meetings/ 
and  added  one  of  his  many  phrases  that  stick, — '  We 
shall  feel  the  effect.'  The  words  are  simple  enough,  but 
they  proved  the  exact  truth.  For  the  meetings  them 
selves  were  not  all  successful ;  it  was,  as  a  writer  ex 
pressed  it,  '  a  day  of  small  towns,'  and  although  from 
more  than  half  the  places  the  report  was,  '  Never  such  a 

meeting  before  in ,'  yet  when  one  reads  those  reports 

now,  the  feeling  is,  *  Was  that  all  ? '  But  most  assuredly 
we  have  'felt  the  effect.'  The  movement  as  a  whole  was 
greater  than  the  aggregate  of  its  parts.  The  simultan- 
eousness  of  the  meetings  told.  Public  attention  was 
aroused.  Missions  were  seen  to  be  no  mere  charity 
asking  for  money,  but  to  be  a  great  and  holy  cause  de 
manding,  and  deserving,  a  front  place  in  the  Church's 
thoughts  and  in  the  thoughts  of  every  Christian. 

"  Lastly,  we  come  to  another  of  the  pre-eminently 
important  events  of  the  year  1887 — the  adoption  of  the 
Policy  of  Faith. 

"It  was  on  this  wise.  The  remarkable  missionary 
meeting  at  the  Keswick  Convention  in  the  July  of  that 
year  was  noticed  earlier.  Its  influence  on  the  Society's 
employment  of  women  missionaries  we  shall  see  here 
after.  But  on  the  Monday  following  that  memorable 
Saturday,  Mr.  Webb-Peploe  and  Mr.  James  Johnston  of 
Lagos  returned  to  London,  and  at  the  ordinary  C.M.S. 
Committee  meeting  on  the  Tuesday,  informed  the  Society 
of  what  they  had  seen  and  heard.  A  solemn  impression 
was  produced,  and  earnest  prayer  was  offered  that  God 
would  guide  what  might  possibly  turn  out  to  be  an 
important  missionary  impulse — and  guide  the  Society 
also  in  its  relations  to  the  spiritual  movements  of  the 


82          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PEOBLEM 

day.  After  the  vacation,  the  General  Committee  again 
reviewed  the  position,  in  the  light  of  a  report  from  the 
Estimates  Committee,  warning  the  Society  that  candi 
dates  were  multiplying  faster  than  funds.  The  dis 
cussions  on  both  occasions  were  conducted  with  much 
gravity  and  reverence,  and  with  an  evident  desire  to 
know  and  to  do  the  will  of  the  Lord.  On  the  one  hand 
it  was  argued  that  the  work  should  be  limited  by  the 
funds  at  the  Society's  disposal.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
was  urged  that  the  men  now  coming  forward  more  freely 
were  unmistakably  men  sent  by  God,  and,  if  so,  was  it 
not  a  reasonable  faith  to  claim  from  Him,  in  all  humility, 
the  means  to  maintain  them,  and  to  be  assured  that  He 
would  certainly  provide  them  in  His  own  way?  Ulti 
mately,  after  fervent  prayer,  it  was  determined  to  refuse 
no  candidate,  and  to  keep  back  no  missionary  ready  to 
sail,  merely  on  financial  grounds. 

"  No  one  knew  at  the  time  that  this  was  only  revert 
ing  to  the  policy  emphatically  announced  by  the  com 
mittee  in  the  Annual  Report  of  1883.  That  fact  was  not 
discovered  till  ten  years  after  this.  God  was  again  lead 
ing  the  Committee  by  a  way  that  they  knew  not.  Nor 
did  anyone  dream  of  what  the  results  would  be  of  this 
decision  of  1887.  Seven  years  passed  away  before  they 
were  realised.  But  God  gave  the  Society  grace  to  adhere 
to  the  resolution,  and  to  trust  Him ;  and  that  trust  He 
abundantly  rewarded,  as  we  shall  see  by  and  by. 

"  Meanwhile,  under  a  deep  sense  of  the  need  of  such 
special  grace,  and  of  diffusing  in  the  C.M.S.  circle  a 
spirit  of  humble  faith  and  unreserved  dedication  to 
Christ's  service,  it  was  arranged  to  hold  a  Whole-Day 
Devotional  Gathering  in  Exeter  Hall.  This  gathering  was 
held  on  llth  January  1888.  There  were  three  meetings. 


THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  83 

"  Of  the  six  speakers,  four  were  of  the  most  prominent 
Keswick  leaders.  The  three  subjects  of  the  day  were 
Spiritual  Shortcomings,  Spiritual  Possibilities,  and  Spir 
itual  Determinations.  To  not  a  few  who  were  present,  all 
day  it  was  a  day  of  much  spiritual  instruction  and  profit. 
The  Committee  had  invited  their  friends  '  to  humble  them 
selves  before  God  for  all  shortcomings  and  mixed  motives 
and  lack  of  zeal  and  love,  to  consecrate  themselves 
solemnly  to  His  service,  and  to  plead  for  His  rich  blessing,' 
and  to  that  invitation  a  heartfelt  response  was  given. 

"So  we  close  the  record  of  those  three  memorable 
years.  It  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our 
eyes." 

The  fact  that  of  the  six  speakers  four  were  of 
the  Keswick  leaders — Messrs.  Handley  Moule,  Webb- 
Peploe,  C.  A.  Fox,  and  E.  Hopkins — proves  how 
closely  the  movement  for  the  deepening  of  spiritual 
life  at  Keswick,  and  the  quickening  of  the  mission 
ary  spirit  in  the  Society,  were  allied.  It  proclaims 
as  with  trumpet  voice  the  great  truth,  that,  if  the 
Church  is  to  be  aroused  to  do  her  duty  towards  the 
evangelisation  of  the  world,  there  must  not  only  be 
the  missionary  appeal,  but  that  living  experience 
of  the  Spirit's  power  which  will  fit  the  speakers  for 
appealing  to  the  right  motive,  and  the  Christian 
Church  for  yielding  to  it  personal  and  whole 
hearted  devotion  to  Jesus  Christ  and  His  service. 

In  coming  to  the  year  1890  the  historian 
writes — 

"This  History  has  dwelt  before  upon  the  influence  of 


84          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PKOBLEM 

the  Keswick  Convention  on  the  Society,  and  it  is  another 
indirect  result  of  that  influence  which  must  now  be 
noticed.  In  July  1890  it  so  happened  that  several 
evangelical  clergymen  who  had  been  supposed  to  stand 
rather  aloof  from  the  Keswick  movement  were  present  at 
the  Convention  for  the  first  time,  the  most  of  them  as 
listeners.  A  conversation  on  the  needs  of  the  C.M.S.  led 
to  a  private  Conference,  at  which  were  also  present  some 
of  the  Convention  leaders,  who  were  also  supporters  of  the 
Society.  The  result  was  the  drawing  up  of  a  letter  to  be 
sent  to  the  C.M.S.  Committee,  which  was  signed  by  those 
present,  and  dispatched  by  those  present  to  Mr.  Wigram 
in  London.  This  document  came  to  be  known  afterwards 
as  'The  Keswick  Letter,'  though  it  in  no  way  emanated 
from  the  Convention,  but  from  a  band  of  tried  friends  of 
the  Society  only.  No  doubt,  however,  it  was  inspired  by 
the  influence  of  the  solemn  and  stirring  meetings  which 
had  been  taking  place.  The  Voice  of  the  Lord  had  been 
very  plainly  heard  that  week.  The  sin  of  '  limiting  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel,'  the  claims  of  Christ  upon  all  that 
His  people  are  and  have,  the  mighty  possibilities  of  a 
faith  that  rests  not  on  man,  but  on  Him  alone,  had  all 
been  set  forth  before  the  assembled  crowds  with  great 
power,  and  the  application  was  obvious,  not  to  individual 
lives  only,  but  also  to  the  work  of  the  Church  in  the  world. 
In  that  sense,  the  term  '  Keswick  Letter  '  was  correct. 

"  The  letter  called  attention  to  the  pressing  needs  of 
India,  the  recent  appeal  for  China  sent  home  by  the 
Shanghai  Missionary  Conference,  and  the  African  tribes 
discovered  in  Mr.  Stanley's  latest  journey.  'The  case,' 
it  said,  '  when  viewed  in  all  lights,  is  so  startling  that  it 
justifies  an  advance  on  a  large  scale  under  the  directing 
hand  of  God,'  and  it  proceeded  to  suggest  the  issue  of  an 


THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  85 

appeal  for  one  thousand  missionaries  '  within  the  next  few 
years.'  No  period  was  named;  some  said  'By  the 
centenary ' ;  others  an  even  shorter  time ;  but  the  letter 
itself  left  this  open.  '  We  are  far,'  the  letter  added, 
'from  desiring  that  the  standard  of  spiritual  life  and 
teaching  should  be  lowered;  on  the  contrary,  we  urge 
that  no  one  should  be  accepted  for  any  department  of  the 
work  who  has  not  given  proof  of  a  desire  to  seek  souls, 
and  of  a  power  to  win  them  to  Christ.'  The  letter  was 
dated  the  25th;  it  was  received  by  the  C.M.S.  Committee 
by  the  29th.  A  grateful  and  cordial  resolution  was  at 
once  passed,  and  further  consideration  deferred  until  after 
the  recess.  Meanwhile  critics  and  objectors  quickly 
made  their  views  known.  What  would  become  of  the 
home-heathen  if  everybody  went  abroad?  It  did  not 
seem  to  occur  to  the  propounders  of  this  question  that, 
supposing  one  thousand  of  the  five  thousand  parishes 
contributing  to  the  C.M.S.  to  be  earnest  supporters,  the 
letter  asked  only  for  one  worker  from  each  parish !  In 
truth,  the  utter  failure  of  some  evangelical  churchmen  to 
see  the  enormous  disproportion  of  workers  devoted  to 
home  work  in  comparison  with  foreign  work,  was  never 
more  sadly  conspicuous. 

"  In  October  the  committee  set  to  work,  making  careful 
inquiries  into  the  needs,  and  appointing  sub-committees 
to  consider  suggestions.  In  December,  many  friends 
having  asked  for  a  more  definite  expression  of  the 
Committee's  opinion  regarding  the  suggestion  of  one 
thousand  missionaries,  they  adopted  a  string  of  important 
resolutions  on  the  general  outlook  of  the  missionary 
enterprise,  the  urgent  need  of  labourers,  and  the  duty  of 
scrupulously  maintaining  a  high  standard  in  the  accept 
ance  of  candidates,  while  they  affirmed  that  if  'the 


86          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

Church's  responsibilities  to  her  Divine  Head  were  duly 
recognised  by  the  tens  of  thousands  of  members  of  the 
C.M.S.,  they  would  not  rest  satisfied  with  sending  out 
only  one  thousand  additional  workers.'1 

"  It  cannot  be  said  that  these  appeals  led  to  any  speedy 
and  definite  result.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  the  thought 
of  the  thousand  missionaries  remained  long  in  the  mind 
of  the  Committee,  and  its  fulfilment  watched.  Neverthe 
less  the  Lord  Himself  had  His  own  purposes,  which  were 
ripening  though  scarcely  noticed.  Before  the  Centenary 
Year  opened,  1899,  more  than  eight  hundred  names  had 
been  added  to  the  roll — clergymen,  laymen,  wives,  and 
single  women,  and  all  probabilities  point  to  the  number  of 
one  thousand  being  exceeded  before  ten  years  have  elapsed 
since  the  Keswick  Letter  was  written.  This  would  be 
three  times  the  number  added  in  the  preceding  years. 

"  After  a  statement  of  how  the  Keswick  Letter  had  led 
to  the  adoption  of  the  system  of  appropriated  contribu 
tions,  by  which  many  thousands  of  pounds  had  been 
added  to  the  Society's  income  yearly — in  the  year  ending 
March  1898,  £5700— the  historian  adds:  'The  Keswick 
Letter  of  1890  did,  directly  or  indirectly,  a  greater  work 
than  even  its  signatories  expected.  It  was,  in  fact, 
merely  an  instrument  in  God's  hand  for  setting  in  motion 
or  giving  an  impetus  to  certain  influences,  which  have 
had  a  large  share  in  the  recent  progress  of  the  C.M.S.  In 
all  its  advances  the  Society  may  well  say  with  St.  Paul, 
4i  Yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me." ' " 

Before  laying  aside  the  History  of  the  Society, 
just  one  more  paragraph  from  its  closing  chapter — 

1In  the  C.M.S.  Report  for  1901  we  read:  "The  number  of 
additional  workers  sent  out  in  the  ten  years  was  exactly  om 
thousand  and  two.*' 


THE    CHUKCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  87 

"  We  have  learned  in  our  long  survey  that  missionary 
advance  depends  upon  spiritual  life.  Evangelical  Ortho 
doxy  is  powerless  in  itself  to  spread  the  gospel.  Unim 
peachable  Protestant  teaching  in  the  pulpit,  and  the 
plainest  of  church  services,  may  be  seen  in  combination 
with  entire  neglect  of  the  Lord's  great  Commission.  Let 
the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  stir  the  heart  and  enlighten  the 
eyes,  and  the  conversion  of  the  unconverted  becomes  a 
matter  of  anxious  concern.  And  so  we  have  seen  in  these 
pages  how  much  the  modern  development  of  missions 
owes  to  the  spiritual  movements  of  the  day.  In  a  word, 
Consecration  and  the  Evangelisation  of  the  World  go 
together.  The  latter  depends  upon  the  former.  This 
History  has  shown  us  how  the  missionary  impulse  a 
hundred  years  ago  sprang  from  the  Methodist  Eevival ; 
how  the  early  German  missionaries  were  the  fruit  of  the 
Pietist  movement  on  the  Continent;  how  the  recent 
growth  of  missionary  zeal  in  the  Church  of  England  is 
due  in  no  small  degree  to  the  influence  of  an  American 
evangelist,  and  a  free-lance  China  missionary,  neither  of 
them  a  member  of  the  Church.  God  has  shown  us  that 
He  is  a  Sovereign,  and  that  He  works  according  to  His 
Will,  sometimes  by  means  of  the  most  unlikely  instru 
ments — because  it  has  pleased  Him  to  fill  those  instru 
ments  with  His  Spirit." 

We  have  seen  in  the  story  of  Dr.  Moule,  in  the 
Keswick  Letter,  in  the  prominent  place  given  to 
Keswick  speakers  at  some  of  the  turning-points  in 
the  History  of  the  C.M.S.,  how  close  was  the  con 
nection  between  the  Keswick  Movement  for  the 
deepening  of  the  spiritual  life  and  the  quickening 
missionary  life  and  enthusiasm  in  the  Society.  God 


88          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

does  not  stereotype  movements  and  methods  through 
which  He  sends  blessing.  But  He  would  have  His 
children  in  each  case  learn  what  the  secret  source 
of  the  blessing  was.  What  was  the  power  in  the 
case  of  the  Keswick  Convention,  and  the  blessing 
it  wrought  ?  The  answer  may  be  found  in  the 
expression — the  Deepening  of  the  Spiritual  Life. 

No  one  can  understand  the  value  of  Keswick 
who  does  not  give  full  weight  to  the  deep  sense  in 
many  believers  of  a  lack  in  the  spiritual  life,  and  the 
faith  that  a  definite  deepening  and  strengthening  of 
it  is  possible.  The  consciousness  of  that  lack  was 
generally  felt  in  connection  with  the  painful 
experience  of  the  power  of  sin  in  daily  life.  The 
memoirs  of  the  first  originator  of  the  Convention, 
Canon  Battersby,  and  of  the  latest  and  youngest  acces 
sion  to  its  platform,  Eev.  G.  H.  C.  M'Gregor,  both 
prove  this.  They  were  both  men  of  marked  godli 
ness  in  life  and  devotion  to  their  Master's  work. 
But  there  was  always  a  secret  dissatisfaction  and 
self-condemnation.  How  was  it,  they  asked,  that 
temper,  selfishness,  worldliness  so  often  gained  the 
upper  hand,  and  robbed  the  soul  of  its  peace  ?  All 
their  struggles  and  prayers  appeared  vain ;  deliver 
ance  appeared  impossible.  They  heard  men  testify 
of  having  been  once  in  the  same  state,  but  having 
found  that  it  was  owing  to  their  not  knowing 
Christ's  full  power  to  save.  They  were  told  that 


THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  89 

there  was  a  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin 
which  Christ  can  give,  not  as  a  removal  of  the 
sinful  taint  out  of  the  nature,  but  in  virtue  of  His 
own  presence  and  keeping  power.  As  they  listened 
they  saw  how  little  they  had  believed  in  that  power 
of  Christ  as  a  real  continual  experience.  They  saw 
in  God's  word  that  it  was  what  Christ  could  do  and 
would  do,  and  that  on  their  part  nothing  was  needed 
but  a  new — and  now,  in  the  assurance  that  He  would 
fit  for  it,  a  full — surrender  to  His  keeping  and 
service.  They  yielded,  they  believed,  they  intrusted 
themselves  in  a  way  they  had  never  known  before, 
and  they  testified  that  Christ  was  faithful,  and 
brought  them  into  a  life  of  communion,  of  peace 
and  strength  in  His  own  keeping,  that  they  had 
never  known  before.  And  it  was  the  living  testi 
mony  of  these  and  many  others  that  gave  the 
Keswick  platform  its  wonderful  attractiveness  and 
power.  Men  stood  there  as  living  witnesses  to  the 
power  of  Christ  to  save  from  the  power  of  sin  in 
daily  life. 

Around  the  three  words,  Sin,  Faith,  Consecra 
tion — deep  conviction  of  sin  was  often  the  first 
sign  that  the  teaching  was  laying  hold — the  whole 
Keswick  teaching  continually  circles.  George 
M'Gregor  wrote  from  Keswick — 

"  I  have  learned  innumerable  lessons,  principally 
these :  my  own  sinfulness  and  shortcoming.  I  have 


90          THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

been  searched  through  and  through,  and  bared  and 
exposed,  and  searched  by  God's  light.  And  then  I  have 
learned  the  unsearchableness  of  Christ.  How  Christ  is 
magnified  here,  you  can  have  scarcely  any  idea.  And  I 
have  learned  the  absolute  necessity  of  obedience.  Given 
obedience  and  faith,  nothing  is  impossible." 

Speaking  of  his  nervous  temperament,  manifesting 
itself  in  quick  temper,  and  the  thought  that  it  is  a 
cross  to  be  borne,  his  biographer  says — 

"At  Keswick  he  learnt  to  think  differently  about 
this.  There  he  learned,  as  never  before,  to  understand 
that  yielding  to  any  evil  tendency,  however  deeply 
rooted  in  one's  nature,  were  it  hereditary  twenty  times 
over,  is  Sin.  And  God  does  not  mean  His  children 
to  live  in  any  kind  of  sin,  or  of  yielding  to  sin.  He  calls 
men  to  holiness,  and  when  He  so  calls  He  does  not  mock 
them  by  impossibilities.  In  his  season  of  self-abasement 
at  Keswick,  Mr.  M'Gregor  had  a  special  sense  of  the  evil, 
and  made  a  special  confession  to  God  of  this  besetting  sin 
of  temper.  And  when  after  these  days  of  consecration  he 
left  Keswick,  certainly,  to  a  large  extent,  the  evil  temper 
was  left  behind.  From  that  time  he  was  really,  in  this 
respect,  a  different  man." 

Paul  wrote  of  the  Corinthians  that,  because  there 
was  among  them  strife  and  division,  they  were  still 
carnal  and  not  spiritual.  One  chief  mark  of  the 
desire  to  be  truly  spiritual  is  the  desire  not  to  sin, 
to  be  delivered  from  the  common  sins  of  which  the 
average  Christianity  is  so  tolerant.  When  this 
desire  ripens  into  faith  the  soul  is  brought  into  an 


THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  91 

altogether  fresh  and  much  clearer  consciousness  o! 
Christ's  power  to  save,  and  learns  how  broad  and 
deep  is  the  meaning  of  faith,  as  it  lives  by  the  faith 
of  Him  who  loved  and  gave  Himself,  and  now  lives 
in  us,  and  is  Himself  our  Keeper.  The  new  ex 
perience  of  what  Christ  has  done  for  oneself  leads 
to  a  larger  trust  in  what  He  can  do  for  others,  and 
gives  a  point  and  a  courage  in  testifying  of  Him, 
which  brings  a  new  tone  into  a  man's  preaching  or 
speaking.  Christ  becomes  more  distinctly  the 
centre  of  all  thought  and  all  work,  at  once  the 
source,  the  subject,  the  strength  of  all  our  witness. 
With  this  the  claim  of  Christ  and  His  service  to 
our  devotion  and  loyalty  and  entire  surrender 
becomes  clearer,  and  it  is  seen  that  entire  consecra 
tion,  which  at  conversion  was  scarce  understood,  is 
at  once  our  simple  duty  and  our  highest  privilege. 
And  work  for  Christ,  or  rather  a  life  wholly  given 
up  to  live  for  Him  and  for  the  souls  He  loves, 
becomes  the  unceasing  aim  of  the  liberated  soul 

In  its  teaching  of  these  truths  Keswick  is 
naturally  led  to  lay  emphasis  on  the  mighty  saving 
power  of  Christ,  on  the  sin  of  limiting  Him,  on  the 
call  to  honour  Him  by  an  unbounded  trust,  and  on 
His  claims  to  a  life  wholly  devoted  to  His  will  and 
service.  The  transition  from  the  thought  of  faith 
and  consecration,  as  related  to  personal  blessing,  to 
their  application  to  a  life  given  up  to  winning  souls 


92          THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

to  the  Saviour,  is  simple  and  sure.  And  many 
have  found  that  what  at  first  was  sought  for  the 
sake  of  personal  blessing,  becomes  the  power  for 
living  to  be  a  blessing  to  others.  And  so  the 
deepening  of  the  Christian  life  becomes  the 
power  of  a  new  devotion  to  missions  and  the 
Kingdom  of  our  Lord. 

It  is  this  thought  that  the  story  of  the  C.M.S. 
teaches.  This  is  the  lesson  the  whole  Church  of  Christ 
may  learn  from  it  in  its  search  after  the  kQy  to  the 
missionary  problem.  Many  can  never  attend  a  Con 
vention.  It  may  appear  difficult  or  impossible  to  move 
our  large  churches  or  societies  simultaneously,  so  as  to 
get  the  life  really  deepened  and  fitted  for  the  tremen 
dous  work  that  has  been  undertaken  in  the  name  of 
this  generation.  Let  the  beginning  be  made  with 
single  congregations.  Let  the  pastor  learn  and  teach 
that  all  failure  in  caring,  and  giving,  and  praying,  and 
living  for  missions,  is  owing  to  a  feeble  superficial 
spiritual  life.  Let  him  call  upon  his  people  to 
follow  him  as  he  seeks  to  lead  them  to  a  deeper 
spiritual  life.  Let  him  speak  of  sin,  and  Christ  as 
a  Saviour  from  it ;  of  faith  in  Christ  as  able  to  do 
more  than  we  have  experienced  or  expected ;  of 
entire  consecration,  the  giving  up  of  our  will  and 
all  we  have,  to  be  wholly  under  the  control  of  our 
Lord,  as  the  only  door  to  abiding  happiness  and  to 
true  service.  Let  him  plead  with  his  people,  by 


\ 
THE    CHURCH    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY  93 

the  love  and  honour  of  Christ,  by  the  need  of  the 
heathen,  by  the  inconceivable  privilege  of  being 
made  the  channel  of  the  Divine  life  to  the  souls  of 
men,  to  come  and  be  whole-hearted  for  Christ.  Let 
him  speak  of  work  for  Christ  among  those  near  or 
far  off  as  the  one  thing  by  which  we  can  prove  our 
faith  and  love.  Let  him  gather  the  people  to  pray 
for  the  Holy  Spirit's  working  in  themselves  to  fit 
them  for  mission  work.  Let  him  encourage  the 
faith  that,  to  hearts  that  give  themselves  in  sim 
plicity  to  their  Lord,  expecting  His  guidance,  He 
will  show  what  He  would  have  them  do.  As  the 
deepening  of  the  spiritual  life  and  the  devotion  to 
mission  work  are  together  sought  after,  the  one  will 
react  on  the  other,  because  both  have  their  root  in 
Jesus  Christ  Himself,  revealed  afresh  as  Saviour 
and  Lord. 

When  such  a  new  revelation  of  Christ  takes 
place,  and  a  new  relationship  is  established,  prayer 
becomes  the  spontaneous  turning  of  the  soul,  or  of 
a  company  of  believers,  to  Him  who  has  proved  His 
power  to  them,  and  from  whom  they  know  that  the 
power  will  come  for  all  they  have  to  do,  and  on  all 
the  work  that  is  done.  For  the  sad  complaint  of  lack 
of  time  or  heart  for  much  prayer,  for  the  vain  call  to 
more  prayer,  there  is  but  one  cure — the  deepening 
of  the  spiritual  life.  The  missionary  problem  is  a 
personal  one.  Lead  men  to  the  deliverance  there  is 


94          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

in  Christ  from  the  half-hearted,  worldly  life  in  which 
they  have  lived,  back  to  the  "  first  love  "  of  a  personal 
attachment  and  devotion  to  the  living,  loving  Christ, 
and  to  see  that  there  is  no  life  worth  living  but 
that  of  devotion  to  His  kingdom,  and  prayer,  secret 
and  united,  will  flow,  and  the  blessing  it  draws  down 
from  heaven  will  prepare  the  Church  to  labour  as 
it  has  never  yet  done,  and  to  see  blessing  above  all 
we  can  ask  or  think.1 


1  This  very  day,  as  I  am  reading  these  pages  over  regarding  the 
connection  between  the  spiritual  life  and  the  deepening  of  mission 
interest,  I  have  a  letter  from  a  young  minister  telling  me  of  such 
blessing  received  by  himself  and  his  people  during  the  ten  days  of 
united  prayer  between  Ascension  and  Whitsunday.  He  writes  : 
' '  Personally,  the  blessing  has  been  great  too.  As  never  before  we 
understood  the  acceptance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  faith."  And  then 
he  adds  later  on  :  "  Part  of  the  blessing  received  is  an  altogether 
new  and  deep  interest  in  missions.  Hence  my  first  sermon  after 
Whitsunday  was  a  mission  one.  Through  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
more  than  one  has  been  convinced  of  our  terribly  sinful  state  in 
doing  next  to  nothing  for  that  glorious  work. " 

The  missionary  problem  is  a  personal  one.  Seek  the  deepening 
of  the  spiritual  life,  and  missionary  consecration  will  follow. 


CHAPTER    V 


Cfjina  Inland  JHissfon 
anfc  tfje  $otoer  of  JSeltefring  $rager 


IN  the  New  York  Conference,  the  China  Inland 
Mission  was  more  than  once  mentioned.  Under 
the  leadership  of  one  man  of  faith  God  had,  in  the 
course  of  thirty  years,  led  out  600  missionaries 
into  the  field,  without  any  guarantee  for  funds  for 
their  support  beyond  what  God  might  give  in 
answer  to  believing  prayer.  We  have  already 
seen  how  strongly  the  historian  of  the  C.M.S 
speaks  of  the  blessing  that  Society  owes  to  the 
China  Inland  Mission  in  stirring  it  to  give  the 
Policy  of  Faith  a  large  place  in  its  work.  If  the 
Church  at  large  is  to  profit  by  the  example,  it  is 
well  that  all  Christians  who  take  part  in  the  sup 
port  of  Missions  should  know  what  was  the  secret 
of  its  power.  There  need  be  no  copying  of  its 
methods  and  organisation.  There  is  urgent  need 
everywhere  throughout  the  Church  of  learning 
from  every  side  what  the  way  is  in  which  the 

95 


96          THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

power  of  God   can    be   brought   into   our    mission 
work. 

At  the  New  York  Conference  Mr.  Hudson  Taylor- 
spoke  of  the  source  of  power  for  Christian  missions, 
and  gave  an  instance  of  what  the  power  of  believing 
prayer  is.  I  quote  at  some  length  from  his  speech — 

"  God  Himself  is  the  great  source  of  power.  Power 
belongeth  unto  God.  .  .  .  Further,  God's  power  is  avail 
able  power.  We  are  a  supernatural  people,  born  again  by 
a  supernatural  birth,  kept  by  a  supernatural  power,  sus 
tained  on  supernatural  food,  taught  by  a  supernatural 
Teacher  from  a  supernatural  book.  We  are  led  by  a 
supernatural  Captain  in  right  paths  to  assured  victories. 
The  risen  Saviour,  ere  He  ascended  on  high,  said  to  His 
disciples,  '  Ye  shall  receive  power  when  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  come  upon  you.'  Not  many  days  after  this,  in  answer 
to  united  and  continued  prayer,  the  Holy  Ghost  did  come 
upon  them,  and  they  were  all  filled.  Praise  God,  He 
remains  with  us  still.  The  power  given  is  not  a  gift  from 
the  Holy  Ghost.  He  Himself  is  the  power.  To-day 
He  is  as  truly  available  and  as  mighty  in  power  as  He 
was  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  But  has  the  whole  Church 
ever,  since  the  days  before  Pentecost,  put  aside  every  other 
work  and  waited  for  Him  for  ten  days,  that  that  power 
might  be  manifested  ?  Has  there  not  been  a  source  of 
failure  here?  We  have  given  too  much  attention  to 
methods  and  to  machinery  and  to  resources,  and  too 
little  to  the  Source  of  Power — the  filling  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  This,  I  think,  you  will  agree  with  me,  is  the 
great  weakness,  has  been  the  great  weakness,  of  our  ser 
vice  in  the  past,  and,  unless  remedied,  will  be  the  great 
weakness  in  the  future.  We  are  commanded  to  be  filled 


THE    CHINA    INLAND    MISSION  97 

with  the  Spirit.  If  we  are  not  filled,  we  are  living  in 
disobedience  and  sin,  and  the  cause  of  our  sin  is  the  cause 
of  Israel's  sin  of  old — the  sin  of  unbelief. 

"  It  is  not  lost  time  to  wait  upon  God.  May  I  refer 
to  a  small  gathering  of  about  a  dozen  men  in  which  I  was 
permitted  to  take  part  some  years  ago,  in  November  1886. 
We  in  the  China  Inland  Mission  were  feeling  greatly  the 
need  of  Divine  guidance  in  the  matter  of  organisation  in 
the  field  and  in  the  matter  of  reinforcement,  and  we 
came  together  before  our  Conference  to  spend  eight  days 
in  united  waiting  upon  God,  four  alternate  days  being 
days  of  fasting  as  well  as  prayer.  This  was  November 
1886  when  we  gathered  together;  we  were  led  to  pray 
for  a  hundred  missionaries  to  be  sent  out  by  our  English 
Board  in  the  year  1887,  from  January  to  December.  And, 
further  than  this,  our  income  had  not  been  elastic  for  some 
years ;  it  had  been  about  £22,000 ;  and  we  had,  in  connec 
tion  with  that  Forward  Movement,  to  ask  God  for  £10,000, 
say  $50,000,  in  addition  to  the  income  of  the  previous 
year.  More  than  this,  we  were  guided  to  pray  that  this 
might  be  given  in  large  sums,  so  that  the  force  of  our 
staff  might  not  be  unduly  occupied  in  the  acknowledg 
ment  of  contributions.  What  was  the  result?  God  sent 
us  offers  of  service  from  over  six  hundred  men  and  women 
during  the  following  year,  and  those  who  were  deemed 
to  be  ready  and  suitable  were  accepted,  and  were  sent  out 
to  China;  and  it  proved  that  at  the  end  of  the  year 
exactly  one  hundred  had  gone.  What  about  the  income  ? 
God  did  not  give  us  exactly  the  £10,000  we  asked  for, 
but  He  gave  us  £11,000,  and  that  £11,000  came  in  eleven 
contributions :  the  smallest  was  £500,  say  $2500,  the 
largest  was  $12,500,  or  £2500.  We  had  a  thanksgiving 
for  the  men  and  the  money  that  were  coming  in  Novem- 


38          THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

ber  1886,  but  they  were  all  received  and  sent  out  before 
the  end  of  December  1887. 

"The  power  of  the  living  God  is  available  power.  We 
may  call  upon  Him  in  the  name  of  Christ,  with  the 
assurance  that  if  we  are  taught  by  the  Spirit  in  our 
prayers,  those  prayers  will  be  answered." 

Where  and  how  had  the  secret  of  such  believing 
prayer  been  learnt  ?  Was  it  a  gift  bestowed  by  the 
Divine  favour  on  a  chosen  one,  which  others  cannot 
expect  to  receive  ?  or  was  it  the  result  of  training 
and  practising,  the  reward  of  faithfulness  in  little 
things,  to  teach  us  that  we  too  can  walk  in  the  same 
path  ?  It  was  indeed  a  gift,  as  every  grace  is  a  gift 
of  God  bestowed  in  different  measure  as  He  pleases. 
But  it  was  at  the  same  time  the  outcome  of  a  life 
of  trial  and  obedience,  by  which  the  gift  that  had 
been  but  as  a  little,  hidden,  unconscious  seed  had 
been  developed  and  had  grown  strong,  that  all  God's 
children  might  be  encouraged  to  walk  in  his  foot 
steps,  in  the  assurance  that  to  each  one  in  his 
measure  the  path  of  prevailing  prayer  stands  open. 
Listen  to  the  story  of  how  it  was  learnt : — 

"  Not  many  months  after  my  conversion,  having  a 
leisure  afternoon,  I  retired  to  my  chamber  to  spend  it 
largely  in  communion  with  God.  Well  do  I  remember 
that  occasion.  How,  in  the  gladness  of  my  heart,  I  poured 
out  my  soul  before  God ;  and,  again  and  again  confessing 
my  grateful  love  to  Him  who  had  done  everything  for 
me, — who  had  saved  me  when  I  had  given  up  all  hope 


THE   CHINA   INLAND   MISSION  99 

and  even  wish  for  salvation, — I  besought  Him  to  give  me 
some  work  to  do  for  Him,  as  an  outlet  for  love  and 
gratitude :  some  self-denying  service,  no  matter  what  it 
might  be,  however  trying  or  however  trivial — something 
with  which  He  would  be  pleased,  and  that  I  might  do 
directly  for  Him  who  had  done  so  much  for  me.  Well 
do  I  remember,  as  in  unreserved  consecration  I  put  my 
self,  my  life,  my  friends,  my  all  upon  the  altar,  the  deep 
solemnity  that  came  over  my  soul  with  the  assurance 
that  my  offering  was  accepted.  The  presence  of  God 
became  unutterably  real  and  blessed ;  and  though  but  a 
child  of  fifteen,  I  remember  stretching  myself  on  the 
ground,  and  lying  there  silent  before  Him  with  unspeak 
able  awe  and  unspeakable  joy.  For  what  service  I  was 
accepted  I  know  not;  but  a  deep  consciousness  that  I 
was  no  longer  my  own  took  possession  of  me,  which  has 
never  since  been  effaced.  Within  a  few  months  of  this 
time  of  consecration  the  impression  was  wrought  into  my 
soul  that  it  was  in  China  the  Lord  wanted  me." 

Consecration  is  ever  the  outcome  of  a  powerful 
conversion,  and  the  secret  of  a  life  in  which  power 
in  prayer  and  faith  are  to  be  acquired.  Some  are 
inclined  to  look  upon  it  as  an  attainment  and  an 
end :  its  true  value  consists  in  its  being  a  beginning, 
a  putting  oneself  into  God's  hands  to  prepare  for 
His  service.  It  is  only  the  entrance  into  the  higher 
class  of  the  school  where  God  Himself  teaches  how 
He  would  be  served. 

Hudson  Taylor  had  still  much  to  learn  ere  he  could 
become  the  man  of  faith  who  could  be  a  witness  to 
what  God  can  do.  In  thinking  of  going  to  China 


100       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

he  felt  that  he  wanted  to  do  so  in  faith,  trusting 
God  for  the  supply  of  his  needs.  If  he  was  to  trust 
Him  there,  why  not  learn  to  trust  Him  in  England  ? 
Failure  in  China  might  be  fatal :  he  would  ask  God 
to  teach  him  at  home  how  to  walk  in  faith.  He 
resolved,  though  in  receipt  of  a  salary  as  a  doctor's 
assistant  in  the  dispensary,  never  to  ask  for  it  when 
due :  he  would  learn  to  trust  God  for  it.  He  under 
stood  the  command,  "  Owe  no  man  anything,"  to  be 
meant  literally :  however  great  his  need  might  be,  he 
would  speak  to  none  but  God  about  it.  Two  stories 
out  of  his  experience  at  this  time  show  the  schooling 
through  which  his  faith  was  trained. 

"  At  Hull  my  kind  employer,  busily  occupied,  wished 
me  to  remind  him  when  my  salary  became  due.  I  deter 
mined  to  ask  God  to  bring  the  fact  to  his  recollection,  and 
so  encourage  me  by  answering  prayer.  At  the  end  of  a 
certain  quarter,  when  my  salary  was  due,  one  Saturday 
night  I  found  myself  possessed  of  only  a  single  coin — one 
half-crown  piece.  Still  I  had  hitherto  had  no  lack,  and  I 
continued  in  prayer. 

"  That  Sunday  was  a  very  happy  one.  After  Divine 
service  in  the  morning,  the  rest  of  the  day  was  filled  with 
gospel  work  in  lodging-houses  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  town 
as  usual.  It  seemed  as  though  heaven  had  begun  below. 
After  my  last  service  at  ten  o'clock  that  night,  a  poor  man 
asked  me  to  go  and  pray  with  his  wife,  as  she  was  dying, 
and  the  priest  had  refused  to  come  without  a  payment  of 
one  shilling  and  sixpence,  which  the  man  could  not  pro 
duce,  as  the  family  were  starving.  It  flashed  into  my 


THE    CHINA    INLAND    MISSION  101 

mind  at  once  that  all  the  money  T  possessed  was  the 
solitary  half-crown,  and  that  it  was  in  one  coin,  and, 
moreover,  that  though  I  had  gruel  sufficient  for  supper 
and  for  breakfast,  I  had  nothing  for  dinner  the  next  day. 

"  At  once  there  was  a  stoppage  of  the  flow  of  joy  in  my 
heart.  Instead  of  reproving  myself,  I  began  to  reprove 
the  poor  man.  I  found  he  had  applied  to  the  relieving 
officer,  and  had  been  told  to  come  at  eleven  the  next 
morning ;  but  he  feared  his  wife  might  not  live  through 
the  night.  '  Ah,'  thought  I,  '  if  only  I  had  two  shillings 
and  a  sixpence  instead  of  this  half-crown,  how  gladly  would 
I  give  these  poor  people  one  shilling  ! '  The  truth  of  the 
matter  was  that  I  could  trust  God  plus  one  shilling  and  six 
pence,  but  could  not  trust  Him  only,  without  any  money. 

"  My  conductor  led  me  into  a  court  where,  on  my  last 
visit,  I  had  been  roughly  handled.  I  followed  up  a 
miserable  flight  of  stairs,  and  into  a  wretched  room,  and 
oh,  what  a  sight  presented  itself  to  us  !  Four  or  five 
starved-looking  children  stood  about,  and  on  a  wretched 
pallet  lay  the  poor  mother,  with  a  tiny  babe,  thirty-six 
hours  old,  moaning  at  her  side.  '  Ah/  thought  I,  '  if  I 
had  two  shillings  and  a  sixpence  instead  of  half  a  crown, 
how  gladly  would  I  give  one  shilling  and  sixpence  of  it.' 
Still  unbelief  prevented  me  from  relieving  their  distress 
at  the  cost  of  all  I  possessed. 

"  Strange  to  say,  I  could  not  comfort  these  poor  people. 
I  told  them  not  to  be  cast  down,  for  they  had  a  kind, 
loving  Father  in  heaven ;  but  something  said  to  me,  '  You 
hypocrite,  speaking  about  a  kind,  loving  Father  when  you 
are  not  prepared  to  trust  Him  without  half  a  crown  ! '  I 
was  nearly  choked.  If  I  had  only  had  a  florin  and  a  six 
pence  ! — but  I  was  not  yet  ready  to  trust  God  without  the 
sixpence, 


102       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

"  In  those  days  prayer  was  a  delight  to  me ;  and  I  tried 
to  pray,  but  when  I  opened  my  lips  with  '  Our  Father 
which  art  in  heaven,'  prayer  seemed  a  mockery,  and  I 
passed  through  such  a  time  of  conflict  as  I  have  never 
experienced  before  or  since.  I  arose  from  my  knees  in 
great  distress  of  mind. 

"  The  poor  father  turned  to  me  and  said,  '  Sir,  if  you 
can  help  us,  for  God's  sake,  do ! '  and  the  word  flashed 
into  my  mind,  *  Give  to  him  that  asketh  of  thee ' ;  and  in 
the  word  of  a  king  there  is  power.  Slowly  taking  the 
half-crown  from  my  pocket,  I  gave  it  to  the  man,  saying 
that  I  was  giving  him  my  all,  but  that  God  was  really 
a  Father  and  might  be  trusted.  All  the  joy  came  back 
to  my  heart,  and  the  hindrance  to  blessing  was  gone — 
gone,  I  trust,  for  ever. 

"  Not  only  was  the  woman's  life  saved,  but  I  was  saved 
too.  My  Christian  life  might  have  been  a  wreck  had 
the  striving  of  God's  Spirit  not  been  obeyed.  As  I  went 
home,  my  heart  as  light  as  my  pocket,  the  lonely  streets 
resounded  with  a  hymn  of  praise.  As  I  knelt  at  my  bed 
side,  I  reminded  the  Lord  that  '  he  who  giveth  to  the  poor 
lendeth  to  the  Lord ' ;  and  with  peace  within  and  peace 
without,  I  spent  a  restful  night. 

"  Next  morning,  at  breakfast,  I  was  surprised  to  see  my 
landlady  come  in  with  a  letter  in  her  hand.  1  could  not 
recognise  the  handwriting  or  the  postmark,  and  where  it 
came  from  I  could  not  tell.  On  opening  the  envelope  I 
found,  inside  a  sheet  of  blank  paper,  a  pair  of  kid  gloves, 
and  as  I  opened  them,  half  a  sovereign  fell  to  the  ground. 
1  Praise  the  Lord ! '  I  exclaimed ;  *  four  hundred  per  cent, 
for  twelve  hours'  investment !  How  glad  the  merchants 
of  Hull  would  be  to  lend  their  money  at  such  a  rate  ! ' 
I  then  and  there  determined  that  a  bank  which  could  not 


THE    CHINA    INLAND    MISSION  103 

break  should  have  my  savings, — a  determination  I  have 
not  yet  learned  to  regret." 

A  second  trial  of  faith  occurred  some  days  later. 

"  This  remarkable  deliverance  was  a  great  joy  to  me, 
but  still  ten  shillings  will  not  go  very  far,  and  the  larger 
sum  still  remained  due  to  me.  I  continued  pleading  with 
God  that  He  would  graciously  remind  my  employer  that 
my  salary  was  overdue.  It  was  not  the  want  of  money 
that  troubled  me,  but  the  thought  in  my  mind  was  this : 

I  Can  I  go  to  China  ?  or  will  my  want  of  faith  prove  an 
obstacle  to  this  much-prized  service  1 ' 

"  When  Saturday  evening  came,  a  payment  was  due  to 
my  landlady.  Ought  I  not,  for  her  sake,  to  speak  about 
the  salary  ?  I  gave  much  time  on  Thursday  and  Friday 
to  earnest  wrestling  in  prayer  with  God,  and  by  Saturday 
morning  I  received  an  assurance  that  to  wait  God's  time 
was  best.  Sol  waited,  my  heart  at  rest  and  the  burden  gone. 

"  That  afternoon,  as  I  was  watching  a  pan  in  which  a 
decoction  was  boiling,  the  doctor  came  in  from  his  rounds, 
and,  as  he  was  wont,  began  to  speak  of  the  things  of  God. 
Suddenly,  without  any  introduction,  he  said,  '  By  the 
bye,  Taylor,  is  not  your  salary  due  again  ? '  My  emotion 
may  be  imagined !  I  told  him,  as  quietly  as  I  could,  that 
it  was  overdue  some  little  time.  How  thankful  I  felt ! 
God  had  surely  heard  my  prayer.  Presently  he  continued, 

I 1  am  so  sorry  you  did  not  remind  me,  for  I  sent  all  the 
money  I  had  to  the  bank  this  afternoon;  otherwise  I 
would  pay  you  at  once.'     It  is  impossible  to  describe  my 
revulsion  of  feeling,  and  I  was  glad  to  get  away  without 
the  doctor  perceiving  my  emotion. 

"  I  then  sought  my  little  sanctum,  and  poured  out  my 
heart  before  the  Lord,  till  calmness  and  even  joy  were 


104       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

restored  to  me.     I  felt  that  God  was  going  to  work  in  His 
own  way. 

"  That  evening  was  spent  in  preparing  for  my  work  on 
the  morrow,  and  it  was  about  ten  o'clock  before  I  got 
ready  to  go  home.  There  seemed  no  help  for  that  night ; 
perhaps  on  Monday  God  would  interpose  for  me.  Just 
as  I  was  leaving,  I  heard  the  doctor  come  in,  laughing 
heartily  to  himself.  Entering  the  surgery,  he  asked  for 
his  ledger,  telling  me  that  one  of  his  richest  patients  had 
just  been  to  pay  his  bill — was  it  not  an  odd  thing  to  do  ?  I 
too  was  highly  amused  that  a  man  rolling  in  wealth  should 
come  so  late  to  pay  a  bill  which  might  any  time  have 
been  met  by  a  cheque.  The  account  was  duly  receipted 
in  the  ledger,  and  the  doctor  about  to  leave,  when  he 
suddenly  handed  me  some  of  the  bank-notes,  saying,  *  By 
the  way,  Taylor,  you  might  as  well  take  these  notes,  and 
I  can  give  you  the  balance  next  week.'  Again  I  was  left 
to  go  back  to  my  own  little  closet  to  praise  the  Lord  with 
a  joyful  heart  that,  after  all,  I  might  go  to  China." 

These  two  incidents  prove  what  training  is 
needed  in  private  ere  men  are  allowed  in  public  to 
become  witnesses  to  the  power  of  faith  in  God  and 
the  prevailing  prayer  for  which  it  fits.  They  teach 
us  that,  if  our  public  united  mission  work  is  really 
to  be  a  work  in  which  the  power  of  believing  prayer 
is  to  be  signally  displayed,  the  faith  of  individual 
believers  must  have  its  roots  deeply  fixed  in  true 
consecration  to  God,  and  an  entire  dependence  upon 
His  mighty  power  working  through  us. 

In  1854  Mr.  Taylor  left  England  for  China, 
After  labouring  for  five  years  he  was  compelled  to 


THE   CHINA   INLAND    MISSION  105 

return  home  on  account  of  failing  health.  During 
his  stay  at  home  he  prayed  much  for  five  labourers 
to  go  to  Ningpo,  where  he  had  been  stationed. 
Part  of  the  time  was  spent  in  bringing  out  a 
revised  New  Testament  in  the  dialect  of  the  people 
among  whom  he  had  lived,  with  references.  He 
tells  how,  in  doing  this  work,  he  only  thought  of  the 
use  it  would  be  to  the  native  Christians.  He  dis 
covered  later  on,  that,  had  it  not  been  for  that  time 
of  close  intercourse  with  God's  word,  he  would 
have  been  quite  unprepared  to  form  a  mission  like 
the  C.LM. 

:c  In  the  study  of  that  Divine  Word  I  learned  that  to 
obtain  successful  workers,  not  elaborate  appeals  for  help, 
but  first  earnest  prayer  to  God  to  thrust  forth  labourers, 
and  secondly  the  deepening  of  the  spiritual  life  of  the 
Church,  so  that  men  should  be  unable  to  stay  at  home, 
were  what  was  needed.  I  saw  that  the  apostolic  plan 
was  not  to  be  concerned  about  ways  and  means,  but  to 
go  and  do  the  work,  trusting  in  His  sure  word  who  has 
said,  'Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His 
righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto 
you.'" 

The  more  Mr.  Taylor  prayed  and  studied  God'e 
word  and  the  needs  of  China,  the  utter  helplessness 
of  its  heathendom  began  to  weigh  as  a  heavy 
burden  on  his  mind.  A  request  came  to  him  to 
write  a  series  of  articles  for  a  missionary  magazine, 
As  he  wrote  them  he  began  to  feel  how  terrible 


106       THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

that  need  was,  and  how  utterly  the  Lord's  last 
command  was  being  ignored  by  His  Church.  The 
careful  study  of  the  whole  subject  brought  out  how 
there  were  eleven  vast  interior  provinces,  each  with 
its  tens  of  millions,  without  a  single  resident  Protes 
tant  missionary.  Gradually  the  truth  dawned  upon 
him  that  to  overtake  the  evangelisation  of  inland 
China  a  new  and  special  agency  was  needed.  He 
spoke  to  various  representatives  of  leading  mission 
ary  societies,  but  was  met  by  difficulties,  either 
financial  or  political.  The  money  was  wanting,  or 
it  was  not  possible  to  penetrate  into  the  interior 
before  the  country  had  become  more  open.  Gradu 
ally  the  thought  came,  as  he  felt  how  little  the 
Church  had  learnt  to  trust  the  promises  of  God, 
"  Well,  if  you  see  these  things  more  clearly  than 
others,  why  not  go  forward  yourself,  and  trust  God 
to  accomplish  His  purposes  through  you  ?  Go 
yourself  to  inland  China.  What  is  to  hinder  your 
obtaining  the  men  and  the  means  ? "  The  thought 
raised  a  controversy  in  his  soul,  which  gradually 
affected  his  health.  The  story  is  thus  told : — 

"  I  saw,"  Mr.  Taylor  says,  "  that  in  answer  to  prayer 
the  workers  needed  would  certainly  be  given,  and  their 
support  secured,  because  asked  for  in  the  precious  name 
of  Jesus,  which  is  worthy ;  but  there  a  trembling  unbelief 
crept  in. 

" '  Suppose  that  workers  are  given/  I  asked  myself 
doubtfully,  'and  that  they  succeed  in  reaching  inland 


THE   CHINA   INLAND    MISSION  107 

China :  what  then  ?  Trials  will  come,  and  conflicts  such 
as  they  have  never  dreamed  of  at  home.  Their  faith 
may  fail,  and  they  may  even  be  tempted  to  reproach  one 
for  having  brought  them  into  such  a  plight.  Have  I 
strength  and  ability  to  cope  with  such  difficulties  as 
these  1 '  And  the  answer,  of  course,  was  always  '  No  ! ' 

"  It  was  just  a  bringing  in  of  self  through  unbelief,  the 
devil  getting  one  to  feel  that  while  faith  and  prayer 
might  lead  one  into  the  dilemma,  one  would  be  left  to  get 
out  of  it  as  best  one  might.  And  I  failed  to  see  that  the 
Power  that  gave  the  labourers  would  be  quite  sufficient 
also  to  sustain  them,  under  any  circumstances,  no  matter 
how  trying. 

"  Meanwhile  the  awful  realisation  was  burned  into  my 
very  soul  that,  a  million  a  month,  in  China  the  heathen 
were  dying  without  God.  'If  you  would  pray  for 
preachers/  came  the  dread  conviction,  '  they  might  have  a 
chance  of  hearing  the  glorious  gospel ;  but  still  they  pass 
away  without  it,  simply  because  you  have  not  faith  to 
claim  for  them  heralds  of  the  Cross.'  " 

Week  after  week  the  conflict  went  on,  until  the  strain 
became  so  intense  that  sleep  almost  forsook  him,  and  it 
seemed  as  if  reason  itself  must  fail.  Rest  was  impossible 
by  day  or  night.  The  thought  of  China's  millions  was 
always  before  his  mind,  and  of  what  the  gospel  might 
bring  them  of  blessing  if  only  they  could  come  in  contact 
with  it.  And  yet  he  could  not  yield  and  accept  the 
position  and  responsibility  that  would  have  ended  all  the 
strife. 

"How  inconsistent  unbelief  always  is!"  Mr.  Taylor 
continues.  "  I  had  no  doubt  that  if  I  prayed  for  fellow- 
workers  they  would  be  given  me.  I  had  no  doubt  that 
in  answer  to  prayer  the  means  for  our  going  forth  would 


108       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

also  "be  supplied,  and  that  doors  would  be  opened  in  un- 
reached  parts  of  the  Empire.  But  I  had  not  then 
learned  to  trust  God  fully  for  keeping  power  and  grace 
for  myself,  so  that  it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  I 
found  a  difficulty  in  trusting  Him  to  keep  any  others 
who  might  be  led  to  go  out  with  me. 

"Yet  what  was  I  to  do?  The  feeling  of  blood- 
guiltiness  became  more  and  more  intense.  Simply 
because  I  refused  to  ask  for  them,  the  labourers  did  not 
come  forward,  did  not  go  out  to  China ;  and  every  day 
tens  of  thousands  in  that  vast  land  were  living  and  dying 
with  no  knowledge  of  the  way  of  salvation." 

The  burden  upon  his  mind  began  to  tell  upon  Mr. 
Taylor's  health,  and  he  went  down  to  Brighton,  at  the 
invitation  of  a  friend,  to  take  a  rest  at  the  sea. 

When  Sunday  morning  came,  hundreds  of  happy 
church-goers  thronged  the  streets,  but  Mr.  Taylor  could 
only  think  of  the  need  of  the  vast  land  to  which  his  life 
was  given. 

"More  than  a  thousand  souls  in  China,"  he  thought, 
"will  be  swept  into  eternity  while  the  people  of  God, 
with  so  many  privileges,  are  gathered  here  in  the  morn 
ing  services  to-day ! " 

The  incubus  of  heathendom  was  upon  him,  and  was 
almost  more  than  his  soul  could  bear.  In  great  distress 
of  mind,  he  left  the  quiet  house  and  went  down  to  the 
forsaken  beach.  It  was  a  lovely  summer  morning ;  the 
Lide  was  out ;  and  far  away  upon  the  silent  sands  he  met 
the  crisis  of  his  life,  alone  with  God. 

At  first  there  was  no  light,  and  the  conflict  was  intense. 
The  only  ray  of  comfort  he  could  obtain  was  from  the 
strange  reflection :  "  Well,  if  God,  in  answer  to  prayer, 
does  give  a  band  of  men  for  inland  China,  and  they  go 


THE    CHINA    INLAND    MISSION  109 

and  reach  those  distant  regions,  and  they  should  all  die  of 
starvation  even,  they  will  all  go  straight  to  heaven ;  and 
if  only  one  heathen  soul  is  saved,  it  would  be  well  worth 
while !  "  But  the  thought  was  agony,  for  still  he  could 
not  see  that  God,  if  He  gave  the  labourers,  would  be  sure 
to  keep  them,  even  in  inland  China. 

All  at  once  the  thought  came,  "  Why  burdened  thus  1 
If  you  are  obeying  God,  all  the  responsibility  must  rest 
with  Him,  and  not  with  you." 

What  an  unspeakable  relief  ! 

"  Very  well,"  was  the  immediate,  glad  reply ;  "  Thou, 
Lord,  shalt  be  responsible  for  them,  and  for  me  too ! " 
And  the  burden,  from  that  moment,  was  all  gone. 

Then  and  there  Mr.  Hudson  Taylor  surrendered  himself 
to  God  for  His  service,  and  lifted  up  his  heart  in  prayer 
for  fellow-labourers — two  for  each  of  the  inland  pro 
vinces,  and  two  for  Mongolia.  His  Bible  was  in  his 
hand,  and  there,  upon  the  margin  of  the  precious  volume, 
he  recorded  the  momentous  transaction  that  had  taken 
place  between  his  soul  and  God.  Few  and  simple  are 
the  words  he  uses ;  but,  oh,  how  full  of  meaning  ! — 

"Prayed  for  twenty-four  willing  skilful  labourers  at 
Brighton,  June  25th,  1865." 

"  How  restfully  I  turned  away  when  this  was  done ! 
The  conflict  was  all  ended.  Peace  and  gladness  filled  my 
soul.  I  felt  like  flying  up  the  steep  hill  to  the  house. 
And  how  I  did  sleep  that  night !  My  dear  wife  thought 
that  Brighton  had  done  wonders  for  me ;  and  so  it  had." 

I  have  quoted  thus  much  of  the  story  of  Hudson 
Taylor's  inner  life,  because  it  reveals  to  us  the  secret 
source  from  whence  power  for  true  mission  work 
must  come.  "  That  the  heathen  are  fellow-heirs  and 


110       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

fellow-members  of  the  body  and  fellow-partakers 
of  the  promise  in  Christ  Jesus  through  the  gospel " 
is  a  great  spiritual  mystery,  "  which  in  other  genera 
tions  was  not  made  known  unto  the  sons  of  men  as 
it  hath  now  been  revealed  unto  His  holy  apostles 
and  prophets  in  the  Spirit."  Any  man  can  under 
stand  the  missionary  command  or  the  missionary 
argument  as  Scripture  sets  it  forth,  but  it  needs 
a  spiritual  mind  to  apprehend  it  in  its  true  spiritual 
meaning  and  power.  What  Paul  writes  of  it  is  as 
true  now  as  it  was  then  :  "  The  mystery  hath  now 
been  manifested  to  His  saints,  to  whom  God  was 
pleased  to  make  known  what  is  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles."  It 
needs  Divine  teaching,  it  needs  the  revelation  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  to  give  a  true  apprehension  of  what 
is  the  mystery  of  God.  Mr.  Hudson  Taylor's  ex 
perience  shows  us  how  God  trains  a  man  to  believe 
in  Him,  to  wait  on  Hun,  to  give  himself  up  entirely 
to  His  will  and  service,  however  great  the  difficulty 
may  be.  The  Church  needs  to  learn  the  lesson, 
our  missionary  meetings  and  our  mission  sermons 
must  aim  at  teaching  the  lesson,  that,  as  individuals 
give  themselves  wholly  to  God  to  bear  the  burden 
of  the  perishing  in  the  faith  of  His  redeeming  love- 
He  will  fit  them  for  being  used  in  the  service  of 
His  kingdom.  It  was  a  solemn  thing  for  the  Son 
of  God  to  come  to  save  the  world :  He  had  to  bear 


THE   CHINA   INLAND   MISSION  111 

its  sins  and  to  die  for  it.  It  is  no  less  a  solemn 
thing  for  us  to  take  part  in  the  work  of  soul-saving : 
it  needs  that  we,  in  faith  and  love,  bear  the  burden 
of  souls,  and,  if  need  be,  give  our  lives  for  their  sal 
vation.  And  it  needs  close  intercourse  with  God, 
and  a  full  surrender  to  His  guidance,  to  fit  us  to  do 
His  work. 

Let  me  give  just  one  more  incident  to  illustrate 
the  way  in  which  Mr.  Taylor  sought,  in  his  meetings, 
to  bring  Christians  into  personal  contact  with  God. 
The  first  party  of  twenty-two,  including  children, 
was  ready  to  go  to  China,  when  the  following 
incident  occurred : — 

"  In  the  month  of  April  I  was  asked  to  give  a  lecture 
on  China  at  Totteridge,  a  village  near  London,  and  will 
ingly  consented  to  do  so,  on  condition  that  there  should 
be  no  collection,  and  that  this  should  be  announced  on 
the  bills.  Mr.  Puget,  who  invited  me,  and  who  kindly  pre 
sided  as  chairman,  said  he  had  never  before  heard  of  such 
a  stipulation.  He  accepted  it,  however,  and  the  bills 
were  issued  for  May  2nd. 

"  With  the  aid  of  a  large  map,  something  of  the  extent, 
population,  and  deep  spiritual  need  of  China  was  pre 
sented  to  the  people,  many  of  whom  were  much  impressed. 
At  the  close  of  the  meeting  the  chairman  said  that  at  my 
request  there  had  been  no  collection,  but  he  felt  there 
were  many  present  who  would  be  distressed  and  burdened 
if  not  allowed  to  contribute  something  to  the  good  work 
proposed.  He  trusted  that  as  this  suggestion  emanated 
entirely  from  himself,  and  expressed  the  feelings  of  the 
audience,  I  should  not  object  to  it.  I  begged,  however, 


112       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

that  the  condition  agreed  upon  should  not  be  altered, 
pointing  out  that  the  very  reason  given  by  the  chairman 
was,  to  my  mind,  one  of  the  strongest  for  not  making  any 
collection.  My  desire  was  not  that  those  present  might 
be  relieved  by  giving  then  and  there  such  contributions 
as  might  be  convenient  under  the  influence  of  present 
emotion,  but  that  each  one  should  go  home  really  bur 
dened  with  a  sense  of  China's  deep  need,  and  go  to  ask 
of  God  what  He  would  have  them  do.  If,  after  thought 
and  prayer,  they  were  satisfied  that  a  pecuniary  contri 
bution  was  all  He  wanted  of  them,  this  could  be  given  to 
any  society  having  missionaries  at  work  in  China,  or  might 
be  posted  to  our  London  address.  But  perhaps  in  many 
cases  what  God  was  asking  was  not  a  money  contribution, 
but  personal  consecration  to  His  service  abroad,  or  the 
gift  of  a  dear  son  or  daughter,  more  precious  far  than 
gold. 

"  I  added  that  I  thought  the  tendency  of  a  collection 
was  to  leave  upon  the  mind  the  impression  that  the  all- 
important  thing  was  money,  whereas  no  amount  of  money 
could  convert  a  single  soul.  The  supreme  need  was  that 
men  and  women  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  should  give 
themselves  to  the  work,  and  for  the  support  of  such  there 
would  never  be  a  lack  of  funds. 

"  As  my  wish  was  evidently  strong,  the  chairman 
kindly  yielded,  and  closed  the  meeting.  He  told  me, 
however,  at  the  supper-table  that  he  thought  I  was  sadly 
mistaken,  and  that  some  little  contributions  had  been  put 
into  his  hand  for  the  mission. 

"  Next  morning,  at  breakfast,  my  kind  host  came  in  a 
little  late,  and  said  he  had  passed  a  restless  night.  After 
the  meal  was  over  he  asked  me  into  his  study,  and, 
handing  me  the  contributions  of  the  previous  evening, 


THE    CHINA    INLAND    MISSION  113 

remarked :  '  I  thought  yesterday,  Mr.  Taylor,  that  you 
were  wrong  about  the  collection,  but  now  I  am  convinced 
you  are  right.  As  I  considered  in  the  night  that  stream 
of  souls  in  China,  ever  passing  onward  to  the  dark,  I 
could  only  cry,  as  yon  suggested,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou 
have  me  to  do  ?"  I  believe  I  have  obtained  the  guidance 
I  sought ;  and  here  it  is.'  He  handed  me,  as  he  spoke,  a 
cheque  for  five  hundred  pounds,  adding  that  if  there  had 
been  a  collection  he  would  have  given  a  few  guineas 
towards  it,  but  that  this  cheque  was  the  result  of  having 
spent  no  small  part  of  the  night  in  prayer. 

"  I  need  scarcely  say  how  surprised  and  thankful  I  was 
for  the  gift.  A  letter  had  reached  me  at  the  breakfast- 
table  that  very  morning  from  the  shipping  agents,  in  which 
they  stated  that  they  could  offer  us  the  whole  passenger 
accommodation  of  the  Lammermuir.  I  went,  on  my  way 
home,  to  see  the  ship,  found  it  every  way  suitable,  and 
paid  the  cheque  on  account.  Thus  did  the  Lord  encourage 
our  hearts  in  Himself."  l 

We  are  studying  the  missionary  problem.  We 
are  seeking  the  answer  to  its  most  important  ques 
tion —  How  can  the  Church  be  spiritually 
quickened  to  do  the  work  with  its  whole  heart, 
in  the  power  which  God  can  give  ?  We  have 
been  trying  to  learn  from  those  whom  God  has 
specially  used  and  blessed  what  the  secret  of  their 
strength  is.  God  has  set  forth  Hudson  Taylor 

1  These  extracts  are  taken  from  The  Story  of  the  China  Inlatid 
Mission,  by  M.  Geraldine  Guinness,  2  vols.,  one  of  the  most 
instructive  of  mission  narratives.  One  would  hope  that  either 
an  abridgment  or  a  cheaper  edition  may  bring  its  precious 
teaching  to  many  who  have  not  yet  read  it. 
8 


114       THE   KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

as  an  example  of  what  He  can  do  for  a  young  man 
who  gives  himself  wholly  to  live  by  faith  in  God  as 
he  seeks  to  do  God's  work.  We  have  learnt  that 
the  missionary  problem  is  a  personal  one.  Hudson 
Taylor's  training  for  fellowship  with  God  was  an 
intensely  personal  one.  If  the  missionary  problem — 
how  to  win  the  world  for  God — is  only  to  be  solved 
by  each  individual  believer  giving  himself  personally 
to  the  work,  we  may  learn  from  this  servant  of  God' 
wherein  this  personal  element  consists. 

It  is  easy  to  say  that  it  consists  in  the  prevailing 
prayer  of  faith.  But  how  can  every  believer  be 
trained  for  this  ?  The  lesson  is  very  clear.  We 
have  seen  the  path  in  which  the  power  of  believing 
prayer  came  to  him.  He  gave  himself  wholly  to 
God's  work :  this  gave  him  the  confidence  that  God 
would  care  for  him  and  all  his  work.  Faith  cannot 
grow  strong  except  by  exercise.  Difficulties  are  the 
exercise-ground  of  faith :  they  give  it  nourishment 
and  strength.  A  believer  who  does  not  realise  the 
difficulty  of  mission  work,  because  he  is  not  intensely 
interested  in  it,  cannot  taste  the  privilege  of  believing, 
persevering,  prevailing  prayer.  We  want  to  train 
every  believer  to  take  such  an  interest  in  the  progress 
of  the  work  of  God's  kingdom  that  he  may  feel  and 
bear  the  burden  of  its  great  need,  that  he  may  realise 
the  impossibility  of  its  being  done  without  God's 
own  power,  that  he  may  learn  to  cry  for  more  men 


THE    CHINA    INLAND    MISSION  115 

and   money,  and   the   Spirit's   power,  and   the   in 
gathering  of  souls. 

Strong  desire,  personal  interest  and  effort,  faith 
in  God's  power  of  working  in  answer  to  our  prayer : 
these  are  the  conditions  of  that  prevailing  prayer,  in 
which  every  believer  can  have  a  share.  We  need,  in 
our  missionary  meetings  and  sermons,  to  aim  at  cul 
tivating  this.  We  need  to  encourage  the  humblest 
believer  to  know  that  he  can  do  much  for  God's  cause. 
The  poor  widow  did  more  than  she  knew  by  the  devo 
tion  her  gift  manifested.  Let  our  mission  work  not 
only  rest  on  the  amount  of  the  gifts  we  receive,  but 
on  the  spirit  of  devotion  which  offers  believing  prayer 
with  them.  Let  it  be  seen,  in  our  ministers  and 
leaders,  in  our  Churches  and  societies,  that  faith  in 
God's  working,  and  continual  prayer  to  secure  that 
working,  is  the  chief  element  in  our  hopes,  and  the 
Church  will  become  what  she  should  be,  and  God 
will  say  to  her,  "  Believest  thou  ?  thou  shalt  see 
greater  things  than  these." 


CHAPTEK    VI 

Cljurclj  of  Pentecost 
an&  tije  3&olg  Spirit 


WE  have  looked  at  three  cases  in  which  we 
have  seen  how  wonderfully  God  has  led 
His  servants  in  modern  times  into  the  secret  of 
power  and  blessing  in  the  mission  field.  Let  us 
now  go  back  to  Pentecost,  and  there  see  how,  in 
the  birth  of  the  Christian  Church,  are  revealed 
the  great  root-principles  in  which,  through  all  ages, 
it  will  find  the  law  of  its  service  and  its  triumph 
over  the  powers  of  darkness. 

We  have  already  quoted  the  words  in  which  Mr. 
Mott  appealed  to  the  example  of  the  pentecostal 
Church  :  — 

"  It  is  possible  to  evangelise  the  world  in  this  genera 
tion  —  in  view  of  the  achievements  of  the  Christians  of 
the  first  generation.  They  did  more  to  accomplish  the 
evangelisation  of  the  world  than  any  succeeding  gener 
ation.  The  persecutions  of  the  first  and  second  cen 
turies  attest  how  vigorously  the  faith  of  Christ  must  have 

116 


THE    CHURCH    OF   PENTECOST  11? 

been  propagated  by  the  first  disciples.  These  achieve 
ments  seein  very  remarkable  in  the  light  of  the  fact 
that  at  the  time  of  the  ascension  of  Christ  the  whole 
number  of  believers  did  not  exceed  a  few  hundreds.  In 
studying  the  secret  of  what  they  accomplished,  one  is 
led  to  the  conclusion  that  they  employed  no  vitally 
important  method  which  cannot  be  used  to-day,  and 
that  they  availed  themselves  of  no  power  which  we 
also  cannot  utilise.  .  .  .  Think  of  the  remarkable  re 
sources  the  Church  of  this  generation  possesses.  There 
are  not  less  than  135  million  members  of  Protestant 
Churches.  Contrast  these  with  the  few  thousands  con 
stituting  the  small,  unacknowledged,  despised  sect  which 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  began  the  evangelisation  of 
the  then  known  world.  As  we  recall  the  achievements 
of  that  infant  Church,  can  we  question  the  ability  of  the 
Christians  of  our  day,  were  they  unitedly  resolved  to 
accomplish  it,  so  to  distribute  within  the  present  genera 
tion  the  gospel  messengers  and  agencies  that  all  mankind 
might  have  an  opportunity  to  know  Christ  the  Saviour 
and  Lord?" 

If  this  statement  be  true, — and  it  is  true, — it 
is  a  terrible  condemnation  to  the  Church  of  our  day 
And  if  the  admission  of  the  truth  is  to  have  any 
real  influence  to  stimulate  or  to  guide,  it  is  need 
ful  that  we  take  time  to  come  to  the  deep  convic 
tion  of  wherein  the  difference  between  us  and  them 
consists,  and  what  it  is  that  can  enable  us  truly 
to  walk  in  their  footsteps,  and  do  our  work  as 
they  did  theirs.  Our  ascended  Lord  has  not  only 
given  us  His  Holy  Spirit,  but  in  the  men  in  whom 


118       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

He  first  came  to  dwell,  the  living  embodiment  of 
what  He  is  able  to  do  for  us  too.  It  has  been 
well  said  that  men  become  interested  not  so  much 
in  abstract  ideas,  as  in  individuals  who  represent 
these  ideas.  The  Church  of  the  first  generation 
is  given  us  by  God  as  an  example  and  a  pledge 
of  what  the  Holy  Spirit  can  do  in  men  wholly 
possessed  by  Him.  If  the  Church  of  our  day  is 
really  to  be  and  do  what  God  desires  it  to  be 
and  do,  pastors  and  congregations  must  be  led  to 
study  the  pentecostal  pattern,  and  to  be  content 
with  nothing  less  than  an  equal  devotion  to  the 
work  of  making  Christ  everywhere  known.  A 
tree  can  only  thrive  and  grow  strong  by  abiding 
in  the  root  from  which  it  was  born.  The  mis 
sionary  revival  we  need  and  pray  for  within  the 
Church,  ere  it  is  fitted  to  do  its  work  aright, 
can  only  come  by  a  return  to  Pentecost.  The 
end  is  ever  contained  in  the  beginning,  and  returns 
to  the  beginning.  To  know  what  Pentecost  means, 
to  have  its  faith  and  its  Spirit,  is  the  only  power 
to  evangelise  the  world  in  this  generation. 

Let  us  strive  to  realise  our  position.  The  great 
commission  was  given  in  connection  with  Pentecost, 
and  its  fulfilment  was  made  entirely  dependent  on  it. 
"  It  behoved  .  .  .  that  repentance  and  remission 
of  sins  should  be  preached  in  His  name  among  all 
nations ;  but  tarry  at  Jerusalem,  until  ye  be 


THE  CHUKCH  OF  PENTECOST        119 

endued  with  power  from  on  high."  "  Ye  shall 
receive  power,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon 
you,  and  be  My  witnesses  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth."  The  pentecostal  commission  can  only  be 
carried  out  by  a  pentecostal  Church,  in  pentecostal 
power.  The  charge  has  been  laid  against  the 
Church  of  our  day,  and  admitted,  that  she  is  not 
what  she  ought  to  be.  It  is  vain  to  think  of 
this  generation  accomplishing  the  pentecostal  com 
mission  without  a  return  to  the  pentecostal  state. 
The  great  and  burning  question  of  the  missionary 
problem  is,  How  can  the  Church  be  brought  back 
to  the  place  where  the  disciples  and  the  early 
Church  were,  when,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  they  did  what  no  other  generation  since 
their  time  has  done  ?  The  Church  of  Pentecost 
was  not  merely  an  example  and  pledge  of  what 
God  could  do,  leaving  it  to  us  to  choose  if  we 
would  enjoy  the  same  blessing.  Nay,  it  is  much 
more — a  revelation  of  God's  will  as  to  what  His 
Church  ought  to  be,  and  of  what  is  absolutely  indis- 
psnsable  if  there  is  to  be  any  real  hope  of  securing 
obedience  to  the  command  to  bring  the  gospel  to 
every  creature.  The  pentecostal  state  is  the  only 
one  that  satisfies  God,  the  only  one  that  ought  to 
satisfy  us. 

Like  all  seed,  Pentecost  was  a  fruit  too.     The 
fruit  not  only  of  Christ's  work  for  us  on  the  cross 


120       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

and  in  heaven,  but  the  fruit  also  of  His  work  in 
the  disciples  in  preparing  them  for  the  reception 
of  the  Spirit.  The  pastor  who  would  learn  what 
the  missionary  enthusiasm  of  his  ministry  ought 
to  be,  and  how  he  can  communicate  it  to  his  people  ; 
the  leader  of  a  mission  circle  who  would  fain  find 
for  his  band  the  full  equipment  for  the  service  of 
the  kingdom ;  every  believer  who  would  personally 
learn  from  his  Lord  the  secret  of  entire  devotion 
to  His  work,  of  being  filled  with  His  Spirit,  and 
of  winning  souls  to  the  knowledge  of  His  love 
— must  become  a  learner  in  the  school  in  which 
Christ  trained  His  disciples.  There  we  find  how 
they  were  fitted  to  be  the  vessels  and  channels  of 
the  Spirit  on  earth,  when  He  should  have  gone  to 
heaven. 

The  first  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  power 
was  to  a  prepared  people.  For  the  Church  in  our 
day  to  receive  the  Spirit  in  pentecostal  power  there 
is  a  need  of  the  same  preparation, — a  giving  up 
and  forsaking  of  all  that  hinders,  an  emptying  and 
a  cleansing,  a  thirsting  and  waiting  and  entire 
surrender,  to  which  the  blessing  of  the  Spirit's 
power  surely  comes. 

Let  us  consider  what  were  the  chief  elements 
of  that  training. 

1.  There  was,  first  of  all,  a  calling  out  and  separ 
ation  from  the  ordinary  interests  and  claims  of 


THE    CHURCH   OF   PENTECOST  121 

daily  life.  The  principle  that  underlies  the  life 
of  all  God's  great  servants  in  the  previous  ages — 
Abraham  and  Joseph,  Moses  and  Joshua,  David 
and  Elijah — is  a  taking  out  of  and  setting  apart 
of  them  from  their  ordinary  environment,  often 
by  persecution  and  suffering,  that  they  might  be 
brought  into  solitude  with  God  alone,  and  be  free 
and  disengaged,  from  what  is  otherwise  innocent 
or  lawful  on  earth,  to  listen  to  the  Divine  voice, 
to  receive  the  Divine  revelation,  to  be  changed 
and  fitted  by  the  Divine  power  for  the  work 
they  had  to  do.  Even  so  Christ  called  His  dis 
ciples  to  forsake  all,  to  deny  themselves  what  to 
others  might  be  perfectly  legitimate,  and  to  share 
with  Him  His  cross  and  all  it  would  entail.  For 
three  years  He  had  them  in  His  training — by  His 
intercourse,  by  the  sight  of  what  He  did,  by  His 
reproofs  and  instructions,  preparing  them  to  be  the 
recipients  and  the  channels  of  that  Holy  Spirit 
from  heaven,  who  should  come  to  take  the  place 
of  His  earthly  presence,  and  open  within  them 
His  abiding  indwelling.  In  a  sinful  world  sacrifice 
is  the  law  of  life  and  of  love.  The  men  whom 
Christ  had  fitted  to  become  the  leaders  of  the 
pentecostal  Church,  and  to  embody  in  their  lives 
His  own,  with  the  mind  and  the  life  of  the  Spirit, 
had  learnt  to  give  up  everything  for  Christ.  As 
their  Lord  could  not  give  Himself  for  us  without 


122       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

sacrificing  all,  they  too  had  learnt,  in  giving  them 
selves,  to  part  with  all  for  the  sake  of  His  service 
and  kingdom.  In  that  entire  self  -  abandonment 
of  their  Lord  to  one  purpose  the  pentecostal  Church 
had  struck  its  roots  deep. 

In  a  time  when  there  is  no  persecution,  when 
money  and  comfort  and  Christian  civilisation  sur 
round  us  on  every  side,  when  it  appears  to  cost 
little  to  be  a  Christian,  many  find  it  difficult  to 
know  where  the  forsaking  all  to  become  a  disciple 
comes  in,  or  what  shape  it  will  assume.  We  shall 
find  the  answer  if  we  think  of  the  second  great 
element  in  Christ's  training  of  His  disciples. 

2.  This  was  an  intense  personal  attachment  to 
Christ,  as  the  chief  fruit  of  their  three  years'  inter 
course.  When  Christ  first  called  them,  there  was 
something  in  Him  that  attracted  them  and  made 
that  call  irresistible.  As  Christ  drew  them  without 
their  knowing  how  and  why,  so  He  led  them  by  a 
way  and  to  a  goal  they  knew  not.  They  began  by 
believing  in  Him  as  the  Messiah :  He  led  them  on 
to  know  Him  as  the  Son  of  God,  as  a  Friend,  as  a 
Master,  as  a  Eedeemer.  Of  His  love  to  them,  or 
theirs  to  Him,  He  said  little  or  nothing  till  the  last 
night  of  His  life.  Then  He  opened  up  to  them  the 
mystery  of  His  loving  them  with  a  Divine  love — of 
His  giving  His  life  for  them,  of  the  Father's  love 
resting  on  them,  of  their  loving  Him  and  keeping 


THE    CHUKCH    OF    PENTECOST  123 

His  commandments.  It  was  not  the  disciples  who 
had  followed  Him  with  any  thought  of  such  an 
aim :  it  was  Christ  who  had,  by  His  Divine  love, 
thus,  in  the  course  of  His  three  years'  training, 
attached  them  to  Himself.  It  is  this  intense  per 
sonal  living  attachment  to  Christ  that  prepares  for 
receiving  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  brings  that  pente- 
costal  power  without  which  the  Church  cannot  hope 
to  conquer  the  world. 

Here  we  have  the  answer  to  the  question  at 
the  close  of  our  previous  paragraph.  Detachment 
comes  only  through  a  new  and  stronger  attachment. 
As  a  Christian  sees  that,  though  he  knows  so  little 
of  his  Lord's  love,  the  Lord  is  ready  to  lead  him 
on  to  it  in  a  way  he  knows  not,  he  becomes 
willing  to  turn  away  from  everything  that  can 
occupy  the  heart,  and  to  yield  himself,  in  patient 
obedient  discipleship,  to  the  influences  of  intercourse 
with  his  Lord.  He  learns  to  believe  that  that 
love  can  master  him.  The  love  of  Christ  asks  and 
claims  the  whole  heart  and  life.  If  we  are  really 
to  appeal  to  our  Churches  to  follow  in  the  footsteps 
of  the  pentecostal  Church,  and  to  claim  its  power 
and  blessing,  do  let  us  encourage  them  to  enter  the 
school  in  which  Christ  trained  His  disciples.  When 
the  love  of  Christ  becomes  everything  to  any  of  us, 
and  we  yield  ourselves  to  His  love,  dying  for  sinners, 
to  take  possession  of  us  and  use  us,  that  love  will 


124       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

teach  us,  it  will  constrain  us,  to  part  with  all  for 
this  pearl  of  great  price.  Detachment  from  the 
world,  attachment  to  Christ,  are  the  secrets  of 
pentecostal  blessing. 

3.  Closely  connected  with  this  love,  as  another 
element  of  preparation  for  Pentecost,  was  the 
brotherly  love  which  Christ  had  taught  them  and 
wrought  in  them.  He  had  bound  them  to  Himself, 
but  also  to  each  other.  Christ  ever  dealt  with 
individual  men.  He  calleth  His  sheep  by  name. 
He  knows  and  meets  the  needs  of  each.  But  His 
work  does  not  end  there.  He  makes  them  members 
of  His  body.  The  Divine  life  is  a  life  of  love.  He 
leads  us  into  a  life  of  love ;  He  calls  us,  His  Spirit 
enables  us,  to  love  each  other  as  He  loved  us.  His 
own  love  is  to  dwell  in  us,  and  bind  the  body  into  a 
living  whole.  In  this  is  to  be  the  Church's  power  to 
convince  the  world  of  its  Divine  origin :  a  love  that 
is  supernatural  and  Divine.  The  union  this  love 
gives  brings  strength  to  each  member,  multiplying 
the  strength  of  all  by  the  aid  derived  from  the 
whole  body.  It  was  this  love  that  often  made 
men  say,  See  how  they  love  one  another.  It  was 
this  love,  in  the  unity  of  the  body,  that  made  feeble 
men  and  women  strong  to  conquer. 

This  love  was  cultivated  in  close  fellowship,  both 
in  Christ's  lifetime  and  after  the  Spirit  came.  It  is 
this  fellowship  of  love  that  is  often  sadly  lacking  in 


THE    CHURCH    OF    PENTECOST  125 

a  congregation  or  a  society.  A  hundred  men  con 
tribute  to  the  same  collection  for  mission  work,  and 
partake  of  the  same  Holy  Supper,  and  yet  know 
nothing  of  the  interchange  of  mutual  love  and 
spiritual  fellowship.  When  we  begin  to  seek 
Christ's  Spirit  in  earnest  for  our  mission  work,  or 
when  we  think  that  His  first  movings  are  felt,  do 
let  us  remember  that  there  is  no  place  where  the 
Spirit  works  so  surely  as  when  we  are  gathered 
together  with  our  brethren  into  the  Name  of  Jesus. 
To  speak  together  of  that  name  and  love  has  more 
to  do  with  our  spiritual  life  than  we  think.  To 
give  ourselves  to  encourage  the  feeble,  to  instruct 
the  ignorant,  to  warn  the  erring,  by  telling  what 
Christ  is  to  us,  is  one  of  the  sure  means  of  drawing 
down  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  of  building  the 
separate  members  into  one  body,  of  rousing  the 
hope  of  all  and  preparing  them  for  that  blessed 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit  which  is  indispensable  if  we 
are  to  witness  for  Christ  in  power. 

4.  Is  it  necessary  to  speak  of  faith  as  one  of  the 
chief  lessons  that  was  needed  for  the  pentecostal 
mission  work  of  the  first  century  and  of  ours  ?  It 
was  not  only  in  His  direct  teaching  of  the  disciples, 
but  in  all  He  said  to  others  in  their  hearing,  and  in 
all  the  proofs  He  gave  in  their  presence  of  the 
indispensable  need,  of  the  conditions,  of  the  power 
of  faith,  that  He  trained  them  into  the  apprehension 


126       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

of  the  place  it  must  have  in  their  life  and  work, 
We  know  what  faith  is.  From  the  first  simple  faith 
that  hears  a  promise  and  believes  God's  word,  to  the 
faith  that  enters  into  full  and  conscious  union  with 
our  Lord,  and  abides  in  Him  and  does  the  "  greater 
works,"  faith  is  ever  one  of  the  first  conditions  of  the 
power  of  the  Spirit's  working.  The  pentecostal 
Church  received  and  maintained  its  blessing  and 
power,  did  its  work,  endured  its  sufferings,  and 
gained  its  conquests,  all  through  faith. 

Faith  is  such  a  simple  thing  that  many  think  it 
an  easy  thing.  As  the  power  to  overcome  the 
world,  and  cast  out  Satan,  and  bring  men  out  of 
darkness  into  God's  light,  it  is  no  easy  thing.  It 
implies  the  renunciation  of  self,  the  crucifixion  to 
the  world,  the  ceasing  from  man  with  his  wisdom 
and  his  power,  and  dependence  on  God  alone.  We 
speak  of  faith  missions,  in  which  faith,  in  some  one 
of  its  special  aspects  is  specially  prominent.  We 
need  to  emphasise  the  great  truth  that  all  mission 
work  is  to  be  faith  work.  And  that,  if  this  is  to  be, 
we  want  to  begin  at  the  beginning,  and  seek  not 
only  to  have  the  word  mixed  with  faith  in  them 
that  hear,  but  to  have  all  our  work  and  prayer 
mixed  with  faith  too.  "By  faith  Abel  offered  a 
better  sacrifice."  When  the  offering  of  money  in  a 
collection  is  as  sacred  a  thing  as  the  offering  of 
prayer,  when  the  faith  which  is  essential  to  make  a 


THE  CHUKCH    OF    PENTECOST  127 

prayer  effectual  is  seen  to  be  just  as  indispensable 
to  make  a  gift  effectual,  we  shall  find  the  point  of 
contact  in  dealing  with  individual  believers,  and  our 
missionary  meetings  and  collections  will  become  as 
helpful  to  the  life  of  faith  as  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel.  From  the  individuals  we  shall  then  rise  to 
the  various  societies  or  congregations  to  which  they 
belong,  and  through  these  on  to  leaders  and  directors 
and  missionaries,  until  all  unite  in  the  one  deep  and 
overmastering  conviction :  Mission  work  is  faith 
work.  When  the  faith  which  comes  from  knowing 
Christ,  in  His  saving  power  in  ourselves,  in  His 
saving  power  over  all,  from  knowing  Him  as  the 
Triumphant  and  Almighty  One  who  Himself  will 
work  in  them  that  believe  in  Him,  is  acknowledged 
as  indispensable  for  all  our  workers  at  home  and 
abroad,  we  shall  be  approaching  the  new  pente- 
costal  era. 

5.  One  more  thought.  When  Christ  ascended 
the  throne,  one  would  say  the  preparation  was  com 
plete.  It  was  not  so.  One  thing  more  was  needed 
to  finish  the  work.  Even  with  the  three  years' 
training,  the  mysterious  influence  of  the  fellowship 
with  Christ  in  the  death  they  had  seen  Him  die, 
the  mighty  power  of  the  resurrection-life  He  breathed 
into  them,  the  wonderful  revelations  of  the  forty 
days  all  in  the  power  of  the  New  Life,  the  ascension 
to  the  throne  and  the  sitting  down  at  the  right 


128       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

hand  of  the  Father,  and  Christ's  receiving  from  Him 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  there  is  still  something  needed. 
It  was  the  ten  days  of  continued,  united  prayer 
and  supplication.  I  hardly  know  a  passage  in 
Scripture  which  presents  prayer  in  such  a  wondrous 
light.  God  in  heaven  has  done  all  that  was  needed ; 
Christ  has  finished  His  work  for  His  disciples  and 
in  them :  Pentecost  has  still  to  wait  ten  days  for 
their  prayers.  Prayer  is  to  put  the  finishing  touch 
to  the  work  of  preparation.  In  it  is  to  be  found 
that  complete  and  continuous  turning  away  from 
earth,  that  opening  of  the  whole  being  to  God,  that 
rising  into  heaven,  and  that  abiding  in  Christ  there, 
which  is  to  prove  that  these  men  are  indeed  prepared 
vessels  for  God's  Holy  Spirit.  When  Jesus  had 
been  glorified,  when  the  Lamb  had  taken  His  place 
in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  the  stream  of  the  river 
of  the  water  of  life  broke  forth  from  the  throne  of 
God  and  the  Lamb,  and  flowed  as  streams  of  living 
water  into  and  out  of  these  praying  disciples. 
It  is  even  as  it  is  written  of  Christ :  "  And  it  came 
to  pass  that,  Jesus  also  being  baptized,  and  praying, 
the  heaven  was  opened,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
descended  upon  Him."  When  every  other  condition 
has  been  fulfilled,  prayer,  continued  prayer,  is  needed 
to  bring  down  the  blessing.  If  the  pentecostal 
Church  is  to  be  an  example,  and  that  cannot  be 
without  the  pentecostal  era  being  repeated,  prayer 


THE   CHUKCH   OF   PENTECOST  129 

must  again  be  the  key  that  opens  the  windows  of 
heaven.  Prayer  must  be  preached  and  practised  as 
the  first  and  the  last  duty  of  a  Church  that  hopes 
to  have  the  power  of  God  seen  in  its  work.  The 
ten  days'  continued  prayer  must  teach  the  lesson 
that  is  so  simple,  and  yet  so  difficult  to  master,  that 
what  little  prayer  does  not  obtain,  much  prayer, 
earnest  believing  prayer,  prayer  continued  long 
enough,  will  bring  down. 

It  was  said  in  the  words  we  quoted  at  the  begin 
ning  of  this  chapter:  "They  availed  themselves 
of  no  power  which  we  cannot  also  utilise."  We 
have  seen  what  some  of  these  powers  are.  The 
power  of  separation  from  the  world  and  true  self- 
sacrifice,  of  intense  attachment  and  devotion  to 
Jesus,  of  love  and  fellowship  making  us  one  with  the 
saints  around  us,  of  faith,  of  continued  prayer — these 
were  the  things  that  fitted  the  disciples  to  receive 
the  promise  of  the  Father,  and  be  the  fit  instru 
ments  for  the  Holy  Spirit's  mighty  work  in  witness- 
nig  for  Christ  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth. 

We  have  seen  the  preparation,  the  wonderful 
forming  of  men  to  have,  in  human  nature,  as  Jesus 
had,  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  them.  Think,  now, 
how  wonderful  this  blessing  was  in  itself — the  fruit 
and  the  crown  of  Christ's  redeeming  work.  These 
men,  prepared  by  Christ,  were  all  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  On  earth  Christ's  body  had  been  the 
9 


130       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

home  of  the  Spirit  and  the  instrument  of  His 
work.  They  now  are  His  body;  they  take  His 
place ;  the  Spirit  dwells  in  them  as  the  instruments 
for  His  work,  the  continuance  of  Christ's  own 
work.  The  Spirit,  through  whom  God  is  God,  and 
Father  and  Son  each  is  what  He  is,  and  both 
are  One, — the  Spirit,  the  very  life  of  God,  fills  them. 
In  the  threefold  operation  of  His  quickening  grace, 
He  enlightens,  He  sanctifies,  He  strengthens.  That 
is,  He  reveals  Divine  truth,  He  makes  partaker  of 
the  holy  life  and  disposition  of  Christ,  and  He 
endues  with  the  Divine  power  that,  in  the  midst 
of  weakness,  labours  and  suffers  and  triumphs.  As 
Christ's  training  was  to  prepare  them,  so  this  endue- 
ment  was  actually  to  fit  them  for  His  work.  "  Ye 
shall  receive  power  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come 
upon  you."  God's  power  for  God's  work  was  to  be 
the  one  condition  of  success  in  their  undertaking  to 
bring  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  in  being  Christ's 
witnesses  to  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

"That  pentecostal  generation  did  more  to 
accomplish  the  evangelisation  of  the  world  than 
any  succeeding  generation."  If  we  are  to  do  as 
much  as  they  did, — considering  the  increase  in  the 
population  of  the  world  and  the  increase  of  the 
Church,  we  ought  to  do  tenfold  more  than  they  did, 
— we  need  this  one  thing :  To  be  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  the  Power  of  God  to  do  the  work 


THE    CHURCH   OF   PENTECOST  131 

of  God !  It  is  not  enough  that  the  river  of  the 
water  of  life  is  still  flowing  from  under  the  throne 
of  God  and  the  Lamb ;  it  is  not  enough  that  we  are 
the  temple  of  God,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth 
in  us.  The  Spirit  may  be  in  us,  and  yet  be  grieved, 
or  quenched,  or  resisted,  or  neglected.  Where  He  is 
to  work  in  power,  He  asks  the  whole  being,  to  fill  it. 
He  claims  control  of  the  whole  life,  for  it  to  be  led 
and  ruled  by  Him  in  everything.  He  asks  that  the 
man  shall  be  a  living  sacrifice,  a  whole  burnt-offer 
ing,  to  be  consumed  by  the  fire  of  God.  If  there  is 
to  be  any  hope  of  our  working  like  the  Church  of 
Pentecost,  we  must  have  a  new  era  in  our  missions. 
There  must  be  a  real  restoration  of  the  pentecostal 
life  and  power  in  the  Church  at  home.  The  power 
of  God  for  the  work  of  God  must  be  the  watch 
word  of  every  worker.  Then  alone  will  our  mission 
work,  both  in  its  extent  and  its  intensity,  be  able 
to  overtake  the  thousand  millions  who  are  still  with 
out  the  knowledge  of  Christ. 

If  the  appeal  that  has  been  made  to  the  Church, 
to  believe  that  there  is  nothing  which  the  pente 
costal  Church  did  that  we  cannot  and  ought  not 
to  do,  is  to  be  taken  seriously,  what  are  we  to  do 
with  it  ?  We  are  confessedly,  in  an  overwhelming 
majority  of  our  Church  members,  very  far  from 
Pentecost.  What  is  to  be  done  to  get  all  our  leaders 
in  churches  and  boards,  hi  societies  and  committees{ 


132       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

to  take  up  the  watchword :  Back  to  Pentecost : 
without  this  the  work  cannot  be  done  ?  Is  there 
no  way  of  reaching  our  pastors  and  congrega 
tions,  and  gathering  all  who  feel  that  God's  work  is 
not  being  done  as  it  should  be,  into  one  holy  bond 
of  union  until  the  watchword  has  rung  through  the 
Church:  Back  to  Pentecost:  God's  Power  for 
God's  work :  without  this  the  work  cannot  be 
done? 

The  missionary  problem  is  a  personal  one.  Every 
believer,  in  receiving  the  love  of  Christ  into  his 
heart,  has  taken  in  a  love  that  reaches  out  to  the 
whole  world.  On  every  member  of  the  Church  the 
great  commission  rests  :  The  gospel  to  every  creature. 
Let  each  of  us  begin  with  himself  in  seeking  for  the 
Church  the  restoration  of  her  pentecostal  power  for 
the  work  of  conquering  the  world  for  her  King. 

It  was  prayer  brought  Pentecost — intense,  con 
tinued,  united  prayer  ;  prayer  that  did  not  cease  till 
it  was  answered.  Such  prayer  is  not  an  easy  thing. 
Hudson  Taylor  said  at  the  Conference — 

"  Not  only  must  the  missionaries  suffer  in  going  forth, 
but  the  Church  must  go  forward  in  self-denial  to  the 
point  of  suffering.  Redemptive  work,  soul-saving  work, 
cannot  be  carried  on  without  suffering.  If  we  are  simply 
to  pray  to  the  extent  of  a  simple,  pleasant,  and  enjoyable 
exercise,  and  know  nothing  of  watching  in  prayer,  and 
weariness  in  prayer,  we  shall  not  draw  down  the  blessing 
we  may.  We  shall  not  sustain  our  missionaries,  who  are 


THE    CHUBCH    OF   PENTECOST  133 

overwhelmed  with  the  appalling  darkness  of  heathenism ; 
we  shall  not  even  sufficiently  maintain  the  spiritual  life 
of  our  own  souls.  We  must  serve  God  even  to  the  point 
of  suffering,  and  each  one  ask  himself — In  what  degree, 
in  what  point,  am  I  extending,  by  personal  suffering,  by 
personal  self-denial  even  to  the  point  of  pain,  the  king 
dom  of  Christ  ? " 

Let  us  give  ourselves  anew  to  prayer,  that  the 
Church  may  be  restored  to  her  pentecostal  state. 
Let  us  by  faith  yield  ourselves  wholly  to  the  Spirit, 
and  receive  Him  by  faith  to  fill  us.  Let  us  give 
ourselves  to  prayer  for  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  life  and  work  of  the  Church  at  home  and  abroad. 
The  pentecostal  command  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
every  creature  is  urgent,  all  tbe  more  from  having 
been  neglected  so  long.  The  need  of  the  pentecostal 
power  is  urgent  beyond  all  thought.  Yet  prayer 
brought  it.  Prayer  still  brings  it.  And  few  feel  how 
feeble  our  power  of  prayer  and  our  power  in  prayei 
is.  Let  us  go  back  and  study  what  it  was  that  fitted 
these  humble  fishermen  and  women  to  pray  so.  It 
was  this  one  thing :  Jesus  Christ  had  their  whole 
heart.  They  had  forsaken  everything  for  Him. 
His  love  filled  them  and  made  them  one  with  Him, 
and  with  each  other.  The  fellowship  of  love 
strengthened  them.  Their  ascended  Lord  was  every 
thing  to  them :  they  could  not  but  pray.  Let  us 
pray  in  secret.  Let  us  unite  in  love  with  others, 
and  pray  without  ceasing,  and  watch  unto  prayer 


134       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

that,  for  the  sake  of  His  Son  and  a  perishing  world, 
God  would  restore  His  people  to  their  first  estate  in 
the  devotion  and  power  and  joy  of  Pentecost. 

But — let  us  ever  again  remember :  The  Missionary 
Problem  is  a  personal  one.  A  passionate  love  to 
Jesus  Christ,  born  out  of  His  love,  truly  possessing 
each  of  us  personally,  will  teach  us  to  pray,  and 
to  labour,  and  to  suffer.  Let  us  pray  for  such  a 
love. 


CHAPTEK    VII 

Jfttesionarg  problem  a  personal  ©ne: 
(JEberg  Belitber  a 


IN  the  report  of  the  Students'  Missionary 
Conference  held  in  London  in  January  1900,1 
the  Appendix  contains  a  Diagram  under  the  head 
ing,  The  Possibilities  of  Personal  Work.  Its 
object  is  to  prove,  by  the  law  of  arithmetical  pro 
gression,  how,  if  there  were  only  one  Christian  in 
the  world  to-day,  and  he  and  all  succeeding  converts 
were  faithful  to  their  calling,  within  a  generation 
every  person  in  the  world  might  be  Christian.  The 
statement  made  is  as  follows  :  —  IF  there  were  only 
one  Christian  in  the  world,  and  he  worked  a 
year  and  won  a  friend  for  Christ,  and  IF  these 
two  continued  each  year  to  win  another,  and  IF 
every  man  thus  led  into  the  kingdom  led  another 
every  year,  in  thirty-one  years  every  person  in 
the  world  would  be  won  for  Christ.  And  then 
follows  the  table,  showing  that  the  result  would  be, 

1  Students  and  the  Missionary  Problem. 
135 


136       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY  PROBLEM 

at  the  end  of  the  thirty -one  years,  over  two  thousand 
million  of  Christians. 

Some  may  doubt  the  wisdom  of  calculations 
which  lie  altogether  beyond  the  range  of  possibilit/ 
or  the  promises  of  God's  word.  Others  may  ques 
tion  the  correctness  of  a  calculation  which  appears 
to  count  upon  all  who  become  Christians  living 
all  through  the  thirty-one  years,  while  we  know 
that  something  like  one-thirtieth  of  the  earth's 
population  dies  each  year.  Leaving  such  questions 
aside,  I  wish  simply  to  take  the  principle  which 
forms  the  basis  of  the  calculation,  and  to  point  out 
what  the  effect  would  be  if  the  substantial  truth  it 
contains  were  really  believed,  and  preached,  and 
practised.  That  truth  is  this,  that  Christ  meant 
every  believer  to  be  a  soul-winner.  Or  rather,  for 
this  is  the  deeper  truth  in  which  the  former  haa  its 
root  and  strength,  that  every  believer  has  been 
saved  with  the  express  purpose  that  he  should  make 
the  saving  of  other  souls  the  main,  the  supreme,  end 
of  his  existence  in  the  world. 

If  ever  I  feel  the  need  of  the  teaching  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  for  myself  and  my  readers,  it  is  when  I 
come  to  this  point.  We  so  easily  accept  general 
statements,  without  realising  fully  what  they  imply. 
It  is  only  when  brought  face  to  face  with  them,  and 
summoned  to  apply  and  act  upon  them,  that  the 
secret  unbelief  comes  out  that  robs  them  of  their 


KVEBY   BELIEVER   A   SOUL- WINNER  137 

power.  It  is  only  when  by  the  Holy  Spirit  we  look 
away  from  the  state  of  the  Church  around  us  and 
the  great  majority  of  Christians,  and  wait  to  realise 
what  actually  is  the  will  of  our  God  concerning  His 
people,  and  what  He  has  actually  made  possible  to 
them  in  the  grace  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  that  in  our 
teaching  within  the  Church  it  will  become  our 
watchword :  Every  believer  a  soul-winner !  It  is 
this  alone  will  give  a  sure  foundation  on  which  to 
ground  our  missionary  appeal,  and  our  hope  for  an 
immediate  and  a  sufficient  response  to  the  call  to 
rise  and  make  Christ  known  to  every  creature. 

But  is  this  law — every  believer  a  soul-winner 
— literally  true  and  binding  ?  Is  it  not  something 
outside  of  the  region  of  "  practical  politics  "  ?  some 
thing  beyond  the  reach  of  the  great  majority  of  true 
but  feeble  believers  ?  The  very  fact  of  this  truth 
being  strange  to  so  many,  so  difficult  altogether  for 
any  but  the  spiritual  mind  to  apprehend  as  possible 
and  obligatory,  is  the  most  urgent  reason  for  its 
being  taught.  Let  us  look  and  see  what  are  the 
grounds  on  which  it  rests.1 

All  nature  teaches  us  that  it  must  be  so.  The 
law  has  its  root  in  the  very  nature  of  things.  It  is 
an  essential  part  of  the  New  Nature.  Do  we  not  see 

1  In  a  little  shilling  volume  just  published,  I  have  attempted  to 
enforce  the  two  truths  of  the  duty  of  every  believer,  as  a  member 
of  Christ's  body,  to  work  for  Him,  and  of  his  ability  to  do  so, 
because  God  works  in  him.  Working  for  God :  Nisbet  &  Co. 


138       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

it  in  every  child,  how  it  loves  to  share  and  tell 
out  its  happiness,  and  to  bring  others  to  share 
it  ?  Do  we  not  expect  to  find  in  every  human 
heart  a  feeling  of  compassion  for  the  poor  and  the 
suffering  ?  And  why  should  it  be  thought  strange 
that  every  child  of  God  is  called  to  take  part  in 
making  known  the  happiness  he  has  found,  to  con 
cern  himself  about  those  who  are  perishing,  have 
compassion  on  them,  and  labour  for  their  salvation. 
Every  believer  a  soul- winner !  What  can  be  more 
natural ? 

Christ  called  His  disciples  the  light  of  the  world. 
The  believer  is  an  intelligent  being — his  light  does 
not  shine  as  a  blind  force  of  nature,  but  in  the 
voluntary  reaching  out  of  the  heart  towards  those 
who  are  in  darkness,  in  the  longing  desire  to  bring 
the  light  to  them,  to  do  all  he  can  do  to  make  them 
acquainted  with  Christ  Jesus.  The  illustration  of 
the  light  is  often  used  of  the  silent  influence  which 
good  works  and  a  consistent  life  may  have.  It  in 
cludes  this  as  an  essential  element,  but  it  means  a 
great  deal  more.  It  does  not  mean,  as  is  often 
understood,  that  I  am  to  be  content  with  seeking 
my  own  salvation,  and  that  I  may  trust  that  my 
example  will  do  others  good.  No ;  even  as  Christ's 
example  derived  its  power  from  the  fact  that  it  was 
a  life  lived  in  our  service,  and  given  up  on  our  be 
half,  so  the  true  power  of  the  Christian's  influence 


EVERY   BELIEVER   A   SOUL- WINNER  139 

lies  in  the  love  that  gives  itself  away  to  seek  the 
happiness  of  others.  As  God  is  Light  and  Love,  it 
is  love  that  makes  the  Christian  the  light  of  the 
world.  Every  believer  a  soul-winner — this  is  in 
deed  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus. 

How  could  it  be  otherwise  ?  As  God  is  Love,  so 
is  he  that  loveth  born  of  God.  Love  is  God's 
highest  glory,  His  everlasting  blessedness.  God's 
children  bear  His  image,  share  His  blessedness,  are 
the  heirs  of  His  glory.  But  this  cannot  be  in  any 
other  way  than  by  their  living  a  life  of  love.  The 
New  Life  in  them  is  a  life  of  love  ;  how  can  it  mani 
fest  itself  but  in  loving  as  God  loves,  in  loving  those 
whom  God  loves  ?  It  is  God's  own  love  that  is 
shed  abroad  in  our  hearts.  Christ  prayed,  "  that 
the  love  wherewith  Thou  lovedst  Me  may  be  in 
them."  It  is  the  love  of  Christ,  the  love  with 
which  He  loved  us,  that  constrains  us.  Love  cannot 
change  its  nature  when  it  flows  down  from  God 
into  us:  it  still  loves  the  evil  and  the  unworthy, 
Christ's  love  has  no  way,  now  that  He  is  in  heaven, 
of  reaching  the  souls  for  whom  He  died,  for  whom 
He  longs,  but  through  us.  Surely  nothing  can  be 
more  natural  and  true  than  the  blessed  message: 
Every  believer  redeemed  to  be  a  soul-winner. 

But  why,  if  it  be  so  simple  and  so  sure,  why  are 
so  many  words  needed  to  prove  and  enforce  it  ? 
Alas !  because  the  Church  is  in  a  feeble  and  sickly 


140       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

state,  and  tens  of  thousands  of  its  members  have 
never  learnt  that  this  is  one  of  the  choicest  treasures 
of  their  blessed  heritage.  They  were  content  with 
the  selfish  thought  of  personal  salvation,  and  even 
in  the  struggle  after  holiness  never  learnt  the 
Divine  purpose  in  their  salvation.  And  there  are 
tens  of  thousands  more  who  have  some  thought  of  its 
being  part  of  their  calling,  who  yet  have  looked 
upon  it  as  a  command  beyond  their  strength,  and 
never  known  that,  as  a  law  and  a  power  of  their  in 
most  nature,  its  fulfilment  is  meant  to  be,  as  every 
function  of  a  healthy  body  is,  a  joy  and  a  strength, 
the  path  to  the  full  development  of  their  spiritual 
nature.  Even  the  commandments  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  may  be  to  us  as  great  a  burden  as  the  law  of 
Moses,  bringing  bondage  and  condemnation,  unless 
we  know  the  blessed  twofold  secret  that  brings  the 
power  of  performance.  That  secret  is  first  what 
we  have  already  named — the  faith  that  love  is  the 
inward  law  of  our  nature,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God's 
law  is  within  us  to  enable  us  gladly  to  love,  and  bless, 
and  save  those  around  us.  And  then,  that  it  is  in  the 
surrender  to  a  life  of  close  following  and  continual 
fellowship  with  the  Lord  Jesus — rejoicing  in  Him, 
forsaking  all  for  Him,  yielding  all  to  the  service 
of  His  love — that  our  spiritual  nature  can  be 
strengthened,  and  the  work  of  winning  souls  become 
the  highest  joy  and  completion  of  the  Christian  life. 


EVERY    BELIEVER    A    SOUL- WINNER  141 

To  those  who  in  some  measure  understand  this,  there 
is  nothing  strange  in  the  thought  that  Every  be 
liever  a  soul-winner !  ought  to  be  the  watchword 
for  every  pastor's  preaching  and  every  believer's 
life. 

But  even  this  is  not  all  Many  a  one  will  agree 
that  every  believer  is  called  upon  to  live  and  work  for 
others,  but  still  looks  upon  this  as  only  a  secondary 
thing,  additional  and  subordinate  to  the  primary 
interest  of  working  out  his  own  salvation.  He  has 
never  seen  that  the  very  reverse  is  the  truth — 
that,  as  with  Christ  His  humility  and  obedience 
and  being  perfected  through  suffering  were  entirely 
subservient  to  the  great  purpose  of  redeeming  love 
in  saving  men,  so  the  redemption  and  acceptance 
and  sanctification  of  a  believer  are  as  entirely 
subordinate  to  the  carrying  out  in  our  lives  of  the 
same  work  of  loving  and  saving  those  around  us. 
Every  believer  a  soul-winner — that  does  not 
mean  only,  among  other  things,  but  first  of  all,  as 
the  chief  reason  of  his  existence.  We  all  agree  in 
saying  that  the  one  and  supreme  end  of  the  Church 
is  to  be  the  bringing  of  the  world  to  Christ.  We 
know  that  God  gave  Him  the  Church  as  His  body, 
with  the  one  purpose  of  its  being  to  its  Head  what 
every  body  is  on  earth — the  living  organ  or  instru 
ment  through  which  the  purposes  and  the  work  of 
the  head  can  alone  be  carried  out.  What  is  true 


142       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

of  the  Head,  is  true  of  the  Body ;  what  is  true  of 
the  Body,  is  true  of  each  individual  member — the 
very  feeblest.  As  in  the  Head,  Christ  Jesus,  as  in 
the  Body,  the  Church,  so  in  every  believer,  the 
supreme,  the  sole,  end  of  our  being  is,  the  saving 
of  souls.  It  is  in  this,  above  everything,  God  is 
glorified.  "  I  have  chosen  you,  and  ordained  you, 
that  ye  should  go  and  should  bring  forth  fruit." 
In  Christ's  election  and  commission  our  watchword 
alone  finds  its  full  meaning,  Every  believer  a 
soul-winner,  as  the  one  object  of  life.  Christ  came 
to  undo  what  sin  had  done,  in  bringing  man  back 
to  God.  This  is  the  object  for  which  each  member 
of  His  body  is  to  live. 

Many  may  be  brought  to  assent  to  this  truth 
and  yet  have  to  confess  that  they  do  not  feel  its 
full  force.  And  many  a  minister  may  feel  how 
little  he  is  able  to  preach  it,  and  the  grace  that 
will  most  certainly  fit  for  it,  with  the  same  full 
conviction  with  which  he  preaches  grace  for  pardon. 
It  is  well  that  we  should  give  this  admission 
careful  consideration.  Whence  comes  the  difficulty  ? 
This  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  this  elevation  to 
a  participation  in  His  saving  work  to  such  an 
extent  that  without  us  He  cannot  do  it,  that 
through  us  He  will  and  can  accomplish  it  in 
Divine  power,  is  a  deep  spiritual  mystery.  It  is 
an  honour  altogether  too  great  for  our  apprehen- 


EVERY    BELIEVER    A    SOUL- WINNER  143 

eion ;  it  is  a  fellowship  and  union  and  partnership 
in  what  is  the  highest  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
life, — its  redeeming,  saving  work, — so  intimate  and 
Divine  that  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  can  reveal  it  to 
us.  To  simple,  childlike  souls  the  reality  of  it 
comes  without  their  knowing  how.  For  those 
who  have  lived  in  the  Christian  life  and  lost  the 
first  love  that  would  have  led  them  into  it,  and  to 
whom  everything  has  to  come  by  the  slow  way  of 
the  understanding,  there  is  need  of  humiliation  in 
giving  up  preconceived  opinions,  and  the  confidence 
of  being  able  to  grasp  spiritual  truths ;  need,  too,  of 
patient  waiting  for  the  Spirit  to  work  such  truth 
in  their  inmost  part.  And  there  is,  above  all,  need 
of  a  turning  away  from  the  world,  with  its  spirit 
and  wisdom,  and  a  return  to  closer  fellowship  with 
Jesus  Christ,  from  whom  alone  the  light  and  the 
love,  with  the  sense  and  experience  of  what  He  can 
work  in  us,  can  come.  Every  believer  ordained  to 
be  first  and  most  a  soul-winner.  Simple  though 
the  watchword  sounds,  and  easy  of  acceptation, 
it  will  cost  much  to  many  before  it  has  mastered 
them.  But  when  Christ  and  the  Spirit  of  His  life 
and  love  in  the  heart  are  waited  on,  we  can  learn 
the  lesson. 

This  supreme  end  for  which  the  Church  and 
each  believer  alone  exists — partnership  with  God 
in  His  saving  work — is  the  crown,  the  highest 


144       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

glory,  of  God's  redeeming  grace — the  preparation 
for  our  sitting  with  Christ  on  His  throne.  Such 
truth  can  fully  enter  and  hold  the  heart  only  in 
close  and  abiding  fellowship  with  Christ.  We 
are  often  at  a  loss  to  understand  this  need  of  much 
continued  communion  with  God.  And  yet  it  is  in 
this  no  otherwise  than  with  the  things  of  earth. 
Take  the  gold  put  into  the  furnace.  Exposed  to 
an  insufficient  heat,  it  gets  heated  but  not  melted. 
Exposed  to  an  intense  heat  for  a  short  time,  and 
then  taken  out  again,  it  is  not  melted.  It  needs 
an  intense  and  continuous  heat,  ere  the  precious 
but  hard  metal  is  prepared  for  the  goldsmith's 
work.  It  is  even  so  with  the  fire  of  God's  love. 
They  who  would  know  it  in  its  power,  they  who 
would  be  able,  in  the  power  of  a  living  faith  and 
experience,  to  proclaim  and  convey  it  to  others, 
must,  in  contact  with  the  love  of  Christ  that  con 
sumed  Him,  know  it  in  its  intensity,  and  know 
what  it  is  to  tarry  in  it  till  their  whole  being 
realises  that  that  love  can  reach  all,  and  melt  all, 
and  make  even  the  coldest  and  feeblest  child  of 
God  a  lover  and  seeker  of  souls.  In  that  intense 
and  continuous  fire  a  pastor,  a  leader,  can  learn  to 
witness  in  power  to  the  truth  of  the  watchword — 
Every  believer  a  soul-winner. 

Let  me  for  a  moment  turn  again  to  the  illustra 
tion  of  the  Head  and  the  Body.     The  lessons  are 


EVERY    BELIEVER    A    SOUL- WINNER  145 

so  obvious  that  it  needs  but  little  reflection  to  find 
them.  The  head  can  do  nothing  but  through  the 
body.  Each  member  is  as  completely  under  the 
control  of  the  head  as  the  whole  body.  If  the 
members,  owing  to  disease,  refuse  to  act,  the  head 
is  helpless  to  carry  out  its  plans.  The  object  of 
the  head  is,  first,  to  use  every  member  for  the 
preservation  and  welfare  of  the  whole  body,  and 
then  to  let  it  take  its  share  in  the  work  the  body 
has  to  do.  If  our  being  members  of  Christ's  body 
has  any  meaning, — and,  praised  be  God !  it  has  an 
infinite  meaning, — every  believer  is  in  the  body  to 
care  for  the  other  members,  and  all  to  co-operate  with 
the  others  in  working  out  the  plans  of  the  head. 
Wherever  I  go,  whatever  I  do,  I  carry  every  member 
of  my  body  with  me,  and  they  take  part  in  all  I  do. 
It  is  no  otherwise  in  the  Body  of  Christ  Jesus. 
Every  member  has  but  one  object,  and,  in  health, 
is  every  moment  to  fulfil  that  object — to  carry 
out  the  work  of  the  Head.  The  work  of  our 
Head  in  heaven  is  to  gather  all  the  members  of 
His  body  on  earth.  In  this  work  every  member 
of  the  body  co-operates  ;  not  under  the  law  of  a 
blind  force  of  nature,  but  under  the  law  of  the 
spirit  of  life,  which  connects  every  believer 
with  his  Lord  in  love,  and  imparts  to  him  the 
very  disposition  and  the  very  strength  in  which 
Christ  does  His  work.  Each  time  we  read  of  Christ 
10 


146       THE   KEY   TO    THE   MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

the  Head,  and  His  body  the  Church,  let  us  with 
new  emphasis  pronounce  the  watchword — Every 
believer,  like  Christ,  a  soul-winner. 

And  what  is  now  the  connection  of  all  this  with 
our  missionary  discussion  ?  We  have  said  more 
than  once — we  seek  to  make  it  the  keynote  of 
this  little  book — The  missionary  problem  is  a 
personal  one.  If  the  Church  is  really  to  take  up 
its  work,  it  is  not  enough  that  we  speak  of  the 
obligation  resting  upon  the  present  generation  to 
make  Christ  known  to  everyone  who  belongs  to  it. 
True  education  must  deal  with  the  individual  mind. 
To  the  general  watchword  there  must  be  added  the 
personal  one.  Nelson's  signal,  "England  expects 
every  man  to  do  his  duty,"  was  a  personal  appeal 
addressed  to  every  man  in  his  fleet.  As  we  seek 
to  find  out  why,  with  such  millions  of  Christians, 
the  real  army  of  God  that  is  fighting  the  hosts  of 
darkness  to  take  from  them  their  prey  is  so  small, 
the  only  answer  is — lack  of  heart.  The  enthusiasm 
of  the  kingdom  is  wanting.  And  that  because 
there  is  so  little  of  the  enthusiasm  of  the  King. 
And  though  much  may  be  done  by  careful  organ 
isation  and  strict  discipline  and  good  generalship 
to  make  the  best  of  the  troops  we  have,  there 
is  nothing  that  can  so  restore  confidence  and  cour 
age  as  the  presence  of  a  beloved  King,  to  whom 
every  heart  beats  warm  in  loyalty  and  devotion. 


EVEKY    BELIEVER    A    SOUL- WINNER  147 

The  Missionary  Appeal  needs  not  only  by  force  of 
argument  and  encouragement  to  do  its  very  best 
with  the  forces  at  its  disposal :  it  must  go  deeper, 
and  seek  to  deal  with  the  very  root  of  the  evil.  If 
there  be  no  desire  for  soul-winning  at  home,  how 
can  the  interest  in  the  distant  heathen  be  truly 
deep  or  spiritual  ?  There  may  be  many  motives  to 
which  we  appeal  effectively  in  asking  for  supplies 
of  men  and  money, — the  compassion  of  a  common 
humanity,  the  extirpation  of  the  evils  of  heathen 
ism,  the  elevation  of  fellow-creatures  in  the  scale 
of  being,  the  claims  of  our  church  or  society, — the 
true  and  highest  motive  is  the  only  one  that  will 
really  make  our  mission  work  subservient  to  the 
spiritual  welfare  of  the  Church,  and  call  forth  its 
spiritual  power  for  the  work  to  be  done. 

If  the  Missionary  Appeal  to  this  generation  to 
bring  the  gospel  to  every  creature  is  to  be  success 
ful,  the  Church  will  have  to  gird  itself  for  the 
work  in  a  very  different  way  from  what  it  has 
done.  The  most  serious  question  the  Church  has 
to  face  just  now — in  fact,  the  only  real  difficulty  of 
the  missionary  problem — is  how  it  is  to  be  roused 
as  a  whole  to  the  greatness  and  glory  of  the  task 
intrusted  to  it,  and  led  to  enter  upon  it  with  all 
its  heart  and  strength.  And  the  only  answer  to 
that  question — the  key  to  the  whole  situation — 
appears  to  be  the  simple  truth :  The  missionary 


148       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

problem   is   a   personal   one.     The   Lord   Jesus 

Christ  is  the  Author  and  Leader  of  Missions. 
Whoever  stands  right  with  Him,  and  abides  in 
Him,  will  be  ready  to  know  and  do  His  will.  It 
is  simply  a  matter  of  being  near  enough  to  Him  to 
hear  His  voice,  and  so  devoted  to  Him  and  His 
love  as  to  be  ready  to  do  all  His  will.  Christ's  whole 
relation  to  each  of  us  is  an  intensely  personal  one. 
"He  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  My 
relation  to  Him  is  an  entirely  personal  one.  He 
gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  me,  and  I  am  His,  to 
live  for  Him  and  His  glory.  He  has  breathed  His 
love  into  my  heart,  and  I  love  Him.  He  tells  me 
that,  as  a  member  of  His  body,  He  needs  me  for 
His  service,  and  in  love  I  gladly  yield  myself  to  Him. 
He  wants  nothing  more  than  that  I  should  tell  this 
out  to  others,  and  prove  to  them  how  He  loves,  and 
how  He  enables  us  to  love,  and  how  blessed  a  life 
in  His  love  is. 

The  personal  element  of  the  missionary  problem 
must  be  put  in  the  foreground.  The  missionary 
sermon  or  meeting  must  give  the  love  of  Christ  the 
first  place.  If  Christians  are  in  a  low,  cold,  worldly 
state,  the  first  object  must  be,  waiting  on  God  in 
prayer  and  faith  for  His  Holy  Spirit  to  lead  them 
to  a  true  devotion  to  Jesus  Christ.  The  apparent 
loss  of  time  in  not  coming  at  once  with  the  ordinary 
missionary  information  and  argument  will  soon  be 


EVERY    BELIEVER    A    SOUL- WINNER  149 

made  up.  Feeble  believers,  who  are  glad  to  hear 
and  give,  must  be  lifted  to  the  consciousness  of  the 
wonderful  spiritual  privilege  of  offering  themselves 
to  Christ  to  live  for  His  kingdom.  They  must  be 
encouraged  to  believe  that  the  Lord  who  loves 
them,  greatly  prizes  their  love,  and  will  enable  them 
to  bring  it  Him.  They  must  learn  that  Christ's 
dying  love  asks,  and  that  rightly,  a  whole-hearted 
devotion,  and  that  the  more  they  sacrifice,  the  more 
will  that  love  possess  them.  As  definitely  as  we 
labour  to  secure  the  interest  and  the  gifts  of  each 
individual,  and  even  more  so,  must  we  labour  to  bring 
each  one  into  contact  with  Christ  Himself. 

At  first  it  may  appear  as  if  we  are  aiming  too 
high.  In  many  a  congregation  the  response  may 
be  very  feeble.  Let  the  pastor  give  himself  to 
study  the  missionary  problem  in  this  light.  Let 
him  put  it  to  his  people,  clearly  and  perseveringly : 
You  have  been  redeemed  to  be  the  witnesses  and 
messengers  of  Christ's  love.  To  fit  you  for  it,  His 
love  has  been  given  you,  and  shed  abroad  in  your 
heart.  As  He  loves  you,  He  loves  the  whole  world. 
He  wants  those  who  know  it  to  tell  those  who 
know  it  not.  His  love  to  you  and  to  them,  your 
love  to  Him  and  to  them,  call  you  to  do  it.  It  is 
your  highest  privilege;  it  will  be  your  highest 
happiness  and  perfection.  As  Christ  gave  Himself, 
give  yourself  wholly  to  this  work  of  love. 


150       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

As  the  minister  seeks  to  lead  his  congregation  on 
to  this,  he  may  find  how  little  of  it  he  realizes  him 
self.  That  will  be  the  beginning  of  blessing.  While 
he  is  thinking  of  the  need  of  the  heathen,  Christ  is 
thinking  of  his  need,  and  seeking  to  bring  him 
into  the  blessing  of  a  new  experience  of  His  love. 
As  his  own  need,  and  the  need  of  his  people,  and 
their  impotence  to  meet  the  need  of  the  heathen, 
press  upon  him,  he  may  learn  to  pray  more  than  he 
ever  did  before  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  teach  him 
to  know  and  preach  the  love  of  Christ.  He  will 
begin  to  see,  too,  that  nothing  but  a  more  fervent 
enthusiasm  for  Jesus  Christ  and  His  love  will  fit 
him  for  making  a  truly  missionary  congregation. 
And  he  will  experience  that,  while  he  thought  at 
first  only  of  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  abroad, 
the  appeal  to  live  wholly  for  Christ  and  His  love 
and  service  will  lead  to  blessing  at  home. 

The  missionary  problem  a  personal  one, 
because  every  believer  a  soul-winner.  This 
watchword,  which  was  sounded  to  bring  the  mis 
sionary  cause  to  its  true  place,  will  at  the  same 
time  have  formed  workers  who,  under  the  constraint 
of  the  love  of  Jesus,  will  be  soul-winners  at  home. 


CHAPTEE    VIII 


TN  our  opening  chapter  a  number  of  extracts  were 
-*-  given  in  which  the  chief  responsibility  for  the 
solution  of  the  missionary  problem  was,  by  common 
consent,  laid  upon  the  ministry.  "  To  the  pastor 
belongs  the  privilege  and  responsibility  of  the 
foreign  missionary  problem."  These  words, 
apparently  indorsed  by  the  whole  Conference,  point, 
in  connection  with  the  ministry,  to  a  high  honour  ; 
a  serious  shortcoming;  an  urgent  duty;  and  the 
great  need  of  seeking  from  God  the  grace  worthily  to 
fulfil  its  vocation.  We  need  not  seek  to  apportion 
exactly  the  measure  of  responsibility  as  between  the 
ministry  and  the  membership  of  the  Church  ;  that 
on  the  ministry  a  holy  and  heavy  responsibility 
rests  in  this  matter,  all  are  agreed.  Let  all  ministers 
heartily  admit  and  accept  it,  and  prepare  themselves 
to  live  up  to  it. 

Let  us  try,  first  of  all,  to  find  the  ground  on  which 
that   responsibility  rests.      The   principles  out   of 

161 


152       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

which  it  grows  are  simple,  and  yet  of  inconceivable 
importance.  They  are  these  four : 

That  missions  are  the  chief  end  of  the  Church. 
That  the  chief  end  of  the  ministry  is  to  guide  the 
Church  in  this  work,  and  fit  her  for  it.  That  the 
chief  end  of  the  preaching  in  a  congregation  ought 
to  be  to  train  it  to  take  its  part  in  helping  the 
Church  to  fulfil  her  destiny.  And  that  the  chief  end 
of  every  minister  in  this  connection  ought  to  be  to 
seek  grace  to  fit  himself  thoroughly  for  this  work. 

Let  no  one  think  these  statements  exaggerated. 
They  appear  so  because  we  have  been  so  accustomed 
to  give  missions  a  very  subordinate  place  in  our 
thoughts  of  the  Church  and  its  ministry.  We 
need  ever  to  be  brought  back  to  the  great  central 
truth,  "the  mystery  of  God,"  that  the  Church  is 
the  body  of  Christ,  as  absolutely  and  exclusively 
ordained  by  God  to  carry  out  the  purpose  of  His 
redeeming  love  in  the  world  as  Christ  the  Head 
Himself.  The  Church  has,  even  as  Christ,  but  one 
object  of  being — to  be  the  light  of  the  world.  As 
Christ  died  for  every  man,  as  God  wills  that  all 
men  should  be  saved,  so  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the 
Church  knows  no  object  but  this — that  the  gospel 
be  brought  to  every  creature.  Missions  are  the 
chief  end  of  the  Church.  All  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  converting  sinners  and  sanctifying 
believers,  has  this  for  its  one  aim — to  fit  them 


A   MISSIONARY   MINISTRY  153 

for  the  part  that  each  must  at  once  take  in 
winning  back  the  world  to  God.  Nothing  less 
than  what  God's  eternal  purpose,  and  Christ's 
dying  love,  aimed  at,  can  be  the  aim  of  the  Church. 
As  we  see  this  to  be  true,  we  shall  see  that  the 
chief  end  of  the  ministry  ought  to  be  to  fit  the 
Church  for  this.  Paul  writes,  "  God  gave  pastors 
and  teachers  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints  unto  (as 
what  these  saints  have  to  do)  the  work  of  ministering, 
or  serving,  unto  (as  the  final  aim  of  this  work  of 
the  saints)  the  building  up  of  the  body  of  Christ." 
It  is  through  the  ministering,  the  loving  service  of 
the  saints  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  to  be  gathered 
and  built  up.  And  the  pastors  and  teachers  are 
given  to  perfect  the  saints  for  this  work  of  minister 
ing.  A  Normal  School  or  Training  Class  is  very 
different  from  an  ordinary  school.  It  seeks  not  only 
to  train  every  pupil  to  acquire  and  possess  know 
ledge  for  himself,  but  to  fit  him  to  impart  it  to 
others.  Each  congregation  is  meant  to  be  a 
training  class.  Every  believer,  without  exception, 
is  to  be  "  perfected,"  to  be  thoroughly  fitted  for  the 
work  of  ministering  and  taking  his  part  in  labour 
and  prayer  for  those  near  and  far  off.  In  all  the 
pastor's  teaching  of  repentance  and  conversion,  of 
obedience  and  holiness,  this  ought  definitely  to  be 
his  supreme  aim — to  call  men  to  come  and  serve 
God  in  the  noble,  holy,  Christlike  work  of  saving 


154       THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

the  lost  and  restoring  God's  kingdom  on  earth. 
The  chief  end  of  the  Church  is  of  necessity  the 
chief  end  of  the  ministry. 

Out  of  this  follows,  naturally,  the  statement  that 
the  chief  end  of  preaching  ought  to  be  to  train  every 
individual  believer  and  every  congregation  to  take  its 
part  in  helping  the  Church  to  fulfil  her  destiny.  This 
will  decide  the  question  as  to  how  often  a  missionary 
sermon  ought  to  be  preached.  As  long  as  we  only 
speak  of  one  every  year,  it  is  probable  that  the 
chief  thought  will  be  the  obtaining  of  a  better 
collection.  This  may  often  be  obtained  without 
the  spiritual  life  being  raised  one  whit.  When 
missions  take  their  true  place  as  the  chief  aim  of 
the  Church  of  which  the  missionary  spirit  has 
really  taken  possession,  there  may  be  times  when  a 
minister  will  feel  it  needful,  time  after  time,  to 
return  to  the  one  subject,  until  the  neglected  truth 
begins  to  master  at  least  some  in  the  congregation. 
At  times,  again,  it  may  be  that  while  there  is  no 
direct  preaching  on  missions,  yet  all  the  teaching  on 
love  and  faith,  on  obedience  and  service,  on  holiness 
and  conformity  to  Christ,  may  be  inspired  by  this 
one  truth — that  we  are  to  be  "  imitators  of  God,  and 
walk  in  love,  even  as  Christ  loved  and  gave  Him 
self  a  sacrifice  for  us."  Missions  are  the  chief  end 
of  the  Church,  and  therefore  of  the  ministry,  and 
therefore  of  all  its  preaching. 


A   MISSIONARY   MINISTRY  155 

All  this  now  leads  up  to  what,  in  view  of  the 
responsibility  of  the  minister,  is  the  main  point  that 
must  be  pressed,  that  the  chief  aim  of  every 
minister  ought  to  be  to  fit  himself  for  this  great 
work.  To  be  the  teacher  of  a  Normal  College  or 
Training  School  needs  a  special  training.  To  inspire 
and  train  and  help  believers  is  not  an  easy  thing ; 
it  does  not  come  from  the  mere  fact  of  being  an 
earnest  Christian,  and  having  had  a  ministerial 
training.  It  is  a  matter  to  which  larger  place 
ought  to  be  given  in  our  theological  seminaries. 
But  even  this  can  only  be  partial  and  preparatory. 
The  minister  who  would  combat  successfully  the 
selfishness  that  is  content  with  personal  salvation, 
the  worldliness  that  has  no  idea  of  sacrificing  all  or 
even  anything  for  Christ,  the  unbelief  that  measures 
its  power  to  help  or  bless  by  what  it  feels  and  sees, 
and  not  by  what  God  and  His  Spirit  can  work,  and 
so  would  lift  the  Church  to  know  and  rejoice  in 
and  fulfil  her  heavenly  calling,  will  find  the  need  of 
a  special  training  to  fit  him  for  this,  the  highest 
and  holiest  part  of  his  vocation. 

If  the  question  be  asked  how  the  minister  is  thus 
to  fit  himself  for  carrying  out  his  responsibility, 
the  first  answer  will  usually  be,  and  we  may  take 
it  first,  "By  study."  In  regard  to  this,  many 
pointed  things  were  said,  at  the  Conference,  of  the 
members  of  the  Church,  which  are  specially 


156       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

applicable  to  the  pastor,  as  the  representative  and 
guide  of  his  people  in  this. 
Mrs.  Montgomery — 

"  We  all  know  that  the  greatest  need  in  our  mission 
work  is  the  need  of  a  fuller  and  a  deeper  realisation  of  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself  with  us.  But  next  to 
that,  I  believe  that  our  greatest  need  is  a  broader  and 
more  thoughtful  grasp  of  the  subject." 

Mrs.  J.  T.  Gracey — 

"  Possibly  one  of  the  greatest  factors  in  the  develop 
ment  of  missionary  interest  is  the  systematic  study  of 
missions." 

Kev.  Dr.  Halsey  began  an  address  on  the  "  Use 
of  Missionary  Literature  by  the  Pastor"  with  the 
words — 

"  It  was  said  of  the  late  Keith  Falconer,  by  one  of  his 
instructors,  that  'he  approached  the  world  of  ideas  as 
great  observers  approach  the  world  of  nature — with 
wonder,  with  reverence,  and  with  humility.'  In  some 
such  spirit  must  the  pastor  approach  the  study  of 
missions." 

These  last  are  golden  words.  What  may  have 
been  the  reason  that  the  speaker  who  quoted 
them  added,  "  In  some  such  spirit  must  the  pastor 
approach  the  systematic  study  of  missions "  ?  It 
can  only  be  because  he  knows  how  often,  in  the 
study  of  the  Bible  or  theology,  everything  is  simply 
regarded  as  a  matter  of  the  intellect,  leaving  the 
heart  unblessed.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  study 


A    MISSIONARY    MINISTRY  157 

and  know  the  Theory  and  History  of  Missions,  and 
yet  lack  the  inspiration  that  knowledge  was  meant 
to  give.  Let  no  pastor  say  that  he  surely  knows 
how  to  study.  To  study  nature  with  wonder  and 
reverence  and  humility  is  a  great  gift — how  much 
more  is  all  this  needed  in  the  higher  region  of  the 
spiritual  world,  and  specially  in  this,  the  highest 
spiritual  truth  in  regard  to  the  destiny  of  the 
Church,  "  the  mystery  of  God  "  ! 

Let  me  quote  some  words  from  a  great  master  in 
education  x  which  give  emphasis  to  what  was  said  : — 
"  All  genius  begins  by  coming  down,  and  kneeling,  and 
supplicating,  and  winning  a  way  in,  and  nestling  at 
last  in  the  heart  of  spirit  power,  and  learning  all  its 
tenderest  perfection  by  devotion  to  its  service — 
patient,  watchful,  long-suffering  devotion.  And  if 
genius  thus  stoops  to  conquer,  and  cannot  conquer 
without  stooping,  then  any  mind  can  stoop  in  like 
manner.  Genius  begins  by  loving  exceedingly,  and 
through  love  getting  close  to  the  noblest  forms  of 
life.  All  can  walk  part  of  the  way  with  genius. 
A  painter  quickly  masters  the  commonplace  and 
outside  husk  of  things,  and  goes  on,  and  perseveres 
and  penetrates  into  the  subject,  and  loves  it,  and 
sees  more  than  others  because  he  loves,  and  strives 
to  reproduce  what  he  sees.  A  poet  turns  his  eyes, 
and  all  the  strength  of  his  passionate,  impressive 

1  Edward  Thring,  Theory  and  Practice  of  Education. 


158       THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

heart,  on  the  objects  which  stir  his  inmost  being, 
And  so  on,  through  the  whole  range,  down  to  the 
schoolboy  in  the  lowest  form,  as  far  as  any  true 
work  is  going  on.  ...  Teacher  and  taught  must 
win  true  power  by  humbly  striving  to  get  close,  to 
win  a  way  by  love  into  the  heart  of  the  subject 
they  deal  with.  This  is  the  highest  form  of  work 
ing  possible  for  man. 

"  From  this  it  follows  that  the  burglar  who  thinks 
to  break  in  by  force  of  intellect,  and  wrest  the 
secret  power  of  spirit  beauty  from  the  spirit  within, 
is  little  likely  to  win  the  love  that  dwells  there. 
The  burglar-intellect  will  for  ever  be  an  outcast 
from  the  home  of  higher  life.  Love  must  woo  love ; 
the  loving  mind  of  one  willing  to  be  led  gets  closer 
and  closer  to  the  object  of  his  love,  ever  clasps  with 
reverent  affection  the  beauty  it  would  make  its 
own,  and  strives  to  interpret  every  work  of  God  or 
man  by  this  only  law  that  thought-creations  obey." 

If  such  be  the  spirit  to  which  alone  Nature 
unlocks  her  secret  laws  and  beauties,  how  much 
more  do  we  need,  in  the  mysteries  of  the  heavenly 
kingdom,  to  stoop,  and  gaze,  and  wait  until  our 
hearts  are  made  tender  and  receptive,  and  it  pleases 
the  Divine  love  to  give  us  some  insight  into  the 
riches  of  the  glory  of  this  mystery  among  the 
Gentiles. 

Let   us    now    turn    to    speak    of    the    study  of 


A   MISSIONAKY   MINISTKY  159 

missions,  as  something  for  which  we  need  the  deep 
humility  that  is  conscious  of  its  ignorance,  and  has 
uo  confidence  in  its  own  understanding;  the 
reverent  waiting  and  patience  that  is  willing  to  gaze 
and  listen  to  what  God's  Spirit  can  reveal  in  our 
life ;  and  the  love  and  devotion  that  gives  itself 
away  to  be  mastered  and  led  by  Divine  love  whither 
it  will. 

And  what  is  it  a  pastor  will  need  specially  to 
study  ?  In  the  missionary  problem  there  are  three 
great  factors.  The  world  in  its  sin  ana  misery; 
Christ  in  His  dying  love ;  the  Church  as  the  link 
between  the  two. 

The  first  thing  is :  Study  the  world.  Take  some 
of  the  statistics  that  tell  of  its  population.  Think, 
for  instance,  of  some  three  million  of  the  heathen 
and  Mohammedans  dying  every  month ;  dropping 
over  the  precipice  in  the  gloom  of  thick  darkness  at 
the  rate  of  more  than  one  every  second.  Or  take 
some  book  that  brings  you  face  to  face  with  the  sin 
and  degradation  and  suffering  of  some  special 
country.  Take,  for  instance,  a  book  like  Across 
India  at  the  Dawn  of  the  Twentieth  Century,  by  Miss 
Lucy  Guinness  (Eel.  Tract  Soc.).  I  know  of  no 
book  that,  by  its  diagrams,  its  maps  with  letterpress, 
its  statistics,  so  compels  the  reader  to  stop  and  ask 
himself  whether  he  believes,  whether  he  feels,  what 
he  has  read.  Pause  and  meditate  and  pray,  asking 


160       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

God  to  give  you  an  eye  to  see  and  a  heart  to  feel 
that  misery.  Think  of  these  300  millions  that 
they  are  your  British  fellow-subjects.  Look  at  the 
picture  of  that  man  worshipping,  with  a  reverence 
many  a  Christian  knows  little  of,  a  cobra  cut  in 
stone,  until  you  take  in  what  it  means,  and  cannot 
forget  it.  That  man  is  your  brother.  He  has,  like 
you,  a  nature  formed  for  worship.  He  does  not, 
like  you,  know  the  true  God.  Will  you  not  sacri 
fice  everything,  sacrifice  yourself,  to  save  him  ? 
Study,  sometimes  in  its  great  whole,  sometimes  in 
its  detail,  the  state  of  the  world,  until  you  begin  to 
feel  that  God  has  placed  you  in  this  dark  world 
with  the  one  object  of  studying  that  darkness,  and 
living  and  helping  those  who  are  dying  in  it. 

And  if  at  times  you  feel  that  it  is  more  than  you 
can  bear,  cry  to  God  to  help  you  to  look  again,  and 
yet  again,  until  you  know  that  the  need  of  the  world 
makes  it  the  very  place  where  you  choose  to  dwell. 
But  remember  always,  the  strongest  intellect,  the 
most  vivid  imagination,  the  most  earnest  study, 
cannot  give  you  the  right  sense  of  these  things ; — 
nothing  but  the  Spirit  and  Love  of  Jesus,  waited  on 
to  make  you  feel  what  He  feels,  and  love  as  He  loves. 

Then  comes  the  second  great  lesson:  Christ's 
love,  dying  for  these  sinners,  and  now  longing  to 
have  them  won  for  Him.  Oh,  do  not  think  you 
know  that  dying  love,  that  love  resting  on  and 


A    MISSIONARY   MINISTRY  161 

thirsting  for  every  creature  on  earth !  If  it  takes 
time,  and  a  humble,  reverent,  loving  spirit,  to  enter 
into  the  meaning  and  spirit  of  nature  and  its  beauty, 
— what  think  you,  my  brother  minister,  is  it  an 
easy  thing  to  enter  into  the  Holiest  of  All,  the 
sanctuary  of  God's  love,  and  in  very  deed  have  it 
possess  our  hearts  ?  Love  is  needed  in  the  poet 
who  would  woo  the  secrets  of  nature.  The  Divine 
love,  Christ's  love  to  every  creature,  can  only  be 
known  and  felt  by  the  loving  heart  that  gives  itself 
up  to  it,  that  reverently  waits  for  it  as  it  pleases  to 
make  itself  known.  If  you  would  study  the 
missionary  problem,  study  it  in  the  heart  of  Jesus. 
The  missionary  problem  is  a  personal  one — that  is 
meant  of  every  believer.  But  it  is  specially  true  of 
the  minister,  who  is  to  be  the  pattern,  the  teacher, 
of  believers.  Study,  experience,  prove  the  power  of 
the  personal  relationship,  that  you  may  be  able  to 
teach  well  this,  the  deepest  secret  of  true  mission 
work. 

And  then  with  Christ's  love  there  is  His  power. 
Study  this  until  the  vision  of  a  triumphant  Christ, 
with  every  enemy  at  His  feet,  has  cast  its  light 
upon  the  whole  earth.  The  whole  work  of  saving 
men  is  Christ's  work,  as  much  to-day  as  on  Calvary, 
as  much  with  each  individual  conversion  as  in  the 
propitiation  for  the  sins  of  all.  His  Divine  power 
carries  on  the  work  in  and  through  His  servants. 
ii 


162       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

In  studying  the  possible  solution  of  the  problem,  in 
any  case  of  special  difficulty,  beware  of  leaving  out 
the  omnipotence  of  Jesus.  Humbly,  reverently, 
patiently  worship  Him,  until  Christ's  love  and 
power  become  the  inspiration  of  your  life. 

And  the  third  great  lesson  to  study  is — the  Church 
the  connecting  link  between  the  two,  between  the 
dying  Saviour  and  the  dying  world.  And  here 
some  of  the  deepest  mysteries  of  the  missionary 
problem  will  be  found.  That  the  Church  should 
really  be  the  Body  on  earth  of  Christ,  the  Head  in 
heaven,  as  indispensable  to  Him  as  He  is  to  it !  That 
His  omnipotence  and  His  infinite  redeeming  love 
should  have  linked  themselves,  for  the  fulfilment  of 
His  desires,  to  the  weakness  of  His  Church !  That 
the  Church  should  now  these  hundred  years  have 
heard  the  preaching,  Missions  the  supreme  end  of 
the  Church !  and  yet  be  so  content  with  a  state  in 
which  that  end  is  not  counted  the  supreme  thing ! 
And  that  the  Lord  should  yet  be  waiting  to  prove 
most  wonderfully  how  really  He  counts  His  Church 
one  with  Himself,  and  be  ready  to  fill  her  with  His 
Spirit  and  power  and  glory !  And  that  there  is 
abundant  ground  for  a  confident  faith  that  the 
Lord  is  able  and  waiting  to  restore  the  Church  to 
its  pentecostal  state,  and  so  fit  it  for  carrying  out 
its  pentecostal  commission ! 

In  the  midst  of  such  study  there  will  grow  up 


A   MISSIONARY   MINISTRY  163 

the  clearer  conviction  of  how  really  the  Church  is 
His  Body,  endued  with  the  power  of  His  Spirit, 
true  partaker  of  His  Divine  love,  the  blessed 
partner  of  His  life  and  His  glory.  And  the  faith  will 
be  awakened  that  if  the  Church  in  her  members, 
who  see  the  evil  and  believe  in  the  Divine  possibility 
of  deliverance,  will  but  arise  and  give  themselves, 
in  true  renunciation  of  all,  to  their  Lord,  the 
pentecostal  glory  can  still  return. 

The  world  in  its  Sin  and  Woe,  Christ  in  His  Love 
and  Power,  the  Church  as  the  Link  between  the  two 
— these  are  the  three  great  magnitudes  the  minister 
must  know  if  he  is  to  master  the  missionary  problem. 
In  his  study  he  may  have  to  go  to  Scripture,  and  to 
missionary  literature,  and  to  books  on  theology  or 
the  spiritual  life ;  but  in  the  long  run  he  will  ever 
have  to  come  back  to  the  truth :  the  problem  is  a 
personal  one.  It  demands  a  most  complete  and 
unreserved  giving  up  of  the  whole  being  to  live  for 
that  world,  for  that  Christ,  for  that  Church.  And 
it  demands,  as  we  have  already  shown,  that  that 
personal  surrender  shall  not  merely  be  that  of  a 
student  who  is  determined  to  master  some  human 
problem,  but  of  one  who,  like  a  true  observer  of 
nature,  gives  himself  humbly,  reverently,  lovingly, 
to  wait,  and  gaze,  and  listen  till  the  spirit-world 
unlocks  its  secrets.  The  Living  Christ  can  manifest 
Himself ;  He  can,  to  the  penitent,  patient  supplicant, 


164       THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

impart  His  love  in  its  power.  He  can  make  His 
love  ours,  that  we  may  feel  as  He  does.  He  can 
let  the  light  of  His  love  fall  on  the  world,  to  reveal 
at  once  its  need  and  its  hope.  He  can  give  the 
experience  in  the  soul  of  how  close  and  how  real  is 
His  union  with  the  believer,  and  how  divinely  He 
can  dwell  and  work  in  us.  The  missionary  problem 
is  a  personal  one,  to  be  solved  by  the  power  of 
Christ's  love.  Let  the  minister  thus  study  it,  and 
he  will  learn  to  preach  in  new  power — Missions, 
the  great  work,  the  supreme  end,  of  Christ,  of  the 
Church,  of  every  congregation,  of  every  believer, 
and,  specially,  of  every  minister. 

We  have  said  that  the  first  need  of  the  ministry, 
if  it  is  to  fulfil  its  calling  in  regard  to  missions,  is 
to  study  them.  But  when  light  begins  to  come,  and 
the  mind  is  convinced  and  the  emotions  are  stirred, 
these  must  at  once  be  translated  into  Action,  if  the 
knowledge  and  sentiment  are  not  to  remain  barren. 
And  where  shall  this  Action  begin  ?  Undoubtedly 
in  prayer,  more  definite  prayer,  for  missions.  It 
may  be  for  the  awakening  of  the  mission  spirit  in 
the  Church  at  large,  or  in  his  own  church,  or  in 
special  congregations.  It  may  be  for  some  special 
field  or  station.  It  may  be  for  God's  leading  in 
regard  to  his  own  people  or  the  Church  around 
him.  It  may  be,  it  must  be,  for  himself  very 
specially,  that  God  would  give  and  ever  renew  the 


A   MISSIONARY   MINISTRY  165 

mission  fire  from  heaven.  Whatever  the  prayer  be — 
the  study  must  lead  at  once  to  more  prayer,  or  the 
fruit  will  be  comparatively  small.  Without  this, 
there  may  be  more  interest  in  missions,  more  work 
for  them,  better  success  in  organization  and  col 
lections,  while  the  real  growth  of  the  spiritual  life, 
and  of  the  love  of  Christ  in  the  soul,  is  but  very 
small. 

Let  us  turn  aside  a  moment  to  think  of  this. 
In  all  religions  there  are  two  factors — God  and 
man.  Religion  ever  has  its  character  from  the 
degree  of  prominence  which  either  of  these  receives. 
When  man's  will  and  work  are  in  the  foreground, 
the  spiritual  life  is  feeble  ;  God's  presence  and  power 
are  little  known.  It  is  very  markedly  so  in  mis 
sions.  You  may  have  people  who  read  missionary 
books  and  faithfully  give  liberal  subscriptions  as  part 
of  their  religion,  while  there  is  but  little  love  to  Christ 
or  prayer  for  His  kingdom.  You  may,  on  the  con 
trary,  have  humble,  simple  people,  who  can  give  but 
little,  but  with  that  little  give  their  whole  heart's 
love  and  prayer.  The  one  is  the  religion  in  which 
man  is  prominent ;  the  other  is  on  a  higher  and 
more  spiritual  level,  in  which  the  love  of  God  is 
the  supreme  aim.  No  one  needs  to  watch  more 
earnestly  than  the  minister  to  see  that  the  mis 
sionary  enthusiasm  he  fosters  in  himself  and  others 
is,  in  very  deed,  the  fire  that  comes  from  heaven  in 


166       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

answer  to  believing  prayer  to  consume  the  sacrifice. 
The  missionary  problem  is  a  personal  one.  The 
minister  who  has  solved  it  for  himself  will  find 
grace  to  lead  others  to  find  its  solution  too  in  the 
constraining  power  of  Christ's  love. 


A  MISSIONARY  MINISTRY  167 

THE  GREAT  COMMISSION 

Every  minister  holds  office  under  the  Great  Commis 
sion.  Each  of  us  is  to  take  to  heart  the  world-wide  field 
committed  to  our  care.  In  addition  to  the  corner  in 
which  we  labour,  we  are  responsible  for  aiding  in  getting 
the  whole  occupied.  Each  of  us  ever  needs  to  study  our 
Commission  afresh,  to  see  that  we  rightly  understand 
and  truly  fulfil  it.  Let  us,  in  view  of  the  sad  failure 
of  the  Church,  and  the  cry  for  the  restoration  of  the 
pentecostal  state,  once  again  listen  to  the  words  in 
which  our  Lord  intrusts  us  with  the  commission  to  see 
that  the  message  of  His  love  reaches  every  human  being. 


3esus  spake,  &II  pettier  is  gfuen  unto  JHe  in 

Jjeafoen  anfc  in  eartfj 
The  All  of  unlimited  power 

Jesus  reveals  Himself  as  the  Omnipotent  One,  seated 
at  God's  right  hand,  ruling  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies, 
making  His  people  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power. 
That  was  His  Coronation  day,  when  He  received  the 
Spirit  to  fill  His  disciples  with  power,  and  make  thousands, 
even  of  those  who  had  crucified  Him,  bow  at  His  feet. 

In  this  Jesus,  the  Triumphant  Lord,  missions  have 
their  origin,  their  power,  their  certainty  of  success.  The 
word  He  spake  made  His  disciples  strong.  Let  us 
humbly  bow  and  wait  until  the  vision  and  the  word 
of  the  Omnipotent  Christ  deliver  us  from  every  fear, 
whether  of  the  Church's  not  being  willing  in  the  day 
of  His  power,  or  His  enemies  not  bowing  at  His  feet. 

(So  2*  therefore,  lead)  all  nations,  anfc  preacfj  tfje 

gospel  to  cfaerg  creature 
The  All  of  unbounded  love 

Ho  died  for  all  ;  His  dying  love  thirsted  for  all  ;  His 
love  in  heaven  seeks  all.  In  these  words  all  nations, 


168       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

every  creature,  He  reveals  to  His  Church  the  boundless 
love  that  is  to  be  the  measure  of  their  love.  In  that 
word  He  speaks  it  into  the  very  heart  of  His  people, 
and  there  begins  to  burn  within  them  a  love  that  cannot 
rest  till  every  living  being  knows  of  Jesus. 

Brother  ministers  !  has  this  love  got  possession  ?  does  it 
burn  in  us  1 

&eacjjmij  tfjem  to  otorfo  all  tfjittjjg  forfjatsoeber  I 
fja&e  nrmmantietj  gon 

The  All  of  universal  obedience 

He  had  taught  His  disciples  the  heavenly  blessedness 
of  obedience.  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments : 
and  the  Father  will  send  you  the  Spirit ;  and  the  Father 
will  love  you ;  and  I  will  love  you ;  and  I  will  manifest 
Myself  to  you ;  and  We  will  come  and  make  Our  abode 
with  you ;  and  ye  shall  abide  in  My  love ;  and  ye  shall 
be  My  friends  (John  xiv.  15).  And  they  were  to 
go  out,  that  the  vilest  and  most  hardened,  His  very 
enemies  and  murderers,  might  be  changed  and  be  taught 
to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  He  had  commanded. 

Brother  ministers !  have  we  understood  the  high  aim 
of  our  commission — to  lead  to  a  life,  and  gather  into  a 
Church,  of  universal  obedience  ? 

&nto  10,  £  am  im't!j  goa  all  tije  trajjg,  efan  tmto 
tje  nib  of  tfyt  fcoorlfc 

The  All  of  unceasing  fellowship 

The  Commission  ends  where  it  began  —  with  Jesus 
Himself.  There  it  was  His  Power;  here  it  is  His 
Presence.  All  the  days,  and  all  the  day,  His  Divine 
abiding  fellowship  is  to  be  the  portion  of  His  obedient 
disciple.  No  trials,  or  difficulties,  however  dark  j  no 
labours,  however  wearying  or  fruitless ;  no  opposition  or 


A   MISSIONARY   MINISTRY  169 

suffering,  however  painful;  no  conscious  weakness  or 
unworthiness,  however  great,  can  break  this  promise, 
or  prevent  His  holy,  blessed  fellowship  with  His  servant. 
To  every  one  who  accepts  the  Commission  and  lives 
under  it,  the  holy  nearness  of  Jesus  is  secured. 

Brother  ministers !  let  us  seek  by  the  Holy  Spirit  a 
deeper,  a  full  entrance  into  our  Lord's  Commission,  and 
an  entire  surrender  to  its  service:  He  will  make  His 
promise  true. 

What  was  it  that  enabled  these  poor  fishermen  so 
simply  to  accept,  and  so  loyally  to  carry  out,  this  so 
Divine  Commission?  Two  things. 

The  one  was :  Their  hearts  had  been  prepared  for  it 
by  their  intense  devotion  to  Jesus.  They  had  learnt 
to  love  Him.  They  had  gone  down  with  Him  into 
His  death.  They  had  been  quickened  in  His  resurrection 
life.  He  was  their  all  in  all.  His  words  were  to  them 
as  water  to  the  thirsty. 

The  other :  It  was  Jesus  Himself  who  spoke  the  words. 
Not  a  book  or  a  messenger,  but  Jesus  Himself.  Oh ! 
come,  let  us  rise  from  the  Commission  to  our  Ascended 
Lord,  and  wait  on  Him.  And  as  we  patiently  bow  for 
Him  to  reveal  first  the  Power  in  which  He  works,  then 
the  Love  with  which  He  longs  for  every  soul  of  man, 
then  the  blessed  obedience  He  teaches  us  to  claim  for 
Him,  and  then  the  joy  of  His  unchanging  Presence  He 
bestows,  we  too  shall  learn  to  wait  to  be  clothed  with 
power,  and  in  part  help  in  leading  Christ's  Church  back 
to  its  pentecostal  fulness  of  the  Spirit  for  the  work  it 
has  to  do, 


CHAPTER    IX 

(tall  to  Pracr  atrtr  Jjumflfatfon 


IN  the  previous  pages  I  have  more  than  once 
had  occasion  to  speak  of  prayer.  As  I  come 
to  the  closing  chapters  of  the  book,  and  review 
the  argument,  I  feel  that  all  that  has  been  said 
will  profit  little,  unless  it  lead  up  to  prayer.  As 
we  look  at  the  extent  of  the  field,  and  the  greatness 
of  the  work  that  has  yet  to  be  done  ;  at  the  utterly 
inadequate  force  which  the  Church  has  as  yet  in 
the  field,  and  the  absence  of  any  signs  that  she 
is  ready  at  once  to  place  herself  and  all  her 
resources  at  her  Lord's  disposal;  at  our  absolute 
impotence  to  give  life  either  in  the  Church  at  home 
or  the  work  abroad,  and  our  entire  dependence 
upon  the  power  that  comes  from  above  in  answer 
to  prayer  and  faith  ;  at  the  love  of  our  Lord  to 
His  people  and  to  the  perishing,  and  the  promises 
He  has  given  and  waits  to  fulfil  —  we  feel  that 
our  only  hope  is  to  betake  ourselves  to  prayer. 
Prayer,  more  prayer,  much  prayer,  very  special 

170 


A  CALL   TO    PRAYER   AND    HUMILIATION       171 

prayer,  in  the  first  place,  for  the  work  to  be  done 
in  our  home  Churches  on  behalf  of  foreign  missions, 
is  indeed  the  one  great  need  of  the  day.  "  Our 
help  cometh  from  the  Lord,  who  made  heaven  and 
earth." 

If  I  may  be  allowed  to  say  it,  I  was  somewhat 
surprised  at  the  little  direct  mention  that  was 
made  of  prayer  as  one  of  the  most  important 
factors,  the  chief  source  of  power,  in  mission  work. 
Chapter  VIII.  of  the  Eeport  is  indeed  entitled 
Prayer  and  Beneficence,  but  almost  all  the 
addresses  deal  chiefly  with  the  latter  subject.  Mr. 
Eddy  spoke  of  the  unselfish  prayer-life  as  developed 
by  the  use  of  prayer  cycles.  In  a  short  but  sug 
gestive  address  Mrs.  J.  H.  Eandall  said — 

"  One  great  and  imperative  need  to-day  of  foreign  mis 
sion  work  is  the  almost  forgotten  secret  of  prevailing 
prayer.  Missions  have  progressed  so  slowly  abroad  be 
cause  piety  and  prayer  have  been  so  shallow  at  home. 
Only  get  people  praying  for  mission  work,  and  they 
must  give.  Nothing  but  continuous  prayer  will  solve 
the  missionary  problems  of  to-day.  God  must  be  inquired 
of  to  do  these  things  for  them.  Ye  have  not  because 
ye  ask  not.  God  has  promised  great  things  to  His  Son 
and  His  Church  concerning  the  heathen.  God  has  pro 
mised  great  things  to  His  children  in  the  work  of  extending 
and  hastening  His  kingdom.  But  notice — these  promises 
are  conditioned.  His  Son,  His  Church,  His  children, 
are  to  intercede  and  to  sacrifice.  The  consequence  of 
habitual  intercession  will  be  a  new  outpouring  of  the 


172       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

Holy  Spirit  upon  the  individual,  the  Church,  and  upon 
all  the  missionary  work  of  the  world.  Whoever  prays 
most,  helps  most." 

If  these  words  are  true, — and  they  are  the  very 
truth  of  God, — surely  the  first  care  of  the  leaders 
of  mission  work  in  our  churches  and  societies,  to 
whom  the  spiritual  training  of  their  members  is 
intrusted  by  God,  should  be  to  seek  for  grace  and 
wisdom  from  on  high  to  give  prayer  the  place 
in  all  their  appeals  and  exhortations  which  it  has 
in  the  will  and  purpose  of  God. 

Kev.  W.  Perkins  said — 

"  The  Foreign  Mission  Movement  was  horn  in  prayer, 
and  prayer  is  the  vital  breath  by  which  it  lives.  .  .  . 
Great  as  the  results  are  of  foreign  missions,  they  would 
have  been  a  hundredfold  greater  if  the  Church  of  Christ 
had  been  what  she  ought  to  be  in  the  two  great  matters 
of  prayer  and  beneficence.  .  .  .  What  is  needed  is  that 
the  spiritual  life  of  every  Christian,  and  that  of  the 
whole  Church,  should  be  so  deepened,  instructed,  and 
inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  it  shall  become  as 
natural  and  easy  to  pray  daily  for  foreign  missions  aa 
to  pray  for  daily  bread.  .  .  .  There  must  be  wrought  in 
the  heart  of  the  Church  the  conviction  that  the  law 
of  sacrifice  is  the  law  of  life,  and  that  we  must  find 
time  for  prayer,  even  though  it  may  mean  the  with 
drawal  of  time  from  pleasure  and  business.  Sacrifice 
alone  is  fruitful." 

"  There  must  be  wrought  into  the  heart  of  the  Church 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  a  penetrating  and  abiding  sense  of 
the  world's  dire  need,  its  misery  and  darkness  and 


A    CALL    TO    PRAYEK    AND    HUMILIATION        173 

despair.  A  power  must  come  that  shall  make  the  need 
so  real,  so  terrible,  that  our  first  feeling  shall  be  one  of 
helplessness  in  presence  of  it ;  our  next  feeling,  '  I  must 
go  and  pray  about  it ' ;  and  the  next,  '  I  will  give  up  and 
sacrifice  some  things  that  almost  are  like  necessities,  in 
presence  of  woes  like  these  which  Christ  died  to  remove, 
and  for  the  removal  of  which  He  waits,  and  has  waited 
long.' " 

If  these  words  are  to  be  taken  seriously,  and  are 
to  do  any  good,  the  great  question  is  surely,  How 
are  the  leaders  of  our  mission  work  to  waken  and 
to  train  the  Churches  to  the  life  of  prayer  they 
speak  of  ?  If  it  be  true — the  results  of  Foreign 
Missions  would  have  been  a  hundredfold 
greater,  if  the  Church  had  been  what  she 
ought  to  have  been  in  the  matter  of  prayer — 
there  can  be  no  more  urgent  duty  resting  upon  the 
Church  than  to  give  itself  to  prayer,  first  of  all, 
that  its  members  at  home  may  be  roused  and 
sanctified  to  take  their  part  in  the  struggle  with 
the  hosts  of  darkness,  "  praying  with  all  prayer 
and  supplication  in  the  Spirit."  And  if  it  be  found 
that  there  are  multitudes  who  give  but  do  not  pray, 
or  give  little  and  pray  little,  those  who  know  what 
prayer  is  must  only  pray  and  labour  the  more 
earnestly  that  the  life  of  Christians  may  be  so 
deepened  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  it  shall  become 
"as  natural  and  easy  to  pray  daily  for  foreign 
missions  as  to  pray  for  daily  bread."  God  can  do 


174       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

it.     Let  it  be  our  definite  aim  and  prayer — God 
will  do  it. 

I  trust  that  what  I  have  said  in  regard  to  the 
Conference,  and  the  place  it  gave  to  the  discussion 
of  prayer,  will  not  be  misunderstood.  In  all  nature 
so  much  depends  upon  the  law  of  proportion.  It 
is  so  in  the  spiritual  life  too.  One  finds  nowhere 
Evangelical  teaching  in  which  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  the  power  of  prayer  to  secure  His  work 
ing,  are  not  acknowledged.  These  truths  have  a  place 
in  the  articles  of  our  Creed.  And  yet  it  is  only  where 
they  have  a  first  place,  and  everything  else  is  made 
subordinate  to  them,  that  the  Christian  life  will  be 
truly  healthy.  And  it  is  only  when,  in  the  dis 
cussion  of  how  our  mission  work  is  to  attain  greater 
success,  and  how  the  world  can  best  be  won  for 
Christ,  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  power 
of  believing  prayer,  indeed  get  the  attention  and  the 
prominence  that  they  have  in  the  mind  of  God,  that 
the  supernatural  character  of  our  work  and  its  re 
sults  can  be  fully  apprehended.  Of  all  the  questions 
claiming  the  care  and  guidance  of  the  leaders  of  our 
mission  work  at  home,  there  is  not  one  that  demands 
more  urgent  consideration,  that  is  more  difficult  of 
decision,  and  that  will  bring  a  richer  reward,  than 
this :  How  can  the  Churches  be  educated  to 
more  persistent,  fervent,  believing  prayer? 
Prayer  will  at  once  be  the  means  and  the  proof  of 


A   CALL   TO   PRAYER   AND   HUMILIATION        175 

a  stronger  Christian  life,  of  more  devotion  to  Christ's 
service,  and  of  the  blessing  of  Heaven  descending  on 
our  work.  Much  prayer  would  be  the  token  that  we 
had  found  again  the  path  by  which  the  pentecostal 
Church  entered  on  its  triumphant  course. 

We  cannot  teach  people  to  pray  by  telling  them 
to  do  so.  Prayer  is  the  pulse  of  the  life.  The  call 
to  more  prayer  must  be  connected  with  the  deepen 
ing  of  the  spiritual  life.  The  two  great  conditions 
of  true  prayer  are  ever :  an  urgent  sense  of  need, 
and  a  full  assurance  of  a  supply  for  that  need.  We 
must  bring  God's  children  to  see  and  feel  the  need. 
The  work  intrusted  to  them,  the  obligation  to  do 
it,  the  consequence  to  ourselves,  to  Christ,  to  the 
perishing,  of  neglecting  it,  our  absolute  impotence 
to  do  it  in  our  own  strength — these  great  truths 
must  get  the  mastery,  and  urge  us.  And  then,  on 
the  other  side,  the  love  of  Christ  to  us  and  to  the 
world,  our  access  to  God  in  Him  as  Intercessor, 
the  certainty  of  persevering  prayer  being  heard, 
the  blessedness  of  a  life  of  prayer,  and  the  blessings 
to  the  world  it  can  bring — these,  too,  must  live  in 
us  and  encourage  us.  We  must  learn  to  pray  in 
secret,  and  wait  on  God,  and  take  hold  on  His 
strength.  We  must  teach  Christians  to  pray  in 
little  companies,  with  the  joy  and  the  love  and  the 
faith  that  fellowship  brings.  We  must  gather  the 
Church  at  times  in  special  seasons  of  prayer,  when 


176       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONAKY    PKOBLEM 

the  consciousness  can  be  quickened  and  wrought 
deep  into  her  life  that,  as  her  only  and  supreme 
aim  is  the  bringing  joy  and  glory  to  her  Lord  in 
the  salvation  of  souls,  so  her  only  and  sufficient 
trust  is  in  Him  who,  in  answer  to  her  prayer,  gives 
His  Divine  power,  and  works  above  what  she  can 
ask  or  think. 

In  the  heading  of  this  chapter  I  have  spoken  of 
Prayer  and  Humiliation.  I  confess  that  I  some 
what  missed  this  note  in  the  Conference.  Inci 
dental  mention  was  frequently  made  of  shortcoming 
in  pastors  and  laymen,  in  interest  and  prayer  and 
beneficence,  of  the  failure  of  the  Church  as  a  whole 
to  do  its  duty.  And  yet  the  solemnity,  the  awful- 
ness  of  the  neglect  of  our  Lord's  commission,  of  the 
terrible  sin  of  disobedience  to  His  last  command,  of 
the  entire  lack  of  sympathy  with  the  desire  for 
gratifying  His  love  or  seeking  His  glory,  on  the  part 
of  the  great  majority  of  Christians,  was  not  pressed 
as  some  think  it  should  be,  and  must  be,  ere  a 
return  to  the  true  state  can  come.  There  is  an 
optimism  that  loves  to  speak  of  what  is  bright  and 
hopeful.  It  thinks  that  thus  thanks  are  brought  to 
God  and  courage  to  His  servants.  It  is  above  every 
thing  afraid  of  pessimism.  And  yet  optimism  and 
pessimism  are  errors  equally  to  be  avoided.  They  are 
equally  one-sided ;  they  are  both  extremes.  The  Divine 
wisdom  has  taught  us,  "  I  lead  (walk)  in  the  midst  of 


A    CALL   TO    PRAYER    AND    HUMILIATION        177 

the  paths  of  judgment."  Experience  teaches  us  that, 
when  we  have  to  deal  with  two  apparently  con 
flicting  truths,  there  is  but  one  way  to  see  the  true 
relation,  and  to  be  kept  from  giving  either  undue 
prominence.  That  way  is  to  look  first  to  the  one 
as  if  it  were  all,  and  thoroughly  master  all  it 
means.  Turn  then  to  the  other,  and  grasp  as  fully 
all  it  implies.  When  we  know  both,  we  are  in  a 
position  to  walk  "  in  the  midst "  of  the  path  of  truth. 
Apply  this  to  missions.  On  the  one  side  there 
is,  oh  !  so  much  to  rejoice  in,  to  thank  God  for, 
and  to  take  courage  from.  In  the  Conference 
Keport  this  note  was  often  struck.  And  we  never 
can  give  God  too  much  praise  for  what  He  has 
wrought  during  the  past  century,  and  specially 
during  the  past  twenty  years.  On  the  other  hand, 
as  compared  with  the  work  that  has  been  done, 
there  is  so  much  work  that  has  not  been  done  that 
could  have  been  done,  that  has  not  been  done  for 
no  other  reason  than  that  the  Church  was  not  what 
she  ought  to  be.  When  once  we  are  brought  face 
to  face  with  this  truth :  Millions  are  perishing 
to-day  without  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  will 
go  on  perishing,  simply  because  the  Church  is  not 
doing  the  work  for  which  she  was  redeemed  and 
endowed  with  God's  Spirit,  our  hearts  will  spon 
taneously  cry  out  in  humiliation  and  shame,  and 
make  confession  of  our  sin.  The  sin  of  blood-guilti- 

12 


178       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

ness  ;  the  sin  of  disobedience ;  the  sin  of  unbelief ;  the 
sin  of  selfishness  and  worldliness,  grieving  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  quenching  Christ's  love  in  our  hearts ; 
the  sin  of  not  living  wholly  for  Christ,  for  His  love 
and  His  kingdom — these  sins  will  become  a  burden 
greater  than  we  can  bear,  until  we  have  laid  them 
at  our  Lord's  feet  and  had  them  removed  by  Him. 

Let  no  one  say  that  these  are  the  sins  of  those 
who  take  no,  or  very  little,  interest  in  missions ;  at 
a  Conference  you  speak  to  those  whose  whole  heart 
and  life  are  given  up  to  them.  In  Scripture  we 
find  that  the  men  who  were  most  jealous  for  the 
honour  of  God,  most  diligent  in  His  service,  and  least 
guilty  of  the  sin,  were  the  first  to  confess  it  and 
mourn  over  it.  Moses  and  David,  Ezra,  Nehemiah, 
and  Daniel — the  godliest  men  of  their  times — were 
the  men  to  take  up  the  sin  and  bring  it  before 
God.  Is  not  the  sin  of  the  members,  the  vast 
majority  of  them,  to  be  counted  as  the  sin  of  the 
whole  body  ?  Are  not  the  most  devoted  friends  of 
Christ  and  of  missions — the  men  who  in  church  or 
society,  as  committee  members,  or  workers,  are  the 
leaders — the  very  men  who,  in  virtue  of  their 
spiritual  insight,  ought  to  feel  the  sin  most,  to 
carry  it  to  God,  and  then  to  appeal  to  the  erring 
ones  to  come  and  join  them  in  humiliation  and 
confession  ?  We  speak  of  the  need  of  a  pentecostal 
era :  it  will  have  to  be  preceded  by  a  great  putting 


A    CALL   TO   PRAYER   AND   HUMILIATION        179 

away  of  and  turning  from  sin.  It  is  frequently 
said,  Any  very  deep  spiritual  revival  in  the  Church 
will  have  to  be  preceded  by  a  deeper  sense  of  sin. 
And  that  cannot  be  until  the  men,  to  whom  the 
Lord  gives  the  deepest  sense  of  the  sin  of  His 
people,  have  gathered  them  with  a  call  to  repentance 
and  surrender  to  full  obedience.  The  Missionary 
Appeal  gives  one  of  the  grandest  opportunities  for 
convicting  Christians  of  sin,  as  it  points  to  and 
brings  home  the  lack  of  true  devotion  and  entire  sur 
render  to  God's  service,  the  lack  of  love  and  prayer 
and  self-denial  and  obedience,  and  uncovers  the 
worldliness  and  selfishness  that  lies  at  the  root  of  all. 
This  has  at  all  times  been  God's  way.  Humilia 
tion  precedes  restoration  and  renewal  On  the 
day  of  Pentecost  it  was  the  preaching  of  "  this 
same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified,"  that  broke 
the  hearts,  and  prepared  for  the  receiving  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  We  still  need  the  same  preaching  to  God's 
people.  "This  same  Jesus,"  whose  command  ye 
have  disobeyed  and  neglected,  whose  love  ye  have 
despised  and  grieved,  God  hath  made  Him  both 
Lord  and  Christ.  If  we  are  to  summon  Christians 
to  a  life  of  higher  devotion  in  God's  service,  the 
wrong,  the  shame,  the  guilt  of  our  present  state 
must  be  set  before  them.  We  never  shall  win 
them  from  the  low  level  of  a  selfish  salvation,  to  live 
wholly  and  only  for  the  love  and  honour  of  Christ, 


180       THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

unless  the  evil  of  the  one  be  known  and  forsaken 
as  the  entrance  to  the  other.  It  is  when  the  sin 
is  felt  and  confessed,  that  Christ's  pardoning  love 
will  afresh  be  felt,  and  that  a  new  experience  of 
His  power  and  love  will  become  the  incentive  to 
make  that  love  known  to  others.  It  is  the  con 
trite  heart  God  makes  alive.  It  is  to  the  humbled 
soul  He  gives  more  grace.  An  essential  element  in  a 
true  missionary  revival  will  be  the  broken  heart  and 
the  contrite  spirit  in  view  of  past  neglect  and  sin. 

This  preaching  of  humiliation  on  account  of  our 
lack  of  obedience  to  Christ's  great  command  will  be 
no  easy  thing.  It  will  need  men  who  take  time  to 
wait  before  God  for  the  vision  of  what  this  sin  of 
the  Church  really  implies.  Hudson  Taylor  spent 
five  years  in  China,  and  felt  for  its  heathen  dark 
ness,  without  realising  what  it  is.  He  spent  five 
years  more  in  England  working  and  praying  for 
China,  and  still  he  did  not  know  how  great  its 
awful  need  was.  It  was  only  when  he  began  to 
prepare  a  statement  on  China's  needs,  for  publica 
tion,  that  he  so  felt  the  full  horror  of  the  thick 
darkness  that  he  could  find  no  rest  till  God  gave 
him  the  twenty-four  workers  he  had  prayed  for, 
and  that  he  was  willing  to  accept  the  responsibility 
fco  lead  them  out.  We  shall  need  men  who  will 
give  themselves,  in  study  and  prayer  and  love,  to 
take  in  all  the  terrible  meaning  of  the  words  we 


A   CALL   TO    PRAYER   AND   HUMILIATION        181 

utter  so  easily — that  the  Church  is  disobedient  to 
her  Lord's  last  and  great  command.  As  they  yield 
themselves  to  the  awful  truth  of  thirty  millions  a 
year  dying  in  hopeless  darkness,  because  God's 
people  do  not  care ;  of  Christ's  love  seeking  in  vain 
to  find  a  channel  through  us  to  save  the  perish 
ing  ones,  because  we  refuse  to  place  ourselves 
at  His  disposal ;  of  our  resting  perfectly  content 
with  a  selfish  religion  that  hopes  for  heaven  with  a 
Christ  whose  cross  it  refuses  to  bear  upon  earth— 
these  men  will  begin  to  feel  that  they  are  dealing 
with  a  power  of  darkness  in  God's  children  which 
nothing  can  penetrate  or  remove  but  God's  Almighty 
Power.  They  will  feel  that  nothing  less  than  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  who  convicts  of  sin  can  convict 
or  arouse  the  Church. 

In  such  humiliation  the  pastors  will  feel  that 
they  must  take  the  lead.  The  preaching  of  humili 
ation  cannot  be  in  power,  if  the  pastor  has  no 
experience  of  it.  The  missionary  problem  is  a 
personal  one — to  the  pastor  too.  Both  on  their 
own  behalf  and  as  representatives  of  the  people, 
they  must  take  the  lead.  "  Let  the  priests,  the 
ministers  of  the  Lord,  weep  between  the  porch  and 
the  altar  and  say,  Spare  Thy  people,  0  Lord,  and 
give  not  thine  heritage  to  reproach,  that  the 
heathen  should  rule  over  them."  Is  there  any 
one  church  or  parish  of  which  it  can  in  truth  be 


182       THE    KEY   TO    THE   MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

eaid  that  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom  is  the 
one  end  for  which  it  lives,  and  that  its  chief  con 
cern  is  that  every  man  on  earth  should  have  the 
gospel  without  delay  ?  Is  it  not  admitted  on 
every  hand  that  the  Church  is  not  what  it  should 
be  ?  *  And  is  it  not  plain  that  if  this  continues  so, 
the  evangelisation  of  the  world  in  this  generation 
will  be  an  impossibility  ?  With  the  Church  as  a 
whole  so  guilty  before  God,  does  there  not  appear 
to  be  a  call  for  every  minister  to  take  some  part  of 
the  blame  to  himself  for  this  state  of  things,  and  to 
seek  with  his  people  to  come  under  the  deep  con 
viction  that  they  have  not  given  themselves  to 
Christ  with  that  entire  devotion  which  His  love 
and  His  work  in  the  world  claim  ?  That  they  have 
not  sufficiently  renounced  their  own  interest  and 
ease,  and  the  spirit  of  the  world,  with  all  their 
strength  to  carry  out  the  great  command  of  their 
Lord  ?  And  all  because  their  heart  and  life  have 
not  been  wholly  yielded  to  the  transforming  power 
of  Christ's  Spirit  and  love. 

1  Of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland  Dr.  Smith,  in  his  Short  History <t 
says  : — "  Only  one-third  of  the  communicants  give  for  Foreign  Mis 
sions.  This  is  still  the  day  of  small  things  with  the  prayer  of  faith 
and  labour  of  love."  And  of  the  Church  as  a  whole  ; — "The  most 
hopeful  estimate  cannot  go  farther  than  this,  that  in  the  most 
Evangelical  Churches  not  more  than  a  third,  and  in  the  least  active 
not  more  than  a  tenth,  of  the  communicants  pray,  give,  or  in  any 
way  energise  for  the  nations  whom  the  Lord  charged  every  one  of 
His  members  to  disciple." 


A    CALL    TO    PRAYER   AND    HUMILIATION        183 

In  whatever  respect  we  regard  the  lamentable 
state  of  unfaithfulness  in  which  the  greater  part  of 
the  Church  lives,  and  in  which  we  all  in  some 
degree  share,  there  is  no  possible  way  for  the 
ministry  to  remove  the  evil  and  promote  a  better 
state  of  things,  but  by  every  one  of  us  confessing  in 
the  presence  of  God  our  lack  of  that  enthusiastic 
love  to  Christ,  of  that  whole-hearted  surrender  to 
the  leading  of  His  Spirit,  which  would  have  enabled 
us  to  be  true  witnesses  to  Him  and  to  His  will — 
that  the  one  work  of  the  Church  and  the  believer 
is  to  have  every  creature  know  of  Him  and  His 
love.  Nothing  can  be  more  reasonable  than  that 
every  minister,  who  sees  and  mourns  the  worldli- 
ness  and  selfishness  of  the  majority  of  Christians, 
and  the  feebleness  in  work  and  prayer  of  so  many 
who  are  not  indifferent,  should  suspect  himself 
to  some  extent  to  be  responsible  for  this.  The 
ministry  has  been  instituted  to  secure  knowledge 
of  and  obedience  to  Christ's  commands  in  the 
Church :  there  is  a  manifest  failure  in  this :  then 
surely  our  one  need  is  to  confess  our  shortcoming, 
and  cry  to  God  for  a  holy,  devoted,  spiritual 
ministry,  able  to  lead  the  Church  to  fulfil  her 
destiny  to  bring  the  gospel  to  every  creature. 

When  once  the  spirit  of  humiliation  takes  hold 
upon  the  ministry,  there  will  be  hope  for  the 
people.  If  in  the  public  preaching  and  praying 


184       THE   KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

the  tone  of  contrition  and  confession  be  clear  and 
deep,  there  will  assuredly  be  a  response  in  the 
hearts  and  the  inner  chambers  of  all  earnest  souls ; 
and  those  who  are  now  our  best  contributors  will 
feel  how  much  more  God  asks — and  is  willing  to 
give,  through  His  Holy  Spirit — of  fervent  love  and 
prevailing  prayer,  and  the  full  consecration  of  all 
to  His  service.  And  it  will  be  proved  in  our 
mission  work :  "  He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be 
exalted."  Eepentance  is  ever  the  gate  of  larger 
blessing. 

Listen  for  a  moment  to  what  He  that  holdeth 
the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand  said  to  the 
Church  of  Ephesus.  "  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy 
labour,  and  thy  patience,  and  how  thou  canst  not 
bear  them  that  are  evil :  and  thou  hast  tried  them 
which  say  they  are  apostles,  and  are  not,  and  hast 
found  them  liars:  and  hast  borne,  and  hast 
patience,  and  for  My  Name's  sake  hast  laboured, 
and  hast  not  fainted."  It  would  be  difficult  to 
draw  a  picture  more  nearly  that  of  a  model  Church. 
What  diligence  and  zeal  in  good  works ;  what 
patience  in  suffering ;  what  purity  in  discipline ; 
what  zeal  for  orthodoxy ;  and  what  unwearied 
perseverance  in  it  all !  And  what  is  best — all  for 
His  Name's  sake.  And  yet  the  Lord  was  not 
satisfied.  "  Nevertheless  I  have  somewhat  against 
thee,  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love.  Re- 


A   CALL   TO   PRAYER    AND   HUMILIATION        185 

member  therefore  from  whence  thou  art  fallen, 
and  repent,  and  do  the  first  works ;  or  else  I  will 
come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  remove  thy  candle 
stick  out  of  her  place,  except  thou  repent." 

The  Church  had  lost  its  first  love.  The 
tenderness  and  fervour  of  the  first  love,  of  the 
personal  attachment  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  was  now 
lacking.  The  works  were  still  being  done,  and  that 
in  His  name,  with  the  acknowledgment  of  Him  as 
their  Lord,  but  they  were  no  longer  the  first  works, 
in  the  spirit  of  the  first  love.  He  calls  them  to 
look  back,  and  remember  whence  they  were  fallen, 
and  repent,  and  do  the  first  works.  It  is  possible 
to  work  much  and  earnestly  for  Christ  and  His 
cause  in  a  way  which  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired, 
as  far  as  man  can  judge ;  but  there  may  be  lacking 
that  without  which  the  works  are  as  nothing  in 
His  sight — that  which  He  counts  the  greatest  of 
all — love,  the  love  of  a  personal  attachment  to 
Christ.  God  is  Love.  Christ  loved  us  and  gave 
Himself.  His  love  was  a  tender,  holy  giving  of 
Himself,  a  personal  friendship  and  fellowship.  That 
love  of  His,  cherished  in  the  heart  in  daily  close 
intercourse,  responded  to  by  a  love  that  clings  to 
Him,  proved  by  His  love  pervading  all  our  labour 
for  others — it  is  this  makes  our  work  acceptable.  It 
was  this  first  love  and  enthusiastic  attachment  to 
Christ  gave  the  pentecostal  Church  its  power.  It 


186       THE   KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

was  this  pentecostal  love  out  of  which  Christ  calls 
them  to  remember  that  they  were  fallen,  and  to 
which,  in  repentance,  they  were  to  return.  Nothing 
less  can  satisfy  the  heart  of  Him  who  loved  us. 
Shall  we  not  give  it  Him  ? 

It  is  this  pentecostal  love  to  which  we  must 
return  in  our  mission  work.  We  saw  how  God 
made  the  Moravian  Church  the  first  Church  of  the 
Eeforrnation  to  take  the  pentecostal  stand,  and  give 
itself  wholly  to  bringing  the  gospel  to  every 
creature.  And  we  saw  that  it  was  love — a  passionate, 
adoring  contemplation  of  Christ's  dying  love,  a 
passionate  desire  to  make  that  love  known,  and,  still 
more,  to  gratify  that  love  by  bringing  to  it  the  souls 
it  had  died  to  save — that  made  that  least  of  the 
Churches  in  this  respect  the  greatest  of  all.  As  we 
mourn  over  the  state  of  the  Church,  with  all  its  un 
faithfulness  to  Christ  and  to  the  perishing  souls  of 
heathendom,  let  us,  above  all,  penitently  make  con 
fession  of  this  sin — the  loss  of  the  first  love.  Let 
us  remember  how  even  Peter,  after  his  fall  out  of 
his  first  love,  could  not  be  restored  till  the  search 
ing  question,  "  Lovest  thou  Me  ? "  had  deeply 
wounded  him,  and  he  penitently,  but  confidently, 
had  answered,  "  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee." 
And  as  we  repent  and  mourn  the  past,  let  us  wait 
before  our  Lord  with  the  one  prayer :  Love,  Lord !  it 
is  Thy  love  we  need.  We  know  about  it ;  we  have 


A   CALL   TO    PRAYER  AND    HUMILIATION        187 

preached  of  it ;  we  have  sought  to  find  it ;  but  now 
we  wait  in  humility  and  reverence  and  wonder  for 
Thee,  the  Loving  One,  to  shed  it  abroad  in  our 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  look  to  Thee,  at 
length,  to  enable  us  in  its  power  to  take  the  world 
so  into  our  hearts  that,  like  Thee,  we  only  live 
and  die  that  love  may  triumph  over  every  human 
soul 


CHAPTER   X 

proposal  —  3  SEUrft  of 


THE  question  has  come  to  me  very  strongly 
whether  it  would  not  be  possible,  in  view  of 
all  that  was  said  at  the  Conference  of  the  short 
coming  of  pastors  in  preaching  and  leading,  of  mem 
bers  in  taking  an  interest  and  giving  and  praying,  to 
gather  God's  people  unitedly  to  consider  the  greatness 
of  the  work  to  be  done,  the  call  to  confession  and 
repentance,  the  need  of  an  entirely  new  standard  of 
devotion  throughout  the  Church,  and  the  certainty 
that  in  answer  to  prayer  God  will  open  the  windows 
of  heaven  and  pour  out  His  blessing.  The  Confer 
ence  was  indeed  representative  of  the  whole  Church  ; 
but  it  is  to  be  feared  that  but  a  very  small  fraction 
will  become  acquainted  with  what  was  said,  or  profit 
by  its  instruction.  The  expression  was  used,  "  If 
this  Conference  and  those  whom  it  represents 
will  do  their  duty"  —  Would  there  be  no  possibility 
of  bringing  our  representatives  into  contact  with 
their  large  constituency,  so  that  throughout  it  all 

183 


A  PROPOSAL A  WEEK  OF  PKAYEE     189 

the  sense  of  unity  and  obligation,  and  renewed  con 
secration  and  hope,  might  be  wakened  ? 

The  first  thought  that  came  was  whether  some  of 
the  Committee,  who  had  so  enthusiastically  laboured 
on  behalf  of  the  mission  cause  in  the  Conference, 
could  not  be  got  to  devise  and  carry  out  some 
scheme  by  which  the  substance  and  spirit  of  the 
many  earnest  appeals  made  there  might  be  brought 
to  the  notice  of  all  the  Churches.  It  was  easy  to 
see  what  difficulties  there  would  be  in  the  way.  To 
be  effective,  it  would  almost  need  a  new  organisation, 
with  a  large  machinery. 

But  then  I  was  reminded  of  a  world-wide 
organisation,  with  all  its  machinery  ready  to  hand. 
We  have  the  Evangelical  Alliance,  and  the  Week  of 
Prayer  in  the  first  week  of  January.  Would  it  not 
be  something  wonderful  and  blessed  if  the  whole 
Church  could  gather  at  her  Lord's  feet  during  a 
whole  week,  and  devote  herself  to  this  one  thing 
— the  extension  of  the  kingdom  through  foreign 
missions  ?  There  could  be  no  grander  opportunity 
for  instruction  as  to  the  will  of  God  and  His 
promises  ;  the  greatness  of  the  work  and  its  urgency ; 
the  claim  of  Christ  on  the  world  and  every  creature 
in  it  as  His  inheritance,  and  on  His  people  to  be  the 
willing  messengers  of  His  love.  There  is  not  a 
doubt  that  it  would  give  an  opportunity  of  enforc 
ing  Christ's  last  command,  and  rousing  the  children 


190       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

of  God  to  prayer  and  consecration  such  as  it  would 
be  difficult  to  find  in  any  other  way. 

I  have  no  access  here  where  I  write  to  a  copy  of 
the  letter  in  which  the  missionary  at  Lodiana  first 
made  the  proposal  for  a  week  of  prayer.  I  would 
not  wonder  if  it  were  found  that  he  had  in  his  view 
more  especially  foreign  missions.  But,  even  if  this 
were  not  so,  the  circumstances  appear  to  be  such  as 
would  fully  justify  for  one  year  the  setting  aside 
of  other  subjects,  and  giving  the  evangelising  of 
fche  world  as  the  supreme  end  of  the  Church  a 
prominence  which  it  much  needs  and  well  deserves. 
It  may  be  that  in  future  it  will  be  found  that  it  is  a 
help  each  year  to  give  some  special  subject  greater 
prominence.  To  take  one  year  all  the  forms  of 
Home  Missions,  another  year  National  Kighteousness, 
another  Our  Youth,  with  all  the  interests  of  Home 
and  School  and  College,  may  be  a  means  of  fixing 
attention,  and  wakening  interest  in  greater  measure 
than  by  keeping  to  a  subject  for  each  day.  This  is 
only  by  the  way  —  in  regard  to  it  I  make  no 
proposal. 

But  in  regard  to  the  plan  of  giving  the  whole 
week  of  January  1902,  I  feel  I  must  make  bold  to 
put  in  an  earnest  plea.  The  distance  is  too  great, 
and  the  time  when  the  programme  must  be  sent 
out  is  too  near,  to  admit  of  my  seeking  by  private 
correspondence  to  ascertain  what  likelihood  there  is 


A  PROPOSAL A  WEEK  OF  PRAYER     191 

of  the  proposal  being  accepted.  I  can  only  lay  my 
thoughts  before  the  members  of  the  Council  of  the 
Alliance,  and  any  of  the  leaders  in  mission  work 
who  may  feel  interested  in  it. 

My  appeal  is  simply  the  summing  up  of  what 
this  book  contains.  There  are  many  pleas  that 
may  be  urged.  When  the  Student  Volunteer  Move 
ment  announced  its  watchword,  The  Evangelisation 
of  the  World  in  this  Generation,  it  met  with  a 
hearty  response,  and  was  unanimously  adopted. 
This  adoption  of  the  watchword  brings  with  it 
tremendous  responsibility.  We  cannot  raise  the 
plea  of  ignorance.  We  cannot  excuse  ourselves  by 
saying  that  we  are  doing  our  utmost.  On  behalf 
of  the  Church  we  have  accepted  the  obligation,  and 
our  first  duty  is  to  seek  to  waken  and  guide  the 
Church  to  obey  her  Lord's  command.  If  there  is 
one  lesson  that  is  taught  by  the  Eeport  of  the 
Ecumenical  Conference,  it  is  this — that  one-third  of 
the  members  of  our  Churches  are  giving  nothing, 
one-third  are  giving  very  little,  of  the  remaining 
third  but  a  small  portion  is  doing  all  it  can.  Here 
is  the  revelation  of  a  terrible  disobedience  in  a 
large  portion  of  Christ's  body,  bringing  guilt  and 
judgment  on  the  Church.  Can  no  plan  be  devised, 
by  united  action,  to  gather  as  many  as  possible  of 
God's  children  together  to  consider  and  resolve  what 
can  be  done  ? 


192       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

This  is  one  plea.  Here  is  another.  Of  the  one 
thousand  million  of  heathens  and  Mohammedans 
who  are  living  without  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  more 
than  thirty  million  are  dying  every  year,  will  die 
this  year,  into  thick  darkness.  And  that  simply 
because  the  Church  is  unfaithful  to  her  calling.  Is 
it  not  time  that  we  seek  to  waken  every  believer 
we  can  reach  to  realise  the  need,  and  in  the  power 
of  Christ's  compassion  to  give  themselves  to  save 
some  ? 

The  Church  herself  is  losing  more  than  can  be 
told  by  her  unfaithfulness.  Her  spiritual  life  is 
enfeebled ;  worldliness  and  selfishness  get  the  upper 
hand  in  millions  of  her  members  ;  the  power  of  God's 
Spirit  is  withheld  in  her  ministrations,  and  countless 
prayers  remain  unanswered  because  God  is  robbed 
of  the  devotion  and  service  He  claims.  Would  it 
not  bring  health  and  blessing  to  many  if  the  Church 
would  unite  in  presenting  herself  before  God,  with 
her  members,  with  the  one  prayer  that  all  who 
have  sinned  through  ignorance  or  feeble-inindedness 
may  be  roused  to  begin  the  work  that  is  waiting 
for  them  ?  Such  an  awakening  of  true  mission 
interest  would  be  a  beginning  of  the  quickening  of 
the  spiritual  life,  and  might  greatly  strengthen  the 
desire  for  that  quickening  in  larger  measure.  But 
how  to  get  the  Churches  to  act  together,  and  the 
Church  members  to  gather  before  God  for  instruc- 


A    PROPOSAL A    WEEK    OF    PKAYER  193 

tion  and  prayer  ?  One  can  hardly  conceive  of  a 
more  glorious  opportunity  than  the  Week  of  Prayer 
would  afford. 

I  cannot  but  think  that  our  missionaries  in  the 
field  would  welcome  the  proposal,  and  be  greatly 
strengthened  by  its  carrying  out.  To  feel  that  the 
whole  Church  was  giving  a  week  to  spend  with 
them  before  the  throne  of  their  Lord,  in  order  to 
receive  anew  His  instruction  and  equipment  for  the 
work,  would  be  an  inspiration.  And  it  would  be  to 
the  Native  Churches  an  invaluable  lesson  as  to  our 
deep  sense  of  the  life  we  offer  them  being  a  life  that 
comes  from  above,  to  be  received  and  dispensed 
only  as  it  is  given  in  answer  to  prayer.  They  and 
we  would  feel  how  truly  we  are  "  one  new  man  in 
Christ  Jesus."  And  God,  our  God,  would  bless  us. 

One  plea  more.  The  heart  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
goes  out  in  tender  love  towards  all  these  dying 
souls.  And  in  love  as  tender  towards  all  His 
redeemed,  whom  He  asked  that  they  should  prove 
their  love  by  satisfying  His  love,  by  winning  for 
Him  the  lost  whom  He  died  to  save.  He  longs  to 
make  us  share  fully  His  own  love  and  the  joy  of 
seeing  God  glorified  in  the  salvation  of  men.  He 
longs  for  this.  Our  heart  can  form  no  conception 
of  what  He  must  feel  as  He  sees  the  coldness  and 
neglect  of  so  many  of  those  who  are  indeed  His  blood- 
bought  property.  Would  it  not  be  right  for  once 
13 


194       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

to  try  and  avail  ourselves  of  the  annual  gathering 
at  the  beginning  of  a  new  year,  and  lead  God's 
people  to  plead  exclusively  and  intensely  for  this 
one  blessing — an  awakening  of  tens  of  thousands  of 
believers  to  see  that  to  labour  to  bring  the  gospel 
without  delay  to  every  creature  is  the  sacred  duty 
and  the  highest  privilege  and  blessedness  of  every 
Christian  ? 

The  new  century  calls  us  to  it.  Much  has  been 
said  of  the  past  having  been  a  missionary  century. 
We  thank  God  for  all  that  He  has  wrought  in  it 
through  His  people.  But  all  admit  that  unless  the 
Church  begins  to  live  and  love,  to  give  and  pray,  on 
a  very  different  scale  from  what  she  has  been  doing, 
there  is  not  the  least  prospect  of  the  evangelisation 
of  the  world  within  this  generation.  The  first  year 
of  the  new  century  is  passing.  We  have  had  time 
to  consider  and  say  whether  there  are  the  signs  of 
a  liberality  and  a  devotion  greater  than  heretofore. 
We  have  had  the  opportunity  of  calculating  what  is 
needed  if  the  work  is  to  be  done.  How  can  we 
consecrate  the  century  more  effectually  to  God  than 
by  beginning  its  second  year  with  a  grand  muster 
of  the  whole  army  of  God  on  earth  to  renew  its 
vow :  The  whole  earth  for  Christ  Jesus ;  His 
gospel  for  every  creature  ? 

A  few  words  as  to  the  carrying  out  of  the 
scheme,  should  the  Alliance  feel  at  liberty  to  give 


A  PROPOSAL A  WEEK  OF  PRAYER     195 

the  invitation.  It  will  need  much  prayerful  thought 
and  effort  if  the  whole  Church  is  to  be  wakened  up 
to  take  part  in  it  intelligently  and  heartily,  and  if 
we  are  to  seek  to  avail  ourselves  to  the  utmost  of 
the  blessing  it  might  work.  Arrangements  will 
need  to  be  made  by  which  different  Churches  and 
societies  could,  as  far  as  possible,  co-operate.  Even 
where  there  cannot  be  united  meetings,  men  of 
missionary  enthusiasm  or  of  spiritual  power  in 
different  Churches  might  be  lent  to  each  other. 
Each  society  will  not  only  seek  how  it  can  gain 
most  for  itself,  but  how  it  can  impart  to  others 
most  of  the  blessings  it  may  have  received  from 
God.  In  view  of  what  was  said  at  the  Conference 
of  the  responsibility  of  pastors,  and  the  very  large 
degree  in  which  the  home  interest  in  foreign 
missions  depends  upon  them,  they  ought  to  be 
approached  with  suggestions  for  securing  their  aid. 
A  special  study  of  the  missionary  question,  the 
preaching  of  a  series  of  sermons  before  the 
Great  Week,  to  prepare  Christians  for  it,  the 
stirring  up  to  prayer  beforehand,  would  be  a 
blessing  to  pastor  and  people.  All  who  have  been 
working  as  evangelists  might  be  asked  for  the  one 
week  to  give  up  their  ordinary  gospel  preaching, 
and  to  give  their  help  in  this  combined  effort  to 
win  Christians  to  take  their  part  in  winning  the 
world  for  Christ.  They  will  have  their  recompense 


196       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY   PROBLEM 

in  a  new  zeal  in  their  helpers  in  the  home  work. 
And  it  will  be  seen  that,  for  all  those  who  have 
been  gathered  in  to  the  Saviour  during  the  Simul 
taneous  Mission  of  the  past  year,  there  is  nothing 
more  helpful  than  to  get  them  at  the  beginning 
of  their  Christian  course  thoroughly  identified  with 
the  mission  cause. 

There  will  be  need,  too,  of  a  special  literature. 
Many  Christians  are  so  ignorant  of  the  facts  of  the 
case,  of  Scripture  truth  bearing  on  it,  of  the  true  spirit 
in  which  the  work  is  to  be  done,  of  the  need  and  the 
joy  of  self-sacrifice,  of  the  power  of  prayer,  both  as 
power  to  pray  and  power  to  obtain,  of  the  unspeak 
able  joy  which  the  love  of  Christ  can  give  in  this 
service,  and  the  need  of  an  entire  consecration  to 
the  loving  Saviour,  that  one  could  wish  that  a 
number  of  simple,  pointed  tracts  might  be  prepared 
and  brought  into  the  hands  of  those  who  have 
hitherto  been  comparatively  indifferent.  Or  if 
four  or  six  men  of  spiritual  power  could  each  write 
a  paper  on  some  different  aspect  of  the  great  ques 
tion,  and  these  be  issued  as  a  little  pamphlet, 
addressed  to  our  more  intelligent  and  interested 
Christians,  this  might  prepare  the  way  for  their 
giving  themselves  to  labour  for  the  ingathering  of  a 
large  harvest  of  new  warm-hearted  mission  friends 
into  the  service  of  our  King. 

The  question  naturally  arises:  Who  is  to  care 


A   PROPOSAL A    WEEK    OF    PRAYER  197 

for  all  the  correspondence  and  labour  connected 
with  preparing  for  such  a  great  missionary  cam 
paign  ?  I  know  not  whether  the  Alliance,  even  if 
it  consents  to  issue  such  invitation,  would  regard  it 
desirable  or  possible  to  assume  the  leadership  in 
such  a  matter.  If  not,  might  it  not  at  least  take 
the  initiative  in  inviting  a  number  of  known 
leaders  in  mission  work,  and  arranging  with  them 
for  the  appointment  of  a  Committee  of  Management. 
If  one  or  two  men  could  be  set  apart  by  this  body 
to  circulate  information,  to  waken  interest,  and  to 
secure  aid,  local  helpers  would  surely  be  every 
where  forthcoming. 

The  Students'  Volunteer  Movement  has  hitherto 
couiined  its  work  very  much  to  the  ingathering  and 
training  of  those  who  are  ready  to  go  to  the  foreign 
field.  I  have  sometimes  wondered  whether  they  would 
not  find  it  an  admirable  training  if  they  were  to  offer 
themselves  to  ministers  to  help  in  meetings  for  creat 
ing  missionary  interest.  The  complaint  has  been  made 
that,  however  desirable,  it  is  so  difficult  to  secure  a 
visit  from  a  missionary  for  every  congregation.  A 
volunteer,  full  of  enthusiasm,  who  has  studied  some 
part  of  the  mission  field,  or  better,  two  or  three  in 
company,  testifying  to  what  their  Lord  has  done  for 
them,  and  their  surrender  to  His  service,  might  in 
many  cases  supply  the  lack.  I  do  not  know 
whether  they  have  yet  taken  up  the  home  work  for 


198       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

foreign  missions  into  their  programme.  I  cannot 
but  think  that  it  would  be  a  blessing  to  themselves 
as  well  as  to  the  Church.  The  chief  question  of 
the  Missionary  Problem  is  at  this  moment :  How  to 
get  the  Church  quickened  ?  To  aid  in  solving  that 
question  is  the  best  work  that  can  be  done  for 
foreign  missions.  Out  of  that  quickened  life — the 
Holy  Spirit's  presence  in  the  Church — will  come 
the  answer  to  every  other  question. 

Extraordinary  circumstances  require  extraordin 
ary  measures.  The  discovery  of  an  imminent 
danger  justifies  exceptional  changes,  and  men 
willingly  approve  and  submit  to  the  inconvenience. 
The  state  of  the  Church,  the  need  of  the  world,  the 
command  of  Christ,  appear  to  me  to  call  for  very 
special  efforts.  The  urgency  of  the  case  is  extreme. 
There  is  no  time  to  be  lost.  Our  Master  wishes 
every  human  being  without  delay  to  know  of  His 
having  come  to  the  world  to  save  him.  Let  not 
the  enthusiasm  of  our  watchword,  In  this  Genera 
tion  !  deceive  us.  It  may  make  us  content  that 
meantime  the  thirty  million  a  year  who  are  passing 
away  in  darkness  should  not  know  Him.  It  may 
deceive  us  with  the  idea  that  it  is  certainly  going 
to  be  done.  But  it  is  most  certainly  not  going  to 
be  done  if  the  Church  remains  on  her  present  level. 
The  one  deep  impression  the  Report  of  the  Con 
ference  leaves  is  that,  unless  pastors  and  members 


A    PKOPOSAL A    WEEK    OF    PKAYER  199 

labour  and  pray  with  an  entirely  new  devotion,  the 
work  cannot  possibly  be  accomplished.  It  is  so 
large,  it  is  so  difficult,  it  needs  such  an  interposition 
of  Divine  power,  that,  unless  the  Church  return  to 
the  pentecostal  life  of  her  first  love,  it  cannot  and 
will  not  be  done.  I  say  again,  the  urgency  of  the 
case  is  extreme.  No  sacrifice  can  be  too  great  if 
we  can  only  get  the  Church,  or  the  more  earnest 
part  of  it,  to  take  time  and  wait  unitedly  before  the 
Throne  of  God,  to  review  her  position,  to  confess 
her  shortcoming,  to  claim  God's  promise  of  power, 
and  to  consecrate  her  all  to  His  service.  I  cannot 
but  think  that  the  change  in  devoting  the  week 
exclusively  to  foreign  missions  would  be  acceptable 
to  God  and  His  people,  and  bring  abundant 
blessing. 

As  we  gather,  one  great  company  throughout 
the  world,  and  ask  the  Master  to  repeat  to  us  the 
Great  Commission,  and  breathe  its  power  into  our 
hearts;  as  our  hearts  open  out  in  faith  to  the 
promise  of  His  infinite  power  and  unchanging 
presence  with  us ;  as  we  yield  ourselves  in  fresh 
obedience  and  consecration  to  the  work  of  His  love 
— His  blessing  and  His  Spirit  will  be  given  us.  I 
cannot  but  believe  that  many  a  one  who  has  been 
labouring  heartily  in  this  blessed  service  will  be 
brought  near  his  blessed  Lord,  and  fired  with  new 
zeal  to  lead  on  others  who  are  lagging  behind. 


200       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

And  many  a  one  who  has  been  giving  something, 
and  praying  or  loving  little,  will  be  taught  to  see 
what  the  true  secret  is  of  partnership  with  Christ 
in  this  work.  And  many  a  one  will  hear  a  call  to 
consider  whether  the  Lord  does  not  want  his 
personal  service  in  the  field.  Many  a  pastor  will 
get  a  new  insight  into  what  he  has  really  to  train 
his  people  for,  and  how  much,  while  labouring  at 
home,  he  may  do  for  the  world  at  large.  And  I 
am  confident  that  to  many  it  may  be  made  the 
beginning  of  a  new  revelation  of  what  our  Lord 
Jesus  is  and  claims,  and  of  the  inexpressible 
blessedness  of,  like  Him,  only  living  to  bring  the 
world  back  to  God. 

I  leave  the  proposal  in  the  hands  of  those  who 
have  the  power  to  decide,  either  in  the  Evangelical 
Alliance  Council,  or  among  the  friends  of  missions 
they  may  consult.  Should  there  be  good  reasons  for 
not  making  the  change,  I  shall  not  regret  having 
made  the  proposal.  It  may  direct  attention  to  a 
great  need,  and  in  God's  good  time  bring  forth  fruit 
in  a  way  we  do  not  expect.  I  commit  the  thought 
to  His  gracious  care. 

And  may  the  day  speedily  come  when  His 
Church  shall,  in  waiting  on  God,  renew  her  youth, 
when  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and 
all  flesh  shall  see  it  together. 


WEEK  OF  PRAYER  FOR  FOREIGN 
MISSIONS 

Sunfcag,  5tfj  Sanuarg,  to  Suntmg, 
12tlj  Sanuaqj 

(These  notes  are  given,  not  so  much  with  a  view  to  their  being 
adopted,  as  to  suggest  to  the  readers  of  this  the  many 
various  lines  of  thought  which  there  are  to  be  taken  up.) 


Santrng,  5tij  .Uanuarg.    $ratee.    $0aim  cilb.  U-43 
Praise  —  for  the  glory  of  His  kingdom  in  the  earth  —  for 
what  He  has  wrought  —  for  the  share  He  gives  us 
in  His  work—for  what  He  is  doing  and  is  going 
to  do.     2  Chron.  xx.  14-22. 


,  6tfj  Sanuarg.    Ejje  OTorft  anfc  tfje 
The  Work.     Its  extent.  One  thousand  million  heathens 

and  Mohammedans.     2  Cor.  ii.   16.     Its  difficulty. 

The  power  of  Satan.     Eph.  vi.  12.     Its  urgency. 

The  worth  of  a  soul;  thirty  million  a  year  dying. 
The  Workers.  The  Church,  the  Body  of  Christ.     Every 

member,  without  exception,  redeemed  to  take  part 

in  that  work.     Phil.  ii.   15,  16. 
Pray.  For  a  vision  of  the  need  of  the  world,  of  the  glory 

of  Christ,  of  the  calling  of  believers.     For  all  mis 

sionaries,  our  representatives  in  the  field.     Col.  iv. 

2-4. 


202       THE    KEY    TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 


t{j  Januarg.    8Hje  Pofoer  for  tfje  TOork— 
tfje  golg  Spirit 

The  Holy  Spirit.  All  mission  work  is  God's  own  work. 
1  Cor.  xii.  6.  The  Holy  Spirit  the  Mighty  Power 
of  God  working  in  us.  Eph.  iii.  16,  17,  20.  The 
Spirit  given  at  Pentecost  as  the  power  to  bring  the 
gospel  to  every  creature.  John  xv.  26,  27  ;  Acts  i.  8. 
All  failure  owing  to  the  loss  of  this  power.  Gal. 
iii.  3.  All  real  mission  work,  in  giving,  praying, 
working,  only  of  value  as  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
is  in  it.  Rom.  xv.  16.  God's  promise  of  the  Spirit 
meeting  us,  and  our  prayer  for  the  Spirit  meeting 
Him,  the  only  hope  for  our  missions.  Acts  iv.  31. 

Pray.  For  the  power  of  the  Spirit  as  the  enthusiasm 
of  Christ's  presence  and  love  in  the  Church,  in 
missionary  societies,  in  your  own  congregation,  in 
your  own  life,  with  the  one  aim  of  witnessing  to 
every  human  soul  of  Jesus.  Luke  xxiv.  47-49  ; 
Acts  i.  8. 


,  8tij  Januarg.    f^timiliation  ano  (Confession 

Confession.  Of  the  terrible  failure  of  the  Church  to 
know  and  fulfil  her  mission.  Of  the  lack  of  entire 
consecration  to  Christ's  honour  and  kingdom.  Of 
the  lack  of  love  and  self-sacrifice  in  giving  and 
praying.  Hag.  i.  1-11;  Mai.  iii.  10;  Phil.  ii.  21. 

Humiliation.  The  only  path  to  restoration.  Isa.  Iviii.  1, 
2,  6,  7;  Gen.  xlii.  21.  Pray  for  the  Spirit  to  con 
vince  of  sin. 

dnuirsfcag,  9tfj  Janttarg.     Kfy  Spirit  of  Supplication 

Prayer.  Its  place.  The  chief  factor  on  man's  side  in 
doing  God's  work.  The  key  to  all  heavenly  blessing 
and  power.  Luke  xi.  1  3  ;  John  xiv.  13,14;  Eph.  iii.  20. 


WEEK    OF    PKAYEIt    FOK    FOKEIGN    MISSIONS       203 

Its  difficulty.  It  needs  crucifixion  of  the  flesh 
to  strive  and  labour  (agonise)  (Rom.  xv.  30;  Col. 
iv.  12),  to  watch  in  prayer.  It  needs  a  spiritual 
mind  to  delight  in  fellowship  with  Christ,  and  to 
believe  that  our  prayers  will  prevail. 

Its  urgent  necessity.  More  men  and  more  money 
are  needed  ;  but  the  need  is  greater  of  more  prayer, 
such  as  ushered  in  Pentecost.  Acts  i.  14. 
Pray.  That  in  this  week  of  prayer  God  may  give  the  spirit 
of  prayer.  And  that  there  may  be  a  great  increase 
of  secret,  habitual,  fervent,  believing  intercession  for 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  our  mission  work. 

JFrfoaj,  lOtfj  Sanuarg.  Consecration  anU  Serb  tee 
Consecration.  If  confession  has  been  real,  if  prayer  has 
been  honest,  there  must  follow  a  new  surrender. 
2  Chron.  xv.  8-15.  This  implies  a  turning  away 
from  all  sin,  and  from  all  shortcoming,  to  a  life  of 
entire  obedience  and  devotion.  2  Cor.  v.  15. 

It  implies  specially  a  very  personal  giving  of  one's 
self  to  the  Lord  Jesus  and  His  love,  to  be  by  Him 
kept,  and  used,  as  His  own  property  and  possession. 
2  Tim.  ii.  21  ;  Tit.  ii.  14.  Everything  depends  on 
this  :  the  missionary  problem  is  a  personal  one. 
Service.  It  implies  that  we  take  up  the  service  of  Christ 
in  seeking  souls  for  Him.  Isa.  liii.  10.  In  caring 
for  missions  by  interest,  and  giving,  and  praying, 
and  fellowship  with  others.  And  also  in  making 
Him  known  to  those  in  whose  midst  we  live. 

,  Utfj  3fanuat2»    tfaitjj  antJ  itg 


Faith.  The  power  in  man  that  corresponds  to  the  power 
of  God.     Matt.  xix.  26;  Mark  ix.  23.     It  is  the 


204       THE    KEY   TO    THE    MISSIONARY    PROBLEM 

power  that  leads  to  prayer,  grows  strong  in  prayer, 
and  prevails  in  prayer.  Mark  xi.  24.  It  is  the 
power  that  overcomes  the  world,  because  Christ 
has  overcome  it,  and  faith  lives  in  union  with  Him. 
John  xvi.  33;  1  John  v.  4,  5. 

Missions  have  no  foundation  or  law  but  in  God's 
purpose,  God's  promise,  God's  power.  These  Divine 
possibilities  are  the  food  of  faith,  and  call  every 
mission  friend  to  this  one  thing  —  to  be  strong  in 
faith,  giving  glory  to  God.  Rom.  iv.  20,  21. 
Pray.  That  this  week  may  lead  to  a  deep  revelation  of 
God's  readiness  and  power  to  fulfil  His  promises  to 
His  people,  and  a  great  quickening  of  true  faith 
in  every  mission  worker  and  helper  at  home  and 
abroad. 

,  I2tlj  Samiarg.    &fje  ILofce  of 
31 


Its  triumph  in  every  human  heart  our  aim.     Phil.  ii.  13. 
Its  possession  our  only  power.     2  Cor.  v.  14. 


"  Get  this  burning  thought  of  '  personal  love  for  the 
Saviour  who  redeemed  me '  into  the  hearts  of  all  CJiris- 
tians,  and  you  have  the  most  powerful  incentive  that  can 
be  for  missionary  effort  of  every  kind. 

"  Oh  !  if  we  could  make  this  problem  a.  personal  one, 
if  we  could  Jill  the  hearts  of  the  people  with  a  personal 
love  for  the  Saviour  who  died  for  them,  the  indifference 
of  Christendom  would  disappear,  and  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  would  appear" 


A  SELECTION  FROM 

JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.'S 
NEW  &  FORTHCOMING  BOOKS. 


THE  MODERN  MISSION  CENTURY. 

By  the  Rev.  A.  T.  PIERSON,  D.D., 

Author  of  "The  Life  of  George  Mttller,"  "The  New 

Acts  of  the  Apostles,"  etc. 

Large  crown  8vo,  6s. 

Dr.  Pierson  is  well  known  as  one  of  the  greatest  living 
authorities  on  modern  missionary  work.  In  this  volume 
he  gives  a  history  and  picture  of  the  leading  missionary 
movements  of  the  Nineteenth  Century  with  a  fulness  and 
thoroughness  not  attempted  before. 


SERMON   SEED. 

FIFTY-TWO    SERMON    STUDIES. 

By  the  Rev.  R.  TUCK, 

Author  of  "The  First  Three  Kings  of  Israel,"  etc. 
Crown  8vo,  6s. 

"The  author  is  a  past-master  in  the  art  of  homiletic 
suggestion  and  guidance.  This  work  will  prove  one  of  his 
most  useful  helps." — Life  of  Truth. 


TWO   STUDIES   IN  THE   BOOK  OF 
COMMON   PRAYER. 

By  the  Rev.  T.  W.  DRURY, 

Principal   of  Ridley   Hall,    Cambridge. 

Large  Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d. 


TIMES    OP    RETIREMENT. 

A  VOLUME  OF  DEVOTIONAL  READINGS. 

By  Rev.  Dr.  MATHESON, 

Author  of 
11  Voices  of  the  Spirit,"  "Moments  on  the  Mount,"  etc. 

Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d. 

Dr.  Matheson's  devotional  books  have  long  enjoyed  a 
wide  reputation.  To  the  present  volume  there  has  bet-w 
prefixed  a  sketch  of  the  author's  interesting  career. 


THE  EVANGELICAL  SCHOOL  IN 
THE  CHURCH   OF  ENGLAND: 

Its  Men  and  its  Work  in  the  Nineteenth 
Century.  A  New  Volume  in  Nisbet's  "  Church, 
of  England  Handbooks." 

By  the  Rev.  H.  C.  G.  MOULE,  D.D. 

Small  crown  8vo,  Is. 

"  It  is  wonderful  how  much  information  is  woven  into  a 
stirring  and  flowing  narrative." — Church  Missionary 
Intelligencer. 


FAMILY  PRAYERS  FOR  FOUR 
WEEKS. 

By  the  Author  of  "Daily  Prayers  for  Busy  Homes." 
Extra  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

"The  simplicity  and  brevity  of  these  petitions  will  give 
the  book  an  entrance  into  many  houses  in  which  elaborate 
forms  of  prayers  are  not  desired."— Examiner. 


ALONE    IN    AFRICA. 

A  LADY'S  EXPERIENCES. 
By  MADAM  GOY. 
Small  crown  8vo,  Is. 

"Written  from  the  heart,  and  is  well  worth  reading." — 
Family  Churchman. 


THE 

MISSIONARY  SPEAKER'S  MANUAL, 

A  Handbook  for   Missionary   Preachers   and 
Speakers.     With  Sermon  Outlines. 

By  the 

Rev.  A.  R.  BUCKLAND  and  the  Rev.  J.  D.  MULLINS. 
Extra  crown  8vo,  6s. 


THE  CHURCH  DIRECTORY  AND 
ALMANACK  FOR  1902. 

Second  Year.      Revised  and  Enlarged,  with 
many  Additions  and  new  Matter. 

2s.  net ;  or  in  cloth  cover,  3s.  net. 

"Anew  venture  which  says  much  for  the  enterprise  of 
its  publishers,  and  the  diligence  of  its  editor." — Times. 

"A  boon  which  will  be  welcomed  on  all  sides,  and  will 
at  once  make  a  place  for  itself  amongst  the  recognised  books 
of  reference." — Record. 

"A  very  useful  compilation,  and  its  cheapness  should 
ensure  it  the  success  it  deserves." — Church  Times. 

' '  One  of  the  marvels  of  successful  compilation  and  cheap 
publishing.  There  are  directories  published  at  ten  times 
this  price  and  they  are  not  so  good  as  this." — Expository 
Times. 


THE  LIFE  OF  F.  W.   CROSSLEY 

By  J.  RENDEL  HARRIS, 
Author  of  "  Letters  from  Armenia." 

Illustrated.       Extra  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

"This  concise,  but  intensely  interesting  memoir  of  one  of 
the  noblest  and  most  saintly  men  of  the  century.  ...  Dr. 
Rendel  Harris  has  edited  with  rare  sympathy,  delicacy, 
and  literary  skill." — Spectator. 

' '  Every  young  man  should  be  the  richer  for  possessing 
this  most  thrilling  record  of  a  life  bathed  in  the  very  spirit 
of  the  cross."— Dr.  PARKER. 

"One  of  the  most  charming  biographies  we  have  read  for 
a  long  time." — Christian  Newt. 


THE  LIFE  OF  GEORGE  MULLER 
OF  BRISTOL. 

By  the  Rev.  A.  T.  PIERSON,  D.D., 
Author  of  "The  New  Acts  of  the  Apostles,"  etc. 

Sixth  Edition.     Large  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.  net. 

1 '  One  of  the  most  extraordinary  things  to  be  found  in 
religious  history. " — Spectator. 

"A  beautiful  story  of  a  noble  life." — Morning  Herald. 

"A  work  of  intense  interest  and  value,  and  one  that 
ought  to  be  a  prized  possession  in  all  our  Christian  coin- 
nmnities. " — Christian. 

LONDON  : 
JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.   LTD.,  21  BERNERS  ST.,  W. 


THE  KEY 
TO  THE  MISSIONARY  PROBLEM 

BY  THE 

KEY.     ANDREW     MURRAY 

Small  Crown  8vo 

Cloth,  2s.  6d.  Paper  Covers,    is.   6d. 


THE    BISHOP    OF    DURHAM,    in    a    commendatory 
Preface,   says : — 

"  With  all  my  heart  I  commend  this  volume  to  the  perusal, 
the  thought,  and  the  prayers,  of  all  Ministers  of  Christ  and  His 
flock.  It  is  an  appeal  to  the  inmost  soul  of  the  Pastor,  and  at 
the  same  time  a  suggestion  for  the  most  practical  possible 
application  of  his  activities. 

"  The  great  Christian  who  writes  it  puts  his  main  propositions 
with  an  urgency  which,  just  here  and  there,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
invites  the  recollection  of  other  sides  of  truth.  His  contention 
that  the  Missionary  enterprise  of  the  Church  is  its  supreme  call 
seems  in  places  to  become  an  assertion  that  it  is  its  one  real  call. 
But  no  deep-sighted  reader  will  really  mistake  those  places.  And 
every  reader  who  has  indeed  his  eyes  towards  the  will  of  God, 
will  rise  from  the  perusal,  or  rather  kneel  down  after  it,  asking 
'  Lord,  what  would'st  Thou  have  me  to  do  1 ' ' 

HANDLEY   DUNELM. 


THE  KEY 
TO  THE  MISSIONARY  PROBLEM 

BY  THE 

REV.     ANDREW     MURRAY 


THE  REV.  R,  F.  HORTON,  M.A.,  D.D,  of  Hampstead, 

writes : — 

"  Six  weeks  ago  I  brought  ANDREW  MURRAY'S  book  before  ray 
Church,  and  they  have  bought  and  read  about  100  copies. 

"  I  fervently  trust  that  every  Minister  will  read  it,  for  he 
makes  it  clear  that  the  Key  to  the  Missionary  Problem  is  in  the 
hands  of  the  Ministers  :  they  open  and  no  man  can  shut ;  they 
keep  shut  and  no  man  can  open. 

"  But  I  want  the  people  to  read  it,  too,  because  it  seems  to 
me  the  most  inspiring  and  inspired  book  written  in  1901,  the 
true  note  of  a  new  Century.  Personally  I  would  do  anything  to  get 
it  read,  marked,  and  inwardly  digested." 

R.  F.  HORTON. 


THE  REV.   J.   H.   JOWETT  twites:— 

"  I  have  read  MR.  ANDREW  MURRAY'S  book  on  the  Missionary 
Problem  with  extraordinary  interest.  It  is  a  remarkable  work. 
Nothing  that  I  have  read  for  a  long  time  has  so  led  me  to  the 
secret  spring  of  Missionary  work,  and  to  the  glorious  privilege  of 
having  a  share  in  it." 

J.  H.  JOWETT. 


THE    KEY 
TO  THE  MISSIONARY  PROBLEM 

BY    THB 

REV,  ANDREW  MURRAY 


THE  REV.  F.  B.  MEYER,  B.A.,  writes:— 

"  Of  all  books  that  I  have  ever  read  on  the  call  of  our  Lord 
to  the  Evangelization  of  the  world,  this  appeal  by  the  beloved 
ANDREW  MURRAY  must  stand  in  the  front  rank,  if  not  first.  My 
heart  has  been  deeply  moved  by  it,  and  I  propose  to  read  large 
portions  of  it  to  my  people.  If  only  it  were  read  universally 
throughout  our  Churches,  by  ministers  and  people  alike,  I  believe 
it  would  lead  to  one  of  the  greatest  revivals  of  Missionary  enthu 
siasm  that  the  world  has  ever  known.  It  is  deeply  spiritual, 

interesting,  and  inspiring." 

F.     B.     MEYER. 


THE  REV.  ALEXANDER  MACLAREN,  D.D.,  writes :— 

"  I  hope  that  MR.  MURRAY'S  heart- searching  book  may  be 
widely  read  and  prayerfully  pondered.  I  know  of  nothing  that 
would  so  much  quicken,  not  only  our  Missionary  zeal,  but  the 
Christian  life  of  our  Churches.  It  is  the  Key  to  the  Missionary 
Problem  indeed,  but  it  is  also  the  key  to  most  of  our  problems, 
and  points  to  the  only  cure  for  all  our  weaknesses.  I  wish  that 
it  and  DR.  PIERSON'S  comprehensive  '  Modern  Mission  Century '  ° 
could  be  in  the  hands  of  all  our  people.  Entirely  unlike  in  form 
and  method,  these  two  books  would  aid  each  other  in  quickening 
the  Christian  conscience  in  regard  to  the  Church's  shortcomings 
in  the  work  of  Missions." 

*TMs  remarkable  book  is  also  published  by  J.  NISBET  &  Co.,  Ltd. 
Price  6s. 


THE  KEY 
TO  THE  MISSIONARY  PROBLEM 


THE  REV.  H.  BICKERSTAFF  KENDALL,  B.A.,  Presi 
dent  of  the  Primitive  Methodist  Conference,  and 
ex-Connexional  Editor,  writes: — 

"  I  have  found  the  book  exceedingly  searching  and  stimulating, 
and  it  puts  in  a  plain  and  convincing  way  the  truth  that  I  have 
been  getting  to  see  more  and  more  clearly — the  truth  that  until 
each  Christian,  like  Andrew  of  old,  seeks  to  bring  his  brother  to 
Jesus,  there  is  little  hope  of  the  speedy  evangelization  of  the 
world. 

"  I  am  sure  that  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  book  would  be  an 
untold  blessing,  and  hence,  as  I  go  up  and  down  among  our 
Churches,  I  shall  not  fail  to  call  attention  to  it.  I  only  wish  some 
arrangement  could  be  made  for  its  distribution  amongst  our 
ministers  and  lay  preachers." 

H.   B.   KENDALL. 


THE  REV.  MARSHALL  HARTLEY,  Secretary  of  the 
Conference)  and  of  the  Wesleyan  Missionary  Society, 
writes : — 

"  MR.  MURRAY'S  book  has  deeply  impressed  me.  It  recalls  the 
heart-searching,  soul-stirring  words  of  WILLIAM  ARTHUR'S  'Tongue 
of  Fire.'  I  warmly  commend  it,  to  ministers  especially,  but  also 
to  all  servants  of  Christ. 

"The  prayerful  reading  of  this  book,  followed  by  thoughtful 
meditation  upon  the  considerations  set  forth  with  so  much  power 
in  it,  cannot  but  result  in  personal  blessing,  and  in  a  consequent 
access  of  zeal  for  the  extension  of  the  KINGDOM  OF  CHRIST,  leading 
each  of  us  to  ask, 

"  '  What  shall  I  do  to  make  it  known 

What  Thou  for  all  mankind  hast  done.'" 

MARSHALL   HARTLEY. 


JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.,  LTD.,  21,  BERNERS  ST.,  LONDON,  W. 


BY    THE    REV.   ANDREW    MURRAY. 


"All  that  this  author  writes  ia  good." — Christian  CorntMn- 

wealth. 
"Books  that  deserve  the  success  they  have  won/" — Aberdeen 

Free  Press.        

THE  HOLIEST  OF  ALL:  An  Exposition  of 
the  Hebrews.  Pott  4  to,  6s. 

"The  analysis  of  the  Epistle  is  most  masterly,  in  fact  as  good 
as,  or  better,  than  any  we  have  seen,  though  we  are  acquainted 
with  the  main  works  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  in  German 
and  in  English." — Aberdeen  Free  Press. 

"A  true  exposition,  not  a  piece  of  arbitrary  moralising  on  a 
sacred  text ;  but  also  a  true  book  of  devotion." — British  Weekly. 

WHOLLY  FOR  GOD :  The  True  Christian  Life. 

A  series  of  Extracts  from  the  Writings  of  William  Law. 

Selected,    and  with    an    Introduction,   by    the    Rev. 

ANDREW  MURRAY.  Crown  8vo,  gilt  top,  5s. 
"  Mr.  Murray  has  made  a  good  and  useful  selection,  Messrs. 
Nisbet  have  admirably  seconded  him,  and  the  book  is  one  of 
the  most  elegant  published  this  season.  We  anticipate  for  it 
a  wide  popularity." — Rev.  ROBERTSON  NIOOLL  in  the  British 
Weekly. 


ABIDE  IN  CHRIST :   Thoughts  on  the  Blessed 
Life  of  Fellowship  with  the  Son  of  God.     Small  crown 
8vo,  2s.  6d.  and  Is.  nett. 
"The  varied  aspects  of  this  practical  truth  are  treated  with 

much  freshness,  power,  and  unction.    It  cannot  fail  to  stimulate, 

to  cheer,  and  to  qualify  for  higher  service."— Mr.  SPURQEON  in 

the  Sword  and  Trowel. 


WITH    CHRIST    IN    THE    SCHOOL    OF 

PRAYER  :  Thoughts  on  our  Training  for  the  Ministry 
of  Intercession.     Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 
"A   volume  of  rare  excellence,   and    one   which  is  much 
needed," — Christian  News. 


LIKE   CHRIST:  Thoughts  on  the  Blessed  Life 
of   Conformity   to    the    Son    of  God.      A    Sequel    to 
"Abide  in  Christ."     Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 
"Everywhere  may  be  felt  a  depth  of  devotion,  true  scrip 
tural  earnestness,  together  with  an  affectionate  simplicity."— 
Churchman. 

14 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  CHRIST:  Thoughts  on  the 
Indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Believer  and 
the  Church.  Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

"Mr.  Murray's  new  work,  like  hia  former  ones,  will  serve 
for  the  edification  of  those  who  are  able  to  appreciate  spirituality 
of  thought,  and  inclined  to  give  the  attention  needful  to  digest 
and  profit  by  meditations  presented  in  a  manner  more  solid  than 
lively. " — Record. 


HOLY  IN  CHRIST:  Thoughts  on  the  Calling 
of  God's  Children  to  be  Holy  as  He  is  Holy.  Small 
crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

"This  is  one  of  the  best  books  we  have  seen  upon  a  subject 
which  is  happily  attracting  much  attention  nowadays.  There 
is  so  much  spurious  sentimentalism  abroad,  that  we  are  glad 
to  meet  with  a  book  in  which  this  sacred  theme — holiness- 
is  dealt  with  so  robustly  and  scripturally." — Methodist  N.  C. 
Magazine, 


THE  CHILDREN  FOR  CHRIST:  Thoughts  for 
Christian  Parents  on  the  Consecration  of  the  Homo 
Life.  Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

"  All  that  this  author  writes  is  good,  but  this  book  is  the  best 
of  all ;  not  because  it  is  more  ably  written  than  others,  but 
because  it  treats  a  subject  of  supreme  importance,  and  treats  it 
for  the  most  part  in  a  m  anner  well  calculated  to  produce  a  deep 
impression." — Christian  Commonwealth. 

"This  is  a  golden  book,  full  of  holy  wisdom  and  impulse, 
which  cannot  fail  to  stir  the  hearts  of  all  parents." — Christian* 


THE  NEW  LIFE:  Words  of  God  for  Disciples 
of  Christ.  Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. ;  Cheap  Edition, 
Is.  nett. 

' '  This  book  stands  out  among '  many  of  its  kind  as  dis 
tinguished  by  a  new  impulse  and  freshness  of  thought."— 
Scotsman. 

THE    MINISTRY    OF    INTERCESSION.      A 

Plea  for  more  Prayer.      Small  crown   8vo.  2s.  6d. ; 
Cheap  Edition,  Is.  6d. 

THE  POWER  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  With  additional 
Extracts  from  the  "Writings  of  William  Law.  Crown 
8vo,  2s.  6d. 

THY  WILL  BE  DONK    Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 


THE  SCHOOL  OF  OBEDIENCE.    Pott  8vo,  Is 

WAITING  ON  GOD!  Cloth  extra,  pott  8vo, 
18. ;  roan,  gilt  edges,  2s. 

HUMILITY:  The  Beauty  of  Holiness.  Cloth 
extra,  pott  8vo,  Is. ;  roan  leather,  gilt  edges,  2s. 

"The  subject  is  one  of  great  moment  to  the  honest,  earnest 
believer,  and  it  is  treated  with  much  simplicity  and  spiritual 
insight.  "—Christian. 

LET  US  DRAW  NIGH.     Cloth  extra,  pott  8vo, 

la.;  roan  leather,  gilt  edges,  2s. 

' '  Every  page  affords  spiritual  delight  to  devout  and  aspiring 
souls." — Christian. 

WHY  DO  YOU  NOT  BELIEVE?  Cloth  extra, 
pott  8vo,  Is.;  roan,  gilt  edges,  2s. 

"The  style  is  plain,  earnest,  and  evangelical;  and  light  and 
comfort  for  seeking  souls  break  out  of  every  page." — Methodist 
Times. 

BE  PERFECT :  A  Message  from  the  Father  in 
Heaven  to  His  Children  on  Earth.  Meditations  for 
a  Month.  Cloth  extra,  pott  8vo,  Is.;  roan,  gilt 
edges,  2s. 

"We  heartily  commend  this  little  work.  It  is  gracious, 
devout,  instructive,  and  practical." — Christian. 

THE  LORD'S  TABLE:  A  Help  to  the  Right 
Observance  of  the  Holy  Supper.  Cloth  extra,  pott 
8vo,  Is.  ;  roan,  gilt  edges,  2s. 

THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE.  Crown 
16mo,  Is. ;  gilt  edges,  la.  6d. 

THE  DIVINE  INDWELLING.  Selections  from 
the  Writings  of  William  Law.  With  Introduction  by 
Rev.  ANDREW  MURRAY.  Crown  16mo,  Is. ;  gilt 
edges,  Is.  6d. 

WORKING  FOR  GOD.     Pott  8vo,  Is. 


LONDON  : 
JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.  LTD.,  21  BURNERS  STBEirr,  W. 


REV.  GEO.  EVERARD,  M.A. 


"The  name  of  the  evangelical  author  is  a  sufficient  guarantee 
for  the  trustworthiness  of  the  teaching  to  ba  found." — English, 
Churchman, 

MERRY  AND  WISE.  Talks  with  School  Girls. 
16mo,  Is. 

FIGHT  AND  WIN.  Talks  with  Lads  about 
the  Battle  of  Life.  16mo,  Is. 

LINED  WITH  LOVE.  Friendly  Talks  with 
Young  Girls  about  the  Yoke  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
16mo,  Is. 


SALVATION    AND    SERVICE;    or,    Practical 

Talks  about  Grace  and  Godliness.     Extra  crown  8vo, 
3s.  6d. 

THE  SHIELD,  THE  SWORD,  AND  THE 
BATTLE.  Extra  crown  16mo,  Is. 

ALL  THROUGH  THE  DAY.  A  Precept  and 
Meditation  for  every  Day  in  the  Month.  16mo,  Is. 

"IN  THE  MORNING."  A  Scripture  Prayer 
and  Meditation  for  each  Morning  in  the  Month. 
16mo,  Is. 

"IN  THE  EVENING."  Thirty-One  Scripture 
Promises  with  a  Meditation  for  each  Evening  in  the 
Month.  16mo,  Is. 

FIVE  STONES  FROM  THE  BROOK.  Counsel 
and  Comfort  for  the  People  of  God.  2s. 

THE  BELLS  OF  ST.  PETER'S,  and  other 
Papers  on  Gospel  Truth.  16mo,  Is. 


YOUR  SUNDAYS.  Fifty-Two  Short  Readings 
especially  intended  for  Schoolboys.  Crown  8ro, 
2s.  6d. 

EVERY  EYE.  Practical  Addresses  specially 
suited  for  Advent  and  the  Old  and  New  Year. 
Crown  8vo,  2s. 

UP  HIGH!  Friendly  Words  to  those  Within 
and  Without  the  Fold  of  Christ.  16mo,  Is.  6d. 

"YOUR  INNINGS."  A  Book  for  Schoolboys. 
Crown  8vo,  Is.  6d. 

HIS  STEPS  AS  TRACED  IN  THE  GREAT 
BIOGRAPHY.  Practical  Readings  in  the  Life  of  our 
Lord.  Crown  8vo,  Is.  6d. 

BRIGHT  AND  FAIR.  A  Book  for  Young 
Ladies.  16mo,  Is. 

STRONG  AND  FREE.  A  Book  for  Young 
Men.  16mo,  Is. 

FOLLOW  THE  LEADER,  and  other  Papers. 
Counsels  on  the  Christian  Life.  16mo,  Is.  6d. 

IN  SECRET:  Private  Prayers  for  a  Fortnight, 
with  Occasional  Prayers  and  Introduction.  16mo,  Is. 

THE  RIVER  OF  LIFE ;  or,  Salvation  Full  and 
Free.  16mo,  Is. 

EDIE'S  LETTER;  or,  Talks  with  the  Little 
Folks.  Small  4to,  2s.  6d. 

DAY  BY  DAY;  or,  Counsels  to  Christians  on 
the  Details  of  Everyday  Life.  Cheap  Edition,  16mo, 
Is.  6d. 

STEPS  ACROSS ;  or,  Guidance  and  Help  to  the 
Anxious  and  Doubtful.  Crown  8vo,  3s. 

BEFORE  HIS  FOOTSTOOL  Family  Prayers 
for  One  Month,  the  Principal  Festivals,  etc.  Crown 
8vo,  3.s. 


HOME  SUNDAYS;  or,  Help  and  Consolation 
from  the  Sanctuary.  Designed  especially  for  thoso 
prevented  from  attending  the  Public  Services  of  the 
Church.  Crown  8vo,  3s. 

THE  WRONG  TRAIN;  or,  Common  Mistakes 
in  Religion.  A  Series  of  Short  Readings  in  very  large 
Type.  Small  crown  8vo,  Is. 

MY  SPECTACLES,  and  What  I  saw  with 
Them.  16mo,  Is. 

BENEATH  THE  CROSS.  Counsels,  Medita 
tions,  and  Prayers  for  Communicants.  16mo,  Is. 

SAFE  AND  HAPPY.  Words  of  Help  and 
Encouragement  to  Young  Women.  "With  Prayers  for 
Daily  Use.  16mo,  Is. 

LITTLE  FOXES,  and  How  to  Catch  Them. 
16mo,  Is. 

WELCOME  HOME:  Plain  Teachings  from  the 
Story  of  the  Prodigal.  32mo,  8d. ;  paper  cover,  6d. 

NOT  YOUR  OWN;  or,  Counsels  to  Young 
Christians.  Especially  designed  for  the  Season  of 
Confirmation  and  First  Communion.  16mo,  Is. 

THE  HOLY  TABLE:  A  Guide  to  the  Lord's 
Supper.  With  Prayers  and  Hymns,  32mo,  6d.  ; 
paper  cover,  4d. 

THE  HOME  AT  BETHANY ;  or,  Christ  revealed 
as  the  Teacher  and  Comforter  of  His  People.  32mo, 
6d. ;  paper  cover,  4d. 

NONE  BUT  JESUS.  Especially  suitable  for  a 
Gift  after  a  Mission,  or  to  Anxious  Enquirers.  32mo, 
6d. ;  paper  cover,  4d. 

OUR  WEDDING  DAY.  Words  of  hearty  good 
will  to  a  Bride  and  Bridegroom.  6d. ;  paper  cover,  2d. 


LONDON  : 
JAMES  NISBET  &  00.  LTD..  21  BEKNBES  STBEET,  W 


• 


