





The Library 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 


CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA ~ 





a ie st a y) . 
ee ; 
a : ie 
- 
| 7 


4 
Fe wa : 
J io 
) 2 by > ey 
— 
- 


- -~d2 

“ a 

Jenks. 7 

7 : ary oe ‘7a 
ie eee 
sae ae 

















THE PROPHET OF HOPE 


By Rev. F. B. Meyer 


The Shepherd Psalm, Illustrated. Printed in two 


a xemo, cloth, gilt top, boxed, $1.25; full gilt, 

1.50. 

The Bells of Is. Echoes from my early pastorates. 
With portrait, xz2mo, cloth, 75c. 

Prayers for Heart and Home. 8vo, flex. cloth, 75¢. 

Paul: a Servant of Jesus Christ. 12mo, cloth, $1.00. 

Old Testament Heroes. 8 vols., 12mo, cloth, each, 
$1.00; the set, boxed, $8.00. 

Abraham. Elijah. ‘heer oshua. 
David. Israel. oseph. oses. 
The Expository Series. 12mo, cloth, each $1.00 ; 

the set, boxed, $4.00. 

Tried by Fire. The Way Into the Holiest. 

Christ in Isaiah. The Life and Light of Men. 
The Christian Life Series. 18mo, cloth, each, 30. 


The Shepherd Psalm Through Fire and Flood. 
Christian Living. The Glorious Lord. 

The Present Tenses Calvary to Pentecost. 

The Future Tenses Key Words to the Inner Life. 


*,* The first four also issued in flexible, decorated cloth, 
16mo, each, soc. ; the set, boxed, $2.00. 


Addresses. 12mo0, paper, each, 15c.; cloth, each, 
net, 30C, 


Meet for the Master’s Use A Castaway 
The Secret of Guidance Light on Life’s Duties 


Saved and Kept. Long 16mo, cloth, 50c. 

Cheer for Life’s Pilgrimage. Long 16mo, cloth, 50c. 
Peace, Perfect Peace. 18mo, cloth, 25¢. 

The Psalms, Notes and Readings. 18mo, cloth, 60 c. 
Envelope Series of Booklets, Packets Nos. 1 and 2, 


each containing 12 Tracts, assorted, net, 20c. 


Choice Extracts. 24mo, paper, each, 5c.; per doz. 


net, 35¢.; 16mo, paper, 5c. 


Fleming H. Revell Company 


New York: 158 Fifth Ave. | CxicaGo: 63 Washington St. 
ORONTO: 154 Yonge St. 





im) 
loG5” 
THe MAY 


Studies in Zechariah 


BY 


F, B. Meyer, B.A. 


Author of ‘*The Way into the Holiest,’” **Our Daily Homily,”’ 
“‘Christ in Isaiah,”’ etc., etc. 





Chicago New York Toronto 


Fleming H. Revell Company 


Publishers of Evangelical Literature 


Copyright 1900 
By Fleming H. Revell Company 


PREFACE. 


HERE are several matters of a critical nature 
which do not come within the scope of this 
book; such as the quotations from it in the 

Gospels, and the difference in style between the earlier 
and later chapters. These are questions that must 
be discussed before another audience than that which 
I address, and by a more competent hand. 

It has been my single aim to give the salient fea- 
tures and lessons of each chapter, with the object of 
alluring the Bible student to a more searching and 
careful acquaintance with this Prophet. 

Zechariah, Haggai, and Malachi, complete the Old 
Testament canon—their faces turned toward the 
sunrise, but conscious that darkness still brooded 


' deep over their contemporaries. They remind one 


of the crisp breeze that awakes a little before the 
“. dawn, and announces its advent, to hush itself into 


silence and expectancy till the sun appears. 

As one who has found spoil, which he would fain 
share, the author writes across this prophetic treatise, 
Dig here; and hopes that many will be attracted by 
Zechariah’s holy and eager spirit, through which God 
spake. 

The title of this little book lays stress on one thought 
which pervades the prophecy of Zechariah. He is 
pre-eminently the Prophet, as the Apostle Peter is 
the Apostle, of Hope. 


\) 


hh 4 9 24 Faroe tacks ; 


SCHOO! OF THEOLOGY 
AT “LAREMONT 


La 4 er 
Lomein | 
is 





Il. 


III. 


IV. 


Vi: 
Wik: 


VII. 


IX. 


XI. 
XII. 
XIII. 
XIV. 
XV. 


CONTENTS. 


. THE PERMANENCE OF GOD’s WORDS oF 
THE MYRTLE VALLEY 17 
THE SECOND VISION 24 
THE MAN WITH THE MEASURING LINE 31 

. JOSHUA THE PRIEST ., 40 
THE CANDLESTICK 50 
GOING FORTH ...  .. see ve we 61 
CHRIST—PRIEST AND KING 69 
Fasts TURNED TO FEASTS 79 

. Goop NEWS FOR PRISONERS OF HOPE gI 
Gop’s SOWINGS . 102 
THE SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL 114 
THE SPIRIT OF GRACE AND SUPPLICATION ... 126 
“THINGS WHICH MUST SHORTLY COME TO Pass” 137 
THE MILLENNIAL AGE, AND THIS 145 





THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


STUDIES IN ZECHARIAH. 


I 


The Permanence of Gced’s Word. 


(ZECHARIAH i., I-6.) 


The Prophet Zechariah was born in the latter 
years of the captivity in Babylon. His name means 
one whom Jehovah remembers. It was evidently 
a common name among the chosen people, as it is 
borne by several others in the course of Old Testa- 
ment story. How good it is to be always sure that 


God thinks of us—even when we forget or believe Pe tt 


<< (34 


not! He remaineth faithful. “I am poor and needy, 
yet the Lord thinketh upon me. How precious are 
thy thoughts unto me, O God! How great is the 


sum of them! If I should count them, they are — 


more in number than the sand.” 

Zechariah came of a priestly family. His grand- 
father (Iddo) is expressly mentioned as¥accom-\_ 
panying Zerubbabel, the Prince of Judah, and 


Joshua, the high priest, back to their desolated coun- \ 


try (Ezra ii. 1, 2; and Neh. xii. 4). His father, 


Berechiah, probably died when Zechariah was yet a _ 


9 


ite) THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


/child, and the boy was reared by the grandfather; 

‘he is therefore spoken of as the son of Iddo, and 
from the earliest his young mind must have been 
imbued with the traditions and habits of the priestly 
caste. 

The first expedition of exiles, to which we hav 
referred, reached Palestine about twenty years be- 
fore our story opens. The immense majority of the 
Jews were too well circumstanced in the wealthy 
land of their conquerors to be in any hurry to re- 
turn; and only some fifty thousand souls had risked 
the dangers of the desert and the privations of the 
new settlement—but these would comprise, without 
doubt, the flower of the race for piety and national 
pride. 

The majority of the returned exiles probably be- 
took themselves to their ancestral portions in various 
parts of the country, only a comparatively small 
number settling among the charred and blackened 
ruins of Jerusalem. The Book of Lamentations de- 
scribes, in elegiacs broken with sobs, the condition 
of the city, as their forefathers had left it seventy 
years before; and that period of desolation and waste 
must have still further added to the despair of 
the situation. 


How hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a 
cloud in his anger! 


He hath cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty 


\¢° of Israel, 


And hath not remembered his footstool in the day of his 
anger. 


THE PERMANENCE OF GOD’S WORD. II 


The Lord hath swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, 
and hath not pitied; 

He hath thrown down in his wrath the strongholds of the 
daughter of Judah; 

He hath burned up Jacob like a flaming fire; 

He hath violently taken away his tabernacle, as if it were 
of a garden; 

He hath destroyed his Place of Assembly (Lam. ii.). 


Amid these piles of blackened ruins, the handful 
of impoverished captives settled; and for some time 
after their arrival occupied themselves in rearing 
dwellings for themselves, and in setting up some at 
least of those religious observances of which for so 
long they had been necessarily deprived (Ezra iii. 
3-6). The foundation of the new Temple was laid) 
shortly afterward amid shouts of joy, which were” 
overborne by the noise of weeping on the part of\ 
those who had seen the first house in its glory— } 
“the ancient men.”’ é 

It was a fair dawn, but was soon overcast; for the 
enemies of the returned people set themselves to 
poison the mind of Artaxerxes (Smerdis), who, 
being a usurper and a magician, did not feel bound / 
to respect the decree of Cyrus, and ordered the, 
cessation of the work. And it ceased for fifteen 
years (Ezra iv.). At the end of that time Haggai/ 
the prophet, and Zechariah, the son of Iddo, began 
to stir their fellow-countrymen to resume their neg- 
lected toils. The political horizon had undergone a 
great change in the interval; and there was every 
reason to hope that Darius, who had headed a suc- 
cessful conspiracy against the usurping Smerdis, 


12 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


and had lately ascended the Persian throne, would 
be favorable to the purpose of the Jewish exiles, 
. since he was a monotheist, and zealous for the restor- 
‘ation of pure and spiritual religion. So it afterward 
proved (Ezra v., vi., especially 7-12). ! 

But the great difficulty experienced by the 
prophets was with the Jews themselves. “The time 
was not come,” they said, “the time for the Lord’s 
house to be built.” In the meanwhile they were 
living in ceiled houses, whilst God’s house lay 
_waste. 

First Haggai spoke. On the first day of the 
sixth month of the second year of Darius, he 
pointed to the disasters beneath which the country 
was groaning, that the dews of heaven were stayed 
and the earth was unproductive; that a drought lay 
upon the land and upon the mountains, upon the corn 
and wine and oil, upon men and cattle, and upon all 
the labor of their hands; that they sowed much and 
brought in little; ate and had not enough; drank 
and were not filled; clothed themselves but were not 
warm; earned wages which were dissipated as 
though holes were at the bottom of the bag—and 
urged that all these misfortunes were intended by 
God as a remonstrance against their laxity and an 
incentive to diligence. “Why?” saith the Lord of 
hosts. ‘Because of my house that lieth waste, while 
ye run, every man to his own house” (Hag. i. 1-11). 

“Then Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, and 
Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high priest, with all 
the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the 


THE PERMANENCE OF GOD’S WORD. 13 


Lord their God, and the words of Haggai the 
prophet, as the Lord their God had sent him, and 
the people did fear before the Lord. Then spake 
Haggai, the Lord’s messenger, in the Lord’s mes- 
sage unto the people, saying, I am with you, said 
the Lord. And the Lord stirred up the spirit of 
Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, Governor of Judah, 
and the spirit of Joshua, the son of Josedech, the 
high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the 
people; and they came and did work in the house 
of the Lord of Hosts, their God, in the four-and- 
twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year 
of Darius the King” (Hag. i. 12-15). 


In the following month, the seventh, a very en-~ 


couraging word came again through the mouth of 


Haggai, predicting that the latter glory of the new —~ 


Temple should even excel that of the former one; 
a glory not of gold or silver or precious stones, but 
the spiritual radiance and splendor of Him who 
was to be the Desire of all nations, and whose 
advent was destined to invest that building with 
eternal significance and interest (Hag. ii. 1-9). 
The month after, “the Word of the Lord came 
unto Zechariah.” Probably the Word of the Lord 
is ever circling through the world, as the waves of 
wireless telegraphy through the air; but there needs 
_an anointed, prepared, and receptive heart to receive 
and translate the sacred impressions. In the case 
of the prophets, however, there would be more than 
this. They spoke as they were moved or borne along 
by the Holy Spirit. When the apostle speaks of the 


_ 


14 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


senses being exercised to discern good and evil, he 
suggests that to each sense of the body there is a 
corresponding one of the soul; and this, like that, 
may become more or less acute. Seek after the 
quickened, Spirit-touched soul-sense! 
Be still and strong, 

O Man, my Brother! hold thy sobbing breath, 

And keep thy soul’s large window pure from wrong! 

That so, as life’s appointment issueth, 

Thy vision may be clear to watch along 

The sunset consummation-lights of death! 

Zechariah prefaces his prophecies with a very 

tender message. True, he does not slur over the 
sins of the past. “The Lord hath been sore dis- 
pleased with your fathers.” The memory of that 
displeasure was only too recent, the signs too ob- 
vious; but he hastens to accentuate the divine piti- 
fulness and tender mercy. “Thus saith the Lord of 
Hosts: Return unto Me, and I will return unto 
you.” There never yet was a backslider for whose 
return the infinite love of God did not yearn, and 
after whom it did not send messages like this. In 


~. this the divine love exceeds human love. Even our 


Lord could not depict the father of the prodigal 
sending messages into the far country, where he 
sat among the swine; but this is precisely what God 
does. Can you not hear the peal of the silver bells, 
borne across the valley? “Return! return!’ And 
when thou art yet a great way off the Father will 
see thee, and, being moved with compassion, will 
run and fall on thy neck, and kiss thee much, and 


THE PERMANENCE OF GOD’S WORD. 15 


reinstate thee where thou wast at first. He remem- 
bers sins no more. 

The only fear was lest God should call in vain. 
“Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former 
prophets cried; * * * but they did not hear, nor 
harken unto Me, saith the Lord.” Though the 
chosen people had suffered so terribly, there was a 
pitiful possibility of the obstinacy of the former 
generation reappearing in this. Each generation 
insists on trying its own bitter experiences, un- 
warned by the experiences of the preceding. 

“Your fathers, where are they?” They were re- 
bellious and sinned, and have passed away under 
the divine judgments. “And the prophets, do they 
live forever?’ But even though the lips that utter 
the divine Word wax cold in death, the Word itself 
remains; and it shall have an ever-abiding force. 
“But my words and my statutes, which I commanded 
my servants the prophets, did they not overtake 
your fathers?”—as a foe overtakes the flying fugi- 
tive. So much so as to extort from them a confes- 
sion of the righteousness of their doom; and they 
turned and said, “Like as the Lord of Hosts thought 
to do unto us, according to our ways and according 
to our doings, so hath He dealt with us.” 

The conclusion is forcible and clear. The prophet 
may die, but the divine word remains. Heaven and 
earth may pass away, but no word of God shall 
fail. All flesh is as grass, and all the glory thereof 
as the flower of grass, more transient still; but the 
Word of the Lord is incorruptible, it liveth and 


16 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


abideth forever. The fulfilled predictions of the 
past—whether threatenings like those which befell 
the Jews, or promises like those realized in the ad- 
vent of our Lord—all confirm the certainty that 
“no word from God is void of power.” Let us give 
the more earnest heed then to his invitations, warn- 
ings, threatenings, and promises, fashioning the — 
whole course of our lives by them, and ever remem- 
bering that they are the asseverations of “the Lord 
of Hosts.” ; 

That title is specially applied to the Divine Being 
by the three post-exilic prophets. It occurs in this 
Introduction, five times in six verses. How signifi- 
cant! Though the Jews had seen the vast hosts of 
their enemies arrayed against them in battle, or 
marshaled in their own distant lands, they were 
assured that their Jehovah had vaster squadrons yet; © 
and that all the powers of nature, all the restless 
wills of men, all the unseen kingdoms of the dead, 
and all the principalities and powers of the heaven— 
the archangels, angels, seraphim and cherubim— 
stood obedient to his sovereign sway, going, coming, 
doing this or that, as He chose. Look up, child of 
God! thy Father is also the great King, who doeth 
as He will “in the army of heaven, and among the 
inhabitants of the earth.” “Bless the Lord, all ye 
his hosts, ye ministers of his, that do his pleasure. 
Bless the Lord, O my soul!” 


II. 


The Myrtle Valley. 


(ZECHARIAH i., 7-17.) 


Three months had passed since the preceding 
vision, and the month Sebat had come, when the 
trees begin to shoot, and Zechariah says, “I saw by 
night.”” What did he see? 

If we may be allowed to follow the suggestion of 
one of the commentaries, we may imagine that not 
far from the prophet’s home there was a green val- 
ley, or bottom, filled with graceful myrtle trees, 
amid which a water-course had its way. Thither 
he may have been accustomed to resort for prayer, 
as our Lord retired among the olive trees outside 
Jerusalem. It is conceivable that ever since the 
return of the exiles from Babylon he had paced 
this green glade, pouring out his heart in words like 
those which weré afterward uttered by the Angel- 
Intercessor: “O Lord of Hosts, how long wilt Thou “ 
not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of 
Judah, against which Thou hast had indignation 
these three-score and ten years?” It is pleasant to 
pray in the open field of nature; the expanse above 
is suggestive of eternity and unchangeableness, and 
all the sounds of Nature’s varied orchestra, from 

17 


y 


18 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


| the rustle of the wind among the leaves to the long- 
drawn wave-beat on the sand, are marvelously 
adapted to be an accompaniment to the voice of 
4 supplication. , 

There was a special significance in the~ presence 

“of the myrtles which grew in humble and fragrant 
: beauty around. The myrtle was a native of Persia 
-and Assyria. Esther’s name, Hadassah, meant 
|myrtle It was, therefore, significant of the return 
‘of the exiles from the lands of the north; and its 
Wages beauty was an appropriate symbol of the 
, depressed condition of the chosen people, who could 

no longer be compared to the spreading cedar, or 

‘the deeply-rooted oak, but were like the myrtle, 

which, though graceful and evergreen, is neverthe- 
less an inconspicuous and unassuming plant. Many 
believers are as the myrtle. Their heart is not 
haughty, nor their eyes lofty; neither do they exer- 
,cise themselves in great matters, nor in things too 

‘wonderful for them. They still themselves, as a 

child weaned from its mother; and their hope is in 
he Lord for evermore. 

‘(On the night in question, which may have fol- 
lowed a day of unusual exercise of spirit, Zechariah 
thought that he was in his favorite valley, sur- 
rounded by the myrtles; and behold, in the midst of 
them, “‘a man riding upon a red horse; and behind 
him” there was a group of companions, mounted on 
horses, red, sorrel, and white. The whole valley 
seemed alive with these mysterious figures. They 
had doubtless been there whenever the prophet had 


THE MYRTLE VALLEY. 19 


paced to and fro, or knelt in intercession; but never 
before had his eyes been opened to see them. Ah!’ 
how perpetually are our eyes holden, so that we do 
not perceive the bands of God’s marshaled angels 
gathered to our succor. The fountain rises from the 
desert sands, on which our Ishmaels are dying for | 
thirst; but we perceive it not. The mountains are 
full of horses and chariots of fire; but we tremble 
as though there were nothing to prevent the enemy 
making an end of us. The glorious Lord engirds 
us, as a broad river with its flashing surface might / 
encircle a city; but only to the anointed eye is his| 
defensive presence made manifest. 

Naturally the prophet’s curiosity was excited, 
and he sought the significance of the heavenly 
vision. “Then said I, O my Lord, what are these?” 
This inquiry was addressed to a celestial Friend | 
and Adviser, with whom Zechariah was in constant 
fellowship. He often alludes to him as “the Angel 
that talketh with me” (9, 14, 19; iv. I, 4, 5; Vv. 5, 
10; vi. 4). This celestial visitant must be dis- 
tinguished from “the Angel of the Lord,” referred 
to in verse 12, and who could be none other than 
the Angel of the Covenant, our blessed Lord Him- 
self, to whom, also, the riders gave in their reports 
C10); rt): 

It has often been the comforting renecuae of in- 
dividual saints that their lives were under the direct 
tutelage and care of guardian angels. Still God 
gives his angels charge over us tokeep us. Still He 
sends his angel before us, to bring us into the place 


y 


ttle aia 


20 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


that He has prepared. Still the interpreting-angel 
talks with us—or, as Jerome says, within us—and 
says, “I will show thee what these be.” 

The holy soul, which has its myrtle valley for 
prayer, and has been accustomed through long years 
to pour out its intercessions and supplications before 
God, though it may have been with small response, 
is the one for whom presently the veil shall drop 
from the invisible world; and in that rapturous 
moment the anointed eye will be opened to behold 
the ministries of God’s high angels, as they go to 
and fro throughout the world on his embassies; 
whilst the purged ear will become the auditor of 
their elevated converse as they discuss the affairs 
of men, and especially of those intercessions with 
which Christ pleads for his own. “The man that 
stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, 
These are they whom the Lord hath sent to walk to 
and fro through the earth.” Then, as the prophet 
waited and listened, he heard the report which the 
angel-scouts handed in to headquarters, one in which 
they agreed with perfect unanimity: “We have 
walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all 
the earth sitteth still, and is at rest.” 

It was a time of almost universal peace. The new 
empire of Cyrus had become securely settled, and 
beneath the strong rule of his successors there was 
a grateful cessation of the throes and convulsions 
which had ushered in the fall of the empire of the 


Chaldeans. 


But to the peace and prosperity of all surrounding 


THE MYRTLE VALLEY. 21 


countries the condition of the returned remnant pre- 
sented a notable and strange contrast. If any spot 
should be verdant and radiant, surely it should 
be the hill which the Lord had chosen for Himself; 
and yet it was desolate. This astounding contrast 
elicited from the Angel of the Covenant an earnest 
entreaty that God would show Himself strong on 
behalf of those whom He had brought back from 
the land of the enemy. “He answered (as though 
He were speaking to the prophet’s thoughts) and 
said, O Lord of Hosts, how long wilt Thou not 
have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of 
Judah?” 

This is a beautiful glimpse of the intercessions 
which emanate from our Lord’s unchangeable Mel- 
chizedek priesthood. The believer having viewed 
Him in his Aaronic ministry, by which He put away 
sin through the sacrifice of Himself, derives great 
comfort from considering Him as a Priest forever 
after the order of Melchizedek; having no begin- 
ning of days nor end of life, but abiding a Priest con- 
tinually, and ever living to make intercession in the 
heavenly temple for his people. “Simon, Simon, 
Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you 
as wheat; but I have prayed for thee.” What un- 
told benefit accrues to us from his ceaseless and 
prevalent prayers! 

“And the Lord (i. ¢., the Angel of the Covenant) 
answered the angel that talked with me with good 
words and comfortable words.” It was as though 
the Father had heard and answered the pleadings 


22 LPHE PROPHET OF HOFE. 


of the Son, and returned Him an answer, which 
he passed on to Zechariah’s angel-guide; and then 
the prophet in turn was bidden proclaim them with 
the urgency and insistence of a cry: “Thus said 
the Lord of Hosts: 1 am jealous for Jerusalem and 
for Zion with a great jealousy.” 

More disclosures of God’s will followed; that He 
was displeased with the nations, who had gone be- 
yond his commission; that He had returned to Je- 
rusalem with great mercies; that the holy house 
should be built again; that the line of the builder 
should be stretched again over Jerusalem; that the 
cities of Judah were his cities, which should yet be 
spread forth in prosperity; that the Lord should 
yet comfort Zion and choose Jerusalem. 

Zechariah awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. 
But was it not more? Did he not visit that valley 
at daybreak with new and awful wonder? And 
did not the people, when they heard what he had 
seen, and the message which had been communi- 
cated to them, pluck up new courage to prosecute 
toils? If God was with them, who could stand 
against them? If angels were encamping round 
Jerusalem, how inevitable would be her resurrec- 
tion from encumbering ruin! The return of God 
to his city meant her return to the beauty that had 
attracted the wonder and jealousy of the world (Psa. 
xl viii. ). 

These words may come under the eye of some who 
have sighed and cried over the desolations of the 
house of God, whether of the universal Church, or 


THE MYRTLE VALLEY. 23 | 


of some beloved sphere of labor, on which they seem 
to have expended prayers and tears in vain. Have 
such waited for fifteeen years as Zechariah did A 
Have they had their myrtle grove of supplication? | 
Have they remained steadfast and unmoved amid_ 
universal surrounding declension? If they could | 
hear the good and comfortable words that are being | 
spoken, how glad and thankful they would be! For 
when men and women pray like this, they do but 
echo the prayer of the great Intercessor yonder, and | 
their prayer is the sure precursor of the return of 
God to his heritage with great mercy. Whenever 
God lays the state of his Church on the hearts of his 
people, so that they travail in birth for it, a power- 
ful revival of his work is at hand. i 

Are you, my reader, desolate through the pressure 
of long-continued sorrow? God’s chastenings have 
been greatly exaggerated by those who have helped 
forward the affliction. What was once a busy scene 
of active service is waste; your home is desolate; 
your heart sad. Yet, be of good cheer! There is 
One that ever liveth to intercede. Jesus has graven 
you upon the palms of his hands. Your sad lot is 
ever before Him. He will yet talk with you with 
good words and comfortable ones. ‘Turn’—they 
are his own words—‘“O backsliding children; for I 
am married unto you, saith the Lord.” “I will heal 
their backsliding, I will love them freely; for mine 
anger is turned away.” “He is able to save them to 
the uttermost that come unto God by Him, seeing He 
ever liveth to make intercession for them.” 


III. 


The Second Wision. 


(ZECHARIAH i. 18-21.) 


The next vision was full of comfort. The good 
words and comfortable words of the previous chap- 
ter are continued, like the long-drawn-out sweetness 
of a lullaby. 

As the little group of returned exiles looked nerv- 
ously out on the mighty world-empires, which sur- 
rounded and threatened them, they were filled with 
alarm. How could they cope with them? There 
were Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of 
their companions, of the nations whom Nebuchad- 
nezzar had settled in Samaria; Rehum the chancel- 
lor, and Shimshai the scribe, so ready in their use of 
the pen to exert influence on the great kings beyond 
the river, to make the work of temple-building cease; 
and the reactionary influences at work in the far-dis- 
tant court, always adverse to the resuscitation of a 
subdued nation, like the Jews, which had given such 
proofs of inevitable independence. Beneath the ir- 
resistible pressure of these hostile forces the work of 
temple-building had already ceased for fifteen years, 
and there was every fear that the new resolve to arise 
and build would meet with similar opposition and a 

24 


THE SECOND VISION. 23 


similar fate. There was singular appropriateness, 
therefore, in the prophet’s vision: “Then lifted I up 
mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, four horns.” 

In the language of a pastoral people like the Jews, 
the horn naturally represents the pride and power of 
the ravager and oppressor of the flock. The Divine 
Shepherd is heard from the very horns of the wild 
oxen (Psalm xxii. 21); and Daniel speaks of the 
horn which made war with the saints and overcame 
them, until the Ancient of Days came. The wild 
fury of man against the people of God is aptly de- 
scribed by the irruption of a herd of tusked boars, by 
the charge of the rhinoceros, or the rush of the wild 
ox on a harmless, defenceless flock, which has no 
power of resistance, but only of flight. 

The number four reminds us of the cardinal points 
of the compass, and indicates that, wherever the peo- 
ple turned, there were foes, which were sworn to re- 
sist their attempt to renew their national life. On 
the north, Chaldea, Assyria, and Samaria; on the 
south, Egypt and Arabia; on the west, Philistia ; and 
on the east, Ammon and Moab. And it is probable 
that the Spirit of God looked beyond these to the 
four Gentile monarchies, which have occupied, and 
still occupy, the “Times of the Gentiles,” and which 
were represented in the four metals of Daniel’s 
vision, or in the four great beasts, which one after 
another emerged from the sea. 

As yet Babylon and Medo-Persia alone had 
arisen; Greece and Rome, the latter including the 
kingdoms of modern Europe, were to come; but all 


26 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


were included in this one comprehensive glance at 
the kings of the earth, which set themselves, and the 
rulers who took counsel together, against the Lord 
and against His Anointed, saying: 


Let us break their bands asunder 
And cast away their cords from us. 


We must not forget that God Himself gave these 
world-powers their authority. He says, in Isaiah, 
“T was wroth with my people; I profaned mine in- 
heritance, and gave them into thine hand” (Isa. 
xlvii. 6, 7). And in Daniel He lifts the veil and 
shows that the world-rulers represent not flesh and 
blood merely, but malign and mighty spirits that 
actuate and inspire them (Dan. x. 13-20). As long 
as God’s people are perfect in their loyalty and obed- 
ience towards Him, they need fear the power of no 
adversary whatsoever ; but when there is a break in 
the holy connection which binds Him and them in an: 
inviolable safety,.it seems as though all the forces of 
evil are set free to bear down on and ravage them, 
until their chastisement is completed, and they re- 
turn to their first love. 

If we were asked to name the four horns which 
are ravaging the Church in the present day, we 
should not hesitate to say that they are Priestcraft, 
Worldliness, Christian Science, and Spiritualism. 

Priestcraft, which substitutes the priest for the liv- 
ing Saviour ; rites for faith; and the sacrifice of the 
Mass for that once offered and finished on the cross; 
and which is corrupting and undermining, by the 


THE SECOND VISION. 27 


accursed system of the confessional, the home-life of 
our country, as it has that of every nation which has 
fallen under its blighting scourge. 

W orldliness, to which our Lord alludes in his de- 
scription of the lusts, the strong desires for other 
things, which enter into competition with the seed 
sown in our hearts, and make it unfruitful. 

Christian Science, which, under the specious use 
of Christian terms, really eviscerates Christianity of 
its essential doctrines, making sin an illusion and its 
penalty a mortal dream; denying the Atonement, and 
the true nature of Jesus Christ; and teaching men to 
look on sin, sickness, and death, as matters of wrong 
thinking rather than wrong being and doing. 

Spiritualism, which reduces Christ to the level of 
a medium, and works lying wonders by the aid of 
seducing spirits. 

As we look on these and kindred evils which are 

just now invading and ravaging the professing 
Church, we may well adopt the words of the prophet: 
“And I said unto the Angel that talketh with me, 
What are these? And he answered me, These are 
the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and 
Jerusalem.” 

In every life there are similar experiences. Some- 
times, when we lift up our eyes, we find ourselves 
begirt with opposition and threatened by hostile pow- 
ers. Think of the martyr-host who have witnessed 
for God in every age, and who could reiterate the 
words of the greatest Sufferer of all, “Many bulls 


28 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


have compassed Me, strong bulls of Bashan have 
beset Me round about ; they gape upon Me with their 
mouth as a ravening and a roaring lion.” Ignatius, 
who complains that his custodians were like “ten 
leopards, who only wax worse when they are kindly 
treated’; Blandina, the girl slave; Germanicus, the 
noble youth; the Waldenses, whose wrongs roused 
Cromwell’s wrath and Milton’s muse; the Nether- 
lands, in their long conflict with Philip, when the 
leaders saw their homes covered again by the ocean 
from which their ancestors had redeemed them; 
Madame Guyon, beset by husband, mother-in-law, 
servants and priests; Samuel Rutherford, and hun- 
dreds of his time, harried by the fiercest and most 
insatiable hate; William Tyndale, the celebrated 
translator of the English Bible; John G. Paton, beset 
with savages—these are specimens of a multitude, 
which no man can number, of every nation, and kin- 
dred, and people, who have seen the vision of the 
four horns. 

But there is something beyond; and surely it is 
not without significance that the prophet says: “The 
Lord showed me four carpenters” (or smiths, R.v.). 
We have no difficulty in decrying the sources of 
alarm for ourselves; but we need a Divine Hand to 
reveal our assured deliverance. “And Elisha prayed 
and said: Lord, I pray Thee open his eyes, that he 
may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the 
young man and he saw; and, behold, the mountain 
was full of horses and chariots of fire round about 
Elisha.” 


THE SECOND VISION. 29 


For Babylon, the “carpenter” was Cyrus; for Per- 
sia, Alexander ; for Greece, the Roman; for Rome, 
the Gaul. Very different from each other, very ruth- 
less and unsparing; but very well adapted for their 
work. Commenting on this passage, the late Gc kas 
Spurgeon said: “He who wants to open an oyster\ 

ust not use a razor; for some works there needs 
Jess of daintiness and more of force; Providence) 
‘does not find clerks, or architects, or gentlemen, to 
_cut off horns, but carpenters. The work needs a‘man 
who, when he has work to do, puts his whole 
strength into it, and beats away with his hammer, or 
‘cuts through the wood that lies before him with | 
‘might and main. Let us not fear for the cause of | 
God; when the horns become too troublesome, the | 
Ppciters will be forthcoming to fray them.” 

Remember how in every age He has found his ap- ; 
propriate messenger. Athanasius frayed Arianism, | 
and Augustine, Manicheism; Luther frayed the / 
power of the Pope in Germnay, as did Hugh/ 
Latimer in England; Wesley and Whitefield frayed, 
the religious indifference of the last century. When 
Haldane went to Geneva, he frayed the scepticism 
which was destroying the Helvetian and Gallic 
Churches. The Lord knows where to find his serv- 
ants, and when the predestined hour strikes, there 
will stand the workman ready. “These are the horns 
which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift 
up his head ; but these are come to fray them, to cast 
down the horns of the nations which lifted up their 
horn against the land of Judah to scatter it.” 


| 


30 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


O child of God! there have been many horns en- 
gaged in scattering thee. Year after year they have 
wrought sad havoc in thy plans, and cost thee bitter 
tears. But thine Almighty Friend is greatly dis- 
pleased that they have hurt thee more than his pur- 
poses of chastisement required, and He has resolved 
that they shall be frayed. He is well able to do this; 
for He hath sworn that no weapon which is formed 


_ against thee shall prosper, and that every tongue 


which shall rise in judgment against thee shall be 
condemned. Since the discipline has fulfilled its 
purpose, it shall be stayed ; since the refining fire has 
purged out the dross, it shall lie down; since the win- 
nowing fan has purged the chaff from the wheat, the 
grain shall no longer be tossed in the breeze. Com- 
fort ye, comfort ye, saith thy God. “For a small 
moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mer- 
cies will I gather thee. In overflowing wrath I hid 
my face from thee for a moment; but with ever- 


lasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the 
Lord thy Redeemer.” 


ty 
- 


IV. 


The Man with the Measuring Line. 


(ZECHARIAH ii.) 


A third vision was granted to Zechariah. “J 
lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, a man with 
a measuring line in his hand.” 

It was natural enough. We dream of what occu- 
pies our waking thoughts ; and probably Jerusalem 
was full of surveyors, engaged in mapping out the 
new streets and walls. 

Some feeble attempts had already been made 
towards rebuilding; but as yet the ancient sites were 
principally distinguished by blackened walls and 
heaps of ruins. The walls of the city, especially, re- 
sembled the rubble of a quarry. At last, however, 
the national pride was awakening the common inter- 
est of citizens for their city, of patriots for their 
fatherland; and the young man with the measuring 
line in his hand was the fitting embodiment of this 
new spirit which was breathing throughout the na- 
tion. 

“Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said 
unto me, “To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the 
breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof.” It 
was as though he were defining the limits of the 

31 


oo 


“ never exceed this. 


set 


erm 


32 | THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


future city, indicating the direction the walls should 
take, and where they should stay. “Thus far,” he 
kept saying to himself. “The city will never get 
beyond this boundary line. Grow as it may, it will 
” How apt we aretodothis. We 
are all given to forecasting the future, and place lim- 
its, which God has never designed, on the growth of 
the City of God. 

The Sacramentarian comes with his measuring 
line, and insists that Baptism, however administered, 
and by whomsoever, is the limit; and that all the bap- 
tized, Protestants, Roman Catholics, or of the Greek 
Church, are included in God’s City; but he refuses 
to include the member of the Society of Friends, or 
the adherent of the Salvation Army. Slightly modi- 
fying the ancient challenge, he says, ““Except ye be 
baptized, ye cannot be saved.” 

The Pessimist comes with his measuring line, and 
draws the plan of the City within the narrowest pos- 
sible boundaries. He justifies his forecast by quot- 
ing such a text as “Fear not, little flock”; or “Strait 
is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto 
life, and few there be that find it.’ Sometimes he 
fears that he will not enter; at other times he doubts 
all others but himself. It may be that depression of 


_ spirit, or long removal from contact with the mani- 


fold activities of God in the world, induce these mor- 
bid views—as with Elijah, who thought that he only 
was left. 

The Bigot comes with his measuring line and in- 


sists that the City walls must coincide with his shib- 


fy Pe dbtotlt 


MAN WITH THE MEASURING LINE. 33 


boleth, and follow the tracings of his creed. We 
have known men much given to splitting hairs, and 
making minute and often imaginary distinctions, 
who have excommunicated all who did not exactly 
agree with them. Very narrow is the enclosure they 
mark out for future populations, and very scant their 
acreage of the Holy City. 

The Experimentalist is apt to refuse to consider as 
Christians those who have not experienced exactly 
the same doubts, fears, ecstacies, deliverances, and 
cleansings, which he himself has felt. Before a man 
may be included in his city, he must have gone 
through a series of defined and successive steps or 
chambers in the divine life. 

The Universalist goes to the other extreme, and 
practically builds his walls around the entire race of 
man, including within their circumference every 
member of the human family. 

It is not for us to fix the boundaries, or insist on 
our conceptions. These are secret things which be- 
long to the Lord our God. On the one hand, He 
only knows if those who call themselves and are con- 
sidered Christians are really so; and He only can 
detect the seven thousand who have not bowed the 
knee to Baal or kissed his image. “Lord,” said the 
apostles on one occasion, “are there few that be 
saved2” And the Master made answer, as though 
to turn away their inquiry, “Strive ye to enter ine” 
It is not for us to measure the city, but_to be sure 
that we have entered in.” 


“Run,” said another angel to the prophet’s angel- 












34 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


guide, “speak to this young man (1.e., who had the 
measuring line) saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited 
as villages without walls, by reason of the multitude 
of men and cattle therein.” It was useless to mark 
out boundaries, because the city was destined to ex- 
ceed all ordinary dimensions, and become so great 
that no walls would be capable of containing or keep- 
ing pace with it. The mighty populations that would 
congregate at that sacred center would overflow all 
limitations, as London had radiated to every point of 
the compass beyond the narrow enclosure of its 
ancient walls. It is hard to imagine the time when 
our own metropolis was contained between London 
Wall and the Thames. 

So shall it be with the saved. We have no right to 
include in their ranks any who know not God, and 
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, who have 
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds 
were evil. But apart from these, these will be a mul- 
titude which no man can number, out of every na- 
tion and of all tribes, and peoples, and tongues; as 
stars in the midnight sky, or the sand-grains on the 
seashore; enough to compensate for the travail of 
the Redeemer’s soul, and to satisfy the yearning love 
of God. But here an objection might be raised. If 
the Holy City was to be without walls, would it not 
be open to every assailant? What would there be to 
afford a cover for the soldier, or hinder the advance 
of the spoiler? Supposing that the enemy should 
say, “I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; 
I will go to them that are at quiet, that dwell se- 


MAN WITH THE MEASURING LINE. 35 


curely, all of them dwelling without walls, and hav- 
ing neither bars nor gates; to take the spoil, and to 
take the prey”’( Ezek. xxxviii. 11)! How then 
would Israel fare? No sooner is the suggestion 
made than it is met. “I, saith the Lord, will be unto 
her a wall of fire round about, and I will be the glory 
in the midst of her.”’ The image is probably bor- 
rowed from the camp-fires with which hunters sur- 
round themselves at night to scare off the beasts of 
prey. Imagine what that means! Just as no pesti- 
lence, and certainly no intruder, could break through 
a cordon of flame, so the unseen but almighty pres- 
ence of God would be a bulwark on which all the 
powers of earth and hell would break to their own 
undoing. 

This is what every congregation of believers may 
perpetually enjoy. They may be situated in the 
midst of the ancient civilization of China, or the rude 
heathenism of West Africa; no walls of wealth, or 
worldly influence, or prestige may engird them; but 
they will be absolutely safe, because that cordon of 
Divine and inviolable protection will enclose them on 
every side. God will be to them all that walls can be, 
and more. Indeed, it is better to dwell in an unde- 
fended, unwalled city; because we are made more 
conscious of, and more dependent upon, the environ- 
ing presence of the Eternal. Surely, the same 
thought was in the apostle’s mind when he gloried 
and took pleasure in weaknesses, injuries, necessi- 
ties; persecutions, distresses for Christ’s sake; be- 
cause, when he was weak, then he was strong. 


as 


36 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Are you like an unwalled town, with nothing be- 
tween you and the attacks of poverty, misfortune, 
godless fellow-workmen, and false brethren? Do 
not lose heart! you may yet dwell within the devour- 
ing fire of God’s presence, and be surrounded by the — 
everlasting burnings of his protection (Isa. xxxiii. 
14). He hath declared: “No weapon that is formed 
against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that 
shall rise in judgment against thee thou shalt con- 
demn.” Such an one may well exclaim with David, 
“T will not be afraid of ten thousands of the people 
that have set themselves against me round about; 
for Thou, Lord, art a Shield for me, my glory, and 
the Lifter up of mine head.”” Remember to realize 
God as between you and everything. Some put cir- 
cumstances between them and God; it is far wiser to 
put God between oneself and circumstances. Yes, 
we are as safe, stretched on the bare earth with no 
covering but the fall of night, as when engirt by mas- 
sive walls and palace doors. Nay, it is even a blessed 
thing to be deprived of all that men are so prone to 
magnify, that we may be thrown back absolutely on 

| God. We never discover how much He can be to the 


VY + soul until we have no other resource. 


Three appeals follow :—One to the exiles (6, 7). 
There were still vast numbers of Jews in Babylon, 
and to these an earnest invitation was addressed: 
“Ho, ho, flee from the land of the north, saith the 
Lord; for I have spread you abroad as the four 
winds of the heaven, saith the Lord! Ho, Zion, 
escape thou that dwellest with the daughter of Baby- 


MAN WITH THE MEASURING LINE. 37 


lon!’ And this invitation was backed by two con- 
siderations. On the one hand, safety is assured to 
them if they return. God would be as quick to pro- 
tect them as a man to raise his arm when injury is 
threatened to his eye. On the other hand, they are 
warned of the certain danger they incur by lingering 
in Babylon. God was already shaking his hand over 
that guilty city, as a signal to the nations she had 
oppressed to gather to her overthrow, and to share 
her spoils. 

Ah, Christian soul, art thou still sojourning in 
Babylon, conforming to the conventions of the 
world, molded by the spirit of the age? Heed the 
Divine summons to arise and depart. This cannot be 
thy rest. And flatter not thyself that thou canst do 
as the world does, and yet enjoy immunity from its 
destruction. The conquering troops would make no 
nice distinctions between Jews and Babylonians, but 
would slay indiscriminately; and the recoil of nat- 
ural law, violated by the professing Christian, will be 
as sharp and inevitable as on those who do not as- 
sume to be other than men of the world. Thou may- 
est bea child of God; but if this do not prevent thee 
from behaving as a child of this world, it will not 
prevent thee from suffering as the children of this 
world suffer when inevitable retribution befalls. 

How comforting it is to know that our souls are as © 
safe and dear to God as the apple of his eye! for 
there is no part of the body so safely guarded as the 
eye. The strong frontal bones, the brow or eyelash 
to intercept the dust, the lid to protect from scorch- 


38 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


ing glare, the sensitive tear-glands incessantly pour- 
ing their crystal tides over its surface—what a 
wealth of delicate machinery for its safety and 
health! We have all these in God. He is always on 
the alert to warn, defend, and cleanse us. “I, the . 
Lord, do keep it; I will water it every moment! 
Lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.” 

An Appeal to Zion (10). The daughter of Zion 
might be a scattered remnant, settled amid the black- 
ened ruins of the city; but she might well sing and 
rejoice, since God declared his willingness to come 
and share her humble lot, helping her children 
in their toils, and attracting many nations to 
Himself. “Lo, I come, and I will dwell in 
the midst of thee, saith the Lord.” She might 
well dispense with walls and bulwarks, with 
splendid buildings and holy fanes, since God 
was in the midst of her. When the tabernacle 
of God is with men, and He dwells with them, wip- 
ing away all tears, there is neither mourning nor cry- 
ing nor tears; but the mouth 1s filled with laughter, 
and the tongue with singing. Sometimes the Chris- 
(tian gets a vision of this. He realizes that since God 
has come into the midst of his work, it is no longer 
nis, but God’s; he is only the agent and errand-lad. 
God comforts and teaches the people; God restores 
the ruins; God builds the walls of Jerusalem; God 
does good in his good pleasure to Zion ; God attracts) 
the people, who join themselves not to a congrega- j ' 


(tion, a church, or a minister, but to the Lord, and be- W 


MAN WITH THE MEASURING LINE. 39 


come his. He is not only a wall of fire round about, ) 
but the glory in the midst. 

An Appeal to all Flesh (13). In the bold imag- 
ery of Scripture, God is sometimes represented as 
sleeping (not that there is any weariness or indiffer- 
ence in the Divine nature, for He that keeps us 
neither slumbers nor sleeps), but to account for his 
apparent apathy. Such times are always those in 
which Zion herself slumbers in Sleepy Hollow. 
There never can be any change in his power or ten- 
derness; but the exertion of his energy is often ar- 
rested through the indifference and unbelief of his 
people. 

When the Church awakes to repentance, humilia- 
tion, and prayer, God is said to*awake. The stir 
among the restored exiles, in consequence of the 
preaching of Zechariah and Haggai, is here de- 
scribed his awakening—not, however, that He had 
ever slept. 

When God arouses Himself, let all flesh be silent 
before Him. Let there be the silence of reverence, 
of eager expectancy, of humble obedience, of wistful 
desire. “Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for 
He is raised up out of His holy habitation.” “My 
soul, be silent unto God, for my expectation is from 
Him.” 


V. 
Josbua the Priest. 


(ZECHARIAH iii.) 


We learn from the Book of Ezra (ii. 36-39) that 
among the exiles who returned with Zerubbabel 
from Babylon, were Joshua or Jeshua, and 4,289 
priests. But they were in a sorry plight, their char- 
acter is described by the prophet Malachi; and it was 
in sad contrast, as he suggests, to the original type of 
the priesthood represented in Phinehas. 

They despised God’s name. Without scruple they 
offered on his altar the lame, the blind, and the sick. 
They said that the table of the Lord was polluted, 
and the fruit thereof, even his meat, contemptible. 
They did not hesitate to affirm that the routine of 
Levitical service was a weariness; and they snuffed 
at it, and brought that which was taken by violence, 
or the lame and the sick. They had turned aside out 
of the way themselves, and had caused many to 
stumble in the law. From these disgraceful charac- 
teristics the prophet turned to paint, with a few bold 
touches, the noble priest whose burning zeal for the 
honor of God averted his wrath from the people, and 
secured for himself and his seed after him the cov- 
enant of an everlasting priesthood (Num. xxy. 


10-13). 40 


JOSHUA THE PRIEST. 41 


“My covenant was with him,” the Spirit of God 
declares, “of life and peace; and I gave them to him 
that he might fear: and he feared Me, and stood in 
awe of my name. The law of truth was in his 
mouth, and unrighteousness was not found in his 
lips; he walked with Me in peace and uprightness, 
and did turn many away from iniquity” (Mal. 11. 
5; OF 

As a judgment on the priesthood, the whole body 
had fallen under great reproach: “Therefore have I 
also made you contemptible and base before all the 
people, according as ye have not kept my ways” 
(Mal. ii. 9). 

There is every reason to believe, also, that the reg- 
ulations for the maintenance of the priesthood by the 
people had fallen into disuse ; so that they had neither 
robes, nor vessels, nor the proper equipment required 
for the stately ceremonial of the House of God. Un- 
der such conditions there was great propriety in 5 
Zechariah’s vision of Joshua, the high priest, and his 
fellows that sat before him: ‘‘And He showed me 
Joshua the high priest, standing before the Angel of 
the Lord. . . . Now Joshua was clothed with filthy 
garments and stood before the Angel.” There was 
no mitre on his head, no insignia of exalted office on 
his person; whilst his disheveled robes told the sad 
story of neglect. The description at least reflected 
the general conception entertained of the priesthood ; 
and the question may even have been raised as to 
whether there was any use in rebuilding the temple 
while the officiating ministers were so unworthy of 
their high calling. 


42 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


There have been times in the past when the lead- 
ers of various branches of the professing Church 
might have been described in similar terms; when 
the services of God’s House have been performed in 
a slovenly and perfunctory manner; when the relig- 
ious instincts of the people have been subordinated to 
the sport, pleasure and material advantages, of their 
religious teachers; when services have been without 
decorum, prayers without reverence, music without 
taste, buildings in such repair as would not for a 
moment be tolerated in our homes—everywhere dirt, 
cobwebs, neglect. Such a condition of things may 
still be described as the robing of the priestly caste 
in filthy garments. 

But is there not another and deeper meaning in | 
these words? Recall the Angel’s words: jae 
now, O Joshua, the high priest, thou and thy fellows \ 
that sit before thee; for they are men which are a 
sign.” May not this mean that they represent all | 
who have been made priests unto God, called “to / 
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by! 
Jesus Christ”? (1 Peter ii. 5). Are there not times | 
in our lives when we feel unfit to render that sacred 
service? It may be at the hour of evening prayer, © 
when the household is assembling ; but we hesitate to. 
open the sacred Word, or engage in prayer, because | 
something has gone amiss during the preceding | 
hours, which has soiled the heart and ruffled the in- | 
ward peace. It may be, as we take our wonted seat 
in the House of God on the morning of God’s day, 
and there flashes across us the memory of habits in- © 


JOSHUA THE PRIEST. 43 


dulged, practices sanctioned, methods of making; 
money pursued, which are unworthy of our Chris- 
‘tian profession; and again our hearts condemn us.. 
Or, as we ascend the pulpit, take our class, mingle, 
with our fellow-workers, we remember outbursts of» 
irritability, proud and vainglorious thoughts, words | 
and deeds of senseless folly; and we feel the incon- 
gruity of standing up as God’s messengers between 
the living and the dead. At all such times we are, 
like Joshua, clothed in filthy garments. 

The sense of shame becomes more acute when we 
stand before the Angel of the Lord. “He showed me 
Joshua, the high priest, standing before the Angel of 
the Lord.” In the world’s twilight much may pass 
muster which, in the light of that sweet, pure face, 
must be utterly condemned. Garments which served 
us well enough in the short, dark winter days are 
laid aside when spring arrives; they will not bear the 
searching scrutiny of the light. In the ordinary life 
of our homes, we are less particular of our attire 
than when, on some special occasion, we have to un- 
dergo the inspection of stranger eyes. Thus we are 
prone to compare ourselves with ourselves, or with 
others, and to argue that the habit of our soul is not 
specially defiled. Alas! we reason thus in the dark. 
But when the white light of the throne of God breaks 
on us, we cry with Job: “If I wash myself with 
snow-water, and make my hands never so clean, yet 
wilt Thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own 
clothes shall abhor me.” 

Joshua must have felt much as Isaiah did, when he 


a 


44 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


was passing through the supreme crisis of his life. 
Prophet though he were, admired and beloved by the 
good, hated by the bad, when he beheld the Lord sit- 
ting on his high and exalted throne, the cry of soul- 
anguish was extorted from him: “Woe is me, for I 


am undone.” He was probably the last man in Israel 


who would have been deemed capable of such a con- 
fession; yet he was the first to make it. The greatest 
saints are they who, like Augustine, write confes- 
sions. The larger the sphere of light, the wider the 
circumference of darkness. The more we know of 
God, the more we loathe ourselves and repent. 
What is to be done under such circumstances? 


Renounce our priesthood? Disclaim its God-given | 


functions? No: remain standing before the Angel. 
He knows all—we need not shrink from his search- 
ing eyes—but He loves infinitely. He has power to 
make our iniquity pass from us, and clothe us with 


change of raiment—that white linen which is the | 


righteousness of saints. 

It is at such moments, however, that our great 
adversary puts forth his worst insinuations. “Satan 
standing at his right hand to be his adversary.” 
Since he was cast out of his first estate, he has been 
the antagonist of God, the hater of good, and the 
accuser of the brethren. He discovers the weak 
spots in character, and thrusts at them; the secret 
defects of the saints, and proclaims them upon the 
housetops; the least symptom of disloyalty, incon- 
stancy, and mixture of motive, and flaunts it before 
God’s angels. He is keen as steel, and cruel as hell, 


i ATA pie 


JOSHUA THE PRIEST. 45 


Ah, it is awful to think with what implacability he 
rages against us! 

When we pray, he is quick to detect the wandering 
thought, the mechanical repetition of well-worn 
phrases, the flagging fervor. With a sneer, he says, 
“Dost thou hear that? Is not this the voice of one 
whom Thou hast redeemed ?” 

When we work for God, he is keen to notice our 
desire to dazzle our fellows, to secure name and 
fame, to use the cross as a ladder for our own exalta- 
tion instead of our Master’s. “Is this,” he hisses, 
“the kind of service which thy chosen servants offer 
heees * 

When we approach the Lord’s table, and our 
hearts are cold in the very presence of that mystery 
of Love, he claps his hands in glee, and takes care to 
taunt the Bridegroom with the irresponsiveness and 
coolness of the Bride. And Christ suffers much. He 
had noticed all this; but who cares to be accosted 
with that which is already gnawing at your heart ? 

And when, like Job, we do bear trial patiently and 
nobly, the great adversary suggests that we do it 
from a selfish motive—“Doth Job serve God for 
naught?” 

Satan cannot reach the Son of God now, save 
through the members of his Body; but he misses no 
opportunity of thrusting at Him, as he accuses them. 

Let us now turn to notice the intervention and an- 
swer of the Angel of the Covenant. It 1s spon- 
taneous and unsought. Before Joshua had time to 
say, “Shelter me,” his faithful Friend and Advocate 


46 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


had cast around him the assurance of His Protection, 
and had silenced the adversary. The Lord rebuke 
_ thee, O Satan. As the Aaronic Priest, He died ; but, 
as the Melchizedek Priest, He ever lives to make in- 
tercession on our behalf; and as the torpedoes of the 
enemy are launched against us, He catches them in. 
the net of his Intercession, and makes them power- 
less to hurt. Before we call, He answers. Before 
we realize the strong and cunning charges accumu- 
lated against us, He has rebutted them. In the same 
breath in which the Master told Peter that Satan had 
sought to sift him as wheat, He told him that He had 
') prayed for him. 

It 1s founded on electing grace. For He says: 
“The Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee.” 
Before ever He chose her, He must have foreseen all 
that she would become, her backslidings and re- 
bellions, her filthy garments, her wounds and bruises 
and putrefying sores; but, notwithstanding all, He 
set His heart upon her. Surely, then, He would not 
abandon her because of anything that her adversary 
might rake up to her discredit. He knew the worst 
about her before He chose her as His own; nothing 
could happen that had not been well considered in the 
white light of eternity. Satan could allege nothing 
which the Advocate had not weighed in the balances 
of his Divine prescience. He had realized the very 
worst before making his final choice. 
¢ These are foundation thoughts, on which we rest 

(the structure of our hopes. When we are most 
agonized at the memory of recent failure, most dis- 


JOSHUA THE PRIEST. 47 


tressed as we weigh and consider the cruelty and \ 
meanness of our selfish actions, most ashamed for : 
the vileness and inveteracy of our impure and unholy : 
passions, we can only turn to those passages which | 
assure us that we were chosen in Christ before the | 
foundation of the world, and that he had predes- 
tinated those whom he foreknew. For God to reject |. 
us now would be a reflection on His ominpotence. 
Yes, thou great adversary, thou canst not tell our | 
Lord worse things about us than He knows; and ) 
notwithstanding all, He loves, and will love. Pe 
Moreover, it has already done too much to go 
back. The point of the metaphor which follows is 
very reassuring. “Is not this a brand plucked out of oy 
the fire?” You have been writing all the morning | 
at your desk, answering letters, assorting papers and | 
manuscripts, destroying much that there was no need | 
to keep. After two or three hours of work, there is | 
a heap of papers which you wish to destroy, and you | 
place them in your stove or fireplace, the fire kindles 
on them, and they begin to blaze. Suddenly, to your \ 
dismay, you remember that there was a cheque or : 
note among them, or a letter with an address, or a 
paper which has cost you hours of work. As quick 
as thought you rush to the kindling flames, and 
snatch away the paper, and attempt to stay the gnaw- 
ing edge of flame. But what an appearance the 
paper suggests! It is yellow with smoke, charred 
and brittle round the edges, scorched and hot, here 
and there are gaps—it is a brand plucked out of the 
fire. Would you have snatched it out if you had not 


48 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


valued it? And, after you have taken such pains to 
rescue it, is it likely that you will thrust it back to 
| destruction? And would Jehovah have snatched 
Israel out of Babylon, and expended so much time 
and care over her, if at the end He meant to destroy 
her? The fact of his having done so much, not only 
proved his love, but implied its continuance. 

What depths of consolation are here! As we look 
back on our lives, we become aware of the narrow- 
ness of our escape from dangers which overwhelmed 
others. We have been involved in companionships 
and practices which have ruined others irretrievably ; 
but somehow, though we are charred and blackened, 
we have escaped the ultimate results. We have been 
plucked out of the burning. What can we infer 
from so gracious an interposition, except that we 
have been preserved for some high and useful pur- 
pose; and that God will yet make use of us for His 
kingdom and glory, in spite of all that Satan may 
say or do on the other side—and this because He 
sees, what Satan cannot see, the bitterness of our re- 
pentance, the poignancy of our grief, and the sincere 
desire of our hearts yet to serve Him, before we go 
hence. 

Manoah’s wife was perfectly justified in meeting 
the fears of her timorous husband by saying, “If the 
Lord were pleased to kill us, He would not have told 
us such things as these.’ All the past is an argument 
for faith. God resembles an investor who has sunk 
so much in an undertaking that, though it has hith- 
erto proved unprofitable, he dare not abandon it; he 


JOSHUA THE PRIEST. 49 


is bound to go on until the scale turns, and it begins 
to pay—then he will be abundantly recouped. Has 
God snatched you from destruction, from the jaws 
of the lion, and the mouth of hell? It is a proof that 
He will perfect what concerneth you. Let Satan try 
his worst, God cannot deny Himself. He does not 
say, Yea, yea; nay, nay. ‘Whom He called, them 
He also justified; and whom He justified, them He 
also glorified. What then shall we say to these 
things? If God be for us, who can be against us!” 


VI. 
The Candlestick. 


(ZECHARIAH iv.) 


On their return from Babylon the Jews were con- 
fronted with immense difficulties arising from the 
opposition of their neighbors, their want of re- 
sources, and the incompetence of their leaders. The 
last was probably their most serious difficulty. 
Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and Zerub- 
babel had faltered in his attempt to rear the Temple. 
His hands had laid the foundation, but, after a brief 
effort, they had fallen paralyzed by his side. Royal 
blood was in his veins, but he sadly lacked the energy 
and faith of the princes of his line. The rebuilding 
of the Temple had been greatly hindered, and for 
some time had been entirely suspended; and, all 
around, the heaped-up ruins and unused materials 
showed how much needed to be done. The suspicion 
may have suggested itself, and spread from lip to lip, 
that there could be no improvement, no hope of ad- 
vance, while Zerubbabel was to lead. 

These difficulties and forebodings rose like a 
mountain range between the returned exiles and the 
accomplishment of their purpose. Not more abso- 
lutely do the Himalayas, which seem like a vision of 


50 


THE CANDLESTICK. 51 


clouds to dwellers on the plains of India, wall out 
invasions and bar the northern route, than did these 
tremendous obstacles rear themselves before the re- 
turned remnant. 

It was at this juncture, and to reassure them, that 
the Angel that talked with Zechariah came again, 
and waked him, as a man that is wakened out of his 


sleep. He did not minimize the greatness of the dis- | 


couragements, but he brought a message of hope. 
Even though Zerubbabel might lack the essentials of 
a great leader, yet the success of their undertaking 
did not depend upon him, but on the Divine power, 
which was working through him to achieve the Di- 
vine purpose. “Then he answered and spake unto 
me, saying, This is the word of the Lord unto Zerub- 
babel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by 
my spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts. Who art thou, ‘0 
great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shalt be- 
come a plain: and He shall bring forth the headstone 
with shoutings of Grace, Grace unto it.” 

In the most express and unmistakable terms 
Zechariah was further assured that God would cer- 
tainly fulfill his word through this scion of David’s 
house. ‘‘Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto 
me, saying, The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the 
foundations of this house; his hands shall also finish 
it.’ With what new pleasure the prophet would 
contemplate the state of the Temple area; and, the 
day of small things, as it undoubtedly was. With 
what new fortitude he would bear the adverse criti- 
cisms of the old men who had seen the glory of the 


me 


a, 


x 
0. ae: 


52 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


former house, and were loth to believe that anything 
could come of beginnings so feeble and delayed! He 
could already see the Prince of Judah, standing in 
the sunny air, plummet and trowel in hand, fixing 
the capstone in its place, amid the enthusiastic shouts 
of the people. Better than all, he could see the eyes 
of God, seven in number, because of their perfection, 
which run to and fro throughout the whole earth, re- 
joicing as they beheld the plummet in his hand. We 
pause here for a moment to absorb the sweetness of 
the suggestion, that God delights in his people's 
_-work for Him, and joins his congratulations with 
theirs, when the crown is placed on their labors. 

In order to make God’s meaning clearer, the 
prophet was granted the vision of the candlestick 
(lamp-stand), the gist of which was that the wick, 
though necessary to the light, played a very incon- 
siderable part in its production. It had no illum- 
inating power; it could only smoke, and char, and 
smoulder. At the best, it could only be a medium 
between the oil in the cistern and the fire that burned 
on its serried edge. Thus Zerubbabel might be weak 
and flexible as a wick, but none of his deficiencies 
could hinder him finishing the work to which he had 
been called, if only his spirit was kindled with the 
Divine fire, and fed continually by the gracious in- 
fluences of the Holy Spirit. Ao We — 

The candlestick, which Zechariah beheld in pro- 
phetic ecstacy, was evidently fashioned on the model 
of that in the Temple, the shape of which is still pre- 
served to us on the Arch of Titus, At the top there 


THE CANDLESTICK. 53 


was a large bowl or cistern filled with the golden oil, 
in which the wicks of the lamps were dipped, and 
which stole up their texture to burn for the light of 
all that were in the house. The branches radiated 
from a central stem to the seven lamps. According 
to the Revised Version, there were seven pipes to 
each lamp, and therefore forty-nine in all. Nor was 
this all. On either side of this massive candlestick 
stood an olive-tree, from the heart of which, by a 
golden pipe, the oil was continually being poured 
into the reservoir; so that even though it might be 
limited in its containing power, there could be no 
failure in its ability to meet the incessant demands of 
its lamps. 

So far as the Jews were concerned, the meaning of 
the vision was obvious. They were represented in 
the candlestick, of which the many lamps and the 
precious metal of its composition set forth their per- 
fection and preciousness in the thought of God. 
Their function was to shed the light of his knowl- 





edge on the world, as it lay under the power of dark-\ ws 


Divine supplies would be forthcoming from a celes- 
tial and living source, and brought to them through 
the golden pipes, of which one represented Joshua 
the priest, and the other Zerubbabel the prince. 
These men, therefore, were but mediums for Divine 
communications. Their sufficiency was not of them- 
selves, but of God. The mission of Israel would be 
realized not by them, but by the Spirit of God 
through them. They might seem altogether helpless 


ness; while, to aid them in fulfilling this mission | 


\ 


i] 


54 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


and inadequate; but a living fountain of oil was pre- 
pared to furnish them with inexhaustible supplies. 

For us, too, this vision is full of teaching, encour- 
agement, and admonition, to which we would do 
well if we pay heed. 

The first chapter of the Book of Revelation, which ~ 
compares the work of the Church during the present 
age to seven light-bringing candlesticks, suggests 
the application of this vision of Zechariah’s to our- 
selves. As yet dawn has not broken; darkness en- 
velops the earth, and gross darkness the peoples. 
But God has called his people, in the meanwhile, to 
“shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word 
of life.” Let us recognize the important work to 
which God has called us; and whether it be as the 
household candle, the street lamp, or the gleam of the 
lighthouse, let us beware of hiding our light under 
a bushel, lest men stumble to their destruction. The 
lights of a dark night seldom receive their meed of 
notice or gratitude; but how could we do without 
them? And though the children of this world rarely 
recognize their indebtedness to the Christian Church, 
they would be in a sorry plight if it were not for its 
three-fold beam of faith, hope, and love. 

The golden bowl filled with oil is an eloquent sym- 
bol of the relationship of our Redeemer to his people. 
“Tt hath pleased the Father that in Him should all 
fullness dwell.” The fullness of the Holy Spirit is 
always at high-water mark within his glorious na- 
ture. It is not possible to imagine any aspect of 
Holy Ghost fullness which is not embraced and in- 


THE CANDLESTICK. 55 


cluded in our glorious Lord; and there is no quality 
needed for the outshining of Christian character 
which is not richly stored in Him; He is “the fullness 
of the God-head bodily.” His the spirit of wisdom 
and understanding; his the spirit of counsel and 
might; his the spirit of understanding and of the fear 
of the Lord; and He “is made unto us wisdom, and 
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.” 
Press this thought to your heart, child of God, and 
dwell on it—that in Christ are hidden all the treas- 
ures of wisdom and knowledge; He is the ocean- 
basin of God’s infinite resources, that we may forever 
draw on his stores, and be replenished from his full- 
ness with grace upon grace. 

It was explained to Zechariah that the olive trees 
on either side of the candlestick were the two sons of 
oil that stand by the Lord of the whole earth. If, in 
its primary significance, this figure indicated the 
royal and priestly elements of the Jewish national 
life, in our case it signifies the royal priesthood of 
our Lord and of us His people. He is a Priest upon 
His throne. He is a Priest for ever after the order of 
Melchizedek, who was King of Salem as well as 
Priest of the Most High God. Had He been only 
our Aaron, He would have made peace between God 
and us by the shedding of blood, and have gone into 
the Holy of Holies to intercede; but the veil would 
have fallen intact behind Him,and He would have 
had no power to introduce us into the Most Holy 
Place, and maintain us there. He would not have 
been able to communicate a royal and victorious life, 


56 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


which defies the power of sin, and goes forth to con- 
quer in eternal vigor and beauty. Christ is King as 
well as Priest; and therefore He not only brings us 
nigh to God, but makes us sit with Him in the 


heavenlies of his eternal supremacy. 


Yes, friend, we may be but as wicks, with no pith 
or power of our own, smoking, charring, burning 
out; unnoticed amid the flame we yield; unrewarded 
and unthanked; pieces of coarse tow. But let us 
keep saturated in the fullness that is in Christ Jesus, 
let us abide in Him, let us dip deep into the well of 
His supplies; so shall the quality of His glorious 
nature yield itself up through us to the illumination 
of men. “nly 

It is easy to see what comfort this vision brought 
to the handful of exiles amid those blackened ruins. 


It seemed as though mountain ranges of difficulty 
_ stood between them and the accomplishment of their 
' great undertaking. But now they learned that at the 


_ best they were only the channels and instruments ; 


and that God was prepared to accomplish the results 
'they sought. It was not to be by their might, nor 
' power, but by his Spirit, pouring into and through 


ase ee 


them with inexhaustible fullness, as the oil poured 
into and aan the golden pipes from the two olive 
trees. Rey 

We are often menaced by apparently insurmount- 
able difficulties, which extort from us the groan, “O 
great mountain!’ At other times we are oppressed 
with a sense of our impotence, and of the weight 
and weariness of life. How can we be always good? 


THE CANDLESTICK. 57 


How obey the heavenly vision? How last? Weare 
told that Daniel continued unto the first year of 
Cyrus. Ah, this patient endurance and continuance 
in well-doing! If we are to live for twenty, thirty, 
or fifty years from now, in a world in which the 
shocks, perils, and demands will certainly not dimin- 
ish as the coming of the Bridegroom draws nigh, 
shall we be able to endure to the end? Will not the 
lamp expire before the gust which shall precede the 
gray dawn of Advent? The outward man decays; 
will the inward man be always renewed ? 

These thoughts attracted me to a conversation \ 
‘with the wick of my lamp. For long it had served 
my purpose, silently ministering as I read beside it. 
I felt ashamed that I had not before noticed its unob- 
trusive ministry. I said to the wick :— 

“For the service of many months I thank thee.” 

“What have I done for thee?” 

“Hast thou not given light upon my page?” 

“Indeed, no; I have no light to give, in proof 
whereof take me from my bath of oil, and see how 
quickly I expire. Thou wilt soon turn from me, asa 
piece of smoking tow. It is not I that burn, but the 
oil with which my texture is saturated. It is this 
that lights thee. As for me, I simply mediate be- 
tween the oil in the cistern and the fire on my edge. 
See this blackened edge. It slowly decays, but the 
light continually burns.” 

“Dost thou never fear becoming exhausted? See 
how many inches of coil remain! Wilt thou be able 


58 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


to give light till every inch of this is slowly charred 
and cut away?” 

“T have no fear so long as the supply of oil does 
not fail, if only some kindly hand will remove, from 
time to time, the charred margin, trimming me, and 
exposing a fresh edge to the flame. This is my two- 
fold need: oil and trimming. Give me these, and I 
shall burn to the end.” 

“I thank thee, gentle teacher,” I said, as I turned 
away; “thou hast greatly encouraged me. I, too, 
shall endure, so-long as I abide in Him, in whom 
God has stored the measureless residue of the Spirit ; 
and so long also as the Divine hand, with delicate 
thoughtfulness, uses the golden snuffers, removing 
the debris and decay, pruning that I may bear fruit; 

. piercing to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, 

‘that I may enter into his rest.” 
“ Some among us appear to think that the soul can 
accumulate a stock of grace, in a sacrament, a con- 
vention, or a night of prayer. But this is at variance 
with the teaching of the wick. It accumulates noth- 
ing. It has no stores. From hour to hour it is al- 
ways on the edge of bankruptcy, but always supplied. 
So should we live—at every moment giving all we 
have, but never doubting about the supplies of the 
future. Bear pain for one moment at a time; there 
is patience enough in Jesus for the next moment. 
Do your Christian work with as much energy as 
though each service were your last. You cannot 

j exhaust God; and your work is to be, not in your 
might or power, but by his Spirit. 


THE CANDLESTICK. 59 


Moment by moment I’m kept in his love; 
Moment by moment, I’ve life from above; 
Looking to Jesus! till glory doth shine, 

Moment by moment, O Lord, I am thine. 


There is also a warning for us all implied in this 
vision, to which we must give heed. We must very 
carefully abide in Christ, that He may abide in us; | 
always recognizing his royalty, which calls for 
obedience; always resting upon his priesthood, which 
reconciles us to God. In obedience and faith the 
bond of fellowship is perpetually maintained and 
strengthened. Every time we do as our Prince bids, 
though it contradicts the strongest desires of our 
nature; every time we resort to our Priest—there ts 
an accentuation of that fellowship which draws his 
nature into ours. 

Forgive me if I return to this thought again and 
again. It has become so precious an emblem of my 
relationship with my Lord, to think of the union be- 
tween the wick and the limitless supplies of the olive 
tree. Hour after hour the oil climbs up the wick to 
the flame, and thus insensibly the grace of the risen 
Lord passes through the medium of our faith into 
the radiant beauty of a life on fire with God. O fire 
of God, thou shalt burn on us for evermore; and our 
spirits shall be thy candles, because we have learned 
to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the 
inner man, and Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. 

We must expect that Christ will use his golden 
snuffers. Let us not flinch from them. When He 
seems sacrificing some vital, necessary part of our 


60 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


nature, He is only cutting away the black, charred, 
burnt-out debris. Trust Him. That piece which He 
has cut away was smoking badly, and spoiling the 
testimony of the rest. It was better for it to come 
off ; but He thinks so much of this work, that He will. 
use only golden snuffers. Can you not trust the 
hand that holds them? It bears the nail-print of 
Calvary. 

Beware, also, that nothing chokes the golden pipes 
of obedience to his kindliness, and trust in his priest- 
hood; else the entrance of the golden oil will be ar- 
rested. They may soon become stopped by neglect, 
inattention, or disuse. 

Do not weary of the slow advance of your life to 
Christian perfection. This is the day of small 
things ; of the foundation-trench rather than the top- 
stone; of the testing of line and plummet, rather 
than of shoutings of “Grace, grace unto it.” But be 
of good cheer; the seven eyes of the Lord are upon 
the worker and the work. They run to and fro 
throughout the whole earth; but they return to rest 
in loving interest on the progress of His work. He 
will perfect that which concerneth you; He cannot 
forsake the work of His own hands. 


Grace all the work shall crown 
Through everlasting days; 

It lays in Heaven the topmost stone, 
And well deserves the praise. 


Vil. 


Going Fortb. 


(ZECHARIAH V., vi., 1-8.) 


There is a clear connection between the three next 
visions, furnished by the words, Going forth. alg 
curse goes forth over the face of the whole land” 
(3); “The ephah goeth forth” (6); “The chariots 
go forth” (vi. 1-5.) Itis as though Zechariah were 
permitted to stand in the center of things, where God 
is, and was able to see the successive issues of the 
Divine Providence in respect of the moral govern- 
ment of his people and the world. 


I. Tue Vision oF THE Fryinc Roti.—The 
prophet beheld in vision a huge sheet of paper, or 
dressed skin, prepared for writing, slowly floating 
in mid-heaven. It seemed to be hovering, and pre- 
pared to pounce, as a bird of prey may often be seen 
on the point of settling over a plowed field. Its 
considerable extent, thirty feet by fifteen—the di- 
mensions of the temple porch—was covered on each 
side by the solemn curses of the law; on this, by 
those that condemn the thief; on that, by those con- 
demning the false swearer. 

We have already learned that God had returned to 

61 


62 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Jerusalem, prepared to become a wall of fire round 
about, and its glory in the midst; the temple should 
be rebuilt, and the priesthood reconstituted ; but the 
people must be made to understand what a solemn 
thing it was to have God in such near proximity. If 
He was ready to defend them against their foes, He 
was also determined to purge out from among them 
those who transgressed His holy law. 

It is clear that this young community was spe- 
cially cursed by these twin sins. Men were fraudu- 
lent and mendacious. They got the better of their 
customers if they had the chance; and then, with un- 
blushing effrontery, lied to conceal their frauds. 
These are always the sins of a mercantile commun- 
ity; and they are as prevalent in London and New 
York, in Bombay and Melbourne, as ever they were 
in the newly-restored Jerusalem. But God is al- 
ways pledged to deal with them, in the interests of 
society itself, which must be undermined if they be 
allowed to prevail unchecked. Over the great com- 
mercial centers of the world—yes, and over the 
great emporiums of trade—that roll still hangs, and 
the curse of God threatens to fall. 

The effect of the curse is told in graphic symbol- 
ism. It seemed after a time to settle down on cer- 
tain houses. They may have been resepectable 
houses, the houses of men that were held in reverent 
repute, houses which were often alight with the lamps 
of high festival; but by the settling down of that 
roll, the master of such and such a house was indi- 
cated as being either a thief or a liar. “I will cause it 


GOING FORTH. 63 


to go forth, saith the Lord of Hosts, and it shall enter 
into the house of the thief, and into the house of him 
that sweareth falsely by my name.” 

That, however, was not the end, either of the 
vision or of those divine dealings which the vision 
describes. The interpreting angel goes on to say: 
“Tt shall abide in the midst of his house, and shall 
consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones 
thereof.” It was as though, from the moment that 
the curse settled down, the whole fabric of the house 
commenced to rot; and the owner might fairly 
adopt the words of Leviticus: “There seemeth to 
me to be, as it were, a plague in the house.” 

How terribly those words have been fulfilled in 
the case of people and families we have known! It 
has seemed as though there were a plague in the 
house. The fortune which had been accumulated 
with such toil has crumbled; the children turned out 
sources of heart-rending grief; the reputation of the 
father has become irretrievably tarnished. “There 
is a plague spread in the house; it is a fretting 
leprosy, it is unclean.” No man can stand against 
that curse. It confronts him everywhere. It 
touches his most substantial effects, and they pul- 
verize, as furniture eaten through by white ants. It 
is as though he were condemned to hear, like an- 
other Job, the voices of successive messengers, ati- 
nouncing that they only are left to tell the story of 
irremediable disaster. Timber and stones, however 
carved and chiseled, crumble to ash and dust! How 
awfully realistic! How terribly true! 


64 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


II. Tue Vision oF THE EpHAan.—Again the 
prophet’s eyes were directed by the angel that spoke 
with him toward mid-heaven, and he saw a yet 
more graphic symbol. An ephah was seen careering 
through the air. “TI said, What is it? And he said, 
This is the ephah that goeth forth. He said, more- 
over, This is their resemblance in all the land.”’ As 
much as to say that the Jews were known through- 
out the world of that time as traders, who were con- 
stantly handing the Hebrew dry measure, contain- 
ing about a bushel, or seven-and-a-half gallons. 

Presently the cover was lifted off, and a woman 
was seen sitting in the midst of the ephah. “And he 
said, “This is Wickedness; and he cast her down 
into the midst of the ephah: and he cast the weight 
of lead upon the mouth thereof.’ Does not this 
clearly mean that the commercial life of these Jew- 
ish traders was deeply saturated with wicked prac- 
tices, and that there was a kind of alliance between 
them and the impalpable spirit of Wickedness, as 
illustrated by this personification of evil? 

How often when men slam to the doors of their 
safes, shut their ledgers, and lock their counting- 
houses, they seem to place the leaden weight on the 
top of the ephah containing wickedness! They wish 
to hide it from the eyes of their nearest and dearest. 
They would like to hide it from the face of God 
Himself. 

It is at this juncture, however, that an entirely 
new turn is given to this vision. “Then lifted I up 
mine eyes, and saw, and behold, there came forth 


GOING FORTH. 65 


two women, and the wind was in their wings; now 
they had wings like the wings of a stork: and they 
lifted up the ephah between the earth and the 
heaven.” The stork has long and wide wings. It is 
also a migratory bird. It would have no difficulty 
in covering the distance between Jerusalem and 
Babylon. And, therefore, storks’ wings are attrib- 
uted to these two women. As two anointed ones 
stand by the Lord as his ministers, so these two 
women execute his purposes in removing wicked- 
ness, which answers to the mystery of iniquity, of 
which the apostle speaks. 

“Then said I to the angel that talked with me, 
Whither do these bear the ephah? And he said unto 
me, To build her an house in the land of Shinar; 
and when it is prepared, she shall be set there in her 
own place.” Babylon was far away, the seat of 
apostasy from God and demon-worship. It was 
meet that Wickedness should be borne thither. But 
how great the deliverance for the chosen land! 

What comfort is here! Wickedness may be 
strongly entrenched ; but she shall be removed, when 
once God arises on the behalf of his people. Do you 
sigh and cry against it? Do you desire that some 
terrible form of it, which has cursed your life too 
long, and alienated the Divine favor, should be elim- 
inated? Be encouraged by that vision! Lift up 
your eyes, and see the swift stork-like wings, with 
the favoring breeze bearing them forward as they 
speed to perform God’s behest. If only you are 
willing, God will certainly free and deliver you. 


i as 


66 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Thousands have experienced this deliverance 
from certain forms of besetting sin, which have 
dropped off as the viper from Paul’s hand, as they 
have received the more perfect indwelling of the 
Holy Ghost. Not long after his conversion, the ~ 
saintly Fletcher passed into this experience, trod sin 
under his feet, and proclaimed that we must not be 
content till we have been delivered from the power of 
sin, through the indwelling of the Divine Spirit. 
And Wesley says of Halyburton: “This great serv- 
ant of God sometimes fell back, from the glorious 
liberty he had received, into the spirit of fear, and 
sin, and bondage. But why? Because he did not 
abide in Christ; because he did not cleave to Him 
with all his heart; because he grieved the Holy 
Spirit by whom freedom from sin is rendered the 
common privilege of all.” From which we infer 
that Wesley held and taught, that we are delivered 
from the power of sin and darkness, just in so far as 
we abide in Him who is the light of life. Abide in 
Him, and you, too, shall see wickedness borne out 
of the practical experience of your life. 


III]. Tue Vision of THE CHARIOTS.—This is a 
vision of Protection and Deliverance. Four char- 
iots are seen issuing from the mountains that were 
round about Jerusalem. In each case the color of 
the horses represented the commission that their 
hurrying drivers bore to the different nations, which, 
before that time, had ravaged the Jewish people. 
“Then I answered and said unto the angel that 


GOING FORTH. 67 


talked with me: What are these, my lord? And 
the angel answered and said unto me: These are 
the four spirits of Heaven, which go forth from 
standing before the Lord of all the earth.” 

Against the north country, where Babylon lay, 
two chariots went forth; whereof the black horses 
represented defeat and despair, while the white 
stood for the victorious successes of some conquer- 
ing people, before whom Babylon would be laid low 
in the dust—a prediction which was probably ful- 
filled in the rise of the third great world-wide king- 
dom of Greece, under Alexander the Great. 

The grizzled, or piebald, went forth toward the 
south country, and represent the mixed experiences 
—partly of disaster, and partly of prosperity— 
which would befall Egypt, on the southern frontier 
of the Holy Land. For the word bay, the margin 
suggests the possible alternative strong; and this is 
probably the right rendering. So this one chariot 
seems to have been allocated to the work of going to 
and fro in the earth, on a general mission of patrol 
and defense. If Satan goes to and fro, seeking 
whom he may injure, the chariots of God go to and 
fro, to bring succor and deliverance to the saints. 

How comforting this vision was and is! It 
clearly teaches that, when sin is put away, as be- 
tween God and his people, He constitutes Himself 
their gracious Keeper: no weapon that is turned 
against them prospers, and every tongue that rises 
in judgment against them is condemned. Woe be 


68 | THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


to their enemies! God’s Spirit is, in strong meta- 
phor, described as being quieted by their overthrow ; 
whilst his chosen dwell always within the precincts 
of his Almighty guardianship. “They shall dwell 
securely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.”. 


VIII. 


Cbhrist—pPriest and ‘Ring. 


(ZECHARIAH Vi., 9-15.) 


At this point an interesting episode breaks in on 
this wonderful series of visions. From far-off 
Babylon, where the majority of the Jewish nation » 
was still residing, a deputation of three Jews came 
to Jerusalem, bringing a present of gold and silver. 
This donation was evidently intended to aid the 
little band of returned exiles in their heroic work. 
Alas, it is still the way in which too many Christians 
do the work of God! They shrink from personal 
service; but are quite ready, in lieu of it, to give a 
subscription in aid of those who are sacrificing ease 
and emolument that they may give priceless per- 
sonal service. 

The men who brought the gift were Heldai 
(called Helem in verse 14), Tobijah, and Jedaiah, 
and they were received and entertained by Josiah, or 
Hen, the son of Zephaniah. 

Zechariah was directed to take the gold and sil- 
ver, and make a crown (or crowns). These, on — 
some public occasion, and with, perhaps, some little 
ceremony, were placed on the fair mitre, which, we 
have already seen, had been set on the high priest’s 


head. 69 


70 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


It was a much more significant act than this bare 
recital of it suggests. These two offices, the sacer- 
dotal and the regal, had been always kept jealously 
apart in Israel; and when King Uzziah had at- 
tempted to burn incense upon the altar of incense, _ 
the altercation which ensued in the holy place be- 
tween himself and the priests, countersigned as their 
horror and indignation were by the rising of the 
brand of leprosy on his forehead, proved how 
stringent that separation was. But here the divinely 
commissioned prophet, by an unmistakable symbolic 
act, combined the two offices in the same individual. 
And, using a well-understood name for the Messiah, 
went on to say: “Thus speaketh the Lord of Hosts, 
saying: Behold, the Man whose name is THE 
BrancH. He shall grow up out of his place (ze., 
shall emerge from the obscurity of his early begin- 
nings), and He shall build the Temple of the Lord ; 
and He shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule 
upon his throne; and He shall be a priest upon his 
throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between 
them both” (i.e., between these two offices, the 
priestly and the regal). 


I. NoTICcE THIS SIGNIFICANT DESIGNATION OF 
THE Lorp Jesus—“The Branch.” The family of 
David was like a decayed tree, the stump of which 
alone remains; but from so lowly and unlikely an 
origin, a shoot or scion would emanate, which 
would again become a noble forest tree, and per- 
petuate the memory and influence of the royal line. 
This imagery is familiar to more than one of the 


CHRIST—PRIEST AND KING. 71 


prophets, and, in every case, can only be applied to 
“Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abra- 
ham” (Matt. i. 1). “There shall come forth,” says 
Isaiah, “a shoot out of the stock of Jesse; and a 
Branch out of his roots shall bear fruit, and the 
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon Him. In that day 
shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and 
glorious.” “Behold’”—they are the words of Jere- 
miah—“the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
raise unto David a righteous Branch, and He shall 
reign as King.” It is suggested that, in the song of 
Zecharias, so full of the glad realization of the ful- 
filled past, Branch may be substituted for Dayspring, 
and he may, therefore, have quoted this very phrase 
and said, “The Branch from on high hath visited 
us” (Luke i. 78). 

Certainly David’s race had reached a low ebb 
when Joseph went up from Galilee, out of the city of 
Nazareth into Judea, to the city of David which is 


called Bethlehem, to be enrolled with Mary his I 
espoused wife, because they wete of the house and | 
lineage of David. There was no room for them in | 
the village inn; the new-born/babe was wrapped in > 


swaddling clothes and laid in a manger; and the | 


couple were so straitened for means that they could 
not afford to purchase two young pigeons, the gift 
of the poor, for the mother’s thank-offering in the 
Temple. From that stock, however, the scion has 


grown into a noble tree, whose branches reach out to | 


the ends of the earth, and whose fruit gives life and _ 


blessing to all mankind. | 


Hi - 


- A . 
«y f eae, Ca Lp tt - 
Neus (tides ¢f Bere cry a. 


72 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Through a branch the fullness of the Root is car- 
ried to the fruit, which swells in ruddy beauty on its 
extremity, and presently falls into the hand of the 
wayfarer; so Jesus is the blessed channel of com- 
munication between the fullness of God, and the 
thirsty wastes of human need. We sit under his 
shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet to 
our taste. 


II. THE COMBINATION IN CHRIST OF THE 
PRIESTLY AND KincLty OFrrices.—‘He shall be a 
priest upon his throne.’’ Man’s nature demands a 
Priest. Conscious of sin and defilement, he rears 
an altar wherever he pitches his tent; and, selecting 
one of his fellows, he separates him from the or- 
dinary duties of life, and bids him stand as mediator 
and priest between God and himself. It was thus 
that Micah addressed the young man, the Levite of 
Bethlehem-Judah, when he said, “Dwell with me, 
and be unto me a father and priest; and I will give 
thee ten pieces of silver by the year, and thine ap- 
parel, and thy victuals.” 

If an argument were needed to prove the unity of 
the human family, it surely would be suggested by 
the universal distribution of temples and altars over 
the world, as though men were everywhere alike in 
this—that they know themselves to be sinful, and 
desire to find some way of propitiating and ap- 
proaching the Almighty. 

In the Levitical system, and, above all, in Jesus 
Christ, God has met this universal craving of the 
human heart. Indeed, no religion is destined to uni- 


CHRIST—PRIEST AND KING. 7 


versal supremacy that does not provide for the con- 
sciousness of guilt, and reveal a merciful and faith- 
ful priest, appointed in things pertaining to God, 
that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins, 
and bear gently with the ignorant and erring. 

Man also requires a KING. God had designed to 
meet this need by Himself by being Israel’s King, 
that they should not be “like other nations,” but a 
peculiar people unto Him. They were following 
natural promptings, when the Israelites came to 
Samuel and said: ‘We will have a king over us, 
that we also may be like the other nations, and that 
our king may judge us, and go out before us, and 
fight our battles.” Man needs a leader—one whom 
he may admire and obey; from whom he may re- 
ceive indisputable commands; and in whom his fac- 
ulty of veneration may find satisfaction. The days 
when there was no king in Israel, and every man did 
what was right in his own eyes, were far from being 
either contented or prosperous. 

How remarkable it is that the kingship of Jesus 
should have been so accentuated in his trial. It was 
the center around which the storm raged. Pilate 
challenged his claims: ‘Art Thou a king, then?” 
and Jesus asseverated them: “Thou sayest that I 
am—a king.” The faded purple robe flung over his 
shoulders, the reed in his hand, the mocking bend- 
ing of the knee, the crowd of thorns on his brow, 
were but the grotesque and heartless mockery of his 
claims. And when his sacred body was affixed to 
the cross, the title on the headpiece, written in the 


74 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


languages of learning, imperial power, and religion, 
attested that He was King of the Jews. 

And since he has passed into the glory, He is still 
the Priest-King. Not Aaron, but Melchizedek, is 
the true type of our Saviour now. As Aaron, He. 
made Atonement and propitiation for sin; but as 
Melchizedek, He has sat down at the right hand of 
the throne of God. “This Melchizedek was King 
of Salem, and Priest of the Most High God.” 

As Priest, Jesus pleads the merit of his blood; as 
King, He exerts power on our behalf. As Priest, 
He pacifies the guilty conscience; as King, He sends 
thrills of his own victorious life into our spirits. 
As Priest, He brings us nigh to God; as King, He 
treads our enemies under his feet. It is of great 
importance to us all to think of our Saviour in this 
dual aspect. On the one hand, we get all the benefit 
of his Cross and Passion; on the other, all the 
benefit of his resurrection and session at the right 
hand of God. May it not be that the weakness of 
thy Christian life is due to the fact that thou hast 
viewed Him only in the light of Calvary, and hast 
not, with Stephen, seen Him seated at the right 
hand of the Majesty on High—a Prince as well as a 
Saviour—a Saviour because a Prince? Thank God 
for the Lamb; but rejoice, O child of God, that He 
is in the midst of the throne! He bore the penalty 
of thy sin, when He shed his precious Blood; He 
will deliver thee from the power of sin, as thou 
placest thyself absolutely beneath his royalty, both 
King and Lord. When He is absolutely trusted 


CHRIST—PRIEST AND KING. 75 


and obeyed, he accounts Himself absolutely respons- 
ible to achieve the uttermost salvation of those who 
trust in Him. If there is some sin which defies 
thee, at least it shall not be too strong for Him. 
And if the outflow of his delivering power toward 
thee seems restrained and ineffective, be sure that, 
in some one particular, which He will be quick to 
show thee, if only thou art willing to be informed, 
there has been a failure to yield Him the obedience 
which is due to Him as thy King. He sits and rules 
upon the throne of the universe; and, therefore, will 
subdue all rule, authority, and power. He must sit 
and rule on the throne of thy heart, that there also 
He may put down everything which opposes and 
obstructs his sway. “God hath exalted Him to be 
a Prince and a Saviour.” 

What majesty there is in these words: “He 
shall sit and rule upon his throne, and He shall be 
a Priest upon his throne! Let all other beings 
stand; He sits. He sits because of his intrinsic dig- 
nity; because of his finished mediatorial work; be- 
cause full of a calm expectancy that.his foes shall 
be subdued under Him. The priests of Aaron’s line 
stood day by day ministering and offering often- 
times the same sacrifices, the which could never take 
away sins; but He, “when He had offered one 
sacrifice for sins forever, sat down at the right 
hand of God, from henceforth expecting till his 
enemies be made the footstool of his feet.” 

Infinite woe has come to mankind through the 
reign of priests. No rule has been so intolerant, so 


76 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


capricious, so cruel, as that exercised by some of 
the pontiffs, or by priests, of one sort and another, 
through monarchs, who have been the creatures of 
their will. But this world will never be at rest 
until it submits to the beneficent rule of the Lord. 
Jesus, and acknowledges that the counsel of its 
peace emanates from the combination of these two 
offices in his sacred person. 


III]. As THE PRIEST-KING, CHRIST BUILDS THE 
TEMPLE oF Gop.—Twice over this is affirmed; but 
what untold comfort the assurance must have 
brought when first addressed to that little band of 
exiles! Their temple site was strewn with ruins: 
it seemed almost hopeless to contend with those 
heaps of rubbish, impossible to rear a fabric worthy 
of the past and adequate for the future; but these 
words must have greatly heartened them. As the 
hand of Inspiration drew aside the veil, they beheld 
another and greater than either Joshua or Zerub- 
babel, working with them and for them, and bear- 
ing the chief responsibility in all the toils and labors 
of their new erection—He; not they. They would 
work with new energy and courage, knowing, as 
they did, that they were fellow-workers with God. 
What difficulty could daunt, what enemies thwart 
or frustrate, the work of his right hand? 

Is not this as true a description of what is hap- 
pening today as it was of those far-off incidents of 
temple-building? We may be engaged in building 
that spiritual house, that holy temple of saved souls, 
which is slowly rising amid the wrecks of time; and 


CHRIST—PRIEST AND KING. 77 


sometimes it seems as though the structure will 
never be completed. The scaffolding poles and 
rafters hide the unfinished walls; the very pattern is 
obscured amid the dust and pother; for every step 
in advance there are apparently two or three of 
recession and failure, and we break our hearts. 
Will the work ever be done? Is it worth all the 
expenditure of blood and tears? Shall we not 
desist? 

Then we understand that we have much less to do, 
with it than we supposed; that we are not so neces- \ 
sary as we thought; that we are but day laborers at | 
the best, and that He is the great. Master Builder. 
It was this that made Paul exclaim: “We are God’s 
fellow-workers; ye are God’s Husbandry, God’s 
Building.” 

If these words should be read by any who are 
losing heart because of the difficulties presented by) 
their parish, their church, or the souls of their] ¢ 
charge, let them be reassured, as they behold the \ * 
trowel in the hands of the Priest-King; and let them * 
be sure that He will succeed, They know not what | 
He is doing, or using them to do. They are probably». 
doing more than they know; and He is responsible | : 
for employing them, whether in the deep founda- “> 
tion-digging, or in the high stories away in the{ {ft 
sunny air. (But let them not be discouraged, or) ~ 
desert Him, lest He be compelled to summon others | 
to help Him perfect what they commenced. } w 

The crowns of gold were put aside till the temple 
was completed, and then deposited there, as a 


, 


78 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


memorial to the men who had formed the deputa- 
tion; and an assurance was given that those who 
were far off should come to add their strength to 
that of the returned remnant. 

The Spiritual Temple is rising through the ages, 
and includes the workmanship of Jew and Gentile, 
of bond and free, of those who are the children of 
privilege, and those who seemed outside the pale 
of salvation. “Remember that aforetime ye, the 
Gentiles in the flesh, . ... were, at that time, 
separate from Christ, alienated from the common- 
wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants 
of promise;... . but now—ye are fellow-citizens 
with the saints—being built upon the foundation of 
the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus Himself 
being the chief Corner-stone, in whom the whole 
building, fitly framed together, groweth into a holy 
temple in the Lord.” 


ix 


fasts Turned to Feasts. 


(ZECHARIAH Vii., viii. ) 


The Jews, during their captivity, appear to have 
observed four fasts. Four months were darkened 
by them. That of the tenth month recalled the first 
enclosure of Jerusalem by the lines of circumvalla- 
tion; that of the fourth month commemorated the 
capture of the city in the reign of Zedekiah (Jer. 
xxxix. 2; lii. 6, 7); of the fifth, the disaster which 
capped all, when the house of the Lord was set on 
fire (lii. 12-14) ; that of the seventh, the murder of 
Gedaliah, resulting in the dispersion of the remnant 
(xli.. 1-3). 

The Jewish year was thus filled with sad retro- 
spects, and the national life was perpetually op- 
pressed with gloom: for it is clear that the observ- 
ance of these days was a rigorous obligation (Zech. 
vii. 4-6). 

On their return from captivity the people still 
maintained these fasts; and it seems to have struck 
some of the exiles who had settled in Bethel as 
altogether incongruous to continue wearing sack- 
cloth, and casting ashes on their heads, when the 
Holy City was rapidly rising from the dust, and 

Pie 


80 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


regaining much of her former prosperity and beauty. 
It seemed to savor of unreality and hypocrisy to 
continue to profess a grief which had long since 
been assuaged, and even changed into great joy. 
Surely the confessions and lamentations, which 
were befitting enough in Babylon, were out of place 
in the land of their fathers. They sent, therefore, 
a deputation to the house of God, to consult the 
priests and prophets congregated there, saying: 
“Should I weep in the-fifth month, separating my- 
self, as I have done these so many years?” (Zech. 
Vii. I-3.) 

It was a very reasonable inquiry, and becoming 
to honorable men, who felt that fasting and mourn- 
ing must be both meaningless in themselves and 
displeasing to God, unless they were the outward 
expression of the soul’s genuine emotions. It was 
surely worse than useless to keep up an antiquated 
form, the effigy of the past, the withered mummy 
of a service which once expressed the most profound 

( anguish and repentance. It is, above all things, 
necessary to be real in our religious life—never to 
L orofess what we do not feel. Do not keep up a 
form for form’s sake, if you have left behind the 
experience of which it was once the expression. 

| Nothing will so deaden the soul as the maintenance 
of rites from which the fire and light have died, 
leaving them as the scoriae of the volcano. 

Zechariah seems to have given four separate 
answers to this inquiry. Four times “The Word of 
the Lord of Hosts” came to him. 


FASTS TURNED TO FEASTS. 81 


In the first (vii. 4-7), he reminds the people that 
these fasts were of their own appointing; and sug- 
gests the inference, therefore, that as they had in- 
augurated them, they were at liberty to discontinue 
them when they chose. He suggests the further 
inference, also, that it would have been far better 
if, instead of appointing fasts, which satisfied 
national sentiment, the people had set themselves 
to ponder the words of the older prophets: “Should 
ye not hear the words which the Lord hath cried 
by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was in- 
habited, and in prosperity?” It is so much easier to 
set up fasts, and to insist on outward observances, 
than to bow down the heart before God, and to obey 
the ordinances which He has enjoined. 

In the second (vii. 8-14), the prophet says, that 
whatever they may or may not do with respect to 
the outward fast, they should at least exemplify the 
spirit of true religion, which was of priceless im- 
portance. “Execute true judgment, and show 
mercy and compassion every man to his brother; 
and oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the 
stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine 
evil against his brother in your heart.” Thus had 
God spoken to their fathers, and thus He was now 
speaking with them. Their fathers had refused to 
hear, but had made their hearts as an adamant 
stone; and it had befallen, therefore, that, as they 
were deaf to God’s cry, so He had been to theirs. 
He had scattered them as with a whirlwind, and left 
their land desolate. Thus Zechariah implored the 


82 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


people of his time not to yield to the obtuseness and 
disobedience of their fathers; that they might 
escape their fate, and that no catastrophe should 
interrupt the resurrection of their nation, or cast 
it back into the disasters with which it had been 
visited. 

In his third answer (viii. 1-17), Zechariah dilates 
on the great prosperity which was awaiting the 
chosen city. The Lord had returned to dwell there, 
to constitute Jerusalem the city of truth, and Zion, 
his holy mountain. The streets should yet be full 
of old men and women, staff in hand for very age. 
The ringing, careless laughter of boys and girls at 
play should proclaim the prosperity and security of 
the times. From east and west, contingents of 
exiles should troop back to repopulate the former 
desolations. “Now I will not be unto the remnant 
of this people as in the former days, saith the Lord 
of Hosts. For there shall be the seed of peace; the 
vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give 
her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew; 
and I will cause the remnant of this people to inherit 
all these things.” 

And, again, on these delightful promises ensue 
the reiterated appeals—that every man should 
speak truth with his neighbor; that true judgment 
should be executed in the gates; and that all things 
which God hated should be put away. It was as 
though these golden visions of prosperity and 


| blessedness were enumerated to convince the chosen 


\ 


\ 


people that God desired to remember their sins no 


FASTS TURNED TO FEASTS. 83 


more; and to urge that, instead of dwelling mourn- 
fully on the past, they should launch upon the swell- 
ing tide of light and love, which was creeping up 
their shores. 

This is God’s way still. He chastens sorely. If 
we profane his name and pollute his temple; if we 
strike hands in ungodly alliances, and go after 
strange gods; if we dye our hands in the vats of the 
world’s vanity—we are sent, as Israel was, into 
captivity, and our seventy years are fulfilled. But 
when we have profited by his stern discipline, and 
returned to Him with all our heart and soul, we are 
restored to our former position; God’s hand wipes 
the tears from our eyes, and He bids us turn from 
our bitter repinings over an irretrievable past, to 
accept the unalloyed mercy which remembers our 
sins no more: 

God who, whatever frenzy of our fretting 
Vexes sad life to spoil and to destroy, 


Lendeth an hour for peace and for forgetting, 
Setteth in pain the jewel of his joy. 


Such dealings with his rebellious and erring 
children are very wonderful. They pass all human 
thought. It is much to be forgiven: but to be for- 
given so utterly, so completely, so extravagantly, 
“according to the riches of his grace’”—here is a 
marvel indeed. But there is no marvel with Him! 
Such grace is no effort to his glorious nature! He 
is not sensible of strain! It is simply the bubbling 
over of his heart, which is Love. “Thus saith the 
Lord of Hosts: If it be marvelous in the eyes of the 


aeRO aa earner 


84 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


remnant of this people, should it also be marvelous ( 

in mine eyes, saith the Lord of Hosts?” “His ways J 

are higher than our ways, and his thoughts than : 
\our thoughts.”’ 

In his final answer (viii. 18-23), Zechariah gives 
a delightful anticipation of future days, which are 
still awaiting complete realization, but in some 
measure were fulfilled in the history of the Restora- 
tion. “The word of the Lord of Hosts came unto 
me, saying, Thus saith the Lord of Hosts; The fast 
of the fourth month, of the fifth, of the seventh, 
and of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy 
and gladness, and cheerful feasts; therefore love the 
truth and peace” (viii. 18, 19). 

This is a welcome exchange. We could not be 
surprised to learn that God had so blotted out the 
memory of the past that fateful anniversaries would 
pass without special recognition. Our memory of 
the dark and disastrous is commonly short-lived. 
Bitter recollections soon fade from memory’s 
tablets. What we do not like to recall, we drop 
into the keeping of oblivion, and that sea is never in 
haste to give up its dead. But the remarkable point 
here was, that these anniversaries, which had form- 
erly brought the deepest melancholy, would hence- 
forth be hailed as festal days, as though the events 
which had happened on them, and seemed only dis- 
astrous, were really full of the choicest blessing, 
and had been misinterpreted. It reminds us of the 
dark lines in the spectrum, which stands for new 
and unrealized constituents in the solar atmosphere. 


FASTS TURNED TO FEASTS. 85 


Does the astronomer regret them, when he under- 
stands their significance? No, he counts them of 
inexpressible worth. 

As we inquire how such a revulsion of feeling 
could be brought about, we catch a further glimpse 
into God’s thoughts. He set Himself to assure his 
people, in effect, that in the future, when they could 
view his dealings in their true perspective, they 
would discover that their darkest days had been the 
source and origin of their gladdest ones; because 
through them they had come to know themselves, 
been weaned from their sins, and had acquired 
those virtues which attracted the reverence and love 
of the world. 

Consider again these glowing predictions: “It 
shall come to pass that as ye were a curse among the 
nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so 
will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing.” And 
again: “Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, It shall yet 
come to pass, that there shall come peoples, and the 
inhabitants of many cities; and the inhabitants of 
one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go 
speedily to entreat the favor of the Lord, and to seek 
the Lord of Hosts.” And again: “Thus saith the 
Lord of Hosts, In those days it shall come to pass 
that ten men shall take hold, out of all the languages 
of the nations, shall even take hold of the skirt of 
him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for 
we have heard that God is with you” (vs. 13, 20, 
Be). 

eee predictions have already been marvelously 


86 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


fulfilled. In the midst of the dark night of heathen 
idolatry, when the foremost and wisest nations of 
the world were given up to the grossest idolatry and 
impurity, the synagogues of the dispersed Jews 
shone like sparks of light, holding forth the great. 
doctrines of the unity and spirituality of the Divine 
Nature, the need of forgiveness, and the sanctity of 
Home. In every considerable Gentile city, the syna- 
gogue had a large following of devout proselytes 
drawn from the leading Gentile families. From the 
Jewish nation came the Saviour of mankind, and 
the earliest members of his Church. To Jews we 
owe the New Testament, as the Old. It was at 
Jerusalem, on the occasion of a Jewish festival, that 
the Holy Ghost descended to begin his mighty work. 
And in all the so-called Christian ages, while per- 
secuting the chosen people, the foremost nations of 
the world have taken hold of their skirts, going 
with them to their sacred shrines, using their con- 
ceptions of God, appropriating their sacred writings, 
and venerating their lawgivers, prophets, and saints, 
with a reverence equal to their own. 

There is also a time, yet future, but probably not 
far away, when the Jewish people shall be brought 
to own the claims of Jesus, and shall look on Him 
with repentance, faith, and love; and then they will 
be still more sought after by the nations of the 
world as the representatives and teachers of the 
only true religion. These days are clearly predicted ; 
and the signs on every hand corroborate our faith 


FASTS TURNED TO FEASTS. 87 


that it shall be even as the prophets, and this prophet 
especially, have foretold. 

But we can never forget that this vast respect of 
the world for the Jewish people dates from the 
Babylonish captivity. Before that they were too 
fickle in their allegiance to Jehovah, too deeply 
tarred by the vile impurities of surrounding peo- 
ples, to win either audience or credence, when they 
advocated their own religion. What respect could 
the nations have for them, when the heights around 
Zion were covered by temples to foreign deities; 
and when the same defiling rites were practiced 
as disgraced the fanes of Chemosh, Molech, and 
Astarte? Abana and Pharpar were equal to any of 
the waters of Israel; Balaam was as Moses, and 
Zoroaster as Elijah. 

But the captivity altered everything. They 
entered it deeply imbued with polytheism, and left it 
the strictest monotheists the world has ever seen. 
Their sorrows gave birth to some of their noblest 
Scriptures, and made their hold on the sacred Canon 
more tenacious than ever. Cast out by man, they 
fled to the bosom of God. Divorced from the out- 
ward rites of the temple, they were driven to cling 
to the spiritual realities, of which the Levitical 
institutions were only transient types. Israel owes 
all the influence she has wielded in the world to the 
anguish which culminated in the conflagration of 
the temple; and, if she were wise, she would ever- 
more keep those ancient anniversaries of despair as 
birthdays of her power. Until March, the farmer 


88 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


may regard with regret the days in which he empties 
his barns of their precious contents to cast seed into 
the soil; but when April comes, and all the furrows 
are covered with the green spires of the young corn, 
he reviews those dark winter days with congratula- 
tion, and dates from them his glorious heritage. 
_ From this historical review, we are led to appre- 
hend the working of an eternal principle, which is 
thus enunciated elsewhere by the Holy Spirit: 
“Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be 
joyous, but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it 
yieldeth the peaceable fruits of righteousness with 
them that are exercised thereby.” 

We have all had our dark, sad days. The day 
when God said “No” to some eagerly pressed re- 
quest; or when life was overcast by a dread an- 
nouncement concerning our own life, or the life of 
one dearer to us than life; or when our trust in 
man’s faith rocked to ruin. We have put a black 
mark against those days in our calendar, and are 
apt, as these anniversaries occur, to give ourselves 
to unrestrained sorrow. It is natural, and God does 
not blame the tears which are salt with rebellious 
repining. It is natural and human, as we sit by the 
crags on which the sea breaks heavily, to regret the 
tender grave of a day that is dead, and to long for 
the sound of a voice that is still, and to borrow from 
Job’s magnificent soliloquy : 


Let that day be darkness; 
Let not God regard it from above, 
Neither let the light shine upon it. 


f 
? 
% 


QOIN, Abe “t ‘3 
\ 


FASTS TURNED TO FEASTS. Ree 

Let darkness and the shadow of death claim it for 
their own. But this will not be our final verdict. 
Probably in the golden sunset of our life, when we 
can see its true meaning and perspective, when its 
various parts are fitted together like the variously 
shaped pieces of our childhood’s puzzles, we shall 
see reason to thank God most for our darkest days, 
so long as they are not days of sin, and to keep them 
as feasts in the eternal noon of heaven. We shall 
perceive that out of the darkness light was born; out 
of the anguish joy was born; out of the trial we 
entered into God’s blessed peace. 

That day, when God said “No” to your hot 
desires, was the day of your weaning from the babe- 
life into the strength and growth of an independent 
existence. That day, when a dark cloud settled on 
all your hopes, was the beginning of your new 
appreciation of the eternal constellations, shining 
unnoticed in your sky. That day, when your Joseph 
was torn from you, was really necessary to those 
seventeen years of prosperity in the sunshine of 
Egypt’s favor. That day of captivity, which 
snatched you from your busy life, to share Paul’s 
four years’ imprisonment at Cesarea and Rome, 
gave birth to deeper views of the nature of Jesus; 
so that, whereas you had only known Him as the 
Divine Substitute, you came to know Him in his 
heavenly glory, seated at the right hand of God; and 
your discoveries not only comforted your stricken 
heart, but made for the enrichment of the world. 


go THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Dare to believe this; dare to anticipate the far-off 
interest of tears; dare to live in the day which is 
after tomorrow. As Dante said, “In God’s will is 
our peace.” He loves us infinitely. No good thing 
will He withhold. He must lay deep in tears the 
foundations that shall upbear our eternal weight of 
glory: 

Thus hath He done, and shall we not adore Him? 
This shall He do, and can we still despair? 


Come, let us quickly fling ourselves before Him— 
Cast at his feet the burden of our care. 


X. 


Good Hews for Prisoners of Dope. 


(ZECHARIAH ix.) 


There is a change in the phraseology of the re- 
maining chapters of this book. Not now the word 
of the Lord, but the burden of the word of the Lord. 
By this term we are prepared for tidings,of sorrow 
and disaster, which are about to fall on the nations 
addressed. These burdens lay heavily on the 
prophet’s soul, who was probably already advanced 
in years when he announced them. There is, at 
least, a remarkable contrast between the visions of 
the earlier, and the predictions of the later chapters. 
The difference has even led some critics to.suppose 
that they were added_by another hand ;..but..this 
view, founded rather on internal evidence, cannot 
be maintained in» the face_ of the strong external 
testimony for the ‘unity of the authorship of this 
book; ~ 

When Zechariah wrote this prophecy, the early 
troubles of the returned remnant in the reconstruc- 
tion of Temple City, and State, were at an end; but 
they were hemmed in and pressed by Tyre on the 
north, and by Ashkelon, Gaza, and Ekron on the 
south. It was for their encouragement, therefore, 

QI 


92 THE PROPHET OP HOPE. 


that he foretold an approaching invasion, before 
which their strong and hostile neighbors would be 
swept away. Though Tyre had built herself a 
stronghold on an apparently impregnable island, 
and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the 
mire of the streets, and though her counselors were 
famous for their wisdom, the Lord would dispossess 
her, smiting her power in the sea, and devouring her 
palaces with fire. And the devastation which would 
befall Damascus and Hadrach (a part of Syria), 
would extend southward till the worst fears of 
Gaza, Ashkelon, and Ekron would be realized in 
their utter destruction. Philistia would be as a 
young lion deprived of its prey, while the chosen 
city would be defended by unseen angel forces. “I 
will encamp about mine house as a garrison, that 
none pass through or return; and no oppressor shall 
pass through them any more; for now have I seen 
with mine eyes.” 

All these predictions were literally fulfilled within 
a few years by the invasion of the third of the great 
world-conquerors, Alexander the Great. Syria, 
New Tyre, and the old seaboard, including the cities 
of Philistia, fell under his arms; but both in going 
and returning, he spared Jerusalem, being much im- 
pressed by a dream, in which he was warned not to 
approach the city, and by a solemn procession of 
priests and Levites, headed by Jaddua, the high 
priest. 

Then a stream of exalted prediction ensues, sweet 
as the refrain of an angel’s hymn, which, as the 


GOOD NEWS FOR PRISONERS OF HOPE. 93 


Evangelist tells us, was fulfilled when, in lowly tri- 
umph, Jesus entered Jerusalem at the beginning of 
the week in which He died. “This came to pass, 
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through 
the prophet, saying, Tell ye the daughter of Zion, 
Behold, thy king cometh unto thee, meek, and riding 
upon an ass, and upon a colt, the foal of an ass.” 
What sublimity there is in the prophet’s words, in | 
which stress is laid on the fact that the king who 
saves is lowly; that his steed is not the richly- 
caparisoned war-horse, but the humble ass; and 
that he needs neither chariot nor battle-bow for the 
overthrow of his foes; but speaks peace unto the 
nations, as though waving his hands in priestly 
benediction over the troubled waters; and lo, there 
is a great calm (v. 9, 10). 

Then follows the remarkable promise alluded to 
in the heading of this chapter. “As for thee also, 
because of the blood of thy covenant I have sent 
forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no 
water. Turn you to the stronghold, ye prisoners of 
hope; even today do I declare that I will render 
double unto thee.” 

In eastern lands, liable to long spells of drought, 
it is customary to hew cisterns out of the solid rock 
for the storage of water, that provision may be 
made against the failure of the rains. These abound 
in Palestine. “They hewed_ out for themselves. cis- 
terns.” When these were empty, they might be 
used for other purposes, and at all times provided 
a useful retreat, or hiding-place, from the Philistines 








94 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


or other hostile neighbors, who periodically poured 
up through the valleys, carrying fire and sword to 
the peaceful pastoral and agricultural hamlets. Such 
use of the rock-hewn cisterns is referred to in these 
words, It seemed to the prophet as though Israel 
might be compared to a terrified peasantry, shelter- 
ing in some dark, dry, mountain cistern, far up 
from the valleys, dreading every day lest their 
hiding-place might be discovered, and themselves 
dragged forth to dye with their blood the green 
_ sward. 

Thus, in every age God’s people have been im- 
prisoned. You may have been caught in the snare 
of this world’s evil. You have no sympathy with it, 
yet somehow you have become involved in the snares 
and toils of malign combinations. As the wild thing 
of the forest, bounding carelessly down the glade, 
suddenly finds itself at the bottom of the dark pit 
prepared and hidden by the hunter; so you, who 
began life so guilelessly, and passed your early days 
so blithely, have awoke to discover yourself in- 
volved with people and things, from which you 
cannot disassociate yourself. You have no desire 
for them—they chafe and try you—but you cannot 
get them off. It seems as though some evil spirit 
has lassoed you, not indeed in your soul, but in your 
home and circumstances. 

Or, perhaps, you have been led captive by the 
devil at his will. There is no doubt about your son- 
ship; in your better moments, God’s Spirit witnesses 
clearly with yours that you have been born again; 


Ur 
f ar 


A 
GOOD NEWS FOR PRISONERS OF HOPE. 95 


you have strong yearnings after the souls of others, 
and at times are marvelously used for their awaken- 
ing and comfort; and yet, during long and sad 
periods of experience, you seem the bound slave of 
the great enemy of souls. Swept before strong 
gusts of passion; careening in the dock; water- 
logged until progress in the divine life seems im- 
possible, and you can only drift helplessly to and 
fro on the tides. 


Or, perhaps, you have fallen into deep despond- \ 


ency, partly as the result of ill-health, and partly 
because you have looked off the face of Christ to the 
winds and waves. The clear-shining of his love is 
obscured, and at times it is difficult to believe in 
anything but the pressure of your own dark 
thoughts. Some of God’s children seem to choose 
the valley of the shadow of death as the site of their 
dwelling, and then employ doubt, dread, and de- 
spondency, to design and build the house, which is 
sadly like a gaol. They affect the somber tint, and 
the despairful tone; and—strange anomaly !—ap- 
pear happiest when abandoned to the profoundest 
melancholy. 

All such are prisoners, but they are prisoners of 
hope. There is a sure and certain hope of their 
deliverance. Out of their prisons they shall ulti- 
mately emerge, as Peter, angel-led, from his. The 
clouds might more easily succeed in imprisoning 
the sun than any of these dark conditions perma- 
nently hold one of God’s children. They belong to 
the light and day; and, though they see it not, Hope, 


ee 


96 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


as God’s angel, is standing near, only waiting his 
signal to open the prison door. The prisoner, on 
whom the sentence of capital punishment has been 
passed, and who has no strong, wise friends to inter- 
fere on his behalf, may well abandon hope as he 
passes within the massive walls of the fortress, and 
hears the heavy gates, one after another, slammed 
and locked behind him. But where justice and 
truth are on his side, when he has been the victim of 
craft and guile, if there be a good wife and strong 
friends to espouse his cause, though he be incarcer- 
ated, bound with chains on the Devil’s Island, and 
though the weary years pass over him, yet he is a 
prisoner of hope, and shall come forth again into the 
light of day. All God’s children are prisoners of 
hope. 

Their hope rests on the Blood of the Covenant. 
“Because of the blood of thy covenant, I have sent 
forth thy prisoners out of the pit.” When God 
entered into covenant-relationship with Abraham, 
the sacred compact was ratified by the mingled 
blood of an heifer of three years old, a she-goat of 
three years old, a ram of three years old, a turtle 
dove, and a young pigeon. And, in after years, 
when beneath the beetling cliffs of Sinai, Moses 
acted as mediator between God and the children of 
Israel, he sent young men, because the order of 
priesthood was not established, which offered burnt- 
offerings and sacrificed peace-offerings of oxen unto 
the Lord. Then Moses took the blood and sprinkled 
part on the altar, and part on the people, saying, 


GOOD NEWS FOR PRISONERS OF HOPE. 97 


“Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord 
hath made with you concerning all these words” 
(Gen. xv. 9; Exod. xxiv. 7, 8). 

Similarly, when the new covenant—the pro- 
visions of which are enumerated in Heb. viii—was 
ratified, it was in the blood of Jesus. As He took 
the cup, He said: “This is my blood of the new 
covenant, which is shed for many unto the remission 
of sins.” “And for this cause He is the Mediator 
of a new covenant.” The shedding of the blood 
of the Lamb of God indicates that God has entered 
into a covenant relationship with Him, and all 
whom He represents, who are, by faith, members 
of his mystical body, the Church. On his side, He 
promises to be a God to us, and to take us to be his 
people; on our side, Christ promises, on our behalf, 
that we shall be a people for his own possession, 
zealous of good works. This covenant embraces 
all who have believed, shall believe, and do believe 
in Jesus. It embraces thee, if thou dost at this 
moment simply believe in Him as thine, and art 
willing to be evermore his. And in placing the cup 
to thy lips at the Holy Supper, thou dost visibly and 
solemnly attest thy belief that there is a special rela- 
tionship between God and thee, not in virtue of thy 
worthiness, but for the sake of his Son, that great 
Shepherd, who, through the blood of the everlasting 
Covenant, was brought again from the dead. 

Because of the Blood of the Covenant, God will 
send forth each of his imprisoned ones out of the pit. 
That blood binds Him to interpose on their behalf. 


98 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Wherever they are, and however thick-ribbed the 
walls of their prison, God must deliver them. That 
they might have strong consolation, He has con- 
firmed his word by an oath. He will bow the 
heavens and come down, will ride upon a cherub and 
fly, will certainly rescue from the entanglements 
and complications of evil. 

Suppose two men were bound in the closest, ten- 
derest friendship, not needing to exchange blood 
from each other’s veins, as the manner of some is, 
because heart had already exchanged with heart; 
and suppose one of these, traveling in Calabria or 

} Anatolia, was captured by brigands and carried into 
some mountain fastness, threatened with death un- 
less ransomed by an immense sum of money: can 
you imagine his friend at home, in the enjoyment of 
opulence and liberty, settling down in circumstances 
of ease, and allowing his brother to suffer his miser- 
able fate, with no effort for his deliverance? It is — 
impossible to imagine such a thing! With tireless 
perseverance, he would leave no stone unturned, 
and the captive might rely on every possible effort 
being made for his deliverance. So it is with God. 
Whatever be the sad combination of disaster which 
has overtaken us, He is bound by the Holy Cove- 
nant, sealed by the blood of Jesus, to spare no effort 
till our soul is escaped as a bird from the snare of 
the fowler, until the snare is broken, and we are 
escaped. 

There is a remarkable illustration of this in the 
story of the conquest of Canaan. By guile, the men 


RY NEWS FOR PRISONERS OF HOPE. 99 » 


of at betrayed Israel into making a covenant with | \ 
them. Three days after, their lie was exposed; but ij 
the princes said, “We have sworn unto them by the , 4° 
Lord, the God of Israel; now, therefore, we will | 
not touch them.’’ And when Ai was besieged by, : 
neighboring kings, out of pure revenge, and an, 
appeal was made for help, it was at once furnished, 
because of Israel’s troth. So, child of God, if you | 
have made Jesus your King, He is sure to succor | 
you. Behold, thy King cometh, O prisoner of hope!: 
He is just, and therefore he has salvation. 

Is not this the reason why some of us are not 
delivered? We should be glad enough to accept 
deliverance, but are not prepared to pay the price. 
We have not observed the divine order, and crowned 
Jesus King of our hearts and lives. We are wishful 
that He should be our Saviour, but not altogether 
prepared to accept Him as King. This is our mis- 
take; God hath exalted Him to be a Prince and a 
Saviour 4 He is first King of Righteousness, before 
He is Priest after the order of Melchisedek : and it 
is only when we confess with our mouths Jesus as 
Lord, that we shall be saved. 

But do not fear Him. His footfall is very soft. 
He is lowly, and rides upon a colt, the foal of an 
ass. No prancing steed, no banner flaunting in the 
breeze, no long train of warriors. Soft as the sum- 
mer breeze; irresistible as the summer sunshine, be- 
fore which great tubular bridges bend. Lowly as 
a child—thy King, thy King is here. And before 
his advent the bars are broken, as though ice were 


100 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


thawing drop by drop in spring, and letting the im- 
prisoned ship through the close-set floes. 

The King speaks peace; but He uses his eman- 
cipated ones as weapons in the great fight. “I have 
bent Judah for me” (as a man might bend his bow) ;. 
“T have filled my bow with Ephraim” (as with an 
arrow). This, in the first instance, refers to the 
struggle of the Maccabees against Alexander’s suc- 
cessor—Antiochus—as appears in the following 
words: “I will stir up thy sons, O Zion, against thy 
sons, O Greece, and will make thee as the sword of 
a mighty man.” But there is a deeper meaning, 
which applies to us all—Jesus first saved us, and 
then we become as arrows in the hand of a mighty 
man. 

O prisoners of hope, lift up your heads! your sal- 
vation is come out of Zion. Turn you to the strong- 
hold! The enemy has been driven from his posi- 
tion. There is no more fear of his attack. Take up 
your abode in the stronghold of God’s care and love, 
in the fortress of his Righteousness, in the keep of 
his Covenant. 

As we turn from this chapter, we cannot but feel 
that it contains unexplored depths, which no previ- 
ous fulfillment has exhausted; and which are prob- 
ably awaiting further developments, which, at pres- 
ent, we cannot prognosticate. When the closing 
verses tell us of what God will do for his people, 
“seen over them,” “defending them,” “saving them, 
as the stones of a crown glittering on high over his 
land”; when our attention is called to the greatness 


GOOD NEWS FOR PRISONERS OF HOPE. 10! 


of his goodness and beauty reflected on the people 
of his choice—we cannot but feel that days are com- 
ing in which He shall yet more conspicuously and 
victoriously interpose on their behalf, and when, lit- 
erally, his dominion shall be from sea to sea, and 
from the river to the ends of the earth. And if such 
a surmise be true, this chapter is closely related to 
the scenes which are delineated in the last chapters 
of this book, and which probably lie just in front 
of us, waiting for the withdrawal of the veiling 
curtain, which often appears to move with prepara- 
tions for the events behind it. 


XI. 


God’s Sowings. 


(ZECHARIAH x.) 


To the superficial eye there is no difference in the 
distance from our earth of the planets and the fixed 
stars; but, as a matter of fact, between the one and 
the other there is a vast intervening space of millions 
of miles. So in regard to these predictions. The 
prophet searches “what manner of time” the Spirit 
of Christ which is in him signifies. He describes 
the great facts revealed to him; but it is not within 
his province to announce the times and seasons 
which the Father hath kept in his own power. He 
sees the mighty mountain ranges; but it is left for us 
to discover that deep and far-stretching valleys lie 
between the nearer and the further, between the first 
and second advents of Christ. We shall find, there- 
fore, the prophet passing from the one to the other, 
and grouping on the foreground of his picture in- 
cidents which really belong to different ages in the 
world’s history. Such a method of workmanship 
was necessary, if prophecy was to be an incentive to 
faith and patience. 

We have already had an illustration of this in the 
previous chapter, when the advent of the Christ on 

102 


GOD’S SOWING. 103 


his lowly steed, the struggle of the Maccabees, and 
the deliverance of Israel in the last years of this 
dispensation, are classed together as though pertain- 
ing to the same epoch. There is nothing surprising 
in such grouping, if we remember that our Lord 
inserts the whole Christian dispensation in the break 
of a single comma (compare Isa. Ixi. 2, and Luke 
iv. 19). 

In this chapter and the next, taken as one, we 
detect the same fact. We are bidden, in the first 
verse, to ask for the latter rain, that Pentecost 
which is to close the present age, and which the 
apostle Peter describes as “times of refreshing from 
the presence of the Lord.” These are to be ex- 
_pected, he tells us, when the Jewish people repent 
and turn again to God, and will inaugurate the time 
of restitution of all things, whereof God hath spoken 
by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been 
since the world began. And the rest of the chapter 
may be interpreted as referring to the same events. 
But the next deals with the destruction of the second 
temple by Titus, and the rejection of the true Shep- 
herd. In the thirteenth chapter there is a similar 
rapid transition from the final cleansing of the 
chosen people to the awakening of the sword against 
the Shepherd, who is also the fellow of the Lord of 
Hosts. And probably there is no satisfactory clue 
to the comprehension of the Lord’s closing utter- 
ances about the fall of Jerusalem, which does not 
recognize the same principle. He passes from the 
close of one age to that of the other, describing both 


104 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


in the same sentences; and only in a passing phrase, 
as when He speaks of the fulfillment of the times of 
the Gentiles, does He open to our view the mighty 
gulf of time which was destined to intervene. 

If these thoughts are borne in mind, there will 
be no obstacle to our deriving help and teaching 
from these chapters; and in the last days of this dis- 
pensation we shall be able, with tolerable accuracy, 
to assign the various paragraphs to their respective 
place on the great chart of God’s providential gov- 
ernment. 

From the summons to ask for the latter rain, 
coupled as it is with the Divine promise of a gra- 
cious hearing, we are led to a graphic description 
of what God will make of his people—a description 
which was partially realized in the successful stand 
made by Judas Maccabzeus and his brethren against 
Antiochus. “Judah was as his goodly horse in the 
battle. From him came forth the corner-stone, from 
him the nail, from him the battle-bow, from him 
every exactor together.”’ The following description 
of their successes against their foes, treading them 
down in the battle, as mire in the streets, was fully 
verified during that brief but glorious period, when 
for a little the waning splendor of the Hebrew people 
shone out in its pristine beauty. But when the 
prophet goes on to class Joseph with Judah, and to 
speak of the people being brought again from the 
ends of the earth, the mightiest nations being hum- 
bled for their sake, and the promised land, though 
inhabited to Lebanon on the north and to Gilead on 


GOD’S SOWING. 105 


the east, being too small for them, we feel that 
there looms before his vision something greater than 
has taken place, or shall take place, till God sum- 
mons His people from all the world to inhabit their 
own land—as the bee-farmer hisses for his bees, 
scattered in search of honey throughout meadows 
and garden (ver. 8). 

In the meanwhile, during the present age, we may 
view the Jewish race as so much buried seed. “I 
will sow them among the people; and they shall 
remember Me in far countries; and they shall live 
with their children, and shall return.” 

At the end of the seventy years’ captivity the 
people of God’s ancient choice were distributed 
through Parthia, Media, Persia, Mesopotamia, Cap- 
padocia, Pontus, Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, Libya 
and Rome, Crete and Arabia. Everywhere through- 
out the great Roman Empire they fell into the 
ground to die. So far as their natural life was con- 
cerned, they seemed on the point of being obliterated 
among the nations of the world; but you might as 
well talk of the obliteration of the seed which the 
husbandman casts into the autumn furrows. They 
built their synagogues, throve in the quarters as- 
signed to them in the great cities, and disseminated 
new conceptions of God, high ethical standards, a 
fresh religious speech, destined to be of incalculable 
service to the early preachers of Christ’s Evangel. 

At this present hour the Jews. lie sown among all 
the nations of the earth. But they still live, with 
their children, and shall one day return. _ There 


106 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


shall be springtime, earing, and harvest. The sea 
of affliction has too long rolled over them, with the 
thunder of its mighty billows. Its wide expanse has 
stretched out between them and their great destiny ; 
but their Almighty Friend shall yet pass through 
it, smiting its waves and drying up its depths, 
achieving a national deliverance, so that they may 
reoccupy the land given in covenant to their fathers. 

It was thus with the first believers. By the rough 
hand of the persecutor, the rich wheat of Pentecost, 
which had laid too long in the bin of the mother 
Church, was scattered abroad throughout the re- 
gions of Judea and Samaria. “They therefore that 
were scattered abroad went everywhere preaching 
the Word.” “They therefore that were scattered 
abroad, upon the tribulation that arose about 
Stephen, traveled as far as Phenicia, and Cyprus, 
and Antioch.” These spring sowings yielded a mar- 
velous return. There was such a crop of churches 
and converts as multiplied the original number of 
the Church a hundredfold. Though there was a 
diminution of the numbers at Jerusalem, there were 
sheaves of golden corn throughout the world’s 
acreage. 

How many illustrations have existed, throughout 
the entire history of the Church, of the effect of 
God’s sowings! ‘My Father is the Husbandman,” 
said our Lord. With both hands He has prosecuted 
his work of sowing. In the persecutions of Nero, 
Decius, and Diocletianus, the precious seed of the 
Kingdom was sown deep in the dark graves of agony 


GOD’S SOWING. 107 


and death. Surely the great Sower went forth weep- 
ing, as He bore the precious seed to its destined 
ministry. It was buried in the voracious animals 
of the arena, in the labyrinths of the catacombs, in 
the dens and caves of the earth; but it lived again 
in millions of converts that so filled the earth as to 
appall and silence their persecutors. The emperors 
at last gave up the work of slaughter, because 
martyrdoms only served to root Christianity deeper 
in the empire. The blood of the martyrs became 
the seed of the Church. 

There was a grand quality in the corn of the 
Waldensian Valleys, in the Paulicians, the Hus- 
sites, the Lollards, which was sown by the Master 
in the dungeons of the Inquisition, in mockings and 
scourgings, in bonds and imprisonment, in the fires 
of martyrdom, and in the current of swiftly-flowing 
rivers. But what harvests it all yielded! There 
was, for instance, the harvest of the Reformation 
in Germany, of the Huguenots in France, and of 
the Puritans in England. It would be impossible 
to compute the vast hosts of the true disciples of 
Jesus through the dreary Middle Ages, because the 
apostate Church has concealed their number and 
misrepresented their influence. But many pages 
of the Lamb’s Book of Life must be filled with their 
names. “A great multitude which no man can 
number, of every nation, and tribe, and people.” 

So in later days. The martyrs of Uganda have 
yielded today three hundred Christian churches. 
The devoted labors of saintly missionaries in India, 


108 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Burmah, China, and Africa, who fell into the ground 
of obscurity, and loneliness, and disappointment, and 
died among strangers, many of them prematurely 
or violently—have resulted in the salvation of 
myriads. There was a handful of corn in the tops 
of mountains, in the ledges, where the earth was 
deep and rich enough to admit of a grave being 
dug, and the fruit thereof has shaken like Lebanon. 

In all probability many of the children of God who 
read these lines know what sowing means. They, 
too, have fallen into the ground to die. That ob- 
scure village in which your friends say you are 
buried; that humble position in which your powers . 
are cramped and limited by neglect and confinement ; 
that bed of suffering and weakness; that incessant 
demand to undertake menial and lowly drudging; 
that summons to leave home and friends, and sphere 
of successful labor, to become the companion of 
savage and illiterate people—all this is the grave, 
with its darkness and silence, in which God sows 
his people; not that they should abide there forever, 
but that they should bring forth much fruit. You 
shall live through other lives. Your prayers and 
alms shall be a memorial before God, and the day 
shall reveal the wonderful. ways in which you have 
no longer abode alone. 

Listen to the complaint of the buried seed : “Lord, 
in trouble have we visited Thee. We have poured 
out our prayer when thy chastening was upon us. 
We have been with child; we have been in pain; 
we have, as it were, brought forth wind; we have 


GOD’S SOWING. 109 


not wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither 
have the inhabitants of the world fallen.” And here 
is the Divine response: “Thy dead shall live; my 
dead bodies shall arise. Awake and sing, ye that 
dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, 
and the earth shall cast forth the dead.” 

Sowing means death. “Except a corn of wheat 
fall into the ground and die * * * ” We must be 
prepared to die, not only to sins, and weights, and 
self-indulgences, but to our own notions of pleasing 
God, to our emotional life, to our self-congratula- 
tion at the results of Christian service, to the energy 
and enthusiasm of our devotion. The little corn 
of wheat must feel very disconsolate when it finds 
itself attacked by chemical agents lurking in the 
soil, that begin to tear at its integuments and strike 
their rapiers at its heart. It is sad at having to 
surrender its beauty of form, its sprightly nimble- 
ness, its secret soul. Dying is not easy work. And 
when the process is prolonged, when the disintegra- 
tion of the self-energy takes place by slow degrees, 
it is bitter to bear. 

Sowing means darkness. Through long months 
the seed lies in darkness and has no light. Madame 
Guyon tells of prolonged seasons in which she lost 
all the joy of God, that she might be led to God 
Himself. It is a strange experience; “God removes 
all conscious experience of his grace, all power to 
work for Him, and the very beauty of the Divine 
virtues.” The soul does not fall away from God, 
because He is beside it while it treads the dark 


IIO THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


valley; but it goes ever deeper into the grave of 
Jesus—no song on its lips, no rapture at its heart, 
no ray of sunlight from the former sources of hope 
and consolatior. 

Sowing means loneliness. The corn of wheat falls 
into the ground to die, that it may not abide alone; 
but this dying is necessarily a long experience. Each 
man is born alone, and alore he dies. God will 
perhaps touch your friends, and you will be sepa- 
rated from them by misunderstandings; your home 
life, so that your dearest will be called from your 
side; your church relationships, and you will have 
to go forth without the camp, bearing his reproach. 
But there is no one who has left brethren, or sister, 
or father, or mother, or children, for Christ’s sake, 
that shall not receive a hundredfold in this time, 
houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and 
children; and in the age to come eternal life. 

But God does not forget the buried seed. Cana 
woman forget her sucking child? Can a farmer 
forget the seed which at so much pains he flung 
abroad on the brown furrows? Can God forget 
those who have not counted their lives dear unto 
themselves, but for his sake have been killed all the 
day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter ? 
They shall be his, in the day that He shall make 
even his peculiar treasure. 

In that wonderful ladder or scale of ascending 
prayer, of which we are informed in Hosea, we hear 
the heaven calling to God, the earth calling to 
heaven, and the corn, wine, and oil calling to the 


GOD’S SOWING. rit 


earth, and Jezreel (the sown) calling to the corn, 
wine, and oil. And as the result of these appeals, 
ringing through earth and heaven, He who had 
sown his people in the earth, has mercy on them, 
and says, Thou art my people; and they say unto 
Him, Thou art our God. “Doubtless Thou art our 
Father, though Abraham knoweth us not, and Israel 
doth not acknowledge us: Thou, O Lord, art our 
Father, our Redeemer from everlasting.” 

When the destined hour has come the buried 
seed hears the call of spring to arise and come forth 
from her cell. The voice that bade Lazarus come 
forth is heard deep down in the recesses of the 
earth. That which was in the grave hears the voice 
of the Word of God, and comes forth. How beau- 
tifully the words of the prophet’s vision lend them- 
selves to the metamorphosis of the spring: “So I 
prophesied as He commanded me, and the breath 
came into them, and they lived, and stood upon their 
feet, an exceeding great army.” 

Yes, buried ones, God does not forget your work 
and the love which ye have showed toward his 
name, in that ye have ministered to his saints, and 
still minister, though your ministries be hidden from 
the admiration of the great world. Your resurrec- 
tion is guaranteed. You may not be able to dis- 
cover the body of usefulness with which you will 
be clothed. God will give you your body as it pleases 
Him, and to each its own. But your death shall be 
swallowed up in the victory of life, and God shall 
wipe all tears from your eyes. 


112 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


And that new life will be God’s. “They shall re- 
member Me, * * * and they shall live.” Jesus said 
that he who believed in Him, through he were 
dead, yet should he live. Now, to believe is to re- 
ceive. Evidently, then, the life which comes after 
death is by the reception into our spirit of Him who 
is the Resurrection and the Life. We obtain by 
union with Jesus, and direct from God, all that we 
had previously sought in his service, his gifts, his 
people. 

“The soul lives no longer, works no longer of 
itself. It is God (by the Holy Spirit) who lives, 
works, operates within it. This goes on increas- 
ingly, so that it becomes rich with his riches. It is 
also enriched and revivified by degrees as it was 
stripped by degrees (2 Cor. iii. 18). The soul lives 
with the life of God. He being the principle of life, 
it cannot want for anything. It has lost the created 
for the Creator; nothingness for all things. All is 
given to it in God, not to possess, but to be pos- 
sessed (2 Cor. vi. 10; Col. ii, 9). 

You have, as it were, been buried in Egypt; but 
God is going before you, smiting the waves of the 
sea and drying up the depths of the mighty river, 
which had seemed an impassable barrier. He will 
strengthen you to follow Him; only dare to step 
out in faith, and you shall walk up and down in his 
name (x. 12). 

Who shall estimate the results? One head of 
corn may have fifty seed-corns, and each of these 
fifty, and each of these again fifty. At this rate we 


GOD’S SOWING. 113 


may soon arrive at tens of thousands. Behold the 
revenue of your tears, and prayers, and anguish. 
God will richly compensate. Lift up thine eyes and 
see. They gather themselves together, they come to 
thee; thy sons shall come from far, and thy daugh- 
ters borne in arms. The little one shall become a 
thousand, and the small one a strong nation, because 
the Lord will hasten it in his time. 


XII. 
The Shepherd of Tsract. 


(ZECHARIAH Xi. I-17; xiii. 5-9.) 


If these two passages are read together, it will be 
observed that they give some remarkable foreshad- 
owings of the ministry of the Messiah to his flock 
of the chosen people, as well as to those other sheep 
of which He spake, as not of that fold, but which 
He must bring, that they should become one flock, 
one Shepherd (John x. 16). 

Five hundred years before Judas sold the true 
Shepherd for thirty pieces of silver—the price of a 
slave—and then, seized with remorse, flung the price 
of blood upon the Temple pavement, that scene had 
been enacted in the streets of Jerusalem, freshly 
risen from their ruins. There is prophecy in action, 
as well as prediction; and the Holy Spirit often led 
the prophets to embody in striking deeds the con- 
ceptions of the future which had been impressed on 
their own minds. 

At the time of which we write the Jewish people 
seem to have been specially unfortunate. Joshua 
and Zerubbabel had both passed away, and the rulers 
and priests who had succeeded them were actuated 
by the most violent passions. They resembled fire 

114 


THE SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL. 115 


devouring the cedars of Lebanon, or the ax by which 
the oaks of Bashan are felled. They slew the flock — 
for the fleece, and the people became a prey to their 
rapacious appetite for self-aggrandisement. “They 
that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am 
rich, and their own shepherds pity them not.” Hand 
was raised against hand, the rich plundered the poor, 
the rulers (jis king, verse 6) smote the land with 
their violence and injustice, and every weaker one 
was delivered over to the oppression of high-handed 
wrong. 

It was under such circumstances that Zechariah 
felt called upon to become the shepherd of Jehovah’s 
harried flock, and to stand in the breach which 
should have been filled by faithful and righteous 
men. Whether Israel generally recognized his pas- 
toral authority does not appear; but he realized 
strongly the call of God, and fed the flock of slaugh- 
ter, verily the most miserable of sheep (verse 7, 
R. V., marg.). 

Two staves were in his hand: the one a club to 
beat back the beasts of prey; the other the crook, 
with which to extricate any of his charge that might 
be entangled in pit or thicket. The one was called 
Beauty, or Grace; the other Bands, or Union. These 
were the rod and staff of which David had sung in 
earlier days, and they represent God’s perpetual atti- 
tude toward his sheep. He ever deals with them 
in abundant grace; He is united to them, as they 
should be united to each other, by the bonds of 
everlasting love. 


116 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Three shepherds, which probably stand for the 
threefold office of Priest, Prophet, and King, had 
already failed in the difficult work of restoring order 
to the disturbed and distressed land. There had been 
an inalienable disagreement between the Divine 
Spirit and them. “My soul was weary of them, and 
their soul also loathed Me.” 

After a brief effort to reclaim Israel for its true 
Shepherd, Zechariah renounced the attempt, saying, 
“T will not feed you: that that dieth, let it die; and 
that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let 
them which are left, eat every one the flesh of an- 
other.” He broke his staff of beauteous grace, and 
cut it asunder, as though the tender love of God had 
withdrawn from its long wrestle with indomitable 
pride and self-will. As he did so, the poor of the 
flock that gave heed unto him, knew that he was 
acting in accord with the word of the Lord (verse 
II). 

Then came the crucial test. The prophet chal- 
lenged the people to appraise his services, to give him 
their estimate in money value. “I said unto them, If 
ye think good, give me my hire; and if not, forbear.” 
This incident may have taken place in the Temple, 
as he stood with his remaining staff in hand, face 
to face with those that held priestly office, though 
they lacked the priestly heart. In contempt and 
scorn they weighed out to him thirty pieces of sil- 
ver, the price of a slave. “There, prophet of God,” 
they seemed to say, “take that! Thy services are as 
worthless to the community as those of some obscure 


THE SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL, 117 


menial employed in the lowest service!” A goodly 
price indeed for a man’s prayers and tears, for a 
heart of compassion, and a life of absolute self-sur- 
render! “Cast it unto the potter,” said the inner 
voice; and, as for this people, they shall pass into 
the hand of rulers, who shall eat the flesh of the fat, 
and drive them along paths so rough and flinty that 
their hoofs will be torn in pieces—a prediction which 
had a terrible fulfillment in the days of Antiochus 
and of Hered the Great. 

Thereupon the prophet also broke in pieces the 
other staff, Bands, that the brotherhood between 
Judah and Israel might be broken in symbol, as 
afterward in reality. How evidently that brother- 
hood is broken today! The Jews among us are 
the descendants of Judah and Benjamin; but where 
are the ten tribes? 

In the following paragraph (vers. 15-17) there 
is a further evident reference to the terrible reign 
of Antiochus, whose cruelties toward the Jews in- 
stigated the heroic uprising of the Maccabees and 
their adherents, and led to deeds of faith and prowess 
which will be forever famous in the annals of the 
world. 

Five centuries passed, and Jehovah made one last 
effort to reciainr fis wandering sheep, who were } 
“distressed and scattered, as sheep not having a 
shepherd” (Matt. ix. 36). Full of grace and truth, 
fresh from the bosom of the Father, Jesus was sent 
to gather the flock, which had been scattered in the 
cloudy and dark day. It was already a flock of 


118 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


slaughter when He began his ministry. The dark 
shadows of that awful storm of disaster and de- 
struction, which was, within a period of forty years, 
to sweep Mount Zion bare, had already commenced 
to brook ominously over the devoted race. If his 
gracious offices had been recognized and accepted, 
that slaughter might have been averted. With his 
staff of grace and his crook of love, the Good Shep- 
herd might have brought his flock from out the 
dangers that threatened it, and realized the ancient 
prediction of Ezekiel: “I will feed them with good 
pasture, and upon the mountains of the height of 
Israel shall their fold be; there shall they lie down 
in a good fold, and on fat pasture shall they feed 
upon the mountains of Israel.” But they would 
have none of Him. He would have gathered them 
as the hen her brood, yet they would not. There- 
fore He was compelled to break his rod and staff, 
and abandon them to the results of their sin. He 
was compelled to abandon his earnest endeavors, 
and, quitting the Temple, uttered the ominous words, 
“Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For 
I say unto you, Ye shall not see Me henceforth till 
ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name 
of the Lord”—a prediction which probably refers to 
the period described in the last chapter of this book. 
As Jesus withdrew from the Temple, the last effort 
of Jehovah to save Israel as a nation was frustrated ; 
the greatest of her prophets had failed, and the last 
barrier to the catastrophe of descending judgment 
was removed. 


THE SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL. 119 


It was at this juncture that the nation was chal- 
lenged to appraise the worth of the Saviour’s min- 
istry. Between Judas and the priests a monstrous 
bargain was struck. “They weighed unto him thirty 
pieces of silver.” This meager dole of the priests 
stands in grim contrast to the priceless gift of Mary’s 
ointment, at which Judas caviled; but for this, and 
so little as this, the Messiah was sold, betrayed, and 
done to death. 

Rejected by his own, the people whom He ar- 
dently longed to save, and forsaken by his chosen 
followers, the Good Shepherd went forth alone to 
meet the sword. Not the sword of Caiaphas, or the 
priests; not the sword of Pilate, or the Romans; 
not the sword of impending justice—but the sword 
of righteous retribution for the sins of Israel, and 
the sins of the world. Jew though He were by 
birth, He was more. The Son of Man, the second 
Adam, the Lord from Heaven—such are the desig- 
nations placed on his head, like many crowns. It 
was as the representative of the race that He went 
to receive into his own heart the penalty which, like 
the sword of Damocles, hanging by a hair, impended 
not over Jerusalem alone, but over the world. He 
had heard the mysterious summons sounding 
through the courts of the Temple, and along the 
corridors of time, “Awake, O sword, against my 
Shepherd, and against the Man that is my Fellow, 
saith the Lord of Hosts. Smite the Shepherd.” 

That sword had flashed in the hand of the Cheru- 
bim at the gate of Eden; had turned every way to 


120 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


guard the path to the Tree of Life; had threatened 
to pursue the transgressing pair with its relentless 
edge. It was the sword of justice, the two-edged 
sword of the Word of God, which avenges dis- 
obedience with death. For four thousand years 
it had slept in its scabbard, pacified, if we may say 
so, by the Divine assurance that the mercy shown to 
men would be reconciled with the due acknowledg- 
ment of the righteous demands of a broken law. 
But it could not sleep forever. God’s promise must 
be redeemed, and his guarantee made good; and so, 
in the fullness of time, Jesus was set forth as a 
propitiation, showing the Divine righteousness in 
passing over sins done aforetime, in the forbear- 
ance of God, and enabling God Himself to be just, 
and the Justifier of those that have faith in Jesus. 
When our Lord was arrested in the garden, con- 
demned by his judges, and, finally, nailed to the 
cross; when his heart broke with uncontrollable and 
unfathomed grief; when the soldier took a spear and 
pierced his side—simultaneously with these outward 
scenes there was the awakening of the sword of 
Divine justice, which pierced and laid bare his heart. 
“He was wounded for our transgressions, He was 
bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our 
peace was upon Him; and with his stripes we are 
healed.” We cannot penetrate the deep mystery 
which veils the cross, or understand how the suffer- 
ing of the Shepherd could be counted as equivalent 
to our bearing the results of our sins. It is difficult 
to comprehend the transferrence of penalty from a 


THE SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL. 121 


sinful race to the sinless Substitute. But it is im- 
possible to read the inspired statements that describe 
the death of Christ without realizing that, in some 
way, which we shall, perhaps, understand in heaven, 
He met and satisfied the claims of violated law, so 
that it can ask no more. The quotation of this verse 
by our Lord Himself on the threshold of Geth- 
semane (Matt. xxvi. 31) indicates, with unerring 
precision, its reference and fulfillment; and we be- 
lieve that because the sword was plunged in his 
heart, it will sleep forever. The law is magnified 
and honored, as it could not be by the destruction 
of a race. However much we prize the death of 
Christ, our Lord, as an example of patience and 
self-sacrifice, we must never forget that He did for 
us what we never could have done for ourselves in 
magnifying, satisfying, and honoring the claims of 
the Divine law. 

It is interesting to notice how our Lord quotes 
this summons to the sword. The prophet hears it , 
addressed directly by the lips of God, “Awake, O 
sword, against my Fellow”; but in the thought of 
Jesus, it was not a dumb and impersonal agent 
merely, with power of automatic or self-prompted 
action, but an instrument in his Father’s hand. In 
his lips the quotations stands: “J will smite the 
Shepherd.” With Him there was no vague abstrac- 
tion or impersonality. It was not an attitude or 
quality of the Divine nature, such as justice or 
righteousness, that drew the sword from its scab- 
bard and plunged it in his heart. He even refused 


122 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


to see Judas, Caiaphas, or Pilate. Passing by all 
these secondary causes, He sped into the very pres- 
ence of the Father, and realized that the cup was 
mixed, the death of the cross arranged, and the 
sword wielded by Him. This enabled Him to bear 
his unutterable woe with yielded will and acquiescing 
heart. 

In this, O child of God, learn a life lesson. In all 
anxieties, in troubles that men may cause to thee, 
refuse to consider thyself a prey of their wild will, 
as though thou wert a storm-driven leaf; but dare to 
believe that what God permits to come is his ap- 
pointment, and that amid all the plottings and mach- 
inations of human malice runs a Divine purpose. 

The infinite meaning and value of the death of 
the Cross are indicated by the three significant ap- 
pellations with which the Sufferer 1s addressed. 

My SHEPHERD.—Mark that emphatic my. It is 
as though Jehovah would contrast the Shepherd of 
his choosing with those that had been selected by 
human caprice. His Davids against the people’s 
Sauls. From out of the family of man God has 
drawn, and is drawing, certain who are attracted by 
a special affinity to his Son, wrought in them by 
his Holy Spirit; and these are accounted his flock, 
and are entrusted to his pastoral care. They were 
the Father’s; but the Father has made them over to 
the Son, according to Christ’s own words: “Thine 
they were, and Thou gavest them Me, * * * and 
these have known that Thou didst send Me.” Dis- 
tinguished from the rest of men—because they hear 


THE SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL. 123 


the Shepherd’s voice, know, and follow Him—these 
enjoy immediately and intimately his pastoral care. 
He guides them over the wolds of time, feeding them 
on the green pastures, and beside the still waters ; 
conducting them through darksome gorges and dan- 
gerous glens; defending them from lion and bear 
with rod and staff; and even in the realms of glory 
not ceasing to be their Shepherd. They follow Him 
even deeper into the heart of eternity, where the 
fountains of life first break forth into sight. 

This thought for the sheep committed to his cus- 
tody possessed the mind of the Great Shepherd on 
the night in which He was betrayed, when He went 
forth to meet Judas and the arresting band. Placing 
Himself between them and the frightened little 
group that cowered behind Him, He said, “If ye seek 
Me, let these go their way.” If He had been an 
hireling, when He saw thé wolf coming, He would 
have fled; but because He was God’s Shepherd, He 
stood between his own and peril, as He always will 
do in every dark hour that may menace us between 
this and the safety of the gates of pearl. 

We have a strong claim on Jesus, because He is 
God’s Shepherd, the representative of the Divine 
care, the custodian of the Divine honor. In every 
prayer for help, we may remind Him that He stands 
to us as the gift and sponsor of the Divine faithful- 
ness. He must be to us all that God Himself would 
be. 

* My Fertow.—When our Lord quoted this text 
in the upper room, as He rose to leave it, He stopped 


124 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


before He reached these words. But the omission 
was not due to any hesitation on his part to appro- 
priate them. He knew that He was Jehovah's Fel- 
low, else He would never have included the Father 
with Himself in the significant pronoun, We. “We 
will come, and make our abode with Him.” He 
counted not equality with God a prize to be grasped 
at. And it was the fact of his being Jehovah’s: 
Fellow that made his death of such infinite worth. 
Man could not have redeemed his fellow; but the 
Infinite Lawgiver Himself, taking to his heart the 
penalty of his own broken law, afforded it the great- 
est possible homage and satisfaction. 

Surely there is a designed contrast between Fellow 
and Hosts. God is the Lord of many Hosts, in 
heaven, and earth, and sea; but He has only one 
Fellow. All the Hosts of angels and nature had not 
availed for the work of propitiation—this He must 
do Himself; and He did it in the person of Jesus. 

Tue Man.—“The Man that is my Fellow.” By 
his tears and anguish, by the pains of death and 
the article of dissolution, his humanity was attested. 
And how real, how tender, how near they make Him 
to us all. No man so abject and sinful but may 
approach Him, when he is numbered with the trans- 
gressors,and hangs in death between two malefac- 
tors. Would you touch God through his Fellow, 
then touch yonder dying Man. The gulf is bridged; 
the yawning chasm is spanned. By the grace of the 
one Man we may now receive the abundance of 
grace, and reign in life, here and hereafter. 


THE SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL. 125 


Beware how you treat this blessed Man. Still 
men sell Him for thirty pieces of silver; tread be- 
neath their wanton feet his precious blood; and do 
despite to his grace. Still they prefer their paltry 
silverlings to his matchless worth. Would that their 
blind eyes were opened to see the matchless glory and 
beauty of Him who stands at their door to knock. 

The disciples were scattered when their Shepherd 
was taken. He had foreseen this: “Behold the hour 
cometh, yea, is come, that ye shall be scattered, every 
one to his own, and shall leave Me alone.” And it 
seemed as though the hand of God was against them, 
to their utter undoing in the dread hours that fol- 
lowed. But who shall tell the woes that befell the 
chosen people that had rejected the Messiah! The 
disciples wept for but a little space, and their sorrow 
was soon turned into joy. But the Jews succumbed 
beneath the woes, which, within forty years, befell 
their nation. It came to pass in all the land, that 
two parts were cut off, while the remainder passed 
through the fire, and have been passing through it 
ever since. Nor can it be otherwise, until they 
acknowledge Jesus as their true Shepherd, and allow 
Him to fold them, and humble themselves to be- 
come the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his 
hand. 


XIII. 
The Spirit of Grace and Supplication, 


(ZECHARIAH Xii., xili.) 


There is unusual solemnity in these opening 
words, as though to assure us that there can be no 
doubt as to the sufficiency of the speaker to carry 
into effect all that He is about to unfold. “Thus 
saith the Lord, which stretcheth forth the heavens, 
and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth 
the spirit of man within him.” 

The vision itself refers to a time yet future, though 
perhaps not far away, when the Jewish people shall 
have returned to their own land, but still in unbe- 
lief. Indeed, it is supposed by some that they will 
be in actual league with some awful impersonation 
of Antichrist, in accordance with Daniel ix. 27. For 
some reason, for the present veiled in mystery, the 
anti-Semitic hate with which some of the nations of 
Europe are already smitten will then become uni- 
versal, “and all the nations of the earth shall be 
gathered together against Jerusalem.” But their 
confederacy will be overwhelmed with infinite dis- 
aster. Such is the burden of this threefold affirma- 


tion: 
126 


SPIRIT OF GRACE AND SUPPLICATION. 127 


“Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of reeling 
unto all the peoples round about” (ver. 2). 

“T will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for 
all the peoples” (ver. 3). 

“Tn that day will I make the chieftains of Judah 
like a torch of fire in a sheaf” (ver. 6). 

Immediately upon this, an assurance is given that 
in that awful day, more fully described in the suc- 
ceeding chapter, the Lord shall save, and the Lord 
shall defend (vs. 7, 8). In clouds the long-rejected 
Messiah, accompanied by his Bride—the Church— 
will appear to the succor of his brethren, as Joseph 
interposed on the behalf of his; and, as they behold 
Him seated at the right hand of power, and com- 
ing, as He told Caiaphas He would, in the clouds of 
heaven, they will appropriate the old refrain, pre- 
pared by Isaiah for this very occasion; when He 
shall swallow up death in victory, and take away 
the reproach of his people from off all the earth: 
“To, this is our God; we have waited for Him, and 
He will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited 
for Him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salva- 
tion” (Isa. xxv. 9). “Behold, He cometh with the 
clouds; and every eye shall see Him, and they 
which pierced Him; and all the tribes of the earth 
shall mourn over Him. Even so, Amen.” Then 
the Lord Jesus will slay the lawless one with the 
breath of his mouth, and bring Him to naught by 
the brightness of his coming. And then the solemn 
and awful threatenings of this passage will take 
effect : “It shall come to pass in that day, that I will 


128 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


seek to destroy all the nations that come against 
Jerusalem.” 

Let us now turn from this side of the picture to 
consider the threefold effect that this pa ag 
will have on the Jews themselves: 

“In that day shall there be a great mourning” 
(ver.cniye 

“In that day there shall be a fountain opened” 
(xaos 

“It shall come to pass in that day, that I will cut 
off the names of the idols out of the land” (ver. 2). 


I. A GREAT Mourninc.—Notice the certainty of 
this announcement. “There sHALL be a great 
mourning in Jerusalem.’ There is no hesitation in 
the prophet’s speech. He is as sure as the apostle 
Paul, when he says: “So all Israel shall be saved.” 
This is a solemn reflection for the traveler, as he 
perambulates the streets of Jerusalem, or visits the 
piece of ancient wall by which the Jews wail weekly. 
There shall be a great mourning, not because the 
Turk has desecrated the sacred places, nor because 
the ruins of bygone days affront with their yawning 
gaps, nor yet because of the bitter sufferings of the 
much-hated race; but each for a personal rejection 
of the Messiah, who was driven through those streets 
and crucified without the gate. 

The Comparison. “As the mourning of Hadad- 
rimmon in the Valley of Megiddon.” At this spot 
the good King Josiah, whose reign had been the 
only gleam of brightness in the period between the 


SPIRIT OF GRACE AND SUPPLICATION. 129 


reign of Hezekiah and the downfall of the State, 
was done to death by the Egyptian arrows. Jere- 
miah, the prince of lamenters, lamented for Josiah, 
and all the singing men and singing women spake 
of him in their lamentations. There never had been 
such universal and heart-rending sorrow since Israel 
became a nation, as that which arose when the royal 
chariot drove through Jerusalem bearing his dead 
body for burial; but such grief is the only symbol 
adequate to express that coming national agony, 
when Israel shall look on her rejected Lord and 
mourn. 

Yet another metaphor is pressed into service. The 
anguish with which a parent mourns for his only 
son, the bitterness of sorrow for a first born, is heart- 
rending in any land, and among all peoples; but it 
is peculiarly so in an Eastern—a Hebrew—home. 
Yet the bitter mourning which is one day to fill Jeru- 
salem will be like that—as it was in the land of 
Egypt, when every family mourned over the death 
of its. first born. 

It will be universal. From the highest to the low- 
est of the court—for Nathan here stands for the 
youngest of David’s sons; from the highest to the 
lowest of the priestly order—for Shimei stands for 
the least conspicuous of the priestly clans; all the 
people that remain shall be bowed in one common 
act of contrition. It is much to see one prodigal 
stricken with remorse—what will it be when a whole 
nation beats on its breast, and bewails its sins! 
Every wind laden with dirges, all the open spaces 


130 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


black with prostrate forms, all eyes wet with 
tears, the somber shadow of the funeral pyre flung 
over all. 

It will be Jonely! “Every family apart, and their 
wives apart.” Excessive grief seeks seclusion. It 
brooks no distraction; its attention is too absorbed 
with the object of its agony to have thought for any- 
thing beside. It did not seem surprising to her 
friends when Martha arose from a house full of 
mourners and hastened away. They whispered, “It’s 
natural enough: she wants to be alone. She goeth 
to the grave to weep there.” So this mourning will 
isolate people. Each will feel personally concerned ; 
each will feel as though chiefly responsible; each 
will take to his own heart the crucifixion of the 
Messiah, and will turn the Misere into a wail of 
personal confession. “J have sinned; J pierced his 
hands and feet; J am of all men most miserable, and 
of all sinners the chief.” 

It will be due to a vision of the mediatorial suf- 
ferings of Jesus. “They shall look on Him whom 
they pierced, and they shall mourn.” There is no 
doubt as to the application of these words, for as 
the beloved apostle stood beside the cross, on which 
only the precious casket of the Jewel—the body of 
our Lord—remained, and saw the soldier pierce his 
side, as the blood and water issued forth, he was 
reminded by the Holy Ghost that this Scripture was 
being fulfilled (John xix. 34-36). 

This is the fact which the Spirit of God delights 
to use for the breaking of our hard hearts. They 


SPIRIT OF GRACE AND SUPPLICATION. 131 


are broken on the broken heart of Jesus. They are 
pierced by the sight of His piercing. They mourn 
when they look on Him whom they pierced. 

There are two kinds of sorrow—the one to death, ( 
the other to life. The first considers the penalty 
of our wrong-doing; the second the Person against 
whom the wrong has been done. The one is largely 
selfish, dreading only the scorpion whip and the 
sting of flame—it would cease in a moment if these 
were withdrawn; the other is altogether regardless 
of consequences that may accrue to itself, and bit- 
terly laments that shame and sorrow have been 
brought to the heart of Jesus, so true, so tender, so 
altogether lovely. 

Sinners seeking forgiveness often appear to think 
that they must bring some need of sorrow as a con- 
dition of acceptance with the Saviour. If only they 
can feel an adequate sorrow for sin, they may surely 
bring their tears as a price for his mercy, as a reason 
for his salvation. But we can never feel an adequate 
sorrow for sin. To wait for this will be to wait for- 
ever. To postpone coming until the tear-bottles are 
full, will be to postpone forever. Besides, the spir- 
itual philosophy of the matter is that we shall never 
get the right sorrow for sin till we see Jesus, and 
are admitted into the intimacy of his love. The tears 
that we do not need to weep over come, not before, 
but after conversion. It was after the poor sinful 
outcast had been forgiven that she washed the 
Saviour’s feet with tears. It was when Jesus turned 
and looked upon Peter that he went forth to weep 


132 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


bitterly. We must come to Christ as we are, not 
trying to realize what sin is, not seeking to be 
smitten with adequate grief, but just accepting his 
finished work and trusting Himself: after this will 
come the forth-pouring of our grief. The eyes that 
first look to Him for salvation may be tearless, but 
they will not long remain so. The first act may be 
largely one of will; but the last will be of the emo- 
tions. When we have looked on Him whom our 
sins pierced, we shall mourn as one mourneth for 
his only son, and be in bitterness as one in bitterness 
for the first born. 
Let us distinguish, then, between Repentance a 
Penitence. The one is the child of the will; the 
other of the heart. We repent when we turn from 
sin to Christ; we are penitent when we meet his eyes 
as Peter did, and go out to weep bitterly. To repent 
is the definite act of the moment; but penitence will 
accompany us to the very gates of heaven, only to | 
flee away before the light of eternal blessedness. 
The Agent in producing this mourning 1s the 
Holy Spirit. “Iwill pour * * * the Spirit of grace 
and supplication.” Conviction of sin is the special 
work of the Holy Spirit. He uses the truth as his 
sword, piercing to the dividing asunder of soul and 
spirit, of the joints and marrow. He particularly 
takes the truth of the sufferings and death of the 
Lord Jesus, and presents that to the conscience, 
pressing home the evil of rejecting such a Saviour, 
such pity, such holy, yearning love, until the soul 
understands what sin has cost the Lord, and melts, 


SPIRIT OF GRACE AND SUPPLICATION. 133 


as icebergs do, when they float down into Southern 
seas. 


II. A Fountain OpENED.—On the day of Pente- 
cost Peter pointed to those cleansing streams. “And 
Peter said unto them; Repent ye, and be baptized 
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, unto 
the remission of your sins; and ye shall receive the 
gift of the Holy Ghost.” With marvelous force and 
eloquence John Bunyan brought the force of those 
words, “every one of you.” “But I struck Him on 
his head with the rod: is there any hope for me?” 
Every one of you, saith the apostle. “But I spat in 
his face: is there forgiveness for me?” Yes, is the 
reply, for every one of you. “But I drove the spikes 
into his hands and feet, which transfixed Him to the 
cross: is there cleansing for me?” Yes, cries Peter, 
for every one of you. “But I pierced his side, though 
He had never done me wrong; it was_.a ruthless, 
cruel act, and I am sorry for it now: may that sin 
be washed away?” Every one of you, is the constant 
answer. Repent, and turn again, that your sins may 
be blotted out. The blood of Jesus Christ, God’s 
Son, cleanseth from all sin. If the blood of bulls 
and goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the 
unclean, sanctify unto the cleanness of the flesh, how 
much more shall the blood of Christ, who, through 
the Eternal Spirit, offered Himself without blemish 
to God, cleanse your consciences! 

And as it was at the beginning of this era, so it 
shall be at its close—with this difference, that 
whereas then some few thousand souls only stepped 


134 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


into the fountain, at last a whole nation, the house 
of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, shall 
wash there and be cleansed. Then the words of 
the apostle Peter, spoken centuries ago in Solomon’s 
porch, will be fulfilled, when Israel repents and turns 
again; her sins will be blotted out, and there will 
come times of refreshing from the presence of the 
Lord, and the restoration of all things, “whereof 
God spake by the mouth of his holy prophets which 
have been since the world began” (Acts iii. 21). 


III. Tue Destruction or IpoLtatry. — The 
names of the idols will be cut off out of the land, 
and the prophets and unclean spirits will be caused 
to pass out of it. It is not enough for God to for- 
give. He must deal with the sources of all the way- 
wardness and backsliding of his people. There will 
be, therefore, a strong and radical dealing with idols, 
prophets, and demons. 

The thoroughness of these drastic measures is 
brought out in an imaginary vignette of a household 
scene in those happy days. It is supposed that the 
son of Godly parents, who have lately mourned for 
their sins apart, and been delivered from them, sud- 
denly feels himself called upon to assume the role 
of a prophet. He encourages people to come to him 
to detect the culprit in some theft or murder, or to 
cause the rain to fall on the parched ground, or to 
perform magical rites over the sick, or call up the 
dead—to do, in fact, what Balaam wanted Balak 
to do, when he sent for him across the desert. The 
tidings come to his parents, who are so devoted in 


SPIRIT OF GRACE AND SUPPLICATION. 135 


their adherence to God that they would rather lose 
their child than allow him to pursue his evil, God- 
dishonoring work in their home. “It shall come 
to pass that, when any shall yet prophecy, then his 
father and his mother that begat him shall say unto 
him, Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies in 
the name of the Lord: and his father and his mother 
that begat him shall thrust him through when he 
prophesieth.” It would not be possible to discover 
a stronger way of affirming the absolute transforma- 
tion that will finally come over the Jewish people 
when their devotion to God shall overpower their 
natural love to their children. 

The passion against idolatry and false prophets 
would become so intense that the practicers of arts 
which had imposed on the credulity of the people 
would be ashamed and afraid to own their profes- 
sion. “The prophets shall be ashamed, every one of 
his vision, when he prophesieth, neither shall they 
wear a hairy garment’’—this being the special dress 
of the sons of the prophets, by which they were at 
once recognized. 

If a township of people should rise against a man 
suspected of being a prophet, he would vehemently 
protest that they were mistaken, and that he was no 
prophet. Trembling for his life, because so certain 
of the temper of his accusers, he would make any 
subterfuge to escape suspicion. “I am a tiller of 
the ground, for I have been made a bondman from 
my youth.” 

If, finally, in the pursuance of their hot inquiry, 


136 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


they discovered marks on his body, which indicated 
that he had been previously convicted and branded 
for following the calling of a prophet, he would 
rather assign them to the hands of his friends than 
dare to admit that he had ever been suspected of 
claiming to be a prophet. “One shall say unto him, 
What are these wounds between thine arms? Then 
he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded 
in the house of my friends.” 

This inquiry and reply have often been associated 
with the marks of the nails in the hands of Christ. 
But this is not the natural reading of the passage, 
which can only be attributed in the sense above 
given ; the evident drift of the passage being to show 
that there will be such a revelation of the evil 
wrought by the prophets, and so strong an antago- 
nism against them, that those suspected of being 
such will be prepared to evade the charge at any 
cost, knowing that if it is established against them 
they may expect but short shrift. This will be a 
deliverance, indeed, which shall be radical and final. 
But if God is prepared to do so great and perfect a 
work for his ancient people, let us give Him no rest 
until He has utterly abolished our idols also and 
purified us unto Himself—people for his possession, 
zealous of good works. 


XIV. 


“Things Shortly to Come to Pass.” 


(ZECHARIAH xiv.) 


It is impossible to regard this mysterious and 
sublime prophecy as having been already fulfilled. 
There is nothing in the story of the Maccabees, nor 
in the fall of Jerusalem beneath the arms of Titus, 
which at all adequately fulfills the conditions of the 
prophet’s words. When have all nations been gath- 
ered together against Jerusalem in battle? When 
has the Mount of Olives rent in twain for the flight 
of the besieged? What day that has ever broken 
from the East has fulfilled the description of verses 
6 and 7? At what time of their chequered history 
have the Jews gathered the spoils of their enemies 
in battle; gold and silver, and apparel, in great 
abundance? Of course, it is possible to put meta- 
phorical and spiritualizing interpretations on all 
these touches. But to do so is to jeopardize the 
whole force and value of prophetic Scripture. If 
the predictions of the Advent. of our Lord in the 
days of his humiliation were so literally fulfilled, 
why should we suppose that the predictions of his 
Second Advent in great glory must be treated as 

137 


4? 


138 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


metaphor and trope? Surely we are justified by the 
minute accuracy of the former fulfillment to expect 
as exact a fulfillment of prophecies which are still 
awaiting accomplishment. When it is built, the 
new Jerusalem shall comply with every line of the 
Architect’s plan, as communicated to the prophet. — 

Following, then, the successive features of the 
prophet’s delineation, we learn that a time is coming 
when the nations of the world—which, to adopt a 
modern phrase, may indicate the concert of Euro- 
pean powers—will be gathered against Jerusalem 
in battle, that city being held by the Jews, as yet 
in unbelief. And we can hardly doubt that Zecha- 
riah is here anticipating the same events as are 
described by Ezekiel, when the great nations of the 
north come against “the land that is brought back 
from the sword, and gathered out of many peoples, 
upon the mountains of Israel, to take the spoil and 
to take the prey” (Ezekiel xxxvili., xxxix.). 

At first this invasion shall be completely success- 
ful. “The city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, 
and the women ravished”’: hell let loose, and no re- 
straint exerted.on the excesses of the infuriated 
soldiery. Then will the Lord appear to his people, 
as He did to the typical Jew on the road to Damas- 
cus. “Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight 
against those nations, as when He fought in the 
day of battle.” “Behold,” says John, referring to 
the same event, ““He cometh with clouds, and every 
eye shall see Him, and they which pierced Him, and 
all the tribes of the earth shall mourn over Him.” 


THINGS SHORTLY TO COME TO PASS. 139 


“In that day,” to quote Ezekiel’s vivid and striking 
imagery, ‘“‘said the Lord, when Gog shall come 
against the land of Israel, my fury shall come up 
into my nostrils. And I will plead against him 
with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon 
him, and upon his hordes, and upon the many peo- 
ples that are with him, an overflowing shower, and 
great hail-stones, fire, and brimstone. And I will 
magnify Myself, and sanctify Myself, and I will 
make Myself known in the eyes of many nations.” 

It is impossible to doubt that, at that time, there 
will be a literal appearance of the rejected Saviour. 
Where his feet often stood in the days of his flesh, 
they shall stand again. “His feet shall stand in that 
day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before Je- 
rusalem on the East. The Lord my God shall come, 
and all the holy ones with Thee.” In other words, 
there shall be a glorious and literal fulfillment of the 
reassuring words of the two men, who, clad in 
white and glistening raiment, stood beside the apos- 
tles on Olivet. 

“Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye looking into 
heaven? This Jesus, which was received up from 
you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye 
beheld Him going into heaven” (Actsi. 11). “And 
it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we 
have waited for Him, and He will save us: this is 
the Lord; we have waited for Him, we will be glad 
and rejoice in his salvation. For in this mountain 
shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab shall be 
trodden down in his place, even as straw is trodden 


140 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


down in the water of the dunghill”—(Isa. xxv. 9, 
IO). 

It was when his brethren were in their greatest 
straits that Joseph made himself known unto them; 
and when the Jews are in their dire extremity, they 
will cry aloud for help and deliverance from Him 
whom they rejected. That memorable scene in the 
ancient land of the pyramids will be reproduced in 
all its pathos, when the long-rejected Brother shall 
say to his own brethren after the flesh, “I am Jesus, 
your Brother, whom ye sold unto Pilate: and now 
be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye 
delivered Me up to be crucified; for God did send 
Me before you to preserve a remnant in the earth 
and to save you alive by a great deliverance” (see 
Gen. xlv. I-15). 

When this final reconciliation shall have taken 
place; when the mutual blessings and embracings 
have effaced the memory of the bitter past; when 
the chosen people shall have recognized their great 
Deliverer—He will set Himself to deliver them. It 
may be that they will recognize Him in the act of 
their deliverance. The cleaving mountain shall 
make a way of escape, as of old time the cleaving 
sea. On that memorable day—“one day, which is 
known unto the Lord, not day, and not night”; 
when the cold and frost (ver. 6, R. v., marg.) shall 
mingle with the throes of earthquake (ver. 5); 
when the sun shall be turned into darkness and the 
moon into blood; when atmospheric and cosmical 
convulsions, accompanying the crisis, give evidence 


THINGS SHORTLY TO COME TO PASS. 141 


of its momentous character, as the pangs of the 
travail-hour in which the new age is being born— 
God will destroy the face of the covering that is 
cast over all peoples, and the veil that is spread 
over all nations. He will swallow up death in vic- 
tory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears from 
off all faces; and the reproach of his people shall He 
take away from off all the earth; for the Lord hath 
speken it. How touching and significant are the 
prophet’s words: “It shall come to pass, that at 
evening time it shall be light.” The day of Israel’s 
history has been long and stormy. For the most 
part, heavy storm-clouds have brooded over her na- 
tional life, emitting from age to age thunder and 
deluges of rain; but already there is a rim of light 
on the horizon, and this is destined to grow until it 
dispossesses the brooding darkness. The sun shall 
yet break out and bathe the whole landscape with 
warm and glowing radiance. “At evening time 
it shall be light.” 

Whether we shall live to see that evening we can- 
not tell. But during these latter years many signs 
have been giving evidence that we are approaching 
one of those epoch-making moments in the history 
of our race which may be called the hinges of the 
ages. The despair which is settling down on some 
of the noblest spirits; the excessive devotion to 
pleasure which engrosses the light and vain; the 
descent of empire from the gold of imperial autoc- 
racy to the iron and clay of the rule of the peoples; 
the lawless disregard of family ties and sacred in- 


142 - THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


stitutions; the bitter hatred of the Jewish people, 
known as anti-Semitism, which, like a contagious — 
fever, has befallen most of the European nations; 
the interesting movements among the Jews them- 
selves, that known as Zionism, that identified with 
the name of Rabinovitch in South Russia, and those 
which are attempting the decolonization of the land 
of their fathers—all these announce the near ap- 
proach of the fulfillment of these words. It seems, 
as we study contemporary history, that, in all like- 
lihood, we are watching the first stages of scenes 
destined to culminate in the public reconciliation of 
the Jews with their Messiah. 

The calculations of the most careful students of 
prophecy also indicate that we are approaching the 
time at which the times of the Gentiles run out, 
and at which the chosen people must be restored to 
their national prerogative and reinstated as God’s 
representatives before the world. “Now from the 
fig-tree learn her parable. When her branch is now 
become tender, and putteth forth its leaves, ye know 
that the summer is nigh; even so ye also, when ye 
see all these things, know ye that He is nigh, even 
at the doors. * * * Watch therefore: for ye know 
not what hour your Lord doth come.” 

Apparently the land of the Jews is destined to 
pass through considerable changes, dating from the 
time of the Lord’s interposition on their behalf. The 
issue of living waters east and west ; the depression 
of the surrounding country to the level of the Ara- 
bah, from Gibeah of Saul on the north to Rimmon 


THINGS SHORTLY TO COME TO PASS. 143 


on the south: the elevation of Jerusalem, as though 
to a level plateau; and the removal of the curse— 
are, of course, capable of metaphorical and figura- 
tive treatment: but there is no precise reason for 
doubting that the volcanic action, which is so clearly 
referred to in the fifth verse, will produce great 
modifications of the present landscape. 

That the Jews shall be entirely victorious in that: 
last great struggle is abundantly enforced. We learn 
from Ezekiel’s visions of the same event that they 
that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth to 
make fires of the weapons of their foes, to burn 
them, so that they shall have no need to gather the 
wood of the forest for fuel; and that men will have 
to be set apart for the work of burying the multi- 
tudes of the dead. Here, too, we are told that when 
Judah fights at Jerusalem (not against, see R. V., 
marg.), the Lord shall smite the opposing hosts with 
a great plague, before which they shall be con- 
sumed; and that there shall be vast spoils of gold 
and silver, and apparel in great abundance. 

This, surely, is the scene which the beloved apostle 
depicts in marvelous phraseology, thrilling with the 
splendor of his rich and glowing eloquence: 


“I saw the heaven opened; and behold, a white horse, and 
He that sat thereon, called Faithful and True; and in right- 
eousness He doth judge and make war. And his eyes are a 
flame of fire, and upon his head are many diadems; and He 
hath a name written, which no one knoweth but He Himself. 
And He is arrayed in a garment sprinkled with blood; and 
his name is called The Word of God. And the armies which 
are in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in 


144 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


fine linen, white and pure. And out of his mouth proceedeth 
a sharp sword, that with it Heshould smite the nations; 
and He shall rule them with a rod of iron; and He treadeth 
the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God. 
And He hath on his garment and on his thigh a name written 
—KING OF KINGS, AND LorD OF LORDS. : 
“And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with 
a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in mid-heaven, 
Come and be gathered together unto the great supper of 
God; that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of 
captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses 
and of them that sit thereon, and the flesh of all men, both 
free and bond, and small and great” (Rev. xix. 11-18). 


So all Israel shall be saved. The envy also of 
Ephraim shall depart; Ephraim shall not envy 
Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. The 
mountain of the Lord’s house shall be established 
in the top of the mountains, and all nations shall 
flow unto it. The holy city shall arise and shine, 
because her light is come, and the glory of the Lord 
is risen upon her; and all the glowing words of 
Isaiah’s sixtieth chapter shall be gloriously fulfilled. 

Behold the Lord, by many a prophet, and espe- 
cially by his servant Zechariah, has proclaimed to 
the end of the earth: “Say ye to the daughter of 
Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh!” 


XV. 


The Millennial Age, and This, 


(ZECHARIAH xiv., 16.) 


The Feast of Tabernacles was one of the bright- 
est and gladdest of all the Hebrew Festivals. It 
commemorated the wanderings of the children of 
Israel in the wilderness, when they dwelt in booths. 
“Ye shall dwell in booths seven days,” ran the 
ancient words of prescription; ‘all that are home- 
born in Israel shall dwell in booths, that your gen- 
erations may know that I made the children of Israel 
to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the 
land of Egypt” (Lev. xxiii. 39, etc). 

The time fixed for its celebration was after the 
harvest was gathered in. ‘On the fifteenth day of 
the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the 
fruits of the land, ye shall keep the feast of the Lord 
seven days; on the first day shall be a solemn rest, 
and on the eighth day shall be a solemn rest.” But 
the rest of that first day was consistent with the 
gathering of branches of palm trees, boughs of thick 
trees, and willows of the brook. What a joyful 
conjunction! The labors of the year were over, 
the corn was in the barns, the wine and oil were 
safely stored, the fields were resting in the mellow 

145 


146 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


sunshine, recuperating after their toils. From all 
parts of the land the people gathered to the city of 
their fathers, whose grim and ancient palaces and 
fortresses were festooned with greenery, the roofs 
covered with bowers, and all the open spaces packed 
close with leafy tabernacles. The people made 
themselves booths, every one upon the roof of his 
house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the 
house of God, and in the broad place of the water- 
gate, and in the broad place of the gate of Eph- 
raim’ (Neh. viii. 16). 

To the quickened eye of the prophet, scenes were 
to take place again, similar to those recorded in 
the books of Ezra and Nehemiah (Ezra iii. 4; Neh. 
viii. 16) ; only in the glad days he anticipated there 
would gather not Jews alone, acknowledging the 
Divine King, but representatives of the nations of 
the world, gathered out of every land, and speaking 
in every tongue. “It shall come to pass, that every 
one that is left of all the nations which came against 
Jerusalem, shall go up from year to year to wor- 
ship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to keep the 
feast of Tabernacles.” It is not requisite to believe 
that the literal feasts of the old covenant shall be 
restored; but that the gladness, the restfulness, the 
festal array, which pervaded the city at that time 
of the year, in the olden days, shall characterize the 
religious life of the world, the focus of which will 
be “the beloved city.” 

The fair vision that closes the vista of the glade 
of time to the Hebrew prophets, was always the 


MILLENNIAL AGE, AND THIS. 147 


rehabilitation of Jerusalem as the religious metropo- 
lis of the world. It was so once, when the Queen 
of Sheba led the devout inquirers of many lands to 
hear the wisdom of Solomon. It was so when at 
the day of Pentecost its streets were filled with the 
Babel of languages from all the world, and men of 
different garb, complexion, and religion, poured 
through the tortuous streets. Spiritually, it has 
been so since, for more eyes have turned to Jerusalem 
than to Rome; and as the religion of Jesus has 
spread, the whole trend of religious thought has been 
toward the city where Christianity was born and 
cradled, and which is the type of the Jerusalem 
which is above, and is the mother of us all. But 
such conceptions will not satisfy the rich predictions 
of holy men, who spake as they were borne along 
by the Holy Ghost. The multitude of camels shall 
bring the pilgrims of the East, as the ships of Tarsh- 
ish the children of the West. Through the wide- 
open gates the streams of worshipers shall pour 
into the city, bringing the wealth of the nations. 
Instead of being forsaken and hated, so that no man 
passed through, she shall become an eternal excel- 
lency, the joy of many generations. 

Even in those halcyon days when righteousness 
shall begin to cover the earth—as waters the sea— 
when tidal waves of salvation shall sweep over the 
nations, some will be recalcitrant. The true con- 
ception of the Millennium does not imply that every 
single soul will be regenerate; but that the prepon- 
derating influences of the world shall be in favor of 


148 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


whatsoever things are just, pure, lovely, and of good 
report. As now the heavenlies are filled with the 
evil spirits, who rule the darkness of this world, so 
then they shall be filled with Christ and his saints, 
who shall rule the cities and continents in the direc- 
tion of righteousness, temperance, and peace. But 
even under these favorable circumstances, the evil 
of the human heart will break out into obstinate 
rebellion, and some will refuse to submit to Israel’s 
God. “And it shall be, that whoso of all the families 
of the earth goeth not up to Jerusalem to worship 
the King, the Lord of Hosts, upon them there shall 
be no rain. And if the family of Egypt go not up, 
andcomenot, * * *_ there shall be the plague.” 

This adaptation of punishment to the circum- 
stances of the lands which are the objects of Divine 
chastisement is very significant. Clearly it would 
be no punishment to the land of Egypt for rain to 
be withheld, as her prolific harvests depend on her 
mighty river. But she shall not therefore escape 
judgment; but for her there shall be the stroke of 
the plague. God leaves no sin unchastised; but He 
knows how to lay his hand on the spot where we 
are most vulnerable. There He touches us, and 
thus we are brought most swiftly to repentance. 
We cry, “Ah, if it had been anything but that, I 
could have borne it; but that was my Benjamin, my 
Rachel, the apple of my eye, the one sensitive spot 
where I am capable of the intensest suffering.” 

At this juncture a shaft of light breaks over the 
coming age, which stands revealed in all its beauties 


MILLENNIAL AGE, AND THIS. 149 


of holiness. We all know that the High Priest 
wore on his forehead a golden plate, on which the 
sacred words, HoLINEss To THE LorD, were en- 
graved. It was always on his miter, held there by 
its lace of blue, that the people of Israel might be 
accepted before the Lord (Exod. xxviii. 36-38). 
But here the prophet sees that same inscription on 
the bells of the horses, and the common vessels of 
household use. “In that day shall there be upon 
the bells of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; 
and the pots in the Lord’s house shall be like the 
bowls before the altar. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem 
and Judah shall be Holiness unto the Lord of 
Hosts.” 

Holiness stands for three things: Separation from 
sin and unbecomingness; devotion to the service of 
God; and that growing likeness to Him which is 
the necessary consequence of receiving Him as an 
Almighty Tenant of the heart. For holiness can 
never be an inherent and personal attribute; it must 
always be ours in proportion as we are God-pos- 
sessed and God-filled. They are holiest who have 
most of God. It is a remarkably vivid portrayal of 
the distinction between Judaism and Christianity, 
that the word, which of all others characterized the 
exclusiveness and limitations of the old law, should 
be here appropriated to the most ordinary and com- 
monplace of domesticities. 

_ We have here, first, the abolition of the distine- 
tion between sacred and secular. Some people 
resemble ships, which are built in water-tight com- 


150 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


partments; all their religion is kept carefully apart 
from the ordinary interests and pursuits of their 
existence. For instance, they go religiously to their 
place of worship on Sunday, but would be almost 
horrified if you were to mention the name of God 
in their drawing-room, or at the dining-table. They 
might even look at their guest reprovingly, as much 
as to say, There is a place and a time for everything, 
but not here or now. - With such, Holiness to the 
Lord is well enough for the high priest and for the 
sanctuary; but it has no place on the bells of the 
horses, or the vessels of household use. Certainly 
the hostler in the stable, or the domestic servant 
about her duties, would have no right to use so 
reverend a designation. 

But surely this rigid separation between duties 
as sacred and duties as secular, between clean and 
unclean, between holy and common, cannot be justi- 
fied in the face of the teachings of the New Testa- 
ment, which bid us do all, even eating and drinking, 
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and for the glory of 

\. God Cr Corme 3 Patol. iiigr7). 

Besides, consider the genius and inner heart of 
Christianity. (1) It brings us into the possession 
of a new life. We are Christians, not because we 
avow a certain creed, or conform to certain outward 
exercises; but because we have received the life, the 
Eternal Life, which was with the Father, and was 
manifested unto us in Jesus. And is it possible to 
restrict the manifestations of life? Can a flower 
weave its petals and exhale its fragrance to order? 


MILLENNIAL AGE, AND THIS. 151 


Can the young things of the woodlands and meadows 
be thus today and something else tomorrow? Can 
a child observe days and times in its laughter, its 
tears, its appetite? Is not God’s life always the 
same in its abundant and infinite variety? So surely 
the life of God in the soul should, and must, express 
itself in all the outgoings of our existence—in 
speech, act, movement—equally on the six days as 
the one day; as much in the kitchen, or the shop, as 
the church. If you are possessed by the life of the 
Holy One, it will as certainly appear as the idiosyn- 
crasy of your character, which underlies, molds 
and fashions your every gesture. 

(2) Moreover, Christianity is Consecration to 
Christ. It may be questioned if we have a right 
to call ourselves Christians unless we regard Him 
as our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King, and are 
deliberately obeying and serving Him. But if we 
are going to reserve our religion to certain days, 
places, and actions, we necessarily exclude Him 
from all that is not contained within the fences we 
erect. If it be measured by days, we exclude from 
the government, and therefore the peace, of Christ, 
at least six-sevenths of our time. Does the owner 
of a slave expect his ownership to be curtailed and 
narrowed after this fashion? Would he consider 
that he was receiving the value of his purchase- 
money, which he had paid down for the exclusive 
and unceasing rights of proprietorship? And what 
tight have we to suppose that our Master Christ 
will be satisfied with an arrangement which asks 


152 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


Him to accept a part for the whole, a composition 
for the entire debt? 

(3) Then, also, the needs of the world demand 
an entire and unbroken religious life. The world 
does not see us in our religious exercises, whether 
in our private retirement or our public worship. It 
has no idea, therefore, of the anguish of our peni- 
tence, the earnestness of our desires for a righteous 
and noble life, the persistency of our endeavors. 
And if we do not give evidence of our religion in 
our dealings with matters that the men of the world 
understand, they will naturally and rightly consider 
that religion is an unpractical dream, the child of 
superstition and emotion. We need to witness to 
the world, where its paths intersect ours, and in 
regard to matters it can appreciate. If we are 
found to be more patient, truthful, honest, than 
other men; if our integrity can only be accounted 
for by causes beyond our ken—then the children of 
this age will be prepared to acknowledge that we 
have come into contact with sources of life and 
strength, which are clearly realities, but of which 
they know nothing. 

For these reasons, we should refuse to maintain 
the false distinction between things that are sacred 
and those that are secular. There are right and 
wrong things in the world. The wrong ones are, 
of course, to be fenced out of our lives; but all 
right ones are sacred. Everything that may be done 
at all, may be done to Christ, and in being done to 
Him, is rendered holy. The hostler with his horses, 


MILLENNIAL AGE, AND THIS. 153 


the servant with the vessels of her household service, 
the clerk with his pen, the mechanic with his tool, 
the guide with his alpenstock, the artist with his 
camera, may realize that those mystic words are 
graven on his forehead, and on the instrument of 
his toil. And each one of us, on entering the work- 
shop of his life, may feel that he is serving God 
there as much as if he were entering the shrine of 
some holy temple, and were called to minister at 
God’s altar. The pots and vessels may be looked 
on as though they were the vessels in which the 
victim’s blood was collected as it flowed from the 
sacrificial knife. 

Il. THERE MAY BE THE INCLUSION OF MANY 
THINGS WHICH ONCE SEEMED SECULAR, IF WE CAN 
CoNSECRATE THEM TO CuRIst.—The Jews were 
forbidden to own horses. With a tear in his voice, 
the sacred chronicler records it as a sign of Solo- 
mon’s degeneracy that he brought horses up out of 
Egypt. Horses were associated with the pride and 
pomp of kings, and savored of the arm of flesh, 
therefore they were prohibited. “Some trust in 
chariots,” said the psalmist, “and some in horses; 
but we will remember the name of the Lord our 
God.” But here they are specially accepted and 
acknowledged. They are included in the prophet’s 
anticipation of the blessed future. But, notice, 
HoLiness TO THE Lorp is now engraven upon the 
bells that make sweet music as they move. 

What a graphic and significant manner of teach- 
ing one of the profoundest lessons! 


154 THE PROPHET, OF HOPE. 


Judaism, with its special days, places, and men, 
had its part in the religious training of the race. 
It was the kindergarten of human childhood; but 
when we become men, we put away childish things. 
Probably every life, in its earliest stages, must be. 
fenced and partitioned off from things which, how- 
ever innocent in themselves, are prejudicial to its 
development. It was impossible for God to teach 
men what holiness meant, save by this process of 
prohibition, of separation, and of setting apart. 
But, when the lesson was fully learned, the Levitical 
code was abolished, and Jesus came, saying, “It 
was said to them of old time; * * * but J say 
unto you.” The horses which might not be used, 
came to be as much in vogue as the bowls of the 
altar or the household vessels, and to bear upon 
their harness the significant sentence that gleamed 
aforetime on the forehead of Aaron and his sons. 

In the middle ages, saintly souls dreaded to enter 


\ the sacred relationships of home, and thought that 


\ 


the babble and prattle of babes, and the love of wife, 


| were inimical to their highest interests. But they 


\ 


\ sadly misread Christ’s meaning; they forgot that 


i 
4 


\ He sat at Cana’s feast; they failed to understand 
that nothing included in God’s original creation 


\ . 
could be common and unclean. It is a more excel- 


| lent and Christ-like way to follow the dictates of 


ane and of the heart, only with the resolve and 


purpose that human love should be a chalice full of 
he Eternal and the Divine, and that on the most 


MILLENNIAL AGE, AND THIS. 155 


intimate relationships of life “Holiness to the Lord” 
should be inscribed. 

So with recreation. It is not wrong to unbend 
the bow in manly games, that develop the sinews 
and expand the lungs, or to join in the pastimes 
of your age and companions, so long as you can 
write on bat and football, on lawn tennis bat and 
piano, on oar and paddle, on skate or sleigh, the 
words of the High Priest’s frontal, HoLINEss TO 
THE Lorp. Whatever you cannot pray over, refuse 
to touch. Whatever you cannot make a matter of 
prayer and consecration is legitimate. Every thing 
is good, and not to be refused, which can be received 
with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the Word 
of God and prayer. 

The same rule applies to the enjoyment of nature, 
of art, of music, of beautiful objects, whether sculp- 
tured or carved, photographed or painted. True 
holiness does not consist in bare walls, and hard 
seats, and a dingy environment; but in all that 
resembles God’s work in nature, which is exquis- 
itely beautiful, whether it be the creepers that change 
to crimson in the autumn, or the enameling of the 
rocks, or the tesselated floors of the woodlands, or 
the silver features of the stars. 

Take the horses into the economy of your life; 
only see to it that the memory of “Holiness to the 
Lord” recurs to you at every movement of their 
arching necks. 

(3) Let us note that there must be an elevation 
of all life to the level of our sacred and religious 


156 THE PROPHET OF HOPE. 


moments. It would be, of course, possible to oblit- 
erate the distinction between sacred and secular by 
treating all as secular; but this would be a desecra- 
tion of our life indeed. The process is not one of 
leveling-down, but of leveling-up. The Lord’s 
house must be established ‘on the top of the moun- 
tains,” and all nations are to flow to it. It is not 
that the priest is to take off his sacred emblem when 
he enters the sanctuary; but that he is to put it on 
when he goes to the stable to mount his horse. It 
is not that the bowls of the altar are to be ejected 
from their sacred office there; but that common ves- 
sels—“every pot in Jerusalem and Judah’’—is to be 
treated with equal regard. It is not that the sanc- 
tuary is to be abolished; but that all other places 
are to become oratories for prayer and shrines for 
holy service. It is thus that we are able to dwell in 
the house of the Lord all the days of our life. 

We cannot make all time sacred unless we set 
apart special hours and days for God. We cannot 
carry the spirit of pure and undefiled religion among 
our fellows, unless we often enter into our closet 
and shut the door, and pray unto our Father, who - 
is in secret. We cannot do all tasks to the glory 
of God, unless we have mountains of transfiguring 
prayer. We cannot read all books and papers in a 
religious spirit, unless we are loving and systematic 
Bible-students. We cannot use ordinary vessels as 
though they were the bowls of the altar, unless we 
handle the bowls of that altar, which is in the pos- 
session of all holy souls, who do not serve the taber- 


MILLENNIAL AGE, AND THIS. 157 


nacle. ‘Wherefore, forsake not the assembling of 
yourselves, as the manner of some is’; * * * 
and, “Remember the Sabbath-day to keep it holy.” 

So many bells ring out in our lives. The morn- 
ing wakening bell, and the school bell; the work 
bell for the mechanic, and the shop bell for the 
assistant; the visitors’ bell on one side of the door, 
and the tradesmen’s on the other ; the wedding bells 
with their merry peal, and the funeral bells with 
their sorrowful monotone; the bicyclist’s bell warn- 
ing the foot passenger on to the pavement, and the 
bells on the sleigh horses, as they draw the vehicle 
over the frozen snow. To many of these, in times 
past, we have given a lethargic, listless, and indolent 
response; we have resented their intrusion on our 
slumbers and plans; we have chafed against their 
peremptory summons. But enough of this. Hence- 
forth, let us hear in their clangor or chime the call 
of God to the tasks to which He summons us; let 
us obey with alacrity, looking to Him for grace 
and strength to do whatever He would have us do, 
and realizing that on each the inscription of Aaron’s 
frontal-piece is engraven, 


“HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD.” 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 


AT CLAREMONT 
CALIFO2MIA 





bel 


























BS 
1665 
M4gQ 


BS1665 .M49 
Meyer, F. B. (Frederick Brotherton), 18 
The prophet of hope : studies in Zechar 


Meyer, Frederick Brotherton, 1847- 192° 


The prophet of hope; studies in Zecha 
New York ;etc.) F. H. Revell co. 1900, 


187 p. 19cm. 


Bip mage Oo Te Zechariah—-Critieism, ix 
ALY 4 cost 


fobrary of Compress f 


Ate ht 
ed ate ; 
fy’ a EEA S 
i a 


ate 
A) 





