THIS BOOK BELONGS TO 
ROBERT BRUCE LANDIS 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2025 


https://archive.org/details/owb_T4-AJW-054 


The Angels of God 


by 
A. C. Gaebelein 


THE GOSPEL HOUR, INC. 
Oliver B. Greene, Founder 
Box 2024, Greenville, South Carolina 29602 


First printed in 1924 
by “Our Hope” Publication Office 


Printed in the United States of America 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER WIS... soit Mee cena aa er ins Cie nc 
The Heavens and their glory—Immeasurable Dis- 
tances.—Sixty thousand billion miles.—Spiral Nebulae 
are agglomorations of suns.—Ancient nations and as- 
tronomy.—David’s statement.—Is Man the only in- 
telligent Creature in the Universe?—Are the stars in- 
habited?—Professor Lowell and Mars.—The answer 
from the Bible. 


le 9X. o\.c 6.0 ©: e/a Sis 0] (0 ws) atels oe ee a0 9.4 cree 0.0.0 .6)4 04 018 


Prominence of Angels in both Testaments.—Sadducees 
and Modernists.—Testimony of Christ as to the Angels. 
—Mythologies of other nations——Angels a class of 
Beings above man.—The Sons of God shouting for joy. 
—The innumerable company of Angels——The Arch- 
angel, the Seraphim and Cherubim. 


CHAPTER WITT tiara cei iat coed aaea thee eebee Ge tore te 
The Angel of the Lord.—Not a created Angel, but the 
Lord Himself.—The Metatron of Jewish tradition.— 
Hagar and the Samaritan woman——Abraham in 
Mamre.—The Lord His guest.—Prayer for Sodom.— 
At Isaac’s offering.—Jacob and the Angel.—The Angel, 
the Redeemer at Peniel.—In the burning bush.—Angel 
of the Presence.—Joshua sees the Captain of our Sal- 
vation.—Gideon and Manoah.—The destruction of the 
Assyrian Army.—The Angel of Jehovah in the Book 
of Revelation. 


CHARTERS Viena a reig cre catia Maat e iatsl si cus ego onerateeeteteteis 
Angels are Spirits.—Have they Bodies?—Entertaining 
Angels unawares.—Take on visible bodies for physical 
manifestation.—They also have permanent bodies.— 
Not bones and flesh—Corinthians xv.—Celestial and 
spiritual bodies—Christ’s answer to the Sadducees.— 
Nature of bodies unrevealed—Summary.—Where do 
they dwell?—The three heavens. 


CHAPTER Vb eins oi tioe ce entero eniam aeps ae seiaj ele loysiabe «seme te 
Lucifer, the Son of the Morning.—His glory and his 
fall—He had a throne.—His original dwelling place, 
our earth.—The Scripture evidence (Gen. i:2).—Angels 
have their own habitations—The Father’s House.— 
What are the many mansions?—The Star Flower.— 
Christ in the midst.—In the Church.—In Glory.—In 
the Universe.—The great Worship. 


3 


CHAPTER Vie cee ie ee oe eel ee eee 


The Ministry of Angels in the third heaven.—The Sera- 
phim and what they teach us.—Bishop Bull’s remarks. 
—The Cherubim.—The sentinels of Eden.—Above the 
Mercy Seat.—lIsrael’s camp.—In Ezekiel and Revela- 
tion.—Court Days in glory.—Job’s revelation.—Satan 
the accuser——Not yet cast out——Another Court Day 
in heaven (1 Kings xxii:19-23). 


CHAPTERS Viv ores co ian iale Sects ia oat ala ete wialagatetelakatt ieee 


More about Angels in the New Testament than in the 
Old.—Angels not ominiscient—1 Peter i:12.—Their 
deep interest in redemption.—The great conflict—The 
opposing forces—The Angels in Sodom.—Abraham and 
Elieser.—Jacob and the Angels at Mahanaim.—The Law 
ordained by Angels——Angelic protection.—Daniel’s 
companions and Daniel in the Lion’s den.—Watching 
and waiting for redemption. 


CHAPTER? VET 2 ties sates cose cnn cee eet anaes 


CHAPTER Ix 


CHAPTER X 


Another court day in heaven.—The 400 silent years.— 
Zechariah and the Angel.—Gabriel sent to the Virgin 
of Nazareth.—Joseph’s vision of an Angel.—Angels 
announce the birth of Christ—-Why Angels are so 
prominent in the Gospels and the last book of the Bible. 
—Joseph warned by an Angel.—Ministering to Christ. 
—During His life—The Angel in Gethsemane.—The 
witnesses of His suffering and at death.—Present at His 
resurrection and ascension. 


ee 


The denial of Modernism.—Christ’s testimony con- 
cerning Angels——As to their corporality—Their in- 
terest in the earth.—Rejoicing over repenting sinners. 
—Lazarus and the Angels.—In connection with His 
second coming.—In the kingdom parables described 
as reapers.—Present at the judgment throne.—The 
meaning of Matthew xviii:10. 


Cy 


The great day of His return to heaven.—At the right 
hand of God in glorious exaltation—The Lord Jesus 
Christ present in heaven in His glorious humanity.— 
A real body.—The great vision for Angels ——The mar- 
vellous redemption.—Man taken in redemption above 


the Angels.—Shares His glory.—The testimony of 
Hebrews i. 


4 


54 


61 


75 


80 


SAP PRICE AL cee as ati, Sat na sioe kaneis « as aerate 86 


Why miracles and supernatural manifestations.— 
Jews require a sign.—Angels also still visibly present. 
—Apostles delivered by Angels.—Used in judgment.— 
Philip guided by an Angel.—Cornelius sees an Angel.— 
Paul’s experience.—Angels no longer visible in this age 
and why it is so.—They are still active on earth.— 
Ephesians iii:8-11.—Present in worship.—1 Corinthians 
xi:10.—How they are now the ministering spirits for 
the Saints.—Practical value of this truth. 


CHAP ERM ORI re et ree beet ee tes eee eee bes 102 
The waiting heavens.—Christ waiting and Angels wait- 
ing.—His coming again and what it will mean.—The 
visible manifestation.—1 Thess. iv:16-18.—Present at 
the Judgment seat.—Another great and glorious court 
day in heaven.—Satan rebuked and cast out.—Reve- 
lation and Angels used in judgment.—The heavenly 
hosts manifested in the day of His glory.—They are 
used by Him.—Hebrews i:6.—The Rages ascending 
and descending.—Conclusion. 


CHAPTER 1 


The Heavens and their glory—Immeasurable Dis- 
tances.—Sixty thousand billion miles.—Spiral Neb- 
ulae are agglomorations of suns.—Ancient nations 
and astronomy.—David’s statement.—Is Man the 
only intelligent Creature in the Universe?—Are the 
stars inhabited?—Professor Lowell and Mars.— 
The answer from the Bible. 


i HE heavens declare the glory of God; and the 

firmament showeth His handiwork” (Ps. xix:1). 
How marvellous these heavens are! It staggers the 
finite mind of man to listen to the wonder-story told 
by astronomy. It fills the heart with awe and reveals 
to man his own insignificance. Two hundred and 
forty thousand miles from our earth is the Moon, our 
satellite—so near, yet so mysterious. Light travels at 
186,000 miles in a second, so that it only takes one and 
one-third seconds to cover the distance between Earth 
and Moon. Our next door neighbor in our solar 
system is the planet Mars. Mars is thirty-seven 
million miles from man’s habitation. If supposed 
beings are dwelling there our Earth would appear to 
them as a brilliant star. Next we reach the planet 
Saturn at a distance of 750 million miles from us. 
Saturn’s diameter is nine and one-half times larger than 
our own and this planet is surrounded by immense rings 
measuring nearly 200,000 miles across. 2,500 million 
miles from the Sun is the planet Neptune. There are 
other planets, still unknown, beyond Neptune, which 
belong to the outermost regions of our solar system. 
And beyond are the almost infinite heavens. There 

7 


8 CHAPTER I 


25 billion miles from our Earth every star is a 
shining sun. ‘Whatever star we approach, we find 
in it a sun like a blinding furnace. These innumerable 
centers of light, heat, electricity and gravitational 
attraction only appear to us as small luminous points 
on account of the immense abysses which separate us 
from them. The nearest sun, our nearest star in 
space, burns at 276,000 times the distance which separ- 
ates us from the Sun, i.e., 25 billion miles from the 
Earth. Travelling with the speed of an express train 
flung into space at 40 miles an hour towards the nearest 
star, without any stoppageor slowing down, we should not 
arrive at our destination until after an uninterrupted 
flight of 75 million years.”” But even this inconceivable 
space dwindles in view of the fact that in a distance 
of 60,000 billion miles there are other wonderful suns. 
And beyond that? Another mighty universe. The 
spiral nebulae, which the powerful telescopes bring 
within human vision, are not, as once supposed, balls 
of gaseous matter, but agglomerations of suns, in such 
a distance and in such numbers that the finite mind of 
man is unable even to express it. ‘“Then I understand 
that all the stars which have ever been observed in 
the sky, the millions of luminous points which constitute 
the Milky Way, the innumerable celestial bodies, suns 
of every magnitude and of every degree of brightness, 
solar systems, planets and satellites, which by millions 
and hundreds of millions succeed each other in the void 
around us, that whatever human tongues have desig- 
nated by the name of universe, do not in the infinite 
represent more than an archipelago of celestial islands 
and not more than a city in a grand total of population, 
a town of greater or lesser importance. In this city of 


CHAPTER I 9 


the limitless empire, in this town of a land without 
frontiers, our Sun and its system represents a single 
point, a single house among millions of other habita- 
tions. Is our solar system a palace or a hovel in this 
great city? Probably a hovel. And the earth? The 
Earth is a room in the solar mansion—a small dwelling, 
miserably small.’’* 

The heavens declare the glory of God! And such a 
glory!’ From earliest times man has been occupied 
with the heavens and their unfathomable mysteries. 
Astronomy and astrology were the chief occupations 
of the wise men of Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia and other 
great empires of the past. The inspired pen of David, 
Judah’s great king, tells us how he contemplated these 
wonderful heavens. “When I consider the heavens, 
the work of Thy fingers, the moon and the stars which 
Thou hast ordained—What is man that Thou art 
mindful of him? And the Son of man that Thou 
visitest Him?” (Ps. viii:3, 4). 

He marvelled at the condescension of the mighty 
Creator, who called all these suns and stars into ex- 
istence out of nothing, that He should be mindful 
of man, the creature of the dust. He felt what every 
intelligent human being must feel, that this earth is 
but a little grain of sand on the mighty shores of uni- 
verses, and man, the tiny creature upon this little 
speck. 

Here another question arises. Is man the only 
creature of God in this vast space, amidst these millions 
and millions of flaming worlds, who has a mind to 
appreciate and to contemplate these master works of 
God? Has God no other creatures of intelligence who 


*Camille Flammarion. 


10 CHAPTER I 


praise Him for all His works and serve Him? Are 
these millions of stars without tenants? Is our 
world the only world upon which a race dwells with 
capacity to know God and His works? If man is 
God’s only creature, gifted by Him with powers to 
search out His creation, to admire His works and to 
praise Him for them, how little is the praise and glory He 
gets from His creatures! The vast majority of our 
race, though walking erect, has only eyes for the things 
of the dust, and never thinks of Him who has created 
all. And, worse than that, countless thousands deny 
the existence of a personal God, speak of matter as 
being eternal, self-existent; and earth and the heavens 
as they are now the result of an imaginary evolutionary 
process, the when and how of which is still, and will 
always be, enshrouded in an impenetrable mystery. 
A very small part of our race worship and praise 
Him. Is it God-like to have fashioned universes with 
no other creatures in these heavenly depths to appre- 
ciate Him and His creation, than man dwelling on this 
little globe we call earth? 

The question is an old one. The ancients thought 
of it. For centuries it has occupied some of the great 
minds of ourrace. Astronomers have been asked about 
other inhabited worlds and have given often an affirma- 
tive answer. Some years ago, during a stay in Arizona, 
the writer visited Flagstaff. We called on the widely- 
known astronomer, Professor Lowell. At that time, 
much was being said in the astronomical world about 
Mars and the possible intelligent beings living on that 
planet. Professor Lowell claimed that there is intelli- 
gent lifeon Mars. He had noticed through his magnifi- 
cent telescope that certain lines on the surface of Mars 


CHAPTER I 11 


were changing and he claimed to have discovered that 
somebody is at work in digging gigantic canals. He had 
taken many photographs showing the supposed activi- 
ties of intelligent creatures. He showed us these photo- 
graphs. When the time came for us to ask him a few 
questions to satisfy our curiosity, we found that he 
could not answerus. “Who, doyou think, are the beings, 
living on Mars?” “I donot know.” “What kind of a race 
are they, and have they bodies like ours?” “I do not 
know.” “If there are real beings there, where did they 
come from?” “TI donot know.” Sowecame away, having 
admired the nice big glass on top of the mountain, and 
the fine photographs, but not a bit wiser than before. It 
has been almost universally conceded by the foremost 
astronomers that Mars has conditions which are suitable 
for life as we know it on our earth. Like our earth, 
Mars has dry land and oceans. The spectroscope has 
revealed that Mars has an atmosphere like our own; 
there is oxygen and nitrogen. Venus, also, it is claimed, 
has similar conditions. But who can tell of the other 
suns and their planets and their possible inhabitants? 
From the guesses of science we turn to the revelation 
of God, the Bible. Does the Word of God answer 
our question about other beings in this immense 
space, which we call the heavens, who know God as 
Creator, who know His works and who serve Him? 
And if there are such beings in existence, who are they, 
where are they and what are they doing? The Bible 
is not silent on these questions. God’s Holy Word 
gives us an answer. There is another class of beings 
above man. These beings are the Angels of God, the 
heavenly hosts, the tenants of the heavens, the in- 
numerable company of the unseen servants of God. 


CHAPTER II 


Prominence of Angels in both Testaments.—Sadducees 
and Modernists.—Testimony of Christ as to the 
Angels.—Mythologies of other nations.—Angels a 
class of Beings above man.—The Sons of God 
shouting for joy.—The innumerable company of 
Angels.—The Archangel, the Seraphim and 
Cherubim. 


ROM Genesis to Revelation the angels of God are 

prominently mentioned, one hundred and eight 
times in the Old Testament and one hundred and sixty- 
five times in the New Testament. They are seen 
throughout sacred history. Their activities in heaven 
and on earth in the past are recorded in both Testaments, 
also their future manifestations are prophetically re- 
vealed. There can, therefore, be no question as to the 
existence of these supernatural beings for the infallible 
Word of God speaks of them as such. The sect of the 
Sadducees among the Jews did not believe in angels 
(Acts xxiii:8). Modernism of today, the Twentieth 
Century Sadduceeism, also denies the existence of such 
a class of beings. Destructive criticism, which has given 
birth to Modernism, claims that the belief in angels 
must be traced to the period of the exile, when the 
Jews came in contact with Babylonian and Persian 
myths. Like so many other precious things in the 
Word of God, belief in angels is said to be of Babylon- 
ian origin. We do not follow these so-called “schol- 

12 


CHAPTER II 13 


arly” inventions, which are aimed at the destruction 
of the Bible as our only authority. Over against all 
these denials we put but one witness, the Son of God, 
our Lord Jesus Christ. What did He have to say 
about angels? He confirmed the teachings as to angels 
in the Hebrew Scriptures. He spoke of them as real 
beings. In His kingdom parables He mentions them 
as the reapers at the close of the age. He spoke of 
them as associated with Him in His second coming. 
He rebuked Peter’s action in defending Him in the 
garden by a reference to angels, ““Thinkest thou that 
I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently 
give me more than twelve legions of angels?” (Matt. 
xxvi:53). He described their very nature as well as 
their interest in what is going on in the earth (Luke 
xv:10) and that in the days of His kingdom they shall 
be seen ascending and descending upon the Son of 
Man (John i:51). Modernism gives an answer to these 
testimonies of our Lord, which dishonors Him in such 
a manner that we cannot be in doubt as to the source 
from whence these infidel theories emanate. They 
say that our infallible Lord, He who is the Truth, 
mingled with His instructions the erroneous notions 
of those to whom they were addressed. They claim, 
perhaps He knew, or perhaps He knew not, that 
angels never existed, but He accommodated Himself 
to the beliefs current among the Jews in His day. 
We add one more argument. As we shall show later, 
our blessed Lord, after His resurrection, was exalted 
in His glorified humanity to a place above the angels, 
receiving a more excellent name than they (Heb. i:4). 
Now, if angels are only imaginary beings and do not 
exist, then we might conclude that His exaltation and 


14 CHARTER TI! 


inheritance is also only imaginary and has no reality. 
Like everything else in Modernism, the denial of 
angels strikes at the Deity and glory of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

The mythologies of nearly all the ancient nations 
speak of such beings. Babylonian mythology pictured 
them as gods who conveyed messages from gods to men. 
Roman and Greek mythology had its genii, semi-gods, 
fauns, nymphs and naiads, who visited the earth. 
Hesiod, next to Homer, the earliest Greek poet, said: 
“Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth.” 
Egypt and Eastern nations believed in such super- 
natural, unseen creatures. The belief is well-nigh 
universal. Mythologies are the faint and distorted 
echoes of a common primeval knowledge possessed by 
the race. If such beings of a higher rank than man did 
not exist we would not find them in the traditional 
beliefs of the nations of old. 

The Bible teaches that angels are a class of created 
beings above man. Man is made a little lower than 
the angels (Ps. viii:5; Heb. ii:7). This disposes of 
another false conception. Some teach that believers 
who die, as well as children, become angels. Man can 
never be an angel, for angels are forever distinct from 
human beings. Man redeemed is not lifted in redemp- 
tion to the dignity of an angel, but in Christ man is 
carried into a higher rank than angels can ever occupy. 
More of that later. 

When were they created? The Bible gives no defi- 
nite answer to this question. But there is at least one 
passage from which we can learn by inference that they 
were created in the beginning, when God created the 
heavens and the earth. When that beginning was, no 


CHAPTER II 15 


scientist will ever discover by his research. Perhaps 
millions of years before man was put here the earth 
existed in another condition from what it is now. It 
must have been at the time of that original creation, 
when God created the class of beings whom we call 
angels. All was created by Him in the person of His 
Son, and for Him, including the invisible things, thrones, 
dominions, principalities and powers (Col. i:16). 

In the beautiful words with which Jehovah answered 
Job out of the whirlwind, we find this hint as to the 
time when the angels came into being. 

Where wast thou when I laid earth’s foundation? 

Tell me if thou knowest and hast understanding. 

Who set the measures thereof? Dost thou know? 

Or who upon it stretched the measuring line? 

On what were the foundations made to rest? 

Or who laid then the cornerstone, 

When the morning-stars sang together, 

And all the sons of God shouted for joy?—Job xxxviii:4-7. 
That Jehovah here refers to creation is perfectly clear. 
They were, therefore, in existence when God laid 
the foundation of the earth, when He first created. 
And as they beheld His wonders in creation, they 
shouted for joy. We must not overlook the name given 
to them. They are called the Sons of God. Six times 
we read of the Sons of God in the Old Testament and 
each time it means these supernatural beings (Gen. 
vi:2; Job. i:6, ii:l, xxxviii:7; Ps. xxix:1, Ixxxix:6). 
But it must be noted that while angels are called 
Sons of God, they are never called the Sons 
of the Lord. It is in the Hebrew always Bnai* 
Elohim (Elohim is God’s name as Creator) and never 
Bnai Jehovah. The Bnai Jehovah are sinners redeemed 


*Bnai is the Hebrew for sons. 


16 CHAR TERAEL! 


and brought into the filial relationship by redemption. 
The Bnai Elohim are unfallen beings, Sons of God by 
creation. ‘The angels are the Sons of God in the first 
creation; sinners saved by grace are the Sons of God 
in the new creation. 

Inasmuch as they are sexless, according to the testi- 
mony of our Lord (they marry not nor are they given 
in marriage—Matt. xxii:30), and therefore do not 
multiply as the human race does, they were all created 
at one time in the beginning. Scripture informs us 
that their number is very large. Daniel, in one of his 
night visions, saw them before the throne, “thousand 
thousands ministered unto Him and ten thousand 
times ten thousand stood before Him” (Dan. vii:10). 
John tells us of his vision, similar to Daniel’s, “And I 
beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round 
about the throne, and the living creatures and the elders, 
and the number of them was ten thousand times ten 
thousand and thousands of thousands” (Rev. v:11). 
Hebrews xi:22 speaks also of ‘an innumerable company 
of angels” (literally: myriads). Multitudes of heav- 
enly hosts appeared at the birth of Christ, shouting 
once more for joy at the beginning of the new creation 
(Luke ii:13). How large their number is only He 
knows whose name is Jehovah-Zebaoth, the Lord of 
Hosts. 

Scripture indicates that in the angelic world, this 
vast kingdom of light and glory, there are different 
grades and ranks. In Ephesians i:21 and Col. i:16 
we read of principalities, thrones, dominions and 
powers, which exist in this unseen world. They are in 
the heavenlies. 


We also know there is an Archangel. Christendom 


CHAPTER, «Il 17 


speaks of archangels, and follows certain traditional, 
apocalyptic views of different archangels, but in 
Scripture only one archangel is seen. His name is 
Michael, which means, Who is like God? His name 
occurs three times. In Daniel xii:1, where his special 
work is mentioned in behalf of the remnant of Israel, 
here he is called the Great Prince. In Jude, verse 9, 
where we hear of him contending with the devil for the 
body of Moses, and in Rev. xii, where he appears as 
the victorious Jeader of the heavenly hosts warring 
against Satan and his angels. His voice will be heard 
when the Lord comes for His own (1 Thess. iv:17). 
Then we find Gabriel in Scripture. Gabriel means, 
The Mighty One. Both Jews and Christians have 
also called him an archangel without any Scriptural 
foundation, for he is never called by that name. He 
is a very august person. He, himself, bears witness 
to his place in glory, for he said to Zechariah the 
ministering priest, “I am Gabriel, that stand in the 
presence of God” (Lukei:19). From the throne of God 
he was commissioned (besides announcing the birth 
of John the Baptist) to bring to earth two of the great- 
est messages which ever left the courts of heaven. 
When Daniel prayed his great prayer of humiliation, 
Gabriel was called upon to carry the answer to the 
praying prophet of God. So swiftly did he pierce the 
immeasurable space that it took him but a few min- 
utes to reach Daniel and to interrupt his prayer 
(Dan. ix:21-23). But the greatest of all the messages 
any angel ever carried to earth was the message sent 
through Gabriel to the Virgin of Nazareth, announcing 
the coming incarnation of the Son of God (Luke 
i:26-38). The Cherubim and Seraphim are angelic 


18 CHAPIRER Fit 


beings of a very high rank and are always seen in con- 
nection with the throne of God. The Seraphim appear 
only in Isaiah’s temple vision (Isaiah vi). Ezekiel 
and John in the Apocalypse (as living creatures, 
erroneously translated, “‘beasts”) saw the Cherubim. 

And, now, before we examine the Scriptures as to 
the nature of the angels, their bodily forms, their dwell- 
ing places, their ministries in the past, in the present, 
and their wonderful relation to coming events and their 
future glorious display in the age to come, we must call 
attention to the person so frequently mentioned in the 
Old Testament as The Angel of the Lord. 


CHAPTER III 


The Angel of the Lord.—Not a created Angel, but the 
Lord Himself.—The Metatron of Jewish tradition. — 
Hagar and the Samaritan woman.—Abraham in 
Mamre.—tThe Lord His guest.—Prayer for Sodom.— 
At Isaac’s offering—Jacob and the Angel.—The 
Angel, the Redeemer at Peniel.—In the burning 
bush.—Angel of the Presence.—Joshua sees the 
Captain of our Salvation.—Gideon and Manoah.— 
The destruction of the Assyrian Army.—The Angel 
of Jehovah in the Book of Revelation. 


HE first time the word angel appears in Scripture 

is in the sixteenth chapter of the Book of Genesis. 
Hagar, the bondmaid, had been forced to leave the 
tent of Abraham; she fled from Sarai. ‘And the angel 
of the Lord found her by a fountain of water in the 
wilderness in the way to Shur” (Gen. xvi:7). This 
angel (Hebrew: Malach-Jehovah) is not a created 
being, but an uncreated angel. It is Jehovah, the 
Lord, who revealed Himself at different times in the 
garb of an angel and generally in the form of man. 
This Angel of the Lord is not a messenger sent from 
God, but a theophany, a manifestation of Deity. 
Jehovah, the “I Am,” is the Son of God. We have, 
therefore, in the repeated appearances of the angel of 
the Lord very interesting pre-incarnation manifesta- 
tions of the Son of God, our Lord. We shall see that in 
each case of the manifestation of this Angel of the Lord, 
the marks of Deity are present. 

19 


20 CHAPTER. Ubi 


It is noteworthy and of great interest that the ancient 
Jews in their traditions regarded the Angel of the Lord, 
in every instance, not as an ordinary angel, but as the 
only mediator between God and the world, the author 
of all revelations, to whom they gave the name 
Metatron. They called him “the angel of the counte- 
nance” (see Is. Ixiii:9), because he always sees and 
beholds God’s countenance, and they speak of him as 
the highest revelation of the unseen God, a partaker 
of His nature and of His majesty. They speak of him 
as the Shechinah. A talmudical statement declares 
“the Metatron, the Angel of the Lord, is united with the 
most high God by oneness of nature”, while another 
source speaks of him as‘“having dominion over all created 
things.”” The very ancient Midrash known as Otiot de 
Rabbi Akiba makes the following declaration about the 
Angel of the Lord, “The Metatron is the angel, the 
prince of the face, the prince of the law, the prince of 
wisdom, the prince of strength, the prince of glory, 
the prince of the temple, the prince of the kings, the 
prince of the rulers and of the high and exalted.” 
These ancient Jewish sources identify, therefore, the 
Angel of the Lord, whom they call Metatron, with the 
Messiah and as one with God. This was also the view 
of later Jews. Malachi iii:1 sanctions such an inter- 
pretation, the angel of the covenant is Jehovah, and the 
Messiah is the Angel of the Lord. 

We shall examine briefly a number of these manifesta- 
tions of the Angel of the Lord. As stated in the begin- 
ning of the chapter, He appeared first to Hagar. His 
visit to her reveals the tenderness of Him, who in time 
came to seek and to save that which is lost. He found 
her by a fountain of water in the wilderness. Knowing 


CHAPTER III 21 


all about her and her affliction, He asked, “Whence 
comest thou and whither wilt thou go?” He revealed 
Himself as the omniscient Lord, who knows the secrets 
of life, and made such promises which no created angel 
could have made. And Hagar called the name of the 
Lord, with whom she had been face to face in angelic 
form, ‘“Thou God seest me.” He had bared her secret 
and revealed the future. He is the same who many 
centuries later in incarnation met another woman at 
the fountain of water in Samaria and revealed her 
secrets and she too confessed that He is the all-seeing 
One. “He told me all that I ever did” (John iv:29). 

Years later, Abraham sat in the heat of the day in the 
tent door. Suddenly he beheld three strangers stand- 
ing nearby. He left his tent door and ran to meet 
them. Before one, perhaps the one in the middle, 
he prostrated himself and addressed him as Lord. 
There must have been some mark of dignity about this 
visitor that the man of faith recognized Him at once. 
His companions were two angels (Gen. xix:1). Abra- 
ham entertains the Lord and the Lord promises to 
Abraham a son. The two angels departed; the Lord 
tarried with Abraham, His friend. Then followed 
words spoken by Him. “Shall I hide from Abraham 
that thing which I do?” The same voice spoke in 
the upper room with disciples gathered about Himself, 
“Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant 
knoweth not what his lord doeth; but I have called you 
friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father 
I have made known unto you” (John xv:15). Abra- 
ham’s prayer of intercession for Sodom was addressed 
to the Lord as He stood in human form before him. 
Abraham knew Him in His glory as the judge, for he 


22 CHARA ERAMT 


said to Him, “Shall not the Judge of all the earth do 
right?” (Gen. xix:25). Then the Lord left and went 
towards Sodom, where the two angels had already pre- 
ceded Him. Remarkable is Gen. xix:24: “Then the 
Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brim- 
stone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.” The 
Jehovah on earth calls to Jehovah in heaven to execute 
the fiery judgment upon the wicked cities. It is He, 
who in the days of His flesh, said, “I and the Father 
are One,” the same who in future days will judge the 
world in righteousness, for the Father judgeth no man, 
but hath committed all judgment unto the Son 
(John v. 22). 

On the mount of sacrifice He appears again. Abra- 
ham is commanded to take his son, his only son, whom 
he loved and offer him for a burnt offering. And He 
who was present, who watched, who knew all things, 
who interfered when the knife was ready to slay, 
knew that He Himself, God’s only Son, should be the 
victim when His hour had come. When Abraham 
said to Isaac, “My son, God will provide Himself a 
Lamb for a burnt offering,” He knew He would be 
that Lamb. “And the angel of the Lord called unto 
him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham; 
and he said, Here am I. And He said, Lay not thine 
hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything to him, 
for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing that thou 
hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, from me” 
(Gen. xxii:11,12). This angel identifies Himself here 
with God. Abraham knew that it was the Lord, for 
he called the place “Jehovah-Jireh.” And when the 
angel of the Lord called the second time He gave such 
promises to Abraham which no created angel could 


CArAP YE RAIL 23 


ever have made. The Son of God in the form of an 
Angel was present in this scene, the same who in His 
days on earth said, “Before Abraham was, I Am.” 

Jacob knew Him well for he had most remarkable 
manifestations of Him throughout his life of conflict, 
ending in final victory. When upon his dying bed, 
blessing Joseph’s sons, the old patriarch said, “God, 
before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, 
the God which fed me all my life long unto this day, 
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the 
lads” (Gen. xlviii:15, 16). He knew that the Angel.of 
the Lord was none other than the Redeemer, the 
Holy One of Israel, as the prophet Isaiah so frequently 
called Him. He appeared unto him as the Angel ina 
dream, and then told him, “I am the God of Bethel” 
(Gen. xxxi:11, 13). 

But the greatest manifestation of this heavenly 
being Jacob had at the ford of Jabbok. There he was 
alone. All at once a man appeared who began to 
wrestle with him. When day was breaking, the 
mysterious visitor asked Jacob, ‘“‘What is thy name?” 
And he said, “Jacob.” And He said, “Thy name 
shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel; for as a prince 
hast thou power with God and with men and hast 
prevailed” (Gen. xxxii:24-32). Who was He? Modern 
criticism suggests that Jacob had probably a nightmare 
brought on by his deadly fear of Esau. Jacob knew 
with whom he had been face to face, for he called the 
place Peniel, “I have seen God face to face.” 
Hosea bears witness to it in his prophecy. ‘Yea, he 
had power over the angel, and prevailed. He wept 
and made supplication unto Him. He found him in 
Bethel and there He spake with him, even the Lord 


24 CHAPTER III 


God of hosts; the Lord is His memorial’ (Hosea 
xii:4-5). He who was with Jacob, the Angel, the 
Redeemer, is the same who left the promise to His own, 
“Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the 
age.” 

Moses beheld Him in the burning bush. The bush 
is on fire. The Shechinah-glory is there, but the bush 
is not consumed. Out of that flame came the voice of 
the Angel of the Lord. He was in the midst of the 
burning bush. Moses is commanded to take off his 
shoes, for he stands on holy ground, in a holy presence. 
And when that voice speaks and reveals who He is, 
Moses hid his face for he was afraid to look not upon 
an angel, but afraid to look upon God. The Angel of 
the Lord in the burning bush said: “‘I am the God of 
thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac 
and the God of Jacob * * * J Am that I Am.” 
He told Moses, too, that He knows the sorrows of His 
people, that He sees their affliction and hears their cry, 
and that He will come down to deliver, to bring out and 
to bring in. 

“In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the 
angel of his presence saved them; in his love and in his 
pity he redeemed them; and he bare them and carried 
them all the days of old” (Is. Ixiii:9). The Angel in 
the burning bush is the same, who revealed Himself in 
creature-form as the I Am, the loving, sympathizing 
Christ, who is now at the right hand of God, and sees, 
and knows, and hears, who has all power to redeem 
and to sustain. 

The same uncreated Angel, the gracious, loving 
Lord, was with Israel in the wilderness. He was their 
Guide and their Provider. He had brought them out 


CHAPTERAIII 25 


of Egypt (Numbers xx:16). In the history of Balaam 
we meet Him likewise, and while the blind heathen 
prophet did not see Him, his ass saw the Being of 
glory. 

He was with His people when they entered the land 
of promise. When camped in Gilgal, the place ot self- 
judgment, where the reproach of Egypt was rolled 
away, Joshua took a walk and looked upon the mighty, 
almost impregnable walls of Jericho. All at once there 
stood in his presence a man with a drawn sword. 
Joshua was not afraid to approach and to ask him who 
he was. But when the man reveals himself as the 
captain over the Host of the Lord, the mighty leader 
of the heaven’s unseen forces, Joshua fell on his face 
and worshipped, while the captain tells Joshua to do 
what forty years before He had spoken to Moses, 
“Loose thy shoes from off thy foot, for the place where- 
on thou standest is holy” (Joshua v: 13-15). It is the 
Angel, the Redeemer, the Protector of His people, 
who compasses them about. The great post-exilic 
prophet Zechariah saw Him in his first night vision 
in the same character as Joshua did. He appeared 
unto the young prophet in the figure of a man riding 
upon a red horse, who is followed by an army of horse- 
men, who are now ready to undertake for Jerusalem. 
The Captain of the host of the Lord is our Lord, the 
Captain of our salvation (Heb. ii:10), who will come 
again some day riding upon a white horse and followed 
by the armies of heaven (Rev. xix:11, etc.). 

In the second chapter of Judges He leads to Bochim, 
the place of weeping. Not a created angel can speak 
like as the Angel of the Lord spake at that time; only 
the Lord Himself can use such expressions: “I made 


26 CHAPT ERAGE: 


you go out of Egypt and I brought you unto the land 
that I sware unto your fathers, and I said I will never 
break my covenant with you. And ye shall make no 
league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw 
down their altars, but ye have not obeyed my voice. 
Why have ye done this?” Later in the history of Judges 
He appeared to Gideon. There, too, He is called 
Jehovah (Judges vi:14). Gideon addressed Him as 
‘Adonai,’ Lord, and begs permission to bring an 
offering. The Angel touches the offering with the end 
of his staff, and fire bursts forth from the rock and 
consumes it. Suddenly He vanished. Gideon is 
stricken with fear, when the Lord assures him, “Peace 
be unto thee! Fear not! Thou shalt not die.” Yes, 
He is the same who made peace, “Jehovah Shalom,” as 
Gideon called his altar, the Lord, our Peace. 

Still more significant and instructive was His visit to 
Manoah and his wife announcing the coming birth of 
ason. Manoah asked Him His Name. The author- 
ized version misses the meaning of the original text. 
The Angel answered not that His Name is secret, but 
that it is ‘‘Pele,” which means “Wonderful.” It is 
the same word which Isaiah uses, when predicting the 
Messiah, the Child to be born and the Son to be 
given, and that His Name would be “Wonderful.” 
Manoah and his wife also brought Him a sacrifice 
(Judges xiii:19-22). Then the mysterious visitor did 
wondrously. The flame of the burnt offering went up 
toward heaven and suddenly the Angel entered the 
flame and ascended to heaven from where He had come. 
It is a remarkable foreshadowing of the mighty work He 
would do in His incarnation, that He Himself would be 


CHA DRA HEI 27 


the sacrifice and after His finished work return to 
heaven. 

It was this mighty Angel of Jehovah who destroyed 
the Assyrian army which threatened destruction to the 
theocracy (2 Kings xix:35). He foreshadowed thereby 
the future deliverance of Jerusalem, when at the 
close of the times of the Gentiles that city is again 
besieged, when all nations will be gathered against 
Jerusalem to battle. Then, the prophecy of Zech- 
ariah tells us, the Lord shall go forth and fight against 
those nations, and His feet shall stand in that day upon 
the Mount of Olives (Zech. xiv:1-4). Then will He 
destroy with the brightness of His Coming the wicked 
one. We also mention 1 Chron. xxi:16, “And David 
lifted up his eyes, and saw the Angel of the Lord stand 
between the earth and the heavens having a drawn 
sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem.” 
In Psalm xxxiv:7 He is seen as the Guardian Angel, He 
who delivers. Rome has used this passage in her false 
doctrines that angels should be feared, worshipped 
and addressed in prayer. The Angel is Jehovah 
Himself. 

When we read the last book of the Bible, the Book 
of Revelation, we find that the Lord Jesus Christ, 
whose full glory is revealed in this capstone of the 
Bible, appears again under the symbolical name of 
an Angel. It seems to be the object of the Holy Spirit 
to remind us that He is the Angel of the Covenant of 
the Old Testament, who acts again in covenant 
promises, remembering mercy in wrath, when the 
present age ends and the kingdom age is about to 
begin. In Revelation vili:1-5, He is seen in His 


28 CHAPTER ITI 


ministry of intercession, offering the prayers of the 
Jewish Saints, who are suffering in the tribulation 
period, with which the times of the Gentiles close, and 
then He casts the judgment fire upon the earth. In 
Revelation x He is revealed as the mighty Angel, 
crowned with a rainbow, the covenant sign, His face, 
as it were the sun, and feet as pillars of fire. He stands 
upon the sea and the land. It is a perfect picture of 
our Lord, about to come to claim His crown right over 
sea and land.* 

We have written all this to show that in our treatise 
on the Angels of God we must separate this Angel of 
the Lord, as He is the Lord Himself. We shall now 
investigate more fully what Scripture teaches con- 
cerning the angels and their ministries. 


*For a fuller treatment of the Angel of the Lord in Revelation 
see the Exposition of Revelation, by the writer. 


CHAPTER IV 


Angels are Spirits—Have they Bodies?—Entertaining 
Angels unawares.—Take on visible bodies for 
physical manifestation.—They also have permanent 
bodies.—Not bones and flesh.—Corinthians xv.— 
Celestial and spiritual bodies.—Christ’s answer to 
the Sadducees.—Nature of bodies unrevealed.— 
Summary.—Where do they dwell?—The three 
heavens. 


HAT, then, is the nature of these wonderful 

creatures of God? The Word of God answers 
us that they are spirits. “Are they not all ministering 
spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be 
heirs of salvation?’ (Heb. i:14). This fact needs no 
further elucidation. 

The question is often asked by thoughtful believers, 
have angels bodies? If they have bodies, what kind of 
bodies do they possess? The question as to the 
corporality of the angels of God demands, therefore, 
a closer attention. Not a few expositors of Scripture 
maintain that a spirit must be immaterial, that 
spirituality excludes corporality and, therefore, the 
angels as spirits are bodyless beings. We know from 
Scripture that they appeared in visible form, generally 
in likeness of a human body. It seems these unseen 
spirits taking on visibility could not always be dis- 
tinguished from ordinary creatures. In an exhortation 
to hospitality we read in Hebrews xiii:1, “Be not 

29 


30 CHAPTER Lv 


forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby some have 
entertained angels unawares.” We learn from this 
that pious Hebrews in Old Testament times received 
strangers into their homes, entertained them, only to 
discover later that they were the messengers of God. 
We conclude, therefore, that they did not appear, 
as pictured in art, with wings and a halo about the 
head. They looked like as if they were common 
mortals. From other Scriptures we learn that their 
bodies sometimes possessed a marvellous glory. Their 
garments are described as shining, their faces like the 
lightning and their whole appearance in whiteness like 
the snow. How can this be reconciled with the as- 
sertion that they are only spirits? It is answered, that 
they possess the faculty of appearing in corporeal form 
at will; that they can pierce the universe at a speed 
even greater than the speed of light; that they can 
come and go unperceived by mortal sense, or appear 
visibly. There can be taken no exception to these state- 
ments. We also believe that these holy beings possess 
such a faculty of taking on bodily form and appear 
and disappear as they desire. But this is not the ques- 
tion with which we are now occupied. ~Have they as 
spirit-beings permanent bodies? It is not the question 
of their power to clothe themselves with such a garment 
that will make them visible to human eyes, but have 
they always bodies? This question we can answer 
from the Scriptures in the affirmative. The Bible 
teaches the corporality of the angels. They possess 
personality and, though spirits, they have their own 
distinctive bodies. That the bodies they possess are 
not like our own bodies may be learned from the words 
of the risen Lord. When suddenly He appeared in 


CHAPTER AV 31 


the midst of the disciples, they cried out for fear. 
“They were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that 
they had seen a spirit. And he said unto them, 
Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in 
your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that 
it is myself; for a spirit has not bones and flesh as ye 
see me have” (Luke xxiv:37-39). Our Lord, therefore, 
taught definitely that a spirit has not a body of bones 
and flesh. 

In the great resurrection chapter, that is, the fif- 
teenth chapter of the first epistle of Paul to the Cor- 
inthians, different kinds of bodies are mentioned. 
The Spirit of God speaks of terrestrial bodies and of 
celestial bodies. He tells us that there is a natural 
body and there is a spiritual body. Man received his 
terrestrial, his natural body, from mother earth. But 
angels never were clothed with such a body, for that 
is indicated in the statement of Scripture, that man is 
made a little lower than the angels. The angels, 
therefore, have spiritual bodies, that is, celestial bodies, 
corresponding to their exalted, glorious, spiritual 
nature. Apart from this general fact, we have more 
positive information from the lips of our Lord. 

The Sadducees, those infidels of the past, who denied 
the existence of angels and also the resurrection, 
came and asked the Lord a question: ‘‘Master, Moses 
wrote unto us, if any man’s brother die, having a wife, 
and he die without children, that his brother should 
take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. 
There were, therefore, seven brethren, and the first 
took a wife, and died without children. And the second 
took her to wife, and he died childless. And the third 
took her; and in like manner the seven also; and they 


32 CH SEVER: iV 


left no children, and died. Last of all the woman died 
also. Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of 
them is she, for seven had her to wife?’ (Luke xx: 
27-36). In all probability the story was of their own 
invention to ensnare the Lord Jesus Christ. The 
answer He gave contains the information as to the 
corporality of the angels: “And Jesus answering said 
unto them, The children of this world marry, and are 
given in marriage; but they which shall be accounted 
worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from 
among the dead (the first resurrection) neither marry, 
nor are given in marriage, neither can they die any 
more; for they are equal unto angels, and are the 
children of God, being the children of resurrection.” 
Here the Lord teaches that angels have real bodies. 
The logical conclusion is that the angels have bodies, 
but that these bodies are different from human bodies 
in that the angels do not marry, or are given in mar- 
riage and that they do not die. Here, also, is the 
valuable hint of the resurrection bodies of the 
redeemed; the participators in the first resurrection 
will have bodies, at least in these two respects, like 
unto the angelic bodies. Our resurrection bodies are 
deathless bodies and the earthly conjugal relationship 
will no longer exist. The highest revelation concerning 
the resurrection body of the redeemed is given after 
the Lord Jesus Christ rose from among the dead. The 
Spirit of God tells us that our bodies shall be like unto 
His glorious body. As pointed out, our Lord speaks 
of only two things in which our resurrection bodies 
are equal to that of angels. We learn from these 
words of our Lord that angels have real bodies. 
What kind of bodies are theirs? This question is 


CHAPTER IV 33 


unanswerable. Councils in early church-history held 
that their bodies were ethereal and firelike, while the 
scholastics and the Lateran Council decided that their 
bodies were material bodies. The synagogical liter- 
ature of the Jews is rich in all kinds of suggestions as 
to the bodies of angels and strange traditional 
beliefs. Many rabbis declared that the body of an 
angel is fully described in Daniel x:6. But these are 
vain speculations. We have to own that we look into 
a glass darkly in connection with these unseen things. 
These things are for us in our present state unexplain- 
able and incomprehensible. Beyond what is written 
we dare not go. The time will surely come when we 
shall not longer look into a glass darkly, when faith is 
changed into sight. Then the unseen things, including 
angels and their glorious bodies, will be fully known 
by us. What we know from Scripture are the following 
facts: 

1. They are spirits called into existence by an im- 
mediate act of creation. 

2. In coming in touch with man they displayed their 
faculty of assuming the human form at will, to appear 
suddenly and to disappear in the same manner. They 
also appeared in white raiment—white as snow, with a 
light of glory about them. 

3. They have bodies. A creature without cor- 
porality is next to inconceivable. Corporality is the 
goal of all the ways of God. The Lord Jesus Christ 
shows that the resurrection bodies of His people will 
be equal to the bodies of the angels, which they possess 
now. 

4. The nature of the angelic body is unknown for it 
is unrevealed. 


34 CH Aaa WV 


In the next place we have to ascertain their dwelling 
places. As we have pointed out before, their number is 
so great that they cannot be reckoned. The unseen 
world of angels is a mighty kingdom in which are 
thrones, principalities, powers and dominions. In- 
asmuch as they are spirits clothed with bodies they 
must have fixed dwelling places. Where are the angels 
is therefore another interesting question which 
Scripture, at least in part, answers also. A child who 
has been taught something about the Bible will answer 
readily the question about the place where the angels 
are. The child will answer, “In heaven.” But heaven 
is a term of vast meaning. In the Hebrew, heaven is 
in the plural, “the heavens.” The Bible speaks of 
three heavens, the third heaven is the heaven of 
heavens, the dwelling place of God, where His throne 
has always been. The tabernacle possessed by His 
earthly people, Israel, was a pattern of the heavens. 
Moses upon the mountain had looked into the vast 
heavens and saw the three heavens. He had no 
telescope. But God Himself showed to him the 
mysteries of the heavens. Then God admonished him 
when he was about to make the tabernacle and said to 
His servant, “See, that thou make all things according 
to the pattern showed to thee in the mountain” 
(Heb. viii:5). The tabernacle had three compart- 
ments, the outer court, the Holy part and the Holiest. 
Once a year the high priest entered this earthly place 
of worship to pass through the outer court, into the 
Holy part, and, finally, carrying the sacrificial blood, 
he entered into the Holiest to sprinkle the blood in 
Jehovah’s holy presence. But Aaron was only a type 
of Him who is greater than Aaron, the true High Priest. 


CHAPTER IV 35 


Of Him, the true Priest, our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ, it is written that He passed through the heavens 
(Heb. iv:14). “For Christ is not entered into the 
holy places made with hands, which are the figures of 
the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the 
presence of God for us” (Heb. ix:24). He passed 
through the heavens, the outer court, the heaven sur- 
rounding the earth; the holy part, the immense uni- 
verses, with their immeasurable distances, and finally 
He entered the third heaven, that heaven astronomy 
knows exists, but which no telescope can ever reach. 

In the heavenlies, according to the Epistle to the 
Ephesians, are the principalities and the powers, the 
innumerable company of angels. Their dwelling places 
are in these heavens. God who created them, who 
made them spirits and clothed them with bodies suited 
to their spirit nature, must have also assigned to them 
habitations. But what and where are these habita- 
tions? That these dwellings are in the heavens is not 
only taught in Ephesians. In the prayer our Lord 
taught His disciples is a petition which tells us of this: 
“Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven,” 
that is, there are beings in heaven and they do His 
will. It is also significant and not without meaning 
that the phrase “the host of heavens” means both the 
stars and the angelic hosts; the “Lord of Hosts” has 
also the same double meaning, for He is the Lord of 
the stars and the Lord of the angels. 

We shall learn much from the great catastrophe which 
took place long before man ever was created, when a 
great angel-prince rebelled and fell and with him a great 
number of other angels. 


CHAPTER V 


Lucifer, the Son of the Morning.—His glory and his 
fall—He had a throne.—His original dwelling 
place, our earth—The Scripture evidence (Gen. 
i:2).—Angels have their own habitations.—The 
Father’s House.—What are the many mansions?— 
The Star Flower.—Christ in the midst.—In the 
Church.—In Glory.—In the Universe.—The great 
Worship. 


N the fourteenth chapter of Isaiah is given the 

description of the fall of this great angel-prince, 
whom some take to have been another archangel. He 
is addressed by the name of Lucifer, the son of the 
morning. Lucifer is taken from the Vulgate version 
which translated the Hebrew word Helel with the Latin 
Lucifer, light-bearer. The Hebrew word is best 
derived from the root halal, which has the meaning 
of brilliant, magnificent or splendid. This being then 
addressed as ‘‘Son of the Morning,” perhaps the first 
creature, called into existence, was, as his name denotes, 
a magnificent, brilliant angel. This may also be 
learned from the prophecy of Ezekiel. In a message 
concerning the king of Tyrus, the Spirit of God sud- 
denly addressed another person and spoke words 
which could never be true of a human being. Behind 
the king of Tyrus stood an unseen power, the master 
of darkness. To the once great Lucifer the following 
words must be applied: “Thou sealest up the sum, 

36 


CHAPTER V 37 


full of wisdom and perfect in beauty. Thou hast 
been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone 
was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, 
the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the emerald and 
the carbuncle, and gold; the workmanship of thy 
tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the 
day thou wast created. Thou art the anointed cherub 
that covereth; and I have set thee so, thou wast upon 
the holy mount of God, thou hast walked up and 
down in the midst of the stones of fire. Thou wast 
perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, 
till iniquity was found in thee” (Ezek. xxviii:12-15). 
We notice he is called “the anointed cherub that cover- 
eth,” which gives him another great distinction. 
This mighty and glorious person, Lucifer, the son of 
the morning, became a rebel. Isaiah gives us the 
story of his fall. ‘Thou hast said in thine heart, 
I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above 
the stars of God, I will also sit upon the mount of the 
congregation, in the sides of the north. I will ascend 
above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most 
High” (Isaiah xiv:13, 14). He fell by pride. He 
exalted himself. 

As we are not writing on Satan, the origin of evil, 
the fallen angels and the kingdom of darkness, we do 
not enter into this theme, but we point out certain 
outstanding facts in the passage quoted. Lucifer’s 
ambition was to ascend into heaven, which must mean 
the third heaven, where the throne of God stands in its 
eternal majesty. He said again, “I will exalt my 
throne above the stars of God.” He possessed a throne. 
The throne, which had been given to him by his 
Creator he wanted to transfer above the stars. Here 


38 CHAPTER: V 


again we find the evidence that his ambition was to be 
in the third heaven, for that is the heaven above the 
stars. Now a throne demands a locality. If a king 
has no kingdom, over which he rules, how can he have 
a throne? Lucifer had a throne and, therefore, he 
possessed originally a dwelling place, a fixed place 
in this universe assigned to him. This is strengthened 
by the next “I will,” “I will ascend above the heights 
of the clouds.” He dwelled then in a place which 
clouds covered. 

The dwelling place of Lucifer, in his unfallen con- 
dition, was undoubtedly the globe on which man dwells 
now, the earth. Science has shown that the earth 
existed once in a different form from what it is now. 
There was here a gigantic animal creation and acor- 
responding gigantic vegetation. Man was not here in 
that distant past, perhaps millions of years ago. 
Science has never yet brought forth indisputable and 
conclusive evidence that man lived here ten thousand 
years ago, nor has science ever disproven the teaching 
of the Bible that man is the direct creation of God, in a 
class by himself, with a gulf between him and the 
animal kingdom which can never be bridged. Such a 
thing as the missing link never existed, and that is 
why it can never be found. All at once that original 
creation was wiped out by a great judgment of God and 
plunged into death, chaos and darkness. That state 
of the original earth is seen in the second verse of the 
Bible, “And the earth was without form and void; 
and darkness was upon the face of the deep.” The 
word “was” has been more correctly rendered “‘be- 
came.’ God did not create the original earth in a 
chaotic condition (Isaiah xlv:18), for He is a God of 


CHAP T ERE V 39 


order. The condition of the earth as seen in Gen. i:2 
must, therefore, be the result of the fall of Lucifer, 
when he attempted to have the throne on this globe 
above the stars. He lost his domain, and when God 
created man, after having put the original earth into 
a condition to sustain a creature made a little lower 
than the angels, he appeared on the scene to regain his 
dwelling place. God had deposed him; he had be- 
come the prince of the power of the air, a wandering 
star, without a fixed habitation. The third chapter in 
Genesis tells the story of the fall of man. He injected 
his poison of self-will, self-exaltation into the head of 
the race. He had said, “‘I will be like the Most High,” 
and he promised to the woman, “Ye shall be as gods.” 
Through the fall of man he has been enabled to possess 
again this earth, andScripture calls him now “the Prince 
of this world,” and even more, “the God of this age.” 

But now to the point. Here is an argument for the 
belief that the angels of God have fixed dwelling 
places assigned to them by their Creator-Lord. Lucifer, 
as we have proven, had such a place and if he had a 
fixed domain it is perfectly reasonable that other 
angels have similar spheres—stars, if you please—in the 
heavens. 

There is still another passage which proves this, even 
stronger than what we have written concerning 
Lucifer and his throne. In the epistle of Jude we 
find this significant statement: “And the angels 
which kept not their first estate, but left their own 
habitations, he hath reserved in everlasting chains 
under darkness unto the judgment of the great day” 
(Jude 6). To locate this event of which Jude speaks 
is not our purpose here. We believe, however, that 


40 CHAPTER V 


this fall of angels is different from the prehistoric fall 
of Lucifer. We think it must be read and studied in the 
light of the opening verses of the sixth chapter of 
Genesis. The one thing we wish to consider is the 
fact, the outstanding fact, that these angels had 
“their own habitation.” They had an estate given to 
them. This seems to us conclusive that angels have 
in the heavens habitations, places where they dwell, 
which they can leave as the unseen ministers of God. 

Let us also remind ourselves of that beautiful word 
of our gracious Lord, which all His people love so well. 
“Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, 
believe also in me. In my Father’s house are many 
mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. I 
go to prepare a place for you” (John xiv:2-3). It is 
true this lovely utterance of our Lord concerned 
first of all His soon to be orphaned disciples. He as- 
sured them that there is the Father’s house, that He 
went there to prepare a place and then to come again 
and have them with Him in that place of glory. And 
ever since these words have been spoken they have 
comforted His sorrowing people and wiped their 
tears away. But who would deny that in the statement 
of our Lord there is a meaning beyond that it has for 
His own? The Father’s house is a term which in- 
cludes the whole universe. In that vast universe are 
many mansions, or as it should be translated, abodes— 
dwelling places. Man, as a fallen being, has no claim 
to any place in the heavenlies. The redemption work 
of the Son of God prepares the place for the redeemed, 
the blood-bought host. That place in the Father’s 
house is the highest, the most glorious, as we shall see 
later. The Son of God, risen and glorified, brings 


CHAPTER V 41 


His many sons, purchased by Himself, into glory, the 
very glory of Himself. But what are the many 
abodes or dwelling places in this universe? The earth 
is but His footstool (Isaiah lxvi:1) and the clouds the 
dust of His feet (Nahum i:3). Is it unreasonable to 
suppose that these wonderful heavenly bodies we call 
stars are also dwelling places? Would it be reasonable 
to think that all these millions of worlds are mere 
ornaments, seen only by human eyes, and that no 
intelligent beings outside of the human race are in 
these universes to adore and praise the mighty 
Maker of it all? We cannot be dogmatic about it. 
We can only speak by inference. Angels are per- 
sons, they are spirits, they have a body cor- 
responding to their spiritual nature. Furthermore, 
they have their own habitations, their own estates, 
where they dwell. These dwelling places are in the 
heavenlies; the stars are in the heavens. Where else 
can we locate the habitations of the innumerable 
company of angels, but among the stars? Many 
theologians of the past have expressed the same opinion. 
Yet, to find out if this is really so, we will have to wait 
for that happy, glorious day when we, with all the 
Saints of God, shall be caught up in clouds to meet the 
Lord in the air, when He Himself will introduce us 
to the mysteries of the heavens, which then will cease 
to be mysteries. 

Last summer, we picked in a meadow a large flower, 
known as the wild carrot. It looked like a beautiful 
white star. The flower was composed of some thirty 
or forty smaller flowers, all forming a star, and each of 
these was also composed of a dozen or more small stars. 
It occurred to us that it might be named the “star 


42 CHAP BERT V 


flower.’ ‘Then we noticed in the very center a single 
object, not a star, but something which looked like a 
tiny flower, of a purple color. All the star flowers 
were grouped about it. The purple object was in the 
middle. The longer we looked at it the more beautiful 
it appeared to us. Then we felt that even in nature 
are illustrations of Him by whom and for whom all 
things were created. We can see Him everywhere in 
creation, in the flowers of the meadow and in the stars 
of heaven. Like this purple center around which all 
the other star flowers are gathered, He is in the midst. 
Where two or three are gathered together unto His 
Name, there He is in the midst. It is His place and 
He delights in being with His own. His voice is heard 
in the worship of His blood-washed people, for it is 
written, “In the midst of the church will I sing praise 
unto thee” (Heb. 11:12). 

He is in the midst in glory, the center of heaven, 
the heir of all things, the upholder of all things. All 
gathers around and about Him. Some day the impres- 
sive scene of the fifth chapter of Revelation will become 
history. Before the throne His people are gathered, 
when He only is found worthy to open the seven 
sealed book, He, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the 
Root of David. John had a great vision, “I beheld, 
and, lo, in the midst of the throne, and of the four living 
creatures, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb 
as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes 
which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all 
the earth.” 

Here He is seen in the midst in glory. Then the 
worship and praise begins. It is a praise and worship 
before the throne in the heaven of heavens. The 


CHAPTER V 43 


earth joins in and finally every creature which is in 
heaven, and on the earth, and such as are in the sea, 
praises and adores. 

In this great worship scene we find the angels men- 
tioned. “And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many 
angels round about the throne * * * and the 
number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, 
and thousands of thousands, Saying with a loud voice, 
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, 
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, 
and glory, and blessing” (Rev. v:11-12). 

Perhaps in that day of consummation there will be 
heard the voice of praise and adoration from these 
dwelling places of the unfallen spirits, these mighty 
creatures and servants of God, grouped around the 
throne of majesty and glory, and upon the throne in 
purple, the color of royalty, He who was once mocked 
upon earth with the purple robe, but now enthroned as 
King of kings. But even now He is the object of praise 
and worship in the heavenlies. He alone is worthy 
and the angelic hosts know Him in their habitations in 
the heavenlies as the Lord of all. 


CHAPTER VI 


The Ministry of Angels in the third heaven.—The 
Seraphim and what they teach us.—Bishop Bull’s 
remarks.—The Cherubim.—The sentinels of Eden. 
—Above the Mercy Seat.—Israel’s camp.—In 
Ezekiel and Revelation.—Court Days in glory.— 
Job’s revelation.—Satan the accuser.—Not yet cast 
out.—Another Court Day in heaven (1 Kings 
xxii:19-23). 


he angels of God are seen in Scriptures active 

in the heavens and on earth. Glimpses of their 
presence in the third heaven before the throne of God 
and the worship and praise they render, we find in 
different parts of the Bible. In Daniel vii:10 we read 
of the myriads of angels who minister unto God. 
That ministry is the same which redeemed sinners are 
privileged to render—the ministry of praise. The 
Holy Spirit in the psalms calls upon angels to utter 
their praises. “Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that 
excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearken- 
ing unto the voice of his word” (Psalm ciii:20). ‘‘Halle- 
lujah. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens; praise 
him in the heights. Praise ye him all his angels, 
praise ye him all his hosts” (Psalm cxlviii:1-2). Isaiah 
had a vision of what is going on in the presence of God. 
In the year King Uzziah died he saw the Lord. Above 
the throne stood the Seraphim. It is the only place 
in the Bible where these marvellous beings are men- 

44 


CHAPTER VI 45 


tioned. Isaiah gave us a description of them. “Each 
one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and 
with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did 
fly. And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, 
holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full 
of his glory.” No wonder that the prophet in behold- 
ing such a scene cried out, “‘Woe is me! for I am undone; 
because I am a man of unclean lips, for mine eyes have 
seen the King, the Lord of hosts” (Isaiah vi:1-6). 
The lessons here, which the Seraphim give to us, we 
must not pass by. 

The covering of their faces denotes their deep rever- 
ence. The higher a being is in creation the greater is 
the reverence given to the Creator-God. The 
Seraphim are nearest the throne hence their great rev- 
erence. And reverence, in its fullest expression, as it 
beholds the infinite One, is worship. They teach us 
reverence. Many years ago, Canon Liddon, an able 
and pious scholar, declared that “reverence is not one 
of the most popular virtues at the present time.” 
It is much more true today. The lack of reverence, 
especially among the young, is appalling. Here, too, 
we must charge that vile offspring of the destructive 
criticism, Modernism, with being responsible for 
the deplorable irreverence of our times. ‘Where 
angels fear to tread, fools rush in.”’ It is folly for the 
finite mind to sit in judgment upon God’s holy infallible 
Word, to reject portions of it under the plea of human 
learning and scholarship, when the angels, with their 
superior knowledge, desire to look into these things. 
The destruction of the authority of the Word of God, 
as it has been going on in the camp of Modernism, 
not only robs man of faith, but it destroys the virtue 


46 CHAPTER VI 


of reverence. Evil days are in store for this age. Days 
of apostasy, ending with judgment, loom up on all 
sides. And what shall we say when even believers, 
certain evangelists, drag down “that worthy Name,” 
and use it with an obnoxious familiarity. The Holy 
Spirit is the Spirit of reverence and worship. He 
never leads to anything but the deepest reverence. 
The more we know God and His only Son our Lord, 
the greater our reverence and worship. 

The Seraphim also covered their feet. It means, 
symbolically, their humility. In covering their feet 
they acknowledge their own unworthiness. The last 
mentioned is, “with twain he did fly.” This stands for 
service. They execute promptly and swiftly His 
commands. It is the very last, showing that service 
is not the first thing God wants. Reverence and 
worship is what God delights in. The Son of God has 
given us also the same truth. “God is a Spirit, and 
they that worship him must worship him in spirit 
and in truth.” Before He uttered these words He 
said, “the Father seeketh such to worship him” (John 
iv:23, 24). True service for Him must be born in 
reverence and worship and must be coupled with 
humility, the deepest feeling of our unworthiness, that 
after all we are but unprofitable servants. 

Bishop Bull (1634-1710) wrote about these lessons — 
which come to us from the reverence, the worship, the 
humility and the service of the Seraphim and all the 
angels of God. 

“When we consider what glorious beings the angels 
are, and yet that they are but creatures of, and servants 
to, the God whom we serve, waiting before His Throne, 
and humbly attending His commands; this consider- 


Cr APSR Wi 47 


ation, if we let it sink deeply into our hearts, must needs 
possess us with most awful apprehensions of the 
glorious majesty of our God at all times, but especially 
in our approaches to Him in His worship, and fill us 
with the greatest reverence and humility. We should 
do well often to call to mind Daniel’s vision, to whom 
was represented the ‘Ancient of Days sitting upon His 
throne, a thousand thousand ministering unto Him, 
and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before 
Him.’ 

‘With what reverence should we behave ourselves 
in our addresses to the Divine Majesty, before 
whom the Seraphim themselves hide their faces! 
And if they cover their feet, are conscious to them- 
selves of their natural imperfection, compared to 
the infinitely glorious God; how should we clods of 
earth, we vile sinners, blush and be ashamed in His 
presence, assuming no confidence to ourselves, but 
what is founded on the mercies of God and the merits 
of our blessed Redeemer and Advocate, Jesus Christ! 

“And when we find ourselves inclined to pride and 
vanity, to think highly of ourselves and of our services 
to God, let us reflect at what a vast distance we come 
behind the holy angels; how far short our poor, 
lame, imperfect services are of their holy and excel- 
lent ministry. Yet, when we think of the ministry 
which the holy angels perform towards God, and for us; 
let us at the same time propound them to ourselves, 
as patterns and examples for our imitation.” 

The Cherubim are another class of mighty beingsclose 
to the throne of God in worship and in government. 
We first meet them in the Bible as the sentinels of the 
garden of Eden, after man and the woman had been 


48 CHAPTER VI 


driven out. It was mercy which placed them there. 
For the tree of life was there and had man returned to 
eat of the tree of life, it would have resulted in a dread- 
ful disaster for man. He would have lived forever, 
as to the body, and thus prolonged his miserable earth- 
existence, in sin, sickness, pain and sorrow on to end- 
less being.* 

Next we see them in connection with the mercy- 
seat (Exodus xxxvii:7, 9). They were there as 
beautiful figures of gold, as symbolical figures, their 
wings spread, covering the mercy seat, with their 
faces one to another. Their attitude is twofold, the 
attitude of worship and the attitude of deep contem- 
plation. Here we may remember Peter’s statement in 
the passage in which he speaks of the sufferings of 
Christ and the glory that should follow, and the 
Gospel, which is now preached, and then he adds, 
“which things the angels desire to look into” (1 Peter 
1:12). As they looked downward upon the mercy-seat, 
beholding, symbolically, the blood, they expressed 
the contemplative attitude of the angelic world, looking 
into the depths of that self-sacrificing love, which 
would be manifested in the gift of God’s Son. Their 
figures also appeared embroidered on the curtains of 
the tabernacle (Ex. xxvi:1). Much else is connected 
with them in a symbolical way. We know from 
Ezekiel and from John’s Patmos vision that their 
faces were fourfold—the lion, the ox, the man and the 
eagle. Israel journeyed through the wilderness in four 


_ “It is an unscriptural invention to teach that man lost his 
immortality when he sinned. Immortality such as the breath 
of God imparted to man can never be lost. 

As stated above, to live forever in Gen. iii:22 has nothing to do 
with the soul of man, but refers to the body. 


CHAPTER VI 49 


great divisions, and each division had a_ banner. 
According to Jewish tradition, the standard of Judah 
had in it a lion; that of Reuben a human face. (Reuben 
means “Behold a son.”) The division of Ephraim 
had the calf in the banner. In the banner of Dan was 
an eagle, the foe of the serpents. There is no valid 
reason to reject this rabbinical tradition. Symbolically 
these faces of the Cherubim represent the Son of 
God in His fourfold character—as King, represented 
by the lion; as Servant, represented by the ox; as 
Man, as the incarnate perfect Man; as the Eagle, 
which comes from the sky and swiftly mounts up, 
the emblem of the Son of God. This was known to 
the early church, for many ancient manuscripts 
associated the lion with the Gospel of Matthew, for 
it is the Gospel of the King. The Gospel of Mark, 
the record of His service, is symbolized by the ox; 
the Gospel of Luke, the record of the perfect Man, 
by the face of a man; and the Gospel of John, by the 
eagle. 

Nineteen times the Cherubim are mentioned in the 
book of Ezekiel. This great Prophet-priest saw the 
visions of God in the prison colony by the River 
Chebar. In the first chapter of the book, which bears 
his name, is the detailed description of the glory of the 
Lord. He beheld the Schechinah cloud of glory and the 
chariot throne he beheld was surrounded and supported 
by the Cherubim. The greater portion of the vision 
concerns these mighty and mysterious creatures of God. 
In the midst of the glory cloud was seen the form of a 
Man; He is the Son of God anticipated as the incarnate 
One. The vision shows the very intimate relation of 
the Cherubim to the throne of God, to His government 


50 CH APALIRE VI 


in righteousness and His judgments.* Later the 
prophet was transported to Jerusalem and saw the 
glory of the Lord departing from the temple and from 
the city. In his final vision, when he beheld the com- 
ing restoration, that glory with the Cherubim returns 
to fill that great house of worship, the millennial temple. 

Nothing is seen of the Cherubim till we come to the 
book of consummation in the New Testament, the 
Revelation. To painstaking students of this book it is 
well known that not one of the visions of this great 
book, beginning with the fourth chapter, has been 
fulfilled. In that chapter we are introduced into 
heaven and the first thing we behold is the throne and 
He who occupies it. The twenty-four elders, sitting 
upon thrones, represent all the redeemed. Then in the 
midst of the throne and round about are the four 
Cherubim. The King James version uses the word 
“beast,” but the right rendering is “‘living creatures,” a 
term which disposes of the views of some that the 
Cherubim are not real beings. Like the Seraphim, 
they have six wings. Without a moment’s rest they 
say, day and night: “Holy, holy, holy, Lord God 
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.” We 
behold them again in the attitude of worship and praise 
in the fifth chapter. When the Lamb opens the first 
four seals of the book, each living creature says, 
“Come.” In answer to their ‘Come,’ the four 
apocalyptic riders appear. The white-horse rider is the 
false Christ, who appears after the true Saints of God 
have left earth; the red-horse rider represents judg- 
ment by universal warfare; the black-horse rider, 
judgment by famine; and the pale-horse rider, judg- 


*For the full explanation see an exposition of Ezekiel. 


CHAPTER VI 51 


ment by pestilence. We learn from this that the 
Lord uses them in His future judgments. Their 
worship is also recorded in Revelation vii:11, while 
their connection with judgment is again stated in 
chapter xv:7. The last time they are mentioned 
is in Revelation xix:4, “And the four and twenty elders 
and the four living creatures fell down and worshipped 
God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Alleluia.” 
What blessed things for us to believe now, and in holy 
anticipation to look forward to the day when we shall 
meet these great and glorious creatures of God face to 
face! 

The heavenly hosts are also praising and adoring 
God. These 


“Wondrous beings who, ere the worlds were made, 
Millions of ages back, have stood around the 
Throne of God.” 
What glory must dwell in the highest heaven with ite 
never-ceasing worship and adoration! How many 
things of which we, nor any mortal, have even dreamt of 
must go on there! 

One of the interesting revelations in connection with 
angels is, what may be termed in human language, 
the court days in glory. The Book of Job, this most 
ancient book, contains the description of such days. 
It begins with the statement, “(Now there was a day 
when the sons of God came to present themselves 
before the Lord, and Satan came also among them” 
(Job i:6). The story of Job is not an allegory, it is 
actual history. Nor is this court day an imagination, 
but reality. The sons of God are the angels. They 
gather at stated occasions before the throne. Among 
them Satan, the fallen Lucifer, appeared likewise. 


52 CHAPTER VI 


He is forced to give an account of himself. His occu- 
pation is to walk as the restless spirit to and fro through 
the earth. Then, when the Lord speaks of Job, His 
servant, the dark shadow sneers and challenges God, 
accusing Job wrongfully, to permit him to attack the 
saint of God. What followed we read in the first 
chapter of Job. Not Satan triumphs, but the power 
and grace of God has in Job the victory. Another 
court day comes. The same scene is repeated. Once 
more the Lord puts Job into Satan’s hand to touch his 
body, but not his life. The same result followed. Job 
did not sin and Satan must depart defeated in his 
purposes. 

Satan is still the accuser of the brethren and per- 
chance much of the severe suffering among the people 
of God may be traced to the same source. He accuses 
the children of God before God on account of their sins 
and failures. But Christ is there also, as the Advocate 
of His own. One of the night visions of Zechariah 
sheds interesting light on this (see Zechariah iii:1-5). 

Some Christians think that Satan is cast out of 
heaven and has no longer any right of access to accuse 
before God. But the twelfth chapter of Revelation 
makes such a view impossible. The war between 
Michael and his angels and the dragon and the angels 
which belong to him, has not yet been fought. It is 
still future. When it will take place we shall see in 
another chapter. But when it comes, Satan will be 
cast out and the heavens rejoice, because the accuser of 
the brethren, which accused them day and night, is 
cast down to the earth, and can no longer accuse. 

Another court day in heaven is described by the 
prophet Micaiah in 1 Kings xxii:19-23, “I saw the Lord 


CHAPTER VI 53 


sitting on His throne, and all the host of heaven 
standing by Him on His right hand and on His left. 
And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he 
may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one said 
this manner, and another on that manner. And there 
came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and 
said, I will persuade him. And the Lord said unto 
him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I 
will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. 
And he said, Thou shalt persuade him, and prevail 
also, go forth and do so.” Without explaining the 
meaning of this incident we use it only as an argument 
that there are certain days in glory when the hosts of 
heaven gather before the throne of God. 


CHAPTER VII 


More about Angels in the New Testament than in the 
Old.—Angels not omniscient.—1 Peter i:12.— 
Their deep interest in redemption——The great 
conflict—The opposing forces—-The Angels in 
Sodom.—Abraham and Eliezer——Jacob and the 
Angels at MahanaimThe Law ordained by 
Angels.—Angelic protection.—Daniel’s companions, 
and Daniel in the Lion’s den.— Watching and waiting 
for redemption. 


ROM heaven we turn to earth to examine the re- 

lation which the angels sustain to the earth and the 
human race. What is their service under God? It 
is a very interesting fact that much more is said about 
angels in the New Testament than in the Old Testa- 
ment Scriptures. In the New Testament, the angels 
are the most frequently mentioned in the beginning of 
the New Testament Scriptures, that is, in the Gospels, 
and at the close, in the Book of Revelation. This in it- 
self is of deep meaning. We shall return to it. We 
quote once more | Peter i:12, “which things the angels 
desire to look into.” Their chief interest seems to 
be in connection with the redemption of man and the 
earth, which God gave to His creatures. They watched 
with holy awe when God said (not to angels), as the 
triune God, “Let us make man in our image, after our 
own likeness, and let them have dominion over the 
fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the 

54 


CHAPTER VII 55 


cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping 
thing that creepeth upon the earth” (Gen. i:26). 
They watched God as He fashioned man’s body out of 
the dust of the ground and, breathing into him, com- 
municated to this creature immortality. What shouts 
of joy must have come from them when man, the crown 
of all the earth, stood before his Creator, made a little 
lower than themselves, the angels. Angels are not 
omniscient. The future is only known to them as the 
omniscient God is pleased to reveal it. With what 
horror, then, they must have watched when the 
serpent, Satan, whom they knew so well, sneaked up 
to the woman and the fatal conversation began. 
If angels can weep and demons laugh, when sin was 
born conceived by the liar and murderer from the 
beginning, angels must have wept in deepest agony, 
while the demon-world shouted for joy. 

And now the history of redemption begins. There 
is to be enmity between the serpent and the woman, 
between the seed of the woman and the seed of the 
serpent. ‘There is to appear the seed of the woman to 
crush the serpent’s head; the heel of the seed of the 
woman is to be wounded. He who defeats the serpent 
and gains the victory is to suffer. Now, angels begin 
in their eager desire to look into these things, the things 
concerning Him who is to come, concerning His suffer- 
ing and the glory to follow. 

In the great conflict which began upon earth they 
have a definite part to perform. Satan and his angels 
are active. The prince of the power of the air opposes 
God’s purposes in redemption. He has his seed among 
men, those who side with him. The angels of God on 
the Lord’s side are God’s agencies in defeating the 


56 CHAPTER VII 


devil and his hosts; He uses them in behalf of His 
people, in their protection, in carrying out His plans 
and eternal purposes. 

How little of all this we know! Here and there the 
veil is lifted in sacred history and we get glimpses of 
the service of the angels. Perhaps on purpose but 
little has been revealed so that we might escape the 
snare of being over-occupied with angels and the 
unseen things, instead of the Lord of Glory. 

We remind the reader that “‘the Angel of the Lord” 
cannot be considered in this connection, for the Angel 
of the Presence is, as we have shown in the third 
chapter, the Lord Himself. 

Angels came to Sodom. They were the com- 
panions of the Lord, who tarried with His friend Abra- 
ham. Lot, poor worldly Lot, sat in the gate. He 
recognized the strange visitors and invited them to 
tarry with him. How reluctant they were to enter 
his house! When the vile mob gathered to assault 
Lot, the angels protected him and smote the assailants 
with blindness. In the morning of the fatal day when 
judgment was to wipe out the wicked cities, the angels 
hastened Lot and, while he lingered, they laid hold upon 
his hand, the hands of his wife and daughters and 
brought them forth without the city. It was their 
God-sent errand of mercy to save Lot. 

Abraham believed in angels and their ministries, for, 
when he sent forth Eliezer to fetch a bride for Isaac, 
he said: “He shall send his angel before thee.”? When 
Jacob was a wanderer away from the homeland, 
angels must have been at his side and shielded him. 
Finally, when returning to the land of his fathers, the 
angels of God met him. He recognized them and said, 


CHAPTER VII 57 


“This is God’s host, and he called the name of that 
place Mahanaim.” This name means “double camp,” 
or “double host.” He realized that his own host was 
surrounded by the host from above. These angels 
must have reminded him of the vision he had twenty 
years before when he saw the angels of God ascending 
and descending on the ladder (Gen. xxviii:12), by which 
he must have been assured of divine protection, as now 
he knew that God was with him, for His hosts were 
about him. 

An angel sent by the Lord kept Israel. But here, 
again, we are sure it is not a created angel but the 
angel, Jehovah, in angelic form, for we read of him 
something which can only be true of God Himself. 
“Beware of him and obey his voice, provoke him not, 
for he will not pardon your transgressions, for my name 
isin him.” But we may be sure the ministry of angels 
attended Israel in her march from Egypt to the land of 
promise. How they were used in keeping Israel and 
perhaps in supplying them miraculously with food, 
we do not know. 

But we know that the law “was ordained by angels” 
(Gal. iii:19), that they received the law by the “dis- 
position of angels”’ (Acts vii:53). 

From Psalm Ixviii:17, we learn that the display of 
glory was effected by the ministration of thousands of 
angels. ‘They were much in evidence on holy Sinai. 
Witness to it is given in Deuteronomy xxxiii:2 where 
the Lord is seen coming with ten thousands of saints, 
the correct translation is, ‘“‘holy ones’’—angels. 

In the Psalms, we read of angelic protection. In 
Psalm xxxiv:7 it is again the Angel of the Lord, but in 
Psalm xci:11 the angels are revealed. ‘For he shall 


58 CHAPTER VII 


give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy 
ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest 
thou dash thy foot against a stone.” The ninety-first 
Psalm is prophetic. While the preceding Psalm 
shows the first man in failure and death, the ninety- 
first Psalm gives a prophetic picture of the second Man. 
The Devil knew this for he quoted this passage when 
he had led our Lord on a pinnacle of the temple. But 
whenever the devil uses Scripture, he either adds to it 
or takes away from it.* In quoting the promise 
concerning angelic protection, he left out the words 
“to keep thee in all thy ways.” Only in God’s ways 
can we claim His presence and His care. 

We know the companions of Daniel passed through 
the fire unhurt, because the same angel who was in the 
burning bush was with them in the fiery furnace, and 
that was again the Lord in angelic form; Nebuchad- 
nezzar bears witness of it, when he said, “‘Lo, I see four 
men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they 
have no hurt; and the fourth is like the Son of God” 
(Dan. iii:25). It must have been the same angel who 
stopped the lions’ mouths when the aged Daniel had 
been cast into the lions’ den. Happy words which 
came from Daniel’s lips after a night spent with lions, 
“My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the 
lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me” (Daniel 
vi:22). 

To these incidents that angels are used of God in 
ministries on earth, in compassing about His people, 


*All cults and error systems either take away from the Word 
of God or add to it, the significant marks of the power which 
stands behind them. This is true of Christian Science, Russell- 
ism, Spiritism, Theosophy, Mormonism, Bahaism and a lot 
of smaller isms. 


CHAPTER VII 59 


in their protection, we add another where angels are 
not mentioned, though angels are meant. When 
Elisha’s servant saw the forces of the enemy, with 
horses and chariots, surrounding the city, he was 
stricken with fear. But the prophet comforted him 
saying, “Fear not! for they that be with us are more 
than they that be against us.”” Then the Man of God 
prayed. “Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes that he 
may see.” ‘The prayer was answered at once and the 
young man saw the mountain full of horses and chariots 
of fire round about Elisha. The host of angels, 
heaven’s warriors were with His people. In all the 
battles Israel fought, when they trusted the Lord and 
depended on Him, the hosts of the Lord fought for 
them and gave them the victory. 

Satan’s agencies are active on earth. The head of 
the kingdom of darkness walks to and fro in the 
earth (Job i) and that for the purpose to devour 
(1 Peter v:8). But God has His own forces which are 
also walking through the earth. Zechariah, the 
prophet, saw a vast company of horses, led by the rider 
upon the red horse. The question of the prophet, 
“0, my Lord, what are these?”’, was answered by the 
man upon the red horse, “These are they whom the 
Lord hath sent to walk to and fro through the earth” 
(Zech. i:8-10). Angels must have been constantly in 
service during the many centuries of Israel’s history, 
sent forth from the throne of God to carry out His plans 
and purposes. 

In the book of Daniel they are also revealed as 
watchers (Dan. iv:13, 17 and 23). 

And all through the four thousand years of prepara- 
tion for the promised redemption, beginning with the 


60 CHAPTER VII 


first promise in Eden, they waited for the increasing 
revelation of God’s wondrous redemption plans, 
always desiring to look into these things. As God 
revealed, they learned and understood. His love 
towards a lost world became known to them. They 
listened to the voice of prophecy as the Spirit of God 
unfolded the sufferings of Christ and the glory that 
should follow. They learned that He, whom they knew 
as God’s Only Begotten Son would some day come to 
earth, born of the Virgin. That He would suffer as the 
rejected One. The story of redemption as written in 
the Old Testament filled them with wonder, as more 
and more they desired to look into these things. While 
believing Israelites on earth waited for the promise, 
the Lord’s hosts, the innumerable company of angels, 
waited in the heavens, in their dwelling places, for the 
appointed time. 


CHAPTER VIII 


Another court day in heaven.—The 400 silent years.— 
Zechariah and the Angel.—Gabriel sent to the 
Virgin of Nazareth.—Joseph’s vision of an Angel.— 
Angels announce the birth of Christ——Why Angels 
are so prominent in the Gospels and the last book 
of the Bible——Joseph warned by an Angel.— 
Ministering to Christ.—During His life-—The Angel 
in Gethsemane.—The witnesses of His suffering 
and at death.—Present at His resurrection and 
ascension. 


T last the appointed time had come. Perhaps 

there was another great court day in heaven, 
greater than any court day before. The heavenly 
hosts surrounded the throne and stood in holy awe 
and deepest reverence as the hour came for Him to 
lay His glory by and to take on the creature’s form, 
to be made a little lower than the angels. O wonder 
of wonders! The Lord who had created them by 
whom and for whom all things were made, whom they 
adore and worship, is about to leave heaven to come to 
earth to fulfill all the prophets of God had spoken. 
What a day it must have been when God was about to 
send forth His Son to become incarnate! Four 
hundred years of silence had passed since Malachi 
had delivered the last message, announcing once more 
His coming and His day. Four hundred years the 
Lord did not speak as He had spoken before, and no 

61 


62 CHAPTER MeLET 


angels had been manifested. We are aware that the 
so-called Apocryphae contain numerous references to 
angels, but it does not take much discernment to see 
that they are spurious and of a far different nature to 
the chaste and dignified accounts in the Word of God.* 
These apocryphal books have been rejected as un- 
inspired by the true church, while the Romish church 
has endorsed them because they support their un- 
scriptural doctrines and practices. At best the angelic 
manifestations described in these writings are the 
records of the superstitions of the centuries when God 
did not speak. But now the silence is to be broken. 
An aged priest, a righteous man, one of those who 
trusted the Lord and waited in faith and patience for 
the consolation of Israel, the coming of the Messiah, 
was burning incense in the temple, while the multitude 
stood outside. His name was Zechariah, which means 
“the Lord remembers’’, and his aged wife was Elizabeth, 
which means “God’s oath”. The time had come when 
God would remember His oathbound covenants. 
The couple had no child, because Elizabeth was 
barren, and they both were well stricken in years 
(Luke i:7). All at once, while Zechariah officiated, 
there appeared at the right side of the altar an angel 
of the Lord. The angel speaks; the silence is broken. 
From the throne of God this angel carried the message 
which announces the coming birth of him who is to 
go before the incarnate Lord of glory, “in the spirit and 


*For instance, in the Book of Tobit is an account of an angel 
by name of Rafael. The young man whom the angel accom- 
panied was in danger of being devoured by a big fish. The angel 
saved him. Then he told the young man to use the heart and 
liver of the fish against demon influences, and the gall against 
eye diseases, etc. This is not revelation but a childish fairy 
tale. Other stories are even more ridiculous. 


CHAPTER VIII 63 


power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the 
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the 
just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord” 
(Luke i:17). A few months later a still greater message 
was given to Gabriel. The same Gabriel, who was 
made to fly swiftly almost six. centuries before to 
announce exactly when Christ should suffer (Dan. 
ix:24-27), is now sent from the heavenly court to the 
poor little city of Nazareth. There dwelt the Virgin 
who, as Isaiah predicted, should bring forth a son, 
whose name should be Immanuel. No greater news 
ever came from heaven toearth. Well can we imagine 
the deep and solemn interest of the angelic world, 
as in holy anticipation they looked on, and gazed 
forward to the days of the Son of God on earth. 

Like the angel who spoke to Zechariah, Gabriel 
also said, ‘“‘Fear not!”’ But his first words to Mary of 
Nazareth were words of blessed salutation. ‘Hail, 
thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee; 
blessed art thou among women.” ‘The word “Hail” 
means literally “Oh joy!” Then comes the great and 
blessed announcement, “Behold, thou shalt conceive 
in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his 
name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the 
Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give unto 
him the throne of his father David; and he shall reign 
over the house of Jacob; and of his kingdom there shall 
be no end” (Luke i:31-33)._ Once more the angel speaks 
in answer to her question, “How shall this be?” 
‘“‘And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy 
Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the 
Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that 
holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the 


64 CHAPA SE RI Vili 


Son of God” (Luke i:35). How very simple, yet how 
deep, beyond human ken this angelic statement! 
Gabriel himself must have uttered these blessed words 
in holy reverence. The angels had been the witnesses, 
when the triune God formed man out of the dust of 
the earth. The second man did not need to be created, 
for He is the Lord “‘whose goings forth have been from of 
old, from everlasting” (Micah v:2). He comes to take 
on the body of the first man and that body is called into 
existence by a creative act of the third person of the 
Holy Trinity. He Himself, the Highest, is going to 
overshadow the Virgin, to unite Himself with that body. 
Here is the great mystery over which the innumerable 
hosts of angels pondered in holy awe. What must be 
their feeling when they see man, the creature of the 
dust, for whom God sent His only begotten Son, with 
his darkened mind and unbelieving heart turning away 
from the mystery of Godliness (1 Tim. iii:16), and 
refusing to believe in Him whom the Father sent! 
It seems to us they must shudder and tremble when 
they listen to the denials of the Virgin birth, for which 
they waited, the denials so prominent in the religious 
world of today. 

Joseph, to whom Mary, the Virgin, was espoused, 
had the visit of an angel of the Lord. He is a beautiful 
character, righteous and tender hearted. When Mary 
was found with child of the Holy Spirit, “then Joseph 
her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make 
her a public example, was minded to put her away 
privately. But while he thought on these things, 
an angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, 
saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto 
thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her 


CHAPTER? VIII 65 


is of the Holy Spirit.” He was obedient to the angel’s 
command. “Then Joseph being raised from the sleep 
did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took 
unto him his wife, and knew her not till she had brought 
forth her firstborn son, and he called his name Jesus” 
(Matt. i:18-25). 

The memorable night had come. The long expected 
child is cradled in a manger in Bethlehem. The seed 
of the woman has come. All heaven was astir that 
night. The whole universe filled with the angels of 
God knows what has taken place. The earth alone is 
in ignorance of the great event. Shepherds in the 
field keeping watch over their flock by night were 
suddenly startled by the appearance of an angel of the 
Lord.* These shepherds belonged to the pious in 
Israel, waiting for the promised Redeemer-King. 
Perhaps that very night they were meditating on these 
things and praying, like all pious Jews had been pray- 
ing, for the coming of the Son of David. The glory of 
the Lord shone about them and in the glory an angel, 
the messenger of God. No wonder that they were sore 
afraid. Then the angel delivered the message. “Fear 
not!” had been spoken to Zechariah and to Mary of 
Nazareth, and this angel also says, “Fear not! For 
behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which 
shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day 
in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the 
Lord” (Luke ii:10, 11). Blessed news this messenger 
brought to earth for man to listen to and to believe! 
But while they had gazed into the glory light, they did 


*Not “the” angel, but an angel. The Authorized Version is 
incorrect in using several times in the New Testament the 
definite article. 


66 CHUA PT ERs Wii 


not realize that the angel had a multitude of com- 
panions. “And suddenly there was with the angel 
a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and 
saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth 
peace, good will toward men.” It must have been a 
vast host and their praise and joyful declaration was 
not only heard by the shepherds, but it extended up- 
ward and wherever the angels dwell the same praise 
probably sounded forth. The angelic hosts having 
watched for four thousand years the preparation for 
redemption, being used by the Lord in His service and 
in the conflicts on earth, listening all the while to the 
voice of prophecy, ever desiring to look into these 
things, had learned some of the secrets of God’s love 
in redemption. They knew God would ultimately be 
glorified in the highest; that poor, suffering, blood- 
drenched earth, with its restless nations like the 
restless sea, would have peace, while the loving, 
gracious will of God toward lost man would now be 
fully revealed in Him who had come from heaven to 
earth. 

We meet angels on the threshold of the New Testa- 
ment. Angels are very prominent in the Gospel 
records. It could not be otherwise. He who had 
created the angels, whom they worshipped as Lord; 
He who would, after a few years, return in His glorified 
humanity to heaven, to receive a place higher than the 
angels, was now on earth made a little lower than the 
angels. Because He was here the angels were present 
and seen by human eyes, while He Himself was at- 
tended by the angels. And even after He had left 
the earth angels were still seen, in connection with 
the beginning of the church, the body of Christ, 


CHAPTER VIII 67 


that great mystery, which was new to angels, for it had 
not been revealed in former ages. 

In the last book of the Bible, the Book of Revelation, 
angels are still more prominent, for that book concerns 
mostly the coming of the Lord, His return to the earth. 
In that day the earth will become the scene of glory 
as never before in its history. Angels will then be 
manifested and be seen in their heavenly glory, the 
invisible things will become visible. That is the reason 
why angels are so prominent in the beginning of the 
New Testament and in the closing book. 

The next manifestation of an angel, after the shep- 
herds had seen the heavenly hosts, happened again to 
Joseph. Angels appear always tohiminadream. It 
was so when he had discovered that his Virgin-bride 
was with child. When Herod was getting ready to 
have the children in Bethlehem killed, “an angel of 
the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a dream, saying, 
Arise, take the young child and his mother, and flee 
into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word, 
for Herod will seek the young child to destroy Him” 
(Matt. ii:13). It was Satan’s attempt through Herod 
to kill the child. But he could not do it. That child 
was not like any other child, subject to disease and 
death. It was not an innocent child, but a holy child. 
No sin was in Him and where there is no sin death has 
no claim. Herod’s rage against the child is used by 
God as an occasion to fulfill His own purpose. That 
child is the true Israel of God. Israel, the nation, in 
her youth was as the first born son called out of Egypt. 
Christ had to pass though the same history in a perfect 
way of perfect obedience without any failure. Herod 
could not touch the life of the child. He sought to 


68 CHA PEERG Vat 


destroy it, but no Roman soldier could have ever 
plunged the sword into His little breast. And when 
Herod was dead the angel appeared again to Joseph 
commanding him to return to the land of Israel. 

Some of the old masters, in painting the flight to 
Egypt, associated with it an angel, or angels, accom- 
panying the child, His mother and Joseph. These 
heavenly beings were surely about and around the 
infant. They kept their watch over Him. The Jews 
have an interesting tradition concerning Adam, the 
first man in his unfallen state. The tradition says 
that he had the angels for his servants, that he had 
power and authority to command them to minister 
to his need. Perhaps this is true. But we know it 
is true of the second man, the last Adam, our blessed 
Lord. Angels were His ministers. It has not pleased 
the Holy Spirit to give us a record of the years of His 
boyhood and youth, save the one incident of going to 
Jerusalem in His twelfth year. We doubt not angels 
were about Him all through these years. 

The first time we find angels mentioned in His 
public life on earth is in the fourth chapter of Matthew. 
After His Sonship had been declared by the Father’s 
voice at the banks of Jordan, He was led by the Spirit 
into the wilderness to be tested by the devil. As 
stated before, the devil quoted Scripture. He knew 
that the ninety-first psalm was written by the Spirit of 
God describing the second Man walking in obedience 
and trusting God on earth. He, the Son of God in- 
carnate, dwelled in the secret place of the most High. 
He said to God, “My God, in him I will trust.” And 
therefore the promise “‘He shall give his angels charge 
over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall 


CHAPTER VIII 69 


bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot 
against a stone,” belonged to Him. Satan knew this 
and tried to make the Lord Jesus act in self-will. 
After He had spoken His majestic, “Get thee behind 
me Satan!” the Gospels tell us that angels appeared 
on the scene. “Then the devil leaveth him, and 
behold, angels came and ministered unto him” (Matt. 
iv:11). Mark gives us additional information, “He 
was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of 
Satan; and was with the wild beasts; and angels min- 
istered unto Him” (Mark i:13). We do not know in 
what the ministry of the angels consisted. We believe 
it must have concerned His physical needs. He was in 
a wilderness. The devil had asked Him, when He 
hungered, to turn stones into bread. He had the 
power to do it, but He would have acted, in doing this, 
to please Himself. And, now, after the victory was 
won and the devil had left Him, His physical needs 
were still unsupplied. Therefore, angels appeared to 
minister to Him. ‘Though this is the only place in the 
Gospels in which we read that angels ministered to the 
Son of God on earth, besides in Gethsemane, there can 
be no question that they ministered to Him on many 
other occasions. ‘They were the onlookers, the holy 
watchers above Him and around Him. If they are 
now, as we shall show later, the unseen witnesses when 
Christians worship (1 Cor. xi:10), how much more 
must they have seen and watched Him as He lived 
that blessed life on earth. There is one sentence which 
confirms this fact. Paul writes that He was “seen of 
angels” (1 Tim. iii:16). He was seen of angels in every 
period of His life on earth, in His sufferings, in His 
death, in His resurrection and in His ascension. 


70 CHAPTER {Wi 


They beheld Him as He went about doing good. 
They watched His deeds of mercy and power, how He 
healed the sick and cleansed the lepers. They must 
have rejoiced when with His omnipotent power He 
drove out the demons and delivered their victims 
from possession. They listened to His words. They 
hovered about Him in the nights spent in mountain 
tops and in desert places, when He held communion 
with His Father and prayed. They were the silent wit- 
nesses of the plottings of His enemies. They must have 
grieved when men turned away from Him, and re- 
joiced when others fell at His blessed feet and wor- 
shipped Him. 

What must have been the effect of His sufferings 
with these holy watchers? They knew that He came 
to earth to be the Lamb of God, to suffer and to die. 
They witnessed His agony in the garden and listened 
to His prayer, His strong crying and His tears. “And 
there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, 
strengthening him” (Luke xxii:43). Here, again, we 
are not told in what way he strengthened Him. 
Some have imagined that Satan was present and 
exercised such power that Christ feared He might 
succumb under it and, dying in the garden, might not 
be able to finish the work on the cross. But that is 
a theory which gives the devil a power over Christ, 
which he had not, besides being dishonoring to our 
Lord. The agony was not produced by Satan’s power, 
but it was in the anticipation of the Holy One, who 
knew no sin, now to be made sin for us. His holy soul 
shrank from that, The angel may have carried a 
message from the Father to the Son. Gethsemane, 


GHA PIER VLE 71 


in its deep sorrow, is one of the mysteries connected 
with His suffering. 

Angels saw Him when He was mocked, cruelly 
scourged and His face marred and dishonored. Legions 
of angels hovered nearby and He might have asked 
the Father and more than twelve legions of angels 
would have appeared in His behalf (Matt. xxvi:53). 
But when He spoke about the twelve legions of angels 
to Peter, who had drawn the sword in His defense, 
He adds, “But how, then, shall the Scriptures be ful- 
filled, that thus it must be?” The angels knew that 
the Scriptures must be fulfilled, that His hands and 
feet must be pierced, that He must be afflicted and 
smitten of God. Surely they must have veiled their 
faces as they beheld the shame of the cross which He 
despised and the suffering He endured so patiently. 
Then came the three hours of darkness. Was it con- 
fined only to our solar system, or did it extend through- 
out all the heavens? All heaven must have been 
affected by what was going on in that little land of 
one of the smallest planets of the universe. Creation’s 
Lord died for the creature’s sin! The Just and Holy 
One died for the unjust! The deepest mystery of 
His atoning work, the cry from the cross, ‘““My God, 
My God, why hast thou forsaken me?” was even for 
angels shrouded in darkness, a darkness which they 
could not pierce. But how they must have wondered 
at God’s great love as well as at His righteousness and 
wisdom revealed in the cross of Christ! 

The work was done. “It is finished!” was His 
triumphant utterance. It was heard by those who 
stood by. But angels heard it and perchance the 


72 CHAPTER? Vl 


shout, “It is finished!’ was passed on from star to 
star in the universe till all heaven vibrated with the 
glorious news, “It is finished! It is finished!” 

“And behold, the veil of the temple was rent in 
twain from the top to the bottom.” For all we know it 
may have been an angel whom God commissioned to 
make that rent so that it might be known at once that 
the new and living way into the Holiest, the very pres- 
ence of God, had been made by His precious blood. 

While Roman soldiers watched at the sealed tomb, 
there were other watchers. The dawn of the first day 
of the week was nearing, while Mary Magdalene and 
the other Mary approached the sepulchre, where He 
had been buried. ‘And, behold, there was a great 
earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from 
heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the 
door and sat upon it. His countenance was like 
lightning and his raiment white as snow” (Matt. 
XXviii:2-3). The earthquake was occasioned by the 
descending angel, and the stone, so securely sealed, was 
rolled away by angelic power. However, the resur- 
rection of the Lord did not take place when the stone 
was rolled away. No angel was needed nor angelic 
power to open for Him the way from the tomb. It was 
God who raised Him from among the dead; but equally 
true it is that He Himself arose. The stone was 
rolled away to show that the tomb was empty. With 
what heavenly joy that angel must have told out the 
good news to the two women. ‘Fear not ye; for I 
know that ye seek Jesus, who was crucified. He is not 
here; for He is risen, as He said. Come, see the place 
where the Lord lay. And go quickly, and tell His 
disciples that He is risen from among the dead; and, 


CHAPTERS Vii 73 


behold he goeth before you into Galilee; there ye shall 
see him; lo I have told you” (Matt. xxviii:5-8). And 
Mark tells us: “And very early in the morning the 
first day of the week, they (the women) came unto the 
sepulchre at the rising of the sun. And they said 
among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone 
from the door of the sepulchre? And when they 
looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away, for 
it was very great. And entering into the sepulchre 
they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed 
in a long white garment, and they were very affrighted” 
(Mark xvi:2-5). Luke says, “They found the stone 
rolled away from the sepulchre. And they entered in 
and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. And it came 
to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, 
behold, two men stood by them in shining garments. 
And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces 
to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the 
living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen. 
Remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in 
Galilee, saying, the Son of Man must be delivered into 
the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third 
day rise again” (Luke xxiv:2-7). And John tells of 
these angels. “But Mary stood without at the 
sepulchre weeping, and as she wept, she stooped down, 
and looked into the sepulchre and seeth two angels in 
white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the 
feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. And they say 
unto her, Woman why weepest thou?” (John xx: 
11:13).* He was seen of angels in His resurrection. 
They were the messengers at the empty tomb telling 
out the blessed news that He is risen, as they told out 


*There is no discrepancy in these different accounts. 


74 CHAPTER VIFI 


the story of His birth. They also manifested loving 
sympathy for His perplexed disciples. From all this 
we learn of their intimate connection with the life and 
work of our ever blessed and adorable Lord. 

They were present when He ascended on high. The 
cloud had received Him out of their sight. ‘‘And while 
they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, 
behold, two men stood by them in white apparel, 
which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye 
gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is 
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like 
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven” (Acts 
i:10, 11). There is a theory taught by some that these 
two were Moses and Elijah. We do not believe this is 
true; the two in white apparel were angels. 

“Seen of angels” is true, likewise, of His glorious 
ascension, when He passed through the heavens, as 
the glorified man, the mighty victor over sin, death 
and the grave. It must have been a great triumphal 
train, headed by Himself and followed by the angelic 
hosts. We believe there is a strong hint about this in 
the sixty-eighth psalm. “The chariots of God are 
twenty thousand, even thousands of angels, the Lord 
is among them as in Sinai in the holy place. Thou hast 
ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive, 
thou hast received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious 
also, that the Lord God might dwell among them” 
(Psalm lxviii:17, 18). Before we follow the risen and 
glorified Man to His place of exaltation and describe 
how He is made so much better than the angels, we 
devote a chapter to the words spoken by our Lord 
concerning the angels and their activities. 


CHAPTER IX 


The denial of Modernism.—Christ’s testimony con- 
cerning Angels.—As to their corporality.—Their 
interest in the earth.—Rejoicing over repenting 
sinners.—Lazarus and the Angels.—In connection 
with His second coming.—In the kingdom parables 
described as reapers.—Present at the judgment 
throne.—The meaning of Matthew xviii:10. 


S we have stated before, the infidelity of Modern- 

ism and the destructive criticism, both denying 
the existence of angels, is answered conclusively by our 
Lord. He spoke a number of times of the angels and 
associated them frequently with His own glory. To 
deny the existence of angels charges the Lord Jesus 
Christ with having taught something which is not 
true. Such a denial makes of Him a fallible teacher 
and strikes at His Deity. We give a brief review of the 
different passages in the four Gospels in which our 
Lord mentions the angels. 

I. As to their existence and corporality. “They 
which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, 
and the resurrection from among the dead, neither 
marry, nor are given in marriage, neither can they die 
any more; for they are equal unto the angels; and are 
the children of God, being the children of the resur- 
rection” (Luke xx:35, 36; Matt. xxii:30; Mark 
xii:25). If there were no angels these words of our 
Lord would be a deception. But His witness is true 

75 


76 CHAPTER’) 1X 


for He came from heaven and knows the angels, for 
He is their Creator. As pointed out before, this 
passage teaches the corporality of the angels. 

II. As to their presence on earth. “Likewise I 
say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels 
of God over one sinner that repenteth” (Luke xv:10). 
They are in close touch with what is going on in the 
earth and when one sinner repents and turns to the 
Lord there is great rejoicing among them. 

They are active in connection with the departure 
of believers out of this life. ‘And it came to pass, 
that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels 
to Abraham’s bosom” (Luke xvi:22). Not a few 
expositors say that the story of Dives and Lazarus is 
only a parable. Our Lord did not say so. He said: 
“There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in 
purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day; 
and there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which 
was laid at his gate, full of sores.” If it had been a 
parable the Spirit of God would have stated it, but the 
Lord spoke of the actual existence of that rich man and 
the beggar named Lazarus. The dispensational 
allegory, as given by the late Dr. Bullinger, is extremely 
fanciful. Our Lord gives us in this story the informa- 
tion that angels are used to carry the disembodied 
parts of believers to heaven. 

III. When our Lord spoke as Prophet, revealing the 
future, His second coming, the judgments He will 
execute, the restoration of Israel, His own glory and 
His kingdom, He always mentioned the angels. As 
chapter xii deals exclusively with the future glory and 
the manifestation of angels and their ministries during 


CoEVATPAL EER? fx 77 


the coming age of the kingdom, we give only the pas- 
sages in which the Lord speaks of these things. 

He speaks of the angels in His kingdom parables in 
the thirteenth chapter of Matthew. The end of the 
age brings the harvest and then angels will be used by 
Him. “The reapers are the angels” (verse 39). 
“The Son of Man shall send forth his angels, and they 
shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, 
and them which do iniquity”’ (Verse 41). ‘“‘So shall it 
be at the end of the age, the angels shall come forth 
and shall sever the wicked from the just”’ (Verse 49). 
They will be used in gathering the elect. “And he 
shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, 
and they shall gather together his elect from the four 
winds, from one end of heaven to the other” (Matt. 
xxiv:31). The elect are the people Israel and not the 
church as so many teach. 

They will accompany Him in His second, visible 
and glorious coming. ‘For the Son of Man shall come 
in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then 
shall he reward every man according to his work’ 
(Matt. xvi:27). They will be present before His 
judgment-seat. “Also I say unto you, Whosoever 
shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of 
Man also confess before the angels of God. But he 
that denieth me before men shall be denied before the 
angels of God” (Luke xii:8, 9). 

As to the time of His second coming, the angels of 
God are ignorant of it. It is not known to them. 
“But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, 
not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, 
but the Father. Take ye heed, watch and pray, for 


78 CHAPTER IX 


ye know not when the time is” (Mark xiii:32, 33). 
What presumption, then, for man to try to figure out 
the year and the time of that coming event! 

Angels will be visibly seen in connection with the 
throne of our Lord, the King of Israel. “Verily, verily 
I say unto you, Afterward ye shall see heaven open, 
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon 
the Son of Man” (Johni:51). Nathaniel had confessed 
Him as the Son of God, the King of Israel. Then the 
Lord promised him “greater things,” which will come 
when He is enthroned as King, when the invisible 
angelic hosts will be seen by human eyes. 

There is another passage in which our Lord mentions 
the angels which we have not yet quoted. It is ex- 
plained in different ways. ‘““Take heed that ye despise 
not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in 
heaven their angels behold the face of my Father who 
is in heaven” (Matt. xviii:10). It has been explained 
as meaning that every believer has a guardian angel in 
heaven. This we do not believe is the correct inter- 
pretation. He evidently speaks of the little children, 
and not of believers. All depends of the interpretation 
of the word “angels.” At the first glance it would 
seem as if these little ones have angels in heaven. There 
is a passage in the twelfth chapter of Acts which seems 
to solve this difficult passage. When Peter, rescued 
from prison, by angelic interference, came to the house 
where a prayer meeting was in progress and the maid 
Rhoda maintained that Peter was knocking at the 
door, they said, “It is his angel.”” They thought that 
Peter had been killed and when they used the expres- 
sion “his angel” they meant his disembodied spirit. 
It throws some light on the passage before us. The 


CHAPTER: IX 79 


little children belong to the kingdom of heaven. When 
they depart in their infancy out of this life, their dis- 
embodied spirits behold the face of the Father in 
heaven. In other words, they are saved. These 
little ones perish not. The work of the Lord Jesus 
Christ brings them to glory. This seems to be the 
most satisfactory explanation of this passage. 

Finally we do not overlook the angel who came at 
certain times to the pool Bethesda, agitating the 
waters so that healing powers were imparted (John 
v:1-9). Many critics attack this record and question 
its genuineness. “After all, there is no more real dif- 
ficulty in this account than in the history of our Lord’s 
temptation in the wilderness, the various cases of 
demon possession, or the release of Peter from prison 
by an angel. Once admit the existence of angels, their 
ministry on earth, and the possibility of their inter- 
position to carry out God’s designs, and there is noth- 
ing that ought to stumble us in this passage.” 


CHAPTER X 


The great day of His return to heaven.—At the right 
hand of God in glorious exaltation—The Lord 
Jesus Christ present in heaven in His glorious 
humanity—A real body.—The great vision for 
Angels.—The marvellous redemption.—Man taken 
in redemption above the Angels.—Shares His glory. 
—tThe testimony of Hebrews i. 


HAT a day it must have been in glory when the 

Son of God, clothed in a real human body, 
returned to heaven, His eternal dwelling place! As we 
have stated before, angels accompanied Him in His 
glorious upward sweep, clothed in the Schechinah cloud. 
He passed through the heavens. All laws of nature, 
which He made and maintains in His creation, were 
set aside. Neither space nor time are anything with 
Him. He passed through the first heaven, passing 
the planets of our solar system, then He passed the 
distant constellations, way beyond the milky way, 
with its millions of suns, till the limit of the second 
heaven was reached. And there is the portal which 
leads into the third heaven, the heaven of heavens, 
which no human eye has ever seen. He advanced to 
enter in, surrounded by the worshipping hosts of angels. 
What a day it was when He left heaven to come down 
to earth! But it was a greater day when He returned, 
His work finished, to receive the place of honor and glory 
at the right hand of God. What shouts of glory must 

80 


CHART ERY X 81 


have then been heard! A mighty hallelujah chorus 
swept through the heavens as He seated Himself 
“at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above 
all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, 
and every name that is named, not only in this world, 
but also in that which is to come” (Eph. i:20, 21). 
As He took that place, the once thorn-crowned Man, 
now crowned with glory and honor, angels and authori- 
ties and powers were made subject unto Him (1 
Peter iii:22). 

Seated, now, upon the throne of God, His God and 
our God, His Father and our Father, is the Man— 
Christ Jesus. The Lord Jesus has taken His in- 
carnation body into heaven and in that glorified 
human body fills the highest place in glory. It is the 
same body which was created for Him in the Virgin’s 
womb by the Holy Spirit. It is the body in which He 
lived on earth, toiled for man, in which He glorified 
God. It is the body, the sinless, the deathless body, 
which He gave as the mighty sacrifice on Calvary’s 
cross. It is the body in which He suffered agony and 
shame, the body which passed through death on account 
ofoursins. It is the body which was buried, but which 
could not see corruption. It is the body which was 
raised from among the dead and in which He ascended 
up on high. Oh blessed, blessed sight for faith to see 
Him there, the Man in the glory! 

What a deep and blessed meaning it has! Man was 
made a little lower than the angels. Angels watched 
as the triune God carried out His purpose of eternity 
to have such a creature as man to inherit the earth. 
They saw that creature formed out of the dust of the 
earth with the divine breath, immortality communi- 


82 CHAPTER) X 


cated to him. Then came the awful catastrophe. 
Man, the offspring of God, falls into sin through the 
agency of the first sinner, Satan, the enemy of God. 
His inheritance is lost. The erstwhile owner of this 
earth becomes once more the prince and the god of 
this world. Man himself is dragged down and through 
sin becomes a subject to the power of darkness. The 
devil is man’s master. He has fallen into a horrible 
depth. How is God to save His fallen creature? 
As we have seen, angels desired to look into these things 
and as God begins to reveal His purposes in redemption, 
they learn to know His plans. They know that the 
Son of God will be the Redeemer. He came, garbed 
as a servant in a human body and finished the great 
work the Father gave Him to do. And now He is 
back in glory and the form of man has been taken 
by Him into the highest heaven, to the nearest and 
dearest place in God’s presence. 

And, now, angels learn God’s marvellous purposes in 
redemption. They begin to understand what God is 
accomplishing in the riches of His grace for lost sinners, 
redeemed by the blood of His own Son. They begin 
to see that He is but God’s First Begotten Son in resur- 
rection, and that sinners saved by grace are destined 
to be like Him, sharers of His nature, sharers of His 
place and sharers of His glory. They begin to see that 
His prayer request is answered, that the glory the 
Father gave to Him, He bestows upon His own 
(John xvii:21). They learn that every redeemed one 
will some day be with Him where He is, in the Father’s 
house, and to inherit all things, as the heir of God and 
the joint heir of Jesus Christ. ‘They understand that 
the Son of God will bring many sons unto glory and 


CHAPTER X 83 


that ultimately Christ and His body, the Bridegroom 
and the bride will be at home in everlasting glory in 
the New Jerusalem. 

What a wonderful redemption made known to lost 
sinners and also to the angels of God! The redemption 
which does more than wash sins away, save from eternal 
night and give peace in time and eternity, the re- 
demption which lifts man from where he is by nature 
as a fallen being and gives to him a place in Christ 
and a glory higher and better than the angels. Believers 
are made in redemption higher than the angels, for no 
angel can say to God, Father; nor is an angel indwelt 
by the Holy Spirit, nor is an angel an heir of God. 

Angels behold now these marvels of redemption. 
They have found out what riches of glory are in store 
for those whom He purchased by the blood of His 
only Son. Poets have sometimes sung of angels 
envying. Angels know no envy; they cannot be 
jealous. Every new manifestation of the grace of 
God towards lost sinners, every new revelation of the 
surpassing riches of His grace in lifting man redeemed 
to the heights of Him who redeemed, brings forth from 
all the angels of God nothing but praise and ceaseless 
adoration. The evidence of this is found in the fifth 
chapter of Revelation. When the redeemed sing their 
song, ‘“Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open 
the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed 
us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and 
tongue, and people, and nation; and hast made us 
unto our God kings and priests, and we shall reign 
over the earth,” the myriads of angels join in the 
praise. “And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many 
angels round about the throne and the living creatures 


84 CHAPTER: X 


and the elders, and the number of them was ten 
thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of 
thousands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the 
Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, 
and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, 
and blessing.” 

The first chapter in the Epistle to the Hebrews makes 
special mention of this most blessed phase of the 
Gospel. In a few sentences the Holy Spirit gives the 
facts concerning Christ, His person and His work. 
His Deity is stated in these words, ““By whom he made 
the worlds, who being the brightness of his glory, 
and the express image of his person, and upholding 
all things by the word of his power.” Then we read 
of His work in incarnation, “He made purification of 
our sins,” and finally we have a statement of His 
resurrection glory: ‘‘Whom he hath appointed heir 
of all things * * * and he sat down on the right 
hand of the majesty on high.” 

In the fourth verse of this chapter angels are men- 
tioned. “Being made so much better than the angels, 
as He hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent 
name than they.” The Spirit of God uses next the 
witness of the psalms as to this exaltation. The second 
psalm is quoted. “For unto which of the angels said 
he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I 
begotten thee?”? Nowhere is this spoken of angels, 
only He is Son incarnate and Son of God by resur- 
rection from among the dead. In the eighty-ninth 
psalm God says that He would be to Him a Father— 
“TI will be to Him a Father, and He shall be to Me a 
Son”; He never addressed such words to angels, but 
only to Him who is our Saviour. “And again, when 


CHAPTER X 85 


he bringeth in the Firstbegotten into the world, he 
saith, and let all the angels of God worship him” 
(Psalm xcvii). The blessed meaning of angels wor- 
shipping the Christ is explained in our last chapter. 
But what are angels? They are spirits and a flame of 
fire, as His ministers (Psalm civ). But He is more than 
a servant. He has a throne and a sceptre in His 
kingdom (Psalm xlv). The One Hundred and Second 
Psalm speaks of that which could never be true of 
angels and the One Hundred and Tenth Psalm reveals, 
prophetically, the place which is His now in glory. 
“Sit on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool.” Never did God speak thus to an angel. 
No angel can sit in the presence of God. “Are they 
not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister 
for them who shall be heirs of salvation?” 

The truth that our Lord Jesus Christ is higher than 
the angels, and that we share in Him this place and 
are destined to share the glory He has, is a great, 
separating truth, if it is held in real heart occupation. 
Alas! there are only too many believers who believe it 
theoretically, but they never permit the power of it to 
control their lives and their daily walk. May the 
Holy Spirit of God make it a real power in the life of 
every one of our readers. When we realize in faith 
our unspeakable dignity, our marvellous calling and 
glorious destiny, a destiny far above all the angels of 
God, we shall walk in separation from this present 
evil age and demonstrate in our lives that which His 
blessed lips have spoken of us, “we are not of the world 
even as He is not of the world.” But what will it be 
when some blessed day we shall be lifted by His power 
to the place where He is, to meet Him and the angels 


of God! 


CHAPTER XI 


The Book of Acts.—Opening chapters in Jerusalem.— 
Why miracles and supernatural manifestations?— 
Jews require a sign.—Angels also still visibly 
present.—Apostles delivered by Angels.—Used in 
judgment.—Philip guided by an Angel.—Cornelius 
sees an Angel.—Paul’s experience.—Angels no 
longer visible in this age and why it is so.—They are 
still active on earth.—Ephesians iii:8-11.—Present 
in worship.—1l Corinthians xi:10.—How they are 
now the ministering spirits for the Saints.—Practical 
value of this truth. 


HE Book of Acts contains the inspired record of 

the beginning of the church of God on earth. 
The day of Pentecost marks her birth, for on that day 
the Holy Spirit of God came to earth and baptized 
the assembled believers into one body (1 Cor. xii:13). 
The beginning of the church was made in Jerusalem and 
all members of it were believing Jews. As the Lord 
had commanded, “beginning in Jerusalem,” so it 
was done. Yet not even the mouthpiece of the 
Spirit of God, the apostle Peter, knew on the day of 
Pentecost that Gentiles were to be added to that body. 
The opening chapters of the Book of Acts present a 
transition period. We are still on Jewish ground and, 
therefore, different things took place which later, 
when the Gospel is carried far hence to the Gentiles, 
disappear. What happened in those apostolic days 

86 


CHAPTER XI 87 


in Jerusalem can never be repeated. How much con- 
fusion and error would have been avoided in the 
past, and especially in our days, if this were correctly 
understood. Such unscriptural movements as Pente- 
costalism, Dowieism and others, with their spurious 
claims of a restoration of apostolic gifts, especially the 
gift of talking in a strange tongue and the gift of healing, 
would not flourish if it had been understood that the 
supernatural manifestations recorded in the opening 
chapters of Acts had a special significance on account 
of the Jews. It is written, “the Jews require a sign” 
(1 Cor. 1:22). It was so from the very beginning. 
It was only after Moses did the signs in the sight of the 
people, after his return from Midian, that the people 
believed (Ex. iv:29-31). God, in His loving kindness, 
met this demand “‘bearing witness, both with signs 
and wonders, and divers miracles, and gifts of the 
Holy Spirit, according to His own will” (Heb. 11:4). 
But these signs and miracles, so much needed in the 
beginning of this age, in behalf of the Jews, are no 
longer necessary after God’s fullest revelation has 
been given. The age becomes the age of taith for 
“we live by faith and not by sight.” 

But in connection with the Jews and God’s repeated 
offer of mercy, supernatural demonstrations were 
given. A lame man is supernaturally healed, signs 
and wonders were wrought by the apostles among the 
people. Multitudes came from the surrounding cities, 
bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with 
unclean spirits; and they were healed every one. 
What the Lord Jesus had done was done by His apostles 
who used His Name, so that the unbelieving Jews 
might know that He whom they crucified is living 


88 CHAPTER XI 


and is their promised Messiah-King. There was 
also a supernatural judgment when Ananias and his 
wife Sapphira had told an untruth. Those who seek 
restoration of apostolic signs never mention this 
miracle of judgment. Furthermore, angels also are 
seen and act as God’s messengers. 

When the apostles were in the common prison, 
there was a miraculous deliverance. ‘“‘An angel of the 
Lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought 
them forth, and said, Go, stand and speak in the temple 
to the people all the words of this life” (Acts v:17-20). 
It was an angel who gave direction to the evangelist 
Philip telling him where to go. “And an angel of the 
Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go towards 
the South unto the way that goeth down from Jeru- 
salem unto Gaza, which is desert” (Acts vii:26). 
And Philip obeyed without a moment’s hesitation. 
It was an angel who appeared to Cornelius, the pious 
Centurion of the band called Italian, an earnest seeker 
after God. And the angel said to him, ‘“Thy prayers 
and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God. 
And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, 
whose surname is Peter. He lodgeth with one Simon 
the tanner, whose house is by the seaside, he shall tell 
thee what thou oughtest to do” (Acts x:3-6). God did 
not send this angel to preach the way of salvation to 
Cornelius, for this is not the calling of an angel, but to 
give direction to the Centurion of Cesarea. 

In the twelfth chapter of Acts, Peter is in prison. 
Herod intended to kill him as he had killed James, 
with the sword. The church made prayer for Peter 
without ceasing. Their prayers were answered by a 
miracle. Peter was specially guarded, sleeping between 


CHAPTER XI 89 


two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keepers 
before the door kept the prison. “And behold an 
angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in 
the prison; and he smote Peter on the side, and raised 
him up, saying, Arise quickly. And his chains fell 
off his hands. And the angel said unto him, Gird 
thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And so he did. 
And he saith unto him, Cast thy garment about thee, 
and follow me. And he went out and followed him, 
and wist not that it was true which was done by the 
angel, but thought he saw a vision. When they were 
past the first and second ward, they came unto the iron 
gate that leadeth unto the city, which opened to them 
of its own accord, and they went out, and passed on 
through one street; and forthwith the angel departed 
from him” (xii:7-10). Evidently the two soldiers 
saw nothing and heard nothing of all this. Not even 
the chains which fell off to the floor awakened them out 
of their sleep. And even Peter did not realize that it 
was an angel; he felt as if it were a dream vision. 

In the same chapter an angel is used in executing 
judgment upon wicked Herod, “Upon a set day 
Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, 
and made an oration unto them. And the people 
gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not of 
aman. And immediately an angel of the Lord smote 
him, because he gave not the glory to God, and he was 
eaten of worms, and gave us the ghost.” 

The last time an angel is mentioned in the Book of 
Acts is in connection with Paul’s journey to Rome. 
The prisoner of the Lord, when disaster stared the 
sea-faring company in the face, addressed them in the 
following words: “And now I exhort you to be of good 


90 CHAPTER XI 


cheer, for there shall be no loss of any man’s life among 
you, but of the ship. For there stood by me this night 
an angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, 
Saying, fear not, Paul, thou must be brought before 
Caesar, and lo, God has given thee all them that sail 
with thee” (xxvii:22-27). In the last chapter of this 
book we see the great apostle Paul in a Roman prison. 
No angel appeared to open his prison door. And 
when later he is condemned to die, no angel comes to 
arrest the arm of the executioner. Throughout this 
age thousands upon thousands, tens of thousands, 
yea hundreds of thousands of Christians were cast into 
vile prisons, cruelly tortured and finally put to death 
in a merciless manner. No angels came to deliver 
them. The heavens are silent. Angels are no longer 
seen for the reason that God expects man to believe 
in His completed revelation. 

But while no longer angels appear in visible form 
as in olden times as God’s ministers, while these beings 
of the heavenly spheres no longer display their glorious 
figures, it does not mean in the least that they have 
ceased to visit the earth and are no longer active in 
the affairs of human existence. They are heaven’s 
visitors still and He who has all power in heaven and 
on earth, who is far above the angels, uses them as 
His servants. There is Scripture evidence which makes 
this clear. It is true we lack a full revelation on the 
matter of the ministry of angels throughout this present 
age, and we will have to wait till all things become 
known to us in glory to find out the great and various 
services they rendered, under the Lord, to His people. 
There are also many traditions and legends from earliest 
times which claim that holy men and women were 


CH APTTLIER, XI 91 


visited by angels. But no one can vouch for the gen- 
uineness of these things. Just as today in certain sects 
claims are made that they have seen angels in visions 
and in dreams. 

In approaching, now, the present ministries of angels 
and their intercourse with the earth we quote first a 
passage from the Epistle to the Ephesians. In the 
third chapter of this epistle Paul speaks of his God- 
given ministry: “Unto me, who am less than the least 
of all the Saints, is this grace given, that I should 
preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of 
Christ; and to make all men see what is the fellowship 
of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world 
hath been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus 
Christ; to the intent that now unto the principalities 
and powers in heavenly places might be made known 
by the church the manifold wisdom of God, according 
to the eternal purpose, which he purposed in Christ 
Jesus our Lord” (Eph. iii:8-11). The principalities 
and powers in the heavenly places are the angels. 
As we have seen, from the beginning the angels were 
desirous of looking into the things concerning redemp- 
tion, the redemption of man. It was the great theme 
they followed in Old Testament times with wonder and 
adoration. When He came, the Saviour-Lord, they 
were intimately connected with His life and work on 
earth. But now they learn the manifold wisdom of 
God by the mystery of God which was hid in God from 
the beginning of the world. That mystery is the 
church. They see, now, that all who believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ, Jews and Gentiles, become members 
of that body and that the Lord Jesus is the head of it. 
They see that in each heart dwells the Spirit of God, 


92 CHAPTER ‘XI 


that they are one spirit with Him; that each member 
possesses His life, is of His flesh and of His bones 
(Eph. v:30). They behold how this building is fitly 
framed together, groweth towards its final destiny to 
be an holy temple unto the Lord. They watch to 
learn the manifold wisdom of God in all this so that 
the church, the body of Christ, the mystery made 
known, is, during this age, one of the great objects of 
angelic contemplation. If we, as believers, had this 
more real before our hearts, that these heavenly 
beings are watching and beholding us, how much more 
we would give all diligence to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace, and avoid everything 
which would mar in the least that unity. How angels 
must grieve when they see the degradation of the 
“church” and see those who are real members of the 
body of Christ divided amongst themselves. They 
know that such divisions are Christ-dishonoring and 
are not according to the purpose of God. 

In the first epistle to the Corinthians, angels are 
mentioned in connection with the worship of the true 
church. We quote the verse: “For \this cause 
ought the woman to have power on her head because 
of the angels.”” What is the meaning of this verse? 
God is the God of order not only in creation but also 
in redemption. Man and woman are given a place 
before Him. In the church, woman has her place 
given to her by the Lord. That place is revealed 
in 1 Timothy ii:11-14. ‘Let the women learn in 
silence with all subjection. But I suffer not a woman 
to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but 
to be in silence. For Adam was first formed, then 
Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman 


CHAIPTE R* Xi 93 


being deceived was in the transgression.” God has 
given to man the first place both in creation and in 
redemption. Woman takes her place as under the 
man. Paul, in this chapter, speaks of this when he 
writes by the Spirit of God that the head of the woman 
is the man; that the head of the man is Christ, and 
that the head of Christ is God. This is the scale of 
power ascending to the supreme God. Then he adds 
that the man was not created for the woman, but the 
woman for the man. In worship in the assembly, 
that is the church, woman has, therefore, her place 
which needs to be expressed outwardly. Man is to 
pray and worship with his head uncovered. He 
represents authority, and in this respect was invested 
with the glory of God, of whom he was the image. 
The woman is to have her head covered, as an outward 
sign and evidence that she is subject to the man; that 
covering is a token of the power to which she is subject. 
In connection with this the apostle speaks of the order 
in creation, according to which a woman’s hair, her 
glory and attractive ornament, showed in contrast 
with the hair of the man, that she was not made to 
present herself before all with the boldness of man. 
“Given as a veil, her hair showed that modesty, 
submission (a covered head that hides itself, as it were, 
in that submission and in that modesty) was her true 
position, her distinctive glory.’’* 

It hardly needs any mention how all these injunc- 
tions are ignored in our days. But few pay attention 
to them. Others say they are but unessential details 
and have no more meaning for us today. Sad it is to 
see how professedly Christian women can imitate the 


*Synopsis J. N. D. 


94 CHAPTER XI 


fashion of this world and have their hair shorn. But 
even these details are connected with the glory of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. We return to our theme. The 
woman, in her worship and in prayer, should cover her 
head. Besides maintaining the order of God she is 
to do this because of the angels. They look on while 
the church is gathered to worship. With what holy 
admiration they must witness the supremest form of 
worship on earth, when true believers gather around 
the Lord’s table to break the bread and partake of the 
blessed cup, showing forth the Lord’s death, till He 
comes! They behold the divine order then, man un- 
covered, the token of his place; woman with covered 
head, the token of her place. The verse teaches us 
that angels behold the church in worship. They are 
the unseen witnesses when God’s people meet in that 
blessed and worthy name. 

Another passage on the same truth we find in 
1 Tim. v:21, “I charge thee before God, and the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou 
observe these things without preferring one before 
another, doing nothing by partiality.” Here, also it 
is the question of order. ‘Let all things be done 
decently and in order” (1 Cor. xiv:40). The elect 
angels behold all these things. 

We have already mentioned the words of our Lord 
in the fifteenth chapter of Luke’s Gospel, that there is 
joy in the presence of the angels over one sinner that 
repenteth. They are looking on when the Gospel is 
preached. Unseen beings are present when the Holy 
Spirit pleads with the unsaved to turn to Christ. 
The demons are there to catch away the seed which 


CHAPTER XI 95 


has been sown. Angels watch and when one sinner 
repenteth they begin their rejoicing. 

We learn then from these passages of Scripture that 
the church, the body and bride of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, is the special object of angelic occupation and 
contemplation. Through the mystery of God hidden 
in former ages, they learn the manifold wisdom of 
God. They look on when believers worship; they 
are the unseen witnesses when the Gospel is preached. 

And now we turn to the verse in the New Testament 
which reveals the fact that angels are ministers of God 
during this dispensation. ‘Are they not all minister- 
ing spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall 
be heirs of salvation?” (Heb. i:4). We take these 
words to mean exactly what they say. The meaning 
is that the angels are ministering to those who shall be 
heirs of salvation. There is a school of Bible inter- 
pretation which tries to rob believers of certain portions 
of the Word of God by saying that these portions are 
not for the church, but for the Jews. This school 
claims the Gospels are mostly for the Jews. The 
epistles of Peter, James and Hebrews are also Jewish; 
even the book of Revelation is Judaized. They would 
have Christians read and study only certain epistles 
of the apostle Paul, addressed to the church. A 
one-sided Bible study produces a one-sided character 
and a one-sided service. And so they say because this 
verse is in Hebrews it has nothing to do with us. They 
rob the church of a comfort which belongs ta every 
child of God. The fact that angels are ministering 
spirits sent forth from above is a neglected truth of the 
Word of God. Rome’s abuse in worshipping angels 


96 CHAPTER) X1 


has kept evangelical Christians from examining more 
closely the ministry of angels. 

As we think on this truth, it appears perfectly logical 
that angels minister to those who belong to Christ. 
They know that redeemed sinners, washed in the blood 
of the Lamb, are the glory of Christ. They know 
Christ dwells in them; they know that they are the 
heirs of salvation. As Christ was in the world so are 
they now in the world. They ministered to Christ 
and as the believers are in Christ’s stead, sent into the 
world, as the Son of God was sent into the world 
(John xvii:18) they minister now to them. This 
appears so much more reasonable when we considerithe 
hostile forces which are in the world. The world 
lieth in the wicked one. The devil is the god of this 
age, the prince of this world and the prince of the power 
in the air. He hates Christ. He tried to frustrate 
for four thousand years the purposes of God, and was 
active as the murderer and liar, to make it impossible 
for God to carry out His plans. And now that he is 
defeated and Christ is victor, seated as such at the 
right hand of God, he strikes at that which names the 
blessed Name of the Lord Jesus Christ on earth. His 
demon forces, through whom he acts, are active in 
every direction. If he could do it he would end the 
life of every child of God on earth. The true church is 
the object of his hatred. The angels of God are min- 
istering to prevent the success of the devil’s attacks. 

But how do they minister? What kind of a ministry 
do they exercise? They cannot minister to believers 
in spiritual things. They cannot assist them in the 
study and in the understanding of the Word and the 
Truth of God. Believers have the unction from 


CHAPRUERISX 1 97 


above, they are indwelt by the Holy Spirit. ‘But the 
anointing which ye have received of him abideth in 
you, and ye need not that any man teach you; but as 
the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is 
truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye 
shall abide in him” (1 Johnii:27). “We have received, 
not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of 
God; that we might know the things that are freely 
given to us of God. Which things we also speak, not 
in the words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which 
the Holy Spirit teacheth; comparing spiritual things 
with spiritual” (1 Cor. ii:12, 13). Angels are not the 
temples of the Holy Spirit, for the Spirit of God is the 
gift of the grace of God in the Lord Jesus Christ, given 
to those who believe on Him. Therefore, angels are 
beneath us in this respect and they cannot minister 
to us in spiritual things; God, the Holy Spirit, through 
the Word of God, of which He is the author, ministers 
to the spiritual needs of the flock of God. 

In what, then, consist their ministries? In physical, 
temporal matters exclusively. In a world which is 
antagonistic to the children of God, which is controlled 
by the forces of evil, dangers and pitfalls abound on all 
sides. There are many perils. The apostle Paul 
had them in his life of service. ‘Of the Jews five times 
received I forty stripes but one. Thrice was I beaten 
with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered ship- 
wreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep. 
In journeyings often, in perils in water, in perils of 
robbers, in perils by my own countrymen, in perils 
by the heathen, in perilsin the city, inperilsin the wilder- 
ness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren” 
(2 Cor. xi:24-26). We doubt not that all these perils 


98 CH ARTIC XI 


were attempts made on his life. Satan used wicked men 
to beat him and to stone him. He used robbers and 
wild beasts (1 Cor. xv:32), his own countrymen and the 
heathen, to end his career, but the Lord saved him and 
kept him as long as his work was not finished. That 
angels were about him in these perils and were sent 
forth by the Lord to protect His faithful servant, min- 
istering thus to him, in unquestionable. We have the 
hint of it in the story of the shipwreck, when an angel 
appeared to him, assuring him of his safety and that of 
the company which sailed with him. 

The lives of the Lord’s people are in the Lord’s 
hands. It is a true saying, ““We are immortal, as con- 
cerns the earth, as long as our work is not done.” 
The Lord keeps the very feet of His saints and protects 
them in all perils and dangers. In this respect, life 
is full of mysteries. The great men of God in the past 
in every century record miraculous escapes from 
threatening dangers which they could not explain in any 
other way but by the ministry of the angels. We pray 
for heavenly protection; we put ourselves into His 
hands when we go on a journey; we commit our loved 
ones into His care and keeping. But how little we 
know how graciously our prayers and our trust in Him 
are answered in a supernatural manner by ministering 
angels! Children seem to be especially under the 
protecting care of the angels. Many miraculous 
escapes of little ones in the hour of danger can only be 
explained by supernatural agencies. When we re- 
member the loving interest our Lord had in the little 
children when He was on earth, and His words, “Suffer 
the little children to come unto me, and forbid them 
not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven” (Matt. xix:14), 


CHAPSLERA XI 99 


we have a reason for the special watch and care of the 
angels over the little ones. 

If we were to ask our fellow Christians to give us 
experiences of Providence, miraculous preservation 
and protection in the hours of danger, when death 
threatened, we would receive enough incidents to fill a 
volume. For years, the writer has watched in his own 
busy life of travel and service for Him, His gracious 
protection and many deliverances seem unexplainable 
apart from the services of unseen agencies. A number 
of years ago, while travelling northward, we committed 
ourselves especially into His loving hands. There was 
a feeling of danger in the heart. The Lord gavea 
night of peaceful rest. But in the morning we heard 
the story of what had happened during the night. The 
train was hours late and the crew told us that near to 
midnight the train had been flagged by a farmer and had 
been brought to a stop less than five yards from a deep 
abyss. A storm further north sent its flood-waters 
down the creek and washed the wooden bridge away. 
A farmer was asleep. He said a voice awoke him 
to arise. He heard the rushing water and hastily 
dressed himself and lit a lantern, when he heard the 
oncoming train, which he stopped in time. We have 
always believed that an angel of God acted then. And 
how many more incidents there are in all our lives. 
Simple faith can look up and thank the Lord for His 
kind. providences, for His deliverances, for His pro- 
tection and for the unknown and unseen ministers 
He uses in the execution of His purposes and the keep- 
ing of those who are “Beloved of God, called Saints.” 
Surely the angels must compass those about who fear 
the Lord. It seems also that the words of Satan in the 


100 CHAPTER XI 


book of Job indicate this, when he said: “Hast thou 
not made a hedge about him, and about his house, 
and about all that he hath on all sides?” 

Yet we cannot tell and we do not know all the ways 
in which this unseen ministry is done. We are assured 
that there is such a ministry and far be it from us to go 
beyond that which is written or to try to explore that 
which is God’s secret. The story of Lazarus tells us 
how they are used when God’s people die. 

What other ministries the angels have in this great 
universe in connection with its government and its 
laws, we do not know. Bishop Westcott, the great 
scholar, wrote many years ago as follows: “‘We com- 
monly limit our notion of angelic service to personal 
ministrations. No doubt Scripture dwells specially on 
this kind of office; but it indicates yet more, a min- 
istration of angels in nature, which brings both them 
and the world closer to men. Perhaps one effect of 
the growing clearness with which we apprehend the 
laws of the physical phenomena is to bring out into 
prominence the thought of the powers which work 
according to them.”’ “Icansee,” writes one who was 
himself a distinguished physiologist, “nothing in all 
nature but the loving acts of spiritual beings.” But 
this is only a suggestion. 

The day is coming when we shall no longer look into 
a glass darkly, when we shall know as we are known. 
Then we shall know these secret things and meet the 
angels. What discoveries we shall make then as we 
trace our little life’s story in the light of God. Perhaps 
these blessed beings will tell us in glory of the many 
ways in which they were alongside of us, keeping and 
protecting, like a mighty shield, guarding and directing 


CHAPTER XI 101 


of which we never dreamt while clothed in a mortal 
body. Like every truth, the truth of the angels of 
God, their presence on earth and their loving minis- 
tries, has a practical value. As we realize in faith that 
we are the objects of observation of so many unseen 
beings, the host of angels, and, think of it, that they are 
watching us, ready to walk with us, as we walk with 
Him in His ways, ready to serve us as we serve Him, 
ready to shield us and help us in a hundred different 
ways, a solemn feeling will come into our lives. Surely 
we shall walk softly in the presence of the Lord and 
His holy angels. We shall remember that they also 
are witnesses of our deeds and listen to our words. 
Thus this truth will assist us in a holy life. Further- 
more, as we remember that they are about us for our 
preservation and protection we can live for Him and 
serve Him without fearing the power of the enemy, 
knowing that our Lord will keep us in all His ways. 


CHAPTER XH 


The waiting heavens.—Christ waiting and Angels wait- 
ing.—His coming again and what it will mean.— 
The visible manifestation—1 Thess. iv:16-18.— 
—Present at the Judgment seat.—Another great and 
glorious court day in heaven.—Satan rebuked and 
cast out.—Revelation and Angels used in judgment. 
—The heavenly hosts manifested in the day of His 
glory.—They are used by Him.—Hebrews i:6.— 
The Angels ascending and descending. Conclusion. 


HERE is waiting in Heaven. Once the heavens 

were waiting when the Lord had spoken the first 
prophecy and the first promise of redemption. The 
waiting began with the third chapter in Genesis. 
Angels waited for the accomplishment of God’s 
purposes in redemption, as we have shown in the 
preceding chapters, desiring to look into these things, 
and used by God as servants during the four thousand 
years before He came as the promised seed of the 
woman. 

But the heavens are still waiting. The Christ as 
the glorified Man, fills the throne in the highest heaven. 
He is waiting till His enemies are made the footstool 
of His feet, and that will be in the day when the 
Father sends Him the second time, to claim His crown 
rights over the earth, which He purchased by His blood. 
The spirits of the redeemed are waiting for that coming 
day when they will receive their resurrection bodies and 

102 


CRAP TER fOr 103 


the rewards, and their crowns (2 Tim. iv:8). The 
innumerable company of angels are also waiting. On 
the earth the true church is waiting. The living 
members of His body, believers on every continent 
are longing for His coming and the long-forgotten 
prayer is now prayed as perhaps never before: “Even 
so, Come Lord Jesus.” 

Angels must, indeed, long with us for that promised 
day of consummation. We long for it because we 
know that day will bring His glory. When He appears 
in power and great glory every question which agitates 
the so-called “religious world” of today concerning 
His Person will be forever settled. Today, the men 
who call themselves “scholars,” great “thinkers” or 
“scientists” sneer at the Virgin birth of our Lord, 
deny His miracles, because they are baptized infidels 
who do not believe in His Deity; they sneer at His 
resurrection and ridicule His return to earth. But 
when He comes again, when this same Jesus, in that 
same body which He had on earth and in which He is 
now at the right hand of God, reappears, the great 
scholars, thinkers and scientists, with their denials of 
Christ will be found miserable liars and put to shame. 
The curse of God will rest upon them, for it is written, 
“If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be 
anathema maranatha” (accursed when the Lord 
comes. 1 Cor. xvi:22). 

Angels know all this and, therefore, they long with 
us for that day of His glory and victory. They also 
know that when the day of the Lord comes they 
will be manifested in their glory. The day will bring 
what they must long for, their visible display. ‘Then 
modern Sadduceeism will be answered as the existence 


104 CHAPTER XII 


of angels is demonstrated in their glorious presence. 

The Lord has been pleased to give to His people in 
His Word the order of events in connection with the end 
of this present age, His visible return, the dawn of the 
morning and the glories of the coming age. In all 
these events angels are very prominently mentioned 
in both Testaments. 

It is well known to all painstaking Christians, who 
divide the Word of Truth rightly, that the Lord begins 
the events of the end of the age with the fulfillment of a 
promise which He did not give to the world, but only 
to His own. It is the familiar promise in John xiv, 
“I will come again and receive you unto myself that 
where I am ye may be also.” He did not reveal 
at that time how this promise would be fulfilled. 
His disciples who listened to these words were Jews. 
They had never heard anything like it before. The 
hope of the Jew in the Old Testament was to be with 
the Messiah in His earthly kingdom and enjoy the 
kingdom blessings in Immanuel’s land. The full 
revelation as to the manner of the fulfillment of this 
promise was given through the apostle Paul, who tells 
us that he received it by the Word of the Lord 

“For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven 
with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, with the 
trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; 
then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in clouds, to meet the Lord in the 
air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord” (1 Thess. 
iv:16-17). This is “that blessed Hope,” the true hope 
of the church. We notice that in this great revelation 
the voice of the archangel is mentioned. The arch- 
angel is Michael. He is closely connected with the 


CHAPTER XII 105 


events in the end of the age (Daniel xii and Revelation 
xii). The Lord Himself comes as the Head of all 
things and gives the word. Then the archangel 
passes it on, and the trumpet of God will be sounded. 
’ Then comes the great and precious event. The right- 
eous dead arise; the living believers are changed 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, and all are 
caught up together in clouds to meet the Lord in the air. 

The archangel Michael evidently represents as head 
of the angelic world the entire heavenly hosts. They 
will be onlookers when this great miracle takes place. 
Again, all heaven, it seems to us, will be astir, for here 
come the redeemed, the saints of God, the fellows of 
Christ, to receive His glory; and as it was with the fore- 
runner so now again all laws of space, distances and 
time are not in operation as heaven’s chariots carry 
the saints of God from earth to heaven. As He passed 
t hrough the heavens so the redeemed pass through the 
heavens. As He was seen of angels so angels see the 
fellow heirs of Christ in their glorious home-going. 
Then, too, the mysteries of the stars and the vast 
universe will be known by the future tenants of the 
heavens. 

Angels will be witnesses at the judgment seat of 
Christ when the hidden things will be brought to light. 
When the rewards are given for faithful service and 
some will be approved and many others disapproved, 
when some receive crowns and others suffer loss, though 
saved as by fire. Angels will stand by, for they too 
watched the believers’ works and witness for Christ 
(Luke xii:2, 3; 8,9; 1 Cor. iii:11-15; iv:5). 

It will be another marvellous court day in heaven, 
when all the redeemed are gathered before the throne. 


106 CHA PEER XxOrl 


The Sons of God, the angels, the Sons of Jehovah, 
the redeemed and glorified children of men are there, 
and, Satan will probably be there also. One of the 
night visions of Zechariah suggests this as a possi- 
bility (Zech. iii:14). In this vision Israel, the priestly 
nation is in view. It is equally true of the church; 
she too is “as a brand plucked out of the fire.” Satan 
has been the accuser of the brethren. He tried his 
utmost to snatch away the members of His body, to 
pluck them out of His hand. The advocacy of Christ 
answered to all his malignant accusation. The 
complete body of Christ is now in glory; not a member 
is missing. His blessed words of assurance, teaching the 
eternal security of His own, given to Him by the 
Father, are realized (John x:28-29). The accuser of 
the brethren is now completely silenced. He cannot 
speak another word. 

It is at that time when the impressive scene of the 
twelfth chapter of the Book of Revelation is enacted. 
The time has come when the accuser of the brethren 
is to be cast out of heaven. The true church, the 
Christ complete, He the Head, His church His Body, is 
in glory. There is war in heaven. The Lord calls to 
Michael, and the archangel summons his hosts to fight 
with the Dragon and with his angels. ‘‘And the great 
dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the Devil, 
and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world; he was 
cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out 
with him. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, 
Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom 
of our God, and the power of His Christ, for the accuser 
of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before 
God day and night” (Rev. xii:7-12). On the earth 


CHYA P'RER 2X1 107 


Satan, the Devil, the Serpent called also the Dragon, 
will produce the great tribulation. 

The great worship scenes which John beheld in 
Patmos, when the door was opened for him in heaven, 
and the voice commanded him to come up hither, 
will then be enacted (Rev. iv andv). The twenty-four 
elders, clothed in white raiment, seated upon thrones 
and wearing crowns, represent the redeemed. Then, 
when the Lord Jesus is about to manifest His kingly 
rights, the multitude of angels breaks forth in adoration 
and worship. 

When the Lord Jesus Christ opens the seven-sealed 
book, He received from the hand of God, the book in 
which are written the judgments for this earth, the 
book He alone is worthy to open, the four Cherubim 
and the angels are seen in action. During the seven 
years between His coming for His Saints (1 Thess. 
iv:13-18) and His coming with His Saints, supernatural 
powers will be manifested on the earth. Satan is on 
the earth and the two beasts of Revelation xiii, ener- 
gized by the Dragon, control the politics and the 
ecclesiastical affairs of apostate Christendom. Lying 
signs and miracles appear on all sides, the great delusion 
has come (2 Thess. ii). Angels, as the agents of judg- 
ment, reach into the affairs of the world. These 
judgments, the contents of the book our Lord received, 
are revealed in chapters vi-xix of the last book of the 
Bible. All is yet to come. Nothing has been ful- 
filled in these chapters, nor are they in process of ful- 
fillment now. The Saints of God must first be brought 
to glory. 

When the Lord begins His judgment work and breaks 
the first four seals, each one of the Cherubim says, 


108 CHA RRER oul 


“Come,” and in response the four apocalyptic riders 
appear. Angels are seen in the seventh chapter re- 
straining the four winds of the earth, while another 
angel seals the 144,000, the remnant of Israel, turning 
to the Lord during that time of Jacob’s trouble. 
Seven angels appear sounding their trumpets and after 
each sounding a judgment falls upon the earth.* In 
almost every chapter angels are mentioned, sufficient 
evidence that the Lord uses them in His judgments 
which fall then upon the earth. Six angels are prom- 
inent in the fourteenth chapter. One announces the 
everlasting Gospel; the second announces the fall of 
Babylon, and the third warns against worshipping the 
beast, the Anti-christ, and his image, and receiving 
the mark of the beast. The fourth angel comes out of 
the temple calling for the harvest of the earth, followed 
by the fifth angel who carried a sharp sickle. The sixth 
angel “cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp 
sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the 
clusters of the vine of the earth; for the grapes are 
fully ripe.” After that, seven other angels appear; 
they carried the vials filled with the wrath of God. 
Each pours out his vial and a judgment-plague falls 
upon the earth. One of these seven angels showed 
also to John the great mystical Babylon, Babylon the 
great, the mother of harlots and abominations on the 
earth, while another angel announces the complete 
fall of Babylon (Rev. xvii:1 and xviii:i).¢ From all 
this we learn how our Lord, to whom all judgment is 
committed, will use the angels in these future judg- 
ments of the earth. 


*The word “angel” in Chapter viii should be “eagle.” 
{See the author’s Exposition of Revelation. 


CHAPTER XII 109 


At last the great day, called by the prophets the day 
of the Lord, has come. It is the day of which He so 
often spoke, ‘“‘when the sign of the Son of Man shall 
appear in heaven,” when the dwellers on the earth 
“shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven 
with power and great glory.” It is the glorious day 
when He comes in the glory of His Father with His 
angels, the day when the veil is lifted and the angels 
will be seen on a far greater scale than when He entered 
the world in Bethlehem. 

The nineteenth chapter of Revelation gives us a 
great prophetic picture of that coming event. Heaven 
is once more astir, for now the time has come when He 
shall be revealed from heaven with His mighty angels, 
when He shall come bringing His own redeemed ones 
with Him. All heaven is in commotion. A great 
voice of much people in heaven shout their hallelujahs. 
“Hallelujah! Salvation, and glory, and honor and 
power unto the Lord our God.” And after this vast 
multitude shouts again, “Hallelujah!” the twenty- 
four elders and the four living creatures, the Cherubim, 
fall down and worship saying, ‘Amen, Hallelujah!” 
Then comes the voice of a great multitude, which must 
be the innumerable company of angels, like the voice 
of many waters, as the voice of mighty thunderings, 
saying, “Hallelujah for the Lord God omnipotent 
reigneth.” Heaven is filled with praise and joy, 
because everything is ready for the great manifesta- 
tion, for which the ages waited. The Lamb’s wife, 
the glorified church, is ready for the grand and glorious 
display. She is arrayed in fine linen, clean and white. 
The archangel Michael is ready as the chief commander 
of the heavenly hosts to do the part which belongs to 


110 CHAPORERT AI 


him (Daniel xii). All the angelic hosts are ready, 
awaiting the word to take their places in the train of 
the King of kings and Lord of lords. 

The spot to which the Lord Jesus Christ is to descend 
is His beloved Jerusalem, and over yonder in the East, 
the Mount of Olives. Jerusalem, in that day, is once 
more ina desperate condition. All nations are gathered 
together against her to battle. In the midst of the 
city is a faithful remnant crying to heaven for inter- 
ference. “Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, 
that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains 
might flow down at thy presence” (Isaiah Ixiv:1). 
They wait for the coming of the King. They know 
that the prophet Zechariah foresaw this very siege of 
Jerusalem; and they know what else must happen. 
For it is written, ‘“Then shall the Lord go forth and 
fight against those nations, as when he fought in the 
day of battle. And his feet shall stand in that day 
upon the mount of Olives, * * * and the Lord 
my God shall come and all the holy ones (angels) with 
thee” (Zechariah xiv). And as they look upward to 
heaven there is suddenly a glory flash. The sign of 
the Son of Man appears. It must be the Schechinah 
cloud. As these believing Jews see it, they shout for 
joy, “Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and 
he will save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for 
him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.” 
A greater glory than the glory which shone around the 
shepherds the night Christ was born covers the 
heavens, a glory so great that the physical sun begins 
to darken, for the Sun of Righteousness is about to rise. 
Heaven is opened and the vision of the lone prisoner 
in Patmos becomes history (Rev. xix:11-16). The 


CHA PoE RE OXF] 111 


leader and center of all is the Son of Man, He who has a 
name written known only to Himself; whose name is 
the Word of God, whose name, written on His thigh, 
is King of kings and Lord of lords. With Him are the 
armies of heaven, the Saints of God, clad all in white. 
The closest to Him is His beloved bride and His body, 
the Church, and close to the Church, the friends of the 
bridegroom, the Old Testament Saints. Then the 
multitude of angels, angels upon angels, as far as the 
human eye can see the glorious figures of the tenants of 
the heavens, now made visible in His manifestation. 
They are a worshipping company. 

We mention here the first chapter of Hebrews. 
‘And again when he bringeth in the First begotten 
into the world (the inhabited earth), he saith, And let 
all the angels of God worship him.” This is a quotation 
from Psalm xcvii. This does not mean the birth of 
Christ, for He was not then the First begotten, but the 
Only Begotten. He became the First begotten in 
resurrection. The bringing in of the First begotten is 
His second coming. Then the angels of God are 
worshipping Him and not only Him, but His body, 
His church as well. He is now glorified in His Saints. 
Each one is transformed into the same image. The 
blessed hope is realized, ““We shall be like him for we 
shall see him as he is”; and He will be admired in all 
them that believed, in that day (2 Thess. 1:10). In 
all the glories of that day, and in the events which are 
connected with it, angels are prominently associated. 
This is the teaching of both Testaments. Our Lord 
spoke of it on earth. The apostle Paul taught it. 
He speaks prophetically of the time “when the Lord 
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty 


112 CHAPTER XATII 


angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that 
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ” (2 Thess. i:7-8). An angel is seen 
standing in the sun inviting the birds of prey to the 
great judgment supper of God. They will be used 
by Him in gathering out the offending things from His 
kingdom, in separating the good from the bad. They 
will attend to the re-gathering of Israel. “He shall 
send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and 
they shall gather together his elect (Israel) from the 
four winds, from one end of heaven unto the other” 
(Matt. xxiv:31). No doubt in many other ways will 
the Lord use the angels. 

When His kingdom is established upon earth, when 
the glory of the Lord will rest upon Jerusalem 
(Isaiah iv), when the glory of the Lord and the knowl- 
edge of it, not in a spiritual, but in a physical and visible 
way, will cover the earth as the waters cover the sea, 
there will be a wonderful intercourse between heaven 
and earth. No mind can imagine what it will be. 

Up yonder in the sky, where we behold now the sun, 
the moon and the stars, telling out the glory of God, 
there will be seen the New Jerusalem. There is His 
glorious throne. From there, over the earth,* He 
reigns and His Saints reign with Him. The throne in 
the earthly Jerusalem is His likewise, for it is the throne 
of His father David. As Ezekiel tells us, a prince will 
occupy that throne and reign under Him (Ezekiel 
xliv:3). 

Jacob, in his dream-vision, saw the angels of God 
ascending and descending on the ladder. The Lord 
Jesus Christ promised to Nathaniel and to His disciples 


*It is not “on,” but “over the earth;” this is the correct reading. 


CHAPTER XII 113 


an opened heaven, “and the angels of God ascending 
and descending upon the Son of Man.” It has never 
been in the past. But it will be in that day when 
He has been manifested. Heaven and earth will be 
joined together. The hallelujahs of the earth will be 
answered by the hallelujahs in the heavens and the 
message which the heavenly hosts uttered over the 
night-fields of Bethlehem is accomplished, “Glory to 
God in the Highest, Peace on earth and good will 
towards man.” 


* bd * * & 


Never before have God’s people needed the vision of 
the unseen things and the believing anticipation of 
them so much as in our days. The playthings of the 
dust are being made more and more attractive by the 
god of this age to blind the eyes of them that believe 
not. We are, too, in constant danger to lose sight of 
the unseen things, because faith’s vision becomes 
dimmed through the materialism of our times. For all 
we know, we are facing the first streaks of the coming 
day-dawn; the morning star is about to rise. 

May it please our Lord to use these pages in refresh- 
ing our hearts as His waiting people, to fill us with holy 
anticipation, to guide our feet in the path of separation 
and to give us the courage of faith to go forward in 
His service, till the day dawns and the shadows flee 


away. 


Things Hoped For 


These are the crowns that we shall wear, 
When all thy saints are crowned; 

These are the palms that we shall bear 
On yonder holy ground. 


Far off as yet, reserved in heaven, 
Above that veiling sky, 

They sparkle, like the stars of even, 
To hope’s far-piercing eye. 


These are the robes, unsoiled and white, 
Which then we shall put on, 

When, foremost ’mong the sons of light, 
We sit on yonder throne. 


That city with the jewelled crest, 
Like some new-lighted sun; 

A blaze of burning amethyst— 
Ten thousand orbs in one;— 


That is the city of the saints, 
Where we so soon shall stand, 

When we shall strike these desert-tents, 
And quit this desert-sand. 


114 


These are the everlasting hills, 
With summits bathed in day: 

The slopes down which the living rills, 
Soft-lapsing, take their way. 


Fair vision! how thy distant gleam 
Brightens time’s saddest hue; 

Far fairer than the fairest dream, 
And yet so strangely true! 


Fair vision! how thou liftest up 
The drooping brow and eye; 

With the calm joy of thy sure hope 
Fixing our souls on high. 


Thy light makes even the darkest page 
In memory’s scroll grow fair; 

Blanching the lines which tears and age 
Had only deepened there. 


With thee in view, the rugged slope 
Becomes a level! way, 

Smoothed by the magic of thy hope, 
And gladdened by thy ray. 


With thee in view, how poor appear 
The world’s most winning smiles; 

Vain is the tempter’s subtlest snare, 
And vain hell’s varied wiles. 


115 


116 


Time’s glory fades; its beauty now 
Has ceased to lure or blind; 

Each gay enchantment here below 
Has lost its power to bind. 


Then welcome toil, and care, and pain! 
And welcome sorrow, too! 

All toil is rest, all grief is gain, 
With such a prize in view. 


Come crown and throne, come robe and palm! 
Burst forth glad stream of peace! 

Come, holy city of the Lamb! 
Rise, Sun of Righteousness! 


When shall the clouds that veil thy rays 
Forever be withdrawn? 

Why dost thou tarry, day of days? 
When shall thy gladness dawn? 


—H. BONAR. 


‘ 
a 


ae 


