Cibrarp  of  Che  theological  ^emfnarjo 

PRINCETON  •  NEW  JERSEY 


PRESENTED  BY 

The  Estate  of 
Harold  McAfee  Robinson 

.£^56 
23;  I 


THE    BIBLICAL    ILLUSTRATOR. 
XSAIAH. 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Literature, 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

Royal  OcUyo,  CUth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volume,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sees  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  words,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
in  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Genesis,  Vol.  i.  I.    and    II.   Chronicles,  Isaiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxx. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2.  Ezra,    Nehemiah    and  Jeremiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxii. 

Exodus.  Esther.  Jeremiah,    Vol.    II:   xxiii- 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs.                                   Hi. 

Deuteronomy.  The    Psalms,  Vol.  I:  i-  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I. 

Joshua,  Judges  and  Ruth.  xxvi.  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  II. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Col«ssia.n«. 

St.  Mark.  Thessalonians. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Second  Timothy,   Titus,   and 

St.  Luke,   Vol.  3.  Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James. 

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Galatians.  and  Jude. 

Ephesians.  Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 
Send  for  our  circular  giving  special  offers. 

FLEMING    H.    REVELL     COMPANY 

NB"W     YORK:    158   Fifth  Avenue  CHICAGO:   80  Wabash  Avenue 

TORONTO  LONDON  EDINBURGH 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on     the    Verses    of    the    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,   M.A. 


ISAIAH.     Vol.  I. 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming   H.    Revell   Company 

London    and     Edinburgh 


INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  THE 
PROPHET  ISAIAH. 

I.  Ths  Prophet  Isaiah. — 1.  His  name. — Isaiah  : — The  English  name  Isaiah  is 
an  approximate  transliteration  of  the  abbreviated  form  YZshdyah,  which  appears 
as  the  title  of  the  prophet's  book  in  the  Hebrew  canon,  and  occurs  besides  as  the 
name  of  several  individuals  in  post-exilic  writings  (Ezra  viii.  7,  19 ;  Neh.  xL  7 ; 

1  Chron.  iii.  21).  The  full  and  older  form  is  YSshdydhti  (Gr.,  'Baaias ;  Lat., 
Esaias  and  Isaias),  by  which  the  prophet  himself  is  always  called  in  the  text  of  his 
book,  and  in  the  historical  writings  of  the  Old  Testament  (2  Kings  xix.  2,  &o. ; 

2  Chron.  xxvi.  22,  xxxii.  20,  32) ;  also  other  Jews  (1  Chron.  xxv.  3,  15,  xxvi. 
25).  It  means  "  Jehovah  is  salvation,"  and  is  therefore  synonymous  with  the 
frequent  Joshua  or  Jeshua  (Jesus),  and  Rosea  (cf.  the  Heb.  Elisha,  "  God  is,"  or 
**  God  of,  salvation  " ;  Elishua,  Ishi,  &c. )  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D. )  His  original 
name  may  have  been  Meshvllam.     (See  Prof.  Margoliouth's  view,  p.  xxii.) 

2.  His  personal  history. — The  exact  limits  which  we  are  led  to  assign  to 
Isaiah's  career  depend  on  the  conclusions  we  reach  with  regard  to  several  disputed 
portions  of  his  book.  Generally  speaking,  however,  we  may  say  that  he  prophesied 
from  the  year  in  which  King  Uzziah  died  (740  or  736  B.C.)  to  the  year  of  the  sudden 
deliverance  of  Jerusalem  from  Sennacherib  (701),  and  possibly  some  years  after 
this.  Isaiah  was,  therefore,  born  about  760,  was  a  child  when  Amos  appeared 
at  Bethel  (c.  755  or  750),  and  a  youth  when  Hosea  began  to  prophesy  in  N.  Israel. 
Micah  was  his  younger  contemporary.  The  chief  political  events  of  his  life  were 
the  ascent  of  the  great  soldier  Tiglath-pileser  III.  to  the  throne  of  Assyria  in  745, 
with  a  new  policy  of  conquest ;  the  league  of  Aram  and  N.  Israel  in  735,  and  their 
invasion  of  Judah,  which  moved  Ahaz  to  call  Assyria  to  his  help  ;  Tiglath-pileser's 
capture  of  Damascus,  and  the  captivity  of  Gilead  and  Galilee  in  734 ;  the  invasion 
of  N.  Palestine  by  Salmanassar  IV.  in  725,  with  the  long  siege  of  Samaria  which 
fell  to  his  successor  Sargon  in  or  about  721 ;  Sargon's  defeat  of  Egypt  on  her 
border  at  Raphiain  719  ;  Sargon's  invasion  of  Palestine  in  711,  with  the  reduction 
of  Ashdod,  and  his  defeat  of  Merodach-baladan  and  capture  of  Babylon  in  709  ; 
Sennacherib's  succession  in  705,  and  invasion  of  Palestine  in  701 ;  his  encounter 
with  Egypt  at  Eltekeh  on  the  borders  of  Philistia  and  Judah ;  his  capture  of 
Ekron  and  siege  of  Jerusalem,  with  the  pestilence  that  overtook  him  between 
Palestine  and  Egypt ;  and  his  retreat  from  Palestine,  with  the  consequent  relief 
of  Jerusalem — all  in  701.  About  695  (some  say  about  690  or  even  685)  Hezekiah 
was  succeeded  by  Manasseh.  Whether  Isaiah  lived  into  the  reign  of  the  latter  is 
very  doubtful.  We  have  no  prophecies  from  him  later  than  Hezekiah's  reign, 
perhaps  none  after  701.  The  Mishna  says  that  he  was  slain  by  Manasseh.  The 
apocryphal  work  "  The  Ascension  of  Isaiah,"  which  was  written  in  the  beginning 
of  the  second  Christian  century,  affirms  that  Isaiah's  martyrdom  consisted  in  being 
sawn  asunder,  which  Justin  Martyr  repeats.  Whether  this  be  true,  and  whether 
it  is  alluded  to  in  Hebrews  xi.  37,  we  cannot  tell.  Isaiah  is  called  the  son  of  Amos 
(i.  1,  ii.  1),  who  must  not  be  confounded,  as  he  has  been  by  various  Christian 
lathers,  with  the  prophet  Amos.     A  Jewish  tradition  makes  Isaiah  nephew  of  King 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


Amaziah;  and  his  royal  descent  has  been  inferred  from  his  familiarity  with 
successive  monarchs  of  Judah,  and  his  general  political  influence.  A  stronger 
reason  than  these  might  be  drawn  from  the  presence  in  his  name  of  Jehovah, 
which  appears  to  have  been  confined  at  the  earlier  periods  of  Israel's  history  to 
proper  names  of  the  royal  houses.  But  even  this  is  not  conclusive,  and  one 
really  knows  nothing  of  either  Isaiah's  forefathers  or  his  upbringing.  He  was 
married,  his  wife  is  called  "  the  prophetess  "  (viii.  3),  and  he  had  two  sons  to  whom 
he  gave  names  symbolic  of  those  aspects  of  the  nation's  history  which  he  enforced 
in  his  prophecies  :  She'  ar-yashub,  '  A  remnant  shall  return,"  who  was  old  enough 
in  736-735  to  be  taken  by  his  father  when  he  went  to  face  King  Ahaz  (vii.  3),  and 
Maher-shalal-hash-baz,  "  Spoil-speeds-booty-hastes,"  who  was  born  about  a  year 
later  (viii.  1-4).  The  legend  that  Isaiah  was  twice  married  has  been  deduced 
from  the  false  inference  that  "  the  young  woman  of  marriageable  age  "  (vii.  14) 
was  his  wife.  By  this  expression  the  prophet  probably  did  not  mean  a  definite 
individual.  The  most  certain  and  significant  fact  about  Isaiah  is  that  he  was  a 
citizen,  if  not  a  native,  of  Jerusalem,  and  had  constant  access  to  the  court  and 
presence  of  the  king.  Jerusalem  is  Isaiah's  immediate  and  ultimate  regard, 
the  centre  and  return  of  all  his  thoughts,  the  hinge  of  the  history  of  his  time,  the 
Bummit  of  those  brilliant  hopes  with  which  he  fills  the  future.  {Prof.  0.  A. 
Smith,  D.D.) 

3.  His  vocation. — A  prophet : — The  work  of  a  prophet  was  the  vocation  of  his 
life,  to  which  every  energy  was  devoted  ;  even  his  wife  is  ealled  the  prophetess 
(chap.  viii.  3) ;  his  sons  bore  prophetic  names,  not  enigmatic  like  those  given  by 
Hosea  to  Gomer's  children,  but  expressing  in  plain  language  two  fundamental 
themes  of  his  doctrine.  .  .  .  The  truths  which  he  proclaimed  he  sought  to  make 
immediately  practical  in  the  circle  of  disciples  whom  he  gathered  round  him 
(viii.  16),  and  through  them  to  prepare  the  way  for  national  reformation.  And  in 
this  work  he  was  aided  by  personal  relations  within  the  highest  circles  of  the 
capital.  Uriah,  the  chief  priest  of  the  temple,  was  his  friend,  and  appears  associ- 
ated with  him  as  witness  to  a  solemn  act  by  which  he  attested  a  weighty  prophecy 
at  a  time  when  king  and  people  had  not  yet  learned  to  give  credence  to  his  words 
(viii.  2).  His  own  life  seems  to  have  been  constantly  spent  in  the  capital ;  but  he 
was  not  without  support  in  the  provinces.  ( W.  Robertson  Smith,  LL.D.)  Rela- 
tion to  the  unseen  and  the  seen  : — Never,  perhaps,  has  there  been  another  prophet 
like  Isaiah,  who  stood  with  his  head  in  the  clouds  and  his  feet  on  the  solid  earth, 
with  his  heart  in  the  things  of  eternity  and  with  mouth  and  hand  in  the  things  of 
time,  with  his  spirit  in  the  eternal  counsel  of  God  and  his  body  in  a  very  definite 
moment  of  history.     (Valeton.) 

4.  His  commanding  influence. — The  whole  subsequent  history  of  the  Hebrew 
people  bears  the  impress  of  Isaiah's  activity  : — It  was  through  him  that  the  word 
of  prophecy,  despised  and  rejected  when  it  was  spoken  by  Amos  and  Hosea, 
became  a  practical  power  not  only  in  the  State,  but  in  the  whole  life  of  the  nation. 
We  can  readily  understand  that  so  great  a  work  could  not  have  been  effected  by 
an  isolated  mission  like  that  of  Amos,  or  by  a  man  like  Hosea,  who  stood  apart 
from  all  the  leaders  of  his  nation,  and  had  neither  friend  nor  disciple  to  espouse 
his  cause.  Isaiah  won  his  commanding  position,  not  by  a  single  stroke,  but  by 
long-sustained  and  patient  effort.  .  .  .  The  countryman  Micah,  who  prophesied 
in  the  low  country  on  the  Philistine  border  near  the  beginning  of  Hezekiah's 
reign,  was  unquestionably  influenced  by  his  great  contemporary,  and,  though 
his  conceptions  are  shaped  with  the  individual  freedom  characteristic  of  the  true 
prophet,  and  by  no  means  fit  mechanically  into  the  details  of  Isaiah's  picture  of 
Jehovah's  approaching  dealings,  the  essence  of  his  teaching  went  all  to  further 
Isaiah's  aims.  Thus  Isaiah  ultimately  became  the  acknowledged  head  of  a  great 
religious  movement.  It  is  too  little  to  say  that  in  his  later  years  he  was  the  first 
man  in  Judah,  practically  guiding  the  helm  of  the  State,  and  encouraging 
Jerusalem  to  hold  out  against  the  Assyrian  when  all  besides  had  lost  courage. 
Even  to  the  political  historian,  Isaiah  is  the  most  notable  figure  after  David  in 
the  whole  history  of  Israel.  He  was  the  man  of  a  supreme  crisis,  and  he  proved 
himself  worthy  by  guiding  his  nation  through  the  crisis  with  no  other  strength 
than  the  prophetic  word.  (W.  Robertson  Smith,  LL.D.)  A  comparison  urith 
Elisha  : — His  commanding  influence  on  the  history  of  his  nation  naturally  suggests 
comparison  with  Elisha,  the  author  of  the  revolution  of  Jehu,  and  the  soul  of  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH.  vii 

great  struggle  with  Syria.     The  comparison  illustrates  the  extraordinary  change 
which  little  more  than  a  century  had   wrought  in  the  character  and  aims  of 

Erophecy.  Elisha  effected  his  first  object — the  downfall  of  the  house  of  Ahab — 
y  entering  into  the  sphere  of  ordinary  political  intrigue  ;  Isaiah  stood  aloof  from 
all  political  combinations,  and  his  influence  was  simply  that  of  his  commanding 
character,  and  of  the  imperial  word  of  Jehovah  preached  in  season  and  out  of 
season  with  unwavering  constancy.  Elisha  in  his  later  years  was  the  inspiring 
spirit  of  a  heroic  conflict,  encouraging  his  people  to  fight  for  freedom,  and  resist 
the  invader  by  armed  force.  Isaiah  well  knew  that  Judah  had  no  martial  strength 
that  could  avail  for  a  moment  against  the  power  of  Assyria.  He  did  not  aim  at 
national  independence ;  and,  rising  above  the  dreams  of  vulgar  patriotism,  he 
was  content  to  accept  the  inevitable,  and  mark  out  for  Judah  a  course  of  patient 
submission  to  the  foreign  yoke,  in  order  that  the  nation  might  concentrate  itself 
on  the  task  of  internal  reformation,  till  Jehovah  Himself  should  remove  the  scourge 
appointed  for  His  people's  sin.     In  this  conception  he  seized  and  united  in  one 

Sractical  aim  ideas  which  had  appeared  separately  in  the  teaching  of  his  pre- 
ecessors,  Amos  and  Hosea.  ...  In  the  supreme  crisis  of  the  Assyrian  wars, 
Isaiah  was  not  less  truly  the  bulwark  of  his  nation  than  Elisha  had  been  during 
the  Syrian  wars.  But  his  heroism  was  that  of  patience  and  faith,  and  the  deliver- 
ance came  as  he  had  foretold,  not  by  political  wisdom  or  warlike  prowess,  but  by 
the  direct  intervention  of  Jehovah.     (Ibid.) 

5.  The  period  of  his  ministry. — The  period  of  Isaiah's  ministry  falls  into 
three  parts : — (1)  The  time  previous  to  the  Syro-Ephraitic  war,  when  Judah 
enjoyed  external  peace  and  apparent  prosperity.  (2)  The  troubles  under  the 
reign  of  Ahaz,  when  the  land  was  invaded  by  Pekah  and  Rezin,  and  the  Judsean 
monarch  became  a  vassal  of  Assyria  to  obtain  the  help  of  Tiglath-pileser.  (3)  The 
time  of  Assyrian  suzerainty,  when  Judah's  growing  impatience  of  the  yoke  at 
length  led  the  nation  to  intrigue  with  Egypt,  and  exposed  it  to  the  vengeance 
of  Sennacherib.  The  last  section  of  the  prophet's  life  culminates  in  the  great  in- 
vasion and  marvellous  deliverance  of  the  year  701  B.C.    (W.  Robertson  Smith,  LL.D.) 

II.  The  book  bearing  Isaiah's  name. — I.  General  characteristics. — 
Foremost  book  in  prophetical  literature  : — The  book  that  bears  [Isaiah's]  name, 
in  the  variety,  beauty,  and  force  of  its  style,  and  in  the  sublimity  of  its  contents, 
takes  the  foremost  place  in  the  prophetical  literature.  (Prof.  James  Robertson, 
D.D.)  The  greatest  classic  of  Israel : — With  Isaiah  sank  into  the  grave  the 
greatest  classic  of  Israel.  (Carl  Heinrich  Cornill.)  Isaiah  a  poet  : — If  poetry  is 
"  the  eloquence  of  excited  emotion,  whose  chief  end  is  to  unite  beauty  with  truth," 
then  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  justice  of  Isaiah's  claim  to  be  classed  among 
poets.  (F.  Sessions.)  Isaiah  a  psalmist: — It  has  been  said  of  Burke  that  he 
would  have  been  a  great  poet  if  he  had  not  been  a  great  orator.  It  might  be  said 
of  Isaiah  that,  if  he  had  not  been  the  chief  of  the  prophets  of  Israel,  he  would  have 
been  the  chief  of  its  psalmists.  (E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)  Chaps,  xxviii.-xxxiii. 
are  unexampled  for  grandeur,  music,  and  the  softness  of  idyllic  peace.  (A.  B. 
Davidson,  D.D.)  Literary  characteristics  of  the  acknowledged  prophecies  of  Isaiah  : 
— The  thing  of  chief  importance  is,  that  we  are  wholly  unable  to  name  a  special  peculi- 
arity and  favourite  manner  of  style  in  the  case  of  Isaiah.  He  is  not  the  specially 
lyric,  or  the  specially  elegiac,  or  the  specially  rhetorical  and  monitory  prophet,  as, 
e.g.,  Joel,  Hosea,  Micah,  in  whose  writings  a  special  manner  is  predominant ;  but 
every  kind  of  style  and  every  variation  of  exposition  is  at  his  command  to  meet 
the  requirements  of  his  subject ;  and  this  it  is  which  in  respect  of  style  constitutes 
his  greatness,  as  well  as  generally  one  of  his  most  prominent  excellences.  His 
fundamental  peculiarity  is  only  the  exalted  majestic  repose  of  style,  proceeding 
from  the  full  and  sure  command  of  his  subject.  This  repose  by  no  means  requires 
that  the  language  should  never  be  more  riolently  agitated,  and  not  blaze  up 
where  the  subject  demands  it ;  but  even  the  most  extreme  agitation  is  bridled 
by  this  repose  in  the  background,  and  does  not  pass  beyond  its  proper  limits, 
and  soon  returns  with  higher  self-mastery  to  its  regular  flow,  not  again  to 
leave  it  (iL  9-iii.  1,  xxviii.  11-23,  xxix.  9-14).  (H.  Ewald,  D.D.)  Isaiah's 
style  : — It  would  hardly  be  possible  to  characterise  the  style  of  Isaiah  better  than 
by  the  four  notes  under  which  Matthew  Arnold  has  summed  up  the  distinctive 
qualities  of  Homer's  genius :  Plainness  of  thought,  plainness  of  style,  nobleness, 
•nd  rapidity.     (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH, 


2.  Phases  of  Isaiah's  ministry. — Reformer,  statesman,  theologian  : — In  the 
parts  [of  the  book]  which  are  indubitably  his,  we  can  watch  him,  and,  as  it  were, 
walk  by  his  side,  through  all  the  varied  and  eventful  phases  of  bis  forty  years* 
ministry.  We  can  observe  him  as  a  reformer,  denouncing  social  abuses,  sparing 
neither  high  nor  low  in  his  fearless  and  incisive  censure.  We  can  follow  him  as  a 
statesman,  devoted  patriotically  to  his  country's  interests,  and  advising  her 
political  leaders  in  times  of  difficulty  and  danger.  We  can  see  him  as  a  theologian, 
emphasising  old  truths,  developing  new  ones,  bringing  fresh  ideas  to  light  which 
were  destined  to  exercise  an  important  influence  in  the  generations  which  followed. 
Throughout  the  reigns  of  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah  he  is  the  central  figure  in  Jeru- 
salem, and  the  position  which  he  there  took — his  motives,  principles,  policy,  the 
character  of  his  teaching,  the  nature  and  extent  of  his  influence — are  all  reflected 
in  the  collection  of  his  prophecies  which  we  possess.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.) 
The  evangelical  prophet : — Isaiah  has  received  from  the  Christian  Church  the  title 
of  the  evangelical  prophet.  This  was  given  mainly  in  the  belief  that  chaps. 
xl.-lxvL  were  also  by  him.  But  even  in  the  prophecies  which  criticism  has  left 
to  him,  we  find  the  elements  of  the  doctrines  of  grace.  God  forgives  sin,  the 
most  heinous  and  defiling  (i.  18).  Though  He  has  passed  sentence  of  death  upon 
His  people  (xxii.  14),  their  penitence  procures  for  them  His  pardon  and  deliver- 
ance (xxxvi.,  xxxvii.).  Necessarily  severe  as  His  judgment  is,  cruelly  as  His 
providence  bears  upon  sin  and  folly,  His  love  and  pity  towards  His  own  never 
fail  (xiv.  32).  He  is  their  well-beloved,  and  has  constantly  cared  for  them(v.  1,  &o.). 
He  longs  to  be  gracious,  and  to  have  mercy  even  when  His  people  are  most  given 
to  their  own  destructive  courses  ;  and  He  waits  eagerly  for  their  prayers  to  Him 
(xxx.  18,  &c).     (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

3.  Thb  place  op  the  book  amongst  the  prophetic  Scriptures. — The  canon- 
icity  of  Isaiah  was  never  questioned  by  the  Jewish  Church  in  later  times.  There 
is,  however,  a  curious  divergence  of  tradition  with  regard  to  its  place  amongst 
the  prophetic  Scriptures.  The  order  of  the  E.  V.,  where  the  book  stands  first 
among  the  "  Later  Prophets  "  (the  strictly  prophetic  writings),  is  that  of  all 
printed  editions  of  the  Hebrew  Bible,  as  well  as  of  the  Masora  and  the  best  MSS. 
In  the  LXX.  it  stands  first  amongst  the  Major  Prophets,  but  is  preceded  by  the  so- 
called  Minor  Prophets.  A  still  more  peculiar  arrangement  is  given  by  the  Talmudic 
treatise  Baba  bathra  (fol.  146),  where  the  order  is :  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  Isaiah, 
the  Twelve  (Minor)  Prophets.  It  has  been  thought  by  some  that  this  arrangement 
betrays  a  dim  consciousness  of  the  late  authorship  of  the  second  part  of  the  book, 
which  is  possible,  although  the  Jewish  authorities  know  nothing  of  it,  and  explain 
the  traditional  order  by  reasoning  of  a  somewhat  nebulous  kind.  (See  Ryle, 
"  Canon  of  the  Old  Testament,"  pp.  273  ff.,  281  f.)     (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

4.  The  chronology  op  the  book. — The  view  of  Hengstenberg,  that  the  pro- 
phecies of  Isaiah  are  arranged  chronologically,  though  not  without  justification, 
fails  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  historical  interpretation.  (Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne, 
D.D.)  The  chronological  arrangement  in  i.-xxxix.  has  been  disturbed  by  throwing 
the  prophecies  against  foreign  nations  (xv.-xxiii.)  together,  as  in  Jeremiah  and 
Ezekiel,  with  which  an  oracle  against  Babylon  (xiii.,  xiv. ;  cf.  xxi.  1-10)  and  a 
great  prophecy  of  the  general  judgment  on  the  world  (xxiv.-xxvii.)  have  been 
connected,  though  probably  due  to  later  prophets.  (A  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
Suggested  explanations  of  the  uncertain  chronology  : — It  is  plain  that  the  book, 
as  it  stands,  is  in  a  somewhat  disordered  state.  Presumably  Isaiah  himself  issued 
no  collected  edition  of  all  his  prophecies,  but  only  put  forth  from  time  to  time 
individual  oracles  or  minor  collections,  which  were  gathered  together  at  a  later 
date,  and  on  no  plan  which  we  can  follow.  Some  of  the  prophecies  bear  a  date, 
or  even  have  brief  notes  of  historical  explanation  ;  others  begin  without  any 
such  preface,  and  their  date  and  occasion  can  only  be  inferred  from  the  allusions 
they  contain.  We  cannot  even  tell  when  or  by  whom  the  collection  was  made. 
The  collection  of  all  remains  of  ancient  prophecy,  digested  into  the  four  books 
named  from  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  the  Twelve  Minor  Prophets,  was  not 
formed  till  after  the  time  of  Ezra,  two  hundred  and  fifty  years,  at  least,  after  the 
death  of  Isaiah.  In  one  of  these  four  books  every  known  fragment  of  ancient 
prophecy  had  to  take  its  place,  and  no  one  who  knows  anything  of  the  collection 
and  transmission  of  ancient  books  will  think  it  reasonable  to  expect  that  the 
writings  of  each  separate  prophet  were  carefully  gathered  out  and  arranged 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


together  in  such  a  way  as  to  preclude  all  ambiguity  as  to  their  authorship.  If  every 
prophecy  had  had  a  title  from  the  first,  the  task  of  the  editor  would  have  been 
simple ;  or,  if  he  did  not  aim  at  an  exact  arrangement,  we  could  easily  have 
rearranged  the  series  for  ourselves.  But  there  are  some  prophecies,  such  as  those 
which  occupy  the  last  twenty-seven  chapters  of  Isaiah,  which  have  no  title  at  all, 
and  in  some  other  cases  there  is  conclusive  evidence  that  the  titles  are  not  original, 
because,  in  point  of  fact,  they  are  incorrect.  In  the  absence  of  precise  titles  giving 
names  and  dates  to  each  separate  prophecy,  an  editor  labouring  after  the  time  of 
Ezra  would  be  quite  as  much  at  a  loss  as  a  modern  critic,  if  he  made  it  his  task  to 
give  what  is  now  called  a  critical  edition  of  the  remains  that  lay  before  him.  But 
ancient  editors  did  not  feel  the  need  of  an  edition  digested  according  to  the  rules 
of  modern  literary  workmanship.  Their  main  object  was  to  get  together  every- 
thing that  they  could  find,  and  arrange  their  material  in  volumes  convenient  for 
private  study  or  use  in  the  synagogue.  In  those  days  one  could  not  plan  the  number 
of  volumes,  the  number  of  letters  in  a  page,  and  the  size  and  form  of  the  pages,  with 
the  freedom  to  which  the  printing  press  has  accustomed  us ;  the  cumbrous  and 
costly  materials  of  ancient  books  limited  all  schemes  of  editorial  disposition.  In 
ancient  books  the  most  various  treatises  are  often  comprised  in  one  volume  ; 
the  scribe  had  a  certain  number  of  skins,  and  he  wished  to  fill  them.  Thus,  even 
in  the  minor  collections  that  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  editor  of  the  prophets,  a 
prophecy  of  Isaiah  and  one  from  another  source  might  easily  occupy  the  same  roll ; 
copies  were  not  so  numerous  that  it  was  always  possible  to  tell  by  comparison  of 
many  MSS.  what  pieces  had  always  stood  together,  and  what  had  only  come 
together  by  accident ;  and  so,  taking  all  in  all,  we  need  not  be  surprised  that  the 
arrangement  is  imperfect  according  to  our  literary  lights,  but  will  rather  expect  to 
find  much  more  serious  faults  of  order  than  the  lack  of  a  just  chronological  dis- 
position. If  the  present  Book  of  Isaiah  has  itself  been  made  up  from  several 
MSS.,  a  conclusion  which  the  lack  of  chronological  order  renders  almost  inevitable, 
we  must  deem  it  probable  that  at  the  end  of  some  of  these  MSS.  prophecies  not  by 
Isaiah  at  all  may  have  been  written  in  to  save  waste  of  the  costly  material ;  and  so, 
when  the  several  small  books  came  to  be  joined  together,  prophecies  by  other 
hands  would  get  to  be  embedded  in  the  text  of  Isaiah,  no  longer  to  be  distinguished 
except  by  internal  evidence.  That  what  thus  appears  as  possible  or  even  probable 
actually  took  place  is  the  common  opinion  of  modern  critics.  (W.  Robertson  Smith, 
LL.D.) 

5.  Division  of  the  book. — The  division  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  into  two  parts 
at  the  end  of  chap,  xxxix.,  although  indicated  by  no  superscription,  is  at  once 
suggested  by  the  intervention  of  the  narrative  section,  chaps,  xxxvi. -xxxix.,  and 
is  fully  justified  by  the  character  of  the  last  twenty-seven  chapters.  {Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.) 

6.  Was  Isaiah  the  author  of  the  entire  book  T — A  rule  of  criticism : — 
The  rules  of  ordinary  criticism  require  us  to  accept  Isaiah  as  the  author  until  it 
be  shown  that  he  cannot  have  been  so.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart. )  The  critical 
treatment  of  Isaiah  began  in  the  following  manner.  The  commencement  was 
made  with  the  second  part.  Koppe  first  of  all  expressed  doubt  regarding  the 
genuineness  of  chap.  1. ;  then  Doderlein  expressed  his  decided  suspicion  as  to  the 
genuineness  of  the  whole  ;  and  Justi,  followed  by  Eichhorn,  Paulus,  and  Bertholdt, 
raised  the  suspicion  into  confident  assurance  of  spuriousness.  The  result  thus 
attained  could  not  possibly  remain  without  reaction  on  the  first  part.  Rosen- 
miiller,  who  was  always  very  dependent  upon  predecessors,  was  the  first  to  deny 
the  Isaian  origin  of  the  prophecy  against  Babylon,  in  chaps,  xiii.-xiv.  23,  though 
this  is  attested  by  the  heading ;  Justi  and  Paulus  undertook  to  find  further  reasons 
for  the  opinion.  Greater  advance  was  now  made.  Along  with  the  prophecy 
against  Babylon  in  chaps,  xiii.-xiv.  23,  the  other,  in  chap.  xxi.  1-10,  was  likewise 
condemned,  and  Rosenmuller  could  not  but  be  astonished  when  Gesenius  let  the 
former  fall,  but  left  the  latter  standing.  There  still  remained  the  prophecy  against 
Tyre,  in  chap,  xxiii.,  which,  according  as  the  announced  destruction  of  Tyre  was 
regarded  as  accomplished  by  the  Assyrians  or  the  Chaldeans,  might  either  be  left 
to  Isaiah  or  attributed  to  a  later  prophet  unknown.  Eichhorn,  followed  by 
Rosenmuller,  decided  that  it  was  spurious  ;  but  Gesenius  understood  the  Assyrians 
as  the  destroyers,  and  as  the  prediction  consequently  did  not  extend  beyond  the 
horizon  of  Isaiah,  he  defended  its  genuineness.     Thus  was  the  Babylonian  series 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


of  prophecies  set  aside.  The  keen  eyes  of  the  critics,  however,  made  still  further 
discoveries.  In  chaps,  xxiv.-xxvii.,  Eichhorn  found  plays  on  words  that  were 
■unworthy  of  Isaiah,  and  Gesenius  an  allegorical  announcement  of  the  fall  of 
Babylon :  both  accordingly  condemned  these  three  chapters,  and  Ewald  trans- 
posed them  to  the  time  of  Cambyses.  With  chaps,  xxxiv.,  xxxv.,  on  account  of 
their  relation  to  the  second  part,  the  procedure  was  shorter.  Rosenmiiller  at 
once  pronounced  them  to  be  "  a  poem  composed  during  the  Babylonian  Exile, 
near  its  close."  Such  is  the  history  of  the  origin  of  the  criticism  of  Isaiah.  Its 
first  attempts  were  very  juvenile.  It  was  Gesenius,  but  especially  Hitzig  and 
Ewald,  who  first  raised  it  to  the  eminence  of  a  science.  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 
Advocates  of  an  exilian  date  for  chaps,  xl.-lxvi.  : — Doderlein,  in  1775,  was  the  first 
modern  scholar  who  took  up  this  position.  Before  then  the  traditional  view  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  questioned,  except  by  the  Jewish  commentator,  Aben 
Ezra  (tH67  a.d.),  who,  in  very  obscure  language,  appears  to  bint  that  the  title 
of  the  book  does  not  guarantee  the  authorship  of  every  part  of  it,  any  more  than 
in  the  case  of  the  books  of  Samuel,  of  which  Samuel  himself  could  only  have  written 
the  first  twenty-four  chapters  (his  death  being  recorded  in  1  Sam.  xxv.  1 ).  Doderlein 
has  been  followed,  among  others,  by  Gesenius,  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Knobel,  Umbreit, 
de  Wette,  Bleek,  Bunsen,  Cheyne,  Kuenen,  Reuss,  Duhm,  Oehler,  A.  B.  Davidson, 
Orelli,  Konig,  Driver,  G.  A.  Smith,  Kirkpatrick,  Delitzsch  (in  the  4th  edition  of 
his  Commentary,  1890),  &o.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Defenders  of  the  Isaianie 
authorship  : — Amongst  these  the  best-known  names  are  those  of  Hengstenberg, 
Havernick,  Drechsler,  Delitzsch  (down  to  about  1880),  Stier,  Rutgers,  Kay, 
Nagelsbach,  Douglas,  &c.  (Ibid.)  General  view  of  the  question  of  authorship  : — 
Part  Second  (xl.-lxvi.)  is  broadly  distinguished  from  Part  First  both  in  literary  form 
and  in  subject-matter.  It  has  the  appearance  of  being  one  sustained  composition, 
rather  than  a  number  of  spoken  addresses  ;  and  whereas  the  situation  in  the 
First  Part  was  the  Assyrian  period  in  which  Isaiah  lived,  the  standpoint  here  is  the 
time  of  the  Exile,  and  the  tone  is  mainly  that  of  consolation  in  the  near  prospect 
of  deliverance, — the  name  of  Cyrus,  who  gave  the  edict  permitting  the  return 
(536  B.C.),  being  expressly  mentioned  (xliv.  28,  xlv.  1).  We  cannot  doubt  that 
the  deportation  of  the  Ten  Tribes,  and  the  ominous  threatening  of  a  similar  fate 
for  Judah,  had  accustomed  Isaiah  to  the  thought  of  the  Captivity  and  its  ultimate 
issues.  So  that,  if  these  chapters  are  from  his  hand,  we  must  assume  that,  in 
spirit,  he  placed  himself  in  the  Exile,  and  from  that,  as  a  prophetic  standpoint, 
depicted  the  restoration  and  the  final  glory.  Most  modern  critics,  however, 
think  that  these  chapters  are  an  anonymous  production  of  the  Exile,  which  was 
united  to  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah.  {Prof.  J.  Robertson,  D.D.)  The  doubtful 
portions  : — The  question  relates  to  xiii.  2-xiv.  23,  xxiv.-xxvii.,  xxxiv.,  xxxv., 
and  xl.-lxvi.  (xxi.   1-10  must  henceforth  be  excluded,  on  objective,  historical 

? rounds,  from  the  list  of  doubtful  prophecies).  (Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.) 
saiah  of  Jerusalem  capable  of  producing  the  entire  book  : — Such  a  man  as  Isaiah  of 
Jerusalem  is  universally  acknowledged  to  have  been,  with  such  an  unique  call 
as  he  claims  to  have  received,  was  at  least  capable  of  seeing  in  open  vision  the 
glories  of  the  coming  Messianic  kingdom,  as  clearly  as  he  saw  the  impending  ruin 
of  nations  laden  with  iniquity.  That  he  should  have  written  both  portions  of 
the  great  series  of  prophecies  bearing  his  name  is  prima  facie  as  probable  as  that 
John  Milton  wrote  Paradise  Lost "  and  "  Paradise  Regained  "  long  after  having 
given  to  the  politicians  of  the  Republic  bis  dry  polemic  "  In  Defence  of  the  People  " ; 
or  that "  Sartor  Resartus,"  pantheistic  and  expressed  in  CLarlylese,  was  the  offspring 
of  the  same  genius  that  penned  the  chaste  and  simple  English  of  the  "  Life  of 
Sterling  " ;  or  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  both  the  compiler  of  a  dictionary  and  the 
author  of  such  a  romance  as  "  Rasselas."  (F.  Sessions.)  The  language  of 
Isaiah  : — If  Prof.  Margoliouth  is  working  on  a  right  line,  and  if  the  results  which 
he  anticipates  are  established,  the  conclusion,  so  far  as  language  is  concerned, 
will  be  that  the  whole  of  Isaiah  being  written  in  classical  Hebrew,  not  in  what 
he  calls  the  Middle-Hebrew  of  the  Prophets  of  the  Exile,  still  less  in  the  New 
Hebrew,  whioh  was  the  classical  language  of  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Ben-Sira, 
200  B.C.,  belongs  to  the  age  of  the  historio  Isaiah  of  the  days  of  Hezekiah. 
(J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  If  a  composite  work,  who  collected  the  several  parts? — It  is 
becoming  more  and  more  certain  that  the  present  form,  especially  of  the  prophetic 
Scriptures,  is  due  to  a  literary  class  [the  Sopherim,  Scribes  or  Scripturists],  whose 
principal  function  was  collecting  and  supplementing  the  scattered  records  of 
nrophetio  revelation.     (Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.)        Prof.  Cheyne's  idea  of  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


work  done  by  the  Sopherim  editors  is  utterly  baseless.  The  known  writings  of 
inspired  prophets  were  guarded  as  by  a  wall  of  fire.  And  all  classes,  whatever 
their  practical  unfaithfulness,  stood  in  awe  of  them  then,  as  they  do  until  this  day. 
(J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  The  later  authors  Isaian: — Isaiah  had  left  his  sublime 
deliverances  to  fructify  in  the  minds  of  his  disciples.  One  disciple,  separated  by 
three  or  four  generations  from  the  master,  but  living  constantly  with  his  prophecies 
and  nourished  upon  his  spirit,  produced  at  the  crisis  of  Babylon's  fall  a  prophecy 
of  Israel's  restoration  as  immortal  as  Isaiah's  own.  This  disciple  named  not 
himself.  Whether  he  intended  the  work  to  become  joined  with  Isaiah's,  and  to 
pass  among  men  with  the  authority  of  that  great  name,  we  cannot  know.  But 
his  contemporaries  joined  the  disciple's  work  with  the  master's,  and  by  Ezra's 
time  the  conjunction  was  established.  {Matthew  Arnold.)  These  later  prophets 
so  closely  resemble  Isaiah  in  prophetio  vision,  that  posterity  might  on  that  account 
well  identify  them  with  him.  They  belong,  more  or  less  nearly,  to  those  pupils 
of  his  to  whom  he  refers  (chap.  viii.  16).  We  know  of  no  other  prophet  belonging 
to  the  kingdom  of  Judah  like  Isaiah,  who  was  surrounded  by  a  band  of  younger 

frophets,  and,  so  to  speak,  formed  a  school.  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  Book  of 
saiah  is  the  work  of  his  creative  spirit  and  the  band  of  followers.  These  later 
prophets  are  Isaian, — they  are  Isaiah's  disciples  ;  it  is  his  spirit  that  continues 
to  operate  in  them,  like  the  spirit  of  Elijah  in  Elisha, — nay,  we  may  say,  like  the 
spirit  of  Jesus  in  the  apostles  ;  for  the  words  of  Isaiah  (viii.  18),  "  Behold.  I  and 
the  children  whom  God  hath  given  me,"  are  employed  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
(ii.  13)  as  typical  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  view  of  this  fact,  the  whole  book  rightly 
bears  the  name  of  Isaiah,  inasmuch  as  he  is,  directly  and  indirectly,  the  author 
of  all  these  prophetic  discourses ;  his  name  is  the  correct  common-denominator 
for  this  collection  of  prophecies,  which,  with  all  their  diversity,  yet  form  a  unity  ; 
and  the  second  half  particularly  (chaps.  xl.-lxvi.)  is  the  work  of  a  pupil  who  sur- 
passes the  master,  though  he  owes  the  master  everything.  Such  may  possibly 
be  the  case.  It  seems  to  me  even  probable,  and  almost  certain,  that  this  may  be 
bo  ;  but  indubitably  certain  it  is  not,  in  my  opinion,  and  I  shall  die  without  getting 
over  this  hesitancy.  For  very  many  difficulties  arise.  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 
Why  should  important  portions  of  the  book  be  anonymous? — It  will  always  remain 
a  mystery  how  the  name  of  the  great  prophet  of  the  Exile,  who  stood  far  nearer 
to  the  return  from  Exile  than  Ezekiel,  has  fallen  into  oblivion,  and  it  is  a  question 
among  how  many  prophets  the  Deutero-Isaianic  passages  should  be  divided.  (Ibid. ) 
Orelli  (" Commentary  on  Isaiah")  thinks  there  are  reasons  for  ascribing  the  book 
(chaps,  xl.-lxvi.)  to  an  exilian  author,  but  says:  "Its  incorporation  with  the 
Book  of  Isaiah  remains  a  riddle."  "  One  thing  remains  utterly  unexplained — 
the  anonymity  of  so  glorious  a  book  carefully  arranged  by  the  author  himself. 
It  has  been  said  that  he  could  not  mention  his  name  from  regard  to  the  Chaldeans  ; 
but  what  prevented  him  from  coming  forward  after  the  victory  of  Cyrus  over 
Babylon  T  In  a  time  when  Haggai  and  Zechariah  so  carefully  dated  their  pro- 
phecies, how  could  the  name  be  lost  of  the  seer  who  had  unquestionably  done 
most  towards  the  revival  of  the  theocratic  spirit  and  the  home-coming  of  the 
faithful  ones  ?  The  question  might  be  answered  if  the  author  appeared  pseudony- 
mously  under  Isaiah's  name  ;  but  no  trace  of  such  intention  is  found  anywhere. 
Whereas  in  Isaiah  i.  the  person  of  the  prophet  comes  out  in  different  ways,  here 
in  Isaiah  n.,  all  name,  even  all  heading,  is  wanting.  Criticism  should  honestly 
confess  that  the  special  reason  of  this  anonymity  remains  in  utter  obscurity." 
Explanation  of  the  supposed  plural  authorship : — How  came  the  works  of  five 
unknown  prophets  in  Babylon  to  be  ascribed  to  Isaiah,  or  at  any  rate  inserted  in 
the  Book  of  Isaiah  T  .  .  .  These  chapters  were  evidently  added  at  a  later  period, 
and  most  probably,  as  Eichhorn  suggested,  with  the  object  of  producing  a  con- 
veniently large  volume,  nearly  equal  in  size  to  those  of  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  the 
Twelve  Minor  Prophets.  In  taking  this  course  the  editor  might  invoke  a  precedent 
already  familiar  to  his  contemporaries,  the  Twelve  Minor  Prophets  having  been 
combined  into  a  single  "  volume  "  at  some  unknown  period  previous  to  the  com- 
position of  Ecclesiastlcus.  (See  Ecclus.  xlix.  10.)  (Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.) 
The  explanation  regarded  as  inadequate  : — We  can  easily  see  a  reason  why  these 
minor  prophets — minor  in  bulk — should  be  engrossed  on  one  roll  for  convenience 
sake.  But  they  are  still  twelve,  not  one.  More  than  this.  To  each  of  them  is 
carefully  prefixed  the  name  of  its  author,  even  when,  as  in  the  case  of  Obadiah, 
his  prophecy  consists  of  but  a  single  chapter.  Had  this  "  precedent  "  been  followed 
by  the  hypothetic  editor  who  added  chaps,  xl.-lxvi.  to  chaps,  i.-xxxix.,  he  would 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


have  inscribed  on  each  part  the  name  of  its  author.  (J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  Provi- 
dential guidance  in  the  form  and  contents  of  the  book  : — The  boldest  advocates  of 
even  the  most  "  advanced  "  critical  hypothesis  will  be  still  obliged  to  confess  that 
it  must  have  been  a  wise  instinct,  to  say  nothing  of  Divine  inspiration  and 
guidance,  that  induced  the  "  compilers  "  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  to  present  it  to  the 
world  in  its  existing  form.  The  denunciations  of  sin  by  the  prophets  held  to  bo 
responsible  for  the  earlier  chapters  are  incomplete  and  gloomy,  with  "  a  darkness 
that  may  be  felt,"  without  the  addition  of  the  glorious  Evangel  proclaimed  by 
those  who  wrote  the  later  ones.  The  overthrow  of  the  kingdom  of  Satan  is  not 
good  enough  for  the  world  without  the  simultaneous  establishment  of  the  kingdom 
of  God.  A  sinner  without  hope  is  a  sinner  lost, — a  nation  with  its  golden  age 
behind  it,  and  none  before  it,  is  a  nation  God-forsaken  and  outcast,  given  over 
to  despair  and  reckless  of  the  end.  The  preaching  of  the  law  and  its  terrors,  apart 
from  the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel  with  its  regenerative  force,  never  has  been, 
and  never  can  be,  accordant  with  the  mind  of  the  All-just  and  All-merciful 
Creator.  (F.  Sessions.)  The  Book  of  Isaiah  comes  to  us  from  post-exilio 
times ;  on  this  point  there  can  be  no  doubt  among  educated  students.  It  was 
brought  into  its  present  form,  not  by  a  committee  of  lovers  of  ancient  literature, 
but  by  men  whose  great  preoccupation  was  the  building  up  of  a  righteous,  God- 
fearing people.     (Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.) 

7.  Chaptebs  xl.-lxvt. — Critical  difficulties  no  barrier  to  an  understanding  of 
the  prophecy  : — Many  persons  who  would  wish  to  study  the  second  half  of  Isaiah 
are  discouraged  from  making  the  attempt  by  a  feeling  that  an  insurmountable 
barrier  of  critical  difficulties  lies  between  them  and  any  comprehension  of  the 
prophecy.  That  is,  in  great  measure,  a  delusion.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  large 
critical  questions  rise  in  connection  with  these  prophecies,  there  is,  perhaps,  no 
part  of  Scripture  to  the  understanding  of  which  criticism  contributes  so  little. 
Like  the  Book  of  Job,  the  piece  is  almost  purely  theological,  and  occupied  with 
ideas.  It  is  a  structure  based  upon  and  built  out  of  the  Monotheistic  conception, 
the  idea  that  Jehovah,  God  of  Israel,  is  the  true  and  only  God.  It  need  not  be 
supposed  that  the  author  consciously  started  from  this  principle  and  logically 
deduced  his  other  conclusions  from  it.  This  is  not  the  method  of  Old  Testament 
writers.  Nevertheless,  to  us  who  read  his  work  now,  the  effect  is  the  same  as  if 
he  had  done  so ;  and  obviously  the  question  at  what  time  or  in  what  circum- 
stances  such  a  theological  structure  was  reared  is  only  of  secondary  importance, 
so  far  as  understanding  the  work  itself  is  concerned.  It  may  be  that  many  of 
the  details  of  the  structure  point  to  a  definite  historical  period ;  to  many  minds, 
indeed,  the  theological  character  of  the  work  will  be  conclusive  evidence  that  it 
cannot  belong  to  a  time  anterior  to  the  Exile  ;  but  such  methods  of  reasoning 
show  that  the  meaning  of  the  passage  may  be  learned  from  itself  independently 
of  external  aids,  and  that  this  meaning  may  be  found  to  lead  to  critical  conclusions 
rather  than  to  receive  light  from  them.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  primary 
critical  question — what  is  it? — The  great  critical  question  agitated  in  regard  to 
these  twenty-seven  chapters  is,  whether  the  author  was  a  contemporary  of  the 
Exile,  or  was  an  older  prophet,  enabled  by  an  extraordinary  gift  of  foresight  to 
transport  himself  into  its  circumstances  and  realise  its  conditions.  The  way  in 
which  such  a  question  has  to  be  put  indicates  how  far  scholars  of  all  opinions  are 
in  agreement.  It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that,  at  whatever  time  the  prophet 
actually  lived  and  wrote,  the  Exile  is  the  stage  on  which  his  personages  move, 
and  on  which  the  great  drama  which  he  exhibits  is  transacted.  (Ibid.)  A 
secondary  question : — Another  critical  question  of  less  magnitude  is,  How  far 
the  prophet  of  these  twenty-seven  chapters  has  adopted  fragments  from  other 
prophecies,  or  other  writers,  into  his  own  work  ?  It  is  admitted  that  the  bulk 
of  the  chapters  forms  a  unity,  and  is  from  the  hand  of  one  author.  But  certain 
passages  are  thought  to .  betray  a  different  hand  ;  while  others,  unlike  the  bulk 
of  the  prophecy,  seem  written  from  a  point  of  view  anterior  to  the  time  of  the 
Exile.  (Ibid.)  A  third  question: — Another  question  less  strictly  critical,  but 
partly  exegetical  and  of  a  more  internal  kind,  is  the  inquiry  whether  these  twenty- 
seven  chapters,  admittedly  in  the  main  a  unity  and  the  work  of  one  hand,  have 
been  composed  all  at  one  gush,  or  whether  there  are  not  distinct  divisions  in  the 
composition,  points  at  which  the  author  paused,  having  rounded  off  his  previous 
work,  and  from  which  he  again  started  in  order  to  give  his  conceptions  a  more 
perfect  development.     (Ibid.)        A  threefold  division  : — The  great  prophecy  of 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH.  xiii 

Israel's  restoration  falls  naturally  into  three  divisions.  1.  Chapters  xl.-xlviii. 
deal  mainly  with  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews  by  Cyrus.  2.  Chapters  xlix.-lvii. 
with  the  future  of  Israel,  and  the  work  of  Jehovah's  ideal  Servant.  3.  Chapters 
lviii.-lxvi.  with  the  glories  of  the  restored  Zion,  and  the  difficulties  caused  by  the 
nation's  sin.  (Edward  Grubb,  M.A.)  The  prophecy  may  be  conveniently 
divided  into  three  nearly  equal  sections.  I.  Chaps,  xl.-xlviii.  The  Restoration 
of  Israel  through  the  instrumentality  of  Cyrus.  II.  Chaps,  xlix.-lv.  The  work 
of  Jehovah's  Servant,  and  the  glorification  of  Zion.  III.  Chaps,  lvi.-lxvi.  The 
future  blessedness  of  the  true  Israel  contrasted  with  the  doom  of  the  apostates. 
The  third  section  of  the  book  is  less  homogeneous  in  its  composition  than  the 
two  others.  In  passing  from  chap.  lv.  to  chap.  lvi.  the  reader  is  at  once  sensible 
of  a  change  of  manner  and  circumstance,  which  becomes  still  more  manifest  as 
he  proceeds.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  contents  :  —  It  begins  with  a  pro- 
phecy putting  into  the  mouth  of  John  the  Baptist  the  theme  of  his  preaching ; 
it  concludes  with  the  prophecy  of  the  creation  of  a  new  heaven  and  new  earth, 
beyond  which  even  the  last  page  of  the  New  Testament  Apocalypse  cannot  soar;  and 
in  the  middle  (lii.  13-liii.),  the  suffering  and  exaltation  of  the  Servant  of  God  are 
announced  as  plainly  as  if  the  prophet  had  stood  beneath  the  Cross  and  seen  the 
Risen  One.  Placing  himself  at  the  beginning  of  New  Testament  days,  he  begins 
like  the  New  Testament  Gospels  ;  he  describes  further  the  death  and  new  life  of 
God's  Servant  as  completed  facts  with  the  clearness  of  Pauline  teaching;  he 
cleaves  at  last  to  the  higher,  heavenly  world,  like  the  Johannine  apocalpyse ; — 
and  all  this  without  exceeding  the  Old  Testament  limits ;  but  within  these  he  is 
evangelist,  apostle,  and  apocalyptist  in  one  person.  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The 
author's  wide  range  : — The  standpoint  of  the  prophet  may  be  the  Exile,  but  his 
vision  ranges  from  Abraham  to  Christ.  (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Problem 
before  the  writer  twofold : — In  order  to  effect  some  general  arrangement  and 
division  of  Isa.  xl.-lxvi.  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  view  that  the  immediate  problem 
which  the  prophet  had  before  him  was  twofold.  It  was  political,  and  it  was 
spiritual.  There  was,  first  of  all,  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from  Babylon,  according 
to  the  ancient  promises  of  Jehovah ;  to  this  were  attached  such  questions  as 
Jehovah's  omnipotence,  faithfulness,  and  grace ;  the  meaning  of  Cyrus ;  the 
condition  of  the  Babylonian  Empire.  But  after  their  political  deliverance  from 
Babylon  was  assured,  there  remained  the  really  larger  problem  of  Israel's  spiritual 
readiness  for  the  freedom  and  the  destiny  to  which  God  was  to  lead  them,  through 
the  opened  gates  of  their  prison-house :  to  this  were  attached  such  questions  as 
the  original  calling  and  mission  of  Israel ;  the  mixed  and  paradoxical  character 
of  the  people ;  their  need  of  a  Servant  from  the  Lord,  since  they  themselves  had 
failed  to  be  His  servant ;  the  coming  of  this  Servant,  His  methods  and  results. 
(Ibid.)  Our  Lord' a  favourite  book: — If  it  can  be  said  of  any  prophetic  book 
that  it  was  certainly  the  favourite  book  of  our  Lord,  it  is  this  book  of  the  second 
Isaiah,  in  which  what  God's  Elect  One  was  to  be  and  do  was  outlined  with  studied 
ideality.  Here  the  ideal  stood  before  Him,  the  realising  of  which  was  His  life- 
task.  When  He  read  in  this  book,  the  person  of  the  Coming  One  and  the  Mani- 
fested One  met  together,  the  former  found  its  body  and  the  latter  its  soul. 
(F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  author's  theological  conceptions: — He  is  the  first 
prophet  who  discerns  in  the  signs  of  the  times  a  Divine  purpose  which  is  from  the 
first  a  purpose  of  grace  towards  Israel.  His  predecessors  had  all  looked  on  the 
world-power  as  the  instrument  of  Jehovah's  chastisement  of  His  people,  and 
had  anticipated  a  happy  issue  only  as  a  second  step,  after  the  earthly  instrument 
had  been  broken  and  thrown  away.  But  the  writer  of  these  chapters  has  the 
word  "  comfort "  constantly  on  his  lips ;  the  whole  burden  of  his  message  is  one 
of  consolation  and  good  tidings ;  and  he  views  Cyrus  as  the  chosen  agent  of 
Jehovah,  not  merely  in  crushing  obstacles  to  the  execution  of  His  purpose,  but 
as  lending  active  support  in  the  establishment  of  His  kingdom.  Like  other 
prophets,  too,  he  sees  in  the  events  of  the  time  the  immediate  precursors  of 
Jehovah's  everlasting  kingdom  of  righteousness.  The  final  consummation  of 
God's  purposes  with  humanity  lies  in  germ  in  the  appearance  of  Cyrus;  in  the 
writer's  own  graphic  phrase,  it  already  "sprouts"  before  men's  eyes  (xlii.  9, 
xliii.  19).  The  prophet  is  aware,  however,  that  his  hearers  are  not  in  a  mood  to 
be  easily  cheered.  References  to  their  state  of  mind  are  numerous,  and  nowhere 
do  we  find  any  indication  of  an  enthusiastic  response  to  the  prophet's  joyful 
proclamation.  The  prevalent  mood  was  one  of  utter  weariness  and  despondency 
(xl.  27,  xlix.  14).     To  counteract  this  despairing  mood,  something  more  was  needed 


INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


than  a  bare  announcement  of  deliverance.  The  first  requisite  was  to  revive  their 
consciousness  of  God,  to  impress  them  with  a  sense  of  His  infinite  power  and 
resources,  and  the  immutability  of  His  Word  ;  and  also  to  impart  to  them  a  new 
and  inspiring  view  of  their  own  mission  and  destiny  as  a  nation.  1.  The  pro- 
phet's doctrine  of  God  is,  accordingly,  the  fundamental  element  of  his  teaching. 
2.  Remarkable  as  is  the  prophet's  contribution  to  the  Biblical  doctrine  of  God,  it 
is  surpassed  in  importance  and  originality  by  his  teaching  with  regard  to  the 
mission  of  Israel.  The  very  grandeur  and  universality  of  his  conception  of 
Jehovah  appears  to  necessitate  a  profounder  interpretation  of  Israel's  place  in 
history  than  any  previous  prophet  had  explicitly  taught.  This  view  of  Israel's 
position  among  the  nations  is  expressed  in  the  title  "  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  which 
is  applied  to  the  people  in  passages  too  numerous  to  quote.  In  most,  there  is 
no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  subject  which  the  writer  has  in  his  mind.  It  is  the 
historic  nation  of  Israel,  represented  in  the  present  chiefly  by  the  community  of 
the  exiles,  but  conceived  throughout  as  a  moral  individual  whose  life  and  con- 
sciousness are  those  of  the  nation.  But  there  is  another  class  of  passages  where 
this  application  of  the  title  "  Servant  of  Jehovah  "  to  the  actual  Israel  does  not 
suffice  (xlii.  1-4,  xlix.  1-6,  1.  4-9,  lii.  13-liii.  12).  What  makes  it  impossible  to 
suppose  that  the  Servant  means  Israel  simply  is  not  so  much  the  intense  personi- 
fication of  the  ideal  (although  that  is  very  remarkable,  and  weighs  with  many 
minds) ;  it  is  rather  the  character  attributed  to  the  Servant,  and  the  fact  that 
he  is  distinguished  from  Israel  by  having  a  work  to  do  on  behalf  of  the  nation. 
(1)  A  large  number  of  expositors  hold  that  the  term  "Servant  of  Jehovah" 
always,  in  some  sense,  denotes  Israel.  (2)  Other  writers  think  that  the  Servant 
of  Jehovah  must,  in  some  cases,  be  an  individual  yet  to  arise,  who  shall  embody 
in  himself  all  the  characteristics  that  belong  to  the  Divine  idea  of  Israel.  The 
value  of  the  conception  as  a  prophetic  delineation  of  the  character  and  work  of 
our  Lord  is  in  no  way  affected  by  the  view  we  may  be  led  to  adopt  regarding  its 
inception  in  the  mind  of  the  prophet.  All  Christian  interpreters  agree  that  the 
ideal  has  been  fulfilled  but  once  in  history,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom 
all  the  features  of  the  Divine  ideal  impressed  on  Israel  have  received  adequate 
and  final  expression.  Perhaps  we  may  go  further,  and  say  that  to  us  it  is  clear 
that  the  ideal  could  only  be  realised  in  a  personal  life  at  once  human  and  Divine  ; 
only,  we  have  no  right  to  say  that  this  must  have  been  equally  evident  to  the 
prophet  in  his  day.  The  significance  of  his  teaching  does  not  lie  in  any  direct 
statement  that  in  some  future  age  an  individual  should  arise  bearing  this  image, — 
a  statement  which  he  never  makes  ;  it  consists  in  the  marvellous  degree  in  which 
he  has  been  enabled  to  foreshadow  the  essential  truths  concerning  the  life  and 
mission  of  the  Redeemer.  This  is  a  fact  which  nothing  can  obscure,  and  which 
is  attested  for  us,  if  it  needed  attestation,  by  the  application  of  these  passages  to 
Christ  in  the  New  Testament.  (3)  The  state  of  things  which  follows  the  redemption 
of  Israel  is  an  age  of  universal  salvation  in  which  all  nations  share  in  the  blessings 
that  flow  from  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The 
author  as  an  evangelist : — The  author  has  been  called  the  evangelist  of  the  Old 
Testament.  All  the  prophets  are  evangelists,  in  the  sense  that  they  teach  that 
salvation  belongeth  unto  the  Lord,  that  by  grace  are  we  saved  through  faith, 
not  of  ourselves, — it  is  the  gift  of  God.  And  in  this  the  prophet  of  these  chapters 
agrees  with  his  brethren.  But  while  other  prophets  content  themselves  with 
this  general  doctrine  of  grace,  moving  exclusively  in  the  region  of  Divine  efficiency 
and  operation,  and  suggesting  no  solution  or  principle  of  this  operation  beyond 
this,  that  God  pardons  sin  of  His  mercy,  having  by  the  severe  dispensations  of 
His  providence  brought  the  sense  of  sin  home  to  the  people's  heart,  and  thus 
fitted  them  to  receive  His  mercy,  this  prophet,  in  his  profound  doctrine  of  the 
Buffering  Servant  of  the  Lord,  makes  an  extraordinary  movement  towards  a 
solution,  teaching  that  the  sins  of  the  people  as  a  whole  were  laid  by  God  upon  the 
innocent  Servant,  and  were  atoned  by  His  sufferings,  and  that  thus  the  people 
were  redeemed.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  Messiah  and  His  kingdom: — It 
is  only  when  chaps,  xl.-lxvi.  are  viewed  in  the  fight  of  a  great  Messianic  develop- 
ment— a  series  of  predictions  respecting  the  Person,  the  work,  and  the  kingdom 
of  Christ — that  the  earnestness,  the  protracted  length,  the  fulness,  the  deep  feeling, 
the  holy  enthusiasm,  the  glowing  metaphors  and  similes,  and  the  rich  and  varied 
exhibitions  of  peace  and  prosperity,  can  well  be  accounted  for.  The  writer,  in 
taking  such  a  standpoint,  uses  the  Exile  and  the  return  from  it  as  the  basis  of 
his  comparisons  and  analogies.     It  was  a  rich  and  deeply  interesting  source  from 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


which  to  draw  them.  Any  other  solution  of  the  whole  phenomena  is,  to  my 
mind,  at  least,  meagre  and  unsatisfactory;  on  no  other  ground  can  I  account 
for  it  that  Isaiah,  so  long  beforehand,  should  have  dwelt  on  an  Exile  and  a  return 
from  it  which  were  more  than  a  century  distant  from  him  and  his  contemporaries. 
(Moses  Stuart.)  "Two  Isaiahs": — That  the  Isaiah  who  composed  chaps, 
xl.-lxvi.,  in  comparison  with  the  Isaiah  of  the  time  of  Uzziah  till  Hezekiah,  is 
one  raised  far  above  that  time  and  at  a  higher  stage  of  insight  into  God's  work 
in  the  future,  is  certain,  whether  the  two  Isaiahs  are  one  person  or  two  persons. 
(F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Were  there  two  Isaiahs? — The  author  of  chaps,  xl.-lxvi. 
is  in  any  case  a  prophet  of  the  Isaianic  type,  but  of  an  Isaianic  type  peculiarly 
developed.  It  is  scarcely  conceivable,  although  not  quite  inconceivable,  that  in 
a  final  stage  of  Isaiah's  life  reaching  into  the  days  of  Manasseh,  his  style  of  thought 
and  speech  may  have  undergone  a  modification  in  breadth  and  depth  which  carried 
it  beyond  itself.  And  yet — we  ask  for  this  vitro  citoque  the  credit  of  a  pure  love 
of  truth,  conscious  of  freedom  from  apologetic  prepossession — yet  the  distinction 
between  an  Assyrian  and  a  Babylonian  Isaiah  involves  us  in  all  sorts  of  difficulties, 
when  we  take  into  view  the  reciprocal  relations  of  the  Isaianic  collection  of  pro- 
phecies with  the  other  Old  Testament  literature  known  to  us.  (Ibid.)  The 
traditional  view  of  the  authorship : — The  existence  of  a  tradition  in  the  last  three 
centuries  B.o.  as  to  the  authorship  of  any  book  is  (to  those  acquainted  with  the 
habits  of  thought  of  that  age)  of  but  little  critical  moment ; — the  Sopherim,  or 
students  of  Scripture  in  those  times,  were  simply  anxious  for  the  authority  of 
the  Scriptures,  not  for  the  ascertainment  of  their  precise  historical  origin.  It 
was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  declare  that  (especially)  Isaiah  xl.-lxvi.  was  a 
prophetio  work  of  the  highest  order ;  this  was  reason  sufficient  (the  Sopherim 
may  have  had  other  reasons,  such  as  phraseological  affinities  in  xl.-lxvi.,  but  this 
was  sufficient)  for  ascribing  them  to  the  royal  prophet  Isaiah.  When  the  view 
had  once  obtained  currency,  it  would  naturally  become  a  tradition.  The  ques- 
tion of  the  Isaianic  or  non-Isaianic  origin  of  the  disputed  prophecies  (especially 
xl.-lxvi. )  must  be  decided  on  grounds  of  exegesis  alone.  There  are  indications 
among  critics,  bred  in  different  schools,  of  a  growing  perception  of  this  truth. 
(Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.) 

8.  Reasons  foe  believing  that  chaps.  xl.-lxvi.  are  not  the  work  of 
Isaiah. — The  evidence  internal : — Critical  writers  generally  assign  them  to  an 
anonymous  prophet  living  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Babylonian  Exile.  The  grounds 
on  which  this  conclusion  rests  will  be  found  to  be  all  of  the  nature  of  what  is  called 
internal  evidence,  being  drawn  from  indications  furnished  by  the  book  itself  of  the 
circumstances  in  which  it  was  composed.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  true 
method  of  procedure  in  investigating  the  evidence  : — The  proper  course  obviously  is, 
first  of  all,  to  gain  as  clear  an  idea  as  possible  of  the  prophecy  itself,  and  then 
to  consider  what  light  is  thereby  thrown  on  its  origin.  (Ibid.)  Summary  of 
evidence  : — 1.  The  historical  background.  2.  The  phraseology  and  style.  3.  The 
character  of  the  theology.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  Spoken  appeals,  not 
"  chamber-prophecy  ": — If  any  prophet  in  the  Old  Testament  gives  evidence  that 
he  speaks  in  public,  and  that  his  desire  is  to  stir  and  move  those  whom  he  addresses, 
it  is  the  author  of  these  chapters.  What  meaning  have  appeals  and  protestations, 
such  as  those  in  chaps,  xl.  21,  26,  28,  xliii.  10,  xlviii.  8,  1.  10  f.,  li.  6,  12  f., 
lviii.  3  ff.,  except  as  spoken  in  the  very  presence  of  those  whose  assent  the  prophet 
seeks  to  win  T  The  author's  warm  and  impassioned  rhetoric,  the  personal  appeals 
with  which  his  prophecies  abound,  show  conclusively  that  he  is  not  writing  a 
literary  essay  in  the  retirement  of  his  chamber,  but,  like  a  true  prophet  of  his  nation, 
is  exerting  himself  in  all  earnestness  to  produce  an  impression  by  the  force  of  his 
own  personality  upon  the  hearts  of  those  who  hear  him.  The  very  first  words  of 
the  prophecy,  '  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  My  people,"  mark  a  rhetorical  peculiarity 
of  the  author.  The  emphatic  duplication  of  a  word,  significant  of  the  passion  and 
fervour  of  the  speaker,  is  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  entire  prophecy ;  in  the 
prophets  generally  it  is  rare  ;  in  Isaiah  the  only  examples — and  those  but  partly 
parallel — are  viii.  9  6.,  xxi.  9,  xxix.  1.  (Ibid. )  The  historical  background : — 
1.  The  allusions  to  Cyrus  in  the  prophecy  make  it  perfectly  certain  that  the  time  to 
which  it  refers  lies  between  549  and  538.  Cyrus  is  mentioned  as  one  already  well 
known  as  a  conqueror,  and  one  whose  brilliant  victories  have  sent  a  thrill  of  excite- 
ment through  the  world.  On  the  other  hand,  the  capture  of  Babylon  is  still  in  the 
future.    The  standpoint  of  the  prophecy,  therefore,  is  certainly  intermediate 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


between  549  and  538,  and  most  probably  about  540  B.C.  2.  In  perfect  harmony 
with  these  references  to  Cyrus  are  those  to  the  circumstances  of  Israel.  The  nation 
is  in  exile,  but  on  the  eve"  of  deliverance.  The  oppressing  power  is  Babylon,  the 
imperial  city,  still  called  "  the  mistress  of  kingdoms  "  (xlvii.  5).  It  is  from  Babylon 
that  the  exiles  are  summoned  to  make  good  their  escape  (xlviii.  20,  cf.  lii.  11,  &c). 
Meanwhile,  Palestine  is  a  waste  and  ruined  land  (xlix.  8,  19,  li.  3,  lii.  9).  No  such 
calamity  as  these  accumulated  allusions  imply  had  ever  befallen  Israel  except  in 
the  half-century  that  followed  the  destruction  of  the  State  by  the  Chaldeans  (586 
B.C.).  3.  One  other  fact  may  be  noticed  as  showing  how  completely  the  prophet's 
point  of  view  is  identified  with  the  age  of  the  Exile.  Amongst  the  arguments  most 
Frequently  adduced  for  the  deity  of  Jehovah  and  against  idolatry  is  the  appeal  to 
prophecies  fulfilled  by  the  appearance  of  Cyrus  (xli.  26,  xlii.  9,  xliii.  8-10,  xlv.  21, 
xlvi.  10).  What  prophecies  are  referred  to  is  a  question  of  some  difficulty.  What- 
ever they  are,  the  argument  has  no  force  except  as  addressed  to  persons  for  whom 
the  fulfilment  was  a  matter  of  experience.  To  the  men  of  an  earlier  age  such  an 
appeal  could  only  appear  as  confusing  and  fallacious,  being  an  attempt  to  illustrate 
ignotum  per  ignotius ;  hence,  we  must  conclude  that  the  prophecy  was  directly 
intended  for  the  generation  of  the  Exile,  and  could  produce  its  full  effect  only  on 
them.  It  must  be  observed  that  neither  the  appearance  of  Cyrus  nor  the  captivity 
of  Israel  is  ever  predicted  in  this  prophecy  ;  they  are  everywhere  assumed  as  facts 
known  to  the  readers.  Predictions  do  occur  of  the  most  definite  kind,  but  they  are 
of  events  subsequent  to  those  mentioned  and  lying  in  advance  of  the  standpoint 
which  the  prophet  occupies.  A  distinction  is  often  made  by  the  writer  between 
"  former  things,"  which  have  already  come  to  pass,  and  "  new  things  "  or  "  coming 
things  "  (xli.  22,  xlii.  9,  xliii.  9,  18,  &c,  xliv.  7,  xlv.  11,  xlvi.  9,  xlviii.  3-8),  and  in 
some  cases  it  seems  clear  that  by  "  former  things  "  he  means  the  fulfilment  of  earlier 
prophecies  concerning  Cyrus,  while  the  "  new  things,"  now  first  announced,  are 
such  events  as  the  triumph  of  Cyrus,  the  salvation  of  Israel,  and  the  conversion  of 
the  world  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  Even  on  the  supposition  that  the  chapters 
were  written  by  Isaiah,  150  years  before  any  of  these  occurrences,  it  still  remains 
true  that  he  does  not  formally  predict  the  rise  of  Cyrus,  but  addresses  himself 
to  those  who  have  witnessed  it  and  only  require  to  be  told  what  developments  will 
result  from  it  in  the  unfolding  of  Jehovah's  purpose.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
The  evidence  of  language  and  style  : — When  the  biblical  writings  are  examined  care- 
fully, individualities  of  style  appear  as  one  of  their  most  prominent  features.  .  .  . 
Now,  when  the  prophecies  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah  possessing  an  evident  reference 
to  the  events  of  Isaiah's  lifetime  are  compared  with  those  relating  to  the  restora- 
tion of  Israel  from  Babylon,  and  especially  with  chaps,  xl.-lxvi.,  many  remarkable 
differences,  both  of  phraseology  and  conception,  disclose  themselves  The  terms  and 
expressions  which,  in  the  former  series  of  prophecies,Isaiah  uses,  and  uses  repeatedly, 
are  absent  in  chaps.  xL-lxvi. ;  conversely,  new  terms  and  expressions  appear 
in  chaps.  xl.-lxvi.  which  are  without  parallel  in  the  first  part  of  the  book.  Some- 
times the  expressions  used  in  one  part  of  the  book  occur  never  in  the  other ;  in 
other  cases,  they  occur  once  or  twice  only  in  one  part  of  the  book,  while  in  the  other 
part  they  occur  frequently,  and  often  with  a  peculiar  nuance  or  shade  of  meaning. 
No  doubt,  if  the  subject-matter  of  the  two  parts  varied  greatly,  it  would  be  natural 
that  to  a  certain  extent  different  terms  should  be  employed,  even  though  both 
were  by  the  same  author ;  but,  as  will  be  seen,  the  variations  between  the  two 
parts  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  are  not  to  be  explained  by  the  difference  of  subject- 
matter  ;  they  extend,  in  many  instances,  to  points,  such  as  the  form  and  con- 
struction of  sentences,  which  stand  in  no  appreciable  relation  to  the  subject  treated. 
(Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.).  Theology  and  thought  : — Of  course,  the  fundamental 
principles  of  the  Israelitish  religion  are  common  to  both  parts  of  the  Book  of 
Isaiah,  as  they  are  to  the  prophets  generally  ;  when  we  look  for  features  that  are 
distinctive,  we  at  once  find  that  they  are  different.  Isaiah  depicts  the  majesty  of 
Jehovah ;  the  author  of  chaps.  xl.-lxvi.,  His  infinity.  This  is  a  real  difference. 
It  would  be  difficult  to  establish  from  Isaiah — not  the  greatness  merely,  but — the 
infinitude  of  the  Divine  attributes ;  the  author  of  chaps.  xl.-lxvi.  exhausts  the 
Hebrew  language  in  the  endeavour,  if  possible,  to  represent  it.  Jehovah  is  tha 
Creator,  the  Sustainer  of  the  universe,  the  Life-giver,  the  Author  of  history,  the 
First  and  the  Last,  the  Incomparable  One.  Where  does  Isaiah  teach  such  truths 
as  these  ?  Yet  it  cannot  be  maintained  that  opportunities  for  such  assertions 
of  Jehovah's  power  and  Godhead  would  not  have  naturally  presented  themselves 
to  Isaiah  whilst  he  was  engaged  in  defying  the  armies  of  Assyria.     But  the  truth  is, 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH.  xvii 

the  prophet  of  the  Exile  moves  in  a  different  region  of  thought  from  Isaiah.  The 
doctrine  of  the  preservation  from  judgment  of  a  worthy  remnant  is  characteristic 
of  Isaiah ;  it  appears  alike  in  his  first  prophecy  (vi.  13)  and  in  his  last  (xxxvii.  3 If.)  •, 
in  chaps,  xl.-lxvi.,  if  it  appears  once  or  twice  by  implication  (lix  20,  lxv  8  f.).  it  is 
not  a  distinctive  element  in  the  author's  teaching ;  it  is  not  expressed  in  Isaiah's 
phraseology,  and  is  not  more  prominent  than  it  is  in  the  writings  of  many  other 
prophets.  Where,  in  Isaiah,  is  the  destiny  of  Israel,  and  the  purpose  of  its  call, 
developed — or  even  noticed  allusively — as  it  is  developed  in  chaps,  xl.-lxvi.?  In 
these  chapters,  again,  the  figure  of  the  Messianic  king  is  absent ;  another  figure, 
intimately  connected  with  the  view  of  Israel's  destiny  that  has  just  been  mentioned 
— a  figure  singularly  striking  and  original  in  its  conception — holds  a  corresponding 
position.  To  say  that  the  figure  of  Jehovah's  ideal  Servant  is  an  advance  upon 
that  of  the  Messianic  king  is  not  correct ;  it  starts  from  a  different  origin  altogether  ; 
it  is  parallel  to  it,  not  a  continuation  of  it.  The  mission  of  Israel  to  the  nations  is 
developed  in  new  directions ;  the  Divine  purposes  in  relation  to  them  are  exhibited 
upon  a  wider  and  more  comprehensive  scale.  The  prophet  moves  along  lines  of 
thought  different  from  those  followed  by  Isaiah ;  he  apprehends  and  dwells 
upon  different  aspects  of  truth.  .  .  .  Thus,  even  where  there  is  a  point  of  contact 
between  the  two  parts  of  the  book,  or  where  the  same  terms  are  employed,  the 
ideas  attached  to  them  have,  in  chaps,  xl.-lxvi.,  a  wider  and  fuller  import.  But 
this  is  exactly  what  would  be  expected  from  a  later  writer  expanding  and  developing, 
in  virtue  of  the  fuller, measure  of  inspiration  vouchsafed  to  him,  elements  due, 
perhaps,  originally  to  a  predecessor.  (Ibid.)  The  idea  of  "righteousness"  in 
tlie  two  parts  of  the  book  : — This  difference  between  the  two  parts  of  the  book  is 
summed  up  in  their  respective  uses  of  the  word  "  righteousness. "  In  Isaiah  i.-xxxix., 
or  at  least  in  such  of  these  chapters  as  refer  to  Isaiah's  own  day,  righteousness  is 
man's  moral  and  religious  duty,  in  its  contents  of  piety,  purity,  justice,  and  social 
service.  In  Isaiah  xl.-lxvi.,  righteousness  (except  in  a  few  cases)  is  something  which 
the  people  expect  from  God, — their  historical  vindication  by  His  restoral  and 
reinstatement  of  them  as  His  people.     (Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

9.   ARGUMENTS  IN  SUPPORT  OP  THE  UNITY  OP  THE  AUTHORSHIP. — 1.   The  title 

of  the  whole  book  (chap.  i.  1).  In  the  general  title  of  the  book,  as  it  has  existed 
from  a  period  centuries  before  Christ,  the  claim  is  made  by  the  book  itself  for 
the  authorship  of  the  later  as  well  as  of  the  earlier  chapters.  And  the  anonymity 
of  the  part  which  contains  the  later  chapters,  if  not  written  by  Isaiah,  is 
unparalleled  in  the  prophetic  writings  of  the  Old  Testament.  2.  Historical 
evidence.  (1)  The  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time,  with  Christ  Himself  and  His  apostles, 
believed  the  whole  book  which  bore  the  name  of  Isaiah  to  be  the  work  of  Isaiah. 
(2)  The  LXX.,  begun  somewhere  about  280  B.C.,  and  made  from  Hebrew  MSS. 
of  that  period,  contains  the  whole  book  as  the  Book  of  Isaiah.  (3)  There  is  another 
book,  dating  from  the  same  period,  which  contains  a  distinct  assertion  of  the 
unity  of  the  authorship  of  Isaiah.  The  author  of  Ecclesiasticus  says :  "  He 
(Esaias)  saw  by  an  excellent  spirit  what  should  come  to  pass  at  the  last,  and  he 
comforted  them  that  mourn  in  Zion ;  he  showed  what  should  come  to  pass  for 
ever,  and  secret  things  or  ever  they  came."  According  to  Prof.  Margoliouth, 
the  date  of  the  book  cannot  be  later  than  200  B.o.  (4)  The  second  part  of  the 
book  is  not  known  historically  to  have  ever  existed  in  a  separate  form.  And  on 
the  hypothesis  of  its  having  had  a  separate  existence,  dating  from  the  Exile,  no 
rational  explanation  can  be  given  of  its  addition  to  the  first  part.  So  far  as  it  can 
be  traced,  it  always  appeared  as  a  part  of  "  The  Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah." 
In  the  only  translations  that  have  come  down  to  us  it  thus  appears.  (5)  If  ever 
separate,  those  who  joined  the  parts  believed  in  their  Isaiah  authorship.  Who 
was  he  ?  or  who  were  they  ?  For  answer,  we  naturally  search  the  history  of  the 
period  which  intervened  between  the  first  return  of  the  exiles  under  ZerubbabeL 
on  the  authority  of  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  and  the  close  of  the  canon  by  the  prophecy 
of  Malachi.  The  only  person  known  to  this  history  who  can  be  at  all  supposed 
to  have  vouched  the  sacred  books  of  the  prophets  is  Ezra.  It  will  not  be  pre- 
tended that  Ezra  could  be  mistaken  in  regard  to  the  authorship  of  the  second  part 
of  the  Book  of  Isaiah.  If  it  was  written  by  a  contemporary,  or  by  a  prophet  of 
the  immediately  preceding  age,  he  must  have  known.  And  if  he  either  put  the 
two  parts  together,  or,  finding  them  already  together,  adopted  the  book  as  he 
found  it,  it  must  have  been  because  he  believed  that  both  parts  rightly  bore  the 
name  of  Isaiah.     If  for  the  personal  action  of  Ezra  we  substitute  that  of  the 

b 


xviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 

traditional  "  Great  Synagogue,"  the  conclusion  must  be  the  same.  (6)  A  second 
Isaiah  is  unknown  to  history.  The  prophets  "  were  not  obscure  and  unknown 
individuals,  but  public  and  official  characters,  whose  credentials  had  been  tested 
and  approved  as  genuine  by  the  community  in  which  they  lived,  as  well  as  by 
those  more  immediately  called  upon  to  judge  of  such  matters."  How  comes  it, 
then,  that  no  trace  can  be  discovered  of  this  prophet  of  wonderful  personality, 
of  earnest  and  persistent  ministry  among  the  exiles  in  Babylonia  ?  We  are  told 
of  Daniel  and  Ezekiel,  of  Zechariah  and  Haggai,  of  the  exile  period,  but  nowhere 
do  we  find  a  trace  of  this  greater  than  they.  We  have  a  history  of  the  return  of 
the  exiles  to  their  own  land,  and  of  the  restoration  of  their  worship  and  temple, 
and  we  know  their  leaders,  Zerubbabel,  Ezra,  and  Nehemiah.  But  we  search 
in  vain  for  any  mention  of  the  unknown  prophet  to  whom  the  nation  owed  so 
much.  We  have  even  a  long  list  of  the  names  of  those  who  accompanied  Zerub- 
babel, but  not  one  hint  that  any  of  them  was  a  prophet.  More  than  that,  the  first 
words  of  the  history  of  the  return  are  these  :  Now,  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus, 
King  of  Persia,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah  might 
be  fulfilled,"  &c.  (Ezra  i.  1).  Seventy  years  had  gone  since  Jeremiah  foretold 
the  deliverance  from  Babylon.  But  only  two  years  had  gone,  according  to 
Driver,  since  the  unknown  prophet  who  wrote  chaps,  xliv.  and  xlv.  of 
the  book  which  bears  the  name  of  Isaiah  not  only  foretold  the  deliverance, 
but  named  Cyrus  as  its  author.  And  yet  there  is  no  reference  to  him  I  3.  Simil- 
arity of  religious  idea  and  expression.  (1)  The  prophet's  almost  uniform 
designation  of  God,  "  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  It  occurs  twenty-three  times, 
ten  of  these  being  in  the  first  part  of  the  book,  and  thirteen  in  the  second.  This 
designation  belongs  almost  exclusively  to  the  Book  of  Isaiah.  It  occurs  elsewhere 
in  Psalms  lxxi.,  lxxviii.,  lxxxix. ;  Jer.  L,  li.  In  2  Kings  xix.  22,  Isaiah  is  the  speaker. 
We  find  the  explanation  in  the  remarkable  vision  in  which  he  received  his  prophetic 
commission  (chap.  vi.).  The  experience  of  this  vision  was  never  forgotten.  It 
gave  colour  to  his  every  thought  of  God.  If  the  later  portion  of  the  book  was  not 
written  by  the  prophet  who  heard  the  seraphim  chanting  their  great  song,  "  Holy, 
holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  we  can  find  no  explanation  of  his  habitual  and 
exclusive  use  of  the  designation  which  that  prophet  owed  to  that  vision,  and 
which  no  other  prophet— not  forgetting  the  slight  exception  in  the  case  of 
Jeremiah — used  before  or  after.  To  call  the  second  hypothetic  Isaiah  a  copyist 
of  the  first  would  be  to  call  the  greater  a  copyist  of  the  less.  (2)  The  catholicity 
of  the  Divine  purpose  of  grace  towards  the  world.  This  was  no  new  idea  in  the 
days  of  Isaiat  It  may  oe  found  implicitly  in  the  first  Gospel  promise  ;  it  is 
found  explicitly  in  the  promise  to  the  father  of  the  Jewish  nation — "  In  thy  seed 
shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  But,  comparing  prophet  with 
prophet,  we  find  prominence  given  to  it  in  Isaiah  which  we  find  nowhere  else,  and 
in  both  parts  of  the  book  alike.  The  passages  are  not  isolated  texts  which  might 
be  cut  out  without  causing  any  sense  of  want  or  incompleteness  in  what  remains. 
They  represent  the  spirit  of  the  book.  This  becomes  significantly  obvious  if  we 
accept  Delitzsch's  interpretation  of  the  words  of  the  seraphim,  "  The  whole  earth 
is  full  of  His  glory."  These  words  he  regards  as  prophetic.  Looking  at  the 
ministry  which  was  actually  exercised  by  Isaiah,  and  which  had  to  do  so  largely, 
prophetically,  with  the  recovery  of  the  world  to  God,  through  a  Divine  Servant 
who  was  to  come  in  the  last  days,  the  most  probable  explanation  of  the  words  is 
that  which  finds  in  them  an  anticipation  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  purpose. 
Thus  understood,  the  song  of  the  seraphim  is  the  prelude  to  the  entire  ministry 
of  Isaiah,  as  the  song  of  the  angels  over  the  plains  of  Bethlehem  is  the  prelude 
to  the  entire  work  of  Christ  in  this  world.  We  have  found  in  it  a  key  to  the 
prophet's  chosen  designation  of  the  God  of  Israel  as  "  the  Holy  One,"  and  we 
now  find  in  it  a  key  to  the  prominence  which  he  gives  to  the  world-wide  purpose 
of  the  Divine  grace,  with  the  "  wonderful  "  Person,  Divine  and  human  (chap,  ix.), 
by  whom,  and  the  means  by  which,  the  purpose  is  to  be  accomplished.  This 
unifying  idea  of  the  book  of  the  prophet  Esaias  "  is  confirmed  by  the  statement 
of  the  apostle  (John.  xii.  41),  that  it  was  the  glory  of  the  Christ  who  was  to  come, 
although  that  coming  was  800  years  distant,  that  Isaiah  saw  in  vision.  (3)  The 
personality  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Among  "  the  characteristic  religious  peculiar- 
ities of  the  disputed  as  opposed  to  the  acknowledged  prophecies  "  of  Isaiah, 
Prof.  Cheyne  finds  the  "  personality  of  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah."  But  we  think 
we  may  find  here,  as  in  former  cases,  materials  for  an  argument  in  support  of  the 
unity  of  the  book.    It  is  true  that  there  are  seven  instances  in  which  the  per- 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH.  xlx 

eonality  of  the  Spirit  is  indicated  or  implied  in  the  second  part  of  the  book.  But 
it  is  true  likewise  that  there  are  two  instances  in  which  it  is  indicated  or  implied 
with  equal  clearness  in  the  first  part  of  the  book  (chaps,  xi.  2,  xxxii.  15).  The 
doctrine  is  not  peculiar  to  Isaiah  (see  Psa.  li-  11;  Mio.  ii.  7,  iii.  8 ;  Zeoh.  iv.  6). 
What  is  special  in  Isaiah  is  the  more  frequent  mention  and  the  greater  prominence 
of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  there  is  one  point  in  reference  to  which 
this  book  differs  from  all  the  other  prophetic  books,  and  it  is  common  to  both 
parts  of  the  book, — it  is  the  endowment  of  the  Messiah  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
(xi.  2,  Ixi.  1,  &c).  We  do  not  argue  that  this  alone  proves  a  common  author* 
ship,  but  it  is  strikingly  corroborative  of  other  evidence  to  that  effect.  (4)  The 
Divinity  of  the  coming  Christ.  "  Both  parts  of  Isaiah  give  us  to  understand 
clearly  that  the  agent  of  Jehovah  in  the  work  of  government  and  redemption 
is  Himself  Divine  (Cheyne).  The  absence  of  a  direct  assertion  of  the  Divinity 
of  the  Messiah  in  the  second  part  of  the  book,  such  as  we  find  in  the  first  (chap.  ix. ), 
instead  of  being  a  reason  for  ascribing  the  second  to  a  different  author,  seems  to 
me  to  be  the  very  reverse.  Such  an  assertion  would  seem  to  be  much  more  natural 
if  the  author  were  another  than  the  author  of  the  first.  But  on  the  assumption  of 
one  author,  we  see  a  significant  continuity  running  through  the  whole.  The  first 
part  casts  its  light  forward  on  the  entire  book  The  Messiah,  once  explicitly 
declared  in  the  first  part  to  be  Divine,  has  functions  ascribed  to  Him  in  the  second 
part  which  only  a  Divine  person  could  fulfil.  There  is  a  marked  likeness,  which 
should  not  be  overlooked,  between  the  two  portions  of  the  book  in  the  way  in 
which  Messianic  prediction  occurs  in  both.  It  starts  up  from  the  even  surface 
of  the  prophetic  page  with  an  abruptness  which  there  is  nothing  in  the  page  to 
account  for.  Hence  the  glorious  "  surprises  "  of  which  Dr.  Cheyne  is  conscious 
as  he  reads  the  book  (J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  Scientific  grounds  for  believing  in  the 
unity  of  Isaiah  : — 1.  The  external  evidence,  so  far  as  it  can  be  traced,  is  unanim- 
ously in  favour  of  it ;  and,  since  the  second  part  of  Isaiah  has  enjoyed  exceptional 
popularity,  it  is  improbable  +hat  the  name  of  the  author  would  have  been  forgotten 
within  200  years  of  the  time  when  he  wrote,  and  his  work  merged  in  that 
of  a  writer  of  a  few  scraps  of  150  years  before.  2.  The  theory  which 
bisects  Isaiah  leads,  by  a  logical  necessity,  to  further  and  further  dissection, 
and  so  to  results  which  are  absurd.  3.  The  geography  of  chaps.  xL-lxvi.  is  earlier 
than  the  geography  of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  and  a  geographical  notice  in  the 
last  chapter  of  Isaiah  was  mistaken  by  Jeremiah.  4.  The  idolatrous  practices 
rebuked  by  the  "  second  Isaiah  "  are  pre-exilian  rites,  such  as  we  cannot,  without 
anachronism,  attribute  to  the  Israelites  either  during  or  after  the  Exile.  They 
can  only  be  explained  as  relics  of  a  very  primitive  fetish-worship  connected  with 
particular  localities.  6.  Other  crimes  rebuked  by  the  "  second  Isaiah  "  are  identical 
with  crimes  rebuked  by  the  "  first  Isaiah,"  and  are  of  a  sort  which  imply  the  exist- 
ence of  an  independent  community  long  established  on  the  soil.  6.  The  "  second 
Isaiah"  gives  us  some  personal  details  which  enable  us  to  identify  him  with  the 
prophet  of  chap,  vi.,  and,  what  is  most  important,  tells  us  the  name  borne  by  the 
prophet  before  he  took  the  name  Isaiah.  7.  The  "second  Isaiah "  employs  words 
only  known  otherwise  to  the  "  first  Isaiah,"  of  which  the  meaning  was  lost  by 
Jeremiah's  time.  8.  The  "  second  Isaiah"  shows  himself  otherwise  possessed  of  a 
scientific  and  technical  vocabulary  which  the  "  first  Isaiah  "  only  shares  with  him. 
(Prof.  D.  S.  Margoliouth,  M.A.)  A  touchstone: — In  the  case  of  prophecy  we 
have  to  deal  with  a  class  of  literature  unrepresented  anywhere  but  in  Israel. 
Therefore,  the  only  analogies  that  can  guide  us  must  be  got  from  Hebrew  literature. 
And,  happily,  we  have  one  that  is  amply  sufficient  to  serve  as  a  touchstone  for  the 
twenty-Isaiah  theory.  By  the  side  of  the  lengthy  roll  of  Isaiah  is  the  less  lengthy 
roll  of  the  Twelve  Minor  Prophets.  Few  of  these  prophets  figure  in  history ;  and 
the  judgment  of  mankind  on  their  literary  merits  places  none  of  them  in  the  first 
class.  They  neither  thrill  as  Isaiah  thrills,  nor  have  they  influenced  mankind 
as  Isaiah  has  influenced  it.  How  comes  it,  then,  if  it  was  really  the  fashion  of  the 
Israelites  to  lump  the  oracles  of  different  prophets  together,  that  the  works  of  the 
whole  series  are  not  ascribed  to  the  first  ?  Why  are  not  the  prophecies  of  Haggai 
ascribed  to  Hosea  ?  Some  of  the  Minor  Prophets  have  produced  one  chapter  or 
thereabouts  ;  but  the  tradition  has  not  forgotten  their  names.  How  then  comes 
it  that  the  brilliant  authors  of  the  Isaianic  oracles  are  for  the  most  part  utterly 
forgotten  and  neglected  T  (Ibid.)  The  analogy  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah : — 
That  two  authors  of  stupendous  merit  might  accidentally  get  bound  up  together, 
and  so  the  works  of  the  second  get  attributed  to  the  first,  is  exceedingly  unlikely. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


but  not  so  unlikely  as  to  be  impossible  ;  in  the  case  of  Isaiah,  however,  not  only 
is  the  analogy  of  the  Minor  Prophets  decidedly  against  it,  but  that  of  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah  still  more  so.  Owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  subject  of  which  these 
authors  treat,  they  appear  in  several  canons  under  the  single  head  of  Ezra ;  but 
the  Jews,  though  they  probably  often  bound  them  up  together,  never  confused 
them.  Still,  if  the  division  of  Isaiah  between  two  authors  gave  satisfaction,  and 
further  dissection  did  not  immediately  follow,  this  solution  would  not  go  so  far 
outside  the  bounds  of  experience  as  to  be  called  uncritical.  But  the  fact  that  this 
first  dissection  leads  to  innumerable  others  renders  it  useless.  (Ibid. )  The  Cyrus 
predictions  : — The  mention  by  [the  author]  of  the  name  of  Cyrus  (xlv.  4-6)  is  declared 
to  be  a  tremendous  miracle  wrought  in  order  that  the  whole  world  from  East  to 
West  might  know  that  Jehovah  was  the  only  God.  If  the  fact  was  that  the  prophet 
of  an  unimportant  and  oppressed  community  mentioned,  in  the  name  of  his  god,  a 
conqueror  whose  fame  was  filling  the  world,  what  miracle  was  there  in  this  ? 
The  world  might  as  well  ring  with  the  fact  that  Virgil  mentioned  Augustus.  Yet 
the  "  second  Isaiah  "  claims  foreknowledge  so  constantly  and  so  emphatically 
that  he  has  left  himself  no  loophole  (xli.  23,  xlii.  9,  xliii.  9,  10,  xliv.  7,  8, 
xlviii.  3-5).  These  are  not  all  the  passages  in  which  this  writer  insists  on  the  fact 
that  he,  as  God's  spokesman,  has  foretold  events  with  certainty,  whereas  the 
representatives  of  other  gods  have  been  unable  to  predict.  The  author  therefore 
speaks  like  a  man  of  science,  who  is  aware  that  the  truth  can  submit  itself  to  tests. 
...  If  we  regard  chaps.  xl.-lxvi.  as  the  continuation  of  the  first  half  of  Isaiah, 
the  references  to  the  former  events  which  had  come  about  as  the  prophet  had 

f>redicted  are  intelligible ;  the  failure  of  the  invasion  of  Sennacherib,  which  his 
ying  annals  conceal,  is  attested  by  the  Greek  historian;  and  we  are  justified 
in  ascribing  that  failure  to  providential  interference.  That  was,  doubtless,  the 
most  striking  of  Isaiah's  predictions,  but  in  other  cases  he  took  the  wise  precaution 
of  having  his  oracles  properly  attested  (viii.  2,  16,  xxx.  8).  Either,  then,  we 
are  to  suppose  that  the  "  second  Isaiah  "  had  foretold  events  successfully,  but 
that  his  predictions  attracted  so  little  attention  as  to  be  lost ;  or,  we  are  to  suppose 
that  this  profession  of  his  is  a  piece  of  imposture  ;  or  thirdly,  there  remains  the 
old  and  traditional  theory  that  the  oracles  on  the  fulfilment  of  which  the  "  second 
Isaiah  "  bases  his  claim  to  credibility  are  the  oracles  of  the  "  first  Isaiah."  Re- 
jecting the  first  proposition  as  absurd,  and  the  second  on  the  ground  that  a  claim 
bo  forcibly  put  forward  would  certainly  have  been  challenged  unless  substantiated, 
we  are  driven  to  the  third  alternative  ;  the  "  former  events  "  to  which  the  passages 
quoted  allude  must  be  events  predicted  by  the  "  first  Isaiah,"  and  duly  realised. 
Either,  then,  the  "first  Isaiah  "  wrote  the  work  ascribed  to  the  second,  or  the  "  second 
Isaiah  "  wrote  the  work  ascribed  to  the  first ;  for  the  idea  that  the  "  second 
Isaiah  "  claimed  falsely  to  have  produced  the  oracles  which  were  really  by  the  "  first 
Isaiah"  may  be  excluded.  Either  the  "first  Isaiah"  was  gifted  with  astounding 
knowledge  of  the  future,  or  a  false  prophet  of  the  time  of  Cyrus  forged  a  whole 
Beries  of  oracles,  some  of  which  corresponded  well  with  past  history,  in  order  to 
attach  to  them  an  appendix  of  oracles  referring  to  events  in  the  then  future.  This 
latter  supposition  may  be  refuted  when  any  serious  writer  maintains  it.  (Ibid.) 
The  author  knew  but  little  of  Babylon  : — Out  of  the  oracles  of  the  "first  Isaiah" 
it  seems  impossible  to  banish  certain  leading  ideas  which  perpetually  recur.  "  A 
remnant  shall  return  "  (i.  9,  x.  21,  xi.  11,  xxvii.  12,  13).  If,  then,  the  true  and 
genuine  message  of  Isaiah  is  that  a  remnant  6hall  return,  and  yet  that  remnant 
is  not  to  return  from  Assyria,  whence  is  it  to  return  t  Chiefly  from  Babylon, 
as  the  historically  attested  oracle  in  chap,  xxxix.  implies  ;  and  what  is  clear  is,  that 
the  "  second  Isaiah,"  like  the  first,  knows  little  of  Babylon  but  the  names  Babel 
and  Chasdees ;  and  that,  except  the  name  Cyrus,  the  second  possesses  no  detailed 
foreknowledge  of  later  events  that  is  not  also  at  the  command  of  the  first.  (Ibid.) 
Geographical  considerations  : — There  is  some  geography  in  these  chapters,  and 
there  is  also  some  in  Jeremiah  and  in  Ezekiel.  If  the  second  Isaiah  "  wrote  in 
the  time  of  Cyrus,  he  must  have  had  the  works  of  these  two  prophets  before  him, 
and  can  scarcely  have  been  less  familiar  than  Ezekiel  with  the  geography  of  the 
countries  that  entered  into  Babylonian  politics.  But  it  is  the  fact  that  the  "  second 
Isaiah  "  is  ignorant  of  what  was  commonplace  to  Ezekiel.  The  races  Meshech 
and  Tubal,  to  the  Assyrians  Muski  and  Tabali,  to  the  Greeks  Moschi  and  Tibareni, 
formed  a  natural  couple,  like  Holland  and  Belgium,  or  Norway  and  Sweden. 
Ezekiel  mentions  them  together  five  times  (xxvii.  13,  xxxii.  26,  xxxviii.  2,  3, 
xxxix.  1),  and  they  are  named  together  in  the  genealogical  tables,  which  couple 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH.  xad 

Javan  (the  Oriental  name  for  Greece)  with  them.  To  Ezekiel,  therefore,  it  was 
well  known  that  Moshech  (aa  Meshech  should  be  corrected)  was  a  proper  name, 
belonging  to  a  nation  or  country.  But  Isaiah  thought  it  a  Hebrew  word  meaning 
"  drawer,"  and  he  interprets  it  "  drawers  of  the  bow."  Thus  the  verse  lxvi.  19 
reads :  "  I  will  send  refugees  of  them  to  Tarshish,  Pul,  and  Lud,  drawers  of  the  bow, 
Tubal  and  Javan."  But  the  Hebrew  for  drawers  is  Mosh'che.  If  we  compare 
the  lists  in  Ezekiel  and  in  the  genealogical  tables,  it  will  seem  clear  that  "  drawers 
of  the  bow  "  is  not  an  epithet  of  Lud,  but  the  name  of  a  race,  namely,  Moshech. 
Jeremiah  had  this  passage  of  Isaiah  before  him,  and  stumbled  over  it  curiously. 
In  enumerating  some  warlike  tribes  (xlvi.  9)  he  mentions  Cush  and  Put,  bearers  of 
shields,  and  Ludim,  bearers  treaders  of  the  bow."  This  variation  is  highly 
interesting.  The  verb  mdshach  is  so  rarely  used  of  "  the  bow  "  that  the  prophet 
might  well  doubt  whether  Isaiah's  phrase  meant  "  draggers  "  of  the  bow  or 
"  pullers  "  of  it ;  i.e.,  whether  it  referred  to  the  carrying  of  the  bow,  or  to  the 
employment  of  it  in  actual  warfare.  The  alternate  suggestions,  curiously  enough, 
remain  side  by  side  in  the  text ;  but  the  reason  of  the  association  of  the  bow  with 
the  Lydian  lancers  is  lost.  Jeremiah  is,  however,  one  step  further  than  Isaiah  in 
that  he  has  the  correct  form  "  Put "  for  the  incorrect  "  Pul."  The  name  Pul  is 
probably  due  to  a  reminiscence  of  the  name  of  an  Assyrian  king.  We  see  from 
this  passage  in  the  last  chapter  of  the  "  second  Isaiah  "  a  proof  of  priority  to 
Jeremiah  and  EzekieL  (For  further  developments  of  the  geographical  argument, 
see  "Expositor,"  sixth  series,  vol.  i.,  pp.  254-261.)  (Ibid.)  Argument  from 
idolatrous  practices  : — The  abominations  described  in  chapter  lvii.  include  (ver.  5) 
the  worship  of  dim  under  green  trees  ;  the  only  other  place  in  which  this  technical 
term  appears  is  Isaiah  i.  29  ("  Men  shall  be  ashamed  of  the  dim  which  ye  have 
desired").  The  ceremonies  rebuked  in  chapter  lxv.  include  sacrifices  in  gannoth 
(ver.  3),  and  the  same  technical  term  figures  in  chapter  lxvi.  (ver.  17) ;  the  only 
other  place  in  which  it  is  found  is  also  Isaiah  i.  29  ("  Ye  shall  be  ashamed  of  the 
gannoth  which  ye  have  chosen  ").  That  gannoth  here  does  not  mean  ordinary 
gardens,  but  is  a  technical  term,  appears  from  the  threat  in  i.  30,  where  the  votaries 
of  these  gannoth  are  told  that  they  shall  become  like  a  garden  that  has  no  water. 
For  this  threat  evidently  derives  its  suitability  from  a  play  on  words.  ...  If  the 
word  gannoth  were  not  technical,  the  play  on  the  words  would  be  pointless  ;  and  we 
may  observe  that  the  threat  of  i.  30  is  matched  by  the  promise  of  lviii.  11:"  Thou 
ehalt  be  like  a  well-watered  garden,"  where  (owing  to  the  absence  of  any  other 
allusion)  the  ordinary  form  of  the  word  for  "  garden  "  is  used.  The  worship 
with  which  these  terms  gannoth  and  dim  are  connected  was  exceedingly  elaborate, 
and  therefore  characteristic  of  a  period.  We  learn,  therefore,  that  the  authors 
of  Isaiah  i.  and  of  Isaiah  lvii.  and  lxv.,  lxvi.  were  contemporaries.  That  the  first 
chapter  of  a  great  classic  could  be  attributed  to  any  one  but  its  right  author  is  too 
wild  a  surmise  to  deserve  consideration.  We  start,  then,  with  the  remarkable 
fact  that  the  "  first  Isaiah  "  uses  two  technical  terms  with  which  the  "  second 
Isaiah  "  and  no  other  Hebrew  author  is  familiar.  And  the  "  second  Isaiah  " 
acts  as  interpreter  to  the  "  first  Isaiah,"  by  enabling  us  to  locate,  and  to  some 
extent  comprehend,  the  nature  of  the  cults  to  which  these  technical  terms  belonged. 
And  from  this  observation  a  very  easy  step  leads  to  the  identification  of  the  two 
authors.  (Ibid.)  Ceremonies  alluded  to  in  chapters  lvii.,  lxv.,  and  lxvi.  : — The 
source  of  these  practices  in  Palestine  must  have  been  ancient  and  undisturbed 
custom ;  they  had  been  brought  by  the  Canaanites  with  them  from  Arabia,  and 
the  Israelites  had  learned  them  from  the  Canaanites.  They  were  kept  alive 
by  attachment  to  particular  mountains  and  particular  rivers,  and  in  part  were 
based  on  the  system  which  connected  and  even  identified  the  gods  with  particular 
localities.  The  cultivation  of  them  involved  an  insult  to  the  temple  (lxv.  11), 
which,  therefore,  must  have  been  standing  at  the  time  of  the  rebuke.  These 
passages  are  in  consequence  so  clearly  pre-exilian,  that  even  some  of  those  who 
were  in  favour  of  the  dissecting  theory  have  been  unable  to  place  them  any  later. 
While,  then,  the  "  first  Isaiah  "  is  supposed  to  be  interpolated  with  post-exilian 
matter,  the  "  second  Isaiah  "  is  supposed  to  be  interpolated  with  pre-exilian 
matter.  Naturally,  a  theory  that  involves  so  much  complication  can  make  little 
claim  to  probability.  (Ibid.)  Anachronisms  involved  in  the  supposition  of  a 
"  second  Isaiah  "  ; — The  author  of  chap.  lxv.  8,  9  takes  the  same  view  of  the 
purpose  of  the  Exile  which  is  taken  throughout  the  book,  and,  indeed,  throughout 
the  Bible.  Attachment  to  these  savage  and  primitive  rites  could  only  be  dis- 
solved by  removing  the  worshippers  from  the  soil  on  which  they  were  practised  ; 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


hence,  the  Exile  was  not  only  a  punishment  but  also  a  corrective.  Prom  it  there 
returned  those  whose  progenitors  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal,  while  those 
whose  interests  were  far  removed  from  the  objects  which  Israel  was  destined  to 
accomplish  lost  their  nationality.  Those  who  came  back  were  cured,  or  rather 
purified,  from  this  particular  form  of  evil.  That  they  were  not  faultless  we  know 
from  the  prophets  of  the  Return ;  but,  to  attribute  to  them  fetish  worship  of  a 
primitive  sort  is  a  gross  anachronism.  One  might  as  well  accuse  the  English  of 
the  nineteenth  century  of  burning  heretics  or  using  ordeals  as  evidence.  .  .  .  Next 
after  the  idolatrous  rites  rebuked  by  the  "  second  Isaiah,"  we  may  consider  some 
other  crimes  which  he  condemns.  One  of  the  most  serious  impeachments  is  to  be 
found  in  lix.  2-9.  The  prophet  there  states  that  the  sins  of  his  countrymen  have 
been  a  bar  between  them  and  God ;  they  have  caused  God  to  hide  His  face,  and  pre- 
vented Him  from  hearing.  This  is  the  same  message  as  that  in  i.  14, 15,  with  a  slight 
difference  in  the  tense  and  the  expression.  He  then  proceeds  :  "  for  your  hands 
are  polluted  with  blood."  This  also  is  identical  with  the  accusation  in  i.  15, 
"your  hands  are  full  of  blood";  or,  perhaps,  "tainted  with  blood."  Now, 
this  is  as  grave  an  accusation  as  can  be  made ;  to  what  it  precisely  refers  our 
Blight  knowledge  of  IsraeUtish  history  does  not  enable  us  to  say:  the  prophet 
may  have  in  mind  either  judicial  murders  (such  as  that  in  old  times  of  Naboth), 
or  recklessness  of  human  life  among  loose  livers,  or  .  .  .  infanticide.  .  .  .  Which- 
ever of  these  it  be — supposing  it  does  not  refer,  as  many  have  thought,  to  a  judicial 
murder  in  the  distant  future — the  two  "  remonstrances  "  must  clearly  belong 
to  the  same  period.  And  that  period  can  only  be  pre-exilic  ;  the  mere  notion 
of  such  a  remonstrance  being  addressed  to  the  returned  exiles  seems  to  involve 
anachronism.  Indeed,  the  prophet's  idea  is  clearly  that  the  Exile  was  a  sort  of 
sea  in  which  these  offences  were  to  be  washed  out.  The  terrible  impeachment 
of  his  contemporaries  which  follows  strongly  resembles  that  contained  in  chaps,  i. 
and  v.  It  is  illustrated  by  similes  taken  from  natural  history,  in  which  words 
otherwise  only  used  by  the  "  first  Isaiah"  are  employed.  Verses  9  and  11  contain 
a  free  paraphrase  of  v.  7  ;  but  the  play  on  the  words  in  the  earlier  chapter  is 
intentionally  altered.  An  imitator  would  probably  have  reproduced  it.  In  lvi. 
10-12  the  impeachment  is  confined  to  the  rulers ;  they  are  accused  of  drunken- 
ness, corruption,  and  incompetence,  just  as  they  are  in  v.  22,  23,  iii.  12,  and  ix.15. 
That  the  same  impeachment  could  be  made  with  justice  at  such  different  periods 
as  the  time  of  the  "  first  Isaiah  "  and  the  close  of  the  Exile  or  commencement 
of  the  Return  seems  unthinkable  ;  but  to  deny  the  authenticity  of  the  early 
chapters  of  the  book  is  uncritical.  How  could  such  a  forgery  have  remained 
undetected  ?  In  chap,  lviii.  the  people  are  accused  of  lip-service ;  they  ask  why 
their  punctilious  performance  of  ceremonies  is  unproductive  of  results,  and  are 
told  that  it  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  their  service  is  not  accompanied  by  a  corre- 
sponding reform  in  their  conduct.  The  same  is  the  burden  of  chap.  i.  and  of  xxix. 
13.  Surely  the  remonstrances  addressed  to  the  Jews  before  and  after  the  great 
crisis  in  their  national  existence  cannot  have  been  so  similar.  (Ibid.)  The 
"  second  Isaiah  "  identical  with  the  prophet  of  chap.  vi.  : — Let  us  see  whether  the 
second  half  of  Isaiah  tells  us  anything  about  the  prophet's  person.  Ewald  seems 
to  have  rightly  interpreted  viii.  18:  Verily,  I  and  the  children  which  the  Lord 
has  given  me  are  for  signs  and  tokens  in  Israel,"  of  the  names  Isaiah,  Shear  - 
yashub,  and  Maher-shalal-hash-baz.  Clearly,  the  names,  "  A  remnant  shall 
return,"  and  "  Hasten  the  spoil,  hurry  the  plunder,"  were  too  full  of  meaning  to 
escape  notice ;  therefore  the  prophet's  own  name,  "  The  salvation  of  the  Lord," 
must  also  have  been  of  notable  significance ;  and,  indeed,  that  theme,  "  the 
salvation  of  the  Lord,"  pervades  the  whole  book.  But  it  follows  that  the  prophet 
must  have  taken  this  name  himself.  Thus  only  would  its  significance  be  forced 
on  the  minds  of  his  contemporaries.  .  .  .  What,  then,  was  his  original  name  ? 
This  appears  to  be  given  in  xlii.  18-21.  The  way  to  translate  these  verses  seems 
to  me  the  following :  "  Hear,  ye  deaf ;  and  look,  ye  blind,  so  as  to  see.  Who 
was  blind  but  My  servant,  or  deaf  as  My  messenger  whom  I  send  ?  Who  was 
blind  as  Meshullam,  and  blind  as  the  servant  of  the  Lord  ?  Seeing  much  without 
noticing ;  open-eared  without  hearing.  The  Lord  was  pleased  of  His  grace  to  make 
a  great  and  notable  example."  The  name  Meshullam  is  by  no  means  uncommon  ; 
it  belongs  to  a  root  which  gives  a  great  number  of  proper  names  both  in  Hebrew 
and  Arabic  ;  they  all  mean  "  safe  and  sound,"  and  are  names  of  good  omen  .  .  . 
The  "  great  and  notable  example,"  then,  lay  in  the  fact  that  he,  Meshullam,  had 
been  enabled  to  see  ;  why,  then,  should  not  others  ?     Let  us  compare  this  with 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


the  most  autobiographical  chapter  in  Isaiah — chap.  vi.  In  the  first  place,  the 
vision  there  justifies  the  description  of  himself  in  the  above  passage  as  "  My 
messenger  whom  I  send  "  (vi.  8,  9).  He  was  told  to  go  and  say  to  the  people, 
"  Hear,  but  understand  not  •  see,  and  know  not  " — the  very  condition  wherein, 
according  to  xlii.  20,  the  messenger  himself  had  been.  Then,  we  see  that  in  ver.  5 
he  identifies  his  condition  with  that  of  his  countrymen  until  the  live  coal  had 
touched  his  lips.  The  immediate  result  of  that  was  to  be  the  removal  of  sin  ; 
but  assuredly  the  image  is  meant  to  suggest  "  the  scholar's  tongue,"  which  in 
1.  4,  he  says,  was  given  him  by  the  Lord,  to  utter  the  words  which  (as  Ben-Sira 
6ays)  blaze  like  a  fire,  and,  indeed,  however  inadequately  they  are  translated, 
thrill  the  reader  and  hearer  more,  probably,  than  any  other  form  of  utterance. 
Hence  it  would  seem  that  the  verses  xlii.  18-21  give  us  a  very  needful  supplement 
to  the  biographical  notice  of  chap.  vi.  But  is  the  supposition  that  Meshullam 
is  a  proper  name  a  wild  conjecture,  or  an  observation  that  is  likely  sooner  or  later 
to  be  generally  accepted  ?  I  trust  the  latter,  because  modern  scholars  see  the 
necessity  of  correcting  the  text,  owing  to  the  fact  that,  taken  as  a  substantive, 
the  word  gives  no  satisfactory  meaning.  It  is  only  in  rare  cases  that  [the  cor- 
rection of  the  text]  is  dictated  by  the  canons  of  science.  On  the  other  hand, 
I  can  imagine  no  reason,  grammatical  or  other,  which  stands  in  the  way  of  the 
interpretation  given  above.  And  seeing  how  deeply  this  prophet  is  imbued 
with  the  feeling  that  a  new  condition  calls  for  a  new  name  (cf.  lxii.  2),  the  con- 
jecture of  Ewald,  that  the  name  Isaiah  was  meant  to  mark  the  prophet's  new 
condition,  seems  highly  probable.  .  .  .  We  learn,  then,  from  chap.  vi.  that  the 
mission  undertaken  by  the  prophet  was  without  hope  of  brilliant  success  ;  it  was 
only  when  Jerusalem  was  reduced  to  a  ruin  that  it  was  to  begin  to  be  heard.  In 
1.  6-10  we  hear  the  prophet  complain  of  its  ineffectual  character ;  the  reception 
of  his  message  was  just  what  had  been  promised :  it  was  greeted  with  contempt 
and  ridicule,  with  blows  and  buffets.  The  consolation  that  he  had  was  the  same 
as  that  which  nerves  all  those  who  are  defending  the  cause  of  science  against 
tremendous  odds,  namely,  that  the  truth  is  permanent,  and  must  slowly  approve 
itself,  whereas  the  opposite  is  transitory.  Naturally,  it  might  be  said  that  this 
was  too  often  the  fate  of  those  who  interpreted  the  purposes  or  work  of  God  aright 
for  the  first  time  to  serve  for  scientific  identification  ;  but  then,  it  must  be  ob- 
served that  we  have  no  other  justification  save  this  passage  for  the  oracle  of  chap, 
vi.  .  .  .  The  valuable  notice  in  xlii.  19  of  the  author's  former  name,  Meshullam, 
seems  intelligible  only  on  the  hypothesis  stated  above.  Had  it  not  been  known 
that  the  author  of  that  chapter  bore  the  name  Isaiah,  the  chapter  (and  the  collec- 
tion in  which  it  occurred)  would  be,  of  course,  attributed  to  Meshullam.  Anyone 
who  has  ever  catalogued  MSS.  is  aware  that  the  first  expedient  adopted  for  finding 
out  the  name  of  an  author  is  to  search  through  his  book  for  some  proper  name 
that  may,  from  the  context,  be  his.  To  those  with  whom  classical  Hebrew  was 
a  living  language,  a  proper  name  would  be  as  easily  distinguishable  as  to  us  in 
reading  English ;  in  such  a  sentence  as  "  who  is  so  pathetic  as  gray,"  the  absence 
of  the  capital  would  confuse  no  intelligent  reader  ;  and  hence,  had  not  the  readers 
of  these  oracles  from  the  time  they  were  first  issued  in  a  roll  been  convinced  that 
the  author's  name  was  Isaiah,  it  would  never  have  occurred  to  them  to  render 
Meshullam  as  "  perfect,"  or  "  requited,"  or  "  devoted."     But  since  the  fact  of  the 

Erophet  having  changed  his  name  was  only  recorded  in  the  allusion  of  chap.  viii.  18, 
is  former  name  was  forgotten.  That  "  who  so  blind  as  Meshullam  ?  "  meant  "  who 
so  blind  as  Isaiah  before  his  mission  ?  "  was  not  perceived  by  those  who  only 
knew  of  Isaiah.  Even  in  this  country,  where  a  change  of  name  is  usually  preceded 
by  the  most  important  work  in  a  man's  life,  the  name  by  which  a  peer  was  known 
before  his  elevation  is  constantly  forgotten  by  the  majority  of  the  public.  But 
where  the  change  is  preceded  by  no  important  work,  the  original  name  is  likely 
to  be  lost  altogether.  How  many  educated  persons  could  say  offhand  what 
was  the  original  name  of  Voltaire  or  Neander  or  Lagarde  ?  (Ibid.)  Argu- 
ment from  words  common  to  the  "  first "  and  "  second  Isaiah  "  .• — A  scientific 
argument  can  be  drawn  from  the  use  of  words  only  when  they  can  be  dated  before 
or  after.  By  the  latter  method  of  dating  I  mean  the  case  in  which  we  can  show 
that  by  a  certain  date  the  sense  of  a  word  had  been  entirely  forgotten  in  a  com- 
munity ;  for  then,  whoever  is  found  using  it  in  the  old  sense  will  almost  certainly 
be  earlier  than  that  date.  The  discovery  of  this  scientific  principle  is  the  service 
rendered  the  world  by  the  Greek  critic  Aristarchus;  let  us  see  whether  it  will 
help  us  to  determine  the  date  of  the  "  second  Isaiah."     1.  There  is  a  word  ndshatht 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


used  by  Isaiah  once  in  the  first  half  of  the  book  (xix.  5),  and  once  in  the  second 
(xli.  17).  In  both  those  passages  it  clearly  means  "  to  be  dry  "  ;  "  the  waters 
shall  dry  up  from  the  Nile,"  and  "  their  tongue  is  dry  with  thirst."  It  is  well  to 
know  the  etymology  of  a  word  before  we  base  any  argument  upon  it ;  and  here 
the  surest  source  of  Hebrew  etymology,  classical  Arabic,  does  not  fail  us.  The 
word  nashifa  has,  from  time  immemorial,  been  used  by  the  Arabs  precisely  as 
Isaiah  uses  this.  .  .  .  What,  therefore,  appears  is  that  the  authors  of  both  parts 
of  Isaiah  are  acquainted  with  a  verb  nashath  or  nasath,  meaning  "  to  be  dry,"  and 
in  all  probability  identical  with  a  very  familiar  Arabic  verb  meaning  the  same. 
Now  let  us  examine  two  passages  of  Jeremiah.  The  first  is  li.  30.  "  The  champions 
of  Babylon  have  ceased  to  fight ;  they  sit  in  their  fortresses ;  their  manhood  is 
nashath  ;  they  have  become  women  "  (nashim).  The  second  clause  is  here  evidently 
in  explanation  of  the  first ;  it  tells  us  what  nashath  means,  namely,  "  to  become 
effeminate."  The  author  regards  it  as  a  denominative  from  nashim,  "  women," 
probably  through  an  abstract  nashuth,  "  womanhood."  Hence,  between  the  time 
when  Isaiah  n.  wrote,  and  the  time  of  the  composition  of  Jer.  li.  30,  the  meaning 
of  the  word  nashath  must  have  been  forgotten.  Therefore,  the  author  of  Isaiah  xli. 
is  earlier  than  the  author  of  Jeremiah  li.  by  some  generations.  That  this  observa- 
tion is  correct  is  shown  by  Jer.  xviii.  14:  "  Can  the  cool  flowing  water  be  destroyed" 
(nathash)  ?  That  men  do  not  speak  of  water  being  destroyed  or  plucked  up  is 
evident ;  the  author  must  mean,  "  Can  they  dry  up  ?  "  The  phrase,  then,  is  modelled 
on  Isaiah  xix.  5 ;  but  the  later  prophet,  being  no  longer  familiar  with  the  old  verb 
nashath,  "  to  dry  up,"  substitutes  by  conjecture  the  more  familiar  nathash.  By 
the  time  li.  30  is  written  he  has  remembered  that  Isaiah  used  not  nathash,  but 
nashath,  in  connection  with  waters  drying  ;  hence  he  gives  it  a  special  application, 
adding  an  etymological  explanation.  The  process  is  very  similar  to  that  which 
was  traced  in  reference  to  "  the  Lydians,  drawers  of  the  bow."  Just  as  Isaiah 
utilised  the  lost  Book  of  Wisdom,  so  Jeremiah  utilises  the  language  of  the  existing 
classic,  Isaiah.  In  the  case  of  obsolete  phrases,  he  makes  guesses,  which,  as 
philology  is  not  the  purpose  of  Holy  Scripture,  by  the  fact  that  they  are  unfortunate, 
give  us  valuable  clues  of  date.  2.  In  Isaiah  x.  18  there  occurs  a  difficult  phrase, 
rendered  in  our  Authorised  Version,  "  as  when  a  standard-bearer  fainteth.  The 
meaning  of  this  expression  is  probably  lost ;  but  it  must  have  been  known  to  the 
author  of  Isaiah  lix.  19,  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  standard  against  him." 
For  the  same  word  (noses)  is  here  used,  but  in  an  entirely  different  context  There 
can,  therefore,  be  no  question  of  imitation ;  the  prophet  must  have  known  the 
meaning  of  the  word,  though  we  do  not  know  it ;  and  the  argument  is  unaffected 
by  the  question  of  the  meaning  which  should  be  assigned  it.  These  words  would 
appear  to  be  of  real  importance,  because  the  argument  drawn  from  them  is  of 
a  sort  that  science  recognises.  (Ibid.)  The  technical  vocabulary  of  Isaiah  II. 
shared  by  Isaiah  I. : — Agriculture  and  natural  history  seem  clearly  to  interest  the 
author  (or  authors)  of  these  oracles  very  much ;  and  allusions  to  these  subjects 
lead  to  the  employment  of  a  considerable  number  of  technicalities.  Whether  a 
member  of  the  exiled  community  would  have  had  the  opportunity  of  becoming 
so  familiar  with  these  subjects  seems  doubtful ;  but  documents  illustrating  the 
life  of  the  exiles  may  some  day  be  discovered,  which  will  enable  us  to  speak  positively 
on  this  matter.  There  are  some  facts  about  the  use  of  these  terms  in  the  two  parts 
of  the  book  which  seem  to  me  scarcely  explicable  on  the  hypothesis  of  divided 
authorship.  In  the  parable  of  the  Vineyard  (v.  1-6)  there  occurs  a  word  for  "  to 
hoe  "  ('adar,  ver.  6),  and  also  a  word  for  "  to  stone,"  meaning  "  to  remove  stones  " 
(sikkel,  ver  2).  Both  these  verbs  have  other  meanings,  which  are  more 
familiar  ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  vineyard  there  could  be  no  mistaking  their  import, 
whence  they  are  used  without  any  explanation.  However,  in  vii.  25  the  prophet 
has  occasion  to  use  the  word  for  to  hoe  "  in  a  less  technical  context,  so  this  time 
he  adds  "  with  the  hoe,"  that  there  may  be  no  error.  The  author  of  lxii.  10  has 
occasion  to  use  the  word  for  "  to  stone  of  a  road,  where  it  would  be  ambiguous ; 
for  "  to  stone  a  road  "  might  mean  to  put  stones  on  it  or  to  remove  them  from  it. 
Hence  he  adds  "  from  stones,"  that  there  may  be  no  error.  Now,  either  there  never 
was  an  Isaiah,  or  the  oracles  of  chaps,  v.  and  vii.  are  Isaianic.  Therefore  lxii. 
is  also  Isaianic.  For  it  must  be  remembered  that  these  words,  in  their  technical 
sense,  only  occur  in  these  two  places.  The  theory  that  another  author  felt  the 
same  scruple  about  the  second  as  Isaiah  had  felt  about  the  first  scarcely  commends 
itself ;  a  later  imitator  would  have  thought  Isaiah's  authority  sufficient  to  justify 
him  in  using  "  to  stone  "  for  "  to  remove  stones."     In  xxxiv.  15,  and  twice  in 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH.  xxv 

!ix.  5,  a  verb  (meaning  literally  "  to  split ")  is  used  of  hatching  serpents'  eggs;  it 
does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  this  sense.  In  xxxiv.  15  a  special  verb  is  used  for  "  to 
be  delivered  of,"  "  produce,"  which  only  occurs  in  lxvi.  7  besides.  Jeremiah 
(xvii.  11)  is  apparently  acquainted  with  part  of  this  scientific  vocabulary,  but  not 
with  the  word  for  "  produce."  Now,  the  author  of  xxxiv.  seems  on  other  grounds 
identical  with  the  "second  Isaiah  "  ;  the  reference  to  Edom  and  Bozrah  in  ver.  6 
cannot  with  any  probability  be  separated  from  that  in  lxiii.  1,  and  the  address 
to  the  "  nations  and  peoples  "  in  xxxiv.  1  is  evidently  in  the  style  of  the  author  of 
xli.  1.  The  threat  in  xxxiv.  3  closely  resembles  that  with  which  the  Book  of 
Isaiah  closes.  Chap.  xxxv.  also  cannot,  with  any  probability,  be  separated  from 
chaps,  xl.-lxvi.;  both  the  thought  and  the  language  are  closely  akin  to,  and  in 
part  identical  with,  those  of  the  "  second  Isaiah."  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  by  no 
means  easy  to  separate  xxxv.  from  what  precedes ;  ver.  5  takes  us  back  to  xxix.  18, 
and  ver.  4  to  xxxii.  4.  Now,  this  fact  hits  the  splitting  theory  very  hard.  (Ibid.) 
Is  the  standpoint  Babylonian? — The  Babylonian  standpoint  must  at  least  be 
doubtful,  when  so  great  and  free  a  critic  as  Ewald  not  only  failed  to  see  it,  but, 
while  maintaining  the  exilic  date  of  these  chapters,  found  an  entirely  different 
standpoint  or  historic  background  in  them — an  Egyptian.  (J.  Kennedy,  D.D.) 
Professor  Cheyne  not  only  admits  that  there  is  "  a  paucity  of  allusions  in  these 
chapters  to  the  special  circumstances  of  Babylon,"  but  admits  likewise  that  there 
is  not  a  little  of  Palestinian  colouring  in  tbem.  "  Some  passages,"  he  says,  "  of 
'second  Isaiah'  are  in  variable  degrees  really  favourable  to  the  theorypf  a  Palestinian 
origin.  Thus  in  Ivii.  6  the  reference  to  torrent  beds  is  altogether  inapplicable  to 
the  alluvial  plains  of  Babylonia  ;  and  equally  so  is  that  to  subterranean  holes  in 
xlii.  22.  And  though,  no  doubt,  Babylonia  was  more  wooded  in  ancient  times 
than  it  is  at  present,  it  is  certain  that  the  trees  mentioned  in  xli.  19  were  not,  for 
the  most  part,  natives  of  that  country ;  while  the  date-palm,  the  commonest  of  all 
the  Babylonian  trees,  is  not  once  referred  to."  He  admits,  at  the  same  time, 
that  there  are  allusions  in  the  later  chapters  "  which  unmistakably  point  away 
from  the  period  of  the  Exile."  "  They  are  most  numerous,"  he  says,  "  and  striking 
in  chaps,  lvi.,  Ivii.,  lxv.,  lxvi.  Let  us  read  them  by  themselves,  and  I  think  we 
shall  hardly  doubt  that  the  descriptions  refer  to  some  period  or  periods  other  than 
the  Exile."  Isaiah,  he  further  admits,  might  have  learned  in  Palestine  almost 
as  much  about  Babylon  as  is  mentioned  in  the  second  portion  of  the  book,  either 
from  travelling  merchants  or  from  the  ambassadors  of  Merodach  Baladan.  "  The 
only  possible  allusion  of  this  kind  (if  we  may  press  the  letter  of  the  prophecy) 
distinctly  in  favour  of  an  exilic  date  is  that  of  chap.  xlvi.  1  to  the  worship  of  Bel- 
Merodach  Nebo,  which  specially  characterised  the  later  Babylonian  empire.  This 
paucity  of  Babylonian  references  would  be  less  surprising  (for  prophets  and  apostles 
were  not  curious  observers)  were  it  not  for  the  very  specific  allusions  to  Palestinian 
circumstances  in  some  of  the  later  chapters  " :  on  which  the  remark  is  obvious, 
that  with  "  very  specific  allusions  to  Palestinian  circumstances,"  and  only  "  one 
possible  allusion  "  to  what  is  distinctly  Babylonian,  we  may  assume  that,  so  far  as 
local  environment  is  indicated,  the  standpoint  of  the  author  is  not  Babylonian, 
but  Palestinian.  (Ibid.)  Rev.  G.  A.  Smith  says:  "  While  the  bulk  of  chaps, 
zl.  to  lxvi.  were  composed  in  Babylonia  during  the  Exile  of  the  Jews,  there  are 
considerable  portions  which  date  from  before  the  Exile  and  betray  a  Palestinian 
origin  ;  and  one  or  two  smaller  pieces  that  seem — rather  less  evidently,  however — 
to  take  for  granted  the  return  after  the  Exile."  As  to  chaps,  xl.  to  xlviii.,  Mr.  Smith 
holds  very  positively  that  they  are  to  be  dated  in  Babylonia,  and  that  they  form  a 
unity,  being  the  work  of  one  author.  As  to  chaps,  xlix.  to  lxvi.,  the  evidence  he 
regards  as  less  conclusive.  In  chaps,  liv.,  lv.,  he  thinks  we  are  still  in  exile.  "  A 
number  of  short  prophecies  now  follow  till  the  end  of  chap.  lix.  is  reached."  These, 
he  thinks,  make  it  extremely  difficult  to  believe  in  the  original  unity  of  "  second 
Isaiah."  Some  of  them  are  undoubtedly  of  earlier  date.  Such  is  chap.  lvi.  9  to 
Ivii.,  which  regards  the  Exile  as  still  to  come  ;  while  others  of  these  short  prophecies 
are,  he  says,  in  the  opinion  of  some  critics,  post-exilic.  Chap,  lix.,  Mr.  Smith 
says,  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult  portion  of  all ;  chaps.  Ixi.  and  lxii.  he  holds  to  be 
certainly  exilic  ;  chap,  lxiii.  7  to  lxiv.  implies  a  ruined  temple  (lxiv.  11),  but  bears 
no  traces  of  the  writer  being  in  exile  ;  chap.  lxv.  has  been  assigned  by  some  to  the 
same  date  ;  chap.  lxvi.  betrays  more  evidence  of  being  written  after  the  Return. 
Mr.  Smith  considers  himself  "  justified  in  coming  to  the  provisional  conclusion 
that  'second  Isaiah  '  is  not  a  unity,  in  so  far  as  it  consists  of  a  number  of  pieces  by 
different  men  whom  God  raised  up  at  various  times  before,  during,  and  after  th« 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 

Exile,  to  comfort  and  exhort  amid  the  shifting  circumstances  and  tempers  of  the 
people  ;  but  that  it  is  a  unity  in  so  far  as  these  pieces  have  been  gathered  together 
by  an  editor,  very  soon  after  the  return  from  exile,  in  an  order  as  regular  both  in 
point  of  time  and  subject  as  the  somewhat  mixed  material  would  permit."  So  that 
it  is  rather  an  editorial  than  an  original  unity  which  is  apparent."  I  submit 
that  in  the  face  of  these  differences  as  to  what  chapters  in  "second  Isaiah  "  do  or  do 
not  manifest  a  Babylonian  standpoint,  it  is  impossible  to  rely  on  the  assumption 
of  such  a  standpoint  as  an  argument  against  the  authorship  of  the  historic  Isaiah. 
(Ibid.)  The  value  of  the  arguments  from  language  and  style  : — The  assumption 
that  we  can  locate  disjointed  fragments  of  Hebrew  is  to  be  summarily  rejected. 
( Prof.  D.  S.  Margoliouth,  M.A.)  The  diction  of  the  second  part  of  Isaiah  is  tolerably 
pure  and  free  from  Chaldaisms.  (Samuel  Davidson,  D.D.)  There  cannot  be  a 
more  false  canon  of  criticism  than  that  a  man  who  has  written  one  work  will,  when 
writing  a  second,  introduce  no  ideas  and  make  use  of  no  modes  of  expression  that 
are  not  to  be  found  in  the  first.  On  the  contrary,  a  writer  may  be  pronounced 
very  barren  indeed  if  he  exhausts  all  his  ideas  and  expends  all  his  vocabulary 
on  one  production.  (0.  Salmon,  D.D.)  My  own  opinion  is  that  the  peculiar 
expressions  of  the  latter  prophecies  are,  on  the  whole,  not  such  as  to  necessitate 
a  different  linguistic  stage  from  the  historical  Isaiah  ;  and  that,  consequently,  the 
decision  of  the  critical  question  will  mainly  depend  on  other  than  purely  linguistio 
considerations.  (Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D. )  On  the  authority  of  "  great  Hebraists," 
with  scarcely  an  exception,  there  is  no  linguistic  necessity  for  the  theory  of  a  dual 
or  plural  authorship.  (J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  A  supplementary  consideration : — 
It  is  admitted  that  the  man  who  wrote  the  second  part  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  or, 
at  least,  the  greater  part  of  it,  was  himself  intellectually  and  morally  as  great  as,  or 
greater  than,  the  historic  Isaiah.  Our  ideal  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  on  which  so  much 
eloquence  has  been  expended,  is  the  ideal  rather  of  the  man  who  wrote  the  second 
part  than  of  the  man  who  wrote  the  first.  It  is  in  chaps,  xl.  to  xlviii.  especially 
that  we  find  the  origin  of  our  conception  of  Isaiah  as  the  greatest  of  the  Hebrew 
poets.  (Ibid. )  The  prophecies  respecting  Cyrus  : — Josephus  ascribes  the  decree 
of  Cyrus  (Ezra  i.  1,  2)  to  his  having  read  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  or  portions  of  it. 
Quoting  part  of  the  passage  in  which  Cyrus  is  named,  Josephus  says  :  "  This  was 
foretold  by  Isaiah  140  years  before  the  temple  was  destroyed.  Accordingly,  when 
Cyrus  read  this,  and  admired  the  Divine  power,  an  earnest  desire  and  ambition 
seized  upon  him  to  fulfil  what  was  so  written  ;  so  he  called  for  the  most  eminent 
Jews  that  were  in  Babylon,  and  said  to  them,  that  he  gave  them  leave  to  go  back 
to  their  own  country,  and  to  rebuild  their  city  Jerusalem  and  the  temple  of  God  " 
(Antiq.  xi.  1).  From  which  we  gather,  at  the  least,  that  Josephus  had  not  dis- 
covered the  grand  secret  of  the  Higher  Criticism,  that  the  prophecy  concerning 
Cyrus  was  only  two  years  old  when  he  read  it,  if  ever  he  did  read  it  at  all.  (Ibid.) 
The  knowledge  of  the  name  by  the  historic  Isaiah  would,  according  to  Cheyne, 
"  involve  the  necessity  of  assuming  a  suspension  of  the  laws  of  psychology."  But 
a  priori  objections  of  this  sort  must  give  way  before  the  evidence  of  facts.  What, 
after  all,  is  meant  by  a  suspension  of  the  laws  of  psychology  ?  In  this  case  it  can 
only  mean  that  the  discovery  of  the  name  of  Cyrus  was  something  above  the 
operation  of  the  natural  laws  of  the  human  mind.  And  this  is  only  saying,  in  other 
words,  that  it  was  supernatural ; — the  very  thing  we  maintain  concerning  thia 
and  every  other  bona  fide  prediction.  Suppose  we  had  the  prophecy  in  all  respects 
as  it  is,  but  without  the  name.  Instead  of  Cyrus,  let  it  be  only  "  a  king  "  that  shall 
arise  to  "  perform  Jehovah's  pleasure."  Would  all  else  in  the  prophecy  be  discover- 
able by  the  human  mind  ?  Is  there  nothing  supernatural  in  it  but  the  name  t 
Or,  will  it  be  said  that  the  other  contents  of  the  prophecy,  though  not  discoverable 
by  any  natural  operation  of  the  human  mind,  would  be  intelligible  when  made 
known  ?  Then  we  ask.  What  is  there  that  is  unintelligible  in  the  addition  of  the 
name  ?  The  prophet  must  have  known  that  it  was  not  of  himself  that  he  foresaw 
the  deliverance  of  his  nation  by  the  Persian  monarch.  The  authoritative  preface, 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  intimates  the  source  of  his  knowledge.  But  how  the  Lord 
said  it  to  him  he  does  not  say, — probably  could  not  say.  And  the  revealing  the 
name  of  the  deliverer  to  his  mind  would  scarcely  be  a  greater  wonder  to  him  than 
the  revealing  of  the  deliverance  itself,  and  of  the  circumstances  in  which  it  should 
take  place.  The  mention  of  the  name  of  Cyrus  is  not  without  a  parallel  in  an  older 
record  (1  Kings  xiii.  2).  To  suppose  that  "  Josiah  by  name  "  is  an  interpolation 
or  gloss  that  has  slipped  into  the  text  from  the  record  of  its  accomplishment 
(2  Kings  xxiii.  15,  16)  is  an  arbitrary  assumption.     (Ibid.)        Did  Isaiah  form  a 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


prophetic  school  ? — As  to  this  suggestion  of  a  band  of  younger  prophets  who  formed 
the  school  of  Isaiah,  it  is  based  on  a  very  uncertain  foundation,  the  words  in  chap, 
viii.  16,  "  Bind  up  the  testimony,"  &c.  Commentators  differ  in  their  interpretation 
of  this  text,  some  holding  that  the  words  are  the  Lord's,  some  that  they  are  Isaiah's. 
Even  if  we  accept  them  as  Isaiah's,  there  is  no  evidence  that  Isaiah  was  at  the 
head  of  a  school  of  the  prophets,  such  as  we  have  in  the  case  of  Samuel,  and  in  the 
story  of  Elijah  and  Elisha.  And  if  there  were,  it  would  be  impossible  to  connect 
that  school  with  the  origination  of  a  book  which  was  written  during  the  Exile. 
We  should  have  to  suppose  that  the  school  of  Isaiah  survived  through  the  idolatrous 
and  disastrous  reigns  that  followed,  going  into  exile  with  other  captives,  and  still 
existing  during  the  Exile  period,  and  having  a  succession  of  heads  or  masters  all 
that  time.  Such  a  continuous  existence  would  be  a  very  remarkable  phenomenon. 
And  very  remarkable,  too,  is  the  absence  of  all  historic  reference  to  it.  {Ibid.) 
Did  Isaiah  leave  his  prophecies  in  a  fixed  form  ? — In  the  Book  of  Jeremiah  we  are 
told  that  all  the  words  of  the  prophet  were  written  in  a  roll,  and  that  when  the 
king  cut  the  roll  in  pieces  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  the  prophet  commanding 
him  to  have  his  prophecies  rewritten  on  a  new  roll  or  in  a  new  book.  And  it  was 
done  (chap,  xxxvi.  4,  23,  28,  32).  But  as  we  find  no  intimation  of  this  sort  in 
Isaiah,  we  are  asked  to  suppose  that  his  prophecies  were  not  left  by  him  in  a  fixed 
form.  If  this  be  a  correct  inference,  it  follows  that  no  prophet  but  Jeremiah 
left  his  writings  in  a  fixed  form,  i.e.,  on  a  roll  or  in  a  book  !  For  in  none  of  them 
are  we  told  that  he  did.  The  true  inference  from  the  incident  in  Jeremiah  is, 
that  all  the  prophets  were  instructed  of  the  Lord  carefully  to  write  in  a  book  such 
communications  as  the  Divine  Inspirer  willed  to  be  preserved  for  permanent  use. 
It  is  not  credible — ( 1 )  That  Isaiah  should  take  no  trouble  to  certify  his  own  pro- 
phecies ;  and  (2)  that  for  300  years  these  prophecies  should  still  be  uncollected 
into  the  unity  of  a  book,  thus  not  precluding  the  addition  "  of  writings  which 
were  certainly  not  his.     {Ibid.) 

10.  The  historical  chapters,  xxxvt.-xxxix. — An  historical  section,  differing 
(except  by  the  addition  of  the  Song  of  Hezekiah,  xxxviii.  9-20)  only  verbally 
from  2  Kings  xviii.  13,  17-xx.  19,  and  narrating  certain  important  events  in  which 
Isaiah  was  concerned.  The  original  place  of  these  narratives  was  not  the  Book 
of  Isaiah,  but  the  Book  of  Kings,  whence  they  were  excerpted  (with  slight  abridg- 
ments) by  the  compiler  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  (as  Jer.  lii.  was  excerpted  from 
2  Kings  xxiv.  18  ff.  by  the  compiler  of  the  Book  of  Jeremiah),  on  account,  no 
doubt,  of  the  particulars  contained  in  them  respecting  Isaiah's  prophetical  work, 
and  the  fulfilment  of  some  of  his  most  remarkable  prophecies,  the  Song  of  Hezekiah 
being  added  by  him  from  an  independent  source.  (With  xxxvii.  36  f.  compare 
not  only  xxxvii.  7,  22,  29,  but  also  x.  33  f.,  xiv.  25,  xvii.  13  f.,  xviii.  5  f.,  xxix.  6  f., 
xxx.  27  ff.,  xxxi.  8  f.,  xxxiii.  3,  10-12).     (Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.) 

ILL  The  devotional  reading  op  Isaiah. — First  recall  some  of  the  general 
rules  given  by  Thomas  a  Kempis  (Book  I.  chap.  v.).  Speaking  as  one  who  accepts 
a  good  many  of  the  results  of  modern  criticism  as  most  probably  true,  I  should  say 
that  the  Book  of  Isaiah  remains  as  helpful  to  devotion  as  it  ever  was.  We  are 
now  concerned  with  the  contents  of  the  book.  These  lay  before  our  Lord  in  the 
form  in  which  we  read  them  to-day ;  from  these  St.  Philip  preached  Ckcist  to 
the  Ethiopian  eunuch  ;  in  these  St.  Paul  found  some  of  his  most  fruitful  spiritual 
thoughts.  In  our  devotional  reading  we  will  put  aside  such  questions  as  whether 
many  authors  or  one  wrote  the  great  prophetical  book.  I  do  not  say  that  every 
passage  of  Isaiah  is  suitable  for  devotional  use,  and  when  a  verse  is  really  obscure 
in  meaning  I  do  not  think  it  is  right  to  give  it  a  fanciful  explanation,  even  if  by 
bo  doing  a  devotional  use  may  be  made  of  the  verse.  Such  a  proceeding  is  not 
quite  honest,  and,  be  it  remembered,  devotion  is  nothing  if  it  be  not  honest.  Even 
a  cursory  reading  of  Isaiah  will  bring  to  our  knowledge  many  passages  which 
are,  in  the  truest  sense,  helps  to  devotion.  Let  me  take  three  such  passages  aa 
examples — 1.  The  first  (Isa.  xi.  1-9)  may  be  called  a  vision  of  the  kingdom  of 
God.  Here  we  have  an  ideal  picture  of  the  future  ;  how  will  such  a  picture  help 
us  ?  By  guiding  and  quickening  our  devotion.  Devotion  (in  the  fullest  sense 
of  the  word)  means  giving  ourselves  to  God  for  one  of  God's  great  ends.  Our 
own  devotion,  like  St.  Paul's  (Acts  xxii.  10),  needs  to  catch  some  glimpse  of  God's 
great  ends,  in  order  that  it  may  not  spend  itself  in  aimless  feeling.  We  have 
been  taught  to  pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come  "  ;  but  it  is  of  no  avail  to  use  that 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAlt. 


petition  if  we  have  no  notion  of  that  for  which  we  pray.  Here  Isaiah's  vision 
comes  in  to  help  us.  2.  I  would  call  the  second  passage  (Isa.  lii.  13-liii.  12)  a 
Btudy  of  Christ's  Passion.  No  one  can  gainsay  the  fact  that  we  find  here,  in  a 
passage  written  centuries  before  Christ's  coming,  the  very  principles  laid  down 
which  governed  Christ's  atoning  work  on  earth.  The  passage  teaches  us — (1)  To 
look  upon  the  Passion  of  our  Lord  with  wonder.  The  whole  is  a  fathomless 
mystery  of  love.  (2)  To  meditate  on  the  Passion  with  thankfulness  and  with 
confession  of  our  sin.  (3)  The  lesson  of  self-restraint  under  injury  (liii.  7).  The 
very  injuries  inflicted  upon  us  become  helps,  if  they  lead  us  to  humble  ourselves 
in  silence  before  God.  (4)  To  gather  satisfaction  and  even  joy  from  the  story  of 
Christ's  death.  We  learn  that,  however  slow  Christ's  kingdom  may  appear  to 
us  in  its  coming,  the  coming  itself  is  certain  (liii.  11).  3.  The  third  passage 
(lxiii.  7-lxiv.  12)  may  be  called  a  model  prayer  for  one  in  trouble.  It  contains 
the  pleading  of  one  (the  Israelite  nation  is  meant)  who  has  had  a  rich  experience 
of  God's  goodness  in  the  past,  and  is  now  face  to  face  with  crushing  affliction- 
It  is  a  pattern  of  devotion  to  us  for  four  reasons — (1)  It  begins  with  recognising 
the  past  goodness  of  God,  the  sun  now  behind  the  cloud  (lxiii.  9).  If  we  keep 
God's  past  goodness  fresh  in  mind  we  have  something  solid  to  meet  present  trial 
with.  (2)  This  passage  does  not  merely  glance  at  this  goodness,  but  realises  it 
by  tracing  it  step  by  step  (lxiii.  9-14).  So  we  should  not  merely  confess  God's 
guidance  in  our  past  lives  in  general  terms ;  the  true  spirit  of  devotion  will  say, 
here  and  there,  and  here  and  there  again,  in  such  a  year  and  on  such  an  occasion, 
God  helped  me.  (3)  The  prophet  gives  us  an  example  of  steadfastness  in  devotion. 
He  has  not  one  eye  on  God  and  the  other  on  earthly  help.  God  fills  his  thoughts 
(lxiii.  16).  (4)  This  passage  shows  us  man's  part  in  the  day  of  affliction,  namely, 
to  wait  and  to  work  (lxiv.  4,  5).  Few  books  of  the  Bible  offer  such  variety  of 
devotional  help  as  Isaiah.  In  it  speaks  the  evangelist,  the  spiritual  guide,  the 
spiritual  comforter,  in  almost  every  tone  of  the  language  of  the  spiritual  life. 
( W.  Emery  Barnes,  D.D.) 


The  Sermons  by  Rev.  C  H.  Spurgeoa  la  thU  volume  are  used  by  permission  od  Mesar* 
Passmore  &  Alabaster. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

ISAIAH. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Ver.  1.  The  vision  of  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz. — Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz:— 
This  is  not  Amos  the  inspired  herdsman.  It  is  his  glory  simply  that  he  was  the 
father  of  Isaiah.  Like  many  another  he  lives  in  the  reflected  glory  of  his  offspring. 
The  next  best  thing  to  being  a  great  man  is  to  be  the  father  of  one.  (8.  Horton.) 
Isaiah's  father : — The  rabbis  represent  his  father  Amoz  as  having  been  a  brother 
of  King  Amaziah ;  but,  at  anyrate,  if  we  may  judge  from  his  illustrious  son's 
name,  which  means  "  salvation  is  from  Jehovah,"  he  was  loyal  to  the  national 
faith  in  days  clouded  by  sore  troubles,  political  danger  threatening  from  without, 
and  deep  religious  decay  pervading  all  classes  of  the  community.  (C.  Geikie, 
LL.D.)  The  vision  of  Isaiah  : — The  word  "  vision  "  is  used  here  in  the  wide 
sense  of  a  collection  of  prophetic  oracles  (Nah.  i.  1  ;  Obad.  i.).  As  the  prophet 
was  called  a  "  seer,"  and  his  perception  of  Divine  truth  was  called  "  seeing," 
so  his  message  as  a  whole  is  termed  a  "  vision."  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
The  time  when  Isaiah  prophesied  : — Why  does  the  Bible  tell  us  so  particularly 
the  time  when  Isaiah  prophesied  ?  Does  not  the  thinker  belong  to  all  the  ages  ? 
Does  not  the  poet  sing  for  all  time  ?  Why  weight  the  narrative  with  these  chrono- 
logical details  ?  Because  you  can  only  judge  either  a  man  or  his  message  by 
knowing  the  circumstances  of  his  time.  If  you  take  a  geologist  a  new  specimen 
he  not  only  wants  to  know  its  genus  and  species,  but  the  matrix  out  of  which  it 
was  hewn.  The  best  men  not  only  help  to  make  their  times,  but  their  times  help 
to  make  them.  He  who  is  moulded  entirely  by  his  surroundings  is  a  human 
jelly-fish — of  no  account.  He  who  is  not  influenced  at  all  by  "  the  play  of  popular 
passion "  —  the  set  of  public  opinion  —  is  an  anachronism,  a  living  corpse. 
(8.  Horton.)  Isaiah's  wanly  outspokenness  : — It  is  a  living  man  who  speaks 
to  us.  This  is  not  an  anonymous  book.  Much  value  attaches  to  personal  testi- 
mony. The  true  witness  is  not  ashamed  of  day  and  date  and  all  the  surrounding 
chronology ;  we  know  where  to  And  him,  what  he  sprang  from,  who  he  is,  and 
what  he  wants.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2-31.  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth :  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken. — 
God  finds  vindication  in  nature  : — I  well  remember  two  funerals  going  out  of  my 
house  within  a  few  brief  months  during  my  residence  in  London.  There  were 
cards  sent  by  post  and  left  at  the  door,  in  all  kindliness  ;  but  one  dark  night  when 
my  grief  overwhelmed  me  I  looked  at  some  of  the  cards  and  could  find  no  vibration 
of  sympathy  there.  I  had  not  felt  the  touch  of  the  hand  that  sent  them.  I  went 
out  into  the  storm  that  moaned  and  raged  alternately,  and  walked  round  Regent's 
Park  through  the  very  heart  of  the  hurricane.  It  seemed  to  soothe  me.  You 
say  I  could  not  find  sympathy  there.  Perhaps  not,  but  I  at  least  found  affinity  : 
the  storm  without  seemed  to  harmonise  with  the  storm  within ;  and  then  I 
remembered  that  He  who  sent  that  storm  to  sweep  over  the  earth  loved  the  earth 
still,  and  then  remembered  that  He  who  sent  the  storm  to  sweep  over  my  soul, 
and  make  desolate  my  home,  loved  me  still.  I  got  comfort  there  in  the  darkness, 
and  the  wild  noise  of  a  storm  on  an  autumn  night,  which  I  found  not  in  cards  of 
condolence,  sincere  as  in  many  instances  the  sympathy  of  the  senders  was.     Ah 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

me  !  when  man  not  only  failed  to  sympathise,  but  also  forgot  all  gratitude  and 
rebelled  against  his  Heavenly  Father,  I  can  imagine  God  looking  out  to  His  own 
universe,  to  the  work  of  His  own  hand,  and  seeking  vindication,  if  not  sympathy, 
as  He  spoke  of  man,  his  rebellion  and  folly.  (D.  Dairies.)  The  sinjvl  nation : — 
I.  The  privileges  of  the  nation.  It  was  no  mean  prerogative  to  become  the 
chosen  people  of  God,  but  for  what  was  that  choice  made  ?  Not  because  of 
perfect  characters  surely  ;  but  rather  to  declare  among  the  nations  the  messages 
of  God  ;  not  a  nation  holy  in  character,  but  with  a  holy  errand.  When  the  ten 
tribes  revolted,  leaving  only  a  remnant,  that  remnant  must  do  the  errand  appointed. 
Thus  did  God  speak  of  them  as  "  My  people,"  "  My  children."  Our  privileges 
cannot  save  us,  and  even  our  blessings  may  become  a  curse.  God  cannot  give 
to  us  personally  what  we  will  not  receive.  II.  The  national  corruption. 
What  the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  in  the  New  Testament, 
that  is  the  first  chapter  of  Isaiah's  prophecy  in  the  Old.  Deeper  degradation 
than  that  of  Israel  it  would  be  hard  to  find.  In  Isaiah's  time,  gold  and  silver 
idols  glittered  on  every  street  of  Jerusalem.     By  royal  authority,  worship  was 

fiven  to  the  sun  and  moon.  At  the  opening  of  each  new  season,  snow-white 
orses,  stalled  in  the  rooms  at  the  temple  entrance,  were  driven  forth  harnessed 
to  golden  chariots  to  meet  the  sun  at  its  rising.  Incense  ascended  to  heathen 
gods  from  altars  built  upon  the  streets.  Vice  had  its  impure  rites  in  the  temple 
itself.  The  valley  of  Hinnom  echoed  the  dying  screams  of  children  offered  aa 
sacrifices  in  the  terrible  flames  of  the  hideous  Moloch.  Words  fail  in  depicting 
the  deep  corruption.  There  is  the  sting  of  sin  in  the  plain  statement  of  the  awful 
history,  "  They  have  forsaken  the  Lord,"  &c.  III.  The  relation  of  ritual 
to  morality.  The  more  pronounced  the  ceremonial,  the  more  tenaciously 
will  men  cling  to  it.  Thus,  in  Isaiah's  day,  they  who  had  swung  their  incense  to 
the  sun  and  moon ;  who  had  worshipped  Baal  upon  the  high  places  and  in  the 
groves ;  who  had  cast  their  children  into  the  burning  arms  of  Moloch,  turned 
immediately  from  these  heathenish  practices  to  worship  in  the  temple.  Of  burnt- 
offerings  and  sacrifices  there  was  no  end.  The  purest  spiritual  worship,  like  that 
of  Enoch  and  Abraham  and  Melchizedek,  did  not  need  it ;  it  was  given  when  a 
nation  of  slaves,  degraded  by  Egyptian  bondage,  could  appreciate  nothing  higher, 
and  it  was  taken  away  when  the  true  light  was  come.  There  was  neither  perfection 
nor  spirituality  in  such  a  ritual ;  yet  in  such  a  system  God  tried  to  elevate  the 
nation  to  spiritual  truths  they  could  not  yet  apprehend.  The  ritual  could  not 
make  morality.  IV.  Any  worship  to  please  God  must  be  reasonable.  The 
Divine  appeal  claims  the  undivided  attention  of  the  profoundest  thoughts ; 
"  Come,  now,  and  let  us  reason  together."  (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)  The 
sinjvl  nation : — The  message  to  the  "  sinful  nation  "  with  which  the  book  of 
Isaiah  begins  has  for  ourselves  the  tremendous  force  of  timeliness  as  well  as  truth. 
I.  We  are  led  to  consider,  that  state  and  nation  are  involved  together. 
The  country  is  "  desolate,"  the  cities  are  "  burned  with  fire,"  "  and  the  daughter 
of  Zion  is  left  as  a  cottage  in  a  vineyard,  as  a  lodge  in  a  garden  of  cucumbers,  as  a 
besieged  city."  We  remember  indeed  that  the  saints  have  survived  in  "  the  dena 
and  caves  of  the  earth."  But  these  victories  of  truth  and  righteousness — God's 
power  to  overrule  wickedness — by  no  means  contradict  Isaiah's  vision.  If  it  ia 
true  that  the  Founder  of  the  Church  can  maintain  its  strength  notwithstanding 
civil  turmoil  and  decay,  let  us  also  consider  how  God  magnifies  the  Church  through 
days  of  peace  and  virtue.  Jesus  Himself  waited  until  the  nations  were  still. 
And  what  may  be  the  possibilities  for  His  kingdom  of  the  continued  growth  and 
happiness  of  our  own  country,  it  is  entrancing  to  contemplate.  The  treasuries 
of  love,  how  full  they  may  be  !  The  pastors  and  teachers  for  every  dark  land, — 
what  hosts  there  may  be  prepared  !  II.  Aroused  to  the  consideration  of  such  a 
problem,  we  readily  appreciate  the  prophet's  reference  to  the  responsibility 
of  rulers  (ver.  10).  Our  own  happy  visions  of  the  future  may  all  be  over- 
clouded if  there  be  but  one  Ahab  in  authority.  The  exhortation,  therefore, 
addresses  those  who  as  citizens  are  to  be  charged  with  the  duty  of  placing  men  in 
power.  III.  We  find  the  prophet  distinctly  tracing  the  national  calamities 
to  the  nation's  wickedness  (vers.  4-8).    IV.  The  prophet's  message  to  ma 

COUNTRYMEN  IS  PARTICULARLY  DIRECTED    AGAINST   THEIR  IMPIETY.      They  have 

forms  of  religion  enough,  indeed.  But  out  of  the  people's  worship  the  heart  and 
life  have  departed.  Only  the  husks  remain.  Perhaps  it  will  be  seen  in  the  end 
that  the  Pharisee  is  not  only  as  bad,  but  as  bad  a  citizen  too,  as  the  glutton  and 
the  winebibber.    The  Pharisaic  poison  works  with  a  more  stealthy  force  and 


chap.  L]  ISAIAH.  3 

makes  its  attacks  upon  more  vital  parts.  We  are  to  look  not  only  for  a  sinful 
nation's  natural  decay,  but  besides  for  those  mighty  interpositions  of  Providence 
in  flood  and  famine,  in  pestilence  and  war,  directly  for  its  punishment  and  over- 
throw. V.  The  value  op  a  "  remnant."  God  has  been  saving  remnants 
from  the  beginning — Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  Nehemiah — and  the  little  companies 
of  which  such  souls  are  the  centre  and  the  life  in  every  age.  God's  plans  are  not 
spoiled  by  man's  madness.  If  many  rebel  against  Him,  He  saves  the  few  and 
multiplies  their  power.  The  leaven  leavens  the  whole  lump  again.  VI.  Most 
impressive,  therefore,  is  the  tender  and  emphatic  proclamation  op  mercy 
and  pardon  in  this  chapter.     (Hanford  A.  Edson,  D.D.)        The  sinful  nation: — 

1.  The  writer  (ver.  1).  II.  The  character  of  the  people  (vers.  2-6).  III.  The 
fruits  of  this  character  (vers.  7-9).  IV.  False  efforts  to  obtain  relief 
(vers.  10-15).  Murderers  may  be  found  at  church,  making  their  attendance 
a  cloak  for  their  iniquity  or  an  atonement  for  their  crime.  God  cannot  become 
a  party  to  such  horrible  trading.  V.  The  true  way  of  deliverance  (vers.  16-18). 
God  not  only  describes  the  disease,  but  provides  the  remedy.  The  fountain  is 
provided ;  sinners  must  wash  in  it- — must  confess,  forsake,  get  the  right  spirit, 
and  do  right.  (J.  Sanderson,  D.D.)  Isaiah's  sermon: — The  sermon  which 
is  contained  in  this  chapter  hath  in  it — I.  A  high  charge  exhibited  in  God's 
name  against  the  Jewish  Church  and  nation.     1.  For  their  ingratitude  (vers.  2,  3). 

2.  For  their  incorrigibleness  (ver.  5).  3.  For  the  universal  corruption  and  de- 
generacy of  the  people  (vers.  4,  6,  21,  22).  4.  For  their  rulers'  perverting  of 
justice  (ver.  23).  LI.  A  sad  complaint  of  the  judgments  of  God  which  they 
had  brought  upon  themselves  by  their  sins,  and  by  which  they  were  brought 
almost  to  utter  ruin  (vers.  7-9).  III.  A  just  rejection  of  those  shows  and 
shadows  of  religion  which  they  kept  up  among  them,  notwithstanding  this 
general  defection  and  apostasy  (vers.  10-15).  IV.  An  earnest  call  to  re- 
pentance and  reformation,  setting  before  them  life  and  death  (vers.  16-20). 
V.  A  threatening  of  ruin  to  those  that  would  not  be  reformed  (vers. 
24,  28-31).  VI.  A  promise  of  a  happy  reformation  at  last,  and  a  return 
to  their  primitive  purity  and  prosperity  (vers.  25-27).  And  all  this  is  to  be 
applied  by  us,  not  only  to  the  communities  we  are  members  of,  in  their  public- 
interests,  but  to  the  state  of  our  own  souls.  (M.  Henry.)  A  last  appeal : — 
The  prophets  are  God's  storm  signals.  This  was  a  crisis  in  Israel's  history. 
Mercy  and  judgment  had  alike  failed.  The  mass  of  the  people  had  become  more 
hardened.  Judgment  alone  had  now  become  the  only  real  mercy.  The  prophet 
was  sent  to  make  a  last  appeal ;  to  warn  of  judgment.  I.  The  charge.  They 
have  proved  unnatural  children.  Have  disowned  their  Father.  Have  failed 
to  meet  the  claims  due  from  them.  Have  frustrated  the  purpose  of  their  national 
existence.  Have,  as  a  nation,  wholly  abandoned  themselves  to  sin.  In  spite 
of  exceptional  privileges,  they  have  lowered  themselves  beneath  the  level  of  the 
brutes.  Nature  witnesses  against  them,  and  puts  them  to  shame.  II.  The 
defence.  The  prophet  imagines  them  to  point  to  their  temple  services, — so 
regular,  elaborate,  costly, — in  proof  that  their  natural  relations  to  their  Father 
have  been  maintained.  But  this  common  self-delusion  is  disallowed,  exposed, 
repelled.  Not  ritual,  not  laborious  costly  worship  is  required,  but  sincerity  of 
heart,  integrity  of  purpose,  rightness  of  mind.  Acceptable  religious  observance 
must  be  the  spontaneous  expression  of  an  inward  religious  life.  III.  The  offer 
of  mercy.  But  the  day  of  grace  is  not  even  yet  past.  One  last  attempt  is  yet 
made  to  arouse  the  sleeping  spiritual  sensibilities  of  the  nation  by  the  offer  of 
pardon.  Reconciliation  is  possible  only  upon  amendment.  IV.  The  threat 
of  judgment.  Fire  alone  can  now  effect  the  change  desired.  God  cannot  be 
evaded.  He  is  as  truly  merciful  in  threatening  as  in  offering  pardon.  The 
nation  shall  be  purged,  yet  not  destroyed.  Evil  shall  be  consumed.  But  those 
who,  like  gold,  can  stand  the  fire  and  come  out  purified  shall  be  the  nucleus  of 
an  ideal  society,  and  remodel  the  national  life.  All  social  amendment  has  its 
roots  in  complete  purification  of  individual  hearts.  The  prophet's  dream  was 
never  realised.  Yet  it  was  not  therefore  wasted.  It  was  an  ideal,  an  inspira- 
tion to  the  good  in  after  ages.  It  will  one  day  be  realised  through  the  Gospel. 
(Lloyd Robinson.)  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  re- 
belled against  Me. — The  Fatherhood  of  God  in  relation  to  Israel : — Israel  is  Jehovah's 
eon  (Exod.  iv.  22,  &c.) ;  all  the  members  of  the  nation  are  His  children  (Deut.  xir.  1, 
xxxii.  20) ;  He  is  the  Father  of  Israel,  whom  He  has  begotten  (Deut.  xxxiL  6,  18). 
The  existence  of  Israel  as  a  nation,  like  that  of  other  nations,  is  effected,  indeed 


4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

by  means  of  natural  reproduction,  not  by  spiritual  regeneration  ;  but  the  primary 
ground  of  Israel's  origin  is  the  supernaturally  efficacious  word  of  grace  addressed 
to  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  15,  &c.) ;  and  a  series  of  wonderful  dealings  in  grace  has 
brought  the  growth  and  development  of  Israel  to  that  point  which  it  had  attained 
at  the  Exodus  from  Egypt.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  Jehovah  has  begotten  Ie  ael. 
(F.  Delitzsch.)  Israel's  apostasy  : — Two  things  that  ought  never  to  have  been 
conjoined — I.  The  gracious  and  filial  relation  of  Israel  to  Jehovah. 
II.  Israel's  base  apostasy  from  Jehovah.  (Ibid.)  The  Fatherhood  of 
Qod  in  the  Old  Testament  /—Sometimes  we  imagine  that  the  Fatherhood  of  God 
is  a  New  Testament  revelation ;  we  speak  of  the  prophets  as  referring  to  God 
under  titles  of  resplendent  glory  and  overpowering  majesty,  and  we  set  forth 
in  contrast  the  gentler  terms  by  which  the  Divine  Being  is  designated  in  the  new 
covenant.  How  does  God  describe  Himself  in  this  chapter  ?  Here  He  claims 
to  be  Father:  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  sons — not,  I  have  nourished 
and  brought  up  slaves — or  subjects — or  creatures — or  insects — or  beasts  of 
burden — I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  sons :  I  am  the  Father  of  creation, 
the  fountain  and  origin  of  the  paternal  and  filial  religion.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Ingratitude  : — As  the  Dead  Sea  drinks  in  the  river  Jordan  and  is  never  the  sweeter, 
and  the  ocean  all  other  rivers  and  is  never  the  fresher,  so  we  are  apt  to  receive 
daily  mercies  from  God  and  still  remain  insensible  to  them — unthankful  for 
them.  (Bishop  Reynolds.)  God  man's  truest  Friend : — We  are  obliged  to 
speak  of  the  Lord  after  the  manner  of  men,  and  in  doing  so  we  are  clearly  author- 
ised to  say  that  He  does  not  look  upon  human  sin  merely  with  the  eye  of  a  judge 
who  condemns  it,  but  with  the  eye  of  a  friend  who,  while  he  censures  the  offender, 
deeply  laments  that  there  should  be  such  faults  to  condemn.  "  Hear,  0  heavens, 
and  give  ear,  0  earth :  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have 
rebelled  against  Me,"  is  not  merely  an  exclamation  of  surprise,  or  an  accusation 
of  injured  justice,  but  it  contains  a  note  of  grief,  as  though  the  Most  High  repre- 
sented Himself  to  us  as  mourning  like  an  ill-treated  parent,  and  deploring  that 
after  having  dealt  so  well  with  His  offspring  they  had  made  Him  so  base  a  return. 
God  is  grieved  that  man  should  sin.  That  thought  should  encourage  every  one 
who  is  conscious  of  having  offended  God  to  come  back  to  Him.  If  thou  lamentest 
thy  transgression,  the  Lord  laments  it  too.  (0.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  parental 
grief  of  Qod,  and  its  pathetic  appeal  (with  ver.  3)  .• — I  look  upon  this  text 
as  a  fragment  of  Divine  autobiography,  and  as  suoh  possessing  the  greatest 
significance  to  us.  I.  It  presents  to  us  in  a  striking  manner  the  social  side 
of  God's  character.  It  is  well  for  us  to  remember  that  all  that  is  tender  and 
lovable  in  our  social  experience,  so  far  as  it  is  pure  and  noble,  is  obtained  from 
God.  The  revelation  which  we  have  of  God  presents  Him  to  us,  not  as  isolated 
from  all  His  creatures,  but  as  finding  His  highest  joy  in  perfect  communion  with 
exalted  spirits  whom  He  has  created.  I  love  to  think  that  man  exists  because 
of  this  exalted  social  instinct  in  God.  Further,  when  God  said,  "  It  is  not  good 
that  the  man  should  be  alone,"  methinks  I  hear  but  the  echo  of  a  Divine,  of  a  God- 
felt  feeling.  Among  the  mysteries  of  Christ's  passion  we  find  an  element  of 
suffering  which,  as  God  and  man,  He  felt — "  Ye  shall  leave  Me  alone  "  ;  "  My 
God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  T "  Our  God  is  to  us  an  object  of 
supremest  interest  because  He  holds  with  us  the  most  sacred  relationship. 
II.  Our  text  represents  God  on  the  domestic  side  of  His  character.  It  is  the 
parental  rather  than  the  paternal  that  we  see  here.  The  word  father  does  not 
express  all  that  God  is  to  us.  The  illustrations  of  this  Book  are  not  exhausted 
with  those  that  refer  to  His  fatherhood  :  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child," 
&c.  (Isa.  xlix.  15).  All  that  is  tender  in  motherhood,  as  well  as  all  that  is 
strong  in  fatherhood,  is  to  be  found  in  Him.  It  is  as  a  parent  that  He  speaks 
here:  "I  have  nourished"  —  or  "given  nutriment."  In  other  words,  "Out 
of  My  rich  resources  of  blessing  have  I  provided  for  their  need  ;  I  have  nourished 
and  Drought  up  children."  Here  we  have  God's  grief  revealed  in  the  light  which 
can  only  come  through  such  tender  and  loving  channels  as  parental  patience 
and  wounded  love.  III.  Our  text  reveals  God's  character  in  its  reproving 
aspect.  The  folly  is  emphasised  by  the  comparison  with  two  creatures,  by  no 
means  noted  for  their  intelligence.  Yet  both  are  domesticated  creatures,  and 
feel  the  ties  of  ownership.  What  is  it  that  domesticates  a  creature  ?  The 
creature  that  recognises  man  as  his  master,  by  that  very  act  becomes  domesticated. 
The  higher  type  of  knowledge  possessed  by  the  domesticated  animal  is  a  direct 
recognition  of  its  master.     The  finest  creatures  possess  that.     There  is  a  lower 


chap.  1.1  ISAIAH.  B 

grade  of  knowledge,  but  yet  one  which  stamps  the  creature  as  domesticated. 
That  is  an  acknowledgment,  not  of  the  master  directly,  but  a  recognition  of  the 
provision  which  the  master  has  made  for  its  need.  "  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner." 
The  ass  does  not  do  that ;  but  the  ass  knoweth  "  his  master's  crib."  The  ass 
knows  the  stall  where  it  is  fed,  and  it  goes  and  is  fed  there.  By  that  act  it 
indirectly  acknowledges  the  sovereignty  of  its  owner,  because  it  recognises  his 
protection.  IV.  The  text  presents  to  us  the  tender  and  pathetic  side  of 
God's  character.  This  is  God's  version  of  human  sin.  His  rebukes  are  full 
of  pathos.  With  the  great  mantle  of  charity  that  covers  over  a  multitude  of 
Bins,  and  with  the  Divine  pity  that  puts  the  best  construction  upon  human  re- 
bellion, He  puts  all  down  to  ignorance  and  folly.  Observe  further,  that  although 
they  have  rebelled  against  Him,  He  does  not  withdraw  the  name  He  gave  them, 
Israel — "  Israel  doth  not  know :  My  people  doth  not  consider."  He  does  not 
repudiate  them.  The  last  thing  that  love  can  do  is  that.  There  is  something 
exceedingly  pathetic  in  God  here  making  an  appeal  to  creation  relative  to  His 
relationship  with  man.  What  if  it  gave  a  relief  to  the  heart  of  God  to  exclaim 
to  His  own  creation  that  groaned  with  Him  over  human  sin,  "  Hear,  O  heavens, 
and  give  ear,  O  earth  !  "  Am  I  imagining  ?  Do  we  not  find  a  Divine  as  well 
as  human  feeling  in  Christ's  going  to  the  wilderness  or  the  mountain  top  in  the 
hours  of  His  greatest  need  ?  There,  amid  God's  creation,  He  found  His  Father 
very  near.  Here  the  fact  that  the  child  does  not  know  his  Heavenly  Father 
is  represented  as  tbe  burden  of  God's  grief.  But  in  this  case  the  ignorance  was 
wilful.  This  was  the  burden  on  the  heart  of  Christ  in  His  prayer  (John  xvii. ). 
There  everything  is  made  to  depend  upon  men  knowing  God  as  their  Father. 
That  is  just  why  we  preach.  We  seek  to  make  it  impossible  for  you  to  pass 
through  God's  world,  and  receive  from  His  hands  blessings  great  and  boundless, 
and  yet  not  know  Him.  We  seek  to  make  it  impossible  for  you  to  look  at  the 
Cross  and  listen  to  the  story  of  an  infinite  sacrifice,  and  yet  forget  that  "  God 
bo  loved  the  world,"  &c.  (D.  Davies.)  The  heinousness  of  rebellion  against  God's 
paternal  government  : — The  criminality  of  rebellion  must,  of  course,  be  affected  by 
the  nature  of  the  government  and  administration  against  which  it  is  exerted.  It 
must  be  measured  by  the  mildness  and  propriety  of  the  system  whose  authority 
it  renounces,  and  by  the  patience,  lenity,  and  wisdom  with  which  that  system 
is  administered.  If  the  government  be  despotic  in  its  character,  and  administered 
with  implacable  or  ferocious  sternness,  it  can  hardly  be  unlawful,  and  may  be 
deserving  of  commendation.  If  the  government  be  paternal  in  its  character 
and  administered  with  paternal  sensibilities,  then  criminal  to  a  degree  absolutely 
appalling.  I.  The  paternal  government  op  God.  This  is  seen  in — 1.  The 
object  of  its  precepts.  The  entire  and  simple  aim  of  all  and  every  one  of  His 
commands,  and  the  motives  by  which  He  urges  them,  appear  to  be  an  advance- 
ment in  knowledge,  holiness,  and  felicity,  that  we  may  be  fitted  for  His  own 
presence  and  intimate  communion ;  for  the  exalted  dignities  and  interminable 
bliss  of  the  realms  where  His  honour  dwelleth.  2.  The  length  of  His  forbear- 
ance. Who  but  a  father,  surpassing  all  below  that  have  honoured  this  endearing 
name,  could  have  borne  so  long  and  so  meekly,  with  the  thankless,  the  wayward, 
the  audacious,  the  provoking  !  Who  but  a  father,  such  as  Heaven  alone  can 
furnish,  would  return  good  for  evil,  and  blessing  for  cursing,  hundreds  and  thou- 
sands of  years,  and  then,  when  any  finite  experimenter  had  utterly  despaired, 
resolve  to  vanquish  his  enemies,  not  by  terror,  wasting  and  woe,  but  by  the  omni- 
potence of  grace  and  mercy  !  Who  but  a  God,  and  a  paternal  God,  would  have 
closed  such  a  strange  and  melancholy  history  as  that  of  Israel,  by  sending  "  His 
Son  into  the  world,  not  to  condemn  the  world,"  &c.  3.  The  nature  of  His  tender- 
ness. The  philanthropist  commiserates  the  distresses  of  his  fellow-creatures, 
and  magnanimously  resolves  to  meliorate  them.  But  he  is  not  animated  by  that 
lively,  that  overpowering,  self-sacrificing  tenderness  which  prompts  the  exertions 
of  a  father  in  behalf  of  his  suffering  child.  No ;  that  tenderness  shrinks  from 
no  expenditure,  falters  before  no  obstacles.  And  such  was  the  tenderness  of  God, 
for  it  is  not  said  that  He  so  pitied,  but  that  "  He  so  loved  the  world  as  to  give 
His  only  begotten  Son,"  &o.     II.  If  sin  bh  the  resistance  op  the  commands 

AND  CLAIMS,  THE  MOTIVES  AND  EXPOSTULATIONS,  THE  GRACE  AND  MERCY  OP  ONB 
WHO  HAS  GIVEN   ITS   SUCH  ILLUSTRIOUS    PROOFS    OP  HIS  PATERNAL  REGARD   AND 

goodness — can  it  be  other  than  rebellion  ?  Can  it  be  other  than  rebellion 
of  a  most  aggravated  character  T  The  consideration  should  silence  every  whisper 
of  pretension  to  meritorious   virtue,  and   stir  up  the  sentiments  of  profound 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v 

contrition.     It  should  take  every  symptom  of  stubbornness  away,  and  make  us 
self-accusing,  lowly,  and  brokenhearted.    (T.  W.  Coit.) 

Ver.  3.  The  oz  knoweth  his  owner  .  .  .  hut  Israel  doth  not  know. — Isaiah's 
message : — What  does  Isaiah  teach  about  God  ?  A  prophet  of  his  times  had 
much  to  do  in  clearing  the  minds  of  the  people  from  the  confusion,  or  some- 
thing worse,  into  which,  as  the  history  shows,  the  Jews  were  only  too  prone  to  fall. 
They  were  surrounded  by  idolatrous  nations,  and  there  was  a  danger  that  they 
might  regard  Jehovah  as  though  He  were  like  these  gods  of  the  nations.  Even 
when  they  did  not  sink  to  this  level  they  wereprone  to  regard  Him  as  their  national 
God,  not  as  the  God  of  all  the  earth.  I.  What  the  prophet  sought  to  do  was  to 
communicate  to  them  something  of  that  view  of  the  majesty  of  His  glory  and 
the  beauty  of  His  holiness  which  had  impressed  itself  so  deeply  on  his  own  mind. 
He  had  seen  God,  and  he  would  fain  have  them  see  Him  also.  And  where  can  we 
search  for  more  sublime  conceptions  of  the  spirituality,  the  holiness,  the  majesty 
of  God  than  those  which  we  find  in  this  book  ?  II.  But  the  teaching  of  the  prophet 
includes  another  conception  of  God  which  we  should  be  still  less  prepared  to  find 
in  the  Old  Testament.  If  the  lofty  conceptions  of  the  Divine  spirituality  surprise, 
still  more  are  we  impressed  with  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  tenderness  and 
thought  for.  man.  This  is  the  basis  of  all  those  urgent  appeals  addressed  by 
Isaiah  to  his  own  generation.  The  first  chapter  strikes  the  keynote.  Here  is 
not  a  distant  God  so  absorbed  in  the  care  of  His  vast  empire  that  He  has  no  remem- 
brance of  His  poor  children  here,  and  so  far  removed  that  between  Him  and  them 
there  can  be  no  sympathy.  The  prevailing  note  is  that  for  which  we  are  least 
prepared — that  of  Love.  There  is  no  dallying  with  the  sin.  The  apostasy  of 
the  people  is  set  forth  in  its  darkest  aspects,  and  the  enormity  of  the  rebellion 
only  serves  to  make  more  conspicuous  the  glory  of  the  grace  which  is  proclaimed  to 
these  sinners.  All  their  iniquity,  their  ingratitude,  their  pride  of  heart,  their 
forgetfulness  of  God  have  not  turned  the  heart  of  their  God  from  them.  Surely 
these  are  wondrous  teachings  to  find  in  this  old  world  record.  Isaiah  had  them 
from  God  Himself.  (J.  0.  Rogers,  B.A.)  The  inconsiderateness  of  mankind 
towards  Ood  : — I.  A  serious  fault,  common,  yea,  universal.  "  Israel  doth  not 
know,  My  people  doth  not  consider."  1.  Men  are  most  inconsiderate  towards  God. 
One  would  pardon  them  if  they  forgot  many  minor  things,  and  neglected  many 
inferior  persons,  but  to  be  inconsiderate  to  their  Creator,  to  their  Preserver,  to 
Him  in  whose  hand  their  everlasting  destiny  is  placed,  this  is  a  strange  folly  as 
well  as  a  great  sin.  If  it  were  only  because  He  is  so  great,  and  therefore  we  are 
so  dependent  upon  Him,  one  would  have  thought  that  a  rational  man  would  have 
acquainted  himself  with  God  and  been  at  peace ;  but  when  we  reflect  that  God 
is  supremely  good,  kind,  tender  and  gracious,  as  well  as  great,  the  marvel  of  man's 
thoughtlessness  is  much  increased.  2.  Then,  again,  man  is  inconsiderate  towards 
himself  in  reference  to  his  best  interests.  3.  Thoughtless  man  is  inconsiderate 
of  the  claims  of  justice  and  of  gratitude,  and  this  makes  him  appear  base  as  well 
as  foolish.  The  text  says,  "  Israel  doth  not  know."  Now,  Israel  is  a  name  of 
nobility,  it  signifies  a  prince ;  and  there  are  some  here  whose  position  in  society, 
whose  condition  amongst  their  fellow-men,  should  oblige  them  to  the  service  of 
God.  That  motto  is  true,  "  noblesse  oblige" — nobility  has  its  obligations ;  and 
where  the  Lord  elevates  a  man  into  a  position  of  wealth  and  influence,  he  ought 
to  feel  that  he  is  under  peculiar  bonds  to  serve  the  Lord.  I  speak  also  to  those 
who  have  been  trained  in  the  fear  of  God.  To  you  more  is  given,  and  therefore 
of  you  more  is  required.  4.  One  sad  point  about  this  inconsiderateness  is,  that 
man  lives  without  consideration  upon  a  matter  where  nothing  but  consideration 
will  avail.  5.  This  inconsideration,  also,  occurs  upon  a  subject  where,  by  the 
testimony  of  tens  of  thousands,  consideration  would  be  abundantly  remunerative, 
and  would  yield  the  happiest  results.  II.  Aggravations  which  attend  it,  in 
many  cases.  1.  And  first,  remember  that  some  of  these  careless  persous  have 
had  their  attention  earnestly  directed  to  the  topics  which  still  they  neglect. 
Observe  in  this  passage  that  these  people  had  been  summoned  by  God  to  consider. 
The  heavens  and  the  earth  were  called  to  bear  witness  that  they  had  been  nourished 
and  brought  up  by  the  good  Father,  and  in  the  fourth  verse  they  are  rebuked 
because  they  continue  to  be  so  unmindful  of  their  God.  Now,  if  a  person  should 
for  a  while  forget  an  important  thing,  we  should  not  be  surprised,  for  the  memory 
is  not  perfect ;  but  when  attention  is  called  to  it  again  and  again,  when  considera- 
tion is  requested  kindly,  tenderly,  earnestly,  and  when  because  the  warning  is 


chap.  I.]  ISAIAH.  7 

neglected,  that  attention  is  demanded  with  authority,  and  possibly  with  a 
degree  of  sharpness,  one  feels  that  a  man  who  is  still  unmindful  is  altogether 
without  excuse,  and  must  be  negligent  of  set  purpose  and  with  determined  design. 

2.  The  prophet  then  mentions  the  second  aggravation,  namely,  that  in  addition 
to  being  called  and  admonished,  these  people  had  been  chastened.  They  had 
been  chastised,  indeed,  so  often  and  so  severely  that  the  Lord  wearied  of  it.  He 
«aw  no  use  in  smiting  them  any  more.  Their  whole  body  was  covered  with 
bruises,  they  had  been  so  sorely  smitten.  The  nation  as  a  nation  had  been  so 
invaded  and  trodden  down  by  its  enemies  that  it  was  utterly  desolate,  and  the 
Lord  says,  "  Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  more  ?  Ye  will  revolt  more  and 
more."  I  may  be  addressing  some  one  whose  life  of  late  has  been  a  series  of 
sorrows.  Know  you  not  that  all  these  are  sent  to  wean  you  from  the  world  ? 
Will  you  still  cling  to  it  ?  Must  the  Lord  strike  again  and  again,  and  again  and 
again,  before  you  will  hear  Him  ?  3.  It  was  an  additional  piece  of  guiltiness  that 
these  people  were  all  the  while  that  they  would  not  consider,  very  zealous  in  an 
outward  religion.  4.  Yet  further,  there  was  an  aggravation  to  Israel's  forget- 
fulness  of  God,  because  she  was  most  earnestly  and  affectionately  invited  to  turn 
to  God  by  gracious  promises.  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the 
Lord :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though 
they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  A  man  might  say,  "  Why  should 
I  think  of  God  ?  He  is  my  enemy."  0  man,  you  know  better.  5.  As  a  last 
aggravation,  note  that  these  very  people  had  ability  enough  to  consider  other 
things,  for  we  find  that  they  considered  how  to  get  bribes,  and  were  very  shrewd 
in  following  after  rewards ;  yet  they  did  not  know  and  did  not  consider  their 
God.  Oh,  how  quick  are  some  men  in  the  ways  of  evil,  and  yet,  if  you  talk 
to  them  about  religion  they  say  it  is  mysterious,  and  beyond  their  power  of 
apprehension.  Those  same  persons  will  discuss  with  you  the  knottiest  points  of 
politics,  or  unravel  the  abstrusities  of  science,  and  yet  they  pretend  they  cannot 
understand  the  simplicities  of  revelation.  "  I  am  a  poor  man,"  saith  one,  "  and 
you  cannot  expect  me  to  know  much  "  ;  yet,  if  anybody  were  to  meet  that  same 

1  poor  man  "  in  the  street  and  tell  him  he  was  a  fool,  he  would  be  indignant  at 
such  an  accusation,  and  would  zealously  prove  that  he  was  not  inferior  in  common 
sense.  "  I  cannot,"  says  one,  "  vex  my  brain  about  such  things  as  these  "  ;  yet 
that  very  man  wears  his  brain  far  more  in  pursuit  of  wealth  or  pleasure.  If  a 
man  has  an  understanding,  and  can  exercise  it  well  upon  minor  matters,  how 
shall  we  apologise  for  his  neglect  of  his  God  ?  III.  The  secret  causes  of  human 
indifference  to  topics  so  important.  1.  In  the  case  of  many  thoughtless  persons 
we  must  lay  the  blame  to  the  sheer  frivolity  of  their  nature.  2.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  in  every  case,  however,  the  bottom  reason  is  opposition  to  God  Himself. 

3.  Upon  some  minds  the  tendency  to  delay  operates  fearfully.  4.  Some  make 
an  excuse  for  themselves  for  not  considering  eternity,  because  they  are  such 
eminently  practical  men.  I  only  wish  that  those  who  profess  to  be  practical  were 
more  truly  so,  for  a  practical  man  always  takes  more  care  of  his  body  than  of  his 
coat,  certainly ;  then  should  he  not  take  more  care  of  his  soul  than  of  the  body, 
which  is  but  the  garment  of  it  ?  A  practical  man  will  be  sure  to  consider  matters 
in  due  proportion ;  he  will  not  give  all  his  mind  to  a  cricket  match  and  neglect 
his  business.  And  yet  how  often  your  practical  man  still  more  greatly  errs  ;  he 
devotes  all  his  time  to  money  making,  and  not  a  minute  to  the  salvation  of  his 
soul  and  its  preparation  for  eternity  !  5.  I  have  no  doubt  with  a  great  many 
their  reason  for  not  thinking  about  soul  matters,  is  prejudice.  They  are  prejudiced 
because  some  Christian  professor  has  not  lived  up  to  his  profession,  or  they  have 
heard  something  which  is  said  to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  Gospel,  which  they  cannot 
approve  of.  6.  In  most  cases  men  do  not  like  to  trouble  themselves,  and  they 
have  an  uncomfortable  suspicion  that  if  they  were  to  look  too  narrowly  into  their 
affairs  they  would  find  things  far  from  healthy.  They  are  like  the  bankrupt 
before  the  court  the  other  day  who  did  not  keep  books  ;  he  did  not  like  his  books, 
for  his  books  did  not  like  him.  He  was  going  to  the  bad,  and  he  therefore  tried 
to  forget  it.  They  say  of  the  silly  ostrich  that  when  she  hides  her  head  in  the 
sand  and  does  not  see  her  pursuers  she  thinks  she  is  safe ;  that  is  the  policy  of 
many  men.  IV.  A  few  words  of  expostulation.  Is  not  your  inconsiderateness 
very  unjustifiable  ?  Can  you  excuse  it  in  any  way  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  In- 
stinct compared  with  reason  in  its  recognition  of  persons  : — Adam,  previously  to 
his  fall,  instinctively  recognised  the  relations  in  which  he  stood  to  God,  to  his  only 
existing  fellow-creature,  and  to  the  beasts  of  the  field.     He  recognised  God  as  hia 


8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   l. 

Creator  and  Preserver;  Eve  as  partaker  of  the  same  nature  and  the  same  sym- 
pathies with  himself, — as  one  therefore  to  whom  he  owed  a  debt  of  benevolence 
and  support ;  the  inferior  animals  as  vassals  put  under  his  feet.  But  no  sooner 
did  he  fall,  than  his  natural  acknowledgment  of  these  several  relations  forsook 
him.  The  relations,  indeed,  themselves  existed  still ;  but  be  lost  all  sense  (or 
nearly  all  sense)  of  the  obligations  grounded  upon  them.  Of  all  the  three  ruptures 
which  took  place  at  the  fall,  the  first  was — not  only  far  the  most  serious,  but  also 
— the  most  total  and  complete.  We  do  not  assert  that  the  natural  man  has  lost 
all  sense  of  obligation  to  his  fellow-creatures  and  to  the  beasts  of  the  field.  We 
do  not  desire  to  derogate  from  this  amiability,  this  considerateness,  this  benevo- 
lence ; — let  them  pass  for  what  they  are  worth.  At  the  same  time  it  should 
be  remembered  that  such  traits  of  character,  however  pleasing  in  themselves, 
rather  aggravate  than  extenuate  the  fact  of  the  man's  godlessness.  What  shall  we 
Bay  to  man's  acknowledgment  of  his  family  and  dependants,  but  that  it  gives 
point  to  the  insult  of  withholding  acknowledgment  from  God  ?  Nor,  although 
the  brute  creation  revolted  from  man  in  the  hour  of  his  fall,  and  became  intract- 
able, was  this  breach  of  separation  total  and  complete.  "The  ox  knoweth  his 
owner."  Even  those  animals  whose  instinct  is  less  keen,  whose  very  name  has 
passed  into  a  proverb  of  stupidity  and  stubbornness,  do  not  fail  to  recognise  the 

Slace  in  which,  and  the  hand  from  which,  they  are  in  the  habit  of  receiving  their 
aily  sustenance.     "  The  ass  knoweth    his  master's  crib."    (Dean  Qovlburn.) 
Man  in  his  relation  to  God: — I.  Compabb  thb  relations  subsisting  between 

AN   INFERIOR   AND   A   SUPERIOR   OREATURB   WITH   THOSE   SUBSISTING   BETWEEN   A 

superior  and  thb  Creator.  And  it  will  at  once  suggest  itself  that,  though 
these  relations  may  be  susceptible  of  comparison,  yet  there  is  an  insufficiency  in 
the  lower  relation  to  type  out  the  higher.  The  distance,  in  point  of  faculties, 
between  man  and  the  inferior  creatures,  if  great,  is  at  least  measurable.  Man 
has  the  superiority  over  the  brutes  in  respect  of  his  reason, — but  in  respect  of 
our  mortal  bodies,  the  subjects  of  infirmity  and  decay,  we  are  both  entirely  on  a 
par.  Whereas  the  distance  between  finite  man  and  the  Infinite  God  is,  of  course, 
incalculable.  This  inadequacy  of  the  comparison  suggested  in  our  text  will 
become  more  evident,  as  we  enter  into  a  consideration  of  its  details.  The  dumb 
creature  recognises  the  master,  whose  property  he  is.  "  The  ox  knoweth  hia 
owner."  What  constitutes  man's  right  of  ownership  to  the  ox  ?  Simply  the 
fact  that  he  has  given  in  exchange  for  it  an  equivalent  in  the  gold  that  perisheth. 
It  was  not  he  who  created  the  ox.  If  he  supports  its  life,  it  is  only  by  providing 
it  with  a  due  supply  of  food,  not  by  ministering  to  it  momentarily  the  breath 
which  it  draws.  So  much  for  man's  ownership  of  the  ox.  Turn  we  now  to  God's 
ownership  of  man.  What  constitutes  God's  right  of  ownership  in  us,  His 
intelligent  creatures  ?  1.  The  fact  that  we  are  the  work  of  His  hands.  This 
constitutes  a  claim  to  our  services,  a  property  in  all  our  faculties,  whether  bodily 
or  mental,  which  no  one  creature  can  have  in  the  faculties  of  another.  2.  But 
creation  is  not  the  only  ground  on  which  God's  ownership  of  man  rests.  Of  all 
things  which  we  may  be  said  to  own,  our  property  is  most  entire,  in  those  things 
which,  having  been  once  deprived  of  them  by  fraud  or  violence,  we  have  sub- 
sequently paid  a  price  to  recover.  That  claim,  grounded  originally  upon  the 
fact  of  creation,  has  been  confirmed,  and  extended  by  the  fact  of  redemption. 
"  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  says  the  apostle  Paul ;  "  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price  : 
therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's."  Where, 
in  the  whole  realm  of  nature,  shall  we  seek  a  claim  so  overwhelmingly  powerful 
as  this,  upon  the  unreserved  devotion  of  our  hearts, — of  all  that  we  are  and  all 
that  we  have  ?  3.  But  our  text  suggests  to  us  another  detail  of  the  claims  which 
our  heavenly  Owner  has  upon  our  allegiance.  "  The  ass  knoweth  his  master's 
crib."  He  knows  the  hand  that  feeds  him  and  the  manger  at  which  he  is  fed. 
It  asks  no  scintillation  of  intelligence,  no  high  effort  of  an  almost  rational  instinct, 
to  recognise  this  claim.  If  man  seems  to  ignore  those  claims  of  God  which  are 
established  by  creation  and  redemption,  it  might  haply  be  pleaded  in  his  behalf 
that  he  is  a  creature  of  the  senses,  and  that  the  facts  of  creation  and  redemption 
are  not  cognisable  by  the  senses.  These  stupendous  facts  are  transacted  and 
past,  and  as  far  as  our  animal  life  is  concerned,  we  do  not  seem  to  derive  any 
present  benefit  from  them.  But  is  not  even  this  paltry  justification  entirely 
cut  off  by  the  fact  here  implied,  that  man  is  indebted  to  his  God  for  his  daily 
maintenance,  for  the  comfort  and  the  continuance  even  of  his  animal  life  ?  Our 
every  period  of  refreshment  and  repose,  of  ease  and  relaxation  from  toil,  is  from 


chap.  I.]  ISAIAH.  9 

the  unseen  hand  of  our  heavenly  Owner.  It  is  not,  then,  the  brute  creation  in  a 
savage  state,  whose  relations  towards  man  are  here  drawn  into  comparison  with 
the  relations  of  man  towards  God.  The  inspired  writer  has  chosen,  as  best  adapted 
to  illustrate  his  argument,  instances  from  the  domestic  animals,  who  are  domi- 
ciliated with  man,  who  share  his  daily  toils,  and  live  as  his  dependants  in  the 
immediate  neighbourhood  of  his  home.  He  mentions  not  the  wild  and  untamed 
buffalo,  which  ranges  in  the  distant  prairie,  but  the  patient  ox  and  ass,  accustomed 
from  early  youth  to  the  restraints  of  the  yoke,  and  familiarised  by  long  habit 
with  their  master's  abode  and  ways  of  life.  Neither,  on  the  other  hand,  in  drawing 
out  the  contrast,  does  he  mention  mankind  generally  ;  the  charge  of  ingratitude 
is  here  brought  against  a  specific  portion  of  the  human  race.  Israel  doth  not 
know — My  people  doth  not  consider."  It  were,  in  some  measure,  excusable  that 
the  Gentiles  should  refuse  acknowledgment  to  the  living  God.  They  possess  no 
revelation  of  His  will.  If  Israel  entertain  a  secret  distaste  for  the  things  of  God, 
it  is  not  that  such  things  are  strange  to  him, — jar  with  his  old  prejudices  or 
grate  upon  his  early  associations.  And  that  which  enhances  so  peculiarly  the 
guilt  of  Israel  enhances  yet  more  the  guilt  of  that  Gentile  who,  by  the  reception 
of  the  first  sacrament  of  the  Gospel,  has  become  a  fellow-citizen  with  the  saints 
And  of  the  household  of  God.  We  might  reasonably  expect,  then,  that  the 
baptized  at  least,  whatever  others  may  do,  will  yield  to  their  Creator,  Redeemer, 
Benefactor,  and  adopted   Father   some  heartfelt  tribute  of  acknowledgment. 

II.  A  CONTRAST  IS  DRAWN  BETWEEN  THE  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  HADE  BY  DUMB 
ANIMALS    OF    THEIR    RELATION    TO    THEIR    OWNERS,    AND    ISRAEL'S    REFUSAL    OF 

acknowledgment  to  his  God.  1.  And  first  of  the  dumb  animal's  acknowledg- 
ment of  his  owner.  "  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner."  I  understand  the  term  "  know  " 
in  the  ordinary  sense  of  recognising.  The  cattle  recognise  the  voice  of  their  owner. 
A  word,  either  of  menace  or  of  caress,  if  addressed  to  them  in  the  well-known  accents 
of  their  lord,  has  an  instantaneous  effect.  Not  so  the  menaces  or  caresses  of  strangers. 
What  a  cutting  proof  upon  the  insensibility  of  God's  people  1  2.  "  Israel  doth 
not  know."  The  professing  members  of  God's  household,  the  Church,  heed  not 
the  calls  which  He  is  daily  addressing  to  them  by  the  dealings  of  His  providence 
without,  and  the  pleadings  of  His  Spirit  within  them.  (1)  They  recognise  not 
God  in  His  warnings,  whether  those  warnings  be  addressed  to  themselves  as 
individuals,  or  to  the  nation  of  which  they  are  members.  Some  of  them  have 
been  stretched  upon  a  sick-bed,  where  death  and  judgment  and  eternity  have 
come  very  nigh  unto  them.  (2)  But,  finally,  can  we  allege  in  his  behalf  that  he 
habitually  acknowledges  God  in  His  mercies  ?  God's  blessings  of  nature  and 
providence  are  accepted  by  the  great  body  of  His  professing  people  as  a  matter 
of  course.  "  The  ass  knoweth  his  master's  crib  "  ;  but  Israel,  more  senseless 
than  the  dumb  creature,  recognises  not  the  hand  which  confers  his  blessings. 
"  He  doth  not  consider."  Want  of  consideration  is  the  root  and  reason  of  this 
strange  insensibility.  It  is  not  that  he  lacks  the  faculty  of  apprehending  God, 
but  he  will  not  be  at  the  pains  to  exercise  that  faculty.  It  is  not  that  he  lacks  a 
speculative  knowledge  of  the  truths  we  have  set  forth,  but  that  he  does  not  lay 
to  heart  that  knowledge,  nor  allow  it  its  due  weight.     The  want  of  impressibility 

Eroceeds  from  deliberate  and  wilful  thoughtlessness.  (Ibid.)  The  distinction 
itween  knowledge  and  consideration : — It  would  appear,  from  this  verse,  that 
the  children  of  Israel  neither  knew  nor  considered — but  still  there  is  a  distinction 
suggested  by  it  between  these  two  things.  And  in  the  Book  of  Malachi,  we  have 
a  similar  distinction,  when  the  Lord  says  to  the  priests,  "  H  ye  will  not  hear,  and 
if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  heart."  It  is,  in  fact,  possible  for  a  man  to  do  one  of  these 
things,  and  not  to  do  the  other.  He  may  know  the  truth,  and  yet  he  may  not 
consider  it.  He  may  hear,  and  yet  not  lay  it  to  heart.  And  thus  it  is  that  we 
may  gather  the  difference  which  there  is  between  knowledge  and  wisdom.  The 
one  is  a  speculative  acquirement.  The  other  is  a  practical  faculty  or  habit.  By 
the  latter,  we  turn  to  its  profitable  use  the  former.  Thus  it  is  that  there  may 
be  great  folly  along  with  great  scholarship ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  may  an 
unlettered  mind  be  illustrious  in  wisdom.  You  have  perhaps  seen  when  there 
was  great  wealth,  and  yet,  from  the  want  of  judicious  management,  great  want 
of  comfort  in  a  family ;  and  what  stands  in  beautiful  contrast  with  this,  yon 
may  have  witnessed  the  union  of  very  humble  means,  with  such  consideration 
in  the  guidance  of  them,  as  to  have  yielded  a  respectable  appearance,  and  a 
decent  hospitality,  and  the  sufficiency  of  a  full  provision.  And  so,  with  the 
treasures  of  intellect,  the  acquisitions  of  the  mind,  whereof  one  may  be  rich, 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i 

being  possessed  of  most  ample  materials  in  all  knowledge,  and  yet  have  an  ill- 
conditioned  mind  notwithstanding ;  and  another  destitute  of  all  but  the  most 
elementary  truths,  may  yet,  by  a  wise  application  of  them,  have  attained  to  the 
true  light  and  harmony  of  the  soul,  and  be  in  sound  preparation  both  for  the 
duties  of  time  and  for  the  delights  of  eternity.  All  have  so  learned  to  number 
their  days  as  to  know  the  extreme  limit  of  human  life  upon  earth ;  yet  all  have 
not  so  learned  to  number  their  days  as  to  apply  their  hearts  unto  wisdom. 
(T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Knowledge  and  wisdom  : — I.  This  distinction  between 
knowledge  and  wisdom  is  abundantly  realised  even  on  the  field  op  earthly 
and  op  sensible  experience.  The  man  of  dissipation  may  have  his  eyes  open 
to  the  ruin  of  character  and  of  fortune  that  awaits  him,  yet  the  tyranny  of  hi3 
evil  desires  constrains  him  to  a  perseverance  in  the  ways  of  wretchedness.  The 
man  of  indolence  may  foresee  the  coming  bankruptcy  that  will  ensue  on  the 
slovenly  management  of  his  affairs,  yet  there  is  a  lethargy  within  that  weighs 
him  down  to  fatal  inactivity.  The  man  of  headlong  irritation  may  be  able  to 
discern  the  accumulating  mischief  that  he  raises  against  himself,  and  yet  continue 
as  before  to  be  hurried  away  by  the  onward  violence  that  seizes  him.  In  all 
these  instances  there  is  no  want  of  knowledge  in  possession.  But  there  is  a 
want  of  knowledge  in  use,  or  in  application.  The  unhappy  man  has  received 
the  truth,  but  he  does  not  give  heed  unto  the  truth.  II.  But  what  we  have 
affirmed,  even  of  those  events  and  consequences  that  take  place  along  the  journey 
of  this  world,  is  still  more  strikingly  apparent  of  that  great  event  which  marks 
its  termination.  There  is  not  a  human  creature  of  most  ordinary  mind,  and 
who  hath  overstepped  the  limits  of  infancy,  that  does  not  know  of  death,  and  with 
whom  it  does  not  rank  among  the  most  undoubted  of  the  certainties  that  await 
him.  And  it  is  not  only  that  of  which  he  is  most  thoroughly  assured,  but  it  is 
that  of  which,  in  the  course  of  observation  and  history,  he  is  most  constantly 
reminded.  But  how  is  it  truly  and  experimentally  ?  That  death  of  which  we 
all  know  so  well,  is  scarcely  ever  in  our  thoughts.  The  momentary  touch  of 
grief  and  of  seriousness,  wherewith  we  are  at  times  visited,  speedily  goeth  into 
utter  dissipation.  It  seems  not  to  work  the  slightest  abatement  in  the  eagerness 
of  man  after  this  world's  nterests.  It  needs  no  impetuous  appetite  to  overbear 
the  thought  of  death  ;  for  in  the  calm  equanimity  of  many  a  sober  and  aged 
citizen,  you  will  find  him  as  profoundly  asleep  to  the  feeling  of  his  own  mortality 
as  he  is  to  any  of  the  feelings  or  instigations  of  licentiousness.  Death  is  the 
stepping-stone  between  the  two  worlds ;  and  so  it  somewhat  combines  the 
palpable  of  matter,  with  the  shadowy  and  the  evanescent  of  spirit.  It  is  the 
gateway  to  a  land  of  mystery  and  of  silence,  and  seems  to  gather  upon  it  some- 
thing of  the  visionary  character  which  the  things  of  faith  have  to  the  eye  of  the 
senses.  And  so,  amid  all  the  varieties  of  temperament  in  our  species,  there  is 
a  universal  heedlessness  of  death.  It  seems  against  the  tendency  of  nature  to 
think  of  it.  The  thing  is  known,  but  it  is  not  considered.  This  might  serve  to 
convince  us  how  unavailing  is  the  mere  knowledge,  even  of  important  truth,  if 
not  accompanied  by  the  feeling,  or  the  practical  remembrance  of  it.  The  know- 
ledge in  this  case  only  serves  to  aggravate  our  folly.  Thus,  the  irreligion  of  the 
world  is  due  not  to  the  want  of  a  satisfying  demonstration  on  God's  part,  for  this 
might  have  excused  us ;  but  to  the  want  of  right  consideration  on  ours,  and  this 
is  inexcusable.  III.  Let  us  now  pass  onwards  to  the  invisibles  op  faith — to 
those  things  which  do  not,  like  death,  stand  upon  the  confines  of  the  spiritual 
region,  but  are  wholly  within  that  region,  and  which  man  hath  not  seen  by  his 
eye,  or  heard  by  his  ear — to  the  awful  realities  that  will  abide  in  deep  and  mys- 
terious concealment  from  us,  so  long  as  we  are  in  the  body.  This  character  of 
unseen  and  spiritual  is  not  confined  to  things  future.  There  are  things  present 
which  are  spiritual  also.  There  is  a  present  Deity,  who  dwelleth  in  light,  it  is 
true ;  but  it  is  light  inaccessible.  And  yet,  even  of  this  great  Spirit  we  may  be 
8aid,  in  one  sense,  to  know,  however  little  it  is  that  we  may  consider  Him.  There 
are  averments  about  God  which  we  have  long  recognised  and  ranked  among  our 
admitted  propositions,  though  we  seldom  recur  to  them  in  thought,  and  are  never 
adequately  impressed  by  them.  We  know,  or  think  we  know,  that  God  is ;  and 
that  all  other  existence  is  suspended  upon  His  will ;  and  that  He  is  a  God  of 
inviolable  sacredness,  in  whose  presence  evil  cannot  dwell.  Now,  as  a  proof 
how  distinct  this  knowledge  of  God  is  from  the  consideration  of  Him,  we  will 
venture  to  say  that  even  the  first  and  simplest  of  all  these  propositions  is,  by  many, 
unthought  of  for  days  and  weeks  together.     In  the  work  that  you  prosecute, 


ohap.  i]  ISAIAH.  11 

and  the  comforts  that  you  enjoy,  and  even  the  obligations  of  which  you  acquit 
yourselves  to  relatives  and  to  friends,  is  there  any  fear  of  God  before  your  eyes  T — 
and  is  not  the  fear  of  disgrace  from  men  a  far  more  powerful  check  upon  your 
licentiousness,  than  the  fear  of  damnation  from  Him  who  is  the  judge  and  the 
discerner  of  men  T  This  emptiness  of  a  man's  heart  as  to  the  recognition  of  God 
runs  throughout  the  whole  of  his  history.  He  is  engrossed  with  what  is  visible 
and  secondary  and  he  thinks  no  farther.  When  he  enjoys,  it  is  without  gratitude. 
When  he  labours,  it  is  without  the  impulse  of  an  obedient  loyalty.  When  he 
admires,  it  is  without  carrying  the  sentiment  upwardly  unto  heaven.  Now, 
this  is  God's  controversy  with  man  in  the  text.  He  there  complains  of  our 
heedlessness.  And  this  inconsideration  of  ours  is  matter  of  blame,  just  because 
it  is  a  matter  of  wilfulness.  Man  has  a  voluntary  control  over  his  thoughts. 
IV.  But  the  distinction  between  those  who  only  know  and  those  who  also  con- 
sider, is  never  more  strongly  marked  than  in  the  fecttliab  doctrines  of  the 
Gospel.  And  fearful  is  the  hazard  lest  knowledge  and  it  alone  should  satisfy 
the  possessor.  The  very  quantity  of  debate  and  of  argument  that  has  been 
expended  on  theology,  leads  to  a  most  hurtful  misconceiving  of  this  matter.  The 
design  of  argument  is  to  carry  you  onward  to  a  set  of  accurate  convictions.  And 
yet,  the  whole  amount  of  your  acquisition  may  be  a  mere  rational  Christianity. 
There  are  no  topics  on  which  there  has  been  so  much  of  controversy,  or  that  have 
given  rise  to  so  many  an  elaborate  dissertation,  as  the  person  and  offices  of  Christ. 
Yet,  let  it  not  be  disguised  that  the  knowledge  of  all  these  credenda  is  one  thing, 
and  the  practical  consideration  of  them  is  another.  First,  He  is  the  Apostle  of 
our  profession,  or  we  profess  Him  to  be  our  Apostle.  Let  us  bethink  ourselves 
of  all  which  this  title  implies.  It  means  one  who  is  sent.  How  it  ought  to  move 
us  with  awe  at  the  approach  of  such  a  messenger  when  we  think  of  the  glory 
and  the  sacredness  of  His  former  habitation  !  And  what  ought  to  fasten  upon 
Him  a  still  more  intense  regard,  He  comes  with  a  message  to  our  world — He 
comes  straight  from  the  Divinity  Himself,  and  charged  by  Him  with  a  special 
communication.  By  your  daily  indifference  to  the  word  that  is  written,  you 
inherit  all  the  guilt,  and  will  come  under  the  very  reckoning  of  those,  who,  in 
the  days  of  the  Saviour,  treated  with  neglect  the  word  that  was  spoken.  There 
is  one  topic  which  stands  connected  with  the  apostleship  of  Christ,  and  that  stamps 
a  most  peculiar  interest  on  the  visit  which  He  made  to  us  from  on  high.  He  is 
God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  In  the  character  of  a  man  hath  He  pictured  forth  to 
us  the  attributes  of  the  Divinity.  And  we,  by  considering  this  Apostle,  learn 
of  God.  But  this  leads  us  to  another  topic  of  consideration,  the  priesthood  of 
Christ.  The  atonement  that  He  made  for  sin  has  a  foremost  place  in  orthodoxy. 
But,  a  truth  may  be  acquired,  and  then, — cast,  as  it  were,  into  some  hidden  corner 
of  the  mind, — may  lie  forgotten,  as  in  a  dormitory.  And  therefore  would  we 
again  bid  you  consider  Him  who  is  the  High  Priest  of  your  profession.  We  call 
upon  you,  ever  and  anon,  to  think  of  His  sacrifice ;  and  to  ward  off  the  legality 
of  nature  from  your  spirits,  by  a  constant  habit  of  recurrence,  upon  your  part, 
to  the  atonement  that  He  hath  made,  and  to  the  everlasting  righteousness  that 
He  hath  brought  in.  Without  this,  the  mind  is  ever  lapsing  anon  into  alienation 
and  distrust.  (Ibid.)  Inconsiderateness  : — It  is  not  a  charge  brought  against 
the  human  family  in  general.  The  terms  are  special,  "  My  people  doth  not  con- 
sider." If,  then,  the  chiefs  and  leaders  of  society  have  fallen  into  inconsiderateness, 
what  wonder  that  the  nameless  multitude  should  be  giddy  ?  The  salt  has  lost 
its  savour  and  the  high  city  has  concealed  its  beauty.  It  was  not  left  for  un- 
believers and  scoffers  to  bring  the  severest  accusations  against  the  Church ;  God 
Himself  has  marked  her  shortcomings  and  loudly  charged  her  with  sin  !  Never 
has  He  been  the  special  pleader  of  His  people ;  He  never  sought  to  make  out  a 
case  for  them  in  spite  of  facts  or  even  appearances ;  with  solemn  fidelity  and 
poignant  grief  He  has  shown  the  Church  her  corruptness  and  made  her 
ashamed  in  the  presence  of  her  enemies.  We  shall  dwell  on  the  subject  of  Incon- 
siderateness as  it  bears  upon  the  Church  and  upon  men  generally.  There  are 
two  noticeable  points  common  to  both.  Why  do  not  men  consider  ?  1.  Not 
for  want  of  opportunity.  There  are  the  great  heavens  which  David  considered  ; 
there  are  the  lilies  which  Jesus  Christ  charged  men  to  consider ;  there  are  the 
signs  of  the  times,  full  of  significance  ;  a  thousand  objects,  indeed,  daily  challenge 
our  thoughtfulness.  2.  Not  for  want  of  reproof  or  encouragement.  Failures, 
disappointments,  blunders,  beyond  numbering,  have  shown  us  the  mischief  of 
inconsiderateness.     On  the  other  hand,  consideration  has  always  rewarded  ua 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ft 

with  the  quietness  of  a  good  conscience ;  yet  again  and  again  we  cease  to  be 
thoughtful.  Let  us  look  upon  inconsiderateness — I.  In  its  reasons.  1.  Incon- 
siderateness saves  intellectual  trouble.  Men  do  not  like  to  think  deeply. 
They  prefer  to  skim  the  surface,  and  instead  of  working  steadily  for  results,  they 
choose  to  snatch  at  anything  which  may  serve  them  for  the  passing  moment. 
A  decline  of  thoughtfulness  is  also  a  decline  of  moral  strength  !  The  Church 
thinks  but  little.  Nearly  all  its  propositions  have  been  accepted  on  trust. 
Observe  !  Jesus  Christ  always  challenged  the  thought  of  those  who  heard  Him. 
He  never  discouraged  honest  and  devout  inquiry.  He  never  said  a  word  in 
praise  of  ignorance.  No  authority  of  His  can  be  quoted  for  intellectual  indolence. 
Christianity  vivifies  the  intellect.  2.  Inconsiderateness  mitigates  moral  com- 
punction. It  does  this  by  concealing  a  man  from  himself.  Men,  in  many 
instances,  dare  not  consider  themselves.  One  look  at  their  own  hearts  would 
affright  them  !  We  may  think  well  of  ourselves  simply  because  we  do  not  know 
ourselves.  Pain  comes  with  self-knowledge ;  but  if  pain  drive  men  to  the  Healer,  it 
will  be  to  them  as  the  angel  of  God.  3.  Inconsiderateness  escapes  social  obligation. 
There  is  ignorance  to  be  taught ;  but  we  don't  go  into  the^question  I  There 
is  misery  to  be  alleviated ;  but  we  think  nothing  about  it !  There  is  a  man 
dying  in  the  road  ;  but  we  pass  by  on  the  other  side  !  (Prov.  xxiv.  12.)  II.  Ih 
its  results.  1.  Practical  atheism.  God  is  acknowledged  with  the  lips,  but 
He  hath  no  place  in  the  heart.  Things  are  viewed  from  the  outside,  and  secondary 
causes  are  looked  upon  as  primary  and  original.  2.  Spiritual  feebleness.  Without 
consideration  no  man  can  be  strong.  He  has  no  abiding  convictions.  There 
is  nothing  about  him  or  within  him  which  he  is  unprepared  to  cast  off  under 
pressure.  3.  Needless  alarm.  The  man  who  has  spent  no  time  in  quiet  thinking 
mistakes  the  bearing  of  unusual  circumstances.  A  shadow  frightens  him.  He 
has  no  grasp  of  history.  Having  eyes,  he  sees  not.  4.  Self-deprivation.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  Fatal  inconsideration  : — I  shall  treat  of  the  charge  here  brought 
against  the  ancient  Jews  in  a  double  view — I.  As  it  more  especially  concerns 
impenitent  sinners.  It  is  the  proper  character  of  all  the  impenitent,  that  they 
do  not  and  will  not  consider.  This  is  the  ground  of  their  guilt,  and  the  fatal  cause 
of  their  ruin.  Consideration  is  the  same  as  attentively  applying  the  mind  to  things, 
according  to  their  respective  nature  and  importance,  in  order  to  our  having  the 
clearer  apprehension  of  them,  and  knowing  how  we  ought  to  act  in  relation  to  them. 
And,  forasmuch  as  the  things  of  religion  are  of  the  highest  nature,  and  the  utmost 
conceivable  importance,  our  considering  these  things  must  imply  our  looking 
into  them,  and  pondering  them  with  the  greatest  care,  and  seriousness,  and 
impartiality ;  and  this  with  a  view  of  our  being  able  to  form  a  truer  and  more 
distinct  judgment  concerning  them,  and  concerning  the  manner  in  which  they 
ought  to  influence  our  actions ;  to  the  end  we  may  be  effectually  led  and 
determined  to  act  as  we  ought,  and  as  the  nature  and  importance  of  the  things 
should  persuade  us  to  do.  We  must  attend  carefully,  examine  impartially, 
think  and  reflect  seriously,  that  we  may  judge,  and  resolve,  and  act  rightly.  I 
shall — 1.  Instance  some  particulars  in  which  it  is  manifest  the  persons  I  am  now 
speaking  of  do  not  consider.  (1)  They  do  not  consider  what  their  own  reason 
and  the  Holy  Scripture  would  instruct  them  in  concerning  God,  His  being  and 
providence,  His  attributes  and  works.  "  The  wicked,  through  the  pride  of  his 
countenance,  will  not  seek  after  God  :  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts  "  (Psa.  x.  4). 
(2)  They  do  not  consider  the  end  for  which  they  were  made,  and  what  is  their 
true  interest  and  highest  happiness.  This  is  a  most  important  question,  of 
absolute  necessity  to  regulate  human  life  ;  for  as  our  end  is,  such  will  the  course 
of  our  actions  be  in  pursuance  of  it.  (3)  They  do  not  consider  the  infinite 
obligations  they  are  under  to  that  God  whose  commands  they  disobey.  This  is 
the  particular  ground  and  instance  of  the  allegation  against  the  people  of  Judah. 
(4)  They  do  not  consider  the  vast  importance  of  salvation  and  what  the  indis- 
pensable terms  of  it  are.  (5)  The  same  persons  do  not  consider  the  nature  and 
tendency  of  their  present  course  of  life.  They  do  not  reflect  upon  their  actions 
and  weigh  and  ponder  their  steps.  They  have  not  the  caution  of  common 
travellers,  to  think  whether  they  are  right  or  wrong.  (6)  They  do  not  consider 
the  uncertainty  of  life.  (7)  Or,  the  certainty  of  a  world  to  come.  2.  Set 
before  you  the  deplorable  consequences  of  this  neglect  of  serious  consideration. 
(1)  Men  do  not  consider,  and  therefore  do  not  know.  (2)  Men  do  not  consider, 
and  therefore  are  without  all  awakening  apprehensions  of  the  guilt  and  misery 
of  a  vicious  course  of  life.     (3)  Persons  engaged  in  a  vicious  course  do  not  consider, 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  13 

and  are  therefore  little  solicitous  to  make  their  peace  with  God,  and  to  secure 
an  interest  in  the  Saviour,  and  the  salvation  proposed  to  them  in  the  Gospel. 
(4)  They  do  not  consider,  and  therefore  resign  themselves  to  the  conduct  of 
appetite  and  lust  and  passion.  (5)  Men  do  not  consider,  and  for  that  reason  it 
is  the  temptations  to  sin  are  so  invincible.  (6)  Men  will  not  consider,  and  there- 
fore support  themselves  with  false  and  dangerous  props,  such  as  these :  God  is 
merciful ;  Christ  died  for  sinners ;  and  it  will  be  time  to  repent  hereafter. 
Application — (1)  How  inexcusable  must  all  those  appear  who  perish  in  their 
sins !  They  perish  because  they  will  not  consider.  (2)  Here  you  see,  in  case 
you  have  any  purposes  of  leading  a  holy  life,  where  you  must  begin.  You  must 
sit  down  and  consider.  "  I  thought  on  my  ways,"  &c.  (Psa.  cxix.  59).  (3)  Let 
me  therefore  exhort  you  to  practise  a  duty  so  necessary  and  of  such  infinite 
advantage.  II.  As  in  a  lesser  degree  it  too  frequently  affects  persons 
of  sincere  piety.  All  that  consideration  which  is  necessary  to  the  essence  of 
virtue  and  piety,  they  practise  ;  but  not  always  that  which  is  requisite  to  a  state 
of  greater  perfection.  There  are  several  things  which  too  plainly  prove  their 
want  of  consideration.  1.  The  errors  and  failings  of  which  they  are  too  often 
guilty.  I  do  not  mean  those  which  are  so  incident  to  human  nature  in  the  present 
state,  that  it  is  next  to  impossible  to  preserve  ourselves  entirely  free  from  them  ; 
but  those  which,  with  due  care  and  circumspection,  we  might  easily  enough  avoid. 
2.  Sloth  and  inactivity  in  a  virtuous  and  religious  course  of  life  is  another  argu- 
ment of  a  defective  consideration,  even  in  good  men.  Akin  to  this  is — 3.  That 
indevotion  in  the  exercises  of  religious  worship,  which  Christians  are  too  apt  to 
slide  into,  and  which  too  visibly  argues  their  disuse  of  that  consideration  which 
would  be  of  admirable  service  to  fan  the  sacred  fire,  when  it  began  to  grow  dull 
and  languid.  "  While  I  was  musing,"  saith  the  Psalmist,  "  the  fire  burned." 
4.  The  love  of  the  world,  which  has  too  much  the  ascendant  over  some  pious 
minds,  and  their  being  so  greatly  moved,  if  not  unhinged,  by  the  shocks  and 
changes  of  it,  must  often  be  ascribed  to  the  same  cause.  5.  A  misplaced  and 
misconducted  zeal ;  a  zeal  for  opinions  and  practices  we  know  not  why,  and  this 
zeal  under  so  little  government,  as  to  occasion  bitter  strife  and  animosity  among 
Christians,  and  raise  such  disturbances  in  the  Church  of  God,  as  hinder  its 
flourishing  state ;  this  likewise  shews  that  men  do  not  consider.  6.  It  is  many 
times  because  they  do  not  consider  that  they  who  are  religious  do  not 
enjoy  tfoeir  religion.  (H.  Grove,  M.A.)  Reasons  for  consideration: — 1.  Con- 
sideration is  the  proper  character  of  reasonable  beings :  this  faculty  is  the  main 
distinction  of  the  man  from  the  beast ;  and  the  exercise  of  it,  of  the  wise  man 
from  the  fool.  2.  We  show  that  we  can  consider  in  the  things  of  this  life  ;  and 
why  not  then  in  the  things  of  religion  ?  3.  Do  your  part,  and  God  will  not  with- 
hold His  grace,  by  which  you  shall  be  enabled  to  do  all  required  of  you.  4.  By 
time  and  use  this  exercise,  however  ungrateful  at  first,  will  become  more  easy 
and  pleasant.  5.  Consideration  is  further  recommended  by  its  most  blessed 
effects.  As,  to  mention  only  two  of  a  more  general  nature :  the  first,  our  being 
converted  from  the  error  of  our  ways ;  the  other,  our  constant  perseverance  in 
the  practice  of  holiness.  6.  Were  there  nothing  else  but  this  one  motive  to 
engage  you  to  consider,  this  one  should  be  irresistible,  that  it  is  absolutely  neces- 
sary :  it  cannot  be  dispensed  with ;  the  consequence  of  neglecting  it  is  fatal, 
and  never  to  be  retrieved.  (Ibid.)  Man  shamed  by  the  lower  animals  : — A 
fine  pass  man  is  come  to  when  he  is  shamed  even  in  knowledge  and  understanding 
by  these  silly  animals ;  and  is  not  only  sent  to  school  to  them  (Prov.  vi.  6,  7), 
but  set  in  a  form  below  them  (Jer.  viii.  7) ;  "  taught  more  than  the  beasts  of 
the  earth"  (Job  xxxv.  11),  and  yet  knowing  less.  (M.  Henry.)  Inconsidera- 
tion  of  what  we  do  know  is  as  great  an  enemy  to  us  in  religion  as  ignorance  of 
what  we  should  know.  (Ibid.)  God's  grief  because  His  children  do  not 
know  Him : — An  ancestor  of  mine  was  once  imprisoned  for  righteousness'  sake, 
and  among  the  tenderest  traditions  which  have  been  handed  down  to  me  is  this, 
that  when  that  strong  man  entered  gaol  not  a  nerve  quivered,  and  not  a  look 
of  sorrow  was  seen  upon  his  countenance.  Again,  when  he  was  released  and 
met  his  friends,  he  bore  up  heroically ;  the  joy  of  deliverance  did  not  break  him 
down :  but  when  he  entered  his  home,  and  when  the  little  child  on  the  mother's 
knee,  that  a  month  or  so  before  had  known  its  father,  did  not  know  him,  but 
turned  away  from  him,  the  strong  man  wept  as  a  child.  He  burst  into  tears 
and  sobs.  The  grief  of  God  here  is  that  His  own  children  did  not  know  Him. 
(David  Davies.) 


0 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Ver.  4.  Ah,  sinful  nation. — God's  indignation  against  sin  : — The  word  "  ah  " 
is  not  an  interjection,  indicating  a  mere  sighing  of  pity  or  regret ;  the 
word  should  not  be  spelt  as  it  is  here,  the  letters  should  be  reversed,  it  should 
be  "  ha,"  and  pronounced  as  expressive  of  indignation.  God  does  not  merely 
sigh  over  human  iniquity,  looking  upon  it  as  a  lapse,  an  unhappy  thing,  a  circum- 
stance that  ought  to  have  been  otherwise ;  His  tone  is  poignant,  judicial,  indignant, 
for  not  only  is  His  heart  wounded,  but  His  righteousness  is  outraged,  and  the 
security  of  His  universe  is  threatened, — for  the  universe  stands  in  plomb-hne, 
in  strict  geometry,  and  whoever  trifles  with  the  plomb,  with  the  uprightness, 
tampers  with  the  security  of  the  universe.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  sinning 
nation  : — The  original  words  used  in  reference  to  God's  ancient  people  are  "  a 
sinning  nation,"  which  denotes  a  nation  sinning  habitually.  There  are  three 
ways  in  which  a  nation   becomes   sinful.     I.   When  the  great  body  of  the 

PEOPLE  CONSENT  TO  OB  APPROVE  OP  THE  SINS  OF  FOBMEB  GENEBATIONS.   Thus 

Christ  Baid  to  the  Jews,  "  Truly  ye  bear  witness  that  ye  allow  the  deeds  of  your 
fathers."  II.  When  the  great  body  of  the  people  consent  to  the  sins 
of  their  rulers.  Thus  the  Jews  were  a  sinful  nation,  because  they  approved 
of  the  deeds  of  their  rulers  in  killing  the  prophets  and  in  crucifying  Christ,  and 
these  sins  are  expressly  charged  against  them,  and  were  visited  upon  them 
nationally.  III.  When  the  generality  of  the  people  are  living  in  sin 
in  their  own  persons.  Such  was  the  state  of  the  Jews  when  Isaiah  charged 
them  with  contempt  of  God,  hypocrisy  and  manifold  habitual  transgressions. 
(Original  Secession  Magazine.)  Savonarola  and  Florence  : — Florence,  in  the 
days  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent,  had  become  practically  a  pagan  city.  She  had 
fallen  from  Christ  as  Jerusalem  from  Jehovah.  One  of  her  historians  descants 
upon  her  as  being  "  hopeless  morally,  full  of  debauchery,  cruelty,  and  corruption, 
violating  oaths,  betraying  trusts,  believing  in  nothing  but  Greek  manuscripts, 
coins  and  statues,  and  caring  for  nothing  but  pleasures."  It  was  into  such  a 
city,  to  which  Isaiah's  prelude  would  almost  literally  apply,  that  Savonarola 
came.  Seeing,  as  he  expressed  it,  "  the  world  turned  upside  down,"  he  traversed 
the  streets  and  wandered  along  the  banks  of  the  Arno,  musing  and  weeping  over 
the  great  misery  of  the  world,  and  the  iniquities  of  men,  and  the  enormous 
wickedness  of  the  people  of  Italy.  Then,  after  a  time  of  probation  at  the  con- 
vent of  San  Marco,  he  burst  upon  the  Florentines  as  a  prophet  of  fiery  eloquence 
and  uncompromising  virtue,  of  a  fearless  character,  and  with  Divine  insight 
akin  to  that  of  his  great  prototype,  Isaiah  of  Jerusalem.  Through  internal 
troubles,  and  assaults  from  without,  he  warned  the  people  and  their  rulers, 
endeavouring  to  turn  their  hearts  to  God,  and  to  stay  them  upon  Him.  To 
the  priests  he  said,  that  the  false  and  lukewarm  among  them,  the  dumb  dogs 
that  could  not  bark,  had  perverted  the  people,  and  prejudiced  them  against  the 
truth.  "  Before  all,  the  wicked  priests  and  servants  of  the  Church  are  the  guilty 
causes  of  this  corruption,  as  also  of  the  coming  calamities."  He  cried  aloud 
to  the  populace,  "  Thou  knowest,  thou  knowest,  0  Florence,  that  I  would  have 
thee  a  spiritual  State.  I  have  always  shown  thee  clearly  that  a  kingdom  is  only 
strong  in  proportion  as  it  is  spiritual,  by  being  more  closely  related  to  God." 
Thus  faithfully  and  boldly  spoke  out  Savonarola  what  was  in  him  from  the  Holy 
Spirit.     (F.    Sessions.)  Corrupters.  —  "Corrupters": — Sons    that    are    as 

cankerworms ;  sons  that  throw  poison  into  pellucid  water  streams  ;  sons  that 
suggest  evil  thoughts  to  opening  minds.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  force  of 
example  : — Have  fellowship  with  the  lame,  and  you  will  learn  to  limp.  (Latin 
adage.)  The  corrupt  are  corrupters: — One  rotten  apple  will  infect  the  store; 
the  putrid  grape  corrupts  the  whole  cluster.  (F.  Jacox.)  Companionship 
in  evil: — Men  love  not  to  be  found  singular,  especially  where  the  singularity 
lies  in  the  rugged  and  severe  paths  of  virtue :  company  causes  confidence,  and 
gives  both  credit  and  defence,  credit  to  the  crime,  and  defence  to  the  criminal. 
(R.  South,  D.D.)  The  contagion  of  character : — "  Do  you  see,"  said  Dr.  Arnold 
to  an  assistant-master  who  had  recently  come  to  Rugby,  "  those  two  boys  walk- 
ing together  ?  I  never  saw  them  together  before ;  you  should  make  an  especial 
point  of  observing  the  company  they  keep ; — nothing  so  tells  the  changes  in  a 
boy's  character."  (F.  Jacox.)  Bad  company  injurious: — He  that  lies  down 
with  dogs  shall  rise  up  with  fleas.  (Spanish  proverb.)  Leading  others  astray  : — 
A  father  bade  his  son  set  up  some  bricks  endways,  in  regular  line  a  short  distance 
apart.  "  Now,"  said  he,  knock  down  the  first  brick."  The  boy  obeyed,  and 
all  the  others  fell  with  it.     "  Now,"  said  the  father,  "  raise  the  last  brick  and 


chap.  I.]  ISAIAH.  15 

see  if  the  others  will  rise  with  it."  But  no,  once  down,  they  must  he  raised 
singly.  Said  the  father,  "  I  have  given  you  this  object  lesson  to  teach  you 
how  easy  it  is  for  one  to  lead  others  astray,  but  how  difficult  for  him  to  restore 
them,  however  sincere  his  repentance  may  be."  (Sunday  School  Chronicle.) 
They  have  forsaken  the  Lord. — A  specific  and  terrible  indictment : — What  have 
they  done  ?  They  have  done  three  things.  It  is  no  general  accusation  that 
is  lodged  against  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and  through  them  against  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth  ;  it  is  a  specific  indictment,  glittering  with  detail.  I.  "  They  have 
forsaken  the  Lord.  By  so  much  their  action  is  negative ;  they  have  ceased 
to  attend  the  altar ;  they  have  neglected  to  read  the  holy  writing ;  they  have 
turned  their  backs  upon  that  towards  which  they  once  looked  with  open  face 
and  radiant  eye.  II.  "  They  have  provoked  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  unto 
anger."  Observe  how  the  intensity  increases,  how  the  aggravation  deepens 
and  blackens;  they  have  grown  bold  in  sin;  they  have  thrown  challenges  in 
the  face  of  God;  they  have  defied  Him  to  hurl  His  thunderbolts  and  His  light- 
nings upon  them.  III.  "  They  are  gone  away  backward."  They  forsook, 
they  provoked,  they  apostatised.  Sin  has  its  logical  course  as  well  as  holiness. 
Men  do  not  stand  still  at  the  point  of  forsaking  God :  having  for  a  little  while 
forsaken  Him,  they  will  find  it  almost  necessary  to  provoke  Him,  that  they  may 
justify  themselves  to  themselves  and  to  others,  saying,  Even  provocation  cannot 
awaken  the  judgment  of  heaven  with  any  sign  of  impatience;  and  having  pro- 
voked the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  the  next  point  will  be  universal  apostasy,  a  thorough 
off-casting  of  the  last  traces  and  semblances  of  religion.  See  if  this  be  not  so 
in  the  history  of  the  individual  mind.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Moral  gravitation  : — 
There  is  a  law  of  gravitation,  spiritual  as  well  as  physical,  and  now  the  man  who 
has  begun  by  forsaking  will  end  by  going  backward,  his  whole  life  thrown  out 
of  order,  decentralised ;  and  he  perpetrates  the  irony  of  walking  backwards,  and 
his  crab-like  action  will  bring  him  to  the  pit.  (Ibid.)  The  Holy  One  of  Israel. 
— The  Holy  One  of  Israel: — That  is,  "He  who  shows  Himself  holy  in  Israel." 
(Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Why  should  ye  he  stricken  any  more? — The  power  of  evil 
habits : — There  are  no  passages  in  Holy  Writ  more  affecting  than  those 
in  which  God  seems  to  represent  Himself  as  actually  at  a  loss,  not 
knowing  what  further  steps  to  take  in  order  to  bring  men  to  repentance  and 
faith  (Isa.  v.  4 ;  Hos.  vi.  4).  Of  course,  the  chastisements  may  be  continued, 
but  the  experience  of  the  past  attests  but  a  strong  likelihood  that  further  afflic- 
tions would  effect  no  reform.  God,  therefore,  can  only  ask,  and  the  question 
is  full  of  the  most  pathetic  remonstrance — "  Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any 
more  ? "  1.  Now,  observe  that  it  was  a  long  course  of  misdoing  that  had 
brought  the  people  into  such  a  morally  hopeless  condition.  It  was  the  habit 
of  committing  sin,  the  habit  of  resisting  the  admonitions  and  the  chastisements 
of  God  that  had  at  last  exhausted  the  resources  of  Divine  wisdom.  The  words 
in  which  Jeremiah  states  the  tremendous  power  of  habit  are  very  striking — "  Can 
the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots  ?  then  may  ye  also  do 
good,  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil."  Yet  our  text,  probably,  puts  it  in  a  yet 
more  affecting  point  of  view — the  considering  wherefore  it  is  that  men  who  have 
long  been  accustomed  to  do  evil,  thereby  bring  themselves  morally  into  such  a 
condition,  that  God,  as  if  in  despair,  is  forced  to  exclaim  "  Why  should  ye  be 
stricken  any  more  ?  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint."  Now, 
they  can  know  very  little  of  their  moral  constitution,  and  of  the  tendency  of 
their  nature,  who  are  not  thoroughly  aware  how,  as  a  general  rule,  the  doing 
a  thing  twice  facilitates  the  doing  it  again.  We  have  no  right  to  complain  of 
there  being  such  a  law,  for  it  is  of  universal  application,  and  will  therefore  be 
every  jot  as  beneficial  to  us  if  we  aim  at  doing  good,  as  detrimental  if  we  allow 
ourselves  to  do  evil.  The  man  who  has  yielded  to  a  temptation  will  undoubtedly 
find  himself  less  able  to  resist  when  that  temptation  assails  him  again.  But  if 
he  have  overcome,  he  will  as  undoubtedly  find  himself  better  able  to  withstand. 
The  inveterate  habit  and  the  seared  conscience  are  so  far  necessary  companions, 
that  when  we  wish  to  induce  a  man  to  abandon  a  long-cherished  practice,  we  do 
not  reckon  on  any  such  keenness  of  the  moral  sense,  as  will  make  it  second  our 
remonstrance,  or  give  point  to  our  advice ;  and  this  it  is  which  renders  almost 
desperate  the  case  of  those  who  have  been  long  living  in  any  known  sin.  Such 
men  must  have  won  that  most  disastrous  of  victories — the  victory  over  con- 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  l 

science.  Therefore,  we  hardly  know  under  what  form  to  shape  our  attack.  Our 
position  takes  for  granted  that  there  is  an  internal  monitor,  so  that  the  voice 
from  without,  answered  from  the  voice  from  within,  may  force  for  itself  an 
audience,  and  cause  a  present  conviction,  if  not  a  permanent  resolution ;  but 
now  the  internal  monitor  is  wanting ;  the  voice  from  without  calling  forth  no 
voice  from  within,  would  seem  to  have  no  organ  to  which  to  address  itself,  and 
therefore  our  words  will  be  as  much  wasted  as  though  spoken  to  the  air. 
Hence  it  is  we  are  so  urgent  with  the  young  that  they  put  not  off  to  a  later  day 
the  duties  of  religion.  The  young  seem  to  imagine  that  the  question  between 
us  and  them  is  simply  a  question  as  to  the  probabilities  of  life ;  and  that  if  they 
could  ensure  themselves  a  certain  number  of  years,  they  should  run  no  risk  in 
delaying  for  a  time  the  giving  heed  to  religion.  Thus  they  take  no  account  of 
the  inevitable  result  of  a  continuance  in  sin,  namely,  that  there  will  be  generated 
a  habit  of  sin,  so  that  when  the  time  shall  be  reached  which  they  themselves 
may  have  fixed  as  suited  to  repentance,  they  will  be  widely  different  beings  from 
what  they  are  when  resolved  to  delay — beings  tied  and  bound  with  fetters  forged 
and  fastened  by  themselves,  and  wanting  in  the  principle  which  might  urge  them 
to  the  breaking  loose  from  the  self-imposed  bondage.  It  is  this  which  makes 
the  aged  sinner  so  unpromising  a  subject  for  the  ministrations  of  the  Word — 
not  his  being  old  in  years,  but  his  being  old  in  sin.  This  is  the  first  evidence 
which  we  advance  as  to  the  truth  of  that  fearful  fact  which  we  derive  from  our 
text — the  fact  that  habitual  sin  brings  even  God  Himself  into  a  perplexity  as 
to  how  to  deal  with  the  sinner ;  makes  it  difficult  for  Him  to  employ  further 
means  for  recovering  that  sinner  from  wickedness.  2.  There  is  a  yet  worse  thing 
to  be  said.  The  man  who  persists  in  sinning,  till  to  sin  has  become  habit,  alien- 
ates from  him  that  Holy  Spirit  of  God  whose  special  office  it  is  to  lead  us  to 
repentance,  and  renew  our  fallen  nature.  It  is  not  by  an  occasional  act  of  sin 
that  a  man  may  "  quench  "  the  Spirit ;  though  his  every  transgression  may  "grieve  " 
that  Spirit.  You  will  observe  what  a  correspondence  there  is  between  quenching 
the  Spirit  and  quenching  the  conscience.  So  connected,  if  not  identified,  are 
conscience  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  actually  is  the  one  an  engine  through  which 
the  other  works,  that  in  proportion  as  man  succeeds  in  deadening  his  conscience, 
he  advances  towards  quenching  the  Spirit.  Why  wonder  then  at  the  expression 
of  our  text  ?  3.  Our  text  implies  a  great  difficulty  rather  than  an  impossibility, 
and  it  ought  not  therefore  to  be  without  some  measure  of  hope  that  the  minister 
addresses  even  those  who  are  the  slaves  of  bad  habits.  The  Spirit,  it  may  be, 
does  not  so  depart  as  to  determine  that  He  will  not  return.  We  may  rather 
regard  Him  as  hovering  over  the  transgressor  who  has  so  pertinaciously  grieved 
and  withstood  Him  ;  and  let  there  be  only  the  least  intimation  of  a  wish  for  His 
presence,  and  He  may  descend,  and  take  up  His  abode  in  the  soul  which  He  has 
been  forced  to  forsake.  And,  if  conscience  were  but  roused,  there  may  be  a 
desire  for  the  return  of  the  Spirit.  Whilst  we  do  not  shut  the  door  even  against 
habitual  sinners,  our  great  effort  must  be  that  of  persuading  men  against  the 
forming  bad  habits.  (H.  Melvitt,  B.D.)  The  power  of  evil  habit: — H  a  man 
be  a  confirmed  drunkard  or  gambler,  it  has  almost  passed  into  a  proverb,  that 
there  is  but  little  hope  of  reform,  and  you  regard  it  as  little  short  of  miracle  if 
he  be  brought  to  abandon  the  wine  or  the  dice.  In  such  instances,  the  habit 
forces  itself  on  your  notice  in  all  its  fearful  tyranny.  The  efforts  to  break  away 
are  made,  in  a  certain  sense,  in  public,  and  whether  they  fail  or  succeed,  you 
are  able  to  observe.  But  if  these  be  the  more  notorious  cases  of  striving  against 
the  power  of  an  evil  habit,  you  are  not  to  think  that  the  power  may  not  be  as 
actually,  or  as  injuriously  exerted  in  cases  where  there  is  little  or  nothing  of 
manifest  tyranny.  There  may  be  habits  of  mental  or  moral  indulgence;  habits 
of  self-indulgence ;  habits  of  covetousness ;  habits  of  indifference  to  serious 
things ;  habits  of  delaying  the  season  of  repentance— these  may  be,  and  often 
are  found  in  one  and  the  same  person ;  and  though,  unquestionably,  no  one 
of  these  can  be  parallel  to  the  habit  by  which  the  drunkard  or  the  gambler  is 
enthralled,  yet  they  resemble  so  many  lesser  cords  tying  down  a  man  in  place 
of  one  massive  chain ;  and  the  endeavour  to  break  loose  will  be  equally  likely 
to  be  unsuccessful.  (Ibid.)  The  deceitftdness  of  sin  : — In  this,  and  in  the 
like  cases,  it  is  especially  by  and  through  its  deceitfulness,  that  sin  produces 
final  obduracy,  making  the  whole  head  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint."  The 
man  is  blinded  to  the  fact,  that  he  is  being  hardened  ;  it  is  all  done  underhand  ; 
and  while  there  is  the  rapid  formation  of  an  inveterate  habit  of  indulgence,  a 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  17 

depraved  inclination,  or  a  habit  of  covetousness,  or  a  habit  of  selfishness,  or 
a  habit  of  procrastination,  there  may  be  great  ease  and  satisfaction,  and  a  feeling 
of  cordial  commiseration  for  those  slaves  of  their  passions  who  may  be  said 
hardly  to  put  forth  exertion,  and  to  be  led  captive  by  Satan  at  his  will.  Away 
tlen  with  the  limiting  the  power  of  evil  habits  to  persons  who  live  in  the  practice 
of  gross  sins.  (Ibidl)  Sin  not  self -reformatory  : — It  might  seem,  if  sin  can  bo 
called  unnatural  and  monstrous,  that  nature  could  shake  it  off,  and  return  to 
her  own  law.  It  might  seem  also  that  the  results  of  sin  would  cure  the  sinner 
of  his  evil  tendencies,  and  send  him  back  on  the  path  of  wisdom.  We  grant  that 
a  man  in  a  state  of  sin  may  be  led  to  abandon  some  sin,  or  some  excess  of  sin, 
from  considerations  of  prudence.  We  grant  also  that  affliction  softens  many 
characters  which  it  fails  to  lead  to  sincere  repentance,  by  lowering  their  pride, 
or  by  sobering  their  views  of  life.  We  have  no  doubt  that  the  seeds  of  a  better 
life  are  sown  amid  the  storms  and  floods  of  calamity.  And  for  the  Christian 
it  is  certain  that  sorrow  is  a  principal  means  of  growth  in  holiness.  Nay,  it  may 
even  happen  that  a  sin  committed  by  a  Christian  may,  in  the  end,  make  him 
a  better  man,  as  Peter,  after  his  denial  of  Christ.  We  admit,  also,  that  a  life 
of  sin,  being  a  life  of  unrest  and  disappointment,  cannot  fail  of  being  felt  to  be 
such,  so  that  a  sense  of  inward  want,  a  longing  for  redemption,  enters  into  the 
feelings  of  many  hearts  that  are  not  willing  to  confess  it.  But  all  this  does  not 
oppose  the  view  which  we  take  of  sin,  that  it  contains  within  itself  no  radical 
cure,  no  real  reformation.  Man  is  not  led  by  sin  into  holiness.  The  means  of 
recovery  lie  outside  of  the  region  of  sin,  beyond  the  reach  of  experience, — they 
lie  in  the  free  grace  of  God,  which  sin  very  often  opposes  and  rejects,  when  it 
comes  with  its  healing  medicines  and  its  assurances  of  deliverance.  The  most 
which  prudence  can  do,  acting  in  view  of  the  experienced  consequences  of  sin, 
is  to  plaster  over  the  exterior,  to  avoid  dangerous  habits,  to  choose  deep-seated 
sins  in  lieu  of  such  as  lie  on  the  surface.  (T.  D.  Woolesey,  D.D.)  Sin  not 
self-reformatory  : — That  sin  by  no  process,  direct  or  indirect,  can  purify  the 
character,  will  appear — I.  From  the  self-propagating  nature  of  sin.  If 
sin  has  the  nature  to  spread  and  strengthen  its  power,  if  by  repetition  habits 
are  formed  which  are  hard  to  be  broken,  if  the  blindness  of  mind  which  super- 
venes adds  to  the  ease  of  sinning,  if  sin  spreading  from  one  person  to  another 
increases  the  evil  of  society,  and  therefore  reduces  the  power  of  each  one  of  its 
members  to  rise  above  the  general  corruption,  do  not  all  these  considerations 
ehow  that  sin  provides  no  cure  for  itself,  that  there  is,  without  Divine  intervention, 
no  remedy  for  it  at  all  ?  Can  any  one  show  that  there  is  any  maximum  of  strength 
in  sin,  so  that  after  some  length  of  continuance,  after  the  round  of  experiences  is 
run  over,  after  wisdom  is  gained,  its  force  abates,  and  the  soul  enters  on  a  work 
of  self-restoration  ?    II.  From  the  fact,  that  the  mass  of  the  persons  who 

ABB  TRULY  BECOVERED  FROM  SIN,  ASCRIBE  THEIR  CURE  TO  SOME  EXTERNAL  CAUSE,  ■ 

— nay,  I  should  say  to  some  extraordinary  cause,  which  sin  had  nothing  to  do  with 
bringing  into  existence.  Ask  any  one  who  seems  to  you  to  have  a  sincere  principle 
of  godliness,  what  it  was  that  wrought  the  change  in  his  case,  by  which  he  forsook 
his  old  sins.  Will  he  tell  you  that  it  was  sin  leading  him  round,  by  the  experience 
of  its  baneful  effects,  to  a  life  of  holiness  7  Will  he  even  refer  it  to  a  sense  of  obli- 
gation awakened  by  the  law  of  God  ?  Or,  will  he  not  rather  ascribe  it  to  the 
perception  of  God's  love  in  pardoning  sinners  through  His  Son  ?  Nor  will  he  stop 
there ;  he  will  go  beyond  the  outward  motive  of  truth  to  the  inward  operation 
of  a  Divine  Spirit.  You  cannot  make  those  who  have  spent  the  most  thought 
about  sin,  and  had  the  deepest  experience  of  its  quality,  admit  that  spiritual 
death  of  itself  works  a  spiritual  resurrection.  Moreover,  were  it  so,  you  could 
not  admit  the  necessity  of  the  Gospel.  What  is  the  use  of  medicine,  if  the  disease, 
after  running  its  course,  strengthens  the  constitution,  so  as  to  secure  it  against 
maladies  in  the  future  ?  Can  truth,  with  all  its  motives,  do  as  much  ?  To  this 
it  may  be  added,  that  the  prescriptions  of  the  Gospel  themselves  often  fail  to  cure 
the  soul ;  not  half  of  those  who  are  brought  up  under  the  Gospel  are  truly  Chris- 
tians.    This  again  shows  how  hard  the  cure  of  sin  is.     III.  We  do  not  find  that 

INORDINATE  DESIRE  IS  RENDERED  MODERATE  BY  THE  EXPERIENCE  THAT  IT  FAIL3 

to  satisfy  the  soul.  A  most  important  class  of  sins  are  those  of  excited  desire, 
or,  as  the  Scriptures  call  them,  of  lust.  The  extravagance  of  our  desires — the 
fact  that  they  grow  into  undue  strength,  and  reach  after  wrong  objects,  is  owing 
to  our  state  of  sin  itself,  to  the  want  of  a  regulative  principle  of  godliness.  But 
no  such  gratification  can  fill  the  souL     How  is  it  now  with  the  soul  which  has 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

thus  pampered  its  earthly  desires,  and  starved  its  heavenly  ?  Does  it  cure  itself 
of  its  misplaced  affections  ?  If  it  could,  all  the  warnings  and  contemplations 
of  the  moral  philosophers  might  be  thrown  to  the  winds,  and  we  should  only 
need  to  preach  intemperance  in  order  to  secure  temperance ;  to  feed  the  fire  of 
excess,  that  it  might  the  more  speedily  burn  out.  But  who  would  risk  such  an 
experiment  ?  Does  the  aged  miser  relax  his  hold  on  his  money-bags,  and  settle 
down  on  the  lees  of  benevolence  ?  IV.  The  pain  or  loss,  endured  as  a  fruit 
of  sin,  is  not,  of  itself,  reformatory.  I  have  already  said  that  under  the 
Gospel  such  wages  of  sin  are  often  made  use  of  by  the  Divine  Spirit  to  sober, 
subdue,  and  renovate  the  character.  But  even  under  the  Gospel,  how  many, 
instead  of  being  reformed  by  the  punishment  of  their  sins,  are  hardened,  em- 
bittered, filled  with  complaints  against  Divine  justice  and  human  law  !  We  find 
continual  complaints  on  the  part  of  the  prophets  that  the  people  remained 
hardened  through  all  the  discipline  of  God,  although  it  was  fatherly  chastisement, 
which  held  out  hope  of  restoration  to  the  Divine  favour.  Such  was  a  large  experi- 
ence of  the  efficacy  of  punishment  under  the  Jewish  economy.  Turn  now  to  a 
state  of  things  where  the  Divine  clemency  is  wholly  unknown  or  seen  only  in  its 
feeblest  glimmerings.  Will  naked  law,  will  pure  justice  work  a  reform  to  which 
Divine  clemency  is  unequal  ?  V.  Remorse  op  conscience  is  not  reformatory. 
Remorse,  in  its  design,  was  put  into  the  soul  as  a  safeguard  against  sin.  But  in 
the  present  state  of  man  remorse  has  no  such  power  for  the  following  reasons — 
1.  It  is  dependent  for  its  power,  and  even  for  its  existence,  on  the  truth  of  which 
the  mind  is  in  possession.  Of  itself  it  teaches  nothing ;  it  rather  obeys  the  truth 
which  is  before  the  mind  at  the  time.  If  now  the  mind  lies  within  the  reach  of 
any  means  by  which  it  can  ward  off  the  force  of  truth,  or  put  falsehood  in  the  place 
of  truth,  sin  will  get  the  better  of  remorse, — the  dread  of  remorse  will  cease  to  set 
the  soul  upon  its  guard.  2.  Every  sinner  has  such  means  of  warding  off  the  force 
of  truth,  and  so  of  weakening  the  power  of  self-condemnation,  at  his  command. 
The  sophistries  which  a  sinful  soul  plays  off  upon  itself,  the  excuses  which  palliate, 
if  they  do  not  justify  transgression,  are  innumerable.  3.  Remorse,  according 
to  the  operation  of  the  law  of  habit,  is  a  sentiment  which  loses  its  strength  as  the 
sinner  continues  to  sin.  4.  But,  once  more,  suppose  that  all  this  benumbing  of  con- 
science is  temporary,  as  indeed  it  may  well  be  ;  suppose  that  through  these  years 
of  sinning  it  has  silently  gathered  its  electric  power,  but,  when  the  soul  is  hackneyed 
in  sin  and  life  is  in  the  dregs,  will  give  a  terrible  shock — will  this  work  reform  ? 
Will  there  be  courage  to  undertake  a  work  then  for  which  the  best  hopes,  the 
greatest  strength  of  resolution,  and  the  help  of  God  are  wanted  ?  No  !  dis- 
couragement then  must  prevent  reform.  The  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  death. 
VI.  The  experience  of  sin  brings  the  soul  no  nearer  to  religious  truth. 
For  sin,  amongst  other  of  its  effects,  makes  us  more  afraid  of  God  or  more  indifferent 
to  Him.  The  first  inward  change  wrought  by  sin  is  to  beget  a  feeling  of  separation 
from  God.  To  this  we  may  add  that  a  habit  of  scepticism  is  contracted  in  a  course 
of  sinning,  which  it  is  exceedingly  hard  to  lay  aside.  It  became  necessary  in 
order  to  palliate  sin  and  render  self-reproach  less  bitter  to  devise  excuses  for  the 
indulgence  of  wrong  desires.  Is  then  such  a  habit  easy  to  be  shaken  off  ?  Is  it  easy, 
when  habits  of  sin  have  brought  on  habits  of  scepticism,  to  become  perfectly 
candid,  and  to  throw  aside  the  doubts  of  a  lifetime,  which  are  often  specious  and 
in  a  certain  sense  honestly  entertained  T  The  blindness  of  the  mind  is  the  best 
security  against  reformation.  1.  From  the  course  of  thought  in  this  discourse 
it  appears  that  our  present  life  shows  no  favour  to  the  opinion  that  sin  is  a  necessary 
stage  in  the  development  of  character  towards  perfection.  The  tendency  of  sin, 
as  life  shows,  is  to  grow  blinder,  more  insensible,  less  open  to  truth,  less  capable 
of  goodness.  2.  And,  again,  the  experience  of  this  world  throws  light,  or,  I  should 
rather  say,  darkness,  on  the  condition  of  the  sinner  who  dies  impenitent.  There 
is  no  tendency  in  the  experience  of  his  whole  life  towards  reform.  How  can  it  be 
shown  that  there  will  be  hereafter  T  3.  Our  subject  points,  as  with  a  finger  that 
can  be  seen,  to  the  best  time  for  getting  rid  of  sin.  All  we  have  said  is  bat  a 
commentary  on  that  text,  "  Exhort  one  another  daily  while  it  is  called  to-day, 
lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin."  Sin  is  now  shapening 
your  character ;  he  is  adding  stroke  after  stroke  for  the  final  countenance  and 
form.  If  you  wait  all  will  be  fixed ;  his  work  will  be  done.  (T.  D.  Woolesey, 
D.D.)  Isaiah  a  physician  as  well  as  a  seer : — He  says,  you  are  vitally  wrong, 
organically  out  of  health :  the  whole  head  is  sick,  the  whole  heart  is  faint :  the 
chief  members  of  your  constitution  are  wrong.     It  is  a  question  of  the  head  and 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  19 

the  heart.  Not,  the  foot  has  gone  astray,  and  the  hand  has  been  playing  an  evil 
game,  or  some  inferior  member  of  the  body  has  given  hint  of  restlessness  and 
treason ;  but,  the  head,  where  the  mind  abides,  is  sick ;  the  heart,  continually 
keeping  the  life-current  in  action,  is  faint  and  cannot  do  its  work.  Until  you 
see  the  seriousness  of  the  case  you  cannot  apply  the  right  remedies.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  What  is  human  nature? — Do  not  consult  the  sanguine  poet,  for  he 
takes  a  roseate  view  of  everything  :  he  sees  in  leprosy  only  the  beauty  of  its 
snowiness ;  he  looks  upon  the  green  mantling  pool,  and  sees  nothing  there  but 
some  hint  of  verdure.  Do  not  consult  the  gloomy  pessimist,  for  at  mid-day  he 
sees  nothing  but  a  variety  of  midnight,  and  in  all  the  loveliness  of  summer  he  sees 
nothing  but  an  attempt  to  escape  from  the  dreariness  of  winter.  But  consult 
the  line  of  reason  and  solid  fact,  or  undeniable  experience,  and  what  is  this  human 
nature  ?  Can  it  be  more  perfectly,  more  exquisitely  described  than  in  the  terms 
used  by  the  prophet  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  verses  of  this  chapter  ?  Do  the  poor 
only  fill  our  courts  of  law  ?  Are  our  courts  of  justice  only  a  variety  of  our  ragged 
schools  ?  Is  sin  but  the  trick  of  ignorance  or  the  luxury  of  poverty  ?  Or  the 
question  may  be  started  from  the  other  point :  Are  only  they  who  are  born  to 
high  degree  guilty  of  doing  wrong  ?  Read  the  history  of  crime,  read  human 
history  in  all  its  breadth,  and  then  say  if  there  be  not  something  in  human  nature 
corresponding  to  this  description.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  8.  A  cottage  In  a  vineyard. — A  lodge  in  a  garden  : — The  true  point  of  the 
comparison  will  not  appear  until  the  crop  is  over,  and  the  lodge  forsaken  by  the 
keeper.  Then  the  poles  fall  down  or  lean  every  way,  and  those  green  boughs 
with  which  it  is  shaded  will  have  been  scattered  by  the  wind,  leaving  only  a  ragged, 
sprawling  wreck, — a  most  affecting  type  of  utter  desolation — "  as  Sodom,  and 
like  unto  Gomorrah."     (Thomson's  "  The  Land  and  the  Book") 

Ver.  9.  Except  the  Lord  of  hosts  had  left  unto  us  a  very  small  remnant. — The 

influence  of  good  men  : — 1.  God's  greatness  in  the  universe.  The  "  Lord  of  hosts," 
or  Jehovah  of  hosts.  Who  are  His  "  hosts  "  ?  Angels.  Who  shall  count  the 
number  of  these  troops  ?  He  is  their  Creator  and  Sustainer.  2.  God's  authority 
over  good  men.  He  is  here  represented  as  having  "  left  a  very  small  remnant.  * 
Whilst  all  existences  are  absolutely  His,  He  has  a  special  interest  in  the  good. 
He  keeps  good  men  here  as  long  as  He  thinks  fit.  He  removes  them  at  His  pleasure. 
I.  Their  influence  is  highly  beneficent.  From  what  evil  did  this  rem- 
nant deliver  the  country  ?  The  answer  will  come  out  with  potency  by  replying 
to  two  other  questions.  1.  What  was  the  moral  condition  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  ?  Their  sin  was  "  very  grievous "  (Gen.  xviii.  20).  2.  What  was 
their  doom  ?  (Gen.  xix.  24,  25.)  Now,  it  was  from  this  moral  corruption  and 
terrible  doom  these  good  people,  it  is  said  in  our  text,  delivered  others.  "  Ye 
are  the  salt  of  the  earth."  History  abounds  with  examples  of  moral  declination, 
and  all  hearts  are  conscious  of  this  gravitating  force.  What  is  the  counteractive  7 
The  life  of  Christ  in  man.  That  life  flashes  a  light  upon  the  corrupt  heart  of 
society,  and  makes  it  blush.  But  few  will  dare  to  sin  in  the  presence  of  living 
holiness.  Vice  cowers  under  the  radiant  eye  of  virtue.  II.  Their  influence 
is  highly  beneficent,  however  few  their  number.  "  A  very  small  remnant." 
A  little  goodness  on  this  earth  goes  a  great  way.  Even  one  man  like  Moses, 
Elijah,  Paul,  Luther,  Whitefield,  Wesley,  may  stop  the  flow  of  depravity  and 
turn  the  destinies  of  an  age.  Conclusion — 1.  The  criminal  ignorance  of  nations 
in  relation  to  their  true  benefactors.  2.  The  supreme  value  of  Christianity. 
(D.  Tlvomas,  D.D.)  Beneficial  influence  of  goodness: — On  a  hot  summer's 
day,  some  years  ago,  I  was  sailing  with  a  friend  in  a  tiny  boat  on  a  miniature 
lake  enclosed  like  a  cup  within  a  circle  of  steep,  bare  Scottish  hills.  On  the 
shoulder  of  the  brown  sunburnt  mountain,  and  full  in  sight,  was  a  well  with 
a  crystal  stream  trickling  over  its  lip,  and  making  its  way  down  towards  the 
lake.  Around  the  well's  mouth  and  along  the  course  of  the  rivulet  a  belt  of  green 
stood  out  in  strong  contrast  with  the  iron  surface  of  the  rocks  all  around.  We 
soon  agreed  as  to  what  should  be  made  of  it.  There  it  was,  a  legend  clearly  printed 
by  the  finger  of  God  on  the  side  of  these  silent  hills,  teaching  the  passer-by  how 
needful  a  good  man  is,  and  how  useful  he  may  be  in  a  desert  world.  ( W.  Arnot, 
D.D.)  The  Lord  of  hosts: — Jehovah  of  hosts,  or  of  armies,  is  a  favourite 
expression  of  the  Hebrew  writers,  and  especially  of  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Zechariah 
and  Malachi,  by  which  they  recognise  Him  as  the  universal  governor  of  heaven 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  earth,  "  who  has  ordained  and  constituted  the  services  of  men  and  angels 
in  a  wonderful  order,"  and  who  employs  His  kingly  and  almighty  power  to  rule 
the  nations  in  righteousness,  and,  as  now,  both  to  punish  and  to  save  His  chosen 
people.     (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.) 

Ver.  10.  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  rulers  of  Sodom. — The  true  prophet 
deals  with  the  needs  of  the  present : — It  is  a  very  miserable  thing  for  a  preacher 
when  he  lives  wholly  either  in  the  past  or  in  the  future,  and  so  allows  either 
the  one  or  the  other  to  divert  him  from  the  duty  he  owes  to  God  in  the  present. 
What  is  more  pitiful,  more  unlike  the  idea  of  a  true  prophet,  than  to  find  one 
whose  work  is  to  preach  to  men  of  the  twentieth  century  occupying  his  time 
in  discoursing  of  the  sins  of  the  Jews  centuries  before  Christ,  or  even  of  those 
sinners  of  Jerusalem  who  crucified  the  Lord,  unless  his  first  care  be  to  warn  them 
lest  they  fall  after  the  same  example  of  unbelief  ?  And  Isaiah  would  have 
done  a  very  poor  service  to  the  Jews  at  that  time  if,  instead  of  holding  out  to 
them  light  for  their  present  guidance  and  wisdom  to  direct  them  in  the  emer- 

fencies  of  the  terrible  crisis  through  which  they  were  passing,  he  had  simply 
een  for  ever  inviting  them  to  contemplate  the  glories  of  a  future  nto  which  they 
would  never  enter.  He  was  there  to  tell  men  what  God's  will  was  in  relation 
to  themselves,  to  deal  with  their  own  difficulties,  to  answer  the  problems  by 
which  their  hearts  were  agitated,  to  cheer  them  under  the  reverses  by  which 
they  were  disheartened,  to  rebuke  them  for  the  evil  which  was  separating  them 
from  God,  and  warn  them  of  the  judgment  which  God  would  bring  upon  them  ; 
but,  at  the  same  time,  to  assure  them  of  His  infinite  pity  and  compassion.  (J. 
O.  Rogers,  B.A.)  Plain  speaking: — This  is  plain  speaking;  but  God  never 
sends  velvet-tongued  men  as  His  messengers.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Corrupt 
ruler  a  : — The  fish  stinks  first  at  the  head.     (Turkish  proverb.) 

Vers.  11-15.  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  Me? 
saith  the  Lord.  —  Hypocrisy  and  partiality  in  religion :  —  These  words  are 
not  to  be  understood  absolutely  but  comparatively,  and  with  respect  to  the 
manners  of  these  men.  For — I.  God  could  not  absolutely  reject  sacrifices, 
because  they  were  of  His  own  appointing,  as  we  are  abundantly  certified  in  the 
Books  of  Exodus  and  Leviticus.  And  they  were  instituted  for  very  good  pur- 
poses. 1.  As  federal  rites  between  God  and  His  people,  that  by  eating  of  what 
was  offered  upon  His  altar  they  might  profess  their  union  and  communion  with 
Him,  that  they  were  of  His  family,  He  their  Father,  and  they  His  children.  And 
this  is  what  made  idolatry  so  odious  to  Him,  and  for  which  He  declares  Himself 
a  jealous  God,  that  when  they  sacrificed  to  idols  they  made  the  same  acknowledg- 
ments to  them.  2.  Sacrifices  were  instituted  to  expiate  sins  of  ignorance  and 
trespasses  of  an  inferior  nature.  It  is  true,  St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
affirms,  that  it  was  impossible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  should  purify 
the  conscience,  so  as  to  wash  away  the  guilt  of  sin,  which  only  can  be  atoned 
for  by  the  Lamb  of  God,  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  But  yet  they 
availed  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,  and  were  accepted  of  God  in  lieu  of  temporal 
punishments.  3.  Sacrifices  were  designed  to  teach  men  that  without  shedding 
of  blood  there  could  be  no  remission  of  sins.  They  were  hereby  led  to  consider 
that  infinite  justice  properly  required  the  life  of  the  offender,  but  that  infinite 
mercy  accepted  of  a  vicarious  lire.  4.  Peace-offerings,  or  sacrifices  of  gratitude 
were  offered  to  God  in  hope  of  obtaining  some  favour,  or  as  a  thanksgiving  for 
having  received  some  signal  mercy  from  Him.  5.  Sacrifices  were  instituted 
for  types  and  representatives  of  that  final  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God  in  whom 
they  all  centred  and  were  consummated.  (Psa.  xl.  6 ;  Heb.  x.  5,  6.)  "  He 
taketh  away  the  first,  that  He  may  establish  the  second,"  i.e.,  the  sacrifice  of 
Himself;  and  consequently  Paul  calls  the  law  our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to 
Christ,  and  Christ  the  end  of  the  law,  because  it  was  ended  in  Him  and  by  Him. 
In  this  sense  it  is  that  our  Lord  affirms  that  He  came  not  to  destroy  the  law  and 
the  prophets,  but  to  fulfil  them.  He  fulfilled  the  moral  law  by  His  perfect  holi- 
ness and  virtue,  and  the  law  of  sacrifices  by  His  death  and  passion.  From  all 
this  I  infer  that  God  does  not  reject  sacrifices  as  such,  and  therefore  we  must 
conclude  that — II.  His  aversion  to  them  was  occasioned  by  the  ill  manners 
op  those  that  offered  them,  who  had  no  concern  to  accomplish  the  good  ends 
which  were  intended  by  them,  nor  considered  that  by  these  sacraments  they 
laid  themselves  under  renewed  obligations  to  be  sensible  of  their  own  demerits. 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  21 

to  repent  and  reform  whatever  they  found  amiss  in  their  lives,  and  to  abound 
in  the  love  of  God,  and  the  fruits  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  It  appears  from  the  characters 
of  these  men,  especially  in  their  latter  and  worst  times,  that  they  satisfied  them- 
selves with  the  opus  operatum,  the  external  duties  of  religion,  and  had  no  regard  to 
the  renovation  of  their  hearts  and  minds.  ( W.  Reading,  M.A.)  Religiousness  : — 
The  common  man's  commonest  refuge  from  conscience.  (Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 
Sin  offensive  to  God: — 1.  The  Scripture  for  our  understanding  ascribes  senses  to 
God,  and  here  we  find  every  sense  displeased  with  their  sins.  (1)  They  were 
offensive  to  His  tasting ;  for  their  burnt-offerings  of  rams,  with  the  fat  of  lambs, 
&c,  He  could  not  relish — they  delighted  Him  not,  they  were  sour  to  His  palate. 
(2)  They  were  offensive  to  His  smelling ;  for  He  tells  them  that  their  incense 
was  an  abomination  unto  Him — that  precious  perfume,  whioh  was  made  with 
so  many  sweet  spices  and  pure  frankincense  (Exod.  xxx.  34,  35),  did  stink  in 
His  nostrils,  the  scent  thereof  He  could  not  abide.  (3)  They  were  offensive  to 
His  feeling ;  for  their  new  moons  and  appointed  feasts  were  a  burden  unto  Him, 
He  was  aweary  to  bear  them.  And  though  He  be  not  weary  of  bearing  the  whole 
world,  yet  He  is  aweary  of  this  burden  ;  so  heavy  is  it  to  His  sense,  that  He  com- 
plains He  is  "  pressed  under  it,  as  a  cart  is  pressed  that  is  full  of  sheaves"  (Amos 
ii.  13).  (4)  They  were  offensive  to  His  seeing ;  and  therefore  He  tells  them, 
though  they  spread  forth  their  hands,  He  will  hide  His  eyes.  His  pure  eyes 
"  cannot  behold  evil,"  nor  endure  to  look  upon  iniquity,  and  therefore  He  must 
turn  away  His  face  from  them.  (5)  They  were  offensive  to  His  hearing ;  for 
when  they  make  many  prayers  He  will  not  hear.  Their  prayers  were  as  jarring 
in  His  ears  as  if  divers  distracted  musicians  should  play  upon  divers  bad  instru- 
ments so  many  several  tunes  at  one  time.  2.  Neither  were  their  sins  only  dis- 
pleasing to  His  senses,  but  also  grievous  to  His  mind,  and  therefore  He  tells  them, 
their  new  moons  and  appointed  feasts  His  soul  did  hate ;  which  is  an  emphatical 
speech,  and  an  argument  of  God's  hearty  detestation.  (N.  Rogers.)  Dis- 
sembled piety  is  double  iniquity.  (M.  Henry.)  M oral  whitewash : — God  is 
not  mocked,  and  even  man  is  not  long  imposed  upon  by  a  vain  show  of  devotion. 
We  once  heard  Father  Taylor,  a  noted  preacher  to  sailors  in  America,  pray  that 
men  who  thought  themselves  good,  and  were  not,  might  be  undeceived  ;  and 
he  cried,  "  Lord,  take  off  the  whitewash  !  "  (D.  Fraser,  D.D.)  Religious 
hypocrisy  :  Dukes  Orleans  and  Burgundy : — On  the  20th  of  November  1407, 
the  two  cousins  heard  mass,  and  partook  of  the  holy  sacrament  together  at  the 
church  of  the  Augustins.  Never  was  there  a  blacker  instance  of  sacrilegious 
hypocrisy.  At  the  very  moment  when  he  thus  profaned  the  most  solemn  rite 
of  Christianity,  Jean  sans  Peur  had  deliberately  doomed  his  enemy  to  a  bloody 
and  violent  death.  (Student's  France.)  Formal  religion  : — Dickens  describes 
how  in  Genoa  he  once  witnessed  "  a  great  festa  on  the  hill  behind  the  house, 
when  the  people  alternately  danced  under  tents  in  the  open  air  and  rushed  to 
say  a  prayer  or  two  in  an  adjoining  church  bright  with  red  and  gold  and  blue 
and  silver  :  so  many  minutes  of  dancing  and  of  praying  in  regular  turns  of  each." 
(H.  0.  Mackey.)  Inconsistency  : — Writing  of  Lorenzo  de  Medici,  Mr.  Howells 
eays :  "  After  giving  his  whole  mind  and  soul  to  the  destruction  of  the  last  rem- 
nant of  liberty,  after  pronouncing  some  fresh  sentence  of  ruin  or  death,  he  entered 
the  Platonic  Academy,  and  ardently  discussed  virtue  and  the  immortality  of 
the  soul ;  then  sallying  forth  to  mingle  with  the  dissolute  youth  of  the  city,  he 
sang  his  carnival  songs,  and  abandoned  himself  to  debauchery ;  returning  home 
with  Pulci  and  Politian,  he  recited  verses  and  talked  of  poetry ;  and  to  each 
of  these  occupations  he  gave  himself  up  as  wholly  as  if  it  were  the  sole  occupa- 
tion of  his  life."  (Ibid.)  "  Holiness  becometh  Thine  house  "  : — When  Ruskin 
was  making  explorations  about  Venice,  in  the  Church  of  St.  James,  he  discovered, 
engraved  on  a  stone,  these  words,  "  Around  the  temple  let  the  merchant's  weights 
be  true,  his  measures  just,  and  his  contracts  without  guile."  (Sunday  School 
Chronicle.)  The  Paris  Figaro  mentions  that  a  curious  discovery  was  made 
recently  when  the  famous  robber-gang  of  Papakoritzopoulo  was  broken  up.  In 
the  pocket  of  this  most  notorious  of  European  brigands  was  found  a  small  Bible, 
neatly  bound  and  wrapped  in  a  clean  silk  handkerchief,  a  prayer-book,  holy 
relics  in  tiny  boxes,  a  cross,  and  other  religious  objects.  Inconsistency  : — The 
son  of  Sirach  asks  of  him  that  washeth  himself  after  the  touching  of  a  dead  body, 
and  then  touches  it  again,  what  availeth  his  washing  ?  "So  is  it  with  a  man 
that  fasteth  for  his  sins,  and  goeth  again,  and  doeth  the  same  :  who  will  hear  his 
prayer  ?  or  what  doth  his  humbling  profit  him  ?  "     (F.  Jacox,  B.A.)        Audacious 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

hypocrisy  : — When  Pope  Hadrian  II.  consented  at  last  to  admit  Lothair  to  the 
holy  communion  he  warned  him,  "  But  if  thou  thinkest  in  thine  heart  to  return 
to  wallow  in  lust,  beware  of  receiving  this  sacrament,  lest  thou  provoke  the  terrible 
judgment  of  God."  And  the  king  shuddered,  but  did  not  draw  back.  (Ibid.) 
Detestable  worship  : — Dr.  South  saya  of  him  who,  by  hypothesis,  comes  to  church 
with  an  ill  intention,  that  he  comes  to  God's  house  upon  the  devil's  errand, 
and  the  whole  act  is  thereby  rendered  evil  and  detestable  before  God.  The 
prayers  of  a  wicked  man  are  by  Jeremy  Taylor  likened  to  "  the  breath  of  cor- 
rupted lungs:  God  turns  away  from  such  unwholesome  breathings."  (Ibid.) 
Smuggler  and  preacher  too  : — The  letters  of  Robert  Louis  Stevenson  tell  an  astonish- 
ing story  of  smuggling  in  the  Shetlands.  The  revenue  official  had  great  trouble 
with  a  man  known  as  Preaching  Peter,  who,  whenever  he  returned  with  his  spoils, 
sent  round  handbills  to  announce  his  coming,  and  went  about  the  country  preach- 
ing. After  he  had  much  prayed  and  much  preached,  he  gave  the  benediction, 
and  this  was  the  signal  for  all  who  knew  him  to  crowd  round.  "  How  many 
gallons  shall  I  give  you  ?  "  "  How  many  do  you  want  ?  "  Such  was  the  con- 
versation ;  and  so  he  sold  his  smuggled  spirits  and  improved  the  people's  souls 
while  he  filled  his  own  purse.  Worship  and  wickedness  :—  -A  famous  brigand 
in  Sicily  was  constantly  robbing  and  sometimes  murdering.  But  he  would  never 
go  forth  on  his  expeditions  without  first  kneeling  at  a  little  shrine  in  his  cave, 
where  he  kept  an  image  of  the  Virgin.  (Christian  Commonwealth.)  Pew- 
holding  : — Emerson,  in  an  essay,  refers  to  "  what  is  called  religion,  but  is,  perhaps, 
pew-holding."  A  red-handed  religionist : — There  is  no  name  in  Scottish  history 
round  which  darker  or  grimmer  or  bloodier  associations  gather  than  the  name 
of  John  Graham  of  Claverhouse.  He  hunted  and  harried  the  men  of  the  Coven- 
ant. He  shot  some  of  them  with  his  own  hand.  He  brought  misery  and  weep- 
ing, widowhood  and  orphanhood,  to  many  a  lowly  and  godly  home.  Yet  he 
was  scrupulous  in  the  observance  of  all  religious  ordinances.  Let  me  beware 
of  this  double  life.     (A.  Smellie,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  The  calling  of  assemblies,  I  cannot  away  with. — Service  not 
services : — 1.  Many  think  religion  flourishes  if  services  are  well  attended.  But, 
unless  we  are  "  willing  and  obedient "  our  "  fat  things  "  will  not  make  us  fat. 
They  will  rather  harm  us.  Paul  says,  "  Ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ."  Your 
vocation  is  the  main  part  of  your  service  for  Him,  provided  you  are  in  the  place 
where  He  would  have  you  be.  If  you  are  not  clear  about  that  point,  be  sure  and 
inquire  of  Him.  In  a  well-ordered  house  there  are  many  servants,  and,  if  one 
tried  to  do  another's  work,  there  would  be  confusion.  Do  your  work  and  do  it 
faithfully.  If  God  has  special  and  occasional  service,  beyond  this,  He  will  direct 
you  to  it.  2.  Again,  remember  what  the  apostle  says  about  service,  "  Not 
slothful  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord  — fervent,  that  is,  quite 
hot,  boiling.  You  might  as  well  run  a  locomotive  without  steam  as  try  and  serve 
the  Lord  without  fervour.  How  shall  you  get  it  ?  You  can  get  it  in  a  measure 
from  the  influence  of  those  who  themselves  are  warm  in  God's  service.  Catch 
fire  from  such  as  Samuel  Rutherford,  whose  volume  reminds  me  of  a  contrivance 
they  had  before  matches  were  invented.  It  was  a  kind  of  bottle,  containing  some 
mixture,  into  which  you  dipped  the  match,  and  it  immediately  took  fire.  These 
letters  of  Rutherforcf's  are  just  like  that.  When  you  feel  dull,  lukewarm,  read 
one  or  two  of  those  letters,  and,  provided  your  heart  is  sincere,  see  if  it  does  not 
set  you  on  fire.  But  we  have  better  than  that.  We  have  Rutherford's  Master. 
The  central  source  of  holy  zeal,  of  burning  love,  is  there.  3.  Again,  be  willing 
to  do  what  is  humble,  what  seems  useless,  if  He  so  direct.  It  is  a  great  trial  of 
patience.  Moses  tended  sheep  forty  years.  God's  chief  difficulty  with  us  is,  not 
filling,  but  emptying  us ;  not  edifying  or  building  up,  as  it  is  pulling  us  down. 
Look  at  the  history  of  the  Church,  and  you  will  see  that  most,  if  not  all,  of  those 
whom  God  has  employed  in  a  signal  manner  for  His  glory,  have  been,  in  one  way 
or  another,  among  the  most  afflicted  of  men  either  in  heart  or  in  body,  sometimes 
in  both.  Therefore,  do  not  be  afraid  of  suffering ;  it  helps  service.  The  work 
of  God  is  mostly  hidden  work,  fully  known  to  Him,  known  partly  to  those  who  are 
the  immediate  objects  of  it,  scarcely  known  to  ourselves.  I  am  afraid,  nowadays, 
there  is  a  great  deal  too  much  speaking  about  the  work  done  or  doing.  I  have 
sometimes  thought  how  well  the  apostles  got  on  without  newspapers — and  the 
work  was  done  all  the  same  !  4.  If  we  are  thus  doing  God's  work  fervently, 
humbly,  patiently,  though  obscurely,  looking  to  Him  alone,  we,  like  our  Master, 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  23 

will  finish  the  work  that  He  has  given  us  to  do.  Only  as  we  abide  in  Christ,  can 
we  be  able  to  complete  our  work.  Mere  machinery  and  outward  activity  are  of 
no  account  without  this  daily  dwelling  in,  and  drawing  from,  Him.  (T.  Monod.) 
Acceptable  worship : — To  adore  God  for  His  goodness,  and  to  pray  to  Him  to  make 
us  good,  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  wholesome  worship.  Then  is  a  man  fit  to 
come  to  church,  sins  and  all,  if  he  carry  his  sins  into  church  not  to  carry  them  out 
again  safely  and  carefully,  as  we  are  all  too  apt  to  do,  but  to  cast  them  down  at 
the  foot  of  Christ's  Cross,  in  the  hope  (and  no  man  ever  hoped  that  hope  in  vain) 
that  he  will  be  lightened  of  that  burden,  and  leave  some  of  them,  at  least,  behind 
him.     (C.  Kingaley,  M.A.) 

Ver.  14.  I  am  weary  to  bear  them. — Ood  oppressed : — Wonderful  expression 
this !  It  suggests  the  idea  that  the  Almighty  is  oppressed  with  the  weight 
of  human  sins.  I.  The  exquisite  moral  sensibility  of  God.  God  is 
not  mere  force  or  intellect,  He  is  heart,  He  is  infinite  sensibility.  All  events  and 
actions  vibrate  on  His  nature — He  is  feelingly  alive  to  all.  II.  The  amazing 
patience  of  God.  If  He  is  "  weary  "  why  does  He  "  bear  "  it  T  Why  does 
He  not  quench  in  the  midnight  of  eternal  extinction  all  the  authors  of  sin  ? 
III.  The  remedial  agency  of  God.  Because  sin  is  so  abhorrent,  and  the 
sinner  so  dear,  He  sent  His  "  only  begotten  Son  "  into  the  world,  in  order  to 
"  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself."     (Homiliat.) 

Ver.  16.  Wash  yon,  mate  you  clean. — Repentance  necessary  and  possible: — 
Two  things  are  necessarily  to  be  acknowledged  to  encourage  endeavours 
after  piety.  1.  To  be  assured  that  God  will  not  be  wanting  to  afford  the  assistance 
of  His  grace  and  Spirit.  2.  That  by  this  assistance  we  are  enabled  to  do  our 
duty.  There  are  two  things  which  no  wise  man  doth  submit  to  his  care  or  thought, 
namely,  necessaries  and  impossibles.  For  things  necessary,  he  needs  not  to 
charge  himself  with  them,  for  they  will  be  done  of  course ;  and  for  things  im- 
possible, it  is  a  vain  thing  for  him  to  undertake.  We  are  not  to  consider  ourselves 
to  be  in  a  state  of  impossibility,  therefore  we  must  suppose  that  God  is  with  us  by 
His  grace  and  assistance ;  and  while  God  is  with  us  that  we  are  able  to  do  those 
things  that  He  requires  of  us — to  wash  and  make  us  clean,  &c,  which  words 
are  to  be  considered  according  to  their  form  and  according  to  their  matter, 
i.  According  to  their  form,  they  are  an  exhortation,  and  so  it  is  not  in  vain  that  we 
are  exhorted  to  duty.  2.  In  respect  of  their  matter,  they  afford  these  two  observa- 
tions— ( 1 )  That  sin  is  in  itself  a  thing  of  defilement  and  pollution.  (2)  That  religion 
is  a  motion  of  restoration.  Ill  habits  do  strangely  bias  our  faculties  ;  but  though 
they  do  this,  yet  they  do  not  absolutely  determine  our  faculties  or  sink  them,  for 
these  faculties  are  of  the  essence  of  the  soul.  It  is  with  much  difficulty  they  are 
overcome  (Jer.  xiii.  23) ;  but  the  faculty  is  free  notwithstanding  any  habit 
acquired  ;  otherwise  it  were  impossible  ever  to  recover  any  habitual  sinner. 
I.  God  doth  primarily  desibe  the  good  of  all  His  cbeatuees  (1  Tim.  ii.  4; 
Isa.  v.  4).  II.  God  doth  not  desire  man's  salvation  without  his  eeturn. 
For  it  is  impossible  that  any  man  should  be  happy  in  a  way  of  obstinacy  and 
rebellion  against  God.  III.  God  doth  not  desire  man's  return  without 
his  own  consent.  For  if  He  should  desire  this,  He  should  desire  that  which 
cannot  be :  for  being  intelligent  and  voluntary  agents,  we  cannot  truly  be  said 
to  do  that  which  we  do  against  our  minds.  For  to  a  human  act  two  things  are 
necessary ;  that  there  be  the  judgment  of  reason  in  the  understanding,  and  the 
choice  of  the  will.  If  the  mind  do  not  consent,  it  is  not  a  free  act ;  and  if  not  done 
freely,  and  of  choice,  it  cannot  be  an  act  of  virtue ;  and  if  not  an  act  of  virtue, 
it  cannot  be  of  any  moral  consideration.  It  is  no  less  an  act  of  the  will,  though 
a  man  be  at  the  first  attempt  unwilling  and  averse ;  yea,  though  he  suffer  great 
difficulty  to  bring  himself  to  it.  For  this  man  hath  brought  himself  to  it  by 
reason,  consideration,  and  argument,  and  so  his  consent  is  the  better  grounded. 
Application — 1.  We  ought  to  be  thankful  to  God,  and  to  acknowledge  Him  for 
the  gracious  assistance  that  He  doth  afford  unto  us.  2.  We  ought  to  make  use 
of  and  employ  this  Divine  assistance,  which  is  in  the  apostle's  language,  not  to 
receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain  (2  Cor.  vi.  1).  (B.  Whichcote,  D.D.)^  Moral 
ablution : — I.  That  sin  can  be  separated  from  man's  nature.  Sin  is  no  more 
a  part  of  human  nature  than  a  stain  is  of  a  garment.  1.  Human  nature  has 
existed  without  ever  having  been  touched  by  sin.  Christ  through  all  His 
life  could  say,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  Me." 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

2.  Human  nature  does  exist  after  having  been  cleansed  from  sin.  It  does  so 
in  heaven.  II.  That  sin  should  be  separated  from  man's  nature.  There 
are  three  obvious  reasons  for  this  command — 1.  Because  your  pollution  conceals 
the  moral  image  of  Himself  which  your  Maker  has  impressed  upon  your  nature. 
Sin  is  such  a  besmearment  of  the  moral  mirror  of  man's  being,  that  scarcely  a 
Divine  ray  is  seen  reflected.  2.  Because  your  pollution  enfeebles  your  moral 
health.  Physical  pollution  is  inimical  to  physical  health.  Sin  renders  a  man 
powerless  for  good.  3.  Because  your  pollution  injures  society.  (Homilist.) 
Practical  regeneration  : — The  call  is  made  to  the  class  that  are  usually  given  up. 
Two  questions  come  up  in  connection  with  this  subject.  1.  When  a  man  is  wrong 
in  his  life,  is  wicked  on  account  of  the  strength  of  constitutional  peculiarities, 
and  is  organised  with  such  passion,  such  will,  such  temper,  such  pride  and  avarice, 
that  that  organisation  compels  as  well  as  controls  him,  is  it  possible  for  him  to 
change  that  organisation  and  its  fruits  ?  2.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  pro- 
portions in  which  a  man's  faculties  are  given  to  him,  if  he  has  been  cast  in  the 
midst  of  temptations,  is  it  in  his  power,  if  he  be  an  average  man,  to  break  away, 
to  assert  his  own  sovereignty,  and  recover  himself  ?  Can  a  man  control,  first, 
himself  inwardly,  and  second,  himself  outwardly  ?  Did  not  Peter  wrestle  success- 
fully with  his  constitutional  organisation  ?  There  is  an  example  which  is  still 
more  remarkable  in  some  respects.  The  account  which  Paul  gives  of  himself  is 
most  striking.  Here  we  have  a  precisionist,  a  narrow  and  intense  bigot,  a  man 
whose  conscience  was  logical,  and  who  therefore  followed  his  conscience  without 
scruple  and  without  the  restraint  of  any  meliorating  principle.  Not  only  was  he  a 
man  of  the  most  malign  feeling  in  the  service  of  religion,  but  he  was  a  man  of  the 
utmost  firmness  of  purpose.  Nothing  could  stop  him  on  sea  or  on  land.  He  was 
a  man  of  the  most  sensitive  pride.  Now,  turn  to  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  First 
Corinthians,  and  see  what  the  fruit  of  Paul's  change  was.  It  may  be  said  to  be  a 
record  of  his  experience.  Then,  as  to  the  other  question,  Can  men  control  their 
circumstances  ?  Ha  man  can  overrule  a  constitutional  peculiarity,  how  much 
easier  can  he  control  that  which  is  not  of  himself,  but  is  exterior  to  himself  !  The 
experiences  of  the  Gospel  for  thousands  of  years  show  that  men  can  be  reclaimed 
from  all  forms  of  vice.  Men  can  break  through  and  rescue  themselves  from  the 
power  of  wickedness  when  it  takes  on  an  external  and  social  form.  That  is  the 
voice  of  the  Old  Testament.  Is  it  a  false  proclamation,  based  upon  a  false  view 
of  life  and  possibility  ?  Pre-eminently  it  is  the  voice  of  the  New  Testament.  The 
invisible  things  of  God  are  more  and  mightier  than  the  visible.  If  a  man  treats 
himself  simply  as  a  physical  organisation,  and  believes  in  nothing  but  what  he  can 
Bee  and  handle,  it  may  seem  to  him  as  though  this  world  were  simply  a  gigantic 
crashing  machine,  irresistible  in  its  impulses,  and  as  though  the  best  way  for  him 
were  to  submit  himself  to  it,  and  let  it  take  him  whither  it  will ;  but  we  are  taught, 
and  we  believe  that  the  whole  heaven  is  full  of  powers  which  are  mightier  than 
any  which  are  seen.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Renewing  forces  are  silent  and  gentle  : — 
Nature  itself  gives  us  an  illustration  of  it.  When  the  spring  draws  the  sap  out  of 
the  ground  into  the  trees  the  actual  force  which  is  exerted  is  greater  than  that  of  all 
human  machines  put  together.  Never  was  there  an  engine  built  that  could  for  one 
single  moment  compare  with  the  development  of  actual  physical  power  in  an  oak 
tree  standing  in  a  field,  acre-broad,  every  spring.  Yet  you  see  nothing  and  hear 
nothing.  But  it  has  been  measured  and  estimated.  There  is  in  the  silent  influence 
of  the  seasons  more  power  than  in  all  the  storms  that  ever  swept  over  the  earth 
since  creation.  The  invisible  forces  of  nature  are  mightier  than  the  visible.  Look 
into  a  household.  The  bustling  husband  who  drives  the  children  here  and  there, 
and  will  have  order,  has  nothing  but  disorder ;  while  the  mother  sits  still,  and 
loves,  rules  over  every  child  in  the  family,  and  secures  perfect  obedience.  The 
silence  of  love  is  mightier  than  all  the  physical  or  moral  force  of  boisterous  strength. 
Now,  this  truth,  which  we  discern  even  in  the  lowest  forms  of  matter,  and  which 
grows  more  and  more  striking  as  you  ascend  along  the  line  of  human  society, 
meets  the  great  declaration  of  the  Divine  Word,  that  God  has  given  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  that  this  invisible  and  silent  force  in  the  universe  is  such  that  more 
are  they  that  are  for  a  man  who  wants  to  turn  than  are  they  that  are  against 
him.  The  whole  heaven  is  God's  apparatus  for  helping  men  to  unharness  their 
faults,  to  lay  aside  their  habits,  to  change  mightily  their  whole  internal  economy, 
yea,  to  so  revolutionise  themselves  that,  whereas  before  the  animal,  the  physical, 
was  in  the  ascendency,  now  the  angel,  the  spiritual,  is.  Is  there,  then,  such  an 
influence  existing   in   every   community  ?     Yes,    in   every   community.     (Ibid. ) 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  25 

In  regeneration  man  must  co-operate  with  God's  Spirit : — If  men  would  have  the 
Help  of  the  sun  they  must  not  sulk  in  caves ;  if  men  would  set  the  sun  to  bringing 
forth  vines  and  corn  and  other  grains  they  must  employ  it  according  to  the  sun's 
laws  and  methods.  If  they  do  this  they  shall  have  the  benefit  of  its  might.  All 
the  power  that  is  in  nature  is  mine  if  I  but  study  natural  law  and  obey  it.  Now, 
the  invisible  influences  in  the  Divine  nature,  we  are  taught  very  abundantly  in 
the  Word  of  God,  are  to  be  sought  as  men  seek  the  seasons.  If  the  power  that  is 
in  God  is  to  come  to  the  help  of  a  man  there  should  be  at  least  as  much  seeking 
as  men  give  to  the  laws  of  nature  when  they  seek  them.  How  do  men  attempt 
to  renovate  their  spiritual  nature  ?  With  what  dalliance,  what  carelessness, 
what  facile  discouragement,  what  intermissions,  what  associations  that  neutralise 
or  blur  that  which  is  bright  in  us  do  men  seek  to  bring  the  Divine  influence  to  bear 
upon  their  constitutional  peculiarities !  Are  you  proud  ?  You  know  how  to 
extract  the  roots  of  the  mightiest  tree  that  ever  grew ;  you  know  how  to  attack 
it  and  draw  it  forth ;  and  yet  the  influences  by  which  a  man  may  extract  by  the 
roots  all  the  evil  influences  within  him  are  a  hundred  times  greater,  if  men  had 
Borne  conception  of  the  necessity.  A  man  can  overmaster  his  pride.  Paul  did  it. 
Can  a  man  change  his  basilar  passions  so  that  they  shall  be  held  in  abeyance  ? 
Certainly  he  can.  Something  can  be  done  for  every  man  by  physiological  methods. 
A  man  of  violent  temper,  easily  excited,  an  excessively  meat-eating  man,  or  a  man 
addicted  to  the  use  of  stimulating  drinks,  can  hardly  expect  to  overcome  the 
animal  in  himself  while  he  is  gorging  him,  and  is  building  fires  under  the  very 
caldrons  which  he  would  cool  off.  If  a  man  choose  to  go  through  the  necessary 
practice,  he  certainly  can  change  ;  but  if  a  man  say  to  himself,  "  I  do  not  believe 
in  religion  ;  I  will  change  by  and  by  ;  it  is  not  convenient  now  ;  I  do  not  under- 
stand this  great  change,  and  I  do  not  like  to  go  into  anything  which  my  reason 
does  not  comprehend,"  I  say  to  him,  Do  you  insist,  when  you  are  sick,  and  you  send 
for  your  physician,  upon  entering  into  an  argument  with  him  ?  Do  you  say  to 
him,  "  What  is  the  matter  with  me  ?  "  and  when  he  prescribes  for  you  do  you  say, 
"  Sit  down  and  tell  me  the  whole  history  of  this  medicine,  who  invented  it,  what 
its  use  is,  who  has  employed  it,  and  what  right  the  man  had  to  compose  it  or 
mix  it  "  ?  You  do  not  act  so.  A  man  under  such  circumstances  instantly  makes 
a  practical  matter  of  it,  and  takes  certain  practical  steps.  On  the  other  side,  no 
man  can  tear  himself  away  from  surrounding  temptations  and  evil  influences 
without  an  adaptation  of  his  life  and  will  to  the  peculiar  work  which  is  required. 
Shall  a  man  attempt  to  change  himself  from  evil  to  good,  and  do  it  easily  and 
thoughtlessly  and  carelessly  ?  Such  a  change  never  comes  by  accident  nor  by  a 
little  striving.  Here  is  the  simple  fact  of  this  whole  subject :  both  philosophy 
and  example  teach  that  in  our  strife  for  virtue  the  passions  and  appetites,  the 
infelicities  of  our  organisation,  can  be  overmastered ;  that  we  can  take  ourselves 
out  of  our  constitutional  faults,  and  that  if  we  have  fallen  under  temptations, 
it  is  possible  for  us  to  break  the  net  and  escape  from  them.  When  Jesus  came, 
one  of  the  most  matchless  and  eloquent  of  all  His  utterances  was  that  He  had 
come  to  open  the  prison  doors,  to  break  the  shackles,  to  give  the  prisoners  liberty, 
and  to  let  those  that  were  bound  go  free.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Cease  to  do  evil;  learn  to  do  well. — An  inoffensive  life: 
— The  order  in  which  these  words  are  placed,  was  evidently  designed  to  teach 
lis,  that  the  foundation  of  acting  right  is  avoiding  everything  wrong.  Several 
other  parts  of  Scripture  lay  down  the  same  rule  in  almost  the  same  terms  (Psa. 
xxxiv.  14,  xxxvii.  27;  Amos  v.  15;  Rom.  xii.  9;  1  Pet.  hi.  11);  and  many 
express  or  imply  the  same  doctrine,  putting  repentance  before  faith  and  obedience 
(Matt.  xxi.  32  ;  Mark  i.  15  ;  Acts  xx.  21 ;  Tit.  ii.  12,  13).  Even  heathen  authors, 
in  very  distant  ages  and  countries,  have  given  the  like  direction.  And  indeed 
every  one  must  own  the  justness  of  it :  but  still  very  few  appear  to  perceive 
or  attend  sufficiently  to  its  importance :  which,  therefore,  I  shall  endeavour 
to  shew  you — I.  In  respect  of  our  conduct  is  general.  It  is  plainly  the 
natural  and  rational  method  to  begin  with  removing  what  else  will  obstruct  our 

Erogress,  and  to  make  unity  within  our  own  breasts  our  earnest  care.  He  who 
ath  only  consistent  pursuits  may  follow  them  with  a  prospect  of  success :  but 
a  mind,  distracted  between  contrary  principles  of  action,  can  hope  for  nothing 
but  to  be  drawn  backward  and  forward  by  them  continually,  as  they  chance 
to  prevail  in  their  turns.  Things,  indeed,  that  do  but  accidentally  give  some 
little  hindrance  to  each  other  now  and  then,  may  be  prosecuted  together,  and 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  due  preference,  when  they  interfere,  be  adjusted  well  enough.  But  sin  and 
duty  are  so  essentially  opposite,  that  their  interests  can  never  be  reconciled. 
They  flow  from  different  motives,  proceed  by  different  means,  aim  at  different 
ends,  and  thwart  one  another  perpetually.  And  it  is  to  men's  overlooking  this 
obvious  truth,  that  the  miscarriage  of  their  good  intentions,  the  irresolution 
of  their  lives,  the  incoherence  of  their  characters,  in  a  great  measure,  owes  its 
rise.  Every  one  of  us  knows,  in  the  main,  what  he  ought  to  do  :  every  one  feels 
an  approbation  of  it ;  and  so  far,  at  least,  a  disposition  to  it.  But  then  he  feels 
also  dispositions  quite  adverse :  and  though  he  sees  them  to  be  unwarrantable, 
yet  it  is  painful  to  root  them  out,  and  not  pleasing  even  to  take  notice  of  them. 
So,  to  avoid  trouble,  both  sorts  are  allowed  to  grow  up  together  as  they  can  ; 
and,  which  will  thrive  faster,  soon  appears.  Perhaps  but  one  or  two  sorts  of 
wickedness  were  intended  to  be  indulged :  but  these  have  unforeseen  connections 
with  others,  and  those  with  more.  Or,  had  they  none,  when  men  have  once 
yielded  to  do  but  a  single  thing  amiss,  they  have  no  firm  ground  to  stand  upon 
in  refusing  to  do  a  second,  and  a  third :  so  gradually  they  lose  their  strength, 
God  withdraws  His  help,  and  they  fall  from  bad  to  worse.  II.  In  respect  op 
our  behaviour  to  each  other.  It  is  a  remarkable  thing  in  the  constitution 
of  this  world,  that  we  have  much  more  power  of  producing  misery  in  it  than 
happiness.  Every  one,  down  to  the  most  insignificant,  is  capable  of  giving  dis- 
quiet, nay,  grievous  pain  and  affliction  to  others,  and  often  to  great  numbers, 
without  the  least  difficulty ;  while  even  those  of  superior  abilities  in  every  way, 
can  hardly  discover  the  means,  unless  it  be  within  a  very  narrow  compass  now 
and  then,  of  doing  any  great  good,  or  communicating  any  considerable  pleasure. 
Besides,  the  effects  of  kindnesses  may  always  be  entirely  lost :  but  those  of  injuries 
too  frequently  can  never  be  remedied.  And  therefore  we  ought  to  watch  over 
ourselves  with  perpetual  care,  examine  the  tendency  of  all  our  words  and  actions, 
and,  not  contented  with  meaning  no  harm,  be  solicitous  to  do  none.  The  harm 
that  we  do  through  heedlessness  is  certainly  not  so  criminal,  as  if  it  were 
purposely  contrived :  but  may  be  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  severely  felt  notwith- 
standing :  or  though  it  were  but  slightly,  why  should  we  be  so  inadvertent,  as 
unnecessarily  to  cause  but  an  hour's,  nay,  a  moment's  vexation  or  grief  to  one  of  our 
brethren  ;  or  deprive  him  of  the  smallest  of  those  innocent  gratifications,  that  help 
to  alleviate  the  sorrows  of  life,  and  make  the  passage  through  it  comfortable  ? 
{T.  Seeker,  LL.D.)  The  Bible  art  of  reforming  men  : — I.  Its  primary  principle  is, 
that  reformation  should  begin  at  the  source  of  human  conduct.  Change 
the  springs  of  all  action  and  you  change  every  element  of  conduct.  Ye  must 
be  born  again.  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  all  evils.  1.  It  does  not  set  aside  all 
forms  of  outward  help — society,  industry,  family,  church,  but  these  are  aux- 
iliaries to  the  central  endeavour  of  the  human  will.  2.  It  recognises,  too,  that 
the  complete  work  is  by  stages,  gradual — though  the  purpose.may  be  immediate. 
II.  Not  only  is  the  central  element  of  reformation  clearly  established,  but  what 
may  be  called  the  working-plan  of  reformation  from  evil  is  laid  down. 
(Dan.  iii.  27.  Compare  that  with  Matt.  iii.  8-10.)  1.  Right-doing  is  the  way 
to  cease  wrong-doing.  Eph.  iv.  28 — not  enough  to  stop  getting  by  stealing, 
but  must  do  that  by  learning  how  to  get  by  working  !  The  way  to  cure  evil, 
is  to  set  a  current  of  contrary  action.  2.  The  illustration  of  the  inward  govern- 
ment of  mind — how  feelings  of  one  class  rise  or  fall  in  answer  to  the  excitement 
or  somnolency  of  another.  3.  The  two  faulty  forms.  (1)  Forming  a  purpose, 
without  taking  practical  steps — empty  resolves — by  repentance — leaves  only  ; 
no  fruit.  (2)  Reformation  by  external  regulation — mechanical.  III.  The 
difficulties  of  vice,  of  habit,  when  they  are  simply  watched  against. 
1.  They  leave  men  lonesome — unhappy.  2.  The  soul  develops  power  to  over- 
turn evil  only  by  inspiration  of  opposite  virtues.     IV.  The  reason  why  so 

MANY  PEOPLE  BECOME  NEGATIVE,  FEEBLE,  AND  UNINTERESTING  WHEN  THEY 
BECOME  RELIGIOUS.  V.  THE  REASON  WHY  SO  MANY  ARE  STRONG,  NOBLE,  AS 
WORLDLY  MEN  IN  BUSINESS,  BUT  WITHOUT   FORCE   IN   SPIRITUALS.       They  let  loose 

their  whole  selves  in  the  one  case.  They  tie  up  the  strong  elements  in  the  other, 
for  fear  of  mischief — and  do  not  let  out  any  other.  (Prov.  iii.  13-18 ;  also 
viii.  11,  &c.)  VI.  When  men  turn  from  evil  let  them  go  clear  over  to 
religion  !  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  men  for  the  times: — Men  are  wanted  who 
are  prepared  to  march  in  the  van  of  the  army  of  national,  civic,  and  personal 
reformers, — men  with  the  one  thought  dominating  them  that  God  the  Father  lives, 
and  loves  with  an  everlasting  love  every  member  of  the  human  race, — men  who. 


ohap.  i.]  ISAIAH.  27 

influenced  by  this  irresistible  intuition,  seek  to  purge  and  purify  politics  and 
trade,  society  and  the  Church,  law  and  custom,  speech  and  practice,  of  all  things 
that  oppress  and  injure,  and  which  in  any  way  retard  the  triumph  of  the  kingdom 
of  God.  The  watchword  still  is,  "  Cease  to  do  evil,"  &c.  (F.  Sessions.)  The 
prophetic  temper  in  James  Russell  Lowell : — The  temper  that  was  in  James  Russell 
Lowell  is  the  temper  we  seek  for  in  all  our  public  men — in  all  leaders  of  thought 
in  Church  or  State,  of  local  or  general  following.  "  He  sang  of  the  wrongs  of 
the  poor  and  the  slave ;  the  emptiness  of  life  without  conviction ;  of  the  nullity 
of  poetry  without  purpose ;  the  vapidness  of  preaching  without  piety ;  the 
shame  of  law  without  justice  ;  the  blank  horror  of  a  world  without  God."  (Ibid.) 
Holding  on  to  a  sin  : — A  little  child  was  one  day  playing  with  a  very  valuable/J^y) 
vase,  when  he  put  his  hand  into  it  and  could  not  withdraw  it.  His  father,  too, 
tried  his  best  to  get  it  out,  but  all  in  vain.  They  were  talking  of  breaking  the 
vase,  when  the  father  said,  "  Now,  my  son,  make  one  more  try ;  open  your 
hand  and  hold  your  fingers  out  straight,  as  you  see  me  doing,  and  then  pull." 
To  their  astonishment  the  little  fellow  said,  "  Oh,  no,  pa.  I  couldn't  put  out 
my  fingers  like  that,  for  if  I  did  I  would  drop  my  penny.  He  had  been  holding 
on  to  a  penny  all  the  time  !  No  wonder  he  could  not  withdraw  his  hand.  (J. 
McNeill.)  The  first  principle  : — There  is  no  religion — or  if  there  is,  I  do  not 
know  it— which  does  not  say,  "  Do  good  ;  avoid  evil."  There  is  none  which  „ 
does  not  contain  what  Rabbi  Hillel  called  the  quintessence  of  all  religions,  the 
simple  warning,  "  Be  good,  my  boy."  "  Be  good,  my  boy,"  may  seem  a  very 
short  catechism  ;  but  let  us  add  to  it,  "  Be  good,  my  boy,  for  God's  sake,"  and  we 
have  in  it  very  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.  (Max  Mutter.) 
What  repentance  is  : — Suppose  I  am  to  go  down  to  Boston  to-night,  and  I  go 
down  to  the  Union  station,  and  say  to  a  man  I  see  there,  "  Can  you  tell  me,  ia 
this  train  going  to  Boston  ?  "  and  the  man  says  "  Yes."  I  go  and  get  on  board 
the  train,  and  the  superintendent  comes  along  and  says,  "  Where  are  you  going  ?  " 
I  say,  "  I  am  going  to  Boston,"  and  he  says,  "  Well,  you  are  in  the  wrong  train, 
that  train  is  going  to  Albany."  "  But  I  am  quite  sure  I  am  right ;  I  asked  a 
railroad  man  here,  and  he  told  me  this  was  the  train."  And  the  superintendent 
says,  "  Moody,  I  know  all  about  these  trains ;  I  have  lived  here  forty  years, 
and  see  these  trains  go  up  and  down  here  every  day."  And  at  last  he  convinces 
me  that  I  am  on  the  wrong  train.  That  is  conviction,  not  conversion.  But 
if  I  don't  remain  on  that  train,  but  just  get  into  the  other  train,  that  is  repentance. 
Just  to  change  trains — that  is  repentance.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Evil  to  be  sup- 
planted by  good : — Sin  is  to  be  overcome,  not  so  much  by  maintaining  a  direct 
opposition  to  it,  as  by  cultivating  opposite  principles.  Would  you  kill  the  weeds 
in  your  garden,  plant  it  with  good  seed :  if  the  ground  be  well  occupied  there 
will  be  less  need  of  the  labour  of  the  hoe.  If  a  man  wished  to  quench  fire,  he 
might  fight  it  with  his  hands  till  he  was  burnt  to  death  ;  the  only  way  is  to  apply 
an  opposite  element.  (Andrew  Fuller.)  Learn  to  do  well. — The  highest  educa- 
tion : — We  hear  much  about  various  grades  of  education — primary,  secondary, 
and  higher  education ;  by  the  text  we  are  reminded  of  that  highest  education 
which  concerns  all,  and  which  it  is  the  main  end  of  life  to  secure.  Moral  culture 
is  even  more  imperative  than  intellectual  development.  I.  The  necessity 
fob  moral  learning.  Numerous  definitions  have  been  given  of  man,  but  he 
might  justly  be  defined  as  the  being  who  learns.  Other  creatures  can  scarcely 
be  said  to  learn ;  whatever  pertains  to  their  species  they  do  instinctively,  imme- 
diately, perfectly.  A  lark  builds  its  first  nest  as  skilfully  as  its  last,  a  spider's 
first  embroidery  is  as  exquisite  as  anything  it  spins  in  adult  life,  a  bee  constructs 
its  first  cell  and  compounds  its  first  honey  with  an  efficiency  that  leaves  nothing 
to  be  desired.  We  know  that  naturalists  are  not  altogether  agreed  on  this  point, 
but  we  may  conclude  that  substantially  instinct  dispenses  with  that  laborious 
process  which  we  know  as  learning.  It  is  altogether  different  with  the  human 
creature.  If  we  are  "  to  do  well,"  taking  that  phrase  in  its  noblest  sense,  we  must 
"  learn "  to  do  it,  acquiring  the  splendid  power  through  attention,  repeated 
endeavour,  and  manifold  sacrifice.  Take,  e.g.,  the  virtue  of  contentment.  We, 
are  persuaded  of  the  reasonableness  of  contentment  with  the  dispensations  of 
Divine  Providence;  yet  the  folly  of  the  soul  is  subdued  only  through  much 
failure  and  discipline.  Or,  take  the  virtue  of  sincerity.  This  virtue,  if  it  be  not 
rather  of  the  essence  of  all  virtues,  we  all,  to  some  extent,  require  to  learn,  some, 
however,  finding  in  the  learning  of  it  the  chief  task  of  life.  It  seems  paradoxical 
to  say  so,  but  some  men  are  naturally  theatrical ;  the  temptation  is  always  to 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

act  a  part.  Through  repeated  and  bitter  castigations  of  the  soul  do  we  master 
this  passion  for  masquerading,  and  attain  sincerity,  simplicity,  and  thoroughness 
of  life.  Take  the  virtue  of  veracity.  We  have  much  to  learn  here — to  speak 
the  truth,  to  act  the  truth,  to  live  the  truth.  Take  the  virtue  of  temper.  There 
is  a  faculty  of  wrath  in  nature,  and  a  faculty  of  wrath  becomes  noble  men  •  but 
to  harmonise  this  faculty  with  reason,  and  to  be  at  once  high-spirited  and  gentle, 
is  a  problem  that  may  demand  years  for  its  solution.  Or,  take  the  virtue  of  kind- 
ness. We  pass  through  much  self-reproach,  scourging,  and  shame  in  striving 
to  reach  the  beauteous  ideal.  St.  Paul  bears  witness  of  himself,  "  I  have  learned 
in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content."  Let  us  remember  in  the  training 
of  our  children  that  virtue  is  acquired  much  as  intellectual  life  is.  II.  Consider 
the  method  of  this  moral  culture.  Three  things  are  essential  to  the  liberal 
education  of  the  soul.  1.  A  pattern.  "  Looking  unto  Jesus."  He  is  the  supreme 
Pattern.  Said  an  American  artist,  "  I  would  give  everything  I  have  to  see 
Velasquez  paint  for  one  week,  one  day."  But  the  splendid  privilege  is  given  to  us 
to  behold  the  Lord  Jesus  live  through  years  !  "  Learn  of  Me,"  says  the  Master, 
and  a  loving,  thoughtful  glance  into  the  New  Testament  every  day  is  a  lifelong 
vision  of  perfection.  Let  us  learn  of  Him  in  joy  and  sorrow,  in  work  and  leisure, 
in  strength  and  weariness,  in  popularity  and  neglect,  in  success  and  failure,  in  life 
and  death.  He  best  teaches  the  art  of  life.  2.  Power.  We  can  never  become 
holy  except  as  we  have  a  genius  for  holiness,  and  this  genius  in  an  adequate 
degree  only  the  Spirit  of  God  can  impart.  Let  us  in  prayer  seek  for  more  inward 
vision,  receptivity,  and  energy,  more  of  the  Spirit  that  worketh  mightily  in  fully 
eurrendered  souls,  and  all  things  will  become  possible.  3.  Practice.  We  learn 
to  do  well  through  doing  well.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Life's  great  lesson: — 
I.  There  is  no  royal  road  to  renown.  "  You  envy  me,  do  you  ?  "  said  a 
marshal  (Lefevre)  of  France,  to  a  friend  complimenting  him  on  his  possessions 
and  good  fortune.  "  Well,  you  shall  have  these  things  at  a  better  bargain  than  I 
had.  Come  into  the  courtyard :  I'll  fire  at  you  with  a  gun  twenty  times  at 
thirty  paces,  and  if  I  don't  kill  you,  all  shall  be  your  own.  What,  you  will  not 
come  !  Very  well ;  recollect,  then,  that  I  have  been  shot  at  more  than  a  thousand 
times,  and  much  nearer  than  thirty  paces,  before  I  arrived  at  the  state  in  which 
you  now  find  me  !  "  The  marshal's  friend  saw  only  the  success  attained  ;  he 
forgot  the  toil,  the  suffering  and  peril  through  which  it  had  been  achieved.  The 
traveller  with  ardent  love  of  beauty  climbs  the  rugged  hill  whence  his  view,  he 
fancies,  will  be  unobstructed  and  complete ;  but  the  first  ascent  made,  behold, 
another  hill  overshadowing  him  ;  and  that  surmounted,  behold,  still  another 
frowns  upon  him  higher  yet.  So  with  the  hill  of  life.  One  arduous  ascent  made, 
one  difficulty  overcome,  another  presents  itself,  another,  and  still  another.  It  is 
ever  "  Excelsior  I  "  We  would  not  have  it  otherwise.  Without  difficulty,  there 
were  no  display  of  energy.  Without  temptation,  there  were  no  self-discipline. 
Without  trial  and  suffering,  there  were  no  fortitude  and  resignation.  II.  Observb 
the  enforcement  of  this  lesson  on  the  part  of  nature  in  the  very  begin- 
nings of  life.  We  begin  life  as  "  strangers  in  a  strange  land."  We  bring  nothing 
with  us  into  the  world,  either  of  wealth,  knowledge,  or  experience.  What  we 
possess,  we  receive,  acquire,  or  learn.  We  find  the  conditions  of  life  already 
existing.  We  must  "  accept  the  situation  " ;  meet  it  as  best  we  may,  and  each 
go  on  to  act  his  part.  Beginning  to  learn,  we  find  nature  and  her  laws  fixed, 
inexorable,  demanding  recognition  and  obedience.  Observe  these  laws,  heed 
nature's  warnings,  and  she  is  a  gentle  mistress,  a  kind  benefactress ;  but  disregard 
them,  disobey  them,  and  she  becomes  a  terrible  avenger.  The  penalty  she  never 
fails  to  inflict.  If  not  in  youth,  then  in  manhood  ;  if  not  in  manhood,  then  in  old 
age.  Though  her  voice  be  silent,  still  nature  speaks.  And  this  is  her  word  : 
Whatever  and  wherever  your  place  in  life's  arena  act  well  your  part — "  learn  to 
do  well."  For  the  sake  of  your  physical  well-being ;  for  the  sake  of  your 
temporal  happiness ;  for  the  sake  of  those  to  come  after  you — observe  my  com- 
mandments to  do  them  !  III.  Consider  the  utility  of  this  lesson  as  taught 
by  society  and  emphasised  in  every  sphere  of  life.  The  household,  the  school, 
the  college,  the  counting-room  tuitions,  the  business  apprenticeships,  civil  and 
political  laws  and  institutions — whatever  factors  enter  in  to  develop  and  improve 
society — are  but  the  outgrowth  and  exemplification  of  the  precept  of  "  learning 
to  do  well."  They  are  nature's  assistants,  teaching  us  how  to  do  well  in  life. 
What  is  self-denial  ?  It  is  but  another  word  for  "  learning  to  do  well "  ;  that  is, 
learning  to  forego  the  lesser  for  the  sake  of  the  higher  good  ;  denying  the  present 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  29 

moment  for  the  sake  of  the  moment  that  is  to  come — all  which  involves  difficulty, 
cost,  pain,  persistent  effort.  Persistent  effort  in  the  mastering  of  difficulties  lies 
at  the  basis  of  true  advancement  and  success.  Wisdom,  skill,  mastery  in  hall  of 
trade  or  science,  in  field  of  politics  or  war,  come  not  by  wishing.     IV.  But,  alonq 

WITH  SELF-DENIAL,    "  LEARNING    TO    DO  WELL  "   INVOLVES  SUBMISSION  TO  HIGHER 

authority.  Who  could  expect  to  become  an  able  soldier  without  first  submitting 
to  a  tactician's  guidance  ?  There  must  be  days,  weeks,  months  of  weary  taxation 
of  eye  and  ear,  nerve  and  muscle  ;  there  must  be  continued  restraint  of  body 
and  mind  ;  there  must  be  submission  to  another's  will — obedience  to  a  master's 
command.  But — there  it  comes  again — obedience,  self-restraint,  is  difficult. 
And  what  is  all  this  struggle  with  difficulty  for  ?  Why,  simply  for  the  sake  of 
"  learning  to  do  well  " — to  drill  well ;  for  the  sake  of  becoming  a  good  soldier ! 
V.  But  the  Bible  declares  that  this  life  is  a  period  of  trial,  on  the  issue  of  which 
turns  the  destiny  of  our  future  being.  If,  then,  whatever  is  worth  the  having 
in  this  present  life  comes  not  without  conflict  with  difficulties,  is  it  reasonablb 

TO    SUPPOSE   THAT  THE    ADVANTAGES   OP   THE   FUTURE   LIFE   WILL   ACCRUE   TO   U3 

without  like  conflict  with  difficulties  T  Do  nothing,  and  still  inherit 
eternal  life  ?    It  is  not  so  cheap  a  thing  as  that.    VI.  Beyond  this,  the  Bible 

NOT   ONLY  POINTS   OUT  THE   DIFFICULTIES  THAT  OPPOSE  US — IT  SHOWS  HOW  THE 

difficulties  are  to  be  het.  In  the  lives  of  its  heroes  the  Bible  individualises 
every  virtue,  but  in  no  one  of  them  does  every  virtue  appear  till  we  come  to  the 
perfect  man,  Christ  Jesus.  He  is  the  Master  of  goodness.  And  He  says,  "  If 
any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross  daily, 
and  follow  Me."  If  the  way  seem  too  full  of  obstructions,  and  old  sins  hedge 
us  in,  and  our  weakness  is  very  great,  He  yet  kindly  says  to  us  as  to  the  apostle 
Paul,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,"  &c.  (0.  P.  H.  Nason,  M.A.)  The 
struggle  between  good  and  evil  in  the  human  soul : — We  see  what  the  author  has 
produced,  but  we  do  not  see  what  he  has  destroyed.  The  book  comes  out  in  fair 
copy,  and  we,  looking  upon  the  surface  only,  say,  How  well  done  !  Who  can  tell 
what  that  "  fair  copy  "  cost  ?  We  see  the  picture  hung  upon  the  wall  for  exhibi- 
tion, but  we  do  not  see  how  much  canvas  was  thrown  away,  or  how  many  outlines 
were  discarded,  or  how  many  efforts  were  pronounced  unworthy.  We  only  see 
the  last  or  best.  So  much  is  to  be  done  in  private  with  regard  to  learning  to  do 
well.  We  do  not  live  our  whole  life  in  public  We  make  an  effort  in  solitude : 
it  is  a  failure  ;  we  throw  it  away  ;  we  acknowledge  its  existence  to  no  one  :  still, 
we  are  acquiring  skill — practice  makes  perfect — and  when  we  do  our  first  act  of 
virtue  in  the  public  sight  people  may  suppose  that  we  are  all  but  prodigies  and 
miracles,  so  well  was  the  deed  done.  Only  God's  eye  saw  the  process  which  led  up 
to  it.  This  is  a  characteristic  of  Divine  grace,  that  it  sets  down  every  attempt 
as  a  success,  it  marks  every  failure  honestly  done  as  a  victory  already  crowned. 
So  we  are  losing  nothing  even  on  the  road.  The  very  learning  is  itself  an  education  ; 
the  very  attempt  to  do,  though  we  fail  of  doing,  itself  gives  strength,  and  encourage- 
ment, and  confidence.  In  learning  to  do  well  we  assist  the  negative  work  of 
ceasing  to  do  evil.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  "Learn  to  do  well" : — 1.  We  must  be 
doing ;  not  cease  to  do  evil,  and  then  stand  idle.  2.  We  must  be  doing  good ; 
the  good  which  the  Lord  our  God  requires,  and  which  will  turn  to  a  good  account. 
3.  We  must  do  it  well,  in  a  right  manner,  and  for  a  right  end.  4.  We  must  learn 
to  do  well,  we  must  take  pains  to  get  the  knowledge  of  our  duty,  be  inquisitive 
concerning  it,  in  care  about  it ;  and  accustom  ourselves  to  it,  that  we  may  readily 
turn  our  hands  to  our  work,  and  become  masters  of  this  holy  art  of  doing  well. 
(M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  19.  Come  now,  and  let  ns  reason  together,  salth  the  Lord. — Further 
reasoning  useless : — "  You  have  nothing  more  to  say ;  all  that  you  have 
already  said  has  no  value ;  reasoning  has  done  its  work ;  if  reasoning  is  to  rule, 
the  case  must  go  against  you — there  can  be  no  other  issue ;  but  if  yielding  to 
the  force  of  My  reasoning,  admitting  it  is  true  and  fair,  you  confess  yourselves 
convicted  and  condemned,  then  My  mercy  shall  have  its  free,  triumphant  exer- 
cise upon  you ;  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ; 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  ( W.  Perkins.)  Reform 
and  'pardon: — "Cease  to  do  evil,"  &c.  "Come  now,"  &c.  As  early  as  the 
time  of  Isaiah  we  find  the  doctrine  of  the  reformation  of  character  dependent 
on  forgiveness  of  sin  distinctly  taught.  God's  remedy  for  sin  is  the  same  in  all 
ages.     More  prominence  perhaps  was  given  to  the  observance  of  the  law  in  the 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

olden  times,  but  not  to  the  exclusion  of  grace  ;  while  in  the  New  Testament  grace 
appears  the  more  prominent,  but  surely  not  to  the  exclusion  of  law.  Neither 
in  the  one  nor  in  the  other  was  the  law  the  condition  of  life.  Both  represent 
rather  two  different  stages  in  the  same  covenant  of  grace — the  one  preparatory 
to  the  other.  I.  The  demand  here  made.  1.  The  nature  of  the  demand. 
It  is  for  reformation  of  practice.  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean,"  &c.  This 
is  the  one  Divine  call  to  fallen  man.  In  it  everything  is  summed  up.  Made  in 
sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners,  it  ever  remains  substantially  the  same.  The 
essence  of  moral  beauty  is  goodness.  Now  goodness  is  not  a  quality  deposited 
in  the  heart  and  there  shut  up ;  nor  yet  a  something  to  put  on  as  a  garment 
at  will.  Rather  it  is  the  fruit  of  well-doing — the  outgrowth  of  a  righteous  life. 
This  is  what  God  requires.  This  is  to  be  the  outcome  of  His  redeeming  love. 
But  it  cannot  be  accomplished  without  the  co-operating  activity  of  the  human 
wuL  While  the  hands  are  besmeared  with  blood — the  token  of  an  immoral 
life — all  natural  refinements  are  of  very  little  value  in  His  sight.  God  ia 
uncompromising  here.  Our  greatest  happiness  is  to  do  good.  By  doing  good 
we  shall  find  the  highest  good.  This  then  is  the  great  lesson  of  life — "  Cease 
to  do  evil ;  -earn  to  do  well."  2.  The  word  "  learn  "  suggests  a  further  thought, 
namely,  the  ground  of  this  demand  for  reform.  Man  is  evil  and  does  evil.  Even 
those  who  take  the  most  sanguine  view  of  human  nature  admit  that  there  is 
something  wrong  in  man's  moral  constitution.  3.  To  estimate  rightly,  how- 
ever, this  cause,  we  must  consider  the  justice  of  the  demand.  It  is  God  who 
makes  it.  But  He  could  not  have  made  it  unless  it  were  just  to  do  so ;  nor 
would  He  have  made  it  unless  it  were  possible  for  man  to  meet  it.  II.  How 
to  meet  God's  demand.  Where  is  the  power  to  come  from  ?  Two  answers 
only  are  possible :  either  it  is  inherent  in  man — this  is  the  answer  of  nature ; 
or  it  is  supplied  from  without — this  is  the  answer  of  grace.  1.  The  answer 
of  nature.  The  belief  in  the  ability  of  man  to  reform  himself  is  founded  either 
on  ignorance  of  the  real  nature  of  his  moral  condition,  as  was  the  case  in  the  pagan 
world,  or  on  a  deliberate  refusal  to  recognise  the  truth  when  it  is  presented  con- 
cerning that  condition,  as  was  the  case  in  Judaism,  and  is  the  case  at  the  present 
day  with  those  who  persuade  themselves  to  a  belief  in  the  infinite  intrinsic  capa- 
bility of  human  nature.  Such  is  the  pride  of  man,  that  he  is  ever  slow  to  admit 
his  own  weakness.  No,  says  the  modern  enthusiast :  I  regret  the  new  light, 
for  the  demands  it  makes  upon  me  are  far  too  humiliating ;  I  see  no  reason  why 
a  man,  given  the  necessary  favourable  environments,  should  not,  by  a  little 
effort,  become  perfectly  good.  Neither  the  religion  of  the  pagan  world,  nor 
the  philosophy  of  the  Greeks,  nor  the  power  and  civilisation  of  the  Romans 
afford  much  ground  for  this  belief  in  human  nature.  Wisdom  then,  under  the 
most  favourable  circumstances,  has  failed  to  supply  the  necessary  power  to 
reform  the  world.  Neither  the  enactments  of  a  Roman  senate,  nor  the  Acts  of 
a  modern  Parliament,  nor  any  power  of  law,  can  make  man  good  or  even  moral. 
Justice  by  itself,  no  more  than  wisdom,  can  remove  the  evil.  But  nowhere  is 
the  inadequacy  of  wisdom  and  of  law  to  draw  forth  the  power  there  is  in  man 
to  reform  his  own  character,  better  illustrated  than  in  the  case  of  the  chosen 
people  of  Israel.  They  could  boast  of  a  wisdom  more  divine  than  that  of  the 
Greeks,  a  system  of  law  superior  to  that  of  the  Romans ;  while  in  virtue  of  their 
peculiar  privileges  as  a  nation  they  were  in  an  incomparably  more  advantageous 
position  than  any  other  people,  to  succeed  in  their  own  strength,  since  they  had 
a  will  to  it.  The  very  possession  of  their  superior  privileges,  when  they  abused 
them,  brought  upon  them  a  severer  punishment.  2.  The  answer  of  grace.  A 
power  from  without  is  absolutely  necessary  to  enable  man  to  meet  the  demand 
for  reform.  This  power  is  God's  forgiveness.  "  Come  now,  let  us  reason 
together,"  or  better,  "  let  us  end  the  dispute  " :  "  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall 
be  as  wool."  Although  the  demand  precedes  the  offer  of  forgiveness,  we  are 
not  to  suppose  that  the  work  of  reforming  is  to  precede  the  enjoyment  of  the 
Divine  gift.  That  indeed  were  impossible.  As  every  duty  of  man  is  summed 
up  in  the  command  to  reform,  so  all  the  riches  of  grace  are  summed  up  in  the 
gift  of  pardon.  But  what  peculiar  virtue  or  power  does  pardon  possess  for  pro- 
ducing a  change  of  life?  (1)  It  is  an  inducement  to  repentance,  which  is  the 
first  step  in  the  reformation  of  character.  It  induces  the  resolution  to  reform, 
then  becomes  a  power  in  the  penitent  man  to  help  him  to  carry  out  his  resolution. 
Pardon  thus  bridges  the  chasm  which  exists  between  a  knowledge  of  duty  and 


chap,  t.]  ISAIAH.  31 

the  doing  of  it.     (2)  Another  function  of  pardon,  and,  perhaps,  the  most  important 
of  all  in  the  reformation  of  character,  is  that  it  removes,  or  rather  is  itself,  as  its 
name  implies,  the  removal  of  sin.     Pardon  will  convert  the  criminal  into  a  saint. 
The  pagan  world  knew  nothing  of  this.     It  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation." 
{R.  E.  Morris,  B.A.)        God  reasoning  with  man  : — The  gracious  promise  that 
God  will  make  us  clean  follows  immediately  on  a  most  distinct  commandment 
that  we  make  ourselves  clean.     Does  this  seem  to  you  inconsistent  ?     The  Jews 
are  here  exhorted  to  make  themselves  clean,  by  putting  away  from  them  the 
evil  of  their  doings — ceasing  to  do  evil,  learning  to  do  well.     In  fact,  they  are 
spoken  to  just  as  though  it  had  wholly  rested  with  themselves  to  acquire  moral 
purity.     1.  But  I  dare  say  they  were  ready  with  their  objections :  they  would 
plead  that  it  was  really  of  no  service  to  decry  and  exhort  them  in  one  and  the 
same  breath.     "  Of  what  use,"  they  seem  to  say,  "  is  it  for  us  to  make  any  effort, 
unable  as  we  confessedly  are  to  keep  the  law  of  God  T     And  even  were  we  able 
to  obey  for  the  future,  is  there  not  past  disobedience  for  which  we  have  yet  to 
be  reckoned  with  ?  "     It  is  much  in  this  way  that  men  still  receive  exhortations 
to  repentance  and  amendment ;  for  such  exhortations  belong  to  the  Gospel  aa 
much  as  to  the  law.     And  what  do  men  say  in  reply  ?     "  The  minister,  teaching 
as  he  does  the  doctrine  of  human  corruption  and  helplessness,  it  is  absurd  that 
he  should  tell  men  to  repent.     Is  he  not  contradicting  himself  ?  "     It  was,  we 
may  believe,  in  the  face  of  such  arguments  as  these,  that  God  challenged  the 
Jews  to  controversy  in  the  words  of  our  text.     "  Is  this  the  way,"  the  Almighty 
seems  to  exclaim,     in  which  you  treat  My  urgent  admonitions  to  amendment  ? 
Come  now,  let  us  reason  together !  "     But  with  what  sort  of  reasoning  are  the 
objectors  metT    Perhaps  you  look  for  some  subtle  and  ingenious  argument. 
Yet  you  have  no  argument  at  all ;  you  have  only  the  promise — a  most  free  and 
gracious  one,  but  still  only  a  promise — "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall 
be  as  white  as  snow."     But  how  does  the  promise  do  away  with  the  objection  ? 
Only  thus, — God  states  this  to  be  His  appointed  way ;  He  designs  to  save  men 
in  this  manner,  and  therefore  is  this  manner  prescribed.     The  parties  to  whom 
He  will  impart  additional  grace  are  those  who,  in  obedience  to  His  call,  are  strain- 
ing every  nerve  to  forsake  evil  ways.     It  is  not  that  they  are  able  of  themselves 
to  work  out  a  moral  amendment ;  but  it  is  that  God  intends  to  bestow  on  them 
the  ability  whilst  they  are  making  the  effort.     2.  And,  perhaps,  the  Jews  raised 
more  general  objections.     They  may  have  murmured  at  God's  dealings,  without 
selecting  this  or  that  particular  instance,  just  as  men  are  now  disposed  to  arraign 
the  appointments  of  Heaven  as  severe  or  unjust.     The  chapter  in  which  our 
text  occurs  is  full  of  indignant  rebuke,  and  vehement  threatenings,  and  it  may 
not  be  imagined  that  a   haughty  people  would   fail   to  resent   being  so  sternly 
addressed,  and  deny  the  equity  of  the  judgments  which  the  prophet  foretold. 
If  this  be  supposed,  then  God  invites  men  to  reason  with  Him  on  the  goodness 
of  His  dealings.     Come,  let  us  clear  the  scene  for  the  controversy.     Come,  all 
of  you  who  think  you  are  in  any  way  hardly  dealt  with  by  God — that  His  dis- 
pensations are  not  such  as  might  have  been  looked  for — "  Come,  let  us  reason 
together."     You  need  not,  therefore,  hesitate  to  utter  plainly  what  you  think, 
and  to  make  statement  of  your  grievances.     Well,  what  have  you  to  say  ?     You 
urge,  it  may  be,  that  your  lot  is  one  of  poverty,  that  troubles  are  multiplied  beyond 
your  power  of  endurance,  and  temptations  beyond  your  power  of  resistance. 
Some  of  you,  perhaps,  plead  that,  born  as  you  are  with  corrupt  tendencies,  and 
placed  where  there  is  everything  to  incite  and  strengthen  them,  you  have  really 
no  chance  of  keeping  out  of  vice ;  that  you  are  summoned  to  duties  which  are 
manifestly  too  arduous,  and  threatened,  if  you  fail,  with  punishments  which 
are  manifestly  excessive.     You  expect  that  God  will  take  your  complaints  one 
by  one,  and  either  show  them  to  be  groundless,  or,  if  He  admit  certain  evils, 
show  them  more  than  counterpoised  by  blessings.     Or,  again,  you  expect  that, 
as  far  as  you  have  dwelt  on  trials  peculiar  to  yourselves,  God  will  patiently  weigh 
them,  prove  them  not  excessive,  or  trace  out  beneficial  results  which  they  are 
calculated  to  produce.     Well,  this  is  very  natural ;  I  think  it  is  just  what  would 
be,  if  the  debate  were  with  a  mere  human  reasoner.     But  you  will  hearken  in 
vain  if  you  expect  from  God  this  careful  exposure  of  the  fallacy  or  falseness  oi 
your  statements.    There  is  heard  nothing  but  the  beautiful  promise :  "  Though 
your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they  be  red  like 
crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."    (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        The  right  use  of  reason  : 
—The  occurrence  of  the  word  "  reason  "  warrants  my  speaking  to  you  on  the 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

right  use  of  reason,  and  warning  you  against  mistakes  into  which  some  are  apt 
to  fall.  1.  If  you  hear  some  objections  to  Christianity  which  you  are  not  able 
to  answer,  do  not  on  that  account  conclude  that  they  cannot  be  answered, — 
have  the  modesty  to  believe  that  others  may  be  able  to  explain  what  is  too  hard 
for  you.  There  is  one  evidence  which  I  can  promise  you  :  if  you  read  the  Bible 
carefully  and  prayerfully  the  Bible  will  speak  for  itself.  2.  And,  besides  the 
evidences  of  Christianity,  reason  has  a  great  part  to  perform  in  regard  to  the 
doctrines.  It  would  be  as  great  a  fallacy  as  could  be  alleged  against  the  Gospel 
were  it  to  be  said  that  it  does  not  commend  itself  to  man  as  exactly  what  he  needs, 
so  that  when  he  receives  it  it  must  be  on  the  strength  of  external  testimony  and 
not  at  all  in  the  consciousness  of  its  meeting  his  necessities.  I  do  not  say  that 
reason  can  trace  in  every  point  the  connection  between  the  death  of  Christ  and 
the  pardon  of  sin ;  but,  at  all  events,  reason  can  clearly  make  out  that,  because 
God's  honour  is  provided  for  by  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary,  and  that  this  sacrifice 
must  have  been  of  so  stupendous  a  value  as  to  render  possible  the  salvation  of 
every  human  being, — there  is,  therefore,  nothing  to  shrink  from  in  the  challenge 
of  our  text.  I  am  jealous  for  reason ;  I  will  not,  indeed,  burn  an  idolatrous  incense 
before  reason ;  as  though  I  held  it  sufficient  for  man's  guidance,  wanderer  as 
he  is  in  a  darkened  world ;  but  let  reason  keep  her  right  province,  and  in  place 
of  jostling  with  revelation,  she  will  put  revelation  on  a  throne,  and  then  reverently 
and  submissively  prostrate  herself  before  it.  For  it  is  quite  wretched  to  think 
how  many  a  man  loses  his  soul  because  he  will  not  humble  his  reason.  The  direc- 
tions are  very  plain ;  do  not  puzzle  yourselves  with  any  difficulties ;  the  direc- 
tions are — "  Cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well."  Make  a  beginning.  Many 
a  man  loses  his  soul  by  neglecting  to  act  at  once  on  some  truth  which  has  been 
brought  home  to  his  conscience.  (Ibid.)  Religion  rational: — I.  Take  that 
basal  truth  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  reasonable  religion — the  Being  of 
God.  The  doctrine  of  the  existence  of  God  is  reasonable.  To  believe  that  there 
is  no  self-conscious  power  behind  the  world  to  account  for  it,  is  irrational.  It 
argues  nothing  that  all  minds  do  not  see  God  behind  nature ;  all  minds  do  not 
see  the  beauty  of  art ;  all  ears  are  not  ravished  with  music.  II.  Again,  we  are 
living  under  a  moral  government  that  is  reasonable,  one  that  can  Toe  defended 
and  rested  in.  A  moral  government  is  here,  which  brings  evil  to  its  doom,  and 
makes  right  safe  and  successful  in  the  long  run.  It  is  rational,  and  can  be 
defended,  as  it  can  be  understood.  All  sin  is  irrational  and  utterly  indefensible. 
III.  Take  again  some  of  the  fundamental  truths  of  supernatural  religion. 
1.  The  doctrine  of  the  incarnation  is  reasonable.  Whether  the  incarnation 
is  or  is  not  reasonable  depends  upon  your  conception  of  God.     If  He  is  like  men 

S;enerally,  a  sort  of  incarnate  selfishness,  out  of  sympathy  with  suffering,  indif- 
erent  to  the  miseries  of  the  world,  then  the  incarnation  is  unreasonable.  But 
if  God  is  love,  and  loves  His  children  as  we  love  ours,  then  the  incarnation  is 
reasonable,  it  is  inevitable.  2.  Then  again  His  life  in  the  flesh  is  rational.  The 
Gospels  narrate  just  what  we  might  expect  God  to  do  if  He  came  here.  3.  Then 
it  was  reasonable  that  He  should  die.  The  principle  was  in  the  heart  of  God 
from  all  eternity.  The  Lamb  was  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world. 
Sacrifice  was  not  foreign  to  the  nature  of  God  and  suddenly  invoked  for  a  specifio 
occasion  or  emergency ;  it  was  eternal  with  Him.  The  atonement  is  the  most 
rational  of  all  rational  truths.  The  principle  at  its  heart  is  at  the  heart  of  nature  ; 
it  is  at  the  heart  of  humanity.  It  is  the  condition  on  which  rests  the  world's 
best  life.  4.  And  the  same  can  be  claimed  for  the  resurrection.  The  resur- 
rection of  Christ  is  a  rational  doctrine.  It  is  the  fitting  climax  to  the  life  behind 
it,  to  the  mission  upon  which  He  came.  It  was  not  fitting  in  the  nature  of  things 
that  death  should  hold  in  its  grip  such  a  life.  It  was  due  to  the  majesty  of  truth 
and  virtue  that  such  vindication  should  be  appealed  to.  IV.  Turn  now  to  some 
of  the  practical  REQUIREMENT3  of  the  Biblical  religion.  1.  Take  that  initial 
requirement  of  faith.  Faith  is  reasonable.  The  best  things  are  out  of  sight. 
We  rise  toward  our  highest  possibilities  only  as  we  live  by  the  unseen.  2.  Repent- 
ance is  a  reasonable  demand.  3.  Closely  connected  with  faith  and  repentance  is 
confession.  Confession  of  sin  is  rational,  but  so  is  the  confession  of  Jesus  Christ. 
4.  The  duties  of  Christianity  are  reasonable.  Prayer  is  a  rational  exercise  of  the 
bouI.  If  we  have  a  Father  in  heaven  it  is  reasonable  that  we  should  come  into  touch 
with  Him.  And  so  of  the  means  of  grace  in  their  entirety.  The  use  of  the  means 
of  grace  is  reasonable  and  right.  Effects  come  through  well-defined  causes  always 
and  everywhere.     The  use  of  the  Church  to  the  utmost  of  its  power  to  serve  us 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  33 

is  a  rational  procedure.  We  have  no  great  saints  among  those  who  ignore  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  one  conclusion :  a  set  of  opinions  and  beliefs 
that  will  not  bear  the  test  of  reason  had  better  be  abandoned.  A  life  that  you 
cannot  defend  and  justify  had  better  be  given  up.  We  had  better  put  our  life 
on  a  basis  that  can  be  justified  at  every  point.  (8.  H.  Howe.)  God's  argu- 
merit  with  man  : — It  has  been  pointed  out  to  us  that  in  the  opening  verses 
of  Isaiah's  book  we  seem  to  be  present  in  a  Law  Court,  at  some  Assize,  and  it 
is  a  Crown  case  that  is  on.  And  the  Crown  is  present  in  person  to  argue  and 
plead  its  own  cause.  God  and  His  people  Israel  are  the  parties  concerned,  and 
God  is  heard  in  argument  establishing  the  charge  He  makes,  sweeping  away 
utterly  the  pleas  and  excuses  that  are  offered,  until  in  this  verse  He  seems  to 
sum  up  the  position,  and  the  case  comes  to  a  most  wonderful  and  unexpected 
and  Divine  conclusion.  The  people  are  brought  in  guilty  on  every  count.  Any 
attempt  at  justifying  their  conduct  but  makes  it  worse,  and  covers  them  with 
darker  guilt.  The  case  has  gone  so  clearly  against  them,  their  arguments  have 
proved  so  utterly  worthless,  the  verdict  is  so  certain,  that  we  are  almost  waiting 
in  silence  for  the  dread  sentence  to  be  uttered.  But  lo  !  instead  of  the  sentence 
of  condemnation  and  punishment,  pardon,  perfect  and  complete,  is  offered.  I 
have  given  you  the  case  of  God  versus  Israel,  but  it  is  a  typical  one  repeated  from 
age  to  age.  It  is  equally  the  case  of  God  versus  man,  God  versus  the  sinner.  It 
is  a  case  in  which  we  are  not  spectators,  we  are  ourselves  the  defendants.  God 
is  here  in  argument  with  us,  in  argument  against  us,  and  He  sums  up  the  whole 
by  the  gracious  declaration,  "  Admit  the  force  of  My  reasoning,  yield  yourselves 
to  it,  confess  yourselves  convicted  and  condemned,  and  My  mercy  shall  have 
its  free  and  triumphant  exercise  upon  you."  (W.  Perkins.)  The  reasoning 
God  : — God  reasons  with  man — that  is  the  first  article  of  religion  with  Isaiah. 
God  addresses  man's  mind,  intelligence,  conscience.  There  are  two  great  false* 
hoods  in  the  world  about  God.  1.  That  He  is  too  great  to  reason  with  man ; 
that  He  never  gives  any  reason  for  anything  He  commands  or  does.  2.  That 
God  Himself  is  not  a  reasonable  Being  at  alL  It  is  a  falsehood  not  openly 
declared  in  so  many  words,  but  a  practice  adopted  in  the  lives  of  men.  Men  act 
as  though  they  believe  they  could  impose  upon  God.  Let  us  try  to  follow  God's 
reasoning  in  this  chapter.  There  is  a  threefold  basis  of  reasoning  laid  down. 
I.  God  reasons  with  man  on  the  basis  of  man's  whole  lite.  God  said  to  man, 
"  Come,  let  us  reason  together."  "  Very  well,"  says  man,  "  let  this  be  the  ground 
of  our  reasoning.  Look  at  my  life  as  it  lies  within  the  circle  of  its  religious  action 
and  exercises,  the  sacrifices  I  bring  to  you,  the  incense  I  offer,  the  fasts  I  make. 
Let  us  reason  on  that  basis,  let  us  take  our  stand  there."  And  as  you  will  see 
in  this  chapter,  God  utterly  rejects  reasoning  like  this,  and  says,  No,  no ;  I 
must  deal  with  you  on  the  basis  of  your  whole  life,  not  any  limited  and  selected 
part  of  it  which  you  choose  to  present  and  urge."  Now  there  is  great  significance 
in  this  connection  in  the  opening  words  of  this  chapter.  God  cries  out  to  earth 
and  heaven,  and  says,  "  These  are  the  only  limits  of  man's  life  I  can  recognise 
— the  earth  on  which  he  walks,  on  the  surface  of  which  everything  is  done,  the 
heavens  over  his  head,  which  look  down  upon  every  transaction  of  his  life  ;  that 
is  the  basis  of  My  reasoning,  and  that  alone."  It  is  well  for  us  to  remember 
this,  for  to-day  men  are  trying  continually  to  reason  with  God  on  some  narrow 
chosen  ground  of  their  own.  II.  God  reasons  with  men  on  the  basis  op  His 
own  Fatherhood.  You  will  see  how  in  this  chapter  He  reminds  all  men  of 
it,  gives  men  proofs  of  it,  tells  men  He  has  fulfilled  it  in  relation  to  them.  "  Admit," 
He  says,  "  My  Fatherhood,  and  what  does  your  life  look  like  in  the  light  of  it  ? 
How  unnatural  and  base  it  becomes.  You  sink  below  the  brute."  This  is  God's 
reasoning,  and  who  of  us  can  stand  against  it  ?  III.  God  reasons  with  man 
on  the  basis  op  sin's  results.  He  says,  "  You  have  rebelled  against  Me.  Has 
it  justified  itself  in  its  success  ?  "  And  God  gives  the  answer  in  searching  and 
terrible  words.  "  Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  more  ?  "  &o.  (vers.  6-8).  He 
points  them  to  the  terrible  and  pitiful  results  which  have  oome  to  pass  for  the 
individual  and  the  nation  through  their  disobedience  towards  God ;  and  He 
challenges  them,  and  says,  "  Now,  look  at  it  as  I  have  reasoned  it  out  with  you." 
This  is  God's  argument  still.  If  we  would  listen,  we  might  hear  His  voice  in 
His  Word,  and  in  our  consciences,  saying,  "Tell  me,  O  men  and  women  who 
are  living  without  Me  and  in  sin,  what  good  has  your  sin  ever  done  yon  ?  "  There 
is  no  answer.  And  so  we  are  led  to  the  crisis  of  my  text.  We  seem  to  be  in 
the  presence  of  a  great  dilemma.     Either  God  must  abate  His  claims,  lower 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

His  righteousness,  repeal  His  law,  make  terms  with  the  rebels  and  condone  their 
rebellion,  or  else  logic  must  rule,  justice  must  have  its  way.  The  first  of  these 
we  know  God  cannot  do.  It  would  wreck  His  universe  if  God  declined  from 
the  absolute  right,  it  would  bring  ruin  and  shame  wherever  created  and  finite 
beings  are  found.  If  that  be  impossible,  what  remains  ?  Oh,  there  seems  to 
be  an  awful  moment  between  that  first  clause  of  the  text  and  what  follows. 
"  Come  now,  let  us  bring  our  reasoning  to  an  end.  There  is  nothing  more  to 
be  said.  The  ease  has  gone  against  you ;  all  your  arguments  have  fallen  to 
the  ground."  What  remains  ?  We  wait  to  hear,  and  instead  of  the  dread  sentence 
of  wrath  and  judgment  come  the  words  of  mercy :  "  Though  your  sins  be  as 
scarlet,"  &o.  Bight  in  between  the  eternal  and  infinite  righteousness  and  the 
sinner's  doom  meroy  breaks  in,  pardon  perfect  and  complete.  So  great  the 
change  that  when  a  man  feels  the  pardon  in  his  heart,  he  can  turn  his  face  and 
address  himself  hopefully  to  that  great  ideal  of  life  which  the  law  of  God  pre- 
sents. "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean,"  &c.  And  then,  the  soul  within  us  rises 
up  and  asks,  "  Why  is  this,  if  God  be  infinitely  reasonable,  if  He  reasons  with 
such  force  and  conclusion,  why  does  He  not  follow  out  His  reasoning  to  its  logical 
conclusion  ?  Why  does  He  spare  and  pardon  the  sinner  taken  red-handed  in 
his  sin  ?  "  Why,  simply  because  there  is  something  more  scarlet  than  the  scarlet 
of  a  sinner's  sin,  that  covers  the  sinner's  sin,  and  makes  God's  pardon  a  just  and 
rightful  thing.  "There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood,"  &c.  (Ibid.)  Men 
invited  to  reason  with  God  : — 1.  God  is  a  moral  agent.  That  He  has  moral  char- 
acter is  sufficiently  manifest  from  the  revealed  fact  that  man  is  made  in  His  image. 

2.  God  is  also  a  good  Being — not  only  moral,  but  holy  and  wise.  He  always 
acts  upon  good  and  sufficient  reasons,  and  never  irrationally  and  without  reasons 
for  His  conduct.  3.  God  is  always  influenced  by  good  reasons.  Good  reasons 
are  more  sure  to  have  their  due  and  full  weight  on  His  mind  than  on  the  mind 
of  any  other  being  in  the  universe.  I.  What  is  that  to  which  this  text 
invites  us  T  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together."  But  what  are  we  to 
"  reason  "  about  ?  The  passage  proceeds  to  say,  "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet," 
&o.  In  the  previous  context  God  makes  grievous  charges  against  men.  Now, 
He  comes  down  to  look  into  their  case  and  see  if  there  be  any  hope  of  repent- 
ance, and  proceeds  to  make  a  proposal — "  Come,"  &c.  Produce  your  strong- 
reasons  why  your  God  should  forgive  your  great  sin.  II.  The  invitation,  coupled 
with  the  promises  annexed,  implies  that  there  abe  good  and  sufficient  reasons 
why  God  should  forgive  the  penitent.  Sinners  may  so  present  their  reasons 
before  God  as  to  ensure  success.     III.  The  nature  of  the  case  shows  that  wb 

ARE  TO  ADDRESS  OUR  REASONS  AND  MAKE  OUR  APPEAL,  NOT  TO  JUSTICE  BUT  TO 

meroy.  We  are  to  present  reasons  which  will  sanction  the  exercise  of  mercy. 
(C.  0.  Finney.)  Reasons  for  pardon  and  sanctification : — I.  The  reasons 
which  may  be  offered  why  God  should  pardon  our  sin.  1.  You  may  plead 
that  you  entirely  justify  God  in  all  His  course.     You  must  certainly  take  this 

?>sition,  for  He  cannot  forgive  you  so  long  as  you  persist  in  self-justification, 
ou  know  beyond  all  question  that  all  the  wrong  is  on  your  side  and  all  the  right 
on  God's  side.  You  might  and  should  know  also  that  you  must  confess  this. 
You  need  not  expect  God  to  forgive  you  till  you  do.  2.  You  may  come  to 
God  and  acknowledge  that  you  have  no  apology  whatever  to  make  for  your  sin. 

3.  You  must  also  be  ready  to  renounce  all  sin,  and  be  able  in  all  honesty  to  say 
this  before  God.  4.  You  must  unconditionally  submit  to  His  discretion.  Nothing 
less  than  this  is  the  fitting  moral  position  for  a  sinner  towards  God.  5.  You 
may  plead  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ  as  sufficient  to  honour  the  law  and 
justify  God  in  showing  mercy.  Pardon  must  not  put  in  peril  the  holiness  or 
justice  of  Jehovah.  The  utmost  expression  He  could  make,  or  needs  to  make, 
of  His  holiness  and  justice,  as  touching  the  sins  of  man,  is  already  made  in  the 
death  of  Christ,  "whom  God  did  Himself  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation,"  &o. 
6.  You  may  also  urge  His  professed  love  for  sinners.  7.  He  has  also  invited  you 
to  come  and  reason  with  Him.  Therefore  He  has  fully  opened  the  way  for  the 
freest  and  fullest  communion  on  this  point.  You  may  also  plead  His  honour ; 
that,  seeing  He  is  under  oath,  and  stands  committed  before  the  universe,  you 
may  ask  Him  what  He  will  do  for  His  great  name  if  He  refuse  to  forgive  a 
repentant  and  believing  sinner.  You  may  plead  all  the  relations  and  work  of 
Christ.  You  may  say  to  Him,  Lord,  will  it  not  induce  other  sinners  to  come 
to  Thee  ?  Will  it  not  encourage  Thy  Church  to  labour  and  pray  more  for  salva- 
tion ?    Will  not  Thy  mercy  shown  to  me  prove  a  blessing  to  thousands  ?     Yon 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  35 

may  urge  the  influence  of  refusing  to  do  so.  You  may  suggest  that  His  refusal 
is  liable  to  be  greatly  misapprehended ;  that  it  may  be  a  scandal  to  many  ;  and 
that  the  wicked  will  be  emboldened  to  say  that  God  has  made  no  such  exceed- 
ing great  and  precious  promises.  You  may  urge  that  there  is  joy  in  heaven, 
and  on  earth  also,  over  every  sinner  pardoned  and  saved.  You  may  urge,  that, 
eince  God  loves  to  make  saints  happy  in  this  world,  He  surely  will  not  be  averse 
to  giving  you  His  Spirit  and  putting  away  your  sins — it  wul  cause  such  joy  in 
the  hearts  of  His  dear  people.  You  may  also  plead  the  great  abhorrence  you 
have  of  living  in  sin,  as  you  surely  will  unless  He  forgives  you.  Tell  Him,  more- 
over, how  wretched  you  are,  and  must  be  in  your  sins,  if  you  cannot  find  salva- 
tion, and  what  mischief  you  will  be  likely  to  do  everywhere,  on  earth  and  in  hell, 
if  you  are  not  forgiven  and  renewed  in  holiness.     II.  The  reasons  which  may 

BE  URGED  BY  THE  PARDONED  SINNER  WHO  PLEADS  FOR  ENTIRE  SANCTIFICATION. 

1.  You  may  plead  your  present  justification.  2.  You  may  plead  your  relation 
to  Him,  to  the  Church,  and  to  the  world — that,  having  now  been  justified  and 
adopted  into  His  family,  you  are  known  as  a  Christian  and  a  child  of  God,  and 
it  therefore  becomes  of  the  utmost  consequence  that  you  should  have  grace  to 
live  so  as  to  adorn  your  profession,  and  honour  the  name  by  which  you  are  called. 
You  may  also  plead  your  great  responsibilities,  and  the  weight  of  those  interests 
that  are  depending  upon  your  spiritual  progress.  Plead  the  desire  you  feel  to 
be  completely  delivered  from  sin.  Ask  Him  if  He  has  not  given  you  this 
very  desire  Himself,  and  inquire  if  He  intends  to  sharpen  your  thirst  and  yet 
withhold  the  waters  of  life.  Plead  also  His  expressed  will.  Appeal  to  His  great 
love  to  you,  as  manifested  in  what  Christ  has  done,  &c.  Tell  Him  how  you  have 
stumbled  many  by  your  falls  into  sin,  and  have  given  great  occasion  of  reproach 
to  the  cause  you  love ;  tell  Him  you  cannot  live  so.  Tell  Him  of  your  willing- 
ness to  make  any  sacrifice ;  that  you  are  willing  to  forego  your  good  name,  and 
to  lay  your  reputation  wholly  upon  His  altar.  Be  sure  to  remind  Him  that 
you  intend  to  be  wholly  disinterested  and  unselfish  in  this  matter ;  you  ask  these 
things  not  for  your  own  present  selfish  interest ;  you  are  aware  that  a  really 
holy  life  may  subject  you  to  much  persecution.  You  want  to  represent  Him 
truly.  Then  tell  Him  of  your  great  weakness,  and  how  you  entirely  distrust 
yourself.  Tell  Him  you  shall  go  away  greatly  disappointed  if  you  do  not  receive 
the  grace  you  ask  and  need.  Remarks — 1.  Whenever  we  have  considered  the 
reasons  for  God's  actions  till  they  have  really  moved  and  persuaded  us,  they  will 
surely  move  Him.  God  is  not  slow — never  slower  than  we,  to  see  the  reasons 
for  showing  mercy  and  for  leading  us  to  holiness.  2.  Many  fail  in  coming  to 
God  because  they  do  not  treat  Him  as  a  rational  being.  3.  Many  do  not  present 
these  reasons,  because  in  honesty  they  cannot.  4.  When  we  want  anything 
of  God,  we  should  always  consider  whether  we  can  present  good  reasons  why 
it  should  be  granted.  5.  All  who  are  in  any  want  are  invited  to  come  and  brine 
forward  their  strong  reasons.  6.  Of  all  beings,  God  is  most  easily  influenced 
to  save.  He  is  by  His  very  nature  disposed  to  save  the  lost.  (Ibid.)  The 
cultivation  of  the  reason  : —  What  a  piece  of  work  is  a  man  I  How  noble  in 
reason  !  how  infinite  in  faculty !  in  form  and  moving,  how  express  and  admirable  ! 
in  action,  how  like  an  angel !  in  apprehension,  how  like  a  god  !  "  In  this  well- 
known  panegyric  on  man  the  great  dramatist  puts  the  reason  foremost:  "How 
noble  in  reason  !  "  and,  perhaps,  the  reason  is  the  prime  dignity  of  man.  It  is 
by  it,  more  than  ought  else,  that  man  is  separated  from  the  inferior  animals. 
It  is  by  it  that  he  rules  over  them.  It  is  by  the  development  of  reason  that  one 
race  outstrips  another  in  the  course  of  progress,  and  this  is  the  accepted  standard 
by  which  we  measure  greatness  between  man  and  man.  Therefore  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  reason  must  be  a  subject  of  supreme  and  even  religious  interest  to 
all  who  wish  to  attain  to  a  noble  and  well-developed  manhood.  (J.  Stalker, 
D.D.)  The  reason : — I.  The  work  of  the  reason.  1.  The  reason  is  the 
faculty  by  which,  from  things  already  known,  we  advance  to  conclusions  which 
these  imply,  but  which,  till  the  act  of  reason  is  performed,  are  unknown  ;  so 
the  work  of  the  reason  is  a  kind  of  creative  work,  and  do  you  not  think  there 
is  an  inkling  of  that  in  the  kind  of  exultation  with  which  we  complete  any  difficult 
act  of  reasoning,  or  even  hear  a  speaker  completing  it  ?  I  think  every  school- 
boy feels  a  touch  of  this  exultation  when  he  sees  a  sum  at  which  he  is  working 
coming  right,  and  every  housewife  feels  it  when  she  sees  that  the  two  sides  of 
her  accounts  are  about  to  balance  exactly.  In  a  court  of  law,  at  the  conclusion 
of  the  evidence  the  facts  often  appear  to  the  jury  a  confused  mass,  pointing  in  nc 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

particular  direction ;  but  when  a  skilful  advocate  rises,  and  taking  hold  of  th« 
evidence,  separating  one  thing  from  another,  and  laying  this  beside  that,  showa 
that  from  the  confused  mass  there  emerges  a  necessary,  irresistible  conclusion,  how 
delightful  it  is  to  listen  to  that.  The  whole  science  of  mathematics  is  deduced 
from  a  few  simple  axioms.  To  these  an  ordinary  mind  might  give  assent,  without 
observing  that  anything  might  be  implied ;  but  the  practised  intellect  deducts 
from  them,  step  by  step,  a  magnificent  system  of  truth.  Thus,  the  reason,  bring- 
ing its  forces  to  bear  on  the  raw  materials  of  knowledge  supplied  by  the  lower 
faculties,  infers  from  them  a  more  advanced  and  lofty  knowledge  of  its  own. 
2.  But  now,  I  would  like  to  give  a  clearer  and  simpler  explanation  of  what  its 
work  is.  The  reason  may  be  called  the  faculty  of  comparison,  or  the  faculty  by 
which  we  perceive  the  connections  or  relations  of  things.  These  relations  between 
things  with  which  the  reason  has  to  deal  are  of  different  kinds,  but  of  whatever 
kind  they  are,  the  reason  has  to  deal  with  them.  (1)  One  of  them  is  that  of 
means  and  ends.  Something  requires  to  be  done,  but  how  ?  It  is  the  work  of 
the  reason  to  find  that  out.  (2)  Another  relation  between  things  which  is  still 
more  important  for  the  reason,  is  that  of  cause  and  effect.  The  word  "why"  is 
a  great  word  of  the  reason,  and  its  sister  word  is  "  because."  Wherever  "  why  '* 
and  "  because  "  are  coming  into  speech,  there  reason  is  at  work.  (3)  But  this 
process  can  be  turned  the  other  way.  Instead  of  looking  at  phenomena,  and 
asking  how  they  come  there,  we  can  say,  "  Given  certain  things,  what  will  be 
the  consequence  T  Suppose  there  are  certain  conditions,  what  will  follow  from 
them  !"  If  fire  and  gunpowder  are  brought  into  contact,  we  know  what  will 
follow.  If  people  live  in  a  polluted  atmosphere,  we  know  what  the  result  will 
be  to  their  bodies.  But  we  cannot  deal  much  with  such  relations  without  this 
question  arising,  How  do  these  relations  come  to  subsist  between  things  ?  (4)  One 
of  the  greatest  triumphs  of  the  reason  is  to  find  out  the  laws  of  nature,  e.g., 
the  law  of  gravitation.  Newton  discovered  that  law,  and  applied  it  first  to  some 
trivial  things ;  then  he  and  others  applied  it  to  more  distant  and  sublime  things, 
until  we  now  know  it  to  be  a  law  prevailing  in  the  whole  system  of  things,  and 
among  the  bodies  that  roll  in  space ;  but  how  comes  it  that  all  the  bodies  in  earth 
and  heaven  are  directed  by  this  law  ?  As  the  mind  thus  moves  through  nature 
it  finds  that  it  cannot  go  arbitrarily.  The  divisions  which  it  makes  are  in  nature 
before  it  finds  them.  In  short,  nature  is  intelligent — aye,  and  it  is  moral,  because 
nature  is  seen  to  be  so  arranged  as  to  encourage  certain  lines  of  action,  and  to  dis- 
courage certain  other  lines  of  action.  The  stars  in  their  courses,  so  to  speak,  fight 
against  evil  and  on  the  side  of  righteousness.  And  does  not  that  look  as  if  behind 
nature  there  were  some  One  who  is  intelligent,  and  who,  because  He  orders  nature 
bo  as  to  make  for  righteousness,  is  good  ?  II.  The  cultivation  of  the  reason. 
This  faculty  is  bestowed  on  different  individuals  in  very  different  degrees.  To  those 
intended  by  the  Creator  to  be  leaders  of  their  fellows,  it  is  given  in  liberal  measure. 
There  are  multitudes  of  others  whose  ideas  are  habitually  vague  and  feeble. 
Reason  may  be  given  in  different  forms,  some  of  which  are  more  conscious,  and 
some  more  unconscious.  Reason  in  the  unconscious  form,  we  call  by  such  names 
as  tact,  or  common  sense.  The  science  of  logic  has  for  its  aim  the  making  visible 
to  the  eye  the  process  through  which  the  mind  passes  in  reasoning,  whether  it  is 
conscious  of  this  process  or  not,  and  at  the  same  time  it  makes  visible,  so  as  to 
show  their  absurdity,  the  different  kinds  of  fallacious  reasoning ;  and  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  the  study  of  that  science  is  one  of  the  best  means  of  cultivating 
the  mind.  III.  Thb  keligious  use  of  reason.  The  marks  of  God  are  on  all 
things  that  He  has  made,  and  by  collecting  these  from  all  places  where  they  can 
be  seen,  the  reason  apprehends  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead,  and  never  is  the 
reason  of  man  so  nobly  employed  as  when  thus  it  is  collecting  the  indications  of 
God,  bo  as  to  convert  them  into  a  correct  and  impressive  conception  of  what  He 
is,  or  when  it  is  vindicating  His  existence  and  His  character  against  the  attacks 
of  unbelief.  Our  text  says,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the 
Lord,"  and  one  of  the  commonest  complaints  of  the  Bible  is  that  people  will  not 
reason.  "  Israel  doth  not  know,  My  people  doth  not  consider."  That  is  the 
complaint  all  through  the  prophets.  It  is  always  taken  for  granted  that  if  people 
only  would  think,  they  would  love  and  obey  God.  One  of  the  commonest  names 
in  the  Bible  for  sin  is  folly.  At  the  present  time  we  have  need  of  a  reasoned 
Christianity,  because  Christianity  is  tending  far  too  much  to  sentimentalism  and 
sensationalism.  Christian  work  is  becoming  so  absorbing  that  men  have  not 
leisure  to  think,  and  if  Christians  do  not  think,  Christianity  will  before  long  suffer 


chap.  L]  ISAIAH.  37 

the  consequences,  and  they  will  be  hard  to  bear.  (Ibid. )  The  Gospel  of  pardoning 
mercy  as  preached  by  the  prophets  of  tlie  kingdom : — Analyse  carefully  the  picture 
of  the  sins  which  the  prophet  sets  before  his  people,  as  preliminary  to  his  glorious, 
full  and  free  offer  of  mercy.  1.  A  marked  feature  of  the  portraiture,  here  drawn, 
is  that  they  are  sinners  under  the  light  of  Jehovah's  special  revelations  and  appointed 
ordinances.  2.  These  sinners  are  such  in  face  of  every  obligation  of  love  and 
gratitude  to  Jehovah,  arising  out  of  peculiar  blessings  and  privileges.  3.  Yet 
in  the  midst  of  all  these  mercies,  sin  everywhere  abounds.  The  public  men  and 
the  people  alike  are  corrupt.  4.  All  this  wickedness  clothes  itself  in  the  garb 
of  religion.  Having  considered  to  whom  he  speaks,  let  us  consider  what  it  is 
the  prophet  says  to  all  such.  It  embraces  three  points  chiefly.  I.  A  proposition 
to  stop  and  reason  the  matter  with  Jehovah.  The  proposition  is  very 
suggestive  ;  both  of  the  cause  why  men  continue  to  live  in  sin  ;  and  of  the  means 
and  process  whereby  Jehovah  would  bring  them  back  to  Himself.  The  grand 
cause  of  the  continuance  in  sin  is  that  men  will  not  reason  of  the  matter.  It  is 
not  that  they  do  not  know  enough  ;  but  they  do  not  reason  concerning  what 
they  do  know.  II.  The  subject-matter  op  the  parley — sin  and  its  conse- 
quences. III.  The  remedy  for  sin — its  effectiveness,  certainty,  and  readiness. 
(S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Pardon  for  aggravated  sin  : — "  Though  your  sins  be  as 
scarlet,  and  red  like  crimson."  The  critics  tell  us  that  one  of  the  terms  here  refers 
to  the  outward  appearance,  glaring,  attracting  and  fixing  the  attention ;  the 
other,  from  a  root  signifying  double-dipped,  refers  to  the  ineffaceable  stain  of  sin 
upon  the  soul ;  a  stain  that  no  rain,  nor  sunshine,  nor  dew  can  ever  wash  out, 
or  bleach.  The  meaning  is,  however  aggravated  your  sins  may  be.  What,  then, 
are  some  of  the  circumstances  that  aggravate  sin  ?  Sins  are  aggravated — 1.  When 
committed  against  special  light  and  knowledge.  2.  When  committed  against 
special  obligations  of  gratitude.  3.  From  the  social  position  of  those  who  sin, 
or  their  relative  position  towards  others,  or  their  peculiar  gifts  and  endowments 
which  give  them  influence  over  others.  4.  As  committed  against  special  covenants 
and  vows.  (Ibid.)  Ood  reasoning  with  man  : — This  text  strikes  at  the  root 
of  the  wicked  notion  that  man  is  under  an  arbitrary  government,  that  he  is  a 
mere  slave,  or  a  mere  machine,  and  that  he  is  controlled  apart  from  principles  that  are 
moral.  He  is  addressed  almost  as  the  equal  of  the  Almighty.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
God  reasoning  with  man  : — The  proposition  comes  from  God.  It  does  not  arise  from 
the  human  side  at  all.  1.  God  having  made  this  proposition  proceeds  upon  the 
assumption  that  He  knows  Himself  to  be  right  in  this  case.  The  man  who  knows 
himself  to  be  in  the  right  is  always  the  first  to  make  the  noblest  propositions,  and 
to  offer  as  many  concessions  as  are  possible  without  impairing  the  law  of  absolute 
right,  truth,  and  propriety.  If  amongst  ourselves  we  do  so,  it  is  in  an  infinitely 
higher  degree  true  in  the  case  of  Almighty  God.  He  makes  the  proposition  to 
His  rebel.  This  proposition  is  not  only  the  proof  of  the  grace  of  God  ;  but  that 
grace  itself  is  the  vindication  of  His  righteousness.  He  knows  He  is  right  in  the 
court  of  reason  ;  that  if  the  case  be  fully  stated  the  criminal  will  convict  himself, 
he  will  burn  with  shame,  and  cry  out  for  the  judgment  that  is  just.  We  are  not 
wrong  partially,  not  wrong  here  and  there,  with  little  spots  of  light  and  blue 
between  the  errors,  but  we  are  wrong  altogether, — shamefully,  infamously  wrong  J 

2.  Yet  God  knowing  this,  asks  us  to  reason  the  case  with  Him.  Showing  us,  in 
the  next  place,  that  God  proceeds  upon  the  assumption  that  man  ought  to  be 
prepared  to  vindicate  his  conduct  by  reasons.  God  says,  "  Why  do  you  do  this  T 
Let  Me  know  your  reasons  for  having  done  so.  Will  you  state  your  case  to  Me  ? 
I  give  you  the  opportunity  of  stating  your  own  case  in  your  own  terms."  Observe 
how  wonderfully  influential,  when  rightly  accepted,  is  a  proposition  of  this  kind. 
If  men  would  think  more  they  would  sin  less.  Logic  is  against  you  as  well  as 
theology.  Common  sense  is  against  you  as  well  as  spiritual  revelation.  This  is 
the  strength  and  the  majesty  of  the  Christian  faith,  that  it  challenges  men  by  the 
first  principles  of  reasoning  to  defend  themselves,  as  sinners,  before  the  Almighty. 

3.  But  there  is  something  to  be  remembered  at  this  point.  If  God  could  trifle 
with  righteousness  in  making  a  case  up  with  us,  His  own  throne  would  be  insecure, 
His  own  heaven  would  not  be  worth  having.  In  taking  care  of  righteousness  He 
is  taking  care  of  us.  Herein  do  men  greatly  err.  Talking  upon  religious  questions, 
they  say,  "  Why  does  not  God  come  down  and  forgive  us  all  ?  "  That  is  precisely 
what  God  Himself  wants  to  do.  Only  even  God  cannot  forgive,  until  we  ourselves 
want  to  be  forgiven.  4.  With  all  this  before  me  I  am  driven  to  this  conclusion, 
that  now  the  sinner  is  left  absolutely  without  excuse.     (Ibid.)        God  reasoning 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

with  man  : — I.  The  parties  invited.  Who  are  these  ?  They  are  those  of 
whom  it  is  said,  "  their  sins  are  as  scarlet,  and  red  like  crimson "  —  terms 
which  clearly  convey  the  idea  that  there  are  no  sins  so  heinous  that  they  may 
not  be  forgiven,  and  no  men  so  wicked  that  they  may  not  be  saved.  These  terms 
designate  bright,  glowing,  easily-seen  colours,  teaching  most  explicitly,  in  their 
present  connection,  that  sin,  though  so  large  as  to  fill  the  public  eye,  nevertheless 
may  be  pardoned.  Indeed,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  the  language  of  the 
prophet  here  has  also  a  symbolical  meaning,  and  that  as  crimson  is  the  colour  of 
the  blood,  there  is  set  before  us  the  thought  that  not  merely  the  flagrant  trans- 
gressor, but  the  atrocious  criminal — the  man  whose  hands  have  been  imbued  in 
the  blood  of  his  fellow-man — is  declared  to  be  within  the  reach  of  the  Divine  mercy. 
And  I  am  fortified  in  this  persuasion  by  the  words  of  the  Master,  "  that  repent- 
ance and  remission  of  sins  should  be  preached  in  His  name  among  all  nations, 
beginning  at  Jerusalem."  EL  The  invitation  given  them.  "  Come  now,  and 
let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord."  What  forcibly  impresses  us  in  this  state- 
ment is  not  only  the  all-embracing  sweep  of  the  Divine  mercy,  but  the  singular 
way  in  which  this  mercy  is  offered.  The  usual  manner  in  which  a  superior  makes 
known  his  will  to  an  inferior  is  by  a  command.  The  master  gives  his  orders  to 
his  servant.  The  parent  commands  his  child,  and  the  language  of  royal  personages 
is  never  the  language  of  solicitation.  But  we  have  here  the  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords,  very  unlike  man,  not  employing  force,  authority,  command,  but 
condescending  to  reason  with  His  creatures,  and  trying,  as  it  were,  by  argument 
and  persuasion,  to  induce  them  to  accept  His  grace.  III.  The  authority  on 
which  the  invitation  rests.  When  good  news  is  brought  to  us  we  sometimes 
hesitate  about  receiving  it.  And  why  ?  Because  we  think  it  too  good  to  be  true, 
and  are  not  satisfied  of  the  entire  truthfulness  and  fidelity  to  fact  of  the  person 
who  brings  it.  When  it  was  told  Jacob  that  Joseph,  his  beloved  son,  whom  he 
had  long  mourned  as  dead,  was  alive  and  well,  and  governor  of  Egypt,  his  heart 
fainted,  "  for  he  believed  them  not."  But  here,  the  authority  is  as  unassailable 
as  the  invitation  is  cordial,  and  it  is  issued  on  the  authority  of  God  Himself. 
IV.  The  period  when  the  invitation  is  given.  All  privileges  urged  upon 
your  acceptance  in  the  Bible  are  strictly  applicable  and  limited  to  the  very  time 
when  they  are  offered  to  you.  That  mental  and  moral  inaction,  so  fatal  to  our 
spiritual  prospects,  gets  no  countenance  from  the  Word  of  God.  On  the  contrary, 
it  is  always  denounced  as  fraught  with  the  greatest  dangers  to  our  souls.  (J. 
Imrie,  M.A.)        Reasoning  with  God  : — From   this  passage   we   infer — I.  That 

MAN,  THOUGH  DEPRAVED,    HAS   STILL  A   FACULTY  TO   REASON    WITH   GOD.       1.    This 

power  exists  as  an  unquestionable  fact.  It  is  a  fact — ( 1 )  Involved  in  the  existence 
of  a  revelation.  Would  Infinite  Reason  appeal  to  us  unless  we  had  the  power 
of  appreciation  ?  (2)  Implied  in  the  considerations  addressed  to  our  reason. 
The  Bible  abounds  in  considerations  addressed  to  us  as  to  the  wisdom  and  the 
folly,  the  night  and  the  wrong,  of  our  conduct.  (3)  Attested  by  the  universal 
consciousness  of  humanity.  2.  This  power  exists  as  the  chief  glory  of  human 
nature.  What  is  the  chief  glory  of  human  nature  in  itself  considered  ?  Not 
its  faculties  of  contrivance  and  logical  investigation,  as  you  see  them  developed 
in  the  arts  and  sciences.  But  man's  power  to  reason  with  the  Infinite — to  take 
the  thoughts  of  God  and  to  feel  their  power.  3.  This  power  exists,  notwith- 
standing the  devastations  of  depravity.  II.  That  man,  though  depraved,  has 
now  an  opportunity  op  reasoning  with  God.  Whilst  all  sinners  for  ever 
will  have  the  power  of  moral  reasoning,  only  now  on  earth  are  they  invited  to 
a  merciful  conference  with  God.  This  invitation  implies — 1.  The  existence  of 
an  extraordinary  principle  in  the  Divine  government  of  God.  Antecedent 
reasoning  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  whenever  a  creature  rebelled  against 
the  righteous  government  of  his  Creator,  banishment  from  His  holy  presence 
would  be  the  result.  "  The  angels  that  kept  not  their  first  estate,"  &c.  God 
governs  humanity  through  the  mediation  of  Christ.  2.  It  denotes  the  astonishing 
condescension  of  God.  III.  That  man,  though  depraved,  by  rightly  availing 
himself  of  this  opportunity,  may  be  entirely  cleansed  of  his  sins.  "  Though 
your  sins  be  as  scarlet,"  &c.  Notice — 1.  That  sin  has  taken  a  very  fast  hold  on 
numan  nature.  How  closely  and  firmly  attached  to  human  nature  is  sin  !  It 
has  coloured  not  only  the  complexion,  but  the  vital  current,  of  man's  life.  Every 
thought,  feeling,  and  expression,  is  tinged  with  the  stain  of  sin.  2.  That  though 
it  has  taken  this  fast  hold,  it  can  be  separated.  The  scarlet  is  not  a  part  of  the 
texture.     So  of  sin.      Though  closely  identified  with  human  nature,  it  is  not 


chap.  I.]  ISAIAH.  39 

of  it.  Human  nature  can  exi3t  without  it,  has  existed  without  it,  will  exist  without 
it.  There  is  a  moral  chemistry  that  can  take  the  scarlet  and  the  crimson  from 
the  texture  of  human  nature.  3.  That  right  attention  to  God's  reasoning  will 
certainly  and  effectively  remove  the  stain  of  6in.  (Homiliat.)  Desperate 
characters : — I.  I  have  to  publish  thb  Lord's  invitation  to  despbbath 
characters.  The  invitation  is  to  those  whose  sins  are  double-dyed  scarlet  and 
orimson  in  colour.  1.  You  have  had  pious  parents.  2.  You  were  once  a  member 
of  a  Christian  congregation  or  Church.  3.  I  have  to  give  the  invitation  to  those 
whose  sins  have  made  them  worse  than  beasts.  4.  And  to  those  who  are  "  laden 
with  iniquity."  6.  And  to  those  who  are  "  corrupters  "  of  others.  6.  This  all- 
embracing  invitation  is  to  those  who  have  "  forsaken  the  Lord."    IL  I  am  to  give 

REASONS  WHY  DESPERATE  CHARACTERS  SHOULD  ACCEPT  THE  INVITATION.      1.   You 

eay,  "  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  accept  of  it  because  my  heart  is  perfectly  hardened." 
Impossible  !  If  your  heart  is  hard,  come  and  accept  the  invitation,  because  God 
has  promised  to  take  away  the  stony  heart  and  to  give  you  one  of  flesh.  2.  Again, 
you  say,  "  I  cannot  accept  it,  because  I  am  so  wicked."  If  you  feel  wicked  it  is 
God's  Spirit  showing  His  light  in  your  soul  in  order  that  you  may  be  led  to  the 
Cross  of  Jesus  and  have  your  sins  washed  as  white  as  snow.  3.  Then  somebody 
else  answers,  "  Well,  I  would  accept  it,  but  I  have  always  failed."  Though  you 
have  failed,  yet  come  again,  for  our  heavenly  Father  is  noted  for  receiving  sinners. 
4.  But  another  says,  "  Before  I  came  to-night  I  said  I  would  not  be  converted." 
Two  men  were  bidden  to  do  their  lord's  will.  One  of  them  said,  "  I  will  do  it  "  ; 
but  he  went  away,  and  did  it  not.  And  the  other  was  angry  and  exclaimed,  "I 
will  not  do  thy  will,"  but  after  he  had  gone  away  he  repented  and  went  and  did  it. 
Copy  the  example  of  the  latter.  5.  Perhaps,  somebody  still  answers,  "You  have 
not  put  your  hand  on  me,  for  I  am  sunk  in  sin."  The  Bible  tells  me  that  no  man 
can  be  sunk  lower  than  the  reach  of  the  everlasting  arms  of  God.  Though  you 
have  lost  your  character,  your  honour,  and  your  self-control,  yet  God  invites 
you  to  be  saved.  III.  An  earnest  entreaty  for  you  to  come  at  once. 
( W.  Birch. )  The  Lord  reasoning  with  sinners  : — Let  us  regard  these  words — 
I.  As  addressed  to  those  who  are  living  in  sin.  "  Come  now,  and  let  us 
reason  together,  saith  the  Lord."  Sinner,  bring  forth  thy  strong  reasons;  then 
hear  the  reasons  of  God.  What  plea  will  you  make  for  not  turning  to  God  ? 
1.  You  say,  perhaps,  "  This  world  is  all  I  desire.  I  am  well  content  with  what  it 
gives.  Its  gains  and  pleasures  suit  me  well.  I  wish  for  nothing  beyond.  Why 
not  leave  me  to  follow  my  own  way  ?  "  What  says  God  in  reply  ?  "  The  world 
passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof."  2.  Or,  wilt  thou  reason  thus :  "  I  have 
years  yet  before  me.  At  a  more  convenient  season  I  will  seek  God  "  ?  What  does 
God  answer  ?  "  Thou  fool,  this  night,  it  may  be,  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of 
thee."  3.  Or,  dost  thou  say  in  thine  heart — "  I  hate  the  knowledge  of  God's 
ways.  Religion  is  a  weariness  to  me.  I  will  go  on  as  I  am,  and  take  the  conse- 
quences "  ?  Dost  thou  know  the  end  of  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  ?  4.  Or,  is  it  in 
thy  thought  to  say  to  God,  "  Wherein  have  I  sinned  so  much  against  Thee  ?  " 
Behold,  He  answers  thee :  "  I  made  thee,  O  man,  and  every  power  thou  hast 
should  be  devoted  to  Me — thy  life,  thy  health  and  strength,  thy  body  and  souL 
Have  these  been  devoted  to  Me  ?  Has  thy  body  been  kept  in  soberness,  temper- 
ance, and  chastity  ?  Hast  thou  always  been  led  by  My  Spirit  T  "  II.  But  the 
text  is  addressed,  in  its  latter  part  more  particularly,  to  those  who  know  that 

THEY  HAVE  DEEPLY  SINNED  AGAINST  GOD,  AND  WOULD  WILLINGLY,  IF  THEY  DARED, 

return  to  Him.  What  is  the  feeling  of  such  ?  It  may  be,  you  are  tempted  to 
say,  "  There  is  no  hope.  My  sin  is  too  great  to  be  forgiven."  God's  answer  is, 
"  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  &c.  Is  it  not  well  suited  to  your  case  ? 
III.  The  text  is  not  without  admonition  and  comfort  to  the  believing 
Christian.  (E.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  Forgiveness  of  sin : — I.  The  gracious 
condescension  and  boundless  love  of  God,  in  addressing  this  invitation 
to  sinners.  Even  among  friends,  the  offended  party  does  not  first  display  a 
disposition  to  be  reconciled.  He  usually  deems  that  the  first  overture  should 
proceed  from  the  offender.  But  behold  the  infinite  condescension  and  compassion 
of  the  most  high  God  toward  sinful  man.  He  does  not  wait  till  men  come  to  a 
sense  of  their  delinquencies.  H.  The  import  of  the  invitation.  What  U 
this  to  which  God  calls  you  ?  He  says,  "Let  us  reason  together."  It  seems  to 
be  an  expression  borrowed  from  courts  of  justice,  and  is  tantamount  to  saying, 
"  Let  us  hear  the  cause  of  the  defendants."  1.  The  sinner  must  listen  to  the 
chaige — to  the  grand  indictment,  that  he  may  know  both  the  extent  of  his  guilt 


40  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

and  feel  the  hopelessness  of  his  case.  This  charge  is  indeed  heavy,  but  it  must 
be  heard.  The  law  is  holy.  Let  it  operate  on  you  as  it  did  on  Saul  of  Tarsu3. 
2.  Observe,  God  is  willing  to  hear  your  defence,  if  you  can  make  one  honestly  and 
truly ;  but  if  not  He  will  hear  your  confession.     Which  shall  it  be  ?     III.  God 

MAY  BE  CONSIDERED  AS  ADDRESSING  THOSE  WHO,  WITH  A  CONVINCED  AND  BROKEN 

heart,  are  afraid  to  venture  beforb  Him,  and  who  have  the  sentence  of 
condemnation  and  death  in  themselves.  IV.  Let  us  complete  the  whole  of  this 
glorious  theme  of  salvation,  by  calling  upon  you  to  observe,  and  admire,  the  great 
principle  established  by  this  text,  that,  whatever  the  magnitude  of  our  sens 

MAY  BE,  THEY  DO  NOT  EXCLUDE  US  FROM  THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  DlVINE  MERCY. 

(The  Evangelist.)  Pardoning  mercy  : — The  pardon  of  sin  has  been  justly  called 
"  the  life-blood  of  religion."  It  is  this  which  runs  through  all  parts  of  the  Scrip- 
ture, like  the  blood  in  our  veins,  and  is  the  foremost  object  in  the  glorious  Gospel. 
I.  The  first  thing  in  the  text  is  a  charge  implied,  and  more  particularly  expressed, 
in  the  former  verses  of  this  chapter.  The  charge  is  sin — sin  the  most  aggravated. 
Scarlet  and  crimson  are  colours  far  remote  from  white,  which  is  the  emblem  of 
innocence,  or  righteousness.  (Rev.  xix.  8.)  But  here  sinners  are  represented 
as  in  garments  stained  with  blood.  The  bloody,  murderous,  destructive  nature 
of  sin  may  be  intended.  Sin  has  slain  its  millions.  (Rom.  v.  12.)  Some  under- 
stand by  the  word  "  scarlet,"  double-dyed  ;  as  deeply  tinotured  by  sin  as  possible  ; 
as  when  any  garment  has  been  twice  dyed,  first  in  the  wool,  and  again  in  the 
thread  or  piece.  So  great  sinners  are  twice  dyed,  first  in  their  corrupt  nature, 
and  then  again  in  the  long  confirmed  habits  of  actual  transgression.  It  is  absolutely 
necessary  that  each  of  us  should  personally  know  that  this  is  his  own  case.  II.  The 
invitation.  True  religion  is  the  most  reasonable  thing  in  the  world.  1.  Is  not  self- 
preservation  highly  reasonable  ?  We  account  it  the  first  law  of  nature,  and  should 
blame  the  man  who  neglects  it.  Is  a  house  on  fire  ?  Let  the  inhabitant  escape 
for  his  life.  2.  Is  it  not  reasonable  for  a  man  to  do  well  for  himself  ?  Yes  ;  "  Men 
will  praise  thee  when  thou  doest  well  for  thyself."  We  commend  the  honest, 
ingenious,  industrious  tradesman.  Is  it  reasonable  for  a  man  to  mind  his  own 
business  ?  Well,  "  one  thing  is  needful "  ;  the  care  of  thy  soul  is  the  business 
of  life  (Luke  x.  42).  Is  it  reasonable  to  improve  opportunities  for  business,  as 
fairs  and  markets  ?  Redeem  then  the  time,  and  catch  the  golden  opportunities 
of  gain  to  thy  soul.  Is  it  reasonable  to  make  a  good  bargain  ?  The  Christian 
makes  the  best  in  the  world.  Is  it  reasonable  to  cultivate  friendship  with  the 
wise,  the  good,  and  the  great  ?  Oh,  how  wise  to  make  Christ  our  Friend.  3.  Is 
it  not  reasonable  to  believe  the  God  of  truth  ?  The  Word  of  God  has  every  con- 
firmation we  could  wish.  4.  Is  not  love  to  God  and  man  perfectly  reasonable  ? 
This  is  the  whole  of  our  religion.  Is  it  reasonable  or  not  to  love  the  Best  of  beings 
better  than  all  other  beings  ?  III.  The  gracious  promise.  "  Though  your 
sins,"  &c.  The  pardon  of  sin  is  the  first  thing  in  religion.  It  was  the  great 
business  of  Christ  upon  earth  to  procure  it.  The  pardon  of  sin  originates  in  the 
free  mercy  and  sovereign  grace  of  God,  without  respect  to  anything  good  in  the 
creature.  But  we  are  not  to  expect  pardon  from  an  absolute  God.  Pardon  is 
an  act  of  justice  as  well  as  of  mercy.  Mercy  on  God's  part,  but  justice  on  account 
of  Christ.  Another  thing  is,  that  it  is  by  faith  alone  we  are  made  partakers  of 
pardoning  mercy.  Notice,  too,  the  perfection  of  pardon,  which  is  expressed  by 
making  scarlet  as  snow,  and  crimson  like  wool.  We  are  to  understand  this  of 
the  sinner,  not  of  his  sins.  Pardon  does  not  alter  the  nature,  or  lessen  the  evil  of 
sin.  (O.  Burder,  D.D. )  The  reasonableness  of  the  offers  and  terms  of  the  Gospel : — 
I.  The  offers  of  the  Gospel.  The  Almighty  here  proposes  completely  to  take 
away  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  consequently  to  remit  the  punishment  due  to  it.  There 
are  various  kinds  and  degrees  of  sin ;  sins  of  different  colours  and  complexions, 
more  or  less  aggravated,  more  or  less  strengthened  by  habit  and  indulgence.  But 
the  offer  of  pardon  extends  to  all  alike.  Is  not  this  a  blessing  peculiarly  adapted 
to  our  need  ?  Nothing  but  a  gratuitous  remission  of  sin  can  suit  our  case. 
God  deals  with  us  in  the  most  reasonable  manner,  and  leaves  us  without  excuse, 
if  we  attend  not  to  His  offer.  II.  The  terms  of  the  Gospel.  1.  With  respect 
to  faith.  Is  not  this  a  perfectly  reasonable  requisition  ?  Since  God  has  provided 
a  salvation  for  you,  has  He  not  a  right  to  stipulate  the  means  by  which  you  shall 
apply  to  yourself  the  benefit  of  that  salvation  ?  And  what  easier,  simpler  way 
could  He  have  devised  ?  2.  As  to  repentance.  Is  there  anything  unreasonable 
in  this  requisition  ?  Can  it  be  considered  as  a  hard  condition  that  we  •hould 
relinquish  those  practices  which  cost  the  Son  of  God  His  life ;  and  which,  if  He 


chap.  I.]  ISAIAH.  41 

had  not  died  for  them,  would  have  cost  us  our  souls  ?     If  religion  he  in  itself  so 
reasonable  a  service,  how  can  you  act  so  unreasonably  as  not  to  choose  and  follow 
it  ?     (E.  Cooper.)        Self -scrutiny  in  God's  presence : — I.  The  duty  of  examining 
oue  moral  character  and   conduct  alono  with   God.      There  are   always 
two  beings  who  are  concerned  with  sin — the  being  who  commits  it,  and  the  Being 
against  whom  it  is  committed.     Such  a  joint  examination  as  this  produces  a  very 
keen  sense  of  the  evil  and  guilt  of  sin.     When  the  soul  is  shut  up  with  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  there  are  great  searchings  of  heart.     Another  effect  is  to  render  our 
views  discriminating.     Objects  are  seen  in  their  true  proportions  and  meanings. 
II.  There  is  forgiveness  with  God.     We  deduce  the  following  practical  direc- 
tions.    1.  In  all  states  of  religious  anxiety,  we  should  betake  ourselves  instantly 
and  directly  to  God.    2.  We  should  make  a  full  and  plain  statement  of  every- 
thing to  God.     (W.   O.   T.   Shedd,  D.D.)        Forgiveness: — In  this   passage  — 
I.  There  is  assumed  the  existence  of  enormous  guilt.    The  aggravations  of 
sin  are  to  be  found  in  their  highest  form  where  there  are  instituted  powerful  means 
to  deter  from  its  perpetration,  and  where  yet  it  is  committed  in  spite  of  restraints 
eminently  calculated  to  direct  the  soul  to  goodness.     We  turn  at  once  to  the 
country  in  which  we  dwell,  to  find  the  sins  which  are  as  the  "  scarlet "  or  the 
"  crimson  "  dye.      Ours  is  a  country,  signally  favoured  with  means  the  best 
adapted  to  lead  from  transgression,  and  excite  to  obedience.     II.  There  is 
promised  the  bestowment  of  pardoning  mercy.     1.  It  might  indeed  have 
been  imagined,  that,  after  such  repeated  accusations  of  iniquity,  there  would 
succeed  only  a  threatening  of  doom.    Is  God  not  just  ?    Is  He  not  jealous  of 
His  glory  ?     2.  Such  a  promise  as  this  is  made  in  perfect  consistency  with  the 
immutable  justice  and  holiness  of  the  Divine  nature.     3.  It  will  be  proper  to 
observe  the  manner  in  which  the  promised  blessing  is  bestowed.     God  com- 
municates forgiveness  through  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  His  Son.     4.  In  order  to 
secure  the  personal  application  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  there  must  be,  in  your- 
selves, the  production  of  certain  emotions  and  principles,  by  the  operation  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.     5.  Let  us  further  observe,  the  sufficiency  by  which  this  promised 
blessing  of  forgiveness  is  characterised.     III.  There  is  desired  the  exercise 
of  wise   consideration.     (James  Parsons.)        Divine  expostulation: — I.   The 
characters  who  are  here  addressed.     We  see  the  Jews  charged — 1.  With 
a  gross  departure  from  God.     2.   With  carrying   their  abominations   into  the 
religious  services  of  the  sanctuary.     II.  The  character  in  which  God  is  here 
represented   by  the  prophet — that,   namely,   of   the  most  amazing  conde- 
scension.    Various  are  the  methods  in  which  God  may  be  said  to  reason  with  us. 
1.  By  family  afflictions.     2.  By  personal  inflictions.     3.  By  awful  providences. 
4.  Through  the  ministry  of  His  Word.     For  what  does  God  condescend  to  reason 
with  us  ?     For  the  bestowment  of  pardon.     Your  reason,  in  its  highest  powers, 
is  challenged.     (J.  Gaskin,  M.A.)        The  silver  trumpet : — I.  Our  text  is  addressed 
to  sinners  of  the  deepest  dye.     1.  In  the  second  verse  you  will  perceive  that 
the  text  was  addressed  to  senseless  sinners — so  senseless  that  God  Himself  would 
not  address  them  in  expostulation,  but  called  upon  the  heavens  and  the  earth  to 
hear  His  complaints.     2.  The  text  is  given  to  ungrateful  sinners.     "  I  have 
nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  Me."     Oh, 
how  many  of  us  come  under  this  description !     3.  By  reading  in  the  third  verse, 
you  will  perceive  again  that  the  text  is  addressed  to  men  who  are  worse  than 
beasts.     None  of  us  would  keep  a  horse  for  twenty  years,  if  it  never  worked  but 
only  sought  to  injure  us;   and  yet  there  are  men  whom  God  has  kept  these 
forty  and  fifty  years,  put  the  breath  into  their  nostrils,  the  bread  into  their  mouths, 
and  the  clothes  upon  their  backs,  and  they  have  done  nothing  but  curse  at  Him, 
speak  ill  of  His  service,  and  do  despite  to  His  laws.     4.  They  were  a  people 
laden  with  iniquity."    5.  They  were  not  only  loaded  with  sin  themselves,  but 
they  were  teachers  in  transgressions.     "  Children  that  are  corrupters."    6.  The 
blessed  text  we  have  on  hand  is  addressed  to  men  upon  whom  all  manner  of 
afflictions  had  been  lost  and  thrown  away.     It  is  a  great  aggravation  of  our  sin 
when  we  sin  under  the  rod.     7.  The  invitation  is  sent  to  men  who  appeared  to 
have  been  totally  depraved  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  to  the  head.     II.  The 
text  presents  us  with  reasoning  of  the  most  prevalent  power.     HI.  The 
words  of  this  text  contain  a  promise  of  pardon  of  the  fullest  force. 
"  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  and  though  they 
be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."     These  colours  are  selected  because 
of  their  exceeding  brilliancy.     Now  some   sins   are   striking,  glaring  sins;   yon 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

cannot  help  seeing  them ;  and  the  sinner  himself  is  compelled  to  confess  them. 
But  the  Hebrew  word  conveys  the  idea  of  doubly  dyed — what  we  call  ingrained 
colours — when  the  wool  has  lain  so  long  in  the  dye  that  it  cannot  be  got  out ; 
though  you  wash  or  wear  it  as  long  as  you  please,  you  must  destroy  the  fabric 
before  you  can  destroy  the  colour.  Yet  here  is  the  promise  of  full  pardon  for 
glaring  and  for  ingrained  lusts.  And  note  how  the  pardon  is  put — "  they  shall 
be  as  snow" — pure  white  virgin  snow.  But  snow  soon  loses  its  whiteness,  and 
therefore  it  is  compared  to  the  whiteness  of  the  wool  washed  and  prepared  by 
the  busy  housewife  for  her  fair  white  linen.  You  shall  be  so  cleansed,  that  not 
the  shadow  of  a  spot,  nor  the  sign  of  a  sin,  shall  be  left  upon  you.  When  a  man 
believes  in  Christ,  he  is  in  that  moment,  in  God's  sight,  as  though  he  had  never 
sinned  in  all  his  life.  IV.  The  time  mentioned  in  the  text,  which  is  of  the  most 
solemn  significance.  "  Now."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Reasons  for  parting  with 
gin  : — It  is  the  great  joy  of  our  heart  that  we  do  not  labour  in  vain,  nor  spend 
our  strength  for  nought.  Still,  there  is  a  bass  to  this  musio  :  there  are  some,  and 
these  not  a  few,  who  remain  unblest  where  others  are  saved.  It  is  obvious  that 
something  hinders.  What  can  it  be  ?  The  real  reason  why  men  who  have  an 
earnest  desire  to  be  saved,  and  have  sincere  religiousness  of  a  certain  sort,  do  not 
find  peace,  is  this,  because  they  are  in  love  with  sin.  "  Come  now,  and  let  us 
reason  together,  saith  the  Lord."  Let  us  have  this  matter  out,  and  hear  what  is 
to  be  urged  in  favour  of  God's  demands.  I.  It  is  a  reasonable  thing  that  sin 
should  be  renounced.  1.  Because  it  is  most  inconsistent  to  suppose  that 
pardon  can  be  given  while  we  continue  in  sin.  How  could  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth  thus  wink  at  iniquity  ?  Only  fancy  what  the  effect  would  be  upon  our 
country  if  a  proclamation  were  issued,  that  henceforth  all  manner  of  offences 
against  the  law  would  be  immediately  forgiven,  and  men  might  continue  still  to 
perpetrate  them.  And  what  would  be  the  effect  upon  the  sinner  himself  if  such 
could  be  the  case  ?  Say  to  a  man — you  are  not  to  be  punished  for  your  sin,  and 
yet  you  may  live  in  it  still,  and  what  worse  turn  could  you  do  him  ?  Here  is  a 
bleeding  wound  in  my  arm  ;  the  surgeon  says  he  will  allow  it  still  to  bleed,  but 
he  will  remove  my  sense  of  faintness  and  pain.  I  would  decline  to  have  it  so.  It 
is  unreasonable  that  you  should  expect  that  God  will  allow  you  to  remain  impeni- 
tent, and  yet  give  you  the  kiss  of  forgiving  love.  It  would  be  neither  honourable 
to  God,  nor  good  to  your  fellow-men,  nor  really  beneficial  to  yourself.  2.  Is  it 
not  reasonable,  too,  that  we  should  part  with  sin,  because  sin  is  so  grievous  to 
God  ?  3.  Should  it  not  be  given  up  because  of  the  mischief  it  has  already  done 
to  man  ?  4.  Remember,  also,  that  unless  sin  is  repented  of  and  forsaken  no  act 
of  yours,  nor  ceremony  of  religion,  nor  hearing,  nor  praying  can  possibly  save 
you.  II.  Let  me  now  go  further,  and  declare  that  it  is  most  reasonable  that 
man  should  seee  PURITY  of  heart.  You  ask  for  forgiveness,  and  in  return 
God  says  to  you,  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean ;  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings 
from  before  Mine  eyes ;  cease  to  do  evil ;  learn  to  do  well ;  seek  judgment ;  relieve 
the  oppressed ;  judge  the  fatherless ;  plead  for  the  widow."  Is  there  not  reason 
in  this  command  ?  You  practically  say,  "  Lord,  enter  into  amity  and  peace 
with  me."  The  Lord  replies,  "  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked :  only  as  you 
become  renewed  in  nature  can  there  be  any  peace  between  us."  Do  you  dare 
to  ask  God  to  commune  with  you  while  you  are  a  lover  of  sin  T    III.  If  the 

SINNER  REMAIN  IMPENITENT  IT  IS  MOST  UNREASONABLE  FOR  HTM  TO  LAY  THE  BLAME 
OF  HIS  NOT  BEING  FORGIVEN  UPON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  GOD,  FOR  GOD  IS  READY  TO 
FORGIVE.      IV.   IT    IS    A    REASONABLE    THTNG    THAT    GOD    SHOULD    DEMAND    WITH 

this  pardon  obediencb  TO  His  command.  And  what  is  that  command  ?  It  is, 
"  H  ye  be  willing  and  obedient  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land ;  but  if  ye  refuse 
and  rebel  the  sword  shall  devour  you."  Obedient  to  what  t  Obedient  to  all 
Gospel  precepts.  (Ibid.)  Scarlet  sinners  pardoned  and  purified:  —  It  is  a 
wonderful  instance  of  Divine  compassion  that  God  should  be  willing  to  hold  a 
conference  with  man.  Of  course,  the  first  person  to  ask  for  such  a  conference 
ought  to  have  been  the  offending  party.  But,  instead  of  man  seeking  God,  and 
pleading,  with  bitter  tears,  "  Lord,  pitifully  hear  me  ;  graciously  listen  to  me, 
and  forgive  me  "  ;  it  is  God  who  comes  seeking  man.  Surely  it  should  be  a  great 
joy  to  a  man  to  hear  that  God  invites  him  to  a  conference ;  he  should  take  heart 
of  hope  from  that  fact.  God  meets  man  in  two  ways  :  first,  by  the  perfect  pardon 
of  sin,  and,  next,  by  a  clean  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin.  I.  First,  I  will 
suppose  that  I  have  before  me  someone  who  says,  "  My  sins  are  as  glaring  A3 
scarlet."     How  can  I  ever  be  the  friend  of  God  as  my  sins  are  so  prominent  t 


chap,  i.]  ISAIAH.  43 

Some  people's  sins  are  of  a  drab  colour,  you  might  not  notice  them  ;  other  people'3 
sins  are  a  sort  of  whitey-brown,  you  would  scarcely  perceive  them  ;  but  my  sins 
are  scarlet,  that  is  a  colour  that  is  at  once  observed.  What  sort  of  sins  may  be 
called  scarlet  ?  1.  The  filthier  vices.  2.  The  universally  condemned  sins,  those 
sins  which  are  offences  against  the  State,  and  against  the  well-being  and  social 
order  of  the  community,  such  as  dishonesty,  theft,  peculation  in  all  its  forms, 
knavery,  cheating,  lying.  3.  The  louder  defiances  of  God.  Some  men  dare  to 
contradict  Scripture,  to  express  their  disbelief  in  it,  nay,  to  contradict  God  Himself, 
even  to  express  their  disbelief  in  His  existence;  and,  disbelieving  in  God,  they 
dare  to  cavil  at  His  providence,  to  judge  His  words,  and  to  utter  criticisms  and 
sarcasms  about  the  acts  of  the  Most  High.  4.  Scarlet  sins  may  consist,  again, 
in  long-continued  dissipations.  5.  In  repeated  transgressions.  6.  In  any  act 
of  sin  which  is  distinctly  deliberate.  Do  you  want  to  know  how  this  can  be  done  ? 
It  is  through  the  great  atoning  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ.  II.  But  there  is  a  second 
difficulty.  The  man  of  whom  I  first  spoke  also  says,  "  My  tendency  to  sin  is 
deeply  ingrained."  He  says,  "  If  all  my  scarlet  sins  were  forgiven,  yet  I  am 
afraid  I  should  not  be  all  right  even  then."  Why  not  ?  "  Because  I  feel  impulses 
within  me  towards  evil  which,  I  think,  are  stronger  than  in  anybody  else."  Well, 
I  will  take  you  on  your  own  ground ;  I  do  believe  that  there  are  some  persons 
who  have  a  greater  hereditary  tendency  to  some  Bins  than  others  have.  Still, 
though  your  sins  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool.  God  knows  how  to 
effect  this  transformation  by  the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Oh  !  "  says 
another,  "  I  should  not  mind  about  hereditary  tendencies ;  but  my  difficulty  is 
that  I  have  been  habitually  committing  sin."  The  Holy  Spirit  will  help  you  to 
break  off  every  sinful  habit  at  once.  You  know  that  scarlet  and  crimson  are 
colours  very  hard  to  get  out  of  any  fabric.  Neither  the  dew,  nor  the  rain,  nor 
any  ordinary  processes  of  bleaching,  will  get  out  the  scarlet.  But  God  knows 
how,  without  destroying  the  fabric,  to  take  out  a  fifty  years'  crimson  habit,  and 
not  leave  a  stain  behind.  I  heard  a  third  person  say,  "  The  trouble  with  me  is 
that  I  have  such  feeble  mental  resistance  to  evil,  I  am  so  weak,  such  a  poor  fool." 
Well,  you  are  not  much  of  a  fool  if  you  know  you  are ;  the  biggest  fools  are  those 
who  never  know  that  they  are  fools.  Still,  there  are  people  of  this  kind.  Now, 
if  you  will  come  and  reason  with  God,  and  yield  yourself  to  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  Re  will  put  a  backbone  into  you.  Still,  perhaps,  I  have  not  quite  hit  the 
nail  on  the  head  with  all  of  you.  Some  are  entangled  by  their  circumstances.  But 
God's  grace  can  deliver  you.  There  is  nothing  like  making  up  your  mind  that 
you  are  coming  right  straight  out  from  everything  that  is  wrong,  let  it  cost  what- 
ever it  may.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and 
lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  The  ship  is  going  down,  and  if  your  little  boat  is  tied  to  it, 
you  will  go  down  too.  Up  with  the  axe,  and  cut  the  rope  !  I  think  I  hear 
another  say,  "  But  I  am  a  man  of  such  strong  passions."  They  must  be  got  rid 
of ;  and  I  do  not  know  of  any  surgical  operation  that  can  do  it ;  you  will  have 
to  be  born  again,  that  is  the  only  real  cure.  (Ibid.)  Dyeing  and  bleaching  : — 
All  men  can  dye  their  souls,  but,  as  saith  a  quaint  divine,  only  God  can  bleach 
them.  It  is  in  our  power  to  dye  ourselves  into  all  colours,  but  only  God  can  make 
us  white.  The  idea  is  that  there  is  no  human  condition  too  desperate  for  Divine 
treatment.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  theology  of  colours  : — There  is  a  philosophy 
of  colours ;  there  is  a  theology  of  hues ;  and  it  hath  pleased  God  to  represent 
purity  by  whiteness.  The  saints  above  are  robed  in  white ;  they  who  love  God 
are  clothed  in  white  raiment  now,  and  it  is  the  harlot  of  the  earth  that  is  scarleted 
and  that  lives  in  her  significant  redness.  (Ibid.)  Scarlet  and  crimson  sins  : — 
Sins  are  here  likened  to  scarlet  and  crimson  dye,  and  with  good  reason,  indeed. 
For,  first  of  all,  scarlet  and  crimson  are  the  most  glaring  and  flaunting  of  colours  ; 
and  sin  is  the  most  audacious  as  well  as  self-delusive  appearance,  under  which 
man  affronts  the  majesty  of  God  in  the  sight  of  heaven  and  earth.  Scarlet  and 
crimson,  also,  are  the  blush  of  shame.  And  what  so  shameful  as  sin,  or  rather 
what  can  be  shameful  but  sin  ?  Scarlet  and  crimson  are  also  the  colour  of  blood  ; 
and  blood  is  on  the  head  of  every  sinner,  as  St.  Paul  told  the  unbelieving  Jews 
when  they  refused  to  be  converted  from  their  sins :  "  Your  blood  be  upon  your 
own  heads."  And  scarlet  and  crimson  were  (whatever  they  may  be  now)  colours 
which  it  was  beyond  all  men's  power  and  skill  to  discharge  from  the  cloth  which 
had  been  once  dyed  with  them.  And  is  it  not  equally  beyond  all  man's  power 
to  cleanse  his  own  soul  from  the  dye  of  sin  ?  (It.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)  God 
Almighty's  white  : — A  preacher  admired  the  whiteness  of  a  washerwoman's  clothes. 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

There  they  hung  upon  the  line,  beautifully  white,  as  compared  with  the  dark  slates 
of  the  roof  of  the  house  behind  them.  But  after  a  snow-storm  had  come  on, 
which  covered  the  roofs  and  streets  with  a  mantle  of  unsullied  purity,  they  seemed 
to  have  lost  all  their  whiteness.  And  when  he  said  to  her,  "  The  clothes  do  not 
look  quite  so  white  as  they  did,"  she  replied,  "  Ah,  sir  !  the  clothes  are  as  white 
as  they  were,  but  what  can  stand  against  God  Almighty's  white  ?  "  (Life  of 
Faith.)  Come  now  : — "  Do  you  know,  that  as  I  live,"  wrote  James  Smetham, 
"  I  become  more  and  more  impressed  by  one  word,  and  that  word  is  Now  !  " 
"  Scarlet "  sins  : — "  We  have  some  little  difficulty,"  said  a  scientific  lecturer, 
"  with  the  iron  dyes  ;  but  the  most  troublesome  of  all  are  Turkey  red  rags.  You 
eee  I  have  dipped  this  into  my  solution  ;  its  red  is  paler,  but  it  is  still  strong.  If 
I  steep  it  long  enough  to  efface  the  colour  entirely  the  fibre  will  be  destroyed ; 
it  will  be  useless  for  our  manufacture.  How,  then,  are  we  to  dispose  of  our  red 
rags  T  We  leave  their  indelible  dye  as  it  is,  and  make  them  into  red  blotting 
paper.  Perhaps  you  have  wondered  why  our  blotting  pad  is  red  ;  now  you  know 
the  reason."  What  a  striking  illustration  of  the  fitness  and  force  of  this  figure  of 
God's  Word,  and  of  the  power  of  "  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  "  to  change  and 
cleanse  is  furnished  by  the  above  explanation  !  The  Spirit  of  God  led  the  prophet 
Isaiah  to  write,  not  though  your  sins  be  as  blue  as  the  sky,  or  as  green  as  the 
olive  leaf,  or  as  black  as  night."  He  chose  the  very  colour  which  modern  science, 
with  all  its  appliances,  finds  to  be  indestructible — "  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be 
as  wool."  Roses  speaking  of  sin  and  forgiveness  : — One  night  in  June,  a  few  years 
ago,  Sister  Margaret  was  going  home  from  her  work  in  the  streets,  sad  at  heart 
because  of  the  sin  and  misery  about  her,  and  somewhat  disappointed  at  what 
seemed  a  night  of  fruitless  toil.  She  had  taken  with  her  a  bunch  of  flowers,  and 
now  they  were  all  withered  except  two  roses  that  had  kept  their  freshness — the 
one  a  deep  red,  the  other  a  pure  white.  As  she  looked  at  them,  the  words  occurred 
to  her  mind,  "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow." 
Suddenly  looking  up,  she  saw  in  the  shadow  of  a  doorway  in  Piccadilly  a  young 
girl,  a  picture  of  utter  despair.  The  sister  came  to  her  and  held  out  the  roses ; 
but  the  girl's  face  at  once  hardened  scornfully,  and  she  turned  away.  Quietly 
the  sister  followed  her,  when  the  girl  turned  and  said  angrily,  "  Why  do  you  come 
to  me  with  flowers  ?  Do  you  want  to  torment  me?"  'Do  you  know  what  these 
rosea  seemed  to  say  to  me — this  white  and  this  red  rose  ?  "  said  the  sister,  kindly. 
"  The  message  they  spoke  was  this :  '  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall 
be  as  white  as  snow.'  "  "  Yes,"  said  the  girl,  "  that  is  all  very  well  for  you,  but 
I  am  not  fit  to  touch  them."  "  Oh,  but  the  message  is  meant  for  you  as  much 
as  for  me,"  and  again  the  sister  held  out  the  flowers.  Then  the  girl  burst 
into  tears.  "  I  will  take  them  and  keep  them  for  my  mother's  sake.  She 
cent  me  two  roses  in  her  last  letter.  I  have  got  them  now  in  the  Bible 
Bhe  gave  me  when  I  left  home  to  come  to  London."  It  was  an  easy  thing 
now  to  urge  the  message  of  love.  That  night  the  girl  left  her  life  of  sin  and 
came  simply  to  the  Saviour.  She  was  soon  restored  to  her  home  in  the 
country,  and  her  new  life  has  been  a  blessing  to  many.  Frequently  there 
comes  from  her  a  box  of  flowers  to  Sister  Margaret,  with  the  message: 
"  Give  these  to  the  girls ;  a  flower  saved  me.  It  may  do  as  much  for  somebody 
else."     (M.  Guy  Pearse.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  If  ye  be  willing-  and  obedient*  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of 
the  land.  —  The  obligation  of  all  who  have  received  the  revealed  will  of 
God  to  conform  thereto : — The  text,  involving  the  great  truth  which  is  evidently 
implied  therein,  is  the  sanction  with  which  the  whole  of  the  chapter  is  enforced. 
I.  It  is  the  bounden  obligation  op  all  who  have  received  the  revealed 
will  of  God,  whether  nations  or  individuals,  to  abide  by  that  will, — as 
well  in  the  regulation  of  their  faith  and  practice,  as  in  the  order  and  management 
of  their  affairs,  in  the  formation  and  execution  of  their  laws ;  and  to  admit  of 
no  other  principle,  nor  to  walk  by  any  other  rule  whatsoever.  Consider — 1.  Whose 
revelation  it  is  for  a  devout  and  universal  conformity  to  which  we  plead.  2.  For 
what  purpose  God  has  been  pleased  to  make  known  His  mind  and  will  to  us. 
3.  The  wonderful  adaptation  of  this  heavenly  will  to  all  our  wants  and  circum- 
stances. 4.  The  deplorable  condition  of  man  without  such  a  light  from  heaven. 
6.  It  is  by  God's  revealed  will  we  shall  all  be  judged  at  last.  II.  The  consequences 
of  adhering  to,  or  swerving  from,  that  Divine  revelation,  in  either  respect.     W« 


ohap.  i.]  ISAIAH.  45 

can  never  suppose  that  God  will  permit  any  nation  or  individual  to  disbelieve  or 
disregard  His  Word  with  impunity ;  nor  can  we  imagine  that  He  wiil  suffer  any 
nation  or  individual,  obeying  His  voice,  to  go  without  His  blessing.  IH.  Somb 
objections  which  may  be  URGED.  1.  All  this  applies  to  Israel  of  old,  as  a  peculiar 
nation,  raised  up  in  a  particular  manner,  for  a  special  purpose.  But  is  not  He, 
who  was  their  God,  the  God  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  ?  2.  But  does  the 
Old  Testament  equally  apply  to  us  as  the  New  ?  Undoubtedly.  3.  Do  we  meet 
with  any  intimation  of  this  kind  in  the  New  Testament  ?  Certainly.  (Matt.  v. 
17,  18 ;  Rom.  xv.  4 ;  1  Cor.  x.  11.)  4.  How  is  it  possible,  amidst  a  mixed  descrip- 
tion of  character,  to  bring  about  such  a  state  of  things  ?  Try  and  leave  the  issue 
with  God.  5.  But  would  you  have  everything  to  be  based  upon  the  Divine  Word  ? 
Yes,  everything.  I  would  wish  to  see  the  whole  nation  living  in  the  fear  of  God, 
and  striving  to  promote  His  glory.  (R.  ShitUer.)  Sincere  obedience  accepted: — 
He  doth  not  say,  If  you  be  perfectly  obedient,  but  willingly  so ;  for  if  there  be  a 
willing  mind  it  is  accepted.  (M.  Henry.)  Guilt  embitters  creature-comforts  :—- 
If  sin  be  pardoned,  creature-comforts  become  comforts  indeed.  (Ibid.)  Mis- 
taken economy : — Close  to  Port  Arthur  in  the  Canadian  Dominion  there  is  a  little 
island  named  Silver  Island.  It  was  known  that  silver  was  there,  and  a  few 
Canadian  gentlemen  united  in  explorations.  Most  of  them,  however,  objected 
to  the  necessary  outlay  on  works,  and  sold  their  claims  to  an  American  Company. 
The  Americans  began  to  dig,  and  found  silver  not  only  in  rich  veins,  but  also  in 
thick,  solid  sheets.  The  Canadians  bitterly  lamented  their  folly  in  not  spending 
the  money  which  would  have  secured  the  treasure,  but  it  was  too  late.  There 
are  those  who,  though  called  to  enrich  themselves  both  for  time  and  eternity, 
are  unwilling  to  give  up  the  sins  they  find  so  pleasant.  They  will  not  pay  the 
preliminary  price,  and  discover  when  too  late  how  much  they  have  missed.  Others 
have  paid  the  price ;  they  have  secured  the  treasure,  but  when  regrets  are  un- 
availing, the  lovers  of  the  present  world  see  what  a  fatal  mistake  they  have 
made,  and  have  a  dark  eternity  in  which  to  meditate  on  their  folly.  (Gates  of 
Imagery.)  The  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it. — The  infallibility  of 
Scripture :  —  What  Isaiah  said  was,  therefore,  spoken  by  Jehovah.  All 
Scripture,  being  inspired  of  the  Spirit,  is  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  God.  The 
like  valuation  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  is  seen  in  our  Lord's  apostles;  for  they 
treated  the  ancient  Scriptures  as  supreme  in  authority,  and  supported  their  state- 
ments with  passages  from  Holy  Writ.  I.  This  is  oub  warrant  for  teaching 
Scriptural  truth.  It  would  not  be  worth  our  while  to  speak  what  Isaiah  had 
spoken,  if  in  it  there  was  nothing  more  than  Isaiah's  thought ;  neither  should 
we  care  to  meditate  hour  after  hour  upon  the  writings  of  Paul,  if  there  was  nothing 
more  than  Paul  in  them.  We  feel  no  imperative  call  to  expound  and  to  enforce 
what  has  been  spoken  by  men  ;  but,  since  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
it,"  it  is  woe  unto  us  if  we  preach  not  the  Gospel !  1.  The  true  preacher,  the 
man  whom  God  has  commissioned,  delivers  his  message  with  awe  and  trembling, 
because  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  He  bears  the  burden  of  the 
Lord  and  bows  under  it.  They  called  George  Fox  a  Quaker,  because  when  he 
spoke  he  would  quake  exceedingly  through  the  force  of  the  truth  which  he  so 
thoroughly  apprehended.  Martin  Luther,  who  never  feared  the  face  of  man,  yet 
declared  that  when  he  stood  up  to  preach  he  often  felt  his  knees  knock  together 
under  a  sense  of  his  great  responsibility.  Woe  unto  us  if  we  dare  to  speak  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  with  less  than  our  whole  heart  and  soul  and  strength  !  Woe 
unto  us  if  we  handle  the  Word  as  if  it  were  an  occasion  for  display  !  2.  Because 
the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  the  truth  of  God,  we  therefore  endeavour 
to  preach  it  with  absolute  fidelity.  It  is  not  ours  to  correct  the  Divine  revelation, 
but  simply  to  echo  it.  3.  Again,  as  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it," 
we  speak  the  Divine  truth  with  courage  and  full  assurance.  Modesty  is  a  virtue  ; 
but  hesitancy,  when  we  are  speaking  for  the  Lord,  is  a  great  fault.  Those  who 
fling  aside  our  Master's  authority  may  very  well  reject  our  testimony:  we  are 
content  they  should  do  so.  But,  if  we  speak  that  which  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
hath  spoken,  those  who  hear  His  Word  and  refuse  it,  do  so  at  their  own  peril. 
We  are  urged  to  be  charitable.  We  are  charitable  ;  but  it  is  with  our  own  money. 
We  have  no  right  to  give  away  what  is  put  into  our  trust  and  is  not  at  our  disposal. 
When  we  have  to  do  with  the  truth  of  God  we  are  stewards,  and  must  deal  with 
our  Lord's  exchequer,  not  on  the  lines  of  charity  to  human  opinions,  but  by  the 
rule  of  fidelity  to  the  God  of  truth.  4.  Because  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  it,"  we  feel  bound  to  speak  His  Word  with  diligence,  as  often  as  ever  we 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

can,  and  with  perseverance,  as  long  as  ever  we  live.  Surely,  it  would  be  a  blessed 
thing  to  die  in  the  pulpit ;  spending  one's  last  breath  in  acting  as  the  Lord's  mouth. 
Dumb  Sabbaths  are  fierce  trials  to  true  preachers.  Remember  how  John  Newton, 
when  he  was  quite  unfit  to  preach,  and  even  wandered  a  bit  by  reason  of  his 
infirmities  and  age,  yet  persisted  in  preaching;  and  when  they  dissuaded  him, 
he  answered  with  warmth,  "  What  I  Shall  the  old  African  blasphemer  leave  off 
preaching  Jesus  Christ  while  there  is  breath  in  his  body  ?  "  So  they  helped  the 
old  man  into  the  pulpit  again,  that  he  might  once  more  speak  of  free  grace  and 
dying  love.  5.  If  we  get  a  right  apprehension  concerning  Gospel  truth — that 
"  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it " — it  will  move  us  to  tell  it  out  with  great 
ardour  and  zeal.  How  can  you  keep  back  the  heavenly  news  T  Whisper  it  in  the 
ear  of  the  sick ;  shout  it  in  the  corner  of  the  streets ;  write  it  on  your  tablets ; 
Bend  it  forth  from  the  press ;  but  everywhere  let  this  be  your  great  motive  and 
warrant — you  preach  the  Gospel  because  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
it."  II.  This  is  the  claim  of  God's  Word  upon  youb  attention.  1.  Every 
word  which  God  has  given  us  in  this  Book  claims  our  attention,  because  of  the 
infinite  majesty  of  Him  that  spake  it.  2.  God's  claim  to  be  heard  lies  also  in  the 
condescension  which  has  led  Him  to  speak  to  us.  3.  God's  Word  should  win  your 
ear  because  of  its  intrinsic  importance.  "  The  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it " 
— then  it  is  no  trifle.  God  never  speaks  vanity.  No  line  of  His  writing  treats  of 
the  frivolous  themes  of  a  day.  Concerning  eternal  realities  He  speaks  to  thee. 
4.  Depend  upon  it,  if  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it,"  there  is  an  urgent, 
pressing  necessity.  God  breaks  not  silence  to  say  that  which  might  as  well  nave 
remained  unsaid.  His  voice  indicates  great  urgency.  III.  This  gives  to  God's 
Word  a  very  special  character.  1.  In  the  Word  of  God  the  teaching  has 
unique  dignity.  This  Book  is  inspired  as  no  other  book  is  inspired,  and  it  is  time 
that  all  Christians  avowed  this  conviction.  I  do  not  know  whether  you  have  seen 
Mr.  Smiles'  life  of  our  late  friend,  George  Moore;  but  in  it  we  read  that,  at  a 
certain  dinner-party,  a  learned  man  remarked  that  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  a 
person  of  intelligence  who  believed  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible.  In  an  instant 
George  Moore's  voice  was  heard  across  the  table,  saying  boldly,  "  I  do,  for  one." 
Nothing  more  was  said.  Let  us  not  be  backward  to  take  the  old-fashioned  and 
unpopular  side,  and  say  outright,  "  I  do,  for  one."  Where  are  we  if  our  Bibles 
are  gone  T  Where  are  we  if  we  are  taught  to  distrust  them  ?  It  is  better  to 
believe  what  comes  out  of  God's  mouth,  and  be  called  a  fool,  than  to  believe  what 
comes  out  of  the  mouth  of  philosophers,  and  be,  therefore,  esteemed  a  wise  man. 

2.  There  is  also  about  that  which  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  an  absolute 
certainty.  What  man  has  said  is  unsubstantial,  even  when  true.  But  with 
God's  Word  you  have  something  to  grip  at,  something  to  have  and  to  hold. 

3.  Again,  if  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it,"  we  have  in  this  utterance  the 
special  character  of  immutable  fixedness.  Once  spoken  by  God,  not  only  is  it  so 
now,  ^but  it  always  must  be  so.  One  said  to  his  minister,  "  My  dear  sir,  surely 
you  ought  to  adjust  your  beliefs  to  the  progress  of  science."     "Yes,"  said  he, 

but  I  have  not  had  time  to  do  it  to-day,  for  I  have  not  yet  read  the  morning 
papers."  One  would  have  need  to  read  the  morning  papers  and  take  in  every 
new  edition  to  know  whereabout  scientific  theology  now  stands ;  for  it  is  always 
chopping  and  changing.  4.  Here  let  me  add  that  there  is  something  unique 
about  God's  Word,  because  of  the  Almighty  power  which  attends  it.  Where 
the  word  of  a  king  is,  there  is  power  " ;  where  the  Word  of  a  God  is,  there  is  omni- 
potence. IV.  This  makes  God's  Word  a  ground  op  great  alarm  to  many. 
Shall  I  read  you  the  whole  verse  T  "  But  if  ye  refuse  and  rebel,  ye  shall  be 
devoured  with  the  sword  :  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  God  has 
never  yet  spoken  a  threatening  that  has  fallen  to  the  ground.  It  is  of  no  avail 
to  sit  down,  and  draw  inferences  from  the  nature  of  God,  and  to  argue,  "  God  is 
love,  and  therefore  He  will  not  execute  the  sentence  upon  the  impenitent."  He 
knows  what  He  will  do  better  than  you  can  infer  ;  He  has  not  left  us  to  inferences, 
for  He  has  spoken  pointedly  and  plainly.  V.  This  makes  the  Word  of  the 
Lord  the  reason  and  rest  of  our  faith.  "  The  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
it,"  is  the  foundation  of  our  confidence.  There  is  forgiveness  ;  for  God  has  said  it. 
I  think  I  hear  some  child  of  God  saying,  "  God  has  said,  '  I  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee,'  but  I  am  in  great  trouble ;  all  the  circumstances  of  my  life 
seem  to  contradict  the  promise  "  :  yet,  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it," 
and  the  promise  must  stand.  Believe  God  in  the  teeth  of  circumstances.  By 
and  by  we  shall  come  to  die.     Oh,  that  then,  like  the  grand  old  German  emperor, 


chap.  I.]  ISAIAH.  47 

we  may  say,  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation,"  and,  "  He  hath  helped  me 
with  His  name."     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vet.  21.  How  la  the  faithful  city  become  an  harlot. — The  faithful  city  a 
harlot : — A  dirge  in  dirge  metre  over  Jerusalem.  "  Harlot "  is  unfaithful 
wife.  In  Isaiah  "  unfaithfulness "  is  declension  from  social  and  civil 
righteousness.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  Spiritual  harlotry: — It  is  not  merely 
gross  outward  idolatry,  that  makes  the  Church  of  God  a  "  harlot,"  but  the  defection 
of  the  heart,  however  this  may,  at  any  time,  express  itself ;  for  which  reason  Jesus 
also  could  call  the  generation  of  His  time  yevea  ^oixaXk,  in  spite  of  the  strict 
worship  of  Jehovah  carried  on  in  the  Pharisaic  spirit.  For,  as  shown  by  the  verse 
before  us,  the  basis  of  that  marriage-relation  was  justice  and  righteousness  in 
the  widest  sense.  (F.  Dditzsch.)  An  aggravation  of  guilt : — It  is  a  great 
aggravation  of  the  wickedness  of  any  family  or  people  that  their  ancestors  were 
famed  for  virtue  and  probity;  and  commonly  those  that  thus  degenerate  prove 
the  most  wicked  of  all  other.  "  Corruptio  optimi  est  pessima  " — that  which 
was  originally  the  best  becomes,  when  corrupted,  the  worst  (Luke  xi.  26  ;  Eccles. 
iii.  16 ;  Jer.  xxii.  15-17).  (M.  Henry.)  Righteousness  lodged  in  it. — 
Jerusalem,  the  righteous  city : — Righteousness  was  not  merely  like  a  passing  guest 
in  the  city,  but  she  who  came  down  from  above  had  there  fixed  her  permanent 
abode ;  there  she  used  to  tarry  day  and  night,  as  if  it  were  her  home.  When 
the  prophet  refers  to  former  days,  he  has  in  his  mind  the  times  of  David  and 
Solomon,  but  especially  those  of  Jehoshaphat,  who  (about  150  years  before  Isaiah 
appeared)  restored  the  administration  of  justice  which  had  fallen  into  neglect 
since  the  latter  years  of  Solomon  and  the  days  of  Rehoboam  and  Abijah, — a  point 
to  which  the  reformation  of  Asa  had  not  extended, — and  who  reorganised  all  in 
the  spirit  of  the  law.     (F.  Delitzsch.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  Thy  silver  is  become  dross,  thy  wine  mixed  with  water. — 
Silver : — The  silver  represents  the  princes  and  lords,  viewed  with  reference 
to  the  nobility  of  mind  associated  with  their  nobility  of  birth  and  rank ; 
for  silver — sterling  silver — is  a  symbol  of  all  that  is  noble  and  pure,  and 
it  is  the  purity  of  light  which  shows  itself  in  it,  as  in  the  pure  white  of  byssus  and 
of  the  lily.  The  princes  and  lords  formerly  possessed  the  virtues  which  together 
are  in  Latin  called  candor  animi, — the  virtues  of  magnanimity,  courtesy,  impar- 
tiality, and  freedom  from  the  influence  of  bribes ;  now,  this  silver  has  become 
dross,  such  base  metals  as  are  separated  or  thrown  aside.  (F.  Delitzsch.) 
Diluted  urine : — In  a  second  figure,  the  leading  men  of  Jerusalem  in  former  days 
are  compared  to  "  choice  wine,"  such  as  drinkers  like.  This  pure,  strong,  and 
costly  wine  is  now  adulterated  with  water,  or  weakened ;  i.e.,  through  this  addition, 
its  strength  and  flavour  are  diminished.  The  present  is  but  the  dregs  and  the 
shadow  of  the  past.  (Ibid.)  Impaired : — The  essential  idea  seems  to  be  that  of 
impairing  strength.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  possible  degeneracy  of  valuable 
things  : — There  are  many  valuable  and  good  things  in  the  world  that  through 
varied  causes  are  rendered  comparatively  useless.  I.  The  silver  op  thy  char- 
acter HAS  BECOME  DROSS  BECAUSE  OP  LITTLE  FAILINGS.  II.  The  SILVER  OP 
THY  SERVICE  WAH  BECOME  DROSS  BECAUSE  OP  UNHOLY  MOTIVES.  III.  THE  SILVER 
OP  THY  MONEY  was  BECOME  DROSS  BECAUSE  OP  SELFISHNESS.  IV.  THE  SILVER 
OP  THY  TALENTS  HAS  BECOME  DROSS   BECAUSE  OP  INDOLENCE.      Silver  is  bright 

when  kept  in  use.  Talents  are  valuable  when  active.  (J.  S.  ExeU,  M.A.)  Sin- 
ful compromise  and  its  results  : — "  Thy  wine  is  mixed  with  water  " — that  sounds 
like  a  compromise.     Thy  wine  diluted ;  it  is  the  corruption  of  the  ideal.     "  Thy 

1>rinces  are  rebellious  " — that  is  the  corruption  of  government.  "  Every  one 
oveth  gifts,  and  followeth  after  rewards  " — that  is  the  corruption  of  justice. 
"  They  judge  not  the  fatherless,  neither  doth  the  cause  of  the  widow  come  unto 
them  " — that  is  the  corruption  of  the  tenderest  ties  of  the  heart.  Do  you  see 
where  you  begin  ?  You  begin  by  mixing  wine  and  water,  you  begin  by  illicit 
compromise,  by  lowering  and  corrupting  the  ideal,  and  you  end  in  cruelty,  you 
forget  God,  then  the  ideal  is  forgotten,  then  yourself  is  forgotten,  you  forget 
your  neighbour,  and  the  cause  of  the  widow  makes  no  appeal  to  you.  (J.  H. 
Jowett,  M.A.) 

Ver.  23.  Thy  princes  are  rebellious  .  .  .  every  one  loveth  gifts. — Rebellious 
princes ; — Instead    of    suppressing    rebellion,    they    were    rebels    themselves. 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

(J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  rebellious  princes:  —  I.  The  profit  of  their 
places  is  all  their  aim.  They  love  gifts,  and  follow  after  rewards ; 
they  set  their  hearts  upon  their  salary,  the  fees  and  perquisites  of  their  offices, 
and  are  greedy  of  them,  and  never  think  they  can  get  enough.  Presents  and 
gratuities  will  blind  their  eyes  at  any  time,  and  make  them  pervert  judgment 
(Hos.  iv.  18).  II.  The  duty  of  their  places  is  none  of  their  care.  They 
ought  to  protect  those  that  are  injured,  and  take  cognisance  of  the  appeals  made 
to  them;  why  else  were  they  preferred  ?  But  "  they  judge  not  the  fatherless," 
take  no  care  to  guard  the  orphans,  "  nor  doth  the  cause  of  the  widow  come  unto 
them,"  because  the  poor  widow  has  no  bribe  to  give.  Those  will  have  a  great 
deal  to  answer  for,  who  when  they  should  be  the  patrons  of  the  oppressed 
are  their  greatest  oppressors.  (M.  Henry.)  Audacious  corruption  : — Catiline, 
being  prosecuted  for  some  great  offence,  corrupted  the  judges.     When  they  had 

fiven  their  verdict,  though  he  was  acquitted  only  by  a  majority  of  two,  he  said 
e  had  put  himself  to  a  needless  expense  in  bribing  one  of  those  judges,  for  it  would 
have  been  sufficient  to  have  had  a  majority  of  one.  (Plutarch.)  Political 
corruption  in  England : — The  machinery  of  both  sides  [Whig  and  Tory]  waa 
unlimited  bribery.  The  degradation  of  the  briber  was  as  great  as  that  of 
the  bribed.  Berkeley  writes  in  1721 : — "  This  corruption  has  become  a  national 
crime,  having  infected  the  lowest  as  well  as  the  highest  amongst  us."  (Knight's 
England.)  Francis  Bacon : — He  was  charged  by  the  Commons  before  the 
Lords,  with  twenty-two  acts  of  bribery  and  corruption.  He  attempted  no  defence. 
He  made  a  distinct  confession  in  writing  of  the  charges  brought  against  him. 
And  when  a  deputation  of  peers  asked  if  that  confession  was  his  own  voluntary 
act,  he  replied :  "  It  is  my  act,  my  hand,  my  heart.  O  my  lords,  spare  a  broken 
reed."  (Ibid.)  Corruption  in  the  reign  of  James  I.  : — It  was  an  age  of  universal 
abuses.  Local  magistrates  were  influenced  by  the  pettiest  gifts,  and  were  called 
"  basket-justices."  (Ibid.)  Corruption  checked  by  Act  of  Parliament : — [In 
1275  Parliament  enacted]  that  no  king's  officer  should  take  any  reward  to  do  his 
office,  such  enactment  being  one  of  the  many  proofs  of  the  inefficiency  of  law 
to  restrain  corruption ;  for  within  fourteen  years  there  were  only  two  judges  out 
of  fifteen  who  were  not  found  guilty  of  the  grossest  extortions.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  24.  Ah,  I  will  ease  Me  of  Mine  adversaries. — God's  enemies  and  His 
treatment  of   them : — I.    Wicked    people,   especially    wicked    rulers   that 

ARE    CRUEL    AND     OPPRESSIVE,    ARE    GOD'S    ENEMIES.       II.    THEY    ARE   A    BURDEN 

to  the  God  of  heaven.     This  is  implied  in  His  easing  Himself  of  them.     III.  God 

WILL  FIND  OUT  TIME  AND  WAY  TO   EASE  HlMSELF  OF  THIS   BURDEN.       (31.  Henry.) 

Salvation  through  judgment  is  still  and  ever  the  only  means  of  reproving  and  pre- 
serving the  congregation  that  takes  its  name  from  Jerusalem.     (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Vers.    25-27.  And  I  will  turn    My  hand   upon  thee. — True  reformation  the 
work  of  God  : — I.  The  reformation  of  a  people  is  God's  own  work.     II.  He 

DOTH   IT   BY   BLESSING   THEM   WITH   GOOD   MAGISTRATES   AND   GOOD    MINISTERS   OF 

state  (ver.  26).  III.  He  doth  it  by  restoring  judgment  and  righteousness 
among  them  (ver.  27).  IV.  The  reformation  of  a  people  will  be  their 
redemption.  Sin  is  the  worst  captivity,  the  worst  slavery.  V.  The  reviving 
of  a  people's  virtue  is  the  restoring  of  their  honour.  "  Afterward  thou 
shalt  be  called,  the  city  of  righteousness,  the  faithful  city."  (Matthew  Henry.) 
And  purely  purge  away  thy  dross,  and  take  away  all  tny  tin. — Purging  away 
dross  : — "  Purely  "  ;  R.V.  "  thoroughly  "  ;  lit.  "  as  with  lye,"  i.e.,  potash,  which 
was  used  as  a  flux  to  facilitate  the  separation  of  the  metals.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D. ) 
Dross  and  alloy: — Notice  the  imagery.  Here  is  a  community,  an  individual, 
that  knows  and  belongs  to  God  ;  redeemed  of  the  Lord ;  His  own.  Yet  into  life, 
and  into  work,  and  into  testimony  and  service,  there  has  come  that  which  He 
compares  to  dross  and  to  alloy  in  metal.  The  two  words  in  the  imagery  (dross 
and  alloy)  are  not  precisely  the  same  in  idea.  Dross  suggests  to  us  that  which  is 
repulsive,  as  well  as  worthless — the  glaring  inconsistency,  crude,  and  ugly.  In 
the  alloy  or  tin,  which  looks  so  much  like  silver,  and  yet  is  different,  we  see  rather 
the  ore,  specious  and  subtle  ingredients  of  evil  that  enter  into  the  Christian's 
work  and  life— not  crying  inconsistencies  so  much  as  the  more  interior  and  hidden 
evil  of  silent  self-complacency  ;  of  a  tacit  search  for  our  own  glory  under  colour 
of  the  Lord's ;  things  which  the  soul  has  never  fairly  traced  out,  but  which  it  may 
plainly  trace  if  it  will  firmly  use  God's  tests.     And  these  are  the  things  of  which 


chap.  I.]  ISAIAH.  49 

we  read :  "  I  will  turn  my  hand  upon  them  and  thoroughly  purge  them." 
(Bp.  H.  C.  0.  Moule,  D.D.)  Dross  and  alloy  : — "  I  will  purge  away  thy  dross." 
What  is  the  dross  ?  That  which  is  openly  flagrant  in  the  life.  It  is  different 
from  the  metal,  and  is  comparatively  easily  separated  from  it.  But  God  goes 
further.  He  says,  "  I  will  take  away  all  thy  alloy."  This  is  far  more  wonderful, 
because  the  alloy  is  something  which  enters  into  the  nature  of  the  metal,  as  it 
were,  and  it  requires  a  chemical  process  to  separate  them.  God  says  that  He 
will  deal  not  only  with  the  outcrop  of  sin  in  act,  but  He  will  deal  with  the  sin  of 
which  the  act  is  the  outcrop.  (0.  H.  C.  Macgregor,  M.A.)  Moral  dross: — 
What  is  the  dross  which  God  sees  in  our  heart  and  life  ?  Lack  of  truthfulness, 
showing  itself  in  simple  lying,  in  exaggeration,  in  fraud,  in  deceit,  in  slander,  in 
gossiping,  in  prevarication,  in  equivocation,  in  guile,  in  evil  speaking.  Lack  of 
justice  and  due  regard  to  the  rights  of  others,  showing  itself  in  a  spiteful  temper, 
in  unwillingness  to  give  up  our  own  way  to  others,  in  incivility,  in  rudeness,  in 
disregard  of  the  comfort  of  others,  in  thoughtlessness,  in  ingratitude,  in  un thankful- 
ness. Lack  of  wisdom,  showing  itself  in  the  misuse  of  the  opportunities  God 
gives  us,  in  our  ignorance,  in  our  thoughtlessness,  in  our  stupidity,  in  our  blindness 
to  the  things  of  God.  Lack  of  love,  showing  itself  in  our  pride,  in  envy,  in  malice, 
in  hate,  in  unwillingness  to  forgive,  in  unwillingness  to  apologise  for  evils  which 
we  have  done.  Lack  of  self-control,  showing  itself  in  our  avarice,  in  covetousness, 
in  sloth,  in  lethargy,  in  laziness,  in  sleepiness,  in  lust,  in  sensuality,  in  gluttony, 
in  self-indulgence  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  What  shall  we  say  about  our  sins  against 
God,  our  want  of  prayerfulness,  our  want  of  knowledge  of  God's  Word,  our  want 
of  trust  in  God,  showing  itself  in  our  worry ;  our  want  of  love  to  God,  showing 
itself  in  our  shameful  hankering  after  the  things  of  this  world  ?  The  case  is 
indeed  desperate,  and  calls  for  the  Divine  interference.  I  should  go  mad  at  the 
sight  of  my  own  heart  if  I  did  not  believe  in  the  power  of  God  to  cleanse  that 
heart.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  26.  And  I  will  restore  thy  judges  as  at  the  first. — A  grand  ideal: — 
Two  things  are  noteworthy  in  this  passage.  1.  The  ideal  is  political.  The 
salvation  of  Israel  is  secured  when  all  public  offices  are  filled  with  good  men. 
"  Judges  "  and  "  counsellors."  2.  The  ideal  will  be  realised  by  a  restoration  of 
the  best  days  of  the  past.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Social  regeneration: — 
I.  All  the  arrangements  op  society  are  absolutely  en  God's  hands.  "  I 
will  restore,"  &o.  No  man  can  overturn,  or  build  up,  but  by  His  permission. 
n.  All  interruptions  op  social  order  are  under  the  control  op  God. 
DI.  No  social  state  can  be  purified  but  by  religious  processes.  There 
are  many  philanthropic  and  political  projects  which  have  for  their  aim  national 
regeneration,  but  they  are  all  foredoomed  to  come  to  nought,  because  they  lack 
the  religious  element.  IV.  The  great  name  will  follow  the  true  regenera- 
tion. Afterward  thou  shalt  be  called,"  &o.  Not  first  the  exalted  title,  but 
the  illustrative  character ;  not  first  the  splendid  renown,  but  the  glorious  achieve- 
ment I  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  National  revivification  : — The  imperishable  kernel 
that  remains  becomes  the  centre  to  which  all  elements  of  excellence  are  attracted. 
(F.  Delitzsch.)  "  The  city  of  righteousness  "  : — With  Isaiah,  the  giving  of  a  name 
is  the  perception  and  recognition  of  the  real  existence  of  what  has  come  into 
outward  manifestation.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  27.  Zion  shall  be  redeemed  with  Judgment. — Evil  in  the  Church : — 
I.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  Zion.  The  word  signifies  a  heap 
of  stones — a  monument — a  sepulchre.  This  figuratively  describes  the  literal 
Zion  ;  and  spiritually  sets  forth  the  visible  and  mystical  Church.  The  true 
members  of  the  Church  of  Christ  are  as  lively  stones,  built  up  a  spiritual  house ; 
and  for  their  security  God  Himself  has  laid  a  foundation.  (Isa.  xxviii.  16  ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  5. )  Every  stone  of  this  sacred  building  is  hewn  out  of  nature's  quarry, 
and  when  prepared  by  the  transforming  power  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  is  placed 
in  that  part  of  the  spiritual  edifice  which  it  is  appointed  to  occupy.  And  the 
building  thus  formed  is,  indeed,  as  the  word  Zion  signifies,  a  monument — 
an  everlasting  monument  of  God's  grace ;  whilst  a  mere  professing,  but  not  a 
confessing,  protesting,  and  believing  Church  may  very  properly  be  compared 
to  a  sepulchre.  Hence  Zion  of  old  contained  a  church  within  a  church ;  those 
who  were  circumcised  outwardly  in  the  flesh,  and  those  whose  circumcision 
was  that  of  the  heart.     According  to  the  New  Testament  we  understand  by  Zion 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  Church  visible  and  the  Church  mystical.  II.  What  may  be  considered 
Zion's  transgression.  If  Ave  look  at  Zion  of  old,  we  behold  formality  manifestly 
pervading  the  Church,  and  the  most  lofty  and  presumptuous  hypocrisy  character- 
ising the  outward  worship  of  God.  Now,  turn  your  attention  to  the  Church  of 
God  in  her  present  state.  Such  an  examination  will  bring  to  light  many  evils, 
which  are  serious  hindrances  to  the  spread  of  evangelical  truth,  and  afford  ground 
for  sarcasm  and  opposition,  to  the  enemies  of  the  Church.  1.  Pride.  2.  Laodicean 
lukewarmness.  3.  Abuse  of  doctrine  and  discipline.  III.  Zion's  visitations 
and  chastisements.  The  history  of  the  Church,  as  well  as  of  nations,  affords 
the  most  impressive  evidence  of  the  truth  of  that  often  fulfilled  declaration, 
"  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  (Rom.  xi.  19-22 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  2-5, 
9,  10 ;  Rev.  ii.  15,  Hi.  1-3,  14-20.)  IV.  Zion's  deliverance.  In  the  exercise 
of  justice,  in  the  overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  His  Church  and  deliverance  of  Hia 
people,  as  well  as  by  the  faithful  performance  of  His  promises,  God  has  engaged 
that  Zion  shall  be  redeemed  with  judgment  and  her  converts  (or  those  that  return 
of  her)  "with  righteousness."  (J.  F.  Witty.)  Redeemed  with  judgment: — 
Jesus  lived  to  die.  It  was  a  voluntary  necessity.  We  are  redeemed  with  "  judg- 
ment." The  Judge  has  pronounced  the  sentence  over  the  sacrifice :  "  This  is 
My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  The  converted  soul  is  redeemed 
with  "  righteousness."  "  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through 
faith  in  His  blood,"  &o.     (T.  Davies,  M.A.) 

Ver.  28.  They  that  forsake  the  Lord  shall  be  consumed. — Forsaking  the 
Lord : — I.  The  guilt  op  forsaking  the  service  of  the  Lord.  1.  Man  is 
bound  by  the  law  of  his  nature  to  obey  that  Almighty  Being  by  whom  he  was 
made  an  intelligent  and  immortal  creature.  2.  Many  in  forsaking  the  Lord 
violate  their  own  express  and  solemn  engagements.  (Heb.  x.  29.)  II.  The  folly 
of  forsaking  the  service  of  the  Lord.  If  we  do  so  we  shall — 1.  Incur  the 
reproaches  of  our  own  mind.  2.  Forfeit  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  all  good 
men.  3.  Forfeit  the  favour  and  incur  the  wrath  of  God.  And  for  what  are  all 
those  tremendous  sacrifices  made  ?  For  "  the  pleasures  of  sin,"  which  are  but 
"  for  a  season  "  !  III.  The  danger  of  forsaking  the  service  of  the  Lord. 
"  Shall  be  consumed."  The  threatened  doom  is — 1.  AwfuL  2.  Certain.  (J.  H. 
Hobart,  D.D.) 

Vers.  29,  30.  They  shall  be  ashamed  of  the  oaks  which  ye  have  desired. — OotTe 
judgment  of  destruction  : — "  For  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  the  terebinths  in  which 
ye  delighted,  and  ye  must  blush  because  of  the  gardens  in  which  ye  had  pleasure  " 
(ver.  29).  The  terebinths  and  gardens  are  not  referred  to  as  objects  of  luxury 
(as  Hitzig  and  Drechsler  suppose),  but  as  unlawful  places  of  worship  (Deut.  xvL 
21),  and  objects  of  worship ;  both  of  them  are  frequently  mentioned  by  the  prophets 
with  this  meaning  (lvii.  5,  lxv.  3,  lxvi.  17).  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Terebinth: — "  For 
ye  shall  be  like  a  terebinth  with  withered  leaves,  and  like  a  garden  in  which  there 
is  no  water "  (ver.  30).  Their  prosperity  is  being  destroyed,  and  they  are  thus 
like  a  terebinth  which  is  withered  in  its  foliage ;  their  sources  of  help  are  dried 
up,  and  thus  they  resemble  a  garden  that  has  no  water  and  is  therefore  waste. 
The  terebinth  (turpentine-pistacia),  a  native  of  southern  and  eastern  Palestine, 
casts  its  leaves  (which  are  small,  and  resemble  those  of  the  walnut-nut)  in  the 
autumn.  In  this  dry  and  parched  condition  terebinth  and  garden,  to  which  the 
idolaters  are  compared,  are  readily  inflammable.  There  is  but  needed  a  spark  to 
kindle,  and  then  they  are  consumed  in  the  flame.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  31.  And  the  strong  shall  be  as  tow. — The  tinder  and  the  spark : — 
"  The  strong  shall  become  tow,  and  his  work  a  spark,  and  both  shall 
burn  together  " — a  vivid  picture  of  the  doom  of  transgressors,  since  the  mighty 
man  is  made  combustible,  and  his  own  act  is  that  which  kindles  the  flame. 
(T.  W.  Chambers,  D.D.)  The  fire  of  judgment  that  consumes  sinners  does 
not  need  to  come  from  without ;  sin  carries  within  itself  the  fire  of  wrath. 
{F.  Delitzsch.)  The  tow  and  the  spark: — These  terrible  words  of  warning  are 
not  levelled — 1.  Against  low  and  vile  people  (vers.  23-26).  Nor — 2.  Against  the 
avowedly  irreligious.  The  people  addressed  performed  a  multitude  of  sacrifices 
(ver.  11),  were  punctilious  in  their  attendance  on  the  house  of  God  (vers.  12-14), 
were  full  of  apparent  devotion  (ver.  15).  Nor — 3.  Do  they  refer  to  the  grosse* 
forms  of  sin.     These  would,  of  course,  come  under  the  same  condemnation.     But 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  51 

spiritual  sins,  though  more  refined  to  our  perception,  are  more  fatal  even  than 
sensual  sins.  It  is  pre-eminently  a  spiritual  sin  in  root,  however  sensual  in  fruit, 
that  is  here  arrived  at.  It  is  all  summed  up  in  the  one  evil,  "  forsaking  the  Lord  " 
(ver.  28).  Consider — I.  The  radical  change  sin  works  in  the  constitution  op 
the  sinner.  Sin,  the  prophet  says  in  effect,  has  a  disintegrating,  deteriorating, 
degrading  influence  upon  the  man's  nature  who  yields  to  it.  "  Tow  "  is  the 
coarse,  broken  part  of  flax  or  hemp — waste,  refuse.  It  is  used  here  in  contrast 
to  that  which  is  strong — also  as  a  pattern  of  what  is  inflammable.  1.  Sin  lowers 
the  tone  and  tenor  of  our  nature.  2.  Sin,  depraving  and  degrading  the  type 
and  tenor  of  our  nature,  enfeebles  our  powers  of  resistance  to  the  assaults  of 
external  evil.  Sin  is  weakness  as  well  as  wickedness ;  weakness  as  the  result  of 
wickedness.  3.  Sin  imparts  to  us  an  increased  susceptibility  to  evil — makes  us 
more  inflammable.  II.  The  way  in  which  the  sinner  and  his  sin  co-operate 
FOR  their  common  destruction.  Sin  is  ever  multiplying  itself  between  the 
sinner  and  his  sinful  deed.  And  the  issue  is  irremediable  ruin.  "  They  shall 
both  burn  together,  and  none  shall  quench  them."  The  moral  is,  that  if  we 
would  keep  out  of  hell,  we  must  keep  out  of  sin.  (W.  Roberts,  B.A.)  Sin 
weakens  the  strong  : — The  Earl  of  Breadalbane  planned  the  massacre  of  Glencoe, 
and  carried  it  out  in  the  most  cruel  and  dastardly  manner.  Macaulay,  speaking 
of  the  effects  produced  upon  the  mind  of  the  perpetrator  of  this  atrocious  deed, 
says  that  "  Breadalbane,  hardened  as  he  was,  felt  the  stings  of  conscience,  or 
the  dread  of  retribution.  He  did  his  best  to  assume  an  air  of  unconcern.  He 
made  his  appearance  in  the  most  fashionable  coffee-house  at  Edinburgh,  and 
talked  loudly  and  self-complacently  about  the  important  services  in  which  he  had 
been  engaged  among  the  mountains.  Some  of  his  soldiers,  however,  who  observed 
him  closely,  whispered  that  all  this  bravery  was  put  on.  He  was  not  the  man 
that  he  had  been  before  that  night.  The  form  of  his  countenance  was  changed. 
In  all  places,  at  all  hours,  whether  he  waked  or  slept,  Glencoe  was  ever  before 
him."     (Tools  for  Teachers.) 


CHAPTER  IL 

Ver,  1.  The  word  that  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  saw  concerning  Judah  and 
Jerusalem. — Heading  to  a  small  collection  (chaps,  ii.-iv.),  the  contents  of  which 
are — 1.  (ii.  1-4)  All  nations  shall  yet  acknowledge  the  God  of  Israel.  2.  (ii.  5-iv.  1) 
Through  great  judgments  shall  both  Israel  and  the  nations  be  brought  to  the 
knowledge  of  Jehovah.  3.  (iv.  2-6)  When  these  judgments  are  overpast,  all  Zion's 
citizens  shall  be  holy.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  A  general  view  of  the  chapter  : — 
The  verses  2-4,  it  should  be  premised,  recur  with  slight  variations  in  the  fourth 
chapter  of  Micah,  and  are  supposed  by  many  to  have  been  borrowed  by  both 
writers  from  some  older  source.  The  prophet  appears  before  an  assembly  of  the 
people,  perhaps  on  a  Sabbath,  and  recites  this  passage,  depicting  in  beautiful 
and  effective  imagery  the  spiritual  pre-eminence  to  be  accorded  in  the  future 
to  the  religion  of  Zion.  He  would  dwell  upon  the  subject  further ;  but  scarcely 
has  he  begun  to  speak  when  the  disheartening  spectacle  meets  his  eye  of  a  crowd 
of  soothsayers,  of  gold  and  silver  ornaments  and  finery,  of  horses  and  idols ;  his 
tone  immediately  changes,  and  he  bursts  into  a  diatribe  against  the  foreign  and 
idolatrous  fashions,  the  devotion  to  wealth  and  glitter,  which  he  sees  about  him, 
and  which  extorts  from  him  in  the  end  the  terrible  wish,  "  Therefore  forgive  them 
not "  (vers.  5-9).  And  then,  in  one  of  his  stateliest  periods,  Isaiah  declares  the 
judgment  about  to  fall  upon  all  that  is  "  tall  and  lofty,"  upon  Uzziah's  towers 
and  fortified  walls,  upon  the  great  merchant  ships  at  Elath,  upon  every  object 
of  human  satisfaction  and  pride,  when  wealth  and  rank  will  be  impotent  to  save, 
when  idols  will  be  cast  despairingly  aside,  and  when  all  classes  alike  will  be  glad 
to  find  a  hiding-place,  as  in  the  old  days  of  Midianite  invasion  or  Philistine  oppres- 
sion (Judg.  vi.  2 ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  6),  in  the  clefts  and  caves  of  the  rocks.  {Prof. 
S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  Isaiah's  citizenship  in  Jerusalem  colours  all  his  prophecy. 
More  than  Athens  to  Demosthenes,  Rome  to  Juvenal,  Florence  to  Dante,  is 
Jerusalem  to  Isaiah.  She  is  his  immediate  and  ultimate  regard,  the  centre  and 
return  of  all  his  thoughts,  the  hinge  of  the  history  of  his  time,  the  one  thing 
worth  preserving  amidst  its  disasters,  the  summit  of  those  brilliant  hopes  with 


52  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

whioh  he  fills  the  future.  He  has  traced  for  us  the  main  features  of  her  position 
and  some  of  the  lines  of  her  construction,  many  of  the  great  figures  of  her  streets, 
the  fashions  of  her  women,  the  arrival  of  embassies,  the  effect  of  rumours.  He 
has  painted  her  aspect  in  triumph,  in  siege,  in  famine,  and  in  earthquake;  war 
filling  her  valleys  with  chariots,  and  again  nature  rolling  tides  of  fruitfulness 
up  to  her  gates ;  her  moods  of  worship  and  panic  and  profligacy — till  we  see  them 
all  as  clearly  as  the  shadow  following  the  sunshine  and  the  breeze  across  the  corn- 
fields of  our  own  summers.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Judah  and  Jerusalem  : — 
There  is  little  about  Judah  in  these  chapters :  the  country  forms  but  a  fringe  to 
the  capital.  (Ibid.)  The  Word  of  the  Lord  "seen": — Though  the  spirit  of 
man  has  neither  eyes  nor  ears,  yet  when  enabled  to  perceive  the  supersensuous, 
it  is  altogether  eye.     (F.  Delitzsch.) 

Vers.  2-4.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  In  the  last  days. — Isaiah's  description 
of  the  last  days : — The  description  of  "  the  last  days " — which  in  the 
Hebrew  begins,  "  And  it  hath  come  to  pass  .  .  .  the  mountain  of  Jehovah's 
house  shall  be  established,"  &c. — is  an  instance  of  the  use  of  the  perfeot  tense  to 
express  the  certain  future.  Its  explanation  seems  to  be  that  the  structure  of 
such  a  passage  as  that  before  us  is  imaginative,  not  logical — a  picture,  not  a  state- 
ment. The  speaker  completely  projects  himself  into  "  the  last  days  "  ;  he  is 
there,  he  finds  them  come ;  he  looks  about  him  to  see  what  is  actually  going 
on,  and  sees  that  the  mountain  of  Jehovah's  house  is  about  to  be — still  in  process 
of  being — established  at  the  head  of  the  mountains  ;  he  looks  again,  and  the 
nations  have  already  arrived  at  the  place  prepared  for  them,  yet  so  freshly  that 
they  are  still  calling  one  another  on ;  and  as  they  come  up  they  find  that  the 
King  they  seek  is  already  there,  and  has  effected  some  of  His  judgments  and 
decisions  before  they  arrive  for  their  turn.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  An  epitome 
of  Isaiah's  vision  (vers.  2-4) : — Isaiah,  "  rapt  into  future  times,"  sees  the  throne 
of  the  Lord  of  Israel  established  in  sovereignty  over  all  the  nations  of  the  earth, 
and  they  becoming  willing  subjects  to  Him,  and  friendly  citizens  to  each  other. 
The  nations  attain  to  true  liberty,  for  they  come  to  submit  themselves  to  the 
righteous  laws  and  institutions,  and  to  the  wise  and  gracious  word  and  direction 
of  that  King  whose  service  is  perfect  freedom  ;  and  to  true  brotherhood,  for 
they  leave  their  old  enmities  and  conflicts,  and  make  the  same  Lord  their  Judge 
and  Umpire  and  Reconciler.  And  all  this,  not  by  some  newly  invented  device 
of  the  nations,  some  new  result  of  their  own  civilisation,  but  by  the  carrying 
out  of  the  old  original  purpose  and  plan  of  God,  that  His  chosen  people  of  the 
Jews  should  be  the  ministers  of  these  good  things,  and  that  in  them  should  all 
nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed, — that  "  out  of  Zion  should  go  forth  the  law, 
and  the  Word  of  Jehovah  from  Jerusalem."  This  is  the  vocation  of  the  Hebrew 
people.  This,  says  the  prophet,  is  the  key  to  all  our  duties  as  a  nation,  this  is  the 
master-light  to  guide  us  to  right  action.  (Ibid.)  The  supremacy  of  Mount 
Zion : — Transport  yourselves  for  a  moment  to  the  foot  of  Mount  Zion.  As  you 
stand  there,  you  observe  that  it  is  but  a  very  little  hill.  Bashan  is  far  loftier, 
and  Carmel  and  Sharon  outvie  it.  As  for  Lebanon,  Zion  is  but  a  little  hillock 
compared  with  it.  If  you  think  for  a  moment  of  the  Alps,  or  of  the  loftier  Andes, 
or  of  the  yet  mightier  Himalayas,  this  Mount  Zion  seems  to  be  a  very  little  hill, 
a  mere  mole-hill,  insignificant,  despicable,  and  obscure.  Stand  there  for  a  moment, 
until  the  Spirit  of  God  touches  your  eye,  and  you  shall  see  this  hill  begin  to  grow. 
Up  it  mounts,  with  the  temple  on  its  summit,  till  it  outreaches  Tabor.  Onward 
it  grows,  till  Carmel,  with  its  perpetual  green,  is  left  behind,  and  Salmon,  with  its 
everlasting  snow  sinks  before  it.  Onward  still  it  grows,  till  the  snowy  peaks  of 
Lebanon  are  eclipsed.  Still  onward  mounts  the  hill,  drawing  with  its  mighty 
roots  other  mountains  and  hills  into  its  fabric ;  and  onward  it  rises,  till  piercing 
the  clouds  it  reaches  above  the  Alps  ;  and  onwards  still,  till  the  Himalayas  seem 
to  be  sucked  into  its  bowels,  and  the  greatest  mountains  of  the  earth  appear  to 
be  but  as  the  roots  that  strike  out  from  the  side  of  the  eternal  hill ;  and  there  it 
rises  till  you  can  scarcely  see  the  top,  as  infinitely  above  all  the  higher  mountains 
of  the  world  as  they  are  above  the  valleys.  Have  you  caught  the  idea,  and  do 
you  see  there  afar  off  upon  the  lofty  top,  not  everlasting  snows,  but  a  pure  crystal 
table-land,  crowned  with  a  gorgeous  city,  the  metropolis  of  God,  the  royal  palace 
of  Jesus  the  King  ?  The  sun  is  eclipsed  by  the  light  which  shines  from  the  top 
of  this  mountain  ;  the  moon  ceases  from  her  brightness,  for  there  is  now  no  night : 
but  this  one  hill,  lifted  up  on  high,  illuminates  the  atmosphere,  and  the  nation! 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  63 

of  them  that  are  saved  are  walking  in  the  light  thereof.  The  hill  of  Zion  hath  now 
outsoared  all  others,  and  all  the  mountains  and  hills  of  the  earth  are  become  as 
nothing  before  her.  This  is  the  magnificent  picture  of  the  text.  I  do  not  know 
that  in  all  the  compass  of  poetry  there  is  an  idea  so  massive  and  stupendous  as 
tliis — a  mountain  heaving,  expanding,  swelling,  growing,  till  all  the  high  hills 
become  absorbed,  and  that  which  was  but  a  little  rising  ground  before,  becomes 
a  hill  the  top  whereof  reacheth  to  the  seventh  heavens.  Now  we  have  here  a 
picture  of  what  the  Church  is  to  be.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  vision  of  the  latter 
day  glories  : — Of  old,  the  Church  was  like  Mount  Zion,  a  very  little  hill.  What 
saw  the  nations  of  the  earth  when  they  looked  upon  it  ?  A  humble  Man  with 
twelve  disciples.  But  that  little  hill  grew,  and  some  thousands  were  baptized 
in  the  name  of  Christ ;  it  grew  again  and  became  mighty.  But  still,  compared 
with  the  colossal  systems  of  idolatry,  she  is  but  small.  The  Hindoo  and  the 
Chinese  turn  to  our  religion,  and  say,  "  It  is  an  infant  of  yesterday ;  ours  is  the 
religion  of  ages."  The  Easterns  compare  Christianity  to  some  miasma  that  creep? 
along  the  fenny  lowlands,  but  their  systems  they  imagine  to  be  like  the  Alps, 
outsoaring  the  heavens  in  height.  Ah,  but  we  reply  to  this,  "  Your  mountain 
crumbles  and  your  hill  dissolves,  but  our  hill  of  Zion  has  been  growing,  and  strange 
to  say,  it  has  life  within  its  bowels,  and  grow  on  it  shall,  grow  on  it  must,  till  all 
the  systems  of  idolatry  shall  become  less  than  nothing  before  it."  Such  is  the 
destiny  of  our  Church,  she  is  to  be  an  all-conquering  Church,  rising  above  every 
competitor.  The  Church  will  be  like  a  high  mountain,  for  she  will  be — 1.  Pre- 
eminently conspicuous.  2.  Awful  and  venerable  in  her  grandeur.  3.  The  day 
is  coming  when  the  Church  of  God  shall  have  absolute  supremacy.  The  Church 
of  Christ  now  has  to  fight  for  her  existence ;  but  the  day  shall  come  when  she 
shall  be  so  mighty  that  there  shall  be  nought  left  to  compete  with  her.  How  is 
this  to  be  done  ?  There  are  three  things  which  will  ensure  the  growth  of  the 
Church.  1.  The  individual  exertion  of  every  Christian.  2.  We  may  expect 
more.  The  fact  is,  that  the  Church,  though  a  mountain,  is  a  volcano — not  one 
that  spouts  fire,  but  that  hath  fire  within  her  ;  and  this  inward  fire  of  living  truth, 
and  living  grace,  expands  her  side,  and  lifts  her  crest,  and  upwards  she  must 
tower,  for  truth  is  mighty,  and  it  must  prevail — graoe  is  mighty,  and  must  conquer 
— Christ  is  mighty,  and  He  must  be  King  of  kings.  Thus  there  is  something  more 
than  the  individual  exertions  of  the  Church  ;  there  is  a  something  within  her  that 
must  make  her  grow,  till  she  overtops  the  highest  mountains.  3.  But  the  great 
hope  of  the  Church  is  the  second  advent  of  Christ.  When  He  shall  come,  then 
shall  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  be  exalted  above  the  hills.  We  must 
fight  on  day  by  day  and  hour  by  hour ;  and  when  we  think  the  battle  is  almost 
decided  against  us,  He  shall  come,  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth.  (Ibid.) 
"  All  nations  shall  flow  unto  it "  .• — Observe  the  figure.  It  does  not  say  they 
shall  come  to  it,  but  they  shall  "  flow  unto  it."  1.  It  implies,  first,  their  number. 
Now  it  is  but  the  pouring  out  of  water  from  the  bucket ;  then  it  shall  be  as  the 
rolling  of  the  cataract  from  the  hillside.  2.  Their  spontaneity.  They  are  to 
come  willingly  to  Christ ;  not  to  be  driven,  not  to  be  pumped  up,  not  to  be  forced 
to  it,  but  to  be  brought  up  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  to  pay  Him  willing  homage. 
Just  as  the  river  naturally  flows  down-hill  by  no  other  force  than  that  which  is  its 
nature,  so  shall  the  grace  of  God  be  so  mightily  given  to  the  sons  of  men,  that  no 
acts  of  parliament,  no  state  churches,  no  armies  will  be  used  to  make  a  forced 
conversion.  3.  But  yet  again,  this  represents  the  power  of  the  work  of  conversion. 
They  "  shall  flow  to  it."  Imagine  an  idiot  endeavouring  to  stop  the  river  Thames. 
The  secularist  may  rise  up  and  say,  "  Oh,  why  be  converted  to  this  fanatical 
religion  ?  Look  to  the  things  of  time."  (Ibid.)  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's 
house  : — The  text  calls  our  attention — L  To  a  period  op  time  when  the  events 
OP  which  rr  speaks  ABE  TO  occuB.  "  The  last  days."  The  phrase  means, 
generally,  the  age  of  the  Messiah ;  and  is  thus  understood  by  both  Jewish  and 
Christian  commentators.  The  apostle  has  put  this  meaning  beyond  all  doubt. 
"  God,  who  spake  in  times  past  unto  the  fathers,  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken 
unto  us  by  His  Son."  1.  The  expression  intimates,  that  the  dispensations  in 
whioh  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  lived,  were  but  preparatory  to  one  of 
complete  perfection.  To  the  future  all  these  ancient  holy  men  were  ever  looking. 
The  patriarchal  was  succeeded  by  the  Mosaic  age.  Prophet  came  after  prophet ; 
bjtt  all  were  looking  forward.  All  things  around  them,  and  before  them,  were 
typical  and  shadowy.  2.  The  emphasis  with  which  the  prophets  speak  of  "  the 
last  days,"  intimates,  also,  the  views  they  had  of  the  complete  emcienoy  of  that 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

religious  system  which  the  Messiah  was  to  introduce.  On  that  age  all  their  hopes 
of  the  recovery  of  a  world  they  saw  sinking  around  them  rested  ;  and  in  the  con- 
templation of  this  efficient  plan  of  redeeming  love,  they  mitigaied  their  sorrows. 
They  felt  that  the  world  needed  a  more  efficient  system,  and  they  saw  it  descend 
with  Messiah  from  heaven.  3.  The  days  of  the  Messiah  were  regarded  by  the 
ancient  Church  as  "  the  last  days,"  because  in  them  all  the  great  purposes  of 
God  were  to  be  developed  and  completed.  II.  To  the  state  of  the  general 
Church  of  God  in  the  last  days.  "  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall 
be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills  ; 
and  all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it."  Some  have  considered  this  as  a  prediction 
of  the  actual  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  and  the  restoration  of  the  political  and 
church-state  of  the  Jews,  in  the  close  of  the  latter  days  of  the  times  of  the  Messiah. 
Such  an  interpretation,  if  allowed,  would  not  at  all  interfere  with  that  in  which 
all  agree,  that,  whatever  else  the  prediction  may  signify,  it  sets  forth,  under 
figures  taken  from  the  Levitical  institutions,  the  future  state  of  the  general  Church 
of  Christ.  For  the  principle  which  leads  to  such  an  interpretation,  we  have  no 
less  authority  than  that  of  the  apostle  Paul,  who  uniformly  considers  the  temple, 
its  priests,  and  its  ritual,  as  types  of  heavenly  things ;  and  in  one  well-known 
passage,  makes  use  of  them  to  characterise  the  true  Church  of  Christ.  "  But  ye 
are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem."  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  is  no  longer  covered  with 
ruins,  but  established  in  the  top  of  the  hills.  We  learn  from  it — 1.  That  the  Church 
shall  be  restored  to  evangelical  order  and  beauty :  it  shall  be  as  Mount  Zion. 
(1)  Zion  was  the  place  of  sacrifice.  And  in  the  last  days  the  true  sacrifice  shall 
be  exhibited  here.  (2)  Mount  Zion  was  the  throne  of  majesty.  And  in  coming 
to  the  evangelical  Zion  we  come  to  God  as  the  universal  Sovereign  and  Judge. 
In  the  latter  days  Gospel  law  will  shine  there  as  brightly  as  Gospel  grace.  (3)  Zion 
was  the  mountain  of  holiness.  And  in  these  glorious  days  holy  shall  all  they 
be  who  name  the  name  of  Christ.  (4)  Zion  was  the  special  residence  of  God. 
On  the  day  of  Pentecost  He  took  possession  of  the  Church ;  but  in  the  latter 
days  there  shall  be  special  manifestations  of  His  presence  in  richer  displays  of 
vital  power.  To  this  state  we  are  ever  to  labour  to  bring  the  Church,  avoiding, 
ourselves,  all  that  is  inconsistent  with  truth  in  doctrine  and  holiness  in  life.  For 
the  richer  effusions  of  grace  we  are  earnestly  to  pray.  2.  In  this  state  the  Church 
shall  be  distinguished  by  its  zeal.  "  Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  So  it  was  in  the  best  estate  of  the  Jewish 
Church.  The  Gospel  is  to  be  preached  in  all  nations ;  and  till  you  send  forth 
the  law  they  will  not  say,  "  Come,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord." 
We  thus  see  the  connection  between  the  best  state  of  the  Church  and  this  holy 
zeal.     All  history  proves   it.     III.  To   certain   special  operations   of  God 

BY  WHICH  THE  EFFORTS  OF  HlS  RESTORED  CHURCH  TO  BLESS  AND  SAVE  THE  WORLD 

shall  be  rendered  effectual.  Without  God,  not  all  the  efforts  of  the  Church, 
even  in  her  best  state,  can  be  effectual.  1.  He  shall  judge  among  the  nations. 
The  word  "  judge  "  is  not  always  used  in  its  purely  judicial  sense,  but  in  that 
of  government, — the  exercise  of  regal  power  both  in  mercy  and  judgment ;  and 
in  this  sense  we  here  take  it.  He  shall  so  order  the  affairs  of  the  world,  that 
opportunities  shall  be  afforded  to  His  Church  to  exert  herself  for  its  benefit.  And 
thus  is  He  judging  among  the  nations  in  our  own  day.  2.  It  is  a  part  of  the 
regal  office  to  show  mercy  ;  and  thus,  too,  shall  He  "  judge  among  the  nations." 
This  He  shall  do  by  taking  off  those  judicial  desertions  which,  as  a  punishment 
for  unfaithfulness,  He  has  inflicted.  "  He  shall  judge  among  the  nations."  He 
shall  do  this  judicially,  yet  not  for  destruction,  but  correction.  There  are 
two  sorts  of  judgments ;  judgments  of  wrath,  and  judgments  of  mercy.  When 
grace  is  given  with  judgments,  then  do  they  become  corrective  and  salutary. 
3.  It  is,  therefore,  added,  "  and  shall  rebuke  many  people  "  ;  or,  according  to 
Lowth's  translation,  "  work  conviction  among  them."  And  may  we  not  hope 
that  this  is  approaching  ?  Even  while  waiting  for  the  glorious  period  described 
and  promised  in  the  preceding  prophecy,  the  Church  is  called  to  "  walk  in  the 
light  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  5).  1.  Walk  by  this  light  of  truth  yourselves.  2.  Set 
the  glory  of  these  splendid  scenes  before  you,  and  let  them  encourage  you  to 
increasing  exertions  for  the  spread  of  truth,  holiness,  and  love  throughout  the 
earth.  (Richard  Watson.)  The  glorious  exaltation  and  enlargement  of  the. 
Church : — I.  The  glory  and  exaltation.  "  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's 
house  shall  be  established,"  &c.     IL  The  enlargement.     "  All  nations  shall  flow 


chap,  u.]  ISAIAH.  55 

unto  it."  III.  The  prosperity  of  the  Church  begins  to  be  desciibed  in  ver.  4. 
(J.  Mede,  B.D.)  The  Church's  visibility  and  glory: — There  are — I.  Times 
when  the  Church  is  visible  but  not  glorious.    IT.  Times  when  it  is 

NEITHER     VISIBLE      NOR     GLORIOUS.      III.      TlMES     WHEN     IT     IS     TO     BE     BOTH 

visible  and  glorious.  (Ibid.)  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house : — 
I.  The  period  referred  to.  The  reference  is  not  to  the  Gospel  era  as  a 
whole,  but  to  an  advanced  period  of  it,  even  the  time  of  the  great 
millennial  prosperity.  The  golden  age  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  was  the  past, 
but  our  golden  age  is  yet  to  come.  II.  The  cheering  truth  declared.  '  The 
mountain,"  &c.  Often  has  Zion  languished,  but  she  is  to  become  a  praise  in 
the  whole  earth.  In  this  striking  figure  two  things  are  embraced — 1.  Elevated 
position.  2.  Permanent  duration.  III.  The  general  interest  awakened. 
We  have  here — 1.  The  invitation  given.  "  And  many  people  shall  go  and 
say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the 
God  of  Jacob."  2.  The  considerations  by  which  it  is  enforced.  "  And  He  will 
teach  us  of  His  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  His  paths :  for  out  of  Zion  shall  go 
forth  the  law,  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  It  is  the  seat  of 
Divine  instruction  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  centre  of  holy  influence  on  the  other. 
TV.  The  happy  results  declared  (ver.  4).  This  is — 1.  A  consummation  most 
devoutly  to  be  desired.  2.  Absolutely  certain  in  its  realisation.  "  They  shall 
beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares."  3.  The  means  whereby  it  will  be  accom- 
plished. By  God  judging  or  ruling  among  the  nations,  and  rebuking  or  working 
conviction  among  them.  (Anon.)  The  future  glory  and  amplitude  of  the 
Church : — 1.  The  Gospel  dispensation  was  designed  to  supersede  that  which  was 
given  by  the  hand  of  Moses  ;  it  was  to  be  exalted  above  this  hill.  2.  The  Gospel 
also  was  destined  to  triumph  over  all  those  corrupt  systems  of  religion  which 
have  ever  been  received  among  men.  3.  The  assertion  before  us  is  also  under- 
stood as  a  prophecy  relative  to  the  fulness  of  the  Church  when  the  Jews  shall 
be  called  in.  This  important  event  is  foretold  by  the  sacred  writers.  (8.  Ramsey, 
M.A.)  Isaiah's  wideness  of  view  : — Consider  what  that  prediction  meant  in 
Isaiah's  time.  He  lived  within  well-defined  boundaries  and  limitations :  the 
Jew  was  not  a  great  man  in  the  sense  of  including  within  his  personal  aspira- 
tions all  classes,  conditions,  and  estates  of  men ;  left  to  himself  he  could  allow 
the  Gentiles  to  die  by  thousands  daily  without  shedding  a  tear  upon  their  fallen 
bodies ;  he  lived  amongst  his  own  people ;  it  was  enough  for  him  that  the  Jews 
were  happy,  for  the  Gentiles  were  but  dogs.  Here  is  a  new  view  of  human  nature, 
a  great  enlargement  of  spiritual  boundaries.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  Church 
of  the  future — Goethe  and  Isaiah  : — It  is  quite  the  fashion  in  these  days  for  those 
who  do  not  believe  in  the  Christian  religion  to  bestow  on  it  their  patronage.  The 
Bible  is  full  of  delusion  and  falsehood,  but  they  regard  it,  on  the  whole,  as  a  book 
that  deserves  notice ;  parts  of  it  are  almost  as  good  as  the  Rig- Veda.  The 
Church  has  been  the  handmaid  of  bigotry  and  superstition,  yet  they  find  in  the 
history  of  the  Church  some  passages  that  are  inspiring.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was 
a  teacher  in  whose  doctrine  they  find  many  things  to  set  right ;  yet,  so  rich  were 
His  contributions  to  ethical  science  that  they  feel  themselves  justified  in  bestow- 
ing on  Him  a  qualified  approval  This  fashion  of  patronising  Christianity  may 
have  been  set  by  Goethe.  Into  that  temple  of  the  future  which  he  describes  in 
his  Tale,  the  little  hut  of  the  fisherman,  by  which  he  symbolises  Christianity, 
was  graciously  admitted.  "  This  little  hut  had,  indeed,  been  wonderfully  trans- 
figured. By  virtue  of  the  Lamp  locked  up  in  it  [the  light  of  reason]  the  hut  had 
been  converted  from  the  inside  to  the  outside  into  solid  silver.  Ere  long,  too, 
its  form  changed ;  for  the  noble  metal  shook  aside  the  accidental  shape  of  planks, 
posts  and  beams,  and  stretched  itself  out  into  a  noble  case  of  beaten,  ornamented 
workmanship.  Thus  a  fair  little  temple  stood  erected  in  the  middle  of  the  large 
one ;  or,  if  you  will,  an  altar  worthy  of  the  temple."  This  is  Goethe's  view  of 
the  Church  of  the  future.  He  has  been  magnanimous  enough  to  provide  a  niche 
for  it  in  the  perfected  temple  of  the  Great  Hereafter ;  it  is  to  serve  as  a  pretty 
decoration  of  that  grand  structure,  as  a  dainty  bit  of  bric-a-brac.  About  twenty- 
five  centuries  before  Goethe's  day  another  poet,  dwelling  somewhere  in  the  fast- 
nesses of  Syria,  had  visions  of  the  future  in  form  and  colour  quite  unlike  this  of 
the  German  philosopher.  In  Isaiah's  sight  of  the  latter  day,  the  Church  of  God 
is  not  merely  a  feature — it  furnishes  the  outline,  it  fills  the  whole  field  of  vision. 
It  is  not  merely  a  trait  of  the  picture — it  is  the  picture.  Instead  of  putting  the 
Church  into  a  niche  in  the  temple  of  the  future,  to  be  kept  there  as  a  kind  of  heir- 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

loom — a  well-preserved  antique  curiosity — Isaiah  insists  that  the  Church  is  the 
temple,  and  that  all  stores  and  forces  of  good  are  to  be  gathered  into  it,  to  cele- 
brate its  empire  and  to  decorate  its  triumph.  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's 
house,  the  typical  Zion  on  which  the  spiritual  Church  is  builded,  is  to  be  exalted 
above  all  other  eminences.  Toward  that  all  eyes  shall  turn  ;  toward  that  all 
paths  shall  lead  ;  toward  that  shall  journey  with  joy  all  pilgrim  feet.  For  the 
heralds  of  its  progress,  for  the  missionaries  of  its  glad  tidings  it  shall  have  many 
nations ;  it  shall  give  to  all  the  world  the  ruling  law  and  the  informing  word. 
This  is  Isaiah's  view  of  the  Church  of  the  future.  When  twenty-five  centuries 
more  shall  have  passed  it  will  be  easier  to  tell  whether  the  Hebrew  or  the  German 
was  the  better  seer.  ( Washington  Gladden,  D.D.)  The  Church  of  the  future  : — 
Isaiah  shows  us  the  Church  of  the  future  only  in  outline ;  the  great  fact  which 
he  gives  us  is  that  in  the  last  days  the  spiritual  Jerusalem  shall  gather  into  itself 
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  all  the  glory  of  them.  It  may  be  possible 
for  us  in  some  indistinct  way  to  fill  in  this  outline ;  to  imagine,  if  we  cannot 
prophesy,  what  the  scope  and  character  of  the  future  Church  shall  be.  L  Will 
it  have  A  creed  ?  A  creed  is  only  a  statement,  more  or  less  elaborate,  of  the 
facts  and  principles  of  religion  accepted  by  those  who  adhere  to  it.  Religion 
is  not  wholly  an  affair  of  the  emotions ;  it  involves  the  apprehension  of  truth. 
In  the  future,  as  in  the  past,  this  truth  must  be  stated,  in  order  to  be  apprehended. 
A  man's  creed  is  what  he  believes ;  and  there  must  be  creeds  as  long  as  there 
are  believers.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  creeds  may  be  considerably 
modified  as  the  years  pass.  Certainly  they  have  been  undergoing  modifications, 
continually,  through  the  centuries  gone  by.  It  must  be  remembered,  however, 
that  the  changes  through  which  theological  science  has  been  passing  have  been 
changes  of  spirit  rather  than  of  substance,  of  form  more  than  of  fact.  The 
essential  truth  remains.  The  great  changes  in  theology  are  moral  changes. 
Theology  is  constantly  becoming  less  materialistic  and  more  ethical.  This  pro- 
gress will  continue  through  the  future.  The  creed  of  the  future  will  contain, 
I  have  no  doubt,  the  same  essential  truth  that  is  found  in  the  creeds  of  the 
present ;  but  there  may  be  considerable  difference  in  the  phrasing  of  it,  and  in 
the  point  of  view  from  which  it  is  approached.  1.  Men  will  believe  in  the  future 
in  an  infinite  personal  God,  the  Creator,  the  Ruler,  the  Father  of  men.  The 
abstract,  impersonal  Force  to  which  Agnosticism  leads  us  has  no  relation  to  that 
which  is  deepest  in  man,  and  can  have  none.  Christ  bade  us  love  the  Lord  our 
God  with  all  our  heart  and  mind  and  soul.  Can  any  man  ever  be  perfectly  happy 
until  he  has  found  some  Being  whom  he  can  love  in  this  way  ?  Must  not  the 
Being  who  is  worthy  to  be  loved  in  this  way  be  both  perfect  and  infinite  ?  And 
is  it  possible  for  a  man  to  love  with  heart  and  mind  and  soul,  any  being, 
however  vast  or  powerful,  that  has  neither  heart  nor  mind  nor  soul  ?  2.  Con- 
cerning the  mode  of  the  Divine  existence,  men  will  learn  in  the  future  to  speak 
more  modestly  than  they  have  spoken  in  the  past.  It  will  become  more  and 
more  evident  that  it  is  not  possible  to  put  the  infinite  into  terms  of  the  finite. 
There  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  ;  there  is  truth  in  it,  or  under  it ;  but  can 
any  one  put  that  truth  into  propositions  that  shall  be  definite  and  not  contra- 
dictory ?  3.  If  one  may  judge  the  future  by  the  past  there  is  no  reason  to  fear 
that  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  will  be  less  commanding  in  the  Church  of  tne 
future  than  it  is  in  the  Church  of  the  present.  4.  The  fact  of  sin  will  not  be 
denied  by  the  Church  of  the  future.  Doubtless  organisation  and  circumstance 
will  be  taken  into  the  account  in  estimating  human  conduct ;  but  the  power 
of  the  human  will  to  control  the  natural  tendencies,  to  release  itself  from  entang- 
ling circumstances,  and  to  lay  hold  on  the  Divine  grace  by  which  it  may  over- 
come sin,  will  also  be  clearly  understood.  The  supremacy  of  the  moral  nature 
will  be  vindicated.  5.  Punishment,  as  conceived  and  represented  by  the  Church 
of  the  future,  will  not  be  an  arbitrary  infliction  of  suffering,  but  the  natural  and 
inevitable  consequence  of  disobedience  to  law.  It  will  be  discovered  that  the 
moral  law  is  incorporated  into  the  natural  order,  and  that  its  sanctions  are  found 
in  that  order ;  while,  in  the  work  of  redemption,  God  interposes  by  His  personal 
and  supernatural  grace  to  save  men  from  the  consequences  of  their  own  dis- 
obedience and  folly.  Law  is  natural ;  grace  is  supernatural.  Transgressors 
will  be  made  to  see,  what  they  now  so  dimly  apprehend,  that  uo  effect  can  be 
more  closely  joined  to  its  cause  than  penalty  to  sin.  6.  Whatever  the  creed 
of  the  future  may  be,  however,  it  will  not  be  put  to  the  kind  of  use  which  the 
creed  of  the  present  is  made  to  serve.     It  will  not  be  laid  down  as  the  doctrinal 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  67 

plank  over  which  everybody  must  walk  who  comes  into  the  communion  of  the 
Church.  The  Church,  like  every  other  organism,  has  an  organic  idea,  and  that 
is  simple  loyalty  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  Head  of  the  Church.  There  will  be  but 
one  door  into  that  Church — Christ  will  be  the  door.  II.  What  will  be  the 
polity  op  the  future  Church  ?  It  is  likely  that,  of  the  various  sorts  of  ecclesi- 
astical machinery,  each  of  the  several  religious  bodies  will  freely  choose  that 
which  it  likes  best.  Doubtless  the  Church  will  have  some  form  of  government : 
it  will  not  be  a  holy  mob ;  lawlessness  will  not  be  regarded  as  the  supreme  good, 
in  Church  or  in  State.  In  whatever  ecclesiastical  mould  the  Church  of  the  future 
may  be  cast,  there  will  be  no  mean  sectarianism  in  existence  then.  The  various 
families  of  Christians  will  dwell  as  happily  together  as  well-bred  families  now  do 
in  society.  Though  there  be  diversities  of  form  in  the  future,  there  will  be  real 
and  thorough  intercommunion  and  co-operation  among  Christians  of  all  names, 
and  nothing  will  be  permitted  to  hold  apart  those  who  follow  the  same  Leader 
and  travel  the  same  road.  III.  What  kind  op  wobk  will  bb  done  by  thb 
Church  op  thb  future  ?  It  will  have  many  ways  »f  working  that  the  Church 
of  the  present  has  not  dreamed  of.  "  The  field  is  the  world,"  Christ  has  told 
tts ;  and  in  that  better  day  the  Church  will  have  learned  to  occupy  the  field. 
1.  Paul  said  that  as  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel  he  magnified  his  office.  There  is 
no  office  more  honourable.  But  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  there  is  no  other 
way  of  preaching  the  Gospel  except  the  formal  utterance  of  religious  truth,  in 
the  presence  of  a  congregation.  The  truth  will  be  disseminated,  in  that  time, 
in  many  other  ways.  For  though  the  living  voice  is  the  best  instrument  for 
the  proclamation  of  the  truth,  so  far  as  it  will  reach,  it  cannot  reach  very  far. 
The  art  of  printing  has  been  given  to  the  world  since  that  day;  and  by  that 
invention  the  whole  business  of  instructing  and  influencing  men  has  been 
revolutionised.  The  Church  has  already  appropriated  this  agency;  and  it  is 
doubtless  true  that  it  will  be  employed  in  the  future  more  effectively  than  in 
the  past.  Neither  will  the  range  of  teaching  be  so  narrow  as  it  has  some- 
times been  in  the  past.  To  apply  the  ethical  rule  of  the  New  Testament  to 
the  conduct  of  individuals,  and  to  the  relations  of  men  in  society,  will  be 
the  constant  obligation  of  the  pulpit.  Out  of  Zion  must  go  forth  the  law  by 
which  parents,  children,  neighbours,  citizens,  workmen,  masters,  teachers,  pupils, 
benefactors,  beneficiaries,  shall  guide  their  behaviour.  Science,  long  the  night- 
mare of  the  theologians,  will  no  more  trouble  their  dreams ;  it  will  be  under- 
stood that  there  can  be  no  conflict  between  truths ;  that  physical  science  has 
its  facts  and  laws,  and  spiritual  science  its  facts  and  laws  ;  that  these  are  diverse 
but  not  contradictory,  and  that  the  one  is  just  as  positive  and  knowable  as  the 
other.  The  unfriendliness  now  existing  between  the  scientists  and  the  theologians 
will  exist  no  longer,  because  both  parties  will  have  learned  wisdom.  2.  But 
the  work  of  teaching  will  not  be  the  only  work  to  which  the  Church  of  the  future 
will  address  itself.  Large  and  wise  enterprises  for  the  welfare  of  men  will  be 
set  on  foot ;  many  of  the  instrumentalities  now  in  use  will  continue  to  be  employed, 
under  modified  forms,  and  many  new  ones  will  be  devised.  It  will  be  understood 
that  the  law  of  the  Church  is  simply  this,  "  Let  us  do  good  to  all  men  as  we  have 
opportunity."  (Ibid.)  The  magnet  which  draws  the  nations: — The  Church 
is  established  on  the  top  of  the  mountain,  and  all  nations  are  flowing  unto  it.  Yes, 
flowing  up  hill !  Yes,  up  the  mountain  side  !  When  I  was  a  boy  I  said,  "  That 
is  false  rhetorio,  a  mistake — flowing  to  the  top  of  the  mountain ;  it  cannot  be." 
I  went  to  the  workshop  of  a  friend,  and  I  saw  in  the  dust  a  parcel  of  steel  filings. 
And  he  had  a  magnet,  and,  as  he  drew  it  near  to  the  steel  filings,  they  were  attracted 
to  it  and  kissed  the  magnet.  Then  I  said,  Give  me  a  magnet  large  enough,  place 
it  on  the  mountain  top,  and  it  will  draw  all  the  nations  unto  it.  That  magnet  is 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  He  said,  "  If  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  I  will  draw 
all  men  unto  Me."    (Bp.  M.  Simpson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Come  ye,  ana  let  us  go  up  to  toe  mountain  of  the  Lord. — "  Many 
people "  .• — For  "  people "  read  "  peoples."  So  ver.  4.  (A.  B.  Davidson, 
LL.D.)  Desire  for  spiritual  instruction  : — What  I  intend  is  to  make  use  of 
the  words  as  they  express  a  sincere  desire  in  many  people  of  being  better  informed 
in  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  by  some  particular  revelation  from  Himself,  than 
they  could  be  by  the  mere  natural  light  of  their  own  minds,  reflecting  only  upon 
the  general  works  of  creation  and  providence.    L  Ever*  rational  man,  who 

BELIEVES  A  GOD  AND  A  PRO VID  JNCE  QOVBRNINO  THB  WORLD,  IS  UNDER  A  NATURAL 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

OBLIGATION  TO  INQUIRE  WHETHER  GOD   HAS   MADE   ANT  PARTICULAR  REVELATION 

op  His  will  to  men,  which  they  aee  any  way  concerned  to  take  notice  op. 
IL  Whoever  seriously  makes  this  inquiry,  will  find  it  reasonable  to 

CONCLUDE  THAT  SOME  REVELATION  MAY  JUSTLY  BE  EXPECTED  PROM  GOD,  CON- 
SIDERING the  general  statb  op  mankind.  1.  In  the  nature  of  things,  there 
is  no  impossibility  that  God  should  make  a  particular  revelation  of  His  will  to 
men.  That  God  should  communicate  His  will  to  men  in  a  particular  manner, 
implies  nothing  contradictory,  either  to  the  nature  of  man  or  God.  For  if  we 
believe  that  God  is  the  Maker  of  mankind,  and  that  from  Him  they  received 
their  reason  and  understanding,  then  it  is  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the 
mind  of  man  is  incapable  of  receiving  any  impression  of  revelation  or  instruction 
from  the  Supreme  mind,  only  because  that  Supreme  mind  is  of  an  invisible  nature. 
And  it  is  yet  much  more  unreasonable  to  suppose  any  incapacity  in  the  Divine 
Being,  of  making  such  discovery  of  His  will  to  the  mind  of  man,  as  His  wisdom 
sees  fit ;  for  this  would,  in  effect,  be  to  deny  the  perfection  of  His  nature,  and  to 
make  him  a  Being  not  acting  freely  but  by  necessity,  without  liberty  or  choice : 
and  this  in  the  end  comes  to  the  same  thing  as  denying  His  Being  altogether. 
2.  Considering  our  natural  notions  of  the  goodness  of  God,  there  is  no  reason  to 
think  it  incredible  that  He  should  at  some  time  or  other  make  such  discovery 
of  His  will.  3.  Considering  the  general  condition  of  mankind,  such  revelation 
is  by  no  means  unnecessary.  (1)  It  is  evident,  that  there  is  a  surprising  corruption 
in  human  nature ;  that  the  generality  of  men  have  hardly  ever  attended  duly, 
at  any  time,  to  the  natural  dictates  of  their  own  reason.  But  much  the  greater 
part  have  shewn  themselves  more  prone  to  extinguish  than  to  improve  the  light 
of  reason.  (2)  Suppose  they  had  really  known  the  true  state  of  their  own 
case,  yet  the  true  cure  for  it  was  more  than  human  power  or  skill  could  effect. 
Some  of  them  had  recourse  to  philosophy.  But  the  disease  was  too  inveterate 
and  epidemical  to  be  cured  by  so  weak  a  medicine.  (3)  Supposing  the  philo- 
sophers had  been  really  designed  to  reform  the  morals  and  religion  of  mankind, 
they  were  not  sufficiently  qualified  for  such  an  undertaking,  because  they  them- 
selves were  ignorant  of  many  things  necessary  for  it.  As  they  knew  not  the 
first  cause  of  the  corruption  of  human  nature,  so  they  could  know  nothing  of 
God's  design  in  suffering  it,  nor  of  the  scheme  and  order  of  His  providence,  by 
which  He  designed  to  conduct  mankind  out  of  it,  into  a  more  perfect  and  happy 
state  than  that  from  which  they  had  fallen.  (4)  In  matters  of  religion,  which, 
naturally,  have  the  greatest  influence  over  the  mind  of  man,  and  which  therefore 
ought  to  be  under  the  best  and  truest  direction  of  all  others,  they  were  still  more 
deficient  than  in  anything  else.  When  mankind  had  once  generally  fallen  from 
the  worship  of  the  one  true  God,  they  sunk,  by  degrees,  into  the  most  brutal 
superstition  and  idolatry.  (5)  Divers  of  the  wisest  philosophers  did  themselves 
confess  that  they  wanted  a  Divine  revelation  to  set  them  right,  even  in  matters 
which  were  of  the  utmost  consequence.  (6)  Such  men  as  now  think  that  no 
revelation  was  ever  necessary,  but  that  the  want  of  it  might  always  have  been 
sufficiently  supplied  by  the  use  of  human  reason  alone,  do  not  state  the  matter 
fairly ;  because  they  confound  part  of  that  light  which  we  insensibly  receive 
by  the  revelation  of  the  Gospel,  with  that  light  of  nature  which  men  had  before 
it :  that  is,  they  do  not  distinguish  between  those  notions  which  the  mere 
heathen  world  were  in  possession  of  before,  and  those  which  they  attained  to 
after  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.     III.  Ip  this  be  so,  then  it  is  every  man's 

DUTY  TO  USE  ALL  THE  PROPER  MEANS  HE  CAN  TO  FIND  OUT  WHAT  IS  TRUE  REVELATION, 

and  what  is  only  pretended.  (R.  Boyle.)  "  Let  us  go  up  "  : — Those  that 
are  entering  into  covenant  and  communion  with  God  themselves  should  bring 
as  many  as  they  can  along  with  them.  (M.  Henry.)  He  will  teach  us 
of  His  ways.  —  The  ways  of  God :  —  By  the  ways  of  God  may  be  meant — 
1.  His  purposes  and  counsels,  so  far  as  are  proper  and  necessary  for  His  servants 
to  be  acquainted  with,  in  order  to  promote  their  happiness  and  salvation.  2.  His 
providential  dispensations,  so  far  as  is  consistent  with  their  duty  and  interest  to 
know  them,  that  they  may  understand  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord.  3.  The 
ministration  of  His  Spirit  and  the  way  of  salvation,  by  which  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  Jehovah  is  admirably  displayed.  These  are,  with  great  propriety, 
called  the  ways  of  God,  as  He  points  them  out  to  us  in  His  Word,  and  as  they  are 
intended  to  conduct  to  the  enjoyment  of  Him  in  the  land  of  everlasting  upright- 
ness. (R.  MaccuUoch.)  And  we  will  walk  in  Hia  paths. — Walking  in 
God's  paths : — The  resolution  before  us — 1.  Plainly  implies  a  free  choice  of  the 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  69 

precepts  of  the  Gospel,  in  preference  to  all  other  ways,  and  in  opposition  to  every 
kind  of  compulsion  whatever.  2.  It  includes  a  fixed  purpose  of  heart,  a  firm 
determination,  to  cleave  unto  the  Lord,  notwithstanding  every  difficulty  and 
discouragement  that  may  lie  in  the  way.  3.  And  as  walking  is  an  uniform, 
progressive  motion,  it  comprehends  a  constant,  persevering  progress  in  the  good 
ways  of  the  Lord,  wherein  they  are  instructed.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  And  He  shall  judge  among  the  nations  .  .  .  neither  shall  they  learn 
war  any  more. — Christ's  kingdom  upon  earth  : — 1.  When  it  is  said  that  He  should 
"  judge  among  the  nations,"  we  must  observe  that  the  term  is  continually  used 
in  the  Old  Testament  of  the  rule  of  a  chief  magistrate.  Under  the  theocracy 
those  who  ruled  the  nation,  as  we  read  in  Judges  ii.,  and  in  many  other  places, 
were  termed  "  judges."  Of  one  of  these  it  is  said — "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
came  upon  Othniel,  and  he  judged  Israel,  and  went  out  to  war," — acted  as  their 
supreme  ruler.  And  the  same  language  is  employed  continually  of  those  who 
ruled  in  Israel,  under  God  their  King.  The  prediction  is  very  nearly  parallel  to 
one  in  the  seventy-second  Psalm  respecting  the  Messiah :  "  He  shall  judge  " — or 
rule — "  the  people  with  righteousness,  and  the  poor  with  judgment."  Accord- 
ingly, in  our  text  it  is  declared  that  the  Messiah  should  be  a  Ruler  "  among  th6 
nations."  This  rule  was  to  take  place,  according  to  the  language  of  prophecy, 
when  the  Redeemer  came  into  this  world.  Hence  when  our  Lord  was  upon  earth, 
He  Himself  proclaimed  that  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand."  He  directed 
His  disciples  to  preach  the  same  truth.  And  we  know  that  a  time  is  to  come, 
when  "  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  to  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and 
of  His  Christ."  When  our  Saviour  was  upon  earth  He  allowed  the  expression 
used  by  Nathaniel — "  Rabbi,  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  Thou  art  the  King  of 
Israel."  When  He  came  in  triumph  into  Jerusalem,  and  the  people  shouted  out — 
"  Hosannah  !  blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  our  Lord  did 
not  repress  the  exultation.  All  believers,  then,  have  already  become  subjects  of 
His  Kingdom,  and  He  is  stated  in  Scripture  to  be  their  King.  He  has  a  dominion, 
indeed,  far  more  extensive  than  that  of  the  Church ;  He  has  "  all  power  given 
Him  in  heaven  and  earth."  But  the  passage  before  us  does  not  refer  to  this 
universal  dominion,  which  He  exercises  in  providence,  but  it  speaks  of  the 
dominion  of  grace,  His  dominion  limited  to  His  Church — because  it  is  a  dominion 
that  was  to  result  from  the  promulgation  of  His  Word  out  of  Zion,  and  a  dominion 
to  be  co-extensive  with  the  exaltation  of  His  Church  of  Zion.  "  Out  of  Zion  shall 
go  forth  the  law,  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.  And  He  shall  judge 
among  the  nations."  (1)  Since  this  dominion  was  to  be  established  by  the 
promulgation  of  the  Word  of  God  we  may  learn  that  no  other  ways  are  legitimate 
for  the  extension  and  establishment  of  Christ's  Kingdom  than  this  weapon  of 
truth.  (2)  Till  He  establishes  His  dominion  over  any  man's  heart  that  man  is 
not  a  Christian.  (3)  Christ  has  a  right  to  rule.  (Rom.  xiv.  9.)  But  it  is  here 
said,  not  merely  that  He  shall  judge  among  multitudes,  among  His  universal 
Church,  but,  "  He  shall  judge  among  the  nations,"  by  which  we  learn  that  He 
means  still  to  multiply  the  numbers  of  His  people,  till  nations  are  born  in  a  day, 
and  irreligion  and  rebellion  against  Christ  on  this  earth  shall  be  as  rare  as  they 
are  now  general.  2.  It  was  added,  as  a  contemporaneous  act  of  His  sovereignty, 
"  He  shall  rebuke  many  people."  By  that  word  "  rebuke  "  is  evidently  meant, 
He  shall  reprove  them  for  their  sinfulness.  (1)  Wherever  He  sets  up  His  dominion 
over  any  heart  He  first  makes  that  heart  to  feel  bowed  down  by  the  load  of  its 
guilt.  (2)  Nations  shall  also  be  rebuked  for  their  sinfulness.  The  Gospel  tends 
to  rebuke  all  abuses  and  evils  among  mankind — in  Churches,  governments,  &c. 
3.  The  effect  of  the  Saviour's  reign  is  further  described ;  it  is  to  be  universal 
peace.  "  They  shall  beat,"  &c.  (B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  Anomalies  in  the  history 
of  Christendom  : — An  obvious  reflection  which  occurs  to  us,  when  reading  this 
prediction — or  at  least  which  is  likely  to  occur  to  any  one  not  well  acquainted 
with  Scripture — is,  that  the  effect  of  the  Gospel,  going  forth  from  Zion  and  from 
Jerusalem,  seemed  from  the  very  first  to  be  quite  the  opposite  of  this  prediction. 
How  can  it  be  said  that  the  effect  of  the  Gospel  has  been  to  introduce  a  universal 
peace,  when  it  seems  man  fest  from  history  that  it  has  introduced  universal  dis- 
turbance and  confusion  ?  Our  Lord  Himself,  when  on  earth,  by  His  ministry 
and  life,  only  led  to  a  universal  conspiracy  against  Him ;  and  when  He  ascended 
to  His  glory,  and  His  disciples  began  to  preach  in  His  name,  it  was  the  signal  for 
general  confusion.     As  that  Gospel  advanced,  it  was  the  signal  for  more  savage 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

opposition,  till  every  part  of  the  Roman  empire  was  stained  with  the  blood  ol 
Christ's  followers,  till  everywhere  there  was  a  universal  warfare  among  men — 
between  those  who  were  the  advocates  of  the  old  system,  and  those  who  proclaimed 
the  new.  At  length,  when  the  empire  was  conquered,  it  was  only  to  be  the 
occasion  of  still  wider  and  more  sanguinary  disturbances.  Many  as  had  perished 
through  popular  fury,  or  by  legal  interference,  during  the  three  first  centuries, 
multitudes  more  perished,  as  the  indirect  consequence  of  the  Gospel  in  after  ages. 
When  the  Roman  empire  was  shivered  by  the  shock  of  barbarian  invaders,  and 
the  feudal  kingdoms  of  Europe  rose  in  its  place,  in  each  of  those  kingdoms  the 
castle  of  the  noble  frowned  defiance  upon  the  castle  of  every  good  and  great  man  ; 
the  wars  between  neighbouring  nations  became  interminable ;  and  when  at  last 
the  monarchies  were  consolidated,  and  the  great  modern  monarchies  rose  out  of 
that  confusion,  it  was  only  to  see  in  every  page  of  history  an  interminable  war- 
fare between  Christian  nations.  So  that,  for  instance,  in  our  own  frontiers, 
the  Border  warfare  between  Scotland  and  England  was  almost  interminable ; 
and  yet  these  were  Christian  nations ;  and  the  Christian  nations  of  France  and 
England  were  termed  hereditary  foes,  and  there  was  not  a  monarch  of  Europe 
that  did  not  join  in  some  sanguinary  strife,  to  please  a  minister,  or  to  gratify  his 
own  ambition,  or  for  some  vain  pretence,  as  corrupt  as  it  was  often  false.  But 
this  has  not  been  the  only  way  in  which  this  prediction  appears  to  have  been 
perpetually  frustrated — for  there  have  actually  been  sanguinary  wars  that  have 
arisen  from  no  other  cause  than  religion.  The  wars  of  Bohemia  and  the  Low 
Countries,  and  the  civil  wars  of  France  and  many  other  countries,  which  long 
raged  in  the  hearts  of  nations,  for  no  other  cause  than  a  difference  in  Christian 
doctrine,  seem  to  be  a  contradiction  of  the  prophecy  in  our  text,  beyond  all 
apology.  And  even  when  the  disturbances  of  nations  have  not  risen  to  actual 
warfare,  how  lamentable  have  been  the  cruelties  exercised  over  a  profession  of 
belief  in  Christianity  1  See  the  dukes  of  Savoy  soaking  the  valleys  of  Piedmont 
with  the  blood  of  their  best  subjects ;  see  the  rage  of  the  Roman  Catholic  perse- 
cutors exhibiting  itself  in  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew ;  view  the  remorseless 
Dragonades  in  the  south  of  France ;  see  the  many  enormities  which  were  per* 
petrated  in  our  own  country  during  the  reigns  of  Henry  the  Seventh  and  Eighth, 
and  Charles  the  First  and  Second.  Carry  your  views  to  the  northern  parts  of  thiB 
island,  and  there  see  Claverhouse  and  his  companions  reeking  with  the  blood 
of  the  guiltless  Covenanters ;  cross  the  Channel,  and  see  the  Roman  Catholics 
of  Ireland  massacring  thousands  of  Protestants  because  they  were  Protestants, 
and  the  equally  bloody  return  secured  to  them  by  the  iron-hearted  and  relentless 
soldiers  of  Oliver  Cromwell.  So  that  everywhere  massacre  and  misery  have 
followed  the  introduction  of  the  Gospel.  Is  this  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise — 
"  They  shall  beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares,  and  their  s.pears  into  pruning- 
hooks :  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn 
war  any  more  "  ?  1.  Let  us  first  notice,  that  the  Gospel  is  not  responsible  for 
the  acts  of  its  enemies, — and  in  all  the  cases  I  have  named  its  friends  might  still 
be  like  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves.  They  might  be  "  wise  as  serpents,  harmless 
as  doves,"  and  yet  all  this  slaughter  might  take  place  under  the  name  of  religion. 
They  have  been  the  enemies  of  the  Gospel,  and  not  its  friends,  who  have  thus 
manifested  such  savage  cruelty  and  unprincipled  cupidity  towards  their  fellow- 
men.  2.  And  let  us  notice,  in  the  next  place,  that  the  prediction  in  our  text 
was  manifestly  not  to  be  fulfilled  immediately  ;  it  was  to  take  place  "  in  the  last 
days  " — and  those  "  last  days  "  have  not  yet  transpired.  (Ibid.)  War  during 
the  Christian  centuries,  though  peace  predicted : — It  may  be  said,  that  however 
guiltless  the  Gospel  may  have  been  of  these  sanguinary  results,  yet  they  are  facts 
of  history.  The  prediction  was,  universal  peace  to  follow  from  the  Gospel,  and 
the  experience  has  been  universal  war.  Does  not  this  seem  to  contradict  the 
prediction  T  Nothing  is  more  conclusive  than  the  answer  which  may  be  given 
to  this  objection.  1.  The  Gospel  was  declared  to  be  of  a  pacific  tendency.  It 
forbids  all  the  causes  of  war  in  the  world — pride,  passion,  cupidity,  &o.  It  bids 
all  who  become  the  subjects  of  Christ's  dominion  to  be  mild  and  meek  and  patient 
as  their  Master  was.  2.  There  must  be  the  same  pacific  tendency  among  nations 
that  are  in  any  degree  Christianised.  3.  This  tendency  has  not  been  and  could 
not  be  wholly  counteracted.  It  is  true  there  have  been  these  shameful  wars ;  but 
it  is  no  less  true  that  under  even  the  partial  influence  of  the  Gospel  wars  have  in 
our  day  assumed  a  humanity  which  they  never  before  manifested.  4.  The  influence 
of  each  individual  Christian  and  the  tendency  of  Christian  institutions  combine 


ohap.  n.]  ISAIAH.  61 

to  secure  the  fulfilment  of  these  prospects.  And  if  so,  may  we  not  reasonably 
exult  in  this  blessed  doctrine  of  Christ  ?  And  if  we  look  back  with  shame  and 
pain  on  the  history  of  the  nations  that  call  themselves  Christian,  let  us  seek  our- 
selves to  manifest  a  better  spirit  and  be  men  of  peace.  {Ibid.)  God  the 
Arbitrator  : — Here  is  a  prediction  of  arbitration  in  case  of  war.  "  He  .  .  .  shall 
rebuke  many  people."  Read  the  word  "  rebuke  " — He  shall  arbitrate  amongst 
many  people ;  He  shall  hear  their  cause ;  He  shall  redress  their  grievances ;  He 
shall  determine  their  controversies,  and  men  shall  accept  His  award  as  final. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Learning  war  no  more  : — Not  learning  war  is  something 
more  than  not  continuing  to  practise  it  (Calvin),  and  signifies  their  ceasing  to 
know  how  to  practise  it.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  War: — I.  Thb  miseries  and 
crimes  op  war.  II.  The  sources  of  war.  Many  will  imagine  that  the  first 
place  ought  to  be  given  to  malignity  and  hatred.  But  justice  to  human  nature 
requires  that  we  ascribe  to  national  animosities  a  more  limited  operation  than 
is  usually  assigned  to  them  in  the  production  of  war.  1.  One  of  the  great  springs 
of  war  is  the  strong  and  general  propensity  of  human  nature  towards  the  love 
of  excitement,  of  emotion,  of  strong  interest.  2.  Another  powerful  principle  of 
our  nature,  which  is  a  spring  of  war,  is  the  passion  for  superiority,  for  triumph, 
for  power.  3.  Another  powerful  spring  of  war  is  the  admiration  of  the  bril- 
liant qualities  displayed  in  war.  4.  Another  cause  of  war  is  false  patriotism. 
5.  Another  spring  of  war,  the  impression  (and  false  views  of  war)  we  receive  in 
early  life.  These  principal  causes  of  war  are  of  a  moral  nature.  They  may  be 
resolved  into  wrong  views  of  human  glory,  and  into  excesses  of  passions  and 
desires,  which,  by  right  direction,  would  promote  the  best  interests  of  humanity. 
From  these  causes  we  learn  that  this  savage  custom  is  to  be  repressed  by  moral 
means,  by  salutary  influences  on  the  sentiments  and  principles  of  mankind. 
III.  The  remedies  of  war.  Without  taking  an  extreme  position,  we  ought 
to  assail  war,  by  assailing  the  principles  and  passions  which  gave  it  birth,  and 
by  improving  and  exalting  the  moral  sentiments  of  mankind.  1.  Important 
service  may  be  rendered  to  the  cause  of  peace  by  communicating  and  enforcing 
just  and  elevated  sentiments  in  relation  to  the  true  honour  of  rulers.  2.  To 
these  instructions  should  be  added  just  sentiments  as  to  the  glory  of  nations. 

3.  Another  most  important  method  of  promoting  the  cause  of  peace  is  to  turn 
men's  admiration  from  military  courage  to  qualities  of  real  nobleness  and  dignity. 

4.  Let  Christian  ministers  exhibit,  with  greater  clearness,  the  pacific  and  bene- 
volent spirit  of  Christianity.  ( W.  E.  Channing,  D.D.)  Private  war  abolished  : — 
There  was  a  time,  not  very  long  ago,  when  private  war  was  even  more  universal 
than  public  or  international  war  is  to-day.  City  against  city  !  Baron  against 
baron !  Even  private  persons  were  entitled  to  settle  their  differences  by  judicial 
combat  if  they  preferred.  Right  of  trial  by  combat  still  survives  in  some 
European  countries  in  the  form  of  duelling.  But  with  that  solitary  exception, 
private  war  has  now  been  entirely  abolished  throughout  the  civilised  world. 
How  has  this  immense  improvement  been  achieved  ?  The  fact  to  be  specially 
remembered  is  that  the  barons  of  the  Middle  Ages  submitted  very  reluctantly 
and  slowly  to  the  substitution  of  judicial  arbitration  for  private  war.  Kings 
had  not  the  power  to  compel,  and  the  barons  continually  defied  the  kings.  Gradu- 
ally a  more  enlightened  and  moral  public  opinion  grew  up  in  favour  of  the  rational 
and  Christian  method  of  settling  disputes.  At  last  the  supremacy  of  law  and  of 
courts  of  justice  became  established.  Private  war  is  now  impossible,  so  absolute 
is  the  triumph  of  Christianity  in  the  internal  affairs  of  the  nation.  Now,  a  precisely 
similar  slow  and  intermittent  change  is  evolving  better  order  in  international 
life.  Barbarous  and  heathen  governments  still  defy  the  dictates  of  reason  and 
of  conscience  as  the  cities  and  barons  of  the  Middle  Ages  did.  But  slowly  and 
intermittently  their  ferocity  is  being  overcome.  Arbitration  has  already  been 
substituted  for  war  in  a  large  number  of  important  cases  which,  in  any  previous 
period  of  human  history,  would  inevitably  nave  deluged  the  world  with  blood. 
(H.  P.  Hughes,  M.A.)  War : — I.  The  terrible  evils  of  was.  There  are  many 
evils  we  have  to  endure  in  this  life  that  we  cannot  avoid.  They  are  unforeseen, 
indirect,  irresistible.  Disease,  domestio  sorrows,  adversity,  and  other  evils  befall 
men ;  but  none  can  equal  war.  II.  It  is  impossible  to  settle  national 
disputes  by  war.  No  argument  is  necessary  to  prove  that  physical  force  can 
never  settle  the  right  or  wrong  of  any  question.  The  most  powerful  battalions 
are  not  always  on  the  side  of  the  just  cause.  And  when  a  war  is  over,  who  accepts 
it  as  a  final  settlement  of  the  question  in  dispute  ?     Often  a  bloody  war  is  followed 


02  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

by  conferences  and  treaties,  and  after  a  vast  expenditure  of  treasure  and  life, 
after  the  entrance  of  sorrow  into  many  homes,  the  measures  which  should  have 
been  resorted  to  at  first  are  the  measures  which  decide  the  question.  How  often 
one  side  accepts  peace  simply  because,  for  the  present,  it  can  no  longer  prosecute 
war.  The  only  true  method  of  settling  quarrels  is  by  reason,  the  furnishing  of 
explanations,  the  granting  of  concessions,  the  manifestation  of  a  desire  and 
purpose  to  agree.  Two  nations  may  thus  settle  their  misunderstandings  without 
calling  in  a  third  party,  or  they  may  call  in  others  to  arbitrate  between  them  and 
agree  to  abide  by  their  decision.  A  high  court  of  arbitration  is  in  full  agreement 
with  enlightened  reason  and  Christian  teaching ;  it  seems  in  the  highest  degree 
practicable,  and  it  would  prove,  in  its  operations  and  results,  one  of  the  greatest 
blessings  to  the  nations  of  the  earth.  III.  One  of  the  most  pressing  duties 
of  Christian  men  is  to  employ  all  possible  means  for  the  extinction  of 
war.  We  should  steadfastly  set  ourselves  against  the  maintenance  of  large 
standing  armies.  We  should  leaven  public  opinion  with  the  principles  of  peace — 
by  the  press,  in  social  intercourse,  and  by  using  our  power  as  citizens  in  seeking 
to  purge  our  Legislature  as  much  as  possible  from  warlike  influences.  There  is 
no  cause  in  which  woman's  influence  may  be  more  appropriately  exercised  or 
can  have  greater  weight.  Preachers  of  the  Gospel  should  preach  peace.  {W. 
Walters.)  Universal  peace  : — Let  me  attempt  to  do  away  a  delusion  which 
exists  on  the  subject  of  prophecy.  Its  fulfilments  are  all  certain,  say  many, 
and  we  have  therefore  nothing  to  do  but  to  wait  for  them  in  passive  and  indolent 
expectation.  Now,  it  is  very  true,  that  the  Divinity  will  do  His  work  in  His  own 
way,  but  if  He  choose  to  tell  us  that  that  way  is  not  without  the  instrumentality  of 
men,  might  not  this  sitting  down  into  the  mere  attitude  of  spectators  turn  out 
to  be  a  most  perverse  and  disobedient  conclusion  ?  The  prophecy  of  a  peace  as 
universal  as  the  spread  of  the  human  race,  and  as  enduring  as  the  moon  in  the 
firmament,  will  meet  its  accomplishment;  but  it  will  be  brought  about  by  the 
activity  of  men — by  the  philanthropy  of  intelligent  Christians.  L  The  evils 
of  war.  The  mere  existence  of  this  prophecy  is  a  sentence  of  condemnation 
upon  war.  So  soon  as  Christianity  shall  gain  a  full  ascendency  in  the  world, 
war  is  to  disappear.  We  have  heard  that  there  is  something  noble  in  the  art  of 
war ;  that  there  is  something  generous  in  the  ardour  of  that  fine  chivalric  spirit 
which  kindles  in  the  hour  of  alarm,  and  rushes  with  delight  among  the  thickest 
scenes  of  danger  and  of  enterprise ;  that  expunge  war,  and  you  expunge  some 
of  the  brightest  names  in  the  catalogue  of  human  virtue,  and  demolish  that  theatre 
on  which  have  been  displayed  some  of  the  sublimest  energies  of  the  human 
character.  One  might  almost  be  reconciled  to  the  whole  train  of  its  calamities  and  its 
horrors,  did  he  not  believe  his  Bible,  and  learn  that  in  the  days  of  perfect  righteous- 
ness, there  will  be  no  war ; — that  so  soon  as  the  character  of  man  has  had  the  last 
finish  of  Christian  principle  thrown  over  it,  all  the  instruments  of  war  will  be 
thrown  aside,  and  all  its  lessons  forgotten.  But  apart  altogether  from  this 
testimony  to  the  evil  of  war,  let  us  take  a  direct  look  at  it,  and  see  whether  we 
can  find  its  character  engraven  on  the  aspect  it  bears  to  the  eye  of  an  attentive 
observer.  Were  the  man  who  stands  before  you  in  the  full  energy  of  health,  to 
be  in  another  moment  laid  by  some  deadly  aim  a  lifeless  corpse  at  your  feet, 
there  is  not  one  of  you  who  would  not  prove  how  strong  are  the  relentings  of 
nature  at  a  spectacle  so  hideous  as  death.  But  generally  the  death  of  violence 
is  not  instantaneous,  and  there  is  often  a  sad  and  dreary  interval  between  its 
final  consummation,  and  the  infliction  of  the  blow  which  causes  it.  A  soldier 
may  be  a  Christian,  and  from  the  bloody  field  on  which  his  body  is  laid,  his  soul 
may  wing  its  way  to  the  shores  of  a  peaceful  eternity.  But  when  I  think  that 
the  Christians  form  but  a  little  flock,  and  that  an  army  is  not  a  propitious  soil 
for  the  growth  of  Christian  principle ;  when  I  follow  them  to  the  field  of  battle, 
and  further  think,  that  on  both  sides  of  an  exasperated  contest  the  gentleness 
of  Christianity  can  have  no  place  in  almost  any  bosom,  but  that  nearly  every 
heart  is  lighted  up  with  fury,  and  breathes  a  vindictive  purpose  against  a  brother 
of  the  species,  I  cannot  but  reckon  it  among  the  most  fearful  of  the  calamities 
of  war,  that  while  the  work  of  death  is  thickening  along  its  ranks,  so  many  disem- 
bodied spirits  should  pass  into  the  presence  of  Him  who  sitteth  upon  the  throne, 
in  such  a  posture,  and  with  such  a  preparation.  II.  Let  me  direct  your  attention 
to  those  obstacles  which  stand  in  the  way  of  the  extinction  of  war,  and 
which  threaten  to  retard,  for  a  time,  the  accomplishment  of  this  prophecy.  1.  The 
first  great  obstacle  is  the  way  in  which  the  heart  of  man  is  carried  off  from 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  63 

its  barbarities  and  its  horrors,  by  the  splendour  of  its  deceitful  accompaniments. 
There  is  a  feeling  of  the  sublime  in  contemplating  the  shock  of  armies,  just  as 
there  is  in  contemplating  the  devouring  energy  of  a  tempest ;  and  this  so  elevates 
and  engrosses  the  whole  man,  that  his  eye  is  blind  to  the  tears  of  bereaved  parents, 
and  his  ear  is  deaf  to  the  piteous  moan  of  the  dying,  and  the  shriek  of  their 
desolated  families.  There  is  a  gracefulness  in  the  picture  of  a  youthful  warrior 
burning  for  distinction  on  the  field,  and  lured  by  this  generous  aspiration  to  the 
deepest  of  the  animated  throng,  where,  in  the  fell  work  of  death,  the  opposing 
sons  of  valour  struggle  for  a  remembrance  and  a  name ;  and  this  side  of  the 
picture  is  so  much  the  exclusive  object  of  our  regard,  as  to  disguise  from  our  view 
the  mangled  carcases  of  the  fallen,  and  the  writhing  agonies  of  the  hundred 
and  the  hundreds  more  who  have  been  laid  on  the  cold  ground,  where  they  are 
left  to  languish  and  die.  On  every  side  of  me  I  see  causes  at  work  which  go  to 
spread  a  most  delusive  colouring  over  war,  and  to  remove  its  shocking  barbarities 
to  the  background  of  our  contemplations  altogether.  I  see  it  in  the  history 
which  tells  me  of  the  superb  appearance  of  the  troops  and  the  brilliancy  of  their 
successive  charges.  I  see  it  in  the  poetry  which  lends  the  magic  of  its  numbers 
to  the  narrative  of  blood,  and  transports  its  many  admirers,  as  by  its  images  and 
figures  and  its  nodding  plumes  of  chivalry  it  throws  its  treacherous  embellish- 
ments over  a  scene  of  legalised  slaughter.  2.  But  another  obstacle  to  the  extinc- 
tion of  war  is  the  sentiment  that  the  rules  and  promises  of  the  Gospel  which 
apply  to  a  single  individual,  do  not  apply  to  a  nation  of  individuals.  If  forbear- 
ance be  the  virtue  of  an  individual,  forbearance  is  also  the  virtue  of  a  nation.  If 
it  be  the  glory  of  a  man  to  defer  his  anger,  and  to  pass  over  a  transgression,  that 
nation  mistakes  its  glory  which  is  so  feelingly  alive  to  the  slightest  insult,  and 
musters  up  its  threats  and  its  armaments  upon  the  faintest  shadow  of  a  provoca- 
tion. If  it  be  the  magnanimity  of  an  injured  man  to  abstain  from  vengeance, 
and  if  by  so  doing,  he  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  the  head  of  his  enemy,  then  that 
is  the  magnanimous  nation,  which,  recoiling  from  violence  and  from  blood,  will 
do  no  more  than  send  its  Christian  embassy,  and  prefer  its  mild  and  impressive 
remonstrance ;  and  that  is  the  disgraced  nation  which  will  refuse  the  im- 
pressiveness  of  the  moral  appeal  that  has  been  made  to  it.     III.  It  is  only 

BY  THE  EXTENSION  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRINCIPLE  AMONG  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE 
EARTH,    THAT    THE    ATROCITIES     OF     WAR    WILL     AT    LENGTH     BE    SWEPT    AWAY 

from  it.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  world's  deliverance  from  war  : — Ever  since 
the  fall,  our  world  has  exhibited  much  of  degradation  and  misery ;  and  it  is 
lamentably  true,  that  a  vast  amount  of  its  wretchedness  has  been  produced  by 
the  active  agency  of  its  own  inhabitants.  Man  has  hated  and  oppressed  his 
fellow-man.  But  how  delightful  is  it  to  think  that  we  have  been  assured  by  the 
word  of  Divine  inspiration,  that  it  is  tht>  design  of  the  great  Creator  of  all  things, 
to  reclaim  our  earth  from  its  state  ot  degradation  and  wickedness  and  misery, 
and  to  make  it  again  the  scene  of  holiness  and  harmony  and  happiness  !  I.  The 
nature  of  the  evtl  to  be  removed.  This  evil  is  represented  to  consist  in  the 
lifting  up  of  the  sword,  and  in  the  learning  of  the  art  of  war.  II.  The  character 
of  the  change  to  be  produced.  "  They  shall  beat,"  &c.  The  period  is  to  arrive, 
in  the  history  of  our  world,  in  which  the  operation  of  those  unholy  passions  by 
which  so  much  destruction  and  misery  has  been  produced,  shall  be  subdued ;  and 
in  which  the  principle  of  love  to  God  and  to  men  shall  be  delightfully  predominant 
within  the  human  bosom.  III.  The  means  by  which  the  happy  transition 
is  to  be  accomplished.  Swords  are  to  be  beaten  "  into  ploughshares,  and 
spears  into  pruninghooks,"  and  war  is  no  more  to  be  learned,  when  many  people 
shall  go  and  say, '  Come  ye  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  to  the 
house  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  for  He  will  teach  us  of  His  ways."  Hence,  it  appears 
that  the  change  is  to  be  produced  by  the  agency  of  the  Gospel.  There  may  be 
other  instrumentalities  of  a  subordinate  nature  brought  into  operation,  such  as 
the  commercial  intercourse  of  nations  with  each  other,  and  the  knowledge  which 
they  may  acquire  of  their  mutual  interests  and  dependencies ;  but  the  religion 
of  Jesus  is  to  be  the  principal  cause  of  the  termination  of  hostilities  in  our  world, 
and  the  introduction  of  the  reign  of  universal  peace  and  felicity.  The  Gospel 
of  Christ  informs  us  of  the  source  whence  all  our  enmities  and  contentions  proceed, 
even  from  the  deceitfulness  and  desperate  wickedness  of  our  hearts.  The  Gospel 
of  Christ  first  of  all  reconciles  man  to  his  God,  and  then  works  within  him  the 
dispositions  which  lead  him  to  be  reconciled  to  his  fellow-man,  and  to  "  love  him 
with  a  pure  heart  fervently."    The  Gospel  of  Christ  inculcates  those  principles 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it 

of  peace  and  goodwill,  the  recognition  of  which  composes  differences,  soften* 
down  resentments,  inspires  with  forgiving  and  kindly  feelings,  and  prompts  to 
deeds  of  beneficence.  It  is  the  testimony  of  experience,  moreover,  that  nothing 
but  the  Gospel  of  Christ  has  ever  opposed  the  system  of  war,  and  diminished  in 
any  degree  the  amount  of  the  evil  which  it  occasions.  The  ancient  philosophy 
dignified  with  the  name  of  virtues  the  unholy  passions  from  which  it  arose,  and 
the  poets  of  the  olden  times  made  it  the  theme  of  their  highest  admiration,  and 
of  their  sweetest  praise.  The  classical  heathenism  of  Greece  and  of  Rome  had 
its  god  and  goddess  of  war,  and  represented  its  deities  as  mingling  in  the  fray 
and  delighting  in  the  carnage  of  the  battlefield.  But  Jesus  appeared  in  our  world 
as  the  Prince  of  Peace  ;  and  one  of  the  most  delightful  precepts  of  His  meek  and 
gentle  faith  is,  "  Blessed  are  the  peace-makers,  for  they  shall  be  called  the  children 
of  God."  What  was  it  but  the  spirit  of  Christianity  which  put  an  end  to  the  cruel 
gladiatorships  of  the  amphitheatre  of  Rome  ?  What  was  it  but  the  spirit  of 
Christianity  which  subdued  the  fierceness  of  the  Huns,  the  Goths,  and  the  Vandals 
of  former  times,  and  made  so  many  of  them  the  soldiers  of  the  Cross  and  the 
followers  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation?  {W.  M'Kerrow.)  The  cessation 
of  war  an  effect  of  the  prevalence  of  Christianity  : — Notwithstanding  any  accompany- 
ing references,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  take  this  for  a  prediction  of  times  yet  to  come. 
Evidently,  it  has  never  yet  been  fulfilled.  1.  It  is  as  conjoined  with  very  nearly 
the  beginning  of  our  race,  that  we  have  to  look  upon  this  direful  phenomenon. 
But  how  strange,  for  a  creature,  come  fresh,  living,  and  pure,  from  the  beneficent 
Creator's  hands  !  The  least  that  we  can  think  of  that  original  state  of  man  is, 
that  there  must  have  been  in  his  soul  the  principle  of  all  kind  affections, — a 
state  of  feeling  that  would  have  been  struck  with  horror  at  the  thought  of  inflicting 
suffering.  And,  from  the  creature  thus  originally  constituted,  afl  the  race  was 
to  descend.  Can  such  a  nature  ever  rage  with  malignity  and  revenge,  and  riot 
in  suffering  and  destruction  ?  Yet,  in  this  original  family,  in  the  very  first  degree 
of  the  descent,  war  and  slaughter  began.  While  we  think  of  the  deadly  conflicts 
of  those  early  ages,  the  idea  may  occur  to  us  of  the  peculiar  atrocity  of  destroying 
a  life  which  might,  in  the  course  of  nature,  have  lasted  so  long.  Living  beings 
cloven  down  or  mortally  pierced  or  poisoned  or  burnt  that  might  have  lived  seven 
or  eight  centuries,  for  improvement,  for  serving  God,  for  usefulness,  for  whatever 
happiness  there  might  have  been  in  this  world  or  preparation  for  another  J  2.  The 
world  began  anew  in  the  person  and  family  of  a  selected  patriarch,  whom  alone 
"  the  Lord  had  seen  righteous  in  that  generation."  Now,  then,  for  a  better 
race, — if  the  human  nature  were  intrinsically  good,  or  corrigible  by  the  most 
awful  dispensations.  But  all  in  vain !  The  flood  could  not  cleanse  the  nature 
of  man ;  nor  the  awful  memory  and  memorials  of  it  repress  the  coming  forth  of 
selfishness,  pride,  ambition,  anger,  and  revenge.  3.  The  sacred  history,  after 
just  recounting  some  successions  of  names  in  the  different  branches  of  the  new 
race,  limits  its  narrative  to  the  origin  and  progress  of  what  became  the  Jewish 
people — Abraham  and  his  posterity.  Their  history,  however,  in  proceeding 
downward,  involves  much  of  that  of  the  surrounding  nations.  And  some  of 
the  profane  histories  go  far  back  into  the  period  subsequent  to  the  deluge.  And 
what  is  so  conspicuous  over  all  the  view,  as  wars  and  devastations  ?  There  is 
one  portion  of  this  tragical  exhibition  which  we  are  to  take  out  of  the  account 
of  ordinary  war,  namely,  the  war  of  extirpation  against  the  Canaanites.  But, 
setting  this  portion  of  the  history  aside,  think  of  the  long  course  of  sanguinary 
conflicts  within  the  boundary  of  the  selected  nation  itself,  between  Israel  and 
Judah.  Besides  the  slaughters,  of  battle  and  massacre,  within  each  separately, 
of  these  two  divisions  of  that  people,  add,  all  their  wars  with  Syria  and  Egypt, 
with  the  Babylonian,  Grecian,  and  Roman  powers,  closed  finally,  in  that  most 
awful  catastrophe,  the  siege  and  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  4.  Then  glance  a 
moment  over  the  wider  view  of  the  whole  ancient  world ;  as  far  abroad  and  as 
high  up  in  time  as  history  has  made  it  visible.  The  human  race  is  exhibited,  in 
some  regions,  in  the  form  of  numerous  small  states.  But  their  smallness  of 
size  and  strength  was  not  the  measure  of  their  passions.  What  we  are  certain 
to  read  of  them  is,  that  they  attacked  and  fought  one  another  with  the  ferocity 
of  wild  beasts.  By  some  ambitious  "  conquering  hero  "  a  great  number  of  these 
were  subdued  and  moulded  together  into  a  great  kingdom,  on  one  large  space 
of  the  earth,  and  the  same  on  another.  And  then  with  a  tremendous  clash,  these 
empires  came  into  conflict.  5.  But  now  if  we  could  take  one  grand  compass  of 
view  over  the  earth,  and  down  through  time  from  that  period  to  this  1     What  a 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  8S 

vision  of  destruction  !  And  to  complete  the  account — as  if  the  whole  solid 
earth  were  not  wide  enough — the  sea  has  been  coloured  with  blood,  and  received 
into  its  dark  gulf  myriads  of  slain,  as  if  it  could  not  destroy  enough  by  its  tempests 
and  wrecks  !  Reflections — (1)  What  a  state  of  the  spirit  of  mankind,  of  their 
heart  and  intellect  is  here  disclosed  before  us  !  (2)  What  a  state  of  their  social 
constitution,  and  of  their  national  situation,  that  the  mass  and  strength  of  nations 
should,  over  the  greatest  part  of  the  world,  be  at  the  absolute  disposal  of  a  few 
individuals,  for  this  very  business  of  war  !  (3)  What  a  state  of  the  moral  sense, 
that  there  should  be  whole  hosts  of  men,  leaders  and  followers,  capable  of  holding 
themselves  totally  divested  of  all  personal  responsibility  for  right  and  wrong, 
in  the  zealous  prosecution  of  such  achievements  !  (4)  What  a  state  of  Christianity, 
as  to  any  real,  vital  prevalence  of  it  among  the  nations  denominated  Christian  ! 
(John  Foster.)  War : — I.  Somb  op  the  leading  featukes  op  wab,  as 
recorded  in  God's  Word.  1.  The  cause  of  war  (James  iv.  1,  2).  From  this 
passage,  we  see  that  just  as  in  domestic  broils,  just  as  in  strifes  between  sects 
and  parties,  so  in  strifes  between  nation  and  nation — they  all  proceed  from  the 
lusts  of  men,  and  from  that  carnal  mind  which  is  enmity  against  God.  2.  We 
learn  from  God's  Word  that  war  is  a  tremendous  evil.  What  horror  filled  the  soul 
of  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  when  he  heard  the  rumour  of  war — "  My  bowels,  my 
bowels !  I  am  pained  at  my  very  heart ;  my  heart  maketh  a  noise  in  me ;  I 
cannot  hold  my  peace,  because  thou  hast  heard,  O  my  soul,  the  sound  of  the 
trumpet,  the  alarm  of  war "  (Jer.  iv.  19).  See  again  Jeremiah  xlvii.  2,  3, 
how  the  prophet  describes  the  distress  and  anguish  of  the  Philistines  at  the  approach 
of  an  invading  army — an  anguish  so  great  and  so  terrible,  as  to  lead  them  even 
to  forget  the  common  ties  of  humanity.  See  again  Deuteronomy  xxviii.  50,  61, 
how  Moses  speaks  of  the  devastating  force  of  an  invading  army ;  and  Joel  ii.  2, 
where  the  prophet  describes  the  day  of  the  Lord  as  compared  to  an  invading 
army.  3.  God's  Word  shows  us  that  war  is  one  of  God's  scourges,  by  which  He 
punishes  guilty  nations  for  their  wickedness.  In  Ezekiel  xiv.  21,  the  sword 
is  distinctly  spoken  of  as  one  of  God's  four  sore  judgments.  4.  God's  Word  shows 
us  that  it  is  He  alone  who  can  bring  war  to  an  end.  (Psa.  xlvi.  9.)  In  every 
war  God  has  a  special  design  of  His  own  to  fulfil — a  purpose  into  which  the  eye 
of  mortality  can  never  pierce — but  until  that  purpose  is  executed  the  war  can 
never  end.  (Jer.  xlvii.  6,  7. )  5.  God's  Word  shows  that  war  is  to  be  the  imme- 
diate precursor  of  the  terrors  of  the  latter  days.  (Joel  iii.  9,  &c. ;  Matt, 
xxiv.  6.)  6.  God's  Word  declares  that  there  is  a  time  approaching  when  wars 
will  for  ever  cease.     II.   Practical  lessons.     1.  What  is  our  present  duty  T 

2.  The  necessity  of  being  prepared  for  the  things  that  are  coming  upon  the  earth. 

3.  The  awfulness  of  being  overtaken  unprepared.  You  will  be  speechless.  (A.  W. 
Snape,  M.A.)  The  means  by  which  this  prophecy  is  to  be  fulfilled  : — I.  A  proper 
estimate  of  the  miseries  of  war  must  prepare  the  way  for  universal  peace. 
II.  The  dissemination  of  the  Word  of  God.  Nothing  but  the  Word  of 
God  can  effect  the  cure  of  this  moral  distemper — nothing  but  the  Spirit  of  God 
can  subdue  the  native  principles  of  the  heart — nothing  but  the  salvation  of  the 
Gospel  can  remove  the  evil  we  deplore.  There  is  no  other  remedy  can  reach 
the  core  of  the  malady.  III.  The  prayers  of  Christians  must  accompany  the 
other  means  used  for  the  establishment  of  peace.  (J.  Gray,  M.A.)  War  to 
cease : — I.  Human  industry  is  a  feature  in  the  bright  picture  op  future 
happiness.  The  inhabitants  of  the  earth  throughout  the  millennium,  when  the 
globe  is  to  be  covered  with  its  first  beauty,  are  not  to  subsist  without  some  measure 
of  labour.  They  are  to  use  the  ploughshare  and  the  pruninghook ;  and  this  ose 
is  sufficient  to  show  that  the  ground  will  not  then  yield  its  fruits,  except  in  return 
for  the  toil  of  the  husbandman.  It  seems  to  indicate  how  accurately  the  world 
will  be  put  back  into  its  condition  before  defiled  by  sin — that  a  necessity  for 
toiling  should  be  alleged  or  implied ;  though  all  that  is  painful  or  exhausting  in 
labour  must  be  supposed  to  have  ceased.  We  are  greatly  struck  by  the  carefulness 
displayed  throughout  the  Bible,  to  put  honour  on  industry,  and  to  represent 
labour  as  in  the  largest  sense  an  appointment  of  God.  The  too  common  sup- 
position is,  that  labour  was  a  curse  which  disobedience  provoked,  whereas  labour 
was  appointed  unto  man  while  yet  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  favour  of  his  God* 
We  are  so  constituted,  that  labour  is  indispensable  to  our  happiness,  to  the 
strengthening  of  our  faculties,  and  to  the  preservation  of  a  wholesome  tone  in 
our  spirits.  We  know  not  whether  the  going  to  the  armouries,  and  ransacking 
them  for  the  materials  of  the  implements  of  agriculture,  may  not  mark  such  an 


66  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

increase  in  the  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  as  would  require  continued 
effort  on  the  part  of  the  husbandman  to  keep  pace  with  the  growing  demand,  so 
that  ploughshares  and  pruninghooks  are  not  furnished  fast  enough,  and  swords 
and  spears  must  be  made  to  do  their  office.  But  we  now  proceed  to  consider  what 
seems  given  as  the  reason  for  this  conversion  of  the  instruments  of  war  into 
the  implements  of  husbandry.  IT.  There  will  certainly  be  no  further 
use  fob  thb  abms  op  was — "  Nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation, 
neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  more."  It  is  Isaiah's  assertion,  that  the 
cessation  of  war  is  to  result  from  the  general  diffusion  of  Christian  principles. 
And  there  is  no  difficulty  in  tracing  the  necessary  connection  between  the 
sovereignty  of  Christ  and  the  extinction  of  war ;  for  the  tendency  of  the  religion 
of  Jesus  is  to  bind  the  whole  world  in  brotherhood.  III.  Wab  shall  not  only 
obasb  as  an  employment,  but  also  as  A  sciencb — "  Neither  shall  they  learn 
war  any  more."  They  shall  not  only  enjoy  the  liberty  of  peace — for  peace  may 
be,  and  too  commonly  is  a  season  in  which  war  is  studied,  and  preparations  are 
made  for  future  battles ;  they  shall  be  so  secure  of  peace  being  permanent,  that 
the  arts  of  attack  and  defence  will  fall  into  oblivion,  and  the  whole  array  of 
military  tactics  pass  from  the  world  like  the  science  of  the  necromancer,  or  any 
other  exploded  and  reprobated  study.  We  find  no  hint  in  Scripture,  but  alto- 
gether the  reverse,  that  the  profession  of  a  soldier  cannot  harmonise  with  godliness. 
The  angel  sent  to  the  Roman  centurion  bore  no  message  as  to  the  unlawfulness 
of  his  calling.  But  these  admissions  are  quite  in  harmony  with  what  we  have 
stated  as  to  the  condemnation  of  war,  which  is  wound  up  in  the  sentence  that  war 
is  a  science.  That  men  should  not  merely  have  been  roused  by  sudden  passion 
into  the  doing  violence  to  one  another,  but  that  they  should  actually  have  studied 
how  best  to  effect  the  butchery  of  thousands,  having  their  schools  and  establish- 
ments in  which  numbers  may  be  trained  in  the  art  of  destruction — this,  of  itself, 
presents  such  a  picture  of  human  depravity  as  would  serve  for  the  painter  who 
might  desire  to  exhibit  it  in  the  darkest  possible  colours.  There  is  a  great  dif- 
ference between  a  prophecy  which  should  assert  the  termination  of  war  as  an 
employment,  and  another  which  affirms  its  termination  as  a  science ;  since  the 
former  might  only  show  the  existence  of  a  restraining  power,  whereas  the  latter 
indicates  such  a  forgetfulness  or  renunciation  of  everything  military  as  requires 
the  supposing  the  human  race  universally  changed,  and  all  the  elements  of  discord 
eradicated  from  every  bosom.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  WiUiam  Penn : — The 
King  of  England  strongly  urged  William  Penn  (the  founder  of  Pennsylvania), 
ont  of  the  king's  great  respect  for  his  father,  Admiral  Penn,  as  he  was  going  out 
with  many  followers  amongst  known  savages,  to  take  out  with  him  sufficient 
troops  which  should  be  placed  at  his  service.  It  was  averred  that  William  Penn 
and  his  followers  would  speedily  be  placed  in  the  war-kettle  of  the  untutored 
Indians,  if  he  did  not  go  out  well  armed  to  protect  himself  and  his  large  colony. 
In  the  spirit  of  his  Master,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  he  declined  to  take  any  soldiers ; 
he  went  open-handed  and  unarmed  to  the  red-men  !  When  the  Council  of  State 
was  held,  the  red-men  believed  in  William  Penn's  professions  of  amity,  and  they 
always  thereafter  lived  in  peace !  When  the  Indians  disagreed  amongst  their 
several  tribes  they  frequently  took  their  differences  to  be  settled  "  justly  "  by 
William  Penn,  or  their  "  Father  Onas,"  as  they  became  accustomed  to  call  him. 
(James  Withers.)  War  sometimes  justifiable  : — A  war  undertaken  in  self-defence 
is  natural  and  right,  and  under  the  rights  of  self-defence  must  be  included  the 
protection  of  our  countrymen  in  distant  lands  and  of  our  interests  in  the  future 
as  well  as  in  the  present.  It  must  be  carried  on  with  a  serious  mind,  with  a 
consistent  purpose,  and  not  without  the  hope  of  benefiting  other  nations  as 
well  as  ourselves  ;  it  can  only  be  justified  by  the  event  whether  it  leaves  the 
world  better  off  than  it  found  it.  There  are  many  evils  for  which  war  provides 
the  only  remedy,  and  we  cannot  say  that  centuries  of  oppression  are  better  than 
a  struggle  for  independence.  The  religion  of  Christ  gives  no  sanction  or  encour- 
agement to  war.  The  conscience  of  mankind  acknowledges  that  while  wars 
continue  there  is  something  not  altogether  right  in  the  world  ;  and  yet  under 
given  circumstances  it  may  be  the  duty  of  a  nation  to  strike  the  blow  ;  the  greatest 
safety  may  be  the  willingness  to  meet  the  greatest  danger.  (Prof.  B.  Jowett,  D.D.) 
The  evils  of  war — loss  of  life  : — -What  a  fearful  loss  of  human  life  it  entails  !  It  is 
computed  that  Alexander  and  Caesar  caused,  each  of  them,  the  death  of  two 
millions  of  the  human  race.  Bonaparte's  campaign  in  Russia  carried  death  to 
five  hundred  thousand  human  beings,  and  in  the  vast  majority  of  that  number 


chap.  II.]  ISAIAH.  67 

death  was  accompanied  by  the  most  awful  sufferings.  At  Borodino  in  one  day 
eighty  thousand  were  sacrificed  amid  the  most  horrid  cruelties.  The  next  day 
it  was  found  that  a  surface  of  about  nine  squares  miles  was  covered  with  the 
killed  and  wounded ;  the  latter  lying  one  upon  another,  destitute  of  assistance, 
weltering  in  their  blood,  uttering  fearful  groans,  and  beseeching  any  who  passed 
by  to  put  an  end  to  their  excruciating  torments.  During  the  burning  of  Moscow, 
twelve  thousand  wounded  were  in  the  hospitals ;  and  almost  all  perished  in  the 
flames.  No  tongue  or  pen  can  describe  the  horrors  of  the  retreat.  "  Multitudes 
of  these  desolate  fugitives,"  says  Sir  R.  K.  Porter,  in  his  Narrative  of  the  Cam- 
paign in  Russia,  "  lost  their  speech,  others  were  seized  with  frenzy,  and  many 
were  so  maddened  by  the  extremes  of  pain  and  hunger  that  they  tore  the  dead 
bodies  of  their  comrades  into  pieces,  and  feasted  on  the  remains."  The  last 
Russian  war  cost  this  country  a  hundred  thousand  human  lives.  Hundreds  of 
thousands  fell  victims  during  the  Franco-German  war.  In  one  sortie  from  Metz 
four  hundred  wives  were  made  widows,  and  upwards  of  a  thousand  children 
fatherless,  out  of  a  single  Prussian  regiment  in  the  course  of  an  hour.  What 
barbarities  are  practised  !  What  disastrous  results  follow !  What  desolation 
to  fertile  and  flourishing  districts  of  country  I  What  a  blight  shed  on  commerce ! 
What  an  increase  of  taxation !  What  corruption  to  public  morals !  It  is  im- 
possible to  exaggerate,  in  conception  or  statement,  the  evils  of  war.  (W.  Walters.) 
The  enormous  cost  of  war : — When  Napoleon's  army  marched  up  towards  Moscow, 
they  burned  every  house  for  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles.  Our  Revolutionary 
war  cost  the  English  Government  six  hundred  and  eighty  millions  of  dollars.  The 
wars  growing  out  of  the  French  Revolution  cost  England  three  thousand  millions 
of  dollars.  Christendom — or,  as  I  might  mispronounce  it  in  order  to  make  the 
fact  more  appalling,  Chris t-en-dom — has  paid  in  twenty-two  years  fifteen  thousand 
million  dollars  for  battle.  Those  were  the  twenty-two  years,  I  think,  ending 
in  1820  or  thereabout.  Edmund  Burke  estimated  that  the  nations  of  this  world 
had  expended  thirty-five  thousand  million  dollars  in  war  ;  but  he  did  his  ciphering 
before  our  great  American  and  European  wars  were  plunged.  He  never  dreamed 
that  in  this  land,  in  the  latter  part  of  this  century,  in  four  years,  we  should 
expend  in  battle  three  thousand  million  dollars.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 
Enormous  sacrifice  of  human  life  through  war : — In  one  battle,  under  Julius 
Caesar,  four  hundred  thousand  fell.  Under  Xerxes,  in  one  campaign,  five  millions 
were  slain.  Under  Jengispham,  at  Herat,  one  million  six  hundred  thousand 
were  slain.  At  Nishar,  one  million  seven  hundred  and  forty-seven  thousand 
were  slain.  At  the  siege  of  Ostend,  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand.  At 
Acre  three  hundred  thousand.  At  the  siege  of  Troy,  one  million  eight  hundred 
and  sixteen  thousand  fell.  The  Tartar  and  African  wars  cost  one  hundred  and 
eighty  million  lives.  The  wars  against  the  Turks  and  the  Saracens  cost  one 
hundred  and  eighty  million  lives.  Added  to  all  these,  the  million  who  fell  in  our 
own  conflict.  Then  take  the  fact  that  thirty-five  times  the  present  population  of 
the  earth  have  fallen  in  battle.  (Ibid.)  The  greatest  peace  can  only  be  secured 
by  the  entire  extinction,  as  speedily  as  possible,  of  the  false  Gospels  of  Materialism 
and  Force.  Empires  built  on  Force  have  never  persisted.  Military  kingdoms 
must  pass  away.  No  nation  was  ever  more  military  than  Rome ;  it  was  armed 
from  head  to  foot ;  it  was  a  great  fighting  empire,  and  though  it  lasted  long  it 
had  to  go.  The  seven  Oriental  empires  that  preceded  Rome  were  military ; 
they,  too,  have  disappeared.  Permanence  of  empire  depends  on  peace,  social 
justice,  liberty,  and  brotherhood.  (J.  Clifford,  D.D.)  Christian  soldier  and 
war : — There  is  no  reason  why  a  Christian  soldier  should  not  as  vehemently  de- 
nounce war  as  a  medical  man  attacks  disease,  as  a  minister  does  sin.  Success 
would  mean  in  either  case  an  end  of  their  work,  but  that  in  either  case  were  a 
consummation  devoutly  to  be  wished.  The  sooner  the  profession  of  arms  becomes 
unnecessary  and  impossible,  the  better  for  everybody.     (H.  P.  Hughes,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  0  house  of  Jacob,  come  ye,  and  let  us  walk  In  the  light  of  the  Lord. — 
Mutual  encouragement : — I.  Sympathetic  fellow  -  feeleng.  All  who  are 
anxious  for  their  own  welfare,  desire  the  welfare  of  others.  IL  Mutual  fbogbess. 
Two  together  are  stronger  than  two  apart.  "  Let  us."  A  weak  brother  at  our 
side  will  not  only  get  help  but  will  afford  us  assistance.  HI.  Apfeeciattvb 
knowledge.  "  Let  us  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord."  The  light  is  the  place 
for  safety.  Light  is  life,  darkness  is  death.  IV.  Unfailing  provision.  The 
light  of  the  Lord."    God  is  the  only  source  of  light,  but  He  is  an  all-efficient 


C8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

source.  He  never  can  fail.  God  is  light.  (HomilisL)  An  invitation  to 
repentance  : — I.  This  is  Isaiah's  invitation  to  his  countrymen  to  repent. 
To  feel  the  full  force  of  his  appeal  we  must  notice  the  connection  of  the  text  with 
its  context.  1.  The  prophet  commences  by  quoting  (vers.  2-4)  what  is  probably 
an  ancient  prediction,  quoted  also  by  Micah  (iv.  1-3).  The  people  would  doubt- 
less look  eagerly  for  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  so  agreeable  to  their  national 
hopes.  But  no  sign  of  its  accomplishment  was  to  be  seen.  They  were  indeed 
enjoying  in  the  reign  of  Uzziah  a  season  of  secular  prosperity,  but  they  were 
far  from  being  "  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains  " ;  they  were  sur- 
rounded by  watchful  foes,  and  certainly  there  were  no  signs  of  the  long  foretold 
reign  of  peace.  2.  The  light  of  worldly  prosperity  had  not  brought  them  the 
fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  peace.  Isaiah  then  bids  them  "  walk  in  the  light 
of  the  Lord  " ;  for,  as  he  goes  on  to  show,  God  had  forsaken  His  people  on  account 
of  those  sins  which  their  prosperity  had  engendered.  Therefore  it  was  that  this 
prophecy  was  not  fulfilled  to  them.  Th  ir  very  prosperity  kept  them  back  from 
greater  prosperity  (vers.  6-9).  3.  But  this  state  of  things  could  not  continue.  If 
they  refuse  to  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,  He  will  not  only  withdraw  the  promised 
blessings,  but  will  humble  them  by  taking  away  the  prosperity  they  already 
enjoyed  (vers.  10-21).  II.  The  situation  of  the  Church  of  God  thus  de- 
scribed by  Isaiah  remains  almost  unchanged  to  the  present  day.  1.  We 
still  look  for  the  time  when  "  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  estab- 
lished in  the  top  of  the  mountains,"  and  the  promised  "  peace  on  earth  "  shall 
be  realised ;  but  we  see  no  sign  of  its  immediate  approach.  The  Church  still 
continues  beset  with  foes,  unable  to  stem  the  rising  tide  of  rationalism  and 
unbelief ;  and  certainly  these  are  no  signs  of  the  long-foretold  reign  of  peace. 
2.  If  we  inquire  why  this  is  so,  the  answer  is  the  same  as  it  was  in  the  days  of 
Isaiah.  We  do  not,  with  a  single  eye,  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord.  We  enjoy 
a  large  measure  of  worldly  prosperity.  Science  and  secular  knowledge  and 
useful  arts  make  rapid  progress,  and  in  their  light  we  walk,  too  often  forgetting 
that  it  is  but  a  reflected  radiance,  borrowed  from  the  one  source  of  all  true  light. 
If  the  Church  makes  some  impression  upon  the  world,  the  world  also  makes  great 
inroads  upon  the  Church.  3.  But  this  state  of  things  cannot  last  for  ever. 
Isaiah  of  old  spake  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  which  would  surely  overtake  His 
people  if  they  continued  to  follow  their  own  inventions  and  to  neglect  God.  A 
yet  greater  and  more  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand.  In  that  day  all  tht 
pride  of  our  modern  civilisation,  its  wisdom  and  knowledge,  will  aid  us  no  more 
than  the  idols  of  silver  and  gold,  unless  withal  we  are  found  walking  in  the  light 
of  the  Lord.  (A.  K.  CherrU,  M.A.)  Walking  in  the  light  of  the  Lord: — To 
"  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord  "  implies — I.  That  we  avail  ourselves  of  His 
revelation  of  truth.  II.  That  we  order  the  course  of  our  lives  accord- 
ino  to  His  example  and  the  guidance  of  His  Word  and  Spirit  (Jer.  x.  23). 
III.  Progress.  It  supposes  that  we  leave  behind  our  former  darkness  and  sin,  our 
slothf  ulness  and  error,  and  march  every  day  some  distance  on  our  road  to  eternal 
life.  IV.  Light  inspires  cheerfuuiess  and  joy  ;  and  if  we  "  walk  in  the  light 
of  the  Lord,"  we  must  have  the  only  true  happiness  and  peace.  The  truth  of  the 
Gospel  is  enough  to  cause  constant  exultation.  (HomUist.)  Walking  in  the 
light  of  the  Lord : — L  The  import  of  the  words,  "  the  light  of  the  Lord."  There 
appears  here  to  be  an  allusion  to  that  striking  token  of  special  guardianship 
which  was  vouchsafed  to  the  Israelites  in  the  Shechinah  as  it  appeared  to  the 
Church  in  the  wilderness ;  which,  while  it  was  the  recognised  token  of  special 
favour  from  God,  indicated  also  their  course  of  movement.  The  expression 
"  to  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,"  we  regard — 1.  As  indicative  of  a  cordial  recep- 
tion of  His  truth.  Light  is  the  general  emblem  of  knowledge ;  and  there  are 
many  striking  points  of  analogy  between  religious  knowledge  and  light.  The 
phrase  is  applicable  to  the  whole  body  of  Divine  revelation,  which  may  be 
viewed  as  the  light  of  God,  that  breaks  forth,  as  it  were,  from  His  countenance : 
His  countenance,  which  is  the  emblem  of  His  immaculate  purity,  as  well  as  His 
infinite  intelligence.  He  is  said  "  to  dwell  in  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach 
unto."  And  this  is  also  significant  of  the  glory  of  revealed  truth — it  is  the  very 
light  in  which  the  perfections  of  God  stand  manifested ;  the  light  that  develops 
to  us  His  secret  counsels,  His  plans  of  government,  especially  His  plan  of  saving 
mercy ;  the  light,  in  allusion  to  which  the  prophet  elsewhere  speaks  when  he 
says,  "  Arise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  come,"  &c.  (1)  This  expression  is  applicable 
to  the  law — that  law  which  embodied  the  principles  of  the  truth,  indeed  the  only 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  69 

authenticated  truth  which  then  existed  in  the  world.  It  was  the  purpose  of 
God  that  His  Church  should  walk  in  this  light  under  that  preparatory  dispensa- 
tion ;  that  the  Church  should  travel  onward  to  me  t  the  superior  splendours 
of  the  Gospel  dispensation,  the  dispensation  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  (2)  To 
the  Gospel,  especially,  the  expression  "  the  light  of  the  Lord  "  is  exceedingly 
applicable.  This  is  that  great  light  which  shines  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness 
of  the  world.  This  is  the  glory  of  the  Lord  which  is  "revealed."  And  this  Gospel 
also  threw  its  light  on  the  future ;  it  abolished  death ;  it  proclaimed  a  resur- 
rection. The  Gospel  showed,  also,  the  principles  on  which  God  governs  the 
world,  both  moral  and  providential ;  that  the  whole  world  is  under  mediatorial 
government ;  and  that  everything  is  moved  for  religious  purposes — to  support 
the  Church,  to  diffuse  the  truth.  To  "  walk,"  then,  "  hi  the  light  of  the  Lord  " 
with  respect  to  the  Jews,  was  to  retain  the  faith  which  had  been  handed  down 
to  the  Church ;  to  retain  it  free  from  all  Gentile  delusion,  from  all  pagan  inter- 
mixture, from  all  rabbinical  subtleties.  2.  To  "  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord," 
seems  to  imply  the  full  reception  of  all  the  blessings  which  the  light  revealed. 
And  there  is  this  idea  suggested  in  this  view  of  the  phrase,  "  the  light  of  the 
Lord,"  that  there  is  an  inseparable  connection  between  the  truth  of  God  and 
the  favour  of  God.  Whilst  the  truth  creates  piety,  the  piety  of  the  Church  is  to 
react  on  the  Church  and  preserve  it  from  decline.  3.  To  '  walk  in  the  light  of 
the  Lord  "  implies  the  zealous  prosecution  of  all  those  duties  which  the  light 
unfolds.  (1)  It  seems  to  imply  that  the  Church  is  bound  to  avow  herself,  not  to 
put  her  light  under  a  bushel.  (2)  Also  that  there  is  to  be  an  aggressive  spirit  in 
the  Church,  arising  from  those  views  of  evil  which  the  light  will  give,  and  which 
while  they  concern  the  purity  of  the  Church,  are  thrown  on  the  mass  of  darkness 
which  surrounds  the  Church.  (3)  To  "  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,"  is  to  direct 
the  spirit  of  enterprise  in  the  Church.  The  ancient  Church  itself  had  an  office 
to  perform  to  the  world.  That  Church  had  to  preserve  the  primitive  theology, 
to  protest  against  the  corruptions  of  paganism :  to  show,  in  the  connection  of 
religion  with  public  as  well  as  personal  happiness,  the  folly  of  Gentile  paganism, 
ana  to  show  the  absolute  necessity  of  submission  to  the  spiritual  government 
of  Almighty  God.  (Ver.  3.)  The  Church  in  her  purest  ages  walked  in  this  light 
of  evangelical  enterprise ;  and  her  achievements  were  noble — in  beneficence 
most  splendid,  in  its  results  the  most  excellent  of  the  world.  And  there  are 
in  modern  times  the  same  decisive  evidences  of  the  Divine  will  as  it  respects  the 
Church.  4.  To  "  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord  "  is  to  walk  in  the  calm  contem- 
plation of  the  final  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  II.  The  motives  or  principles 
which  enforce  this  exhortation.  1.  There  is  moral  obligation,  for  what  is 
moral  obligation  but  submission  to  the  will  of  God — and  to  Him  who  is  the 
Sovereign,  we  being  the  subjects  ?  Therefore  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  submit 
to,  and  to  recognise  His  will,  to  love  His  law,  to  mark  His  rule,  and  to  feel  all 
the  force  of  the  sanctions  appended  to  that  rule.  This  may  be  very  appropriately 
illustrated  by  the  very  phrase  itself:  it  is  "the  light  of  the  Lord" — the  light 
of  Jehovah,  sovereign  light ;  the  light  dispensed  by  Him  for  special  purposes  ; 
and  the  natural  light  does  not  more  clearly  indicate  its  office  than  the  moral 
light  indicates  the  special  intentions  of  the  God  of  heaven.  This  light  is  given 
for  a  special  purpose ;  it  is  directing  light ;  and  saving  light ;  it  regulates  the 
degree  of  personal  as  well  as  collective  responsibility.  2.  Then  there  is  also 
obligation  specially  induced  by  conviction  of  privilege.  Privilege  exists  wherever 
light  exists.  There  was  nothing  in  the  Jewish  Church  which  bore  any  comparison 
to  the  gift  of  religious  truth  to  that  nation.  Any  nation  that  has  the  light  of 
the  Lord  and  the  ability  to  use  it,  is  signally  privileged,  and  attains  the  very 
altitude  of  human  glory.  All  this  is  not  given  us  for  vain  glory  ;  it  is  conferred 
that  we  might  preach  Christ  and  bring  the  world  under  His  government.  3.  The 
blessings  attendant  on  walking  in  the  light  of  the  Lord.  There  is  personal  salva- 
tion, for  instance,  diffused  to  the  very  greatest  possible  extent.  Then,  if  you 
look  at  the  subject  simply  in  reference  to  Churches,  there  is  a  very  powerful 
motive  ;  for,  to  "  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord  "  is  the  sole  condition  for  retaining 
the  light.  (G.  Steward.)  Walk  in  the  light  .-—From  looking  into  the  future 
Isaiah  comes  back  to  his  work  of  trying  to  amend  the  present.  He  neither  wastes 
time  in  singing  funereal  dirges  over  Israel's  decay,  nor  spends  his  life  in  useless 
reveries  about  the  future.  He  saw  the  sad  present,  and  wept ;  he  saw  the  bright 
future,  and  rejoiced ;  and  then  set  to  work  with  heart  and  tongue  to  arouse  the 
nation,  crying,  "  O  house  of  Jacob,"  &c.    So  let  us  all  act.     I.  The  secret  cause 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

op  this  people's  gxtilt — moral  and  spiritual  gloom.  By  implication,  at  least, 
we  learn  from  this  text  that  moral  darkness  is  the  fruitful  mother  of  every  species 
of  iniquity.  One  master-stroke  of  Paul's  pen  gives  the  secret  of  the  sins  of  Rome 
in  his  day — "  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened."  "  The  way  of  the  wicked," 
says  Solomon,  "  is  as  darkness."  1.  Let  us  dwell  upon  the  natural  darkness 
of  men.  (1)  Observe  that  sin  blinds  men  as  to  its  own  nature.  Its  solicitations 
to  our  first  parents  were  such  as  to  hide  from  their  innocent,  unsuspecting  minds 
all  knowledge  of  its  own  hideous  features ;  and  not  until  it  was  too  late  did  they 
know  what  an  evil  and  bitter  thing  it  was  to  sin  against  the  Lord.  Not  till  sin 
has  done  its  work  does  it  allow  itself  to  be  seen  and  known.  It  is  in  the  mouth 
honey,  but  when  eaten  a  deadly  poison.  It  changes  its  shape  like  Proteus,  and 
its  colours  like  the  chameleon.  It  has  the  fascinating  voice  of  a  siren,  luring 
to  destruction.  (2)  Sin  also  deceives  men  as  to  their  own  moral  condition. 
(Isa.  v.  20.)  (3)  Sin,  moreover,  hides  from  man  the  deep  spirituality  of  the 
Divine  law.  He  is  in  the  dark  as  to  its  inner  meaning  and  far-reaching  influence. 
If  he  observes  the  letter  of  the  law  he  thinks  he  has  done  well.  He  altogether 
overlooks  the  fact  that  "  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend 
in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all."  (4)  Sin  also  darkens  the  mind  and  heart  of 
man  as  to  the  Divine  character.  This  must  be  so,  because  it  is  only  the  pure 
in  heart  who  can  see  God.  2.  This  darkness  is  wilfully  and  wickedly  incurred. 
If  the  "  house  of  Jacob  "  were  ignorant  of  the  character  of  God,  this  was  their 
own  fault,  for  God  had  revealed  Himself  in  manifold  and  marvellous  ways.  And 
if  they  had  sufficient  light  who  dwelt  in  the  dim  dawn  of  revelation,  what  shall 
be  said  of  us  who  have  the  accumulated  light  of  intervening  centuries  ?  II.  We 
have  the  one  remedy  declared.  "  Walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord."  Like 
all  Divine  remedies  it  is  striking  in  its  simplicity.  1.  Get  into  the  light.  Con- 
version is  the  passing  of  the  soul  "  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light." 
What  is  this  light  ?  (1)  The  people  to  whom  this  exhortation  was  first  addressed 
would,  I  think,  understand  by  it  the  light  of  the  Divine  Word.  To  Israel  the 
words  of  the  prophet  meant,  Study  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  so  come  into  the 
light  of  that  law."  To  us  they  mean,  "  Search  the  Scriptures,"  and  so  come 
into  the  light  of  Divine  truth.  Bible-reading  of  itself  will  not  save,  but  it  reveals 
the  Saviour  who  can  and  will.  (2)  Isaiah  also  meant  by  this  exhortation  that 
they  should  get  into  the  light  of  communion  with  God.  They  had  sought  fellow- 
ship with  idols,  but  now  Isaiah  calls  them  to  return  to  fellowship  with  Jehovah. 
Every  blessing  is  born  of  communion.  The  diamond  which  sparkles  and  flashes 
out  rays  of  light  was  once  but  a  piece  of  black  coal.  It  had  no  inherent  light. 
It  is  as  if  by  some  mysterious  process  the  light  has  become  absorbed  until  it  has 
transformed  that  black  substance  into  the  likeness  of  its  own  essence.  Thus 
the  nature  of  the  sinner,  black  and  dark  through  sin,  becomes,  in  communion 
with  the  eternal,  pure  and  beautiful  with  the  light  of  God.  2.  Make  progress 
in  the  light.  "  Walk  in  the  light."  Both  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  speak 
of  the  daily  life  of  the  godly  man  as  a  walk,  suggesting  that  it  is  to  be  a  progressive 
life.  3.  Associate  with  the  children  of  light.  "  Let  us  walk  in  the  light  of  the 
Lord,"  says  Isaiah.  He  will  not  walk  in  the  light  alone,  but  will  seek  the  com- 
pany  of  those  like-minded  with  himself.  He  will  use  his  influence  to  induce 
others  to  walk  in  the  light  with  him.  (W.  Williams.)  The  gentle  strength 
of  light : — I  have  seen  the  sun  with  a  little  ray  of  distant  light  challenge  all  the 
powers  of  darkness,  and  without  violence  and  noise,  climbing  up  the  hill,  hath 
made  night  so  retire  that  its  memory  was  lost  in  the  joys  and  sprightliness  of 
the  morning.  If  physical  light  hath  such  gentle  strength,  how  much  more  hath 
spiritual.  {Bp.  Taylor.)  Walking  in  the  light  ensures  ever -increasing  revela- 
tion : — That  is  the  only  preparation  for  further  revelation.  Walking  in  the 
light,  we  shall  receive  increase  of  illumination ;  thankful  for  the  morning  dawn, 
we  shall  see  the  noontide  splendour ;  faithful  in  a  little,  we  shall  be  entrusted 
with  much  ;  honest  children  of  the  twilight,  we  shall  yet  see  things  in  their 
largest  and  grandest  reality.  If  we  do  the  will,  we  shall  know  the  doctrine. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Nations  prosper  as  they  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord  : — There 
is  inscribed  upon  the  pedestal  of  the  statue  of  Samuel  Morley,  late  M.P.  for 
Bristol,  this  sentence,  quoted  from  a  speech  of  his,  that  tallies  with  the  experi- 
ence of  every  country,  ancient  or  modern:  "  I  believe  that  the  power  of  England 
is  to  be  reckoned,  not  by  her  wealth  or  armies,  but  the  purity  and  virtue  of  the 
great  mass  of  her  population."  (F.  Sessions.)  National  religion: — Religious 
ideas  alone  have  power  to  transform  a  nation's  tendencies  and  actions.     The 


■chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  71 

religious  idea  is  the  very  breath  of  humanity, — its  life,  soul,  conscience,  and 
manifestation.  (Mazzini.)  The  light  cure : — Lately  we  have  discovered 
a  new  method  by  which  a  terrible  disease  can  be  cured.  It  is  called  the  light 
method,  and  the  cure  is  wrought  by  concentrating  upon  the  scarred  and  diseased 
form  a  powerful  and  peculiar  light.  The  effect  of  the  light  is  so  great  that  in 
time  the  disease  is  arrested  and  the  skin  becomes  healthy  and  natural.  {Sunday 
School  Chronicle.)  Best  things  seen  in  God's  light : — Dr.  Charles  Berry  said, 
in  the  last  pastoral  letter  he  wrote,  "  There  are  some  things — the  best  things — ■ 
that  can  only  be  seen  when  the  lights  of  life  are  turned  low,  and  the  light  of  God 
is  left  to  shine  alone."  The  limitations  of  earthly  light : — Clear  and  brilliant 
light  often  brings  out  exquisite  colours,  as  happens  among  the  Alps  and  also  in 
the  north  frigid  zone,  where  the  humble  little  plants  called  lichens  and  mosse9 
are  in  many  cases  dyed  of  the  most  brilliant  hues,  purple  and  gold  predominating. 
Warmth,  in  like  manner,  will  stimulate  vegetable  growth  in  the  most  astonishing 
manner,  but  it  is  growth  not  necessarily  accompanied  by  the  secretion  of  valuable 
substances,  such  as  give  quality  and  real  importance  to  the  plant.  In  English 
hot-houses,  for  example,  we  have  plenty  of  spice-trees,  those  generous  plants  that 
yield  cinnamon  and  cassia,  the  nutmeg  and  the  clove ;  but  although  healthy  and 
blossoming  freely,  they  never  mature  their  aromatic  secretions.  Though  they 
have  artificial  heat  equal  to  that  of  their  native  islands,  which  burn  beneath  the 
sun  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  we  cannot  supply  them  with  similar  and  proportionate 
eolar  light.  Our  cloudy  skies  shut  us  in  from  the  full  and  direct  radiance  of  the 
sunshine,  and  wanting  this,  heat  alone  will  not  avail.  (Scientific  Illustrations  and 
Symbols.) 

Vers.  ft-9.  Therefore  Thou  hast  forsaken  Thy  people. — God  never  forsakes 
without  good  reason : — "  Therefore  Thou  hast  forsaken  Thy  people."  The 
term  is  logical.  God  never  forsakes  His  people  in  any  whimsical  way: 
He  is  not  a  man,  or  a  son  of  man,  that  He  should  treat  His  creatures 
arbitrarily,  moodily, — now  full  of  sunshine  in  relation  to  them,  and  now  covered 
with  great  clouds,  without  giving  any  reason  for  the  change.  It  is  a  most  notice- 
able feature  in  Biblical  revelation  that  when  God  forsakes  men  He  gives  the 
reason  for  abandoning  them.  The  reason  is  always  moral.  God  never  leave3 
man  because  he  is  little,  or  weak,  or  self-distrustful,  or  friendless,  or  homeless, 
or  broken-hearted ;  when  God  forsakes  man  it  is  because  man  has  first  forsaken 
Him,  broken  His  laws,  defied  His  sword,  challenged  His  judgment,  forsaken 
with  ungrateful  abandonment  the  altar  at  which  the  life  has  received  its  richest 
blessing.  So,  never  let  us  neglect  the  word  "  therefore  "  in  reading  concerning 
Divine  judgments.  God  will  never  forsake  the  life  that  trusts  Him.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  A  forsaken  people  : — Read  :  "  for  Thou  hast  cast  off  .  .  .  they  strike 
hands  "  (make  alliances)  "  with  the  children  of  strangers."  (.4.  B.  Davidson, 
LL.D.)  God  claims  the  sole  sovereignty  of  the  life  : — When  we  are  forsaken 
it  is  because  we  have  forsaken  God.  Is  God  to  be  the  companion  of  idols  ?  Is 
the  Lord  to  be  invited  into  darkened  rooms,  that  He  may  be  one  of  the  deities 
of  the  universe,  and  take  His  place  in  order  of  seniority  or  of  nominal  superiority  T 
Is  He  to  be  invited  to  compete  with  the  fancies  of  the  human  brain  for  the 
sovereignty  of  human  mind  and  the  arbitrament  of  human  destiny  ?  Herein 
He  is  a  jealous  God.  "  The  Lord  alone  shall  be  exalted  in  that  day."  If 
we  make  gods  we  must  be  content  with  the  manufactures  which  we  produce ; 
but  we  never  can  persuade  the  eternal  God  to  sit  down  with  our  wooden  deities, 
and  hold  counsel  with  the  inventions  and  fictions  of  a  diseased  imagination. 
"  Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve."  "  If  Baal  be  God,  serve  him ;  if 
the  Lord,  serve  Him."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  God  had  forsaken  them  as  their 
Father  and  Friend,  but  He  comes  to  call  them  to  account  as  their  Judge.  (Sir 
E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  A  sad  sequence  :  money  leading  to  idolatry : — Observe 
how  the  sequence  runs :  money  in  abundance :  money  will  buy  horses,  and 
horses  stand  for  power :  horses  will  need  chariots,  and  chariots  mean  dash,  speed, 
ostentation — money,  horses,  chariots,  can  men  end  there  T  They  cannot ;  and 
given  money,  horses,  chariots,  without  a  corresponding  sanctification,  without 
the  inworking  of  that  spirit  of  self-control  which  expresses  the  action  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  yon  compel  men  to  go  farther  and  to  fill  their  land  with  idols.  The 
sequence  cannot  be  broken.  Men  may  have  money,  horses,  chariots,  and  the 
true  God ;  but  when  men  have  money,  horses,  chariots,  and  no  god  that  is  true, 
they  will  make  goda  for  themselves,  for  they  must  eke  out  their  ostentation  by 


72  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

some  sort  of  nominal  piety.  («7.  Parker,  D.D.)  Spiritual  idolatry : — Men 
will  build  churches ;  men  must  have  religious  rites  and  ceremonies ;  and  what 
can  suit  the  worldly  man  better  than  an  idol  that  takes  no  notice  of  him,  a 
wooden  deity  that  never  troubles  him  with  its  disciplinary  obligations  ?  (Ibid.) 
An  honoured  yet  God-forsaken  people  : — I.  The  house  of  Jacob  is  here  honoured 
with  the  character  of  the  people  op  God.  They  were  His  in  a  special  manner, 
in  consequence  of  His  choosing  them  for  His  peculiar  people;  redeeming  them 
with  a  strong  hand  and  stretched  out  arm ;  and  entering  into  covenant  with 
them,  so  that  they  became  His  property,  were  called  by  His  name,  and  professedly 
devoted  to  His  service.  II.  Notwithstanding  this  intimate  connection,  God 
had  foksaken  them.  He  took  off  the  restraining  influence  of  His  pro- 
vidence, whereby  He  prevented  their  enemies  from  executing  their  destruc- 
tion ;  He  removed  the  hedge  of  His  kind  protection,  by  which  they  enjoyed  the 
most  agreeable  safety.  He  withheld  from  them  His  gracious  direction,  which 
had  attended  them  in  all  their  fortunes.  The  Most  High  hid  counsel  from  them, 
so  that  they  groped  at  noon  day.  He  withdrew  from  them  His  Divine  favour, 
which  had  long  compassed  them  as  a  shield ;  He  denied  them  His  gracious 
presence  and  Holy  Spirit,  which  was  the  beauty  and  glory  of  their  assemblies, 
having  in  reserve  for  them  the  most  awful  temporal  calamities.     (R.  Macculloch.) 

Ver.  7.    Their   land  also    Is    fall   of    silver   and   gold.  —  An  up -to-  date 

inventory : — There  is  something  startlingly  modern  about  this  chapter ; 
if  you  sit  down  to  analyse  it,  you  will  feel  that  there  is  something 
startlingly  up-to-date  about  the  inventory.  What  did  this  proud  people  make 
their  boast  about  ?  1.  The  abundance  of  their  treasure ;  their  land  also  is 
full  of  silver  and  gold,  neither  is  there  any  end  of  their  treasures."  2.  Their 
shipping  and  their  active  commerce ;  "  all  the  ships  of  Tarshish."  3.  Their 
military  equipment ;  "  their  land  is  also  full  of  horses,  neither  is  there  any  end 
of  their  chariots."  4.  Their  natural  defences ;  "  all  the  high  mountains,  all  the 
hills  that  are  lifted  up."  6.  Their  artificial  defences ;  "  every  high  tower,  every 
fenced  wall."  6.  The  wealth  of  their  timber ;  "  all  the  cedars  of  Lebanon, 
all  the  oaks  of  Bashan."  7.  They  boasted  even  of  the  treasures  of  their  art ; 
"  all  pleasant  pictures."  (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Oold  may  shut  out  the  vision 
of  God : — An  old  proverb  runs,  "  The  sixpence  in  the  man's  eye  prevented  him 
from  seeing  the  sovereign  at  the  end  of  his  nose."  And  some  men  allow  the 
passion  for  money  to  become  so  all-absorbing  that  the  coin  fills  all  their  vision 
and  shuts  out  God  and  His  heaven.     (W.  C.  Bonner.) 

Ver.  8.  Their  land  also  is  full  of  idols. — Idols : — The  philosophic  theory 
of  polytheism  is  "  one  centre,  many  emanations."  Iamblicus  and 
Porphyry  defend  it  on  this  line  against  the  monotheism  of  early  Christianity. 
Hermes  Trismegistus,  according  to  St.  Augustine,  says  the  Egyptians 
regarded  images  as  being  merely  the  bodies  of  the  gods.  In  India 
there  may  be  seen  any  day  of  the  week  the  ceremony  of  praying  a  spirit  of 
Vishnu  or  of  Shiva  into  a  statue,  or  into  a  symbolic  stone,  by  the  Brahmin  priest. 
The  priestly  theory  is  one  of  "  consubstantiation,"  like  the  Lutheran  theory  of 
the  Eucharist,  the  difference  being  between  the  spiritual  indwelling  in  material 
bread  and  material  wine  in  the  one  case,  and  material  wood  and  stone  in  the  other. 
The  gods,  thus  made  visible  to  the  common  people,  are  endowed,  by  the  popular 
consent,  with  human  passions  and  human  prejudices.  Each  represents  one 
or  more  of  these  human  propensities.  Some  are  emblems  of  the  reproductive 
powers  of  nature — fertilizers  of  the  flocks  and  fields.  Their  worship,  pure  at 
the  first  possibly,  became  beyond  all  telling,  licentious  and  abominable.  (F. 
Sessions.) 

Ver.  9.  The  mean  man.  —  The  mean  man  :  — "  Mean  "  there  does  not 
mean  selfish  or  stingy,  but  the  man  between  two  extremes,  the  mean,  average, 
ordinary  man.  The  mean  man  and  the  great  man  are  both  bowing — what  are 
they  bowing  to  ?  Something  beneath  them ;  they  have  lost  the  sense  of  their 
dignity,  and  they  have  forgotten  that  they  are  kings,  and  now  they  are  bowing 
down  to  things  that  they  ought  to  control.     (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  Enter  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  in  the  dust. — The  sinner's 
ignominy  before   the   manifestation   of   God's   glory : — No    other   course   is  now 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  73 

left  open  for  them  but  to  follow  the  sarcastic  command  of  the  prophet : 
"  Creep  into  the  rock,  and  bury  thyself  in  the  dust,  before  the  dread  look  of 
Jehovah,  and  before  the  glory  of  His  majesty  !  "  The  nation  that  was  supposed 
to  be  a  glorious  one  shall  and  must  creep  away  and  hide  itself  ignominiously, 
when  the  glory  of  God  which  it  had  rejected,  but  which  alone  is  true  glory,  is 
judicially  manifested.  It  must  conceal  itself  in  holes  of  the  rocks  as  if  from  a 
host  of  foes  (Judg.  vi.  2;  1  Sam.  xiii.  6,  xiv.  11),  and  bury  themselves  with  their 
faces  in  the  sand,  as  from  the  deadly  simoom  of  the  desert,  that  they  may  but 
avoid  the  necessity  of  enduring  this  intolerable  sight.     (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  The  lofty  looks  of  man  shall  be  humbled  .  .  .  the  Lord  alone 
shall  be  exalted  in  that  day.  —  Man  humbled  and  Christ  exalted :  —  The 
day  may  be  very  properly  applied  to  any  of  those  days  when  the  Lord 
abases  the  pride  of  guilty  man,  or  when  He  makes  His  presence  felt  by 
the  power  of  His  Spirit  upon  the  heart ;  for  it  is  then  the  lofty  looks  of 
man  are  humbled ;  it  is  then  the  haughtiness  of  man  is  bowed  down, 
and  the  Lord  is  exalted  in  the  heart.  What  other  than  this  is  God's  object 
in  the  Gospel  ?     It  is  definitely  that  self  may  be  humbled,  and  Christ  exalted. 

1.  Let  us  look  at  some  points  on  which  men  are  apt  to  be  lifted  up  and  to 
bolster  themselves  up  in  their  pride  and  self-sufficiency.  1.  They  hold  that  they 
have  natural  ability  to  understand  the  Word  of  God.  What  saith  the  Scripture 
upon  this  point  ?  (1  Cor.  ii.  11,  &c.)  How  many  take  up  the  Word  of  God  to 
read  it  just  as  they  would  any  other  book,  forgetting  its  character — forgetting 
its  object !  They  read  it  merely  to  know,  not  in  order  to  be.  Whereas  the 
value  of  the  Book  is,  that  it  is  to  tell  upon  man's  character.  It  is  to  make  him 
altogether  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  Another  point  of  deep  importance 
is  the  opinion  which  men  have  with  respect  to  their  power  to  save  themselves. 
It  is  not  that  they  think  that  they  can  actually  blot  out  their  sins,  or  that  they 
can  perfectly  keep  God's  law ;  but  they,  in  imagination,  strike  a  kind  of 
balance  between  their  good  and  bad  deeds.  They  think  that  there  is  something 
good  in  what  they  do,  and  that  what  they  fail  in  Christ  will  make  up ;  and  the 
consequence  is,  there  is  no  real  humiliation  before  God  while  this  idea  lasts. 
3.  The  foolish  thoughts  men  have  of  the  character  of  God,  as  if  He  were  such  an 
one  as  themselves.  You  will  often  hear  men  speak  of  what  they  conceive  the 
justice  of  God  to  be,  without  attending  in  the  smallest  degree  to  the  declara- 
tions which  He  makes  of  Himself  in  His  Holy  Word.  They  speak  as  though 
they  thought  the  difference  between  themselves  and  God,  who  is  holy,  is  one  of 
degree  merely,  and  not  of  nature.  They  put  on  one  side  altogether  the  fact  that 
God  is  a  Spirit,  and  that  they  themselves  are  carnal,  and  they  speak  as  if 
morality  would  fit  a  man  for  heaven,  utterly  ignoring  the  words  of  the  Lord, 
"  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God." 
Men,  indeed,  form  their  own  opinions ;  but  remember  the  way  in  which  God 
speaks  of  it :  "  Thou  thoughtest  that  I  was  such  an  one  as  thyself ;  but  I  will 
reprove  thee."  II.  Now,  all  these  mistaken  views  are  so  many  sources  of 
pride  in  men;  but  when  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  into  the  heart  in  power,  they 
are  bowed  down  and  HUMBLED  befobb  God.  One  of  the  effects  produced 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  He  comes  upon  a  man's  heart,  is  to  make  him  consider 
his  ways.  He  looks  to  himself  and  sees  nothing  but  sin ;  that  there  is  not  one 
single  ground  of  hope ;  and  when  the  Holy  Spirit  has  graciously  brought  him 
to  this  point,  then  He  shows  him  the  salvation  of  Christ.  And  then  in  this  exalta- 
tion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  comes  the  true  abasement  of  the  man  himself.  Lessons 
— 1.  The  object  of  all  God's  dispensations  is  to  humble  us,  and  to  bring  us  down 
to  the  feet  of  Clirist.  2.  The  nature  of  true  faith.  It  is  humility  ;  it  is  depend- 
ence ;  it  is  coming  down  from  all  self-confidence ;  it  is  resting  upon  another, 
and  that  Christ  alone.  (J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.)  God  exalted  : — 1.  By  entertaining 
elevating  apprehensions  of  His  infinite  majesty,  and  exercising  suitable  affections 
towards  Him — fearing  Him  who  pours  contempt  upon  princes,  trusting  in  Him 
in  whom  is  everlasting  strength,  and  loving  Him  in  whose  favour  there  is  life. 

2.  By  celebrating  the  praises  of  His  Divine  excellencies  with  gratitude  and  joy 

3.  By  such  conduct  as  may  give  the  most  sensible  and  lively  representation  ot 
Cod — beginning,  carrying  on,  and  ending  all  their  businesses  in  Him ;  making 
His  love  the  principle,  His  law  the  rule,  and  His  glory  the  end  of  all  their 
actions.  (R.  Maccalloch.)  Humility  : — Life  is  a  long  lesson  in  humility.  (J.  M. 
Barrie.) 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohai-.  n. 

Vers.  12-17.  The  day  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  upon  every  one  that  is  proud 
and  lofty. — Scepticism  discomfited  by  Christ's  advent : — I.  Among  the  causes 
op  the  spirit  of  religious  scepticism  there  are — 1.  An  early  habit  of  spiritual 
negligence.  2.  A  state  of  exaggerated  and  credulous  belief.  II.  Consider  the 
inseparable  consequences  of  such  a  state,  whatever  be  the  peculiar  causes 
out  of  which  it  springs.  1.  He  who  is  in  suspense  about  the  truth  of  the  Gospel 
cannot  pray.  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  He  is."  He  who  feels 
that  he  has  sinned,  and  that  God  is  holy,  knows  that  he  needs  a  mediator ;  and  he 
that  would  trust  in  a  mediator  must  believe  that  He  is.  2.  He  cannot  resist 
sin.  He  who  is  in  suspense  about  the  truth  of  Christ's  Gospel  is  as  weak  as  he 
who  denies  it,  yea,  weaker.  For  the  other  knows  that  he  is  thrown  upon  the 
resources  of  his  own  unaided  strength,  and  he  summons  them  all  together  for  his 
support.  But  the  man  who  doubts  is  a  divided  man.  He  has  cast  off  his  other 
armour ;  and  this,  the  armour  of  God,  he  cannot  take,  for  he  has  not  proved  it. 
III.  Think  what  the  advent  will  be  to  such  a  mind.  The  day  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts  will  be  "upon  "  it,  and  will  bring  it  low.  We  inquired  whether  there  was 
a  day  coming ;  and  behold,  it  is  come.  While  we  inquired  and  reasoned  and 
speculated,  He  of  whom  we  doubted  was  carrying  on  His  judgment  upon  us. 
(C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  The  day  of  the  Lord: — The  flood,  the  destruction  of 
Sodom,  the  invasion  of  Judaea  in  the  reigns  of  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah,  the  taking 
of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  or  by  Titus,  were  held  by  the  Jewish  prophets 
and  preachers — as  the  like  national  crises  in  ancient  and  in  modern  history  have  ever 
been  held  by  Christian  philosophers  and  historians — to  be  "  days  of  the  Lord," 
in  which  He  has  come  to  judge  the  earth ;  and  partial  anticipations  of  the  last 
judgment  of  the  world.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The  day  of  the  Lord  and 
the  majestic  beauty  of  nature  (vers.  13,  14) : — Has  this  language  a  merely  figurative 
meaning  ?  ...  In  order  to  understand  the  prophet  we  must  bear  in  mind  what 
sacred  Scripture  assumes  throughout,  that  all  nature  is  joined  with  man  to 
form  one  common  history  ;  that  man  and  the  whole  world  of  nature  are  insepar- 
ably connected  as  centre  and  circumference ;  that  this  circumference  likewise  is 
under  the  influence  of  the  sin  which  proceeds  from  man,  as  well  as  under  the 
wrath  and  the  grace  which  proceed  from  God  to  man ;  that  the  judgments  of  God, 
as  proved  by  the  history  of  nations,  bring  a  share  of  suffering  to  the  subject 
creation,  and  that  this  participation  of  the  lower  creation  in  the  corruption  and 
the  glory  of  man  will  come  into  special  prominence  at  the  close  of  this  world's 
history,  as  it  did  at  the  beginning ;  and  lastly,  the  world  in  its  present  form,  in 
order  to  become  an  object  of  the  unmixed  good  pleasure  of  God,  stands  as  much 
in  need  of  a  regeneration  (ira\iyyeve<rla)  as  the  corporeal  part  of  man  himself. 
In  accordance  with  this  fundamental  view  of  the  Scriptures,  therefore,  we  cannot 
wonder  that,  when  the  judgment  of  God  goes  forth  upon  Israel,  it  extends  to  the 
land  of  Israel,  and,  along  with  the  false  glory  of  the  nation,  overthrows  every- 
thing glorious  in  surrounding  nature  which  has  been  forced  to  minister  to  the 
national  pride  and  love  of  display,  and  to  which  the  national  sin  adhered  in  many 
ways.  What  the  prophet  predicts  was  already  actually  beginning  to  be  fulfilled 
in  the  military  inroads  of  the  Assyrians.  The  cedar  forest  of  Lebanon  was  being 
unsparingly  shorn ;  the  hills  and  vales  of  the  country  were  trodden  down  and 
laid  waste,  and,  during  the  period  of  the  world's  history,  beginning  with  Tiglath- 
pileser,  the  holy  land  was  being  reduced  to  a  shadow  of  its  former 
predicted  beauty.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  The  Lord  of  hosts: — All  the  creatures  in 
the  universe  are  the  hosts  or  armies  of  Jehovah ;  angels,  who  excel  in  strength ; 
the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars  ;  the  thunder  and  the  lightning ;  the  wind,  the 
hail,  and  the  rain ;  the  storm  and  the  tempest ;  the  most  insignificant  insects, 
such  as  the  flies  and  the  caterpillars ;  yea,  the  sand  of  the  sea  and  the  dust  of 
the  earth.  (B.  MaccuUoch.)  The  day  of  the  Lord  upon  the  proud  and  lofty  : — 
Is  it  personal  strength,  vigour,  and  firmness  of  constitution  with  which  he  is  elated  ? 
Though  he  be  among  the  sons  of  the  mighty,  strong  as  the  children  of  Anak,  the 
weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men ;  before  the  Almighty,  he  is  only  as  a 
grasshopper,  and  is  easily  crushed  as  the  moth.  Is  it  courage  and  fortitude  which 
hath  rendered  him  valiant,  and  made  his  heart  as  the  heart  of  a  lion  ?  He  who 
saith  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart,  Be  strong,  can  quickly  deprive  him  of 
his  courage,  and  render  him  timorous  and  faint-hearted,  so  as  to  tremble  at  the 
shaking  of  a  leaf.  Is  it  riches  which  are  reckoned  a  strong  tower,  a  defence,  and 
the  sinews  of  strength  ?  The  day  of  the  Lord  shall  blow  upon  them,  and  they 
shall  pass  away  as  the  flower  of  the  field,  or  an  eagle  flying  toward  heaven.     Is 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  75 

it  honour  and  renown  that  hath  lift  him  up  to  the  pinnacle  of  earthly  glory  ? 
God,  who  overthroweth  the  mighty,  shall  bring  down  all  that  dignity,  on  account 
of  which  he  highly  valued  himself,  and  reduce  him  to  the  most  humiliating  con- 
dition. History,  sacred  and  profane,  confirms  the  truth  of  this  prediction.  (Ibid.) 
Man  humiliated  : — Zedekiah,  King  of  Judah,  deprived  of  his  royal  dignity,  of 
his  sons,  who  were  slain  before  his  eyes,  and  then  of  his  eyesight,  was  bound  in 
fetters  of  brass,  and  carried  to  Babylon.  Bajazet,  the  Emperor  of  Turkey,  was 
bound  with  fetters  of  gold,  by  the  victorious  Tamerlane,  and  carried  along  with 
him  in  his  march  through  Asia,  in  an  iron  cage,  as  an  object  of  ridicule.  Henry  V., 
Emperor  of  Germany,  was  reduced  to  such  poverty,  that  he  went  to  the  great 
church  which  he  himself  had  built  at  Spires,  begging  the  place  of  a  chorister, 
to  keep  him  from  starving.  (Ibid.)  Ships  of  Tarahish  are  deep  sea  ships. 
Possibly  Tartessus,  west  of  the  straits  of  Gibraltar.     {A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  16.  Pleasant  pictures. — The  proper  use  of  art : — Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 
wisely  stated  the  canon  for  artists  when,  referring  to  the  choice  of  subjects,  he 
said,  "  No  subject  can  be  proper  that  is  not  generally  interesting.  It  ought  to 
be  either  some  eminent  instance  of  heroic  action  or  heroic  suffering.  There  must 
be  something,  either  in  the  action  or  in  the  object,  in  which  men  are  universally 
concerned,  and  which  publicly  strikes  upon  the  public  sympathy."  They  who 
are  not  content  to  copy  what  is  ignoble,  or  reproduce  what  is  insignificant— who 
use  art  to  expound  and  apply  the  teaching  of  God  in  nature  and  revelation — who 
design  to  address  the  heart,  and  so  elevate  the  imaginations  and  judgments  of 
men,  are  benefactors  of  their  race — ministers  at  the  altar  of  truth  and  righteous- 
ness. The  work  of  such  artists  can  be  regarded  as  eminently  sacred.  (J.  H. 
Uitchens,  D.D.)  The  far-reaching  influence  of  art: — The  preacher's  voice 
must  be  occasionally  silenced  by  weariness,  and  ultimately  hushed  by  death ; 
but  the  artist's  pictures  continue  to  tell  their  own  tale,  and  enforce  their  own 
lessons  to  all  spectators,  night  and  day,  so  long  as  they  may  be  preserved.  The 
author's  book,  upon  the  loftiest  possible  theme,  can  be  read  only  by  those  who 
are  familiar  with  the  language  in  which  it  is  written,  and  among  the  would-be 
readers  will  be  some  who,  being  unaccustomed  to  the  laws  of  thought,  will  lay 
the  book  aside  as  uninteresting  ;  but  pictures  are  biographies,  histories,  homilies, 
poems  which,  without  words,  can  be  studied  at  a  glance.  (Ibid.)  Pictures  are 
by  some  relegated  to  the  realm  of  the  trivial,  accidental,  sentimental,  or  worldly, 
but  the  text  shows  that  God  scrutinises  pictures,  and  whether  they  are  good  or 
bad,  whether  used  for  right  or  wrong  purposes,  is  a  matter  of  Divine  observation 
and  judgment.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  prostitution  of  art  : — That 
the  artist's  pencil  and  the  engraver's  knife  have  sometimes  been  made  subservient 
to  the  kingdom  of  evil  is  frankly  admitted.  After  the  ashes  and  scoriae  were 
removed  from  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  the  walls  of  those  cities  discovered  to 
the  explorers  a  degradation  in  art  which  cannot  be  exaggerated.  Satan  and  all 
his  imps  have  always  wanted  the  fingering  of  the  easel ;  they  would  rather  have 
possession  of  that  than  the  art  of  printing,  for  types  are  not  so  potent  and  quick 
for  evil  as  pictures.  (Ibid.)  Bad  pictures  should  be  avoided  : — Pliny  the  elder 
lost  his  life  by  going  near  enough  to  see  the  eruption  of  Vesuvius,  and  the  further 
you  can  stand  off  from  the  burning  crater  of  sin,  the  better.  Never  till  the  books 
of  the  Last  Day  are  opened  shall  we  know  what  has  been  the  dire  harvest  of  evil 
pictorials  and  unbecoming  art  galleries.  Despoil  a  man's  imagination  and  he 
becomes  a  moral  carcase.  The  show  windows  of  English  and  American  cities 
in  which  have  sometimes  hung  long  lines  of  brazen  actors  and  actresses  in  style 
insulting  to  all  propriety,  have  made  a  broad  path  to  death  for  multitudes  of 
people.  (Ibid.)  The  value  of  Bible  pictures  : — I  refer  to  your  memory  and 
mine  when  I  ask  if  your  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  has  not  been  mightily 
augmented  by  the  woodcuts  or  engravings  in  the  old  family  Bible,  which  father 
and  mother  read  out  of,  and  laid  on  the  table  in  the  old  homestead  when  you  were 
boys  and  girls.  The  Bible  scenes  which  we  all  carry  in  our  minds  were  not  gotten 
from  the  Bible  typology,  but  from  the  Bible  pictures.  To  prove  the  truth  of 
it  in  my  own  case,  the  other  day  I  took  up  the  old  family  Bible  which  I  inherited. 
Sure  enough,  what  I  have  carried  in  my  mind  of  Jacob's  ladder  was  exactly  the 
Bible  engraving  of  Jacob's  ladder ;  and  so  with  Samson  carrying  off  the  gates 
of  Gaza ;  Elisha  restoring  the  Shunammile's  son  ;  the  massacre  of  the  innocents  ; 
Christ  blessing  little  children  ;  the  Crucifixion,  and  the  Last  Judgment.  My  idea 
of  all  these  is  that  of  the  old  Bible  engravings  which  I  scanned  before  I  could  read 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

a  word.  (Ibid.)  Gustave  Doris  pictures : — In  1833  forth  from  Strassburg, 
Germany,  there  came  a  child  that  was  to  eclipse  in  speed  and  boldness  and  grandeur 
anything  and  everything  that  the  world  had  seen  since  the  first  colour  appeared 
on  the  sky  at  the  creation,  Paul  Gustave  Dore.  At  eleven  years  of  age  he  published 
marvellous  lithographs  of  his  own.  Saying  nothing  of  what  he  did  for  Milton's 
Paradise  Lost,  emblazoning  it  on  the  attention  of  the  world,  he  takes  up  the 
Book  of  books,  the  monarch  of  literature,  the  Bible,  and  in  his  pictures  The 
Creation  of  Light,"  "The  Trial  of  Abraham's  Faith,"  "The  Burial  of  Sarah," 
"  Joseph  Sold  by  his  Brethren,"  "  The  Brazen  Serpent,"  "  Boaz  and  Ruth," 
"  David  and  Goliath,"  "  The  Transfiguration,"  "  The  Marriage  in  Cana," 
"  Babylon  Fallen," — two  hundred  and  five  Scriptural  scenes  in  all, — and  that  with 
a  boldness  and  grasp  and  almost  supernatural  afflatus  that  make  the  heart  throb, 
and  the  brain  reel,  and  the  tears  start,  and  the  cheeks  blanch,  and  the  entire 
nature  quake  with  the  tremendous  things  of  God  and  eternity  and  the  dead. 
I  actually  staggered  down  the  steps  of  the  London  Art  Gallery  under  the  power 
of  Dore's  "  Christ  Leaving  the  Praetorium."  Profess  you  to  be  a  Christian  man 
or  woman,  and  see  no  Divine  mission  in  art,  and  acknowledge  you  no  obligation 
either  in  thanks  to  God  or  man  ?     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  18.  And  the  Idols  He  shall  utterly  abolish. — The  cessation  of  idolatry  : — 
In  heathen  systems  of  religion,  God  and  nature  are  not  kept  distinct.  His  per- 
sonality, also,  is  confounded.  The  fears  and  hopes  of  idolaters  are  projected 
into  deities.  Two  things  are  necessary  to  destroy  idolatry  in  this  its  grossest 
form.  I.  The  prevalence  op  the  Word  op  God.  1.  Within  its  pages  God 
and  nature  are  carefully  distinguished  and  separated.  2.  Here  His  personality 
is  clearly  presented.  3.  Here  commands  against  idolatry  are  fully  and  solemnly 
promulgated.  4.  Here  the  true  God  is  set  forth  in  all  the  glorious  attributes 
that  constitute  His  character,  allegiance  is  commanded,  service  demanded,  and 
every  soul  held  to  a  strict  accountability.  II.  The  prevalence  op  the  Christian 
civilisation.  1.  The  Bible  is  indispensable.  Heathen  science  is  insufficient 
to  deliver  men  from  idolatry,  as  witness  Rome  and  Greece.  2.  Mere  science  is 
in  danger  of  becoming  materialistic  or  agnostic.  3.  Science  needs  to  be  vitalised 
by  the  Bible,  the  moral  law,  and  conscience.  Reflections — 1.  Science  is  the  hand- 
maid of  the  Bible.  2.  There  can  be  no  contradiction  between  the  work  of  God 
and  the  Word  of  God.  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  every  Christian  to  assist  in  the  circula- 
tion of  the  Bible,  to  the  end  that  every  idol  on  the  face  of  the  earth  may  be  speedily 
destroyed.  (HomUetic  Review.)  The  evils  of  idolatry  and  the  means  of  its 
abolition  : — The  progress  of  Christianity  in  the  world  has  already  been  so  great 
and  wonderful  as  to  carry  evidence  of  its  Divine  original,  and  of  its  promised 
final  triumph  over  every  false  religion.  I.  The  evil  to  be  abolished.  Idolatry. 
It  has  been  commonly  and  very  properly  distinguished  as  of  two  kinds,  literal 
and  spiritual.  Spiritual  idolatry  is  an  evil  which,  by  the  apostasy  of  our  nature, 
attaches  to  all  mankind,  whether  inhabiting  Christian  or  pagan  regions,  except 
those  individuals  whose  hearts  have  experienced  a  renovation  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.  It  is  to  literal  idolatry  that  the  prophet  refers  in  the  text — this  the  connec- 
tion shows,  where  mention  is  made  of  those  idols  of  silver  and  gold  which  the 
converted  idolaters  would  cast  away.  The  progress  of  Christianity  was,  from 
the  first,  marked  by  the  cessation  of  idol  worship.  There  are  two  principal 
points  of  view  in  which  we  may  regard  the  evil  nature  and  effects  of  idolatry — 
its  aspect  toward  God  and  its  aspect  toward  man.  In  the  former  aspect,  it 
appears  as  a  crime ;  in  the  latter  as  a  calamity :  thus  contemplated,  it  appears 
as  an  evil  destructive  equally  to  the  Divine  glory  and  to  human  happiness.  Man 
naturally  tends  to  this  evil ;  and  one  generation  after  another  gradually  accum- 
ulated the  follies  of  superstition,  till  it  reached  the  monstrous  extreme  of 
gross  idolatry.  1.  The  Word  of  God  everywhere  reprobates  idolatry  as  an 
abominable  thing  which  the  soul  of  God  abhors.  To  provide  against  it  was  the 
principal  object  in  the  political  and  municipal  department  of  the  Mosaic  law. 
It  is  expressly  prohibited  by  the  first  and  second  commandments  of  the  moral 
law.  The  golden  calf  was  intended  as  a  representative  of  the  God  of  Israel ; 
and  the  calves  set  up  by  Jeroboam  were  the  same :  yet  the  worship  of  the  golden 
calf  occasioned  the  slaughter,  by  the  Divine  command,  of  three  thousand  persons  ; 
and  the  executioners  of  Divine  vengeance  were  extolled  for  having  forgotten 
the  feelings  of  nature  toward  their  nearest  kindred  :  every  man  was  commanded 
to  slay  his  brother  or  his  son,  and  so  to  consecrate  himself  to  the  Lord.     Where 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  77 

the  honour  of  God  was  so  deeply  concerned,  men  were  to  lose  sight  of  common 
humanity.  When  the  Israelites  were  tempted  by  the  artifices  of  Balaam  to 
commit  idolatry  at  Baal  Peor,  twenty-four  thousand  were  slain  at  once;  the 
memory  of  Phinehas  was  immortalised  on  account  of  the  holy  zeal  he  displayed 
in  the  destruction  of  certain  conspicuous  offenders ;  and  the  Moabites  were 
devoted  to  extermination,  because,  in  this  respect,  they  had  proved  a  snare  to 
Israel.  Idolatry  is,  with  respect  to  the  government  of  God,  what  treason  or 
rebellion  is  with  respect  to  civil  government.  It  is  the  setting  up  of  an  idol  in 
the  place  of  the  supreme  Power  ;  an  affront  offered  to  that  Majesty,  in  which  all 
order  and  authority  is  combined  and  concentred,  and  which  is  the  fountain  of 
all  social  blessings.  Idolatry  is  an  evil  which  taints  every  apparent  virtue ; 
because  it  destroys  the  soul  of  duty,  which  is  conformity  to  the  Divine  command. 
2.  But  we  turn  to  contemplate  idolatry  on  another  side ;  in  its  aspect  toward 
man,  its  influence  on  society.  The  apostle  Paul  informs  us  (Rom.  i.  19-25)  that 
God  hath  shown  to  men  what  may  be  known  concerning  Himself ;  that  His 
invisible  Being,  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead,  may  be  clearly  seen  and  under- 
stood by  the  works  of  creation  ;  so  that  those  are  without  excuse  who  have  changed 
the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  into  an  image  in  the  likeness  of  corruptible 
man,  of  birds  and  beasts  and  reptiles.  They  are  without  excuse ;  their  conduct 
admits  of  no  apology.  The  origin  of  all  the  atrocities  they  committed  is  to 
be  found  in  aversion  to  God;  dislike  of  the  spirituality  and  purity  of  His 
character ;  a  desire,  like  Cain,  to  retire  from  the  presence  of  their  Maker ; 
a  wish  to  forget  a  Being  whose  character  they  knew  to  be  utterly  uncon- 
genial with  their  own.  This  disposition  originally  led  men  to  substitute  idola 
for  God.  Those  idols  would,  of  course,  be  conceived  of  a  character  unlike  that 
of  God.  II.  We  must  now  advert  to  a  brighter  seene,  presented  by  the  prophet, 
when  he  assures  us  that  Jesus  Christ  (of  whom  he  is  speaking)  will  utterly 
abolish  idolatry,  and  sweep  it  from  the  face  of  the  earth  with  the  "  besom  of 
destruction."  In  sending  the  Gospel  to  the  heathen,  you  offer,  as  it  were,  the 
holy  incense,  like  Moses,  when  he  interposed  between  God  and  the  perishing 
Israelites :  you  stand,  like  him,  between  the  dead  and  the  living, — the  dead  and 
the  living  for  eternity  ! — and  you  stay  the  plague  !  No  sooner  did  Christianity 
appear,  than  its  formidable  power,  as  the  opponent  of  idolatry,  was  felt  and  mani- 
fested. Preaching,  an  instrument  so  unpromising  in  the  view  of  carnal  reason, 
has  been  the  chief  instrument  employed  in  producing  these  moral  revolutions. 
(Robt.  Hall.)  The  downfall  of  idolatry : — I  wish  to  invite  your  attention  to 
some  of  the  reasons  which  induce  me  to  believe  that  the  heathen  kingdoms  of  this 
world  are  to  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  of  His  Christ.  I.  Consider, 
in  the  first  place,  the  light  in  which  idolatry  is  regarded  by  God.  I  am 
sometimes  asked,  "  Why  do  you  unsettle  the  religious  convictions  of  a  highly- 
civilised  people  like  the  Chinese  ?  Is  not  the  Supreme  Governor  of  the  universe 
§  leased  with  the  homage  of  His  rational  creatures  when  proceeding  from  sincere 
evotion,  whether  according  to  the  one  mode  or  the  other,  of  the  various  religions 
which  He  has  permitted  to  be  published  ?  "  Lord  Macartney,  the  first  ambassador 
to  China,  in  writing  to  the  Chinese  emperor,  gave  this  as  a  reason  why  the  English 
never  attempted  to  dispute  or  disturb  the  worship  of  others.  But  in  whatever 
light  idolatry  is  regarded  by  man,  we  know  that  it  is  a  thing  on  which  God  cannot 
look  with  indifference.  When  we  see  idolatry  associated  with  immorality  and 
inhumanity,  our  instincts  are  naturally  shocked,  but  where  such  is  not  the  case, 
even  the  missionary  finds  it  difficult  to  think  and  feel  rightly  in  regard  to  it.  The 
spiritual  idolatry  within  us  has  so  distorted  our  intellectual  vision  and  perverted 
our  spiritual  taste  that  it  requires  an  effort  to  see  the  literal  idolatry  in  all  its 
hideous  deformity  and  feel  towards  it  as  we  ought.  The  whole  of  heathendom  is 
under  the  dominion  of  the  prince  of  this  world,  and  he  and  his  angels  are  the  powers 
worshipped  by  the  heathen,  however  little  they  themselves  may  be  aware  of  the 
fact.  The  whole  fabric  of  heathenism  has  been  reared  under  the  inspiration  of 
the  spirit  of  darkness,  and  it  is  he  that  sits  as  God  in  that  vast  temple,  calling 
himself  God,  and  receiving  oblations,  sacrifice,  and  adoration  from  his  deluded 
votaries.  God  sees  in  idolatry  not  weakness  only,  but  also  sin,  positive  sin,  in 
its  nature  God-opposing  and  soul-destroying.  It  is  an  attempt  to  rob  Him  of 
that  glory,  which  is  peculiarly  His  own,  and  to  confer  it  on  the  creature.  But  if 
this  is  the  light  in  which  God  regards  idolatry,  we  may  rationally  infer  that  the 
abomination  will  not  be  permitted  to  pollute  the  world  for  ever.  II.  My  faith  in 
the  final  triumph  OF  truth  in  the  progress  of  the  race  tends  to  produce  this 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  is. 

conviction  in  my  mind.  At  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  began  to  scatter  the  thick  darkness  with  His  beams.  For  some  time 
it  rose  higher  and  higher,  and  thousands  were  rejoicing  in  the  Divine  light  which 
promised  speedily  to  fill  the  whole  earth  with  life  and  gladness.  But  these  hopes 
were  no  sooner  raised  than  dashed  to  the  ground.  Two  dark  clouds  rose  between 
the  nations  and  the  sun,  which,  lowering  and  spreading,  enveloped  them  in  more 
than  Egyptian  darkness.  These  were  the  Papacy  and  Mohammedanism.  It  is 
estimated  that  more  than  eight  hundred  millions,  or  about  two-thirds  of  the  human 
family,  are  idolaters  to-day.  But  matters  shall  not  remain  in  this  state  for  ever. 
The  light  is  greater  than  the  darkness ;  the  truth  of  heaven  is  mightier  than 
:he  falsehood  of  hell,  and  God  is  infinitely  stronger  than  the  devil.  There  may  be 
occasionally  something  like  a  retrograde  movement ;  the  retrogression  is  only  in 
appearance.  The  onward  course  of  the  race  has  been  compared  to  that  of  a  ship 
making  way  against  the  breeze  ;  it  consists  of  a  series  of  movements,  each  of 
which  seems  to  bear  her  away  from  the  true  direction,  yet,  in  fact,  brings  her 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  destined  haven.  But  if  the  race  is  progressing,  and  is 
ultimately  to  realise  the  object  of  its  existence,  idolatry  must  pass  away.  You 
cannot  conceive  of  such  a  thing  as  the  progress  of  the  race  along  with  the  existence 
of  idolatry.  (Griffith  John.)  The  gods  and  goddesses  of  mythology  : — Homer, 
the  first  who  appears  to  have  composed  a  regular  picture  of  idolatry,  paints  his 
Jupiter,  or  supreme  deity,  as  deficient  in  every  Divine  attribute;  in  omnipotence, 
in  justice,  and  even  in  domestic  peace.  He  paints  Juno  as  the  victim  of  eternal 
jealousy ;  and  with  good  reason  for  her  jealousy,  when  the  earth  was  peopled, 
according  to  Homer,  with  the  illegitimate  progeny  of  Jupiter,  to  whom  almost 
every  hero  traced  his  pedigree.  Mars  was  the  personification  of  rage  and  violence ; 
Mercury,  the  patron  of  artifice  and  theft.  How  far  such  a  mythology  influenced 
the  character  of  its  votaries,  it  is  perhaps  impossible  for  us  to  know:  nothing 
could  be  more  curious  than  to  look  into  the  mind  of  a  heathen.  But  it  is  certain 
that  the  mind  must  have  been  exceedingly  corrupted  by  the  influence  of  such  a 
creed :  and  probably  each  individual  idolater  would  be  influenced  by  the  deity 
whose  character  happened  to  be  most  accommodated  to  his  own  peculiar  passions. 
Achilles  would  emulate  Mars  in  ferocity  and  deeds  of  blood ;  Ulysses  would  be 
like  Mercury  in  craft  and  stratagem ;  while  the  ambitious  mind  of  Alexander  or 
Julius  Caesar  would  aspire  to  act  a  Jupiter  on  earth.  What  a  state  of  society 
must  that  be,  in  which  no  vice,  no  crime  could  be  perpetrated  that  was  not 
sanctioned  by  the  very  objects  of  religious  worship  !  What  a  religion  that  which 
exerted  an  antagonist  force  against  conscience  itself ! — a  religion  which  silenced 
or  perverted  the  dictates  of  the  moral  sense,  the  thoughts  that  should  either  accuse 
or  excuse  us  within  !  The  temples  of  Venus,  we  are  informed,  were  crowded  by 
a  thousand  prostitutes,  as  servants  and  representatives  of  that  licentious  goddess  ; 
the  very  places  of  their  worship  were  the  scenes  of  their  vices,  and  seemed  as  if 
they  were  designed  to  consecrate  the  worst  part  of  their  conduct !  (Robt.  Hall.) 
Destroying  an  idol : — Two  young  men  owned  and  supported  a  Hindu  temple  in  a 
village  named  Rammakal  Cooke.  Both,  becoming  Christians,  determined  after 
much  prayer  to  destroy  the  idol  which  had  previously  been  worshipped  in  the 
temple.  When  they  went  to  carry  out  their  intention,  a  vast  concourse  assembled 
to  hinder  them.  One  of  them  brought  out  the  idol,  and  lifting  it  up,  asked  if 
any  one  would  maintain  its  cause.  The  bold  words  awed  the  crowd,  and  then  was 
heard  the  voice  of  a  woman,  saying,  "  Victory,  victory  to  Jesus  Christ."  Others 
took  up  the  cry.  The  idol  was  broken,  the  temple  destroyed.  (J.  Vaughan.) 
J.  O.  Raton's  success  among  idol-worshippers  : — After  the  sinking  of  the  well  by 
Paton  on  Aniwa,  and  the  discovery  of  water  in  answer  to  prayer,  the  chief,  Namakei, 
in  a  striking  address,  declared  for  Jehovah.  That  very  afternoon  he  and  several 
others  brought  their  idols  to  the  mission  house.  Intense  excitement  followed. 
For  weeks,  company  after  company  came,  and,  with  tears,  sobs,  or  shouts,  laid  down 
their  cherished  idols  in  heaps,  again  and  again  repeating,  "  Jehovah  I  "  (Sunday 
School  Chronicle.) 

Ver.  19.  And  they  shall  go  Into  the  holes  of  the  rocks. — No  escape  from  the 
judgments  of  God : — They  shall  vainly  seek  to  escape,  as  unarmed  peasants 
or  women  fly  into  the  nearest  cave  or  hole  when  they  hear  the  hoofs  of  some 
plundering  tribe  of  Edom  or  Ishmael  from  the  desert ;  but  the  judgment  of  Jehovah 
shall  reach  them,  as  the  earthquake  (then,  as  now,  not  uncommon  in  Judaea)  would 
bring  down  the  rock  on  him  who  sought  refuge  in  it.     (Sir  E.  Straehey,  Bart.) 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  79 

For  feax  of  the  Lord. — The  fear  of  the  Lord : — 1.  It  is  some  alleviation  of  a 
man's  misfortune,  if  he  knows  the  worst  of  it.  For  the  apprehension  of  evil 
is  sometimes  worse  than  the  evil  itself.  But  this  rule  holds  good  only  in 
temporal  evils.  2.  In  the  present  state  of  things,  men  can  harden  their  hearts 
against  all  the  threatenings  and  terrors  of  the  Lord :  and  have  so  accustomed 
themselves  to  dispute  and  disbelieve  everything  which  is  supernatural,  that 
the  concerns  of  another  world  make  but  faint  impressions  upon  them.  3.  The 
great  foundation,  therefore,  on  which  the  substance  of  our  religion  is  built,  is 
the  belief  of  that  day  when  God  shall  call  men  to  an  account  for  all  the  works 
which  they  have  done  in  this  life,  and  shall  deal  with  them  according  to  the  pro- 
mises and  threatenings  of  His  own  word.  4.  The  way  not  to  be  afraid  of  the  wrath 
of  God  then,  is  to  stand  in  awe  of  it  now.  6.  He  hath  declared  that  He  hath  an 
extraordinary  indignation  at  proud  men,  t.e.,  such  as  have  no  regard  for  His  laws, 
and  that  He  will  one  day  effectually  humble  them.  6.  When  we  fear  God  as 
a  merciful  and  gracious  Father,  we  live  easy  in  His  family,  and  rejoice  in  His 
presence  ;  but  a  guilty  fear  causes  us  to  fly  from  Him  like  our  first  parent,  dreading 
Him  as  justly  provoked  to  be  angry  with  us,  and  ready  to  execute  His  threatened 
judgments  upon  us.  7.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord,"  says  Solomon,  "  is  the  beginning 
of  wisdom  "  ;  and  I  will  venture  to  add,  that  it  is  the  end  of  it  too :  for  a  man 
can  never  be  denominated  wise  without  this  fear ;  whenever  he  lays  it  aside,  he 
certainly  plays  the  fool.  8.  There  is  no  man  who,  by  daily  reading  and  hearing 
of  God's  Word,  keeps  the  rule  of  his  life  in  his  eye,  but  must  see  that  he  has  mani- 
fold reasons  to  be  humbled  for  not  acting  up  to  it.  9.  And  as  horrible  fear,  so 
ehall  shame  and  confusion  of  face  be  the  portion  of  all  those  who  will  not  now  be 
restrained  by  a  virtuous  modesty  from  offending  against  God.  10.  Let  us,  then, 
wisely  make  choice  of  these  restraints  in  due  season,  and  keep  up  their  influence 
so  strong  in  our  minds,  that  no  sinful  temptation,  even  in  the  closest  retirement 
and  most  secret  corner,  may  ever  be  able  to  prevail  against  them.  ( W.  Reading, 
M.A.) 

Ver.  20.  In  that  day  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver. — The  return  to  Ood  : 
idols  cast  away : — The  most  beautiful  sight  on  God's  earth  is  a  man  turning 
home  again  to  God.  What  will  happen  when  he  comes  back  ?  "  They  shall  fling 
their  idols  to  the  bats  and  to  the  moles."  Blind  as  a  mole,  blind  as  a  bat,  and  the 
idols  have  to  go  to  them.  The  man  discovers  that  the  thing  by  which  he  has  been 
led  is  itself  a  blind  thing,  and  he  flings  it  to  blind  things,  to  the  moles  and  the  bats. 
He  sees  that  the  thing  is  blind  :  which  means  that  he  has  recovered  his  own  sight, 
and  therefore  Malachi  says,  "  They  shall  return  and  discern."  When  they  come 
back  they  shall  see — see  what  things  are,  and  what  things  are  not,  and  no  longer 
shall  they  be  seduced.  Their  lands  shall  still  be  full  of  silver  and  gold.  I  have 
no  wish  for  my  country  to  be  poor.  But,  when  we  have  said  that,  we  shall  be 
able  to  alter  the  other  phrase.  No  longer  shall  we  say,  "  The  land  is  full  of  silver 
and  gold,  the  land  is  full  of  idols  " ;  but  this  shall  be  the  refrain,  "  The  land  is  full 
of  silver  and  gold,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filleth  the  land  as  the  waters  cover  the 
sea."    (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Ver.  22.  Cease  ye  from  man. — The  Septuagint  omits  this  verse.  {R.V.  margin.) 
Maris  insignificance  and  God's  supremacy : — Two  things  are  indispensable 
to  undisturbed  tranquillity  of  mind,  namely,  humble  and  distrustful  views 
of  ourselves,  and  supreme  and  unfaltering  reliance  on  God.  So  long  as  a  man 
depends  on  his  own  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  he  must  be  disquieted  and 
unhappy.  We  can  attain  to  substantial  quiet  only  when  we  feel  that  our  depend- 
ence is  on  a  Being  omnipotent,  independent,  and  supreme,  as  well  as  abundant 
in  truth  and  love  (chap.  xxvi.  3).  To  produce  in  us  this  twofold  feeling  is  the 
constant  aim  of  Holy  Scripture.  The  grand  scheme  of  redemption  is  founded  on 
the  principle  here  laid  down.  Man  is  sinful,  ignorant,  impotent  to  good,  and  of 
himself  inclined  oaly  to  evil,  and  that  continually.  God,  in  His  infinite  mercy, 
wisdom,  and  power,  hath  provided  the  only  means  by  which  he  can  be  restored 
to  holiness,  to  the  favour  of  his  God,  and  to  life  everlasting.  But  while  there  is 
in  all  religiously  instructed  people  a  readiness  to  concede  to  Christ  the  merit  of 
salvation,  there  is  too  much  disposition  to  rely  upon  ourselves  and  our  own  arrange- 
ments for  success  in  temporal  and  physical  things,  and  to  claim  the  merit  of  it 
if  we  do  succeed.  There  are  various  things  that  have  a  tendency  to  produce 
within  us  a  feeling  of  self-dependence,  and  lead  to  the  ignoring  of  the  Divine  power 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

and  efficiency.  There  is  in  us  too  often  an  idolatry  of  human  agency  and  natural 
or  artificial  instrumentalities,  and  too  often  these  occupy  in  our  souls  the  place 
of  God.  In  the  order  of  nature  causes  produce  their  legitimate  effects,  so 
that  if  we  can  secure  certain  antecedents  we  feel  confident  of  corresponding 
results.  To  use  all  wisdom  and  discretion  in  the  use  of  means  is  a  plain  duty. 
But  the  difficulty  with  us  is,  that  in  our  reliance  on  secondary  agencies  we  too 
often  leave  God  out  of  the  account.  We  forget  that  He  is  above  all  means,  that 
He  can  work  without  them,  or  He  can  frustrate  all  our  means  and  all  our  best- 
concerted  plans.  There  is  nothing  that  men  are  more  disposed  to  confide  in 
than  superiority  of  intellect.  Yet  God  has  given  us  reasons  sufficient  to  abate 
our  idolatry  of  human  talent.  For — 1.  The  largest  capacity  of  man  is  really  very 
small.  Knowledge  with  all  men  ia  very  limited,  even  in  those  that  know  the  most. 
2.  Men  of  great  capacity  and  uncommon  attainments  seldom,  perhaps  never, 
bear  to  be  examined  very  closely.  If  one  excel  in  one  thing  he  is  deficient  in 
another.  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  great  as  he  was  in  science  and  philosophy,  failed 
in  the  common  affairs  of  life.  Laplace,  whose  extensive  range  of  thought  took 
in  the  whole  mechanism  of  the  planetary  universe,  did  not  at  all  justify  the  high 
opinion  formed  of  him  by  Napoleon,  when  he,  at  the  emperor's  invitation,  under- 
took the  business  of  the  statesman.  3.  Men  of  the  largest  pretensions  to  mind 
have  been  and  are  still  guilty  of  the  puerile,  the  absurd,  the  degrading  crime  of 
idolatry.  E.g.,  Plato,  Aristotle,  Socrates,  modern  Hindoos.  4.  The  comparatively 
few  specimens  of  unsullied,  religious  character.  5.  We  see  in  the  record  which 
God  has  given  of  His  dealings  with  our  race,  a  series  of  illustrations  of  man's 
inefficiency  and  God's  supremacy.  He  has  seldom  used  the  means  to  accomplish 
an  end  that  man  would  have  selected  or  supposed.  Egypt  saved  from  perishing 
by  a  seven  years'  famine  by  a  young,  falsely  accused  slave,  wrongfully  cast  into 
prison.  Naaman.  Deliverance  of  Israel  from  the  Midianites  (Judg.  vii.). 
Destruction  of  Spanish  Armada,  Waterloo,  &c.  Lessons — (1)  Because  means 
sometimes  fail,  that  is  no  good  reason  why  we  should  expect  the  end  without  them. 
God  ordinarily  works  by  means.  (2)  We  should  not  rely  on  the  means  as  being 
effectual  in  and  of  themselves.  (3)  After  having  used  all  the  agencies  and  all 
the  discretion  which  wisdom  and  sagacity  prescribe,  we  must  still  rely  upon  God 
for  the  issue.  (4)  Apply  the  same  rule  to  spiritual  things.  We  are  to  use  all 
prescribed  and  prudential  means ;  frequent  the  means  of  grace,  &o.  But  these 
are  only  the  means  which  bring  us  to  God.  (J.  Holdich,  D.D.)  Ceasing  from 
man : — I.  Cease  ye  from  expecting  too  great  perfection  in  man.  Many 
are  sadly  mistaken  on  this  point.  They  have  higher  ideas  of  the  excellency  of 
human  nature  than  the  Word  of  God  warrants.  It  is  sad  that  our  experience  of 
life  should  chill  its  generous  sympathies,  and  that  the  heart  should  become  cold 
and  selfish  as  our  knowledge  of  mankind  increases.  We  ought  so  to  live  that  the 
more  we  become  acquainted  with  human  wickedness,  the  more  our  compassionate 
feelings  should  be  enlarged  ;  and  that  person  has  a  Christian  spirit  whose  experience 
of  man's  depravity  and  love  for  man  have  increased  in  the  same  ratio.  II.  The 
rule  of  our  text  will  apply  also  to  Christians.  Cease  from  expecting 
perfection  in  them.  1.  The  Bible  teaches  us  to  regard  a  Christian  as  different 
from  others  only  as  the  man  recovering  from  disease  differs  from  one  who  is  still 
under  its  full  power,  not  as  one  in  perfect  health  and  strength.  2.  As  Christians 
we  may  learn  to  cease  from  expecting  too  much  from  our  fellow- Christians.  3.  We 
should  cease,  too,  from  making  any  fellow-Christian  our  model,  or  measuring  our 
faith  by  his  faithfulness.  4.  And  let  us  cease  from  expecting  too  much  from 
Christian  friendship.  Christ  was  forsaken  by  the  twelve,  and  at  St.  Paul's  first 
answer  before  the  Boman  emperor,  no  man  stood  with  him,  but  all  forsook 
him.  LU.  Cease  ye  from  the  fear  of  man  is  another  appropriate  application 
of  the  text.  1.  The  Word  of  God  warns  us  against  this.  Who  can  say  that  he 
pursues  just  that  path  which  conscience  approves  without  being  drawn  aside  by 
the  fear  of  man  ?  And  how  strong  is  the  antidote  to  such  a  fear  which  the  text 
presents  !  His  breath  is  in  his  nostrils !  2.  We  should  be  careful,  however, 
that  our  ceasing  from  man  be  not  attended  with  evil  feelings  towards  him.  If  a 
poor  man  is  fearless  in  the  presence  of  the  rich  because  he  scorns  them,  that  is 
wrong.  If  we  go  forward  in  the  path  of  duty,  undeterred  by  the  opinion  of  the 
world,  because  we  are  self-opinionated,  and  care  nothing  for  any  conclusions 
except  our  own,  that  is  wrong.  IV.  Cease  ye  from  man  as  a  source  of  happi- 
Kess.  We  build  our  enjoyments  on  relatives  and  friends.  We  gather  around 
us  those  who  are  worthy  of  our  love ;  our  hearts  begin  to  knit  with  theirs,  and 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  81 

we  say,  This  is  comfort,  here  is  happiness.  But  one  touch  of  death  crumbles 
all  to  the  dust,  and  leaves  us  to  mourn  over  our  disappointed  expectations.  ( W.  H. 
Lewis,  D.D.)  God,  maris  only  dependence  : — Our  text  speaks  in  a  twofold 
manner :  there  is  in  it  warning  pointedly  expressed ;  also  instruction  indirectly 
conveyed  —  I.  Regarding    thb    condition  op  man.     II.  Regarding   man's 

DELIVERANCE    AND    SALVATION.       III.    REGARDING    THE    CONVERSION    OF    EVERY 

saved  sinner.  Man  cannot  save  you,  whatever  he  may  pretend  to  do. 
IV.  Regarding  the  character  op  the  Gospel.  Such  is  man  that  he  will 
hold  the  truth  with  the  head,  and  think  he  can  be  saved  whilst  his  heart  is  in 
the  world.  V.  Regarding  the  maintenance  and  promulgation  op  Divine 
truth  rN  the  earth.  How  frequently  the  necessity  of  this  warning  ia 
seen  in  missionary  enterprises  !  "  Oh,"  say  some,  "  you  have  got  the  right 
missionaries  now  ;  their  heads  are  full  of  learning  ;  they  have  very  strong  bodies, 
able  to  stand  any  climate ;  there  is  plenty  of  money  in  the  missionary  exchequer  "  ; 
and  away  they  go.  Ah,  "  let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  riches ;  let  not  the 
strong  man  glory  in  his  strength ;  let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom ; 
but  let  him  that  glorieth,  glory  in  this,  that  he  understandeth  and  knoweth  Me, 
saith  the  Lord  God  Almighty."  And  then,  there  is  not  only  work  to  do  abroad, 
but  at  home  too.  If  you  speak  to  some  men  about  the  infidelity  and  superstition 
at  home,  they  will  say,  the  government  should  do  so  and  so,  and  make  such  and 
such  an  act  of  parliament.  Do  you  think  that  men  can  be  converted  by  acts  of 
parliament  ?  Oh  !  "  cease  ye  from  man."  The  text  does  not  mean — 1.  That 
any  unconverted  person  is  to  say,  I  will  wait  till  God  thinks  proper  to  convert 
me.  2.  That  there  is  no  necessity  for  men  to  preach  the  Gospel.  Preaching  ia 
necessary,  because  God  has  ordained  it.  3.  That  it  is  wrong  for  rulers  or  govern- 
ments to  give  their  legitimate  aid  to  God's  truth.  Finally,  we  are  taught  the 
great  duty  of  prayer  to  God.  (Hugh  Allen,  M.A.)  Ceasing  from  man : — I.  What 
the  exhortation  does  not  imply.  1.  That  God  wills  our  seclusion  from  the 
society  of  man.  2.  That  we  are  not  to  give  any  confidence  to  man.  3.  That  we 
are  to  withdraw  from  the  appointed  means  of  grace  as  being  superior  to  them, 
or  standing  in  no  need   of  them.     II.  What  the  exhortation  does  imply. 

1.  That  we  should  cease  from  all  that  vain  admiration  of  the  external  appearance 
in  the  character  and  condition  of  men  in  which  we  are  so  prone  to  indulge. 

2.  That  we  should  not  indulge  the  desire  of  applause  from  man.  3.  That  we 
should  not  envy  man — his  popularity,  prosperity,  &c.  4.  That  we  should  cease 
from  all  such  confidence  in  man  as  would  supersede  confidence  in  God.  5.  That 
we  should  cease  from  the  fear  of  man.  6.  That  we  should  cease  from  all  expecta- 
tions of  perfection  in  the  character  of  men,  even  of  those  who  profess  religion. 
7.  That  we  should  cease  from  all  inordinate  attachment  to  creatures. 
IIL  Thb  argument  by  which  this  exhortation  is  enforced.  Cease 
from  man — 1.  Because  he  is  a  depraved  creature,  subject  to  violent  and 
dangerous  passions.  2.  Because  he  is  a  deceitful  creature,  often  deceiving  himself 
as  well  as  others.  3.  Because  he  is  a  fickle  and  changeable  creature.  4.  Because 
he  is  a  weak  and  helpless  creature.  5.  Because  he  ia  a  dying  creature.  (E. 
Parsons.)  Man,  "  soul  and  soil  "  : — Man  is  made  up,  as  the  old  writers  used 
to  say,  of  soul  and  soil.  Alas,  the  soil  terribly  soils  his  soul !  "  My  soul 
cleaveth  to  the  dust "  might  be  the  confession  of  every  man  in  one  sense  or  another. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils  : — One  consequence  of 
the  prevailing  materialism  of  our  corrupt  nature  is  our  craving  for  something 
tangible,  audible,  visible,  as  the  object  of  our  confidence.  Man  is,  by  nature, 
an  idolater.  The  people  of  Isaiah's  day  were  like  the  rest  of  their  race :  they 
showed  their  unspiritualness  and  their  inability  to  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord 
by  making  their  own  wealth  their  chief  confidence  (ver.  7).  Nations  also, 
like  the  Israelitish  people,  are  apt  to  idolise  power ;  even  power  in  the  form  of 
brute  force.  We  read :  "  Their  land  also  is  full  of  horses,  neither  is  there  any  end 
of  their  chariots."  These  people,  in  the  heat  of  their  idolatry,  set  up  many 
idols.  Idolatry  is  common  even  here.  May  we  not  easily  make  idols  of  our- 
selves ?  There  is  nothing  more  absurd  in  the  history  of  human  nature  than  the 
fact  that  man  is  apt  to  trust  in  man.  The  sin  is  none  the  less  accursed  because 
of  its  commonness.  I.  Our  first  inquiry  is,  What  is  man  ?  This  question  is 
asked  many  times  in  Scripture,  and  it  has  been  frequently  answered  with  a 
copiousness  of  instruction.  1.  What  is  man  ?  He  is  assuredly  a  very  feeble 
creature.  He  must  be  weak,  for  "  his  breath  is  in  his  nostrils."  We  measure 
the   strength   of    a  chain    by   its   weakest  link.      See,   then,   how  weak  man 

6 


82  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

is,  for  he  is  weakness  itself  in  a  vital  point.  2.  Man,  moreover,  is  a  frail 
creature.  It  seems  as  though  his  life  in  his  breath  stood  at  the  gates,  ready 
to  be  gone,  since  it  is  in  his  nostrils.  3.  Man  is  also  a  dying  creature.  Contem- 
plate the  dead !  What  think  you  now  of  your  idol  ?  4.  The  text  also  reminds 
us  that  man  is  a  very  fickle  creature.  His  breath  is  in  his  "  nostrils."  As  hia 
breath  is  affected  by  his  health,  so  is  he  changed.  To-day  he  loves,  and  to- 
morrow he  hates ;  he  promises  fair,  but  he  forgets  his  words.  5.  If  you  read 
the  chapter  through,  you  will  also  find  that  man  is  a  trembling  creature,  a 
cowardly  creature,  a  creature,  indeed,  who,  if  he  were  not  cowardly,  yet  has 
abundant  reason  to  fear.  (Read  from  ver.  19.)  "  They  shall  go  into  the  holes 
of  the  rocks,"  &c.  Think  of  the  days  of  Divine  wrath,  and  especially  of  the  last 
dread  day  of  Judgment,  and  of  the  dismay  which  will  then  seize  upon  many  of 
the  proud  and  great.  Are  you  going  to  make  these  your  confidants  ?  II.  What 
is  to  be  our  relation  to  man,  or  what  does  the  text  mean  when  it  says,  "  Cease 
ye  from  man  "  ?  It  implies,  that  we  very  probably  have  too  much  to  do  with 
this  poor  creature  man  already.  We  may  even  require  to  reverse  our  present 
conduct,  break  up  unions,  cancel  alliances,  and  alter  the  whole  tenor  of  our  con- 
duct. 1.  "  Cease  ye  from  man  "  means,  first,  cease  to  idolise  him  in  your  love. 
It  is  very  common  to  idolise  children.  A  mother  who  had  lost  her  babe  fretted 
and  rebelled  about  it.  She  happened  to  be  in  a  meeting  of  the  Society  of  Friends, 
and  there  was  nothing  spoken  that  morning  except  this  word  by  one  female  Friend 
who  was  moved,  I  doubt  not,  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  say,  "  Verily,  I  perceive 
that  children  are  idols."  She  aid  not  know  the  condition  of  that  mourner's 
mind,  but  it  was  the  right  word,  and  she  to  whom  God  applied  it  knew  how  true 
it  was.  She  submitted  her  rebellious  will,  and  at  once  was  comforted.  Cease 
ye  from  these  little  men  and  women ;  for  their  breath  is  in  their  nostrils,  and 
indeed  it  is  but  feebly  there  in  childhood.  A  proper  and  right  love  of  children 
should  be  cultivated ;  but  to  carry  this  beyond  its  due  measure  is  to  grieve 
the  Spirit  of  God.  You  can  idolise  a  minister,  you  can  idolise  a  poet,  you  can 
idolise  a  patron ;  but  in  so  doing  you  break  the  first  and  greatest  of  the  com- 
mandments, and  you  anger  the  Most  High.  2.  "  Cease  ye  from  man  "  :  cease 
to  idolise  him  in  your  trust.  3.  Cease  to  idolise  any  man  by  giving  him  undue 
honour.  "  Honour  all  men."  A  measure  of  courtesy  and  respect  is  to  be  paid 
to  every  person,  and  peculiarly  to  those  whose  offices  demand  it ;  therefore  is  it 
written,  "  Honour  the  king."  Some  also,  by  their  character,  deserve  much 
respect  from  their  fellow-men ;  but  there  is  a  limit  to  this,  or  we  shall  become 
sycophants  and  slaves,  and,  what  is  worse,  idolaters.  It  grieves  one  to  see  how 
certain  persons  dare  not  even  think,  much  less  speak,  till  they  have  asked  how 
other  people  think.  The  bulk  of  people  are  like  a  flock  of  sheep  ;  there  is  a  gap, 
and  if  one  sheep  goes  through,  all  will  follow.  God's  people  should  scorn  such 
grovelling.  If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  you  will  be  free  indeed.  4.  Equally 
does  the  text  bid  us  cease  from  the  fear  of  man.  5.  Once  more,  cease  from  being 
worried  about  men.  We  ought  to  do  all  we  can  for  our  fellow-men  to  set  them  right 
and  keep  them  right,  both  by  teaching  and  by  example;  but  certain  folks  thiuk 
that  everything  must  go  according  to  their  wishes,  and  if  we  cannot  see  eye  to  eye 
with  them,  they  worry  themselves  and  us.  Let  us  not  be  unduly  cast  down  if  we 
cannot  set  everybody  right.  The  body  politic,  common  society,  and  especially 
the  Church,  may  cause  us  great  anxiety  ;  but  still  the  Lord  reigneth,  and  we  are 
not  to  let  ourselves  die  of  grief.  He  only  requires  of  us  what  He  enables  us  to 
do.  6.  "  But  they  say."  What  do  they  say  ?  Let  them  say.  It  will  not  hurt 
you  if  you  can  only  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  and  cease  from  man.  "  Oh,  but 
they  have  accused  me  of  this  and  that."  Is  it  true  ?  "  No,  sir,  it  is  not  true, 
and  that  is  why  it  grieves  me."  If  it  were  true  it  ought  to  trouble  you ;  but 
if  it  is  not  true  let  it  alone.  Nine  times  out  of  ten  if  a  boy  makes  a  blot  in  his 
copy-book  and  borrows  a  knife  to  take  it  out,  he  makes  the  mess  ten  times  worse  ; 
and  as  in  your  case  there  is  no  blot  after  all,  you  need  not  make  one  by  attempting 
to  remove  what  is  not  there.  All  the  dirt  that  falls  upon  a  good  man  will  brush 
off  when  it  is  dry :  but  let  him  wait  till  it  is  dry,  and  not  dirty  his  hands  with 
wet  mud.  Let  us  think  more  of  God  and  less  of  man.  Come,  let  the  Lord  oui 
God  fill  the  whole  horizon  of  our  thoughts.  Let  our  love  go  forth  to  Him ;  let 
us  delight  ourselves  in  Him.  Let  us  trust  in  Him  that  liveth  for  ever,  in  Him 
whose  promise  never  faileth.  Cease  ye  from  man  because  you  have  come  to  know 
the  best  of  men,  who  is  more  than  man,  even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  He  ha* 
eo  fully  become  the  beloved  of  your  souls,  that  none  can  compare  with  Him. 


chap,  in.]  ISAIAH.  83 

Rest  also  in  the  great  Father  as  to  your  providential  cares :  why  rest  in  men 
when  He  careth  for  you  ?  Rest  in  the  Holy  Spirit  as  to  your  spiritual  needs ; 
why  need  to  depend  on  man  ?  Yea,  throw  yourself  entirely  upon  the  God  all- 
sufficient,  El  Shaddai,  as  Scripture  calls  Him.  III.  Why  are  we  to  cease  from 
man  ?  The  answer  is,  because  he  is  nothing  to  be  accounted  of.  Every  man 
must  cease  from  himself  first,  and  then  from  all  men,  as  his  hope  and  his  trust, 
because  neither  ourselves  nor  others  are  worthy  of  such  confidence.  "  Wherein 
is  he  to  be  accounted  of  ?  "  Compared  with  God  man  is  less  than  nothing  and 
vanity.  Reckon  him  so,  and  act  upon  the  reckoning.  {Ibid.)  God,  the 
Verity  of  verities : — Care  nothing  for  the  vanity  of  vanities,  but  trust  in  the  Verity 
of  verities.  {Ibid.)  Man's  mortality: — "His  breath  is  in  his  nostrils,"  puffed 
out  every  moment,  soon  gone  for  good  and  all.  Man  is  a  dying  creature,  and 
may  die  quickly ;  our  nostrils,  in  which  our  breath  is,  are  of  the  outward  parts 
of  the  body ;  what  is  there  is  like  one  standing  at  the  door  ready  to  depart.  Nay, 
the  doors  of  the  nostrils  are  always  open ;  the  breath  in  them  may  slip  away, 
ere  we  are  aware,  in  a  moment ;  wherein  then  is  man  to  be  accounted  of  ?  Alas, 
no  reckoning  is  to  be  made  of  him  ;  for  he  is  not  what  he  seems  to  be, — what  he 
pretends  to  be,  what  we  fancy  him  to  be.  {M.  Henry.)  Insignificance  of 
men: — A  Sultan,  amusing  himself  with  walking,  observed  a  dervish  sitting  with 
a  human  skull  in  his  lap,  and  appearing  to  be  in  a  profound  reverie.  His  attitude 
and  manner  surprised  the  Sultan,  who  demanded  the  cause  of  his  being  so  deeply 
engaged  in  reflection.  "  Sire,"  said  the  dervish,  "  this  skull  was  presented  to 
me  this  morning,  and  I  have  from  that  moment  been  endeavouring,  in  vain, 
to  discover  whether  it  is  the  skull  of  a  powerful  monarch  like  your  Majesty,  or 
of  a  poor  dervish  like  myself."  {Baxendale's  Anecdotes.)  Folly  of  man  .•— 
It  was  once  remarked  to  Lord  Chesterfield  that  man  is  the  only  creature 
endowed  with  the  power  of  laughter.  "  True,"  said  the  peer ;  "  and  you  may  add, 
perhaps,  that  he  is  the  only  creature  that  deserves  to  be  laughed  at."    (Timbs.) 


CHAPTER  in. 

Outline  of  chapter  : — The  first  part  opens  with  a  general  prediction  of  the  loss  of 
what  they  trusted  in,  beginning  with  the  necessary  means  of  subsistence  (ver.  1). 
We  have  then  an  enumeration  of  the  public  men  who  were  about  to  be  removed, 
including  civil,  military,  and  religious  functionaries,  with  the  practitioners  of  certain 
arts  (vers.  2,  3).  As  the  effect  of  this  removal,  the  government  falls  into  incom- 
petent hands  (ver.  4).  This  is  followed  by  insubordination  and  confusion  (ver.  5). 
At  length,  no  one  is  willing  to  accept  public  office,  the  people  are  wretched,  and 
the  commonwealth  a  ruin  (vers.  6,  7).  This  ruin  is  declared  to  be  the  consequence 
of  sin,  and  the  people  represented  as  their  own  destroyers  (vers.  8,  9).  God's 
judgments,  it  is  true,  are  not  indiscriminate.  The  innocent  shall  not  perish  with 
the  guilty,  but  the  guilty  must  suffer  (vers.  10,  11).  Incompetent  and  faithless 
rulers  must  especially  be  punished,  who  instead  of  being  the  guardians  are  the 
spoilers  of  the  vineyard,  instead  of  protectors  the  oppressors  of  the  poor  (vers.  12-15). 
As  a  principal  cause  of  these  prevailing  evils,  the  prophet  now  denounces  female 
luxury,  and  threatens  it  with  condign  punishment,  privation,  and  disgrace  (vers. 
16,  17).  This  general  denunciation  is  then  amplified  at  great  length,  in  a  detailed 
enumeration  of  the  ornaments  which  were  about  to  be  taken  from  them  and 
succeeded  by  the  badges  of  captivity  and  mourning  (vers.  18-24).  The  agency 
to  be  employed  in  this  retribution  is  a  disastrous  war,  by  which  the  men  are  to  be 
swept  off,  and  the  country  left  desolate  (vers.  25,  26).  The  extent  of  this  calamity 
is  represented  by  a  lively  exhibition  of  the  disproportion  between  the  male  sur- 
vivors and  the  other  sex,  suggesting  at  the  time  the  forlorn  condition  of  the  widows 
of  the  slain  (chap.  iv.  1).     (J.  A.  Alexander.) 

Vers.  1-3.  For  behold  the  Lord  .  .  .  doth  take  away  .  .  .  the  mighty  man. — 
National  leaders  removed : — The  Jewish  nation,  at  this  time,  may  be  considered 
as  represented  by  an  old  building,  ready  to  fall  into  ruin,  to  prevent  which  many 
props  had  been  added.  These  supports,  on  which  it  leaned,  that  were  derived 
from  the  authority,  the  prudence  and  fortitude  of  its  leading  men,  God  threatens 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

to  remove;  in  consequence  of  which  the  State  should  as  certainly  become  ruinous 
as  a  decayed  building,  when  the  props  on  which  it  rested  are  taken  away.  (R. 
Maccvttoch.)  The  death  of  the  renowned  : — There  is  a  tendency  to  trust  in  the 
arm  of  flesh.  It  would  be  most  wicked  if  we  were  ungrateful  for  our  great  deliverers, 
raised  up  by  that  God  to  whom  the  shield  of  the  earth  belongeth ;  but,  at  the  same 
time,  it  must  be  sinful  to  trust  in  them  as  if  they  were  the  authors  of  all,  and, 
therefore,  deserved  all  the  glory.  1.  We  need  the  admonition  which  precedes 
this  text — "  Cease  ye  from  man  (whether  prince  or  senator,  soldier  or  orator, 
counsellor  or  captain),  whose  breath  (whatever  his  strength  or  genius,  talent  or 
fame)  is  in  his  nostrils."  2.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  chance ;  whether  it  be  a 
hair  which  falls  to  the  ground,  or  a  sparrow  that  drops  in  its  weary  way  across 
the  field,  or  a  prince  smitten  from  his  throne,  or  a  dynasty  broken — God  is  in 
them,  giving,  permitting,  overruling,  and  sanctifying ;  it  is  not  the  shot  or  shell, 
the  wave  or  wind,  incident  or  accident,  but  God  that  "  takes  away,"  and  those 
things  which  we  suppose  to  have  played  the  principal  part,  are  merely  servants 
sent  out  by  God  to  lead  the  soldier  from  his  duty  in  the  field,  to  receive  the  crown 
of  glory  and  war  no  more.  3.  But  not  only  is  it  the  Lord,  but  He  has  right  and 
jurisdiction  to  do  so.  He  not  only  reigns,  but  He  rules.  Unsanctified  inter- 
positions of  God  are  the  darkest  judgments;  whilst  therefore,  we  recognise  His 
hand  in  giving,  let  us  recognise  His  hand  in  taking  away.  A  father  and  his  child 
walk.  They  pick  up  a  stone  with  a  green  substance,  which  appears  worthless, 
and  fit  only  to  be  cast  away  ;  but  they  apply  the  microscope,  and  this  green  sub- 
stance on  the  stone  he  finds  to  be  a  magnificent  though  tiny  forest.  So  it  is  with 
any  fact  that  occurs.  Man  looks  at  it  with  his  own  eyes,  sees  it  uninstructive ; 
but  when  seen  in  the  light  of  God's  truth,  he  finds  in  it  what  is  instructive  and 
suggestive.  4.  When  God  removes  from  a  nation  its  props,  pillars,  and  supports, 
He  does  so  to  lead  that  nation  to  see  Himself  more  clearly  and  to  lean  on  Him 
more  entirely.  5.  The  Lord  thus  "  takes  away  "  in  order  to  teach  men  impressively 
this  lesson  which  man  is  very  slow  to  learn — that  death  must  come  upon  all. 
Death  enters  the  cabinets  of  princes  and  statesmen,  the  camp  of  the  hero,  and  the 
hut  of  the  peasant,  without  paying  the  least  respect  to  rank  or  royalty.  (J. 
Cumming,  D.D.)  The  death  of  statesmen  : — I.  Learn  from  the  death  of  a  great 
statesman  the  weight  of  government  in  a  fallen  world.  For  when  we  see 
the  mightiest  minds  that  our  country  has  produced,  a  Fox,  a  Pitt,  a  Liverpool,  a 
Canning,  one  after  another  taking  the  weight  of  government  upon  them,  and 
dropping  under  its  weight  into  the  arms  of  death — can  we  avoid  thinking  of  the 
mighty  mass  of  care  that  has  pressed  them  down  ?  II.  We  are  taught  the  weak- 
ness of  the  shoulders  of  mortal  men.  However  mighty  his  shoulders  may  be, 
he  must  be  a  bold  man  that  would  venture  to  take  up  a  burden  that  has  crushed 
so  many :  and  yet  there  are  many  that  will  venture  on  it ;  for  there  are  those 
who  delight  in  danger,  who  sport  with  difficulties,  and  who  delight  in  doing  what 
no  one  else  can  do.  And  it  is  well  for  society  that  there  are  men  of  moral  courage. 
If  all  preferred  the  comfort  and  quiet  of  domestic  life,  how  could  the  affairs  of 
government  go  on  ?  Yet  there  are  some  burdens,  the  weight  of  which  will  crush 
any  mind,  for  the  sons  of  Anak  are  not  omnipotent.  And  how  knows  any  man 
how  near  he  is  to  this  point,  when  he  shall  be  overwhelmed  with  his  own  duties, 
distracted  with  his  own  cares,  become  a  prey  to  the  very  thing  in  which  he  delighted  ? 
III.  The  uncertainty  of  all  human  affairs.  We  need  to  be  taught  this  with 
a  strong  hand,  for  this  warm  piece  of  moving  clay  that  is  bustling  about  the  earth, 
ready  to  drop  to  pieces  every  moment,  is  so  swollen  with  vanity  that  it  would 
fain  fancy  it  is  made  of  adamant.  Therefore  God  supplies  us  with  strong  reasons, 
at  certain  seasons,  to  teach  us  the  contrary.  IV.  Our  absolute  dependence 
on  the  supreme  Governor.  When  we  behold  the  profound  counsellor  and  the 
mighty  orator,  and  are  entranced  with  their  talents  and  execution,  we  grow 
idolatrous,  and  think  these  men  are  more  than  mortal,  and  that  society  could  not 
go  on  without  them  ;  little  thinking  that  He  who  made  them  as  they  are,  to  be 
employed  as  He  pleases,  and  to  be  laid  aside  when  He  pleases,  can  rai.se  others 
equally  fitted  as  they  are.    (Exod.  iv.  11.)  V.  Another  lesson  which  we  should  learn 

is,  THE  SACRED  DUTY  OF  PRAYER  FOR  KINGS  AND  ALL  IN  AUTHORITY  OVER  US.   Wo 

should  make  our  supplications  that  councils  may  be  assisted,  that  the  cares  of 
government  may  not  overwhelm  and  destroy,  that  there  may  be  a  reasonable 
spirit  prevalent  in  the  public,  so  that  it  may  be  rendered  less  oppressive.     VI.  In 

YOUR  SUPPLICATIONS    ESPECIALLY  REMEMBER   ZlON,    THE   CHURCH   OF  THE   LIVING 

God.     The  Church  has  been  compared  to  a  building,  and  the  world  to  a  scaffold 


chap,  in.]  ISAIAH.  85 

placed  around  it  in  order  to  assist  in  rearing  the  edifice.  Vil.  Learn  to  prepabe 
for  oxjb  own  death.  (J.  Bennett,  D.D.)  The  death  of  the  renowned  excites 
special  attention  and  interest : — In  the  humble  cottage  on  some  mountain  slope, 
in  some  shaded  valley  or  distant  forest,  or  in  the  living  wilderness  of  some  great 
city,  are  the  young  and  the  old,  the  brave  and  the  fair,  passing  away  in  unbroken 
procession  to  the  dust  of  the  sepulchre,  and  to  the  destinies  of  the  life  to  come 
But  the  great  world  without  does  not  regard  it.  Like  the  leaves  of  autumn  that 
strew  our  pathway,  they  sink  into  the  grave,  and  their  death  is  crowded  from 
recollection  by  the  never-ending  succession  of  new  events.  But  when  the  tall 
and  graceful  trees  of  the  forest — the  monarchs  whose  heads  towered  above  the 
general  altitude — are  brought  down  by  some  resistless  blow,  their  fall  is  attended 
with  a  louder  crash,  and  the  earth  itself  trembles  beneath  the  shock  :  so,  when 
the  men  who  walk  upon  the  loftier  heights  of  place  and  power,  when  those  whose 
intellectual  stature  as  they  move  along  the  paths  of  science,  of  history,  of  literature, 
and  of  art,  renders  them  pre-eminent  above  the  general  mass,  are  laid  prostrate 
by  the  stroke  of  death,  the  event  impresses  itself  more  vividly  upon  the  minds  of 
men,  and  calls  out  from  its  hidden  springs  in  the  heart  a  profounder  sentiment 
of  sorrow.  (J.  A.  Todd.)  The  perils  of  greatness  : — Every  state  is  set  in  the 
midst  of  danger,  as  all  trees  are  set  in  the  wind  ;  but  the  tallest  endure  the  greatest 
violence  of  the  tempest.     (Bishop  J.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-8.  I  will  give  children  to  be  their  princes. — Puerile  government : — 
Probably  an  abstract  term  used  for  a  concrete — puerilities  or  childish- 
nesses for  childish  persons.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Juvenile  government  a 
curse : — If  it  is  in  itself  generally  a  misfortune  when  the  king  of  a  country  is  a 
lad  (Eccles.  x.  16),  it  is  doubly  so  when  the  princes  or  magnates  surrounding 
and  advising  him  are  also  youths  or  youngsters  in  the  bad  sense  of  the  term.  .  .  . 
Varying  humour,  utterly  unregulated  and  unrestrained,  rules  supreme.  (F. 
Delitzsch.)  A  foolish  ruler  :  Justinian  II.  (of  Constantinople) : — The  name  of  a 
triumphant  lawgiver  was  dishonoured  by  the  vices  of  a  boy,  who  imitated  his 
namesake  only  in  the  expensive  luxury  of  building.  His  passions  were  strong ; 
his  understanding  was  feeble ;  and  he  was  intoxicated  with  a  foolish  pride  that  his 
birth  had  given  him  the  command  of  millions,  of  whom  the  smallest  community 
would  not  have  chosen  him  for  their  local  magistrate.  His  favourite  ministers 
were  two  beings  the  least  susceptible  of  human  sympathy,  a  eunuch  and  a  monk  ; 
to  the  one  he  abandoned  the  palace,  to  the  other  the  finances  ;  the  former  corrected 
the  emperor's  mother  with  a  scourge,  the  latter  suspended  the  insolvent  tributaries, 
with  their  heads  downward,  over  a  slow  and  smoky  fire.     (Gibbon's  Borne.) 

Ver.  5.  And  the  people  shall  be  oppressed. — Tyranny : — The  dissolution 
of  good  order  and  political  confusion.  Oppression  and  pride  everywhere 
prevail.  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  State  -  chaos  : — There  is  a  natural  relation  of 
classes.  Whilst  all  that  is  purely  mechanical  and  arbitrary  is  to  be  viewed 
with  suspicion,  yet  there  is  a  natural  sequence  in  things;  there  is,  indeed, 
what  is  called  a  fitness  or  harmony  of  things  ;  and  when  society  is  rightly  inspired 
the  base  man  knows  that  he  is  base,  and  his  baseness  is  his  weakness,  ana  his 
weakness  defines  his  position ;  and  the  child  knows  himself  to  be  but  a  child, 
and  therefore  he  behaves  himself  with  discretion,  and  is  limited  by  circumstances 
which  he  cannot  control.  Once  let  the  moral  centre  be  lost,  and  then  you  have 
lost  all  arithmetical  counting,  all  geometrical  relationship,  all  figure  and  form 
and  mechanism  and  security,  and  the  foursquare  is  thrown  out  of  its  parallel, 
and  that  which  was  right  is  numbered  with  that  which  is  forbidden.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  An  evil  spirit  in  the  nation  : — It  is  here  threatened  that  God  would  send 
an  evil  spirit  among  them  (Judg.  ix.  23),  which  would  make  them — 1.  Injurious 
and  unneighbourly  one  towards  another.  "  The  people  shall  be  oppressed  every 
one  by  his  neighbour,"  and  their  princes,  being  children,  take  no  care  to  restrain 
the  oppressors,  or  relieve  the  oppressed.  Nor  is  it  to  any  purpose  to  appeal  to 
them.  2.  Insolent  and  disorderly  towards  their  superiors.  It  is  as  ill  an  omen 
to  a  people  as  can  be,  when  the  rising  generation  among  them  is  generally  untract- 
able,  rude,  and  ungovernable,  when  "  the  child  behaves  himself  proudly  against 
the  ancient "  ;  whereas  he  should  "  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head,  and  honour 
the  face  of  the  old  man  "  (Lev.  xix.  32).  When  young  people  are  conceited  and 
pert,  and  carry  it  scornfully  towards  their  superiors,  it  is  not  only  a  reproach  to 
themselves,  but  of  ill  consequence  to  the  public ;  it  slackens  the  reins  of  govern* 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

ment,  and  weakens  the  hands  that  hold  them.  It  is  likewise  ill  with  a  people 
when  persons  of  honour  cannot  support  their  authority,  but  are  affronted  by  the 
base  and  beggarly ;  when  judges  are  insulted  by  the  mob,  and  their  power  set  at 
defiance.  (M.  Henry.)  A  lamentable  state  of  society  : — Homo  homini  lupus — 
man  becomes  a  wolf  to  man  ;  jusque  datum  sceleri — wickedness  receives  the  stamp 
of  law ;  nee  hospes  ab  hospite  tutus — the  guest  and  the  host  are  in  danger  from 
each  other.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  A  man  snail  take  hold  of  his  brother.  —  Seeking  to  transfer 
rulership : — Here  we  have  the  law  of  primogeniture.  By  the  law  of  the 
State  it  was  right  that  the  eldest  son  should  take  a  certain  definite  and  ruling 
position.  But  he  was  naked ;  he  had  not  one  rag  with  which  to  cover  his  nudity ; 
and  seeing  one  of  his  younger  brethren  with  a  coat  on,  with  a  garment  on,  he  sprang 
upon  him  and  said,  By  that  coat  I  ask  thee  to  take  my  place :  thou  hast  at  least 
so  much,  and  I  have  nothing ;  come,  be  head  of  the  family  and  be  prince  of  the 
tribe.  But  the  younger  son  scorned  the  proffered  dignity.  The  moral  base 
had  gone,  and  therefore  the  mechanical  dignity  was  of  no  account ;  the  pedestal 
of  righteousness  had  been  struck  away,  and  the  statue  of  nominal  dignity  fell 
into  the  dust.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Let  this  ruin  be  under  thy  hand  "  .• — Or, 

according  to  a  various  reading,  making  a  very  good  sense,  "  Take  into  thy  hand 
our  ruinous  state."  Endeavour,  if  possible,  to  retrieve  our  affairs,  now  in  sad 
disorder,  prognosticating  our  destruction  as  a  people  :  deliver,  if  possible,  from 
injustice  and  oppression,  from  foreign  enemies  and  domestic  troubles  ;  and,  in 
the  prosecution  of  these  great  and  important  purposes,  we  will  act  as  thy  dutiful 
subjects.  (R.  Maccidloch.)  Government  going  a-begging:  —  Here — 1.  It  is 
taken  for  granted  that  there  is  no  way  of  redressing  all  these  grievances  and 
bringing  things  into  order  again,  but  by  good  magistrates,  that  shall  be  invested 
with  power  by  common  consent,  and  shall  exert  that  power  for  the  good  of  the 
community.  And  it  is  probable  this  was  in  many  places  the  true  origin  of  govern- 
ment. Men  found  it  necessary  to  unite  in  a  subjection  to  one  who  was  thought 
fit  for  such  a  trust,  in  order  to  the  welfare  and  safety  of  them  all,  being  aware  that 
they  must  be  either  ruled  or  ruined.  2.  The  case  is  represented  as  very  deplorable, 
and  things  come  to  a  sad  pass ;  for — (1)  Children  being  their  princes,  every  man 
will  think  himself  fit  to  prescribe  who  shall  be  a  magistrate,  and  will  be  for  pre- 
ferring his  own  relations.  (2)  Men  will  find  themselves  under  a  necessity  even  of 
forcing  power  into  the  hands  of  those  that  are  thought  to  be  fit  for  it.  Nay,  a 
man  shall  urge  it  upon  his  brother;  whereas,  commonly,  men  are  not  willing 
that  their  equals  should  be  their  superiors ;  witness  the  envy  of  Joseph's  brethren. 
3.  It  will  be  looked  upon  as  ground  sufficient  for  the  preferring  a  man  to  be  a 
ruler,  that  he  hath  clothing  better  than  his  neighbours ;  a  very  poor  qualification 
to  recommend  a  man  to  a  place  of  trust  in  the  government.  It  was  a  sign  the 
country  was  much  impoverished,  when  it  was  a  rare  thing  to  find  a  man  that  had 
good  clothes,  or  that  could  afford  to  buy  himself  an  alderman's  gown,  or  a  judge's 
robes ;  and  that  the  people  were  very  unthinking,  when  they  had  so  much  respect 
to  a  man  in  gay  clothing  with  a  gold  ring  (James  ii.  2,  3),  that  for  the  sake  thereof 
they  would  make  him  their  ruler.  It  had  been  some  sense  to  have  said,  Thou 
hast  wisdom,  integrity,  experience,  be  thou  our  ruler ;  but  it  was  a  jest  to  say, 
Thou  hast  clothing,  be  thou  our  ruler.  A  poor,  wise  man,  though  in  vile  raiment, 
delivered  a  city  (Eccles.  ix.  15).  (Matthew  Henry. )  "  I  will  not  be  an  healer  "  : — 
"  I  do  not  want  to  be  a  surgeon  " — he  does  not  like  to  be  a  binder,  namely,  of  the 
broken  arms  and  legs  and  ribs  of  the  ruined  State  (xxx.  26,  i.  6,  lxi.  1). 
(F.  Delitzsch.)  A  reason  for  refusing  rulership  : — "  In  my  house  is  neither 
bread  nor  clothing."  If  he  saith  true,  it  was  a  sign  men's  estates  were  sadly 
ruined  ;  if  he  do  not  speak  truth,  it  was  a  sign  men's  consciences  were  sadly 
debauched,  when,  to  avoid  the  expense  of  an  office,  they  would  load  themselves 
with  the  guilt  of  perjury,  (M.  Henry. )  Clothing  in  the  East : — It  was  customary 
in  Eastern  countries,  where  fashions  did  not  vary  as  among  us,  to  collect  immense 
quantities  of  clothes  and  provisions,  not  only  for  the  person's  own  use,  and  that 
of  his  family,  but  for  presents  upon  proper  occasions.  This  appears  plainly. 
from  the  sacred  writings,  to  have  been  the  practice  among  the  Jews.  This,  as  a 
celebrated  writer  observes,  explains  the  meaning  of  the  excuse  made  by  him  that 
is  desired  to  undertake  the  government.  He  alleges  he  hath  not  wherewithal 
to  support  the  dignity  of  that  station  by  such  acts  of  liberality  and  hospitality 
as  (he  law  and  custom  required  of  persons  in  high  rank.     (R.  Maccidloch.) 


chap,  m.]  ISAIAH.  87 

Ver.  8.  For  Jerusalem  Is  ruined.  —  "Jerusalem  is  ruined/"  —  forfeited 
privilege : — What  a  verse  is  the  eighth !  We  cannot  even  now  read  it 
without  quailing  under  the  awful  representation — "  For  Jerusalem  is  ruined." 
We  thought  Jerusalem  never  could  be  ruined :  the  mountains  were  round  about 
her,  and  to  the  old  psalmists  those  mountains  signified  the  security  of  the  righteous. 
Is  beauty  no  protection  ?  is  ancient  history  of  no  account  ?  will  not  the  dead 
kings  of  Judah  speak  for  her  in  the  time  of  her  trial  ?  We  cannot  live  upon  our 
past,  upon  our  forefathers,  upon  our  vanished  glories  ;  morality  must  be  as  fresh 
as  the  dew  of  the  morning ;  our  righteousness  must  be  as  clear,  personal,  and 
definite  as  the  action  which  we  perform  at  the  living  moment.  A  man  cannot 
lay  up  a  character  and  fall  back  upon  it  if  his  present  conduct  is  out  of  keeping 
with  it ;  he  himself  takes  the  juice  and  sap  out  of  the  character  which  he  once 
lived.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  "The  eyes  of  His  glory"  : — The  glory  of  God  ia 
that  eternal  manifestation  of  His  holy  nature  in  its  splendour  which  man  pictures 
to  himself  anthropomorphically,  because  he  cannot  conceive  of  anything  more 
sublime  than  the  human  form.  It  is  in  this  glorious  form  that  Jehovah  looks 
upon  His  people.  In  this  is  mirrored  His  condescending  yet  jealous  love,  His 
holy  love,  which  breaks  forth  into  wrath  against  all  who  requite  His  love  with 
hate.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  The  fall  of  the  Campanile  at  St.  Mark's,  Venice  : — Latterly 
it  had  been  ignobly  used  as  an  office  for  the  State  lotteries  which  are  demoralising 
Italy.  In  cutting  the  wall  for  the  purposes  of  that  office,  the  whole  building 
had  been  weakened.  The  event  spoke  as  a  parable  whose  meaning  could  not 
be  missed.  That  great,  stately  tower,  with  its  history  of  a  thousand  years,  fell, 
because  of  the  little  lottery  office  which  cut  into  it  and  weakened  it.  There  is 
an  application  of  the  parable  to  our  own  national  life.  Is  it  possible  that  a  great 
empire  like  ours  can  fall  through  the  gambling  habit — the  lowest  and  meanest 
of  the  vices — insidiously  spreading  through  all  classes  of  the  community  ?  Is  it 
possible  to  conceive  that  such  a  vice  should  so  undermine  the  character  of  the 
people,  that  the  stately  structure,  built  by  heroic  men  in  the  past,  shall  crash  down 
in  swift  ruin  at  the  end  ?  (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  Ruinous  effects  of  sin  : — It 
is  just  like  what  happens  sometimes  in  a  forest.  In  a  calm  day,  when  all  else  is 
silent,  something  crashes  heavily  through  the  branches,  and  we  know  a  tree  has 
fallen.  No  axe  was  lifted,  no  white  lightning  streamed,  there  was  only  a  passing 
breeze.  The  wind  that  did  but  gently  sway  the  little  flower,  shook  down  that 
towering  tree,  because  long  before  the  catastrophe,  its  vital  progress  had  been 
disturbed,  and  millions  of  foul  insects  had  entered  it,  which,  leaving  its  bark 
untouched,  and  its  boughs  unshorn  of  their  glory,  had  slowly,  silently,  withered 
its  strong  fibres  and  hollowed  its  core.     (C.  Stanford.) 

Ver.  9.  The  shew  of  their  countenance  doth  witness  against  them. — 
Character  revealed  in  the  countenance  : — What  is  meant  is  the  insolent  look  which 
their  sinfulness  is  stamping  upon  their  faces,  without  the  self-condemnation 
which  in  others  takes  the  form  of  dread  to  commit  sin.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  "  Woe 
unto  their  sotd  "  I — 1.  The  condition  of  sinners  is  woeful  and  very  deplorable. 
2.  It  is  the  soul  that  is  damaged  and  endangered  by  sin.  Sinners  may  prosper 
in  their  outward  estates,  and  yet  there  may  be  a  woe  to  their  souls.  3.  Whatever 
evil  befalls  sinners,  it  is  of  their  own  procuring  ( Jer.  ii.  19).     (M.  Henry. ) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Say  ye  to  the  righteous,  that  It  shall  be  well  with  him.— 

Retribution  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  : — In  this  passage  the  Sovereign  of  the 
universe  proclaims  to  all  the  subjects  of  His  moral  government  the  great  sanctions 
of  His  law.  Two  powerful  principles  of  action  in  our  nature  are  addressed,  namely, 
hope  and  fear.  By  the  one  we  are  allured  to  love  and  pursue  that  which  is  right  ; 
by  the  other,  we  are  restrained  from  that  which  is  wrong.  The  combined  influence 
of  both  of  these  principles  is,  in  most  cases,  necessary  to  the  production  and  security 
of  human  virtue.  God  has  established  a  natural  and  intimate  connection  between 
virtue  and  happiness,  and  between  sin  and  misery,  and  in  consequence  of  this  connec- 
tion, it  must  necessarily  happen  that  it  will  be,  on  the  whole,  well  with  the  righteous 
and  ill  with  the  wicked.  I.  Let  us  inquire  what  confirmation  this  doctrine  receives 
from  what  we  know  of  the  present  constitution  of  things,  and  from  what  we  find  to  be 

THE  USUAL  COURSE  OF  God's  MORAL  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  WORLD.       If  we  Consult  the 

structure  and  operations  of  our  own  souls,  we  shall  find  many  striking  intimations  of 
this  doctrine  there.  The  Author  of  our  nature  has  made  us  rational,  free,  moral,  and 
accountable  beings.     For  the  direction  and  government  of  our  conduct,  He  has 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

implanted  within  us  a  principle,  which  we  call  conscience,  which  distinguishes  actions 
as  good  or  bad,  and  which  always  urges  us  to  perform  the  one  and  to  avoid  the  other. 
He  has,  moreover,  enforced  the  authority  of  this  principle,  by  annexing  present 

Pleasure  to  obedience  to  its  dictates,  and  present  pain  to  a  violation  of  them, 
he  passions  of  hope  and  fear  ever  attend  on  conscience ;  the  one  to  encourage 
and  reward  faithful  adherence  to  its  commands ;  the  other  to  restrain  and  punish 
a  wilful  transgression  of  them.  Now,  all  this  takes  place  in  consequence  of  that 
moral  constitution  which  God  has  given  us,  and  of  that  intimate  connection  which 
He  Himself  has  established  between  virtue  and  happiness  and  between  sin  and 
misery.  So  long,  therefore,  as  the  moral  constitution  of  our  nature  continues 
the  same,  and  so  long  as  God  continues  to  be  the  same  infinitely  wise,  holy,  and 
good  Being,  so  long  must  it  necessarily  happen  that,  on  the  whole,  it  will  be  well 
with  the  righteous  and  ill  with  the  wicked.  II.  This  doctrine  receives  additional 
confirmation  from  the  universal  consent  of  mankind.  In  consequence  of 
that  moral  nature  which  God  has  given  us,  by  which  we  cannot  but  approve  that 
which  we  know  to  be  right,  and  condemn  that  which  we  know  to  be  wrong,  all 
men  are  agreed  that  vice  (as  far  as  they  know  it  to  be  such)  should  be  restrained 
and  punished,  and  that  virtue  should  be  encouraged  and  rewarded.  Hence,  in 
all  governments,  laws  are  enacted  against  wickedness  and  for  the  protection  and 
encouragement  of  the  righteous.  III.  A  further  confirmation  of  this  doctrine  is 
derived  from  what  appear  to  be  the  principles  upon  which  God's  present 
moral  government  of  the  world  is  conducted.  We  find  that,  in  most  cases, 
present  good  is  connected  by  Him  with  virtuous  dispositions  and  habits ;  and 
present  evil,  with  sinful  tempers  and  practices.  And  although  this  connection 
is  not  always  so  intimate  and  inseparable,  as  that  punishment  immediately  follows 
transgression,  and  reward  instantly  attends  obedience,  yet  the  natural  retribu- 
tions or  effects  of  virtue  and  vice  are  exhibited  with  sufficient  frequency,  to  show 
us  in  what  light  God  regards  them.  With  certain  vices,  we  find  that  God  has 
connected  terrible  physical  evils,  as  their  proper  consequences.  Intemperance, 
in  most  instances,  induces  disease,  excruciating  pains  and  premature  death.  It 
impairs  the  mind,  and  is  generally  attended  with  the  loss  of  property,  and  invari- 
ably with  the  loss  of  reputation.  With  some  other  of  the  vices  of  sensuality  are 
connected  the  most  loathsome  and  destructive  maladies,  in  the  endurance  of 
which  the  victim  suffers  a  dreadful  retribution.  And  with  regard  to  other  vices, 
it  not  unfrequently  happens  that  the  events  of  providence  are  so  ordered  in 
reference  to  the  perpetrators  of  them  that  the  wicked  man  becomes  miserable, 
notwithstanding  all  his  worldly  possessions  and  honours,  and  all  that  he  has  can 
give  him  neither  joy  not  quietude.  On  the  contrary,  God  has  connected  with 
temperance  and  industry,  health,  cheerfulness,  and  competency.  To  the  godly 
there  is  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come. 
This  promise  we  see  fulfilled,  in  part,  in  the  general  esteem  and  love  in  which  the 
virtuous  are  held,  and  in  the  usual  prosperity  of  their  affairs.  If  they  have  not 
abundance,  they  have  a  competency  ;  or,  if  they  are  abridged  in  that  respect, 
they  have  friends  and  a  contented  mind.  Besides,  the  events  of  providence  are, 
in  general,  so  ordered  with  regard  to  them,  that  they  find  "  all  things  working 
together  for  their  good."  Upon  these  principles  does  the  course  of  God's  moral 
government  of  mankind  appear  now  to  be  conducted.  And  from  what  is  now 
known  of  the  principles  of  His  government,  we  may  confidently  infer  that,  during 
the  whole  of  man's  continuance  in  being,  it  will  always  be  well  with  the  righteous 
and  ill  with  the  wicked.  (J.  Bartlelt.)  Objections  to  God's  moral  government : — 
1.  "  Good  and  evil  are  often  so  promiscuously  distributed  in  the  present  life,  that 
we  cannot  with  certainty  infer  what  are  the  principles  upon  which  God's  govern- 
ment of  mankind  is  conducted.  The  fraudulent  and  wicked  are  frequently 
prosperous  and  rich  and  flattered,  while  the  righteous  are  often  poor,  neglected, 
oppressed,  and  despised."  This  is  frequently  the  fact,  and  were  the  present  the 
only  state  in  which  mankind  were  to  exist,  and  were  worldly  riches  and  honours 
the  only  and  the  proper  reward  of  virtue,  and  were  they,  in  themselves,  that  real 
good  which  mankind  fancy  them  to  be,  then,  this  fact  alone  would  render  this 
whole  doctrine  suspicious,  and  the  arguments  adduced  in  support  of  it  inconclusive. 
But  it  must  first  be  proved  that  the  present  is  the  only  state  in  which  mankind 
are  to  exist ;  a  position,  which  few  will  pretend  to  sustain,  and  against  which 
innumerable  arguments  array  themselves,  suggested  by  the  structure  and  opera- 
tions of  our  own  minds  ;  the  desires  and  hopes  which  are  ever  springing  up  within 
us;  by  our  capacity  of  knowledge,  goodness,  and  happiness,  which  here  are  only 


chap,  ra.]  ISAIAH.  89 

imperfectly  attained,  and  also  by  that  very  unequal  distribution  of  good  and  evil, 
in  the  present  life,  which  has  been  objected  to.  2.  It  is  objected  that  "  the  miseries 
attending  upon  wickedness  in  this  world  are  punishment  enough  for  the  vicious, 
and  therefore  they  will  be  exempted  from  further  suffering  hereafter."  It  is 
true  that,  in  the  present  life,  there  is  much  misery  attending  upon  wickedness ; 
but  this  furnishes  not  the  least  ground  for  the  supposition  that  misery  will  ever 
cease  to  be  connected  with  sin,  as  its  natural  and  necessary  consequence.  On 
the  contrary,  it  affords  a  very  strong  proof  that  this  connection  will  ever  exist, 
and  that  so  long  as  men  are  wicked,  so  long  will  they  be  miserable.  It  is  agreeable 
to  the  nature  of  things  that  it  should  be  so.  In  the  natural  world,  we  find  that 
fruit  corresponds  to  the  nature  of  the  tree  that  bears  it ;  the  grain  that  is  reaped 
to  the  seed  that  was  sown.  3.  "  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  Divine  mercy  that  the 
wicked  should  ever  experience  any  more  suffering  than  what  they  endure  in  this 
world."  It  savours  not  a  little  of  presumption  for  creatures  of  such  limited,  weak, 
and  erring  minds  as  ours  to  undertake  to  decide,  with  regard  to  the  various  measures 
of  the  Divine  government,  what  is  and  what  is  not  consistent  with  God's  mercy. 
No  one  thinks  to  arraign  the  Divine  government  for  connecting  with  sin,  in  the 
present  life,  distress  of  mind,  disgrace,  and  suffering.  And  were  our  stay  on 
earth  prolonged  to  millions  of  years  it  would  still  be  thought  just  and  right,  and 
entirely  consistent  with  the  meroy  of  God,  that  the  same  evils  should  attend  the 
wicked,  and  the  same  good  should  attend  the  righteous.  It  is  an  error,  common 
to  many,  that  they  look  upon  the  evils  which  attend  upon  sin  in  this  life,  as  a 
punishment  vindictively  appointed  by  God,  to  be  endured  by  the  transgressor, 
as  a  penalty  for  having  violated  His  law,  and  that  after  he  has  endured  it,  he  has 
paid  the  price  of  his  transgression ;  the  sin  for  which  he  has  suffered  is  expiated. 
and  therefore  he  thinks  it  would  be  unjust  that  he  should  be  subjected  to  any 
more  suffering,  although  his  disposition  be  not  changed  in  the  least.  There  is 
hardly  a  sentiment  that  can  be  named,  more  injurious  in  its  influence  than  this, 
where  it  is  fully  entertained.  This  error  proceeds  from  misapprehension  of  the 
design  of  God  in  connecting  evil  with  sin.  The  miseries  which  are  consequent 
upon  sin  are  not  appointed  vindictively,  as  a  punishment ;  but  benevolently,  as 
preventives  of  it.  Our  Maker  has  kindly  placed  at  the  entrance  of  every  path 
of  vice,  pain,  disgrace,  and  suffering,  to  deter  us  from  entering  therein ;  or  if  we 
have  entered,  to  make  us  retrace  our  steps.  Every  onward  step  we  take  in  a 
6inful  course,  these  evils  assail  us.  (Ibid.)  The  righteous  and  the  wicked,  their 
reward  and  their  woe  : — "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation,  but  sin  is  a  reproach 
to  any  people."  Plainly  do  we  see  this  exemplified  in  the  history  of  God's  once 
favoured  people,  the  Jews.  I.  The  reward  of  the  righteous.  1.  We  must, 
before  we  contemplate  their  reward,  inquire  who  are  meant  by  the  righteous. 
The  Bible  elsewhere  tells  us,  "  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  All  our 
powers  and  faculties  are  represented  as  disordered  and  depraved.  After  the 
Holy  Spirit  has  convinced  any  one  of  sin,  humbled  his  heart,  and  won  his  affections 
to  Christ,  that  man  is  "  accounted  righteous  " — "  righteousness  is  imputed  unto 
him  also,"  as  it  was  unto  faithful  Abraham.  And  "  as  a  refiner's  fire  "  will  the 
Holy  Spirit  gradually  purify  all  those  powers  and  faculties  of  the  now  justified 
sinner  that  were  once  prostituted  to  the  debasing  service  of  the  flesh,  the  world, 
and  Satan.  2.  And  now  we  are  prepared  to  notice  his  reward.  We  cannot, 
indeed,  imagine  that  an  infinitely  glorious  Creator  can  ever  become  obligated  to 
reward  a  creature's  faith  and  service  :  nevertheless,  there  is  a  "  reward  of  grace." 

(1)  It  shall  be  well  with  him  in  life.  Is  he  young  ?  He  shall,  in  the  Spirit  of 
adoption,  and  through  a  Saviour's  mediation,  cry  unto  the  eternal  God,  "  My 
Father,  Thou  art  the  guide  of  my  youth."  Is  he  engaged  in  the  necessary  cares 
and  businesses  of  the  world  ?  He  shall  be  "  kept  in  the  hour  of  temptation." 
Is  he  "  small  and  of  no  reputation  "  ?  Angels  shall  minister  unto  him.  Is  he 
poor  T  "  God  hath  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world  "  ;  riches  of  grace  below,  and 
riches  of  glory  in  reversion,  far  outweigh  in  excellence  and  value  every  earthly 
good  whatever.     Is  he  "  in  sorrow,  need,  pain,  sickness,  or  any  other  adversity  "  ? 

'  The  high  and  lofty  One  "  will  "  make  for  him  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness." 

(2)  It  shall  be  well  with  him  also  in  death.  That  which  to  nature  is  commonly 
terrible  and  affrighting,  is  to  the  regenerate  man — if  not  always  desirable,  at  least, 
often  so,  and  never  otherwise  than  safe  and  happy.  (3)  It  shall  be  well  with  him 
in  eternity.  II.  The  woe  of  the  wicked.  1.  And,  as  before  we  inquired, 
Who  were  meant  by  the  righteous  ?  so  here  we  must  ask,  Whom  are  we  to  under- 
stand by  the  wicked  7    Although,  in  a  general  way,  people  allow  themselves  to 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj    m 


be  sinners,  yet  even  whilst  making  this  admission,  there  is  evidently  no  conscious- 
ness of  sin,  no  apprehension  of  its  adequate  desert,  no  sorrow  for  it,  no  hatred  to 
it.  2.  Their  woe.  Here  the  woe  of  the  wicked  is  called  their  "  reward  "  ;  and 
a  reward  it  is :  for  while  "  eternal  life  "  is  bestowed  as  a  "  gift  through  Jesus 
Christ,"  upon  the  righteous,  the  "  woe  "  of  the  wicked  is  paid  to  them  as  '  wages  " 
earned.  (1)  It  shall  be  ill  with  the  wicked  in  life.  The  wicked  may,  as  the 
Scripture  says,  "  bless  himself  in  his  heart,  saying,  I  shall  have  peace,  though  I 
walk  in  the  imagination  of  my  heart,  to  add  drunkenness  to  thirst "  ;  but  '  the 
anger  of  the  Lord  and  His  jealousy  shall  smoke  against  that  man,  and  all  the 
curses  that  are  written  in  this  Book  shall  lie  upon  him."  The  life  of  the  wicked 
is  one  "  woeful  day,"  nor  is  there  a  period  of  it,  however  marked  either  by  pros- 
perous or  adverse  circumstances,  wherein  it  is  not  "  ill  "  with  him.  (2)  And  can 
it  be  otherwise  in  death  ?  "I  am  not  afraid  to  die,"  says  many  a  careless  man : 
"  I  heartily  wish  you  were  so,"  is  the  mental  answer  of  the  pious  minister.  The 
stupid  insensibility  of  the  unhumbled,  unawakened  sinner,  even  death  itself  can 
scarcely  appal.  The  same  self-delusion  prevails  in  the  expiring  moments  as 
marked  the  days  of  life  and  vigour.  (3)  It  shall  be  ill  with  the  wicked  for  ever. 
(W.  Mudge,  M.A.)  Cheering  words  and  solemn  warnings  : — The  Book  of  God 
speaks  but  little  of  upper  and  lower  classes ;  it  says  but  little  concerning  the 
various  ranks  into  which  civil  and  political  institutions  have  divided  the  race  of  man; 
but  from  its  first  page  to  its  last  it  is  taken  up  with  this  grand  division,  the  righteous 
and  the  wicked.  The  line  of  nature  and  the  line  of  grace  run  on  the  same  as  ever ; 
the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent  contend  with  each  other  still. 
A  crimson  line  runs  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  the  line  of  atoning 
sacrifice  ;  faith  crosses  that  line,  but  nothing  else  can.  There  is  a  sharp  line  of 
division  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  as  clear  as  that  which  divides  death 
from  life.  There  are  no  "  betweenites  "  ;  no  amphibious  dwellers  in  grace  and 
out  of  grace ;  no  monstrous  nondescripts,  who  are  neither  sinners  nor  saints. 
I.  The  well-being  of  the  righteous.  1.  Observe  the  fact  mentioned.  "  It 
shall  be  well  with  him  "  ;  that  is  the  whole  of  the  declaration ;  but  the  very  fewness 
of  the  words  reveals  a  depth  of  meaning.  (1)  We  may  gather  from  the  fact  that 
the  text  is  without  descriptive  limits ;  that  it  is  well  with  the  righteous  always. 
It  shall  be  well  with  the  righteous,  especially,  in  futurity.  Well,  upon  Divine 
authority.  (2)  It  is  well,  we  may  rest  assured  again,  with  our  best  selves.  The 
text  does  not  say  it  is  always  well  with  our  bodies,  but  our  bodies  are  not  ourselves, 


(4)  - 

saints  happy,  and  therefore  He  says  to  His  prophets,  "  Say  ye  to  the  righteous, 
it  shall  be  well  with  him."  It  is  not  wise  sometimes  to  remind  a  man  of  his  wealth, 
and  rank,  and  prospects,  for  pride  is  so  readily  stirred  up  in  us.  But  it  is  not 
dangerous  to  assure  the  Christian  that  it  is  well  with  him.  (5)  It  is  no  wonder 
that  it  is  well  with  the  believer  when  you  consider  that  his  greatest  trouble  i3 
past.  His  greatest  trouble  was  the  guilt  of  sin.  (6)  Then,  your  next  greatest 
trouble  is  doomed — indwelling  sin.  (7)  With  regard  to  the  Christian,  he  knows 
that  his  best  things  are  safe.  As  for  his  worst  things,  they  only  work  his  good. 
(8)  It  must  be  well  with  the  Christian,  because  God  has  put  within  him  many 
graces,  which  help  to  make  all  things  well.  Has  he  difficulties  ?  Faith  laughs  at 
them,  and  overcomes  them.  Has  he  trials  ?  Love  accepts  them,  seeing  the  Father's 
hand  in  them  all.  Has  he  sicknesses  ?  Patience  kisses  the  rod.  Is  he  weary  ? 
Hope  expects  a  rest  to  come.  The  sparkling  graces  which  God  has  put  within 
the  man's  soul  qualify  him  to  overcome  in  all  conflicts,  and  to  make  this  world 
subject  to  his  power  in  every  battle  ;  I  mean  that  he  getteth  good  out  of  the  worst 
ill,  or  throweth  that  ill  aside  by  the  majesty  of  the  life  that  is  in  him.  (9)  Then 
mark  how  the  Christian  has,  beside  what  is  put  within  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
this  to  comfort  him,  namely,  that  day  by  day  God  the  Holy  Ghost  visits  him  with 
fresh  life  and  fresh  power.  (10)  Let  me  run  over  a  few  things  which  the  Christian 
has,  from  each  of  which  it  may  be  inferred  it  must  be  well  with  him.  He  has  a 
bank  that  never  breaks,  the  glorious  throne  of  grace  ;  and  he  has  only  to  apply 
on  bended  knee  to  get  what  he  will.  He  has  ever  near  him  a  most  sweet  companion, 
whose  loving  converse  is  so  delightful  that  the  roughest  roads  grow  smooth,  and 
the  darkest  nights  glow  with  brightness.  The  believer  has  an  arm  to  lean  upon 
also,  an  arm  that  is  never  weary,  never  feeble,  never  never  withdrawn  ;  so  that  if 
he  hath  to  climb  along  a  rugged  way,  the  more  rough  the  road  the  more  heavily 


chap,  m.]  ISAIAH.  91 

he  leans,  and  the  more  graciously  he  is  sustained.  Moreover,  he  is  favoured  with 
a  perpetual  Comforter.  It  is  well  with  the  righteous  when  he  comes  to  die.  It 
is  well  with  the  righteous  after  death.  2.  The  ground  upon  which  it  is  well  with 
the  righteous.  "  They  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings."  That  is  the  only  terms 
upon  which  the  old  covenant  can  promise  that  it  shall  be  well  with  us ;  but  this 
is  not  the  ground  upon  which  you  and  I  stand  under  the  Gospel  dispensation. 
Absolutely  to  eat  the  fruit  of  all  our  doings  would  be  even  to  us,  if  judgment  were 
brought  to  the  line  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet,  a  very  dreadful  thing. 
Yet  there  is  a  limited  sense  in  which  the  righteous  man  will  do  this.  I  prefer, 
however,  to  remark  that  there  is  One  whose  doings  for  us  are  the  grounds  of  our 
dependence,  and,  blessed  be  God,  we  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  His  doings.  He,  the 
Lord  Jesus,  stood  for  us,  and  you  know  what  a  harvest  of  joy  He  sowed  for  us  in 
His  life  and  death.  II.  The  misery  of  the  wicked.  "  Woe,"  &c.  You  have 
only  to  negative  all  that  I  have  already  said  about  the  righteous.  But  why  is  it 
ill  with  the  wicked  ?  It  must  be  ill  with  him  ;  he  is  out  of  joint  with  all  the  world. 
The  man  has  an  enemy  who  is  omnipotent,  whose  power  cannot  be  resisted  ; 
an  enemy  who  is  all  goodness,  and  yet  this  man  opposes  Him.  How  can  it  be 
well  with  the  stubble  that  fighteth  with  the  flame,  or  with  the  wax  that  striveth 
with  the  fire  ?  An  insect  fighting  with  a  giant,  how  should  it  overcome  ?  And 
thou,  poor  nothingness,  contending  with  the  everlasting  God,  how  can  it  be  any- 
thing but  ill  with  thee  ?  It  is  ill  with  thee,  sinner,  because  thy  joys  all  hang  upon 
a  thread.  It  is  ill  with  you,  because  when  these  joys  are  over  you  have  no  more 
to  come.  It  shall  be  ill  with  the  wicked,  and  let  no  present  appearance  lead 
you  to  doubt  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  happiness  of  the  righteous  in  all  circum- 
stances illustrated  : — I.  Who  are  the  righteous,  and  in  what  sense  it  shall 
be  well  with  them.  1.  In  this  mixed  state,  when  men  are  neither  perfectly 
good  nor  bad,  the  exact  boundaries  are  not  so  easily  fixed,  especially  when  an 
application  is  made  of  these  characters  to  particular  persons,  and  we  judge  con- 
cerning ourselves,  in  which  case  prejudice  and  self-partiality  often  mislead  men; 
and  superstition,  a  very  prevailing  error  among  mankind,  contributes  to  these 
errors  by  leading  them  to  imagine  that  there  is  righteousness  and  religion  in  those 
things  which  have  really  nothing  to  do  with  it.  In  general  the  righteous  is  he 
in  whose  heart  the  morally  good  or  pious,  virtuous  and  pure  affections  rule,  and 
whose  practice  is  habitually  conducted  by  their  direction ;  the  man  who  loves 
God  above  all  things  ;  not  the  person  who  is  altogether  free  from  any  infirmities, 
which,  strictly  speaking,  may  be  called  sinful,  and  who  never,  through  the  whole 
course  of  his  life,  has  by  ignorance  or  surprise  been  drawn  into  those  indeliberate 
actions,  which  upon  a  review  he  cannot  justify.  If  this  were  the  sense  of  righteous- 
ness, who  could  pretend  to  it  ?  2.  In  what  sense  it  shall  be  well  with  him.  The 
meaning  certainly  is  not  that  he  shall  possess  all  external  advantages  in  this  world, 
whereby  his  condition  shall  be  rendered  more  easy  and  prosperous  than  that  of 
the  wicked.  That  is  contrary  to  fact  and  experience,  as  well  as  to  many  plain 
declarations  of  Scripture.  The  stable  uniform  desire  of  the  good  man,  is,  that 
God  may  "  lift  on  him  the  light  of  His  countenance,"  or  grant  him  His  "  favour, 
which  is  better  than  life."  Nor  is  it  to  be  thought  that  Divine  providence  will 
always  interpose  to  rescue  the  righteous  from  those  calamities  that  come  upon 
the  world  of  the  ungodly  in  which  they  live  ;  it  was  not  the  intention  of  the  prophet 
to  assure  them,  that  they  should  be  preserved  from  the  ruin  of  Jerusalem,  and  the 
common  fall  of  Judah,  which  was  to  be  expected  because  of  their  crying  national 
sins,  in  which  the  righteous  had  no  share;  but  that  in  all  events  they  should  be 
happy,  even  though  they  were  involved  in  the  common  desolation,  and  perished 
with  the  multitude  of  sinners.  We  must,  therefore,  in  order  to  understand  fully 
how  it  shall  be  well  with  the  righteous,  enlarge  our  notion  of  the  state  of  man  ; 
we  must  consider  him  in  the  whole  of  his  being,  his  soul  as  well  as  his  body,  and  in 
every  condition  and  period  of  his  existence.  It  is  thus  we  judge  concerning  our 
state  within  the  compass  of  the  present  life,  and  its  affairs.  A  man  may  be  easy 
and  prosperous  in  the  main,  when  his  principal  interests  are  flourishing,  although 
he  meets  with  various  disappointments  in  things  which  are  of  lesser  moment.  In 
like  manner  we  may  justly  say,  it  is  well  with  good  men  when  their  souls  prosper ; 
they  enjoy  inward  peace  and  satisfaction,  and  their  future  happiness  is  secured, 
though  they  are  liable  to  sufferings  in  this  present  time.  II.  Upon  what  evidence 
the  prophet's  assertion  rests,  or  how  it  appears  that  there  is  a  connection 
between  righteousness  and  felicity.  1.  Consider  the  state  and  constitution  of 
human  nature  as  in  fact  we  find  it,  abstracting  from  any  inquiry  concerning  the 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

Author  of  it  and  His  designs  and  conduct  towards  us.  Scarcely  is  there  any  man 
not  conscious,  in  some  measure,  of  the  satisfaction  which  arises  from  morally 
good  dispositions  ;  and  that  this  is  stronger  and  more  intense  than  the  enjoyments 
which  any  sensible  object  can  yield  appears  from  this  consideration,  that  the 
latter  are  frequently  sacrificed  to  the  other.  Who  doth  not  know,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  pains  of  a  self-accusing  heart  ?  2.  Consider  righteousness  not  merely 
as  the  glory  of  the  human  mind,  and  the  naturally  felicitating  exercise  and  attain- 
ment of  its  powers,  but  further,  as  it  is  approved  and  recommended  to  mankind 
by  the  Deity,  their  rightful  and  supreme  Ruler.  We  have  the  clearest  evidence 
that  He  approves  the  good  actions  of  men,  and  disapproves  the  bad ;  whence 
we  infer  that  one  part  of  His  own  character  is  moral  rectitude,  which  is  a  per- 
fection that  necessarily  appears  to  our  minds  amiable,  and  every  way  worthy 
of  the  most  excellent  nature ;  and  since  He  is  our  natural  Governor,  by  whose 
will  we  exist,  are  preserved,  and  all  the  circumstances  of  our  condition  are  deter- 
mined, here  is  a  sufficient  intimation  of  the  rule,  according  to  which  He  doth, 
and  will  always  proceed,  in  His  dispensations  towards  us,  making  us  happy  or 
unhappy.  (J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  All  well  with  the  righteous  : — I.  Who  these 
righteous  are.  1.  A  "  righteous  "  man  before  God  is  made  so  by  the  imputation 
of  Christ's  holy  obedience,  put  to  his  account.  2.  He  has  a  righteous  kingdom 
implanted  and  set  up  in  his  soul.  A  righteous  man  has  proof  of  his  being  such. 
3.  He  can  feed  upon  nothing  but  God's  righteous  provision.  He  cannot  feed 
upon  his  own  obedience,  or  upon  the  mere  letter  of  the  word,  or  upon  his  mere 
judgment.  He  must  have  "  precious  faith  "  to  "  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood 
of  the  Son  of  Man."  4.  He  loves  righteous  fruits — a  holy  walk  in  all  godliness 
and  fear.  II.  The  very  encouraging  language  spoken  respecting  them. 
It  shall  be  well  with  them.  1.  In  providence.  2.  In  spiritual  things.  All  thy 
temptations,  all  thy  darkness,  all  thy  perplexities,  all  thy  disquietudes,  all  thy 
wanderings,  God  will  overrule.  There  shall  never  be  a  night,  but  morning  shall 
come ;  never  a  day  of  adversity,  but  a  day  of  prosperity  shall  follow  ;  never  an 
emptying,  but  there  shall  be  a  filling ;  never  a  bringing  down,  but  He  will  raise 
thee  up  again.  (J.  Warburton. )  The  happiness  of  the  righteous  : — I.  Who  are 
the  righteous  ?  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  the  self-righteous,  who  have  a  high 
opinion  of  themselves.  It  cannot  be  well  with  them,  for  they  deny  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ  by  which  sinners  are  constituted  righteous.  (2)  Not  those  who  deny 
the  necessity  and  importance  of  good  works  (Rom.  vi.  1,  2).  2.  Positively. 
This  leads  to  a  very  affecting  truth,  namely,  that  all  by  sin  are  unrighteous. 
Observe — (1)  Every  true  believer  is  righteous  according  to  the  covenant  of  grace 
(Rom.  v.  1,  iv.  3,  23-25,  v.  18,  19).  (2)  They  have  an  inherent  righteousness 
wrought  in  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  are  "  born  again  " — "  renewed  in 
the  spirit  of  their  minds,"  and  are  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.  (3)  They  declare 
by  their  conduct  that  they  are  righteous.  "  They  love  mercy,  do  justly,"  &c. 
They  "  have  their  fruit  unto  holiness,"  &c.  II.  What  is  their  happiness  ?  "  It 
shall  be  well  with  him."  1.  Their  present  state  of  justification,  &c,  already 
described,  proves  this  :  they  are  free  from  guilt  and  condemnation.  "  Blessed  is 
the  man  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,"  &c.  This  freedom  gives  hope  and  is  the 
precursor  of  blessedness  to  come.  2.  They  have  a  good  conscience  (Heb.  ix.  14, 
x.  21, 22  ;  2  Cor.  i.  12).  3.  They  enjoy  all  the  pleasures  of  true  religion,  arising  from 
the  possession  of  Christian  graces — the  enjoyment  of  Christian  privileges — and  the 
performance  of  Christian  duties.  4.  It  shall  be  well  with  them  in  all  adverse 
circumstances.  5.  In  death,  the  period  when  the  presence  of  God  is  most  needed. 
6.  At  the  resurrection.  "  They  that  have  done  good  shall  come  forth  to  the  resur- 
rection of  life."  7.  At  the  judgment  day  (Mai.  iii.  17).  8.  For  ever  in  heaven. 
They  shall  be  "with  Christ."     (Homilist.)        It  is  well  with  the  righteous: — I.  In 

EVERY  PERIOD  OF  LIFE.  II.  In  EVERY  RELATION  IN  LIFE.  III.  In  EVERY  CON- 
DITION of  life.  IV.  In  death.  V.  In  eternity.  (H.  Woodcock.)  The  end 
of  Christian  life: — "  God  hangs  great  weights  on  slender  wires."  Thus  He  has 
made  Eternity  to  depend  on  Time,  and  our  state  in  heaven  or  in  hell  to  be  decided 
by  our  character  on  earth.  Our  whole  history,  in  like  manner,  often  hangs  upon 
a  trifle ;  and  that  which  moulds  our  character,  upon  an  incident  which  we  hardly 
notice.  Hence  even  the  least  actions  in  themselves  and  in  their  connection  with 
others,  in  leading  to  results,  forming  habits  and  moulding  character,  are  of  the 
highest  importance  to  us,  and  demand  our  most  thoughtful  reflection.  I.  Their 
connection  with  one  another.  No  action  stands  alone ;  each  is  a  link  in  a 
chain  stretching  oat  to  eternity.     Take  the  case  of  an  intemperate  and  unchaste 


chap,  in.]  ISAIAH.  93 

man ;  his  habits  are  neither  without  a  cause  preceding  nor  an  effect  to  follow. 
It  is  quite  possible  that  several  generations  backward,  some  ancestor  of  his, 
through  some  so-called  trivial  accident,  some  casual  meeting,  first  gave  way  to 
drunkenness.  Now  look  onwards  a  few  steps ;  we  will  suppose  ourselves  in  a 
hospital  a  generation  or  two  hence :  as  we  pass  from  ward  to  ward  we  come  to 
a  descendant  of  the  man  before  us — a  poor  creature,  more  miserable  than  any 
we  have  seen  dying  of  some  miserable  disease.  The  cause  of  his  suffering  is  to 
be  found  in  the  intemperance  and  incontinenoy  of  those  who  have  gone  before 
him.  Step  by  step  it  may  be  traced  back  to  the  trifle  which  led  his  forefather 
to  his  first  night  of  revelling  and  drunkenness.  Take  an  instance  on  the  brighter 
side— the  thought  which  first  hit  on  the  art  of  printing.  This  too  arose  from  some 
so-called  trivial  accident.  We  do  not  know  what  preceded  it ;  but  we  may  be 
sure  it  did  not  come  without  some  connection  in  its  author's  mind.  Every  great 
result  strikes  its  roots  deep  into  the  past.  But  what  has  followed  ?  has  it  stood 
alone,  unconnected,  the  act  of  one  isolated  mind  ?  is  not  the  world  rather  full  of 
its  consequences,  one  of  which,  perhaps  the  most  blessed,  is  that  men  of  all  kindreds 
and  nations  may  now  read  in  their  own  tongues  the  wonderful  works  of  God  T 
Both  good  and  evil  actions  fructify,  and  reproduce  themselves  in  various  forms. 
Whither  their  roots  shall  extend,  and  when  shoot  up  again,  whither  their  seed 
may  be  carried,  where  it  may  fall,  and  what  it  shall  produce,  who  can  tell  ?  Some- 
times the  least  promising  seed  will  produce  the  most  abundant  return  of  fruit. 
So  that  we  may  not  pronounce  upon  the  importance  of  an  action,  for  we  do  not 
see  its  connection  ;  neither  may  we  think  any  action  trivial,  for  it  may,  I  had 
almost  said  it  must,  lead  to  consequences  of  importance  throughout  eternity. 
II.  The  effect  of  otjb  actions  on  oubselves  and  on  others.  1.  On  ourselves. 
Every  step  we  take  not  only  brings  us  forward,  but  leaves  a  foot-print  behind. 
Every  thought,  word,  action,  all  we  suffer  and  all  we  do,  not  only  has  its  own 
importance,  and  leads  us  forward  in  the  march  of  life,  but  also  leaves  its  impres- 
sion, its  foot-print  upon  us,  and  tends  to  form,  confirm,  or  change  our  character. 
There  is  a  memorable  instance  in  point,  illustrating  both  the  weakness  of  yielding 
and  the  nobleness  of  holding  fast  to  one's  convictions,  in  the  visit  of  Henry  III. 
of  France  to  Bernard  de  Palissy  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Bastile.  The  King  desired 
to  give  the  celebrated  potter  his  liberty,  asking  as  the  price  of  his  pardon  the  easy 
condition  of  giving  up  his  Protestant  faith  ;  "  My  worthy  friend,"  said  the 
monarch,  "  you  have  now  been  forty-five  years  in  the  service  of  my  mother  and 
myself ;  we  have  suffered  you  to  retain  your  religion  amidst  fire  and  slaughter  ; 
I  am  now  so  pressed  by  the  Guises  and  my  people,  that  I  find  myself  compelled 
to  deliver  you  into  the  hands  of  your  enemies,  and  to-morrow  you  will  be  hurnt 
unless  you  are  converted."  The  old  man  bowed,  touched  by  the  goodness  of 
the  King,  humbled  by  his  weakness,  but  inflexible  in  the  faith  of  his  fathers. 
"  Sire,"  he  answered,  "  I  am  ready  to  give  up  the  remainder  of  my  life  for  the 
honour  of  God ;  you  have  told  me  several  times  that  you  pity  me,  and  now  in 
my  turn  I  pity  you,  who  have  used  the  words  '  I  am  compelled ' ;  it  was  not 
spoken  like  a  king,  Sire,  and  they  are  words  which  neither  you,  nor  the  Guises, 
nor  the  people  shall  ever  make  me  utter  :  Sire,  I  can  die."  By  continually  yield- 
ing, the  monarch  had  become  a  slave  ;  by  continually  acting  up  to  his  convictions, 
the  potter  had  become  more  than  a  king.  "  He  that  ruleth  his  spirit  is  better 
than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  2.  Look  next  at  the  effect  of  our  actions  upon  others. 
Not  only  our  children,  friends,  servants,  but  all  we  have  any  intercourse  with, 
are  more  or  less  affected  by  us.  Every  one  knows  the  force  of  example,  the  im- 
pulse we  have  to  imitate.  Every  one  must  have  noticed  the  contagion,  as  it  were, 
of  opinion,  which  from  house  to  house  influences  a  whole  circle  of  acquaintanceship. 
How  often  have  you  felt  the  devotion  or  the  carelessness  of  the  person  kneeling 
by  your  side  in  church  !  How  frequently  must  you  have  noticed  the  way  in 
which  you  catch  the  habits  and  manners  of  those  you  live  with  ;  the  way  in  which 
you  too  are  watched,  and  observed,  and  copied  by  others.  So  that,  if  you  did 
nothing  directly  to  influence  others,  the  effect  of  your  indirect  influence  is  yet 
incalculable.  But  you  have  direct  influence  also  to  exercise  and  give  account  of. 
Every  one  does  act  directly  upon  others.  Every  one  does  hinder  or  encourage, 
lead  into  sin,  sin  with,  or  lead  away  from  sin,  and  walk  godly  with,  others.  And 
where  is  this  to  stop  ?  You  ruin  or,  under  God,  save  others.  This  goes  on ; 
their  influence  ruins  or  saves  others,  and  so  on  and  on  for  ever.  Solemn,  indeed, 
are  the  words  of  our  Saviour  on  this  subject.  (Luke  xvii.  1,  2.)  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  equally  encouraging  to  know  that  no  virtuous  effort  is  ever  lost.     It 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in 

has  been  said  that  every  pulsation  made  in  the  air  by  the  feeblest  human  effort 
produces  a  change  in  the  whole  atmosphere  ;  so  that  the  "  air  is  one  vast  library, 
on  whose  pages  are  for  ever  written  all  that  man  has  ever  said  or  woman  uttered." 
Is  it  not  equally  true,  that  the  feeblest  effort  made  for  God  has  an  influence  on 
some  heart,  and  that  on  others  onwards  and  onwards  throughout  all  generations  ? 
that,  as  the  air  is  one  vast  library  of  whatever  has  moved  it  from  eternity,  so  the 
hearts  and  consciences  of  men  are  a  vast  register  of  every  effort  made,  every 
word  spoken,  every  influence  exerted  upon  them  for  God  and  for  His  Christ  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  time  ;  a  register  to  be  read  out  on  the  last  great  day. 
(F.  Morse,  M.A.)  An  old  man's  hallelujah : — When  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  was  an  old 
man  he  wrote :  "  I  have  enjoyed  the  spring  of  life ;  I  have  enjoyed  the  toils  of 
its  summer ;  I  have  culled  the  fruits  of  its  autumn ;  I  am  now  passing  through 
the  rigours  of  its  winter,  and  I  am  neither  forsaken  of  God  nor  abandoned  by  man. 
I  see  at  no  great  distance  the  dawn  of  a  new  day,  the  first  of  a  spring  which  shall 
be  eternal.  It  is  advancing  to  meet  me  !  I  run  to  embrace  it !  Welcome, 
eternal  spring !  Hallelujah !  "  A  Christian  gardener's  hope : — An  old  gardener 
said,  "  I  trust  I  cannot  be  wrong  in  believing  that  year  by  year,  as  I  grow  older, 
I  draw  nearer  to  a  garden  of  perfect  beauty  and  eternal  rest, — a  garden  more 
glorious  than  that  which  Adam  lost,  the  Eden  and  the  paradise  of  God."  (Oates 
of  Imagery.)  Heaven,  the  outcome  of  godly  living : — When  John  Bunyan 
was  once  asked  about  heaven,  and  the  glories  of  heaven,  he  answered :  "If  you 
want  to  know  more  about  it,  you  must  live  a  godly  life,  and  go  and  see  for  your- 
selves."    (D.  J.  S.  Hunt.) 

Ver.  11.  Woe  unto  the  wicked  I — All  things  conspire  for  evil  to  the  sinner: — 
As  all  events  are  to  be  made  public  under  God's  moral  government,  it  is  for 
His  own  interest,  as  well  as  for  the  interest  of  His  creatures,  that  He  should 
apprise  them  fully  of  His  character  and  of  the  principles  of  His  government. 
As  all  events  are  to  be  made  known,  both  for  the  vindication  of  God's  character 
and  for  the  instruction  of  all  moral  agents,  it  follows  that  the  destruction  of  the 
wicked  will  be  aggravated  by  every  accession  of  light  to  their  minds.  Every 
new  revelation  of  God's  works  or  ways  which  is  made  to  them  must  conspire, 
( 1 )  to  enlighten  their  minds,  and,  (2)  by  consequence,  to  deepen  their  guilt  and 
enhance  and  aggravate  their  doom.  1.  Men  will  be  held  responsible  for  mercies 
abused.  Hence  those  things  which  most  please  sinners,  and  which  they  call 
their  good  things,  are  charged  to  their  account,  and  they  must  be  held  to  the 
strictest  accountability  for  their  use  or  abuse  of  all  their  good  things.  2.  If  these 
are  facts,  then  sinners  are  getting  deeply  in  debt.  Everything,  therefore,  that 
now  pleases  the  sinner  so  much  will  swell  the  mass  of  things  that  shall  agonise 
him  at  the  judgment  day,  and  throughout  his  eternal  existence.  3.  The  same 
principle  applies  to  the  entire  course  of  God's  discipline  towards  you,  embracing 
the  various  rebukes  of  His  providence.  All  these  are  measures  taken  for  your 
good,  but  if  you  will  not  improve  them,  they  will  only  work  out  your  deeper  ruin. 
How  marvellous  that  wicked  men  should  suppose  that  these  light  afflictions  are 
the  proper  punishment  of  sin  !  No ;  these  are  only  God's  means  of  discipline, 
employed  here  in  this  life  for  the  good  of  men's  souls.  Instead  of  being  them- 
selves the  retribution  due  for  sin,  they  are  only  the  guarantees  sent  on  beforehand 
by  the  great  King,  involving  His  pledge  that  He  will  punish  sin  unless  He  can 
secure  repentance.  4.  All  your  infirmities  and  all  your  sins ;  also  the  sins  of 
those  who  live  near  you  so  that  you  can  see  the  course  of  God's  dealings  with 
them  ;  indeed,  the  whole  history  of  sin  in  the  universe  so  far  as  known  to  you,— 
all  conspire  to  heighten  your  responsibility  and  aggravate  the  guilt  of  your  sin. 
For  all  these  things  serve  to  show  you  the  real  evil  and  wrong  of  sin  ;  they  serve 
to  reveal  God's  hatred  of  sin,  and  to  assure  you  that  He  must  and  will  punish  it. 
Remarks : — (1)  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  the  Christian,  and  ultimately, 
when  he  comes  to  see  how  all  things  have  had  this  result,  he  will  regret  nothing 
he  has  ever  done,  although  he  may  greatly  blame  himself  for  all  his  sins.  It  is 
often  the  case  that  Christians  here  learn  lessons  of  deep  experience  under  their 
sins.  They  are  deeply  affected  when  they  see  how  God  overrules  even  their  sins 
for  good  to  themselves  and  to  others.  But  nothing  of  this  sort  happens  to  sinners. 
They  are  not  of  those  that  love  God,  and  they  have  no  reason  to  expect  that  God 
will  make  all  things  work  together  for  their  good.  Hence  they  must  both  blame 
themselves  and  also  regret  everything  they  have  ever  done.  (2)  Sinners  have  never 
any  good  reasons  for  joy.     (3)  Sinners  procure  this  result  to  themselves.     God  gave 


chap,  m.]  ISAIAH.  95 

you  voluntary  powers,  that,  on  your  own  responsibility,  you  might  use  them  for 
your  own  welfare.  He  gave  you  His  Son,  and  in  Him  an  offered  salvation,  that 
you  might  lay  hold  of  everlasting  life.  He  gave  you  a  Bible,  that  you  might  read 
it  and  become  wise  unto  salvation.  He  gave  you  these  and  a  thousand  other 
blessings,  that  they  might  be  improved,  and  if  you  will  not  improve  them,  you 
have  no  right  to  complain  of  God.  (4)  Sinners  need  not  be  stumbled  by  any 
calamities  whatever  which  befall  God's  real  children.  Let  them  not  trouble 
themselves  about  this  matter.  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His,  and  they 
shall  never  lack  His  constant  care.  (5)  All  events  that  transpire  in  this  world 
or  the  next  will  only  make  the  great  gulf  fixed  between  saints  and  sinners  the 
deeper  and  the  broader — will  only  make  the  saints  more  holy  and  more  happy, 
the  sinners  more  sinful  and  more  wretched.  (6)  What  an  infinite  folly  is  it  to 
judge  of  things  only  by  their  relations  to  this  life!  (7)  God's  conduct  in  all  thi» 
is  just  and  righteous  altogether.  (C.  G.  Finney.)  The  wicked  man  digs  his 
own  hell : — We  must  not  think  of  hell  as  a  Divine  invention  ;  may  we  not  say  it 
reverently  ?  it  is  an  invention  totally  human.  All  evil  digs  and  eats  its  own 
perdition  ;  all  evil  chokes  its  throat  with  brimstone  of  its  own  finding.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  Presumptuous  disobedience:  —  Steel-headed  hammers  are  not  allowed 
to  be  used  inside  powder  mills,  copper  ones  being  used  instead,  there  being  no 
fear  of  drawing  fires  with  them.  Two  carpenters,  going  into  a  powder  mill  to 
do  some  repairs,  though  fully  acquainted  with  the  regulations,  persisted  in  using 
a  steel  hammer,  with  the  result  that  a  spark  flew  from  the  hammer-head,  and  in  a 
moment,  with  a  dull,  heavy  roar,  the  mill  and  the  men  were  blown  to  atoms. 
Their  presumptuous  disobedience  brought  upon  them  an  awful  punishment. 
(Sunday  School  Chronicle.) 

Ver.  12.  As  for  My  people. — A  protest  against  the  influence  of  women 
and  children,  concubines  and  minions  (what  we  should  call  the  harem- 
influence)  in  the  king's  counsels.  (E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)  The  rule  of  corrupt 
women : — The  celebrated  Aspasia,  first  the  mistress  and  afterward  the  wife  of 
Pericles,  had  from  her  extraordinary  talents  a  great  ascendency  over  his  mind, 
and  was  supposed  frequently  to  have  dictated  his  counsels  in  the  most  important 
concerns  of  the  State.  She  was  believed  to  have  formed  a  society  of  courtesans, 
whose  influence  over  their  gallants,  young  men  of  consideration  in  the  republic, 
she  thus  rendered  subservient  to  the  political  views  of  Pericles.  .  .  .  Such  were 
the  powers  of  her  mind  and  the  fascinating  charms  of  her  conversation,  that  even 
before  her  marriage,  and  while  exercising  the  trade  of  a  courtesan,  her  house  was 
the  frequent  resort  of  the  gravest  and  most  respectable  of  the  Athenian  citizens ; 
among  the  rest,  of  the  virtuous  Socrates.  (Tytler's  History.)  0  My  people, 
they  which  lead  thee  cause  thee  to  err. — The  character  of  rulers  to  be  proved 
jrom  the  principles  they  inculcate  and  the  policy  they  pursue :  —  The  Divine 
compassion  is  not  only  exercised  towards  men  in  reference  to  the  danger  of  their 
immortal  souls ;  it  is  also  most  strikingly  to  be  witnessed  with  regard  to  their 
temporal  miseries.  The  Lord  is  lamenting,  in  this  chapter,  the  miseries  which 
were  coming  upon  His  professed  people  as  the  fruit  of  their  doings ;  and  as  the 
consequence  of  that  course  of  procedure  which  He  would  be  constrained  to  adopt 
as  the  only  means,  devised  by  infinite  wisdom,  which  could  either  work  for  their 
good,  or  be  consistent  with  His  character  and  glory.  That  order  of  dealing  would, 
in  many  respects,  be  exceedingly  mortifying  and  painful.  How  lamentable  must 
be  the  condition  of  any  nation  or  people  when  the  words  of  the  text  are  literally 
fulfilled  in  them !    I.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  they  who  abb 

ENTRUSTED  WITH  THE  RULE  AND  GUIDANCE  OF  OTHERS  SHOULD  THEMSELVES  BE 
RULED  AND  QUIDED  BY  THE  FEAR  AND  WORD  OF  THE  LORD.      The  text  is  not  the 

only  passage  in  which  the  Lord  speaks  of  the  misery  and  ruin  brought  on  the 
people  by  the  errors,  vices,  and  mismanagement  of  their  rulers  (chap.  ix.).  Here 
you  see,  not  only  who  the  leaders  of  this  people  are,  and  how  they  are  led  astray 
l>y  them,  but  what  are  the  consequences  of  being  under  such  an  erring  influence 
The  leaders  are  the  "  head  and  the  tail ;  the  ancient  and  honourable,  he  is  the 
head ;  and  the  prophet  that  teacheth  lies,  he  is  the  tail."  Under  this  twofold 
guidance,  the  people  are  led  astray ;  and  the  result  is,  "  they  that  are  led  of  them 
are  destroyed.  Advert  again  to  the  case  before  us.  How  came  "  the  paths  " 
of  the  people  to  be  "  destroyed  "  in  the  days  of  the  prophet  T  "  They  that  led 
them,  eaused  them  to  err."  Now,  could  this  have  taken  place  if  their  lyin 
prophets  and  wicked  rulers  themselves  had  been  governed  in  the  fear,  and  guide 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

by  the  Word,  of  God  ?  (Psa.  lxxxi.  13-16.)  Now,  does  not  the  same  truth 
apply  with  equal  force  to  ourselves,  to  our  own  rulers  and  our  own  people  ?  Should 
any  one  be  disposed  to  object  to  this  statement  and  say,  May  not  a  line  of  policy 
be  good  although  not  founded  upon  this  principle  ?  or,  May  not  a  man  be  a  good 
ruler  who  follows  no  other  guidance  than  his  own  wisdom  or  will  ? — we  deny 
the  assertion  altogether.  We  deem  nothing  to  be  good  which  is  not  done  in  the 
fear,  or  according  to  the  truth,  of  God.  Now,  can  any  one  rule  in  that  fear  who 
does  not  live  under  its  influence  T  Can  any  one  lead  others  in  the  right  way, 
who  is  not  himself  walking  in  it  T  Can  any  one  enforce  on  others  the  maxims 
and  precepts  of  the  Divine  Word — the  only  standard  of  truth  and  error,  and  the 
only  test  of  good  and  evil — unless  that  Word  be  made  the  light  of  his  own  feet, 
and  the  lamp  of  his  own  path  ?  Morally  speaking,  the  thing  is  impossible.  Or, 
if  he  were  to  attempt  to  do  so,  would  not  indecision,  ignorance,  uncertainty,  and 
error  characterise  all  his  proceedings  ?    II.  It  is  no  difficult  thing  to  ascertain 

THE  REAL  CHARACTER  OP  SUCH  PERSONS,  ESPECIALLY  IN  THEIR  PUBLIC  CAPACITY, 
WHETHER  THEY  ARE  UNDER  SUCH  AN  INFLUENCE  OR  GUIDED  BY  SUCH  A  RULE,  OR 

not.  How  are  we  to  ascertain  whether  they  who  are  entrusted  with  the  rule 
and  guidance  of  others  are  men  to  be  confided  in,  as  being  themselves  under  the 
rule  and  guidance  of  the  fear  and  Word  of  the  Lord  ?  We  may  ask  in  return. 
By  what  means  are  we  to  ascertain  the  true  character  of  any  other  person  or 
thing,  so  far  as  man  is  authorised  and  able  to  judge,  which  is  brought  under  our 
notice,  and  whose  real  state  and  condition  it  may  be  of  importance  to  determine  ? 
By  whatever  standard  we  are  directed  in  the  one  case,  by  the  same  should  we  be 
guided  in  the  other.  We  must  be  guided  in  our  decision  by  the  conduct  and 
actions  which  are  constantly  exhibited  before  our  eyes,  and  not  merely  by  any 
fair  professions  which  are  totally  contradicted,  or,  at  least,  exceedingly  weakened, 
and  continually  to  be  called  in  question,  by  the  life  and  conversation.     III.  The 

MANNER  IN  WHICH  SUCH  RULERS  AND  GUIDES  GENERALLY  MISLEAD  OTHERS  IS 
NOT  ONLY  PERNICIOUS  IN  ITSELF,  BUT  IS  OPEN  AND  MANIFEST  TO  ALL  BEHOLDERS. 

1.  By  the  inculcation  of  dangerous  and  pernicious  principles.  A  man  is  what 
his  principles  are  ;  and  his  actions  and  life  will,  of  necessity,  be  according  to  the 
principles  by  which  he  is  governed.  But  how  are  we  to  ascertain  the  real  character 
of  principles  ?  By  the  same  test  as  we  try  men  and  actions.  "  To  the  law  and 
to  the  testimony ;  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  Word,  it  is  because  there 
is  no  light  in  them."  2.  By  the  introduction  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  course 
of  policy.  Principles  and  policy  in  the  affairs  of  nations,  like  faith  and  works 
in  the  things  of  God,  will  always  go  hand  in  hand  together ;  or,  at  least,  they  will 
be  so  intimately  blended  with  each  other  that  they  can  never  remain  far  asunder, 
because,  in  fact,  as  the  one  is  the  fruitful  cause,  so  the  other  is  the  native  effect 
produced.  3.  By  the  exhibition  of  a  wicked  and  contagions  example.  4.  By 
an  unwarrantable  abuse  of  their  power,  and  by  the  countenance  afforded  to 
unworthy  characters,  and  sanction  given  to  wicked  measures.  Here,  then,  is  a 
loud  call — (1)  To  survey  and  ponder  the  imminent  peril  to  which  we  are  exposed. 
(2)  To  be  humbled  for  our  sins,  and  to  sue  to  God  for  His  mercy.  (3)  And  how 
does  the  subject  speak  to  all  those  who  lead  the  people  astray,  and  destroy  the 
way  of  their  paths  I  How  great  must  be  their  guilt !  How  heavy  will  be  their 
condemnation  !  (R.  ShitUer.)  Ungodly  national  leaders  to  be  deprecated : — 
Surely  it  ought  to  be  for  a  lamentation,  when  the  present  and  eternal  interests  of 
any  nation  or  people  are  committed  to  persons  who  know  not  the  Lord,  and  are 
determined  not  to  walk  in  His  paths !  If  any  spark  of  proper  feeling  were  in 
exercise,  we  should  grieve  over  a  family  placed  under  the  care  of  such  parents ! 
we  should  mourn  over  a  parish  or  diocese  entrusted  to  the  hands  of  such  a  shepherd  ! 
we  should  lament  the  fate  of  the  crew  of  that  vessel,  which,  instead  of  being  steered 
amidst  the  perils  of  the  storm,  by  an  experienced  and  careful  pilot,  into  the  harbour 
for  safety,  should  by  some  rash  and  unskilful  hand  be  conducted  into  the  quick- 
sands or  dashed  upon  the  rock  !  We  should  feel  the  risings  of  national  indignation, 
if  the  admirals  of  our  fleets,  or  the  commanders  of  our  armies,  instead  of  resisting 
an  opposing  foe,  should  sully  their  character,  disobey  their  orders,  disregard  their 
king  and  their  country,  and,  either  from  incompetency,  or  fear,  or  cowardice,  or 
treason,  should  play  into  the  enemy's  hand,  betray  the  honour  of  the  nation, 
abuse  the  confidence  of  their  prince,  and  with  reckless  indifference  sacrifice  the 
lives  of  their  men  !  Every  one  would  cry  out,  and  that  justly,  against  them. 
What  then  ought  to  be  our  feelings — how  ought  we  to  be  affected — when  such  a 
dishonour  is  cast  upon  the  Majesty  of  heaven ;  when  Hia  fear  is  disregarded ; 


chap,  m.]  ISAIAH.  9f 

when  His  Word  is  set  at  nought ;  when  His  authority  is  despised ;  and  the  present 
and  eternal  welfare  of  millions  is  sacrificed  by  the  wickedness  or  weakness  of  those 
who  reject  the  only  rule  of  all  safe  guidance — who  lead  a  whole  nation  into  sin, 
and  bring  down  the  wrath  of  God  upon  a  guilty  land  1     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  13-15.  The  Lord  standeth  up  to  plead. — God's  controversy : — The  manage- 
ment of  this  controversy.     I.  God   Himself  is  the  prosecutor.      II.  The 

INDICTMENT   13    PROVED    BY    THE    NOTORIOUS    EVIDENCE    OP   THE    PACT    (ver.    15). 

HL  The  controversy  is  already  begun  in  the  change  op  the  ministry. 
To  punish  those  that  had  abused  their  power  to  ill  purposes,  God  sets  those  over 
them  that  had  not  sense  to  use  it  to  any  good  purposes  (ver.  12).     (M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  14.  The  Lord  will  enter  into  Judgment. — God,  the  Friend  of  the  poor : — 
Whoever  abandons  the  sanctuary,  the  poor  should  never  go  away ;  whoever 
closes  the  Bible,  the  poor  man  should  keep  it  lying  widely  open ;  he 
should  always  have  a  Bible  that  opens  easily,  not  stiffly,  because  it  is  well  handled, 
and  is  the  continual  defence  of  men  who  cannot  defend  themselves.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  Isaiah's  solemn  reproof  : — Returning  into  the  city  he  silently  hovers  in 
and  out  of  the  courts  of  revelry  and  feasting  that  open  on  to  the  narrow  thorough- 
fares, watching  the  judges  and  honourable  men  of  wealth,  who  had  just  come  in 
from  their  ceremonial  worship  at  the  temple,  to  eat,  to  drink,  to  talk  lewdly,  and 
to  amuse  themselves  with  soothsayers  and  necromancers,  and  the  haughty  women, 
with  stretched  forth  necks  and  wanton  eyes,  and  gay  and  sumptuous  dresses, 
paid  for  with  the  money  wrung  from  the  impoverished  tenantry  of  their  spouses. 
As  he  watches  and  muses,  the  fire  within  his  bones  flames  up,  and  he  reminds 
them  as  he  passes  into  the  darkness,  "  the  spoil  of  the  poor  is  in  your  houses  !  " 
(F.  Sessions.) 

Vers.  16-24.  The  daughters  of  Zion  are  naughty. — Wanton  eyes  ("  twinkling 
with  the  eyes"):  —  Compare  the  Talmudic  witticism,  "God  did  not  create 
the  woman  out  of  Adam's  ear,  lest  she  might  become  an  eavesdropper ; 
nor  out  of  Adam's  eye,  lest  she  might  become  a  winker."  (F.  Delitzsch.) 
The  "  wanton "  eyes  of  A.V.,  or  the  '  ogling "  eyes  of  others,  introduces  an 
idea  foreign  to  the  connection.  There  seems  no  reference  to  immorality. 
It  is  the  pride  of  beauty  and  attire,  which  has  no  mind  for  the  Ruler  above, 
which  is  punished  with  all  that  makes  loathsome.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.) 
A  mincing  gait : — The  rendering  should  rather  be  "  tripping "  ;  for  only 
such  little  steps  can  they  take,  owing  to  their  pace-chains,  which  join  together 
the  costly  foot-rings  that  were  placed  above  the  ankle.  With  these  pace-chains, 
which  perhaps  even  then  as  now,  were  sometimes  provided  with  little  bells,  they 
make  a  tinkling  sound,  clinking  the  ankle-ornaments,  by  placing  the  feet  in  such  a 
way  as  to  make  these  ankle-rings  strike  one  another.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Pride 
of  beauty  and  attire  reproved : — The  prophet's  business  was  to  show  all  sorts  of 
people  what  they  had  contributed  to  the  national  guilt,  and  what  share  they 
must  expect  in  the  national  judgments  that  were  coming.  Here  he  reproves 
and  warns  the  daughters  of  Zion,  tells  the  ladies  of  their  faults.  I.  The  sin 
charged  upon  the  daughters  op  Zion.  The  prophet  expressly  voucheth  God's 
authority  for  what  he  said,  lest  it  should  be  thought  it  was  unbecoming  him  to 
take  notice  of  such  things,  and  should  be  ill  resented  by  the  ladies.  The  Lord 
saith  it.  Whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear,  let  them  know 
that  God  takes  notice  of,  and  is  much  displeased  with,  the  folly  and  vanity  of 
proud  women ;  and  His  law  takes  cognisance  even  of  their  dress.  Such  a  nice 
affected  mien  is  not  only  a  force  upon  that  which  is  natural,  and  ridiculous  before 
men  of  sense,  but,  as  it  is  an  evidence  of  a  vain  mind,  it  is  offensive  to  God.  And 
two  things  aggravated  it  here — 1.  That  these  were  the  daughters  of  Zion — the 
holy  mountain — who  should  have  carried  themselves  with  the  gravity  that  becomes 
women  professing  godliness.  2.  That  it  should  seem  by  the  connection  they  were  the 
wives  and  daughters  of  the  princes  who  spoiled  and  oppressed  the  poor  (vers.  14, 15), 
that  they  might  maintain  this  pride  and  luxury  of  their  families.  II.  The  punish- 
ments threatened  for  this  sin,  and  they  answer  the  sin  as  face  answers  to 
face  in  a  glass  (vers.  17,  18).  1.  They  "  walked  with  stretched  forth  necks." 
But  God  '  will  smite  with  a  scab  the  crown  of  their  head,"  which  shall  lower 
their  crests,  and  make  them  ashamed  to  show  their  heads,  being  obliged  by  it  to 
cut  off  their  hair.     2.  They  cared  not  what  they  laid  out  in  furnishing  themselves 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

with  great  variety  of  fine  clothes  ;  but  God  will  reduce  them  to  such  poverty  and 
distress  that  they  should  not  have  clothes  sufficient  to  cover  their  nakedness. 
3.  They  were  extremely  fond  and  proud  of  their  ornaments ;  but  God  will  strip 
them  of  those  ornaments,  when  their  houses  shall  be  plundered,  their  treasures 
rifled,  and  they  themselves  led  into  captivity.  4.  They  were  very  nice  and  curious 
about  their  clothes,  but  God  would  make  those  bodies  of  theirs  a  reproach  and 
burden  to  them  (ver.  24).  5.  They  designed  by  these  ornaments  to  charm  the 
gentlemen,  and  win  their  affections,  but  there  shall  be  none  to  be  charmed  by 
them  (ver.  25).  (Matthew  Henry.)  A  Jerusalem  fashion-plate : — This  is  a 
Jerusalem  fashion-plate.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Comely  clothing  natural  : 
— That  we  should  all  be  clad  is  proved  by  the  opening  of  the  first  wardrobe  in 
Paradise,  with  its  apparel  of  dark  green.  That  we  should  all  as  far  as  our  mean3 
allow  us  be  beautifully  and  gracefully  apparelled  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  God 
never  made  a  wave  but  He  gilded  it  with  golden  sunbeams,  or  a  tree  but  He 
garlanded  it  with  blossoms,  or  a  sky  but  He  studded  it  with  stars,  or  allowed 
even  the  smoke  of  a  furnace  to  ascend  but  He  columned,  and  turreted,  and  doled, 
and  scrolled  it  into  outlines  of  indescribable  gracefulness.  When  I  see  the  apple- 
orchards  of  the  spring,  and  the  pageantry  of  the  autumnal  forests,  I  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  if  Nature  ever  does  join  the  Church,  while  she  may  be  a  Quaker 
in  the  silence  of  her  worship,  she  never  will  be  a  Quaker  in  the  style  of  her  dress. 
Why  the  notches  of  a  fern  leaf  or  the  stamen  of  a  water  lily  ?  Why,  when  the 
day  departs,  does  it  let  the  folding  doors  of  heaven  stay  open  so  long,  when  it 
might  go  in  so  quickly  ?  {Ibid.)  Costume  and  morals: — 1.  Much  of  the  worldly 
costume  of  our  time  is  the  cause  of  the  temporal  and  eternal  ruin  of  a  multitude  of 
men.  2.  Extravagant  costume  is  the  foe  of  all  Christian  almsgiving.  3.  Is 
distraction  to  public  worship.  4.  Belittles  the  intellect.  Our  minds  are  enlarged, 
or  they  dwindle  just  in  proportion  to  the  importance  of  the  subject  on  which 
they  constantly  dwell.  6.  It  shuts  a  great  multitude  out  of  heaven.  You  will 
have  to  choose  between  the  goddess  of  fashion  and  the  Christian  God.  (Ibid.) 
Ood-dejying  extravagance  of  modern  society : — 1.  This  wholesale  extravagance 
accounts  for  a  great  deal  of  depression  in  national  finances.  Aggregates  are  made 
up  of  units,  ana  so  long  as  one-half  of  the  people  of  this  country  are  in  debt  to  the 
other  half,  you  cannot  have  a  healthy  financial  condition.  2.  The  widespread 
extravagance  accounts  for  much  of  the  crime.  It  is  the  source  of  many  abscond- 
ings,  bankruptcies,  defalcations,  and  knaveries.  3.  It  also  accounts  for  much 
of  the  pauperism  in  the  country.  Who  are  the  individuals  and  the  families  who 
are  thrown  on  your  charity  ?  Who  has  sinned  against  them  so  that  they  suffer  ? 
It  is  often  the  case  that  their  parents,  or  their  grandparents,  had  all  luxuries, 
lived  everything  up,  more  than  lived  everything  up,  and  then  died,  leaving  their 
families  in  want.     {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Ver.  I.  And  In  that  day  seven  women  shall  take  hold  of  one  man. — The 

climax  of  Ziorts  ruin  : — This  verse  should  be  part  of  the  preceding  chapter,  the 
very  climax,  indeed,  of  the  ruin  which  Zion  has  brought  upon  herself.  (Read 
chap.  iii.  25,  26.)  In  this  verse  the  course  of  nature  is  inverted.  This  is  the 
ruin  which  sin  always  works.  The  picture  is  that  of  a  country  desolated  by  war, 
and  when  the  census  comes  to  be  taken  it  is  found  that  there  are  seven  women  to 
one  man.  The  men  are  murdered,  the  strong  have  been  taken  away,  the  mighty 
men  have  gone  down  in  the  shock  of  war.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Social  anarchy  : — 
A  companion  picture  to  chap.  iii.  6; — the  male  population  are  in  search  of  a 
ruler ;  the  women  in  search  of  a  husband.     (R.  Weir.) 

Vers.  2-6.  In  that  day  shall  the  branch  of  the  Lord  be  beautiful  and  glorioue 
— The  first  personal  reference  in  Isaiah  to  the  Messiah  : — If  this  is  a  reference  to 
Christ,  critics  are  agreed  that  it  is  the  first  personal  reference  to  the  Messiah  which 
Isaiah  has  yet  given.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  pleasing  contrast : — What  so 
beautiful  as  that  a  "  branch  "  should  appear  in  this  wilderness  of  lava  ?  Blessed 
are  they  who  can  turn  away  from  the  desert  and  look  at  the  garden.  {Ibid 
A  branch  : — Then  tbs  fountains  of  life  and  energy  are  not  dried  up.     (Ibid.)        A 


chap,  iv.]  ISAIAH.  99 

branch  : — That  is  to  say,  fruitfulness,  beauty,  sufficiency,  energy,  summer.  This 
is  what  the  Son  of  God  came  to  be  and  to  do — to  fill  the  earth  with  fruitfulness, 
to  drive  away  the  ghastly,  all-devouring  famine,  and  to  feed  the  world  with  the 
fruit  of  heaven.  (Ibid.)  The  Branch  of  the  Lord  : — I.  The  general  meaning 
of  the  passage.  The  time  spoken  of  by  the  prophet  is  clearly  the  time  of  the 
Christian  dispensation,  called  "the  last  days"  (ch.  ii.).  And  we  need  not  stop 
to  prove  that  "  the  Branch  of  the  Lord  "  is  a  name  or  title  of  the  Messiah.  We 
have,  therefore,  a  prophecy  of  the  glory  of  Christ's  kingdom.  II.  The  inneb 
meaning  of  the  passage.  (1)  Why  is  it  said  "  In  that  day,"  specifying  a  particular 
time,  "  the  Branch  of  the  Lord  shall  be  glorious  "  ?  And  (2)  what  is  the  special 
force  or  meaning  of  the  title,  "  the  Branch  of  the  Lord  T  1.  The  glory  of 
Christ  is  surely  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  from  the  beginning.  How 
then  can  it  be  said  of  Him  that  at  any  assigned  time  He  is  glorious,  rather  than 
at  another  ?  The  word  glory,  when  spoken  of  God  or  Christ,  cannot  have  precisely 
the  same  sense  as  when  spoken  of  a  man.  A  man  may  gain  glory  by  some  act 
above  the  average  of  human  nature.  But  starting  from  infinite  perfection,  nothing 
greater  or  nobler  can  be  conceived.  Glory,  therefore,  with  reference  to  God  is 
not  the  gaining  of  any  higher  excellence,  but  the  manifestation  of  excellence  which 
existed  already.  The  creation  was  the  first  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God. 
And  if  the  glory  of  God  was  made  manifest  in  creation,  it  is  yet  more  fully  revealed 
in  those  mysteries  of  redemption  which  angels  desired  to  look  into.  2.  But  why 
in  this  connection  is  the  Saviour  called  the  Branch  of  the  Lord  ?  If  the  appropriate- 
ness of  the  figure  does  not  at  once  appear,  it  will  at  least  remind  us  of —  I  am  the 
Vine,  ye  are  the  branches."  The  expression  thus  sets  Christ  before  us  in  His 
character  as  the  Mediator — Himself  the  Branch  of  the  Lord,  and  His  people 
branches  of  that  true  Vine.  Thus  we  are  enabled  further  to  connect  the  title 
with  the  glory  spoken  of.  The  glory  and  beauty  of  the  vine  is  in  its  fruit  (John 
xv.  8).  (A.  K.  Cherritt,  M.A.)  God's  perpetual  presence  with  His  people  : — I.  Thb 
preparation  fob  THE  promise.  In  the  earlier  verses  of  the  chapter  you  will 
find  that  two  things  are  presented  as  antecedent  to  the  gifts  of  blessing — that  is, 
the  coming  of  the  Divine  Saviour,  and  His  discipline  for  holiness  within  His  Church. 

1.  The  transition  from  the  gloomy  judgment  to  the  grandeur  of  deliverance  is 
abrupt  and  striking,  as  if  from  a  savage  wilderness  one  were  to  emerge  suddenly 
into  green  pastures  and  among  gay  flowers.  And  surely  this  is  a  true  representation 
of  the  change  which  passes  upon  human  destinies  when  Christ  the  Lord  comes 
down.  We  are  naturally  heirs  of  judgment.  There  is  not  a  family,  there  is  not 
a  heart,  upon  which  the  curse  has  not  descended  in  disastrous  entail ;  there  is  a 
stain  upon  the  birth,  there  is  a  feebleness  in  the  nature  of  us  all.  But  there  comes 
a  sound  of  help  and  of  deliverance,  for  a  Saviour  has  been  provided — a  Saviour 
who,  in  the  mysterious  union  of  natures,  combines  perfection  of  sympathy  and 
almightiness  of  power.  2.  It  would  at  once  correct  our  estimate  and  restrain 
our  pride  if  we  could  remember  always  that  with  God  the  greatest  thing  is  holiness. 
And  then,  further,  we  are  told  that  to  work  this  holiness  in  His  people,  God  subjects 
them  to  discipline,  and,  if  necessary,  to  the  spirit  of  judgment  and  to  the  spirit 
of  burning.  Mark  the  exquisite  fitness  and  the  exquisite  kindness  of  the  discipline. 
There  are  some  stains  that  water  can  wash  away.  If  the  water  will  avail,  there 
is  no  need  of  the  fire.  There  are  some  stains  so  deep  and  foul  and  crimson  that 
the  fire  must  purge  them.  II.  The  promise  itself  (ver.  5).  As  we  read  these 
word  8,  we  are  translated  to  a  former  scene  of  deliverance.  We  go  back  to  the 
older  ages ;  and  there,  in  the  fierce  wilderness,  where  no  groves  of  palm-trees 
wave  with  shade,  a  vast  host  marching  steadily,  now  in  their  van  for  guidance, 
now  in  their  rear  for  protection,  there  rises  by  day  a  pillar  of  cloud  and  by  night 
a  pillar  of  flame ;  and,  as  we  gaze,  we  listen  to  the  snatches  of  their  song :  "  Sing 
ye  to  the  Lord,  for  He  hath  triumphed  gloriously ;  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath 
He  thrown  into  the  sea."  This  was  the  vision  prominent  in  the  mind  of  the 
prophet  when  he  symbolised  by  it  God's  presence  and  protection  to  His  chosen 
Church.  1.  The  central  thought  is  the  presence  of  God.  Then,  there  are  right- 
hand  and  left-hand  thoughts  or  aspects  in  which  that  presence  manifests  itself. 

2.  The  presence  of  God  for  counsel.  3.  The  presence  of  God  for  defence.  (W.  M. 
Punshon.)  God's  promise  to  the  remnant : — I.  The  persons  intended,  The 
remnant,  the  escaping,  the  "  evasion  of  Israel,"  as  the  word  signifies  (ver.  2)j 
they  that  are  left,  that  remain  (ver.  3),  who  escape  the  great  desolation  that  was 
to  come  on  the  body  of  the  people,  the  furnace  they  were  to  pass  through.  Only 
in  the  close  of  that  verse,  they  have  a  further  description  added  of  them,  from  the 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

purpose  of  God  concerning  their  grace  and  glory — they  are  written  among  the 
living,  or  rather,  written  unto  life  ;  "  Every  one  that  is  written,"  i.e.,  designed 
unto  life  in  Jerusalem.  II.  The  condition  wherein  they  were.  This  is  laid 
down  in  figurative  expressions  concerning  the  smallness  of  this  remnant,  or  thd 
paucity  of  them  that  should  escape,  and  the  greatness  of  the  extremities  they 
should  be  exercised  withal.  III.  The  promises  here  made  to  this  peoplb 
are  of  two  sorts  :  Original,  or  fundamental ;  and  then  consequential  thereon. 
1.  There  is  the  great  spring,  or  fountain  promise,  from  which  all  others,  as  lesser 
streams,  do  flow ;  and  that  is  the  promise  of  Christ  Himself  unto  them,  and  amongst 
them  ;  He  is  that  Branch  of  Jehovah,  and  that  fruit  of  the  earth,  which  is  there 
promised  (ver.  2).  He  is  the  foundation,  the  fountain  of  all  the  good  that  is  or 
shall  be  communicated  unto  us ;  all  other  promises  are  but  rivulets  from  that 
unsearchable  ocean  of  grace  and  love  that  is  in  the  promise  of  Christ.  2.  The 
promises  that  flow  from  hence — (1)  Of  beauty  and  glory  (ver.  2).  (2)  Of  holiness 
and  purity  (vers.  3,  4).     (3)  Of  preservation  and  safety  (vers.  5, 6).     (J.  Owen,  D.D) 

Ver.  3.  He  that  is  left  In  Zion. — The  holy  remnant: — "Holy"  means  what 
is  separated  from  the  world  and  superior  to  it ;  the  congregation  of  the 
saints,  or  holy  ones,  who  now  inhabit  Jerusalem,  are  what  remain  after  a 
smelting ;  their  holiness  is  the  consequence  of  a  washing.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  God 
has  never  yet  left  the  world  without  a  nucleus  of  heaven  : — He  has  drowned  the  world, 
but  left  a  seed  to  build  an  altar ;  He  has  burned  the  Gomorrahs  of  the  world, 
but  He  has  allowed  the  faithful  to  escape,  and  to  become  the  beginning  of  a  new 
progeny.  There  is  always  a  remnant,  the  one  left,  the  true  heart,  the  faithful 
among  the  faithless  found.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Holiness  becomes  the  Christian  : — 
We  are  told  that  the  little  creature  called  the  ermine  is  so  sensitive  to  its  own 
cleanliness  that  it  becomes  paralysed  and  powerless  at  the  slightest  touch  of 
defilement  upon  its  snow-white  fur.  A  like  sensibility  should  belong  to  the 
Christian,  who  should  abstain  from  the  very  appearance  of  evil.  (Sunday  School 
Chronicle.) 

Ver.  5.  A  cloud  and  smoke  by  day,  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night.— 
The  pillar-cloud  of  Israel — Christ,  the  Leader  of  His  Church  (with  Exod.  xiii.  21, 
22) : — It  was  good  for  the  Israelites  that  they  were  so  long  in  the  wilderness. 
There  the  most  impressive  intimations  of  a  present  Deity  followed  their  every  step. 
Miracles  were  wrought  to  feed  them  when  hungry,  and  to  satisfy  their  thirsty 
souls.  Jesus  was  in  the  manna — "  I  am  the  living  Bread  which  came  down  from 
heaven."  There,  in  the  form  of  a  vast  column  of  mingled  fire  and  smoke,  Is  the 
mysterious  yet  faithful  guide  of  the  Lord's  people.  When  it  is  stationary,  they 
rest ;  when  it  advances,  they  journey.  The  pillar-cloud  was  typical  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ  ever  liveth  as  the  Church's  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King. 
"  And  the  Lord  will  create  upon  every  dwelling-place  of  Mount  Zion,"  &c.  If 
the  pillar-cloud  was  the  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  glorious 
substance ;  and  we  shall  endeavour  to  show  in  what  manner  the  Redeemer  leads 
His  Church.  I.  Jesus  leads  the  Church  by  His  Word.  Not  more  certainly 
was  there  one  pillar-cloud  than  there  is  one  Bible.  The  Word  stands  alone  in  its 
authority.  It  is  the  sole  director  of  our  faith  ;  it  is  the  sole  regulator  of  our  walk. 
The  Word  is  the  sole  standard  in  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  worship  of  God, 
and  if  human  opinions  or  imperial  statutes  should  oppose  its  high  demands,  "  we 
must  obey  God  rather  than  men."  II.  Jesus  leads  the  Church  by  His  Spirit. 
How  precious  the  promise  which  He  made  to  His  disciples :  "  The  Comforter, 
who  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  My  name,  He  shall  teach 
you  all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I  have  said 
unto  you."  The  Word  is  a  lamp  to  the  feet  and  a  light  to  the  path ;  but  what  if 
the  hands  of  men  are  so  feeble  that  they  cannot  hold  the  heaven-sent  lamp  ? 
What  if  the  darkness  which  shrouds  their  minds  is  so  dense  that  all  the  rays  shining 
from  the  Word  serve  only  to  render  the  darkness  visible  ?  In  such  circumstances, 
how  desirable  to  have  a  living  guide  to  expound  the  infallible  directory  !  The 
cloud  which  was  in  the  tabernacle  by  day,  and  the  fire  by  night,  formed  a  guiding 
pillar,  but  for  which  the  people  of  Israel  must  have  wandered  and  lost  their  way 
in  the  desert.  Yet  there  was  an  imperfection  arising  from  its  very  nature.  The 
fiery  pillar  taught  seeing  men  where  to  go  ;  but  it  could  not  give  sight  to  the  blind. 
It  pointed  to  the  direction  in  which  the  pilgrims  were  to  advance ;  but  it  could 
not  make  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart.     We  do  not  say  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ 


chap,  iv.]  ISAIAH.  101 

did  not  impart  inward  light,  saving  knowledge,  in  the  days  of  Moses.  Wherever 
holiness  adorned  any  character,  He,  the  Sanctifier,  was  its  source.  The  crowning 
excellence  of  the  New  Testament  economy  is,  that  it  is  the  dispensation  of  the 
Spirit.  While  it  does  not  dispense  with  forms,  it  specially  inculcates  the  power 
of  godliness.  While  it  commends  the  Word,  it  holds  the  Word  to  be  powerless 
without  the  Spirit  of  God.  III.  Jesus  leads  the  Church  by  His  providence. 
The  Saviour  whom  we  adore,  is  Ruler  of  all  worlds.  Supreme  in  heaven,  He  is 
not  less  so  on  earth.  The  Author  of  salvation,  He  is  the  regulator  of  all  the  com- 
plicated wheels  of  providence.  Providence  is  a  volume  which  is  often  hard  to  be 
understood.  And  the  reason  why  we  put  providence  after  the  Word  and  Spirit 
of  Christ  is,  that  no  man  is  able  to  explain  providence  aright  until  he  has  studied 
the  Word,  and  been  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  (J.  Patrick,  M.A.)  Israel's 
guide  and  guard  : — I.  It  refers  to  the  Church  of  God  in  its  private  and  domestic 
character.  These  are  denoted  by  the  expression — "  every  dwelling-place  of 
Mount  Zion."  It  is  one  among  the  many  beautiful  descriptions  of  the  true 
Christian,  with  which  the  Bible  abounds,  not  simply  that  he  does  approach  to 
God,  but  that  he  takes  delight  in  doing  so  ;  and  having  "  tasted  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious,"  he  will  strive  to  realise,  in  his  own  parental  character,  the  exalted 
qualities,  which  God  ascribed  to  Abraham,  and  which  doubtless  were  even  then 
in  the  course  of  development,  though  "  as  yet  he  had  no  child."  Happy  is  that 
parent,  happy  is  that  child,  with  respect  to  whom  it  can  be  truly  said,  "  The 
fathers  to  the  children  shall  make  known  Thy  truth."  II.  The  second  aspect, 
under  which  the  Church  of  God  is  here  presented  to  us,  is  in  its  social  and 
collective  character.  This  is  indicated  by  the  expression — "  her  assemblies." 
The  expression  refers  to  the  union  of  the  servants  of  God  in  public  worship: 
ccuresponding  exactly  to  that  of  which  our  Saviour  spoke,  when  He  said — "  Where 
two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them." 
There  can  be  no  doubt,  that  from  the  very  earliest  ages  of  the  Church,  the  rest 
of  the  holy  Sabbath  was  observed  ;  and  the  more  the  spirit  of  genuine  religion 
diffused  itself,  the  more  did  men  of  similar  tastes  and  feelings  seek  pious  association 
with  each  other.  (0.  Weight,  M.A.)  The  glory  of  Christ's  Church  :—  1.  Expe- 
rience has  amply  shown  the  true  glory  of  a  Church  does  not  consist  in  outward 
pomp  or  splendour.  Even  Solomon  confessed  that  the  magnificence  which 
adorned  his  temple  in  all  its  untarnished  glory  was  unworthy  to  become  a  residence, 
or  to  receive  the  manifested  tokens  of  Jehovah's  presence.  In  rich  and  stately 
decorations  even  the  heathen  may  enshrine  his  iifeless  idol,  and  outvie  the  splendour 
of  the  ancient  Jewish  sanctuary.  On  the  other  hand,  the  patriarchs  in  their 
wandering,  and  the  persecuted  Christians,  convened  in  woods  and  caves  and 
retired  chambers,  have  beheld  the  manifested  light  of  God's  countenance,  and 
have  seen  His  power  and  glory  as  graciously  displayed  as  in  the  most  splendid 
sanctuary.  2.  The  true  and  essential  glory  of  the  Church  principally  consists 
in  the  spirituality,  holiness,  and  unity  of  its  members.  3.  The  doctrine  of  the 
restoration  of  the  image  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man,  by  the  agency  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  challenges  for  the  Church  which  prominently  exhibits  it,  the  title  of  a 
glorious  Church.  4.  Of  the  varied  glories  of  the  Church,  none  in  its  early  days 
was  more  conspicuous  than  that  of  unity  in  government,  discipline,  worship, 
and  spirit.  Long  has  Satan  prevailed  in  his  endeavours  to  divide  and  conquer. 
(0.  Almond.)        God  in  His  sanctuary : — I.  Religious  worship,  whether  in 

THE  FAMILY  OR  THE  SANCTUARY,  IS  PARTICULARLY  REGARDED  BY  GoD.  II.  GOD 
WILL  EXPRESS  HlS  APPROVAL  BY  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  HlS  PRESENCE.      The  benefits 

of  the  Jews  from  the  Shechinah  were  a  type  of  the  benefits  of  Jesus  among  us. 
What  were  these  ?  1.  The  manifestation  of  truth— the  Urim  and  Thummim. 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  medium  through  which  we  can  have  knowledge  of  God, 
redemption,  and  the  way  of  worship.  2.  The  display  of  holiness.  Wherever 
the  Shechinah  appeared  there  was  an  impression  of  holiness.  Moses  and  the 
bush.  The  Holy  of  Holies.  So  in  the  Gospel,  we  have  not  only  a  display  of  truth, 
but  of  holiness  also.  3.  Communication  of  comfort.  The  cloud  covered  Israel 
in  a  heated  atmosphere  ;  it  dropped  dew,  and  they  were  baptized  in  the  cloud. 
Is  not  this  the  end  of  the  spiritual  manifestation"?  The  Holy  Ghost  is  called 
the  Comforter.  III.  These  manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence  con- 
stitute the  glory  of  the  Church.  What  was  the  temple  without  it  ?  And 
how  is  this  house  filled  with  glory  ?  It  is  not  in  the  altar,  the  shewbread,  the 
ark,  or  the  manna,  but  in  Jesus'  presence  walking  among  the  candlesticks. 
(J.  Summerfield,  M.A.)        Upon  all  the  glory  shall  be  a  defence.—  A  Gospel  projes- 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T9. 

sion  the  glory  of  a  nation  : — These  words  are  a  recapitulation  of  the  whole  verse, 
and  are  a  Gospel  promise  given  out  in  law  terms,  or  a  New  Testament  mercy 
under  Old  Testament  expressions.  1.  What  is  here  expressed  as  to  the  type  and 
figure.  For  the  glory  and  defence  two  pairs  of  things  seem  to  be  intended :  the 
ark  and  the  mercy-seat;  the  tabernacle  and  the  pillar  of  fire.  (1)  The  ark  is 
oftentimes  called  the  glory  of  God  (Psa.  lxxviii.  61  ;  1  Sam.  iv.  21).  The  word 
which  we  have  rendered  "  a  defence,"  properly  signifies  "  a  covering  "  ;  as  was  the 
mercy-seat  the  covering  of  the  ark.  So  that  "  upon  the  glory  shall  be  a  defence," 
is  as  much  as,  unto  yon  the  "  mercy-seat  shall  be  on  the  ark,"  or  you  shall  have 
the  mercy  represented  and  intimated  thereby.  (2)  The  tabernacle  and  cloud, 
or  pillar  of  fire,  are  also  called  to  mind  ;  so  the  words  are  expressive  of  that  figure 
of  God's  gracious  presence  with  His  people,  which  we  have  recounted  (Exod.  xl. 
34).  "  Then  a  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  the  congregation,  and  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  filled  the  tabernacle."  2.  What  is  here  intended,  as  to  the  substance  of 
the  mercy  promised.  All  those  things  were  typical  of  Christ.  Apply,  then,  this 
promise  to  Gospel  times,  and  the  substance  of  it  is  comprehended  in  these  two 
propositions:  I.  The  presence  of  Christ  with  any  people  is  the  glory  op 
any  people.  This  is  the  glory  here  spoken  of,  as  is  evident  to  any  one  that  will 
but  read  verse  2,  and  consider  its  influence  unto  these  words.  This  is  their  glory, 
or  they  have  none.  Is  it  in  their  number,  that  they  are  great,  many,  and  populous  ? 
God  thinks  not  so  (Deut.  vii.  7  ;  Psa.  cv.  12).  You  know  what  it  cost  David  in 
being  seduced  by  Satan  into  the  contrary  opinion.  There  is  nothing  more  common 
in  the  Scripture  than  for  the  Lord  to  speak  contempt  of  the  multitude  of  any 
people,  as  a  thing  of  nought.  Is  it  in  their  wisdom  and  counsel,  their  under- 
standing for  the  ordering  of  their  affairs  ?  Is  that  their  glory  ?  Why,  see  how 
God  derides  the  prince  of  Tyrus,  who  was  lifted  up  with  an  apprehension  hereof; 
and  counted  himself  as  God,  upon  that  account  (Ezek.  xxvii. ;  Jer.  ix.  23y  24). 
1.  Now,  Christ  may  be  said  to  be  present  with  a  people  two  ways.  (1)  In  respect 
of  the  dispensation  of  His  Gospel  amongst  them,  the  profession  of  it  and  subjection 
to  the  ordinances  thereof.  (2)  In  and  by  His  Spirit,  dwelling  in  their  hearts 
by  faith,  uniting  them  to  Himself.  2.  This  is  the  glory  of  any  people  upon  a 
threefold  account.  (1)  This  alone  makes  them  honourable  and  precious  before 
God.  (2)  This  presence  of  Christ  makes  men  comely  and  excellent  in  themselves 
(Psa.  xvi.  3)  (3)  This  alone  makes  any  truly  useful  unto  others.  Here  lies  the 
preservation  of  any  nation  from  ruin.  Prosperity  is  from  hence  also.  (Mic.  v.  7.) 
If  you  desire  the  glory  of  the  nation,  labour  to  promote  the  interest  of  Christ  in 
the  nation.  Value,  encourage  and  close  with  them  in  and  with  whom  is  the 
presence  of  Christ.  II.  The  presence  or  God  in  special  providence  over  a 
people  attends  the  presence  op  Christ  in  grace  with  a  people.  (J.  Owen, 
D.D.)  Christ  the  Defence  of  His  people: — I.  A  Defender  of  the  home.  It 
is  "  upon  every  dwelling-place  of  Mount  Zion  "  that  there  shall  be  "  the  cloud 
and  smoke  by  day,"  and  the  "pillar  of  fire  by  night."  What  is  a  house  without 
Christ  ?  II.  A  Defender  of  the  Church.  Upon  "  all  her  assemblies,"  as 
well  as  in  every  "  dwelling-place,"  rose  the  symbols  of  His  presence.  Eli  trembled 
for  the  ark  of  God,  and  men  now  tremble  for  the  safety  of  the  Church  in  this 
wilderness  world.  But  it  is  safe  as  the  children  of  Israel  under  the  cloud  and  the 
pillar.  III.  A  Defender  of  the  person.  We  need  personal  protection.  A 
»hade  in  the  heat  of  calamity  ;  a  tent  in  the  storm  of  adversity.  This  Christ  is 
to  His  people.     1.  In  temporal  matters.     2.  In  the  interests  of  the  soul.     (J.  8.  H.) 

Ver.  6.  And  there  shall  be  a  tabernacle  for  a  shadow. — A  substantial  shadow 
amid  the  insubstantials  : — The  tabernacles  of  the  Old  Testament  typify  the  abiding 
glory  of  that  true  tabernacle  which  the  Lord  pitched  and  not  man.  They  were 
taken  down.  This  abideth  evermore.  The  dissolving  process  of  death  only 
developed  the  capacity  of  the  Divine  Redeemer  to  become  a  universal  tabernacle. 
Isaiah  saw  the  Divine  King  in  all  His  beauty  and  in  all  His  adaptedness  for  the 
world's  deep  needs  when  he  declared,  "  And  there  shall  be  a  tabernacle  for  a 
shadow  in  the  day-time  from  the  heat."  The  word  shadow  is  not  always  attract- 
ively employed.  Job,  in  mournful  imagery,  describes  the  traveller  going  to  the 
land  of  darkness,  and  the  shadow  of  death.  And  cheering  ideas  are  not  always 
suggested  by  the  proverb  which  affirms  that  coming  events  cast  their  shadows 
before  them.  But  the  sublime  tabernacle  spoken  of  by  Isaiah  is  a  shadow  that 
always  attracts.  It  never  hides  any  sunlight  which  may  be  needful  for 
the  ripening  of  celestial  fruits.     I.  This  tabernacle  is  a  cooling  shadow.     The 


chap.  T.]  ISAIAH.  103 

heats  of  this  world  will  not  be  so  oppressive  to  him  who  dwells  in  this  tabernacle. 
For  the  soul  finds  adequate  provisions  for  the  wants  and  aspirations  of  its  largo 
capacities  in  this  substantial  shadow.  II.  This  tabernacle  is  a  life-giving  and 
preserving  shadow.  The  summer  heat  of  Judaea  is  intense.  Some  of  the 
rivers  are  dried  up,  and  become  lanes  of  burning  sand.  Near  Mount  Tabor  many 
of  the  soldiers  of  Baldwin  IV.  died  through  the  oppressive  heat ;  and  at  this  very 
place  of  Shunem,  the  son  of  the  Shunammite  was  struck  in  the  head  by  the  sun's 
rays  as  he  went  up  to  his  father  to  the  reapers,  and  he  died.  A  shadow  to  impart 
and  preserve  life  as  well  as  to  give  a  cooling  place  of  resort.  The  spirit  of  man 
dies  in  consequence  of  unforgiven  transgression,  but  life  is  found  in  the  true  taber- 
nacle. III.  This  tabernacle  is  a  delightful  shadow.  Delightful,  not  only  in 
protecting  from  evils,  but  in  the  direct  impartation  of  pleasure.  If  there  is  any 
delightful  state  in  this  world,  it  is  where  and  when  the  soul  sits  down  under 
the  shadows  of  the  Beloved  and  holds  sublime  communion  with  the  Infinite. 
IV.  This  shadow  is  an  abiding  shadow.  Unlike  that  afforded  by  Jonah's  gourd. 
God  blasts  our  cherished  gourds  in  order  to  lead  us  out  of  all  narrow  and  selfish 
policies.  Earth's  protecting  shadows  flee  away  to  teach  us  to  abide  more  con- 
stantly and  believingly  beneath  the  one  perfect  and  ever-abiding  shadow. 
(IF.  Burrows,  B.A.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vers.  1-7.  Now  will  I  slug  to  my  well-beloved. — Hopes  concerning  the 
vineyard :  —  The  Lord's  hopes  and  disappointment  with  His  vineyard. 
(A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  Truth  to  be  presented  in  varied  form  : — Aaron's  bells 
must  be  wisely  rung.  Sometimes  the  treble  of  mercy  sounds  well,  at  other  times 
the  tenor  of  judgment,  or  counter-tenor  of  reproof,  sounds  better :  and  it  often 
happens  that  the  mean  of  exhortation  sounds  best  of  all.  It  is  wisdom  to 
observe  circumstances,  and  know  how  to  curse  as  well  as  bless,  chide  as  well  as 
comfort,  and  speak  war  to  a  rebel  as  well  as  peace  to  a  friend.  And  herein,  indeed, 
lies  the  wisdom  and  faithfulness  of  a  teacher.  (N.  Rogers.)  Who  was  the 
speaker  ? — It  is  an  interesting  question,  and  one  to  which  the  answer  is  not  alto- 

Sjther  obvious.  And  who  is  the  well- beloved  to  whom  these  words  are  addressed  ? 
nly  two  answers  seem  possible.  Either  it  must  be  the  prophet  who  speaks, 
and  his  God  that  he  is  addressing ;  or  else  it  must  be  the  eternal  Father  that  is 
addressing  His  co-eternal  Son.  1.  If  we  adopt,  as  most  commentators  seem  to 
do,  the  former  explanation,  we  have  to  face  two  very  serious  difficulties,  neither 
of  which  can  I  meet.  (1)  The  prophet  here  uses  a  term  of  endearment  which 
would  be  strangely  inconsistent  with  his  usual  style  of  addressing  God,  and  such 
a  use  of  the  Hebrew  term  here  employed  occurs  nowhere  else  in  Scripture.  It  is  a 
term  of  endearment  of  the  strongest  kind,  answering  very  closely  to  our  English 
word  "  darling  "  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  there  is  something  very  repugnant 
to  our  ideas  of  seemliness  and  reverence  in  the  application  of  such  a  term  to  that 
God  with  whose  majesty  Isaiah  was  himself  so  profoundly  impressed.  In  every 
other  case  in  which  this  word  is  used  as  a  term  of  endearment,  it  is  addressed 
by  the  stronger  to  the  weaker,  by  the  superior  to  the  inferior.  Thus  Benjamin  i3 
spoken  of  as  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  in  the  blessings  of  Deuteronomy,  the  thought 
suggested  being,  that  as  Benjamin  himself  was  Jacob's  favourite,  the  darling  of 
his  heart,  so  the  tribe  was  to  be  specially  dear  to  the  great  Father  of  the  race. 
But  obviously,  while  Benjamin  might  justly  be  called  the  darling  of  Jacob's 
heart,  it  would  have  been,  to  say  the  least,  somewhat  incongruous  to  speak  of 
Jacob  as  Benjamin's  darling.  The  term  would  have  been  wholly  out  of  place 
here  ;  and  not  less,  but  even  more,  out  of  place  must  it  needs  be  in  the  lips  of  an 
Isaiah  addressing  his  God.  (2)  Yet  another  difficulty  has  to  be  faced  if  wo 
make  the  prophet  the  singer ;  for  in  that  case,  his  song  clearly  ends  at  the  close 
of  the  second  verse,  whereas  on  this  hypothesis  it  must  be  assumed  that  there  is  an 
abrupt  transition  from  the  speech  of  the  prophet  to  the  speech  of  God.  But  it 
seems  clear  that  the  whole  passage,  down  to  the  end  of  the  seventh  verse,  con- 
stitutes the  song  referred  to  in  the  first  verse,  and  it  is  all  spoken  of  as  a  song 
sung  to  the  beloved.  2.  Let  us  adopt  the  other  explanation  of  the  passage, 
and  all  at  once  becomes  straightforward  and  self-consistent,  the  only  difficulty 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

involved  being  that  we  have  here  a  marvellously  explicit  reference  to  a  great 
theological  verity,  that  was  not  fully  revealed  to  the  world  till  the  Christian  epoch 
— the  doctrine  of  the  distinction  of  Persons  (as  we  are  obliged  to  express  it  for 
lack  of  better  terms)  in  the  Divine  Unity.  This  great  truth  is,  however,  implied 
in  many  other  passages  of  Old  Testament  Scripture,  and  therefore  its  occurrence 
here  need  not  trouble  us.  According  to  this  second  interpretation,  it  is  the  eternal 
Father  that  is  here  addressing  His  well-beloved  Son,  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant, 
to  whose  tutelage  the  ancient  Theocracy  was  delivered,  just  as  at  a  subsequent 
period  He  became,  in  the  flesh,  the  Founder  and  Head  of  the  Christian  Church. 
Here  the  expression  used  is  just  what  might  be  expected,  and  we  are  reminded  of 
the  voice  which  fell  from  heaven  in  New  Testament  times :  "  This  is  My  beloved 
Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  In  this  exegesis  the  identity  of  the  singer  and 
the  unity  of  the  song  is  preserved  throughout.  There  is  no  abrupt  transition 
from  the  utterance  of  one  person  to  that  of  another ;  for  He  who  sings  and  He 
to  whom  the  song  is  sung  are  one.  The  Father  does  Himself  that  which  He  does 
through  the  Divine  Word,  and  hence  the  passage  from  the  third  person  to  the 
first  in  the  third  verse  ceases  to  be  embarrassing ;  nay,  additional  force  is  added 
to  the  Divine  expostulation ;  for  the  Father  is  jealous  with  a  holy  jealousy  for 
the  Person  and  work  of  His  Son.  He  knows  how  well  that  work  has  been  done, 
and  has  all  the  more  reason  to  complain  of  its  having  been  denied  its  proper  results 
and  its  merited  reward.  There  is  something  infinitely  pathetic  in  the  idea  of  this 
eong  of  lamentation,  poured  forth  from  the  great  Father's  heart  of  love  into  the 
sympathetic  ear  of  His  well-beloved  Son,  and  in  this  enumeration  of  all  that  He, 
the  well-beloved  of  the  Father,  had  wrought  for  favoured  Israel.  When  man  was 
created,  he  was  created  as  the  result  of  the  decree  of  a  Divine  council :  "  Let  tu 
make  man  in  our  own  image."  And  now  when,  after  years  of  trial,  man  has 
proved  himself  a  miserable  failure,  the  Divine  Father  and  the  co-eternal  Son  are 
represented  as  conferring  over  the  disastrous  issue.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
The  vineyard  song : — There  are  plaintive  songs,  mournful  songs,  as  well  as  songs 
expressive  of  joy  and  delight.  I.  The  appellative  address.  "  My  well- 
beloved."  Can  you  call  Jesus  so  T  "  If  any  man  love  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
let  him  be  accursed  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord."  II.  The  song.  Observe,  that 
whilst  this  vineyard  is  the  choice  of  "  my  well-beloved,"  and  His  own  hand  plants 
it,  He  has  a  right  to  the  fruits.  Take  care  and  do  not  rob  Him.  Do  not  tell  me 
anything  about  a  sandy  and  barren  Christianity.  It  is  not  worth  twopence  an 
acre,  if  you  go  by  the  measurement.  Do  not  tell  me  of  a  tree  in  the  Lord's  vine- 
yard that  brings  forth  no  fruit ;  tell  me  rather  of  the  post  in  the  street.  I  look 
for  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  that  He  may  be  glorified  in  and  by  you.     HI.  The 

KNOWLEDGE  WHICH  IS  REQUISITE  FOR  THE  SINGERS.      (J.Ir07l8.)  V nfruitfvlne88 

reproved: — 1.  It  is  natural  to  ask,  Who  is  this  that  says,  "  I  will  sing  a  song  to 
my  Beloved  "  ?  I  take  these  words  to  be  spoken,  not  in  the  person  of  Isaiah,  but  of 
God  the  Father  to  His  Son  our  Lord,  who  in  the  evangelical  style  is  called,  "  the 
beloved  Son  of  God,  in  whom  He  is  well  pleased."  But  how  can  the  Church  of 
those  times  be  called  the  vineyard  of  the  Son  ?  I  answer,  Because  as  the  Father 
created  all  things  by  Him,  so  by  Him  He  has  always  governed  all  things,  and  more 
especially  His  Church.  2.  The  Church  of  God  is  styled  a  vineyard,  which  is  a  very 
pertinent  resemblance  of  it.  For  as  a  vineyard  is  a  plot  of  ground  separated  from 
common  field  and  pasture,  in  order  to  be  improved  with  such  cultivation  as  that 
the  vines  and  grapes  it  produces  may  supply  the  owner  with  generous  wines  : 
so  '  od's  Church  consists  of  a  people  chosen  by  Him  out  of  the  rest  of  the  world, 
that  they  may  worship  Him  by  the  laws  and  rules  of  His  own  revealing,  and  so 
exercise  a  purer  religion,  and  abound  in  the  fruits  of  good  living,  above  other  men, 
v,  ho  have  not  the  light  of  the  same  revelation,  nor  direction  of  the  same  laws. 
This  similitude  of  a  vine,  or  vineyard,  for  the  justness  of  the  resemblance,  is  several 
times  used  to  denote  the  Church.  (Psa.  lxxx.)  3.  This  vineyard  is  said  to  be 
situate  in  a  very  fruitful  hill,  alluding  to  the  land  of  Canaan,  which  was  a  high- 
raised,  and  a  very  fertile  soil,  agreeable  to  the  character  which  Moses  gives  of  it 
(Deut.  xxxii.  13).  4.  God  made  a  fence  round  about  it,  i.e..  He  distinguished 
His  people  from  all  other  nations  by  peculiar  laws,  statutes,  and  observances, 
not  only  in  religion,  but  even  in  civil  life,  in  their  very  diet  and  conversation,  so 
that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  remain  Jews,  and  to  accompany  freely  with 
the  rest  of  the  world.  He  also  fenced  them  with  a  miraculous  protection  from  the 
invasions  of  their  adversaries,  which  bordered  upon  them  on  every  side.  5.  God 
cleared  the  soil  of  this  vineyard  from  stones ;   not  indeed  in  the  literal  sense, 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  lOff 

for  this  country  pretty  much  abounds  with  rocks  and  flints,  which  are  so  far  from 
being  always  prejudicial,  that  they  are  serviceable,  not  only  for  walls  and  buildings, 
but  even  for  some  parts  of  agriculture.  But  this  is  a  proper  continuation  of  the 
allegory,  that  as  stones  should  be  cast  out  of  a  vineyard,  so  God  cast  out  the 
ancient  inhabitants  of  Canaan,  to  make  room  for  the  children  of  Israel.  And 
with  them  He  cast  out  their  idols,  made  of  wood  and  stone,  and  demolished  the 
temples  dedicated  to  idolatry,  that  His  own  people  might  have  no  stumbling- 
blocks  left  in  their  way,  but  might  be  wholly  turned  to  His  service.  6.  He  planted 
it  with  the  choicest  vine,  the  true  religion,  and  form  of  government  both  ecclesi- 
astical and  civil,  which  He  had  revealed  from  heaven.  He  made  excellent  pro- 
vision for  the  instruction  of  His  people,  and  the  promulgation  of  His  will  and 
pleasure  among  them.  7.  After  much  cultivation  of  His  vineyard  and  choice  of 
His  vine,  He  justly  expected  a  plentiful  product  of  the  best  kind  of  grapes ;  but 
was  recompensed  for  all  His  pains  with  no  better  than  the  fruits  of  wild,  uncultivated 
nature;  "grapes  of  Sodom,  and  clusters  of  Gomorrah,"  as  He  complains  (Deut. 
xxxii.).  And  He  gives  us  a  sample  and  taste  of  them  in  some  of  the  following 
words.  "  He  looked  for  judgment,  but  behold  oppression ;  for  righteousness, 
but  behold  a  cry."  The  great  increase  of  their  fields  and  flocks,  wherewith  He 
had  blessed  them,  afforded  them  sufficient  means  of  rendering  those  dues  to 
religion,  and  loving-kindness  to  their  neighbours,  especially  to  the  more  indigent 
sort,  which  by  many  sacred  laws  and  serious  exhortations  He  had  enjoined.  But 
instead  of  being  led  by  the  Divine  beneficence  to  works  of  liberality  and  charity, 
they  only  studied  how  to  sacrifice  to  their  insatiable  lusts  and  lewd  affections. 
8  Therefore  with  good  reason  God  tells  them  and  appeals  to  themselves  for  the 
justice  of  it,  that  He  would  take  away  the  hedge  of  His  vineyard,  and  lay  it  open 
to  be  wasted  and  trodden  under  foot.  The  proper  application  of  all  this  to  our- 
selves, is  briefly  hinted  by  St.  Paul  (Rom.  xi.  21).  "  If  God  spared  not  the  natural 
branches,  take  heed  lest  He  also  spare  not  thee."  (W.  Beading,  M.A.)  Britain 
highly  favoured  of  God : — The  natural  advantages  of  Great  Britain  have  been 
deemed  extremely  great ;  an  island  (says  an  early  historian)  "  whose  valleys  are 
as  Eshcol,  whose  forests  are  as  Carmel,  whose  hills  as  Lebanon,  and  whose  defence 
is  the  ocean."  But  our  country  has  to  enumerate  advantages  of  a  still  higher 
order, — both  of  a  civil  and  of  a  religious  nature.  Our  civil  constitution  is  a  fabric, 
which,  on  account  of  its  symmetry  and  grandeur,  has  even  called  forth  the  admira- 
tion of  foreigners.  Respecting  this  invaluable  constitution,  the  late  Dr.  Claudius 
Buchanan  asks,  "  Was  it  the  peculiar  wisdom  of  the  Danes  which  constructed  it  T 
or  of  the  Saxons,  or  of  the  Normans,  or  of  the  natives  of  the  island  ?  What  is  the  name 
of  the  great  legislator  who  conceived  the  mighty  plan  ?  Was  it  created  by  chance, 
or  by  design  ?  .  .  .  We  know  well  by  whose  counsel  and  providence  our  happy 
government  hath  been  begun  and  finished.  Our  constitution  is  the  gift  of  God, 
and  we  have  to  acknowledge  His  goodness  for  this  blessing,  as  we  thank  Him  for 
life,  and  breath,  and  all  things."  But  should  we  be  less  grateful  for  the  benefits 
of  a  religious  description,  which  have  been  conferred  in  past  years  upon  our 
ancestors,  and  so  copiously  upon  ourselves  ?  We  have  reason  to  believe  that 
the  holy  light  of  Christian  truth  was  introduced  amongst  the  Britons  in  the  apostolio 
age,  and  during  the  captivity  of  Caractacus ;  and  that  numerous  churches  being 
gradually  formed,  the  sanguinary  rites  of  the  Druids,  practised  in  the  dark  recesses 
of  their  forests,  were  exchanged  for  the  pure  worship  of  the  Gospel.  In  the  sixth 
century,  Christianity,  though  too  much  tinctured  with  the  superstition  of  the 
age,  was  introduced  amongst  the  idolatrous  Saxons.  It  was  a  benefit  to  many 
of  our  ancestors  that  the  dawn  of  a  reformation  also  appeared,  when  the  doctrines 
of  the  Waldenses  were  brought  from  France ;  and  when  the  intrepid  Wiclifie — 
whose  writings  were  of  no  small  advantage  to  the  revival  of  religion,  both  in  his 
own  country  and  in  Bohemia — protested  against  the  reigning  errors.  This 
reformation,  though  soon  crushed,  was  renewed  within  about  a  century  afterwards, 
and  established  under  the  auspices  of  a  young  monarch  whose  name  should  be 
remembered  with  the  warmest  gratitude, — the  sixth  Edward.  The  protestant 
Church  was  in  the  next  reign  greatly  oppressed,  and  many  were  added  to  the  noble 
army  of  martyrs ;  but  in  the  following  reign  it  acquired  a  stability  unknown 
before ;  and  notwithstanding  the  various  difficulties  with  which  it  has  struggled 
has  flourished  to  this  day.  (T.  Sims,  M.A.)  Man  under  the  eulturing  cart  of 
Heaven : — The  Eternal  employs  fiction,  as  well  as  fact,  in  the  revelation  of  His 
great  tho  ghts  to  man.  Hence  we  have  in  the  Bible,  fable,  allegory,  parable. 
Fiction,  used  in  the  way  which  the  Bible  employs  it,  is  a  valuable  servant  of  truth. 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap    t. 

It  is  always  pore,  brief,  attractive,  and  strikingly  apt.  The  Divine  idea  flashes 
from  it  at  once,  as  the  sunbeam  from  the  diamond.  The  text  is  one  of  the  oldest 
parables,  and  is  run  in  a  poetic  mould.  It  is  fiction  set  to  music.  "  I  will  sine 
to  my  beloved  a  song  touching  his  vineyard."  Isaiah's  heart,  as  all  hearts  should 
be,  is  in  loving  transports  with  the  absolutely  Good  One,  and  by  the  law  of 
strong  affections  he  expresses  himself  in  the  language  of  bold  metaphor  and 
the  musio  of  lofty  verse.  Love  is  evermore  the  soul  of  poetry  and  song.  This 
parabolio  song  is  not  only  a  song  of  love,  but  a  song  of  sadness,  for  it  expresses 
in  stirring  imagery  how  the  Almighty  had  wrought  in  mercy  to  cultivate 
the  Hebrew  people  into  goodness,  how  unsuccessful  He  had  been  in  all  His 

gacious  endeavours,  and  how  terrible  the  judgment  that  would  descend  from 
is  throne  in  consequence  of  their  unfruitfulness.  We  have  man  under 
Divine  culture  here  set  before  us  in  three  aspects.  I.  Receiving  the 
utmost  attention.  So  much  had  the  Eternal  done  for  the  Hebrew  race  in 
order  to  make  them  good,  that  He  appeals  to  the  men  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah 
in  these  remarkable  words :  "  What  could  have  been  done  more  to  My  vineyard, 
that  I  have  not  done  in  it  ?  "  What  has  the  great  moral  Husbandman  done 
towards  our  moral  culture  ?  1.  Look  at  nature.  There  is  an  intelligence,  a 
goodness,  a  calm,  fatherly  tenderness,  animating,  beautifying,  and  brightening 
all  nature,  which  is,  in  truth,  its  moral  soul,  that  silently  works  evermore  to 
fashion  the  heart  of  humanity  for  God.  2.  Look  at  history.  There  is  running 
through  all  history,  as  its  very  life,  an  Eternal  Spirit  of  inexorable  justice  and 
compassionating  mercy,  whose  grand  mission  it  is  to  turn  the  souls  of  men  from 
the  hideousness  of  crime  to  the  beauties  of  virtue,  from  confidence  in  man,  "  whose 
breath  is  in  his  nostrils,"  to  trust  in  Him  who  liveth  for  ever,  from  the  temporary 
pleasures  of  earth  to  the  spiritual  joys  of  immortality.  3.  What  are  the  events 
of  our  individual  life  ?  Why  is  our  life,  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  one  per- 
petual change  of  scene  and  state  ?  Why  the  unceasing  alternation  of  adversity 
and  prosperity,  friendship  and  bereavement,  sorrow  and  joy  ?  Rightly  regarded, 
they  are  God's  implements  of  spiritual  culture.  4.  Look  at  mediation.  Why 
did  God  send  His  only-begotten  Son  into  the  world  ?  We  are  expressly  told 
that  it  "  was  to  redeem  men  from  all  iniquity."  5.  Look  at  the  Gospel  ministry. 
Why  does  the  great  God  ordain  and  qualify  men  in  every  age  to  expound  the 
doctrines,  offer  the  provisions,  and  enforce  the  precepts  of  the  Gospel  of  His 
Son  T  Is  it  not  to  enlighten,  renovate,  purify,  and  morally  save  the  souls  of  men  ? 
TT.  Becoming  worse  than  fruitless.  "  He  looked  that  it  should  bring  forth 
grapes,  and  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes."  The  idea  is  that  the  Jewish  people, 
under  the  culturing  care  of  God,  produced  instead  of  good  fruit  the  foetid,  noxious 
fruit  of  the  wild  vine.  And  truly  their  history  demonstrates  this  lamentable 
fact.  From  age  to  age  they  grew  more  and  more  corrupt,  morally  offensive, 
and  pernicious.  Thus  they  went  on  until  the  days  of  Christ.  Unfruitfulness 
is  bad  enough,  but  pernicious  fruitfulness  is  worse.  The  history  of  the  world 
shows  that  it  is  a  common  thing  for  men  to  grow  in  evil  under  the  culturing  care 
of  God.  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened  under  the  ministry  of  Moses ;  Saul 
advanced  in  depravity  under  the  ministry  of  Samuel ;  and  Judas  became  a 
devil  under  the  ministry  of  Christ  Himself.  Man  growing  in  evil  under  the 
culturing  agency  of  God,  indicates  two  facts  in  human  nature.  1.  The  spon- 
taneity of  man's  action.  What  stronger  proof  can  there  be  that  our  Maker  has 
endowed  us  with  a  sovereign  power  of  freedom  than  the  fact  that  we  act  contrary 
to  His  purpose  regarding  us,  and  neutralise  His  culturing  efforts  ?  2.  The  per- 
versity of  man's  heart.  The  disposition  to  run  counter  to  Heaven,  which  is  coeval 
with  unregenerate  souls,  is  the  root  of  the  world's  upas.  How  came  it  T  It 
does  not  belong  to  human  nature  as  a  constitutional  element.  It  is  our  own 
creation,  and  fcr  it  etc:nal  justice  holds  us  responsible.  III.  Sinking  into  utter 
desolation  (vers.  5,  6).  These  words  threaten  a  threefold  curse.  1.  The  with- 
drawal of  Divine  protection.  "  I  will  take  away  the  hedge  thereof,"  &c.  The 
meaning  is,  that  He  will  withdraw  His  guardianship  from  the  Hebrew  people. 
This  threat  was  fulfilled  in  their  experience.  Heaven  withdrew  its  aegis,  and  the 
Romans  entered  and  wrought  their  ruin.  What  thus  occurred  to  the  Jew  is  only 
a  faint  symbol  of  what  must  inevitably  occur  in  the  experience  of  all  who  con- 
tinue to  grow  in  evil  under  the  culturing  agency  of  God.  2.  A  cessation  of 
culturing  effort.  "  It  shall  not  be  pruned  nor  digged ;  but  there  shall  come  up 
briers  and  thorns."  The  idea  is  that  He  would  put  forth  no  more  effort  to  improve 
their  condition,  that  He  would  cease  to  send  them  visions  and  prophets.    The 


chap,  t.]  ISAIAH.  107 

time  must  come  in  the  case  of  all  the  unregenerate,  when  God  will  cease  His 
endeavours  to  improve.  His  Spirit  will  not  '  always  strive  with  man."  3.  The 
withholding  of  fertilising  elements.  "  I  will  also  command  the  clouds  that  they 
rain  no  rain  upon  it."  However  protected  the  vineyard  might  be,  and  however 
enriched  the  soil,  and  skilfully  pruned  the  branches,  if  no  rain  come,  the  whole 
will  soon  be  ruined.  What  a  terrible  picture  of  a  soul  is  this  ! — here  is  a  soul 
from  which  its  great  Father  has  withdrawn  all  protection,  ceased  all  culturing 
efforts,  and  withholds  all  fertilising  influences !  Here  is  hell.  This  subject 
starts  many  solemn  reflections,  and  has  many  practical  uses.  (1)  It  unfolds  the 
mercifulness  of  God.  How  infinite  His  condescending  love  in  taking  this  little 
world  under  His  culturing  care.  (2)  It  reveals  the  morality  of  life.  Man  is  a 
moral  being,  and  everything  here  connected  with  his  life  has  a  moral  purpose, 
and  a  moral  bearing.     (3)  It  explains  all  human  improvement.     God,  as  the 

freat  Husbandman,  is  here  "  building  fences,"  "  digging  and  pruning,"  and  thus 
elping  on  the  world  to  moral  fruitfulness.  (4)  It  urges  self-scrutiny.  In  what 
state  is  our  vineyard  ?  (5)  It  suggests  the  grand  finale  of  the  world's  history. 
There  is  a  harvest  marching  up  the  "  steeps  of  time."  (Homilist.)  Great 
opportunities : — I.  As  abundantly  possessed.  The  vineyard  here  is  repre- 
sented— 1.  As  in  a  salubrious  position.  "  In  a  very  fruitful  hill."  2.  As  subject 
to  culturing  care.  Canaan  was  the  fruitful  hill ;  the  theocratic  government 
was  the  fence  built  around  it.  What  rare  opportunities  has  every  man  amongst 
us !  Bibles  in  our  houses,  churches  near  our  dwellings,  preachers  of  every  type 
of  mind,  class  of  thought,  and  oratorio  power.  II.  As  shamefully  abused. 
"  When  I  looked  that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes,  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes." 
III.  As  utterly  lost.  (Ibid. )  A  history  of  the  Jews : — We  have  in  this 
parable  a  summing  up  of  the  history  of  God's  chosen  people.  I.  God's  cabb 
fob  them — their  privileges.  II.  God's  grief  over  them — their  sin  and  un- 
faithfulness. III.  God's  sentence  upon  them — their  punishment.  (C.  J. 
Ridgeway.)  Human  life  in  parable: — I.  Here  is  human  life  placed  in  a  good 
situation.  "  In  a  very  fruitful  hill."  II.  Here  is  human  life  as  the  subject 
of  detailed  care  (ver.  2).  He  stood  back  and  waited  like  a  husbandman.  The 
vineyard  was  upon  a  hill,  and  therefore  could  not  be  ploughed.  How  blessed  are 
those  vineyards  that  are  cultivated  by  the  hand  !  There  is  a  magnetism  in  the 
hand  of  love  that  you  cannot  have  in  an  iron  plough.  He  gathered  out  the  stones 
thereof  one  by  one  .  .  .  He  fenced  .  .  .  He  built  .  .  .  He  made  a  wine-press.  It 
is  hand-made.  There  is  a  peculiar  delight  in  rightly  accepting  the  handling  of  God. 
We  are  not  cultivated  by  the  great  ploughs  of  the  constellations  and  the  laws  of 
nature ;  we  are  handled  by  the  Living  One,  our  names  are  engraven  on  the  palms 
of  His  hands :  "  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  doeth  gloriously."  Human  life, 
then,  is  the  subject  of  detailed  care ;  everything,  how  minute  soever,  is  done  as 
if  it  were  the  only  thing  to  be  done  ;  every  man  feels  that  there  is  a  care  directed 
to  him  which  might  belong  to  an  only  son.  III.  Human  life  is  next  regarded 
as  the  object  of  a  just  expectation.  "  He  looked  that  it  should  bring  forth 
grapes."  Had  He  not  a  right  to  do  so  ?  Is  there  not  a  sequence  of  events  ? 
When  men  sow  certain  seed,  have  they  not  a  right  to  look  for  a  certain  crop  ? 
When  they  pass  through  certain  processes  in  education,  or  in  commerce,  or  in 
statesmanship,  have  they  not  a  right  to  expect  that  the  end  should  correspond 
with  the  beginning  ?  Who  likes  to  lose  all  his  care  ?  IV.  Human  life  as  the 
occasion  of  a  bitter  disappointment.  "  It  brought  forth  wild  grapes." 
(Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Life  given  for  culture  : — It  is  not  the  best  at  the  first; 
it  has  to  be  fenced,  and  the  stones  are  to  be  taken  out,  and  the  choice  vine  is  to 
be  planted,  and  the  tower  is  to  be  set  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  the  wine-press  is  to 
be  built  therein.  The  child  is  but  the  beginning ;  the  man  should  be  the  culti- 
vated result.  Culture  is  bestowed  for  fruit.  Culture  is  not  given  for  mere 
decoration,  ornamentation,  or  for  the  purpose  of  exciting  attention,  and  invoking 
and  securing  applause;  the  meaning  of  culture,  ploughing,  digging,  sowing  is — 
fruit,  good  fruit,  usable  fruit,  fruit  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  The  fruit 
for  which  culture  is  bestowed  is  moral.  God  looked  for  judgment  and  for 
righteousness.  (Ibid.)  God's  expectation  of  fruit : — I.  The  motives  oe 
reasons  iNDUcrNO  us  to  fbuitfulnes3.  1.  Every  creature  in  its  kind  is  fruitful. 
The  poorest  creature  God  hath  made  is  enabled,  with  some  gift,  to  imitate  the 
goodness  and  bounty  of  the  Creator,  and  to  yield  something  from  itself  to  the 
use  and  benefit  of  others.  Shall  not  every  creature  be  a  witness  against  man, 
and  rise  up  in  judgment  to  condemn  him,  if  he  be  fruitless  ?    2.  The  fruitfulneu 


108  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

of  a  Christian  is  the  groundwork  of  all  true  prosperity.  3.  If  we  be  fruitful, 
bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  there  is  no  law  against  us  (Gal.  v.  22,  23). 
4.  The  circumstance  of  time  calls  upon  us  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  obedience. 
Forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  year  by  year,  for  bo  long  succession  of  years,  sought 
for  fruit  of  us  and  found  none,  it  is  now  high  time  to  bring  forth  plenty.  6.  If 
all  this  will  not  serve  to  make  us  fruitful,  that  which  our  Saviour  saith  in  John 
xv.  2,  6,  should  awaken  us.  II.  Some  profitable  means  that  must  be  used 
to  make  us  grow  more  FRUITFUL.  1.  See  thou  be  removed  out  of  thy  natural 
soil,  and  be  engrafted  into  another  stock.  2.  See  thou  plant  thyself  by  the 
running  brooks.  3.  See  thou  labour  for  humility  and  tenderness  of  heart.  The 
ground  which  is  hard  and  strong  is  unfit  for  fruit.  4.  Beware  of  overshadowing 
thy  heart  by  any  sinful  lust,  whereby  the  warm  beams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
are  kept  from  it.  5.  A  special  care  must  be  had  to  the  root  that  that  grow  well. 
Faith  is  the  radical  grace.  6.  We  must  be  earnest  with  the  Lord,  that  He  would 
make  us  fruitful.  III.  The  nature  and  quality  of  that  fruit  which  wh 
must  bring  forth.  1.  Proper.  It  must  be  thy  own.  2.  Kindly,  resembling 
the  Author,  who  is  the  Spirit  of  grace.  3.  Timely  and  seasonable  (Psa.  i.  3). 
4.  Ripe.  5.  A  fifth  property  of  good  fruit  is  universalities.  Fruits  of  the  first 
and  second  table,  of  holiness  towards  God  and  righteousness  towards  man. 
Fruits  inward  and  outward.     6.  Constant.     (N.  Rogers.) 

Ver.  2.  It  brought  forth  wild  grapes. — Wild  grapes  : — The  history  of  the  Jewish 
nation  is  written  for  our  warning,  and  the  lessons  taught  by  this  parable  are  sadly 
needed  by  the  England  of  to-day.  There  is  not  one  word  of  this  description  of 
the  vineyard  at  its  best  which  is  not  true  of  this  highly  favoured  land.  This,  too, 
is  a  very  fruitful  hill.  Under  the  soil,  what  unheard-of  mineral  riches,  mines  of 
wealth !  Above  the  soil  and  in  it  what  fertility,  what  productive  power ! 
Around  us,  from  port  and  bay  and  harbour,  our  merchant  fleets  take  and  fetch 
and  gather  the  riches  of  the  earth  !  Here,  too,  is  planted  a  chosen  and  favoured 
vine.  Here  God  has  planted  the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  so  blended  with  some  other 
tribal  blood  that,  even  our  enemies  being  judges,  we  have  been  unequalled  in 
hardy  daring,  conquering  energy,  splendid  enterprise,  and  universal  stretch  of 
power.  We,  too,  have  been  strangely  "  fenced  in  "  by  the  providence  of  God. 
Our  iron  coasts,  compassed  by  the  inviolate  sea,  have  largely  made  and  kept  us 
separate  and  safe.  Out  of  this  land  have  also  been  gathered  the  stones  of  idolatry, 
barbarism,  despotism,  bigotry,  slavery.  Here,  too,  the  Husbandman  hath  built 
His  tower  and  made  His  wine-press.  "  The  temples  of  His  grace,  how  beautiful 
they  stand  !  "  Surely  the  Lord  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  people !  To  us  He 
Bays,  as  well  as  to  Israel  of  old,  "  What  more  could  I  do  to  My  vineyard,  that  I 
have  not  done  ?  Why,  then,  when  I  looked  for  grapes,  brought  it  forth  wild 
grapes  ?  "  Is  not  this  indictment  true  T  Wild  grapes,  offensive  to  God,  mis- 
chievous to  others,  and  ruinous  to  us,  are  being  produced  on  every  hand.  The 
Husbandman  describes  some  of  them.  1.  The  excessive  greed  of  gain  (ver.  8). 
The  sin  lies  not  in  the  mere  addition  of  house  to  house,  by  fair  and  lawful  means, 
or  a  moderate  gathering  together  of  earthly  good ;  but  in  that  mad  rush  and 
Bcramble,  that  strife  and  struggle  to  lay  hold  of  all  the  hand  can  grasp.  Never 
was  Nebuchadnezzar's  golden  god  worshipped  with  half  the  eager  frenzy  of  to-day. 
Utterly  reckless  of  Naboth's  honest  claim  to  his  little  vineyard — regardless  of 
the  right  of  poorer  neighbours  to  gain  a  livelihood,  a  powerful  purse  shall  buy 
them  out ;  huge  estates  shall  be  enclosed  in  an  ever-expanding  ring  fence ; 
rampant  speculators  shall  starve  the  spinner  and  weaver  by  the  cunning  of  a 
"  cotton-corner."  It  is  a  moral  wrong ;  it  is  a  national  calamity ;  it  is  a  wild 
grape  which  wins  a  "  woe  "  from  God.  The  one  gleam  of  hope  lies  in  the  fact 
that  the  monster  will  be  its  own  destroyer.  "  Of  a  truth,  many  such  houses, 
great  and  fair,  shall  be  without  inhabitant."  2.  Another  wild  grape  is  the  crying 
pin  of  intemperance  (ver.  11).  3.  Another  wild  grape  is  the  headstrong  rush  after 
pleasure ;  the  follies  and  frivolities  of  the  tens  of  thousands  whose  whole  time 
and  tastes  and  talents  are  wickedly  laid  on  the  shrine  of  sensual  delights.  A 
perpetual  round  of  feasting,  junketing,  dancing,  sightseeing,  and  sensational  enjoy- 
ments is  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  their  existence  (ver.  12).  4.  Another  wild  grape  is 
sensuality  in  its  grosser  and  fouler  shapes.  "  Woe  unto  them  which  draw  iniquity 
with  cords,  and  sin  as  with  a  cart-rope."  In  this  case  the  silken  threads  which 
bound  them  to  the  gilded  chariot  of  pleasure  have  been  woven  by  the  force  of 
habit  into  strong  cords  and  cables,  and  they  are  drawn  by  the  baser  passions  into 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  109 

bestial  sensuality,  and  within  the  veil  of  secrecy,  and  under  the  curtains  of  night, 
uncleanness  reigns.  5.  Another  wild  grape  is  infidelity.  "  Woe  unto  them  that 
regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord,  neither  consider  the  operations  of  His  hands." 
They  deny  His  creating  power,  they  question  His  existence,  and  as  for  the  opera- 
tion of  His  providence,  not  God  but  law  and  nature  is  the  cause  of  all !  And  all 
this  in  England !  6.  Another  wild  grape  here  mentioned  is  fraud  and  falsehood ;  and 
still  another  is  dishonesty.  "  Woe  to  them  who  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for 
bitter,"  and  so  on.  Again,  "  Woe  unto  them  which  justify  wickedness  for  reward ! " 
Tricks  of  trade,  scamped  handiwork,  adulterated  goods,  lying  puffs  and  advertise- 
ments, commercial  frauds,  haphazard  speculations — oh,  'tis  a  sickening  list ! 
What  shall  be  the  end  of  it  ?  Must  England,  like  Israel,  perish,  forsaken  of  her 
God  ?  No  nation  that  forgets  God  shall  prosper :  look  on  the  ruins  of  Babylon, 
of  Greece,  of  Israel,  of  Rome.  No  city  that  forgets  God  shall  prosper:  read  the 
sad  records  of  Nineveh,  of  Tyre,  of  Jerusalem,  of  Sardis,  of  Laodicea.  No  man 
that  forgets  God  shall  prosper  :  look  at  the  graves  of  Pharaoh,  of  Ahab,  of  Saul, 
of  Herod,  of  Napoleon.  If  England  lives  on,  and  grows  in  lustre  as  she  lives,  it 
must  be  because  the  King  Emmanuel  is  undisputed  Monarch  of  the  national  heart, 
uncontrolled  Director  of  the  national  policy  and  the  national  wilL  (J.  J.  Wray, 
M.A.)  Isaiah  an  embodied  conscience  : — Isaiah  was  speaking  in  the  first  years 
of  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  who,  by  his  luxury  and  effeminacy,  was  beginning  to  imperil 
the  splendid  results  of  the  reigns  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham.  Like  most  men  who 
are  embodied  consciences,  the  prophet  was  looked  upon  as  a  busybody.  Those 
are  usually  most  hated  who  do  that  which  is  most  needed.  Having  attracted 
attention  by  his  parable  of  the  vineyard  and  the  grapes,  Isaiah  became  a  remorse- 
less and  terrible  voice.  The  man  seemed  to  have  disappeared,  while  the  voice 
spoke  the  retributions  of  the  Almighty.  This  embodied  conscience  was  terribly 
faithful.  It  is  useless  to  attempt  argument  with  a  conscience.  It  can  never  be 
argued  with — it  must  be  heard.  It  utters  its  imperative,  and  you  are  heedless 
at  your  peril.  Some  things  may  be  reasoned  about ;  a  matter  of  conscience, 
never.  Furthermore,  conscience  is  always  and  of  necessity  prophetic.  Whenever 
conscience  tells  you  that  you  are  wrong,  it  tells  you  more  than  that — it  tells  you 
that  you  must  turn  or  you  will  be  punished.  That  is  what  makes  it  a  terror. 
Not  only  does  it  point  the  finger  of  shame  ;  it  also  points  the  finger  of  doom.  So 
is  it  with  the  national  conscience ;  it,  too,  is  prophetic,  and  always  speaks  of 
judgment.  Isaiah  was  the  conscience  of  Judah  speaking  its  imperative,  as 
Wendell  Phillips  and  William  Lloyd  Garrison  were  our  national  conscience  in 
the  days  when  the  Republic  protected  slavery.  Judah  had  grown  rich ;  she  was 
getting  careless ;  she  was  trusting  in  her  riches.  Judah  had  been  sadly  dis- 
ciplined. There  had  been  earthquakes,  loss  of  territory,  defeat,  and  now  there 
was  approaching  the  spectre  of  an  Assyrian  invasion.  For  all  this  she  boasted 
of  her  riches  and  neglected  God.  (Amory  H.  Bradford,  D.D.)  Old  foes  with 
new  faces  : — 1.  As  soon  as  a  people  become  rich,  they  usually  begin  to  subvert 
the  natural  and  Divine  order  to  their  own  selfishness.  The  tendency  of  riches  is 
to  lead  people  to  do  wrong.  That  may  be  why  it  is  so  hard  for  a  rich  man  to 
get  into  heaven.  He  makes  the  mistake  of  thinking  he  can  buy  his  way  any- 
where, and  finds  at  last  that  character,  not  gold,  is  the  currency  he  needs. 
2.  The  sternness  of  the  prophet  continues.  Those  who  have  grown  rich  have  also 
grown  luxurious.  They  have  learned  the  pleasures  of  the  wine-cup ;  they 
tarry  long  at  the  wine.  The  land  question  is  an  old  one ;  the  liquor  question 
is  equally  old.  Again  I  ask,  Who  shall  tell  why,  as  soon  as  men  begin 
to  prosper,  they  begin  to  do  what  is  worst  for  themselves  and  worst  for 
the  world  ?  Read  that  fifth  chapter  from  verse  12  to  17.  How  true  to 
life !  "  The  mean  man  is  bowed  down,  and  the  great  man  is  humbled."  The 
low-bred  fellow  drinks  his  fiery  liquor  and  wallows  in  the  gutter ;  the  high- 
bred and  rich  say  that  they  can  mind  their  own  business,  and  go  to  the 
same  disgusting  squalor.  But  Isaiah  was  speaking  of  the  nation  rather  than 
to  individuals.  It  was  a  national  shame  that  such  things  were  tolerated 
then ;  it  is  a  disgrace  that  such  things  are  tolerated  now.  If  Isaiah  were  alive 
to-day,  or,  better,  if  Jesus  Christ  could  have  your  attention  for  a  moment,  He 
would  say,  How  can  you  justify  yourselves  in  giving  so  much  time  to  purely 
economic  questions  and  so  little  to  the  devising  of  means  for  the  abolition  of  what 
ruins  the  finest  of  our  boys,  blights  homes  that  would  otherwise  be  beautiful  and 
full  of  love,  and  makes  so  many  of  our  rulers  more  like  swine  than  the  sovereigns 
they  were  intended  to  be  ?    These  two  old  foes  are  still  alive,  with  new  faces — 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

the  land  question  and  the  liquor  question.  The  lesson  which  we  have  to  learn 
is  the  one  which  the  prophet  sought  to  impress  in  his  time — that  both  individuals 
and  nations  are  responsible  to  God  ;  that  responsibility  is  real ;  and  that  there  is 
a  judgment-seat  before  which  men  and  nations  must  stand.  "  For  all  this  His 
anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  His  hand  is  stretched  out  still."  Let  us  not  forget 
that  we — our  community,  our  state,  our  nation — are  in  the  moral  order  of  God  ; 
that  everything  we  do  is  making  ourselves  and  all  others  better  or  worse ;  that 
we  are  all  called  to  fellowship  with  the  prophets  and  apostles  and  faithful  souls 
in  all  ages,  to  do  something  toward  bringing  in  the  time  when  the  good  things  of 
the  world  shall  belong  to  all  people.  (Ibid.)  A  reasonable  expectation: — God 
expects  vineyard  fruit  from  those  that  enjoy  vineyard  privileges.     (M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  3.  Judge,  I  pray  you,  betwixt  Me  and  My  vineyard.— The  unfruitful 
vineyard  : — I.  The  way  in  which  the  inspired  penman  is  guided  to  put  the  question 
in  the  text  seems  to  lead  us  to  one  of  the  subtlest  weaknesses  of  human 
nature, — I  mean  the  power  which  men  possess  of  perceiving  general  truth  without 
at  the  same  time  perceiving  its  particular  bearing  on  themselves.  Often  and 
often  are  we,  all  unconsciously,  judging  between  God  and  His  vineyard,  and  we 
know  it  not.  There  is  no  general  denunciation  of  the  Bible  which  does  not  meet 
with  our  full  assent ;  but  we  are  too  often  unable  to  see  that  we  ourselves  come 
under  its  terms.  And  this  is  one  of  the  dangers  attendant  on  listening  to 
preaching.  II.  The  portion  of  Scripture  under  consideration  has  a  most  direct 
reference  to  our  own  probation.  1.  As  members  of  the  Church.  2.  As 
individual  souls.     (IF.  Alexander.) 

Vers.  4-6.  What  could  have  been  done  more  to  My  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  don« 

in  it  ? — Human  responsibility  and  Divine  grace : — I.  In  any  attempt  at  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  story  and  the  exhibition  of  its  moral  and  religious  uses,  its  national 
application  should  be  considered  first.  (Ver.  7.)  1.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it 
may  almost  be  said  that  Israel  was  Jehovah's  vineyard  as  no  other  race  or  nation 
has  ever  been.  Selected  from  an  ancient  stock  which  certainly  does  not  seem  to 
have  greatly  distinguished  itself  before,  it  had  been  preserved  and  cherished 
century  after  century ;  and  in  its  most  marvellous  history  are  to  be  found  the 
purest  revelations  of  God  in  antiquity,  leading  up  to  the  "  unspeakable  gift  * 
in  which  men  have  life.  That  history  proves  that  the  nation  had  enjoyed  every 
condition  of  blessedness,  every  opportunity  of  fruitfulness  and  service.  2.  The 
kind  of  career  it  chose  is  sufficiently  indicated  in  this  fifth  chapter,  in  the  latter 
part  of  which  the  vices  seem  almost  to  run  riot.  But  it  is  even  more  significant 
of  the  state  of  the  nation,  that  these  lurid  paragraphs  are  not  perhaps  quite  an 
adequate  representation.  For,  threatened  with  an  attack  from  an  alliance  of 
the  neighbouring  tribes,  Abaz  sought  the  aid  of  the  King  of  Assyria ;  and  to  secure 
it,  he  actually  consented  to  govern  his  country  as  an  Assyrian  province.  Then 
followed  one  of  the  most  dismal  periods  of  Jewish  history.  The  weak  king  became 
infatuated  with  his  oppressor,  and  nothing  would  satisfy  him  except  the  intro- 
duction of  Assyrian  manners  and  morals  and  worship  into  Jerusalem.  The 
example  of  the  court  infected  the  nobles  and  the  priests  ;  and  at  length,  in  the 
beautiful  valley  of  Hinnom,  amongst  the  groves  that  were  kept  green  by  the 
fountains  of  Siloah,  an  altar  to  Moloch  was  erected.  That  was  the  sort  of  wild 
grape  "  this  choice  vine  was  yielding, — idolatry  of  the  most  cruel  and  savage 
kind,  varied  with  sensuality  and  the  oppression  of  the  poor.  3.  That  such  a 
result  should  disappoint  the  Owner  of  the  vineyard  was  only  natural ;  and  accord- 
ingly this  little  story  represents  Him  next  as  trying  to  find  out  the  cause,  or  rather, 
as  appealing  to  the  men  of  Judah  to  acknowledge  what  He  and  they  well  knew. 
He  sets  them  up  for  the  moment  as  judges,  and  confronts  reason  and  conscience 
with  the  question,  "  What  could  have  been  done  more  to  My  vineyard,  that  I 
have  not  done  in  it  ?  "  Everything  that  could  be  done  and  yet  leave  them  free 
to  sin  and  capable  of  righteousness  had  been  done.  4.  A  nation  convicted  and 
self-convicted  of  the  most  gross  offences  against  God  and  against  morals,  offences 
the  entire  responsibility  of  which  rests  upon  itself — what  will  become  of  that 
nation  ?  There  are  other  parts  of  the  Bible,  not  quite  so  stern  as  this,  which 
indicate  that  further  opportunities  may  be  given  it,  and  the  final  punishment 
withheld  for  a  time.  But  it  is  also  true  that,  in  regard  of  nations  as  well  as  of 
men,  the  patience  of  God  may  be  exhausted.  We  have  accordingly,  in  this  song 
and  story,  the  outline  of  the  history  of  Judah.    God's  consideration,  first  of  all, 


chap.  ▼.]  ISAIAH.  Ill 

with  every  kind  of  gracious  help  and  opportunity, — all  wasted  through  the 
neglect  or  wilfulness  of  the  nation  itself,  until  it  became  fruitless  and  hopelessly 
corrupt ;  and  then  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  words :  "  Go  to ;  I  will  tell  you 
what  I  will  do  to  My  vineyard  :  I  will  lay  it  waste :  it  shall  not  be  pruned  nor 
digged  ;  but  there  shall  come  up  briers  and  thorns :  I  will  also  command  the 
clouds  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it."  Judah,  in  its  origins  and  early  career, 
is  a  sufficient  illustration  of  the  preliminary  stages :  Judah,  in  its  dispersion  and 
miseries,  is  a  standing  witness  to  the  certainty  with  which  national  calamity  over- 
takes national  contempt  of  God.  A  nation  that  ignores  its  past,  and  just  sur- 
renders itself  to  sin,  is  manifestly  good  for  nothing,  filling  no  worthy  function,  but 
cumbering  the  earth.  II.  But  no  national  interpretation  of  this  parable 
seems  quite  sufficient.  The  way  in  which  the  Bible  insists  upon  the  truth 
that  national  responsibility  does  not  obliterate  but  only  gathers  together  and,  as 
it  were,  organises  personal  responsibility,  has  some  important  bearings  upon 
current  modes  of  speech  and  thought.  There  is  a  disposition  sometimes  to  speak 
of  the  conscience  of  a  nation,  to  imagine  that  the  phrase  stands  for  something 
that  is  entirely  separate  and  apart  from  ourselves,  and  to  regard  it  as  a  power 
outside  of  a  man,  to  which  he  may  add  or  from  which  he  may  withhold  his  own 
influence.  At  times  it  has  proved  a  convenient  generalisation ;  but  it  is  well 
that  an  exact  meaning  should  be  given  it.  It  must  denote,  not  something  apart 
from  any  man,  but  either  the  average  personal  conscience,  or  the  aggregate  of 
all  the  consciences ;  and  an  average  or  an  aggregate  is  a  figure  upon  which  every 
unit  tells.  All  morality,  indeed,  must  always  be,  in  its  essence  and  in  its  appeals, 
personal,  lifting  up  a  nation  by  lifting  up  the  individuals  that  constitute  it; 
exposing  it  to  the  wrath  of  God  because  the  individuals  expose  themselves.  The 
most  effective  social  movements  are  found  to  be  accordingly  those  which  address 
themselves  in  the  name  of  God  to  individuals,  and  persuade  them  one  by  one  to 
aim  more  resolutely  at  the  fulfilment  of  righteousness.  1.  If  then  this  passage  be 
taken  personally,  no  one  who  recalls  his  past  life,  and  remembers  the  way  in  which 
God  has  dealt  with  him,  is  likely  to  object  to  its  symbolism.  Every  one  of  us  has 
been  and  is  a  vineyard  of  the  Lord ;  and  He  does  for  us  all  that  a  God  can  do. 
2.  What  has  been  the  result  of  it  all  ?  Wild  grapes  in  abundance — weakness  and 
bad  temper  and  almost  every  kind  of  fault  we  can  show,  but  little  else.  3.  The 
reason  of  such  failure  is  not  far  to  seek.  That  God  can  be  blamed  for  it,  is 
impossible ;  for  there  has  been  no  defect  of  grace  or  help  on  His  part.  Tempera- 
ment and  circumstance  might  be  pleaded,  aptitudes  we  have  inherited,  and 
hindrances  amidst  which  we  have  found  ourselves,  but  for  the  obvious  reply 
that,  whilst  these  things  may  involve  effort  and  strain,  they  never  involve  defeat. 
The  man  who  is  most  embarrassed  by  his  own  disposition  and  surroundings, 
but  for  his  own  fault  might  be  a  better  man  than  he  is.  4.  The  consequences 
of  continuing  in  fruitlessness  are  shown  by  the  passage  to  be  fatal  and  hopeless. 
To  waste  Divine  grace  is  to  run  the  risk  of  losing  it  altogether.  That  point, 
however,  has  not  been  reached  by  any  one  who  retains  any  aspiration  after  God, 
or  any  desire  to  be  a  better  man.  In  Christ  there  is  power  for  all  to  shake  off 
every  habit  of  sin,  to  reverse  tendencies  to  neglect  and  waste,  to  evolve  in 
righteousness  and  peace.  (R.  Waddy  Moss.)  God  and  men: — I.  The  dealings 
of  God  with  us.  EL  Our  conduct  towards  Him.  (A.  Roberts,  M. A.) 
Divine  disappointment : — It  may  seem  irreverent  to  speak  of  a  Divine  disappoint- 
ment, but  this  is  by  no  means  the  only  passage  of  Scripture  which  in  its  obvious 
meaning  conveys  this  idea.  Perhaps  we  may  have  to  leave  the  explanation  of 
such  words  till  we  obtain  fuller  light  in  higher  worlds  upon  the  great  mystery 
of  the  relation  of  Divine  foreknowledge  to  human  freedom ;  but  clearly  such 
words  are  spoken  to  us  after  the  manner  of  men,  in  order  that  we  may  the  better 
discern  the  intensity  of  desire  and  the  warmth  of  loving  interest  with  which  the 
God  from  whom  we  all  proceed  seeks  to  raise  us  to  our  true  functions  and  our 
proper  place  in  His  universe,  and  the  sorrow  and  regret  with  which  He  witnesses 
the  failure  of  His  gracious  purposes  concerning  us.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
The  moral  limits  of  the  Divine  resources  : — 1.  Perhaps  it  may  occur  to  you  to  object, 
Why  this  lamentation  and  apparent  disappointment  ?  Surely,  this  is  a  confession 
of  impotence  on  the  part  of  the  Omnipotent.  If  God  be  really  what  we 
call  Him — Almighty — why  should  He  waste  words  in  futile  expostulations  ? 
Surely,  He  who  makes  the  vine  put  forth  her  tender  grapes,  and  prepares  the 
autumn  vintage  the  wide  world  over,  could,  if  He  pleased,  by  the  mere  exercise 
of  His  superior  power,  constrain  men  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  that  He  desires  to 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

Bee  brought  forth.  Why  did  He  not  increase  the  pressure  of  His  power  on  Israel 
until  He  had  constrained  the  disobedient  nation  to  become  obedient,  and  had 
practically  forced  them  to  bring  forth  their  fruit  ?  Our  answer  to  this  very 
natural  difficulty  is  simply  this— that  the  suggestion  involves  a  contradiction. 
This  will  be  sufficiently  obvious  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  ask,  What  is  the  special 
fruit  that  God  seeks  at  the  hand  of  man  T  The  proper  fruit  of  humanity,  the 
fruit  that  God  seeks  in  human  character  and  life,  is  the  reproduction  of  the  Divine 
nature.  God's  purpose  in  man  is  answered  when  He  sees  in  man  His  own  moral 
likeness  formed.  But  now,  inasmuch  as  God  is  a  free  agent,  it  is  only  by  the 
possession  of  a  similar  moral  faculty,  and  of  the  capacity  of  exercising  it,  and  only 
by  its  exercise  in  the  highest  and  best  manner,  that  man  can  ever  be  conformed 
into  the  Divine  image ;  for  no  two  things  are  more  essentially  unlike  than  an 
automaton  and  a  free  agent.  Indeed,  I  think  we  might  venture  to  say  that  even 
a  free  agent  who  uses  his  freedom  badly  is  morally  more  like  God,  just  because 
he  is  free,  than  the  most  perfect  automaton — perfect,  I  mean,  in  every  other  par- 
ticular you  can  name — could  ever  hope  to  become,  seeing  that  he  is  not,  and  can 
never  hope  to  be,  free.  No  doubt  God  could  have  arranged  that  man  should  be 
a^very  different  being,  and  bring  forth  very  different  fruit ;  but  then  in  doing  so 
He  would  have  had  to  abandon  the  specific  purpose  emphatically  announced 
when  man  was  just  about  to  be  called  into  existence — "  Let  us  make  man  in  our 
image,  after  our  own  likeness."  St.  Paul  teaches  us  that  the  "  gifts  and  calling 
of  God  are  without  repentance,"  and  we  see  this  illustrated  all  through  the  natural 
world.  God  does  not  alter  the  functions  of  particular  organisms,  and  make 
them  produce  something  totally  distinct  from  their  own  proper  type.  Were 
He  to  do  so  He  would  be  admitting  failure  and  inconsistency.  And  as  in  the 
material  so  in  the  spiritual  world.  Man  has  been  originally  designed  to  occupy 
a  certain  unique  position  there,  and  to  exercise  certain  definite  functions,  and  to 
bring  forth  a  particular  kind  of  fruit  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  therefore  we  may 
be  quite  sure  that  God  will  not  transform  him  into  a  being  of  another  order 
altogether,  just  to  make  him  do  and  be  what  he  in  his  free  manhood  wills  not 
to  do  or  to  be.  2.  But  it  might  still  be  urged,  Would  not  God  be  acting  a  kinder 
part  if  He  withdrew  this  faculty  of  free-will  which  has  caused  us  so  much  trouble, 
and  sin  and  sorrow — if  He  were  so  completely  to  override  it  by  His  own  superior 
power,  and  so  control  it  that  it  should  be  able  to  exercise  no  appreciable  influence 
in  our  conduct,  but  that  He  Himself  should  always  have  His  way  T  To  this  we 
answer,  God  loves  man  too  much  to  do  anything  of  the  kind.  Man's  capacity 
of  rising  to  his  proper  destiny  is  involved  in  his  possession  and  exercise  of  this 
faculty  of  volition.  Take  it  away,  and  we  must  needs  turn  our  backs  for  ever 
upon  the  thought  of  rising  to  the  prize  of  our  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus ;  for  it 
is  by  the  use  of  these  wills  of  ours,  and  by  their  voluntary  subordination,  that  we 
are  to  be  trained,  and  developed,  and  educated,  and  fitted  for  enjoying  that 
wondrous  relation  to  the  Son  of  God  which  is  spoken  of  as  the  spiritual  Bridal 
and  Union  of  Christ  and  His  Church.  No;  man  must  remain  free,  or  else  his 
own  proper  fruit  can  never  be  brought  forth ;  and  hence  there  is  really  and  actually 
a  moral  limit  to  the  Divine  resources.  3.  Bearing  in  mind,  then,  these  necessary 
limitations  of  the  Divine  resources,  let  us  each  face  the  inquiry,  What  more  would 
we  have  God  do  for  us  than  He  has  actually  done  ?  I  do  not  say  that  all  are 
equally  privileged,  and  I  can  believe  that  some,  in  answer  to  such  a  challenge, 
might  demand  the  enjoyment  of  higher  privileges  such  as  others  possess.  But 
don't  you  see  that,  whatever  privileges  might  thus  be  secured,  the  necessity  for 
the  action  of  the  will  would  not  and  could  not  be  evaded  ?  And  so  long  as  this 
were  so,  what  guarantee  would  you  have  that  your  increased  privileges  might 
not  mean  only  enhanced  condemnation  ?  Others,  who  occupy  the  very  position  of 
privilege  that  you  might  demand,  have  only  turned  their  privileges  into  a  curse  by 
sinning  against  them ;  and  who  shall  say  that  it  would  not  be  the  same  with  you  ? 
Nay,  is  it  not  even  more  than  probable  that  it  would  be  so ;  for  does  not  our 
Lord  Himself  teach  us  that  "  he  that  is  faithful  in  a  very  little  is  faithful  also 
in  much :  and  he  that  is  unrighteous  in  a  very  little  is  unrighteous  also  in 
much  "  ?  Here  we  have  laid  down  one  of  the  great  laws  of  the  moral  world. 
(Ibid.)  God  employs  various  means  in  deeding  with  men  : — He  does  not  exhaust 
all  the  means  that  He  is  capable  of  employing  without  any  inconsistency  all  at 
once.  Just  as  He  dealt  in  different  ways  with  Israel  of  old,  sometimes  sending 
a  miracle-working  prophet  like  Elijah,  and  sometimes  a  man  of  mighty  eloquence 
such  as  Isaiah ;  sometimes  raising  up  a  saintly  hierarch  like  Samuel,  and  some- 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  113 

times  a  philosophic  moralist  like  Solomon  ;  sometimes  speaking  inpestilence, 
defeat,  disaster,  and  sometimes  in  prosperity  and  deliverance,  even  so  He  employs 
first  one  means  and  then  another  in  dealing  with  us.  But  each  of  these,  when  it 
fails  to  bring  about  the  end  for  which  it  was  designed,  represents  the  exhaustion 
of  yet  another  resource  ;  and  when  the  last  which  the  Holy  Ghost  can  righteously 
and  consistently  have  recourse  to  has  been  exhausted,  the  soul  is  lost.  (Ibid.) 
Thankfulness  for  past  mercies  (he  way  to  obtain  future  blessings  : — I.  Thb  form 
and  manner  of  the  complatnt.  It  runs  in  a  pathetical  interrogatory  ex- 
clamation ;  which  way  of  expression  naturally  and  amongst  men  importing  in 
it  surprise  and  a  kind  of  confusion  in  the  thoughts  of  him  who  utters  it,  must 
needs  be  grounded  upon  that  which  is  the  foundation  of  all  surprise,  which  I 
conceive  is  reducible  to  these  two  heads — 1.  The  strangeness  ;  2.  The  indignity  of 
anything,  when  it  first  occurs  to  our  apprehensions.  II.  The  complaint  itself  ; 
for  which  there  are  these  things  to  be  considered.  1.  The  Person  complaining, 
who  was  God  Himself.  2.  The  persons  complained  of,  which  were  His  peculiar 
<  hurch  and  people.  3.  The  ground  of  this  complaint ;  which  was  their  unworthy 
and  unsuitable  returns  made  to  the  dealings  of  God  with  them.  4.  The  issue  and 
consequent  of  it ;  which  was  the  confusion  and  destruction  of  the  persons  so 
graciously  dealt  with  and  so  justly  complained  of.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  Qd^s  vine- 
yard : — With  ill  men  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  accuse  Almighty  God  of 
partiality  and  injustice,  as  if  it  were  in  His  nature  to  be  austere  and  cruel,  and 
expect  more  than  can  reasonably  be  done  by  them  in  their  circumstances.  When 
the  earth  is  unprofitable,  and  its  productions  are  fit  only  to  be  burned  in  the  fire, 
the  fault  is  neither  in  the  sun  nor  yet  in  the  clouds,  but  in  those  whose  business 
it  is  to  prepare  the  earth  for  the  influences  of  the  heavens.  In  like  manner,  and 
with  equal  justice,  may  God  appeal  to  His  people :  and  this  is  the  purport  of 
the  question,  "  What  could  have  been  done  more  for  My  vineyard,  that  I  have 
not  done  in  it  T  "  1.  The  vineyard,  with  all  the  circumstances  relating  to  it, 
is  thus  described  by  the  prophet  (vers.  1-4).  2.  If  Christians  should  at  last 
fall  away,  the  justice  of  God  may  then  appeal  to  them,  "  What  could  have  been 
done  more  for  My  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done  in  it  ?  "  3.  As  true  religion 
brings  with  it  the  blessing  of  God  upon  any  nation,  and  this  blessing  is  the  source 
of  inward  peace,  wisdom,  health,  plenty,  and  prosperity ;  so  the  decay  of 
Christianity  must  bring  such  evils  upon  us  as  were  brought  on  the  impenitent 
Jews.  (W.  Jones,  M.A.)  The  impenitent  inexcusable: — There  is  something 
very  affecting,  very  startling,  in  the  assertion  that  as  much  had  been  done  as  could 
be  done  in  order  to  produce  from  the  ancient  Church  the  "  fruits  of  righteousness." 
And,  if  you  only  ponder  the  arrangements  of  the  Gospel,  you  will  feel  forced  to 
assent  to  the  reproachful  truth  which  is  conveyed  in  the  question  of  the  text. 
There  is  a  wonderful  variety  in  the  arguments  and  appeals  which  are  addressed 
in  Scripture  to  the  thoughtless  and  obdurate.  At  one  time  they  are  attacked 
with  terrors,  at  another  acted  upon  by  the  loving-kindness  of  God,  and  allured 
by  the  free  mercies  of  the  Gospel.  In  our  text  there  is  nothing  alleged  but  the 
greatness  of  what  God  has  done  for  us — a  greatness  such  that  nothing  more  can 
be  done,  consistently,  at  least,  with  that  moral  accountableness  which  must 
regulate  the  amount  of  influence  which  God  brings  to  bear  upon  man.  Of  course, 
if  this  be  so,  then,  if  we  are  not  convinced  and  renewed  under  the  existing  in- 
strumentality, there  is  nothing  that  can  avert  from  us  utter  destruction.  I.  This 
is  the  first  way  of  vindicating  the  question  of  our  text — atheism  has  a  far  better 
apology  for  resisting  the  evidences  of  a  God  which  are  spread  over  creation,  than 
worldly-mindedness  for  manifesting  insensibility  to  redemption  through  Christ. 
It  is  not,  we  think,  too  bold  a  thing  to  say,  that  in  redeeming  us,  God  exhausted 
Himself.  He  gave  Himself ;  what  greater  gift  could  remain  unbestowed  t 
Therefore  it  is  the  fact  that  nothing  more  could  have  been  done  for  the  vineyard, 
which  proves  the  utter  ruin  which  must  follow  neglect  of  the  proffered  salvation. 
Having  shown  yourselves  too  hard  to  be  softened  by  that  into  which  Deity  has 
thrown  all  His  strength,  too  proud  to  be  humbled  by  that  whic  involved  the 
humiliation  of  God,  too  grovelling  to  be  attracted  by  that  which  unites  the  human 
and  the  Divine,  too  cold  to  be  warmed  by  that  which  burns  with  all  the  com- 
passions of  that  Infinite  One,  whose  very  essence  is  love, — may  we  not  argue  that 
yon  thus  prove  to  yourselves  that  there  is  no  possible  arrangement  by  which 
you  could  be  saved  ?  II.  Consider  more  in  detail  what  has  been  done  for  the 
vineyard,  in  order  to  bring  out,  in  all  its  reproachfulness,  the  question  before  us. 
I.  As  much  has  been  done  as  could  have  been  done  because  of  the  agency 

8 


114  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  y 

through  which  redemption  was  effected.  The  Author  of  our  redemption 
was  none  other  than  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  who  had  covenanted  from  all 
eternity  to  become  the  surety  and  substitute  for  the  fallen.  So  far  as  we  have 
the  power  of  ascertaining,  no  being  but  a  Divine  taking  to  Himself  flesh,  could 
have  satisfied  justice  in  the  stead  of  fallen  man.  But  this  is  precisely  the  arrange' 
ment  which  has  been  made  on  our  behalf.  2.  As  much  has  been  done  as  could 
have  been  done  for  the  "  vineyard,"  regard  being  had  to  the  completeness  and 
fulness  of  the  work  as  well  as  to  the  greatness  of  its  Author.  The  sins  of  the  whole 
race  were  laid  upon  Christ ;  and  such  was  the  value  which  the  Divinity  gave  to 
the  endurances  of  the  humanity,  that  the  whole  race  might  be  pardoned  if  the 
whole  race  would  put  faith  in  tho  Mediator  as  punished  in  their  stead.  The 
scheme  of  redemption  not  only  provides  for  our  pardon,  so  that  punishment  may 
be  avoided ;  it  provides  also  for  our  acceptance,  so  that  happiness  may  be 
obtained.  Not  only  is  there  full  provision  for  every  want,  but  there  is  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  apply  the  provision,  and  make  it  effectual  in  the  individual  case. 
3.  There  is  yet  one  more  method  of  showing  that  so  much  has  been  done  for  the 
"  vineyard  "  that  there  remains  nothing  more  which  the  Owner  can  do.  In  the 
teachings  of  the  Redeemer  we  have  such  clear  information  as  to  our  living  under 
a  retributive  government, — a  government  whose  recompenses  shall  be  accurately 
dealt  out  in  another  state  of  being, — that  ignorance  can  be  no  man's  excuse  if  he 
live  as  though  God  took  no  note  of  human  actions.  And  we  reckon  that  much 
of  what  has  been  done  for  the  "  vineyard  "  consists  in  the  greatness  of  the  reward 
which  the  Gospel  proposes  to  righteousness,  and  the  greatness  of  the  punishment 
which  it  denounces  on  impenitence.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        The  Lord's  vineyard  : — 

1.  The  advantages.  II.  The  sins.  III.  The  punishment  of  the  elder  Church. 
(O.  J.  Cornish,  M.A.)  Christmas  thoughts  : — I.  The  solemnity  of  the  present 
season  calls  upon  us  to  commemorate  in  an  especial  manner  the  mercies  op 
God  in  the  redemption  op  the  world,  the  last  and  most  gracious  of  all  His 
dispensations.  The  preceding  vouchsafements  were  preparatory  to  this,  which 
is  therefore  to  be  considered  as  the  completion  of  the  others.  Wherefore,  if 
those  other  dispensations  had  so  much  grace  in  them  as  to  warrant  the  prophet's 
expostulation  in  the  text  and  context,  the  argument  will  be  so  much  the  stronger, 
and  our  obligation  so  much  the  greater,  as  the  grace  in  which  we  stand  is  more 
abounding  and  the  advantage  of  our  situation  more  favourable  and  auspicious 
to  us.  This  whole  matter  will  appear  in  a  stronger  light  to  us  if  we  turn  our 
thoughts  to  those  three  great  periods  of  religion  under  one  or  other  of  which  the 
Church  of  God  and  His  Christ  hath  all  along  subsisted.  In  each  of  these  we  shall 
have  occasion  to  reflect  upon  the  merciful  care  of  providence  and  the  shameful 
negligence  and  ingratitude  of  mankind  in  their  returns  to  it.     1.  The  patriarchal; 

2.  The  Jewish;  3.  The  Christian,  marked  by  the  personal  appearance  of  Christ, 
our  blessed  Mediator,  who  had  all  along  transacted  the  great  affairs  of  the  Church 
under  the  two  preceding  economies.  The  two  main  ends  which  were  here  con- 
sulted were — (1)  The  atonement  of  past  offences.  (2)  The  prevention  of  future 
offences.  II.  The  returns  which  have  been  hade  to  all  this  tender  indulgence 
of  our  merciful  Father.  (N.  Marshall,  D.D.)  '  National  wickedness  in  danger 
of  provoking  national  judgments  : — I.  What  God  hath  done  fob  us,  and  what 
returns  we  have  made.  1.  In  early  ages,  when  we  were  overrun  with  heathenism 
and  idolatry,  it  pleased  God  to  plant  the  Christian  religion  among  us ;  a  religion 
every  way  worthy  of  the  Divine  dispensation,  and  suited  to  the  exigencies  of 
mankind.  When  this  religion  had  flourished  many  centuries  in  its  unalloyed 
purity,  in  a  very  dark  age  it  became  adulterated  with  impure  doctrines,  and  quite 
overgrown  with  a  heap  of  monstrous  absurdities :  but  it  pleased  God,  by  the 
ministry  of  His  faithful  servants,  to  re-enlighten  this  land  with  the  beams  of  truth ; 
to  restore  Christianity  to  its  original  simplicity  and  sincerity.  2.  A  thorough 
disregard  to  Christianity  has  prevailed.  II.  What  we  may  expect  as  the 
consequence  of  our  ingratitude  and  impiety.  Vice,  when  diffused  through 
a  kingdom,  must  have  a  fatal  influence  over  the  whole  community,  and  at  last 
accomplish  the  destruction  of  it.  In  its  universal  progress  it  must  be  attended 
with  idleness  and  immoderate  expense,  the  natural  parents  of  poverty.  Honest 
poverty  would  cast  about  for  honest  and  unthought-of  expedients  for  supporting 
itself  and  bettering  its  condition,  but  poverty,  contracted  by  the  profligate  courses 
of  drunkenness,  lewdness,  and  debauchery,  takes  quite  another  turn,  and  preys 
upon  the  little  industry  that  is  left  to  the  nation,  and  thereby  gives  a  check  to 
that  very  industry ;  for  the  less  secure  men  grow  in  their  properties  the  less  will 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  115 

they  labour  to  improve  them.  Hence  will  it  come  to  pass  that  among  those  of 
higher  condition,  self-interest  will  be  made  the  ruling  principle.  And  among 
the  meanest  of  the  people  what  power  can  we  suppose  will  the  voice  of  human 
laws  have  against  the  louder  calls  of  poverty,  set  free  from  the  barrier  of  con- 
science, and  thereby  at  liberty  to  relieve  itself  by  all  the  methods  that  wickedness 
can  suggest  T  In  proportion  as  the  hands  of  the  government  grow  weak  will  the 
hearts  of  its  enemies  be  strengthened,  and  greater  force  must  still  be  provided 
for  its  support,  and  the  maintenance  of  that  must  again  fall  on  the  public  ;  and 
general  burdens  of  that  kind,  should  they  ever  be  felt,  would  be  followed  by  a 
general  discontent.  And  this  will  give  a  great  temptation  to  our  foreign  enemies 
to  take  the  advantage  of  such  fatal  opportunities  and  try  to  make  us  no  more  a 
nation.  In  the  ordinary  course  of  things  then,  vice,  when  it  becomes  epidemical, 
is  not  only  the  reproach,  but  bids  fair  for  the  ruin  of  any  people.  National  wicked- 
ness never  failed,  sooner  or  later,  to  provoke  the  Almighty  to  a  national  vengeance. 
III.  The  proper  means  whereby  we  may  hope  to  avert  God's  displeasure. 
( Jer.  xviii.  7,  8. )  As  we  make  a  part  of  the  nation,  our  sins  must  make  a  part  of 
the  national  guilt ;  and  consequently  none  of  us  can  think  ourselves  unconcerned 
in  the  important  work  of  a  national  reformation.     (J.  Seed,  M.A.) 

Vers.  8-10.  Woe  unto  them  that  join  house  to  house,  that  lay  field  to 
field.  —  The  selfish  landowner :  —  Selfishness,  or  the  making  self  the  centre  to 
which  all  things  are  to  tend,  is  the  great  sin  in  all  ages  and  peoples.  As  soon  as 
national  institutions  have  awakened  the  sense  of  personality  and  the  feeling  of 
self-respect,  the  desire  of  accumulating  wealth  grows  with  them.  And  in  no  form 
is  it  more  liable  to  abuse  than  in  connection  with  the  possession  of  land.  Men 
desire,  by  an  almost  universal  instinct,  to  possess  property  in  land,  with  its 
healthy  occupations  and  interests,  so  varied  and  multiplied  by  the  living  powers 
of  nature,  and  with  its  important  political  and  social  rights  which  grow  up  with 
the  duties  which  are  specially  connected  with  it ;  for  this  kind  of  property  demands 
the  fulfilment  of  more,  and  more  obvious  duties  than  any  other,  while  it  confers 
corresponding  rights  and  powers  by  bringing  a  man  into  more  complete  personal 
relationship  with  his  neighbours  than  is  possible  in  the  crowd  of  cities  and  the 
whirl  of  city  trades.  Yet,  since  the  land  cannot  be  increased  in  quantity,  its 
possession  by  one  man  is  the  exclusion  of  another,  and  the  Hebrew  laws  en- 
deavoured to  meet  this  difficulty  by  special  provisions,  the  breach  or  evasion  of 
which  the  prophet  now  denounces  in  his  first  "  woe  "  on  the  selfish  landowner. 
He  who  can  join  house  to  house  and  lay  field  to  field  when  he  knows,  and  long 
has  known,  face  to  face,  the  very  man,  wife  and  child  whom  he  has  dispossessed, 
and  can  drive  out  by  his  own  simple  act  his  fellow-men  to  be  desolate  in  their 
poverty,  in  order  that  he  may  be  alone  in  his  riches,  may  expect  a  punishment 
proportioned  to  his  crime.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Nemesis: — The  prophet 
heard,  ringing  in  his  ears,  the  declaration  of  Jehovah,  the  King  of  the  land, 
that  the  great  and  fair  palaces  should  become  as  desolate  as  the  peasants'  and 
yeomen's  cottages  which  had  made  place  for  them — the  vineyard  of  ten  acres 
shall  yield  but  eight  gallons  of  wine,  and  the  corn-field  shall  give  back  but  a  tenth 
part  of  the  seed  sown  in  it.  (Ibid.)  The  Mosaic  legislation: — Moses  directed 
as  equal  a  division  of  the  land  as  possible,  in  the  first  instance,  among  the 
600,000  families  who  originally  formed  the  nation ;  and  provided  against  the 
permanent  alienation  of  any  estate  by  giving  a  right  of  repurchase  to  the  seller 
and  his  relations,  and  of  repossession  without  purchase  at  the  Jubilee.  (Ibid.) 
Land  laws  : — In  the  Channel  Islands  the  acreage  to  be  owned  by  one  individual 
is  limited.  In  Norway  the  law  provides  that  the  heirs  of  any  one  who  has  parted 
with  his  property  may  buy  that  property  back  at  sale  price  within  a  term  of  five 
years.  (F.  Sessions.)  Hebrew  land-laws: — The  Hebrew  legislation  further 
prevented  the  exhaustion  of  the  soil  and  the  fruit  trees,  by  enforcing  fallow  and 
rest  during  every  seventh  year.  The  offerings  of  first-fruits  really  constituted 
a  kind  of  land  tax,  payable  to  Jehovah  as  Over-Lord,  and  tending  to  prevent 
the  conversion  of  folk-land  into  "  thane's  land,"  or  king's  land.  The  legisla- 
tion placed  Jehovah's  tenants  under  a  poor-law,  which  compelled  cultivators  to 
leave  the  gleanings  of  the  crops,  and  all  that  the  fallows  of  the  seventh  year 
Sabbaths  produced  spontaneously  in  those  prolific  fields,  for  the  support  of  the 
needy.  By  the  limitations  of  the  right  of  private  ownership, — a  right  that  was 
not  denied,  and  was  frequently  exercised, — every  man  was  taught  his  responsi- 
bilities to  his  fellows.     The  theory  was,  as  some  one  has  written  :  "  Brotherhood 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

in  the  enjoyment  of  a  Father's  bounty."  (Ibid.)  "  Land-grabbing "  and 
"evictions"  may  be  new  terms,  but  they  are  century-old  sins.  (Ibid.)  The 
land  question  is  as  old  as  history.  The  Hebrews  were  hardly  out  of  the  wilderness 
before  laws  were  enacted  to  prevent  the  strong  from  getting  more  land  than  any 
one  ought  to  possess.  The  land  laws  of  Moses  occupy  a  large  place  in  his  legislation. 
The  prevention  of  monopoly  in  land  was  clearly  in  the  mind  of  the  Hebrew  law- 
giver.  In  Isaiah's  time  the  nation  had  recovered  from  poverty  and  grown  rich, 
and  the  wealthy  and  ruling  classes  had  begun  to  grasp  the  earth.  They  would 
have  tried  to  fence  in  the  air  and  pack  the  sunlight  in  barrels,  if  they  could  have 
done  bo.  The  spirit  that  would  monopolise  land  would  monopolise  light  if  it 
could.  Against  this  awful  wrong  the  voice  of  the  Lord  rings  its  condemnation. 
Four  things  belong  to  man  as  man,  and  any  one  who  tries  to  prevent  their  being 
used  for  the  service  of  humanity  is  a  sinner  against  the  universe  and  against  God. 
Those  four  things  are :  the  earth,  the  air,  the  water,  and  the  light.  Every  man 
has  a  right  to  live,  and  no  one  can  live  as  he  ought  without  free  access  to  earth, 
air,  water,  and  light.  Isaiah  brought  the  people  to  this  one  point — this  land 
belongs  to  God,  and  you  are  using  it  as  if  it  were  yours  to  do  with  as  you  please. 
And  that  is  all  that  need  be  said  to-day.  The  land,  like  the  air,  belongs  to  God  ; 
and  if  to  God,  then  to  humanity ;  and  it  is  our  business  to  find  out,  as  all  easily 
can  if  they  will,  how  the  great  Owner  of  all  the  earth  would  have  men  use  that 
which  must  be  the  home  of  all  His  creatures.  Of  one  thing,  however,  we  may  be 
sure.  He  never  intended  that  a  few  big  lions  should  get  possession  of  all  the 
forests,  so  that  there  should  be  no  comfortable  places  left  for  the  rabbits,  the 
sheep,  and  the  cattle,  except  in  holes  in  the  ground  ;  and  He  never  intended 
that  a  few  strong  men  should  get  possession  of  all  the  fertile,  healthful,  and  beautiful 
portions  of  earth,  so  that  the  rest  of  humanity — the  artists,  the  artisans,  the 
literary  men,  and  those  who  work  with  their  hands — should  be  obliged  to  live  in 
cellars  and  attics,  and  hardly  know  what  is  meant  by  that  great  and  dear  word, 
home.  (Amory  H.  Bradford,  D.D.)  A  woe  on  monopolists : — I.  The  sin. 
Their  fault  is — 1.  That  they  are  inordinate  in  their  desires  to  enrich  themselves, 
and  make  it  their  whole  care  and  business  to  raise  an  estate,  as  if  they  had  nothing 
to  mind,  nothing  to  seek,  nothing  to  do  in  this  world  but  that.  They  never  know 
when  they  have  enough,  but  the  more  they  have  the  more  they  would  have.  They 
cannot  enjoy  what  they  have,  nor  do  good  with  it,  for  contriving  and  studying  to 
make  it  more.  They  must  have  variety  of  houses,  a  winter  house  and  a  summer 
house ;  and  if  another  man's  house  or  field  lie  convenient  to  theirs,  as  Naboth's 
vineyard  to  Ahab's,  they  must  have  that  too,  or  they  cannot  be  easy.  2.  They 
are  herein  careless  of  others ;  nay,  and  injurious  to  them.  They  would  live  so 
as  to  let  nobody  live  but  themselves.  They  would  swell  so  big  as  to  fill  all  space, 
and  yet  are  still  unsatisfied  (Eccles.  v.  10).  II.  The  punishment.  That  which 
is  threatened  as  the  punishment  of  this  sin  is — 1.  That  the  houses  they  were  so 
fond  of  should  be  untenanted,  should  stand  long  empty,  and  so  should  yield  them 
no  rent,  and  go  out  of  repair.  Men's  projects  are  often  frustrated,  and  what  they 
frame  answers  not  the  intention.  2.  That  the  fields  they  were  so  fond  of  should 
be  unfruitful.  (M.  Henry.)  Unpatriotic  monopolies: — In  1650,  while  Cromwell 
was  prosecuting  his  campaign  against  Charles  II.  in  Scotland,  he  wrote  the  Speaker 
of  the  Parliament,  urging  the  reformation  of  many  abuses,  and  added,  "  If  there 
be  any  one  that  makes  many  poor  to  make  a  few  rich,  that  suits  not  a  common- 
wealth." (C.  Knight' a  England.)  Greed  pauperises  the  soul: — A  farmer  said 
"  he  should  like  to  have  all  the  land  that  joined  his  own."  Bonaparte,  who  had 
the  same  appetite,  endeavoured  to  make  the  Mediterranean  a  French  lake.  Czar 
Alexander  was  more  expansive,  and  wished  to  call  the  Pacific  "  my  ocean  " ;  and  the 
Americans  were  obliged  to  resist  his  attempts  to  make  it  a  close  sea.  But  if  he 
had  the  earth  for  his  pasture,  and  the  sea  for  his  pond,  he  would  be  a  pauper  still. 
He  only  is  rich  who  owns  the  day.  (R.  W.  Emerson.)  Covetous  persons  are 
like  sponges,  which  greedily  drink  in  water,  but  return  very  little,  until  they  are 
squeezed.  A  covetous  person  wants  what  he  has,  as  well  as  what  he  has  not, 
because  he  is  never  satisfied  with  it.  (0.  8.  Bowes.)  Folly  of  covetousness : — 
If  you  should  see  a  man  that  had  a  large  pond  of  water  yet  living  in  continual 
thirst,  not  suffering  himself  to  drink  half  a  draught  for  fear  of  lessening  his  pond ; 
if  you  should  see  him  wasting  his  time  and  strength  in  fetching  more  water  to  his 
pond,  always  thirsty,  yet  always  carrying  a  bucket  of  water  in  his  hand,  watching 
early  and  late  to  catch  the  drops  of  rain,  gaping  after  every  cloud,  and  running 
greedily  into  every  mire  and  mud  in  hopes  of  water,  and  always  studying  how  to 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  117 

make  every  ditch  empty  itself  into  the  pond  ;  if  you  should  see  him  grow  grey 
in  these  anxious  labours,  and  at  last  end  a  careful  thirsty  life  by  falling  into  his 
own  pond,  would  you  not  say  that  such  a  one  was  not  only  the  author  of  his  own 
disquiet,  but  was  foolish  enough  to  be  reckoned  among  madmen  ?  But  foolish 
and  absurd  as  this  character  is,  it  does  not  represent  half  the  follies  and  absurd 
disquiets  of  the  covetous  man.     (Law's  Serious  Call.) 

Ver.  9.  Many  houses  shall  be  desolate,  even  great  and  fair,  without  Inhabitant. — 
Empty  houses  (To  children) : — Empty  houses  !  We  all  know  what  they  look 
like.  From  afar  we  can  see  the  bills  in  the  windows — "  This  house  to  let,"  or  "  To 
be  let,"  or,  still  more  curtly,  "  To  let  "  ;  and  when  we  come  nearer,  the  black 
windows,  without  blinds  or  curtains,  gape  and  yawn  at  us.  In  the  garden  the 
long  matted  grass  has  overrun  the  lawn,  and  covered  nearly  all  the  beds.  The 
door  creaks  on  its  hinges  as  we  enter,  as  though  it  had  been  asleep  and  did  not 
wish  to  be  wakened.  There  are  other  houses  that  are  not  quite  empty.  They 
are  comfortably  furnished  ;  but  the  family  has  gone  to  the  seaside.  A  servant 
or  an  old  lady  has  been  kept  in  the  house  as  caretaker,  and  as  she  usually  lives 
in  the  back  part  of  the  house  she  is  often  not  seen  from  one  week's  end  to  the 
other.  I.  This  world  is  like  a  house  comfortably  and  beautifully  furnished,  and 
in  which  we  men  and  women  have  been  placed  "  to  dress  it  and  to  keep  it."  But 
the  world  withoft  God  is  LIKE  an  EMPTY  house.  God  is  the  builder  of  this 
house ;  and  He  is  the  tenant  too.  Cowper,  in  his  "  Task,"  speaks  of  some  men 
who  "  untenant  the  Creator  of  His  universe."  There  are  some  who  say  that 
God  made  this  house,  and  put  us  in  it  as  caretakers,  and  then  went  to  live  in  His 
own  grand  mansion  in  heaven  ;  and  there  He  sits,  receiving  our  letters,  which 
are  our  prayers,  and  sending  His  servants  to  do  His  commands.  But  we  believe 
that  God  always  lives  in  this  house.  He  is  in  every  room,  in  England,  and  in 
the  Continent,  and  in  Africa,  and  in  America.  It  is  God's  name  that  is  woven 
into  the  beautiful  carpet  of  grass  and  flowers,  that  is  carved  into  the  rocks,  and 
worked  into  the  mossy  couches,  and  painted  in  the  beautiful  landscape  pictures, 
and  reflected  in  the  mirror-like  lakes  and  ponds  and  rivers.  If  God  were  not  in 
the  world  it  would  be  like  a  desolate  house,  though  great  and  fair.  II.  But  there 
is  another  kind  of  house  that  is  sometimes  found  to  be  empty.  Life  is  like  a  house. 
Its  length,  however,  is  measured,  not  by  feet  and  yards,  but  by  days  and  months 
and  years.  Some  lives  are  long  and  some  are  very  short.  Its  breadth  is  measured 
by  its  sympathy  and  influence.  Sometimes  the  tenant  is  not  a  good  one.  A 
Eelfish  purpose  takes  possession,  and  then  the  house  is  like  the  house  of  a  miser, 
long,  and  narrow,  and  low.  And  sometimes  the  house  is  like  a  house  of  feasting, 
from  which  there  comes  the  sound  of  music  and  dancing,  and  the  clink  of  glasses 
and  of  plates.  That  is  when  the  desire  for  pleasure  becomes  a  tenant.  But  there 
are  some  of  these  houses  that  are  without  an  inhabitant.  For  a  life  without 
a  purpose  is  like  an  empty  house.  Some  people  do  not  know  why  they  live. 
They  eat  and  drink  and  sleep ;  but  they  have  no  great  aims,  no  noble  purposes. 
Their  lives  are  like  empty  houses.  Take  Christ  with  you  into  your  life.  And 
then  your  life  will  grow  up  like  a  grand  temple,  upon  which  there  will  be  inscribed : 
"  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  ;  in  which  there  will  be  perpetual  peace  and  happiness  ; 
and  from  which  there  will  ever  come  the  sound  of  holy  chant  and  psalm.  HI.  And 
then  there  is  another  house  of  which  I  thought.  It  was  a  small  house,  but  large 
enough  to  accommodate  one  man.  It  was  built  in  the  face  of  a  rock,  and  a  great 
stone  door  was  placed  before  it.  It  belonged  to  a  man  named  Joseph ;  but 
another  tenant  was  put  in.  He  did  not  remain  there  long  :  it  was  too  dark,  and 
cold,  and  dreary.  That  house  was  the  tomb  of  Jesus.  And  a  tomb  without  a 
Saviour  is  like  an  empty  house.  There  are  many  houses  of  that  kind  built  in 
these  days  ;  and  they  are  all  full.  But  a  time  is  coming  when  a  trumpet  shall 
Bound,  and  the  doors  of  these  dreary  houses  shall  be  opened,  and  the  tenants  shall 
all  come  out.  And  then  their  houses  shall  be  empty  like  the  tomb  of  Jesus.  ( W.  V. 
Robinson,  B.A.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  Woe  unto  them  that  rise  up  early  in  the  morning,  that  they  may 
follow  strong  drink. — The  fruits  of  drunkenness : — I.  In  reference  to  the  individual 
himselp,  who  is  its  victim.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  made  a  question  by  some,  When 
may  a  man  be  regarded  as  intoxicated,  and  what  may  be  the  number  of  offences 
which  would  entitle  him  to  the  character  and  name  of  drunkard  ?  Intoxication 
essentially  consists  in  the  obscuration  of  the  light  of  reason,  so  that  it  is  no  longer 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.      ~  [chap.  v. 

able  fully  to  exercise  its  functions ;  and,  therefore,  the  moment  this  light  haa 
become  even  partially  eclipsed,  and  the  moment,  perhaps,  that  that  exhilaration 
begins,  which  always  urges  onwards  and  craves  for  more — at  that  moment  we 
may  say,  that  as  the  individual  is  in  a  state  of  alarming  danger,  so  the  process  of 
intoxication  has  commenced  ;  and,  therefore,  many  a  man  may  be  strictly  and 
truly  said  to  be  intoxicated,  though  he  does  not  "  reel  and  stagger  like  a  drunken 
man."  No  man  ever  became  a  drunkard  all  at  once,  i.e.,  in  ordinary  cases ;  for 
some  have  become  so  instantaneously  through  the  pressure  of  affliction,  and  from 
the  impulse  of  despair.  It  is  not  the  intoxicating  beverage  that  allures  at  first 
(for,  in  general,  the  natural  taste  rejects  it),  but  the  "  harp  and  the  viol,  and  the 
tabret  and  the  pipe,"  that  are  in  the  drunkard's  feasts — that  hilarity  which, 
innocent  perhaps  in  itself,  brings  at  that  time  a  snare,  and  that  good  companion- 
ship which,  while  it  dispenses  its  joys,  spits  its  venom.  By  and  by,  however, 
they  come  to  like  the  beverage,  not  on  account  of  the  company  it  brings  together, 
but  for  itself ;  and  remembering  its  exciting  and  exhilarating  qualities,  have 
recourse  to  it  at  other  seasons,  first  along  with  others,  and  then  in  private  by 
themselves — finding  on  each  occasion  some  excuse  to  silence  conscience,  and  to 
keep  themselves  up  in  their  self-esteem ;  till,  at  last,  going  on  in  their  downward 
career,  their  drink  becomes  as  necessary  as  their  daily  food,  and  they  live  with 
an  appetite  always  craving,  and  an  intellect  seldom  clear.  And  what  are  the 
invariable  accompaniments  and  consequences  ?  1.  The  intemperate  man  is 
brought  into  contact  with  the  most  worthless  companions,  who  have  no  fear  of 
God  before  their  eyes,  and  who  lead  him  on,  step  by  step,  till  they  plunge  him 
into  irremediable  ruin.  2.  Indulgence  in  strong  drink  tends  to  the  eclipse 
of  intellect.  This  effect  may  not  be  exhibited  at  first.  On  the  contrary,  in  the 
first  stages  of  the  sin,  the  opposite  result  may  appear.  Have  you  never  seen 
these  same  faculties,  which  the  exhilarating  draught  awakened  for  more  powerful 
efforts,  by  the  very  same  influence,  deprived  of  all  their  wakeful  energy,  and 
steeped  in  an  oblivion  the  most  complete  and  the  most  melancholy  ;  so  that 
far  from  being  capable  of  bursting  forth  with  more  than  common  brilliancy, 
they  become  incapacitated  for  the  performance  even  of  their  common  functions  ? 

3.  Look  at  the  effects  resulting,  when  the  orb  of  reason  has  undergone  thi3 
dread  eclipse.  Then  is  an  inlet  afforded  for  all  wickedness,  and  every  crime  may 
find  a  perpetrator.  The  strong  man  of  the  house  being  bound,  the  passions  arise 
like  robbers,  and  rifle  his  goods.  The  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eye, 
are  all  permitted  to  riot  in  unchecked  fury.  The  monarch  of  the  soul  being, 
for  the  time,  dethroned,  the  subjects  spend  themselves  in  the  work  of  anarchy. 

4.  No  one  can  sin  with  impunity  ;  and  even  in  this  life,  we  often  see  transgression 
closely  tracked  by  its  attendant  punishment.  But  of  all  sins,  that  of  drunkenness 
seems  to  be  peculiarly  visited  with  retribution  here ;  for  the  loss  of  reputation 
invariably  follows  indulgence  in  the  habits  of  intemperance.  II.  Glance  at  its 
results  as  far  as  the  drunkard's  family  is  concerned.  No  ruin  can  be  conceived 
more  tremendous  than  when  the  roof-tree  of  a  man's  domestic  happiness  falls  in, 
and  leaves  him  a  home,  but  without  its  joys.  He  is  an  enemy  indeed  who  casts 
a  brand  into  that  temple,  and  envelops  that  altar  in  destructive  flames.  But 
this  intemperance  does.  No  one  can  express  the  hopes  or  the  joys  of  a  mother, 
when  she  sees  her  son  walking  in  the  ways  of  virtue.  But,  in  proportion  is  her 
sorrow,  when  she  sees  the  son  that  she  has  borne  and  nursed,  becoming  a  worthless 
profligate,  an  outcast,  and  a  drunkard.  Intemperance  is  silently  but  too  surely 
sapping  the  very  foundations  of  society.  Who,  then,  that  has  any  regard  either 
for  the  glory  of  God,  or  for  the  welfare  of  his  country,  would  not  gird  on  his  armour 
to  meet  the  enemy  in  the  gate  ?  (P.  M'Morland.)  The  degradation  and  ruin 
of  intemperance : — I.  The  sin,  with  its  concomitants  and  connections, 
described  in  the  text.  1.  The  prophet  refers  to  intemperance  and  its  associate 
habits  of  festivity  and  dissipation.  The  corrupt  condition  of  social  life,  springing 
from  the  depravity  of  the  heart,  has  in  every  age  encouraged  those  stimulants 
to  evil  adverted  to  in  this  passage,  and  which  are  alike  felt  by  the  high  and  the  low. 
The  wine  mentioned  is  the  date  or  palm  wine,  which  possessed  an  inebriating 
quality ;  but,  whatever  be  the  particular  drink — the  wine  of  the  wealthy  or 
the  beer  of  the  poor — the  accompaniments  of  the  festival,  metropolitan  or  rural, 
are  frequently  similar  both  in  kind  and  effect,  and  tend  to  evil.  Our  Lord,  it  is 
true,  was  at  a  feast  of  Cana  in  Galilee  ;  and  music,  "  the  harp  and  the  viol, 
the  tabret  and  pipe,"  may  minister  to  an  innocent  recreation  or  gratify  a 
judicious  taste ;  but  we  need  scarcely  adduce  the  trite  distinction  between  the 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  119 

use  and  abuse  of  a  thing,  to  show  wherein  lies,  in  the  present  case,  the  moral 
danger.  The  sin  of  excess,  both  in  eating  and  drinking,  in  the  forms  of  gluttony 
and  intoxication,  is  peculiarly  odious.  (1)  Intemperance  is  both  bad  in  principle 
and  degrading  in  character.  Chrysostom  and  Augustine  call  it  "  a  spontaneous 
fury  "  ;  and  Basil,  with  greater  vehemence  of  expression,  says  it  is  "  a  voluntary 
devil,  a  chosen  madness."  (2)  But  while  this  is  the  case,  it  has  a  greater  tendency 
than  almost  any  other  crime  to  destroy  the  feeling  of  shame  and  to  harden  con- 
science. (3)  It  leads  to  other  great  sins.  Its  name  is  legion ;  for,  in  reality, 
there  is  scarcely  any  vice  or  folly  that  it  does  not  either  originate  or  encourage. 
It  is  said  by  Eustathius  that  "  the  nurses  of  Bacchus  were  painted  with  snakes 
and  daggers  in  their  hands,  to  show  that  drunkards  were  beastly  and  bloody." 
(4)  Intemperance  is  dangerous  to  the  peace  of  society,  and  puts  to  hazard  the 
lives  of  men.  Vulgar  quarrelling  in  low  life,  and  polite  duelling  in  high,  disturb, 
separate,  and  destroy  families.  How  many  have  been  the  murderers  of  others 
in  seasons  of  intemperate  festivity.  Ammon  was  slain  by  his  brother  Absalom 
when  indulging  in  wine.  Simon  the  high  priest,  and  two  of  his  sons,  were  sacrificed 
to  the  inebriation  of  their  brother.  Judith  slew  Holofernes,  when  the  latter  was 
in  a  state  of  intoxication.  Alexander  the  Great  killed  Clitus  at  a  feast,  and  inflicted 
upon  himself  a  vain  repentance.  2.  The  prophet  points  out  the  connection 
between  intemperance  and  unhallowed  festivity,  and  an  infidel  disregard  of  the 
works  and  ways  of  Deity.  Thus  are  body  and  soul  at  once  degraded  and  ruined. 
Under  the  influence  of  intemperance  men  are  led  to  disregard  '  the  operations  of 
His  hands,"  not  only  undervaluing  the  works  of  God,  but  unmindful  of  His  pro- 
vidential and  gracious  dispensations.  His  judgments  do  not  alarm,  His  mercies 
do  not  conciliate  them ;  they  despise  the  one,  and  disown  the  other.     II.  The 

WOE  DENOUNCED  BY  THE  PROPHET  UPON  THE  SONS  AND  DAUGHTERS  OP  INTEMPER- 
ANCE. The  "  woe  "  is  to  be  plainly  traced  in  the  conscious  unhappiness  of  the 
delinquent,  even  though  he  seem  gay  and  smiling — in  the  general  and  almost 
certain  loss  of  health,  that  first  of  earthly  blessings — in  the  diminution  and  probable 
loss  of  property,  and  of  every  resource — in  the  dereliction  of  friends  worth  having — 
in  the  terrors  of  an  unprepared-for  death,  or  the  even  more  horrible  condition  of  a 
moral  death  unfelt,  and  a  natural  death  unheeded — and,  lastly,  in  the  quenchless 
burnings  of  the  bottomless  pit.  Habits  of  intemperance  are  progressively  formed, 
and  therefore  require  the  exercise  of  extreme  carefulness,  self-discipline,  and 
prayer.  Beware  of  the  first  step — of  the  first  temptation — of  the  first  immoderate 
indulgence.  I  conclude  by  presenting  you  with  three  short  maxims  of  human 
wisdom,  and  one  precept  of  Divine  inspiration.  He  that  will  not  fear,  shall  feel 
the  wrath  of  heaven.  He  that  lives  in  the  kingdom  of  sense,  shall  die  into  the 
kingdom  of  sorrow.  He  shall  never  truly  enjoy  his  present  hour,  who  never  thinks 
on  his  last.  "  Be  not  filled  with  wine  wherein  is  excess,  but  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit."  (F.  A.  Cox,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  Following  strong  drink  : — 1.  The  Almighty 
has  set  His  face  solemnly  and  strongly  against  the  sin  denounced  in  the  text. 
2.  Unquestionably,  the  surest  way  of  stopping  the  ravages  of  strong  drink  will  be 
by  means  of  total  abstinence.  The  fear  of  ridicule,  the  force  of  habit,  the  con- 
sideration of  health,  the  charge  of  inhospitality,  or  the  appearance  of  unsociable- 
ness,  one  or  other  of  these  arguments  prevail  with  the  vast  multitude  to  induce 
them  to  stand  aloof  from  the  total  abstinence  movement.  3.  Certain  precautions 
which  are  within  the  compass  of  those  who  are  not  prepared  to  give  their  adhesion 
to  total  abstinence.  (1)  We  may  be  careful  about  ourselves  and  the  example 
we  set.  (2)  We  should  be  very  careful  of  the  influence  we  exercise  on  those  around 
and  connected  with  us.  If  we  are  careful  of  the  example  we  set,  it  must  be  on 
account  of  the  influence  which  that  example  may  exert.  (3)  Let  us  be  exceeding 
jealous  of  leading  any  one  into  temptation.  (4)  Let  us  be  on  our  guard  against 
making  drunkenness  a  subject  of  wit,  drollery,  and  fun.  (5)  Be  careful  how  you 
yield  to  the  opinion  of  those  friends  who  would  urge  you  to  increase  the  quantity 
of  stimulant  you  are  in  the  habit  of  taking  in  the  course  of  the  day.  (6)  In  all 
cases  within  your  knowledge,  in  which  persons  cannot  use  without  abusing  strong 
drink,  exert  all  your  influence  to  induce  them  to  become  total  abstainers.  (J. 
Mould,  M.A.)  The  drunkard's  doom  : — I.  The  sign  of  the  drunkard's 
captivity.  In  every  vice  there  is  a  stage  beyond  which,  humanly  speaking, 
recovery  is  impossible.  A  time  comes  when  the  jaws  of  the  trap  snap  together 
and  the  victim  is  caught.  In  intemperance  this  point  is  reached  imperceptibly, 
and  the  victim  is  ignorant  long  after  others  see  his  danger.  II.  Thb  helpless- 
ness of  the  captive  drunkard.     Isaiah  describes  him  as  following  strong  drink. 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

As  the  obedient  dog  at  his  master's  heels,  or  as  the  moth  after  the  light,  so  the 
drunkard  follows  strong  drink.  At  first  he  thinks  he  does  so  for  the  pleasure 
he  derives  from  it,  but  he  soon  recognises  that  he  is  helpless  in  so  doing.  As  a 
man  swept  down  towards  the  rapids  looks  longingly  towards  those  on  the  bank 
who  can  render  no  help,  so  the  drinker  yearns  after  virtues  and  peace  which 
can  never  more  be  his.  No  tyrant  was  ever  more  exacting.  Though  he  be  pros- 
trate in  the  morning,  yet  he  must  rise  at  his  captor's  bidding,  and  by  forced  marches 
hasten  to  his  doom.  III.  Thb  doom  that  awaits  the  drunkard.  1.  Moral 
insensibility.  They  regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord.  They  call  good,  evil ; 
and  evil,  good.  Drink  so  blunts  the  sensibilities  that  the  victim  under  its  influ- 
ence can  commit  crimes  from  which  at  other  times  he  would  shrink.  More 
crimes  are  committed  "  in  drink "  than  out  of  it.  2.  Shamelessness.  After 
obliterating  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  he  turns  and  defies  God 
and  glories  in  sin.  When  the  prophet  warns  him  that  God  will  visit  him,  he 
dares  Him  to  do  His  worst.  "  Let  Him  make  speed,  and  hasten  His  work,  that 
we  may  see  it."  3.  Hell.  The  drinker  tempts  the  devil,  for  even  hell  has  to 
enlarge  its  appetite  to  receive  him.  When  the  destroyer  would  be  satisfied, 
the  drinker  stimulates  his  satiated  desire,  determining  to  be  lost.  So  he  ends 
his  course  with  the  drunkard's  grave  and  the  drunkard's  hell.  (R.  C. 
Ford,  M.A.)  Isaiah's  testimony  to  the  licentiousness  and  degeneracy  of  his 
age  : — 1.  Contrary  to  modern  and  superficial  notions,  which  confine  intemperance 
to  northern  climes,  and  exclude  it  from  vine-growing  countries,  the  people 
of  Israel,  following  the  example  of  their  chief  men,  were  addicted  to  the 
grossest  indulgence  in  intoxicating  liquors.  The  juice  of  the  grape  (yayin)  and 
the  juice  of  other  fruits  (shakar)  were  drunk  in  their  fermented  state  ;  and  probably 
both,  certainly  the  latter,  were  mixed  with  pungent  and  heavy  drugs  (ver.  22) 
in  order  to  gratify  a  base  and  insatiable  appetite.  Men  rose  up  early  and  sat  up 
late  to  prosecute  these  vicious  indulgences,  and  they  boasted  of  themselves  as 
"  mighty  "  and  "  valiant "  (ver.  22)  in  proportion  as  they  were  able  to  gulp 
down  large  quantities  of  these  compounds  and  to  "  carry  their  drink  well."  2.  The 
attendant  and  in  no  small  measure  the  consequential  evils  were  of  the  most  aggra- 
vated kind.  The  Divine  works  were  disregarded  (ver.  12),  ignorance  reigned 
(ver.  13),  sin  abounded  (ver.  18),  men's  moral  conceptions  were  the  opposite  of 
the  truth  (ver.  20),  self-conceit  grew  luxuriantly  (ver.  21),  bribery  and  injustice 
were  rampant  (ver.  23).  The  vengeance  of  God  was  awakening  against  them 
and  would  take  the  triple  form  of  famine,  pestilence,  and  invasion,  so  that  their 
supplies  of  drink  would  be  cut  off  (vers.  6,  7,  10),  the  pest-stricken  would  lie  in 
the  streets  (ver.  25),  and  hostile  nations  would  ravage  the  land  (vers.  26-30). 
(Temperance  Bible  Commentary.)  Musical  merriment  silencing  conscience: — 
And  the  harp,"  &c.  Better,  And  guitar  and  harp,  tambourine  and  flute,  and  wine 
constitute  their  banquet; — as  if  to  drown  the  voice  of  conscience  and  destroy 
the  seme  of  Jehovah's  presence  and  working  in  their  midst.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner, 
D.D.)  Edison's  testimony  to  the  value  of  abstinence  : — I  once  asked  the  greatest 
of  inventors,  Thomas  A.  Edison,  if  he  were  a  total  abstainer ;  and  when  he  told 
me  that  he  was,  I  said,  "  May  I  inquire  whether  it  was  home  influence  that 
made  you  so  ?  "  and  he  replied,  "  No,  I  think  it  was  because  I  always  felt  that 
I  had  a  better  use  for  my  head."  Who  can  measure  the  loss  to  the  world  if  that 
wonderful  instrument  of  thought  that  has  given  us  so  much  of  light  and  leading 
in  the  practical  mechanism  of  life  had  become  sodden  with  drink,  instead  of  electric 
with  original  ideas  ?    (Frances  E.  Willard.) 

Ver.  12.  They  regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord. — The  providence  of  God : — 
A  neglect  of  God,  and  a  disregard  of  His  wonder-working  providence,  con- 
stitutes the  character  of  man  under  the  influence  of  his  natural  corruption  of 
heart.  It  formed  the  character  of  the  Jewish  Church,  notwithstanding  its  out- 
ward privileges  and  its  appointed  means  of  religious  improvement.  It  forms  the 
character  of  nominal  Christians.  Covetousness  and  sensuality  are  the  two  great 
causes  of  man's  neglect  of  God  (vers.  8,  11,  12).  I.  Take  a  Christian  view  of 
the  providence  op  our  Heavenly  Father.  God's  "  never-failing  providence 
ordereth  all  things  both  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  This  providence  is — 1.  Divine. 
2.  Universal.  3.  Tender.  4.  Watchful.  II.  Points  of  practical  instruction. 
1.  This  doctrine  is  quite  consistent  with  your  free  agency.  2.  Think  not  that 
your  Lord  forgets  you  in  the  immensity  of  His  works.  "  Sanctified  afflictions," 
eays  an  old  writer,  "  are  good  promotions."     3.  Pray  that  God  would  by  His 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  121 

providence  "  put  away  from  yau  all  hurtful  things,"  and  "  give  you  those  things 
which  be  profitable  for  you,"  and  remember  that  the  welfare  of  your  souls  is  con- 
cerned in  all  the  actions  and  undertakings  of  every  day  and  hour.  (W.  M.  Earie.) 
Sensuality  essentially  atheistic : — The  sensual  reveller  simply  disregards  God's 
constitution  and  government  of  society.     (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.) 

Ver.  13.  Sly  people  are  gone  Into  captivity,  because  they  have  no  knowledge. — 
A  sermon  for  Trinity  Sunday: — 1.  "My  people."  The  Almighty  has  a  people 
of  His  own ;  a  people  with  special  privileges  and  a  special  work  to  do.  In  the 
Old  Testament  and  the  New  this  is  clearly  written.  "  My  people,"  says  Isaiah ; 
"  My  flock,"  says  Jesus  Christ.  That  is  the  method  of  grace.  God  acts  upon  some 
of  us  that  they  may  act  upon  the  rest.  In  the  days  of  a  school  the  young  influence 
one  another.  In  a  town,  in  a  nation,  it  is  the  same.  And  a  whole  country  has  its 
mission  for  the  world  as  the  Hebrews  had.  Now,  in  the  text  that  nation  is  com- 
plained of.  Why  ?  Because  they  had  no  knowledge.  2.  "  My  people  "  is  a 
term  which  shows  us  God's  character.  The  inferences  which  arise  from  it  should 
be  dear  to  Christians.  God  will  not  be  without  a  people,  because  He  is  a  God  of 
love.  He  must  have  around  Him  children  to  love.  But  it  is  a  quality  inherent 
in  love  to  love  its  like.  Children  may  be  helpless,  or  wayward  :  we  can  bear  with 
them,  love  them,  not  less,  perhaps  more,  for  their  weakness  and  dependence; 
but  they  must  not  be  reprobate.  There  must  be  some  affinity  of  feeling,  some- 
thing lovable  in  them,  or  at  last  we  shall  not  love,  or  at  any  rate  love  will  be  in 
abeyance.  God,  we  believe,  has  not,  and  never  will,  disinherit  Israel  finally. 
Why  did  he  go  so  wrong  and  choose  so  badly  ?  "  Therefore  My  people  are  gone 
into  captivity,  because  they  have  no  knowledge."  They  had  knowledge  enough 
in  their  head  no  doubt,  but  they  had  not  taken  it  to  their  heart.  3.  Now, 
as  regards  ourselves,  we  are  God's  people — not  exclusively,  but  among  other 
Christian  nations  of  this  later  time.  God  has  given  us  great  knowledge  of 
His  truth.  He  has  even  revealed  to  us  deep  secrets  of  His  own  nature : 
even  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Trinity  itself.  Since  God  has  given  know- 
ledge to  us,  it  should  be  kept  by  us  not  in  a  passive  but  in  a  living  active 
state.  (2  Tim.  i.  13;  Tit.  i.  13,  ii.  1  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  5;  Jude  3.)  And  this 
knowledge  is  so  efficient  and  operative  a  force  that  it  is  all-important  to  keep 
it  "  whole  and  undefiled."  This  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Trinity  is  "  no  speculative 
thing,  but  it  is  closely  interwoven  with  the  principles  of  Christian  life."  (T.  F. 
Crosse,  D.C.L.)  "They  have  no  knowledge": — How  should  they,  when  by 
their  excessive  drinking  they  make  sots  and  fools  of  themselves  ?  They  set  up 
for  wits ;  but  because  they  regard  not  God's  controversy  with  them,  nor  take 
any  care  as  to  their  peace  with  Him,  they  may  truly  be  said  to  have  no  knowledge ; 
and  the  reason  is,  because  they  will  have  none ;  inconsiderate  and  wilful,  and 
therefore  "  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge."  (M.  Henry.)  Inconsideration 
and  ignorance : — 1.  Ignorance  is  the  certain  consequence  of  inconsideration. 
2.  Inconsideration  is  the  natural  effect  of  luxury  and  dissipation,  which  arise 
from  gratified  avarice  and  ambition.  (R.  MaccuUoch.)  Records  of  the  past : — 
The  great  stone-book  of  nature  reveals  many  strange  records  of  the  past.  In 
the  red  sandstone  there  are  found  in  some  places  marks  which  are  clearly  the 
impressions  of  showers  of  rain,  and  these  so  perfect  that  it  can  even  be  determined 
in  which  direction  the  shower  inclined,  and  from  what  quarter  it  proceeded  ;  and 
this  ages  ago  1  So  sin  leaves  its  track  behind  it,  and  God  keeps  a  faithful  record 
of  all  our  sins.     (0.  H.  Morrison,  M.A.) 

Vers.  14-16.  Hell  hath  enlarged  herself  .  .  .  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  exalted 
In  Judgment. — The  grave  : — "  Hell,"  here,  stands  not  for  future  punishment. 
The  word  "  Sheol "  in  Hebrew,  "  Hades  "  in  Greek,  and  "  Hell  "  in  this  verse, 
represent  the  place  of  the  dead — the  grave.  This  place  of  the  dead  is  spoken  of 
in  the  Bible  as  a  very  deep  place  (Deut.  xxxii.  22 ;  Job  xi.  8  ;  Psa.  cxxxix. 
7,  8).  As  a  very  dark  place  (Job  x.  21,  22).  And  as  a  place  having  gates  into  it 
(Isa.  xxxviii.  10).  I.  The  growing  power  of  the  grave.  The  grave  is  here 
represented  as  having  "  enlarged  herself,  and  opened  her  mouth  without  measure." 
The  words  refer,  undoubtedly,  to  a  period  when,  through  famine,  pestilence,  or 
war,  mortality  was  on  the  increase.  This  increase  of  mortality  teaches  us — 1.  The 
fruitlessness  of  all  human  efforts  to  avert  death.  Men  have  been  struggling 
against  death  for  six  thousand  years,  and  his  dominion  is  wider  to-day  than  ever. 
2.  How  soon  we  shall  be  in  the  grave-world.     The  mouth  is  opening  for  us ;  it 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r 

is  yawning  at  our  feet.  II.  The  levelling  power  of  the  grave.  "  And  their 
glory,  and  their  multitude,  and  their  pomp,  and  he  that  rejoiceth,  shall  descend 
into  it.  And  the  mean  man  shall  be  brought  down,  and  the  mighty  man  shall  bo 
humbled,  and  the  eyes  of  the  lofty  shall  be  humbled."  Learn  from  this — 1.  How 
foolish  it  is  to  be  proud  of  adventitious  distinctions.  They  are  only  as  flowers 
of  the  field,  evanescent  forms,  and  hues  that  variegate  the  common  grass. 
2.  How  important  to  seek  an  alliance  with  the  eternally  great  and  good.  Seek 
"  a  city  which  hath  foundations,"  a  kingdom  that  cannot  be  shaken.  III.  Thb 
eternal  Sovereign  op  the  grave.  "  But  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  exalted  in 
judgment,  and  God  that  is  holy  shall  be  sanctified  in  righteousness."  1.  He 
survives  all  dissolutions.  2.  He  will  be  increasingly  honoured.  "  The  Lord  of 
hosts  shall  be  exalted  in  judgment."  (Homilist.)  God's  judgments  on  the 
Jews  : — This  judgment  began  to  come  upon  the  men  whom  Isaiah  addressed, 
in  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  soon  after  the  delivery  of  the  warning  ;  but  in  order  fully  to 
understand  it,  we  must  (as  in  the  case  of  all  other  prophecies)  look  at  it  in  the  light 
of  the  whole  subsequent  history  of  the  Jews  and  of  Christendom.  In  the  final 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans,  Christ  and  His  apostles  saw  the  selfish 
and  carnal  nation  brought  to  its  last  trial  and  righteously  condemned,  and  the 
sentence  carried  into  execution  by  that  Man  whom  God  had  appointed  to  judge 
the  world.  They  declared,  and  the  event,  spread  over  successive  centuries,  has 
proved  the  truth  of  the  declaration,  that  God  was  bringing  down  the  mean  man 
and  the  mighty  man  alike  throughout  the  world  and  exalting  Himself  and  His 
Son,  setting  His  name  up  in  the  world,  and  causing  it  to  triumph  over  all  opposition. 
(Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart. )  God  the  righteous  Judge  : — Though  men  may  slavishly 
dread  an  arbitrary  will,  they  can  never  feel  for  it  that  salutary  fear  which  is  the 
beginning  of  wisdom ;  and  unless  we  believe  that  God's  judgments  are  righteous 
— that  they  are  a  part  of  the  steady  administration  of  a  polity — as  well  as  good 
in  their  effects,  it  will  be  impossible  for  us  to  keep  long  from  superstition,  or  its 
opposite,  scepticism.  And,  therefore,  we  may  see  the  germ  of  a  true  historical 
and  political  philosophy  in  the  prophet's  repeated  assertion,  that  God  is  exalted 
in  executing  justice  and  sanctified  in  righteousness.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  Woe  unto  them  that  draw  Iniquity  with  cords  of  vanity. — Frivolity 
and  profanity  : — Frivolity,  he  says,  is  the  herald  and  handmaid  of  guilt.  The 
cords  are  cords  of  vanity  bound  about  us  in  mere  thoughtlessness  in  the  unguarded 
hours  of  recreation,  in  the  giddy  whirl  of  society,  when  talk  is  gay  and  free,  and 
no  man  weighs  his  words  ;  the  cords  of  vanity  bind  us  on  subtly  but  surely  to  the 
calamitous  burden  of  sin.  I  submit  to  you  that  the  prophet  in  thus  linking 
together  frivolity  and  iniquity,  commends  himself  to  us  as  a  close  and  just 
observer  of  human  society.  Profanity  is  the  last  term  of  a  series  ;  it  is  a  stage  we 
reach  by  the  unmarked  way  of  frivolous  habit,  and  that  unmarked  way  is  the 
broad  way  of  the  general  life.  Society  itself  is  unfavourable  to  thought  and 
gravity  and  depth  of  character.  It  makes  us  of  necessity  superficial,  light,  shallow. 
At  best  it  ministers  to  the  gracious  externals  of  a  man's  conduct,  and  too  often 
it  does  this  at  the  cost  of  his  character  ;  for  the  philosopher  said  truly  that  custom 
is  the  principal  magistrate  of  a  man's  life ;  and  if,  by  the  ceaseless  iteration  of 
frivolous  speech  and  action,  we  bind  upon  ourselves  the  chain  of  frivolous  habit, 
be  sure  the  mischief  penetrates  into  the  very  citadel  of  character.  (Canon  H. 
Hensley  Henson,  B.D.)  God's  woes  are  better  than  the  devil's  welcomes.  When 
we  get  a  woe  in  this  book  of  blessings  it  is  sent  as  a  warning,  that  we  may  escape 
from  woe.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Disguises  and  defiances : — Society,  for  its 
self-preservation  and  well-being,  provides  that  virtue  should  be  in  the  ascendant, 
should  sit  on  the  throne,  should  hold  the  empire  and  make  the  laws  of  the  world. 
There  have  been  times  when  vice  has  ostentatiously  unmasked  itself  in  high 
places,  and  with  a  triumphant  audacity  has  made  itself  the  fashion  and  the 
social  law.  Such  was  the  epoch  of  the  decadence  of  the  old  Roman  civilisation. 
Such  were  the  times  of  the  restoration  of  the  English  monarchy  under  Charles  II. 
The  moral  collapse  at  the  Restoration  was  the  inevitable  unbending  of  the  bow 
after  the  rigours  of  the  Puritan  regime.  England  was  tired  of  unmelodious 
psalm-singing  and  endless  homilies  on  the  sin  of  eating  Christmas  pies  and  dancing 
around  May-poles.  It  welcomed  with  a  strange  alacrity  and  a  strange  forget- 
fulness  the  exiled  prince,  whose  morals,  none  too  good  to  begin  with,  had  been 
debauched  in  foreign  courts,  and  who  brought  back  to  the  palace  of  his  fathers 
nothing  of  royalty,  except  enchanting  manners,  graceful  wit,  and  an  insatiable 


chap.  ▼.]  ISAIAH.  123 

thirst  for  pleasure.  But  the  enthronement  of  vice  was  only  for  a  day.  Men 
on  the  morrow  smote  it  on  the  face,  and  hurled  it  from  the  seat  which  gave  it 
power  and  lustre.  This  is  the  history  of  fashionable  and  jewelled  vice  in  every 
age.  When  those  who  inherit  wealth  and  polite  culture  and  the  accumulated 
embellishments  of  life  conspicuously  trample  on  the  laws  of  righteousness  the 
insulted  world  calls  them  to  account,  and  in  self-defence  consigns  them  to  social 
outlawry.  So  plainly  is  Virtue  the  eldest-born  and  the  fairest  of  the  daughters 
of  God.  If  our  Lord  uttered  woe  on  the  heartless  and  pretentious  morality  of 
His  day,  the  prophet  uttered  woe  on  the  confessed  and  ostentatious  immorality 
of  his  time.  Isaiah's  words,  as  well  as  Christ's,  have  a  bearing  on  our  modern 
life :  "  Woe  unto  them  that  draw  iniquity  with  cords  of  vanity,  and  sin  as  it 
were  with  a  cart-rope."  Men  hate  hypocrisy.  A  profitable  virtue  that  is  not 
real,  or  a  formal  virtue  that  is  not  large  and  loving,  moves  us  to  scorn  or  pity. 
But,  strange  to  say,  the  hatred  of  hypocrisy  is  not  always  in  the  interests  of  virtue. 
"  I  will  not  be  a  hypocrite,"  says  one,  and  in  his  horror  of  hypocrisy  he  rushes 
into  an  open  and  shameless  evil  life.  This  is  what  the  prophet  means  in  his 
graphic  picture,  "  Woe  unto  them  that  draw  iniquity,"  &c.  He  depicts  a  class 
of  men  who  have  deliberately  harnessed  themselves  to  evil,  as  a  horse  or  mule 
is  harnessed  to  a  loaded  waggon.  There  are  forms  of  iniquity  which  are  difficult 
and  laborious.  Those  who  get  over  any  ground  with  them  must  pull  them  with 
a  cart-rope.  It  is  grievous  business,  but  some  men  choose  it,  and  take  more 
trouble  to  be  bad  than  actually  is  necessary  to  be  good.  And  they  prosecute 
ostentatiously  the  business  that  they  have  chosen.  They  take  no  care  to  conceal 
the  evil  industry  of  their  life.  It  is  the  instinct  of  sin  to  disguise  itself.  It  usually 
skulks  behind  an  assumed  goodness.  It  takes  to  itself  virtuous  names.  It 
puts  on  masks  to  hide  itself,  not  only  from  the  eyes  of  men,  but  also  from  the 
eyes  of  conscience.  But  the  man  who  drags  sin  with  a  cart-rope  boasts  only 
one  virtue,  and  that  is  a  real  one :  he  is  no  hypocrite.  He  has  thrown  appear- 
ances to  the  winds.  He  drags  his  iniquity  conspicuously  on  the  highway,  in 
the  daylight.  He  does  not  care  to  conceal  the  coat  of  arms  on  the  carriage,  or 
the  livery  of  the  driver  who  holds  the  reins  and  snaps  over  him  the  whip.  Perhaps 
no  one  ever  fully  commits  himself  to  this  sort  of  life  until  he  has,  or  thinks  that 
he  has,  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  all  goodness  in  the  world  is  a  sham  ;  that 
the  virtue  to  which  men  sing  praises  is  simply  a  convenient  fiction,  which  they 
affect  to  believe,  and  pretend  to  possess ;  that,  as  there  is  no  real  righteousness 
on  the  earth,  so  there  is  no  sovereign  righteousness  in  the  heavens ;  that  God 
is  simply  a  dumb  force,  without  moral  quality,  and  indifferent  to  the  moral  quality 
of  His  creatures.  Hence  the  prophet  makes  such  a  one  say,  in  presumptuous 
taunt  and  irony :  "  Let  Him  make  speed,"  &c.  Is  this  rude  picture,  culled 
from  the  page  of  the  old  Hebrew  prophet,  unsuited  to  these  smooth  times  and 
this  Christianised  civilisation  ?  Do  none  of  you  ever  say  :  "I  know  it  is  wrong. 
It  is  an  offence  against  God,  against  myself,  against  my  neighbour.  It  is  an 
unquestionable  violation  of  what  is  pure  and  honest.  I  can  see  the  harm  that 
it  works  ;  but  I  do  not  disguise  it.  I  do  not  pretend  to  be  other  than  I  am.  I 
am  at  least  frank.  I  do  not  affect  a  virtue  which  I  do  not  possess  "  ?  Well, 
this  is  one  alternative  to  hypocrisy.  Did  you  ever  think  that  there  is  another, — 
to  recognise  the  evil  in  your  nature  and  the  sin  in  your  life ;  to  look  at  it  with 
keen,  brave  eyes,  illumined  by  the  study  of  God's  law ;  to  guard  against  it,  day 
by  day  and  moment  by  moment ;  and  resolutely  to  fight  it,  in  its  first  impulses, 
in  its  fiercest  assaults,  by  the  help  of  God's  grace  ?  Is  not  this  a  possible  alterna- 
tive ?  It  is  not  demanded  of  you  that  you  be  sinless  ;  but  you  need  not  be  the 
liveried  slave  of  sin.  It  is  not  required  of  you  that  you  be  perfect;  but  you 
can  enlist  and  do  battle  on  the  side  of  right.  (W.  W.  Battershall,  D.D.)  Cords 
and  cart-ropes; — I.  Explain  the  singular  description.  Here  are  persons 
harnessed  to  the  waggon  of  sin — harnessed  to  it  by  many  cords,  all  light 
as  vanity  and  yet  strong  as  cart-ropes.  1.  Let  me  give  you  a  pioture. 
Here  is  a  man  who,  as  a  young  man,  heard  the  Gospel  and  grew  op  under 
the  influence  of  it.  He  is  an  intelligent  man,  a  Bible  reader,  and  somewhat 
of  a  theologian.  He  attended  a  Bible  class,  was  an  apt  pupiL  and  could 
explain  much  of  Scripture,  but  he  took  to  lightness  and  frothiness.  He  made  an 
amusement  of  religion  and  a  sport  of  serious  things.  He  came  under  the  bond 
of  this  religious  trifling,  but  it  was  a  cord  of  vanity  small  as  a  packthread.  Years 
ago  he  began  to  be  bound  to  his  sin  by  this  kind  of  trifling,  and  at  the  present 
moment  I  am  not  sure  that  he  ever  cares  to  go  and  hear  the  Gospel  or  to  read  the 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T» 


Word  of  God,  for  he  has  grown  to  despise  that  which  he  sported  with.  The  wanton 
witling  has  degenerated  into  a  malicious  scoffer  :  his  cord  has  become  a  cart-rope. 
His  life  is  all  trifling  now.  2.  I  have  seen  the  same  thing  take  another  shape, 
and  then  it  appeared  as  captious  questioning.  How  can  he  believe  in  Christ 
when  he  requires  Him,  first  of  all,  to  be  put  through  a  catechism  and  to  be  made 
to  answer  cavils  ?  Oh,  take  heed  of  tying  up  your  soul  with  cart-ropes  of  scepticism. 
3.  Some  have  a  natural  dislike  to  religious  things  and  cannot  be  brought  to  attend 
to  them.  Let  me  qualify  the  statement.  They  are  quite  prepared  to  attend  a 
place  of  worship  and  to  hear  sermons,  and  occasionally  to  read  the  Scriptures, 
and  to  give  their  money  to  help  on  some  benevolent  cause ;  but  this  is  the  point 
at  which  they  draw  the  line — they  do  not  want  to  think,  to  pray,  to  repent,  to 
believe,  or  to  make  heart-work  of  the  matter.  If  you  indulge  in  demurs  and 
delays  and  prejudices  in  the  first  days  of  your  conviction,  the  time  may  come 
when  those  little  packthreads  will  be  so  intertwisted  with  each  other  that  they 
will  make  a  great  cart-rope,  and  you  will  become  an  opposer  of  everything  that  is 
good,  determined  to  abide  for  ever  harnessed  to  the  great  Juggernaut  car  of  your 
iniquities,  and  so  to  perish.  4.  I  have  known  some  men  get  harnessed  to  that 
car  in  another  way,  and  that  is  by  deference  to  companions.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  many  people  go  to  hell  for  the  love  of  being  respectable.  It  is  not  to  be 
doubted  that  multitudes  pawn  their  souls,  and  lose  their  God  and  heaven,  merely 
for  the  sake  of  standing  well  in  the  estimation  of  a  profligate.  He  that  would  be 
free  for  ever  must  break  the  cords  ere  yet  they  harden  into  chains.  5.  Some  men 
are  getting  into  bondage  in  another  way ;  they  are  forming  gradual  habits  of 
evil.  6.  I  fear  that  not  a  few  are  under  the  delusive  notion  that  they  are  safe  as 
they  are.  Carnal  security  is  made  up  of  cords  of  vanity.  II.  There  is  a  woe 
about  remaining  harnessed  to  the  cart  of  srN,  and  that  woe  is  expressed  in 
our  text.  1.  It  has  been  hard  work  already  to  tug  at  sin's  load.  2.  But,  if 
you  remain  harnessed  to  this  car  of  sin,  the  weight  increases.  You  are  like  a  horse 
that  has  to  go  a  journey,  and  pick  up  parcels  at  every  quarter  of  a  mile  :  you 
are  increasing  the  heavy  luggage  and  baggage  that  you  have  to  drag  behind  you. 
3.  Further,  I  want  you  to  notice  that  as  the  load  grows  heavier,  so  the  road  becomes 
worse,  the  ruts  are  deeper,  the  hills  are  steeper,  and  the  sloughs  are  more  full  of 
mire.  An  old  man  with  his  bones  filled  with  the  sin  of  his  youth  is  a  dreadful 
Bight  to  look  upon;  he  is  a  curse  to  others,  and  a  burden  to  himself.  4.  The 
dav  will  come  when  the  load  will  crush  the  horse.  5.  I  am  sure  that  there  is 
nobody  here  who  desires  to  be  eternally  a  sinner :  let  him  then  beware,  for  each 
hour  of  sin  brings  its  hardness  and  its  difficulty  of  change.  When  the  moral 
brakes  are  taken  off,  and  the  engine  is  on  the  down-grade,  and  must  run  on  at  a 
perpetually  quickening  rate  for  ever,  then  is  the  soul  lost  indeed.  III.  Now  I 
want  to  offer  some  encouragement  for  breaking  loose.  1.  There  is  hope 
for  every  harnessed  slave  of  Satan.  Jesus  Christ  has  come  into  the  world  to 
rescue  those  who  are  bound  with  chains.  2.  You  are  bound  with  the  cords  of 
Bin,  and  in  order  that  all  this  sin  of  yours  might  effectually  be  put  away,  the  Lord 
Jesus,  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  was  Himself  bound.  3.  There  is  in  this  world  a 
mysterious  Being  whom  thou  knowest  not,  but  whom  some  of  us  know,  who  \a 
able  to  work  thy  liberty.  Wherever  there  is  a  soul  that  would  be  free  from  sin 
this  free  Spirit  waits  to  help  him.  4.  Our  experience  should  be  a  great  encourage- 
ment to  you.  ( C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  Spiritual  cart-ropes : — Cart-ropes  are  composed 
of  several  small  cords  firmly  twisted  together,  which  serve  to  connect  the  beasts  of 
burden  with  the  draught  they  pull  after  them.  These  represent  a  complication 
of  means  closely  united,  whereby  a  people  here  described  continue  to  join  them- 
selves to  the  most  wearisome  of  all  burdens.  They  consist  of  false  reasonings, 
foolish  pretexts,  and  corrupt  maxims,  by  which  obstinate  transgressors  become 
firmly  united  to  their  sins,  and  persist  in  dragging  after  them  their  iniquities. 
Of  this  sort  the  following  are  a  few  specimens  :  God  is  merciful,  and  His  goodness 
will  not  suffer  any  of  His  creatures  to  be  completely  and  everlastingly  miserable. 
Others,  as  well  as  they,  are  transgressors.  Repentance  will  be  time  enough  upon 
a  death-bed  or  in  old  age.  The  greatest  of  sinners  often  pass  unpunished.  A 
future  state  of  retribution  is  uncertain.  Unite  these,  and  suchlike  cords,  and, 
I  suppose,  you  have  the  cart-ropes  whereby  the  persons  mentioned  draw  after 
them  much  sin  and  iniquity.  All  these  pretexts,  however,  are  light  as  vanity. 
(R.  MaccuUoch.)  The  cord  of  sin  .-—These  words  are  at  all  times,  and  among 
every  people,  of  especial  interest,  were  it  only  on  two  account* — (1)  The  easy 
thoughtlessness  with  which  men  begin  their  acquaintance  with  sin,  and  (2)  The 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  125 

hardness  of  heart  in  which  they  are  confirmed  by  its  habits.  These  are  represented 
under  a  very  lively  figure  in  the  former  of  these  two  verses ; .  and  the  desperate 
rebelliousness  of  spirit  to  which  they  are  brought,  so  as  to  utter  defiance  against 
the  judgment  of  the  Almighty,  is  expressed  to  the  life  in  the  latter.  I.  Thb 
figure  under  which  the  sinner  is  represented  in  the  former  of  these  verses  is  that 
of  a  rope-maker.  He  begins  with  a  slight  slender  thread  of  flax  or  hemp,  which 
he  can  break  almost  with  as  much  ease  as  a  spider's  web  ;  but  the  end  of  his  work 
is  a  cart-rope,  thick  and  strong  enough  to  bind  the  strongest  man  or  beast  upon 
earth.  So  a  man  begins  and  ends  with  sin.  He  begins  with  drawing  iniquity 
with  cords  of  vanity.  The  iniquity  upon  which  he  is  tempted  to  enter  seems  to 
him  a  mere  trifle  at  first,  to  which,  if  not  good,  he  thinks  that  he  gives  a  hard  name 
to  call  it  downright  bad ;  and  if  it  even  do  smite  his  conscience  with  some  evil 
signs  of  its  real  nature,  which  he  can  hardly  mistake,  he  is  vain  enough,  in  the 
notion  of  his  own  strength,  to  think,  that  when  he  has  gone  into  it.he  can  as  easily 
come  out  of  it  again.  It  is  but  as  flax  or  tow  (he  says) ;  it  is  but  a  cord  of  vanity 
and  not  of  substance.  He  needs  not  to  go  on  spinni  g  and  drawing  it  out  (he 
thinks) ;  but  he  will  stop  short  as  soon  as  he  has  gone  as  far  as  he  wants,  and  that 
is  not  far.  Alas  !  how  many  can  fix  the  beginning  of  their  ruin  in  this  world, 
and  imminent  peril  of  the  judgment  of  the  next,  on  the  day  when  they  said  in 
foolish  security,  and  in  face  of  a  warning  conscience,  "  It  is  but  for  this  once  !  " 
Alas !  they  never  said  so  again.  It  proved  to  them  to  be  "  now  and  for  ever." 
II.  The  text  informs  us  in  the  next  verse  that  these  men,  who,  beginning  with 
drawing  iniquity  with  cords  of  vanity,  had  ended  with  drawing  sin,  as  it  were, 
with  a  cart-rope,  went  on  to  mock  at  judgment  to  come.  The  thoughts  of 
judgment  to  come  re,  of  course,  very  unpleasant  to  him  who  knows  that  he  shall 
have  to  suffer  from*it  when  it  does  come.  His  sin,  therefore,  hardens  him  into  a 
disbelief  of  it.  (R.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)  The  growth  of  sin : — Sin  grows  as  naturally 
nd  as  fast  as  the  fire,  which  lays  a  city  in  ruins,  comes  out  of  a  single  spark  in 
some  solitary  obscure  corner  ;  as  surely  as  the  rains,  which  bury  a  whole  country 
in  a  flood,  begin  with  a  few  sprinkled  drops,  which  were  not  worth  talking  about ; 
as  surely  as  the  river,  which  must  be  crossed  with  ships,  begins  with  a  well  which 
you  might  empty  almost  with  the  scoop  of  your  hand  ;  as  certainly  as  the  strong 
thick  cart -rope  begins  v  ith  a  few  weak  flaxen  or  hempen  threads.  (Ibid.) 
Strength  of  habit : — The  surgeon  of  a  regiment  in  India  relates  the  following 
incident :  "  A  soldier  rushed  into  the  tent,  to  inform  me  that  one  of  his  com- 
rades was  drowning  in  a  pond  close  by,  and  nobody  could  attempt  to  save  him 
in  consequence  of  the  dense  weeds  which  covered  the  surface.  On  repairing  to 
the  spot,  we  found  the  poor  fellow  in  his  last  struggle,  manfully  attempting  to 
extricate  himself  from  the  meshes  of  rope-like  grass  that  encircled  his  body ;  but, 
to  all  appearance,  the  more  he  laboured  to  escape,  the  more  firmly  they  became 
coiled  round  his  limbs.  At  last  he  sank,  and  the  floating  plants  closed  in,  and 
left  not  a  trace  of  the  disaster.  After  some  delay,  a  raft  was  made,  and  we  put 
off  to  the  spot,  and  sinking  a  pole  some  twelve  feet,  a  native  dived,  holding  on  by 
the  stake,  and  brought  the  body  to  the  surface.  I  shall  never  forget  the  expression 
of  the  dead  man's  face — the  clenched  teeth,  and  fearful  distortion  of  the  counten- 
ance, while  coils  of  long  trailing  weeds  clung  round  his  body  and  limbs,  the  muscles 
of  which  stood  out  stiff  and  rigid,  whilst  his  hands  grasped  thick  masses,  showing 
how  bravely  he  had  struggled  for  life."  This  heart-rending  picture  is  a  terribly 
accurate  representation  of  a  man  with  a  conscience  alarmed  by  remorse,  struggling 
with  his  sinful  habits,  but  finding  them  too  strong  for  him.  Divine  grace  can 
save  the  wretch  from  his  unhappy  condition,  but  if  he  be  destitute  of  that,  his 
remorseful  agonies  will  but  make  him  more  hopelessly  the  slave  of  his  passions. 
Laocoon,  in  vain  endeavouring  to  tear  off  the  serpents'  coils  from  himself  and 
children,  aptly  portrays  the  long-enslaved  sinner  contending  with  sin  in  his  own 
strength.  (C.  II .  Spurgeon.)  Insidious  nature  of  sin: — In  the  gardens  of 
Hampton  Court  you  will  see  many  trees  entirely  vanquished  and  well-nigh  strangled 
by  huge  coils  of  ivy,  which  are  wound  about  them  like  the  snakes  around  the 
unhappy  Laocoon :  there  is  no  untwisting  the  folds,  they  are  too  giant-like,  and 
fast  fixed,  and  every  hour  the  rootlets  of  the  climber  are  sucking  the  life  out  of 
the  unhappy  tree.  Yet  there  was  a  day  when  the  ivy  was  a  tiny  aspirant,  only 
asking  a  little  aid  in  climbing ;  had  it  been  denied  then,  the  tree  had  never  become 
its  victim,  but  by  degrees  the  humble  weakling  grew  in  strength  and  arrogance, 
and  at  last  it  assumed  the  mastery,  and  the  tall  tree  became  the  prey  of  the  creeping, 
insinuating  destroyer.     (Ibid.)        Moral  slavery: — James  II.  on  his  death- bed 


126  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

thus  addressed  his  son,  "  There  is  no  slavery  like  sin,  and  no  liberty  like  God'a 
service."    (E.  MelviU,  B.D.) 

Ver.  20.  Woe  unto  them  that  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil. — Woe  unto  (hem 
that  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil: — There  is  a  customary  mode  of  talking,  in 
which  familiar  formulas  of  praise  and  censure,  as  to  moral  objects,  are  employed 
as  if  by  rote,  involving  the  admission  of  important  principles,  and  recognising 
in  its  full  extent  the  grand  distinction  between  moral  good  and  evil.  Such  men 
will  speak  familiarly  of  other  men  and  of  their  acts  as  right  or  wrong,  as  virtuous 
or  vicious,  in  a  manner  which  implies  not  only  preference  of  judgment,  but  of 
inclination  ;  so  that  if  we  draw  conclusions  from  their  language  merely,  we  should 
certainly  infer  that  they  not  only  understood  the  principles  of  sound  morality, 
but  loved  them  and  obeyed  them.  The  latter  conclusion  would,  in  too  many 
instances,  be  found  to  be  erroneous,  not  because  the  person,  in  his  talk,  was  guilty 
of  deliberate  hypocrisy,  or  even  intended  to  deceive  at  all,  but  because  his  words 
conveyed  more  than  he  meant,  especially  when  phrases  used  of  course,  and  by  a 
sort  of  habit,  came  to  be  subjected  to  the  rules  of  a  strict  interpretation.  In 
all  such  cases  it  will  soon  be  found,  upon  a  little  observation,  that  the  dialect 
in  question,  however  near  it  may  approach  to  that  of  evangelical  morality,  is 
still  distinguished  from  it  by  indubitable  marks.  1.  Any  one  who  thus  indulges 
in  the  use  of  such  conventional  expressions  as  imply  a  recognition  of  those  principles 
of  morals  which  are  laid  down  in  the  Bible,  but  whose  conduct  repudiates  and 
nullifies  them,  avoids,  as  if  instinctively,  those  terms  of  censure  and  of  approbation 
which  belong  distinctively  to  Scripture,  and  confines  himself  to  those  which  are 
common  to  the  Bible  and  the  heathen  moralists,  to  Christian  ethics  and  the  code 
of  honour.  He  will  speak  of  an  act,  or  a  course  of  acts,  as  wrong,  perhaps  as 
vicious, — it  may  even  be  as  wicked,  but  not  as  sinfuL  The  difference  between 
the  terms,  as  viewed  by  such  a  person,  seems  to  be  that  vice  and  crime  are  referable 
merely  to  an  abstract  standard,  and  perhaps  a  variable  one ;  while  sin  brings 
into  view  the  legislative  and  judicial  character  of  God.  Sin,  too,  is  associated  in 
most  minds  with  the  humiliating  doctrine  of  a  natural  depravity,  while  vice  and 
crime  suggest  the  idea  of  a  voluntary  aberration  on  the  part  of  one  by  nature 
free  from  taint,  and  abundantly  able  to  stand  fast  in  his  own  strength.  By  tracing 
such  diversities,  however  slight  and  trivial  they  seem  to  be  when  in  themselves 
considered,  we  may  soon  learn  to  distinguish  the  characteristic  dialect  of  worldly 
moralists  from  that  of  evangelical  religion.  2.  It  will  also  be  found  that  in  the 
use  of  terms  employed  by  both,  there  is  a  difference  of  sense,  it  may  be  unintentional, 
denoting  no  small  difference  in  point  of  principle.  Especially  is  this  the  case  in 
reference  to  those  important  principles  of  morals  which  bear  most  directly  upon 
the  ordinary  business  of  life,  and  come  most  frequently  into  collision  with  the 
selfish  interests  and  inclinations  of  ungodly  men.  Two  men,  for  instance,  shall 
converse  together  upon  truth  and  falsehood,  upon  honesty  and  fraud,  employing 
the  same  words  and  phrases,  and,  perhaps,  aware  of  no  diversity  of  meaning  in 
their  application.  And  yet,  when  you  come  to  ascertain  the  sense  in  which  they 
severally  use  the  terms  employed  by  both,  you  shall  find  that  while  the  one  adopts 
the  rigorous  and  simple  rule  of  truth  and  falsehood  which  is  laid  down  in  the  Bible 
and  by  common  sense,  the  other  holds  it  with  so  many  qualifications  and  exceptions, 
as  almost  to  render  it  a  rule  more  honoured  in  the  breach  than  the  observance. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  diversity  in  the  use  of  language  exerts  a  constant 
and  extensive  influence  on  human  intercourse,  and  leads  to  many  of  those  miscon- 
ceptions which  are  tending  daily  to  increase  the  mutual  distrust  of  men  in  one 
another's  candour  and  sincerity.  3.  Who  pretends  to  think  that  men  are  often, 
I  might  almost  say  ever,  better  in  the  bent  of  their  affections  and  their  moral 
dispositions  than  in  the  general  drift  of  their  discourse  ?  Who  does  not  know 
that  they  are  often  worse,  and  that  where  any  marked  diversity  exists,  the  difference 
is  commonly  in  favour  of  his  words  at  the  expense  of  his  thoughts  and  feelings  ? 
Nothing,  however,  could  be  more  unjust  or  utterly  subversive  of  impartial  judgment 
in  this  matter,  than  to  choose  as  tests  or  symptoms  mere  occasional  expressions. 
4.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  a  rational  nature  is  incapable  of  loving  evil, 
simply  viewed  as  evil,  or  of  hating  good,  when  simply  viewed  as  good.  Whatever 
thing  you  love,  you  thereby  recognise  as  good  ;  and  what  you  abhor,  you  thereby 
recognise  as  evil.  When,  therefore,  men  profess  to  look  upon  that  as  excellent 
which  in  their  hearts  and  lives  they  treat  as  hateful,  and  to  regard  as  evil  that 
which  they  are  seeking  after,  and  which  they  delight  in,  they  are  not  expressing 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  127 

their  own  feelings,  but  assenting  to  the  judgment  of  others.     They  are  measuring 
the  object  by  a  borrowed  standard,  while  their  own  is  wholly  different.     And  if 
they  are  really  so  far  enlightened  as  to  think  sincerely  that  the  objects  of  their 
passionate  attachment  are  evil,  this  is  only  admitting  that  their  own  affections 
are  disordered  and  at  variance  with  reason.     So  the  sinner  may  believe  on  God's 
authority  or  man's  that  sin  is  evil  and  that  holiness  is  good,  but  as  a  matter  of 
affection  and  of  inclination,  his  corrupted  taste  will  still  reject  the  sweet  as  bitter, 
and  receive  the  bitter  as  sweet ;  his  diseased  eye  will  still  confound  light  with 
darkness,  and  his  lips,  whenever  they  express  the  feelings  of  his  heart,  will  con- 
tinue to  call  good  evil  and  evil  good.     5.  The  text  does  not  teach  us  merely  that 
punishment  awaits  those  who  choose  evil  in  preference  to  good,  but  that  an  out- 
ward mark  of  those  who  hate  God,  and  whom  God  designs  to  punish,  is  their 
confounding  moral  distinctions  in  their  conversation.     6.  When  one  who  admits 
in  words  the  great  first  principles  of  morals,  takes  away  so  much  on  one  hand  and 
grants  so  much  on  the  other,  as  to  obliterate  the  practical  distinction  between 
right  and  wrong  ;  when  with  one  breath  he  asserts  the  inviolable  sanctity  of  truth, 
but  with  the  next  makes  provision  for  benevolent,  professional,  jocose,  or  thought- 
less falsehood  ;  when  he  admits  the  paramount  importance  of  religious  duties 
in  general,  but  in  detail  dissects  away  the  vital  parts  as  superstition,  sanctimony, 
or  fanaticism,  and  leaves  a  mere  abstraction  or  an  outward  form  behind  ;  when 
he  approves  the  requisitions  of  the  law  and  the  provisions  of  the  Gospel  in  so  far 
as  they  apply  to  other  people,  but  repudiates  them  as  applying  to  himself ; — 
I  ask,  whatever  his  professions  or  his  creed  may  be,  whether  he  does  not  virtually, 
actually,  call  evil  good  and  good  evil  ?  7.  Again,  I  ask,  whether  he  who  in  the  general 
admits    the  turpitude  of  fraud,   impurity,   intemperance,   malignity,   and  other 
vicious  dispositions  with  their  practical  effects,  and  thus  appears  to  be  an  advocate 
for  purity  of  morals,  but  when  insulated  cases  or  specific  acts  of  vice  are  made  the 
subjects  of  discussion,  treats  them  all  as  peccadilloes,  inadvertencies,  absurdities, 
indiscretions,  or,  perhaps,  as  virtues  modestly  disguised,  can  be  protected  by  the 
mere  assertion  of  a  few  general  principles  from  the  fatal  charge  of  calling  evil 
good  ?     And,  as  the  counterpart  of  this,  I  ask  whether  he  who  praises  and  admires 
all  goodness,  not  embodied  in  the  life  of  living  men  or  women,  but  detests  it  when 
thus  realised  in  concrete  excellence,  does  not  really  and  practically  call  good  evil  ? 
8.  And  I  ask,  lastly,  whether  he  who,  in  relation  to  the  self-same  acts,  performed 
by  men  of  opposite  descriptions,  has  a  judgment  suited  to  the  case  of  each,  but 
who  is  all  compassion  to  the  wilful  transgressions  of  the  wicked,  and  all  inexorable 
sternness  to  the  innocent  infirmities  of  godly  men ;  he  who  strains  at  a  gnat  in 
the  behaviour  of  the  meek  and  conscientious  Christian,  but  can  swallow  a  camel 
in  the  conduct  of  the  self-indulgent  votary  of  pleasure ;  he  who  lauds  religion  as 
exhibited  in  those  who  give  him  no  uneasiness  by  their  example,  but  maligna 
and  disparages  it  when,  from  its  peculiar  strength  and  brightness,  it  reflects  a 
glare  of  painful  and  intolerable  light  upon  his  own  corruptions, — let  his  maxims 
of  moral  philosophy  be  what  they  will, — does  not,  to  all  intents  and  purposes, 
incur  the  woe  pronounced  on  those  who  call  evil  good  and  good  evil,  who  put 
darkness  for  light  and  light  for  darkness,  who  put  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  for 
bitter  ?     (J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)        The  guilt  of  establishing  unscriptural  prin- 
ciples of  conduct : — I.  Among  the  most  prominent  illustrations  of  the  present 
subject  we  may  produce  those  persons,  who  represent  enthusiasm  as  religion. 
By  enthusiasm,  as  applied  with  a  reference  to  religion,  I  understand  the  subjection 
of  the  judgment,  in  points  of  religious  faith  or  practice,  to  the  influence  of  the 
imagination.     II.  Let  us  now  turn  our  eyes  to  the  opposite  quarter ;  to  men 
who  denominate  religion  ENTHUSIASM.     Enthusiasm  is  on  principle  busy  and 
loquacious.     Lukewarmness,   though   capable   of  being  roused   to   a  turbulent 
defence  of  forms  and  of  its  own  conduct,  is  by  nature  silent  and  supine.     Hence 
enthusiasm,  in  proportion  to  the  relative  number  of  its  adherents,  raises  a  much 
louder  stir,  and  attracts  far  more  extensive  notice,  than  lukewarmness.     But  let 
the  torpid  conviction  of  the  lukewarm  be  contrasted  with  the  illusion  of  the 
enthusiast,  and  the  former  will  prove  itself  not  less  dangerous,  and  generally  more 
deliberately  criminal,  than  the  latter.     III.  Another  illustration  of  the  text  is 
furnished  by  persons  who  represent  a  partial  conformity  to  the  com- 
mandments op  God  as  meriting  the  appellation  op  religion  :  and  thus  also 
by  implication  stigmatise  the  true  Christian  as  "  righteous  over-much." 
IV.  We  may  in  the  next  place  produce  as  illustrative  of  the  general  proposition 
before  us  those  who  represent  the  palliation  op  sin  as  charity  ;  and  brand 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

WITH  THE   CHARACTER   OF   CENSORIOUSNESS   ALL   OPINIONS   AND   DESCRIPTIONS   OP 

guilt  conformable  to  the  Scriptures.  From  the  mouth  of  these  apolcgisers 
no  sin  receives  its  appropriate  denomination.  Some  lighter  phrase  is  ever  on 
the  lips  to  cloke  its  enormity,  perhaps  to  transform  it  into  a  virtue.  Is  profane- 
ness  noticed  ?  It  is  an  idle  habit  by  which  nothing  is  intended.  Is  extravagance 
named  ?  It  is  a  generous  disregard  of  money.  Is  luxury  mentioned  ?  Tt  is  a 
hospitable  desire  to  see  our  friends  happy.  What  is  worldly-mindedness  ?  It  is 
prudence.  What  is  pride  ?  It  is  proper  spirit,  a  due  attention  to  our  own 
dignity.  What  is  ambition  T  A  laudable  desire  of  distinction  and  pre-eminence ; 
a  just  sense  of  our  own  excellence  and  desert.  What  is  servility  ?  It  is  skill 
in  making  our  way  to  advancement.  What  are  intemperance  and  sins  of  impurity  ? 
They  are  indecorums,  irregularities,  human  frailties,  customary  indiscretions, 
the  natural  and  venial  consequences  of  cheerfulness,  company,  and  temptation  ; 
the  unguarded  ebullitions  of  youth,  which  in  a  little  time  will  satiate  and  cure 
themselves.  Now  all  this  is  candour  :  all  this  is  charity.  If  a  reference  be  made 
to  religion,  these  men  immediately  enlarge  on  the  mercy  of  God.  V.  There  yet 
remains  to  be  specified  an  exemplification  of  the  guilt  menaced  with  vengeance 
by  the  prophet:  a  perversion  op  principle  which,  while  the  lower  ranks  are 
happily  too  little  refined  to  be  infected  with  it,  taints  with  a  greater  or  a  less 
degree  of  its  deceitful  influence  the  bulk  of  the  middle  and  higher  classes  of  the 
community.  By  what  criterion  are  applause  and  censure  apportioned  ?  By 
the  rule  of  honour.  "  Honour  "  reigns,  because  multitudes  "  love  the  praise  of 
men  more  than  the  praise  of  God."  It  reigns,  because  "  they  receive  honour 
one  of  another  ;  and  seek  not  that  honour  which  cometh  from  God  only."  What 
is  this  idol,  which  men  worship  in  the  place  of  the  living  God  ?  The  votary  of 
honour  may  delude  himself  with  the  idea  that,  whatever  be  the  ordinary  expressions 
of  his  lips,  his  heart  >s  dedicated  to  religion.  But  his  heart  is  fixed  on  his  idol, 
human  applause.  In  the  place  of  the  love  and  the  fear  of  God  he  substitutes 
the  love  of  praise  and  the  fear  of  shame.  In  the  place  of  conscience  he  substitutes 
pride.  For  the  dread  of  guilt  he  substitutes  the  apprehension  of  disgrace.  (T. 
Gisbome,  M.A.)  The  unchangeable  difference  of  good  and  evil : — Moral  good 
and  evil  are  as  truly  and  as  widely  different  in  their  own  nature  as  the  perceptions 
of  the  outward  senses ;  and  God  has  endued  us  with  faculties  of  the  soul  as  well 
fitted  to  distinguish  them,  as  the  bodily  senses  are  to  discern  corporeal  objects. 
If  any  man,  notwithstanding  this,  will  obstinately  call  evil  good  and  good  evil, 
and  will  deny  all  distinctions  between  virtue  and  vice,  he  must  as  much  have  laid 
aside  the  use  of  his  natural  reason  and  understanding  as  he  that  would  confound 
light  and  darkness  must  contradict  his  senses  and  deny  the  evidence  of  his  clearest 
sight.  And  when  such  a  person  falls  finally  into  the  just  punishment  of  sin,  he 
will  no  more  deserve  pity  than  one  who  falls  down  a  precipice  because  he  would 
not  open  his  eyes  to  discern  that  light  which  should  have  guided  him  in  his  way. 

I.  There  is  originally  in  the  very  nature  of  THiNas  a  necessary  and 

ETERNAL  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  GOOD  AND  EVIL,  BETWEEN  VIRTUE  AND  VICE, 
WHICH  THE  REASON  OF  THINGS  DOES  ITSELF  OBLIGE  MEN  TO  HAVE  CONSTANT  REGARD 

TO.  This  is  supposed  in  the  text  by  the  prophet's  comparing  the  difference  between 
good  and  evil  to  that  most  obvious  and  sensible  difference  of  light  and  darkness. 

II.  GOD  HAS,  MOREOVER,  BY  HlS  SUPREME  AND  ABSOLUTE  AUTHORITY,  AND  BY 
EXPRESS  DECLARATION  OF  HlS  WILL  IN  HOLY  SCRIPTURE,  ESTABLISHED  AND  CON- 
FIRMED THIS  ORIGINAL  DIFFERENCE  OF  THINGS,  AND  WILL  SUPPORT  AND  MAINTAIN 
IT   BY   HlS  IMMEDIATE   POWER   AND   GOVERNMENT  IN   THE   WORLD.      "  Woe  unto 

them,"  &c.  III.  Observations  which  may  be  op  use  to  us  in  practice. 
1.  Religion  and  virtue  are  truly  most  agreeable  to  nature,  and  vice  and  wickedness 
are  of  all  things  the  most  contrary  to  it.  2.  Knowledge  of  the  most  important 
and  fundamental  doctrines  of  religion  must  be  very  easy  to  be  attained,  and 
gross  ignorance  of  our  duty  can  by  no  means  be  innocent  or  excusable,  our  minds 
being  as  naturally  fitted  to  understand  the  most  necessary  parts  of  it  as  our  eyes 
are  to  judge  of  colours  or  our  palate  of  tastes.  3.  The  judgments  of  God  upon 
impenitent  sinners,  who  obstinately  disobey  the  most  reasonable  and  necessary 
laws  in  the  world,  are  true  and  just  and  righteous  judgments.  4.  Whatever 
doctrine  is  contrary  to  the  nature  and  attributes  of  God,  whatever  is  plainly 
unwise  or  wicked,  whatever  tends  to  confound  the  essential  and  eternal  differences 
of  good  and  evil,  must  necessarily  be  false.  5.  Every  person  or  doctrine  which 
would  separate  religion  from  a  holy  life,  and  make  it  to  consist  merely  in  such 
speculative  opinions  as  may  be  defended   by  an  ill  liver,  or  in  such  outward 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  129 

solemnities  of  worship  as  may  be  performed  by  a  vicious  and  corrupt  man,  does 
greatly  corrupt  religion.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Good  and  evil : — The  difference 
of  good  and  evil  is  a  subject  of  the  highest  concern,  since  upon  it  is  founded  the 
truth  of  religion,  the  obligation  to  virtue,  and  the  peace  and  satisfaction  of  our 
minds.  Upon  it  is  founded  the  knowledge  which  we  can  attain  of  God's  moral 
perfections;  for  we  cannot  prove  that  God  is  good,  unless  we  have  antecedent 
notions  of  goodness  considered  in  itself,  and  separated  from  all  law,  will,  or  appoint- 
ment, Divine  or  human.  I  shall,  therefore,  now  proceed  to  prove  the  different 
natures  of  our  actions  as  to  moral  good  and  evil — I.  Fkom  the  history  of  thb 

MOST   ANCIENT   TIMES   AS   RECORDED   IN    THE    SACRED    BOOKS.      From    the    whole 

dispensation  of  providence,  as  set  forth  in  the  Old  Testament,  it  may  be  collected 
that  the  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong,  good  and  evil,  just  and  unjust,  might 
always  have  been  evident  to  those  who  would  make  a  proper  use  of  their  senses 
and  faculties.  But  that  we  may  not  carry  this  point  too  far,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  men  being  frail  and  fallible,  surrounded  with  temptations,  and  having  passions 
as  well  as  reason,  God  did  not  totally  leave  them  to  discover  their  duty  by  their 
own  natural  abilities.  Certain  religious  traditions  were,  without  question,  delivered 
down  by  Adam  and  his  sons,  and  some  prophets  and  pious  teachers  were  raised  up 
in  the  earliest  age3  from  time  to  time  by  the  Divine  Providence  to  instruct  and 
correct  the  world,  and  to  enforce  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  moral  duties,  by 
declaring  that  God  required  the  observance  of  them,  and  that  He  would  be  the 
rewarder  of  the  good  and  the  punisher  of  the  wicked.  Such  an  one  was  Enoch, 
and  such  was  Noah,  prophets  and  righteous  men,  and  preachers  of  righteousness 
in  their  generations.  II.  From  our  relation  to  God.  That  there  is  a  Maker 
and  Governor  of  the  world,  who  is  endued  with  all  perfections,  is  evident  from 
His  works.  Without  any  instructor,  besides  our  own  understanding,  we  know 
that  we  are,  and  that  we  did  not  make  ourselves,  and  that  we  owe  our  being  to  a 
superior  cause  ;  and  then  we  proceed  to  the  discovery  of  a  First  Cause  of  us  and  of 
all  other  things  ;  and  thence  we  also  discern  our  duty  towards  Him.  It  is  absurd 
to  suppose  that  God  should  have  supreme  power,  and  we  not  be  bound  to  revere 
Him  ;  that  He  should  have  perfect  goodness,  and  we  not  be  bound  to  love  Him. 
He  who  gives  life  and  the  comforts  of  life  to  His  creatures,  hath  a  right  to  their 
gratitude  and  to  their  best  services :  and  if  it  be  absurd  not  to  think  ourselves 
obliged  to  obey  Him,  it  is  right  and  fit  to  obey  Him,  and  to  conform  our  will  to 
His.  So  that,  with  respect  to  God,  there  must  be  moral  good  or  moral  evil  in 
our  behaviour.  As  the  foundations  of  religion  are  thus  fixed  and  unchangeable, 
so  the  continual  practice  of  religion  is  necessary  through  the  whole  course  of 
our  lives.  They  who  seem  to  have  little  or  no  value  for  religion  yet  will  often 
tell  you  that  they  have  a  great  regard  for  virtue,  for  honour,  for  justice,  and  for 
gratitude  to  friends  and  benefactors.  If  they  would  reason  consistently,  they 
would  find  the  same  obligations  in  a  higher  manner  to  serve  God,  who  is  both 
their  Master  and  their  Father.  III.  Another  way  to  find  out  the  differences  of 
good  and  evil  is  from  the  consideration  of  the  peculiar  frame  of  human 
nature.  The  beasts,  though  so  much  our  inferiors,  fulfil  the  designs  of  providence 
by  pursuing  the  ends  for  which  they  were  made.  But  they  are  no  patterns  for  us 
whom  God  hath  endued  with  faculties  above  sense,  and  who  are  able  to  control 
and  subdue  the  inclinations  which  we  have  in  common  with  brutes.  Nature 
hath  limited  and  determined  their  appetites  within  certain  bounds,  which  they 
have  no  desire  to  transgress.  Nature  hath  not  so  dealt  with  mankind  ;  for  our 
desires  are  impetuous  and  boundless :  but  then  God  hath  implanted  in  us  under- 
standing and  reason  to  direct  them,  and  to  judge  what  is  right  and  wrong.  And 
thus,  as  man  by  the  help  of  reason  and  reflection,  and  by  moral  motives,  becomes 
vastly  superior  to  the  brutes ;  so  by  vice,  and  particularly  by  intemperance 
and  sensuality,  he  sinks  as  much  beneath  them,  and  runs  into  excesses  which  are 
not  to  be  found  in  them.  Hence  the  real  and  moral  differences  of  good  and  evil 
may  be  proved ;  for  the  superior  faculties  in  man  must  have  a  superior  good 
agreeable  to  them.  And  as  the  inferior  faculties,  namely,  the  bodily  senses, 
have  always  external  objects  suitable  to  them,  or  unsuitable ;  so  it  is  with  those 
nobler  powers  of  the  mind,  thinking,  reflecting,  inquiring,  judging,  refusing, 
and  choosing.  The  proper  objects  of  these  powers  are  moral  or  religious  good 
and  evil.  No  faculty  creates  its  own  object,  but  only  discerns  it.  In  like  manner, 
truth  and  falsehood,  right  and  wrong,  are  the  objects  of  the  understanding ; 
and  no  man  surely  is  so  absurd  or  stupid  as  to  think  that  we  can  make  a  thing 
true  by  believing  it,  or  false  by  disbelieving  it.     So  virtue  or  goodness  is  the 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v, 

proper  object  of  our  unprejudiced  and  reasonable  desires.  Every  one  would 
infallibly  choose  it,  if  he  acted  according  to  his  nature,  to  pure  and  undefiled 
reason,  and  were  not  seduced  by  sensual  motives  and  temporary  views.  IV.  We 
may  also  judge  of  good  and  evil  by  the  common  interest  and  sense  of  mankind. 
And  here  we  are  not  to  be  determined  so  much  by  the  opinion  of  this  or  that 
person,  though  eminent  perhaps  in  some  respects,  as  by  the  general  consent  of 
men  in  approving  things  praiseworthy  and  conducing  to  the  common  advantage. 
Some  things  are  so  universally  esteemed,  that  even  they  who  do  not  practise 
them  must  approve  them  ;  and  this  shows  their  intrinsic  and  invariable  excellence. 
For  men  are  very  partial  to  their  own  conduct,  and  therefore  when  they  approve 
virtue  in  others,  though  themselves  be  vicious,  there  must  be  an  overbearing 
evidence  in  favour  of  it.  The  common  and  public  interest  cannot  be  supported 
by  any  measures  contrary  to  virtue  and  goodness.     V.  From  the  will  of  God 

AS  DISCOVERABLE  BY  REASON,  AND   AS  DISCOVERED  TO  US  BY  REVELATION.      (J. 

Jortin,  D.D.)  Confusion  in  men1  a  notions  of  good  and  evil : — Whence  comes 
it  to  pass  that  men  should  lose  the  notions  of  good  and  evil  so  far  as  to  stand 
in  need  of  a  Divine  law  to  reinforce  them,  whilst  yet  they  never  lose  the  notion 
of  things  pleasing  or  hurtful  to  their  senses  ?  We  may  answer — 1.  That  sense 
hath  usually  nothing  to  corrupt  its  judgment ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  the  deter- 
minations which  the  mind  passeth  upon  well-doing  and  evil-doing ;  for  there 
is  often  an  inclination  one  way  more  than  another,  and  this  inclination  is  towards 
the  wrong  way,  arising  from  various  causes  internal  and  external ;  so  that  serious 
consideration  and  caution  are  necessary  to  go  before  the  judgment.  2.  The 
reasons  of  good  and  evil  are  not  usually  understood  in  their  whole  extent  by  the 
bulk  of  mankind.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  there  are  some  right  and  some 
wrong  actions  ;  but  accurate  notions  of  right  and  wrong  have  seldom  been  found 
where  revelation  hath  not  been  received ;  which  should  teach  us  to  set  a  just 
value  upon  the  Gospel.  3.  Great  examples  have  greatly  tended  to  corrupt 
men's  notions  of  good  and  evil.  Many  there  are  who  judge  not  for  themselves, 
but  take  up  with  the  judgment  of  others ;  and  seeing  men  of  knowledge,  rank, 
and  figure,  practising  iniquity  without  fear  or  remorse,  they  think  they  may 
do  the  same,  and  follow  their  leaders.  4.  The  prevalence  of  any  vice  in  any 
country  or  society  takes  away  men's  apprehensions  of  the  evil  of  it.  When  a 
vice  is  uncommon,  men  stare  at  it  as  at  a  monster ;  but  when  it  is  generally 
practised,   they  are    insensibly  reconciled    to    it.     {Ibid.)        Good  and,  evil: — 

1.  Give  some  general  account  of  the  nature  of  good  and  evil,  and  of  the  reasons 
upon  which  they  are  founded.  2.  Show  that  the  way  by  which  good  and  evil 
commonly  operate  upon  the  mind  of  man,  is  by  those  respective  names  and 
appellations,  by  which  they  are  notified  and  conveyed  to  the  mind.  3.  Show 
the  mischief  which  directly,  naturally,  and  unavoidably  follows,  from  the  mis- 
application and  confusion  of  these  names.  4.  Show  the  grand  and  principal 
instances  in  which  the  abuse  or  misapplication  of  those  names  has  such  a  fatal 
and  pernicious  effect.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  The  misapplication  of  words  and 
names  : — I.  In  religion.  Religion  is  certainly  in  itself  the  best  thing  in  the 
world  ;  and  it  is  as  certain  that,  as  it  has  been  managed  by  some,  it  has  had  the 
worst  effects :  such  being  the  nature,  or  rather  the  fate  of  the  best  things,  to  be 
transcendently  the  worst  upon  corruption.  II.  In  civil  government,  or  politics. 
III.  To  the  private  interests  of  individuals.  1.  An  outrageous,  ungoverned 
insolence  and  revenge,   frequently  passes   by  the  name  of    sense  of    honour. 

2.  Bodily  abstinence,  joined  with  a  demure,  affected  countenance,  is  often  called 
piety  and  mortification.  3.  Some  have  found  a  way  to  smooth  over  an  implac- 
able, unalterable  spleen  and  malice,  by  dignifying  it  with  the  name  of  constancy. 
4.  A  staunch,  resolved  temper  of  mind,  not  suffering  a  man  to  sneak,  fawn,  cringe, 
and  accommodate  himself  to  all  humours,  though  never  so  absurd  and  unreason- 
able, is  commonly  branded  with  and  exposed  under  the  character  of  pride,  morosity 
and  ill-nature.  5.  Some  would  needs  have  a  pragmatical  prying  into  and  meddling 
with  other  men's  matters,  a  fitness  for  business,  forsooth,  and  accordingly  call 
and  account  none  but  such  persons  men  of  business.  (Ibid.)  An  essential 
difference  between  virtue  and  vice  in  the  nature  of  things  : — L  I  shall  first  explain 
the  meaning,  and  then  confirm  the  truth  of  this  observation.  Every 
thing  has  a  nature  which  is  peculiar  to  itself,  and  which  is  essential  to  its  very 
existence.  Light  has  a  nature  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  darkness.  Sweet 
has  a  nature  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  bitter.  Animals  have  a  nature 
by  which  they  are  distinguished  from  men.     Men  have  a  nature  by  which  they 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  131 

are  distinguished  from  angels.  Angels  have  a  nature  by  which  they  are  dis- 
tinguished from  God.  And  God  has  a  nature  by  which  He  is  distinguished  from 
all  other  beings.  Now  such  different  natures  lay  a  foundation  for  different  obliga- 
tions ;  and  different  obligations  lay  a  foundation  for  virtue  and  vice  in  all  their 
different  degrees.  As  virtue  and  vice,  therefore,  take  their  origin  from  the  nature 
of  things,  so  the  difference  between  moral  good  and  moral  evil  is  as  immutable 
as  the  nature  of  things  from  which  it  results.  The  truth  of  this  assertion  will 
appear  if  we  consider — 1.  That  the  essential  difference  between  virtue  and  vice 
may  be  known  by  those  who  are  wholly  ignorant  of  God.  The  barbarians,  who 
saw  the  viper  on  Paul's  hand,  knew  the  nature  and  ill-desert  of  murder.  The 
pagans,  who  were  in  the  ship  with  Jonah,  knew  the  difference  between  natural 
and  moral  evil,  and  considered  the  former  as  a  proper  and  just  punishment  of 
the  latter.  And  even  little  children  know  the  nature  of  virtue  and  vice.  But 
how  would  children  and  heathens  discover  the  essential  difference  between  moral 
good  and  evil,  if  this  difference  were  not  founded  in  the  nature  of  things  ?  2.  Men 
are  capable  of  judging  what  is  right  or  wrong  in  respect  to  the  Divine  character 
and  conduct.  This  God  implicitly  allows,  by  appealing  to  their  own  judgment, 
whether  He  has  not  treated  them  according  to  perfect  rectitude.  In  the  context, 
He  solemnly  calls  upon  His  people  to  judge  of  the  propriety  and  benignity  of 
His  conduct  towards  them  (vers.  3,  4 ;  also  Jer.  ii.  5 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  25,  29 ;  Mic. 
vL  1-5).  In  these  solemn  appeals  to  the  consciences  of  men,  God  does  not  require 
them  to  believe  that  His  character  is  good  because  it  is  His  character ;  nor  that  His 
laws  are  good  because  they  are  His  laws ;  nor  that  His  conduct  is  good  because 
it  is  His  conduct.  But  He  allows  them  to  judge  of  His  character,  His  laws  and 
His  conduct,  according  to  the  immutable  difference  between  right  and  wrong, 
in  the  nature  of  things;  which  is  the  infallible  rule  by  which  to  judge  of  the 
moral  conduct  of  all  moral  beings.  3.  God  cannot  destroy  this  difference  without 
destroying  the  nature  of  things.  4.  The  Deity  cannot  alter  the  nature  of  things 
so  as  to  destroy  the  essential  distinction  between  virtue  and  vice.  We  can  con- 
ceive that  God  should  make  great  alterations  in  us,  and  in  the  objects  about 
us ;  but  we  cannot  conceive  that  He  should  make  any  alterations  in  us,  and  in 
the  objects  about  us,  which  should  transform  virtue  into  vice,  or  vice  into  virtue, 
or  which  should  destroy  their  essential  difference.  II.  Take  notice  op  one 
ob  two  objections  which  may  be  made  against  what  has  been  said.  1.  To 
suppose  that  the  difference  between  virtue  and  vice  results  from  the  nature  of 
things,  is  derogatory  and  injurious  to  the  character  of  God.  For,  on  this  sup- 
position, there  is  a  standard  of  right  and  wrong  superior  to  the  will  of  the  Deity, 
to  which  He  is  absolutely  bound  to  submit.  To  say  that  the  difference  between 
right  and  wrong  docs  not  depend  upon  the  will  of  God,  but  upon  the  nature  of 
things,  is  no  more  injurious  to  His  character  than  to  say  that  it  does  not  depend 
upon  His  will  whether  two  and  two  shall  be  equal  to  four ;  whether  a  circle  and 
square  shall  be  different  figures  ;  whether  the  whole  shall  be  greater  than  a  part ; 
or  whether  a  thing  shall  exist  and  not  exist  at  the  same  time.  These  things  do 
not  depend  upon  the  will  of  God,  because  they  cannot  depend  upon  His  will. 
So  the  difference  between  virtue  and  vice  does  not  depend  upon  the  will  of  God, 
because  His  will  cannot  make  or  destroy  this  immutable  difference.  And  it 
is  more  to  the  honour  of  God  to  suppose  that  He  cannot,  than  that  He  can,  perform 
impossibilities.  But  if  the  eternal  rule  of  right  must  necessarily  result  from  the 
nature  of  things,  then  it  is  no  reproach  to  the  Deity  to  suppose  that  He  is  morally 
obliged  to  conform  to  it.  To  set  God  above  the  law  of  rectitude,  is  not  to  exalt, 
but  to  debase  His  character.  It  is  the  glory  of  any  moral  agent  to  conform  tc 
moral  obligation.  The  supreme  excellency  of  the  Deity  consists,  not  in  always 
doing  what  He  pleases,  but  in  always  pleasing  to  do  what  is  fit  and  proper  in  the 
nature  of  things.  2.  There  is  no  other  difference  between  virtue  and  vice  than 
what  arises  from  custom,  education,  or  caprice.  Different  nations  judge  differently 
upon  moral  subjects.  This  objection  is  more  specious  than  solid.  For — (1)  It 
is  certain  that  all  nations  do  feel  and  acknowledge  the  essential  distinction  between 
virtue  and  vice.  They  all  have  words  to  express  this  distinction.  Besides, 
all  nations  have  some  penal  laws,  which  are  made  to  punish  those  who  are  guilty 
of  criminal  actions.  (2)  No  nation  ever  did  deny  the  distinction  between  virtue 
and  vice.  Though  the  Spartans  allowed  their  children  to  take  things  from  others 
without  their  knowledge  and  consent,  yet  they  did  not  mean  to  allow  them  to 
steal,  in  order  to  increase  their  wealth,  and  gratify  a  sordid,  avaricious  spirit. 
They  meant  to  distinguish  between  taking  ana  stealing.    The  former  they  con- 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

sidered  as  a  mere  act,  which  was  suited  to  teach  their  children  skill  and  dexterity 
in  their  lawful  pursuits,  but  the  latter  they  detested  and  punished  as  an  infamoua 
crime.  So  when  the  Chinese  expose  their  useless  children,  or  their  useless  parents, 
they  mean  to  do  it  as  an  act  of  kindness  both  to  their  friends  and  to  the  public. 
These,  and  all  other  mistakes  of  the  same  nature,  are  to  be  ascribed  to  the  corruption 
of  the  human  heart,  which  blinds  and  stupefies  the  conscience,  and  prevents  it 
from  doing  its  proper  office.  III.  It  now  remains  to  make  a  number  of  deduc- 
tions FROM  THE  IMPORTANT  TRUTH  WHICH  WE  HAVE  EXPLAINED  AND  ESTABLISHED. 

1.  If  there  be  an  immutable  difference  between  virtue  and  vice,  right  and  wrong, 
then  there  is  a  propriety  in  every  man's  judging  for  himself  in  matters  of  morality 
and  religion.  2.  If  there  be  a  standard  of  right  and  wrong  in  the  nature  of  things, 
then  it  is  not  impossible  to  arrive  at  absolute  certainty  in  our  moral  and  religioua 
Bentiments.  3.  If  right  and  wrong  are  founded  in  the  nature  of  things,  then  it 
is  impossible  for  any  man  to  become  a  thorough  sceptic  in  morality  and  religion. 
4.  If  right  and  wrong,  truth  and  falsehood,  be  founded  in  the  nature  of  things, 
then  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  what  moral  and  religious  sentiments  mankind 
imbibe  and  maintain.  5.  If  right  and  wrong,  truth  and  falsehood,  be  founded 
in  the  nature  of  things,  then  there  appears  to  be  a  great  propriety  in  God's  appoint- 
ing a  day  of  judgment.  6.  All  who  go  to  heaven  will  go  there  by  the  unanimous 
voice  of  the  whole  universe.  7.  All  who  are  excluded  from  heaven  will  bo 
excluded  from  it  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  all  moral  beings.  It  will  appear 
clearly  to  the  view  of  the  universe,  that  all  who  are  condemned  ought  to  be  con- 
demned and  punished  for  ever.  [N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Perverting  the  right 
way 8  of  the  Lord  : — I.  Nature  of  the  practice.  1.  Not  a  mere  error  or  defect 
of  judgment,  but  a  habit,  practice  or  system  of  perverting  right  and  wrong. 

2.  Examples  of  "calling  evil  good,  and  good  evil"  (Psa.  x.  3;  MaL  ii.  17,  Hi.  15; 
Luke  xvi.  15 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  19).  Putting  bondage  to  sin  for  liberty,  and  counting 
Christian  freedom  to  be  servitude.  3.  Examples  of  "  putting  darkness  for  light, 
and  light  for  darkness."  The  traditions  of  men  for  doctrines  of  God.  Opposi- 
tions of  science,  falsely  so  called,  for  truths  of  Holy  Writ.  4.  Examples  of 
"  putting  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  bitter."  "  Pleasures  of  sin  "  counted 
sweet;  the  joy  of  the  Lord  despised.  (Prov.  ix.  17)  "Stolen  waters  {i.e.,  sins) 
are  sweet."  (Prov.  v.  4)  "  Her  end  is  bitter  as  wormwood."  (Prov.  xx.  17.) 
II.  Origin  of  the  practice.  1.  Satan  the  first  on  record  who  thus  acted.  (Gen. 
iii.  1-5.)  It  is  an  old  device.  2.  As  he  did,  so  do  his  children  and  dupes  (John 
viii.  44 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  13-15).  3.  Men  perverted  become  perverters,  "  deceiving 
and  being  deceived."  4.  The  practice  is  easy,  and  seems  to  be  a  source  of 
malicious  pleasure  to  those  who  so  do.  III.  Effects  of  the  practice.  1.  The 
practice  is,  to  a  mournful  extent,  successful,  because  of  our  weak  and  perverted 
fallen  nature.  2.  It  discredits  God's  words  and  ways.  3.  It  distresses  the 
righteous  (Ezek.  xiii.  22).  4.  It  deceives  the  young  and  unstable.  5.  It  destroys 
both  the  perverters  and  the  perverted.  IV.  Judgment  on  these  perverters. 
"  Woe  unto  them "  (Prov.  xvii.  15).  1.  By  these  perversions  the  perverters 
become  such  as  described  in  Eph.  iv.  18,  19;  1  Tim.  iv.  2.  2.  It  is  too  true  that 
men  may  come  at  length  to  say,  "  Evil,  be  thou  my  good."  3.  They  who  have 
done  the  works  of  the  devil  in  perverting  and  confusing  right  and  wrong,  will 
share  the  devil's  judgment.  V.  Preservation  from  perversion.  1.  How  to 
be  kept  from  sharing  with  such  perverters,  and  from  being  seduced  or  deceived 
by  them ;  most  important  to  know  this.  2.  See  the  example  of  Jesus  in  His 
temptation.  Prayer,  and  keeping  close  to  Holy  Scripture.  3.  Copy  His  ex- 
ample. 4.  Gospel  "  light,"  "  good,"  "  sweet,"  here  set  forth,  showing  the  way 
of  salvation  by  faith  in  Christ.  5.  Pray  that  the  Spirit  may  "  guide  you  into  all 
the  truth,"  and  "  give  you  a  right  judgment  in  all  things."  6.  Hereafter  good 
and  evil,  light  and  darkness,  sweet  and  bitter,  will  be  known,  seen,  and  tasted, 
without  the  confusion  and  perversion  which  now  prevail.  (Flavel  Cook,  B.A.) 
Sinful  nomenclature  : — Reproof  and  denunciation,  distasteful  as  they  ever  must 
be,  have  their  office.  The  Word  of  God  is  something  more  than  a  pleasant  song. 
It  is  sometimes  a  fire  to  scathe,  a  hammer  to  dash  in  pieces,  a  sword  to  divide 
the  soul  and  spirit,  the  joints  and  marrow ;  and  therefore  it  is  a  great  sin  to  try 
to  blunt  the  edge  of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  by  calling  evil  good  and  good  evil. 
I.  It  13  A  great  sin  to  disregard  or  even  to  underrate  in  the  least  degree  th« 
eternal  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong,  to  view  things  in  their  wrong  aspects 
and  to  call  things  by  their  wrong  names.  "  He  that  saith  to  the  wicked,  '  Thou 
art  righteous,' "  says  Solomon,  '  him  shall  the  people  curse."    And  Paul  tella 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  133 

us  there  are  some  things  that  ought  not  to  be  so  much  as  named  among  those 
who  live  holy  lives.  The  evil  word  is  a  long  step  beyond  the  evil  thought 
Speak  of  sin  in  its  true  terms  and  you  strip  it  of  its  seductiveness.  Call  a  vice 
by  its  real  name  and  you  rob  it  of  half  its  danger  by  exposing  its  grossness.  The 
very  guiltiest  of  sinners  is  he  who  paints  the  gates  of  hell  with  the  colours  of 
Paradise,  and  gives  names  of  clear  disparagement  and  dislike  to  scrupulous 
honour  and  stainless  purity.  II.  The  cause  of  this  sin  is  due  to  a  fading 
appreciation  of  moral  evil,  to  a  tampering  with  it,  and  to  a  destruction  of  that 
healthy  instinct  which  revolts  at  it.  This  is  illustrated  in  the  third  chapter  of 
Genesis.  Light  words  and  careless  thoughts  are  not  indifferent  things.  Character 
is  not  cut  in  marble ;  it  may  become  diseased  as  our  bodies  do.  Abhor  that  which 
is  evil,  cleave  to  that  which  is  good.  III.  The  punishmknt  of  this  sin  is  the 
failure  of  all  life,  the  waste,  the  loss,  the  shipwreck  of  the  human  soul.  The 
rose  is  a  glorious  flower,  but  it  withers  sometimes  and  produces  nothing  but 
mouldering  and  loathly  buds,  because  there  is  some  poison  in  the  sap  or  some 
canker  at  the  root.  Careers  that  might  have  been  prosperous  and  happy  are 
sometimes  cut  short,  blighted  with  disgrace,  the  conscience  seared,  the  distinction 
between  right  and  wrong  lost.  They  are  mortified  to  painlessness,  and  this  is 
death.  This  is  the  worst  woe  that  can  befall  those  who  miscall  things  which  God 
has  stamped  with  His  own  signet.  (Dean  Farrar,  D.D.)  The  sin  of  confounding 
good  and  evil : — I.  Consider  the  particular  species  of  crime  against  which  we 
have  the  warning  of  the  text  as  tt  relates  to  the  individual  who  is  guilty 
of  it.  1.  There  is  scarcely  one  of  us  who  does  not  think  himself  sufficiently 
religious ;  and  yet,  to  what  does  the  religion  of  many  a  man  amount  ?  2.  If 
we  can  be  successful  enough  to  persuade  men  to  believe  that  the  slight  notion 
which  they  have  of  religion  is  insufficient,  we  then  find  them  flying  to  another 
subterfuge  to  screen  them  from  its  duties,  by  affixing  the  name  of  evil  to  what 
we  pronounce  to  be  good,  and  calling  our  representation  of  religion  morose  and 
gloomy.  3.  Religion  being  once  rendered  so  slight  in  the  mind,  once  esteemed 
so  gloomy  and  unworthy  a  pursuit,  its  restraints  are  neglected,  its  principles 
evaded,  and  the  wavering  deceitfulness  of  men's  hearts  made  the  standard  of 
men's  actions.  4.  To  these  notions  of  indifference  concerning  religion,  we  may 
add  those  arising  from  misguided  zeal  in  it.  Divisions,  persecutions,  &c. 
II.  Consider  those  who  are  not  imposing  on  themselves  by  believing  things  to 
be  good,  which  are  really  evil,  but  who  wilfully  and  maliciously  endeavour 
to  destroy  a  true  belief  in  others,  by  false  representations  of  sin  and 
duty.  1.  How  artfully  and  speciously  vice  is  often  portrayed  in  those  numerous 
works  which  find  the  easiest  admission  to  the  closets  of  the  young!  Into  the 
character  of  the  frail  and  guilty  is  thrown  a  variety  of  qualities  of  seeming  liber- 
ality, honour,  and  the  like ;  the  reader,  with  an  ingenuous  tenderness,  without 
deliberation,  pities  and  forgives ;  and  begins  to  think  the  crime  no  indiscretion, 
or  at  least  no  crime  at  all !  2.  You  have  witnessed  the  effect  of  similar  principles 
conveyed,  not  in  books,  but  conversation.  3.  We  find  many  a  villain  pouring 
forth  his  artful  tale  of  constancy  and  honour,  calling  all  "  good  evil,  and  all  evu 
good,"  ridiculing  marriage  as  a  useless  human  ceremony,  decrying  religion  as 
an  idle  state-invention,  painting  human  nature,  its  passions  and  the  indulgence 
of  them,  in  every  glowing  colour,  till  he  has  broken  a  parent's  heart,  and 
brought  his  child  to  ruin  in  time  and  in  eternity  !  (0.  Mathews,  M.A.)  The 
perversion  of  right  and  wrong: — Nothing  tends  more  to  remove  the  just  distinc- 
tions of  virtue  and  vice,  or  to  blend  the  nature  of  good  and  evil,  than  the  giving 
plausible  and  specious  names  to  what  are  really  great  and  substantial  crimes. 
1.  The  boldest  attacks  of  infidelity  are  often  couched  under  the  plausible  name 
of  "  a  spirit  of  free  inquiry."  2.  An  indifference  to  all  religious  worship  is  often 
concealed  under  the  specious  term  of  "a  truly  religious  spirit  of  universal  toleration." 
3.  The  duel  is  converted  into  an  "honourable  deed."  4.  Shameless  and  lawless 
adultery  is  denominated  gallantry.  5.  Is  not  a  certain  profusion  and  expense, 
which  causes  a  breach  of  common  justice  in  squandering  what  men  are  not  able 
to  pay,  often  described  as  an  enlarged  and  generous  mode  of  living  ?  6.  If  the 
libertine  who  indulges  in  every  sensual  appetite  without  control,  happen  to 
possess  a  certain  share  of  vivacity  and  good  humour,  or  be  a  man  of  boundless 
profusion  and  indiscriminate  liberality,  his  vices  are  swallowed  up  in  the  sup- 
posed good  qualities  of  his  heart;  and  the  worst  title  perhaps  that  is  bestowed 
on  his  worst  actions,  is  that  of  a  thoughtless  ease  and  good-nature,  which  is  too 
apt  to  be  led  astray  by  the  example  and  vices  of  others.     (C.  Moore,  M.A.) 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAr.  r. 

Calling  evil  good,  and  good  evil : — The  real  horror  of  this  passage  consists  in  tne 
fact  that  we  have  here  one  of  the  greatest  sins  that  can  be  conceived,  and,  at  the 
came  time,  one  of  the  most  common.  To  call  evil  good  is  practical  atheism. 
To  call  good  evil  is  practical  blasphemy.  The  words  of  the  passage  supply  a 
certain  vision  of  the  order  of  the  process.  1.  To  "  call  evil  good  is  the  sin 
especially  of  the  young  and  careless — the  giddy  and  wanton  in  their  way.  2.  The 
calling  good  evil  is  the  sin  especially  of  the  earnest  and  professedlv  religious — 
whether  or  not  their  religion  be  of  the  kind  called  Christian.  This  was  the  great 
crime  of  the  Pharisees  against  Christ.  This  has  been  the  crime  of  all  the  per- 
secutors of  the  Church  of  Christ  from  the  Roman  emperors  to  the  Romish  priests. 
Also,  of  many  theologians  of  all  sides  in  controversy;  and  of  politicians. 
3.  Before  our  eyes  the  evil  and  the  good  are  mingled,  in  characters  and  acts  and 
institutions,  till  it  is  often  beyond  our  power  to  extricate.  And  what  are  we 
to  do  ?  Let  us  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  confessing  we  are  helpless  often 
in  the  matter,  remembering  also  this,  that  although  it  be  in  ignorance,  our  error 
may  be  great,  like  the  crucifying  of  Christ.  Let  the  Church  be  improved  from 
within,  seeking  rather  the  resources  of  the  heavenly  grace  to  replenish  her  heart 
with  charity — its  native  and  original  virtue.  Let  her  turn  from  all  the  tumult 
without  to  Him  who  is  "  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her."  Let  her  learn  her  liber- 
ality at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  For  evil  rolls  into  the  light  of  Christ  and  is  detected 
and  abhorred.  The  good  that  is  in  evil  is  caught  by  that  light  and  gladly  hailed. 
The  love  of  Christ  is  the  best  of  teaching  here.  (J.  Cunningham,  M.A.)  The 
danger  of  depraving  the  moral  sense  : — 1.  The  current  conventional  standard  of 
flociety  around  them  is  even  in  this  Christian  land  the  main  principle  by  which 
the  great  mass  of  the  better  sort  of  people  regulate  their  conduct.  For  one  who 
refers  truly  to  the  law  of  God,  hundreds  may  be  found  who  act  upon  the  common 
maxims  of  society.  This,  therefore,  it  becomes  us  especially  to  bear  in  mind  : 
never  can  we  live  for  ourselves  alone.  2.  It  is  one  especial  part  of  their  punish- 
ment who  are  thus  engaged  in  lowering  the  moral  standard  of  society  around 
them,  that  they  must  be,  in  a  still  greater  measure,  injuring  themselves.  How 
"  shall  a  man  touch  pitch  and  not  be  denied  "  ?  We  have  no  other  way  of 
transmitting  moral  evil  than  by  contagion ;  we  must,  in  the  first  place,  be  our- 
selves the  victims  of  that  which  we  convey  to  others.  (1)  There  is  within  each 
of  us  a  power  or  faculty  by  which  we  judge  of  good  or  evil,  and  which  we  call 
conscience  or  the  moral  sense.  Although  we  cannot  by  a  direct  act  of  the  reason 
alter,  or  at  our  immediate  volition,  silence,  the  decision  and  the  voice  of  moral 
consciousness,  we  may,  by  a  course  of  actions,  altogether  debase,  and  even  for 
the  time  extinguish  it.  (2)  It  is  of  great  moment  to  observe  how  from  this  it 
follows  that  there  is  a  necessary  tendency  in  any  one  allowed  form  of  evil  to 
prepare  the  soil  for  receiving  others.  (3)  After  vicious  practice,  there  is  nothing  of 
which  they  who  would  preserve  their  moral  sense  unclouded  should  more  cautiously 
beware,  than  a  needless  acquaintance  with  sin.  The  first  and  evident  form  in 
which  tins  danger  meets  us  is  from  the  company  of  evil  men.  There  are  some 
remarkable  provisions  by  which  the  Christian's  power  of  discrimination  can  be 
formed,  without  encouraging  an  evil  curiosity  or  courting  any  familiarity  with 
vice.  For,  first,  it  will  grow  gradually  with  the  growth  of  our  self-knowledge. 
Alas !  we  bear  evil  always  with  us ;  and  if  we  search  ourselves  we  must  become 
acquainted  with  it.  Yet  even  here  we  need  a  word  of  caution,  for  our  very  self- 
inspection  may  become  the  means  of  self-defilement.  At  God's  call  we  may 
walk  unharmed  even  in  the  fire  of  present  sin.  And  here,  again,  we  may  trace 
the  provision  God  has  made  for  this  security  in  the  nature  He  has  given  us.  For 
the  feelings  of  grief  and  shame  which  are  naturally  roused  by  the  first  sight 
of  sin,  and  which  of  themselves  will  die  away  with  each  repetition,  if,  from 
curiosity  or  the  love  of  excitement,  we  call  them  into  fruitless  exercise,  these, 
when  they  lead  us  to  strive  against  the  evil  which  we  see,  grow  into  a  living  habit 
of  resisting  sin  ;  and  this  habit  keeps  the  conscience  quick  and  tender,  and, 
through  the  blessing  of  God's  grace,  purifies  and  strengthens  the  power  of  moral 
judgment  beyond  all  other  means  of  wholesome  exercise.  Thus  it  is  that  God'a 
especial  witnesses  have  borne,  amidst  an  evil  generation,  the  burden  of  His  holiness 
and  truth.  (Bishop  8.  Wilier force,  D.D.)  A  shameful  doctrine: — Bellarmine, 
in  his  4th  Book  and  fifth  chapter,  De  Pontifice  Romano,  has  this  monstrous 
passage :  That  if  the  Pope  should  through  error  or  mistake  command  vices  and 
prohibit  virtues,  the  Church  would  be  bound  in  conscience  to  believe  vice  to  be 
good  and  virtue  evil.     (R.  South,  D.D.)        Straining  at  a  gnat  and  swallowing 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  135 

a  camel  : — A  Neapolitan  shepherd  came  in  anguish  to  his  priest,  saying,  "  Father, 
have  mercy  on  a  miserable  sinner.  It  is  the  holy  season  of  Lent ;  and  while 
I  was  busy  at  work,  some  whey  spirting  from  the  cheese-press  flew  into  my  mouth, 
and, — wretched  man ! — I  swallowed  it.  Free  my  distressed  conscience  from 
its  agonies  by  absolving  me  from  my  guilt !  "  "  Have  you  no  other  sins  to 
confess  ?  "  said  his  spiritual  guide.  "  No ;  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  committed 
any  other."  "  There  are,"  said  the  priest,  "  many  robberies  and  murders  from 
time  to  time  committed  on  your  mountains,  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  that 
you  are  one  of  the  persons  concerned  in  them."  "  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  I  am, 
but  these  are  never  accounted  as  a  crime ;  it  is  a  thing  practised  by  us  all,  and 
there  needs  no  confession  on  that  account."  (K.  Arvine.)  Defective  moral 
sense  : — It  is  no  exaggeration  to  assert  that  Napoleon  I. — strangely  called  the 
Great — had  no  moral  sense.  Carlyle  tells  the  story  of  a  German  emperor  who, 
when  corrected  for  a  mistake  he  made  in  Latin,  replied,  "  I  am  King  of  the 
Romans,  and  above  grammar  !  "  Napoleon's  arrogance  was  infinitely  greater. 
He  thought  himself  above  morality,  and  really  seems  to  have  believed  that  he 
had  a  perfect  right  to  commit  any  crime,  political  or  personal,  that  would  advance 
his  interests  by  an  iota :  and,  in  truth,  he  did  commit  so  many  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  recount  them.  (H.  O.  Machey.)  Little  evils  making  way  for 
greater : — The  carpenter's  gimblet  makes  but  a  small  hole,  but  it  enables  him 
to  drive  a  great  nail.  May  we  not  here  see  a  representation  of  those  minor 
departures  from  the  truth  which  prepare  the  minds  of  men  for  grievous  errors, 
and  of  those  thoughts  of  sin  which  open  a  way  for  the  worst  of  crimes  t  Beware, 
then,  of  Satan's  gimblet.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  21.  Woe  unto  them  that  are  wise  In  their  own  eyes. — A  false  estimate 
of  human  wisdom : — The  sin  reproved  (as  Calvin  well  observes)  is  not  mere 
frivolous  self-conceit,  but  that  delusive  estimate  of  human  wisdom  which  may 
co-exist  with  modesty  of  manners  and  a  high  degree  of  real  intellectual  merit, 
but  which  must  be  abjured,  not  only  on  account  of  its  effects,  but  also  as  involv- 
ing the  worst  form  of  pride.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Wisdom  and  prudence:  true 
and  false: — 1.  Persons  are  accounted  wise  and  prudent  who  keep  in  view  the  most 
excellent  designs,  who  govern  their  passions  with  moderation,  who  conduct  their 
affairs  with  discretion,  and  proportion  their  application  to  their  several  interests 
according  to  the  dictates  of  well-informed  minds,  and  the  maxims  of  sound  wisdom. 
They  belong  to  this  description  who  are  possessed  of  a  sound  judgment,  a  quick 
penetration  and  extensive  knowledge,  and  improve  these  accomplishments  for 
attaining  the  most  valuable  purposes.  The  wisdom  and  prudence  of  which  such 
persons  are  possessed  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no 
variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning.  According  to  the  apostle  James'  descrip- 
tion, it  is  pure,  free  from  the  corruptions  of  sin  and  error ;  it  is  peaceable,  disposing 
those  who  act  under  its  influence  to  live  in  harmony  and  concord  ;  it  is  gentle, 
bearing  with  meekness  the  infirmities  and  injuries  of  others ;  it  is  easy  to  be 
entreated  by  the  persuasion  of  sound  reason  and  good  counsel ;  it  is  full  of  mercy 
toward  the  offending  and  the  afflicted ;  it  is  without  partiality  in  its  opera- 
tions, and  without  hypocrisy  and  dissimulation,  being  sincere  in  all  its  exertions. 
2.  Persons  are  said  in  Scripture  to  have  those  qualifications  in  their  own  eyes 
or  sight,  which  they  vainly  reckon  they  have  acquired.  People  are  said  to  be  wise 
or  prudent  in  their  own  sight  who  flatter  themselves  that  these  characters  indeed 
belong  to  them,  until  the  hatefulness  of  their  iniquity  is  discovered.  Though  they 
know  but  little,  they  were  never  sensible  of  their  ignorance  ;  though,  in  the  view 
of  God,  and  men  of  understanding,  they  are  foolish,  they  never  were  convinced 
of  their  folly.  Elated  with  their  supposed  excellence  on  every  occasion,  and  even 
when  there  is  no  occasion,  they  proclaim  their  own  praises,  and  applaud  their 
own  performance.  (B.  Maccvlloch. )  Self-conceit  : — I.  Its  signs.  Dogmatism  ; 
contempt  of  others  ;  scepticism.  II.  Its  causes.  Ignorance  ;  vanity.  III.  Its 
polly.  It  makes  a  man  ridiculous ;  leads  him  into  error.  IV.  Its  offensive- 
nbss  to  God — in  spirit ;  principle ;  action.  V.  Its  certain  humiliation. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Prayer  for  Divine  enlightenment: — In  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson's 
diary  the  following  prayer  was  found,  offered  in  view  of  his  becoming  a  politician  : 
"  Enlighten  my  understanding  with  the  knowledge  of  right,  and  govern  my  will 
by  Thy  laws,  that  no  deceit  may  mislead  me,  nor  temptation  corrupt  me ;  that 
I  may  always  endeavour  to  do  good,  and  hinder  evil." 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

Vers.  22,  23.  Woe  unto  them  that  are  mighty  to  drink  wine  .  .  .  which  justify 
the  wicked  for  reward. — Wine-loving  lawyers  and  judges  : — Among  the  men  whom 
Isaiah  denounces  as  the  corrupters  and  destroyers  of  the  society  of  which  they  are  the 
leaders,  are  the  unjust  lawyers  and  judges  :  he  mentions  as  characteristic  of  them, 
that  they  are  heroes  at  drinking,  and  spice  their  wine  to  make  it  stronger  ;  by 
which,  perhaps,  we  are  to  understand,  not  that  their  heads  and  senses  were  over- 
come with  wine  like  the  drunkards  spoken  of  above,  but  that  the  effect  on  their 
hearts  and  consciences  was  such  as  to  harden  them  in  their  criminal  perversion 
of  the  law.  Perhaps  the  passage  might  be  illustrated  by  instances  of  the  pro- 
fessional character  of  hard-drinking  but  strong-headed  judges  of  other  time3. 
(Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Aromatites : — The  Romans  called  this  spiced  wine 
"  Aromatites."  (Ibid.)  Drunkenness : — The  woe  denounced  in  the  text 
against  those  notorious  for  drunkenness  is  made  up  of  the  unavoidable  effects  it 
produces,  and  these  effects  are  too  dear  a  price  to  be  paid  by  a  reasonable  creature 
for  all  the  sensual  pleasures  of  this  life,  did  they  even  accompany  this  single  sin. 

1.  The  drunkard's  excuses.  1.  His  first  excuse  is  charged  to  the  account  of 
good  fellowship.  But  surely,  friendship  can  never  be  founded  on  anything  else 
than  an  amiable  and  affectionate  disposition,  a  likeness  of  temper,  and  true 
honesty  of  heart  on  both  sides.  Will  strong  drink  bestow  these  on  us  ?  Can 
mutual  love  and  confidence  be  built  on  vice  ?  And  how  doth  drunkenness  pro- 
mote the  gaiety  of  conversation  ?  Does  it  not  rather  destroy  all  conversation, 
for  what  is  conversation,  but  the  communication  of  rational  and  agreeable  thoughts  T 

2.  The  next  excuse  for  drinking  to  excess  is,  that  it  stupifies  the  cares  and  troubles 
of  the  drunkard,  which  arise  from  three  different  quarters, — his  ill  state  of  health, 
the  unfortunate  posture  of  his  worldly  affairs,  or  the  stings  of  his  guilty  conscience. 

3.  The  drunkard  hath  other  more  common  and  accidental  excuses  for  his  vice. 
He  .says  he  is  so  exposed  to  company  and  business,  that  it  is  impossible  for  him  to 
avoid  drinking  to  excess.  Then,  he  is  of  so  easy  and  flexible  a  temper,  that  he 
cannot  resist  the  importunities  of  his  friends,  as  he  calls  them.  Thus,  he  is  for 
softening  his  vice  into  a  sort  of  virtue,  and  calling  that  mere  good-nature,  which 
his  creditor  calls  villainy,  and  his  family  cruelty.  II.  The  woe  denounced  by 
Almighty  God  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  miserable  effects,  as  well  temporal  as 
spiritual,  of  his  favourite  vice.  1.  Poverty.  2.  Universal  contempt.  3.  Ill 
health  and  an  untimely  death.  4.  These  evils  are  as  nothing  compared  to  the 
spiritual  evils  that  spring  from  drunkenness.  In  destroying  his  health  he  shortens 
his  life,  and  so  far  is  guilty  of  self-murder.  In  impairing  his  reason  he  makes  his 
life  useless  and  burdensome  to  the  world.  (J.  Skelton.)  Mighty  to  drink  wine: 
— Strength  is  a  great  blessing,  but  if  it  is  used  in  the  service  of  sin  it  becomes  a 
curse.  I.  The  great  drinkers  of  that  day  were  just  the  same  sort  of  men  as 
they  are  now  here  in  our  country.  1.  They  are  grasping  and  selfish  (ver.  8). 
They  are  often  willing  to  take  bribes  if  they  are  magistrates  (ver.  23),  and  to  condemn 
the  innocent  rather  than  lose  their  money  or  credit.  2.  They  are  dull  of  under- 
standing of  the  things  of  God  (ver.  12).     3.  They  are  greedy  of  sin.     Drink  makes 

•  men  pull  destruction  upon  themselves  (ver.  18).  4.  They  are  liars  (ver.  20).  It 
would  be  difficult  to  find  one  lover  of  drink  who  was  truthful.  However  kind  and 
generous  a  sot  may  be,  his  word  can  never  be  depended  upon.  "  Deceiving  and 
being  deceived"  is  his  exact  portrait.  6.  Clever  in  their  own  eyes  (ver.  21). 
II.  The  woes  the  prophet  declares  are  sure  to  come  on  these  men  mighty  to  drink 
wine.  1.  Poverty  (vers.  9,  10).  The  great  and  beautiful  houses  will  soon  be 
vacant,  and  the  neglected  fields  will  soon  be  like  the  sluggard's  garden.  More 
than  half  the  empty  houses  and  the  farms  that  are  given  up  in  this  country  repre- 
sent the  doings  of  drink.  2.  Degradation  (ver.  13).  Captivity  to  a  Jew  meant 
more  than  poverty — loss  of  honour,  of  position,  of  hope,  grinding  toil,  pollution, 
horrid  slavery.  What  can  degrade  body  and  mind  like  drink?  (ver.  15.) 
3.  Death  (ver.  14).  There  is  a  sin  unto  death.  More  than  60,000  drunkards 
go  down  to  their  dishonoured  graves  every  year  in  Britain.  Think  of  death 
and  hell  "  gaping  "  to  take  in  these  hosts  of  slain.  (Josiah  Mee.)  The  bane 
and  antidote  (with  Hab.  ii.  15) : — I.  The  evil.  1.  As  affecting  the  individual. 
It  is  no  trivial  result  to  demoralise  the  human  spirit.  2.  As  it  ramifies  itself 
throughout  the  framework  of  society.  (1)  As  respects  the  family.  (2)  The 
wider  circle  of  the  general  community.  II.  The  cure.  1.  Total  abstinence. 
2.  Legislative  prohibition.  (J.  Guthrie,  M.A.)  Tlie  unworthy  glorying  of  the 
intemperate : — They  gloried  in  it  as  a  great  accomplishment,  that  they  were  able 
to  bear  a  great  deal  of  strong  liquor,  without  being  overcome  by  it.     Let  drunkards 


chap,  v.]  ISAIAH.  137 

know  from  this  Scripture  that — 1.  They  ungratefully  abuse  their  bodily  strength, 
which  God  hath  given  them  for  good  purposes,  and  by  degrees  cannot  but  weaken 
it.  2.  It  will  not  excuse  them  from  the  guilt  of  drunkenness  that  they  can  drink 
hard,  and  yet  keep  their  feet.  3.  Those  that  boast  of  their  drinking  down  others 
glory  in  their  shame.  4.  How  light  soever  men  make  of  their  drunkenness,  it  is 
a  sin  which  will  certainly  lay  them  open  to  the  wrath  and  curse  of  God.  ( M .  Henry.) 
Intemperance  a  fine  art  : — Cyrus,  writing  the  Lacedaemonians  for  assistance,  spoke 
in  very  high  terms  of  himself,  telling  them  he  had  a  greater  and  more  princely 
heart  than  his  brother  ;  that  he  was  the  better  philosopher,  being  instructed 
in  the  doctrines  of  the  Magi,  and  that  he  could  drink  and  bear  more  wine  than  his 
brother.  (Plutarch's  Artaxerxes.)  Mighty  to  drink  wine: — When  Bonosus  the 
drunken  Roman  had  hanged  himself,  it  went  for  a  byword  that  a  tun  or  tankard 
hung  there  and  not  a  man.  And  when  one  was  commended  to  King  Alphonsus 
for  a  great  drinker,  and  able  to  bear  it,  he  answered  that  that  was  a  good  praise 
in  a  sponge  but  not  in  a  prince.  (J.  Trapp.)  Darius,  King  of  Persia,  caused 
it  to  be  engraved  upon  his  tomb,  "  I  could  drink  much  wine,  and  bear  it  bravely." 
Perhaps  he  was  proud  of  it,  but  it  was  his  shame.  (J.  Mee.)  Intemperance 
destroys  character  : — The  title  of  "  Rois  faineants  " — "  do-nothing  kings  " — 
expresses  very  aptly  the  character  of  the  last  descendants  of  the  house  of  Clovis. 
At  the  moment  when  circumstances  demanded  from  the  occupants  of  the  Frankish 
throne  a  more  than  ordinary  share  of  talent  and  force  of  character,  they  lapsed 
into  a  state  of  imbecility  and  insignificance,  both  bodily  and  mental.  Intem- 
perance and  debauchery  entailed  on  them  premature  decrepitude ;  few  attained 
the  mature  age  of  manhood ;  they  rarely  appeared  in  public,  except  at  the  annual 
pageant  of  the  Champ  de  Mars.  (Student's  France.)  A  Japanese  proverb  : — 
The  Japanese  have  a  true  proverb  which  describes  millions  of  sad  cases  :  "  A  man 
took  a  drink,  then  the  drink  took  a  drink,  then  the  drink  took  the  man."  Effects 
of  wine-drinking  : — Whilst  the  drunkard  swallows  wine,  wine  swallows  him.  God 
disregards  him,  angels  despise  him;  men  deride  him,  virtue  declines  him,  the 
devil  destroys  him.     (Augustine.) 

Vers.  24-30.  Therefore  as  the  Are  devoureth  the  stubble. — Sin  brings  judg- 
ment in  its  train  : — Let  not  those  expect  to  live  easily  that  live  thus  wickedly, 
for  the  righteous  God  will  take  vengeance.  Observe — I.  How  complete  this 
ruin  will  be,  and  how  necessarily  and  unavoidably  it  will  follow  upon  their  sins. 
The  prophet  had  compared  this  people  to  a  vine  (ver.  7),  well  fixed  and  which 
it  was  hoped  would  be  flourishing  and  fruitful.  But  the  grace  of  God  towards 
it  was  received  in  vain,  and  then  the  root  became  rottenness,  being  dried  up 
from  beneath,  and  the  blossom  would  of  course  blow  off  as  dust,  as  a  light  and 
worthless  thing  (Job  xviii.  16).  Sin  weakens  the  strength,  the  root  of  a  people, 
so  that  they  are  easily  rooted  up ;  it  defaceth  the  beauty,  the  blossoms  of  a 
people,  and  takes  away  the  hopes  of  fruit.  Sinners  make  themselves  as  stubble 
and  chaff,  combustible  matter,  proper  fuel  to  the  fire  of  God's  wrath.  II.  How 
just  the  ruin  will  be.  "  Because  they  have  cast  away  the  law,"  &c.  God  doth 
not  reject  men  for  every  transgression  of  His  law  and  word,  but  when  His  word 
is  despised  and  His  law  cast  away,  what  can  they  expect  but  that  God  should 
utterly  abandon  them  T  III.  Whence  this  ruin  should  come  (ver.  25).  It 
is  destruction  from  the  Almighty.  1.  The  justice  of  God  appoints  it.  2.  The 
power  of  God  effects  it.  "  He  hath  stretched  forth  His  hand  against  them." 
IV.  The  consequences  and  continuance  of  this  ruin.  When  God  comes 
forth  in  wrath  against  a  people,  "  the  hills  tremble  " ;  fear  seizeth  even  their 
great  men,  that  are  strong  and  high ;  the  earth  shakes  under  men,  and  is  ready 
to  sink ;  and  as  this  feels  dreadful  (what  doth  more  so  than  an  earthquake  ?) 
bo  what  sight  can  be  more  frightful  than  the  carcases  of  men  torn  with  dogs,  or 
thrown  "  as  dung  "  (margin)  in  the  midst  of  the  streets "  T  This  intimates 
that  great  multitudes  should  be  slain,  not  only  soldiers  in  the  field  of  battle,  but 
the  inhabitants  of  their  cities  put  to  the  sword  in  cold  blood,  and  that  the  sur- 
vivors should  neither  have  hands  nor  hearts  to  bury  them.  V.  The  instruments 
that  should  be  employed  in  bringing  this  ruin  upon  them.  It  should  be  done 
by  the  incursions  of  a  foreign  enemy.  When  God  designs  the  ruin  of  a  provoking 
people — 1.  He  can  send  a  great  way  off  for  instruments  to  be  employed  in  it. 
'  Prom  the  end  of  the  earth  "  (ver.  26).  If  God  set  up  His  standard,  He  can 
incline  men's  hearts  to  enlist  themselves  under  it,  though,  perhaps,  themselves 
know  not  why  or  wherefore.    2.  He  can  make  them  come  into  the  service  with 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

incredible  expedition.  "With  speed  swiftly"  (ver.  26).  Those  that  defy  God's 
judgments  will  be  ashamed  of  their  insolence  when  it  is  too  late ;  they  scornfully 
said  (ver.  19),  "  Let  Him  make  speed,  let  Him  hasten  His  work,"  and  they  shall 
find  to  their  terror  and  confusion  that  so  He  will.  3.  He  can  carry  them  on  in 
the  service  with  amazing  forwardness  and  fury  (vers.  27-30).  (1)  Though 
their  marches  be  very  long,  yet  "  none  among  them  shall  be  weary  "  ;  so  desirous 
shall  they  be  to  engage  that  they  shall  forget  their  weariness  and  make  no  com- 
plaints of  it.  (2)  Though  the  way  be  rough,  and,  perhaps,  embarrassed  by  the 
usual  policies  of  war,  yet  "  none  among  them  shall  stumble,"  but  all  the  difficulties 
in  their  way  shall  easily  be  got  over.  (3)  Though  they  are  forced  to  keep  constant 
watch,  yet  "  none  shall  slumber  or  sleep  "  ;  so  intent  shall  they  be  upon  then- 
work  in  prospect  of  having  the  plunder  of  the  city  for  their  pains.  (4)  They 
shall  not  desire  any  rest  or  relaxation ;  they  shall  not  put  off  their  clothes,  not 
"  loose  the  girdle  of  their  loins,"  but  shall  always  have  their  belts  on  and  swords 
by  their  sides.  (5)  They  shall  not  meet  with  the  least  hindrance  to  retard  their 
march,  or  oblige  them  to  halt ;  not  a  "  latchet  of  their  shoes  shall  be  broken," 
which  they  must  stay  to  mend,  as  Josh.  ix.  13.  (6)  Their  arms  and  ammuni- 
tion should  all  be  fixed  and  in  good  posture  (ver.  28).  (7)  Their  horses  and 
chariots  of  war  shall  all  be  fit  for  service  (ver.  28).  (8)  All  the  soldiers  bold  and 
daring ;  "  their  roaring,"  or  shouting  before  a  battle,  "  shall  be  like  a  lion," 
who  with  his  roaring  animates  himself  and  terrifies  all  about  him.  (9)  There 
shall  not  be  the  least  prospect  of  relief  or  succour.  Let  the  distressed  look  which 
way  they  will,  everything  appears  dismal ;  for  if  God  frown  upon  us  how  can 
any  creature  smile  ?  (M.  Henry.)  Divine  judgments  as  fire  and  flame: — They 
cannot  be  resisted,  their  direction  cannot  be  altered,  their  force  abated,  nor  can 
the  flame  be  extinguished  by  human  efforts.  As  threatened  calamities  cannot  be 
averted,  so  inflicted  judgments  cannot  be  removed,  unless  by  true  repentance 
and  earnest  supplication  to  the  supreme  Disposer  of  all  events.  (R.  Macculloch.) 
Root  and  blossom : — The  posterity  of  Israel  are  here  compared  to  a  fruit-bearing 
tree,  whose  root  gives  it  strength  and  stability,  conveys  to  it  nourishment,  and 
preserves  it  firm  amidst  the  storms  to  which  it  may  be  exposed.  By  their  root 
may  be  meant  everything  whereby  they  thought  to  secure  and  establish  them- 
selves, such  as  their  secret  counsels,  their  deep-laid  designs,  their  strength  and 
riches,  their  friends  and  connections,  from  all  which  they  derived  support,  and 
expected  to  keep  their  station.  Viewing  them  in  their  social  capacity,  by  their 
root  we  may  understand  parents,  heads  of  families,  judges,  governors  and  princes, 
who  give  stability  and  support  to  the  state  and  preserve  it  in  a  flourishing  condition. 
.  .  .  The  blossoms  denote  the  beautiful  promising  appearances  among  that 
people,  which  seemed  to  presage  plenty  of  fruit ;  such  as  their  religion,  their 
children,  their  magnificence  and  influence  as  a  nation ;  in  short,  everything 
which  constituted  their  excellence,  and  displayed  their  glory  was  to  be  consumed. 
(Ibid.)  Universal  judgment : — The  judgment  here  foretold  was  to  prove 
universal ;  for  what  remains  of  a  tree  when  its  roots  and  branches  are  destroyed  ? 
(Ibid.)  Sin  and  judgment : — Sin  doth  as  naturally  draw  and  suck  judgments 
to  it  as  the  loadstone  doth  iron,  as  dry  stubble  and  light  chaff  doth  fire.  (J.  Trapp. ) 
The  "  law  "  and  the  "  word  "  : — The  "  law  "  of  Jehovah  was  given  by  Moses 
and  embodied  in  institutions  and  a  code;  the  "word"  was  that  exposition  of 
the  meaning  and  life  of  these  which  the  prophets  were,  from  time  to  time,  declaring 
in  the  ears  of  the  people.  The  nation  had  cast  away  this  law  and  despised  this 
word.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Withered  roots  : — When  all  heart  and  morality 
are  gone  from  a  nation,  its  roots  below  ground  are  rotten,  and  its  flourishing 
appearance  is  ready  to  turn  to  dust.  There  is  no  substance  in  such  a  people, 
nothing  which  can  stand  calamity  of  any  kind.  It  will  sweep  them  away  as  the 
fire  licks  up  the  stubble  which  men  burn  when  the  crop  of  corn  or  hay  has  been 

?athered  in.     (Ibid.)         Unfruitfulness :  cause  and  effect: — The  sin  of  unfruit- 
ulness  is  punished  with  the  plague  of  unfruitfulness.     (M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  25-30.  Therefore  is  the  anger  of  the  Lord  kindled  against  His  people. — 
The  prophecy  explained  : — Jehovah  is  about  to  bring  foreign  armies  as  the  instru- 
ments of  His  judgment ;  the  vision  of  the  worst  of  human  calamities — the  invasion 
of  a  rich,  civilised,  luxurious  nation  by  overwhelming  hordes  of  barbarians — 
rises  before  the  prophet :  he  speaks  of  them  as  present,  and  his  words  have  a 
terrible  force  to  him  who  reads  them  now,  while  he  thinks  of  their  fearful  import 
then.     Jehovah  has  set  up  a  standard  to  which  He  is  gathering  the  nations  under 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  139 

the  Assyrian  rule,  and  the  prophet  sees  them  steadily  though  swiftly  coming 
on  in  warlike  array — bowmen,  horses  and  chariots :  they  rush  to  battle  with  the 
roar  of  lions,  they  seize  and  hold  down  their  prisoners  and  their  booty  with  the 
growl  which  marks  the  lion's  refusal  to  give  up  his  prey  ;  they  come  on  like  the 
sea  in  its  rage  ;  and  when  the  helpless  inhabitant  of  Judah  turns  from  this  rising 
tide  to  the  land — his  own  land — he  sees  only  the  darkness  of  woe ;  and  when 
he  turns  again  from  the  earth  to  look  upward  he  sees  only  the  thick  clouds  gather- 
ing over  the  heavens  above  him.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Prophecy  perpetu- 
ally fulfilled  : — This  is  such  a  picture  of  "  the  life  of  things  "  that  it  is  equally  the 
description  of  the  same  judgment  of  God  in  whatever  age  or  to  whatever  nation 
occurring.  In  successive  ages  it  told  the  Jew  of  the  Assyrian,  the  Babylonian, 
the  Greek  and  the  Roman ;  to  the  subject  of  the  Roman  Empire  it  spoke  no  less 
clearly  of  the  Goth  and  the  Vandal ;  the  British  monk  must  have  recalled  it  in 
the  days  when  Gildas  learnt  its  truth  from  the  Dane  and  the  Norman ;  and  the 
Spaniard  from  the  Mohammedan ;  the  Byzantine  from  Timour  "  the  incarnate 
wrath  of  God  "  ;  the  continental  nations  from  the  revolutionary  armies  and 
Napoleon  ;  and,  in  our  own  day,  the  people  of  France  from  the  Germans.  (Ibid.) 
God's  anger  and  its  manifestation : — I.  In  God's  infinite  nature  there  is  the 
quality  OF  anger.  It  is  not  a  stormy  passi<  n,  like  wrath  in  sinful  man,  but  the 
settled,  intense,  burning  antagonism  to  moral  evil  which  must  necessarily  exist 
in  one  who  is  infinitely  perfect.  The  man  who  most  nearly  resembles  God  will 
be  "  angry  and  sin  not."  II.  God's  anger  may  be  kindled  by  the  spirit 
and  conduct  of  His  people.  "  Therefore  is  the  anger  of  the  Lord  kindled 
against  His  people."  Guilt  is  in  proportion  to  the  light  and  privilege  abused. 
III.  God's  anger  may  manifest  itself  in  actual  and  fearful  punishment. 
It  is  an  active  antagonism  to  moral  evil.  "  He  hath  stretched  forth  Hia 
hand  against  them,"  &c.  The  hand  of  God  is  the  symbol  of  His  mighty  power. 
"  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall,"  &c.  (H.  M.  Booth.)  Hills  trembling  (ver.  25) : — ■ 
The  words  seem  to  allude  to  the  tremor  occasioned  by  the  stroke  of  the  workman's 
hammer  upon  some  hard  body.  (B.  Macculloch.)  Horses'  hoofs  as  flint  (ver. 
28) : — Therefore  he  will  not  shrink  from  riding  them  on  the  rocky  soil  of  Palestine, 
which  was  extremely  unfavourable  to  the  use  of  horses  (Amos  vi.  12).  Similar 
allusions  are  frequent  in  ancient  literature,  the  shoeing  of  horses  being  unknown 
in  antiquity.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  A  darkened  heaven  (ver.  30): — It 
is  our  wisdom,  by  keeping  a  good  conscience,  to  keep  all  clear  between  us  and 
heaven,  that  we  may  have  light  from  above,  when  clouds  and  darkness  are  round 
about  us.     (M.  Henry.) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Vers.  1-13.  In  the  year  that  King  Uzziah  died  I  saw  also  the  Lord. — 
The  story  of  the  prophet's  call — why  inserted  here  : — Why  the  narrative  of  the 
prophet's  call  was  not,  as  in  the  cases  of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  allowed  to  occupy 
the  first  place  in  the  book,  is  a  question  which  cannot  be  certainly  answered. 
One  conjecture  is  that  chaps,  i.-v.  were  placed  first  for  the  purpose  of  preparing 
the  reader  of  the  book  for  the  severity  of  tone  which  marks  the  end  of  chap,  vi., 
and  of  acquainting  him  with  the  condition  of  things  in  Judah  which  led  to  such 
a  tone  being  adopted.  Or,  again,  it  is  possible  that  chap.  vi.  may  have  been 
placed  so  as  to  follow  chaps,  i.-v.,  because,  though  describing  what  occurred 
earlier,  it  may  not  have  been  actually  committed  to  writing  till  afterwards — 
perhaps  as  an  introduction  to  chaps,  vii.  1-ix.  7.  (Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.) 
Why  did  Isaiah  publish  this  account  of  his  call  ? — Why  was  it  needful  to  publish 
a  private  transaction  between  God  and  Isaiah  ?  The  only  reason  we  can  conceive 
of  is  that  the  prophet  needed  to  give  a  justification  of  his  public  assumption  of 
prophetic  work.  And  that  implies  in  the  community  a  suspicion  of  prophetic 
men,  and  in  the  young  prophet's  mind  struggles  and  hesitation  such  as  we  can 
easily  conceive.  This  picture  of  his  call  he  holds  up  half  before  himself,  as  the 
answer  to  all  the  timid  fears  of  his  own  heart,  and  half  before  his  countrymen, 
as  his  reply  to  all  the  objections  they  might  raise  against  his  prophetic  commission. 
This  is  strongly  confirmed  when  we  proceed  to  look  at  the  message  which  the 
prophet  is  sent  to  deliver  (vers.  9,  10).     (P.  Thomson,  31. A.)        The  circumstance* 


140  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  the  vision  : — Let  us  try,  if  we  can,  and  present  to  our  imaginations  some  idea 
of  this  extraordinary  scene.  The  shades  of  evening  are  closing  in,  and  all  is  still 
within  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  temple.  The  daily  ritual  has  been  duly 
observed,  and  priests  and  worshippers  have  withdrawn  from  the  hallowed  fane. 
The  noise  and  stir  of  the  great  city  hard  by  is  subsiding ;  a  solemn  hush  and  still- 
ness pervades  the  place.  One  solitary  worshipper  still  lingers  within  the  sacred 
courts  absorbed  in  a  reverie  of  prayer.  He  is  a  religious  and  devout  man ;  pro- 
bably a  member  of  the  school  of  the  prophets,  well  instructed  in  the  faith  of  his 
fathers,  and  familiar  with  the  sacred  ritual  of  the  temple,  and  the  lessons  that  it 
inculcated.  There  he  is,  looking  forward  possibly  to  a  prophet's  career,  yet 
feeling  keenly  the  responsibilities  which  it  will  involve,  and  perhaps  pleading 
earnestly  to  be  fitted  for  his  mission.  He  cannot  be  blind  to  the  unsatisfactory 
condition  of  his  people.  Amidst  much  outward  profession  of  religiousness  and 
readiness  to  comply  with  the  ceremonial  demands  of  the  faith,  he  cannot  but 
discern  the  presence  of  barren  formalism  and  hypocrisy,  and  of  a  latent  super- 
stition that  might  at  any  moment,  were  the  restraints  of  authority  removed, 
blossom  out  into  open  idolatry.  And  who  shall  say  what  heart-searchings  may 
have  occupied  his  own  mind  as  he  knelt  there  in  the  temple  all  alone  with  God.. 
Was  he  more  spiritual  than  those  around  him  ?  Was  he  sufficiently  pure  and 
devout  to  stand  up  in  protest  against  a  nation's  sins  ?  One  moment  all  is  silence 
and  stillness  as  he  kneels  in  prayer  ;  the  next,  and  lo  !  a  blaze  of  glory  and  a  burst 
of  song  !  Startled  and  awe-stricken,  the  lonely  worshipper  raises  his  head  to 
find  himself  confronted  with  a  sublime  and  dazzling  spectacle.  His  bewildered 
vision  travels  up  through  ranks  of  light  till  it  finds  itself  resting  for  a  moment, 
but  only  for  a  moment,  on  an  Object  too  august  for  human  gaze.  "  I  saw  also 
the  Lord  sitting  upon  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  up,  and  His  train  filled  the  temple." 
Around  that  dread  Presence  the  forms  of  vast  and  wondrous  intelligences  of  glory, 
the  attendant  ministers  of  the  Majesty  Divine,  seem  bending  in  adoration,  and 
the  voice  of  their  worship  falls  like  the  roll  of  thunder  on  his  ear,  shaking  the  very 
pillars  of  the  temple  porch  with  its  awe-inspiring  resonance,  as  they  echo  and 
re-echo  with  answering  acclamations  the  antiphon  of  heaven — "  Holy,  holy,  holy 
is  the  Lord  of  hosts :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  ( W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
The  vision  : — Isaiah  might  probably  have  said,  as  St.  Paul  did  on  a  like  occasion, 
"  Whether  I  was  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body  I  cannot  tell,"  but  he  would 
undoubtedly  have  confirmed  the  plain  meaning  of  his  words  that  the  vision  was  a 
reality  and  a  fact.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The  symbolism  of  Isaiah's  vision: — 
There  is  a  variety  of  opinion  among  the  commentators  as  to  the  basis  of  the 
symbolism  of  this  vision.  Some  assert  that  the  imagery  by  which  the  prophet 
Bets  forth  the  wealth  and  splendour  of  the  heavenly  kingdom  is  taken  entirely 
from  the  scenery  and  ritual  of  the  temple ;  that  when  the  worshippers  had  left, 
and  the  sacrifices  had  been  offered,  and  only  a  few  of  the  most  devout  remained 
for  prayer  and  vigil,  Isaiah,  lingering  with  the  few,  unsatisfied  and  perplexed, 
beheld  this  vision,  and  consecrated  himself  to  his  prophetic  activity.  In  this 
view  the  picture  presented  of  the  celestial  world  is  the  inner  features  and  ritual 
of  the  temple  idealised  and  expanded.  Dr.  Cheyne  casts  doubt  upon  this  inter- 
pretation, and  leans  to  the  opinion  that  not  the  temple  but  the  palace  is  the  point 
from  which  the  prophet's  inspired  imagination  takes  its  departure.  The  figures, 
the  messengers,  and  the  throne  are  from  the  court,  not  from  the  temple.  It  is 
impossible  wholly  to  accept  either  of  these  views.  There  is  no  reason  why  we 
should  not  blend  both  in  our  exposition  of  Isaiah's  vision.  There  are  certainly 
some  references  to  the  temple  in  the  altar,  the  purging  away  of  sin,  and  the 
smoke-filled  house.  In  the  throne  and  the  train  filling  the  temple  there  are 
suggestions  of  the  court.  As  Isaiah  was  an  attendant  on  both,  it  is  probable 
that  the  ideas  under  which  he  sets  forth  the  kingship  of  Christ,  as  priestly  and 
yet  regal,  were  drawn  from  his  own  observation  of  the  centres  of  government 
and  worship  in  his  own  country.  Ideas  of  righteousness,  and  sympathy,  and 
sacrifice  unite  in  his  conception  of  the  invisible  kingdom.  (J.  Matthews.) 
Isaiah's  vision  of  God  : — Some  of  you  may  have  been  watching  a  near  and  beautiful 
landscape  in  the  land  of  mountains  and  eternal  snows,  till  you  have  been 
exhausted  by  its  very  richness,  and  till  the  distant  hills  which  bounded  it  have 
seemed,  you  knew  not  why,  to  limit  and  contract  the  view ;  and  then  a  veil  has 
been  withdrawn,  and  new  hills,  not  looking  as  if  they  belonged  to  ihis  earth, 
yet  giving  another  character  to  all  that  does  belong  to  it,  have  unfolded  them- 
selves before  you.     This  is  a  very  imperfect  likeness  of  that  revelation  which 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  141 

must  have  been  made  to  the  inner  eye  of  the  prophet,  when  he  saw  another  throne 
than  the  throne  of  the  house  of  David,  another  King  than  Uzziah  or  Jotham, 
another  train  than  that  of  priests  or  minstrels  in  the  temple,  other  winged  forms 
than  those  golden  ones  which  overshadowed  the  mercy-seat.  (F.  D.  Maurice, 
M.A.)  The  inaugural  vision  of  Isaiah  contains  in  brief  an  outline  of  his  prophetic 
teaching.  The  passage  besides  this  has  a  singular  psychological  and  religious 
interest  of  a  kind  personal  to  the  prophet.  It  consists  of  a  series  of  steps,  each  one 
of  which  naturally  follows  upon  the  other.  I.  There  is  first  A  vision  of  thb  Lord, 
the  King,  surprising  and  majestic,  with  a  singular  world  of  beings  and  activities 
around  Him  (vers.  1-4).  II.  This  vision  of  Jehovah  reacts  upon  the  mind 
of  the  prophet  and  makes  him  think  of  himself  in  relation  to  this  great  King, 
the  Holy  One,  whom  he  had  seen  ;  and  one  thought  succeeds  another,  so  that  in 
a  moment  he  lives  a  history  (vers.  5-7).  III.  Having  passed  through  this  history, 
the  beginning  of  which  was  terror,  but  the  end  peace,  an  altogether  new  sensa- 
tion filled  his  mind,  as  if  the  world,  which  was  all  disorder  and  confusion  before, 
and  filled  with  a  conflict  of  tendencies  and  possibilities,  had  suddenly,  in  the 
light  falling  on  it  from  the  great  King  whom  he  had  seen,  become  clear  and  the 
meaning  of  it  plain,  and  also  what  was  his  own  place  in  it ;  and  this  was  accom- 
panied with  an  irresistible  impulse  to  take  his  place.  This  is  expressed  by  saying 
that  he  heard  the  voice  of  the  great  Sovereign  who  had  been  revealed  to  him 
proclaiming  that  He  had  need  of  one  to  send,  to  which  he  replied  that  he  would 
go.  rV.  Finally,  there  comes  the  service  which  hb  has  to  perform,  which  ia 
no  other  than  just  to  take  his  place  in  the  midat  of  that  world,  the  meaning  of 
which  his  vision  of  the  Sovereign  Lord  had  made  clear  to  him,  and  state  this 
meaning  to  men,  to  hold  the  mirror  up  to  his  time  and  declare  to  it  its  condition 
and  its  tendencies,  and  what  in  the  hand  of  the  great  King,  God  over  all,  its  issue 
and  the  issue  of  all  must  be  (vers.  8-13).  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Isaiah's 
vision: — L  We  have  to  contemplate  a  remarkable  manifestation  of  God. 
LI.  What  was  its  effect  on  thb  prophet  ?    ELL  The  means  by  which  thb 

PENITENT  PROPHET  WAS  PURIFIED.      IV.    THB    CALL    OF   THE    PROPHET.      V.   HlS 

commission.  (T.  Allen,  D.D.)  Realising  God: — A,  man's  realisation  of  the 
character  of  God  does  not  depend  altogether  on  his  religious  experience ;  it 
depends  also  on  original  capacity,  temperament,  and  on  suitable  physiological 
conditions  both  of  body  and  of  mind.  (Ibid.)  An  anticipation  of  the  Incarna~ 
tion  : — This  vision  was  an  anticipation  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord.  St.  John 
tells  us  distinctly  that  the  glory  which  the  prophet  saw  was  the  glory  of  the 
Redeemer.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time."  God  is  a  spiritual  being, 
and  therefore  He  does  not  appeal  to  sense.  He  reveals  Himself  to  faith,  to 
conscience,  and  to  love.  But  sense  is  an  avenue  through  which  the  soul  is  reached 
and  influenced,  and  Almighty  God,  in  revealing  Himself  to  man,  has  not  over- 
looked this  constitutional  fact.  The  Incarnation  was  a  tribute  of  respect  paid  to 
our  senses.  What  the  prophet  saw  only  in  symbol  we  realise  in  the  form  of  a 
glorious  historic  Presence.     (Ibid.)         Vision  and  service: — I.  The  procession 

OF  THE  DEAD  FROM  EARTH  BRINGS  US  FACE  TO  FACE  WITH  THE  ETERNAL  KINGDOM. 

We  cannot  look  upon  any  visible  forms,  and  note  their  changefulness  and  yet 
the  permanence  of  the  ideas  they  illustrate,  and  not  infer  the  existence  of  the 
world  of  thought,  and  law,  and  reality  from  which  they  proceed.  But  while 
all  life  is  based  on  the  unseen,  and  witnesses  to  its  presence  ever,  the  procession 
of  the  generations  of  men  on  the  earth  more  powerfully  still  reveals  the  higher 
kingdom.  Think  of  the  populations  that  have  lived  in  this  planet,  and  received 
their  first  schooling  and  drill  here.  After  a  brief  preparation  and  teaching  in 
the  knowledge  of  the  laws  and  facts  of  existence,  they  depart.  The  procession 
into  the  pale  kingdoms  is  endless  and  crowded.  The  majority  the  other  side 
becomes  greater  each  day.  It  is  impossible  to  think  of  that  succession  and  deny 
the  celestial  world.  The  law  of  continuity  suggests  a  life  beyond.  The  principle 
which  secures  the  completion  of  all  great  work  rightly  begun,  speaks  of  it.  Our 
sense  of  the  justice  at  the  heart  of  things  assures  us  of  a  realm  of  compensation 
for  unrequited  labour  and  unexplained  sorrow.  The  union  with  God  that  begins 
here  must  be  consummated  elsewhere.  Such  faots  as  these  would  be  forced 
upon  the  thought  of  Isaiah  as  all  Israel  mourned  the  death  of  their  leader  and 
king.  II.  Thb  supreme  fact  of  the  celestial  kingdom  is  thb  sovereignty 
of  Christ.  After  John's  statement  (xii.  41)  that  Isaiah  saw  His  glory,  and  spake 
of  Him,  there  can  be  no  question  with  any  Christian  mind  as  to  the  Messianio 
reference  of  the  manifestation.     Isaiah  may  not  have  known  of  the  sacrifice  and 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

resurrection  by  which  that  throne  was  gained,  but  the  general  outlines  of  the 
mediatorial  kingdom  are  fully  recognised  here.  "  I  saw  the  Lord,  high  and  lifted 
up."  All  else  in  heaven  was  subordinated  to  that  central  fact.  1.  The  supremacy 
of  our  Lord's  rule  over  heaven  and  earth,  over  angels,  monarchs,  events,  the  great 
and  the  little,  the  present  and  the  future.  2.  The  absorbing  attraction  of  that 
rule.  For  as  prophet,  and  angels,  and  men,  discern  the  glory  of  His  love,  and 
mercy,  and  power,  they  are  constrained  to  praise.  3.  The  perfect  serenity  and 
sufficiency  of  His  rule  are  indicated  here.  Beneath  is  storm  and  tumult.  He 
sits  above  the  flood.  4.  The  universality  of  His  rule  is  clear.  His  train  fills 
the  temple.  Those  who  went  before,  and  those  who  came  after,  cried  Hosanna  ! 
5.  The  design  of  Christ's  rule  on  earth  is  to  bestow  pardon  and  purity.  6.  The 
King  who  confers  cleansing  and  peace  demands  service.  7.  He  does  not  hesitate 
to  discipline  His  unfaithful  servants  until  their  loyalty  is  assured.     III.  Thb 

EFFECT   OF  THE   VISION   OF   CHRIST'S   LORDSHIP   ON   THE    BEHOLDER.      1.    A   deep 

sense  of  personal  sinfulness.  2.  A  deep  sense  of  insufficiency  for  the  work  of 
God.  3.  The  vision  that  humbles,  clothes  with  power,  fills  with  certitude,  directs 
our  steps,  inspires  with  invincible  heroism,  and  makes  us  partakers  of  its  glory 
and  its  resources.  (J.  Matthews.)  The  vision  of  God: — No  truth  is  more 
familiar  than  that  God  cannot  be  seen  by  mortal  eye.  But  God  has  so  manifested 
Himself  that  we  may  say,  without  impropriety  or  mistake,  that  we  have  seen  Him. 
He  did  so — I.  Occasionally,  before  the  Christian  era.  We  have  illustrations 
of  this  in  the  case  of  the  burning  bush  (Exod.  iii.),  of  Moses  on  the  mount  of  God 
(Exod.  xxxiv.),  of  Micaiah,  the  Hebrew  prophet  (1  Kings  xxii.),  and  in  that  before 
us  in  the  text.  In  such  experiences,  each  one  of  which  may  have  been  unlike 
the  others,  a  very  special  privilege  was  granted  to  these  men ;  so  special  and 
peculiar  that  they  felt,  and  had  a  right  to  feel,  that  they  stood  in  the  very  near 
presence  of  the  High  and  Holy  One  Himself.  II.  Permanently,  in  the  Temple. 
The  religion  of  the  people  of  Israel  differed  from  that  of  the  surrounding  nations 
in  that  there  was  not  to  be  found  in  their  sacred  places  any  image  or  statue  or 
visible  representation  of  God.  If  any  such  were  found  it  was  a  marked  violation 
of  law,  a  distinct  apostasy.  Only  one  visible  indication  of  the  Divine  presence 
was  permitted,  and  that  was  as  immaterial  as  it  could  be,  and  was  only  beheld 
by  one  man  once  in  the  year — the  Shechinah  in  the  Holy  of  holies.  Once  a  year 
the  high  priest  might  use  the  words  of  our  text ;  for  when  he  entered  within  the 
veil,  on  the  great  day  of  atonement,  he  stood  in  the  presence  of  manifested  Deity. 
III.  Once  for  att.  tn  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  All  previous  historical 
manifestations  were  lost  in  the  presence  of  the  Son  of  God.  He  manifested  the 
Divine  so  that  those  who  saw  Him  did  in  truth  see  God.  They  saw  nothing 
less  than — 1.  Divine  power,  including  control  over  the  body  and  the  spirit  of 
man,  over  the  elements  of  nature,  over  disease  and  death.  2.  Divine  wisdom, 
reaching  to  all  those  truths  that  concern  the  nature  and  will  of  God,  and  also 
the  character,  life,  and  destiny  of  man.  3.  Divine  purity,  shown  in  an  absolutely 
blameless  life.  4.  Divine  love,  shining  forth  in  tender,  practical  sympathy  with 
men  in  all  their  sufferings  and  sorrows ;  showing  itself  in  compassion  for  men 
in  their  spiritual  destitution  (Mark  vi.  34) ;  culminating  in  the  agony  of  the 
garden  and  the  death  of  the  Cross.  Well  might  the  Master  say  that  His  disciples 
were  privileged  beyond  kings  and  prophets,  for  as  they  walked  with  Him  they 
"  saw  the  Lord."  Conclusion — We  can  see  God  in  nature,  in  history,  in  the 
outworkings  of  His  providence,  in  the  human  conscience  and  human  spirit. 
But  the  way  in  which  to  seek  His  face  is  by  acquainting  ourselves  with,  and 
uniting  ourselves  to,  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son.  (W.  Clarkson,  B.A.)  The  empty 
throne  filled  : — I.  The  vision  itself.  The  centre-truth  is  that  the  Lord  of  hosts 
is  the  King — the  King  of  Israel.  II.  The  ministration  of  loss  and  sorrow 
in  preparing  the  vision.  If  the  throne  of  Israel  had  not  been  empty,  the 
prophet  would  not  have  seen  the  throned  God  in  the  heavens.  And  so  it  is 
with  all  our  losses,  with  all  our  sorrows,  with  all  our  disappointments,  with 
all  our  pains ;  they  have  a  mission  to  reveal  to  us  the  throned  God.     III.  Tot 

TEXT   SUGGESTS  THE   COMPENSATION   THAT  IS   GIVEN   FOR  ALL  LOSSES.      The  One 

God  will  become  everything  and  anything  that  every  man,  and  each  man,  requires. 
He  shapes  Himself  according  to  our  need.  The  water  of  life  does  not  disdain  to 
take  the  form  imposed  upon  it  by  the  vessel  into  which  it  is  poured.  The  Jews 
used  to  say  that  the  manna  in  the  wilderness  tasted  to  each  man  as  each  man 
desired,  of  dainties  or  of  sorrows.  And  the  God  who  comes  to  us  all,  oomes  to 
us  each  in  the  shape  that  we  need  ;  just  as  He  came  to  Isaiah  in  the  manifesto- 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  143 

tion  of  His  kingly  power,  because  the  throne  of  Judah  was  vacated.  So  when 
our  hearts  are  sore  with  loss  the  New  Testament  manifestation  of  the  King, 
even  Jesus  Christ,  comes  to  us  and  says,  "  The  same  is  My  mother  and  sister 
and  brother,"  and  His  sweet  love  compensates  for  the  love  that  can  die,  and 
that  has  died.  When  losses  come  to  us  He  draws  near,  as  durable  riches  and 
righteousness.  In  all  our  pains  He  is  our  anodyne,  and  in  all  our  griefs  He  brings 
the  comfort ;  He  is  all  in  all,  and  each  withdrawn  gift  is  compensated,  or  will 
be  compensated,  to  each  in  Him.  So  let  us  learn  God's  purpose  in  empty- 
ing hearts  and  chairs  and  homes.  He  empties  that  He  may  fill  them  with  Him- 
self.    (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  moral  and  mediatorial  dominion  of  God: — 

I.  Peculiarities  of  this  dominion.  1.  The  law  of  belief,  or  what  we  may  other- 
wise phrase,  the  law  of  intellectual  humility.  Revelation  was  never  intended  to 
be  a  revelation  to  our  comprehension  or  to  our  reason.  The  revelation  of  the 
Bible  is  made  to  faith.  2.  The  law  of  evangelical  faith.  3.  The  law  of  holiness. 
You  will  find  a  great  difference  between  the  nature  of  the  obedience  which  God 
in  the  Gospel  requires  and  that  which  earthly  governments  require.  (1)  Earthly 
governments  take  cognizance  of  the  outward  act,  but  none  at  all  of  the  motives, 
the  affections,  or  the  tempers :  but  God  in  the  Gospel  government  controls  these. 
(2)  Earthly  governments  are  usually  backward  in  interfering  with  the  private 
arrangements  of  commercial  and  domestio  life,  and  with  the  personal  property 
of  their  subjects.  But  Christianity  puts  everything  under  law.  Its  sway  is 
universal,  all-pervading,  absolute.  (3)  Earthly  governments,  earthly  systems 
of  ethics,  either  fail  to  inculcate,  or  are  at  positive  variance  with,  much  of  the 
more  elevated  and  spiritual  morality  of  the  Bible.  The  great  peculiarity  of  the 
government  of  Jehovah  the  Saviour  in  this  respect  is,  that  He  requires  men  to 
be  holy  and  not  merely  to  be  moral.    4.  The  law  of  disciplinary  suffering. 

II.  Excellencies  of  this  dominion.  1.  It  is  a  spiritual  government.  2.  It  is 
a  mediatorial  government — a  government,  therefore,  of  mercy.  3.  The  supremacy 
of  this  dominion  might  be  adverted  to.  It  is  a  "  throne  high  and  lifted  up  " 
above  all  the  thrones  and  dynasties  of  the  earth.  Let  this  comfort  the  people 
of  God.  4.  It  is  eternal.  (W.  M.  Bunting.)  The  dead  king  ;  the  living  God: — 
Israel's  king  dies,  but  Israel's  God  still  lives.  From  the  mortality  of  great 
and  good  men  we  should  take  occasion,  with  the  eye  of  faith,  to  look  up  to 
"  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible."  (M.Henry.)  Government  human  and 
Divine: — I.  The  changes  in  civil  society  take  place  under  the  direction 
and  government  of  the  providence  op  god.  ii.  the  permanency.  of  the 
Divine  government  affords  a  striking  contrast  to  the  fading  character 
of  earthly  governments.  iii.  the  spiritual  kingdom  in  the  hands  op 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  proceeds  with  majestic  progress  notwithstanding, 
and  even  by  means  of,  these  various  changes.  (B.  Winter,  D.D.)  Seeing 
God : — Isaiah  saw  God :  do  men  see  Him  to-day  ?  Was  He  any  nearer  to 
Jerusalem  than  He  is  to  London  and  New  York  ?  Did  that  old  Hebrew  possess 
faculties  different  from  ours  ?  1.  God  can  be  seen  and  known.  He  has  been 
seen  and  known.  Moses,  Isaiah,  Elijah,  Paul,  John — all  saw  Him.  He  has 
been  seen  and  known  in  all  lands  and  among  all  religions.  2.  What  do  we  mean 
by  seeing  and  knowing  God  ?  A  spirit  cannot  be  seen  with  physical  eyes.  We 
mean  that  we  are  so  convinced  of  the  nearness  and  reality  of  God  that  our  thinking 
and  living  are  all  determined  by  that  conviction — so  sure  of  Him  that  we  live 
as  if  we  saw  Him  by  physical  sight.  3.  But  have  not  men  seen  their  own  imagin- 
ings, and  thought  that  those  were  God  ?  Is  not  a  perfect  God  the  noblest  work 
of  man  ?  It  has  not  been  proved  that  any  have  actually  known  God.  It  would, 
in  the  nature  of  things,  be  impossible  to  demonstrate  that  to  any  one  who  did 
not  himself  possess  the  same  knowledge ;  but  it  has  been  proved  that  those  whom 
the  world  always  heeds  when  they  speak  concerning  other  things  have  believed 
that  they  had  this  knowledge ;  and  that  faith  has  been  the  inspiration  of  dauntless 
heroism,  most  patient  endurance,  and  most  sacrificing  service.  4.  How  is  God 
known  T^  Many  answers  are  given.  Probably  all  are  partially  correct.  As 
each  individual  sees  natural  objects  from  his  own  standpoint,  so  must  he  approach 
the  highest  knowledge.  We  are  not  asking  whether  men  have  known  about 
God,  but  whether  they  have  known  Him.  We  know  about  Caesar,  but  we  do 
not  know  him ;  we  know  about  the  Mikado  of  Japan,  but  we  do  not  know  him. 
Many  know  about  God  who  show  no  signs  of  knowing  Him.  I  think  that  no  one 
has  been  able  to  tell  how  this  knowledge  is  attained.  Some  say,  "  We  are  con- 
scious of  Him";  others,  "We  see  Him  with  the  inner  eye";  others,  M Reason 


H4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yl, 

leads  to  Him  "  ;  and  others  still,  "  He  is  seen  and  known  in  the  things  which 
are  made."  But  after  all,  the  most  that  any  can  say  is,  "  I  know  Him."  Isaiah 
said,  "  I  saw  the  Lord,"  but  all  is  hazy  and  indistinct  when  he  comes  to  detail. 
5.  All  who  have  learned  to  love  man  in  the  spirit  of  Christ  never  can  fail  of  coming 
to  the  knowledge  of  God,  "  for  whosoever  loveth  is  born  of  God  and  knoweth 
God."  Love  is  the  new  life ;  and  love  secures  knowledge.  6.  When  we  want 
to  know  about  God  we  stand  before  the  majesty  of  an  ocean  in  a  storm,  before 
the  terrible  splendour  of  Alpine  crests  and  glaciers,  beneath  the  host  of  the  heavens 
that  in  solemn  silence  thread  the  mazes  of  the  sky,  and  say :  "  Behold  the  greatness 
of  God  !  "  We  study  the  movement  of  history,  and  see  how  the  dispersion  of  the 
Jews  sent  true  spiritual  ideas  into  all  lands ;  how  the  triumphs  of  Alexander 
gave  a  common  language  to  the  world  ;  how  the  supremacy  of  Rome  made  nations 
one  ;  how  the  carnival  of  blood  called  the  "  French  Revolution  "  overthrew  more 
abuses  than  it  worked ;  how  the  American  Civil  War  ended  in  the  proclamation 
of  freedom,  and  we  say,  God  is  revealing  Himself  in  history.  We  read  the  story 
of  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus,  and  say,  If  that  is  a  revelation  of  God,  then  He  is 
the  One  for  whom  our  souls  long.  But  all  these  revelations  may  be  accepted 
without  personal  knowledge.  The  Father,  who  is  a  Spirit,  comes  to  us  in  spirit; 
speaks  in  a  still  voice  in  the  chambers  of  memory,  conscience,  aspiration ;  and 
we  know  Him.  and  yet  may  not  be  able  to  explain  that  knowledge  to  those  who 
do  not  have  it.  "  I  know  my  Father;  He  knows  His  child."  That  is  the  highest 
human  experience.  That  is  eternal  life.  7.  If  eternal  life  is  not  a  question  of 
dates,  of  the  succession  of  months  and  years,  but  knowing  God,  then  no  question 
is  more  imperative  than,  "  Is  it  possible  for  me  to  know  Him  ?  "  It  is  a  great 
thing  to  claim  that  knowledge.  It  should  never  be  done  irreverently  or  lightly, 
but  always  humbly  and  with  great  joy.  The  mission  of  the  pulpit  and  the  Church 
is  primarily  to  help  men  to  know  God.  How,  then,  may  we  know  Him  T  How- 
ever many  answers  are  possible,  only  one  need  be  given.  All  who  follow  Jesus 
Christ  are  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  realise  that,  like  Him,  they,  too,  are  sons  of 
God.  (Amory  H.  Bradford,  D.D.)  Removing  the  veil: — 1.  A  king  must  die! 
There  almost  seems  to  be  something  incongruous  in  the  very  phrase.  The  very 
word  "  king  "  means  power.  The  king  is  the  man  who  can — the  man  who  is 
possessed  of  ability,  dominions,  sovereignty;  and  the  shock  is  almost  violent 
when  we  are  told  that  the  range  of  kingship  is  shaped  and  determined  by  death. 
How  the  one  word  suffices  for  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men !  The  registrar 
deals  with  us  very  summarily !  We  look  through  his  books.  His  vocabulary 
is  very  limited.  He  has  two  words,  "  born  "  and  "  died,"  and  between  the  two  he 
can  fit  in  all  mankind ;  there  is  no  exception  to  disturb  his  little  printed  form  ; 
we  all  take  our  place  in  it,  prince  and  peasant,  emperor  and  slave.  And  all  this 
irrespective  of  character.  2.  As  kings  went  in  those  days,  Uzziah  had  proved 
himself  an  admirable  king,  a  wise  ruler,  a  good  man.  He  was  distinctly  a  pro- 
gressive man,  a  man  of  action  and  enterprise.  His  energies  were  not  absorbed 
in  merely  foreign  affairs,  nor  shaped  by  the  lust  of  mere  dominion.  He  proceeded 
upon  the  principle  that  a  successful  foreign  policy  must  be  based  upon  a  wise 
domestic  policy ;  that  an  efficient  and  stable  rulership  must  begin  at  home.  I 
like  the  way  in  which  the  chronicler  sums  up  the  king's  motives  and  gives  us  the 
very  spirit  of  his  home  policy,  "  he  loved  husbandry."  "  He  loved  husbandry," 
and  therefore  you  find  him  hedging  his  people  about  with  security  as  they  go 
about  their  daily  life.  He  "  digged  many  wells,"  he  attended  to  the  requirements 
of  irrigation,  he  laid  the  hand  of  protection  and  favour  upon  husbandmen  and 
vine-dressers,  and  in  every  way  he  showed  that  he  regarded  agriculture  as  the 
fundamental  and  primary  pursuit  of  national  life.  Upon  that  home  policy  he 
built  his  foreign  policy.  If  you  have  peace,  security,  and  contentment  at  the 
centre  it  is  easier  to  extend  and  widen  the  bounds  of  your  circumference ;  and 
with  order  and  prosperity  at  home,  Uzziah  was  able  to  enlarge  the  borders  of  his 
empire.  He  could  raise  from  his  devoted  people  an  army  of  mighty  power.  The 
limits  of  his  kingdom  were  being  continually  expanded.  "  His  name  spread 
far  abroad.  He  was  marvellously  helped,  till  he  was  strong."  Such  was  the 
nation's  king ;  loved  by  all  his  people,  feared  by  all  his  foes.  Is  it,  then,  any 
wonder  that  King  Uzziah — skilled  organiser  in  home  affairs,  subtle  strategist  in 
foreign  affairs — became  the  pillar  of  the  nation's  hopes,  the  repository  of  her 
trust,  the  ultimate  security  of  her  prosperity  and  permanence  ?  3.  Now,  there 
is  a  strange  tendency  in  human  nature  to  deify  any  person  who  gives  evidence  of 
possessing  any  kind  of  extraordinary  power.     We   place  them  on  the  heart's 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  145 

throne — the  throne  on  which  are  centred  the  soul's  hopes  and  which  carries  with 
it  the  ultimate  sovereignty  and  apportionment  of  life.  Extraordinary  power  of 
any  kind  appeals  to  the  godlike  within  us,  and  upon  the  object  evincing  the 
extraordinary  power  we  too  often  fix  our  trust.  Watch  the  principle  in  the 
narrative  before  us.  Here  is  Isaiah.  Before  his  call  and  consecration  he  had 
lived  on  the  political  plane  of  life.  His  thought  was  ever  moving  among  the 
forces  of  diplomacy  and  statecraft.  How  intensely  absorbed  he  was  in  the  game 
of  national  politics  !  The  national  problem  was  to  Isaiah  a  political  problem. 
The  ultimate  foundation  of  national  prosperity  was  stable  government.  The 
wise  handling  of  political  forces  was  the  one  essential  for  the  continuity  and 
grandeur  of  the  nation's  life.  That  was  the  plane  of  thought  and  life  on  which 
Isaiah  moved,  and  on  that  plane  he  must  find  his  heroes.  He  found  the  hero 
in  Uzziah.  What  then  ?  He  had  won  Isaiah's  admiration.  Next,  he  won 
his  confidence,  next  his  love,  next  his  devotion;  then  Uzziah  became  Isaiah's 
god  !  Uzziah  filled  the  whole  of  Isaiah's  vision.  How  now  did  Isaiah's  reasoning 
run  T  Thus — "  What  will  become  of  the  world  when  Uzziah  dies  T  When 
the  master  of  statecraft  is  gone,  in  whose  hands  will  the  rulership  rest  ?  When 
the  political  nave  is  removed,  will  not  all  the  spokes  of  the  national  wheel  be 
thrown  into  the  direst  confusion  ?  "  That  was  Isaiah's  fear,  begotten  by  hia 
hero-worship.  Well,  Uzziah  died.  What  then  T  Says  Isaiah,  '  In  the  year 
that  King  Uzziah  died " — what  ? — "  All  my  worst  fears  were  abundantly 
realised  "  ?  No,  no !  "In  the  year  that  King  Uzziah  died  I  had  my  eyes 
opened ;  I  saw  there  was  a  greater  kingdom  with  a  greater  King — I  saw  the  Lord." 
The  hero  died  to  reveal  the  hero's  God.  What,  then,  did  the  revelation  do  for 
Isaiah  ?  It  gave  him  an  enlarged  conception  of  all  things.  It  gave  him  a  new 
centre  for  his  thoughts  and  life.  It  taught  him  this,  that  the  ultimate  security 
for  all  national  greatness  is  not  kings  and  crowns,  but  God.  It  taught  him  this, 
that  big  armies,  and  walled  cities,  and  quiet  husbandry,  and  subtle  diplomacy, 
and  complex  civilisations  are  not  the  fundamental  forces  on  which  mankind 
rests.  The  eternal  centre  of  all  true  life,  the  centre  which  time  cannot  weaken 
and  which  death  cannot  corrupt,  is  not  diplomacy,  but  holiness — not  Uzziah, 
but  the  Lord.  The  earthly  king  had  come  between  Isaiah  and  his  God,  and  it 
was  only  when  the  earthly  king  was  taken  away  that  Isaiah  saw  the  King  of 
kings.  I  saw  the  Lord  high  and  lifted  up  " — a  limited  interest  replaced  by 
a  larger  one,  a  low  standard  supplanted  by  a  loftier  one,  a  local  monarch  stepping 
aside  to  reveal  the  universal  King.  4.  This  teaching  has  a  most  pertinent  applica- 
tion to  the  life  of  to-day.  Which  is  the  most  prominent  in  English  national 
life  to-day — King  Uzziah  or  King  Jesus,  the  representative  of  diplomacy  or 
the  representative  of  holiness  T  Which  are  we  most  concerned  about — the  science 
of  politics  or  the  science  of  holy  living  ?  What  are  the  forces  on  which  we  are 
chiefly  depending  for  the  continuity  of  our  national  supremacy  ?  The  eternal 
forces  are  not  material,  but  spiritual,  proceeding  not  from  the  earth,  but 
coming  down  from  heaven.  Material  forces  must  be  kept  secondary,  because 
they  are  transient ;  spiritual  forces  must  be  primary,  because  they  are  eternal. 
What  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  ?  Don't  let  us  lay  the  stress  and 
emphasis  of  life  upon  secondary  things — not  upon  Uzziah,  but  upon  the  Lord. 
(J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  "  Uzziaha  "  of  history  and  the  Lord  : — History  tells 
ns  the  stories  of  nations  who  have  looked  no  further  than  King  Uzziah,  and  who 
have  been  accustomed  to  use  the  temporal  and  earthly  forces  which  Uzziah  repre- 
sents. And  how  has  it  fared  with  them  ?  Ancient  Phoenicia  looked  no  further 
than  King  Uzziah.  She  built  her  national  temple  upon  the  foundation  of  com- 
merce, and  the  only  binding  force  among  her  people  was  the  relationships  of  trade. 
Ancient  Greece  looked  no  further  than  King  Uzziah.  She  raised  a  palatial 
national  structure  upon  the  foundation  of  literature  and  art,  and  the  structure 
was  exceeding  beautiful,  the  wonder  and  admiration  of  all  time.  Ancient  Rome 
looked  no  further  than  King  Uzziah.  She  raised  an  apparently  solid  masonry, 
compact  and  massive,  upon  a  political  foundation,  and  all  the  stones  in  the  build-  j 
ing  were  clamped  together  by  a  tie  of  patriotism,  such  as  the  world  has  elsewhere 
never  known.  Now  what  has  become  of  them — Phoenicia,  Greece,  and  Borne  t  i 
How  has  it  fared  with  the  nations  so  constituted,  the  houses  so  built  ?  This  is 
the  record.  They  stood  for  a  time,  proud,  august,  radiant  with  imperial  splendour,  j 
fair  with  the  smile  of  fortune,  ana  reflecting  the  sunny  light  of  the  prosperous  j 
day.  But  "  the  rains  descended,  and  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew,  and 
beat  upon  "  those  nations,  and  they  fell,  and  great  was  the  fall  of  them  I  Surely 
10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yi. 

that  is  a  lesson  for  to-day,  that  national  foundations  must  not  be  laid  by  Uzziah, 
but  by  the  Lord.  (Ibid.)  The  material  fleeting:  the  spiritual  enduring: — I 
spent  a  little  time  in  the  old  castle  at  Stirling,  and  in  one  of  the  rooms  of  the  tower 
were  two  curiosities  which  riveted  my  attention.  In  one  corner  of  the  room  was 
an  old  time-worn  pulpit.  It  was  John  Knox's  pulpit,  the  pulpit  from  which 
he  used  to  proclaim  so  faithfully  the  message  of  the  King.  In  the  opposite 
corner  were  a  few  long  spears,  much  corrupted  by  rust,  found  on  the  field  of 
Bannockburn,  which  lies  just  beyond  the  castle  walls.  John  Knox's  pulpit  on 
the  one  hand,  the  spears  of  Bannockburn  on  the  other  !  One  the  type  of  material 
forces,  forces  of  earth  and  time  ;  the  other  the  type  of  spiritual  forces,  forces  of 
eternity  and  heaven.  The  spears,  representative  of  King  Uzziah  ;  the  pulpit, 
representative  of  the  Lord.  Which  symbolises  the  eternal  ?  The  force  and 
influence  which  radiated  from  that  pulpit  will  enrich  and  fashion  Scottish  character 
when  Bannockburn  has  become  an  uninfluential  memory,  standing,  vague  and 
indefinite,  on  the  horizon  of  a  far  distant  time.  (Ibid.)  Gain  through  lose: — 
God  puts  out  our  little  light  that  we  may  see  Him  the  better.  When  you  are 
looking  out  of  the  window  at  night,  gazing  towards  the  sky,  you  will  see  the  stars 
more  clearly  if  you  put  out  your  gaslight.  That  is  what  God  has  to  do  for  us. 
He  has  to  put  out  the  secondary  lights  in  order  that  we  may  see  the  eternal  light. 
Uzziah  has  to  die,  in  order  that  we  may  see  it  is  God  who  lives.  (Ibid.)  The 
compensations  of  life  : — I  know  a  little  cottage  which  is  surrounded  by  great 
and  stately  trees,  clothed  with  dense  and  massy  foliage.  In  the  summer  days, 
and  through  all  the  sunny  season,  it  just  nestles  in  the  circle  of  green,  and  has  no 
vision  of  the  world  beyond.  But  the  winter  comes,  so  cold  and  keen.  It  brings 
its  sharp  knife  of  frost,  cuts  off  the  leaves,  until  they  fall  trembling  to  the  ground. 
There  is  nothing  left  but  the  bare  framework  on  which  summer  hung  her  beauteous 
growths.  Poor  little  cottage,  with  the  foliage  all  gone  !  But  is  there  no  com- 
pensation T  Yes,  yes.  Standing  in  the  cottage  in  the  winter  time  and  looking 
out  of  the  window,  you  can  see  a  mansion,  which  has  come  into  view  through 
the  openings  left  by  the  fallen  leaves.  The  winter  brought  the  vision  of  the 
mansion  !  My  brother,  you  were  surrounded  by  the  summer  green  of  prosperity. 
It  had  become  your  king.  There  your  vision  ended.  But  the  Lord  wished  to 
give  your  thought  a  further  reach.  He  wanted  your  soul  to  see  "  the  mansion 
which  the  Father  hath  prepared  "  for  them  that  love  Him.  So  He  took  away 
your  little  king.  He  sent  the  winter  and  stripped  your  trees  ;  and  "  in  the  year 
that  the  little  king  died  you  saw  the  Lord."  (Ibid.)  Isaiah's  call : — I.  The 
medium  through  which  it  was  GIVEN — a  vision.  Why  was  it  recorded  ?  Not 
to  indulge  the  conceit  of  the  prophet,  nor  even  chiefly  to  certify  him  to  the  Jews  ; 
but  because  of  the  messages  to  them  which  it  so  vividly  conveys,  and  the  repre- 
sentative interest  of  the  experience  to  all  spiritual  minds.  II.  The  state  of 
mind  the  vision  produced.  (Ver.  5.)  Fear,  dejection,  self-humiliation.  ?oth 
personally  and  as  representative  of  the  Jewish  nation  he  was  convicted  of  sin. 
This  is  the  invariable  result  of  close  intercourse  with  God.  Our  inborn  sin  is 
brought  to  light  and  rebuked.  And  the  more  Christlike  we  are  the  more  will 
our  brothers'  sin  likewise  weigh  upon  our  hearts.  It  is  in  this  very  experience 
that  our  preparation  for  service  begins.  III.  How  this  was  dealt  with.  The 
fact  of  sinfulness  is  not  denied  by  Him  to  whom  it  is  confessed.  It  is  tacitly 
confirmed  by  what  takes  place.  Yet  how  tender  and  considerate  is  the  silence 
of  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  !  At  once  He  institutes  and  sets  in  operation  a 
mediatorial  agency.  Such  guilt  and  impurity  no  water  can  cleanse :  fire  is 
needed,  fire  from  the  Consuming  Fire.  IV.  The  call.  1.  Couched  first  in  a 
universal  question, — "  Whom  shall  I  send  ? "  &c.  2.  After  the  prophet's 
response  the  call  is  more  direct  and  personal :  "  Go,  and  tell  this  people,"  &c. 
The  more  general  call  to  us  consists,  as  it  did  to  Isaiah,  in  the  sense  of  our  neigh- 
bours' need  and  our  own  duty  with  regard  to  supplying  it.  But  if  a  Christian 
is  in  earnest,  and  willing  to  surrender  himself  to  the  commandment  of  his  Lord, 
more  specific  direction  will  not  be  wanting.  V.  The  response.  (Ver.  8.) 
"  Then  said  I,  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  A  sacrifice  and  a  petition.  (Homiletit 
Magazine.)  Isaiah's  vision : — I.  The  ineffable  majesty  of  God.  1.  His 
supreme  authority.  "  Sitting  upon  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  up."  He  is  the 
high  and  lofty  One.  He  ruleth  over  all,  matter  and  mind,  the  evil  and  the  good. 
2.  His  magnificent  aspect.  "  His  train  filled  the  temple."  This  is  an  allusion 
to  the  flowing  robes  of  Oriental  raonarchs,  which  signalise  their  stately  grandeur. 
What  is  the  costume  of  the  Infinite  ?     "  Thou  clothest  Thyself  with  light  as  witb 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  147 

a  garment."     The  flowing  robes  of  His  majesty  filled  the  temple  of  immensity. 

3.  His  illustrious  attendants.  "  Above  it  stood  the  seraphim."  Eastern  monarchs 
had  numerous  princes  and  nobles  as  their  attendants  ;  but  these  fiery  ones  are 
the  ministers  of  the  eternal  King.  4.  His  absolute  holiness.  "  One  cried  unto 
another,  and  said,  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  repetition  indi- 
cates the  intensity  of  their  conviction.  II.  The  lofty  services  of  celestial 
intelligences.  Their  services  are — 1.  Reverential.  2.  Alert.  They  do  not 
move  with  a  tardy  reluctance  in  the  service  of  their  Lord  ;  but  with  wings 
expanded  they  stand  ever  ready  to  execute  His  behest.  3.  Individual.  "  One 
cried  unto  another."    Each  was  intensely  alive  to  his  own  responsibility  and  duty. 

4.  Harmonious.  After  the  separate  cries  there  was  a  blending  of  all  in  one  grand 
chorus,  "  The  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  5.  Enthusiastic.  As  the  peal  of 
a  majestic  organ  sometimes  shakes  the  cathedral,  the  voice  of  one  worshipper 
in  heaven  is  represented  as  moving  the  posts  of  the  door.  The  grand  solo  sends 
a  tremor  through  the  temple.  III.  The  amazing  capacity  of  the  human  soul. 
Isaiah  saw  all  this,  not  with  the  outward  eye,  but  with  the  eye  of  his  mind. 
Unlike  all  other  creatures  on  this  earth,  man  has  a  capacity  to  see  God.  He  can 
see  God  enthroned  in  the  universe.  1.  Sin  has  injured  this  capacity.  Whilst 
all  men  have  the  power  to  see  God,  few  men  do.  2.  The  Gospel  restores  this 
capacity.  It  opens  the  spiritual  eye,  sweeps  away  the  carnal  atmosphere,  and 
shows  God  filling  the  temple.  (Homilist.)  The  Trinity  in  unity  (for  Trinity 
Sunday) : — I.  As  to  the  universal  prevalence  of  belief  in  the  doctrine. 
The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  has  always  been  one  of  those  things,  to  use  the  language 
of  St.  Luke,  which  have  been  most  surely  believed  among  us.  II.  The  scriptural 
proof  of  the  doctrine.  It  underlies  the  whole  Bible,  and  is  inextricably  inter- 
woven with  its  fabric  and  its  structure.  III.  The  nature  of  this  doctrine. 
We  grant  at  once  that  it  is  mysterious,  and  that  it  is  inexplicable.  We  walk  by 
faith,  not  by  sight.  This  great  doctrine  in  its  inner  being  is  hidden  from  us  ; 
but  it  presents  a  countenance  to  us  full  of  beauty  and  loveliness,  the  features  of 
which  are  discerned  by  the  eye  of  faith.  It  is  a  golden  casket,  containing  a  most 
precious  jewel ;  locked,  if  you  like,  which  we  cannot  open,  but  enriching  us  never- 
theless. It  is  a  song  in  a  strange  language,  the  meaning  of  it  in  a  great  degree 
unintelligible,  but  the  melody  most  exquisite.  Practical  application  of  the 
doctrine — 1.  It  is  bound  up  with  our  duty  to  God.  We  have  duties  to  pay  to 
each  of  the  three  Persons  if  we  would  perfectly  know  our  glorious  God,  if  we  would 
worthily  magnify  His  holy  name.  2.  It  is  bound  up  with  our  hope  of  salvation. 
3.  It  is  bound  up  with  the  fulness  of  Gospel  blessings.  Take  the  apostolic  bene- 
diction ;  what  more  can  you  conceive  of  spiritual  life  and  blessing  than  is  con- 
tained within  that  ?  (R.  W.  Forrest,  M.A.)  The  command  and  encourage- 
ment to  communicate  the  Gospel : — The  communication  of  the  will  of  God  to  others 
is  connected  with  the  manifestation  of  the  excellency  of  all  the  perfections  of 
the  Deity,  but  appears  in  the  passage  before  us  in  more  especial  relation  to  the 
glory  of  the  Divine  holiness.  I.  The  revelation  which  God  has  made  to 
His  intelligent  creatures  manifests  His  supreme  and  perfect  holiness. 
The  great  lesson  which  the  vision  taught  was  the  holiness  of  Jehovah,  and  that 
by  the  manifestation  of  this  the  whole  earth  was  to  be  filled  with  His  glory.  This, 
if  not  the  source  and  end,  has  always  formed  a  part,  an!  has  often  been  pre-eminent 
in  the  manifestations  God  has  made  to  His  intelligent  creatures.  Although 
inseparably  blended  with  the  infinite  benevolence  and  perfect  rectitude,  we  find 
this  perfection  more  frequently  associated  with  the  name,  and  employed  to  qualify 
the  attributes  of  Jehovah,  than  any  other.  The  arm  of  the  Lord,  the  emblem 
of  His  power,  is  called  His  holy  arm  ;  His  eyes,  emblems  of  omniscience,  the 
eyes  of  His  holiness ;  His  presence,  Holy  of  holies ;  His  majesty,  the  throne  of 
His  holiness  ;  His  name,  the  holy  name  ;  Himself,  the  Holy  One.  This  is  equally 
applicable  to  the  Father,  Holy  Father, — the  Son,  Holy  Child, — the  Spirit,  Holy 
Ghost.  All  the  manifestations  God  has  ever  made  of  Himself,  so  far  as  our  limited 
and  imperfect  knowledge  extends,  have  been  those  of  His  holiness  He  is  holy 
in  all  His  works.  It  was  because  they  beheld  a  new  impress  of  the  moral  image 
of  Jehovah  that  the  sons  of  God  shouted  together  for  joy.  The  Divine  holiness 
was  also  exhibited,  under  a  new  aspect,  to  all  orders  of  intelligent  creation,  in 
the  contrast  between  the  state  of  the  first  human  pair  and  that  of  fallen  spirits. 
All  the  manifestations  which,  since  the  fall,  the  Divine  Being  has  condescended  to 
make  to  our  race,  either  of  His  dominion  over  the  affairs  of  men,  the  intimations 
of  His  will,  or  the  operations  of  His  grace  and  Spirit  on  the  soul,  have  been  revela- 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yi. 

tions  of  the  Divine  holiness.  In  the  human  nature  of  Christ,  the  glory  of  Divine 
holiness  was  enshrined  in  a  temple  more  pure  than  that  in  which  the  Shekinah 
had  appeared  ;  here  was  an  altar  that  sanctified  both  the  giver  and  the  gift ;  a 
sacrifice  in  which  Omniscience  saw  no  imperfection  ;  a  Priest  who  needed  not 
to  offer  sacrifice  for  His  own  sins,  for  He  was  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled.  The 
purity  of  God  had  been  shown  in  the  creation ;  in  the  consequences  of  the  fall ; 
the  destruction  of  the  old  world;  and  the  giving  of  the  law:  but  on  Calvary, 
though  softened  by  the  veil  of  humanity  through  which  it  was  revealed,  it  beamed 
forth  with  an  intensity  and  effulgence  which  rendered  it  at  once  the  moat 
stupendous  and  sublime  display  of  the  Divine  equity  and  holiness  that  ever  has, 
or,  we  have  reason  to  believe,  ever  will  take  place.  The  design  of  the  sacrifice 
displays  more  vividly  this  glorious  perfection.  It  was  not  simply  to  redeem 
from  sin,  but  to  redeem  to  holiness.  The  dispensation  which  terminated  with 
the  return  of  the  Redeemer  to  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  has  been  followed  by 
another,  les3  imposing,  but  equally  clear  and  more  extensive,  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  holiness,  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  volume  of  inspiration 
is  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  holiness ;  all  its  precepts  and  promises  are  holy. 
With  what  superiority  in  moral  excellency  does  this  view  of  the  connection 
between  the  diffusion  of  the  Gospel  and  the  glorious  holiness  of  Jehovah  invest 
this  sacred  cause ;  what  impressive  instruction  does  it  impart  to  all  engaged 
in  its  varied  departments,  at  home  or  abroad ;  and  how  imperative  its  require- 
ment, that,  on  every  order  of  agency  in  its  support,  direction,  and  application, 
holiness  unto  the  Lord  should  ever  be  distinctly  inscribed  1  II.  The  communica- 
tion  TO   OTHERS   OF  THB   REVELATION  WHICH   GOD   HAS   MADE,   IS   ENJOINED   BY 

Divtne  authority.  Whatever  motives  may  engage  the  people  of  God  to  com- 
municate to  others  what  He  has  revealed  to  them,  the  Divine  command  constitutes 
the  foundation,  augments  the  force  of  every  other,  and  must  give  vitality  and 
efficiency  to  all.  This  commission  has  been  either  special  or  ordinary ;  but  the 
authority  has  been  the  same  in  all,  and  the  obligation  equal.  III.  Knowledge 
of  the  Divine  will,  and  experience  op  the  Divine  mercy,  demand  and 
encourage  prompt  and  cheerful  obedience.  This  is  strongly  and  beautifully 
shown  in  the  vision  of  the  prophet.  Many  of  the  communications  of  the  Divine 
will  appear  to  have  been  preceded  by  peculiar  manifestations  of  the  Divine  glory. 
Thus  Moses,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel ;  the  disciples,  after  the 
resurrection,  and  on  the  mountain  in  Galilee  ;  Saul,  on  his  way  to  Damascus  ; 
and  the  beloved  disciple  in  Patmos,  were  favoured.  This  was  probably  designed 
to  strengthen  their  minds  with  vivid  and  solemn  impressions  of  the  greatness 
and  majesty  of  that  God  whose  message  they  were  to  declare,  and  to  encourage 
their  fidelity.  It  is  a  humiliating  fact,  that,  with  authority  equally  distinct, 
motives  more  numerous  and  strong,  and  facilities  greater  than  at  any  former 
time,  discouragements  and  difficulties  still  keep  many  at  home,  who  ought  to  be 
on  the  broad  plains  of  moral  death,  pointing  the  nations  to  "  the  Lamb  of  God, 
that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."  These  difficulties  principally  arise 
from  the  views  which  are  taken  of  the  nature  of  the  work  and  the  qualifications 
it  requires.  1.  Physical  unfitness.  2.  Deficiency  of  natural  or  acquired  abilities. 
3.  Moral  unfitness.  4.  Attachment  to  home,  and  the  privations  and  perils  of 
the  work.  5.  The  magnitude  and  importance  of  the  work.  Let  us  glance  at 
the  encouragements  to  obedience.  1.  The  dominion  and  omnipotence  of  the 
Redeemer.  2.  The  grateful  import  of  the  message.  3.  The  measure  of  success, 
though  not  the  rule  of  duty,  is  cheering.  4.  The  spirit  of  the  times  and  the 
aspect  of  the  world.  (W.  Ellis.)  The  idea  of  God: — I.  Isaiah's  vision  ov 
God.  This  was,  in  all  probability,  the  greatest  incident  in  his  whole  life,  and  it 
left  an  indelible  mark  on  his  thinking,  just  as  the  thinking  of  St.  Paul,  and,  in 
fact,  his  whole  activity,  sprang  out  of  what  happened  to  him  on  the  way  to 
Damascus.  That  day  he  saw  God.  That  is  his  own  account  of  the  matter. 
Now,  as  he  prophesies  through  three  reigns  after  the  death  of  Uzziah,  Jotham's, 
Ahaz's,  and  Hezekiah's,  and  probably  lived  sixty  years  after  this  date,  he  must 
at  the  time  have  been  a  very  young  man,  and  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  think 
that  this  was  not  only  the  commencement  of  his  activity  as  a  prophet,  but  the 
beginning  of  his  own  religious  life.  It  was  what,  in  modern  language,  would  be 
called  his  conversion.  He  says  that  he  "  saw  the  Lord,"  and  what  better  account 
could  any  one  give  of  the  crisis  by  which  real  religion  commences  ?  Before  this, 
Isaiah  had  heard  plenty  about  God,  because  he  seems  to  have  been  the  son  of  a 
wealthy  family  living  in  Jerusalem  ;  but,  as  another  eminent  Old  Testament 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  149 

writer  indicates,  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  hearing  about  God  and 
seeing  Him.  "  I  have  heard  of  Thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now 
mine  eye  seeth  Thee."  It  is  really  just  the  transition  from  the  religion  of  tradition 
to  the  religion  of  experience.  Religion  comes  to  us  all  first  as  a  tradition.  It 
is  the  tradition  of  our  home,  the  tradition  of  our  Church,  the  tradition  of  our 
country,  and  so  on ;  but  as  long  as  it  is  merely  that,  it  is  vague,  unreal,  and 
remote.  But  some  day  this  God  of  whom  we  have  heard  is  realised  by  us  to  be 
here ;  and  this  Christ,  of  whom  we  have  heard  that  He  has  saved  others,  comes 
seeking  for  entrance  into  our  own  soul ;  and  if  we  let  Him  in,  our  religion  passes 
into  an  entirely  new  stage.  Now,  this  was  what  happened  to  Isaiah.  II.  Thb 
effect  of  the  vision  on  his  work.  One  of  the  seraphim  cried  to  another, 
and  said,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His 
glory."  That  is  to  say,  two  attributes  of  God  overawed  and  overwhelmed 
these  supernal  beings — His  holiness  and  His  omnipotence.  The  one  of  these  is 
the  inner  glory  of  God  ;  the  other  is  the  outer  glory.  He  is  holy,  holy,  holy 
inwardly — that  is  perfectly,  unspeakably,  uncompromisingly  holy ;  and  then 
outwardly,  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory  ;  or  rather,  to  put  it  quite  literally, 
the  fulness  of  the  universe — that  is  to  say,  all  the  variety  of  suns  and  stars,  of 
heaven  and  earth,  of  land  and  sea — all  that  is  His  glory,  or  the  garment  by  which 
He  is  made  visible.  We  are  wont  in  secular  things  to  say  that  the  child  is  father 
of  the  man,  and  if  any  man  does  anything  very  remarkable  in  the  world  it  will 
usually  be  found  that  he  has  seen  by  the  instinct  of  genius  very  early  what  he 
was  intended  to  do.  And  this  is  true  of  Isaiah  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  What 
he  saw  that  day  in  a  moment  it  took  a  whole  life-time  to  write  out.  Manifold 
as  is  the  truth  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  it  may  all  be  deduced  from  these  two  things — 
the  holiness  of  God  and  the  omnipotence  of  God.  The  one-half  of  his  prophecies 
may  be  summed  up  in  this  word  which  I  borrow  from  one  part  of  his  writings : 
"  Cry  aloud,  spare  not,  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  show  My  people 
their  transgression,  and  the  house  of  Jacob  their  sins."  The  book  opens  with 
an  extraordinary  description  of  the  sins  of  the  nation,  and  this  theme  occurs  all 
through.  And  what  is  all  that  but  just  an  echo  of  holy,  holy,  holy  ?  If  God 
is  what  the  seraphim  said  that  day  He  was,  then  sin  must  be  such  as  Isaiah 
represents  it  to  be.  Then,  the  other  great  note  of  his  writings  is  that  which 
is  expressed  in  the  first  verse  of  the  opening  of  the  second  part  of  the  book: 
"'  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  My  people,  saith  your  God."  Isaiah  is  among  all  the 
prophets  the  prophet  of  comfort.  He  was  indeed  a  prophet  of  calamity,  and 
perhaps  in  no  other  book  of  the  Old  Testament  do  we  see  so  clearly  as  in  his  the 
cruel  and  the  irresistible  might  of  the  great  world  monarchs  by  which  the  people 
of  that  age  were  surrounded ;  but  mighty  as  these  were,  a  Mightier  was  known 
to  Isaiah ;  One  to  whom  they  were  just  like  the  dust ;  One  that  could  call  them 
like  dogs  to  His  feet,  and  wield  them  as  the  woodman  in  the  woods  wields  his 
axe ;  and  therefore  those  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord  do  not  need  to  fear  these 
great  monarchs ;  let  them  only  trust  and  hope.  That  was  the  Gospel  of  Isaiah, 
and  who  does  not  see  that  it  is  merely  an  echo  of  what  he  heard  the  seraphim  say: 
"  The  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  For  these  two  ideas  about  God,  Isaiah 
has  two  names  that  recur  all  through  his  writings.  To  denote  the  holiness  of 
God,  he  calls  Him  the  "  Holy  One  of  Israel  "  ;  and  to  denote  His  omnipotence 
he  calls  Him  the  "  Lord  of  hosts."  III.  The  effect  of  the  vision  on  himself. 
The  revelation  made  to  him  that  day  about  God,  namely,  that  He  is  the  Holy  One, 
had  an  immediate  and  transforming  effect  on  himself.  My  idea  is  that  up  to  this 
time  Isaiah  was  a  man  of  the  world,  perhaps  indulging  in  the  vices  which  the 
young  nobility  of  Jerusalem  of  that  day  were  famous  for ;  but  now,  in  a  moment, 
in  the  light  of  God,  he  sees  the  error  of  his  ways  and  the  putridity  of  his  heart, 
and  hence  there  bursts  from  him  the  exclamation  :  "  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  am 
undone ;  because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people 
of  unclean  lips."  You  see  he  felt  his  sin  chiefly  on  his  lips — i.e.,  it  was  sins  of 
speech  he  became  conscious  of.  I  should  think  that  few  will  doubt  that  when 
he  says,  "  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips,"  he  means  to  refer 
to  a  prevalence  of  profanity  amongst  his  companions.  Well,  is  it  not  the  most 
natural  explanation  to  believe  that  he  had  in  his  previous  life  given  way  to  that 
sin,  and  now  that  is  the  sin  that  burns  in  on  his  conscience  ?  But  he  learned 
at  this  point  also  something  very  precious  about  the  holy  God.  As  soon  as  he 
had  confessed  his  sin,  one  of  the  seraphim,  doubtless  obeying  a  secret  hint  from 
Jehovah,  flew  to  the  altar,  and,  seizing  the  tongs,  lifted  from  the  altar  a  hot  stone, 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vt. 

and  laid  it  on  the  lips  of  the  prophet — on  the  place  where  his  sin  was.  The  mean- 
ing was  that  his  sin  was  burned  away.  And  this  became  to  Isaiah  the  cause  of 
one  of  the  greatest  features  of  his  work  as  a  prophet  in  his  subsequent  life.  There 
is  no  writer  in  the  Bible  that  in  language  more  tender  and  convincing  speaks 
about  God's  willingness  to  forgive.  And  where  did  Isaiah  learn  that  t  He  learnt 
it  that  day  when  the  seraph  laid  the  burning  stone  upon  his  own  lips  and  burned 
his  sin  away.  The  other  half  of  the  revelation,  the  omnipotence  of  God,  had  its 
immediate  practical  effect  also.  But  it  was  the  Maker  of  Isaiah  that  was  playing 
on  his  mind  on  this  occasion  for  His  own  purpose.  He  was  playing  as  an  artist 
might  play  on  an  exquisite  instrument,  and  in  point  of  fact  the  mind  of  Isaiah 
was  one  of  the  most  exquisite  instruments  that  have  ever  existed  in  this  world. 
There  has  hardly  ever  been  a  mind  in  this  world,  in  its  native  structure,  so  perfect, 
and  the  Maker  of  it  was  now  touching  it  to  splendid  issue.  He  was  needing  a 
messenger  to  that  generation,  and  He  had  fixed  on  Isaiah  to  be  His  messenger, 
and  He  was  making  him  ready.  Isaiah  had  just  realised  that  God  was  the 
Omnipotent,  to  whom  all  creatures  and  he  himself  belonged,  and  now  that  the 
relief  and  joy  of  forgiveness  were  thrilling  through  him,  he  realised  in  a  still 
higher  sense  he  belonged  absolutely  to  the  God  who  had  pardoned.  (James 
Stalker,  D.D.)  Isaiah's  vision  in  the  temple  : — God  often  prepares  His  servants 
for  special  work  by  special  grace.  I.  The  views  with  which  this  vision  furnishes 
us  concerning  God.  1.  His  sovereignty.  2.  His  holiness.  3.  His  mercy. 
II.  The  views  with  which  this  vision  furnishes  us  concerning  angels.  1.  Their 
humility.  2.  Their  obedience.  3.  Their  devotion.  HI.  The  views  with  which 
this  vision  furnishes  us  respecting  man.  1.  His  sinful  condition.  2.  His  gracious 
recovery.  3.  His  exalted  calling.  (0.  T.  Perks,  D.D.)  Preparation  for  the 
LorSs  work : — I.  Special  preparation  is  necessary  for  a  special  work  op 

GRACE,  WHETHER  IT  BE  IN  THE  INDIVIDUAL  HEART,  OR  IN  THE  CHURCH.  II.  THE 
BLESSED  RESULTS  OP  THE  WORK  WILL  BE  LARGELY  PROPORTIONED  TO  THE  CHAR- 
ACTER and  degree  of  the  preparation.  (J.  Sherwood.)  The  threefold 
vision : — I.  A  vision  of  God.  This  can  only  come  to  us  in  our  present  state 
indirectly,  parabolically,  or  as  here,  symbolically.  It  will  include  a  conception 
of  God's — 1.  Authority :  "  a  throne  high  and  lifted  up."  2.  Glory :  "  His  train 
filled  the  temple."  3.  Holiness :  seraphic  action  and  seraphic  tones  proclaimed 
Him  as  the  Thrice  Holy.  II.  A  vision  of  spiritual  intelligence.  Just  as 
the  prophet  came  to  understand  that  there  was  a  vast  spiritual  universe  behind 
and  beyond  the  material,  and  of  which  the  material  was  but  the  hint  and  type, 
so  must  we.  He  saw  in  the  seraphim  a  revelation  of  the  existence  of  spiritual 
beings.  HI.  A  vision  of  self.  There  is  a  vision  of  his — 1.  Own  individuality. 
The  right  use  of  the  pronouns  "  I "  and  "  me,"  is  a  lesson  worth  learning,  he  finds. 
2.  Relationship  to  others :  "  I  dwell  among  a  people,"  &c.  3.  Sinfulness.  To 
this— (1)  The  vision  of  God  as  holy ;  (2)  The  vision  of  spiritual  beings  as  pure  ; 
and  (3)  The  consciousness  of  his  own  condition,  all  contributed.  4.  Possible  purifi- 
cation. Here  we  have — (1)  The  supernatural  means  of  this  purification.  "  A 
seraph."  (2)  The  connection  of  these  means  with  sacrifice.  "  From  off  the  altar," 
&o.  6.  Life-mission.  Here  we  note — (1)  God's  care  for  the  world.  It  is  He  who 
cries  "  Who  will  go  for  Us  t "  (2)  The  godly  man's  response.  It  is  for  him 
eagerly,  obediently,  loyally  to  cry,  "  Here  am  I,  send  me."  In  Isaiah,  in  Paul, 
in  every  godly  man,  the  vision  of  God  leads  to  unselfish  consecration  to  the 
good  of  others.  (U.  R.  Thomas,  B.A.)  Isaiah's  vision: — I.  The  vision  which 
the  prophet  beheld  (vers.  1-4).  1.  Of  the  Divine  supremacy.  2.  Of  the  Divine 
attendants.  Their  name  signifies  "  fiery  ones."  There  is  a  remarkable  analogy 
between  what  is  said  here,  and  what  is  stated  of  the  mysterious  beings  in  the 
Book  of  Revelation — "  They  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy, 
Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come."  The  holiness  of  God 
is  the  great  burthen  of  the  celestial  songs.  3.  The  vision  connects  holiness  with 
the  Divine  greatness — "  The  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  All  His  creatures 
speak  His  praise.  4.  A  remarkable  effect  is  stated  to  have  been  produced  by  this 
celebration  of  the  Divine  majesty  and  holiness — "  The  posts  of  the  door  moved 
at  the  voice  of  him  that  cried,  and  the  house  was  filled  with  smoke."  This  may 
be  intended  to  show  the  terrors  of  the  Divine  holiness,  when  it  is  kindled  and 
brought  into  exercise  by  human  transgression.  Smoke  is  connected  in  Scripture 
with  the  tokens  of  rising  wrath  in  the  Almighty.  (Deut.  xxix.  20;  Psa.  xviii. 
7,  8 ;  Rev.  xv.  8.)  And  the  sequel  informs  us  that  He  had  determined  to  "  waste 
the  cities,  and  depopulate  the  habitations,  until  there  should  be  a  great  forsaking 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  151 

in  the  midst  of  the  land."  Observe  from  the  vision  here  granted  to  the  prophet, 
how  necessary  it  is  that  those  who  go  out  on  the  work  of  the  Lord  should  have 
a  vision  of  His  glory  and  greatness  that  they  may  have  a  proper  sense  of  the  work 
in  which  they  are  engaged.  How  can  he  speak  of  the  glory  of  God,  who  has 
not  seen  it  ?  Or  how  can  he  speak  of  the  holiness  of  God,  of  the  terrors  of  the 
Almighty,  who  has  himself  no  true  idea  of  either  T  II.  The  effect  which  this 
vision  produced  upon  the  prophet's  mind.  "  Then  said  I,  Woe  is  me !  for 
I  am  undone,"  &c.  The  vision  of  the  glory  of  God  which  he  beheld,  became 
the  means  of  filling  him  with  reverence,  humility,  and  fear.  The  prophet  was 
filled  with  an  awful  sense  of  his  own  depravity  in  two  respects — 1.  As  a  man. 
Why  are  the  lips  mentioned  T  Not  because  the  depravity  is  merely  superficial, 
or  resting  on  the  surface  ;  but  because  the  depravity  of  the  heart  rends  and  rages 
without,  and  finds  vent  in  the  tongue.  The  vision  of  the  Divine  holiness  is  the 
best  way  of  impressing  our  minds  with  a  sense  of  our  own  defects  and  vileness. 
2.  As  an  intended  messenger  of  God.  He  saw  how  unworthy  he  was  to  receive 
messages  from  God  and  go  out  to  the  people.  If  private  Christians  should  feel 
their  depravity  and  un worthiness,  how  much  more  should  those  who  are  ministers. 
He  who  has  not  been  humbled  under  a  sense  of  his  own  unworthiness  before 
God  has  no  right  at  all  to  go  out  to  speak  to  others.  III.  The  sustaining  visita- 
tion WHICH  WAS  MADE  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  THE  EFFECT  PRODUCED.      To  prevent 

the  prophet  from  sinking  into  despair,  Divine  consolation  was  given.  Notice — 
1.  The  agent  sent.  "  One  of  the  seraphim."  These  are  often  employed  in 
messages  of  goodness  to  man.  Observe  his  celerity — he  "  flew."  These  celestial 
beings  take  an  especial  interest  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  designs  of  God.  2.  The 
assurance  communicated.  "  Thine  iniquity  is  taken  away,"  &c.  3.  The  manner 
in  which  the  assurance  is  testified.  "  Then  flew  one,"  &c.  Fire  is  symbolical 
of  purity.  The  Spirit's  influence  is  compared  to  fire.  This  transaction  signifies — 
(1)  The  purity  of  the  ministry.  (2)  The  fervour  of  the  ministry.  IV.  The  com- 
mission   WHICH,    IN   CONNECTION    WITH    THIS    VISITATION,    WAS    PROPOSED    AND 

accepted.  "  Whom  shall  I  send,"  &c.  Observe — 1.  That  the  messenger  who 
goes  out,  God  sends  by  His  own  power.  2.  Such  messengers  are  fully  devoted  to 
God.  They  may  indeed  say  "  Corban  "  with  respect  to  all  they  have.  What  an 
honourable  work  is  this  !  It  is  also  a  work  of  responsibility.  3.  The  messenger 
of  God  must  proceed  without  debate  as  to  the  object  of  his  mission.  (J.  Parsons. ) 
Isaiah's  vision  : — The  scene  is  Messianic.  Christ  is  in  it.  I.  What  the  prophet 
saw  and  heard.  There  is  no  special  stress  to  be  laid  on  the  term  Lord,  as  used 
here.  It  is  not  the  incommunicable  name  of  essence,  Jehovah ;  but  the  title 
of  dominion,  of  mastership  and  ownership.  The  awe  of  His  appearance  is  in 
the  circumstances  or  surroundings.  1.  He  is  upon  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  up. 
It  is  the  throne  of  absolute  sovereignty ;  of  resistless,  questionless,  supremacy 
over  all.  2.  He  is  in  the  temple,  where  the  throne  is  the  mercy-seat,  between 
the  cherubim,  over  the  ark  of  the  Covenant,  which  is  the  symbol  and  seal  of 
reconciliation  and  friendly  communion.  And  He  is  there  in  such  rich  grace  and 
glory  that  the  whole  temple  is  filled  with  the  overflowing  robe  of  His  redeeming 
majesty.  3.  Above,  or  upon,  that  ample  overflowing  train  of  so  magnificent 
a  raiment  stood  the  seraphim.  These  are  not,  as  I  take  it,  angelic  or  superangelic 
spirits,  but  the  Divine  Spirit  Himself,  the  Holy  Ghost ;  appearing  thus  in  the 
aspect  and  attitude  of  gracious  ministry.  In  that  attitude  He  multiplies  Him- 
self, as  it  were,  according  to  the  number  and  exigencies  of  the  churches  and  the 
individuals  to  whom  He  has  to  minister.  He  takes  up,  moreover,  the  position 
of  reverential  waiting  for  His  errand,  and  in  an  agency  manifold,  but  yet  one, 
readiness  to  fly  to  its  execution.  The  cherubim  are  on  almost  all  hands  admitted 
to  be  representative  emblems  of  redeemed  creation,  or  of  the  redeemed  Church 
on  earth.  And  I  cannot  think  it  wrong  to  give  to  the  seraphim  in  this,  the  only 
passage  in  which  the  name  occurs,  a  somewhat  corresponding  character  as  repre- 
sentative emblems  of  the  active  heavenly  agency  in  redemption.  Nor  is  the 
plural  form  any  objection.  I  find  a  similar  mode  of  setting  forth  the  multiform 
and  multifarious  agency  of  the  Spirit  in  the  opening  salutation  of  the  Apocalypse — 
"  the  seven  Spirits  which  are  before  His  throne  "  (Rev.  i.  4).  It  is  the  Holv  Ghost, 
waiting  to  go  forth  from  the  Father,  to  apply  and  carr^  forward  the  threefold 
work  of  the  Son,  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King ;  and  to  do  so  as  if  He  were  becoming 
seven  Spirits  in  accommodation  to  the  seven  churches  ;  as  if  each  church  was  to 
have  Him  as  its  own ;  yes,  and  each  believer  too.  4.  With  this  great  sight, 
voice  and  movement  are  joined.     "  And  one  cried  unto  another,  and  said,  Holy, 


152  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  It  is  not 
necessarily  the  voice  of  the  seraphim,  though  that  is  the  ordinary  view.  I  would 
rather  take  the  words  abstractly  and  indefinitely.  There  is  an  antiphonic  cry 
or  song.  It  is  not  said  among  whom.  Of  course,  the  readiest  reference  is  to  the 
eeraphim.  But  the  text  does  not  require  that ;  it  is  literally  "  this  cried  to 
this."  And  the  attendance  of  an  angelic  choir,  of  all  hosts  of  heaven,  may  be 
assumed.  Assuredly  Christ  is  here.  He  is  here  as  revealing  the  Father.  And 
He  is  here,  not  merely  outwardly,  in  outward  manifestation ;  but  inwardly, 
in  the  deepest  inward  contact  and  converse  of  the  soul  with  God.  II.  How 
the  prophet  felt  (ver.  5).  It  is  a  thorough  prostration.  HI.  How  the 
prophet's  case  is  met.  Lo  !  an  altar ;  the  altar  of  propitiation,  on  which  lies 
the  ever  freshly  bleeding  victim.  One  of  the  seraphim — the  Holy  Spirit  in  one  of 
His  varied  modes  of  operation — flies,  as  if  in  haste,  with  what  is  as  good  as  the 
entire  altar  and  its  sacrifice  to  apply  it  all  effectually.  And  the  effect  is  as  imme- 
diate as  the  touch.  Nothing  comes  in  between.  There  is  no  waiting,  as  for  a 
medicine  to  work  its  cure ;  no  bargaining,  as  if  a  price  were  to  be  paid  ;  no  pro- 
cess to  be  gone  through ;  no  preparation  to  be  made.  IV.  The  subsequent 
offer  and  command  (vers.  8,  9).  Two  things  are  noticeable  here.  1.  The 
grace  of  God  in  allowing  the  prophet,  thus  exercised,  to  be  a  volunteer  for  service. 
The  Lord  might  issue  a  peremptory  command.  But  His  servant  has  the  unspeak- 
able privilege  of  giving  himself  voluntarily  to  the  Lord  who  willingly  gave  Himself 
for  him.  2.  The  unreservedness  of  the  prophet's  volunteering.  It  is  no  half- 
hearted purpose  conditional  on  circumstances  ;  but  the  full,  single-eyed  heartiness 
of  one  loving  much,  because  forgiven  much,  that  breaks  out  in  the  frank, 
unqualified,  unconditional  self-enlistment  and  self-enrolment  in  the  Lord's  host, 
"  Here  am  I,  send  me."  Hence,  accordingly,  the  crowning  proof  and  pledge 
of  his  conversion,  his  cleansing,  his  revival,  his  commission.  He  now  learns 
for  the  first  time,  after  he  has  committed  himself  beyond  the  possibility  of  honour- 
able retraction  or  recall,  what  is  the  errand  darkly  indicated  by  the  heavenly 
voice,  Whom  shall  I  send  ?  At  first  there  may  be  secretly  the  feeling  that  any 
mission  on  which  such  a  Master  may  send  me  must  have  in  it  the  elements  of 
intrinsic  glory  and  assured  triumph.  But  as  it  turns  out  it  is  far  otherwise  than 
that.  The  case  is  altogether  the  reverse.  The  mission  is  to  be  a  mission  of 
judgment.  But  what  then  ?  Does  the  freshly  quickened  volunteer  withdraw 
his  offer  T  or  qualify  it  ?  or  raise  any  question  at  all  about  it  ?  No ;  he  simply 
asks  one  question  ;  a  brief  one ;  comprised  in  three  words — "  Lord,  how  long  ?  " 
It  is  a  question  indicating  nothing  like  reluctance  or  hesitation ;  no  repenting 
of  his  offer ;  no  drawing  back.  For  himself  he  has  nothing  more  to  say.  It  is 
only  in  the  interest  of  his  people,  and  out  of  deepest  sympathy  with  them,  that 
the  irrepressible  cry  of  piety  and  of  patriotism  bursts  from  his  lips — "  Lord, 
how  long  T  how  long  ?  "     (R.  8.   Candlish,  D.D.)        Isaiah's  vision  : — I.  Thh 

LIGHT  IN  WHICH  THE   SON   OF  GOD  APPEARS  TO  THOSE  WHO  ENJOY  AN  INTIMATE 

union  with  Htm,  and  a  near  contemplation  of  Him.     He  is  represented — 

I.  As  seated  on  a  lofty  throne.  2.  As  attended  by  celestial  spirits.  3.  As 
receiving  their  homage  and  praise.     (1)  The  matter  of  it.     (2)  The  manner  of  it. 

II.  The  effect  which  this  intimate  union  and  near  contemplation  will 
produce.  1.  Humility.  It  is  ignoranee  of  God  that  is  the  parent  of  pride. 
True  knowledge  of  Him  tends  to  humility.  Qualities  are  never  seen  so  clearly 
as  by  contrast.  The  application  of  a  straight  rule  marks  the  obliquity  of  a  crooked 
line.  2.  Purification.  3.  Self-devotion.  As  eyes  dazzled  by  the  sun  see  not 
the  glittering  of  drops  of  dew  upon  the  earth,  so  the  glory  of  worldly  objects 
ceases  to  interest  a  soul  that  is  taken  up  with  the  contemplation  of  God  ;  while 
he  will  be  led,  by  a  regard  to  Him  whose  word  has  been  the  instrument  of  his 
purification  and  encouragement,  to  devote  himself  unreservedly  to  His  will. 
(R.  Brodie,  31. A.)  Isaiah's  vision  of  God's  glory: — I.  The  first  view  of  the 
Divine  glory  in  the  text  is  that  of  rule  and  dominion.  The  Lord  is  King — this 
is  the  first  character  under  which  to  approach  Him  whenever  we  engage  in  worship. 
II.  The  second  view  of  the  majesty  and  glory  of  God  is  that  in  His  nature  and 
perfection  He  is  incomprehensible.  III.  The  third  view  of  the  Divine 
Majesty  is  holiness.  IV.  The  fourth  view  is  that  of  a  penitent,  abased  man 
sinking  before  this  overpowering  manifestation.  V.  The  fifth  view  we 
have  is  that  of  this  humble,  silenced  man  obtaining  mercy.  (J.  Summer- 
field,  M.A-)  Isaiah's  vision  of  Christ's  glory  : — He  who  "  sat  upon  the  throne  " 
Isaiah  saw  is  none  other  than  God  Himself.     But  in  his  Gospel  (xii.  41)  John 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  153 

tells  us,  "  these  things  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  Christ's  glory,  and  spake  of  Him." 
It  is  the  throne  of  Jesus.  Let  us  examine  the  manner  in  which  they  who  actually 
saw  the  vision  were  affected  by  it,  and  this  will  best  show  us  at  once  its  consummate 
splendour  and  the  sentiments  it  should  awaken.     I.  It  was  seen  by  angels  and 

THE  "  SPIRITS  OF  THE  JUST  MADE  PEBFECT,"  AND  HOW  WEBE  THESE  AFFECTED  ? 

1.  They  were  astonished.  2.  They  were  filled  with  joy.  Because  God's  grace 
runs  in  the  channel  of  justice.  3.  They  celebrate  it  with  songs.  4.  They  were 
ready  to  advance  the  cause  of  redemption,  for  with  their  wings  they  were  ready 
to  fly.  IL  Let  us  understand  from  the  experience  of  Isaiah  how  believers 
abb  affected  BY  the  vision  OF  ODB  text.  1.  Isaiah  was  overwhelmed  at  the 
first.  He  sees  in  himself  nothing  but  the  dry  stubble  of  guilt,  and  in  God  an 
insatiable  fire,  approaching  to  devour  it.  He  sees  no  fitness  for  heaven,  either 
in  himself  or  those  he  loved.  2.  But  he  is  immediately  revived.  3.  Then  called 
to  active  duty.  III.  We  would  now  consider  how  the  world  is  affected  by 
the  vision  that  Isaiah  saw.  Isaiah  preaches  the  Gospel,  but  his  message  is 
rejected.  So  now.  (J.  J.  Bonar.)  The  enthroned  Lord  : — The  Lord  is  always 
upon  a  throne,  even  when  He  is  nailed  to  the  Cross ;  this  Lord  and  His  throne 
are  inseparable.  There  are  dignitaries  that  have  to  study  how  to  keep  their 
thrones;  but  the  Lord  and  His  throne  are  one.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Isaiah's 
vision  of  God : — I.  The  occasion  of  the  vision.  The  emptied  throne  is  the 
occasion  for  the  manifestation  of  the  true  King.  God's  purpose  in  all  His  with- 
drawals is  the  same  as  His  purpose  in  all  His  gifts,  that  we  may  be  led  to  see  Him 
more  clearly  as  the  one  foundation  of  all  things,  the  anchor  of  our  lives  and  the 
hope  and  stay  of  our  hearts.  The  text  not  only  teaches  us  the  purpose  of  all 
withdrawals,  but  comes  to  us  heavy-freighted  with  the  blessed  thought  that 
God  is  able  to  fill  every  place  that  He  empties.  This  King  of  Judah  was  followed 
by  another,  a  decent  enough  young  man  in  his  way,  who  on  the  whole  went  straight 
and  did  God's  will.  But  that  was  no  comfort  to  the  prophet's  heart.  It  did 
not  avail  to  show  him  a  Jotham  behind  an  Uzziah.  What  he  needed,  and  what 
you  and  I  need,  to  fill  the  empty  places  in  our  hearts  and  lives,  is  the  vision  that 
flamed  upon  his  inward  eye  ;  and  the  conviction  that  the  Lord,  the  King  Himself, 
had  come  when  the  earthly  shadow  passed  away.  II.  The  contents  of  the 
vision.  The  temple  here  is,  of  course,  not  the  mere  earthly  house,  but  that 
higher  house  of  the  Lord,  of  which  the  temple  of  earth  is  a  shadow.  Isaiah's 
vision  was  none  the  less  objective,  none  the  less  distinguishable  from  an  imagina- 
tion of  his  own,  none  the  less  manifestly  and  marvellously  a  revelation  from 
God,  because  if  we  had  been  there  we  should  have  seen  nothing,  any  more  than 
the  Sanhedrim  shared  in  the  vision  of  the  opened  heavens  which  gladdened 
Stephen's  dying  eyes.  Mark,  how  there  is  no  word  of  description  here  of  what 
the  prophet  saw  in  the  centre  of  the  light.  But  if  we  listen  to  the  description 
given  to  us,  there  are  two  great  thoughts  in  it.  "  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  the 
throne,  high  and  lifted  up  — the  infinite  exaltation  of  that  Divine  nature  which 
separates  Him  from  all  the  lowness  of  creatures,  and  makes  Him  the  blessed  and 
incomprehensible  infinite  foundation  of  good  and  of  blessedness  and  the  source 
of  life.  Correspondent  and  parallel  to  this  thought  of  the  sovereign  exaltation 
is  the  song  that  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  seraphim.  The  same  idea  is  expressed 
by  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  of  hosts,"  as  is  expressed  by  "  high  and 
lifted  up."  The  holiness  of  God  means  the  infinite  separation  of  the  infinite 
nature  from  the  finite  creature ;  and  that  separation  is  manifest  both  in  the 
incomprehensible  elevation  of  His  being  and  in  the  perfect  purity  of  His  nature. 
But  whilst  thus  a  great  gulf  is  fixed  between  us  and  Him,  and  we,  like  the  seraphs, 
have  to  veil  our  faces  that  we  see  not,  and  our  feet  that  we  be  not  seen,  there  is 
another  side  to  the  thought,  "  His  skirts  filled  the  temple,"  and  that  is  paralleled 
with  the  other  number  of  the  seraphs'  song,  "  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory." 
For  the  glory  of  God  is  the  manifestation  of  His  holiness.  And  just  as  the  trailing 
skirts  of  that  great  robe  spread  over  the  whole  floor  of  the  temple,  so  through 
the  whole  earth  go  flashing  the  manifold  manifestations  of  His  glory.  These 
twin  thoughts,  never  to  be  separated  from  each  other,  of  the  infinite  separation 
and  the  immeasurable  self-communication  of  our  Father-God,  are  all  as  true 
for  us  to-day  as  they  ever  were.  That  vision  is  as  possible  to  us  as  it  was  to 
Isaiah.  It  was  no  prerogative  of  the  prophet's  office.  Our  eyes  too,  if  we  will, 
may  behold  the  King  in  His  beauty.  It  is  Christ  that  explains  to  us  by  His 
Incarnation  how  it  ever  came  to  pass  that  to  man's  inward  or  outward  eyes  there 
was  granted  a  manifestation  of  Deity  in  the  form  of  humanity  as  here ;  and  His 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yj. 

permanent  revelation  of  God  to  us  puts  us  more  than  on  a  level  with  any  of  those 
of  old  to  whom  were  granted  the  foreshadowings  of  that  historical  fact  of  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh.  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  III.  Tkb 
effects  of  sttch  a  vision  on  the  life.  A  man  that  sees  God  will  know  his 
own  impurity.  Where  there  is  a  sense  of  sin  roused  by  the  sight  of  God  there 
will  come  the  fiery  coal  from  the  altar  that  purifies ;  and  where  there  is  a  sense 
of  sin,  and  the  taking  away  of  it,  by  the  sacrifice  not  brought  by  the  prophet, 
but  provided  for  the  prophet  by  God,  there  will  follow  the  glad  surrender  of  self 
for  all  service,  and  any  mission.  "  Here  am  I,  send  me."  So  this  vision  of 
God  is  the  foundation  of  all  nobleness  of  life.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Isaiah 
a  typical  prophet : — This  is  not  a  story  of  individual  experience  only.  Isaiah 
was  a  typical  prophet  with  special  duties,  and,  consequently,  with  special  qualifica- 
tions for  their  right  discharge.  But  in  many  respects  he  is  also  representative 
of  the  faithful  preacher  of  the  Gospel  and  worker  for  Christ.  In  its  inspirations, 
its  aims  and  motives,  its  responsibilities  and  difficulties,  the  prophet's  office  was 
like  that  of  Christ's  servant  everywhere,  and  from  this  record  we  may  gather 
lessons  of  universal  application.  1.  The  prophet  must  be  a  man  whose  soul  is 
possessed  with  God,  to  whom  God  is  a  reality,  not  an  abstraction,  a  living  and 
present  Friend,  not  a  distant  and  unknown  Ruler.  There  must  be  visions  of 
God  in  the  glory  of  His  holiness  as  well  as  in  the  tenderness  of  His  condescension, 
or  there  will  be  neither  desire  nor  capacity  to  testify  of  Him.  It  is  the  pure  in 
heart  who  thus  see  God,  and  even  as  Isaiah  needed  that  the  live  coal  from  the 
altar  should  touch  his  lips  and  he  should  be  cleansed  from  all  iniquity,  so  must 
Christ's  messenger  know  for  himself  the  blessedness  of  that  salvation  which  he 
preaches  to  others.  This  does  not  supersede  the  necessity  for  intellectual  qualifica- 
tions for  the  work.  Impulse,  however  pure  and  noble,  cannot  fit  a  man  for  even 
the  humblest  work,  much  less  for  the  noblest,  the  most  difficult,  the  most  respons- 
ible of  all.  God  does  lay  His  hands  upon  some  whom  the  wisdom  of  this  world 
would  pronounce  incompetent  for  the  work.  As  in  the  case  of  Bunyan,  the 
working  of  His  grace  in  the  heart  may  develop  gifts  of  fancy  or  of  eloquence 
which  might  else  have  lain  dormant.  2.  Of  the  special  gift  of  inspiration  which 
Isaiah  enjoyed  suffice  it  to  say  that  if  that  is  to  be  reduced  to  a  "  genius  for 
righteousness  "  which  he  shared  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  Jewish  race, 
the  unique  character  and  supreme  authority  of  the  Bible  are  gone.  Define  inspira- 
tion how  men  will,  it  must,  at  all  events,  imply  that  God  revealed  His  will  to  these 
prophets  and  seers  by  whom  the  Sacred  Volume  was  penned,  as  He  did  not  to 
the  great  poets  and  writers  of  the  world,  or  this  Book  has  no  distinctive  value. 
3.  The  prophet  must  be  a  consecrated  servant — one  who  lives  not  to  do  his  own 
pleasure,  but  to  glorify  God.  (J.  G.  Rogers,  B.A.)  The  making  of  a  prophet : — 
1.  The  experience  that  made  Isaiah  a  prophet  took  the  form  of  a  vision.  It 
happened  in  a  period  of  distressing  perplexity  and  gloom.  Wrestling  passionately 
with  the  darkness,  craving  wistfully  for  light,  the  yearning  to  see  God  in  the 
man's  soul  became  so  intense  and  sensitive,  that  the  great  Heart  in  heaven  answered 
the  longing  of  the  heart  on  earth,  and  aspiration  leapt  into  realisation,  and  faith 
flashed  into  vision.  That  sight  of  God — the  living,  holy,  loving  God — made 
Isaiah  a  prophet.  Preachers  and  teachers  of  to-day !  if  we  are  to  be  prophets, 
we  need  just  such  a  sight  of  God.  2.  The  vision  of  God  made  Isaiah  a  prophet ; 
but  the  immediate  result  was  something  different.  The  first  effect  of  contact 
with  God  was  to  produce  in  his  soul  an  intolerable  sense  of  sin.  Had  Isaiah  been 
a  Pharisee,  he  would  have  seized  the  opportunity  of  his  sudden  vicinity  to  the 
Almighty  to  direct  the  Divine  attention  to  his  virtues  and  superiority  over  other 
men.  Had  he  been  one  of  those  philosophers  in  whom  the  heart  has  been  overlaid 
by  the  intellect,  he  would  have  calmly  proceeded  to  make  observations  of  the 
Divine  for  a  new  theory  of  the  absolute  and  unconditioned,  in  sublime  insensibility 
to  the  deepest  problem  of  existence,  the  awful  antithesis  of  human  sin  and  of 
Divine  holiness.  Because  Isaiah  was  a  good  man,  his  new  proximity  to  God 
woke  within  him  a  crushing  horror  of  defilement  and  undoneness.  And  it  was 
so,  precisely  because  he  had  never  been  so  near  to  God  before,  and  had  never  felt 
himself  of  so  much  importance.  Away  down  here,  sinning  among  his  fellow-men, 
the  blots  and  blemishes  of  his  soul  seemed  of  little  moment.  But  up  there,  in 
the  stainless  light  of  heaven,  with  God's  holy  eyes  resting  on  him,  every  spot  of 
sin  within  him  grew  hot  and  horrible,  every  defiling  stain  an  insult  and  a  suffering 
inflicted  on  the  sensitive  holiness  of  God.  These  two  things  are  linked  together, 
and  no  man  can  divorce  them — the  dignity  of  humanity  and  the  damnablenesa 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  155 

of  sin.  3.  The  ethical  process  by  which,  in  the  imagery  of  the  vision,  Isaiah's 
sense  of  sinfulness  came  home  to  him,  is  finely  natural  and  simple.  It  was  at 
his  lips  that  the  consciousness  of  his  impurity  caught  him.  "  I  am  a  man  of 
unclean  lips."  That,  judged  by  our  formulas  and  standards,  might  seem  a  some- 
what superficial  conviction  of  sin.  We  should  have  expected  him  to  speak  of  hia 
unclean  heart,  or  the  total  corruption  of  his  whole  nature.  But  actual  conviction 
of  sin  is  very  regardless  of  our  theories,  and  is  as  diverse  in  its  manifestations 
as  are  the  characters  and  records  of  men.  Sin  finds  out  one  man  in  one  place, 
and  another  in  a  quite  different  spot,  and  perhaps  the  experience  is  most  real 
when  it  is  least  theological.  4.  Isaiah,  in  the  presence  of  God,  felt  within  him 
the  pang  of  that  death,  which  must  be  the  end  of  unpardoned  sin  in  contact  with 
the  Divine  holiness.  He  felt  himself  as  good  as  dead,  yet  never  in  all  his  life 
had  he  so  longed  to  live  as  now,  in  sight  of  God  and  heaven  and  holiness.  He  did 
not  ask  to  escape.  He  was  too  overwhelmed  to  pray  or  hope.  But  to  God's 
heart  that  cry  of  despair  was  an  infinitely  persuasive  prayer  for  mercy.  Pagan 
sages  and  Christian  saints  alike  unite  in  proclaiming  the  overmastering  strength 
of  sin.  5.  Is  there,  then,  no  possibility  of  recovery  ?  no  way  of  cleansing  ?  One 
there  is,  and  one  alone.  Aye,  if  only  God  so  loves  our  sin-stained  race  as  that 
His  stainless  purity  enters  really  into  our  humanity,  and  wrestles  with  our  impurity 
in  a  contact  that  must  be  suffering  to  the  Divine  holiness,  and  is  sin-cleansing 
to  us — that  were  salvation  surely ;  that  were  redemption.  But  is  it  a  reality  ? 
Jesus  Christ  has  lived,  and  died,  and  lives  again,  and  we  know  that  His  Holy 
Spirit  dwells  in  us  and  in  our  world.  That,  and  that  alone,  is  salvation ;  not  any 
theories  nor  any  rites,  but  God's  Holy  Spirit  given  unto  us.  6.  It  was  at  Isaiah's 
lips  that  the  sense  of  sin  had  stung  him,  and  it  was  there  that  he  received  the 
cleansing.  He,  too,  might  now  join  in  heaven's  praise  and  service ;  no  more  an 
alien,  but  a  member  of  the  celestial  choir  and  a  servant  of  the  King.  That  act 
of  Divine  mercy  had  transformed  him.  7.  He  was  a  new  creature,  and  instantly 
the  change  appeared.  The  voice  of  God  sounds  through  the  temple,  saying, 
"  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  Us  ?  "  And  the  first  of  all  heaven's 
hosts  to  offer  is  Isaiah.  A  moment  before,  he  had  shrunk  back,  crushed  and 
despairing,  from  God's  presence,  feeling  as  if  the  Divine  gaze  were  death  to  him. 
Now  he  springs  forward,  invokes  God's  attention  on  himself,  and  before  all  heaven's 
tried  and  trusty  messengers  proposes  himself  as  God's  ambassador.  Was  it 
presumption  T  was  it  self-assertion  ?  I  think,  if  ever  Isaiah  was  not  thinking 
of  himself  at  all,  and  was  conscious  only  of  God  and  goodness  and  gratitude, 
it  was  then,  when  his  heart  was  running  over  with  wonder,  love,  and  praise  for 
God's  unspeakable  mercy  to  him.  It  was  not  presumption ;  it  was  a  true  and 
beautiful  instinct  that  made  him  yearn  with  resistless  longing  to  do  something 
for  that  God  who  had  shown  such  grace  to  him.  {Prof.  W.  6.  Elmslie,  D.D.) 
Christian  missions: — L  What  Isaiah  saw.  II.  What  he  said.  "Woe,"  &c. 
III.  What  hb  felt.  The  assurance  of  pardon.  IV.  What  he  heard. 
The  pardoned  sinner  is  all  ear,  all  eye.  "I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord," 
&o.  V.  What  he  did.  He  made  consecration.  (Richard  Knill.)  Isaiah's 
vision : — 1.  Inasmuch  as  sitting  upon  a  throne  implies  a  human  form,  we 
are  inclined  to  agree  with  those  expositors  who  speak  of  Isaiah's  vision  as  a 
vision  of  Jehovah-Jesus.  2.  The  vision  rebukes  those  who  entertain  the  notion 
that,  so  far  as  Divine  superintendence  is  concerned,  the  universe  is  in  a  state  of 
orphanage.  3.  The  vision  likewise  rebukes  those  who  picture  God  as  absorbed 
in  the  contemplation  of  His  own  excellence,  and  as  existing  in  solitary  grandeur. 
God  is  of  a  social  nature.  Like  earthly  kings  He  has  a  court,  as  much  superior 
to  theirs  as  He  is  Himself  above  them.  3.  Isaiah's  vision  further  teaches  us, 
that  the  creatures  referred  to,  and  represented  by  the  seraphim,  possess  such  a 
knowledge  of  God,  are  in  such  sympathy  with  Him,  and  have  such  confidence 
in  Him,  that  their  lives  are  spent  in  an  element  of  worship.  4.  The  vision  was 
designed  to  qualify  Isaiah  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  course  as  one  of  the  prophets 
of  Judah ;  and  nobly  it  answered  its  purpose.  (O.  Cron,  M.A.)  Isaiah's 
vision  (for  Trinity  Sunday) : — We  have  here  the  proper  inauguration  of  the 
great  evangelical  prophet  to  his  future  work ;  and  one  which,  in  its  essential 
features,  resembles  very  closely  the  inauguration  which  other  eminent  servants 
of  God,  alike  under  the  Old  Covenant  and  under  the  New,  obtained ; — Moses 
(Exod.  iii.  6) ;  Jeremiah  (Jer.  i.  6-9) ;  Paul ;  Joshua  (Josh.  i.  1) ;  Gideon  (Judg. 
vi.  12-24) ;  Ezekiel  (Ezek.  i.  3) ;  Peter  (Luke  v.  4-10).  God's  messengers  go 
not  until  they  are  sent,  and  presume  not  to  deliver  a  message  which  they  have 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

not  received  directly  from  the  Sender.  1.  And,  first,  he  gives  the  date  of  the 
vision.  What  meaning  may  there  sometimes  be  in  a  thing  which  seems  so  simple 
as  a  date  !  What  significance,  what  solemnity  may  it  sometimes  have,  as  surely 
it  has  here.  How  simply  and  yet  how  grandly  are  earth  and  heaven  here  brought 
together,  and  the  fleeting  phantoms  of  one  set  over  against  the  abiding  realities 
of  the  other.  2.  But  if  God's  throne  is  in  heaven,  the  skirts  of  His  glory  reach 
even  to  the  earth :  "  His  train  filled  the  temple."  3.  The  glimpse  afforded  here 
to  the  Church  of  the  elder  dispensation  of  that  great  crowning  mystery  which 
the  Church  of  the  newer  dispensation  throughout  all  the  world  is  celebrating 
to-day.  In  this  Trisagion  we  have,  it  is  true,  no  more  than  a  glimpse  of  the 
mystery;  even  as  in  the  Old  Testament  more  is  nowhere  vouchsafed.  More, 
in  all  likelihood,  the  Church  could  not  then,  nor  until  it  had  been  thoroughly 
educated  into  a  confession  of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  with  safety  have  received  ; 
while  yet  it  was  a  precious  confirmation  of  the  faith,  when,  in  a  later  day,  this 
mystery  was  fully  made  known,  to  discover  that  the  rudiments  of  it  had  been 
laid  long  before  in  Scripture.     4.  But  what  is  the  first  impression  which  this 

glorious  vision  makes  upon  the  prophet  ?  His  first  cry  is  not  of  exultation  and 
elight,  but  rather  of  consternation  and  dismay.  "  Woe  is  me,"  &c.  Even  the 
heathen,  as  more  than  one  legend  in  their  mythology  declares,  could  apprehend 
something  of  this  truth.  If  Jupiter  comes  to  Semele  arrayed  in  the  glories  of 
deity,  she  perishes,  consumed  to  ashes  in  a  brightness  which  is  more  than  mortality 
can  bear.  So,  too,  it  must  have  fared  with  Moses,  if  to  him,  still  clothed  in  flesh 
and  blood,  that  over-bold  request  of  his,  "  Show  me  Thy  glory,"  had  been  conceded ; 
if  it  had  not  been  answered  to  him,  "  Thou  canst  not  see  My  face  ;  for  there  shall 
no  man  see  Me  and  live."  "  We  shall  perish,  for  we  have  seen  the  Lord  of  hosts," 
was  the  ever-recurring  cry  of  those  saints  of  old  ;  and  even  such  is  the  voice  of 
the  prophet  here.  5.  Yet  that  moment  with  all  its  dreadfulness  is  a  passage,  in 
eonie  sense  the  only  passage,  into  a  true  life.  And  such  the  prophet  found  it. 
Observe  the  manner  in  which  sin,  the  guilt  of  sin,  is  here,  as  evermore  in  Holy 
Scripture,  spoken  of  as  taken  away  by  a  free  act  of  God,  an  act  of  His  in  which 
man  is  passive  ;  in  which  he  has,  so  to  speak,  to  stand  still  and  see  the  salvation 
of  the  Lord ;  an  act  to  which  he  can  contribute  nothing,  save  indeed  only  that 
Divinely  awakened  hunger  of  the  soul  after  the  benefit  which  we  call  faith. 
6.  Behold  in  the  prophet  the  fruit  of  iniquity  taken  away,  and  sin  purged.  Behold 
the  joyful  readiness  with  which  he  now  offers  himself  for  the  service  of  his  God. 
(Abp.  Trench.)  The  triune  Name  a  call,  a  message,  a  chastening : — The  con- 
templation of  the  majesty  of  God  is  the  source  of  the  largest  hope  for  all  His 
creatures.  For  beings  pure  and  holy  that  vision  is  the  call  to  unfaltering  adoration 
and  limitless  faith ;  for  men  "  of  unclean  lips  " — sin-stained,  and  labouring  in 
a  sin-stained  world — it  is  the  reassuring  call  to  the  prophet's  work.  I.  The 
vision  of  God  the  call  op  the  prophet.  1.  Nowhere  is  the  thought  presented 
to  us  in  the  Bible  with  more  moving  force  than  in  this  record  of  Isaiah's  mission. 
The  very  mark  of  time  by  which  the  history  is  introduced  has  a  pathetic  signifi- 
cance. It  places  together  in  sharp  contrast  the  hasty  presumption  of  man  and 
the  unchanging  love  of  God.  The  king  died  an  outcast  and  a  leper  because  he 
had  ventured  to  take  to  himself  the  function  of  a  priest  in  the  house  of  God , 
and  in  close  connection  with  that  tragic  catastrophe  an  access  to  God,  far  closer 
than  that  which  the  successful  monarch  had  prematurely  claimed,  was  foreshown 
to  the  prophet  in  a  heavenly  figure.  Isaiah,  a  layman,  was,  it  appears,  in  the 
heavenly  court,  and  he  saw  in  a  trance  the  way  into  the  holiest  place  laid  open. 
The  veils  were  removed  from  sanctuary  and  shrine,  and  he  beheld  more  than 
met  the  eyes  of  the  high  priest,  the  one  representative  of  the  people,  on  the  one 
day  on  which  he  was  admitted,  year  by  year,  to  the  dark  chamber  which  shrouded 
the  Divine  presence.  For  an  eternal  moment  Isaiah's  senses  were  unsealed. 
He  saw  that  which  is  and  not  that  which  appears.  For  him  the  symbol  of 
God  dwelling  in  light  unapproachable,  was  transformed  into  a  personal  presence  ; 
the  chequered  scene  of  human  labour  and  worship  was  filled  with  the  train  of 
God  ;  the  marvels  of  human  skill  were  instinct  with  the  life  of  God.  The  spot 
which  God  had  chosen  was  disclosed  to  his  gaze  as  the  centre  of  the  Divine  revela- 
tion ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  he  was  taught  to  acknowledge  that  the  Divine  presence 
is  not  limited  by  any  bounds,  or  excluded  by  any  blindness,  when  he  heard  from 
the  lips  of  angels  that  the  fulness  of  the  whole  earth  is  His  glory.  Now,  when 
we  recall  what  Judaism  was  at  the  time — local,  rigid,  exclusive — we  can  at  once 
understand  that  such  a  revelation  taken  into  the  soul  was  for  Isaiah  an  illumina- 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  157 

tion  of  the  world.  He  could  see  all  creation  in  its  true  nature  through  the  light 
of  God.  So  to  have  looked  upon  it  was  to  have  gained  that  which  the  seer, 
cleansed  by  the  sacred  fire,  was  constrained  to  declare.  Humbled,  and  purified 
in  his  humiliation,  he  could  have  but  one  answer  when  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
required  a  messenger:  "  Here  am  I;  send  me."  2.  Isaiah's  vision  and  call  are 
for  us  also,  and  they  await  from  us  a  like  response.  When  he  looked  upon  that 
august  sight,  he  saw  Christ's  glory  ;  he  saw  in  figures  and  far  off  that  which  wo 
have  been  allowed  to  contemplate  more  nearly  and  with  the  power  of  closer 
apprehension.  He  saw  in  transitory  shadows  that  which  we  have  received  in 
a  historic  Presence.  By  the  Incarnation  God  has  entered,  and  empowered  us 
to  feel  that  He  has  entered,  into  fellowship  with  humanity  »nd  men.  As  often 
as  that  truth  rises  before  our  eyes,  all  heaven  is  indeed  rent  open,  and  all  earth  is 
displayed  as  God  made  it.  For  us,  then,  the  vision  and  the  call  of  Isaiah  find  a 
fuller  form,  a  more  sovereign  voice  in  the  Gospel  than  the  Jewish  prophet  could 
know.  3.  What  does  "  the  mystery,"  the  revelation  "  of  God,  even  Christ " 
(Col.  ii.  2),  mean,  the  mystery  of  which  we  are  ministers  and  prophets,  the  mystery 
which  brings  the  eternal  within  the  forms  of  time,  the  mystery  which  shows  to 
us  absolute  love  made  visible  in  the  Incarnate  Word  T  It  means  that  the  outward, 
the  transitory,  is  a  veil  woven  by  the  necessities  of  our  weakness,  which  half  hides 
and  half  reveals  the  realities  with  which  it  corresponds  ;  that  the  changing  forms 
in  which  spiritual  aspirations  are  clothed  from  generation  to  generation  and  from 
life  to  life,  are  illuminated,  quickened,  harmonised  in  one  supreme  fact ;  that 
beyond  the  temples  in  which  it  is  our  blessing  to  worship,  and  beyond  the  phrases 
which  it  is  our  joy  to  affirm,  there  is  an  infinite  glory  which  can  have  no  local 
circumscription,  and  an  infinite  Truth  which  cannot  be  grasped  by  any  human 
thought ;  that  man,  bruised  and  burdened  by  sorrows  and  sins,  was  made  for 
God,  and  that  through  His  holy  love  he  shall  not  fail  of  his  destiny ;  that  all 
creation  is  an  expression  of  God's  thought  of  wisdom  brought  within  the  reach 
of  human  intelligence ;  that  God's  Spirit  sent  in  His  Son's  name  will  interpret 
little  by  little,  as  we  can  read  the  lesson,  all  things  as  contributory  to  His  praise  ; 
that  we  also,  compassed  with  infirmities  and  burdened  with  sins,  may  take  up  the 
song  of  the  redeemed  creation,  the  song  of  the  unfallen  angels,  and  say,  "  Holy, 
holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  the  fulness  of  the  earth  is  His  glory."  It  means 
this,  and  more  than  this.  II.  The  vision  of  God  the  message  of  the  prophet. 
It  is  this  vision  which  the  prophet  has  to  proclaim  and  to  interpret  to  his  fellow- 
men,  not  as  an  intellectual  theory,  but  as  an  inspiration  of  life.  The  prophet's 
teaching  must  be  the  translation  of  his  experience.  The  Gospel  of  Christ  Incarnate, 
the  Gospel  of  the  Holy  Trinity  in  the  terms  of  human  life,  covers  every  imaginable 
part  of  life  to  the  end.  of  time,  and  is  new  now  as  it  has  been  new  in  all  the  past ; 
as  it  will  be  new,  new  in  its  power  and  in  its  meaning,  while  the  world  lasts.  True 
it  is  that  such  a  vision  of  God — Creator,  Redeemer,  Sanctifier — entering  into 
fellowship  with  the  beings  whom  He  has  made,  "  gathering  up  all  things  to  Him- 
self," "  making  peace  through  the  blood  of  the  Cross,"  shows  life  to  us,  as  Isaiah 
saw  it,  in  a  most  solemn  aspect :  that  it  must  fill  us,  as  it  filled  Isaiah,  with  the 
sense  of  our  immeasurable  unworthiness  in  the  face  of  Christ's  majesty  and  Christ's 
love :  that  it  must  touch  us  also  with  something  of  a  cleansing  power.  And 
because  it  is  so  we  can  take  heart  again.  For  such  emotion,  such  purification 
of  soul,  is  the  beginning  of  abiding  strength.  III.  The  vision  of  God  the  chasten- 
ing OP  the  prophet.  In  the  fulfilment  of  our  prophetic  work  we  need  more 
than  we  know  the  abasing  and  elevating  influences  which  the  vision  of  Isaiah 
and  the  thoughts  which  it  suggests  are  fitted  to  create  or  deepen.  In  the  stress 
of  restless  occupation  we  are  tempted  to  leave  too  much  out  of  sight  the  inevitable 
mysteries  of  life.  We  deal  lightly  with  the  greatest  questions.  We  are  peremptory 
in  defining  details  of  dogma  beyond  the  teaching  of  Scripture.  We  are  familiar 
beyond  apostolic  precedent  in  our  approaches  to  God.  We  fashion  heavenly 
things  after  the  fashion  of  earth.  In  all  these  respects,  then,  for  our  strengthening 
And  for  our  purifying,  we  must  seek  for  ourselves  and  strive  to  spread  about  us 
the  sense  of  the  awfulness  of  being,  as  those  who  have  seen  Godat  Bethlehem, 
Calvary,  Olivet,  and  on  the  throne  encircled  by  a  rainbow  as  an  emerald :  the 
sense,  vague  and  imperfect  at  the  best,  of  the  illimitable  range  of  the  courses 
and  issues  of  action  ;  the  sense  of  the  untold  vastness  of  that  life  which  we  are 
bold  to  measure  by  our  feeble  powers ;  the  sense  of  the  majesty  of  Him  before 
whom  the  angels  veil  their  faces.  If  we  are  cast  down  by  the  meannesses,  the 
sorrows,  the  sins  of  the  world,  it  is  because  we  dwell  on  some  little  part  of  which 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

we  see  little  ;  but  let  the  thought  of  God  in  Christ  come  in,  and  we  can  rest  in 
that  holy  splendour.  At  the  same  time  let  us  not  dare  to  confine  at  our  will 
the  action  of  the  light.  It  is  our  own  irreparable  loss  if  in  our  conceptions  of 
doctrine  we  gain  clearness  of  definition  by  following  out  the  human  conditions 
of  apprehending  the  Divine,  and  forget  that  every  outline  is  the  expression  in 
terms  of  a  lower  order  of  that  which  is  many-sided  ;  if  in  our  methods  of  devotion 
we  single  out  the  human  nature  of  the  Lord,  or  rather  the  manifestation  of  His 
unascended  manhood,  as  the  object  of  our  thoughts,  and  forget  that  He  leads 
us  to  the  Father ;  if  we  rest  in  things  visible  and  do  not  rather  strive  to  read 
ever  more  clearly  the  spiritual  lessons  to  which  they  point ;  if  we  concentrate  our 
worship  in  isolated  rites  and  fail  to  bear  to  the  world  of  daily  thought  and  action 
the  teaching  and  the  promises  of  sacraments.  (B.  F.  Westcott,  D.D.)  Uzziah 
and  Isaiah  :  George  III.  and  John  Wesley  : — The  year  in  which  King  Uzziah 
died  must  have  appeared  a  very  noteworthy  one  to  the  Jewish  contemporaries 
of  Isaiah,  most  of  whom,  in  all  probability,  regarded  the  death  of  one  king  and 
the  accession  of  another  as  the  most  important  events  which  occurred  in  it.  Yet 
to  us,  who  know  that  this  was  the  year  in  which  Isaiah  was  called  to  the  prophetio 
office,  these  occurrences  shrink  into  insignificance  when  compared  with  the  last- 
named  fact,  although  that  would  take  place  without  attracting  the  notice  of  any 
one  besides  the  prophet  himself.  ...  In  the  year  1738,  on  May  24th,  the  prince 
was  born  who  was  afterwards  known  as  George  III.  The  event  would  soon  be 
proclaimed  all  through  England.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  in  a  quiet 
meeting  in  Aldersgate  Street,  London,  another  event  took  place,  known  only 
to  one  man :  John  Wesley  "  believed  to  the  saving  of  the  soul,"  and  obtained 
assurance  of  sins  forgiven.  In  a  few  years  George  III.  will  become  to  all  but 
a  few  a  name,  and  nothing  more ;  but  John  Wesley  will  become  more  illus- 
trious, and  the  influence  of  his  work  will  be  more  widely  felt,  as  the  ages  roll  on. 
(B.  Hettier.)  The  elevating  presence  of  God  : — How  well  I  remember  when  first 
I  visited  Switzerland  that  my  bedroom  window,  perched  in  Les  Avants,  looked 
across  the  blue  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva  towards  that  noble  line  of  snow-capped 
mountains  that  border  its  southern  shore.  It  seemed  for  the  brief  fortnight 
that  I  lived  there  as  though  the  spell  of  that  mighty  vision  held  me  enthralled. 
I  slept  and  awoke  and  wrote  and  conversed  as  one  on  whom  a  new  dignity  had 
fallen.  Could  I  ever  be  mean  or  selfish  in  the  presence  of  that  mystery  of  purity 
and  solemnity  ?  This  and  much  more  shall  be  the  temper  of  the  soul  which  by 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  has  learnt  habitually  to  recognise  and  cultivate  the 
presence  of  God  as  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Above  it  stood  the  serapnims. — The  seraphim  : — The  first  question 
that  arises  is,  Who,  or  what  were  the  seraphim  ?  They  belong  to  this  vision  only, 
and  must  stand  in  vital  relation  to  the  condition  and  circumstances  of  the  seer  at 
the  time.  It  is  to  be  noted,  further,  that  the  time  was  that  of  the  greatest  crisis  in 
the  life  of  the  greatest  prophet  of  the  ancient  world.  It  was  the  time  when  he 
was  struggling  through  the  portals  of  spiritual  agony  into  the  temple  of  prophecy. 
Such  visions  have  no  room  for  superfluous  adornment.  If  ever  a  picture  had 
a  meaning  that  is  worth  knowing,  it  is  surely  Isaiah's  picture  of  the  seraphim. 
In  the  whole  vision,  as  I  have  said,  there  is  no  sign  of  drapery.  It  throbs  in 
all  its  parts  with  the  struggles  and  revelations  and  hopes  of  the  prophet's  heart. 
What,  then,  was  that  crisis  in  the  prophet's  life  in  the  light  of  which  the  vision 
will  become  interpreted  ?  It  is  pregnantly  indicated  in  the  first  verse  of  this 
chapter — "  In  the  year  that  King  Uzziah  died,  I  saw  the  Lord  high  and  lifted 
up."  These  words  indicate  the  battle-ground  of  Isaiah's  soul.  Around  this 
King  Uzziah,  who  was  now  dead,  unusual  hopes  had  gathered.  In  him  many 
deemed  that  the  Saviour  of  Israel  had  at  length  appeared.  He  feared  God,  and 
waxed  mighty  in  his  kingdom.  On  every  hand  he  extended  the  realm  of  Judah, 
and  made  the  foemen  of  God's  people  lick  the  dust.  But  when  Uzziah  waxed 
mighty,  he  revealed  that  he  was  but  flesh.  He  became  arrogant,  as  though 
the  strength  and  prowess  of  his  own  right  hand  had  accomplished  all  this.  Then, 
forgetting  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  he  presumed  to  carry  the  sacred  censer  into  the 
sanctuary,  and  to  usurp  presumptuously  the  holy  functions  of  God's  anointed 
priesthood.  Then  the  mighty  hand  of  Jehovah  that  had  upheld  him  so  long 
struck  him,  and  he  fell.  And  with  his  fall  a  thousand  hopes  were  shattered, 
and  a  nation's  faith  fell  headlong  to  the  ground.  This  was  a  critical  moment 
for  the  young  Isaiah.     Now  his  faith  must  either  die  or  be  re-born  with  a  new 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  159 

and  more  glorious  birth.  Now  it  shall  be  seen  whether  everything  falls  for  him 
with  the  fall  of  the  great  Uzziah.  The  vision  is  the  answer.  When  Uzziah 
died,  the  young  prophet  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  up. 
The  collapse  of  the  Jewish  monarch  revealed  the  King  Eternal.  Now,  beyond 
Uzziah's  shattered  throne,  the  young  seer  beholds  the  throne  of  God  towering 
high  in  eternal  majesty  and  splendour.  The  part  that  the  seraphim  play  in  this 
new  consciousness  is  not  far  to  seek.  They  are  obviously  an  express  contra- 
diction of  the  attitude  of  Israel  as  typified  and  exemplified  in  the  self-confident 
and  presumptuous  king.  They  represent  the  attitude  which  Israel  ought  to 
learn  in  contradiction  of  the  attitude  in  which  it  was  now  found.  They  represent 
the  prophet's  own  new  ideal.  Henceforth  he  will  strive  to  make  the  attitude 
and  the  message  of  the  seraphim  his  own.  So  the  seraphim  have  probably  no 
actual  existence  as  celestial  beings.  They  are  here  the  symbol  of  a  human  ideal, 
wrought  out  of  the  struggling  heart  of  a  prophet.  From  the  moment  that  hi8 
lips  are  touched  with  the  glowing  stone  from  the  altar,  Isaiah  also  becomes  one 
of  the  seraphim.  So  the  picture  of  the  seraphim  still  remains  as  an  ideal,  not 
only  for  the  ministers  of  the  Word  of  God,  but  also  for  the  whole  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Let  us,  therefore,  consider  their  attitude  and  their  message.  I.  In 
relation  to  the  signification  of  the  sekaphim,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  name 
by  which  the  prophet  designates  them  is  very  significant.  These  seraphim  are 
simply  the  "  burning  "  ones.  They  stand  around  (not  above)  the  throne,  and 
partake  of  its  burning  glory.  In  this  participation  in  the  fires  of  God  the  seer 
sees  the  starting-point  of  the  new  way  that  he  is  about  to  mark  for  himself  and 
the  nation  of  Israel  and  the  peoples  of  the  earth.  He,  too,  will  learn  to  stand 
in  the  presence  of  the  glory  of  God  until  every  fibre  of  his  life  is  aflame  with  the 
same  glory.  He  will  learn  to  be  a  seraph,  one  of  God's  fiery  ministers,  one  of 
His  glorious  ones.  For  such  the  true  prophet  must  be.  "  He  was  a  burning  and 
a  shining  light,"  said  our  Saviour  concerning  John  the  Baptist.  It  is  not  enough 
to  be  reflectors  of  a  higher  light ;  we  must  become  burners,  and  have  a  veritable 
fire  of  our  own.  There  is  a  vaunted  morality  which  is  only  a  cold  reflection  of 
the  life  of  Christ,  in  which  the  glory  of  the  Christ  is  made  nothing  more  than  a 
chiselled  model.  The  Christian  man  should  be  all  on  fire,  yea,  on  fire  to  his  very 
finger-tips.  Such  must  be  our  response  to  the  glory  of  God's  throne.  We  must 
receive  it  into  our  life  until  we  catch  fire,  and  respond  to  Heaven  with  a  glory 
like  unto  its  own.  Note,  in  the  next  place,  the  perfect  reverence  which  is  here 
pictured.  "  Each  had  six  wings.  With  twain  he  covered  his  face,  and  with 
twain  he  covered  his  feet."  Of  six  wings,  four  are  utilised  for  the  purpose  of 
doing  reverence  to  the  majesty  of  the  eternal  God.  Here  lies  the  central  and 
most  emphatic  rebuke  of  the  spirit  of  the  Jewish  people.  Uzziah  had  no  doubt 
rightly  represented  the  prevailing  spirit  of  the  people  when  he  dared  presumptu- 
ously to  invade  the  sacred  offices  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  Prosperity  had 
made  them  arrogant,  and  arrogance  had  made  them  irreverent.  In  their  own 
growing  splendour  they  forget  to  do  due  homage  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  The 
bulking  throne  of  Uzziah  had  hidden  the  throne  of  Jehovah  from  view.  The 
glory  that  made  the  seraphim  veil  their  faces  was  not  felt  by  the  heart  of  the 
people.  So  as  Isaiah  gazes  upon  the  veiled  faces  of  the  seraphim  he  passes  from 
what  is  to  what  ought  to  be.  Reverence  is  the  mark  of  those  that  stand  in  the 
highest  place,  and  henceforth  will  take  a  primary  position  in  the  life  of  Isaiah. 
In  reverence  power  begins.  The  vision  of  the  seraphim  with  veiled  faces  and 
feet  is  sorely  needed  again  in  our  day.  There  are  those  that  make  their  boast 
in  desecrating  the  sacred  things  of  life,  and  in  defiling  the  vessels  of  God's  temple. 
Yet  you  may  be  assured  that  all  irreverence  is  essentially  impotence.  It  will 
have  its  little  day  of  loud  presumption,  and  then  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall 
blow  upon  it,  and  it  shall  wither,  and  the  whirlwind  shall  take  it  away  as  stubble. 
The  covering  of  the  feet  as  well  as  the  face  is  a  striking  picture.  It  is  difficult 
to  carry  the  spirit  of  reverence  into  the  smaller,  minuter,  and  obscurer  details 
of  life.  There  are  many  that  remember  to  cover  the  face  before  God,  yet  that 
forget  to  cover  the  feet.  We  are  on  our  guard  on  great  occasions  and  in  great 
things.  In  the  sanctuary,  with  its  atmosphere  of  worship,  we  bend  our  hearts 
into  reverent  homage,  but  we  forget  that  the  cottage  and  the  villa,  the  workshop 
and  the  office,  are  also  holy  ground.  There  we  often  walk  unveiled.  And  the 
world  sees  us  uncovered,  and  thinks  there  is  no  God.  The  Christian  Supper 
of  Communion  we  treat  as  holy,  but  the  daily  meal  is  reduced  to  commonplace. 
The  seraphim  teach  us  also  self-effacement.     The  prophet  sees  the  glory  that 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

they  send  forth,  and  hears  the  message  that  they  utter  in  never-ceasing  music, 
but  the  seraphim  themselves  are  hidden  from  view,  covered  from  head  to  foot 
with  their  own  wings.  They  sing  the  message  and  flash  the  glory,  but  they 
completely  efface  themselves.  Here  again  the  attitude  of  the  Jewish  people 
as  manifested  in  their  king  is  challenged  and  contradicted.  Uzziah,  instead  of 
effacing  himself  before  God,  had  thrust  himself  ostentatiously  forward,  as  though 
his  own  wonderful  presence  were  necessary  to  bring  glory  to  the  land.  If  he 
had  learnt  to  efface  himself,  he  might  have  done  great  things  for  God  and  His 
people.  But  he  gave  glory  to  himself,  and  the  Lord  smote  him.  Self-effacement 
is  no  easy  task,  but  is  one  of  the  fundamental  lessons  that  must  be  learnt  by 
the  prophet  of  the  Lord.  There  is  no  sight  more  contemptible  on  earth  than 
that  of  a  man  parading  his  own  marvellous  personality  when  he  has  the  message 
of  the  Lord  to  proclaim.  To  reverence  and  self-effacement  the  seraphim  add 
readiness  for  service.  "  With  twain  he  covered  his  face,  with  twain  he  covered 
his  feet,  and  with  twain  he  did  fly."  "  What  a  mistake  !  "  says  Mr.  Modern 
Shallowbrain.  "  These  seraphim  are  provided  with  six  wings,  yet  they  waste 
two  pairs  of  them  in  reverence,  and  reserve  only  one  pair  for  service.  If  they 
would  only  give  up  that  other-world  sort  of  thing  which  is  called  worship  and 
reverence,  and  use  all  their  six  wings  for  service,  what  an  increase  of  good  there 
would  be  accomplished  on  the  earth."  So  some  simpletons  talk,  and  act  upon 
their  own  shallow  creed,  and  for  awhile  you  see  nothing  but  the  dust  of  their 
wings,  as  though  they  were  turning  the  world  upside  down.  Then  they  disappear, 
wings  and  all,  and  for  all  their  labour  nothing  but  a  cloud  of  dust  remains.  And 
even  that  God's  whirlwind  soon  sweeps  away.  With  the  seraphim  is  the  secret 
of  power.  The  wings  that  fly  have  the  strength  of  ten,  because  face  and  feet 
are  veiled  by  the  others.  Out  of  unceasing  worship  spring  forth  the  currents 
of  power  and  the  energies  of  service.  Four  things  go  together  in  the  life  of  the 
seraphim,  and  they  must  be  found  in  every  good  and  strong  life — participation 
in  God's  burning  glory,  profound  reverence,  self-effacement,  and  readiness  for 
service.  To  divide  them  is  disaster.  II.  The  message  of  the  seraphim  is  important, 
because  it  is  clearly  a  message  fob  Isaiah's  own  heart,  the  message  that  is 
henceforth  to  be  the  keynote  of  his  own  teaching.  The  strain  is  twofold.  The 
first  part  is,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Jehovah  of  hosts.  Some  would  have  us  eschew 
all  metaphysical  conceptions  of  God,  yet  Isaiah  must  needs  begin  with  one,  and 
a  very  profound  one  too.  If  there  is  to  be  any  conception  of  God  at  all,  it  must 
be  metaphysical.  That  the  standpoint  we  adopt  should  be  an  ethical  one  does 
not  in  the  least  lessen  its  metaphysical  character.  The  problem  of  the  Infinite 
is  essentially  a  metaphysical  one,  and  the  question  that  remains  is  simply  one 
of  little  or  much.  Shall  our  conception  of  God  be  little  or  great,  clear  or  obscure, 
definite  or  indefinite,  true  or  confused  ?  These  are  the  alternatives.  We  cannot 
move  a  step  in  the  sphere  of  true  religion  without  some  conception  of  God,  and 
the  fuller  and  richer  that  conception  is,  the  nobler  and  stronger  will  be  our  religious 
and  ethical  life.  Isaiah,  like  every  true  prophet,  begins,  not  with  the  service 
of  man,  but  with  the  nature  of  God.  The  source  of  all  inspiration  for  him  lies 
in  the  profound  conception  that  the  heart  of  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  is  holiness, 
and  such  a  conception  has  vast  unfoldings.  The  Old  Testament  "  holy  "  is  a 
very  beautiful  term.  George  Adam  Smith  appears  to  say  that  its  primary  meaning 
as  applied  to  God  is  simply  "  sublimity."  If  he  will  change  that  into  "  moral 
sublimity,"  I  agree  with  him.  But  if  not,  I  must  dissent.  I  do  not  believe 
that  the  word,  whatever  its  origin,  is  ever  applied  to  God  in  the  Old  Testament 
except  with  a  moral  signification.  The  "  high  "  place  and  the  "  holy  "  place 
do  not  mean  precisely  the  same  thing.  "  Jehovah  of  hosts  "  is  a  mark  of  sublimity. 
But  the  thrice  "  holy  "  involves  an  ethical  view  of  the  nature  of  God.  But  there 
is  another  implication  in  "  holiness,"  which  the  careful  student  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment cannot  fail  to  observe,  namely,  that  of  self-communication.  That  which 
seems  at  first  an  impassable  barrier  reveals  itself  as  a  yearning  heart  and  stretched- 
out  hands.  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy,"  is  a  golden  chain  of  link  within  link. 
Such  a  conception  of  God  leads  to  the  inspired  and  inspiring  response,  "  The 
whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  Or,  to  put  the  song  of  the  seraphim  more  accur- 
ately, "  The  fulness  of  the  whole  earth  is  His  glory."  These  words  mean  one 
of  two  things,  and  perhaps  they  mean  both.  They  mean  that  everything  that 
is  of  any  value  on  the  earth  is  a  ray  from  God's  glory.  All  the  fulness  of  the 
earth,  everything  of  beauty  and  of  joy,  all  the  products  of  thought  and  organisation 
and  energy  and  life,  all  the  love  of  human  hearts,  and  all  the  achievements  of 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  161 

the  human  will,  everything,  in  fine,  that  is  lovely  and  of  good  report,  belong  to 
Him  whose  glory  fills  the  heavens,  are  flaming  sparks  from  the  anvil  of  His  bright- 
ness. Akin  to  this,  though  not  identical,  is  the  other  signification.  The  words 
may  mean  that  the  earth  can  find  its  fulness  only  in  and  through  the  glory  of 
God.  This  earth  wants  filling,  for  there  is  now  in  it  many  a  gaping  void ;  and 
nothing  but  the  glory  of  God  can  fill  it.  We  have  now  a  larger  term  for  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  than  Isaiah  had,  and  so  can  give  his  words  a  higher  reading.  For 
what  is  the  highest  reading  of  God's  glory  ?  Here  it  is :  "  And  the  Word 
became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as 
of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father."  Only  in  Him  can  the  world  receive 
its  power,  and  the  desert  places  of  the  earth  blossom  as  the  rose.  In  Him 
only  all  fulness  dwells.  (J.  Thomas,  M.A.)  The  worship  of  the  seraphim : 
— Three  times  over  in  Holy  Scripture  is  heaven  so  opened  to  us,  and  the 
blessed  spirits  shown  to  us  adoring ;  in  this  sixth  chapter  of  Isaiah,  in  the 
first  of  Ezekiel,  and  in  the  fourth  of  the  Revelation.  In  each  passage  the  vision 
of  Godhead  occurs  as  an  introduction  to  the  prophecy  that  follows.  It  forms 
the  prophet's  warrant  and  commission  for  his  work.     It  is  his  strength  and  pre- 

faration  for  entering  on  his  ministry.  The  lesson  is  of  universal  application, 
t  is  when  we  have  shut  ourselves  up  with  God  ;  when  we  have  cast  down  our 
sins  before  His  throne ;  when  we  have  called  up  the  vision  of  His  glory — from  such 
a  trance  of  devotion  we  go  out  into  the  world,  indifferent  to  the  opinions  of  man- 
kind ;  raised  above  the  temptations  of  the  flesh ;  with  grace  and  power  to  control 
the  little  tempers  that  arise,  and  to  hold  them  in  submission  to  our  work.  1.  Learn, 
first,  to  veil  our  eyes  when  we  approach  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  We  must  put  off 
curious  thoughts  at  prayer;  we  are  not  come  to  inquire,  but  to  adore,  and  must  strive 
to  be  absorbed  in  the  sense  of  the  Presence.  Nay,  in  our  studies,  too,  of  the  mysteries 
of  religion,  the  nature  of  sin,  the  necessity  of  atonement,  the  punishment  of  eternity, 
or  the  Trinity  in  unity — here  often  must  we  restrain  our  curiosity,  limit  our  specula- 
tions. A  ray  or  two  of  light  is  all  our  capacities  can  receive ;  the  full  naked  orb  of 
truth  is  often  more  than  we  can  bear.  2.  Our  weakness  will  teach  us  to  veil  our  eyes, 
and  our  sins  to  veil  our  bodies  and  our  feet.  3.  "  With  twain  they  did  fly."  They 
exhibit  to  us  the  due  union  of  meditative  and  active  piety.  Devotion  in  the 
temple  without  labour  in  the  vineyard  is  not  the  worship  of  angels  and  is  not 
to  be  the  religion  of  men.  While,  on  the  other  hand,  to  engage  in  the  Church's 
work  without  a  habit  of  earnest  prayer,  is  to  sink  one's  self  into  a  toiling  slave  and 
run  the  danger  of  becoming  a  self-conceited  religious  busybody.  4.  The  seraphim 
are  our  pattern  for  common  praise  and  prayer.  They  have  suggested  the  anti- 
phonal  chanting  of  the  Church,  voice  against  voice,  alternately.  5.  Observe, 
too,  that  holiness  is  the  attribute  upon  which  they  dwell,  not  the  goodness 
or  the  greatness,  but  the  holiness  of  the  Lord  whom  they  adore.  There  are 
pseudo-philanthropists  who  prefer  to  dwell  entirely  upon  the  goodness  of  the 
Lord,  and  would  run  up  all  His  nature  into  benevolence.  There  are  natural 
philosophers,  again,  who  are  lost  in  contemplation  of  the  stupendous  forces  of 
nature  and  the  vastness  of  the  universe,  and  from  them  alone  they  draw  their 
conceptions  of  the  greatness  of  the  Godhead.  The  Architect  of  aU  things,  the 
Almighty,  the  Supreme,  these  are  the  names  they  know  Him  by  and  talk  mostly 
of  worshipping  their  Maker.  But  it  is  not  Great,  great,  great,  nor  Good,  good, 
good  which  is  the  angels'  song,  but  Holy,  holy,  holy.  It  is  in  the  character  of 
a  moral  Governor  and  a  Judge  that  we  are  to  contemplate  our  God.  6.  The 
earth  is  full  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  but  the  temple  shakes  at  the  proclamation 
of  His  name.  The  living  temples  are  penetrated  with  emotion  and  with  awe 
before  the  glory  of  the  Most  High  and  the  sense  of  His  presence.  7.  The  prophet 
is  himself  moved  and  disturbed  before  the  glory  of  God's  presence,  and  under 
the  sense  of  his  own  unworthiness.  Here  is  the  test  of  a  genuine  revelation  from 
above.  It  dazzles  not  with  vanity;  it  humbles  to  the  dust  under  the  burden 
of  unmeetness  for  so  great  a  favour  from  the  Lord.  Isaiah  mentions  his  own 
sin  first,  and  then  the  sin  of  his  people.  Let  us  always  accuse  ourselves  the  first. 
8.  But  the  sin  that  is  thus  deeply  felt  is  thoroughly  cured.  The  light  that  discovers 
to  us  our  impurities  is  a  sacred  fire  as  well  to  burn  them  out.  (C.  F.  Secretan.) 
Who  are  the  Seraphim  ? — Canon  Cheyne's  answer  in  the  "  Polychrome  Bible  " 
is  almost  as  grotesque  as  it  is  uncanny, — "  mythical  beings,  adopted  instinctively 
by  Isaiah  from  the  folk-lore  of  Judah  "  !  On  no  other  ground,  apparently,  than 
a  disputed  etymology,  he  sees  in  them  only  "  mythical,"  treasure-guarding, 
serpent-like  spirits,  erect,  gigantic,  connected  in  some  inexplicable  way  with  tha 
II 


162  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vx. 

snake  worship  of  Egypt !  Wiser,  more  consonant  with  the  facts  as  related  by 
the  seer  himself,  and  in  stricter  accord  with  the  genius  of  the  Hebrew  religion 
and  temple  service,  is  the  suggestion  of  the  late  Professor  Maurice,  that  they 
represent,  not  slimy,  treasure-loving,  serpentine  worldliness,  but  "  those  Divine 
energies  and  affections  of  which  the  zeal,  devotion,  and  sympathy  of  man  are 
counterparts."  This  is  the  only  place  in  the  Bible  where  they  are  mentioned. 
Their  Hebrew  name  stands  for  burning  radiancy,  and  in  its  adjective  form 
may  apply  to  " fiery  "  serpents,  or  "glowing"  angelio  appearances,  or  kinsmen 
"burning"  dead  bodies,  or  iconoclastic  kings  who  destroy  objects  of  idolatry 
by  "  fire.  Though  the  visual  shapes  of  these  heavenly  powers  were  symbolical, 
they  clearly  are  not  merely  symbols,  but  "  living  intelligent  creatures,  who 
perform  acts  of  unceasing  worship,"  and  were  actual  agencies  in  conveying  the 
prophetic  inspiration  to  the  receptive  soul  of  the  prophet.  (F.  Sessions.)  The 
service  of  the  seraphim,  contemplative  and  active  : — That  perfect  prayer,  which 
our  Lord  bequeathed  to  His  disciples,  sets  forth  to  us  angelic  service  as  a  model 
which  we  shall  do  well  in  our  services  to  copy.  Not  that  the  services  we  are 
called  upon  to  render  are  the  same  with  those  assigned  to  angels.  No,  the 
sphere  in  which  they  live  is  heaven ;  ours  for  the  present  is  the  earth ;  and  each 
of  these  spheres  has  its  distinct  and  peculiar  duties  appropriate  to  the  nature 
and  faculties  of  its  occupants.     I.  The  twofold  lite  op  a  servant  op  God, 

WHETHER  HUMAN   OR  ANGELIC,   IS    HERE    VERY    BEAUTIFULLY   EXHIBITED   TO   US. 

The  seraphim  are  represented  as  veiling  their  faces  and  feet  with  their  wings  while 
they  stand  in  adoration  before  the  throne  of  God.  But  though  engaged  in  cease- 
lessly adoring  the  Divine  perfections,  they  lead  not  a  life  of  barren  contemplation. 
The  words  "  with  twain  he  did  fly  "  intimate  to  us  that  they  are  also  engaged 
in  the  active  execution  of  those  errands  with  which  God  has  charged  them. 
1.  Consider,  first,  the  devotional  branch  of  the  Christian's  life,  that  branch  of  it 
which  is  withdrawn  from  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  opened  only  to  the  inspec- 
tion of  Him  who  seeth  in  secret.  In  the  exercises  of  the  closet  and  of  the 
sanctuary  are  to  be  found  the  springs  of  the  Christian's  exertions  in  his  Master's 
cause.  The  Christian's  life,  like  that  of  the  seraphim,  branches  out  into  the  two 
great  divisions  of  contemplative  devotion  and  active  exertion.  It  is  the  life  of 
Mary,  who  sat  at  our  Lord's  feet  and  heard  His  word,  combined  with  that 
of  Martha,  who  busied  herself  in  outward  ministrations  to  Him.  If  even  the 
energies  of  angels  (excelling  as  they  do  in  power)  would  be  certainly  impaired 
unless  they  were  ever  and  anon  renewed  by  an  adoring  gaze  on  the  Divine  per- 
fections, how  certainly  shall  ours  languish  and  die  if  we  stir  them  not  up  bythe 
diligent  and  persevering  use  of  all  those  means  of  grace  which  God  has  put  into 
our  hands !  2.  The  Christian  life,  although  as  to  its  springs  and  sources  hid  with 
Christ  in  God,  yet  has  an  outward  manifestation,  discernible  by  the  world.  _  Care 
must  be  taken  not  only  that  the  lamp  shall  be  filled  with  a  due  supply  of  oil,  but 
also  that  there  shall  be  a  light  shining  before  men.  Here  is  a  reproof  of^  what 
may,  without  injustice,  be  termed  the  monastic  principle— a  principle  which  in 
former  ages  was  deemed  correct,  and  accordingly  adopted  into  the  practice  of 
many.  It  is  as  if,  in  the  case  of  animal  life,  a  man  should  content  himself  with 
taking  supplies  of  repose  and  nourishment,  without  exhibiting  and  improving 
the  strength  thus  gained  by  the  exercise  of  his  limbs.  U.  Having  thus  opened 
the  subject  generally,  let  us  seek  to  enter  more  into  its  details,  as  the 
text  brings  them  before  us.  1.  Let  us  learn  from  the  seraphim  a  lesson  as  to 
the  spirit  which  should  pervade  all  true  devotion.  (1)  These  bright  and  glorious 
beings  are  without  sin,  whether  original  or  actual.  Still,  such  is  their  sense  of 
the  mfinite  distance  subsisting  between  themselves  and  Him,  of  whose  hand 
they  are  the  creatures,  that  they  veil  their  faces  and  feet  before  His  throne  in 
token  of  adoring  reverence.  The  first  and  most  essential  element  of  devotion 
is  a  feeling  of  deep  awe,  flowing  from  a  sense  of  God's  transcendent  excellences, 
and  leading  to  a  profound  self-abasement.  (2)  But,  if  there  be  ground  for  a 
sentiment  of  deep  self-abasement  even  in  the  approach  of  unfallen  creatures  to 
the  throne  of  God,  with  what  intense  feelings  of  humiliation  should  the  members 
of  Adam's  fallen  family  draw  nigh.  God  hath  not  left  man  without  the  means 
of  such  a  moral  cleansing,  as  may  make  him  meet  to  bear  part  in  those  hymns 
of  praise  which  are  offered  by  creatures  who  still  retain  their  integrity.  But 
this  provision  would  be,  to  say  the  least,  most  inadequate,  if  it  did  not  involve 
sanctifying  as  well  as  pardoning  grace.  And  this  it  does  involve.  2.  Let  us 
follow  the  Christian's  steps  as  he  descends  from  the  mount,  on  which  he  has  held 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  163 

communion  with  God,  once  again  to  grapple  with  the  difficulties  and  trials  of 
time,  and  to  bear  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day  amidst  the  engagements  of  the 
vineyard.  "Son,  go  work  to-day  in  My  vineyard."  (1)  Our  own  heart  is  a 
vineyard  into  which  God  hath  sent  every  one  of  us,  to  dress  it  and  to  keep  it. 
(2)  But  surely  there  is  an  outward  no  less  than  an  inward  work  which  God  has 
made  binding  upon  all  of  us.  (a)  His  providence  has  called  almost  all  of  us  to  a 
definite  sphere  of  duty,  and  assigned  to  us  a  certain  position  in  life.  Every  such 
position  involves  its  peculiar  responsibilities,  its  peculiar  snares,  its  peculiar 
occupations.  (6)  But  besides  the  fufilment  of  the  duties  of  our  station,  the 
Christian  has  many  indirect  opportunities  offered  to  him — opportunities  which 
as  a  Christian  he  cannot  but  arrest,  and  many  of  which  we  miss  for  lack  of 
being  on  the  watch  for  them — of  promoting  the  cause  of  God  in  the  world. 
(Dean  Ootdburn.)  The  vision  of  God  the  essence  of  true  worship: — I  take  it 
that  in  the  veiling  of  the  head  and  the  feet,  the  source  of  conception,  the  source 
of  action,  is  represented  the  act  of  homage  in  which  all  true  worship  begins. 
I  take  it  that  in  the  outburst  of  song  is  represented  the  result  of  all  the  worship. 
All  worship  is  meant  to  bring  us  nearer  to  God,  and  God  near  to  us,  so  that  if 
we  worship  truly,  to  us,  as  to  them,  there  shall  be  a  revelation  of  God's  nature 
and  God's  truth.  The  object  of  all  worship  is  not  to  please  God,  not  even  to 
save  our  own  souls,  though  these  may  be  incidents  of  worship ;  the  object  of 
worship  is  that,  coming  into  His  presence,  we  may  be  transformed  into  His 
image,  as  we  learn  of  His  ways  and  work.  (Brooke  Lambert,  M.A.)  Com' 
merce  and  science  acknowledging  Ood  : — The  vision  of  Isaiah  shall  yet  receive 
another  fulfilment.  Commerce  and  science  shall  yet  bow  their  heads  before  the 
great  Power  from  which  they  derive  their  true  energy.  And  when  they  do,  as 
with  twain  of  their  wings  the  seraphs  flew,  bowing  the  while  before  the  Presence, 
there  shall  be  an  advance  in  knowledge  and  material  prosperity  such  as  the 
world  has  never  known.  Religion,  which  did  stimulate  the  arts  and  the  sciences 
to  the  creation  of  works  which,  with  all  our  knowledge,  we  cannot  rival  ? 
religion,  which  did  permeate  action  in  days  of  which  history  tells  us,  and  stirred 
men  to  mighty  deeds,  shall  yet  again  become  a  mighty  power.  And  when 
through  the  world  there  goes  up  the  chant,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of 
hosts :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory,"  there  will  be  days  such  as  the 
world  has  not  yet  known.  (Ibid.)  The  cry  of  the  seraphim  : — I.  The  first 
thing  that  strikes  us  respecting  the  seraphim  is  their  redundance  op  wings. 
They  each  had  six,  only  two  of  which  were  used  for  flying ;  the  others,  with 
which  they  shrouded  their  faces  and  their  feet,  were,  apparently,  quite  superfluous. 
Why  should  they  have  had  them  when  there  was  no  fit  employment  for  them  ? 
Was  it  not  sheer  waste  to  be  possessing  wings  that  were  merely  employed  as 
covering,  and  never  spread  for  flight  ?  And  yet,  perhaps,  without  this  shrouding 
of  their  faces  and  their  feet  they  might  not  have  answered  so  well  high  Heaven's 
purposes,  might  not  have  swept  abroad  with  such  undivided  intentness  and  such 
entire  abandonment  on  their  Divine  errands.  We  meet  sometimes  with  these, 
seemingly  wasted  wings  in  men,  in  the  form  of  capabilities,  knowledges,  or  skills, 
for  the  exercise  of  which  there  is  no  scope  or  opportunity  to  their  lot.  To  what 
end,  we  ask,  have  they  been  acquired  ?  or  what  a  pity,  we  say,  that  the  men 
could  not  be  placed  in  circumstances  in  which  a  field  would  be  offered  them  ! 
And  yet,  a  knowledge  or  skill  gained  may  not  be  really  wasted,  though  it  be 
left  without  due  scope  and  opportunity.  The  best,  the  finest  use  of  it  does  not 
lie  always  in  what  it  accomplishes,  but  often  in  what  has  been  secretly  added 
to  us,  or  wrought  into  us,  through  gaining  it;  in  the  contribution  which  the 
gaining  it  has  been  to  our  character  or  moral  growth.     II.   The  apparent 

CONTRADICTION  HERE  BETWEEN  THE  COVERED  PACES  OP  THE  SERAPHIM  AND  THEIR 

temple-shaking  shouts.  Feeble,  muffled  sounds  are  the  most  we  should  have 
expected  to  proceed  from  them.  Fancy  the  posts  of  the  Lord's  house  quivering, 
and  the  prophet's  heart  stirred  to  its  depths  beneath  the  cries  of  those  whose  heads 
were  bowed  and  hid  behind  their  wings !  Here,  however,  is  an  adumbration  of  much 
truth.  Great,  penetrating,  inspiring  utterances  like  the  utterances  of  the  seraphim  of 
Isaiah's  vision — are  they  not  always  connected  with  some  deep,  still  inwardness,  with 
some  profound  withdrawal  and  retirement  of  soul  ?  No  one  speaks  with  quickening 
energy,  to  the  rousing  of  his  fellows,  who  has  not  dwelt  apart,  who  has  not  had 
his  moments,  his  hours,  of  dumb  absorption,  with  bent  brows  and  folded  hands, 
when  thought  and  feeling  have  weighed  upon  him  heavily,  and  held  him  bound! 
There  is  no  life  of  noble  activity  and  influence  which  does  not  rest  on,  and  issue 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

from,  some  inner,  hidden  life  of  careful  self-discipline  and  quiet  self-communion  ; 
which  is  not  fed  and  sustained  from  benind  with  cherishings  of  faith  and  con- 
templation of  ideas.  III.  The  unintentional,  unpurposed  effect  produced 
by  the  seraphim ;  the  much  commotion  they  created  without  in  the  least  aiming 
at  or  meaning  it.  What  were  they  doing,  because  of  which  the  vestibule  of  the 
temple  shook,  and  the  prophet  awoke  to  an  overwhelming  conviction  of  his 
un worthiness  ?  Simply  crying  one  to  another,  saying,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is 
the  Lord  of  hosts :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  They  were  conscious 
of  no  audience,  were  making  no  appeal,  but  were  entirely  absorbed  in  adoring 
together,  in  exchanging  with  each  other  their  Divine  thoughts  and  emotions. 
Yet  see  the  deep  agitations  they  caused,  the  deep  stir  in  a  human  breast.  It 
reminds  me  of  the  incidental  effects  of  intense  enthusiasm ;  how,  in  pursuing 
its  object,  in  accomplishing  triumphantly  what  it  contemplates  and  desires, 
it  will  often  overflow  upon  spectators,  disturbing  the  idle  with  new  dreams  of 
work,  rousing  the  lethargic,  reanimating  the  faint  and  weary,  moving  some  to 
attempt  as  they  had  not  done,  or  to  feel  aspirations  which  they  had  not  felt ;  how 
sometimes,  one  and  another  standing  by,  dull  and  inert,  are  caught  by  and  swept 
on  with  it,  and  begin,  themselves,  to  glow !    IV.  And  now,  concerning  the 

ASPECT,   THE   SALIENT   FEATURES   OF  THESE   BURNING   ONES   who   proclaimed   the 

glory  of  the  Lord,  and  were  such  moving  powers.  They  were  creatures  with 
six  wings :  "  with  twain  they  covered  their  face,  with  twain  they  covered  their 
feet,  and  with  twain  they  did  fly  " — in  which  composition  of  them  we  may 
see  imaged  three  things  which  are  always  involved  in  real  greatness  of  character, 
without  which  no  real  nobility  is  attained.  "  They  covered  their  face  "  —  it 
was  the  expression  of  humility,  the  humility  of  awe  and  worship,  of  those  who 
were  admiringly  conscious  of  a  splendour  and  majesty,  a  sublime  strength  and 
perfection,  in  the  presence  of  which  they  felt  their  own  littleness,  their  poorness 
and  infirmity.  And  no  lofty  excellence  is  ever  reached  where  there  is  nothing 
of  this.  They  only  grow  fine  and  do  finely  who  know  what  it  is  to  kneel  in 
spirit,  to  have  visions  before  which  their  heads  are  bowed.  "  They  covered 
their  feet " — renouncing  the  use  of  these,  though  they  had  them,  because  it  was 
theirs  to  fly.  Meaning  to  be  wholly  "  winged  "  ministers  of  the  Lord,  they  wrapt 
up  their  feet.  And,  devotion  to  some  chosen  life-purpose  involves  always  some 
resolute  self-limiting  in  relation  to  things  lawful  enough,  but  not  expedient,  and 
always  impels  to  it.  "  With  twain  they  did  fly  " — swift,  so  swift,  to  execute 
the  errands  of  Jehovah ;  and  faithful  velocity,  instantaneous  and  vivid  move- 
ment in  obedience  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  within  you,  action  that  drags  not, 
nor  halts,  that  is  never  reluctant  or  slow  when  duty  is  seen,  when  conviction 
speaks,  but  flashes  forth  at  once  in  quick  and  bright  response — this  is  the  third 
of  the  three  essentials  to  real  greatness  of  character  and  nobility  of  life  which 
Isaiah's  seraphim  suggest.  (S.  A.  Tipple.)  The  six  wings  : — L  The  wings 
that  covered  the  feet.  When  we  see  the  seraph  spreading  his  wings  over 
the  feet,  there  comes  a  most  useful  lesson — the  lesson  of  humility  at  imperfection. 
The  brightest  angels  of  God  are  so  far  beneath  God  that  He  charges  them  with 
folly,  H.  The  wings  that  covered  the  face.  Another  seraphic  posture 
in  the  text.  That  means  reverence  Godward.  How  many  take  the  name  of 
God  in  vain,  how  many  trivial  things  are  said  about  the  Almighty  !  Not  willing 
to  have  God  in  the  world,  they  roll  up  an  idea  of  sentimentality  and  humani- 
tarianism  and  impudence  and  imbecility  and  call  it  God.  No  wings  of  reverence 
over  the  face,  no  taking  off  of  shoes  on  holy  ground !  Who  is  this  God  before 
whom  the  arrogant  and  intractable  refuse  reverence  T  Earthly  power  goes  from 
hand  to  hand,  from  Henry  I.  to  Henry  II.  and  Henry  III. ;  from  Louis  I.  to 
Louis  II.  and  Louis  III.  ;  but  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  is  God ;  God  the 
first,  God  the  last,  God  the  only.  Oh !  what  a  God  to  dishonour !  The 
brightest,  the  mightiest  angel  takes  no  familiarity  with  God.  The  wings 
of  reverence  are  lifted.  '  With  twain  he  covered  his  face."  III.  The 
wtngs  of  flight.  The  seraph  must  not  always  stand  still.  He  must  move, 
and  it  must  be  without  clumsiness.  There  must  be  celerity  and  beauty  in  the 
movement.  A  dying  Christian  not  long  ago  cried  out,  "  Wings,  wings,  wings  !  " 
The  air  is  full  of  them,  coming  and  going.  You  have  seen  how  the  dull,  sluggish 
chrysalid  becomes  the  bright  butterfly,  the  dull  and  the  stupid  and  the  sluggish 
turned  into  the  alert  and  the  beautiful.  Well,  in  this  world  we  are  in  the  chry- 
salid state.  Death  will  unfurl  the  wings.  See  that  eagle  in  the  mountain  nest. 
It  looks  so  sick,  so  ragged-feathered,  so  worn  out,  and  so  half  asleep.     Is  that 


chap,  n.]  ISAIAH.  165 

eagle  dying  ?  No.  The  ornithologist  will  tell  you  it  is  the  moulting  season 
with  that  bird.  Not  dying,  but  moulting.  You  see  that  Christian,  sick  and 
worn  out,  on  what  is  called  his  deathbed.  The  world  says  he  is  dying.  I  say 
it  is  the  moulting  season  for  his  soul — the  body  dropping  away,  the  celestial 
pinions  coming  on.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  seraphim  are  not  angels ; 
they  are  rather  the  expressions  of  the  forces  of  the  universe  waiting  there  beside 
the  throne  of  God.  They  are  titanic  beings,  in  whom  is  embodied  everything 
of  strength  and  obedience  which  anywhere,  in  any  of  the  worlds  of  God,  is  doing 
His  will.  Since  man  is  the  noblest  type  of  obedient  power,  these  majestic  sera- 
phim seem  to  be  human  in  their  shape  ;  but,  as  if  further  to  express  their  meaning, 
there  are  added  to  each  of  them  three  pairs  of  wings,  whose  use  and  disposition 
•re  with  particularity  described.  If  the  highest  attitude  of  any  man's  life  is 
to  stand  waiting  for  what  use  God  will  choose  to  make  of  him,  then  we  have  a 
right  to  seek  for  something  in  the  fullest  life  of  consecrated  manhood — of  man- 
hood standing  by  the  throne  of  God — correspondent  to  each  indication  of  temper 
and  feeling  which  Isaiah  shows  us  in  the  seraphim.  How  shall  man  stand,  then, 
in  a  world  where  God  sits  in  the  centre  on  His  throne  ?  We  gather  so  many  of 
our  impressions  of  humanity  from  poor  stunted  human  creatures — poor  wingless 
things  who  strut  or  grovel  in  their  insignificance — that  it  will  surely  be  good 
if  we  can  turn  for  once  and  see  the  noblest  image  of  consecrated  power,  and  say 
to  ourselves,  "  This  is  what  man  is  meant  to  be.  This  it  is  in  me  to  be  if  I  can 
use  all  my  powers  and  let  God's  presence  bring  out  in  me  all  that  it  really  means 
to  be  a  man."  (Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  The  wings  of  the  seraphim  : — Each 
of  the  three  pairs  of  wings  has  its  own  suggestion.  Let  us  see  how  they  repre- 
sent the  three  qualities  which  are  the  conditions  of  a  complete,  effective  human 
life.  I.  With  the  first  pair  of  wings,  then,  it  is  said  that  the  living  creature, 
standing  before  God,  "  covered  his  face."  There  was  a  glory  which  it  was 
not  his  to  see.  There  was  a  splendour  and  exuberance  of  life,  a  richness  of 
radiance  coming  from  the  very  central  source  of  all  existence  which,  although 
to  keep  close  to  it  and  to  bathe  his  being  in  its  abundance  was  his  necessity  and 
joy,  he  could  not  search  and  examine  and  understand.  There  was  the  incom- 
prehensibleness  of  God  !  We  talk  about  God's  incomprehensibleness  as  if  it 
were  a  sad  necessity ;  as  if,  if  we  could  understand  God  through  and  through,  it 
would  be  happier  and  better  for  us.  The  intimation  of  Isaiah's  vision  is  some- 
thing different  from  that.  It  is  the  glory  of  His  seraphim  that  they  stand  in  the 
presence  of  a  God  so  great  that  they  can  never  comprehend  Him.  No  man 
does  anything  well  who  does  not  feel  the  unknown  surrounding  and  pressing 
upon  the  known,  and  who  is  not  therefore  aware  all  the  time  that  what  he  does 
has  deeper  sources  and  more  distant  issues  than  he  can  comprehend.  I  know, 
of  course,  how  easily  corruptible  the  faculty  of  reverence  has  always  proved  itself 
to  be.  The  noblest  and  finest  things  are  always  most  capable  of  corruption. 
I  see  the  ghosts  of  all  the  superstitions  rise  before  me.  I  see  men  standing  with 
deliberately  blinded  eyes,  hiding  from  their  inspection  things  which  they  ought 
to  examine,  living  in  wilfully  chosen  delusions  which  they  prefer  to  the  truth. 
I  see  all  this  in  history  ;  I  see  a  vast  amount  of  this  to-day  ;  and  yet  all  the  more 
because  of  this,  I  am  sure  that  we  ought  to  assert  the  necessity  of  reverence  and 
of  the  sense  of  mystery,  and  of  the  certainty  of  the  unknown  to  every  life.  You 
can  know  nothing  which  you  do  not  reverence  !  You  can  see  nothing  before 
which  you  do  not  veil  your  eyes  !  But  now  take  one  step  farther.  All  of  the 
mystery  which  surrounds  life  and  pervades  life  is  really  one  mystery.  It  is  God. 
Called  by  His  name,  taken  up  into  His  being,  it  is  filled  with  graciousness.  It  is 
no  longer  cold  and  hard  ;  it  is  all  warm  and  soft  and  palpitating.  It  is  love. 
And  of  this  personal  mystery  of  love,  of  God,  it  is  supremely  true  that  only  by 
reverence,  only  by  the  hiding  of  the  eyes,  can  He  be  seen.  Isaiah  says  01  the 
seraphim  not  merely  that  their  eyes  were  covered,  but  that  they  were  covered 
with  their  wings.  Now  the  wings  represent  the  active  powers.  It  is  with  them 
that  movement  is  accomplished,  and  change  achieved,  and  obedience  rendered ; 
so  that  it  seems  to  me  that  what  the  whole  image  means  is  this — that  it  is  with 
the  powers  of  action  and  obedience  that  the  powers  of  insight  and  knowledge 
are  veiled.  The  being  who  rightly  approaches  God,  approaches  Him  with  the 
powers  of  obedience  held  forward ;  and  only  through  them  does  the  sight  of 
God  come  to  the  intelligence  which  lies  behind.  The  mystery  and  awfulness 
of  God  is  a  conviction  reached  through  serving  Him.  Behold,  what  a  lofty  idea 
of  reverence  is  here  !     It  is  no  palsied  idleness.     The  figure  which  we  see  is  not 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

flung  down  upon  the  ground,  despairing  and  dismayed.  It  stands  upon  its  feet ; 
it  is  alert  and  watchful  j  it  is  waiting  for  commandments  ;  it  is  eager  for  work  ; 
but  all  the  time  its  work  makes  it  more  beautifully,  completely,  devoutly  reverent 
of  Him  for  whom  the  work  is  done.  II.  Let  us  pass  on  to  the  second  element 
in  Isaiah's  image  of  a  strong  and  consecrated  life.  With  twain  of  his  wings, 
he  says,  each  of  the  seraphim  "  covered  his  feet."  The  covering  of  the  feet 
represents  the  covering  of  the  whole  body.  As  the  covering  of  the  face  means  not 
seeing,  the  covering  of  the  feet  means  not  being  seen.  It  signifies  the  hiding  of  one's 
Belf,  the  self-effacement  which  belongs  to  every  effective  act  and  every  victorious  life. 
Here  is  a  man  entirely  carried  away  by  a  great  enthusiasm.  His  heart  and  hands  are 
full  of  it.  What  is  the  result  ?  Is  it  not  true  that  he  entirely  forgets  himself  ? 
Whether  he  is  doing  himself  credit  or  discredit,  whether  men  are  praising  him  or 
blaming  him,  whether  the  completion  of  the  work  will  leave  him  far  up  the  hill  of 
fame  or  down  in  the  dark  valley  of  obscurity,  he  literally  never  thinks  of  that.  He 
is  obliterated.  Consider  your  own  lives.  Have  you  not  had  great  moments  in 
which  you  have  forgotten  yourselves,  and  do  you  not  recognise  in  those  moments 
a  clearness  and  simplicity  and  strength  which  separates  them  from  all  the  other 
moments  of  your  life  ?  The  man  who  forgets  himself  in  his  work  has  but  one 
thing  to  think  of,  namely,  his  work.  The  man  who  cannot  forget  himself  has 
two  things  to  think  of — his  work  and  himself.  There  is  the  distraction  and  the 
waste.  Efface  yourselves  ;  and  the  only  way  to  do  it  is  to  stand  in  the  presence 
of  God,  and  be  so  possessed  with  Him  that  there  shall  be  no  space  or  time  left 
for  the  poor  intrusion  of  your  own  little  personality.  Here,  as  before,  it  may 
mean  something  to  us  that  the  feet  are  not  merely  covered,  but  covered  with 
the  wings.  The  meaning  is  that  the  thought  of  one's  self  is  to  be  hidden  and  lost 
behind  the  energy  and  faithfulness  and  joy  of  active  work.  I  may  determine 
that  I  will  not  be  self-conscious,  and  my  very  determination  is  self-conscious- 
ness ;  but  I  become  obedient  to  God,  and  try  enthusiastically  to  do  His  will, 
and  I  forget  myself  entirely  before  I  know  it.  III.  "  With  twain  he  did  fly." 
Here  there  comes  the  simpler,  and,  perhaps,  the  healthier  thought  of  obedience 
purely  and  solely  for  itself  —  the  absolute  joy  and  privilege  of  the  creature  in 
doing  the  Creator's  will.  There  are  two  extremes  of  error.  In  the  one,  action 
is  disparaged.  The  man  says,  "  Not  what  I  do  but  what  I  am  is  of  significance. 
It  is  not  action.  It  is  character."  The  result  is  that  character  itself  fades  away 
out  of  the  inactive  life.  In  the  other  extreme,  action  s  made  everything.  The 
glory  of  mere  work  is  sung  in  every  sort  of  tune.  Just  to  be  busy  seems  the 
sufficient  accomplishment  of  life.  The  result  is  that  work  loses  its  dignity,  and 
the  industrious  man  becomes  a  clattering  machine.  (Ibid.)  Reverence,  an 
element  of  power  : — It  is  not  only  a  pleasing  sentiment,  it  is  a  necessary  element 
of  power — this  reverence  which  veils  its  eyes  before  something  which  it  may 
not  know.  What  would  you  give  for  the  physician  who  believed  that  he  had 
mastered  all  the  truth  concerning  our  human  bodies,  and  never  stood  in  awe 
before  the  mystery  of  life,  the  mystery  of  death  ?  What  would  you  give  for 
the  statesman  who  had  no  reverence,  who  made  the  State  a  mere  machine,  and 
felt  the  presence  in  it  of  no  deep  principles  too  profound  for  him  to  understand  T 
What  is  more  dreadful  than  irreverent  art  which  paints  all  that  it  sees  because  it  sees 
almost  nothing,  and  yet  does  not  dream  that  there  is  more  to  see ;  which  suggests 
nothing  because  it  suspects  nothing  profounder  than  the  flimsy  tale  it  tells,  and 
would  fain  make  us  all  believe  that  there  is  no  sacredness  in  woman,  nor  noble- 
ness in  man,  nor  secret  in  nature,  nor  dignity  in  life.  Irreverence  everywhere 
is  blindness  and  not  sight.  It  is  the  stare  which  is  bold  because  it  believes  in 
its  heart  that  there  is  nothing  which  its  insolent  intelligence  may  not  fathom, 
and  so  which  finds  only  what  it  looks  for,  and  makes  the  world  as  shallow  as  it 
ignorantly  dreams  the  world  to  be.  (Ibid. )  Reverence  should  be  universal : — 
To  make  the  sentiment  of  reverence  universal  would  be  the  truest  way  to  keep 
it  healthy  and  pure.  It  must  not  seem  to  be  the  strange  prerogative  of  saints 
or  cranks  ;  it  must  not  seem  to  be  the  sign  of  exceptional  weakness  or  exceptional 
strength ;  it  must  be  the  element  in  which  all  lives  go  on,  and  which  has  its  own 
ministry  for  each.  The  child  must  have  it,  feeling  his  little  actions  touch  the 
infinite  as  his  feet  upon  the  beach  delight  in  the  waves  out  of  the  boundless  sea 
that  strike  them.  The  mechanic  must  have  it,  feeling  how  his  commonest  tools 
are  ministers  of  elemental  forces,  and  raise  currents  in  the  air  that  run  out 
instantly  beyond  his  ken.  The  scientist  needs  it  as  he  deals  with  the  pal- 
pable and  material  which  hangs  in  the  impalpable  and  spiritual,  and  cannot  be 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  167 

known  without  the  knowledge  of  the  mystery  in  which  it  floats.  Every  true 
scientist  has  it ;  Newton  or  Tyndal  pauses  a  moment  in  his  description  of  the 
intelligible,  and  some  hymn  of  the  unintelligible,  some  psalm  of  delight  in  the 
unknown,  comes  bursting  from  his  scientific  lips.  (Ibid.)  A  seraph's  wings : — 
This  is  the  only  mention  in  Scripture  of  the  seraphim.  I  would  notice,  before  I 
deal  with  the  specific  words  of  my  text,  the  significance  of  the  name.  It  means 
"  the  flaming  "  or  "  burning  ones,"  and  so  the  attendants  of  the  Divine  glory 
in  the  heavens,  whether  they  be  real  or  imaginary  beings,  are  represented  a3 
flashing  with  splendour,  as  full  of  swift  energy,  like  a  flame  of  fire,  as  glowing 
with  fervid  love,  as  blazing  with  enthusiasm.  That  is  the  type  of  the  highest 
creatural  being  that  stands  closest  to  God.  Cold  religion  is  a  contradiction  in 
terms,  though,  alas  !  it  is  a  reality  in  professors.  I.  The  wings  op  beverence. 
He  covered  his  face,  or  they  covered  their  faces,  lest  they  should  see.  As  a  man 
brought  suddenly  into  the  sunlight,  especially  if  out  of  a  darkened  chamber, 
by  an  instinctive  action  shades  his  eyes  with  his  hand,  so  these  burning  creatures, 
confronted  with  the  still  more  fervid  and  fiery  light  of  the  Divine  nature,  fold 
one  pair  of  their  great  white  pinions  over  their  shining  faces,  even  whilst  they 
cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  God  Almighty !  "  And  does  not  that 
teach  us  the  incapacity  of  the  highest  creature,  with  the  purest  vision,  to  gaze 
undazzled  into  the  shining  light  of  God  ?  I,  for  my  part,  do  not  believe  that 
any  conceivable  extension  of  creatural  faculties,  or  any  conceivable  hallowing 
of  creatural  natures,  can  make  the  creature  able  to  gaze  upon  God.  "  We  shall 
be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  But  who  is  the  "  Him  "  T  Jesus 
Christ.  And,  in  my  belief,  Jesus  Christ  will,  to  all  eternity,  be  the  medium  of 
manifesting  God.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,"  nor  can  see  Him. 
But  my  text  does  also  suggest  to  us  by  contrast  the  possibility  of  far  feebler 
sighted  and  more  sinful  creatures  than  these  symbolical  seraphs  coming  into  a 
Presence  in  which  God  shall  be  manifest  to  them ;  and  they  will  need  no  veil 
drawn  by  themselves  across  their  eyes.  God  has  veiled  Himself,  that  "  we, 
with  unveiled  faces,  beholding  His  glory,  may  be  changed  into  the  same  image." 
So  the  seraph,  with  his  white  wings  folded  before  his  eyes,  may  at  once  stand  to 
us  as  a  parallel  and  a  contrast  to  what  the  Christian  may  expect.  We  can  see  Jesus, 
with  no  incapacity  except  such  as  may  be  swept  away  by  His  grace  and  our  will. 
There  is  no  need  for  you  to  draw  anything  between  your  happy  eyes  and  the 
Face  in  which  we  "  behold  the  glory  as  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father."  AD 
the  tempering  that  the  Divine  lustre  needed  has  been  done  by  Him  who  veils 
His  glory  with  the  veil  of  Christ's  flesh,  and  therein  does  away  with  the  need  for  any 
veil  that  we  can  draw.  But,  beyond  that,  there  is  another  consideration  that  I 
should  like  to  suggest,  as  taught  us  by  the  use  of  this  first  pair  of  the  six  wings, 
and  that  is  the  absolute  need  for  the  lowliest  reverence  in  our  worship  of  God. 
It  is  strange,  but  true,  I  am  afraid,  that  the  Christian  danger  is  to  lose  the  sense 
of  the  majesty  and  splendour  and  separation  of  God  from  His  creatures.  What 
does  that  lofty  chorus  that  burst  from  those  immortal  lips  mean :  "  Holy,  holy, 
holy !  "  but  the  declaration  that  God  is  high  above  and  separate  from  all  limita- 
tions and  imperfections  of  creatures  ?  We  have  need  to  take  heed  that  we  do 
not  lose  our  reverence  in  our  confidence,  and  that  we  do  not  part  with  godly 
fear  in  our  filial  love.  II.  The  wings  of  HtrMTLTTY.  "  With  twain  he  covered 
his  feet."  The  less  comely  and  inferior  parts  of  that  fiery  corporeity  were  veiled 
lest  they  should  be  seen  by  the  Eyes  that  see  all  things.  The  wings  made  no 
screen  that  hid  the  seraph's  feet  from  the  eye  of  God,  but  it  was  the  instinctive 
lowly  sense  of  unworthiness  that  folded  them  across  the  feet,  even  though  they, 
too,  burned  as  a  furnace.  The  nearer  we  get  to  God  the  more  we  shall  be  aware 
of  our  limitations  and  unworthiness.  And  it  is  because  that  vision  of  the  Lord 
sitting  on  "  His  throne,  high  and  lifted  up,"  with  the  thrilling  sense  of  His  glory 
filling  the  holy  temple  of  the  universe,  does  not  burn  before  us  that  we  can  conceit 
ourselves  to  have  anything  worth  pluming  ourselves  upon.  Once  lift  the  curtain, 
once  let  my  love  be  flooded  with  the  sight  of  God,  and  away  goes  all  my  self  • 
conceit,  and  all  my  fancied  superiority  above  others.  Get  God  into  your  lives, 
and  you  will  see  that  the  feet  need  to  be  washed,  and  you  will  cry,  "  Lord  !  not 
my  feet  only,  but  my  hands  and  my  head  ! "  HI.  The  wings  fob  sebvice. 
"With  twain  he  did  fly."  That  is  the  emblem  of  joyous,  buoyant,  easy,  un- 
hindered motion.  It  is  strongly,  sadly  contrary  to  the  toilsome  limitations 
of  us  heavy  creatures  who  have  no  wings,  but  can  at  best  run  on  His  service, 
and  often  find  it  hard  to  walk  with  patience  in  the  way  that  is  set  before  us.     But 


1?8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yi. 

(service  with  wings,  or  service  with  lame  feet,  it  matters  not.  Whosoever,  behold- 
ing God,  has  found  need  to  hide  his  face  from  that  Light,  even  whilst  he  cornea 
into  the  Light,  and  to  veil  his  feet  from  the  all-seeing  Eye,  will  also  feel  impulses 
to  go  forth  in  His  service.  For  the  perfection  of  worship  is  neither  the  conscious- 
ness of  my  own  insufficiency,  nor  the  humble  recognition  of  His  glory,  nor  the 
great  voice  of  praise  that  thrilled  from  those  immortal  lips,  but  it  is  the  doing 
of  His  will  in  daily  life.  Some  people  say  the  service  of  man  is  the  service  of  God. 
Yes,  when  it  is  service  of  man,  done  for  God's  sake,  it  is  so,  and  only  then.  Now, 
we,  as  Christians,  have  a  far  higher  motive  for  service  than  the  seraphs  had. 
We  have  been  redeemed,  and  the  spirit  of  the  old  Psalm  should  animate  all  our 
obedience:  "  0  Lord,  truly  I  am  Thy  servant."  Why  ?  The  next  clause  tells 
you.  "  Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds."  The  seraphs  could  not  say  that.  The 
seraphim  were  winged  for  service  even  while  they  stood  above  the  throne  and 
pealed  forth  their  thunderous  praise  which  shook  the  temple.  May  we  not 
discern  in  that  a  hint  of  the  blessed  blending  of  two  modes  of  worship  which  will 
be  perfectly  united  in  heaven,  and  which  we  should  aim  at  harmonising  even  on 
earth  T  "  His  servants  serve  Him  and  see  His  face."  There  is  possible,  even 
on  earth,  some  foretaste  of  the  perfection  of  that  heavenly  state  in  which  no  worship 
of  service  shall  interfere  with  the  worship  of  contemplation.  The  seraphs  sang 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy !  "  but  they,  and  all  the  hosts  of  heaven,  learn  a  new  song 
from  the  experience  of  earth,  and  redeemed  men  are  the  chorus-leaders  of  the 
perfected  and  eternal  worship  of  the  heavens.  For  we  read  that  it  is  the  four- 
and-twenty  elders  who  begin  the  song  and  sing  to  the  Lamb  that  redeemed  them 
by  His  blood,  and  that  the  living  creatures  and  all  the  hosts  of  the  angels  to  that 
song  can  but  say  "Amen!"  (A  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  use  of  faculty: — 
Is  it  not  strange,  that  of  those  parts  of  an  angel's  figure  which  seem  as  if  they 
were  made  only  for  action,  four  out  of  six  are  used  for  an  entirely  different 
purpose  ?  It  is  to  teach  us,  that  it  is  not  every  power  which  we  have — and 
which  we  might  think  given  us  for  public  service,  and  for  the  outer  life — which 
is  really  intended  by  God  for  that  use.  Never  think  that  large  faculties  are  fitted 
only  for  large  enterprises,  and  that  all  your  endowments  are  to  be  spent  on  that 
which  is  to  meet  the  general  eye.  Remember  that  of  six  wings  an  angel  uses 
only  two  to  fly  with.     (J,  Vaughan,  M.A.)         Why  is  an  angel  so  very  humble  ? — 

1.  An  angel  is  very  great,  and  therefore  he  grows  humble.  2.  An  angel  is  always 
conversant  with  the  great  things  of  God.  3.  An  angel  knows  and  is  sure  that 
he  is  loved.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  3.  And  one  cried  unto  another,  and  said,  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the 
Lord  of  hosts. — The  holiness  of  God : — Wc  consider  holiness  as  essential 
to  the  very  being  of  God.  Holiness  is  originally  in  God.  If  angels  are  holy, 
God  made  them  so.  If  believers  are  holy,  God  made  them  so.  But  the  holiness 
of  God  is  not  derived  ;  it  was  eternally,  originally  and  unchangeably  in  Him. 
Let  us  now  produce  some  evidence  of  this  truth.  1.  The  holiness  of  God  appears 
from  the  positive,  uniform,  repeated  testimony  of  the  sacred  writers.  2.  We 
refer  to  the  original  state  of  all  rational  and  immortal  beings.  When  formed 
by  God  they  were  holy.  3.  Consider  the  nature  of  the  law,  originally  given  to 
man  in  paradise,  and,  long  after,  renewed  at  Sinai.  It  is  "  holy  and  just  and 
good."  4.  Let  us  take  a  view  of  the  holiness  of  God  as  awfully  displayed  in  His 
anger  against  sin  and  sinners.  5.  But  we  must  visit  Calvary  if  we  would  behold 
at  once  the  most  awful  and  the  most  engaging  display  of  the  Divine  holiness. 
It  was  because  He  was  infinitely  displeased  with  sin  that  the  Lord  was  pleased 
to  bruise  His  Son  and  put  Him  to  grief.  6.  The  holiness  of  God  appears  in 
the  sanctifying  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  hearts  of  believers,  and  in  all  the 
means  appointed  for  that  purpose.  Practical  inferences — 1.  Is  God  so  holy  ? 
then  how  base  and  sinful  is  the  hatred  of  holiness  !  2.  Is  God  so  holy  ?  then 
what  cause  is  there  for  humiliation  !  3.  Is  God  holy  ?  then  let  us  also  be  holy. 
(<?.  Burder.)  The  holiness  of  God  : — I.  The  sublime  representation  which 
IS  made  of  thb  holiness  OP  Jehovah.  Holiness  is  the  glory  of  God's  nature, 
and  that  which  entitles  Him  to  the  supreme  love,  confidence,  and  worship  of  all 
His  creatures.  We  may  view  the  holiness  of  God  more  particularly — 1.  As  that 
which  He  has  Himself  declared  and   made  known  in  the  sacred  Scriptures. 

2.  As  that  which  is  displayed  in  the  representations  given  us  of  the  heavenly 
world.  3.  As  exhibited  in  the  punishment  of  rebellious  angels  and  lost  spirits 
in  hell.     4.  As  made  known  to  the  inhabitants  of  earth  in  the  moral  law  and  in 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  169 

the  glorious  Gospel.  II.  The  effects  which  the  contemplation  of  it  should 
produce  on  us.  It  has  been  revealed  for  our  benefit,  and  in  proportion  to 
its  importance  and  glory  should  be  its  influence  on  our  minds  and  characters. 
With  what  feelings  of  adoring  reverence  and  humility  was  it  beheld  by  the  holy 
inhabitants  of  heaven  !  What  was  the  effect  which  the  vision  of  it  had  on  the 
prophet  Isaiah  ?  "  Then  said  I,  Woe  is  me  !  "  &c.  A  similar  impression  was 
made  on  the  mind  of  Job.  (Job  xlii.  5,  6.)  If  such  impressions  were  made  on 
the  minds  of  these  eminent  saints  by  the  discovery  of  Jehovah's  holiness,  what 
effects  should  it  produce  on  us  T  It  should  lead — 1.  To  the  deepest  humiliation 
and  contrition  of  soul.  2.  To  an  immediate  application  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling. 
3.  Such  a  believing  view  of  the  character  of  God  will  produce  love  to  holiness 
and  earnest  desire  to  possess  it.  The  contemplation  of  the  holiness  of  God  should 
lead — 4.  To  earnest  supplications  for  the  sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
5.  To  active  efforts  for  the  diffusion  of  His  glory.  (Essex  Congregational  Remem- 
brancer.) The  holiness  of  God: — God  has  been  pleased  to  declare  to  man- 
kind His  views  as  to  what  constitutes  a  holy  or  an  unholy  action  ;  consequently, 
when  we  say  that  God  is  holy,  we  mean  that  He  is  both  by  nature  and  character 
originally,  essentially,  and  infinitely  inclined  to  the  approbation  and  performance 
of  those  actions  which  He  has  Himself  thus  pronounced  to  be  holy ;  and,  by 
converse,  that  He  is  originally,  essentially,  and  infinitely  removed  from  the 
approbation  of  any  action  or  disposition  which  He  has  declared  to  be  sinful. 
The  holiness  of  God  may  be  established — I.  By  appealing  to  the  conduct 
of  God  as  it  may  be  frequently  observed  in  providence.  It  is  of  essential 
importance  to  remark  that,  although  Divine  providence  affords  many  proofs 
of  the  holiness  of  God,  yet  there  are  many  reasons  why  we  may  presume  that 
the  whole  displeasure  of  God  against  sin  ia  not  thus  exhibited.  The  present 
life,  amid  other  purposes,  serves  that  of  a  state  of  trial ;  it  is  impossible,  there- 
fore, that  in  it  a  complete  exhibition  of  His  holiness  can  be  made.  Notwith- 
standing these  considerations,  the  providence  of  God  affords  the  most  abundant 
testimony  to  His  holiness.  The  proof  I  allude  to  is  this,  that  evil  and  misery 
invariably,  in  the  common  course  of  things,  follow  the  practice  of  those  actions, 
and  of  those  actions  only,  which  God  has  declared  to  be  sinful.  II.  By  appeal- 
ing to  the  conduct  of  God  as  it  is  recorded  in  the  Scriptures.  1.  The 
event  which  first  claims  our  regard,  as  being  the  first  in  the  order  of  time,  is  the 
condemnation  of  the  apostate  angels.  2.  The  fate  of  our  first  parents.  3.  The 
destruction  of  the  world  by  an  universal  deluge.  4.  The  sufferings  and  death 
of  Jesus  Christ.  III.  By  appealing  to  the  express  testimony  of  revela- 
tion. Everything  too  that  has  the  slightest  relation  to  Him  is  said  to  be  holy, 
as  partaking  of  this  essential  perfection  of  His  nature :  hence,  His  name  is  said 
to  he  holy.  He  is  said  to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  His  holiness,  to  dwell  in  the 
most  holy  place.  The  hills  on  which  His  people  meet  to  worship  Him  are  said 
to  be  holy  mountains.  His  promise,  His  covenant,  His  commandment,  His 
law,  His  sabbath,  His  people,  His  prophets,  His  angels,  His  Son,  His  Spirit, 
are  all  respectively  called  holy  in  numerous  passages.  (J.  F.  Deriham,  M.A.) 
God's  holiness  and  God's  glory : — Two  of  the  Divine  attributes  form  the  theme 
of  the  seraphs'  hymn.  I.  God's  holiness  as  inherent  ln  Himself.  Holiness 
denotes,  fundamentally,  a  state  of  freedom  from  all  imperfection,  specially  from 
all  moral  imperfection ;  a  state,  moreover,  realised  with  such  intensity  as  to 
imply  not  only  the  absence  of  evil,  but  antagonism  to  it.  It  is  more  than  good- 
ness, more  than  purity,  more  than  righteousness ;  it  embraces  all  these  in  their 
ideal  completeness,  but  it  expresses  besides  the  recoil  from  everything  which  is 
their  opposite.  II.  As  IT  is  manifested  in  the  material  world.  "  The  fulness 
of  the  whole  earth  is  His  glory."  By  "  glory  "  we  mean  the  outward  show  or 
state  attendant  upon  dignity  or  rank.  The  glory,  then,  of  which  Isaiah  speaks, 
is  the  outward  expression  of  the  Divine  nature.  Pictured  as  visible  splendour, 
it  may  impress  the  eye  of  flesh ;  but  any  other  worthy  manifestation  of  the 
being  of  God  may  be  not  less  truly  termed  His  glory.  It  is  more  than  the 
particular  attribute  of  power  or  wisdom  ;  it  is  the  entire  fulness  of  the  Godhead, 
visible  to  the  eye  of  faith,  if  not  to  the  eye  of  sense,  in  the  concrete  works  of  nature, 
arresting  the  spectator  and  claiming  from  him  the  tribute  of  praise  and  homage. 
1.  Wherein  does  the  world  so  reflect  the  being  of  God  as  to  be  the  expression  of 
His  glory  T  It  is  visible  (1)  in  the  fact,  as  such,  of  creation ;  (2)  in  the  means 
by  which  an  abode  has  been  prepared  for  the  reception  of  life  and  intelligence, 
and  the  majestic  scale  upon  which  the  process  has  been  conceived  and  carried 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vt 

out ;  (3)  in  the  rare  and  subtle  mechanism  which  sustains  the  world  in  every 
part,  and  the  intrinsic  adequacy  and  beauty  of  the  results.  2.  Can  we  trace 
any  evidence  of  the  moral  character  of  God,  or  is  the  earth  full  merely  of  the 
tokens  of  His  power  ?  It  is  difficult  to  think  that  we  are  mistaken  in  tracing  it 
in  the  constitution  of  human  nature,  in  the  affections  and  aspirations  which 
it  displays,  in  the  conditions  upon  which  social  life  is  observed  to  depend.  He 
who  has  inspired  human  nature  with  true  impulses  of  justice  and  generosity, 
of  sympathy  and  love,  with  admiration  for  the  heroic  and  noble,  with  scorn  for 
the  ignoble  and  the  mean,  cannot  but  be  possessed  of  a  kindred  character  Him- 
self. Though  the  rays  are  broken  and  the  image  is  obscured,  the  moral  glory 
of  the  Creator  shines  in  the  world ;  it  is  reflected  in  the  verdict  of  the  individual 
conscience ;  it  is  latent  in  the  ethical  sanctions  upon  which  the  permanence 
and  welfare  of  society  depends.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  doctrine, 
of  the  Trinity  : — This  is  a  great  deep  where  faith  must  receive  mysteries  on  the 
authority  of  God,  and  reason  be  satisfied  with  the  fact  that  He  has  revealed  it. 
The  objection  that  it  is  contrary  to  reason  is  weak,  for  nothing  can  be  contrary 
to  reason  except  what  lies  within  its  boundary.  This  lies  in  a  region  far  above 
it.  We  can  only  know  so  much  of  God  as  He  reveals.  He  would  not  be  God 
if  His  nature  were  not  mysterious  to  us.  We  are  mysteries  to  ourselves.  God's 
works  are  often  mysteries  to  us.    Can  we  expect  to  comprehend  Himself  T 

1.  The  doctrine  is  interwoven  with  the  whole  texture  of  revelation. 
Indications  of  plurality  in  unity  meet  us  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Bible  (Gen. 
i.  26,  27),  "  Our  image."  "  His  image."  This  becomes  more  definite  as  we 
advance  (Numb.  vi.  22-27).  Threefold  mention  of  Jehovah,  yet  "  My  name  "  (see 
Isa.  lxi.  1).  These  Old  Testament  indications  are  remarkable  because  given 
to  a  people  prone  to  polytheism.  They  are  inexplicable  except  on  the  ground 
that  a  mysterious  trinity  existed  in  the  unity  of  the  Godhead.  This  mystery 
was  breaking  out  amidst  the  shadows  of  the  darker  dispensation.  A  seed  of 
truth  only  needing  fuller  light  to  develop  it.  It  came  out  most  distinctly  in  the 
New  Testament.  Besides  many  passages  which  assert  the  Deity  of  Christ  and 
of  the  Spirit  take  three  cardinal  passages  (Matt.  iii.  16,  17,  xxviii.  19 ;  2.  Cor. 
xiii.  14).  At  Christ's  entrance  on  His  ministry  this  truth  shines  out  not  so  much  as 
dogma  but  as  fact.  The  very  porch  of  the  church,  facing  the  world,  has  "  the 
name  "  (not  names)  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  inscribed  on  it.  Dedication 
to  the  Trinity  in  baptism  is  dedication  to  the  one  God.  The  apostolic  bene- 
diction invokes  a  Divine  blessing  from  each  Person ;  indicates  their  equality 
and  their  unity.  II.  The  Scriptures  present  this  mystery  in  a  practical 
aspect.  It  is  interwoven  throughout  with  the  living  realities  of  faith ;  presented 
to  the  heart  for  affectionate  embrace,  rather  than  to  the  head  for  intellectual 
apprehension.  Explanations  of  the  infinite  would  be  lost  on  finite  minds :  so 
the  Bible  reveals  the  Persons  of  the  Trinity,  not  in  their  incomprehensible  rela- 
tions to  each  other,  but  in  their  appreciable  relation  to  us.  We  find  the  doctrine 
underlying  every  truth,  every  hope  of  the  Gospel.  Take  as  illustrations  Rom. 
viii.  9,  16,  17  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  3  ;  Gal.  iv.  4-6 ;  Eph.  ii.  18 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13,  14 ;  Tit. 
iii.  4-6 ;  Heb.  ix.  14 ;  Rev.  xxii.  1.  Thus  each  Person  co-operates  in  our 
redemption  :  the  Father  planning,  the  Son  performing,  the  Spirit  applying  the 
work  of  redeeming  love.  If  angels  bowed  and  adored,  with  what  reverence  and 
gratitude  should  we  exclaim,  "  Glory  be  to  the  Father,"  &c.  1.  How  much  they 
reject,  who  reject  the  Gospel !     A  whole  Trinity  of  grace,  and  love,  and  power ! 

2.  How  much  they  secure,  who  embrace  the  Gospel !  What  a  Father,  Saviour, 
Sanctifier !  3.  Not  a  mere  orthodox  profession  will  bless  us,  but  the  sanctifying 
power  of  this  creed  in  our  hearts.  Christ  found  and  received  by  faith,  through 
the  Spirit,  as  the  Son  of  God  and  our  Redeemer,  will  unlock  that  mystery  to  the 
heart,  which  is  beyond  our  poor  reason  to  comprehend.  (W.  P.  Walsh,  D.D.) 
The  Holy  Trinity : — The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  teaches  us  to  think  of  God  not 
in  singularity  or  individuality,  but  as  a  harmony  of  Persons  or  manifestations. 
This  is  best  seen  when  we  look  at  the  Divine  working  in  nature,  and  especially 
in  that  human  life  which  is  the  crown  of  nature  and  which  He  has  united  with 
His  own.  The  Jewish  Church  is  often  thought  to  have  worshipped  God  only 
in  His  lonely,  distant  majesty.  The  word  "  Holy  "  by  which  He  is  so  constantly 
described  means  "  Separate "  ;  and  God  was  to  them  the  Separate  One,  far 
removed  in  His  purity  from  a  sinful  world.  But  there  is  another  side  to  this 
teaching.  Jehovah  was  separate  or  withdrawn  from  the  world — not  as  a  material 
world,  but  as  a  sinful  world.     Where  sin  is  not,  there  He  abides ;  and  Hia  peopla 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  171 

are  a  kingdom  of  saints — a  holy  nation.  They  go  with  Him,  so  to  speak,  into 
the  place  into  which  He  is  withdrawn,  that  He  may  abide  among  them.  And, 
further,  the  psalmists  and  prophets  never  lost  sight  of  the  universal  hope  ;  they 
looked  forward  to  the  Gospel  times,  when  the  Lord  of  Israel  should  sustain  the 
same  relation  to  the  whole  world  which  He  sustained  to  His  chosen  people  in 
their  time.  Thus  it  is  that  Isaiah  in  our  text  represents  the  seraphim  as  saying 
of  the  Holy  or  Separate  God  that  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory.  What 
is  the  glory  of  God  ?  It  is  the  glory  of  Love.  We  are  not  to  think  of  God  as 
One  resting  in  the  self-complacency  of  a  solitary  majesty,  but  as  Love,  which 
goes  forth  continually  to  its  object.  When  we  read  the  highest  expression  of 
the  conscious  union  of  our  Lord  with  His  Father,  this  doctrine  of  love  again  and 
again  appears.  "  The  glory  which  Thou  gavest  Me  I  have  given  them ;  that 
they  may  be  one,  even  as  We  are  one  :  I  in  them,  and  Thou  in  Me,  that  they  may 
be  made  perfect  in  one."  And  surely  it  is  a  worthy  conception  of  the  Divine 
nature  which  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  presents  to  us,  when  it  makes  us  think 
of  the  Godhead  not  as  chiefly  glorious  because  of  certain  abstract  qualities  which 
a  lonely  individual  nature  might  possess  within  itself,  but  rather  as  a  fellowship 
which  was  self-involved  and  self-embraced  in  mystic,  eternal  love.  This  Divine 
love,  I  repeat,  as  being  the  very  nature  of  God,  was  felt  by  the  prophets  of  Israel 
to  be  dwelling  in  them,  immanent  in  their  nation.  "  The  Lord  his  God  is  with 
him,  and  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among  them."  Observe  what  this  teaching  or 
this  consciousness  implies.  It  is  that  the  Divine  nature  of  love  is  the  soul  of 
man's  social  life,  that  this  is  the  binding  power  which  draws  men  together.  By 
unity  God  realises  Himself  among  men,  or  draws  them  into  Himself,  that  He 
may  live  out  His  life  of  love  in  their  relationships.  In  this  sense  it  is  that  the 
whole  earth  is  full  of  the  glory  of  the  Holy  One.  When,  then,  we  treat  of  the 
Christian  doctrine  of  the  Church,  or  social  union  of  men  in  God,  we  are  guided 
by  the  experience  of  the  older  dispensation,  which  in  this,  as  in  all  things,  finds 
its  completion  in  our  Lord.  If  God  was  to  the  Jews  ImmanueL  God  with  us, 
in  Jesus  Christ  He  has  come  yet  closer  to  us.  The  loving  embrace  of  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom  has  taken  the  human  nature  into  God.  The  twain  are  one.  He 
abides  in  us  and  we  in  Him.  (W.  H.  Fremantle,  M.A.)  The  whole  earth 
is  full  of  Hia  glory. — God  most  fully  displays  His  glory  on  earth : — It  is 
certain  from  the  language  of  these  holy  beings  that  they  delightfully  contemplate 
the  glory  of  God ;  and  especially  in  this  world,  where  it  is  most  clearly  displayed. 
I.  The  angels  of  heaven  have  always  been  well  acquainted  with  this 
world.  Though  these  exalted  spirits  have  always  been  invisible  to  mankind 
except  on  particular  occasions,  yet  we  have  abundant  evidence  from  Scripture 
that  they  have  always  been  acquainted  with  the  objects  and  events  of  this  world. 
When  God  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  they  sang  together  and  shouted  for 
joy.  And  from  that  day  to  this,  they  have  been  more  or  less  concerned  in  execut- 
ing the  purposes  of  God  respecting  mankind.  They  are  "  ministering  spirits, 
sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation."  It  is  natural 
to  conjecture  that  many  of  them  continually  reside  here,  while  others  are  alter- 
nately employed  on  great  and  extraordinary  occasions.  (Psa.  lxviii.  17  ;  Luke 
ii.  8-14 ;  2  Kings  xix.  35 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  53 ;  Luke  xxii.  43 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  2 ; 
Acts  v.  19.)  II.  They  have  discovered  more  of  the  glory  of  God  in  this 
world  than  in  any  other  part  OF  the  universe.  It  may  be  presumed  that 
they  have  explored  the  whole  circle  of  creation,  which,  though  widely  extended, 
is  certainly  limited,  and  capable  of  being  surveyed  by  finite  beings.  They  have 
been  friendly  to  God,  and  taken  pleasure  in  contemplating  the  displays  of  His 
glory.  They  have  always  possessed  great  intellectual  powers  and  capacities, 
which  have  enabled  them  to  receive,  retain  and  digest  the  most  extensive  and 
sublime  ideas  of  their  Maker  and  His  works.  And  being  spirits,  unencumbered 
by  such  gross  bodies  as  we  have,  they  have  always  been  capable  of  passing  from 
world  to  world,  and  from  one  part  of  the  universe  to  another,  with  inconceivable 
ease  and  rapidity.  They  say,  "Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts";  i.e., 
the  Lord  of  the  whole  vast  number  of  created  beings,  in  every  part  of  His  extensive 
dominions.  They  add,  "  The  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory  "  ;  by  which  they 
intimate  that,  after  surveying  heaven  and  hell  and  the  whole  empire  of  God, 
they  discover  greater  displays  of  His  glory  in  this  world  than  in  any  other.  ^  1.  God 
has  established  such  a  connection  between  one  creature  and  another  in  this  world 
as  He  has  not,  as  we  know,  anywhere  else  established.  Angels  were  all  created 
at  onoe,  and  stood  independently  of  each  other.    And  while  some  maintained 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  w 

th?ir  integrity  and  attachment  to  God,  others  renounced  their  allegiance  and 
rose  in  rebellion  against  their  supreme  Sovereign.  But  when  God  made  man. 
He  constituted  an  intimate  and  important  connection  between  him  and  all  that 
f  hould  proceed  from  him,  to  the  end  of  time.  2.  The  method  which  God  has 
devised  and  adopted  to  save  the  guilty  and  perishing  children  of  men  from  destruc- 
tion has  given  a  display  of  His  glory  which  He  has  not  given  in  any  other  part 
of  the  universe.  3.  In  this  world  God  has  been  constantly  increasing  the  number 
of  His  moral  subjects.  There  has  been  no  increase  of  either  good  or  bad  angels  ; 
but  there  has  been  an  immense  increase  of  mankind  for  nearly  six  thousand  years. 
If  the  glory  of  a  prince  consists  in  the  multitude  of  His  subjects,  then  the  glory 
of  God  must  be  displayed  by  the  vast  numbers  of  rational  and  immortal  beings 
which  He  brings  into  existence  in  this  part  of  His  dominions.  4.  God  subjects 
mankind  to  greater,  more  numerous  and  more  surprising  changes  than  He  does 
any  other  of  His  intelligent  creatures.  The  angels  of  light  have  never  been  sub- 
jected to  any  great  or  peculiar  changes  since  their  creation  ;  and  evil  angels  have 
experienced  but  one  great  and  dreadful  change.  But  all  mankind,  from  their 
birth  to  their  death,  are  perpetually  subject  to  great,  sudden  and  unexpected 
changes.  Their  bodies,  their  minds,  and  all  their  external  circumstances  are 
perpetually  changing.  Still  greater  changes  and  revolutions  are  frequently 
passing  over  whole  nations  and  kingdoms.  And  as  all  these  are  ordered  and 
Drought  about  by  God,  so  He  here  gives  peculiar  displays  of  His  glory,  which  are 
not  to  be  seen  in  any  other  part  of  the  universe.  5.  The  angels  of  God  behold 
Him  here  forming  the  moral  characters  of  men  for  eternity.  Though  the  angels 
of  God  have  seen  their  fellow-angels  changed  from  holiness  to  sin  in  heaven,  yet 
they  have  never  seen  any  of  their  fellow-creatures  changed  from  sin  to  holiness 
anywhere  but  in  this  world  ;  which  is  a  distinction  among  equally  guilty  creatures 
that  eminently  displays  the  awful  and  glorious  sovereignty  of  God.  6.  The 
angels  of  God  see  Him,  in  this  world,  continually  calling  off  mankind  from  the 
stage  of  life  and  from  the  state  of  probation  into  their  eternal  states.  Improve- 
ment— 1.  If  angels  discover  more  of  the  glory  of  God  in  this  world  than  in  any 
other  part  of  the  universe,  then  we  may  justly  suppose  that  this  world  is,  on  the 
whole,  better  than  it  would  have  been  if  neither  natural  nor  moral  evil  had  ever 
entered  into  it.  2.  If  angels  discover  the  brightest  displays  of  the  glory  of  God 
in  this  world,  then  it  is  certain  that  He  treats  all  mankind  perfectly  right,  in  all 
His  conduct  towards  them  in  the  dispensations  of  providence  and  grace.  3.  If 
angels  view  this  world  as  the  most  important  and  interesting  part  of  the  creation, 
then  secure  sinners  are  extremely  stupid.  They  see  the  same  world,  the  same 
objects,  the  same  persons,  and  the  same  changes,  which  angels  admire  ;  but 
they  take  no  notice  of  the  glory  of  God  manifested  by  them,  though  they  are 
far  more  deeply  concerned  in  the  objects  with  which  they  are  surrounded,  and 
the  scenes  through  which  they  are  passing.  4.  If  the  angels  of  heaven  discover 
the  brightest  displays  of  the  glory  of  God  in  this  world,  then  all  real  Christians 
have  great  advantages,  while  they  are  passing  through  the  changing  scenes  of 
life,  to  make  constant  and  swift  advances  in  Divine  knowledge.  5.  If  angels 
see  and  admire  the  glory  of  God  in  His  conduct  towards  mankind  in  this  world, 
then  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  they  will  see  and  admire  the  glory  of  God  in  His 
conduct  towards  them,  in  their  eternal  state.  6.  If  God  gives  brighter  displays 
of  His  glory  here  than  anywhere  else,  then  all  men,  in  this  life,  are  in  the  most 
important  stage  of  their  existence.     (N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  And  the  posts  of  the  door  moved. — The  shaken  temple : — It  is 
stated  that,  at  a  musical  festival  which  was  held  in  Westminster  Abbey  on 
one  occasion,  the  strains  were  so  powerful  in  a  certain  part  of  the  performance, 
that  the  whole  building  was  shaken.  So  it  was  on  this  occasion.  The  sacred 
edifice  trembled  at  the  presence  of  God,  and  at  the  voice  of  those  who  were  engaged 
in  His  praise. 

Vers.  6-8.  Then  said  I,  Woe  is  me ! — The  moral  history  of  a  rising  sovl ; 
or,  the  way  up  from  depravity  to  holiness : — Whilst  holiness  is  the  normal, 
depravity  is  the  actual  state  of  man.  A  restoration  to  his  spiritual  condition  is 
his  profoundest  necessity.  What  is  the  path  of  the  soul  up  from  the  depths 
of  depravity  to  those  sunny  heights  of  holiness  where  unfallen  spirits  live  an 
exultant  life  ?  I.  A  vision  of  the  great  Ruler  as  the  holiest  of  beings. 
Three  facts  show  this.     1.  There  can  be  no  excitement  of  the  moral  sensibilities 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  173 

and  powers  without  a  vision  of  God.  Show  me  a  soul  that  has  never  had  an  inner 
vision  of  God,  and  you  show  me  a  soul  whose  moral  powers  are  in  a  chrysalis 
state.  2.  The  means  which  the  great  God  has  ever  employed  to  restore  men 
are  visions  of  Himself.  What  is  the  Bible  but  a  record  of  Divine  visions  and 
manifestations  to  man  ?  What  is  the  Gospel — "  God's  power  unto  salvation  " — 
but  the  manifestation  of  the  Eternal  in  Christ  ?  Here  He  appears  to  man 
in  the  "  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  3.  The  history  of  all  restored  souls  shows  that 
the  improvement  commences  at  this  stage.  II.  A  profound  consciousness 
OF  OUB  fallen  state.  "  Then  said  I,  Woe  is  me ! "  &c.  The  prophet's  con- 
sciousness included  four  things.  1.  A  deep  sense  of  his  personality.  "I  am 
undone."  He  feels  himself  singled  out  from  the  millions.  2.  A  sense  of  personal 
ruin.  3.  A  sense  of  personal  sin.  4.  A  sense  of  personal  sin  heightened  by  a 
remembrance  of  his  neighbours'  sins.  So  long  as  conscience  is  torpid,  men  often 
make  the  sinful  conduct  of  others  an  apology  for  their  own  ;  but  when  conscience 
awakes,  such  sophistries  depart.  III.  A  removal  of  the  crushing  sense  of 
guilt.  "  Then  flew  one  of  the  seraphims  unto  me,"  &o.  Three  thoughts  are 
suggested  by  this.  1.  There  are  Divine  means  for  the  removal  of  sin.  2.  The 
means  are  something  in  connection  with  sacrifice.  3.  The  means  are  employed 
by  a  Divinely  appointed  ministry.  Let  that  seraphim  stand  as  the  emblem  of  a 
true  minister,  and  we  see  that  his  work  is  to  take  the  purifying  elements  from 
the  altar,  and  apply  them  to  men.  He  has  to  take  burning  thoughts,  and  burning 
thoughts  must  come  from  the  Cross.  IV.  An  ever-open  and  sensitive  ear 
to  the  voice  of  God.  "  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Whom  shall  I  send, 
and  who  will  go  for  Us  ?  "  Three  thoughts  will  develop  the  general  and  practical 
meaning  of  these  words.  1.  The  great  God  has  deep  thoughts  about  our  race. 
2.  Just  as  the  soul  is  cleared  of  sin  does  it  become  conscious  of  these  thoughts. 
It  will  hear  the  voice  of  God  in  every  sound,  and  see  His  glory  in  every 
form.  3.  This  consciousness  of  the  Divine  thoughts  about  the  race  is  a 
necessary  stage  in  the  moral  progress  of  the  soul.  V.  A  hearty  readiness 
to  do  what  the  Supreme  Will  demands.  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me." 
To  reach  this  point  is  to  be  in  sympathy  with  the  great  and  good  every- 
where ;  this  is  heaven.  Conclusion — Art  thou  in  the  first  stage,  0  my  soul  ? 
Stay  not  there ,-  a  mere  vision  of  the  holy  God  will  only  fire  thee  with 
remorse ;  struggle  on.  Art  thou  in  the  second  ?  Stay  not  there ;  hell 
is  somewhere  in  that  direction ;  struggle  on.  Art  thou  in  the  third  ?  Stay 
not  there ;  freedom  from  sin  is  but  negative  excellence ;  struggle  on.  Art 
thou  in  the  fourth  ?  Happy  spirit !  thou  hast  scaled  the  mountains  of  difficulty 
and  darkness.  Thy  jubilee  has  commenced.  Thou  art  in  conscious  companion- 
ship and  concert  with  the  Infinite.  Still  stay  not  there ;  struggle  on.  Ascend 
to  the  last ;  and  from  that  supernal  altitude,  with  the  vast  and  beaming  universe 
around  thee,  look  ever,  in  waiting  attitude,  to  thy  Maker,  and  say,  Here  am 
I ;  send  me."  (Homiliat.)  The  vision  of  the  King : — Every  man's  course 
is  shaped  by  the  view  that  he  forms  of  the  Supreme  Ruler.  If  a  man  has  no 
such  view,  he  has  no  principle,  and  he  is  living  either  in  anarchy  or  in  slavery 
to  some  other  mind.  There  are  hours  in  every  earnest  life,  and  especially  in 
every  powerful  leading  life,  when  new  truths  or  new  views  of  old  truths  breaking 
in  upon  the  eye  of  the  soul  change  all  the  aspects  of  being,  and  give  an  impulse 
that  never  loses  its  force.  Such  an  hour  of  insight  as  came  to  Jacob  at  Bethel 
and  afterwards  at  Penuel  now  came  to  Isaiah  in  the  temple.  I.  The  view  of 
the  Supreme  Ruler.  Isaiah  now  passed  through  a  great  spiritual  excite- 
ment, such  as  marks  the  hours  of  conversion,  the  chief  turning-point  in  the  careers 
of  great  souls.  The  leading  idea  is  described  in  these  words,  "  Mine  eyes  have 
seen  the  King."  A  new  regal  power  had  arisen  within  his  life.  Now,  in  his  first 
natural,  unenlightened,  unregenerate  state,  a  man  sees  no  supreme  authority 
that  has  a  right  to  rule  his  inner  and  outer  being.  But  when  the  light  of  God 
dawns  upon  his  soul,  then  man  becomes  conscious  of  a  personal  will  that  claims 
to  rule  his  life,  and  of  a  personal  mind  that  knows  his  downsitting  and  his  uprising, 
and  understands  his  thoughts  afar  off.  In  this  vision  of  the  Triune  Godhead 
Isaiah  saw  the  Divine  life  now  more  fully  and  more  clearly  than  he  had  ever  seen 
it  before.  In  words  he  paints  for  us  the  impressions  made  by  it  upon  his  soul. 
Hitherto  God  had  been  to  him  a  dim  floating  idea,  far  away  in  the  clouds,  like 
a  distant  monarch  exercising  no  constant  sway  over  existence  ;  but  now  he 
recognises  that  the  Divine  life  is  everywhere  ;  that  all  things  are  united  to  God  ; 
that  all  the  duties,  all  the  energies  and  the  scenes  of  existence  are,  as  it  were. 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

parts  of  the  royal  train,  wide  as  the  world,  filling  the  vast  floor  of  the  temple 
of  being.  This  change  in  the  spiritual  ideas  of  Isaiah  seems  to  have  been 
very  similar  to  the  change  that  was  wrought  in  the  disciples  by  the  power  of 
the  resurrection,  the  sight  of  the  ascension,  and  the  inspiration  of  Pentecost. 
They  had  before  acknowledged  Jesus  as  their  Master,  but  their  ideas  of  His  Divine 
authority  were  dim  and  uncertain.  But  when  He  rose  from  the  grave  and 
ascended  to  realms  out  of  sight,  when  He  sent  down  the  light  and  heat  of  His 
Spirit  into  their  hearts  and  minds,  then  they  recognised  Him  with  the  sight 
of  the  soul  as  the  King ;  they  then  realised  that  all  power  was  given  to  Him  in 
heaven  and  in  earth,  that  the  height  and  the  depth,  that  life  and  death,  that 
sickness  and  health,  that  the  cross  of  suffering  and  the  crown  of  sovereignty, 
that  the  earthly  course  and  the  silent  grave,  the  temporal  home  and  the  great 
hereafter,  were  all  subject  to  the  sovereignty  of  His  Divine  human  sceptre.  Similar 
to  that  is  the  change  wrought  in  every  human  soul  when  religion  comes  instead 
of  a  misty,  cloudy,  speculative  theory,  as  a  living  power  to  rule  our  daily  being. 
This  revelation  of  Jesus  as  the  King  is  going  on  for  ever  through  the  ages. 
II.  The  effects  of  this  vision  upon  the  soul.  1.  It  produces  an  abasing  sense 
of  personal  sin.  Why  did  the  vision  of  the  King  create  this  sense  of  guilt  and 
misery  ?  In  the  King  is  the  law  of  our  life ;  it  is  only  when  we  see  the  King's 
life  that  we  know  what  our  own  life  ought  to  be.  So  it  is  for  ever.  Where  there 
is  no  vision  of  excellence  there  can  be  no  pangs  of  self-reproach.  The  village 
artist,  who  has  never  seen  any  works  better  than  his  own,  is  self-satisfied  in 
his  ignorance ;  but  the  man  who  has  seen  the  master  works  of  sovereign  genius, 
recognises  in  the  light  his  own  nothingness  in  the  presence  of  an  ideal  unap- 
proached,  high-throned,  and  lifted  up :  he  cries,  abased,  "  Woe  is  me  !  I  am 
nothing,  I  have  everything  to  learn."  So  is  it  in  the  moral  world.  When  the 
vision  of  a  pure  life  breaks  in  upon  the  eyes  of  the  impure  it  creates  bitter  self- 
reproach,  and  at  first  rebellious  impatience.  2.  It  quickens  the  sense  of  social 
sin.  We  cannot  separate  our  personal  life  from  our  social  life ;  therefore,  in 
the  moment  when  we  begin  to  desire  a  nobler  personal  life  we  desire  also  to  create 
around  us  a  nobler  social  state.  So  Isaiah,  when  he  saw  the  King,  looked  with 
agony  upon  the  depravity  of  the  society  of  which  he  was  a  member,  and  cried, 
"  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips."  And  what 
were  the  sins  that  defiled  the  lips  of  Israel  in  those  days  ?  We  have  a  description 
of  them  in  the  five  preceding  chapters.  The  fountain  of  all  uncleanness,  ever 
the  same,  is  the  self-will  of  our  lower  nature,  that  rebels  against  the  King  whose 
higher  law  is  that  love  which  constrains  man  to  sacrifice  his  baser  instincts  for 
the  Divine  glory  and  the  social  good.  Sin  is  not  peculiar  to  any  age.  Our  nation 
has  its  great  social  evil.  There  are,  amongst  us  sometimes,  men  who  defile  their 
lips  with  commercial  fraud,  but  still  the  motto  of  the  British  merchant  is  "  Integ- 
rity," and  "  Thoroughness  "  is  the  boast  of  the  British  workman.  But  there 
is  one  fountain  of  uncleanness  that  pours  forth  a  poisonous  stream  to  defile  the 
lips  of  the  nation.  The  curse  of  strong  drink  is  an  overflowing  well  of  shame, 
of  sin,  of  vice,  of  woe.  We  feel  pain  at  social  evil  in  exact  proportion  to  the  clear- 
ness with  which  we  have  seen  the  King — in  other  words,  to  the  strength  of  our 
religious  convictions,  and  the  sincerity  of  our  religious  emotions.  If  we  take 
low  views  of  human  destiny  we  do  not  feel  much  pain  when  existence  around 
us  is  without  high  ends  here,  or  high  hopes  of  hereafter;  then  we  can  bear  to 
look  with  calmness  on  the  masses  of  human  misery.  But  if  we  have  seen  the 
King ;  if,  in  the  light  of  His  face,  we  have  learnt  what  life  is  to  be,  and  what 
by  His  royal  grace  He  will  make  it  to  be,  then  we  never  can  look  at  these  social 
evils  without  feeling  our  own  share  of  responsibility,  without  feeling  a  bitter, 
salutary  self-reproach  and  crying  out,  "  Woe  is  me !  for  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of 
a  people  of  unclean  lips."  3.  It  brings  to  bear  upon  the  life  a  purifying  power. 
The  altar  is  a  place  of  sacrifice ;  sacrifice  is  an  expression  of  love,  and  love  is  a 
leading  feature  in  the  countenance  of  the  King,  and  therefore  the  power  that 
redeems  us  into  the  likeness  of  the  King  is  the  Spirit  that  brings  to  bear  upon 
us  the  burning  influence  of  love  from  the  altar.  The  altar  is  the  Cross  of  Calvary, 
on  which  the  Son  of  Man  gave  Himself  for  the  good  of  many.  Love  is  the  source 
of  all  personal  and  of  all  social  good.  4.  It  gives  to  the  life  an  ardent  mission. 
(H.  T.  Edwards,  M.A.)  The  vision  of  Isaiah: — There  was  a  veil  before  the 
Holy  of  holies,  so  that  the  prophet,  who  is  evidently  supposed  to  have  stood  in 
the  outer  sanctuary,  could  not  ordinarily  have  seen  the  throne  of  the  Lord  ;  but 
the  veil  is  here  supposed  to  be  taken  away — a  circumstance  in  itself  emblematical  j 


chap,  vi]  ISAIAH.  175 

for  the  vision  related  to  the  future  kingdom  of  Christ,  when  the  veil  of  separation 
was  to  be  removed,  and  all  distinctions  destroyed  between  the  Gentile  and  the 
Jew.  I.  The  conduct  op  Isaiah.  1.  Observe  how  affecting  a  testimony  is 
given  to  the  corruption  and  alienation  of  our  nature  by  the  fact  that  a  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Divine  glory  could  produce  in  him  nothing  but  dread  and  confusion. 
2.  The  reason  which  Isaiah  gives  for  being  sorely  confounded  at  beholding  the 
glories  of  Christ.  By  specifying  his  "  lips  "  and  the  "  lips  "  of  the  people,  as 
unclean,  and  thus  calling  to  remembrance  sins  of  the  tongue  rather  than  any 
other  offences,  the  prophet  appears  to  have  in  mind  the  office  to  which  he 
had  been  appointed,  and  the  difficulties  which  attended  its  faithful  discharge. 
XL  Thb  emblematical  action  of  which  the  prophet  was  the  subject,  and  the 
comforting  words  by  which  he  was  addressed.  It  was  in  consistency  with 
the  general  course  of  the  Divine  dealings  that  the  prophet's  confession  should 
be  followed  by  an  assurance  of  the  Almighty's  forgiveness.  And  it  was,  further, 
a  sort  of  anticipation  of  the  privileges  belonging  to  believers  in  Christ,  that  one 
of  the  seraphim  should  be  employed  in  conveying  to  Isaiah  an  assurance  of  pardon. 
There  was  no  virtue  naturally  in  the  coal — the  whole  virtue  must  have  been 
derived  from  some  fire  or  some  burnt-offering  to  which  the  coal  bore  a  typical 
relation.  And  no  one  living  in  Christian  times  and  blessed  with  Christian  privi- 
leges can  doubt  for  a  moment  what  this  typical  relation  was.  And  if  this  were 
a  vision  of  Christ  in  His  glory,  rather  than  of  Christ  in  His  humiliation — a 
vision  more  fitted  to  instruct  Isaiah  as  to  the  exaltation  of  the  Mediator,  than  to 
show  him  that  He  might  be  a  propitiation  for  sins — yet  observe,  that  the  scenery 
of  the  vision  was  laid  in  the  temple,  all  whose  furniture  and  whose  every  rite 
was  emblematic  of  the  suretyship  and  offering  of  Christ.  The  fire  was  still  burn- 
ing on  the  altar,  though  the  Lord  was  on  His  throne,  clad  in  that  glory  which 
was  to  be  gained  by  the  extinguishing  the  sacrificial  flames — extinguishing  them 
by  the  one  oblation  of  Himself ;  and  therefore  might  it  justly  be  said,  that  the 
temple,  thus  lit  up  and  thus  crowded  with  brilliant  forms,  presented  to  the 
prophet  a  complete  parable  of  redemption.  From  the  altar  of  burnt-offering 
whose  fire  went  not  out,  though  celestial  shinings  flooded  the  sanctuary,  might 
he  learn,  that  the  Divinity  of  the  Person  of  the  Mediator  would  not  rescue  humanity 
from  the  flames  of  God's  wrath  against  sin  ;  from  the  throne,  with  all  the  attendant 
gorgeousness,  might  he  be  instructed,  that  when  the  work  of  suffering  was  com- 
plete, there  should  be  given  to  the  Saviour  "  a  name  above  every  name,"  and 
that  He  should  sit  in  heavenly  places,  the  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church." 
But  then  it  is  as  "  a  live  coal "  that  Christ  acts.  He  was  to  baptize  "  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire."  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Isaiah's  vision, : — There 
were  two  purposes  which  might  be  served  by  this  magnificent  vision :  it  could 
hardly  fail  to  be  profitable  both  to  the  prophet  to  whom  it  was  originally  given, 
and  to  the  people  to  whom  he  would  assuredly  reveal  it.  I.  We  have,  perhaps, 
the  most  affecting  possible  illustration  of  human  depravity.    II.  The  sense  op 

DEFICIENCY  IN  THB  PERFORMANCE   OP  DUTY.      III.    THE   COMFORTING   ASSURANCE 

op  paedon.  IV.  This  work  was  accomplished  by  personal  agency.  One 
of  the  burning  ones  came  and  took  the  live  coal  with  the  tongs  from  off  the  altar, 
and  touched  with  it  the  lips  of  the  delinquent  prophet.  And  a  fair  inference 
from  this  will  land  us  in  the  grand  New  Testament  doctrine  and  privilege  of  the 
direct  witness  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  to  the  adoption  of  the  believer  into  the  family 
Divine.  (PP.  M.  Putuihon,  LL.D.)  Sin  and  its  cure: — "Then  said  I,  Woe 
is  me ! "  &c.  It  is  always  thus  when  God  draws  near  to  man.  When  Moses  saw 
that  bush  in  the  desert,  which  burned  and  was  not  consumed,  he  took  the  shoes 
from  off  his  feet  and  hid  his  face,  for  it  is  written,  "  He  was  afraid  to  look  upon 
God."  At  Sinai  the  people  trembled  and  said,  "  Let  not  God  speak  with  us 
lest  we  die."  And  when  that  glorious  vision  of  the  living  Christ  appeared  to 
the  apostle  in  Patmos,  he  says,  I  fell  at  His  feet  as  dead."  Revelations  of  the 
unseen,  of  the  eternal,  ef  the  unnameable  Jehovah  have  filled  men  always  with 
alarm  and  with  fear.  And  when  the  saints  of  God — men  of  pure  and  irreproach- 
able lives — have  been  going  home  to  heaven,  it  has  been  said  of  many  of  them, 
"  They  died  under  a  cloud."  The  sense  of  eternity  drawing  near  has  filled 
even  them  with  apprehension.  Is  it  that  the  unseen,  the  mysterious,  must  always 
be  to  creatures  such  as  we  are,  the  source  of  terror  ?  as  it  was  with  those  disciples 
on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  of  whom  revelation  records,  "  They  feared 
as  they  entered  into  the  cloud."  It  is  nothing  that  you  say  our  fears  are  vain 
and  foolish  under  the  circumstances,  that  blessings  in  disguise  coming  in  this 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vt. 

way  have  filled  men  with  terror,  that  Jesus  Christ  Himself  drawing  near  to  His 
tempest-tossed  disciples  upon  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and  drawing  near  to  bless  them, 
approached  after  this  fashion  and  alarmed  them  in  this  way — the  fear  is  there, 
and  the  trouble  is  that  this  bondage  of  fear  is  upon  some  men  all  their  lives,  and 
that  we  do  not  leave  it  behind  even  in  the  most  exalted  moments  that  c  me  to 
the  saints  of  God.  Men  may  have  their  theories  which  explain,  or  which  con- 
tradict, the  fact — it  is  true  nevertheless.  Isaiah's  experience  sums  up  that  which 
is  noblest  and  best  in  human  life.  I.  First  of  all,  it  was  the  sense  op  sin,  which 
moved  Isaiah  in  that  hour  and  in  this  way ;  sin  in  himself,  sin  in  others,  sin  in 
the  world  around,  sin  which  the  sense  of  the  nearness  of  God's  presence  made 
all  the  more  vivid  and  real  to  him,  just  as  the  light  reveals  the  darkness  and  the 
things  of  darkness  to  men  who  are  immersed  in  it,  men  who  otherwise  may  not 
have  had  and  would  not  have  had  a  thought  concerning  it.  Live  away  from 
God,  and  sin  is  nothing,  lies  light  as  a  gossamer  upon  the  conscience ;  draw  near 
to  God,  and  sin  begins  to  be  a  trouble,  a  perplexity,  a  burden  to  man.  II.  In 
the  Divine  way  of  dealing  with  men  there  is  a  provision  made  fob  removing 
this  fear  and  purging  this  iniquity.  It  13  not  so  much  the  method  which 
is  illustrated  here  as  the  fact  itself.  Sense  of  sin  and  unworthiness  there  must 
be  to  that  man  who  comes  near  to  God.  But  it  need  not  be  an  abiding  sense 
as  of  terror.  There  comes  a  day,  or  there  ought  to  come  a  day,  when  God 
says,  "  Thine  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin  purged."  The  sense  of  the 
remission  of  sin  is  as  real  as  the  sense  of  sin  itself.  (W.  Baxendale.)  The 
Holy  One  the  Purifier  : — I.  What  is  there  in  the  vision  of  God  that  need 

FILL  A  MAN,  AND  ESPECIALLY  A  RELIGIOUS  MAN,  WITH  8UCH  OVERWHELMING  TERROR  ? 

1.  No  doubt  certain  very  impressive  contrasts  are  suggested  between  God  and 
man  when  the  Divine  Majesty  comes  into  close  contact  with  His  frail  and  feeble 
creature ;  but  these  are  not,  at  any  rate,  all  of  them,  of  such  a  kind  as  to  cause 
alarm.  (1)  There  is  the  contrast  between  God's  greatness  and  man's  littleness 
and  insignificance.  This  is,  indeed,  humiliating,  and  should  lead  us  to  abandon 
all  foolish  feelings  of  self-importance  and  self-sufficiency  ;  but  it  need  not  induce 
overwhelming  terror  and  alarm.  So  far  from  this,  is  there  not  something  in 
our  nature  that  seems  to  delight  in  the  contemplation  of  greatness  ?  Do  we 
not  go  in  search  of  greatness  ?  (2)  Or,  again,  there  is  the  contrast  between  man's 
weakness  and  God's  omnipotence.  Yet  here,  again,  we  can  but  notice  that  in 
the  mere  revelation  and  exhibition  of  power,  as  of  greatness,  there  is  nothing 
necessarily  alarming.  All  that  we  need  to  know  is,  that  the  power  is  friendly, 
or,  at  least,  not  actually  unfriendly.  (3)  Or,  just  once  more,  there  is  something 
very  humiliating  in  the  contrast  between  God's  eternal  and  ineffable  wisdom 
and  man's  ignorance  and  blindness.  Yet  there  is  nothing  alarming  in  superior 
wisdom;  nay,  there  is  something  necessarily  attractive  in  it.  2.  What  was 
the  thought,  then,  that  broke  the  prophet  down,  and  what  the  contrast  between 
God  and  himself  that  impressed  him  so  powerfully  and  so  painfully  t  For  an 
answer  we  have  but  to  listen  to  that  song  of  the  adoring  seraphim  that  was 
sounding  in  his  ear  at  the  moment  he  was  seized  with  this  uncontrollable  agony 
of  terror.  When  he  heard  them  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy ! "  there  rushed  into 
his  mind  the  thought  of  his  own  unfitness  to  stand  before  One  to  whom  the 
intelligences  of  glory  bore  such  witness.  And  it  is  to  this  that  God  brings  us 
when  we  yield  to  the  convicting  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  There  comes 
in  most  men's  lives  who  yield  to  God — it  is  not  equally  marked  in  all — a  moment 
of  utter  breakdown ;  a  moment  when  all  our  self-respect  seems  to  be  humbled, 
and  our  self-confidence  to  melt  away ;  a  moment  when  the  sense  of  sin  seems 
indeed  an  intolerable  load,  that  crushes  the  staggering  conscience  beneath  its 
weight,  and  suggests  the  gloomiest  anticipations  of  judgment,  the  forecast  of 
despair.  Some  are  led  to  God  through  Christ  in  very  early  days,  and  retain  no 
recollection  of  any  such  experience,  even  if  it  ever  occurred  with  them ;  though 
my  personal  observation  leads  me  to  conclude  that  it  often  does  occur,  even 
with  very  young  children.  Such  an  experience  would  doubtless  occur  in  many 
more  cases,  were  it  not  for  our  successful  efforts  at  evasion.  We  endeavour 
to  get  away  from  reality,  and  take  refuge  in  what  is  superficial  and  conventional ; 
we  flatter  ourselves  into  the  deep  stupor  of  self-complacency  by  the  cry,  "  Peace, 
peace  !  "  when  there  is  no  peace.  "  He  speaks  to  us  just  as  if  we  were  a  pack 
of  sinners,"  said  the  indignant  churchwarden  of  a  church  in  which  I  once  con- 
ducted a  mission,  and  yet  that  man  had  probably  joined  in  repeating  the  Litany 
that  very  morning  I     II.  But  let  us  look  again  at  this  trembling  man  as  he  lies 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  177 

there  in  his  terror  and  anguish.     What  is  to  become  of  one  who  is,  by  his  own 

CONFESSION,   GUILTY  AND  CONDEMNED  IN  THE  PRESENCE  OF  HIS  JUDGE  ?      1.    At 

the  very  moment  when  the  man  felt  himself  undone,  at  the  moment  when  the 
contrast  between  God's  dazzling  purity  and  awful  holiness  and  his  own  unclean- 
ness  and  sin  had  taken  possession  of  his  moral  consciousness,  and  he  could  think 
and  speak  of  nothing  else,  then  flew  one  of  the  seraphim,  speeding  on  a  congenial 
errand,  to  bring  the  provisions  of  Divine  mercy  to  bear  upon  this  trembling 
soul.  "  Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity."  No  doubt  the  phrase  repre- 
sents a  feature  of  God's  providence  that  is,  at  any  rate,  frequently  illustrated 
in  the  incidents  of  our  natural  life.  But  I  think  we  may  say  the  words  represent 
a  law  of  the  spiritual  world,  a  great  principle  from  which  God  seldom,  if  ever, 
departs  in  His  dealings  with  human  souls.  How  often,  when  men  think  they 
are  waiting  for  God,  and  wondering  why  He  does  not  intervene  on  their  behalf, 
is  He  waiting  for  them  to  reach  the  end  of  their  own  resources,  in  order  that  He 
may  find  His  opportunity  !  2.  Let  us  notice,  too,  how  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost  are  alike  concerned  in  the  provision  of  this  Divine  consolation.  It  is 
at  the  behest  of  the  eternal  Father,  responsive  to  the  voice  of  His  child's 
bewildered  terror,  that  the  great  seraph  speeds  on  his  mission.  God  so  loved 
the  world  that  He  sent  His  Son,  and  God  so  loves  still,  that  He  is  ever  sending — 
sending  fresh  influences  of  grace,  fresh  messages  of  mercy,  fresh  flashes  of  spiritual 
light.  But  further,  notice  how  the  mission  of  mercy  is  performed  through  the 
Divinely-appointed  means.  There  stands  the  sacrificial  altar  where  the  expiatory 
sacrifices  had  that  day  been  offered.  Cleansing  must  reach  the  guilty  in  God's 
own  appointed  way.  And  as  we  have  the  love  of  the  Father,  and  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Son,  presented  to  us  here  as  the  conditions  on  God's  side  of  the  cleansing 
of  the  sinner,  so  have  we  also  a  symbolic  presentation  of  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  spirit  of  burning,  the  "  refiner's  fire,"  that  alone  can  cleanse  the 
heart,  and  consume  the  dross  and  filthiness  of  our  sin,  breathing  health  and 
infusing  purity,  approaches  us  through  the  sacrificial  work  of  Christ.  And  thus 
the  night  of  sorrow  and  of  self-despair  melts  into  the  blessed  dawn  of  pardon. 
3.  As  we  contemplate  this  marvellous  transformation  scene,  it  is  as  well  to  dwell 
upon  the  fact  that  these  effects  were  produced,  not  only  by  forgiveness,  but  by 
the  knowledge  of  forgiveness.  4.  And,  most  of  all,  was  it  not  the  expression 
of  forgiveness  to  the  heart  of  the  awakened  sinner  that  drew  him  towards  the 
heart  of  his  God,  and  led  him  in  grateful  love  to  present  himself  to  God  for  service  ? 
{W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  three  "thens"  of  Isaiah'*  temple  vision: — The 
prophet  commenced  his  narrative  by  a  note  of  time,  and  he  makes  his  time-bell 
ring  again  and  again — striking  "  then,  then,  then."  I.  The  first  "  then  " 
occurs  thus — The  prophet  was  led  to  feel  his  own  uncleanness,  and  the 
uncleanness  of  those  among  whom  he  dwelt.  When  was  that  t  For  it  is 
important  for  us  to  feel  the  same  conviction,  and  we  may  do  so  by  the  same 
means.  Was  it  when  he  had  been  looking  into  his  own  heart,  and  seeing  its 
dire  deceitfulness,  and  the  black  streams  of  actual  transgression  which 
welled  up  from  that  inward  fountain  of  depravity  T  He  might  certainly 
have  said  "  Woe  is  me ! "  if  he  had  been  looking  there ;  but  he  was  not 
doing  so  on  this  occasion.  Had  he  been  considering  the  law  of  God,  had  he 
observed  how  exceeding  broad  it  is,  how  it  touches  the  thoughts  and  intents 
of  the  heart,  and  condemns  us  because  we  do  not  meet  its  demands  of  perfect 
obedience  ?  Assuredly  if  he  had  been  looking  into  that  pure  and  holy  law  he 
might  have  well  bewailed  his  guilt,  for  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  Or, 
had  he  been  turning  over  the  pages  of  memory,  and  noting  his  own  shortcomings 
and  the  sins  of  his  fellows  ?  Had  he  noted  his  own  failures  in  prayer,  or  in  service, 
or  in  patience  T  Had  he  watched  himself  in  private  and  in  public,  and  did  the 
record  of  the  past  bring  a  consciousness  of  sin  upon  him  ?  If  so,  he  might  well 
enough  have  lamented  before  the  Lord  and  cried,  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  am  undone." 
I  might  even  say,  had  he  been  carrying  out  self-examination  for  a  single  day 
of  his  life,  and  had  that  day  been  the  Sabbath,  and  had  he  been  acting  as  the 
preacher,  or  had  he  been  sitting  under  the  most  stirring  ministry,  and  had  he 
been  at  the  holy  feasts  of  the  Lord,  he  might  have  found  reason  for  confession. 
But  none  of  these  things  are  mentioned  here  as  the  occasion  for  this  humbling 
cry.  It  was  "  then  " — when  he  had  seen  the  Lord.  If  yon  have  never  seen 
God,  you  have  not  seen  yourselves ;  you  will  never  know  how  black  von  are 
till  you  have  seen  how  bright  He  is ;  and  inasmuch  as  you  will  never  know  all 
His  brightness,  so  you  will  never  know  all  your  own  blackness.  Learn,  however, 
12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vt. 

this  lesson,  that  to  turn  your  face  away  from  God  in  order  to  repent  is  a  great 
mistake  ;  it  is  a  sight  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  which  will  breed  humiliation  and 
lowly  confession  of  sin.  Now,  did  I  hear  you  say,  "  I  am  a  man  that  lives  very 
near  to  God,"  &c.  ?  No  man  who  has  come  fresh  from  God  ever  speaks  in  tones 
of  self-congratulation.  What  said  Job  ?  (See  Job  xlii.  5,  6.)  This  wan 
the  experience  of  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man.  II.  You  see  the  man 
trembling ;  in  himself  unclean  and  conscious  of  it,  and  surrounded  by  a 
people  as  unclean  as  himself,  and  it  is  while  he  stands  in  that  condition  that  we 
meet  with  our  second  "  then."  "  Then  flew  one  of  the  seraphims,"  &c.  III.  Let 
me  now  speak  of  the  third  "then."  "Then  said  I,  Here  am  I;  send  me." 
Knowing  that  we  are  now  clean  in  the  sight  of  God,  through  that  altar  which 
sanctifies  all  that  it  touches,  we  shall  have  all  our  fears  removed,  and  then  with 
grateful  love  burst  out  into  the  cry  of  full  surrender  and  complete  consecration. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  essentials  of  true  worship: — These  verses  teach  us 
the  essentials  of  true  worship  and  of  acceptable  approach  to  God.  And  they 
eeem  to  indicate  these  essentials  as  threefold,  involving — I.  A  sense  of  personal 
■wbetchedness.  To  worship  truly,  there  must  be  a  sense  of  our  own  nothing- 
ness and  need.  The  sense  of  wretchedness  is  first  induced  by  the  contemplation 
of  the  holiness  and  majesty  of  God.  It  is  relieved  by  the  condescension  and 
mercy  of  the  King.  "  Mercy  and  truth  meet  together ;  righteousness  and  peace 
embrace  each  other  "  ;  and  in  that  embrace  the  man  who  is  undone  is  folded, 
and  invited  to  bring  forth  his  offering.  II.  A  sense  op  pabdon.  "  Our  God 
is  a  consuming  fire,"  and  our  first  contemplation  of  Him  thus  is  one  which  appals 
and  overcomes  us.  But  a  'ittle  further  prostration  before  the  Holy  One  shows 
that  the  fire  is  a  purging  fire,  not  to  consume  the  man,  but  only  to  erase  the  con- 
fessed uncleanness  from  his  lips.  With  the  anointing  of  the  holy  fire  on  the  lip 
there  comes  the  new  life  into  the  heart,  and  now  the  mortal  may  mingle  his  praises 
with  the  seraphim  themselves.  III.  But  worship  is  not  complete  without  service. 
To  the  ascription  of  the  heart  and  lip  there  must  be  added  the  alacrity  and  obedience 
of  the  life.  There  was  service  for  the  seraphim  :  to  fly  with  the  live  coal.  And 
there  is  service  for  the  seer  :  to  fly  with  the  living  message.  "  Here  am  I  ;  send 
me."  Here  is  the  alacrity  of  obedience.  There  is  no  curious  inquiry  about  the 
nature  of  the  service.  The  man  becomes  as  winged  as  the  seraph.  (A  Mursell.) 
Isaiah's  purification : — I.  In  the  text  we  have  personal  uncleanness  acknow- 
ledged. II.  Observe,  God's  method  of  discovering  this  condition  to  His 
people.  1.  A  vision  of  Himself.  2.  The  prophet  discovered  his  corruption 
by  a  particular  manifestation.  "  Unclean  lips."  Lips  are  indicative  of  character ; 
they  reveal  the  state  of  the  heart.  III.  The  prophet  was  filled  with  keen 
distress  when  he  discovered  that  there  was  corruption  within  him.  IV.  The 
text  reveals  God's  willingness  and  ability  to  save  His  people  from  all 
bin.  V.  The  text  points  out  the  definite  nature  op  this  full  salvation. 
1.  As  to  date.  "  The  year  that  King  Uzziah  died."  2.  As  to  place.  The 
sanctuary.  It  has  been  said  that  of  all  places  in  the  world  there  are  two  which 
a  man  never  forgets — the  place  where  he  was  converted,  and  the  place  where 
he  got  his  wife.  A  sea  captain  says,  "  I  was  crossing  the  Channel  one  day,  in 
command  of  a  passenger  steamer,  when  a  person  rushed  up  to  me,  and  said, 
'  Captain,  why,  that  is  Jersey  !  '  '  Jersey,'  I  said,  '  I  know  that,  right  well, 
for  I  have  seen  it  hundreds  of  times  ;  but  the  speaker  was  not  to  be 
shaken  off  with  my  reply,  and,  with  greater  emphasis,  repeated,  '  But,  sir, — 
Captain,  that  is  Jersey!'  I  replied,  Well,  my  good  woman,  what  of  that?* 
'  Why,'  said  she,  '  I  was  born  to  God  there  ! '  "  3.  As  to  results.  Readiness 
and  fitness  for  service.  (H.  Woodcock.)  The  views  of  the  glory  of  Christ 
which  produce  humiliation  and  penitence: — I.  Represent  the  olory  which 
every  true  saint  beholds  in  Jesus  Christ.  1.  The  saints  behold  the  Son 
of  God  undertaking,  and  in  the  fulness  of  time  accomplishing,  the  work  of  our 
redemption.  2.  They  contemplate  the  exalted  Redeemer,  calling  and  entreating 
sinners  to  accept  of  the  benefits  of  His  purchase  as  the  free  gift  of  God.  3.  They 
behold  the  great  Redeemer  setting  up  that  kingdom  which  shall  never  be 
destroyed  ;  taking  possession  of  those  by  His  Spirit,  whom  He  hath  purchased 
with  His  blood  ;  and  adorning  and  beautifying  them  with  His  own  image. 
4.  They  behold,  with  awful  reverence,  the  majesty  of  Christ,  when  those  who  have 
heard  the  Gospel,  but  have  not  received  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it,  are  given  tip 
to  judicial  blindness  and  hardness  of  heart.  II.  Explain  the  peculiar  manner 
in  which  the  true  saints  behold  the  olobies  op  "  the  King,  the  Lord  op 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  179 

hosts."  1.  The  saints,  having  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ,  behold  a  glory  and  excellency,  and  taste  a  sweetness  in  Divine 
things,  which  other  men  cannot  and  do  not  perceive.  2.  The  saints  alone  are 
spiritually  convinced  of  the  reality  and  certainty  of  the  great  doctrines  of  the 
Gospel.    III.  Consider  the  tendency  op  such  views  op  the  glory  op  Christ, 

AND  OP  THE  SCHEME  OP  SALVATION  THROUGH  HlM,  TO  PROMOTE  THE  VARIOUS 
EXERCISES    OP   PENITENCE    AND    SELF-ABASEMENT.      1.   Such    views    of   the    great 

Redeemer  will  produce  deep  and  serious  thoughtfulness  about  salvation.  2.  They 
will  excite  those  who  receive  them  to  a  strict  and  close  examination  of  their 
hearts  and  lives.  3.  They  will  produce  low  and  debasing  thoughts  of  ourselves. 
4.  They  will  promote  in  the  mind  of  a  saint  a  godly  sorrow  and  a  holy  indignation 
on  account  of  his  personal  sins.  5.  They  will  determine  those  who  receive  them 
to  turn  from  sin  unto  God,  and  by  His  grace  to  devote  themselves  entirely  to 
His  service.  6.  They  have  a  transforming  or  sanctifying  influence.  7.  They 
wean  the  affections  from  things  below  and  place  them  on  things  spiritual  and 
Divine.  (J.  Erskine,  D.D.)  Personal  responsibility  of  man  as  the  possessor 
of  speech: — Like  the  coins  which  we  daily  pass  through  our  .hands  without  reading 
the  superscription  or  testing  the  metal,  we  use  language  for  our  momentary  needs 
without  thinking  whence  it  came  to  us,  or  what  is  its  worth.  But  words  are 
a  great  gift  of  God  to  man.     Language  is  our  inheritance  from  the  ages  that  are 

fone ;  it  grows  richer  as  generations  pass  from  the  accumulations  of  their  thought. 
)escending  to  us,  it  educates  us.  But  if  language  does  so  much  to  fashion  us, 
it  is  an  instrument  for  us  of  wonderful  power  in  moulding  other  minds.  God's 
work,  or  else  Satan's  work,  it  is  for  ever  doing.  1.  If  we  were  to  decide  what 
was  the  commonest  fault  of  the  tongue  amongst  ourselves,  we  should  almost 
all  answer  that  it  was  the  making  light  of  sin.  We  can  allude  to  any  sinful  act 
in  three  ways :  we  can  speak  of  it  as  the  Bible  speaks,  as  a  sin  against  the  Holy 
God  ;  or  as  prudent  men  of  the  world  speak,  as  a  mistake,  and  a  blunder,  and 
a  want  of  self-command  and  dignity;  or,  as  the  thoughtless  speak,  as  something 
to  be  laughed  at  and  forgotten,  a  natural  and  admissible  thing.  Our  language 
is  copious  enough  for  any  of  these.  One  of  the  greatest  dangers  to  souls  is  impurity. 
What  shall  we  say  of  one  who  in  that  moment  of  trial  when  a  soul  is  suspended 
between  life  and  ruin,  steps  in,  with  no  interest  in  the  case  except  the  love  of 
evil,  to  unloose  the  bands  that  hold  him  to  life,  and  so  to  help  his  downfall  ?  If 
there  is  any  retribution  for  sin,  is  not  this  the  sin  to  call  it  down  ?  Tell  him  that 
modesty  is  weak  and  boyish,  and  that  a  certain  measure  of  dissipation  befits 
the  finished  character  of  a  man.  Disconnect  this  sin,  in  all  that  you  say  about 
it,  from  every  thought  of  God  ;  speak  never  of  fornication  and  adultery ;  language 
is  rich  in  words  that  soften  and  disguise  the  guilt  of  this  sin.  Show  how  common 
the  sin  is.  Throw  on  nature  and  on  youth  the  blame,  if  there  is  blame,  of  passions 
too  strong  for  restraint.  You  will  extinguish,  by  such  means,  the  last  spark 
of  that  shame,  which,  fostered  in  a  home  where  all  was  pure  and  chaste,  has  been 
sustained  till  now  from  extinction  by  a  mother's  pure  prayers,  by  her  solicitous 
efforts  to  keep  enfolded  even  when  far  off,  her  darling  in  the  invisible  arms  of 
her  chaste  affection.  You  will  succeed.  It  were  better  that  a  mill-stone  were 
hanged  about  your  neck,  and  you  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea,  than  to  reap 
such  an  accursed  success  against  one  of  those  for  whom  our  beloved  Lord  died. 
2.  This  brings  us  to  another  peril  of  the  tongue.  Two  of  the  safeguards  against 
sin  are  the  love  of  God  and  the  fear  of  judgment.  But  they  suppose  a  faith  that 
God  indeed  is,  and  that  He  verily  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him. 
A  theology  of  suppositions  has  no  force  as  a  safeguard.  Faith  may  be  strong 
or  weak,  but  it  cannot  be  faith  and  not  faith  at  the  same  time.  Through  this 
state  of  division  and  doubt  men  have  sometimes  had  to  pass,  but  to  linger  in  it 
is  death.  It  is  not  a  phase  of  religion,  but  a  suspension  of  it.  He  for  whom 
nor  God,  nor  Christ,  nor  conscience,  nor  the  life  to  come  id  a  reality,  has 
nothing  on  which  he  may  support  himself.  But  how  are  these  questions, 
this  state  of  doubt,  treated  in  common  talk  ?  People  mean  no  harm  when  they 
jest  about  the  last  new  theory  in  science,  yet  when  they  come  to  consider  what 
is  the  tendency  of  the  conversation  in  the  circle  in  which  they  live,  they  may 
have  to  confess  that  its  tone  tends  to  encourage  doubt,  and  to  make  them  content 
with  the  darkness.  3.  Might  not  even  our  religious  conversation  be  more  fruitful 
than  it  is  ?  St.  James,  from  whose  Epistle  we  might  derive  a  complete  code 
of  rules  for  the  government  of  the  tongue,  says,  "  Let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear, 
•low  to  speak,  slow  to  wrath  ;  for  the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteousnesa 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vl 

of  God."  He  is  speaking  of  religious  things,  of  hearing  and  speaking  "  the  word 
of  truth,"  mentioned  in  the  former  verse.  Does  not  religion  suffer  often  from 
our  hot  and  impetuous  advocacy  ?  We  are  zealous  for  God,  and  that,  we  think, 
excuses  everything ;  and  we  are  ready  with  the  nickname  or  the  good  story 
against  those  whose  views  differ  from  our  own,  and  we  separate  readily  from  those 
that  will  not  go  as  far  as  we  ;  and  the  lines  that  separate  Church  parties  are  daily 
more  deeply  marked.  God's  great  purposes,  in  the  growth  of  His  kingdom,  will 
gain  nothing  from  our  noisy  warmth.  (Archbishop  Thomson.)  The  making 
of  a  prophet : — I.  If  we  see  God  ws  shall  see  our  sin.  IL  Note  the  second 
stage  here,  in  the  education  of  a  soul  for  service— the  sin  beoognised  and 
bepented  OF  is  burned  AWAY.  I  would  notice  about  this  stage  of  the  process — 
1.  That  Isaiah  singularly  passes  beyond  all  the  old  ritual  in  which  he  had  been 
brought  up,  and  recognises  another  kind  of  cleansing  than  that  which  it  embodied. 
He  had  got  beyond  the  ritual  to  what  the  ritual  meant.  2.  But  far  more 
important  than  that  thought  is  the  human  condition  that  is  required  ere  this 
cleansing  can  be  realised.  "  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips."  "  I  am  undone  !  " 
It  was  because  that  conviction  and  confession  sprang  in  the  prophet's  conscious- 
ness that  the  seraph  winged  his  way  with  the  purifying  fire  in  his  hands.  Which 
being  translated  is  just  this :  faith  alone  will  not  bring  cleansing.  There  must 
go  with  it  what  we  call,  in  our  Christian  phraseology,  repentance,  which  is  but 
the  recognition  of  my  own  antagonism  to  the  holiness  of  God,  and  the  resolve 
to  turn  my  back  on  my  own  past  self.  3.  Again,  note  that  we  have  here  set 
forth  most  strikingly  the  other  great  truth,  the  two  being  as  closely  synchronous 
as  the  flash  and  the  peal;  namely,  as  soon  as  the  consciousness  of  sin,  and  the 
aversion  from  it,  spring  in  a  man's  heart,  the  seraph's  wings  are  set  in  motion. 
Remember  that  beautiful  old  story  in  the  historical  books,  of  how  the  erring 
king,  brought  to  sanity  and  repentance  by  Nathan's  apologue,  put  all  his  acknow- 
ledgments in  these  words,  "  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  "  ;  and  how  the 
confession  was  not  out  of  his  lips,  nor  had  died  in  its  vibration  in  the  atmosphere, 
before  the  prophet,  with  Divine  authority,  replied  with  equal  brevity  and  com- 

Eleteness,  and  as  if  the  two  sayings  were  bits  of  the  one  sentence,  "  And  the  Lord 
ath  made  to  pass  the  iniquity  of  thy  sin."  That  is  all.  Simultaneous  are  the 
two  things.  4.  Still  further,  notice  how  the  cleansing  comes  as  a  Divine  gift. 
The  Lord  is  He  that  healeth  us.  6.  But,  further,  the  cleansing  is  by  fire.  By 
which,  as  I  suppose,  in  the  present  context,  and  at  Isaiah's  stage  of  religious 
knowledge  and  experience,  we  are  to  understand  that  great  thought  that  God 
burns  away  our  sins ;  as  you  put  a  piece  of  foul  clay  into  the  fire,  and  the  stain 
melts  from  the  surface  like  a  dissipating  cloud,  as  the  heat  finds  its  way  into  the 
substance.  "  He  will  baptise  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire  " — a  fire  that 
quickens.  A  new  impulse  will  be  granted,  and  that  will  become  the  life  of  the 
sinful  man's  life,  and  will  emancipate  him  from  the  power  of  his  own  darkness 
and  evil.  Now,  let  us  remember  that  we  have  the  fulness  of  all  that  was  shadowed 
to  the  prophet  in  this  vision,  and  that  all  these  emblems  are  gathered  together, 
not  with  confusion,  but  abundance  and  opulence  in  Jesus  Christ  Himself. 
Is  He  not  the  seraph  ?  Is  He  not  Himself  the  burning  coal  ?  Is  He  not  the 
altar  from  which  it  is  taken  ?  All  that  is  needed  to  make  the  foulest  clean  lies 
in  Christ's  great  work.  III.  The  third  stage  here  is — the  purged  spirit  is 
beady  fob  sebvice.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  true  messenger  of  Ood : — 
Though  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  are  amongst  the  most  evangelical  portions  of 
the  Old  Testament,  and  though  we  read  them  with  true  delight,  yet  the  history 
of  the  prophet  himself,  the  writer  of  this  splendid  poem,  is  only  very  partially 
revealed.  He  is  like  a  summer  bird  who  sings  sweetly  on  the  branch  of  a  tree, 
but  hides  himself  from  view.  In  this  chapter  we  have  an  account,  if  not  of  his 
conversion,  at  least  of  his  call  to  the  prophetic  office.  It  took  place  in  the  year 
of  Uzziah's  death.  That  was  more  than  a  date,  or  he  would  have  probably  said 
the  year  when  Jotham  began  to  reign.  We  find  here  the  essential  qualifications  of 
the  true  messengers  of  God.  I.  A  view  of  God's  holiness.  He  saw  the  Lord 
"  sitting  upon  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  up,"  and  heard  the  heavenly  choir  chanting 
"Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  word  "holy"  means  "separate." 
Israel  was  a  holy  nation,  separate  from  all  the  people  of  the  earth,  and  Canaan 
was  the  holy  land.  But  God  Himself  is  the  holy,  the  separate,  dwelling  in  light 
inaccessible.  God  is  love,  but  He  is  holy  love.  He  is  a  Father,  infinitely  excell- 
ing any  earthly  parent  in  kindness  and  compassion;  but  He  is  a  "holy  Father." 
God's  holiness  was  revealed  to  Isaiah  in  a  remarkable  manner.     He  saw  God, 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  181 

not  with  his  natural  eyes,  but  in  such  a  manner  as  every  quickened  spirit  must 
6ee  Him.  He  saw  God  ;  that  is,  had  a  true  conception  of  His  character.  He 
had  heard  of  Him  before  when  attending  the  national  festivals,  but  he  never 
saw  Him  properly  until  Uzziah  was  stricken  with  leprosy  for  his  presumption. 
Every  prophet  and  every  messenger  has  a  certain  truth  which  has  sunk  deeper 
into  his  soul  than  any  other  truth,  and  it  is  not  strange,  therefore,  if  he  enters 
into  a  covenant  with  that  truth,  as  it  were,  that  he  will  be  faithful  to  it  at  all 
costs  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he  will  receive  great  comfort  to  himself  from  such 
a  truth,  and  find  shelter  under  its  branches  from  the  heat  of  the  day  or  the  fury 
of  the  storm.  Every  worker  for  God  in  order  to  be  successful  must  first  have  a 
vision  of  God.  This  must  be  the  foundation  of  our  work  and  the  source  of  our 
success.  To  have  a  firm  building,  the  foundation  must  be  sound.  We  have 
never  understood  holiness,  righteousness,  and  truth  unless  we  have  seen  God. 
We  can  never  have  any  idea  of  law  except  in  the  light  of  the  Lawgiver.  Great 
reformers  have  been  great  believers.  This  is  the  place  to  grow  a  creed  in  the 
Bunshine  of  God's  presence,  and  in  contemplation  of  His  supreme  will.  A  short 
creed  of  thirty-nine  letters  burnt  into  our  soul  by  the  fire  of  conviction  is  better 
than  a  long  creed  of  thirty-nine  articles  conveyed  to  our  mind  by  traditionalism. 
A  personal  contact  with  God  will  ever  leave  its  mark  on  the  soul.  This  was 
experienced  by  Augustine,  Anselm,  Calvin,  Bunyan,  Jonathan  Edwards,  and 
other  men  of  valour  in  the  religious  world.  When  Christmas  Evans  was  once 
on  his  travels  between  Dolgelly  and  Machynlleth  he  had  such  a  view  of  God's 
glory  that  he  felt  that  the  barren  mountain  of  Cader  Idris  had  become  a  Holy 
of  holies.  He  wrestled  with  God  for  several  hours,  praying  for  the  Churches 
and  ministers  of  Wales  by  name.  What  wonder  that  he  returned  to  Anglesey 
like  a  giant  refreshed,  and  that  a  strong  religious  awakening  was  the  natural 
result.  II.  Another  necessary  qualification  is  a  sense  of  man's  sinful- 
ness.  The  vision  of  God's  holiness  created  within  Isaiah's  mind  a  sense  of  his 
own  unworthiness.  "  Then,  said  I,  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips." 
Why  does  he  say  unclean  lips  ?  Because  he  was  called  to  speak  for  God,  and 
therefore  he  must  be,  before  all  things,  a  man  of  pure  lips,  and  must  utter  true 
words.  He  is  only  a  voice  uttering  the  thoughts  of  God,  and  it  requires  a  clean 
channel  for  the  waters  of  God's  blessings  to  flow.  He  appears  to  be  anxious 
to  join  the  seraphic  song,  but  how  could  he  with  his  lips  unclean  ?  A  sense  of 
man's  sinfulness  will  naturally  follow  a  true  view  of  God's  holiness.  No  one  with 
a  light  view  of  sin,  viewing  it  only  as  mere  weakness,  the  result  of  circumstances, 
or  the  effect  of  man's  environment,  can  effect  any  real  deliverance.     III.  Another 

NECESSARY   QUALIFICATION   IS   FAITH  IN   THE   POSSIBILITY   OF  A   MAN'S   RENEWAL. 

Isaiah  looked  upon  God,  the  Holy  Being,  as  dwelling  apart.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  prophet  views  man  in  the  darkness  of  his  corrupt  nature  as  far  from 
God — the  distance  being  measured,  not  by  miles  or  geographical  distinctions, 
but  by  sins  and  man's  shortcomings.  The  prophet,  first  of  all,  seeks  his  own 
purity,  and  cries  for  renewal,  and  one  of  the  seraphs,  the  agents  of  God's  mercy, 
becomes  the  medium  of  that  blessed  work.  We  very  often  find  during  the  first 
real  awakening  of  a  religious  activity  that  men  become  very  pessimistic  in  their 
views.  They  have  passed  through  these  two  stages — the  contemplation  of  God's 
holiness  and  man's  sinfulness — and  think  of  the  great  gulf  between,  but  before 
they  can  expect  to  effect  a  great  improvement,  and  turn  any  portion  of  the  vast 
wilderness  into  God's  garden,  they  must  reach  a  further  stage,  and  possess  faith 
in  the  possibility  of  a  man's  renewal.  They  must  look  upon  sin  as  a  terrible 
enemy,  but  as  an  intruder  in  the  city  of  Mansoul ;  look  upon  it  as  a  serious  blot 
upon  our  nature ;  but  still  to  be  removed  by  the  healing  influences  of  the  grace 
of  God.  Michael  Angelo  saw  in  the  rough  stone  at  Florence  the  necessary  material 
for  the  picture  of  an  angel.  So  our  Saviour  looked  with  a  prophetic  eye  upon  all 
conditions  of  men,  and  He  saw  in  Matthew,  the  publican,  the  making  of  an  apostle. 
We  need  preachers  of  the  Gospel  of  joy  and  of  hope.  John  Newton  said  that 
he  never  doubted  the  power  of  God  to  save  any,  since  he  himself  had  been  rescued 
from  the  bondage  of  sin.  William  Carey,  studying  a  map  of  the  world  that 
hung  in  his  workroom,  thought  with  pain  how  small  a  portion  of  the  human  race 
had  any  knowledge  of  the  Saviour ;  but  he  determined  that  something  should 
be  done,  and  he  conversed,  corresponded,  preached,  and  published  in  order  to 
awaken  men,  so  as  to  expect  great  things  from  God,  and  to  attempt  great  things 
for  God.  To  love  God  and  love  our  neighbour  are  two  parts  of  the  same  law. 
IV.  Another  qualification  is  a  desire  to  partake  in  the  work  of  restora- 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

tion.  Isaiah  heard  the  voice  of  God  saying,  "  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who 
will  go  for  Ue  ?  "  This  voice  is  only  heard  by  those  who  are  possessed  of  an 
obedient  nature.  1.  Man  does  not  lose  his  personality  in  the  work  of  God.  **  Here 
am  I ;  send  me."  He  offers  himself.  Nothing  less  will  do,  and  nothing  more  is 
possible.  The  grace  of  God  does  not  destroy  man's  identity,  nor  his  personality. 
The  most  solemn  thought  possible  is  the  responsibility  of  personal  man  to  a 
personal  God.  We  should  lay  our  best  at  the  feet  of  our  Saviour,  and  put  every 
faculty  under  tribute  to  Him.  There  is  room  in  His  service  for  the  gifts  of  the 
imagination,  the  strength  of  the  intellect,  the  power  of  the  will,  and  the  emotions 
of  the  heart.  Let  us  do  duty  first,  and  then  we  can  leave  the  consequences  to 
God.  Let  us  say,  Send  me,  and  let  us  consecrate  the  entire  man  on  the  altar 
of  service.  2.  The  true  worker  must  also  feel  that  he  is  the  object  of  Divine 
commission.  "Send  me."  He  feels,  though  willing  and  anxious  to  do  his  best, 
that  he  can  accomplish  nothing,  unless  he  receives  Divine  commission,  is  endowed 
with  Divine  wisdom,  and  inspired  by  Divine  fellowship.  With  this  equipment 
a  man  can  weather  many  a  storm,  and  struggle  manfully  against  many  foes. 
Paul  came  face  to  face  with  God  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  and  that  made  him 
strong  to  fight  the  battle  and  run  the  race.  {H.  G.  Williams.)  In  the  temple  : — 
Jerusalem  was  the  London  of  the  Holy  Land,  the  capital  of  Palestine.  WelL 
a  very  dreadful  thing  had  just  happened  in  Jerusalem.  The  king  was  dead, 
and  he  died  in  the  saddest  possible  way.  The  people  were  very  sorry,  and  talked 
a  great  deal  about  it ;  and  Isaiah,  too,  was  filled  with  grief  and  wonder.  What 
could  it  all  mean  T  But  there  was  nobody  in  all  Jerusalem  who  could  tell  him. 
But  God,  who  had  a  great  work  for  the  youth  to  do,  took  him  and  told  him  what 
it  all  meant.  He  showed  him  a  vision.  Just  as  we  see  things  with  our  minds 
when  our  eyes  are  closed,  so  God  taught  Isaiah  the  meaning  of  the  king's  death, 
by  making  him  see  and  hear  wonderful  things  with  the  eye  and  ear  of  his  mind. 
I.  What  Isaiah  saw.  He  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  a  throne.  The  King  Uzziah 
was  dead,  but  the  eternal  King  never  dies.  He  was  on  His  throne,  high  and 
lifted  up,  and  the  glory  of  His  garments  filled  the  temple,  so  great  and  glorious 
was  He.  And  then  Isaiah  heard  angels  singing,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord 
of  hosts;  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  If  you  went  into  a  great  picture 
gallery  you  would  probably  come  to  one  room  which  would  be  called  the  "  Rubens 
room,"  where  all  the  pictures  would  be  by  Rubens ;  then  in  another  part  of  the 

fallery  you  would  come  to  the  "  Turner  room,"  and  all  the  pictures  in  that  would 
e  Turner's,  the  great  English  painter ;  and  so  on  through  room  after  room. 
And  if  you  went  into  a  library,  on  one  shelf  you  would  find  the  works  of  Shake- 
speare, on  another  the  works  of  Bacon,  on  another  the  works  of  Milton.  But 
with  regard  to  God,  the  angels  say  you  may  go  up  and  down  the  world,  and 
everywhere  you  go  you  will  find  every  room,  every  shelf,  filled  with  the  glory 
of  the  same  One.  The  whole  earth  is  filled  with  the  glory  of  One,  and  that  One 
is  God.  Now,  why  does  God  sav  that  to  Isaiah  ?  In  order  to  teach  Isaiah 
reverence ;  to  teach  him  to  fear  God — not  to  be  afraid,  but  to  teach  him  to  honour 
God.  Uzziah  had  dared  God,  as  it  were.  Uzziah  had  forgotten  the  greatness 
of  God,  and  so  the  first  thing  God  did  with  the  boy  was  to  stamp  upon  his  mind 
that  he  must  be  reverent.  And,  dear  children,  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  lessons 
that  we  all  need :  have  your  play  and  fun  and  laughter  in  their  right  time  and 
in  the  right  way ;  but  when  you  come  to  this  place  for  worship,  for  prayer  and 
praise,  remember  how  great  God  is.  II.  What  Isaiah  felt.  He  knew  that 
Uzziah  had  done  wrong ;  and  God  taught  him  that,  young  as  he  was,  he  too  had 
sinned,  and  so  he  cried  out,  "  Woe  is  me,  /  am  unclean."  He  felt  that  he  had 
sinned,  and  then  lest  his  heart  should  be  broken  with  sorrow,  God  made  him  feel 
that  He — the  God  against  whom  he  had  sinned,  could  pardon  and  cleanse  him. 
It  is  a  grand  moment  when  you  find  fault  with  yourselves.  That  is  the  finest 
thing  a  boy  can  do,  to  stand  up  and,  as  it  were,  pitch  right  into  himself,  find 
fault  with  himself,  feeling  that  he  has  done  wrong.  Have  you  felt  that,  children 
— felt  that  you  too  have  sinned  ?  But  if  you  have  sinned  it  isn't  hopeless,  for 
God  can  take  your  sin  away.  Ask  Him  for  pardon,  ask  Him  for  power  not  to 
sin.  LTI.  What  Isaiah  heard.  He  heard  God  asking  for  somebody  to  carry 
a  message  for  Him  and  do  work  for  Him.  Well,  but  you  say,  "  We  never  heard 
God  say  that."  No,  you  never  heard  Him  in  so  many  words,  but  if  you  know 
how  to  listen  for  God's  call,  you  can  hear  Him  calling  every  day.  How  does 
God  call  ?  God  calls  by  putting  a  need  before  you.  When  anything  wants 
doing,  that  is  God's  call  to  somebody.     IV.  What  Isaiah  said.     "  Here  am  I." 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  183 

He  didn't  look  about  and  say,  "  Who  is  there  that  will  go  ?  "  No ;  he  said, 
"  Here  am  I ;  send  me,"  and  God  did  not  refuse  him.  You  know  that  in  arranging 
their  play,  the  bigger  boys  choose  who  shall  be  on  their  side,  and  they  always 
choose  the  best  boys ;  the  poor  little  fellows  who  can't  play  well  are  left  for  the 
other  side.  They  are  always  so  anxious  to  be  called ;  but  are  always  passed 
by,  or  left  to  the  very  last.  God  doesn't  do  that ;  He  doesn't  say,  "  Oh  no,  no, 
I  want  somebody  else."  He  says,  "  Come,  whosoever  will  let  him  come." 
(J.  M.  Gibbon.)        Fear,  as  a  preparation  for  duty: — I.  The  emotion  which 

THE    MAN   EXHIBITS.      (Ver.  5.)       II.     THE    BEARING    IT    HAS   UPON    HIS    HISTORY. 

Inferences — 1.  To  make  conviction  of  sin  profounder  a  man  needs  to  come 
up  more  and  more  evidently  before  the  presence  of  the  Divine  purity.  It 
never  helps  any  one  to  begin  desperately  to  study  his  wickednesses  with  a 
view  to  outroot  them.  It  is  better  for  him  to  keep  looking  at  God.  The 
objective  study  of  Christ,  His  life,  character,  &c,  is  far  safer  and  more  profitable 
for  growth  in  grace  than  any  painful  act  of  self-examination.  2.  He  who  has 
Buffered  himself  to  tolerate  trivial  notions  of  disobedience  has  not  yet  ever 
had  a  proper  conception  of  his  Maker,  who  is  one  day  to  be  his  Judge.  (C.  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  A  vision  of  God  humbles  : — The  prophet  does  not  come  away 
triumphing  in  what  he  has  seen ;  he  does  not  hold  the  vision  as  a  prize,  and  mock 
other  men  because  they  have  not  seen  similar  revelations  ;  he  says,  in  effect, 
If  ever  you  see  God  you  will  fall  down  in  humility,  self-abhorrence  and  self-help- 
lessness. (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Isaiah's  true  character  : — Only  the  pure  in 
heart  can  see  God.  But  he  who  is  sufficiently  pure  in  heart  to  see  God  is,  by 
that  very  vision,  convicted  of  an  unspeakable  impurity.  Isaiah  was  not  a  bad 
man  but  a  good,  one  of  the  excellent  of  the  earth  in  whom  God  took  delight. 
But  the  very  light  that  is  in  him  turns  to  darkness  in  a  glory  so  ineffable ;  and 
he  finds  a  sentence  of  death  in  the  very  life  which  alone  can  quicken  and  renew 
him.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Self-humbling  a  preparation  for  service: — I  have  noted 
in  my  own  experience  that  whenever  I  have  been  most  blessed  in  the  winning 
of  souls,  it  has  generally  been  just  after  I  have  endured  a  thorough  stripping 
in  my  own  heart,  or  when  by  soul  trouble  I  have  been  brayed  as  in  a 
mortar  among  wheat  with  a  pestle  till  I  seemed  ground  into  dust.  Trial 
has  preceded  triumph.  A  wider  field  has  been  opened  to  me  by  the  breaking 
down  of  my  hedges.  I  have  shrunk  into  self-oblivion,  and  then  the  Lord 
has  moved  me  to  speak  in  a  burning  manner  to  His  glory.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
God's  holiness,  a  revelation  of  sin  : — Like  some  search-light  flung  from  a  ship 
over  the  darkling  waters,  revealing  the  dark  doings  of  the  enemy  away 
out  yonder  in  the  night,  the  thought  of  God  and  His  holiness  streaming  in 
upon  a  man's  soul,  if  it  is  there  in  any  adequate  measure,  is  sure  to  disclose 
the  heaving  waters  and  the  skulking  foes  that  are  busy  in  the  dark.  (A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D.)  The  thought  of  God  in  the  heart : — The  sleeping  snake  that  is 
coiled  in  every  soul  stirs  and  begins  to  heave  in  its  bulk,  and  wake  when  the 
thought  of  a  holy  God  comes  into  the  heart.  (Ibid.)  No  heaven  possible  to 
the  uncleansed  man  : — Oh,  you  who  think  that  you  are  sure  to  go  to  heaven,  are 
you  quite  sure  that  you  would  be  happy  if  you  got  there  ?  Might  not  the  vision 
of  God  produce  a  similar  effect  upon  you  to  that  which  was  produced  upon  one 
who  was  probably  a  better  man  than  you,  by  this  august  display  ?  And  what 
would  heaven  be  but  a  moral  hell  if  you  found  yourself  grovelling  in  the  dust, 
crying  out  in  anguish  and  terror,  "  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  am  undone  ?  (W.  Hay 
Aitken,  M.A.)  Consciousness  of  sin  : — When  one  turns  to  look  with  a  stead- 
fast eye  upon  one's  own  doings,  the  terrible  revelation  come3  as  a  sickening  fear 
to  each  of  us,  that  the  dark  side  of  our  life  is  practically  limitless.  President 
Edwards  used  to  exclaim  for  months  together,  "  Infinite  upon  infinite  !  In- 
finite upon  infinite  !  "  And  many  an  awakened  soul  has  felt  that  the  words 
were  hardly  exaggerated.  (D.  M.  Mclntyre.)  The  sense  of  sin: — Augustine 
of  Hippo  records  in  his  "  Confessions  "  :  Thou,  O  Lord,  while  he  [Pontitianus] 
was  speaking,  didst  turn  me  round  towards  myself,  taking  me  from  behind  my 
back,  where  I  had  placed  me,  unwilling  to  observe  myself,  and  setting  me  before 
my  face,  that  I  might  see  how  foul  I  was,  how  crooked  and  defiled,  besotted  and 
ulcerous.  And  I  beheld  and  stood  aghabt ;  and  whither  to  flee  from  myself 
I  found  not.  Self -revelation  a  preparation  for  great  usefulness: — Students  of 
religious  biography  are  familiar  with  the  strange  tale  of  the  great  mediaeval 
preacher,  Dr.  John  Tauler,  of  Strasburg,  and  know  how  popular  he  was  while 
his  sermons  were  of  the  letter  only,  and  not  from  the  Spirit,  and  how  he  was  set 


184  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

to  the  child's  task  of  learning  the  very  A  B  C  of  Christianity  ere  he  could  preach 
with  the  tongue  of  fire  which  reaches  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  the  hearers. 
Falling  into  great  weakness  of  body  and  continual  sorrow  of  soul,  losing  all  trust 
in  himself  and  his  own  doings,  he  owned  with  bitter  tears,  "  I  am  wretched  and 
miserable  and  poor  and  blind  and  naked."  It  was  at  that  moment  he  received 
the  blessed  knowledge  of  Christ  as  the  sin-offering,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
used  him  thenceforth  in  a  marvellous  manner  for  the  convicting  and  comforting 
of  the  citizens,  in  the  midst  of  earthquakes  and  wars  and  famine  and  pestilence, 
bo  that  the  great  power  of  God  fell  upon  that  town  as  probably  never  before 
nor  since.  (F.  Sessions.)  Jonathan  Edwards'  conversion : — Jonathan  Edwards 
was  suddenly  converted,  as  by  a  flash  of  light,  in  the  moment  of  reading  a  single 
verse  of  the  New  Testament,  into  contact  with  which  he  was  brought  by  a  series 
of  unusual  circumstances.  He  was  at  home  in  his  father's  house  ;  some  ordinary 
hindrance  kept  him  from  going  to  church  one  Sunday  with  the  family ;  a  couple 
of  hours  in  prospect  with  nothing  to  do  sent  him  listlessly  into  the  library ;  the 
eight  of  a  dull  volume  with  no  title  on  the  leather  back  of  it  piqued  curiosity 
as  to  what  it  could  be ;  he  opened  it  at  random  and  found  it  to  be  a  Bible ;  and 
then  his  eye  caught  this  verse  :  "  Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible, 
the  only  wise  God,  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  He  tells  us 
in  his  journal  that  the  immediate  effect  of  it  was  awakening  and  alarming  to  his 
soul ;  for  it  brought  him  a  most  novel  and  most  extensive  thought  of  the  vastness 
and  majesty  of  the  true  Sovereign  of  the  universe.  Out  of  this  grew  the  astonish- 
ing pain  of  guilt  for  having  resisted  such  a  Monarch  so  long,  and  for  having  served 
Him  so  poorly.  And  whereas,  he  had  hitherto  had  slight  notions  of  his  own 
wickedness  and  very  little  poignancy  of  acute  remorse,  now  he  felt  the  deepest 
contrition.  Here  is  a  precise  reproduction  of  Isaiah's  experience.  (C.  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Then  flew  one  of  the  seraphims  unto  me,  having  a  live  coal  in  his 
hand. — The  live  coal  from  the  altar  : — These  words  seem  to  address  themselves  in 
the  way  of  encouragement  and  consolation — I.  To  the  ministers  of  the  woed 
specially.  Like  Isaiah  they  feel  the  importance  of  the  work  to  which  they  are 
called,  and  their  inability  to  discharge  aright  the  commission  with  which  they 
are  entrusted.  The  more  they  contemplate  the  holiness  of  Jehovah,  the  purity 
and  excellency  of  His  Word,  the  distance  between  God  and  the  sinner,  the  awful 
majesty  of  the  Almighty,  and  the  ineffable  glory  in  which  He  is  enshrined,  the 
more  they  perceive  their  own  unworthiness,  and  grieve  over  the  sinfulness  which 
adheres  to  them.  They  feel  their  shortcoming,  and  are  disposed  to  say  with 
the  prophet,  "  Woe  is  me  !  "  &c.  But  they  have  consolation.  The  coal  from 
the  altar,  when  brought  in  contact  with  the  prophet's  lips,  purged  his  sin,  cleansed 
his  iniquity,  and  fitted  him  for  the  work  to  which  he  was  Divinely  called.  IL  To 
believers  generally.  Not  only  to  the  prophet  of  old,  nor  yet  to  the  minister 
of  the  Gospel,  but  to  every  child  of  Adam,  is  there  need  for  cleansing  of  sin  in 
order  to  effect  reconciliation,  and  make  him  a  child  of  God.  (T.  R.  Redwar,  M.A.) 
The  ceremony  of  purification  : — It  shows  that  contact  with  the  fire  of  the  Divine 
holiness  is  not  necessarily  destructive  even  to  man.  It  is  possible  to  "  dwell 
with  devouring  fire."  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  peace  of  forgiveness  in 
Judaism: — What  was  the  meaning  of  this  to  Isaiah  ?  If  I  am  not  mistaken, 
it  is  this  :  Up  to  this  time  all  that  system  of  sacred  rites  to  which  he  had  yielded 
all  perfunctory  obedience  had  been  to  him  but  as  dead  ceremonies,  but  now  he 
Bees  that  each  of  them  is  a  living  thing  instinct  with  Divine  life  and  power ;  each 
a  splendid  sacrament  of  grace  to  him  who  in  conscious  spiritual  need  will  approach 
not  it,  but  the  God  of  Israel  in  and  through  it.  And  he  realises  how  that,  sinner 
as  he  is,  he  is  by  the  providence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  a  great  and  glorious  spiritual 
system  in  which  his  craving  for  peace  is  met,  and  where  the  Divine  absolution 
is  brought  home  to  him.  (Canon  Body,  D.D.)  The  peace  of  forgiveness  in 
Christendom  : — What  is  it  that  gives  to  this  great  system  of  Christendom  the 
peace-giving  power  that  by  the  confession  of  nineteen  centuries  it  has  ?  It  is 
this.  Behind  all  the  ministries  of  the  Church,  vocal  and  sacramental,  lies  the 
pleading  Priest,  at  the  golden  altar  in  heaven,  for  ever  present  and  pleading  before 
the  Father  the  consummated  sacrifice  of  Calvary.  That  sacrifice  takes  the 
form  of  a  great  offering  of  propitiation.  And  it  is  this  that  lies  behind  all  the 
Church's  rites,  the  powerful  pleading  by  the  living  Christ  of  the  death  died  on 
Calvary,  through  which  pleading  comes  the  living  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  into 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  185 

the  Divine  society,  holding  her  in  her  weird,  mysterious  life,  through  which  plead- 
ing simple  rites  are  Divinely  efficacious,  through  which  pleading  the  coal  becomes 
the  coal  that  burns  with  living  fire.  And  it  is  in  the  midst  of  this  wondrous 
system  of  sacred  ministries  that  the  blessed  Jesus  applies  to  each  the  peace 
of  reconciliation.  (Ibid.)  The  Holy  Spirit  as  fire: — Fire  is  something  pure, 
burning,  purifying ;  it  lays  hold  of,  penetrates,  and,  as  it  were,  converts  into 
its  own  substance  whatever  is  susceptible  of  its  action,  thus  hallowing  the  gifts 
laid  on  the  altar.  All  these  are  the  attributes  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  office  it 
is  to  purge  and  illuminate  man,  to  excite  him  to  the  love  of  God,  to  affect  him 
with  zeal  for  His  glory,  to  arouse  him  from  sloth  to  fervour,  to  inflame  him 
with  courage  and  constancy,  with  energy  and  devotion  of  all  his  powers  to  the 
cause  of  God,  and  to  enable  him  to  make  supplications  to  God  according  to  His 
will.  And  in  this  place  fire  signifies  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  which  spirit,  like 
fire,  sanctifies  men  in  a  peculiar  manner  to  this  great  work,  kindles,  inflames, 
makes  them  glow  with  zeal ;  and,  what  is  true  in  itself  and  specially  applicable 
here,  converts  them  into  seraphs.  (C.  Vitringa.)  "  A  live  coal "  .* — The  render- 
ing of  the  A. V.,  "  a  live  coal,"  i.e.,  a  burning  log  (for  of  course  in  those  days  the 
fuel  was  wood),  is  totally  wrong,  and,  indeed,  the  conception  is  too  grotesque  to 
be  for  a  moment  entertained.  (P.  Thomson,  M.A.)  The  hot  stone  : — A  stone 
kept  in  all  ancient  Oriental  households  as  a  means  of  applying  heat  to  household 
purposes.  In  order  to  bake  cakes  ( 1  Kings  xix.  6,  "  cake  baked  on  the  hot  stones  "), 
or  to  roast  flesh,  the  stone  was  first  heated  in  the  fire,  and  the  wet  dough  or  the 
flesh  spread  out  upon  it,  the  stone3  as  they  grew  cold  being  exchanged  for  hot 
ones  fresh  from  the  fire.  To  boil  milk,  the  hot  stone  was  plunged  into  it  when 
contained  in  the  leathern  skin  that  served  alike  as  cauldron  and  pitcher.  In 
Bhort,  the  heated  stone  was  a  primitive  means  of  applying  fire  wherever  fire  was 
needed.  The  prophet,  carrying  the  similitude  of  an  earthly  household  into  the 
heavenly  palace,  assumes  the  presence  of  such  an  utensil  on  the  hearth,  which 
here,  of  course,  must  be  conceived  as  an  altar  on  the  model  of  God's  earthly 
dwelling-place.  (Ibid.)  The  symbolic  act  of  the  angel: — This  would,  perhaps, 
be  quite  intelligible  to  the  contemporaries  of  the  prophet ;  but  it  is  undoubtedly 
very  obscure  to  us.  The  act  is  intended  to  shadow  forth  in  some  way  the 
cleansing  of  the  prophet  from  sin  ;  but  what  is  the  connection  between  such 
cleansing  and  the  touching  of  Isaiah's  lips  with  the  stone  heated  on  the  altar- 
fire  ?  The  stone  is  a  means  of  applying  fire ;  when,  therefore,  it  is  brought  to 
the  lips  of  the  prophet,  it  is  the  same  as  if  the  whole  altar-fire  had  been  brought 
there ;  and  that  again  is  the  same  as  if  the  prophet's  "  unclean  lips  "  had  been 
laid  on  the  altar.  The  everyday  use  of  the  stone  would  at  once  suggest  this  to 
the  mind  of  Isaiah's  hearers.  The  angel's  act,  therefore,  is  as  much  as  to  say: 
M  Lo,  I  lay  thy  sinfulness  on  the  altar-fire ;  and  thou  art  cleansed  from  sin  thereby." 
But  how  should  laying  on  the  altar  cleanse  from  sin  ?  To  lay  on  the  altar  is  to 
give  up  to  God — to  make  wholly  His.  Here,  then,  the  angel  says  to  Isaiah  in 
substance  this :  "  Thy  sin-defiled  nature  ('  lips  ')  I  lay  on  God's  altar.  I  make 
it  all  His  again.  The  uncleanness  of  thy  nature  consisted  in  its  opposition  to 
God,  for  all  sin  is  selfish  action,  as  opposed  to  action  for  God,  and  now  all  the 
opposition  of  thy  nature  to  God  is  taken  away.  Thy  nature  is,  by  this  act,  devoted 
wholly  to  God.  By  Divine  power  thou  hast  been  suddenly,  miraculously,  turned 
into  one  from  whom  all  selfish  thoughts  and  words  and  deeds  are  taken  away, 
into  one  whose  every  thought  and  desire  is  toward  God  ;  into  one  wholly  con- 
secrated and  devoted  to  God  ;  and  therefore  into  one  wholly  pure."  All  this  is 
done  only  in  symbol,  of  course ;  not  in  reality.  What  the  prophet  receives  is 
in  truth  only  God's  twice-repeated  assurance  that  He  looks  on  the  prophet  as 
one  thus  cleansed  and  devoted  ;  that  He  overlooks  the  prophet's  past  sins  ;  that 
He  imputes  to  him  the  purity  of  consecration  ;  or,  in  short,  that  God  pardons 
and  forgives  him.  The  essential  core  of  the  idea  of  forgiveness,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment as  well  as  in  the  Old,  is  just  this,  that  God  treats  guilty  but  penitent  men 
as  if  they  were  not  guilty,  with  a  view  to  freeing  them  from  their  guilt  and  making 
them  righteous.  Isaiah  conceives  of  His  forgiveness  under  forms  familiar  to 
his  time.  He,  a  sinful  man,  is  laid  on  the  altar  of  God,  and  made  wholly  clean 
in  God's  sight,  whatever  the  imperfections  that  may  still  cling  to  his  nature, 
whatever  selfishness  or  self-will  may  still  mar  his  reconciliation  to  the  will  of 
God.  Of  course,  however,  the  change  of  will  does  not  long  continue  merely 
imaginary,  or  in  symbol  only  ;  for,  in  all  time,  God's  treatment  of  men  as  if  their 
wills  were  devoted  to  Him,  God's  loving  forgiveness  of  men's  6ins,  has  been  the 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vx. 

chief  means  of  subduing  man's  will  to  Him  in  actual  fact.  (Ibid.)  Christ 
symbolised  by  fire  : — A  traditional  saying  attributed  to  our  Lord — "  He  that  is 
near  Me  is  near  fire."  (B.  F.  Westcott,  D.D.)  Holiness  and  service: — Had 
the  prophet  need  of  a  coal  ?  Oh,  then,  grant  for  me  a  whole  globe  of  fire,  to  remove 
my  impurity  and  make  me  a  fit  messenger  to  Thy  people.  (Bernard.)  Sin, 
and  Ood's  treatment  of  it : — No  intelligent  man  oan  read  the  entire  Bible  without 
discovering  four  things — 1.  That  God  considers  sin  a  positive  element  in  human 
affairs,  to  be  talked  about  and  dealt  with  as  a  fact.  2.  That  sin  is  the  one  abomin- 
able thing  God  says  He  hates,  and  will  heavily  punish.  3.  That  every  sin  is 
inherent  in  some  personal  factor.  4.  That  Almighty  God  Himself  has  provided 
a  way  by  which  every  sinner  can  be  relieved  from  the  penalty  of  his  transgressions, 
and  graciously  restored  to  holiness.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  John  Woolman's 
experience  : — That  eminently  holy  man,  "  Saint  John  Woolman,"  as  the  poet 
Whittier  called  him,  who  struck  the  first  blow  against  domestic  negro  slavery 
in  America,  notwithstanding  the  Divine  illuminations  he  had  been  blessed  with 
in  early  boyhood,  had  to  pass  through  an  analogous  baptism  ere  he  was  able  to 
follow  the  Master's  call  into  public  service.  "  I  sought  deserts  and  lonely  places, 
and  there  with  tears  did  confess  my  sins  to  God,  and  humbly  craved  His  help. 
And  I  may  say  with  reverence,  He  was  near  me  in  my  troubles,  and  in  these 
times  of  humiliation  opened  my  ears  to  discipline.  .  .  .  From  an  inward  purifying, 
and  steadfast  abiding  under  it,  sprang  a  lively  operative  desire  for  the  good  of 
others.  All  the  faithful  are  not  called  to  the  public  ministry;  but  whoever  are, 
are  called  to  minister  of  that  which  they  have  tasted  and  handled  spiritually." 
(F .  Sessions.)  Stephen  Orellet  : — Of  all  the  men  of  recent  generations,  Stephen 
Grellet,  the  French  refugee  nobleman,  seem3  to  have  come  nearest  to  the  ancient 
Hebrew  "  evangelical  "  prophet,  and  to  the  apostles  of  Christ.  Pope,  emperors, 
kings,  and  princes  were  the  objects  of  bis  solicitude,  and  to  these  exalted  personages 
he  was  permitted  access,  and  personally  delivered  messages  from  God,  as  straight- 
forward and  cogent  as  those  he  gave  to  the  veriest  offscourings  of  the  slums  and 
purlieus  of  European  cities,  or  to  the  formalists  of  Catholic  and  Protestant  creeds. 
"  One  evening,  as  I  was  walking  in  the  fields  alone  [this  was  when  he  was  twenty- 
two  years  of  age],  my  mind  being  under  no  kind  of  religious  concern,  nor  in  the 
least  excited  by  anything  I  had  heard  or  thought  of,  I  was  suddenly  arrested 
by  what  seemed  to  be  an  awful  voice,  proclaiming  the  words  Eternity,  Eternity, 
Eternity !  It  reached  my  soul, — my  whole  man  shook, — it  brought  me,  like  Saul, 
to  the  ground.  The  great  depravity  and  sinfulness  of  my  heart  were  set  open 
before  me,  and  the  gulf  of  everlasting  destruction  to  which  I  was  verging."  In  thi3 
state  he  remained  for  many  days,  till  it  pleased  God  to  deliver  him,  not  by  the  agency 
of  a  hot  stone  brought  by  a  winged  angel  from  a  visible  altar,  but  by  that  of  some 
loving  sentences  spoken  by  a  lady  preacher  from  England  who  was  visiting  the 
American  home  of  the  exile.  "  No  strength  to  withstand  the  Divine  visitation 
was  left  in  me.  Oh,  what  sweetness  did  I  then  feel  1  It  was  indeed  a  memorable 
day.  I  was  like  one  introduced  into  a  new  world ;  the  creation  and  all  things 
around  me  bore  a  different  aspect, — my  heart  flowed  with  love  to  all."  From 
that  "  awful  day,"  as  he  calls  it,  deep  convictions  laid  hold  of  his  mind,  which, 
as  he  cherished  them,  led  him  to  a  full  surrender,  and  a  willingness  to  devote 
himself  to  the  life  of  an  ambassador  of  Christ  to  the  rulers  and  people*  of 
the  world.  (Ibid.)  Another  inward  vision: — He  tells  us  that  once  again  an 
inward  vision  came  to  him.  It  was  during  a  period  of  silent  worship  among  the 
members  of  the  religious  body  to  which  this  quondam  disciple  of  Voltaire  had 
joined  himself.  He  was  here  granted  such  a  view  and  sense  of  his  sinful  nature, 
though  he  was  at  that  time  a  converted  man,  that  he  was  like  one  crushed  under 
millstones.  "  My  misery  was  great,  and  my  cry  was  not  unlike  that  of  Isaiah, 
'  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am  undone !  Then  there  came  to  him  a  revelation  of  perfect 
salvation  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  8.  Also  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Whom  shall  I  send? — 
Messengers  wanted: — I.  The  person  wanted,  as  described  in  the  questions, 
"  Whom  shall  I  send  ?  Who  will  go  for  Us  ? "  The  person  wanted  is  viewed 
from  two  points.  The  person  wanted  has  a  Divine  side :  "  Whom  shall  I  send  ?  " 
Then  he  has  a  human  aspect :  "  Who  will  go  for  Us  ?  "  But  the  two  meet  together 
— the  human  and  Divine  unite  in  the  last  words,  "  for  Us."  Here  is  a  man, 
nothing  more  than  a  man  of  human  instincts,  but  clad  through  Divine  grace  with 
superhuman,  even  with  Divine  authority.     Let  us  look,  then,  at  this  two-sided 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  187 

person.  1.  He  is  Divinely  chosen.  2.  Cheerfully  willing.  3.  Sent  by  the  Three- 
One.  When  we  tell  others  the  story  of  the  Cross  we  speak  for  God  the  Father. 
Nor  must  we  forget  our  tender  Redeemer.  Moreover,  that  blessed  Spirit,  under 
whose  dispensatorial  power  we  live  at  the  present  hour,  He  has  no  voice  to 
speak  to  the  sons  of  men  audibly  except  by  His  people ;  and  though  He  works 
invisibly  and  mysteriously  in  the  saints,  yet  He  chooses  loving  hearts,  and  com- 
passionate lips,  and  tearful  eyes  to  be  the  means  of  benediction.  II.  The  person 
offering  himself.  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  The  person  offering  himself  is 
described  in  the  chapter  at  very  great  length — he  must  be  an  Isaiah.  Being  an 
Isaiah,  he  must — 1.  Have  felt  his  own  unworthiness.  Notice  how  it  was  that  Isaiah 
was  made  to  feel  his  unworthiness.  (1)  By  a  sense  of  the  presence  of  God. 
(2)  Isaiah  saw  the  glory  of  Christ.  (3)  It  will  strike  you,  too,  that  the  particular 
aspect  in  which  this  humiliation  may  come  to  us  will  probably  be,  a  sense  of  the 
Divine  holiness,  and  the  holiness  of  those  who  see  His  face.  2.  We  must  possess 
a  sense  of  mercy.  3.  The  man  who  will  be  acceptable  must  offer  himself  cheerfully. 
"  Here  am  I."  How  few  of  us  have  in  very  deed  given  ourselves  to  Christ.  It 
is  with  most  professors, "  Here  is  my  half-guinea,  here  is  my  annual  contribution  "  ; 
but  how  few  of  us  have  said,  "  Here  am  I."  4.  The  person  who  thus  volunteered 
for  sacred  service  gave  himself  unreservedly.  He  did  not  say,  "  Here  am  I ; 
use  me  where  I  am,"  but  "  send  me."  Where  to  ?  No  condition  as  to  place  is 
bo  much  as  hinted  at.  5.  He  gives  obediently,  for  he  pauses  to  ask  directions. 
It  is  not,  "  Here  am  I ;  away  I  will  go,"  but  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  Some 
people  get  into  their  head  a  notion  that  they  must  do  something  uncommon  and 
extraordinary,  and  though  it  may  be  most  irrational,  it  is  for  that  very  reason 
that  the  scheme  commends  itself  to  their  want  of  judgment.  Because  it  is  absurd, 
they  think  it  to  be  Divine ;  if  earthly  wisdom  does  not  justify  it,  then  certainly 
heavenly  wisdom  must  be  called  in  to  endorse  it.  Now,  I  conceive  that  you  will 
find  that  whenever  a  thing  is  wise  in  God's  sight  it  is  really  wise,  and  that  a  thing 
which  is  absurd  is  not  more  likely  to  be  adopted  by  God  than  by  man  ;  for  though 
the  Lord  does  use  plans  which  are  called  foolish,  they  are  only  foolish  to  fools, 
but  not  actually  foolish.  III.  The  work  which  such  persons  will  be  called 
to  undertake.  Isaiah's  history  is  a  picture  of  what  many  and  many  a  true 
Christian  labourer  may  expect.  Isaiah  was  sent  to  preach  very  unpleasant  truth, 
but  like  a  true  hero  he  was  very  bold  in  preaching  it.  "Isaiah  is  very  bold," 
says  the  apostle.  Now,  if  you  are  called  of  God  either  to  preach  or  teach,  or  what- 
ever it  is,  remember  the  things  you  have  to  preach  or  teach  will  not  be  agreeable 
to  your  hearers.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Militia-Christiana : — Some  people  are 
militia-Christians  —  they  serve  the  King  with  a  limitation,  and  must  not  be 
sent  out  of  England ;  but  others  are  soldier-Christians,  who  give  themselves 
wholly  up  to  their  Lord  and  Captain ;  they  will  go  wherever  He  chooses  to  send 
them.  (Ibid.)  Copyhold-Christians : — Some  professors  appear  to  belong  to 
God  by  copyhold.  They  grant  a  limited  kind  of  Divine  right  to  their  energies 
and  substance ;  but  there  are  many  clauses  which  limit  the  holding.  I  hope  that 
you  are  God's  portion  upon  an  absolute  freehold.  (Ibid.)  God's  call  for 
servants  : — Several  questions  arise  as  we  read  these  words.  Why  is  God  asking 
for  service  instead  of  discharging  the  work  Himself  ?  He  can  speak  in  tones 
which  would  make  the  proudest  quail ;  He  can  unfold  a  majesty  before  which 
the  whole  nation  should  be  subdued.  Or  again,  if  He  needs  service,  why  does 
He  wait  for  volunteers  ?  Why  does  He  not  compel  servants  to  enter  upon  this 
mission,  as  He  imposed  on  Moses  the  task  of  leading  the  people  of  Israel  out  of 
the  land  of  bondage  ?  I.  The  Divine  call.  "  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who 
will  go  for  Us  ? "  1.  Why  should  God  thus  ask  human  service  ?  We  cannot 
doubt  for  a  moment  how  independent  our  glorious  God  might  be  of  all  mere  human 
resources.  (1)  The  great  purposes  which  God  seeks  to  accomplish  can  best  be 
achieved  through  human  instrumentality.  God  craves  from  men,  not  the  un- 
conscious response  which  the  mown  grass  makes  to  the  showers,  or  dewdrops  to 
the  sunlight.  He  desires  intelligent,  trustful,  loving  union  with  Himself,  and  it 
may  be  that  such  ends  as  these  are  better  obtained  through  human  instrument- 
ality than  by  an  overpowering  exhibition  of  the  Divine  majesty  and  glory.  As 
the  light  comes  to  us  through  the  atmosphere,  which  lessens  its  dazzling  power, 
so  that  we  are  illuminated  instead  of  being  blinded  with  excess  of  light,  so  God 
gives  to  us  His  commands  and  messages  through  human  tongues  and  language, 
lest  we  should  be  overpowered.  (2)  God  means  to  educate  His  servants  by  using 
them  for  His  purposes.     When  He  says,  "  Whom  shall  I  send,"  it  is  not  that  H© 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vx 

is  destitute  of  angelic  hosts  who  would  thankfully  accept  the  commission.  He 
knows  how  our  human  hearts  will  be  educated  by  the  very  ministry  we  render. 
2.  Notice  what  is  involved  in  such  a  call  as  this.  When  God  says,  "  Whom  shall 
I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  Us,"  He  pledges  Himself  to  endue  with  authority,  and 
to  endow  with  all  needful  gifts,  the  man  who  answers  the  call.  II.  The  responsb 
of  the  PROr-HET.  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  1.  What  could  have  led  the  prophet 
to  offer  himself  for  a  Divine  mission  ?  How  had  he  the  courage  to  step  forward 
and  volunteer  ?  Did  he  not  shrink  from  the  vast  issues  involved  in  the  work  ? 
Did  he  not  understand  the  dangers  into  which  he  would  plunge  1  Did  he  not  know 
how  hard  it  would  be  to  reach  men's  hearts  around  him  with  the  solemn  message  ? 
He  knew  it  all,  but  he  stepped  forward  in  the  simplicity  of  a  perfect  faith,  and 
Baid,  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me.  You  will  perceive  in  the  foregoing  verse  an  account 
of  his  preparation  for  receiving  this  call.  He  was  prepared  by  a  sense  of  pardoning 
love.  In  the  fulness  of  a  loving,  grateful  heart,  he  stepped  forward  and  accepted 
the  mission.  2.  Notice  the  willingness  with  which  the  prophet  offered  himself. 
He  steps  forward  as  one  who  feels  it  an  honour,  and  is  ready  for  any  sacrifice 
which  the  honour  may  entail.  This  is  the  light  in  which  we  may  wisely  look  on 
Christian  service.  III.  The  Divine  acceptance  of  the  prophet's  offer,  God 
said,  "  Go."  You  have  just  that  very  simple  succession  of  events.  God  asking 
for  service,  the  prophet  offering  himself,  and  God  accepting  his  services.  If  God 
has  given  you  aptitude  in  dealing  with  the  experiences  of  men,  go  into  the  homes 
of  the  poor  and  destitute,  ministering  consolation  to  their  sorrows.  If  God  has 
given  you  warm  sympathies  with  the  young,  go  into  the  ranks  of  the  Sunday 
school,  draw  young  hearts  around  you,  and  win  them  to  Christ.  If  God  has 
given  you  influence  with  men,  go  to  the  drunkard  and  the  fallen  and  seek  to 
reclaim  them  from  the  depths  of  degradation  in  which  they  are  sunk.  If  God  has 
given  you  the  tongue  of  the  wise  to  speak  a  word  in  season,  which  shall  be  as 
apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver,  go  and  use  the  power  in  private  talk  with  the 
men  you  meet  in  daily  life.  (C.  B.  Symes,  B.A.)  The  commission  of  a  sinful 
j  but  cleansed  man  : —  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  Us  ?  "  Why 
does  the  Lord  ask  that  question  with  such  anxiety  when  He  has  all  those  shining 
seraphs  standing  at  His  side,  and  each  one  of  them  with  six  wings  ?  Why  was  Isaiah, 
the  son  of  Amoz,  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  a  man  woeful  and  undone,  so  accepted, 
and  so  sent  ?  Seraphs,  not  sinners,  should  surely  be  the  preachers  of  such  holiness 
as  that  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  the  heralds  of  such  a  Saviour — that  is  what 
we  would  have  expected.  But  God's  thoughts  in  these  things  are  not  as  our 
thoughts.  This  has  always  been  God's  way  in  choosing  and  in  ordaining  and 
in  sending  both  prophets,  and  psalmists,  and  priests,  and  preachers  for  His  Church 
on  earth.  Only  once  did  God  choose  a  completely  sinless  preacher.  Always, 
but  that  once,  God  has  chosen  sinful  men ;  and,  not  seldom,  the  most  sinful  of 
men  He  could  get  to  speak  to  their  fellow-men  about  sin  and  salvation.  Gabriel 
might  come  with  his  six  wings  and  his  salutation  to  announce  to  Mary  that  the 
fulness  of  time  had  come  and  that  the  Word  was  to  be  made  flesh,  but  it  was  John, 
the  son  of  Zacharias,  who  was  not  that  light,  who  was  sent  to  preach  repentance 
to  the  vipers  of  his  day,  and  to  urge  them  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  And 
just  as  for  the  awakening  and  the  warning  of  sinners,  so  for  the  edification  and  the 
comfort  of  saints.  "  For  every  high  priest  is  taken  from  among  men,  who  can 
have  compassion  on  the  ignorant,  and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way ;  for  that 
he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  infirmity."  Isaiah,  accordingly,  of  all  men  on 
the  earth  at  that  moment,  and  of  all  angels  in  heaven,  was  the  man  chosen  of 
God  to  preach  repentance  to  Jerusalem,  and  to  prophesy  to  her  the  coming  of 
her  Messiah.  And  he  preached  on  all  these  matters  as  no  angel  in  all  heaven 
could  have  preached.  He  preached  as  only  a  leper  could  preach  to  his  brother 
lepers,  and  as  only  one  undone  man  could  preach  to  other  undone  men.  Just 
hear  him  in  his  first  sermon.  "  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's 
crib.  Ah  !  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil-doers.  Why 
should  ye  be  stricken  any  rnore  ?  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart 
faint.  From  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head  there  is  no  soundness  in  it ; 
but  wounds  and  bruises  and  putrifying  sores."  All  God's  seraphs  taken  together 
could  not  preach  like  that.  It  takes  a  great  sinner  to  preach  as  well  as  to  hear 
like  that.  You  must  have  a  man  of  men  to  see,  and  to  feel,  and  to  say  things 
like  that.  And  then,  on  the  other  hand,  no  seraph  of  them  all,  with  all  his  wings, 
had  seen  down  so  deep,  and  had  come  up  so  close  to  the  holiness  of  God  as  Isaiah 
had  seen  and  had  come  close.     The  seraphs  cry  Holy,  holy,  holy,  to  one  another. 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  189 

but  they  do  not  know  what  they  are  saying.  The  seraphs  are  innocent  children. 
And  He  whom  they  so  innocently  praise  charges  His  seraphs  with  folly.  But, 
"  Woe  is  me !  for  I  am  undone  !  "  The  Lord  likes  to  hear  that.  This  young 
preacher,  then,  having  seen  both  sin  and  holiness  as  no  seraph  ever  saw  these 
terrible  things,  proceeds  in  his  sermon  in  this  way :  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean  ; 
cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well ;  judge  the  fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow. 
Come  now,  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord.  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  white  as  snow :  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be 
as  wool."  Every  syllable  of  all  that  is  out  of  Isaiah's  own  experience.  Preaching 
like  that  never  yet  came  out  of  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  any  more  than  it  ever 
came  out  of  the  mouth  of  an  angel.  Isaiah  had  done  it  all  to  himself,  and  had 
had  it  all  done  unto  him  of  God.  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.)  The  challenge  of  service  : — 
L  The  challenge.  "  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  Us  ?  "  The  Lord's 
ordinary  manner  of  appointing  His  messengers  is  to  select  them  Himself,  and 
without  consulting  them  send  them  to  do  their  work.  He  commanded  Jonah 
to  go  to  Nineveh  with  every  consideration  for  Jonah's  fitness,  and  no  consideration 
for  Jonah's  tastes.  The  work  is  always  more  important  than  the  man,  for  the 
man  has  a  brief  life,  and  the  work  is  immortal.  It  ought  not,  therefore,  to  be 
expected  that  the  Lord  should  regard  anything  in  choosing  a  servant  for  duty 
but  that  servant's  qualifications  for  the  duty.  But  there  are  exceptions  to  thia 
rule  of  selection  for  work.  When  the  task  is  a  peculiarly  hazardous  one  ;  when 
the  performance  of  it  demands  the  highest  attributes  of  the  intellect,  the  rarest 
qualities  of  the  heart,  and  an  extraordinary  stimulus  of  inspiration,  it  is  better 
that  these  gifts  should  go  to  the  work  under  the  impulse  of  a  self-moving  passion 
rather  than  under  the  enforcement  of  command.  The  General  of  an  army  wisely 
relaxes  the  routine  discipline  of  duty  when  in  the  fortunes  of  the  campaign  the 
troops  have  to  face  the  desperate  service  of  some  forlorn  hope.  "  Whom  shall  I 
send,  and  who  will  go  for  us  ?  "  is  the  proclamation  from  the  Commander's  tent, 
and  a  storming  party  of  volunteers  is  told  off,  to  mount  the  breach  and  take  the 
van  of  danger.  1.  In  the  year  that  King  Uzziah  died  it  seemed  as  if  the  last  hope 
of  the  people  of  God  had  expired  with  him.  2.  The  nature  of  the  work  may  be 
inferred  from  the  condition  of  the  people.  They  were  an  old  and  not  a  young 
nation :  they  were  wicked  and  not  ignorant :  the  two  fountains  of  power,  the 
Church  and  the  State,  were  corrupt  at  their  sources,  authority  of  every  kind 
was  on  the  side  of  licentiousness ;  and  since,  with  all  this,  the  outward  forms  of 
order  and  of  piety  were  preserved,  the  people  grew  up  to  be  as  remarkable  for  their 
hypocrisy  as  for  their  immorality.  It  has  always  been  supposed  that,  whether 
in  the  case  of  a  nation,  or  an  individual,  suffering  is  a  powerful  moralist ;  and  that 
a  mind  which  is  proof  against  the  humbling  and  cleansing  effects  of  pain  is  reprobate 
and  beyond  redemption.  The  people  of  Israel  and  Judah  had  been  punished 
by  every  species  of  chastisement ;  invasion,  captivity,  pestilence,  famine,  and 
sword,  nothing  that  a  people  loves  or  a  man  cherishes  had  been  left  untouched  ; 
from  the  sole  of  the  nation's  foot  to  the  crown  of  her  head,  the  lash  of  retribution 
had  been  laid  on  so  heavily  that  nothing  was  to  be  seen  but  "  wounds  and  bruises 
and  putrifying  sores."  Yet  they  continued  to  revolt  more  and  more.  Thia 
was  the  state  of  things  for  which  the  Lord  demanded  a  voluntary  workman. 
Who  will  be  a  bearer  of  evil  tidings  t  Who  will  reprove  kings  for  My  sake  ?  Who 
will  expose  and  denounce  wickedness  in  high  places  T  Who  will  proclaim  the 
insincerity  of  the  priests,  their  robbery  of  the  flock,  and  the  fiction  of  their 
ceremonial  ?  Who  will  go  to  the  market-places  and  declare  the  dishonesty  of 
their  traffic  T  Who  will  Deard  the  army  and  charge  the  soldiers  with  cowardice 
and  treason  ?  Who  will  be  hated  of  all  men,  and  be  the  victim  of  the  conspiracies 
of  the  crafty,  of  the  insults  of  the  street  rabble,  and  of  the  desertion  of  false  and 
incompetent  friends  ?  Who  will  endure  to  fail ;  to  be  simply  a  witness  ;  to 
speak  without  convincing ;  to  sow  without  a  harvest  T  3.  The  voice  of  the  Lord 
cries  loudly  in  the  midst  of  the  Churches  of  to-day,  inviting  voluntary  service 
for  difficult  work ;  missionary  work  abroad  and  missionary  work  at  home. 
II.  The  acceptance  of  the  challenge.  "Here  ami;  send  me."  Looking 
at  this  acceptance  by  itself,  it  seems  an  extraordinary  sacrifice  on  the  part  of 
Isaiah.  He  was  a  youth,  probably  not  more  than  eighteen  or  nineteen,  when 
he  answered  the  Lord's  challenge ;  he  was  a  member  of  the  first  circle  of  the 
Jewish  aristocracy,  and,  according  to  some  authorities,  a  prince  of  the  royal 
blood.  He  was  nurtured  in  the  soft  and  sumptuous  luxuriance  of  palaces. 
There  had  been  in  his  training  everything  to  satisfy  sense  and  to  kindle  ambition. 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

Having  great  natural  parts  and  a  fine  genius,  and  commanding  both  means  and 
leisure,  the  career  of  a  great  State  ruler,  or  a  Church  dignitary,  or  the  easy  splendour 
of  an  intellectual  voluptuary,  any  or  all  of  these  distinctions  were  within  reach 
of  the  gifted  kinsman  of  Uzziah.  Youth  as  he  was,  his  social  position  and  quick 
observation  enabled  him  to  appreciate  the  service  demandea  in  the  challenge. 
He  knew  the  people  to  whom  the  message  would  be  sent ;  he  conjectured  what 
the  character  of  that  message  would  be ;  and  what  kind  of  service  awaited  the 
man  who  should  deliver  it ;  that  it  would  be  hard,  unthankful,  and  dangerous ; 
and  yet  this  youth,  born  to  be  a  fine  gentleman,  accepted  a  task  which  might 
well  have  made  the  strongest  and  most  experienced  natures  shrink,  "  Here  am  I; 
send  me  !  "  Let  us  seek  the  explanation  of  this  simplicity,  devotion,  and  courage 
in  that  which  went  before  the  acceptance  of  the  challenge.  (E.  Jenkins,  LL.D.) 
Visions  of  God : — I.  The  vision  op  God  to  the  soul.  The  vision  of  God 
to  the  soul  implies  these  two  facts,  namely,  that  God  can  communicate,  speak, 
and  make  Himself  manifest  and  known  to  the  soul,  and  that  the  soul  has 
capacity  to  receive  what  God  makes  known,  or  communicates  to  it.  This  capacity 
has  been  impaired,  more  or  less,  in  all  human  beings.  II.  The  vision  of  God 
has  epfects  upon  the  soul.  It  has  a  creative  power  that  calls  several  new 
forces  into  action.  1.  The  sense  of  sin.  2.  The  sense  of  forgiveness.  3.  The  sense 
of  duty.  4.  Power  to  perform  duty.  (W.  Thomas.)  The  Divine  call  for 
missionaries  : — I.  Let  us  gaze  upon  the  vision  op  glory  which  Isaiah  saw.  _  It 
was  necessary  for  him  to  see  it  in  order  that  he  might  be  brought  into  the  condition 
of  heart  out  of  which  should  come  the  full  consecration  expressed  in — "  Here  am 
I;  send  me."  Observe  what  he  saw.  1.  The  supreme  glory  of  God.  See  the 
patience  of  His  infinite  majesty, — He  sits  in  calm  glory  upon  His  eternal  throne. 
Nor  is  it  a  mean  throne  either,  nor  one  of  little  dignity  ;  it  is  "  high  and  lifted  up." 
It  is  not  merely  above  all  other  thrones  by  way  of  greater  power,  but  over  them 
all  by  way  of  supreme  dominion  over  them.  2.  The  court  of  the  great  King. 
He  beheld  the  glorious  attendants  who  perpetually  perform  homage,  nearest  to 
His  throne.  3.  The  perpetual  song,  for  these  sacred  beings  continually  cried, 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory." 
While  you  praise  His  holiness  do  not  forget  His  power,  but  adore  Him  as  "  Jehovah 
of  hosts."  And  then  dwell,  that  you  may  feel  a  missionary  spirit,  on  that  last 
part  of  the  song,  "  The  whole  earth  is  filled  with  His  glory,"  for  so  it  really  is  in 
one  sense.  "  Jehovah  of  hosts  is  the  fulness  of  the  whole  earth."  Turn  this 
ascription,  for  it  may  be  so  read,  into  a  wish  :  "  Let  the  whole  earth  be  filled 
with  His  glory."  Read  it,  if  you  please,  as  a  prophecy  :  "  The  whole  earth  shall 
be  filled  with  His  glory,"  and  then  go  you  forward,  O  ye  servants  of  the  Most 
High,  with  this  resolve,  that  in  His  hands  you  will  be  the  means  of  fulfilling  the 
prophecy  by  spreading  abroad  the  knowledge  of  His  name  among  the  sons  of 
men.  II.  Let  us  now  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  vision  op  okdination.  This  man 
Isaiah  was  to  go  forth  in  Jehovah's  name,  but  in  order  to  preparation  for  so  high 
an  embassage  he  must  undergo  a  process  peculiar  but  necessary.  III.  When  a 
man  is  prepared  for  sacred  work  he  is  not  long  before  he  receives  a  commission. 
We  come,  then,  to  think  of  the  Divtnb  call.  Notice  the  particular  kind  of  man 
for  whom  this  voice  is  seeking.  It  is  a  man  who  must  be  sent,  a  man  under 
impulse,  a  man  under  authority — "  Whom  shall  I  send  ?  "  But  it  is  a  man  who  is 
quite  willing  to  go,  a  volunteer,  one  who  in  his  inmost  heart  rejoices  to  obey — 
"  Who  will  go  for  Us  T  "  What  a  strange  mingling  this  is  !  Woe  is  me  if  I 
preach  not  the  Gospel,"  and  yet  "  taking  the  oversight  of  the  flock  of  God  not 
by  constraint  but  willingly."  IV.  Now  comes  the  last  point,  the  earnest 
response.  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  1. 1  think  I  see  in  that  response  a  conscious- 
ness of  his  being  in  a  certain  position  which  no  one  else  occupied,  which  rendered 
it  incumbent  upon  him  to  say,  "  Here  am  I."  2.  Then,  he  makes  a  full  surrender 
of  himself.  Isaiah  gave  himself  up  to  the  Lord  none  the  less  completely  because 
his  errand  was  so  full  of  sadness.  He  was  not  to  win  men,  but  to  seal  their  doom 
by  putting  before  them  truth  which  they  would  be  sure  to  reject.  3.  Then 
comes  Isaiah's  prayer  for  authority  and  anointing.  If  we  read  this  passage 
rightly  we  shall  not  always  throw  the  emphasis  upon  the  last  word,  "  me,"  but 
read  it  also  thus,  "  Here  am  I,  send  me."  He  is  willing  to  go,  but  he  does  not 
want  to  go  without  being  sent.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Here  ami;  send  me. — 
Whole-hearted  service : — "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  These  few  simple  words  express 
the  crisis,  the  turning-point  in  the  life  of  Isaiah.  If  he  had  never  uttered  these 
words  you  would  never  have  heard  of  him.     But  the  uttering  of  these  words  in 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  191 

profound  sincerity  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart  made  him  one  of  the  greatest  of 
the  prophets  of  God.  The  very  first  condition  of  whole-hearted  service  is  the 
conviction  that  the  cause  which  we  serve  will  ultimately  prevail.  The  day  is 
coming  when  the  Christian  religion  will  prevail  everywhere,  when  the  will  of 
God  will  be  done  on  earth  as  literally  and  really  as  angels  do  it  in  heaven.  Even 
now  things  are  not  as  they  seem.  Even  now  the  glory  of  God  fills  the  whole  earth. 
So  young  Isaiah  realised  in  days  much  darker  and  more  ominous  than  these. 
(H.  P.  Hughes,  M.A.)  The  birth  of  the  true  missionary: — In  the  fellowship 
of  the  cleansing,  the  fellowship  of  the  Cross,  the  missionary  is  born.  (B.  J. 
Campbell,  31. A.)  Seeing  and  saying: — Men  must  see  before  they  can  any. 
(Ibid.)  Ecstasy  and  self-immolation: — Bless  God  for  any  ecstasy  that  leads 
to  self-immolation.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Seers  and  servants  : — We  must  become 
seers  before  we  can  become  servants.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Experience  to  be  used 
for  the  benefit  of  others  : — Isaiah  saw  the  King  that  he  might  serve  the  King.  He 
was  convinced  of  sin  that  he  might  convince  his  fellows.  He  was  purged  from 
his  iniquity  that  he  m'ght  proclaim  the  love,  the  sacrifice,  which  takes  away  the 
iniquity  of  us  all.  (Ibid.)  The  whole  life  should  be  devoted  to  God: — Though 
at  times  he  had  to  rebuke  princes  and  to  pronounce  the  doom  of  nations,  yet  it 
was  his  whole  life  that  he  dedicated  to  God,  with  all  its  petty  details  of  daily 
conduct.  It  was  part  of  his  work  to  live  with  the  prophetess  he  took  to  wife 
according  to  a  Divine  law ;  to  name  and  train  his  children  so  that  little  Immanuel 
and  little  Maher-shalal-hash-baz  should  be  "  for  signs  and  for  wonders  in  Israel 
from  the  Lord  of  hosts."  And,  in  like  manner,  God  sends  us  to  our  own  people, 
to  our  kinsfolk  and  acquaintance.  (Ibid.)  "  To  let  the  love  out  "  .• — If  there 
were  no  humanity  to  save,  none  but  our  own,  yours  and  mine,  the  fellowship  of 
the  cleansing  would  still  be  ours,  but  we  would  be  seeking  for  something  to  do  to 
express  to  the  Christ  our  sense  of  what  that  fellowship  had  brought.  Two  sisters 
brought  this  fact  home  to  me.  One  was  weak,  suffering,  dying,  though  the  other 
did  not  know  it  at  the  time.  The  one  who  was  watching  by  the  bedside  said, 
"  It  seems  dreadful  to  be  so  helpless,  to  feel  I  can  do  so  little  to  assuage  the  suffering 
of  the  dear  one.  I  can  do  nothing  whatever.  If  I  only  could  do  something  that 
hurts,  hurts  me,  I  think  I  should  feel  better,  to  let  my  love  out."  I  know  what 
ehe  meant  quite  well — to  let  the  love  out.  The  love  that  we  bear  the  dear 
Redeemer  compels  us  to  see  the  Divine  in  mankind.  There  is  a  sweet  and  holy 
sympathy  born  of  that  urgent  desire  to  let  the  love  out  which  was  born  in  the 
fellowship  of  the  cleansing.  (B.  J.  Campbell,  M.A.)  Every  church  member 
should  be  a  missionary  : — In  looking  over  a  certificate  of  membership  which  I 
had  received  from  a  church  in  New  York,  concerning  one  of  its  members  who  was 
a  sailor,  I  was  pleased  to  observe  that  at  the  back  of  the  certificate  there  were 
directions  given  to  the  member  ;  and  the  first  one  was  this,  "  You  are  to  remember 
that  as  a  member  of  this  church  going  upon  a  voyage,  you  are  sent  by  us  as  a 
missionary.  You  are  to  understand  that  you  and  every  other  member  of  the 
church  are  bound  to  spread  abroad  the  Saviour's  name."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
"  Beady  to  obey"  : — Of  a  man  chosen  by  the  church  council  of  a  Uganda  mission, 
to  act  as  father  to  the  boys  and  see  that  they  kept  out  of  mischief,  a  missionary 
writes  :  "  An  ordination  candidate,  whose  name  is  Jacob  the  elephant,  an  ex- 
tremely nice,  sensible  man,  was  suggested,  and  I  was  much  struck  by  his  reply 
when  asked  if  he  would  undertake  the  post.  He  at  once  said,  '  Is  it  for  me  to 
choose  my  work  ?  You  tell  me  what  to  do,  and  I  am  ready  to  obey.'  "  (Christian 
Endeavour.)  The  missionary  spirit: — General  Booth  once  wanted  fourteen 
recruits  for  India.  He  had  his  whole  company  about  him,  and  he  said  :  "  This 
is  very  dangerous  work,  and  it  requires  great  self-sacrifice.  I  might  detail  you 
for  the  work,  but  I  will  not  detail  any  one  of  you.  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do : 
if  any  of  you  want  to  volunteer  for  it,  you  will  have  the  privilege  to  do  so  after 
one  hour.  Go  away  now  and  pray  about  it."  They  went  away  and  prayed 
about  it,  and  at  the  end  of  the  hour  General  Booth  said,  "  Are  any  of  you  willing 
to  undertake  this  work  ?  "  And  fourteen  stalwart  men  stepped  forward  and 
8aid,  "  We  are  ready  to  sail  to-morrow  morning."  (A.  H.  Bradford,  D.D.) 
A  true  missionary  .•—Speaking  at  Exeter  Hall,  in  1886,  James  Chalmers  said,  in 
reference  to  his  New  Guinea  experiences:  "Recall  the  twenty-one  years;  give 
me  back  all  its  experiences,  give  me  its  shipwrecks,  its  standings  in  the  face  of 
death  ;  give  it  me  surrounded  by  savages  with  spears  and  clubs  ;  give  it  me  back 
again  with  spears  flying  about  me  and  the  club  knocking  me  to  the  ground  ;  give 
it  me  back,  and  I  will  still  be  your  missionary."    (Sunday  School  Chronicle.) 


192  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ru 

"  Send  me  :  " — David  Brainerd  prayed  for  such  a  complete  absorption  in  the  Divine 
will  that  he  might  become  utterly  indifferent  to  every  outward  circumstance  of 
discomfort  and  trial,  if  only  he  could  make  known  the  love  of  Christ.  He  says 
in  his  journal : — "  Here  am  I,  Lord,  send  me  ;  send  me  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ; 
send  me  to  the  rough  and  savage  pagans  of  the  wilderness  ;  send  me  from  all 
that  is  called  comfort  in  the  earth  ;  send  me  even  to  death  itself,  if  it  be  but 
in  Thy  service  and  to  promote  Thy  kingdom."  (Ibid.)  Save  one:  —  A 
man  once  rose  in  one  of  Mr.  Moody's  meetings,  and  gave  his  experience.  "  I 
have  been  for  five  years  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration."  "  How  many  souls 
did  you  lead  to  Christ  last  year  ?  "  was  the  sharp  question  that  came  from  Mr. 
Moody,  in  an  instant.  "  Well,  I  don't  know,"  was  the  astonished  reply.  "  Have 
you  led  any  ?  "  persisted  Mr.  Moody.  "  I  don't  know  that  I  have,"  answered 
the  man.  Well,"  said  Mr.  Moody,  "  we  don't  want  that  kind  of  mountain-top 
experience.  When  a  man  gets  so  high  that  he  can't  reach  down  and  save  poor 
sinners,  there  is  something  wrong."  (Ibid.)  Every  Christian  should  be  an 
evangelist : — Dr.  Howard  Crosby  used  to  say,  "  When  will  New  York  city  be 
evangelised  T  I'll  tell  you  —  when  every  Christian  becomes  an  evangelist." 
(Christian  Endeavour.)  God's  call:  the  anti-slavery  and  other  crusades: — Those 
who  do  the  best  work  in  the  world's  redemption,  and  yet  may  never  preach  a 
sermon,  have  had  a  "  call "  to  accomplish  it.  The  "  call  "  may  have  been  felt 
only  as  an  overwhelming  and  disinterested  desire  to  accomplish  some  noble  end, 
but  it  has  been  as  truly  there  as  if  seraphim  had  announced  it.  Such  great  move- 
ments as  the  anti-slavery  crusade  are  full  of  instances.  Of  Thomas  Clarkson  it 
is  recorded  that  when  about  twenty-four  years  of  age,  after  having  composed 
and  read  a  Latin  prize  essay  at  Cambridge  University,  he  travelled  to  London 
to  assist  in  founding  a  society  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade.  Over- 
whelmed with  the  awfulness  of  the  traffic  he  had  been  denouncing,  he  alighted 
from  his  horse,  and  sitting  by  the  roadside  prayed  that  God  would  raise  up  some 
devoted  champion  of  the  oppressed  African.  Suddenly  the  thought  flashed  into 
his  mind  that  he  should  offer  himself  to  this  cause.  How  he,  under  this  over- 
mastering feeling,  ultimately  surrendered  the  clerical  life  for  which  he  was  pre- 
paring, how  he  laboured  till  the  slave  trade  was  excised  from  the  body-politic, 
and  how  he  was  followed  in  a  true  "  apostolic  succession  "  by  William  Wilberforce, 
in  the  further  attack  upon  domestic  slavery,  is  recorded  in  the  pages  of  history. 
Wilberforce,  too,  passed  through  times  of  deep  self-conflict  till  the  necessary 
new  habits  of  mind  and  life  were  formed.  He,  in  turn,  gave  place  to  such  men 
as  Sir  Thomas  Fowell  Buxton  and  Joseph  Sturge,  who  also  were  "  called  "  and 
"  ordained  "  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  the  Christlike  work  of  securing  liberty  to  the 
captive.  Prison  reformers  and  uplifters  of  the  criminal,  like  John  Howard, 
Elizabeth  Fry  and  Sarah  Martin,  passed  through  periods  of  probation,  when 
there  seemed  to  be  in  their  minds  "  a  prophetic  stir  of  coming  duties  outside  the 
usual  sphere"  of  their  daily  lives.  (F.  Sessions.)  Richard  KnilVs  call: — I 
was  studying  for  the  ministry,  with  a  view  to  labour  in  England  ;  it  happened 
that  there  was  a  missionary  meeting  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  one  of  the  ministers 
said  to  me,  "  Come  over,  and  bring  the  students  with  you,  it  will  do  them  good,"— 
and  as  one  inducement  he  said,  "There  is  an  eminent  Scotch  minister  in  town, 
Dr.  Waugh,  who  is  to  preach."  We  went — and,  I  have  no  doubt,  we  went  praying 
to  receive  a  blessing.  Dr.  Waugh  took  for  his  text  that  beautiful  verse  in  Isaiah, 
"  It  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the  great  trumpet  shall  be  blown,  and  they 
shall  come  who  were  ready  to  perish  in  the  land  of  Assyria,  and  the  outcasts  in 
the  land  of  Egypt,  and  shall  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem." 
In  the  first  part  of  his  subject  he  spoke  of  the  perishing  condition  of  the  man  who 
was  ignorant  of  the  Gospel,  and  he  said,  "  It  is  a  fact,  there  are  four  hundred 
millions  of  our  fellow-creatures  in  this  deplorable  condition,  without  God,  and 
without  hope."  After  he  had  dwelt  on  this,  he  spoke  of  the  infinite  wisdom 
and  goodness  of  God,  which  had  provided  a  remedy  for  perishing  sinners.  After 
speaking  on  this  for  some  time  he  stopped,  and  looking  around  on  the  congregation, 
he  said,  "  This  trump  cannot  blow  of  itself,  we  must  have  men  to  blow  it — 
pardoned  sinners — redeemed  men — those  who  have  tasted  the  love  of  Christ, 
and  who  feel  for  their  fellow-creatures — those  who  know  what  a  precious  Saviour 
Christ  is,  from  sweet  experience.  We  want  such  men — the  heathen  are  perishing, 
and  will  perish,  unless  God's  remedy  is  sent  to  them — that  remedy  is  in  your 

fossession."     He  then  paused  again,  and  looking  around,  as  if  wanting  to  fix 
is  eyes  on  some  object,  he  said  in  a  moving  manner,  "  Is  there  one  disciple  of 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  193 

the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  has  love  enough  for  his  Divine  Master  in  his  heart  to 
say,  Here  am  I ;  send  me  ?  "  Oh,  when  he  said  that,  I  felt  it  thrill  through  my  soul, 
and  I  silently  said  to  Him  who  searcheth  my  heart,  "  Lord,  I  will  go."  It  was  a 
memorable  day  to  me,  I  can  never  forget  it.  The  sermon  was  soon  ended  ;  the 
congregation  was  broken  up  ;  my  friends  went  to  dine  ;  I  was  invited  to  dine 
with  my  fellow-students  ;  I  had  no  appetite  for  food,  my  heart  was  full — and  I 
said  to  a  friend,  Can  you  procure  me  a  garret,  where  I  can  spend  the  remainder 
of  the  day  in  fasting  and  prayer  ?  He  procured  it  for  me  ;  and  in  that  garret 
I  spent  some  of  the  happiest  and  most  solemn  moments  of  my  life  ;  and  seeing 
the  agony  of  Him  whose  blood  was  shed  a  sacrifice  for  my  sins,  I  said,  "  Lord,  I  will 
go."  (R.  Knill.)  Ready  for  service  : — When  the  Moravian  Brethren  in  Germany 
were  carrying  on  their  great  mission  work  in  heathen  lands,  Zinzendorf,  their 
distinguished  leader,  sent  one  day  for  one  of  the  ministers,  and  said  to  him,  "Will 
you  go  to  Greenland  to-morrow  as  a  missionary  ?  "  The  minister,  after  a  moment's 
hesitation,  said,  "  Yes,  if  the  shoemaker  can  finish  the  boots  which  I  have  ordered 
of  him  by  to-morrow,  I  will  go."  (H.  MacmiUan,  LL.D.)  God's  call  :  Cobden 
and  Bright : — Cobden  and  Bright  believed — to  quote  the  language  of  the  former — 
that "  a  moral  and  even  religious  spirit  might  be  infused  into  the  question  of 
the  repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws.  The  story  of  Mr.  Bright's  dedication  to  this  most 
beneficent  idea  is  admirably  reproduced  in  Vince's  life  of  the  great  Tribune. 
There  came  to  his  soul's  vision  no  forthshadowing  of  God's  glory  in  any  man* 
made  temple,  but  the  story  is  thus  told  by  himself:  "I  was  at  Leamington 
when  Mr.  Cobden  called  upon  me.  I  wan  then  in  the  depths  of  grief, — I  might 
almost  say  of  despair, — for  the  light  and  sunshine  of  my  house  had  been  extin- 
guished. All  that  was  left  on  earth  of  my  young  wife,  except  the  memory  of 
a  sainted  life  and  of  a  too  brief  happiness,  was  lying  still  and  cold  in  the  chamber 
above  us.  Mr.  Cobden  called  upon  me  as  a  friend,  and  addressed  me,  as  you  may 
suppose,  with  words  of  condolence.  After  a  time  he  looked  up  and  said,  '  There 
are  thousands  of  homes  in  England  at  this  moment  where  wives,  mothers,  and 
children  are  dying  of  hunger.  Now,'  he  said,  '  when  the  first  paroxysm  of  your 
grief  is  passed,  I  would  advise  you  to  come  with  me,  and  we  will  never  rest  till 
the  Corn  Law  is  repealed.'  I  accepted  his  invitation.  I  knew  that  the  descrip- 
tion he  had  given  me  of  the  homes  of  thousands  was  not  an  exaggerated  descrip- 
tion. I  felt  in  my  conscience  that  there  was  a  work  that  some  one  must  do, 
From  that  time  we  never  ceased  to  labour  hard  on  behalf  of  the  resolution  we 
had  made."  In  this  case  a  Lancashire  manufacturer  brought  the  "  call,"  but 
surely  the  angels  of  sorrow  and  sympathy  assisted  in  the  "  consecration,"  and  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel  worked  with  His  servant.     (F.  Sessions.) 

Vers.  9-13.  And  lie  said,  Go,  and  tell  this  people,  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  under- 
stand not.— Isaiah:  his  heaviness  and  his  consolation  : — 1.  Isaiah  summed  up  his 
whole  future  life  in  those  two  words,  "  Behold  me  ;  send  me."  Then  on  his 
ardent  soul  was  poured  the  heavy  message,  "  Go,  and  thou  shalt  tell  this  people  " 
(God  speaks  of  them  no  more  as  His  own),  "  Hear  ye  on,  and  understand  not  ; 
and  see  ye  on,  and  know  not.  Make  thou  dull  the  heart  of  this  people,  and  its 
ears  make  thou  heavy,  and  its  eyes  close  thou  ;  lest  it  see  with  its  eyes,  and  with 
its  ears  hearken,  and  its  heart  understand,  and  it  return  and  one  heal  it." 
Startling  office  for  one  so  sanguine  and  so  young  !  Heavy  burden  to  bear  for 
probably  sixty-one  years  of  life,  to  be  closed  by  a  martyr's  excruciating  death  ! 
Outside  of  that  commission  there  was  hope :  hope,  because  the  promises  of  God 
could  not  fail  of  fulfilment :  hope,  because  in  the  worst  times  of  Israel  there 
had  been  those  seven  thousand  which  the  prophet  knew  not  of,  but  whose  number 
God  revealed  to  him,  who  had  stood  faithful  to  God  amid  the  national  apostasy : 
hope,  because  when  God  pronounces  not  a  doom,  we  may  take  refuge  in  the 
loving  mercy  of  Him  who  swears  by  Himself,  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God, 
I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,"  &o.  2.  The  message  was  to 
the  people,  not  to  individuals :  "  Go  to  this  people,  and  say."  It  related  to 
individuals,  only  as  they  were  such  as  the  mass  of  the  nation  was,  as  they  them- 
selves made  up  that  mass.  This,  in  all  seeming,  was  the  thankless  office  to 
which  Isaiah  was  called,  to  be  heard,  to  be  listened  to,  by  some  with  contempt, 
by  others  with  seeming  respect,  and  to  leave  things  in  the  main  worse  than  he 
found  them.  3.  Isaiah's  office  was  towards  those,  in  part  at  least,  who  were 
ever  hearing,  never  doing,  and  so  never  understanding.  And  so  (so  to  speak) 
he  was  only  to  make  things  worse.    So  St.  Paul  says,  "  The  earth  which  drinketh 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

in  the  rain  which  cometh  oft  upon  it — if  it  bring  forth  thorns  and  briars,  is 
accounted  worthless  and  nigh  unto  cursing,"  not  yet  accursed,  yet  nigh  unto 
it,  "  whose  end  " — if  it  remains  such  unto  the  end — "  is  to  be  burned."  There 
were  better  among  the  people ;  there  were  worse ;  but  such  was  the  general 
character ;  it  was  an  ever-hearing, — hearing, — hearing  (such  is  the  force  of  the 
words,  "  hear  ye  hearing  on,"  evermore),  never  wearied  of  hearing,  yet  never 
doing  ;  ever  seeing,  as  they  thought,  yet  never  gaining  insight ;  and  so  becoming 
ever  duller,  their  sight  ever  more  and  more  bleared,  until  to  hear  and  to  see 
would  become  well-nigh,  and  to  man,  impossible.  The  more  they  heard  and 
Baw,  the  further  they  were  from  understanding,  from  being  converted,  from 
the  reach  of  healing.  Such  they  were,  a  little  later,  in  Ezekiel's  time.  So  it 
was  when  He  came  of  whom  Isaiah  prophesied.  They  thought  that  they  knew 
the  law,  but  only  to  allege  their  interpretation  of  it  against  Him.  The  more 
they  heard,  the  more  they  were  blinded.  And  their  imagined  seeing  and  their 
real  blindness,  was  their  condemnation  (John  ix.  41).  This  is  inseparable 
from  every  revelation  of  God,  from  every  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  from  every 
speaking  of  God  inwardly  to  the  soul,  from  every  motion  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  from  every  drawing  or  forbidding  of  that  judge  which  He  has  placed 
within,  our  conscience,  from  every  hearing  of  God's  Word.  All  and  each  leave 
the  soul  in  a  better  condition  or  a  worse.  Not  by  any  direct  hardening  from 
God,  not  through  any  agency  of  the  prophet,  but  by  man's  free-will,  heariag 
but  not  obeying,  seeing  but  not  doing,  feeling  but  resisting,  the  preaching  ol 
the  prophet  would  leave  them  only  more  hopelessly  far  from  that  conversion, 
whereby  God  might  heal  them.  4.  And  what  said  the  prophet  T  Contrary 
as  the  sentence  must  have  been  to  all  the  yearnings  of  his  soul,  crushing  to  his 
hopes,  he  knew  that  it  must  be  just,  because  "  the  Judge  of  the  whole  world  " 
must  "  do  right."  He  intercedes,  but  only  by  those  three  words,  "  Lord,  how 
long  ?  "  He  appeals  to  God.  Such  could  not  be  God's  ultimate  purpose 
with  His  people.  The  night  was  to  come  ;  sin  deserved  it ;  but  was  it  to  have 
no  dawn  ?  Hope  there  is  yet,  but  meanwhile  a  still-deepening  night,  a  climax 
of  woe  ;  and  that  in  two  stages.  In  the  first,  "  cities  left  without  inhabitants  "; 
and  not  cities  only,  as  a  whole,  but  "  houses  "  too  "  tenantless  "  ;  nor  these 
alone,  but  "  the  whole  land  desolate,  and  God  removes  the  inhabitants  far  away, 
and  there  shall  be  a  great  forsaking  in  the  midst  of  the  land."  Nor  this  only, 
but  when,  in  this  sifting-time,  nine  parts  should  be  gone,  and  one-tenth  only 
remain,  this  should  be  again  consumed  :  only,  like  those  trees  which  survived 
the  winters  and  storms  of  a  thousand  years,  while  the  glory,  wherewith  God  once 
clad  it,  was  gone,  its  hewn  stem  was  still  to  live  ;  "  a  holy  seed  "  was  to  be  the 
stock  thereof.  The  vision,  opened  before  him,  stretches  on  until  now  and  to 
the  end.  His  question,  "  How  long  ?  Until  when  ?  "  implied  a  hope  that  there 
would  be  an  end  ;  the  answer  "  until,"  declared  that  there  would  be  an  end. 
We  have,  in  one,  that  first  carrying  away,  the  small  remnant  which  should 
return  ;  its  new  desolation ;  the  holy  seed  which  should  survive  ;  the  restora- 
tion at  the  end,  of  which  St.  Paul  says,  then  "  all  Israel  shall  be  saved."  5.  And 
this  message  fell  on  one  of  the  tenderest  of  hearts  in  its  early  freshness.  As  he 
is  eminently  the  Gospel-prophet,  the  evangelist  in  the  old  covenant,  so  he  had 
already  been  taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Gospel-lesson,  "  Love  your  enemies.  * 
He  denounces  God's  judgments ;  but  he  himself  is  the  type  of  Him  who  wept 
over  Jerusalem.  6.  Yet  where  there  is  desolation  for  the  sake  of  God,  there  is 
also  consolation.  Wherein  was  Isaiah's  ?  Not  in  the  solace  of  his  married  life. 
His  daily  dress  was  like  John  Baptist's,  the  hair-cloth  pressing  upon  his  loins, 
wearing  to  the  naked  flesh,  although  mentioned  only  when  he  was  to  put  it  off 
and  himself  to  become  a  portent  to  his  people,  walking  naked  and  barefoot 
(chap.  xx.  2).  His  two  sons  were,  by  their  names,  the  continual  pictures  of 
that  woe  on  his  people.  What,  then,  was  his  solace  ?  Isaiah  had  seen,  as  man 
can  see,  Christ's  Deity  (John  xii.  41).  He  had  seen  Him,  the  brightness  of  the 
Father's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His  person.  Yet  he  had  not  seen  the 
Son  alone.  He  himself  says,  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  Him  who  is  the 
Lord  of  hosts."  And  the  Holy  Ghost  says  by  St.  Paul  that  He  spake  by  Isaiah 
in  these  words  (Acts  xxviii.  25-27).  It  was  a  human  Form  which  he  beheld, 
sitting  enthroned  as  the  Judge,  and  receiving  the  worship  of  the  glowing  love 
of  the  seraphim.  How  should  not  this  vision  live  in  him  for  those  threescore 
years  ?  So  God  prepared  him  to  be,  above  all  "  the  goodly  company  of  the 
prophets,"  the  evangelic  prophet,  in  that  he  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Lord.     He, 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  195 

too,  was  a  man  of  longing.  His  darkest  visions  are  the  dawn-streaks  of  the 
brightest  light.  He  lived  in  a  future  for  himself,  a  future  which  God  had  promised 
to  the  remnant  of  His  people  He  looked  on  beyond  this  world  of  disappointment 
and  shadows.  God  Himself  is  the  everlasting  bliss  of  those  who  wait  for  Him. 
7.  Be  not  dismayed,  then,  though  men  who  think  that  they  see,  see  not,  or  though 
they  see  not,  beoause  they  think  that  they  see.  It  is  but  the  condition  of  the 
victories  of  faith  over  the  soul,  free,  if  it  will,  to  disbelieve.  Be  not  discouraged, 
if  iniquity  abound,  or  mankind  seem  to  deafen  itself  in  its  pleasures  or  gains, 
or  at  the  stupidity  of  an  intellect  which  will  not  acknowledge  a  God  whom  it 
does  not  see,  or  own  its  own  free-will,  which  it  has  used  against  God  continually, 
and,  by  repeated  choices  of  its  own  evil  against  God's  good,  has  well-nigh 
enslaved  to  its  master-passion,  which  God  would  have  subjected  to  it.  Jesus 
foretold  at  once  His  victories  and  His  sorrows ;  His  victories  in  those  who  willed 
to  look  to  Him  as  their  Master,  their  Saviour,  their  Regenerator,  their  Life,  their 
Resurrection,  their  Immortality  of  joy  ;  His  sorrows,  in  those  who  would  not 
be  redeemed.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  prophet's  thoughts  at  this  period  are 
few,  if  great.  They  are  in  the  main  these  three :  1.  His  thought  of  the  Lord, 
the  King.  2.  His  thought  of  the  people  in  their  insensibility  to  the  majesty  and 
rule  of  the  King.  3.  These  two  thoughts  when  brought  together  inevitably 
create  the  third — that  of  the  annihilation  of  the  people  down  to  a  remnant,  that 
the  Lord  may  be  exalted  in  that  day.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  import- 
ance of  understanding  truth : — The  vast  importance  of  people's  understanding 
what  they  hear,  our  blessed  Saviour  frequently  inculcated  upon  those  who 
attended  His  ministry.  He  often  introduced  His  subject  by  calling  upon  them 
to  hear  and  understand :  after  discoursing  to  them  He  sometimes  asked  if  they 
understood  what  they  heard  ?  He  blamed  them  if  they  did  not  understand, 
and  commended  those  who  were  so  happy  as  to  know  the  things  which  were 
freely  given  them  of  God.  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  Israel's  punishment  necessary  : — 
We,  reading  this  prophecy  in  the  light  of  history,  can  say  that  if  it  were  anywhere 
necessary  thus  to  assert  God's  righteousness  against  sin,  most  especially  was  it 
eo  in  this  the  chosen  nation  of  Israel.  Israel  had  been  set  apart  that  in  him  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed  ;  and  if  he  became  reprobate,  where 
were  this  promise  to  the  world  ?  "  If  gold  rusteth,  what  should  iron  do  ?  " 
Therefore  the  cities  were  to  be  wasted  without  inhabitant,  and  the  land  utterly 
desolate  ;  and  even  after  a  partial  recovery  from  this  punishment,  and  a  humble 
restoration  of  a  small  part  of  their  ancient  glory,  the  stern  process  should  be 
repeated  again  and  again :  the  invasion  of  Pekah  and  Rezin  would  be  repaired 
only  to  be  followed  by  that  of  Sennacherib ;  the  captivity  of  Manasseh  would 
succeed  the  peaceful  reign  of  Hezekiah ;  Josiah  would  restore  the  kingdom  only 
to  be  laid  waste  by  the  Egyptian  and  the  Assyrian  ;  the  Roman  would  come 
after  the  Greek,  and  even  Hadrian  after  Titus.  All  thought  of  an  earthly  glory 
of  the  nation  must  give  way  before  such  a  prospect.  If  the  prophet  could  nave 
looked  so  far  forward,  and  with  a  patriot's  hopes  alone,  there  was  nothing  but 
humiliation  and  despair  before  him  ;  he  could,  at  most,  expect  but  such  temporary 
alleviation  and  restoration  as  might  enable  him  to  do  his  work  while  he  was 
there.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart. )  The  meaning  of  the  message  intrusted  to  Isaiah  : — 
Did  it  represent  the  ministry  to  which  he  was  solemnly  deputed  as  a  forlorn  hope, 
because,  from  the  moral  temper  and  confirmed  habits  of  the  people,  an  unfavour- 
able result  was  antecedently  certain  ?  This  seems  the  sense  in  which  it  was 
understood  by  the  authors  of  the  LXX.,  and  its  form,  if  Hebrew  idiom  be  taken 
into  account,  is  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  this  meaning.  It  is  a  mode  of 
expression,  very  characteristic  of  Hebrew  thought,  to  represent  the  result  of 
a  course  of  action  as  designed  which  is  only  foreseen  or  confidently  anticipated. 
Familiar  with  forms  of  government  in  which  the  sovereign  power  appeared  wholly 
without  control,  the  Hebrews  transferred  ideas  derived  from  this  source  to  the 
government  of  God.  They  had  a  conviction  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
must  do  right,  but  the  conception  of  the  rights  of  the  creature  and  correlative 
responsibilities  of  the  Creator  did  not  lie  within  the  horizon  of  their  thought. 
Their  overwhelming  sense  of  the  Divine  power,  absolutely  ordering  all  events 
and  giving  no  account  of  its  dealings,  permitted  them  to  say,  without  any  idea 
that  they  were  imputing  evil  to  God,  "  Why  hast  Thou  made  us  to  err  from  Thy 
ways,  and  hardened  our  heart  from  Thy  fear  ?  "  (E.  W.  Shalders.)  The 
message  from  God : — It  may  be  said  that  in  the  passage  under  consideration 
the  utterance  is  not  the  prophet's,  but  God's.      But  this  makes  no  difference, 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ru 

since  Isaiah's  mind  was  the  field  of  revelation  ;  and,  strictly  speaking,  there 
is  no  more  difficulty  in  the  idea  of  God's  accommodating  Himself  to  modes  of 
human  thought  than  in  His  employing  our  modes  of  speech.  It  is  a  necessity 
limiting  the  absolute  truth  of  revelation.  If  men's  minds  are  to  be  reached, 
the  Spirit  must  use  such  avenues  of  approach  as  have  been  thrown  up  for  other 
occasions.  God's  communications  to  Isaiah  would  be  tinctured  by  Isaiah's 
habits  of  thought  as  inevitably  as  the  prophet's  publication  of  them.  (Ibid.) 
Incidental  penalty  : — A  college  professor  would  not  be  doing  his  duty  towards 
his  conscientious  and  diligent  students  if  he  forbore  to  proceed  to  the  higher 
branches  of  the  subject  of  his  prelections,  because  his  teaching  would  have  the 
inevitable  effect  of  confusing  and  discouraging  the  idle  men  who  had  failed  to 
master  his  elementary  course.  So  it  is  the  appointment  of  Isaiah's  mission, 
notwithstanding  its  foreseen  failure  in  the  case  of  all  but  a  remnant  of  the  nation, 
which  gives  it  a  judicial  character,  and  makes  it  a  menace  of  judgment.  (Ibid.) 
Judgment  and  mercy  : — Hence  our  Lord's  use  of  the  passage  to  justify  His  having 
recourse  to  parables  while  prosecuting  His  ministry  in  the  midst  of  a  nation  that 
had  already  shown  a  strong  disposition  to  reject  Him.  He  puts  His  teaching 
into  a  form  in  which  it  could  be  apprehended  by  such  as  were  willing  to  do  the 
will  of  His  Father,  but  which  would  hide  it  from  those  whose  disobedience  to 
known  truth  had  deprived  them  of  spiritual  insight.  This  was  a  chastisement 
upon  their  perverse  and  prejudiced  minds,  because  a  virtual  withdrawal  of  His 
saving  ministry  from  them.  It  was  like  closing  their  day  of  visitation.  Yet 
in  another  aspect  the  adoption  of  this  course  was  an  act  of  mercy ;  for  teaching, 
the  meaning  of  which  is  obscure  to  the  unwilling  hearer,  is  less  hardening  than 
plain  truth,  because  it  does  not  provoke  such  obstinate  resistance.  So  also  there 
was  mercy  in  Isaiah's  ministry  to  his  hardened  fellow-countrymen.  It  was  to 
be  continued  until  their  cities  were  desolate,  without  inhabitant,  and  the  Lord 
had  removed  men  far  away.  Then  its  gracious  purpose  to  them  would  become 
manifest,  for  when  suffering  Divine  judgments  they  would  be  thrown  back  upon 
neglected  warnings.  Though  so  long  unavailing,  as  unavailing  as  if  their  very 
design  had  been  to  confirm  them  in  their  disobedience,  these  warnings  would 
eventually  become  weird  fingers  pointing  to  the  cause  of  their  sufferings,  and 
indicating  the  way  of  salvation  through  repentance  and  turning  to  God  (vers. 
11-13).  For  the  severest  lines  of  the  prophet's  message  plainly  imply  that, 
even  after  a  course  of  obstinate  impenitence,  to  turn  to  put  a  constraint  upon 
God's  mercy,  and  draw  forth  His  forgiveness :  "  lest,"  He  says,  "  they  convert 
and  be  healed."  (Ibid.)  A  loud  call  to  repentance : — For  the  prophet  to 
represent  God  as  actually  no  longer  inviting  men  to  repent,  but  only  desiring 
their  greater  condemnation,  was  a  new  and  most  forcible  call  to  repentance  for 
men  who  had  rejected  many  previous  calls.  It  was  like  digging  a  grave  for  a 
man  in  his  own  sight,  after  you  have  failed  to  convince  him  by  word  that  his 
course  of  conduct  must  end  in  death.  It  brought  the  far-off  results  of  men's 
behaviour  most  vividly  before  their  eyes.  It  roused  them  to  thought  by  the 
unwonted  cry  that  the  hour  of  repentance  was  past.  (P.  Thomson,  M.A.) 
Ood  vindicating  Himself  : — It  is  most  important,  when  a  boy  at  school  is  careless, 
and  makes  little  or  no  progress  in  learning,  that  his  teacher  should  put  himself 
in  a  right  position — that  he  should  be  able  to  declare  that  he  paid  attention  to 
him,  and  did  his  utmost  to  promote  his  education.  It  is  most  important,  when 
a  son  turns  out  badly,  that  the  parents  should  put  themselves  in  a  right  position — 
that  they  should  be  able  to  declare  that  they  did  their  duty  by  him.  In  like 
manner,  it  was  most  important  that,  relative  to  the  people  of  Judah,  God  should 
put  Himself  in  a  right  position,  or  in  a  position  to  appeal  to  facts ;  that  He  should 
be  able  even  to  appeal  to  themselves,  as  to  whether  He  had  not  interested  Him- 
self in  them,  borne  patiently  with  them,  and  wrought  with  them  in  every  possible 
way  to  guide  their  feet  into  right  paths.  But  if  Isaiah  had  not  been  sent  to 
them,  would  God  have  been  in  a  position  to  appeal  to  facts  ?  He  would  not. 
It  is  not  strange,  then,  that  he  was  commissioned  to  go  to  them  in  the  character 
of  a  prophet,  and  deal  with  them  in  order  to  their  reformation.  (G.  Cron, 
M.A.)  Opposite  effects  from  the  same  agencies : — The  same  fire  reddens  the 
gold  and  burns  the  dross.  Under  the  same  threshing-sledge  the  grain  is  cleansed 
and  the  chaff  crushed  out.  By  the  same  press -beam  the  oil  is  separated  from 
the  dregs.  The  same  sunshine  and  rain  which  cause  the  living  tree  to  grow  and 
flourish,  are  the  most  potent  influences  to  bring  the  dead  tree  to  deoay.  (Sunday 
School  Chronicle.)        A  liard  ministry  : — "  On  the  morning  before  I  was  licensed," 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  197 

says  the  late  Rev.  John  Brown,  "  that  text  was  much  impressed  on  my  spirit, 

*  He  said,  Go  and  tell  this  people,  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  understand  not ;  and 
see  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not,'  &c.  Since  I  was  ordained  at  Haddington,  I 
know  not  how  often  it  hath  been  heavy  to  my  heart  to  think  how  much  this 
Scripture  hath  been  fulfilled  in  my  ministry.  Frequently  I  have  had  an  anxious 
desire  to  be  removed  by  death,  from  being  a  plague  to  my  poor  congregation. 
Often,  however,  I  have  checked  myself,  and  have  considered  this  wish  as  my 
folly,  and  begged  of  the  Lord,  that  if  it  were  not  for  His  glory  to  remove  me  by 
death,  He  would  make  me  successful  in  my  work."  See  ye  indeed,  but 
perceive  not. — Sight  without  insight  (with  Mark  viii.  18): — They  had  sight,  but 
no  insight.  They  exercised  the  power  of  observation,  but  had  no  imagination. 
They  were  ritualistic,  but  not  poetic.  In  their  company  could  be  found  scribes, 
but  no  prophets.  They  had  many  politicians,  but  no  statesmen.  Eyes  had 
they,  but  no  vision.  Life  to  these  people  was  a  superficies,  not  a  profundity. 
Facts  were  planes,  not  cubes.  Everything  was  a  surface  phenomenon,  a  mere 
skin  with  no  wondrous  internal  ministry  to  arouse  the  imagination  and  to  fill 
the  being  with  awe.  Now  the  suggestion  of  the  Scriptures  is  this  :  Life  is  cubical, 
every  fact  being  a  cube.  To  see  only  the  surface  is  elementary  and  primitive. 
The  crown  of  life  consists  in  being  able  to  comprehend  with  all  saints  "  what 
is  the  length,  and  breadth,  and  depth,  and  height,"  of  every  fact  which  we 
encounter  in  the  common  paths  of  daily  life.  The  practical  which  we  can  measure 
with  a  foot-rule  has  mystical  relationships;  the  material  has  spiritual  signifi- 
cance. To  see  the  larger  relationships  of  things,  to  discern  their  spiritual  pose 
and  set,  to  peer  into  their  possible  issues,  is  vision.  "  Thousands  of  people  can 
talk  for  one  who  can  think,  but  thousands  can  think  for  one  who  can  see."  («/.  H. 
Jowett,  M.A.)  Two  ways  of  looking  at  things  :  the  superficial  and  the  cubical  : — 
Let  me  illustrate  a  little  more  clearly  these  two  ways  of  looking  at  things,  the 
superficial  and  the  cubical ;  the  so-called  practical  and  the  imaginative ;  the 
way  of  sight  and  the  way  of  vision.  1.  There  are  two  ways  of  looking  at  a  little 
child.  "  Sight "  exercises  the  power  of  observation  and  beholds  a  little  animal, 
compounded  of  material  atoms  in  varying  quality,  a  cunning  product  of  material 
forces ;  a  little  bundle  of  hungers  and  thirsts.  "  Insight "  beholds  in  the  child 
a  germ  of  wondrous  possibility,  a  promise  of  the  eternal,  a  vehicle  of  unnamed 
endowments,  a  possible  image  of  Christ.     2.  There  are  two  ways  of  looking  at 

•  flower.     There  is  the  way  of  "  sight " — 

A  primrose  by  the  river's  brim 

A  yellow  primrose  was  to  him, 

And  it  was  nothing  more. 

And  there  is  the  way  of  "  insight " — 

Flower  in  the  crannied  wall, 

I  pluck  you  out  of  the  cranny. 
I  hold  you  here,  root  and  all,  in  my  hand. 
Little  flower,  but  if  I  could  understand 
What  you  are,  root  and  all,  and  all  in  alL 
I  should  know  what  God  and  man  is. 

3.  There  are  two  ways  of  looking  at  a  book :  "  sight "  and  "  insight."  Here 
is  a  book.  It  is  a  dictionary.  A  man  gave  years  of  ceaseless  labour  to  its  creation. 
What  is  it  T  A  Chinese  dictionary.  Who  compiled  it  ?  A  missionary.  And 
this  when  he  might  have  been  teaching  the  multitude,  feeding  the  hungry,  carry- 
ing consolation  to  the  terrified  and  depressed.  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  T 
Why  were  not  these  years  invested  and  given  to  the  poor  ?  So  says  "  sight." 
How  does  "  insight "  regard  the  labour  ?  The  dictionary  is  a  door  of  hope,  the 
carrier  of  light,  the  key  to  an  empire,  a  living  way  into  the  thought  and  heart 
of  a  vast  people.  4.  There  are  two  ways  of  looking  at  the  fabric  of  this  building 
in  which  we  at  present  worship.  "  Sight "  says,  "  How  plain  the  structure, 
made  of  common  brick!  And  the  windows!  nothing  about  them  tasteful  and 
refined."  "  Insight "  gazes  at  the  building  and  recalls  the  men  and  women  who 
have  found  their  Saviour  here.  A  panorama  of  spiritual  ministers  passes  before 
it,  the  consecration  of  wedlock,  the  dedication  of  little  children,  the  illumination 
of  death,  the  transfiguration  of  sorrow,  the  heightening  of  joy !     To  the  soul's 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

vision  this  plain  brick  house  is  an  earthly  vessel,  precious  because  of  the  heavenly 
treasure  of  which  it  has  been,  and  is,  the  shrine.  5.  There  are  two  ways  of  look- 
ing at  the  bread  upon  the  Communion-table.  To  "  sight  "  it  is  common  baker's 
bread,  bought  at  so  much  a  loaf,  and  there  is  much  more  like  it.  To  "  vision  " 
it  is  a  token  of  a  broken  body  and  of  shed  blood.  By  vision  we  realise  the 
spiritual  significance  of  things,  and  by  fixing  our  regard  upon  them  we 
appropriate  their  contents  into  our  own  spirits.  (Ibid.)  Religious,  but 
without  spiritual  discernment : — Now  let  me  mention  an  astounding  thing. 
This  word  of  the  prophet's,  and  the  stern  warning  as  to  the  perils  of 
blindness  with  which  this  book  abounds,  are  addressed  not  to  the  men  of 
the  world,  the  jauntily  irreligious,  the  men  who  treat  the  affairs  of  the 
Highest  with  levity  or  derision.  They  are  addressed  to  the  religious,  to  the 
regular  churchgoers,  to  the  recognised  adherents  of  the  synagogue  and  the  temple. 
They  are  addressed  to  men  and  women  who  are  religious  but  who  have  no  vision, 
who  pay  scrupulous  attention  to  ritual  but  who  are  devoid  of  spiritual  discern- 
ment. They  had  given  undue  emphasis  to  the  formal.  Their  life  had  been 
lived  on  the  superficies.  In  the  realm  of  religion  they  were  geographers,  not 
geologists ;  registrars,  not  poets.  They  lived  and  moved  on  the  plane  of  rules, 
they  did  not  enter  into  the  roomy  depths  of  principles.  They  were  great  at 
surface  measurements ;  the  measure  of  a  Sabbath  day's  journey,  the  length 
of  a  rope,  the  hang  of  a  tassel,  the  fixing  of  a  pin,  the  duration  of  a  fast.  Now 
when  the  formal  is  unduly  emphasised  it  is  at  the  expense  of  the  moral.  When 
ritual  is  obtrusive  the  spiritual  is  impaired.  These  exalted  the  trellis  and  forgot 
the  fruit !  But  when  the  spiritual  is  minimised,  life  becomes  callous.  We 
become  indurated  by  worship  of  form.  What  therefore  do  we  rind  ?  We  find 
that  in  the  speech  of  the  prophets  it  is  the  formally  religious  people  who  are 
denounced  for  their  senselessness ;  the  formal  have  become  the  brutal.  They 
have  lost  their  spiritual  refinement,  and  with  it  their  sympathy  for  their  kind. 
And  when  the  refinement  has  gone  from  the  spirit,  men  lose  their  insight,  their 
power  of  seeing  the  invisible.  "They  have  eyes,  but  they  see  not."  (Ibid.) 
Conditions  of  spiritual  vision  : — How  can  we  gain  and  keep  the  power  of  vision  ? 
1.  Let  us  seek  our  answer  in  the  Book  of  Revelation :  "  Anoint  thine  eyes  with 
eye-salve  that  thou  mayest  see."  Mark  the  connection  of  this  passage.  The 
anointing  follows  an  adorning ;  before  the  eyes  are  mentioned  attention  has 
been  drawn  to  the  garments.  The  garment  must  be  changed  ;  the  raiment 
must  be  made  "  white."  The  life  must  attain  unto  purity.  Then,  succeeding 
the  purity,  comes  the  vision  —  the  insight.  First,  there  is  the  "  washing  of 
regeneration";  then  "the  vision  and  faculty  Divine."  "Blessed  are  the  pure 
in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  "  Open  Thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold 
wondrous  things."  2.  And  there  is  one  other  condition  which  must  be  named. 
It  is  suggested  to  us  by  a  word  of  the  Apostle  Paul :  "  I  was  not  disobedient 
unto  the  heavenly  vision."  When  we  have  discerned  a  heavenly  meaning, 
when  we  have  seen  the  Divine  significance  of  things,  when  we  have  entered  into 
the  spiritual  purpose,  we  are  to  be  true  to  what  we  have  seen.  I  must  bring 
my  life  into  conformity  with  my  light.  "  Hold  fast  that  which  thou  hast."  I 
must  not  batter  the  gates  of  heaven  for  more  light  if  I  am  rebellious  to  the  light 
already  given.  I  must  be  true  to  what  I  see.  If  I  live  truly  I  shall  see  truly. 
Obedience  is  the  way  to  the  larger  vision.  (Ibid.)  Israel's  defective  insight : — 
The  great  objects  which  were  presented  to  the  view  of  this  people  were,  the 
astonishing  wonders  which  were  brought  before  their  eyes,  the  many  terrible 
judgments  inflicted  upon  their  enemies,  the  signal  victories  with  which  they 
were  crowned,  the  glorious  deliverances  and  remarkable  interpositions  of  kind 
Providence  in  their  behalf.  (R.  Macculloch.)  Responsibility  of  having  the 
Gospel : — A  writer  says,  "  You  may  buy  a  New  Testament  for  a  few  pence,  yet 
it  may  be  to  you  at  last  the  most  costly  possession  you  ever  had."  (Sunday 
School  Chronicle.)  Petrifaction : — The  petrifying  well  at  Knaresborough  is 
well  known,  and  may  illustrate  this  subject.  It  is  a  cascade  from  the  river  Nidd, 
about  fifteen  feet  high  and  twice  as  broad,  and  forms  an  aqueous  curtain  to  a 
cave.  The  dripping  waters  are  used  for  petrifying  anything  that  may  be  hung 
up  in  the  drip  of  the  water-ledge,  which  flows  over,  as  it  were,  the  eaves  of  the 
cave.  This  ledge  of  limestone  rock  is  augmented  unceasingly  by  the  action  of 
the  water  which  flows  over  it.  In  the  cascade  a  great  variety  of  objects  are 
hung  up  by  short  lengths  of  wire,  and  these  are  petrified,  turned  into  rock,  by 
the  water  trickling  over  them  ;  sponges,  books,  gloves,  veils,  animals,  and  bird* 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  199 

subjected  to  the  action  of  the  shower  are  changed  into  stone.  A  sponge  is 
petrified  in  a  few  months  ;  some  things  require  a  year  or  two.  Petrifying  streams 
threaten  our  spiritual  life,  and  unless  duly  resisted,  steal  away  our  vitality  and 
leave  us  with  the  coldness  and  hardness  of  stone.     (W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Ver.  10.  Make  the  heart  of  this  people  fat — The  power  of  self -cursing  : — 
"  Make  the  heart  of  this  people  fat,"  &c.  By  this  it  is  not  meant  that  Isaiah 
was  to  aim  at  and  put  forth  what  power  ne  possessed  to  lead  the  people 
of  Judah  deeper  and  ever  deeper  into  error  and  sin.  That  was  an  errand 
on  which  God  was  morally  incapable  of  sending  him.  His  business  was  to  teaoh 
them,  not  error,  but  truth ;  to  set  them  an  example  not  of  rebellion,  but  obedi- 
ence to  the  Divine  will ;  to  diminish  and  do  away  with  their  moral  insensibility 
and  wickedness,  not  increase  them.  The  meaning  is,  that  they  would  so  act  that 
the  effect  of  all  his  diligence  and  ingenuity  to  instruct  and  reform  them  would 
be  to  render  them  still  more  stupid  and  wicked,  and  still  more  the  objects  of  the 
Lord's  displeasure.  Accordingly,  both  in  Matt.  xiii.  14,  15  and  Acts  xxviii. 
25-27,  we  find  the  passage  so  quoted  and  interpreted  as  to  bring  out  the  guilt 
of  the  people  themselves,  and  constrain  us  to  throw  all  the  blame  on  them. 
(0.  Cron,  M.A.) 

Ver.  11.  Then  said  I,  Lord,  how  long? — The  state  of  the  Church: — I.  Notice 

A  FEW  THINGS  AFFECTING  THE  STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH  AND  OF  THE  WORLD  WHICH 
ARE   CALCULATED   TO   EXCITE  THE   ASTONISHMENT  AND   GRIEF   OF  THE   CHRISTIAN. 

I.  The  little  progress  which  Christianity  has  made  after  a  lapse  of  eighteen 
hundred  years.  2.  The  prevalence  of  irreligion  in  those  parts  of  the  world  which 
are  professedly  Christian.  3.  The  low  state  of  religion  in  the  Church  itself. 
4.    The   obstacles  which   the  Church   presents  to  the   increase  of   vital   piety. 

II.  How  long  this  state  of  things  is  to  continue,  or  when  we  may  reasonably 
expect  another,  and  a  better.  1.  There  is  a  connection  established  between 
the  spirit  or  the  state  of  mind  generally  prevailing  in  the  Church  and  its  pros- 
perity, or  the  extension  of  religion  in  the  world.  As  soon  as  the  Church  is 
thoroughly  alive  and  truly  devoted  to  God,  the  time  of  her  enlargement  is  at 
hand.  2.  The  second  point  respects  the  inquiry,  what  is  that  state  of  mind 
which  must  generally  prevail  in  the  Church  in  order  to  the  extension  of  religion 
in  the  world?  (1)  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  Church  should  realise 
her  position  and  feel  her  responsibility.  (2)  It  is  absolutely  necessary  also  that 
the  Church  should  feel  sympathy  with  her  Lord  in  His  intense  solicitude,  or  in 
the  accomplishment  of  the  great  purpose  of  His  mediation.  (3)  Until  this  state 
of  mind  prevail  in  the  Church  our  efforts  will  not  be  of  such  a  character  as  God 
can  greatly  bless,    in.  How  may  the  Church  be  brought  into  that  state 

OF  MEND  WHICH  APPEARS  TO  BE  ABSOLUTELY  NECESSARY  IN  ORDER  TO  HER 
KXTENDED  USEFULNESS  AND  TO  THE  DIFFUSION  OF  THE  GOSPEL  THROUGHOUT  THE 

world  ?  Every  man  should  begin  with  himself,  and  every  one  who  is  awake 
should  endeavour  to  awaken  his  brother.  (J.  J.  Davies.)  Isaiah's  attitude 
towards  his  message : — The  prophet  cannot  venture  to  intercede  for  the  people, 
nor  does  he  dare  to  give  vent  to  his  sorrow  over  the  need  of  this  stern  message 
save  by  the  words,  How  long,  Lord  ?  "  How  long  shall  I  have  this  painful 
and  fruitless  duty  to  perform  ?    (P.  Thomson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  But  yet  in  it  shall  he  a  tenth,  and  it  shall  return. — The  remnant : — 
In  the  worst  of  times  God  has  a  little  remnant  that  kept  their  garments 
clean,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  most  sweeping  and  desolating  calamities 
He  will  take  special  notice  of  it  for  good.  1.  The  remnant  will  be  but  small. 
"  A  tenth."     A  certain  number  put  for  an  uncertain.      The  tenth  was  God's 

Eroportion  under  the  law,  consecrated  for  His  use.  2.  They  shall  return;  i.e., 
:om  their  sins  and  backslidings  and  the  common  defections  of  the  Church  of 
Israel.  They  shall  return  also  from  their  captivity  in  Babylon  to  their  native 
land.  3.  It  is  asserted  of  this  remnant  that  it  shall  be  eaten ;  that  is,  say  some, 
after  they  return  they  shall  be  devoured  a  second  time  by  the  kings  of  Assyria. 
God's  remnant,  when  they  are  delivered  out  of  one  trouble,  must  lay  their  account 
with  another.  Or,  as  some  understand  it,  shall  be  accepted  of  God  as  the  tithe 
was  which  was  meat  in  God's  house.  The  saving  of  this  remnant  shall  be  meat  to 
the  faith  and  hope  of  them  that  wish  well  to  God's  kingdom  and  interest.  4.  It 
is  said  of  this  remnant,  that  it  shall  be  "  as  a  teil,  and  as  an  oak  whose  substance 


200  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

is  in  them,  even  when  they  oast  their  leaves."  As  if  He  had  said,  Though  they 
may  be  stripped  of  their  outward  prosperity,  and  share  in  the  common  calamity ; 
yet  they  shall  recover  like  a  tree  in  the  spring,  and  sprout  and  flourish  again : 
although  they  fall,  they  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down.  5.  This  distinguished 
remnant  shall  be  the  stay  and  support  of  the  public  interest.  "  The  holy  seed 
shall  be  the  substance  thereof."  (E.  Erskine.)  How  the  religious  of  a  nation 
are  the  strength  of  it : — L  What  are  wb  to  understand  by  the  religious  of 
a  nation  ?     1.  Those  who,  as  to  the  doctrine  of  Christianity,  "  hold  the  Head." 

2.  Those  who,  as  to  the  practice  of  Christianity,  "  fear  God  and  work  righteous- 
ness."    II.   HOW,  AND  IN  WHAT  RESPECTS,  THEY  MAY  BE  SAID  TO  BE  ITS  STRENGTH. 

"  The  holy  seed  "  is  here  called  "  the  substance,"  or  "  stock,"  of  a  people ;  so 
that  in  what  respects  the  strength  of  a  tree  is  in  its  stock,  in  those,  or  several  of 
them,  the  strength  of  a  people  is  in  the  religion  of  them.  1.  The  stock  of  a  tree 
is  the  most  firm  and  durable  part  of  it.  2.  The  stock  is  that  which  propagates 
its  kind.  Cut  off  all  the  boughs,  and  yet  the  stem  will  shoot  forth  again,  send 
out  new  leaves  and  fruit  and  seed,  from  which  other  trees  will  come.  So  here 
the  righteous  propagate  their  righteousness,  communicate  to  others,  beget 
children  to  GocL  3.  The  stock  of  the  tree  is  that  for  the  sake  of  which  the  tree 
is  dressed  and  watered  and  looked  after.  Men  take  care  of  the  tree  so  long  as 
there  is  life  in  the  stock ;  they  not  only  do  not  grub  it  up,  but  prune  it,  and  bestow 
upon  it  what  cost  and  labour  is  fit  for  it.  III.  On  what  account  the  religious 
of  a  nation  may  be  said  to  be  its  strength,  or  what  influence  they  have  on 
the  welfare  and  security  of  a  people.  1.  As  they  are  God's  favourites.  2.  As 
they  improve  their  interest  with  God  for  a  people.  3.  As  they  are  a  means  many 
times  to  stop  the  current  of  wickedness,  which  is  ready  to  overflow  a  land  with 
judgments,  and  to  bring  swift  destruction  on  it.  4.  As  they  not  only  check 
the  progress  of  sin,  but  propagate  goodness  to  others,  as  well  as  promote  it  in 
themselves.  This  they  do  by  their  counsels,  admonitions,  example.  5.  Some- 
times the  religious  of  a  nation  may  have  an  influence  upon  its  public  welfare,  by 
doing  some  eminent  service,  wherewith  God  is  much  pleased,  and  to  which  He  hath 
a  special  respect.  "  Phinehas  stood  up,  and  executed  judgment :  and  so  the 
plague  was  stayed"  (Psa.  cvi.  30).  6.  God  may  sometimes  spare  a  people 
for  the  sake  of  His  children  among  them,  that  they  may  be  useful  and  helpful 
to  them  in  His  work.  This  end  God  had  in  sparing  the  Gibeonites  ;  He  intended 
they  should  be  "  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  "  for  His  sanctuary,  and 
so  assistant  to  the  priests  and  Levites  in  their  service  (Josh.  ix.  27).  So,  Isa. 
lxi.  5,  6.  God  can  make  even  Moab  "  hide  His  outcasts  "  (Isa.  xvi.  3,  4) ;  "  the 
earth  help  the  woman "  (Rev.  xii.  16) ;  Ahab  favour  a  good  Obadiah,  that 
he  may  hide  the  Lord's  prophets  (1  Kings  xviii.  3,  4) ;  a  heathen  Cyrus  "  let 
go  His  captives  and  build  His  city  "  (Isa.  xlv.  13) ;  a  Darius,  an  Artaxerxes, 
an  Ahasuerus,  countenance  and  prefer  a  Daniel,  a  Nehemiah,  a  Mordecai,  public 
instruments  of  good  to  His  people.  Sometimes  God  may  so  twist  and  combine 
the  interest  of  worldly  men  with  the  interest  of  His  children,  that  they  cannot 
promote  their  own,  without  helping  on  the  others'.  TV.  Application.  5.  If 
the  religious  of  a  nation  are  the  strength  and  defence  of  it,  then  the  same  may 
be  said  of  the  religious  of  the  world, — they  are  the  substance  of  it,  the  support, 
the  strength  of  it.  The  world  itself  is  preserved  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  the  godly 
in  it,  "  the  holy  seed."     2.  The  religious  of  a  nation  are  not  its  enemies. 

3.  The  sinners  of  a  nation  are  really  the  weakness  of  it.  4.  It  is  the  interest  of 
any  people  where  God  hath  a  seed  of  righteous  ones  to  favour  them  and  make 
much  of  them.  5.  It  is  folly  in  any  people  to  persecute  them  that  are  truly 
religious.  For  by  this  means  they  lose — (1)  the  benefit  of  the  saints'  prayers; 
(2)  the  help  of  the  saints.  (J.  Collins,  M. A.)  The  doctrine  of  the  remnant 
an  antidote  to  discouragement : — Though  it  belongs  to  the  very  essence  of  Biblical 
revelation,  we  find,  we  moderns,  a  strange  difficulty  in  laying  hold  of  it.  In 
epite  of  the  pathetic  beauty  of  its  exposition  in  Isaiah  it  never  lays  hold  of  us 
in  our  reasonable  thinking,  in  our  habitual  imagination,  as  the  truth  of  all  truths 
in  estimating  and  justifying  the  ways  of  Providence.  We  read  these  great  and 
beautiful  passages  which  tell  of  the  remnant  which  shall  return,  to  come  again 
to  Zion  with  joy  and  singing,  and  yet  it  does  not  fasten  on  us  as  the  exhibition 
of  a  principle  which  should  govern  our  conduct,  and  determine  our  growth,  and 
solve  our  practical  perplexities,  and  disperse  depression  and  feed  hope.  Yet 
this  is  what  it  did  to  the  prophets,  and  this  is  what  it  did  to  St.  Paul.  In  every 
darkest  hour,  under  every  bewilderment,  at  every  blow  that  smote  the  spirit 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  201 

of  faith  or  wounded  the  heart  of  love,  back  they  turned  to  this  one  prevailing 
theme — Never  fear  !  Never  give  up  !  The  remnant  shall  return ;  the  remnant 
shall  be  saved.  God  has  not  forgotten  His  remnant,  and  in  the  safety  of  the 
remnant  all  is  once  more  possible.  The  whole  jeopardised  salvation  of  Israel 
and  the  Church  may  yet  De  recovered.  (H.  Scott-Holland,  D.D.)  Practical 
application  of  the  idea  of  "  the  remnant "  : — Practically,  in  conduct,  in  handling 
your  own  lives,  in  dealing  with  your  neighbours,  surely  this  method  of  God's 
should  be  yours  also.  1.  You  are  inclined  to  denounce  the  wickedness  of  the  world, 
to  despair  of  human  nature,  to  abandon  some  one  as  hopeless,  to  see  nothing 
in  him  that  you  can  like  or  respect.  Look  again,  consider  it  once  more.  Is 
there  no  place  in  that  man's  heart  where  you  may  touch  him,  no  point  at  which 
he  will  reveal  a  good  side  ?  It  is  strange  how  men  we  thought  to  be  the  very 
worst  surprise  us  here ;  constantly  we  come  upon  something  generous  that  they 
do,  some  touch  of  loyalty,  some  sign  of  tenderness  and  devotion.  There  it  is ; 
that  is  the  one  hope  !  God  need  not  despair  of  the  man  so  long  as  he  has  one 
spot  left  on  which  to  work.  One  saith :  Destroy  it  not,  for  its  blessing  is  in 
it " — the  blessed  words  of  mercy  said  over  the  dead  trunk  of  a  tree,  bare  and 
wasted  and  burned  with  fire,  a  stump  charred  to  the  naked  ground,  yet  destroy 
it  not ;  its  seed,  its  substance  is  in  it !  So  long  as  that  can  be  said  over  a  man, 
strive  for  him,  pray  for  him,  work  for  him  at  that  spot  to  rescue  it,  to  enlarge 
it,  to  save  it.  2.  And  do  the  same  with  yourself  when  you  are  despairing,  when 
you  review  your  life  and  condemn  it  at  every  point,  when  you  can  see  no  use 
whatever  in  renewing  resolutions  which  you  are  sure  to  break,  and  efforts  which 
already  foretell  their  own  disaster.  Nevertheless,  go  back  on  the  holy  sub- 
stanee — "  Christ  is  in  you,  the  eternal  hope  of  honour."  "  Yes,"  you  will  say, 
"  all  else  would  have  been  lost  but  for  that ;  verily,  if  God  had  not  left  me  that 
seed,  I  should  have  been  even  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  but,  thanks  be  to  God, 
it  is  not  so  ;  it  never  can  be  so  if  only  I  will  believe  it."  (Ibid.)  The  leafless 
tree  : — The  application — I.  To  the  Jews.  What  a  chequered  history  has  been 
the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  !  Why  is  it  that  the  Jewish  race  is  preserved  ? 
We  have  our  answer  in  the  text:  "The  holy  seed  is  the  substance  thereof." 
There  is  something  within  a  tree  mysterious,  hidden  and  unknown,  which  preserves 
life  in  it  when  everything  outward  tends  to  kill  it.  So  in  the  Jewish  race  there 
is  a  secret  element  which  keeps  it  alive.  We  know  what  it  is ;  it  is  the  "  rem- 
nant according  to  the  election  of  grace."  II.  To  the  Church  of  Christ,  whereof 
the  Jewish  people  are  but  a  dim  shadow  and  an  emblem.  The  Church  has  had 
its  trials;  trials  from  without  and  trials  within.  Why  is  it  that  the  Church 
is  still  preserved,  when  she  looks  so  dead  ?  For  this  reason :  that  there  is  in 
the  midst  of  her — though  many  are  hypocrites  and  impostors — a  "  chosen  seed," 
who  are  "  the  substance  thereof."  Let  me  draw  your  attention,  as  a  Church 
connected  with  this  place,  to  this  point — that  the  holy  seed  is  the  substance  of 
the  Church.  A  great  many  of  you  might  be  compared  to  the  bark  of  the  tree ; 
some  of  you  are  like  the  big  limbs ;  others  are  like  pieces  of  the  trunk.  Well, 
we  should  be  very  sorry  to  lose  any  of  you  ;  but  we  could  afford  to  do  so  without 
any  serious  damage  to  the  life  of  the  tree.  Yet  there  are  some  here — God  knoweth 
who  they  are — who  are  the  substance  of  the  tree.  By  the  word  "  substance  " 
is  meant  the  life,  the  inward  principle.  The  inward  principle  is  in  the  tree,  when 
it  has  lost  its  leaves.  Now,  God  discerns  some  men  in  this  Church,  I  doubt  not, 
who  are  towards  us  like  the  inward  principle  of  the  oak :  they  are  the  substance 
of  the  Church.  Note  here,  that  the  life  of  a  tree  is  not  determined  by  the  shape 
of  the  branches,  nor  by  the  way  it  grows,  but  it  is  the  substance.  The  shape 
of  a  Church  is  not  its  life.  In  one  place  I  see  a  Church  formed  in  an  Episcopalian 
shape ;  in  another  place  I  see  one  formed  in  a  Presbyterian  shape ;  then,  again, 
I  see  one  formed  on  an  Independent  principle.  Here  I  see  one  with  sixteen  ounces 
to  the  pound  of  doctrine ;  there  I  see  one  with  eight,  and  some  with  very  little 
clear  doctrine  at  all.  And  yet  I  find  life  in  all  the  Churches,  in  some  degree — 
some  good  men  in  all  of  them.  How  do  I  account  for  this  ?  Why,  just  in  this 
way — that  the  oak  may  be  alive,  whatever  its  shape,  if  it  has  got  the  substance. 
Observe,  again,  that  the  substance  of  the  oak  is  a  hidden  thing ;  you  cannot 
see  it.  Thou  art  a  Church  member.  Let  me  ask  thee — art  thou  one  of  the  holy 
seed  ?  Some  will  say,  "  How  is  it  that  good  men  are  the  means  of  preserving 
the  visible  Church  ?  "  I  answer,  the  holy  seed  doth  this,  because  it  derives 
its  life  from  Christ.  III.  This  is  true  of  every  individual  believer  :  his  sub- 
stance is  in  him  when  he  has  lost  his  leaves.     1.  Christian  men  lose  their  leaves 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi 

when  they  lose  their  comforts.     The  faith  of  the  Christian,  when  shrouded  by 
doubts  and  fears,  is  just  as  much  there  as  when  he  rejoiceth  devoutly  in  the  dis- 
play of  it.     2.  Some  Christians  lose  their  leaves  not  by  doubts,  but  by  sin.     Many 
a  ohild  of  God  has  gone  far  away  from  his  Master,  but  His  substance  is  in  him. 
(0.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Life  in  the  root : — A  gentleman  had  a  beautiful  shrub  in 
hia  garden.     He  set  great  store  by  it  as  the  pride  of  his  place.     At  the  time  of 
the  great  blizzard  it  was  blasted  and  withered.     The  life  of  it  seemed  wholly 
gone.     He  did  not  give  up  hope,  though  there  was  nothing  that  gave  him 
encouragement.     But  he  loved  that  shrub,  and  longed  to  save  it  if  he  could.     So 
what  did  he  do  T    Tended  it  more  than  ever.     Opened  its  roots  to  the  genial 
sun,  pruned  it  patiently  and  with  care,  cherished  it  all  he  possibly  could.     A 
year  or  two  passed  away.     It  was  a  slow  and  cheerless  business,  and  he  came 
near  losing  hope.     But,  one  day,  what  was  his  joy  to  see  signs  of  life  returning. 
The  sap  began  to  rise,  the  stems  to  recover  their  spring,  it  put  on  fresh  leaves, 
bloomed  anew,  and  filled  his  heart  with  thankfulness.     Be  patient.     God  sees 
deeper  than  we  do.     (Sunday  School  Chronicle.)        A  teil  tree  ...  an  oak. — 
The  terebinth  and  the  oak : — The  two  most  common  forest  trees  of  Palestine 
were  the  terebinth  and  oak.     They  were  strong  hardy  trees.     It  was  a  matter 
of  difficulty  to  kill  them,  so  to  cut  and  maim  them  as  to  take  the  substance  or 
vitality  out  of  them.     So  long  as  the  trunk  or  stem  was  allowed  to  remain  in  the 
soil,  they  were  sure,  in  course  of  time,  to  grow  and  flourish  anew ;  and  Isaiah 
was  taught  by  God  Himself  that  His  people  would  be  equally  tenacious  of  life. 
The  red  rough  hand  of  war  might  shake  off  the  leaves  and  lop  off  the  branches  ; 
it  might  also  reduce  the  stem  to  the  slenderest  proportions  ;  but  the  tree  of  Judah, 
at  times  a  large  fair  tree,  would  not  fall  into  a  state  of  utter  decay,  and  vanish 
away.     Period  after  period  there  would  be  a  tenth — a  remnant,  however  diminu- 
tive, as  many  as  would,  by  the  blessing  of  Heaven,  once  more  develop  into  a 
prosperous  nation.     Sooner  or  later,  the  judgments  of  God  would  have  the  desired 
effect,  and  the  tree  that  had  been  hurt  and  peeled  would  give  indications  that 
it  had  not  been  deprived  of  all  its  substance  or  vitality.     (G.  Cron,  M.A.)        The 
terebinth,  a  beautiful  tree,  the  Pistacia  terebinthus,  growing  to  a  large  size  in  the 
countries  around  the  east  end  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  in  countries  further 
to  the  east,  especially  in  Syria,  Palestine,  Arabia,  and  Persia.     It  is  also  called 
the  "  turpentine  tree,"  and  a  transparent,  pleasant-smelling  resin  of  high  value 
is  procured  in  small  quantities  from  slits  made  in  the  bark  of  branches  and  stems. 
Its  blossoms  bloom  in  April,  and  its  fruit  is  a  small  bluish  nut  with  an  edible 
kernel,  much  used  and  relished  especially  by  the  Persians.    In  Palestine  it  was 
found  in  valleys,  not  in  woods,  but  generally  isolated.     The  name  does  not 
occur  in  the  A.V.,  but  the  Heb.  elah,  rendered   in  Isa.  vi.    13  "  teil,"  and 
in  Hos.   iv.   13    "  elm,"    is   most    probably  the    terebinth.      (J.  Macphereon, 
M.A.)        8o  the  holy  seed  shall  he  the  substance  thereof. — The  substance  of 
a  nation : — "  The  holy  seed  "  is  the  substance,  the  body,  the  life,  the  worth  of 
any  nation,  any  community,  or  any  church.    I.  First,  therefore,  we  must  con- 
template "  thb  holy  seed  "  that  we  may  know  who  they  are.     1.  This  seed 
of  God  are  they  whom  He  has  chosen  out  of  the  world,  whom  He  has  called  to 
Himself  in  Christ  Jesus,  whom  He  has  created  anew  by  His  Spirit,  whom  He 
has  adopted  into  His  family.    2.  But  this  seed  are  evidenced  and  demonstrated 
by  their  holiness ;  they  are  "  the  holy  seed."    Holiness  signifies  separation, 
seclusion,  setting  apart.    IL  Our  main  point  is  to  prove  that  this  "  holy  seed  " 

IS,   IN  ANY  COMMUNITY  OR  CHURCH,   "  THE  SUBSTANCE  "   OF  IT.      The  holy  Seed 

is  the  substance  of  a  nation — 1.  Because  God  regards  all  beside  in  a  nation  but 
as  dross  and  foliage — dross  without  gold,  foliage  without  fruit.  2.  Because 
the  holy  seed  alone  diffuses  a  sanctifying,  a  saving  and  a  savouring  efficacy  upon 
the  land  in  which  it  is  found.  3.  Because  for  their  sakes  God  spares  a  guilty 
land  when  otherwise  His  whole  displeasure  would  be  allowed  to  rise  against  it 
(ch.  i.  9;  Gen.  xviii.  23,  &c).  4.  Because  the  holy  seed  are  the  spiritual  warders 
of  a  nation,  who  watch  with  prayer,  and  stand  in  the  breach  and  implore  God 
that  He  should  not  destroy  it.  (H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  The  holy  seed: — I.  Give 
a  description  of  the  remnant  spoken  of  in  the  text.  1.  A  remnant  is  a  small 
piece  taken  from  a  greater.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  remnant  separated  from 
the  rest  of  mankind.  2.  This  remnant  is  different  from  the  rest  of  mankind  in 
their  character.  3.  They  are  also  under  a  different  government.  4.  They  also 
stand  on  a  different  foundation.  5.  They  are  under  the  influence  of  another 
spirit.     6.  They  are  travelling  quite  a  different  road.     7.  They  come  to  a  different 


chap,  vi.]  ISAIAH.  203 

end.  II.  Show  why  they  are  called  a  seed.  Because — 1.  They  owe  their 
spiritual  origin  to  God.  2.  They  bear  His  likeness.  Aa  every  tree  bringeth 
forth  its  natural  fruit,  he  that  is  born  of  God  will  be  like  God.  3.  They  are  seed 
in  respect  to  their  dependence  on  God.  God  grafts  us  into  Jesus  Christ,  and  we 
are  therefore  dependent  upon  Him  for  nourishment  and  strength,  as  the  branch 
depends  on  the  stock  of  the  tree  for  support  and  sap  to  grow  thereby.  4.  Because 
they  are  of  the  family  of  God.  5.  Because  they  are  heirs  of  His  estate. 
III.  Show  why  they  are  called  a  "  holy  "  seed.  1.  They  are  holy  by 
sanctification.  They  are  set  apart.  2.  Because  of  their  purification.  3.  Because 
the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  them.  IV.  What  is  meant  by  this  seed  being 
denominated  the  "  substance  "  of  a  land  OR  church  T  1.  By  the  word  "  sub- 
stance "  I  think  the  prophet  means  treasure,  or  the  chief  part,  or  that  which 
constitutes  the  welfare  of  a  land — that  in  which  the  chief  excellency  or  support 
or  wealth  of  a  nation  consists.  This  is  true  of  the  people  of  God.  2.  Further, 
it  implies  that  they  are  God's  only  inheritance  in  the  world.  3.  This  seed  is  called 
a  substance  because  it  is  the  support  and  stay  of  a  land  or  a  church.     V.  Show 

IN  WHAT  RESPECT  THIS  SEED  MAY  BE  SAID  TO   BE  THE  STAY  AND  SUPPORT  OP  A 

land  OR  of  a  chubch.  For  their  sakes  ruining  calamities  are  withheld  from 
those  nations  which  deserve  to  be  visited  with  the  judgments  of  God  (Gen. 
xix.  22;  2  Sam.  v.  12;  Gen.  xxx.  27,  xxxix.  3;  Mai.  iii.  11).  This  remnant 
shall  be  the  strength  of  the  land  by  their  prayers  ( Jer.  xxix.  7 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  9). 
(T.  Bagnall- Baker,  M.A.)        The  present  obligations  of  pious  men: — I.  What  is 

THE   CONDUCT  WHICH  IT  NOW  BECOMES  PIOUS  MEN  TO   CULTIVATE   AND   DISPLAY. 

In  order  that  they  may  sustain  the  honourable  station  which  is  assigned  to 
them,  they  are  to  cultivate  and  display  certain  habits  of  thought  and  character 
appropriate  to  the  season  in  which  it  is  their  lot  to  live.  1.  Pious  men  should 
cultivate  and  display  uncompromising  separation  from  the  practical  wicked- 
ness  which  is  around  them.  2.  Pious  men  ought  to  cultivate  and  display  firm 
and  unwavering  attachment  to  the  cardinal  doctrines  of  the  Christian  faith. 
3.  Pious  men  ought  to  cultivate  and  display  cordial,  fraternal  attachment  towards 
each  other.  4.  Pious  men  ought  to  cultivate  and  display  zealous  exertion  for  the  ', 
promotion  of  Christian  truth  and  influence  throughout  the  land.    II.  What 

ARE  THE  RESULTS  WHICH,  FROM  THE  CULTIVATION  AND  DISPLAY  OP  THIS  CONDUCT,  ; 

may  be  properly  anticipated.  "  The  holy  seed  shall  be  the  substance  thereof." 
Pious  men  are  to  be  the  safeguards  of  the  national  interests ;  and  when  the  time 
of  calamity  has  passed,  those  interests  are  to  be  maintained  in  security  and  in 
honour.  God  preserves  nations  for  the  sake  of  the  pious  men  who  are  in  them, 
and  who  duly  display  and  vindicate  their  character.  1.  Observe  the  anticipated 
results  as  they  bear  upon  what  is  temporal  and  civil.  There  has  not  been  a 
dynasty  holding  the  reins  of  empire  since  genuine  Christianity  took  its  root  amongst 
us,  and  there  has  not  been  a  single  reign  of  any  one  of  those  dynasties,  but  what 
might  be  summoned,  as  affording  living  testimony  to  the  truth,  that  the  temporal 
interests  of  the  nation  have  been  bound  up  with  the  piety  of  its  people.  Pious 
men  will  preserve — (1)  The  order  of  our  land.  (2)  The  freedom  of  our  land. 
(3)  The  peace  of  our  land.  (4)  The  prosperity  and  honour  of  our  land.  2.  Notice 
the  anticipated  results  as  they  bear  upon  matters  spiritual  and  religious.  Here 
the  promise  is  more  distinct  and  the  consequences  are  more  palpable.  (1)  The 
defeat  and  destruction  of  erroneous  opinions  will  be  secured.  (2)  The  salvation 
of  multitudes  of  immortal  souls  will  be  secured.  (3)  Vastly  increased  facilities 
for  the  promotion  of  the  Saviour's  kingdom  throughout  the  earth  will  be  secured. 
Conclusion — 1.  The  vast  importance  of  being  numbered  amongst  the  "  holy  seed  " 
yourselves.  2.  Let  us  endeavour  to  arise  to  the  performance  of  our  obligations. 
(J.  Parsons.)  The  holy  seed  : — 1.  The  seed,  like  the  tithe,  is  but  little  in  respect 
of  the  rest  of  the  field.  Yet — 2.  It  is  a  numerous  seed,  absolutely  considered 
in  itself  (Rev.  vii.  9).  3.  It  is  an  honourable  seed.  4.  A  costly  seed  unto  our 
glorious  Redeemer.  5.  A  flourishing  and  fruitful  seed.  6.  A  troubled  and  perse- 
cuted seed  in  this  world.  7.  Yet  a  very  durable  seed  (Psa.  lxxxix.  28,  29). 
8.  In  this  world  a  scattered  seed.  9.  A  holy  seed.  {E.  Erskine.)  The  holy 
teed  the  substance  : — This  imports — 1.  That  the  wicked  of  a  land  are  but  a  heap 
of  lumber  in  God's  reckoning,  whatever  be  their  station,  quality,  or  estate. 
2.  That  the  saints,  the  truly  godly,  in  a  land  are  excellent  and  valuable  persons 
(Pea.  xvi.  3  ;  Prov.  xii.  26;  Rev.  iii.  4 ;  Heb.  xi.  38).  3.  That  the  saints  of 
God  are  His  inheritance  and  portion  in  a  land.  He  has  a  peculiar  right  and 
property  in  them  beyond  the  rest  of  mankind ;  they  are  so  much  His  that  they 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  to 


are  not  their  own,  and  therefore  have  not  power  to  dispose  of  themselves,  but 
for  His  glory.  4.  That  as  they  are  His  portion  and  property,  so  He  has  a  great 
deal  of  pleasure  in  them,  even  as  a  man  takes  delight  and  pleasure  in  that  which 
is  his  substance.  5.  That  there  is  something  in  and  about  the  godly  that  is  not 
to  be  found  among  other  men.  The  wicked,  when  laid  in  God's  balance,  are 
found  wanting  solidity ;  but  the  holy  seed  are  the  substance,  they  bear  weight. 
6.  That  the  remnant  of  truly  godly  in  a  land  are  the  riches  thereof,  for  a  man's 
riches  is  his  substance.  7.  That  the  truly  godly  are  the  stay  and  support  of  the 
land  where  they  live.  (Ibid.)  The  judgments  threatened  : — We  do  not  suppose 
that  the  prophet  means  to  say  that  all  the  wicked  men  will  be  removed  from 
captivity  and  the  good  men  only  left.  (See  on  the  contrary  Jer.  xxiv.  5-7.) 
He  is  dealing  with  the  nation  as  representing  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  means  to 
say  that  the  coming  judgments  will  weed  out  the  worldliness  and  carelessness  that 
prevail  at  present,  will  deepen  true  spiritual  religion  in  Israel,  and  fit  her  to  be 
the  centre  from  which  the  truth  and  grace  of  God  shall  go  forth  to  all  the  world. 
(P.  Thomson,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  VIL 


Vers.  1-9.  Rezin  .  .  .  and  Pekah  .  .  .  went  np  toward  Jerusalem  to  war 
against  it. — The  confederacy  against  Jerusalem: — The  reason  of  thi3  war  is 
not  stated :  but  from  the  desire  of  those  kings  to  dethrone  Ahaz,  and  place  on 
the  throne  in  Jerusalem  another,  even  Ben  Tabeal,  it  may  be  inferred  that  Ahaz 
refused  to  join  these  two  powers  in  a  general  rising  against  Assyria.  Obviously, 
Ahaz  was  well  advised  in  not  taking  a  step  of  such  decided  opposition  to  Nineveh  : 
for  had  he  done  so,  the  legions  of  that  empire  would  only  have  spread  desolation 
in  Judah  twenty  or  thirty  years  earlier  than  they  did.  To  a  certain  extent,  the 
policy  commended  by  Isaiah  was  adopted  :  Ahaz  did  not  take  up  his  stand  against 
Assyria.  The  prophet,  of  course,  wanted  more.  For  he  urged  an  absolute  and 
complete  neutrality,  in  which  Ahaz  would  have  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  this 
power.  So  far  as  Ahaz  acted  on  the  prophet's  advice,  he  was  successful:  for 
this  confederacy  against  Jerusalem  proved  a  failure.  (B.  Blake,  B.D.)  Aha* 
and  Isaiah,  a  contrast: — Ahaz  is  timid  and  helpless,  takes  no  position,  and  dis- 
plays no  promptitude  or  courage.  Isaiah,  on  the  contrary,  steps  forward  with 
assurance  :  he  is  collected  and  calm :  and  his  complete  control  of  the  political 
situation  impresses  us  forcibly.  (Prof.  8.  B.  Driver,  D.D.)  Isaiah's  interview 
with  Ahaz : — At  the  date  of  Isaiah's  interview  with  Ahaz  the  application 
to  Assyria  was  meditated,  but  not  actually  carried  into  effect.  To  understand 
this  interview  two  things  must  be  borne  in  mind.  Firstly,  Isaiah  is  aware  of 
the  king's  intention  to  solicit  aid  from  Assyria,  but  it  is  not  openly  admitted 
between  them.  Secondly,  the  power  and  resources  of  the  allied  kings,  especially 
of  Rezin,  so  impressed  the  popular  imagination  that  they  were  held  to  be 
practically  invincible ;  Isaiah  views  both  differently ;  describes  them  as  "  smoked 
out  firebrands,"  and  intimates  that  he  considers  the  terror  of  the  people  to  be 
unreasonable.  (Ibid.)  The  prophet  and  the  king: — God  speaks  comfort  to 
many  who  not  only  are  not  worthy  of  it,  but  do  not  so  much  as  inquire  after  it. 
(M.  Henry.)  Unsuccessful  attacks  upon  the  Christian  stronghold: — "We  can  do 
nothing  against  the  truth,  but  for  the  truth  "  :  clever  arguments,  witty  retorts, 
brilliant  repartees,  criticisms  that  dazzle  by  their  brightness  and  exasperate  by 
their  acerbity,  come  and  go,  and  Jerusalem  stands,  sunlit,  fair,  invincible. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Take  heed,  and  be  quiet. — Take  heed,  and  be  quiet : — That  is,  be  on 
your  guard  and  do  not  act  precipitately,  rather  keep  at  rest.     I.  A  warning 

AGAINST  SELF-WILLED  ACTING.     II.  AN  EXHORTATION  TO  UNDISMAYED  EQUANIMITY. 

(F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  true  attitude  of  life  : — This  is  the  attitude  we  should 
observe  in  all  this  human  life — on  the  one  hand,  vigilance,  determination,  earnest- 
ness  ;  and  on  the  other  silence,  resignation,  hope.  Just  as  we  observe  in  due 
proportion  the  active  and  passive  aspects  of  life  will  our  character  become  com- 
plete and  our  heart  find  rest.  I.  All  true  life  is  a  listening.  1.  "  Take  heed," 
i.e.,  be  attentive,  alert,  susceptible.     Light  will  not  come  to  careless,  inattentive 


chap,  vii.]  ISAIAH.  205 

souls.  We  must  hearken,  which  really  means  the  concentration  of  all  the  powers 
of  the  soul  that  we  may  detect  the  significance  of  things.  (1)  This  is  true  in 
relation  to  nature.  The  light  does  not  shine  into  our  soul  irrespective  of  our 
gazing;  the  secret  does  not  disclose  itself  to  us  irrespective  of  our  listening. 
(2)  This  is  true  in  relation  to  revelation.  The  Bible  is  a  great  whispering  gallery ; 
but  God's  whisper  is  often  lost  because  men  come  with  souls  full  of  noises,  or 
because  they  do  not  lend  their  ear  patiently  and  systematically.  (3)  It  is  so 
with  our  personal  life.  Our  personal  history  is  a  revelation  of  the  mind  of  God ; 
but  we  often  miss  the  precious  instructions.  2.  And  when  you  have  given  full 
place  to  observation  and  reflection,  "  be  quiet,"  for  you  will  find  plenty  of  room 
and  reason  for  suspense,  resignation,  silence.  When  you  have  carried  criticism 
to  its  final  limit,  see  that  no  place  is  left  in  your  heart  for  anxiety,  unbelief,  and 
despair.  II.  All  tktte  life  is  a  watching.  "  Take  heed."  Be  cautious, 
vigilant,  circumspect.  There  is  no  room  in  life  for  presumption.  But  when  we 
have  felt  the  need  of  earnest  prayer,  when  we  have  cultivated  the  habit  of  prayer- 
ful watchfulness,  let  us  "  be  quiet."  Many  Christians  feel  the  need  of  walking 
softly,  of  being  on  the  alert,  their  soul  is  full  of  solemn  caution  ;  but  they  never 
know  how  to  combine  with  this  that  strong  confidence  in  God  which  brings  the 
sensitive  heart  assurance  and  peace.  Let  us  remember  that  when  we  have  done 
our  best  God  will  do  the  rest.  III.  All  true  life  is  a  striving.  "  Take  heed." 
Life  must  be  full  of  effort,  aspiration,  strenuousness,  perseverance.  The  policy 
of  many  is  the  policy  of  drift.  But  this  is  not  the  true  idea  of  life.  We  are 
perpetually  called  upon  to  consider,  to  discriminate,  to  decide,  to  act.  And  yet 
with  all  this  we  are  to  be  "  quiet."  Calm  amid  tumult,  tranquil  in  severest 
effort,  full  of  peace  and  confidence  when  life  is  most  difficult  and  denying.  Let 
us  remember  this — (1)  In  all  our  worldly  life.  God  has  not  promised  the  things 
of  this  life  to  the  lazy.  We  must  be  earnest,  discreet,  economical,  prudent,  pains- 
taking. But  when  we  have  done  our  best  to  provide  honest  things  we  must  be 
quiet.  No  painful,  misgiving  thoughts  or  words.  (2)  In  all  our  religious  life. 
We  shall  never  moon  and  dream  ourselves  into  spiritual  knowledge,  strength, 
beauty,  completeness.  But  having  given  ourselves  to  God's  service  and  glory 
with  a  single,  purposeful  heart,  let  us  for  the  rest  "  be  quiet."  ( W.  L.  Watkinson.) 
"  The  crooked  serpent "  / — True  rationalism  not  only  investigates,  but  is  cautious, 
reticent,  patient,  hopeful.     Much  about  us  is  very  mysterious  and  bewildering. 

1.  It  is  so  with  nature.  Ages  ago  the  patriarch  Job  found  this  out.  "  By  His 
Spirit  He  hath  garnished  the  heavens ;  His  hand  hath  formed  the  crooked  serpent." 
"  Garnished  the  heavens  !  " — that  we  can  understand,  that  we  can  admire.  The 
vast,  the  balanced,  the  magnificent,  the  beautiful,  the  benign — this  is  what  we 
expected  from  the  wise  and  generous  Source  of  all  things.  "  His  hand  hath 
formed  the  crooked  serpent."  Nature  contains  the  mean,  the  unharmonious, 
the  dark,  the  grotesque,  the  bloody  ;  and  this  we  did  not  expect.  The  thoughtful 
man  is  sorely  puzzled  in  the  presence  of  these  confusions  and  contradictions. 

2.  It  is  so  with  revelation.  We  are  often  greatly  delighted  with  the  contents 
of  the  Bible.  It  is  a  firmament  full  of  stars  of  light,  speaking  to  us  eloquently 
of  the  glory  of  God.  We  cry  with  rapture  as  we  scan  successive  constellations 
which  gleam  with  truth  and  love  and  righteousness.  "  By  His  Spirit  Ha 
hath  garnished  the  heavens."  But  it  is  not  long  before  the  problems  of  nature 
reappear  in  revelation ;  there  are  teachings  obscure  and  painful,  in  fact,  the  crooked 
serpent  wriggles  across  the  page.  People  who  read  cursorily  and  think  loosely 
may  glide  over  such  pages,  but  thoughtful  souls  are  often  sorely  troubled.  3.  It 
is  the  same  in  our  personal  history.  There  are  times  in  our  life  when  all  things 
go  smoothly  with  us — our  health  is  good,  in  business  we  are  in  the  swim,  we  are 
socially  popular,  and,  full  of  gratitude  and  thanksgiving,  we  wonder  how  anybody 
can  ever  be  fretful,  or  call  into  question  the  government  of  God  ;  we  feel  that 
the  Spirit  that  garnished  the  heavens  has  brought  order  and  beauty  into  our 
persona]  lot.  But  soon  circumstances  change  :  our  health  fails,  we  are  called 
to  attend  two  or  three  creditors'  meetings,  our  popularity  wanes  ;  and  then  we 
are  staggered,  and  begin  to  ask  sceptical  questions  touching  the  ways  of  heaven. 
What  is  the  matter  ?  The  crooked  serpent  crawls  across  our  path  of  roses.  Now 
what  are  we  to  do  when  these  dark  enigmas  reward  our  study,  when  we  witness 
the  contradictions  of  nature,  the  tragedy  of  history,  when  we  endure  the  pathos 
of  our  own  life  ?  Are  we  to  take  refuge  in  scepticism,  cynicism,  despair  ?  Surely 
not.  "Be  quiet."  (Ibid.)  A  New  Year's  motto: — I.  A  word  of  catttion. 
"Take  heed."     It  is  as  though  Isaiah  called  a  halt ;  as  though,  to  use  another 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vii 

metaphor,  he  swung  the  red  light  in  front  of  the  rushing  train,  as  though  he  put 
a  detonator  on  the  rails  in  the  time  of  mist  and  fog.  Saith  he,  "  Take  heed  ; 
you  are  very  busily  preparing,  your  mind  is  filled  with  a  multitude  of  thoughts." 
He  does  not  speak  ill  of  these  preparations  and  these  plans,  but  he  does  6ay, 
"  Proceed  with  caution ;  look  before  you  leap,  think  before  you  act.  Do  nothing 
till  you  have  thought  it  over  and  prayed  about  it.  You  will  discover,  Ahaz, 
that  whereas  some  of  your  precautions  are  legitimate,  others  of  them  are  dis- 
honouring to  God  and  to  the  throne  of  David."  Well  now,  is  there  not  a  word 
for  you  and  for  me  just  here  ?  Take  heed  ! — do  not  rush  blindly  on,  wait  to  be 
guided,  slip  your  hand  into  God's.  Ye  people  of  God,  take  heed  !  Worldliness 
is  gradually  creeping  into  the  Church  and  fastening  its  fangs  upon  her.  Doctrine 
of  all  sorts  is  at  a  discount,  except  false  doctrine.  Take  heed  lest  you  sip  of  the 
poisoned  cup  or  ever  you  are  aware.  And  ye  shepherds  of  the  flock,  take  heed ! 
Ministers  are  too  busy  nowadays  "  getting  up  "  this,  that,  and  the  other.  Be  it 
ours  to  bring  the  blessing  down.  Sunday-school  teachers,  take  heed  that  you 
do  not  merely  amuse  or  only  instruct  the  children.  Win  them  for  Christ.  Take 
heed,  ye  who  profess  to  follow  Jesus  !  Look  where  you  are  going ;  ponder  the 
paths  of  your  steps.  II.  Then  thb  prophet  recommended  quiet.  Be  quiet." 
It  is  not  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  be  quiet,  especially  when  there  are  two 
confederate  armies  coming  up  against  you.  It  is  ever  easier  to  assault  than  to 
"  sit  tight."  I  do  not  believe  there  is  anything  that  more  honours  our  holy 
religion  than  self-possession  in  the  time  of  stress  and  storm.  It  is  then  that  the 
worldling  says,  "  Why,  I  could  not  do  that ! "  What  is  the  secret  of  that  wonder- 
ful composure  T  The  secret  is  God.  That  heart  is  kept  quiet  that  is  stayed 
on  Him.  III.  Then  Isaiah  says,  "  Fear  not."  He  has  spoken  of  the  outward 
attitude  and  action ;  now  he  refers  to  the  inward  emotion.  Know  you  not  that 
fear  is  fatal  T  I  suppose  that,  humanly  speaking,  almost  as  many  people  die  of 
fear  as  of  anything  else.  Many  of  our  best  hopes  are  thwarted,  not  because 
there  was  any  real  necessity  they  should  suffer  so,  but  because  we  were  afraid 
from  the  first  that  they  would.  Many  of  our  high  ambitions  come  to  nought 
because  we  were  never  very  confident  that  they  would  have  any  other  ending. 
If  the  work  be  of  God,  trust  God  to  see  it  through.  We  may  have  our  fears,  but 
we  must  not  cherish  them.  There  were  words  of  cheer  accompanying  this  message. 
The  prophet  said,  "  These  great  flaming  firebrands  that  you  fear  are  going  out. 
Already  they  are  smoking.  They  are  only  the  tails  of  firebrands.  A  little  patience 
and  you  will  see  an  end  of  this  trouble."  We  do  not  ask  a  sign  of  God  that  He 
will  give  us  the  victory  in  our  warfare,  and  success  in  our  work  for  Him.  He  gives 
it  without  asking.  We  would  believe  without  a  sign.  "  Blessed  are  they  that 
have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."  But  if  God  offers  us  a  sign  we  do  not 
refuse  it.  Ahaz  did.  He  said — suddenly  posing  as  a  saint — "  No,  I  will  not 
tempt  God."  When  God  offers  ns  a  sign  it  is  not  reverence  to  refuse  it ;  it  is 
gross  irreverence.  But  He  has  granted  us  the  best  sign  of  all,  the  sign  to  which 
I  do  not  doubt  that  Isaiah  made  reference.  Christ  has  come ;  nay,  God  has 
come,  for  Christ  is  God.  "  li  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shaD  not  be  estab- 
lished." John  Bunyan  used  to  call  unbelief  a  white  devil.  (T.  Spurgeon.) 
Tails  of  smoking  firebrands  : — The  two  allies  are  at  once  designated  as  what  they 
are  before  God,  who  sees  through  things  in  the  future.  They  are  two  tails,  i.e., 
nothing  but  the  fag-ends  of  wood  pokers,  half-burned  off  and  wholly  burned 
out,  so  that  they  do  not  burn  any  longer,  but  only  still  keep  smoking.  (F. 
Delitzsch.)  Caution  with  confidence: — Life  is  danger.  The  more  precious 
anything  is  the  more  enemies  it  has.  You  rarely  see  any  lice  on  the  wild  rose  in 
the  hedgerow,  but  the  prize  rose  in  the  garden  will  soon  be  covered  with  them  if 
the  gardener  remits  his  severe  attention  ;  crab-apple  trees  on  a  common  may 
be  left  with  confidence  to  take  care  of  themselves,  but  the  husbandman  must 
watch  by  night  and  day  an  orchard  full  of  sweetness.  Man  has  the  most  enemies 
of  all,  they  swarm  on  every  hand,  he  walks  in  jeopardy  every  hour.  But  we 
often  forget  all  this  and  act  with  strange  heedlessness.  Awhile  ago,  from  the 
flowery  cliffs,  I  was  watching  the  beautiful  gulls  as  they  flashed  between  the  sun 
and  the  sea  uttering  cries  of  joy,  when  some  wretched  sportsmen  appeared  on 
the  scene  and  began  to  fire  at  the  lovely  creatures.  I  thought  that  at  the  first 
shot  the  birds  would  have  vanished  into  space,  but,  strangely  enough,  as  if  they 
were  enchanted,  they  continued  to  whirl  around  the  very  focus  of  destruction. 
Fortunately,  they  were  not  hit,  the  marksmen's  aim  was  as  bad  as  their  temper ; 
but  at  any  moment  the  glorious  birds  might  have  dropped,  shattered,  bloody 


chap,  vn.3  ISAIAH.  207 

things,  into  the  sea.  It  is  very  much  the  same  with  men.  They  go  negligently, 
presumptuously,  although  moral  dangers  are  thicker  than  all  other  dangers,  and 
any  moment  might  see  the  glory  and  hope  of  life  quenched  in  midnight  darkness. 
(Jr.  L.    Watkmson.)  Morbid  nervousness: — We  all    know   suspicious    souls 

whose  nervousness  gives  them  not  a  moment  of  peace.  If  they  are  going  on  a 
railway  journey,  they  anxiously  look  out  for  the  middle  compartment  of  the 
middle  carriage,  fancying  that  the  safest  place,  and  there  is  no  telling  how  many 
trains  they  miss  looking  for  that  carriage  ;  if  they  are  in  the  country,  they  will 
not  drink  a  drop  of  milk  until  they  have  ascertained  whether  the  foot  and  mouth 
disease  has  been  in  that  district ;  and  at  the  railway  station  they  cross-examine 
the  driver  to  know  whether  he  has  conveyed  in  that  cab  any  passenger  having  an 
infectious  malady.  Now,  if  you  once  give  way  to  a  morbid  nervousness  of  this 
sort,  there  is  positively  no  end  to  the  thing,  and  every  bit  of  comfort  is  taken 
out  of  life.  (Ibid.)  Ood  the  sure  Protector  of  His  people  : — The  sensible  voyager 
lays  his  head  on  the  pillow  and  goes  to  sleep,  although  the  gleaming  teeth  of 
sharks  are  only  a  few  inches  away;    the  thickness  of  the  plank  or  plate  is 

Jiractically  the  thickness  of  a  planet :  and  although  hell  is  always  nigh, 
et  us  remember  that  God  is  still  nigher,  and  that  a  bit  of  tissue  paper  in  His 
hands  is  the  munition  of  rooks  to  those  who  trust  in  Him.  (Ibid.)  Vigilance 
and  gladness: — The  bird  on  the  branch  is  intensely  sensitive  and  tremulous; 
it  looks  around,  above,  beneath;  all  the  world  might  be  a  fowler,  a  snare,  a 
cat,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  it  goes  on  pouring  out  its  happy  soul  in  music. 
Let  us  be  like  it  in  watchfulness  and  gladness.  (Ibid.)  Morbid  introspec- 
tion:— When  I  was  a  growing  lad  I  was  always  measuring  myself  to  see  how 
much  I  had  gained  every  week  or  two.  Sometimes  there  was  a  distinct  gain, 
and  then  another  testing  seemed  to  indicate  that  I  was  standing  still ;  so  I  fed 
my  hopes  and  fears.  But  I  did  very  well  on  the  whole,  and  it  would  have  been 
a  great  deal  better  if  I  had  let  the  measuring-tape  alone  and  attended  to  my 
learning  and  my  business.  Do  not  afflict  your  souls  with  morbid  solicitudes. 
(Ibid.)  Ood' 8  contempt  for  Rezin  and  Pekah: — God  will  have  those  in  derision 
who  set  their  shoulders  against  His  throne  for  the  purpose  of  overturning  it. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Harmfulness  of  fear  : — There  is  a  legend  which  is  in  itself 
instructive  concerning  the  time  of  plague  in  a  certain  Eastern  city,  to  the  effect 
that  20,000  people  having  died  therein,  a  traveller  entering  the  gates  spoke  to 
the  plague  as  it  was  leaving,  and  said,  "  I  understand  that  you  have  slain  20,000 
people  within  these  walls."  "  No,"  said  the  plague,  "  I  have  slain  but  10,000 ; 
the  rest  have  died  of  fear."  It  is  an  instructive  story.  (T.  Spurgeon.)  Injur  • 
ious  struggling  /^-Once  I  remember  I  picked  up  a  small  bird  which  had  fallen 
on  the  pavement  by  my  feet.  I  sought  to  reinstate  it  among  the  branches  over- 
head ;  but  the  creature  could  not  appreciate  my  generosity,  and  with  passionate 
eagerness  struggled  to  escape.  I  began  unconsciously  to  talk  aloud  to  it,  "  Poor, 
silly  thing ;  why  do  you  not  trust  your  best  friend  T  All  I  want  is  to  get  you 
up  again  in  the  fork  of  the  tree.  You  are  making  it  harder  for  me,  by  dashing  so 
against  my  fingers  ;  for  I  am  obliged  to  hold  you  firmly,  and  you  do  all  the 
hurting  yourself."  Why  is  it  we  all  struggle  so,  when  the  Lord  is  giving  us  help  ? 
(G.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Be  quiet  : — Phoebe  Simpson  said  to  Ellice  Hopkins, 
"I  think,  miss,  religion  is  doing  things  still."  Stillness  of  spirit  is  like  the 
canvas,  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  draw  His  various  graces  upon.  (Dr.  Love.) 
The  happy  people  are  calm : — The  really  and  substantially  happy  people  in 
the  world  are  always  calm  and  quiet.  (Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson.) 
Christian  serenity : — The  child  of  God  should  live  above  the  world,  moving 
through  it,  as  some  quiet  star  moves  through  the  blue  sky,— clear,  and  serene, 
and  still.    (Hetty  Bowman.) 

Ver.  9.  If  ye  will  not  believe,  Barely  ye  shall  not  be  established.—  Faith 
in  the  Divine  Word  and  promises  the  alone  ground  of  the  believer's  establishment 
and  happiness : — There  are  only  two  sources  from  which  human  hope  or 
happiness  can  be  derived,  and  these  are  sense  and  faith.  I.  Sensb  as  thb 
boubob  of  human  HAPPtNESs.  It  is  self-evident  from  the  history  of  what 
is  past  and  from  observation  and  experience  of  what  is  present  that, 
amidst  all  the  enjoyments,  whether  more  gross  or  more  refined,  the  objects 
of  sense  can  possibly  furnish  to  flatter  or  gratify  the  passions,  nothing  is  to  be 
found  that  can  give  establishment  to  the  numan  heart,  or  settle  and  compose 
the  restless  spirit.    There  are  three  things  which  render  it  impossible  that  any 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

mere  worldly  object  or  pursuit  should  render  us  happy.  1.  The  difficulty  of 
acquiring  what,  in  imagination  or  forethought,  we  have  placed  our  happiness 
upon,  and  in  the  possession  of  which  we  have  fondly  dreamed  of  enjoying  all 
that  our  hearts  could  desire.  2.  When  with  infinite  labour  we  seem  to  have 
surmounted  every  difficulty  and  to  have  gained  the  point  we  had  in  view,  our 
promised  happiness  is  snatched  from  us  in  a  moment,  and  we  feel  our  disappoint- 
ment and  distress  rendered  more  poignant  from  the  flattering  prospects  that 
lay  before  us,  and  the  ideal  estimate  we  had  formed  of  what  we  have  lost. 
3.  But  let  us  suppose  that  we  could  acquire  with  ease,  and  enjoy  with  security, 
for  a  limited  time — to  our  dying  day — the  objects  we  so  eagerly  pursue ;  how 
do  we  know  that  we  shall  preserve  our  relish  for  them  ?  "  Our  very  wishes  give 
us  not  our  wish."     II.  Faith  alone  holds  forth  those  objects  that  can 

ESTABLISH    THE   HUMAN    HEART    OR    QUIET    THE    RESTLESS    SPIRIT.       Nothing    Can 

give  establishment  to  the  mind  of  man  but  what  can  effectually  remove  the 
cause  of  our  present  disordered  state  and  prove  a  never-failing  source  of  inward 
peace  and  self -enjoyment.  1.  What  is  the  cause  of  this  disorder ;  of  this  dis- 
quietude and  restlessness,  amidst  all  the  objects  of  sense ;  of  this  vacancy  of 
the  human  mind,  amidst  all  the  profusion  of  nature  ?  The  cause  is  evidently 
a  departure  from  the  original  constitution  of  our  nature.  For  no  creature 
can  be  unhappy,  continuing  in  that  state  in  which  he  was  placed  by  perfect 
wisdom  and  goodness.  2.  The  remedy  which  faith  provides  for  the  cure  of  this 
evil.  It  directs  us  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  manifested  without  the  law, 
being  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  prophets ;  even  the  righteousness  of  God 
which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all  and  upon  all  that  believe ;  for  there 
is  no  difference.  The  doctrine  that  holds  forth  a  finished  salvation  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  as  the  alone  ground  of  a  believer's  hope,  is,  of  all  others,  the 
best  fitted  to  beget  not  only  a  humble  submission,  but  a  cheerful  resignation 
to  our  gracious  Lord  in  the  various  allotments  of  His  providence  concerning 
us.  Who  that  believeth  all  this  with  all  his  heart  could  for  a  moment  enter- 
tain a  doubt  that  his  bodily  and  temporal  concerns  would  be  safe  in  His 
hands?  (T.  Gordon.)  Stability  through  faith: — 1.  The  promises  of  God  are 
not  at  all  times  easily,  steadily,  and  firmly  believed.  2.  God,  in  the  communica- 
tion of  His  Word,  does  not  regard  us  as  mere  machines.  The  Word  cannot 
{wofit  unless  it  be  mixed  with  faith  in  those  who  hear  it.  In  the  Christian's 
ife  there  are  three  kinds  of  stability.  I.  There  is  a  stability  of  judgment. 
This  regards  the  truths  of  religion.  It  is  of  great  importance  to  have  a  judgment 
clear  and  fixed  as  it  respects  the  great  concerns  of  the  soul  and  eternity,  and 
the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ ;  for  as  we  think  we  feel,  as  we  feel  we  desire, 
as  we  desire  we  act,  and  as  we  act  our  characters  are  formed,  and  our  conditions 
determined.  There  are  some  things  in  revelation  concerning  which  a  man's 
mind,  so  to  speak,  need  not  be  made  up.  Little  or  no  injury  will  arise  from  his 
hesitation  or  suspense.  But  this  is  not  the  case  with  all.  There  are  some  things 
which  must  be  fundamental,  and  therefore  sustain  others ;  and  according  to 
the  firmness  of  the  foundation  will  be  the  firmness  of  the  whole  superstructure. 
Now  what  is  to  lead  us  into  this  stability  but  faith  ?  It  cannot  be  human 
authority  among  men.  What  oae  patronises  another  denies,  and  here  you  would 
soon  find  yourself  like  a  man  in  a  labyrinth,  who  on  this  side  and  on  that  is  calling 
out,  "  Is  this  the  way  ?  "  and  knows  not  what  direction  to  take  with  safety 
and  comfort.  Or,  if  you  depend  upon  reason,  this  may  do  something  from 
observation  and  analogy ;  but  if  you  receive  the  revelation  of  God  only  as  far 
as  you  can  understand  it,  you  will  make  your  faith  commensurate  with  your 
knowledge.  Thus  obstructions  and  difficulties  will  arise  continually,  and  you 
will  be  strangers  to  all  satisfaction  and  repose.  No,  we  must  believe  all  that 
the  Lord  has  spoken  to  us  in  His  Word,  and  because  He  has  spoken  it.  "  I  had 
a  little  talent  and  a  little  learning,"  said  Dr.  Watts  before  his  death ;  "  but  now 
I  lay  them  all  aside,  and  endeavour  to  receive  the  Gospel  as  the  poor  and  unlearned 
receive  it."  II.  There  is  a  stability  of  practice.  This  regards  the  duties 
of  religion.  By  faith  we  stand.  In  order  to  see  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the 
sentiment  contained  in  our  text,  let  us  place  the  believer  in  three  positions.  1.  In 
a  place  of  secrecy.  When  alone,  how  do  we  act  ?  Faith  is  a  principle  that  always 
operates  alike  upon  the  mind,  i.e.,  its  motives  are  the  same  in  private  as  in  public. 
Faith  shows  us  the  future  and  eternal  consequences  of  our  actions.  Faith 
brings  God  and  places  Him  before  us.  Hence  the  closet  is  visited  as  the  temple. 
The  good  fight  of  faith  is  carried  on  amidst  many  struggles,  unobserved  by  any 


chap,  vii.]  ISAIAH.  209 

human  being,  but  all  well  known  to  Him  who  is  the  Captain  of  our  salvation. 
2.  In  cases  of  prosperity  and  indulgence.  How  easily  is  a  person  drawn  aside 
from  the  path  of  duty  by  the  honour  which  cometh  from  men,  by  a  regard  to 
the  friendship  of  this  world,  or  by  earthly  riches  !  We  are  therefore  told  that 
the  prosperity  of  fools  destroys  them.  But  the  believer  in  Christ  is  not  a  fool : 
faith  makes  him  wise  unto  salvation,  wise  both  for  time  and  eternity.  "  This 
is  tk©  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  3.  In  a  condition 
of  suffering  and  danger.  What  an  agonising  trial  was  Abraham  called  to 
endure,  when  God  bade  him  take  his  only  son  Isaac,  whom  he  loved,  and  offer 
him  up  for  a  burnt-offering  1  yet  faith  enabled  him  to  do  it.  Moses  had  a  hard 
task  to  accomplish,  when  he  went  and  stood  before  Pharaoh,  but  we  are  told, 
"  he  had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward  " ;  "  by  faith  he  forsook 
Egypt,  not  fearing  the  wrath  of  the  king,  for  he  endured  as  seeing  Him  who  is 
invisible."  And  how  was  it  with  Daniel  T  There  was  something  dreadful  in 
being  cast  into  the  den  of  lions ;  but  what  was  this  to  a  man  who  saw  that  God 
would  shut  the  lions'  mouths,  so  that  they  should  not  hurt  him  T  What  was  this 
to  a  man  who  by  faith  heard  the  voice  of  Him  who  said,  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them 
that  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do ;  but  fear  Him 
who  is  able  to  destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell ;  yea,  I  say  unto  you,  fear  Him." 
Faith  also  views  the  Saviour  as  acting  and  a3  suffering  for  us.  III.  There  is 
a  stability  OP  hope.  This  regards  the  comforts  of  religion.  How  is  it  that 
Christians  can  rejoice  amidst  their  sorrows  ?  The  Scripture  assigns  the  reason 
when  it  tells  us  of  the  joy  of  faith.  Faith  appropriates.  (W.  Jay.)  Isaiah's 
commission  and  King  Ahaz  : — Isaiah  had  a  very  heavy  commission  from  God. 
He  was  to  go  and  speak  to  people  who  would  not  hear  him,  and  to  be  to  them  a 
messenger  rather  of  death  than  of  life.  Though  the  message  itself  would  be  full 
of  life,  yet  they  would  refuse  it,  and  so  bring  upon  themselves  a  tenfold  death. 
As  a  sort  of  experiment  in  his  work,  he  was  called  upon  first  to  go  and  speak  to 
King  Ahaz,  that  wicked  king.  He  knew  in  his  own  soul  that  what  he  had  to  say 
would  be  rejected ;  but,  nevertheless,  at  the  command  of  God,  he  went  to  speak 
to  the  king.  He  was  told  where  he  would  meet  him.  God  knows  where  to  send 
His  faithful  servants.  He  knows  how  to  adapt  the  message  with  great  speciality 
to  the  individual  case  of  each  person  who  is  within  sound  of  the  preacher's  voice; 
and  He  knows  how  to  adapt  even  the  voice  itself  to  the  ear  of  every  hearer. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  No  fixity  without  faith : — These  words  furnish  us  with  a  warn- 
ing and  an  encouragement.  L  God  desebves  to  be  believed.  1.  He  is  God ; 
and  being  God,  He  cannot  lie.  2.  His  Word  always  has  been  true.  3.  He  has 
no  motive  for  being  untrue.  4.  The  honour  of  God  is  involved  in  His  veracity. 
6.  Suppose  even  for  a  moment  that  we  could  not  trust  in  the  truthfulness  of  God, 
what  would  be  left  for  us  to  trust  to  ?  When  rocks  move,  what  stands  firm  ? 
EL  Some  are  not  willing;  to  believe  God.  That  is  clear  by  the  fear  expressed 
in  the  text :  "If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not  be  established."  Believ- 
ing is  a  matter  of  the  will.  God's  grace  works  faith,  not  upon  us,  but  in  us.  God 
works  in  us  to  will  and  to  do ;  and  in  the  willing  He  leads  us  up  to  believing. 
We  voluntarily  believe ;  and  certainly  men  voluntarily  disbelieve.  Why  is  this, 
this  strange  unwillingness  of  some  men,  nay,  in  a  sense  of  all  men,  to  believe  in 
God  ?  1.  They  are  willing  to  believe  other  things.  2.  Another  thing  is  significant, 
that  men  cling  tenaciously  to  faith  in  themselves.  3.  Instead  of  believing 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life,  some  prefer  an  emotional  religion. 
4.  Some  stubbornly  suffer  under  unbelief.  5.  I  notice,  too,  that  such  people 
demand  this  and  that  of  God,  beyond  what  He  ha3  revealed.  III.  Faith  is  not 
a  thing  to  bb  despised.  Have  you  never  heard  people  say,  "  Oh,  they  preach 
np  faith,  you  know  "  ?  "  Well,  what  is  faith  ?  "  "  Well,  it  is  just  believing 
so-and-so."  Faith  is  a  most  wonderful  thing,  for — 1.  It  is  a  fair  index  of  the  heart. 
2.  A  sure  proof  of  a  change  of  mind.  3.  It  inaugurates  purity  of  life.  4.  It  is 
faith  that  leads  to  prayer,  and  prayer  is  the  very  breath  of  God  in  man.  5.  It  is 
faith  that  glorifies  God.  IV.  Those  who  refuse  to  exebcise  faith  will  miss 
many  great  privileges.  I  might  mention  many,  but  the  text  gives  us  the 
one  which  I  will  dwell  upon :  "  If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not  be 
established."  1.  It  means,  first,  that  those  who  believe  not  will  miss  establish- 
ment in  comfort.  2.  Ye  shall  never  enjoy  establishment  in  judgment.  There 
are  many  persons  who  do  not  know  what  to  believe ;  they  heard  one  man  the 
other  day,  and  they  thought  that  he  spoke  very  cleverly,  and  they  agreed  with 
him.     They  heard  another  the  next  day,  who  was  rather  more  clever,  and  he 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tu 

went  the  other  way,  so  they  went  with  him.  Poor  souls,  driven  to  and  fro, 
never  knowing  what  is  what!  "If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not  be 
established " ;  you  shall  be  like  the  moon,  that  is  never  two  days  alike ;  you 
shall  seem  to  believe  this,  and  to  believe  that,  and  yet  really  believe 
nothing.  3.  Next,  we  want  an  establishment  in  conduct.  4.  So  it  is  also 
with  establishment  in  hope.  5.  We  want  to  be  established  in  spiritual  vigour 
and  strength.  (Ibid.)  The  principle  of  true  permanence  is  here  shown  to  be 
a  holding  of  Divine  truth.  "  He  who  confides  in  God  will  abide."  (B.  Blake, 
B.D.)  Holding  and  being  held: — If  Judah  does  not  hold  fast  to  his  God,  he 
will  lose  his  fast  hold  by  losing  the  country  in  which  he  dwells,  the  ground  beneath 
his  feet.  (J?.  Delitzsch.)  Ahaz  a  representative  of  double-mindedness  : — Ahaz 
was  a  mixed  character.  He  has  been  convicted  in  history  of  being  an  idolater 
as  well  as  a  professor  of  the  true  religion.  He  was  therefore  the  representative 
of  double- mindedness,  a  halting  between  two  opinions,  that  double-mindedness 
which  is  unstable,  and  which  cannot  excel.  Probably  Isaiah,  marking  the 
workings  of  his  countenance  under  the  delivery  of  this  communication,  saw  signs 
of  fear,  doubt,  hesitancy:  the  king  did  not  spring  at  the  word  with  access  of 
energy  and  with  the  confidence  of  inspiration ;  so  the  prophet,  quick  to  detect 
all  facial  signs,  blessed  with  the  insight  that  follows  the  spirit  in  all  its 
withdrawment,  said  instantly,  "If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not  be 
established."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Unbelief  undermines  character  : — To  take  an 
illustration  from  architecture,  materialism  cuts  out  the  foundation  of  the  soul- 
structure  just  where  the  strain  comes.  We  are  told  that  the  lamentable  disaster 
to  the  Campanile  of  St.  Mark's  at  Venice  was  due  to  the  action  of  the  Loggia 
architects  in  cutting  out  the  stone  coping  in  its  whole  length,  thus  making  a  wound 
on  the  side,  where  the  pressure  was  severest,  half  a  yard  deep  and  half  a  yard 
high.  If  this  be  true,  it  is  not  remarkable  that  the  massive  tower  came  down 
bodily.  Neither  is  the  downfall  of  many  a  man  remarkable  to  us  when  we  come 
to  know  how  his  faith  in  God  had  been  utterly  destroyed.  (Sunday  School 
Chronicle.)  The  power  of  faith : — Lord  Wolseley  said,  "  Give  me  20,000 
fanatics  and  I  would  march  across  Europe."  Grotius,  in  describing  the  success 
of  the  Dutch  in  snapping  the  Spanish  yoke,  gives  this  as  the  secret  of  their  prowess, 
"  Believing  that  they  could  do  it  they  did  it."     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  11.  Ask  thee  a  sign  of  the  Lord  thy  God. — God's  grace  towards  the 
toayward: — Jehovah  does  not  scorn  to  call  Himself  the  God  of  this  son  of 
David  who  so  hardens  himself.  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  A  critical  moment : — 
In  this  hour  when  Isaiah  stands  before  Ahaz,  the  fate  of  the  Jewish  people  is 
decided  for  more  than  two  thousand  years.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  12.  Bat  Ahaz  said,  I  will  not  ask. — Why  did  Ahaz  refuse  to  ask  a 
sign? — Ahaz,  who  looked  on  Jehovah  not  as  his  God,  but  only  (like  any  of 
his  heathen  neighbours)  as  the  god  of  Judaea,  and  as  such  inferior  to  the 
god  of  Assyria,  and  who  had  determined  to  apply  to  the  King  of  Assyria,  or 
perhaps  had  already  applied  to  him  as  a  more  trustworthy  helper  than  Jehovah 
in  the  present  strait,  declines  to  ask  a  sign,  excusing  himself  by  a  canting  use 
of  the  words  of  Moses,  "  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  Jehovah."  He  refused  the  sign, 
because  he  knew  it  would  confirm  the  still  struggling  voice  of  his  conscience ; 
and  that  voice  he  had  resolved  not  to  obey,  since  it  bade  him  give  up  the  Assyrian, 
and  trust  in  Jehovah  henceforth.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  A  secret  disaffec- 
tion to  God  is  often  disguised  with  the  specious  colours  of  respect  to  Him.  (M. 
Henry.)  Making  a  decision  : — How  often  men,  like  Ahaz,  arrive  at  decisions 
which  are  irrevocable  and  unspeakably  momentous  !  1.  To  have  to  make  deci- 
sions that  may  be  solemn  in  both  these  senses  is  one  of  the  things  that  make 
the  position  of  a  ruler  or  statesman  so  serious.  2.  Every  man  is  at  some  juncture 
called  to  make  a  decision,  the  results  of  which  to  him  individually  will  be  of 
unspeakable  importance ;  e.g.,  the  young  ruler.  Every  one  of  you  will  at  some 
moment  be  called  to  decide  for  or  against  Christ,  and  the  decision  will  be  final 
and  irreversible.  The  test  may  come  to  you  in  the  shape  of  a  temptation, 
appealing  to  some  passion  of  the  mind  or  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  your  eternal 
destiny  may  be  determined  by  the  manner  in  which  you  deal  with  that  one 
temptation.  3.  Like  a  railway-train  we  are  continually  arriving  at  "  points," 
and  the  manner  in  which  we  "  take "  them  affects  our  whole  after  career. 
(R.  A.  Bertram.) 


chap,  vn.]  ISAIAH.  211 

Ver.  13.  Is  it  a  email  thing-  for  you  to  weary  men,  but  will  ye  weary 
my  God  also  ? —  Wearying  God  : — The  work  and  experience  of  the  prophet 
and  the  Gospel  minister  in  dealing  with  men  are  similar.  I.  It  is  no  small  sin 
to  weary  God's  prophets  and  preachers.  They  are  His  ambassadors. 
II.  It  is  infinitely  worse  to  weary  God,  whose  hand  holds  their  life  and 
destiny.  God  is  patient.  This  is  evident  from  Scripture  and  observation. 
(Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9.)  Consider  also  the  history  of  nations  and 
individuals  and  of  our  own  life.  III.  God's  patience  may  be  wearied  out  by 
indifference,  obstinacy,  procrastination,  backsliding.  The  sinner  is  in  present 
danger  of  doing  this.  Others  have  done  it  in  Scripture  and  history.  Application — 
The  axe  is  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree ;  make  haste  to  repent.  (Homiletic  Review. ) 
Wearying  God  : — Ahaz  refused  to  ask  a  sign,  probably  wishing  to  avoid  as  much 
as  possible  further  intercourse  with  Isaiah,  who,  he  feared,  would  reprove  him  for 
his  vices  and  idolatry.  1.  That  which  seems  specially  to  have  wearied  God  in 
the  instance  of  Ahaz  was,  the  sinning  yet  more  in  a  season  of  distress.  2.  There 
is  a  likelihood  that  his  offence  may  be  copied,  and  that,  too,  not  merely  in  the 
general,  but  even  in  minute  particulars.  God  became  wearied  by  a  repetition 
of  the  sin  when  He  had  tried  by  calamities  to  produce  its  abandonment.  It 
does  not  seem  that  there  was  ever  the  least  pause  in  his  wickedness.  God  smote 
him,  but  he  went  on  frowardly.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Wearying  God: — The 
house  of  David  weary  the  long-suffering  of  God  by  letting  Him  exhaust  all  the 
means  of  their  correction  without  effect.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Wearying  God: — 
1.  The  great  God  is  pleased  to  consider  the  indignities  and  injuries  done  to  His 
servants  as  done  to  Himself.  2.  Beware  then  of  wearying  God  by  refusing 
to  comply  with  the  administrations  and  offers  He  gives  you  by  His  servants; 
but  now,  while  it  is  called  to-day,  hearken  to  His  voice  and  obey  His  call. 
(R.  Macculloch.) 

Ver.  14.  Therefore  the  Lord  Himself  shall  give  you  a  sign. — God'a  sign  to  King 
Ahaz : — Perhaps  more  perplexity  has  been  produced  among  commentators  by  this 
passage  than  by  any  other  in  Old  Testament  prophecy.  The  chief  difficulties 
of  the  passage  may  be  stated  as  follows  :  Does  the  prophecy  refer  to  some  event 
which  was  soon  to  occur,  or  does  it  refer  exclusively  to  some  event  in  the  distant 
future  ?  If  it  refers  to  some  event  which  was  soon  to  occur,  what  event  was  it  ? 
Who  was  the  child  intended,  and  who  the  virgin  who  should  bring  forth  the  child  ? 
1.  The  first  step  toward  the  unravelling  of  the  prophet's  meaning  is  to  determine 
the  exact  significance  of  the  wo*ds.  What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  the  word 
th*,  which  is  translated  "  sign  "  ?  Delitzsch  defines  the  word  as  "  a  thing,  event, 
or  act  which  may  serve  to  guarantee  the  Divine  certainty  of  some  other  thing, 
event,  or  act."  It  does  not  of  necessity  denote  a  miracle.  For  example,  in 
Gen.  xvii.  11,  circumcision  is  said  to  be  a  "sign,"  or  token.  The  context,  to- 
gether with  the  nature  of  the  thing,  event,  or  act,  must  decide  whether  the  rtie 
is  a  miracle  or  not.  All  that  is  necessary  to  constitute  a  "  sign  "  to  Ahaz  is  that 
some  assurance  shall  be  given  which  Jehovah  alone  can  give.  And  the  certain 
prediction  of  future  events  is  the  prerogative  of  Jehovah  alone.  2.  We  turn  now 
to  the  word  nD^y,  translated  "  virgin,"  and  shall  try  to  find  its  exact  meaning. 
The  derivation  of  it  from  D^y,  to  hide,  to  conceal,  is  now  generally  abandoned. 
Its  most  probable  derivation  is  from  D^if,  to  grow,  to  be  strong,  and  hence  the 
word  means  one  who  has  come  to  a  mature  or  marriageable  age.  Hengstenberg 
contends  that  it  means  one  in  an  unmarried  state ;  Gesenius  holds  that  it  means 
simply  being  of  marriageable  age,  the  age  of  puberty.  However  this  may  be, 
it  seems  most  natural  to  take  the  word  in  this  place  as  meaning  one  who  was 
then  unmarried  and  who  could  be  called  a  virgin.  But  we  must  guard  against 
the  exegetical  error  of  supposing  that  the  word  here  used  implies  that  the  person 
spoken  of  must  be  a  virgin  at  the  time  when  the  child  is  born.  All  that  is  said 
is  that  she  who  is  now  a  virgin  shall  bear  a  son.  3.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider 
the  interpretation  of  the  prophecy  itself.  The  opinions  which  have  generally 
prevailed  with  regard  to  it  are  three — (1)  That  it  has  no  reference  to  any  Messianic 
fulfilment,  but  refers  exclusively  to  some  event  in  the  time  of  the  prophet. 
(2)  That  it  has  exclusive  and  immediate  reference  to  the  Messiah,  thus  excluding 
any  reference  to  any  event  which  was  then  to  occur.  On  this  view,  the  future 
birth  of  the  Messiah  from  a  virgin  is  made  the  sign  to  Ahaz  that  Jerusalem  shall 
be  safe  from  a  threatened  invasion  (3)  That  the  prophet  is  speaking  of  the 
birth  of  a  child  which  would  soon  take  place  of  some  one  who  was  then  a  virgin ; 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vtl 

but  that  the  prophecy  has  also  a  higher  fulfilment  in  Christ.  This  last  view  we 
regard  as  the  only  tenable  one,  and  the  proof  of  it  will  be  the  refutation  of  the 
other  two.  The  following  reasons  are  presented  to  show  that  the  prophecy  refers 
to  some  event  which  was  soon  to  occur.  1.  The  context  demands  it.  If  there 
was  no  allusion  in  the  New  Testament  to  the  prophecy,  and  we  should  contemplate 
the  narrative  here  in  its  surrounding  circumstances,  we  should  naturally  feel  that 
the  prophet  must  mean  this.  If  the  seventh  and  eighth  chapters,  connected  as 
they  are,  were  all  that  we  had,  we  should  be  compelled  to  admit  a  reference  to 
something  in  the  prophet's  time.  The  record  in  chap.  viii.  1-4,  following  in  such 
close  connection,  seems  to  be  intended  as  a  public  assurance  of  the  fulfilment  of 
what  is  here  predicted  respecting  the  deliverance  of  the  land  from  the  threatened 
invasion.  The  prediction  was  that  she  who  is  a  virgin  shall  bear  a  son.  Now 
Jehovah  alone  can  foreknow  this,  and  He  pronounces  the  birth  of  this  child  as  the 
sign  which  shall  be  given.  2.  The  thing  to  be  given  to  Ahaz  was  a  sign  or  token 
that  a  present  danger  would  be  averted.  How  could  the  fact  that  the  Messiah 
would  come  seven  hundred  years  later  prove  this  T  Let  us  now  look  at  the 
reasons  for  believing  that  it  contains  also  a  reference  to  the  Messiah.  1.  The 
first  argument  we  present  is  derived  from  the  passage  in  chap.  ix.  7.  There  is  an 
undoubted  connection  between  that  passage  and  the  one  under  consideration, 
as  almost  all  critical  scholars  admit.  And  it  seems  that  nothing  short  of  a 
Messianic  reference  will  explain  the  words.  Some  have  asserted  that  the  un- 
doubted and  exclusive  reference  to  Messiah  in  this  verse  (ix.  7)  excludes  any  local 
reference  in  the  prophecy  in  chap.  vii.  14.  But  so  far  from  this  being  the  case, 
we  believe  it  is  an  instance  of  what  Bacon  calls  the  "  springing,  germinant  fulfil- 
ment of  prophecy."  And  we  believe  that  it  can  be  proved  that  all  prophecies 
take  their  start  from  historical  facts.  Isaiah  here  (ix.  7)  drops  the  historical 
drapery  and  rises  to  a  mightier  and  more  majestic  strain.  2.  The  second  and 
crowning  argument  is  taken  from  the  language  of  the  inspired  writer  Matthew 
(i.   22,  23).     (D.  M.  Sweets.)         Who  was  the  "virgin,"  and  who  the  son? — 

1.  Some  have  supposed  that  the  wife  of  Ahaz  was  meant  by  the  "  virgin,"  and  that 
his  son  Hezekiah  was  the  child  meant.  There  is  an  insuperable  difficulty  against 
this  view.  Ahaz's  reign  extended  over  sixteen  years  (2  Kings  xvi.  2),  and 
Hezekiah  was  twenty-five  years  old  when  he  succeeded  Ahaz  (2  Kings  xviii.  2). 
Consequently,  at  this  time  Hezekiah  could  not  have  been  less  than  nine  years 
old.  It  has  been  supposed  that  Ahaz  had  a  second  wife,  and  that  the  son  was 
hers.  This  is  a  mere  supposition,  supported  by  nothing  in  the  narrative,  while 
it  makes  chap.  viii.  1-4  have  no  connection  with  what  precedes  or  follows. 

2.  Others  have  supposed  that  some  virgin  who  was  then  present  before  Ahaz 
was  designated,  and  they  make  the  meaning  this :  "  As  surely  as  this  virgin 
shall  conceive  and  bear  a  son,  so  surely  shall  the  land  be  forsaken  of  its  kings." 
This  is  too  vague  for  the  definite  language  used,  and  gives  no  explanation  of  the 
Incident  in  chap.  viii.  about  Maher-shalal-hash-baz.  3.  Another  opinion  is  that  the 
virgin  was  not  an  actual  but  an  ideal  virgin.  Michaelis  thus  presents  this  view: 
*'  By  the  time  when  one  who  is  yet  a  virgin  can  bring  forth  (i.e.,  in  nine  months), 
all  will  be  happily  changed  and  the  present  impending  danger  so  completely 
passed  away  that  if  you  were  to  name  the  child  you  would  call  him  ImmanueL" 
Surely  this  would  not  be  a  sign  or  pledge  of  anything  to  Ahaz.  Besides,  it  wu 
not  a  birth  possible,  but  an  actual  birth,  which  was  spoken  of.  4.  But  the  view 
which  is  most  in  keeping  with  the  entire  context,  and  which  presents  the  fewest 
difficulties,  is  that  the  prophet's  own  son  is  intended.  This  view  does  require 
the  supposition  that  Isaiah  married  a  second  wife,  who  at  the  time  of  this  prophecy 
was  still  a  virgin,  and  whom  he  subsequently  married.  But  there  is  no  improba- 
bility in  the  supposition  that  the  mother  of  his  son,  Shear -jashub,  was  deceased, 
and  that  Isaiah  was  about  again  to  be  married.  This  is  the  only  supposition 
which  this  view  demands.  Such  an  occurrence  was  surely  not  uncommon.  All 
other  explanations  require  more  suppositions,  and  suppositions  more  unnatural 
than  this.  Our  supposition  does  no  violence  to  the  narrative,  and  certainly  falls 
in  best  with  all  the  facts.  We  would  then  identify  Immanuel  (as  Ahaz  and 
his  contemporaries  would  understand  the  name  to  be  applied)  with  Maher- 
shalal-hash-baz.  With  this  view  harmonises  what  the  prophet  says  in  chap, 
viii.  18  :  "  Behold,  I  and  the  children  whom  Jehovah  hath  given  me  are  for  signs 
and  for  wonders  in  Israel  from  Jehovah  of  hosts,  which  dwellcth  in  Mount  Zion." 
It  is  no  objection  to  this  view  that  another  name  than  "  Immanuel  "  was  given 
to  the  child.     It  was  a  common  thing  to  give  two  names  to  children,  especially 


chap,  vn.]  ISAIAH.  213 

when  one  name  was  symbolic,  as  Immanuel  was.  Jesus  Christ  was  never  called 
Immanuel  as  a  proper  name,  though  almost  all  scholars  agree  that  the  prophecy 
referred  to  Him  in  some  sense.     (Ibid.)        A  double  reference  in  Isaiah's  pro- 

Ehecies  : — The  careful,  critical  student  of  Isaiah  will  find  this  thing  common  in 
is  writings,  namely,  that  he  commences  with  a  prophecy  having  reference  to  some 
remarkable  delivery  which  was  soon  to  occur,  and  terminates  it  by  a  statement 
of  events  connected  with  a  higher  deliverance  under  the  Messiah.  His  mind 
becomes  absorbed  ;  the  primary  object  is  forgotten  in  the  contemplation  of 
the  more  remote  and  glorious  event.  (Ibid. )  The  virgin : — The  Hebrew 
word  rendered  "  virgin "  in  the  A.V.  would  be  more  accurately  rendered 
"  damsel."  It  means  a  young  woman  of  marriageable  age,  and  is  not  the  word 
which  would  be  naturally  used  for  "  virgin,"  if  that  was  the  point  which  it  was 
desired  to  emphasise.  (Prof.  A.  F.  KirkpatricTc.)  Our  English  word  "  maiden  " 
comes  as  near,  probably,  as  any  to  the  Hebrew  word.  (Speaker's  Commentary.) 
The  Hebrew  lexicons  tell  us  that  the  word  almah,  here  translated  virgin,  may 
denote  any  mature  young  woman,  whether  a  virgin  or  not.  So  far  as  its  deriva- 
tion is  concerned,  this  is  undoubtedly  the  case ;  but  in  Biblical  usage,  the  word 
denotes  a  virgin  in  every  case  where  its  meaning  can  be  determined.  The 
instances  are,  besides  the  text,  that  in  the  account  of  Rebekah  (Gen.  xxiv.  43), 
that  of  the  sister  of  Moses  (Exod.  ii.  8),  the  word  used  in  the  plural  (Psa.  lxviiL 
25, 26 ;  Cant.  i.  3,  vi.  8),  its  use  in  the  titles  of  Psalms  (Psa.  xlvi ;  1  Chron.  xv.  20), 
and  its  use  in  Prov.  xxx  19.  The  last  passage  is  the  one  chiefly  relied  on  to 
prove  that  the  word  may  denote  a  woman  not  a  virgin  ;  but,  "  the  way  of  a  man 
with  a  maid  "  there  spoken  of  is  something  wonderful,  incapable  of  being  traced 
or  understood,  like  the  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  air,  a  serpent  on  a  rock,  a  ship 
in  the  sea,  and  it  is  only  in  its  application  to  that  wonderful  human  experience, 
a  first  love  between  a  man  and  a  virgin,  that  this  description  can  find  a  full  and 
complete  significance.  The  use  of  the  word  in  the  Bible  may  not  be  full  enough 
in  itself  to  prove  that  almah  necessarily  means  virgin,  but  it  is  sufficient  to  show 
that  Septuagint  translators  probably  chose  deliberately  and  correctly,  when 
they  chose  to  translate  the  word,  in  this  passage,  by  the  Greek  word  that  dis- 
tinctively denotes  a  virgin,  and  that  Matthew  made  no  mistake  in  so  understanding 
their  translation.  (Prof.  W.  J.  Beecher,  D.D.)  Deliverance  by  a  lowly  agent  : — 
Not  Ahaz,  not  some  high-born  son  of  Ahaz's  house,  is  to  have  the  honour 
of  rescuing  his  country  from  its  peril :  a  "  nameless  maiden  of  lowly  rank  '* 
(Delitzsch)  is  to  be  the  mother  of  the  future  deliverer.  Ahaz  and  the  royal  house 
are  thus  put  aside  ;  it  is  not  till  chap.  ix.  7 — spoken  at  least  a  year  subsequently — 
that  we  are  able  to  gather  that  the  Deliverer  is  to  be  a  descendant  of  David's 
line.  (Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.)  Ood's  sign  to  Ahaz : — The  king  having  refused 
to  ask  a  sign,  the  prophet  gives  him  one,  by  renewing  the  promise  of  deliver- 
ance (vers.  8,  9),  and  connecting  it  with  the  birth  of  a  child,  whose  significant 
name  is  made  a  symbol  of  the  Divine  interposition,  and  his  progress  a  measure 
of  the  subsequent  events.  Instead  of  saying  that  God  would  be  present  with  them 
to  deliver  them,  he  says  the  child  shall  be  called  Immanuel  (God  with  us) ;  instead 
of  mentioning  a  term  of  years,  he  says,  before  the  child  is  able  to  distinguish 
good  from  evil ;  instead  of  saying  that  until  that  time  the  land  shall  lie  waste, 
he  represents  the  child  as  eating  curds  and  honey,  spontaneous  products,  here 
put  in  opposition  to  the  fruits  of  cultivation.  At  the  same  time,  the  form  of 
expression  is  descriptive.  Instead  of  saying  that  the  child  shall  experience  all 
this,  he  represents  its  birth  and  infancy  as  actually  passing  in  his  sight ;  he  sees 
the  child  brought  forth  and  named  Immanuel ;  he  sees  the  child  eating  curds 
and  honey  till  a  certain  age.  But  very  different  opinions  are  held  as  to  the  child 
here  alluded  to.  Some  think  it  must  be  a  child  about  to  be  born,  in  the  course 
of  nature,  to  the  prophet  himself.  Others  think  that  two  distinct  births  are 
referred  to,  one  that  of  Shear-jashub,  the  prophet's  son,  and  the  other  Christ, 
the  Virgin's  Son.  Yet  others  see  only  a  prophetic  reference  to  the  birth  of  Messiah. 
(J.  A.  Alexander.)  A  prediction  of  the  miraculous  conception  of  Jesus  Christ  .•— 
While  some  diversity  of  judgment  ought  to  be  expected  and  allowed,  in  relation 
to  the  secondary  question  (of  the  child  of  the  period  that  is  referred  to),  there  is 
no  ground,  grammatical,  historical,  or  logical,  for  doubt  as  to  the  main  point, 
that  the  Church  in  all  ages  has  been  right  in  regarding  this  passage  as  a  signal 
and  explicit  prediction  of  the  miraculous  conception  and  nativity  of  Jesus  Christ. 
(Ibid.)  The  figure  of  Immanuel  an  ideal  one  : — The  language  of  Isaiah  forces 
upon  us  the  conviction  that  the  figure  of  Immanuel  is  an  ideal  one,  projected  by 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

him  upon  the  shifting  future — upon  the  nearer  future  in  chap,  vii.,  upon  the 
remoter  future  in  chap,  ix.,  but  grasped  by  the  prophet  as  a  living  and  real  person- 
ality, the  guardian  of  his  country  now,  its  deliverer  and  governor  hereafter.  The 
circumstances  under  which  the  announcement  is  made  to  Ahaz  are  such  as 
apparently  exclude  deliberation  in  the  formation  of  the  idea ;  it  is  the  unpre- 
meditated creation  of  his  inspired  imagination.  This  view  satisfies  all  tho 
requirements  of  the  narrative.  The  birth  of  the  child  being  conceived  as 
immediate  affords  a  substantial  ground  for  the  assurance  conveyed  to  Ahaz  ; 
and  the  royal  attributes  with  which  the  child  speedily  appears  to  be  endued, 
and  which  forbid  his  identification  with  ariy  actual  contemporary  of  the  prophet's, 
become  at  once  intelligible.  It  is  the  Messianic  King,  whose  portrait  is  here  for 
the  first  time  in  the  Old  Testament  sketched  directly.  (Prof.  8.  R.  Driver,  D.D.) 
Immanuel,  the  Messiah  : — It  is  the  Messiah  whom  the  prophet  here  beholds  as 
about  to  be  born,  then  in  chap.  ix.  as  born,  and  in  chap.  xi.  as  reigning. 
(F.  Delitzsch.)  What  sign  could  the  distant  birth  of  Christ  be  to  Ahaz? — The 
answer  is  plain,  as  evidenced  by  the  prophet  turning  away  from  the  king  who 
repudiated  hia  privileges  to  the  '  house  of  David,"  to  which  in  all  its  generations 
the  promise  was  given.  The  king  was  endeavouring  to  bring  about  the  destruc- 
tion of  "  the  land,"  but  his  efforts  in  that  direction  would  be  useless  until  the 
destiny  of  the  house  of  David  was  fulfilled.  The  virgin  must  bear  the  promised 
Son ;  Judah  is  immortal  till  that  event  is  accomplished.  It  matters  not  whether 
it  is  near  or  far,  the  family  and  lineage  of  David  must  survive  till  then.  Hence 
the  sign  was  plain  enough,  or  ought  to  have  been,  to  Ahaz  and  the  people  in 
general.  The  closing  portion  of  this  section  of  Scripture  fully  discloses  the 
destruction  that  should  befall  Judah  as  well  as  Israel,  but  the  final  fall  of  Judah 
is  after  the  birth  of  Immanuel.  (F.  T.  Bassett,  M.A.)  The  virgin  mother  : — 
To  maintain  that  Isaiah  did  not  mean  to  say  that  a  certain  Person  in  the  future 
was  to  be  born  of  a  virgin,  is  not  the  same  thing  as  to  hold  that  Christ  was  not 
so  born  as  a  fact.  ( F.  H.  Woods,  B.D.)  The  mystery  of  the  sign  : — The  "  sign  " 
is  on  the  one  side  a  mystery  staring  threateningly  at  the  house  of  David,  and  on 
the  other  side  it  is  a  mystery  rich  in  comfort  to  the  prophet  and  all  believers; 
and  it  is  couched  in  such  enigmatic  terms  in  order  that  they  who  harden  them- 
selves may  not  understand  it,  and  in  order  that  believers  may  so  much  the 
more  long  to  understand  it.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  A  new  thing  in  the  earth  (vers. 
10-16)  : — I.  The  pledge  proposed.  1.  The  condescension  which  God  displayed 
on  this  occasion  was  very  remarkable.  2.  There  may  be  a  semblance  of  regard 
for  the  honour  of  God,  while  the  heart  is  in  a  state  of  hostility  against  Him. 
3.  God  may  sustain  a  certain  relationship  to  those  who  are  not  His  in  reality. 
II.  The  indignant  rebuke  administered.  (Ver.  13.)  1.  The  persons  to  whom 
it  was  addressed.  Not  the  king  only,  but  the  whole  nation  ;  which  shows  that 
they,  or  a  large  portion  of  them,  were  like-minded  with  their  ungodly  ruler.  They 
are  called  "  the  house  of  David,"  a  designation  which  was  doubtless  intended 
to  remind  them  of  his  character,  and  the  great  things  which  God  had  done  for 
him.  Well  would  it  have  been  if  he  by  whom  David's  throne  was  now  occupied 
had  been  imbued  with  David's  spirit,  and  walked  in  David's  ways  ;  and  that 
hia  influence  had  been  exerted  in  inducing  his  subjects  to  do  so  likewise.  2.  The 
feeling  by  which  it  was  prompted.  It  was  evidently  that  of  holy  indigna- 
tion. 3.  The  grounds  on  which  it  rested.  There  were  two  things  especially  by 
which  God  was  dishonoured  on  this  occasion.  (1)  Unbelief.  Nothing  casts  a 
greater  indignity  upon  the  Divine  character  than  for  His  word  to  be  distrusted. 
(2)  Hypocrisy.  Far  better  to  bid  open  defiance  to  the  Most  High,  and  say  with 
Pharaoh,  "  Who  is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  His  voice  ?  "  than  pretend  to 
serve  Him  while  we  are  resolved  to  act  in  opposition  to  His  will.  III.  The  glorious 
event  predicted.  As  to  this  striking  prediction,  in  itself  considered,  there  are 
several  particulars  which  it  sets  before  us — 1.  The  miraculous  conception  of 
Christ.  2.  The  essential  Deity  of  Christ.  3.  The  design  of  the  coming  of  Christ. 
For  Him  to  be  called  "  Immanuel,  God  with  us,"  shows  that  He  appeared  to 
espouse  our  cause.  4.  The  lowly  condition  of  Christ.  "  Butter  and  honey  shall 
He  eat,"  &c.  5.  The  moral  purity  of  Christ.  Although  the  expression,  "  before 
the  child  shall  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose  the  good,"  has  literal  reference 
to  His  attaining  the  age  of  discernment,  yet  it  may  be  applied  with  special  pro- 
priety to  the  spotless  sanctity  of  His  character.  He  knew,  in  a  sense  in  which  no 
one  else  ever  knew,  how  to  refuse  the  evil  and  choose  the  good.  (Anon.)  Tin 
birth  of  Christ : — I.  The  birth  of  Christ.     1.  We  see  here  a  miraculous  ooncep- 


chap,  vn.]  ISAIAH.  215 

tion.  2.  Notice  next,  the  humble  parentage.  Though  she  was  not  a  princess, 
yet  her  name,  Mary,  by  interpretation,  signifies  a  princess ;  and  though  she  is 
not  the  queen  of  heaven,  yet  she  has  a  right  to  be  reckoned  amongst  the  queens 
of  earth ;  and  though  she  is  not  the  lady  of  our  Lord,  she  does  walk  amongst 
the  renowned  and  mighty  women  of  Scripture.  Yet  Jesus  Christ's  birth  was  a 
humble  one.  Strange  that  the  Lord  of  glory  was  not  born  in  a  palace !  Let 
us  take  courage  here.  If  Jesus  Christ  was  born  in  a  manger  in  a  rock,  why 
should  He  not  come  and  live  in  our  rocky  hearts  ?  If  He  was  born  in  a  stable, 
why  should  not  the  stable  of  our  souls  be  made  into  a  habitation  for  Him  ?  If 
He  was  born  in  poverty,  may  not  the  poor  in  spirit  expect  that  He  will  be  their 
Friend  T  3.  We  must  make  one  more  remark  upon  this  birth  of  Christ,  and  that 
remark  shall  be  concerning  a  glorious  birthday.  With  all  the  humility  that 
surrounded  the  birth  of  Christ,  there  was  yet  very  much  that  was  glorious,  very 
much  that  was  honourable.  No  other  man  ever  had  such  a  birthday  as  Jesus 
Christ  had.  Of  whom  had  prophets  and  seers  ever  written  as  they  wrote  of  Him  ? 
Whose  name  is  graven  on  so  many  tablets  as  His  ?  Who  had  such  a  scroll  of 
prophecy,  all  pointing  to  Him  as  Jesus  Christ,  the  God-man  ?  Then  recollect, 
concerning  His  birth,  when  did  God  ever  hang  a  fresh  lamp  in  the  sky  to  announce 
the  birth  of  a  Caesar  T  Caesars  may  come,  and  they  may  die,  but  stars  shall  never 
prophesy  their  birth.  When  did  angels  ever  stoop  from  heaven,  and  sing  choral 
symphonies  on  the  birth  of  a  mighty  man  ?  Christ's  birth  is  not  despicable, 
even  if  we  consider  the  visitors  who  came  around  His  cradle.  H.  The  food  of 
Christ.  "  Butter  and  honey  shall  He  eat,  that  He  may  know  to  refuse  the  evil, 
and  choose  the  good."  Our  translators  were  certainly  very  good  scholars,  and 
God  gave  them  muoh  wisdom,  so  that  they  craned  up  our  language  to  the  majesty 
of  the  original,  but  here  they  were  guilty  of  very  great  inconsistency.  I  do  not 
see  how  butter  and  honey  can  make  a  child  choose  good,  and  refuse  evil.  If  it 
is  so,  I  am  sure  butter  and  honey  ought  to  go  up  greatly  in  price,  for  good  men 
are  very  much  required.  But  it  does  not  say,  in  the  original,  '  Butter  and  honey 
shall  He  eat,  that  He  may  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose  the  good,"  but, 
"  Butter  and  honey  shall  He  eat,  till  He  shall  know  how  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose 
the  good,"  or,  better  still,  "  Butter  and  honey  shall  He  eat,  when  He  shall  know 
how  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose  the  good."  We  shall  take  that  translation, 
and  just  try  to  elucidate  the  meaning  couched  in  the  words.  They  should  teach 
us — 1.  Christ's  proper  humanity.  When  He  would  convince  His  disciples  that  Ho 
was  flesh,  and  not  spirit,  He  took  a  piece  of  a  broiled  fish  and  of  a  honeycomb, 
and  ate  as  others  did.  2.  The  butter  and  honey  teach  us,  again,  that  Christ  was 
to  be  born  in  times  of  peace.  Such  products  are  not  found  in  Judea  in  times 
of  strife ;  the  ravages  of  war  sweep  away  all  the  fair  fruits  of  industry.  3.  There 
is  another  thought  here.  "  Butter  and  honey  shall  He  eat  when  He  shall  know 
how  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose  the  good."  This  is  to  teach  us  the  precocity 
of  Christ,  by  which  I  mean  that,  even  when  He  was  a  child,  even  when  He  livea 
upon  butter  and  honey,  which  is  the  food  of  children,  He  knew  the  evil  from  the 
good.  4.  Perhaps  it  may  seem  somewhat  playful,  but  I  must  say  how  sweet 
it  is  to  my  soul  to  believe  that,  as  Christ  lived  upon  butter  and  honey,  surely 
butter  and  honey  drop  from  His  lips.  Sweet  are  His  words  unto  our  souls,  more  to 
be  desired  than  honey  or  the  honeycomb.  5.  And  perhaps  I  ought  not  to  have 
forgotten  to  say,  that  the  effect  of  Christ's  eating  butter  and  honey  was  to  show 
us  that  He  would  not  in  His  lifetime  differ  from  other  men  in  His  outward  guise. 
Butter  and  honey  Christ  ate,  and  butter  and  honey  may  His  people  eat ;  nay, 
whatsoever  God  in  His  providence  gives  unto  them,  that  is  to  be  the  food  of  the  child 
Christ.  III.  The  name  of  Christ.  "  And  shall  call  His  name  Immanuel."  1.  The 
Virgin  Mary  called  her  son  Immanuel  that  there  might  be  a  meaning  in  His  name. 
2.  Would  you  know  this  name  most  sweetly  you  must  know  it  by  the  teaching 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  responsibility  of  revelation  : — 1.  This 
annunciation  to  Ahaz  was  a  great  opportunity  for  him — a  crisis  in  his  spiritual 
life.  He  was  getting  entangled  in  idolatrous  ways,  involved  in  disloyal  relations 
with  the  Assyrian  monarchy,  and  had  already  seriously  compromised  himself  in 
sacrilegious  appropriation  of  temple  treasure.  And  here  was  a  golden  opportunity 
to  break  through  his  bonds,  and  cast  himself  loose,  once  for  all,  from  his  unworthy 
associations.  He  was  only  asked  to  trust  on  for  a  little  while  longer,  to  watch 
•vents,  and,  as  they  fell  out  in  a  certain  direction,  to  recognise  that  they  were 
of  God's  special  ordering,  and  that  they  constituted  a  claim  on  his  obedience  and 
trust  in  God.     But  he  was  incapable  of  profiting  by  God's  goodwill  towards 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

him.  He  rejected  the  Divine  overtures  of  prosperity  and  peace  ;  and,  while 
God  still  carried  out  the  dictates  of  His  purpose,  they  came  to  Ahaz  without 
blessing  and  without  relief.  His  enemies  were  removed,  but  a  direr  foe  stood 
in  their  place  ;  he  could  not  but  learn  that  God  was  faithful,  but  the  word  that 
he  compelled  God  to  keep  was  a  word  of  retribution.  2.  And  if  we  were  capable 
of  the  combined  mental  and  spiritual  effort  that  such  a  course  would  require, 
and  were  to  sit  down  calmly  and  without  prejudice  to  dissect  our  past  lives, 
and  with  unerring  judgment  were  to  separate  cause  from  effect  in  every  case, 
and  to  trace  each  important  issue  of  life  to  its  true  turning-point,  how  often, 

Srobably,  should  we  find  that  the  unsatisfactory  features  of  the  past  were  largely 
ue  to  our  neglect  of  some  revelation — some  annunciation — of  God !  By 
experience,  by  example,  by  warning,  by  discipline  ;  by  difficulties  significantly 
placed  in  our  path,  or  by  clearances  unexpectedly  but  unmistakably  made ; 
by  words  in  season,  out  of  season  ;  by  a  thousand  things,  and  in  countless  ways, 
we  have  had  annunciations  from  God — plain  indications  of  His  will  and  pleasure 
concerning  us,  and  no  indistinct  prophecies  of  things  that  shall  be  hereafter. 
And  our  judgment  upon  a  review  of  the  whole  is  this — that  our  true  happiness  and 
our  genuine  success  have  been  in  very  exact  proportion  to  our  faithfulness  or  our 
unfaithfulness  in  reading  the  signs  of  God.  (E.  T.  Marshall,  M.A.)  The  mercy 
of  Qod  : — The  first  word  of  this  text  joins  the  anger  of  God  and  His  mercy  together. 
God  chides  and  rebukes  the  king  Ahaz  by  the  prophet ;  He  is  angry  with  him, 
and  "  therefore  "  He  will  give  him  a  sign — a  seal  of  mercy.     I.  God  takes  any 

OCCASION  TO  SHOW  MEECY.      II.  THE  PARTICULAR  WAY  OF  HlS  MERCY  DECLARED 

here.  "  The  Lord  shall  give  you  a  sign."  III.  What  this  sign  was.  "  Behold 
a  virgin,"  &c.  (J.  Donne.)  Miracle  of  miracles  : — King  Ahaz  saith,  I  will 
not  tempt  God,  and,  making  religion  his  pretence  against  religion,  being  a 
most  wilful  and  wicked  man,  would  not.  We  may  learn  by  this  wretched  king 
that  those  that  are  least  fearful  before  danger  are  most  basely  fearful  in  danger 
(ver.  2).  We  may  see  the  conflict  between  the  infinite  goodness  of  God  and 
the  inflexible  stubbornness  of  man  ;  God's  goodness  striving  with  man's  badness. 
When  they  would  have  no  sign,  yet  God  will  give  them  a  sign.  "  Behold."  ( 1 )  As 
a  thing  presented  to  the  eye  of  faith.  (2)  As  a  matter  of  great  concernment. 
(3)  As  a  strange  and  admirable  thing.  It  is  atheistical  profaneness  to  despise 
any  help  that  God  in  His  wisdom  thinketh  necessary  to  support  our  weak  faith 
withal.  The  house  of  David  was  afraid  they  should  be  extinct  by  these  two 
great  enemies  of  the  Church ;  but,  saith  Isaiah,  "  A  virgin  of  the  house  of  David 
shall  conceive  a  son,"  and  how  then  can  the  house  of  David  be  extinct  ?  Heaven 
hath  said  it ;  earth  cannot  disannul  it.  God  hath  said  it,  and  all  the  creatures 
in  the  world  cannot  annihilate  it.  How  doth  friendship  between  God  and  us 
arise  from  hence,  that  Christ  is  God  in  our  nature  ?  1.  Sin,  the  cause  of  division, 
is  taken  away.  2.  Our  nature  is  pure  in  Christ,  and  therefore  in  Christ  God  loveth 
us.  3.  Christ  being  our  head  of  influence  conveyeth  the  same  Spirit  that  is  in 
Him  to  all  His  members,  and,  little  by  little,  by  that  Spirit,  purgeth  His  Church 
and  maketh  her  fit  for  communion  with  Himself.  4.  The  second  person  is  God 
in  our  nature  for  this  end,  to  make  God  and  us  friends.  (R.  Sibbes.)  Christ 
in  prophecy: — You  will  find  that  the  presence  of  one  Person  pervades  the  whole 
book  If  you  go  iato  a  British  navy-yard,  or  on  board  a  British  vessel,  and  pick 
up  a  piece  of  rope,  you  will  find  that  there  is  one  little  red  thread  which  runs 
through  the  whole  of  it — through  every  foot  of  cordage  which  belongs  to  the 
British  government ;  so,  if  a  piece  of  rope  is  stolen,  it  may  be  cut  into  inch 
pieces,  but  every  piece  ha3  the  mark  which  tells  where  it  belongs.  It  is  so  with 
the  Bible.  You  may  separate  it  into  a  thousand  parts,  and  yet  you  will  find  one 
thought — one  great  fact  running  through  the  whole  of  it.  You  will  find  it  con- 
stantly pointing  and  referring  to  one  great  Personage.  Around  this  one  mighty 
Personage  this  whole  book  revolves.  "  To  Him  give  all  the  prophets  witness." 
(H.  L.  Hastings.)  ImmanneL  —  Shear  -  jashub  ;  Maher  -  shalal  -  hash  -  baz  ; 
Immanuel : — The  three  names  taken  together  would  mean  this — the  Assyrians 
would  spoil  the  countries  of  Syria  and  Ephraim,  and  though  they  would  threaten 
Judah,  God  would  be  with  His  people,  and  save  them,  and  so  a  remnant  would 
be  left  which  would  return  at  once  to  religious  faith  and  to  national  prosperity. 
For  these  two  last  are  almost  always  associated  in  the  prophet's  view.  (F.  H. 
Woods,  B.D.)  A  prophecy  of  the  Messiah: — When  Jesus  claimed  to  be  the 
Son  of  God,  the  Jews  saw  quite  clearly  that  this  was  indeed  nothing  less  than 
the  claim  to  be  Divine,  and  they  cried  out  that  this  was  blasphemy.     And  what 


chap,  vn.]  ISAIAH.  217 

was  His  reply  T  Jesus  reminded  His  hearers  that  the  earliest  judges  and  leaders 
of  the  people  of  Israel,  as  testified  by  the  language  of  their  Scriptures,  had  been 
called  gods.  "  Jesus  answered  them,  Is  it  not  written  in  your  law,  I  said,  ye  are 
gods  ?  If  He  called  them  gods,  unto  whom  the  Word  of  God  came,  and  the 
Scripture  cannot  be  broken  ;  say  ye  of  Him,  whom  the  Father  hath  sanctified 
and  sent  into  the  world,  Thou  blasphemest ;  because  I  said,  I  am  the  Son  of 
God  ?  "  The  judges  and  rulers  of  the  early  days  of  Israel  had  been  called  gods 
because  their  office  and  function  was  just  this — to  represent  God  on  earth  to  men, 
to  reflect  His  character,  and  do  His  will,  and  lead  His  people.  They  often  failed 
to  do  this  because  they  were  merely  human.  In  some  cases  they  were  false  to 
their  trust,  and  then  God's  vengeance  overtook  them.  Yet  they  pointed  to 
that  one  far-off  Divine  event  when  One  who  should  perfectly  fulfil  that  name 
was  to  interpose  for  the  world's  deliverance.  And  thus,  just  as  the  implied  pro- 
phecy in  calling  men  gods  was  to  be  one  day  fulfilled,  so  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah 
before  us  was  also  a  prophecy  of  that  same  later  far-off  event,  when  one  who  was 
in  every  sense  "  God  with  us  "  should  come  to  satisfy  the  needs  and  the  longings 
of  the  human  heart.  (Canon  Ainger.)  Immanuel,  the  Sympathiser: — "God 
with  us."  This  means  omnipotence  with  us,  omniscience  with  us,  perfection 
with  us,  and  the  love  that  never  fails.  Some  of  us,  perhaps,  have  tried,  in  con- 
formity with  the  passion  for  getting  rid  of  the  supernatural  that  marks  the  latest 
struggle  of  the  scientific  world,  to  construct  a  new  religion  out  of  the  old,  in  which 
the  same  pathetio  and  lovely  figure  as  before  shall  be  placed  beside  us  for  our 
example,  but  from  whom  the  aureole  of  Deity  has  been  taken  away ;  they  have 
been  trying  to  find  all  that  life  needs  in  the  presence  only  of  a  fellow-man,  however 
superior  to  ourselves  in  holiness  and  purity.  There  are  moments  in  our  lives 
when  we  feel  ourselves  face  to  face  with  sin,  in  the  presence  of  sorrow  or  of  death 
from  which  no  man  can  deliver  us.  In  the  sad  hours  of  your  life,  it  has  been 
said,  the  recollection  of  that  Man  you  read  of  in  your  childhood,  the  Man  of  sorrows, 
the  great  Sympathiser  with  human  woes  and  sufferings,  rises  up  before  you.  I 
know  it  is  a  reality  for  you  then,  for  you  feel  it  to  be  not  only  beautiful  but  true. 
In  such  moments  does  it  seem  to  you  as  if  Christ  were  merely  a  person  who  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago  made  certain  journeying  between  Judea  and  Galilee  ?  Can 
such  a  recollection  fill  up  the  blank  which  some  present  grief,  the  loss  of  some 
friend,  has  made  in  your  heart  ?  It  does  not.  It  never  did  this  for  you  or  for 
anyone.  But  the  comfort  that  came  to  you  from  the  thought  of  Him  may  be 
safely  trusted  not  to  betray  you,  for  that  voice  that  came  to  you  in  your  anguish 
says,  "  You  may  trust  Me,  you  may  lean  upon  Me,  for  I  know  all  things  in  heaven 
and  earth.  I  and  My  Father  are  one."  (Ibid.)  Immanuel : — Nature,  God, 
and  Jesus  are  words  often  used  to  designate  the  same  power  or  being,  but  are 
suggestive  of  very  different  associations.  The  word  "  nature  "  veils  from  our  view 
the  glory  of  the  Godhead,  and  removes  His  personality  from  our  consciousness. 
It  removes  the  Deity  to  a  distance  from  us,  but  Jesus,  the  newer  and  better  name, 
the  latest  revelation,  brings  Him  nearer  to  us.  The  associations  of  the  name 
Jesus,  as  a  name  of  God,  are  most  tender  and  endearing.  Jesus  does  not  remind 
us  of  blind  power  or  unfeeling  skill,  as  the  word  nature  does  ;  nor  yet  of  over- 
whelming greatness,  distant  force  and  vast  intelligence,  the  conception  of  which 
strains  our  faculties,  and  the  realisation  of  which  crushes  our  power,  as  the  word 
God  does.  The  name  of  Jesus  reminds  us  chiefly  of  sympathy,  kindheartedness, 
brotherly  tenderness,  and  one-ness  with  ourselves.  The  word  God  presents  a 
picture  of  the  Deity  to  the  mind,  in  which  those  attributes  of  the  Divine  character 
which  are  in  themselves  most  removed  from  us,  occupy  the  most  prominent 
position,  and  are  bathed  with  a  flood  of  light,  while  those  features  of  character, 
by  which  the  Divine  Spirit  touches  the  delicate  chords  of  human  affections,  are 
dimly  seen  amid  the  darkening  shadows  of  the  background.  The  picture  is 
reversed  in  Jesus.  The  great  attributes  are  buried  in  the  light  of  love,  as  the 
Btars  are  covered  by  the  light  of  day.  (Evan  Lewis,  B.A.)  " Immanuel" 
a  stimulus  to  the  prophet  himself : — Isaiah  may  have  meant  the  Name  to  speak 
to  him  as  well  as  to  the  nation.  He  may  have  desired  to  bring  the  message  of 
the  Name  into  his  personal  and  family  life.  For,  after  all,  a  prophet  is  but  a 
man  of  like  passions  with  ourselves,  subject  to  the  same  infirmities  and  fluctua- 
tions of  spirit,  "  warmed  and  cooled  by  the  same  winter  and  summer."  There 
were  times,  no  doubt,  when  even  Isaiah  lost  faith  in  his  own  function,  in  his  own 
message,  when  the  very  man  who  had  assured  a  sinful  nation  that  God  was  with 
them  could  hardly  believe  that  God  was  with  him,  or  could  even  cry  out*  "  Depart 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  vn. 

from  me,  0  Lord,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man  !  "  And  in  such  moments  as  these,  when, 
weary  of  the  world  and  weary  of  himself,  he  lost  courage  and  hope,  he  may  have 
felt  that  it  would  be  well  for  him  to  have  that  in  his  very  household  which  would 
help  to  recall  the  truths  he  had  recognised  and  taught  in  hours  of  clearer  insight, 
help  to  restore  the  faith  with  which  he  had  first  sprung  up  to  greet  the  Divine 
message.  We  may  believe  that  there  were  many  darkened  hours  in  his  experience, 
hours  of  broken  faith  and  defeated  hope,  when  he  would  fall  back  on  his  earlier 
faith  and  brighter  hopes ;  when  he  would  call  his  little  son  to  him,  and,  as  he 
fondled  him,  would  repeat  his  name,  Immanuel,  Immanuel — God-with-us,  God- 
with-us, — and  find  in  that  Name  a  charm  potent  to~restore  his  waning  trust  in 
the  gracious  presence  and  gracious  wtll  of  Jehovah.  ("Niger"  in  Expositor.) 
The  child  Immanuel : — Isaiah  may  have  felt,  as  we  feel,  that  God  is  with  a  little 
child  in  quite  another  sense,  in  a  more  pathetic  sense,  than  He  is  with  grown 
men.  To  him,  as  to  us,  their  innocence,  their  loveliness,  and,  above  all,  their  love, 
may  have  been  the  most  exquisite  revelation  of  the  purity  and  love  of  God. 
"  Heaven  lies  about  their  infancy  "  ;  and  in  this  heaven  the  prophet  may  often 
have  taken  refuge  from  his  cares,  despondencies,  and  fears.  Every  child  born 
into  the  world  brings  this  message  to  us,  reminds  us  that  God  is  with  us  indeed 
and  of  a  truth ;  for  whence  did  this  new,  pure,  tender  life  come  if  not  from  the 
central  Fountain  of  life  and  purity  and  love  ?  And  from  this  point  of  view 
Isaiah's  "  Immanuel  "  is  but  the  ancient  analogue  of  our  Lord's  tender  words  : 
"  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  (Ibid.)  Immanuel : — The  text  is  a 
prophecy  of  the  Messiah  (Matt.  i.  23).  I.  The  circumstances  under  which  it 
was  spoken,  n.  Its  fulfilment.  For  more  than  seven  hundred  years  devout 
Jews  waited  for  the  Divinely  predicted  sign.  Then  came  the  day  which  Christmas 
commemorates.  III.  Its  practical  import.  To  Christians  this  prophecy  ia 
significant  of  those  blessings  which  are  pledged  to  us  in  Christ.  In  Him  we  have 
the  assurance  of  God  being — 1.  With  us  in  the  sense  of  on  our  side.  Nature  shows 
us  God  as  above  us ;  law  shows  us  God  as  against  us,  because  we  have  made 
ourselves  His  enemies ;  but  the  Gospel  shows  us  God  with  us  to  defend  us  from 
the  power  of  sin  and  to  deliver  us  from  the  penalty  of  sin.  2.  With  us  in  the  sense 
of  in  our  nature.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  "  ;  became 
one  of  ourselves,  shared  with  us — (1)  The  trials  of  a  human  life;  (2)  The  tempta- 
tions which  assail  us ;  (3)  The  penalty  of  sin — death  of  the  body,  the  hiding  of 
God's  countenance.  And  so  in  Christ  Jesus  we  have  the  pledge  of  the  three 
cardinal  blessings  of  all  Divine  revelation — (a)  The  Divine  sympathy,  because 
He  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  (6)  The  Divine  salvation, 
because  He  has  "  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself."  (c)  The  Divine 
succour,  because  He  "  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  "  for  us;  and  His  parting 
word  to  His  Church  is,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world." 
(T.  H.  Barnett.)  God  with  us,  though  His  presence  is  not  always  realised: — 
Professor  Tyndall  has  told  us  how,  as  he  wandered  through  the  higher  Alpine 
pastures  in  the  earlier  months  of  the  present  summer  (1879),  he  was  often  sur- 
prised to  find  at  evening  lovely  flowers  in  full  bloom  where  in  the  morning  he 
had  seen  only  a  wide  thin  sheet  of  snow.  Struck  with  the  strange  phenomenon, 
unable  to  believe  that  a  few  hours  of  even  the  most  fervent  sunshine  had  drawn 
these  exquisite  flowers  to  their  full  maturity,  he  carefully  scraped  away  the  snow 
from  a  few  inches  of  pasture  and  examined  the  plants  that  were  growing  beneath 
it.  And,  to  his  surprise  and  delight,  he  found  that  the  powers  of  life  had  been 
with  them  even  while  they  seemed  wrapped  in  death ;  that  the  sun  had  reached 
them  through  the  snow ;  that  the  snow  itself  had  both  held  down  the  rising 
warmth  of  the  earth  upon  them,  and  sheltered  them  from  the  cold  biting  winds 
which  might  else  have  destroyed  them.  There  they  stood,  each  full  grown, 
every  flower  maturely  developed,  though  the  green  calyx  was  carefully  folded 
over  the  delicately  coloured  petals ;  and  no  sooner  was  the  snow  removed,  no 
sooner  did  the  rays  of  the  sun  touch  the  green  enfolding  calyx,  than  it  opened 
and  revealed  the  perfect  beauty  it  had  shrouded  and  preserved.  And  so,  doubt- 
less, we  shall  one  day  find  that  God,  our  Sun,  has  been  with  us  even  during  the 
winter  of  our  self-discontent,  all  through  the  hours  of  apparent  failure  and  inert- 
ness, quickening  in  us  a  life  of  which  we  gave  but  little  sign,  maturing  and  making 
us  perfect  by  the  things  we  suffered ;  so  that  when  the  hindering  veils  are  with- 
drawn, and  the  full  light  of  His  love  shines  upon  us,  at  that  gracious  touch 
we  too  may  disclose  a  beauty  of  which  we  had  not  dreamed,  and  of  which  foe 
long  we  gave  no  promise.      ("Niger"  in  Expositor.)        Life's  best  amulet: — A 


chap,  vn.]  ISAIAH.  219 

Mohammedan  negro  in  Africa  was  once  taken  prisoner  in  war.  He  wore  sus- 
pended around  his  neck  an  amulet  or  charm.  When  this  was  taken  from  him 
he  became  almost  frenziea~-wrth~grief,  and  begged  that  it  be  returned  to  him 
He  was  willing  to  sacrifice  his  right  hand  for  it.  It  was  his  peculiar  treasure, 
which  he  valued  as  life  itself.  It  was  a  very  simple  affair — a  little  leather  case 
enclosing  a  slip  of  paper  on  which  was  inscribed  in  Arabic  characters  one  word — 
"  God."  He  believed  that  the  wearing  of  this  charm  secured  for  him  a  blessed 
iinlnunity  from  ill.  When  it  was  returned  to  him  he  was  so  overjoyed  that  the 
tears  streamed  from  his  eyes,  and  falling  to  the  ground  he  kissed  the  feet  of  the 
man  who  restored  to  him  his  treasure.  That  poor  negro  had  but  the  bare  name — 
we  have  God  !  Not  a  distant  monarch  seated  lonesomely  away  from  any  human 
voice  or  footstep.  There  is  one  name  that  ought  to  be  dearest  of  all  to  every 
Christian — "  Immanuel."  It  means  not  a  Deity  remote  or  hidden,  but  "  God 
with  us."  (Christian  Endeavour.)  God  with  us  : — An  old  poet  has  represented 
the  Son  of  God  as  having  the  stars  for  His  crown,  the  sky  for  His  azure  mantle, 
the  clouds  for  His  bow,  and  the  fire  for  His  spear.  He  rode  forth  in  His  majestic 
robes  of  glory,  but  one  day  resolved  to  alight  on  the  earth,  and  descended,  undress- 
ing Himself  on  the  way.  When  asked  what  He  would  wear,  He  replied,  with 
a  smile,  "that  He  had  new  clothes  making  down  below."     (Gates  of  Imagery.) 

Vers.  17-25.  The  Lord  shall  bring  upon  thee  .  .  .  tven  the  king  of 
Assyria. — The  prophecy  fulfilled : — The  calling  in  of  Assur  laid  the  founda- 
tion for  the  overthrow  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  not  less  than  for  that  of  the  king- 
dom of  Israel.  Ahaz  thereby  became  a  tributary  vassal  of  the  Assyrian  king, 
and  although  Hezekiah  again  became  free  from  Assyria  through  the  miraculous 
help  of  Jehovah,  nevertheless  what  Nebuchadnezzar  did  was  only  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  frustrated  undertaking  of  Sennacherib.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Assyria 
and  the  Jews  : — If  Isaiah  here,  in  chaps,  vii.-xii.,  looks  upon  Assyria  absolutely 
as  the  universal  empire  (2  Kings  xxiii.  29  ;  Ezra  vi.  22),  this  is  so  far  true,  seeing 
that  the  four  empires  from  the  Babylonian  to  the  Roman  are  really  only  the 
unfolding  of  the  beginning  which  had  its  beginning  in  Assyria.  And  if,  here 
in  chap,  vii.,  he  thinks  of  the  son  of  the  virgin  as  growing  up  under  the  Assyrian 
oppressions,  this  is  also  so  far  true,  since  Jesus  was  actually  born  in  a  time  in 
which  the  Holy  Land,  deprived  of  its  earliest  fulness  of  blessing,  found  itself 
under  the  supremacy  of  the  universal  empire,  and  in  a  condition  which  went 
back  to  the  unbelief  of  Ahaz  as  its  ultimate  cause.  Besides  He,  who  in  the  fulness 
of  time  became  flesh,  does  truly  lead  an  ideal  life  in  the  Old  Testament  history. 
The  fact  that  the  house  and  people  of  David  did  not  perish  in  the  Assyrian 
calamities  is  really,  as  chap.  viii.  presupposes,  to  be  ascribed  to  His  presence, 
which,  although  not  yet  in  bodily  form,  was  nevertheless  active.  Thus  is  solved 
the  contradiction  between  the  prophecy  and  the  history  of  its  fulfilment.  (Ibid.) 
Judah's  loss  of  national  independence  : — From  this  application  of  Ahaz  to  Tiglath- 
Pileser  was  to  date  the  transition  of  Judah  "  to  a  servile  state  from  which  it  was 
never  permanently  freed,  the  domination  of  Assyria  being  soon  succeeded  by 
that  of  Egypt,  and  this  by  that  of  Babylon,  Persia,  Syria,  and  Borne,  the  last 
ending  only  in  the  downfall  of  the  State,  and  that  general  dispersion  which  con- 
tinues to  this  day.  The  revolt  of  Hezekiah,  and  even  longer  intervals  of  liberty 
in  later  times,  are  mere  interruptions  of  the  customary  and  prevailing  bondage." 
(J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  perspective  of  prophecy : — God  makes  what  was 
announced  by  prophecy  separate  itself  in  reality  into  different  stages.  (E.  Kbnig. ) 
History  and  prophecy : — Prophecy  never  seems  to  forsake  the  ground  of  history. 
However  extended  the  vista  which  stretches  before  him,  that  vista  begins  at 
the  prophet's  feet.  (Bishop  Perowne.)  Bees  and  flies: — Bees  and  swarms 
of  flies  are  used  as  a  Homeric  image  for  swarms  of  peoples  (II.  ii.  87).  Here  the 
images  are  likewise  emblematic.  Ihe  Egyptian  people,  being  unusually  numerous, 
is  compared  to  the  swarming  fly ;  and  the  Assyrian  people,  being  warlike  and 
eager  for  conquest,  is  compared  to  the  stinging  bee,  which  is  so  difficult  to  turn 
away  (Deut.  i.  44 ;  Psa.  cxviii.  12).  The  emblems  also  correspond  to  the  nature 
of  the  two  countries ;  the  fly  to  slimy  Egypt,  which,  from  being  such,  abounds 
in  insects  (chap,  xviii.  1),  and  the  bee  to  the  more  mountainous  and  woody 
Assyria,  where  bee-culture  still  constitutes  one  of  the  principal  branches  of  trade 
in  the  present  day.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Hissing  for  the  fly  and  the  bee  : — To  hiss 
for  them,  is  to  call  or  summon  them,  derived  from  the  practice  of  the  bee-keepers, 
who,  with  a  whistle,  summoned  them  from  the  hives  to  the  open  fields,  and,  by 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

the  same  means,  conducted  them  home  again.  .  .  .  We  are  assured  by  St.  Cyril 
that  [the  practice]  subsisted  in  Asia  down  to  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries.  (J. 
Kitto,  D.D.)  A  sentence  of  doom  : — I.  God  is  sovereign  in  the  whole  earth. 
All  governments  are  but  instruments  which  He  uses  when  and  as  He  pleases 
(vers.  17-21).  A  thought  full  of  comfort  for  the  righteous,  of  horror  for  the 
unrighteous.  II.  The  consequent  insecurity  of  all  prosperity  thai  is 
not  based  upon,  and  promotive  of,  righteousness  (ver.  23).  Britain  will 
be  "  Great  Britain  "  only  so  long  as  God  pleases.  III.  Whatever  chastise- 
ments God  may  have  inflicted,  He  has  always  a  more  terrible  one  behind 
(ver.  17).  IV.  Seeing  that  all  these  things  were  threatened  against  and  inflicted 
upon  God's  chosen  people,  learn  that  no  mercy  that  God  has  shown  us  will 
furnish  any  immunity  for  us,  if,  notwithstanding  that  mercy,  we  sin 
against  Him.  There  is  a  tendency  in  our  evil  hearts  to  think  that  because 
God  has  been  specially  good  to  us,  we  may  sin  with  less  risk  than  others ;  but 
the  teaching  of  the  Bible  is,  that  those  who  turn  the  grace  of  God  into  lascivious- 
nese  "  shall  be  visited  with  a  sorer  doom  than  others.     (R.  A.  Bertram.) 

Ver.  20.  In  the  same  day  shall  the  Lord  shave  with  a  razor  that  Is 
hired. — The  hired  razor : — There  is  involved  the  bitterest  sarcasm  for 
Ahaz ;  the  cheap  knife  which  he  had  hired  for  the  deliverance  of  Judah 
is  hired  by  the  Lord  in  order  to  shave  Judah  wholly  and  most  shame- 
fully. (F.  Delitzsch.)  Shaving  the  beard: — The  most  shameful  of  all.  The 
beard  is  the  sign  of  manly  vigour,  manliness,  and  manly  dignity.  (Ibid.)  The 
Lord's  razor : — The  Bible  is  the  boldest  book  ever  written.  There  are  no  simili- 
tudes in  Ossian  or  the  Iliad  or  the  Odyssey  so  daring.  Its  imagery  sometimes 
seems  on  the  verge  of  the  reckless,  but  only  seems  so.  The  fact  is  that  God  would 
startle  and  arouse  men  and  nations.  A  tame  and  limping  similitude  would  fail 
to  accomplish  the  object.  While  there  are  times  when  He  employs  in  the  Bible 
the  gentle  dew  and  the  morning  cloud  and  the  dove  and  the  daybreak  in  the 
presentation  of  truth,  we  often  find  the  iron  chariot,  the  lightning,  the  earth- 
quake, the  sword  and,  in  my  text,  the  razor.  This  keen-bladed  instrument 
has  advanced  in  usefulness  with  the  ages.  In  Bible  times  and  lands  the  beard 
remained  uncut  save  in  the  seasons  of  mourning  and  humiliation,  but  the  razor 
was  always  a  suggestive  symbol.  David  says  of  Doeg,  his  antagonist :  "  Thy 
tongue  is  a  sharp  razor  working  deceitfully  "  ;  that  is,  it  pretends  to  clear  the 
face,  but  is  really  used  for  deadly  incision.     I.  If  God's  judgments  are  razors, 

WE  HAD  BETTER  BE  CAREFUL  HOW  WE  USE  THEM  ON  OTHER  PEOPLE.      In  careful 

sheath  the  domestic  weapons  are  put  away,  where  no  one  by  accident  may  touch 
them,  and  where  the  hands  of  children  may  not  touch  them.  Such  instruments 
must  be  carefully  handled  or  not  handled  at  all.  But  how  recklessly  some  people 
wield  the  judgments  of  God.  If  a  man  meet  with  business  misfortune,  how 
many  there  are  ready  to  cry  out,  "  This  is  a  judgment  of  God  upon  him  because 
he  was  unscrupulous,  or  arrogant,  or  over-reaching,  or  miserly."  How  I  do 
dislike  the  behaviour  of  those  persons  who,  when  people  are  unfortunate,  say : 
"I  told  you  so — getting  punished — served  him  right!"  With  air  sometimes 
supercilious  and  sometimes  Pharisaical,  and  always  blasphemous,  they  take 
the  razor  of  Divine  judgment  and  sharpen  it  on  their  own  hard  hearts,  and  then 
go  to  work  on  men  sprawled  out  at  full  length  under  disaster,  cutting  merci- 
lessly. They  begin  by  soft  expressions  of  sympathy  and  pity  and  half  praise, 
and  lather  the  victim  all  over  before  they  put  on  the  sharp  edge.  II.  Again, 
when  I  read  in  my  text  that  the  Lord  shaves,  with  the  hired  razor  of  Assyria,  the 
land  of  Judea,  I  bethink  myself  of  the  precision  of  God's  providence.  A 
razor  swung  the  tenth  part  of  an  inch  out  of  the  right  line  means  either  failure 
or  laceration,  but  God's  dealings  never  slip,  and  they  do  not  miss,  by  the  thou- 
sandth part  of  an  inch,  the  right  direction.  III.  Further,  my  text  tells  us  that 
God  sometimes  shaves  nations.  "  In  the  same  day  shall  the  Lord  shave  with 
the  razor  that  is  hired."  With  one  sharp  sweep  He  went  across  Judah,  and 
down  went  its  pride  and  its  power.  Assyria  was  the  hired  razor  against  Judah, 
and  Cyrus  the  hired  razor  against  Babylon,  and  the  Huns  the  hired  razor  against 
the  Goths,  and  there  are  now  many  razors  that  the  Lord  could  hire  if,  because 
of  our  national  sins,  He  should  undertake  to  shave  us.  IV.  But  notice  that  God 
is  so  kind  and  loving,  that  when  it  is  necessary  for  Him  to  cut,  He  has  to  go 
to  others  fob  the  sharp- edged  weapon.  "  In  the  same  day  shall  the  Lord 
shave  with  a  razor  that  is  hired."    God  is  love.     God  is  pity.     God  is  help.    God 


chap,  vm.]  ISAIAH.  221 

is  shelter.     God  is  rescue.     There  are  no  sharp  edges  about  Him,  no  thrusting 

Eoints,  no  instruments  of  laceration.  If  you  want  balm  for  wounds,  He  has  that. 
f  you  want  salve  for  Divine  eyesight,  He  has  that.  But  if  there  is  sharp  and 
cutting  work  to  do,  which  requires  a  razor,  that  He  hires.  God  has  nothing 
about  Him  that  hurts,  save  when  dire  necessity  demands,  and  then  He  has  to 
go  to  some  one  else  to  get  the  instrument.  (T.  De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  Allies 
and  razors  : — You  thought  you  were  buying  an  ally  when  you  were  only  hiring 
a  razor  by  which  you  were  to  be  rendered  naked  and  made  contemptible. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  VITL 


Vera.  1-4.  Maher  -  ehalal  -  hash  -  baz. — Maker  -slbalal-  hash  •  baz  ;— -Four  words, 
or  rather  two  sentences,  form  now  the  burden  of  this  message ;  and  they 
are  embodied  in  the  name  of  a  boy.  Maher-shalal, — this  first  sentence  means 
that  quickly  shall  trophies  be  taken — the  prophet  thus  seeing  the  army  of  Samaria 
in  full  and  disgraceful  flight.  While  Hash-baz,  the  second,  tells  us  about  booty 
being  taken,  as  the  Assyrian  forces  shall  enter  Damascus  in  732  B.C.,  and  help 
themselves  to  its  wealth.     (B.  Blake,  B.D.)         Unconscious  testimony: — I.  God 

MEANT  SOMETHING  BY  THIS   CHILD.      II.  GOD   HAS  A  MEANING  OP  HlS  OWN  WITH 

every  life.  (J.  B.  Howatt.)  God's  writing: — God  hath  a  large  print  in 
some  of  His  books.     Verily,  He  can  write  a  small  hand  too,  which  men  can  only 

see  through  the  microscope   of  tears.     (J.   Parker,  D.D.)        A  man's  pen: 

They  that  write  for  men  should  write  with  a  man's  pen,  and  not  covet  the  pen 
or  tongue  of  angels.  (M.  Henry.)  A  help  to  memory  : — It  is  sometimes  a 
good  help  to  memory  to  put  much  matter  in  few  words,  which  serve  as  handles 
by  which  we  take  hold  of  more.  (Ibid. )  Naming  children  from  passing  events : — 
In  1900  many  a  helpless  infant  was  saddled  for  life  with  a  name  drawn  from  South 
Africa,  and  reminiscent  of  certain  towns  and  certain  individuals  conquered  or 
conquering  by  the  might  of  British  arms.  However  patriotic  we  may  be,  we 
feel  sympathy  for  these  little  innocents  with  the  reverse  of  euphonious  names, 
for  their  trials  in  after  days  when  they  become  Miss  Ladysmith  Tomkinson 
and  Mr.  Pretorius  Simpkinson,  will  not  be  light.  An  additional  burden  for  the 
feminine  portion  of  this  sorry  community  will  be,  that  their  mere  names  will  be 
as  definite  as  a  census  paper  and  as  plain  as  a  birth  certificate,  as  a  declaration 
of  age.  In  the  year  1926  Mr.  William  Smith  will  have  no  need  to  inquire  dili- 
gently the  approximate  age  of  Miss  Methuen  Redvers  Robinson ;  he  will  at 
once  be  able  to  fix  the  glorious  year  when  her  presence  began  to  usher  a  happy 
springtime  into  this  wintry  world — at  least,  for  him.  Strange  and  unforeseen 
results  may  follow  from  the  naming  of  the  little  children  from  the  crimsoned 
fields  of  war.  But  the  custom  of  naming  the  children  from  passing  events  is 
by  no  means  new.  The  old  Hebrews,  with  their  religious  intensity,  and  fervent 
patriotism,  usually  found  names  for  their  children  that  had  a  very  distinct 
meaning  and  a  very  distinct  message,  quite  unlike  the  stolid  English,  who  may 
by  chance  stumble  upon  the  fact  that  Irene  means  peace,  and  Theodore,  the  gift 
of  God,  but  who  never  trouble  themselves  overmuch  about  such  un-English 
things.  (W.  Owen.)  Maher-shalal-hash-baz : — One  very  distinct  difference 
between  this  old  Hebrew  name  and  any  recent  English  battle -name  is 
this,  that  the  latter  is  a  cry  of  triumph,  and  the  former  an  announcement 
of  trial,  and  in  this  difference  there  may  be  seen  a  difference  in  the  temper 
of  these  name-makers.  "  Let  us  remember  the  past,"  say  the  English,  "  let 
lis  perpetuate  our  victories  and  immortalise  them,  but  let  defeat  be  forgotten, 
and  let  the  future  take  care  of  itself."  "  No,  let  us  look  onward,"  said  the 
Hebrew  prophet,  "  let  us  face  the  facts,  and  realise  that  no  past  victory  at  the 
Red  Sea  can  make  us  conquerors  now,  if  we  lose  our  faith  in  God."  Of  course, 
as  the  result  of  such  an  utterance,  Isaiah  was  deemed  a  pessimist  (as  is  every  man 
who  is  far-seeing  enough  to  discern  the  cloud  in  the  distance,  even  if  it  be  no  bigger 
than  a  man's  hand,  and  brave  enough  to  tell  what  he  has  seen),  and  it  was  easy 
enough  then,  as  now,  and  satisfactory  enough  to  the  majority,  to  label  him  a 
pessimist  and  then  ignore  him!  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  the  easiest 
of  things  to  listen  to  the  men  who  prop  esy  smoothly  of  continual  summer, 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

while,  round  them  as  they  speak,  the  leaves  are  falling  in  autumn,  and  the  trees 
stripping  themselves  bare  to  face  the  unseen  icy  wind.  There  is  room  for  the 
cry,  "  Maher-shalal-hash-baz  !  "     [Ibid.) 

Vers.  5-8.  This  people  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go  softly. — 
Consolation  amidst  predictions  of  judgment : — Isaiah  does  not  find  himself 
surrounded  merely  by  the  very  wide  circle  of  an  incorrigible  people  ripe 
for  judgment.  He  does  not  stand  alone,  but  is  surrounded  by  a  small 
band  of  believing  disciples  who  need  consolation  and  are  worthy  of  it. 
It  is  to  these  that  the  promising  other  side  of  the  prophecy  of  Immanuel 
belongs.  Mahershalal  cannot  comfort  or  console  them ;  for  they  know 
that  when  Assyria  has  done  with  Damascus  and  Samaria  the  troubles 
of  Judah  are  not  over,  but  are  only  really  about  to  begin.  The  prophecy  of 
Immanuel  is  destined  to  be  the  stronghold  of  the  believers  in  the  terrible  judg- 
ment-time of  the  worldly  power  which  was  then  commencing ;  and  to  turn  into 
the  light  and  unfold  the  consolation  it  contained  for  the  believers,  is  the  purpose 
of  the  discourses  which  now  follow  (chaps,  viii.  6-xii.).  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Judg- 
ment and  salvation : — 1.  Vision  of  a  terrible  devastation  of  the  country,  north 
and  south,  by  the  Assyrian.  2.  The  salvation  and  Saviour  that  rise  to  view 
behind  the  desolation  (chap.  ix.  1-7).  (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  The  waters 
of  Shiloah  took  their  rise  on  Mount  Moriah,  "  the  hill  of  the  Lord,"  the  hill  on 
which  the  temple  was  built.  Indeed,  the  spring  is  said  to  have  risen  within  the 
very  precincts  of  the  temple,  and  to  have  supplied  its  courts  and  cisterns  with 
the  abundant  water  required  for  its  innumerable  washings  and  sacrifices.  From 
the  summit  of  the  hill  it  now  flows  gently  to  its  base,  not  along  any  external 
channel  however,  but  through  a  secret  tunnel  which  it  seems  to  have  worn  for 
itself  through  the  solid  rock.  Its  waters,  therefore,  flow  underground,  running 
far  before  they  meet  the  light  of  day.  And,  when  they  re-emerge,  they  rise 
and  flow  without  noise  or  turbulence.  They  form  no  brawling  torrent,  no  swift 
and  angry  stream,  sweeping  away  its  banks  and  carrying  havoc  before  it.  Softly 
and  gently  they  rise  and  fill  the  pool.  Softly  and  gently  they  overflow  into  a 
placid  stream,  a  stream  that  does  not  fail  even  in  times  of  drought ;  a  stream 
that  quickens  all  it  touches  into  life,  and  reveals  its  presence  only  hy  the  beauty 
and  fertility  which  mark  its  course.  This  is  no  imaginary  description  adapted 
to  the  requirements  of  the  passage  before  us,  but  a  description  given  by  a  traveller 
who  stood  on  its  margin  and  tracked  its  course  only  a  few  years  since.  And 
yot  how  admirably  it  illustrates  the  prophet's  words — "  The  waters  of  Shiloah 
that  go  softly  "  ;  or,  as  the  Hebrew  word  also  means,  secretly.  They  do  go 
both  secretly  and  softly.  They  flow  unseen  for  a  while ;  and  when  they  emerge 
from  their  rocky  tunnel,  they  do  not  rush  and  fret  and  whiten  in  their  course 
as  most  hill  streams  do,  but  lapse  gently  on,  carrying  with  them  a  belt  of  verdure 
to  the  very  margin  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  words  of  Isaiah  describe  the  waters 
of  Shiloah  as  they  remain  to  this  day.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Shiloah  and  the 
Euphrates,  or  mercy  and  judgment: — The  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  mirrors 
the  life  of  the  individual  man.  I.  That  the  mercies  of  otjb  present  life  flow 
"  softly  "  by  as  A  gentle  stream.  1.  They  flow  vivifyingly.  The  waters  of 
Shiloah  were  the  life  of  Jerusalem.  The  stream  of  mercy  here  is  our  life. 
2.  They  flow  constantly.  The  streams  of  Shiloah  are  flowing  now.  The  stream 
of  mercy  is  constantly  rolling  by  us  from  infancy  to  our  mortal  gasp.  3.  They 
flow  softly.  It  rolls  by  us  almost  unheard.  II.  That  the  abuse  of  this 
stream  of  mercies  is  an  immense  crime.  The  text  teaches  that  the  crime 
of  the  Jew  in  relation  to  his  privileges  was  twofold :  1.  Rejection.  "  They 
refused  the  waters  of  Shiloah,"  which  means,  they  refused  to  avail  themselves 
of  those  means  of  national  improvement  and  defence  which  the  munificent  reign 
of  Jehovah  under  which  they  lived  afforded.  They  refused  to  trust  Him  in 
their  dangers.  2.  Presumption.  These  people  "  rejoiced  in  Rezin  and  Remaliah's 
son."  Their  minds  ever  occupied  by  the  failures  and  successes  of  wicked  men, 
their  hope  of  safety  rested  on  the  confidence  they  had  in  mere  worldly  alliances ; 
they  trusted  in  an  arm  of  flesh.  We  abuse  God's  mercy  when  we  allow  it 
not  to  inspire  us  with  unshaken  confidence  in  His  protecting  love  and  power. 
IDI.  THAT  THIS  CRIME  WILL  BRING  ON  THE  TUMTJLTUOTrS  river  of  retribution. 
"  Behold,  the  Lord  bringeth  up  upon  them  the  waters  of  the  river,  strong  and 
many,"  &o.  1.  The  abuse  of  mercy  leads  to  retributive  misery.  2.  The  streams  of 
retributive  misery  stand  in  awful  contrast  with  those  of  mercy.    (Bomilist.) 


chap,  vm.]  ISAIAH.  223 

Shiloah  a  type  of  Gospel  grace  : — There  are  more  reasons  than  one  why  Siloam, 
rather  than  the  other  waters  of  Jerusalem,  is  selected  by  the  prophet  as  a  type 
of  Gospel  influences  and  Gospel  grace.     It  filtered  clear  from  the  temple-rock, — 
emblem  of  grace  in  its  source, — and  for  a  time  ran  its  unseen  course  underground, 
— emblem  of  grace  in  its  secrecy.     Then  it  sparkled  out  and  along  a  broad  band 
of  silver,  till  it  reached  the  gardens  and  the  vineyards  beyond,  where  it  divided 
into  a  hundred  tiny  courses  that  covered  the  sward  with  their  shining  network, 
and  filled  the  air  with  their  gentle  music, — emblem  of  grace  in  its  power  to  refresh 
and  fertilise.     Add  to  this  the  fact  that  Siloam  played  a  part  in  Jewish  religion, 
and  entered  once  and  again  into  Jewish  story.     It  was  there  that  the  temple 
vessels  were  cleansed.     There,  once  a  year,  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  the 
priests  went  in  solemn  procession,  and  fetched  water  in  golden  goblets,  to  pour 
as  an  offering  to  the  Lord.     There,  in  later  times,  dwelt  virtue  to  heal.     It  was 
by  the  brink  of  Siloam  that  the  impotent  man  lay  till  He  of  whom  Siloam  testified 
wrought  the  cure  he  had  waited  so  long  for  in  vain.     It  was  in  the  waters  of 
Siloam  that  the  blind  man  washed  and  received  his  sight.     And  it  was  close 
to  Siloam  that  our  Saviour  most  probably  stood,  when  He  spoke  of  a  better 
etore  than  gushed  from  its  mossy  fountain,  or  rippled  in  its  pebbly  bed,  and 
uttered  that  greatest  of  all  Gospel  invitations,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come 
unto  Me,  and  drink."     The  figure  is  fruitful  in  striking  analogies,  suggesting  much 
as  to  the  nature  and  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom  of  grace  beyond  the  main  fact 
of  its  gentleness.     The  Gospel  of  Christ  as  a  matter  that  comes  not  by  observa- 
tion,— the  prime  and  outstanding  illustration  of  that  gentleness  of  God  which 
makes  great, — an  agency  which  pursues  its  peaceful  processes  and  accomplishes 
its  peaceful  results,  not  by  might  nor  by  power,  but  by  God's  own  Spirit,  whose 
operations  are  generally  noiseless  and  often  unseen, — is  the  subject  before  us. 
1.    When    we    speak    of    the    gentleness    of    the    Gospel,    it    is    not    denied 
that  there  may  be  a  great  deal  of  stir  in  the  means  and  the  circumstances  that 
precede  and  prepare  for  the  Gospel.     That,  however,  does  not  interfere  with 
the  truthfulness  of  the  figure;  the  figure,  on  the  contrary,  suggests  it.     When 
you  wish  to  dig  a  bed  for  a  stream,  and  lead  its  waters  through  a  region  hitherto 
dry,  you  must  be  prepared  for  a  certain  disturbance.     Rocks  may  have  to  be 
blasted,  trees  to  be  torn  up,  long  accumulations  to  be  removed,  as  rough  places 
are  made  smooth  and  crooked  places  plain,  and  a  channel  prepared  for  the  fertilis- 
ing current.     But  the  stream  when  it  comes  may  flow  softly  all  the  same,  gurgling 
gently  past  the  seams  of  the  pickaxe  and  the  stones  that  the  powder  has  stained. 
The  fact  is,  all  God's  saving  work  is  gentle.     He  may  smite  like  the  hammer, 
but  He  heals  like  the  dew ;   His  severities  may  crush,  but  it  is  the  gentleness 
that  comes  after  that  makes  great.     2.  Nor,  in  speaking  of   the  gentleness  of 
the  Gospel,  do  we  forget  that  a  great  deal  of  stir  may  follow  it.     Most  true  it  is 
that  the  Gospel  fits  a  life  for  outward  processes  of  activity,  expenditures  of  effort 
and  of  energy,  feats  of  work  and  of  warfare,  which  may  be  far  from  being  secret 
or  noiseless.    Just  so  with  a  stream.     You  may  have  the  industry  and  stir  of  the 
mill  on  its  banks,  when  the  wheels  whirl  and  the  looms  hum,  as  corn  is  bruised 
for  man's  food,  or  cloth  is  prepared  for  his  raiment ;  and  you  may  have  at  the 
same  time  the  quiet  of  the  stream  that  turns  it,  whose  current  flows  softly,  and 
whose  ripple  is  all  but  unheard,  as  it  steals  brimming  through  the  lush,  level 
meadows,  or  hides   beneath  the  overarching  elms.      Yes,  the  outcome  of  the 
Gospel  may  mean  stir.     But  the  Gospel  itself,  the  secret  and  spring  of  it,  that 
is  always  as  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  flow  softly.     3.  Nor,  once  more,  when 
we  speak  of  the  gentleness  and  equality  of  the  grace  and  influences  of  the  Gospel, 
do  we  fail  to  remember  that  even  the  Gospel  itself  has  its  periods  of  quickening 
and  enlargement.     Every  now  and  then  the  stream  of  its  influences   is  more 
copious,  and  the  evidence  of  its  existence  more  visible  and  obtrusive.     Again 
the  figure  fits  in  at  this  point, — for  Siloam  was  intermittent.     Every  few  hours 
or  so  the  calmness  of  its  surface  was  broken,  the  speed  of  its  current  was  hastened, 
by  a  richer  jet  of  water  from  its  spring.    But  no  perception  of  the  good  to  be  gained 
at  such  epochs  is  to  blind  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  the  blessing  may  exist,  and 
exist  to  fertilise  and  enrich  at  other  times,  when  the  course  of  God's  dealings 
is  more  ordinary,  and  their  effects  more  regular  and  unseen.     After  all,  the  waters 
of  Shiloah  flow  softly,  and,  even  when  stillest  and  most  secret,  they  are  visible 
enough  for  thirsty  souls  to  discover  their  existence,  abundant  enough  for  them 
to  dip  their  pitchers,  and  drink.     (W.  A.  Gray.)         The  choices  of  life: — Are 
we  not  all  more  or  less  in  the  position  of  the  Jews  whom  Isaiah  addresses,  with 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciiap.  via 

perils  surrounding  us,  and  with  the  need  of  protection  and  assistance  pressed 
home  on  us  ?  Have  we  not  all,  too,  an  alternative  of  the  same  kind  presented 
ua, — between  Gospel  grace  and  Gospel  influences  on  the  one  hand,  and  worldly 
advantages  and  alliances  on  the  other, — between  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that 
go  softly,  whose  very  silence  and  secrecy  may  offend  us,  and  the  noisier  rapids  of 
earth,  which  attract,  like  the  Euphrates  in  the  prophet's  figure,  only  to  disappoint 
or  betray  T  Every  man's  life  yields  an  opportunity  for  choosing,  and  every 
man's  life  is  shaped  and  conditioned  by  the  choice  which  he  makes.  I.  Let 
me  exemplify  the  alternative  before  us  by  a  reference  to  the  example  we  follow. 
Our  example  has  been  given  us.  It  is  the  example  of  one  wbose  existence  while 
here  was  a  living  embodiment  of  the  figure  of  the  text  It  ran  its  course  through 
this  earth  of  ours  like  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go  softly.  The  stream  of  Shiloah 
was  a  picture  and  a  prophecy  of  Christ.  The  mystery  lies  wrapped  in  the  very 
name,  and  John,  the  evangelist,  who  was  ever  quick  in  discerning  such  refer- 
ences,  and  ever  ready  in  expressing  them,  intends  the  analogy  to  be  marked  when 
he  says :  "  The  pool  of  Siloam,  which  is  by  interpretation,  Sent."  And  was  not 
the  sending  of  Christ,  to  begin  with,  and  His  life  all  throughout,  characterised 
by  the  aspect  of  the  text  ?  What  of  His  youth  ?  For  thirty  long  years,  His 
life  ran  its  hidden  course, — through  a  self-restraint  that  may  well  be  called 
marvellous,  making  music  and  greenness,  no  doubt,  in  the  mountain  retreat 
where  it  flowed,  but  known  nowhere  besides  ;  scarcely  recognised,  as  it  seems, 
even  there.  And  when  solitude  and  secrecy  had  accomplished  their  work,  and 
His  hour  for  disclosure  had  come,  and  the  stream  that  had  hitherto  hid  itself  took 
its  way  through  the  glare  of  publicity,  as  He  wrought  and  spoke  among  men, 
was  it  otherwise  ?  Still,  as  before,  His  life,  like  the  waters  of  Shiloah,  flowed 
softly.  Take  His  mien  and  bearing  among  men.  Popularity  did  not  elate 
Him  ;  difficulty  did  not  bewilder  Him  ;  insult  did  not  ruffle  Him.  He  was  never 
unquiet ;  He  never  made  haste ;  He  was  never  surprised.  Or  take  the  nature 
of  His  kingdom  and  His  sway.  It  was  a  powerful  sway  that  He  exercised  even 
while  on  earth,  but  how  was  it  manifested,  and  to  what  did  it  owe  its  might  ? 
No  flaunt  of  banner  nor  beat  of  drum  accompanied  His  progress.  Victor  and 
King  though  He  was,  He  did  not  cry  nor  lift  up  His  voice  in  the  streets.  A 
bruised  reed  He  did  not  break ;  the  smoking  flax  He  did  not  quench.  What- 
ever of  tumult  and  confusion  He  experienced,  it  was  in  His  circumstances  and 
not  in  His  life.  Have  you  found  your  ideal  of  life  in  a  picture  of  purity,  of 
charity,  of  self-restraint  and  self-sacrifice  such  as  this  ?  If  your  heart's  real 
creed  is,  Blessed  are  the  rich,  blessed  are  the  joyful,  blessed  are  the  self -aggrandis- 
ing, blessed  are  they  of  whom  all  men  speak  well, — your  choice  is  the  choice  of 
the  Jews;  you  have  pitched  by  the  rivers  of  Assyria,  with  their  treacherous 
waves  for  protection,  and  their  turbid  stores  for  supply.  II.  We  pass  from  the 
examples  men  follow,  to  the  principles  and  the  agencies  they  bely  on, 
and  try  to  illustrate  how  the  alternative  holds  there.  And  the  choice  is  just 
as  before,  between  such  agencies  as  are  unobtrusive  and  gracious,  and  those  that 
are  pretentious  and  human ;  between  the  aids  of  religion  and  the  aids  of  the 
world.  Most  men  have  an  eye  to  success ;  especially  have  the  young ;  and 
how  often  do  they,  in  the  choice  of  the  agencies  they  depend  on  and  the  means 
they  adopt,  choose  wrong.  The  thought  applies  to  communities  and  to  Churches 
as  well  as  to  individuals.  III.  Let  us  apply  the  principle  of  the  text  to  the 
modes  of  religion  WE  ADOPT.  There,  too,  there  is  the  difference  between  what 
is  unobtrusive  on  the  one  hand  and  what  is  ostentatious  on  the  other;  between 
what  is  satisfying  and  secure  and  what  is  disappointing  and  unsafe ;  between 
what  is  true  and  what  is  false.  "  The  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go  softly  "  ;  does 
not  the  phrase  remind  us — 1.  Of  the  Gospel's  simplicity.  2.  Of  its  secrecy 
and  noiselessness  ?  Phases  of  religion  may  come  and  go,  and  those  who  imagine 
that  religion  is  real  only  where  its  instrumentalities  are  special,  and  its  outward 
manifestations  demonstrative,  may  have  their  hopes  dashed  and  their  faith 
staggered,  as  they  watch  these  manifestations  disappear.  But  religion  itself, 
the  kingdom  which  cometh  not  by  observation,  may  be  pursuing  its  quiet  course, 
and  extending  its  beneficent  influences  notwithstanding,  and  that  in  ways  and 
in  quarters  which  are  unseen  and  unguessed  of  now,  but  which  the  last  great  day 
will  in  due  time  declare.  (Ibid.)  "  By  cool  Siloarris  shady  rill"  : — Not  only 
because  of  their  usefulness  had  the  waters  of  Shiloah  endeared  themselves  to 
the  heart  of  Israel.  There  were  other  and  more  hallowed  associations  which  they 
suggested.     I.  The  waters  of  Shiloah  represented  to  the  Jew  the  idea  of  Fatheb- 


chap,  viii.]  ISAIAH.  225 

land.  Both  Israel  and  Judah  were  in  danger  of  forgetting  the  true  ideal  of 
patriotism  which  David  had  fostered,  and  were  fast  degenerating  into  a  spurious 
imitation  of  it,  a  mere  feverish  militarism.  How  are  we  to  translate  this  message 
into  the  English  of  the  twentieth  century  T  Does  it  not  mean  that  the  springs 
of  our  national  greatness  are  not  the  matters  which  bulk  most  largely  in  our 
newspapers,  are  not  the  doings  of  courts  and  kings,  of  diplomatists  and  statesmen, 
of  generals  and  armies,  though  these  have  an  influence  on  a  nation's  destiny,  and 
often  one  not  to  be  despised  ?  But  far  more  important  are  the  more  unobtrusive 
factors  of  a  nation's  greatness ;  its  care  for  the  moral  nurture  and  intellectual 
equipment  of  its  children,  its  fostering  of  the  arts  and  sciences  and  industrial 
training,  the  quality  of  its  manufactures  and  the  honesty  of  its  commerce,  its 
care  for  the  moral  and  material  condition  of  the  workmen  who  produce  its  wealth, 
the  freedom  of  its  subjects,  the  equity  of  its  laws,  the  purity  and  loftiness  of  its 
literature,  the  respect  for  religion,  for  home,  for  marriage  bonds, — these  are  the 
things  that  make  a  nation  great,  though  they  are  as  "  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that 
go  softly,"  little  seen  and  regarded.  The  penalty  for  refusing  these  softly  flowing 
waters  of  Shiloah  is  obvious  to  Isaiah's  mind.  The  instinct  of  the  statesman  in 
him,  apart  from  any  predictive  faculty,  would  be  quite  sufficient  to  show  him  the 
inevitable  end  of  such  fatuity.  The  king  of  Assyria,  at  first  invited  to  interfere 
in  Judah's  interest,  would  be  Bure  finally  to  interfere  in  his  own,  and  both  Israel 
and  Judah,  weakened  by  mutual  jealousy  and  strife,  and  by  internal  dissensions, 
would  fall  an  easy  prey.  So  do  God's  retributive  providences  ever  fall  on  the 
nation  which  forgets  the  true  sources  of  its  greatness,  relies  on  the  arm  of  flesh 
while  inward  corruption  is  working  unheeded  at  its  vitals,  forsakes  an  enlightened 
patriotism  which  strives  to  be  great  for  a  spurious  one  which  labours  to  appear 
so.  II.  These  waters  of  Shiloah  suggested  to  the  Jew,  not  only  his  Fatherland, 
but  his  Religion.  It  was  a  sacred  stream,  for  it  rose  in  a  spur  of  Mount  Zion, 
near  the  temple.  And  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  on  "  the  last  great  day  of 
the  feast,"  a  priest  brought  water  from  the  Pool  of  Siloam  in  a  golden  vessel, 
and  poured  it  on  the  altar  amid  the  rejoicings  of  the  people.  It  was  on  this  annual 
occasion  that  the  Immanuel  prophesied  by  Isaiah  stood  and  cried,  "  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink."  Judah,  in  Isaiah's  time,  was  fast  deserting 
the  religion  so  closely  associated  with  this  stream.  Such  apostasy  from  God 
brings  its  own  retribution  before  long,  whether  on  the  nation  or  the  individual 
that  practises  it.  Some  such  loosening  of  moral  fibre  is  often  seen,  not  only  in 
the  man  who  loses  his  hold  on  religion  itself,  but  who  loses  his  loyalty  to  the  Church 
which  nurtured  him.  III.  The  waters  of  Shiloah  also  represented  to  the  Jew 
the  sanctities  of  Home,  and  the  prophet  here  reproves  him  because  he  had  rejected 
these  sanctities  and  beauties  of  religious  family  life  for  polygamy  and  foul 
idolatry,  which  broke  up  the  family,  and  embittered  and  destroyed  its  hallowed 
relationships.  The  word  "  home  "  is  one  in  which  we  English  have  a  special 
heritage.  Be  careful  where  you  go  outside  the  home  for  your  enjoyments.  Do 
not  cast  aside  the  healthful  restraints  of  home,  and  reject  those  quiet  waters, 
lest  there  rise  upon  you  "  the  waters  of  the  river,  strong  and  many,"  remorse  and 
unavailing  repentance,  self-contempt,  lost  character,  and  a  hopeless  future. 
(C.  A.  Healing,  B.A.)  God's  gentle  care: — The  brook  which  flowed  by  the  base 
of  Mount  Zion,  and  down  by  the  side  of  the  temple-covered  Moriah,  was  an  emblem 
of  the  help  and  defence  which  the  God  of  Zion  and  of  the  temple  supplied  to  His 
people  in  Jerusalem.  And  it  was  no  angry  or  noisy  torrent,  but  water  that  flowed 
softly.  So  for  communities  and  individuals  now  who  trust  in  Him,  there  is  a 
quiet  but  most  potent  protection  from  the  Lord.  Let  us  show  this  in  the  case  of 
an  individual.  I.  Trouble  without.  Say  that  gloom  or  pain,  or  both  together, 
fall  upon  you.  Your  heart,  like  that  of  the  king  and  people  referred  to  by  the 
prophet  Isaiah,  is  agitated  "  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  with  the  wind." 
You  seek  God  in  your  affliction :  you  hearken  to  His  prophets ;  you  look  to 
Him  for  deliverance.  And  from  some  unexpected  quarter  help  arises.  Your 
burden  is  lightened ;  your  disaster  is  retrieved.  Do  not  call  it  good  fortune. 
You  do  well  to  seize  what  helps  and  remedies  are  brought  within  your  reach ; 
but  give  the  glory  to  God.  It  is  His  secret  will,  His  noiseless  care  that  has  been 
your  true  defence.  You  are  not  hurt  because  of  "  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go 
softly."  II.  Trouble  within.  The  spiritual  life  is  invaded  and  endangered 
by  unseen  foes  and  spiritual  wickednesses;  and  against  such  adversaries  the 
appeal  to  God  may  still  be  made — "  Strive  Thou,  0  Lord,  with  those  that  strive 
with  me :  fight  Thou  against  them  that  fight  against  me."     In  such  cases  ot 

*5 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

spiritual  temptation,  God  knows  how  to  help.  But  do  not  look  for  any  mere 
show  of  power.  It  is  the  enemy  that  "  comes  in  like  a  flood."  Yet  far  greater 
than  the  power  of  the  enemy  is  the  power  of  Him  who  is  to  His  people  as  "  cool 
Siloam's  shady  rill."  Fussy  Christians  are  feeble.  The  calm  and  strong  are  they 
who  trust  God  simply  and  fully,  and  are  content  with  "  the  waters  that  go  softly." 
The  Lord  will  beautify  the  meek  with  salvation.  In  new  covenant  faith  and 
privilege  we  "  are  come  to  Mount  Zion,  and  to  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem."  It  becomes  us  to  be  calm,  because  that  Living  One  is 
our  defence.  (D.  Eraser,  D.D.)  The  Jewish  temptation  to  a  false  trust : — All 
the  Hebrew  prophets,  and  Isaiah  among  them,  use  the  kingdoms  of  Syria  and  of 
Assyria  a*  types  of  the  great  world-power,  of  those  external  forces  of  every  kind 
in  which  it  is  our  constant  temptation  to  trust  rather  than  in  the  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth.  To  the  Jewish  people,  dwelling  in  their  scattered  village  communities, 
with  their  self-elected  judges  and  leaders — to  this  people,  who  were  held  together 
by  religious  rather  than  by  political  ties,  the  vast  organised  despotisms  beyond 
their  borders  were  a  strangely  impressive  and  terrible  spectacle.  It  is  impossible 
to  read  the  inspired  prophecies  and  chronicles  without  perceiving  that  the  national 
imagination  was  dominated,  that  it  was  now  attracted  and  now  daunted,  by 
the  immense  power  of  these  great  instruments  of  conquest  and  oppression  ;  without 
perceiving  that  in  the  minds  both  of  prophets  and  of  the  people  these  despotisms 
came  to  stand  for  all  the  hostile  and  seductive  forces  of  that  world  which  is  without 
God  and  even  opposes  itself  against  Him.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  A  virtual  renuncia- 
tion of  the  Consolation  of  Israel : — In  preferring  the  alliance  of  Syria  and  Assyria 
to  the  help  of  God,  these  men  were  virtually  renouncing  their  special  prerogative, 
the  peculiar  hope  and  consolation  of  Israel.  For  just  as  those  ancient  despotisms 
were  prophetic  types  of  the  forces  of  the  outward  world,  so  the  son  of  Isaiah  was 
a  type  of  the  true  Immanuel,  and  the  waters  of  Shiloah  a  type  of  the  quickening 
ana  cleansing  ministry  of  Him  who  was  sent  of  God  to  take  away  the  sin  of  the 
world.  To  refuse  the  waters  of  Shiloah  for  the  sake  of  Rezin  and  Reraaliah's 
son,  to  pay  so  little  heed  to  the  promises  and  significance  of  the  birth  of  Immanuel, 
was  virtually,  therefore,  to  reject  the  God  whom  they  professed  to  worship,  and 
to  renounce  the  hope  to  which  they  had  been  called.  It  was  to  prefer  man  to 
God.  It  was  to  be  conformed  to  the  world,  and  alienated  from  the  Christ.  (Ibid.) 
Choice  and  its  consequences  : — H  we  refuse  gracious  ministries  we  must  encounter 
judicial  judgment.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Wise  and  unwise  choices: — Let  us  be 
best  pleased  with  the  waters  of  Shiloah,  that  go  softly,  for  rapid  streams  are 
dangerous.  (M.  Henry.)  Christ  the  true  Shiloah: — No  sooner  has  St.  John 
told  us  (John  ix.)  that  Jesus  declared  Himself  to  be  "  sent "  of  the  Father,  than 
he  also  tells  us  that  Siloam  means  "  sent "  ;  the  implication  being  that  just  as 
Christ  was  sent,  so  also  the  waters  of  Siloam  were  sent  by  God,  and  were  His 
gift  to  the  world.  The  commentators  are  agreed  that  the  apostle  adds  this 
parenthesis  in  order  to  teach  us  that  the  cleansing,  healing  spring,  which  gave 
sight  to  the  blind  and  kept  the  temple  pure,  was  a  symbol  of  the  Messiah  and  of 
His  cleansing  and  enlightening  ministry.  He  tells  us  that  Siloam  meant  "  sent 
of  God  "  in  order  that  we  may  recognise  in  Christ  the  true  Siloam — Him  by  whose 
virtue  the  sick  are  healed  and  the  service  of  God  is  sanctified.  So  that,  in  fine, 
to  refuse  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go  softly,  and  to  dread  or  to  glory  in  Rezin 
and  Remaliah's  son,  is,  in  the  last  resort,  to  put  our  trust  in  the  forces  of  this 
visible  and  passing  world,  instead  of  trusting  in  Christ,  the  Sent  One  of  God  and 
the  Saviour  of  the  world.  A  very  beautiful  and  suggestive  meaning  is  thus 
reached.  For  the  passage,  so  obscure  at  first,  sets  Christ  before  us — I.  As  the 
Sent  One  op  God,  the  true  Siloam.  He  is  the  Fountain  of  Life  in  the  spiritual 
temple.  II.  In  the  might  of  His  gentleness.  The  waters  of  Shiloah  go 
softly,  secretly.  In  like  manner,  Jesus  did  not  strive  nor  cry,  nor  make  a  noise 
in  the  streets.  His  course  through  life,  like  that  of  the  sacred  hill  stream,  was 
to  be  traced  by  the  blessings  He  shed  around  Him,  the  added  life  and  fruitfulness 
He  carried  to  prepared  and  fertile  hearts,  the  new  life  and  fruitfulness  He  carried 
to  barren  hearts.  111.  As  rejected  by  His  own.  They  refused  the  waters 
of  Shiloah — refused  them  precisely  because  they  ran  softly.  Had  Jesus  come 
to  reveal  His  power  instead  of  to  display  His  mercy,  blazing  fierce  wrath  upon 
His  enemies  and  smiting  hostile  nations  to  the  earth,  the  Jews  would  probably 
have  received  Him  and  rejoiced  in  Him.  But  He  came  not  with  observation. 
(S.  Cox,  D.D.) 


chap,  vra.]  ISAIAH.  227 

Vers.  11-15.  For  the  Lord  spake  thus  to  me. — God's  overpowering  hand  .•— 
The  hand  is  the  absolute  Hand  which,  when  it  is  laid  upon  a  man,  over- 
powers all  his  perception,  feeling,  and  thinking.  (F.  Delilzsch,  D.D.)  "  With 
strength  of  hand"  (ver.  11): — That  is,  seizing  him  and  casting  him  into  the 
prophetic  trance  (2  Kings  iii.  15  ;  Ezek.  i.  3,  iii.  14,  viii.  1).  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver, 
D.D.)  Warning  and  encouragement  : — The  cry  in  Judah  had  been,  "  There 
is  a  conspiracy  against  us,  a  formidable  combination,  which  can  only  be  met 
by  a  counter-alliance  with  Assyria  "  (such  appears  to  be  the  best  interpretation 
of  this  difficult  verse) :  Isaiah  and  his  little  circle  of  adherents  had  been  warned 
not  to  join  in  it,  not  to  judge  of  the  enterprise,  or  probable  success,  of  Rezin  and 
Pekah,  by  the  worldly  and  superficial  estimate  of  the  masses.  A  truer  guide 
for  action  had  been  revealed  to  them.  "  Do  not,"  such  is  the  lesson  which  he 
has  been  taught,  "  do  not  follow  the  common  people  in  their  unreasonable  alarm  " 
(ver.  12) :  "  Jehovah  of  hosts,  Him  shall  ye  count  holy  ;  and  let  Him  be  your 
fear,  and  Him  your  dread,"  i.e.,  in  modern  phraseology,  "  Do  not  be  guilty  of 
*  practical  abandonment  of  Jehovah  ;  do  not  sacrifice  principle  to  expediency. 
If  you  do  not  lose  faith,  '  He  will  be  for  you  a  sanctuary '  "  (ver.  14),  i.e.,  (appar- 
ently) He  will  be  as  a  sanctuary  protecting  the  territory  in  which  it  is  situated, 
and  securing  for  those  who  honour  it  safety  and  peace  ;  "  but  "  (it  is  ominously 
added)  "  a  cause  of  stumbling  and  ruin  to  both  the  houses  of  Israel,"  to  you  of 
Judah  not  less  than  to  those  of  Ephraim,  to  whom  alone  you  think  that  the  warn- 
ing can  apply.  (Ibid.)  Principle  and  expediency  : — Translated  into  modern 
language,  the  prophet's  lesson  is  this — that  those  who  in  a  time  of  difficulty 
and  temptation  sacrifice  principle  to  expediency,  and  abandon  the  clear  path  of 
duty  for  a  course  which  may  seem  to  lead  to  some  greater  immediate  advantage, 
must  not  be  surprised  if  the  penalty  which  they  ultimately  have  to  pay  be  a  severe 
one.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  12-14.  Neither  fear  ye  their  fear  .  .  .  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts 
Himself.  —  Sanctifying  the  Lord : — To  sanctify  Jehovah  is  in  mind  and  in 
practice  to  recognise  Him  as  the  holy  God,  the  Lord  who  is  absolute,  free 
from  the  limitations  which  hinder  all  other  beings  from  carrying  their  wills 
into  full  operation ;  and  to  believe  with  the  whole  heart  that  God  can  and 
does  govern  all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  own  will,  and 
that  what  He  determines  does  certainly  come  to  pass,  however  probabilities 
and  appearances  may  be  against  the  belief.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  God 
should  be  a  nation^  supreme  regard  : — Isaiah's — or  rather  the  Divine — policy 
was  one  of  non-alliance  and  non-intervention.  It  did  not  forbid  kindly  com- 
mercial and  literary  intercourse  with  foreign  nations.  On  the  contrary,  it  ever 
looked  hopefully  forward  to  a  time  when  all  kings  and  their  subjects  should 
acknowledge  Jehovah,  and  flow  into  His  house.  It  was  a  policy  of  justifiable  and 
absolute  trust  in  the  protecting  care  of  the  living  God,  who  holds  the  nations 
in  the  hollow  of  His  hand.  It  was  a  policy  of  the  highest  and  truest  patriotism, 
because  it  first  insisted  on  the  internal  purification  of  the  nation  from  sin  and 
disobedience,  from  idolatry,  drunkenness,  oppression  of  the  poor,  unrighteous 
trading,  luxury  and  lust,  from  hypocrisies  and  shams  of  ceremonial  religion; 
and  then,  upon  the  uselessness  and  irrationality  of  standing  armies  and  warlike 
weapons.  (F.  Sessions.)  The  true  remedy  against  fear  : — I.  Speak  against 
giving  way  TO  fear.  In  periods  of  alarm  the  reports  that  are  spread  always 
much  outstrip  the  truth.  Fear  is  a  very  inventive  passion ;  it  creates  to  itself 
many  causes  of  alarm  which  have  no  existence,  and  greatly  magnifies  those  which 
really  exist.  II.  Point  out  the  proper  and  only  sufficient  remedy  against 
disquietude.  There  is  no  rationality  in  being  free  from  fear,  or  relieved  from 
fear,  otherwise  than  by  true  piety  towards  God.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts 
Himself,"  &c.  III.  Show  how  complete  this  relief  ought  to  be.  And 
in  doing  this,  I  shall  place  before  you  a  few  passages  of  Holy  Scripture  showing 
what  is  proposed  to  you,  what  may  be  hoped  for  and  ought  to  be  aspired  after. 
"  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower,"  &c.  The  perfections  of  God  are  our 
never-failing  resource  and  security.  "  Come,  My  people,  enter  into  thy  chambers," 
&c.  (ch.  xxvi.  20).  "  Be  careful  for  nothing,"  &c.  "  Cast  thy  burden  on  the  Lord," 
&c.  "  Thou  shalt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,"  &c.  "  They  that  trust  in  the 
Lord  shall  be  as  Mount  Zion,"  &c.  (J.  Scott,  M.A.)  The  fear  of  God  .—I.  The 
whole  subject  of  Godhead  is  one  of  awe,  and  if  of  awe,  then  "  dread."  The 
more  you  know  of  God,  the  more  you  feel  the  unfathomableness  of  the  mystery 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

of  Godhead.  And  all  mystery  is  awe.  It  is  a  rule  of  our  being,  that  we  must 
tremble  when  we  stand  on  the  margin  of  the  unknown.  Therefore  they  who 
know  most  of  God  will  most  "  fear,"  not  Hi3  anger,  but  simply  His  amazing 
greatness.  II.  The  sense  of  mercy  and  benefits  heaped  upon  us  has  an 
overwhelming  influence  upon  the  mind.  Do  not  you  know  what  it  is  to 
tremble  at  a  danger  when  you  have  escaped  it,  much  more  than  you  did  when 
you  encountered  it  ?  That  is  exactly  the  '  fear  "  and  the  "  dread  "  of  a  pardoned 
sinner.  It  is  the  contemplation  of  a  thunder-cloud  which  has  rolled  over  your 
head.  III.  Reverence  is  the  great  lesson  which  our  age  has  to  learn. 
Be  suspicious  of  the  love  which  is  without  awe.  Remember  that  our  best  acquaint- 
ance with  God  only  shows  us  more  the  immensity  of  the  fields  of  thought  which 
no  mind  can  traverse.  IV.  "  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary."  Do  you  recoil 
at  the  idea  of  dreading  God  ?  That  which  makes  the  dread  makes  the  hiding- 
place.  To  those  who  fear,  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary.  1.  To  a  Jewish  mind, 
the  first  idea  of  the  sanctuary  would  be  refuge.  2.  The  sanctuary  of  safety 
becomes  the  home  of  peace.  "  Lord,  Thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in  all 
generations."  3.  God  is  the  fountain  of  your  holiness.  The  Shechinah  shine* 
within  the  veil ;  but  as  you  become  familiar  with  the  precincts  of  that  holy  place, 
you  catch  some  of  its  rays,  and  reflect  its  glory.  (J.  Vaughan.)  Pear: — 
I.  An  evtl  practice  prohibited.  "  Fear  not  their  fear,  neither  be  afraid." 
Sinful  fears  are  apt  to  drive  the  best  men  into  sinful  compliances  and  indirect 
shifts  to  help  themselves.  Their  fear  may  be  understood  two  ways — 1.  Sub- 
jectively. A  fear  that  enslaved  them  in  bondage  of  spirit,  a  fear  that  is  the  fruit 
of  sin,  a  sin  in  its  own  nature,  the  cause  of  much  sin  to  them,  and  a  just  punish- 
ment  of  God  upon  them  for  their  other  sins.  2.  Effectively.  Let  not  your 
fear  produce  in  you  such  mischievous  effects  as  their  fear  doth;  to  make 
you  forget  God,  magnify  the  creature,  prefer  your  own  wits  and  policies  to  the 
almighty  power  and  never-failing  faithfulness  of  God.  II.  An  effectual 
remedy  prescribed.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts  Himself,"  &c.  The  fear  of 
God  will  swallow  up  the  fear  of  man,  a  reverential  awe  and  dread  of  God  will 
extinguish  the  slavish  fear  of  the  creature,  as  the  sunshine  puts  out  fire,  or  as 
one  fire  fetches  out  another.  When  the  Dictator  ruled  at  Rome,  then  all  other 
officers  ceased  ;  and  so,  in  a  great  measure,  will  all  other  fears,  where  the  fear  of 
God  is  dictator  in  the  heart.  III.  A  singular  encouragement  proposed. 
"  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary."  (J.  Flavel.)  Fear  and  Us  remedy  : — I.  Thb 
best  men  are  too  apt  to  be  overcome  with  slavish  fears  in  times  of  imminent 
distress  and  danger.     II.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  most  effectual  means 

TO  EXTINGUISH  THE  SINFUL  FEAR  OF  MAN  AND  TO  SECURE  US  FROM  DANGER.      (Ibid.) 

Different  kinds  of  fear : — There  is  a  threefold  fear  in  man,  namely — I.  Natural, 
of  which  all  are  partakers  that  partake  of  the  common  nature.  It  is  the  trouble 
or  perturbation  of  mind,  from  the  apprehension  of  approaching  evil  or  impending 
danger.  1.  To  this  natural  fear  it  pleased  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  subject  Himself 
in  the  days  of  His  flesh  (Mark  xiv.  33).  2.  This  fear  creates  great  trouble  and 
perturbation  in  the  mind ;  in  proportion  to  the  danger  is  the  fear,  and  in  proportion 
to  the  fear,  the  trouble  and  distraction  of  the  mind  ;  if  the  fear  be  exceedingly 
great,  reason  is  displaced.  3.  Evil  is  the  object  of  fear,  and  the  greater  the 
evil  is  the  stronger  the  fear  must  needs  be ;  therefore  the  terrors  of  an  awakened 
and  terrified  conscience  must  be  allowed  to  be  the  greatest  of  terrors,  because 
in  that  case  a  man  hath  to  do  with  a  great  and  terrible  God,  and  is  scared  with 
apprehensions  of  His  infinite  and  eternal  wrath,  than  which  no  evil  is  or  can 
be  greater.  4.  Yet  evil,  as  evil,  is  rather  the  object  of  hatred  than  of  fear.  It 
must  be  an  imminent  or  near  approaching  evil  that  provokes  fear.  5.  All  con- 
stitutions and  tempers  admit  not  the  same  degrees  of  fear.  II.  Sinful.  Not 
only  our  infelicity  but  our  fault.  The  sinfulness  of  it  lies  in  five  things.  1.  In 
the  spring  and  cause  of  it,  which  is  unbelief  (chap.  xxx.  15-17).  2.  In  the  excess 
and  immoderacy  of  it ;  for  it  may  be  truly  said  of  our  fears,  as  the  philosopher 
speaks  of  waters,  it  is  hard  to  keep  them  within  bounds.  3.  In  the  inordinacy 
of  it.  To  exalt  the  power  of  any  creature  by  our  fears,  and  give  it  such  an 
ascendancy  over  us  as  if  it  had  an  arbitrary  and  absolute  dominion  over  us,  or 
over  our  comforts,  to  do  with  them  what  it  pleased — this  is  to  put  the  creature 
out  of  its  own  class  and  rank  into  the  place  of  God.  To  trust  in  any  creature 
as  if  it  had  the  power  of  a  God  to  keep  us,  or  to  fear  any  creature,  as  if  it  had 
the  power  of  a  God  to  hurt  us,  is  exceedingly  sinful  (Matt.  x.  28).  4.  In  the 
distracting  influence  it  hath  upon  the  hearts  of  men,  whereby  it  discomposes 


chap,  vra.]  ISAIAH.  229 

and  unfits  them  for  the  discharge  of  their  duties.  Under  an  extraordinary  fear 
both  grace  and  reason,  like  the  wheels  of  a  watch,  wound  above  its  due  height, 
stand  still,  and  have  no  motion  at  all.  5.  In  the  power  it  hath  to  dispose  and 
incline  men  to  the  use  of  sinful  means  to  put  by  their  danger,  and  to  cast  them 
into  the  hands  and  power  of  temptation  (Prov.  xxix.  25 ;  Isa.  lvii.  11).  There 
is  a  double  lie  occasioned  by  fear,  one  in  words  and  another  in  deeds  ;  hypocrisy 
is  a  lie  done,  a  practical  lie,  and  our  Church  history  abounds  with  sad  examples 
of  dissimulation  through  fear.  III.  Religious.  This  is  our  treasure,  not  our 
torment ;  the  chief  ornament  of  the  soul ;  its  beauty  and  perfection.  It  is  the 
natural  passion  sanctified,  and  thereby  changed  and  baptized  into  the  name 
and  nature  of  a  spiritual  grace.  This  fear  is  prescribed  as  an  antidote  against 
sinful  fears ;  it  devours  carnal  fears,  as  Moses'  serpent  did  those  of  the  enchanters. 

1.  It  is  planted  in  the  soul  as  a  permanent  and  fixed  habit ;  it  is  not  of  the  natural 
growth  and  production  of  man's  heart,  but  of  supernatural  infusion  and  implanta- 
tion ( Jer.  xxxii.  40).  2.  It  puts  the  soul  under  the  awe  of  God's  eye.  It  is  the 
reproach  of  the  servants  of  men  to  be  eye-servants,  but  it  is  the  praise  and  honour 
of  God's  servants  to  be  so.  3.  This  respect  to  the  eye  of  God  inclines  them  to 
perform  and  do  whatsoever  pleaseth  Him  and  is  commanded  by  Him ;  hence, 
fearing  God  and  working  righteousness,  are  linked  together  (Acts  x.  35 ;  Gen. 
xxii.  12).  4.  This  fear  engageth,  and  in  some  degree  enableth,  the  soul  in  which 
it  is,  to  avoid  whatsoever  is  displeasing  to  God  (Job  ii.  3).  (Ibid.)  The  use 
of  natural  fear  : — If  fear  did  not  clap  its  fetters  upon  the  wild  and  boisterous 
lusts  of  men,  they  would  certainly  bear  down  all  milder  motives,  and  break  loose 
from  all  bonds  of  restraint.  Men  would  become  like  the  fishes  of  the  sea  (Hab. 
i.  14),  where  the  greater  swallow  up  a  multitude  of  the  smaller  fry  alive  at  one 
gulp  ;  power  and  opportunity  to  do  mischief  would  measure  out  to  men  their 
lot  and  inheritance,  and  consequently  all  societies  must  disband  and  break  up. 
It  is  the  law  and  fear  of  punishment  that  keeps  the  world  in  order  ;  men  are 
afraid  to  do  evil  because  they  are  afraid  to  suffer  it.  If  the  severest  penalties 
in  the  world  were  annexed  to,  or  appointed  by,  the  law,  they  could  signify  nothing 
to  the  ends  of  government  without  fear.  This  is  that  tender,  sensible  power  or 
passion  on  which  threatenings  work,  and  so  brings  men  under  moral  government 
and  restraint  (Rom.  xiii.  3,  4).  (Ibid.)  The  use  of  sinful  fear: — The  Lord 
knows  how  to  overrule  this  in  His  providential  government  of  the  world  to  His 
own  wise  and  holy  purposes.  And  He  does  so — 1.  By  making  it  His  scourge 
to  punish  His  enemies.  If  men  will  not  fear  God  they  shall  fear  men.  There  is 
scarce  a  greater  torment  to  be  found  in  the  world  than  for  a  man  to  be  his  own 
tormentor,  and  his  mind  made  a  rack  and  engine  of  torture  to  his  body.  It  is  a 
dreadful  threatening  which  is  recorded  in  Deut.  xxviii.  65-67.  When  fear  hath 
once  seized  the  heart,  you  may  see  death's  colours  displayed  in  the  face.  2.  By 
fear  God  punishes  His  enemies  in  hell.  3.  Providence  makes  use  of  the  slavish 
fears  and  terrors  of  wicked  men  to  scatter  them,  when  they  are  combined  and 
confederated  against  the  people  of  God  (Psa.  lxxviii.  55,  and  Josh.  xxiv.  11,  12. 
See  also  Psa.  ix.  20).  (Ibid.)  The  use  of  religious  fear: — 1.  By  this  fear  the 
people  of  God  are  excited  to  and  confirmed  in  the  way  of  duty  (Eccles.  xii.  13; 
Jer.  xxxii.  40).  2.  Another  excellent  use  of  this  fear  is,  to  preserve  the  purity 
and  peace  of  our  consciences  by  preventing  grief  and  guilt  therein  (Prov.  xvi.  6 ; 
Gen.  xxxix.  9 ;  Neh.  v.  15).  3.  A  principal  use  of  this  fear  is,  to  awaken  us  to 
make  timely  provisions  for  future  distresses,  that  whensoever  they  come,  they 
may  not  come  by  way  of  surprise  upon  us  (Heb.  xi.  7  ;  Prov.  xiv.  16).  (Ibid.) 
The  causes  of  sinful  fear  : — I.  The  sinful  fears  of  most  good  men  spring  out  of 
their  ignorance  ;  all  darkness  disposes  to  fear,  but  none  like  intellectual  darkness. 
You  read  (Cant.  iii.  8)  how  Solomon's  life-guard  had  every  man  his  sword  upon 
his  thigh,  "  because  of  fear  in  the  night."  The  night  is  the  frightful  season,  in 
the  dark  every  bush  is  a  bear ;  we  sometimes  smile  by  day  to  see  what  silly 
things  those  were  that  scared  us  in  the  night.  So  it  is  here ;  were  our  judgments 
but  duly  informed,  how  soon  would  our  hearts  be  quieted  !  There  is  a  fivefold 
ignorance  out  of  which  fears  are  generated.  1.  Ignorance  of  God.  Ignorance 
and  inconsiderateness  lay  at  the  root  of  the  fears  expressed   in  Isa.   xl.   27. 

2.  Ignorance  of  men.  Did  we  consider  men  as  they  are  in  the  hand  of  our  God 
we  should  not  tremble  at  them  as  we  do.  3.  Ignorance  of  ourselves  and  the 
relation  we  have  to  God  (Isa.  Ii.  12  ;  Gen.  xv.  1  ;  Neh.  vi.  11).  O  that  we  could, 
without  vanity,  but  value  ourselves  duly,  according  to  our  Christian  dignities 
and  privileges,  which,  if  ever  it  be  necessary  to  count  over  and  value,  it  is  in  such 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 

times  of  danger,  when  the  heart  is  so  prone  to  sinking  fears.  4.  Ignorance  of  our 
dangero  and  troubles.  We  are  ignorant  of — (1)  The  comforts  that  are  in  them. 
Paul  and  Silas  met  that  in  a  prison  which  made  them  to  sing  at  midnight,  and 
so  have  many  more  since  their  day.  (2)  The  outlets  and  escapes  from  them 
(Psa.  lxviii.  20 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  9  ;  1  Cor.  x.  13).  5.  Especially  ignorance  and  incon- 
siderateness  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  II.  Another  cause  of  sinful  fear  is  guilt 
upon  the  conscience.  No  sooner  had  Adam  defiled  and  wounded  his  conscience 
with  guilt,  but  he  trembles  and  hides  himself  (Prov.  xxviii.  1 ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  14). 
To  this  wounded  and  trembling  conscience  is  opposed  the  spirit  of  a  sound  mind 
(2  Tim.  i.  7).  An  evil  conscience  foments  fears  and  terrors  three  ways.  1.  By 
aggravating  small  matters.  So  it  was  with  Cain  (Gen.  iv.  14),  "  Every  one  that 
meets  me  will  slay  me."  Now  every  child  was  a  giant  in  his  eye,  and  anybody 
he  met  his  over-match.  2.  By  interpreting  all  doubtful  cases  in  the  worst  sense 
that  can  be  fastened  upon  them.  If  the  swallows  do  but  chatter  in  the  chimney, 
Bessus  interprets  it  to  be  a  discovery  of  his  crime  ;  that  they  are  telling  tales 
of  him  and  saying,  Bessus  killed  a  man.  3.  A  guilty  conscience  can  and  often 
does  create  fears  and  terrors  out  of  nothing  at  all  (Psa.  liii.  5).  III.  No  less  is 
the  sin  of  unbelief  the  real  and  proper  cause  of  most  distracting  fears  (Matt. 
viii.  26).  Fear  is  generated  by  unbelief,  and  unbelief  strengthened  by  fear,  as 
in  nature  there  is  an  observable  circular  generation,  vapours  begetting  showers 
and  showers  new  vapours.  1.  Unbelief  weakens  the  assenting  act  of  faith, 
and  thereby  cuts  off  from  the  soul,  in  a  great  measure,  its  principal  relief  against 
danger  and  troubles  (Heb.  xi.  27).  2.  Unbelief  shuts  up  the  refuges  of  the  soul 
in  the  Divine  promises,  and  by  leaving  it  without  those  refuges,  must  needs  leave 
it  in  the  hand  of  fears  and  terrors.  3.  Unbelief  makes  men  negligent  in  providing 
for  troubles  before  they  come,  and  so  brings  them  by  way  of  surprises  upon  them. 
4.  Unbelief  leaves  our  dearest  interests  and  concerns  in  our  own  hands  ;  it  com- 
mits nothing  to  God,  and  consequently  must  needs  fill  the  heart  with  distracting 
fears  when  imminent  dangers  threaten  us  (1  Pet.  iv.  19 ;  2  Tim.  i.  12 ;  Prov.  xvi.  3). 
IV.  Many  of  our  fears  are  raised  by  the  promiscuous  administration  oe  pro- 
vidence in  this  world  (Eccles.  ix.  2  ;  Ezek.  xxi.  3  ;  Hab.  i.  13).  The  butcheries 
of  the  Albigenses,  Waldenses,  &c.  1.  We  are  apt  to  consider  that  the  same  race 
and  kind  of  men  that  committed  these  outrages  upon  our  brethren  are  still  in 
being,  and  that  their  malice  is  not  abated  in  the  least  degree.  Cain's  club  is  to 
this  day  carried  up  and  down  the  world,  stained  with  the  blood  of  Abel,  as 
Bucholtzer  speaks.  2.  We  know  also  that  nothing  hinders  the  execution  of 
their  wicked  purposes  against  us  but  the  restraints  of  providence.  3.  We  find 
that  God  hath  many  times  let  loose  these  lions  upon  His  people.  The  best  men 
have  suffered  the  worst  things.  4.  We  are  conscious  how  far  short  we  come 
in  holiness  of  those  excellent  persons  who  have  suffered  these  things,  and  therefore 
have  no  ground  to  expect  more  favour  from  providence  than  they  found.  The 
revolving  of  such  considerations  in  our  thoughts  and  mixing  our  own  unbelief 
with  them,  creates  a  world  of  fears,  even  in  good  men,  till,  by  resignation  of 
all  to  God,  and  acting  faith  upon  His  promises  (Rom.  viii.  28  ;  Psa.  xci.  15 ; 
Isa.  xxvii.  8  ;  Rev.  vii.  17),  we  do,  at  last,  recover  our  hearts  out  of  the  hands 
of  our  fears  again,  and  compose  them  to  a  quiet  and  sweet  satisfaction  in  the 
wise  and  holy  pleasure  of  our  God.  V.  Our  immoderate  love  of  life  and 
the  comforts  and  conveniences  thereof  may  be  assigned  as  a  proper  and  real 
ground  and  cause  of  our  sinful  fears,  when  the  dangers  of  the  times  threaten  the 
one  or  the  other  (Rev.  xii.  11  ;  Acts  xx.  24,  25).  1.  Life  is  the  greatest  and 
nearest  interest  men  naturally  have  in  this  world,  and  that  which  wraps  up  all 
other  inferior  interests  in  itself  (Job  ii.  4 ;  Gen.  xxv.  32).  2.  That  which 
endangers  life  must,  in  the  eyes  of  the  natural  man,  be  the  greatest  evil  that  can 
befall  him.  3.  Though  death  be  terrible  in  any  shape,  yet  a  violent  death  by 
the  hands  of  cruel  and  merciless  men  is  the  most  terrible  form  that  death  can 
appear  in.  VI.  Many  of  our  sinful  fears  flow  from  the  influences  of  Satan 
upon  our  phantasies.  By  putting  men  into  such  frights  he  weakens  their  hands 
in  duty,  as  is  plain  from  his  attempt  this  way  upon  Nehemiah  (Neh.  vi.  13),  and 
if  he  prevail  there,  he  drives  them  into  the  snares  and  traps  of  his  temptations, 
as  the  fisherman  and  fowler  do  the  birds  and  fishes  in  their  nets,  when  once  they 
have  frighted  them  out  of  their  coverts.  (Ibid.)  Effects  of  slavish  and  inord- 
inate fear : — I.  Distraction  of  mind  in  dutv  (Luke  i.  74).  1.  Hereby  Satan 
will  cut  off  the  freedom  and  sweetness  of  our  communion  with  God  in  duties. 
2.  So  distracting  fears  cut  off  the  soul  from  the  reliefs  it  might  otherwise  draw 


chap,  vhi.]  ISAIAH.  231 

from  the  promises.  3.  We  lose  the  benefit  and  comfort  of  all  our  past  experiences 
(Isa.   li.   12,    13).      II.  Dissimulation    and  hypocrisy.     Abraham  (Gen.  xx. 

2,  11) ;  Isaac  (Gen.  xxvi.  7) ;  Peter.  (Matt.  xxvi.  69,  &c).  1.  By  these  falls  and 
scandals  religion  is  made  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  2.  It  greatly 
weakens  the  hands  of  others,  and  proves  a  sore  discouragement  to  them  in  their 
trials,  to  see  their  brethren  faint  for  fear,  and  ashamed  to  own  their  principles. 

3.  It  will  be  a  terrible  blow  and  wound  to  our  own  consciences.  III.  Thh 
strengthening  of  temptation  in  times  of  danger  (Prov.  xxix.  25).  Aaron 
(Exod.  xxxii.);  David  (1  Sam.  xxi.  12).  It  was  fear  that  prevailed  with  Origen 
to  yield  so  far  as  he  did  in  offering  incense  to  the  idol,  the  consideration  of  which 
fact  brake  his  heart  to  pieces.  1.  Sinful  fear  drives  men  out  of  their  place  and 
duty.  2.  Fear  is  usually  the  first  passion  in  the  soul  that  parleys  with  the  enemy, 
and  treats  with  the  tempter  about  terms  of  surrender.  '  The  castle  that  parleys 
is  half  won  "  (French  proverb),  e.g.,  Spira.  3.  Fear  makes  men  impatient  of 
waiting  God's  time  and  method  of  deliverance,  and  so  drives  the  soul  into  the 
snare  of  the  next  temptation.  IV.  Pusillanimity  and  cowardice.  You 
find  it  joined  frequently  in  the  Scriptures  with  discouragement  (Deut.  i.  21, 
xx.  3,  &c. ).  V.  Apostasy.  It  is  not  so  much  from  the  fury  of  our  enemies  without, 
as  from  our  fears  within,  that  temptations  become  victorious  over  us  (Matt.  xxiv. 
9,  10).  VI.  Great  bondage  of  spirit.  Sinful  fear  makes  death  a  thousand 
times  more  terrible  than  it  would  otherwise  be  (Heb.  ii.  16).  1.  Such  a  bondage 
as  this  destroys  all  the  comfort  and  pleasure  of  life.  2.  It  destroys  our  spiritual 
comforts.  3.  It  deprives  us  of  the  manifold  advantages  we  might  gain  by  the 
calm  and  composed  meditations  of  our  own  death.  (Ibid.)  The  security  of  the 
righteous  under  national  calamity  : — I.  A  caution  (ver.  12).  1.  It  will  be  necessary 
to  explain  the  emotion  against  which  the  caution  is  directed.  Taking  the  caution 
in  its  comprehensive  import,  it  is  addressed  to  men,  not  to  submit  the  govern- 
ment of  the  soul  to  the  influence  of  excessive  terror,  arising  from  the  approach  of 
temporal  calamity  and  distress.  It  is  an  universal  disposition,  among  the  children 
of  men,  in  the  prospect  of  evil,  to  admit  such  fears  and  such  emotions  as  these. 
The  thought,  for  example,  of  national  distresses,  such  as  those  which  were  now 
about  to  be  poured  out  on  the  people  of  Israel ;  the  thought  of  personal  trials  in 
the  common  relations  of  life,  from  domestic  distress,  from  disease,  from  bereave- 
ment and  death,  are  causes  that  often  inspire  the  emotion  we  contend  against, 
as  existing  in  former  ages,  and  which  we  are  aware  is  often  witnessed  now. 
2.  We  must  consider  also,  the  reasons  on  which  the  propriety  of  this  caution  is 
founded.  (1)  The  origin  of  this  emotion  of  fear  is  always  degrading  and  improper, 
proceeding,  as  it  invariably  does,  from  ignorance  or  forgetfulness,  or  a  disbelief 
of  God  as  a  God  of  providence  and  grace.  (2)  Its  workings  always  fill  the  mind 
with  unnecessary  agitation,  alarm,  and  anguish,  and  disturb  it  from,  and  entirely 
unfit  it  for,  the  right  and  adequate  performance  of  the  existing  and  the  varied 
duties  of  life.  (3)  It  opens  the  way  for  the  entrance  of  many  dark  and  dreadful 
temptations,  and  thus  drives  men  to  seek  a  shelter  in  those  means  which  are 
forbidden  by  God  ;  to  propose  an  alliance,  on  any  terms  whatever,  with  adver- 
saries whom,  as  idolaters,  and  the  avowed  and  open  enemies  of  God,  they  ought 
entirely  to  have  foiled.  (4)  It  is  often  directed  to  means  of  increased  danger 
and  trial,  or  to  resort  to  those  refuges  which  are  but  the  means  of  increasing 
calamity.  Thus,  when  we  find  that  a  confederacy  of  this  unholy  description, 
under  the  influence  of  slavish  fear,  had  been  formed  by  Israel  with  the  people 
of  Egypt,  that  very  plan  was  the  means  of  their  downfall.  God,  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  thirty-first  chapter  of  Isaiah,  exclaims,  "  Woe  to  them  that  go  down 
to  Egypt  for  help,"  &o.  II.  A  recommendation.  "  Sanctify,"  or  select  and 
set  apart,  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  Himself ;  and  let  Him,"  so  selected  and  set  apart, 
"be  your  fear,  and  let  Him  be  your  dread."  1.  In  this  recommendation  there 
is  a  call  upon  man  to  honour  Jehovah,  by  recognising  the  presence  and  the 
action  of  His  perfections  in  the  various  calamitous  visitations  whioh  He  permits 
or  sends.  His  knowledge,  His  power,  His  holiness,  His  justice,  His  wisdom. 
2.  Here  is  a  call  upon  men  to  honour  Jehovah  by  repenting  of  their  past  trans* 
gressions,  and  by  devoting  themselves  to  a  practical  obedience  to  His  command- 
ments. It  is  remarkable  to  observe,  especially  in  the  Old  Testament,  how  often  the 
fear  of  God  is  connected  with  repentance,  and  with  obedience  to  God.  3.  Here 
is  a  call  upon  men  to  honour  Jehovah  by  resorting  and  trusting  to  His  mercy,  aa 
that  which  will  grant  spiritual  blessings,  and  give  final  salvation  to  their  souls. 
III.  A  promise.    "  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary."    The  ordinary  meaning  which 


232  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  via 

Is  ascribed  to  the  word  "  sanctuary  "  is  simply  a  place  of  religious  worship ; 
in  this  case,  however,  as  in  many  others  of  the  sacred  writings,  it  signifies  a  place 
of  religious  worship,  devoted  also  as  a  place  where  endangered  persons  may  receive 
security.  Amongst  the  heathen,  religious  temples  were  places  of  refuge ;  and 
when  men  endangered  by  misfortune  or  even  crime  ran  within  the  threshold 
of  the  place  called  holy  there  was  no  possibility  of  grasping  the  offender ;  so 
long  as  he  remained  in  the  sanctuary  he  was  safe.  So  it  was  amongst  the  Jews. 
When  it  is  said  that  "  God  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary,"  it  is  intended  that  God  shall 
be  as  a  holy  building  where  men  endangered  by  temporal  calamity  may  find 
shelter  and  repose.  The  instances  are  singularly  numerous  in  which  God  is  pre* 
sen  ted  in  the  character  of  a  refuge  (Psa.  xviii.  1,  2,  xlvi.  1,  11  ;  Prov.  xviii.  10 ; 
Isa.  iv.  6,  xxvi.  1,  3,  20).  1.  God  shelters  those  who  resort  to  Him  as  their 
sanctuary  from  the  perturbation  of  slavish  fear.  The  fear  of  God  is  strictly 
what  is  called  an  expulsive  emotion ;  it  banishes  from  the  mind  of  man  a  vast 
quantity  of  other  modifications  of  feeling,  from  which  he  could  derive  only  sorrow 
and  anguish  and  pain  (Prov.  xiv.  26).  2.  The  Lord  of  hosts  shelters  those  who 
resort  to  Him  as  their  sanctuary  from  temporal  judgments.  There  is  provided, 
on  behalf  of  the  righteous,  a  remarkable  exemption  from  those  temporal  calamities 
and  judgments  which  God  inflicts  upon  men  directly  as  the  consequence  of  sin. 
And  if  it  sometimes  does  happen  that  the  righteous  suffer  in  those  judgments  as 
well  as  the  wicked,  it  is  not  because  of  failure  in  the  promises  of  God,  but  because 
the  righteous  will  not  come  out  and  be  separate.  If  a  man  will  stay  in  Sodom 
when  God  has  threatened  to  devour  it  with  fire,  the  man  who  so  stays  must  be 
destroyed.  But  when  there  is  a  separation  from  all  the  ungodly  confederacies 
of  the  world,  and  a  solemn  and  determinative  sanctification  to  the  Lord,  by  causing 
Him  to  be  our  fear  and  dread,  the  Scriptures  plainly  state  that  there  shall,  as 
the  result,  be  an  exemption  from  all  those  calamities  which  fall  upon  the  world 
for  sin  (Ezek.  ix.  4-6).  3.  With  regard  to  those  calamities  which  are  the  common 
allotments  of  life,  we  are  not  to  say  that  from  these  there  is  an  exemption  ;  they 
must  suffer  death  in  its  most  sudden,  and  its  most  awful  power.  But  there  is 
a  Spirit  that  "  guides  the  whirlwind  and  that  rides  upon  the  storm  " ;  there  is  a 
hand  of  mercy  in  these  calamities  of  providence,  transforming  them  into  a  new 
class  of  blessings.  4.  The  Lord  of  hosts  shelters  those  who  resort  to  Him  as 
their  sanctuary  from  the  perils  and  perdition  of  final  ruin.  (James  Parsons. )  The 
Lord  a  sanctuary  : — I.  Thb  duty.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  &c.  II.  Thb 
promise.  "  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary."  Consider  the  preciousness  of  this 
promise  in  the  time  when  all  human  help  will  be  vain.  We  refer  to  the  last  day, 
when  Christ  shall  come  "  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead."  (W.  Hortoood.) 
The  true  sanctuary,  and  how  to  get  there  : — I.  This  passage  tells  tjs  what  to 
do  with  our  natural  fears.  God  is  in  the  believer's  life  as  He  is  not  in  the 
life  of  another.  He  has  come  to  him  in  the  wilderness  to  be  his  guide,  into  the 
storm  to  be  his  pilot,  into  the  battle  to  be  his  captain.  All  difficulties  are  nothing 
before  Divine  wisdom,  all  opposition  nothing  against  Divine  strength.  The 
Christian's  great  danger  is  unbelief  or  unfaithfulness  to  God,  which  would  make 
him  lose  for  a  time  the  means  of  safety  and  victory.  He  is  like  one  closely  following 
a  guide  in  the  darkness  over  pathless  mountains,  whose  one  concern  is  to  keep 
him  in  sight  who  will  thus  secure  to  him  a  safe  and  successful  journey  ;  and  again 
he  is  like  a  child  who  does  not  burden  himself  with  any  cares,  but  that  of  pleasing 
the  father  whose  love  and  power  have  supplied  all  his  need  in  the  past  and 
will  supply  all  in  the  future.  It  is  thus  that  the  Christian  fears  his  foes,  only  as 
the  possible  causes  of  the  one  misfortune  of  estrangement  from  his  God.  The 
treacherousness  of  his  own  heart  and  the  subtlety  of  those  enemies  who  are  ever 
seeking  to  break  the  union  which  makes  him  too  strong  for  them,  exercise  his 
thoughts  and  his  feelings,  but  all  in  relation  to  God,  so  that  He  alone  may  be 
truly  said  to  be  the  fear  of  His  people.  All  this  is  true  for  a  Church  as  it  is  true 
for  the  individual  Christian.     II.  This  passage  teaches  us  what  is,  or  should 

BE,  TO  US  TRULY  HOLY.      III.    TfflS  PASSAGE  OFFERS  THE  MOST  EXALTED  NOTION 

of  A  sanctuary.  Man  dwelling  in  God  is  the  realisation  of  our  happiness  and 
of  the  Divine  glory.  It  speaks  to  all  of  purity,  safety,  peace,  but  it  speaks  of 
much  more,  according  to  the  spiritual  capacity  of  those  to  whom  it  is  made  known. 
But  few  among  the  thousands  of  Israel  knew  anything  of  abiding  in  that  house 
of  God,  which,  whether  they  knew  it  or  not,  represented  Jehovah  Himself.  Most 
of  them  visited  it  at  intervals  more  or  less  rare,  and  left  to  the  priestly  family 
the  duty  and  privilege  of  regarding  it  as  their  home.     And  in  this  the  great  mass 


chap,  vra.]  ISAIAH.  233 

of  professors  are  aptly  represented  by  the  nation  of  Israel.  They  seek  the  Divine 
sanctuary  as  a  house  of  defence  or  a  place  for  pardon,  when  specially  pressed  by 
trouble  or  a  sense  of  sin  ;  but,  if  they  would  be  Christians  indeed,  they  should 
remember  that  the  Church  of  Christ  is  the  spiritual  priesthood ;  that  the  members 
of  it  are  expected  to  "  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  continually  "  ;  that  to  do  this 
they  must  dwell  in  God,"  they  must  "  abide  in  Christ "  ;  and  that  no  less  close 
and  no  less  constant  union  than  this  can  be  natural  to  faith  which  has  learnt 
that  "  we  are  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones."     IV.  Thi3 

PASSAGE  PEBPABES  US  POB  WHAT  OTHEBWISE  WOT/LD  HAVB  SEEMED  INCONSISTENT 

with  thb  blessedness  it  speaes  of — the  sight  of  others  stumbling  at  that 
which  has  become  our  glory,  finding  Jehovah  Himself  to  be  a  rock  of  offence. 
How  is  this  ?  A  very  simple  law  will  answer.  We  stumble  through  ignorance. 
It  is  not  what  we  know,  but  what  we  do  not  know  that  offends  us.  The  rock 
of  offence  is  a  thing  misunderstood,  for  which  our  philosophy  had  not  prepared 
us.  Now  nothing  is  more  misunderstood  than  goodness  among  the  bad,  than 
God  among  those  who  have  fallen  from  the  knowledge  of  Him.  He  Himself 
has  said,  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  My  ways." 
This  stumbling  of  the  natural  mind  at  God  may  be  seen  in  all  His  manifestations. 
Men  deny  His  government  because  they  do  not  see  in  it  what  they  think  worthy 
of  His  hand ;  they  grumble  or  rage  at  His  distribution  of  goods  ;  they  reject 
or  explain  away  His  revelations  of  the  future ;  and,  above  all,  they  refuse  to 
believe  in  salvation  through  His  crucified  Christ.  But  in  all  this  they  are  fulfilling 
His  sure  Word  of  prophecy,  and  while  they  continue  to  exhibit  the  depravity 
of  fallen  man,  and  so  the  riches  of  Divine  grace,  they  do  not  prevent  humble, 
believing  souls  from  sanctifying  God  in  their  hearts  and  proving  Him  to  be  their 
sanctuary.  (J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  The  fear  of  God  steadying  the  soul  in 
worldly  loss  : — Augustine  relates  a  very  pertinent  and  memorable  story  of  Paulinus, 
Bishop  of  Nola,  who  was  a  very  rich  man  both  in  goods  and  grace :  he  had  much 
of  the  world  in  his  hands,  but  little  of  it  in  his  heart ;  and  it  was  well  there  was 
not,  for  the  Goths,  a  barbarous  people,  breaking  into  that  city,  like  so  many 
devils,  fell  upon  the  prey  ;  those  that  trusted  to  the  treasures  which  they  had 
were  deceived  and  ruined  by  them,  for  the  rich  were  put  to  tortures  to  confess 
where  they  had  hid  their  monies.  This  good  bishop  fell  into  their  hands,  and 
lost  all  he  had,  but  was  scarce  moved  at  the  loss,  as  appears  by  his  prayer,  which 
my  author  relates  thus :  Lord,  let  me  not  be  troubled  for  my  gold  and  silver : 
Thou  knowest  it  is  not  my  treasure  ;  that  I  have  laid  up  in  heaven,  according 
to  Thy  command.  I  was  warned  of  this  judgment  before  it  came,  and  provided 
for  it ;  and  where  all  my  interest  lies,  Lord,  Thou  knowest.  (J.  Flavel.)  The 
fear  of  God  delivers  from  the  fear  of  death  : — Mr.  Bradford,  when  the  keeper's  wife 
came  running  into  his  chamber  suddenly,  with  words  able  to  have  put  most 
men  in  the  world  into  a  trembling  posture :  "  Oh,  Mr.  Bradford !  I  bring  you 
heavy  tidings ;  to-morrow  you  must  be  burned,  and  your  chain  is  now  buying  — 
he  put  off  his  hat,  and  said,  "Lord,  I  thank  Thee  ;  I  have  looked  for  this  a  great 
while,  it  is  not  terrible  to  me  ;  God  make  me  worthy  of  such  a  mercy."  (Ibid.) 
True  courage  : — The  following  prayer  was  found  in  the  desk  of  a  schoolboy  after 
his  death  :  "  0  God,  give  me  courage  to  fear  none  but  Thee."  (Sunday  School 
Chronicle.)  The  exaggerations  of  guilty  fear  : — The  rules  of  fear  are  not  like 
the  rules  in  arithmetic,  where  many  nothings  make  nothing,  but  fear  can  make 
something  out  of  nothing.     (J.  Flavel. ) 

Ver.  14.  And  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary. — Sanctuary  in  God : — I  suppose 
that  what  all  of  us  mourn  over  most  in  a  bustling  age,  is  a  loss  of  sacredness  in 
life.  We  have  no  wish  to  secure  the  false-sacred — that  which  is  merely  ascetic ; 
nor  that  which  is  merely  solemn- sacred — the  dull  monotony  of  darkened  church 
or  gloomy  retreat.  We  naturally  say,  if  this  is  God's  world  ;  if  civil  and  civic 
duties,  social  and  relative  responsibilities,  are  all  God-ordained  ones,  it  is  likely, 
at  least,  that  here,  we  may  be  able  to  secure  a  heavenly  citizenship  amid  earthly 
cares  and  customs.  God  will  not  call  us  to  the  wear  and  worry,  the  strain  and 
temptation,  of  a  life  in  the  world,  and  leave  our  souls  without  sacred  home  and 
spiritual  retreat  in  Himself.  How  often  this  idea  recurs  in  the  sacred  writings. 
God  is  our  refuge  and  rest — our  hiding-place,  our  dwelling-place.  I.  The  sacbed- 
ness  that  a  beveeent  heabt  desibes.  Our  Lord  lived  and  worked  amongst 
men,  dined  with  the  Pharisee,  dwelt  with  the  quiet  family  at  Bethany,  consecrated 
the  marriage  feast,  and  went  to  the  publican's  home.     We,  too,  may  secure  sacred- 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vnc 

ness  for  our  live3.  II.  The  sacredness  that  makes  sanctuary  in  God  Himself. 
This  is  so  beautiful :  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary.  He  whom  wicked  men  dread 
and  flee  from — flee  from,  indeed,  because  He  is  a  sanctuary ;  for,  as  of  old,  darkness 
cannot  dwell  with  light,  nor  irreverence  with  reverence,  nor  mammon  worship 
with  devotion  to  God.  We  may  carry  very  bad  hearts  into  very  beautiful  places. 
Place  is  easily  made  unsacred.  But  the  Divine  nature  must  be  spiritual.  Into 
fellowship  with  God  there  can  enter  nothing  that  is  false  or  worldly  or  vile. 
1.  Sanctuary  in  a  person.  Yes ;  for  even  here,  in  this  dim  sphere  of  earthly 
friendship,  our  best  sanctuaries,  apart  from  our  Saviour  Himself,  have  been  those 
who  bear  His  likeness,  and  who  do  His  will.  If  asked  where  the  fountains  of  our 
reverence  have  been  best  nourished,  and  where  the  noble  thoughts  that  make  us 
men  indeed,  have  been  most  wondrously  fed,  we  should  think  of  friends  that  have 
received  us  into  the  sanctuary  of  their  love  and  friendship,  and  helped  to  diminish 
the  dross  of  our  character  and  to  brighten  the  gold  of  our  faith.  2.  We  abide 
in  Him  who  says,  "  I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead,  and  behold  I  am  alive 
for  evermore."  And  if  by  His  own  Divine  nature  He  is  a  sanctuary,  He  is  so  by 
experience  too.  He  has  been  tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin. 
"  He  suffered,  being  tempted."  HI.  The  sacredness  of  all  the  fxttdrh 
days.  "  He  shall  be."  Names  vary  concerning  what  God  is  to  suit  need  and 
experience.  We  translate  the  want,  and  then  God's  name  is  translated  to  meet 
it.  I  am  hungry,  He  is  Bread ;  I  am  thirsty,  He  is  Water ;  I  am  faint,  He  is 
Wine ;  I  am  heated  in  the  way,  He  is  a  Rock-Shadow  in  the  weary  land.  We 
can  suppose,  therefore,  that  the  word  "  sanctuary  "  meets  special  wants.  Life  is 
not  always  a  seeking  for  a  refuge,  but  it  is  so  especially  at  certain  times  and  in 
strange  and  desolate  experiences.  In  looking  forward,  therefore,  ourselves  to 
life's  future  seasons,  we  see  what  the  soul  within  us  cannot  do  in  itself,  and  what 
nature  can  never  perfectly  be  to  any  of  us.  Christ,  and  He  alone,  will  be  now 
and  for  ever — a  sanctuary.  IV.  The  sacredness  of  personal  life  in  God. 
We  cannot  say,  as  medievalism  said,  Enter  the  Church  and  be  saved.  We 
want  to  obey  God's  sweet  will — to  seek  more  and  more  for  union  with  Himself 
through  Christ  Jesus.    (W.  M.  Statham.) 

Ver.  16.  Bind  up  the  testimony. — "  Bind  up  the  testimony " : — There  is 
evidently  a  reference  in  the  text  to  wares  or  merchandise  which  are  very 
valuable,  and  which  must  be  bound  up  and  sealed,  to  preserve  them  from  being 
injured  or  lost,  and  to  convey  them  in  safety  to  those  to  whom  they  belong.  The 
meaning  of  the  text  is,  that  we  should,  by  searching  the  Scriptures,  and  by  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  ascertain  what  truths  and  duties  are  contained  in 
them,  and  carefully  preserve  and  maintain  thece  like  that  which  is  bound  up  and 
sealed.  In  acting  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  the  text,  the  office- 
bearers of  the  Church  should  take  the  lead,  to  encourage  and  direct  the  people 
of  Christ ;  and  His  people  must  concur  with  them  in  binding  up  the  testimony 
and  sealing  the  law.  Bind  up  the  testimony,  seal  the  law  among,  or  along  with. 
My  disciples.  I.  In  what  manner  the  testimony  must  be  bound  up,  and  the 
law  sealed,  among  Christ's  disciples.  1.  By  their  faith  in  His  Word.  2.  By 
their  profession  of  the  faith.  3.  By  obeying  the  truth.  4.  By  suffering  for  the 
truth.  5.  By  religious  covenanting.  II.  For  what  ends  the  testimony  is  bound 
up  and  the  law  sealed  among  Christ's  disciples.  1.  For  their  preservation. 
2.  For  their  transmission  to  posterity.  {Original  Secession  Magazine.)  Divine 
revelation : — It  is  a  great  instance  of  God's  care  of  His  Church  and  love  to  it,  that 
He  hath  lodged  in  it  the  invaluable  treasure  of  Divine  revelation.  1.  It  is  a  testi- 
mony and  a  law.  2.  This  testimony  and  law  are  bound  up  and  sealed,  for  we 
are  not  to  add  to  them  or  diminish  from  them.  3.  They  are  lodged  as  a  sacred 
depositum  in  the  hands  of  the  disciples  (2  Tim.  i.  13,  14).     (M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  17.  And  I  will  wait  upon  the  Lord. — Waiting  upon  (he  Lord: — In 
the  practice  of  this  becoming  resolution,  Jehovah  is  the  object  of — 1.  Intense 
desire.  2.  Diligent  attention.  3.  Earnest  expectation.  4.  Constant  dependence. 
In  this  all-important  exercise,  humility  and  hope,  patience  and  perseverance, 
are  happily  combined  with  an  agreeable  serenity  of  mind,  which  stands  in 
direct  opposition  to  turbulence  of  spirit  and  uneasy  emotions  of  soul.  It 
checks  every  opposite  passion,  and  preserves  the  mind  in  a  pleasing  tranquillity, 
satisfied  with  the  sovereign  good  pleasure  of  God,  and  attentive  to  the  diligent 
improvement  of  all  the  means  appointed  for  attaining  the  end  in  view.    In  every 


chap,  vul]  ISAIAH.  235 

change,  affliction,  and  trial  it  disposes  wholly  to  rely  upon  God,  for  all  the  blessings 
He  hath  promised  to  bestow,  in  the  season  He  sees  most  proper  to  confer  them. 
Hence,  in  the  last  clause  of  this  verse,  the  same  resolution  is  thus  expressed,  "  I 
will  look  for  Him."  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  Waiting  on  the  Lord  in  desertion  and 
gloom : — I.  The  chabaotebistic  appellation  of  Jehovah.  "  The  God  who 
hideth  Himself."  II.  The  implied  mystebiotjsness  op  His  dealings  with 
TTts  people.  ILT.  The  besolve  op  the  believes  undeb  this  visitation. 
(G.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  Behold,  I  and  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me. — Names 
as  signs  : — The  Hebrews,  like  most  Eastern  races,  were  very  quick  to  see  the 
omen  in  the  nomen,  the  sign  or  portent  in  the  name.  ("Niger"  in  Expositor.) 
Isaiah  and  his  children  as  signs  : — If  one  of  these  names  implied  judgment,  three 
of  them  implied  mercy.  The  omen  in  the  name  "  Speed-spoil  Hasten-booty  " 
was  doubtless  full  of  terror;  for  the  Assyrians  were  the  most  fierce  and  cruel 
race  of  ancient  times,  and  would  sweep  through  the  land  like  a  destructive  storm ; 
but,  if  this  one  name  was  so  terribly  ominous  and  suggestive,  all  the  others  speak 
of  an  untiring  and  inalienable  compassion.  "  Shear-jashub "  predicted  that 
God  would  bring  back  a  faithful  remnant  even  from  the  cruel  bondage  of  Assyria ; 
"  Immanuel "  assured  them  that  God  would  be  with  them  in  all  their  perils  and 
reverses ;  while  the  name  of  Isaiah  himself  pointed  to  the  end  of  all  Jehovah'a 
dealings  with  them — "  salvation  "  from  all  evil.  (Ibid.)  Christian  nurture: — 
There  are  some  things  which  if  we  can  give  them  place  and  power  in  our  own 
lives,  will  have  great  influence  in  enabling  us  to  oarry  through  our  work  as  parents 
to  a  blessed  issue  of  success.  I.  Faithfulness.  The  meaning  of  this  word  is 
explained  by  the  resolve  of  the  Psalmist  when  he  says :  "  I  will  behave  myself 
wisely  in  a  perfect  way ;  I  will  walk  within  my  house  with  a  perfect  heart." 
Always  when  we  try  to  do  good  to  others  we  are  thrown  back  upon  ourselves ; 
we  are  reminded  that  high  work  must  have  fit  instruments,  and  that  our  influence 
is  likely  to  be  as  our  character  is.  As  the  man  is  so  will  be  his  strength.  This  is 
peculiarly  the  case  as  between  us  and  our  children.  They  know  us  much  better 
than  others,  are  much  nearer  to  us,  see  us  more  clearly.  For  our  children's  sakes 
we  are  bound  to  be  the  best  we  may.  Nothing  that  we  can  say  or  do  will  have 
half  the  force  of  that  invisible  and  almost  irresistible  power  which  comes  right 
from  our  souls,  and  goes  at  once  and  straight  into  theirs.  This  power,  issuing 
from  the  depths  of  our  own  being,  is  an  involuntary  thing  on  our  part.  We  cannot 
make  it  this  or  that  by  an  act  of  will.  This  sincerity  on  our  part  ought  to  take 
as  one  of  its  forms  a  firm,  steady  family  rule — an  exercise  of  wise  parental  authority. 
On  the  other  hand,  parents  mar  their  own  influence,  hinder  their  prayers,  and  injure 
their  children,  although  they  are  very  far  from  meaning  it,  by  over-indulgence. 
They  never  command — never  rule  calmly  and  firmly — all  is  softness,  liberty,  or 
even  license.  Such  parents  tell  us  in  defence  of  their  system :  "  It  is  not  for  us 
to  command ;  our  best  influence  is,  as  has  been  said,  that  of  personal  character ; 
if  that  be  not  right,  commands  from  us  will  be  of  little  use."  On  the  same  principle 
it  might  be  said  that  God  does  not  need  to  command ;  that  He  only  needs  to 
reveal  to  His  creatures  what  He  is,  and  they  will  love  and  serve  Him.  He  has 
revealed  Himself  to  us.  And  yet  this  same  God,  this  Father  of  mercies,  commands, 
legislates,  and  duly  brings  penalty  upon  those  who  do  not  obey.  Law  and  love, 
these  make  the  whole  revelation  of  God.  II.  Tendebness.  A  mother's  tender- 
ness !  It  is  one  of  the  continual  wonders  of  the  world.  It  is  really  a  greater 
thing  than  a  father's  constancy,  a  soldier's  courage,  or  a  patriot's  love.  Yet 
the  world  is  full  of  it.  III.  Such  feelings  will  lead  to  Pbayeb.  In  prayer  for 
our  children  we  are  putting  ourselves  in  the  line  of  God's  laws.  "  Bring  them 
up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  It  is  not  our  nurture,  it  is  His, 
and  in  prayer  we  cast  it  over  on  Him.  IV.  We  are  thus  naturally  led  to  the  last 
word — Hopefulness.  We  ought  to  cherish  a  feeling  of  cheerful  confidence  in 
God  as  to  the  result  of  our  endeavours  for  our  children's  good.  Discouragement, 
and  despondency  even,  will  come  to  us  soon  enough,  and  darkly  enough,  if  w» 
will  permit  them  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  "  /  and  the  children  "  .'—Turn  to  tha 
New  Testament  and  the  text  will  be  no  mystery  to  you ;  its  key  hangs  on  its 
proper  nail  (Heb.  ii.  13).  We  have  evidence  that  it  is  our  Lord  who  speaks,  and 
speaks  of  His  people  as  His  children.  This  clue  we  will  follow.  The  context 
sets  forth,  as  is  most  common  throughout  the  whole  of  Scripture,  the  different 
results  which  follow  from  the  appearance  of  the  Saviour.    He  is  rejected  by  many, 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tul 

and  accepted  by  others.  I.  Here  is  A  remarkable  relationship.  Jesus  is 
called  a  Father.  This  is  not  according  to  precise  theology,  or  according  to  the 
more  formal  doctrinal  statements  of  Scripture.  1.  Still,  the  title  of  Father  is 
very  applicable  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  many  reasons.  (1)  Because  He  is 
our  federal  Head.  We  speak  correctly  of  "  father  Adam,"  and  Jesus  is  the  second 
Adam  who  heads  up  our  race  anew,  and  is  the  representative  man  of  redeemed 
mankind.  (2)  Our  Lord  is  also  Father  of  the  golden  age  of  grace  and  glory. 
(3)  There  is  a  sense  in  which  Christ  is  our  Father,  because  by  His  teaching  we  are 
born  unto  God.  Just  as  the  minister  who  brings  a  soul  to  Christ  is  said  to  be  the 
spiritual  parent  to  such  a  soul,  and  is,  indeed,  instrumentally  so,  so  the  Lord 
Jesus,  as  the  author  of  our  faith,  is  our  spiritual  Father  in  the  family  of  God. 
2.  Now,  let  us  see  whether  there  is  not  much  of  teaching  in  this  metaphor  by  which 
we  are  called  children  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  expression  denotes — (1)  That  we 
derive  our  spiritual  life  from  Him  as  children  take  their  origin  from  their  father. 
(2)  They  have  a  likeness  to  His  nature.  (3)  The  text  has  in  it  very  clearly  the 
idea  of  charge  and  responsibility.  Children  are  a  charge  always ;  a  comfort 
sometimes.  Wherever  conscience  is  lively,  fatherhood  is  regarded  as  a  solemn 
thing.  (4)  In  our  relationship  towards  our  children  there  is  involved  very  often 
a  great  deal  of  care  and  grief.  (5)  The  possession  of  children  involves  a  very 
near  and  dear  love.  (6)  Children,  when  they  behave  aright,  bring  to  the  heart 
of  their  parent  sweet  solace  and  dear  delight.  II.  A  spontaneous  avowal. 
"  Behold  I,"  &c.  1.  The  Lord  owns  His  children.  Sometimes  they  are  ashamed 
to  own  Him;  and  He  might  always  be  ashamed  to  own  them,  but  He  never  is. 
2.  He  glories  in  them  as  being  God's  gift  to  Him.  "  Whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  "  ; 
as  if  they  were  something  more  than  ordinary  children.  3.  He  challenges  inspec- 
tion. "  Behold  !  look  at  them,  for  they  are  meant  to  be  looked  at ;  they  are 
set  '  for  signs  and  wonders '  throughout  all  generations."  4.  And  do  notice 
again — for  it  affects  my  mind  much  more  powerfully  than  I  can  express,  * '  Behold, 
I  and  the  children."  I  can  understand  a  mother  speaking  thus  about  herself 
and  children,  but  for  Christ  the  Lord  of  glory  to  unite  His  glorious  name  with 
those  of  such  poor  worms  of  the  dust  is  very  wonderful.  Now,  if  Jesus  owns  us 
so  lovingly,  let  us  always  own  Him :  and  if  Christ  takes  us  into  partnership— 
"  I  and  the  children  " — let  us  reply,  "  Christ  is  all."  Let  Him  stand  first  with 
us ;  and  let  our  name  be  for  ever  joined  with  His  name.  III.  A  common  function. 
Christ  and  His  people  "  are  for  signs  and  for  wonders  in  Israel  from  the  Lord  of 
hosts  which  dwelleth  in  Mount  Zion."  Both  Christ  and  His  people  are  set  for 
a  purpose.  1.  They  are  to  be  "  signs  and  wonders  "  by  way  of  testimony. 
2.  By  way  of  marvel.  Genuine  Christians  will  generally  be  reckoned  by  the  world 
to  be  singular  people.  3.  When  the  believer's  testimony  for  good  becomes  a 
marvel,  it  is  not  wonderful  if  he  afterwards  becomes  an  object  of  contempt.  Hold 
on,  brother !  and  hold  out  to  the  end ;  be  humbly  and  quietly  faithful.  Do 
not  try  to  be  a  wonder,  but  be  a  wonder.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Children  have 
a  mission: — Infancy  is  the  perpetual  Messiah  which  comes  to  the  arms  of  fallen 
men  and  pleads  with  them  to  return  to  Paradise.     (R.  W.  Emerson.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  And  when  they  shall  say  unto  yon,  Seek  unto  them  that 
have  familiar  spirits.  —  Wizards,  and  "  they  that  have  familiar  spirits,"  are 
what  we  should  now  call  "  mediums,"  through  whom  the  dead  speak. 
(A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Wizards  that  peep  and  mutter: — "Peep"  (i.e., 
chirp)  and  "  mutter  "  refer  to  the  faint  voice,  like  that  of  a  little  bird,  which 
antiquity  ascribed  to  the  shades  of  the  departed :  "  The  sheeted  dead  did  squeak 
and  gibber  in  the  streets  of  Rome  "  (see  chap.  xxix.  4).  The  LXX.  suggests  that  the 
voice  of  the  ghost  was  imitated  by  ventriloquism,  which  is  not  unlikely.  (Prof. 
J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Religion  and  superstition  contrasted  (vers.  19,  20).  {Ibid.) 
Should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God  ? — Gripping  old  truths  and  seeing 
new  visions  : — We  must  learn  to  recognise  the  friends  and  foes  of  our  life 
even  when  they  are  presented  to  us  in  an  Oriental  and  old-world  dress.     I.  Wb 

EAVE    HERE    A    PLEA     FOR     THE     LIBERTY     AND    INDEPENDENCE    OF    THE    LIVTNO 

present.  "  On  behalf  of  the  living  should  they  seek  unto  the  dead  ?  "  Such 
is  the  sarcastic  question  that  the  disciples  of  the  great  prophet  are  required  to 
ask  the  people  when  the  latter  desire  to  resort  to  wizards  and  witches  to  help 
them  out  of  their  straits.  The  retort  goes  much  further  than  merely  striking 
a  blow  at  the  silly  superstition  of  seeking  by  enchantment  to  bring  back  and 
question  the  shades  of  the  dead.     It  contains  a  principle  which  lies  at  the  very 


chap,  vni.]  ISAIAH.  237 

foundation  of  the  world's  development, — a  principle  the  reverent  recognition  of 
which  will  enable  us  to  work  out  unfettered  the  full  mission  of  our  lives,  and 
give  us  unbounded  faith  in  the  future  of  the  race  which  Christ  has  come  to  redeem. 
Every  new  generation  has  its  own  special  mission  to  fulfil ;  it  is  a  new  life  charged 
with  the  duty  of  working  out  its  own  salvation.  It  is  a  new  stage  in  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Divine  through  the  human.  The  living  present  claims  for  itself  a 
dignity  and  a  mission,  and,  if  we  are  lax  in  upholding  the  former,  we  are  likely 
to  fall  short  of  fulfilling  the  latter.  There  is  a  way  of  worshipping  the  past,  and 
of  appealing  to  it  which  puts  the  present  in  chains,  or,  at  least,  compels  it  to  be 
stationary.  Has  human  life  in  very  deed  exhausted  the  thought  of  God  ?  Surely 
the  very  history  of  the  past  itself  ought  to  teach  us  the  essential  liberty  and  power 
of  life.  What  epochs  of  the  past  are  those  that  call  forth  our  highest  admiration 
and  homage  ?  Not  such  a  period  as  that  of  the  Middle  Ages  when  the  living 
fortified  and  entrenched  themselves  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  dead ;  but  rather 
such  times  as  those  of  the  Lutheran  reformation,  when  men  felt  the  holy  freedom 
of  their  own  life,  cast  away  the  swathings  of  the  past,  and  fearlessly  took  a  new 
step  in  the  name  of  God.  I  believe  that  God  reigns  through  the  rich  movements 
of  life,  and  not  through  traditional  and  external  fetters.  Given  an  earnest 
generation,  awake  to  the  responsibilities  of  its  own  life,  and  I  can  trust  God  to 
direct  the  flowing  tide  to  a  sacred  shore.  We  cannot  assert  that  an  active  and 
earnest  generation  will  not  make  any  mistakes.  Every  age  has  its  own  peculiar 
dangers,  the  vices  which  are  the  excess  of  its  virtues.  There  are  shallow  livea 
that  lose  their  gravity  with  the  slightest  movement,  and  dash  themselves  into 
thin  vapour  around  the  deeper  movement  of  the  time.  And  there  are  the 
men  that  pride  themselves  upon  being  fearless  spirits  in  the  realm  of  thought ; 
which  often  means  that  they  take  advantage  of  a  new  movement  to  rush  into 
one-sided  and  extreme  conclusions  upon  the  most  precarious  basis — conclusions 
which  a  truer  judgment  will  anon  reverse  or  correct.  And  even  the  most  earnest 
and  reliable  spirits  find  it  difficult  to  discover  the  golden  mean  between  the 
bondage  of  the  old  and  the  violence  of  the  new.     II.  That  the  texts  life  of 

THE  PRESENT  CAN  BE  ATTAINED  ONLY  BY  LIVING  CONTACT  WITH  THE  LIVING  GOD. 

The  prophet's  message  has  not  ended  with  the  declaration  that  life  is  essentially 
a  movement  and  a  force,  having  a  Divine  right  to  cast  off  the  encrusting  forma 
of  the  dead  past.  In  order  to  prevent  this  awful  liberty  from  being  abused, 
and  this  vast  movement  from  being  misdirected,  he  must  supply  it  with  a  guiding 
Spirit,  and  a  directing  force.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  for  men  to  become  suddenly 
conscious  of  a  vast  and  unused  power  unless  they  at  the  same  time  feel  the  grip 
of  the  eternal  principles  along  which  this  power  should  move.  Every  move- 
ment of  life  presupposes  an  appointed  orbit,  without  which  it  runs  wild,  and 
ends  in  a  crash.  The  prophet,  therefore,  directs  the  people  to  root  and  ground 
their  liberty  in  living  contact  with  God :  "  Should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their 
God  ?  "  In  examining,  therefore,  any  particular  case  of  movement  in  the  moral 
and  religious  sphere  it  is  all-important  to  inquire  whether  it  exhibits  the  living 
energy  of  the  Divine  life  in  the  human,  whether  it  enriches  men  with  a  profounder 
apprehension  of  the  beating,  quickening  life  of  God  here  in  our  very  midst ;  in 
fine,  whether  the  movement  is  marked  with  the  sacred  brand  of  living  contact 
with  the  living  God.  Every  true  life-movement  brings  God  nearer — never  drives 
Him  further  away.  Let  us  apply  this  test  in  one  particular  and  crucial  case — 
the  great  question  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Perhaps  our  formal 
definitions  may  undergo  a  slight  change ;  but  of  this  I  feel  sure — that  it  will 
never  be  necessary  or  rational  for  me  to  accept  a  theory  of  inspiration  which  will 
make  the  Bible  less  Divine  than  I  hold  it  to  be  at  present.  There  is  no  truly 
onward  movement  which  is  not  also  upward.  Life's  true  mission  is  fulfilled 
and  life's  true  path  pursued,  only  in  proportion  as  a  people  seek  to  their  God. 
HI.  So  we  are  led  to  our  last  thought:  that  the  truths  which  were  ths 

ESSENTIAL  BASIS    OF  THE    BEST  LIFE    OF   THE    PAST   MUST    BE  THE   BASIS   OF   THE 

enlarging  life  of  the  present.  "  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony.  If  they 
speak  not  according  to  this  word,  surely  there  is  no  morning  for  them."  So 
the  cycle  of  thought  is  completed.  True  progress  and  true  conservatism  are 
not  opposed  to  one  another,  but  are  rather  supplementary.  The  only  true  liberty 
is  that  which  runs  along  the  lines  of  eternal  law.  The  world  was  not  begun 
yesterday,  and  we  have  not  been  deputed  to  lay  its  foundations  anew.  So  Isaiah's 
last  position  is  not  only  consistent  with  his  first ;  it  is  necessarily  involved  in  it. 
The  living,  says  the  prophet,  need  not  consult  the  shades  of  the  dead,  for  they 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vro. 

have  a  living  God  to  guide  them  and  to  give  them  ever  larger  supplies  of  power. 
True ;  but  God  is  one.  He  does  not  change  with  each  new  generation.  The 
great  principles  by  which  He  ennobles  human  life  are  well  known,  for  they  have 
been  writ  large  in  His  self-manifestations  in  the  past.  God  will  not  reveal  Him- 
self in  the  present  to  those  that  are  too  blind  to  recognise  His  glory  as  revealed 
in  the  past.  God  has  revealed  Himself  to  the  world  long  ago.  If  we  would  have 
more  light  in  the  present,  we  must  be  true  to  the  radiance  that  lights  up  the  history 
of  the  past.  (J.  Thomas,  MA.)  God  to  be  sought  by  nations: — The  history  of 
our  own  country  coincides  with  the  record  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  given 
of  the  history  of  Judah  and  of  Israel,  in  illustrating  the  important  fact  that 
God  in  the  dispensations  of  His  providence,  deals  with  nations  in  their  collective 
capacity  according  to  their  faithfulness  in  His  service.  The  condition  of  Judah 
in  the  time  of  Isaiah  demanded  this  remonstrance.  There  prevailed  much  of 
avowed  irreligion  and  immorality.     I.  In  what  manner  can  Wl  personally 

INFLUENCE    THE    CHARACTER    AND    CONDUCT    OF    THE    NATION    AT    LARGE  ?      The 

nation  is  made  up  of  the  aggregate  of  its  individual  members.  Each  person, 
therefore,  may  justly  consider  his  own  character  and  conduct  in  a  twofold  view : 
as  it  affects  himself,  and  as  it  affects  the  whole  country.  The  influence  of  each 
distinct  member  on  the  whole  community,  as  contributing  to  the  formation  of 
its  character,  whether  for  good  or  for  evil,  is  a  subject  of  deep  importance.  In 
this  respect,  indeed,  the  more  prominent  the  station  in  which  a  man  is  placed,  the 
greater  is  his  responsibility.  But  the  religious  character  of  the  nation  does  not 
rest  with  these  alone :  piety  or  impiety  in  all  other  men  of  influence,  of  wealth, 
of  talent,  are  likewise  the  constituent  parts  of  the  nation's  excellence  or  the 
nation's  guilt,  while  they  are  also  productive  of  a  corresponding  character  in 
the  various  subordinate  ranks  of  life.  Nor  is  there  any  single  person,  however 
subordinate  his  station,  who  does  not  in  the  same  manner  contribute  towards 
the  formation  of  the  general  character  of  the  nation  of  which  he  constitutes  a 
part.  II.  In  what  does  this  seeking  unto  God  consist  ?  Nations  and 
individuals  seek  unto  the  Lord — 1.  By  applying  to  Him  for  true  knowledge 
and  instruction  (ver.  20;  John  v.  39).  2.  By  taking  refuge  in  Him  as  their 
confidence  and  hope.  (1)  Nationally,  we  have  examples  of  this  confidence 
in  God,  in  the  sacred  records  concerning  Jehoshaphat  and  Hezekiah,  in  seasons 
of  public  alarm  and  difficulty.  (2)  Every  man  is  called  on  to  seek  to  the  Lord 
for  the  foundation  of  his  personal  hope  and  comfort,  not  merely  as  to  the  con- 
cerns of  this  life,  but  in  reference,  also,  to  his  eternal  welfare.  And,  according 
as  the  hope  of  the  people  in  general  is  well  or  ill  grounded,  will  be  the  state  and 
condition  of  the  Church  or  of  the  nation  professing  the  religion  of  Christ.  3.  By 
following  His  guidance  as  to  their  character  and  conduct.  (J.  Hill,  B.D.)  The 
duty  of  seeking  unto  God  : — I.  The  reasons  why  we  ought  to  seek  unto  our 
God.  1.  We  should  seek  to  Him  for  light  and  guidance  in  perplexity  and  doubt. 
No  state  is  more  painfully  trying  to  man  than  to  have  the  mind  tossed  and 
agitated  like  a  bark  on  the  stormy  waves,  without  chart  and  compass.  There 
is  an  eager  impatience  in  such  a  state,  which  lays  men  open  to  imposition.  They 
become  the  easy  dupes  of  crafty  deceivers.  Hence  magicians  and  necromancers, 
in  an  age  of  ignorance  and  credulity,  gained  such  an  aseendency  over  the  vulgar. 
You  have  read  what  history  records  of  the  oracles  of  Greece,  and  the  sibyls  of 
Italy.     But  a  superstition,  very  similar,  prevailed  over  all  Asia,  and  at  times 

Senetrated  into  Judea.  Now  all  such  practices  were  dishonouring  and  forsaking 
ehovah.  The  mind  of  a  sincere  believer  may,  both  on  points  of  faith  and 
practice,  be  in  a  state  of  doubt  and  suspense.  And  to  whom  should  he  look, 
but  to  the  Father  of  lights  who  can  scatter  every  cloud  ?  2.  For  support  and 
consolation  in  sorrow  and  distress  (Job  v.  8  ;  Psa.  1.  15).  3.  For  protection 
and  defence  amidst  difficulties  and  dangers.  4.  For  strength  to  fit  us  for  all 
the  active  duties  of  life  and  religion.     II.    How  we  are  to  seek  unto  our  God. 

1.  By  diligently  and  impartially  consulting  His  revealed  will  in  the  Holy  Scriptures. 

2.  By  constantly  and  seriously  frequenting  the  public  ordinances  of  His  house. 

3.  By  carefully  marking  and  observing  the  openings  and  leadings  of  Providence. 
"  In  particular  cases,"  says  Mr.  Newton,  "  the  Lord  opens  and  shuts  for  His  people, 
breaks  down  walls  of  difficulty  which  obstruct  their  path,  or  hedges  up  their 
way  with  thorns,  when  they  are  in  danger  of  going  wrong,  by  the  dispensations 
of  His  providence.  They  know  that  their  concernments  are  in  His  hand  ;  they 
are  willing  to  follow  whither  and  when  He  leads,  but  they  are  afraid  of  going 
before  Him."     4.  By  offering  up  humble  and  earnest  petitions  at  the  throne  of 


chap,  m]  ISAIAH.  239 

His  heavenly  grace.  (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  From  light  to 
darkness  .•  from  darkness  to  light  (chap.  viii.  18-22,  ix.  2) : — The  experience 
of  Israel  is  here  described  in  three  pictures,  each  marking  a  distinct  stage  in 
that  experience — I.  Israel  rejecting  the  light.  The  prophet  comes  with  a 
Divine  message  to  his  people.  The  people  will  not  believe — 1.  From  inability, 
being  unused  to  exercise  simple  trust  in  God.  2.  From  pride,  for  the  mingling 
of  judgment  with  mercy  in  Isaiah's  message  offends  them.  3.  Disbelieving 
Isaiah,  and  finding  no  help  in  human  wisdom,  they  turn  like  Saul  in  his  extremity, 
with  the  proverbial  credulity  of  unbelief,  to  the  oracles  of  necromancy.  The 
old  watchword!  of  religion,  '  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony  !  "  •*  Should  not 
a  people  seek  unto  their  God  ?  "  are  forgotten.  "  For  those  who  act  thus," 
says  Isaiah,  "  there  is  no  morning  dawn,"  for  they  wilfully  turn  from  the  light. 
II.  A  time  comes  when  Isaiah's  warnings  are  fulfilled.  Calamity,  famine, 
distress  drive  the  people  to  despair.  There  is  no  voice  of  hope  from  their  wizards 
and  soothsayers.  Haunted  by  the  memory  of  the  time  when  the  watchword  of 
faith  might  have  saved  them,  they  feel  that  they  have  grieved  the  Spirit  and  He 
is  gone !  "  Hardly  bestead  and  hungry  they  pass  through  the  land  and  curse 
their  king  and  their  God."  III.  In  the  midst  of  their  despair  they  look 
upwards,  scarce  knowing  why.  All  other  helpers  failing,  they  direct  towards 
heaven  a  despairing  glance,  as  if  hardly  daring  to  think  of  God's  help,  and  then 
at  last  light  shines  through  the  gloom.  IV.  Such  also  may  be  the  experience 
of  an  individual  soul.  First,  the  Divine  warning  is  despised,  and  the  Word 
of  God  neglected,  set  aside  as  a  worn-out  superstition.  The  voice  of  religion 
seems  to  have  lost  its  hold  upon  such  a  soul.  Then  all  manner  of  refuges  are 
tried,  alliance  with  the  world-power — immersion  in  secular  business ;  the  super- 
stition of  unbelief,  agnosticism,  etc.  All  in  their  torn  fail  to  alleviate  the  weary 
heartache  which  prompts  the  cry,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  "  The  whole 
universe  seems  out  of  joint,  and  the  soul  hardly  bestead  and  hungry  curses  its 
king  and  its  God,  the  whole  order  of  things  in  the  world,  and  every  form  of  religion 
alike,  the  false  and  the  true.  At  length,  in  very  despair,  as  if  feeling  "  it  is  no 
use,  '  for  me  there  is  no  morning  dawn,'  "  the  soul  looks  upwards.  The  darkness 
is  past,  the  true  light  now  shineth,  the  soul  that  walked  in  darkness  and  the 
shadow  of  death  sees  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.  {Hugh  H.  Currie,  B.D. )  Super- 
stition : — In  the  years  which  preceded  the  French  Revolution,  Cagliostro  was  the 
companion  of  princes — at  the  dissolution  of  paganism,  the  practisers  of  curious  arts, 
the  witches  and  the  necromancers,  were  the  sole  objects  of  reverence  in  the  known 
world  ;  and  so  before  the  Reformation,  archbishops  and  cardinals  saw  an  inspired 
prophetess  in  a  Kentish  servant-girl ;  Oxford  heads  of  colleges  sought  out  heretics 
with  the  help  of  astrology ;  Anne  Boleyn  blessed  a  bason  of  rings,  her  royal 
fingers  pouring  such  virtue  into  the  metal  that  no  disorder  could  resist  it ;  Wolsey 
had  a  magic  crystal,  and  Thomas  Cromwell,  while  in  Wolsey's  household,  "  did 
haunt  to  the  company  of  a  wizard."  These  things  were  the  counterpart  of  a 
religion  which  taught  that  slips  of  paper,  duly  paid  for,  could  secure  indemnity 
for  sin.    (A.  Froude.) 

Ver.  20.  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony. — The  written  Word  of  God  the 
only  standard  of  truth : — I.  Consider  the  principle  laid  down  in  the 
text,  namely,  that  we  are  to  take  the  Scriptures,  the  inspired  Word  of 
"  the  true  and  living  God,"  as  the  only  standard  of  truth.  II.  See  how  sadly 
the  Church  of  Rome,  both  in  doctrine  and  practice,  has  departed  from 
this  principle.  At  the  Council  of  Trent,  where  the  Pope,  bishops,  and  other 
ecclesiastics  were  assembled,  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  to  put  into 
definite  form  the  articles  of  their  Church,  it  was  unanimously  decreed,  that 
traditions  should  be  received  as  "  of  equal  authority  with  the  Scriptures  "  :  and 
at  the  same  Council  it  was  also  agreed  to  make  all  the  books,  apocryphal  as  well 
as  others,  "  of  equal  authority."  The  reason  of  their  adding  traditions  to  the 
Scriptures  is  given  by  Pope  Pius  IV.,  in  these  words :  "  all  saving  truth  is  not 
contained  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  but  partly  in  the  Scripture  and  partly  in  un- 
written traditions ;  which  whosoever  doth  not  receive  with  like  piety  and  rever- 
ence as  he  doth  the  Scriptures,  is  accursed."  We  have  a  reasonable  instance 
of  their  readiness  to  set  aside  the  Bible,  in  order  to  establish  their  own  opinions, 
at  the  Council  of  Augsburg.  It  was  there  that  the  Protestant  confession  of  faith, 
drawn  up  by  Melanchthon,  was  presented  to  the  Emperor.  After  the  reading 
of  it,  the  Duke  of  Bavaria,  who  was  on  the  Popish  side,  asked  Eckius,  one  of  his 


240  .    THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vtu. 

party,  whether  he  could  overthrow  the  doctrines  contained  in  it,  by  the  Holy 
Scripture.  "  No  (replied  Eckius),  we  cannot  by  the  Holy  Scriptures,  but  we 
may  by  the  fathers."  III.  See  how  the  acting  on  this  principle,  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  Church  of  Rome,  led  to  the  Reformation,  and  produced  those 
blessed  consequences  which  we  are  now  reaping  the  advantage  of.  It  is  not 
a  little  remarkable  that  the  art  of  printing,  about  the  year  1450,  very  greatly 
contributed  to  the  work  which  followed.  It  revived  the  study  of  classical  literature ; 
and  thus  the  Bible,  which  even  clergymen  and  others  acquainted  with  learning, 
had  been  very  little  used  to  read  before,  was  now  studied  by  them ;  and  it  was  that 
that  led  in  the  first  instance  to  a  discovery  that  the  religion  in  which  their  fathers 
had  been  brought  up  could  not  be  proved  by  the  New  Testament.  IV.  Test 
the  reformed  religion  by  this  scriptural  rule,  and  prove  thereby  the 
soundness  OF  its  principles.  The  Reformation  has  not  founded  a  new 
Church,  it  has  corrected  an  old  one ;  and  the  religion  which  we  now  profess  is 
the  religion  of  primitive  Christianity.  See,  in  our  sixth  article,  how  the  Church 
of  England  places  herself  on  the  ground  of  the  Scriptures.  She  says,  against 
the  Church  of  Rome,  that  "  Holy  Scripture  containeth  all  things  necessary  to 
salvation,  so  that  whatever  is  not  read  therein,  nor  may  be  proved  thereby,  is 
not  to  be  required  of  any  man  that  it  should  be  believed  as  an  article  of  faith, 
or  be  thought  requisite  or  necessary  to  salvation."  (W.  Curling,  M.A.)  Holy 
Scripture,  without  tradition,  man's  sufficient  guide  to  salvation : — This  passage 
embodies  the  truth  that  in  the  difficulties  and  questions  that  arise  in  the  Christian 
Church,  and  which  are  frequently  presented  to  the  mind  of  Christian  persons,  the 
Holy  Scriptures  are  the  last  appeal  to  which  the  Christian  shall  have  recourse.  This 
subject  branches  out  into  a  vast  variety  of  inquiries ;  but  we  shall  consider  it 
in  connection  with  the  sixth  article  of  our  Church  of  England.  I.  The  affirma- 
tive proposition  which  asserts  the  sufficiency  of  Holy  Scripture  in  all  things 
requisite  or  necessary  to  salvation.  To  men  who  have  read  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
it  will  seem  strange  that  there  ever  should  have  arisen  a  question,  as  to  theii 
sufficiency  in  things  requisite  to  salvation.  They  see  that  the  Holy  Scripture! 
are  large  and  full,  that  they  develop  innumerable  truths  of  mighty  magnitude — 
that  they  unfold  mysteries  beyond  the  grasp  of  the  human  intellect — that  they 
propound  a  series  of  the  most  pure  and  hallowing  precepts — that  they  narrate 
the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people,  so  far  as  they  are  known  to  humac 
knowledge — and  that  they  enter  upon  an  ample  detail  of  all  those  things  which 
God  hath  revealed  of  His  future  purposes  for  mankind.  They  see  that  th« 
Scriptures  unfold  the  fall  of  man,  God's  purpose  to  save  a  people  to  Himself. 
God's  love  in  the  gift  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  in  order  to  save  them,  the  incarna 
tion  of  the  Word,  the  atonement  of  the  Cross,  the  resurrection  and  triumph  over 
death,  the  ascension  into  heaven,  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  judgment 
of  the  last  day,  and  the  everlasting  glories  that  shall  follow.  They  see  that  the 
Holy  Scriptures  contain  all  this ;  and  still  further,  that  they  contain  all  those 
rules  and  principles  that  should  govern  man  in  his  duty  to  God  and  in  his  duty 
to  his  fellow- man,  and  entering  into  such  detail  of  relative  duties,  of  husbands 
and  wives,  parents  and  children,  masters  and  servants,  princes  and  subjects, 
that  every  honest  man,  from  th*  monarch  to  the  peasant,  shall  find  in  the  Holy 
Scriptures  a  sufficient  guide  and  enlightener  in  the  duties  of  a  Christian  life.  But 
in  the  spirit  of  the  words  of  our  text,  let  us  "  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony." 
Let  us  take  counsel  of  our  God,  and  ask  of  Him  in  the  record  of  His  own  Word, 
whether  the  Holy  Scriptures  be  sufficient  unto  salvation  (Deut.  xi.  16-21, 
xxxi.  11,  12  ;  Psa.  cxix.  9-11 ;  Isa.  viii.  20  ;  Luke  i.  1-4;  John  v.  39,  xx.  30,  31 ; 
Acts  xvii.  10-12 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  14-17).  The  Romanists  reply  to  these  Scriptures 
in  a  body  by  stating  that  they  prove  too  much,  inasmuch  as  they  prove  either 
that  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  are  sufficient,  or  that  one  or  more  Gospels 
are  sufficient  for  our  salvation.  We  reply,  that,  if  this  be  true,  then,  a  fortiori, 
if  a  part  of  the  Scriptures  contain  sufficient  unto  salvation,  the  whole  of  the 
Scriptures  as  a  matter  of  course  must  be  admitted  to  contain  all  things  necessary 
to  salvation.  II.  The  negative  proposition  in  the  article,  namely,  that  "  what- 
soever is  not  read  in  Holy  Scripture,  nor  may  be  proved  thereby,  is  not  to  be 
required  of  any  man,  that  it  should  be  believed  as  an  article  of  the  faith,  or  be 
thought  requisite  or  necessary  to  salvation."  The  position  upon  which  the 
Romanists  have  erected  their  whole  system  has  been,  that  besides  the  written 
Word  there  is  also  an  unwritten  word: — that  besides  the  Holy  Scriptures  there 
is  another  vehicle  for  conveying  religious  truth,  and  that  other  vehicle  they 


chap,  vm.]  ISAIAH.  241 

have  named  tradition.  The  nature  of  tradition  is  this.  They  state  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  taught  many  things  to  His  apostles  and  disciples,  which  they 
did  not  commit  to  writing  in  the  sacred  Scriptures,  but,  instead  of  committing 
them  to  writing,  they  committed  them  by  oral  communication  to  those  men  whom 
they  appointed  as  bishops  throughout  the  Church  universal ;  they  add  that 
those  bishops  have  in  a  similar  manner  communicated  these  doctrines  and 
practices  to  the  bishops  and  priests  that  were  to  come  after  them,  and  that  thus 
there  is  a  mass  of  floating  doctrine  and  practice  pervading  the  Church  universal, 
partly  written  in  the  books  of  Romish  priests  and  partly  deposited  in  the  breasts 
of  Romish  bishops.  There  are  certain  difficulties  and  objections  to  this  system. 
1.  A  historical  objection  derived  from  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  His 
people.  The  original  revelation  made  to  our  first  parents,  being  dependent 
upon  tradition,  soon  became  corrupted  and  lost.  And  this  inefficacy  of  tradition 
is  the  more  remarkable,  when  we  consider  that  the  life  of  man  in  the  ante-diluvian 
world  was  extended  far  beyond  the  life  of  man  in  the  post-diluvian  world.  Nor 
is  this  the  whole  of  the  historical  argument  or  objection  against  tradition,  because 
after  the  waters  of  the  deluge  had  rolled  away,  the  first  fact  that  is  narrated  is 
that  man  had  so  lost  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  again,  that  he  built  the  tower 
of  Babel ;  and  the  next  fact  we  read  is  that  the  world  was  so  sunk  in  ignorance 
that  it  was  necessary  that  God  should  choose  Abraham  and  elect  one  family  to 
Himself,  in  order  that  in  that  family  He  might  take  certain  steps,  by  which  to 
secure  for  ever  the  remembrance  of  His  name  in  the  earth.  2.  A  Scriptural 
objection.  This  is  founded  upon  a  conversation  narrated  in  the  Gospel  history 
{Mark  vii.  1-9).  Our  Lord  states  that  His  disciples  were  justified  in  rejecting 
the  traditions  of  the  elders  because  they  made  the  law  of  God  of  none  effect. 
3.  An  objection  arising  out  of  the  nature  of  tradition.  With  the  most  anxious 
desire  only  to  speak  the  truth,  the  best  men  will  sometimes  vary  in  their  narrative 
of  facts — there  is  a  defect  in  human  memory;  there  is  in  the  colouring  of  the 
minds  of  men,  and  there  is  in  the  degree  of  knowledge  or  ignorance  of  various 
men,  that  which  leads  to  their  varying  more  or  less  in  their  statements  of  fact. 
Now,  if  this  be  the  case  in  reference  to  fact,  how  much  more  is  it  the  case  in  refer- 
ence to  abstract  doctrines  !  In  order  to  show  that  this  difficulty  still  more  exists 
in  reference  to  doctrine,  we  have  but  to  reflect  how  few  there  are  in  the  world, 
who  agree  in  all  things  precisely  in  the  same  views  of  doctrine.  We  regard,  there- 
fore, everything  that  is  purely  traditionary  as  necessarily  unsound.  (M.  H. 
Seymour,  M.A.)  The  rule  of  faith  : — There  is  a  strong  tendency  in  man  to 
flee  from  the  voice  of  his  Maker.  Why  should  any  of  us  be  afraid  to  hear  the 
voice  of  God,  or  to  have  either  our  principles  or  actions  judged  by  His  Word  ? 
Conscience  makes  us  afraid ;  it  tells  us  that  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  will 
square  with  the  Divine  law.  Therefore,  man  forsakes  the  Word  of  his  God  and 
has  recourse  to  those  who  will  speak  to  him  "  peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace  " 
(ver.  19).  L  Our  position  is,  that  Holy  Scripture  is  the  only  standard  whereby 
to  judge  of  controversies  in  matters  of  faith.  II.  We  now  proceed  to  establish 
this  position.  It  is  proved  by  a  twofold  line  of  argument, — negative,  by  denying 
the  claims  put  forward  on  behalf  of  the  addition  to  this  rule  ;  positive,  by  bringing 
evidence  in  favour  of  the  rule  itself.  1.  The  negative  evidence.  (1)  God's  design 
in  furnishing  His  Word  in  writing  was  to  guard  us  against  the  uncertainty  of 
tradition,  and  lead  us,  through  the  truth  revealed  in  that  Word,  to  eternal  happi- 
ness.    (2)  Tradition  is  an  incompetent  channel  for  the  conveyance  of  truth. 

(3)  In  all  our  Lord's  discourses,  whether  to  the  people  or  to  His  apostles,  or  in  His 
disputation  with  His  adversaries,  He  never  made  a  single  appeal  to  tradition. 

(4)  Our  Lord  not  only  never  appealed  to  tradition,  but  He  expressly  condemned 
it,  and  that  in  the  most  unqualified  manner.  2.  The  positive  evidence.  (1)  The 
Scriptures  contain  the  superstructure  that  is  reared  upon  faith.  They  contain 
exhortations  to  every  possible  good  word  and  work.  Faith  is  the  means,  the 
foundation,  the  source  of  every  good  word  and  work.  (2)  The  Scriptures  assert 
their  own  sufficiency  as  a  rule.  (3)  Whenever  the  written  Word  has  been  laid 
aside,  everything  has  gone  astray ;  and  whenever  a  reformation  has  taken  place, 
all  has  been  restored  in  accordance  with  the  written  Word  (2  Kings  xxii.  8, 
xxiii.  2,  21).  Take  yet  another  instance — the  re-establishment  of  the  worship 
of  God  after  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  By  perusing  the  Books  of  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah  you  will  find  that  everything  was  done  in  accordance,  not  with  any 
tradition  preserved  among  them,  but  with  the  written  Word.  (4)  The  greatest 
question  which  can  concern  the  human  race  has  ever  been  decided  by  an  appeal, 

16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

not  to  tradition,  nor  to  the  priesthood,  but  to  the  written  Word.  The  greatest 
question  that  can  concern  us  is,  whether  Jesus  is  the  true  Messiah  (Matt.  xi.  2-6). 
It  was  as  if  our  Lord  had  said,  Let  John  bring  these,  My  actions  and  My  preaching, 
to  the  written  Word,  and  he  cannot  be  mistaken.  He  will  there  find  whether  I  am 
the  Messiah  or  not  (Acts  xvii.  2,  11,  xviii.  27,  28).  (5)  The  denial  of  this  truth, 
that  the  Scripture  is  the  only  rule  whereby  to  judge  of  controversies  in  matters 
of  faith,  has  been  the  cause  of  grievous  errors  and  many  heresies.  (6)  The 
end  for  which  this  new  rule  is  pretended  is,  to  say  the  very  least,  more  than 
presumptive  evidence  against  it,  and  consequently  in  favour  of  our  rule.  HL  I 
proceed  now  to  notice  a  few  objections  that  are  brought  against  our  position. 
1.  "If  the  Scripture  be  your  rule  of  faith,  there  could  be  no  rule  of  faith,  conse- 
quently no  faith  and  therefore  no  salvation,  until  the  canon  of  Scripture  was 
complete.  But  for  sixty  years  after  the  death  of  Christ  the  canon  was  not  com- 
plete ;  therefore  for  sixty  years  after  the  death  of  Christ  there  could  have  been 
no  salvation  in  the  Church  of  God."  This  is  plausible ;  but  the  reply  is  simple. 
We  will  try  the  soundness  of  the  argument  upon  their  own  principles.  If  Scripture 
and  tradition  be,  as  they  say,  their  rule  of  faith,  there  could  not  have  been  a 
rule  of  faith  until  this  one  was  complete.  The  argument  is  as  good  one  way 
as  the  other.  The  sophism  lies  in  this, — that,  because  God  may  give  more  light 
at  any  particular  period,  therefore  there  was  no  adequate  light  before !  2.  It 
is  objected  that  controversies  cannot  be  determined  by  our  rule  of  faith.  But, 
if  the  Word  of  God  be  not  competent  or  sufficient  to  decide  controversies,  wo 
ask  one  simple  question — How,  then,  shall  the  controversies  concerning  the 
Church  be  determined  ?  3.  "  The  Scriptures  are  (say  they)  difficult  and  liable 
to  be  misunderstood  and  perverted."  We  may  say  the  same  respecting  Scripture 
and  tradition.  "  But,"  says  Dr.  Milner,  "  we  have  an  unerring  judge  of  con- 
troversy "  (i.e.,  they  bring  in  the  infallibility  of  their  Church)  "  to  decide  in  the 
matter,  and  he  must  be  understood."  But  how  can  he  be  understood  ?  We 
must,  as  Chillingworth  remarks,  have  an  infallible  interpreter  to  expound  his 
interpretation,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  But  this  infallible  interpreter  has  never 
yet  spoken.  Then,  further,  if  Scripture  be  so  difficult,  the  interpretation  of  the 
judge  is  not  less  so  ;  for  the  decrees  of  councils  and  popes  cannot  possibly  be  more 
intelligible  than  those  writings  which  were  read  in  the  hearing  of  men,  women, 
and  children ;  than  the  sermons  which  were  addressed  by  our  blessed  Lord  to 
the  simple  and  ignorant ;  than  that  Word  of  which  we  read  that  it  is  so  plain 
that  a  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err  therein.  (J.  R.  Page,  M.A.) 
The  Word  of  God  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice : — When  men  are  in  some  measure 
impressed  with  the  nature  and  importance  of  the  end  for  which  they  have  been 
made,  and  when  they  see  that  this  end  respects  matters  which  do  not  come  under 
the  cognisance  of  their  senses  and  observation,  that  it  has  reference  mainly  to 
God  and  to  eternity,  they  will  naturally  inquire  whether  any  certain  rule  or 
standard  exists  which,  when  rightly  used,  and  faithfully  followed,  may  guide 
them  to  the  attainment  of  this  end.  Writings  possessed  of  such  a  character, 
proceeding  from  such  a  source,  and  resting  on  such  an  authority,  it  must,  of 
course,  be  most  important  for  us  to  know,  that  we  may  be  enabled  rightly  to 
apply  them  for  our  direction.  There  are  many  who  profess  to  regard  the  Scrip- 
tures of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  as  containing  a  revelation  of  God's  will, 
and  of  course  as  being  so  far  a  rule  to  guide  us  in  matters  connected  with  our 
highest  interests,  who  yet  deny  that  they  constitute  the  only  rule  to  direct  us 
how  we  may  glorify  and  enjoy  God.  There  are  other  rules  which  they  would 
exalt  to  a  co-ordinate  place  with  the  Word  of  God.  (1)  The  adherents  of  the 
Church  of  Rome  add  to  the  Old  Testament  the  apocryphal  books,  as  if  they 
too  were  inspired.  They  also  believe  that  oral  tradition  has  conveyed  to  us 
truths  taught,  and  observances  enjoined,  by  Christ  and  His  apostles,  which  are 
not  mentioned  in  the  sacred  Scriptures.  (2)  Those  who  call  themselves  rational 
Christians,  practically  take  their  own  reason  as  the  chief,  if  not  the  only,  rule 
to  guide  them  in  matters  connected  with  God  and  eternity  ;  because,  while  they 
may  profess  to  admit  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  Word  of  God,  they  practically 
set  up  their  own  reason  not  only  as  the  instrument  of  interpreting  Scripture, 
but  as  entitled  to  judge  of  the  truth  of  its  doctrines,  and  to  determine  what  state- 
ments of  Scripture  may  be  received  as  true,  and  what  as  being  irrational  and 
incomprehensible,  must  be  explained  away,  or  virtually  denied.  There  are 
two  general  observations  deserving  of  attention,  as  affording  strong  presumption 
against  the  pretensions  which  have  been  put  forth.     1.  If  the  Bible  be  the  Word 


chap,  viii.]  ISAIAH.  243 

of  God,  we  have  no  need  of  any  other  rule.  The  Bible  is  able  to  make  men  wise 
unto  salvation.  2.  The  attempts  which  have  been  made  to  set  up  other  rules 
as  co-ordinate  with  the  Word  of  God,  have  generally  had  the  effect  of  super- 
seding practically  the  sacred  Scriptures ;  and  this  constitutes  a  fair  and  legitimate 
presumption  against  them.  I.  The  apocryphal  books  are  certain  writings 
composed  in  the  interval  between  the  time  of  Malachi  and  our  Saviour's  appear- 
ance in  the  flesh.  They  were  not  written  in  the  Hebrew  language,  like  the  books 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  exist  only  in  Greek.  The  Jewish  Church 
never  acknowledged  them  as  inspired ;  and  when  the  apostle  says  (Bom.  iii.  2), 
"  that  unto  the  Jews  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God,"  he  seems  to  intimate, 
not  merely  that  the  possession  of  the  sacred  oracles  was  conferred  on  them  as  a 
privilege,  but  that  the  custody  and  preservation  of  them  was  imposed  upon  them 
as  a  duty,  so  that  they  being,  as  it  were,  the  authorised  depositories  of  the  oracles 
of  God,  their  testimony  as  to  their  authenticity  is  to  be  regarded  as  essentially 
important,  if  not  of  itself  absolutely  conclusive.  The  authority  of  these  books 
was  not  in  any  instance  acknowledged,  directly  or  by  implication,  by  our  Saviour 
or  His  apostles,  while  they  plainly  acknowledged  the  authority  of  the  Law,  the 
Psalms,  and  the  Prophets,  the  three  classes  into  which  the  Jews  usually  distri- 
buted the  canonical  Scriptures.  There  is  not  a  vestige  of  evidence  that  these 
books  were  composed  by  men  who  wrote  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
or  that  their  authors  were  regarded  in  that  light  by  any  of  their  cotemporaries. 
There  are  not  a  few  statements  in  these  books  which,  by  no  skill  and  learning, 
can  be  reconciled  with  each  other,  and  which,  therefore,  cannot  have  proceeded 
from  one  and  the  same  Spirit  of  truth.  II.  The  Church  of  Borne  further  professes 
to  receive  and  venerate  apostolical  traditions  with  equal  piety  and  reverence 
as  the  written  Word.  In  support  of  the  authority  of  tradition,  Papists  commonly 
refer  to  the  injunction  of  the  apostle  (2  Thess.  ii.  15),  "  to  hold  fast  the  traditions 
which  they  had  been  taught,  whether  by  word,  or  by  his  epistle."  Of  course, 
it  was  the  duty  of  the  Thessalonians  to  hold  fast  all  that  they  had  been  taught 
by  the  apostle,  whether  orally  or  by  writing.  And  our  answer  to  Papists,  whom 
they  urge  from  this  passage  the  authority  of  tradition,  is  just  this,  that  if  the 
Church  of  Borne  will  put  us  in  the  same  situation  with  regard  to  her  pretended 
traditions  as  the  Thessalonians  were  in  regard  to  the  traditions  to  which  the 
apostle  refers  ;  i.e.,  if  she  will  give  us  as  good  evidence  as  the  Thessalonians  had 
that  these  traditions  really  came  from  an  apostle,  and  were  delivered  by  him  as 
public  instruction  to  the  Churchos,  we  will  implicitly  submit  to  them,  but  not 
otherwise.  III.  Let  us  now  advert  to  the  claims  which  some  who  call  them- 
selves rational  Christians  put  forth  in  behalf  of  human  reason,  to  be  received 
along  with  the  Word  of  God  as  a  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  Men  are  certainly 
bound  to  exercise  their  reason  most  fully  upon  a  matter  so  momentous  as  the 
end  for  which  they  were  made.  It  is  by  their  reason  alone  that  they  come  into 
contact  with  truth,  so  as  to  discover,  to  apprehend,  and  to  establish  it.  When 
the  Bible  is  pressed  upon  their  attention,  as  containing  a  revelation  from  God, 
they  are  bound  to  bring  their  whole  faculties  to  bear  upon  the  examination  of 
the  evidence  on  which  its  claim  to  that  character  rests,  and  to  come  to  a  clear 
and  decided  determination  upon  that  point.  If  they  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  Bible  does  contain  a  revelation  from  God,  then  they  are  further  bound 
to  use  their  reason  in  discovering  the  meaning  and  import  of  its  statements,  and 
in  ascertaining  from  them  what  is  the  standard  of  belief  and  practice  which  they 
ought  to  follow.  And  here  in  right  reason  the  province  of  reason  ends.  There 
can  be  no  more  satisfactory  reason  for  believing  any  doctrine,  no  more  conclusive 
evidence  that  it  is  true,  than  the  fact  that  God  has  revealed  it.  This  is  a  position 
to  which  the  reason  of  every  rational  man  assents,  and  it  plainly  supersedes  the 
mere  unaided  efforts  of  our  own  reason  upon  any  point  on  which  God  has  made 
known  to  us  His  will.  Men  have  no  right  to  regard  their  own  reason  as  the  measure 
or  standard  of  truth,  or  to  suppose  that  they  are  capable  of  discovering  much, 
by  its  unaided  efforts,  in  regard  to  an  infinite  God  and  an  invisible  world.  ( W. 
Cunningham.)  Is  conscience  the  supreme  rule  of  life? — There  is,  indeed,  another 
notion  -very  prevailing  in  the  present  day,  which  seems  to  hold  up  conscience 
as  the  supreme  rule  by  which  men  ought  to  be  guided  in  regard  to  religion,  although 
it  has  scarcely  been  propounded  as  a  distinct  and  definite  doctrine.  This  is 
evidently  a  mere  fallacy,  although  we  fear  it  produces  extensively  very  injurious 
effects.  When  men  talk  of  their  own  conscience  as  being  the  rule  which  they 
are  bound  to  follow,  they  can  mean  by  their  conscience  only  the  opinion  which 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vrn. 

they  sincerely  entertain,  and  seem  to  forget  that  while,  in  a  certain  sense,  they 
may  be  bound  to  follow  their  own  conscientious  convictions,  and  while  it  is 
undoubtedly  true  that  God  alone  is  Lord  of  the  conscience,  that  is,  is  alone  entitled 
to  exercise  jurisdiction  over  their  opinions,  or  to  require  them  to  believe  and  act 
in  a  certain  way  merely  because  they  are  so  required,  it  may  still  be  a  question, 
whether  their  conscience  is  well  or  ill  informed,  whether  the  opinions  they  con- 
scientiously entertain  are  well  or  ill  founded.  Now  this  very  obvious  considera- 
tion shows  that  there  must  be  a  higher  standard  than  conscience  by  which  men 
should  try  all  their  opinions,  however  conscientiously  they  are  held,  and  that 
therefore  conscience  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  standard  of  opinion  and  practice 
in  any  such  sense  as  to  interfere  with  the  supreme  and  exclusive  authority  of 
the  Word  of  God,  or  to  release  men  from  the  obligation  to  regulate  their  whole 
opinions  and  practice  by  its  statements.     (Ibid.)        Search  the  Scriptures: — 

1.  Permit  me  to  urge  upon  you  the  bringing  certain  things  "  to  the  law 
and  to  the  testimony."    1.  The  ideas  engendered  in  you  by  your  early  training. 

2.  The  preachers  of  the  Gospel.  3.  There  is  another  class  of  men.  These  men 
are  their  own  preachers  ;  they  believe  no  one  but  themselves.  4.  Just  do  the 
same  with  all  books  that  you  read.  II.  The  good  effects  that  you  will  derive 
from  a  careful  study  of  the  law  and  testimony  of  God.  1.  Unless  you  study 
the  Word  of  God  you  will  not  be  competent  to  detect  error.  2.  When  you  are 
in  a  matter  of  dispute  you  will  be  able  to  speak  very  confidently.  3.  Search 
the  Scriptures,  because  in  so  doing  you  will  get  a  rich  harvest  of  blessing  to  your 
own  soul.  III.  Other  reasons.  Many  false  prophets  are  gone  forth  into  the 
world.  There  M  a  solemn  danger  of  being  absolutely  misled.  Read  your 
Bibles  to  know  what  the  Bible  says  about  you.  (0.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
evils  resulting  from  false  principles  of  morality  : — There  are  three  erroneous  prin- 
ciples of  morality  prevalent  among  ourselves,  expediency,  honour,  and  custom. 
1.  Expediency,  borrowed  from  the  storehouse  of  sceptical  philosophy,  and  placed, 
by  its  wisest  defenders,  as  nearly  as  might  be  done,  on  a  Christian  foundation, 
pronounces  that  an  action  is  right  or  wrong  according  as  it  tends  to  promote 
or  to  diminish  general  happiness.  Whatever  is  expedient  is  right.  Every  moral 
precept  is  subject  to  exceptions.  And  of  the  expediency  of  regarding  or  dis- 
regarding the  precept  every  man  is  in  every  case  to  judge  for  himself.  2.  Honour, 
as  a  principle  of  action,  refers  to  the  estimation  of  the  class  of  society  in  which 
the  individual  moves,  and  especially  to  the  sentiments  of  the  higher  ranks, 
whose  opinions  will  ever  be  of  the  most  preponderating  influence.  Its  concern 
respecting  moral  actions  is  limited  to  such  as  are  useful  in  fashionable  intercourse: 
and  is  particularly  bestowed  on  those  which  have  somewhat  of  splendour,  com- 
monly of  false  splendour,  in  their  exterior  appearance.  3.  Custom  is  the  general 
guide  of  those  persons  who  give  little  thought  to  the  investigation  of  principles, 
and  take  their  moral  opinions  upon  trust  from  others.  No  one  of  these  is  the 
Scriptural  standard  of  conduct.  They  all  depart  from  "  the  law  and  the  testimony." 
"  They  speak  not  according  to  this  word  "  :  therefore  "  there  is  no  light  in  them." 
Let  us  now  advert  to  their  effects.  I.  One  effect  will  be  this  :  the  morality 
produced  will  BE  uncertain  and  variable.  From  a  survey  of  the  variable 
morality  produced  by  these  false  principles  of  morals,  turn  to  the  morality  of 
the  Scriptures.  Behold  it  firm,  consistent,  immutable :  not  committing  its 
precepts  to  the  jurisdiction  of  man,  and  investing  him  with  a  dispensing  power 
to  suspend  or  to  abrogate  them  at  his  discretion  ;  but  commanding  him  universally 
to  be  faithful  in  obeying  them,  and  to  leave  consequences  with  God.  II.  Another 
effect  of  the  erroneous  principles  under  examination  is,  that  the  morality  pro- 
duced is  low  in  degree.  From  the  view  of  the  debased  morality  originating 
in  false  principles  direct  your  eyes  again  to  the  Word  of  God.  Behold  the  morality 
which  it  teaches,  worthy  of  Him,  suited  to  man  !  Behold  it  manifesting  itself 
by  its  holiness  to  be  a  transcript  of  the  holiness  of  God  !  Behold  it  as  a  branch 
of  that  "  godliness,"  which  "  has  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as 
of  that  which  is  to  come  "  :  behold  it  conducing  to  the  happiness  of  men,  present 
no  less  than  future.  Behold  it  not  partially  confining  its  benefits  to  select  classes 
of  society ;  but  with  outspread  arms  showering  them  down  upon  all.  Behold 
it  displaying  from  age  to  age  its  hallowed  truths,  uncorrupt,  unsullied,  as  the 
source  from  which  it  flows.  Behold  it  exemplified  in  the  fulness  of  perfection,  by 
Him  who  is  the  corner-stone  of  Christian  morality ;  by  the  incarnate  Son  of  God ; 
even  by  Him  who  was  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  III.  The  mischief  pro- 
duced BY  FALSE  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORALITY  WILL  BE  BEYOND  MEASURE  EXTENSIVE. 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  245 

It  is  on  moral  dispositions  and  moral  conduct  that  these  principles  operate.  And 
it  is  in  the  government  of  moral  dispositions,  and  in  the  exercise  of  them  in  moral 
actions,  that  much  of  the  employment  of  life  consists.  If  religion  he  weakened 
in  one  point,  it  is  weakened  in  all  points,  it  is  endangered  in  all.  If  then  you  are 
anxious,  in  discharging  the  duties  of  morality,  faithfully  to  follow  the  Divine 
commandments,  and  to  tread  in  the  steps  of  your  Lord,  search  the  Scriptures." 
By  them  shall  every  moral  deed  be  tried  at  last :  by  them  let  it  be  directed  now. 
(T.  Gisborne.)  The  best  guide-book: — When  Sir  David  Wilkie  was  setting 
out  for  an  artistic  tour  in  the  Holy  Land,  he  was  asked  what  guide-book  he  was 
taking  with  him.  He  held  out  the  Bible,  saying,  "  This  is  the  best  guide-book." 
We  are  pilgrims  to  the  heavenly  Canaan.  What  guide-book  will  be  so  helpful 
to  us  as  the  Bible  ?  It  will  shed  light  on  our  way.  (Gates  of  Imagery.)  The 
Bible  and  superstition  : — After  Henry  the  Eighth's  rupture  with  the  Pope  the 
following  order  was  issued,  to  counteract  if  possible  the  advance  of  sacerdotal 
superstition :  "  Every  parson  or  proprietary  of  every  parish  church  within  this 
realm,  shall  provide  a  book  of  the  whole  Bible,  both  in  Latin  and  in  English, 
and  lay  the  same  in  the  choir,  for  every  man  that  will  to  read  and  look  therein  ; 
and  shall  discourage  no  man  from  reading  any  part  of  the  Bible,  but  rather  comfort, 
exhort,  and  admonish  every  man  to  read  the  same,  as  the  very  Word  of  God  and 
the  spiritual  food  of  man's  soul."     (H.  0.  JUackey.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  And  they  shall  pass  through  it,  hardly  bestead  and  hungry. — 

Vnsanctified  suffering  : — I.  Sin  leads  to  suffering.  II.  There  is  in  suffer- 
ing no  sanctifying  power.     It  may  harden  men  in  iniquity.     III.  Suffering 

DOES    NOTHING    IN   ITSELF   TO    ABATE    GOD'S    ANGER    AGAINST    SINNERS.      Nothing 

will  turn  away  that  anger  but  a  genuine  repentance  (chap.  ix.  13).  (R.  A.  Bertram. ) 
Nemesis  : — fie  reads  the  doom  of  those  that  seek  to  familiar  spirits,  and  regard 
not  God's  law  and  testimony.  There  shall  not  only  be  no  light  to  them,  no  comfort 
or  prosperity,  but  they  may  expect  all  horror  and  misery.  1.  The  trouble  they 
feared  shall  come  upon  them.  They  shall  pass  to  and  fro  in  the  land,  unfixed, 
unsettled,  and  driven  from  place  to  place  by  the  threatening  power  of  an  invading 
enemy.  2.  They  shall  be  very  uneasy  to  themselves,  by  their  discontent  and 
impatience  under  their  trouble.  3.  They  shall  be  very  provoking  to  all  about 
them,  nay,  to  all  above  them.  When  they  find  all  their  measures  broken,  and 
themselves  at  their  wits'  end,  they  will  forget  all  the  rules  of  duty  and  decency, 
and  will  treasonably  curse  their  king,  and  blasphemously  curse  their  God. 
4.  They  shall  abandon  themselves  to  despair,  and,  which  way  soever  they  look, 
shall  see  no  probability  of  relief.  They  shall  look  upward,  but  heaven  shall 
frown  upon  them  ;  they  shall  look  to  the  earth,  but  what  comfort  can  that 
yield  to  those  whom  God  is  at  war  with  ?  (M.  Henry.)  Hardly  bestead: — 
Embarrassed  with  difficulties,  oppressed  with  anxieties,  distressed  with  bitter 
reflections  and  desponding  thoughts,  not  knowing  what  to  do  or  whither  to  go. 
(R.  Macculloch.)  Hungry: — Destitute  not  only  of  necessary  provision  for 
their  personal  support,  but  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  which  is  the  nourishment 
of  the  soul  (Amos  viii.  11,  12).  (Ibid.)  Fretfulness : — Though  hunger  and 
poverty  is  indeed  a  great  calamity,  yet  fretfulness  of  spirit  is  a  still  greater  one ; 
and  when  both  are  united,  it  is  evident  that  the  mind  is  as  empty  of  spiritual 
good  as  the  body  is  of  necessary  provision.  (Ibid.)  No  good  without  God: — 
Those  that  go  away  from  God,  go  out  of  the  way  of  all  good.     (M.  Henry.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Vers.  1-7.  Nevertheless  the  dimness  shall  not  he  such  as  was  in  her  vexation. — 
The  prophecy  explained  : — Let  me  venture  to  give  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  true 
rendering  of  the  prophecy — a  rendering  which  at  least  in  its  main  particulars 
has  the  support  of  the  best  modern  interpreters — and  the  striking  beauty  and 
force  and  consistency  of  the  whole  will  become  evident.  The  prophet  has  been 
speaking  in  the  previous  chapter  of  a  time  of  terrible  distress  and  perplexity 
which  was  close  at  hand.  King  and  people  had  forsaken  their  God.  Ahaz 
had  refused  the  sign  of  deliverance  offered  him  and  was  hoping,  by  an  alliance 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

with  Assyria,  to  beat  off  his  enemies.  The  people  in  their  terror  were  resorting 
to  wizards  and  to  necromancers  for  guidance  instead  of  resorting  to  God.  And 
the  prophet  warns  them  that  the  national  unbelief  and  apostasy  shall  bring  its  sure 
chastisement  in  national  despair.  They  will  look  around  them  in  vain  for  succour. 
The  heavens  above  and  the  earth  beneath  shall  be  wrapt  in  the  same  awful  gloom. 
Nothing  can  exceed  the  dramatic  force  of  the  picture  ;  it  is  a  night  at  noonday, 
the  very  sun  blotted  from  the  heavens ;  it  is  a  darkness  which  might  be  felt. 
But  even  while  the  prophet's  gaze  is  fixed  upon  it  he  sees  the  light  trembling  on 
the  skirts  of  the  darkness.  The  sunrise  is  behind  the  cloud.  "  The  darkness," 
cries  the  prophet,  "  is  driven  away."  So  I  venture  to  render  the  last  words  of 
the  eighth  chapter.  "  For  there  shall  no  more  be  gloom  to  her  (i.e.,  to  the  land) 
that  was  in  anguish.  In  the  former  time  He  made  Tight  of  (not '  lightly  afflicted,' 
as  our  A.V.  has  it),  poured  contempt  upon  the  land  of  Zebulun  and  Naphtali, 
but  in  the  latter  time  He  hath  made  it  glorious  by  the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond 
Jordan,  Galilee  (the  circuit)  of  the  nations."  Take  this  rendering  and  you  "have 
a  perfectly  exact  and  very  striking  prediction.  It  was  not  true  that  the  land 
had  first  been  lightly  afflicted  and  afterwards  was  more  grievously  afflicted.  But 
it  was  true  that  in  the  former  time  the  land  had  been  despised ;  Zebulun  and 
Naphtali  and  Galilee  of  the  nations  had  been  a  byword  among  the  Jews ;  their 
territory  had  been  trampled  under  foot  by  every  invader  who  had  ever  entered 
Palestine.  In  the  former  time  He  did  make  light  of  it,  He  did  abase  it,  but  in 
the  latter  time  He  made  it  glorious  with  a  glory  far  transcending  the  glory  of  any 
earthly  kingdom.  For  it  was  here,  amid  this  despised  half  heathen  population, 
that  the  true  Light  shined  down,  here  the  Lord  of  Glory  lived,  it  was  here  that 
He  wrought  His  wonderful  works  and  uttered  His  wonderful  words,  it  was  here 
that  He  gathered  fishermen  and  tax-gatherers  to  be  His  first  disciples  and  mission- 
aries to  the  world.  This  land  was  of  a  truth  made  glorious  by  the  feet  of  Jesus 
of  Nazareth.  Well  may  the  prophet  continue,  "  The  people  that  walked  in  dark- 
ness have  seen  a  great  light :  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death, 
on  them  hath  the  light  shined.  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  nation,  Thou  hast 
increased  their  joy."  The  insertion  of  the  negative  is  an  unfortunate  mistake 
which,  though  found  in  our  present  Hebrew  text,  can  be  easily  explained,  and 
indeed  has  been  corrected  by  the  Hebrew  scribes  themselves.  They  joy  before 
Thee  according  to  the  joy  in  harvest,  and  as  men  exult  when  they  divide  the 
spoil.  For  the  yoke  of  his  burden,  and  the  staff  upon  his  shoulder,  the  rod  of  his 
oppression  Thou  hast  broken,  as  in  the  day  of  Midian.  For  the  greaves  of  the 
greaved  warrior  and  the  battle-tumult  and  the  garments  rolled  in  blood  shall  be 
for  burning  for  fuel  of  fire."  The  A.V.,  by  the  insertion  of  the  words  "  but  this," 
introduces  an  antithesis  which  destroys  the  whole  force  and  beauty  of  the  picture. 
Strike  out  those  words  and  all  becomes  clear  and  consistent.  The  meaning  is 
that  at  the  advent  of  the  Prince  of  Peace  all  wars  shall  cease.  The  soldier's 
sandals  and  the  soldier's  cloak  and  all  the  bloodstained  gear  of  battle  shall  ba 
gathered  together  and  cast  into  the  fire  to  be  burned.  The  heir  of  David's  throne 
is  no  earthly  warrior ;  He  does  not  win  His  kingdom  by  force  of  arms.  "  For  « 
Child  is  born  unto  us,  a  Son  is  given  unto  us,  and  the  government  shall  be  upon 
His  shoulder ;  He  shall  wear  the  insignia  of  royalty.  And  His  name  shall  be 
called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  Mighty  God,  Father  of  Eternity,  Prince  of  Peace. 
Of  the  increase  of  His  government  and  of  peace  there  shall  be  no  end,  upon  the 
throne  of  David,  and  upon  his  kingdom,  to  establish  it,  and  to  uphold  it  with  judg- 
ment and  with  righteousness,  from  henceforth  even  for  ever.  The  zeal  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  shall  perform  this."  Such  is  the  majestic  vision  of  light  and  peace 
that  dawns  upon  the  prophet's  soul  in  the  midst  of  the  national  apostasy. 
(Bishop  Perowne.)  Nevertheless  "  : — There  is  in  this  world  mercifully  a  com- 

pensating balance  to  all  Divine  denunciations,  a  "  nevertheless  "  to  all  God's 
judgments,  and  a  Gospel  of  grace  appended  to  every  message  of  doom.  It  is 
this  that  makes  this  world,  amid  all  its  tragic  scenes,  a  world  of  mercy.  (D. 
Dairies.)  Clearest  promises  of  Christ  in  darkest  times: — It  is  noteworthy  that 
the  clearest  promises  of  the  Messiah  have  been  given  in  the  darkest  hours  of 
history.  If  the  prophets  had  been  silent  upon  the  Coming  One  before,  they 
always  speak  out  in  the  cloudy  and  dark  day  ;  for  well  the  Spirit  made  them  know 
that  the  coming  of  God  in  human  flesh  is  the  lone  star  of  the  world's  night.  It 
was  so  in  the  beginning,  when  our  first  parents  had  sinned,  and  were  doomed  to 
quit  the  paradise  of  delights.  When  Israel  was  in  Egypt,  when  they  were  in 
the  sorest  bondage,  and  when  many  plagues  had  been  wrought  on  Pharaoh, 


chat,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  247 

apparently  without  success ;  then  Israel  saw  the  Messiah  set  before  her  as  the 
Paschal  lamb,  whose  blood  sprinkled  on  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts  secured 
the  chosen  from  the  avenger  of  blood.  The  type  is  marvellously  clear,  and  the 
times  were  marvellously  dark.  I  will  quote  three  cases  from  the  prophetical 
books  which  now  lie  open  before  us.  In  Isa.  xxviii.  16,  you  read  that  glorious 
prophecy  :  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a  precious 
corner-stone,  a  sure  foundation  :  he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  When 
was  that  given  ?  When  the  foundation  of  society  in  Israel  was  rotten  with  iniquity, 
and  when  its  corner-stone  was  oppression.  Read  from  verse  14:  "Wherefore 
hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  ye  scornful  men,"  &c.  Thus,  when  lies  and  false- 
hoods ruled  the  hour,  the  Lord  proclaims  the  blessed  truth  that  the  Messiah 
would  come  and  would  be  a  sure  foundation  for  believers.  Next,  look  into 
Jer.  xxiii.  6 :  "  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise 
unto  David  a  righteous  Branch,"  &c.  When  was  this  clear  testimony  given  ? 
Read  the  former  verses  of  the  chapter,  and  see  that  the  pastors  were  destroying 
and  scattering  the  sheep  of  Jehovah's  pasture^ '  When  the  people  of  the  Lord 
thus  found  their  worst  enemies  where  they  ought  fo  have  met  with  friendly  care, 
then  they  were  promised  happier  days  through  the  coming  of  the  Divine  Son  of 
Davi<L7  Glance  at  Ezek.  xxxiv.  23,  where  the  Lord  says,  "  And  I  will  set  up 
one  shepherd  over  them,  and  he  shall  feed  them,  even  My  servant  David ; 
he  shall  feed  them,  and  he  shall  be  their  shepherd."  When  came  this  cheering 
promise  concerning  that  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  T  It  came  when  Israel 
is  thus  described :  "  And  they  were  scattered,  because  there  is  no  shepherd," 
&c.  Thus,  in  each  case,  when  things  were  at  their  worst,  the  Lord  Jesus  was 
the  one  well  of  consolation  in  a  desert  of  sorrows.  [  In  the  worst  times  we  are  to 
preach  Christ,  and  to  look  to  Christ.  In  Jesus  there  is  a  remedy  for  the  direst 
of  diseases,  and  a  rescue  from  the  darkest  of  despairs.  (C.  II .  Spurgeon.) 
Phases  of  Divine  purpose : — Let  us  look  at  some  of  the  'abiding  doctrines  and 
illustrations  suggested  by  this  noblest  effort  of  the  prophet's  imagination.  Isaiah's 
wing  never  takes  a  higher  flight  than  it  does  in  this  prevision  of  the  centuries. 

1.  The  Divine  purpose  has  never  been  satisfied,  if  we  may  so  say,  with  darkness, 
judgment,  desolation.  When  God  has  judged  a  man  He  would  seem  to  return 
to  see  what  effect  the  judgment  has  had,  if  haply  He  may  see  some  hope  of  returning 
feeling,  of  loyalty  and  filial  submission.  God's  feeling  has  been  always  a  feeling 
of  solicitude  to  bless  the  nations.  We  shall  do  wrong  if  we  suppose  that  pity 
comes  in  only  with  the  historical  Christ,  that  compassion  was  born  on  Christmas 
Day.  2.  The  Divine  movement  amongst  the  nations  has  always  expressed  itself 
under  the  contrast  of  light  and  darkness  (ver.  2).  No  contrast  can  be  more 
striking ;  therefore  ihis  is  the  one  God  has  chosen  whereby  to  represent  the 
Divine  movement.  fGod  is  associated  with  light,  and  all  evil  with  darkness.  The 
fulfilment  of  Divine  purpose  has  always  been  associated  with  incarnation,  idealised 
Humanity.  3.  Look  at  the  Deliverer  as  seen  by  the  prophet  (ver.  6).  The 
Deliverer  is  to  come  as  a  child,  a  son,  a  governor,  a  name  ;  He  is  to  sit  upon  the 

hrone  of  David,  and  upon  his  kingdom,  to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it  with 
judgment  and  with  justice  from  henceforth  even  for  ever.  Say  there  was  a 
secondary  application  of  the  terms,  there  can  be  no  objection  to  that ;  but  mo 
living  man  ever  filled  out  in  their  uttermost  spheral  meaning  all  these  names 
but  one,  and  His  name  is  Jesus.  4.  Then  comes  rapture  upon  rapture.  And 
the  pledge  of  the  fulfilment  of  all  is,  "  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  perform 
this."     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        The  remedy  of  the  world's  misery  : — I.  The  view 

TAKEN  BY  THE  PROPHET  OP  THE  MORAL  STATE  OP  THE  WORLD  PREVIOUS  TO  THE 
GLORIOUS  CHANGE  WHICH  MAKES  THE  SUBJECT  OP  HIS  PROPHECY.   1.  The  people 

are  represented  as  walking  in  darkness.  The  prophet  contemplates  the  world 
at  large.     Light  is  an  emblem  of  knowledge ;  darkness  of  ignorance  and  error. 

2.  But  darkness  alone  appears  to  the  mind  of  the  prophet  only  a  faint  emblem 
of  the  state  of  the  heathen.  He  adds,  therefore,  the  shadow  of  death."  In 
Scripture  this  expression  is  used  for  death,  the  grave,  the  darkness  of  that  sub- 
terranean mansion  into  which  the  Jews  supposed  the  souls  of  men  went  after 
death.  Figuratively,  the  expression  is  used  for  great  distress ;  a  state  of  danger 
and  terror.  It  is  an  amplification,  therefore,  of  the  prophet's  thought.  Experi- 
ence has  justified  this  representation  of  the  prophet.  The  religion  of  the  heathen 
has  ever  been  gloomy  and  horrible.  II.  The  blessed  visitation  (ver.  2).  1.  Aa 
darkness  is  an  emblem  of  the  religious  sorrows  which  had  overcast  the  world,  so 
light  is  an  emblem  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel.     The  Gospel  is  "  light."    This 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

marks  its  origin  from  heaven.  This  notes  its  truth.  It  is  "  light "  because  of 
its  penetrating  and  subtle  nature.  It  is  called  "  light,"  "  a  great  light,"  because 
of  the  discoveries  which  it  makes.  It  is  life  and  health  to  the  world.  Where 
it  prevails,  spiritual  life  is  inspired,  and  the  moral  disorders  of  the  soul  give  place 
to  health  and  vigour.  2.  As  in  the  vision  light  succeeds  to  darkness,  so  also 
joy  succeeds  to  fear  and  misery.  III.  So  vast  a  change  must  be  produced 
by  causes  peoportionably  powerful  :  and  to  the  means  by  which  this  astonish- 
ing revolution  is  effected  the  prophet  next  directs  attention  (vers.  4,  5).  These 
words  speak  of  resistance  and  a  struggle.  In  the  conduct  of  this  battle  two 
things  are,  however,  to  be  remarked  :  the  absolute  weakness  and  insufficiency 
of  the  assailants,  and  their  miraculous  success.  The  weakness  of  the  instruments 
used  in  breaking  the  rod  and  yoke  of  the  oppressor  is  sufficiently  marked  by  the 
allusion  to  the  destruction  of  the  host  of  Midian  by  Gideon  and  his  three  hundred 
men.  But  it  may  be  said,  "  Is  not  all  this  a  splendid  vision  ?  You  speak  of 
weak  instruments  effecting  a  miraculous  success  ;  of  the  display  and  operation 
of  a  supernatural  power,  touching  the  hearts  of  men,  and  changing  the  moral 
state  of  the  world  ;  but  what  is  the  ground  of  this  expectation  ?  "  This  natural 
and  very  proper  question  our  text  answers.  IV.  "  For  unto  us  a  Child  is 
born,"  &c.  (vers.  6,  7).  (R.  Watson.)  Light  out  of  darkness: — We  are  not 
left  in  doubt  as  to  what  the  end  of  this  great  prophecy  was.  In  Matt.  iv.  15,  16, 
we  have  it  expounded  to  us.  I.  The  great  darkness.  The  prophet  first  saw 
the  people  utterly  overwhelmed  by  the  ruthless  hand  of  merciless  war.  It  had 
been  once  a  prosperous  land,  but  now  darkness  dense  had  come  over  it  till 
it  was  a  veritable  "  shadow  of  death."  Turning  from  the  immediate  political 
significance  of  this  to  its  spiritual  import,  we  can  easily  see  in  it  a  picture  of  the 
spiritual  condition  of  the  world  when  Jesus  came.  The  whole  world  was  lying 
in  the  wicked  one.  The  Jewish  people,  though  they  had  the  living  Word  of  God, 
had  in  the  darkness  of  their  carnal  ambition  and  lifeless  formality  lost  all  true 
vision  of  God.  The  Gentile  world  was  no  better.  The  best  which  they  had  was, 
on  the  one  hand,  a  sensuous  and  godless  Epicureanism,  and  on  the  other  a  cold 
and  hopeless  Stoicism.  Turning  to  the  condition  of  the  unconverted  people  of 
our  own  day,  we  see  also  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death.  What  light  for  the 
soul  has  all  our  modern  philosophical  thinking  and  scientific  research  given  ? 

II.  The  great  light.  TThe  light  which  the  prophet  saw  was  the  intervention 
of  God  for  the  deliverance  of  the  people  from  political  bondage  and  physical 
misery,  with  some  spiritual  return  to  God.  "VThat  which  it  typified  was  the  advent 
and  work  of  Christ.  How  this  light  shone  upon  the  darkened  world  when  He 
came  !  Truly  it  was  a  "  great  light."  The  light  seen  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  glory  of  God,  revealing  His  eternal  purposes  of  grace  to  all  sinful  men. 
Christ  lights  the  world  by  loving  it,  i.e.,  by  revealing  the  love  of  God  to  sinners. 

III.  The  great  blessings.  With  the  coming  of  the  true  light  came  wonderful 
blessings  to  the  people.  This  is  described  in  the  language  of  the  prophet  under 
several  figures  of  speech.  1.  "  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  nation."  If  we  look 
to  the  real  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  what  a  vast  increase  in  the  people  of  God 
there  has  been  !  2.  "  And  increased  their  joy."  Of  old  the  people  of  God  rejoiced 
at  their  best  periods  in  mere  national  prosperity.  But  under  the  spiritual 
reign  of  Jesus  the  people  shall  rejoice  in  better  things.  The  joy  of  salvation. 
3.  According  to  the  joy  in  harvest."  The  happiest  festival  of  the  Jews  was  the 
harvest  feast,  when  the  fruits  of  the  earth  were  all  gathered  in,  and  the  people 
blessed  God  and  rejoiced  in  their  riches.  But  now  He  gives  us  a  new  and  better 
harvest,  the  ingathering  of  souls,  the  first-fruits  of  which  were  gathered  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost.  There  is  no  such  pure  joy  as  that  which  arises  in  the  heart 
when  God's  salvation  is  being  accepted  by  men  and  women,  and  His  harvest  is 
being  gathered.  What  will  it  be  in  that  day  when  the  glad  harvest  home  is 
accomplished  ?  4.  "And  as  men  rejoice  when  they  divide  the  spoil."  This 
is  a  figure  borrowed  from  the  triumphant  joy  of  the  victorious  warrior,  who, 
having  overthrown  the  enemy,  and  taken  possession  of  his  goods,  divides  them 
as  spoil  among  the  victors.  Well,  so  shall,  and  so  do,  God's  people  rejoice  over 
the  victories  which  the  Gospel  wins  over  "  the  god_of  this  world."  5.  "  Thou 
hast  broken  the  yoke  .  .  .  and  the  staff."  Hitherto  the  people  had  been  under 
the  iron  yoke  of  their  oppressors,  and  beaten  by  the  rod  of  their  taskmasters,  as 
in  the  old  slavery  times  of  Egypt.  How  happy  when  that  yoke  shall  be  broken, 
»nd  that  cruel  staff  or  rod  done  away  !  Under  Messiah's  reign  the  cruel  bondage 
of  Satan's  yoke  is  broken,  and   the  taskmaster's  staff  done  away.     IV.  Ho* 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  249 

Christ  delivers.  In  earthly  conflicts  battles  are  fought  "  with  confused  noise 
and  garments  rolled  in  blood."  The  captives  were  delivered  of  old  by  these 
terrible  and  sanguinary  methods;  but  Christ  delivers  His  captives  by  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  "  with  burning  and  fuel  of  fire."  The  fire  is  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  the  fuel  of  fire  is  the  Word  of  truth.  (0.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  The  nativity 
of  our  Lord: — I.  Light  out  of  darkness.     II.  Joy  because  op  the  light. 

1.  Because  Jesus  was  born.  2.  Because  in  His  incarnation  God  and  man  were 
united.  3.  Because  through  His  birth  "  the  yoke  "  of  man's  burden  has  been 
broken  (ver.  4),  and  the  power  of  his  oppressor  destroyed.  III.  The  grounds 
op  this  JOY  (vers.  6,  7).  (Clergyman's  Magazine.)  Good  things  in  the  days 
of  the  great  Messiah  : — If  it  be  asked,  What  the  great  design  of  God  is  in  the 
Scriptures  ?  I  answer,  To  bring  a  lost  world  to  the  knowledge  of  a  Saviour. 
All  the  prophecies,  promises,  histories,  and  doctrines  of  the  Word,  do  point  us  to 
Him,  as  the  needle  in  the  mariner's  compass  points  to  the  pole-star.  "  To  Him 
bore  all  the  prophets  witness."  And  when  apostles  under  the  New  Testament 
were  sent  unto  all  nations,  with  the  silver  trumpet  of  the  everlasting  Gospel  in 
their  mouths,  what  was  the  great  theme  of  their  sermons  ?  It  was  just  to  make 
Christ  known  among  the  nations.  All  the  lines  of  religion  meet  in  Him  as  their 
centre.  The  prophet  in  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter,  having  spoken  of 
dark  and  dismal  days  of  trouble  and  distress,  comes  in  the  beginning  of  this,  to 
comfort  and  encourage  the  hearts  of  true  believers,  with  the  good  things  which 
were  coming  in  the  daya  of  the  great  Messiah.  I.  There  are  three  great 
New  Testament  blessings  he  condescends  upon.  1.  Great  light  should  spring 
up  to  a  lost  world  (ver.  2).  2.  Joy  in  the  Lord  (ver.  3).  3.  Spiritual  liberty 
(vers.  4,  5).  II.  If  any  should  ask  who  is  He,  and  where  is  He,  that  shall  do 
all  these  great  things  ?  Tou  have  an  answer  in  the  words,  "  For  unto  us 
a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given,  and  the  government  shall  be  upon  Hia 
shoulder,"  &o.  In  the  words  we  may  notice  these  things  following.  1.  The 
incarnation  of  the  great  Messiah ;  for  here  the  prophet  speaks  of  His  birth. 

2.  His  donation.    He  is  the  gift  of  God  to  a  lost  world.    "  Unto  us  a  Son  is  given." 

3.  His  advancement  to  the  supreme  rule  and  authority.  "  The  government  shall 
be  upon  His  shoulder."  4.  His  character  and  designation,  in  five  names  here 
given  Him,  which  show  that  He  has  a  name  above  every  name,  "  Wonderful, 
Counsellor,  The  Mighty  God,  The  Everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace." 
5.  The  relation  He  stands  in  to  lost  sinners  of  Adam's  family.  He  is  born  "  to  us," 
He  is  given  "  to  us,"  and  not  to  the  angels  which  fell.  6  The  application  and 
triumph  of  faith  upon  all  this  ;  for  the  Church  here  lays  claim  to  Him,  and  triumphs 
in  her  claim  ;  for  the  words  are  uttered  in  a  way  of  holy  boasting,  "  Unto  us  this 
Child  is  born,  unto  us  this  Son  is  given."  (E.  Er shine.)  Fulness  of  Christ  : — 
There  is  that  in  Jesus  Christ  alone  which  may  and  can  afford  sufficient  comfort 
and  relief  in  the  worst  of  times  and  conditions.  I.  We  will  inquire  into  the 
truth  of  it  (Col.  ii.  9).  1.  If  you  look  into  Scripture  you  shall  find  that  the 
promises  and  prophecies  of  Christ  are  calculated  and  given  out  for  the  worst  of 
times.  2.  H  there  was  enough  in  the  types  of  Christ  to  comfort  and  relieve  the 
people  of  God  under  the  Old  Testament  in  the  worst  of  their  times ;  then  there 
must  needs  be  enough  in  Christ  to  comfort  the  people  of  God  now  in  the  worst 
of  our  times.  In  the  times  of  the  Old  Testament,  in  case  they  had  sinned,  what 
relief  had  they  ?  A  sacrifice  to  make  an  atonement  (Lev.  iv.  20),  and  so  a  type 
of  Christ  the  great  Sacrifice  (Heb.  ix.  26).  In  case  they  were  in  the  wilderness 
and  wanted  bread,  what  relief  had  they  ?  Manna,  a  type  of  Christ,  "  the  true 
Bread  that  came  down  from  heaven."  In  case  they  wanted  water,  what  relief 
had  they  ?  The  rock  opened,  and  "  that  rock  was  Christ."  In  case  they  were 
stung  with  the  fiery  serpents,  what  relief  had  they  T  They  had  the  brazen  serpent, 
and  that  was  a  type  of  Christ  (John  iii.  15).  3.  If  all  the  promises  of  good  things 
made  to  us  were  originated  in  Christ,  and  if  all  the  promises  that  were  made  unto 
Christ  of  good  things  to  come,  do  descend  upon  us,  then  surely  there  is  enough 
in  Christ  to  succour  in  the  worst  of  times.  For  what  are  the  promises  but  Divine 
conveyances  ?  4.  If  all  our  want  of  comfort  and  satisfaction  doth  arise  from 
the  want  of  a  sight  of  Christ's  fulness  and  excellency,  and  all  our  satisfaction 
and  comfort  doth  arise  from  the  sight  of  Christ's  fulness  and  excellency,  then 
this  doctrine  must  needs  be  true.    II.  What  is  that  in  Christ  that  may  or 

CAN  COMFORT,  SUCCOUR,  AND  BELIEVE  IN  THE  WORST  OF  TIMES  AND  CONDITIONS  ? 

1.  Look  what  that  good  thing  is  which  the  world  can  either  give  or  take  away, 
that  is  in  Christ  in  great  abundance ;  and  if  that  be  in  Christ  in  great  abundance 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

which  the  world  can  neither  give  or  take  away,  then  there  is  that  in  Christ  that 
may  or  can  succour,  comfort,  and  relieve  in  the  worst  of  times/>  Can  the  world 
take  away  your  estate,  gold,  or  silver  ?  Then  read  what  iS^flaid  in  Prov.  iii., 
concerning  wisdom,  where  Christ  is  called  wisdom  (ver.  13).  Can  the  world 
take  away  your  liberty  1  Then  you  know  what  Christ  says,  "  Behold,  I  have 
Bet  before  thee  an  open  door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it."  Can  the  world  take 
away  your  life  ?  You  know  what  Christ  saith,  "  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  j 
the  Life."  On  the  other  side,  what  can  the  world  give  to  you  ?  Can  the  world 
give  you  peace,  rest,  quietness  ?  Then  you  know  what  Christ  saith  (Matt.  xi. 
28  ;  John  xiv.  27).  Can  the  world  give  you  happiness  ?  I  am  sure  Christ  can. 
2.  There  is  in  Jesus  Christ  the  greatest  excellency  under  the  best  propriety. 
"  My  Lord  and  my  God."  3.  There  is  in  Jesus  Christ  the  greatest  fulness  joined 
with  the  most  communicativeness.  4.  The  sweetest  love  under  the  greatest 
engagement.  Is  not  a  brother  engaged  to  help  his  brother  ?  A  father  his  children  T 
A  husband  his  wife  ?  Now,  suppose  there  were  one  person  that  could  stand  under 
all  these  relations — a  brother,  a  father,  a  husband  ;  how  much  would  that  person 
be  engaged  to  help  ?  Thus  Christ  doth ;  He  stands  under  all  these  relations. 
5.  There  is  that  in  Jesus  Christ  that  suiteth  all  conditions.  III.  How  par  this 
concerns  va.  (W.  Bridge,  M.A.)  Immanuel,  the  Light  of  Life: — I.  There 
is  to  be  a  light  breaking  in  upon  the  sons  of  men  who  sit  in  darkness,  and  this 
light  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  incarnate  God.  Let  me  illustrate  this  fact 
by  the  context.  1. 1  must  carry  you  back  to  chap.  vii.  14.  The  sign  of  coming 
light  is  Jesus.  2.  Further  on  we  see  our  Lord  Jesus  as  the  hold-fast  of  the  soul 
in  time  of  darkness.  See  in  chap.  viii.  8,  the  whole  country  overwhelmed  by 
the  fierce  armies  of  the  Assyrians,  as  when  a  land  is  submerged  beneath  a  flood. 
Then  you  read — "  And  he  shall  pass  through  Judah ;  he  shall  overflow  and  go 
over,  he  shall  reach  even  to  the  neck  ;  and  the  stretching  out  of  his  wings  shall 
fill  the  breadth  of  Thy  land,  0  Immanuel."  The  one  hope  that  remained  for  Judah 
was  that  her  country  was  Immanuel's  land.  There  would  Immanuel  be  born, 
there  would  He  labour,  and  there  would  He  die.  He  was  by  eternal  covenant 
the  King  of  that  land,  and  no  Assyrian  could  keep  Him  from  His  throne.  If 
you  are  a  believer  in  Christ,  you  belong  to  Him,  and  you  always  were  His  by 
sovereign  right,  even  when  the  enemy  held  you  in  possession.  We  might  exult- 
ingly  have  gloried  over  you,  "Thy  soul,  O  Immanuel."  Herjein  lay  your  hope 
when  all  other  hope  was  gone.  Herein  is  your  hope  now.  3LFurther  on  in  the 
chapter  we  learn  that  Jesus  is  our  star  of  hope  as  to  the  destruction  of  the  enemy. 
The  foes  of  God's  people  shall  be  surely  vanquished  and  destroyed  because  of 
Immanuel.  Note  well  in  verses  9,  10,  how  it  is  put  twice  over  like  an  exultant 
taunt :  "  Gird  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  be  broken  in  pieces ;  gird  yourselves, 
and  ye  shall  be  broken  in  pieces.  Take  counsel  together,  and  it  shall  come  to 
nought ;  speak  the  word,  and  it  shall  not  stand :  for  Immanuel."  Our  version 
translates  the  word  into  "  God  with  us,"  but  it  is  "  Immanuel."  In  Him,  even 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  and  He 
has  brought  all  that  Godhead  to  bear  upon  the  overthrow  of  the  foes  of  His  people. 
4.  Further  on  we  find  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  morning  light  after  a  nighj^ofjiarkness. 
The  last  verses  of  the  eighth  chapter  picture  a  horrible  state  of  wretchedness 
and  despair:  "And  they  shall  pass  through  it,  hardly  bestead  and  hungry:  " 
&c.  But  see  what  a  change  awaits  them  !  Read  the  fine  translation  of  the 
R.V. :  "  But  there  shall  be  no  gloom  to  her  that  was  in  anguish."  What 
a  marvellous  light  from  the  midst  of  a  dreadful  darkness  !  It  is  an  astounding 
change,  such  as  only  God  with  us  could  work.  There  are  some  here  who  have 
traversed  that  terrible  wilderness.  You  are  being  driven  as  captives  into  the 
land  of  despair,  and  for  the  last  few  months  you  have  been  tramping  along  a 
painful  road,  "  hardly  bestead  and  hungry."  You  are  sorely  put  to  it,  and  your 
soul  finds  no  food  of  comfort,  but  is  ready  to  faint  and  die.  You  fret  yourself: 
your  heart  is  wearing  away  with  care,  and  grief,  and  hopelessness.  In  the  bitter- 
ness of  your  soul  you  are  ready  to  curse  the  day  of  your  birth.  The  captive 
Israelites  cursed  their  king  who  had  led  them  into  their  defeat  and  bondage; 
in  the  fury  of  their  agony,  they  even  cursed  God  and  longed  to  die.  It  may  be 
that  your  heart  is  in  such  a  ferment  of  grief  that  you  know  not  what  you  think, 
but  are  like  a  man  at  his  wits'  end.  Those  who  led  you  into  sin  are  bitterly 
remembered ;  and  as  you  think  upon  God  you  are  troubled.  This  is  a  dreadful 
case  for  a  soul  to  be  in,  and  it  involves  a  world  of  sin  and  misery.  You  look  up, 
but  the  heavens  are  as  brass  above  your  head ;  your  prayers  appear  to  be  shut 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  251 

out  from  God's  ear  ;  you  look  around  you  upon  the  earth,  and  behold  "  trouble 
and  darkness,  and  dimness  of  anguish  "  ;  your  every  hope  is  slain,  and  your 
heart  is  torn  asunder  with  remorse  and  dread.  Every  hour  you  seem  to  be  hurried 
by  an  irresistible  power  into  greater  darkness.  In  such  a  case  none  can  give 
you  comfort  save  Immanuel,  God  with  us.  Only  God,  espousing  your  cause, 
and  bearing  your  sin,  can  possibly  save  you.  See,  He  comes  for  your  salvation ! 
5.  Once  more,  we  learn  from  that  which  follows  our  text,  that  the  reign  of  Jesus 
is  the  star  of  the  golden  future.  He  came  to  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles,  and  made 
that  country  glorious,  which  had  been  brought  into  contempt.  That  corner 
of  Palestine  had  very  often  borne  the  brunt  of  invasion,  and  had  felt  more  than 
any  other  region  the  edge  of  the  keen  Assyrian  sword.  It  was  a  wretched  land, 
with  a  mixed  population,  despised  by  the  purer  race  of  Jews  ;  but  that  very 
country  became  glorious  with  the  presence  of  the  incarnate  God.  That  first 
land  to  be  invaded  by  the  enemy  was  made  the  headquarters  of  the  army  of 
salvation.  Even  so  at  this  day  His  gracious  presence  is  the  day-dawn  of  our  joy. 
Here  read  and  interpret  chap.  ix.  3.  Then  shall  your  enemy  be  defeated,  as  in 
the  day  of  Midian.  When  Jesus  comes,  you  shall  have  eternal  peace ;  for  His 
battle  is  the  end  of  battles.  "  All  the  armour  of  the  armed  man  in  the  tumult, 
and  the  garments  rolled  in  blood,  shall  even  be  for  burning,  for  fuel  of  tire."  This 
is  the  rendering  of  the  Revision  ;  and  it  is  good.  The  Prince  of  Peace  wars  against 
war,  and  destroys  it.  Now  is  it  that  the  Lord  Jesus  becomes  glorious  in  our 
eyes  ;  and  He  whose  name  is  Immanuel  is  now  crowned  in  our  heart  with  many 
crowns,  and  honoured  with  many  titles.  What  a  list  of  glories  we  have  here  ! 
What  a  burst  of  song  it  makes  when  we  sing  of  the  Messiah  (ver.  6).  Each  word 
sounds  like  a  salvo  of  artillery.  II.  I  want  to  press  home  certain  truths  con- 
nected with  MY  theme.  Immanuel  is  a  grand  word.  "  God  with  us  "  means 
more  than  tongue  can  telL  It  means  enmity  removed  on  our  part,  and  justice 
vindicated  on  God's  part.  It  means  the  whole  Godhead  engaged  on  our  side, 
resolved  to  bless  us.  1.  Jesus  is  Immanuel  (Matt.  i.  21).  2.  Perhaps  you  wish 
to  know  a  little  more  of  the  incident  in  the  text  which  exhibits  Jesus  as  the  great 
light.  Our  Lord  made  His  home  in  the  darkest  parts.  He  looked  about  and 
saw  no  country  so  ignorant,  no  country  so  sorrowful,  as  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  therefore  He  went  there,  and  lifted  it  up  to  heaven  by  priceless  privileges ! 
3.  We  will  turn  back  to  where  we  opened  our  Bibles  at  the  first,  and  there  we  learn 
that,  to  be  God  with  us,  Jesus  must  be  accepted  by  us.  He  cannot  be  with  us 
if  we  will  not  have  Him.  Hear  how  the  prophet  words  it :  "  Unto  us  a  Child 
is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given."  Be  sure  that  you  go  on  with  the  verse  to  the 
end — "  and  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder."  If  Christ  is  your 
Saviour  He  must  be  your  King.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Lux  in  tenebris  : — One 
evening  last  week  I  stood  by  the  seashore  when  the  storm  was  raging.  The  voice 
of  the  Lord  was  upon  the  waters  ;  and  who  was  I  that  I  should  tarry  within 
doors,  when  my  Master's  voice  was  heard  sounding  along  the  water  t  I  rose 
and  stood  to  behold  the  flash  of  His  lightnings,  and  listen  to  the  glory  of  His 
thunders.  The  sea  and  the  thunders  were  contesting  with  one  another ;  the  sea 
with  infinite  clamour  striving  to  hush  the  deep-throated  thunder,  so  that  His 
voice  should  not  be  heard  ;  yet  over  and  above  the  roar  of  the  billows  might  be 
heard  that  voice  of  God,  as  He  spake  with  flames  of  fire,  and  divided  the  way 
for  the  waters.  It  was  a  dark  night,  and  the  sky  was  covered  with  thick  clouds, 
and  scarce  a  star  could  be  seen  through  the  rifts  of  the  tempest ;  but  at  one 
particular  time,  I  noticed  far  away  on  the  horizon,  as  if  miles  across  the  water, 
a  bright  shining,  like  gold.  It  was  the  moon  hidden  behind  the  clouds,  so  that 
she  could  not  shine  upon  us ;  but  she  was  able  to  send  her  rays  down  upon  the 
waters,  far  away,  where  no  cloud  happened  to  intervene.  I  thought  as  I  read 
this  chapter  last  evening,  that  the  prophet  seemed  to  have  stood  in  a  like  position, 
when  he  wrote  the  words  of  my  text.  All  round  about  him  were  clouds  of  dark* 
ness ;  he  heard  prophetic  thunders  roaring,  and  he  saw  flashes  of  the  lightnings 
of  Divine  vengeance ;  clouds  and  darkness,  for  many  a  league,  were  scattered 
through  history  ;  but  he  saw  far  away  a  bright  spot — one  place  where  the  clear 
shining  came  down  from  heaven.  And  he  sat  down,  and  he  penned  these  words : 
"  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light :  they  that  dwell 
in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined  "  ;  and  though 
he  looked  through  whole  leagues  of  space,  where  he  saw  the  battle  of  the  warrior 
"  with  confused  noise  and  garments  rolled  in  blood,"  yet  he  fixed  his  eye  upon 
one  bright  spot  in  futurity,  and  he  declared  that  there  he  saw  hope  of  peace, 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   it. 

prosperity,  and  blessedness ;  for  said  he,  "  Unto  us  a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a 
Son  is  given :  and  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder :  and  His  name 
shall  be  called  Wonderful."     (Ibid.) 

Yet.  2.  The  people  that  walked  In  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light.— 
The  true  Light : — The  prophet's  vision  has  been  fulfilled.  The  true  light 
now  shineth ;  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Word  made  flesh  is  the  true  Light 
which  lighteth  every  man.  There  is  no  light  in  any  real  sense  but  that  which 
comes  to  man  through  Him.  L  Christ  sheds  light  upon  sin.  By  His  words 
and  by  His  life  He  testifies  to  the  reality  of  sin.  1.  In  Him  was  exhibited  for 
the  first  and  only  time  a  life  perfectly  obedient  to  the  will  of  God,  a  life  the  one 
inspiring  motive  of  which  was  love  to  God  and  love  to  man,  a  life  in  which  every 
thought,  every  word,  every  act  was  influenced  only  by  a  regard  to  the  glory  of 
God,  a  life  in  which  was  manifested  in  perfect  union  and  in  perfect  harmony 
every  human  virtue.  Thus  Christ  has  shown  us  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  in 
showing  us  this  has  shown  us  what  we  are.  In  the  presence  of  His  awful  purity 
how  deep  our  impurity  appears.  2.  And  He  has  tracked  sin  to  its  secret  hiding- 
place.  He  has  discovered  the  fountain  in  the  heart,  the  evil  thought,  the 
murderous  hate,  the  impure  desire,  the  covetousness,  the  malice,  the  bitterness 
which  lurk  within,  and  which  no  human  law  can  touch.  He  has  made  us  discern 
not  only  the  evil  done  and  the  evil  thought,  but  the  good  left  undone.  There 
is  no  part  of  our  nature  which  He  has  not  explored.  Never  had  it  been  so  pro- 
foundly, so  truly  judged,  never  had  man  been  so  discovered  to  us.  3.  Is  the 
light  which  Christ  casts  upon  sin  only  a  condemning  light  ?  Is  it  a  light  which 
shows  us  our  misery  only  to  leave  us  without  hope,  which  shows  us  what  we  ought 
to  be,  but  gives  us  no  power  to  attain  to  the  ideal  set  before  us  ?  No,  the  light 
which  reveals  to  us  our  sin,  reveals  to  us  also  the  mercy  of  God,  a  love  greater 
than  our  transgressions,  a  pardon  greater  than  our  sin.  It  is  the  light  of  the  Cross 
that  gives  us  hope.  Never  does  God  appear  in  more  perfect  holiness  than  when 
He  pardons  sin,  and  the  sinner  looking  upon  the  Cross  feels  the  malignity  of  that 
sin  which  nothing  but  the  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God  could  take  away.  All  other 
religions,  all  other  philosophies  have  failed  here,  all  have  made  some  compromise 
with  sin,  all  have  concealed  its  deep  malignity ;  the  Cross  alone  dares  to  reveal  it, 
because  the  Cross  alone  takes  it  away.  II.  And  so,  too,  of  hitman  suffering. 
The  Cross  consoles  sorrow,  because  it  manifests  to  us  a  power  of  sympathy  in 
God  such  as  man  had  never  dared  to  dream  of.  There  is  no  suffering  for  which 
the  Cross  is  not  a  precious  balm,  because  there  is  no  suffering  which  it  does  not 
surpass  and  consecrate.  HI.  And  much  more  Christ's  light  is  a  light  cast  upon 
death.  Or  rather  let  me  say  the  light  which  He  came  to  bestow  is  the  light  of 
life.  He  came  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it  more 
abundantly.  Beyond  the  Cross  there  is  the  Resurrection.  "  Because  I  live,  ye 
shall  live  also."  This  is  the  grand  prerogative  of  the  Gospel.  All  other  religions 
have  failed  here.  All  have  spoken  with  stammering  lips  of  the  world  beyond  the 
grave.  (Bishop  Perowne.)  Experiences  on  a  sick-bed : — We  are  accustomed 
to  conceive  of  our  experience  of  bodily  affliction  as  a  land  of  "  the  shadow  of 
death."  Just  as  there  was  a  preparation  for  receiving  good  in  the  moral  shadow 
which  enveloped  the  Galileans,  so  is  there  also  good  in  the  pain  and  abasement 
of  bodily  suffering.  There  is  a  breaking  down  of  pride,  and  a  clearer  insight 
into  our  own  utter  weakness.  There  is  new  openness  to  spiritual  realities,  and 
in  this,  at  least  a  preparation  for  being  dealt  with  according  to  the  light  of  our 
relation  to  eternity.  I.  One  almost  invariable  sight  revealed  to  us  in  the  shadow 
of  death  is  the  impeeishableness  of  the  past.  I  remember  reading  some 
years  ago  an  account  of  an  exploration  of  one  of  the  pyramids  of  Egypt.  The 
impression  of  the  darkness  upon  the  explorers  at  first  was  very  oppressive.  On 
every  side  and  overhead,  piled  one  above  another  in  prodigious  lengths  and 
masses,  rose  the  polished  blocks  of  granite  which  formed  the  walls  and  ceiling. 
There  was  not  a  window,  nor  open  chink  from  top  to  bottom.  The  torches  of 
the  guides  only  deepened  the  sense  of  awe,  blinking  as  they  did  like  mere  glow- 
worms in  the  gloom.  As  the  travellers  crept  and  slid  along  the  dismal  passages, 
through  the  almost  solid  darkness,  an  undefined  and  painful  consciousness  of 
something  like  terror  arose  within  them,  from  the  felt  want  of  any  really  satis- 
factory knowledge  of  the  purpose  which  could  be  intended  in  such  a  building. 
At  length  they  came  to  what  seemed  to  them  a  coffin  of  stone.  When  they  struck 
it,  it  rung  like  a  bell.     Everything  else  had  had  a  baffling  and  perplexing  effect 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  263 

on  their  mind3.  Here  was  one  object  they  could  thoroughly  understand — the 
monument  of  a  purpose,  even  if  not  the  main  purpose,  which  the  building  was 
intended  to  serve.  And  in  the  midst  of  that  darkness  they  found  their  minds 
summoned  by  that  coffin  into  the  presence  of  the  past.  Something  not  very 
unlike  this  takes  place  when  we  are  sent  in,  under  some  serious  illness,  to  explore 
the  land  of  the  shadow.  At  first  we  are  oppressed  by  the  mere  darkness — the 
deepening  out  on  every  side  of  the  possibilities  of  the  disease.  Then,  the  ignor- 
ance of  the  purpose  for  which  we  are  afflicted  perplexes  us.  But  at  last,  more  or 
less  in  every  case,  we  find  our  minds  settling  upon  the  past.  Sometimes  it  is  our 
instinctive  forward-looking,  our  attempt  to  penetrate  the  dim,  unsounded  future 
which  thus  leads  us  back  into  the  past.  The  consciousness  that  we  are  passing 
onwards  into  its  territory  will  not  let  sleep  the  question,  "  What  sort  of  past  am 
I  carrying  thither  with  me  ?  "  More  frequently  it  is  the  consideration  of  unfinished 
purposes  which  recalls  the  past.  Often,  however,  there  is  something  in  the  very 
circumstances  of  the  affliction,  some  appropriate  word,  perhaps,  suggested  and 
pressed  upon  our  attention,  which  leads  us  in  this  direction  of  the  past.  Joseph's 
brethren,  e.g.t  in  the  Egyptian  prison,  by  the  simple  utterance  of  the  words,  "  Your 
youngest  brother,"  had  the  past  which  related  to  themselves  and  Joseph  recalled 
to  their  minds.  It  was  this  which  Job  complained  of  when  he  cried  to  God: 
"  Thou  makest  me  to  possess  the  iniquities  of  my  youth."  His  youth  was  not 
dead  as  he  had  supposed;  nor  had  its  actions  altogether  passed.  The  threads  of 
these  were  still  in  His  hand  who  was  afflicting  him.  And  now,  in  his  distress,  they 
are  drawn  up  and  placed  like  network  around  his  soul.  But  there  is  good  in  this 
revision  of  the  past.  For  one  thing,  the  very  sight  of  the  fact  is  good  that  nothing 
of  our  lives  passes  utterly  into  oblivion.  It  is  good  to  know  that  the  past  as  much 
as  the  present  is  real,  that  our  deeds  lie  there,  imperishable,  dormant,  but  not 
dead.  For  a  second  reason  it  is  good.  The  remaining  hours  of  our  time  here 
are  more  likely  to  be  encountered  and  occupied  with  serious  hearts.  But,  for 
a  third  and  still  deeper  reason,  it  is  good  to  have  made  this  discovery.  One  of 
the  main  purposes  of  redemption  is  to  deal  with  this  imperishableness  of  the 
past,  and  solve  the  problems  which  arise  out  of  that  and  our  responsibility.  Our 
Redeemer  came  to  put  away  the  guilt  of  our  past  lives,  and  to  lift  us  into  a 
position  from  which  the  consequences  of  our  guilt  would  shut  us  out  for  ever. 
But  nothing  more  disposes  us  to  listen  to  the  offers  of  Divine  mercy,  than  a  clear 
unambiguous  view  of  the  actual  past  of  our  lives.  II.  Another  and  most 
important  sight  vouchsafed  to  us  in  serious  illness,  is  the  sight  of  thb  world 
we  live  in  dwarfed  to  its  true  proportions.  It  is  a  great  loss  to  any  one 
to  see  the  world  he  lives  in  only  from  the  side  of  health.  The  true  proportions 
of  things  are  almost  sure  to  be  hidden  from  his  view.  This  is  especially  the  case 
with  respect  to  the  common  pursuits  of  life.  It  requires  the  discipline  of  a 
sick-bed  to  reveal  our  error — to  discover  to  us  that  we  have  transgressed  the 
bounds  of  mere  necessity,  and  have  been  giving  them  more  thought  than  they 
demand.  I  would  liken  the  false  value  which  we  put  on  our  lower  vocations 
to  the  shadow  cast  by  a  manor-house  on  the  lawn.  The  house  itself  may  repre- 
sent the  actual  legitimate  thought,  which  we  may  put  into  our  daily  toils.  The 
shadow  of  the  house  is  the  added,  illegitimate  thought — the  burdensome,  down- 
crushing  care,  thrusting  and  pushing  from  their  centres  our -higher  affections 
and  hopes.  At  two  different  moments  there  is  no  shadow.  There  is  none  when 
the  sun  is  in  the  centre  of  the  heavens,  and  pouring  his  light  down  upon  the  roof 
of  the  house  ;  there  is  none  until  he  bends  from  the  centre.  But  then  the  shadow 
begins  to  lengthen  out  its  neck.  The  sunlight  comes  forth  in  horizontal  beams, 
and  the  shadow  stretches  out  its  arms  and  spreads  its  wings,  and  lies  prone  and 
black  on  all  the  colour  of  the  neighbouring  field.  At  last  the  sun  goes  down,  and 
the  shadow  has  disappeared  again.  Night  has  rolled  its  shadow  over  the  land, 
and  the  greater  has  swallowed  the  less.  The  house  is  there,  but  not  its  shadow. 
A  most  true  picture  this  of  the  different  values  we  put  on  our  pursuits  in  the 
hours  of  health  and  at  the  gates  of  the  grave  !  For  with  us  also  there  are  two 
moments  when  no  shadow  falls.  There  is  no  false  estimate  so  long  as  God  is  in 
the  centre  of  our  heavens.  At  last  death  is  rolling  his  shadow  over  our  earthly 
life.  And  we  are  enveloped  in  the  gloom  of  that.  And  then,  looking  outward, 
we  discover  how  all  other  shadows  have  disappeared,  and  have  been  to  us  but 
vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.     III.  A  third  experience  in  serious  illness  is,  that 

AWAY  FROM  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST,  THERE  18  NO  LIGHT  FOR  THB  WORLD 

TO  comb.    The  lights  which  surround  us  in  our  daily  walks,  when  all  is  well  with 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix 

us,  forsake  us  in  the  shadow.  The  light  of  friendship,  for  example.  It  cannot 
pierce  the  blackness  of  the  shadow  of  death,  nor  search  forward  into  the  dimness 
of  unrevealed  futurity.  Next  to  our  friends,  as  lights  of  life  to  us,  are  our  books. 
They  are  our  inner  lights.  But  away  from  the  Book  which  specifically  tells  us 
of  the  resurrection  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  light  of  no  book  in  our  keeping  abides 
with  us  in  the  shadow  to  give  us  one  gleam  of  hope.  But  it  is  worth  while  being 
Bent  into  the  shadow,  if  we  come  out  with  this  experience.  IV.  A  fourth 
experience  is  generally  reached  in  serious  illness,  of  which  it  is  not  so  easy  to 
see  the  good.  This  is  the  loneliness  of  suffering.  Out  spirits  are  gadders- 
about  too  much.  Our  lives  spread  themselves  too  far  upon  society.  A  serious 
illness  carries  us  away  from  this  folly.  It  takes  us  out  into  the  solitude,  and 
leaves  us  there.  This  loneliness  of  great  suffering  is  the  shadow  sent  forth  to 
bring  us  home.  Society  is  not  our  home.  The  dearest,  innermost  circle  of  it  is 
not  our  home.  God  is  our  home — our  present  home.  V.  To  the  children 
of  God  affliction  is  in  every  way  a  good.  Its  shadow  is  a  retirement  for 
renewed  and  deeper  insight  into  the  character  and  purposes  of  their  Father. 
As  much  as  unspiritual  sufferers  they  feel  the  distress  of  their  circumstances. 
The  difference  is,  that  over  and  through  this  distress  they  discern  the  loving 
purpose  towards  themselves  of  Him  who  chasteneth.  Every  way  their  condition 
is  different.  The  world  which  death  is  bringing  close  to  them  is  the  habitation 
of  their  best  and  most  beloved  Brother.  Sustaining  promises  are  suggested  to 
them  by  the  Spirit,  which  have  new  and  unthought  of  appropriateness  to  their 
case.  Light  from  heaven,  in  inexpressible  fulness,  comes  down  into  familiar 
passages  of  the  Bible,  revealing  unimagined  depths  of  Divine  love  for  human 
souls.  There  is  a  nearer,  sweeter,  more  experimental  view  of  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
Sin  is  felt  to  be  the  evil  thing  on  which  God  cannot  look,  in  a  way  to  deepen  the 
abhorrence  of  it,  and  to  excite  a  more  cleaving  love  to  Him  who  is  making 
all  things  work  together  to  deliver  us  from  its  marks  and  power.  And  glimpses 
of  the  sinless  land,  holy,  beautiful  as  morning  light,  come  glowing  and  reddening 
through  the  clouds.  And  the  hour  of  weakness  is  changed  into  an  hour  of  strength 
{A.  Macleod,  D.D.)  Christ  as  light : — I.  How  this  light  may  be  appropri- 
ated to  Christ.  1.  Light  is  an  all-necessary  thing.  2.  It  separates — divides 
the  night  from  the  day.  3.  It  cheers.  4.  Christ  stands  pre-eminently  glorious 
as  a  great  light.  There  is  a  fulness  in  Him  commensurate  with  His  Divinity ; 
there  is  a  brightness  in  Him  that  knows  neither  change  nor  diminution.  II.  The 
description  of  persons  to  whom  this  light  has  been,  or  shall  be,  revealed. 
1.  In  darkness.  2.  Walking  in  darkness.  3.  In  the  shadow  of  death.  (F.  O. 
Crossman.)  Christ  the  true  Light : — I.  The  darkness  reigning  in  the  world 
beforehand  was  to  be  traced  even  in  the  land  of  Judaea  itself.  At  the  period 
of  Christ's  nativity,  there  was  the  darkness  of  types,  the  shadows  and  mere 
secondary  images  of  Divine  truth.  Some  few  only  were  partially  enlightened 
to  believe  and  understand  the  truth,  and  these  exulted  in  the  coming  light,  e.g., 
Simeon  and  Anna.  But  if  some  few  in  Jerusalem  looked  for  redemption,  what 
was  the  state  of  the  heathen  world  T  They,  indeed,  by  all  their  wisdom,  knew 
not  God;  they  were  immersed  in  the  darkest  idolatries  and  most  cruel  super- 
stitions. There  was,  in  all  this  mass  of  external  darkness,  something  congenial 
to  the  inner  corruption,  the  shadow  of  death,  resting  on  our  common  sinful  nature : 
never  could  the  one  have  existed  or  taken  effect  without  the  other.  We  must 
look  within  our  own  hearts  for  that  guilty  ignorance,  that  wilful  blindness  and 
hardened  indifference  to  God  and  His  truth,  which  was  the  source  alike  of  Jewish 
perversions  and  heathen  abominations.  II.  Christ  was  the  light  spoken  of  by 
the  prophet.  To  the  Jews,  how  well  calculated  was  His  appearance  to  clear 
up  the  obscurities  of  their  own  Mosaic  ritual  and  prophetic  declarations  J  To 
the  Gentiles,  no  less  did  the  coming  of  Christ  present  a  religion  able,  for  the  first 
time,  to  resolve  all  their  doubts,  to  satisfy  all  their  wants,  and  unite  the  whole 
family  of  man  under  one  great  Head  of  all.  1.  It  was  a  sudden  light ;  unexpected 
by  most,  and  undeserved  by  all,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  Jesus  Christ,  rose 
upon  a  benighted  world.  2.  It  was  a  great  light.  3.  This  was  verily  the  true 
light.  "  It  shines  with  a  ray  which,"  saith  St.  John,  "  lighteneth  every  man 
that  cometh  into  the  world."  It  is  that  which  is  adapted  to  man  as  man,  beam- 
ing with  an  evidence  only  to  be  resisted  by  wilful  blindness,  and  convincing  all 
with  a  force  which  leaves  the  wanderer  without  excuse,  who  perishes  in  his  sin. 
4.  It  is  a  Divine  light ;  one  shining  as  if  from  the  very  throne  of  God  Himself. 
(C.  J.  Hoare,  M.A.)        Darkness  and  the  sliadow  of  death  : — Picture  to  yourselves 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  255 

a  traveller  fallen  into  a  defile,  the  heavens  concealed  from  his  view  by  clouds 
and  darkness ;  and  as  he  turns  in  his  passage  he  hears  the  ravening  beasts  of 
night  yelling  around  him,  and  ready  to  devour  him ;  conceive  his  heart  sinking 
within  him,  and  seeking  a  refuge  in  vain  !  If  to  this  man  a  glimmering  light  was 
raised  from  a  distant  cottage  where  he  might  find  security,  oh,  what  joy,  what 
hope  of  escape  would  burst  across  his  mind  !  But  yet  this  will  but  faintly  repre- 
sent the  scene,  for  the  light  here  spoken  of  is  not  a  transitory  light  which  may 
soon  be  extinguished,  but  it  is  a  bright  light  that  arises  in  the  land,  a  light  that 
is  raised  in  heaven  to  shine  on  benighted  man.  (J.  Burnett,  LL.B.)  Walk- 
ing in  darkness  : — Concerning  the  people  it  is  affirmed — I.  That  they  walked  in 
darkness.  Darkness  must  be  understood  in  the  figurative  sense  in  which  it 
is  often  used  in  Scripture  to  signify  a  state  of  ignorance,  sin,  and  misery.  Ignor- 
ance, like  a  veil,  continues  upon  their  hearts  until  the  light  of  the  glorious  Gospel 
of  Christ  shines  into  their  minds.  In  this  uncomfortable  state  they  act  under 
the  influence  of  corrupt  principles,  committing  those  enormous  transgressions 
which  are  justly  denominated  the  works  of  darkness.  From  hence  arise  distresses 
and  miseries  of  various  kinds,  which  terminate  in  utter  darkness  and  everlasting 
woe,  unless  prevented  by  the  illumination  of  the  true  light.  II.  In  this  condition 
the  people  are  described  as  walking,  which,  in  the  Word  of  God,  frequently 
denotes  the  whole  course  of  man's  life,  in  which  every  action  makes  a  step  towards 
that  everlasting  state  to  which  we  are  journeying.  1.  Walking  is  a  voluntary 
motion,  the  consequence  of  preceding  choice  and  deliberate  resolution.  2.  Walk- 
ing is  a  continued  motion,  in  which  one  step  regularly  follows  another,  until  the 
ground  intended  is  gone  over.  3.  Walking  is  a  progressive  motion,  by  which 
a  traveller  still  goes  forward  until  he  arrives  at  the  end  of  his  journey.  (R. 
Macculloch.)  The  Light  of  the  world  : — In  the  Arctic  regions,  after  the  long 
dark  night  of  winter,  the  rising  of  the  sun  is  especially  welcome.  So  should 
Christ  be  to  us.  I.  The  world  without  Christ  sits  in  darkness.  1.  The 
minds  of  the  heathen  are  dark.  2.  Their  religion  is  dark  and  gloomy.  3.  Their 
conduct  is  dark.  4.  Their  prospects  after  death  are  dark.  II.  Jesus  Christ  is  a 
"  great  light."  He  is — 1.  Great  in  Himself,  for  He  is  God.  2.  He  is  a  perfect 
light.  3.  He  shines  into  the  heart  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  4.  He  gives  happiness  and 
healing  as  well  as  light  (Mai.  iv.  2;  John  xv.  11).  5.  This  light  cannot  be  put 
out  (Isa.  Ix.  20).  6.  It  is  the  light  of  heaven  as  well  as  of  earth  (Rev.  xxi.  23). 
III.  It  is  the  will  op  God  that  the  heathen  as  well  as  ourselves  should 
see  this  great  light  (1  Tim.  ii.  1-6;  1  John  ii.  2;  Mark  xvi.  15).  (B.  Brewin.) 
The  land  of  darkness  and  the  great  light : — I.  Who  are  the  people  whom  the 
prophet  saw  walking  in  darkness  ?  By  darkness,  Scripture  means  spiritual 
alteration.  Our  normal  condition  is  light ;  for  God  is  light  and  we  were  made 
in  His  image.  But  this  primitive  state  no  longer  exists;  an  astounding  fact 
has  overthrown  Divine  order ;  sin  has  changed  all  things.  The  alteration  pro- 
duced by  sin  is — 1.  An  alteration  of  truth.  Our  intellect  is  darkened  "  through 
the  ignorance  that  is  in  us,  because  of  the  blindness  of  our  heart."  The  know- 
ledge of  God  and  of  ourselves,  which  in  the  origin  was  pure,  has  been  perverted 
by  a  spirit  of  error  and  replaced  by  a  veil  of  darkness.  Man  has  ceased  to  know 
God  and  to  know  himself.  What  light  would  you  kindle  to  dispel  these  shadows 
of  death  ?  2.  An  alteration  of  life.  A  false  life  has  invaded  the  soul  and  driven 
away  the  light  of  life.  The  source  of  life  is  in  God,  but  it  is  no  longer  God  who 
holds  dominion  over  the  soul ;  it  is  self,  the  world,  and  sin.  3.  An  alteration 
of  joy.  Light  and  joy  are  synonymous  in  Scripture ;  "  Light  is  sown  for  the 
righteous,  and  gladness  for  the  upright  in  heart."  But  what  becomes  of 
Joy  if  it  is  deprived  of  truth  and  life  ?  It  is  turned  into  sorrow.  Our  earthly 
joys  are  but  disguised  sorrows.  II.  What  is  the  light  spoken  op  by  the 
prophet  T  Revert  to  the  fall  of  the  first  man  and  woman  in  Eden ;  a  promise 
shines.  This  promise  henceforth  accompanies  humanity.  (Homiletic  Magazine.) 
Darkness  exchanged  for  light  : — The  North  American  Indians  used  to  hold  a  New 
Year's  feast  with  revolting  ceremonies,  the  sick  and  aged  being  neglected,  or 
even  killed,  to  avoid  trouble.  But  missionaries  have  taught  them  the  Gospel 
They  are  Christians,  and  their  New  Year's  feast  is  kept  in  a  different  way.  Before 
it  begins  a  list  is  read  of  aged  and  sick  unable  to  come.  Bundles  of  good  things 
are  packed  up  and  sent  to  each  by  the  fleetest  runners,  who  think  it  a  joy 
and  not  a  burden.  Surely  these  people  "have  seen  a  great  light."  (Egerton 
Young.) 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

Ver  3.  Thou  bast  multiplied  the  nation,  and  not  increased  the  Joy  — 
National  power  and  national  character  : — The  difference  between  national  power 
and  national  character,  between  the  success  and  the  worthiness  of  a  State,  is 
suggested  by  these  words.  Scientific  insight  shows  us  that  a  planet  is  under 
the  dominion  of  the  law  of  gravitation  precisely  as  a  pebble  is  ;  and  religious 
insight  leads  us  to  study  the  life,  and  estimate  the  merits  and  the  perils,  of  an 
empire  in  the  same  light  and  by  the  same  standards  that  we  should  apply  to  any 
single  person.  And  so  religious  insight  prevents  us  from  accepting  the  mere 
numbers,  opulence,  prominence,  and  power  of  a  State  as  sufficient  justification 
for  joy  in  its  existence,  just  as  it  forbids  us  to  acknowledge  such  tests  for  private 
persons.  If  a  man  is  a  sensualist,  a  knave,  a  gambler,  or  a  ruffian,  no  honest 
mind  thinks  of  praising  him  because  he  is  strong-limbed  and  in  florid  health, 
because  he  lives  in  a  handsome  house,  is  worth  a  million,  and  adds  largely  every 
year  to  his  meadows  and  park.  These  splendid  circumstances  only  furnish  a 
pedestal  for  a  piece  of  incarnate  depravity  to  make  its  vileness  conspicuous  and 
repulsive.  And  a  nation  may  be  vigorous  in  physical  health,  and  may  be  gaining 
thus,  while  it  is  going  backward  and  downward  in  character.  The  noble  elements 
which  a  nation  embodies  and  represents,  and  which  gleam  as  expressions  upon 
the  lineaments  which  its  countenance  will  wear  in  history,  constitute  its  glory. 
Mere  numbers,  as  of  the  Chinese,  Hindoos,  or  Turks,  awaken  no  satisfaction  in 
the  competent  student.  The  brawny  energy  that  tugs  at  the  conquest  of  nature  ; 
that  pushes  out  pioneers  whose  axes  mow  the  wilderness,  and  whose  ploughs 
furrow  the  prairies ;  that  quarries  counties  for  coal,  and  tames  the  torrents  for 
its  wheels,  and  makes  the  air  over  wide  longitudes  buzz  with  furious  and  cunning 
mechanism, — this,  in  contrast  with  lazy  content  or  nerveless  beggary,  properly 
awakens  joy  in  the  aspect  of  a  nation.  And  when,  out  of  this  groundwork  of 
enthusiastic  strength,  an  intellectual  force  is  born  that  dots  the  land  with  schools 
which  lead  up  to  academies,  and  in  turn  are  crowned  with  colleges,  from  which 
literatures  blossom  and  shed  the  fragrance  of  culture  and  poetry  in  the  social 
air,  there  is  new  and  higher  call  for  satisfaction  and  gratitude.  And  if  a  religious 
spirit  presses  for  utterance  out  of  the  widening  life  of  the  State,  so  that  churches 
grow  as  naturally  from  its  soil  as  court-rooms,  capitols,  and  schools  ;  and  if  the 
religion  of  the  people,  instead  of  being  a  selfish  commerce  with  Infinite  power 
for  private  insurance  against  suspected  peril,  is  a  reverent  and  glad  recognition 
of  the  Infinite  mind  as  the  source  of  truth,  and  the  Infinite  heart  as  unspeakable 
love,  so  that,  if  poverty  begins  to  border  the  general  plenty,  the  national  genius 
turns  to  study  for  the  wisest  relief  of  it  by  the  quick  impulse  of  duty,  and  when 
vice  and  crime  burst  to  the  surface  the  conscience  of  the  State  is  moved  as  quickly 
to  devise  cures  as  to  build  prisons  ;  then  a  spectacle  is  seen  grander  than  any 
miracle  of  genius,  any  individual  heroism,  any  personal  sanctity  ;  for  then  a 
nation  stands  out  with  intellect  on  its  forehead,  chivalry  in  its  carriage,  and 
Christianity  in  its  heart.  (T.  Starr  King.)  They  Joy  before  Thee  according 
to  the  Joy  In  harvest. — Joy  in  harvest : — We  may  look  upon  the  words  of 
our  text  as  a  kind  of  double  picture  set  in  a  single  frame,  so  that  its  com- 
ponent parts  may  be  contrasted  as  well  as  compared  together.  On  one  side 
is  placed  before  us  a  merry  harvest  scene  —  just  like  what  you  might  see 
going  on  in  many  a  smiling  corn-field  of  this  happy  English  land.  On  the 
other  side  is  depicted  the  confused  noise  of  battle,  and  warriors  with  garments 
rolled  in  blood,  exulting  in  that  fierce  joy  which  foemen  feel  in  prospect  of 
hard-earned  victory.  Gradually  the  tumult  passes  on,  and  the  ground  is  strewn 
with  the  dead  and  dying,  with  here  and  there  a  broken  chariot  and  many 
a  shivered  spear.  And  then  the  camp  followers  issue  forth  to  strip  the 
slain,  and  to  carry  off  the  spoil  to  their  tents  until  the  pursuers  shall  return, 
when  it  shall  be  divided  share  and  share  to  every  man  with  boisterous  mirth 
and  songs  of  revelry.  You  will  see,  therefore,  that  our  attention  is  directed  first 
of  all  to  the  joy  of  harvest — man's  triumph  in  the  labours  of  the  field.  And  then 
we  can  almost  fancy  that  we  hear  the  ringing  shout  of  victory  as  the  battle  sweeps 
across  the  plain.  Dissimilar  though  such  things  may  be,  yet  there  is  more  than 
one  connecting  link  between  them.  For  '*  peace  hath  her  victories  no  less  renowned 
than  war."  We  might  even  say  that  they  are  more  real,  more  complete,  more 
generally  shared  in.  The  rejoicing  after  some  successful  campaign  is  often  loud 
and  great;  the  news  comes  in,  the  cities  are  illuminated,  the  joy- bells  are  rung, 
the  excitement  is  intense,  and  outwardly  there  is  every  appearance  of  extreme 
delight ;  but  it  is  only  a  one-sided  gratification  after  all.     For  many  feel,  alas  ! 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  257 

how  keenly,  that  the  victory  has  been  purchased  at  the  cost  of  many  a  valued 
life,  and  that  warfare  is  always  accompanied  by  desolation,  and  mourning,  and 
woe.  But  in  harvest  joy  this  is  not  the  case.  Here  we  have  an  unmingled  glad- 
ness; especially  in  a  year  when  the  crops  are  reported  from  all  quarters  to  be 
unusually  good — the  triumphant  result  of  toil  and  industry  rewarded  by  the 
fruits  of  the  ground.  {E.  Bell.)  Harvest  joy  among  the  Jews  : — To  a  commercial 
people  the  expression  is  not  so  significant  as  it  would  be  to  a  Jew.  The  Jews 
were  essentially  an  agricultural  people.  God  did  not  encourage  them  to  trade 
with  surrounding  nations,  lest  they  should  fall  into  idolatry  ;  and  so  we  find  that 
they  were  not  a  manufacturing  community,  and,  except  in  the  time  of  Solomon, 
they  made  no  pretensions  to  a  navy.  The  arts  and  sciences  were  but  little  culti- 
vated ;  but  the  fields  and  vineyards  gave  them  abundant  occupation,  and  the 
soil  and  climate  were  favourable  to  the  growth  of  the  corn  and  the  vine.  God 
took  special  interest  in  their  agricultural  pursuits.  He  laid  down  minute  laws 
respecting  sowing  and  gleaning,  and  He  reminded  the  people  in  the  feasts  which 
He  appointed  that  they  were  dependent  on  Him  for  the  gift  of  food,  and  should 
receive  it  with  a  devout  and  thankful  heart.  It  has  been  well  observed  respecting 
the  three  chief  Jewish  festivals  that  one  opened  the  harvest,  the  second  marked 
a  stage  in  it,  and  the  third  closed  it.  Joy  occupied  an  important  place  in  the 
religion  of  the  Jews ;  and  never,  I  suppose,  was  it  so  loud  in  its  expression 
as  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  when  they  looked  upon  their  full  granaries,  and 
brought  in  the  last  clusters  of  their  fruitful  vines.  (F.  J.  Austin.)  Harvest 
joy : — Christian  people  should  be  characterised  by  joy.  While  rejoicing  on 
account  of  our  spiritual  blessings,  we  ought  not  to  be  indifferent  to  our  daily 
temporal  blessings.  I.  Thb  natubb  of  this  joy.  Joy  in  harvest  is — 1.  A 
reasonable  joy.  The  prosperity  of  a  nation  depends  very  largely  upon  the  character 
of  its  harvests  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  most  natural  that  when  the  harvest  is  plenteous, 
our  praise  should  ascend  to  God  the  Father,  from  whom  this,  even  more  directly 
than  many  blessings,  has  surely  come.  We  have  been  taught  to  pray :  "  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread."  If  we  thus  recognise  our  dependence  on  God,  is 
it  not  fitting  that  we  should  thank  Him  when  He  answers  our  prayer  ?  Consider 
what  would  be  the  result  of  a  complete  failure  of  our  crops  for  one  year,  notwith- 
standing that  the  balance  might  be  restored,  to  some  extent,  from  foreign  lands. 
Or,  consider  what  would  be  the  result  if  there  were  failure  in  those  countries 
from  which  we  could  draw  our  supplies.  2.  A  universal  joy — a  joy  in  which  all 
sections  of  the  Christian  Church,  all  classes  of  the  community,  all  nations  and 
races  may  unite  together.  There  are  some  occasions  for  joy  which  only  affect 
small  and  select  circles.  But  a  good  harvest  hurts  no  one,  and  brings  blessings 
to  all.  And  surely  anything  that  tends  to  soften  prejudices,  annihilate  differences, 
break  down  the  barriers  of  caste  and  sect  is  a  national  boon.  3.  A  holy  joy. 
"  They  joy  before  Thee,"  says  the  prophet,  "  according  to  the  joy  in  harvest." 
Among  the  Jews,  joy  in  harvest  was  an  act  of  worship.  The  first  fruits  were 
presented  before  the  Lord  with  thanksgiving.  And  the  joy  of  harvest  should 
be  regarded  by  us  as  a  religious  festival.  Agriculture,  more  than  any  other 
branch  of  human  industry,  is  seen  to  be  under  the  superintendence  of  God.  To 
rejoice  in  a  good  harvest,  therefore,  and  to  forget  the  Being  to  whom  we  owe 
it,  would  be  an  act  of  impiety.  II.  Thb  gbounds  op  this  joy.  A  bountiful 
harvest  is — 1.  A  sign  of  God's  activity.  Very  beautiful  is  the  harvest  festival 
hymn  which  David  wrote  and  sang.  Everything  is  there  attributed  to  Divine 
agency  (Psa.  lxv.  9-13).  Now,  we  are  apt  to  forget  sometimes  how  much  we 
really  owe  to  God.  We  talk  of  the  laws  of  nature  until  we  seem  to  lose  sight 
of  the  Law-maker.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  the  corn  grows.  But  what  is  growth  ? 
It  is,  as  one  has  described  it,  "  the  increase  of  a  living  body  according  to  a  fixed 
pattern,  and  by  materials  derived  from  without — materials  changed  into  its 
own  substance  or  substances.  Here,  then,  are  three  wonders — the  power  of 
absorbing  fresh  materials  from  the  earth  and  air  ;  the  power  of  changing  them 
into  living  and  vegetable  substance,  and  the  power  of  arranging  these  new  materials 
according  to  a  fixed  pattern."  But  how  does  all  this  come  to  pass  ?  Has  the 
plant  a  mind  ?  The  more  we  reflect,  the  stronger  is  the  conviction  that  there 
is  some  intelligent,  powerful  agent  at  work,  to  whom  all  nature  is  subject,  an^i 
whose  will  it  readily  obeys.  And  for  whom  does  God  make  this  yearly  provision 
of  golden  grain  ?  For  us  who  so  constantly  forget  Him,  and  who,  at  best,  serve 
Him  in  a  half-hearted  way.  2.  A  proof  of  God's  fidelity.  Once,  long  ago,  Go" 
gave  a  promise  (Gen.  viii.  21,  22).     On  the  strength  of  that  promise  the  farmer 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

bows  his  seed.  He  may  not  always  think  of  the  promise.  But  it  is,  nevertheless* 
in  accordance  with  this  promise  that  his  crops  arrive  at  maturity.  He  must 
sow  in  faith,  whether  it  be  a  blind  faith  or  an  intelligent  faith.  He  can  only 
fulfil  certain  rules  and  conditions.  And  when  he  has  done  this  he  must  wait. 
If  the  rain  does  not  fall  he  cannot  bring  it  down.  If  the  sun  shines  too  powerfully 
he  cannot  ward  off  its  scorching  rays.  But  he  is  in  the  hands  of  a  faithful  God  ; 
and  though  here  and  there  the  fields  may  not  look  very  promising,  and  in  some 
districts  there  may  be  occasional  scarcity,  the  harvest  is  always  plentiful  in  some 
regions,  and  we  are  thus  able  to  assist  each  other  and  ward  off  or  mitigate  human 
Buffering  and  distress.  Let  us  remember — (1)  That  God's  faithfulness  in  pro- 
viding for  our  physical  necessities  is  only  an  illustration  of  His  general  character. 
(2)  Every  Christian  is  a  husbandman.  But,  as  in  sowing  corn,  we  have  to  work 
in  faith  and  sometimes  with  sore  discouragement.  It  was  so  with  Christ.  But 
we  have  promises,  and  upon  these  we  must  rest.  (3)  There  is  a  grand  harvest- 
day  approaching,  when  we  shall  have  abundant  evidence  of  the  faithfulness  of 
our  God ;  and  though  there  is  a  dark  side  to  that  picture,  which  we  dare  not 
conceal,  we  must  not  overlook  the  bright  side,  which  is  as  plainly  revealed.  "  The 
harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world.  The  reapers  are  the  angels.  Then  shall  He 
Bay  to  the  reapers,  Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares  and  bind  them  in  bundles 
to  burn  them ;  but  gather  the  wheat  into  My  barn."  What  an  ingathering 
of  souls  will  be  then !  Oh,  happy  day  !  when  those  that  sowed  and  those  that 
reaped  shall  rejoice  together.  Oh,  happy  day  1  when  much  of  the  seed  which  we 
feared  was  lost  shall  prove  to  have  been  good  and  fruit-bearing.  (Ibid.)  The 
analogy  between  the  joy  of  harvest  and  spiritual  joy : — I.  The  harvest.  1.  Its 
import.  Seasonable  gathering  of  fruits  yielded  by  the  earth,  according  to  estab- 
lished natural  laws — fruits  of  the  field,  orchard,  vineyard,  or  the  garden.  2.  Its 
antiquity.  It  began  with  the  dawn  of  created  life.  It  is  older  than  any  human 
form  of  government,  and  it  has  the  charm  of  having  existed  anterior  to  the  division 
of  humanity  into  tribes  and  nations,  and  before  the  formation  of  any  landed 
estates.  It  is  one  of  nature's  first  bonds  to  assure  every  living  creature  the  right 
of  existence.  3.  Its  universality.  It  is  the  heritage  of  all  countries,  according 
to  their  climates.  4.  Its  constancy.  It  is  as  firm  from  age  to  age  as  the  Word 
of  God,  and  an  infallible  witness  to  His  faithfulness,  as  well  as  to  the  plenitude 
of  His  goodness.  II.  The  joy  op  harvest.  The  harvest  songs  are  no  pretence 
without  reality.  1.  Its  intensity.  Joy  of  harvest  signifies  great  joy.  2.  Its 
reasonableness.  It  is  grounded  on  realised  goodness.  3.  It  is  grounded  on 
realised  goodness  in  abundance.  III.  The  analogy  between  the  joy  op  harvest 
and  the  joy  which  springs  from  fellowship  with  God.  1.  Both  are  God's 
gifts.  2.  Both  are  sequels  of  human  industry.  3.  Both  are  teachers  of  impressive 
moral  lessons.  (1)  The  goodness  of  God  in  providence  and  grace.  (2)  The  con- 
tinual duty  of  gratitude.  (3)  The  real  dignity  of  labour.  (4)  The  wisdom  of 
looking  for  and  hasting  to  the  heavenly  harvest-home.  4.  They  differ  in  that 
one  is  temporal  and  the  other  eternal  in  its  duration.  Joy  centred  in  God  will 
never  end.  (Homilist.)  The  joy  in  harvest  is  the  joy  of  the  reward,  the  joy 
of  victory.  I.  The  reward  of  labour.  God  gives  us  comparatively  few  things 
ready  for  use.  The  world  is  much  more  like  a  manufactory  than  a  storehouse 
of  ready-made  goods.  God  gives  us  the  raw  material,  but  we  must  work  it  up 
into  the  manifold  forms  in  which  we  require  it  for  the  purposes  of  life.  God 
does  not  give  us  bread,  but  the  possibility  of  bread.  Even  so  God  gives  His 
Word,  not  as  life,  but  as  the  possibility  of  life.  The  seed  stored  in  a  cellar,  though 
it  has  in  it  the  possibility  of  life  for  a  city,  is  valueless  until  it  is  sown  broadcast 
in  the  fields  ;  and  the  Word  of  God,  though  it  has  in  it  the  promise  of  life  eternal 
for  the  whole  world,  may  be  concealed  in  a  convent-cell  or  buried  in  a  dead 
language,  whilst  all  around  the  souls  of  men  are  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge. 
Man  lives  by  bread,  but  not  by  bread  alone.  As  there  is  a  life  which  bread 
sustains,  bo  there  is  a  life  which  truth  sustains.  To  sow  the  truth,  to  prepare 
for  its  harvest,  is  as  truly  to  save  spiritual  life  as  the  sowing  of  corn  in  its  season 
is  the  saving  of  natural  life.  Every  man  is  a  sower,  and  every  man  in  due  season 
shall  be  a  reaper.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,"  &c.  Is  not  this  the  solemn 
lesson  of  the  harvest-time,  that  he  who  would  reap  hereafter  must  sow  now,  that 
he  who  would  rest  hereafter  must  work  now  ?  II.  The  reward  of  patience. 
If  the  earthly  husbandman  has  need  of  long  patience,  how  much  longer  patience 
does  he  need  who  seeks  a  spiritual  harvest !  The  corn  of  wheat  grows  slowly, 
but  God's  truth  grows  more  slowly  stilL     What   axe   the  uncertainties  of  the 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  25» 

changeful  skies  compared  with  the  uncertainties  of  the  changeful  human  life  ! 
Yet  if  he  will  let  patience  have  her  perfect  work  he  shall  have  no  need  to  complain 
of  his  harvest.  III.  The  reward  of  faith.  Faith  and  patience  always  go 
together.  The  man  who  believes  can  wait.  When  a  child  puts  seed  into  the 
ground,  he  does  so  without  any  of  that  strong  conviction  of  its  vital  power  which 
experience  has  given  to  his  father,  and  so  from  want  of  faith  in  the  seed  he  appeals 
to  sight,  and  digs  it  up  to  see  how  it  is  getting  on.  There  are  many  older  children 
who  make  a  similar  mistake  as  to  spiritual  sowing.  The  Gospel  sower  must 
have  faith  in  his  seed.  We  cannot  feel  too  strongly  the  truth  that  the  power  lies 
in  the  seed,  not  in  the  sower.  This  is  as  true  in  the  Church  as  it  is  in  the  corn- 
field. (A.  E.  Gregory.)  Christian  joy  : — I.  The  fact  of  their  joy.  "They 
joy."  Who  ?  Those  who,  embracing  the  light  of  the  Gospel,  and  renouncing 
the  hidden  works  of  darkness,  are  made  the  children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day. 
1.  It  is  Divine  in  its  nature.  The  joy  of  the  men  of  the  world,  however  diversified 
it  may  be,  has  its  spring  and  source  in  the  world.  The  joy  of  the  ambitious  has 
its  rise  in  the  pride  of  the  world.  The  joy  of  the  miser  has  its  spring  in  the 
riches  of  the  world.  The  joy  of  the  sensualist  is  derived  from  the  pleasures  of  the 
world.  But  believers  are  taught  better.  2.  It  is  extensive  in  its  grounds.  God — 
their  Christian  privileges — their  Christian  principles — their  Christian  prospects. 
3.  Salutary  in  its  effects.  Its  tendency  is  good.  II.  The  peculiarity  of  their 
JOY.     "  Before  Thee."     This  is  an  expressive  term  and  intimates  several  things. 

1.  It  is  spiritual  It  is  a  joyful  state  of  mind,  connected  with  that  Divine  Being 
who  is  a  Spirit.     Every  exercise  of  the  mind  that  unites  us  to  Him  must  be  spiritual. 

2.  It  is  sincere.     The  Christian's  joy  is  real,  not  imaginary.     It  will  bear  inspection. 

3.  It  is  secret.  As  the  world  knows  not  the  extent  of  our  sorrows,  so  it  is 
unacquainted  with  the  abundance  of  our  joys.  III.  The  resemblance  of  their 
joy.  To  what  may  it  be  likened  ?  The  sacred  writers  have  used  various  simili- 
tudes. It  may  be  compared  to  the  joy  of  the  captive,  released  from  bondage  j 
to  the  joy  of  a  patient,  after  his  recovery  from  a  severe  illness ;  to  the  joy  of  a 
mariner,  after  a  storm.  Two  figures  are  here  employed  to  set  forth  the  Christian's 
joy — 1.  The  husbandman  in  the  field  of  harvest.  "  According  to  the  joy  of 
harvest."     (1)  It  is  a  joy  that  results  from  labour.     (2)  Connected  with  anxiety. 

(3)  Requires  patience.  2.  The  soldier  in  the  field  of  battle.  Conclusion — This 
subject  gives  us  a  view  of  two  things  with  regard  to  Christianity.  1.  Its  require- 
ments. It  is  no  easy  thing.  There  is  much  to  be  done  and  suffered.  2.  Its 
rewards.  These  are  inestimable.  Present  and  future — exceeding  description 
and  baffling  conception.  {E.  Temple.)  Harvest  joy : — To  some  minds,  and 
to  all  of  us,  perhaps,  in  some  moods,  autumn  brings  gloom,  harvest  sadness  j 
but  to  others  autumn  brings  rest — harvest,  joy.  (1)  There  is  a  joy  in  the  harvest 
of  agriculture.  (2)  In  the  harvest  of  commerce.  Such  is  the  often  honest  joy 
of  the  man  who,  after  years  of  industry  or  enterprise,  feels  that  he  has  realised 
a  fortune,  abundant  in  its  provision  for  himself  and  his  dear  ones.  (3)  In  the 
harvest  of  literature.  As  when,  after  the  toils  of  intellectual  endeavour,  the 
mind  is  at  home  amongst  "  the  fairy  tales  of  science,  and  the  long  results  of  time." 

(4)  There  is  a  harvest  of  love,  when  parents  rejoice  over  the  maturity  of  filial 
affection  ;  when  friends  approach  the  completeness  of  intelligent  and  sympathetic 
communion.  (5)  In  the  harvest  of  religion.  In  personal  experience  it  is  a  glad- 
some thing  to  reach  the  autumn  of  faith,  resignation,  peace,  after  the  earlier 
Beasons  of  doubt,  murmur,  tumult.  In  Christian  activities  it  is  wondrous 
happiness  to  reap  the  results  of  sorrowing,  anxious  sowing  in  enlightened,  com- 
forted, and  converted  souls.     I.  What  is  the  essence  of  the  joy  in  harvest  ? 

Is  not  the  cause  of  joy  the  same  in  all  these  instances  ?     For  there  is 1.  Joyful 

retrospect.  2.  Joyful  anticipation.  II.  What  is  the  measure  of  the  joy 
in  harvest  ?  Do  not  two  things  regulate  the  measure  of  the  joy  that  any  feel, 
in  any  harvest  ?  1.  The  amount  of  its  cost.  The  wheat-field  on  which  the 
farmer  has  expended  most  will  be  the  one  whose  yield  will  the  most  interest  him. 
So  is  it  in  every  kind  of  harvesting,  and  so  especially  in  what  are  distinctively 
the  harvests  of  religion.  In  our  own  personal  experience  we  value  most  in  reaping 
that  which  has  cost  us  most.  The  creed  that  we  have  fought  out  against  doubts 
and  difficulties,  is  inestimably  more  precious  to  us  than  that  which  has  been 
handed  down  and  adopted  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  character  which  is  pure 
after  battle  with  impurity,  sacrificial  after  contact  with  selfishness,  peaceful 
after  provocations  to  revenge  and  anger,  is  of  far  greater  moral  worth  than  that 
which  has  been  seldom  or  feebly  assailed.     In  our  work  for  others,  those  result? 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

on  which  we  have  spent  most  time  and  thought  and  prayer  are  dearest  to  as. 
Harvest  is  valuable  according  to — 2.  Its  intrinsic  value.  In  our  English  harvest- 
homes  there  is  rejoicing  because  of  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  wheat  that  is  reaped 
and  garnered.  This  is  so  because  of — ( 1 )  Its  necessariness.  So  ever  the  most  joyful 
harvest  will  be  the  obtaining  the  greatest  necessary.  What  is  that  ?  Is  it  mere 
wheat,  or  wealth,  or  learning,  or  even  human  love  ?  No,  a  thousand  times,  no,  for  a 
man  can  be  without  food,  or  gold,  or  earthly  knowledge,  or  human  love,  and  yet  live. 
"  A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth." 
Religion  is  the  greatest  necessary.  Christ  is  the  Bread  of  Life.  A  harvest  is 
of  worth  according  to — (2)  Its  sufficiency.  The  results  of  an  abundant  corn  harvest 
last  on  until,  and  even  past,  another  harvest- tide.  Through  successive  seasons 
its  bounties  are  being  enjoyed.  Because  thus  the  permanence  of  the  result  of 
harvest  is  one  measure  of  its  value,  the  harvest  of  knowledge  is  worth  far  more 
than  the  harvest  of  gain,  and  that  of  religion  most  of  all.  Its  ingatherings  are 
"  treasures  in  heaven,  which  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt,  and  where 
thieves  do  not  break  through  nor  steal."  Two  conclusions  arise — 1.  We  ought 
to  have  some  of  "  the  joy  in  harvest "  now.  With  souls  it  is  not  in  every  respect 
as  with  the  soil.  For  in  them  some  sowing  and  reaping,  dropping  in  of  seed, 
and  quickening  of  germ,  springing  of  one  blade  of  promise,  and  reaping  of  another 
harvest  of  result,  go  on  contemporaneously.  2.  We  must  have  joy  or  sorrow 
in  harvest  by  and  by.  There  will  be  unmistakable,  unavoidable  harvest  with 
us  all  soon.  "  The  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world ;  the  reapers  are  the  angels." 
In  solemn  expectation  of  that  harvest  let  us  remember — (1)  We  shall  reap  what 
we  sow.  (2)  We  shall  reap  more  than  we  sow.  What  an  unparalleled,  almost 
infinite,  contrast  between  the  grain  carried  from  the  field  in  harvest,  to  that 
which  had  been  deposited  there  in  the  seed  time.  (3)  We  shall  reap  as  we  sow. 
"  He  that  soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly ;  but  he  that  soweth  bounti- 
fully shall  reap  bountifully."  Be  careless  in  sowing,  and  you  will  be  ashamed 
in  reaping.  (i7.  R.  Thomas,  B.A.)  The  joy  of  harvest : — This  joy  is  used 
as  a  picture  of  the  joy  God  designs  for  His  Church.  I.  Observe  a  geeat  prin- 
ciple in  the  words  "  beforb  Thee."  All  true  joy  is  "  before  God  " — in  His 
presence — with  conscious  reference  to  Him.  1.  One  use  of  harvest  thanksgivings 
is  to  bring  out  this  principle,  to  connect  the  gift  of  the  harvest  with  the  Giver. 
2.  All  the  joy  of  life  is  to  be  sanctified  in  the  same  way.  Make  it  be  "  joy  before 
God."  Let  it  be  deepened,  purified,  ennobled  by  the  thought  of  the  love  that 
gave  it,  and  the  presence  and  sympathy  of  the  Giver.  3.  We  learn  from  the 
same  principle  the  limit  of  innocent  joy.  It  must  be  "  before  God."  Can  you 
connect  your  pleasure  with  Him  T  Use  this  as  a  test.  II.  The  purpose  or 
God  is  that  His  people  should  have  jot,  deep,  pull,  satisfying.  You 
wish  to  be  happy.  God  wishes  it  infinitely  more  than  you  do.  1.  Are  you  happy  ? 
Tes  T  Because  you  have  health,  comforts,  &c.  ?  Is  this  all  ?  Poor  joy !  Enough 
for  animals,  but  not  for  immortal  spirits.  Not  like  the  joy  of  harvest ;  no  rest 
in  it,  no  noble  achievement,  no  permanence.  God  is  not  satisfied  with  this  joy 
for  you.  2.  Are  you  happy  ?  No  ?  Wishes  unfulfilled,  cares,  bereavements,  dis- 
satisfaction with  self,  vain  endeavours  after  goodness,  sense  of  guilt,  &c.  ?  Your 
Saviour  knows  your  sorrows,  offers  you  joy.  3.  Purpose  accomplished  in  the  final 
harvest.  "  Joy  before  Him  " ;  the  "  rest  '• ;  the  "  well  done  "  ;  the  "  evermore." 
(F.  Wynne,  M.A.)  The  joy  of  spiritual  ingathering  : — I.  It  is  the  joy  of  realisa- 
tion. Harvest  is  the  realisation  of  faith,  of  hope,  and  of  labour.  So  with  the 
conversion  of  souls.  IT.  It  is  the  joy  of  congratulation.  Let  us  congratulate 
one  another  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  with  us.  Let  us  congratulate  one  another  that 
our  prayers,  notwithstanding  all  the  faults  that  mar  them,  and  the  infirmities  that 
cleave  to  them,  are  being  heard.  III.  It  is  the  joy  of  gratitude.  I  envy  not  the 
man  who  can  see  the  Church  increased  and  yet  not  feel  a  sacred  home-felt  joy. 
IV.  It  is  the  joy  of  sympathy.  V.  And  may  I  not  ask  you  to  rejoice  because 
there  is  One  who  loves  souls  better  than  I  do,  better  than  you  do,  who 
rejoices  more  than  any  of  us  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  The  joy  of  harvest : — I.  What 
is  the  joy  of  harvest,  which  is  here  taken  as  the  simile  of  the  joy  of  the  saints 
before  God  T  1.  Sometimes  the  farmer  only  rejoices  because  he  sees  the  reward 
of  his  toils,  and  is  so  much  the  richer  man.  2.  The  joy  of  harvest  has  another 
element  in  it,  namely,  that  of  gratitude  to  God  for  favours  bestowed.  3.  To 
the  Christian  it  should  be  great  joy,  by  means  of  the  harvest,  to  receive  an  assur- 
ance of  God's  faithfulness.  4.  To  the  Christian,  in  the  joy  of  harvest,  there  will 
always  be  the  joy  of  expectation.     As  there  is  a  harvest  to  the  husbandman 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  261 

for  which  he  waiteth  patiently,  so  there  is  a  harvest  for  all  faithful  waiters  who 
are  looking  for  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Our  joy 
of  harvest  is  the  hope  of  being  at  rest  with  all  the  saints,  and  for  ever  with  the 
Lord.  II.  What  joys  abb  those  which  to  the  believer  are  as  the  joy  of 
harvest  ?  1.  One  of  the  first  seasons  in  which  we  knew  a  joy  equal  to  the  joy 
of  harvest — a  season  which  has  continued  with  us  ever  since  it  commenced — was, 
when  we  found  the  Saviour,  and  so  obtained  salvation.  No  husbandman  ever 
ehouted  for  joy  as  our  hearts  should  when  a  precious  Christ  was  ours,  and  we 
could  grasp  Him  with  full  assurance  of  salvation  in  Him.  The  joy  of  harvest 
generally  shows  itself  by  the  farmer  giving  a  feast  to  his  friends  and  neighbours ; 
and,  usually,  those  who  find  Christ  express  their  joy  by  telling  their  friends  and 
neighbours  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  them.  2.  It  is  the  joy  of 
answered  prayer.  3.  We  have  another  joy  of  harvest  in  ourselves  when  we  con- 
quer a  temptation.  Those  know  deep  joy  who  have  felt  bitter  sorrow.  As  the 
man  feels  that  he  is  the  stronger  for  the  conflict,  as  he  feels  that  he  has  gathered 
experience  and  stronger  faith  from  having  passed  through  the  trial,  he  lifts  up 
his  heart,  And  rejoices,  not  in  himself,  but  before  his  God,  with  the  joy  of  harvest. 
4.  Again,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  joy  of  harvest  when  we  have  been  rendered 
useful.  5.  Another  delight  which  is  as  the  joy  of  harvest  is,  fellowship  with  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Our  condition  matters  nothing  to  ift  if  Christ  be  with  us. 
(Ibid.)  The  joy  in  harvest : — Is  a  joy — I.  Fob  hopes  fulfilled.  In  the 
midst  of  all  his  anxieties  the  farmer  had  never  abandoned  hope.  His  fears  were 
ended  and  his  hopes  realised,  when  the  last  sheaf  was  gathered  into  his  garner. 
Thus  the  Christian,  who  has  throughout  his  pilgrimage  gone  on  through  fears 
end  doubts  and  infirmities,  yet  still  cheered  by  hope,  shall  stand  before  his  Saviour 
at  the  great  morning  of  the  resurrection.  II.  Fob  labour  repaid.  No  matter 
how  abundant  the  crop  may  be,  so  long  as  it  stands  in  the  field  it  is  unprofitable 
to  the  farmer.  But,  when  he  looks  at  his  well-filled  barns,  he  feels  that  his  labour 
has  not  been  in  vain.  If  this  be  true  respecting  the  things  of  time,  how  much 
more  with  respect  to  those  of  eternity.  The  Christian's  labour  here  is  a  labour 
of  self-denial  in  hope  of  future  glory.  It  is  true  that  he  has  not  the  same 
uncertainty  with  respect  to  futurity  which  characterises  the  labours  of  the  husband- 
man. But,  when  the  conflict  is  at  last  over,  and  he  receives  that  for  the  sake 
of  which  he  had  renounced  all  earthly  objects  and  lusts,  and  finds  that  his  labour 
has  not  been  in  vain  in  the  Lord,  he  "  joys  before  Him  with  the  joy  of  harvest." 
III.  For  rest  obtained.  The  farmer's  year  had  been  a  year  of  labour,  and 
often  of  very  severe  labour  too ;  and  when  the  period  of  harvest  had  commenced, 
his  exertions  were  necessarily  redoubled.  At  length,  however,  his  heavy  toil 
was  for  a  season  ended,  and  in  that  rest  which  is  doubly  sweet  after  labour,  he 
11  joys  according  to  the  joy  in  harvest."  The  rest  of  the  husbandman  is  but 
for  a  time,  and  a  short  time,  but  the  rest  of  the  Christian  shall  be  eternal.  He 
has  had  his  time  of  labour,  such  as  far  to  exceed  in  its  constancy  and  its  stead- 
fastness that  of  the  husbandman.  IV.  Fob  providences  completed.  Not- 
withstanding all  the  care  of  the  husbandman,  he  is  constrained,  from  time  to 
time,  to  acknowledge  that  the  entire  process  of  the  growth  and  ripening  of  the 
corn  has  depended  on  circumstances  over  which  he  has  had  no  control.  Had 
he  been  left  to  dispose  of  the  seasons  as  he  might  have  thought  right,  he  would, 
in  all  probability,  have  destroyed  his  crop.  Many  a  time  had  he  complained  that 
the  frosts  were  too  severe,  the  rain  too  heavy,  the  wind  too  strong,  the  sun  too 
hot — measuring  the  goodness  of  the  all-wise  God  by  his  own  limited  understand- 
ing. But  now  he  admits  that  his  fears  were  groundless,  and  that  all  things  have 
worked  together  for  good.  May  we  not  in  this  picture  see  the  progress  of  the 
Christian  whilst  he  is  the  object  of  Divine  Providence  here  on  earth ;  whilst, 
now  sorrowing  and  now  rejoicing,  he  is  ready  to  murmur  at  every  salutary  check 
which  he  receives  from  the  hand  of  a  Heavenly  Father  T  But  at  the  harvest- 
time  the  "  God  who  hideth  Himself  "  shall  be  made  manifest  as  having  caused 
all  these  things  to  work  for  His  own  glory  in  the  good  of  His  people.  V.  Fob 
promises  fulfilled.  The  husbandman  has  one  promise  whose  fulfilment 
gladdens  him,  the  Christian  has  thousands.  VI.  For  meeting:  with  friends. 
Now  the  harvest-home  is  proclaimed,  and  friends  long  absent  meet  together. 
We  go  to  meet  the  friends  whom  we  have  known  and  loved  in  the  Lord.  And 
in  this  meeting  with  the  dearest  objects  of  the  affections  of  the  Christian's  soul, 
there  is  One  '  whom  having  not  seen,  we  love " ;  Him,  we  shall  then  meet  and 
"  know,  even  as  we  are  known."    If  then  these  be  the  joys  in  harvest,  how  desirable 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

it  is  that  we  should  examine  whether  we  are  such  as  shall  partake  of  them.  Let 
me  briefly  call  your  attention  to  the  character  of  those  who  shall  partake  of  this 
joy.  1.  The  ignorant,  self-conceited  husbandman,  who  neither  knows  how  or 
what  to  sow  nor  when  to  reap,  shall  not  have  "  the  joy  in  harvest."  2.  Nor  is 
there  joy  in  harvest  to  the  slothful.  3.  And  should  we  see  any  one  who  laboured 
as  though  it  were  his  design  to  make  his  land  barren  and  unproductive  we  should 
at  once  declare  him  mad,  and  predict  that  beggary  and  starvation  must  be  the 
inevitable  lot  of  himself  and  his  family.  4.  Those  who  are  indeed  preparing  for 
that  great  harvest  are  those  who  are  applying  to  heavenly  things  the  same  diligence, 
the  same  care,  the  same  watchfulness,  and  the  same  energy  which  the  husband- 
man applies  to  this  earthly  tillage.  (R.  M.  Kyle,  B.A.)  Harvest  joy,  and 
how  we  may  share  in  it : — The  idea  of  national  prosperity  being  dependent  on 
agricultural  prosperity,  true  as  applied  to  Israel,  is  really  universally  true.  There 
may  be  many  an  industry  that  brings  more  wealth  to  a  nation  in  the  shape  of 
money — as  the  coal  industry,  the  iron  industry,  the  shipping  industry — but 
the  primal  industry  is  the  agricultural  industry.  "  Moreover,  the  profit  of  the 
earth  is  for  all ;  the  king  himself  is  served  by  the  field,"  says  the  writer  of  Ecclesi- 
astes.  thereby  giving  expression  to  the  eternal  truth  that  all  wealth  comes  ulti- 
mately from  the  soil ;  even  the  king  himself  is  not  independent  of  it.  One  cannot 
help  rejoicing  over  the  ingathering  of  the  harvest,  for  nature  itself  seems  musical 
with  joy.  "  The  valleys  are  covered  over  with  corn  ;  they  shout  for  joy,  they 
also  sing."  This  joy  is — I.  The  joy  of  provision  secured.  We  can  joy  before 
the  Lord — not  before  the  world,  for  that  would  mean  pride ;  nor  before  ourselves, 
for  that  would  mean  selfishness  ;  but  before  the  Lord,  for  that  means  thank- 
fulness over  provision  secured.  There  is  nothing  meaner  than  to  boast  of  one'a 
prosperity  before  the  world,  or  before  one's  own  heart ;  but  we  can  derive  joy 
from  it  before  the  Lord,  for  the  Lord  means  us  to  rejoice  in  all  His  gifts — material 
as  well  as  spiritual.  II.  The  joy  op  patience  rewarded.  III.  The  joy  op 
labour  requited.  What  kind  of  harvest  is  your  life  to  have  ?  (J.  Maclcie, 
B.D. )  The  joy  of  harvest  : — Harvest  crowns  the  year  with  God's  goodness. 
When  the  harvest  is  abundant  there  is  universal  joy.  Everybody  rejoices.  The 
owner  of  the  land  is  glad,  because  he  Bees  the  recompense  of  reward  ;  the  labourers 
are  glad,  for  they  see  the  fruit  of  their  toil ;  even  those  to  whom  not  a  single 
ear  may  belong  nevertheless  sympathise  in  the  common  joy,  because  a  rich  harvest 
is  a  boon  to  all  the  nation.  It  is  a  joyous  sight  to  see  the  last  loaded  wain  come 
creaking  down  the  village  road,  to  note  the  youngsters  who  shout  so  loudly,  yet 
know  so  little  what  they  are  shouting  about,  to  mark  the  peasant  on  the  top 
of  the  wain  as  he  waves  his  hat  and  gives  vent  to  some  gleeful  exclamation,  and 
to  see  them  taking  it  all  into  the  stack  or  barn.  There  is  joy  throughout  the 
village,  there  is  joy  throughout  the  land,  when  the  harvest- time  is  come.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )  Harvest  rejoicing  among  the  Jews  :  —  It  was  a  common  saying 
of  the  Rabbis  that  he  who  had  not  seen  the  rejoicing  of  the  people  at  that  glad 
time  had  yet  to  learn  what  true  joy  was.  (J.  Mackie,  B.D.)  The  joy  of 
finding  the  Saviour  : — My  heart  was  fallow,  and  covered  with  weeds  ;  but  on 
a  certain  day  the  great  Husbandman  came  and  began  to  plough  my  soul.  Ten 
black  horses  were  His  team,  and  it  was  a  sharp  ploughshare  that  He  used,  and 
the  ploughers  made  deep  furrows.  The  Ten  Commandments  were  those  black 
horses,  and  the  justice  of  God,  like  a  ploughshare,  tore  my  spirit.  I  was  con- 
demned, undone,  destroyed,  lost,  helpless,  hopeless, — I  thought  hell  was  before 
me.  Then  there  came  a  cross  ploughing,  for  when  I  went  to  hear  the  Gospel 
it  did  not  comfort  me  ;  it  made  me  wish  I  had  a  part  in  it,  but  I  feared  that 
■uch  a  boon  was  out  of  the  question.  The  choicest  promises  of  God  frowned 
at  me,  and  His  threatenings  thundered  at  me.  I  prayed,  but  found  no  answer 
of  peace.  It  was  long  with  me  thus.  After  the  ploughing  came  the  sowing. 
God  who  ploughed  the  heart  made  it  conscious  that  it  needed  the  Gospel,  and 
the  Gospel  seed  was  joyfully  received.  Do  you  recollect  that  auspicious  day 
when  at  last  you  began  to  have  some  little  hope  ?  It  was  very  little — like  a 
green  blade  that  peeps  up  from  the  soil :  you  scarce  knew  whether  it  was  grass 
or  corn,  whether  it  was  presumption  or  true  faith.  It  was  a  little  hope,  but  it 
grew  very  pleasantly.  Alas,  a  frost  of  doubt  came ;  snow  of  fear  fell ;  cold 
winds  of  despondency  blew  on  you,  and  you  said,  "  There  can  be  no  hope  for 
me."  But  what  a  glorious  day  was  that  when  at  last  the  wheat  which  God  had 
sown  ripened,  and  you  could  say,  "  I  have  looked  unto  Him  and  have  been 
lightened :   I  have  laid  my  sins  on  Jesus,  where  God  laid  them  of  old,  and  they 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  263 

are  taken  away,  and  I  am  saved."  I  remember  well  that  day.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  joy  of  spiritual  ingathering  : — I  cannot  help  being  egotistical  enough  to  mention 
the  joy  I  felt  when  first  I  heard  that  a  soul  had  found  peace  through  my  youthful 
ministry.  I  had  been  preaching  in  a  village  some  few  Sabbaths  with  an  increas- 
ing congregation,  but  I  had  not  heard  of  a  conversion,  and  I  thought,  "  Perhaps 
I  am  not  called  of  God.  He  does  not  mean  me  to  preach,  for  if  He  did  He  would 
give  me  spiritual  children."  One  Sabbath  my  good  deaoon  said,  "  Don't  be 
discouraged.  A  poor  woman  was  savingly  impressed  last  Sabbath."  How 
long  do  you  suppose  it  was  before  I  saw  that  woman  ?  It  was  just  as  long  as 
it  took  me  to  reach  her  cottage.  I  was  eager  to  hear  from  her  own  lips  whether 
it  was  a  work  of  God's  grace  or  not.  I  always  looked  upon  her  with  interest, 
though  only  a  poor  labourer's  wife,  till  she  was  taken  away  to  heaven,  after  having 
lived  a  holy  life.  Many  since  then  have  I  rejoiced  over  in  the  Lord,  but  that 
first  seal  to  my  ministry  was  peculiarly  dear  to  me.  It  gave  me  a  sip  of  the  joy 
of  harvest.  If  somebody  had  left  me  a  fortune  it  would  not  have  caused  me 
one  hundredth  part  of  the  delight  I  had  in  discovering  that  a  soul  had  been  led 
to  the  Saviour.  I  am  sure  Christian  people  who  have  not  this  joy  have  missed 
one  of  the  choicest  delights  that  a  believer  can  know  this  side  heaven.  (Ibid.) 
Joy  of  realisation  : — Dickens  describes  how  he  dropped  his  first  published  paper 
stealthily  one  evening  at  twilight,  with  fear  and  trembling,  into  a  dark  letter- 
box up  a  dark  court  in  Fleet  Street :  and  his  agitation  when  it  appeared  in  all 
the  glory  of  print.  "  On  which  occasion  I  walked  down  to  Westminster  Hall, 
and  turned  into  it  for  half  an  hour,  because  my  eyes  were  so  dimmed  with  joy 
and  pride,  that  they  could  not  bear  the  street,  and  were  not  fit  to  be  seen  there." 
(H.  O.  Mackey.) 

Ver.  4.  For  Thou  hast  broken  the  yoke  of  his  burden. — Deliverance  from 
the  burden  of  sin : — I.  Sin  is  a  burden  (Psa.  xxxviii.  4).  Sinners  are  heavy 
Istden  with  this  insupportable  load,  which  detains  them  from  God,  who 
alone  can  relieve  them ;  enfeebles  their  minds ;  and  harasses  them  with 
perplexing  fears,  and  the  most  uneasy  reflections.  A  proper  sense  of  its  powerful 
influence,  its  polluting  nature  and  dreadful  guilt,  like  a  crushing  weight,  depresses 
the  spirit,  becomes  irksome  and  grievous,  and  if  not  happily  removed,  will  prove 
the  means  of  irremediable  ruin.     II.  The  ceremonial  law  is  the  yoke  of 

THIS  BURDEN  (Acts  XV.  10).      HI.  ImMANUEL  HAS  BROKEN  THE  YOKE  (Col.  ii.  14). 

(B.  Macculloch.)  The  Gospel  a  liberating  power: — 1.  The  design  of  the  Gospel, 
and  the  grace  of  it,  is  to  break  the  yoke  of  sin  and  Satan,  to  remove  the  burthen 
of  guilt  and  corruption,  and  to  free  us  from  the  rod  of  those  oppressors,  that  we 
might  be  brought  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  2.  This  is 
done  by  the  Spirit  working  like  fire  (ver.  6).  It  is  done  as  in  the  day  of  Midian, 
by  a  work  of  God  upon  the  hearts  of  men.  Christ  is  our  Gideon.  (M.  Henry.) 
Encouragement  from  the  past : — If  God  makes  former  deliverances  His  patterns 
in  working  for  us,  we  ought  to  make  them  our  encouragements  to  hope  in  Him. 
(Ibid.) 

Ver.  5.  Por  every  battle  of  the  •warrior.  —  Significance  of  verse  5 .- — 
The  verse  is  more  noteworthy  for  its  connection  than  for  its  contents. 
As  it  stands  it  suggests  a  not  very  vivid  contrast  between  two  sorts  of 
battle,  which  contributes  nothing  to  the  progress  of  the  prophet's  thought  as 
well  as  quite  misrepresents  the  original.  The  true  rendering,  according  to  all 
interpreters,  is  substantially  this :  '  For  all  the  armour  of  the  armed  man  in 
the  onset,  and  the  garments  rolled  in  blood,  shall  be  for  burning,  shall  be  the 
food  of  fire."  Thus  understood,  the  verse  admirably  concludes  the  picture  of 
prosperity  given  in  the  previous  context  by  declaring  that  even  the  implements 
of  warfare  and  the  blood-stained  clothing  they  cause  shall  be  utterly  consumed. 
Thus  considered,  the  passage  appropriately  introduces  the  famous  Messianio 
prophecy  that  follows :  "  For  unto  us  a  Child  is  born,"  &«.  Such  a  wondrous 
triumph  of  peace  can  be  adequately  explained  only  by  the  appearance  of  One 
whose  name  is  Wonderful.  (T.  W.  Chambers,  D.D.)  Destroying  weapons 
of  war  : — After  the  suppression  of  the  Sepoy  revolt,  the  British  Government 
spent  a  week  in  melting  down  the  vast  array  of  weapons  of  all  sorts  accumulated 
by  the  disarming  of  a  large  portion  of  the  people  of  Northern  India.  (Ibid.) 
Burning  implements  of  war : — The  prophet  foretells  a  time  when  out  of  these 
wars  and  tumults  there  should  come  a  period  of  deep  peace,  when  these  warlike 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

implements  should  be  burnt  to  ashes,  according  to  the  practice  of  ancient  time* 
which  heaped  sword,  spear  and  armour  as  on  a  huge  funeral  pile,  when  the  victory 
was  won,  to  proclaim  that  the  strife  was  over,  that  the  chariots  were  burnt  with 
fire,  and  the  spears  broken  asunder.  And  he  saw  that  this  peace  would  come, 
because  within  his  own  time  or  hereafter — he  knew  not  clearly  which — a  Son, 
a  King,  should  be  born,  who  would  be  the  Prince  of  Peace,  the  founder  of  a  new 
and  eternal  kingdom,  clothed  with  a  majesty  which  should  put  to  silence  the 
contentions  of  men,  and  with  a  power  which  should  compress  and  unite  the  most 
divergent  elements.  (Dean  Stanley.)  The  accoutrements  of  the  warrior  only 
fuel  for  the  fire: — It  has  been  submitted  that  a  better  rendering  is  this:  "  Every 
boot  of  the  warrior  that  tramps  noisily  and  the  cloak  rolled  in  blood  shall  be 
for  burning  as  fuel  for  fire."  The  soldier  wears  his  tall  boot,  and  as  his  foot  comes 
down  on  the  earth  he  makes  it  ring  again :  and  hearing  an  army  pass  by  who 
could  suppose  that  the  earth  will  survive  the  cruel  tramp  ?  Religious  inspira- 
tion lifts  men  so  high  as  to  enable  them  to  despise  the  pomp  and  circumstance 
of  war :  every  boot  of  the  warrior  that  tramps  noisily,  and  the  cloak  rolled  in 
blood  which  men  would  gather  up  and  preserve  in  museums,  and  show  to  admir- 
ing ages,  shall  be  gathered  up  by  the  hand  of  time  and  thrust  into  the  middle 
of  the  hottest  fire.  All  such  relics  were  made  for  burning.  In  our  patriotio 
folly,  our  exuberant  and  intoxicated  zeal,  we  gather  the  boots  of  warriors  and 
the  cloaks  of  conquerors,  and  the  tattered  banners  of  famous  fields,  and  all  but 
worship  them :  underneath  the  whole  pile  should  be  written,  "  These  are  for 
burning  as  fuel  for  fire."    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  For  unto  ub  a  child  Is  born,  unto  us  a  son  Is  given. — The 
"  child  "  Hezekiah — yet  some  one  else  : — I  am  unable  to  form  any  distinct  notion 
of  Isaiah  as  a  man  and  a  Hebrew,  and  as  a  prophet  of  Jehovah  in  contrast  with 
those  muttering  wizards  he  denounces,  without  supposing  that,  at  this  period 
of  his  life  and  ministry,  he  must  have  connected  the  thought  of  "  the  child  " 
with  Hezekiah,  on  whom  the  name  of  the  Mighty  God  had  been  actually  named 
("  Hezekiah  "  means  "  Jehovah  strengthens  "),  and  who  (being  now  a  boy  nine 
or  ten  years  old)  may  already  have  given  promise  of  the  piety  which  afterwards 
distinguished  him:  and  that  he  would  not,  at  this  time,  have  considered  that 
his  prediction  would  be  quite  inadequately  realised  if  the  youthful  prince 
should,  on  his  accession  to  the  throne  of  David  and  Solomon,  renew  the  glories 
of  their  reigns,  in  which  peace  and  justice  were  established  at  home  and  abroad, 
through  trust  in  Jehovah  and  His  covenant: — reigns  of  which  the  historical 
facts  must  be  studied  in  the  light  which  the  Book  of  Psalms  and  such  passages 
as  2  Chron.  ix.  1-8  throw  on  them.  I  say  at  this  time,  because  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  inquire  what  was  the  effect  on  Isaiah's  mind  when  he  did  see  a 
restoration  under  Hezekiah  of  such  a  reign  of  righteousness  and  prosperity ;  and 
whether  his  expectation  of  the  Messiah  did  not  eventually  assume  a  very  different 
form  from  what  could  have  been  possible  to  him  at  the  time  we  now  speak  of. 
There  is  a  method  through  this  whole  Book  of  Isaiah's  prophecies  which  reflects 
a  corresponding  progress  in  the  prophet's  own  mind;  and  this  method  offers  us 
a  clue  through  difficulties  which  are  otherwise  impassable,  if  we  will  only  hold  it 
fast  and  follow  its  guidance  fairly.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  A  prediction  of 
an  ideal  king  : — Such  language  speaks  of  an  ideal  king,  even  a  Divine  ruler,  and 
only  in  a  very  poor  degree  found  its  fulfilment  in  Hezekiah  or  any  Jewish  king. 
(B.  Blake,  B.D.)  The  way  that  led  to  Christ: — In  the  crooked  alleys  of  Venice, 
there  is  a  thin  thread  of  red  stone  inlaid  in  the  pavement  or  wall,  which  guides 
through  all  the  devious  turnings  to  the  Piazza  in  the  centre,  where  the  great 
church  stands.  So  in  reading  the  Old  Testament  we  see  in  the  life  of  many  a 
personage,  illustrious  or  obscure,  and  in  many  a  far-off  event,  the  red  line  of  promise 
and  prophecy  which  stretches  on  unbroken  until  the  Son  of  Man  came.  (Sunday 
School  Chronicle.)  The  Messianic  prophecies  : — Dr.  Gordon,  of  Boston,  had 
a  large  dissected  "  puzzle  map,"  which  he  gave  to  his  children,  saying,  "  Don't 
press  the  parts  into  their  places  ;  you  will  soon  know  when  they  fit."  Coming 
again  into  the  room,  very  soon  after,  he  was  surprised  to  find  the  map  complete. 
He  felt  like  saying,  as  Isaac  to  Jacob,  when  the  latter  returned  with  the  venison, 
"  How  is  it  that  thou  hast  found  it  so  quickly,  my  son  ?  "  "  Why,  father," 
was  the  reply,  "  there  was  a  man  printed  on  the  back ;  we  saw  where  the  feet, 
the  eyes,  the  arms,  and  the  rest  of  the  body  came,  and  so  it  was  easy  to  watch 
it  and  fit  all  in."    So,  if  we  know  the  Bible,  we  see  "  the  Man  on  the  back  "  ; 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  265 

we  pat  together  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  by  "  the  Man  Christ  Jesus." 
(A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  The  prophet's  supernatural  prevision  : — It  is  not  necessary 
to  suppose  that  the  prophet  knew  the  literal  meaning  of  his  own  words.  He  is 
but  a  poor  preacher  who  knows  all  that  he  has  said  in  his  sermon.  Had  the 
prophet  done  so,  he  would  be  no  longer  the  contemporary  of  his  own  epoch.  It 
is  the  glory  of  prophecy  to  feel  after.  It  is  the  glory  of  science  to  say  long  before 
the  planet  is  discovered — there  is  another  world  there:  no  telescope  has  seen 
it,  no  message  of  light  has  been  received  from  it  consciously,  but  keep  your  tele- 
scope in  that  direction,  there  must  be  a  starry  pulse  just  there.  The  botanist 
knows  that  if  he  finds  a  certain  plant  in  a  given  locality  there  will  be  another 
plant  of  another  name  not  a  mile  away.  He  judges  from  one  plant  to  another ; 
he  submits  himself  to  inferential  logic :  he  has  not  seen  that  other  plant,  but  he 
tells  you  in  the  morning  that  because  yesternight  he  found  this  leaf  growing  not 
far  from  the  house  in  which  he  resides  he  will  find  another  leaf  of  a  similar  pattern, 
or  a  diverse  pattern,  not  far  away ;  and  at  night  he  comes  home,  radiant  as  the 
evening  star,  and  says,  Behold,  I  told  you  this  morning  what  would  be  the  case, 
and  there  it  is.  So  with  the  larger  astronomy,  and  the  larger  botany :  there  is 
another  planet  somewhere  yonder ;  when  it  is  discovered  call  it  the  Morning 
Star,  and  inasmuch  as  there  is  triacle,  treacle,  in  Gilead — a  balm  there — there 
shall  be  found  another  plant  not  far  away ;  when  you  find  it  call  it  by  some  sweet 
name,  such  as  the  Rose  of  Sharon,  or  the  Lily  of  the  valley.  It  is  the  glory  of 
the  prophet  to  see  signs  which  have  infinite  meanings — to  see  the  harvest  in  the 
seed,  the  noonday  in  the  faintest  tint  of  dawn,  the  mighty  man  in  the  helpless 
infant,  the  Socrates  in  the  embryo.  This  prevision  made  the  prophets  seemingly 
mad.  Their  knowledge  was  to  them  but  a  prison,  so  small,  so  dark,  yet  now  and 
again  almost  alive  with  a  glory  all  but  revealed.  The  horizon  was  loaded  with 
gloom,  yet  here  and  there  a  rent  showed  that  heaven  was  immediately  behind, 
and  might  at  any  moment  make  the  dark  cold  earth  bright  and  warm  with  eternal 
summer.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  great  Deliverer :— ■Look  at  the  Deliverer  as 
seen  by  the  prophet — " For  unto  us  a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given:  and 

the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder :  and  His  name  shall  be  called ." 

Now,  the  English  punctuation  seems  to  fritter  away  the  dignity  of  the  appellation. 
The  compound  name  really  falls  into  this  classification:  first,  Wonderful* 
Counsellor,  as  one  word,  as  if,  indeed,  it  were  but  one  syllable  ;  second,  God-the- 
Mighty-One,  not  four  words,  but  hyphened  together ;  third,  Father-of-Eternity, 
also  hyphened  and  consolidated ;  fourth,  Prince-of- Peace,  that  likewise  an 
instance  of  the  words  run  into  one  another,  and  in  this  fourfold  classification  we 
have  the  mysterious  name  of  the  Deliverer.  This  is  no  evidence  that  Isaiah  saw 
the  birth  of  Christ  as  we  understand  that  term,  but  what  he  did  see  was  that  the 
only  deliverer  who  could  accomplish  the  necessary  work  must  fill  out  the  whole 
measure  of  these  terms ;  if  he  failed  to  fill  out  that  outline,  he  was  not  the  pre- 
dicted Messiah.  Let  us  see.  1.  He  must  fill  the  imagination — "  Wonderful." 
Imagination  cannot  be  safely  left  out  of  any  religion ;  it  is  that  wondrous  faculty 
that  flies  to  great  heights,  and  is  not  afraid  of  infinite  breadths  ;  the  faculty, 
so  to  say,  that  lies  at  the  back  of  all  other  faculties,  sums  them  up,  and  then  adds 
an  element  of  its  own,  using  the  consolidated  mind  for  the  highest  purposes  of 
vision  and  understanding.  Is  this  name  given  for  the  first  time  T  Where  do 
we  find  the  word  "  Wonderful  "  in  the  Scriptures  ?  We  may  not,  perhaps,  find 
it  in  the  English  tongue,  but  it  is  really  to  be  found  in  Judg.  xiii.  18  :  The  angel 
of  the  Lord  said  unto  Manoah,  "  Why  askest  thou  thus  after  my  name,  seeing  it 
is  secret  ?  " — the  same  Hebrew  word  that  is  rendered  in  the  text  "  Wonderful  " ; 
so  we  might  read,  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Why  askest  thou  thus 
after  my  name,  seeing  it  is  Wonderful  ?  "  2.  He  must  satisfy  the  judgment.  His 
name,  therefore,  is  not  only  Wonderful,  but  "  Counsellor,"  the  fountain  of  wisdom 
and  understanding,  the  mind  that  rules  over  all  things  with  perfectness  of  mastery, 
that  attests  everjrthing  by  the  eternal  meridian,  and  that  looks  for  righteousness. 

3.  He  must  also  satisfy  the  religious  instinct,  so  He  is  called  *'  The  Mighty  God." 
It  is  not  enough  to  describe  God  without  epithetic  terms.  Sometimes  we  say, 
Why  utter  such  words  as,  Thou  infinite,  eternal,  ever-blessed  God  ?  Because 
we  are  so  constituted  in  this  infantile  state  of  being  that  we  need  a  ladder  of 
adjectives  to  get  up  to  our  little  conception  of  that  which  is  inconceivable. 

4.  Not  only  so,  there  must  be  in  this  man  a  sense  of  brotherhood,  so  He  is  called 
"  The-Prince-of- Peace."  He  will  bring  man  to  man,  nation  to  nation ;  He  will 
arbitrate  amongst  the  empires  of  the  earth  and  rule  by  the  Sabbatic  spirit. 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

Christianity  is  peace.  5.  He  is  to  be  more  still.  He  is  to  be  "  The  Everlasting 
Father,"  otherwise  translated,  The  Father  of  Eternity ;  otherwise,  and  better 
translated,  The  Father  of  the  age  to  come.  Therein  we  have  misinterpreted 
Christianity.  We  have  been  too  anxious  to  understand  the  past.  The  pulpit 
has  had  a  backward  aspect — most  careful  about  what  happened  in  the  second 
century,  dying  to  know  what  Tertullian  thought  and  what  Constantino  did. 
Christ  is  the  Father  of  the  age  to  come.  If  He  lived  now  He  would  handle  the 
question  of  poverty  ;  He  would  discuss  the  great  uses  of  Parliament ;  He  would 
address  Himself  to  every  church,  chapel,  and  sanctuary  in  the  kingdom;  Ho 
would  come  into  our  various  sanctuaries  and  turn  us  out  to  a  man.  Christianity 
is  the  prophetic  religion.  It  deals  with  the  science  that  is  to  be,  with  the  politics 
yet  to  be  developed,  with  the  commerce  that  is  yet  to  be  the  bread-producing 
action  of  civilised  life.  (Ibid.)  The  birth  of  Christ : — I.  Let  us  explain  thb 
prediction.  The  grandeur  of  the  titles  sufficiently  determines  the  meaning  of 
the  prophet ;  for  to  whom,  except  to  the  Messiah,  can  these  appellations  belong  ? 
This  natural  sense  of  the  text  is  supported  by  the  authority  of  an  inspired  writer, 
and  what  is,  if  not  of  any  great  weight  in  point  of  argument,  at  least  very  singular 
as  a  historical  fact,  it  is  supported  by  the  authority  of  an  angel  (Matt.  iv. 
12,  &c. ;  Luke  i.  31,  &c).  To  remove  the  present  fears  of  the  Jews,  God  reminds 
them  of  the  wonders  of  His  love,  which  He  had  promised  to  display  in  favour  of 
His  Church  in  ages  to  come :  and  commands  His  prophet  to  say  to  them :  Ye 
trembling  leaves  of  the  wood,  shaken  with  every  wind,  peace  be  to  you !  Ye 
timorous  Jews,  cease  your  fears !  let  not  the  greatness  of  this  temporal  deliverance, 
which  I  now  promise  you,  excite  your  doubts  !  God  hath  favours  incomparably 
greater  in  store  for  you,  they  shall  be  your  guarantees  for  those  which  ye  are 
afraid  to  expect.  Ye  are  in  covenant  with  God.  Ye  have  a  right  to  expect 
those  displays  of  His  love  in  your  favour,  which  are  least  credible.  Remember 
the  blessed  seed,  which  He  promised  to  your  ancestors  (Gen.  xxii.  18).  "  Behold  ! 
a  virgin  shall  conceive  and  bear  a  son,  and  call  His  name  Immanuel "  (Isa.  vii. 
14).  The  spirit  of  prophecy  that  animates  me,  enables  me  to  penetrate  through 
all  the  ages  that  separate  the  present  moment  from  that  in  which  the  promise 
shall  be  fulfilled.  I  dare  speak  of  a  miracle,  which  will  be  wrought  eight  hundred 
years  hence,  as  if  it  had  been  wrought  to-day,  "  Unto  us  a  Child  is  born,"  &c. 

II.  Let  us  show  its  accomplishment.  Who  is  a  king  ?  What  is  a  throne  ? 
Why  have  we  masters  T  Why  is  sovereign  power  lodged  in  a  few  hands  T  And 
what  determines  mankind  to  lay  aside  their  independence,  and  to  lose  their 
beloved  liberty  ?  The  whole  implies  some  mortifying  truths.  We  have  not 
knowledge  sufficient  to  guide  ourselves,  and  we  need  minds  wiser  than  our  own 
to  inspect  and  to  direct  our  conduct.  We  are  indigent,  and  superior  beings  must 
supply  our  wants.  We  have  enemies,  and  we  must  have  guardians  to  protect 
us.  Miserable  men !  how  have  you  been  deceived  in  your  expectations  ?  what 
disorders  could  anarchy  have  produced  greater  than  those  which  have  sometimes 
proceeded  from  sovereign  authority  T  You  sought  guides  to  direct  you :  but 
you  have  sometimes  fallen  under  the  tuition  of  men  who,  far  from  being  able  to 
conduct  a  whole  people,  knew  not  how  to  guide  themselves.  You  sought  nursing 
fathers,  to  succour  you  in  your  indigence :  but  you  have  fallen  sometimes  into 
the  hands  of  men,  who  had  no  otbar  designs  than  to  impoverish  their  people,  to 
enrich  themselves  with  the  substance,  and  to  fatten  themselves  with  the  blood 
of  their  subjects.  You  sought  guardians  to  protect  you  from  your  enemies : 
but  you  have  sometimes  found  executioners,  who  have  used  you  with  greater 
barbarity  than  your  most  bloody  enemies  would  have  done.  Show  me  a  king 
who  will  conduct  me  to  the  felicity  to  which  I  aspire ;  such  a  king  I  long  to  obey. 
Such  a  king  is  the  King  Messiah.  You  want  knowledge :  He  is  the  Counsellor. 
You  want  reconciliation  with  God :  He  is  the  Prince  of  Peace.  You  need  support 
under  the  calamities  of  this  life :  He  is  the  Mighty  God.  You  have  need  of  one 
to  comfort  you  under  the  fears  of  death,  by  opening  the  gates  of  eternal  felicity 
to  you  :  He  is  the  Father  of  Eternity.  (J.  Saurin. )  Titles  of  Christ : — I.  The 
names  and  titles  op  this  wonderful  Child.     II.  For  whom  He  was  born. 

III.  The  prerogative,  which  is  predicted  in  our  text  respecting  this 
Child,  namely,  that  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder.  1.  In  the 
Revelation  the  Church  is  figuratively  represented  under  the  similitude  of  a  woman, 
and  this  woman  is  represented  as  bringing  forth  a  man-child,  who  should  rule 
all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Child  whose  birth 
is  foretold  in  our  text.     All  power  is  committed  to  Him  in  heaven  and  oa 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  261 

earth ;  and  God's  language  respecting  Him  is,  I  have  set  My  King  on  My  holy 
hill  of  Zion.  This  kingdom,  which  is  usually  styled  Christ's  mediatorial  kingdom, 
includes  all  beings  in  heaven  and  hell,  who  will  all,  either  willingly  or  by  constraint, 
finally  submit  to  Christ ;  for  God  has  sworn  by  Himself  that  to  Christ  every  knee 
shall  bow,  of  things  in  heaven  and  things  in  the  earth  and  things  under  the  earth  ; 
and  that  every  tongue  shall  confess  Him  Lord.  He  must  reign  until  He  has  put 
all  enemies  under  His  feet.  Agreeably,  our  text  informs  us,  that  of  the  increase 
of  His  government  there  will  be  no  end.  He  will  go  on  conquering  and  to  conquer. 
2.  But  in  addition  to  this  mediatorial  kingdom  of  Christ,  which  is  set  up  in  the 
world,  He  has  another  kingdom,  the  kingdom  of  His  grace,  which  is  set  up  in 
the  hearts  of  His  people.  This  kingdom  consists  in  righteousness  and  peace  and 
holy  joy,  and  of  the  increase  of  this  kingdom  also  and  of  the  peace  which  accom- 
panies it,  there  shall  be  no  end.  This  kingdom  is  compared  to  leaven  hid  in  meal 
till  the  whole  be  leavened.  Even  in  heaven  there  shall  be  no  end  to  the  increase 
of  His  people's  happiness.  Thus  of  the  increase  of  His  government  and  peace, 
there  shall  be  no  end.  (E.  Pay  son,  D.D.)  Christ  presented  to  mankind- 
sinners : — It  is  "  to  us,"  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Adam ;  we  are  His  poor 
relations ;  and  to  us  as  His  poor  relations  on  earth,  sons  of  Adam's  family,  whereof 
He  is  the  top-branch,  this  Child  is  presented  born,  for  our  comfort  in  our  low 
state.  I.  What  is  pre-supposed  in  this  presenting  of  Christ  as  a  born 
Child.  1.  His  birth  was  expected  and  looked  for.  2.  Christ  is  now  born.  He 
was  really  born ;  a  little  Child,  though  the  Mighty  God  ;  an  Infant,  not  one  day 
old,  though  the  Everlasting  Father.  3.  Some  have  been  employed  to  present 
this  Child  to  the  friends  and  relations ;  and  they  are  still  about  the  work.  (1)  The 
Holy  Spirit.  (2)  Ministers.  4.  This  Child  is  actually  presented  to  us  on  His 
birth.  II.  To  whom  is  Christ  presented  ?  1.  Not  to  the  fallen  angels.  2.  To 
mankind-sinners,  those  of  the  house  of  His  father  Adam.  (1)  Embrace  Him, 
with  old  Simeon,  in  the  arms  of  faith.  (2)  Kiss  the  Son,  receiving  Him  as  your 
Lord  and  King  and  God.  III.  How  is  Christ  presented  ?  1.  In  the  preaching 
of  the  Gospel.  2.  In  the  administration  of  the  sacraments.  3.  In  the  internal 
work  of  saving  illumination.  IV.  What  is  the  import  op  Ht«  being  presented 
to  us  1  1.  Our  special  concern  in  His  birth — as  the  birth  of  a  Saviour  to  us. 
2.  Our  relation  to  Him.  Sinners  of  mankind  have  a  common  relation  to  Christ. 
(1)  In  respect  of  the  nature  He  assumed.  "We  are  members  of  His  body,  of 
His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones  "  (Eph.  v.  30).  (2)  In  respect  of  His  office — the  Saviour 
of  the  world.  3.  An  owning  of  our  relation  to  Him.  "  He  is  not  ashamed  to 
call  them  brethren"  (Heb.  ii.  11).  4.  The  comfortableness  of  His  birth  to  us. 
Children  are  presented  on  their  birth  to  their  relations,  for  their  comfort ;  and 
eo  is  Christ  to  sinners  of  mankind.  V.  Wherefore  is  Christ  presented  to 
us  on  His  birth  ?  1.  That  we  may  see  the  faithfulness  of  God  in  the  fulfilling 
of  His  promise.  2.  That  we  may  rejoice  in  Him.  3.  That  we  may  look  on  Him, 
see  His  glory,  and  be  taken  with  Him  (John  i.  14).  4.  That  we  may  acknow- 
ledge Him  in  the  character  in  which  He  appears  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world  and 
our  Saviour.  (T.  Boston.)  A  prophecy  of  Christ : — I.  Wb  shall  view  thesb 
prophetic  appellations,  in  their  application  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
as  expounding  to  us  His  nature  and  work,  and  receiving  their  fullest 
realisation  in  Him.  They  are  not  mere  empty  names,  assumed  for  the  purposes 
of  pomp  and  impression,  but  appropriate  descriptions  of  living  realities.  When 
it  is  said,  "  His  name  shall  be  called,"  the  meaning  is  that  He  shall  be  such,  for 
in  the  Hebrew  language  "  to  be  called  "  and  "  to  be  "  frequently  mean  the  same 
thing.  Every  name  He  bears  is  the  Divine  exponent  of  a  corresponding  attribute, 
or  office,  or  work,  and  so  it  is  here.  1.  He  is  the  Wonderful.  The  proper  idea 
conveyed  by  this  appellation  is  something  miraculous,  and  it  means  that  the 
great  Personage  to  whom  it  is  here  applied,  in  His  nature  and  works,  would  be 
distinguished  by  supernatural  qualities  and  deeds,  would  be  raised  above  the 
ordinary  course  and  laws  of  nature,  and  would  stand  out  before  angels  and  men 
as  a  unique  and  splendid  miracle.  In  this  sense,  it  applies  with  great  force  and 
accuracy  to  the  Redeemer,  and  to  Him  alone.  2.  He  is  the  Counsellor.  (1)  This 
appellation  points  to  Christ,  not  as  a  Counsellor  among  others,  but  as  Counsellor, 
Counsellor  in  the  abstract,  the  great  Counsellor  of  the  vast  universe,  one  of  the 
glorious  persons  in  the  Godhead,  who  was  concerned  in  all  the  acts  and  counsels 
of  past  eternity.  Hence  the  Septuagint  translates  it,  "  the  Angel  of  the  mighty 
counsel "  ;  and  the  Chaldee,  "  the  God  of  the  wonderful  counseL"  (2)  As  'rthe 
Counsellor,"  He  directs  and  instructs  His  people  in  all  their  temporal,  spiritual. 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

and  eternal  concerns  ;  if  He  did  not  do  so,  they  would  soon  be  involved  in  disorder 
and  ruin.  (3)  And  He  is  ""the  Counsellor,"  inasmuch  as  He  is  the  Advocate  of 
His  people,  and  has  carried  their  cause  into  the  high  court  of  heaven.  3.  He  is 
"  the  Mighty  God  " ;  an  appellation  impressively  sublime,  which  no  serious  mind 
can  approach  without  feeling  the  most  profound  reverence  and  awe.  It  naturally 
and  obviously  denotes  a  person  possessing  a  Divine  nature.  4.  He  is  "  the  Ever- 
lasting Father,"  or,  "  the  Father  of  Eternity."  The  emphasis  of  this  appellation 
is  not  on  the  word  "  father,"  but  on  the  word  "  eternity."  It  was  customary 
among  those  who  spoke  and  wrote  the  Hebrew  language,  to  call  a  person  who 
possessed  a  thing,  the  "  father  "  of  it :  hence,  a  strong  man  was  called  "  the 
father  of  strength  " ;  a  wise  man,  "  the  father  of  wisdom  ' ;  a  wealthy  man,  "  the 
father  of  riches  " ;  and  so  on.  Now,  the  phrase,  "  the  Father  of  Eternity,"  seems 
to  be  here  applied  to  Christ  in  a  similar  way — He  possessed  eternity,  and,  there- 
fore, He  is  called  the  Father  of  it.  It  is  a  Hebraism  of  great  poetic  strength  and 
beauty,  employed  to  express  duration — the  duration  of  His  being — the  essential 
eternity  of  His  existence  past  and  future — and,  perhaps,  there  could  not  be  a 
more  emphatic  declaration  of  His  right  to  this  wonderful  attribute  of  the  Deity, 
%  strict,  proper,  and  independent  eternity  of  being.  5.  He  is  the  "  Prince  of 
Peace."  This  appellation  seems  intended  to  teach  us,  that  the  Messiah  would 
be  invested  with  the  prerogatives  and  honours  of  royalty,  and  that  His  kingdom, 
in  its  essential  laws  and  principles,  would  differ  from  all  the  kingdoms  of  men, 
past,  present,  and  future.  While  other  kings  were  despots  ana  warriors,  He 
would  be  a  peaceable  Prince.  While  other  kingdoms  were  acquired  by  physical 
violence  and  force,  and  were  cemented  with  human  tears  and  blood,  His  would 
consist  in  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy,  and  would  win  its  way  among  men  by 
the  inherent  power  of  its  own  excellence,  would  gradually  terminate  war  and 
conflict,  and  restore  love  and  order  to  the  whole  earth.  But  His  reign  was  to 
achieve  higher  ends  still,  for  it  was  to  establish  peace  between  man  and  his  own 
conscience,  between  man  and  all  good  beings,  between  man  and  all  the  physical 
and  moral  laws  of  the  universe,  and  between  man  and  his  insulted  and  offended 
Maker.  Hence,  prophecy  foretold  that,  in  His  days  there  should  be  abundance 
of  peace ;  that,  in  His  reign,  justice  and  mercy  should  meet  together,  righteous- 
ness and  peace  should  embrace  each  other;  that  the  chastisement  of  our  peace 
should  be  on  Him;  that  He  should  be  the  peace;  and  that,  of  the  increase  of 
His  peace  there  should  be  no  end.  II.  Practical  lessons.  1.  Hold  fast  the 
divinity  of  Christ.  2.  How  great  is  the  sin  and  how  fearful  is  the  condition  of 
those  who  reject  the  Saviour.  He  is  "  the  Wonderful " — the  admired  of  God, 
of  angels,  and  of  saints ;  and  yet  He  has  no  attractions  for  you.  He  is  "  the 
Counsellor  "  ;  and  yet  you  never  "  wait  for  His  counsel,"  but  follow  your  own 
vain  imaginations.  He  is  "  the  Mighty  God  "  ;  and  yet  you  trample  on  His 
authority,  defy  His  power,  and  risk  His  awful  displeasure.  He  is  "  the  Father 
of  Eternity  "  ;  and  yet  you  seek  no  place  in  His  heavenly  family,  and  are  in 
imminent  danger  of  being  for  ever  banished  from  His  presence,  and  the  glory 
of  His  power.  He  is  "  the  Prince  of  Peace  " ;  and  yet  you  voluntarily  live  in  a 
state  of  hostility  to  Him  and  His  kingdom,  and  refuse  to  be  reconciled  by  the  blood 
of  His  Cross.  3.  How  secure  and  happy  is  the  state  of  believers.  (W.  Gregory.) 
The  names  and  titles  of  the  Messiah : — I.  The  first  description  that  is  here  given 
of  the  Redeemer  is  in  these  words — unto  us  a  Child  is  bobn.  This  may  denote 
either  the  infancy  of  His  state,  when  He  appeared  in  our  world,  or  the  reality 
of  His  human  nature.  1.  With  regard  to  the  infancy  of  His  state,  the  apostle 
says,  it  behoved  Him  to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren.  2.  With  regard  to  the 
reality  of  His  human  nature,  the  Scripture  assures  us,  that  it  was  of  the  same 
kind  with  ours,  consisting  of  a  human  body  and  a  human  souL  II.  The  next 
description  of  our  Redeemer  is  in  these  words — unto  us  a  Son  is  given.  This 
is  spoken  of  His  Divine  nature.  He  is  often  called  in  Scripture  the  Son  of  God, 
His  own  Son,  His  only-begotten  and  well-beloved  Son,  and  as  such  is  said  to  be 
given  to  us.  A  son  always  means  one,  not  of  an  inferior,  but  of  the  same  nature 
as  his  father.  III.  It  is  added,  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder. 
Taken  in  its  most  extensive  sense,  the  government  of  our  Lord  extends  over  all. 
The  whole  universe  is  under  His  dominion.  But  what  we  are  chiefly  to  understand 
here  is  the  kingdom  of  grace,  the  administration  of  mercy,  the  government  of 
which  in  a  peculiar  manner  is  intrusted  to  Him.  The  kingdom  of  God  and 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  were  phrases  familiar  to  the  Jews,  by  which  they  always 
understood  the  Messiah's  kingdom.     The  immediate  design  of  erecting  this  king- 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  269 

dom  on  earth  is  the  salvation  of  believers,  of  the  guilty  race  of  men.  All  parts 
of  the  universe  are  concerned  in  this  glorious  design.  The  angels  of  heaven 
rejoice  in  it,  and  are  ministering  spirits  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  The  powers 
of  darkness  unite  their  force  to  disappoint  the  hopes  of  the  heirs  of  this  kingdom, 
but  in  vain ;  the  King  of  Zion  has  bound  them  in  chains  of  darkness,  and  will  turn 
their  malioious  designs  to  their  greater  condemnation.  All  men  do  not  indeed 
submit  to  the  laws  of  this  government,  but  all  are  nevertheless  the  lawful  subjects 
of  it.  But  the  Redeemer  has  also  many  voluntary  subjects.  The  right  of  Jesus 
to  His  mediatorial  kingdom  is  founded  upon  promise,  conquest,  and  purchase, 
even  the  price  of  His  own  precious  blood ;  and  we  have  the  utmost  assurances 
in  His  Word,  which  cannot  fail,  that  He  will  one  day  take  to  Himself  His  great 

Sower  and  reign  in  a  more  illustrious  and  extensive  manner  than  He  has  yet 
one.     IV.  The  next  thing  asserted  of  the  Redeemer  is,  His  name  shall  be 
called  Wonderful.     And  the  Redeemer  is  indeed  Wonderful.     1.  In  the  con- 
stitution of  His  person,  as  Immanuel,  God  in  our  nature.    2.  The  preparations 
for  His  birth,  and  the  manner  and  circumstances  of  it,  were  also  wonderful. 
3.  Jesus  was  also  wonderful  in  His  life.    4.  And  in  His  death.     5.  And  In  His 
rising  from  the  grave,  and  in  His  ascension  to  heaven.     V.  The  next  title  which 
the  Redeemer  has,  is  that  of  Counsellor.     He  is  fully  instructed  in  the  counsels 
of  God  the  Father,  for  He  lay  in  His  bosom  from  eternity ;  and  as  the  execution 
of  the  plans  of  the  Divine  administration  is  committed  to  Him,  He  cannot  but 
be  well  acquainted  with  them.     Besides,  our  Lord,  by  His  office  and  appointment, 
is  the  great  Counsellor  or  Prophet  of  the  Church.     VI.  He  is  also  the  Mighty 
God.     The  same  expression  is  used  in  chap.  x.  21  concerning  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  Israel.     All  the  perfections  of  the  Mighty  God  are  ascribed  to  the  Redeemer 
in  Scripture.     And  worship,  which  only  belongs  to  the  Mighty  God,  is  given  to 
Christ.     VII.  The  next  thing  asserted  of  our  Redeemer  is,  that  He  is  the  Ever- 
lasting Father.     The  LXX.  renders  these  words,  the  Father  of  the  world  to 
come,  or  final  dispensation  of  mercy  and  grace,  as  the  Gospel  is  often  called.     And 
Christ  may  be  called  so — 1.  As  He  has  chosen  His  people,  in  His  eternal  purpose, 
that  they  might  be  sharers  in  His  bliss  and  glory.     2.  Christ  is  the  Father  of  all 
true  believers,  in  a  spiritual  sense.     They  are  all  His  spiritual  seed.     The  great 
outlines  of  His  features  are  drawn  upon  them,  and  when  they  arrive  at  heaven, 
they  shall  attain  to  the  likeness  of  Jesus  in  an  eminent  degree.     VIII.  The  last 
thing  asserted  of  the  Redeemer  is,  that  He  is  the  Prince  op  Peace.     Melchisedeo 
was  an  eminent  type  of  the  Son  of  God,  in  this  respect.     He  was  King  of  Salem, 
which  is  by  interpretation,  King  of  Peace.    And  peace  is  the  disposition  for  which 
the  Saviour  was  renowned ;  the  blessing  which  He  died  to  purchase,  and  lives 
to  bestow.     Conclusion :  1.  What  an  honour  did  the  great  and  mighty  God,  our 
Saviour,  put  upon  our  nature  by  taking  it  into  a  personal  union  with  His  own 
Divine  nature  !    2.  We  may  see  from  hence,  how  well  the  Redeemer  was  qualified 
for  His  office.    What  arm  so  powerful  to  save  as  that  of  the  Mighty  God  ? 
3.  What  a  fund  of  consolation  does  this  passage  of  Scripture  exhibit !    4.  This 
subject  speaks  terror  to  the  wicked.     5.  We  ought  to    entertain  adoring  and 
admiring  thoughts  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.     (J.  Ross,  D.D.) 
The  Incarnation  : — I.  We  are  led  to  inquire,  how  our  Saviour  became  incarnate 
and  took  our  mortal  nature  upon   Him.     Before  Christ  could  become  in- 
carnate, He  would  have  to  lay  aside  His  glory — the  glory  which  He  had  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  was.     Having  laid  aside  His  glory,  Christ  took  a  human 
soul,  took  our  humanity  upon  Him,  together  with  our  form,  and  was  made  in 
the  likeness  of  man.     Nevertheless,  Christ  is  not,  and  was  not,  two  persons,  but 
one.    II.  We  have  now  to  inquire  why  Christ  became  incarnate.     To  say  that 
Christ  died  to  save  sinners  is  true  enough,  but  it  is  not  the  whole  truth.     The 
question  we  have  to  answer  is  this :  Why  Christ  became  a  man  ?     He  came  to 
save,  but  why  not  in  another  form  ?     1.  To  take  away  the  consequences  of  the 
fall,  to  raise  man  to  a  higher  estate  even  than  he  originally  possessed,  to  save 
him   from  eternal  ruin,  and  vindicate  the  love  and  wisdom  which  made  man 
originally  righteous,  but  not  immaculate  or  impeccable,  it  was  necessary  for  the 
Son  of  God  to  become  the  Son  of  Man,  and  to  acknowledge  a  human  parent ; 
to  "  bear  our  griefs  and  carry  our  sorrows  "  (Heb.  ii.  9-18).     For  only  as  a  man 
could  He  undo  the  evil  which  man  had  brought  upon  himself;  only  as  one  of 
those  He  came  to  save,  could  Christ  perform  what  man  had  left  undone.     2.  More- 
over, Christ  came  to  fulfil  God's  law,  and  that  for  us,  though  not  to  supersede 
our  obedience.     That  law  was  designed  for  man,  and  alone  in  the  form  of  man 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

could  Christ  obey  it.  And  having  fulfilled  His  own  broken  law  on  their  behalf 
to  whom  He  had  given  it,  He  is  enabled  to  help  them  to  observe  and  do  it.  By 
His  perfect  obedience  He  has  become  our  Pattern,  and  has  procured  and  pur> 
chased  for  us  the  strength  to  enable  us  to  walk  in  the  steps  of  His  most  holy  life. 
3.  In  the  next  place,  by  assuming  our  nature,  Christ  is  enabled  to  sympathise 
with  us.  4.  Again,  it  was  necessary  for  Christ  to  become  man  in  order  to  reveal 
His  Father  to  us.  Men,  untaught  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  apt  to  think  that 
God  is  altogether  such  as  themselves.  Such  we  find  was  the  case  with  the  heathen 
philosophers  of  anoient  Greece  and  Rome ;  if  they  taught  otherwise,  they  taught 
in  vain.  5.  Christ  also  became  man  to  make  us  love  God,  for  to  know  Him  is 
to  love  Him.  6.  Christ  became  man  to  unite  man  to  God.  (G.  E.  Watkins.) 
The  Child  born  :  the  Son  given  : — I.  The  promised  Savtotjb  is  described  or 
His  human  nature.  "  Unto  us  a  Child  is  born."  Having  respect  to  the  con- 
nection of  the  passage,  and  to  the  object  for  which  the  announcement  is  made, 
we  feel  that  it  is  impossible  to  look  on  at  the  birth  of  this  Child  that  was  predicted, 
without  seeing  that  a  greater  than  one  born  of  woman  is  there.  1.  Still  the  main 
object  of  the  first  clause  of  the  verse  is,  undoubtedly,  to  show  forth  that  human 
nature  in  which  He  was  to  be  manifested  in  order  that  He  might  do  the  work 
of  salvation  for  His  people.  To  be  born  is  as  truly  the  evidence  and  characteristic 
of  humanity  as  to  die.  Not  less  in  the  simple  but  impressive  fact  of  His  birth  of 
a  human  mother,  than  in  the  fact  of  His  dying  a  human  death,  do  we  recognise 
the  proof  of  our  oneness  with  the  Son  of  God  in  the  same  nature.  2.  And  why 
was  it  necessary  for  the  hope  and  consolation  of  those  whom  He  came  to  redeem, 
that  they  should  be  taught  by  the  prophet  that  the  Redeemer  must  be  one  with 
them  in  their  very  nature ;  and  that  the  Eternal  Son  of  God  should  be  born  of 
a  woman  ?  (1)  It  was  necessary  that  the  Son  of  God  should  be  made  man, 
because  otherwise  He  could  not  have  stood  in  man's  place  and  dealt  with  God  on 
man's  behalf,  nor  suffered  and  died,  as  it  was  needful  to  suffer  and  die,  in  order 
to  offer  a  true  atonement  for  human  guilt.  (2)  It  was  necessary  that  the  Son  of 
God  should  become  man  in  order  that  He  might  be  qualified  to  enter  into  our 
human  feelings  and  fears,  and  to  furnish  us  with  a  pledge  of  His  sympathy  in 
all  our  infirmities  and  temptations.  II.  We  find  the  prophet  in  the  second  clause 
making  reference  to  the  Divine  nature  of  Christ.  "  Unto  us  a  Son  is  given." 
And  this  view  of  the  Person  of  Christ,  as  the  Son  of  God  as  well  as  the  Son  of 
man,  is  not  less  necessary  than  the  truth  of  His  proper  humanity  to  furnish  a 
ground  of  hope  and  consolation  to  the  Church  of  God  in  coming  to  Him  as  a 
suitable  and  all-sufficient  Redeemer.  HI.  But  passing  from  the  description  of 
Christ's  Person,  the  prophet  next  proceeds  to  give  an  account  of  the  office 
which  belongs  to  Him,  and  which  He  executes  as  the  Saviour.  "  The  govern- 
ment shall  be  upon  His  shoulder."  Borrowing  its  language  from  anoient  customs, 
it  is  quite  plain  that  the  statement  of  the  prophet  contains  in  substance  a  declara- 
tion that  the  predicted  Deliverer,  whose  advent  was  to  shed  light  and  blessed- 
ness on  those  who  sat  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,  was  to  exercise  a 
supreme  and  unlimited  authority,  and  to  employ  this  authority  for  accomplishing 
the  great  purpose  for  which  He  was  born  as  a  Child  and  given  as  a  Son.  1.  In  the 
case  of  believers — i.e.,  of  those  who  are  already  subjects  of  Christ's  kingdom — 
it  is  a  blessed  privilege  for  them  to  be  assured  that  He  reigns,  alone  and  supreme, 
in  the  world  and  the  Church.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  mere  nominal 
professors,  such  a  truth,  if  in  any  degree  realised,  is  fitted  to  fill  them  with  anxiety 
and  dispeace.  (J.  Bannerman,  D.D.)  The  predicted  names  of  Christ : — In 
interpreting  the  peculiar  language  employed,  it  is  impossible  to  enter  into  its 
true  significance  without  remembering  that  in  ancient  times,  and  more  especially 
in  the  practice  of  the  Jews,  names  had  oftentimes,  when  applied  to  individuals, 
a  significance  which  they  have  not  when  given,  as  among  ourselves,  upon  no 
principle  except  family  custom  or  personal  preference.  Among  the  Jews  espe- 
cially, they  were  often  selected  and  given  on  the  ground  of  some  peculiarity  in  the 
circumstances  or  character  of  the  person  named;  so  that  they  ceased  to  be 
empty  and  arbitrary  signs  of  the  parties  thus  designated,  and  became  truly 
descriptive  of  something  in  their  history  or  condition.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the 
name  of  God  Himself  is  used  as  a  synonym  for  the  character  of  God  (Exod. 
xxiii.  21,  xxxiv.  5-7  ;  Prov.  xviii.  10).  And  it  is  in  this  way,  undoubtedly, 
that  we  are  to  understand  the  language  of  the  prophet  when  he  tells  us,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  coming  Deliverer,  that  "  His  name  shall  be  called,  Wonderful,"  &c. 
[Ibid.)        The  great  Deliverer: — I.  The  dignity  of  Christ's  Person.     He  it 


CHAP.    IX.] 


ISAIAH. 


271 


the  Wonderful,  the  Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God.  II.  The  depth  op  His  love. 
He  is  born  unto  us  a  Child — given  unto  us  a  Son.  HI.  The  success  op  His  under- 
taking. He  is  become  the  Father  of  the  everlasting  age — the  Prince  of  Peace. 
IV.  His  title  to  our  obedience.  The  government  is  on  His  shoulder. 
(0.  Innes.)  The  nativity  of  Christ : — I.  The  announcement  op  Messiah's 
birth  by  the  prophet.  1.  The  Person  announced.  2.  The  terms  of  the  announce- 
ment. Not  for  angel,  nor  for  archangel,  was  the  mighty  scheme  devised  ;  it 
is  for  the  human  race — for  man  though  rebel  of  his  God;  for  man  ruined  and 
desolated  by  sin.  3.  The  confidence  with  which  this  announcement  is  made, 
as  immediately  taking  place.  "  To  us  a  Child  is  born;  to  us  a  Son  is  given." 
Faith  pierces  the  vista  of  time,  and  beholds  events,  anticipated  hundreds  of  years 
before,  the  birth  of  that  glorious  Redeemer  who  was  slain  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world  ;  which  had  been  promised  by  the  word  and  oath  of  Jehovah  Himself  ; 
and  who,  therefore,  in  the  fulness  of  time  should  assuredly  be  granted.     II.  The 

OFFICE  AND  THE  TITLES  WHICH  THE  SAVIOUR  SHOULD  ASSUME.      (D.  Wilson,  M.A.) 

The  child  Jesus : — I.  His  incarnation.  IL  His  empire.  III.  His  names. 
(W.  Jay.)  The  message  of  hope  : — To  us,  as  we  begin  to  wonder  whether  the 
entire  movement  of  human  life  is  not  by  some  evil  inspiration  gone  after  a  false 
ecent,  taken  some  terrible  misdirection,  shut  itself  up  in  a  blind  path  that  arrives 
at  no  goal  and  has  no  outway ;  to  us,  so  heavily  laden  and  so  entangled,  so  fondly 
hoping ;  to  us,  as  we  walk  on  still  in  darkness  and  seem  entering  the  very  shadow 
of  death ;  to  us  this  Child  is  born,  to  us  a  Son  is  given, — a  Child  who  shall  be  the 
issue,  the  justification,  the  consummation  of  all  the  long  and  weary  story ;  a  Son 
who  is  Himself  the  goal  of  our  pilgrimage,  the  fulfilment  of  our  imperfections, 
the  crown  of  our  endurance,  the  honour  of  our  service,  the  glory  of  our  building. 
There,  in  thiB  Son  of  God,  is  an  offer  made  by  God,  by  which  He  will  justify  all 
suffering,  retrieve  all  failure,  redeem  all  fault ;  He  gives  us,  in  Him,  an  end 
for  which  to  live.  Here  is  His  mind ;  here  is  His  plan  for  us — for  us,  not  only 
in  our  simple  individual  troubles  and  worries,  but  for  us  in  the  mass,  as  a  race, 
as  a  society,  as  a  civilisation.  God  has  a  scheme,  an  issue  prepared  for  which 
He  worketh  hitherto,  and  that  issue  is  His  Son.  In  Him  all  will  be  gathered 
in  and  fulfilled,  and  "  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder,"  of  His 
kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end,"  "  His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  the  Mighty 
Counsellor,  the  Prince  of  Peace."  And  in  the  power  of  this  message  we  are  told 
not  to  faint  or  fail.  {Canon  H.  Scott-Holland.)  A  Christmas  question: — The 
principal  object  is  to  bring  out  the  force  of  those  two  little  words,  "  unto  us." 
I.  Is  it  so  ?  1.  If  this  Child  is  born  to  you,  then  you  are  born  again.  "  But," 
eaith  one,  "  how  am  I  to  know  whether  I  am  born  again  or  not  ?  "  (1)  Has  there 
been  a  change  effected  by  Divine  grace  within  you  ?  (2)  Has  there  been  a  change 
in  you  in  the  exterior  ?  (3)  The  very  root  and  principle  of  thy  life  must  become 
totally  new.  2.  If  this  Child  is  born  to  you,  you  are  a  child ;  and  the  question 
arises,  are  you  so  ?  Man  grows  from  childhood  up  to  manhood  naturally ;  in 
grace  men  grow  from  manhood  down  to  childhood,  and  the  nearer  we  come  to 
true  childhood,  the  nearer  we  come  to  the  image  of  Christ."  3.  If  this  Son  is 
given  to  you,  you  are  a  son  yourself.     4.  H  unto  us  a  Son  is  given,  then  we  are 

fiven  to  the  Son.  Are  you  given  up  to  Christ  ?  II.  If  it  is  so,  what  then  ? 
f  it  is  so,  why  am  I  doubtful  to-day  ?  Why  are  we  sad  ?  Why  are  our  hearts 
so  cold  ?  III.  If  it  is  not  so,  what  then  ?  1.  Confess  thy  sins.  2.  Renounce 
thyself.  3.  Go  to  the  place  where  Jesus  died  in  agony.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Christ  the  Revealer  of  Ood  and  the  Asserter  of  man  : — I.  Christ 
took  to  Himself  human  flesh  to  furnish  us  with  an  exhibition  of  the  moral 
character  op  God.  II.  The  incarnation  of  Jesus  is  also  a  stupendous  dis- 
covery OF  WHAT  MAN  IS   IN   HIS   HEAVENLY   IDEAL   AND    HIS  MORAL    DESTINY. 

(A.  Maclennan,  M.A.)  "  Unto  us"  : — As  if  Heaven  would  underline  the  words 
to  catch  the  eye,  as  if  it  were  the  keynote  of  its  love,  and  should  be  the  keynote 
of  our  song  of  praise,  the  words  are  twice  repeated — "  Unto  us  a  Child  is  born, 
unto  us  a  Son  is  given."  (Ibid. )  The  nativity : — I.  The  subject  or  matter 
of  the  blessing.  "  A  Child,"  "  a  Son."  II.  The  manner  op  rrs  conveyance. 
44  Born,"  "  given."  HI.  Our  interest  in  rr.  "  Unto  us,"  in  our  behalf  all 
this,  and  to  our  benefit   and  advantage.     (A.  Littleton,  D.D.)        Redemption 

{roTK  within  humanity  : — This  promise  of  a  Deliverer  has  lit  up  the  march  of  all 
luman  generations ;  it  has  been  the  fountain  of  the  fairest  gleams  which  have 
crossed  the  darkness  of  the  heathen  world.  And  it  is  out  of  the  bosom  of  Humanity 
that  the  Redeemer  must  be  born — the  Christ  must  be  the  human  Child.    The 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  rx. 

essential  point  lies  here  —  redemption  is  not  a  process  wrought  by  the  right 
hand  of  power,  so  to  speak,  from  without ;  the  act  of  a  Being  of  almighty  power, 
who,  seeing  man  in  desperate  extremity  through  sin  and  frustrating  utterly  the 
purposes  and  preparations  of  Heaven,  stooped  to  lay  hold  on  him,  to  lift  him  out 
of  the  abyss  in  which  he  was  sinking,  and  to  place  him  by  a  sovereign  act  on  a 
foundation  where  he  might  rest  in  safety,  and  work  and  grow.  It  is  from  within 
the  bosom  of  humanity  that  the  redemption  is  to  be  wrought  which  is  to  save 
humanity.  It  is  by  the  outward  and  upward  pressure  of  a  life  which  is  truly 
and  fully  human,  which  has  buried  its  Divine  force  in  the  very  heart's  core  of 
our  nature,  and  is  "  bone  of  our  bones,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,"  that  man  is  to  be 
lifted  to  the  levels  which  are  above  the  sphere  of  tears  and  death  for  ever.  (J.  B. 
Brown,  B.A.)  Christ's  birthday  has  been  a  day  through  all  ages  so  solemn 
and  sacred,  that  Justin  Martyr,  a  father  and  saint  of  the  second  century,  calls  it 
i)  paffDuffffa  Tj/itpa,  the  Queen-day  in  the  calendar.  We  do  not  owe  this 
solemnity  then  to  the  rubric  of  the  Roman  Church.  (A.  Littleton,  D.D.)  The 
need  for  the  incarnation  : — Man  can  suffer,  but  he  cannot  satisfy ;  God  can  satisfy, 
but  He  cannot  suffer  ;  but  Christ,  being  both  God  and  man,  can  both  suffer  and 
satisfy  too  ;  and  so  is  perfectly  fit  both  to  suffer  for  man  and  to  make  satisfac- 
tion unto  God — to  reconcile  God  to  man,  and  man  to  God.  (Bishop  Beveridge. ) 
Human  redemption  by  the  Divine  man  : — The  humanisation  of  God  is  the  divinisa- 
tion  of  man.  (Novalis.)  The  preparation  of  the  world  for  Christ  : — A  few 
generations  before  the  Advent  the  word  would  have  been  meaningless.  Jew 
and  Gentile,  Greek  and  Barbarian,  freeman  and  slave,  were  terms  full  of  meaning  ; 
but  "  man,"  what  could  that  mean  ?  Even  Aristotle  found  it  hard  to  discover 
a  common  term  which  would  cover  the  life  of  the  freeman  and  the  slave.  But 
as  the  hour  of  the  Advent,  "  the  fulness  of  the  time,"  approached,  through  a 
very  wonderful  chain  of  agencies  and  influences,  in  the  linking  together  of  which 
the  Hand  which  guided  the  culture  of  the  Jewish  people  to  the  fulfilment  of  the 
primal  promise  is  very  palpably  manifest,  the  idea  of  a  common  human  nature, 
with  common  attributes,  common  sympathies,  needs,  and  interests,  and  capable 
of  a  common  life,  the  life  of  the  universal  human  society,  began  to  haunt  the 
minds  of  men.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  The  world  into  which  Christ  was  born: — 
Here  are  two  very  distinct  features  of  human  development  during  the  ages  which 
preceded  the  Advent  of  the  Lord.  Men  were  feeling  after  the  ground  and  the 
conditions  of  a  universal  human  society ;  and  they  were  searching  for  the  basis 
and  the  law  of  personal  conduct,  as  beings  endowed  with  moral  and  intellectual 
faculties  which  might  be  a  rich  blessing  or  a  terrible  curse  to  them  and  to  man- 
kind. To  this  point  humanity  had  progressed,  moved  from  within,  led  from  on 
High.  Was  the  higher  progress  possible  to  heathen  society  T  Was  there  power 
in  heathenism  to  lift  man  into  this  sphere  of  universal  brotherhood,  and  to 
expound  the  mystery  of  his  being  and  destiny  ?  None,  absolutely  none.  Heathen 
society,  with  ail  its  brilliant  civilisation,  was  utterly,  hopelessly  exhausted.  The 
Lord  was  born  into  a  world  of  wreck.  But  for  Christ  all  must  have  perished. 
The  world  which  the  Lord  came  to  save  was  groaning  beneath  the  wrecks  of  most 
of  the  most  hopeful  political,  philosophical,  and  religious  efforts  and  achievementa 
of  mankind.  And  yet  there  had  been  splendid  progress.  Man's  life  was  enlarged 
in  every  direction  but  the  highest.  (Ibid.)  Christ  the  Revealer  of  God: — 
"  Seek  fellowship  with  Zeus,"  cried  Epictetus,  in  a  last,  eager,  desperate  appeal. 
Alas !  it  was  the  Zeus  that  was  wanting ;  and  to  find  Him  Epictetus  must  pass 
on  his  disciples  to  a  higher  school.  There  was  a  yearning  for  God,  for  personal 
fellowship  with  God,  for  personal  likeness  to  God,  unknown  to  the  older  ages; 
marking  a  grand  advance  in  the  aspiration  and  effort  of  the  noblest  and  most 
far-seeing  spirits.  "  But  who  is  the  Zeus,  the  god  of  whom  you  talk,  that  I 
may  believe  on  Him,"  was  the  cry  which  grew  more  hopeless  and  agonising  genera- 
tion by  generation  ;  to  which  tradition  had  no  answer,  to  which  philosophy  had 
no  answer,  to  which  religion  had  no  answer ;  to  which  no  answer  was  possible 
until  One  stood  on  the  earth  and  said,  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ; 
the  only-begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared 
Him."  Then  man  began  to  look  up  and  live.  (Ibid.)  Christ  the  new  life  of 
humanity  : — When  that  Child  was  born  to  humanity,  when  that  Son  took  Hi3 
place  by  its  hearth-fire,  a  new  life  entered  into  the  world.  That  age  of  the  Advent 
is  very  manifestly  the  age  in  which  some  transcendently  stimulating,  quickening 
influence  penetrated  the  life  of  men,  and  began  to  make  all  things  new.  Faster 
than  the  old  civilisation  decayed,  the  new  power  reorganised  and  restored.    (Ibid.) 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  273 

Important  births  : — Now  and  then  a  birth  occurs  of  such  momentous  portent  to 
man,  that  men  are  constrained  by  the  influences  which  proceed  from  it  to  fix  it 
in  memory,  and  give  to  its  anniversary  fitting  commemoration.  There  are  births 
which  are  like  the  introduction  of  new  forces  and  energies  into  human  society, 
which  pour  the  current  of  their  power  down  through  the  ages  with  ever-widening 
and  deepening  volume.  When  Confucius  was  born,  half  of  the  human  race  had 
a  father  and  a  teacher  given  them.  When  Moses  was  born,  not  only  a  few  millions 
of  slaves  found  a  deliverer,  but  the  great  underlying,  eternal  principles  of  morality 
and  piety  found  a  spokesman.  With  Socrates,  Greece  had  given  to  her  the 
opportunity  of  goodness.  With  Caesar  came  into  human  history  the  embodiment 
of  ambition.  The  birth  of  Wilberforce  was  the  beginning  of  a  philanthropic 
education  to  Christendom.  Howard  demonstrated  that  the  extremest  feelings 
of  a  kindly  humanity  were  practical  and  serviceable  to  society.  With  Washington 
came  to  mankind  the  ideal  of  unselfish  patriotism ;  while  Lincoln  embodied  the 
first  century  of  the  American  Republic.  These  were  noted  men,  extraordinary 
beings ;  and  the  names  of  these  are  all  memorable.  Their  names  have  passed 
into  history,  and  remain  as  certainly  fixed  as  the  stars  beaming  in  the  sky ;  and, 
like  the  stars,  their  glory  is  abundant  to  attract  unto  them  the  observation  of 
men.  When  the  date  of  their  birth,  or  the  supposed  date  of  their  birth,  is  reached, 
as  with  the  movement  of  time  we  swing  round  the  circuit  of  the  year,  men  instinct- 
ively pause  ;  thought  is  quickened  ;  the  depths  of  gratitude  are  stirred  with 
benign  remembrance  ;  and  thanksgiving  naturally  ascends  unto  God,  who  has 

given  unto  men,  unto  them  and  theirs,  such  a  beneficent  gift.  (W.  H.  Murray.) 
hristmas  celebrates  a  personality  : — Wherever  you  find  love,  you  find  a  personal 
being  connected  with  it  as  its  object.  We  do  not  love  motherhood,  we  love 
mother.  We  do  not  love  family  government,  we  love  the  persons  who  compose 
the  family.  We  do  not  love  theology,  we  love  God  of  whom  it  treats.  We  com- 
memorate to-day,  therefore — not  the  birth  of  a  system,  but  the  birth  of  a  man. 
It  is  a  sweet  and  innocent  babe,  and  not  a  collection  of  doctrines,  in  praise  of 
whom  our  songs  are  sung  to-day,  and  unto  whom  our  hearts  are  lifted  in  holy 
gladness.  (Ibid.)  Jesus  had  universal  connections: — We  celebrate  the  birth 
of  a  man  with  universal  connections  ;  you  and  I  were  born  connected  with  but 
a  few.  A  little  group  absorbed  us,  and  a  little  spot  bounded  us  within  its  limits. 
Other  men,  of  larger  mould  than  we,  were  born  with  larger  connections.  The 
chief  is  connected  with  his  tribe  at  his  birth  ;  the  king  with  his  kingdom  ;  the  / 
patriot  and  leader  with  his  country  or  party ;  the  priest  with  his  Church.  ' 
Around  all  these  walls  are  builded,  over  which  they  never  pass  until  death  lifts 
them  above  the  local,  and  multiplies  their  associations.  But  Christ  was  born/ 
with  universal  connections.  His  little  family  did  not  absorb  Him.  He  was 
not  the  son  of  Mary  and  Joseph,  He  was  the  son  of  humanity  ;  He  was  the  Son 
of  Man  the  world  over.  (Ibid.)  Jesus  meets  universal  wants  : — The  reason 
that  Christ  had  these  universal  connections  was  because  He  came  to  assist  men 
in  reference  to  those  conditions  of  want  that  are  universal.  In  Him  the  perfect 
constitution  had  organisation.  In  feeling,  in  thinking,  in  suffering  and  gladness, 
in  mourning  and  joy,  in  every  capacity  which  men  have,  in  every  condition  in 
which  men  stand,  He  was  akin  to  them.  From  every  bosom  a  sympathetio 
chord  ran  up  into  His,  and  He  could,  therefore,  sense  the  needs  of  every  bosom. 
He  sympathised  with  every  phase  of  humanity,  because  His  humanity  was 
perfect  enough  in  its  sensitiveness  to  be  intelligent  with  every  phase.  (Ibid.) 
An  infant's  birth  a  great  event : — The  birth  of  any  infant  is  a  far  greater  event 
than  the  production  of  the  sun.  The  sun  is  only  a  lump  of  senseless  matter : 
it  sees  not  its  own  light ;  it  feels  not  its  own  heat ;  and,  with  all  its  grandeur, 
it  will  cease  to  be :  but  that  infant  beginning  only  to  breathe  yesterday,  is 
possessed  of  reason — claims  a  principle  infinitely  superior  to  all  matter — and  will 
live  through  the  ages  of  eternity  1  (W.  Jay.)  A  Christmas-day  sketch: — 
I.  God  cams  to  us  in  that  Child.  His  parents  were  instructed  to  call  Him 
"  Immanuel  " — "  God  with  us."  Such  a  fact  is  big  with  meaning ;  pregnant 
with  vital,  jubilant  truth.  Why  did  God  come  to  us  thus  in  a  babe  ?  He  must 
have  had  some  wise  and  loving  purpose  that  He  wished  to  secure  thereby.  What  ? 
For  ages  men  had  been  taught  to  fear  God,  their  thoughts  of  Him  filled  them  with 
dismay ;  hence  the  gods  of  the  heathen  nations.  The  large  body  of  the  Jewish 
nation  was  not  much  in  advance  of  the  heathen.  This  dread  of  God  was  universaL 
To  correct  all  such  ideas,  and  remove  all  such  feelings  from  the  minds  and  hearts 
of  men  for  ever,  God  came  to  us  as  a  child.  Are  you  afraid  of  a  babe  t  II.  God 
18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

cas  comb  to  us  in  thb  SMALLEST  thikgs.  We  generally  look  for  God  in  the 
great,  vast,  mighty,  terrible.  We  expect  something  to  strike  the  eye,  &c.  Will 
you  remember  that  God  came  to  us  in  that  quiet,  loving,  unpretending  babe, 
that  lay  in  that  manger  and  nestled  in  His  mother's  bosom  ?  And  so  God  comes 
to  us  in  the  little,  simple,  humble,  noiseless,  common  things  of  life,  if  we  only 
look  for  Him.  Especially  He  comes  to  us  in  our  children.  They  bring  love 
with  them,  and  "  love  is  of  God,"  &c.  We  might  in  a  far  higher  sense  than  we 
think  for  call  every  child  "  Immanuel."  In  our  child  God  comes  to  us,  God  is 
with  us.  Do  we  believe  this  ?  If  so,  should  we  not  oftener  look  for  and  educate 
the  God  in  them  ?  We  should  do  far  better  with  them  if  from  the  beginning  we 
sought  to  bring  out,  nourish,  educate,  develop  the  good,  the  God  that  is  in  them, 
instead  of  making  it  our  chief  concern  to  correct  the  wrong,  to  restrain  the  evil. 
III.  Thb  whole  of  life  is  sacred,  and  should  be  consecrated  to  God.  God 
came  to  us  in  that  Child.  The  whole  of  life  is  sacred,  open  for  the  operations, 
possession,  enjoyment  of  God.  God  was  in  that  Child  notwithstanding  all  its 
infantile  wants,  weaknesses,  complaints.  And  so  God  was  in  that  boy,  notwith- 
standing all  His  playfulness  and  vivacity.  Indeed,  that  was  the  boyish,  outward 
manifestation  of  God ;  the  boyish  way  of  declaring  God's  glory.  If  God  was 
in  that  Child,  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  His  whole  life,  from  His  birth  to  His 
death,  was  God-life.  IV.  Great  endings  havb  little  beginnings.  Who 
shall  measure  the  magnitude,  height,  depth,  length,  breadth  of  the  work  which 
Christ  accomplished  as  Saviour  of  the  world  T  Yet  it  has  all  to  be  traced  back 
to  the  birth  of  that  Child.  God's  method  is  "evolution"  from  the  small  to 
the  great.  (B.  Preece.)  The  Child  Divine: — Pure  Christianity  owes  its  power 
to  the  fact  that  it  comes  to  us  as  a  little  child,  beautiful  in  innocence  and  sim- 
plicity. The  pure  spirit  of  Christianity  is  the  essence  of  kindness.  Christianity 
owes  its  power  to  its  spirit  of  gentleness.  Christianity  is  forgiving  like  a  little 
child.  Christianity,  however,  like  a  little  child,  is  often  misunderstood.  Alas ! 
that  Christianity  should  be  hated  by  some  people.  Not  only  did  Herod  seek  its 
life  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  but  there  are  men  to-day  who,  Herod-like,  seek 
to  strangle  the  infant  Christ.  (W.  Birch.)  Unto  ua  a  Son  is  given. — Christ, 
the  Son  of  God,  gifted  to  sinners  : — I.  The  gift  itself.  Many  precious  gifts  have 
come  from  heaven  to  earth,  yea,  all  we  have  is  Heaven's  gift  (James  i.  17).  But 
this  is  the  great  gift.  1.  What  this  gift  is.  (1)  A  Person.  Persons  are  more 
excellent  than  things.  A  soul  is  more  precious  than  a  world.  So  this  gift  is 
more  precious  than  the  whole  world.  (2)  A  Divine  Person.  (3)  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  2.  Wherein  this  gift  appears  and  comes  to  us.  Those  who  send 
precious  gifts  to  others,  wrap  them  up  in  something  that  is  less  precious.  And 
•  treasure  sent  in  earthen  vessels  is  the  method  of  conveyance  of  the  best  gifts 
from  heaven  to  earth.  The  Son  of  God,  being  the  gift,  was  sent  veiled  and  wrapped 
up  in  our  nature.  This  veil  laid  over  the  gift  sent  to  poor  sinners  was  (1)  less 
precious  than  the  gift  itself.  The  human  nature  of  Christ  was  a  created  thing, 
His  Divine  nature  uncreated.  (2)  However,  it  was  a  cleanly  thing.  The  human 
nature  of  Christ,  though  infinitely  below  the  dignity  of  His  Divine  nature,  yet  was 
a  holy  thing  (Luke  i.  35).  This  gift  appeared  and  was  sent  to  us  in  the  veil 
of  the  human  nature — (a)  that  it  might  be  capable  of  the  treatment  it  behoved  to 
undergo  for  our  relief — to  suffer  and  die;  (b)  that  it  might  be  suited  to  the 
weakness  of  the  capacity  of  the  receivers.  The  Son  of  God  in  His  unveiled  glory 
would  have  no  more  been  an  object  for  our  eyes  to  have  looked  on,  than  the 
shining  sun  to  the  eyes  of  an  owl.  A  few  rays  of  His  glory,  breaking  out  from 
under  the  veil,  made  His  enemies  fall  to  the  ground.  3.  What  a  gift  this  is. 
Singular  for  (1)  the  worth  of  it.  H  it  were  laid  in  the  balance  with  ten  thousand 
worlds,  they  would  be  lighter  than  vanity  in  comparison  of  it ;  nay,  balanced 
with  the  gift  of  created  graces,  and  the  created  heavens,  it  would  down-weigh 
them ;  as  the  bridegroom  s  person  is  more  worth  than  his  jewels  and  palace. 
(2)  The  suitableness  of  it  (Acts  iv.  12 ;  Heb.  vii.  25 ;  1  John  v.  12).  (3)  The 
seasonableness  of  it.  (4)  The  comprehensiveness  of  it  (Rom.  viii.  32  ;  Col.  ii. 
9,  10  ;  1  John  v.  11).  (5)  The  unrestricted  freeness  of  it.  What  is  freer  than  a 
gift  ?  The  joint  stock  of  the  whole  world  could  not  have  purchased  this  gift. 
(a)  Beware  of  slighting  this  gift,  (b)  Take  heed  ye  miss  not  to  perceive  this  gift. 
Most  men  see  no  further  into  the  mystery  of  Christ  than  the  outward  appearance 
it  makes  in  the  world,  as  administered  in  the  Word,  sacraments,  &c. ;  and  they 
despise  it.  (c)  Admire  the  wisdom  of  God,  and  His  infinite  condescension,  in 
the  manner  of  the  conveyance  of  this  gift,     (d)  See  here  how  you  may  be  enriched 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  27S 

for  time  and  eternity.  II.  The  Giver.  1.  Who  is  the  Giver  T  God.  And  to 
exalt  the  Giver's  free  love  and  grace  herein,  observe  from  the  Word  three  things 
there  marked  about  it.  (1)  It  was  His  own  Son  that  He  gave.  (2)  It  was  Hia 
beloved  Son.  (3)  It  was  His  only-begotten  Son.  2.  What  has  He  given  sinners, 
gifting  His  Son  to  them  ?  The  tongues  of  men  and  angels  cannot  fully  express 
this.  (1)  He  has  given  them  Himself.  (2)  Eternal  life.  Here  is  legal  life,  moral 
life,  a  life  of  comfort ;  and  all  eternal.  (3)  All  things  (Rom.  viii.  32 ;  1  Cor.  iii. 
21 ;  Rom.  viii.  17  ;  Rev.  xxi.  7).  III.  The  party  to  whom  He  is  given.  1.  To 
whom  He  is  given.  To  mankind-sinners  indefinitely.  2.  In  what  respects 
Christ  is  given  to  them.  (1)  In  respect  of  allowance  to  take  Him.  (2)  In  respect 
of  legal  destination  (1  John  iv.  14).  If  ye  had  an  act  of  parliament  appointing 
a  thing  for  you,  ye  would  not  question  its  being  given  you  ;  here  ye  have  more. 

(3)  In  respect  of  real  offer.  (4)  In  respect  of  the  freeness  of  the  offer.  (5)  In 
respect  of  exhibition.  This  gift  is  held  forth  as  with  the  hand,  God  saying,  Ho, 
sinners,  here  is  My  Son,  take  Him.  And  God  doth  not  stay  the  exhibiting  of 
His  Son  to  sinners  till  they  say  they  will  take  Him.  3.  In  what  character  Christ 
is  given  to  sinners.  A  Saviour ;  a  surety ;  a  physician ;  a  light ;  an  atoning 
sacrifice ;  a  crowned  King,  mighty  to  destroy  the  kingdom  of  Satan  and  to  rescue 
mankind-sinners,  his  captives  and  prisoners.  IV.  Application.  1.  Believe 
that  to  us  poor  sinners  the  Son  of  God  in  man's  nature  is  given.  2.  Receive 
the  gift  of  Christ,  at  His  Father's  hand.  (1)  Consider  ye  have  an  absolute  need 
of  this  gift.  (2)  There  are  some  who  have  as  much  need  as  you,  to  whom  yet 
He  is  not  given,  namely,  the  fallen  angels.     (3)  Ye  must  either  receive  or  refuse. 

(4)  Consider  the  worth  of  the  gift.  (5)  Consider  the  Hand  it  comes  from. 
(6)  Consider  that  others  before  you  have  received  it,  and  have  been  made  up  by 
it  for  ever.  (7)  Consider  that  this  gift  will  not  always  be  for  the  taking  as  it  is 
now.  (8)  Your  not  receiving  will  be  very  heinously  taken,  as  a  deepest  slight 
put  upon  both  the  Giver  and  the  gift.  (9)  It  will  set  you  at  greater  distance 
from  God  than  ever.  (T.  Boston.)  The  Son  given: — I.  Who  is  the  Son  given, 
and  what  is  His  porpose  ?  It  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  verse  begins  with 
His  humanity;  and,  mounting  upwards,  it  rises  to  the  height  of  His  Divinity. 
The  prophet  conducts  us  to  Bethlehem  and  its  stable,  to  the  desert  and  its 
hunger,  to  the  well  and  its  thirst,  to  the  workshop  and  its  daily  toil,  to  the  sea 
and  its  midnight  storm,  to  Gethsemane  and  its  bloody  sweat,  to  Calvary  and  its 
ignominious  death,  and  all  along  that  thorny  path  that  stretched  from  the  manger 
to  the  Cross ;  for  in  announcing  the  birth  and  coming  of  this  Son  and  Child,  he 
included  in  that  announcement  the  noble  purposes  for  which  He  was  born — His 
work,  His  sufferings,  His  life,  His  death,  all  the  grand  ends  for  which  the  Son 
was  given  and  the  Child  was  born.  II.  By  whom  was  this  Son  given  ?  By 
His  Father.  Man  has  his  remedies,  but  they  are  always  behindhand.  The 
disease  antedates  the  cure.  But  before  the  occasion  came  God  was  ready. 
Redemption  was  planned  in  the  councils  of  eternity,  and  Satan's  defeat  secured 
before  his  first  victory  was  won.  The  Son  gave  Himself,  but  the  Father  gave 
Him ;  and  there  is  no  greater  mistake  than  to  regard  God  as  looking  on  at 
redemption  as  a  mere  spectator,  to  approve  the  sacrifice  and  applaud  the  actor. 
God's  love  was  the  root,  Christ's  death  the  fruit.  III.  To  whom  was  He  given  ? 
He  was  given  "  to  us."  (T  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  advent  of  Jesus  joy -producing  : — 
A  poor  little  street-girl  was  taken  sick  one  Christmas  and  carried  to  a  hospital. 
While  there  she  heard  the  story  of  Jesus'  coming  into  the  world  to  save  us.  It 
was  all  new  to  her,  but  very  precious.  She  could  appreciate  such  a  wonderful 
Saviour,  and  the  knowledge  made  her  very  happy  as  she  lay  upon  her  little  cot. 
One  day  the  nurse  came  around  at  the  usual  hour,  and  Little  Broomstick  " 
(that  was  her  street  name)  held  her  by  the  hand,  and  whispered  :  "  I'm  having 
real  good  times  here — ever  such  good  times !  S'pose  I  shall  have  to  go  away  from 
here  just  as  soon  as  I  get  well;  but  I'll  take  the  good  time  along — some  of  it, 
anyhow.  Did  you  know  'bout  Jesus  bein'  born  ?  "  Yes,"  replied  the  nurse, 
"  I  know.  Sh-sh-sh !  Don't  talk  any  more."  "  You  did  ?  I  thought  you 
looked  as  if  you  didn't,  and  I  was  goin'  to  tell  you."  "  Why,  how  did  I  look  ?  " 
asked  the  nurse,  forgetting  her  own  orders  in  curiosity.  "  Oh,  just  like  most  o' 
folks — kind  o'  glum.  I  shouldn't  think  you'd  ever  look  gloomy  if  you  knowed 
'bout  Jesus  bein'  born."  (Faithful  Witness.)  "  The  joyful  quarter"  : — Part  of 
the  city  of  Florence  was  called  The  Joyful  Quarter."  It  was  through  a  picture 
painted  by  Cimbrie  of  Jesus  as  a  baby  seated  on  His  mother's  knee.  When 
finished,  the  grand  old  painter  did  not  make  a  charge  for  people  to  see  it,  bat 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

had  it  carried  into  the  poor  quarters,  and  through  the  streets  slowly,  in  the  sight 
of  all  the  people.  Before  this,  they  had  thought  of  Jesus  as  far  too  grand  for 
them  to  love.  In  this  picture  He  looked  so  sweet  and  good  that  people  broke 
into  surprised  thankfulness  and  joy.  (Sunday  Magazine.)  A  son  and  a 
brother  : — A  respectable  family  becomes  very  reduced  in  its  circumstances  ;  the 
mother  finds  it  difficult  to  make  the  meagre  provision  suffice  for  her  hungry  little 
ones  ;  their  clothes  get  more  ragged  ;  the  father's  threadbare  coat  makes  it  less 
and  less  possible  for  him  to  obtain  the  situation  which  his  qualifications  deserve. 
But  a  child  is  born  into  that  home,  quite  unlike  the  rest  of  the  children — beautiful 
in  feature,  quick  in  intelligence,  winsome,  gifted,  spirituelle.  As  he  grows  up, 
he  manifests  unusual  powers ;  rapidly  distances  his  compeers ;  passes  from 
the  elementary  school  to  the  college,  and  thence  to  the  university.  Presently 
tidings  begin  to  come  back  of  his  success,  his  growing  fame,  his  prizes,  the  assured 
certainty  of  his  becoming  a  great  man  ;  and  as  they  arrive  in  letter,  and  rumour, 
and  newspaper,  the  mother's  eye  gets  brighter  ;  the  father  no  longer  evades  the 
associates  of  earlier  days ;  the  home  becomes  better  furnished  and  the  table 
better  spread ;  the  other  children  are  better  clothed  and  educated  and  put  for- 
ward in  life  ;  and  the  one  glad  explanation  of  it  all  is  found  in  the  words,  "  Unto 
us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given."  And  as  the  years  go  on,  whilst  money 
pours  in  as  a  golden  tide  to  the  successful  student,  it  will  find  its  way  increasingly 
to  the  family  in  the  old  home;  and  each  member  of  it  will  reap  the  benefit  of 
association  with  its  child  and  son,  all  that  is  needed  being  to  prove  a  distinct  need, 
and  to  put  in  an  appropriate  claim.  What  a  mine  of  wealth  would  be  opened 
up  in  the  counsel,  strength,  resources,  influence,  and  position,  of  that  beloved 
and  trusted  son  and  brother  !  This  will  illustrate  the  prophet's  thought.  As 
the  oppressed  Jews,  groaning  in  their  brick-kilns,  were  glad  for  Moses,  given  to 
lead  them  forth  from  the  house  of  bondage ;  as  England,  travailing  under  the 
cruel  exactions  of  the  Danes,  was  glad  for  our  great  Alfred  ;  as  the  Netherlands 
were  glad  when  William  the  Silent  arose  to  arrest  the  bloodthirsty  rule  of  Alva  ; 
as  Italy  was  glad  when  her  Victor  Emmanuel  overthrew  the  dark  misrule  of  the 
Papacy — so  may  we  be  glad  because  God  has  given  Himself  to  us  in  Jesus.  Why 
should  living  men  complain  ?  Granted  that  Adam  was  our  father,  the  second 
Adam  is  the  Son  of  Man.  If  tears  and  toil  and  pain  and  death  have  come  by  one, 
glory  and  honour  and  immortality  are  ours  by  the  other.  If  we  are  sons,  and 
therefore  younger  brothers  of  the  Son  ;  if  we  have  the  right  to  call  His  Father 
our  Father,  we  gain  from  our  association  with  Him  more  than  enough  to  com- 
pensate us  for  our  association  with  the  gardener  who  stole  his  Master's  fruit  in 
the  garden  of  Paradise.  Christian  people  do  not  enough  appreciate  this  connection, 
or  avail  themselves  of  its  benefits.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  And  the  government 
sliall  be  upon  His  shoulder. — Christ  the  universal,  Governor : — I.  Jesus  Christ 
has  the  government  of  heaven.  After  He  had  triumphantly  risen  from 
the  dead,  and  the  time  of  His  glorious  ascension  to  heaven  was  at  hand,  He  said 
unto  His  disciples,  "  All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven,"  meaning,  that  to 
Him,  as  the  gracious  and  glorious  Mediator  between  us  sinners  and  God  our 
heavenly  Sovereign,  all  power  in  heaven  was  given.  And  hence  the  following 
great  and  gracious  truths — 1.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  person  who,  principally 
and  above  all  others,  has  power  with  God  for  us.  "  There  is  one  God  and  one 
Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus."  2.  He  is  the  only  person 
by  whom  we  can  hope  to  obtain  an  entrance  into  heaven.  3.  He  has  power  in 
heaven  to  exclude,  as  well  as  to  admit,  whom  He  will.  4.  He  has  power  in  heaven 
to  provide  mansions  for  His  friends.  5.  He  has  power  in  heaven  over  all  the 
angels  ;  He  is  their  Lord,  whom  they  worship  and  obey  ;  He  is  exalted  above  all 
principalities  and  powers :  the  angels  are  His  ministering  spirits,  whom  He  sends 
forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  (Heb.  i.  6-14).  II.  Jesus 
Christ  has  the  government  of  earth  (Matt,  xxviii.  18).  1.  He  has  power  on 
earth  to  form  and  establish  a  Church  to  the  glory  and  praise  of  God.  2.  He  has 
power  on  earth  to  keep  His  Church,  through  faith,  unto  final  and  full  salvation. 
3.  He  has  power  on  earth  over  the  wicked.  III.  Jesus  Christ  has  the  govern- 
ment op  hell.  Satan,  therefore,  and  the  whole  host  of  evil  spirits,  are  under 
His  command  ;  and  therefore  their  malice,  their  subtilty,  and  power,  shall  never 
prevail  to  the  ruin  of  the  weakest  of  His  flock.  Conclusion — 1.  And  first,  we 
infer — What  a  glorious  person  is  Jesus  Christ  1  In  defiance  of  all  His  enemies,  He 
it  is  of  whom  the  Father  declares,  "  Yet  have  I  set  My  King  upon  My  holy  hill  of 
Zion  "  (Psa.  ii.  6).     2.  How  dignified,  and  secure,  and  happy,  must  they  be  who 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  277 

have  Jesus  Christ  as  their  Governor,  to  whom  they  willingly  yield  themselves 
in  all  humble  and  affectionate  submission  and  obedience.  3.  The  tremendous 
case  of  those  who  are  strangers  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  without  God  in  the  world, 
(i?.  Phillips.)  The  government  on  Christ's  shoulder  : — As  a  people  whose  affairs 
are  ruined  have  great  need  of  an  active  and  expert  governor  ;  so  the  government 
of  such  a  people  is  a  great  burden.  Such  a  people  are  lost  sinners,  and  with 
respect  to  them  these  words  speak  two  things — 1.  The  burden  and  weight  of 
taking  the  management  of  their  affairs.  2.  Jesus  Christ  the  person  on  whom 
this  burden  was  laid.  This  is  part  of  the  glad  tidings  of  the  Gospel.  (T.  Boston.) 
The  government  on  Christ's  shoulder: — I.  The  occasion  of  setting  up  this 
Prince  and  Governor.  It  was  sinners'  absolute  need.  1.  Their  first  prince 
was  gone,  to  manage  their  affairs  no  more.  Adam  their  natural  head  mismanaged 
the  government  quite.  2.  They  were  left  in  confusion,  in  the  hand  of  the  enemy 
Satan.  3.  Their  affairs  were  desperate.  When  the  whole  earth  could  not 
afford  one,  heaven  gave  sinners  a  Prince,  of  shoulders  sufficient  for  the  burden. 
II.  The  import  op  this  principality  and  government  laid  on  Jesus  Christ 
por  the  benefit  of  mankind-sinners.  It  speaks — 1.  His  near  relation  to 
them.  2.  His  eminency  among  them.  3.  His  honourable  office  over  them. 
4.  His  sovereign  power  and  authority  over  them.  5.  The  burden  of  the  care 
and  duty  belonging  to  the  office  and  station.  III.  The  honour,  power,  and 
authority  belonging  to  this  principality  and  government  of  Jesus  Christ. 
1.  The  legislative  power  belongs  to  Him  solely.  2.  The  supreme  executive 
power  is  lodged  with  Him  (John  v.  22,  23).  3.  The  power  of  granting  remissions, 
receiving  into  peace  with  Heaven,  pardoning  and  indemnifying  criminals  and 
rebels  (Acts  v.  31).  4.  A  large  and  vast  dominion,  reaching  to  earth,  heaven, 
and  hell,  and  the  passage  between  the  two  worlds,  namely,  death  (Matt,  xxviii. 
18;  Rev.  i.  18).  In  His  hand  is — (1)  The  kingdom  of  grace.  "And  gave  Him 
to  be  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church."  (2)  The  kingdom  of  glory  (Luke 
xxii.  29,  30).  (3)  The  kingdom  of  providence.  "  And  hath  put  all  things  under 
His  feet."  IV.  The  burden  of  this  principality  and  government  laid  on 
Christ  Jesus.  It  is  sevenfold.  1.  The  burden,  of  the  purchase  of  it.  2.  The 
burden  of  a  war  with  the  devil  for  the  recovering  of  it.  3.  The  burden  of  sub- 
duing sinners.  4.  The  burden  of  their  reconciliation  with  Heaven.  6.  The 
burden  of  their  defence  and  protection.  6.  The  burden  of  their  provision  in  all 
things  necessary  for  life  and  godliness.  7.  The  burden  of  the  whole  management 
and  conduct  of  them  through  the  wilderness,  till  they  come  to  the  heavenly 
Canaan.  V.  Improve  the  doctrine.  1.  Information.  (1)  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  alone  Head  of  His  Church  and  supreme  Governor  thereof.  (2)  The  interests 
of  the  Church  and  of  every  particular  believer  will  certainly  be  seen  to. 
(3)  Believers  have  all  reason  to  be  quietly  resigned  to  the  Divine  disposal  and 
to  live  in  confidence  of  a  blessed  issue,  whatever  be  the  difficulties  they  have  to 
grapple  with,  either  in  respect  of  the  case  of  the  Church  or  of  their  own  private 
case.  2.  Exhortation.  (1)  Receive  Him  as  your  Prince  and  Governor,  (a)  Let 
His  Spirit  be  your  Guide  and  Leader.  (6)  Let  His  Word  be  your  rule,  (c)  Let 
His  will  be  the  determining  point  to  you.  And  receive  Him  as  Governor — (a)  Of 
your  hearts  and  spirits.  Let  the  proud  heart  be  made  to  stoop  to  Him,  let  the 
covetous  heart  be  purged  by  Him,  and  the  vain  foolish  heart  be  made  to  find  the 
weight  of  His  awful  authority.  While  Christ  has  not  the  government  of  thy 
heart,  thou  hast  not  given  Him  the  throne.  (6)  Of  your  tongues,  (c)  Of  your 
practice.  (2)  Receive  Him  as  the  Prince  and  Governor  of  your  lot  and  condition 
in  the  world,  resigning  the  same  to  His  disposal,  (a)  Be  content  with  the  lot 
carved  out  for  you.  (b)  Never  go  out  of  God's  way  to  mend  your  condition, 
(c)  In  all  changes  of  your  lot,  acknowledge  Him  for  direction  and  guidance. 
Take  Him  for  your  only  Governor ;  your  absolute  Governor ;  your  perpetual 
Governor.  Take  Him  without  delay ;  take  Him  heartily  and  willingly.  3.  Motives. 
(1)  Consider  what  an  excellent  Prince  and  Governor  He  is.  Perfectly  just  in 
His  administration ;  infinitely  wise ;  most  vigilant  and  careful ;  most  tender 
of  His  subjects  and  of  all  their  interests.  (2)  While  ye  are  not  under  His 
government,  ye  are  under  the  government  of  Satan.  (3)  Jesus  Christ  is  your 
rightful  Prince  and  Governor.  (4)  If  ye  submit  not  to  Him,  He  will  treat  you 
as  rebels,  who  have  broken  your  faith  and  allegiance  to  Him,  and  cast  off  the 
yoke  of  His  government.  (Ibid. )  The  hope  of  Israel  : — I.  The  hope  of  the 
chosen  people  concerning  themselves  and  their  race  centred  in  a  Child. 
As  a  general  fact,  how  many  of  the  world's  hopes  and  expectations  have  in  all 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

ages  focussed  in  cradles.  The  children  represent  the  hope  of  all  generations. 
11.  Now  the  paradox  of  Jewish  faith  consisted  in  this — that  it  focussed  at 
once  in  a  cradle  and  a  THRONE ;  a  Child  and  a  King.  Hence  the  birth  in  which 
that  ancient  hope  found  fulfilment  was  the  birth  of  a  King.  The  question  of 
the  wise  men  was  grandly  expressive.  It  centred  alike  in  a  Child  and  a  King. 
"  Where  is  He  that  is  born  King  ?  "  1.  At  the  very  centre  of  the  Jewish  religion 
was  the  belief  in  kingship — a  Divine  kingdom  or  a  theocracy.  This  great  spiritual 
fact  was  symbolised  by  "  the  outward  visible  sign  "  of  human  kingship.  But 
all  human  symbols  are  imperfect.  Their  kings  died  like  other  men.  But  their 
true  King  did  not  die.  They  sought  to  make  the  outward  symbol  of  government 
as  complete  as  possible ;  hence  they  adopted  hereditary  kingship.  The  human, 
and.  in  this  case,  the  Jewish  heart  is  impatient  of  an  interregnum.  There  is  a 
feeling  in  man  that  the  throne  should  at  no  period  be  empty.  This  feeling  ever 
tends  toward  hereditary  rule.  The  prophet  points  to  a  King  to  the  increase  of 
"  whose  government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end."  It  is  a  kingdom  which 
knows  of  no  interregnum.  In  contrast  to  all  other  kings  and  royal  personages, 
who  soon  die  and  pass  away,  He  ever  lives.  2.  It  is  such  a  king  that  the  Jewish 
people  yearned  and  looked  for.  Hence,  when  the  wise  men  came  with  the  question, 
"  Where  is  He  that  is  born  King  of  the  Jews  ?  "  it  not  only  moved  Herod,  but 
all  Jerusalem  with  him.  The  Jews  looked  eagerly  for  a  king  who  should  bear 
upon  his  shoulder  the  burden  of  perpetual  government.  This  yearning  for  a 
king  is  one  of  the  deepest  in  the  heart  of  nations.  3.  Alas  !  that  when  He  came 
men  did  not  recognise  Him  in  the  humble  garb  He  wore.  They  placed  a  Cross 
upon  the  shoulder  that  was  to  bear  the  ensign  of  rule,  and  a  crown  of  thorns  upon 
His  royal  brow.  Yet,  all  was  well,  for  what  could  be  a  better  ensign  of  His 
kingship  than  the  Cross,  since  His  is  "  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ," 
and  He  is  a  "  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  4.  His  sacred  brow,  too,  bore  the  only 
crown  which  man  could  place  there  and  He  accept — a  crown  of  thorns,  symbol 
alike  of  our  sin  and  misery  and  of  His  royalty  who  has  overcome  us  by  the  might 
of  His  compassion,  and  become  our  King  by  the  shedding  of  His  blood.  What 
becomes  the  brow  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows  and  King  of  sorrowing  humanity  like 
a  crown  of  thorns  ?  Our  Lord  exclaimed  some  time  before  His  hour  had  come, 
"  I  have  power  to  lay  down  My  life,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again."  He  based 
His  kingly  claim  upon  that  twofold  power.  It  is  from  His  Cross  that  He  sways  His 
sceptre  over  us.  6.  The  cradle  predicts  the  Cross.  Once  God  has  condescended 
to  touch  the  manger  and  the  crib,  we  are  prepared  to  see  Him  even  touch  the 
Cross  and  bearing  it.  There  is  no  depth  of  condescension  which  He  will  not 
fathom,  no  height  of  self-sacrifice  which  He  will  not  reach.  The  story  of  Divine 
love  is  harmonious  throughout.  We  are  not  surprised  that  the  great  God  who 
submitted  Himself  to  the  humblest  conditions  of  human  birth  should  also,  in 
the  same  spirit,  endure  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame.  6.  This  cradle,  too,  is 
prophetic  of  the  Gospel,  in  which  so  much  that  is  weak  and  human  is  linked  to 
so  much  that  is  strong  and  Divine,  namely,  man's  voice  uttering  God's  message, 
earthly  forms  and  ordinances  conveying  heavenly  energies,  human  swaddling 
clothes  enveloping  a  Divine  life.  {D.  Dairies.)  The  government  upon  Christ's 
shoulder  : — I.  I  would  offer  a  few  thoughts  concerning  the  Church  or  kingdom 
of  Christ  in  the  world.  1.  By  the  Church  I  understand  that  remnant  of  Adam's 
family  who,  being  determined  to  break  their  covenant  with  hell,  and  their  agree- 
ment with  death,  join  themselves  to  Christ,  as  their  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King, 
either  in  reality,  or  by  a  visible  and  credible  profession  of  their  faith  in  Him. 
2.  The  Church  or  kingdom  of  Christ,  during  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  was 
peculiarly  confined  to  the  posterity  of  Abraham,  to  the  nation  of  the  Jews,  except- 
ing a  few  Gentile  proselytes ;  but  now,  since  the  coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh 
and  His  resurrection  from  the  dead,  is  extended  also  to  the  Gentile  nations.  3.  All 
the  subjects  of  Christ's  kingdom  and  government,  are  originally  brought  out  of 
the  territories  of  hell,  being  "  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others."  4.  The  great 
engine  whereby  Christ  rears  up  a  kingdom  to  Himself  in  the  world,  is  the  preaching 
of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  accompanied  with  the  power  and  efficacy  of  His  Spirit. 
6.  The  Church  and  kingdom  of  Christ  being  founded  and  governed  by  Him,  "  in 
whom  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  hid,"  cannot  miss  of  being 
one  of  the  best  regulated  societies  in  the  world  as  under  His  management,  what- 
ever irregularities  may  be  found  in  her  through  the  corruptions  of  men  intermingling 
with  the  concerns  of  the  kingdom.  Everything  necessary  to  render  any  kingdom 
or  society  regular  is  to  be  found  in  the  Church  or  kingdom  of  Christ.    (1)  A. 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  279 

kingdom  well  constituted  hath  its  laws  and  so  hath  the  Church  of  Christ.  And 
the  laws  given  by  her  King  are  all  "  holy,  just,  and  good  "  ;  and  all  the  true  subjects 
of  the  kingdom  delight  in  the  laws  of  their  King,  as  being  the  transcript  of  infinite 
wisdom  and  equity.  (2)  A  kingdom  hath  its  offices  under  its  king ;  and  so  hath 
the  Church  of  Christ  (Eph.  iv.  11-13).  (3)  A  kingdom  hath  its  courts,  where 
the  subjects  attend  to  receive  the  will  of  the  king,  and  the  benefits  of  his  administra- 
tion ;  and  so  hath  the  Church.  (4)  A  kingdom  hath  its  seal.  So  in  the  kingdom 
of  Christ,  He  hath  appended  two  public  seals  unto  the  charter  of  His  covenant 
of  grace,  namely,  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  (5)  A  kingdom  commonly 
hath  its  enemies  to  grapple  with,  both  foreign  and  intestine  ;  and  so  hath  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  (6)  A  kingdom  hath  its  armies  and  auxiliaries ;  and  so  hath 
the  Church  of  Christ,  being  in  a  confederacy  with  the  Lord  of  hosts.  The  armies 
of  heaven  are  ready  to  fight  her  quarrel.  (7)  A  kingdom  hath  its  fortifications 
and  strongholds  ;  and  so  hath  the  Church  of  Christ.     II.  I  would  speak  a  little 

Of  THE  GOVERNMENT  AND  ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE  KINGDOM.      1.   Christ  Himself 

is  the  great  and  glorious  Governor.  2.  All  things  in  heaven,  earth,  and  hell 
are  put  under  the  power  of  Christ,  for  the  more  advantageous  government  of  His 
Church  (Eph.  i.  22,  23  ;  Phil.  ii.  9-11).  3.  Christ  the  King  of  Zion  is  wonderfully 
fitted  by  His  Father  for  the  government  and  administration  (Isa.  xi.  2-4) 
4.  Christ's  government  and  administration  are  very  wonderful.  The  name  of 
the  Governor  is  Wonderful.  5.  Christ's  government  and  administration  in  and 
about  His  Church  and  people  are  exceeding  wise.  So  much  is  imported  in  His 
being  called  the  "  Counsellor."  6.  Also  irresistible.  The  Governor  is  "  The 
Mighty  God,"  who  will  go  through  with  His  designs.  7.  He  is  exceeding  tender 
and  compassionate  ;  for  His  name  is  "  The  Everlasting  Father  "  from  whom  com- 
passions flow.  8.  Christ's  government  and  administration  of  His  Church  are 
very  peaceable ;  for  His  name  is  "  The  Prince  of  Peace,"  and  "  of  the  increase 
of  His  government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end."  9.  This  government  is 
everlasting.  III.  Inquire  how  the  government  op  the  Chttrch  18  committed 
to  Christ.  The  government  is  laid  upon  Christ's  shoulder  with  a  threefold 
solemnity.  1.  The  solemnity  of  an  unalterable  decree  (Psa.  ii.  6-8).  2.  The 
solemnity  of  a  covenant  transacted  betwixt  Him  and  His  Eternal  Father,  when 
the  council  of  peace  was  between  them  both.  3.  The  solemnity  of  an  oath,  ratify- 
ing the  determination  of  the  council  of  peace  in  this  matter  (Psa.  lxxxix.  3,  4,  35). 

IV.  Give  the  reasons  of  the  doctrine.  Why  is  the  government  laid  upon 
His  shoulder  ?  1.  Because  His  shoulder  alone  was  able  to  bear  the  weight  of 
the  administration  and  government  of  the  Church.  2.  That  He  might  be  in 
better  capacity  for  accomplishing  the  salvation  of  His  people,  and  bringing  many 
sons  and  daughters  unto  glory.  Hence  we  find  His  kingdom  and  salvation  fre- 
quently joined  together ;  "  Thou  art  my  King  of  old,  working  salvation  in  the 
midst  of  the  earth  "  ;  and  Zech.  ix.  9.  3.  That  He  may  "  still  the  enemy  and 
the  avenger,"  that  He  may  resent  His  Father's  quarrel  against  Satan,  and  entirely 
bruise  his  head,  for  his  defacing  and  striking  at  His  and  His  Father's  image  in 
our  first  parents,  and  disturbing  His  government,  which  He  had  established 
in  innocence.  4.  Because  He  hath  a  just  title  to  it.  (1)  By  birth.  (2)  By 
purchase.  (3)  By  His  Father's  promise  and  charter,  granted  to  Him  upon 
the    footing  of   His   death    and    satisfaction  (Isa.   liii.    12).     (4)  By  conquest. 

V.  Application.  1.  Information.  (1)  The  wonderful  love  of  God  which  He  bears 
to  His  Church  in  providing  such  a  Ruler  and  Governor  for  them.  (2)  What  a 
happy  government  and  administration  believers  are  under,  namely,  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Child  born,  the  Son  given  to  us,  whose  name  is  Wonderful,  &c. 
(3)  The  misery  of  a  wicked,  unbelieving  world  who  will  not  have  Him  to  rule 
over  them.  (4)  The  nullity  of  all  acts,  laws,  and  constitutions  that  do  not  bear 
the  stamp  of  Christ,  and  are  not  consistent  with  the  laws  and  orders  He  has  left 
for  the  government  of  His  Church.  (5)  They  run  a  very  serious  risk  who  do  injury 
to  His  servants.  (6)  They  have  a  hard  task  to  manage  who  attempt  to  jostle 
Him  out  of  His  government  and  take  it  upon  their  own  shoulders.  (7)  All  odds 
will  be  even,  and  Christ  will  render  tribulation  to  those  that  trouble,  vex,  and 
harass  His  poor  people  in  their  spiritual  rights  and  privileges.  2.  Consolation 
to  the  poor  people  of  God  ;  particularly  to  those  who  are  spoiled  of  their  liberties 
and  privileges  as  Christians.  (1)  Your  God  does  not  stand  as  an  unconcerned 
spectator.  (2)  God  hath  founded  Zion.  (3)  He  who  hath  the  government 
upon  His  shoulder  rules  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies,  and  has  so  much  of  the  act 
of  government  that  He  both  can  and  will  bring  good  out  of  evil.     (4)  The  most 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vs.. 

dark  dispensations  towards  the  Church  and  people  of  God  are  in  the  event  found 
to  have  been  pregnant  with  love  and  mercy.  (5)  He  on  whose  shoulders  the 
government  is  laid  hath  power  to  provide  you  with  honest  ministers.  (E.  Erskine.) 
Christ  the  "  Kinsman  "  of  the  race  : — The  King  must  be  the  Son  of  Man.  The 
real  root  of  king  and  queen  is  "  kin."  The  king  is  not  the  "  able  "  man  but  the 
"  kinsman  of  the  race.  All  our  fundamental,  social,  and  political  ideas  have 
their  root  in  the  patriarchal  home,  as  the  researches  of  Sir  H.  Maine  and  other 
able  scholars  have  established  ;  and  in  the  king  the  whole  "  kindred  "  is  repre- 
sented. "  Unto  us  a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given."  The  King  who  rules 
in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save,  is  the  Son  of  Man,  the  Divine  Kinsman  of  our 
race.  (J.  B.  Broum,  B.A.)  Jesus  Christ  the  King  of  all  creation : — I.  Christ 
thk  Kino  of  all  things  great.  There  is  nothing  so  great  as  to  be  above  the 
government  of  Jesus.  Things  great  belong  to  each  of  the  two  great  provinces 
into  which  the  universe  is  divided,  namely,  the  province  of  matter  and  the  province 
of  mind  ;  yet,  Christ  is  King  of  all.  1.  Greatness  in  the  physical  creation.  The 
earth  is  very  great,  as  we  count  greatness.  The  sun  is  greater  than  the  earth, 
and  many  a  star  which  appears  only  as  a  glittering  point  of  diamond,  is  greater 
than  the  sun  :  yet,  Jesus  makes  the  earth  bring  forth,  commands  the  sun  to  shine, 
and  moves  the  stars  in  silent  harmony.  Jesus  can  rule  the  sea.  Its  billows  rise 
and  fall  according  to  His  will ;  and  when  they  leap  along,  then,  amid  the  roar 
of  tempest  and  the  cries  of  men  for  aid,  the  gentle  voice  of  Jesus  speaks  "  Peace, 
be  still,"  and  winds  and  waves  obey  Him,  for  "  there  is  a  great  calm."  "  The 
government  is  upon  His  shoulder."  2.  The  greatness  of  death.  Of  all  the 
forces  of  nature,  none  is  feared  more  than  death.  Even  death  is  in  the  hand  of 
Jesus  ;  it  never  comes  without  asking  His  permission,  and  in  every  case  He  could 
forbid  its  coming,  and  no  doubt  He  would  forbid  it,  if  that  were  for  the  best, 
for  He  has  the  keys  of  death  and  of  Hades.  3.  Greatness  in  the  spirit- world. 
Material  forces,  however,  form  but  an  insignificant  part  of  the  forces  of  creation. 
There  is  a  world  of  spirit  within,  as  well  as  above  and  beyond  the  world  of  matter, 
and  yet,  of  this  nearest  world  of  matter  we  know  but  little.  The  spirit- world  is 
under  the  rule  of  Jesus  ;  He  is  its  only  King  ;  His  word  its  only  law  ;  His  presence 
its  only  bliss.  He  reveals  to  the  eye  of  faith  the  home  of  heaven.  He  brings 
"  life  and  immortality  to  light."  4.  Greatness  in  moral  government.  God  has 
promised  for  us — and  thereby  has  guaranteed — results  which  can  never  be  effected 
by  any  mere  force,  though  that  force  should  be  even  infinite.  The  difficulty  in 
the  Saviour's  government  of  moral  beings  lies  here, — that  He  has  guaranteed 
and  foretold  the  final  issues  of  that  government ;  that  He  has  foreseen  the  course 
of  life  pursued  by  every  moral  agent,  though  that  life  is  in  many  points  independent 
of  all  external  forces.  Neither  Scripture  nor  reason  may  explain  the  difficulty, 
but  it  is  pleasing  to  think  of  my  text, — "  The  government  shall  be  upon  His 
shoulder,  for  Jesus  is  "  Kings  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  II.  Christ  thb 
King  of  all  things  small.  There  is  nothing  so  small  as  to  escape  the  notice 
of  Jesus.  When  on  earth  He  observed  the  poor  as  well  as  the  rich,  and  commended 
each  according  to  his  fidelity.  Think  not  that  you  are  forgotten  by  the  Saviour, 
or  that  your  work  or  suffering  is  overlooked  because  you  are  poor,  obscure,  and 
feeble,  and  therefore,  forgotten  and  overlooked  by  men.  What  men  despise 
through  ignorance  may  be  most  highly  prized  in  another  form.  Filthy  soot  and 
the  brilliant  diamond  are  formed  of  the  same  material.  The  Saviour  sees,  not 
merely  what  we  are,  but  what  we  may  become,  and  as  fidelity  is  the  highest  ele- 
ment of  moral  worth,  He  estimates  the  value  of  men,  not  by  what  they  do,  but 
by  their  fidelity — by  the  proportion  which  exists  between  their  power  and  their 
performance.  The  lisping  prayer  of  a  little  child  may  thus  be  of  greater  value 
in  God's  estimation,  than  the  highest  song  which  ever  rose  from  an  angel's  heart. 
III.  Christ  the  King  of  all  things  good.  There  is  nothing  so  good  that  it 
can  exist  apart  from  the  rule  of  Jesus.  The  day  is  no  more  dependent  on  the 
sun,  the  rain  upon  the  clouds,  the  stream  upon  the  fountain,  than  happiness  is 
dependent  upon  Christ.  IV.  Christ  the  King  controlling  evil.  There 
is  nothing  so  bad  but  Jesus  can  make  it  the  means  of  good.  In  all  we  suffer, 
as  well  as  in  all  we  enjoy ;  in  the  dark  and  dreary  night  of  trouble,  as  well  as  in 
the  bright  day  of  prosperous  life,  it  is  equally  true  that  Jesus  Christ  is  King  of 
all.  (Evan  Lewis,  B.A.)  Christ  our  life's  Ruler: — Fifteen  miles  from  Sandy 
Hook  the  pilot  comes  on  board  the  English  steamer  to  navigate  it  into  New  York 
harbour.  I  remember  his  climbing  on  board,  on  the  last  occasion  that  I  made 
the  passage.     The  great  steamer  slowed,  and  as  we  looked  down  from  the  deck 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  281 

into  the  dark  night  we  could  see  a  lantern  on  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  where  his 
boat  was  lying.  Presently  he  emerged  from  the  pitchy  darkness  and  reached 
the  deck.  From  that  moment  the  anxieties  of  the  captain  were  at  an  end,  and 
he  might  refresh  himself  in  deep,  long  slumbers.  So  when  Christ  is  on  board  our 
life,  the  government  is  upon  His  shoulders,  and  of  the  increase  of  His  govern- 
ment and  of  our  peace  there  is  no  end.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  And  His 
name  shall  be  called  Wonderful.  —  Messiah's  name  : — As  Jacob  conferred  the 
birthright  and  blessing  of  his  race  upon  the  sons  of  Joseph  by  saying,  "  Let  my 
name  be  named  on  them,  and  the  name  of  my  fathers  Abraham  and  Isaac  "  (Gen. 
xlviii.  16) ;  or  as  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  were  warned  to  obey 
the  angel  who  went  before  them,  because  the  "  name  of  Jehovah  was  in  him  "  ; 
bo  the  name  of  God,  wonderful  in  counsel,  mighty  in  work,  the  Father  of  their 
fathers  and  of  their  children  for  a  thousand  generations,  the  Eternal  Upholder 
of  their  race  and  their  nation  and  of  its  prosperity  and  peace,  shall  be  named  upon, 
shall  be  in,  this  anointed  Saviour,  on  whose  shoulder  the  government  shall  rest. 
(Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart. )  The  Prince  of  the  four  names  : — Wonderful-Counsellor  ; 
God-Hero;  Father- Everlasting ;  Prince-of- Peace.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 
Christ's  name  above  every  name :  —  I.  Who  calls  Him  by  this  name  T 
1.  His  Father  (Phil.  ii.  9).  2.  All  His  people,  flying  to  Him,  in  their  first  believing, 
as  such  an  one,  and  depending  on  Him  all  along  their  course  of  life  as  such  an 
one.  II.  What  does  His  being  called  by  this  name  tmport  ?  1.  That  He 
really  is  what  this  name  bears.  2.  What  He  is  called  He  is  found  to  be  in  the 
experience  of  saints.  III.  Application.  Study  the  name  of  Christ,  as  repre- 
sented in  the  Word,  so  that  your  souls  may  be  enamoured  of  Him.  (T.  Boston.) 
God's  namings  always  mean  character.  They  are  always  revelations.  They  tell 
us  what  the  person  is  or  what  he  does.  (Mrs.  H.  W.  Smith.)  "Ah!  that's  the 
name  I " — Some  Hindus  who  had  read  Christian  tracts  travelled  a  long  way  to 
hear  more  about  Jesus  from  a  missionary.  As  soon  as  he  mentioned  the  name 
of  Jesus,  they  all  exclaimed,  "Ah!  that's  the  name!"  (Gates  of  Imagery.) 
Christ's  name  Wonderful : — Our  Lord  Christ  is  beyond  the  creature's  comprehension. 
So  that  this  is  fitly  made  the  first  syllable  of  His  name,  that  men  may  know 
that  whatever  they  know  of  His  excellencies,  there  is  still  more  behind  ;  and 
though  they  may  apprehend,  they  cannot  comprehend  what  He  is.  I  shall  inquire — 
I.  Undee  what  notion  Christ  is  held  forth  as  a  miracle,  a  miraculous  person. 
1.  Not  in  respect  of  His  being  a  miracle-worker.  It  is  Himself,  and  not  His  work, 
that  is  here  called  a  miracle.  2.  Nor  in  respect  of  His  Divine  nature  simply. 
3/ Nor  in  respect  of  His  human  nature  simply.  4.  Christ  is  held  forth  as  a 
miraculous  personage  as  God-man  in  one  person.  II.  What  is  the  import  op 
Christ  as  God-man  being  and  appearing  to  be  a  miraculous,  most  wonder- 
ful One  ?  1.  The  excellency  of  His  person  as  God-man.  2.  The  fulness  of 
excellencies  in  Him,  our  incarnate  Redeemer.  Some  excel  in' one  thing,  some  in 
another,  but  none  but  Christ  in  all  (Col.  i.  19).  3.  The  uncommonness  and 
singularity  of  His  excellencies.  Every  excellency  in  Christ  is  beyond  that  excel- 
lency in  another.  4.  The  absolute  matchlessness  of  His  person,  for  excellency 
and  glory.  5.  The  shining  forth  of  His  excellencies,  fit  to  draw  all  eyes  upon 
Him.  (1)  His  Father's  eyes  are  fixed  on  Him,  as  the  object  of  His  good  pleasure 
(Matt.  iii.  17).  (2)  The  eyes  of  the  angels  are  drawn  after  Him,  as  a  most  wonder- 
ful sight  (1  Pet.  i.  12).  (3)  The  eyes  of  all  the  saints  are  drawn  after  Him,  as 
the  object  of  their  admiration  and  affection.  6.  The  incomprehensibleness  of 
Him  to  any  creature.  III.  In  what  respects  is  our  incarnate  Redeemer  a 
miraculous  One  ?  He  is  wonderful — 1.  In  His  person  and  natures.  2.  In  His 
perfections  and  qualifications.  3.  All  along  His  duration.  Some  are  wonderful 
in  one  part  of  their  life,  some  in  another ;  but  He  is  miracle  all  over  His  duration. 
(1)  In  His  eternal  generation  of  the  Father.  (2)  In  His  birth.  (3)  In  His  life ; 
a  wonderful  infant ;  a  wonderful  child  ;  a  wonderful  youth,  &c.  (4)  In  His 
death  ;  betrayed  by  one  of  His  own  ;  forsaken  by  them  all,  acquitted  by  His 
judge  as  innocent,  yet  condemned  to  a  most  cruel  death.  Astonishing  wonder ! 
God  dying  in  man's  nature ;  the  beloved  Son  of  God  hanging  on  a  cross.  (5)  In 
His  burial.  The  Lord  of  life  lying  dead  in  a  grave  ;  the  spotless  Jesus  making 
His  grave  with  the  wicked  ;  the  great  Deliverer  from  death  carried  prisoner  to 
its  dark  regions — is  a  wonder  that  may  hold  us  in  admiration  for  ever  !  (6)  In 
His  resurrection.  (7)  In  His  ascension  into  heaven.  (8)  In  His  sitting  at  God's 
right  hand.  (9)  In  His  coming  again  to  judge  the  world.  (10)  In  His  continuing 
for  ever  to  be  the  eternal  band  of  union  and  means  of  communion,  between 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  ix. 

God  and  the  saints  (Rev.  vii.  17,  xxi.  23).  4..  In  His  offices.  (1)  Prophetical. 
The  Spirit  came  at  times  on  the  prophets,  but  He  rested  on  Him.  They  had  their 
foreknowledge  of  future  events  at  secondhand;  but  it  is  His  privilege  to  look 
with  His  own  eyes  into  the  sealed  book.  (2)  Priestly.  He  is  Priest,  Altar,  and 
Sacrifice  all  in  one.  All  the  sacrifices  before  His  were  but  as  hand-writings  to 
own  the  debt  of  sin,  but  could  pay  none.  His  sacrifice  was  truly  expiatory. 
(3)  Kingly.  Zion's  King  is  most  wonderful  in  His  victories,  rescuing  men  from 
the  power  of  the  devil,  subduing  their  hearts  to  Him,  and  conquering  their  wills  ; 
in  His  defence  of  His  subjects  from  the  devil,  the  world,  lusts,  frowns,  and 
flatteries  of  the  world ;  in  ruining  His  enemies  totally,  and  completing  the  happi- 
ness of  His  friends.  Christ's  kingdom  is  the  most  ancient  kingdom;  the  most 
extensive  kingdom,  embracing  both  heaven  and  earth.  Never  a  kingdom  had 
so  many  enemies  and  so  potent ;  yet  has  it  stood  through  all  ages,  and  will  stand 
for  ever  and  ever,  without  end.  5.  In  His  relations.  (1)  He  is  nearly  related 
to  the  house  of  heaven,  and  so  has  the  highest  possible  relation.  The  angeb 
are  the  servants  of  the  house  of  heaven  ;  but  Christ  is  the  Son  of  that  house  (Heb. 
i.  5).  (2)  He  is  nearly  related  to  the  house  of  Adam.  He  is  the  top-branch  of 
it  (Luke  iii.  38).  He  has  a  common  relation  to  them  all — the  Saviour  of  the 
world.  He  has  a  nearer  relation  to  believers — Brother,  Head,  &c.  (3)  He  is 
the  centre  of  union  to  the  two  (John  xvii.  23).  The  Son  of  God  married  our 
nature  to  Himself,  and  so  brings  together  the  two  houses,  making  peace  through 
the  body  of  His  flesh.  6.  In  His  love  (Eph.  iii.  19).  Consider — (1)  The  subject 
of  it — the  party  loving  us.  That  ever  there  should  have  been  an  eye  of  love 
cast  from  heaven  on  us,  not  from  among  the  courtiers,  but  from  the  throne,  the 
King  Himself,  is  wonderful.  (2)  The  objects  of  it.  Sinful  men.  (3)  The  effect, 
force,  and  energy  of  this  love.  It  is  absolutely  matchless.  (4)  The  qualities 
of  it.  Free ;  sovereign ;  preventing ;  tender ;  unchangeable ;  everlasting. 
IV.  Application.  1.  Information.  (1)  The  greatness  of  the  Father's  love  in 
giving  to  us  such  a  wonderful  One  for  our  Prince.  (2)  The  reasonableness  of 
the  believer's  superlative  love  to  Christ.  (3)  The  reasonableness  of  the  Gospel 
demand  of  all  to  receive  and  submit  to  Christ  as  their  Prince  and  Governor.  His 
transcendent  excellency  entitles  Him  to  the  principality  and  government  over 
the  sons  of  men.  His  merit  requires  our  absolute  resignation  to  Him.  He  i3 
the  Father's  choice,  and  in  making  that  choice  He  has  acted  like  Himself,  having 
chosen  for  us  this  most  wonderful  personage.  (4)  The  dreadful  sin  and  danger 
of  slighting  Christ.  The  more  wonderful  and  excellent  He  is,  the  deeper  will  be 
the  guilt  of  refusing  Him ;  the  deeper  the  guilt,  the  more  fearful  will  be  the 
vengeance  for  rejecting  Him  (Heb.  ii.  3).  2.  Exhortation.  (1)  Make  Him  the 
choice  of  your  soul.  (2)  Part  with  all  tor  Him — your  lust  and  idols  ;  renounce 
the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  resting  on  Christ  for  all,  for  time  and  eternity. 
(3)  Dwell  in  the  contemplation  of  His  matchless  excellencies.  Let  it  be  the 
substance  of  your  religion  to  love  Him,  to  admire  Him,  to  be  swallowed  up  in 
His  love.  (T.  Boston.)  Who  was  Jesus  Christ? — That  is  a  question  to  which 
no  man  dares  to  be  indifferent  save  at  the  peril  of  his  soul.  The  great  Unitarian 
minister,  W.  E.  Channing,  said,  "  Love  to  Jesus  Christ  depends  very  little  on 
our  conception  of  His  rank  in  the  scale  of  being."  I  believe  that  remark  to  be 
profoundly  wrong.  On  our  views  of  the  Person  of  Christ  depend  not  only  our 
love  to  Christ,  but  also  our  conception  of  Christianity.  Christ  is  Christianity, 
and  without  clear  views  of  His  character  and  person  our  religious  and  moral 
life  must  be  vague,  unstable,  like  a  house  that  is  built  upon  the  sand.  Consider — 
I.  His  wisdom  as  a  Teacher.  1.  His  originality.  He  never  went  to  college. 
He  had  no  learned  tutors  to  instruct  Him.  Yet  at  the  early  age  of  thirty  He 
taught  the  world  the  sublimest  truths  that  man  has  ever  heard.  He  belonged 
to  none  of  the  sects  of  His  day.  He  had  no  great  intellectual  friends  from  whom 
He  might  gain  flashes  of  suggestive  thought.  From  the  depths  of  mental  and 
social  obscurity,  He  went  forth  to  proclaim  a  world-wide  kingdom,  and  to-day, 
in  the  most  cultivated  nations,  Christ  ranks  first  of  all  the  world.  He  did  not 
teach  by  human  methods.  All  others  have  had  to  prove  the  words  they  spoke. 
Christ  simply  and  directly  uttered  truths,  and  His  hearers  saw  that  there  was  no 
contradicting  Him.  He  did  not  speculate  about  God.  He  simply  revealed  the 
Father,  and  men  felt  that  His  words  were  true.  Others  had  taught  virtue  before 
Christ.  But  how  different  was  their  teaching  !  Note  especially  Christ's  dealings 
with  the  poor.  Christ  was  the  first  poor  man's  philosopher.  And  now,  after 
eighteen  centuries  of  weary  strife  and  struggle,  we  are  just  beginning  to  see  the 


chat,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  283 

transcendent  wisdom  of  such  a  course  of  action.  2.  His  boldness  in  teaching. 
His  mission  was  world-wide.  Having  never  seen  a  map  of  this  earth,  He  comes 
forth  from  the  carpenter's  shop  to  inaugurate  a  kingdom  more  extensive  than 
the  sway  of  Alexander,  more  lasting  than  the  firmament  itself.  And  history  is 
showing  its  success.  He  was  the  greatest  reformer  that  ever  lived.  But  He  never 
started  wild  theories  for  facts  to  make  sad  havoo  with.  He  laid  down  those 
principles  of  love,  of  doing  to  others  as  we  would  have  them  do  to  us,  of  righteous- 
ness, purity,  truth,  and  justice,  the  same  for  rich  and  poor,  those  principles  which 
alone  can  heal  the  wounds  of  society  in  the  future  as  alone  they  have  healed  them 
in  the  past.  Observe,  too,  the  calmness  of  Jesus,  under  all  circumstances.  He 
was  always  calm,  because  He  knew  that  in  the  long  run  He  would  succeed. 
3.  The  consistency  of  His  life  with  His  doctrine.  To  preach  a  low  standard  of 
morality  and  live  up  to  it  is  easy.  But  Christ's  standard  is  the  very  highest. 
Yet  He  lived  up  to  it.  All  other  teachers  confess  their  shortcomings.  Christ 
never  does.  Observe,  too,  the  harmony  of  His  character.  All  virtues  unite  in 
Him,  and  none  in  excess.  Is  not  His  name  wonderful  ?  II.  His  innocence 
and  sinlessness.  Most  marvellous  is  His  character  in  this  respect.  All  our 
goodness  begins  with  repentance.  Not  so  His.  He  puts  before  us  the  highest 
form  of  morality,  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfect."  But  He  never  hints  that  He  has 
need  of  penitence  for  shortcomings.  Further,  Jesus  claims  to  be  sinless,  though 
He  is  full  of  sincerity  and  meekness.  Now,  no  man  could  sham  perfect  holiness. 
No  faulty  man  could  claim  to  be  faultless  without  soon  displaying  faults  that 
would  cover  him  with  derision.  Piety  without  an  ounce  of  repentance,  without 
any  confession  of  sin,  without  one  tear  !  Let  any  man  try  that  sort  of  piety, 
and  see  how  soon  his  assumed  righteousness  will  appear  most  impudent  conceit. 
When  we  think  of  His  sinlessness,  we  must  say,  'His  name  is  Wonderful." 
III.  His  influence  oveb  otheb  men.  1.  Hii  influence  as  a  Teacher  is  wonderful. 
We  see  in  ethics  far  more  than  Socrates  did.  We  see  further  in  theology  than 
Luther.  Mathematicians  have  gone  far  beyond  Euclid.  Our  children  will  see 
further  than  we  do.  But  eighteen  centuries  have  passed  since  the  sun  of  humanity 
rose  to  its  zenith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and  what  man.  or  what  body  of  men,  has 
mastered  His  thought  and  come  up  to  His  teachings,  far  less  gone  in  advance  of 
Him  ?  2.  Observe  the  total  change  in  the  moral  life  of  those  who  have  accepted 
this  Teacher.  And  His  influence  came  from  Himself.  He  was  not  supported 
by  the  authority  of  the  Rabbis.  He  was  in  opposition  to  all  the  religious  pre* 
judices  of  His  day.  From  a  most  sectarian  nation,  He  was  most  unsectarian, 
proposing  to  found  a  universal  kingdom  embracing  all  nations,  a  religion  for  all 
the  earth.  3.  The  influence  of  His  Church.  Villainous  misdeeds  have  been  done 
in  the  name  of  His  Church.  But  the  true  Church  never  did  these  things,  and  her 
influence  has  been  most  beautiful.  The  world  has  never  been  the  same  since 
the  holy  steps  of  Jesus  trod  the  soil  of  Palestine,  and  His  sacred  tears  bedewed 
Mount  Olivet.  The  hospital  is  an  invention  of  Christian  philanthropy.  The 
degradation  of  woman,  of  which  the  pagan  world  was  full,  has  been  exchanged 
for  a  position  of  peculiar  honour.  The  sensualism  which  paganism  mistook  for 
love  has  been  put  under  the  ban  of  true  Christian  feeling,  and  the  chivalrous 
respect  which  all  good  men  have  for  pure  women,  and  the  poetry  of  holy  love, 
have  come  from  the  teachings  of  Jesus  and  His  apostles.  The  old  and  universal 
sentiment  of  bitter  hostility  between  races  and  nations  is  denounced  in  the  severest 
terms,  and  has  been  largely  toned  down  by  Christianity.  Look  again  at  the 
enthusiasm  which  this  wonderful  Teacher  instilled  into  the  early  Christians. 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  is  a  greater  miracle  than  the  raising  of  Lazarus  from  the 
dead.  We  have  not  yet  assumed  the  truth  of  His  miracles.  Yet  is  it  not  idle 
to  deny  these  ?  How  can  we  separate  Christ  from  His  miracles  ?  And  this 
Divine  Jesus,  whose  name  is  Wonderful,  who  has  been  the  support  of  our  fathers 
in  the  days  of  old,  is  with  us  still.  We  need  this  marvellous  Being  in  the  strife 
of  Christian  duty.  (F.  W.  Aveling,  M.A.,  B.Sc.)  Christ  wonderful  in  Hia 
victories: — 1.  Over  the  forces  of  nature.  (1)  The  sea  is  a  crystal  sepulchre. 
It  swallowed  the  Central  America,  the  President,  and  the  Spanish  Armada,  a3 
easily  as  any  fly  that  ever  floated  on  it.  The  inland  lakes  are  fully  as  terrible  in 
their  wrath.  Recent  travellers  tell  us  that  Galilee,  when  aroused  in  a  storm, 
is  overwhelming.  And  yet  that  sea  crouched  in  His  presence  and  licked  His 
feet.  He  knew  all  the  waves  and  the  wind.  When  He  beckoned,  they  came. 
When  He  frowned,  they  fled.  The  heel  of  His  foot  made  no  indentation  on  the 
solidified  water.     (2)  Medical  science  has  wrought  great  changes  in  rheumatio 


284  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

limbs  and  diseased  blood  ;  but  when  the  muscles  are  entirely  withered,  no  human 
power  can  restore  them  ;  and  when  a  limb  is  once  dead,  it  is  dead.  But  here  is 
a  paralytic — his  hand  lifeless.  Christ  says  to  him,  "  Stretch  forth  thy  hand  "  ; 
and  he  stretches  it  forth.  In  the  eye  infirmary,  how  many  diseases  of  that  delicate 
organ  have  been  cured  !  But  Jesus  says  to  one  born  blind,  "  Be  open  !  "  and 
the  light  of  heaven  rushes  through  gates  that  have  never  before  been  opened. 

(3)  The  frost  or  an  axe  may  kill  a  tree :  but  Jesus  smites  one  dead  with  a  word. 

(4)  Chemistry  can  do  many  wonderful  things ;  but  what  chemist,  at  a  wedding 
when  the  refreshment  gave  out,  could  change  a  pail  of  water  into  a  cask  of  wine  t 

(5)  What  human  voice  could  command  a  school  of  fish  ?  Yet  here  is  a  voice 
that  marshals  the  scaly  tribes,  until,  in  the  place  where  they  had  let  down  the 
net  and  pulled  it  up  with  no  fish  in  it,  they  let  it  down  again,  and  the  disciples 
lay  hold  and  begin  to  pull,  when,  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  fish,  the  net  brake. 
2.  Behold  His  victory  over  the  grave.  Here  comes  the  Conqueror  of  death. 
He  enters  that  realm,  and  says,  Daughter  of  Jairus,  sit  up ! "  and  she  sat  up. 
To  Lazarus,  "  Come  forth !  "  and  he  came  forth.  To  the  widow's  son  He  said, 
"  Get  up  from  that  bier !  "  and  he  goes  home  with  his  mother.  Then  Jesus  snatched 
up  the  keys  of  death,  and  hung  them  to  His  girdle,  and  cried,  until  all  the  grave- 
yards of  the  earth  heard  Him  :  "  0  death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues  !  0  grave,  I  will 
be  thy  destruction  !  "  3.  But  Christ's  victories  have  only  just  begun.  The 
world  is  His,  and  He  must  have  it.  (T.  De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  wonderful 
name  : — I.  Jesus  Cheist  is  the  most  wonderful  Being  this  world  ever 
saw.  1.  Because  of  the  number  and  character  of  the  prophecies  announcing 
His  advent  and  mission.  2.  Because  of  what  He  said  of  Himself.  He  distinctly 
declared  that  He  existed  before  He  was  born.  "  Before  Abraham  was  I  am." 
Now,  in  the  matter  of  natural  birth,  man  is  utterly  without  choice  or  control, 
nor  is  he  consulted  as  to  his  coming,  whether  it  shall  be  now  or  in  the  future,  this 
place  or  that.  But  Jesus  Christ  declared  that  He  had  perfect  control  in  all  these 
matters, — control  in  coming,  and  control  in  going, — "  No  man  taketh  away  My 
life.  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again."  He 
actually  said  He  was  God.  He  invited  all  to  come  to  Him  for  pardon  and  eternal 
life,  and  declared  that,  if  they  did  not  so  come,  they  should  all  die  in  their  sins. 
He  said  He  had  power  to  call  to  His  aid  "  twelve  legions  of  angels,"  who  would 

fladly  tender  Him  celestial  protection,  if  required.  3.  Because  of  what  He  did. 
lis  life  was  filled  with  deeds  of  sympathy  and  self-sacrificing  benevolence.  He 
assumed  and  exerted  perfect  control,  both  in  the  physical  and  moral  world. 
4.  Because  of  what  He  was.  "  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness  ;  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh."  Omnipotence  clothed  in  frailty.  II.  Jestjs  Christ  is  the  most 
wonderful  Being  in  heaven.  Not  that  He  is  an  intruder,  or  a  new-comer. 
He  was  at  home  in  heaven,  and  dwelt  amid  the  underived  glory  of  His  Godhead 
before  man  or  angel  was  created.  He  is  the  most  "  wonderful  "  Being  in  heaven 
because  of — 1.  His  history.  He  has  a  history  of  honour  and  glory  in  heaven, 
and  a  history  of  unspeakable  sorrow  and  suffering  on  earth.  2.  His  relationship. 
He  appears  in  heaven  in  the  unique  relationship  of  Brother  and  Redeemer  of  our 
race,  and  Son  of  God.  3.  His  work.  Through  the  glorified  human  lips  of  Jesus 
Christ  the  Divine  mandates  for  the  control  of  the  universe  are  now  uttered.  The 
feet  once  spiked  to  the  Cross  now  rest  upon  the  throne.  Through  the  Person 
and  work  of  this  wonderful  Being,  redeemed  humanity  is  elevated  to  the  very 
Person  and  throne  of  the  Deity.  (T.  Kelly.)  Christ  wonderful  in  the  magnetism 
of  His  -person  : — After  the  battle  of  Antietam,  when  a  general  rode  along  the  lines, 
although  the  soldiers  were  lying  down  exhausted,  they  rose  with  great  enthusiasm 
and  huzzaed.  As  Napoleon  returned  from  his  captivity,  his  first  step  on  the 
wharf  shook  all  the  kingdoms,  and  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men  joined 
his  standard.  It  took  three  thousand  troops  to  watch  him  in  his  exile.  So 
there  have  been  men  of  wonderful  magnetism  of  person.  But  hear  me  while 
I  tell  you  of  a  poor  young  man  who  came  up  from  Nazareth  to  produce  a  thrill 
such  as  has  never  been  excited  by  any  other.  (T.  De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  The 
tilth  of  the  "  Wonderful "  : — Christmas  marks  the  birthtime  of  the  matchless 
Christ.  In  what  respect  was  He  wonderful  ?  I.  Wonderful  in  character. 
II.  Wonderful  in  His  teaching.  III.  Wonderful  as  to  His  mission.  (B.  F. 
Grenoble.)  No  extravagance  in  Christ : — No  one  can  at  all  appreciate  the  wonder- 
fulness  of  Christ  who  does  not  consider  its  freedom  from  the  merely  marvellous. 
Has  not  the  element  of  wonder  in  human  history  always  had  as  its  drawback 
and  bane  the  tendency  to  extravagance  ?     It  cannot  keep  within  bounds.     Its 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  285 

disease  is  unnaturalness,  exaggeration,  grotesqueness.  It  piles  marvel  on  marvel, 
outraging  all  sense  of  proportion.  It  defies  every  feeling  of  the  ludicrous.  It 
delights  in  trampling  on  the  understanding,  and  finds  a  merit  and  satisfaction 
in  receiving  the  monstrous  and  contradictory.  Is  not  this  the  characteristic  of 
all  mythologies,  and  not  least  of  the  history  of  Buddha,  whom  some  havo  ventured 
to  mention  along  with  Christ  ?  The  wonderfulness  of  Christ  is  not  marvellous. 
It  is  not  something  to  astonish.  It  has  a  meaning  and  a  purpose  prior  to  that 
and  above  it.  His  is  not  the  marvellousness  of  the  aurora  borealis,  but  of  the 
eastern  aurora,  the  dawn.  It  is  not  the  marvellousness  of  an  architectural  monu- 
ment meant  to  exhibit  the  resources  of  art  and  wealth,  but  the  architecture  of  a 
temple  for  God  and  man  to  dwell  in.  His  is  not  the  marvellousness  of  a  gigantic 
tree,  but  of  the  tree  of  life  producing  medicine  and  food  ;  not  the  splendour  of 
a  vast  orb  of  fire,  but  of  the  sun  that  rays  out  life  to  the  worlds.  There  is  no  part 
of  Christ's  wonderfulness  which  does  not  serve  a  great  end  and  occupy  a  distinct 
and  necessary  place.  (J.  Leckie,  D.D.)  His  name — Wonderful  : — I.  Christ 
shall  be  called  Wonderful  for  what  He  was  in  the  past.  1.  Consider  His 
eternal  existence,  "  begotten  of  His  Father  from  before  all  worlds,"  being  of  the 
same  substance  with  His  Father ;  begotten,  not  made,  co-equal,  co-eternal,  in 
every  attribute,  "  very  God  of  very  God."  2.  Consider,  again,  the  incarnation 
of  Christ,  and  you  will  rightly  say  that  His  name  deserveth  to  be  called  Wonder- 
ful. 3.  Trace  the  Saviour's  course,  and  all  the  way  He  is  wonderful.  4.  Christ 
is  surpassingly  wonderful.  5.  He  is  not  a  nine  days'  wonder.  He  is  and  ever  shall 
be  wonderful.  He  is  altogether  wonderful.  6.  He  is  universally  wondered  at. 
II.  He  is  Wonderful  for  what  He  is  in  the  present.  III.  His  name  shall  be  called 
Wonderful  in  the  future.  As  the  Judge.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Counsellor. — 
Christ  the  Counsellor : — This  syllable  of  His  name  refers  to  His  singular  capacity  for 
management  of  matters.  Other  princes  must  have  their  counsellors,  by  whose 
advice  they  may  act :  but  He  Himself  is,  and  shows  Himself  to  be,  Counsellor, 
an  oracle  of  government,  a  Prince  in  whose  own  breast  is  the  oracle  for  right 
management  of  all  things  relating  to  His  dominion.  I.  In  what  respects  is 
Christ  the  Counsellor  ?  1.  He  is  of  the  secret  council  of  heaven  (Zech.  vi.  13). 
He  is  a  member  of  the  cabinet-council  of  heaven,  to  which  the  most  favourite 
angel  ia  not  admitted.  There  is  nothing  transacted  there,  nor  has  been  from 
eternity,  but  what  He  is  acquainted  with  (John  v.  20).  With  His  Father  and 
the  Spirit  He  is  of  the  council.  2.  He  is  the  oracle  of  counsel  for  the  earth  (John 
i.  18  ;  Matt.  xi.  27).  (1)  He  is  the  Counsellor  of  the  world  of  men.  (a)  In  respect 
of  office.  (6)  Of  capacity  (Col.  ii.  3).  (2)  He  is  the  Counsellor  of  the  visible 
Church,  (a)  He  consults  her  interest,  for  her  protection  and  preservation 
in  the  world,  (b)  He  is  still  actively  counselling  her  by  His  Word.  (3)  He  is 
the  Counsellor  of  the  invisible  Church,  and  of  every  particular  believer  in  it. 
II.  What  is  the  import  of  this  part  of  Christ's  name  ?  1.  He  is  of  singular 
wisdom  for  the  conduct  and  management  of  affairs  (Isa.  xi.  2,  3).  The  fulness 
of  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  is  lodged  in  Him.  He  is  wisdom  itself,  the  eternal  wisdom 
of  the  Father  (Prov.  viii.).  And  His  children  are  wisdom's  children  (Matt.  xi.  19). 
2.  He  is  a  Prince  of  great  and  noble  designs  and  projects,  requiring  counsel  and 
wisdom  (1  Tim.  ii.  5,  6  ;  Psa.  xlix.  7,  8  ;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19 ;  John  xvii.  24).,.  3.  He 
can  manage  all  by  Himself  and  needs  no  counsel  of  men.  The  name  of  the  wisest 
on  earth  may  be  Consulter  (Prov.  xi.  14).  But  He  is  so  far  a  Counsellor  that  He 
is  a  consulter  of  none  (Rom.  xi.  34).  (1)  His  understanding  is  infinite.  (2)  His 
counsels  were  all  concerted  before  we  had  a  being.  (3)  The  execution  of  them 
was  begun  entirely  without  us.  (4)  How  often  have  we  seen  that  our  counsels, 
had  they  been  mixed  with  those  of  the  great  Counsellor,  would  have  marred  all  ? 
4.  His  manner  of  conduct  and  method  of  management  are  deep  and  uncommon 
(Matt.  xiv.  25,  &c).  5.  He  does  nothing  without  a  becoming  reason.  6.  He  manages 
all  with  a  depth  of  wisdom.  7.  He  is  the  best  Counsellor — there  is  none  like  Him. 
TTT,  Improvement.  1.  Take  Him  for  your  Counsellor,  renouncing  all  other. 
(1)  Renounce  your  own  wisdom.  (2)  Renounce  the  counsel  of  the  world. 
(3)  Take  Christ  for  your  Counsellor,  instead  of  all  other  (Isa.  lv.  4).  2.  Follow 
the  counsel  that  He  is  giving  you.  He  is  counselling  you  in  the  Gospel — (1)  To 
believe  in  Himself.  (2)  To  be  holy.  3.  Make  use  of  Christ  as  a  Counsellor, 
by  consulting  Him  daily.  (T.  Boston.)  Christ  the  best  Counsellor: — L  Con- 
firm the  truth  of  this  assertion.  1.  He  is  of  the  Father's  choice  and 
Domination  for  a  Counsellor  to  us — "  made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom."  2.  He  ia 
the  saints'  choice  in  all  ages  for  a  Counsellor.     3.  He  never  misses  the  point  in 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

His  counselling.  II.  Wherein  doth  Christ  counsel  sinners  T  1.  In  their 
greatest  concerns,  their  concerns  for  eternity.  2.  In  their  lesser  concerns,  the 
tbings  of  time.  III.  How  doth  Christ  give  His  counsel  ?  1.  He  proposes 
His  counsel  in  and  by  His  Word.  2.  He  clears  and  opens  and  confirms  it  by  His 
providence.  3.  He  makes  it  effectual  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  (Ibid.)  Christ 
the  Counsellor  : — Christ  is  our  Counsellor  upon  a  threefold  account — 1.  As  He 
hath  rectified  our  notions  of  the  Deity  and  turned  us  from  the  worship  of  dumb 
idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God.  2.  As  He  hath  taught  us  the  truths 
of  the  moral  law,  and  the  real  difference  between  good  and  evil.  3.  As  He 
hath  instructed  us  in  the  means  whereby  we  may  obtain  everlasting  salvation. 
(W.  Reading,  M.A.)  -Messiah  the  Counsellor  : — The  word  is  employed  in  the 
Bible  frequently  of  those  who  assisted  in  the  councils  of  kings.  Jonathan,  the  uncle 
of  David,  was  called  "  a  wise  counsellor  "  to  his  prince ;  Ahithophel,  the  wisest 
man  of  his  day,  was  termed  "  the  king's  counsellor,"  the  king's  adviser.  And 
thus  it  is  constantly  employed  of  a  person  giving  sound  and  wise  advice.  The 
name,  then,  evidently  implies  these  three  things  respecting  Him — I.  That  Hh 
should  possess  adequate  wisdom.  1.  When  He  came  into  the  world  He 
descended  from  the  bosom  of  God.  2.  As  He  was  acquainted  with  God,  He  was 
acquainted  with  man.  He  "  searches  the  reins  and  the  hearts."  He  therefore 
has  wisdom  enough  to  guide  His  people  through  time  to  eternity,  and  to  be 
their  most  effectual  and  safest  Counsellor.  II.  That  He  should  communicatb 
this  wisdom  by  positivb  instruotion.  And  this  includes  the  fulfilment  of 
an  earlier  promise,  made  by  Moses  to  the  Church  of  God,  "  The  Lord  thy  God 
will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  Prophet  from  the  midst  of  thee,  like  unto  me."  Jesua 
came,  then,  to  be  this  Prophet,  to  speak  with  authority  from  God,  and  thus  to 
communicate  that  instruction  to  mankind,  and  especially  to  believers,  which 
was  needful  for  their  welfare.  He  came,  according  to  the  Divine  appointment, 
to  reveal  the  character  of  God,  which  He  knew ;  to  communicate  to  mankind 
that  amount  of  knowledge  respecting  God  which  they  were  capable  of  receiving. 
He  could  therefore  say  repeatedly,  when  He  was  upon  earth,  that  He  had  mani- 
fested the  name  of  God  (that  is,  His  character)  to  His  disciples,  who  received 
His  instruction.  III.  That  He  should  urge  and  persuade  men  to  receive 
that  instruction.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  still  communicates  His  Spirit  to  men, 
in  order  to  open  their  understandings  and  their  hearts ;  just  as  He  did  when  at 
the  outpouring  of  His  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  three  thousand  were  subdued 
at  once  by  the  Gospel,  and  disregarding  all  the  differences  in  their  circumstances, 
and  putting  away  from  them  all  considerations  of  worldly  ease  or  comfort  altogether, 
at  once  embraced  the  Gospel  of  Christ, — just  as  much  does  Jesus  Christ  now  com- 
municate His  Spirit,  to  subdue  men  to  Himself,  and  is  thus  their  effectual  Counsellor. 
He  has  given  instruction  by  His  Word,  but  He  makes  that  instruction  effectual 
by  His  Spirit.  {B.  W.  Noel,  31. A.)  His  name — the  Counsellor  : — It  was  by 
a  counsellor  that  this  world  was  ruined.  Did  not  Satan  mask  himself  in  the 
serpent,  and  counsel  the  woman,  with  exceeding  craftiness,  that  she  should  take 
unto  herself  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  in  the  hope 
that  thereby  she  should  be  as  God  ?  It  was  meet  that  the  world  should  have  a 
Counsellor  to  restore  it,  if  it  had  a  counsellor  to  destroy  it.  But  mark  the  diffi- 
culties that  surrounded  such  a  Counsellor.  'Tis  easy  to  counsel  mischief ;  but 
how  hard  to  counsel  wisely  !  I.  Christ  may  well  be  called  Counsellor,  for  He  ia 
a  Counsellor  with  God.  It  hath  been  revealed  to  us  that  before  the  world 
was,  when  as  yet  God  had  not  made  the  stars,  the  Almighty  did  hold  a  solemn 
conclave  with  Himself ;  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  held  a  mystic  council  with  each 
other,  as  to  what  they  were  about  to  do.  II.  Christ  is  a  Counsellor  in  the  sense 
whioh  the  LXX.  translation  appends  to  this  term.  He  is  said  to  be  the  Angel  op 
the  great  council.  Do  you  and  I  want  to  know  what  was  said  and  done  in  the 
great  council  of  eternity  T  There  is  only  one  glass  through  which  we  can  look 
back  to  the  dim  darkness  of  the  shrouded  past  and  read  the  counsels  of  God,  and 
that  glass  is  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ.  You  may  find  out  whether  you  are 
among  His  chosen  ones.  Christ  is  the  Angel  of  the  covenant,  and  you  can  find 
it  out  by  looking  to  Him.  III.  Christ  is  a  Counsellor  to  us.  A  man  without) 
a  counsellor,  I  think,  must  of  necessity  go  wrong.  Woe  unto  the  man  that  hath 
got  a  bad  counsellor.  1.  Christ  is  a  necessary  Counsellor.  2.  Christ's  counsel 
is  faithful  counsel.  How  often  do  our  friends  counsel  us  craftily !  3.  Christ's 
counsel  is  hearty  counsel.  4.  Christ  has  special  counsels  for  each  of  us.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        The   mighty   God.  —  Christ     the     mighty    God:  —  L  Christ    is 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  287 

*hb  true  'God.  1.  The  Scripture  expressly  calls  Him  so  (John  i.  1  ;  Acts 
xx.  28 ;  Rom.  ix.  6 ;  1  John  v.  20).  2.  The  attributes  of  God,  distinguishing 
Him  from  all  created  beings,  are  ascribed  to  Him.  3.  The  works  peculiar  to 
God  alone  are  done  by  Him  and  ascribed  to  Him.  4.  Divine  worship,  which 
must  be  given  to  God  alone,  is  due  to  Him.  6.  He  is  equal  with  the  Father. 
II.  Thb  man  Chbist  is  the  mighty  One.  1.  He  does  and  has  done  works 
that  no  other  could  do.  2.  He  has  all  at  His  command  in  heaven  and  earth, 
whether  created  persons  or  things.  3.  Being  God  as  well  as  man  His  power  is 
infinite.  III.  Application.  1.  This  serves  to  refute  the  heresy  of  those  who 
impugn  the  supreme  Godhead  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  It  speaks  terror  to 
all  the  enemies  of  Christ.  3.  It  speaks  comfort  to  the  Church  and  every  believer 
in  their  low  estate.  4.  It  serves  to  exhort  all  to  take  Him  for  their  Prince. 
(T.  Boston.)  His  name — the  mighty  God  : — Other  translations  of  this  Divine  title 
have  been  proposed  by  several  very  eminent  and  able  scholars.  Not  that  they 
have  any  of  them  been  prepared  to  deny  that  this  translation  is  after  all  most 
accurate ;  but  rather  that  whilst  there  are  various  words  in  the  original,  which 
we  render  by  the  common  appellation  of  "  God,"  it  might  be  possible  so  to  inter- 
pret this  as  to  show  more  exactly  its  definite  meaning.  One  writer,  for  example, 
thinks  the  term  might  be  translated  "  The  Irradiator," — He  who  gives  light  to 
men.  Some  think  it  bears  the  meaning  of  "  The  Illustrious," — the  bright  and 
the  shining  One.  Still  there  are  very  few,  if  any,  who  are  prepared  to  dispute 
the  fact  that  our  translation  is  the  most  faithful  that  could  possibly  be  given — 
"  the  mighty  God."  I.  The  folly  of  those  who  profess  to  be  the  disciples 
of  Christ,  yet  do  not,  and  will  not,  call  Him  God.  It  is  His  being  verily 
God,  that  frees  Him  from  the  charge  of  blasphemy.  It  is  the  fact  that  He  is 
God,  and  that  His  Godhead  is  not  to  be  denied,  that  makes  His  death  an  unrighteous 
deicide  at  the  hand  of  apostate  man,  and  renders  it,  as  before  God,  an  acceptable 
sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  people.  II.  How  do  we  call  Christ,  "  the  mighty 
God  "  ?  It  is  our  delight  and  our  privilege  to  attribute  to  Him  the  attributes 
of  Deity.  1.  In  hours  of  devout  contemplation  how  often  do  we  look  up  to  Him 
as  being  the  eternal  Son.  In  doing  so  we  have  virtually  called  Him  the  mighty 
God  ;  because  none  but  God  could  have  been  from  everlasting  to  everlasting. 
2.  How  frequently  do  we  repeat  over  to  ourselves  that  precious  verse,  "  Jesus 
Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Do  you  not  see  that  you 
have  in  fact  called  Him  God,  because  none  but  God  is  immutable  ?  3.  Is  it 
not  also  our  joy  to  believe  that  wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in 
Christ's  name,  there  is  He  in  the  midst  of  them  ?  Have  we  not  ascribed  to  Christ 
omnipresence,  and  who  can  be  omnipresent  but  God  ?  How  is  it  possible  for  us 
to  dream  of  Him  as  being  in  the  bosom  of  His  Father,  with  the  angels,  and  in 
the  hearts  of  the  contrite  all  at  the  same  time,  if  He  be  not  God  ?  4.  We  call 
Him  "the  mighty  God"  in  many  of  His  offices.  (1)  Mediator  between  God 
and  man.  There  is  no  mediatorship  unless  the  hand  is  put  on  both,  and  who 
could  put  his  hand  on  God  but  God  I  (2)  Saviour.  I  could  not  put  my  trust 
in  any  being  that  was  merely  created.  III.  How  Christ  has  proved  Himself 
To  us  to  bb  "  thb  mighty  God."  This  Child  born,  this  Son  given,  came  into 
the  world  to  enter  the  lists  against  sin.  For  thirty  years  and  upwards  He  had 
to  struggle  against  temptations  more  numerous  and  terrible  than  man  had  ever 
known  before.  And  yet,  without  sin  or  taint  of  sin,  more  than  conqueror  He 
etood.  We  know  also  that  Christ  proved  Himself  to  be  "  the  mighty  God  " 
from  the  faot  that  at  last  all  the  sins  of  all  His  people  were  gathered  upon  His 
shoulders,  and  "  He  bare  them  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  But  He  did  more 
than  this — when  He  led  captivity  captive,  and  crushed  death  and  ground  his 
iron  limbs  to  powder,  He  proved  Himself  then  the  mighty  God.  Oh,  my  soul, 
thou  canst  say  that  He  has  proved  Himself  in  thy  heart  to  be  a  mighty  God. 
I  beg  and  beseech  of  you  all,  come  and  put  your  trust  in  Jesus  Christ ;  He  is  the 
mighty  God.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Jesus  the  mighty  God: — I.  He  of  whom 

THE   PROPHET  SPEAKS  IS  THE  MIGHTY  GOD.      II.    In  WHAT  SENSE  THE  CHILD  BORN    I 

may  bb  called  "  thb  mighty  God."  Not  that  the  humanity  is  deified,  or  the 
Deity  humanised.  Humanity  is  still  humanity,  Deity  is  still  Deity.  But  so 
united  in  one  person  that  that  which  is  peculiar  to  one  nature  is  often  ascribed 
to  the  other  (Acts  xx.  28  ;  John  iii.  13).  III.  The  greatness  of  His  acts  in 
regard  to  that  Church  to  whom  He  is  given.  1.  He  bare  her  sins.  And 
had  He  not  been  the  mighty  God,  as  well  as  man,  He  never  could.  2.  Besides 
this,  He  wrought  out  a  perfect  righteousness  for  His  Church.     He  conquered  all 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

her  enemies,  sin,  Satan,  and  the  world,  those  three  strong  ones.  3.  He  converti 
the  hardest  heart,  working  mightily  by  His  own  gracious  Almighty  Spirit.  4.  He 
supports  the  feeblest  grace,  carries  on  the  work  which  He  has  begun.  What 
mighty  effects  He  accomplishes  by  the  simplest  means  !  He  bears  up  the  most 
timid  and  desponding  spirit,  binds  up  with  His  own  hand,  by  His  own  Spirit, 
with  His  own  blood.  5.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  that  mighty  God,  in  all  His 
mighty  doings,  when  He  shall  raise  the  dead,  judge  the  world,  destroy  sin,  and 
in  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  give  His  saints  the  eternal  possession  of 
Himself,  and  of  God  in  Himself  ?  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Jesus  the  mighty 
God: — The  surrounding  nations,  Egypt  and  Assyria,  gave  great  names  to  their 
gods.  Look  upon  the  inscriptions  on  the  pillars  in  the  time  of  Sargon.  One 
Assyrian  king  was  called  "  The  great  king,  the  king  unrivalled  ;  the  protector 
of  the  just ;  the  noble  warrior."  If  Isaiah  wrote  in  a  time  of  great  names  he, 
by  this  conception  of  an  appellation,  threw  all  other  cognomens  into  contempt. 
"  The  mighty  God."  The  word  is  not  Elohim,  a  word  under  which  a  species  of 
sub-divinity  could  be  classified  :  "  Said  I  not  unto  you,  Ye  are  gods  ?  That 
word  is  El,  a  word  which  is  never  applied  but  to  Jehovah,  and  which  is  never 
used  but  as  connoting  the  innermost  essence  of  ineffable  Deity.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Th«  everlasting-  Father.  —  The  everlasting  Father :  —  The  tender,  faithful,  and 
wise  trainer,  guardian,  and  provider  of  His  own  in  eternity  (chap.  xxii.  21). 
(F.  Dditzsch.)  The  everlasting  Father  : — Abiding  in  protection,  as  the  Father 
of  His  people.  {B.  Blake,  B.D.)  Christ  the  everlasting  Father  : — I.  Ik  what 
respects  Christ  is  thb  everlasting  Father.  II.  What  a  Father  He  is. 
III.  Improve  the  subject.  (T.  Boston.)  Christians  bear  Christ's  image  : — 
1.  Conformity  to  Christ  in  His  holiness.  2.  Conformity  to  Christ  in  His  sufferings. 
(Ibid.)  Jesus  the  everlasting  Father: — I.  Christ  is  called  Father.  1.  Not 
in  respect  to  the  eternal  Three.  He  is  the  Son  in  this  point  of  view.  2.  But  as 
one  with  Him,  and  the  Eternal  Spirit,  in  the  unity  of  the  same  Godhead.  3.  He 
is  the  Father  of  His  people.  "  He  shall  see  His  seed  "  (Isa.  liii.  10).  4.  He  is 
their  spiritual  life  (Gal.  ii.  20).  II.  He  is  called  the  everlasting  Father. 
He  ever  lives.  He  is  Life.  He  ever  loves.  His  blessings  are  everlasting. 
{J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  everlasting  Father  : — To  be  the  "  Father  of  eternity  " 
is  to  have  eternity,  and  to  rule  in  eternity — to  be  the  Lord  of  eternity.  That  is 
the  meaning  of  it ;  and  so  Christ  Jesus,  who  hath  the  government  upon  His 
shoulders,  hath  it  on  His  shoulders  for  ever  and  for  ever.  But  the  eternity  spoken 
of  here  is  not  the  eternity  that  is  bygone ;  it  is  the  ongoing  and  unending  duration 
that  lies  before  us,  and  Christ  Jesus  is  Lord  and  Ruler  of  all.  No  doubt  He  who 
can  hold  the  future  eternity  in  His  hand,  and  who  can  rule  all  its  affairs,  must 
have  been  Himself  the  Unbeginning  and  Eternal  One  ;  and  the  Scriptures  leave 
no  doubt  about  that  being  the  attribute  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  that 
august  tribute  of  being  "  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  "  is  not  what  is  strictly 
before  us  here.  It  is  the  duration  from  the  time  that  Christ  became  human 
onwards.  I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Father  of  the  eternity  that  lies  before  and  goes 
on,  because  He  Himself  lives  for  ever.  He  is  Possessor  ;  He  has  it  (Psa.  cii. 
25-27,  and  Heb.  i.  10-12).  The  fact  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  humanity  is 
to  live  for  ever  is  a  stupendous  expectation  and  belief.  Sometimes  it  has  seemed 
to  me  as  if  it  were  more  wonderful  than  the  mere  incarnation.  That  this  is  an 
important  thought  appears  from  two  considerations.  1.  It  is  a  part  of  the  Divine 
promise  of  the  Father  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Isa.  liii.  10).  2.  It  is  a  thing  for 
which  Christ  Himself  prayed  as  part  of  His  Father's  promise  (Psa.  xxi.  4).  And 
so  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thus  in  human  nature  lives  for  ever  and  ever.  But 
that  implies  that  His  work  was  finished  to  the  Father's  satisfaction  ;  to  live  for 
ever  was  a  proof  that  God  the  Father  regarded  Christ's  work  as  finished — this 
same  title,  Father  of  eternity,"  hath  in  germ  within  it  the  great  facts  of 
Christ's  resurrection  and  ascension  and  session  in  glory.  And  so  when  John, 
in  Apocalyptic  vision,  beheld  Him  as  the  Son  of  man,  he  heard  Him  thus  speak : 
"  Fear  not ;  I  am  the  first  and  the  last,  and  the  Living  one ;  and  I  was  dead ; 
and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore,  amen  ;  and  have  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of 
death."  Application — 1.  To  God's  people.  What  a  Saviour  they  have  !  They 
need  never  fear  that  they  will  be  without  His  care.  They  could  not  find  a  world 
in  all  the  universe  where  He  is  not  with  them,  and  they  cannot  live  on  to  any  age 
when  He  shall  cease  to  be  their  light  and  King.  2.  The  same  thing  brings  comfort 
to  every  sinner ;  for  is  it  not  written,  "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them 
that  come  unto  God  by  Him,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them  "  t 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  289 

Mark,  it  does  not  say  "  seeing  He  died  " — if  that  is  all  that  could  have  been  said, 
it  would  not  have  ever  availed  for  the  comfort  and  salvation  of  sinners — but  seeing 
that,  having  died,  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  II.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  Originator  of  this  age  that  is  spoken  of.  He  made  this 
*'  forever,"  and  gave  it  its  grand  characteristic ;  and  all  Gospel  privilege  that 
belongs  to  time,  and  all  celestial  enjoyment  that  belongs  to  eternity,  we  owe 
to  Him.  III.  Jesus  Christ  is  Controller  in  this  eternal  age ;  the  administration 
of  its  whole  affairs  is  in  His  hands.  The  Author  of  our  faith  is  the  Ruler  of  its 
progress,  and  that  not  on  earth  alone,  but  in  heaven.  Can  you  doubt  it,  that 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  risen  from  the  dead,  went  back  to  the  glory  that  He 
had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  began,  went  back  in  human  nature,  and 
Appeared  among  the  saints  in  heaven — can  you  doubt  that  from  that  hour  heaven 
was  another  thing  even  to  the  glorified,  because  the  Lord  that  brought  them  there 
by  His  blood  was  amongst  them  ?  And  so,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  we 
read  that  we  are  come  to  the  "  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,"  which  means  to 
the  Old  Testament  Church,  perfected  now  in  privilege ;  for  at  the  13th  verse  of  the 
eleventh  chapter  it  is  expressly  said,  "  These  all  died  in  faith,  not  having  received 
the  promises,  but  having  seen  them  afar  off."  God  willed  that  He  should  "  pro- 
vide some  better  thing  for  us,  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect," 
— that  heaven  itself  should  not,  in  privilege  and  glory,  even  to  the  saints  that 
had  gone  home,  be  perfect  until  Christ  Himself  had  introduced  a  new  age,  and 

Sone  Himself  to  heaven.  (J.  Edmond,  D.D.)  Hia  name — the  everlasting 
'other  : — How  complex  is  the  Person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  Almost  in  the 
same  breath  the  prophet  calls  Him  a  "Child,"  and  a  "Counsellor,"  a  "Son," 
and  the  "  everlasting  Father."  This  is  no  contradiction,  and  to  us  scarcely  a 
paradox,  but  it  is  a  mighty  marvel.  How  forcibly  this  should  remind  us  of  the 
necessity  of  carefully  studying  and  rightly  understanding  the  Person  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ !  We  must  not  suppose  that  we  shall  understand  Him  at  a  glance. 
A  look  will  save  the  soul,  but  patient  meditation  alone  can  fill  the  mind  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  Saviour.  The  light  of  the  text  divides  itself  into  three  rays — 
Jesus  is  "  everlasting  "  ;  He  is  a  Father  "  ;  He  is  the  "  everlasting  Father." 
I.  Jesus  Christ  is  Everlasting.  Of  Him  we  may  sing,  "  Thy  throne,  0  God, 
is  for  ever  and  ever."  A  theme  for  great  rejoicing  on  our  part.  1.  Jesus  always 
was.  2.  So  also  He  is  for  evermore  the  same.  Jesus  is  not  dead  ;  He  ever  liveth 
to  make  intercession  for  us.  3.  Jesus,  our  Lord,  ever  shall  be.  The  connection 
of  the  word  "  Father  "  with  the  word  "  everlasting  "  allows  us  very  fairly  to 
remark  that  our  Lord  is  as  everlasting  as  the  Father,  since  He  Himself  is  called 
"  the  everlasting  Father  "  ;  for  whatever  antiquity  paternity  may  imply  is  her© 
ascribed  to  Christ.  It  is  the  manner  of  the  Easterns  to  call  a  man  the  father  of 
a  quality  for  which  he  is  remarkable.  To  this  day,  among  the  Arabs,  a  wise  man 
is  called  "  the  father  of  wisdom  "  ;  a  very  foolish  man  "  the  father  of  folly." 
The  predominant  quality  in  the  man  is  ascribed  to  him  as  though  it  were  his 
child,  and  he  the  father  of  it.  Now,  the  Messiah  is  here  called  in  the  Hebrew 
"  the  Father  of  eternity,"  by  which  is  meant  that  He  is  pre-eminently  the  possessor 
of  eternity  as  an  attribute.  II.  We  come  to  the  difficult  part  of  the  subject, 
namely,  Christ  being  called  Father.  In  what  sense  is  Jesus  a  Father  ?  Answer 
1.  He  is  federally  a  Father,  representing  those  who  are  in  Him,  as  the  head  of 
a  tribe  represents  his  descendants.  The  grand  question  for  us  is  this,  Are  we  still 
under  the  old  covenant  of  works  ?  If  so,  we  have  Adam  to  our  father,  and  under 
that  Adam  we  died.  But  are  we  under  the  covenant  of  grace  ?  If  so,  we  have 
Christ  to  our  Father,  and  in  Christ  shall  we  be  made  alive.  In  this  sense,  then, 
Christ  is  called  Father ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  covenant  of  grace  is  older  than 
the  covenant  of  works,  Christ  is,  while  Adam  is  not,  "  the  everlasting  Father  "  ; 
and  inasmuch  as  the  covenant  of  works  as  far  as  we  are  concerned  passes  away, 
being  fulfilled  in  Him,  and  the  covenant  of  grace  never  passes  but  abideth  for 
ever,  Christ,  as  the  Head  of  the  new  covenant,  the  federal  representative  of  the 
great  economy  of  grace,  is  "  the  everlasting  Father."  2.  Christ  is  a  Father  in 
the  sense  of  a  Founder.  The  Hebrews  are  in  the  habit  of  calling  a  man  a  father 
of  a  thing  which  he  invents.  For  instance,  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  Genesis 
Jubal  is  called  the  father  of  such  as  handle  the  harp  and  organ ;  Jabal  was  the 
lather  of  such  as  dwell  in  tents,  and  have  cattle ;  not  that  these  were  literally 
the  fathers  of  such  persons,  but  the  inventors  of  their  occupations.  The  Lord 
jesus  Christ  is,  in  this  sense,  the  Father  of  a  wonderful  system — a  great  doctrinal 
system  ;  a  great  practical  system ;  a  system  of  salvation.     3.  Now  there  is  a 

19 


290  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  dl 

third  meaning.  The  prophet  may  not  bo  have  understood  it,  but  we  bo  receive 
it,  that  Jesus  is  a  Father  in  the  great  sense  of  a  Life-giver.  That  is  the  main 
sense  of  "  father  "  to  the  oommon  mind.  Everything  in  us  calls  Christ  "  Father.** 
He  is  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith.  If  we  love  Him,  it  is  because  He 
first  loved  us.  If  we  patiently  endure,  it  is  by  considering  "  Him  who  endured 
such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself.'  He  it  is  who  waters  and  sustains 
all  our  graces.  We  may  say  of  Him,  "All  my  fresh  springs  are  in  Thee."  The 
Spirit  brings  us  the  water  from  this  well  of  Bethlehem,  but  Jesus  is  the  well  itself. 
4.  The  term  implies  that  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  in  the  future,  the  patriarch  of 
an  age.  So  Pope  in  his  famous  poem  of  the  Messiah  understands  it,  and  calls 
Him,  "  the  promised  Father  of  the  future  age."  5.  Christ  may  be  called  a 
Father  in  the  loving  and  tender  sense  of  a  father's  office.  God  is  called  the 
Father  of  the  fatherless,  and  Job  says  of  himself,  that  he  became  a  father  to  the 
poor.  Now,  albeit  that  the  Spirit  of  adoption  teaches  us  to  call  God  our  Father, 
yet  it  is  not  straining  truth  to  say  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  exercises  to  all  His 
people  a  Father's  part.  According  to  the  old  Jewish  custom  the  elder  brother 
was  the  father  of  the  family  in  the  absence  of  the  father ;  the  firstborn 
took  precedence  of  all,  and  took  upon  him  the  father's  position  ;  so  the  Lord 
Jesus,  the  firstborn  among  many  brethren,  exercises  to  us  a  father's  office.  Is 
it  not  so  ?  Has  He  not  succoured  us  in  all  time  of  our  need  as  a  father  succours 
his  child  ?  Has  He  not  supplied  us  with  more  than  heavenly  bread  as  a  father 
gives  bread  unto  his  children  ?  Does  He  not  daily  protect  us,  nay,  did  He  not  yield 
up  His  life  that  we  His  little  ones  might  be  preserved  ?  Is  He  not  the  head  in 
the  household  to  us  on  earth,  abiding  with  us,  and  has  He  not  said,  "  I  will  not 
leave  you  orphans  ;  I  will  come  unto  you  "  ?  As  if  His  coming  was  the  coming 
of  a  Father.  If  He  be  a  Father,  will  we  not  give  Him  honour  ?  If  He  be  the 
head  of  the  household,  will  we  not  give  Him  obedience  ?  III.  We  weigh  the 
words,  "  everlasting  Father."  Christ  is  called  "  the  everlasting  Father " 
because  He  does  not  Himself,  as  a  Father,  die  or  vacate  His  office.  He  is  still 
the  federal  Head  and  Father  of  His  people ;  still  the  Founder  of  Gospel  truth 
and  of  the  Christian  system ;  not  allowing  popes  to  be  His  vicars  and  to  take 
His  place.  He  is  still  the  true  Life-giver,  from  whose  wounds  and  by  whose 
death  we  are  quickened ;  He  reigns  even  now  as  the  patriarchal  King ;  He  is 
■till  the  loving  family  Head ;  and  so,  in  every  sense,  He  lives  as  a  Father.  But 
here  is  a  sweet  thought.  He  neither  Himself  dies,  nor  becomes  childless.  He 
does  not  lose  His  children.  He  is  the  Author  of  an  eternal  system.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  Prince  of  Peace.  —  The  Prince  of  Peace: — How  peaceful 
was  the  scene  when  the  first  Sabbath  shone  upon  this  world !  How  reversed 
was  the  scene  of  man's  Sabbatism  when  sin  entered  to  revolutionise  it !  It  is 
•  work  of  magnitude  to  which  the  Redeemer  stands  appointed  when  He  is  pre- 
sented in  the  character  of  a  paoificator  to  bring  this  strife  to  a  happy  conclusion 
lor  man.  I.  What  abb  the  qualifications  of  Christ  fob  acting  as  the 
Prince  of  Peace?  1.  His  original  personal  excellence  as  the  Only-begotten 
of  the  Father.  2.  His  Father's  ordination  of  Him  to  the  office.  3.  The  merit- 
oriousness  of  His  work  when  substituted  in  the  room  of  sinners.  4.  The  station 
to  which  He  has  been  exalted  and  the  executive  power  which  has  been  lodged 
in  His  hand.  6.  The  fervency  with  which  His  heart  is  dedicated  to  the  attain- 
ment of  His  object.  Assemble,  then,  together  these  various  items  of  qualification, 
and  howsoever  dreadful  be  the  war  in  which  man  is  naturally  so  unequally  engaged, 
here  we  have  a  Prince  all-sufficient  to  reduce  it  to  peace  in  behalf  of  those  who 
may  accept  His  aid.     That  aid  He  offers  to  all.     II.  The  principal  articles 

OF  THAT  PEACE  OF  WHICH  CHRIST  IS,  OR  SHALL  YET  BE,  THE  MINISTERING  PRINCE 

to  all  that  believb  on  Him.  1.  The  fundamental  article  of  this  great  pacifica- 
tion is  that  He  hath  reconciled  God  to  them.  The  principal  idea  conveyed  in  the 
text  we  maintain  to  be  that  God  has  in  Christ  devised  a  scheme  whereby  He  may 
consistently  leave  off  His  anger,  and  not  impute  to  mankind  their  trespasses.  2.  In 
Christ  we  cease  to  war  against  ourselves.  The  sinner's  follies,  his  passions,  his 
evil  conscience,  destroy  him.  By  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  which  He  has  secured 
for  His  people,  He  restrains,  subdues,  and  controls  their  passions  and  appetites, 
through  the  lawlessness  of  which  men  so  frequently  bring  ruin  on  their  persons, 
their  characters,  and  their  fortunes :  and  altogether,  so  does  He  incline  them  to 
their  duty  that  their  conscience  ceases  to  torment  them  with  its  upbraidings  and 
shall  even  invigorate  and  gladden  them  with  the  smiles  of  its  complacency. 
3.  Our  Prince  hath  reconciled  to  us  the  angels.     When  the  human  race  rebelled. 


chap,  ix]  ISAIAH.  291 

zealous  as  they  are  for  God,  they  participated  in  the  wrath  of  their  King,  disowned 
man  as  their  brother,  and  became  the  willing  executors  of  His  wrath.  But  when 
God  becomes  the  Friend  of  the  believer,  the  angels  hasten  to  salute  him  as  a 
recovered  fellow-subject  and  brother,  and  resume  their  emulousness  of  the  honour 
to  be  made  the  ministering  spirits  of  his  salvation.  4.  By  the  Prince  of  Peace 
reconciliation  is  effected  between  Jew  and  Gentile.  5.  The  fifth  article  of  pacifica- 
tion is  the  general  reconcilement  of  man  to  man,  the  destruction  of  selfishness, 
and  the  diffusion  of  benevolence.  (W.  Anderson,  LL.D.)  Christ  the  Prince 
of  Peace  .-—I.  Peaceful  of  disposition.  1.  He  bears  long  with  His  enemies. 
2.  He  bears  much  at  the  hands  of  His  friends.  3.  He  is  easy  of  access  for  poor 
sinners.  4.  He  is  ready  to  forgive.  5.  He  is  very  familiar  with  His  true  subjects. 
6.  The  afflicting  of  His  people  is,  as  it  were,  against  the  grain  with  Him  (Lam.  iii. 
33 ;  1  Pet.  i.  6  ;  Heb.  xii.  10 ;  Isa.  lxiii.  9).  7.  He  bore  His  own  sufferings  with 
the  utmost  peaceableness,  meekness,  and  patience.  II.  Peaceful  in  action. 
Consider — 1.  What  peace  is  effected  by  this  Prince  of  Peace  ?  (1)  Peace  with 
God.      (2)   Peace  among  men.      (3)   Peace   within  men,   peace  of  conscience. 

2.  What  is  His  work  about  that  threefold  peace  ?  (1)  He  purchased  it  by  His 
precious  blood.  (2)  He  makes  the  peace  of  His  own  efficacy.  The  covenant 
of  grace  is  the  covenant  of  peace,  and  He  is  the  Mediator  of  it.  He  does,  by  His 
Spirit,  bring  the  sinner  into  the  covenant  of  peace,  and  by  His  intercession  obtains 

{>eace  with  God  for  him.  He,  by  the  same  Spirit,  unites  men  to  Himself  by 
aith,  and  to  one  another  in  love.  (3)  He  maintains  the  peace  made.  (4)  He 
restores  the  peace  when  at  any  time  it  is  disturbed  (Isa.  lvii.  18).  (5)  He 
perfects  the  peace.  IIL  Peaceful  in  respect  of  the  state  of  His  kingdom. 
He  is  the  true  Solomon  (Peaceful) ;  and  no  king  of  Israel  had  such  a  peaceable 
and  prosperous  reign  as  Solomon.  1.  Every  one  of  His  subjects  is,  by  His  wise 
management,  put  in  a  state  of  peace  (John  xvi.  33).  2.  The  peace  of  His 
kingdom  is  the  fruit  of  war  and  victory  in  that  war.  What  made  Solomon's 
reign  so  peaceable  was  David's  wars  and  victories.  Our  Lord  Christ  was  a  man 
of  war ;  He  fought  and  overcame  sin,  death,  and  the  devil ;  and  the  peace  of  His 
kingdom  now  is  the  fruit  of  that.  3.  Hence  in  His  kingdom  is  the  greatest  wealth 
and  abundance.  4.  The  good  of  His  kingdom  is  advanced  from  all  quarters,, 
and  there  is  nothing  but  is  turned  to  the  profit  thereof,  by  the  infinite  wisdom 
of  the  Prince  (Rom.  viii.  28).  5.  In  the  end  the  peace  of  His  kingdom  will 
be  absolute.  Solomon's  reign  was  more  peaceable  in  the  beginning  than  toward 
the  end.  But  Christ's  kingdom  is  contrariwise;  though,  indeed,  it  will  never 
end.  But,  at  last,  all  occasion  of  disturbance,  from  without  or  from  within,  will 
be  utterly  cut  off.  (T.  Boston.)  Christ  the  Prince  of  Peace : — 1.  We  learn  from 
the  Roman  historians,  that  at  the  time  of  our  Lord's  nativity,  the  temple  of  Janus 
at  Rome  was  shut  up,  in  token  of  a  profound  peace  all  over  the  world ;  for  the 
Romans,  being  then  lords  of  the  world,  had  power  to  make  peace  or  war  as  they 
pleased.  But  there  was  a  special  providence  of  God  in  it,  that  His  blessed  Son, 
the  Prince  of  Peace,"  should  be  brought  into  the  world  in  such  a  season  of 
tranquillity.  Accordingly  we  hear  the  angels  proclaiming  at  His  nativity,  "  Peace 
on  earth,  and  goodwill  towards  men."  2.  When  He  came  to  preach  the  Gospel, 
He  began  His  sermon,  with  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  blessed  are  the  meek, 
blessed  are  the  peacemakers  ;  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that 
hate  you,  pray  for  them  that  despitefully  use  you  and  persecute  you."  He  calls 
upon  His  disciples  to  learn  of  Him  to  be  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  that  they 
might  find  rest  for  their  souls.  When  He  was  apprehended  and  brought  to  His 
trial,  He  practised  His  own  doctrine  of  meekness  and  patience.  And  when  St. 
Peter  drew  his  sword  in  His  defence,  He  commanded  him  to  put  it  up  again, 
''for,"  says  He,  "all  they  that  take  the  sword,  shall  perish  with  the  sword." 

3.  When  He  took  His  leave  of  His  disciples,  He  bequeathed  peace  to  them,  as 
the  best  legacy  which  He  could  leave  them.  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  My  peace 
I  give  unto  you."  At  His  various  appearances  among  them  after  His  resurrection, 
He  commonly  saluted  them  with  the  blessing  of  peace.  4.  One  great  end  of  our 
Lord's  coming  into  the  world  was,  to  break  down  the  partition-walls  between 
all  nations,  and  take  away  all  party  distinctions  from  among  men.  5.  The  most 
signal  act  which  entitles  our  Lord  to  the  character  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  is  this, 
that  He  has  reconciled  us  to  God,  and  made  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world.  (W.  Beading,  M.A.)  Christ  the  Prince  of  Peace: — I.  He  is 
the  peace  brinqeb,  as  He  is  the  revealer  of  His  Father's  peaceful  designs  towards 
His  sinful  creatures.     1.  Point  out  the  situation  in  which  man  stood  in  relation 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix. 

to  God.  2.  The  office  of  Christ  as  the  bringer  of  peace  reminds  us  how  God  might 
have  acted  in  relation  to  man.  3.  But  His  love  prompted  Him  to  a  design  of 
rich  and  sovereign  mercy.  4.  He  has  developed  this  design  through  the  medium 
pf^Hia  Son,  who,  therefore,  takes  His  title  from  His  work — the  Prince  of  Peace. 

II.  He  is  the  Peacemaker  ;  the  efficient  means  of  procuring  and  establishing 
peace  between  God  and  man.  1.  His  atonement  made  reconciliation  for  the  sin 
of  man.     2.  By  His   mediatorial  office  He  secures   peace  for  us  individually. 

III.  He  is  a  princely  giver  of  peace.  1.  It  is  a  knowledge  of  His  sacrifice 
which  gives  peace  to  the  troubled  conscience.  2.  By  Him  we  receive  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  gives  peace  from  the  power  of  sin.  3.  He  brings  us  into 
a  state  of  communion  with  God,  so  that  we  enjoy  peace.  4.  The  peace  which 
Jesus  gives  endures  through  all  troubles  and  in  spite  of  all  enemies.  5.  He  gives 
eternal  peace  and  rest  in  heaven.  IV.  The  foundation  and  support  of  His 
kingdom  on  earth  is  peace.  1.  It  was  founded  without  the  intervention  of 
violence  or  carnal  weapons.  2.  Its  very  essence  consists  in  the  influence  of  peace- 
ful doctrines.  3.  In  the  promotion  of  His  kingdom  He  employs  none  but  peace- 
able means.  {The  Evangelist.)  The  Prince  of  Peace  :J-T.  He  possesses 
peace.  He  possesses  it  as  none  other  does,  in  greater  measure,  the  abundance 
of  it.  It  is  all  at  His  command.  He  is  the  Prince  or  Monarch  of  it.  1.  He  ia 
in  a  world  where  the  noise  of  our  strife  and  tumult  never  reaches.  Discord  is 
never  known  there,  change  is  never  experienced.  2.  And  then  we  must  try  to 
get  into  His  mysterious  soul,  and  see  the  eternal  calm  which  reigns  there  day 
after  day,  year  after  year,  age  after  age,  unbroken.  All  is  as  quiet  within  as 
around  Him.  And  it  is  not  the  quiet  of  inaction  or  indifference,  of  a  clod  of  earth 
or  a  stone  ;  His  mind  is  ever  working  and  ever  feeling,  and  with  an  energy  which 
to  us  is  inconceivable ;  but  yet  His  mind  is  never  ruffled.  II.  He  exercises 
peace.  1.  Look  at  Him  as  He  trod  our  earth.  The  meek  and  quiet  lamb  was 
an  image  of  Him.  2.  He  bears  long  with  His  enemies.  3.  He  bears  much,  too, 
with  His  friends.  4.  There  must,  then,  be  a  mighty  inclination  to  peace  where 
things  are  thus.  III.  He  bestows  or  dispenses  peace.  God  is  often  called 
in  Scripture  the  God  of  that  which  He  communicates.  In  this  way  may  our 
Lord  be  called  the  Prince  of  Peace.  1.  Our  peace  with  God  flows  from  Him. 
2.  And  peace,  too,  among  men.  3.  Peace  of  conscience  and  peace  of  mind  are 
His  gifts.  IV.  He  delights  in  peace.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Messiah,  the 
Prince  of  Peace  : — Christ,  our  blessed  Lord,  does  evidently  by  establishing  peace 
in  each  bosom  of  His  people,  peace  in  each  family  of  His  disciples,  peace  in  each 
congregation  of  His  saints,  and  peace  in  all  His  Churches,  lead  directly  to  the 
establishment  of  international  peace  throughout  the  world.  (B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.) 
Apparent  contradictions  : — When  we  receive  this  prediction  of  our  Lord,  and 
reflect  upon  it,  we  are  met  with  some  contradictions  to  it,  which  are  both  apparent 
and  most  effectual.  Our  Lord,  when  He  was  upon  earth,  declared  on  the  contrary 
— "  I  came  not  to  send  peace  on  earth,  but  a  sword."  Accordingly,  He  further 
told  His  disciples  that  they  must  expect  to  be  "  hated  of  all  men,"  and  to  be 
"  hated  of  all  nations."  He  warned  them,  that  the  feuds  that  should  arise  through 
His  doctrine,  would  poison  the  peace  of  families ;  "  the  brother  shall  deliver  up 
the  brother  to  death,  and  the  father  the  child."  He  warned  them,  that  there 
should  be  public  persecution  as  well  as  private,  and  that  they  should  be  dragged 
before  governors  and  kings  for  His  sake,  and  scourged  in  public.  Universal  war, 
then,  rather  than  peace,  seemed  to  be  predicted  as  the  result  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ.  And  have  not  facts,  up  to  this  day,  answered  to  these  predictions  ? 
Ten  imperial  persecutions,  extended  over  the  most  civilised  parts  of  the  world, 
threatened  through  three  centuries  the  extermination  of  the  Church  of  Christ : 
in  which  every  atrocity  was  committed,  and  the  barbarous  ingenuity  of  man  taxed 
to  the  utmost  extent  to  devise  new  torments  to  make  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ 
suffer.  And  when  heathenism  was  subdued  by  the  power  of  the  Gospel,  and 
ceased  to  reign,  it  was  only  that  this  other  prediction  might  be  accomplished 
fearfully  in  the  earth ;  so  that  the  saints  of  Jesus  Christ  became  His  martyrs 
throughout  Europe.  Papal  Rome  succeeded  to  the  enmity  of  pagan  Rome : 
in  the  valleys  of  Piedmont,  and  along  the  plains  of  France,  and  throughout  th& 
Low  Countries,  and  in  England  also,  as  well  as,  in  the  time  of  the  Reformation, 
throughout  Italy  and  Spain,  everywhere  accomplishing  what  Christ  by  His 
apostle  had  predicted,  and  bringing  myriads  of  the  saints  of  Jesus  to  public 
martyrdom ;  massacring  without  mercy  the  feeblest  and  the  strongest,  young 
and  old,  and  threatening  the  extermination  of  the  Church  of  Christ.     And  thia 


chap,  rx.]  ISAIAH.  293 

led  to  still  more  extensive  offerings  to  the  sanguinary  dispositions  of  man  ;  great 
and  long  protracted  wars  following  these  massacres.  Witness  the  wars  of  the 
Hussites  in  Bohemia,  the  wars  of  the  Huguenots  in  France,  to  mention  no  other 
civil  commotions,  to  which  the  doctrine  of  Christ  has  seemed  to  lead.  And  then, 
when  the  sword  was'sheathed,  and  nation  was  not  imbruing  its  hands  in  the  blood 
of  other  nations  for  the  sake  of  theology,  even  then  the  different  Churches  of 
Christ  raged  in  enmity  one  towards  the  other :  factions  that  have  not  ceased 
to  this  day,  so  that  the  governments  of  the  world  find  questions  of  theology  and 
ecclesiastical  rivalry  still  mingling  with  the  counsels  of  senates,  and  embarrassing 
all  their  decisions.  Is  this  the  peace  which  Christ  came  to  produce  ?  In  what 
sense  is  He  "  the  Prince  of  Peace  "  ?  (Ibid.)  The  Prince  of  Peace  not  respons- 
ible for  strife  and  violence  : — These  evils  that  have  arisen  from  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  and  which,  perhaps,  have  made  that  doctrine  occasion  more  bloodshed 
than  any  single  cause  that  has  afflicted  mankind,  do  not  in  the  least  degree 
detract  from  the  glory  of  this  great  Monarch,  this  adorable  Saviour,  who  after  all 
establishes  beyond  all  question  at  once,  to  the  minds  of  all  who  believe  on  Him, 
His  claim  to  be  "  the  Prince  of  Peace,"  throughout  the  universe.  If  the  servants 
of  Jesus  Christ  were  sent  forth  by  Him  as  sheep  among  wolves,  and  the  wolves 
have  torn  the  sheep  in  every  land,  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  sheep  that  these  raging 
persecutions  have  taken  place.  If  He  has  sent  forth  His  disciples  to  love  one 
another,  and  to  love  all  mankind,  it  is  not  the  fault  of  Him,  nor  His  doctrine, 
nor  His  people,  if  apostates  from  His  faith  have  chosen  to  carry  His  abused  name 
upon  their  foreheads,  and  under  that  name  to  persecute  with  a  violence  which 
would  have  stamped  infamy  even  upon  heathenism,  those  who  loved  Him  and 
served  Him  the  best  in  the  earth.  And,  if  those  who  have  even  followed  Him 
with  honesty  of  purpose,  have  yet  been  so  ill  instructed  in  His  declared  will, 
or  have  sinfully  given  way  to  the  weakness  of  their  tempers,  so  that  those  have 
quarrelled  for  ages,  who  by  His  express  authority  ought  to  have  been  one  in  Him, 
it  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  His  doctrine,  but  to  their  faults.  And  all  this  evil, 
great  as  it  unquestionably  is,  and  though  it  has  fed  the  mirth  of  the  infidel  age 
after  age,  is  transitory  still,  preparatory  still ;  and  still  does  the  strong  and  stead- 
fast faith  of  His  people  carry  forward  their  thought  to  that  day  when  transient 
evil  will  only  end  in  lasting  good,  and  when,  after  all  impediments  have  been 
swept  away,  He  will  still  reign  everywhere  and  always  as  "  the  Prince  of  Peace." 
(Ibid.)  All  creation  at  war  with  the  sinner  : — When  God  wars  against  the  sinner, 
all  creation  must  war.  The  earth  wars  against  him  in  its  barrenness,  its  poisons, 
its  inundations,  its  earthquakes  and  volcanoes.  The  atmosphere  wars  against  him 
in  its  storms  and  thunders,  and  winds  breathing  pestilence.  The  beasts  war 
against  him,  thirsting  for  his  blood,  and  pursuing  him  as  their  prey.  His  neighbour 
wars  against  him,  slandering  him,  robbing  him,  oppressing  him,  and  murdering 
him.  The  angels  war  against  him,  executing  the  judgments  of  their  insulted 
King.  He  wars  against  himself,  his  own  passions  enslaving  and  destroying  him, 
and  his  conscience  stinging  him  with  deadly  remorse.  The  grave  and  hell  have 
marked  him  for  their  victim.  Oh,  how  beautiful,  then,  upon  the  mountains  are 
the  feet  of  Him  that  publisheth  peace.  (W.  Anderson,  LL.D.)  The  good  time 
coming  : — What  a  day  that  will  be  when  museums  shall  be  erected  to  preserve 
as  curiosities  the  implements  and  accoutrements  of  war,  that  the  children  of 
the  new  age  may  study  the  old  barbaric  times  which  shall  have  passed  away 
as  a  bad  dream  !  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  Prince  of  Peace  : — It  would  be 
ridiculous  to  depict  the  Lord  Jesus  with  a  rifle  over  His  shoulder.     (Josiah  Mee.) 

Ver.  7.  Of  the  increase  of  His  government  and  peace  there  shall  be 
no  end. — The  missionary  work : — I.  What  is  the  work  to  be  performed, 
and  whose  agency  shall  accomplish  it  ?  1.  The  missionary  work  is 
the  increase  of  Messiah's  government  and  peace :  the  proclamation  of 
Messiah  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  throughout  the  universe ;  the  estab- 
lishment of  peace  among  men,  because  He  hath  made  peace  for  them  through 
the  blood  of  His  Cross.  2.  "  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  perform  this." 
II.  What  are  the  instruments  whom  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  employ  in 
the  accomplishment  of  this  seemingly  impossible  work  ?  They  are  themselves 
subjects  of  the  kingdom  which  they  aim  to  extend,  and  adorers  of  the  one  name 
which  they  desire  to  exalt,  believers  in  the  Word  which  they  combine  to  diffuse, 
holding  substantially  the  same  truths,  maintaining  steadfastly  some  fellowship 
with  those  to  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  proclaimed  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  "  Go 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

ye,"  and  to  whom  He  graciously  declared,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the 
end  of  the  world."  III.  What  is  our  own  duty  and  obligation  in  referenob 
to  this  work  7  As  we  are  Britons,  the  missionary  work  belongs  to  us  from 
our  country  ;  as  we  are  Christians,  from  our  profession ;  as  we  are  churchmen,  it 
appeals  to  us  from  our  very  prayers,  for  how  can  we  implore  our  blessed  Lord 
to  bring  home  to  His  flock  the  infidel,  the  heretic,  the  beguiled  Romanist,  the 
benighted  idolater,  unless  we  are  prepared,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  to  "  prepare  the 
way  of  the  Lord,  and  make  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God  "  ?  But  neither 
as  Britons,  nor  as  Christians,  nor  as  churchmen,  shall  we  ever  learn  our  duty 
from  any  teacher  but  God's  Word,  or  perform  it  through  any  power  but  that 
of  God's  Spirit.  Besides,  while  the  missionary  work,  being  a  work  of  faith,  is 
therefore  acceptable  to  God,  it  is  also  profitable  to  ourselves ;  it  awakens  brotherly 
affections,  it  kindles  a  holy  zeal,  it  expands  Christian  charity,  it  brings  us  into 
communion  with  "  the  excellent  of  the  earth,"  it  cements  our  fellowship  with 
each  other,  and  with  Christ ;  by  engaging  in  it  heart  and  soul,  we  not  only  appre- 
hend the  brotherhood  of  man,  but  we  anticipate  the  brotherhood  of  heaven, 
when  they  shall  "  come  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  and  from  the  north, 
and  from  the  south,  and  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God."  Nor  is  the  missionary 
work  profitable  only  to  the  heathen  and  to  our  own  souls,  but  to  those  who  dwell 
immediately  around  us.  What  we  attempt  abroad  we  shall  never  be  content 
to  leave  undone  at  home.  (T.  Dale,  M.A.)  The  increase  of  His  government  : — 
I.  The  increase  of  His  government.  This  implies — 1.  The  extended  diffusion 
of  the  knowledge  of  His  Gospel.  2.  The  triumphs  of  His  grace  over  the  sin  and 
misery  of  man.  3.  The  diffusion  of  the  peaceful  influence  of  the  Gospel  in 
calming  the  passions,  and  allaying  the  violence  of  unhappy  men.  4.  The 
annihilation  of  all  that  opposes  His  progress.  II.  How  is  the  government 
of  Christ  to  increase  ?  By  the  agency  of  miracles  ?  No ;  the  age  of 
miracles  is  gone.  By  the  distribution  of  the  Bible,  and  suitable  tracts,  by  pious 
individuals  ?  Doubtless  this  may  be  the  means  of  great  usefulness.  By  the 
education  of  the  young  ?  We  look  for  something  more  than  all  this.  How  then 
I  shall  it  be  increased  ?  By  the  instrumentality  of  the  preached  Gospel  accom- 
I  panied  by  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     III.  Where  is  the  necessity  or 

CERTAINTY  OF  THIS  INCREASE  OF  THE  SAVIOUR'S  GOVERNMENT  ?      1.  In  the  Divine 

appointment.  2.  In  the  claims  of  His  mediatorial  sacrifice  (Phil.  ii.  8-11).  3.  In 
the  very  nature  of  His  exaltation  (Eph.  i.  21,  22).  4.  In  the  events  which  have 
taken  place  in  the  theatre  of  the  world  (Hag.  ii.  7).  5.  In  the  proofs  with 
which  we  are  furnished  of  the  final  evangelisation  of  the  world.  (E.  Parsons.) 
The  government  of  the  Prince  of  Peace  : — I.  The  vast  amplitude  and  growing 

EXTENT  OF  THE  MESSIAH'S  KINGDOM.      II.   THE  MEANS  BY  WHICH  THE  KINGDOM 

IS  growing.  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  Christian  peace  conditional  : — "  His  govern- 
ment and  peace."  Note  that  combination.  It  contains  a  truth  much  needed 
in  these  times.  There  is  no  peace  without  government.  Liberty  and  independ- 
ence are  our  favourite  watchwords ;  liberty  for  the  community,  liberty  for  the 
individual.  Obedience,  order,  self-control,  are  less  enthusiastically  praised. 
Yet  we  cannot  have  the  one  without  the  other.  We  need  no  appeal  to  history, 
no  a  priori  conjectures,  to  convince  us  of  the  truth,  that  peace  and  government 

imust  go  hand  in  hand.  The  experience  of  our  own  times,  the  experience  of  each 
man's  daily  life,  is  ample  to  teach  us  that.  Every  newspaper  we  take  up  is  full 
of  such  lessons.  Every  reproach  of  conscience  tells  the  same.  1.  Is  it  not  so  in 
the  State  ?  Whence  comes  the  want  of  peace  in  our  sister  island  ?  Whence 
come  the  perplexity  and  the  insecurity  which  are  such  a  stain  on  our  civilisation, 
and  which  make  statesmen  well-nigh  despair  ?  Is  it  not  because  government 
has  become  impossible,  while  law  is  neutralised  and  defiled  by  the  unscrupulous 
opposition  of  a  rival  and  self-constituted  power  ?  2.  Is  it  not  so  in  ourselves  ? 
Whence  comes  the  want  of  peace  in  our  own  hearts  ?  Is  it  not  because  of  the 
want  of  government  there;  while  passion,  and  self-indulgence,  and  the  fashion 
of  the  world,  usurp  in  turn  the  authority  of  conscience  ?  What  we  fancy,  what 
comes  easiest  to  us,  what  other  men  do,  these  constitute  our  rule  of  life :  not 
the  dictates  of  conscience,  not  the  will  of  God,  not  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ. 
I  We  most  of  us  wish  for  peace,  as  we  most  of  us  wish  for  heaven  ;  but  we  take 
\  little  means  of  winning  either  the  one  or  the  other.  The  cry  for  personal  freedom, 
]  for  liberty  of  thought  and  conscience,  is  on  every  lip  ;  but  we  are  most  of  us  more 
eager  to  win  the  power  of  doing  what  we  choose,  than  careful  to  choose  what  is 
best.      Self-knowledge,   self-control,   self-renunciation  —  this   is   the   only  road. 


<jhap.  ix.]  ISAIAH.  295 

And  while  you  pursue  it,  liberty  will  come  unsought ;  for  the  highest  liberty  of 
all  is  to  be  free  from  the  tyranny  of  self.  Self-government  is  only  another  name. 
for  that  service  which  is  perfect  freedom.  Perfect  peace  is  found  in  the  absolute! 
surrender  of  self  to  One  who  cannot  abuse  so  tremendous  a  trust.  And  with' 
this  peace  in  your  own  hearts  you  will  almost  without  effort,  almost  without 
knowing  it,  bring  peace  to  others.  (A.  Plummer,  M.A.)  "  He  will  do  it  "  : — 
Charlss,  King  of  Sweden,  father  of  the  great  Gustavus  Adolphus,  was  an  ardent 
Protestant,  and  purposed  for  his  country  more  good  than  he  was  able  to  accom- 
plish. His  son,  who  gave  early  promise  of  his  brilliant  qualities,  was  his  father'3 
great  hope.  Often  when  a  scheme  of  reformation,  yet  impracticable,  was  referred 
to,  the  king  would  lay  his  hand  upon  the  boy's  head  and  say  to  the  bystanders, 
"  He  will  do  it."  So  with  respect  to  all  which  cannot  now  be  accomplished, 
our  faith  should  look  confidently  to  "  Great  David's  greater  Son,"  in  whose  reign 
it  will  surely  be  effected.  (Sunday  School  Teacher.)  "  The  empire  is  peace  "  .• — 
Napoleon,  standing  amid  the  ambassadors  of  Europe,  reassured  the  entire  con- 
tinent by  the  utterance  of  his  New  Year's  motto,  The  empire  is  peace."  But 
with  far  greater  truth  may  we  apply  the  words  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  Prince  of  Peace, 
whose  rule  over  the  soul  is  the  synonym  of  peace  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 
And  as  His  government  spreads  further  and  further  over  the  soul,  with  its  growing 
area  there  is  growing  peace,  until  they  shall  both  become  complete  to  all  the 
heights,  and  depths,  and  breadths  of  blessedness.  Of  the  increase  of  His  govern- 
ment, and  of  our  peace,  there  is  no  end.  (F.  B.  Meyer  B.A.)  Christ's 
influence  ever  increasing  : — Speaking  on  the  day  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  funeral,  the 
Rev.  F.  6.  Meyer  said  :  "  One  of  the  marks  which  distinguish  Jesus  Christ  from 
every  human  teacher  and  reformer  is  the  fact  that  His  influence  is  ever  increasing. 
The  influence  of  Gladstone,  to-day  so  great,  will  diminish  year  by  year,  but  Jesus 
Christ's  influence  was  never  so  great  as  it  is  now."  The  zeal  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  will  perform  this.  —  The  zeal  of  the  Lord :  — "  The  zeal " 
translates  our  English  version,  but  no  one  English  word  will  give  it.  It  is 
that  mixture  of  hot  honour  and  affection  to  which  "  jealousy  "  in  its  good 
sense  comes  near.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Claiming  and  reckoning: — 
If  we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will,  we  know  that  He  hears  us  ;  and  if  we 
know  that  He  hears  us,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petition  that  we  desired  of 
Him — not  only  that  it  will  be  ours,  but  that  it  is  ours,  to  be  used  forthwith  for 
His  glory,  because  the  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  perform  it.  1.  Are  you  in 
need  of  counsel  ?  Reverently  and  thoughtfully  claim  the  wisdom  of  the  "  Coun- 
sellor "  ;  reckon  that  you  have  it,  and  act  to  the  best  of  your  judgment,  believing 
that  His  wisdom  is  threading  it  with  its  unseen  direction.  And  when  you  have 
acted,  whatever  be  the  results,  dare  to  believe  that  you  were  directed  to  do  the 
best  thing,  and  never  look  back.  2.  Are  you  in  need  of  strength  ?  Reverently 
and  believingly  claim  the  power  of  the  Mighty  God,"  and  reckon  that  it  is 
yours  ;  and  go  forth  to  any  work  to  which  He  may  call  you,  believing  that  you 
are  adequately  equipped.  You  will  not  know  what  power  you  have  till  you 
begin  to  use  it.  3.  Are  you  in  need  of  unchanging  love  and  affection,  in  a  world 
of  incessant  disappointment,  in  which  the  warmest  friendships  cool,  and  the 
dearest  friends  die  ?  Reverently  and  gladly  avail  yourself  of  the  love  of  the 
"  Father  of  the  Ages,"  the  I  am,  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever. 
4.  Do  you  want  peace  ?  Reverently  and  trustfully  claim  His  peace,  who  is  the 
"  Prince  of  Peace  "  ;  and  know  that  it  is  yours  in  the  depths  of  your  soul,  though 
the  surface  of  your  life  be  still  swept  by  storms.  These  are  two  great  words — 
**  claim  "  God's  fulness,  and  "  reckon  "  that  whatever  you  can  claim  is  yours, 
although  no  answering  emotion  assures  you  that  it  is.  Dare  to  act  in  faith, 
stepping  out  in  the  assurance  that  you  have  what  you  have  claimed,  and  doing 
just  as  you  would  do  if  you  felt  to  have  it.  But  this  is  only  possible  when  you 
have  put  the  government,  where  God  the  Father  has  placed  it,  on  the  shoulders 
of  Jesus.  It  is  there  by  right,  but  it  must  be  also  there  by  choice  and  acqui- 
escence.   (F.  B.  Meyer,  BJL) 

Ver.  10.  The  trrttika  are  fallen  down,  but  we  will  build  with  hewn 
atones. — A  drinking  song : — It  has  been  conjectured  that  these  words  are 
a  fragment  of  a  drinking  song  actually  sung  in  Ephraim.  (Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.)  Israel's  presumption: — In  the  first  strophe  Isaiah  depicts 
the  Ephraimites'  proud  superiority  to  danger,  and  their  placid  assurance 
«fter  defeat :    "  The  bricks,"  they  say,  "  are  fallen,  but  we  will  build  with 


296  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

hewn  stone ;  the  sycamores  are  cut  down,  but  we  will  put  cedars  in 
their  place  "  :  no  sooner,  in  other  words,  has  one  scheme  miscarried  than  they 
are  prepared  with  a  more  magnificent  one  to  take  its  place;  no  sooner  is  one 
dynasty  overthrown  than  another  rises  in  its  stead.  The  proverb  gives  apt 
expression  to  the  temper  habitually  displayed  by  the  northern  kingdom.  (Prof. 
S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  sycamore: — The  commonest  tree  in  the  lowlands 
of  Palestine,  by  the  Mediterranean  Sea  (1  Kings  x.  27).  (Ibid.)  Beautiful 
words  of  varying  import : — There  cannot  be  two  opinions  about  the  beauty  of 
these  words.  What,  then,  will  be  your  surprise,  when  you  find  that  they  express 
nothing  more  than  a  wicked  thought  on  the  part  of  Ephraim  and  the  inhabitant 
of  Samaria  ?  This  circumstance  gives  us  our  first  point.  Noble  mottoes  may 
be  written  upon  unworthy  banners.  Religious  words  may  be  pronounced  by 
irreligious  lips.  We  must  always  look  at  the  surroundings  of  a  circumstance  in 
order  to  understand  its  full  value.  Every  circumstance,  like  every  globe,  has 
an  atmosphere  of  its  own,  hence  the  wisdom  of  looking  at  the  context  as  well  as 
at  the  text  itself.  How  needful  it  is  to  inquire  into  the  surroundings  of  anything 
that  may  charm  us.  If  you  have  seen  a  man  in  church,  his  mouth  opened  in 
praise,  his  head  inclined  in  prayer,  surely  you  have  a  right  to  argue  from  that 
individual  circumstance  to  the  whole  circle  and  bearing  of  his  daily  life.  It  is 
impossible  that  a  man  can  have  bowed  his  head  in  prayer,  and  then  allow  the 
devil  to  roam  through  the  whole  circle  of  his  intellect,  there  to  inspire  evil  thoughts. 
He  cannot  allow  anything  that  is  mean  and  unworthy  to  touch  and  debase  the 
life  that  has  been  consecrated  by  prayer.  You  know  how  fallacious  would  be 
such  reasoning  !  But  the  rule  should  be  applied  impartially,  and  therefore  I 
hasten  with  the  noblest  interpretation  which  my  judgment  can  approve  to  those 
who  may  have  been  caught  in  some  moment  of  evil  passion.  Surely  a  man  is 
not  a  bad  man  utterly  because  he  has  once  been  in  high  excitement.  H  the  one 
little  beauty  does  not  redeem  the  whole  sterile  place,  in  the  midst  of  which  it 
was  found,  surely  the  one  act  of  evil  cannot  spoil  the  whole  paradise  of  the  life, 
and  blight  a  heart  beautiful  as  a  garden  in  summer.  We  may  learn  from  these 
words  that  wickedness  is  not  mitigated  by  the  beauty  of  the  language  in  which 
it  is  expressed.  Is  there  anything  lovelier  in  all  the  universe,  possible  to  the 
inspired  imagination,  than  poetry,  painting,  and  music  ?  Do  they  not  carry 
with  them  all  elements  of  beauty  and  all  qualities  of  high  and  noble  strength  t 
Yet  even  they  have  been  uncrowned,  robbed  of  their  nobleness,  and  bound  down 
to  do  menial  work  in  the  devil's  service.  Let  me  guard  the  young,  therefore, 
along  this  line.  They  will  come  from  certain  places  and  will  say,  the  musio 
was  so  beautiful !  "  No  doubt  of  it.  They  will  come  again  and  say,  "  the  whole 
scene  was  so  lovely  !  "  No  one  questions  its  loveliness.  "  The  bricks  are  fallen 
down,  but  we  will  build  with  hewn  stones  ;  the  sycamores  are  cut  down,  but  we 
will  change  them  into  cedars," — what  language,  what  music  could  be  more 
beautiful !  And  yet  through  this  beautiful  speech,  Ephraim  and  the  inhabitant 
of  Samaria  indicated  their  ambitious  purpose  to  thwart  the  God  of  the  universe  ! 
What  would  you  say  if  I  told  you  that  this  hand  of  mine  was  the  hand  of  an 
assassin,  but  yet  pleaded  for  it  because  of  the  jewel  which  flashed  upon  its  fingers  T 
Would  you  kiss  a  hand  so  decorated?  Now,  take  the  other  view,  and  let  us 
imagine  beautiful  words  expressing  a  beautiful  purpose.  Then  we  shall  have 
the  wedlock  which  God  loves.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Building  with  hewn  stone: — 
There  are  three  classes  of  you  who  are  building  with  bricks,  and  I  will  ask  you  if 
you  had  not  better  build  with  hewn  stones.  1.  Take  those  who  make  good  vows 
limited  by  time.  There  are  many  such.  A  man,  for  example,  has  said  to  his 
father,  "  I  promise  I  will  go  to  church  once  a  week,  for  twelve  months."  It  is 
very  good  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  is  building  with  bricks,  not  with  hewn  stones. 
A  young  man  has  said,  "  Give  me  this  paper,  and  I  will  pledge  myself  to  abstain 
from  everything  that  can  intoxicate  for  six  months."  Very  good.  I  do  not 
pour  contempt  upon  such  a  resolution  ;  so  far  as  it  goes,  it  is  good.  But  the 
very  limitation  of  the  vow  is  a  source  of  weakness.  Thus — for  the  first  few  days 
you  are  strong  in  your  purpose,  but  gradually  you  begin  to  count  the  days  that 
you  have  yet  to  serve.  The  last  week  comes,  and  the  vow  is  like  a  pale  figure 
gradually  disappearing ;  the  last  day  but  one  comes,  where  then  is  the  vow  ? 
to-morrow  you  say  you  will  be  free.  Free  what  to  do  ?  To  become  a  slave 
again  !  Now  I  want  you  to  change  that  brick  wall  of  temporary  resolution 
for  the  hewn  stone  of  an  eternal  vow.  2.  Then  there  is  another  class  building 
with  bricks  instead  of  hewn  stones,  namely,  those  who  are  inspired  by  inadequate 


chap,  nc]  ISAIAH.  297 

motives.  Where  the  motive  is  insufficient,  conduct  must  go  down.  We  live 
in  motive.  When  the  motive  force  fails  the  machinery  must  of  necessity 
stand  still.  There  is  a  man  who  says  he  will  do  a  certain  thing  to  obtain 
a  reward.  That  man's  virtue  is  only  suppressed  vice.  He  who  will  do  a 
good  thing  simply  because  he  will  earn  a  reward,  will  do  a  bad  thing  if  you 
double  the  premium.  The  motive  is  insufficient,  and  the  last  state  of  that  man 
will  be  worse  than  the  first.  Others  will  come  to  church  to  please  an  admirer. 
That  is  not  church-going.  Would  that  I  could  speak  in  sufficiently  forceful 
language  to  the  young  about  this  !  Where  the  motive  of  church-going  is 
inadequate  it  will  always  be  intermittent,  and  in  the  end  it  will  expire.  If  you 
go  to  church  because  you  love  to  be  there,  and  would  have  Sunday  doubled  in 
its  golden  hours,  then  you  will  always  be  strong  in  your  religious  attachments, 
affections,  and  convictions.  Then  there  are  those  who  attempt  to  do  right  in 
order  to  escape  a  penalty.  This  is  an  insufficient  motive.  I  know  that  fear 
plays  a  very  important  part  in  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  and  in  the 
direction  of  human  conduct.  But  man  can  outlive  fear.  Man  can  become 
accustomed  to  the  unexpected.  There  is  but  one  true  motive — a  hearty  love  of 
God  I  3.  Then  there  is  the  third  class  to  which  I  refer, — those  who  have  not 
calculated  the  full  force  and  weight  of  temptation.  When  you  build  a  house, 
you  build  for  the  roughest  day  in  the  whole  year.  That  should  be  the  sovereign 
rule,  in  the  building  of  the  life-house.  The  ship  that  left  for  the  United  States 
yesterday,  probably  took  out  three  or  fourfold  the  necessary  provisions,  according 
to  the  season  of  the  year,  and  probably  took  out  coal  sufficient  for  a  double 
journey.  Why  this  excess  ?  Why  take  more  than  is  needed  for  the  ten  days' 
voyage  T  Because  of  the  unforeseen.  If,  therefore,  in  such  things  men  make  such 
arrangements,  they  condemn  themselves — I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  the  word — as 
fools,  if  they  leave  the  spiritual  life  and  the  spiritual  destiny  without  more  than 
a  transient  consideration.  Herein  is  the  glory  of  Christianity,  that  it  builds  with 
hewn  stones.  Christ's  Gospel  is  full  of  soundness,  life,  and  indestructible  virility. 
( Ibid. )  Wise  lessons  from  wicked  lips  : — Jesus  said,  "  The  children  of  this 
world  are  in  their  generation  wiser  than  the  children  of  light,"  meaning  by  the 
statement  that  they  excel  them  in  the  shrewdness  and  tact  with  which  they 
manage  their  business  when  that  has  taken  an  adverse  turn.  Men  of  the  world 
do  not  readily  submit  to  defeat  and  failure,  but  strive  to  convert  defeat 
into  victory,  and  failure  into  success.  Of  this  the  text  affords  illustration. 
I.  These  children  of  this  world  proceed  with  a  defined  purpose,  and  in  this 
are  worthy  of  imitation.  The  bricks  mentioned  as  having  fallen  down  were  not 
a  heap  of  burned  clay  which  had  got  piled  up,  no  one  could  tell  how.  They 
had  been  built  by  human  hands,  and  the  builders  had  heads  as  well  as  hands. 
We  are  not  told  what  sort  of  buildings  they  were  which  "  Ephraim  and  the 
inhabitant  of  Samaria  "  had  constructed,  and  which  had  "  fallen  down."  They 
may  have  been  dwelling-houses,  or  a  temple,  round  which  the  sycamores  would 
be  planted  for  groves  in  which  idolatrous  Israel  worshipped  the  gods  of  her  own 
evil  devising  and  choice,  and  for  which  she  had  forsaken  the  God  of  her  fathers. 
But  let  this  be  as  it  may,  now  that  the  bricks  had  fallen,  and  the  sycamores  were 
cut  down,  in  making  up  their  minds  as  to  what  should  be  done — being  anxious 
to  repair  the  ruin  and  desolation — they  proceed  with  a  defined  purpose.  The 
architect  precedes  the  builder :  the  head  leads  the  hand.  So  when  they  set  to 
work  they  know  what  they  are  about.  Now,  the  same  principle  should  underlie 
the  building  up  of  all  Christian  character  and  work.  Knowledge  and  zeal  should 
ever  be  in  partnership.  II.  These  children  of  the  world  wees  inspired  with 
hopefulness,  and,  therefore,  are  worthy  of  imitation.  Their  bricks  fell  down, 
but  their  spirits  fell  not  into  the  pit  of  despair.  Their  sycamores  were  cut  down, 
but  their  ambition  was  not.  Is  not  that  the  spirit  of  the  world  to-day  as  then  ?  In 
1865  men  said  England  and  America  shall  be  connected  by  the  electric  telegraph, 
and  they  went  to  work.  But  the  cable  snapped,  and  for  the  present  the  enter- 
prise failed.  Were  the  promoters  daunted,  and  persuaded  that  their  scheme 
was  beyond  the  reach  of  possible  things  ?  No,  not  they.  The  next  year  saw 
them  again  at  their  work,  and  saw  not  only  a  new  cable  successfully  laid,  but 
the  broken  one,  searched  for  in  the  great  "  wilderness  of  waters,"  at  length  found, 
after  which  it  was  lost  and  found  again  several  times  over,  until  the  2nd  Sep- 
tember, when  it  was  at  last  secured,  and  the  following  telegram  flashed  along  its 
wire :  "  I  have  much  pleasure  in  speaking  to  you  through  the  1865  cable." 
So  the  Christian  ought  to  be  hopeful.     You  have  fallen !     Say,  I  will  rise  again. 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

Your  schemes  have  failed  !  Say,  I  will  try  again.  You  are  afraid  you  have 
laboured  in  vain  !  Say,  In  labours  I  will  be  more  abundant.  You  have  stormed 
the  citadel  of  indwelling  passion  and  evil,  and  still  you  have  to  confess,  "  The 
good  that  I  would  I  do  not,  but  the  evil  which  I  would  not  that  I  do."  Say  again. 
By  the  grace  of  God  I  shall  meet  my  spiritual  foes.  Have  you  with  earnest  soul 
entered  the  Holy  of  holies,  desirous  to  know  "  the  deep  things  of  God,"  and 
where  you  expected  light,  lo  !  great  darkness  ;  and  where  you  sought  for  peace, 
and  sunshine,  and  beauty,  and  harmony,  lo !  seeming  contradiction,  the  howling 
waste,  cloud,  and  storm  ?  You  searched  for  a  way  out  of  your  intellectual 
doubts  and  difficulties,  and  behold  mystery  has  added  itself  to  mystery.  Still 
hope  thou  in  God.  III.  These  children  of  this  world  show  a  spirit  of  industrious 
perseverance,  and  are  therefore  worthy  of  imitation.  Their  hands  responded 
to  the  impulse  of  their  hearts.  They  dreamed  not  that  by  mere  wishing  their 
ruined  walls  would  rise  again,  or  their  gardens,  laid  waste,  would  blossom  with 
the  rose,  and  be  made  beautiful  with  the  cedar.  The  moral  here  is  plain.  "  Not 
every  one  that  saith  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord  (so  hoping  to  enter),  shall  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father."  Hoping  will  not 
do  everything.  It  must  be  backed  by  earnest  effort.  IV.  These  children  of 
the  world  improve  matters,  and  are,  therefore,  worthy  of  imitation.  These 
tumble-down  buildings  were,  after  all,  but  brick ;  but  now  they  would  build, 
not  with  bricks,  but  with  hewn  stones.  Around  them  had  flourished  the  syca- 
mores, but  now  that  these  were  cut  down,  they  would  plant  no  more  sycamores. 
They  would  do  better  than  that ;  they  would  plant  cedars.  In  three  different 
places  (1  Kings  x.  27 ;  2  Chron.  i.  15,  ix.  27)  the  value  of  the  sycamore  as  compared 
with  the  cedar  is  given  as  the  value  of  stones  compared  to  that  of  silver.  Such 
is  the  spirit  of  the  world.  Is  not  this  the  spirit  which  ought  to  animate  us  ? 
Never  to  rest  satisfied  with  present  attainments  in  self-culture  or  success  in  our 
work.     (A.  Scott.) 

Ver.  11.  Therefore  the  Lord  shall  set  up  the  adversaries  of  Rezin  against  him. — 

Oppositions: — "  The  Lord  shall  set  up  the  adversaries."  This  accounts  for  many 
oppositions  which  otherwise  would  be  without  explanation.  We  wonder  why  such 
and  such  people  should  be  opposed  to  us.  Ask  them  questions  about  this  opposi- 
tion, and  they  will  confess  themselves  bewildered ;  they  daily  look  round  for  causes, 
and  find  none  ;  yet  they  say  they  cannot  restrain  the  dislike,  and  they  must 
force  it  into  forms  of  opposition  about  whose  urgency  and  determinateness  there 
can  be  no  mistake.  How  is  all  this  ?  Is  it  not  the  Lord  reigning  even  here  ? 
God  means  to  chasten  us,  to  make  us  feel  that  there  are  other  people  in  the  world 
beside  ourselves,  and  that  we  have  no  right  to  all  the  room,  and  no  claim  that 
can  be  maintained  to  all  the  property.  Thus  we  teach  one  another  by  sometimes 
opposing  one  another.  We  are  brought  to  chastening  and  sobriety  and  refine- 
ment by  attritions  and  oppositions  that  are,  from  a  human  point  of  view,  utterly 
unaccountable.  The  Bible  never  hesitates  to  trace  the  whole  set  and  meaning 
of  providence  to  the  Lord  Himself :  He  sends  the  plague,  the  pestilence,  the 
darkness,  all  the  flies  and  frogs  that  desolated  old  Egypt ;  He  still  is  the  Author 
of  gale,  and  flood,  and  famine,  and  pestilence.  We  have  amused  ourselves  by 
deceiving  ourselves,  by  discovering  a  thousand  secondary  causes,  and  seeking, 
piously  or  impiously,  to  relieve  providence  of  the  responsibility  of  the  great 
epidemic.  Within  given  limits  all  we  say  may  be  perfectly  true ;  we  are  great 
in  phenomena,  we  have  a  genius  in  the  arrangement  of  detail;  but,  after  all, 
above  all,  and  beneath  all,  is  the  mysterious  life,  the  omnipotence  of  God,  the 
judgment  between  right  and  wrong  that  plays  upon  the  universe  as  upon  an 
obedient  instrument, — now  evoking  from  it  black  frowning  thundor,  and  now 
making  it  tremble  with  music  that  children  love,  and  that  sweetest  mothers  want 
all  their  babes  to  hear.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  For   all  this  His   anger   is   not  turned  away.  —  The  end  of 

judgments    and    the    reason     of     their    continuance. .  —  I.     Thb    design    and 

INTENTION  OF  GOD  IN  SENDING  JUDGMENT  UPON  A  PEOPLE  ;  that  IS,  to  re- 
claim them  from  all  their  sins,  implied  in  these  words,  "  for  the  people  turneth 
not  to  Him  that  smiteth  them."  This,  indeed,  is  the  intention  of  all  God's  dis- 
pensations towards  us  in  this  world.  The  end  oi  all  His  mercies  is  to  take  us 
off  from  our  sins  and  win  us  to  our  duty  (Rom.  ii.  4).  This  is  the  way  wherein 
God  delights  to  deal  with  us.     The  way  of  judgment  is  that  which  He  is  more 


chap.  it.  ISAIAH.  299 

•verse  from.  Though  the  judgments  of  God  be  evils  in  themselves,  yet  con- 
sidering the  intentions  of  God  in  them,  they  are  no  real  objections  against  His 
goodness,  but  rather  arguments  for  it.  1.  The  judgments  of  God  are  proper 
for  the  cure  of  a  far  greater  evil  of  another  kind — the  evil  of  sin.  We  take  wrong 
measures  of  things,  when  we  judge  those  to  be  the  greatest  evils  which  afflict 
our  bodies,  wound  our  reputation,  and  impoverish  our  estates.  For  those  certainly 
are  far  the  greatest  which  affect  our  noblest  part ;  which  vitiate  our  understand- 
ings, deprave  our  wills,  and  wound  and  defile  our  souls.  Now  it  is  very  agreeable 
with  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  the  Divine  providence,  to  administer  to  us 
whatever  is  proper  for  the  cure  of  so  great  an  evil.  2.  The  judgments  of  God 
are  likewise  proper  for  the  preventing  of  far  greater  evils  of  the  same  kind ;  I 
mean,  further  punishments.  In  sending  temporal  judgments  upon  sinners  God 
usually  proceeds  by  degrees.  3.  The  judgments  of  God  are  not  only  proper  to 
these  ends,  but  in  many  cases  very  necessary.  Our  condition  many  times  is 
such  as  to  require  this  severe  way  of  proceeding,  because  no  other  course 
God  hath  taken,  or  can  take  with  us,  will  probably  do  us  good.  The  providence 
of  God  makes  use  of  hunger  and  extreme  necessity  to  bring  home  the  prodigal 
(Luke  xv).  II.  The  reason  op  the  continuance  of  God's  judgments — because 
the  people  were  not  reclaimed  by  them.  And  how  can  t  be  expected  it  should 
be  otherwise,  when  incorrigibleness  under  the  judgments  of  God  is  a  provocation 
of  so  high  a  nature,  a  sign  of  a  most  depraved  temper,  and  an  argument  of  the 
greatest  obstinacy  in  evil  ?  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  22 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  22,  &c. ;  Deut.  xxviii. 
68,  59;  Isa.  i.  4,  6;  Hos.  vii.  9,  10;  Amos  iv.  11,  12;  Psa.  xviii.  26.) 
(J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  God's  judgments  : — God  hath  invited  us  to  Him  by  many 
blessings,  but  we  would  not  come ;  so  (to  borrow  an  apt  illustration  from  Bishop 
Sanderson)  we  have  forced  Him  to  deal  with  us  as  Absalom  did  with  Joab: 
he  sent  one  civil  message  to  him  after  another,  but  he  would  not  come ;  at  last 
he  set  on  fire  his  cornfield  to  try  whether  that  would  bring  him :  this  course  God 
hath  taken  with  us ;  we  would  not  be  persuaded  by  messages  of  kindness  (by 
His  many  blessings  and  favours)  to  return  to  Him,  and  therefore  hath  He  sent 
amongst  us  the  terrible  messengers  of  His  wrath.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  13.  For  the  people  turneth  not  unto  Him  that  amiteth  them. — God's 
rod  should  be  kissed : — "  The  people  turneth  not  unto  Him  that  smiteth 
them."  That  is  one  element  of  the  cause  of  this  judgment.  They 
do  not  kiss  the  rod :  they  see  it  to  be  a  rod  only ;  they  do  not  under- 
stand that  judgment  is  the  severe  aspect  of  mercy,  and  that  without  mercy  there 
could  be  no  real  judgment.  There  might  be  condemnation,  destruction,  anni- 
hilation, but  "  judgment "  is  a  combined  or  compound  term,  involving  in  all 
its  rich  music  every  possible  utterance  of  law  and  grace  and  song  and  hope.  When 
a  man  kisses  the  hand  that  wields  the  rod,  the  rod  blossoms,  and  God's  judg- 
ment becomes  God's  grace.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Turning  to  God  : — Sin  is  described 
in  Scripture  as  departing  from  God.  Repentance,  therefore,  is  returning  to 
Him.  To  "  seek  "  God,  in  the  idiom  of  Scripture,  is  to  pray  to  Him  (chap.  Iv. 
6),  to  consult  Him  (chap.  viii.  19),  to  resort  to  Him  for  help  (chap.  xxxi.  1),  to 
hold  communion  with  Him  (Amos  v.  4,  5).  Hence  it  is  sometimes  descriptive 
of  a  godly  life  in  general  (Psa.  xiv.  2).  So  here  it  includes  repentance,  conver- 
sion, and  new  obedience.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  God's  purpose  in  affliction  should 
be  considered  : — A  very  holy  man,  who  was  working  on  behalf  of  the  sufferers 
in  the  recent  plague  at  Bombay,  wrote  home  to  ask  certain  of  his  friends  not 
to  pray  that  God  would  remove  the  plague,  but  to  pray  that  whatever  was  His 
purpose  and  intention  in  sending  it  might  be  done.  It  was  a  true  and  lofty  view. 
(C.  H.  Sltarpe.)  Chastisement  should  bring  the  soul  to  God: — A  Christian  friend 
visiting  a  good  man  under  great  distress  and  afflicting  dispensations,  which  he 
bore  with  such  patient  and  composed  resignation  as  to  make  his  friend  wonder 
and  admire  it,  inquired  how  he  was  enabled  so  to  comfort  himself  ?  The  good 
man  said,  "  The  distress  I  am  under  is  indeed  severe ;  but  I  find  it  lightens 
the  stroke  very  much  to  creep  near  to  Him  who  handles  the  rod  !  "  (J.  White- 
cross.) 

Ver.  14.  Therefore  the  Lord  will  cut  off  from  Israel  head  and  tail, 
branch  and  rush,  in  one  day.  —  God  giving  account  of  His  actions :  — 
1.  The  ground  or  occasion  of  the  judgment  in  the  particle  "  therefore." 
Wherefore  T  (ver.   13).     The  cause  which  is  here  expressed  may  be  conceived 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

to  proceed  in  the  way  of  a  threefold  gradation.  1.  Of  their  simple  impiety.  Sin 
is  the  meritorious  cause  of  all  punishment.  2.  Of  their  additional  impenitency. 
Those  that  sin  and  so  thoroughly  provoke  God's  anger  against  themselves,  by 
repentance  may  happily  divert  and  appease  it.  But  the  people  in  the  text 
•*  turned  not  to  Him  that  smote  them.  And  this  made  their  judgment  to  be 
so  much  the  surer  to  them.  Impenitency  seems  in  a  manner  to  own  and  justify 
sin  and  stand  in  the  commission  of  it.  Further,  it  does  in  a  manner  trespass 
upon  all  the  attributes  of  God,  which  it  either  questions  or  vilifies.  The  omni- 
science of  God,  as  to  the  deserts  of  sin  (Psa.  xciv.  7).  The  truth  of  God,  as  to 
the  threats  of  sin  (2  Pet.  iii.  4).  The  justice  of  God,  as  to  the  punishing  of  sin. 
The  power  of  God,  as  to  the  executing  of  judgment.  3.  Of  their  continued 
obstinacy.  They  did  not  "  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts."  II.  The  judgment  itself. 
(T.  Horton,  D.D.)  God's  judgment  on  Israel: — I.  The  denunciation  of 
it.  1.  The  Author  of  it.  "The  Lord."  (1)  His  sovereignty  and  power.  It 
is  He  only  that  is  able  to  punish  ;  it  is  He  only  that  hath  all  men  and  creatures 
under  His  command.  (2)  His  purity.  There  are  none  who  are  so  fit  to  punish 
others  as  those  who  are  innocent  persons.  2.  The  nature  of  it.  "  The  Lord 
will  out  off."  From  correction  He  passes  to  destruction.  First,  He  cuts  them 
short ;  and  if  that  will  do  no  good  upon  them,  He  cuts  them  off.  First  the  prun- 
ing-knife,  then  the  axe.  There  is  a  twofold  sword  which  God  makes  use  of  for 
cutting  with,  before  He  proceeds  to  cut  off ;  the  sword  of  His  mouth,  i.e.,  the 
Word  of  God,  and  the  sword  of  His  hand,  i.e.,  the  rod  of  God.  "  He  will." 
(1)  A  word  of  premonition.  Despise  not  God's  gracious  hints  and  admonitions 
of  judgment  beforehand.  (2)  A  word  of  procrastination.  God  is  slow  to  anger. 
(3)  A  word  of  resolution.  God  will  not  be  always  willing ;  He  will  be  at  last 
doing.  3.  The  subject  of  it.  If  Israel  shall  provoke  God  by  their  impenitency 
and  obstinacy  against  Him,  even  Israel  shall  be  punished  and  cut  off  by  Him 
(1  Pet.  iv.  17).  II.  The  extent  op  it.  That  we  have  expressed  in  a  double 
metaphor ;  the  one  from  the  nature  of  the  head  and  the  tail ;  the  other  from 
the  nature  of  a  tree,  in  the  branches  and  roots :  both  of  them  coming  to  one 
and  the  same  purpose.  Whereby  we  have  signified  to  us  the  universality  and 
impartiality  of  the  destruction  which  is  here  threatened  ;  it  shall  be  of  so  general 
an  extent,  as  to  reach  to  all  sorts  of  persons,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  great 
and  small,  to  one  as  well  as  to  another.  1.  The  metaphor  taken  from  a  body 
in  the  head  and  the  tail.  We  may  reduce  it  by  way  of  explication  to  a  threefold 
rank  of — (1)  Age:  old  and  young.  (2)  Estate:  rich  and  poor.  (3)  Place  or 
authority:  governors  and  governed;  magistrates,  ministers,  and  those  who  are 
subordinate  and  in  subjection  to  them.  2.  The  metaphor  taken  from  the  nature 
of  a  tree  or  plant :  the  branch  and  the  rush.  It  is  not  said  the  branch  and 
the  root,  because  the  Lord  reserved  a  remnant  which  should  be  spared  by  Him. 
But  the  branch  and  the  rush ;  the  branch  as  an  emblem  of  usefulness — persons 
of  parts  and  employments;  the  rush  as  a  note  of  unfruitfulness — idle  and 
unprofitable  persons.  The  branch  is  a  note  of  strength  and  solidity ;  the  rush  of 
weakness  and  inconstancy.  The  branch  (in  like  manner  as  the  head)  is  a  note 
of  supremacy,  the  rush  of  meanness.  In  the  execution  of  publio  judgments 
for  the  impenitency  and  incorrigibleness  of  a  nation,  God's  hand  is  indifferent 
and  impartial ;  He  will  spare  no  ranks  or  sorts  or  conditions  of  people  at  all. 
III.  The  time  or  season  op  it.  "  In  one  day."  It  is  a  day — 1.  In  regard  of  the 
certainty  of  it,  as  that  which  is  set  and  fixed.  2.  In  regard  of  the  suddenness, 
as  that  which  is  speedy  and  soon  accomplished.  (Ibid)  Judgment  obliterate* 
classifications  : — "  Branch  and  rush  " — the  allusion  is  to  the  beauteous  palm- 
tree  :  it  shall  be  cut  down  notwithstanding  its  beauty ;  and  the  "  rush  " — 
the  common  growths  round  about  it,  entangled  roots,  poor  miserable  shrubs 
that  crowd  and  cumber  the  earth — branch  and  rush  cannot  stand  before  God's 
sword  and  fire :  everything  that  is  wrong  goes  down  in  a  common  destruction. 
Judgment  obliterates  our  classifications.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  For  the  leaders  of  this  people  cause  them  to  err. — Leaders  mis- 
leading : — Render :  "  And  the  leaders  of  this  people  have  become  misleaders." 
(Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Leaders'  responsibility  for  the  people's  faults: — 
1.  By  conniving  at  their  wickedness.  2.  By  countenancing  wicked  people. 
3.  By  setting  them  ill  examples.  (M.  Henry.)  Unfaithful  physicians  :— It 
is  ill  with  a  people  when  their  physicians  are  their  worse  disease.  (Ibid.) 
A  shameless  ruler  (Charles  II.) : — A  king  might  be  pardoned   for  amusing  his 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  301 

leisure  with  wine,  wit,  and  beauty,  but  it  was  intolerable  that  he  should  sink  into 
a  mere  saunterer  and  voluptuary ;  that  the  gravest  affairs  of  State  should  be 
neglected,  and  that  the  public  service  should  be  starved,  and  the  finances  deranged 
in  order  that  harlots  and  parasites  might  grow  rich.  (Macaulay's  England.) 
The  responsibility  of  leaders : — The  ancients  placed  the  statues  of  their  princes  and 
patriots  near  the  fountains,  to  show  that  they  were  the  spring-heads  of  good 
or  evil  to  the  public.     (J.  Trapp.)        Leadership : — I.  The  world  is  so  constituted 

that  LEADERS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  ABE  AT  PRESENT  A  NECESSITY.  II.  LEADERSHIP 
INVOLVES    FOR   THE    LEADERS    THE    HIGHEST    HONOUR    OR    THE    DEEPEST    SHAME. 

1.  The  man  who  leads  his  fellow- men  well  is  entitled  to  the  highest  honour. 

2.  But  leadership  does  not  necessarily  involve  any  honour  at  all.  3.  Through 
leadership  a  man  may  reach  the  most  utter  degradation  and  shame.  (1)  Through 
his   incompetence.     (2)    Through   his   dishonesty.     III.    Leadership   involves 

FOR  THE  LED  SALVATION  OR  DESTRUCTION.      (R.  A.  Bertram.) 

Ver.  17.  Therefore  the  Lord  shall  have  no  Joy  In  their  young  men. — 
"  The  Lord  shall  have  no  joy  in  their  young  men "  .* — The  meaning  is  full 
of  suggestion.  God  delights  in  the  young.  God  has  made  the  young  a  ministry 
of  instruction  and  comfort  to  old  age.  God  keeps  the  world  young  by  keeping 
children  in  it,  and  helpless  ones.  But  God  shall  cease  to  see  in  young  men  any 
hope  for  the  future.  Henceforth  God  withdraws  from  the  young,  and  they 
become  old ;  He  takes  from  them  His  all-vitalising  and  all-blessing  smile,  and 
they  wither  as  flowers  die  when  the  sun  turns  away.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  General 
corruption  followed  by  general  desolation  : — The  desolation  should  be  as  general 
as  the  corruption  has  been,  and  none  should  escape  it.  1.  Not  those  that  were 
the  objects  of  complacency ;  none  shall  be  spared  for  love.  "  The  Lord  shall 
have  no  joy  in  their  young  men,"  &c.  2.  Not  those  that  were  the  objects  of 
compassion ;  none  shall  be  spared  for  pity.  He  shall  not  "  have  mercy  on  their 
fatherless  and  widows."  They  had  corrupted  their  way  like  the  rest ;  and  if  the 
poverty  and  helplessness  of  their  state  was  not  an  argument  with  them  to  keep 
them  from  sin,  they  could  not  expect  it  should  be  an  argument  with  God  to 
protect  them  from  judgments.     (M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  18-21.  For  wickedness  buraeth  as  the  fire. — Wickedness  as  fire : — 
Wickedness,  i.e.,  the  constant  willing  of  evil,  is  a  fire  which  man  kindles  in 
himself.  And  when  the  grace  of  God,  which  stifles  and  checks  this  fire, 
is  at  an  end,  it  breaks  forth.  .  .  .  The  fire  of  wickedness  is  nothing 
else  but  God's  •"nnj?,  for  so  wrath  is  called  as  breaking  forth  from  within  and 
spreading  itself  inwardly  more  and  more,  and  then  passing  outwards  into  word 
and  deed ;  it  is  God's  own  wrath ;  for  all  sin  carries  this  within  itself  as  its  own 
punishment.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Sin  compared  to  a  great  fire  : — The  prophet  affirms 
that  there  are  resemblances  between  a  fire  and  sin.  It  is  not  a  common  fire  to 
which  he  refers,  such  as  is  employed  for  domestic  or  public  purposes.  It  is  a  great 
conflagration  which  burns  the  humble  shrubbery,  the  gigantic  forest,  extends 
over  the  land,  and  sends  a  mighty  column  of  smoke  and  flame  up  to  heaven. 
I.  The  origin  of  a  great  fire.  Recently  we  read  an  account  of  a  great  fire,  and 
the  paragraph  closed  with  these  words :  "  the  origin  of  the  fire  is  unknown." 
The  same  with  the  origin  of  sin.  We  know  it  had  a  beginning,  for  God  only  is 
from  everlasting.  We  know  it  had  a  beginning  before  Eve  and  Adam  felt  its 
power,  since  they  were  tempted.  We  know  it  began  with  him  who  is  called 
Satan  and  the  father  of  lies.  Still,  there  are  three  questions  about  it  which  we 
cannot  answer.  (1)  Where  did  it  begin?  (2)  When  did  it  begin?  (3)  How 
did  it  begin  ?  n.  The  progress  of  a  great  fire.  Place  one  spark  amid  com- 
bustible material  in  London.  Let  it  alone.  It  will  leap  from  point  to  point, 
house  to  house,  street  to  street,  until  the  whole  city  is  in  names.  Sin  has  spread 
in  an  exactly  similar  way.  One  sin,  to  the  individual ;  one  wrong  action,  to  the 
family;  one  immoral  look,  to  thousands;  one  crime,  to  a  kingdom.  III.  The 
transforming  power  of  a  great  fire.  Wood,  coal,  &o.,  it  transforms  into 
its  own  essence,  because  it  makes  fire  of  these.  It  is  even  so  with  sin.  It  turns 
everything,  over  which  it  gains  the  slightest  control,  into  its  own  nature — that 
is  into  a  curse.  The  desire  to  possess,  sin  has  turned  in  a  different  direction, 
and  made  it  an  autocratic  passion.  Take  the  principle  of  ambition  in  the  same 
way.  Take  commerce  in  the  same  way.  Thus  the  richest  blessings,  yea,  all  the 
blessings  which  God  has  given  to  us,  sin  can  so  transform  that  they  shall  become 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

curses.  IV.  The  destructive  energy  of  a  great  fire.  Who  can  calculate 
the  amount  of  property  in  London  alone,  which  has  been  destroyed  by  fire  T 
But  the  destruction  which  sin  has  caused  in  London  is  infinitely  greater  and 
more  momentous.  Some  have  bodies,  once  beautiful,  now  bloated  and  withered 
by  sin.  Some  have  feelings,  once  tender,  now  petrified  by  sin.  Some  whose 
intellectual  powers  were  once  strong,  now  feeble  by  sin.  Some,  who  were  once 
full  of  hope,  now  hopeless  by  sin.  The  destruction  which  sin  has  caused  is  awful. 
V.  The  termination  or  a  great  fire.  It  terminates  when  all  the  material 
is  reduced  to  ashes.  Can  the  fire  of  sin  ever  be  put  out  in  this  way  ?  The  body 
in  the  grave  is  scorched  by  it  no  more ;  but  what  of  the  soul  T  Look  at  the 
rich  man.  He  is  tormented,  in  pain,  not  by  a  literal  flame,  but  by  the  fire  of 
sin.  He  will  be  so  for  ever,  because  the  soul  is  immortal.  A  great  fire  has  been 
terminated  by  a  superior  quenching  power.  There  is  also  an  element  which  can 
completely  remove  sin  from  the  soul.  What  is  it  ?  Ask  those  in  heaven,  and 
those  on  earth,  who  have  been  saved.  They  all  say  that  they  "  have  washed 
their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  (A.  M'Auslane,  D.D.) 
Sin  mirrored  as  fire  : — The  Bible  is  full  of  the  figurative  and  analogic.  I.  Sin 
IS  like  fire  in  the  forms  in  which  it  exists.  Fire  is  found  to  exist  in 
two  states — the  insensibly  latent,  and  the  sensibly  active.  1.  In  an  insensible 
state,  heat  is  everywhere.  Even  in  solid  masses  of  ice  it  is  to  be  found.  Sir 
Humphrey  Davy,  it  is  said,  quickly  melted  pieces  of  ice  by  rubbing  them  together  in 
a  room  cooled  below  the  freezing  point.  It  is  so  with  sin.  It  is  found  in  every 
part  of  the  human  world ;  it  sleeps,  perhaps,  even  in  the  most  innocent  of  our  kind. 
All  it  wants  is  the  contact  of  some  tempting  circumstance  to  bring  it  out  into 
an  active  flame.  The  virtue  of  some  men  is  but  vice  sleeping.  As  savages  light 
their  fire  by  rubbing  two  pieces  of  wood  together,  so  men  stir  up  the  latent  fires 
of  depravity  by  mutual  contact.  There  is  sufficient  latent  fire  around  us  to 
burn  up  the  globe,  and  there  is  sufficient  latent  sin  in  humanity  to  turn  earth  into 
hell.  2.  But  fire  is  active  as  well  as  latent.  In  its  active  state  you  see  it  flaming 
on  your  hearths,  illuminating  your  cities,  working  your  manufactures,  propelling 
your  fleets,  drawing  your  carriages,  flashing  in  the  lightning  and  thundering  in 
the  earthquake.  Sin  is  terribly  active  in  our  world,  active  in  every  department 
of  life : — in  commerce,  in  politics,  and  religion.  To  use  the  language  of  the  text, 
"  It  mounts  up  like  the  lifting  up  of  smoke  :  the  smoke  of  this  fire  of  sin  pollutes 
and  darkens  every  sphere  of  life.  II.  Sin  is  like  ftrb  in  its  tendency  to  spread 
itself.  What  a  great  fire  a  little  spark  will  kindle  !  Fire  is  essentially  diffusive ; 
bo  is  sin.     How  true  it  is  that  "  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good."    III.  Sin 

IS    LIKE    FIBB    IN    ITS    POWER    OP    CHANGING    EVERYTHING    TO  TTS   OWN  NATURE. 

It  has  turned  alcohol  into  intemperance,  merchandise  into  fraud,  government 
into  tyranny,  aggression  into  the  demon  of  war.  When  Archimedes,  to  gratify 
his  vengeance  on  the  Romans,  brought  down  the  genial  rays  of  heaven  by  his 
magic  glass  to  burn  up  their  ships,  he  only  dramatised  the  universal  fact  that 
ein  ever  strives  to  turn  the  greatest  blessing  to  the  greatest  curse.  IV.  Sin  jb 
like  ptrb  IN  its  repelling  bnergy.  Philosophers  tell  us  that  fire  is  that  principle 
in  nature  which  counteracts  attraction,  and  keeps  the  various  particles  of  matter 
at  their  proper  distance.  It  is  that  repulsive  force  which  prevents  atoms  from 
coming  into  close  contact,  and  sometimes  drives  them  far  apart.  It  turns  the 
solid  bodies  into  liquids  and  liquids  into  vapours.  Apply  fire  to  the  compact 
tree,  and  it  will  break  it  into  a  million  atoms,  and  send  these  atoms  abroad  on 
the  wide  fields  of  air.  Were  it  not  for  heat,  all  parts  of  the  universe  would  rush 
together  into  one  solid  mass,  whose  parts  would  press  together  in  closer  contact 
than  the  heaviest  stone.  Sin  is  a  repulsive  principle.  It  separates  man  from 
man,  family  from  family,  nation  from  nation — all  from  God  !  V.  Sin  is  like 
ptrb  IN  its  devouring  capability.  It  consumes  something  far  more  valuable 
than  the  most  beautiful  forms  of  material  nature,  or  the  most  exquisite  productions 
of  human  art — it  consumes  man.  You  cannot  walk  the  streets  of  any  great  city, 
without  meeting  men  whose  bodies  are  being  consumed  by  sin.  Sin  devours 
the  soul.  It  dries  up  its  fountain  of  Divine  feeling,  it  sears  its  conscience,  it 
withers  its  intellect,  it  blasts  its  prospects  and  its  hopes.  VI.  Sin  is  like  fire 
in  its  power  to  inflict  pain.  There  is  no  element  in  nature  capable  of  inflicting 
more  suffering  on  the  body  than  fire.  But  sin  can  inflict  greater  suffering:  the 
fires  of  remorse  are  a  thousand  times  more  painful  than  the  flames  that  enwrapped 
the  martyrs.  "  A  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ?  "  The  fire  of  sin  in  the  soul 
will  "  burn  to  the  lowest  hell."    Ask  Cain,  Belshazzar,  Judas,  concerning  the 


chap,  ix.]  ISAIAH.  303 

intensity  of  moral  suffering.  VII.  Sin  is  lies  firb  in  its  susceptibility  of 
beinq  extinguished.  You  have  seen  a  raging  fire  go  out  from  one  of  two  causes ; 
either  because  it  has  consumed  the  body  on  which  it  fed  and  reduced  it  to  ashes, 
or  because  of  the  application  of  some  quenching  force.  The  fire  of  sin  will  never 
go  out  for  the  former  reason — the  object  on  which  it  feeds  is  indestructible :  if 
it  is  ever  to  be  destroyed,  it  must  be  extinguished  by  some  outward  force.  Thank 
God  t  there  is  a  moral  element  on  earth  to  put  out  sin  ;  the  river  of  mediatorial 
influences  that  rolls  from  the  throne  of  God  has  quenched  the  fire  of  sin  in  the 
ease  of  millions,  and  is  as  efficacious  to  do  so  now  as  ever.  (Homilist.)  Wicked- 
ness as  fire : — I.  Wickedness.  Of  this  wickedness  there  are  divers  sorts,  each 
of  which  may  be  distinguished  by  the  objects  on  which  it  terminates.  1.  When 
immediately  directed  against  God,  it  is  discovered  by  an  absurd  contempt  of 
His  providences  and  ordinances,  His  commandments,  promises,  and  threatening^, 
and  a  virulent  opposition  to  the  interests  of  His  kingdom  and  glory.  2.  When 
its  operations  are  aimed  against  men,  it  is  perpetrated  by  harassing,  oppressing 
and  persecuting  those  who  are  entitled  to  acts  of  justice,  beneficence,  and  charity, 
and  by  disturbing  the  peace  and  good  order  of  human  society.  3.  When  it  chiefly 
respects  the  persons  themselves  by  whom  it  is  acted,  the  most  daring  iniquities 
are  committed,  forbidden  by  the  law  of  nature,  the  law  of  nations,  and  the  law  of 
God,  in  order  to  gratify  their  ungovernable  desires,  and  to  promote  their  interest, 
honour,  or  pleasure.  II.  Wickedness  bukneth  as  fire.  The  amiable  endow- 
ments of  the  person  in  whom  it  burns,  the  good  dispositions  and  laudable  desires 
with  which  his  mind  is  furnished,  will  fall  a  sacrifice  to  its  rage.  It  will 
enfeeble  the  understanding,  harden  the  conscience,  deprave  the  heart,  hurt  the 
memory,  weaken  the  senses,  debilitate  the  whole  frame  ;  it  will  entirely  eat  away 
peace  of  mind,  and  lead  on  to  contention,  confusion,  and  every  evil  work.  It  will 
devour  the  strength  and  vigour  of  the  body,  bring  on  untimely  old  age,  and 
shorten  the  now  short  life  of  man.  It  will  consume  his  honour  and  reputation, 
and  leave  behind  it  indelible  marks  of  disgrace  and  reproach,  that  shall  not  be 
wiped  away.  It  will  burn  up  his  riches  and  possessions ;  for  by  means  of  it  a  man 
is  often  brought  to  a  piece  of  bread,  and  a  nation  involved  in  irremediable  destruc- 
tion. (R.  Macculloch.)  Wickedness  is  destruction: — There  is  to  be  internecine 
war :  Manasseh  shall  fly  at  Ephraim,  and  Ephraim  at  Manasseh,  and  they  who 
could  agree  upon  nothing  between  themselves  always  agree  in  flying  together 
against  Judah.  This  is  what  wickedness  will  bring  the  world  to — to  murder, 
to  mutual  hatred  and  distrust,  to  perdition.  We  do  not  understand  the  power 
of  wickedness,  because  at  present,  owing  to  religious  thinking  and  action  and 
moral  civilisation,  there  are  so  many  mitigating  circumstances,  so  many  relieving 
lights ;  but  wickedness  in  itself  let  loose  upon  the  earth,  and  the  earth  is  no  longer 
the  abode  of  green  thing,  of  fair  flower,  or  singing  bird,  of  mutual  trust  and  love  : 
it  becomes  a  pandemonium.  If  we  could  consider  this  deeply,  it  would  make 
us  solemn.  We  do  not  consider  it ;  we  are  prepared  to  allow  it  as  a  theory  or  a 
conjecture,  but  the  realisation  of  it  is  kept  far  from  us.  The  wicked  man  kills 
himself ;  puts  his  teeth  into  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm,  and  gnaws  it  with  the  hunger 
of  a  wild  beast.  That  is  what  wickedness  comes  to !  It  is  not  an  intellectual 
error,  not  a  slight  and  passing  mistake,  not  a  lapse  of  judgment,  or  a  momentarily 
lamentable  act  of  misconduct  which  can  easily  be  repaired  :  the  essence  of  wicked- 
ness is  destruction.  Wickedness  would  no  sooner  hesitate  to  kill  a  little  child 
than  to  snap  a  flower.  The  thing  that  keeps  the  world  from  suicide  is  the  provi- 
dence of  God.  Were  God  to  take  away  the  restraining  influences  which  are  keeping 
society  together,  society  would  fall  into  mutual  enmity,  and  the  controversy 
could  only  end  in  mutual  death.  "  For  all  this  His  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but 
His  hand  is  stretched  out  still."  Do  not  blame  the  judgment,  blame  the  sin; 
do  not  say,  How  harsh  is  God,  say,  How  corrupt,  how  blasphemous  is  man  ! 
(J.  Parker,  D.D. )  Injury  inflicted  on  the  body  politic : — A  nation  is  sometimes 
spoken  of  as  a  person  constituted  of  a  soul,  and  the  various  parts  of  a  human 
body.  In  this  political  body  there  are  those  who  act  the  part  of  the  arms,  by 
whom  its  strength  is  exerted,  and  its  safety  preserved.  On  this  principle  I 
explain  this  prediction,  they  shall  eat  every  man  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm.  Every 
one  almost  was  to  be  employed  in  cruelly  harassing  and  devouring  those  whose 
business  it  was  to  support  and  defend  the  interests  of  the  nation.  Unmindful  of 
the  laws  of  nature,  the  ties  of  friendship  and  gratitude,  they  would  vex  and  destroy 
those  useful  members  of  the  community  with  whom  they  were  nearly  connected, 
and  to  whom  they  were  obliged  for  their  efforts  in  their  behalf.     (12.  Macculloch.) 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vers.  1-4.  Woe  unto  them  that  decree  unrighteous  decrees. — Crime  under 
colour  of  law : — The  prophet  has  described  the  sins  of  Ephraim  in  a  general 
manner ;  but  on  the  mention  of  Judah  he  proceeds  to  denounce  what  we  know 
from  the  whole  tenor  of  his  discourses  he  felt  to  be  the  worst  form  of 
the  guilt  of  his  own  people,  with  a  particularity  which  it  is  perhaps  not  fanciful 
to  attribute  to  his  thoughts  being  now  directed  homewards.  The  Ten  Tribes  were 
far  more  ferocious  and  anarchical  than  the  men  of  Judah  :  there  are  more  indica- 
tions in  the  latter  of  that  national  respect  for  law  which  so  characterises  the  English, 
that  it  has  been  observed  (by  Lord  Campbell),  that  though  history  attributes 
to  us  our  share  in  national  wickedness,  our  crimes  have  almost  always  been  com- 
mitted under  colour  of  law,  and  not  by  open  violence, — as  in  the  series  of  judicial 
murders  in  the  reigns  of  Henry  VIII.,  Charles  II.,  and  James  II.  And  thus  Isaiah, 
recurring  to  Judah,  denounces  the  utmost  severity  of  God's  wrath  in  the  day  in 
which  He,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall  come  to  visit  "  an  hypocritical  nation," 
whose  nobles  and  magistrates  decree,  and  execute,  unrighteous  decrees, — "to 
turn  aside  the  needy  from  judgment,"  &c.  (ver.  2).  They  are  satisfied  that  they 
are  safe  in  their  heartless  selfishness,  with  peace  at  home  and  protection  abroad 
restored  by  their  statecraft  and  their  alliance  with  Assyria.  But  while  they 
thus  rejoice  at  home,  "  desolation  cometh  from  afar."  To  whom  will  they  fly 
for  help  when  God  has  abandoned  them  ?  Under  whose  protection  will  they 
leave  their  wealth,  their  dignities,  their  glory,  which  they  have  been  heaping  up  for 
themselves  ?  Captivity  or  death  are  the  only  prospects  before  them.  And  yet,  as 
though  no  judgments  could  sufficiently  condemn  and  punish  their  utter  wickedness, 
the  prophet  repeats, — "  For  all  this  His  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  His  hand  is 
stretched  out  still."  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart. )  God  against  all  unrighteousness : — 
The  Lord's  voice  is  always  for  righteousness.  What  is  it  that  is  denounced  ?  It  is 
the  very  thing  that  is  to  be  denounced  evermore.  There  is  nothing  local  or  temporary 
in  this  cause  of  Divine  offence.  The  Lord  is  against  all  unrighteous  decrees, 
unnatural  alliances,  and  evil  compacts.  This  is  the  very  glory  of  the  majesty  of 
omnipotence,  that  it  is  enlisted  against  every  form  of  evil  and  wrong.  Then,  "  Woe 
unto  them  that  decree  unrighteous  decrees,  and  that  write  grievousness  which  they 
have  prescribed  " — scribes  or  registrars  who  preserve  all  the  forms  of  the  court, 
and  keep  their  pens  busy  upon  the  court  register,  writing  down  every  case,  and 
appearing  to  do  the  business  correctly  and  thoughtfully ;  and  yet,  all  the  while, 
these  very  registrars  were  themselves  plotting  "to  take  away  the  right  from  the 
poor,  that  widows  may  be  their  prey,  and  that  they  may  rob  the  fatherless." 
The  court  of  law  was  turned  into  a  means  of  robbery,  as  it  is  in  nearly  every 
country  under  the  sun.  The  scribes  who  wrote  down  the  law  were  men  who 
secretly  or  ov8rtly  broke  it ;  the  judge  used  his  ermine  as  a  cloak,  that  under 
its  concealment  he  might  thrust  his  hand  farther  into  the  property  of  those 
who  had  no  helper.  "  For  all  this  His  anger  is  not  turned  away."  Blessed  be 
His  name !  Oh,  burn  Thou  against  us  all ;  mighty,  awful,  holy  God,  burn  more 
and  more,  until  we  learn  by  fire  what  we  can  never  learn  by  pity.  The  Lord 
speaks  evermore  for  the  poor,  for  the  widow,  for  the  fatherless,  for  the  helpless. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Oppressors  of  the  poor  and  needy: — I.  Thb  indictment 
drawn  up  against  these  oppressors  (vers.  1,  2).  They  are  charged — 1.  With  making 
wicked  laws  and  edicts.  Woe  to  the  superior  powers  that  devise  and  decree 
these  decrees ;  they  are  not  too  high  to  be  under  the  Divine  check ;  and  woe 
to  the  inferior  officers  that  draw  them  up,  and  enter  them  upon  record,  "  the 
writers  that  write  the  grievousness,"  they  are  not  too  mean  to  be  within  the 
Divine  cognisance.  Principal  and  accessories  shall  fall  under  the  same  woe. 
2.  With  perverting  justice  in  the  execution  of  the  laws  that  were  made.  No  people 
had  statutes  and  judgments  so  righteous  as  they  had ;  and  yet  corrupt  judges 
found  ways  to  "  turn  aside  the  needy  from  judgment,"  to  hinder  them  from 
coming  at  their  right.  3.  With  enriching  themselves  by  oppressing  those  that 
lay  at  their  mercy,  whom  they  ought  to  have  protected.  II.  A  challenge 
given  them,  with  all  their  pride  and  power,  to  outface  the  judgments  of  God 
(ver.  3).  Will  there  not  come  a  desolation  upon  those  that  have  made 
others  desolate  t  Perhaps  it  may  come  from  far,  and  therefore  may  be  long  in 
coming,  but  it  will  come  at  last.  Reprieves  are  not  pardons.  1.  There  is  a 
day  of  visitation  coming,  a  day  of  inquiry  and  discovery,  a  searching  day  which 


chap.  x.J  ISAIAH.  305 

will  bring  to  light,  to  a  true  light,  every  man  and  every  man's  work.  2.  The  day 
of  visitation  will  be  a  day  of  desolation  to  all  wicked  people,  when  all  their 
comforts  and  hopes  will  be  lost  and  gone.  3.  Impenitent  sinners  will  be  utterly 
at  a  loss,  and  will  not  know  what  to  do  in  the  day  of  visitation  and  desolation. 
4.  It  concerns  us  all  seriously  to  consider  what  we  shall  do  in  the  day  of  visitation — 
in  a  day  of  affliction,  in  the  day  of  death  and  judgment,  and  to  provide  that  we 
may  do  well.  III.  Sentence  passed  upon  them,  by  which  they  are  doomed, 
some  to  imprisonment  and  captivity.  (Matthew  Henry.)  Legalised  injustice  :— 
I.  Magistrates  and  rulers  are  answerable  to  God.    II.  Their  decisions 

WILL  BE  REVISED.  III.  THEIR  DECISIONS  WILL  IN  MANY  INSTANCES  BE  REVERSED. 
IV.  THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THEIR  INJUSTICE  WILL  RETURN  BACK  UPON  THEMSELVES. 

{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Oppression  resisted  (Taxation  of  Henry  VIII.) : — In  every 
county  a  tenth  was  demanded  from  the  laity  and  a  fourth  from  the  clergy  by  the 
royal  commissioners.  But  the  demand  was  met  by  a  general  resistance.  .  .  . 
A  revolt  actually  broke  out  among  the  weavers  of  Suffolk  ;  the  men  of  Cambridge 
banded  for  resistance ;  the  Norwich  clothiers,  though  they  yielded  at  first,  soon 
threatened  to  rise.  "  Who  is  your  captain  ?  "  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  asked  the 
crowd.  "  His  name  is  Poverty,"  was  the  answer,  "  for  he  and  his  cousin 
Necessity  have  brought  us  to  this  doing."  There  was,  in  fact,  a  general  strike  of 
the  employers.  Cloth  makers  discharged  their  workers,  farmers  put  away  their 
servants.  "  They  say  the  king  asketh  so  much  that  they  be  not  able  to  do  as 
they  have  done  before  this  time."  Such  a  peasant  insurrection  as  was  raging  in 
Germany  was  only  prevented  by  the  unconditional  withdrawal  of  the  royal 
demand.     («/.  E.  Green's  English  People. ) 

Ver.  3.  And  what  will  ye  do  In  the  day  of  visitation  ? — The  day  of 
visitation : — In  Scripture  style  the  season  in  which  God  is  pleased  to  draw 
near  to  a  person  or  people,  that  He  may  accomplish  various  important 
purposes,  is  called  a  day  of  visitation.  1.  Sometimes  His  visitation  is  intended 
to  afford  deliverance  and  consolation  to  the  oppressed,  by  extricating  them  from 
servitude  and  misery,  and  introducing  them  into  a  happy  and  comfortable 
condition.  In  this  sense  the  Lord  is  said  to  have  visited  His  people  Israel,  when 
He  delivered  them  from  Egyptian  bondage  (Exod.  iv.  31) ;  and  to  have  visited 
and  redeemed  His  people  when  He  bestowed  upon  them  the  greatest  mercy 
(Luke  i.  68).  2.  Sometimes  it  is  designed  to  manifest  His  tender  care  and  constant 
inspection  of  His  people,  over  whom  He  exerciseth  the  most  vigilant  attention, 
that  He  may  effectually  promote  their  best  interests  (Psa.  lxxxix.  32).  Such 
times  are  indeed  days  of  visitation,  wherein  God  sensibly  draws  near  with  the 
proofs  of  His  kindness  and  favour,  which  He  most  undeservedly  confers ;  and  in 
which  He  appears  with  His  rod  of  correction,  that  He  may  administer  necessary 
chastisements,  and  restore  those  who  had  forsaken  His  laws  from  their  wanderings. 
3.  At  other  times,  God  visits  those  who  have  not  profited  by  the  many  warnings 
they  have  received,  nor  repented  of  the  sins  they  have  committed,  notwith- 
standing the  repeated  corrections  that  He  hath  administered,  to  execute  upon 
them  desolating  judgments  and  terrible  vengeance  (Jer.  v.  9).  In  this  last 
sense,  I  suppose,  the  day  of  visitation  is  here  meant.  (R.  Maccuttoch.)  The 
day  of  visitation : — So  far  from  God  having  abandoned  the  world,  He  is  continually 
calling  it  to  account.  Not  only  has  He  fixed  in  His  eternal  mind  a  period  of  final 
visitation,  but  days  of  visitation  are  repeatedly  coming.  And  who  knows  how 
many  may  come  to  us  ?  I.  Thjr  solemn  period  spoken  op.  God  is  said  to 
"  visit "  men  when  He  comes  to  them,  or  reveals  Himself,  either  in  mercy  or 
judgment.  Christ  Himself  calls  the  days  of  His  ministry  among  the  Jews  the 
day  of  their  visitation — their  Gospel  day  of  mercy.  But  the  term,  as  used  in 
our  text,  is  to  be  understood  in  the  contrary  sense,  to  denote  a  period  of  judgment. 
There  are  several  periods  which  are  days  of  Divine  visitation.  1.  The  day  of 
trouble.  2.  The  day  of  affliction.  3.  The  day  of  death.  4.  The  day  of  judg- 
ment. II.  The  soul-awakening  appeal  made.  "  What  will  ye  do  ?  To 
whom  will  ye  flee  for  help  ?  "  This  language  implies  that  something  has  need 
to  be  done — that  help  will  be  required.  Self-sufficient  as  we  may  wish  to  think 
ourselves  when  all  is  bright,  whenever  either  of  the  days  of  Divine  visitation  comes, 
we  shall  find  that  "  help  "  will  be  needed  in  order  to  stand  the  trial  welL  If  so, 
what  will  you  do  ?  1.  What  in  the  day  of  trouble  ?  Many  are  then  overwhelmed 
thereby ;  in  these  circumstances  many  die  in  despair,  fade  away  in  melancholy, 
or  lay  violent  hands  on  themselves.  When  every  draught  of  life's  cup  is  the  very 
20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x. 

gall  of  biterness,  where  will  ye  go  for  sweetness  ?  2.  Should  afflictive  visitations 
come  on,  what  then  will  ye  do  ?  You  may  flee  to  the  physician,  but  he  can  do  no 
more  than  the  God  of  means  may  permit  him.  3.  And  then,  when  the  day  of 
dissolution,  that  awful  day  of  "  visitation  "  comes,  what  will  ye  do  ?  Will  you 
send  for  your  minister  to  pray  for  you  ?  But  what  avail  his  prayers,  if  you  do 
not  pray  for  yourself  ?  4.  And  when  the  last  great  day — that  day  of  all  days — 
comes,  oh,  what  then  shall  we  do  ?  and  where  shall  we  flee  for  help  ?  Now, 
bring  all  this  to  a  point.  (1)  Settle  it  in  your  minds  that  days  of  visitation  will 
come.  (2)  How  necessary,  now  in  the  time  of  our  merciful  visitation  of  Gospel 
offers  and  encouragements,  to  make  the  Almighty  God  our  friend  by  faith  in 
Christ.  (3)  If  we  do  not,  must  we  not  expect  to  be  abandoned  and  left  to  ever- 
lasting ruin,  without  help  or  hope  ?  (Essex  Remembrancer.)  Wliat  will  ye  do 
in  the  day  of  visitation  ? — However  wicked  men  may  natter  themselves,  or  be 
flattered  by  others,  God  will  not  do  it.  L  Let  us  notice  two  or  three  particulars 
contained  en  the  text,  before  we  pursue  the  principal  inquiry.  1.  The 
persons  originally  addressed  were  the  children  of  Israel,  a  rebellious  people; 
but  the  words  are  applicable  to  sinners  of  every  description,  2.  For  the  people 
of  Israel  "  a  day  of  visitation  "  was  appointed,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  us. 
There  are  days  of  visitation  to  individuals  as  well  as  to  whole  nations.  II.  Pursue 
the  principal  inquiry  :  "  What  will  ye  do  T  "  &c.  1.  Will  you  plead  and 
expostulate  with  God  ?  At  a  throne  of  grace  the  sinner  may  indeed  plead  with 
God,  but  what  arguments  will  avail  at  the  tribunal  of  His  justice  ?  2.  Will  you 
attempt  to  resist  Him  ?  3.  Will  you  fly  from  Him  ?  Whither  ?  4.  Will  you 
harden  yourselves  against  Him ;  and  seeing  you  cannot  escape  punishment,, 
endeavour  to  support  yourselves  under  it  as  well  as  you  can;  saying,  with  impenitent 
Israel,  "Truly  this  is  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear  it"  ?  (Jer.  x.  19).  "Who  can  stand 
before  His  indignation  ?  "  (Joel  ii.  11 ;  Nah.  i.  2-6).  5.  Will  you  cast  yourselves 
at  His  feet,  and  adopt  the  humble  and  submissive  language  of  David :  "  If  He 
say,  I  have  no  delight  in  thee,  here  am  I ;  let  Him  do  to  me  as  seemeth  good 
in  His  sight"  ?  This  certainly  would  be  highly  proper,  before  the  decree  is  gone 
forth,  and  such  humiliation  would  be  accepted ;  but  it  cannot  be  done  afterwards, 
or  if  done,  it  would  not  avail.  Propose  then  to  yourselves  another  question :  What 
shall  I  do  before  this  day  of  visitation  come,  that  I  may  avoid  the  tremendous 
consequences  ?  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  day  of  visitation  and  preparation 
for  it : — I.  A  dat  op  visitation  is  coming  upon  all  men.    II.  It  is  op  the 

GREATEST  IMPORTANCE  TO  BE  PREPARED  FOR  THIS  DAY.  1.  Because  yOUT  happi- 
ness, when  the  day  of  visitation  comes,  will  depend  upon  it.  2.  It  will  be  positive 
misery  to  be  unprepared.  3.  You  have  an  invaluable  treasure  in  peril.  4.  If 
you  come  to  judgment  unprepared  it  will  be  too  late  for  ever.     III.  God  in  His 

MERCY  PRESSES  THIS  SOLEMN  QUESTION  UPON  OUR  SERIOUS  AND  DEVOUT  CON- 
SIDERATION. 1.  It  appears  clear  that  God  does  sincerely  desire  the  happiness 
of  all  men.  2.  His  thus  pressing  this  solemn  thought  upon  men's  consideration 
shows  that  they  are  unwilling  to  obey  God.  3.  Man's  want  of  happiness  is 
entirely  with  himself  and  not  with  God.  (N.  M.  Harry.)  Where  will  ye 
leave  your  glory  ?  — The  vanity  of  earthly  glory : — The  principal  word  in 
this  short  question  seems,  by  its  very  sound,  to  bring  before  the  mind 
indistinctly,  a  vision  of  something  great  and  magnificent,  vet  unsubstantial 
and  vain.  When  we  bring  our  thoughts  upon  it  more  distinctly,  we  recognise  it 
as  the  most  conspicuous  favourite  term  of  heathenism.  We  mean  a  heathenism 
of  all  times  and  countries  ;  that  action  and  passion  of  the  human  mind,  by  which 
notions  and  feelings  of  greatness,  transcendent  value,  have  been  attached  to 
certain  things  of  but  imaginary  worth ;  which  things  have  been  coveted, 
adored,  toiled  for,  fought  for,  lived  for,  died  for — as  glory.  "  Glory,"  therefore, 
has  been  the  name  of  vanity  turned  into  a  god.  And  how  vast  the  dominion  of 
this  idolatrous  delusion  !  What  it  consists  of — the  world's  glory — is  readily 
apprehended.  That  a  man  be  conspicuous  among  and  above  his  fellow-mortals ; 
be  much  observed,  admired,  even  envied  as  being  that  which  they  cannot  be. 
I.  Where  will  ye  leave  your  glory  ?  It  is,  then,  after  all,  not  really  united  to 
the  man.  He  expends  the  ardour  of  his  soul  to  combine  it  with  his  being — to 
make  it  his  very  substance — but  it  is  extraneous  still !  He  may  have  to  go 
where  it  will  not  accompany  him.  IL  And  where  will  they  leave  their  glory  ? 
Where,  that  it  can  in  any  sense  continue  to  be  theirs — theirs,  for  any  beneficial 
or  gratifying  effect  to  them  ?  What  will  it  be  to  them  how  it  falls  to  other 
mortals  ?    Nothing  is  more  mournful  than  parting  with  what  is  passionately 


ohap.  x.]  ISAIAH.  307 

loved,  under  a  perfect  certainty  of  possessiDg  it  no  more.  III.  As  the  concluding 
part  of  these  meditations,  let  us  briefly  apply  them  to  several  of  the  forms 
of  this  world's  glory.  There  is  presented  a  Christian,  a  heavenly,  an  eternal 
glory.  When  the  lovers  of  glory  are  invited  to  this,  and  scorn  it,  and  reject  it, 
what  is  it  that  they  take  ?  1.  The  most  common  form  of  the  idolised  thing 
is — what  may  be  called  the  material  splendour  of  life;  that  which  immediately 
strikes  the  senses.  But  they  must  leave  their  glory.  2.  It  is,  in  part,  a  different 
and  additional  form  of  the  world's  glory,  when  we  mention  elevated  rank  in 
society.  All  know  how  vehemently  coveted  and  envied  is  this  glory,  —  how 
elated,  for  the  most  part,  the  possessors  of  it  feel.  But  the  thought  of  leaving 
it !  With  what  a  grim  and  ghostly  aspect  this  thought  must  appear,  when  it  will 
sometimes  intrude !  3.  The  possession  of  power  is  perhaps  the  idol  supreme ; 
to  have  at  control,  and  in  complete  subjection,  the  action  and  the  condition  of 
numbers  of  mankind ;  to  see  the  crowd,  whether  in  heart  obsequious  or  rebellious, 
practically  awed,  submissive,  obedient.  But  it  is  not  that  voice  that  is  long  to 
command  !  4.  We  might  have  named  martial  glory, — the  object  of  the  most 
ardent  aspiration,  and  of  the  most  pernicious  idolatry.  There  is  often  an  utter 
delusion  in  this  expectation.  5.  In  the  last  place  might  be  named  intellectual 
glory, — that  of  knowledge,  talent,  and  great  mental  performance.  If,  in  that 
passion  for  renown,  you  have  exerted  great  powers  of  mind  to  do  fatal  mischief — 
to  overwhelm  truth — to  corrupt  the  morals — to  explode  religion — to  degrade 
the  glory  of  the  Redeemer — what  then  ?  If  you  can,  in  that  world,  have  any 
vital  sympathy  with  your  fame,  your  influence  remaining  in  this,  the  conse- 
quence would  but  be  a  quick  continual  succession  of  direful  shocks,  conveyed 
to  your  living  spirit  from  what  your  works  are  doing  here.  Contrast  with  all 
these  forma  of  folly,  the  predominant  aim  of  a  Christian — which  is  "  glory  "  still ; 
but  a  glory  which  he  will  not  have  to  leave ;  a  glory  accumulating  for  him  in 
the  world  to  which  he  is  going.     (John  Foster.) 

Vers.  6-34.  0  Assyrian. — "  O  Assyrian  "  •• — "  Ho  Asshur,"  the  name  both 
of  the  people  and  its  national  god.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  judg~ 
ment  of  the  world-power  : — The  leading  idea  of  the  passage  is  the  contrast  between 
the  mission  assigned  to  Assyria  in  the  scheme  of  Jehovah's  providence,  and  the 
ambitious  policy  of  universal  dominion  cherished  by  the  rulers  of  that  empire. 
Assyria  was  the  instrument  chosen  by  Jehovah  to  manifest  His  sole  Deity  by  the 
extinction  of  all  the  nationalities  that  put  their  trust  in  false  gods.  But  the 
great  world-power,  intoxicated  by  its  success,  and  attributing  this  to  its  own 
wisdom  and  resource,  recognises  no  difference  between  Jehovah  and  other  gods, 
but  confidently  reckons  on  proving  His  impotence  by  the  subjugation  of  His 
land  and  people.  Hence,  it  becomes  necessary  for  Jehovah  to  vindicate  His 
supreme  Godhead  by  the  destruction  of  the  power  which  has  thus  impiously 
transgressed  the  limits  of  His  providential  commission.  And  this  judgment 
will  take  place  at  the  very  moment  when  Assyria  seeks  to  crown  its  career  of 
conquest  by  an  assault  on  Jehovah's  sanctuary  on  Mount  Zion,  the  earthly  seat 
of  His  government.  (Ibid.)  Assyria  an  instrument  of  vengeance: — We  must 
not  omit  the  reflection  that  this  was  a  terrible  thing  for  Assyria.  What  man 
likes  to  be  an  instrument  through  which  righteousness  will  punish  some  other 
man  ?  Who  would  willingly  accept  a  calling  and  election  so  severe  ?  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  Nations  instruments  in  the  hands  of  Ood  : — What  are  the  nations  but 
instruments  in  the  hands  of  Him  who  made  them  ?  So  we  are  puzzled  and 
perplexed  by  many  an  imperial  policy  ;  we  do  not  like  it,  and  yet  still  it  proceeds 
to  work  out  all  its  mysterious  issues — now  severe,  now  beneficent.  We  are  in 
tumult  and  darkness  and  perplexity,  thick  and  that  cannot  be  disentangled ; 
and  how  seldom  we  realise  the  fact  that  all  this  may  be  a  Divine  movement, 
a  clouding  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  an  outworking  of  Divine  and  eternal  pur- 
poses. (Ibid.)  Our  Assyria  may  be  the  world  in  Christ's  sense,  that  flood  of 
successful,  heartless,  unscrupulous,  scornful  forces  which  burst  on  our  innocence, 
with  their  challenge  to  make  terms  and  pay  tribute,  or  go  down  straightway 
in  the  struggle  for  existence.  ...  It  is  useless  to  think  that  we  common 
men  cannot  possibly  sin  after  the  grand  manner  of  this  imperial  monster.  In 
our  measure  we  fatally  can.  In  this  commercial  age  private  persons  very  easily 
rise  to  a  position  of  influence  which  gives  almost  as  vast  a  stage  for  egotism  to 
display  itself  as  the  Assyrian  boasted.  But  after  all  the  human  Ego  needs  very 
little  room  to  develop  the  possibilities  of  atheism  that  are  in  it.    An  idol  it  an 


30S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

idol,  whether  you  put  it  on  a  small  or  a  large  pedestal.  A  little  man  with  a  little 
work  may  as  easily  stand  between  himself  and  God  as  an  emperor  with  the  world 
at  his  feet.  Forgetfulness  that  he  is  a  servant,  a  trader  on  graciously  intrusted 
capital — and  then  at  the  best  an  unprofitable  one — is  not  less  sinful  in  a  small 
egoist  than  in  a  great  one ;  it  is  only  very  much  more  ridiculous  than  Isaiah,  with 
his  scorn,  has  made  it  to  appear  in  the  Assyrian.  {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Our 
Assyria  may  be  the  forces  of  nature,  which  have  swept  upon  the  knowledge  of 
this  generation  with  the  novelty  and  impetus  with  which  the  northern  hosts 
burst  across  the  horizon  of  Israel.  Men  to-day,  in  the  course  of  their  education, 
become  acquainted  with  laws  and  forces  which  dwarf  the  simpler  theologies 
of  their  boyhood,  pretty  much  as  the  primitive  beliefs  of  Israel  dwindled  before 
the  arrogant  face  of  Assyria.  The  alternative  confronts  them  either  to  retain, 
with  a  narrowed  and  fearful  heart,  their  old  conceptions  of  God,  or  to  find  their 
enthusiasm  in  studying,  and  their  duty  in  relating  themselves  to,  the  forces  of 
nature  alone.  If  this  be  the  only  alternative,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that 
most  men  will  take  the  latter  course.  We  ought  as  little  to  wonder  at  men  of 
to-day  abandoning  certain  theologies  and  forms  of  religion  for  a  downright 
naturalism — for  the  study  of  powers  that  appeal  so  much  to  the  curiosity  and 
reverence  of  man — as  we  wonder  at  the  poor  Jews  of  the  eighth  century  before 
Christ  forsaking  their  provincial  conceptions  of  God  as  a  tribal  Deity  for 
homage  to  this  great  Assyrian  who  handled  the  nations  and  their  gods  as  his 
playthings.  But  is  such  the  only  alternative  ?  Is  there  no  higher  and  sovereign 
■  conception  of  God,  in  which  even  these  natural  forces  may  find  their  explanation 
and  term  ?  Isaiah  found  such  a  conception  for  his  problem,  and  his  problem 
was  very  similar  to  ours.  Beneath  his  idea  of  God,  exalted  and  spiritual,  even 
the  imperial  Assyrian,  in  all  his  arrogance,  fell  subordinate  and  serviceable.  The 
prophet's  faith  never  wavered,  and  in  the  end  was  vindicated  by  history.  Shall 
we  not  at  least  attempt  his  method  of  solution  ?  We  could  not  do  better  than 
by  taking  his  factors.  Isaiah  got  a  God  more  powerful  than  Assyria,  by  simply 
exalting  the  old  God  of  his  nation  in  righteousness.     (Ibid. ) 

Vers.  7-9.  Howbeit  he  meaneth  not  so.  —  Man  proposes,  but  God  dis- 
poses : — "  He  meaneth  not  so."  1.  The  wise  God  often  makes  even  the 
sinful  passions  and  projects  of  men  subservient  to  His  own  great  and  holy  pur- 
poses. 2.  When  God  makes  use  of  men  as  instruments  in  His  hands  to  do  His 
work,  it  is  very  common  for  Him  to  mean  one  thing,  and  them  to  mean  another ; 
nay,  for  them  to  mean  quite  contrary  to  what  He  intends  (Gen.  1.  20  ;  Mic.  iv. 
11,  12).  Men  have  their  ends,  and  God  His  ;  but  we  are  sure  "  the  counsel  of 
the  Lord  that  shall  stand."  (M .  Henry. )  God's  use  of  evil  men  : — As  in  applying 
of  leeches  the  physician  seeketh  the  health  of  his  patient,  the  leech  only  the  filling 
of  his  gorge,  so  is  it  when  God  turneth  loose  a  bloody  enemy  upon  His  people  ; 
He  hath  excellent  ends,  which  they  think  not  on.  (J.  Trapp.)  It  is  ia 
his  heart  to  destroy  and  cnt  off  nations  not  a  few. —  Assyrian  conquests: — 
The  significance  of  ver.  9  appears  when  the  dates  of  the  events  alluded 
to  are  considered.  .  .  .  The  application  to  Jerusalem  is  obvious.  ...  It 
is  true  the  conquests  alluded  to  in  vers.  9-11  are  not  those  of  Sennacherib, 
and  vers.  13,  &c,  would  be  in  his  mouth  an  exaggeration ;  and  hence  the  prophecy 
has  been  referred  by  some  to  the  period  of  Sargon.  But  the  subject  in  vers. 
7-11  is  "  Assyria  "  (see  ver.  5),  and  though  Isaiah  may  have  regarded  the  king 
(ver.  12)  as  being  here  the  speaker,  yet  vers.  5,  &c,  show  that  he  speaks,  not  with 
reference  to  his  personal  achievements,  but  as  an  impersonation  of  the  policy 
of  his  nation.  And  this  policy  Sennacherib  in  701  was  truly  maintaining.  The 
language  of  these  verses  does  not,  therefore,  in  reality  militate  against  a  date 
which  in  other  respects  is  in  entire  accordance  with  the  contents  of  the  prophecy. 
(Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  Foolish  ambition  : — Pyrrhus,  King  of  Epirus,  having 
enlarged  his  dominions  by  the  conquest  of  Macedonia,  was  bent  upon  subduing 
Italy,  and  adding  it  to  his  empire.  Asking  the  advice  of  his  counsellor  Cineas, 
he  inquired  of  the  prince  what  he  meant  to  do  after  he  conquered  Italy  ?  "  Next," 
said  he,  "  I  mean  to  invade  Sicily,  which  is  a  rich  and  powerful  country  and  not 
far  off."  "  When  you  have  got  Sicily,"  said  Cineas,  "  what  then  ?  "  Africa," 
replied  the  king,  "  containing  many  fine  kingdoms,  is  at  no  great  distance,  and 
through  my  renown  and  the  valour  of  my  troops,  I  may  subdue  them."  "  Be 
it  so,"  said  the  counsellor,  "  when  you  have  vanquished  the  kingdoms  of  Africa, 
tfhat  will  you  do  then  T  "     Pyrrhus  answered,  "  Then  you  and  I  will  be  merry 


chap,  x.1  ISAIAH.  309 

and  have  good  cheer."  Cineas  replied,  "  Sir,  if  this  be  the  end  at  which  you  aim, 
what  need  you  venture  your  life,  your  honour,  your  kingdoms,  and  all  that  you 
have,  to  purchase  what  you  already  possess.  Epirus  and  Macedonia  are  sufficient 
to  make  you  and  me  merry  :  had  yon  all  the  world  you  could  not  be  more  merry, 
nor  have  better  cheer."     (R.  Macculloch.) 

Ver.  12.  When  the  Lord  hath  performed  His  whole  work  upon  Mount  Zion. — 

God's  two-sided  providence  : — 1.  God  designed  to  do  good  to  Zion  and  Jerusalem 
by  this  providence.  When  God  lets  loose  the  enemies  of  His  Church  and  people, 
and  suffers  them  for  a  time  to  prevail,  it  is  in  order  to  the  performing  of  some 
great  good  work  upon  them ;  and  when  that  is  done,  then,  and  not  till  then,  He 
will  work  deliverance  for  them.  2.  When  God  had  wrought  this  work  of  grace 
for  His  people,  He  would  work  a  work  of  wrath  and  vengeance  upon  their  invaders. 
(M.  Henry.)  Stoutness  of  heart : — The  "  stout  heart  "  here  threatened  is 
entirely  different  from  true  magnanimity  or  greatness  of  mind,  arising  from  good 
principles  and  accompanied  with  other  virtues,  which  excites  to  the  most  laudable 
and  renowned  actions.  It  is  an  odious,  stubborn  disposition,  which  acts  in  direct 
contrariety  to  lowliness  of  mind  and  poverty  of  spirit,  whereby  people  are  inclined 
to  think  modestly  of  their  abilities  and  performances ;  it  proceeds  from  pride, 
is  strengthened  by  external  grandeur  and  dignity,  and  discovered  by  vain  self- 
conceit  and  foolish  boasting  of  past  exertions  and  successes,  and  future  intended 
enterprises.  The  fruit  of  the  king  of  Assyria's  stout  heart  was  a  daring  expedition 
against  Jerusalem,  undertaken  in  proud  contempt  of  the  true  God,  and  accom- 
panied with  blasphemous  insults,  repeatedly  offered  to  the  Most  High  over  all 
the  earth.  (R.  Macculloch.)  Penalty  in  apparent  success: — When  the  scum 
is  at  highest,  it  falls  in  the  fire.     {J.  Trapp. ) 

Ver.  13.  For  he  salth,  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done  it— 
The  ungodliness  of  worldly  pursuits :  —  1.  Let  us  reflect  on  the  total  for- 
getfulness  of  God,  and  the  unwillingness  to  recognise  His  power  and  presence, 
with  which  objects  of  human  interest  and  ambition  are  frequently  prosecuted 
and  enjoyed.  2.  Let  us  dwell  on  the  spirit  with  which  worldly  men  engage  in 
the  pursuit  of  their  favourite  objects,  the  temper  and  disposition  of  mind  with 
which  they  encounter  disappointment,  and  the  kind  of  happiness  which  they 
derive  from  the  success  of  their  enterprises.  (1)  The  ardour  with  which  they 
prosecute  these  is  virtually  a  declaration  that  they  are  determined  to  be  happy 
independently  of  God  ;  the  firmness  and  perseverance  with  which  they  struggle 
with  adversity,  and  labour  to  retrieve  their  losses,  are  so  many  attempts  to  dispute 
with  Him  the  determination  of  events,  and  to  wrest  from  His  hand  the  govern- 
ment of  the  universe ;  and  when  they  have  been  successful  almost  or  altogether 
to  the  extent  of  their  expectations,  and  when  they  contrast  the  success  that  has 
rewarded  them  with  the  failure  and  disappointment  that  have  befallen  others 
in  similar  circumstances, — the  principle  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  their 
enjoyments,  and  gives  zest  to  every  other  gratification,  is  substantially  that  which 
is  expressed  in  our  text,  "  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done  it,  and  by  my 
wisdom,  for  I  am  prudent."  (2)  It  is  not,  however,  to  those  only  who  place 
their  chief  good  in  a  given  portion  of  this  world's  wealth,  that  these  observations 
are  applicable.  They  will  be  found  to  hold  equally  true  in  the  case  of  those 
who  can  find  in  the  exercise  of  high  intellectual  endowments  a  gratification  which 
mere  worldly  wealth  never  could  furnish, — but  who  have  not  yet  acquired  any 
capacity  for  the  purer  and  more  permanent  happiness  of  a  growing  conformity 
to  the  Divine  image  in  this  world,  and  the  enjoyment  of  eternal  communion  with 
God  in  the  world  to  come.  Elevated  as  such  pursuits  may  be,  and  profound  as 
is  the  homage  of  respect  which  the  world  is  called  upon,  and  readily  consents  to 
pay  to  them,  yet,  wherever  they  constitute  the  only  portion  that  the  soul  seeks 
after,  and  occupy  that  place  in  the  affections  which  God  claims  as  His  own,  then 
they  bear  upon  them  the  same  impress  of  ungodliness  which  characterises  the 
schemes  of  worldly  aggrandisement,  and  may  ultimately  be  traced  to  the  very 
same  principle.  (3)  The  same  remark  is  applicable  also  to  the  man  who,  by  the 
benevolence  of  his  character  and  the  irreproachable  regularity  of  his  life,  has 
secured  the  world's  respect,  and  who  builds  with  confidence  on  his  many  virtues 
as  a  sure  foundation  of  hope  for  the  future ;  for  when  such  a  man  contrasts  his 
own  character  with  that  of  multitudes  around  him,  it  will  be  with  feelings  of  self- 
complacency.     3.  It  would  be  easy,  by  entering  on  the  detail  of  particular  cases, 


310  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohai-.  x. 

to  show  how  the  principle  in  the  text  pervades  all  the  business  and  the  pleasures 
of  an  unregenerate  world.  4.  The  sentiment  is  as  foolish  with  regard  to  the  sinner, 
as  it  is  impious  with  respect  to  the  Almighty ;  for  as  well  might  it  be  supposed 
that  the  movements  of  the  material  universe  would  remain  undisturbed,  though 
the  principle  that  is  essential  to  its  stability  were  annihilated,  as  that  an  intelligent 
and  moral  creature  could  be  permanently  blessed,  if  released  from  the  law  of 
dependence  on  his  Creator.  (R.  Gordon,  D.D.)  "  Remover  of  boundaries  "  : — 
A  title  assumed  by  the  Assjnrian  kings.  They  claimed  to  be  king  of  kings,  and 
lord    paramount   or    superior.     (B.    Blake,    B.D.)  Robbing   tr easier e  : — Great 

conquerors  are  many  times  no  better  than  great  robbers.     (Matthew  Eenry.) 

Ver.  14.  And  my  hand  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches  of  the  people. — 
A  proud  boast  of  utter  subjugation :  —  The  Assyrian  conqueror  has  gathered 
all  the  earth  as  one  gathers  the  eggs  from  which  he  has  first  driven  off  the 
terrified  hen -bird.  But  she  would  hover  round  her  rifled  nest  and  its 
plunderer  with  a  trepidating  flight  and  piercing  cry,  than  which  no  movements 
and  sounds  in  the  brute  creation  express  more  anguish  ;  while  these  spoiled  nations 
dare  not  show  even  such  instinctive  signs  of  a  broken  heart,  but  know  a  depth 
beyond  that  depth — "  there  was  none  that  moved  the  wing,  or  opened  the  mouth, 
or  chirped."  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Easy  conquest : — "  I  have  taken  by  my 
might  the  riches  of  the  people,  with  as  great  ease  as  a  countryman  takes  young 
birds  out  of  a  nest ;  yea,  as  one  taketh  and  gathereth  eggs  which  the  bird  hath 
forsaken  " — which  is  easier  than  to  take  birds.  ( W.  Day,  M.A.)  Unholy  brag : — 
Strange  that  ever  men,  who  were  made  to  do  good,  should  take  a  pride  and  take 
a  pleasure  in  doing  wrong  or  doing  mischief  to  all  about  them  without  control, 
and  should  reckon  that  their  glory  which  is  their  shame.     (M.  Eenry.) 

Ver.  15.  Shall  the  axe  boast  itself  against  him  that  heweth  therewith  T — 
The  Divine  supremacy : — All  the  various  orders  of  creatures,  natural  and 
supernatural,  animate  and  inanimate,  are  under  the  control  of  the  Divine 
Being,  who  uses  them  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  own  purposes.  The 
Assyrians  were  not  conscious  of  being  the  Lord's  servants ;  it  was,  therefore,  no 
virtue  in  them  to  be  employed  in  His  service.  Mark  the  speech  of  the  king  of 
Assyria,  it  is  vain  and  fulsome  enough.  Here  observe — I.  The  sovereignty  op 
God.  1.  This  is  a  doctrine  of  Scripture.  2.  The  term  sovereignty  is  suitable 
here,  since  it  is  significant  of  the  supremacy  of  the  Divine  Being.  Where  shall 
we  go  for  manifestations  of  the  Divine  sovereignty  ?  (1)  To  creation.  (2)  The 
moral  government  of  the  world  furnishes  the  most  striking  illustration  of  the 
Divine  sovereignty.  II.  The  subjection  of  men.  1.  Man  is  not  a  merely 
passive  instrument,  but  an  active  being,  dependent  upon  and  under  the  control 
of  his  Maker.  2.  Man  is  a  voluntary  agent,  has  in  possession  a  power  which  we 
call  will,  and  an  awful  power  it  is  either  for  good  or  evil.  It  imports  responsi- 
bility. 3.  Still,  whatever  may  be  said  about  the  will  of  man,  or  the  will  of  a 
nation,  considered  as  a  power,  it  must  be  allowed  that  man  and  his  circumstances, 
that  nations  with  all  their  complicated  affairs,  are  under  the  control  of  the  Divine 
Being.  4.  The  Divine  Being  is  still  at  the  head  of  the  nations  of  the  earth, 
directing  and  controlling  all  their  affairs,  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  own 
ends ;  just  as  a  man  directs  and  controls  the  mountain  stream,  for  the  working 
of  his  mill,  or  the  watering  of  his  lands.  III.  The  sin  of  slighting  the  Divtne 
Being.  1.  It  is  obvious  that  man  has  no  choice  as  to  whether  or  no  he  will 
have  to  do  with  his  Maker.  Man's  choice  is  as  to  whether  or  no  he  will  pursue 
a  line  of  conduct  befitting  the  relation  in  which  he  stands  to  God ;  whether  he 
will  obey  or  disobey,  honour  or  slight  God.  2.  It  is  in  the  very  nature  of  a 
creature  to  be  dependent ;  man  is  a  creature,  and  therefore  dependent  upon 
God  for  everything  essential  to  his  temporal  welfare ;  and  certainly  not  less 
go  for  everything  essential  to  his  spiritual  welfare.  3.  It  is  therefore  irrational, 
and  indeed  grossly  sinful,  for  those  who  excel  others  in  station,  in  fortune,  in  respect 
to  anything  that  may  be  justly  deemed  an  advantage,  to  ascribe  the  difference 
altogether,  or  even  mainly  to  their  own  skill  and  efforts ;  as  though  there  were 
no  God,  or  as  though  He  were  unable,  or  unwilling,  to  interfere  with  human  affairs 
(1  Cor.  iv.  7).  4.  God  is  jealous  of  His  honour.  He  cannot  give  His  glory  to 
another.  6.  The  case  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  as  recorded  in  Dan.  iv.,  furnishes  a 
remarkable  illustration  of  the  supremacy  of  the  Divine  Being,  and  of  the  sin  of 
slighting  it.     We  infer — (1)  That  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  there  should  be  various 


chap,  x.]  ISAIAH.  311 

distinctions  among  men  with  regard  to  circumstances  ;  that  some  should  be  above 
others.  (2)  It  is  the  imperative  duty  of  man,  whatever  his  rank  or  position  in 
society,  to  acknowledge  the  Divine  Being,  uniformly  and  constantly.  (3)  The 
Divine  supremacy  ought  to  be  cheerfully  acknowledged  in  every  household. 
(4)  Let  the  nations  of  the  earth  acknowledge  the  Divine  authority.  (5)  The 
Church  especially  is  bound  to  honour  God.  (W.  Winterbum.)  The  worker  and 
his  tools : — These  words  describe  one  of  the  common  temptations  of  strong  men 
in  every  sphere  of  action.  Pointing  to  power  in  the  sphere  of  human  industry, 
we  say,  *  Shall  the  axe  boast  itself  against  him  that  heweth  therewith  T  " 
I.  The  seal  connection  op  human  industry  with  God.  Useful  and  fine  art 
belongs  to  the  original  idea  of  man  as  a  working  being.  Man  is  conformed  to  the 
design  of  his  nature  when  muscle  and  nerve,  mind  and  heart,  are  taxed  in  the 
productions  of  human  industry.  1.  This  is  made  evident  by  the  constitution 
of  man.  Sinfulness  does  not  belong  to  the  Divine  idea  of  man.  Hence  man's 
inward  nature  does  not  approve  of  sin.  But  industry  produces  no  such  distress 
and  confusion  in  the  soul.  2.  This  is  further  seen  in  the  kind  of  world  which  God 
has  made  our  present  home.  Some  things  He  has  hidden,  and  others  so  constituted 
that  we  must  search,  discover,  adapt,  apply,  and  manufacture,  before  we  can  get 
from  the  earth  (although  full  of  God's  riches)  what  we  really  need.  The  toil  and 
sorrow  which  are  now  connected  with  labour  do  not  pertain  to  the  original  ordin- 
ance of  labour.  But  even  this  discipline  is  merciful.  In  prison  labour  the  criminal 
is  sometimes  required  to  turn  a  wheel  connected  with  a  loaded  crank.  The  power 
is  applied  to  no  useful  purpose,  but  is  merely  intended  to  weary  the  prisoner,  and 
thus  to  punish  him.  And  one  bitter  element  in  this  correction  is  this,  the 
prisoner  knows  that  his  labour  produces  nothing.  Now,  God  has  superadded  toil 
to  work,  but  with  toil  He  has  connected  increase.  3.  The  mode  in  which  Scripture 
speaks  of  the  arts  sustains  the  doctrine  we  now  propound.  Not  one  word  is 
written  in  the  Bible  against  the  highest  development  of  human  industry.  On 
the  contrary,  much  is  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  nature  of  sanction. 
When  the  desire  to  possess  the  products  of  industry  becomes  lust,  and  when  the 
possession  involves  pride,  then  the  creations  of  art  assume  a  position  and  sustain 
a  relation  which  is  of  the  world,  and  not  of  the  Father.  But  this  shows  that  the 
evil  is  in  the  excess,  and  not  in  the  thing  itself.  The  New  Testament  confirms 
our  remarks.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  reputed  son  of  an  artisan,  and,  though  He 
chose  a  condition  of  poverty,  He  did  not  clothe  Himself  in  sackcloth  nor  refuse 
to  partake  of  the  luxuries  of  the  rich.  Not  a  word  did  He  say  against  human 
industry,  although  He  reprobated  and  denounced  every  vice  and  folly  of  His 
times,  and  at  the  time  of  His  death  He  was  wearing  an  entire  woven  coat,  for  which 
Roman  soldiers  cast  lots.  The  apostles  trod  in  the  steps  of  the  Saviour.  Paul 
does  not  require  Lydia,  a  seller  of  purple,  to  change  her  occupation.  Let  us 
learn  to  separate  human  handiwork  from  human  sin.  Art  is  safe  when  God  is 
recognised  in  it.  II.  The  disconnection  op  industrial  pursuits  prom  God 
in  the  minds  op  men  generaily.  Men  have  either  excluded  God  entirely  from 
art,  or  they  have  worked  as  if  on  Divine  sufferance.  And  because  God  has  not 
been  in  their  thoughts,  they  have  felt  that  God  was  not  in  their  craft,  and  they 
have  taken  to  themselves  all  the  glory.  While  idolaters  have  had  a  God  for  every 
art  and  for  all  important  branches  of  human  enterprise,  Christians  have  too  often 
thought  that  they  must  call  art  the  world,  and  while  they  use  and  enjoy  its  varied 
products,  verbally  abuse  them.  We  do  not  so  read  human  nature.  We  do  not 
so  read  Divine  providence.  We  do  not  so  read  our  Bible.  And  we  are  warned 
against  this  spirit  by  the  words  before  us.  Man  is  made  a  producer  ;  and  when 
he  produces  by  his  labour  he  fulfils  one  part  of  his  mission.  Now  in  this  shall 
God  be  forgotten  ?  God  !  whose  earth  this  is  ?  God !  whose  are  the  precious 
and  the  useful  metals,  and  to  whom  belong  the  trees  of  the  forest  and  the  cattle 
upon  the  hills  ?  Shall  God  be  forgotten  ?  God !  we  are  His  workmen ;  we  use 
His  tools  ;  we  employ  His  materials,  and  we  labour  in  His  factory.  God  for- 
gotten ?  How  unseemly  and  ungrateful  is  this!  1.  The  evil  complained  of 
in  the  text  may  exist  either  in  a  negative  or  a  positive  state.  Say  that  God  13 
not  in  the  thoughts.  There  is  no  rejection  of  God,  but  God  is  not  present.  The 
man  thinks  of  himself — he  does  not  think  of  God.  2.  The  sources  of  this  evil 
are  religious  ignorance  and  alienation  from  God.  3.  The  forms  in  which  this 
evil  is  developed  are  such  as  these — God's  law  is  not  applied  to  human  labour. 
Work  is  not  performed  in  a  devotional  spirit.  God's  honour  is  not  sought  thereby. 
And  you  have  one  of  two  things — a  man  in  appearance  everywhere  irreligious, 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

or  a  man  in  appearance  religious  everywhere  but  in  his  business.  And  then 
what  have  you  ?  A  whited  sepulchre,  a  man-lie,  or  a  rebel,  open  and  avowed, 
against  God  the  Creator.  Trace  this  to  its  results.  Banish  religion  from  human 
industry,  and  you  remove  the  chief  salutary  restraint !  Then  man  will  hold  his 
brother  in  slavery;  then  men  will  cheat  and  He  and  overreach  and  keep  back 
the  hire  of  the  labourer.  4.  The  doctrine  of  what  is  commonly  termed  Justifica- 
tion by  faith,  has  a  most  intimate  connection  with  this  subject.  The  substance 
of  that  doctrine  is,  that  when  a  sinner  truly  repents  and  believes  in  Jesus  Christ, 
GoJ,  instead  of  putting  him  upon  a  probation,  immediately  receives  him  to  child- 
like communion.  This  shows  that  a  Christian  may  at  once  have  communion 
with  God  on  every  subject  that  concerns  him.  5.  Pride,  covetousness,  oppression, 
and  cruelty  are  the  four  transgressions,  chiefly  named  as  God's  reason  for  the 
overthrow  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  Egypt  and  Tyre.  Without  true  religion  the 
progress  of  art  fosters  these  evils.  6.  The  duties  especially  incumbent  upon  the 
Christians  of  this  land,  in  connection  with  their  daily  labour,  are,  the  unfailing 
recognition  of  Divine  providence,  humility,  justice,  and  kindness.  There  are  no 
colours  so  brilliant,  no  forms  so  graceful,  no  combinations  so  complete,  no  products 
so  perfect  and  abundant  as  those  which  exist  apart  from  human  skill  and  toil. 
Man,  in  comparison  with  the  Great  Worker,  has  done  nothing.  7.  You  will  not 
have  failed  to  mark  God's  calling  the  mightiest  by  this  name,  "  axe  and  saw  " ; 
also  God's  intimating  the  uselessness  of  all  boasting,  "  as  if  it  were  no  wood  " ; 
and  God's  threatening  to  teach  the  axe  and  saw  their  real  position ;  and  you  will 
take  this  lesson — if  we  do  not  make  God  of  infinitely  more  consequence  than  man, 
He  will  make  us  feel  how  much  lower  than  man  His  curse  can  sink  us ;  and  then, 
when  like  Nebuchadnezzar,  we  feel  less  and  lower  than  man,  we  may,  in  this 
severe  school,  "  learn  to  praise,  and  extol,  and  honour  the  King  of  heaven,  all 
whose  works  are  truth,  and  all  whose  ways  are  judgment,  and  who  is  able  to  abase 
those  that  walk  in  pride."  (8.  Martin.)  Proud  boastings  not  overlooked  by 
God  : — God  keeps  an  account  of  all  men's  proud  and  haughty  words,  with  which 
they  set  heaven  and  earth  at  defiance.  They  that  speak  great  and  swelling  words 
of  vanity  shall  hear  of  them  again.  (Matthew  Henry.)  Absurd  brag: — Oh 
what  a  dust  do  I  make !  said  the  fly  upon  the  cart-wheel,  in  the  fable.  What 
destruction  do  I  make  among  the  trees  !  saith  the  axe.  (Ibid.)  Qod  to  be 
honoured: — Bengel,  when  a  tutor,  addressing  a  letter  to  an  old  pupil,  said,  "Either 
refrain,  dear  Reuss,  from  writing  to  me,  or  do  not  apply  to  me  such  superlative 
expressions.  I  should  quietly,  like  a  fond  father,  place  it  all  to  the  account  of 
your  love,  were  I  not  afraid  that  my  allowing  it  will  bring  upon  me  a  heavy  respon- 
sibility. For  the  same  reason  I  wish  it  were  not  said  here  at  daily  prayers  our 
most  reverend  tutors.'  I  believe  that  if  Herod  had  been  displeased  with  the 
acclamation,  '  It  is  the  voice  of  a  god  and  not  of  man,'  he  would  not  have  been 
struck  dead  in  such  a  horrible  manner.  God's  honour  is  an  awfully  tender  thing, 
and  may  be  injured  before  we  are  aware."  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  presumption:— 
When  Bonaparte  was  about  to  invade  Russia,  a  person  who  had  endeavoured 
to  dissuade  him  from  his  purpose,  finding  he  could  not  prevail,  quoted  to  him 
the  proverb,  "  Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes"  ;  to  which  he  indignantly  replied, 
"  I  dispose  as  well  as  propose."  A  Christian  lady,  on  hearing  the  impious  boast, 
remarked,  "  I  set  that  down  as  the  turning-point  of  Bonaparte's  fortunes.  God 
will  not  suffer  a  creature  with  impunity  thus  to  usurp  His  prerogative."  It 
happened  to  Bonaparte  just  as  the  lady  predicted.  His  invasion  of  Russia  was 
the  commencement  of  his  fall.     (J.  Whitecross.) 

Ver.  17.  And  the  light  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a  fire. — The  light  of  Israel : — 
A  name  of  Jehovah,  who  was  represented  by  the  Shekinah  glory.  (B.  Blake, 
B.D.)  The  collapse  of  the  Assyrian  enterprise:  —  Isaiah's  genius  supplies 
him  with  a  splendid  figure  under  which  to  depict  the  collapse  of  the  Assyrian 
enterprise.  The  serried  battalions  of  Assyria  appear  to  his  imagination  as  the 
trees  of  some  huge  forest,  irresistible  in  their  strength  and  countless  in  their 
number ;  but  the  Light  of  Israel  kindles  majestically  into  a  flame ;  and  at  the 
end  of  a  single  day  a  child  may  count  them.     (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  They  shall  be  as  when  a  standard-bearer  fainteth. — A  different 
rendering  : — "  As  the  pining  away  of  a  sick  man,"  better  suits  a  connection 
in  which  there  is  no  reference  to  battle.  Assyria  shall  be  utterly  con- 
sumed.    Thorns  and  thistles,  lordly  woods  and  fruitful  fields  shall  alike  perish ; 


chap,  x.]  ISAIAH.  313 

or,  if  any  remain,  they  shall  waste  away  as  a  man  smitten  by  an  incurable  disease. 
(Talbot  W.  Chambers,  D.D.)  The  Christian  standard-bearer  : — Let  me  endeavour 
to  present  to  you  one  or  two  features  by  which  a  leader  in  the  Christian  army 
ought  to  be  distinguished.  I.  There  must  be  fixed  and  strong  principle. 
The  man  who  is  to  bear  the  standard  in  any  army  must  be  devotedly  attached 
to  the  cause  for  which  the  army  is  contending.  The  man  who  is  to  be  a  guide 
and  leader  in  the  Christian  Church  ought  certainly  to  have  very  definite  con- 
victions as  to  what  Christianity  is,  and  as  to  what  the  Church  is.  There  are 
other  qualities  which  may  be  of  eminent  service  to  him — a  capacity  to  take  a 
broad  view  of  all  questions,  a  ready  sympathy  with  all  who  are  struggling  after 
truth,  though  they  may  be  at  present  in  darkness.  II.  The  second  quali- 
fication of  a  standard-bearer  is  courage.  A  true  standard-bearer  may 
be  described  in  a  single  epithet,  taken  from  one  of  the  prophets,  as  "  valiant 
for  the  truth."  That  means  that  truth  is  his  law.  Truth  is  not  with  him  a 
thing  to  be  toyed  with.  It  is  not  so  much  his  possession,  but  rather  he  is 
possessed  by  the  truth ;  it  has  laid  hold  of  his  reason,  enthralled  his  affections, 
quickened  and  inspired  his  conscience.  III.  There  is  a  still  higher  element, 
a  still  nobler,  mightier  force  by  which  the  standard-bearer  in  the 
Christian  army  is  directed  and  governed,  and  that  is  personal  devotion 
to  Christ.  Christ  is  to  him  the  truth,  and  Christ  only  is  his  law.  The  most 
illustrious  of  the  standard-bearers  of  the  Christian  army,  I  suppose  it  would  be 
universally  confessed,  was  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles ;  and  if  we  study  his 
life  and  character,  we  shall  perhaps  arrive  at  the  best  and  truest  conception  of 
an  ideal  leader  in  the  Christian  army.  (J.  O.  Rogers,  B.A.)  A  standard- 
bearer  : — In  a  sermon  on  the  death  of  the  Rev.  G.  M.  Murphy  preached  by 
the  Rev.  P.  J.  Turquand,  Mr.  Turquand  said :  He  carried — 1.  The  standard 
of  the  Cross.  2.  The  standard  of  temperance.  3.  The  standard  of  education. 
4.  The  standard  of  justice.     (Christian  World  Pulpit.) 

Vers.  20-23.  The  remnant  shall  return. — "A  remnant  shall  turn"  (ver. 
21) : — Thus  shall  be  fulfilled  the  prophecy  embodied  in  the  name  of  Isaiah's 
son,  Shear-jashub  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)        A  happy  conversion: — Consider — 

1.  What  is  said  of  their  former  error.  When  it  is  said  that  they  "  shall 
no  more  stay  upon  him  that  smote  them,"  it  surely  implies  that  they  had  done 
this  before  :  this  was  their  error.     1.  They  had  exercised  an  improper  dependence. 

2.  Their  dependence  had  been  disappointed.  3.  Their  folly  was  to  be  corrected 
by  their  Sovereign.  II.  What  is  said  of  their  renewed  experience.  "  Shall 
stay  upon  the  Lord,"  &c.  1.  It  is  an  enlightened  confidence.  It  is  foolish  to 
trust  without  inquiry,  and  to  refuse  to  trust  the  trustworthy.  2.  Their  con- 
fidence is  very  extensive.  It  covers  all  times ;  all  events  that  can  awaken  our 
anxiety ;  all  that  appertains  to  life  and  godliness,  &c.  3.  It  is  a  blessed  con- 
fidence, in.  The  reality  of  their  change.  "  In  truth."  That  is  the 
important  thing.  This  confidence  is  distinguishable — 1.  From  mere  pretensions. 
2.  From  imaginary  confidence.  (W.  Jay.)  Adversity  may  reach  the  hard 
heart : — The  four  seasons  once  determined  to  try  which  could  quickest  reach 
the  heart  of  a  stone.  Spring  coaxed  the  stone  with  its  gentle  breezes,  and  made 
flowers  encircle  it,  and  trees  to  shoot  out  their  branches  and  embower  it,  but 
all  to  no  purpose.  The  stone  remained  indifferent  to  the  beauties  of  the  spring, 
nor  would  it  yield  its  heart  to  its  gentle  caresses.  Summer  came  next,  and  caused 
the  sun  to  shine  on  the  stone,  hoping  to  melt  its  obdurate  heart ;  but  though  the 
surface  of  the  stone  grew  warm  it  quickly  became  cold  again  when  not  under 
the  influence  of  the  summer  sun's  rays.  Summer  thus  being  unable  by  any  degree 
of  warmth  to  penetrate  the  flinty  nature  of  the  stone,  gave  place  to  autumn. 
Believing  that  the  stone  had  been  treated  with  too  much  kindness,  the  autumn 
withered  the  flowers  and  stripped  the  trees  of  their  leaves  and  threatened  and 
blustered ;  but  still  the  stone  remained  impassive.  Winter  came  next.  First 
it  sent  strong  winds  which  laid  the  stone  bare  ;  then  it  sent  a  cold  rain,  and  next 
a  sharp  frost,  which  cleaved  the  stone  and  laid  bare  its  heart.  So  many  a  heart 
which  neither  gentleness,  warmth,  nor  threats  can  touch  is  reached  by  adversity. 
(Nye's  Anecdotes.)  Clod's  twofold  work  on  Judah  : — The  prophet  had  said 
(ver.  12),  that  "  the  Lord  would  perform  His  whole  work  upon  Mount  Zion  and 
upon  Jerusalem,"  by  Sennacherib's  invading  the  land.  Now  here  we  are  told 
what  that  work  should  be,  a  twofold  work — I.  The  conversion  of  some,  to 
whom  this  providence  should  be  sanctified,  and  yield  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteous- 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

ness,  though  for  the  present  it  was  not  joyous  but  grievous.  This  remnant  of 
Israel  is  said  to  be  such  as  are  escaped  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  such  as  escaped 
the  corruptions  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  kept  their  integrity  in  times  of  common 
apostasy.  Therefore  they  escape  the  desolations  of  that  house.  1.  This  remnant 
shall  come  off  from  all  confidence  in  an  arm  of  flesh ;  this  providence  shall  cure 
them  of  that ;  they  "  shall  no  more  again  stay  upon  him  that  smote  them." 
"  Sufferings  teach  caution."  They  have  learned,  by  dear-bought  experience, 
the  folly  of  leaning  upon  that  staff  as  a  stay  to  them  which  may  perhaps  prove 
a  staff  to  beat  them  (Hos.  xiv.  3).  2.  They  shall  come  home  to  God,  to  the  Mighty 
God,  one  of  the  names  given  to  the  Messiah  (ix.  6),  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel. 
They  shall  return  to  God  and  shall  stay  upon  Him.  Those  only  may  with  comfort 
stay  upon  God  that  return  to  Him.  II.  Thb  consumption  of  others.  They 
shall  be  wasted  away  by  this  general  decay  in  the  midst  of  the  land.  Observe — 
1.  It  is  a  consumption  of  Goaf's  own  making.  2.  It  is  decreed,  not  the  product 
of  a  sudden  resolve.  It  is  particularly  appointed  how  far  it  shall  extend,  how 
long  it  shall  continue,  who  shall  be  consumed  by  it  and  who  not.  3.  It  is  an 
overflowing  consumption,  that  shall  overspread  the  land,  and  like  a  mighty  torrent 
or  inundation,  bear  down  all  before  it.  4.  Though  it  overflows,  it  is  not  at  random, 
but  in  righteousness.  (Matthew  Henry.)  The  remnants  of  society  : — Did  you 
ever  ponder  the  disintegrations  that  are  going  on  in  human  society  ?  The  number 
of  those  who  fall  out  of  the  ranks  of  society  is  infinitely  greater  than  the  number 
of  those  who  ever  fell  out  of  any  army  that  was  gathered  on  the  field  of  battle. 
We  usually  take  statistics  of  the  prosperous  men  in  society.  But  who  stands 
to  take  an  accurate  account  of  all  the  weak  ?  Who  cares  for  the  remnants  of 
society  ?  God  does.  Let  us  look  at  some  of  these  remnants.  1.  Those  who 
are  broken  in  health,  and  are  utterly  turned  away,  by  that  reason,  from  all  that 
they  sought.  They  count  as  ciphers.  The  only  thing  they  seem  to  be  good 
for  is  to  serve  a*  memorials  of  a  mother's  patience,  of  a  sister's  goodness,  or  of 
a  wife's  fidelity.  How  many  men  are  like  a  man-of-war,  that  is  staunchly  built 
of  the  best  material,  but  that  on  its  first  voyage  is  so  handled  by  the  winds  and 
waves  that  it  becomes  unmanageable,  and  makes  haste  to  come  to  port  again, 
and  anchors  at  the  navy  yard,  and  is  an  old  receiving  hulk  for  the  rest  of  its 
days  1  2.  Then,  how  many  remnants  there  are  in  society  on  account  of  the 
misapplication  of  their  powers  and  their  utter  failure  therefrom.  How  many 
second  and  third-rate  men  there  are  who  undertake  to  perform  functions  which 
require  the  exercise  of  the  faculties  in  their  best  estate.  3.  Then  there  are 
remnants  from  the  overtaxing  of  men  who  are  adapted  to  their  work,  but  have 
not  the  endurance  which  their  circumstances  require.  There  are  some  men 
who,  when  they  break  down,  are  like  those  who  ride  in  low  waggons,  and  who 
if  the  waggon  breaks  do  not  fall  far,  but  can  get  up  and  mend  it,  and  go  on ;  but 
there  are  other  men  who  when  they  break  down  are  like  those  who  cross  a  dark 
chasm  on  a  high  bridge,  and  who,  if  the  bridge  break,  fall  a  great  distance  into 
the  stream  below,  and  have  no  power  to  get  back,  and  repair  the  damage  and 
proceed  on  their  journey.  4.  A  great  many  more  persons  break  down  from 
a  secret  mismanagement  of  themselves.  I  see  men  who  use  more  wind  to  waft 
a  cockle-boat  across  a  pond  than  would  be  required  to  carry  a  man-of-war  across 
the  sea.  5.  Besides  these,  who  are  perpetually  breaking  down  and  falling  in 
the  rear,  are  those  who  violate  the  laws  of  society ;  who  are  detected,  and  con- 
victed, and  branded  with  shame.  I  think  the  most  piteous  thing  in  the  world 
is  to  see  a  man,  no  worse  than  we  are,  who,  under  the  influence  of  company,  or 
through  temptation,  has  committed  a  great  wrong,  and  has  been  branded  by 
society.  His  life  is  not  worth  anything  after  that.  For  the  laws  of  society  are 
like  the  laws  of  a  fort,  which  when  a  man  is  inside  defend  him  against  all  attack, 
but  which  when  he  is  outside  open  all  the  artillery  of  the  fort  upon  him  if  he 
attempts  to  get  back.  Many  men  have  a  conscience  under  a  prison  jacket. 
God  judges  with  the  justice  of  love,  and  not  with  the  injustice  of  hatred.  To 
all  those  who  are  cast  down  and  suffering,  I  say,  There  is  a  God  that  is  sorry  for 
you.  Beware,  then,  of  desperation.  If  you  have  failed  for  this  life,  do  not  fail 
for  the  other  too.  There  is  very  much  that  may  yet  be  done,  even  in  the  after- 
noon and  twilight  of  men's  lives,  if  they  are  hopeful  and  active.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Remnants : — Think  a  moment  of  what  is  meant  by  "  a  remnant."  It  does  not 
mean  simply  a  few  ;  neither  does  it  mean  merely  the  last  things  ;  though  it  includes 
both  of  these  ideas.  When  one  has  cut  out  a  garment  from  a  web  of  oloth,  there 
ia  a  selvedge,  there  are  the  side  pieces,  of  curious  shapes,  and  there  is  at  last  the 


chap,  x.]  ISAIAH.  315 

tail-piece — a  little  bit  left.  The  main  and  best  parts  have  been  taken  out  and 
used.  Although  they  are  of  as  good  substance  as  the  rest,  there  are  these  edges, 
the  intermediate  bits,  and  the  final  remaining  part ;  and  all  these  are  called 
"  the  remnants."  They  are  not  exactly  waste,  but  they  are  parts  that  are  left 
over  after  the  good  has  been  principally  taken  out.  Out  of  no  carpenter's  shop 
does  the  timber  ever  come  as  large  as  it  went  in.  The  chips,  the  shavings,  the 
slabs,  the  edges,  the  intermediate  pieces — they  are  the  remnants  of  the  carpenter's 
work — the  parts  which  have  not  been  used  up  for  commercial  objects.  Look 
in  upon  a  household  after  all  the  children  have  been  fed,  after  all  the  servants 
have  eaten,  and  the  table  is  cleared  off,  and  see  what  is  left.  See  the  bones ; 
the  gristle  ;  the  scraps  of  meat  that  are  stringy  and  not  easily  chewed  ;  the  bits 
of  potato ;  the  pieces  of  confection  ;  the  heap  of  fragments.  These  are  the 
remnants  of  the  meals.  Look  at  the  remnant  in  the  harvest — all  those  stray 
stalks  of  wheat  in  the  blackberry  edges  of  the  uncomely  farm;  all  those  that 
have  fallen  by  the  way ;  the  gleanings  ;  the  refuse  of  the  field.  So,  in  all  the 
phases  of  society — in  the  army,  in  the  navy,  in  business  circles,  in  the  household, 
everywhere — there  is  a  remnant  constantly  coming  up.  It  is  the  portion  which 
is  left  after  the  better  or  more  favoured  has  been  culled  out  and  used.  (Ibid.) 
Society's  treatment  of  the  weak  : — Who  thinks  of  the  poor  and  fallen  T  Society  ? 
The  most  bungling  work  society  ever  does  in  this  world,  it  does  when  it  attempts 
to  be  merciful.  Society  is  a  machine,  at  best,  of  patches  and  expedients.  When 
men  fall  out  of  their  places,  and  need  to  be  tenderly  dealt  with,  then  the  hands 
of  society  are  clumsier  to  deal  with  than  a  lout's,  a  yeoman's  hand,  in  the  field, 
is  clumsy  to  take  care  of  the  new-born  babe.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  24-34.  0  My  people,  that  dwellest  in  Zion,  be  not  afraid  of  tot 
Assyrian. — Forbidden  fear : — It  is  against  the  mind  and  will  of  God  that 
His  people,  whatever  happens,  should  give  way  to  that  fear  which  has 
torment  and  amazement.  They  that  dwell  in  Zion,  where  God  dwells,  and  where 
His  people  attend  Him,  and  are  employed  in  His  service,  that  are  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  bulwarks  that  are  round  about  Zion,  need  not  be  afraid  of  any 
enemy.  Let  their  souls  dwell  at  ease  in  God.  1.  The  Assyrian  shall  do  nothing 
against  them  but  what  God  hath  appointed  and  determined.  "  He  shall  smite 
thee  "  by  the  Divine  permission,  but  it  shall  be  only  with  a  rod  to  correct  thee, 
not  with  a  sword  to  wound  and  kill.  Nay,  "  he  shall  but  lift  up  his  staff  against 
thee,"  threaten  thee  and  frighten  thee,  and  shake  the  rod  at  thee,  "after  the 
manner  of  Egypt,"  as  the  Egyptians  shook  their  staff  against  your  fathers  at  the 
Red  Sea,  when  they  said,  '  We  will  pursue,  we  will  overtake,"  but  could  not 
reach  to  do  them  any  hurt.  We  should  not  be  frightened  at  those  enemies  that 
can  do  no  more  than  frighten  us.  2.  The  storm  will  soon  blow  over  (ver.  25). 
God's  anger  against  His  people  is  but  for  a  moment ;  and  when  that  ceaseth,  and  is 
turned  away  from  us,  we  need  not  fear  the  fury  of  any  man,  for  it  is  impotent 
passion.  3.  The  enemy  that  threatens  them  shall  himself  be  reckoned  with. 
The  rod  with  which  He  corrected  His  people  shall  not  only  be  laid  aside,  but  thrown 
into  the  fire.  The  prophet,  for  the  encouragement  of  God's  people,  quotes  pre- 
cedents ;  and  puts  them  in  mind  of  what  God  had  done  formerly  against  the 
enemies  of  His  Church  that  were  very  strong  and  formidable,  but  were  brought 
to  ruin.  It  is  good  to  observe  a  resemblance  between  God's  latter  and  former 
appearances  for  His  people,  and  against  His  and  their  enemies.  4.  They  shall 
be  wholly  delivered  from  the  power  of  the  Assyrian,  and  from  the  fear  of  it 
(ver.  27).     (M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  26.  According  to  the  slaughter  of  Midlan. — Assyria  and  Midians— 
1.  As  the  hand  of  God  was  seen  in  the  slaughter  of  the  Midianites,  so 
it  was  in  the  slaughter  of  the  Assyrians.  2.  As  the  Midianites  were  slain 
without  loss  of  any  of  the  Israelites,  so  were  the  Assyrians  without  any  loss 
of  the  men  of  Judah.  3.  As  the  whole  army  of  the  Midianites  was  overthrown, 
so  was  the  whole  army  of  the  Assyrians.  4.  As  the  Midianites  were  overthrown 
on  a  sudden,  when  their  thoughts  were  at  the  highest,  so  was  the  whole  army  of 
the  Assyrians.     (W.  Day,  M.A.) 

Vers.  27-34.  Els  burden  shall  be  taken  away  from  off  thy  shoulder. — 
A  picturesque  representation  of  the  invasion  of  Judah  (vers.  28-34).*— 
The  description  here  given,  when  looked  at  nsthetioally,  is  one  of  the  moat 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

picturesque  and  magnificent  representations  that  human  poetry  has  ever  pro- 
duced. "  He  comes  upon  Ayyath,  marches  through  Migron,  in  Michmash  ho 
leaves  his  baggage.  They  march  right  across  the  ravine ; — let  Geba  be  our  night- 
quarters  !  Ramah  trembles ;  Gibeah  of  Saul  flees  ;  scream  loud,  0  daughter 
of  Gallim  !  0  only  listen,  Laysha  !  Poor  Anathoth !  Hurries  Madmena,  the 
inhabitants  of  Gebim  rescue.  To-day  he  still  makes  a  halt  in  Nob, — swings  his 
hand  over  the  mountain  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the  hill  of  Jerusalem.  Behold, 
the  All-Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  lops  down  the  branches  with  terrible  force,  and 
those  of  towering  growth  are  hewn  down,  and  the  lofty  are  laid  low.  And  He 
fells  the  thickets  of  the  forest  with  the  iron  ;  and  Lebanon,  by  a  majestic  One 
it  falls."  (F.  Dditzsch.)  The  actualities  of  faith  : — The  prophetic  confidence 
in  a  Divine  must-be  leads  to  the  description  of  it  as  an  actuality.  Faith  sees  not 
the  difficulties  that  reason  emphasises;  but  laughs  at  impossibilities,  saying, 
"  It  shall  be  done."  (B.  Blake,  B.D.)  God's  providence  critical  and  retributive: 
— This  is  the  providence,  then,  under  which  we  live.  Facts  prove  it.  We  are 
under  law  and  criticism  of  a  moral  kind :  our  conduct  is  examined,  our  motives 
are  inquired  into  and  pronounced  upon  by  the  just  One  ;  every  morning  is  as  a 
white  throne  set  in  the  heavens  ;  every  noonday  is  as  an  eye  of  fire  watching  the 
ways  of  men  ;  every  night  is  a  pavilion  of  rest,  or  an  image  of  despair.  The  axe 
of  heaven  is  lifted  up  against  all  the  thick  trees  that  suppose  themselves  to  be 
independent  of  God.  All  moral  loveliness  is  cherished  as  the  pearl  greater  in 
value  than  all  others.  This  is  the  economy  under  which  we  live  !  We  are  not 
left  without  law,  judgment,  supervision,  criticism;  every  one  of  us  must  give  an 
account  of  himself  to  God.  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter : 
Fear  God,  and  keep  His  commandments :  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man. 
For  God  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing."  If 
for  a  few  years  we  grow  towards  strength,  we  soon  turn  the  growing  point,  and 
go  down  into  old  age  and  weakness,  that  we  may  know  ourselves  to  be  but  men. 
Life  is  a  great  triumph  up  to  middle  age,  because  the  man  may  be  always  well ; 
he  may  grow  in  strength  and  in  prosperity,  and  he  may  represent  himself  as  a 
successful  fowler ;  but  after  that  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  him,  and 
he  knoweth  it  not,  and  presently  men  may  say  as  he  passes  by,  He  stoops  a 
little  more  ;  his  memory  will  begin  to  be  a  little  blurred  and  clouded,  and  though 
he  can  keep  good  reckoning,  yet  he  must  trust  to  paper  more  than  he  ever  trusted 
before.  If  we  plant  vineyards  and  forests,  and  subdue  wildernesses  by  generous 
culture,  we  die  whilst  we  gaze  on  our  success,  and  are  buried  under  the  very 
flowers  which  have  rewarded  our  toil.  This  is  the  economy  under  which  the 
nations  have  ever  lived,  and  under  which  every  little  life  works  out  its  little 
day.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Vers.  1-16.  And  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse.— A 
prophecy  concerning  Messiah  the  Prince  : — I.  His  rise  out  of  the  house  of 
David  (ver.  1).  II.  His  qualifications  for  His  great  undertaking  (vers. 
2,  3).  III.  The  justice  and  equity  of  His  government  (vers.  3-5). 
IV.  The  peaceableness  of  His  kingdom  (vers.  6-9).  V.  The  accession  of 
the  Gentiles  to  it  (ver.  10).  VI.  And  with  them  the  remnant  of  the 
Jews  that  should  be  united  with  them  in  the  Messiah's  kingdom  (vers.  11-16). 
(M.  Henry.)  The  picture  of  the  future  which  fills  the  eleventh  chapter  is  one  of 
the  most  extensive  that  Isaiah  has  drawn.  Three  prospects  are  unfolded  in  it. 
I.  A  prospect  of  mind  (vers.  2-5).  The  geography  of  a  royal  mind  in  its  stretches 
of  character,  knowledge,  and  achievement.  II.  A.  prospect  of  nature  (vers. 
6-9).  A  vision  of  the  restitution  of  nature — Paradise  regained.  III.  A  prospect 
of  history  (vers.  9-16).  The  geography  of  Israel's  redemption.  To  this  third 
prospect  chapter  xii.  forms  a  fitting  conclusion,  a  hymn  of  praise  in  the  mouth 
of  returning  exiles.  {Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Three  great  ideals: — 1.  The 
perfect  indwelling  of  our  humanity  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  The  peace  and  com- 
munion of  all  nature,  covered  with  the  knowledge  of  God.  3.  The  traversing 
of  all  history  by  the  Divine  purposes  of  redemption.  (Ibid.)  Assyria  and 
Israel :  a  contrast : — We  should  connect  the  opening  of  the  eleventh  chapter 


©hap.  xi.1  ISAIAH.  317 

with  the  close  of  the  tenth  in  order  to  feel  the  full  force  of  the  contrast.  There 
we  read :  "  And  He  shall  cut  down  the  thickets  of  the  forest  with  iron,  and  Lebanon 
shall  fall  by  a  mighty  One."  Then  comes  the  prophecy  that  "  there  shall  come 
forth  a  rod,"  &c.  The  cedar  of  Lebanon  was  the  symbol  of  Assyrian  power. 
It  was  a  poor  symbol.  Looked  at  botanically,  it  very  vividly  represented  the 
passing  pomp  of  a  pagan  empire.  It  is  of  the  pine  genus,  and  sends  out  no  suckers, 
and  when  it  is  cut  down  it  is  gone.  The  oak  is  the  symbol  of  Israel's  power, 
and  though  it  be  cut  down  it  grows  again — "  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out 
of  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots  " — out  of  the  very 
lowest  stump  that  is  left  in  the  ground.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Eternal  youthful- 
ness : — What  is  the  symbol  of  our  power  ?  Is  ours  an  influence  that  can  be 
cut  down  and  never  revive  ?  or  are  we  so  rooted  in  the  Eternal  that  though  perse- 
cution may  impoverish  us,  and  we  may  suffer  great  deprivation  and  depletion 
of  every  kind,  yet  we  shall  come  up  again  in  eternal  youthfulness  ?  (Ibid.) 
Prophecy  :  a  very  good  transition  : — It  is  a  very  good  transition  in  prophecy 
(whether  it  be  so  in  rhetoric  or  no)  and  a  very  common  one,  to  pass  from  the 
prediction  of  the  temporal  deliverances  of  the  Church  to  that  of  the  great  salvation, 
which,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  should  be  wrought  out  by  Jesus  Christ,  of  which 
the  others  were  types  and  figures.  (M.  Henry.)  The  Branch : — The  word 
translated  "  Branch  "  is  in  the  Hebrew  Netser.  The  word  is  said  to  be  derived 
from  a  root  which  means  "  bright "  or  "  verdant."  And  this  agrees  with  the 
character  of  the  valley  in  which  the  town  of  Netzer  or  Natsoreth  (Nazareth) 
stands.  "  The  bushes  and  aromatic  shrubs,  and  especially  the  brilliant  wild 
flowers,  take  away  from  the  bleakness  of  the  landscape."  It  is  from  this  title, 
then,  Netser  or  the  Branch,  that  St.  Matthew  quotes  when  he  says,  "  He  shall 
be  called  a  Nazarene "  (Matt.  ii.  23).  (Expository  Times.)  The  rod  out  of 
the  stem  of  Jesse  : — Let  us  go  back  to  the  humblest  point,  the  very  starting  line, 
and  learn  that  this  Son  of  God  was  not  the  son  of  a  king  only,  but  the  son  of  a 
king's  lowly  father.  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  the  common  people.  The 
Gospel  appeals  to  all  men,  rich  and  poor,  in  every  zone  and  clime,  and  is  most 
to  those  who  need  it  most.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christ  the  fruitful  Branch  : — 
"  A  shoot  out  of  its  roots  brings  fruit."  The  sprout  shooting  out  below  the  soil 
becomes  a  tree,  and  this  tree  gets  a  crown  with  fruits  ;  and  thus  a  state  of  exaltation 
and  completion  follows  the  state  of  humiliation.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  The  quali- 
fications of  Christ  for  His  mediatorial  office  : — I.  The  first  verse  of  the  text  fore- 
tells the  birth  and  family  of  thb  Messiah.  The  Messiah  was  to  be  born  of 
the  house  of  David,  the  son  of  Jesse.  But  why  is  Jesse  mentioned  here,  rather 
than  David,  his  more  illustrious  son  ?  Partly  to  point  out  the  birthplace  of 
the  Messiah.  Jesse  appears  always  to  have  lived  at  Bethlehem,  and  was  known 
as  the  Bethlehemite ;  whereas,  David  resided  the  greater  part  of  his  life  at  Hebron 
and  Jerusalem.  Jesse  was  in  a  more  humble  rank  of  life  than  Jesse's  son  ; 
and  so  Jesus,  though  superior  to  David,  as  a  royal  king,  being  David's  Lord, 
as  well  as  David's  son,  yet,  in  the  actual  circumstances  of  His  life,  was  nearer 
to  the  humble  rank  of  Jesse  than  the  royal  state  of  David.  It  was  also  out  of 
the  stem  of  Jesse  that  the  rod  was  to  come  forth — from  a  stem  where  there 
was  nothing  but  stem  and  root  remaining  ;  not  out  of  a  noble  tree,  with  its  wide- 
spreading  branches.  "  And  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots."  It  is  intimated 
here,  and  elsewhere  more  clearly  foretold,  that  the  Branch  should  spring  from 
the  family  of  Jesse,  when  it  was  in  lowly  circumstances,  at  a  time  when  the  house 
of  David  should  be  much  reduced,  and  that  slender  expectations  should  be  formed 
of  it  at  first,  but  that  in  process  of  time  it  should  grow  into  a  beautiful  and  glorious 
Branch.  How  exactly  all  this  describes  the  birth  and  lineage  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Yet  was  ever  branch  so  glorious  in  its  increase  ?  What  noble  fruits  have  hung 
on  that  Branch !  What  Churches  have  clustered  around  it !  II.  His  full 
qualifications  for  His  offioe,  as  described  in  this  prediction  (ver.  2).  "  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  Him."  On  Him  was  poured  the  unction  of 
the  Holy  One  in  all  its  fulness.  But,  remember,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  rested 
on  Him  in  His  office  of  Mediator.  Now,  this  is  a  public  office,  an  office  which 
Jesus  sustains  for  the  benefit  of  Hia  people ;  and  therefore  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
rests  upon  Him  for  His  people.  1.  "  The  spirit  of  wisdom."  He  had  wisdom 
in  full  measure.  He  must  have  had  a  perfect  comprehension  of  God  in  His  nature, 
qualities,  attributes,  works,  and  ways ;  He  must  have  had  a  thorough  under- 
standing of  the  only  method  by  which  wretched  man  could  be  saved ;  He  must 
have  known  what  was  in  the  mind  of  man,  for  He  answered  the  Pharisees  and 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

Sadducees,  and  knew  the  difficulties  and  doubts  of  His  disciples,  even  before 
they  gave  them  utterance  in  words.  How  wise  were  all  His  provisions  for  His 
Church  !  How  wise  to  win  souls  was  Jesus  Christ !  And  remember  He  has 
wisdom  for  you.  2.  "  The  spirit  of  understanding."  This  is  enlarged  on  in 
the  following  verse.  The  Saviour  had  a  quickness  in  understanding  what  might 
be  for  the  glory  or  dishonour  of  His  heavenly  Father.  No  tinsel  could  hide  from 
Him  the  foul  deformity  of  sin  ;  no  hypocrisy  could  veil  from  Him  the  pride  and 
corruption  of  the  Pharisee.  When  Satan  came  with  his  temptations,  and  baited 
his  snare  with  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  in  all  their  glory,  Christ  instantly 
understood  the  deceit,  and,  "  Get  thee  hence,  Satan,"  was  His  indignant  language. 
3.  "  The  spirit  of  counsel."  "  This,"  says  our  prophet,  "  is  the  name  whereby 
He  shall  be  called,  Wonderful  Counsellor."  Christ  is  able  to  give  the  wisest 
counsel  in  the  kindest  manner.  He  has  advice  suited  to  every  case.  He  counsels 
the  sinner.  He  says  to  the  Church  in  a  Laodicean  state,  "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy 
of  Me  gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou  mayest  be  rich."  He  counsels  the  Christian 
warrior  how  to  maintain  the  fight  against  sin  with  persevering  faith.  4.  "  The 
spirit  of  might."  He  is  a  Lamb  in  meekness  ;  He  is  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah 
in  strength.  His  work  required  a  very  undaunted  spirit,  and  He  never  quaked 
with  fear,  nor  trembled  with  alarm.  And  He  has  the  spirit  of  might  for  you  also. 
5.  "The  spirit  of  knowledge."  In  Christ  dwells  all  knowledge — the  knowledge 
of  Jehovah,  His  heavenly  Father,  of  His  holy  will,  His  righteous  claims,  the 
blessedness  of  knowing  God  as  Father.  And  this  same  knowledge  of  His  Father 
He  is  able  to  impart  to  you.  6.  "  And  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  "  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,"  and  it  is  also  one  of  the  highest  attain- 
ments of  wisdom,  and  one  of  the  best  effects  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  heart. 
(J.  Hambleton,  M.A.)  The  kingdom  of  Christ : — We  may  well  study  this  picture 
of  the  Messiah's  reign  on  earth,  drawn  by  a  Divine  hand  and  painted  with  unfading 
colours,  because  through  it  we  see,  as  we  cannot  otherwise,  what  we  are  daily 
praying  for.  History  does  not  fully  interpret  prophecy  for  us.  If  we  knew 
just  the  changes  in  the  nations  before  the  fulness  of  the  times  comes,  if  we  could 
be  assured  where  and  when  and  how  Jesus  would  reign  in  an  earthly  way  among 
men,  still  we  should  not  have  what  the  vision  of  Isaiah  furnishes  us.  He  saw 
nothing  of  this.  And  what  did  he  see  ?  First  of  all  a  mighty  forest,  whose  tall 
trees  sent  their  roots  down  deep  into  the  earth,  and  whose  branches  cast  wide 
shadows.  These  were  the  proud  nations  that  were  oppressing  Israel,  and  seemed 
strong  enough  to  stand  forever.  But  they  were  to  lose  their  glory.  Among 
them  there  was  a  stump,  sending  up  from  its  decay  and  humiliation  a  small, 
tender,  but  vigorous  shoot.  This  was  the  ancient  but  fallen  house  of  David  ; 
and  the  green  shoot  coming  up  was  only  in  fulfilment  of  the  old  covenant  that 
there  should  always  be  one  to  sit  on  David's  throne.  As  we  look,  through  the 
seer's  vision,  we  see  the  young  tree  dissolve  into  the  form  of  a  Man,  a  Man  on 
whom  the  Holy  Spirit  rests  with  sevenfold  gifts  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  and 
counsel  and  might  and  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  This  Man  is  full 
of  righteousness,  and  His  robes  are  girdled  with  righteousness  as  He  sits  and  judges 
among  the  people.  And  again,  as  we  gaze,  we  see  that  the  Man  dissolves  into  a 
mountain — the  mountain  of  the  Lord  which  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of 
the  mountains  in  the  last  days.  This  mountain  is  full  of  peace  and  security. 
Once  more,  as  if  to  express  in  a  sentence  the  whole  thought  and  hope  of  the  prophet, 
we  see  the  whole  earth  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover 
the  sea.  Interpreting  this  vision  there  are  two  truths  that  may  well  be  dwelt 
upon.  I.  The  chief  fact  about  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  Christ  Himself, 
who  makes  His  kingdom  by  dwelling  in  the  hearts  of  men.  II.  His  reign 
is  like  the  reign  of  the  little  child  in  the  midst  of  the  animals  that 
naturally  hate  and  devour  one  another.  It  is  a  reign  of  childlikeness  and 
innocence,  the  power  of  weakness  and  purity  over  brute  force.  (E.  N.  Packard.) 
The  kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  world  is  only  the  presence  of  Christ  in  the  world,  repeat- 
ing His  acts  of  mercy  and  love,  uttering  His  eternal  truths,  scorching  hypocrisy 
and  error  with  the  breath  of  His  mouth,  changing  unruly  wills  ever  into  docile 
ones,  cleansing  and  making  glad  everything  everywhere.  There  is  no  reign  of 
Christ  of  which  we  can  form  any  idea  but  this.  When  men  are  holy,  through 
His  indwelling  among  them,  that  is  Christ's  reign.  Let  us  forget  the  scenic  and 
dramatic  elements  in  millennial  glories  and  simply  think  of  the  kingdom  as  being 
the  presence  of  the  King.  Here  we  see  the  difference  between  His  reign  and 
that  of  any  earthly  monarch  who  can  transmit  his  power  to  his  son  and  he  to 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  319 

his  posterity,  and  so,  with  precedent  and  law  and  tradition,  there  may  be  some 
approach  to  security  and  peace.  Frederick  the  Great  dies,  but  his  empire  goes 
on  and  holds  him  in  memory.  But  Christ  has  no  successors,  and  there  is  no 
royal  family  save  that  which  is  made  from  all  who  are  named  after  His  name. 
Christ  must  be  as  truly  among  men  at  one  age  as  another,  and  where  He  is  not 
a  living  and  controlling  presence  there  is  nothing  but  a  name.  What  we  call 
Christianity — the  sum  total  of  the  influences  that  emanate  from  Christ  and  touch 
the  complex  life  of  man — has  no  inherent  vitality  of  its  own.  It  cannot  abide 
upon  traditions  of  One  who  founded  it  ages  ago.  Christ's  perpetual  presence 
alone  makes  Christianity  possible.  The  same  is  true  of  the  Church.  (Ibid.) 
Messiah's  reign : — I.  The  person.  II.  The  character.  III.  The  kingdom 
of  Messiah.  (D.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  stem  from  the  rod  of  Jesse: — That  this 
refers  to  the  Lord  Jesus  is  undoubted.  I.  His  descent.  Three  ideas  seem  to 
be  involved.  1.  Meanness  or  obscurity.  2.  Progression.  How  decayed  soever 
the  tree  might  appear,  yet  a  Branch  was  to  shoot  and  grow  up  out  of  its  roots. 
For  a  time,  the  growth  was  far  from  being  rapid,  but  at  length  it  appeared  as 
•  Plant  of  everlasting  renown.  3.  Secret  and  mysterious  operation.  The  meta- 
phor is  taken  from  vegetation,  that  process  of  the  wonder-working  God  which 
none  can  explain,  yet  the  existence  of  which  none  can  dispute.  II.  His  personal, 
and  official  ENDOWMENTS.  1.  Their  nature  (ver.  2).  They  were — (1)  Diver- 
sified in  their  character.  (2)  Unlimited  in  their  range.  The  Spirit  was 
imparted  to  Him  without  measure.  (3)  Continuous  in  their  possession.  "  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  Him."  2.  The  purposes  for  which  these  endow- 
ments  were  conferred.  (1)  That  He  might  discriminate  the  characters  of  men. 
"  And  shall  make  Him  of  quick  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  (2)  To 
defend  the  cause  of  the  oppressed.  "  But  with  righteousness  shall  He  judge 
the  poor,"  &o.  (3)  To  punish  the  workers  of  iniquity.  "  And  He  shall  smite 
the  earth  with  the  rod  of  His  mouth,"  &c.  III.  The  blessed  state  of  things 
which  will  be  realised  under  His  administration.  We  dare  not  lose  sight 
of  the  truth,  that  He  is  mighty  to  destroy  ;  but  how  encouraging  is  it  to  remember, 
that  He  who  speaks  and  acts  in  righteousness  is  also  mighty  to  save.  And  the 
concluding  portion  of  this  prophecy  shows  in  how  signal  a  manner  His  savins 
power  will  be  exerted.  1.  The  condition  described.  The  wolf  also  shall  dwell 
with  the  lamb,"  &c.  We  have  here  two  leading  ideas.  (1)  Peace  and  harmony. 
(2)  Security.  2.  In  order  thereto  the  most  marvellous  transformations  will 
be  effected.  3.  The  means  of  this  transformation  will  be  the  universal  diffusion 
of  Divine  knowledge  (ver.  9).  Conclusion — 1.  Let  us  pray  that  the  Redeemer's 
kingdom  may  come.  2.  To  us,  personally,  the  great  thing  is  to  possess  the  know, 
ledge  of  the  Lord  ourselves.     (Anon.) 

Vers.  2-5.  And  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  npon  Him.— The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord : — 'n  nn  is  the  Divine  Spirit  as  the  bearer  of  the  whole  fulness 
of  Divine  powers.  Then  follow  in  three  pairs  the  six  spirits  comprehended  by 
'n  .tit,  the  first  pair  of  which  relate  to  the  intellectual  life,  the  second  to  the 
practical  life,  and  the  third  to  the  direct  relationship  to  God.  (F.  Delitzsch.) 
The  Spirit  of  Ood  is  absolutely  the  heart  of  all ;  it  corresponds  to  the  shaft  of  the 
seven-flamed  candlestick,  and  the  three  pairs  to  the  arms  that  stretched  out 
from  it.  (Ibid.)  The  great  Preacher  : — Here  it  is  distinctly  prophesied  that 
our  Saviour,  when  He  should  come  into  the  world,  would  be  peculiarly  endowed 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  with  wisdom,  discernment,  and  might  in  speech,  such  as  should 
make  Him  a  remarkable  preacher.  I.  What  a  consummate  master  Jesus 
was  of  real  eloquence.  Of  course  I  do  not  refer  to  the  petty  arts  and  studied 
rules  of  the  professional  orator  and  actor.  He  needed  none  of  these  to  aid  Him  t 
He  was  infinitely  above  them  all.  His  whole  demeanour  was  perfectly  simple 
and  natural,  though  earnest,  discriminating,  and  impressive,  as  the  pure  love 
and  complete  appreciation  of  truth  could  make  one.  Aside  from  earnestness 
and  naturalness,  His  great  power  of  eloquence  consisted — 1.  In  the  clearness 
and  completeness  of  His  views.  2.  In  His  perfect  command,  through  language, 
of  all  the  powers  and  passions  of  the  human  soul.  II.  How  plainly  and  forcibly 
our  Saviour  preached  the  great  doctrines  or  fundamental  facts  of  the 
Gospel  system.  III.  The  peculiar  manner  and  amazing  power  of  the 
Saviour's  preaching.  (E.  P.  Marvin.)  The  Spirit  of  Whitsuntide  : — This  is 
Isaiah's  description  of  the  Spirit  of  Whitsuntide ;  the  royal  Spirit  which  was  to 
descend,  and  did  descend  without  measure,  on  the  ideal  and  perfect  King.     Let 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

us  consider  what  that  Spirit  is.  1.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  love.  God  is  love  ;  and 
He  is  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  wisdom.  Now,  is  the  spirit  of 
wisdom  the  same  as  the  spirit  of  love  ?  ( 1 )  Sound  theology,  which  is  the  highest 
reason,  tells  us  that  it  must  be  so.  To  suppose  that  God's  wisdom  and  God's 
love,  or  that  God's  justice  and  God's  love,  are  different  from  each  other,  or  limit 
each  other,  or  oppose  each  other,  or  are  anything  but  one  and  the  same  eternally, 
is  to  divide  God's  substance ;  to  deny  that  God  is  one.  (2)  But  more ;  experi- 
ence will  show  us  that  the  spirit  of  love  is  the  same  as  the  spirit  of  wisdom ;  that  if 
any  man  wishes  to  be  truly  wise  and  prudent,  his  only  way  is  to  be  loving  and 
charitable.  The  experience  of  the  apostles  proves  it.  They  had  the  most 
enormous  practical  success  that  men  ever  had.  They,  twelve  poor  men,  set  out 
to  convert  mankind  by  loving  them  :  and  they  succeeded.  Remember,  moreover, 
that  the  text  speaks  of  this  Spirit  of  the  Lord  being  given  to  One  who  was  to  be  a 
King,  a  Ruler,  a  Guide,  and  a  Judge  of  men  ;  who  was  to  exercise  influence  over 
men  for  their  good.  This  prophecy  was  fulfilled  first  in  the  King  of  kings,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ:  but  it  was  fulfilled  also  in  His  apostles,  who  were,  in  their 
own  way  and  measure,  kings  of  men,  exercising  a  vast  influence  over  them. 
And  how  ?  By  the  royal  Spirit  of  love.  Our  own  experience  will  be  the  same 
as  the  apostles'  experience.  If  we  do  not  understand  our  fellow-creatures  wa 
shall  never  love  them.  But  it  is  equally  true  that  if  we  do  not  love  them  we 
shall  never  understand  them.  3.  Next,  this  royal  Spirit  is  described  as  the 
"  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,"  i.e.,  the  spirit  of  prudence  and  practical  power ; 
the  spirit  which  sees  how  to  deal  with  human  beings,  and  has  the  practical  power 
of  making  them  obey.  •  Now  that  power,  again,  can  only  be  got  by  loving  human 
beings.  My  experience  is  this :  that  whensoever  in  my  past  life  I  have  been 
angry  and  scornful,  I  have  said  or  done  an  unwise  thing,  I  have  more  or  less 
injured  my  own  cause ;  weakened  my  own  influence  on  my  fellow-men  ;  repelled 
them  instead  of  attracting  them.  4.  And  next:  this  Spirit  is  "the  spirit  of 
knowledge,  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  They  both  begin  and  end  in  love. 
(1)  If  you  wish  for  knowledge,  you  must  begin  by  loving  knowledge  for  its  own 
sake.  And  the  more  knowledge  you  gain,  the  more  you  will  long  to  know.  And 
if  this  be  true  of  things  earthly  and  temporary,  how  much  more  of  things  heavenly 
and  eternal  T  We  must  begin  by  loving  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatso- 
ever things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  honest,  and  of  good  report.  We 
must  begin  by  loving  them  with  a  sort  of  child's  love,  without  understanding 
them.  But  as  we  go  on,  as  St.  Paul  bids  us,  to  meditate  on  them ;  and  "  if  there 
be  any  virtue  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  to  think  on  such  things,"  and  feed  our 
minds  daily  with  purifying,  elevating,  sobering,  humanising,  enl  ightening  thoughts : 
then  we  shall  get  to  love  goodness  with  a  reasonable  and  manly  love ;  to  see 
the  beauty  of  holiness ;  the  strength  of  self-sacrifice ;  the  glory  of  justice ;  the 
divineness  of  love ;  and  in  a  word — to  love  God  for  His  own  sake,  and  to  give 
Him  thanks  for  His  great  glory,  which  is :  that  He  is  a  good  God.  (2)  This 
Spirit  is  also  the  "  spirit  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  That,  too,  must  be  a  spirit 
of  love  not  only  to  God,  but  to  our  fellow-creatures.  For  if  we  but  consider 
that  God  the  Father  loves  all ;  that  His  mercy  is  over  all  His  works  ;  and  that 
He  hateth  nothing  that  He  has  made :  then,  how  dare  we  hate  anything  that 
He  has  made,  as  long  as  we  have  any  rational  fear  of  Him,  awe  and  respect  for 
Him,  true  faith  in  His  infinite  majesty  and  power  ?  If  we  but  consider  that  God 
the  Son  actually  came  down  on  earth  to  die,  and  to  die,  too,  on  the  Cross,  for 
all  mankind :  then,  how  dare  we  hate  a  human  being  for  whom  He  died  ? 
(C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  Gifts  of  the  Spirit  from  Christ  to  His  Church: — It  was  as 
Head  of  His  Church  that  the  Spirit  was  shed  forth  upon  Him,  and  from  Him 
descends  upon  His  members.  If  we  would,  then,  know  what  are  the  graces  we 
are  to  expect  of  this  kind,  we  must  inquire  what  our  Lord  received.  I.  Thh 
gifts  op  the  Spirit  upon  Christ,  fitting  Him  for  His  mediatorial  office. 
Three  several  branches  of  grace  seem  intended :  wisdom,  might,  intelligent 
devotion  to  God's  Word.  II.  How  the  graces  of  spiritual  influence  flow 
from  Christ  to  His  people.  1.  They  first  descended  on  the  apostles  when, 
assembled  at  Jerusalem,  they  waited  for  the  promise  of  the  Father.  2.  These 
gifts  were  not  confined  to  the  apostles.  Multitudes,  through  their  preaching, 
were  turned  from  the  idolatry  of  the  Gentiles  or  the  superstition  of  the  Jews 
to  serve  the  living  God  ;  and  on  them,  too,  the  Spirit  was  bestowed.  3.  Neither 
are  these  rich  streams  exhausted.  The  Saviour  still  bestows  with  liberal  hand 
the  spiritual  influences  we  need.     (J.  Ay  re,  M.A.)        The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  has 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  321 

always  been  in  human  history: — It  accounts  for  all  heroisms,  noble  darings,  self- 
sacrifices,  for  all  labours  meant,  not  for  the  blessedness  of  the  labourer  himself, 
but  for  the  gratification  and  progress  of  other  ages.  (J.  Parker,  D.D. )  Spiritual 
endowments  (or  earthly  rulers : — Modern  expositors  have  often  restricted  this 
gracious  description  of  royal  enrichment  to  the  ideal  King  of  Israel,  the  coming 
Messiah.  This  application  is,  no  doubt,  its  ultimate  designation,  but  there  is 
more  than  sufficient  evidence  to  warrant  the  discrimination  of  mediaeval  teachers, 
who  boldly  selected  this  heroic  passage  concerning  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  as 
a  perfect  epitome  of  the  gifts  that  might  be  rightly  claimed  for  those,  and  by 
those,  who  are  Divinely  called  to  wear  an  earthly  crown,  and  to  rule  in  temporal 
affairs.  Dean  Plumptre  has  suggested  that  these  verses  may  well  represent  the 
programme  which  Isaiah  himself  set  before  his  pupil,  Hezekiah,  on  his  accession 
to  the  throne,  which  his  weak  predecessor  had  suffered  to  degenerate  into  a  vantage 
ground  for  abuse  of  justice  and  laxity  of  morals  such  as  had  deteriorated  the  faith 
and  moral  fibre  of  his  people.  And,  as  Dr.  George  Adam  Smith  points  out,  in 
the  theology,  art,  and  worship  of  the  Middle  Ages,  this  text  was  constantly 
and  consistently  associated  with  the  assumption  of  royal  responsibilities,  and 
with  the  judicial  administration  of  magistrates.  It  was  known  as  "  the  mirror 
for  magistrates,"  and  was  commonly  employed  at  the  coronation  of  kings  and 
the  fencing  of  tribunals  of  justice.  "  What  Isaiah  wrote  for  Hezekiah  of  Judah 
became  the  official  prayer,  song  or  ensample  of  the  earliest  Christian  kings  in 
Europe.  It  is  evidently  the  model  of  that  royal  hymn — not  by  Charlemagne, 
as  is  usually  supposed,  but  by  his  grandson,  Charles  the  Bald — the  Veni  Creator 
Spiritus."  So  deeply  did  this  sense  of  the  need  and  privilege  of  the  gifts  of 
the  Spirit  for  the  ruling  class  pervade  the  life  of  the  times  that  Henry  III.'s  order 
of  knighthood,  "  Du  Saint  Esprit,"  was  restricted  to  political  men,  and  partic- 
ularly to  magistrates.  (F.  Piatt,  B.D.)  Coronation  gifts  : — We  may,  there- 
fore, claim  abundant  precedent  in  using  the  text  to  correct  two  perilous  tendencies 
in  the  national  and  religious  thought  of  our  own  day — one  brought  about  by 
a  mistake  made  by  men  of  the  world  in  the  affairs  of  State,  and  the  other  the 
result  of  a  misapprehension  by  men  of  God  in  the  affairs  of  the  Spirit.  1.  The 
first  tendency,  which  is  to  depreciate  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  civic 
life  and  duty,  may  be  illustrated  by  a  simple  fact.  In  the  Speech  from  the 
throne,  at  the  opening  of  Queen  Victoria's  last  Parliament,  the  customary  refer- 
ence at  the  close  to  the  blessing  of  Almighty  God  upon  the  labours  of  her  faithful 
Commons  was  omitted.  It  was  afterwards  explained  by  a  responsible  Minister 
of  the  Crown  that  the  omission  was  accidental,  but  the  omission  marks  never- 
theless a  tendency.  The  recognition  of  the  Divine  in  political  life  has  become 
formal.  Its  symbols  linger,  but  it  is  assumed  that  thoughtful  men  smile  at  them 
and  lay  the  burthen  of  their  survival  upon  the  substantial  emoluments  of  office, 
or  upon  the  popular  love  of  the  spectacular  symbols  of  dignity.  In  depreciat- 
ing the  "  Divine  right "  of  kings,  have  we  diminished  the  assurance,  "  By  Me 
kings  reign  and  princes  decree  justice  "  ?  Do  the  splendours  of  a  coronation 
impress  us  more  than  its  solemnities  T  Does  the  sense  of  widening  empire 
attract  us  more  than  a  growing  sensitiveness  to  the  supremacy  of  spiritual 
obligation  T  Are  we  more  responsive  in  national  movements  to  the  solicita- 
tions of  sensual  excitement  than  to  the  inward  suggestions  of  the  Spirit  of  know- 
ledge and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  ?  It  was  in  the  midst  of  social  and  political 
conditions  strangely  analogous  to  our  own  that  Isaiah  set  forth  his  inspired  con- 
ception of  the  spiritual  qualifications  of  true  kingship  amongst  men.  2.  Between 
the  tendency  to  depreciate  the  place  of  the  Divine  in  national  life,  and  the  further 
tendency  in  religious  thought  to  limit  the  sphere  of  the  activities  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  unduly  to  what  are  termed  spiritual  as  opposed  to  temporal  affairs, 
there  is  an  inner  correspondence  that  is  very  significant.  There  is  a  mode,  popular 
amongst  the  religious,  of  speaking  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  as  super- 
natural," and  as  thus  excluding  processes  known  as  natural  or  rational,  that  is 
distinctly  perilous.  This  distinction  implies  that  we  may  feel  and  know  the 
presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  at  the  Keswick  Convention,  but  fails  to  expect  His 
influence  in  the  Convention  at  Bloemfontein.  It  asserts  His  inspiration  in  Holy 
Scripture,  but  has  no  sure  place  for  His  control  or  suggestion  in  the  leading  articles 
of  the  "  secular  "  press.  His  gifts  may  be  possessed  by  the  "  spiritually  minded," 
but  the  man  immersed  in  political  affairs  thinks  and  toils  in  quite  another  sphere. 
His  presence  is  invoked  at  the  councils  of  the  Church,  but  at  the  councils  of 
industry  it  is  regarded  as  a  negligible  quality.  In  the  problems  of  the  soul  His 
21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

guidance  as  the  Spirit  of  truth  may  be  consciously  expected,  but  in  the  problems 
of  science  men  must  follow  the  light  of  nature.  It  was  against  a  similar  con- 
caption  in  his  time  that  Isaiah's  declaration  of  the  Spirit's  seven-fold  gifts  was 
announced.  Israel  had  made  the  fatal  distinction  between  secular  and  sacred 
that  is  at  the  root  of  so  much  of  our  own  disregard  of  God.  We  do  not  wonder 
that  with  national  emergencies  and  necessities  such  as  these  pressing  upon  him, 
Isaiah  reveals  the  source  and  strength  of  political  sagacity  and  regal  authority 
as  dwelling  with  these  august  prerogatives  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  that  are  pre- 
vailingly intellectual,  "  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  spirit  of 
counsel  and  might,  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  They 
display  a  marvellous  co-ordination  of  the  intellectual  and  practical  life  with 
the  sense  of  the  direct  relation  of  the  life  to  God.  They  cannot  be  too  closely 
studied  and  applied  as  the  Divine  provision  for  the  governing  and  political 
mind,  and  the  scientific  temper  of  our  own  day.  "  '  Wisdom  '  is  the  power  of 
discerning  the  nature  of  things  through  the  appearance ;  '  understanding  * 
the  power  of  discerning  the  difference  of  things  in  their  appearance  ;  '  counsel ' 
is  the  gift  of  forming  right  conclusions,  and  '  might '  the  ability  to  carry  them 
through  with  energy.  '  The  knowledge  of  the  Lord  '  is  knowledge  founded 
on  the  fellowship  of  love  ;  and  '  the  fear  of  the  Lord  '  is  fear  absorbed  in  rever- 
ence." These  are  the  hidden  springs  of  the  genius  for  statesmanship.  The  Spirit 
is  the  true  historic  glory  of  royalty,  and  the  secret  of  citizenship  in  all  abiding 
developments  of  popular  liberties  and  imperial  expansion  ;  and  to  accept  any 
Btatute  of  limitations  in  the  opulence  of  His  energies  in  national  life  is  as  fatal 
to  permanence  as  to  progress.  (Ibid.)  The  Spirit  of  God  in  patriotism  and 
judicial  administration  : — True  patriotism  is  an  inspiring  variation  of  the  work 
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Judicial  administration  is  a  part  of  religious  life  and  faith. 
"The  Lord  of  hosts  is  for  a  spirit  of  judgment  to  him  that  sitteth  in  judgment, 
and  for  strength  to  them  that  turn  the  battle  to  the  gate."  (Ibid.)  The 
hallowing  of  the  secular  life  : — Whilst  we  are  heedful  of  the  richer  revelation  of 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  disclosed  in  the  New  Testament,  the  Old  Testament 
interpretation  of  His  gifts  is  of  essential  importance.  This  may  be  summed 
up  generally  as  the  hallowing  of  the  secular  life,  the  fertilising  contact  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  with  matter  and  mind  in  their  organisation  in  nature  and  in  human 
Bociety.  Joseph  as  an  administrator  is  recognised  as  His  product — "  a  man 
in  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  is."  It  was  the  equipment  of  Moses'  colleagues 
in  the  judicature,  "God  took  of  the  Spirit  which  was  upon  him  and  gave  it  unto 
them."  Of  Bezaleel  and  his  weavers  and  craftsmen  the  record  runs,  "  I  have 
filled  him  with  the  Spirit  of  God  in  wisdom  and  understanding,  and  in  know- 
ledge, and  in  all  manner  of  workmanship  to  devise  cunning  work."  Samson's 
might  was  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  clothed  itself  with 
Gideon  "  for  the  prowess  of  his  great  military  enterprise.  The  story  of  the 
coronation  of  Saul,  Israel's  earliest  king,  is  the  progressive  history  of  the  move- 
ments and  endowments  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  time  would  fail  to  tell  of  David 
and  the  long  line  of  kings  whom  the  same  Spirit  anointed  and  established  in 
government.  (Ibid.)  Christ  is  full  of  light: — Going  into  a  village  at  night, 
with  the  lights  gleaming  on  each  side  of  the  street,  in  some  houses  they  will 
be  in  the  basement  and  nowhere  else,  and  in  others  in  the  attic  and  nowhere  else, 
and  in  others  in  some  middle  chamber ;  but  in  no  house  will  every  window 
gleam  from  top  to  bottom.  So  it  is  with  men's  faculties.  Most  of  tbem 
are  in  darkness.  One  shines  here,  and  another  there ;  but  there  is  no  man 
whose  soul  is  luminous  throughout.  But  Christ  presented  a  perfect  char- 
acter. Every  room  in  His  soul  was  filled  with  light.  He  is  light.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.) 

Ver.  3.  And  shall  make  Trim  of  quick  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord. — 

*'  Of  quick  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  " — a  word  which  relates  to  the 
power  of  smell  or  scent ;  He  is  to  have  that  keen  sense  which  the  hound  has  when 
the  game  is  not  far  away,  and  yet  is  deeply  hidden  ;  He  is  to  know  wisdom  and 
right  and  truth  as  the  thirsty  hart  smells  the  water-brooks  ;  or,  by  another 
etymology,  He  is  to  draw  His  breath  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord;  i.e.,  the  fear  of 
the  Lord  is  to  be  His  native  breath.  Religion  is  to  be  no  burden  to  Him,  no 
superimposition  which  He  must  carry,  whether  He  will  or  no;  His  religion  is 
His  breath,  He  will  pray  because  He  breathes,  He  will  speak  because  He  breathes ; 
it  is  part  of  Himself,  of  His  very  nature ;  it  belongs  to  a  great  system  of  voluntari- 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  32* 

ness,  which  constantly  and  continually  gives  itself  out  for  the  benefit  of  those 
who  rre  within  the  range  of  its  influence.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christ's  pene- 
trating insight : — This  prediction  was  fully  verified  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  was  of  such  quick  discernment  and  acute  understanding  in  the  dispositions 
of  the  human  heart,  that  He  could  infallibly  determine  with  respect  to  men's 
characters,  of  which  some  memorable  instances  are  recorded  in  the  New  Testament. 
Such  was  His  penetrating  sagacity  that,  at  first  sight,  He  could  easily  discover 
a  true  Israelite  in  whom  was  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  from  those  that  were  wicked, 
hypocritical  or  formal,  and  destitute  of  this  internal  qualification  (John  i.  47,  48). 
He  showed  that  He  was  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  character  of  the  woman 
who  was  a  sinner.  According  to  this  prophecy  the  Messias,  in  admitting  persons 
into  His  kingdom,  was  not  to  have  respect  to  their  external  advantages,  their 
descent  or  their  riches,  their  reputation  and  condition  in  the  world,  or  their  exterior 
appearances  of  feigned  piety  ;  but  to  judge  of  them  simply  by  their  fear  and 
reverence  of  the  Lord,  which  forms  the  beauty  of  the  inward  man,  and  is  inseparably 
connected  with  every  other  Divine  grace  and  the  exercises  of  dutiful  obedience 
to  God.  (R.  Macculloch.)  Christ  and  the  fear  of  Jehovah  : — "  Fear  of  Jehovah 
is  fragrance  to  Him."  It  is  not  meant  that  He  has  as  regards  Himself  pleasure 
in  fear  of  God,  but  that  fear  of  God  when  He  perceives  it  in  men  is  fragrance  to 
Him  (Gen.  viii.  21) ;  for  the  fear  of  God  is  a  sacrifice  of  adoration,  continually 
ascending  to  God.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Religion  qxdckens  the  intelligence : — > 
1.  Those  are  most  truly  and  valuably  intelligent  that  are  so  "  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,"  in  the  business  of  religion ;  for  that  is  both  the  foundation  and  topstone 
of  wisdom.  2.  By  this  it  will  appear  that  we  have  the  Spirit  of  God  if  we  have- 
spiritual  senses  exercised,  and  are  "  of  quick  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord."  Those  have  Divine  illumination  that  know  their  duty  and  know  how 
to  go  about  it.  3.  Therefore  Jesus  Christ  had  the  Spirit  without  measure,  that 
He  might  perfectly  understand  His  undertaking.  (M.  Henry.)  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  may  here  denote  the  devout  affection  of  reverence,  which  arises  in 
the  mind  by  means  of  the  contemplation  of  the  grandeur  and  dominion,  the 
power  and  righteousness,  with  the  other  Divine  excellences  of  Jehovah.  It 
adores  His  greatness ;  it  venerates  His  purity ;  it  respects  His  omniscience  ; 
it  does  homage  to  His  goodness  ;  it  stands  in  awe  of  His  power ;  it  honours  His 
justice,  and  is  solicitous  to  avoid  His  displeasure.  It  is  such  a  profound  reverence 
for  God  as  is  accompanied  with  love,  and  a  becoming  concern  to  yield  an  exact 
obedience  to  all  His  commands;  it  resembles  the  affection  which  a  dutiful  son 
discovers  towards  his  esteemed  parent,  and  faithful  subjects  entertain  for  a  good 
prince.  (R.  Macculloch.)  Effects  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  : — When  this  principle 
reigns  in  the  heart  it  produces  the  most  powerful  effects,  and  hath  an  extensive 
happy  influence  over  all  the  purposes,  affections,  desires,  and  actions.  It  dispels 
the  fear  of  man  that  bringeth  a  snare,  and  renders  superior  to  all  the  threatenings 
and  terrors  of  the  world  ;  it  restrains  from  sin,  and  closely  adheres  to  God  and 
His  ways  ;  it  renders  cautious  and  circumspect,  and  proves  the  watchful  guardian 
of  the  heart ;  it  presides  in  every  act  of  worship,  and  excites  to  the  performance 
of  every  duty  that  may  please  the  Lord.  (Ibid.)  The  relation  of  the  fear  of 
the  Lord  to  other  graces  : — This  filial  fear  and  reverence  of  Jehovah  is  the  fruit 
of  the  Spirit ;  the  offspring  of  faith,  whereby  it  is  cherished  ;  the  concomitant 
of  love,  which  preserves  it  from  degenerating  into  slavish  dread ;  the  companion 
of  hope,  which  it  keeps  from  falling  into  presumption,  whilst  hope  preserves 
fear  from  sinking  into  despair ;  it  qualifies  joy  and  keeps  it  from  levity,  whilst 
joy  shows  that  fear  is  genuine,  and  of  the  right  kind.  (Ibid.)  And  He 
■ball  not  Judge  after  the  sight  of  His  eyes. — Chrisfs  impartial  judgment : — 
Impartial  judgment  and  equitable  reproof  are  foretold  to  be  administered 
by  Him.  In  the  exercise  of  His  penetrating  judgment  He  was  impartially  to 
pronounce  upon  the  characters  of  those  who  were  to  be  admitted  to  participate 
in  the  privileges  of  His  people,  to  determine  according  to  the  perfect  rules  of 
equity  the  differences  that  might  arise  among  them  respecting  their  conduct  and 
interests,  to  defend  them  from  the  injuries  to  which  they  might  be  exposed,  and 
to  avenge  the  wrongs  which  they  sustained.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  But  with  righteousness  shall  He  judge  the  poor. — The  righteous- 
ness of  Christ's  kingdom : — As  it  may  in  many  ways  be  shown  that  the 
Church  of  Christ  though  one  Church  with  the  Jewish,  differs  from  it  as 
being   a   kingdom,    so    now   let    me    dwell    on    this    point :     that    though    a 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

kingdom  like  empires  of  the  earth,  it  differs  from  them  in  being  a  Church,  t'.e., 
a  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness.  That  Scripture  speaks  of  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  as  not  an  earthly  kingdom,  not  supported  by  strength  of  arm  or  force 
of  mind  or  any  other  faculty  or  gift  of  the  natural  man,  is  plain.  But  consider 
some  objections  to  which  the  circumstances  of  its  actual  history  and  condition 
give  rise.  I.  It  may  bb  said  that  the  event  has  not  fulfilled  the  pro- 
phecies ;  that  the  kingdom  has  indeed  been  large  and  powerful,  but  it  has  not 
ruled  according  to  justice  and  truth ;  that  at  times  it  has  had  very  wicked  men 
among  its  rulers,  and  that  great  corruptions,  religious  and  moral,  have  been 
found  in  it ;  and  that  worse  crimes  have  been  perpetrated  under  colour  of  religion 
than  in  any  other  way.  But  this  may  be  granted  in  the  argument ;  yet  the 
Scripture  account  of  the  Church  remains  uncompromised.  It  is  a  kingdom  of 
righteousness,  because  it  is  a  kingdom  founded  in  righteousness.  II.  In  the 
Gospel,  Christ's  followers  are  represented  as  poor,  despised,  weak, 
and  helpless.  Such  pre-eminently  were  the  apostles.  But  in  the  prophets, 
especially  in  Isaiah,  the  kingdom  is  represented  as  rich  and  flourishing  and 
honoured,  powerful  and  happy.  If  the  Church  of  Christ  were  to  seek  power, 
wealth,  and  honour,  this  were  to  fall  from  grace ;  but  it  is  not  less  true  that  she 
will  have  them,  though  she  seeks  them  not — or  rather,  if  she  seeks  them  not. 
Such  is  the  law  of  Christ's  kingdom,  such  the  paradox  which  is  seen  in  its  history. 
It  belongs  to  the  poor  in  spirit ;  it  belongs  to  the  persecuted ;  it  is  possessed 
by  the  meek;  it  is  sustained  by  the  patient.  It  conquers  by  suffering;  it 
advances  by  retiring ;  it  is  made  wise  through  foolishness.    III.  Temporal  power 

AND  WEALTH,  THOUGH  NOT   ESSENTIAL  TO   THE  CHURCH,  ARE  ALMOST  NECESSARY 

attendants  on  it.     (J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  And  righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle  of  His  loins,  and  faithfulness 
the  girdle  of  His  reins. — The  right  girdle : — I.  We  have  the  Saviour  here 
represented  in  His  righteousness.  The  Saviour  was  abstractedly,  in  and 
of  and  from  Himself,  righteous.  But  the  righteousness  here  means  the 
actual  accomplishment  of  His  mission.  He  saith  of  Himself,  "  Ought  not 
Christ  to  suffer  these  things  ?  "  But  He  was  not  only  righteous  in  His  work. 
He  was  righteous  on  all  sides.  "  Righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle  of  His 
loins  "  ;  go  all  round  Him.  That  cannot  be  said  of  us  except  by  faith.  By 
faith  we  put  on  the  girdle  of  righteousness.  But  personally  we  are  compassed 
with  infirmity.  Not  so  the  Saviour.  He  was  tempted  or  tried,  but  never  showed 
a  weak  part  anywhere.  Not  only  was  He  righteous,  He  was  also  strong. 
II.  We  have  the  Saviour  here  represented  in  His  faithfulness.  By  the  "  reins," 
as  Cruden  well  observes,  the  vital  affections  of  the  soul  are  meant.  Did  Christ's 
vital  affections  ever  give  way  ?  No !  How  faithful  He  was  in  love !  {James  Wells. ) 
Girdles  of  various  kinds,  made  of  valuable  materials,  were  anciently  worn  by 
persons  of  high  rank,  which  distinguished  them  from  those  of  inferior  station, 
by  whom  girdles  of  some  sort  were  likewise  worn.  The  girdles  which  the  priests 
put  on  were  made  of  gold,  of  blue,  of  purple,  scarlet,  and  fine-twined  linen.  The 
military  girdle  was  sometimes  of  considerable  excellence  and  value,  as  is  plainly 
intimated  in  what  Joab  said  to  the  young  man  who  informed  him  he  had  seen 
Absalom  hanging  in  a  tree  (2  Sam.  xviii.  11).  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  Righteous- 
ness and  faithfulness,  agreeably  blended  together,  compose  the  girdle  of  the 
Messiah.  These  two  amiable  qualities  cannot  be  separated,  and  serve  mutually 
to  illustrate  each  other ;  faithfulness  is  necessary  to  fulfil  the  promises  of  God, 
and  righteousness  is  no  less  requisite  to  discern  the  characters  of  those  to  whom 
they  ought  to  be  fulfilled,  in  what  measure,  and  in  what  time  they  should  be 
accomplished.  (Ibid.)  ChrisVs  girdle : — 1.  As  a  girdle  surrounds  a  man's 
whole  Dody,  and  is  seen  to  advantage  whithersoever  he  turn  himself,  so,  in  like 
manner,  these  two  Divine  excellences  should  every  way  appear  most  conspicuous 
in  the  Messiah's  administration  of  the  affairs  of  His  kingdom.  2.  As  the  girdles 
which  were  anciently  worn,  served  to  fasten  the  loose  and  flowing  garments  that 
were  then  used  and  to  strengthen  the  loins  of  those  who  were  girt  with  them, 
so  these  glorious  perfections  complete  the  character  of  the  King  of  Israel  and 
give  vigour  to  the  honourable  and  successful  exercise  of  regal  authority.  3.  As 
girdles  served  in  ancient  times  for  ornaments  to  the  illustrious  persons  who 
put  them  on,  so  righteousness  and  faithfulness  were  eminently  to  adorn  the 
personal  conduct  and  public  character  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  the  King  of 
kings,  and  Lord  of  lords  (Rev.  xix.  11).     (Ibid.)        The  trilogy  of  the  prophet* 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  325 

figures  of  the  Messiah — as  about  to  be  born,  as  born,  and  as  ruling — is  now  com- 
plete.    (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-9.  The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb.  —  A  portrait  of 
humanity : — I.  The  moral  varieties  of  the  race.  Men  are  here  repre- 
sented by  irrational  creatures,  differing  immensely  in  their  organisations, 
their  habits,  and  their  tempers — the  "  wolf,"  the  "  lamb,"  &c.  The  physical 
differences  between  men  are  great.  The  mental  differences  are  also  great.  But 
the  moral  varieties  are,  perhaps,  greater  still.  There  are  men  everywhere  about 
us  as  ferocious  as  the  "lion,"  as  savage  as  the  "  bear,"  as  snarling  as  the  "wolf," 
as  cunning  as  the  "leopard,"  as  venomous  as  the  "  serpent,"  as  harmless  as 
the  "  kid,"  the  "  lamb,"  or  the  "  little  child."  II.  The  Gospel  reformation 
of  the  race.  These  creatures  are  here  represented  as  having  passed  through 
a  wonderful  change  in  their  instincts  and  habits,  and  this  change  is  ascribed 
to  the  advent  and  reign  of  Messiah.  It  is  not  a  change  in  their  physical 
constitution.  The  wolf,  the  leopard,  the  bear,  the  lion,  and  the  serpent  retain 
their  constitutions  intact,  though  they  dwell  with  the  kid,  the  lamb,  and  the 
little  child.  The  change  is  in  their  temper — in  their  ruling  instincts.  Such 
is  the  change  that  the  Gospel  works  in  man.  The  change  is  simply  in  the  temper 
— the  heart.  It  does  two  things.  1.  It  extracts  social  antipathies.  2.  It  implants 
social  sympathies.  This  is  the  only  reformation  that  will  meet  the  case. 
III.  The  social  harmony  of  the  race.  These  creatures,  once  antagonistic, 
are  here  eating  together,  lying  down  together,  playing  together.  All  are 
wedded  in  spirit.  Christianity  is  essentially  pacifio  in  its  spirit,  its  teachings,  its 
tendencies  and  results.  (Homilist.)  The  fruits  of  Christ's  kingdom: — 1.  In 
every  soul  which  shall  come  to  heaven  there  must  be  a  change.  2.  The  change 
is  not  of  the  substantial  parts  of  the  body,  but  of  the  corrupt  qualities  of  the 
mind,  or  soul.  3.  The  change  is  made  upon  the  Church  of  God  in  this  world. 
4.  The  change  cometh  from  the  grace  of  God,  and  floweth  to  us  by  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  5.  The  means  by  which  the  change  is  wrought,  namely,  by  the  know- 
ledge of  the  law,  &c.  6.  The  marks  of  the  change.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  The 
touchstone  of  regeneration  : — It  is  an  eminent  mark  of  regeneration  to  have  the 
violence  and  fierceness  of  our  cruel  nature  taken  away.  The  signs  of  regenera- 
tion contained  in  our  text  are — I.  Harmlessness.  This,  though  it  runs  along 
the  body  of  the  text  and  is  last  mentioned,  may  be  named  first,  for  it  is  implied 
in  all.  How  can  a  man  say  he  is  renewed  unless  in  some  sort  he  be  like  unto 
God  in  mercifulness  ?  It  is  a  prime  quality  in  the  wicked  to  do  mischief ;  it 
is  a  property  of  God's  child  to  be  harmless.     There  are  two  signs  of  this  sign. 

1.  If  we  would  not  do  evil,  though  we  might  do  it  unseen  of  any  creature :  as 
when  a  little  child  shall  lay  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice's  den,  the  serpent  might 
sting,  and  yet,  unseen  of  any,  pull  in  the  head  again.  2.  Though  we  have 
provocation,  we  will  abstain  from  doing  evil.  The  little  child  plays  on  the 
hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned  child  lays  his  hand  upon  the  cockatrice's  den. 
Is  not  here  provocation  ?  "Bless  them  that  curse  you,"  &c.  II.  Sociable- 
ness.  With  whom  is  it  that  this  society  holdeth  ?  Not  of  wild  beasts  with 
wild  beasts  ;  but  there  is  implied  here  not  only  a  simple  society,  as  among 
wild  beasts,  but  a  sociableness,  as  it  were,  among  those  of  another  generation. 
Naturally  all  of  us  have  been  lions,  bears,  and  wolves,  and  unsociable  haters 
of  goodness  in  others.  This  sociableness  with  those  former  servants  of  God, 
who  have  been  called  thus,  is  a  very  sure  mark  of  this  change  in  us  (1  John 
iii.  14).  1.  No  man  can  love  a  saint,  as  a  saint,  but  a  saint.  A  true  trial  of 
sociableness  is  when  men  will  joy  to  sort  themselves  with  those  with  whom  formerly 
they  have  been  most  unsociable,  and  whose  company  they  have  most  loathed. 

2.  A  second  sign  of  this  sign  is,  to  love  every  brother,  yea,  though  it  were  to  lay 
down  our  life  for  a  brother.  III.  Constancy.  How  is  this  implied  ?  By 
dwelling  and  lying  together.  You  shall  have  many  companions  go  with  a  man 
for  fashion's  sake  to  the  church,  and  yet  leave  going  ere  it  be  long.  You  shall 
have  some  men  sick,  and  then  like  a  serpent  frozen  in  winter,  which  casts  his  skin, 
you  shall  have  them  cast  their  skin  a  little  ;  that  is,  send  for  a  preacher,  make 
confession  of  their  sins,  saying,  "  Oh !  if  God  will  spare  me,  I  will  become  a  new 
man."  But  when  he  is  well,  within  a  month  after,  you  will  find  him  not  with 
the  lamb,  but  with  the  bears  and  the  wolves.  IV.  Inwardness.  Their  little 
ones — dear  unto  them,  and  of  whom  they  are  so  jealous  and  tender — shall  lie 
down  together  (Acts  iv.  32).     V.  Tractablenbss.     A  little  child    shall  lead 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

them  and  rule  them.  It  is  a  true  sign  of  grace  when  we  become  easy  to  be  ruled, 
and  brought  in  compass  (Job  xxxi.  13).  VI.  Simplicity.  "  The  lion  shall 
eat  straw  like  the  ox."  Cain  was  bloody,  and  fed  upon  blood ;  therefore,  as 
it  is  (John  iv.  32)  when  a  man  is  come  thus  far,  that  he  hath  meat  which 
one  seeth  not.  Uses — 1.  For  consolation.  Look  which  religion  makes  a 
man  most  mild,  and  tames  his  fierce  nature — there  is  the  Church.  If  we  be 
fierce  and  savage,  let  us  not  deceive  ourselves  ;  we  are  not  come  to  the  mountain 
of  which  it  is  said,  "  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  My  holy  mountain." 
2.  For  exhortation.  There  is  yet  a  little  of  the  lion  and  the  bear  remaining  in 
every  one  of  us — our  tree  yet  bears,  on  one  side  of  it,  crabs.  See  what  minds 
we  must  have  if  we  look  for  a  habitation  in  God's  holy  mountain.  (Ibid.) 
The  splendour  and  amplitude  of  Christ's  kingdom  : — I.  The  meaning  op  this 
pbopheoy.  What  is  meant  by  the  wolf,  the  leopard,  and  the  rest  of  the 
creatures  here  mentioned  ?  Christ  shall  come  to  make  the  world  so  happy,  that 
princes  and  people,  the  mighty  and  the  meaner  sort ;  the  violent,  and  they  that 
have  no  power,  or  no  will  to  resist ;  the  soldier,  and  the  peaceable  countryman  ; 
the  waspish  people,  and  they  that  are  of  a  sweet  disposition,  shall  all  be  brought 
under  the  same  discipline,  and  submit  to  the  same  laws  ;  not  to  hurt  or  molest 
one  another,  but  to  promote  the  common  good  of  the  whole  body  to  which  they 
belong.  II.  The  truth  of  it  ;  or,  that  it  was  exactly  fulfilled  in  our  Lord  and 
Saviour.  1.  It  was  the  apparent  design  of  our  Saviour's  coming  to  make  such 
a  happy  accord  among  men.  2.  The  nature  of  His  religion  is  such  as  is  apt  to 
produce  this  effect  which  He  designed.  This  will  be  evident  to  every  one's 
satisfaction  who  will  seriously  weigh  these  three  things.  (1)  The  principles  of 
His  religion,  together  with  the  ways  and  means  whereby  these  principles  were 
established  in  men's  minds.  He  taught  them  that  there  is  but  one  God,  the 
disbelief  of  which  had  set  the  world  at  such  enmities  one  with  another  as  they 
confessed  was  among  the  deities.  He  revealed  Him  as  His  and  their  Father, 
full  of  kindness  and  goodwill  to  all  His  children  ;  which  St.  Paul  thought  a 
bond  so  strong  and  a  motive  so  efficacious  that  it  concludes  the  great  heap  of 
arguments  whereby  he  persuades  Christians  to  unity  of  the  spirit  and  peace  (Eph. 
iv.  6).  They  are  taught  to  worship  this  one  God,  by  one  Mediator  alone.  He 
Bent  His  apostles  to  baptize  all  nations  into  one  simple  faith  (Eph.  iv.  5).  The 
world  was  to  be  governed  and  judged  by  one  common  law,  and  that  not  the  law 
of  Moses,  but  the  plain  rules  of  righteousness,  sobriety  and  godliness.  (Eph. 
ii.  14,  19).  All,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  were  indifferently  endued  with  one 
and  the  same  Spirit.  (2)  The  precepts  of  His  religion.  Exact  justice  (Matt, 
vii.  12).  Mercy.  Meekness  and  patience.  To  bless  our  enemies  and  do 
them  good,  which  hath  a  strange  power  in  it  to  charm  and  conquer  even  the 
most  fierce  and  barbarous  natures.  He  would  have  us  contented  with  such 
things  as  we  have :  which  evidently  destroys  that  envy,  emulation,  and  ambi- 
tion, from  whence  no  small  stirs  and  confusions  arise  in  the  world.  In  questions 
about  matters  of  liberty,  He  charges  those  that  are  satisfied,  not  to  despise  such 
as  are  not ;  and  those  that  are  not  satisfied,  not  to  judge  those  that  are  (Bom. 
xiv.  3).  In  all  manner  of  differences  which  are  apt  to  arise  among  us,  He  would 
have  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  our  hearts,"  so  that  having  this  umpire  there, 
we  should  rest  in  the  determination  of  what  will  make  most  for  peace.  He 
instructs  likewise  our  behaviour  in  our  several  relations,  teaching  husbands  and 
wives,  parents  and  children,  masters  and  servants,  pastors  and  people,  to  demean 
themselves  so  to  their  mutual  satisfaction,  as  to  take  away  the  cause  of  all  dis- 
cord, not  only  in  families  and  parishes,  but  in  the  larger  societies  of  Church  and 
State.  The  root  and  foundation  of  all  these  our  Lord  hath  laid  in  much  humility 
and  charity.  (3)  The  obligations  He  laid  upon  men  to  receive  these  principles 
and  observe  these  precepts.  His  doctrine  excels  that  of  the  best  philosophers, 
who  taught  many  excellent  lessons,  but  could  not  enforce  them  with  such  an 
assured  hope  of  immortal  life  or  fear  of  eternal  death  as  our  Saviour  and  His 
apostles  have  done.  3.  This  effect  was  actually  produced  in  those  that  heartily 
embraced  His  religion  (Acts  iv.  32 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  3,  4).  It  is  to  be  hoped  that 
the  time  is  coming  when  Christianity  will  end,  as  it  began,  in  abundance  of  truth 
and  peace,  by  a  right  understanding  of  the  will  of  God  and  a  hearty  submission 
thereto.  Let  every  soul  of  us  do  his  part  that  the  place  where  he  lives  may  bo 
in  peace — princes  and  governors,  ministers  of  the  Gospel,  &c.  (S.  Patrick,  D.D.) 
A  picture  of  what  the  world  is  to  be  ; — It  is  not  a  photograph.  The  poet  never 
photographs,  he  pictures.     And  this  poet  is  no  exception.      He  does  not  wish 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  321 

tia  to  believe  that  wolves  and  lambs  will  one  day  be  friends,  and  that  what  Burns 
calls  "  Nature's  social  union  "  is  to  be  realised  by  the  transfiguration  of  a  lion 
into  a  domestic  pet  or  into  a  beast  of  the  stall.  He  is  not  photographing,  but 
picturing  a  scene  which  never  was  and  never  shall  be,  in  order  to  represent  a 
splendid  spiritual  and  social  reality  which  must  be — the  reign  amongst  men 
of  perfect  union  and  peace  on  earth.  You  can  see  how  true  this  is  when  you 
turn  over  to  another  picture  by  this  same  prophet-artist  intended  to  illustrate 
the  same  theme.  There  the  wilderness  is  to  be  glad,  the  desert  is  to  blossom 
as  the  rose  and  rejoice,  the  lame  man  is  to  leap  as  the  hart,  the  highway  usually 
infested  by  lions  and  beasts  of  prey  is  to  be  safe  as  a  strong  tower,  for  the  obvious 
reason  "  no  lion  shall  be  there."  Plainly  the  prophet  is  not  photographing, 
but  picturing.  (E.  J.  Kyd.)  "Nature's  social  union"  :  a  picture  of  heaven 
upon  earth : — I.  We  have  a  picture  op  the  inner  spiritual  union  and  peace 
which  God  is  creating  in  every  man's  bosom.  In  man  all  animalism  sums 
itself  up  in  subtlest  composition  ;  but  there  is  a  Divine  element  also  in  his 
bosom  represented  by  a  little  child,  an  elemental  force  which  is  placed  there  to 
reign  over  fierce  passions  and  carnal  lusts,  a  force  which  is  destined  to  be  master. 
Paul  gives  us  insight  into  this  subject.  He  recognises  in  man's  composite  nature 
the  wolf  and  the  lamb,  the  lion  and  the  child.  The  flesh  lusts  against  the  spirit, 
and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh.  The  word  flesh  "  is  Paul's  term  for  that  nature 
in  us  which  loves  self  and  self  only,  a  nature  which  is  characteristic  of  the  whole 
animal  world.  The  term  "  spirit  "  is  a  term  for  that  Divine  nature  in  us  which 
loves  and  cares  for  others  and  takes  little  or  no  thought  of  self.  As  things  are, 
these  two  natures  are  at  variance  more  or  less  in  us  all.  But  there  should  be 
no  war  in  our  bosom.  Peace  is  the  ideal  state.  Love  of  self  and  love  of  others 
should  not  clash,  but  co-operate  as  they  do  in  the  maternal  breast.  Self-love 
must  not  hurt  the  spirit,  the  conscience,  the  finer  and  higher  feelings  of  charity. 
This  harmony  pictured  by  Isaiah  and  ethically  set  forth  by  Paul  is  the  heaven 
which  has  begun  to  be  in  our  bosom,  but  only  begun.  The  Child-heart  must 
reign.  He  who  has  begun  the  good  work  in  us  will  carry  it  on  until  the  day  of 
Christ.  II.  We  have  a  picture  op  man's  social  union.  His  social  union  is 
the  result  of  inner  spiritual  union.  When  a  man  is  constantly  quarrelling  with 
himself,  his  conscience  taunting  his  cupidity  and  selfishness,  and  the  child  in 
him  leading  him  to  toil  and  self-sacrifice  whilst  the  animal  in  him  demands 
ease  and  pleasure,  this  picture  of  union  and  brotherhood  is  not  possible  of  realisa- 
tion. The  first  thing  to  be  done  if  we  would  realise  it  is  to  get  each  man's  bosom 
pat  right.  The  wolves  of  society,  the  serpents,  the  land-sharks,  the  men  who 
devour  widows'  houses,  the  foxes  or  Herods  who  are  ever  looking  after  Number 
One,  the  hypocrite  with  the  slimy  lie  on  his  lip  whilst  the  crocodile  tear  is  in 
his  eye,  will  all  be  changed  into  men  of  honour  and  kindness,  men  of  purity 
*nd  righteousness.  Social  quarrels  will  end.  The  labour  and  capital  problem  will 
be  solved,  and  capital  and  labour  will  dwell  together,  like  Isaiah's  wolf  and 
lamb,  in  peace.  The  poor  and  the  weak  will  not  be  driven  to  the  wall.  Even 
the  innocent  child  will  be  safe  in  the  dark.  The  policeman's  footstep  will  cease 
to  be  heard  in  the  land,  and  the  soldier  will  beat  his  sword  into  a  ploughshare. 
Blessed  outlook  !  III.  This  picture  is  to  be  realised  by  the  Christ  that 
was  and  is  TO  BE.  From  the  power  Christ  has  shown  in  transfiguring  men 
and  raising  the  tone  of  society  to  what  it  is,  we  are  persuaded  that  He  will  succeed 
in  accomplishing  His  herculean  labour  of  turning  earth  into  heaven.  Surely 
He  must  be  Divine  who  proposes  to  undertake  such  a  work  !  Let  us  look  at 
the  Divine  Man  who  is  able  to  accomplish  what  seems  to  us  to  be  impossible. 
He  has  a  child-heart  in  Him.  "  He  is,"  says  Isaiah,  "  a  Rod  out  of  the  stem 
of  Jesse.  On  Him  rests  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  under- 
standing." The  Good  Shepherd's  music  which  brings  about  the  peace  of  God 
in  our  bosom  is  at  first  a  summons  to  war.  It  is  a  call  to  the  child  in  us  to  awake 
and  lead  into  a  glorious  captivity  the  lower  animal  nature  which  ever  lusts  to 
be  first.  It  is  a  call  to  the  higher  in  us  to  hold  in  check  the  lower  and  bring  it 
by  confidence  and  obedience  into  union  and  co-operation.  We  are  summoned 
to  accept  the  blessed  task  of  being  peacemakers  in  our  own  breasts,  and  peace- 
making there  must  begin  by  a  proclamation  of  war.  Strange  work  for  a  child  ! 
Impossible  work  !  do  you  affirm  T  "  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty."  It  is  God's  way  by  "  things 
which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are."  (Ibid.)  The  wild  beasts  : 
— We,  who  live  in  countries  from  which  wild  beasts  have  been  exterminated. 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XV 

cannot  understand  the  insecurity  and  terror  that  they  cause  in  regions  where 
they  abound.  A  modern  seer  of  the  times  of  regeneration  would  leave  the 
wild  animals  out  of  his  vision.  They  do  not  impress  any  more  the  human  con- 
science or  imagination.  But  they  once  did  so  most  terribly.  The  hostility 
between  man  and  the  beasts  not  only  formed  once  upon  a  time  the  chief  material 
obstacle  in  the  progress  of  the  race,  but  remains  still  to  the  religious  thinker  the 
most  pathetic  portion  of  that  groaning  and  travailing  of  all  creation  which  is 
bo  heavy  a  burden  on  his  heart.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Not  exter- 
minated, but  tamed  : — Isaiah  would  not  have  the  wild  beasts  exterminated,  but 
tamed.  There  our  Western  and  modern  imagination  may  fail  to  follow  him, 
especially  when  he  includes  reptiles  in  the  regeneration,  and  prophesies  of  adders 
and  lizards  as  the  playthings  of  children.  But  surely  there  is  no  genial  man, 
who  has  watched  the  various  forms  of  life  that  sport  in  the  Southern  sunshine, 
who  will  not  sympathise  with  the  prophet  in  his  joyous  vision.  Upon  a  warm 
spring  day  in  Palestine,  to  sit  upon  the  grass,  beside  some  old  dyke  or  ruin  with 
its  face  to  the  South,  is  indeed  to  obtain  a  rapturous  view  of  the  wealth  of  life 
with  which  the  bountiful  God  has  blessed  and  made  merry  man's  dwelling- 
place.  How  the  lizards  come  and  go  among  the  grey  stones  and  flash  like  jewels 
in  the  dust !  And  the  timid  snake  rippling  quickly  past  through  the  grass,  and 
the  leisurely  tortoise,  with  its  shiny  back,  and  the  chameleon,  shivering  into 
new  colour  as  he  passes  from  twig  to  stone,  and  stone  to  straw, — all  the  air  the 
while  alive  with  the  music  of  the  cricket  and  the  bee  !  You  feel  that  the  ideal 
is  not  to  destroy  these  pretty  things  as  vermin.  What  a  loss  of  colour  the  lizards 
alone  would  imply !  But,  as  Isaiah  declares, — whom  we  may  imagine  walking 
with  his  children  up  the  steep  vineyard  paths,  to  watch  the  creatures  come  and 
go  upon  the  dry  dykes  on  either  hand, — the  ideal  is  to  bring  them  into  sympathy 
with  ourselves,  make  pets  of  them  and  playthings  for  children,  who  indeed 
stretch  out  their  hands  in  joy  to  the  pretty  toys.  (Ibid.)  The  mystery  of 
the  brute  creation : — What  are  these  animals  T  Who  made  them  ?  Who  can 
explain  them  ?  Who  knows  their  future  ?  This  is  a  gracious  mystery  at  all 
events,  and  may  be  accepted  as  a  fact — that  when  man  is  right  with  God,  the 
animals  will  be  right  with  man ;  when  man  is  right  with  God,  the  earth  will 
be  right  with  man,  and  will  feel  as  if  she  could  not  do  enough  for  him  in  growing 
him  all  the  bread  he  wants,  and  then  giving  him  more  than  he  needs.  "  Let 
the  people  praise  Thee,  O  God  ;  let  all  the  people  praise  Thee.  Then  shall  the 
earth  yield  her  increase  ;  and  God,  even  our  own  God,  shall  bless  us."  (/. 
Parker,  D.D.)  The  redemption  of  nature: — It  is  one  of  those  errors,  which 
distort  both  the  poetry  and  truth  of  the  Bible,  to  suppose  that  by  the  bears, 
lions,  and  reptiles  which  the  prophet  now  sees  tamed  in  the  time  of  the  regenera- 
tion, he  intends  the  violent  human  characters  which  he  so  often  attacks.  When 
Isaiah  here  talks  of  the  beasts,  he  means  the  beasts.  The  passage  is  not  alle- 
gorical, but  direct,  and  forms  a  parallel  to  the  well-known  passage  in  the  eighth 
of  Romans.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  legend  of  St.  Blaise  is  of  Greek 
origin.  He  was  bishop  over  the  Christian  Church  at  Sebaste  in  Cappadocia, 
and  governed  his  flock  for  many  years  with  great  vigilance,  till  the  persecution 
under  Diocletian,  a.d.  289,  obliged  him  to  fly  ;  and  he  took  refuge  in  a  mountain- 
cave  at  some  distance  from  the  city.  This  mountain  was  the  haunt  of  wild 
beasts  (bears,  lions,  and  tigers) ;  but  these  animals  were  so  completely  subdued 
by  the  gentleness  and  piety  of  the  good  old  man,  that,  far  from  doing  him  any 
harm,  they  came  every  morning  to  ask  his  blessing.  If  they  found  him  kneeling 
at  his  devotions,  they  waited  duteously  till  he  had  finished,  and,  having  received 
the  accustomed  benediction,  they  retired.  Now,  in  the  city  of  Sebaste,  and 
in  the  whole  province,  so  many  Christians  were  put  to  death,  that  there  began 
to  be  a  scarcity  of  wild  beasts  for  the  amphitheatres.  And  Agricolaus,  the 
governor,  sent  his  hunters  into  the  mountains  to  collect  as  many  lions,  tigers, 
and  bears  as  possible  ;  and  it  happened  that  these  hunters,  arriving  one  day 
before  the  mouth  of  the  cave  in  which  St.  Blaise  had  taken  refuge,  found  him 
seated  in  front  of  it,  and  surrounded  by  a  variety  of  animals  of  different  species. 
The  lion  and  the  lamb,  the  hind  and  the  leopard,  seemed  to  have  put  off  their 
nature,  and  were  standing  amicably  together,  as  though  there  had  been  ever- 
lasting peace  between  them  ;  and  some  he  blessed  with  holy  words,  knowing 
that  God  careth  for  all  things  that  He  has  made;  and  to  others  that  were  sick 
or  wounded  he  ministered  gently  ;  and  others  he  reprehended  because  of  their 
rapacity  and  gluttony.     And,  when  the   hunters    beheld  this,  they  were  like 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  329 

men  in  a  dream :  they  stood  astonished,  thinking  they  had  found  some  enchanter. 
And  they  seized  him,  and  carried  him  before  the  governor;  and,  as  they  went, 
the  good  bishop  returned  thanks  to  God,  and  rejoiced  greatly,  that,  at  length, 
he  had  been  found  worthy  to  die  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  (Mrs.  Jameson.) 
Man  to  blame  for  the  wildness  of  the  beasts  : — We  may  take  on  scientific  authority 
a  few  facts  as  hints  from  nature,  that  after  all  man  is  to  blame  for  the  wildness  of 
the  beasts,  and  that  through  his  sanotification  they  may  be  restored  to  sympathy 
with  himself.  Charles  Darwin  says  :  "It  deserves  notice  that  at  an  extremely 
ancient  period  when  man  first  entered  any  country  the  animals  living  there 
would  have  felt  no  instinctive  or  inherited  fear  of  him,  and  would  consequently 
have  been  tamed  far  more  easily  than  at  present."  And  he  gives  some  very 
instructive  facts  in  proof  of  this  with  regard  to  dogs,  antelopes,  manatees,  and 
hawks.  "  Quadrupeds  and  birds  which  have  seldom  been  disturbed  by  man 
dread  him  no  more  than  do  our  English  birds  the  cows  or  horses  grazing  in  the 
fields."  Darwin's  details  are  peculiarly  pathetic  in  their  revelation  of  the  brutes' 
utter  trustfulness  in  man  before  they  get  to  know  him.  Persons  who  have 
had  to  do  with  individual  animals  of  a  species  that  has  never  been  thoroughly 
tamed,  are  aware  that  the  difficulty  of  training  them  lies  in  convincing  them  of  our 
sincerity  and  good-heartedness,  and  that  when  this  is  got  over  they  will  learn 
almost  any  trick  or  habit.  The  well-known  lines  of  Burns  to  the  field-mouse 
gather  up  the  cause  of  all  this,  in  a  fashion  very  similar  to  the  Bible's.  {Prof, 
O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Ma  's  relation  to  the  lower  animals  : — The  practical  "  uses  " 
of  such  a  passage  of  Scripture  as  this  are  plain.  Some  of  them  are  the  awful 
responsibility  of  man's  position  as  the  keystone  of  creation,  the  material  effects 
of  sin,  and  especially  the  religiousness  of  our  relation  to  the  lower  animals.  (Ibid. ) 
A  little  child  shall  lead  them. — The  child  to  the  front: — The  Bible,  when  it 
speaks  as  it  does  in  these  verses,  always  means  something  better  than 
it  says.  Many  thngs  come  to  children  much  worse  than  being  destroyed  by 
a  lion,  or  eaten  by  a  wolf,  or  poisoned  by  a  serpent's  fang,  only,  I  am  sorry  to 
believe,  neither  children  nor  grown-up  people  think  them  worse  things,  nor 
anything  like  so  dreadful.  Perhaps  that  is  the  most  doleful  evil  of  all.  Had 
I  not  faith  in  God's  great  wisdom,  love,  and  justice,  I  should  feel  that  for  tens 
of  millions  of  children  in  this  world  it  would  be  infinitely  better  that  they  v  ere 
never  born;  and  that,  being  born,  the  next  preferable  event  would  be  ih\t 
they  should  die  as  soon  after  birth  as  possible,  even  though  it  were  a  h  ngry 
wolf  that  should  slay  them.  They  come  into  places  more  terrible  than  a  wild 
beast's  lair  or  a  cockatrice's  den.  They  come  into  places  full  of  ignorance  and 
iniquity,  where  they  have  no  opportunity  of  growing  up  good,  or  even  of  knowing 
what  good  is.  Now,  this  text  says  that  in  the  good  time  coming  all  this  shall 
be  changed.  The  day  is  coming  in  our  country  when  the  child,  because  of  his 
weakness  and  his  wants,  shall  be  the  most  cherished  and  cared- for  person  either 
in  the  home,  the  Church,  or  the  State.  I.  From  these  words,  then,  we  get  the 
idea  that  as  the  world  gets  on,  and  men  grow  wiser,  truer,  and  holier, 
children  rise  in  their  regard.  The  care  for  children  becomes  exalted;  it 
ceases  to  be  a  merely  natural  affection,  and  is  intensified  and  purified  into  a  moral 
and  spiritual  passion.  The  Bible  teaches  us  that  love  of  children  is  a  note  of 
moral  culture,  and  all  history  shows  that  in  the  measure  the  claims  of  the  little 
ones  are  lightly  regarded  the  moral  tone  is  low.  There  may  be  strength  and 
courage  for  war,  there  may  be  art  and  philosophy,  there  may  be  an  abundance 
of  physical  and  intellectual  display,  but  the  higher  morals — those  that  are  the 
very  graces  of  the  soul,  those  which  perfect  men  and  go  to  the  root  of  the  world's 
sins  and    sorrows — are    exceedingly    scarce.     II.   These  words  teach  us  that 

CHILDREN  ARE  ABLE  TO  PARTICIPATE  IN  THAT  WHICH  IS  HIGHEST  AND  MOST  DlVINE 

— that  they  can  share  the  best  and  highest  with  the  best  and  highest  men.  The 
philosophy  of  the  highest  good  may  be  far  beyond  the  reach  of  their  reason,  but 
the  blessing  of  it  may  be  realised  by  them  and  enjoyed.  The  sunshine  is  as 
warm  and  delightful  to  them  without  any  theory  of  light  and  heat  as  with  one. 
III.  Another  word  we  have  to  speak  is,  that  they  who  are  working  for 

THB  CHILDREN  ARE  ON  THE  LINES  OP  THE  WORLD'S  PROGRESS.      The  world  follow! 

the  children — they  are  always  in  front.  (W.  Hubbard.)  Ministry  of  children  : 
— God's  ministers  are  varied.  Children  teach  many  lessons.  1.  They  purify- 
by  their  innocence,  teachableness,  and  purity.  2.  They  elevate — appealing 
to  our  highest  and  best  instincts.  3.  They  stir.  They  move  us  to  better  living, 
and    stimulate   our    best    qualities.     4.  They  instruct — e.g.,  Samuel   and   Eli. 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 


6.  They  console — helping  to  take  our  minds  off  trouble.  6.  They  reconcile.  A 
mother  is  cheerful  for  the  sake  of  the  children.  A  father  is  strengthened  by 
his  home  life.  7.  They  gladden.  Children  are  the  poetry,  flowers,  and  sunshine 
of  life.  8.  They  soften  and  make  tender, — for  their  helplessness  appeals  to  us ; 
the  touch  of  a  tiny  hand  thrills  us  with  pity.  9.  They  lead  Godward.  10.  They 
are  a  powerful  ministry  for  good.  (Seed  for  Busy  Sowers. )  Led.  by  a  child : — 
1.  We  have  no  right  to  sink  an  interval  of  many  centuries  between  the  verses 
of  this  brief  prophecy,  and  to  say  that  while  one  part  of  it  was  fulfilled  at  the 
Advent,  the  other  will  only  be  fulfilled  in  the  still  distant  Millennium.  We 
are  rather  bound  to  say :  If  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  Branch  that  shot  forth 
from  Jesse's  root,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  did  really  come  upon  Him  that 
He  might  rule  and  reprove  the  people,  then,  from  that  moment,  the  wolf  began 
to  dwell  with  the  lamb,  the  leopard  to  lie  down  with  the  kid,  the  lion  with  the 
oalf ;  and  the  little  Child  went  before  them,  leading  them  to  the  holy  mountain 
in  which  they  neither  hurt  nor  destroy."  We  need  fix  no  date  to  these  words. 
They  are  not  for  an  age,  but  for  all  time,  and  for  eternity  too.  They  describe 
the  universal  reign  of  Christ.  They  tell  us  what  the  spirit,  what  the  distinguish- 
ing characteristics,  of  that  reign  always  have  been  and  always  will  be.  2.  The 
beast-tamer  is  distinguished  by  a  quick  eye,  a  prompt  punishing  hand,  a  courage 
and  self-possession  that  never  falter ;  and  how  should  we  look  for  these  features 
and  qualities  in  a  child  ?  But  may  not  a  child  have  other  qualities  quite  as 
potent,  and  even  more  potent  ?  Is  brute  force  the  only  force  by  which  even 
brutes  are  ruled  ?  Surely  not.  Baby  lies  on  the  rug  with  dog  and  cat.  He 
is  not  so  strong  or  lithe  or  quick  as  they  are,  or  even  as  you  are.  Yet  he  takes 
liberties  with  them  which  you  cannot  take, — and  remember,  the  cat  is  of  one 
blood  with  the  leopard,  and  the  dog  with  the  wolf.  Nor  are  even  wild  beasts 
insensible  to  his  claim  and  charm.  Else  what  mean  all  those  stories  of  helpless 
and  abandoned  children  suckled,  fed,  guarded  by  wolves  and  bears  and  lions ; 
or  of  children  chosen  by  caged  wild  beasts,  the  more  savage  for  their  captivity, 
to  be  their  playmates  and  companions  ?  Many  of  these  stories  are  quite  true, 
and  show  what  power  a  little  child  may  have,  a  power  beyond  that  of  man. 
3.  But  when  the  prophet  tells  us  that  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  a  little  child  leads 
the  wolf  and  the  leopard  and  the  lion,  as  well  as  the  lamb  and  the  kid  and  the 
calf,  he  cannot  simply  mean  that  an  innocent  babe  may  have  more  power  over 
the  brutes  than  a  grown  man.  He  also  meant,  no  doubt,  that  in  proportion 
as  Christ  reigns  on  the  earth  the  primal  order  will  be  restored  ;  that  men,  recon- 
ciled to  God  and  to  each  other,  will  also  be  at  peace  with  all  the  forces  of  nature, 
will  rule  over  them,  and  bend  to  their  service  even  those  of  them  which  are  the 
most  fierce,  lawless,  hostile,  and  untameable,  and  thus  regain  all,  and  more  than 
alL  that  Adam  lost.  4.  Has  not  the  prediction  been  verified  again  and  again, 
and  that  even  on  the  lower  levels  of  our  life  ?  Here,  say,  is  a  bad  man, — brutal, 
fierce,  ungoverned  and  ungovernable.  God  sends  him  a  little  child.  And 
the  rough  man  and  the  abandoned  woman,  as  they  lean  over  it,  are  touched, 
softened,  purified.  God  leads  almost  all  men  by  their  children,  leads  them  to 
the  "holy  mountain,"  i.e.,  to  higher  levels  of  life  where  they  breathe  a  purer 
air  and  gain  a  wider  outlook.  He  sends  the  "  little  child,"  and  forthwith  even 
the  hard  and  selfish  grow  tender  and  unselfish,  at  least  in  some  of  their  aims. 
They  will  follow  him  even  to  the  house  and  worship  of  God — for  many  a  man 
repairs  to  the  house  of  God  for  his  children's  sake  who  would  not  come  for  his 
own, — and  find  themselves  in  "the  holy  mountain"  or  ever  they  are  aware. 
6.  So  that  when  God  sent  the  Holy  Child  Jesus  to  lead  men  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  He  took  no  new  untried  way  with  us,  but  a  way  long  tried  and 
approved.  But,  for  us,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  not  the  Holy  Child  only  at  Christmas, 
or  only  because  He  was  once  a  babe  in  Mary's  arms.  When  He  grew  to  be 
a  man,  He  Himself  took  a  child  in  His  arms,  and  taught  His  disciples  that  to 
enter  His  kingdom  they  must  become  as  little  children,  and  that  whosoever  most 
fully  possessed  himself  of  the  childlike  spirit  would  be  greatest  in  that  kingdom. 
But  to  enter  His  kingdom  is  to  begin  to  grow  like  Christ ;  and  to  become  great 
in  it  is  to  grow  as  like  Him  as  we  can.  To  grow  childlike  is,  therefore,  to  grow 
Christlike.  But  how  can  that  be  unless  Christ  Himself  is  like  a  little  child  ? 
6.  "  A  little  child  shall  lead  them."  But  does  he  not  lead  them  already  ?  When 
the  little  ones  come  to  them,  who  is  it  for  whom  they  think,  and  work,  and  plan  ? 
Who  is  it  that  determines  the  amount  of  their  toil,  and  even  the  kind  of  amuse- 
ments in  which  they  indulge,  and  often  determines  also  the  very  aims  and  methods 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  331 

of  their  lives  ?  7.  "A  little  child  shall  lead  them."  These  words  :.;  v  to  the 
future  as  well  as  to  the  past  and  the  present.  There  is  a  promise  in  them  even 
for  us  who  are  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Holy  Child.  And  the  promise  is  that  as 
the  kingdom  of  God  comes  we  shall  be  more  and  more  animated  by  the  child  - 
spirit  which  was  and  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ  Himself.  [S.  Lox,  D.D.)  What 
is  the  child-spirit  ? — But  what  is  this  blessing,  and  why  is  it  so  great  T  Con- 
sider how  fearless  a  child  is,  so  that  it  can  play  and  take  liberties  with  many  a 
fierce  creature  whose  talons  or  teeth  keep  you  at  a  respectful  distance.  Con- 
sider how  innocent  a  child  is  as  compared  with  you,  and  what  you  would  give 
to  be  equally  clear  of  stinging  memories  and  impure  desires.  Consider  how 
friendly  a  little  child  is,  responding  with  smiles  and  caresses  to  every  genuine 
and  tender  advance.  Consider  how  cheerful  it  is,  with  how  little  it  is  pleased  ; 
how  unworldly,  making  no  distinction  between  beggar  and  prince,  loving  its  poor 
nurse  better  than  the  fine  lady  in  all  her  bravery.  Consider  how  free  from  card 
a  child  is,  because  it  trusts  in  a  wisdom,  an  ability,  a  goodness  beyond  its  own 
— taking  no  thought  for  what  it  shall  eat  or  drink  or  wherewithal  it  shall  be  clothed. 
Consider,  too,  how  lordly  a  child  is.  Hardly  anything  strikes  one  in  little  children 
so  much  as  their  calm  assumption  that  all  the  world  was  made  for  them,  and 
that  all  the  men  and  women  in  it  have  nothing  else,  or  notliing  else  so  important, 
to  do  as  to  wait  on  their  will  and  minister  to  their  whims.  (Ibid.)  Child- 
leading  : — I.  The  text  suggests  some  thoughts  about  the  gentleness  and 
humility  of  Him  who  came  to  us  as  A  Child.  Never  was  a  child  born  into 
this  world  in  humbler  fashion  than  the  Child  who  came  to  redeem  it.  Fib 
prelude  to  that  strange,  solemn,  sorrowful,  yet  infinitely  beautiful  life !  Surely, 
if  humility  depends  at  all  on  outward  circumstances,  this  "  little  Child "  was 
humble  indeed.  But  the  inward  spirit  was  in  perfect  keeping  with  the  outward 
circumstances.  The  little  Child  was  never  lost  in  the  Man.  II.  Was  this  pro- 
phecy NOT  FULFILLED  IN  MANY  WAYS   BY  THE  CHILD  OF  BETHLEHEM  ?      He  led 

the  herald  angels  from  their  highest  ministrations  in  the  realms  of  glory  down 
to  the  plains  of  Bethlehem.  He  led  the  star  that  travelled  ever  westwards  until 
it  "came  and  stood  over  where  the  young  Child  was."  He  led  the  sages  who 
came  with  their  typical  offerings  of  gold,  frankincense,  and  myrrh.  He  led  the 
aged  prophet,  who,  in  the  temrle  of  Jerusalem,  caught  up  the  young  Child  from 
His  mother's  arms,  and  burst  into  that  glad  Dismission  Hymn  which  has  become 
incorporated  with  the  liturgies  of  the  Christian  Church.  Think  what  marvellous 
leading  is  here !  III.  Does  not  the  prophecy  still  receive  daily  fulfil- 
ment in  the  history  and  experience  of  the  world  ?  What  is  it  that  brings  and 
binds  men  to  Christ  ?  Is  it  the  Divinity  of  His  person,  the  glory  of  His  miracles, 
the  thunder  of  His  power,  the  attraction  of  heaven,  the  terrors  of  hell  ?  Ask  a 
missionary  who  has  laboured  for  many  years  among  the  heathen  what  has  Leen 
the  element  in  the  Gospel  which  has  drawn  men  away  from  their  idols  to  Christ. 
He  will  tell  you  that  it  was  not  the  Divine  power,  but  the  human  tenderness  that 
won  their  hearts.  Stern  warriors  become  gentle  in  His  presence.  This  is  He  for 
whom  the  world  has  been  waiting,  and  before  whom  it  will  bow.  IV.  Perhaps 
your  own  experience  will  help  you  to  understand  the  prophet's  words. 
Think  of  your  own  personal  relation  to  Christ.  What  was  it  that  first  drew  you 
to  Him,  and  now  keeps  you  in  His  track  ?  It  was  the  gentleness  and  beauty 
of  His  character — the  "little  Child"  that  is  for  ever  enshrined  in  the  person 
of  Christ.  Or  look  around  you,  and  see  the  marvellous  power  of  child-leading 
in  the  familiar  experience  of  life.  V.  It  may  be  that  the  words  will  touch  for 
some  of  us  the  spring  that  unlocks  secret  and  very  sacred  memories. 
We  said,  with  the  stricken  parent  of  old,  "  I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not 
return  to  me."  But  are  we  very  sure  of  this  ?  Are  the  mysteries  of  life  and 
death  so  clear  to  us,  that  we  dare  not  think  of  child-ministers  and  child-lead- 
ings continued  in  spite  of  death  ?  VI.  "A  little  child  shall  lead  them."  The 
words  may  have  yet  another  fulfilment,  in  "  the  land  that  is  very  fab 
off."  "  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  the  Saviour  said,  as  He  took  the 
children  in  His  arms.  Perhaps  when  our  children  sing,  "  Little  children  shall 
be  there,"  they  touch  a  truth  which  their  elders  are  too  slow  to  believe.  It  may 
be  among  the  child-ministries  of  heaven  to  give  the  first  greetings  to  those  who 
received  them  in  the  helplessness  of  their  earthly  infancy ;  and  many  a  weeper 
may  begin  to  gather  "  the  far-off  interest  of  tears,"  when  "  a  little  child  shall 
lead  them  "  through  the  forum  of  the  elders  to  the  throne  of  the  King.  (J.  C. 
Cameron.)        The  power  of  the  children  : — I.  I  am  going  to  show  you  thji  powes 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

of  the  children.  Again  and  again  great  changes  have  been  brought  about, 
history  has  been  made,  grown-up  people  have  worked  and  have  suffered  because 
of  this  strange  power  of  the  children.  If  children  have  power  they  can  use  it. 
II.  The  good  things  children  can  do.  (E.  Medley,  B.A.)  The  child  not 
to  rule  but  to  lead  : — I  don't  think  it  is  good  for  children  to  rule,  but  I  do  think 
it  very  good  for  children  to  lead.  (Ibid.)  A  little  child  may  disarm  anger  : — 
A  missionary  on  the  great  River  Congo  had  pushed  up  on  a  little  steamer  into 
a  part  where  no  white  man  had  ever  been  before.  The  anchor  was  let  down, 
and  the  steamer  brought  to.  Food  was  needed  for  the  men,  and  firewood  for 
the  engines.  The  natives  came  crowding  down  to  the  bank  to  look  at  this  wonder- 
ful boat ;  they  were  armed  with  arrows,  and  big,  ugly  spears.  The  missionary 
tried  to  talk  to  them,  and  made  signs  of  peace.  But  nothing  that  he  could  do 
seemed  to  touch  them ;  it  was  plain  that  they  were  partly  angry,  partly  sus- 
picious, and  partly  afraid,  and  when  savages  are  in  that  state  they  are  very 
dangerous.  What  was  to  be  done  ?  A  happy  thought  flashed  across  the  mis- 
sionary. He  had  his  wife  and  a  dear  little  baby  on  board ;  he  got  the  baby, 
took  it  up  in  his  arms,  and  showed  it  to  the  people.  Now  the  baby  was  a  really 
sensible  baby,  it  seemed  to  understand  the  situation,  and  instead  of  crying,  or 
pretending  to  be  shy,  it  laughed  and  crowed  as  merrily  as  could  be,  and  when 
the  poor  savages  saw  the  baby  they  felt  themselves  safe ;  they  understood  in  a 
moment  that  no  harm  was  meant,  and  so  they  laid  down  their  arms,  and  became 
quite  friendly.  Even  in  Africa  we  can  say — a  little  child  shall  lead  them.  (Ibid.) 
A  mother  led  to  Christ  by  her  child  : — Some  years  ago,  a  good  woman  came  to 
a  minister,  wanting  to  join  the  Church,  and  confess  herself  a  follower  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  She  was  asked  how  it  wa9  that  she  had  come  to  think  of  Him, 
for  she  had  lived  a  rough,  bad  life.  "  Oh,"  said  she,  "  it  was  in  this  way :  I 
didn't  care  for  good  things,  I  had  to  slave  all  day  long,  I  was  too  busy  and  too 
hard-hearted  and  too  miserable  to  care  for  such  things  at  all.  But  my  little 
girl,  she  goes  to  the  Sunday  school,  and  when  she  comes  home  she  just  sings 
some  of  the  hymns  she  has  learnt— not  to  me,  for  I  never  asked  her,  but  to 
herself.  But  I  couldn't  help  hearing,  and  one  of  them  went  to  my  heart ;  do 
what  I  would,  I  couldn't  forget  it,  until  I  began  to  ask  myself  whether  I,  too, 
could  not  sing — 

I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say, 

Come  unto  Me  and  rest. 

I  did  hear  Him,  and  though  I  am  very  dark  still,  I  do  love  Him."  A  little  child 
shall  lead  them  ;  so  it  is.  (Ibid. )  Little  Lord  Fauntleroy  : — Some  of  you 
may  have  read  a  very  beautiful  children's  story  called  Little  Lord  Fauntleroy. 
The  pith  of  it  is  just  this  :  A  noble,  open-hearted  boy  is  thrown  into  the  company 
of  his  grandfather,  a  proud,  hard-hearted,  selfish,  old  nobleman,  who  knows  as 
well  as  those  about  him  do,  what  a  mean,  cynical  old  tyrant  he  has  been.  The 
earl  is  thoroughly  miserable,  only  he  is  too  proud  to  own  it.  But  the  lad.  who 
has  been  brought  up  in  pure  and  holy  ways,  insists  on  thinking  well  of  the  old 
man,  attributing  to  him  all  sorts  of  good  deeds.  In  the  honest  simplicity  of 
his  little  heart  he  believes  his  grandfather  to  be  a  very  fine  man,  and  says  that 
when  he  grows  up  he  means  to  be  like  him.  The  trustful  love  of  the  boy  touches 
his  grandfather's  stony  heart  just  as  opening  spring  sunshine  touches  the  winter 
ice,  and  it  begins  to  melt;  without  knowing  it  the  little  fellow  leads  the  old 
man  in  good  ways,  and  he  is  won.  As  to  the  boy,  he  is  still  the  merry-hearted 
fellow  he  was,  not  in  the  least  priggish,  or  goody-goody,  or  conceited,  but  he 
has  done  a  work  that  shall  never  die.  (Ibid!)  A  child's  voice  settling  a  great 
question  : — Many  years  since  the  see  of  Milan  was  vacant,  and  the  position  was 
eagerly  sought  by  two  parties  who  disputed  the  election  with  strong  and  bitter 
feelings.  The  prefect  of  the  town,  who  was  a  celebrated  young  lawyer,  was 
c  ailed  in  to  quell  disorder  and  settle  the  dispute.  In  very  earnest  and  affectionate 
strains  he  addressed  the  excited  assembly.  But,  during  one  of  the  momentary 
pauses  in  his  speech,  a  child's  voice  was  heard  exclaiming,  "  Let  Ambrose  be 
our  bishop  !  "  That  tender  utterance  was  accepted  like  a  Divine  instruction ; 
the  youthful  lawyer  was  forthwith  chosen  to  the  occupancy  of  the  episcopal 
chair,  and  became  a  useful  servant  of  the  Church.  Thus  a  little  child  led  the 
assembled  electors  and  secured  the  ministry  of  St.  Ambrose ;  St.  Ambrose  became 
the  means  of  the  conversion  of  St.  Augustine,  and  St.  Augustine  by  his  writings 
etill  speaks  to  Christendom.     (J.  H.  Hitchena,  D.D.)        The  children  leading  : — 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  333 

A  man  commonly  lives,  if  possible,  nearer  to  the  school  to  which  he  senda  hit 
children  than  to  his  own  place  of  business.  It  is  the  children  who  commonly 
fix  the  hour  at  which  he  shall  dine,  and  often  even  what  he  shall  have  for  his 
dinner,  their  health  and  convenience  being  consulted  before  his  own.  He  often 
goes  shabby  that  they  may  be  well  clothed,  and  sometimes  hungry  that  they 
may  be  well  fed.  His  very  home  is  furnished  with  an  eye  to  them ;  and  the 
new  carpets  or  the  costly  furniture  which  he  would  like  to  have  are  postponed 
till  the  children  are  grown  up,  or  the  good  piano  which  his  wife  would  like  till 
the  children  have  got  through  their  practising.  Where  shall  the  summer  holiday 
be  spent  ?  is  a  question  in  which  the  children  have  the  casting  vote.  How  many 
a  man,  too,  long  after  he  has  laid  by  enough  for  himself  and  his  wife,  and  craves 
retirement  and  rest,  goes  labouring  on,  either  that  he  may  provide  for  children 
who  cannot  provide  for  themselves,  or  that  he  may  leave  them  a  little  more  money 
when  he  dies  I  And  when  the  children  grow  up  into  young  men  and  women, 
is  it  not  they  who  lead  the  world  as  once  they  led  their  several  households  ? 
The  ruling  and  shaping  spirit  of  the  world  changes  with  every  generation. 
(8  Cox,  D.D.)  Age  and  youth: — Are  we,  then,  to  discrown  age,  experience, 
authority,  and  enthrone  youth,  inexperience,  and  insolence  T  Are  we  to  listen 
to  whatever  our  children  may  say,  and  let  them  lead  us  where  they  will  T  By 
no  means.  That  would  be  as  injurious  to  them  as  to  us.  But  we  are  to  realise 
the  fact  that  God  is  educating  the  race ;  guiding  every  generation,  and  con-, 
ducting  it  to  a  point  beyond  that  of  the  generation  which  preceded  it.  This 
reverence  for  youth  as  the  new  element,  the  progressive  and  advancing  element, 
of  the  world,  is,  I  believe,  peculiar  to  Christianity,  and  even  in  some  measure 
to  the  Christianity  of  the  present  day.  (Ibid.)  Children's  influence: — I 
heard  the  other  day  in  the  north  of  England  of  a  large  school  where  the  older 
scholars  came  together  and  asked  the  superintendents  that  there  should  be  no 
prizes  and  no  Christmas  trees  and  no  ordinary  gifts,  but  that  the  money  should 
be  given  to  the  Soldiers'  and  Sailors'  Fund.  No  one  had  put  them  up  to  it.  What 
was  the  result  ?  All  round  that  district  everybody  rose  up  at  once  to  a  sense 
of  their  responsibility,  and  the  gifts  received  there  exceeded  the  gifts  from  other 
places.  (Canon  Wilberforce,  D.D.)  A  beautiful  epitaph  : — In  a  certain  grave- 
yard a  white  stone  that  marks  the  grave  of  a  little  girl  bears  these  words : 
■'  A  child  of  whom  her  playmates  said,  '  It  was  easier  to  be  good  when  she  was 
with  us.'  "  Is  not  that  a  beautiful  epitaph,  little  ones  !  "  My  darling  "  :— 
One  instance  wherein  the  prophet's  words  were  fulfilled  in  spirit,  if  not  in  letter, 
is  reported  in  an  American  exchange :  " '  My  darling.'  These  tender  words 
were  painted  in  large  letters  on  the  dashboard  of  a  big  truck  in  the  street.  The 
thoroughfare  was  jammed  with  vehicles,  and  drivers  were  filling  the  air  with 
profanity.  But  the  driver  of  this  particular  truck  sat  silent  and  motionless. 
No  word  of  his  offended  the  ears  of  the  patient,  plodding  beast  over  which  he 
held  the  reins.  During  the  din  of  curses  a  curious  man  stepped  forward  and 
inquired  :  '  You  seem  to  take  things  very  easy  in  this  blockade.'  '  Yes,  mister  ; 
I'm  used  to  'em,'  was  the  laconic  reply.  '  Besides,'  he  added,  *  it  don't  help 
a  bit  to  swear.'  '  I  notice  that  you  have  a  name  for  your  truck.'  '  Yes,'  and 
the  stoical  man's  face  brightened  and  assumed  an  expression  born  of  a  tender 
heart.     '  "  My  darling  "  was  my  dear  little   daughter.     She's  dead  now.     Just 

before  she  died — but  you  don't  care  to  hear  any  part  of  this  '     '  Indeed, 

I  do,'  interrupted  the  listener.  '  Well,  you  see  it  was  this  way  :  Nellie,  my  darling, 
took  sick,  and  we  couldn't  save  her  ;  but  just  before  she  died  she  put  her  thin 
little  arms  around  my  n»ck  and  whispered  in  my  ear :  "  Papa,  your  Nellie  is 

§oing  to  die ;  please  promise  me  that  you  will  be  kind  to  good  ola  Dexter,  and 
on't  swear  at  him.  Will  you  do  that  for  me  ?  "  WelL  sir,  I  used  to  be  pretty 
tough  and  rough,  and  I  could  curse  with  the  best  of  'em,  but,'  and  the  man's 
voice  trembled,  *  I  loved  my  Nellie,  and — and  I  promised  her  that  I  would  do 
what  she  asked.'  '  Yes,  sir ;  I've  kept  my  word.  That's  going  on  three  years 
now,  but  I  haven't  cussed  once  since.  That's  why  I've  named  my  truck  '  My 
darling  "  ;  it  always  reminds  me  of  my  Nellie  and  her  sweet  blue  eyes.'  Just 
then  the  blockade  was  raised,  and  *  My  darling '  rumbled  on."  (Christian  Age.) 
The  effect  of  a  child's  prayer  : — In  a  Southern  hospital  a  little  girl  was  to  undergo 
s  dangerous  operation.  She  was  placed  upon  the  table,  and  the  surgeon  was 
about  to  give  her  ether  when  he  said,  "  Before  we  can  make  you  well,  we  must 
put  you  to  sleep."  She  spoke  up  sweetly  and  said,  "  Oh,  if  yon  are  going  to 
put  me  to  sleep,  I  must  say  my  prayers  first."    So  she  got  on  her  knees,  and 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

said  the  child's  prayer,  "  Now  I  lay  me  down  to  sleep."  Afterward  the  surgeon 
said  that  he  prayed  that  night  for  the  first  time  in  thirty  years.  (Christian 
Endeavour  Times.) 

Ver.  9.  They  snail  not  hurt  nor  destroy  In  all  My  holy  mountain. — The 
golden  age : — Poets  have  sung  of  a  golden  age,  saints  have  prayed  for 
one,  the  Bible  distinctly  teaches  that  one  will  come.  This  passage  gives 
us  the  characteristics  of  this   "  good  time  coming."      I.  The  wholb  earth 

SHALL   BE    THE    SPIRITUAL    REALISATION    OP    WHAT    MOUNT    ZlON    WAS    BUT    THE 

symbol.  What  were  the  great  ideas  that  Mount  Zion  of  old  symbolised  ? 
They  were  especially  two  —  1.  Man's  meeting- place  with  God.  2.  Entire 
consecration  to  worship.  It  was  for  worship  and  worship  only.  These  ideas 
will  be  fully  realised  in  the  last  days.  The  whole  earth  will  be  man's 
meeting-place  with  God,  the  Shechinah  will  gleam  everywhere,  light  up  every 
social  circle,  radiate  from  every  institution,  &c.  Every  spot,  too,  will  be  sacred  to 
worship.  Man  will  worship  in  everything,  handicraft,  commerce,  politics,  liter- 
ature, n.  The  whole  earth  shall  be  freed  from  injustice  and  violence. 
"  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy."  1.  They  shall  not  hurt.  They  shall  not 
hurt  by  any  unkind  word,  or  any  ungenerous  deed,  by  any  species  of  mean 
conduct.  Exquisite  delicacy  of  conduct  shall  distinguish  all.  Every  man  shall 
deal  with  his  fellow  with  the  loving  tenderness  of  a  brother.  2.  They  shall 
not  destroy.  They  shall  not  destroy  the  property,  the  reputation,  or  the  life. 
There  shall  be  no  wars.  III.  The  whole  earth  shall  be  flooded  with 
Christianity.  "  As  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  Full  as  the  waters  roll  through 
the  channels  of  the  Mediterranean,  will  Christianity  roll  through  every  district 
of  human  life.  But  whilst  this  universal  diffusion  of  Christianity  is  a  character- 
istic of  the  golden  age,  the  text  suggests  that  it  is  the  instrumental  cause.  We 
infer — 1.  That  Christianity  is  essentially  pacific.  2.  That  every  philanthropist 
should  use  Christianity  as  his  grand  instrument.  There  is  no  other  panacea  for 
the  world's  woes.  (Homilist.)  Messiah's  peaceful  reign : — I.  The  pacific 
bplrit  that  shall  be  in  the  world  in  Messiah's  reign.  II.  The  cause  op 
its  universal  prevalence.  The  knowledge  with  which  the  world  will  be  filled. 
(J.  Summerfield,  M.A.)  Fcr  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  Lord. — The  great   Oospel  and  millennial  kingdoms  of  Christ  our  Lord : — 

1.  The   declaration    of    the   word    before    us    has    never    yet    been    fulfilled. 

2.  God  is  now  about  speedily  to  fulfil  it.  I.  We  shall  open  the  whole  chapter 
which  contains  our  text,  in  order  to  explain  what  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
IS  of  which  it  speaks,  and  we  shall  bring  before  you  the  great  events  with  which 
the  introduction  of  that  kingdom  of  our  Redeemer  shall  be  attended.  1.  The 
chapter  commences  with  a  glorious  description  of  the  Person  and  the  office  of 
the  blessed  Redeemer  of  men.  2.  Proceed  we  now  to  open  unto  you  the  Gospel 
kingdom  of  Christ,  which  is  contained  in  the  following  portion  of  the  chapter. 
The  design  of  the  figure  (vers.  6-9)  is  to  show  that  in  the  great  day  when  Christ 
shall  execute  His  office  in  a  more  full  and  wide  extent  over  the  earth  there  shall 
be  a  marvellous  concord  and  union  and  love  among  all  the  children  of  men  by 
their  being  brought  to  worship  the  one  Redeemer,  through  the  one  Gospel  of  His 
grace  and  through  the  sameness  of  His  blessed  Spirit.  3.  With  reference  to  the 
expression  in  our  text — "  For  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea  " — we  have  here  set  before  us  both  the  extent 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  which  shall  characterise  this  kingdom  of  our  Lord, 
and  the  depth  of  that  knowledge  also  ;  for  both  are  represented  by  this  similitude 
of  the  ocean.  We  are  to  believe,  therefore,  that  the  knowledge  of  God  which 
shall  then  prevail,  shall  as  far  surpass,  in  extent  and  in  depth,  the  knowledge 
of  every  preceding  Church  state,  as  the  waters  of  the  ocean  exceed,  in  width  and 
profundity,  the  common  lakes  in  the  midst  of  kingdoms.  4.  One  great  event 
that  shall  immediately  precede  this  glorious  issue  of  things  shall  be  the  conversion 
of  God's  ancient  people,  the  Jews ;  their  gathering  from  out  of  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth  into  the  land  of  their  fathers  ;  and,  as  I  believe,  their  becoming  the 
preachers  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  to  all  those  nations  of  the  earth,  which  shall 
now  be  converted  unto  Him.  This  glorious  event  is  immediately  appended, 
in  this  chapter,  to  the  description  of  the  Gospel  kingdom  of  the  Redeemer 
(ver.  11,  &c).  6.  Another  mighty  reality  which  shall  accompany  the  introduction 
of  the  coming  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  is  the  destruction  of  the  anti- 
christian  church  (the  papacy).     6.  The  destruction  of  antichrist.     II.  We  shall 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  333 

present  to  your  view  the  means  which  yott  may  the  most  safely  adopt  fob 

1NSTRUMENTALLY     PROMOTING     THE     KINGDOM    OF     OUR     ADORABLE     ReDEEMEB 

•midst  the  kingdoms  of  the  world.  (H.  Cole.)  The  millennium:—!.  The 
nature  of  the  millennium.     It  is  generally  believed,  by  judicious  divines — 

I.  That  the  millennial  blessedness  shall  consist  of  an  extraordinary  degree  of 
spiritual  knowledge.  2.  That  holiness  shall  prevail  to  an  unexampled  extent. 
3.  That  the  millennial  period  will  be  distinguished  by  happiness  and  peace 
altogether  unexampled  in  any  previous  period  of  the  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

II.  Some  passages  which  seem  plainly  to  indicate  that  such  a  period 
shall  arrive  (Psa.  lxxii. ;  Isa.  lx;  Rom.  xi.  12,  15;  Rev.  xiv.  6).  HI.  Exhibit 
the  triumphs  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  during  the  days  of  millennial 
blessedness.  (A.  Fletcher,  D.D.)  The  moral  certainty  of  the  earth  being  filled 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord : — This  prophecy  was  partially  fulfilled  when 
the  Christian  dispensation  was  instituted,  and  "  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  "  pro- 
duced the  most  wonderfid  effects  on  the  hearts  and  lives  of  multitudes  who  had 
been  the  most  determined  enemies  of  the  Cross.  But  the  expression  looks  forward 
to  a  far  more  illustrious  day,  when  the  prediction  will  have  its  complete  accom- 
plishment, and  the  whole  family  of  man  will  be  blessed  with  the  "  knowledge 
of  the  Lord."  I.  The  import  of  the  phrase,  "  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord." 
1.  It  implies  an  acquaintance  with  the  character  of  the  true  God.  2.  An  acquaint- 
ance with  the  plan  of  salvation  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  An  acquaint- 
ance with  God's  will.  II.  The  moral  certainty  that  the  earth  shall  be 
filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  Reason  renders  it  probable,  but 
revelation  declares  its  certainty.  1.  I  argue  this  from  a  consideration  of  the 
nature  of  the  Christian  religion.  Christianity  is  a  religion  of  benevolence.  It  has 
nothing  exclusive  in  its  character.  It  is  designed  for  man,  considered  as  such, 
and  is  adapted  to  every  latitude  under  heaven.  It  presents  us  with  a  worship 
which  is  simple,  a  faith  which  is  easily  understood,  ordinances  few  in  number, 
sacrifices  that  are  unbloody,  doctrines  and  precepts  which  lead  to  God,  promises 
which  are  joy  and  peace,  and  hopes  which  centre  in  the  throne  of  God  !  It  is 
reasonable  to  conclude  that  God,  who  is  good  to  all,  will  not  limit  blessings  of 
Buch  magnitude  and  so  universally  necessary  for  human  happiness,  to  any  one 
particular  nation  or  age,  but  that  He  will,  in  His  own  way  and  at  His  own  time, 
extend  the  benefits  of  Christianity  to  the  whole  family  of  man.  2.  The  covenant 
relation  between  God  and  His  beloved  Son  furnishes  another  guarantee  that 
the  prediction  will  be  fulfilled.  3.  We  ground  our  hopes  on  the  character  of  the 
Saviour  as  Mediator.     4.  Think  also  of  the  prophetic  record.     III.  Our  duty 

AT  THE  PRESENT  TIMB  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  THB  EXTENDING  OF  THIS  KNOWLEDGE. 

The  work  is  very  great.  How  is  it  to  be  accomplished  ?  By  the  agency  of 
miracles  ?  No.  May  we  expect  the  Saviour  to  visit  our  earth  and  organise 
•  system  for  the  conversion  of  the  heathen  ?  He  has  done  so  already.  He  haa 
made  it  our  duty  to  use  the  means  He  has  appointed.  (John  Hill,  M.A.)  "  As 
the  waters  cover  the  sea  "  „• — The  expression  is  remarkable  for  its  force.  In  looking 
over  the  face  of  the  ocean,  there  are  no  differences  to  be  perceived :  one  part 
is  not  fuller  than  another ;  one  part  is  not  covered,  and  another  left  dry ;  but 
•11  is  one  unbroken  stream,  filling  and  covering  the  whole.  So  shall  it  be 
with  the  Word  of  God  among  mem  It  shall  not  be  known  to  some, 
•nd  hidden  from  others.  It  shall  not  be  fully  declared  in  one  place,  and 
only  partially  set  forth  in  another.  This  is  not  the  whole  purpose  of  the 
Almighty.  But  rather,  whatever  knowledge  it  pleases  Him  to  give  at  all, 
shall  be  given  equally,  and  without  distinction.  (H.  A.  Sullivan,  M.A). 
A  picture  of  the  moral  condition  of  the  world  without  the  knowledge  of  God: — 
If  the  waters  of  the  ocean  were  suddenly  drained,  and  the  channels  of  the 
great  deep  laid  bare,  a  rugged,  unseemly  spectacle  would  meet  the  eye.  The 
elements  of  sublimity  and  beauty  might  then  be  seen,  but  strangely  disfigured, 
and  blended  in  rude  chaotic  masses  ;  profound  valleys  and  dark  ravines,  the 
pathways  of  the  monsters  of  the  deep  ;  gloomy  caverns,  never  visited  by  the 
light  of  day ;  towering  mountains,  abrupt  headlands,  and  precipitous  rocks, 
the  cause  of  many  disasters  to  the  adventurous  seaman,  would  form  an  uncouth, 
repulsive  scene.  All  these  are  hidden  now  by  a  veil  which  the  Almighty  has 
thrown  over  them ;  He  has  covered  them  with  a  fluid,  bright,  transparent, 
elastic,  filling  all  the  depths,  smoothing  all  the  asperities,  reducing  mountains 
and  valleys  to  one  level,  and  spreading  from  the  equator  to  the  poles,  ever  in 
motion,  ever  obedient  to  His  will,  whether  He  bids  its  mountain  billows  utter 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi 

His  praise  in  awful  tones,  or  its  unruffled  surface  reflect  His  glories  to  the  tranquil 
heavens  bending  over  it.  Like  the  dark,  rude  bed  of  ocean,  emptied  of  its  waters, 
has  been  the  moral  aspect  of  our  world  in  all  ages  and  countries  since  the  fall. 
If  we  look  abroad  over  the  nations  to-day,  what  disorder,  misery,  and  ruin 
meet  the  eye  and  pain  the  heart !  But  the  text  speaks  of  a  blessed  change  to 
be  realised  ere  long :  of  a  coming  day,  when  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  (W.  J.  Armstrong,  D.D.)  The 
far-spreading  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — 1.  Most  exactly  have  the  figures  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  condescended  to  apply  to  Himself  been  fulfilled  in  the  course 
of  the  dispensation ;  nay,  even  to  this  day.  His  operation  has  been  calm, 
equable,  gradual,  far-spreading,  overtaking,  intimate,  irresistible.  What  is  so 
awfully  silent,  so  mighty,  so  inevitable,  so  encompassing  as  a  flood  of  water  ? 
Such  was  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  the  beginning,  when  He  vouchsafed  to  descend 
as  an  invisible  wind,  as  an  outpoured  flood.  Thus  He  changed  the  whole  face 
of  the  world.  The  ark  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.  2.  And  what 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  has  been  in  the  world  at  large,  that  it  is  also  in  every 
human  heart  to  which  it  comes.  (1)  Any  spirit  which  professes  to  come  to  us 
alone,  and  not  to  others,  which  makes  no  claim  of  having  moved  the  body  of 
the  Church  at  all  times  and  places,  is  not  of  God,  but  a  private  spirit  of  error. 
(2)  Vehemence,  tumult,  confusion,  are  no  attributes  of  that  benignant  flood  with 
which  God  has  replenished  the  earth.  That  flood  of  grace  is  sedate,  majestic, 
gentle  in  its  operation.  (3)  The  Divine  baptism,  wherewith  God  visits  us,  pene- 
trates through  our  whole  soul  and  body.  It  leaves  no  part  of  us  uncleansed, 
unsanctified.  It  claims  the  whole  man  for  God.  Any  spirit  which  is  content 
with  what  is  short  of  this,  which  does  not  lead  us  to  utter  self-surrender  and 
devotion,  is  not  from  God.  3.  The  heart  of  every  Christian  ought  to  repre- 
sent in  miniature  the  Catholic  Church,  since  one  Spirit  makes  both  the  whole 
Church  and  every  member  of  it  to  be  His  temple.  As  He  makes  the  Church 
one,  which,  left  to  itself,  would  separate  into  many  parts,  so  He  makes  the  soul 
one,  in  spite  of  its  various  affections  and  faculties,  and  its  contradictory  aims. 
(J.  H.  Newman,  D.D. )  The  knowledge  of  the  Lord : — "  As  the  waters  cover  the 
sea."  How  do  they  cover  it  ?  1.  Completely.  There  are  no  gaps  or  interspaces. 
The  sailor  is  glad  to  get  out  into  the  open  sea.  Near  the  land  he  is  watchful, 
but  when  his  pathless  track  lies  far  from  the  shore  he  is  more  at  ease.  2.  They 
cover  it,  too,  abundantly.  There  is  nothing  scanty  about  the  sea.  The  average 
depth,  geographers  tells  us,  is  about  thirteen  times  the  average  height  of  land 
above  sea-level.  3.  They  also  cover  it  helpfully.  The  waters  seem  to  sever  country 
from  country,  but,  really,  they  are  the  best  means  of  bringing  far  separate  lands 
into  communication  with  each  other.  What  a  grand  picture,  then,  is  here  sug- 
gested with  regard  to  the  knowledge  of  God  !  It  will  cover  the  earth  completely. 
All  shall  know  Him  from  the  least  to  the  greatest.  It  will  be  an  abundant  know- 
ledge. As  it  is,  the  earth  is  full  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Everywhere,  God. 
The  cataract  utters  forth  God.  "  Every  common  bush  afire  with  God,"  but 
too  often  we  only  "  sit  round  it  and  pick  blackberries."  It  is  one  thing  for  God 
to  be  everywhere,  it  is  another  thing  for  God  to  be  recognised  everywhere.  It 
will  also  be  a  helpful  knowledge.  It  will  not  lead  us  to  make  less  of  this  world's 
duties,  but  more.  As  the  waters  that  seem  to  separate,  yet  connect  all  the  more 
closely,  remote  lands,  so  the  more  truly  men  know  God,  the  better  will  they  know 
each  other,  and  the  grander  will  seem  the  duties  of  the  common  day.  One  great 
blessing  resulting  from  that  knowledge  is  specially  mentioned  in  the  chapter — 
"  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy."  It  is  something  one  can  hardly  imagine, 
that  beautiful  time  when  nature  shall  no  more  be  "  red  in  tooth  and  claw."  It 
may  be  but  a  poetical  description  of  the  peace  and  harmony  of  the  Messiah's 
kingdom.  But  there  is  one  part,  at  least,  will  be  literally  true.  However  it  be 
with  regard  to  the  attitude  of  beasts  to  men,  or  to  each  other,  man's  attitude  to 
the  beasts  will  be  one  of  thoughtfulness,  gentleness,  and  mercy.  It  is  said  that 
a  man's  dog  should  be  the  better  for  his  Christianity,  and  so  it  will.  "  A  righteous 
man  regardeth  the  life  of  his  beast."  And,  of  course,  still  more  will  it  be  true 
that  man's  attitude  to  his*  fellow-man  will  be  what  it  ought  to  be.  One  of  the 
saddest  thoughts  in  connection  with  this  earth  of  ours,  as  it  is,  is  the  frightful 
callousness  and  unconcern  with  regard  to  human  life  where  God,  as  revealed  in 
Jesus  Christ,  is  not  known.     Think  of  a  country  like  Dahomey,  where  the  most 

Sized  ornaments  are  human  heads  stuck  on  poles  along  the  highways.     The 
lurch  of  Christ  may  be  far  from  perfect  in  our  own  day,  but,  at  least,  it  stands 


<chap.  xi.]  ISAIAH.  337 

for  much  that  is  beautiful  and  helpful  among  men,  and  it  labours  and 
prays  for  the  fulfilment  of  its  hope  that  righteousness  and  peace  shall  at  last 
be  universal.  One  comprehends  that  the  Church — even  the  visible  building  of 
stone  and  lime — stands  for  some  measure  of  realised  blessing  among  men,  by 
even  such  a  simple  story  as  that  of  the  shipwrecked  mariners,  in  doubt  as  to 
what  sort  of  coast  they  had  been  cast  upon, — whether  the  inhabitants  were 
cannibals,  or  with  some  humanity  in  them, — and  whose  fears  were  quite  relieved 
when  one  of  their  number,  who  had  climbed  a  neighbourit  g  hill,  came  rushing 
back,  shouting,  "  It's  all  right.  We  are  safe.  I  saw  a  church  spire  in  the 
distance."  The  most  practical  and  visible  result  of  the  universal  knowledge 
of  the  Lord  will  be  that  men's  relationship  to  each  other  will  be  of  the 
happiest   and   most    helpful    kind.      (J.    S.    Maver,    M.A.)  Things    must 

be  seen  through  the  right  medium:  —  "Seeing  is  believing."  But  no  man 
sees.  Nearly  every  man  is  befooled  by  his  own  eyes.  We  see  nothing  as 
it  really  is.  We  are  the  gulls  and  the  dupes  of  appearances.  Said  a 
friend  to  me,  whilst  we  lived  in  the  Alps,  "  Can  you  see  any  living  things  on 
the  side  of  that  mountain  ?  "  Whereupon  I  answered,  "  There  is  no  living 
thing  there."  It  was  a  reckless  speech.  I  was  then  the  victim  of  incom- 
plete sight.  I  was  deluded,  as  all  men  are  deluded,  by  the  naked  eye.  Said 
my  friend,  "  Look  through  this  telescope."  And  I  looked,  and,  behold  !  the 
chamois  and  the  shepherds — the  beautiful  little  creatures  feeding  on  abundance 
of  grass  on  the  slopes  of  the  hill.  I  should  have  looked  through  the  telescope 
before  I  gave  my  judgment.  Things  are  not  all  given  in  revelation  to  the  naked 
eye.  We  must  look  through  the  right  medium  if  we  would  see  things  with  any 
approach  to  reality.  Is  this  world  going  to  be  converted  to  Christ  ?  "  Never  !  " 
Why  say  you,  never  ?  "  Because  there  are  more  drunkards  than  pure  men  ; 
there  are  more  brothels  than  altars  ;  there  are  more  dishonest  gamblers  on  the 
Exchange  than  there  are  honest  men."  Now  look  through  this  telescope — the 
Divine  promises,  the  Divine  oaths,  the  repeated  and  emphatic  assurances.  Look ! 
What  seest  thou  now,  0  man  ?  "I  see  multitudes  turning  unto  the  Lord, 
Ethiopia  stretching  out  her  hands  unto  God  to  receive  the  vessel  that  shall  carry 
the  news  of  the  eternal  kingdom  to  all  places  on  the  face  of  the  earth."  That 
is  how  we  view  things.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  A  sure  word  of  prophecy: — • 
On  Sabbath,  15th  May  1836,  we  saw  the  sun  seized,  on  the  very  apex  of  his  glory, 
as  if  by  a  black  hand,  and  so  darkened  that  only  a  thin  round  ring  of  light 
remained  visible,  and  the  chill  of  twilight  came  prematurely  on.  That  mass  of 
darkness  within  seemed  the  world  lying  in  wickedness,  and  that  thin  round  ring 
of  light,  the  present  progress  of  the  Gospel  in  it.  But  not  more  certain  were  we 
then,  that  that  thin  round  ring  of  light  was  yet  to  become  the  broad  and  blazing 
sun,  than  are  we  now,  that  through  a  Divine  interposal,  but  not  otherwise,  shall 
the  "  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  the  sea." 
(0.  GUfillan.) 

Ver.  10.  There  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse,  which  shall  stand  for  an  ensign 
Of  the  people. — Messiah,  the  root  of  Jesse  : — If,  through  the  infallible  guidance 
of  the  Divinely  inspired  apostles  and  evangelists,  we  can  find  the  Messiah 
spoken  of  in  many  passages  of  the  Old  Testament,  in  which  we  should  not  other- 
wise have  found  Him  ;  in  many  others  He  is  so  evidently  intended  and  set  forth, 
that,  even  without  that  guidance,  no  intelligent  person,  possessed  of  any  degree 
of  spiritual  discernment,  can  fail  of  discovering  Him  (Psa.  ii.  7,  8  ;  Isa.  ix.  6, 
xlii.  1,  lxi.  1,  xxxv.  4-6,  1.  6;  Psa.  xxii.  16-18,  lxix.  21;  Isa.  Hi.  13,  liii.  2,  3; 
Dan.  ix.  26 ;  Zech.  vi.  12,  13).  This  paragraph  is  so  manifestly  meant  of  Christ, 
and  of  His  kingdom,  that  it  is  perfectly  incapable  of  any  other  application.  I.  Thb 
Person,  and  one  of  the  principal  offices  of  the  Messiah, — "  a  root  of 
Jesse";  "an  ensign  of  the  people."  1.  In  the  preceding  verses,  He  is  set 
forth  in  His  human  nature,  as  the  "  Rod  "  which  should  "  come  forth  out  of  the 
stem  of  Jesse,"  "  the  Branch  which  should  grow  out  of  his  roots  "  (Jer.  xxiii.  5  ; 
Zech.  iii.  8) ;  but  here,  in  His  Divine  nature,  in  which  alone  He  could  be  the 
*  root  of  Jesse  "  ;  the  creating  "  word"  (Col.  i.  16).  The  word  here  rendered 
"  root,"  is  properly  so  translated,  and  never  means  branch,  or  rod.  This  is  the 
case  likewise  in  Rev.  v.  5.  In  Rev.  xxii.  16,  we  find  both  natures  mentioned  and 
distinguished  ;  and  also  in  Rom.  i.  3,  4.  2.  His  office.  "  He  shall  stand  for  an 
ensign  of  the  people."  Where  they  may  take  oath,  and  swear  allegiance  to  the 
great  King,  and  bind  themselves  by  covenant  to  be  His  loyal  subjects.  Where 
22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi- 

they  may  enlist,  and  eugage  to  be  His  faithful  soldiers  to  their  life's  end.  But 
how  is  He  an  ensign,  a  banner,  or  standard,  visibly  displayed  ?  By  manifestation 
of  His  real  character,  and  showing  Himself  to  be  the  very  Messiah  that  should 
come.  By  unfurling  and  unfolding  the  truth  in  His  doctrine.  By  exerting 
and  displaying  His  power  in  miracles.  By  manifesting  His  love  in  all  His  actions 
and  sufferings.  As  lifted  up  upon  the  Cross  (John  xii.  32).  As  exalted  to  the 
Father's  right  hand  (Acts  ii.  33).  As  preached  and  declared  to  every  creature, 
to  every  nation  under  heaven,  for  the  obedience  of  faith.  As  coming  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  gathering  His  elect,  gathering  "  all  nations  and  tongues,"  to 
see  His  glory.  II.  The  application  that  is  to  be  made  to  Him  by  the 
Gentiles.  "To  Him  shall  the  Gentiles  (Heb.,  'the  nations')  seek."  He 
Himself  came  to  seek  and  save  the  lost,  and  He  is  often  found  of  those  that 
before  sought  Him  not.  Those,  however,  that  are  first  found  of  Him  do  them- 
selves also  seek  Him.  1.  But  for  what  purposes  ?  As  an  infallible  Teacher,, 
for  truth  and  grace.  As  a  Mediator,  for  pardon,  &o.  As  an  all-sufficient 
Saviour,  expecting  deliverance  from  the  power  and  pollution  of  sin,  from 
the  flesh,  the  world,  and  the  devil.  As  their  rightful  Sovereign,  to  give  law  to 
them,  to  rule,  protect,  and  exalt  them.  As  the  Captain  of  their  salvation,  to  go- 
before  them  and  conquer  for  them,  to  enable  them  to  conquer,  and  to  crown  them 
as  victorious.  2.  But  how  do  they  seek  Him  ?  By  desire,  earnest,  constant, 
increasing,  restless  (Isa.  lv.  1 ;  John  vii.  37 ;  Rev.  xxii.  17).  By  prayer 
(Joel  ii.  32 ;  Acts  ii.  21 ;  Bom.  x.  13 ;  1  Cor.  i.  2).  By  faith  and  trust  (Isa. 
xxviii.  16  ;  Bom.  x.  11,  xv.  12).  III.  The  effects  that  shall  follow.  "  His 
rest  shall  be  glorious."  As  a  Teacher,  the  "  light  of  the  world,"  and  as  made  of 
God  to  His  people  "  wisdom,"  He  gives  rest  to  the  understanding  from  the 
uncertainties  of  error,  by  the  clear  and  satisfactory  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and 
faith  therein,  or  "  the  full  assurance  of  understanding."  As  a  Priest,  and  as  made 
of  God  to  us  "  righteousness,"  He  gives  rest  to  the  conscience.  As  a  Saviour 
from  sin,  and  as  made  of  God  unto  us  "  sanctification,"  He  gives  rest  to  the  will, 
affections,  and  passions,  humbling  our  pride,  subduing  our  rebellious  dispositions 
(Matt.  xi.  29).  As  a  King,  by  delivering,  defending,  governing,  ordering,  dis- 
posing, and  making  all  things  work  for  good,  and  setting  up  His  kingdom  in  our 
hearts,  He  gives  us  rest  from  cares,  fears,  and  anxieties.  As  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation,  He  gives  the  rest  consequent  on  victory  over  our  enemies,  in  deliver- 
ance from  all  tormenting  fear  of  them,  even  the  fear  of  death,  and  enabling  us* 
while  on  earth,  to  live  in  peace,  love,  and  harmony,  with  one  another.  He  givea 
rest  to  the  earth  during  the  millennium  (Isa.  xi.  6-9,  ix.  7,  xxxii.  15-19  ;  Mic.  iv. 
1-4  ;  Zech.  xiv.  6-9).     (J.  Benson,  D.D.)         The  root  of  Jesse  : — I.  The  sub- 

BOUNDINGS    WITH    WHICH    THE    ReDEEMEB    WOULD    BE    CONNECTED.       He    was    to 

be  "  a  root  of  Jesse."  Elsewhere  in  his  prophecy  Isaiah  speaks  of  Him  as  "  a 
root  out  of  a  dry  ground."  The  dry  ground  in  which  this  root  yielded  the  Plant 
of  renown  was  the  barren  soil  of  a  corrupt  age,  a  worn  out  civilisation,  a  depraved 
humanity.  His  descent  from  Jesse  associated  Him  vitally  with  a  notable  family 
of  the  Jews.  But  centuries  had  passed  since  the  descendants  of  Jesse  had  made 
themselves  conspicuous.  The  energy  of  that  vigorous  family  had  expended 
itself  in  the  luxury  and  the  frivolity  of  many  kings.  Joseph  of  Nazareth,  the 
village  carpenter,  and  Mary  his  espoused  wife,  were  the  living  representatives 
of  an  illustrious  ancestry  ;  and  they  were  so  poor  and  so  humble  that  Bethlehem, 
their  native  city,  had  no  welcome  for  them  when  they  went  thither  to  be  enrolled. 
The  Child  Jesus  shared  their  lot.  He  could  not  have  frequented  the  schools* 
for  His  townsmen  were  astonished  at  His  wisdom  when  He  began  to  teach.  He 
evidently  had  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  in  His  hands,  and  He  had  the  sweet 
influence  of  His  mother,  and  the  wise  counsels  of  Joseph,  and  He  had  the 
synagogue.  That  was  His  environment — so  far  as  His  environment  was  helpful. 
He  could  draw  no  inspiration  from  the  ordinary  Jewish  life  of  Nazareth,  and  still 
less  torn  the  Greek  or  Roman  life  of  Galilee.  His  Jewish  lineage  is  unquestioned* 
and  yet  there  is  nothing  Jewish  about  Him.  He  is  larger  than  the  nation,  larger 
even  than  the  race.  None  of  the  important  laws  of  heredity  can  explain  Him. 
II.  The  attitude  which  the  Redeemeb  would  assume.  He  was  to  "  stand 
for  an  ensign  of  the  people."  Ideas  are  symbolised  by  standards.  A  national 
flag  represents  a  national  idea.  Isaiah  declared  that  Jesus  would  "  stand  for 
r.n  ensign  of  the  people  " — not  of  the  Jews  merely,  but  of  the  Gentiles  also  ;  and 
Jesus  made  a  similar  declaration  concerning  Himself.  "  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up 
from  the  earth,"  &c.     He  anticipated  universal  supremacy.     This  is  surely  a 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  339 

very  remarkable  expectation  to  be  cherished  intelligently  by  an  ordinary  Jew 
of  that  period  of  history.  Racial  lines  were  then  sharply  drawn.  Yet  Jesus — a 
Jew,  and  a  Jew  in  a  small  provincial  town,  rose  to  an  appreciation  of  the  essential 
oneness  of  humanity,  and  presented  Himself,  with  His  idea,  as  the  ensign  of  the 
people,  so  that  Paul,  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,  was  able  to  write  to  the  Gentiles 
of  Ephesus  :  "  Ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow-citizens  with 
the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God."  This  expectation  was  not  cherished  by 
one  who  was  marching  at  the  head  of  an  invincible  army,  but  by  a  very  humble 
young  man  in  the  quiet  village  of  Nazareth.  He  had  never  been  abroad.  He 
had  enjoyed  but  little  contact  with  the  world.  Yet  He  made  this  claim  of 
universal  authority.  The  sobriety  of  His  claim  will  appear,  and  the  wisdom  of 
His  purpose  will  be  evident,  if  attention  is  directed  to  the  characteristics  of  His 
idea,  and  if  the  trend  of  human  progress  is  regarded.  The  idea  of  Jesus,  the  idea 
illustrated  by  His  character  and  life,  the  idea  around  which  Christendom  is 
crystallising,  is  clearly  expressed  in  the  words,  "  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but 
to  minister."  This  idea,  the  service  of  self-sacrifice,  is  one  which  is  capable  of 
transforming  life.  Now  that  idea  is  beginning  to  assert  its  power.  III.  Thb 
influence  which  the  Redeemer  would  exert.  " His  rest  shall  be  glorious." 
This  is  the  promise  of  peace  which  Jesus  Himself  repeated.  Very  simple  are  the 
terms,  and  yet  men  draw  back  from  their  simplicity.  They  want  the  rest,  but 
they  do  not  want  to  kneel  at  the  feet  of  Christ.  This  work — so  glorious — is 
not  an  experiment.  It  has  approved  itself.  In  Christ,  all  men  may  find  rest. 
(H.  M.  Booth,  D.D.)  The  holy  war: — Our  Lord  as  an  Ensign — I.  Musters 
His  forces  for  the  battle.  Under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  Jehovah 
revealed  Himself  as  the  Lord  of  hosts — as  a  man  of  war ;  and  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh  was  the  Captain  of  salvation,  and  set  up  His  standard  for  men  to  rally 
around,  that  they  might  overcome  sin  without  and  sin  within.  As  soldiers  of 
the  Cross,  we  are  to  muster  around  our  great  Ensign,  for  discipline,  drill,  and  for 
battle.  The  royal  proclamation  has  gone  forth;  war  has  been  declared  against 
the  powers  of  darkness;  the  trumpet  of  the  Gospel  has  sounded,  calling  upon 
"  all  the  world  "  and  "  every  creature " ;  to  it  the  Gentiles  have  come,  and  the 
Church  militant  is  going  forth  in  this  holy  war.  II.  Marches  with  His  forces 
to  the  battle.  He  goes  in  front  as  Leader  and  Commander,  to  guide,  stimulate, 
and  cheer.  The  strength  of  His  arm  and  the  light  of  His  eye  are  to  act  as  inspira- 
tion to  His  troops.  1.  He  goes  before  in  His  example.  He  fought  with  Satan, 
and  He  overcame  the  world.  He  conquered  its  frowns  and  smiles,  and  always 
went  His  way.  "  He  was  in  all  points  tempted  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin." 
2.  He  goes  before  us  in  precept.  He  has  given  us  commandments  how  we  shall 
march  and  how  we  shall  fight ;  and  He  is  ever  present  to  give  power  to  His  Word 
by  the  illumination  and  demonstration  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  The  early  Christians 
were  heroic  and  successful  in  battle,  for  they  realised  the  presence  of  the  great 
Ensign  with  them.  III.  Mingles  with  His  forces  in  the  battle.  "  His  rest 
shall  be  glorious."  It  shall  not  be  a  doubtful  or  drawn  battle ;  it  shall  end  in 
complete  victory.  The  Saviour,  when  He  finished  the  great  atonement,  ascended 
up  on  high,  and  "  sat  down  "  in  peace  and  power, — He  entered  into  glorious  rest. 
(F.  W.  Brown.)  Jesus  the  Ensign  : — I.  The  work  of  Christ.  1.  Jesus  may 
be  called  an  ensign  because  He  is  a  gathering  or  rallying  point  for  men.  There 
always  have  been  persons  who  have  stood  forth  prominently  from  their  fellows, 
in  travel,  in  science,  in  ethics,  in  art,  in  song.  These  have  founded  particular 
schools  of  thought  or  philosophy,  and  men  have  claimed  them  as  leaders,  ranged 
themselves  round  their  standards,  and  been  proud  to  be  called  by  their  names. 
Such  individuals  have  been  "  ensigns  of  the  people,"  gathering  or  rallying  points 
for  their  own  followers.  Just  so  is  Jesus  pre-eminently  "  an  ensign  for  the  people." 
2.  An  "  ensign  "  is  a  banner  to  fight  under.  The  watchword  of  the  true  believer 
in  Jesus  is,  "  Jehovah  nissi  !  "  There  are  different  regiments  enrolled  in  the 
Lord's  sacramental  host,  and  therefore  are  they  spoken  of  as  "  an  army  with 
banners  "  ;  but  every  sectional  flag  droops  and  dips  in  the  dust  as  it  is  borne 
before  the  "  Captain  of  our  salvation."  3.  An  "  ensign  "  is  a  guide  to  travellers. 
And  such  is  Christ  to  the  travellers  from  earth  to  heaven.  II.  The  rest  of 
Christ.  "  His  rest  shall  be  glorious."  1.  Because  it  will  be  the  rest  which 
follows  victory.  2.  The  rest  of  abiding  peace.  In  1815,  when  the  British  Parlia- 
ment were  voting  honours  and  emoluments  to  Wellington,  and  considering  "  the 
measures  necessary  towards  forming  a  peace  establishment,"  suddenly  all  their 
plans  were  interrupted  and  their  peace  projects  dissipated  by  the  intelligence 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

that  Napoleon  had  escaped  from  Elba.  Nothing  like  this  will  occur  during  th« 
rest  of  Christ ;  His  enemies  once  subdued  will  be  subdued  for  ever.  3.  Because 
it  will  be  the  rest  which  follows  successful  attempts  at  salvation.  Like  the  rest 
of  the  life-boat  crew,  when  the  mariners  have  been  all  brought  from  the  tempest- 
tost  and  torn  and  tottering  wreck ;  like  the  rest  of  the  firemen  when  they  have 
rescued  the  last  inmate  who  was  ready  to  perish  from  the  burning  building.  His 
rest  shall  be  glorious,  for  "  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied." 
4.  Because  it  shall  be  the  rest  of  social  enjoyment,  unmarred  by  pain  or  sickness, 
by  separation  or  death.  5.  The  rest  of  joyous  activity.  6.  A  rest  of  unending 
duration.  (J.  W.  Cole.)  Christ  the  Ensign  for  His  people: — I.  The  Person 
op  Christ.  II.  The  emblem  by  which  He  is  represented.  III.  Practical 
application.  1.  The  need  we  have  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  work.  Christ  may  be 
faithfully  and  constantly  preached,  but  it  is  by  the  Holy  Spirit  convincing  us  of 
our  need,  and  giving  us  a  living  faith,  that  we  range  ourselves  under  His  banner. 
2.  We  must  expect  a  conflict.  3.  Christ  will  come  to  take  His  saints  to  Himself, 
to  claim  that  glory  which  He  has  purchased  by  having  died  for  them.  (E.  Auriol, 
M.A.)         His   rest    shall   k«    glorious.  —  The     Christian's     glorious     rest: — 

1.  Consider  wherein  this  rest  consists.  1.  In  that  great  obedience  which 
Christ  has  rendered  unto  God,  in  the  human  nature,  for  man.  There  is  a  rest  of 
conscience  to  those  who  are  in  Christ.  2.  Another  ground  of  this  rest  of  the  spirit 
is  in  the  victory  that  Christ  has  obtained  over  all  His  enemies.  Death,  sin,  Satan, 
the  world.  The  enemies  of  the  believer  are  vanquished  through  Christ  Jesus. 
II.  In  what  sense  it  may  be  called  glorious.  1.  It  is  glorious  to  God  the 
Father;  whose  wisdom  and  love  it  manifests.  It  is  glorious  to  God  the  Son; 
who  obtained  it  for  His  whole  spiritual  Church  by  His  incarnation  and  toil  and 
agony.  It  is  glorious  to  God  the  Spirit ;  who  foretold  it,  who  described  it,  who 
reveals  it,  and  seals  them  for  it.  It  is  glorious,  because  all  God's  attributes  are 
honoured  in  it.     His  justice  is  satisfied  :  His  mercy  also  is  infinitely  displayed. 

2.  The  rest  is  glorious  and  honourable  to  all  those  who  are  brought  into  it. 
For  they  are  washed  from  their  sins  wholly,  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and 
stand  as  candidates  for  heaven  in  those  blessed  garments,  which  grace  has  pur- 
chased for  them  and  called  them  to  wear.  They  cease  from  the  impious  intention 
of  asking  heaven  for  their  own  obedience,  from  a  deep  and  heart-felt  conviction 
of  God's  infinite  holiness  and  their  own  unworthiness.  They  place  the  crown  of 
honour  on  the  head,  where  God  would  have  it  placed — even  on  that  head  that 
wore  the  crown  of  thorns.  3.  There  remains  a  more  glorious  rest  hereafter. 
(T.  Snow,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  Lord  shall  set  His  hand  again  the  second  time  to 
recover  the  remnant  of  HJa  people. — The  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  their 
own  land,  and  conversion  to  the  faith  of  Christ : — I.  The  past  and  present 
state  and  character  of  the  Jews.  The  past  history  of  the  Jews  has 
been  very  remarkable,  more  so  than  that  of  any  other  nation.  They  have 
been  remarkable  in  their  origin ;  in  the  miraculous  events  which  befell  them  ; 
in  their  separation ;  in  their  preservation ;  and  in  their  punishment.  II.  What 
is  to  become  of  these  men  for  the  future  ?  1.  Every  part  of  their  history 
is  wonderful.  This  would  lead  us  to  expect  that  their  future  history  should  be 
remarkable  also.  We  generally  find  this  to  be  the  rule  of  Providence.  The 
restoration  and  Christianisation  of  the  Jews  would  be  thus  remarkable,  and 
of  a  piece  with  His  other  dispensations  towards  them.  It  would  not  be  so 
wonderful  that  they  should  continue  to  be  punished  as  they  are  at  present ;  but 
that  they  should  be  restored  and  converted,  in  spite  of  so  many  obstacles  in  the 
way  of  both,  how  singular  ! — that  they  should  be  honoured  in  those  respects 
in  which  they  have  been  most  dishonoured,  how  remarkable  and  how  worthy 
of  the  other  wonderful  events  of  the  Jewish  history  !  2.  We  have  to  remember, 
and  it  strengthens  the  foregoing  consideration,  that  the  Jews  are  capable,  by 
the  events  supposed,  of  adding  much  to  the  illustration  of  God's  glory.  In 
accomplishing  these  events  there  would  be  a  mighty  manifestation  of  power 
and  wisflom,  forbearance  and  compassion,  not  to  speak  of  truth.  The  very 
length  of  time  that  the  Jews  have  lain  under  the  curse  of  God,  and  the  severity 
of  their  punishment,  and  the  mystery  which  overhangs  their  condition  and 
prospects,  would  render  their  deliverance,  and  consequently  the  manifestation 
of  Divine  glory,  more  illustrious  when  it  came.  3.  With  God  the  past  is  a  pledge 
of  the  future ;  and  how  large  is  the  honour  and  goodness  of  which  He  has  made 


chap,  xi.]  ISAIAH.  341 

the  Jews  partakers  in  former  times  !  4.  The  actual  circumstances  of  the  Jews, 
at  present,  betoken  a  propitious  change.  There  are  circumstances  in  their  feelings 
ana  condition  which  intimate  that,  at  least,  their  temporal  state  shall  be  improved. 
The  Jews  themselves  expect  that  one  day  they  shall  be  restored  ;  and  this 
expectation  is  not  the  vague  idea  of  a  few  individuals,  got  up  as  a  refuge  from 
present  pain — it  is  the  prevailing  idea  of  the  Jewish  nation  in  every  age,  and  it 
is  persevered  in,  in  spite  of  the  hardest  experience  which  should  damp  and  destroy 
it.  So  strong  is  the  impression,  that  many  Jews,  when  dying,  make  provisiom 
that  their  bodies,  and  those  of  their  friends,  shall  be  buried  in  the  land  of  their 
fathers ;  and  some  repair  thither  in  the  decline  of  life,  that  they  may  lay  their 
bones  within  the  borders  of  Canaan,  in  the  full  expectation  that  one  day  that 
land  is  to  be  inhabited  by,  and  to  form  the  sepulchre  of,  their  children.  6.  The 
Jews  are  visibly  separated  from  all  other  nations.  This  was  predicted  of  them, 
and  it  has  been  strikingly  realised.  Now,  what  is  the  object  and  use  of  this 
remarkable  separation  ?  Possibly  to  make  the  punishment  fall  more  heavily 
upon  the  sin  of  the  Jews  ;  but  this  will  not  explain  the  whole.  It  will  not  explain 
the  continued  distinction,  now  that  the  punishment  is  becoming  less  severe. 
There  seems  to  be  no  way  of  explaining  it,  but  by  believing  that  some  great  and 
wonderful  event  awaits  them  in  the  future ;  and  what  can  that  be  but  their 
restoration  and  conversion  ?  It  cannot  be  their  amalgamation  with  other 
nations,  for  this  would  not  be  very  wonderful.  It  would  not  be  worthy  of  so 
singular  and  protracted  a  separation ;  and  besides,  were  this  what  was  con- 
templated, we  would  expect  that  there  should  be  some  approach  to  amalgamation 
now.  6.  In  their  pursuits  and  mode  of  life  the  Jews  are  eminently  a  movable 
people.  They  count  no  country  their  home.  It  is  their  business  to  travel  from 
country  to  country.  They  are  not  tied  down  to  fixed  pursuits,  such  as  those  of 
agriculture,  which  cannot  be  readily  parted  with.  Even  in  Poland,  where  they  are 
most  numerous  and  stationary,  they  are  chiefly  engaged  in  trade  and  commerce,  and 
cannot  be  prevailed  upon  to  engage  in  anything  else.  As  a  whole,  they  are  most 
remarkable  as  dealers  and  exchangers  in  money — their  property  is  convertible  in 
the  easiest  manner.  They  are,  so  to  speak,  upon  the  wing — they  could  change  their 
abode  at  a  moment's  warning.  7.  And  if,  from  the  Jews  themselves,  we  turn  to 
the  land  of  their  fathers,  we  find  it  in  a  condition  above  all  others  most  apt  and 
likely  to  change  masters.  It  is  very  partially  inhabited — inhabited,  where  there 
are  a  people,  only  by  the  wandering  Arab,  almost  as  migratory  as  the  Jew.  The 
government  is  fast  hastening  to  dissolution.  It  is  the  interest,  humanly  speaking,, 
of  no  great  or  powerful  nation  to  hinder  the  establishment  of  the  Jews  in  Palestine. 
It  is  rather  for  their  advantage  to  promote  it.  The  Jews  are  sufficiently  able 
to  purchase  the  land  with  money,  were  this  the  stipulation.  8.  We  must  now 
betake  ourselves  to  the  Scriptures,  and  see  what  they  declare  upon  the  subject. 
(J.  0.  Lorimer.)  Restoration  of  the  Jews — obstacles  to  be  overcome  : — All  obstacles, 
even  the  most  formidable,  to  the  restoration  of  God's  people,  shall  be  overcome 
or  taken  away  by  His  almighty  power.  This  idea  is  naturally  expressed  by  the 
dividing  of  the  Red  Sea  and  Euphrates,  because  Egypt  and  Assyria  are  the 
two  great  powers  from  which  Israel  had  suffered  and  was  yet  to  be  delivered. 
(J.  A.  Alexander.) 

Ver.  13.  The  envy  also  of  Ephraim  shall  dtpart. — Judah  and  Ephraim : — 
Jacob,  in  his  prophetic  statement  of  the  fortunes  of  his  sons,  disregards 
the  right  of  primogeniture,  and  gives  the  pre-eminence  to  Judah  and  Joseph, 
and  in  the  family  of  the  latter  to  the  younger  son  Ephraim.  Hence,  from 
the  time  of  the  exodus,  these  two  were  regarded  as  the  leading  tribes  of 
Israel.  Judah  was  much  more  numerous  than  Ephraim,  took  precedence  during 
the  journey  in  the  wilderness,  and  received  the  largest  portion  in  the  promised 
land.  But  Joshua  was  an  Ephraimite ;  and  Shiloh,  where  the  tabernacle  long 
stood,  was  probably  within  the  limits  of  the  same  tribe.  The  ambitious  jealousy 
of  the  Ephraimites  towards  other  tribes  appears  in  their  conduct  to  Gideon  and 
Jephthah.  Their  special  jealousy  of  Judah  showed  itself  in  their  temporary 
refusal  to  submit  to  David  after  the  death  of  Saul,  in  their  adherence  to  Absalom 
against  his  father,  and  in  the  readiness  with  which  they  joined  in  the  revolt  of 
Jeroboam,  who  was  himself  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim.  This  schism  was,  therefore, 
not  a  sudden  or  fortuitous  occurrence,  but  the  natural  result  f  causes  which 
had  long  been  working.  The  mutual  relation  of  the  two  kingdoms  is  expressed 
in  the  recorded  fact  that  "  there  was  war  between  Rehoboam  and  Jeroboam, 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

and  between  Asa  and  Baasha  all  their  days."  Exceptions  to  the  general  rule, 
as  in  the  case  of  Ahab  and  Jehoshaphat,  were  rare,  and  a  departure  from  the 
principles  and  ordinary  feelings  of  the  parties.  The  ten  tribes,  which  assumed 
i he  name  of  Israel  after  the  division,  and  perhaps  before  it,  regarded  the  smaller 
and  less  warlike  state  with  a  contempt  which  is  well  expressed  by  Jehoash  in 
his  parable  of  the  cedar  and  the  thistle,  unless  the  feeling  there  displayed  be 
rather  perso  ,al  than  national.  On  the  other  hand,  Judah  justly  regarded  Israel 
as  g  ilty  not  only  of  i  olitical  revolt,  but  of  religious  apostasy,  and  the  jealousy 
of  Ephraim  towards  Judah  would,  of  course,  be  increased  by  the  fact  that  Jehovah 
had  "  forsaken  the  tabernacle  of  Shiloh,"  that  He  "  refused  the  tabernacle  of 
Joseph,  and  chose  not  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  but  chose  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the 
Mount  Zion  which  He  loved."     (J.  A.  Alexander.) 

Vet.  15.  The  Lord  shall  utterly  destroy  the  tongue  of  the  Egyptian  sea.— 
The  Egyptian  sea  and  the  river: — The  "tongue,"  i.e.,  the  bay  (cf.  Josh.  xv.  2) 
of  the  Red  Sea  (the  Gulf  of  Suez)  will  be  "banned,"  i.e.,  rendered  harmless  to 
those  who  would  cross  it,  by  being  dried  up ;  "  the  river  "  (the  Euphrates), 
swift  and  too  deep  to  be  forded  as  it  is,  will  be  split  into  seven  separate 
channels,  which  separately  may  be  forded  without  danger.    (Prof.  Driver,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XII. 


Vers.  1-3.  And  In  that  day  thou  shalt  say,  0  Lord,  I  will  praise  Thee. — 

Praise  for  redemption  : — As  the  Israel  that  was  redeemed  from  Egypt  raised 
songs  of  praise  on  the  other  side  of  the  Red  Sea,  so  likewise  does  the  Israel 
of  the  second  redemption  when  brought  not  less  miraculously  over  the  Red 
Sea  and  Euphrates.  (F.  Delitzsrh.)  A  song  in  the  night: — It  is  time  we  had  a 
hymn  in  this  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  for  the  reading  has  been  like  a  succession  of 
thunderstorms  and  earthquakes.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Did  Isaiah  write  thU 
song  t — Some  say  Isaiah  did  not  write  this  song.  It  is  of  no  consequence  to  us 
who  wrote  it :  here  it  is,  and  it  is  in  the  right  place,  and  it  expresses  the  right 
thought,  and  there  is  probably  more  evidence  for  the  authorship  of  Isaiah  than 
for  the  authorship  of  any  other  man.  Some  have  said  it  is  not  like  his  style : 
but  what  is  his  style  ?  What  is  the  style  of  the  sky  ?  Is  it  for  two  days  alike  ? 
Who  could  write  the  history  of  the  sky  simply  as  it  appears  to  the  vision  of  man  T 
The  accounts  would  seem  to  contradict  one  another,  for  the  sky  passes  through 
panoramic  changes  innumerable,  infinite,  and  all  beautiful  where  they  are  not 
grand.  So  with  the  style  of  this  great  statesman  Isaiah.  He  handles  things 
with  the  infinite  ease  of  conscious  power;  he  is  as  strong  in  his  music  as  he  is 
in  his  prophecy.  (Ibid.)  Praise  for  redemption  by  the  individual  and  by  the 
Church  : — In  that  day — I.  Every  particular  believer  shall  sing  a  song  of  praise 
for  his  own  interest  in  that  salvation  (vers.  1-3).  "  Thou  shalt  say,  O  Lord, 
I  will  praise  Thee."  Thanksgiving  work  shall  be  closet  work.  II.  Many  in 
concert  shall  join  in  praising  God  for  the  common  benefit  arising  from  this 
salvation  (vers.  4-6).  Ye  shall  say,  Praise  the  Lord."  Thanksgiving  work 
shall  be  congregation  work.  (M.  Henry.)  A  new  song  for  new  hearts: — The 
text  is  many-sided.  We  shall  find  out  the  very  soul  of  the  passage  if  we  consider 
it  as  an  illustration  of  what  occurs  to  every  one  of  God's  people  when  he  is  brought 
out  of  darkness  into  God's  marvellous  light.  I.  The  prelude  of  this  song.  Here 
are  certain  preliminaries  to  the  music.  "  In  that  day  thou  shalt  say."  Here  we 
have  the  tuning  of  the  harps,  the  notes  of  the  music  follow  after  in  the  succeeding 
sentences.  1.  There  is  a  time  for  that  joyous  song  which  is  here  recorded.  The 
term,  "  that  day,"  is  sometimes  used  for  a  day  of  terror,  and  often  for  a  period  of 
blessing.  The  common  term  to  both  is  this,  they  were  days  of  the  manifestation 
of  Divine  power.  "  That  day,"  a  day  of  terrible  confusion  to  God's  enemies  ; 
"  that  day,"  a  day  of  great  comfort  to  God's  friends.  Now,  the  day  in  which  a 
man  rejoices  in  Christ,  is  the  day  in  which  God's  power  is  revealed  on  his  behalf 
in  his  heart  and  conscience.  2.  A  word  indicates  the  singer.  "  Thou."  It  is  a 
singular  pronoun,  and  points  out  one  individual.  One  by  one  we  receive  eternal 
life  and  peace.     You  fancy  that  it  is  all  right  with  you  because  you  live  in  a 


chap,  xn.]  ISAIAH.  343 

Christian  nation  ;  it  is  woe  unto  you,  if  having  outward  privileges,  they  involve 
you  in  responsibilities,  but  bring  you  no  saving  grace.  Perhaps  you  fancy  that 
your  family  religion  may  somewhat  help  you,  but  it  is  not  so ;  there  is  no  birthright 
godliness  :  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  Still,  I  know  ye  fancy  that  if  ye  mingle 
in  godly  congregations,  and  sing  as  they  sing,  and  pray  as  they  pray,  it  shall  go 
well  with  you,  but  it  is  not  so  ;  the  wicket  gate  of  eternal  life  admits  but  one 
at  a  time.  This  word,  "  thou,"  is  spoken  to  those  who  have  been  by  sorrow  brought 
into  the  last  degree  of  despair.  3.  The  next  thing  to  be  noted  in  the  preliminaries 
is  the  Teacher.  It  is  God  alone  who  can  so  positively  declare,  "  thou  shalt  say." 
If  any  man  presumes  to  say,  "  God  has  turned  His  anger  away  from  me,"  without 
a  warrant  from  the  Most  High,  that  man  lies  to  his  own  confusion  ;  but  when  it 
is  written,  "  Thou  shalt  say,"  it  is  as  though  God  had  said,  "  I  will  make  it  true, 
eo  that  you  shall  be  fully  justified  in  the  declaration."  4.  Here  is  another  pre- 
liminary of  the  song,  namely,  the  tone  of  it.  "  Thou  shalt  say."  The  song  is  to 
be  an  open  one,  avowed,  vocally  uttered,  heard  of  men,  and  published  abroad. 
It  is  not  to  be  a  silent  feeling,  a  kind  of  soft  music  whose  sweetness  is  spent  within 
the  spirit.  II.  Ik  the  song  itself,  I  would  call  to  your  notice — 1.  The  fact  that 
all  of  it  is  concerning  the  Lord.  It  is  all  addressed  to  Him.  "  O  Lord,  I  will 
praise  Thee :  though  Thou  wast  angry,  Thine  anger  is  turned  away."  When 
a  soul  escapes  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  becomes  consciously  pardoned,  it 
resembles  the  apostles  on  the  Mount  Tabor — it  sees  no  man,  save  Jesus  only.  God 
will  be  all  in  all  when  iniquity  is  pardoned.  2.  The  next  thing  in  this  song  is, 
that  it  includes  repentant  memories.  "  Though  Thou  wast  angry  with  me." 
There  was  a  time  when  God  was  to  our  consciousness  angry  with  us.  In  the 
Hebrew  the  wording  of  our  text  is  slightly  different  from  what  we  get  in  the 
English.  Our  English  translators  have  very  wisely  put  in  the  word  though," 
a  little  earlier  than  it  occurs  in  the  Hebrew.  The  Hebrew  would  run  something 
like  this,  "  0  Lord,  I  will  praise  Thee  ;  Thou  wast  angry  with  me."  Now  we  do 
this  day  praise  God  that  He  made  us  feel  His  anger.  3.  The  song  of  our  text 
contains  in  itself  blessed  certainties.  "  Thine  anger  is  turned  away."  Can  a 
man  know  that  ?  can  a  man  be  quite  sure  that  he  is  forgiven  ?  Ay,  that  he  can ; 
he  can  be  as  sure  of  pardon  as  he  is  of  his  existence.  4.  Our  song  includes  holy 
resolutions.  "  I  will  praise  Thee."  I  will  do  it  with  my  heart  in  secret.  I 
will  praise  Thee  in  the  Church  of  God,  for  I  will  search  out  other  believers,  and 
I  will  tell  them  what  God  has  done  for  me.  I  will  cast  in  my  lot  with  Thy  people. 
I  will  praise  Thee  in  my  life.  I  will  make  my  business  praise  Thee ;  I  will  make 
my  parlour  and  my  drawing-room,  I  will  make  my  kitchen  and  my  field  praise 
Thee.  I  will  not  be  content  unless  all  I  am  and  all  I  have  shall  praise  Thee.  I 
will  make  a  harp  of  the  whole  universe  ;  I  will  make  earth  and  heaven,  space  and 
time,  to  be  but  strings  upon  which  my  joyful  fingers  shall  play  lofty  tunes  of 
thankfulness.  5.  This  is  a  song  which  is  peculiar  in  its  character,  and  appropriate 
only  to  the  people  of  God.  I  may  say  of  it,  "  no  man  could  learn  this  song  but 
the  redeemed."  It  is  not  a  Pharisee's  song — it  has  no  likeness  to  "God, I  thank 
Thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  "  ;  it  confesses,  "  Thou  wast  angry  with  me," 
and  therein  owns  that  the  singer  was  even  as  others  ;  but  it  glories  that  through 
infinite  mercy,  the  Divine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  herein  it  leans  on  the  appointed 
Saviour.  It  is  not  a  Sadducean  song;  no  doubt  mingles  with  the  strain.  It  is 
not  the  philosopher's  query,  "  There  may  be  a  God,  or  there  may  not  be  " ;  it  is 
the  voice  of  a  believing  worshipper.  It  is  not,  "  I  may  be  guilty,  or  I  may  not  be." 
It  is  all  positive,  every  note  of  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  "heart a  diapason: — 
It  is  a  full  song — the  swell  of  the  diapason  of  the  heart.  (Ibid.)  Grace  upon 
grace: — "Thou  comfortedst  me."  Persons  maybe  liberated  from  slavery  by  the 
arm  of  power  ;  they  may  be  rescued  from  oppression  by  the  exercise  of  justice ; 
they  may  be  relieved  from  want  by  the  hand  of  bounty ;  but  to  pour  reviving 
consolation  into  the  dejected  mind  is  the  kind  office  of  pure  affection  and 
pity  (Isa.  lxvi.  13).  (B.  Macculloch.)  The  song  of  the  ransomed: — Such 
will  one  day  be  the  song  of  a  ransomed  nation,  and  such  is  even  now  the  song  of 
the  ransomed  soul.  Until  we  can  sing  this  song  we  do  not  know  what  praise 
really  means.  It  is  a  striking  contrast  indeed.  (1)  It  is  a  stern  and  terrible  fact 
that  there  are  some  persons  on  whom  the  wrath  of  God  does  rest  (John  iii.  36). 
There  are  few  more  startling  expressions  in  the  whole  Bible  than  this.  Think 
of  the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  you  !  You  rise  up  in  the  morning,  and  there  it 
is — hanging  over  you.  You  go  forth  to  your  work,  the  sun  is  shining  in  the  outer 
world,  making  all  nature  jubilant,  and  over  you  this  dark  funereal  pall  is  still 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xa 

hanging.  You  surround  yourselves  with  all  the  pleasing  scenes  of  a  comfortable 
home.  In  the  very  midst  of  your  comfort  and  prosperity  still  that  cloud  is  there. 
You  lay  your  head  upon  your  pillow  at  night,  and  if  you  should  think  at  all,  youl 
last  thoughts  might  well  be :  If  I  never  wake  again  here  on  earth,  I  must  certainly 
wake  to  find  the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  me.  This  is  not  the  only  passage  in 
which  such  an  affirmation  is  made.  (2)  How  did  this  great  change  indicated 
here  take  place  ?  If  you  refer  to  the  immediate  context,  you  will  learn  a  valuable 
lesson.  In  the  previous  chapters  we  meet  with  a  very  mournful  refrain :  "  For 
ail  this  His  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  His  hand  is  stretched  out  still."  These 
sorrowful  words  come  after  a  description  of  terrible  and  overwhelming  judgment. 
This  points  to  the  solemn  conclusion  that,  although  it  is  perfectly  true  that  sin 
always  brings  punishment  in  its  train,  the  punishment  which  we  endure,  as  the 
result  of  our  sin,  does  not  expiate  its  guilt.  What  was  it  that  turned  away  the 
anger  of  God  from  Israel  ?  The  tenth  chapter  is  merely  a  parenthesis.  It  is 
when  the  Rod  of  the  stem  of  Jesse  has  appeared,  and  the  eye  of  God,  looking  down 
upon  His  own  nation,  sees  something  within  that  nation  that  He  is  well  pleased 
with,  that  a  complete  change  comes  over  the  aspect  of  things.  The  anger  of 
God  disappears,  the  sunlight  of  Divine  pleasure  bursts  upon  a  rejoicing  nation, 
and  the  next  moment  we  are  introduced  to  this  song  of  triumphant  praise.  The 
moment  that  the  eye  of  God,  gazing  down  upon  you,  sees  in  your  nature  that  which 
He  beheld  of  old  in  the  sacred  land,  and  which  He  will  behold  again  one  day  oa 
a  consecrated  earth,  the  Plant  of  renown — Christ  received  into  your  nature, 
Christ  growing  in  the  thirsty,  barren  soil  of  your  fallen  humanity,  like  a  root  in 
a  dry  ground,  and  making  all  things  fertile  and  fruitful  by  His  presence — when 
God,  gazing  down,  sees  within  you  a  received  Christ,  He  has  no  anger,  no  judgment 
for  that.  You  will  be  able  to  say,  "  Thou  wast  angry ;  Thine  anger  is  turned 
away :  Thou  comfortedst  me."  I.  In  reaching  this  point  the  soul  proceeds  to 
make  the  most  astonishing  and  glorious  discovery  it  is  possible  for  us  to  make. 
"  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation."  I  suddenly  discover  that  I  have  no  longer 
anything  to  fear  in  God.  He  bridges  over  in  His  own  blessed  Person  the  vast 
chasm  between  my  sin  and  His  purity,  and  as  I  step  upon  this  wondrous  bridge 
I  find  that  it  will  bear  my  weight.  God  Himself  brings  me  to  God.  This  salva- 
tion is  offered  to  us  for  nothing.  But  it  cost  the  Son  of  God  something.  This 
ealvation  is  to  be  appropriated  by  simple  trust.  "  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid." 
II.  But  not  only  does  the  happy  soul  find  out  that  God  is  his  salvation  ;  he  goes 
on  to  find  out  that  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  his  strength.  The  very  title  which 
the  prophet  gives  to  God  suggests  the  eternal  immutability  of  the  great  "I  Am." 
As  we  obtain  salvation  by  taking  God  for  our  salvation,  so  we  obtain  strength 
by  taking  God  for  our  strength  with  equally  simple,  childlike  faith.  III.  When 
you  have  made  the  discovery  that  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  your  strength,  no  wonder 
if  you  go  on  to  make  yet  a  third.  He  is  our  song.  God  designs  that  from  this 
time  forth  you  shall  be  perfectly  happy  ;  but,  if  you  want  to  be  really  happy, 
God  must  be  your  song.  When  we  think  upon  God  there  is  always  something 
to  sing  about.  His  faithfulness  and  truth ;  His  unchanging  love  ;  His  readiness 
to  be  to  ns  all  that  we  want ;  the  hope  that  He  holds  out  to  us,  blooming  with 
immortality.  IV.  And,  as  the  result  of  this,  we  shall  "  with  joy  draw  water 
out  op  the  wells  OP  salvation."  Some  have  sat  beside  the  wells  of  salvation, 
from  time  to  time,  as  a  matter  of  custom  and  habit,  and  yet  have  never  known 
what  it  was  to  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  with  joy.  You  have  come  to  church 
on  Sunday  because  it  happened  to  be  Sunday.  You  were  expected  to  be  there, 
and  there  you  were.  Some  of  you  have  read  your  Bible  because  it  is  a  proper 
thing  to  do.  Your  life  has  been  a  life  of  legal  performances.  Your  prayers 
have  been  little  better  than  superstitious  incantations.  Now  all  that  is  changed. 
It  is  with  joy,  and  not  with  murmuring,  that  we  are  to  find  our  wells.  On  more 
than  one  occasion  the  Israelites  applied  for  water  in  this  spirit,  and  found  a 
curse  mingled  with  their  blessing.  Let  us  dig  our  wells  as  they  dug  the  well  of 
old  at  Beer,  when,  though  they  lacked  water,  they  were  wise  enough  to  leave 
the  matter  in  the  Lord's  hands.  Then  it  was  God  undertook  for  them.  {Anon.) 
The  present  happiness  of  God's  people  set  before  the  unconverted  : — God,  in  His 
infinite  mercy,  has  addressed  the  most  various  motives  to  sinners  in  general,  to 
induce  them  to  turn  to  Him.  He  has  been  pleased  to  set  before  sinners  in  His 
Word  the  immediate  happiness  that  they  may  enjoy  in  His  service,  as  incompar- 
ablv  greater  than  any  they  can  hope  to  have  in  this  world  while  absent  and 
alienated  from  Him     And  this  truth  is  set  before  us  most  strikingly  in  these 


chap,  xn.]  ISAIAH.  345 

words.  I.  We  have  to  consider  the  joy  that  flows  from  the  sense  of  pardoned 
sin.  1.  The  first  thing  here  declared  to  us  is,  that  God  does  pardon  the  penitent 
believer.  He  was  originally  angry  with  him.  God  is,  and  must  be,  according 
to  His  Divine  perfections,  angry  with  those  who  are  living  in  a  state  of  rebellion 
against  Him.  But  when  a  person  is  brought  to  believe  in  Christ  that  anger  is 
gone.  2.  And  as  this  is  the  blessing  itself,  so  is  the  believer,  when  faith  is  strong, 
assured  of  that  blessing.  But  when  I  speak  of  this  as  a  constraining  motive  why 
sinners  in  general  should  turn  to  God,  they  may  feel  that  ungodly  persons  have 
no  such  burden.  Yet  though  now  the  sinner  may  not  feel  his  need  of  such 
a  consolation,  he  may  be  assured  that  it  is  a  consolation  surpassing  in  value 
and  in  peace  and  in  joy  all  that  he  has  ever  experienced  in  a  life  of  indifference 
and  ungodliness.  II.  There  is  a  joy  arising  from  trust  in  God  for  future 
blessings.  "  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation,"  &c.  1.  God  is  become  the  "  salva- 
tion "  of  a  penitent  believer.  That  is,  He  accomplishes  His  entire  deliverance 
from  sin  and  its  consequences.  2.  God  is  his  salvation  "  from  all  present 
evil,  and  introduces  him  to  the  possession  of  all  real  good  (Psa.  cxxi.  7,  lxxxiv. 
1 1  ;  Bom.  viii.  28).  Hence,  then,  the  Lord  does  not  reserve  all  the  blessings  of 
His  people  for  the  eternal  world,  but  pours  out  His  treasures  of  mercy  upon  them 
even  now.  And  as  God  bestows  upon  His  people  this  assurance  that  He  is  "  their 
strength  and  their  salvation,"  it  must  fill  them  with  abiding  joy.  (B.  W.  Noel, 
M.A.)  The  joy  of  salvation  : — At  the  Southport  Convention,  1901,  the  Rev. 
W.  T.  Fullerton  told  an  amusing  incident  of  a  friend  of  his,  not  a  Methodist,  but 
with  enough  fire  for  two,  who  wrote  a  post-card  to  a  friend,  and  having  filled  up 
the  back,  wrote  a  closing  message  on  the  front  of  the  card,  "  Be  of  good  cheer, 
brother."  And  the  Post-office  authorities  not  only  surcharged  the  recipient, 
but  stamped  beneath  the  message,  "  Contrary  to  regulations."  Christian  joy 
is  legitimate,  and  not  opposed  to  the  regulations  of  heaven.  (Methodist  Times.) 
Assurance  of  salvation  makes  the  firmest,  the  most  active,  the  most  useful,  the 
holiest,  the  happiest,  the  most  even  and  regular  Christians.     (John  Bate.) 

Ver.  2.  Behold,  God  Is  my  salvation. — Rejoicing  in  God : — These  words  are 
used  by  the  prophet,  in  the  name  of  the  Church,  to  set  forth  the  happi- 
ness and  salvation  of  the  Jews  when  they  shall  be  gathered  in  with  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles.  They  also  express  the  experience  of  a  believer — I.  With 
respect  to  his  moral  state.  "  God  is  my  salvation."  Some  would  have 
the  aid,  the  consolation,  and  the  favour  of  God,  but  refuse  His  salvation,  and 
remain  in  sin.  This,  however,  is  vain  and  impossible.  The  privileges  of  a 
believer  are  unspeakably  great,  but  they  all  are  founded  on  that  change  which 
the  grace  of  God  makes  in  his  nature,  here  called  salvation.  Salvation  is  deliver- 
ance, and  how  does  this  show  itself  in  a  believer  ?  He  is  delivered  from  dark- 
ness (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  From  insensibility  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26).  From  pride. 
From  creaturely  dependence.  From  a  sense  of  condemnation  (Bom.  viii.  1). 
From  slavery  (John  viii.  36;  Rom.  vi.  22).  He  is  delivered  from  misery,  into 
union  with  God,  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost;  no  longer  a  stranger  and 
foreigner,  but  a  fellow-heir,  rejoicing  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  in  the  hope  of  His 
glory.     Observe,  to  whom  the  believer  refers  us  as  the  Author  of  this  salvation — 

God."  II.  With  respect  to  His  aid.  "  The  Lord  Jehovah  is  my  strength." 
If  we  have  not  yet  learned  that  our  own  strength  is  weakness,  and  that  we  shall 
never  be  sufficiently  strong  until  the  Lord  Jehovah  Himself  strengthens  with  all 
might  in  our  inner  man,  we  have  learnt  little  of  Christianity.  But  he  who  knows 
that  God  is  his  salvation,  knows  also  that  God  is  his  strength.  Dost  thou  fall  ? 
"  Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy ;  when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise ;  when  I  sit 
in  darkness,  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light  unto  me."  Art  thou  faint  ?  "  He  giveth 
power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength." 
Art  thou  wounded  T  A  touch  of  the  Divine  hand  shall  heal  thee.  Art  thou 
buffeted  by  Satan  ?  God  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly.  In  one 
word,  behold  a  Divine  and  almighty  power  everywhere,  and  always  surrounding 
you,  sufficient  for  all  purposes  to  bless,  support,  deliver.  LLT.  With  respect 
to  His  consolations.  And  my  song."  Here  is  an  allusion  to  the  ancient 
custom  of  composing  and  singing  sacred  odes  or  songs  upon  occasions  of  any 
signal  deliverance,  or  the  communication  of  any  peculiar  blessing.  Such  were 
the  songs  of  Moses  and  Miriam,  when  Pharaoh  and  his  host  were  swallowed  up 
in  the  Red  Sea ;  of  Moses,  after  he  had  brought  the  Israelites  to  the  borders  of 
the  promised  land ;  of  many  of  the  Psalms  of  David,  &c.     Observe,  the  subject 


346  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

of  his  song,  "  the  Lord  Jehovah."  His  nature ;  His  dispensations.  IV.  With 
respect  to  his  confidence.  "  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid."  (J.  Walker, 
D.D.)  Salvation  of  the  Lord: — The  physician  may  be  the  means  of  restoring 
to  health,  but  it  is  God  who  performs  the  cure.  The  counsellor  may  give  good 
advice,  but  it  is  God  who  guides  by  His  counsel  and  conducts  to  glory.  Soldiers 
may  fight  our  battles,  but  it  is  God  who  crowns  them  with  victory.  Friends 
may  try  to  assist,  relieve,  and  comfort  us,  but  their  success  depends  entirely  upon 
God.  From  providences  and  ordinances  we  may  derive  much  benefit,  but 
for  this  purpose  it  is  absolutely  requisite  that  they  be  accompanied  with  the 
Divine  blessing.  In  this  manner  we  are  taught  that  salvation  is  of  the  Lord. 
(R.  Macculloch.)  Salvation: — The  word  "salvation"  is  too  narrowly  defined 
in  many  instances.  People  suppose  that  it  means  a  kind  of  spiritual  selfishness 
which,  being  expressed  in  more  words,  would  run  in  some  such  fashion  as  this  : 
Thank  God  I  am  safe,  whatever  may  become  of  anybody  else  !  Any  man  who 
can  say  that,  or  mean  that,  or  be  in  any  way  under  such  a  delusion,  simply  knows 
nothing  whatever  about  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel.  "  Salvation  "  is  one  of  the 
largest  terms  in  human  speech.  Emancipation  does  not  mean — you  are  now 
no  longer  under  obligation  to  serve  your  old  tyrant  or  your  old  master.  That 
is  but  a  negative  aspect  of  emancipation.  The  true  meaning  is — you  are  invested 
with  all  the  responsibilities  of  organised  liberty ;  you  have  conferred  upon  you 
an  opportunity  of  developing  your  whole  manhood ;  you  may  now  show  the 
very  best  aspect  of  your  character,  and  unless  you  do  it,  then  slavery  were  for  you 
better  than  freedom.  It  is  so  with  the  fullest  meaning  of  this  word  salvation. 
Saved  people  are  generous  people,  beneficent,  charitable,  anxious  about  others ; 
nay,  the  only  explanation  of  their  anxiety  about  others  is  that  they  themselves 
are  conscious  of  having  been  saved — not  saved  from  fear  only,  but  saved  into  life, 
liberty,  and  conscious  possibility  of  doing  great  and  small  things.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  Old  Testament  interpreted  by  the  New : — "  Behold,  God  is  my 
salvation."  Jerome  translates  this,  "Behold,  God  is  my  Jesus."  Jerome 
was  right  in  going  back  to  the  Old  Testament  with  the  key  of  the  New.  In  fact, 
we  are  entitled  to  begin  at  Genesis  after  we  have  perused  the  whole  Gospel  story 
with  the  profoundest  interest  and  have  received  its  spirit  into  our  heart.  The 
Gospels  explain  the  Pentateuch.  There  are  arithmetics  which  are  awful  in  their 
initial  hardness.  They  are  all  questions.  Arithmetic  is  the  most  audacious 
interrogator  I  ever  knew.  But  at  the  end  of  the  arithmetic,  in  some  cases,  there 
is  a  key.  What  different  reading  !  There  is  not  a  question  in  the  whole  key 
unless  it  be  at  the  beginning  of  an  answer,  and  who,  having  read  the  answer, 
does  not  feel  how  easy  it  was  to  have  worked  out  the  sum  after  all  if  one  had 
only  taken  pains  enough  at  the  beginning  ?  At  the  same  time  there  is  a  strong 
disposition  just  to  appropriate  what  the  key  says,  and  then,  perhaps,  to  appear 
before  the  spectacled  master  as  if  we  had  never  heard  of  such  a  thing  as  a  key. 
That  would  be  illegitimate  in  arithmetic.  There  have  been  young  arithmeticians 
who  have  been  guilty  of  that  meanness.  But  we  are  called  to  look  at  the  key  in 
open  day ;  we  are  referred  to  the  key ;  we  are  invited  and  challenged  to  peruse 
it,  and  then  to  go  back  with  the  key  in  our  hand  to  work  out  all  the  mystery 
of  the  lock.  This  is  what  Jerome  did ;  so  he  did  not  hesitate  to  take  out  the 
word  "  salvation  "  in  the  second  verse  and  put  in  the  word  "  Jesus,"  and  say 
with  unction  and  thankfulness,  "  Behold,  God  is  my  Jesus."  "  His  name  shall 
be  called  Jesus,  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins."  (Lbid.)  Salva- 
tion, the  possession  of  God  : — If  there  is  a  man  or  a  woman  that  thinks  of  salvation 
as  if  it  were  merely  a  shutting  up  of  some  material  hell,  or  the  dodging  round 
a  corner,  so  as  to  escape  some  external  consequence  of  transgression,  let  him 
or  her  learn  this :  the  possession  of  God  is  salvation ;  that  and  nothing  else. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  God  our  salvation: — The  prophet  has  been  looking 
forward  through  times  of  darkness  and  captivity  to  the  coming  day  of  light  and 
freedom ;  and  in  the  hymn  of  which  our  text  is  the  keynote  he  shows  what  will 
be  the  spirit  of  the  new  age,  what  the  prevailing  thoughts  and  emotions  of  the 
time.  It  is  an  exultant  song,  but  without  a  word  of  self-congratulation.  It  is 
the  keynote  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  and  the  regeneration  of  society  for 
which  ardent  spirits  long  will  not  be  reached  until  this  old  song  become  again 
a  voice  of  the  time.  1.  We  are  far  enough  from  it  now.  We  have  the  song  in 
our  Bibles,  we  quote  it  in  our  pulpits,  we  sing  it  in  our  church  services,  but  it 
is  not  in  our  modern  life.  There  is  nothing  of  it  in  the  current  literature.  It  is 
the  function  of  the  poet  to  give  voice  to  the  nobler  thoughts  and  emotions  of  his 


chap,  xn.]  ISAIAH.  347 

time.  Now  can  you  imagine  a  poet  of  our  times  bursting  out  into  a  song  like 
that ;  and  if  he  did,  would  the  editors  of  our  first-class  reviews  be  eager  to  glorify 
their  pages  with  it  ?  Instead  of  exultation  in  the  name  of  God,  there  is  all  eager- 
ness to  avoid  it.  It  is  not  that  the  age  is  indifferent :  there  is  much  real  earnest- 
ness. The  word  "  salvation  "  is  not  much  in  vogue ;  but  the  thing  meant  is  by 
no  means  despised.  If  the  spirit  of  earnestness  now  abroad  had  been  foreseen 
fifty  years  ago,  men  would  have  thought  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  verily 
at  hand  at  last.  But  now,  here  all  around  us,  is  the  earnestness — philanthropic, 
moral,  even  spiritual,  earnestness  to  a  considerable  extent ;  but  where  is  the 
kingdom  ?  Alas,  it  still  seems  very  far  away  !  2.  We  are  better  than  we  were. 
Year  by  year  there  is  some  improvement.  But  not  nearly  enough.  The  end 
will  not  be  brought  within  sight  till  the  spirit  of  this  old  song  comes  back  to  us ; 
till  the  nation  as  a  nation,  not  one  here  and  there  among  the  people,  but  the 
people  as  a  people,  look  upwards  to  the  hills  from  whence  cometh  their  aid ;  till 
the  inhabitant  on  every  side  cries  out,  "  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation."  3.  Let 
it  be  remembered  that  trust  in  God  does  not  mean  neglect  of  ordinary  means. 
We  who  believe  in  God  are  thoroughly  with  the  humanitarians  so  far  a3  they  go. 
We  believe  with  them  in  heredity  and  in  its  power  for  evil  and  for  good  ;  only 
we  do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  inheritance  of  evil  so  terrible  that  the  grace 
of  God  cannot  reach  and  save  its  victim,  nor  any  inheritance  of  ancestral  noble- 
ness so  excellent  that  the  grace  of  God  is  not  needed  to  make  and  keep  pure,  and 
to  raise  to  still  higher  things.  We  believe  in  education,  in  refinement,  in  progress 
of  all  kinds,  in  all  processes  of  evolution  which  are  moving  in  the  right  direction, 
onwards  and  upwards ;  only  we  recognise  that  none  of  these,  nor  all  of  them 
together,  quite  meet  the  case,  or  mean  salvation.  There  remain  with  us  mystery, 
unsolved ;  sin,  crying  for  forgiveness  and  cleansing ;  sorrow,  scarce  abated  or 
diminished  ;  death,  with  all  its  victory — mystery,  sin,  sorrow,  death :  all  pre- 
sent, patent  facts,  not  to  be  disputed,  not  to  be  conquered  by  the  freest  education, 
or  the  highest  culture  ;  and  then  there  is  judgment  to  come,  to  which  the  con- 
science is  a  witness  not  in  any  case  to  bo  for  ever  silenced,  though  it  may  be 
hushed  and  quieted  for  a  time ;  and  there  is  the  great  eternity,  the  thought  of 
which  God  has  put  into  our  hearts.  When  we  look  at  these  things  we  see  our 
need,  not  of  education  merely,  but  of  salvation,  and  heart  and  flesh  cry  out 
for  God.  4.  But  is  not  this  the  watchword  of  the  Churches  ?  Do  not  they 
sufficiently  represent  the  Divine  factor  in  the  world's  salvation  ?  Would  that 
they  did.  Look,  first,  at  the  national  Church.  What  is  its  great  message  T 
Is  it,  "  Behold,  God  is  thy  salvation  "  ?  What  we  all  want  is  to  be  so  filled  with 
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  so  thoroughly  saved  ourselves,  that  the  keynote  of  every 
minister's  sermon,  and  of  every  Christian's  life  shall  be,  "  Behold,  God  is  my 
salvation."  5.  There  is,  indeed,  a  human  side  of  Divine  truth  which  is  of  very 
great  importance.  If  God  is  to  be  my  salvation,  He  must  be  in  touch  with  me. 
If  He  show  Himself  to  me,  it  must  be  in  my  likeness ;  if  He  speak  to  me,  it  must 
be  in  my  language ;  if  He  act  on  me,  it  must  be  through  my  faculties  and  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  of  my  being.  He  is  the  God  of  nature  as  well  as  of 
grace.  But  important  as  it  is  to  show  the  Gospel  natural,  it  is  far  more  import- 
ant to  hold  fast  to  the  supernatural.  (J.  Monro  Gibson,  D.D.)  God  the 
souTa  salvation  : — A  character  in  a  modern  book  says,  "  I  said  I  would  leave 
the  saving  of  my  soul  to  Him  that  made  my  soul ;  it  was  in  right  good  keeping 
there  I'd  warrant."  Man's  Saviour  Divine: — Dr.  Mason  of  America  said — "I 
need  such  a  Saviour ;  for  I  would  not  trust  my  soul  to  the  hands  or  heart  of  the 
brightest  seraph  that  burns  before  the  eternal  throne."  Full  assurance  of  salva- 
tion:— Mrs.  Edwards,  wife  of  President  Edwards,  says,  "In  1742  I  sought  and 
obtained  the  full  assurance  of  faith.  I  cannot  find  language  to  express  how 
certain  the  everlasting  love  of  God  appeared  ;  the  everlasting  mountains  and 
hills  were  but  shadows  to  it.  My  safety  and  happiness  and  eternal  enjoyment 
of  God's  immutable  love,  seemed  as  durable  and  unchangeable  as  God  Himself. 
Melted  and  overcome  by  the  sweetness  of  this  assurance,  I  fell  into  a  great  flood 
of  tears,  and  could  not  forbear  weeping  aloud.  The  presence  of  God  was  so  near 
and  so  real  that  I  seemed  scarcely  conscious  of  anything  else.  My  soul  was 
filled  and  overwhelmed  with  light  and  love  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  seemed 
just  ready  to  go  away  from  the  body.  This  exaltation  of  soul  subsided  into  a 
heavenly  calm  and  rest  of  soul  in  God,  which  was  even  sweeter  than  what  pre- 
ceded it."  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid. — Our  liability  to  fear,  and  tha 
power  of   faith   to    overcome   it : — Naturally   any   creature   must    be   liable    to 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat    in. 

fear.  The  finite  nature,  however  exalted,  must  always  feel  itself  trans- 
cended and  surrounded  by  the  infinite  Unknown.  There  can  be  only  one 
Being  in  the  universe  absolutely  and  for  ever  free  from  that  liability — He 
who  knows  everything,  and  who  controls  everything — who  knows  all  beings, 
agents,  facts,  possibilities,  and  rules  them.  We  are  manifestly  far  more  liable 
to  the  inroads  of  this  fear  than  those  creatures  who  have  never  fallen.     I.  The 

GREAT  MYSTERIES  OF  EXISTENCB  HAVE  A  TENDENCY  TO  PRODUCE  FEAR.  Some- 
thing depends,  of  course,  on  the  susceptibility  of  the  individual ;  a  strong  practical 
nature  is  not  so  much  affected  by  mysteries  ;  but  there  are  few  thoughtful  persona 
who  do  not  sometimes  feel  the  shadow  of  them  on  the  path  ;  and  the  continual 
contemplation  of  them  does  not  irradiate  or  dissolve  them  ;  they  become  only 
more  impenetrable  and  more  densely  dark,  and  then  comes  the  fear  lest  this 
aspect  of  them  should  never  be  relieved,  lest  they  should  be  unfathomable  and 
unconquerable  for  ever.  1.  Has  not  every  thoughtful  mind  bowed  and  almost 
trembled  before  the  great  mystery  into  which  so  many  others  may  be  resolved — 
the  existence  of  evil  in  the  universe,  under  the  government  of  an  infinitely  power- 
ful and  infinitely  benevolent  Being  ?  We  have,  indeed,  to  consider  that  along 
with  sin  was  introduced  the  Gospel — the  glorious,  all-sufficient  remedy,  by  which 
ein  is  to  be  taken  away  and  purity  restored ;  but  they  exist  together.  The 
remedy,  although  we  have  the  utmost  confidence  in  its  perfect  sufficiency,  does 
not  destroy  the  disease  in  a  moment ;  it  struggles  with  it,  and  overcomes  it  only 
by  slow  degrees,  and  in  some  instances  the  disease  seems  to  return  with  increasing 
virulence,  and  to  re-assert  its  supremacy  after  the  cure  has  been  more  than  half 
effected ;  while,  in  a  multitude  of  other  instances,  the  remedy  never  takes  effect 
at  all,  and  whole  generation*  of  human  beings  are  swept  away  by  death,  in  a 
moral  condition  that  augurs  ill  for  any  future  happiness.  He  who  can  say  that 
he  has  had  no  difficulties  with  such  a  subject,  only  shows  that  he  has  had  no 
thoughts  about  it.  And  yet  it  is  not  at  all  desirable  to  be  under  the  influence 
of  this  oppression  of  evil ;  it  is  very  desirable,  and  quite  possible,  to  rise  superior 
to  it.  But  how  ?  "I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid."  Many  have  tried  to  reach 
the  ground  of  satisfaction  by  knowledge.  They  have  said,  "  I  will  know,  and 
not  be  afraid  "  ;  but  they  have  had  no  success.  2.  There  is  great  mystery  also 
about  the  plan  of  Divine  providence  in  this  world.  We  see  glimpses  of  Divine 
meaning  shining  out  of  the  plan  at  intervals,  and  we  make  our  way  with  certainty 
to  some  of  the  leading  principles  of  that  providence.  We  are  sure,  e.g.,  that  God 
is  the  friend  and  protector  of  the  righteous  man,  and  yet,  see  how  some  righteous 
men  are  tried !  And  see,  on  the  other  hand,  how  ungodly  men  rise  into  influence 
sometimes.  If  we  gaze  upon  God's  great  providence  in  the  hope  of  being  able 
to  scan  its  parts  and  explain  all  its  movements,  we  shall  be  sadly  disappointed. 
But  if  we  cease  from  the  vain  attempt  to  understand  the  complexities  of  pro- 
vidence and,  looking  above  all  its  visible  movements,  rest  our  faith  on  Him  who 
conducts  them  all,  we  shall  begin  to  have  peace.  It  would  be  easy  to  mention 
many  other  providential  mysteries  which  are  very  appalling  and  perplexing  to 
the  natural  understanding.  Do  you  say,  It  is  all  according  to  law  ?  But  are 
you  not  afraid  as  you  see  how  stern  and  unrelenting  law  is  ?  Where  is  your  relief  ? 
Will  you  try  to  vanquish  nature  and  providence  by  thought  ?  Will  you  resist 
and  seek  deliverance  by  strength  ?  Will  you  be  wiser  and  trust  ?  Ah,  that  is 
relief  !  II.  There  are  certain  possibilities,  the  thought  of  which  has 
a  tendency  to  darken  the  spirit  with  fear.  Unsatisfied  with  past  and 
present,  we  cast  our  hopes  always  within  the  veil  of  the  great  to-morrow ;  but 
our  fears  go  with  our  hopes.  And  it  is  not  merely  that  there  are  such  bare 
possibilities  in  every  man's  future,  but  these  are  always  shaping  themselves  into 
probabilities.  Perhaps  there  is  no  one  person  who  cannot  fancy,  and  who  is  not 
sometimes  almost  compelled  to  expect,  some  particular  form  of  ill,  something 
which  he  shrinks  from.  What  is  the  remedy  ?  "I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid.' 
There  is  yet  one  dread  possibility,  the  contemplation  of  which  is  more  appalling 
than  the  very  worst  of  earthly  calamities — the  possibility  of  spiritual  failure, 
ending  in  a  final  exclusion  from  the  presence  of  God  and  the  joys  of  the  blessed. 
There  is  but  one  way  of  grappling  with  and  overcoming  this  great  fear.  (A. 
Raleigh,  D.D.)  Trust  in  relation  to  the  will : — A  Christian  lady  of  my  acquaint- 
ance was  at  one  time  in  her  life  an  apparently  hopeless  victim  of  doubts  and 
fears.  She  knew  she  ought  to  trust  the  Lord,  and  longed  to  do  it,  but  she  seemed 
utterly  unable.  After  a  long  period  of  suffering  from  this  cause,  she  finally  con- 
fided ner  difficulties  to  a  friend,  who,  as  it  mercifully  happened,  understood  this 


chap,  xn.]  ISAIAH.  349 

secret  concerning  the  will,  and  who  told  her  that  if  in  her  will  she  would  decide 
to  trust,  and,  putting  all  her  will  power  into  trusting,  would  utterly  ignore  her 
feelings,  she  would  sooner  or  later  get  the  victory  over  all  her  doubts.  The  poor 
doubter  listened  in  silence  for  a  few  minutes,  and  then,  drawing  a  long  breath, 
said  with  emphasis,  "  Yes,  I  see  it.  If  I  choose  in  my  will  to  trust,  I  really  am 
trusting,  even  though  all  my  feelings  say  contrary.  I  do  cbbose  to  trust  now. 
I  will  trust ;  I  will  not  be  afraid  again."  As  she  came  to  this  decision,  and  thus 
deliberately  put  her  will  on  the  side  of  God's  will,  all  the  darkness  vanished,  and 
her  soul  was  brought  out  into  the  glorious  light  of  the  Gospel ;  a  light  which  was 
never  dimmed  again,  until  her  eyes  were  opened  in  the  presence  of  the  King. 
(Mrs.  H.  W.  Smith.)  Trust  in  God  : — "  How  do  you  know  that  you  are  ready 
to  appear  before  God  ?  "  was  once  asked  of  one  dying  ;  and  the  answer  was, 
"  Sir,  God  knows  that  I  have  taken  Him  at  His  word."  (Prof.  Laidlaw,  D.D.) 
Trusting  : — I  once  illustrated  the  act  of  faith  by  the  experience  of  a  friend  who 
was  in  an  upper  room  of  a  hotel  at  night  when  the  building  took  fire.  He  seized 
the  escape  rope  that  was  in  his  room,  swung  out  of  the  window,  and  lowered  him- 
self in  safety  to  the  side-walk.  He  had  a  good  opinion  of  that  rope  during  the 
day  when  he  saw  it  coiled  up  by  his  bedside,  but  it  was  only  an  opinion  ;  when 
he  believed  on  the  rope,  and  trusted  himself  to  the  rope,  it  saved  his  life.  (T.  L. 
Cuyler,  D.D.)  A  definition  of  faith  : — An  intensely  interesting  incident  waa 
related  lately  by  Dr.  J.  G.  Paton  of  a  discovery  of  a  term  in  the  language  of  Aniwa 
for  "  Faith."  It  seems  that  for  a  long  time  no  equivalent  could  be  found,  and 
the  work  of  Bible  translation  was  paralysed  for  want  of  so  fundamental  and  oft- 
recurring  a  term.  The  natives  apparently  regarded  the  verb  "  to  hear  "  as 
equivalent  to  belief.  For  instance,  suppose  a  native  were  asked  whether  he 
heard  a  certain  statement.  Should  he  credit  the  statement  he  would  reply, 
"  Yes,  I  heard  it,"  but  should  he  disbelieve  it,  he  would  answer,  "  No,  I  did  not 
hear  it,"  meaning  not  that  his  ears  had  failed  to  catch  the  words,  but  that  he 
did  not  regard  them  as  true.  This  definition  of  faith  was  obviously  insufficient — ■ 
many  passages,  such  as  "  faith  cometh  by  hearing,"  would  be  impossible  of 
translation  through  so  meagre  a  channel ;  and  prayer  was  made  continually 
that  God  would  supply  the  missing  link.  No  effort  had  been  spared  in  interrogat- 
ing the  most  intelligent  native  pundits,  but  all  in  vain  ;  none  caught  the  hidden 
meaning  of  the  word  sought  by  the  missionary.  One  day  Dr.  Paton  was  sitting 
in  his  room  anxiously  pondering.  He  sat  on  an  ordinary  chair,  his  feet  resting 
on  the  floor ;  just  then  an  intelligent  native  entered  the  room,  and  the  thought 
flashed  to  the  missionary  to  ask  the  all-absorbing  question  yet  once  again  in 
a  new  light.  Was  he  not  resting  on  that  chair  ?  Would  that  attitude  lend 
itself  to  the  discovery  T  "  Taea,"  said  Dr.  Paton,  "  what  am  I  doing  now  ?  " 
"  Koihae  ana,  Misi  "  ("You're  sitting  down,  Misi  "),  the  native  replied.  Then 
the  missionary  drew  up  his  feet  and  placed  them  upon  the  bar  of  the  chair  just 
above  the  floor,  and,  leaning  back  upon  the  chair  in  an  attitude  of  repose,  asked, 
"  What  am  I  doing  now  ?  "  "  Fakarongrongo,  Misi  "  ("  You  are  leaning  wholly," 
or,  "  You  have  lifted  yourself  from  every  other  support ").  "  That's  it,"  shouted 
the  missionary,  with  an  exultant  cry  ;  and  a  sense  of  holy  joy  awed  him  as  ha 
realised  that  his  prayer  had  been  so  fully  answered.  To  lean  on  Jesus  wholly 
and  only  is  surely  the  true  meaning  of  appropriating  or  saving  faith.  And  now, 
"  Fakarongrongo  Iesu  ea  anea  moure  "  ("  Leaning  on  Jesus  unto  eternal  life," 
or,  "for  all  the  things  of  eternal  life"),  is  the  happy  experience  of  those  Christian 
islanders,  as  it  is  of  all  who  thus  cast  themselves  unreservedly  on  the  Saviour 
of  the  world  for  salvation.  The  Lord  Jehovah  is  my  strength  and  my 
song. — Jehovah  the  strength  of  His  people : — 1.  *He  is  the  strength  of  my 
understanding,  whereby  I  discern  and  acknowledge  the  great  mysteries  of 
salvation,  and  am  enabled  to  perceive  the  way  in  which  I  ought  to  go.  2.  He 
is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  of  which  He  takes  the  direction,  working  in  me  to 
will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure  ;  giving  the  willing  mind,  which  makes  H13 
work  go  forward  with  alacrity  and  cheerfulness.  3.  He  is  the  strength  of  my 
affections,  which  He  preserves  from  becoming  languid  and  feeble,  and  Axes  them 
upon  the  proper  objects  on  which  they  ought  to  terminate.  4.  He  is  the  strength  of 
my  graces,  who  establisheth  my  faith,  enliveneth  my  love,  animateth  my  hope  and 
patience ;  who  enableth  me  to  resist  my  spiritual  enemies,  to  vanquish  temptations, 
to  mortify  corruptions,  to  perform  duties,  to  sustain  afflictions,  and  to  surmount 
all  the  obstacles  that  lie  in  the  way  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  (B.  Macculloch.) 
The  joy  of  the  Gospel : — At  least  twenty-one  times  in  his  letter  to  the  Philippi&ns, 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

written  in  prison,  does  St.  Paul  use  such  words  as  joy,  rejoice,  gladnesa,  while 
the  whole  letter  is  charged  with  the  spirit  of  joy.  This  is  the  real  spirit  of  the 
Gospel.  (Great  Thoughts.)  Rejoicing  in  God: — When  the  poet  Carpani 
asked  his  friend  Haydn  how  it  happened  that  his  church  music  was  so  cheerful, 
the  beautiful  answer  was :  "  I  cannot  make  it  otherwise ;  I  write  according  to 
the  thoughts  I  feel.  When  I  think  upon  God,  my  heart  is  so  full  of  joy  that  the 
notes  dance  and  leap,  as  it  were,  from  my  pen  ;  and  since  God  has  given  me  a 
cheerful  heart,  it  will  be  pardoned  me  that  I  serve  Him  with  a  cheerful  spirit." 
(Ibid.)  Jehovah  His  people's  song  : — The  wife  of  Hawthorne,  the  American 
writer,  said  in  a  letter  to  her  mother  :  "  Sunday  afternoon  the  birds  were  sweetly 
mad,  and  the  lovely  rage  of  song  drove  them  hither  and  thither,  and  swelled  their 
breasts  amain.  I  kept  saying,  '  Yes,  yes,  I  know  it,  dear  little  maniacs,  I  know 
it !  There  never  was  such  an  air,  such  a  day,  such  a  God  !  I  know  it !  I  know 
it.'  But  they  would  not  be  pacified.  Their  throats  must  have  been  made  of 
fine  gold,  or  they  would  have  been  rent  with  such  rapture- quakes."  Human 
beings  are  compelled  to  declare  in  song  the  ecstasy  which  is  at  times  in  their  souls 
because  of  the  goodness  of  God.  They  cannot  help  being  tunefully  demon- 
strative when  the  Infinite  Being  comes  into  their  souls,  and  makes  Himself  known 
as  a  gracious  visitant  by  the  plenitude  of  blessing  He  bestows.  If  the  great 
visitation  be  to  them  on  the  week-day,  they  give  praise  for  it  in  the  music  which 
attested  their  jubilant  enthusiasm  on  the  Sabbath.  If  the  great  visitation  comes 
to  them  on  the  Sabbath,  they  can  scaroely  tell  whether  they  belong  to  earth  or 
to  the  paradise  never  darkened  by  evening  shadows,  and  in  their  singing  they 
endeavour  to  emulate  "  the  voice  of  harpers,  harping  with  their  harps."  (Gates 
of  Imagery.) 

Ver.  3.  Therefore  with  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of 
salvation.  —  Drawing  water  from  the  wells  of  salvation:  —  The  Talmud ists 
refer  the  words,  "  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation," 
to  the  custom  of  making  an  oblation  of  water  on  the  last  day  of  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles.  But  as  it  is  not  prescribed  in  the  law  of  Moses,  it  has  been  doubted 
whether  it  dates  back  earlier  than  the  times  of  the  Maccabees.  It  is,  however, 
at  least  as  probable  that  the  Asmonean  princes  should  have  restored  an  ancient 
as  ordained  a  new  rite  ;  such  a  rite,  to  acknowledge  God's  gift  of  the  water  without 
which  harvest  and  vintage  must  have  failed,  would  always  have  been  a  likely 
accompaniment  of  the  feast  in  which  these  were  celebrated  ;  and  the  like  acta 
of  Samuel  and  Elijah,  though  for  different  purposes,  perhaps  go  in  confirmation 
of  the  ancient  existence  of  such  a  practice.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The 
prophecy  and  its  fulfilment : — Two  events,  separated  from  each  other  by  fifteen 
hundred  years,  bear  upon  these  words.  One  was  the  origin  of  the  peculiar  form 
of  this  prophecy,  the  other  contains  its  interpretation  and  claims  to  be  its  fulfil- 
ment. 1.  The  wandering  march  of  the  children  of  Israel  had  brought  them  to 
Rephidim,  where  there  was  no  water.  Their  parched  lips  opened  to  murmur 
and  rebel  against  their  unseen  Leader  and  His  visible  lieutenant.  At  his  wits' 
end,  Moses  cried  to  God,  and  the  answer  is  the  command  to  take  with  him  the 
elders  of  Israel,  and  with  his  rod  in  his  hand  to  go  up  to  Horeb  ;  and  then  come 
grand  words,  "  Behold,  I  will  stand  before  thee  there  upon  the  rock,  and  thoti 
shalt  smite  the  rock,  and  there  shall  come  water  out  of  it."  It  is  not  the  rock, 
nor  the  rod,  nor  the  uplifted  hand,  but  it  is  the  presence  of  God  which  makes 
the  sparkling  streams  pour  out.  How  the  thirsty  men  would  drink,  how  gladly 
they  would  fling  themselves  on  the  ground  and  glue  their  lips  to  the  glancing 
blessing,  or  dip  their  cups  and  skins  into  it,  as  it  flashed  along  !  Many  a  psalm 
and  prophecy  refer  to  this  old  story,  and  clearly  Isaiah  had  it  in  his  mind  here, 
for  the  whole  context  is  full  of  allusions  to  the  history  of  the  Exodus,  as  a  symbol 
of  the  better  deliverance  from  a  worse  bondage,  which  the  "  Root  of  Jesse  "  was 
to  effect.  The  lyric  burst  of  praise,  of  which  the  text  is  part,  carries  on  the  same 
allusion.  The  joyful  band  of  pilgrims  returning  from  this  captivity  sing  the 
"  Song  of  Moses,"  chanted  first  by  the  banks  of  the  Red  Sea,  "  The  Lord  is  my 
strength  and  song,  and  He  is  become  my  salvation."  This  distinct  quotation, 
which  immediately  precedes  our  text,  makes  the  reference  in  it  which  we  have 
pointed  out,  most  probable  and  natural.  The  connection  of  these  words  with 
the  story  in  the  Exodus  was  recognised  by  the  Jews  at  a  very  early  period,  as 
is  plain  from  their  use  in  the  remarkable  ritual  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  That 
festival  was  originally  appointed  to  preserve  the  remembrance  of  Israel's  nomad 


chap,  xn.]  ISAIAH.  351 

life  in  the  wilderness.  In  the  later  days  of  the  nation,  ft  number  of  symbolical 
observances  were  added  to  those  of  the  original  institution.  Daily,  amidst  loud 
jubilations,  the  priests  wound  in  long  procession  down  the  slope  from  the  temple 
to  the  fountain  of  Siloam  in  the  valley  beneath,  and  there  drew  water  in  golden 
urns.  They  bore  it  back,  the  crowd  surging  around  them,  and  then  amidst  the 
blast  of  trumpets,  and  a  tumult  of  rejoicing,  they  poured  it  on  the  altar,  while 
thousands  of  voices  chanted  Isaiah's  words,  "  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out 
of  the  wells  of  salvation."  2.  So  much  for  the  occasion  of  the  prophecy ;  now 
for  its  meaning  and  fulfilment.  Nearly  eight  hundred  years  have  passed.  Again 
the  festival  has  come  round.  For  seven  days  the  glad  ceremonial  has  been  per- 
formed. For  the  last  time  the  priestly  procession  has  gone  down  the  rocky  road  ; 
for  the  last  time  the  vases  have  been  filled  at  the  cool  fountain  below ;  for  the 
last  time  the  bright  water  has  been  poured  out  sparkling  in  the  sunlight ;  for  the 
last  time  the  shout  of  joy  has  risen  and  fallen,  and  as  the  words  of  the  ancient 
chant  were  dying  on  the  ear,  a  sudden  stir  began  among  the  crowd,  and  from 
the  midst  of  them,  as  they  parted  for  his  passage,  came  a  young  man,  rustic  in 
appearance,  and  there,  before  all  the  silence-stricken  multitude,  and  priests  with 
their  empty  urns,  "  in  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of  the  feast,  Jesus  stood  and 
cried,  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me,  and  drink."  Surely  such  words, 
in  such  a  connection,  at  such  a  time,  from  such  lips,  are  meant  to  point  the  path 
to  the  true  understanding  of  the  text.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  wells  of 
salvation  : — I.  Consider  what  we  have  to  understand  by  thb  wells  op  salvation. 
1.  We  are  not  to  be  content  with  any  shallow  and  narrow  interpretation  of  either 
idea  in  that  phrase.  No  doubt  "  salvation  "  in  the  Old  Testament  often  means 
merely  outward  deliverance  from  material  peril.  We  shall  not  strain  the  mean- 
ing here,  if  we  take  salvation  almost  in  the  fully  developed  New  Testament  sense, 
as  including,  negatively,  the  deliverance  from  all  evil,  both  evil  of  sin  and  evil 
of  sorrow,  and,  positively,  the  endowment  with  all  good,  good  both  of  holiness 
and  happiness,  which  God  can  bestow  or  man  receive.  2.  Then  if  so,  God  Himself 
is,  in  the  deepest  truth,  the  Well  of  Salvation.  The  figure  of  our  text  does  not 
point  to  a  well  so  much  as  to  a  spring.  It  is  a  source,  not  a  reservoir.  So  we 
have  but  to  recall  the  deep  and  wonderful  words  of  the  psalmist :  "  With  Thee 
is  the  fountain  of  life,"  and  others  not  less  profound,  of  the  prophet:  "  They  have 
forsaken  Me,  the  fountain  of  living  waters,"  in  order  to  be  led  up  to  the  essential 
meaning  of  this  text.  Salvation  has  its  origin  in  the  depths  of  God's  own 
nature.  It  wells  up  as  of  itself,  not  drawn  forth  by  anything  in  us,  but  pouring 
out  as  from  an  inner  impulse  in  His  own  deep  heart.  Surely,  too,  if  God  be  the 
fountain  of  salvation,  the  essence  of  salvation  must  be  His  communication  of 
Himself.  The  water  is  the  same  in  the  fountain  as  in  the  pitcher.  But,  God 
being  the  true  fountain  of  salvation,  notice  that  Jesus  Christ  plainly  and  decisively 
puts  Himself  in  the  place  that  belongs  to  God  :  "  If  any  man  thirst,"  &c. 
Think  of  the  extraordinary  claims  involved  in  that  invitation.  Every  craving 
of  heart  and  mind,  all  longings  for  love  and  wisdom,  for  purity  and  joy,  for  strength 
and  guidance,  He  assumes  to  be  able  to  slake  by  the  gift  of  Himself.  3.  One 
other  remark  may  be  made  on  this  part  of  our  subject.  The  first  word  of  our 
text  carries  us  back  to  something  preceding,  on  which  the  drawing  water  with 
joy  is  founded.  That  something  is  expressed  immediately  before  :  "  The  Lord 
Jehovah  is  my  strength  and  song,"  &c.  These  words  are  quoted  from  Moses* 
song  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  there  point  to  the  one  definite  act  by  which  God  had 
saved  the  people  from  their  pursuers.  In  like  manner,  we  have  to  look  to  a 
definite  historical  act  by  which  the  fountain  of  salvation  has  been  opened  for 
us,  and  our  glad  drawing  therefrom  has  been  made  possible.  The  mission  and 
work  of  Jesus  Christ,  His  incarnation,  passion  and  death,  are  the  means  by  which 
the  sealed  fountain  has  been  opened.  For  men,  Jesus  Christ  is  as  the  river  which 
flows  from  the  closed  and  land-locked  sea  of  the  infinite  Divine  nature.  He  is 
for  us  the  only  source,  the  inexhaustible,  the  perennial  source— like  some  spring 
never  hot  or  muddy,  never  frozen,  never  walled  in,  never  sinking  one  hair- 
breadth in  its  basin,  though  armies  drink,  and  ages  pass.  II.  Consider  again, 
what  is  thb  way  op  drawing  from  the  wells  of  salvation.  1.  Christ  has  taught 
ns  what  drawing"  is.  To  the  Samaritan  woman  He  said,  "Thou  wouldest 
have  asked  of  Him,  and  He  would  have  given  thee  living  water."  So,  then,  Draw- 
ing is  Asking.  To  the  crowds  in  the  temple  courts  He  said,  "  Let  him  come 
unto  Me  and  drink."  So,  then,  Drawing  is  Coming.  To  the  listeners  by  the 
Sea  of  Galilee  He  said,  "  He  that  cometh  to  Me  shall  never  hunger ;  and  he  that 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

believeth  on  Me  shall  never  thirst."  So  Coming,  Asking,  Drawing,  are  all 
explained  by  Believing.  2.  Now  that  faith  which  is  thus  powerful,  must  fasten 
on  a  definite  historical  fact.  The  faith  which  draws  from  the  fountain  of  salva- 
tion is  not  a  vague  faith  in  generalities  about  God's  goodness  and  the  like,  but 
it  grasps  God  as  revealed  and  becoming  our  salvation  in  the  Person  and  work 
of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  The  words  preceding  our  text  suggest  another  characteristic 
of  the  faith  which  really  draws  water  from  the  fountain  :  "  He  is  become  my 
salvation."  That  is  to  say,  this  believing  grasp  of  Christ  manifested  in  a  definite 
historical  act  is  an  intensely  personal  thing.  III.  Consider,  too,  the  joy  of  thb 
wateb  dbawebs.  The  well  is  the  meeting-place  in  these  hot  lands,  where  the 
solitary  shepherds  from  the  pastures  and  the  maidens  from  the  black  camels' 
hair  tents  meet  in  the  cool  evening,  and  ringing  laughter  and  cheery  talk  go  round. 
Or  the  allusion  may  be  rather  to  the  joy,  aa  of  escape  from  death,  with  which 
some  exhausted  travellers  press  towards  the  palm  trees  on  the  horizon  that  tell 
of  a  spring  in  the  desert,  and  when  they  have  reached  it,  crowd  to  the  fountain 
and  drink  greedily,  no  matter  how  hot  and  muddy  it  may  be.  So  jubilant  is 
the  heart  of  the  man  whose  soul  is  filled  and  feasted  with  the  God  of  his  salvation, 
and  the  salvation  of  his  God.  Such  a  man  has  all  the  sources  and  motives  for 
joy  which  the  heart  can  ask.  (Ibid.)  Salvation  :  how  to  get  it: — People  have 
given  many  answers  to  the  question,  If  God  be  the  fountain  of  salvation,  how 
are  we  to  get  the  water  ?  If  I  may  say  so,  pumps  of  all  sorts  have  been  tried, 
and  there  has  been  much  weary  working  of  arms  at  the  handles,  and  much  jangling 
of  buckets  and  nothing  brought  up.  The  old  word  is  true,  with  a  new  application 
to  all  who  try  in  any  shape  to  procure  salvation  by  any  work  of  their  own  :  "  Thou 
hast  nothing  to  draw  with,  and  the  well  is  deep."  But  there  is  no  need  for  all 
this  profitless  work.  It  is  as  foolish  as  it  would  be  to  spend  money  and  pains 
in  sinking  a  well  in  some  mountainous  country,  where  every  hillside  is  seamed 
with  watercourses,  and  all  that  is  needed  is  to  put  one  end  of  any  kind  of  wooden 
spout  into  the  "  burn  "  and  your  vessels  under  the  other.  The  well  of  salvation 
is  an  artesian  well  that  needs  no  machinery  to  raise  the  water,  but  only  pitchers 
to  receive  it  as  it  rises.  {Ibid.)  Christ's  ordinances: — I.  What  is  undebstood 
by  a  means  of  salvation.  It  is  that  by  and  through  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
doth  by  His  spirit  convey  grace  and  salvation  into  a  soul.  These  means  are 
some  outward,  some  inward ;  some  ordinary,  others  extraordinary.  II.  Wha» 
thbsb  means  of  salvation  abb.  1.  The  inward  means  is  faith  (Heb.  iv.  2). 
This  ordinarily  requires  an  outward  means  to  work  it  by.  But  being  wrought, 
it  is  the  great  inward  means  of  communication  betwixt  Christ  and  the  soul. 
2.  Extraordinary  means  are  whatsoever  the  Lord  in  His  sovereign  wisdom  is 
pleased  to  make  use  of  extraordinarily  for  conveying  grace  into  the  hearts  of  His 
elect,  as  He  did  a  voice  from  heaven  for  the  conversion  of  Paul.  3.  The  outward 
and  ordinary  means  are  the  Lord's  own  ordinances  (Bom.  x.  14,  15).     (1)  In 

feneral,  all  the  ordinances  of  God  without  exception,  which  He  has  set  up  in 
[is  Church  for  that  end.  (2)  The  most  special  means  of  grace  and  salvation 
are  the  Word,  sacraments,  and  prayer.  III.  What  makes  any  ordinance  a 
means  of  okacb,  a  well  of  salvation,  out  of  which  one  may  in  faith  look  to  draw 
water  for  his  soul,  or  get  spiritual  good  by.  1.  No  ordinance  whatsoever  can 
avail  without  a  particular  blessing  ,*  for  the  efficacy  of  ordinances  is  not  natural, 
or  from  themselves.  2  Men's  institutions  or  ordinances,  in  respect  of  God,  are 
forbidden,  and  condemned  by  the  Lord's  word,  namely,  in  the  second  com- 
mandment. 3.  Men's  use  of  them  is  not  only  useless,  but  worse,  not  only  to 
no  good  purpose,  but  to  ill  purpose.  That  which  makes  any  ordinance  a  means 
of  grace  or  salvation,  is  Divine  institution  only  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  Therefore 
the  first  question  in  all  ordinances  ought  to  be,  Whose  is  this  image  and  super- 
scription ?  IV.  To  whom  the  Lobd's  ordinances  are  made  effectual. 
1.  Not  to  all  who  partake  of  them.  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to 
whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ?  "  Many  come  to  these  wells  who  never 
taste  of  the  water.  I  think  it  an  unwarrantable  expression,  that  all  God's 
ordinances  do  attain  their  end,  in  the  salvation  or  damnation  of  all  that  come 
under  them ;  for  damnation  is  not  the  end  of  any  of  God's  ordinances,  but  salva- 
tion. 2.  But  to  all  the  elect  they  are  effectual,  unto  whom  they  come  (Acts 
xiii.  48 ;  John  x.  26).  V.  Whence  the  efficacy  of  ordinances  proceeds. 
It  does  not  proceed  from  any  virtue  in  themselves,  or  in  him  that  administers 
them,  but  from  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  working  in  them  and  by  them  (1  Cor.  iii.  7). 
(T.  Boston,  D.D. )        The  wells  of  salvation  : — I.  The  water.   The  entire  text  refers 


chap,  xii.]  ISAIAH.  35  J 

to  the  great  work  of  God  in  saving  sinners  by  the  obedience  and  death  of  His 
Son.  1.  Water  is  essential  to  life.  2.  Water  is  purifying  in  its  influence.  3.  It 
has  refreshing  and  fertilising  properties.  In  this  country  where  water  abounds 
we  can  hardly  appreciate  this.  In  the  East  a  draught  of  cold  water  was  frequently 
invaluable.  It  was  not  only  valuable  to  the  body  of  man,  but  fertilising  to  the 
earth.  In  this  part  of  the  world  we  have  too  much  water,  and  our  ingenuity 
is  taxed  to  drain  the  land,  but  in  the  East  ingenuity  would  be  stretched  to  irrigate 
it.  4.  It  is  a  thing  of  universal  adaptation.  There  are  some  persons  who  cannot 
take  milk,  others  cannot  take  different  kinds  of  food,  and  some  cannot  take 
vegetables  to  any  amount ;  and  so  on.  But  you  never  found  any  one  who  could 
do  without  water.  It  is  a  fact  that  not  only  can  none  of  the  human  race  do 
without  it,  but  all  the  human  race  can  take  it.  In  like  manner,  the  Gospe1  is 
for  every  class  and  condition  of  men.  II.  The  wells  of  salvation.  Wherever 
the  pure  Gospel  is  preached,  it  may  be  considered  one  of  the  wells  of  salvation. 
1.  Properly  speaking,  the  Deity  is  the  well  of  salvation.  Christ  is  the  great 
medium,  the  great  procuring  cause,  the  great  efficient  cause,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  the  water  of  life.  2.  Again,  the  Scriptures  of  truth  may  be  considered  well3 
of  salvation.  We  moreover  observe  that  in  an  emphatic  manner,  all  through 
the  Holy  Scriptures  of  revealed  truth,  Christ  is  preached,  and  they  are  thus  wella 
of  salvation.  3.  Further,  Christ  is  essentially  and  emphatically  the  well  of 
salvation.  III.  The  drawing  of  the  water.  1.  If  you  want  to  draw  water, 
you  must  come  near  to  the  well.  If  you  want  to  understand  something  about  Christ, 
you  must  come  to  the  Bible ;  you  must  listen  to  the  Gospel  faithfully  preached,  or, 
rather,  you  must  come  to  Christ  Jesus  Himself.  2.  There  must  be  a  personal  appli- 
cation. 3.  This  drawing  of  the  water  must  be  continuous.  That  is  a  remarkable 
passage  in  1  Pet.  ii.  4 —  To  whom  coming."  "Coming  "  denotes  continued  applica- 
tion. We  must  not  only  come  for  justification  and  sanctification  to  Christ,  but 
we  must  continue  to  come.  IV.  The  joy.  "  With  joy,"  &c.  No  wonder  when 
you  consider — 1.  The  unrestricted  freeness  of  the  Gospel.  2.  The  gratuitousness 
of  this  great  blessing.  3.  That  this  joy  inspires  a  glorious  hope  of  eternal  bliss. 
(Hugh  Allen,  M.A.)  A  discovery  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ  : — Let  us  consider 
the  feelings  which  a  discovery  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ  awakens  in  the  breasts 
of  believers.  I.  It  gives  joy  to  the  believing  sinner  when  he  first  dis- 
covers it.  II.  It  yields  joy  to  him  through  his  whole  life  afterwards. 
(G.  Innes.)  Wells  of  salvation : — I.  The  metaphor  by  which  salvation 
is  here  described.  "  Wells  of  salvation."  Water  is  a  favourite  emblem  in 
the  sacred  Scriptures  for  setting  forth  the  blessings  of  salvation,  especially  in  the 
writings  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets.  Salvation,  like  a  well,  is — 1.  Invisible 
in  its  source.  God  prepares  the  water  for  the  wells  in  hidden  springs.  Man 
can  make  a  well,  but  he  cannot  make  a  spring ;  so  men  may  form  systems  of 
religion  of  their  own,  but  they  are  only  wells  without  water.  Salvation  is  a  well 
of  God's  own  construction,  and  He  alone  from  His  own  hidden  resources  can  supply 
the  life-giving  water.  There  is  much  mystery  in  the  source  of  an  ordinary  well 
of  water,  yet  we  do  not  allow  our  inability  to  fully  understand  it  to  present  an 
insuperable  barrier  in  the  way  of  accepting  its  great  blessings ;  let  us  exercise 
the  same  common  sense  in  our  treatment  of  the  wells  of  salvation.  2.  Inex- 
haustible in  its  supply.  A  stream  may  be  dried  up,  a  river  may  fail  to  flow, 
a  cistern  may  be  exhausted,  but  a  well  is  fed  from  hidden  deep  springs.  In  the 
Gospel  of  Christ  there  is  enough  for  each,  enough  for  all,  enough  for  evermore. 
3.  Inestimable  in  its  service.  II.  The  means  by  which  salvation  is  to  bh 
obtained.  "With  joy  shall  ye  draw,"  &c.  It  is  not  enough  for  the  thirsty 
to  draw  near  to  a  well,  not  enough  to  look  into  it,  and  listen  to  the  music  of  its 
waters — an  effort  must  be  made,  it  must  be  appropriated.  1.  We  must  "  draw." 
God  provides  the  well,  but  we  must  use  the  hand  of  faith ;  by  the  rope  of  effort 
we  must  let  down  the  pitcher  of  desire — and  as  we  draw  the  blessing  up,  we  shall 
not  thank  the  instruments  by  which  we  obtain  the  water,  but  we  snail  thank 
Him  who  provided  it  so  freely  for  us.  2.  We  must  drink.  Not  enough  to  draw 
the  water  to  the  edge  of  the  well,  not  enough  to  lift  it  to  the  lips,  the  water  must 
be  drunk  as  well  as  drawn.  III.  The  spirit  in  which  salvation  is  to  be 
received.  "  With  joy,"  &c.  The  teaching  of  our  text  harmonises  with  the 
inductions  of  reason,  and  with  the  dictates  of  common  sense.  For  how  else  could 
we  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation  ?  Will  not  the  sufferer  go  gladly 
to  the  physician  who  has  the  ability  and  willingness  to  heal  ?  Will  not  the  faint- 
ing traveller  go  with  joy  to  the  well  he  discovers  close  by  T      (F.  W.  Brown.} 

23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xtl 

Drawing  water  from  the  wells  of  salvation: — The  question  naturally  arising  from 
these  words  is,  What  will  make  us  draw  water  with  joy  from  these  wells  ?  In 
general  we  might  remark,  that  these  being  styled  the  wells  of  salvation  is  a 
sufficient  reason  for  this  joy,  provided  it  is  kept  properly  in  view.  But  more 
particularly,  I  remark — I.  That  these  wells  must  be  kept  open  for  this  purpose. 
The  Church  of  Christ,  because  devoted  to  Him,  and  accessible  to  none  otheiy 
is  like  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed.  Not  so  the  ordinances  of  grace :  they 
are  accessible  to  all.  To  keep  these  open,  ministers  must  labour,  travail  as  in 
birth,  preach  the  Word,  be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season.  Pointed  careful 
attention  on  the  part  of  the  hearers,  accompanied  with  fervent  prayer,  must 
keep  them  open.  II.  They  must  be  kept  pure,  living,  running  clear  from  the 
throne.  No  admixture  to  foul  them  must  be  allowed.  No  addition  of  ours, 
nothing  kept  back.  III.  These  waters  must  be  tasted.  IV.  We  must  highly 
value  these  wells,  if  we  would  draw  water  from  them  with  joy.  V.  A  renewed 
application  to  these  wells  is  necessary  to  our  spiritual  comfort.  We  must 
continue  hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness.  This  application  may 
be  made  at  all  times,  and  in  every  state.  In  the  public  and  private  and  secret 
exercises  of  religion,  in  health  and  sickness,  in  the  prison  or  the  palace,  wherever 
God  is,  public  ordinances  must  be  preferred.  Application:  (1)  To  those  who 
are  employed  in  drawing  water  for  others ;  and  who,  in  order  to  this,  should 
draw  for  themselves,  that  they  may  be  successful  in  their  work.  Do  we  make 
it  our  study  to  speak  from  the  heart  to  the  heart  ?  (2)  To  those  who  think  these 
wells  are  dry  to  them.  What  is  the  reason  of  this  ?  Has  it  proceeded  from 
the  ministry  ?  Have  you  expected  from  them  what  you  should  have  from  their 
Master  ?  Have  you  never  thought  on  your  own  misimprovement  ?  Have  you 
prayed  that  these  wells  might  be  opened  to  you  ?  (3)  To  those  who  have  drawn, 
or  think  they  have  with  joy  drawn  water  from  the  wells  of  salvation.  How 
ardent  will  your  desires  be.  He  that  drinks  of  this  water  will  not  thirst  again. 
Inordinate  desires  after  the  world  will  be  quenched — they  will  be  subdued.  And 
here  the  fullest  satisfaction  will  be  obtained.  (.4.  Brown.)  The  wells  of 
salvation: — I.  The  wells  of  salvation.  The  value  of  the  water  yielded  by 
these  wells  is  found  in  the  saving  effects  to  be  met  with  in  those  who  come  hither 
to  draw  and  to  drink.  These  waters  impart  strength  to  the  worker,  courage 
to  the  timid,  joy  to  the  mourner,  refreshment  to  the  weary,  and  satisfaction  to 
the  dry  and  the  thirsty.  There  is  no  evil  in  the  spirit  that  this  water  will  not 
cure.  It  would  be  a  world's  wonder  if  God's  own  Spirit  could  not  make  man's 
spirit  as  lively  and  happy  as  its  inherent  limits  will  allow ;  as  happy  for  man 
as  God  has  been  happy  in  Himself  from  eternity.  Observe  now  that  the  great 
salvation  which  is  in  God — nay,  which  is  God  in  us  by  His  Spirit — finds  its  way 
outwards  to  thirsty  drinkers  through  many  outlets  and  not  through  one  only. 
There  are  as  many  of  these  precious  wells  as  there  are  distinctly  revealed  truths 
on  the  page  of  Scripture.  Every  promise  of  blessing,  every  call  to  duty,  every 
story  of  God's  dealings  with  Israel  and  the  nations,  every  prediction,  every  verse 
of  sacred  song,  every  miracle  and  parable  of  Christ,  every  word,  indeed,  that 

froceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God,  is,  through  the  Spirit,  a  well  of  salvation, 
n  a  transferred  sense,  there  are  as  many  wells  of  salvation  as  there  are  living 
Christians  on  earth  at  a  given  time.  The  heart  that  draws  water  from  the  wells 
above-mentioned,  becomes  itself  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting 
life.  Every  Christian  worker  is,  in  an  especial  sense,  a  well  of  this  kind.  II.  The 
joyful  drinking  of  the  water  found  in  these  wells.  1.  The  drawer  of  water 
from  any  well  of  salvation  is  any  one  anywhere  who  chooses.  "  Whosoever 
will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  2.  The  drawing  and  drinking  impulse 
is  the  inward  thirst  of  spirit,  which,  in  a  general  form,  characterises  all  mankind, 
and  shows  itself  in  spiritual  minds  in  the  form  of  thirst  for  this  water  in  particular. 
"  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come."  3.  The  drawing  power  is  communicated  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  acting  in  His  character  as  the  promised  Comforter  and  helper 
of  our  infirmities.  In  one  point  of  view  He  is  the  power  through  which  we  draw 
and  drink,  as  in  another  aspect  He  is  the  water  we  work  with  in  this  way  for  the 
refreshment  of  our  souls  and  their  true  life.  4.  The  drawing  apparatus  includes  all 
outward  means  available  for  help  in  our  endeavours  after  the  truth  expressed  in 
this  or  in  that  part  of  revelation,  parallel  passages  containing  like  ideas  or  identical 
expressions,  sound  and  able  expositions,  and  along  with  these  the  lives  and  deeds 
of  our  Lord's  faithful  and  enlightened  followers.  The  intimation  in  hand  lays 
special  stress  upon  the  joy  with  which  the  drawing  of  this  water  is  begun  and 


chap,  xii.]  ISAIAH.  355 

kept  up.  This  joy  comes  of  the  thought  that  the  water  is  pure,  life-giving,  and 
refreshing ;  of  the  ease  with  which  the  drawing  machinery  is  used  when  all  is 
right  with  the  man  who  works  it,  and  when  the  hallowed  practice  is  maintained  ; 
of  the  fulness  and  constancy  of  the  stream  which  flows  toward  us,  after  it  has 
been  drawn  up  from  the  depths  of  the  well  that  is  being  worked  at  the  time  ; 
and  of  the  exhilarating  effects  of  the  water  when  taken  freely.  The  joy  prompts 
and  helps  the  work  of  drawing.  The  drawing  enlarges  and  maintains  the  joy. 
(David  Lowe.)  The  wells  of  salvation: — I.  The  prepared  wells.  A  well 
differs  from  a  spring  in  this :  a  spring  is  a  natural  outlet  for  the  waters  in  the 
earth  ;  a  well  is  an  artificial  one  made  by  man.  The  well  is  the  result  of  design. 
So  the  wells  of  salvation  represent  a  Divine  design.  These  wells  are  the  varied 
"  means  of  grace "  provided  by  God  for  our  highest  welfare.  Two  cautions 
deserve  our  serious  thought.  1.  We  must  not  ignore,  or  neglect,  any  of  these 
wells,  for  God  in  wisdom  has  caused  them  to  be  dug.  2.  We  must  not  substitute 
for  these  wells  any  cisterns  of  mere  human  digging.  II.  The  refreshing  waters 
of  these  wells  of  salvation.  Jesus  Himself  called  it  "  living  water."  It  is  else- 
where called  "  the  water  of  life  " — a  very  expressive  way  of  representing  that 
salvation  which  one  receives  through  the  appointed  means  of  grace.  For— 1.  Like 
living  water,  this  salvation  is  very  refreshing  to  the  thirsty  soul.  2.  Like  water, 
this  salvation  cleanses.  3.  Like  water,  this  salvation  is  free.  4.  And  this  water 
is  inexhaustible.  III.  The  joyful  drawing.  (E.  H.  Witman.)  The  wells 
of  salvation: — I.  The  wells.  God,  in  carrying  on  His  government,  has  seen 
it  wise  to  act  usually  through  agencies  and  means.  He  has  provided  means 
for  carrying  out  His  great  and  gracious  purposes  in  redemption.  These  are  here 
presented  to  us  as  wells."  II.  The  drawing  out  op  these  wells.  I.  The 
existence  of  the  means  of  grace  is  not  enough.  2.  We  never  will  appropriate 
those  blessings  until  impelled  by  a  sense  of  need.  III.  The  joy.  There  are 
many  things  in  Christ  fitted  to  inspire  joy.  I.  His  adaptation  to  the  wants  of 
the  sinner.  2.  His  fulness.  3.  He  is  an  eternal  Christ.  4.  There  is  cause  of 
rejoicing  in  the  terms  on  which  He  is  tendered.  The  Gospel  is  brought  within 
the  reach  of  the  poorest,  the  most  abject,  the  most  hopeless.  Its  language  is 
not  "  Do,"  or  "  Give,"  but  "  Take."  And  if  Christ  be  so  free,  is  it  any  wonder  if 
the  sinner  should  appropriate  Him  with  joy  ?  Application:  (1)  What  a  wilder- 
ness this  land  would  be  without  its  Sabbaths,  its  Bibles,  its  sermons,  its  com- 
munions !  (2)  The  danger  of  polluted  wells.  We  dare  not  mingle  anything 
with  Christ.  (3)  If  we  have  Christ  in  the  ordinances,  let  us  strive  to  partake 
of  His  fulness.  (T.  Maclauchlan,  LL.D.)  The  means  of  grace  to  be  diligently 
used  : — Drawing  water  is  an  employment  which  requires  strength,  labour,  and 
diligence,  to  which  some  means  or  instruments  of  conveyance  are  indispensably 
requisite.  From  these  and  other  circumstances  attending  this  operation  we 
learn  the  import  of  the  spiritual  exercise  here  intended.  The  blessings  communi- 
cated by  the  Holy  Ghost  are  obtained  by  diligent  application  of  the  mind  to  prayer, 
attentive  reading,  hearing,  and  meditation  ;  and  by  rightly  disposing  and  digest- 
ing the  subjects  read,  heard,  and  contemplated,  so  as  believingly  to  apply  them 
for  the  great  purposes  of  spiritual  improvement.  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  The  wells 
of  salvation  : — The  plural  is  used  because  God  is  as  many  wells,  inexhaustible. 
(W.  Day,  M.A.)  Wells  of  salvation:  the  Word  of  God: — A  young  girl,  going 
to  be  servant  in  a  grand  house,  was  discovered  one  day  in  the  servants'  hall  read- 
ing her  Bible.  Her  mistress,  richly  attired  in  satin,  with  dazzling  jewels,  stood 
amazed  at  the  sight  of  her  poor  domestic,  who  had  but  one  spare  evening  a  month, 
employing  it  in  the  study  of  Scripture.  "  Maggie,"  she  said,  "  what  are  you 
doing  with  that  Book  ?  It  is  not  right  that  you  should  read  it  to-night.  You 
should  be  out,  girl."  The  mistress,  though  thoroughly  worldly,  yet  had  a  kind 
heart,  and  put  her  hand  on  the  shrinking  girl.  Maggie  looked  up  with  sweet 
and  steadfast  eyes.  "  This  is  enjoyment,  ma'am,"  she  said  timidly.  Wells 
of  salvation  :  the  house  of  God : — The  camel,  weary  with  his  hundred  miles' 
travel  across  the  burning  sands,  eats  a  few  dried  leaves,  drinks  at  the  well,  lies 
down  on  the  hot  earth,  and  rolls  about  awhile,  and  is  ready  for  another  dash 
across  the  arid  plain.  So  the  tired  burden-bearer  comes  to  the  house  of  God, 
drinks  from  the  fountain  of  life,  and  is  renewed  in  soul  and  body  too.  (King's 
Highway.) 

Vers.  4-6.    And   in   that   day   shall   ye   say,    Praise   the   Lord. — Congrega. 
tional    praise :  —  I.    Who    are    here    called    upon    to    praise    God.      The 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn 

inhabitants  of  Zion  and  Jerusalem,  whom  God  had  in  a  peculiar  manner  protected 
from  Sennacherib's  violence  (ver.  6).  Those  that  have  received  distinguishing 
favours  from  God  ought  to  be  most  forward  and  zealous  in  praising  Him.  The 
Gospel  Church  is  Zion ;  Christ  is  Zion's  King ;  those  that  have  a  place  and  name 
in  that  should  lay  out  themselves  to  diffuse  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  to  bring 
many  to  Him.  II.  How  they  must  praise  the  Lord.  1.  By  prayer.  "  Call 
upon  His  name."  As  giving  thanks  for  former  mercy  is  a  decent  way  of  begging 
further  mercy,  so  begging  further  mercy  is  graciously  accepted  as  a  thankful 
acknowledgment  of  the  mercies  we  have  received.  2.  By  preaching  and  writing 
we  must  speak  to  others  concerning  Him — not  only  "  call  upon  His  name,"  but 
(as  the  margin  reads  it)  "  proclaim  His  name  "  ;  let  others  know  something  more 
from  us  than  they  did  before  concerning  God,  and  those  things  whereby  He  has 
made  Himself  known.  "  Declare  His  doings  " — His  "  counsels,"  so  some  read 
it.  The  work  of  redemption  is  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  will,  and  in  that 
and  other  wonderful  works  that  He  hath  done,  we  must  take  notice  of  His 
"  thoughts  which  are  to  usward."  Declare  these  "  among  the  people  " — among 
the  heathen,  that  they  may  be  brought  into  communion  with  Israel,  and  the 
God  of  Israel.  When  the  apostles  preached  the  Gospel  to  "  all  nations,  beginning 
at  Jerusalem,"  then  this  Scripture  was  fulfilled,  that  His  doings  should  be 
declared  among  the  people,  and  that  what  He  hath  done  should  be  known  in  all 
the  earth.  3.  By  a  holy  exultation  and  transport  of  joy.  "  Cry  out  and  shout." 
m.  For  what  they  must  praise  the  Lord.  1.  Because  He  hath  glorified  Him- 
self. "  His  name  is  exalted,"  is  become  more  illustrious  and  conspicuous,  and 
every  good  man  rejoiceth  in  that.  2.  Because  He  hath  magnified  His  people. 
He  '  hath  done  excellent  things  "  for  them,  which  makes  them  look  great  and 
considerable.     3.  Because  He  is,  and  will  be,  great  among  them.     (M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  6.  Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion. — Rapturous  enthusiasm 
should  characterise  religion : — Here  is  a  call  for  enthusiasm,  rapture,  and 
what  would  generally  be  denominated  madness.  Still,  the  words  are  here, 
and  they  are  perfectly  clear  as  to  their  meaning  and  purpose,  and  a  reason  is 
given  for  the  cry  and  for  the  shout ;  that  reason  is — "  for  great  is  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee."  Men  have  been  infuriated  by  earthly  deliverances, 
and  rightly  so,  and  brought  into  paroxysms  of  thankfulness  and  joy :  why  not 
so  in  their  religious  natures  ?  It  is  recorded  by  Plutarch  that  when  the  Romans 
delivered  a  certain  people  from  the  tyranny  of  the  Macedonians  and  the  Spartans, 
the  cry  of  the  delivered  men  was  so  great  that  it  dissipated  the  very  air,  and  birds 
flying  across  that  plane  of  the  hemisphere  fell  down  amazed.  Have  we  ever 
rent  the  air  with  our  cries  and  shouts  of  delight  and  thankfulness  ?  Our 
Christianity  may  have  been  formal,  and  our  atheism  may  have  been  the  atheism 
of  respectability.  Respectability  can  never  be  earnest.  It  is  limited  by  a  smaller 
word.  If  Sydney  Smith  said  the  Church  is  dying  of  dignity,  we  may  apply  the 
rebuke  to  ourselves,  and  ask  if  we  are  not  falling  into  torpor  through  the  opiate 
of  respectability.  Are  we  called  to  silence  ?  Who  can  describe  the  feeling  of 
those  who  were  imprisoned  during  the  Indian  Mutiny  ?  Is  there  not  a  page  in 
the  history  of  that  rebellion  which  makes  every  human  heart  thrill  with  excite- 
ment ?  We  remember  how  the  Europeans  were  shut  up,  being  beleaguered  and 
invested,  and  within  a  hand-breadth  of  extinction ;  and  we  remember  hearing 
of  the  deliverers'  approach,  and  of  those  who  were  suffering  catching  the  strains 
of  music ;  they  heard  the  pibroch  and  the  slogan,  and  their  hearts  came  again, 
and  every  soldier  was  a  hero,  and  every  woman  a  saint,  and  as  the  deliverers  came 
on  could  you  have  said  to  those  who  had  been  shut  up  in  terror  and  darkness, 
Now  restrain  yourselves ;  avoid  everything  sensational,  and  maintain  a  decorous 
and  proper  attitude  in  all  things — what  answer  would  they  have  returned  to 
your  inane  and  unseasonable  address  ?  We  must  pass  through  a  certain  class 
of  circumstances  before  we  can  understand  the  feelings  of  those  who  express 
gratitude  for  deliverance.  The  singing  of  the  Church  should  be  loud,  joyous, 
and  sweet ;  all  instruments  should  accompany  it :  now  the  clash  of  bells,  now 
the  blare  of  trumpets,  now  the  lilt  of  lutes,  and  now  the  throb  of  drums  ;  strong 
men,  gentle  women,  merry  children  should  unite  their  voices  in  one  glad  burst 
of  religious  joy.  Thank  God  for  music.  That  will  unite  the  Church  when  theology 
will  divide  it.  There  is  no  disputable  argument  in  music.  The  vanity  of  opinion 
is  not  touched  by  music.  The  demon  of  heresy  is  left  without  a  chance  in  music. 
Pedantic  criticism  is  ignored.     The  heart  has  it  all  its  own  way.     All  is  harmony. 


chap,  xn.]  ISAIAH.  357 

All  is  praise.  All  is  love.  If  ever  preaching  be  displaced  or  superseded,  may  it 
be  by  music  !  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  "  Thou  inhabitant  of  Zion  "  : — The  Hebrew  is 
feminine :  the  appeal  is  to  a  woman's  heart — Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  daughter 
of  Zion  !  Without  the  womanly  element  the  Church  is  without  charm,  and 
without  the  Divinest  passion.  The  woman  must  lead  us,  in  song,  in  music,  in 
praise,  and  by  the  contagion  of  her  enthusiasm  must  warm  others  into  responsive 
and  co-operative  zeal.  (Ibid.)  God's  presence  with  His  people: — Among  the 
ancient  people  of  God,  Jehovah  vouchsafed  His  immediate  and  manifest  presence, 
both  in  the  continuance  of  His  visible  glory  between  the  cherubim,  and,  upon 
extraordinary  occasions,  in  an  extraordinary  manner.  Such  miraculous  indica- 
tions of  the  Divine  presence  are  not  to  be  expected  in  these  latter  days.  Now 
that  God  has  blessed  us  with  a  revelation,  so  clear,  so  completely  suited  to  our 
necessities,  and  in  all  its  doctrines  and  precepts  so  manifestly  Divine,  that  our 
own  consciences  cannot  but  acknowledge  it  as  the  truth,  He  has  withdrawn  those 
miraculous  tokens  of  His  favour  by  which  He  upheld  the  confidence  of  His  ancient 
people,  requiring  us  to  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight.  The  glory  of  the  spiritual 
Zion  does  not  consist  in  outward  manifestations  of  the  Godhead,  but  in  the  real 
though  invisible  presence  of  the  King  of  Zion,  according  to  His  gracious  promise, 
"  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway."  He  is  present  by  His  Spirit  in  the  hearts  of  all 
His  faithful  followers.  What  is  implied  in  this  promise  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 
in  the  midst  of  Zion  ?  1.  That  God  is  ever  with  His  people  to  strengthen  and 
sustain  them.  2.  God,  through  Christ,  is  ever  present  with  His  people,  to  succour 
and  defend  them.  3.  Jehovah  is  ever  present  with  His  people  to  lead  and  direct 
them.  4.  God  is  ever  with  His  people  to  comfort  them.  5.  Jehovah  is  ever 
present  with  His  people  to  command  a  blessing  upon  the  appointed  means  of 
His  grace.  Without  this,  the  Scriptures  are  a  dead  letter.  (W.  Ramsay.) 
The  Church  of  the  living  God : — Civilised  countries  have  many  institutions  of  a 
voluntary  kind  for  useful  purposes.  There  is,  however,  an  institution  in  the 
world,  where  men  are  laid  under  direct  obligation  to  Him  who  has  established 
the  institution,  namely,  the  Church  of  God,  in  relation  to  which  the  earnest 
appeal  in  the  text  is  made.  I.  This  Church  presents  to  its  the  way,  under 
God's  hand,  to  true  personal  goodness.  Men  devise  many  recipes  to  correct 
evils  and  excite  to  virtue.  But  Zion  accomplishes  all  these  results  by  one 
simple  method.  To  be  in  the  Church  of  God  is  to  be  in  the  way  of  all  goodness. 
Well  may  the  inhabitants  of  Zion  rejoice,  for  all  spiritual  blessings  of  God's 
kingdom  are  given  to  it.  II.  Another  logical  conclusion  follows,  namely,  that  all 
of  us  ought  to  be  in  that  Zion.  We  are  to  be  in  it,  not  because  the  Church 
itself  demands  it ;  not  because  the  minister  calls  for  it ;  not  because  the  influences 
around  us  have  inculcated  it.  We  are  to  belong  to  the  Church  because  God, 
who  founded  the  Church  and  created  us,  has  laid  this  obligation  upon  us.  And 
we  are  not  to  be  simply  visitors  to  His  Church,  or  occasional  attendants,  and 
especially  not  to  be  patrons.  We  are  to  be  inhabitants,  dwelling  in  it ;  being  in 
it  with  our  whole  souls,  and  complying  with  the  obligations  that  are  incumbent 
upon  its  inhabitants,  if  we  would  be  pure  men.  And  this  is  no  unreasonable 
command.  1.  The  way  in  which  the  word  came  is  both  significant  and  instructive. 
2.  Another  consideration  is  that,  "  Great  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst 
of  her."  That  is  the  culminating  and  crowning  glory  of  God's  Zion.  Practical 
reflections — 1.  We  must  see  that  this  Zion  is  a  home  of  great  dignity.  It  is  more 
than  a  home,  it  is  God's  kingdom.  2.  If  this  be  God's  Zion,  then  what  have  we 
to  do  to  be  in  His  Zion  and  to  feel  the  pleasures  incumbent  upon  members  of 
His  Zion  ?  We  are  to  obey  Him.  It  is  His  presence,  His  power,  His  relation  to 
us,  that  give  sanctity  to  God's  house  and  service.  3.  Let  me  speak  a  word  to  any 
who  are  without  God  and  without  hope  of  eternal  life.  This  King  summons  you 
from  rebellion  ;  He  summons  you  to  peace  and  goodwill  to  Him.  (J.  Hall,  D.D.) 
The  character,  privilege,  and  duty  of  the  people  of  God : — I.  The  character 
here  given  of  the  people  of  God,  couched  in  Old  Testament  language,  in  that 
they  are  called  inhabitants  of  Zion-  To  understand  the  meaning  of  the  words, 
"  inhabitant  of  Zion,"  as  describing  the  people  of  God  in  every  age,  we  should 
first  remember  that  Zion  was  literally  a  hill  in  the  land  of  Judea.  There  was  a 
hill  in  the  southern  part  of  the  promised  land,  on  which,  or  on  part  of  which,  the 
city  of  Jerusalem  was  built,  and  this  hill  had  two  peaks,  the  one  called  Zion  proper, 
and  the  other  called  Mount  Moriah,  and  while  Jerusalem  stood  on  one  of  these 
peaks,  or  Zion  proper,  the  temple  was  built  by  appointment  on  the  other  of  these 
peaks,  or  Mount  Moriah,  but  the  whole  together  was  called  the  hill  of  Zion,  or 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Mount  Zion,  and  accordingly  in  the  2nd  Psalm  we  read,  "  Yet  have  I  set  My 
King  upon  My  holy  hill  of  Zion,"  and  again,  "  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy 
of  the  whole  earth,  is  Mount  Zion,"  plainly  showing  that  this  was  a  hill  in  the 
land  of  Judea.  But,  as  I  have  said,  on  one  peak  or  top  of  this  hill  the  temple 
of  Solomon  was  placed,  and  hence  the  word  "  Zion  "  came  by  a  common  figure  of 
speech  to  be  transferred  from  the  mountain  to  the  temple,  the  most  prominent 
feature  on  the  mountain,  and  in  this  sense  I  think  we  have  it  in  the  87th  Psalm, 
"  The  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob." 
Understanding,  then,  by  the  word  "  Zion  "  the  temple,  an  "  inhabitant  of  Zion  " 
now  calls  up  tne  idea  of  a  person  who  lives  in  and  about  the  temple;  and,  indeed, 
the  will  of  God  was,  that  all  His  ancient  people  should  live  as  much  as  may  be 
in  and  about  the  temple.  But  we  must  remember  that  the  temple  was  intended 
to  be  a  type  of  the  human  nature  of  our  Lord,  or  of  God  in  our  nature  (John  ii. 
19-21).  An  inhabitant  of  Zion  is  one  who  is  much  versant  with  Christ.  II.  The 
privilege  connected  with  this  character.  "  Great  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 
in  the  midst  of  thee."  The  Holy  One  of  Israel,  or  the  God  that  went  out  and  in 
among  the  people  of  Israel,  the  God  that  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
and  through  a  variety  of  vicissitudes  landed  them  at  last  in  the  Canaan  of  promise, 
was  no  other  than  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (1  Cor.  x.  9).  But  it  is  particularly 
the  privilege  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Zion,  that  they  have  the  protection  of  Him 
at  all  times  who  is  the  Almighty,  and  who  is,  therefore,  able  to  prevail  against 
all  opposition.  "  Great  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee."  These 
last  words  convey  the  idea  of  a  garrison,  which,  being  in  the  very  centre  of  a  place 
fortified,  contains  armed  men  ready  to  run  out  from  this  central  point,  whenever 
they  are  called  or  required.  So  Christ,  the  Holy  One,  is  in  the  midst  of  the  Church, 
in  the  midst  of  the  believer  individually,  because  quite  prepared  to  run  out  to 
any  point  where  His  people  are  weak  and  unprotected.  If  any  of  God's  people 
be  poor  in  this  world,  they  need  not  have  recourse  to  unlawful  methods  to  secure 
for  them  and  their  families  bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on,  for  their  Heavenly 
Father  knows  they  need  these  things,  and  He  will  give  them  to  them,  in  the  use 
of  the  lawful  means  put  in  their  power.  It  intimates  God  reconciled  in  Christ 
to  provide  for  their  souls.  He  will  provide  for  them  the  means  of  grace.  But 
once  more,  it  makes  part  of  the  privilege  of  God's  people,  that  they  are  to  see  the 
greatness  of  the  glory  of  God  ultimately.  Now  God  says  that  the  very  greatness 
of  His  glory  shines  out  in  the  work  of  redemption — that  there  is  more  of  that 
great  invisible  God  brought  out  to  intelligent  creatures,  by  the  work  of  redemption, 
than  by  any  work  which  God  created.  III.  The  duty  that  God  expects  of  His 
people,  in  consequence  of  their  understanding  this.  "  Cry  out  and  shout."  And 
here  we  are  taught — 1.  That  courage  is  our  duty — boldness.  "  Cry  out  and  shout." 
Why  ?  Because  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus. 
2.  Cheerfulness.      3.  Holding  forth  the  Word  of  life.      Concluding  remarks — 

1.  How  very  far   below  their  privilege    do    some   professing  Christians  live ! 

2.  Privilege  always  goes  before  duty.  3.  The  words  are  spoken  to  individuals. 
(J.  Muir,  D.D.)  Loyal  joy : — Speaking  of  the  early  days  of  Queen  Mary's 
reign,  Mr.  Froude  says :  "  When  the  lords  with  the  mayor  and  heralds  went  to 
the  Cross  at  Cheapside  to  proclaim  Mary  as  Queen,  there  was  no  reason  to  com- 
plain of  a  silent  audience.  Pembroke  stood  out  to  read,  and  could  but  utter 
one  sentence  before  his  voice  was  lost  in  the  shout  of  joy  which  thundered  into 
the  air.  '  God  save  the  Queen,'  rang  out  from  ten  thousands  of  throats.  '  God 
save  the  Queen,'  cried  Pembroke  himself  when  he  had  done,  and  flung  up  his 
jewelled  cap  and  tossed  his  purse  among  the  crowd.  The  glad  news  spread  like 
lightning  through  London,  and  the  pent-up  hearts  of  the  citizens  poured  them- 
selves out  in  a  torrent  of  exultation.  Above  the  human  cries,  the  long-silent 
church-bells  clashed  again  into  life :  first  began  St.  Paul's,  where  happy  chance 
had  saved  them  from  destruction ;  then,  one  by  one,  every  peal  which  had  been 
spared  caught  up  the  sound ;  and  through  the  summer  evening  and  night,  and 
all  the  next  day,  the  metal  tongues  from  tower  and  steeple  gave  voice  to  England's 


<jhap.  xin.]  ISAIAH.  359 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Vees.  1-5.  The  burden  of  Babylon. — The  prophet's  burden  ; — Whenever  we 
find  the  word  "  burden"  in  this  association  it  means  oracle,  a  speech  of  doom; 
it  is  never  connected  with  blessing,  hope,  enlarged  opportunity,  or  expanded 
liberty  ;  it  always  means  that  judgment  is  swiftly  coming,  and  may  at  any  moment 
burst  upon  the  thing  that  is  doomed.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  power  to  see  : — 
"  Which  Isaiah  did  see."  How  did  he  see  it  ?  The  word  "  see  "  needs  to  be 
denned  every  day.  Blind  men  may  see.  We  do  not  see  with  the  eyes  only, 
else  truly  we  should  see  very  little  ;  the  whole  body  becomes  an  eye  when  it 
is  full  of  light,  and  they  who  are  holiest  see  farthest.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in 
heart:  for  they  shall  see  God."  Men  see  morally,  intellectually,  sympathetically, 
as  well  as  visually.  How  could  Isaiah  see  this  burden  of  Babylon  when  it  did 
not  fall  upon  the  proud  city  for  two  centuries  ?  Is  there,  then,  no  annihilation 
of  time  and  space  T  Are  we  the  mean  prisoners  we  thought  ourselves  to  b«  ? 
Is  it  so,  that  we  are  caged  round  by  invisible  iroD,  and  sealed  down  by  some 
oppressive  power,  or  blinded  by  some  arbitrary  or  cruel  shadow  ?  We  might 
see  more  if  we  looked  in  the  right  direction  ;  we  might  be  masters  of  the  centuries 
if  we  lived  with  God.  Isaiah  is  never  weary  of  saying  that  he  "  saw  "  what  he 
affirms.  He  does  not  describe  it  as  having  been  seen  by  some  other  man ;  having 
written  his  record  he  signs  it,  or  having  begun  to  deliver  his  prophecy  he  writes 
it  as  a  man  writes  his  will ;  he  begins  by  asserting  that  it  is  his  testament,  his 
own  very  witness,  for  he  was  there,  saw  it,  and  he  accepts  the  responsibility  of 
every  declaration.  (Ibid.)  "Babylon"  stands  for  the  spirit  of  the  world: — 
In  the  New  Testament,  Babylon,  more  than  any  other  city,  stood  for  the  per- 
sonification of  the  forces  of  the  world  against  God.  In  the  history  of  Israel 
Babylon  was  the  scourge  of  God  to  them.  They  were  as  grain  under  the  teeth 
of  the  threshing-machine.  In  the  Captivity  the  Jews  felt  the  weight  of  Babylon's 
cruelty,  so  that  in  the  prophetic  literature  of  the  Exile,  Babylon  became  the  type 
of  oppression  and  of  the  insolence  of  material  force.  Thought  is  carried  back 
to  primitive  times  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  in  which  Babylon  is  pictured  in  the 
vain  and  arrogant  attempt  to  rival  God  :  "  Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a  city,  and 
a  tower  whose  top  may  reach  unto  heaven;  and  let  us  make  us  a  name,  lest 
we  be  scattered  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth."  So  deeply  had  the 
experience  of  Babylon's  cruelty  entered  into  the  heart  of  Israel  that  even  in  the 
New  Testament,  St.  John,  in  the  Book  of  Revelation,  uses  the  word  "  Babylon  " 
to  describe  the  material  power  of  Rome.  He  could  not  get  a  better  word  than  just 
the  old  word  "  Babylon  "  to  represent  the  overwhelming  force  of  the  great  Roman 
Empire,  with  its  legions  of  soldiers,  with  its  policy  which  made  the  whole  world 
a  network  of  nerves  running  back  to  their  sensitive  centre  in  the  haughty  city 
on  the  Tiber.  St.  John  saw  past  the  glitter  and  the  conquest,  and  recognised 
in  pagan  Rome  the  mighty  Babylon  which  lifts  her  impious  head  against  God. 
To  nim  she  was  the  "  scarlet  woman  "  ;  he  heard  her  say  in  the  pride  of  her  heart, 
as  the  prophet  had  heard  Babylon  say,  "  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  shall 
see  no  sorrow."  Thus  the  very  name  "  Babylon  "  came  to  take  on  the  religious 
signification  of  the  spirit  of  the  world  ;  it  stood  for  the  dead  weight  of  the  material 
which  resists  the  spirit.  (Hugh  Black,  M.A.)  The  doom  of  Babylon: — Here 
the  prophet  pronounces  doom  upon  the  bloated  empire  which  seemed  to  stand 
so  secure,  and  notes  the  evidence  of  weakness  in  spite  of  apparent  prosperity  and 
careless  trust  in  material  resources.  Disregard  of  human  rights,  lusts,  and  selfish- 
ness and  pride  of  life,  and  the  impious  atheism  which  disregarded  all  this  he 
declared  would  all  exact  their  inevitable  price.  Cruelty  and  oppression  would 
react  upon  the  tyrant  after  their  usual  historic  fashion.  The  huge  accumulations 
on  which  they  rested  would  only  attract  the  foe,  would  weaken  her  hands  in 
her  hour  of  trial,  and  make  her,  in  spite  of  her  wealth,  an  easy  prey  to  the 
spoiler.  To  Babylon  would  come  a  time  when  she  would  have  more  money 
than  men.  It  is  a  picture  of  absolute  ruin  which  the  prophet  gives,  when  the 
great  city  would  be  depopulated  (ver.  12).  (Ibid.)  The  Babylonian  spirit 
has  not  left  the  world,  and  every  great  civilisation  (for  it  is  not  confined  to  one) 
is  menaced  in  the  same  way  by  the  temptation  of  forgetfulness  of  God,  cruelty 
of  sheer  force,  insolence  of  pride,  and  the  empty  trust  of  wealth.  Our  foes  are 
the  old  foes  with  a  new  face  on  them.     (Ibid.) 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xin 

Ver.  12.  I  will  make  a  man  more  precious  than  fine  gold. — Dearth  of  men 
a  judgment  from  God: — When  God  caused  His  scythe  to  swing  through  the 
harvests  of  Babylon  it  was  not  expected  that  a  single  ear  would  be 
left  in  the  devastated  field.  Thus  the  utterance  is  a  menace,  a  judgment;  it 
is  not  part  of  a  lecture  upon  the  dignity  of  human  nature,  it  is  an  illustration 
of  the  vastness  of  the  sweep  of  the  judgments  of  God.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
worth  of  man  : — Our  text  is  a  promise  in  the  guise  of  a  threat.  It  is  a  threat 
to  one  nation,  but  a  promise  to  mankind.  1.  A  true  prophetio  insight  led  to 
the  insertion  of  this  poem  in  the  story  of  the  troubles  of  Assyria.  Babylon  was 
in  her  full  career  of  conquest  when  Assyria  was  trembling  to  her  fall.  But  the 
history  of  Babylon  was  already  written ;  in  that  contempt  of  man,  which  at 
the  first  her  pride  and  lust  of  possession  revealed,  was  hidden  her  own  doom. 
The  nation  so  lavish  of  human  life  was  to  die  utterly  out ;  the  empire  which 
sets  no  value  on  men,  for  lack  of  men  shall  perish.  2.  How  often  has  this  story 
been  repeated !  The  Italian  Campagna  was  once  the  home  of  a  multitude  of 
farmers  ;  the  conquests  of  Rome  demanded  that  legions  should  be  hurled  against 
the  barbarian  tribes.  Because  there  were  not  men  to  till  the  ground,  the  Cam- 
pagna has  become  a  foul  marshland,  the  haunt  of  fevers,  desolate  and  uninhabit- 
able. Spain  sent  out  her  brave  and  stalwart  sons  to  ravage  the  lands  of  the 
Indians,  to  seize  on  Mexican  and  Peruvian  gold ;  and  Spain  has  never  since  been 
able  to  produce  and  nourish  the  men  who  should  enable  her  to  hold  her  place  among 
the  foremost  nations.  3.  There  are  other  ways  in  which  want  of  regard  for  men 
is  evinced  beside  that  of  conquest,  and  the  doom  is  ever  the  same.  "  Peace 
hath  her  victories  no  less  renowned  than  war  "  ;  the  victories  are,  alas  !  too 
often  equally  immoral,  equally  fatal.  In  the  heat  of  business  competition,  pro- 
fessed philanthropists,  and  men  personally  humane — these  two  expressions  do 
not  always  mean  the  same  thing — become  as  reckless  of  lives  as  the  general  in 
the  field.  We  feel  a  man  to  be  more  precious  than  gold  in  the  face  of  sickness 
and  suffering;  if  we  did  but  habitually  recognise  it,  much  sickness  and  suffering 
would  be  spared.  The  ladders  are  reared  against  a  burning  house ;  one 
after  another  of  the  inmates  is  rescued  ;  and  when  the  fire  is  at  its  fiercest,  and 
all  are  supposed  to  be  out  of  danger,  the  frightened  face  of  a  child  appears  at 
an  upper  window.  There  are  tears  among  the  crowd,  and  wringing  of  hands. 
"  A  thousand  pounds,"  says  some  one,  "  to  him  who  will  rescue  that  child  !  " 
A  few  years  after,  the  child  is  an  engine-driver,  and,  drowsy  through  long  hours 
of  work,  he  misreads  a  signal,  wrecks  his  train,  and  dies,  himself  the  involuntary 
instrument  of  an  appalling  calamity.  And  it  may  be  that  the  very  man  who 
offered  the  reward,  and  would  have  doubled  it,  made  it  fivefold,  for  the  saving 
of  the  child,  is  a  director  of  the  railway  company  whose  increasing  exaction  of 
toil  from  its  servants  has  been  the  cause  of  the  disaster.  And  we  all  are  respons- 
ible for  these  things  ;  we  keep  up  the  pressure  which  compels  directors,  managers, 
merchants,  to  work  their  business  at  full  strain.  We  humane  Englishmen  need 
to  be  scourged  into  habitual  practical  humanity.  God  has,  by  His  judgments, 
to  "make  a  man  more  precious  than  fine  gold.'  4.  In  our  discussions  of  what 
we  call  "  the  population  question,"  there  is  a  great  deal  of  unconscious  inhumanity 
which  will  assuredly  entail  its  curse  upon  our  country.  The  population  of  these 
islands  is  ever  pressing  more  and  more  on  the  means  of  the  people's  support. 
In  two  ways  the  pressure  may  be  lightened.  Emigration  is  one  of  them.  But 
we  might  do  much  by  the  amendment  of  our  laws,  by  alteration  of  our  social 
customs  and  personal  habits,  by  a  check  on  extravagant  expenditure,  and  by 
a  juster  distribution  of  the  strain  of  living,  to  lighten  the  pressure  at  home.  It 
is  an  anxious  question  whether  we  are  encouraging  emigration  in  the  best  and 
wisest  mode.  Consider  whom  we  are  sending  out  and  the  result  on  our  future. 
5.  Our  text  is  prophetic,  moreover,  of  the  doom  and  discipline  of  the  exclusive 
spirit.  Tennyson  has  given  us  a  parable  of  this  in  the  "  Palace  of  Art."  Browning, 
too,  in  his  story  of  Paracelsus,  the  gifted  man  who  degenerated  into  a  quack, 
has  marked  it  as  one  of  the  sins  of  that  strangely  complex  soul  that  he  would 
bo  a  philanthropist,  but  without  sympathy,  without  dependence  upon  others. 
No  life  of  pride  or  self-sufficiency  or  exclusiveness  is  possible  to  us,  either  in  the 
Church  or  the  nation.  Nothing  on  earth  is  valuable  when  man  has  lost  his  value. 
The  worth  of  wealth  is  what  you  can  do  with  it  for  your  fellows.  The  loftiest 
prince  would  gladly  mate  with  the  humblest  beggar  were  they  cast  alone  on  some 
desert  island.  6.  How  wonderful  is  the  fulfilment  of  our  text  in  the'  Gospel  t 
It  is  the  worth  of  lost  humanity  which  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  redemption  by 


chap,  xm.]  ISAIAH.  361 

Christ.     Christ  will  not  let  us  love  Him  if  we  love  not  our  brethren  for  whom 
He  died.     If  men  are  not  more  precious  to  us  than  gold,  Christ  becomes  to  us 
of  none  effect.     7.  The  passion  which  Christian  humaneness  becomes  in  the  heart 
of  Christians  is  the  final  earthly  fulfilment  of  our  text.     The  first  feeling  of  the 
saved  man  is  gratitude  for  the  grace  of  God  which  saved  him  ;  and  it  is  a  feeling 
that  abides.     To  it  is  added,  in  the  maturity  of  Christian  life,  an  abounding 
confidence  that  the  grace   which   saved  him  can   save  any   and  every   man. 
(A.  Mackennal,  B.A.)        The  value  of  human  life  : — Probably  it  is  not  true  that 
human  life  is  held  more  dear  in  times  of  war  ;  but  some  sense  of  the  value  of 
the  lives  sacrificed  is  apt  to  dawn  upon  the  people  after  the  war  is  over,  when 
the  nation  finds  its  resources  wasted,  and  the  people  sit  desolate  in  their  homes, 
waiting  for  the  strong  and  the  brave  who  shall  return  no  more.     It  is  a  hard 
eohool  in  which  to  learn  this  lesson  of  the  preciousness  of  man  ;  but  if  it  can  be 
learned  in  no  other  way  it  may  well  be  enforced  upon  the  world,  even  by  such 
fiery  tuition.     (W.  Gladden,  D.D.)        "How  much  is  he  worth?" — One  who 
listens  to  the  talk  of  the  street  and  the  shops,  might  easily  get  the  impression 
that  the  value  of  man  is  a  subject  of  general  interest.     "  How  much  is  he  worth  ?  " 
is  a  question  often  heard.     What  answers  do  you  hear  ?     He  is  worth  five  thousand 
dollars;  ten  thousand;  a  million;  ten  millions.     And  of  one  and  another  it  is 
said  with  a  mixture  of  pity  and  contempt,  "  He  is  not  worth  anything  !  "     Before 
the  war  men  and  women  were  actually  bought  and  sold  for  money.     How  much 
is  he  or  she  worth,  was  then  in  some  quarters  a  question  simply  commercial ; 
a  question  to  which  a  perfectly  literal  answer  could  be  given.     May  it  not  be 
well  to  go  a  little  deeper  than  the  common  usage  goes  into  the  meaning  of  this 
phrase,  and  ask,  with  all  seriousness,  not  concerning  this  man  or  that  man,  but 
concerning  man,  any  man,  every  man,  "How  much  is  he  worth?"     I.  Man 
is  worth  more  than  his  institutions.     Many  persons  have  supposed  that 
the  chief  end  of  man  was  to  support  certain  institutions.     We  get  many  a  hint 
of  this  error  in  our  study  of  the  people  whose  history  is  contained  in  the  Bible. 
They  thought  that  their  ceremonial  law  was  vastly  more  sacred  than  the  men 
who  worshipped  by  means  of  it.    If  their  ritual  obstructed  human  growth,  crippled 
virtue,  or  killed  charity,  no  matter  ;  these  must  stand  back  and  let  the  ritual 
be  exalted.     And  when  Christ  told  them  that  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man 
and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath — that  men  were  of  more  account  than  all  this  ritual 
machinery,  they  were  astonished  and  scandalised  ;  they  called  Him  a  blasphemer. 
This  is  no  singular  phenomenon.     History  is  full  of  the  outworking  of  this  tendency. 
All  over  the  world,  all  along  the  ages,  men  have  been  made  the  slaves  of  systems. 
When  Christ  came,  His  teachings  were  so  entirely  out  of  harmony  with  this  notion 
that  the  people  were  fairly  bewildered  by  them.     What  has  been  said  of  religious 
systems  is  equally  true  of  political  systems.     There  is  now  and  always  has  been 
a  prevalent  notion  that  people  were  made  for  governments,  and  not  governments 
for  people  ;  that  it  is  more  important  that  certain  dynasties  should  reign,  or 
that  certain  political  institutions  should  be  kept  intact,  or  that  certain  parties 
should  remain  in  power,  or  that  certain  policies  should  be  adopted,  than  that 
men  should  be  free  and  wise  and  good  and  prosperous.     It  is  not  true  that  human 
institutions  are  of  no  value ;  they  are  often  of  great  value.     But  they  are  not 
ends ;  they  are  instruments.     It  follows  that  those  systems  are  best  which  best 
assist  the  development  of  manhood.     II.  Man  is  worth  more  than  his  costliest 
possessions.     This  is  another  of  those  truths,  often  on  our  lips,  but  not  more 
than  half  believed.     Evidence  of  this  is  visible  in  the  respect  paid  to  wealth, 
even  when  it  is  joined  to  one  who  is  but  a  caricature  of  manhood ;  even  when 
it  is  the  spoil  that  has  been  won  by  the  debasement  of  manhood.     How  plain 
are  the  proofs  before  our  faces  every  day  that  the  multitudes  do  not  believe  a 
man  to  be  more  precious  than  gold  !     It  is  not  the  rich  alone  whose  judgment 
in  this  matter  goes  astray ;  the  poor  fall  into  the  same  error.     They  say  that 
money  does  not  make  the  man,  say  it  angrily  aDd  bitterly,  not  seldom ;  but 
their  conduct  often  shows  that  they  think,  after  all,  that  money  does  make 
the  man.     Their  envy  of  the  rich   convicts  them.     Are  there  not  in  our  own 
conduct,  sometimes,   clear   illustrations  of  this  fact  ?     Do  we  not  often  find 
ourselves  preferring  gold  to  manhood  ;  labouring  more  diligently  to  enlarge  our 
possessions  than  to  improve  ourselves  ?     It  is  not  true  that  property  is  of  no 
consequence  ;  man's  belongings  are  good  just  in  proportion  as  they  assist  in  the 
development  of  his  character.     III.  It  is  because  of  his  kinship  to  God  that 
man  is  of  such  illustrious  worth.     And  nothing  seems  more  certain  than 


3  2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnt 

that  these  powers  may,  by  disuse  or  misuse,  be  impaired  and  finally  lost.  And 
so  cut  off  by  his  own  act  from  the  source  of  all  light  and  love,  he  is  deserted  by 
all  generous  impulses,  by  all  holy  aspirations,  and  is  left  to  grovel  in  the  mire 
of  selfishness  and  carnality.  "  How  much  was  he  worth  when  he  died  ?  "  some 
man  may  ask.  What  if  the  seer  must  answer  :  "  He  was  the  heir  of  immor- 
tality, but  he  sold  his  birthright  for  a  song."  (Ibid.)  The  end  of  civilisation 
is  not  money,  but  men.  (Hugh  Black,  M.A.)  The  true  history  of  a  man  is  the 
history  not  of  his  wars  and  conquests,  not  even  of  his  commerce ;  the  true  history 
of  a  man  is  the  history  of  his  conscience,  the  history  of  his  moral  development ; 
for  only  that  can  give  permanence  and  security  to  his  other  achievements  ia 
science,  art,  invention,  thought.  (Ibid.)  Faulty  civilisation  : — If,  in  Bacon's 
phrase,  the  "  breed  and  disposition  of  the  people  be  not  stout,"  its  civilisation 
is  a  dismal  failure.  (Ibid.)  Christianity  dignifies  man:  agnosticism  tends  to 
degrade  him: — In  the  teaching  of  Christ  man  is  so  dignified  by  his  connection 
with  God  and  by  his  immortal  destiny,  that  every  one  who  really  believes  this 
creed  must  feel  himself  condemned  if  he  treats  his  brother  ill.  But  strip  man, 
as  agnosticism  does,  of  all  the  greatness  and  mystery  with  which  Christianity 
invests  him — cease  to  believe  that  he  comes  from  God,  that  he  is  akin  to 
beings  greater  than  himself  who  care  for  him,  and  that  his  soul  is  of  infinite 
worth  because  it  has  before  it  an  unending  development — and  how  long  will 
it  be  possible  to  cherish  for  him  the  reverence  which  wins  him  consideration 
and  help  ?  The  brevity  of  man's  existence  gives  him,  according  to  the  present 
teaching  of  agnosticism,  a  pathetic  claim  to  instant  help  ;  but  who  knows  whether 
in  a  society  given  over  to  unbelief  the  argument  might  not  tell  the  other  way, 
the  selfish  heart  reasoning  that  sufferings  which  must  end  so  soon  do  not  matter  ? 
It  was  in  the  generation  preceding  the  French  Revolution  that  atheistic  philosophy 
took  its  rise.  The  prophets  of  the  time  were  predicting  an  age  of  peace  and 
brotherhood,  when  selfish  passion  should  disappear  and  cruelty  and  wrong  no 
more  vex  the  world.  But,  when  their  teaching  had  done  its  work,  its  fruit 
appeared  in  the  Revolution  itself,  whose  unspeakable  inhumanities  afforded  our 
race  such  glances  into  the  dark  depths  of  its  own  nature  as  can  never  be  forgotten. 
It  is  painful  to  recall  that  Rousseau  himself,  the  most  eloquent  and,  in  some 
respects,  the  noblest  apostle  of  the  new  faith,  while  preaching  universal  brother- 
hood, sent  his  own  children  one  by  one,  as  they  were  born,  to  the  Foundling 
Hospital,  to  save  himself  the  trouble  and  expense  of  their  support.  The  Revolu- 
tion did  much  destructive  work  for  which  the  hour  had  come ;  but  it  was  a  gigantic 
proof  that  the  love  necessary  for  the  work  of  reconstruction  must  be  sought  in  a 
superhuman  source.  (J.  Stalker,  D.D. )  John  Ruskin  on  the  value  of  manhood : — 
With  this  accords  the  great  lesson  of  John  Ruskin's  teaching  and  of  his  life — 
one  of  the  greatest  of  Englishmen,  greatest  of  all  as  a  political  teacher,  with  some- 
what of  the  passion  and  power  of  a  prophet.  He  never  wearied  of  insisting  upon 
this  distinction  between  money  and  men.  It  is  at  the  root  of  all  his  economical 
writings.  He  has  been  rated  as  a  fanatic,  as  opposed  to  machinery  and  railways  ; 
and  it  is  not  necessary  to  accept  his  teachings  on  money  on  all  points  ;  all  this  is 
but  a  misunderstanding  of  him  by  unthinking  and  casual  readers.  The  best  of 
his  thought  is  just  a  protest  against  the  prevailing  materialistic  creed.  He  lived 
and  died  protesting  that  man  is  more  precious  than  discoveries  or  engineering 
appliances  or  electrical  contrivances.  He  said  in  his  noble  language :  It  may 
be  discovered  that  the  true  bases  of  wealth  are  spiritual  and  not  in  rock  but  in  flesh. 
Perhaps  even  the  time  will  come  when  it  will  be  seen  that  the  consummation 
of  all  wealth  is  in  producing  as  many  as  possible  full-blooded,  bright-eyed  human 
creatures.  In  some  far-away  extremity  I  can  even  imagine  that  England  can 
cast  all  thoughts  of  possessing  wealth  back  to  barbario  nations,  and  that  while 
the  suns  of  Indus  may  flash  from  the  turban  of  the  slave,  she  as  a  Christian  mother 
may  at  last  attain  to  the  virtues  and  treasures  of  the  heathen  one,  and  be  able 
to  lead  forth  her  sons,  saying,  *  These  are  my  jewels.'  "  (Hugh  Black,  M.A.) 
Men  more  valuable  than  money  : — 

111  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey, 
Where  wealth  accumulates  and  men  decay. 

(O.  Goldsmith.) 

Money  for  men  : — The  preacher  was  promising  a  day  of  trouble  for  great  Babylon. 
"  Behold,"  he  cried,  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  cruel,"  &c.     Then  he  came 


chap,  xin.]  ISAIAH.  36? 

to  the  very  abyss  and  extremity  of  their  desolation.  Bad  enough  to  have  the 
land  shorn  of  its  harvests,  and  all  the  standing  grain  trampled  under  the  feet 
of  war-horses  ;  bad  enough  to  have  the  consuming  fire  lay  hold  upon  its  houses  ; 
bad  enough  to  have  pride  turned  into  shame,  wealth  into  poverty,  power  into 
captivity.  But,  thus  far,  hope  was  left,  for  men  were  left.  Leave  us  men,  and 
we  may  live.  Leave  us  men,  and  you  may  do  your  worst ;  the  day  will  pass, 
and  to-morrow  we  will  repair  the  damage,  and  begin  over  again,  and  get  our 
revenge  upon  you  yet.  But  there  shall  be  no  men.  The  widows  and  fatherless 
children  shall  search  about  the  ruined  streets,  and  a  man  shall  be  as  rare  a  sight 
as  a  purse  of  gold.  The  text  sets  the  emphasis,  not  on  money,  but  on  men. 
And  that  is  Christianity.  That  is  what  the  Master  taught.  What  we  all  need, 
whether  we  have  great  possessions  or  small  possessions,  is  to  be  interested  in  men. 
The  part  of  a  Christian  man  or  woman  is  to  set  about  making  somebody's  life 
better.  The  best  good  is  got  when  one  helps  one  ;  when  a  man  goes  to  his  neigh- 
bour  and  gets  acquainted  with  him,  and  becomes  his  personal  friend,  and 
sympathises  with  him,  and  uplifts  him.  You  won't  have  to  go  very  far  to  find 
somebody  who  is  worse  off  than  you  are.  Take  that  somebody  up.  Interest 
yourself  in  that  unhappy  life.  Perhaps  it  will  take  money ;  perhaps  it  will 
take  time ;  perhaps  it  will  take  yourself.  Give  yourself,  anyhow,  and  as  much 
else  as  you  need  to.  But,  above  all,  be  generously  interested.  One  of  the  most 
helpful  people  I  know  lives  in  a  back  street,  in  an  unpleasant  neighbourhood,  in 
a  small  house.  Everybody  in  that  neighbourhood  knows  her,  and  she  knows 
them  and  their  children.  They  go  to  her  in  their  troubles,  and  she  gives  them 
her  sympathy.  As  for  money,  she  would  give  that  too  if  she  had  any  to  give. 
She  gives  herself.  The  whole  street  is  better  because  she  lives  in  it.  But  if  she 
had  the  means  which  some  have,  what  would  she  do,  I  wonder  T  Would  she 
fall  before  the  temptation  of  a  comfortable  life  ?  Would  she  get,  perhaps,  to 
thinking  that  because  she  had  plenty  of  butter  on  her  bread,  so  had  everybody 
else  ?  and  because  she  was  contented,  all  the  mutterings  of  discontented  people 
were  but  needless  grumblings  ?  Anyhow,  it  is  true  that  the  kindest,  most 
thoughtful,  most  helpful  people,  quickest  to  bear  the  hardest  inconveniences  for  a 
neighbour,  readiest  to  lift  up  those  that  are  down,  are  the  poor.  It  is  not  your 
money  that  we  want  so  much  as  your  interest.  We  want  your  own  personal,  hand 
to  hand  and  heart  to  heart  endeavour.  The  best  use  that  can  be  made  of 
money  is  to  use  it  for  the  uplifting  of  men.  {George  Hodges,  D.D.)  Christ 
discovered  the  human  soul : — I  have  heard  that  one  of  the  diamond-fields 
of  South  Africa  was  discovered  on  this  wise.  A  traveller  one  day  entered  the 
valley  and  drew  near  to  a  settler's  door,  at  which  a  boy  was  amusing  himself 
by  throwing  stones.  One  of  the  stones  fell  at  the  stranger's  feet,  who  picked  it 
up  and  was  in  the  act  of  laughingly  returning  it,  when  something  flashed  from 
it  which  stopped  his  hand  and  made  his  heart  beat  fast.  It  was  a  diamond. 
The  child  was  playing  with  it  as  a  common  stone  ;  the  peasant's  foot  had  spurned 
it ;  the  cart-wheel  had  crushed  it ;  till  the  man  who  knew  saw  it  and  recognised 
its  value.  Was  it  not  the  same  careless  treatment  the  soul  was  receiving  when 
Jesus  arrived  in  the  world  and  discovered  it  ?  A  harlot's  soul,  sunk  in  the  mud 
and  filth  of  iniquity !  why,  a  Pharisee  would  not  stain  his  fingers  to  find  it.  A 
child's  soul !  the  scribes  used  to  discuss  in  their  schools  whether  or  not  a  child 
had  a  soul  at  all.  (J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  Manhood  more  than  belongings  : — Have 
you  ever  seen  the  Apollo  Belvidere  ?  It  is  the  statue  of  a  man,  chiselled  out  of 
marble,  one  of  the  noblest  figures  that  art  has  ever  produced.  Do  you  think 
that  this  statue  would  be  made  any  nobler  or  more  beautiful  if  men  should  put 
gold  rings  on  its  fingers  and  gold  bracelets  on  its  wrists,  and  strings  of  gold  beads 
upon  its  neck,  and  should  trick  it  out  with  ribbons  and  buttons  and  fringes  ? 
Would  not  these  tawdry  ornaments  detract  from  the  simple  dignity  and  majesty 
of  that  model  of  manly  grace  and  strength  T  Well,  the  accidents  of  wealth  and 
rank  and  office  and  station  cannot  add  much  more  of  ornament  or  value  to  a 
true  man  than  could  trinkets  like  these  to  the  beauty  of  the  Belvidere  Apollo. 
His  manhood  itself,  to  all  clear  insight,  is  something  infinitely  grander  and  diviner 
than  these  belongings.  (W.  Gladden,  D.D.)  The  wealth  of  manhood: — A 
Highland  chieftain  on  a  visit  to  England  was  taunted  with  the  poverty  of  his 
country,  at  the  table  of  his  host,  the  occasion  being  when  the  large  silver  candle- 
sticks were  lighted  in  the  spacious  hall  of  the  English  castle,  and  in  a  gust  of 
mistaken  patriotism  (common  enough  in  a  Scot)  the  Highlander  declared  he 
had  seen  better  candlesticks  in  his  own  castle  in  Scotland.     A  wager  was  put 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  nu. 

up,  and  he  could  not  draw  back.  The  laird's  brother,  who  understood  the  terrific 
fix  his  brother  was  in,  placed  at  the  table  on  either  side  a  gigantic  Highlander 
holding  in  his  right  hand  a  drawn  sword  and  in  his  left  a  blazing  torch,  and  ere 
the  strangers  had  recovered  from  their  surprise,  he  said,  "  Behold  the  chandeliers 
of  my  brother's  house  !  Not  one  of  these  men  knows  any  law  but  loyalty.  Would 
you  compare  to  these  the  riches  of  gold  ?  How  say  you,  cavaliers,  is  your  wager 
won  or  lost?"     (H.  Black,  M. A.) 

Ver.  17.  Behold,  I  will  stir  up  the  Medes  against  them. — The  Medea  care 
not  for  gold,  but  for  blood,  though  it  be  the  blood  of  boys  and  infants. 
(Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The  Medes  and  gold  : — "  Ye  Medes  and  others  who 
now  hear  me,  I  well  know  that  you  have  not  accompanied  me  in  this  expedi- 
tion with  a  view  of  acquiring  wealth." — Speech  of  Cyrus  to  his  army.  (Xenophon, 
Cyrop.  V. )  The  Medes  : — The  worst  terror  that  can  assail  us  is  the  terror  of 
forces,  whose  character  we  cannot  fathom,  who  will  not  stop  to  parley,  who  do  not 
understand  our  language  nor  our  bribes.  It  was  such  a  power  with  which  the 
resourceful  and  luxurious  Babylon  was  threatened.  With  money  the  Babylonians 
did  all  they  wished  to  do,  and  believed  everything  else  to  be  possible.  They 
had  subsidised  kings,  bought  over  enemies,  seduced  the  peoples  of  the  earth. 
The  foe  whom  God  now  sent  them  was  impervious  to  this  influence.  From  their 
pure  highlands  came  down  upon  corrupt  civilisation  a  simple  people,  whose 
banner  was  a  leathern  apron,  whose  goal  was  not  booty  nor  ease  but  power  and 
mastery,  who  came  not  to  rob  but  to  displace.     {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Vers.  19-22.  Babylon  .  .  .  shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah. — The  re-entries  of  nature : — All  this  we  may  say  is  historical 
and  local.  On  the  other  hand,  all  this  is  moral  and  suggestive.  This  process 
may  take  place  in  the  Babylon  of  the  mind.  The  greatest  mind  is  only 
safe  whilst  it  worships.  The  most  magnificent  intellectual  temple  is  only  secure 
from  the  judgment  and  whirlwind  of  heaven  in  proportion  as  its  altar  is  defended 
from  the  approach  of  every  unworthy  suppliant.  If  we  hand  over  God's  altar, 
whether  mental  or  ecclesiastical,  to  wrong  custodians,  or  devote  either  to  for- 
bidden purposes,  then  make  way  for  God's  judgments :  wild  beasts  of  the  desert 
shall  lie  there ;  and  the  houses  that  were  full  of  beauty  and  colour  and  charm 
shall  be  full  of  doleful  creatures ;  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands  shall  cry  in 
their  desolate  houses,  and  dragons  in  their  pleasant  palaces.  This  may  happen  to 
any  one  of  us.  Beware  of  arrogancy,  pride,  worldliness,  self-sufficiency ;  beware 
of  the  betrayal  of  trusts :  nature  will  re-enter  if  we  be  unfaithful.  We  speak  of 
our  wisdom  in  putting  cautionary  covenants  into  all  our  legal  documents,  and 
especially  a  man  assures  himself  that  he  is  doubly  safe  when  he  has  secured 
the  right  of  re-entry  under  certain  breaches  of  agreement ;  he  says  to  himself 
with  complacency,  That  is  justifiable ;  I  have  arranged  that  in  the  event 
of  certain  things  failing  I  shall  re-enter.  Nature  always  puts  that  clause 
into  her  covenants.  She  re-enters  in  a  moment.  If  the  gardener  is  too  late  by 
one  day  with  his  spade  or  seed  or  other  attention,  nature  begins  to  re-enter ; 
and  if  he  tarry  for  a  week  he  will  find  that  nature  has  made  great  advances  into 
the  property.  It  is  so  with  education,  with  the  keeping  up  of  intelligence,  with 
the  maintenance  of  healthy  discipline ;  relax  a  month,  and  nature  re-enters,  and 
nature  plays  the  spoiler.  Nature  is  not  a  thrifty,  careful  husbandman.  Nature 
has  a  function  of  desolation ;  she  will  grow  weeds  in  your  richest  flower-beds  if 
you  neglect  them  for  a  day.  God  re-enters  by  the  spirit  of  judgment  and  by  the 
visitations  of  anger.  Herein  His  providence  is  but  in  harmony  with  the  kingdom 
which  He  has  instituted  within  the  sphere  which  we  call  husbandry,  and  even 
within  the  sphere  which  we  denominate  by  education  or  discipline.  It  is  one 
government.  Neglect  your  music  for  a  month,  and  you  will  find  at  the  end  that 
nature  has  re-entered,  and  you  are  not  wanted ;  you  have  not  brought  with  you 
the  wedding-garment  of  preparation  up  to  date.  There  must  be  no  intermission  ; 
the  last  line  must  be  filled  in.  Nature  will  not  have  things  done  in  the  bulk,  in 
the  gross :  nature  will  not  allow  us  simply  to  write  the  name  ;  she  will  weave 
her  webwork  all  round  the  garment  if  we  have  neglected  the  borders,  and  paid 
attention  to  only  the  middle  parts.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Babylon:  an  Arab 
superstition  : — It  is  said  that  at  this  very  day  the  Bedouin  or  wandering  Arab 
has  a  superstitious  fear  of  passing  a  single  night  on  the  site  of  Babylon,  and 
that  the  natives  of  the  country  believe  it  to  be  inhabited  by  demons  in  the  form 


chap,  xrv.]  ISAIAH.  365 

of  goats.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart. )  Satyrs  : — There  seems  to  have  been  an 
ancient  belief  among  the  Jews  themselves  that  demons  took  the  form  of  goats — 
appeared  as  satyrs  in  fact.  (Ibid.)  Satyrs  : — The  word  which  most  versions 
and  commentators  agree  with  the  LXX.  in  rendering  "demons"  or  "satyrs" 
is  used  in  Lev.  xvii.  7  and  2  Chron.  xi.  15  for  demons  which  the  Jews  worshipped 
(Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XTV. 


Vbb.   1.    For  the  Lord  will  have    mercy  on  Jacob.  —  God's    mercy  and 

Israel's  converts : — I.  The  principle  of  God's  moral  government — Mercy. 
This  people  had  grievously  sinned.  1.  They  had  sinned  against  light.  The 
direct  revelation  of  heaven  had  been  given  to  them  as  a  nation.  2.  They  rebelled 
amid  privileges.  The  Mighty  God  interfered  to  protect  them  from  their  foes, 
3.  They  had  sinned  in  spite  of  rebukes  and  punishments.  The  rebellious  people 
had  been  carried  captive  into  a  heathen  nation.  II.  The  constancy  op  Divine 
purposes — "  I  will  yet  choose,"  &c.  Notwithstanding  all  their  rebellion  I  will 
yet  have  mercy  on  them.  Nothing  can  separate  from  the  love  of  God.  III.  The 
restorative  blessedness  op  religion.  When  God  takes  a  man  in  hand,  He 
restores  him.  In  paradise  he  was  the  image  and  associate  of  God.  Salvation 
will  make  him  nothing  more.  Heaven  will  contain  additional  elements  of  joy, 
but  the  man  will  be  restored.  IV.  The  contagion  op  enthusiasm.  When 
the  Jews  should  return,  many  of  the  heathen,  leaving  their  own  country  and  their 
idols,  would  return  along  with  them.  "  And  the  strangers  shall  be  joined  with 
them."  This  was  part  of  God's  design  in  the  Captivity.  It  was  not  only  to 
punish  His  people  for  their  sin,  but  also  to  render  them  a  blessing  to  others.  God 
often  appoints  the  afflictions  of  His  people  for  His  own  glory,  and  we  must  not 
mourn  but  rejoice  if  we  are  counted  worthy  of  forwarding  His  cause.  V.  Tot 
attractiveness  op  religion.  It  commands  affection  and  regard.  It  is  our 
duty  to  render  it  attractive  so  as  to  win  others.  (Homilist.)  God's  com- 
passion to  Israel : — We  have  here  in  nuce  the  comforting  substance  of  chaps,  xL— 
Ixvi.     Babylon  falls  in  order  that  Israel  may  rise.     (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  The  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  thy  sorrow. — Sorrow's  crown:— 
I.  Sorrow  is  the  common  lot.  Though  nobody  is  always  sorrowful,  there 
is  in  every  life  many  a  time  when  the  mind  is  sore  and  the  heart  bruised. 
Yet  people  with  a  sore  heart  often  sing ;  they  find  relief  in  breathing  a  hymn  of 
prayerful  trust.  How  beautiful  is  a  good  man  under  affliction  !  A  child  is  often 
sore  in  mind  because  he  is  not  understood  and  has  not  the  heart-felt  sympathy 
of  those  who  direct  him.  Women  also  are  sorrowful.  Though  a  man  be  in  the 
most  fortunate  state  of  life  he  will  have  something  to  bruise  his  heart.  I  have 
heard  of  a  lady  whose  husband  was  the  worship  of  both  her  mind  and  heart ; 
and  when  he  was  killed  in  a  railway  accident,  her  grief  was  so  terrible  that  in  a 
moment  she  seemed  ten  years  older.  A  short  time  afterwards,  she  lost  her 
children,  and  later  on,  through  the  failure  of  a  bank,  her  fortune  disappeared; 
but  she  endured  these  misfortunes  with  calmness,  and  her  minister  once  asked, 
"  How  is  it  that  you  can  bear  up  so  well  after  the  loss  of  your  children  and  your 
money  ?  "  She  replied,  "  In  the  death  of  my  husband  the  greatest  wound  came 
the  first."  It  is  unwise  to  meet  sorrow  half-way.  But  there  is  one  sorrow  that 
we  should  seek  and  cultivate  ;  it  is  the  sorrow  that  we  are  not  more  godly.  There 
is  another  sorrow  which  is  worth  having ;  it  is  that  pain  of  heart  which  feels  for 
the  man  or  woman  who  is  wounded  in  the  conflict  of  life.  In  the  ancient  world, 
sorrow  was  considered  to  be  God's  curse,  but  the  early  Christians  saw  that  God 
meant  it  as  a  sacred  discipline ;  and  therefore  when  sorrow  came  to  them,  they 
called  it  "  tribulatio,"  using  the  word  and  image  to  set  forth  an  elevating  truth, 
namely,  the  separation  of  the  evil  in  them  from  the  good.  II.  Let  us  notice  onh 
OR  two  personal  sorrows  in  which  some  op  you  are  more  or  less  concerned. 
1.  If  you  are  sore  in  mind  because  you  have  done  wrong,  let  your  first  thought 
be  one  of  gratitude,  that  God  can  and  does  forgive  your  sins.  2.  Many  good 
people  are  sore  in  mind  through  a  physical  or  temporal  trouble.  What  is  more 
unpleasant  than  to  hear  a  cart-wheel  screeching  every  time  it  turns  ?    So,  you 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

have  in  your  lot  something  like  a  screeching  wheel,  and  every  move  makes  you 
feel  the  affliction.  But  the  oil  of  Divine  grace  will  cure  it.  III.  The  crown  of 
borrow  is  trusting  God.  "  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him,"  &c.  IV.  Let 
us  learn  the  object  of  sorrow.  It  is  to  teach  us  to  be  patient  and  kindly. 
If  you  put  roses  into  a  cracked  pot  of  commonest  clay,  it  will  breathe  forth  per- 
fume ;  and  from  the  most  prickly  plant,  the  thorn,  we  gather  the  sweetest  flowers. 
So  if  the  peace  of  God  perfume  your  sorrowing  heart,  the  thorns  and  briars  of 
your  affliction  shall  make  your  life  bright  with  the  flowers  of  godliness  and  charity. 
Bear  your  sorrow  with  true  courage  and  sublime  cheerfulness,  not  only  for  your 
own  sake,  but  for  our  sake  who  look  on  you ;  for  we  wish  to  learn  the  way  to 
bear  our  pain.  (W.  Birch.)  God  an  island  when  fortunes  are  wrecked: — Let 
me  tell  you  of  a  man  who  went  home  one  day,  and  sitting  down  in  his  arm-chair, 
put  his  hand  on  his  brow  as  if  in  great  trouble.  His  little  child  went  up  to  him, 
Baying,  "  Father,  what's  the  matter  ?  "  Looking  down  upon  her  with  eyes  of 
despair,  he  replied,  "  Ah,  little  Mary,  I'm  ruined  !  "  She  said,  "  Ruined,  father, 
what's  that  ?  "  He  answered,  "  Why,  my  child,  I'm  like  a  man  in  a  boat  on  the 
Bea,  and  during  a  storm  the  boat  has  upset,  and  he  is  cast  on  a  desolate  island." 
She  climbed  on  his  knee,  stroking  his  face,  and  after  awhile,  exclaimed,  "  Well, 
but,  father,  you  know,  you  have  only  lost  the  boat;  you  haven't  lost  yourself, 
have  you  ?  "  With  tears  in  his  eyes,  he  said,  "  Ah,  no,  thank  God  !  I  have 
only  lost  the  boat ;  my  heart  and  my  life  remain  !  "  Then  she  asked,  "  Father, 
what's  the  name  of  the  island  ?  "  He  replied,  "  That  is  the  worst  of  it,  Mary ; 
I  don't  know."  She  said,  "  But,  father,  I  know ;  yes,  I  know  the  name  of  the 
island  you  are  on ;  why,  father,  it  is  a  nice  island  !  "  The  wretched  man  tried 
to  smile,  and  drawing  the  dear  little  face  to  his  breast,  said,  "  Mary,  dear,  tell  me 
the  name  of  the  island  !  "  She  replied,  "  Oh,  father,  don't  you  know  ?  you  are 
dull  to-night !  why,  father,  the  name  of  the  island  is  God  !  "  The  sorrowful 
man  was  very  still,  and  little  Mary  looking  up  in  his  face,  put  her  arms  round  his 
neck,  saying,  "  Poor  father,  what  makes  you  cry  ?  Why  don't  you  go  upstairs 
and  tell  God  about  it  ?  "  Then  he  gently  lifted  the  dear  child  down,  and  went  to 
tell  out  his  heart's  sorrow  to  God.  It  is  true  his  business  had  fallen  but  a  Divine 
hand  upheld  him.  (Ibid.)  Trusting  God  in  affliction  : — A  coloured  preacher 
was  in  the  habit  of  exhorting  his  people  when  they  were  in  affliction  to  "  Truss 
de  Lord."  When  they  were  in  sore  distress,  he  had  only  one  remedy,  "  Brudder, 
truss  de  Lord  !  "  One  day,  however,  while  the  old  parson  was  crossing  a  river, 
the  boat  upset,  and  being  unable  to  swim,  he  made  a  great  splutter  and  screamed 
like  a  madman.  After  much  trouble,  he  was  got  out  and  brought  safely  to  the 
river  bank,  when  one  of  his  congregation  said,  "  Massa  Preacher,  why  didn't 
you  truss  de  Lord ;  why  did  you  holler  and  scream  when  you  were  in  de  river ; 
why  didn't  you  truss  de  Lord,  and  be  patient  ?  "  The  dark  minister  exclaimed, 
"  Ah,  you  know,  brudder,  it  is  truss  de  Lord  on  de  land,  not  on  de  water."  Of 
course,  anybody  can  trust  in  the  Lord  when  they  are  on  the  land  of  peace  and 
comfort ;  but  it  needs  Christian  faith  and  fortitude  to  be  contented  in  the  waters 
of  affliction.  (Ibid. )  The  Christian  attitude  towards  trouble : — Christians 
who  give  up  their  special  religious  work  because  they  are  in  sorrow,  may  be 
likened  to  rusty  nails  in  a  bag  under  the  counter  of  the  ironmonger's  shop ;  while 
the  man  who  keeps  on  doing  his  best,  believing  that  God  is  with  him,  is  like 
a  nail  in  a  sure  place,  ready  to  bear  all  the  weight  that  is  hung  on  it.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  4-23.  Thou  shalt  take  up  this  proverb  against  the  King-  of  Babylon. — 

The  "  proverb  against  the  King  of  Babylon "  .• — Lowth  is  generally  thought  not 
to  speak  with  exaggeration  when  he  calls  it  the  finest  [song]  of  its  kind  extant 
in  any  language.  It  is  a  song  of  triumph  in  the  form  of  a  dirge,  and  therefore 
involves  an  under-current  of  sarcasm  or  irony.  (Sir  E  Strachey,  Bart.)  An 
ode  of  triumph  : — This  ode,  if  it  is  to  be  admired  as  it  deserves,  must  be  read  as 
a  whole :  its  perfection  as  a  work  of  art,  its  picturesque  imagery,  the  delicate 
and  subtle  vein  of  irony  by  which  it  is  penetrated — it  is  called  a  "  taunt-song  " — 
will  not  endure  partial  quotation  or  paraphrase.  The  line  of  thought  is  as  follows. 
In  the  first  strophe  (vers.  4-8),  the  prophet  declares  exultingly  how  at  length 
the  tyrant  is  stilled,  the  earth  is  at  peace  ;  only  the  sound  of  rejoicing  is  heard. 
In  the  second  (vers.  9-11),  he  accompanies  in  thought  the  Shade  of  the  King  of 
Babylon  as  it  journeys  to  the  Underworld,  arid  imagines  the  ironical  greeting 
which  there  meets  it  from  the  lips  of  the  other  kings — still,  as  on  earth,  supposed 
to  be  invested  with  the  panoply  of  State.     The  third  strophe  (vers,  12-15)  depict* 


chap,  xiv.]  ISAIAH.  361 

the  abasement  of  the  Babylonian  monarch  in  its  full  magnitude  :  he  who  would 
have  joined  the  ranks  of  the  gods,  is  cast  down  to  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  pit. 
In  the  fourth  and  last  strophe  (ver.  16-2Q),  the  prophet's  thought  passes  to 
the  battlefield — from  the  feeble  Shade  to  the  unburied,  dishonoured  corpse  : 
the  passers-by  express  their  amazement  at  the  contrast  which  its  fate  presents 
to  that  of  other  kings  after  their  death  ;  it  is  excluded  from  the  royal  burial- 
place,  flung  aside  as  a  worthless  bough,  hidden  amongst  the  bodies  of  slain,  common 
eoldiers.  The  prophet  concludes  with  an  epilogue,  spoken  in  his  own  person, 
and  re-asserting  emphatically  the  final  and  irretrievable  ruin  of  the  great  city 
(vers.  21-23).  The  best  commentary  on  this  prophecy  is  the  long  and  impassioned 
invective  against  Babylon  contained  in  Jer.  1.  1-li.  58.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.) 
Destruction  of  the  King  of  Babylon  : — The  Babylonian  monarchy  bade  fair  to  be 
an  absolute,  universal,  and  perpetual  one,  and  in  these  pretensions  vied  with  the 
Almighty;  it  is,  therefore,  very  justly,  not  only  brought  down,  but  exulted 
over  when  it  is  down.  (M.  Henry.)  "  The  golden  city  (ver.  4)  is  a  graphical 
description  of  that  city,  which  was  renowned  for  its  immense  riches  and  incom- 
parable splendour.  (R.  Macculloch. )  Deliverance  from  an  evil  dominion  : — 
If  the  nations  rejoice  at  the  overthrow  of  a  haughty,  tyrannical  prince,  and  the 
re-establishment  of  tranquillity  and  liberty,  how  much  greater  ought  to  be 
the  triumph  of  those  who  are  delivered  from  the  dominion  of  divers  impetuous 
lusts,  and  enjoy  the  earnests  of  spiritual  and  eternal  rest!  (Ibid.)  "Hell" 
(ver.  9),  as  always  in  the  Old  Testament = the  Greek  Hades  ;  not  a  place  of 
torment,  but  the  "  meeting-place  of  all  living  "  (Job.  xxx.  23).  The  prophet's 
representation  is  based  upon  the  ideas  current  among  the  people.  See  Bishop 
Lowth's  "  Lectures  on  the  Sacred  Poetry  of  the  Hebrews,"  Lecture  vii.  The  same 
idea  is  elaborated  in  greater  detail  by  Ezekiel,  chap,  xxxii.  17-32.  [Prof.  S.  It. 
Driver,  D.D.)  An  image  of  the  soul  : — The  mythological  idea  of  Hades  proceeds 
on  the  twofold  truth,  that  what  and  how  man  has  been  in  this  world  is  not  obliter- 
ated in  the  other  world,  but  becomes  essentially  manifest,  and  that  there  is  an 
immaterial  self-formation  of  the  soul  in  which  all  that  the  individual  man  has 
become  through  his  own  self-determination  under  God-given  relations  is  reflected 
as  in  a  mirror,  and  that  in  an  abiding  figure.  This  image  of  the  soul,  to  which 
the  dead  body  is  related  as  the  shattered  form  of  a  mould,  is  the  shadowy  corporeity 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Hades,  in  which  they  appear  essentially,  although  in  the 
condition  of  spirits,  as  what  they  were  in  this  life.     (F.  Delitzsch.)  Hell"  is 

moved  as  a  city  is  moved  when  a  great  king  is  brought  prisoner  thither,  and  every- 
one runs  out  of  his  house  to  see  him.  (W.  Day,  M.A.)  Lucifer  (ver.  12): — In 
his  splendour  [the  King  of  Babylon]  is  likened  to  the  morning  star,  which  was 
worshipped  by  the  Babylonians  under  the  name  of  Istar.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D). 
Impious  expectations  disappointed  (vers.  13-15): — That  he  should  go  to  Sheol  at 
all  was  a  fate  never  contemplated  by  his  soaring  and  self-deifying  pride.  (Ibid). 
Pride  and  ambition  know  no  bounds  (ver.  14).  (R.  Macculloch.)  "  The  bittern  " 
(ver.  23),  Heb.  kippod.  The  word  occurs  also  in  chap,  xxxiv.  11;  Zeph.  ii.  14. 
it  has  been  rendered  otter,  tortoise,  owl,  beaver,  porcupine  (R.V.).  No  one  of 
the  renderings  proposed  is  satisfactory.  "Bittern  "  is  freer  from  objection  than 
any  other  bird  which  might  be  proposed.  It  is  a  solitary  bird,  and  loves  such 
haunts  as  would  be  supplied  by  the  marshes  which  were  found  in  districts  of 
Edom  and  Babylon  and  Nineveh,  as  the  fruit  of  the  desolation  sent  on  them. 
It  feeds  at  night,  and  hides  during  the  day  among  the  long  grass  and  rushes 
of  its  favourite  habitats.  (J.  Duns,  D.D.,  F.R.S.E.)  "The  besom  of  destruc- 
tion "  (ver.  23) : — When  a  people  have  nothing  among  them  but  dirt  and  filth, 
and  will  not  be  made  clean  with  the  besom  of  reformation,  what  can  they 
expect  but  to  be  swept  off  the  face  of  the  earth  with  "  the  besom  of  destruc- 
tion "  ?  (M.  Henry.)  The  Church's  exultation  over  her  foes:  —  Surely,  in 
eome  such  terms  as  these,  the  Church  shall  one  day  exult  over  all  her  foes, 
and  especially  over  the  great  apostate  power  of  Babylon  the  Great,  the  City 
of  the  Seven  Hills.  And  still  more,  over  the  cast  out  prince  of  this  world,  of 
whom  the  King  of  Babylon  and  other  princes  of  this  world  have  been  the  types 
and  representatives.     (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  9.  Hell  from  beneath  is  moved  for  thee.  —  The  first  five  minutes 
after  death  : — There  is  a  very  well-known  story  told  of  a  man  who  had  served  his 
king  and  country  in  many  a  distant  land,  and  in  many  a  strange  experience, 
coming  back  home,  and  talking  to  his  friends  of  the  wonderful  sights  which  he 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xtv. 

had  seen,  and  the  wonderful  experiences  which  he  had  gone  through.  And  when 
they  remarked  to  him  on  the  sort  of  wonders  he  had  experienced  and  known, 
he  checked  them  with  saying,  "  There  is  something  more  wonderful  than  anything 
I  have  yet  known,  which  I  still  have  to  experience,"  and  when  they  asked  him 
what  it  was,  he  said,  "It  is  the  first  five  minutes  after  death."  The  first  five 
minutes  after  death  !  It  was  upon  what  happens  in  the  first  five  minutes  after 
death  that  the  prophet  was  exercising  himself  here  in  this  particular  prophecy. 
(Davey  Biggs,  D.D.)  Life  beyond  the  grave: — 1.  The  prophet  believed  that 
for  those  who  pass  through  the  gate  of  death  there  would  be  recognition  in  the 
strange  life  beyond  the  grave.  He  believed  that  those  who  were  inhabiting  that 
world  before  other  individuals  entered  into  it  would  know  them,  would  be  there 
ready  to  greet  them,  greet  them  as  in  this  case  with  horror,  with  dismay,  with,  as  it 
were,  congratulations  that  what  had  been  tyrannical  in  the  world  of  life  before  death 
had  now,  as  it  were,  found  its  level,  the  opportunity  of  tyranny  gone.  The  prophet 
pictures  the  expectation  that  there  was  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  had  known 
what  it  was  to  be  cruelly  oppressed  in  this  world  when  their  oppressor  came  to  join 
them.  He  shows  that  the  attitude  of  those  who  were  within  the  grave  in  the  unseen 
world  was  one  of  expectation.  2.  There  is  memory  there,  memory  not  only  of  our 
past  selves,  but  about  other  people ;  memory,  too,  of  those  living  on  the  earth. 
(Ibid. )  Recognition  beyond  the  grave : — We  know  that  what  was  only  conjecture 
in  the  mind  of  the  prophet  when  he  painted  hell  stirring  up  the  dead  to  meet 
Belshazzar,  King  of  Babylon,  has  become  certainty  through  the  revelation  given 
to  us  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  do  not  know  how  anybody  can  read  through 
the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus  and  not  feel  that,  whatever  the  intention 
was  with  which  the  parable  was  spoken,  incidentally  our  Lord  does  teach  us  that 
in  the  life  beyond  the  grave  the  personality  which  we  have  known  here  in  this 
life  continues.  As  personality  shows  itself  in  self-consciousness,  so  our  Lord 
shows  that  the  rich  man  and  Lazurus  are  conscious  of  their  own  existence.  There 
is  mutual  recognition  too.  The  rich  man  has  not  any  doubt  whatever  who  it  is 
in  whose  bosom  Lazarus  was  reposing  ;  and  I  suppose  at  the  very  least  fifteen 
centuries  parted  them.  In  the  same  mysterious  way  Peter,  James,  and  John 
on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  knew  that  it  was  Moses  and  Elijah  who  were 
talking  with  the  Messiah.  There  is  a  wonderful  power  of  recognition  of  even 
those  whom  we  have  never  met.  We  shall  know,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
wishes  us  to  know  that  we  shall  know,  the  great  people  in  the  past  to  whom  we 
owe  such  great  debts.     (Ibid. ) 

Ver.  24.  Sorely  as  I  have  thought,  so  snail  it  come  to  pass. — God's 
infinite  intelligence  : — To  think  and  to  purpose  are  the  attributes  of  all  rational 
beings,  whether  created  or  uncreated.  I.  God  is  such  an  infinitely  perfect  being, 
that  His  thoughts  and  purposes  are  co-eternal  with  Himself.  God  cannot 
possibly  exist  without  His  thoughts  and  purposes.  A  child  at  school  in  France, 
was  asked  whether  God  reasoned  or  not.  The  child  paused  awhile,  and  answered, 
"  No :  God  is  too  perfect  to  reason.  He  knows  everything  without  reasoning." 
Newton  himself  could  not  have  given  a  better  answer.  Everything  that  exists 
in  God  now,  has  existed  in  Him  from  eternity.  II.  As  His  thoughts  and  pur- 
poses flow  exclusively  from  Himself,  they  are  absolute;  they  are,  primarily 
considered,  unconditional.  This  is  a  necessity  that  does  not  militate,  in  the 
least  degree,  against  the  accountability  of  man.  They  must  have  been  absolute, 
or  no  being  could  possibly  have  existed.  III.  The  thoughts  and  purposes  of 
the  Almighty  are  infinitely  glorious;  in  other  words,  are  infinitely  worthy 
of  Himself.  It  is  in  the  fulfilment  of  His  own  thoughts  and  purposes  that  He 
develops  all  the  beauty  of  His  own  perfections ;  it  is  in  the  development  of  all 
the  beauty  of  His  own  perfections,  that  He  confers  every  good  on  the  creature. 
Take  two  axioms  in  divinity.  All  good  is  from  God — all  evil  is  from  the  creature. 
Do  justice  to  these  truths,  and  they  will,  as  two  keys,  unlock  some  of  the  most 
difficult  passages  in  Scripture.  IV.  The  purpose  of  God  is  replete  with  lovb 
and  tenderness.  The  sovereign  purpose  of  God,  properly  speaking,  involves 
nothing  but  good.  Evil  is  to  be  traced  to  another  source.  But  what  does  it 
comprise  chiefly  ?  A  Saviour.  We  were  suffered  to  fall  into  the  deepest  guilt, 
that  God  might  display  His  glory  to  the  utmost  in  our  salvation.  (W.  Howels.) 
God's  purposes  must  be  fulfilled  : — The  wheels  in  a  watch  or  a  clock  move  contrary 
one  to  another,  some  one  way,  and  some  another,  yet  all  serve  the  intent  of  tha 
workman,  to  show  the  time,  or  to  make  the  clock  to  strike.     So  in  the  world 


chap,  xiv.]  ISA  TAIL  S69 

the  providence  of  God  may  seem  to  run  cross  to  Hia  promises.  One  man  takes 
this  way,  another  runs  that  way.  Good  men  go  one  way,  wicked  men  another. 
Yet  all  in  conclusion  accomplish  the  will,  and  centre  in  the  purpose  of  God,  the 
great  Creator  of  all  things.     (jR.  Sibbes,  D.D.) 

Vers.  29-32.  Eejoice  not  thou,  whole  Palestina. — Philiatia  was  the  south- 
west coast  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  to  the  whole  of  which  it  afterwards  gave  its 
name  in  the  Greek  form  of  Palestine,  and  was  nominally  included  in  the  tribe 
of  Judah.  It  was  originally  inhabited  by  the  Avites,  who  were  expelled  by  the 
Caphtorim,  a  race  of  Egyptian  origin,  but  supposed  to  have  come  immediately 
from  Crete  or  Cyprus,  and  who,  under  the  name  of  Philistines,  continued  as  a 
distinct,  and  for  the  most  part  independent  nation,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  Israel 
to  subdue  them.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The  Philistine*  were  very  formid- 
able enemies  to  Israel  in  the  days  of  Samuel  and  of  Saul.  The  strong  kings, 
David,  Solomon,  and  Jehoshaphat,  kept  them  in  subjection,  but  in  the  days  of 
Jehoramthey  invaded  Judah  (2  Sam.  v.  17-25,  xxi.  15;  2Chron.xvii.  11,  xxi.  16, 17). 
Uzziah  again  repressed  them,  and  crippled  their  power,  dismantling  their  walled 
cities,  and  building  fortresses  of  his  own  to  command  them  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  6,  7) ; 
and  no  doubt  they  continued  tributary  during  the  still  vigorous  government 
of  his  successor  Jotham.  But  during  the  weak  reign  of  Ahaz,  they  "  invaded 
the  cities  of  the  low  country,  and  of  the  south  of  Judah  " ;  and  not  only  invaded, 
but  settled  themselves  in  them  and  their  neighbouring  villages  (2  Chron.  xxviii. 
18) :  and  to  this  state  of  things  Isaiah  addresses  himself  in  this  prophecy.  (Ibid.) 
The  rod  of  the  taskmaster  is  Isaiah's  frequent  image  for  the  control  of  a  dependent 
and  tributary  nation :  all  Philistia  had  rejoiced  when  the  rod  of  Davia  and  of 
Uzziah  fell  broken  from  the  hands  of  Ahaz,  and  expressed  their  joy  by  wasting 
or  taking  possession  of  their  former  master's  lands;  but  Isaiah  warns  them 
that  the  old  root  of  Israel,  which  from  the  days  of  Samson  had  sent  forth 
many  a  rod  with  a  serpent's  life  like  the  rod  of  Moses,  would  soon  again 
produce  a  basilisk  with  its  royal  crest,  its  inevitable  spring,  and  its  mortal  bite, 
to  take  vengeance  on  his  enemies.  (Ibid. )  Hezekiah  and  the  Messiah : — The 
basilisk  is  Hezekiah,  and  the  flying  dragon  is  the  Messiah  (such  is  the  explanation 
of  the  Targum) ;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  former  is  the  Davidic  kingdom 
of  the  immediate  future,  and  the  latter  the  Davidic  kingdom  of  the  ultimate 
future.  The  figure  may  appear  inappropriate,  because  the  serpent  is  a  symbol 
of  evil ;  but  it  is  not  a  symbol  merely  of  creaturely  evil,  but  also  of  the  Divine 
curse  ;  the  curse,  however,  is  the  energy  of  penal  justice,  and  as  the  executor 
of  this  justice  as  a  judgment  of  God  on  Philistia,  the  Davidic  king  is  here  called 
a  serpent  in  a  climax  rising  through  three  stages.  Perhaps  the  choice  of  the 
figure  was  suggested  by  Gen.  xlix.  17  ;  for  the  saying  concerning  Dan  was  fulfilled 
in  Samson  the  Danite,  the  sworn  enemy  of  the  Philistines.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  The 
law  of  conquests  and  exterminations  : — If  the  spread  of  civilisation,  knowledge, 
justice,  virtue,  religion,  and  whatever  else  distinguishes  men  from  beasts,  is  a 
good  and  not  an  evil,  then  it  is  good  for  men  to  use  all  the  means  which  are  really 
necessary  to  effect  that  end,  even  though  some  of  them  be  never  so  rough  ana 
unpleasing ;  and  it  is  not  less  base  in  public  than  in  private  morals  to  shrink  from 
the  responsibility  of  ourselves  doing  that  which  we  know  it  is  good  to  have  done. 
If  a  weak,  effeminate,  degenerate  nation  can  be  improved  by  subjection  to  a 
stronger,  manlier,  more  virtuous  nation,  then  it  is  not  only  the  right  but  the 
duty  of  the  latter  to  bring  it  into  subjection,  whenever  the  indications  of  God's 
providence,  be  they  of  peace  or  war,  show  that  the  time  has  come.  And  if  the 
nation  is  not  merely  degenerate  but  hopelessly  corrupt,  then  it  is  not  only  the 
right  but  the  duty  of  some  worthier  nation  to  destroy  it,  and  rid  the  world  of 
its  abominations.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The  Gospel  a  means  of  national 
salvation  : — The  Gospel  has  given  to  us,  in  modern  Christendom,  means  of  reclaim* 
ing  nations  who  would  have  been  irreclaimable  by  any  measures  which  Greeks 
or  Romans  or  even  Jews  could  apply ;  and  we  are  bound  to  act  with  corre- 
sponding gentleness  and  forbearance.  (Ibid.)  "  Tht  firstborn  of  the  poor " 
(ver.  30)  seems  to  be  a  Hebrew  idiom  for  the  "  really,  eminently  poor,"  like  that 
of  "  Son  of  Man  "  to  express  the  man.  Or  the  prophet  may  mean  that  the  first 
of  the  next  generation,  the  children  of  the  present  depressed  Israelites,  shall  be 
delivered  from  the  miseries  which  the  Philistines  are  now  inflicting  on  their  fathers. 
{Ibid.) 

24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

Ver.  32.  What  shall  one  then  answer  the  messengers  of  the  nation  ? — Go<T a 
work  in  founding  Zion  : — The  kingdom  of  Judah  was  low  and  broken  ;  foreign 
invasions  and  intestine  divisions  had  made  it  so.  In  this  state  of  things  God  takes 
notice  of  the  joy  and  triumphing  of  the  Philistines.  To  take  them  off  from  their 
pride  and  boasting  He  lets  them  know  that  from  the  people  whom  they  despised 
their  desolation  was  at  hand,  though  they  seemed  to  be  perplexed  and  forsaken 
for  a  season  (vers.  29-31).  I.  There  is  an  inquiry.  "  What  shall  one  answer,'* 
&c.  They  come  to  make  inquiry  after  the  work  of  God  among  His  people,  and 
it  is  fit  that  an  answer  be  given  to  them.  Two  things  are  observable  in  this  interro- 
gation. 1.  The  nations  about  will  be  diligently  inquiring  after  God's  dispensation* 
among  His  people.  There  are  certain  affections  and  principles  that  are  active 
in  the  nations,  that  will  make  them  restless,  and  always  put  them  upon  this 
inquiry.  The  people  of  God,  on  one  account  or  other,  shall  be  in  all  seasons 
a  separated  people.  No  sooner,  then,  is  any  people,  or  portion  of  them,  thus 
dedicated  to  God,  but  all  the  nations  about,  and  those  amongst  them  not  engaged 
in  the  same  way  with  them,  instantly  look  on  them  as  utterly  severed  from  them, 
having  other  ways,  ends,  and  interests  than  they  ;  being  built  up  wholly  on  another 
account  and  foundation.  They  reckon  not  of  them  as  a  people  and  a  nation. 
The  conclusion  they  make  concerning  them  is,  that  of  Haman  (Esth.  iii.  8). 
(1)  They  are  full  of  enmity  against  them.  (2)  A  second  principle,  whereby  they 
are  put  upon  their  inquiries,  is  fear.  They  fear  them,  and  therefore  will  know 
how  things  stand  with  them,  and  what  are  the  works  of  God  amongst  them  (Hab.  iii. 
7  ;  Psa.  xlviii.  1-6).  Fear  is  solicitous  and  inquiring ;  it  will  leave  nothing 
unsearched,  unlooked  into  ;  it  would  find  the  inside  and  bottom  of  everything, 
wherein  it  is  concerned.  Though  the  more  it  finds,  the  more  it  is  increased  ; 
yet  the  greater  still  are  its  inquiries,  fearing  more  what  it  knows  not  than  what 
it  knows.  2.  The  issues  of  God's  dispensations  amongst  His  people  shall  be 
so  evident  and  glorious,  that  every  one,  any  one,  though  never  so  weak,  if  not 
blinded  by  prejudice,  shall  be  able  to  give  a  convincing  answer  concerning  them 
to  the  inquiries  of  men.  II.  There  is  the  resolution  given  of  the  inquiry. 
Hereof  are  two  parts — (1)  What  God  hath  done.  (2)  What  His  people  shall, 
or  ought  to  do.  Wrap  up  at  any  time  the  work  of  God  and  the  duty  of  His  people 
together,  and  they  will  b»  a  sufficient  answer  to  any  man's  inquiry  after  the  state 
of  things  among  them.  1.  The  great  design  of  God  in  His  mighty  works  and 
dispensations  is  the  establishment  of  His  people,  and  their  proper  interest,  in 
their  several  generations.  To  make  this  clear  some  few  things  are  previously 
to  be  considered — (1)  The  proper  interest  of  the  people  of  God  is  to  glorify  Him 
in  their  several  places,  stations,  and  generations  :  none  of  us  are  to  live  unto 
ourselves.  (2)  God  is  the  only  proper  and  infallible  judge,  in  what  state  and 
condition  His  people  will  best  and  most  glorify  His  name,  in  their  several  genera- 
tions. (3)  Providential  dispensations  are  discoveries  of  the  wisdom  of  God  in 
disposing  of  the  condition  of  His  people,  so  as  they  may  best  glorify  Him.  These 
things  being  premised,  it  is  easy  to  give  light  and  evidence  to  the  assertion  laid 
down.  2.  It  is  the  duty  of  God's  preserved  remnant,  laying  aside  all  other  aims 
and  contrivances,  to  betake  themselves  to  the  work  of  God,  founding  Zion,  and 
preserving  the  common  interest  of  His  people.  "  God  hath  founded  Zion,  and 
the  poor  of  the  people  shall  trust  therein,"  or  betake  themselves  unto  it.  We 
are  apt  to  wander  on  hills  and  mountains,  every  one  walking  in  the  imagination 
of  his  own  heart,  forgetting  our  resting-place.  When  God  was  bringing  the 
power  of  the  Babylonian  upon  His  people,  the  prophet  Jeremiah  could  neither 
persuade  the  whole  nation  to  submit  to  his  government,  nor  many  individuals 
among  them  to  fall  to  him  in  particular.  And  when  the  time  of  their  deliverance 
from  that  captivity  was  accomplished,  how  hardly  were  they  persuaded  to  embrace 
the  liberty  tendered  !  (J.  Owen,  D.D.)  God's  care  for  His  people  : — 1.  The 
great  things  God  doth  for  His  people  are,  and  cannot  but  be,  taken  notice  of 
by  their  neighbours  (Psa.  cxxvi.  2).  2.  Messengers  will  be  sent  to  inquire 
concerning  them.  Jacob  and  Israel  have  long  been  a  people  distinguished 
from  all  others,  and  dignified  with  uncommon  favours ;  and  therefore,  some 
for  good-will,  others  for  ill-will,  and  all  for  curiosity,  are  inquisitive  concerning 
them.  3.  It  concerns  us  always  to  be  ready  to  "  give  a  reason  of  the  hope  "  that 
we  have  in  the  providence  of  God,  as  well  as  in  His  grace,  in  answer  to  every 
one  that  asks  it,  "  with  meekness  and  fear."  4.  The  issue  of  God's  dealings 
with  His  people  shall  be  so  manifestly  glorious  that  any  one,  every  one,  shall 
be  able  to  give  an  account  of  them  to  those  that   inquire  concerning  them. 


chap,  xiv.]  ISAIAH.  371 

( M.  Henry. )  The  Church  founded  for  a  refuge : — At  first  sight  the  pred  iction  which 
closes  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  Isaiah  seems  of  temporary  interest  only,  and 
to  speak  of  judgments  which  within  a  very  few  years  were  destined  to  fall  upon 
one  of  the  most  inveterate  enemies  of  God's  ancient  people  ;  and  yet  I  cannot 
but  think  those  commentators  right  who,  following  the  opinion  of  divers  of  the 
fathers  of  the  Church,  have  found  in  the  passage  an  allusion  to  the  Gospel  and 
Church  of  Christ.  I.  That  the  prophecy  would  be  one  of  pressing  and  immediath 
interest  to  the  CONTEMPORARIES  of  the  prophet  is  obvious  from  the  manner 
in  which  it  is  ushered  in :  "  In  the  year  that  King  Ahaz  died  was  this  burden  " 
(or,  as  we  should  nowadays  say,  this  denunciation  of  wrath)  against  the  Philistines. 
After  bidding  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine  howl  for  the  judgments  that  were 
impending,  Isaiah,  speaking  as  he  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  makes  the 
inquiry  and  gives  the  answer  of  the  text.  It  was  usual  for  neighbouring  nations, 
who  were  friends  and  allies,  to  send  ambassadors,  and  congratulate  each  other 
on  success.  When,  therefore,  the  coming  triumph  over  the  Philistines  should 
be  known  abroad,  and  the  envoys  of  friendly  states  should  inquire  of  Judah  into 
the  circumstances  of  his  success,  "let  this  answer,"  said  the  prophet,  "suffice: 
that  the  Lord  hath  founded  Zion,  and  the  poor  of  His  people  shall  trust  in  it." 
II.  No  one  can  read  that  promise  and  not  feel  that  it  was  intended  to  have 
an  ampler  scope  for  its  fulfilment  than  in  the  personal  security  of  a  handful 
of  Jewish  peasants ;  the  whole  turn  of  expression  is  redolent  of  Gospel  times. 
Such  words  were  never  fully  verified  till  Christ,  the  Son  of  David,  had  founded 
the  Christian  Church,  and  made  His  gracious  offer  to  a  world  enslaved  in  the 
most  cruel  of  all  bondage  :  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  (F.  E.  Paget,  D.D.)  The  Church's  heavenly 
origin  and  beneficent  mission : — I.  "  The  Lord  hath  founded  Zion  "  ;  this  18 
the  guarantee  of  His  love  and  her  stability.  The  strongest,  most  funda- 
mental title  of  protection  is  creation.  Even  among  ourselves,  no  one  frames 
an  object  to  destroy  it ;  he  who  makes,  makes  that  he  may  preserve.  And  if 
this  be  so  in  human  nature,  shall  there  be  nothing  to  compare  with  it  in  the  Divine  ? 
God,  indeed,  who  is  eternal,  can  require  no  successor  to  whom  to  devise  His  pur- 
poses of  love ;  but  all  the  claims  that  the  thing  framed  can  have  on  Him  who 
framed  it,  hold  with  tenfold  force  when  the  object  is  not,  as  in  our  humbler  works, 
the  mere  apposition  of  pre-existing  materials,  in  which  nothing  is  ours  except 
the  order  of  arrangement,  but  is  itself,  alike  in  matter  and  in  form,  the  direct 
offspring  of  His  own  inexhaustible  power  and  goodness.  1.  Behold,  then,  how 
as  His  own  "  Cod  loved  the  world  "  ;  how  as  not  only  His  own,  but  His  own 
in  pain  and  anguish,  and  endeared  to  His  inmost  heart  as  such,  God  hath  loved 
His  Church.  He  spoke  to  bid  the  one,  He  died  to  make  the  other,  exist.  2.  In 
this  Church  of  His  is  His  own  honour  pledged.  He  hath  not  covenanted  with 
the  world  that  now  is  to  immortalise  it ;  but  He  has  passed  His  own  word  for 
the  perpetuity  of  His  Church.  Nothing  so  framed  was  ever  framed  to  perish  ; 
He  has  infused  into  it  His  own  Spirit,  and  His  Spirit  is  life.  3.  Is  not  the  Church 
in  its  ultimate  perfection  set  forth  as  the  very  reward  of  all  the  sorrows  of  its 
Lord  ;  and  shall  He  be  defrauded  of  His  recompense  ?  4.  There  is  more  than 
creation  to  bind  the  Church  to  Christ,  more  than  promise,  more  than  reward  ; 
there  is  communion,  oneness,  identification.  A  man  may  desert  his  child  ;  he 
cannot  desert  himself.  With  such  a  union  there  can  be  no  separation  ;  if  Christ 
be  immortal,  the  Church  is  so  ;  when  He  dies  she  shall  perish,  but  not  till  then. 
II.  "  The  poor  of  her  people  shall  trust  in  it " — or,  as  the  margin  has  it,  shall 
betake  themselves  unto  it:  this  is  one  purpose  of  the  Church's  mission 
upon  earth — the  care,  the  teaching,  the  education,  the  guidance  of  the  poor. 
(W.  Archer  Butler,  D.D.)  God  the  Protector  of  His  Church  .-—We  tell  our  Lord 
God  that  if  He  will  have  His  Church,  He  must  keep  it  Himself,  for  we  cannot 
do  it ;  and  it  is  well  for  us  that  we  cannot,  else  we  should  be  the  proudest  asses 
under  heaven.     (M.  Luther.) 


372  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Vbbs.  1-9.  The  burden  of  Moab. — The  Moabite  stone : — From  the  inscrip- 
tion of  Mesha  (c.  900  B.C.),  found  at  Dibon  in  1869,  and  commonly  known  as  the 
"  Moabite  stone,"  we  learn  that  the  Moabites  spoke  a  language  differing  only 
dialectically  from  Hebrew ;  and  it  is  probable  also  that,  in  matters  of  material 
prosperity  and  civilisation,  Moab  stood  hardly  upon  an  inferior  level  to  Israel 
itself.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  prophet's  pity  for  Moab  : — There  is  no 
prophecy  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah  in  which  the  heart  of  the  prophet  is  so  painfully 
moved  by  what  his  spirit  beholds  and  his  mouth  must  prophesy.  All  that  he 
prophesies  is  felt  as  deeply  by  him  as  if  he  belonged  to  the  poor  people  whose 
messenger  of  misfortune  he  is  compelled  to  be  (F.  Delitzsch.)  In  the  night — 
Ar  and  Kir  of  Moab  : — The  seizing  of  them  laid  the  whole  country  open,  and 
made  all  the  wealth  of  it  an  easy  prey  to  the  victorious  army.  1.  Great  changes, 
and  very  dismal  ones,  may  be  made  in  a  very  little  time.  Here  are  two  cities 
lost  in  a  night,  though  that  is  the  time  of  quietness.  Let  us,  therefore,  lie  down 
as  those  who  know  not  what  a  night  may  bring  forth.  2.  As  the  country  feeds 
the  cities,  so  the  cities  protect  the  country,  and  neither  can  say  to  the  other,  "  I 
have  no  need  of  thee.  (M.  Henry.)  God  works  in  the  night-time  : — 1.  Man 
has  but  a  little  day  to  work  in,  but  God's  working  hours  never  cease  ;  man  becomes 
weary  with  his  day's  work,  and  lies  down  to  rest,  and  whilst  he  is  in  slumber 
destruction  swiftly  overtakes  him,  so  that  the  morning  looks  upon  a  branch  out 
off,  a  city  laid  to  waste  and  brought  to  silence.  2.  Men  should  diligently  consider 
this  in  musing  upon  the  judgments  of  providence.  They  cannot  always  be  awake  ; 
they  cannot  always  be  upon  the  walls  defending  the  fortress  ;  they  must  retire 
for  a  time  to  renew  their  strength,  and  whilst  they  are  resting  the  enemy  acquires 
additional  power,  and  comes  down  upon  their  boasted  masonry,  and  hurls  it  to 
the  dust.  3.  Only  the  Christian  man  has  confidence  in  the  night-time.  He 
says,  He  that  keepeth  me  will  not  slumber  nor  sleep.  4.  God  is  against  evil- 
workers,  and  it  delights  Him  to  trouble  them  by  nightly  visits,  so  that  in  the 
morning  they  cannot  recall  their  own  plans  and  purposes,  or  give  an  account  of 
that  which  has  happened  whilst  their  eyes  have  been  closed  in  sleep.  5.  Have 
we  any  safety  in  the  darkness  ?  Have  we  made  no  provision  for  the  night-time  ? 
If  not,  then  woe  will  fall  upon  us,  and  when  the  morning  comes  it  will  rise  upon 
a  scene  of  desolation.  Remember  what  God  said  to  the  fool  in  the  parable  who 
was  counting  his  riches,  and  forecasting  the  happy  years  which  his  soul  was  to 
enjoy — "  Thou  fool  !  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee."  6.  Ponder 
deeply  upon  the  moral  of  night ;  the  darkness  should  instruct  us,  remind  us  of 
our  exhaustion,  helplessness,  and  dependence  upon  others  for  security  and  rest, 
and  should,  above  all  things,  lead  us  to  put  our  confidence  in  Him  to  whom  the 
darkness  and  the  light  are  both  alike.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  He  is  gone  up  to  Bajith,  and  to  Dibon,  tne  high  places,  to  weep. — 

The  helplessness  of  heathen  gods : — We  have  a  picture  of  men  going  to  old 
altars,  and  finding  there  nothing  but  silence.  Bajith  may  be  regarded  as  the 
temple  of  the  Moabite  god.  1.  So  they  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  helplessness  ; 
their  very  gods  had  forsaken  them,  and  had  thus  revealed  their  own  character  aa 
deities.  It  is  under  such  circumstances — namely,  of  desertion  and  sorrow — that 
men  find  out  what  their  religion  is  really  worth.  The  Lord  taunts  all  the  heathen 
nations  because  their  gods  forsook  them  in  the  hour  of  calamity.  One  prophet 
exclaims,  "  Thy  calf  hath  cast  thee  off,  0  Samaria."  The  Lord  Himself  is  repre- 
sented as  going  up  and  down  throughout  the  temples  of  heathenism,  mocking 
and  taunting  the  gods  with  which  they  were  filled,  because  they  were  merely 
ornamental  or  decorative  gods,  and  were  utterly  without  power  to  assuage  the 
sorrow  of  the  human  heart.  2.  Whilst,  however,  all  this  is  true  of  heathenism, 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  even  Christian  men  may  go  back  to  old  altars  and  find 
them  forsaken.  The  Lord,  the  living  One,  the  Father  of  the  universe,  is  not 
pledged  to  abide  at  the  altar  forever  to  await  the  return  of  the  prodigal.  In  the 
very  first  book  of  the  Bible  we  read,  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with 
man."  There  is  a  day  of  grace,  so  measurement  can  be  determined  with  sufficient 
nearness  to  excite  alarm,  lest  its  golden  hours  should  be  lost.  When  the  door  is 
once  shut  it  will  not  be  opened  again.  Men  may  so  live  that  when  they  go  to 
the  sanctuary  itself,  where  the  sweetest  Gospel  is  preached  in  all  its  purity  and 


chap,  xvi.]  ISAIAH.  373 

nobleness,  they  find  no  comfort  in  the  place  that  is  devoted  to  consolation.  The 
fault  is  to  be  found  in  themselves  ;  they  have  sinned  away  their  opportunities, 
they  have  enclosed  themselves  within  walls  of  adamant,  they  have  betaken  them- 
selves to  the  worship  of  their  own  vanity  and  the  pursuit  of  their  own  selfish 
purposes,  so  that  when  they  return  to  the  house  of  God  they  find  that  the  Lord 
has  abandoned  His  temple.  "  They  shall  call  upon  Me,  and  I  will  not  answer." 
This  is  more  than  silence;  it  is  silence  aggravated,  silence  intensified,  silence 
increased  into  burdensomeness.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Signs  of  mourning: — 
The  sorrow  of  those  who  mourn  is  represented  by  a  very  graphic  figure : —  On 
all  their  heads  shall  be  baldness,  and  every  beard  cut  off."  The  primary  reference 
is  probably  to  some  sacrificial  ceremony.  At  a  very  early  period  baldness  was 
regarded  as  a  symbol  of  intensest  sorrow  amongst  Eastern  nations.  Baldness 
was  forbidden  to  Israel,  for  the  probable  reason  that  it  was  identified  with  the 
sacrificial  worship  of  heathen  deities.  The  picture  of  lamentation  is  continued 
in  the  third  verse.  In  Eastern  countries,  when  men  were  afflicted  with  great 
Borrow,  they  betook  themselves  to  the  flat  roofs  of  their  houses,  and  there  publicly 
and  loudly  wailed  on  account  of  their  agony.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  5.  My  heart  shall  cry  out  for  Moab. — The  burden  of  souls  : — Too  often 
have  God's  servants  spoken  with  dry  eyes  and  hard  voices  of  the  doom  of 
the  ungodly  ;  and  have  only  made  them  more  obdurate  and  determined.  We 
never  need  so  much  brokenness  of  spirit  as  when  we  utter  God's  judgments  against 
Bin.  In  his  autobiography,  Finney  sa}'s,  "  Here  I  must  introduce  the  name  of 
a  man  whom  I  shall  have  occasion  to  mention  frequently,  Mr.  Abel  Clary.  He 
was  the  son  of  a  very  excellent  man,  and  an  elder  of  the  Church  where  I  was  con- 
verted. He  had  been  licensed  to  preach ;  but  his  spirit  of  prayer  was  such,  he 
was  so  burdened  with  the  souls  of  men,  that  he  was  not  able  to  preach  much,  his 
whole  time  and  strength  being  given  to  prayer.  The  burden  of  his  soul  would 
frequently  be  so  great  that  he  was  unable  to  stand,  and  he  would  writhe  and 
groan  in  agony.  I  was  well  acquainted  with  him,  and  knew  something  of  the 
wonderful  spirit  of  prayer  that  was  upon  him.  .  .  .  The  pastor  told  me  afterward* 
that  he  found  that  in  the  six  weeks  I  was  in  that  church  five  hundred  souls  had 
been  converted."  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  prophet's  distress  concerning 
Moab  (see  also  chap.  xvi.  9): — These  are  the  men  who  prevail  with  men.  In 
the  early  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  there  was  a  great  religious  awakening  in 
Ulster,  which  began  under  a  minister  named  Glendinning.  He  was  of  very 
meagre  natural  gifts,  but  would  spend  many  days  and  nights  alone  with  God, 
and  seems  to  have  been  greatly  burdened  with  the  souls  of  men  and  their  state 
before  God.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  therefore,  that,  under  his  pleading, 
multitudes  of  hearers  were  brought  into  great  anxiety  and  terror  of  conscience. 
They  looked  on  themselves  as  altogether  lost.  They  were  stricken  into  a  swoon 
by  the  power  of  God's  Word.  A  dozen  in  one  day  were  carried  out  of  doors  as 
dead.  These  were  not  women,  but  some  of  the  boldest  spirits  of  the  neighbour- 
hood, "  some  who  had  formerly  not  feared  with  their  swords  to  put  the  whole 
market  town  into  a  fray."  This  revival  changed  the  whole  character  of  northern 
Ireland.  Would  that  God  might  lay  on  our  hearts  a  similar  burden  for  our 
Churches  and  oar  land  I    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XVL 


Ver.  1.  Send  ye  the  lamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land.  —  A  message  to 
Moab  : — The  fugitives  are  supposed  to  have  found  a  temporary  home  in  Edom. 
The  verse  may  be  spoken  by  the  prophet,  or  (as  Prof.  Cheyne  suggests)  it  may 
proceed  from  the  Moabite  chiefs  themselves,  exhorting  one  another  to  take 
this  step.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D)  Tribute  demanded  of  Moab: — A  very 
terrible  humiliation  had  already  been  inflicted  on  Moab  in  the  reign  of  Jehoram, 
King  of  Israel  (2  Kings  iii.  4,  25).  During  Ahab's  reign,  Moab  had  been  compelled 
to  pay  a  very  heavy  annual  tribute,  even  100,000  lambs  and  100,000  rams. 
Refusal  to  pay  led  to  war  from  time  to  time ;  war  resulting,  however,  invariably 
in  the  defeat  of  the  Moabites.     In  such  circumstances  the  prophet  urges  upon 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvl 

Moab  the  wisdom  of  paying  this  tribute  without  trouble  or  demur.  {Buchanan 
Blake,  B.D.)  Gospel  submission  : — It  is  applicable  to  the  great  Gospel  duty 
of  submisson  to  Christ,  as  the  Ruler  of  the  land  and  our  Ruler.  1.  Send  Him  the 
lamb,  the  best  you  have,  yourselves  a  living  sacrifice.  2.  When  you  come  to 
God,  the  great  Ruler,  come  in  the  name  of  the  Lamb,  the  Lamb  of  God.  3.  Those 
that  will  not  submit  to  Christ,  nor  be  gathered  unto  the  shadow  of  His  wings, 
shall  be  as  a  bird  that  wanders  from  her  nest  (ver.  2),  that  shall  either  be  snatched 
up  by  the  next  bird  of  prey,  or  shall  wander  endlessly  in  continual  frights.  Those 
that  will  not  yield  to  the  fear  of  God  shall  be  made  to  yield  to  the  fear  of  every- 
thing else.     (if.  Henry.) 

Ver.  2.  As  a  wandering-  bird,  cast  out  of  the  nest. — The  unrest  of  the 
sinner :  —  The  picture  represents  the  distress  and  bewilderment  of  the 
wrong-doer.  He  does  not  know  whether  to  go  back  to  the  old  door  and  knock 
at  it  in  the  hope  that  it  may  be  opened  to  him  again  by  some  kindly  hand,  or  to 
flee  away  into  the  land  of  darkness  and  silence.  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my 
God,  to  the  wicked."     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Let  Mine  outcasts  dwell  with  thee,  Moab. — God's  outcasts  in  Moab  : — 
An  injunction  is  given  to  Moab  to  shelter  the  Jewish  fugitives.  I.  God  owns 
His  people  when  all  the  world  forsakes  or  opposes  them.  No  doubt 
Sennacherib  thought  the  "  outcasts  "  to  be  his  victims,  his  prey ;  but  God  claims 
a  personal  interest  in  them,  watches  over  them  when  they  wander,  supplies  them  in 
their  need,  and  protects  them  by  His  guardian  providence.  They  are  His :  His 
as  the  subjects  of  His  government ;  His  as  the  objects  of  His  regard ;  His  as  the 
children  of  His  grace.  II.  God  raises  up  friends  and  comforters  for  His 
Church  in  strange  and  unexpected  quarters.  Here  He  provides  for  them 
a  shelter  before  the  storm  comes  on,  and  makes  Moab,  one  of  the  most  powerful 
of  the  Church's  enemies,  a  near  and  a  present  friend.  God  proves  to  Moab  that 
it  was  their  interest  to  do  so,  because  the  Jews  would  soon  be  in  a  condition  to 
requite  the  favour,  when  their  country  should  be  invaded,  and  their  daughters 
should  wander  without  a  home  (ver.  2).  The  providence  of  God  often  makes  the 
hostile  feelings  of  bad  men  the  occasion  of  good  to  the  righteous.  III.  God 
can  overrule  calamities,  which  threaten  nothing  but  disaster  to  His 
Church,  into  the  means  of  confirming  faith  and  hope.  God's  outcasts  in 
Moab  learned  many  a  useful  lesson  there,  and  when  they  returned  it  was  to  uphold 
the  government  of  Hezekiah,  and  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the  people  with  whom 
they  had  sojourned.  "  And  the  throne  shall  be  established  in  mercy,  and  He 
shall  sit  upon  it  in  truth  in  the  tabernacle  of  David  "  (ver.  5).  Sennacherib's 
invasion,  which  scattered  his  subjects  in  exile,  threatened  the  overthrow  of 
Hezekiah,  but  it  really  tended  to  establish  him,  for  never  was  his  kingdom  more 
secure  than  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian  army.  The  same  thing  obtains 
in  the  experience  of  the  Christian.  As  the  birds  sing  most  sweetly  after  a  tempest ; 
as  torches  shine  brighter  for  shaking ;  as  the  flowers  shed  forth  their  fragrance 
at  the  close  of  a  troubled  day,  so  the  graces  of  a  Christian,  his  faith,  his  patience, 
and  his  hope,  are  matured  by  the  trials  that  threatened  their  utter  extinction. 
In  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  a  kingdom  which  is  established  in  mercy,  you  find 
perpetual  progress  amidst  perpetual  storm,  and  a  noontide  of  brightness  often 
succeeds  the  darkest  night.  IV.  Amidst  at.t.  wanderings  God  would  have 
His  people  remember  their  distinctive  character,  and  prepare  for  return. 
They  were  to  dwell  in  Moab,  but  only  for  a  season,  and  always  to  bear  the  heart 
of  a  stranger.  It  is  a  great  thing  in  days  of  worldly  compliance  and  conformity, 
when  every  one  seems  to  live  as  if  he  were  to  live  here  always,  to  have  in  exercise 
a  better  hope,  and  for  Christians  to  preserve  the  distinctness  of  their  character. 
The  Divine  hand  that  created  our  frame  and  put  life  into  it,  has  provided  us  with 
other  resources  than  are  found  in  feeble  self,  or  in  creatures  feeble  as  ourselves. 
Besides  this  earth  and  these  lower  skies,  there  is  an  invisible  world,  and  a  kingdom  of 
spirits.     Let  Christians  seek  to  be  in  the  world,  but  not  of  it.     (Homiletic  Magazine. ) 

Ver.  5.  In  mercy  shall  the  throne  be  established. — The  moral  purpose 
of  judgment  is  never  concealed  in  the  Divine  writings.  God  is  always 
seeking  to  bring  about  the  time  when  in  mercy  His  throne  shall  be  estab- 
lished, and  when  there  shall  sit  upon  it  in  truth  one  who  will  represent  the  ideal 
judgment  and  blessing  of  God.     The  fifth  verse  might  be  rendered,  "  In  mercy 


chap,  xvii.]  ISAIAH.  37* 

shall  a  throne  be  established,  and  One  shall  sit  upon  it  in  truth."  The  prophet  has 
constantly  kept  before  his  mind  the  image  of  an  ideal  king.  The  ideal  was  partially 
fulfilled  in  Hezekiah,  yet  only  partially ;  the  prophet  was  sure  One  was  coming 
who  would  fulfil  it  in  its  utmost  meaning,  and  he  steadfastly  kept  his  eye  on  the 
bright  day  when  God's  throne  should  be  established  among  the  nations,  and  His 
sceptre  should  be  extended  over  all.  God  does  not  exist  merely  to  destroy,  nor 
does  He  rule  only  in  order  that  He  may  humble  and  crush ;  His  purpose  is  one 
of  equity,  righteousness,  blessing,  cultivation.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  He  shall  come  to  his  sanctuary  to  pray. — Fruitless  supplications : — 
This  line  in  this  dark  picture  reminds  us  of  two  facts  in  the  life  of  the  men 
of   our   own  time,   who   see   clearly  the   folly   of   idolatry.      I.   In   times    of 

SORROW  THEY  ARE  OFTEN  SEEN  IN  THE  SANCTUARY.  II.  MANY  OF  THE  SUPPLI- 
CATIONS THAT  ARE  OFFERED  IN  THE  SANCTUARY  ARE  OFFERED  IN  VAIN.   How 

is  this  to  be  explained  ?  In  such  ways  as  these — 1.  Many  of  the  suppliants 
have  little  or  no  faith,  and  faith  is  the  essential  condition  of  blessing.  2.  Many 
of  the  suppliants  are  not  really  in  earnest,  and  lukewarmness  is  an  offence 
to  the  Divine  Being.  3.  Many  of  the  suppliants  are  not  really  penitent. 
(IF.  Manning.) 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


Vers.  1-5.  The  burden  of  Damascus.  .  .  .  The  fortress  also  shall  cease  from 
Ephraim. — The  oracle  concerning  Damascus  and  Israel  : — The  curse  pronounced 
upon  it  [Damascene-Syria]  falls  also  upon  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  because  it  has 
allied  itself  with  the  heathen  Damascus  against  their  brethren  in  the  south  and  the 
Davidic  kingdom.  From  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  we  are  here  carried  back  to  the 
reign  of  Ahaz,  and  indeed  back  far  beyond  the  death-year  of  Ahaz  (chap.  xiv.  28) 
to  the  boundary  line  of  the  reigns  of  Jotham  and  Ahaz,  soon  after  the  conclusion 
of  the  league  which  aimed  at  Judah's  destruction,  by  which  revenge  was  taken 
for  the  similar  league  of  Asa  with  Benhadad  against  Israel  ( 1  Kings  xv.  9).  When 
Isaiah  incorporated  this  oracle  in  his  collection,  its  threats  against  the  kingdoms 
of  Damascus  and  Israel  had  long  been  fulfilled.  Assyria  had  punished  both 
of  them,  and  Assyria  had  also  been  punished,  as  the  fourth  strophe  (vers.  12-14) 
of  the  oracle  sets  forth.  The  oracle,  therefore,  stands  here  on  account  of  its  uni- 
versal contents,  which  are  instructive  for  all  time.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  The  fall  of 
Damascus  : — When  cities  do  not  pray  they  go  down.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
loss  of  faculty  as  a  judgment  : — It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  moralise  about  the  fate 
of  a  city,  and  forget  that  the  principle  of  the  text  is  aimed  at  all  life.  Life  poorly 
handled  means  loss  of  life ;  faculty  fallen  into  desuetude  means  faculty  fallen 
into  death.  (Ibid.)  The  cities  of  Aroer  represent  the  land  to  the  east  of  the 
Jordan,  in  which  the  judgment  on  Israel,  executed  by  Tiglath-pileser,  began. 
There  were,  in  fact,  two  Aroers ;  an  old  Amorite  Aroer,  which  fell  to  the  tribe 
of  Reuben,  situated  on  the  Arnon  (Deut.  ii.  36,  iii.  12,  and  elsewhere)  ;  and  an 
old  Ammonite  Aroer,  which  fell  to  the  tribe  of  Gad — Aroer  before  Rabba  (Rabbath 
Ammon,  Josh.  xiii.  25).  The  site  of  the  ruins  of  the  former  is  Arair,  on  the  high 
northern  bank  of  the  Mugib  ;  the  situation  of  the  latter  has  not  yet  been  ascer- 
tained with  certainty.  The  "  cities  of  Aroer  "  are  these  two  Aroers  along  with 
the  cities  on  the  east  of  Jordan  like  them,  just  as  the  "  Orions"  in  chap.  xiii.  10, 
are  Orion  and  stars  like  it.     (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Tet  gleaning1  grapes  shall  be  left  In  11 — Autumn:  the  diminutions 
of  life  : — The  prophet  is  here  predicting  a  season  of  national  calamity.  He 
represents  the  condition  of  the  people  under  the  figure  of  an  autumnal  scene. 
Armed  hosts  from  the  north  have  invaded  the  country  like  a  sharp  wind.  The 
substance  of  its  inhabitants  has  been  carried  away  before  their  rapacity,  "  as 
when  the  harvest-man  gathereth  the  corn,  and  reapeth  the  ears  with  his  arm." 
With  this  difference,  however,  that  it  has  been  destroyed  by  the  violence  of 
strangers,  instead  of  being  garnered  for  the  use  of  those  who  had  tilled  the  soil ; 
and  the  sickle  is  the  sword.  The  population  is  thinned,  like  the  trees  in  the  waning 
part  of  the  year.     Only  that  the  wrath  of  man,  unlike  the  severity  of  nature. 


376  '  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvii, 

has  no  benevolent  purpose  in  it.  The  comforts  and  blessings  of  life  are  shaker* 
down  as  faded  leaves.  Only  it  is  without  any  sign  from  experience,  that  they 
shall  be  replaced  by  a  new  spring.  A  desolated  prospect  rises  before  his  sight. 
"  Two  or  three  berries  in  the  top  of  the  uppermost  bough  ;  four  or  five  in  tha 
outmost  fruitful  branches  thereof."  The  Word  of  the  Lord  was  a  "  burden  " 
in  those  days,  and  he  felt  its  weight  upon  his  own  heart  as  he  held  it  over  the 
heads  of  his  people.  He  comforted  himself  at  least  with  the  thought  that  the 
visitation  itself,  if  not  his  warning,  would  bring  them  to  a  more  faithful  mind 
(vers.  7,  8).  There  lies  in  the  text,  apart  from  its  historical  reference,  this  general 
truth, — that  circumstances  of  decline  and  destitution  are  suited  to  wean  the 
heart  from  its  vanities.  In  the  day  of  adversity  men  "  consider."  And  when 
time  and  fortune  have  made  the  enjoyments  of  the  world  fewer,  and  thrown 
a  longer  shadow  and  a  paler  tint  upon  those  that  remain,  the  soul  naturally 
remembers  its  truer  and  more  enduring  portions.  1.  Wich  some  the  change 
relates  to  their  worldly  goods  and  the  general  prosperity  of  their  affairs.  2.  A 
second  class  of  diminutions  concerns  the  bodily  ease  and  health.  3.  The  third 
instance  of  diminutions  to  which  our  attention  is  called,  is  found  in  the  encroach- 
ments of  age.  4.  One  more  instance  of  destitution  is  when  companions  and 
friends  drop  off  like  the  foliage  of  summer,  and  we  are  more  and  more  frequently 
bereft.     (N.  L.  Frothingham.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  At  that  day  shall  a  man  look  to  his  Maker. — Sanctified  affliction  : — 
We  are  led  to  consider  the   designs   of  God   in  the  afflictions   of  His  people. 

1.  TO   RECALL   THEIR   WANDERING   HEARTS   TO    HlMSELF.       "  A   man   Will    look    to 

his  Maker — 1.  With  a  suppliant  eye,  to  find  in  Him  sources  of  consolation  and  a 
rock  of  defence  such  as  the  world  cannot  furnish  (Psa.  cxxiii.  1,  2  ;  Jonah  ii.  1). 

2.  With  a  penitent  eye  (Luke  xxii.  62  ;  Zech.  xii.  10).  3.  With  a  confiding  and 
believing  eye  (chap.  viii.  17).     4.  With  a  rejoicing  eye  (Rom.  v.  11  ;  Hab.  iii.  18). 

II.    TO    RAISE    THEIR   ESTIMATE  OF  THE  HOLINESS  OF  THE  DlVINE  CHARACTER  AND 

the  rectitude  of  the  Divtne  dispensations.  "  Shall  have  respect  unto  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel."  III.  To  separate  them  from  all  sinful  and  idolatrous 
dependences.  "  He  shall  not  look,"  &c.  IV.  To  endear  the  mercy  that 
mingles  with  the  trials.  This  appears — 1.  In  the  moderate  degree  in 
which  God's  people  are  corrected,  compared  with  the  final  and  exterminating 
judgments  which  fall  upon  the  wicked.  Damascus  was  to  be  utterly  destroyed 
(ver.  1),  but  a  remnant  was  to  be  left  to  Israel  (ver.  5).  God's  people  always 
see  that  He  has  afflicted  them  less  than  they  deserve  (Lam.  iii.  22).  2.  In 
the  alleviations  of  their  trials.  3.  In  the  triumphant  issue  of  the  whole. 
(S.  Thodey.) 

Vers.  10, 11.  Because  thou  hast  forgotten  the  God  of  thy  salvation. — Forgetfulnesa 
of  God  punished : — I.  The  magnitude  of  the  sin  here  spoken  of.  Forgetfulnesa 
of  God.  1.  What  is  this  forgetfulness  of  God  ?  It  has  been  denned  as  "  such 
a  habitual  inattention  to  His  existence  and  character,  as  leads  the  individual 
under  its  influence  to  a  mode  of  thinking,  feeling,  and  acting,  which  would  be 
consistent  only  on  the  supposition  that  there  were  no  God,  or  that  God  is  a  very 
different  Being  from  what  the  Scriptures  represent  Him  to  be."  2.  It  is  a  startling 
sin.  Everything  around  us  is  designed  and  fitted  to  remind  us  of  God.  The 
Bible  unfolds  the  moral  character  of  God.  Sharp  dispensations  of  providence 
remind  us  of  His  existence.  Preachers  enforce  His  claims.  Each  returning 
Sabbath,  with  its  closed  shutters,  the  sound  of  the  church-going  bell,  and  the 
voice  of  praise  from  the  lips  of  the  pious,  says,  Worship  God.  But  many  would 
rather  think  about  anything,  or  nothing,  than  about  God.  3.  It  is  a  fearfully 
prevalent  sin.  4.  It  is  an  ungrateful  sin  (chap.  i.  2,  3).  5.  It  is  a  highly  punish- 
able sin.  Many  people  imagine  that  none  are  sinners  but  those  who  openly  sin. 
But  what  of  the  moral  man,  who  does  his  duty  towards  his  fellow-men,  but  who 
forgets  God  ?  II.  The  results  of  this  forgetfulness  of  God.  1.  Dwarfed 
powers.  Men  cannot,  if  they  wish,  be  totally  inactive.  If  activity  be  not  devoted 
to  God,  it  will  be  devoted  to  the  world,  to  "  planting  pleasant  plants."  2.  Secular 
knowledge  is  a  pleasant  plant.  3.  Wealth  is  a  pleasant  plant.  4.  Ambition 
is  a  pleasant  plant.  5.  Amusement  is  a  pleasant  plant.  6.  Hence  observe 
the  ultimate  result  of  this  conduct.  "  The  harvest  shall  be  a  heap,"  &c.  Sooner 
or  later  men  reap  what  they  sow.  Sin  and  suffering  are  bound  together  by  an 
unbreakable  chain.    "  The  gods  are  just,"  says  Shakespeare,  "  and  of  our  pleasant 


chap,  xvn.]  ISAIAH.  S7T 

rices  make  instruments  to  scourge  us."  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8.)  Men  break  God's  physical 
laws,  and  they  suffer  in  their  bodies  and  circumstances.  They  violate  His  moral 
laws,  and  personal  debasement  ensues.  George  Eliot  says,  "  That  is  the  bitterest 
of  all — to  wear  the  yoke  of  our  own  wrong-doing."  (H.  Woodcock.)  Evils 
of  forgetting  God : — I.  Forgetfulness  of  God  is  an  evtl  which  too  generally 
prevails  among  men.  The  text  does  not  so  much  charge  with  positive  wicked- 
ness (though  it  is  implied)  as  forge tfulness  of  God,  whioh  supposes  folly,  because 
He  is  the  God  of  salvation,  and  the  Bock  of  strength.  Consider  these  relations— 
1.  The  God  of  thy  salvation.  (1)  He  is  infinitely  able  to  save  His  creatures, 
whether  the  salvation  required  be  temporal,  spiritual,  or  eternal.  (2)  He  is  always 
willing  to  save  them.  How  inexcusable  is  man !  How  criminal  to  forget, 
to  be  unmindful  of  Him  1  2.  The  Rock  of  thy  strength.  Here  we  may  build, 
and  the  fabric  will  never  be  shaken.  Here  we  may  shelter,  as  in  the  cleft  of  a 
rock,  and  no  evil  shall  prevail  against  us.  For  so  helpless  and  weak  a  creature 
as  man  to  have  such  a  refuge,  such  a  support,  and  to  be  unmindful  of  it,  how 
great  is  his  folly  I  But  when  may  we  be  said  to  forget,  and  to  be  unmindful 
of  God  T  When  we  live  without  thinking  of  Him — without  praying  to  Him — 
without  seeking  His  glory — without  surrendering  our  souls,  bodies,  and  all  our 
cares  into  His  hands.    II.  The  attention  thus  drawn  from  God  and  His 

SERVICE   IS   TRANSFERRED   TO   WORLDLY   AND   SENSUAL  PLEASURES.      The   BOul   of 

man  in  this  case  strives  to  supply  its  want  of  happiness  from  the  world :  "  there- 
fore shalt  thou  plant  pleasant  plants."  Infinitely  varied  are  the  objects  of  the 
attention  or  culture  of  men,  but  they  all  proceed  from  the  above  principle,  or 
rather  have  the  same  end  in  view.  Some  seek  their  pleasure  in  learning,  others 
in  the  arts,  riches,  honours,  employments,  amusements.  But  they  are  strange 
6lips,"  not  natural,  not  designed  to  answer  the  intended  purpose.  The  sons 
of  men  are  determined  to  prove  what  the  world  can  do  for  them.  "  In  the  day 
they  make  their  plant  to  grow,  and  in  the  morning  their  seed  to  flourish."  They 
shall  in  some  measure  succeed.  But — III.  Disappointment  and  sorrow  are 
the  consequences  of  such  oonduot.  "The  harvest  shall  be  a  heap,"  &c. 
(J.   Walker,  D.D.)        Prosperity  in  the  teeming  only: — These   occasional   sun- 

fleams  may  foretoken  the  thunderstorm.  God  can  mock,  God  can  lead  the 
ullock  to  the  knife  by  the  way  of  a  fat  pasture.  There  is,  therefore,  a  promise 
here,  but  the  promise  is  limited.  You  shall  have  mushroom  growths,  you 
shall  see  wonderful  things  within  the  span  of  a  single  day ;  but  what  shall  the 
harvest  be  ?  The  meaning  is,  we  may  be  infatuated  by  appearances,  by  immediate 
successes,  by  flowers  and  strange  slips  growing  up  within  the  compass  of  one 
little  day.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  God's  righteousness  in  His  dealings  with  men: — 
Happily,  this  is  only  one  aspect  of  the  Divine  government ;  we  are  entitled  to 
reverse  this  text,  and  say,  Because  thou  hast  remembered  the  God  of  thy  salvation, 
and  hast  been  mindful  of  the  Bock  of  thy  strength,  therefore  shall  thy  barns  be 
filled  with  plenty,  and  thy  presses  burst  out  with  new  wine.  Thou  hast  not 
withheld  from  God  the  gladness  and  the  service  of  thine  heart,  and  He  will  not 
withhold  from  thee  the  music  and  the  rapture  and  the  abundance  of  harvest. 
The  way  of  the  Lord  is  equal.  (Ibid. )  Pleasant  plants  and  strange  slips : — 
They  made  for  themselves  all  kinds  of  sensuous  cults  in  conformity  with  their 
heathen  inclination.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  The  temporary  success  of  an  evil  alli- 
ance : — The  foreign  slip  has  shot  up  like  a  hothouse  plant,  i.e.,  the  alliance  has 
rapidly  become  a  happy  agreement,  and  has  also  already  shot  forth  a  blossom, 
which  is  the  common  plan  directed  against  Judah.  (Ibid.)  Lives  of  dis- 
appointment : — The  world  is  full  of  people  who  are  engaged  in  planting  their 
Blips.  Fortunes,  luxurious  homes,  great  reputations — such  are  some  of  the  slips  ; 
but  what  disappointment  succeeds — "  desperate  sorrow."  The  egg  turns  out 
to  be  rottenness ;  the  fair  landscape  a  Sahara,  from  which  the  mirage  is  gone ; 
the  beautiful  globe  of  changing  colour,  only  a  drop  of  dirty  soap-and- water.  We 
remember  the  story  of  Faust,  who  sold  himself  to  Satan,  but  the  day  of  bitter 
reaping  came.  We  remember  the  cry  of  Byron  over  his  wasted  years  ;  of  Laurence 
Oliphant,  the  bright  versatile  son  of  Piccadilly,  who  in  his  varied  career  had 
tasted  life  in  many  of  its  brightest  aspects ;  of  Solomon,  whose  Ecclesiastes  is 
one  long  record  of  slip-planting.  Nothing  less  than  God,  our  Maker,  can  suffice 
the  souls  which  He  has  made.  Apart  from  Him  life  may  at  first  promise 
well,  but  the  end,  inevitably,  will  be  desperate  sorrow.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  harvest  shall  be  a  heap. — The  harvest  of  sorrow: — A  harvest  field  is 
a  suggestive  place.    I.  To  every  life  there  is  a  harvest,  either  of  jot 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvrr. 

or  OF  sorrow.  Life  on  earth  is  introductory  and  probationary.  It  is  but  the 
seed-time  for  eternity.  All  our  actions,  words,  thoughts,  have  a  bearing  upon 
the  future.  God  is  our  moral  Governor,  as  well  as  our  loving  Father.  We  are, 
therefore,  accountable  to  Him  for  the  disposal  of  every  moment  of  our  existence. 
Belonging  to  a  depraved  and  fallen  race,  we  are  necessarily  sinners ;  but  this 
has  been  provided  for.  To  every  life  there  is  a  harvest.  When  ?  Sometimes 
in  this  world.  Both  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  reap  on  earth  to  a  certain 
degree  that  which  they  have  sown.  But  still  it  is  most  strictly  true  that  the  great 
and  final  harvest  commences  when  life  on  earth  terminates  and  life  in  eternity 
begins.  This  great  fact  invests  life  with  unspeakable  grandeur.  Every  day  and 
hour  we  are  preparing  for  the  realities  of  eternity.  This  should  moderate  our 
expectations  concerning  the  present  life.  That  which  is  probationary  is  necessarily 
incomplete.     We  should,  therefore,  expect  trials  and  disappointments.     II.  The 

HARVEST   OF  SORROW   MAY,  IN   EVERY   CASE,  BE  TRACED   TO   ONE   GREAT   CAUSE — 

forgetfulness  of  God.  The  ruin  of  the  Ten  Tribes  is  traced  to  this  (vers.  10,  11). 
Jeremiah  brings  the  same  charge  against  them  (Jer.  ii.  12,  13).  Hosea  also  says 
(Hos.  viii.  14),  For  Israel  hath  forgotten  his  Maker,  and  buildeth  temples."  At 
first,  it  seems  impossible  that  they  could  ever  have  done  this.  Had  they  not  the 
history  of  the  great  and  eventful  past  ?  Did  they  not  know  they  were  depending 
on  Him  for  everything  they  enjoyed  ?  Surely,  those  who  had  such  a  God  should 
never  have  forgotten  Him.  The  fact  stated  in  the  text  is  one  of  deep  significance. 
It  shows  us  the  desperate  wickedness  of  the  human  heart.  The  Israelites  were 
so  estranged  from  Jehovah  that  they  acted  as  though  He  did  not  exist.  It  is 
so  in  every  such  case.  Forgetfulness  of  God  always  leads  to  this  terrible  result. 
No  one  can  be  unmindful  of  Him  with  impunity.  Forgetfulness  of  God  produces 
in  the  heart  such  feelings  and  induces  men  to  follow  such  a  line  of  conduct,  that 
their  lives  must  be  a  failure.  It  is,  however,  worthy  of  notice,  that  these  persons 
are  as  anxious  to  be  happy  during  life,  and  at  its  end,  as  any  of  their  fellows. 
They  do  not  resign  themselves  to  despair.  On  the  contrary,  they  fancy  that 
all  is  well.  Their  hearts  beat  high  with  hope.  True,  they  have  not  the  help 
and  protection  which  the  Lord's  people  enjoy,  but  they  do  all  they  can  to  supply 
its  place.  The  people  of  Israel  did  all  they  could  to  make  their  position  a  strong 
one.  They  made  an  alliance  with  Syria,  and  thought,  with  her  help,  they  would 
be  able  to  overcome  their  foes.  So  men  in  the  present  day,  who  forget  God, 
avail  themselves  of  the  dictates  of  worldly  prudence.  In  the  day  they  make 
their  plant  to  grow,  and  in  the  evening  they  make  their  seed  to  nourish.  Here 
we  have  an  affecting  description  of  the  anxiety  and  feverish  effort  of  the  men 
that  know  not  God.  We  may  plant  pleasant  plants,  we  may  set  strange  slips, 
but  they  will  not  compensate  us  for  the  absence  of  the  plants  of  righteousness. 
He  who  forgets  the  God  of  his  salvation,  and  is  unmindful  of  the  Rock  of  his 
strength,  must  be  without  His  favour,  and  at  last  must  reap  a  harvest  of  grief 
and  desperate  sorrow.  III.  The  harvest  of  sorrow  involves  the  soul  in 
utter  and  irremediable  ruin.  It  is  no  slight  matter — it  is  the  loss  of  all  things 
— the  failure  of  every  effort — the  disappointment  of  every  hope,  the  destruction 
of  every  joy,  the  development  and  perpetuation  of  every  sorrow.  The  language 
of  the  prophet  is  very  striking.  The  common  idea  of  harvest  is  that  of  a  joyous 
nature.  But  here  we  have  an  idea  of  the  very  opposite  character.  The  harvest 
is  a  heap.  There  is  no  golden  grain  worthy  of  being  housed  in  everlasting  habita- 
tions. The  soul  sees  with  amazement  that  all  her  efforts  have  been  fruitless, 
and  cries,  "  Is  this  all ;  has  my  life  on  earth  produced  nothing  more  than  this  ?  " 
And  the  answer  is,  "  Nothing  more ;  and  that  which  it  has  produced  is  only  fit 
for  the  burning."  (H.  B.  Ingram.)  God's  love  in  the  deprivations  of  life:— 
There  is  only  one  way  of  getting  at  some  men.  Once  we  could  have  appealed 
to  their  higher  nature ;  once  they  were  subject  to  the  pleasure  and  the  eloquence 
of  reason ;  once  they  had  a  conscience  tender,  sensitive,  responsive ;  now  they 
are  spiritually  dead,  no  conscience,  no  reason,  no  unselfishness  ;  the  whole  nature 
has  gone  down  in  volume  and  in  quality  into  a  terrible  emaciation :  what  shall 
be  done  ?  Smite  their  harvest !  then  like  beasts  they  will  miss  their  food.  God 
does  not  delight  in  this ;  it  is  the  poorest  violence,  it  is  the  feeblest  department 
of  His  providence  ;  but  He  knows  that  it  is  the  only  providence  some  men  can 
understand.  (J.  Parker,  D.D. )  Reclamation  by  punishment : — God  got  you  back 
to  the  Church  through  inflammation,  through  fever,  through  paralysis,  through 
pain,  through  loss,  through  desolation ;  you  came  back  over  the  graveyard. 
No  matter,  said  God  ;  when  He  got  you  into  His  house  again  He  said,  This  My 


chap,  xviii.]  ISAIAH.  379 

son  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again ;  he  was  lost,  and  is  found.  It  is  in  the  reclamation, 
not  in  the  punishment,  that  God  takes  pleasure.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  12-14.  Woe  to  the  multitude  of  many  people. — A  short  triumph  .-— 
These  verses  read  the  doom  of  those  that  spoil  and  rob  the  people  ol 
God.  If  the  Syrians  and  Israelites  invade  and  plunder  Judah — if  the  Assyrian 
army  take  God's  people  captive,  and  lay  their  country  waste, — let  them  know 
that  ruin  will  be  their  portion.  They  are  here  brought  in — I.  Triumphing  over 
the  people  op  God.  They  rely  upon  their  numbers.  They  are  very  noisy, 
like  the  noise  of  the  seas ;  they  talk  big,  hector  and  threaten.  II.  Triumphed 
over  by  the  judoments  of  God.  God  can  dispirit  the  enemies  of  His  Church, 
when  they  are  most  courageous  and  confident,  and  dissipate  them  when  they 
seem  most  closely  consolidated.  This  shall  be  done  suddenly  (ver.  14).  (M.  Henry. ) 
The  punishment  of  the  wicked: — I.  The  striking  contrasts  which  the  day  op 

VISITATION    REVEALS    RESPECTING   THE   CONDUCT  AND    POSITION   OP  THE   WICKED. 

Verge  12  shows  us  the  vast  and  varied  host  in  fancied  security ;  we  have  a 
magnificent  picture  of  a  state  of  might,  pomp,  vainglory,  self-confidence  ;  but  ere 
we  reach  the  end  of  verse  13,  we  see  it  scattered.  We  see  the  same  contrast  in 
everyday  life ;  wicked  men  secure,  strong,  boastful — the  next  moment  utterly  cast 
down  (Psa.  lxxiii.  18-20);  or,  by  the  near  approach  of  death,  transformed  into 
the  subjects  of  a  pitiable  despair.  II.  The  resistless  execution  op  the  sen- 
tence of  doom.  III.  The  swiftness  with  which  the  sentence  of  doom  is 
executed  (ver.  14).  It  is  true  that  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  often  seems 
to  be  delayed  (Eccles.  viii.  11);  but — 1.  Sin  and  punishment  are  inseparable. 
2.  Whenever  the  punishment  comes  it  is  sudden.  Such  is  the  blinding  and 
delusive  power  of  cherished  sin  that  its  penalty  always  finds  the  sinner  unpre- 
pared to  receive  it ;  it  is  always  a  surprise  and  a  shock  to  him.  Conclusion — 
(1)  Nations  and  armies  cannot  successfully  evade  the  penalties  of  their  sins; 
how  much  less  can  the  individual  sinner  do  so !  (2)  The  certainty  of  the  punish- 
ment of  all  unrepented  sin  should  lead  us  seriously  to  reflect  upon  the  attitude 
we  are  assuming  before  God.  (3)  The  subject  should  lead  to  repentance,  but 
not  to  despair  (Psa.  cxxx.  7).     (W.  Manning.) 

Ver.  14.  Behold  at  evening-tide  trouble. — The  night:  —  God  fights  some 
battles  between  evening  and  morning.  The  black  night  is  the  field  of  war. 
The  darkness  fights  for  God.  The  night  is  needed  for  more  than  rest. 
How  busy  the  angels  are  on  the  fields  of  darkness  !  Men  are  fetched  at  night 
by  the  invisible  constable.  Who  reckons  the  night  when  he  adds  up  his  time  ? 
It  may  go  for  nothing  to  us  because  of  our  unconsciousness,  but  God  sleeps  not. 
Speaking  of  the  wicked  we  may  apply  the  figure  of  night  so  as  to  find  in  it  terror 
and  fear,  sorrow  and  judgment,  and  death ;  speaking  of  the  good  man,  we  may 
say,  Dry  thy  tears,  thou  foolish  unbelieving  weeper,  or  shed  them  gratefully 
to  get  rid  of  a  needless  burden ;  for  sorrow  endureth  but  for  a  night,  joy  cometh 
in  the  morning :  take  in  the  black  guest,  do  what  thou  canst  for  him,  he  is  sent 
of  God  for  holy  purposes ;  he  can  live  but  for  a  night,  thou  mightest  afford  to 
be  kind  to  him ;  it  were  but  one  night  in  a  long  life.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XVLIL 


Vers.  1-3.  Woe  to  the  land  shadowing  with  wings. — The  Ethiopians : — The 
people  here  peculiarly  described  are  the  Ethiopians,  and  the  prophet  prophesies 
the  effect  on  Ethiopia  of  the  judgment  concerning  Assyria  which  Jehovah  executes, 
as  Drechsler  has  convincingly  proved,  and  as  is  now  universally  recognised. 
(F.  Delitzsch.)  Ethiopia  : — What  land  is  it  of  which  the  prophet  speaks  T 
It  is  no  doubt  Ethiopia  itself,  a  great  kingdom  in  the  olden  time.  For  although 
he  says  "  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,"  that  is  the  Blue  Nile,  and  the  White 
Nile,  and  the  Astaboras,  the  meaning  is  perhaps  more  accurately  "  beside " 
those  rivers.  In  any  event  the  ancient  land  of  Ethiopia  reached  out  to  the  south 
far  beyond  the  confluence  of  those  rivers  in  the  mighty  Nile,  including  probably 
all  upper  Egypt  beyond  Philae,  Nubia,  and  the   northern  portion  of  modern 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvni. 

Abyssinia.  It  was  a  fertile  country,  very  rich  in  gold,  ivory,  ebony,  frank- 
incense, and  precious  stones.  A  country  thickly  inhabited  by  a  stalwart  well- 
formed  race,  '  men  of  stature  "  the  prophet  calls  them,  who  if  they  were  black 
were  yet  comely.  It  was  a  mighty  kingdom  for  many  centuries,  a  rival  of  Egypt, 
sometimes  its  enemy,  and  apparently  even  its  conqueror ;  a  kingdom  able  to 
make  war  against  the  Assyrians,  and  a  kingdom,  too,  carrying  on  a  great  trade 
by  means  of  abundant  merchandise  with  many  people.  {A.  Ritchie.)  "  The 
land  shadowing  with  wings  "  .• — 1.  Full  of  poetic  suggestion  is  the  expression 
"  shadowing  with  wings."  The  thought  is  of  tender  protection,  as  the  mother- 
bird  hovers  over  and  shields  her  young.  The  Psalmist  is  never  tired  of  crying 
out  to  God,  "  Hide  me  under  the  covering  of  Thy  wings."  It  was  right  that 
Israel  and  Judah  should  cry  thus  to  Jehovah  for  protection,  but  not  that  they 
should  look  to  the  shadowing  wings  of  Ethiopia.  Just  as  it  was  pathetically 
true  that  in  later  times  our  Lord  should  say  of  the  Holy  City,  "  0  Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest  the  prophets,  and  stonest  them  which  are  sent  unto 
thee,  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth 
her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not  " — so  seven  hundred  years  earlier 
it  was  true  that  Judah  would  not  seek  refuge  under  the  wings  of  the  Lord,  but 
under  the  shadowing  of  Egypt  and  the  covering  of  Ethiopia.  2.  In  the  Revised 
Version  we  have  the  passage  rendered,  "  Ah,  the  land  of  the  rustling  of  wings." 
Some  of  the  old  commentators  find  in  this  an  allusion  to  the  multitude  of  bees 
and  the  swarms  of  flies  in  Ethiopia,  so  that  there  the  hum  of  wings  was  never 
absent.  More  picturesque  is  another  suggestion,  that  the  reference  is  to  the 
ever  plashing  waters  of  the  rivers,  hurrying  along  with  swift  current,  in  rapids 
and  through  cataracts  until  the  broad  bosom  of  father  Nile  was  reached.  The 
Bwish  and  lapping  of  the  rushing  waters  seemed  to  the  poet  like  the  noise  made 
by  the  swift  flight  of  many  birds,  beating  the  air  with  strong  pinions,  as  they 
Bweep  on  towards  the  horizon.  3.  If  we  turn  to  the  Septuagint,  the  Greek  Old 
Testament,  we  read  the  text  thus  :  "  Woe  to  you,  ye  wings  of  the  land  of  ships." 
What  are  the  wings  of  the  land  of  ships  but  the  many  sails  whereby  those 
ships  flit  hither  and  thither  ?  One  sees  before  him  a  new  picture.  The  graceful 
dahabiehs  with  their  long  yards  and  triangular  sails,  dotting  the  water  every- 
where, and  naturally  suggesting  great  sea-birds,  with  outspread  wings,  shining 
in  the  starlight  white  and  ghostly  on  the  calm  surface  of  the  mysterious  river 
which  is  Egypt's  life.  4.  Some  of  the  more  acute  Hebrew  scholars  point  out 
that  it  is  possible  to  understand  the  prophet's  language  in  yet  another  way  : 
"  Woe  to  the  land  where  the  shadow  falleth  both  ways,"  that  is,  of  course,  near 
the  Equator,  where  sometimes  the  shadows  stretch  out  to  the  south  and  some- 
times to  the  north,  according  to  the  time  of  the  year.  If  we  understand  our 
text  so,  it  is  natural  to  see  in  it  an  allusion  to  the  fickleness  of  the  Ethiopians, 
a  nation  which  Judah  vainly  trusted  in,  since  to-day  it  would  be  found  an  ally 
and  to-morrow  an  enemy.  (Ibid.)  The  prophet's  charge  to  the  Ethiopian 
ambassadors: — Ethiopia  (Heb.,  "Cush")  corresponds  generally  to  the  modern 
Soudan  (i.e.,  the  blacks).  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  were  at  this  time  ruled  by  Tirhakah 
(704-685).  His  ambassadors  are  in  Jerusalem  offering  an  alliance  against  the 
Assyrian ;  and  the  prophet  sends  them  back  to  their  people  with  the  words, 
"  Go,  ye  swift  messengers,"  &c.  Jehovah  needs  no  help  against  His  enemies. 
(A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  Note: — Full  stop  at  "waters"  (ver.  2),  and  omit 
"saying."  The  prophet  speaks:  "Go,  ye  swift  messengers,  to  a  nation  tall 
and  smooth  ...  a  nation  all-powerful  and  subduing,  whose  land  rivers  divide 
(intersect)."  "Smooth"  may  refer  to  the  glancing,  bronzed  skin  of  the  people. 
(Ibid. )  Vessels  of  bulrushes  : — It  is  well  known  that  timber  proper  for  building 
chips  was  very  scarce  in  Egypt:  to  supply  this  deficiency,  the  Egyptians  used 
bulrushes,  or  a  reed  called  papyrus,  of  which  they  made  vessels  fit  for  sailing. 
Ships  and  boats  built  of  this  sort  of  materials,  being  extremely  light,  and  draw- 
ing very  little  water,  were  admirably  suited  to  traverse  the  Nile,  along  the  banks 
of  which  there  were  doubtless  many  morasses  and  shoals.  They  were  also  very 
convenient  and  easy  to  be  managed  at  the  water-falls,  where  they  might  be  carried 
with  no  great  difficulty  to  smooth  water.  From  such  circumstances  as  these, 
we  may  conclude,  that  they  would  sail  exceeding  fast,  and  afford  a  very  speedy 
conveyance  of  all  kinds  of  intelligence  from  one  part  of  the  country  to  another, 
and  from  Egypt  to  neighbouring  nations.  In  them,  therefore,  ambassadors 
or  messengers  were  often  sent  to  different  places  with  various  kinds  of  information, 
after  having  received  their  orders  in  terms  such  as  these,  "Go,  ye  swift  messengers." 


chap,  xviii.]  ISAIAH.  381 

(R.  Maecvlloch.)  They  were  made  for  folding  together,  so  that  they  could 
be  carried  past  the  cataracts.     (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  All  ye  Inhabitants  of  the  world  .  .  .  see  ye. — Missionary  exertion : — 
Our  whole  hope  of  success  rests  on  the  prophecies  of  the  Word  of  God, 
declaring  it  to  be  His  will.  We  must  first  accurately  examine  what  is 
the  object  we  have  in  view,  for  if  it  be  not  in  unison  with  the  prophets 
it  must  be  disappointed.  I.  The  language  op  the  New  Testament  on  this 
SUBJECT.  What  does  that  give  us  reason  to  expect  under  the  present  dispensa- 
tion ?  An  elect  Church,  though  in  one  sense  it  is  called  an  universal  Church, 
because  it  is  gathered  out  of  all  nations  on  the  earth.  II.  The  experience 
op  the  Church  as  strengthening  this  argument.  For  long  years  the  Gospel 
has  been  preached,  and  what  is  the  result  ?  But  is  it  not  written  in  the  Scriptures 
that  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God,  &c.t  Do  we  not,  then,  rightly 
expect  the  conversion  of  all  the  people  on  the  earth  ?  Yes,  it  is  written,  and 
shall  come  to  pass.  But  the  means  are  also  written,  and  the  time.  What  are 
the  means  ?  What  is  the  time  ?  "  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world,  and  dwellers 
on  the  earth,  see  ye  !  "  When  ?  "  When  He  lifteth  up  an  ensign  on  the 
mountains,  and  when  He  bloweth  a  trumpet,  hear  ye  !  "  I  will  read  you  an 
extract  from  a  missionary  sermon  preached  by  Dr.  Buchanan  shortly  before 
his  death:  "The  ensign  to  be  lifted  up  is  the  Jewish  Church  restored  to  Zion; 
and  the  Gospel  trumpet  is  to  be  sounded  by  Jewish  missionaries,  for  to  them 
is  reserved  the  evangelising  of  the  heathen."  But  before  this  will  be  the  coming 
of  the  Son  of  God.     {Hugh  M'Neile,  M.A.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  For  so  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  I  will  take  My  rest. — The  rest  of 
providence  : — Although  much  diversity  of  opinion  exists  among  commentators 
in  regard  to  the  primary  design  of  the  prophecy  from  which  this  passage  is 
taken,  there  can  be  but  one  sentiment  as  to  the  sublime  moral  which  it  teaches 
concerning  the  mode  in  which  the  Almighty  conducts  His  government.  There 
are  times,  probably,  in  every  man's  life,  when  he  feels  the  temptations  to  scep- 
ticism unusually  strong.  They  are  the  times  of  personal  suffering,  or  of  prosperous 
iniquity.     I.  How  often  has  the  sincere  Christian  mourned  in  bitterness  of  spirit, 

BECAUSE  NO  IMMEDIATE  ANSWER  SEEMED  GIVEN  TO  HIS  PRAYERS.       In  Such  cirCUni- 

stances,  the  assurance  that  providence  is  only  taking  its  rest  and  considering,  i3 
in  the  highest  degree  consolatory.  It  is  not  in  judgment,  but  in  tender  mercy, 
that  God  apparently  suspends  His  answer  to  His  people's  prayers.  Thus  does 
He  exercise  their  faith,  and  the  trial  of  it  is  more  precious  than  gold.  Thus  does 
He  convince  them  of  their  needs,  and  the  conviction  leads  them  to  greater  self- 
abandonment.  Thus  does  He  call  forth  in  them  the  feeling  of  Christian  sympathy 
for  those  who  are  similarly  tried,  and  this  is  better  for  them  than  heart's  desire. 
Thus  does  He  give  unto  them  those  experiences  which,  it  is  not  improbable,  may 
contribute  to  their  felicity  in  heaven  itself.  II.  A  second  example  of  providence 
taking  its  rest,  is  to  be  seen  in  the  comparatively  slow  and  limited  progress 

WHICH   THE    BLESSED    GOSPEL   OP    CHRIST    HAS   YET   MADE   IN   THE   WORLD.      The 

march  of  His  administration  is  not  the  less  sublime,  because  it  is  occasionally 
invisible.  HI.  Providence  takes  its  rest  when  sentence  against  the  evil 
works  op  men  is  not  executed  speedily.  When  the  mystery  of  God  is  finished, 
His  ways  will  appear  at  once  marvellous  and  right.  This  "rest  of  providence" 
is  beautifully  illustrated  by  similitudes  taken  from  i;ature — "  a  clear  heat  upon 
herbs,  and  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  harvest."  You  have  observed,  on  a 
fine  summer  day,  the  sunshine  resting  calmly  on  the  corn-field,  or  the  dew  covering 
the  plants  at  eventide.  All  is  peaceful  and  serene.  It  seems  as  if  the  winds 
had  forgotten  to  blow,  or  the  thunder  to  utter  its  voice.  Thus  calmly  and  silently 
does  the  Almighty  "  rest  in  His  dwelling-place,"  till  the  time  comes  for  inter- 
position. The  patience  of  God  is  a  demonstration  of  His  power,  and  His  slowness 
to  wrath  a  testimony  to  His  infinite  wisdom.  The  metaphor  in  ver.  5  is  to  be 
regarded  as  a  continuation  of  the  preceding  one,  and  may  be  understood  as  intimat- 
ing the  utter  disappointment  of  those  plans  which  wicked  men  form  against 
God,  and  which  He  so  forbearingly  allows  them  to  mature.  "  Afore  the  harvest, 
when  the  bud  is  perfect,  and  the  sour  grape  is  ripening  in  the  flower,  He  shall 
both  cut  off  the  sprigs  with  pruning-hooks,  and  take  away  and  cut  down  the 
branches."  The  meaning  is,  that  at  the  very  moment  when  the  likelihood  is, 
humanly  speaking,  greatest,  that  their  projects  shall  be  successful,  He  will  awak« 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

to  overturn  them.  Conclusion — 1.  The  passage  under  consideration,  while 
it  ought  to  alarm  the  enemies,  may  well  enough  bring  comfort  to  the  people  of 
God.  Let  them  look  up  for  their  redemption  draweth  nigh.  2.  On  the  other 
hand,  let  not  the  impenitent  flatter  themselves  into  security  because  their  Lord 
delayeth  His  coming.  (J.  L.  Adamson.)  Stillness: — "A  figure  of  perfect 
stillness."  (A.B.Davidson.)  The  arrest  of  evil  men  : — It  is  as  though  Jehovah 
were  quietly  looking  on,  and  permitting  the  Assyrians  to  do  their  worst.  So 
far  from  arresting  them,  He  seems  even  to  favour  their  plans.  He  is  to  them, 
as  the  dew  to  the  growth  of  plants.  But  before  the  bud  is  formed,  He  arises 
to  cut  them  off.  This  probably  refers  to  the  fatal  blow  which  overwhelmed 
Sennacherib's  army  in  a  single  night.  The  gratitude  of  surrounding  nations 
for  so  great  a  deliverance  would  cause  them  to  bring  sacrifices  to  Jehovah's  temple 
(ver.  7).  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  God's  secret  words: — How  striking  are  those 
secret  words,  whispered  by  God  to  His  favoured  servant,  "  The  Lord  said  unto 
me."  It  was  as  though  He  had  called  Isaiah  aside,  and  spoken  to  him  confi- 
dentially of  matters  which  must  not  be  uttered  to  uncircumcised  ears.  It  was 
thus  that  God  spake  of  old  to  Abraham  and  Moses.  And  in  modern  days  it  is 
remarkable,  in  reading  the  journals  of  George  Fox,  to  find  how  conscious  he  was 
of  similar  confidences  reposed  in  him  by  his  ever-present  and  faithful  Friend. 
(Ibid.)  Ood  resting  in  His  dwelling-place: — I.  The  dwelling-place  op  God 
and  His  bepose.  Let  me  ask  where  the  queen  rests  in  her  love  ?  You  must 
pass  and  press  beyond  the  regalia,  beyond  the  throne-room,  beyond  the  council, 
beyond  the  levee,  there  in  the  family,  amidst  her  children,  in  a  charmed  family 
circle, — there  she  rests  in  love.  And  has  not  God  such  a  circle,  such  a  dwelling- 
place,  and  home  ?  "  The  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  Him."  God 
has  revealed  to  us  this  great  thing,  that  He,  too,  lives  in  the  sympathies  and 
affections  of  His  intelligent  creatures.  God's  Church  is  His  dwelling-place.  God 
descends  to  dwell  in  us,  as  we  ascend  to  dwell  in  Him.  I  have  been  struck  with 
a  thought  like  this,  when  I  have  been  on  some  quiet  village  hill,  or  in  the  deeps 
of  some  country  forest,  when,  beneath  me,  or  away  from  me,  all  the  villagers 
were  in  the  booths  of  some  fair.  I  saw  it,  perhaps,  at  my  feet,  or  heard  the  sounds 
dying  away  on  my  ear.  So  it  is,  as  we  rise  to  rest  in  God.  At  our  feet  the  uproar — 
the  vice — the  vanity — of  the  Babel  booths — the  dissoluteness  and  the  song, — 
but  with  us  deep  peace,  and  quiet,  and  the  rest  of  heart  and  soul,  and  the  prospect 
of  the  glory  and  the  vistas  beyond  ;  it  is  even  so,  as  the  world  lies  beneath  us, 
and  above  us  spreads  the  calm — when  the  soul  possesses  God,  and  God  sinks 
into  the  soul — what  does  the  soul  look  out  upon  ?  what  does  the  soul  look  down 
upon  ?  what  does  the  soul  look  in  upon  ?  the  soul  one  with  God.  II.  "  I  will 
consider."  "  So  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  I  will  take  My  rest."  Exceedingly 
sublime  are  all  those  magnificent  passages  in  which  the  calm  of  the  Divine  mind 
is  contrasted  with  the  passion  and  the  agitation  of  human  affairs.  This  is  the 
connection  of  the  preceding  verses  (chap.  xvii.  12, 13).  It  is  amidst  that  turbulence 
of  the  oceans  of  the  population  that  God  says,  "  I  will  take  My  rest,  and  consider." 
III.  The  illustrations  op  Divine  consideration,  the  loving  and  beautiful 
result.  (E.  Paxton  Hood.)  God's  all-sufficiency: — There  is  that  in  God  which 
is  a  shelter  and  refreshment  to  His  people  in  all  weathers,  and  arms  them 
against  the  inconveniences  of  every  change.  Is  the  weather  cool  ?  There  is 
that  in  His  favour  that  will  warm  them.  Is  it  hot  ?  There  is  that  in  His 
favour  that  will  cool  them.  Great  men  have  their  winter  house  and  their 
summer  house  (Amos  iii.  15) ;  but  they  that  are  at  home  with  God  have  both  in 
Him.  (M.  Henry.)  When  the  bud  Is  perfect. — The  flower -bud  : — B — U — D — 
bud.  Beauty ;  use ;  design,  shall  be  our  three  points.  I.  Beauty.  Among  the 
many  kinds  of  beauty  nature  gives  us,  three  are  very  noticeable — 1.  Beauty 
of  form.  2.  Beauty  of  colour.  3.  Beauty  of  scent.  And  to  these  man  has 
added — 4.  Beauty  of  association.  II.  Use.  1.  Food.  In  the  economy  of 
nature  flowers  are  useful  as  food  for  insect  and  bird  and  man.  Groundsel  for 
the  birds  of  the  air !  The  honeysuckle  really  belongs  to,  and  is  the  early  home 
of,  a  green  moth,  brown  round  the  edges,  with  transparent  wings.  It  also  belongs 
to  a  caterpillar,  which  afterwards  becomes  a  brown  and  white  and  dull  blue  butter- 
fly. And  so  list  after  list  might  be  given  of  flowers  upon  which  the  insect  world 
feeds,  and  by  which  it  is  nourished.  Again,  it  is  from  flowers  that  the  bees  collect 
the  honey !  Thus  the  flowers  may  be  said  literally  to  feed  man.  2.  Medicine. 
3.  Fruit.  Flowering  is  a  stage  on  the  way  to  fruit.  What  Christian  graces 
will  you  have  to  show  when  the  time  of  the  ingathering  comes  ?     III.  Design. 


chap,  xix.]  ISAIAH.  383 

Nature  works  on  a  plan.  Who  made  the  plan,  the  design  ?  There  cannot  be 
a  plan  without  someone  to  plan  ;  nor  a  design  without  a  designer.  The  Christian 
looks  from  nature  to  nature's  God.     (C.  H.  Grundy,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Veb.  1.  The  burden  of  Egypt. — The  prophecies  concerning  Egypt : — The 
kingdom  to  which  all  the  three  prophecies  (chaps,  xviii.,  xix.,  xx.)  refer  is  the  same, 
namely,  the  Egypto- Ethiopian  kingdom  ;  but  it  is  so  dealt  with  that  chap,  xviii. 
refers  to  the  ruling  people,  chap.  xix.  to  the  ruled  people,  and  chap.  xx.  embraces 
them  both  together.  (F.  Delitzsch. )  Egypt  interwoven  with  the  history  of  the  kingdom 
of  Ood  : — The  reason  why  the  prophecy  occupies  itself  so  particularly  with  Egypt 
is  that  no  people  of  the  earth  was  so  closely  interwoven  with  the  history  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  from  the  patriarchal  time  as  Egypt.  (Ibid.)  The  oracle 
concerning  Egypt  :  promise  as  well  as  threatening  : — Because,  as  the  Thora  impresses 
it,  Israel  must  never  forget  that  it  long  resided  in  Egypt,  and  there  grew  great, 
and  enjoyed  much  good  ;  so  prophecy,  when  it  comes  to  speak  to  Egypt,  is  not 
less  zealous  in  promising  than  in  threatening.  Accordingly,  the  Isaianio  oracle 
falls  into  two  distinct  halves ;  one  threatening,  vers.  1-15,  and  one  promising, 
vers.  18-25 ;  and  between  judgment  and  salvation  there  stands  the  terror  in 
vers.  16,  17,  as  the  bridge  from  the  former  to  the  latter.  (Ibid.)  Behold,  the 
Lord  rideth  upon  a  swift  cloud. — The  way  of  the  Lord : — Here  is  one  way  in 
which  the  Lord  comes,  namely,  "  upon  a  swift  cloud  "  (ver.  1).  The  intimation 
is  one  of  mystery.  No  man  can  tell  which  way  the  Lord  will  come  to-day.  Let 
us  keep  our  eyes  upon  every  point  of  the  horizon  ;  let  us  distribute  the  watchmen 
wisely  and  assign  to  each  his  sphere  of  observation  ;  for  by  what  door  the  Lord 
may  enter  the  field  of  vision  no  man  can  tell, — by  a  political  event,  by  some  new 
movement  in  foreign  policy,  by  the  discovery  of  new  riches  in  the  earth,  by  great 
shocks  which  try  men's  strength,  by  grim  sorrow,  by  cruel  death,  by  judgments 
that  have  no  name,  by  mercies  tender  as  the  tenderest  love,  by  compassions  all 
tears,  by  providences  that  are  surprises  of  gladness :  watch  all  these  doors,  for 
by  any  one  of  them  the  Lord  may  come  into  the  nation,  the  family,  the  heart  of 
the  individual.  This  Divine  policy,  if  it  may  be  so  named,  baffles  the  watchers 
who  trust  to  their  own  sagacity.  If  men  will  say  they  will  circumvent  God  and 
know  all  the  ways  of  His  providence,  behold  God  forsakes  all  ways  that  are  familiar 
and  that  lie  within  the  calculation  of  the  human  mind ;  and  He  startles  those  who 
watch  with  light  from  unexpected  quarters,  with  shakings  and  tremblings  never 
before  felt  in  the  vibrations  of  history.  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about 
Him  " :  the  cloud  that  appears  to  be  nothing  but  vapour  may  enshrine  the  Deity ; 
the  bush,  yesterday  so  common  that  any  bird  might  have  alighted  upon  it,  to-day 
burns  with  unseen,  infinite  energy.  The  Lord  will  come  by  what  way  He  pleases, 
— now  as  if  from  the  depths  of  the  earth,  and  now  as  from  the  heights  of  heaven  ; 
blessed  is  that  servant  who  is  ready  to  receive  Him  and  to  welcome  Him  to  the 
heart's  hospitality  of  love.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  And  I  will  set  the  Egyptians  against  the  Egyptians.  —  Divim 
providence  in  civil  strife  : — This  method  of  administration,  we  say,  obtains  and 
prevails  in  all  ages.  This  is  the  meaning  of  many  a  controversy,  of  many  a  quarrel, 
of  many  a  dissension,  in  cabinets,  in  families,  in  nations.  Men  are  surprised 
that  they  should  turn  upon  their  brothers  with  disdain,  and  even  with  cruel 
hatred.  It  is  indeed  matter  of  surprise  and  great  sorrow,  and  if  looked  at  within 
narrow  limits  it  would  seem  to  be  a  reflection  upon  Providence :  but  when  does 
God  ask  to  be  judged  within  the  four  corners  of  human  imagination  or  criticism  ? 
He  not  only  does  the  deed,  He  does  it  within  a  field  which  He  Himself  has  measured, 
and  within  the  range  of  declarations  which  have  about  them  all  the  mystery 
and  graciousness  of  evangelical  prophecies.  We  must,  therefore,  look  not  only 
at  the  incident,  but  at  all  its  surroundings  and  to  all  its  issues.  When  we  are 
puzzled  by  household  difficulties,  by  commercial  perplexities,  by  unions  that 
only  exist  for  a  moment  and  then  dissolve  or  are  turned  into  sourness  and  aliena- 
tion, we  must  never  forget  that  there  is  One  who  rules  over  all.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

Ver.  11.  How  say  ye  ...  I  am  the  son  of  the  wise,  the  son  of  ancient 
kings  ? — On  the  pride  of  birth  : — The  charge  which  the  prophet  makes  upon 
the  Egyptian  nobles  may,  with  some  justice,  be  extended  to  those  in 
modern  times  who  are  perpetually  reminding  the  world,  directly  or  indirectly, 
of  the  dignity  of  their  ancestors  ;  and  who,  because  they  have  no  living  merit 
to  boast  of,  are  ever  shrining  themselves  in  the  glories  of  the  dead.  1.  Not 
only  does  the  world  set  a  high  value  upon  illustrious  birth,  but  it  commonly 
obtains  the  preference  over  talents  and  virtues.  There  must  be  a  certain  rule 
of  precedence  in  society,  an  arrangement  of  those  pretensions  we  all  exhibit 
for  public  notice  and  respect ;  and  those  causes  which  confer  superiority  must 
be  obvious  and  not  liable  to  be  mistaken  ;  not  chemical  distinctions,  discoverable 
upon  analysis,  but  natural  marks,  perceptible  to  the  eye.  Such,  in  some  degree, 
are  wealth  and  birth,  the  notoriety  of  which  is  much  greater  than  that  of  talents 
and  virtues.  2.  But  how  comes  birth  to  be  respected  at  all  ?  History  teaches 
us  to  connect  courage  to  one  name,  and  counsel  to  another ;  to  connect  them 
even  to  an  eye  or  a  look ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  behold  the  son  or  the  descendant 
of  an  eminent  man  without  deluding  ourselves  into  an  idea  that  some  share 
of  the  virtues  as  well  as  some  trait  of  the  features  has  been  transmitted  from 
one  to  the  other.  A  person  placed  in  a  liberal  situation  of  life,  above  the  necessity 
of  increasing  his  fortune,  is  supposed  to  have  derived  from  education  a  culti- 
vated understanding  and  correct  moral  taste  ;  to  be  careful  of  reputation  and 
worthy  of  trust ;  and,  when  a  family  has  been  long  in  this  situation,  we  associate 
these  qualities  to  them  much  more  strongly,  and  are  apt  to  conceive  that  a  certain 
propriety  of  sentiment  has  been  transmitted,  with  hereditaments  and  lands, 
from  one  generation  to  another.  It  is  therefore  well  to  recollect  that  the  reverence 
mankind  pay  to  birth  is  founded  upon  its  supposed  connection  with  great  and 
amiable  qualities ;  that  it  is  unjust  to  inhale  the  incense  without  possessing 
the  attributes  to  which  it  is  offered  up ;  and  that  no  disapprobation  is  so  com- 
plete as  that  which  succeeds  to  detected  imposture  and  misplaced  regard.  3.  Pride 
of  birth,  in  common  with  every  other  species  of  pride,  is  utterly  incompatible 
with  the  Christian  character,  the  very  essence  of  which  is  lowliness  of  spirit, 
and,  in  common  with  every  other  species  of  pride,  is  marked  by  narrow  and 
erroneous  views  of  human  nature.  The  peculiar  objections  to  it  are,  that  birth 
may  frequently  prove  a  source  of  the  most  serious  misfortunes ;  that,  at  a  certain 
period  of  depravity,  it  gives  splendour  to  shame,  and  inflames  the  contempt 
of  mankind ;  that  it  justifies  the  painful  suspicion  of  being  beloved  from  name, 
and  not  from  nature  ;  that,  considered  singly  by  itself,  without  the  virtues  which 
sometimes  do,  and  are  always  expected  to,  accompany  it,  it  is  of  all  causes  of 
self-approbation  the  least  rational  and  just.  4.  Though  pride  be  the  excess 
of  self-approbation,  it  can  only  rest  ultimately  upon  the  approbation  of  others. 
It  is  always  upon  the  esteem  of  others,  present  and  future,  or  upon  a  title  to 
it,  conceived  to  be  extremely  strong,  that  pride  is  founded.  A  proud  man  may 
not  possess  esteem,  but  he  must  believe  that  he  does  possess  it,  or  shall  possess 
it,  during  life,  or  after  death,  or  that  he  deserves  to  possess  it ;  for,  if  he  con- 
ceives himself  justly  contemptible,  he  must  cease  to  be  proud.  Now,  all  pride 
proceeds  from  a  wrong  notion  of  the  method  by  which  the  approbation  of  others 
is  secured ;  from  a  misappreciation  of  ourselves,  and  of  the  sagacity  of  man- 
kind, who  are  so  far  from  adopting  a  man's  standard  of  himself  as  their  own, 
that  they  commonly  value  a  human  being  inversely  as  he  values  himself.  It 
proceeds  from  an  ignorance  of  that  captivating  modesty  which  lulls  rivalry  to 
sleep,  and  gives  all  the  benevolent  affections  their  free  influence  upon  the  judg- 
ment. Pride,  then,  is  only  another  name  for  ignorance,  because  it  takes  the 
most  shortsighted  and  inefficacious  means  to  effect  its  object.  5.  Travellers 
tell  us  that  there  is  a  tree,  the  roots  of  which  afford  bread  or  poison,  according 
as  they  are  managed  and  prepared.  Such  is  the  doubtful  nature  of  illustrious 
birth  :  it  may  be  a  blessing  or  a  curse,  the  source  of  virtue  or  the  cradle  of  shame  ; 
eminence  it  must  ever  give,  eminence  of  infamy  or  eminence  of  good.  God 
forbid  we  should  not  think  of  ancient  days,  if  thus  doing  we  can  add  virtue  or 
happiness  ;  forbid  us  to  stifle  that  solemn  pleasure  which  we  feel  in  gazing  at 
the  dead,  if  that  solemn  pleasure  teach  us  to  live  aright.  If  you  will  look  upon 
nobleness  of  birth  as  a  promise  to  be  fulfilled  and  a  debt  to  be  paid  to  society  ; 
if  you  will  recompense  mankind,  by  your  personal  merit,  for  their  fervent  love 
to  your  name  and  fathers,  and  think  exalted  birth  a  solemn  pledge  for  exalted 
virtue,  a  covenant  for  honourable  labour  and  unspotted  faith,  an   oath  taken 


.chap,  xix.]  ISAIAH.  381 

to  the  shades  of  the  dead,  never  to  pollute  their  blood  or  sully  their  fame ;  if 
you  hasten  to  fix  this  admiration  of  words  and  sounds  upon  some  more  solid 
foundation,  to  reflect  more  lustre  on  your  race  than  you  take  from  it,  and  to 
be  the  chief  of  the  people  in  thought  and  action  as  well  as  by  chance  and  law 
— then  think  for  ever  on  the  greatness  of  your  name,  and  the  splendour  of  your 
father's  fathers  ;  and  when  a  prophet  shall  ask  you,  yea,  when  more  than  a 
prophet,  when  God  shall  ask  you,  How  have  ye  said  upon  earth,  I  am  the  son 
of  wise  counsellors  and  ancient  kings  ?  "  ye  may  answer,  "  We  have  so  said,  not 
ignorant  that  all  things  on  earth  are  the  shadows  of  a  shadow,  and  the  dust  of 
the  dust ;  but  hoping  like  them  to  walk  in  the  pure  and  perfect  law  of  Him 
who  made  us,  and  to  do  the  good  and  righteous  things  which  our  fathers  have 
done  of  old  time,  that  we  may  draw  down  upon  us  Thy  blessings,  and  finally 
partake  of  that  dear  and  unknown  world  which  Thy  blessed  Son  has  promised 
as  in  Thy  name."     (Sydney  Smith,  M.A.) 

Ver.  18.  The  language  of  Canaan. — Converting  grace,  by  changing  the  heart, 
changeth  the  language  ;  for  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaks. 
(M.  Henry.)  The  language  of  Canaan: — 1.  To  speak  the  language  of  Canaan 
is  to  discourse  on  sacred  subjects  in  a  manner  peculiar  to  those  who  enjoy  Divine 
revelation,  and  are  taught  of  God.  2.  It  is  to  treat  of  spiritual  matters  in  that 
dialect  which  is  best  suited  to  their  nature  and  importance,  and  which  hath  been 
employed  for  this  purpose  by  patriarchs  and  prophets,  by  Jesus  Christ  Himself, 
His  apostles  and  disciples  in  all  ages.  3.  This  language  of  the  people  of  God 
hath  in  it  somewhat  peculiar,  whereby  it  may  be  distinguished  from  all  other 
kinds  of  speech.  It  is  quite  free  from  vanity,  detraction,  falsehood,  impurity, 
and  folly,  with  which  all  other  conversation  is  more  or  less  tinctured ;  whilst 
much  is  said  concerning  the  only  true  God,  the  great  Messiah,  the  promises, 
ordinances,  and  commandments  of  Jehovah,  with  many  other  such  delightful 
topics.     (R.  Maccvlloch.) 

Ver.  20.  He  shall  send  them  a  Saviour  and  a  great  one. — A  Saviour  and 
a  great  one  : — The  literal  coincidences  between  the  promise  of  a  "  saviour  " 
and  a  "  great  one,"  and  the  titles  of  Alexander  the  Great  and  Ptolemy  the  Saviour 
are  noticeable  and  interesting.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Alexander  the  Great 
delivered  them  from  the  grievous  Persian  yoke,  and  he  and  his  successors  greatly 
favoured  the  people  and  improved  the  country.  He  settled  a  great  many  Jews 
in  Alexandria,  giving  them  equal  privileges  with  the  Macedonians ;  and  this 
Hebrew  immigration  was  still  further  promoted  by  Ptolemy  Soter,  so  that  Philo 
reckoned  that  in  his  time  there  were  a  million  Jews  in  the  country.  The  temple 
of  Onias,  the  LXX.  version  of  the  Bible,  the  books  of  the  Apocrypha,  the  philosophy 
and  theology  of  Philo,  indicate  not  only  what  these  Jews  were  in  themselves,  but 
enable  us  to  infer  with  certainty  how  great  must  have  been  their  example  and 
influence  in  humanising  the  Egyptians,  and  bringing  them  to  the  knowledge 
and  worship  of  the  true  God.  And  still  more  were  these  results  apparent,  still 
more  amply  was  this  prophecy  fulfilled,  when  Alexandria  became  one  of  the  great 
centres  of  the  Christian  Church.  (Ibid.)  Who  was  the  great  Saviour  promised 
to  Egypt? — Even  if  the  language  of  this  verse  by  itself  might  seem  to  point  to 
a  particular  deliverer,  the  comprehensive  language  of  the  context  would  forbid 
its  reference  to  any  such  exclusively.  If  the  chapter  is  a  prophecy  not  of  a  single 
event  but  of  a  great  progressive  change  to  be  wrought  in  the  condition  of  Egypt 
by  the  introduction  of  the  true  religion,  the  promise  of  the  verse  before  us  must 
be,  that  when  they  cried  God  would  send  them  a  deliverer,  a  promise  verified 
not  once  but  often,  not  by  Ptolemy  or  Alexander  only,  but  by  others,  and  in  the 
highest  sense  by  Christ  Himself.  (J.  A.  Alexander. )  The  Messiah  a  great  Saviour  : 
— I.  Great  in  His  Person.     "  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever."     IL  Great 

IN  THE   CHARACTER  He   SUSTAINS.       III.   GREAT    IN    THE    WORKS  HB    PERFORMS. 

IV.  Great  in  the  salvation  He  bestows.  V.  Great  in  the  glory  to  which 
He  is  now  exalted.  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  A  great  Saviour  provided: — An  old 
Mexican  monk,  in  his  dingy  cell,  once  painted  an  allegorical  picture,  representing 
a  beautiful  maiden  standing  on  an  island,  with  only  room  for  her  feet  to  rest  upon, 
while  all  around  dashed  and  surged  a  lake  of  fire.  The  angry  flames  almost 
touched  her,  and  yet  she  smiled,  all  unconscious  of  danger.  More  dreadful  still, 
on  each  billow's  crest  rides  a  malignant  fiend,  and  they  are  closing  around  the 
seemingly  defenceless  girl,  seeking  to  fasten  chains  about  her  limbs,  that  they 

25 


286  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

may  drag  her  into  the  burning  lake.  The  maiden  still  smiles  serenely,  for  she 
sees  them  not.  A  golden  cord  of  grace,  descending  from  above,  is  twined  amidst 
her  sunny  hair,  but  death  appears  ready  to  cut  the  slender  thread.  A  hand  of 
help  is  reaching  down  to  her,  which  she  must  take,  or  be  lost  in  the  fiery  abyss. 
A  company  of  attending  angels  anxiously  await  her  decision,  and  this  group 
completes  the  picture.  This  is  no  fancy  sketch  of  the  old  painter's  brain,  but  it 
is  your  condition  unless  you  have  laid  hold  on  Christ  Jesus  to  deliver  you.  (J.  N. 
Norton.) 

Vers.  23-25.  In  that  day  shall  Israel  he  the  third  with  Egypt  and  with 
Assyria. — Israel,  Egypt,  and  Assyria  : — Israel  is  no  longer  alone  God's  people, 
God's  creation,  God's  inheritance,  but  Egypt  and  Assyria  are  each  a  third  sharer 
with  Israel.  In  order  to  express  this,  Israel's  three  names  of  honour  are  mixed 
together,  and  each  of  three  peoples  receives  one  of  the  precious  names,  of  which 
"  inheritance  "  is  assigned  to  Israel  as  pointing  back  to  the  beginning  of  its  history. 
This  essential  equalisation  of  the  heathen  peoples  with  Israel  is  no  degradation 
to  the  latter ;  for  although  henceforth  there  exists  no  essential  distinction  of  the 
peoples  in  their  relation  to  God,  it  is  nevertheless  always  Israel's  God  who  attains 
recognition,  and  Israel  is  the  people  which,  according  to  the  promise,  has  become 
the  medium  of  blessing  to  the  earth.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  The  significance  of  the 
prophecy : — These  nations  represent  to  the  prophet  the  heathen  world  which 
was  "  eventually  to  be  incorporated  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  prediction 
can  never  be  realised  for  those  nations,  because  they  have  ceased  to  exist ;  but 
it  will  yet  be  realised  in  that  great  peace  of  the  world,  which  is  the  hope  of  all 
the  nations  of  mankind."  (C.  A.  Briggs,  D.D.)  A  forecast  of  the  triumph  of 
Christianity  : — Never  had  the  faith  of  the  prophet  soared  so  high  or  approached 
bo  near  to  the  conception  of  a  universal  religion.  (Prof.  Robertson  Smith. )  The 
holy  triple  alliance  : — The  two  great  powers  which  have  hitherto  met  only  as  foes 
are  to  meet  in  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  And  in  consequence  of  this  there  is  to 
be  fellowship  between  them.  And  this  is  brought  about  by  the  little  central 
state.  Israel  has  reached  the  grand  end  of  its  calling ;  it  becomes  a  blessing 
to  the  whole  circuit  of  the  earth.  It  is  a  grand  prophecy  destined  to  find  its  full 
accomplishment  in  the  latter  days.     I.  It  is  God's  purpose  to  perfect  the 

RACE  THROUGH  INTERNATIONAL  INTERCOURSE  AND  FRIENDSHIP.       Chronic  national 

antagonism  is  not  Heaven's  design.  Neither  is  the  design  of  God  respecting  the 
various  peoples  that  they  should  dwell  in  a  state  of  isolation.  The  Divine  purpose 
is  manifestly  that  the  several  nations  shall  complete  each  other  through  sympathy 
and  reciprocity.  1.  Geography  indicates  this.  The  good  things  of  nature  are 
not  all  found  in  any  one  land  ;  reciprocity  is  designed  and  necessitated  by  the 
very  dispositions  of  soil  and  climate.  2.  Ethnology  also  gives  a  reason  for  national 
sympathy  and  intercourse.  No  one  national  type  includes  all  perfections.  The 
nations  need  one  another.  History  shows  us  the  solidarity  of  the  race  and  how 
wonderfully  any  one  people  is  enriched  by  the  contributions  of  the  rest.  Take 
our  own  nation.  In  our  gardens  are  the  flowers  and  fruits  of  all  climates.  In 
a  thousand  ways  our  neighbours  have  contributed  to  make  us  what  we  are.  The 
Italians  and  French  taught  us  silk-weaving.  The  Flemings  taught  us  our  fine 
woollen  trade.  The  Venetians  showed  us  how  to  make  glass.  A  German  erected 
our  first  paper-mill.  A  Dutchman  began  our  potteries.  The  Genoese  taught 
us  to  build  ships.  And  so  history  reveals  that  through  successive  generations 
the  several  nations  have  enriched  each  other  in  art,  industry,  literature,  juris- 
prudence, language,  philosophy,  government,  and  religion.  The  thought  of  God 
is  the  brotherhood  of  man,  and  all  things  prove  it.  II.  The  Gospel  of  Christ 
is  the  supreme  unifying  power  of  the  race.  In  the  fulness  of  its  meaning 
this  is  what  our  text  signifies.  The  lesson  here  for  us  is  that  the  marriage  of 
nations  will  take  place  where  other  marriages  are  celebrated — at  the  altar  of 
God.  In  other  words,  the  unifying  power  of  the  race  is  the  highest  religious 
faith — the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Some  suppose  that  the  ameliora- 
tive reconciling  influence  will  be  found  in  commerce.  But  there  are  malign 
influences  which  defeat  the  benign  influences  of  trade.  2.  Others  think  that 
the  principle  of  unity  will  be  found  in  the  cultivation  of  cosmopolitan  literature. 
The  influence  of  great  literature  is  pacifying,  but  it  must  also  be  remembered 
that  such  literature  feeds  patriotism,  which  is  a  peril.  3.  Many  build  great  hopes 
on  science.  Science  reveals  the  unity  of  nature,  but  it  teaches  also  that  all  nature 
is  full  of  strife,  and  civilisation  itself  is  built  on  antagonism.     It  is  only  as  a  great 


chap,  six.]  ISAIAH.  38? 

faith  changes  the  spirit  of  man  that  discords  will  resolve  themselves  into  harmonies. 
III.  God  has  in  a  very  special  measure  committed  unto  us  the  very  edifying 
Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To  a  large  extent  England  in  this  age 
occupies  the  position  that  Israel  occupied  of  old — it  is  our  special  calling  to  bring 
all  nations  to  the  obedience  of  the  faith.  As  Palestine  came  between  Egypt 
and  Assyria  so  this  island  comes  in  a  wonderful  manner  between  the  Old  World 
and  the  New.  God  gave  spiritual  gifts  in  a  remarkable  degree  to  Israel,  and  God 
has  given  us  richly  the  treasure  of  His  Gospel.  God  has  also  given  to  us  special 
powers  for  the  diffusion  of  the  Gospel.  (W.  L.  Walkinson.)  The  missionary 
religion : — This  was  the  glorious  vision  of  the  statesman-prophet,  a  new  world 
arising  out  of  the  confusions  and  struggles  of  the  old,  a  redeemed  humanity,  of 
which  these  now  extinct  peoples  are  the  symbol,  united  by  the  benediction  of 
God.  I.  We  must  not  read  into  these  words  any  compromise  with  the 
religion  of  Egypt  and  Assyria.  He  did  not  mean  that  the  faith  of  Israel 
was  the  third  with  the  faiths  of  the  Nile  and  the  Euphrates.  Perhaps  the  most 
insidious  foe  of  the  missionary  spirit  is  the  suggestion  that  Christianity  is  only 
one  among  many  religions  and  rival  creeds.  It  is  contradicted  by  all  the  facts 
of  Scripture  and  of  human  experience.  The  study  of  comparative  religion  so 
far  from  blinding  us  to  the  gleams  of  truth  and  the  broken  lights  of  heathenism, 
enables  us  to  feel  more  deeply  how  faint  and  broken  they  are.  The  stars  are 
invisible  to  us  in  the  glory  of  the  noon.  Yet  if  we  descend  into  some  deep 
pit  we  lose  the  daylight  and  we  see  the  stars.  So  in  all  ages  some  elect  souls, 
sunk  in  the  deep  and  horrible  pit  of  heathenism,  have  seen  shining  far  above 
them  the  pure,  peaceful  stars  of  God.  Their  faint  light  has  not  been  enough  to 
live  by,  not  enough  for  guidance  or  hope,  only  enough  to  reach  the  remoteness 
of  heaven  and  God,  enough  for  aspiration  and  to  keep  alive  the  great  questions 
of  human  existence  and  destiny.  Some  of  our  modern  teachers  have  gone 
down  into  the  deep  pit,  and  they  have  forgotten  that  they  themselves  are  the 
children  of  the  day.  We  solemnly  deny  that  any  religion  is  suited  to  any  people, 
either  East  or  West,  which  cannot  give  cleansing  to  the  conscience,  or  power  to 
the  will,  or  peace  to  the  heart,  which  is  silent  where  it  should  speak  most  clearly, 
which  can  cast  no  light  beyond  the  grave,  which  does  not  honour  womanhood 
and  protect  childhood.  Heathenism  is  man  seeking  God.  The  Gospel  is  God 
coming  down  to  seek  man.  In  its  essence  the  Gospel  is  unchangeable,  yet  there 
is  much  in  our  religion  which  is  capable  of  adaptation  to  the  conditions,  tastes, 
and  temperaments  of  different  races.  II.  We  see  in  our  text  the  wiping  out 
of  national  prejudices  and  racial  animosities  in  a  common  salvation. 
Egypt  was  the  ancient  foe  and  oppressor  of  Israel.  The  pages  of  Isaiah  are  full 
of  warnings  against  the  broken  reed  of  Egypt.  The  prophet  saw  the  gathering 
storm  and  knew  that  Assyria  should  scatter  the  nation  and  destroy  the  city  and 
the  temple.  Yet  he  spoke  of  both  as  resting  with  Israel  under  the  blessing  of 
God.  But,  more  than  that,  the  known  world  of  Isaiah's  day  was  bounded  on 
the  west  by  Egypt  and  on  the  east  by  Assyria.  They  stand  for  the  world,  because 
they  were  then  the  confines  of  the  world.  Six  centuries  later  the  world  of 
St.  Paul  was  larger  still.  Our  world  is  the  whole  world,  but  it  has  not  outgrown 
the  love  or  the  promise  or  the  duty.  This  larger  outlook  rests  upon  three  chief 
grounds.  1.  The  brotherhood  of  man.  2.  All  the  great  redemptive  facts  are 
for  humanity.  3.  The  purposes  of  God  are  for  mankind.  III.  It  only  remains 
to  ask  whether  this  promise  of  a  redeemed  humanity  is  only  a  dream,  and  a 
glowing  but  unsubstantial  vision,  or  is  it  a  Divine  reality  ?  If  it  rested  upon 
an  obscure  word  in  an  ancient  prophecy  we  might  fear  to  press  it.  But  it  is  the 
burden  of  Scripture.  It  was  the  vision  of  Christ  as  He  rejoiced  in  spirit  and 
cried,  "  And  if  I  be  lifted  up  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  But  it  is  the  method 
of  God  to  use  human  instruments.  He  accepts  the  tribute  of  His  people's  love, 
and  He  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.  (J.  H.  Shakespeare,  M.A.) 
God's  purposes  worked  out : — 1.  God  intends  that  each  single  nation  of  the  earth 
ehall  make  the  most  of  itself  for  the  good  of  all  other  nations.  2.  God  is  ruling 
over  all  the  nations,  and  is  working  out  His  great  and  glorious  purposes  through 
them.  (D.  Gregg,  LL.D.)  God's  converting  grace : — These  are  mysterious 
words,  which  certainly  have  not  been  fulfilled.  There  was  a  partial  fulfilment 
of  them  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  we  learn  that  Medes,  Parthians,  Elamites, 
together  with  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  joined  with  those  of  Egypt,  Libya,  Cyrene, 
and  Judea,  in  acknowledging  the  power  of  the  exalted  Saviour,  and  the  mighty 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     But  just  beyond  the  veil  which  hides  the  immediate 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  1LLU  ST  BATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

future,  we  are  doubtless  destined  to  see  greater  things  than  these.  In  any  case, 
we  may  take  the  prophet's  words  as  illustrating  the  truth,  that  none  are  beyond 
the  pale  of  Divine  mercy ;  that  God  can  change  persecutors  into  apostles,  and 
that  the  elements  that  make  men  bad  will,  beneath  converting  grace,  be  the  con- 
stituents of  strong  and  holy  lives.  God  rejoices  to  take  those  who  have  been 
strong  in  the  service  of  Satan,  and  make  them  lowly  and  devoted  servants  of  the 
Gross.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Isaiah's  wide  outlook  and  cosmopolitan  sympathies  : 
— We  shall  never  do  the  Jewish  religion  justice  till  we  pay  attention  to  what  its 
greatest  prophets  thought  of  the  outside  world,  how  they  sympathised  with  this, 
and  in  what  way  they  proposed  to  make  it  subject  to  their  own  faith.  1.  There 
is  something  in  the  very  manner  of  Isaiah's  treatment  of  foreign  nations  which 
causes  the  old  charges  of  exclusiveness  to  sink  in  our  throats.  Isaiah  treats 
these  foreigners  at  least  as  men.  Take  his  prophecies  on  Egypt  or  on  Tyre  or 
on  Babylon — nations  which  were  the  hereditary  enemies  of  his  nation — and  you 
find  him  speaking  of  their  natural  misfortunes,  their  social  decays,  their  national 
follies  and  disasters,  with  the  same  pity  and  with  the  same  purely  moral  con- 
siderations, with  which  he  has  treated  his  own  land.  When  news  of  those  far- 
away sorrows  comes  to  Jerusalem,  it  moves  this  large-hearted  prophet  to  mourning 
and  tears.  He  breathes  out  to  distant  lands  elegies  as  beautiful  as  he  has  poured 
upon  Jerusalem.  He  shows  as  intelligent  an  interest  in  their  social  evolutions 
as  he  does  in  those  of  the  Jewish  State.  He  gives  a  picture  of  the  industry  and 
politics  of  Egypt  as  careful  as  his  pictures  of  the  fashions  and  statecraft  of  Judah. 
In  short,  as  you  read  his  prophecies  upon  foreign  nations,  you  perceive  that  before 
the  eyes  of  this  man  humanity,  broken  and  scattered  in  his  days  as  it  was,  rose 
up  one  great  whole,  every  part  of  which  was  subject  to  the  same  laws  of  righteous- 
ness, and  deserved  from  the  prophet  of  God  the  same  love  and  pity.  To  some 
few  tribes  he  says  decisively  that  they  shall  certainly  be  wiped  out,  but  even  them 
he  does  not  address  hi  contempt  or  in  hatred.  The  large  empire  of  Egypt,  the 
great  commercial  power  of  Tyre,  he  speaks  of  in  language  of  respect  and  admira- 
tion ;  but  that  does  not  prevent  him  from  putting  the  plain  issue  to  them  which 
he  put  to  his  own  countrymen :  If  you  are  unrighteous,  intemperate,  impure — 
lying  diplomats  and  dishonest  rulers,  you  shall  certainly  perish  before  Assyria. 
If  you  are  righteous,  temperate,  pure,  if  you  do  trust  in  truth  and  God,  nothing 
can  move  you.  2.  But  he  who  thus  treated  all  nations  with  the  same  strict 
measures  of  justice  and  the  same  fulness  of  pity  with  which  he  treated  his  own, 
was  surely  not  far  from  extending  to  the  world  the  religious  privileges  which  he 
has  so  frequently  identified  with  Jerusalem.  In  his  old  age,  at  least,  Isaiah  looked 
forward  to  the  time  when  the  particular  religious  opportunities  of  the  Jew  should 
be  the  inheritance  of  humanity.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  dominating 
influence  of  national  righteousness  : — The  moral  is  this  :  When  the  leading  nation 
of  the  world  is  true  to  God  and  His  principles,  knowing  no  compromise  and  no 
hesitation  ;  when  it  lives  these  principles,  incorporates  them  into  its  laws  and 
institutions,  builds  them  into  the  code  by  which  it  governs  its  international 
relations,  makes  them  part  of  its  foreign  policy,  and,  so  far  as  it  has  it  in  its  power, 
insists  upon  other  nations  honouring  them  and  administering  their  affairs  by  them 
— it  is  always  sure  to  win  the  day,  and  to  rule  as  a  mighty  influence  among  all 
the  nations  of  the  world,  and  to  lift  them  up  toward  the  level  of  its  own  high 
civilisation.  (Z>.  Gregg,  LL.D.)  A  transformed  world : — No  one  who  has 
seen  the  lovely  Bay  of  Naples  can  ever  forget  it.  The  magnificent  stretch  of 
waters,  the  twenty  or  thirty  miles  of  memorable  coast  that  girdle  it,  the  vast  city 
with  its  painted  palaces,  its  domes  and  spires,  Vesuvius  with  nodding  plume  cc 
fire  and  vapour,  and  over  all  the  sky  blue  as  Aaron's  mantle.  Now,  geologists 
tell  us  that  that  lovely  bay  is  really  the  crater  of  an  extinct  volcano.     In 

Srimitive  ages  it  was  a  vast  and  awful  abyss  of  flame  and  fury,  but  the  fires  died 
own,  the  lava  ceased  to  flow,  the  smoke  rolled  away,  the  glorious  sea  overflowed 
the  crater,  and  now  the  lovely  waters  sleep  and  dream,  reflecting  the  lights  and 
colours  of  the  sky.  This  world,  for  ages,  has  been  a  veritable  mouth  of  hell. 
But  its  fires  are  slackening,  its  wrath  abates,  its  darkness  is  less  dense,  its  desola- 
tions and  miseries  come  to  a  perpetual  end,  and  truth  and  justice,  mercy  and 
kindness,  are  covering  it  as  the  great  deep  profound.  ( W.  L.  Watkinson. )  One 
Gospel  for  all : — Goers  Gospel  is  made  not  for  Englishmen,  but  for  all  men. 
Many  think  the  Gospel  is  a  very  beautiful  thing — if  you  would  only  keep  it 
at  home ;  but  the  moment  you  try  to  apply  it  to  anybody  else,  it  will  not  suit 
them.    Try  it  upon  the  negro ;  he  is  too  low.     Try  it  upon  the  Hindoo ;  he  is 


chap,  xx.]  ISAIAH.  389 

too  high.  Each  of  these  must  have  a  religion  of  his  own  ;  one  would  not  suit 
them  all.  The  rice  that  forms  a  suitable  food  for  the  natives  of  hot  climates 
is  not  suitable  for  the  bleak  north.  The  food  that  is  suitable  for  the  north,  the 
clothing  and  house  suitable  for  the  north,  are  not  suitable  for  the  tropics,  and  so 
with  religion.  "  A  man  looked  into  the  eye  of  an  Anglo-Saxon,"  says  William 
Arthur,  and  found  it  blue,  and  into  the  eye  of  a  negro  and  found  it  black,  and 
he  said,  '  These  are  different  organisations  ;  you  are  not  so  bewildered  as  to  think 
you  can  enlighten  both  these  eyes  with  the  same  sun.  You  must  have  a  sun 
for  each  of  them  ;  you  must  have  different  suns,  you  see,  because  the  eyes  are 
differently  organised.'  "  Very  well,  that  is  exceedingly  fine  in  theory,  but  try  it 
— try  whether  the  sun  which  God  put  in  the  heaven  will  not  illuminate  the  pale 
eye  of  the  northerner  and  the  dark  eye  of  the  southerner.  (Sunday  School 
Chronicle. )  The  universal  language  : — When  Haydn  was  prevailed  upon  to  visit 
England  for  the  first  time,  Mozart  said  to  him,  You  have  no  training  for  the 
great  world,  and  you  speak  too  few  languages."  Haydn  replied,  "  My  language 
is  understood  by  all  the  world."  The  power  of  the  name  of  Jesus  is,  however, 
more  universal  in  its  appeal  than  the  power  of  great  music.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Veb.  1.  In  the  year  that  Tartan  came  unto  Ashdod. — The  purpose  of 
the  chapter : — Judah,  alarmed  by  the  capture  of  Samaria,  and  the  rapid 
extension  of  the  Assyrian  invasion,  looked  for  assistance  from  Egypt.  And 
the  aim  of  this  brief  chapter  is  to  recall  king  and  people  from  any  such  reliance, 
by  the  announcement  that  the  King  of  Assyria  would  shortly  prevail  against 
Egypt,  and  lead  into  captivity  multitudes  of  prisoners.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  date  of  the  prophecy  is  assured.  The  expedition  mentioned  took  place  in 
711  B.C.,  and  is  minutely  related  in  two  of  Sargon's  own  inscriptions.  See 
Schrader,  Cuneiform  Inscriptions,  vol.  ii.  (Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools.)  The 
Tartan,  Assyrian,  turtanu,  i.e.,  Commander-in-chief.     (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Go  and  loose  the  sackcloth  from  off  thy  loins. — Isaiah  stripped 
and  barefooted  : — Owing  to  the  great  importance  which  is  attributed  to  cloth- 
ing from  the  standpoint  of  Oriental  culture  and  manners,  any  one  who 
appears  without  the  upper  garment  is  already  regarded  as  naked  and  bare.  Isaiah 
has  to  lay  off  the  garment  of  the  preacher  of  repentance  and  of  the  mourner, 
bo  that  only  his  tunic  remains  ;  and  in  this  dress,  and  moreover  barefooted,  he 
has  to  appear  in  public.  It  is  the  costume  of  a  man  who  had  been  robbed  and 
disgraced,  of  a  beggar,  it  may  be,  or  a  prisoner  of  war.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  God's 
appointment  magnifies  mean  things  : — The  appointment  of  God  renders  those 
things  and  actions  which  in  themselves  seem  mean  and  contemptible,  momentous 
and  useful :  it  stamps  them  with  real  dignity  and  importance,  and  makes  them 
truly  instructive.  View  the  ceremonial  institutions  of  the  Old  Testament,  such  as 
circumcision,  abstinence  from  particular  kinds  of  food  and  of  raiment,  unclean- 
ness  contracted  by  touching  certain  objects,  and  sprinkling  the  tabernacle 
with  blood,  and  they  appear  trifling  and  ridiculous.  Contemplate  them  again 
as  the  ordinances  of  God,  infinitely  wise  and  gracious,  and  you  may  discern  their 
excellence  and  extensive  utility.  Look  at  our  prophet  as  he  is  here  described, 
and  you  see  an  odd  appearance ;  but  consider  him  acting  by  Divine  commission, 
that  he  might  represent  to  his  countrymen  the  future  naked  and  destitute  con- 
dition to  which  those  nations  were  to  be  reduced  in  whom  they  foolishly  placed 
their  confidence,  and  every  circumstance  acquires  new  consequence.  (R.  Mac- 
culloch.)  Isaiah's  obedience  : — When  we  are  in  the  way  of  our  duty  we  must 
trust  God  both  with  our  credit  and  with  our  safety.  (M.  Henry.)  Qod'a 
purpose  dignifies  what  might  otherwise  be  scandalous  : — If  the  dress  was  scandalous, 
yet  the  design  was  glorious.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  5.  They  shall  toe  .  .  .  ashamed  of  .  .  .  their  expectation. — Unreasonable 
expectations : — A  great  deal  of  the  discomfort,  a  large  proportion  of  the 
disappointments  of  the  world,  may  be    traced    to    unreasonable    expectations 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

— to  the  fact  that  men  will  persist  in  expecting  what  they  have  no  right 
to  expect  at  all,  or  to  expect  in  that  precise  form  or  degree.  Indeed, 
so  many  of  the  expectations  cherished  in  this  world  are  so  vain  and  unreasonable, 
involving  those  who  entertain  them  in  such  necessary  disappointment,  that  some 
one  has  sardonically  observed,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  who  expects  nothing,  for  he 
shall  never  be  disappointed."  But,  while  we  would  not  take  so  gloomy  a  view 
of  human  life  as  this,  we  cannot  help  feeling  that  much  of  the  worry  and  mortifica- 
tion of  life  may  be  accounted  for  by  our  expecting  what  we  have  no  right  to  expect. 
We  all  suffer  from  the  same  complaint,  in  larger  or  lesser  degree.  The  symptoms 
differ  in  different  individuals  ;  the  disease  is  radically  the  same.  Young  and 
old,  rich  and  poor,  learned  and  ignorant,  masters  and  servants,  buyers  and  sellers, 
husbands  and  wives,  parents  and  children,  pastors  and  people — all,  in  some  way 
or  other,  and  to  some  extent  or  other,  are  the  victims  of  unreasonable  expectations. 
Life  with  all  of  them  would  be  a  brighter,  smoother,  pleasanter  thing,  if  they 
expected  less.  As  we  grow  older  we  ought  to  grow  wiser  in  this  respect.  Having 
regard  only  to  the  ordinary  intercourse  and  social  relationships  of  life — how 
many  complaints  would  be  hushed,  how  much  irritation  would  be  allayed,  how 
much  needless  mortification  be  averted,  how  much  resentment  cease,  how  many 
fancied  slights  and  injuries  appear  inconsiderable,  if,  instead  of  brooding  over 
our  rights,  which  we  imagine  have  been  withheld  or  invaded,  we  were  to  sit  down, 
and  quietly,  dispassionately  consider  what,  living  in  a  world  like  this,  we  might, 
on  the  whole,  reasonably  expect.  If  we  were  thus  to  inquire  we  should  find  that 
we  were  getting  more  than  we  deserved  ;  and  that,  for  the  most  part,  we  were 
being  treated  by  others  quite  as  fairly,  honourably,  and  tenderly  as  we  were 
in  the  habit  of  treating  them.     (T.  M.  Morris.)  Unreasonable  expectations  in 

relation  to  religion : — The  subject  of  unreasonable  expectations  is  of  almost 
illimitable  extent,  and  in  further  dwelling  upon  it  I  would  limit  my  remarks 
to  three  points — I.  The  things  which  God's  people  unreasonably  expect. 
Nothing  can  be  more  plain  than  that  our  expectations  as  Christians  should  be 
limited  by  the  teaching  and  promise  of  God's  Word.  We  are  safe  so  long  as  we 
rest  in  the  promise  of  God.  1.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  you  can  place 
yourselves  in  any  false  position,  form  any  unworthy  association,  engage  in  any 
questionable  occupation,  and  be  saved  from  the  natural  consequences  of  so  doing. 
Lot  was  a  very  good  man,  but  he  made  a  very  great  mistake.  If,  in  your  legitimate 
business, — if,  in  sustaining  any  of  the  just  relationships  of  life,  you  meet  with 
danger  or  temptation,  you  may  reasonably  expect  that  God  will  grant  you  all 
the  necessary  assistance  and  protection.  But  if  the  danger  or  temptation  be 
of  your  own  seeking,  it  is  likely  that  God  will  teach  you  wisdom  by  leaving  you 
to  endure  the  consequences  of  your  rashness  or  perversity.  It  is  unreasonable 
for  you  to  expect  that  you  can  touch  pitch  and  not  be  defiled,  take  fire  in  your 
bosom  and  not  be  burned,  nourish  a  viper  and  not  be  stung.  2.  It  is  unreason- 
able to  expect  that  you  should  grow  in  grace,  or  realise  any  very  high  degree  of 
enjoyment  in  the  Divine  life,  if  all  the  while  you  are  neglecting  or  insufficiently 
using  the  means  of  growth,  the  sources  of  enjoyment  which  are  placed  within 
your  reach.  3.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  in  Christian  life  what  our  Master 
expressly  warns  us  against  expecting.  Many  seem  disappointed  because  they 
do  not  find  the  way  of  Christian  pilgrimage  perfectly  smooth  and  pleasant  from 
its  commencement  to  its  close.  Your  Master  tells  you  plainly  that  you  have  to 
lay  your  account  with  suffering  and  trial,  with  disappointment  and  danger.  The 
Christian  life  is  never  represented  as  one  of  ease  and  self-indulgence,  but  rather 
as  a  state  of  warfare.  You  are  treading  in  the  footsteps  of  those  who,  in 
uninterrupted  succession,  have  walked  in  the  same  rough  way.  4.  I  might  easily 
enumerate  many  other  unreasonable  expectations  in  which  Christians  are  tempted 
to  indulge.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  results  from  unassisted  human  nature 
which  can  only  flow  from  Divine  grace.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  from  an 
attempted  conformity  to  the  law  what  can  only  be  secured  Dy  a  simple 
dependence  on  the  Gospel.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  we  shall  find 
on  earth  what  can  be  only  realised  in  heaven,  or  that  we  can  derive  from 
any  inferior  and  created  source  what  can  only  be  found  in  the  centre  and  sum 
of  all  excellency,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  II.  The  things  which  are 
unreasonably  expected  of  God's  people.  1.  There  are  those  who  make  it  a 
matter  of  reproach  against  religion,  and  prefer  it  as  an  excuse  for  their  unbelief, 
that  the  Gospel,  the  religion  of  the  Cross,  does  not  come  up  in  sundry  particulars 
to  their  idea  of  what  a  religion  which  claims  man's  acceptance  and  confidence 


chap,  xxi.]  ISAIAH.  391 

ought  to  be.  Such  objections  we  may  dismiss  as  the  fruit  of  unreasonable 
expectations,  for  all,  save  the  most  shallow  and  pretentious  of  such  objectors, 
are  ready  to  confess  that  there  are  "  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth  than  are 
dreamt  of  in  their  philosophy."  2.  There  are  those  who  do  not  go  so  far  as  to 
object  against  religion  as  unreasonable,  who  seem  to  resent  it  as  an  injury  that 
any  measure  of  mystery  should  attach  to  any  of  the  statements  of  Scripture. 
In  reply  to  this,  several  things  may  be  said.  It  might  be  said  that,  taking  into 
account  what  this  revelation  professes  to  be,  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  that  the 
truths  communicated,  while  intelligible  on  the  one  side,  should  lose  themselves 
in  mystery  on  the  other.  And  it  might  be  further  remarked,  in  reference  to 
many  of  those  who  thus  object,  that  they  make  but  very  little  use  of  such  light 
as  they  confessedly  have.  Is  it  not  the  part  of  reason  first  of  all  to  inquire  whether 
the  Bible  be  an  authentic  and  authoritative  revelation  from  heaven  to  earth, 
and  then,  if  its  claims  to  be  so  regarded  are  substantiated  to  the  satisfaction 
of  reason,  is  it  not  the  very  part  and  office  of  reason  to  sit  submissively  at  the 
feet  of  the  Divine  Teacher  and  learn  of  Him  ?  3.  There  are  many  who  but  very 
slightly  interest  themselves  in  the  truth  which  Christians  hold,  who  seem  to  take 
much  pleasure  in  narrowly  scrutinising  the  lives  which  Christians  live.  The 
real  or  alleged  inconsistencies  of  professing  Christians  do  not  afford  any  ground 
of  reasonable  objection  against  the  Gospel,  or  any  valid  excuse  for  its  continued 
rejection.  In  judging  of  any  practical  system,  we  must  have  reference  to  what 
it  professes  to  be,  and  to  accomplish.  If  you  confine  attention  to  those  who 
are  the  sincere  and  genuine  followers  of  the  Lamb,  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect 
that  they  should  manifest  in  this  world  an  absolute  perfection  of  character.  Such 
perfection,  we  believe,  can  be  only  realised  when  this  body  of  sin  and  death  shall 
nave  been  laid  aside.  III.  The  things  which  those  who  are  not  God's  people 
unreasonably  expect  for  themselves.  1.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that 
anything  which  the  world  contains  can  meet  the  need,  or  satisfy  the  desire,  of 
man's  immortal  soul.  2.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  in  religion  any  one 
can  serve  two  masters.  No  such  thing  as  neutrality  is  possible  in  religion,  and, 
strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  indecision.  3.  It  is  unreasonable 
to  expect  that  sinful  men  can  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  law,  and  avert 
its  penalty,  by  any  obedience  they  can  render,  by  any  penance  they  can  endure. 

4.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  those  who,  enjoying  Gospel  light,  die  despising 
Gospel  grace,  will  be  in  any  wise  benefited  by  the  uncovenanted  mercies  of  God. 

5.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  you  can  spend  a  sinful,  worldly  life,  and  then 
have  a  comfortable  death  and  a  happy  eternity.  6.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect 
that,  because  you  pass  muster  in  this  world,  and  occupy  a  moderately  creditable 
position  among  your  fellow-men,  that  therefore  you  will  do  moderately  well 
in  another  world  ;  and  that,  if  you  do  not  shine  forth  conspicuously  with  the 
best,  you  will  go  through  the  gates  into  the  city,  unnoticed  among  the  crowd. 
7.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that,  because  sentence  is  not  speedily  executed 
against  an  evil  work,  that  therefore  it  never  will  be  ;  and  that,  because  the  present 
order  of  things  has  continued  so  long,  that  therefore  it  will  continue  for  ever. 
(Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXL 


Vers.  1-10.  The  burden  of  the  desert  of  the  sea. — The  desert  of  the  sea : — 
This  enigmatical  name  for  Babylon  was  no  doubt  suggested  by  the  actual  character 
of  the  country  in  which  the  city  stood.  It  was  an  endless  breadth  or  succession 
of  undulations  "  like  the  sea,"  without  any  cultivation  or  even  any  tree :  low, 
level,  and  full  of  great  marshes ;  and  which  used  to  be  overflowed  by  the  Euphrates, 
till  the  whole  plain  became  a  sea,  before  the  river  was  banked  in  by  Semiramis, 
as  Herodotus  says.  But  the  prophet  may  allude  also  to  the  social  and  spiritual 
desert  which  Babylon  was  to  the  nations  over  which  its  authority  extended, 
and  especially  to  the  captive  Israelite ;  and  perhaps,  at  the  same  time,  to  the 
multitude  of  the  armies  which  it  poured  forth  like  the  waters  of  the  sea.  (Sir 
E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The  prophecy  against  Babylon  : — It  is  a  magnificent  speci- 
men of  Hebrew  poetry  in  its  abrupt  energy  and  passionate  intensity.     The  prophet 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xtt- 

is,  or  imagines  himself  to  be,  in  Babylon.  Suddenly  he  sees  a  storm  of  invasion 
sweeping  down  through  the  desert,  which  fills  him  with  alarm.  Out  of  the  rolling 
whirlwind  troops  of  armed  warriors  flash  into  distinctness.  A  splendid  banquet 
is  being  held  in  the  great  Chaldean  city ;  the  tables  are  set,  the  carpets  are 
spread  ;  they  eat,  they  drink,  the  revel  is  at  its  height.  Suddenly  a  wild  cry  is 
heard,  "  Arise,  ye  princes,  anoint  the  shield ! " — in  other  words,  the  foe  is  at  hand. 
"  Spring  up  from  the  banquet,  smear  with  oil  the  leathern  coverings  of  your 
shields  that  the  blows  of  the  enemy  may  slide  off  from  them  in  battle."  The 
clang  of  arms  disturbs  the  Babylonian  feast.  The  prophet  sitting,  as  it  were 
an  illuminated  spirit,  as  a  watchman  upon  the  tower  calls  aloud  to  ask  the  cause 
of  the  terror.  What  is  it  that  the  watchman  sees  ?  The  watchman,  with  deep, 
impatient  groan,  as  of  a  lion,  complains  that  he  sees  nothing ;  that  he  has  been 
set  there,  apparently  for  no  purpose,  all  day  and  all  night  long.  But  even  as 
he  speaks  there  suddenly  arises  an  awful  need  for  his  look-out.  From  the  land 
of  storm  and  desolation,  the  desert  between  the  Persian  Gulf  and  Babylon,  he 
sees  a  huge  and  motley  host,  some  mounted  on  horses,  some  on  asses,  some  on 
camels,  plunging  forward  through  the  night.  It  is  the  host  of  Cyrus  on  his  march 
against  Babylon.  In  the  advent  of  that  Persian  host  he  sees  the  downfall  of 
the  dynasty  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  the  liberation  of  Judah  from  her  exile.  On 
the  instant,  as  though  secure  of  victory,  he  cries  out,  "  Babylon  is  fallen."  And 
he,  that  is,  Cyrus  the  Persian  king,  a  monotheist  though  he  be,  a  worshipper  of 
fire  and  the  sun,  has  dashed  in  pieces  all  the  graven  images  of  the  city  of  Nimrod. 
Then  he  cries  to  his  fellow-exiles  in  Babylonian  captivity,  "  O  my  people,  crushed 
and  trodden  down  " — literally,  "  O  my  grain,  and  the  son  of  my  threshing-floor  " — 
"  this  is  my  prophecy  for  you ;  it  is  a  prophecy  of  victory  for  your  champions  ; 
it  is  a  prophecy  of  deliverance  for  yourselves."  (Dean  Farrar,  D.D.)  The 
Persian  advance  on  Babylon  (vers.  7,  9) : — It  is  a  slight  but  obvious  coincidence 
of  prophecy  and  history  that  Xenophon  represents  the  Persians  advancing  by 
two  and  two.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  Persian  aversion  to  images : — The 
allusion  to  idols  (ver.  9)  is  not  intended  merely  to  remind  us  that  the  conquest 
was  a  triumph  of  the  true  God  over  false  ones,  but  to  bring  into  view  the  well- 
known  aversion  of  the  Persians  to  all  images.  Herodotus  says  they  not  only 
thought  it  unlawful  to  use  images,  but  imputed  folly  to  those  who  did  it.  Here 
is  another  incidental  but  remarkable  coincidence  of  prophecy  even  with  profane 
history.  (Ibid.)  "  The  burden  of  the  desert  of  the  sea"  : — There  is  a  burden 
in  all  vast  things  ;  they  oppress  the  soul.  The  firmament  gives  it ;  the  mountain 
gives  it ;  the  prairie  gives  it.  But  I  think  nothing  gives  it  like  looking  on  the 
sea.  The  sea  suggests  something  which  the  others  do  not — a  sense  of  desertness. 
In  the  other  cases  the  vastness  is  broken  to  the  eye.  The  firmament  has  its 
stars  ;  the  mountain  has  its  peaks ;  the  prairie  has  its  flowers ;  but  the  sea, 
where  it  is  open  sea,  has  nothing.  It  seems  a  strange  thing  that  the  prophet, 
in  making  the  sea  a  symbol  of  life's  burden,  should  have  selected  its  aspect  of 
loneliness.  Why  not  take  its  storms  ?  Because  the  heaviest  burden  of  life 
is  not  its  storms  but  its  solitude.  There  are  no  moments  so  painful  as  our  island 
moments.  One  half  of  our  search  for  pleasure  is  to  avoid  self-reflection.  The 
pain  of  solitary  responsibility  is  too  much  for  us.  It  drives  the  middle-aged 
man  into  fast  living,  and  the  middle-aged  woman  into  gay  living.  I  cannot  bear 
to  hear  the  discord  of  my  own  past.  It  appals  me ;  it  overwhelms  me ;  I  fly 
to  the  crowd  to  escape  my  unaccompanied  shadow.     (0.  Matheson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Anoint  the  shield. — "  Anoint  the  shield "  .•  —  The  ancient  shields 
being  mostly  of  stout  leather  stretched  over  a  frame  or  rim  of  metal  or  wood, 
it  was  necessary  to  rub  them  with  oil,  lest  they  should  become  hard  and  crack, 
or  lest  they  should  become  so  rigid  that  an  arrow  or  spear  might  easily  penetrate 
them.  Shields  of  this  kind  are  still  much  in  use,  and  still  require  the  same  treat- 
ment, in  Western  Asia ;  and  we  have  ourselves  frequently  seen  them  on  sale 
in  the  bazaars,  and  in  use  among  the  Arabs,  the  Kurds,  and  the  Caucasians. 
(J.  Kitto,  D.D.)  Things  that  did  not  happen  : — What  is  a  shield  ?  It  is  a  very 
peculiar  part  of  God's  armour.  It  is  not  a  strength  in  calamity ;  it  is  something 
which  prevents  calamity  from  coming.  My  strength  is  my  power  to  bear  ;  but 
my  shield  is  my  escape  from  bearing.  My  strength  lifts  me  when  the  blow  falls  ; 
my  shield  catches  the  blow  before  it  falls.  My  strength  supports  what  is ;  my 
shield  wards  off  what  might  have  been.  I  have  often  praised  God  for  the  strength  ; 
but  I  have  seldom  anointed  the  shield.     I  have  recognised  a  thousand  timea 


chap,  xxi.l  ISAIAH.  393 

His  songs  in  the  night ;  but  I  have  not  sufficiently  thanked  Him  that  the  night 
itself  has  not  been  deeper.     (G.  Matheson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  0  My  threshing,  and  the  corn  of  My  floor. — God's  threshing : — 
Babylon  is  the  instrument  employed  by  the  Divine  wrath  to  thresh 
with!  But  love  takes  part  also  in  the  work  of  threshing,  and  restrains 
the  action  of  wrath.  A  picture  likely  to  give  comfort  to  the  grain  lying  for 
threshing  on  the  floor,  i.e.,  to  the  people  of  Israel  which,  mowed  down  as  it 
were  and  removed  from  its  native  soil,  had  been  banished  to  Babylon,  and 
there  subjected  to  a  tyrannical  rule.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Comfort  for  God's  afflicted 
people : — I.  The  Church  is  God's  floor,  in  which  the  most  valuable  fruits  and 
products  of  thi3  earth  are,  as  it  were,  gathered  together  and  laid  up.  II.  True 
believers  abe  the  corn  op  God's  floor.  Hypocrites  are  but  as  the  chaff  and 
straw,  which  take  up  a  deal  of  room,  but  are  of  small  value,  with  which  the  wheat 
is  now  mixed,  but  from  which  it  shall  be  shortly  and  for  ever  separated.  III.  The 
corn  of  God's  floor  must  expect  to  be  threshed  by  afflictions  and  perse- 
cutions. IV.  Even  then,  God  owns  it  for  His  threshing — it  is  His  still ; 
nay,  the  threshing  of  it  is  by  His  appointment  and  under  His  restraint  and 
direction.  The  threshers  could  have  no  power  against  it  but  what  is  given  them 
from  above.     (M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  burden  of  Dumah. — The  burden  of  Dumah: — Like  Moab, 
Edom  had  once  formed  part  of  David's  dominions,  but  in  the  days  of  dis- 
ruption and  weakness  both  had  rebelled.  What  about  Edom  now  ?  When 
Moab  was  so  soon  to  fall — when  the  Assyrian  was  spreading  devastation  all 
around — what  was  to  be  Edom's  fate  ?  The  prophet  hears  the  appeal  addressed 
to  him  as  God's  watchman  and  with  anxious  repetition.  The  words,  "Watchman, 
what  of  the  night  ?  How  much  of  the  night  has  passed  ?  "  contain  the  cry  of 
perplexity  and  a  demand  for  light  and  guidance.  But  the  answer  is  an  oracle 
of  silence.  Not  yet  is  Edom  to  be  told  what  is  God's  will  concerning  her  future. 
She  is  assured  that  there  will  be  alternations  of  light  and  darkness  for  her  as  for 
all  in  the  time  of  their  probation.  Meanwhile,  patience  is  to  have  its  perfect 
work ;  and  after  a  little  while  she  may  inquire  again.  A  later  prophecy  shows 
the  work  of  Divine  judgment  on  this  land.  (Buchanan  Blake,  B.D.)  Dumah:— 
It  lay  to  the  south  of  Palestine,  thus  bordering  on  the  inheritance  of  Judah.  It 
was  a  wild  mountainous  district,  inhabited  by  a  race  whose  character  reflected 
the  rugged  nature  of  their  surroundings.  They  were  constantly  at  war  with 
their  neighbours,  especially  the  Jews,  and  spent  a  large  portion  of  their  time 
making  inroads  into  southern  Palestine  for  the  sake  of  plunder  and  conquest. 
On  account  of  these  invasions,  and  also  because  they  joined  the  Chaldeans  against 
the  Jews,  the  most  sweeping  denunciations  were  pronounced  against  them. 
In  course  of  time  these  denunciations  were  followed  by  disasters,  in  consequence 
of  which  the  Edomites  became  a  vanquished  people,  and  were  finally  incorporated 
with  the  Jewish  nation.  Then,  when  at  a  later  period  the  whole  of  that  region 
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  it  became  known  by  the  Greek 
name  of  Idumea — Dumah  being  the  old  Hebrew  name.  Hence  the  "  burden 
of  Dumah "  means  the  prophecy  concerning  the  fate  of  Idumea  or  Edom. 
(D.  Merson,  M.A.,  B.D.)  The  oracle  of  Dumah: — The  land  of  Edom  pleads 
for  some  vision  to  her  also.  Judah  is  to  be  rescued.  The  prophet  has  seen  the 
Persian  host  in  its  varied  array — troops  of  chariots  and  horsemen  crashing  through 
the  brazen  gates  of  idolatrous  Babylon,  extinguishing  its  feasts  in  blood,  issuing 
from  it  with  the  cry  of  victory.  It  is  good  news  for  Judah,  but  what  shall  it  be 
for  Edom  ?  It  is  as  if  the  voice  of  Esau  cried  out  once  more,  "  Hast  Thou  but 
one  blessing,  0  my  Father.  Bless  me,  even  me  also,  O  my  Father."  And  as  the 
prophet  stands  in  imagination  on  the  peak  of  the  hill,  he  hears  a  voice  calling  to 
him  out  of  Seir,  the  stronghold  of  the  Edomites,  a  sharp,  agitated  cry,  "  Watch- 
man, how  far  in  the  night  ?  Watchman,  what  hour  of  the  night  ?  Does  the 
darkness  still  linger,  is  the  morning  near  ?  "  Well  might  Edom  be  in  terror ; 
the  sons  of  Esau  had  behaved  to  Judah  in  her  hour  of  affliction  with  malignant 
hatred  which  had  wounded  her  to  the  heart.  In  Obadiah,  in  Amos,  in  EzekieL 
in  Jeremiah,  you  may  read  traces  of  their  crime.  When  the  Jews  fled  before 
the  advances  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  Edomites,  true  to  their  miserable  destiny, 
their  hand  against  every  man  and  every  man's  hand  against  them,  had  cruelly 
massacred  and  intercepted  the  helpless  fugitives,  and  had  urged  Nebuchadnezzar 


S94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

to  destroy  the  Holy  City.  It  is  to  this  that  the  sad  Psalmist  of  the  Exile  alludes 
when  he  says  :  "  Remember,  0  Lord,  against  the  children  of  Edom,  in  the  day  of 
Jerusalem,  how  they  cried,  '  Down  with  it,  down  with  it,  even  to  the  ground.'  " 
Naturally,  therefore,  in  the  approaching  hour  of  Judah's  emancipation,  the 
prophet  has  not  much  comfort  to  bestow  on  these  cruel  and  treacherous  sons 
of  the  desert.  All  he  can  say  to  the  Edomites  at  first  is  a  riddling  message  of 
which  not  much  can  be  made.  But  then,  after  this  stern  and  dubious  answer, 
as  though  somewhat  relenting,  the  watchman  cries,  "  If  ye  wish  to  inquire 
again,  inquire  ye,"  and  then,  very  briefly,  "  Return,  come."  In  other  words, 
The  oracle  for  you,  sons  of  Edom,  is  no  vaticination  about  a  mere  earthly 
future."  It  may  be  summed  up  in  two  words — in  the  warning,  "  Repent,"  and 
in  the  invitation,  "Come."  (Dean  Farrar,  D.D.)  Edomites  and  Jews:  a  hostile 
world  attacking  the  Church  : — It  may  help  us  to  the  true  meaning  of  this  ques- 
tion, if  we  keep  in  mind  the  relation  in  which  the  Edomites  stood  to  the  Jews. 
That  relation  was  one  of  the  closest,  if  we  have  respect  to  origin  or  birth ;  but 
if  we  have  respect  to  friendship,  then  the  feelings  existing  between  them  were 
of  the  most  hostile  kind.  Descended  from  a  common  stock,  they  kept  alive 
the  family  animosities.  The  Edomites,  who  were  the  descendants  of  Esau,  hated 
the  Israelites  on  account  of  the  deceitful  conduct  of  Jacob  their  father.  The 
sight  of  the  prosperity  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  perpetuated  the  old  grudge  in  the 
breast  of  the  less  favoured  sons  of  Esau  ;  and  their  seasons  of  adversity  were 
made  the  occasions  of  bitter  sneers.  These  two  nations  have  become  associated 
in  our  minds,  the  one  with  the  people  of  God,  the  other  with  their  enemies.  The 
sons  of  Jacob  were  chosen,  in  preference  to  the  sons  of  Esau,  to  be  the  medium 
of  carrying  the  Divine  blessings  to  all  nations.  The  Edomites  were  in  consequence 
filled  with  envy  and  hatred  towards  their  brethren,  lost  no  opportunity  of  attack- 
ing them  in  the  most  envenomed  spirit,  and  thus  they  may  justly  be  regarded 
as  a  type  of  the  hostile  world  attacking  the  Church  of  God.  Here,  then,  we  seem 
to  have  a  clue  to  the  interpretation  of  the  passage  before  us.  If  we  regard  the 
Jewish  nation  as  a  type  of  the  Church  or  people  of  God,  and  the  Edomites  as  a 
type  of  the  hostile  world,  we  have  here  a  question  addressed  to  the  Church  by 
the  world,  and  we  have  the  Church's  reply.  \D.  Merson,  M.A.,  B.D.)  Eastern 
watchmen : — It  was  the  custom  in  the  regions  of  the  East  in  ancient  times,  to 
erect  lofty  watch-towers,  so  high  as  to  be  above  all  surrounding  buildings,  and 
to  place  watchmen  on  them,  who  should  observe  all  that  came  within  their  view 
ana  report  accordingly.  The  design  of  this  custom  was  to  prevent  the  approach 
of  an  enemy  unforeseen.  The  watchman  in  his  lofty  tower  observed  in  the 
distance  the  gathering  of  armies  and  the  mustering  of  hosts ;  he  could  see  in  the 
far-off  horizon  the  glistening  of  weapons  and  the  waving  of  the  banners  of  war ; 
and  then  he  gave  warning  and  the  people  prepared  for  the  event.  There  is  very 
frequent  allusion  to  this  custom  in  the  Scriptures ;  and  it  is  in  reference  to  it, 
that  the  ministers  of  the  Church  of  God  are  described  as  the  Lord's  "  watchmen." 
It  is  their  duty  to  stand  upon  the  walls  and  upon  the  watch-towers  of  the 
Church  that  they  may  see  the  approaching  danger,  and  to  give  warning,  that  tha 
people  perish  not  (Isa.  lxii.  6;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  2,  &c).  (M.  H.  Seymour,  M.A.) 
Watchman : — A  different  word  from  that  in  verse  6,  and  signifying  not  one  who  spies 
or  looks  out,  but  one  who  guards  or  keeps  (Psa.  cxxx.  6).  (Prof.  Driver,  D.D.) 
The  burden  is  in  two  respects — 1.  Of  the  prophets  that  bear  it.  The  Word  of 
the  Lord  is  a  heavy  burden  till  they  are  delivered  of  it ;  there  is  no  rest  to  the 
surcharged  conscience.  The  ministry  is  a  matter  of  both  honour  and  burden. 
Are  there  none  that  catch  at  honour,  but  will  not  meddle  with  the  burden  ? 
2.  Of  the  people  that  were  to  suffer  it.  The  judgments  of  God  are  heavy  on 
whomsoever  they  light.  It  is  true  of  them  what  the  philosopher  said  of  himself, 
Perieram  nisi  periissem, — they  are  undone  that  are  not  undone.  Security  ia 
the  very  suburbs  of  hell.  An  insensible  heart  is  the  devil's  anvil,  he  fashioneth 
all  sins  on  it,  and  the  blows  are  not  felt.  (T.  Adams.)  The  burden  of  Dumah  : — 
I.  The  character  here  given  of  the  prophet.  II.  The  importunity  os* 
the  people  applying  to  him.  III.  His  answer.  1.  We  may  tender  the  prophet's 
answer  to  any  who  would  perplex  themselves  or  others  with  inquiries  respecting 
the  existing  state  of  this  world's  affairs.  2.  The  wicked,  walking  after  their  own 
lusts  and  counsels,  sometimes,  in  a  scoffing  manner,  inquire  of  ministers,  "  What 
of  the  night  ?  What  think  ye  of  my  state  and  prospects  ?  What  of  the  truth 
of  religion  ?  What  of  the  uses  and  importance  of  godliness  ?  My  wickedness 
thrives,  and  you  said  that  it  would  be  my  ruin ;  my  vices  are  pleasant,  and  you 


chap,  xxi.]  ISAIAH.  395 

said  that  they  would  be  bitter ;  my  mind  is  at  ease,  and  you  said  that  I  should 
be  harassed  in  conscience.  Where  is  the  truth  of  your  words  ?  where  the  severity 
of  judgment  ? — what  evidence  of  a  day  of  retribution  ?  "  The  awful  answer 
again  is,  "  the  morning  cometh,  and  also  the  night."  3.  The  prophet's  answer 
was  given  to  persons  in  trouble ;  and  thus  applied,  its  import  is  various.  To 
some  who  demand  of  us,  in  seasons  of  their  distress,  "  Watchman,  what  of  the 
night  ?  "  the  answer  is,  Time  is  fast  passing,  and  your  sorrows  are  fast  passing 
with  it.  To  others,  "  The  morning  cometh,"  but  as  yet  it  is  profound  night  to 
you,  many  and  heavy  sorrows  still  await  you.  Your  spiritual  condition  is  such, 
that  our  Heavenly  Father  will  seek  to  bring  you  to  Himself  by  many  grievous 
visitations  ;  hateful  indeed,  to  the  natural  will,  but  most  salutary  for  the  soul's 
health.  Or  else,  perhaps,  as  you  have  approved  yourselves  to  God  in  the  season 
of  prosperity,  it  is  the  Divine  pleasure  to  make  experiment  of  you  in  the  fiery 
furnace  of  adversity,  to  see  whether  "  tribulation  can  separate  you  from  the 
love  of  Christ."  To  others  again,  the  answer  is,  It  is  the  seventh  hour,  the 
midnight  of  your  affliction  is  already  past,  and  if  passed  by  a  little  only,  you  have 
already  suffered  the  extreme  of  your  earthly  portion  of  endurance ;  all  that 
follows  shall  be  comparatively  light,  and  work  for  you  a  far  more  exceeding  and 
eternal  weight  of  glory,  if  in  patience  ye  possess  your  souls.  (.4.  Williams,  M.A.) 
The  watchman's  report  and  advice :  —  I.  Who  is  the  watchman  referred 
to  T  II.  The  inquiry  instituted.  1.  The  whole  state  of  the  world  demands 
of  the  servants  of  God  that  they  should  prayerfully  and  diligently  regard  the 
signs  and  movements  of  the  times.  2.  There  are  personal  inquiries  which  ought 
to  press  upon  all  who  are  rightly  impressed  with  a  sense  of  their  responsibility 
to  God.  How  is  the  period  of  my  probation  passing  ?  What  is  the  progress 
of  the  night,  which  is  to  be  succeeded  by  a  morrow  which  knows  no  change  or 
ending  ?  How  speeds  the  night  in  which  my  soul's  salvation  is  to  be  determined  ?  " 
III.  The  watchman's  report  in  answer  to  the  question.  "The  morning 
cometh,  and  also  the  night."  This  report  is  most  comprehensive,  and  may  convey 
the  following  ideas — 1.  That  there  will  be  nothing  settled  or  permanent :  changes 
may  be  expected.  (1)  There  has  always  been  a  mixture  of  light  and  darkness 
in  the  Church — in  its  perceptions  of  truth,  and  in  the  events  connected  with  it. 
(2)  So  in  the  case  of  the  individual  Christian,  in  times  of  sorrow  and  distress : 
darkness  has  appeared  to  compass  his  path ;  yet  he  has  not  been  without  gleams 
of  comfort  and  light.  2.  But  the  report  without  doubt  is  designed  to  indicate 
a  period  of  coming  joy  to  believers,  of  misery  and  woe  to  the  wicked — to  the 
one  the  morning  cometh,  to  the  other  night.  3.  There  is  one  other  observation 
in  the  watchman's  report  worthy  of  attention,  namely,  that  the  morning  and 
the  night  are  said  to  come  together  ;  "  the  morning  cometh,  and  also  the  night." 
It  may  seem  strange  to  many  that  these  periods  should  be  said  to  come  simul- 
taneously. But  if  you  look  at  the  characters  to  whom  they  thus  come,  the 
difficulty  is  removed.  That  which  will  be  a  time  of  light  and  comfort  to  the 
righteous,  will  be  one  of  darkness  and  dismay  to  the  ungodly.  Indeed,  it  is 
partly  so  in  the  present  imperfect  state  of  things.  The  very  blessings  of  the 
impenitent  are  turned  into  curses  ;  their  day  of  mercy  and  grace  becomes  a 
night  of  darkness  and  calamity  ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  all  that  appear  night 
and  trouble  to  the  people  of  God,  are  means  of  increased  light  and  joy  to  them. 
Their  sorrow  is  turned  into  joy ;  their  tribulation  worketh  patience  and  experi- 
ence and  hope.  IV.  The  advice  which  the  watchman  gives  in  consequence 
of  the  report.  1.  Inquiry  is  the  first  duty  recommended.  We  look  for  nothing, 
and  expect  nothing  so  long  as  there  is  indifference.  It  was  the  great  sin  of  God's 
professing  people  of  old,  that  "  they  would  not  consider."  It  is  only  when  we 
can  excite  a  spirit  of  serious  inquiry  that  we  can  hope  for  lasting  good  from  our 
efforts.  2.  But  to  diligent  inquiry,  return  to  God  is  recommended.  All  inquiry 
in  fact  is  for  this  purpose,  and  it  would  be  useless  if  it  did  not  issue  in  an  actual 
return  to  your  Father.  3.  The  prophet  closes  with  one  more  observation,  and  it 
is  used  by  way  of  encouragement — "  Come."  (T.  Dealtry,  D.D.)  The  watch- 
man's report  and  advice  : — I.  The  watchman's  report.  1.  As  it  may  be  sup- 
posed to  respect  the  public  affairs  of  our  country.  2.  The  state  of  virtue  and 
piety  among  us.  II.  The  watchman's  advice.  The  doom  of  Dumah  was  not 
inevitably  fixed  ;  she  would  yet  be  indulged  with  a  morning  of  opportunities ; 
and  the  only  sure  ground  of  hope  was  in  a  returning  to  God.  We  have  as  a 
nation  something  of  Dumah's  morning — some  farther  space  for  reflection  and 
repentance.     It  must  be  of  the  greatest  moment  to  know  what  an  offended  God 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxl 

expects.  "  Inquire ;  return ;  come."  The  inquiring,  returning,  coming,  bo 
kindly  and  seasonably  urged  on  Dumah,  in  her  night,  are  recommended  to  us 
on  every  ground,  whether  human  or  Divine.  1.  Nothing  can  be  more  fit  and 
proper  in  itself.  2.  It  is  the  subject  of  a  Divine  command.  3.  In  the  patience 
ana  forbearance  of  God,  and  in  the  wonderful  method  He  has  devised  for  the 
pardon  and  salvation  of  a  guilty  people,  we  have  a  loud  call  and  a  most  powerful 
motive  to  "  inquire,  return,  and  come."  4.  And  there  are  important  and  happy 
consequences  resulting  from  a  sinful  people's  inquiring,  returning,  and  coming 
to  God.  (N.  Hill.)  "Watchman,  what  of  the  night t" — I.  Consider  the 
question.  1.  Some  ask  the  report  of  the  night  with  utter  carelessness  as  to 
the  reply.  2.  Some  ask  in  contempt.  3.  Some  ask  in  horror  and  anguish  of  heart. 
n.  What  is  still  the  duty  op  him  who  holds  the  momentous  position  of 
watchman  IN  the  city  op  God  ?  1.  He  did  not  turn  away  from  the  question, 
in  whatever  spirit  it  was  asked.  2.  He  uttered  with  equal  assurance  a  threat 
and  a  promise.  3.  He  pressed  the  necessity  of  care  in  the  study  and  earnest 
inquiry  after  the  nature  of  the  truth.  4.  He  summed  up  all  by  an  anxious,  a 
cordial,  and  a  reiterated  invitation  to  repentance  and  reconciliation  with  an 
offended  but  pardoning  God.  Thus,  the  single  verse  might  be  regarded  as  an 
abstract  of  the  duties  of  the  ministerial  office.  (W.  Archer  Butler,  D.D.)  The 
toorld's  challenge  and  the  Church's  response  : — I.  This  is  the  world's  challenge 
to  the  Church.  From  the  midst  of  that  darkness  which,  by  reason  of  the 
limitation  of  our  knowledge,  encompasses  us  all ;  and  from  the  midst  of  that 
double  darkness  which  enwraps  those  who  are  untouched  and  unchanged  by  the 
love  of  Christ  Jesus,  this  challenge  is  continually  coming  to  the  Church.  This 
is — 1.  The  cry  of  scepticism.  The  scepticism  of  our  day  is,  in  some  instances, 
evidently  the  error  of  noble  but  misguided  spirits,  who,  having  discovered  that 
in  some  matters  of  belief  concerning  which  they  had  thought  themselves  very 
sure,  they  were  wholly  in  the  wrong,  and  having  in  other  cases  been  baffled  in 
the  search  for  certainty,  have  too  hastily  given  up  all  hope  of  obtaining  satis- 
faction and  rest  with  respect  to  many  of  the  most  momentous  questions  of  human 
life.  There  is,  however,  a  shallower  scepticism.  It  addresses  the  Church  in  tones 
of  equal  incredulity,  but  breathing  the  spirit  of  vanity,  hostility,  and  contempt. 
2.  The  cry  of  the  world's  worldliness.  Men  who  are  living  for  this  life  only, 
ask  the  question.  There  is  a  terribly  close  connection  between  worldliness  and 
scepticism  of  the  scoffing  and  contemptuous  sort.  The  tendency  of  a  life  in  which 
there  is  no  regard  for  God  and  eternity,  is  to  produce  an  unbelief  far  more  blight- 
ing than  that  disbelief  which  is  the  result  of  misguided  thinking.  And  with  all 
the  wild  recklessness  or  supercilious  scorn  or  stolid  indifference  of  old  times, 
they  ask,  "  What  of  the  night  ?  You  prophets  of  darkness,  who  take  so  gloomy 
a  view  of  the  condition  of  the  world,  who  warn  us  of  a  perpetual  darkness  for 
those  who  live  so  heedlessly,  what  of  the  night  ?  You  who  profess  to  believe 
that  your  religion  can  do  such  great  things,  where  are  the  signs  of  its  power, 
and  of  the  accomplishment  of  its  work  ?  What  signs  of  the  dissipation  of  the 
darkness  of  which  you  speak,  and  of  the  coming  of  the  day  ?  "  3.  The  cry  of 
the  world's  agony.  From  the  darkness  of  the  sin  which  is  shutting  out  of  the 
life  all  joy  and  purity  and  hope,  from  the  woe  which  is  crushing  them,  men  make 
their  appeal  to  the  Church  of  God.  They  ask  for  the  causes  of  this  darkness 
and  for  the  means  by  which  it  may  be  removed.  But  there  are  many  who  are 
conscious  that  the  agony  they  feel  is  attributable  to  their  sin ;  and  in  the  sense 
of  their  alienation  from  God  they  ask  of  the  Church,  pleadingly,  What  of  the 
night  T  It  is  not  simply  the  apprehension  of  darkness,  but  the  consciousness  of 
it,  the  darkness  of  being  sinful.  Oh  tell  us  if  there  be  forgiveness,  peace,  purity, 
and  rest,  for  guilty,  storm-tossed,  polluted,  and  wearied  hearts !  "  4.  The  cry 
of  the  world's  hope.  Many  have  felt  the  dawn  of  a  new  day  in  their  own  hearts, 
and  now  they  continually  pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come."  Although  they  have 
light  within,  they  see  the  darkness  around  them.  But  because  of  what  they  have 
themselves  experienced,  they  cannot  despair  of  the  case  of  humanity.  II.  The 
response  with  which  the  Church  is  entrusted,  and  which  she  is  bound 
urgently  and  confidently  to  deliver.  "  The  morning  cometh,  and  also  the  night." 
1.  The  Church's  message  to  the  world  is  a  message  of  mingled  mercy  and  severity, 
of  joyous  and  of  sad  import.  We  look  at  what  Christianity  has  done  and  is  doing 
in  the  world  ;  and  the  result  of  the  examination  is  a  deep  and  growing  conviction 
that  the  evidences  of  Christianity  never  were  so  strong  or  convincing  as  to-day. 
(1)  And  this  is  our  answer  to  scepticism.     Account  for  Christianity.     See  what 


chap,  xxi.]  ISAIAH.  397 

it  has  done  for  nations,  what  for  a  single  life  !  (2)  This,  too,  is  our  answer  to  the 
cry  of  the  worldly.  However  blind  men  may  be  to  the  fact,  however  incapable 
of  reading  the  signs  of  the  times,  assuredly  the  course  of  human  history  proclaims 
"  the  morning  cometh  "  ;  the  morniflg  of  a  day  which  shall  reveal  the  falseness 
of  every  mode  of  life  which  involves  forgetfulness  of  God  ;  the  morning  of  a  day 
when  every  heart  unconsecrated  to  God  shall  declare  its  dissatisfaction,  and 
when  every  cherished  lust  of  wrong  shall  reveal  its  insatiable  appetite,  by  the 
cry,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  (3)  And  this  is  the  message  of  the  Church 
to  the  agonised  :  "  The  morning  cometh  "  of  the  day  when  the  wounds  of  humanity 
shell  be  for  ever  healed  ;  when  the  sorrow  of  men  shall  be  turned  into  joy.  We 
see  signs  of  this  already,  in  the  present  amelioration  of  man's  condition  which 
Christianity  produces.  (4)  And  in  the  brightness  of  that  morning,  which  many 
signs  proclaim  cometh  for  the  world,  the  hopeful  shall  find  all,  and  more  than 
all,  for  which  their  hearts  have  ever  yearned,  and  more  than  all  of  which  their 
imagination  ever  dreamed.  2.  But  alas  !  if  it  be  true  that  the  morning  cometh, 
it  is  not  less  necessary  that  we  should  add,  "  and  also  the  night."  The  dawning 
of  the  day  of  Christ  will  leave  some  in  profounder  darkness.  3.  Therefore,  we 
close  with  the  urgent  personal  appeal  of  the  prophet :  "  If  ye  will  inquire, 
inquire  ye  :  return,  come."  Let  this  be  the  commencement  of  an  earnest  inquiry 
as  to  the  claims  of  Christianity,  and  we  do  not  fear  for  the  result.  Let  the  value 
of  the  world  be  estimated,  and  compared  with  the  value  of  the  favour  and  the 
life  of  God  ;  and  there  can  be  but  one  issue.  Let  this  be  the  day  of  earnest  seeking 
for  the  light,  the  peace  and  the  pardon  of  God  ;  and  the  agony  of  a  troubled 
heart  and  the  burden  of  a  guilty  conscience  shall  be  taken  away,  and  the  spirit 
shall  know  the  life  and  liberty  of  Christ  Jesus.  "  Inquire  ye,"  and  in  this  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus  ye  shall  find  all  you  need.  (T.  Stephenson.)  The  burden 
of  Dumah : — I.  Endeavour  to  explain  it.  II.  Exhibit  the  lessons  which 
it  teaches  ;  or,  apply  it  to  the  friends  and  the  foes  of  God.  1.  We  have  an 
illustration  of  the  conduct  of  a  taunting  world ;  a  world  often  disposed  not  to 
reason,  but  to  make  derision  of  religion ;  a  world  always  rinding  occasions,  in 
some  peculiar  state  of  the  Church,  or  in  some  aspect  of  religion,  for  the  exhibition 
of  irony  or  scorn.  2.  We  have  in  the  response  of  the  watchman,  "  The  morning 
cometh,"  an  illustration  of  the  times  of  light  and  prosperity  in  the  Church  destined 
to  succeed  those  of  calamity.  We  may  apply  it  to  the  individual  Christian  in 
the  midst  of  calamity.  Thus,  too,  it  is  of  the  Church  universal.  In  her  darkest 
hours,  it  was  true  that  brighter  days  were  to  dawn.  So  it  is  now.  The  night 
of  sin  is  to  be  succeeded  by  a  long  bright  day.  There  is  one  thing  only  that  is 
certain  in  the  future  history  of  this  world — its  conversion  to  God  and  to  the  true 
religion.  3.  In  like  manner  we  have  an  illustration  of  a  third  important  fact — 
the  night  of  calamity  that  is  coming  on  a  sinful  and  scoffing  world.  4.  There 
remains  one  other  idea.  That  is,  if  you — the  despiser — will  inquire  in  a  humble 
manner ;  if  you  will  come  with  proper  reverence,  and  will  turn  from  your  sins, 
light  will  stream  along  your  path ;  and  the  sun  of  prosperity  will  ride  up  your 
sky,  and  pour  down  his  noontide  radiance  upon  you  also.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.) 
*'  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  f  " — I.  The  watchman  as  typical  op  every  true 
ambassador  of  the  Cross.  1.  He  occupied  vantage  ground.  He  was  selected 
for  the  office;  placed  in  an  appropriate  position — where,  unhindered,  he  could 
carry  on  his  observations.  2.  He  possessed  knowledge  of  the  ground  he  surveyed , 
a  mere  enthusiast  would  not  do,  nor  a  novice,  nor  an  enemy;  a  patriot  would 
be  the  best,  with  a  clear  head  and  a  warm  heart.  3.  He  would  expect  implicit 
obedience  to  his  cries.  If  he  said  "  All  well ! "  people  might  rest ;  if,  To  arms ! " 
people  must  be  up.  Apply  these  points  to  the  office  of  the  Christian  ministry. 
II.  The  inquirer  of  the  watchman  as  typical  of  the  anxious  seeker  after 
salvation.  1.  He  was  painfully  conscious  of  the  darkness.  Every  awakened 
tinner  feels  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  and  danger,  and  guilt,  and  wonders  what 
of  the  night — how,  and  when  will  it  end  ?  2.  He  was  anxiously  desirous  of 
the  light.  The  anxious  seeker  after  salvation  longs  for  the  Light  of  the  world — 
the  light  of  the  glorious  Gospel  to  shine  into  his  heart,     in.  The  answer  of 

THE  WATCHMAN  AS  TYPICAL  OF  THE  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  SOUL  IN  RELIGION. 

1.  The  morning  cometh — the  morning  of  day,  of  newness  of  life,  of  glorious  oppor- 
tunity. 2.  "  Also  the  night."  The  day  will  not  last  for  ever,  let  us  work  while 
it  is  called  day.  (F.  W.  Brown.)  The  world's  interrogation  and  the  Church's 
response  : — I.  When  night  hangs  heavily  on  the  Church,  it  hangs  still 
more  heavily  on  the  world.     The   Assyrian  oppression  lay  like  a  cloud  oa 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxi 

Judah,  but  in  lying  on  Judah  it  projected  a  still  heavier  cloud  upon  Edom.  The 
world  is  so  bound  up  with  the  Church  that,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  it  rises 
with  the  Church's  rising,  falls  with  the  Church's  falling,  rejoices  in  the  Church's 
freedom,  pines  in  the  Church's  bondage,  is  lightened  by  the  Church's  sunshine, 
is  shadowed  by  the  Church's  clouds.  And  this,  take  the  world  in  what  aspect 
you  may,  as  the  world  of  society,  the  world  of  business,  the  world  of  pleasure. 
What  is  the  practical  lesson  ?  Do  not  leave  the  Church  because  the  Church 
may  be  wrapped  in  adversity ;  if  you  do,  a  deeper  adversity  is  awaiting  you  in 
the  quarter  to  which  you  repair.  And  the  same  law  holds  good  in  a  wider  sense. 
We  are  compassed  with  mystery.  Some  persons,  impatient  with  the  obscurities 
of  faith,  take  refuge  in  the  greater  obscurities  of  unbelief.  Restless  under  the 
clouds  of  Judah,  they  seek  relief  amidst  the  heavier  clouds  of  Edom.  There 
never  was  a  greater  mistake  than  to  suppose  that  because  Christianity  is  bound 
up  with  problems,  the  abandonment  of  belief  is  the  abandonment  of  mystery. 

II.  And  the  fact  is,  the  world  realises  this  ;  for  note  as  the  next  thought  we  deduce 
from  the  passage,  that  in  the  midst  of  this  common  night,  enveloping  both 
Church  and  world,  the  world  turns  to  the  Church  for  light.  It  is  very 
suggestive  that  in  the  general  pressure  of  the  general  gloom  the  Edomite  is 
represented  as  appealing  to  the  Jew,  a  representative  of  the  Jewish  God.  Was 
there  none  to  consult  nearer  home  ?  Where  were  the  seers  of  Idumea  ?  Through 
all  ages  the  principle  is  the  same.  Ever,  in  the  midst  of  the  cloud  that  surrounds 
us  all,  the  world  puts  its  questions  to  the  Church.  Sometimes,  indeed,  the  question 
is  ironical.     Sometimes  it  is  curious.     Often,  however,  the  question  is  earnest. 

III.  And  thus  we  come  up  to  the  next  plain  lesson,  that  when  the  world 

QUESTIONS  THE  CHURCH,  THE  CHURCH  MUST  BE  READY  TO  ANSWER.      That  implies 

1.  That  the  Church  has  an  answer  to  give.  It  is  conceivable  that,  in  some  cases, 
professing  Christian  men  may  have  no  answer.  When  the  question  comes,  they 
are  nonplussed ;  it  embarrasses,  puzzles  them.  What  is  the  reason  ?  With 
one  class,  want  of  perception  of  the  difficulty.  And  for  another  class,  the  reason 
may  be  that,  while  feeling  the  pressure  of  the  difficulty,  they  have  not  obtained 
a  solution  for  themselves.  Wherefore,  when  face  to  face  with  the  world's  questions, 
let  us  see  to  it  that  we  have  material  for  an  answer.  2.  And  let  us  give  the  answer 
we  have.  Let  the  possession  of  truth  be  followed  by  the  communication  of  it, 
as  often  as  opportunity  arises.  IV.  And  yet,  let  it  always  be  remembered  that 
while  the  Church  should  be  ready  to  answer  the  world's  questionings, 
the  nature  of  the  answer  must  be  conditioned  by  the  moral  state  of 
the  questioner.  Look  once  more  at  the  prophet.  So  long  as  the  attitude 
of  Edom  is  an  attitude  of  general  inquiry,  the  prophet  has  only  a  general  state- 
ment. "  The  morning  cometh,"  he  says,  "  and  also  the  night."  It  is  when 
this  attitude  of  general  inquiry  passes  into  the  attitude  of  personal  repentance, 
that  he  promises  a  personal  and  particular  revelation  corresponding.  Cleanse 
your  hearts,"  he  says,  "  reform  your  ways,  turn  to  the  Lord,  and  then  come  back 
again,  and  I  will  tell  you  more."  And  here  we  turn  from  the  duty  and  responsi- 
bility of  those  that  are  questioned  to  the  spirit  and  character  of  those  that  question 
them.  You  ask  if  sorrow  will  pass,  doubt  dissolve,  providence  unfold  itself, 
Scripture  become  plain,  heaven  be  won.  Our  answer  is,  "  Yes — in  the  experience 
of  some  "  ;  whether  in  your  experience  we  cannot  say,  until  we  know  more. 
If  yours  is  the  sensitive  conscience,  the  tender  heart,  the  submissive  will,  if  you 
sorrow  for  sin,  if  you  turn  to  righteousness,  if  you  cleave  to  God,  then  we  can 
tell.  For  you  the  night  is  departing,  but  if  the  night  is  not  vanishing  in  your 
own  heart,  it  is  useless,  it  is  trifling,  to  ask  how  the  night  goes  elsewhere.  How 
apt  are  some  men  to  divert  attention  from  the  state  of  matters  within  by  directing 
it  to  the  state  of  matters  without — the  prospects  of  neighbours,  the  words  of 
Scripture,  the  controversies  of  the  Church,  the  mysteries  of  Providence !  He  who 
will  know  of  the  doctrine  must  do  the  will.  (W.  A.  Gray.)  The  coming  dawn 
(A  Christmas  homily)  (with  Rom.  xiii.  12) : — "  The  night  is  far  spent ;  the  day 
is  at  hand."  But  for  the  fact  which  Christmas  commemorates,  we  should  have 
no  reply  to  that  question  save  one :  "  Though  the  morning  cometh,  the  night 
cometh  also."  It  is  only  the  advent  of  Christ,  and  the  prophecy  latent  in  that 
advent,  whioh  enable  us  to  add  in  the  full  assurance  of  faith :  "  The  night 
is  far  spent,  and  the  day  which  has  no  night  is  at  hand."  1.  That  you  may 
see  that  both  these  answers  to  the  question  which  the  world  and  the  Church 
have  so  long  been  asking  are  true,  and  in  what  sense  they  are  true,  let  us  consider 
how  far  St.  Paul's  answer  to  it  has  been  fulfilled ;  whether  the  day  which  he 


chap,  xxi.]  ISAIAH.  399 

foresaw  did  not  really  come,  but  also  whether  this  day  was  not  followed  by  a 
night  and  the  promise  of  its  dawn  overcast.  When  he  stood  on  his  watch-tower 
and  surveyed  the  horizon,  he  had  much  reason  to  believe  that  the  night  of 
heathenism  was  far  spent ;  that  the  day  of  the  Lord,  the  day  on  which  Christ 
would  take  to  Himself  His  great  power  and  rule  in  all  the  earth,  was  close  at  hand. 
But  as  we  look  back  on  the  period  to  which  he  looked  forward  with  such  confident 
hope,  we  can  see  that  the  end  was  not  yet,  although  it  seemed  so  near  ;  that, 
though  a  morning  came,  a  night  came  also.  The  apostolic  day,  or  age,  was 
hardly  over  before  the  night  came  rushing  back ;  and  in  a  few  centuries  the  dogmas 
and  superstitions,  the  vices  and  crimes,  of  heathenism  were  to  be  found  in  the 
very  Church  itself,  where,  alas,  too  many  of  them  still  linger.  Yet  even  in  "  the 
dark  ages  "  there  was  a  remnant  who  had  light  in  their  dwellings,  and  did  not 
altogether  lose  hope.  And  when  the  day  of  the  Reformation  dawned  on  Europe, 
Luther  and  his  compeers  had  little  doubt  that  the  true  day  of  the  Lord  had  come 
at  last,  that  a  light  had  arisen  which  would  speedily  renew  the  face  of  the  earth. 
And  a  day  had  come,  but  not  the  great  day  of  Christ.  The  end  was  not  even 
yet.  Over  its  larger  spaces,  even  Europe  still  lies  in  darkness,  the  darkness 
of  superstition,  or  sensuality,  or  indifference ;  while  in  Africa,  Asia  with  its  teeming 
millions,  and  South  America,  we  can  discern  only  distant  and  twinkling  points 
of  light  which  are  all  but  lost  in  the  surrounding  darkness.  So  that  when  we 
in  our  turn  ask,  "  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  Is  it  almost  gone  ?  Will 
it  soon  pass  ?  "  we,  too,  can  often  hear  none  but  the  old  reply,  "  If  a  morning 
is  coming,  so  also  is  a  night."  We  try  to  hope,  but  the  verdict  of  history  is  against 
us.  Analogy  is  against  us.  How  long  it  took  to  make  the  world  I  how  slowly 
it  was  built  up,  inch  by  inch,  before  it  was  ready  for  the  foot  of  man  !  And  how 
intolerably  slow  is  man's  growth  and  development !  Reason  and  experience 
are  against  us.  Think  what  the  world  is  like, — how  nation  makes  war  on  nation, 
and  class  on  class,  how  common  and  unblushing  vice  is  even  among  those  who 
should  be  best  fortified  against  it  by  education  and  position,  how  much  of  our 
virtue  is  but  a  prudent  and  calculating  selfishness  !  Think  how  hard  we  our- 
selves know  it  to  be  to  wean  even  one  heart  from  selfishness  and  self-indulgence, 
and  to  fix  it  in  the  love  and  pursuit  of  whatsoever  is  true  and  fair,  good  and  kind  ; 
how  slowly  we  advance  in  godliness  even  when  we  have  the  grace  of  God  to  help 
us  and  are  working  together  with  Him  !  And  then  tell  me  whether  you  must 
not  say,  "  The  dawn  may  be  coming,  but  as  surely  as  the  day  comes,  the  night 
will  come  also ;  many  days  and  many  nights  must  still  pass,  many  alternations 
of  light  and  darkness  must  sweep  across  the  face  of  the  earth,  before  the  great 
day  of  the  Lord  can  arise  and  shine  upon  us."  2.  If  that  be  your  conclusion 
I  have  good  tidings  for  you.  The  very  meaning  and  message  of  advent  is,  that 
all  these  mornings  and  evenings  are  gradually  leading  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  ; 
that  He  is  preparing  for  the  coming  of  His  kingdom  in  the  darkness  as  well  as 
in  the  light,  by  every  night  through  which  we  pass  as  well  as  every  day,  by  every 
disappointment  and  every  postponement  of  hope  as  well  as  by  every  fulfilment. 
Many  forms  of  wrong,  cruelty,  and  vice  are  impossible  now  which  were  possible, 
and  even  common,  before  the  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man  dwelt  among  us ;  nay, 
even  before  the  Reformation  carried  through  Europe  a  light  by  which  such  deeds 
of  darkness  were  reproved.  The  individual  man  may  stand  little  higher,  whether 
in  wisdom  or  in  goodness,  than  of  old ;  but  the  number  of  men  capable  of  high 
thoughts,  noble  aims,  and  lives  devoted  to  the  service  of  truth  and  righteousness, 
is  incomparably  larger.  The  world  took  long  to  make,  and  may  take  still  longer 
to  re-make ;  but  its  re-creation  in  the  image  of  God  is  just  as  certain  as  its  creation. 
The  darkness  of  ignorance  and  superstition  may  still  lie  heavily  over  the  larger 
spaces  of  the  world  ;  but  the  points  of  light  are  rapidly  increasing.  As  we  count 
time,  the  end  is  not  yet ;  but  as  God  counts  time,  the  end  is  not  far  off.  (S.  Cox, 
D.D.)  National  responsibility  : — The  prophet  has  here  nothing  to  predict ; 
his  function  is  only  to  repeat  the  oft  unheeded  warning  that  all  things  in  this 
universe  of  God  go  on  by  unchanging  law  and  in  regular  succession ;  "  the  morn- 
ing," as  in  the  apparent  revolution  of  the  sun  round  the  earth,  so  also  in  the 
revolutions  of  states  and  kingdoms  and  empires,  "  the  morning  cometh,  and 
also  the  night."  Like  causes  produce  like  events;  the  course  of  providence 
may  be  foretold  from  the  action  of  those  with  whom  it  deals.  And  what  is  history, 
but  the  exhibition  of  this  great  but  much  neglected  truth?  e.g.,  Egypt,  Babylon, 
Medo-Persia,  Greece,  Rome.  In  each  case  we  may  distinctly  trace  their  more 
or  less  speedy  downfall  to  the  operation  of  the  same  eternal  law  of  justice ;  requiting 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxt. 

on  each  the  iniquities  of  each,  and  making  those  iniquities  the  very  causes  of  their 
overthrow.  What  likelihood,  then,  is  there  of  the  same  principle  not  being  carried 
out  again;  of  its  not  being  carried  out  in  the  case  of  nations  and  kingdoms  in 
which  we  feel  more  than  an  antiquarian  interest  ?  To  them,  too,  will  come, 
as  the  morning,  so  also  the  night.  It  is,  of  course,  most  difficult  to  appraise  the 
fortunes,  to  calculate  the  probable  destiny  of  any  nation  of  which  we  ourselves 
form  component  parts.  The  human  mind,  like  the  human  eye,  must  see  things 
somewhat  at  a  distance  in  order  to  get  them  into  due  perspective  and  appreciate 
their  exact  proportions.  But  this  difficulty  does  not  affect  our  power  of  evaluating 
the  principles  of  conduct  on  which  we  see  men  or  nations  act.  Those  principles 
are  broad  and  clearly  marked,  and  it  is  easy  to  perceive  how  far  justice  and  right- 
dealing,  truth  and  soberness,  self-devotion  for  the  common  good  and  real,  not 
mock,  philanthropy  are  practised :  or,  on  the  other  side,  how  far  oppression 
and  cowardice,  luxury  and  vice,  falsehood  and  selfishness,  are  the  real  rulers 
of  the  nation.  It  was  the  true  function  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  to  rouse  the 
conscience  of  the  nation  to  what  they  spake.  If,  then,  we  wish  to  acquire  some 
idea  of  the  probable  future  of  the  great  empire  to  which  we  belong,  it  will  be 
well  carefully  to  review  the  aspects  of  life  prevailing  in  it,  and  to  see  in  what 
way  the  eternal  obligations  of  the  Divine  law  are  observed,  or  how  far  they  are 
despised  and  violated.  (Archbishop  Reichel,  D.D.)  **  Watchman,  what  of 
the  night  f  " — I.  Good  men  suffering.  The  pious  Jews  were  now  in  deepest 
sorrow.  It  was  their  night.  The  good  have  often  a  pight.  Physical  suffering, 
secular  difficulties,  social  bereavements,  spiritual  temptations,  conscious  imper- 
fections, often  turn  the  sky  of  a  good  man  into  night.  II.  Wicked  men  taunting. 
The  voice  from  Mount  Seir  was,  '  What  of  the  night  ?  "  The  language  is  sarcastic 
and  contemptuous.  The  wicked,  instead  of  sympathising  with  the  good  in  their 
sufferings,  often  treat  them  with  heartless  ridicule.  The  spirit  is  seen  now  in 
various  questions  that  are  addressed  to  the  Church.  (1)  Where  is  your  superior 
happiness  ?  (2)  Where  are  the  triumphs  of  your  cause  ?  (3)  Where  is  your 
spiritual  superiority  to  other  men  ?  III.  The  great  God  speaking  to  bot*.. 
The  morning  cometh,  and  also  the  night."  1.  His  voice  to  the  good.  "  The 
morning  cometh."  There  is  a  morning  for  the  Church  on  this  earth.  There 
is  a  morning  to  the  good  in  eternity.  2.  The  voice  to  the  wicked.  "  The  night 
cometh."  Where  is  Edom  now?  The  night  cometh,  sinner:  the  shadows  are 
gathering   already,"    &c.      (Homilist.)  What  of  the  night?"  —  I.   "Watch- 

man, what  of  the  night  "  of  sense  and  sin  ?  "  The  morning  cometh  " — the 
morning  of  sinlessness.  "  Also  the  night."  Sin  now,  sin  then ;  sin  on  sin,  sin  for 
ever  and  ever  !  II.  "  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  "  of  suffering  and  sorrow  ? 
"  The  morning  cometh."  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes." 
"  Also  the  night " — the  night  of  eternal  suffering  and  sorrow.  III.  "  Watch- 
man, what  of  the  night "  of  mocking  and  mystery  ?  "  The  morning  cometh," 
when  the  mocking  mystery  will  vanish  "  They  shall  see  His  face."  "  Also 
the  night " — "  the  outer  darkness,"  the  black  profound,  where  the  soul  wanders 
for  ever  Christless,  restless,  lost.  IV.  "  Watchman,  what  of  the  night "  of 
solitude  and  separation  ?  In  this  world  we  have  never  met.  Men  of  science 
tell  us  that  there  are  in  this  universe  no  two  atoms  in  wal  contact.  "  The  morning 
cometh,"  the  morning  of  meeting  for  the  first  time  in  the  never-parting  of  the 
revelation  of  God.  Now  we  see  in  a  mirror  darkly,"  &c.  "  Also  the  night," 
the  night  of  a  separation  eternal.  Let  another  natural  law  be  traced  in  this 
spiritual  world.  If  you  took  away  all  contrary  and  opposing  forces  from  a  pro- 
pelled cannon-ball,  and  if  you  secured  a  perfect  vacuum  in  boundless  space,  by 
via  inertia!,  the  ball  would  go  on  for  ever.  If  this  is  the  first  law  of  motion  in 
mechanics,  it  is  as  really  the  first  law  of  motion  in  the  wrath  of  God  on  an  eternally- 
separated  lost  soul.  (J.  Bailey,  M.A.)  Visions  of  the  day  and  night  : — The 
great  beauty  and  power  of  the  Word  of  God  lies  in  this,  that  it  is  never  obsolete 
and  never  out  of  date.  I.  The  question  in  our  text.  Night  is  the  emblem 
of  ignorance,  sorrow,  sin,  crime,  danger,  and  disaster;  as  in  the  natural  night 
there  are  different  degrees  of  light  and  shade,  of  gloom  and  darkness,  so  it  is  with 
the  spiritual  night.  II.  The  answer.  "  The  morning  cometh."  1.  To  nations. 
2.  To  individuals.  It  comes  to  the  awakened  and  accepted  sinner  in  the  form 
of  pardon  and  deliverance  from  the  power  and  burden  of  sin  and  guilt.  It  comes 
to  others  in  the  form  of  deliverance  from  some  secret,  instinctive,  but  crushing 
Borrow,  which  has  pressed  the  poor  heart  down  for  years ;  which  has  made  them. 
some  from  physical  and  some  from  spiritual  weakness,  walk  for  a  long  period 


chap,  xsi.]  ISAIAH.  401 

in  gloom  and  darkness,  crying,  "  Oh !  when  will  it  end  ?  "  3.  The  morning  cometh 
to  others  in  declining  years  ;  to  the  aged,  the  afflicted,  the  dying.  4.  And  the 
night  cometh,"  when  the  long-abused  love  and  compassion,  and  patience  of  God 
shall  be  at  length  exhausted  ;  when  the  plea  of  mercy  shall  be  exchanged  for  the 
penalty  of  justice,  and  the  shield  of  the  Advocate  give  way  to  the  sword  of  the 
Avenger.  It  cometh  to  nations;  it  cometh  to  individuals.  (0.  Davenport.) 
Alternations  of  morning  and  night : — The  morning  cometh  in  the  appearing  of 
Messiah,  the  Prince ;  and  also  the  night  of  the  exclusion  of  the  Jews.  The 
morning  cometh,  in  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  among  the  Gentile  nations ;  and 
also  the  night,  in  the  tenfold  persecutions  which  wasted  the  Church.  The  morning 
cometh,  in  the  reign  of  Constantino  the  Great  over  the  Roman  empire ;  and 
also  the  night  of  Arian  blasphemy  and  persecution.  The  morning  cometh,  in 
the  reformation  of  religion  from  popery ;  and  also  the  night  of  a  fearful  falling 
away.  The  morning  cometh,  more  bright  and  glorious  than  all  which  have 
preceded,  in  the  glory  of  the  latter  days ;  and  also  the  night  of  another  falling 
away  before  the  general  judgment.  And  then  shall  a  morning  burst  upon 
the  universe,  which  shall  never  be  overcast.  (W.  Taylor.)  The  burden 
of  Dumah : — I.  The  world's  question.  In  the  first  instance  it  is  a 
question  put  by  the  Edomites  of  Mount  Seir  to  Israel's  watchman.  It  is 
worth  noting  that  a  people  animated  with  such  hostile  feelings  should  thus 
open  up  communication  with  the  objects  of  their  hostility.  Two  explanations 
might  be  given.  It  may  be  they  asked  the  question  tauntingly  in  a  spirit  of 
mockery,  or  they  may  have  asked  it  earnestly  in  a  spirit  of  anxious  inquiry.  Either 
of  these  views  will  fit  the  historical  conditions.  1.  If  we  adopt  the  first,  we  must 
suppose  the  Jews  to  be  in  captivity  and  the  Edomites  prospering,  and  we  know 
from  history  that  they  did  prosper  during  the  Babylonish  captivity.  At  that 
time  they  got  possession  of  a  portion  of  Jewish  territory  in  southern  Palestine, 
having  been  permitted  to  settle  there  as  a  reward  for  their  services  to  the  Baby- 
lonians during  the  struggle  that  preceded  the  captivity.  While  occupying  this 
new  settlement,  their  fortunes  rose,  and  in  the  exuberance  of  success  they  retaliated 
on  their  now  oppressed  brethren,  as  much  as  to  say,  You  who  boasted  of  being 
the  special  favourites  of  Heaven,  where  is  now  your  God  ?  Your  night  of  oppression 
has  continued  long  enough,  is  there  any  sign  of  deliverance  ?  Surely  it  is  time 
for  your  God  to  show  His  hand !  The  picture  is  something  like  this  :  On  Mount 
Seir,  the  highest  eminence  in  the  land,  the  Edomites  are  convened,  elated  by  their 
fleeting  prosperity ;  while  in  a  foreign  land  are  the  captive  Jews,  groaning  under 
the  yoke  of  the  oppressor,  and  their  watchman  or  prophet  standing  on  his  watch- 
tower,  eager  to  catch  the  first  ray  of  deliverance.  From  the  one  to  the  other 
passes  the  taunting  call,  "  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  "  And  the  watchman 
returns  the  reply,  "  The  morning  is  coming,  and  also  the  night.  Do  not  deceive 
yourselves,  ye  taunting  Edomites,  your  momentary  prosperity  will  become  a 
night  of  gloom  and  our  present  calamities  will  be  followed  by  a  glorious  day. 
The  morning  of  deliverance  will  come  to  the  captive  Jews,  but  the  night  of  desola- 
tion to  the  mocking  Edomites."  The  question  is  still  thrown  out  by  the  unbeliever 
with  a  fling  of  scorn,  "  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  "  "  Tell  us  what  pro- 
gress you  are  making,"  &c.  There  are  not  wanting  in  these  days  men  who  affect 
to  throw  discredit  on  Christian  and  missionary  effort.  Look,  say  they,  how 
little  has  been  accomplished  by  these  means  in  the  past,  and  how  much  remains 
to  be  done.  Instead  of  the  Gospel,  let  us  try  civilisation,  the  spread  of  commerce, 
and  the  wider  diffusion  of  knowledge,  and  the  morning  will  soon  dawn.  Now, 
if  this  were  so,  it  would  indeed  be  a  serious  charge.  But  what  are  the  facts  T 
Let  it  be  conceded  that  the  visible  marks  of  Christian  progress  are  not  over- 
whelming ;  at  the  same  time  no  one  who  will  cast  his  eyes  over  the  earth  can  fail 
to  see  that  the  nations  most  advanced  in  civilisation  and  what  is  called  modern 
culture  are  also  the  most  Christian.  2.  Let  us  think  of  the  question  as  being 
asked  in  a  spirit  of  anxious  inquiry.  In  this  case,  the  once  captive  Jews  must 
be  regarded  as  a  prosperous  people,  living  in  their  own  land,  and  the  once  pros- 
perous Edomites  as  an  oppressed  people.  In  their  distress  they  cry  to  those 
whom  they  previously  mocked.  But  their  cry  has  a  different  meaning  now  that 
the  tables  have  been  turned.  "  What  of  the  night "  now  means  an  earnest  desire 
to  know  how  long  their  calamities  are  likely  to  last.  As  if  they  had  said,  It  has 
been  a  night  of  dire  adversity  with  us,  tell  us,  you  who  are  a  watchman  in  Zion, 
is  that  night  nearly  past  ?  We  have  suffered  much,  and  are  longing  for  relief. 
Are  our  sufferings  nearly  at  an  end  ?     If  this  view  is  adopted,  it  is  still  a  question 

26 


102  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxl 

addressed  by  the  world  to  the  Church ;  no  longer,  however,  in  mockery,  but  in 
a  spirit  of  anxious  inquiry.  There  do  come  times  in  the  history  of  godless  nations 
and  individuals,  when,  in  the  midst  of  trouble,  they  are  constrained  to  pay  homage 
to  the  Church,  and  call  upon  her  for  advice.  There  are  in  the  Bible  several 
instances  of  the  wicked  consulting  God's  ministers  in  times  of  calamity.  And 
have  we  not  seen  examples  of  men  calling  on  God  in  the  hour  of  calamity,  who 
never  bowed  a  knee  to  Him  in  the  hour  of  their  prosperity  T  When  such  a  question 
is  asked  with  a  true  motive,  that  of  itself  is  an  indication  to  the  watchman  that 
the  morning  is  coming.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  spiritual  watchman  to  declare  te 
the  people  the  whole  counsel  of  the  King,  to  discern  wisely  the  signs  of  the  times, 
so  as  to  be  able  to  impart  the  needed  instruction.  II.  The  Church's  reply, 
whether  the  question  is  asked  by  way  of  taunt  or  in  an  earnest  spirit.  In  either 
case,  the  inquirer  is  assured  that  the  morning  of  a  glorious  deliverance  will  come 
to  the  oppressed  Church,  while  a  night  of  awful  desolation  will  fall  upon  her  foes. 

1.  This  prophecy  was  unmistakably  fulfilled  in  the  after  history  of  the  Edomites. 
The  morning  did  come,  as  the  watchman  said,  and  for  a  short  period  the  Edomites 
were  a  flourishing  people  in  the  land  of  Seir ;  but  they  refused  to  inquire,  they 
did  not  return,  they  wandered  further  from  the  path  of  righteousness,  and  the 
long  night  of  desolation  overtook  them.  The  prophecy  regarding  it,  in  Isaiah 
xxxiv.  12,  13,  has  been  literally  fulfilled.  And  this  is  the  inevitable  doom  of  those 
who  will  not  improve  the  day  of  their  merciful  visitation — "the  night  cometh." 

2.  But  while  the  watchman's  message  to  the  enemies  of  the  Gospel  is  one  of  woe 
and  warning,  he  has  a  message  of  encouragement  to  the  people  of  God.  "  The 
morning  cometh."  Night  and  morning  !  Unlike  pair,  and  yet  they  go  hand 
in  hand.  What  will  be  morning  to  some  will  be  night  to  others.  3.  Yet  again, 
the  watchman  says,  "  If  ye  will  inquire,  inquire  ye."  Addressed  originally 
to  the  inquiring  Edomites,  the  words  still  apply  to  their  modern  successors 
whether  they  put  their  questions  in  jest  or  in  earnest.  The  inquiring  spirit  here 
meets  with  no  rebuff,  for  it  is  a  healthy  sign.  History  records  instances  of  men 
who  studied  the  Christian  evidences  in  order  to  refute  them,  and  ended  by  becoming 
devoted  Christians.  Religion,  so  far  from  shunning  investigation,  rather  invites 
it.  And  if  there  is  a  sure  solution  of  his  perplexities  awaiting  the  critical  investi- 
gator, there   is  also   an  answer  that  will  satisfy  the   inquirer  after  salvation. 

4.  There  is  another  class  of  persons  to  whom  the  watchman's  commission  extends. 
To  them  he  says,  "  return  " — a  word  which  may  be  taken  to  refer  to  backsliders. 

5.  The  text  contains  one  other  word — a  word  of  encouragement  to  all.  This 
word  is,  "  come  "  ;  a  word  that  Jesus,  when  on  earth,  was  never  weary  of  uttering, 
and  which  He  has  left  behind  Him  as  the  Church's  invitation-call  to  Gospel 
privileges.  (D.  Merson,  M.A.,  B.D.)  The  night-watch  in  Mount  Seir: — The 
double  question  and  the  doubting  reply  are  well  suited  to  the  changing  aspects 
of  nature  in  a  mountain  land.  To  the  inhabitants  of  such  countries,  inquiries 
for  the  winds  and  the  clouds,  the  morning  and  the  night,  are  as  familiar  as  the 
words  of  daily  salutation.  And  the  variable  condition  of  human  society,  the 
advance  and  decline  of  nations,  the  concealments  and  revelations  of  Providence, 
are  well  illustrated  by  the  darkness  and  the  day,  the  shadows  and  the  sunshine 
among  mountains.     Such  was  the  history  of  the  Hebrew  nation  under  the  espeeial 

fuidance  of  Divine  providence  in  ancient  times.  Such  has  been  and  still  is  the 
istory  of  peoples  and  opinions  in  the  European  world.  The  good  and  the  glorious 
days  of  Samuel,  and  David,  and  Solomon,  and  Hezekiah,  were  followed  by  the 
dark  and  evil  days  of  Saul,  and  Jeroboam,  and  Ahab,  and  Manasseh.  Athanasius 
and  Augustine,  Luther  and  Calvin,  Cranmer  and  Knox,  Whitefield  and  Wesley, 
the  great  champions  of  truth  and  reformation,  found  their  dark  shadow  and  counter- 
part in  Arius  and  Pelagius,  Loyola  and  the  Inquisition,  Voltaire  and  the  French 
Revolution.  The  bright  dawn  of  a  better  day  has  always  been  overcast  with 
dark  and  angry  clouds.  And  yet  the  providence  of  God  is  wiser  and  mightier 
than  the  policies  of  man.  The  night  which  comes  with  the  morning  is  partial 
and  temporary,  although  it  seems  for  a  time  to  devour  the  day  and  cut  off  the 
hopes  of  mankind.  In  the  darkest  periods  of  human  history,  we  need  only  the 
clear  vision  of  faith  to  see  the  day  approaching.  It  is  ever  God's  way  to  bring 
light  out  of  darkness,  joy  out  of  sorrow,  rest  out  of  weariness,  for  the  waiting 
and  longing  soul.  (-D.  March,  D.D.)  Sin  the  great  silencer  : — The  word  Dumah 
means  silence,"  "  the  land  of  silent  desolation."  It  is  a  very  suggestive  thought. 
Sin  is  the  great  silencer.  The  end  of  sin  is  silence.  Assuredly  that  was  true 
in  the  case  of  Edom.     It  was  true  of  it  at  the  time  when  the  prophet  spoke,  it 


chap,  xxi.]  ISAIAH.  403 

was  to  be  true  of  it  still  more  completely  in  the  ages  to  follow.  Travellers  tell 
us  that  if  we  want  to  know  how  Providence  can  turn  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness, 
and  make  a  defenced  city  a  heap,  for  the  iniquity  of  the  inhabitants  thereof, 
we  have  only  to  look  at  Edom,  with  its  hills  and  plains  picked  clean  of  every 
vestige  of  vegetation,  and  its  ruined  palaces,  once  the  home  of  busy  men,  now 
the  haunt  of  vultures  and  the  lair  of  scorpions,  all  human  sound  gone — the  voice 
of  mirth,  the  voioe  of  gladness,  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom,  the  voice  of  the  bride  ! 
But  why  go  to  Edom  for  an  illustration  ?  Look  nearer  home.  Go  to  any  city 
churchyard.  Pass  through  the  iron  gates  that  divide  those  strangely  contrasted 
crowds,  the  throng  of  the  living  and  the  congregation  of  the  dead.  How  still ! 
Everything  may  be  orderly,  everything  trim — winding  walks,  flowery  borders, 
spreading  shrubs,  grassy  mounds,  carven  monuments  white  and  clean,  but  all 
30  still,  no  sound  nor  motion  anywhere,  save  the  wind  that  shudders  through 
the  yew  trees,  and  the  measured  chime  of  the  steeple-clock  as  it  tolls  its  hourly 
reminder  that  we  too  shall  be  still,  still  as  the  throngs  beneath.  What  makes 
that  stillness  ?  Sin.  Sin  is  the  great  silencer,  and  death  is  the  climax  of  the 
silence  that  it  makes.  ( W.  A.  Gray.)  The  silence  of  God  : — It  is  really  a  terrible 
answer,  for  there  can  be  nothing  so  terrible  for  us  on  earth  as  to  know  that  God 
has  nothing  to  say  to  us.  "  0,  my  God !  "  cried  Martin  Luther,  "  smite  me  with 
famine,  with  want,  with  pestilence,  with  all  the  sore  diseases  on  earth,  rather 
than  Thou  be  silent  to  me."  Yet  God  is  sometimes  thus  silent  to  wicked  men 
and  to  wicked  nations ;  He  is  so  for  their  punishment.  "  Ephraim  is  turned 
unto  idols.  Let  him  alone."  (Dean  Farrar,  D.D.)  Mount  Seir ;  false  con- 
fidences : — Be  not  too  confident  in  thy  Mount  Seir !  Every  wicked  soul  has  her 
Mount  Seir  to  trust  in  ;  they  that  have  no  assurance  of  rest  in  heaven,  have  their 
refuges  and  mountains  of  help  on  earth.  David  so  returns  it  upon  the  wicked 
(Psa.  xi.  1).  "In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust:  how  then  say  ye  to  my  soul,  Flee 
as  a  bird  to  your  mountain  ?  "  Why  should  I  seek  to  foreign  helps,  that  have 
settled  myself  in  the  bosom  of  rest  itself  ?  Riches  are  a  Mount  Seir  to  the  covetous  ; 
they  rest  on  them.  Honour  is  a  Mount  Seir  to  the  ambitious,  against  all  the 
besiegings  of  rivals.  Sensuality  to  the  voluptuous,  against  all  the  disturbances 
of  a  clamorous  conscience.  Pride,  fraud,  drunkenness,  are  a  Mount  Seir  to  the 
lovers  of  them  ;  but  alas,  how  unsafe  !  If  stronger  against,  and  further  removed 
from  the  hand  of  man,  yet  nearer  to  God's  hand  in  heaven  ;  though  we  acknow- 
ledge no  place  procul  a  Jove,  or  procul  A  fulmine, — far  from  God,  or  from  His  thunder. 
But  we  say,  it  is  not  the  safest  sailing  on  the  top  of  the  mast ;  to  live  on  the 
mountainous  height  of  a  temporal  estate  is  neither  wise  nor  happy.  Men  standing 
in  the  shade  of  humble  valleys,  look  up  and  wonder  at  the  height  of  hills,  and 
think  it  goodly  living  there,  as  Peter  thought  Tabor  ;  but  when  with  weary  limbs 
they  have  ascended,  and  find  the  beams  of  the  sun  melting  their  spirits,  or  the 
cold  blasts  of  wind  making  their  sinews  stark,  flashes  of  lightning  or  cracks  of 
thunder  soonest  endangering  their  advanced  heads,  then  they  confess,  checking 
their  proud  conceit,  the  low  valley  is  safest;  for  the  fruitful  dews  that  fall  first  on 
the  hills  stay  least  while  there,  but  run  down  to  the  valleys.  And  though  on  such 
a  promontory  a  man  further  sees,  and  is  further  seen,  yet  in  the  valley,  where 
he  sees  less,  he  enjoys  more.  Take  heed,  then,  lest  to  raise  thy  Mount  Seir  high, 
thou  dejectest  thy  soul.  If  we  build  our  houses  by  unrighteousness,  and  our 
chambers  without  equity,  though  as  strong  as  Mount  Seir,  they  shall  not  be  able 
to  stand  in  the  earthquake  of  judgment.  God  so  threatens  Jehoiakim  ( Jer.  xxii. 
15).  Think  not  your  houses  to  be  fortresses,  when  your  souls  are  unarmed  of 
Christian  weapons — faith  and  obedience.  (T.  Adams.)  Edomite-scorners  : — 
I  will  single  you  out  four  sorts  of  these  Edomites,  scorners, — for  I  justly  parallel 
them — 1.  Atheists :  such  as  have  voluntarily,  violently,  extinguished  to  them- 
selves the  sunlight  of  the  Scripture,  moonlight  of  the  creature,  nay,  the  sparks 
and  cinders  of  nature,  that  the  more  securely,  as  unseen  and  unchidden  of  their 
own  hearts,  they  might  prodigally  act  the  works  of  darkness.  2.  Epicures: 
that  deny  not  a  God  and  a  day  of  judgment,  but  put  it  far  off  (Amos  vi.  3),  with, 
Give  me  the  present,  take  thou  the  hope  of  future  joys.  3.  Libertines :  that 
neither  affirm  no  night,  nor  put  it  far  off,  but  only  the  strength  of  sin  prevails 
over  all ;  and,  come  sorrow,  death,  grave,  hell,  they  must  have  their  pleasures. 
4.  Common  profane  persons :  that  will  suffer  themselves  to  wear  God's  livery, 
though  they  serve  the  devil.  (Ibid.)  Watchman,  what  of  the  night 7 — The 
duty  of  examining  the  signs  of  the  times  : — I.  The  first  thing  which,  in  reference 
to  this  inquiry,  the  words  before  us  suggest,  is,  that  it  is  of  thb  Lord  HrMSTCT.f 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxr. 

the  inquiry  must  be  made.  His  eye  alone  seeth  under  the  whole  heaven  ; 
and  He  only  knoweth  the  end  from  the  beginning.  Nothing  can  be  more  utterly 
fallacious  than  any  mere  calculation  of  human  probabilities  in  regard  to  the  future 
progress  of  Divine  truth — in  regard  to  the  course  it  may  be  destined  to  run.  When 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  been  put  to  an  ignominious  death,  His  few  and  obscure 
disciples  dispersed  in  terror,  and  when  the  handful  of  peasants  and  fishermen 
who  had  been  the  companions  of  His  ministry  were  shut  up,  unnoticed  and 
unknown,  in  an  upper  chamber  at  Jerusalem,  who  could  have  foreseen  that  the 
blast  of  the  trumpet,  blown  by  this  small  and  feeble  band,  was  to  shake  down 
the  mighty  Jericho  of  that  universal  heathenism  which  then  overspread  and 
enslaved  the  benighted  earth  ?  When,  fifteen  hundred  years  thereafter,  a  poor, 
emaciated  Augustinian  monk  was  wearing  himself  out  in  his  gloomy  cell  in  the 
terrible  conflict  of  an  awakened  conscience,  which  all  his  self-righteous  austerities 
could  not  satisfy  or  soothe,  who  could  have  foreseen  that  in  that  single  man  the 
Lord  was  training  a  soldier,  who  s  ould  confront,  single-handed,  the  gigantic 
power  of  the  man  of  sin,  and  liberate  the  half  of  Europe  from  his  galling  and 
destructive  yoke  ?  But  if  human  sagacity  would  thus  have  been  baffled  on  the 
one  hand  by  unlooked-for  triumphs  to  the  cause  of  truth,  would  it  not  have  been 
equally  confounded  on  the  other  by  unexpected  defeats  ?  When  the  day  of 
Gospel  light  was  breaking  forth  in  such  glorious  splendour  upon  the  world  in 
apostolic  times,  who  would  have  ventured  to  anticipate  that  so  bright  a  day 
was  to  be  succeeded  by  the  dark  ages,  the  long,  dismal,  dreary  centuries  during 
which  the  few  remaining  witnesses  prophesied  in  sackcloth,  amid  bonds  and 
stripes,  and  imprisonments,  and  death  ?  Again,  when  the  Lutheran  Reformation, 
like  a  strong  wind  out  of  the  clear  north,  was  sweeping  off  from  the  nations  the 
dense  cloud  of  papal  superstition,  and  revealing  once  more  to  their  wondering 
eyes  the  long-hidden  Sun  of  righteousness,  who  would  have  thought  that  the 
horrid  cloud  would  again  return  to  spread  its  murky  folds  over  so  many  of  its 
ancient  fields,  and  that  men,  choosing  darkness  rather  than  the  light,  would  love 
to  have  it  so  ?  It  is  to  the  Lord  we  must  turn  if  we  desire  to  know  what  is  in 
the  womb  of  time.  II.  However  discouraging  the  aspect  of  things  may,  in  many 
points,  appear,  "  the  morning  cometh  " — a  day  of  unprecedented  brilliancy  and 
joy,  when  the  kingdom  and  dominion  under  the  whole  heaven  shall  be  given  to  the 
Son  of  man,  and  when,  emancipated  from  the  strife  and  turmoil  of  incessant  wars, 
and  enjoying  and  exhibiting  a  foretaste  and  emblem  of  the  heavenly  state,  the 
rest  of  Zion  shall  be  glorious.  III.  We  must  rejoice  with  trembling,  for 
while  the  morning  cometh,  there  cometh  also  the  night.  When  the  year 
of  recompense  for  the  controversy  of  Zion  shall  have  come,  it  will  be  a  night  to 
her  adversaries  and  oppressors  ;  but  to  Zion  herself  it  will  be  a  bright  and  glorious 
day.  (R.  Buchanan,  D.D.)  The  watchman's  office  : — I.  A  watchman  must  be 
duly  authorised  and  appointed  to  the  station.  It  is  not  left  to  any  man 
to  mount  the  watch-tower  at  pleasure — to  take  his  round  through  the  streets — or 
to  challenge  the  citizens,  except  he  can  show  a  regular  commission  for  the  service. 
Ezekiel,  with  all  his  zeal  for  his  country,  and  love  to  his  own  people,  could  not 
occupy  the  post  of  a  watchman  among  them  till  the  God  of  Israel  made  him  one 
(Ezek.  iii.  17).  Thus  a  call,  a  commission,  is  indispensably  necessary  to  the 
exercise  of  any  office  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  especially  of  the  office  of  the  ministry. 
But  when  the  call  is  given  and  the  appointment  conferred,  the  watchman  ought, 
without  gainsaying,  to  repair  to  his  box.  II.  A  watchman  ought  to  be  sagacious 
and  quick-sighted.  A  simpleton,  or  a  blind  man  (Luke  vi.  39),  would  be  alto- 
gether unfit  for  a  watchman.  He  could  neither  descry  the  enemy  as  he  approached 
the  city,  nor  penetrate  his  mischievous  designs,  nor  alarm  the  citizens  of  the 
impending  danger.  The  ministers  of  Christ  are  accordingly  represented  in  the 
Revelation  as  "  full  of  eyes  "  ;  and  they  have  need  of  all  the  eyes  ascribed  to  them, 
that  they  may  take  heed  to  themselves,  and  watch  over  others.  III.  Vigilant. 
An  indolent  and  sleepy  watchman  is  a  most  dangerous  officer  in  a  city,  especially 
in  a  period  of  warfare.  For,  while  men  sleep,  the  enemy  may  occupy  the  gates, 
or  mount  the  walls.  The  ministers  of  Christ  ought  to  be  very  vigilant  in  watching 
over  the  people ;  and  other  officers  are  to  exert  themselves  in  watching  along 
with  them.  For,  "  while  men  sleep,"  the  enemy  sows  his  tares  of  error,  of  heresy, 
and  division.  IV.  Spirited.  A  spirited  watchman,  ever  upon  the  alert,  to 
detect  the  disorderly,  and  to  suppress  them  in  their  first  appearances,  is  an  eminent 
blessing  in  his  station.  By  the  spirited  exertions  of  an  active  watchman,  much 
disorder  and  tumult  in  the  streets  of  a  city  may  be  prevented,  especially  during 


chap,  xxi.]  ISAIAH.  405 

the  night.  So  ought  the  minister  of  Christ  to  display  a  firm  and  spirited  determina- 
tion to  suppress  disorder  and  vice  of  every  kind,  although  it  should  cost  him 
much  trouble,  and  the  strife  of  tongues  against  him,  in  accomplishing  his  object. 
It  is  also  part  of  the  constitutional  duty  of  every  good  citizen,  to  assist  the  watchman, 
by  all  the  means  in  his  power,  to  suppress  riot,  and  check  the  unruly.  Let  private 
Church-members  attend  to  this.  V.  Watchmen  ought  to  be  steady.  They 
are  to  occupy  their  station,  to  maintain  their  post,  and  in  no  instance  to  neglect 
their  duty.  The  ministers  of  Christ,  in  like  manner,  are  to  "  be  steadfast,  immov- 
able," &c.  (1  Cor.  xv.  58).  They  are  "  to  watch,  to  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  to  quit 
themselves  like  men  and  to  be  strong."  VI.  Watchmen  are  to  be  courageous. 
A  coward  would,  of  all  others,  be  a  most  unfit  person  for  a  watchman,  especially 
in  the  night,  and  when  the  enemy  was  at  the  gates.  Such  ought  unquestionably 
to  be  a  prominent  qualification  of  the  minister  of  Christ,  and  of  all  who  bear  rule 
in  the  Church  along  with  him.  A  trimming,  truckling,  temporising  humour,  to  please 
men,  and  a  dread  of  giving  offence  in  the  discharge  of  positive  duty,  is  altogether 
unsuitable  to  the  condition  of  those  whose  chief  attention  is  to  please  and  honour 
Qod.  VII.  Watchmen  are  to  be  faithful.  They  are  neither  to  betray  their  trust, 
by  conniving  with  the  disorderly,  nor  to  expose  the  city,  by  keeping  silence,  while 
they  perceive  danger  approaching.  This  part  of  the  watchman's  character  may 
be  often  perverted,  as,  indeed,  what  part  of  it  may  not  ?  Men  may  make  a  great 
noise  and  parade  about  being  faithful  and  honest,  who,  in  truth,  have  nothing  so 
much  at  heart,  as  to  gratify  their  own  vanity,  interest,  pride,  humour,  or  favourite 
plans  of  action.  But  the  faithfulness  intended  by  this  particular  chiefly  respects 
plain  and  honest  dealing  with  the  consciences  of  men.  The  faithful  servant  of 
the  Lord  is  to  warn  the  trangressor  of  the  error  of  his  ways,  and  of  the  danger 
of  persisting  in  error.  VIII.  Watchmen  are  to  be  frank  in  the  public  service, 
either  to  inform  the  citizen  of  the  hour  of  the  night,  or  to  guide  him  on  his  way. 
The  watchmen  of  the  Old  Testament  gave  the  time  of  night  under  that  dispensa- 
tion, and  laid  themselves  out  to  collect  every  information  (1  Pet.  i.  11).  The 
watchmen  of  the  New  Testament  are  to  continue  the  inquiry  into  the  mind  of 
the  Spirit ;  that  they  may  tell  what  of  the  night — what  is  the  part  of  prophecy 
which  applies  to  the  present  times — and  what  the  signs  of  the  breaking  light 
of  the  coming  glory.  Such  is  a  very  tender  and  useful  department  of  the  spiritual 
watchman.  He  is  to  guide  the  bewildered — to  encourage  and  protect  such  as 
apprehend  themselves  in  danger — and  to  tell  them,  to  the  best  of  his  information, 
concerning  the  Friend  of  sinners.  (W.  Taylor.)  Aspects  of  the  times  : — I.  The 
Christian  man  has  still  before  him  the  unbelief  and  ebreligion  of  the  night, 
and  yet  there  are  streaks  of  sunny  dawn.  II.  The  Christian  man  has  much 
in  his  own  history  that  speaks  of  the  night,  and  yet  there  is  morning  there 
too.  III.  The  Christian  man  sees  that  in  nations  where  the  pure  Gospel 
of  Christ  pervades  the  people,  we  have  the  hope  of  the  world.  IV.  The 
Christless  man  may  ask,  "  What  of  the  night  ? "  as  well  as  the  Christian. 
(W.  M.  Staiham.)  A  momentous  inquiry: — I.  Let  us  see  how  this  inquiry 
will  apply  to  the  world  in  general.  The  world  commenced  with  a  bright  ana 
sinless  morning.  But  early  in  the  history  of  our  race,  the  power  of  the  tempter 
was  so  successfully  wielded,  that  the  bright  morning  was  succeeded  by  a  day  of 
dark  clouds  and  desolating  storms.  With  the  growth  of  the  world's  population 
the  overspreading  darkness  grew  until  God  could  bear  with  the  wickedness  of 
the  world  no  more.  After  the  deluge  the  world  started  anew  from  another  head. 
Old  crimes,  old  corruptions,  quickly  regained  their  sway.  Long  centuries  came 
and  passed  away.  The  moral  heavens  grew  darker  as  time  rolled  by,  and  as  the 
world's  inhabitants  increased  in  numbers.  Here  and  there  only  was  there  a 
ray  of  light  shining  amid  the  abounding  darkness.  Outside  of  Judea  there  was 
not  much  to  dispel  the  darkness.  Greece,  somewhat  enlightened,  furnished  a 
Socrates  and  a  Plato.  But  Greece,  because  of  her  crimes  and  vices,  soon  went 
down  to  ruin.  The  once  magnificent  empires,  Egypt,  Assyria,  Greece,  and  Rome, 
were  alike  involved  in  the  moral  night  of  error  and  sin,  and  their  greatness,  once 
so  commanding,  and  their  glory,  once  so  brilliant,  have  passed  away.  Indeed,  in 
all  succeeding  ages,  and  among  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth,  the  darkness  has 
prevailed.  What  prospect  is  there  for  this  sin-darkened  world  ?  We  may  respond 
in  the  words  of  the  prophet :  "  The  morning  cometh."  The  long  night  of  captivity, 
of  error,  of  wrong,  of  violence  shall  give  place  to  the  glorious  day,  wherein  the 
ransomed  of  the  Lord  everywhere  shall  rejoice  in  that  liberty  with  which  God 
makes  His  people  free.     II.  How  will  the  inquiry  of  our  text  apply  to  Isaiah's 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  ixi. 

time  ?  It  was  indeed  for  the  chosen  people  a  time  of  darkness.  The  Jews  wer« 
captives  in  Babylon.  Isaiah  had  a  grander  vision  and  saw  another  morning. 
He  saw  the  breaking  day,  and  told  of  the  advent  of  the  promised  Messiah,  who 
was  to  be  the  light  and  the  glory  of  the  world.  The  vision  which  Isaiah  saw  we 
also  are  permitted  to  see.  We  see  the  complete  fulfilment  of  many  of  the  pre- 
dictions of  the  prophet.  And  there  are  the  signs,  which  will  not  fail,  that  his 
grandest  visions  will  be  realised.  III.  How  will  this  inquiry,  "  Watchman, 
what  of  the  night  ?  "  apply  to  our  own  times  ?  1.  Glance  for  a  moment  at  the 
progress  that  has  been  made  in  our  times  in  science  and  in  art.  2.  Ours  has 
been  a  time  of  moral  progress.  3.  The  religious  progress  of  the  world  is  remark- 
able. 4.  All  around  us  are  signs  of  improvement.  IV.  How  will  this  inquiry, 
"  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  "  apply  to  ourselves  personally  ?  1.  There 
is  the  night  of  scepticism,  or  partial  scepticism,  in  which  some  are  involved.  To 
the  earnest  and  sincere  inquirer  the  response  must  be,  "  The  morning  cometh." 

2.  There  is  a  night  of  worldliness.  For  the  worldly  the  morning  waiteth.  Christ 
stands  at  the  door  and  knocks.  He  is  the  light  and  the  life  of  men.  3.  There  is  a 
night  of  penitential  sorrow.  For  every  awakened,  penitent,  and  believing  one 
the  morning  cometh.  4.  There  is  the  night  of  suffering.  The  morning  cometh, 
when  the  wounds  of  the  sorrowing  shall  be  healed,  and  when  their  sorrow  shall 
be  turned  into  joy.  5.  The  Christian  worker  may  sometimes  inquire,  "  Watchman, 
what  of  the  night  ?  "  Learn  to  labour  faithfully  and  to  wait.  6.  While  the 
morning  cometh  for  all  who  willingly  hear  and  obey  the  Gospel,  the  night  also 
cometh  for  the  disobedient  and  unbelieving.  (D.  D.  Currie.)  Heathen  darkness 
and  Gospel  light : — 1.  There  is  something  to  encourage  us  in  the  interest  now  taken 
in  missions  as  compared  with  a  century  ago.  We  can  fairly  point  to  what  is  done 
for  missions  as  a  proof  of  the  vitality  and  the  power  of  Christian  principles,  evidence 
at  once  of  the  influence  which  Christianity  exerts  on  its  disciples,  and  earnest  of  its 
ultimate  triumph.  2.  But  looking  at  the  dark  night  of  heathendom  in  answer  to 
the  question,  What  of  the  night  ?  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  present  its  condition  in 
colours  that  are  too  dark.  We  speak  of  the  wickedness  of  our  home  population, 
and  bad  enough  it  is;  but  if  you  remember  how  much  is  done  to  discourage 
it ;  how  a  healthy  public  opinion  rebukes  it ;  how  Christianity  grapples  with  it, 
and  creates  an  atmosphere  which  is  inimical  to  its  existence,  so  that  those  who 
practise  it  are  made  to  feel  ashamed ;  and  when  you  consider,  on  the  other  hand, 
how  in  many  parts  of  heathendom  wickedness  is  actually  deified,  how  the  very 
gods  they  worship  are  incarnations  of  vice,  and  personifications  of  every  evil 
passion ;  how  in  many  instances  licentiousness  and  cruelty  are  enjoined  as  part 
of  their  religious  rites, — when  you  think  of  all  that,  you  can  understand  that  the 
wickedness  at  home  is  nothing  compared  with  that  which  exists  in  heathen  lands. 
To  some  minds  the  most  affecting  consideration  of  all  is  the  dishonour  done  to  the 
Almighty  by  their  religious  beliefs  and  ceremonies.  3.  But  is  the  Gospel  an 
appropriate  remedy  for  the  evils  of  which  we  speak  ?  You  want  the  world  to  be 
brought  back  to  God,  and  nothing  but  the  Gospel  of  Christ  will  suffice  for  that. 
Let  men  say  what  they  will,  the  world  is  not  to-day  what  it  was  when  Christianity 
dawned  upon  it.  Then  it  was  wrapt  in  total  darkness — a  darkness  that  might 
be  felt.  Now  the  light  of  the  Gospel  is  penetrating  the  darkest  parts  of  the  earth, 
and  many  nations  of  the  world  are  being  permeated  with  and  moulded  by  the 
influence  which  it  exerts.  Moreover,  it  is  advancing.  4.  When  the  Church 
enters  on  her  work  with  the  zeal  and  enthusiasm  which  it  ought  to  excite ;  when 
Bhe  drains  her  resources,  and  strains  every  nerve  to  secure  success;  when  she 
prays,  and  labours,  and  toils  for  it ;  when  she  gives  the  bulk  of  her  property  to  it ; 
when  she  sends  out  her  noblest  sons,  and  puts  forth  her  best  energies,  then,  perhaps, 
she  may  begin  to  talk  about  expecting  the  conversion  of  the  world  !  Think 
of  what  Christ  has  done  for  you,  and  then  bestir  yourselves  to  take  an  active 
interest  in  this  stupendous  work,  and  to  make  some  sacrifices  for  its  extension. 
(W.  Landels,  D.D.)  Inquire  ye:  return,  come. — Inquire;  return;  come: — 
I.  Inquire.  1.  Where  ?  Where  should  a  people  inquire,  but  at  their  God  ?  (chap, 
viii.  19,  20).      2.  How  ?     With  humility,  reverence,  and  desire  of  knowledge. 

3.  When  ?  In  the  morning  of  thy  years.  The  devil  is  a  false  sexton,  and  sets  the 
clock  too  slow,  that  the  night  comes  ere  we  be  aware.  Tarry  not,  then,  till  your 
piles  of  usuries,  heaps  of  deceits,  mountains  of  blasphemies,  have  caused  God  to 
hide  Himself,  and  will  not  be  found.  There  is  a  sera  nimis  hora,  time  too  late, 
which  Esau  fell  unluckily  into,  when  "  he  sought  the  blessing  with  tears,  and 
could  not   find    it."     II.  Return  from  your  sins  by  repentance.     ILL  Comb 


chap,  xxi.]  ISAIAH.  407 

home  to  God  by  obedience.  (T.  Adams.)  Destiny  determined  by  conduct  : — 
For  ourselves,  what  need  we  of  oracles  ?  Our  future  will  be  in  all  essential  things 
exactly  as  we  make  it.  The  sunshine  or  the  shadow  of  our  lives  is  less  in  our 
surroundings  than  ourselves.  The  oracle  of  God  to  man  is  not  silence ;  St.  Paul 
gave  it  long  ago,  "  God  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works,"  4c. 
(Rom.  ii.  6-11).     (Dean  Farrar,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-17.  The  burden  upon  Arabia. — Arabia: — The  term  "Arabia,"  in 
the  Old  Testament,  is  not  used  in  such  a  wide  sense  as  in  modern  English, 
and  denotes  merely  a  particular  tribe,  having  its  home  in  the  northern  part  of 
what  is  now  known  as  the  Arabian  peninsula,  and  mentioned  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  20, 
21,  by  the  side  of  Dedan  and  Kedar  as  engaged  in  commerce  with  Tyre.  Isaiah 
sees  a  tide  of  invasion  about  to  overflow  the  region  inhabited  by  these  tribes, 
and  addresses  the  Dedanite  caravans,  warning  them  that  they  will  have  to  turn 
aside  from  their  customary  routes  and  seek  concealment  in  the  "  forest."  In 
verse  14,  he  sees  in  imagination  the  natives  of  Tema  bringing  food  and  water  to 
the  fugitive  traders.  Tema  was  the  name  of  a  tribe  settled  in  the  same  neigh- 
bourhood, about  250  miles  S.E.  of  Edom,  on  the  route  between  Damascus  and 
Mecca,  in  a  locality  in  which  some  interesting  inscriptions  have  recently  been 
discovered.  Within  a  year,  the  prophet  concludes,  the  glory  of  the  wealthy 
pastoral  (chap.  lx.  7)  tribe  of  Kedar — here  used  so  as  to  include  by  implication 
its  less  influential  neighbours — will  be  past,  and  of  its  warriors  only  an  insignificant 
remnant  will  survive.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  Bedawin : — These 
were  the  carriers  of  the  world's  commerce  in  the  days  before  railways  were  intro- 
duced. As  country  after  country  was  feeling  the  consequences  of  the  advance 
of  Nineveh,  these  merchantmen  would  be  the  first  to  hear  the  news  with  alarm, 
and  in  many  cases  to  give  timely  assistance.  But  these  weakly  defended  caravans 
would  not  stand  long  before  the  armies  of  Sargon.     (B.  Blake,  B.D.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Within  a  year,  according  to  the  years  of  an  hireling',  and  all 
the  glory  of  Kedar  shall  fail.  —  End  of  the  year :  a  warning  and  a  lesson : — 
I.  A  terrible  threateninq.  We  have  here  a  prophecy  of  the  fall  of  a 
nation,  which  had  held  a  proud  position  by  reason  of  prowess  and  skill  in 
war.  But  glory  founded  on  physical  strength,  upon  wealth,  or  upon  power, 
may  speedily  fade  away.  With  all  the  study  of  economics  we  seem  to 
know  but  little  even  now,  and  we  have  found,  many  times  of  late,  how  trifling 
a  matter  may  lead  to  the  overthrow  of  existing  engagements  and  conditions. 
Much  less  stable  is  the  glory  of  a  nation  built  upon  the  strength  of  its  arms.  A 
nation's  glory  is  safe  only  when  it  is  founded  upon  righteousness  and  obedience 
to  God.  II.  A  time  fixed.  "Within  a  year."  How  different  the  feeling  in 
looking  back  over  a  year  and  looking  forward  !  The  retrospect — how  short  a 
time,  how  quickly  passed,  how  little  done,  and  yet  what  changes  have  taken  place  ! 
How  the  number  of  the  mighty  have  diminished !  The  prospect — what  a  long 
time,  what  hopes  we  have,  what  possibilities  are  in  it !  To  us  as  a  nation,  to  us 
in  our  families,  to  us  as  persons.  Are  we  prepared  for  them  ?  The  fall  of  tho 
glory  of  Kedar  was  announced  to  come  within  the  year.  Forbearance  must  have 
its  limits.  A  boundary  to  life,  to  sin,  to  indulgence ;  but  within  a  given  period 
the  time  of  reckoning  must  be  fixed.  III.  The  attitude  we  should  adopt. 
Standing  on  the  threshold  of  a  new  year,  let  us  consider  our  position.  Certain 
it  is  that  some  will  fall  "  within  the  year."  Men  shall  be  diminished.  Let  our 
influence,  by  example  and  precept,  be  exerted  to  found  our  national  glory,  not  upon 
our  skill  in  arms,  on  our  insular  position,  on  our  wealth,  but  upon  true  obedience 
to  God.  The  number  of  those  who  form  the  glory  of  the  Church  will  be  diminished 
this  year.  Are  the  younger  people  preparing  themselves  to  fill  the  vacant  places  ? 
There  is  a  warning  here,  that  those  who  trust  in  aught  but  in  Jehovah  will  find 
their  glory  naught  but  folly.  There  is  also  encouragement.  "  The  God  of  Israel 
hath  spoken  it."  To  him  that  walketh  uprightly  and  serveth  God  humbly,  shall 
glory  be  revealed  from  day  to  day,  until  the  full  glory  of  God  is  revealed  to  us 
in  the  life  beyond.  (Frank  Mabin.)  "According  to  the  years  of  an  hireling  "  ; — 
In  a  year's  time,  calculated  as  exactly  as  is  the  custom  between  employers  and 
employed,  Kedar's  freedom,  military  strength,  numbers,  and  wealth  shall  have 
vanished.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  "The  number  of  archers": — They  [the  sons  of 
Kedar]  are  numbered  here,  not  by  heads,  but  by  bows,  so  specifying  the  fighting 
men — a  mode  of  numbering  common,  e.g.,  among  the  Indians  of  America.     (Ibid.) 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

"  Within  a  year  "  : — A  sensible  person  said  he  could  never  covet  the  office  of 
chief  magistrate  of  London,  because  that  honour  continued  only  one  year.  Might 
not  the  idea  be  justly  extended  to  all  the  honours  and  enjoyments  of  this  life  T 
None  of  them  are  permanent.     (Anon.) 


CHAPTER  XXIL 


Veb.  1.  Th«  burden  of  the  valley  of  vision. — "  The  valley  of  vision  **  :-— 
This  expression  is  applied  to  Jerusalem,  where  Jehovah  was  pleased  to  givo 
visions  concerning  His  will  to  His  servants.  (B.  Blake,  B.D.)  The  valley 
of  vision : — It  is  quite  in  place,  in  so  far  as  round  Jerusalem  there  are 
mountains,  and  the  very  city,  which  in  relation  to  the  country  occupied  an  elevated 
position,  in  relation  to  the  mountains  of  the  immediate  neighbourhood  appeared 
to  stand  on  a  low  level.  Because  of  this  twofold  aspect  Jerusalem  is  called  ( Jer. 
xxi.  13)  the  "  inhabitant  of  the  valley,"  and  immediately  on  the  back  of  this 
the  "  rock  of  the  plain,"  and  (Jer.  xvii.  3)  the  "  mountain  in  the  fields,"  whereas 
(Zeph.  i.  11)  not  all  Jerusalem,  but  a  part  of  it  (probably  the  ravine  of  the  Tyro- 
paeum)  is  called  the  mortar,  or  as  we  say,  basin.  If  we  add  to  this  that  Isaiah's 
house  was  situated  in  the  lower  city,  and  that  therefore  the  point  of  view  from 
which  the  epithet  was  applied  was  there,  the  expression  is  perfectly  appropriate. 
(F.  Delitzsch.)  Jerusalem,  the  valley  of  vision: — Furthermore,  the  epithet  is 
intended  to  be  more  than  geographical.  A  valley  is  a  lonely,  quiet  depression, 
shut  in  and  cut  off  by  mountains.  Similarly  is  Jerusalem  the  sheltered,  peaceful 
place,  closed  against  the  world,  which  Jehovah  has  chosen  in  order  to  show  there 
to  His  prophets  the  secrets  of  His  government  of  the  world.  {Ibid.)  The 
valley  of  vision  spiritualised: — Where  Bibles  and  ministers  are,  there  is  a  valley 
of  vision,  from  which  is  expected  fruit  accordingly.  (M.  Henry.)  The  inex- 
piable sin  of  Jerusalem  : — The  key  to  this  passage  (vers.  1-14) — the  most  lurid 
and  minatory  of  all  Isaiah's  prophecies — is  the  irreconcilable  antagonism  between 
the  mood  of  the  prophet  ana  the  state  of  public  feeling  around  him.  In  a  time 
of  universal  mirth  and  festivity  he  alone  is  overwhelmed  with  grief  and  refuses 
to  be  comforted.  In  the  rejoicings  of  the  populace  he  reads  the  evidence  of  their 
hopeless  impenitence  and  insensibility,  and  he  concludes  his  discourse  by  express- 
ing the  conviction  that  at  last  they  have  sinned  beyond  the  possibility  of  pardon. 
The  circumstances  recall  our  Lord's  lamentation  over  Jerusalem  on  the  day 
of  His  triumphal  entry.  (J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  historical  allusion : — It 
may  be  regarded  as  certain  that  the  prophecy  belongs  to  the  period  of  Sen- 
nacherib's invasion  (701),  although  it  is  difficult  to  select  a  moment  when  all  the 
elements  of  the  highly  complex  situation  with  which  it  deals  might  have  been 
combined.  There  is  just  one  incident  that  seems  to  meet  the  requirements  of 
the  case,  namely,  the  raising  of  the  blockade  of  Jerusalem,  in  consequence  of 
Hezekiah's  ignominious  submission  to  the  terms  of  Sennacherib.  It  must  be 
noted  that  this  was  not  the  last  episode  in  that  memorable  campaign.  The 
real  crisis  came  a  little  later  when  the  Assyrian  king  endeavoured  by  threats 
to  extort  the  entire  surrender  of  the  capital.  It  was  only  at  that  juncture  that 
Hezekiah  unreservedly  accepted  the  policy  of  implicit  trust  in  Jehovah  which 
Isaiah  had  all  along  urged  on  him ;  and  it  was  then  that  the  prophet  stepped 
to  the  front  with  an  absolute  and  unconditional  assurance  that  Jerusalem  should 
not  be  violated.  That  the  earlier  deliverance  should  have  caused  an  outbreak 
of  popular  joy  is  intelligible  enough ;  as  it  is  also  intelligible  that  Isaiah  should 
have  kept  his  eye  fixed  on  the  dangers  yet  ahead.  The  allusions  to  the  recent 
blockade  are  amply  accounted  for,  and  the  prophet's  expectation  of  a  terrible 
disaster  yet  in  store  is  obviously  based  on  his  view  of  the  continued  and  aggra- 
vated impenitence  of  his  countrymen.  (Ibid.)  What  aileth  thee  now? — 
A  mad  holiday  : — In  these  words  we  can  hear  the  old  man  addressing  his  fickle 
child,  whose  changefulness  by  this  time  he  knew  so  well.  We  see  him  standing 
at  his  door  watching  this  ghastly  holiday.  "  What  are  you  rejoicing  at  in  such 
an  hour  as  this,  when  you  have  not  even  the  bravery  of  your  soldiers  to  celebrate, 
when  you  are  without  that  pride  which  has  brought  songs  from  the  lips  of  a 
defeated  people  as  they  learned  that  their  sons  had  fallen  with  their  faces  to 


chat,  xxn.]  ISAIAH.  409 

the  foe,  and  has  made  even  the  wounds  of  the  dead  borne  through  the  gate  lips 
of  triumph,  calling  to  festival  T "  (Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  A  new  year's 
question : — I.  It  specially  designates  "  thee."  There  is  an  identity  in  human 
experience.  But  there  is  at  the  same  time  an  intense  personality  in  each  one 
of  us,  secrets  in  our  experience — secret  struggles,  failures,  motives,  emotions. 

II.  A  specific  time — "now."     Not  the  past — or  the  future — but  the  present. 

III.  The  ailment.  IV.  The  query  is  suggestive,  as  though  the  prophet's 
inquiries  were  made  with  a  view  to  a  remedy.  What  is  the  speciflo  for  the 
ailment  ?    Wealth,  &c.  ?    No  !  personal  salvation.     (Preachers'  Magazine.) 

Ver.  11.  Ya  have  not  looked  unto  the  Maker  thereof. — A  godless  prudent*? — 
They  take  measures  to  supply  the  city  with  water  during  its  siege,  and  to 
cut  it  off,  if  possible,  from  the  besiegers.  "  Why,"  as  it  is  written  in  the 
history  which  gives  us  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  "  should  the  kings  of 
Assyria  come  and  find  much  water  T  "  Where  this  fails  everything  fails,  for 
water,  next  to  the  air  we  breathe,  is  the  first  necessity  of  human  life.  There  are, 
it  seems,  certain  streams  or  pools  of  water  fed  with  springs  outside  the  city,  and 
these  they  manage  to  divert,  so  that  they  flow  now  away  from  the  besiegers 
and  in  favour  of  the  besieged.  The  city  has  two  walls,  and  between  these 
two — the  inner  and  the  outer — a  ditch  or  trench  is  dug,  and  the  water  of  the 
old  pool  made  to  flow  into  it,  forming  at  once  as  a  moat  some  kind  of  protection 
for  the  inner  wall,  should  the  outer  De  broken  down,  and  also  a  supply  for  the 
use  of  the  inhabitants.  All  this  was  right  and  reasonable,  and  no  blame  could 
be  laid  upon  the  authorities  for  taking  these  precautions.  But  there  is  blame 
in  this,  that  notwithstanding  they  are  the  Lord's  chosen  people,  and  have  ever 
been  taught  that  they  owe  all  they  have  to  Him,  yet  they  do  not  recognise  Him 
as  the  bountiful  Lord  and  gracious  Giver.  (J.  W.  Lance.)  Man's  use  of 
God' 8  gifts  : — We  have  here  a  kind  of  type  and  pattern  of  the  infirmity  so  common 
to  human  nature,  namely,  forgetfulness  of  God  in  the  use  and  appropriation 
of  those  things  which  He  has  provided  for  us.  I.  Look,  e.g.,  at  the  Divine  pro- 
visions in  the  great  store-houses  of  nature.  See  how  by  invention  and 
discovery  we  turn  these  to  account,  perceiving  in  some  instances  forces  which, 
though  old,  are  new  to  us,  and  in  others  ingeniously  applying  old  and  well-known 
forces  to  new  purposes  in  the  advancement  of  civilisation  and  for  the  comfort 
and  convenience  of  life.  It  is  written  concerning  man  in  the  Book  of  Psalms, 
"Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion  over  the  works  of  Thy  hands."  II.  Let 
us  take  up  the  more  familiar  theme  of  daily  providence.  We  can  see  God  in 
clouds,  we  can  hear  Him  in  the  wind ;  He  is  sometimes  near  to  us  in  the  earth- 
quake and  the  fire,  as  well  as  in  the  still  small  voice ;  but  we  often  fail  to  see 
Him  in  those  common  mercies  which  are  yet  new  every  morning  and  fresh  every 
evening.  Consider  that  loaf  of  bread  on  your  table.  It  should  be  to  you  a 
revelation ;  and  that  it  may  be  so,  find  out  its  genesis.  It  was  flour  yesterday 
or  the  day  before,  and  it  came,  perhaps,  from  France,  or  Spain,  or  America,  where 
it  was  grown  as  wheat — came  to  you  across  the  ocean,  God's  own  highway  in 
the  wilderness  of  waters.  Long  ago  He  fashioned  those  grains  of  wheat,  and 
put  into  them  such  force  of  life  that  a  handful  or  less,  found  in  an  Egyptian 
mummy  three  thousand  years  old,  when  planted  in  English  soil,  have  grown  and 
brought  forth  thirty,  sixty,  or  a  hundredfold.  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread," 
simplest  of  all  prayers  as  it  seems,  is  really  asking  that  nature's  forces  may  con- 
tinue to  be  filled  and  sustained  by  Him  who  made  them ;  and  that  the  industries 
of  life  may  go  on  working  harmoniously  with  the  gracious  providence  of  God, 
for  without  these  links  human  and  Divine  in  the  great  golden  chain,  our  daily 
bread  would  cease,  m.  In  religion,  too,  we  may  see  how  the  Divine  gifts 
have  been  used,  and,  alas  !  too  often  abused,  in  blind  forgetfulness  of  the  Divine 
Giver.  Man  is  a  creature  who  can  no  more  do  without  religion  "  than  he  can 
do  without  money,  without  clothing,  without  houses,  or  without  food.  But 
though  naturally  religious,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is  godly.  We  may  make 
to  ourselves  a  religion  without  God.  One  of  the  charges  brought  by  the  apostle 
Paul  against  those  who  had  formed  the  most  elaborate  and  complex  religious 
systems  was,  that  they  did  not  "  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge."  The 
religious  faculty,  God-given,  in  some  sort  they  exercised,  but  they  lost  sight 
of  Him  the  Giver.  They  lost  His  unity  among  their  myriad  gods  and  goddesses, 
and  so  Israel's  mission  was  to  declare,  Hear,  O  Israel,  the  Lord  our  God  is  one 
Lord."    They  lost  sight,  too,  of  His  justice ;  for  though  they  said,  "  The  gods 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn. 

are  just,"  yet  when  we  read  the  story  of  their  lives,  their  vices,  and  their  crimes, 
every  idea  of  justice  is  shocked  and  revolted ;  and  as  to  these  gods,  they  thai 
make  them  are  like  unto  them.  It  may  be,  too,  that  in  our  own  theologies  w© 
have  not  been  in  this  respect  free  from  fault.  Even  in  Christian  theology  the 
"  Theos,"  the  personal  God,  may  have  been  too  much  lost  sight  of.  It  may 
be,  as  is  sometimes  charged  upon  us,  that  we  think  of  God  as  a  "  bundle  of 
attributes,"  rather  than  as  a  living  Father  revealed  to  us  in  the  Christ. 
IV.  In  Christian  ordinances  let  us  always  see  the  Giver.  Unless  we  do 
so,  use  in  them  there  is  none.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  12-14.  And  In  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  call  to  weeping  .  .  . 
And  behold  Joy  and  gladness. — A  call  to  repentance  : — I.  The  call  to  repent, 
ance  (ver.  12).  1.  The  day  here  referred  to  was  a  season  of  abounding  iniquity. 
2.  A  day  of  sore  trouble  (vers.  4,  5).  II.  The  reception  it  met  with  (ver.  13). 
There  is  no  room  to  suppose  that  they  had  given  no  attention  to  the  message 
delivered  by  the  prophet.  It  would  rather  appear  that  they  had  attended  to 
it  with  accuracy,  nay,  studied  its  meaning  on  purpose  to  counteract  it ;  for  a 
contrast  so  minutely  exact,  a  scheme  of  contradiction  so  completely  adjusted,  could 
hardly  have  been  stumbled  upon  by  mere  accident.  And  indeed  the  latter  part 
of  the  verse  puts  this  beyond  all  doubt,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,"  said  they,  for 
to-morrow  we  shall  die."  We  are  not  to  imagine  that  these  words  were  spoken 
seriously,  by  one  of  those  presumptuous  and  boasting  rebels.  The  most  daring 
amongst  them  must  have  been  conscious  that  the  aspect  of  the  king  of  terrors, 
at  their  most  sumptuous  entertainments,  would  leave  them  no  appetite  either 
for  flesh  or  wine.  They  meant  it  as  a  scoff,  a  witty  saying,  for  turning  into  ridicule 
the  warning  they  had  received,  but  which  they  did  not  believe.  It  is  common 
enough  to  condemn  the  same  faults  in  others  which  we  easily  forgive,  nay,  cherish 
in  ourselves.  III.  The  alarming  denunciation  of  wrath  against  those  per- 
verse and  obstinate  transgressors  (ver.  14).  IV.  Improvement.  What  concern 
have  we  in  these  things  ?  ( 1  Cor.  x.  11).  God  is  always  the  same.  And  therefore, 
in  His  past  acts  of  government,  as  they  are  explained  by  His  Word,  we  behold 
a  plan  of  righteous  administration,  from  whence  we  may  learn,  with  some  degree 
of  certainty,  what  kind  of  treatment,  in  similar  circumstances,  we  ourselves  have 
reason  to  expect.  (H.  Blair,  D.D.)  God's  call  to  repentance : — The  awful 
state  of  Jerusalem  forces  this  truth  upon  our  minds — that  no  privileges,  civil  or 
religious,  can  give  immunity  to  a  depraved  and  guilty  people,  from  the  threatened 
judgments  of  an  angry  God.  In  how  many  instances  do  the  circumstances  and 
the  conduct  of  the  ancient  Jews  strikingly  resemble  ours  !  I.  The  duty  to 
which  God  calls  us.  We  are  called  to  "  weeping  and  to  mourning,  and  to 
baldness,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth" — these  expressions  being  indicative  of 
the  ancient  forms  of  mourning.  We  are  called  by  our  calamities  to  it ;  we  are 
called  by  our  God.  II.  The  conduct  which  is  displayed.  "  And  behold 
joy  and  gladness,  slaying  oxen  and  killing  sheep,  eating  flesh  and  drinking  wine: 
let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die  " — a  sensualist  notion,  which  may 
be  taken  here  either  as  the  language  of  despair — "  Since  we  must  die  to-morrow, 
let  us  eat  and  drink  to-day  "  ;  or,  in  the  way  of  sneering — "  They  say  we  shall 
die ;  let  us  eat  and  drink  then,  and  enjoy  as  much  as  we  can  of  the  good  things 
of  this  life."  III.  The  threatening  which  is  denounced  (ver.  14).  God's 
threatenings  are  not  idle  declamations.  (O.  B.  Macdonald.)  Judah's  great 
folly  : — They  were  entering  on  the  terrible  issues  of  the  struggle  with  Assyria 
with  as  light  a  heart  as  the  Parisians  did  on  the  Franco-German  war.  They 
were  spending,  as  it  were,  the  night  before  the  battle  in  the  revelry  of  drunken 
mirth,  as  the  Saxons  spent  the  night  before  the  battle  of  Hastings.  (E.  H. 
Plumptre,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15-19.  Shebna. — Shebna  : — In  the  councils  of  Hezekiah  there  was  a 
strong  party  favourable  to  an  alliance  between  Judah  and  Egypt.  At  the  head 
of  the  party  stood  Shebna.  He  occupied  a  post  corresponding  to  that  of  our 
prime  minister,  and  was  treasurer,  or  chief  adviser  of  the  king.  His  tenure  of 
office  bode  no  good  to  Jerusalem  :  his  pro-Egyptian  policy,  like  the  pro-Assyrian 
policy  of  Ahaz,  was  utterly  displeasing  to  Jehovah,  and  alien  to  the  best  traditions- 
of  David's  house.  Against  this  policy  Isaiah  is  specially  commissioned  to  raise 
his  voice.  In  the  discharge  of  this  mission  he  singles  out  Shebna,  a  stranger 
apparently,  who  had  by  ambition  raised  himself  to  high  office,  and  was  devoid 


chap,  xxn.]  ISAIAH.  411 

of  religious  principle.  He  had  been  securing  honour  for  himself,  establishing 
his  family  in  the  land,  as  he  thought,  and,  as  the  custom  was,  hewing  out  for 
himself  a  sepulchre.  But  from  that  high  office  he  would  soon  be  disgracefully 
ousted,  when  king  and  people  would  alike  come  to  see  the  unworthy  character 
of  an  Egyptian  alliance.  And  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  this  prophecy  wai 
speedily  fulfilled.  For  when  the  Rabshakeh  is  met  by  Hezekiah  s  messengers, 
Shebna  does  not  occupy  the  first  place.  (B.  Blake,  B.D.)  The  prophecy  con- 
cerning Shebna  : — This  prophecy  illustrates  the  influence  wielded  by  Isaiah  in 
the  domestic  politics  of  Judah.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D. )  Shebna  a  foreigner  .•— 
To  judge  from  the  form  of  his  name  he  was  probably  a  Syrian.  (Ibid. )  Shebna'* 
vain  expectation  : — In  the  rock  of  [the  east  slope  of  Zion]  from  the  top  downward1) 
the  tombs  of  the  kings  were  hewn.  So  high  a  position  does  Shebna  occupy,  and 
so  great  does  he  think  himself,  that  he  hopes  after  his  death  to  be  laid  to  rest 
among  kings,  and  by  no  means  far  down.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Shebna' 8  tomb  : — The 
mention  of  the  height  of  Shebna's  new  tomb  is  supposed  to  indicate  his  extreme 
pretension  to  pomp  and  dignity.  The  ancients,  not  excepting  the  Jews,  attached 
much  more  importance  than  we  do  to  everything  connected  with  the  burial  of 
the  dead,  because  they  were  so  much  less  able  to  distinguish  the  human  person 
from  the  earthly  body,  or  to  apprehend  the  substantial  reality  of  the  former  apart 
from  the  latter.  Our  burials  symbolise,  and  express  our  faith  in,  immortality 
and  a  resurrection ;  but  the  Jews  shared  more  or  less  the  common  feeling  of 
antiquity  that  there  was  some  real  connection  between  a  man's  due  obsequies 
and  his  state  after  death.  Still  their  faith,  though  obscure,  was  in  the  main 
spiritual  and  elevating,  when  held  as  it  was  by  David,  Hezekiah,  or  Job.  But  the 
worldly  and  sense-bound  man  then,  as  indeed  he  does  now,  contemplated  the 
costly  preparations  for  his  burial,  and  for  the  preservation  of  his  embalmed 
and  entombed  body,  as  the  last  possible  act  of  regard  for  that  sensual  existence 
which  he  alone  cared  for.  It  was  but  the  consistent  maintenance  to  the  last  of 
his  sensual  creed,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die."  (Sir  E. 
Strachey,  Bart.) 

Ver  18.  He  will  surely  violently  turn  and  toss  thee  like  a  ball. — Shebna' a 

doom  : — To  this  unfamilied  intruder,  who  had  sought  to  establish  himself  in 
Jerusalem,  after  the  manner  of  those  days,  by  hewing  himself  a  great  sepulchre, 
Isaiah  brought  sentence  of  violent  banishment :  "  Behold,  Jehovah  will  be 
hurling,  hurling  thee  away,  thou  big  man,  and  crumpling,  crumpling  thee  together. 
He  will  roll,  roll  thee  on,  thou  rolling-stone,  like  a  ball  thrown  out  on  broad,  level 
ground ;  there  shalt  thou  die,  and  there  shall  be  the  chariots  of  thy  glory,  thou 
shame  of  the  house  of  thy  lord.  And  I  thrust  thee  from  thy  post,  and  from  thy 
station  do  they  pull  thee  down."  This  vagabond  was  not  to  die  in  his  bed,  nor 
to  be  gathered  in  his  big  tomb  to  the  people  on  whom  he  had  foisted  himself. 
(Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Shebna's  doom: — For  him,  like  Cain,  there  was  a 
land  of  Nod  ;  and  upon  it  he  was  to  find  a  vagabond's  death.  (Ibid.)  Shebna's 
ejection : — The  ideas  suggested  are  those  of  violence,  rapidity,  and  distance. 
(J.  A.  Alexander.)  Retribution  : — Those  that,  when  they  are  in  power,  turn 
and  toss  others,  will  be  justly  turned  and  tossed  themselves  when  their  day 
shall  come  to  fall.  Many  that  have  thought  themselves  fastened  like  a  nail  may 
come  to  be  tossed  like  a  ball,  for  here  have  we  no  continuing  city.  Shebna  thought 
his  place  too  strait  for  him,  he  had  no  room  to  thrive  ;  God  will,  therefore,  send 
him  into  "  a  large  country,"  where  he  shall  have  room  to  wander,  but  never  find 
the  way  back  again.  (M.  Henry.)  The  irresistibleness  of  God's  judgments  : — 
Learn — I.  The  bash  with  which  God  effects  His  judgments.     II.  The 

UTTER  USELESSNESS  OF  ANY  RESISTANCE  TO  THE  DlVTNB  JUDGMENTS.      As  SUTely 

as  a  ball  must  follow  the  line  of  projection,  so  surely  must  we  go  whither  the 
judgments  of  God  carry  us.  III.  The  awfulness  of  falling  into  the  hands 
of  the  living  God.     (W.  Manning.) 

Vers.  20-25.  My  servant  Eliakim.  —  "  My  servant  Eliakim  "  :  —  Who  was 
he  T  Nobody  can  tell.  Where  else  is  he  referred  to  in  Holy  Writ  T  Probably 
nowhere.  Was  he  then  a  man  without  renown  ?  That  depends  npon  what 
you  mean  by  renown,  for  he  is  indicated  in  the  text  by  terms  which  imply  infinite 
fame.  Say  "  Eliakim,"  and  nobody  knows  him  ;  say  "  My  servant  Eliakim," 
and  obscurity  rises  up  into  eminence  unrivalled  and  never  to  be  surpassed. 
{J.   Parker,  D.D.)        Renown,   nominal  and  moral : — Renown,  then,  may  be 


412  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

nominal,  or  it  may  be  moral.  Nominal  renown  is  a  thine  that  comes  and  goes, 
a  coloured  cloud,  a  bubble  on  the  river,  a  noise  in  the  air,  nothing  that  is  sub- 
stantial, nothing  that  is  beneficent  in  itself  ;  but  moral  renown,  the  renown  of 
goodness,  the  fame  of  character,  the  reputation  associated  with  deeds  of  sacrifice 
or  valour — that  is  a  renown  which  lives  in  heaven.  (Ibid.)  Eliakim  and 
Christ : — The  language  here  used  about  Eliakim  finds  its  perfect  fulfilment  only 
in  Him  whose  supreme  prerogative  it  is  so  to  open  that  no  man  can  shut,  even 
Jesus  Christ.  {B.  Blake,  B.D.)  The  power  of  the  keys  (ver.  22)  consists  not 
merely  in  supervision  of  the  royal  chambers,  but  also  in  the  decision  as  to  who 
was  and  who  was  not  to  be  received  into  the  king's  service.  (F.  Delitzsch.) 
Eliakim  :  the  nail  and  the  throne  : — A  nation's  rulers  (Zech.  x.  4)  stand  in  the 
same  relation  to  the  community  as  a  tent-peg  to  the  tent  which  it  holds  firmly 
and  keeps  up.  As  the  tent-peg  is  driven  into  the  ground  in  such  a  way  that  a 
person  can,  if  necessary,  sit  on  it,  so  by  development  of  the  metaphor  the  peg 
is  changed  into  a  seat  of  honour.  As  a  splendid  chair  adorns  a  room,  so  Eliakim 
graces  his  hitherto  undistinguished  family.  The  closely  connected  thought, 
that  the  members  of  his  family  in  order  to  attain  to  honours  would  sit  on  this 
chair,  is  expressed  by  a  different  figure.  Eliakim  is  once  more  presented  to  us 
as  a  "  nail,"  now,  however,  as  a  high  one,  somewhat  like  a  pole  on  which  coats 
are  hung  up,  or  as  a  peg  driven  into  the  wall  at  a  distance  from  the  ground.  On 
this  pole  or  peg  they  hang — i.e.,  one  hangs  or  there  hangs — the  whole  heavy  lot 
(as  in  chap.  viii.  7)  of  the  family  of  Eliakim.  The  prophet  proceeds  to  split  up 
this  family  into  its  male  and  female  components,  as  the  juxtaposition  of  masculine 
and  feminine  nouns  shows.  (Ibid.)  The  kingdom  and  government  of  the 
glorious  Messiah  typified  by  Eliakim 's  preferment  and  promotion  : — I.  Eliakim's 
call  unto  his  honourable  employment,  whereby  is  represented  Christ's  call  unto 
His  mediatory  work  and  office  (ver.  20).  Christ  did  not  run  unsent.  II.  The 
badges  of  honour  bestowed  upon  Him  in  consequence  of  His  call  (vers.  21,  22). 

1.  He  is  clothed  with  a  royal  robe.  So  Christ  is  clothed  (Rev.  i.)  with  a  garment 
down  to  the  foot,  that  serves  to  cover  and  adorn  Himself  and  all  His  members. 

2.  He  is  strengthened  with  a  girdle,  a  girdle  of  truth  and  faithfulness  ;  He  is 
always  ready  girded  for  the  execution  of  His  work.  3.  He  hath  the  keys  of  the 
house  committed  to  Him,  and  the  sole  government ;  He  opens,  and  none  shuts, 
&c.  The  keys  of  the  heart,  and  the  keys  of  hell  and  death  are  in  His  hand. 
III.  His  confirmation  in  His  honourable  office  and  station.  He  is  "fastened 
as  a  nail  in  a  sure  place."  Christ  is  nailed  in  His  mediatory  work  and  office  by 
an  eternal  decree  (Psa.  ii.  7),  and  by  the  oath  of  God  (Psa.  ex.  4) ;  and  all  the 
powers  of  hell  and  earth  shall  never  loose  this  nail.  IV.  We  are  here  told  to 
what  advantage  He  should  discharge  His  trust.  "  He  shall  be  for  a  glorious 
throne  to  His  Father's  house."  God  manifested  in  the  flesh  is  the  throne  of 
grace  to  which  we  are  called  to  come  with  boldness  ;  and  this  may  well  be  called 
"  a  glorious  throne,"  because  there  is,  in  this  dispensation  of  grace,  the  brightest 
display  of  the  glory  of  God.  Christ  is  the  ornament  of  His  Father's  house,  the 
brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the  brightest  crown  that  ever  adorned  the  human 
nature.  V.  Christ's  pre-eminence  in  God's  family,  and  the  dependence  of 
all  the  domestics  upon  Him  (ver.  24).  1.  The  designation  given  unto  the  Church 
of  God;  "  the  house  of  the  God  and  Father  of  Christ."  2.  The  nature  and 
quality  of  the  house ;  there  is  "  glory  "  in  it.  3.  The  high  and  honourable  station 
that  Christ  hath  in  His  Father's  house ;  He  is  the  great  Master-household,  and 
the  whole  family  is  committed  to  Him,  and  is  said  to  "  hang  upon  Him  as  a  nail 
fastened  in  a  sure  place."  4.  The  common  consent  of  the  whole  family  unto  His 
management;  they  shall  hang  upon  Him  all  the  glory,  &c. ;  i.e.,  the  Father  of 
the  family,  and  the  whole  offspring  of  the  house,  concur  amicably  that  He  should 
have  the  sole  management.  5.  Some  account  of  the  furniture  of  the  house,  com- 
mitted to  the  management  of  the  great  New  Testament  Eliakim.  (1)  The  glory. 
(2)  The  offspring  and  issue.  (3)  The  vessels  of  small  quantity,  from  vessels  of 
cups,  even  to  all  the  vessels  of  flagons.  By  which  we  are  to  understand  believers, 
for  they  are  the  children  of  God,  and  the  seed  of  Christ  by  regeneration  ;  and  like- 
wise called  "  vessels,"  because  they  are  the  recipient  subjects  of  Divine  grace, 
which  is  the  wine,  milk,  and  honey  of  the  house.     (E.  Erskine.) 

Ver.  23.  And  I  will  fasten  him  as  a  nail  in  a  sure  place. — The  fastening 
hold  of  Christ  :  —  The  fastening  force  of  Christ  upon  the  soul  of  humanity  is 
Been — I.  In  His  hold  upon  the  general  mind  of  the  world.     Who,  through- 


•chap,  xxn.]  ISAIAH.  413 

out  the  history  of  the  ages,  have  laid  such  a  firm  grip  upon  mankind  as  Christ 
has  ?  It  is  true  that  Buddha,  Zoroaster,  Confucius,  Mohammed,  have  had — and 
still  have — a  firm  hold  on  millions  of  souls.  Some  of  them  have  a  far  wider 
influence  than  that  of  Christ,  but  they  are  not  fastened  so  firmly.  1.  Philosophy 
shows  this.  Their  systems — if  systems  they  can  be  called — only  appeal  to 
certain  faculties  in  human  nature;  Christ  grasps  the  entire  man — intellect,  imagina- 
tion, conscience,  hope,  fear,  love.  2.  History  shows  this.  Heathenism  does 
not  encroach  upon  Christianity.  Christians  are  not  converted  to  Zoroaster, 
Confucius,  &c,  but  their  followers  are  converted  to  Christianity  every  day. 
Heathendom  is  contracting,  Christendom  is  extending  on  all  hands.  Its  language, 
its  literature,  its  institutions,  are  pushing  themselves  everywhere.  The  "nail" 
is  made  so  fast,  that  to  extract  it  would  be  to  tear  the  world  to  pieces.  II.  In 
His  hold  upon  the  consecrated  mind  of  His  disciples.  His  hold  here  is 
far  firmer  than  His  hold  on  the  general  mind.  He  goes  deeper  into  humanity, 
He  takes  hold  of  the  entire  soul,  and  makes  it  captive.  Or,  to  change  the  figure, 
He  strikes  His  roots  into  every  faculty  of  the  soul.  He  becomes  to  the  human 
spirit  in  thi3  case  what  the  sap  is  to  the  tree.  You  must  tear  the  soul  to  pieces — 
nay,  you  must  annihilate  it — before  you  can  extract  this  "nail."  (Homilist.) 
A  nail  in  a  sure  place  : — I.  The  lesson  of  the  nail  ;  that  little  things  may  be 
very  important  things.  We  read  when  David  prepared  for  the  building  of  the 
temple,  '  he  prepared  iron  in  abundance  for  the  nails  for  the  doors  of  the  gates." 
So  all  preparation  for  training,  for  education,  for  the  formation  of  character,  is 
a  kind  of  holy  iron,  hereafter  to  be  fashioned  into  nails  for  the  "  sure  place." 
And  if  you  turn  to  Ezra  ix.  8,  you  will  find  the  good  man  even  makes  this  a 
matter  of  prayer,  that  "  God  would  give  him  a  nail  in  His  holy  place  " — that  is, 
that  he  and  his  might  have  a  place  of  security,  however  insignificant  it  might  be  ; 
for  a  nail,  small  as  it  is,  speaks  of  security,  it  fastens  things.  There  is  an  old 
proverb  which  says  how,  "  for  want  of  a  nail  the  shoe  was  lost,  for  want  of  a  shoo 
the  horse  was  lost,  for  want  of  a  horse  the  rider  was  lost."  II.  The  sure  place. 
From  which  you  learn,  that  even  things  good  in  themselves  must  be  in  a  good 
place,  in  order  that  they  may  be  of  any  good.  For  instance — 1.  Good  words,  in 
order  that  they  may  do  good,  need  good  memories  ;  and  the  good  memory  is  the 
w  sure  place."  2.  A  good  example  in  a  fruitful  life  is  "  a  nail  in  a  sure  place." 
3.  Faith  fixed  on  a  good  object  is  "  a  nail  in  a  sure  place."  Faith  is  not  always 
good  ;  people  may  believe  lies.  If  you  look  to  Christ  and  trust  in  Him  there 
will  be  the  "  nail  in  the  sure  place."  III.  The  lesson  of  the  fastening.  1.  In 
order  to  the  fastening  a  nail  needs  guiding.  You  will  need  strength,  help,  and 
guidance  from  God.  2.  Fastened.  Some  things,  once  fixed,  are  fixed  for  ever. 
What  a  dreadful  thing  it  is,  to  think  that  this  applies,  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  say 
and  to  see,  to  bad  things  !  Habit  fixes  a  man  like  "  a  nail  in  a  sure  place,"  fixes 
his  ways  of  thought  and  life  so  that  it  seems  as  if  he  is  immovable  ;  for  every 
time  we  repeat  a  wrong  thing,  it  is  driven  farther  and  farther  into  our  life.  See 
to  it,  as  you  value  your  happiness  for  time  and  eternity,  that,  if  you  are  fastened 
as  "  a  nail  in  a  sure  place,"  it  shall  be  a  good  place.  3.  In  a  good  place,  fastened. 
"  Be  steadfast,  immovable  "  :  act  in  such  a  manner  that  the  bad  people  shall 
never  have  any  hopes  of  getting  you  over  on  their  side,  or  of  drawing  you  out  of 
your  sure  place.  (Ibid.)  Nails  in  Eastern  houses : — These  nails,  or  pegs,  when 
employed  in  houses,  were  not  driven  into  the  walls  after  the  building  was  finished, 
but  were  worked  in  while  the  building  was  going  up.  The  strong  hooks,  or  spikes, 
thus  secured  in  the  mortar  answered  the  double  purpose  of  clamp-irons  to  hold  the 
walls  together,  and  of  nails  on  which  anything  could  be  hung.  (J.  JV.  Norton.) 
The  nail  in  a  sure  place  : — The  promise  concerning  Eliakim  amounts  to  this  : 
"  I  will  so  build  him  up  into  My  spiritual  temple  (so  the  Almighty  may  be  supposed 
to  say),  that  he  himself  may  be  securely  fixed  in  it,  and  that  others  also  may  safely 
depend  on  him  for  help  and  counsel."  As  Eliakim  was  a  type  of  Christ,  we  have 
in  this  similitude  an  instructive  lesson,  both  of  our  duty  and  our  happiness.  On 
Him  we  must  hang  our  hopes  and  interests,  both  with  respect  to  our  own  salvation, 
and  to  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  Church.     I.  Eliakim  was  a  type  of  Christ 

IN  BEING  THE  SUCCESSOR  OF  ONE  WHO  HAD  PROVED  HIMSELF  UNWORTHY  OF  HI3 

office.  As  the  haughty  and  unprincipled  Shebna  gave  place  to  a  man  whom 
no  selfish  interests  could  possibly  influence,  so  were  the  corrupt  and  evil-minded 
rulers  of  the  Jewish  nation  to  be  set  aside  at  the  appearance  of  the  Messiah  who 
was  to  govern  the  world  in  righteousness.  IL  Again,  Eliakim  was  a  type  of 
Christ,  in  the  authority  entrusted  to  him.    As  the  successor  of  the  faithleM 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Tchap.  xxn. 

Shebna  was  honoured  by  having  "  the  key  of  the  house  of  David  laid  upon  his 
shoulder,"  in  token  of  the  unlimited  authority  which  he  was  thenceforth  to 
exercise,  so  was  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  entrusted  with  "  all  power  in  heaven  and 
earth  " ;  and  we  find  Him  adopting  the  same  lofty  terms  to  describe  His  own  regal 
attributes  (Rev.  iii.  7).  III.  A  third  particular  in  which  Eliakim  may  be  con- 
sidered as  a  type  of  Christ,  is  in  the  benefits  and  blessings  secured  by  his 
righteous  rule.  Eliakim,  we  are  told,  was  "  a  father  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  and  to  the  house  of  Judah,"  but  the  benefits  of  the  wisest  administra- 
tion of  man  are  few  and  insignificant,  when  compared  with  those  which  are  secured 
to  the  world  by  the  glorious  reign  of  the  Prince  of  Peace.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  24.  And  they  shall  hang  upon  him  all  the  glory  of  his  father's  house — 
Eliakim1 8  family : — The  vessels,  large  and  small,  are  figures  of  the  various 
members  of  Eliakim's  family.  As  vessels  of  every  kind  are  suspended  upon 
a  nail,  so  will  Eliakim's  connections,  rich  and  poor  alike,  support  them- 
selves upon  his  new  dignity.  (Prof.  8.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  Oriental  display 
of  wealth  : — A  large  part  of  the  wealth  of  the  ancients  consisted  of  gold  and 
silver  vessels,  and  in  changes  of  showy  raiment,  of  which  they  made  an  osten- 
tatious display,  by  hanging  them  on  the  spikes  along  the  walls.  It  was  also 
common  to  suspend  in  houses  and  temples,  suits  of  armour,  swords,  shields, 
and  helmets  ;  the  spoils  of  war,  or  the  heirlooms  of  honoured  ancestors  (Song 
Sol.  iv.  4).  (J.  N.  Norton.)  Christ  the  sole  Manager  of  the  Church  : — I.  The 
Church  is  the  house  of  God  (chap.  ii.  2,  3  ;  Heb.  iii.  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5).  1.  He 
is   the   Founder  of    the  house.      2.  The  Purchaser.      3.  The  sole  Proprietor. 

4.  Here  He  hath  His  abode.  Hence,  it  must  be  a  very  glorious  structure.  The 
plan  of  it  was  laid  by  infinite  wisdom  from  all  eternity  (Prov.  ix.  1).  (1)  The 
foundation  of  the  house  is  glorious.     (2)  The  form.     (3)  The  door  (John  x.  9). 

(4)  The  pillars  (Prov.  ix.  1).  These  are  the  perfections  of  the  Divine 
nature  as  they  are  manifested  in  Christ.  (5)  The  ordinances.  II.  Christ  is 
constituted  the  great  Manager  of  His  Father's  house.  1.  In  the  council 
of  peace,  from  eternity,  He  was  chosen  to  be  the  Builder  of  the  house  (Zech. 
vi.  12,  13).  2.  He  is  the  everlasting  Father  of  the  family  (chap.  ix.  6).  3.  The 
great  Oracle  and  Counsellor  (chap.  ix.  6).     4.  The  great   Priest  (Heb.  x.  21). 

5.  The  great  Lord -Treasurer,  yea,  the  treasury  (Col.  i.  19 ;  John  i.  16).  6.  The 
great  Lord-Steward  or  Dispenser.  7.  The  Lawgiver.  III.  Christ  is  fixed  in 
the  management  of  the  house  of  God,  as  a  nail  in  a  sure  place.  1.  There 
is  an  irreversible  decree  passed  in  heaven  that  He  should  be  the  sole  Manager 
and  Governor  of  the  house  (Psa.  ii.  6,  7).  2.  He  is  fixed  in  the  administra- 
tion of  the  house  with  the  solemnity  of  a  covenant  transaction  (Psa.  lxxxix.  3). 
3.  With  the  solemnity  of  an  oath  taken  by  the  great  Jehovah.  4.  In  His 
oath  He  pledges  the  most  dazzling  perfection  of  His  nature.  He  will  as  soon 
cease  to  be  a  holy  God,  as  suffer  His  Son's  authority  in  His  house  to  be  over- 
turned.    5.  He  is  fixed  in  the  management  by  a  solemn  call  and  investiture. 

6.  By  an  actual  possession  of  the  throne  (Phil.  ii.  9-11).  7.  By  a  complete 
victory  over  all  His  and  His  Church's  enemies,  so  that  none  of  them  are  capable  to 
give  Him  the  least  disturbance.  IV.  The  whole  house,  with  all  its  appur- 
tenances, HANGS  OR  DEPENDS  UPON  THIS  BLESSED  NATL  THAT  IS  FASTENED 
in  a  sure  place.  1.  All  the  glory  of  the  house  hangs  upon  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
(1)  God's  presence  in  a  Church  makes  her  glorious.  It  is  owing  to  Christ  that 
the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men.  (2)  The  revelation  of  the  mind  and  will  of 
God  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth,  is  the  glory  of  the  Church.  Christ  is  the  Alpha 
and  Omega  of  the  whole  Scriptures.  (3)  A  faithful  ministry  is  the  glory  of  a 
Church.  (See  Eph.  iv.  11-13.)  (4)  The  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  dispensed 
in  purity  by  faithful  ministers  of  Christ,  are  the  glory  of  a  Church.  Well,  all 
hang  upon  the  great  Manager,  such  as  word  and  sacrament,  prayer  and  praise. 

(5)  The  judicatories  of  a  Church,  higher  and  lower,  constituted  in  His  name,  and 
moulded  according  to  His  appointment  for  the  government  and  for  the  exercise 
of  the  keys  of  discipline,  are  the  glory  of  a  Church.  All  this  glory  hangs  upon 
the  nail  fastened  in  a  sure  place,  for  He  it  is  that  gives  the  keys  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  unto  His  office-bearers,  and  promises  that  "  what  they  bind  on  earth, 
shall  be  bound  in  heaven ;  and  what  they  loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven  " ; 
and  where  they  assemble  in  courts  for  discipline,  He  "  will  be  in  the  midst  of 
them."  (6)  The  covenants  of  a  Church  are  her  glory;  God's  covenant  of  grace 
and  promise,  and  their  covenants  of  duty  and  gratitude.     The  covenant,  and 


chap,  xxn.]  ISAIAH.  415 

all  the  blessings  and  promises  of  it,  hang  upon  this  blessed  nail ;  they  are  all 
in  Him,  and  "  in  Him  yea  and  amen."  Our  covenants  for  duty,  obedience, 
and  gratitude,  hang  upon  this  blessed  nail.  When  men  engage  to  duty  in  a  legal 
way,  they  do  only  make  to  themselves  ropes  of  sand.  All  our  funds  of  grace 
lie  in  Him.  (7)  The  multitude  of  real  converts  is  the  glory  of  a  Church.  Of 
His  own  will  He  begets  us  by  the  word  of  grace.  (8)  The  purity,  holiness,  and 
faithfulness  of  Church  members  are  the  glory  of  a  Church.  This  glory  hanga 
upon  this  blessed  nail ;  for  it  is  by  virtue  of  their  union  with  Him,  that  they 
derive  sanctifying  influence  from  Him.  2.  The  offspring  and  issue  of  the  house 
are  also  said  to  hang  upon  Christ.  By  the  offspring  and  issue  I  understand  all 
true  believers.  (1)  Their  very  being,  as  they  are  new  creatures,  hangs  upon 
Him  (Eph.  ii.  10).  (2)  Hence,  their  life  hangs  upon  Christ.  The  second  Adam 
is  a  quickening  Spirit.  (3)  Have  the  offspring  and  issue  of  the  house  anything 
of  the  light  of  saving  knowledge  of  God  ?  This  hangs  upon  Christ ;  for  He  is 
the  true  Sun  of  Righteousness.  (4)  The  offspring  and  issue  of  the  house  of  God 
enjoy  a  glorious  liberty.  This  hangs  upon  Christ ;  for  "  if  the  Son  makes  us 
free,  then  are  we  free  indeed."  (5)  They  have  all  the  best  robe  put  upon  them, 
when  they  return  from  the  far  country  to  their  Father.  Christ  is  the  "  end  of 
the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."  (6)  Have  they  anything 
of  the  beauty  of  holiness  T  Christ  is  made  unto  them  sanctification.  (7)  Have 
they  strength  for  work  or  warfare  ?  They  are  "  strong  in  the  Lord."  (8)  Are 
they  heirs  of  God  and  of  glory  ?     They  are  "  joint-heirs  with  Jesus  Christ." 

3.  The  vessels  of  the  house  hang  upon  this  nail  fastened  in  a  sure  place,  from 
vessels  of  cups  to  vessels  of  flagons.  (1)  By  the  vessels  of  the  house  we  are  to 
understand  believers  (2  Tim.  ii.  20,  21 ;  Acts  ix.  15).  (2)  These  vessels  are  of 
different  sizes.  In  God's  family  there  are  saints  of  different  stature.  V.  The 
reasons  of  the  doctrine.  Why  is  Christ  constituted  sole  Manager  of  His  Father's 
house  ?  why  doth  He  hang  the  offspring  and  issue,  and  all  the  vessels,  upon 
Him,  as  upon  a  nail  fastened  in  a  sure  place  ?  1.  He  only  had  ability  for  bearing 
such  a  weight.  2.  Christ  voluntarily  undertook  it.  3.  Hereby  a  new  revenue 
of  glory  is  brought  in  to  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  4.  Hereby 
all  men  are  brought  to  honour  the  Son,  as  they  honour  the  Father.  5.  This  was 
for  the  safety  and  comfort  of  the  saints  and  children  of  God.  VI.  The  applica- 
tion of  the  doctrine.  (E.  Erskine.)  "  Vessels  of  cups  "  .• — A  word  to  weak 
believers  who  are  designated  "  vessels  of  cups."  1.  It  is  a  high  privilege  to  occupy 
the  least  room  in  the  house  of  our  God.  2.  God  has  service  for  the  least  vessel 
of  His  house,  as  well  as  for  the  largest.  3.  The  least  vessel  is  God's  property, 
and  He  will  not  disown,  but  maintain  His  property,  and  own  it  before  men  and 
angels,  saying,   "  They  are  Mine,"  in  the  day  when  He  makes  up  His  jewels. 

4.  The  bands,  by  which  you  hang  upon  the  nail  fastened  in  a  sure  place,  are  as 
6trong  as  those  by  which  the  vessels  of  flagons  are  secured  ;  for  He  has  said  as 
to  both,  "  They  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  My  hand." 

5.  The  weakest  measure  of  grace  is  a  pledge  of  more  ;  for  "  to  him  that  hath 
shall  be  given."  6.  Although  you  are  not  to  envy  or  grudge  at  God's  bounty 
or  liberality  to  others,  in  making  them  vessels  of  flagons,  yet  you  may  and  ought 
earnestly  to  covet  more  grace  than  you  have  yet  received.  (Ibid. )  The  vessels  of 
flagons,  i.e.,  believers  of  a  higher  stature.  1.  Be  not  proud  of  grace  rece  ved,  but 
walk  humbly  with  your  God.  "  What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received  ?  " 
2.  Instead  of  despising  others  that  are  not  come  your  length,  study  to  be  helpful  and 
serviceable  unto  them.  The  vessels  of  cups  are  ordinarily  filled  out  of  the  flagons ; 
so  study  to  impart  and  communicate  of  your  grace,  of  your  faith,  love,  hope, 
knowledge,  and  other  graces,  unto  those  that  are  weak  in  grace.  The  strong 
children  in  a  family  are  helpful  to  the  young  and  weak.  3.  Whatever  grace  you 
have  received,  be  not  confident  therein,  like  Peter ;  but  be  strong  in  the  grace 
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  let  the  life  you  live  be  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God. 
(Ibid.)  Christ  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house  : — By  Christ's  Father'*  house 
is  meant  His  Church.    I.  On  Christ  Jesus  hangs  all  the  glory  or  thb 

REDEMPTION  OF  HlS  FATHER'S  HOUSE.  II.  On  THE  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST  HANGS 
ALL  THE  GLORY  OF  THE  INSTRUCTION   OF  HlS   FATHER'S  HOUSE.      There  IS  a  tWO- 

fold  light  which  the  Lord  Jesus  imparts  to  the  members  of  His  Father's  house. 
There  is  the  light  of  His  Word,  those  Scriptures  which  testify  of  Him  as  "  the 
Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  The  Scriptures,  however,  are  not,  of  them- 
selves, sufficient  for  spiritual  illumination.  The  light  of  the  Spirit  must  accompany 
the  truth  revealed  in  tbj  Word,  that  it  may  become  effectual  for  salvation.     The 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxil 

Holy  Spirit  is  the  fruit  of  the  Redeemer's  purchase.  It  is  His  glorious  office 
to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  show  these  to  the  soul.  It  is  in  the  light  of 
the  Divine  Word  and  Spirit  that  we  discern  aright  the  way  of  acceptance  and 
the  path  of  duty.  III.  On  the  Lord  Jesxts  Christ  hangs  all  the  glory  of 
the  renovation  of  His  Father's  house.  When  He  ascended  on  high,  He 
received  gifts  for  men  ;  even  the  seven  Spirits  before  the  throne — the  Holy  Ghost, 
in  His  quickening,  renewing,  and  sanctifying  grace.  These  gifts  are  bestowed, 
let  it  be  carefully  noted,  in  virtue  of  the  believer's  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  through  the  instrumentality  of  living  faith.  IV.  On  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  hangs  all  the  glory  of  the  government  of  His  Father's  house. 
They  are  under  law  to  Christ  as  the  sole  Ruler  of  the  house.  We  must  take  order 
from  Him ;  for  "  One  is  our  Master,  even  Christ."  V.  On  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  hanos  at.t.  the  glory  of  the  victories  of  His  Father's  house.  The 
Christian  Church,  both  collectively  and  in  its  individual  members,  is  in  an  enemy's 
country  on  this  side  heaven.  It  is  the  Christian's  solace  to  be  assured  that  he 
has  not  been  sent  a  warfare  on  his  own  charges.  Apart  from  the  clear  and  full 
revelations  of  Scripture,  no  subject  of  human  contemplation  is  so  saddening 
as  death.  He,  on  whom  hangs  all  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house,  is  Himself 
the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  Conclusion — Let  us  seriously  inquire  whether 
we  are  members  of  that  house.  Mere  external  relationship  to  it  will  avail  us 
nothing.  We  must  be  united  in  the  bonds  of  faith  and  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 
(J.  Smyth,  D.D.)  The  glory  of  the  Mediator  : — The  idea  in  the  text  seems 
to  embrace  this  statement :  That  every  attribute  belonging  to  God  is  concen- 
trated in  the  Saviour,  as  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  and  that  the  Father  is 
most  glorified  when  we  give  in  our  services  all  the  glory  to  His  Son.  I.  Upon 
Him  hangs  all  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house  of  creation.  "  By  Him 
were  all  things  made,  and  without  Him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made." 
II.  Upon  Him  hangs  all  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house  of  providence. 
And  what  is  providence  but  creation  continued,  in  upholding,  governing,  and 
guiding  all  things  to  accomplish  their  predestined  end  ?  Jesus  Christ  is  on  the 
throne  ;  every  painful  feeling  is  anticipated,  every  tear  is  bottled,  every  anxiety 
alleviated,  every  distress  sanctified.  He  is  our  Saviour,  our  Friend,  our  Refuge 
and  Strength.  III.  Upon  Him  hangs  all  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house 
of  grace.  Christ's  kingdom  is  a  spiritual  one,  set  up  within  the  believer's  soul. 
IV.  Upon  Him  hangs  all  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house  of  heaven.  "  I 
go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  to  Myself; 
that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain 
to  receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory, 
and  blessing  "  ;  and  thus  the  ransomed  and  renewed  universe  will  "  hang  upon 
Him  all  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house."     (F.  Newman,  D.D.) 

Ver.  25.  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  shall  the  nail  that  Is  fastened 
In  the  sure  place  be  removed.  —  Elevation  is  only  held  on  good  cfiaracter : — 
Even  God  who  drove  in  the  nail  can  take  it  out  again.  No  nail  once 
driven  in  can  do  without  God,  saying,  I  am  driven  in  now,  so  I  care 
not  what  may  happen.  The  highest  lives  in  obedience ;  the  strongest  man 
becomes  weaker  than  the  weakest  when  he  ceases  to  pray.  Genius  cannot  keep 
a  man  in  a  high  moral  elevation.  His  genius  will  soon  be  discovered  to  be  but 
cleverness,  not  the  blooming  out  of  a  life  that  is  hidden  in  the  very  mystery  of 
God.  Leader  of  the  people  !  even  thou  mayest  be  dispossessed  of  thy  leadership. 
Great  statesmen  are  in  the  hands  of  God.  Journalists,  thinkers,  the  advance- 
guard  of  every  name,  all  these  hold  their  position  on  their  good  conduct.  Let 
them  be  good  and  faithful  servants  ;  let  there  be  no  selfishness  in  their  ambition, 
no  vain  conceit  because  of  the  influence  with  which  God  hath  clothed  them ; 
even  the  nail  that  is  fastened  in  the  sure  place  may  be  removed,  the  very  beam 
in  which  it  finds  a  place  may  be  cut  in  two  and  burned  in  unquenchable  fire. 
So,  then,  we  are  nothing  but  in  God.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Nepotism  : — Eliakim 
comes  to  ruin  in  the  exercise  of  the  plenary  power  attaching  to  his  office  by  giving 
way  to  nepotism.  His  family  makes  a  wrong  use  of  him,  and  with  an  unwar- 
rantable amount  of  good  nature  he  makes  a  wrong  use  of  his  official  position 
for  their  benefit.  He  therefore  comes  down  headlong,  and  with  him  all  the  heavy 
burden  which  the  peg  sustains,  i.e.,  all  his  relations,  who,  by  being  far  too  eager 
to  make  the  most  of  their  good  fortune,  have  brought  him  to  ruin.  (F.  Delitzsch.) 
Eliakim  and  Shebna  :  a  couple  of  tragedies : — We  have  not  one,  but  a  couple  of 


chap,  xxin.]  ISAIAH.  41T 

tragedies.  Eliakim,  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  follows  Shebna,  the  son  of  Nobody. 
The  late  of  the  overburdened  nail  is  as  grievous  as  that  of  the  rolling  stone.  It 
is  easy  to  pass  this  prophecy  over  as  a  trivial  incident ;  but  when  we  have 
carefully  analysed  each  verse,  restored  to  the  words  their  exact  shade  of 
signification,  and  set  them  in  their  proper  contrasts,  we  perceive  the  outlines 
of  two  social  dramas,  which  it  requires  very  little  imagination  to  invest  with 
engrossing  moral  interest.     (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXITL 


Vers.  1-18.  The  burden  of  Tyre. — The  prophecy  against  Tyre:  lessons : — 
The  Tarshish  of  this  chapter  is  Spain.  Chittim  is  the  island  of  Cyprus. 
The  word  "  merchant "  is  the  same  word  that  is  rendered  in  other  places 
"  Canaanite."  The  Canaan  ites  were  the  most  energetically  commercial  men 
of  their  time.  To  be  a  merchant  was  to  be  a  Canaanite  ;  to  be  a  Canaanite  was 
to  be  a  merchant,  substantially.  I.  The  world  must  come,  however  slowly,  to 
recognise  the  fact  that  rulers  themselves  abb  ruled  ;  that  the  Lord  reigneth. 
There  can  only  be  one  Supreme.  What  a  glorious  dawn  is  that  which  will  shine 
above  the  eastern  hills  when  the  world  begins  to  feel  that  it  is  reigned  over, 
governed,  guided  in  all  its  march  of  progress.  The  world  grows  warmer  under  that 
recognition.  At  first  the  recognition  is  terrible  enough,  but  it  becomes  more 
and  more  beneficent  as  things  shape  themselves.  II.  The  world  must  come  to 
recognise  the  fact  that  even  empibes  abe  dependent  upon  character  for 
theib  existence.  For  Tyre  we  may  substitute  London,  Paris,  New  York,  or  the 
countries  which  they  indicate.  It  is  only  the  letter  of  this  chapter  which  is 
ancient;  the  principle  is  energetic  evermore.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  prophet's 
attitude  towards  cities  and  states  : — When  the  Spirit  of  God  is  in  a  man  he  cares 
for  no  city,  how  great  soever  it  may  be,  though  he  himself  may  not  have 
whereon  to  lay  his  head.  There  is,  however,  a  spirit  in  him  which  makes  him 
greater  than  all  the  capitals  of  the  world  were  they  added  to  one  another  and  con- 
stituted into  one  great  avenue  of  capitals,  each  house  in  all  the  vista  crowned 
or  starred  with  a  sceptre  thrust  from  every  window.  The  Galilean  fishermen 
cared  nothing  for  the  pomp  of  Jerusalem ;  old  prophets  with  ragged  mantles  on 
their  stooping  shoulders  hurled  Divinest  judgment  against  proud  kings.  (Ibid.) 
The  Church's  love  of  worldly  patronage  : — The  Church  has  lost  this  prophetic 
inspiration,  and  now  she  bows  down  to  worldly  greatness  and  tells  with  delight 
that  a  chariot  and  pair  has  driven  up  to  her  front  door.  To  what  a  cant  of 
indignity  has  she  sunk,  even  in  her  very  speech !  She  is  now  an  influential  Church, 
a  respectable  Church,  an  intelligent  Church,  a  Church  possessed  of  exceptional 
advantages,  and  most  careful  about  her  reputation  !  So  the  world  pays  its  copper 
tribute,  and  says  to  the  Church,  Behave  yourself !  let  us  do  what  we  like,  and 
you  sing  your  hymns  and  go  up  to  heaven  like  any  other  vapour.  Where  are 
the  men  who  can  do  without  food,  clothing,  shelter  ?  Where  are  the  men  who 
would  spurn  any  offer  of  patronage  ? — sons  of  thunder,  sons  of  judgment ;  men 
who  never  sit  down  to  eat,  but  snatch  their  apple  as  they  hasten  along  the  road 
that  they  may  keep  their  next  appointment  to  thunder  judgment  upon  unright- 
eousness, and  break  in  pieces  with  an  iron  rod  the  vessel  of  impurity.  (Ibid.) 
Tyre  : — Tyre's  celebrity  dates  first  from  the  time  of  David.  In  the  Assyrian 
era,  however,  Tyre  had  already  attained  to  a  kind  of  supremacy  over  the  rest  of 
the  Phoenician  cities.  It  lay  on  the  coast,  rather  more  than  twenty  miles  from 
Sidon  ;  but  being  hard  pressed  by  enemies,  it  had  transferred  the  real  seat  of  its 
trade  and  wealth  to  a  rocky  island,  three  miles  farther  north,  and  only  1200  paces 
from  the  mainland.  The  strait  that  separated  this  insular  Tyre  (Tipos)  from 
ancient  Tyre  (HaXalrvpos)  was,  upon  the  whole,  shallow,  and  the  ship 
channel  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  island  was  only  about  eighteen  feet  deep, 
so  that  a  siege  of  insular  Tyre  by  Alexander  was  carried  out  by  the  erection  of  a 
mole.  Luther  refers  the  prophecy  to  this  attack  by  Alexander.  But  earlier 
than  this  event  was  the  struggle  of  Tyre  with  Assyria  and  Babylon,  and  first  of 
all  the  question  arises,  Which  of  these  two  struggles  has  the  prophecy  in  view  ? 
In  consequence  of  new  disclosures,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  Assyriology, 

27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nm. 

the  question  has  entered  a  new  phase.  Down  to  the  present,  however,  it  still 
permits  of  only  a  hypothetical  and  unsatisfactory  solution.  (F.  Delilzsch. )  The 
Phoenicians  were  simply  carriers  and  middle-men.  In  all  time  there  is  no  instance 
of  a  nation  so  wholly  given  over  to  buying  and  selling,  who  frequented  even  the 
battlefields  of  the  world  that  they  might  strip  the  dead  and  purchase  the  captive. 
(Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  The  harvest  of  the  river. — The  harvest  of  the  river : — The  valley 
of  the  Nile  was  the  field  for  sowing  and  reaping.  The  ships  of  Tyre  trafficked 
far  and  wide,  and  by  purchase  or  by  barter  the  corn  supplies  of  Egypt  were 
fetched  in  to  fill  the  barns  and  granaries  of  the  merchant  city,  and  were  thence 
re-sold  with  profit  to  many  nations.  The  harvest  of  the  Nile  most  accurately 
describes  and  stands  for  all  the  resources  and  the  wealth  of  Egypt,  which 
depend  entirely  upon  the  Nile.  This  river  brings  down  from  the  mountains  of 
Abyssinia  a  great  quantity  of  decayed  vegetable  matter  and  rich  alluvial  deposit, 
which  in  flood  time  it  spreads  over  the  land.  A  failure  in  the  rise  of  the  Nile 
means  famine  in  Egypt,  and  it  was  lately  computed  that  one  foot  difference  in 
the  height  of  the  annual  flood  makes  a  difference  of  £2,000,000  to  the  income  of 
the  country.  So  little  in  this  respect  have  things  changed  since  the  days  of  Isaiah. 
(P.  T.  Bainbrigge,  M.A.)  The  harvest  of  the  river: — We  need  not,  however, 
restrict  the  term  to  the  importation  of  corn.  The  harvest  of  the  river  was  the 
merchandise  of  the  world,  which  the  ships  of  Tarshish  conveyed  to  the  city  of 
the  isle — Tyre.  The  harvest  of  the  river,  then,  is  the  commerce  of  the  city 
built  upon  its  banks.  God  is  equally  the  God  of  the  harvest  of  the  river  as  He 
is  the  God  of  the  harvest  of  the  field,  and  though  He  made  the  country  He  ordained 
that  men  should  form  themselves  into  communities  and  dwell  together  in  cities, 
and  He  has  laid  down  laws  for  their  guidance  as  members  of  a  great  society  which 
must  be  followed,  that  order  may  be  maintained  and  prosperity  achieved.  The 
merchant  is  as  much  engaged  in  doing  God's  work  as  the  farmer  is.  There  may 
not  be  so  much  romance  and  poetry  about  his  occupation.  But  God  may  be 
glorified  in  the  fires  as  well  as  in  the  green  fields  and  the  pleasant  woods.  It  is 
He  who  assigns  to  every  man  his  proper  place — implants  within  him  a  desire  to  do 
hi3  duty  in  his  appointed  sphere  of  action,  and  so  contrives  that  while  a  man  does 
his  duty  and  provides  for  his  own  interest  and  welfare,  he  by  so  doing  contributes 
at  the  same  time  to  the  happiness  and  well-being  of  all.  ( W.  Rogers,  M.A.)  God 
the  great  World- Provider  : — When  the  Shah  of  Persia  some  few  years  ago  visited 
this  country,  he  was  taken  through  the  docks  down  the  river,  and  while  con- 
templating the  great  harvest  reposing  on  its  bosom,  and  witnessing  the  crowds 
of  people  eager  to  see  the  Eastern  potentate  and  to  do  him  honour,  he  asked  a 
pertinent  question  of  the  nobleman  who  accompanied  him.  It  was  this  :  "  How 
are  these  vast  multitudes  fed  ?  "  It  is  a  question  which  showed  the  thoughtful 
intelligence  of  the  barbarian,  but  it  is  one  which  few  pause  to  ask,  and  which 
few  are  able  to  answer,  because  few  look  beyond  the  surface  and  attempt  to 
unravel  the  great  mystery  by  which  we  are  enshrouded,  and  recognise  the 
agency  of  the  invisible  One  in  all  the  affairs  of  men.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  The  sea  hath  spoken,  even  the  strength  of  the  sea. — The  voice  of 
the  sea  : — God,  through  the  wildly  wailing  winds,  and  loudly  surging  waves, 
has  often  uttered  a  voice  of  warning  and  of  woe  to  cities  filled  with  corruption 
and  vice.  And  how,  too,  through  these  winds  and  waves,  has  the  sea  spoken  in 
its  strength  to  crushed  and  broken  hearts,  when  its  surface  has  been  thickly 
strewn  with  shattered  wrecks,  and  the  floating  and  sinking  bodies  of  its  helpless 
victims.  I.  But  the  sea  often  speaks  to  us  in  other  language  than  this,  addressing 
us,  as  it  does,  through  the  eye  as  well  as  the  ear,  and  calling  upon  us  to  adorb 
and  love  God  for  the  beauty  with  which  He  clothes  and  overhangs  it,  and  for 
the  blessings  which,  by  means  of  the  sea,  He  conveys  to  us,  no  less  than  to  tremble 
and  bow  down  before  Him  in  view  of  the  vastness  and  the  majestic  grandeur  of 
the  ocean  in  its  more  excited  and  terrific  moods.  II.  The  sea  hath  spoken,  even 
the  strength  of  the  sea,  by  its  vastness  and  the  force  and  grandeur  op  its 
movements.  III.  The  sea  hath  spoken,  too,  and  will,  we  trust,  thus  ever  speak, 
through  the  electric  wire,  which  here  and  there  lies  far  down  in  its  lowest 
depths,  and  which,  in  coming  years,  will  be  more  widely  extended  abroad. 
IV.  Yet  again  the  sea  hath  spoken,  in  that  rr  appeals  to  our  kind  Christian 
sympathy  and  interest  in  behalf  of  those  who,  as  seamen,  go  forth  upon  the 


chap,  xxin.]  ISAIAH.  419 

deep.  V.  When  the  sea  in  its  strength  thus  speaks  to  us,  with  the  voice  of  wailing, 
lamentation,  and  woe,  how  ought  we  to  pray  for  seamen  aj*d  those  con- 
nected with  them,  with  all  the  power  of  faith  which  God  shall  give  us,  that  He 
would  save  them  from  a  watery  grave,  or,  if  they  thus  perish,  that  He  would 
comfort  those  who  mourn  their  loss,  and  that  in  the  day  in  which  the  earth  and  the 
sea  shall  give  up  the  dead  that  are  in  them,  they  may  all  together  enter  the  haven 
of  eternal  rest.  So,  too,  should  we  ever  pray  that  the  time  may  soon  come  when 
the  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  converted  unto  God,  and  the  isles  shall  wait 
for  His  law.  (C.  Rockwell.)  The  violent  in  the  serene  : — The  sea,  as  a  rule,  is 
tranquil.  Yet  what  awful  power  it  possesses  when  it  is  aroused  to  fury  1  Blocks 
of  stone  weighing  over  thirteen  tons  have  been  known  to  be  hurled  by  it  a  distance 
of  more  than  thirty  feet,  and  blocks  of  three  tons  to  more  than  one  hundred  yards. 
Jetties  and  bridges  are  dashed  about  like  toys.  The  entire  harbour  of  Fecamp 
was  destroyed  by  its  rage,  and  the  mass  of  earth  torn  from  the  north  side  of  Cape 
la  Heve  was  estimated  at  more  than  300,000  square  yards.  Yet  these  are  only 
among  the  trifling  achievements  of  the  sea  when  it  passes  from  its  peaceful  to  its 
furious  mood.  Violence  often  slumbers  under  an  appearance  of  serenity.  A 
crowd  of  joyous  holiday-makers  to-day  may  become  to-morrow  a  foaming  mob  of 
insurrectionists!  (Scientific  Illustrations  and  Symbols.)  Power  of  the  sea: — 
That  part  of  Hoy  Head,  in  Orkney,  which  is  called  the  Brow  of  the  Brae,  is  one 
sheer  unbroken  crag  of  1150  feet.  The  Orcadians  told  me  that  in  a  hurricane 
they  have  seen  an  Atlantic  wave  strike  this  headland  in  such  volume  and  with 
such  power,  that  it  has  rushed  half-way  up  the  cliff,  throwing  itself  in  its  great  but 
impotent  rage  to  the  height  of  nearly  600  feet.  Hurled  by  such  a  sea  against 
such  a  crag,  a  man-of-war,  though  built  of  the  strongest  oak,  and  bound  with 
the  toughest  iron,  would  be  shattered  like  a  ship  of  glass.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
The  sea : — He  that  will  learn  to  pray,  let  him  go  to  sea.    (George  Herbert.) 

Ver.  8.  Tyre,  the  crowning  city,  whose  merchants  are  princes. — Tyre,  "  the 
crowning  city "  .• — The  speaker  cannot  drop  his  satire  :  he  has  got  accus- 
tomed to  it  now ;  he  is  in  his  best  vein  of  mockery.  The  crowning  city  was 
Tyre  because  she  distributed  crowns  to  the  Phoenician  colonies,  —  so  to 
say,  she  kept  a  whole  cupboard  full  of  crowns,  and  took  one  out  after  another, 
and  gave  to  the  little  colonies  that  they  might  play  at  being  kingdoms  (Ezek. 
xxvii.    23-25).      (J.    Parker,    D.D.)  The    ancient    estimate    of  trade: — This 

passage  reveals  to  us  the  estimation  in  which  merchants  were  held  in  ancient 
time.  Tyre  was  celebrated  ■  for  her  commerce.  Her  traders  were  renowned 
because  of  their  wealth.  The  treasure  they  amassed  gave  them  rank  and  position. 
They  were  influential  and  honoured.  Trade  was  not  regarded  in  old  time  as  a 
menial,  but  a  noble  pursuit.  The  ambitious  entered  into  it  as  a  means  to  gratify 
their  ambition.  It  furnished  them  with  a  field  in  which  to  exercise  their  faculties 
and  develop  their  powers.  Subsequently  the  sword  gave  rank  and  power, — 
valour,  and  not  ability,  lifted  men  to  thrones :  but  before  the  feudal  age,  in  the 
ancient  time,  and  among  the  older  civilisations,  "  merchants  were  princes,  and 
traffickers  were  the  honourable  of  the  earth."  (W.  H.  Murray.)  The  origin 
of  commerce  : — It  is  not  difficult  to  ascertain  the  origin  of  commerce.  It  was 
born  of  men's  necessities,  and  was  characterised  by  the  spirit  of  accommodation. 
Its  birth  dates  back  to  the  first  family  that  existed  on  the  earth.  One  had  what 
another  needed,  and  for  it  he  had  something  to  give  in  exchange.  From  this 
mutual  need  sprang  trade.  It  was  a  family  institution,  a  method  by  which  the 
several  members  of  the  household  could  benefit  themselves  and  each  other.  As 
families  increased  and  population  multiplied,  trade  enlarged  the  circle  of  its 
operations,  became  more  complex  and  multiform  in  its  action  and  agents,  and 
at  length  grew  to  be  a  vast  system  of  exchange  ;  the  means  of  universal  accommoda- 
tion by  which  every  person  in  the  community  received  and  bestowed  benefits, 
and  acquired  the  facilities  of  a  larger  and  happier  life.  But  it  still  kept  its  original 
significance  and  family  spirit.  Such  was  the  origin  of  trade.  There  was  nothing 
selfish  about  it ;  it  was  not  mercenary,  it  was  benevolent  and  humane.  Centuries 
later,  when  it  had  become  a  profession,  and  its  agents  a  class  among  other  classes, 
there  was  nothing  in  its  parentage  of  which  it  need  be  ashamed,  no  reason  why 
those  who  were  engaged  in  it  should  not  be  called  "  the  honourable  of  the 
earth."  (Ibid.)  Trade  gave  birth  to  our  modern  cities: — If  we  would  realise 
more  fully  the  noble  part  that  merchants  have  played  in  the  history  of  the 
world,  and  the  close  relation  that  commerce  has  always  sustained  to  human 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxni. 

progress,  we  have  only  to  investigate  the  origin  of  cities  and  consider  the  forces 
that  pushed  them  upward  in  their  growth.  It  was  trade  that  gave  birth  to  our 
modern  cities  ;  a  knot  of  traders  beneath  the  walls  of  a  castle,  feeding  the  castle 
and  protected  by  it,  adding  booth  to  booth  and  house  to  house, — so  cities  arose, 
so  have  they  been  builded.  The  same  is  true  to-day.  Commercial  facilities  and 
necessities  are  the  forces  that  build  our  cities.  They  represent  the  material 
forces  and  results  of  civilisation.  Each  city  is  a  hive,  and  ships  and  railways 
are  the  bees  that  bring  honey  to  the  hive,  bringing  it  from  all  the  world.  They 
fly  everywhere, — these  bees  with  sails  and  wheels  for  wings, — their  flight  girdles 
the  earth,  and  the  rush  and  roar  of  their  going  and  returning  fill  the  whole  air. 
Now,  cities  represent  progress.  In  them  you  see  the  results  of  human  invention 
and  skill.  Here  the  artist  brings  his  canvas  and  the  sculptor  his  marble.  Here 
the  loom  is  represented  by  the  finest  fabrics,  and  architecture  lifts  the  pillars 
of  her  power.  In  cities  oratory  finds  her  school,  and  eloquence  her  platform ; 
music  her  applause,  and  the  poet  his  wreath.  Every  city  is  a  record,  a  testimony, 
an  advertisement.  In  its  congregated  forces  and  results  you  behold  the  people 
who  built  it.  (Ibid.)  Commerce  and  discovery: — Nor  would  it  be  well  to 
overlook  the  use  that  God  has  made  of  commerce  in  relation  to  discoveries.  The 
pioneers  of  civilisation  have  been  ships  and  traders.  The  race  has,  as  it  were, 
sailed  to  its  triumphs.     (Ibid.)        God  in  commerce  : — I.  God's  plan  is  to  oivh 

EVERY  MAN  WHAT  HE  NEEDS,  PHYSICALLY,  MENTALLY,  AND  SPIRITUALLY.  II.  To 
RE-ESTABLISH   THE   FAMILY    RELATION    AMONG   MEN.      (Ibid.)  God's    design   in 

commerce  : — It  is  not  that  individuals  may  be  enriched, — that  is  only  an  accidental 
result,  one  of  the  minor  consequences;  the  real  object  on  the  part  of  God,  the 
great  result  to  be  achieved,  is  and  will  be  this :  that  every  man  on  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth  may  be  supplied  with  what  he  needs,  in  body,  mind,  and  spirit,  to 
the  end  that  he  may  stand  at  last  clothed  in  the  original  beauty  and  excellence, 
the  likeness  of  which  has  for  so  many  ages  been  lost  from  the  earth.  (Ibid.) 
Merchants : — I.  Many  merchants  are  much  tried  with  limited  capital. 
II.  Many  merchants  are  tempted  to  overcare  and  ansiety.  III.  Mer- 
chants ARE  TEMPTED  SOMETIMES  TO  NEGLECT  THEIR  HOME  DUTIES.  IV.  MANY 
MERCHANTS    ARE    TEMPTED    TO    MAKE     FINANCIAL     GAIN    OF    MORE    IMPORTANCH 

than  the  soul.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D. )  The  folly  of  reckless  speculation : — 
If  ever  tempted  into  reckless  speculation,  preach  to  your  soul  a  sermon  from  the 
text :  "  As  a  partridge  sitteth  on  eggs  and  hatcheth  them  not,  so  riches  got  by  fraud; 
a  man  shall  leave  them  in  the  midst  of  his  days,  and  at  the  end  he  shall  be  a  fool." 
(Ibid.)  Rivalry  in  business  : — Go  where  you  will,  in  town  or  country,  you 
will  find  half  a  dozen  shops  struggling  for  a  custom  that  would  only  keep  up 
one.  And  so  they  are  forced  to  undersell  one  another ;  and,  when  they  nave 
got  down  the  prices  all  they  can  by  fair  means,  they  are  forced  to  get  them  lower 
by  foul,  and  to  sand  the  sugar,  and  sloeleaf  the  tea,  and  put,  Satan — that  prompts 
them  on — knows  what,  into  the  bread  ;  and  then  they  don't  thrive — they  can't 
thrive.  God's  curse  must  be  on  them.  They  began  by  trying  to  oust  each  other 
and  eat  each  other  up,  and,  while  they  are  eating  up  their  neighbours,  their  neigh- 
bours eat  them  up,  and  so  they  all  come  to  ruin  together.     (C.  Kingsley,  M.J..) 

Ver.  9.  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed  it,  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  glory. — 
God  abases  pride : — In  this  message  there  is  a  revelation  of  the  Divine 
method  in  dealing  with  men  and  nations.  For  here  the  Divine  purpose 
is  to  show  how  stained  is  all  human  pride,  and  how  contemptible  are 
those  whose  honour  comes  from  men  only.  What  God  brings  about  is  a  gradual 
uncovering  of  things,  a  discovering  of  their  true  character,  and  therefore  the 
manifestation  of  the  utter  unsoundness  and  instability  of  anything  not  based 
on  the  Divine  will.  (B.  Blake,  B.D.)  God  exalts  the  humble  and  abases  the 
proud  : — A  philosopher,  being  asked  how  God  was  employed,  gave  for  answer, 
'  In  exalting  the  humble  and  abasing  the  proud."  The  reply  was  good,  and 
agreeable  to  Scripture.  (R.  Macculloch.)  The  great  sin  of  pride : — Other 
sins  are  violations  of  the  law  of  God,  this  acteth  in  direct  opposition  to  His  very 
existence  and  sovereignty ;  it  not  only  despiseth  His  commandment,  but  it 
arraigneth  the  dispensations  of  His  providence  and  grace,  and  proves  the  fruitful 
source  of  all  other  transgressions.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  15.  Tyre  shall  be  forgotten  seventy  years. — Tyre  forgotten  seventy  years  : — 
Tyre  shall  be  forgotten  "  seventy  years,  like  the  days  of  one  king  "  ; — a  Hebrew 


chap,  xxin.l  ISAIAH.  421 

idiom,  obscure  to  us,  though  probably  plain  enough  to  Isaiah's  hearers ;  but  of 
which  the  most  probable  sense  is,  that  the  round  number  here,  as  elsewhere, 
indicates  an  indefinite,  though  considerable  time,  and  that  the  prophet  either 
farther  limits  this  by  a  phrase  equivalent  to  "  for  about  a  whole  generation," 
or  else  implies  that  the  seventy  years — the  long  time  of  oblivion — shall  be  as 
monotonous,  and  perhaps  as  short  to  look  back  upon,  as  those  of  a  single  reign. 
(Sir  E.  Slrachey,  Bart.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  And  It  shall  come  to  pass,  after  the  end  of  seventy  years, 
that  the  Lord  will  visit  Tyre. — The.  revival  of  Tyre. : — In  the  fourth  and  last 
strophe,  the  prophet  dwells  upon  the  revival  of  Tyre  in  the  ideal  future.  After 
seventy  years  of  enforced  retirement  and  quiescence,  Tyre  will  resume  her  previous 
activity,  but  with  the  significant  change  that  her  gains  will  now  be  consecrated 
to  Jehovah,  supplying  food  and  stately  clothing  to  the  people  of  Israel  who  dwell 
in  His  immediate  presence  (ver.  18).  The  figure  under  which  Isaiah  expresses 
this  thought,  appears  to  us  a  strange  one ;  but  it  is  suggested  by  the  reflection 
that  devotion  to  gain  as  such,  unrelieved  by  any  ennobling  principle,  is  an 
unworthy  occupation,  which  may  easily  degenerate  into  spiritual  prostitution. 
The  prophet,  having  once  made  use  of  the  figure,  retains  it  to  the  end.  Disengaged 
from  its  singular  garb,  the  truth  which  he  enunciates  is  an  important  one.  Tyre 
was  pre-eminently,  in  Isaiah's  day,  the  representative  of  the  spirit  of  commerce  : 
and  the  prophet  here  anticipates  the  time  when  this  spirit  may  be  elevated  and 
purified.  Isaiah  pictures  to  himself  the  future  growth  of  religion  among  the 
different  nations  with  which  he  was  acquainted  under  figures  consonant  to  the 
peculiarities  of  each ;  in  the  case  of  Tyre,  it  takes  the  form  of  a  purification  of 
the  base  spirit  of  commerce ;  the  old  occupation  of  Tyre  is  not  discarded,  it  is 
only  purged  of  its  worldliness,  and  ennobled.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The 
mercenary  spirit  a  prostitution  of  the  soul : — In  so  far  as  commercial  activity, 
thinking  only  of  earthly  advantage,  does  not  recognise  a  God-appointed  limit, 
and  carries  on  a  promiscuous  traffic  with  all  the  world,  it  is  a  prostitution  of  the 
soul.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Phoenician  harlotry: — Moreover,  at  markets  and  fairs, 
especially  Phoenician  ones,  prostitution  of  the  body  was  an  old  custom.  {Ibid.) 
Commercial  harlotry  : — The  harlot  converts  into  a  matter  of  traffic  what  should 
be  a  sacred  relationship :  so  trade  brings  men  together  merely  as  buyers  and 
sellers,  not  as  brethren ;  and  consequently  rapidly  degenerates  from  self-interest 
into  selfishness,  unless  it  be  perpetually  counterbalanced  by  other  and  nobler 
aims  in  the  man.     (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.) 

Ver.  18.  And  her  merchandise  and  her  hire  shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord.— 
Mercantile  life  : — I.  We  are  reminded  that  the  market  is  a  Divine  institution. 
In  this  chapter  it  is  not  commerce  that  is  doomed  to  destruction  but  commercialists. 
When  one  thinks  of  the  innate  tendency  of  human  nature  to  exchange  commodities, 
a  tendency  discoverable  even  in  children  and  barbarians :  the  distribution  of 
the  necessaries  of  human  subsistence  and  progress  over  every  zone  of  the  globe, 
each  zone  supplying  a  something  which  the  other  does  not,  and  the  provisions  of 
each  zone,  if  not  essential  to  human  life,  essential  to  human  civilisation  and 
comfort ;  the  facilities  which  nature  has  provided  in  rivers,  and  oceans,  and 
winds  for  conveying  these  commodities  from  one  part  of  the  globe  to  another, 
and  the  fact  that  the  social  unity  and  happiness  of  mankind  can  only  be  advanced 
by  the  principle  of  mutual  inter-dependence,  and  that  commerce  is  essential  to 
this — it  is  impossible  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  trade  is  of  Divine  appoint- 
ment. The  principle  is  as  old  as  the  race,  as  wide  as  the  world,  as  operative  as 
life  itself.  II.  The  chapter  reminds  us  that  the  market  is  under  the  scrutiny 
op  the  righteous  Governor  op  the  world.  Though  the  Tyrian  traders  pur- 
sued their  daily  race  for  wealth,  and  indulged  in  the  luxuries  which  their  wealth 
could  supply,  utterly  regardless  of  God,  He  was  not  regardless  of  them.  So 
now,  God  is  as  truly  in  the  market  as  in  the  temple,  and  as  truly  demands  worship 
at  the  stall  of  the  one,  as  at  the  altar  of  the  other.     III.  The  chapter  reminds  us 

that  MERCANTILE  PROSPERITY   IS   NO    GUARANTEE  FOR  THE  SAFETY  OF  A  COUNTRY. 

If  commercial  prosperity  could  have  saved  a  people,  Tyre  would  have  remained. 
But  where  is  Tyre  now  ?  As  she  rose  in  wealth,  she  sank  in  vice.  "  Righteous- 
ness alone  exalteth  a  nation."  IV.  The  chapter  reminds  us  that  the  market 
should  be  subservient  to  the  temple.  This  indeed  is  the  grand  subject  of 
our  text.     (Homxlist.)        True  religion  in  Tyre  : — The  prophecy  does  not  mean 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxnt 

that  this  would  take  place  immediately  after  the  rebuilding,  but  subsequently 
to  the  seventy  years  of  its  desolation.  After  the  return  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon 
they  penetrated  different  countries  and  everywhere  endeavoured  to  proselyte 
their  inhabitants.  That  the  Christian  religion  was  established  at  Tyre,  is  not 
only  indicated  by  the  fact  that  Paul  found  several  of  his  disciples  there  on  his 
way  to  Jerusalem  (Acts  xxi.  3,  4),  but  from  the  statement  of  subsequent  historians. 
Eusebius  says,  that  when  the  Church  of  God  was  founded  in  Tyre  "  much  of  its 
wealth  was  consecrated  to  God."  And  Jerome  says,  "  We  have  seen  churches 
built  to  the  Lord  in  Tyre."  So  not  only  has  the  prophecy  of  its  destruction  been 
fulfilled,  but  the  prophecy  in  the  text,  namely,  its  restoration  and  consecration 
to  God,  has  also  to  some  extent  been  realised.  (Ibid.)  Business  : — In  relation 
to  this  subject  there  are  several  popular  errors.  1.  One  is,  that  which  makes 
business  an  end  in  itself.  The  pursuit  of  wealth  for  its  own  sake  eats  up  the  soul 
and  reduces  the  man  to  a  grub,  it  may  be  a  bloated  and  a  decorated  grub,  still 
a  grub.  2.  Another  error  is  the  using  of  the  market  as  a  means  of  ultimata 
retirement.  What  is  this  but  to  grasp  at  a  shadow  ?  The  man  who  spends 
his  best  energies  and  days  in  accumulating  riches  becomes  utterly  unfit  for  the 
enjoyment  of  a  retired  life.  3.  Another  error  is  the  regarding  business  and 
religion  as  antagonistic  elements.  Man  is  a  moral  being,  and  everywhere  and 
everywhen  his  moral  obligation  meets  him.  There  is  no  more  opposition  between 
business  and  religion  than  there  is  between  the  body  and  the  soul.  It  is  by  the 
body  only  that  the  soul  can  be  truly  developed.  4.  There  is  yet  another  error 
that  is  noteworthy,  that  of  making  religion  subservient  to  business.  There  are 
men  who  make  gain  of  godliness.  (Ibid.)  The  subserviency  of  the  market  to 
the  temple  : — The  market  should  be  subordinate  to  the  temple.  This  will  appear 
if  we  consider  the  following  things — I.  The  relation  of  man  to  both.  1.  His 
relation  to  the  market  or  to  business  is  material.  But  his  spiritual  part  is  related 
to  religion.  It  hungers  for  spiritual  knowledge,  for  moral  holiness,  for  communion 
with  God.  It  does  not  live  by  bread  alone.  Now,  as  the  spiritual  part  of  man 
is  confessedly  of  more  value  than  the  material,  should  not  that  work  which 
is  necessary  for  the  latter  be  made  subservient  to  the  interest  of  the  former  ? 
2.  Again,  his  relation  to  the  market  is  temporary.  How  short  is  man's  mercantile 
life  !  But  his  relation  to  spiritual  engagements  is  abiding.  Ought  not  the 
market,  therefore,  to  be  rendered  subservient  to  the  interests  of  the  temple  T 
II.  The  adaptation  of  the  market  to  the  promotion  of  personal  religion. 

1.  Commerce  is  suited  to  promote  religious  discipline.  Neither  inactivity  nor 
exclusive  solitude  is  favourable  to  spiritual  development.  The  duties  of  the 
market  properly  discharged  tend  to  quicken,  test,  and  strengthen  the  eternal 
principles  of  virtue.  Those  principles,  like  trees,  always  require  the  open  air, 
and  oftentimes  storms  to  deepen  their  roots,  and  strengthen  their  fibres.  In 
the  market,  man  has  his  integrity,  patience,  faith  in  God  put  to  the  test.  2.  Not 
only  is  the  market  a  good  scene  for  spiritual  discipline,  but  for  spiritual  intercourse 
as  well.  In  it  there  is  not  only  the  exchange  of  material  commodities,  but  an 
exchange  of  thoughts  and  emotions  and  purposes.  Mind  flows  into  mind,  and 
the  souls  of  nations  mingle  their  ideas.  What  an  immense  influence  for  good 
or  ill  can  men  exert  in  the  market !  One  impious  mind  in  the  market  may  pour 
its  poisonous  influence  far  into  the  civilised  world.  On  the  other  hand,  what  an 
opportunity  has  the  godly  man  for  spiritual  usefulness  !  The  apostles  often 
went  into  the  market-place  to  preach  because  of  its  opportunities  for  diffusing 
the  truth.  It  seems  that  the  Author  of  our  being  made  an  exchange  of  temporal 
commodities  necessary  for  us  in  order  that  we  may  exchange  the  spiritual  com- 
modities of  true  thoughts  and  high  purposes.  3.  Once  more,  it  is  one  of  the  best 
scenes  for  the  practical  display  of  religious  truth.  When  does  piety  appear  to 
the  best  advantage  ?  On  its  knees  in  the  closet  ?  No  one  sees  it  there.  In 
the  temple,  in  the  presence  of  the  great  congregation,  going  out  in  song  and  sigh  ? 
No.  But  in  the  market,  a  thing  of  life  and  strength.  The  man  who  stands  firm 
in  the  market  to  principles  in  the  midst  of  temptation,  who  stoops  not  to  the 
mean,  the  greedy  and  the  false,  but  who  governs  his  spirit  with  calmness  amidst 
the  annoyances  and  disturbances  of  commercial  life,  gives  a  far  better  revelation 
of  genuine  religion  than  is  contained  in  the  grandest  sermon  ever  preached.  The 
British  market  is  almost  the  heart  of  the  world :  give  to  it  a  holy  and  healthy 
pulsation,  and  its  sanitary  influence  shall  be  felt  afar.  Conclusion — 1.  The 
principles  of  righteousness  should  govern  us  in  the  discharge  of  eomme,-"ial  duties. 

2.  Spiritual  prosperity  is  the  only  true  test  of  commercial  snccesa     The  more  a 


chap,  xxiv.]  ISAIAH.  423 

man  succeeds  in  the  accumulation  of  wealth  apart  from  the  growth  of  his  soul, 
the  more  really  disastrous  is  his  business.  He  becomes  a  moral  bankrupt.  Nay, 
more,  the  real  man  is  lost — lost  in  the  clerk,  the  shopkeeper,  the  merchant.  (Ibid.) 
Undue  devotion  to  business  : — There  are  too  many  people  in  England  on  whose 
gravestones  the  French  epitaph  might  be  written,  "  He  was  born  a  man  and  died 
a  grocer."    (iJ.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Vna.  1-5.  Behold,  the  Lord  maketh  the  earth  empty.  —  "The  earth"  not 
the  "land"  (R.V.  marg.)  of  Judah  or  Palestine.  "The  propheoy  leaps 
far  beyond  all  particular  or  national  conditions."  (J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The 
sources  and  consequence*  of  anarchy  : — I.  The  fatal  consequences  of  anabchy. 
Of  these  we  may  be  convinced,  by  viewing  the  greatness  of  the  blessings  which 
anarchy  destroys.  Happy  the  prince,  happy  the  people,  when  lawful  government 
is  well  established,  wisely  administered,  duly  honoured,  and  cheerfully  obeyed  ! 
The  persons,  characters,  and  properties  of  the  innocent  are  protected ;  good 
order  is  preserved ;  and  the  duties  of  every  different  situation,  employment, 
and  rank  are  faithfully  discharged.  The  political  body  is  healthy  and  safe. 
Distinguished  genius  and  penetration,  improved  in  wisdom  by  careful  attention 
and  long  experience,  are  as  eyes  to  the  community :  while  the  hands  of  the 
mechanic  and  labourer  supply  its  necessities.  These  blessings  are  interrupted 
when  the  power  of  such  a  government  is  suspended  ;  and,  when  it  is  destroyed, 
they  cease.  Anarchy,  by  levelling  all  ranks,  transgresses  a  great  law  of  nature, 
and  of  the  God  of  nature  ;  and  stops  a  chief  source  of  social  happiness.  Where 
abilities,  dispositions,  situations,  and  enjoyments  differ,  power  and  influence 
cannot  be  equal.  A  land,  where  there  is  no  order,  is  a  land  of  darkness  and  of 
the  shadow  of  death.  A  community,  which  hath  no  eyes  and  guides,  must  wander 
and  perish  in  the  paths  of  destruction  and  misery.  II.  The  sotjeces  of  anabchy, 
in  rulers,  or  subjects,  transgressing  the  laws,  and  neglecting  the  maxims,  which 
season  or  revelation  prescribes,  for  securing  the  happiness  and  peace  of  society. 
1.  Anarchy  is  occasioned  by  violating  the  laws  which  prescribe  patriotism, 
public  spirit,  love  of  liberty,  and  regard  to  the  rights  of  mankind.  2.  Neglect 
of  the  maxims  of  wisdom,  taught  by  reason  or  Scripture,  is  sometimes  the  imme- 
diate, and  sometimes  the  remote,  source  of  anarchy.  3.  Anarchy  is  occasioned, 
and  the  power  of  preventing  or  removing  it  diminished,  by  rulers  and  subjects 
transgressing  the  precepts  of  industry  and  frugality.  4.  Anarchy  is  occasioned 
by  neglect  of  the  laws  of  reason  and  revelation,  which  prescribe  peaceableness 
and  union.  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is  brought  to  desolation. 
5.  Anarchy  is  occasioned  by  transgressing  the  great  laws  of  religion.  Religion 
produces  the  most  perfect  union  :  for  it  inspires,  with  the  same  general  principle 
of  action,  supreme  regard  to  the  glory  of  God,  unfeigned  affection  to  our  neighbour, 
and  a  willingness  to  sacrifice,  whatever  in  its  own  nature  opposes,  or,  through 
peculiar  circumstances,  becomes  incompatible  with  these.  (J.  Erskine,  D.D.) 
National  desolation  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  calamity  which  should  comb 
upon  the  land — the  emptiness  or  desolation  of  the  earth.  This  is  one  of  the 
rods  which  God  holds  over  the  heads  of  people,  to  make  them  stand  in  fear 
of  Him  (Lev.  xxvi.  19 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  38).  II.  Thb  Author  ob  efficient 
cause  of  such  desolation  is  God.  It  does  not  happen  by  any  blind  chance. 
III.  The  means  ob  second  causes  whereby  God  makes  a  land  waste. 
Pestilence,  sword,  fire,  unseasonable  weather,  noxious  creatures,  Ac.  IV.  Thb 
msbftobious  cause  (ver.  5).    (W.  Beading,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2.  And  It  shall  be,  as  with  the  people,  so  with  the  priest.— The 
mutual  assimilation  of  minister  and  people  : — The  minister  makes  the  people 
and  the  people  make  the  minister.  I.  The  minister's  influence.  1.  As  a 
preacher  and  teacher — upon  the  conceptions  of  truth  and  duty,  the  understanding 
of  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  practical  conduct  of  the  people.  2.  As  a  man,  in 
his  own  example  and  life.  3.  As  a  pastor,  in  his  pastoral  intercourse  with  his 
flock.     4.  As  a  public  leader  of  reforms,  &c.     II.  Thb  people's  influence. 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

1.  In  getting  him  audience.  Giving  him  their  own  ears  and  attention  and  gather- 
ing in  others.  2.  In  making  him  eloquent.  Gladstone  says,  "  Eloquence  is 
pouring  back  on  an  audience  in  a  shower  what  is  first  received  from  the  audience 
in  vapour."  3.  In  making  him  spiritual.  They  can  encourage  him  to  spiritual 
growth  and  culture  ;  to  earnest  and  edifying  preaching.  They  can  pray  for  him 
and  help  him  to  feel  that  they  want  and  wish  only  spiritual  food.  4.  In  making 
him  a  power  for  good.  Aristotle  says,  "  Truth  is  what  a  thing  is  in  itself,  in  its 
relations  and  in  the  medium  through  which  it  is  viewed."  Goethe  says,  "  Before 
we  complain  of  the  writing  as  obscure  we  must  first  examine  if  all  be  clear  within." 
In  the  twilight  a  very  plain  manuscript  is  illegible.  So  the  attitude  of  a  hearer 
largely  limits  the  power  of  a  preacher ;  the  co-operation  of  a  Church  member 
may  indefinitely  increase  the  effectiveness  of  a  pastor's  work.  (Homiletic  Review.) 
Preachers  affected  by  their  congregations  : — A  few  years  ago,  after  a  minister  had 
been  preaching  in  a  Wesleyan  chapel  not  far  from  my  house,  one  of  the  older 
officials  of  the  circuit  began  to  talk  to  him  of  the  glories  of  a  past  generation, 
and  said  with  some  fervour,  "  Ah,  sir,  there  were  great  preachers  in  those  days." 
"  Yes,"  was  the  reply  of  the  minister,  "  and  there  were  great  hearers  in  those 
days."  The  answer  was  a  wise  and  just  one.  If  preachers  form  and  discipline 
their  congregations,  it  is  equally  true  that  congregations  form  and  discipline 
their  preachers.  (R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  As  with  the  buyer,  bo  with  th» 
seller. — Buying  and  selling  are  of  very  ancient  date.  The  earliest  instance 
we  read  of  occurs  in  the  history  of  Abraham.  The  purchase  made  was  a  burying- 
place  ;  and  is  connected  with  the  death  of  Sarah,  Abraham's  wife.  Various 
nations  and  states  have  distinguished  themselves  at  different  times  by  their 
trade  and  commerce.  In  ancient  times  we  may  enumerate  Arabia,  Egypt,  and 
especially  Tyre — the  crowning  city  where  "  merchants  were  princes — where 
traffickers  were  the  honourable  of  the  earth."  In  more  modern  times  we  may 
mention  Greece,  Rome,  Venice,  the  Hanse,  Spain,  Portugal,  and  above  all  Great 
Britain.  Well  might  Napoleon  Buonaparte  call  us  a  nation  of  shopkeepers. 
(R.   W.  Overbury.)         The  relative  duties  of  buyers  and  sellers  : — I.  Point  out 

SOME   OF  THE   EVILS   BY    WHICH   THE   RELATION  BETWEEN   BUYER  AND   SELLER  IS 

violated.  This  relation  is  violated  by  every  violation  of  those  two  important 
principles  that  lie  at  the  foundation  of  all  society — justice  and  truth.  Justice 
consists  in  giving  every  one  his  due  ;  and  truth  or  veracity  in  keeping  our  engage- 
ments, and  avoiding  lying  and  dissimulation.  These  principles  and  the  relative 
duties  arising  out  of  them  are  violated — 1.  By  the  practice  of  any  and  every  kind 
of  fraud  in  the  transaction  of  business.  2.  By  the  contracting  of  debts  without 
any  reasonable  prospect  of  being  able  to  pay  them.  (1)  But  what  is  an  individual 
to  do  who  in  the  course  of  regular  business  finds  himself,  through  the  fluctuation 
to  which  every  branch  of  trade  is  liable,  insolvent  at  the  end  of  the  year  ?  If  he 
be  a  man  of  an  honourable  character  and  standing  in  trade,  he  will  not  want 
friends  who  are  willing  to  lend  him  a  sufficient  sum  to  extricate  him  from  his 
present  difficulties,  and  to  enable  him  to  make  a  fresh  trial  under  the  blessing  of 
God  to  succeed  in  that  line  of  business  which  he  has  hitherto  followed.  But  if, 
after  having  renewed  the  attempt,  Divine  providence  does  not  see  fit  to  succeed 
his  endeavours,  then  from  a  false  shame  of  appearing  what  he  is  in  worldly  circum- 
stances before  his  fellow-men,  to  keep  on  in  business  till  he  involve  many  others 
in  ruin  is  most  unjustifiable.  (2)  Further,  if  an  individual  who  has  failed  in 
another's  debt,  should  at  any  future  time  possess  the  means  of  paying  his  debts, 
we  hold  it  that  justice  requires  that  he  should  so  pay  them.  3.  Another  way 
in  which  the  relation  between  buyers  and  sellers  is  violated  is,  by  making  ourselves 
responsible  for  the  debts  of  others,  when  we  are  not  in  possession  of  sufficient 
capital  to  warrant  it.  4.  By  the  very  prevalent  practice  of  underselling.  Where 
does  the  injury  fall  ?  First,  upon  the  poor  operatives,  who  labour  day  and  night 
by  the  sweat  of  their  brow,  to  furnish  conveniences  and  luxuries  for  the  higher 
ranks  of  society,  whilst  their  labour  is  remunerated  at  a  price  that  hardly  keeps 
them  and  their  families  from  starving.  The  other  party  upon  whom  the  injury 
falls  is  other  tradesmen  in  the  same  line,  who,  shrinking  from  the  use  of  such 
unscrupulous  and  oppressive  means  of  realising  large  profits,  lose  either  a  part 
or  the  whole  of  their  custom.  II.  Show  the  importance  of  the  subject.  1.  In 
a  secular  view.  The  permanent  prosperity  of  our  trade,  and  consequently  the 
temporal  welfare  of  society  depend  upon  the  principles  which  pervade  our  business 
transactions.  Every  deviation  from  right  principles  inflicts  injury  somewhere, 
and  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  that  deviation  contributes  to  augment  the* 


chap,  xxiv.]  ISAIAH.  425 

Bum  of  national  distress.  Nations,  as  such,  are  punished  in  this  life — individuals 
hereafter.  An  invisible  Being,  too  little  recognised  in  the  marts  of  trade,  presides 
over  our  national  affairs,  and  distributes  or  withholds  national  blessings  in  pro- 
portion as  the  principles  of  eternal  truth  and  justice  are  practically  acknowledged. 

2.  In  a  religious  view.  It  has  been  well  said,  that  "  a  Christian  is  the  highest 
style  of  man."  (1)  A  man  who  cares  not  by  what  means  he  obtains  money, 
provided  he  succeeds  in  making  a  fortune,  cannot  be  a  Christian.  The  character 
and  doom  of  such  are  too  plainly  written  in  Scripture  to  be  mistaken  for  a  single 
moment.  (2)  We  do  not,  perhaps,  sufficiently  reflect  that  the  predominance  of 
the  love  of  gain  is  equally  incompatible  with  true  piety ;  although  a  feeling  of 
justice  and  benevolence,  joined  with  self-respect,  may  lead  us  to  abhor  and  reject 
all  that  is  dishonourable  in  business.  (3)  Nor  must  we  omit  to  observe,  that 
whilst  the  habitual  predominance  of  a  worldly  spirit  is  incompatible  with  personal 
piety,  the  too  great  prevalence  of  it  is  highly  injurious.  It  either  lifts  a  man  up 
with  vanity  and  pride,  or  it  depresses  him  with  anxiety  and  care  ;  both  of  which 
unfit  him  for  the  service  of  God.  In  proportion  as  the  spirit  of  the  world  prevails 
over  the  people  of  God,  it  stints  their  piety  and  usefulness,  and  counteracts  the 
end  for  which  they  are  constituted  "  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a 
holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people," — "  that  ye  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him, 
who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light."     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  5.  The  earth  also  Is  denied  under  the  inhabitants  thereof — The  earth 

polluted  by  sin : — The  inhabitants  of  the  earth  pollute  it  by  their  sins : 
the  children  of  Israel  defiled  God's  land  by  filling  His  inheritance  with 
the  carcases  of  their  abominable  things,  with  their  idolatries,  with  their  wicked 
inventions  and  corrupt  ways.  (R.  Macculloch.)  Transgression: — "They 
have  transgressed  the  laws  "  of  nature,  of  conscience,  and  of  nations — the  cere- 
monial, judicial,  and  moral  laws,  delivered  to  them  by  Jehovah  Himself.  These 
laws,  stamped  by  the  sacred  authority  of  the  one  great  Lawgiver,  which  they 
ought  to  have  religiously  observed,  they  presumptuously  transgressed,  omitting 
to  do  what  He  required  and  committing  what  He  had  forbidden.  (Ibid. )  The 
earth  cursed  for  man's  sake  : — The  Bible  gives  no  support  to  the  theory  that  matter 
itself  is  evil.  God  created  all  things ;  "  and  God  saw  everything  that  He  had 
made  ;  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good."  When,  therefore,  we  read  in  the  Bible 
that  the  earth  is  cursed,  we  read  that  it  is  cursed  for  man's  sake ;  when  we  read 
of  its  desolation,  it  is  as  the  effect  of  man's  crime.  (0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The 
everlasting  covenant  : — The  covenant  is  that  with  Noah,  and  the  law  that  against 
bloodshed  (Gen  ix.  5,  6).     (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  15.  Wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  fires.  —  Glorifying  the  Lord 
in  the  fires :  —  The    suffering   child   of   God   will   glorify  Him    in   the    fires — 

1.  By  acknowledging  His  power.  The  same  Almighty  One  who  fed  Elijah, 
in  the  terrible  days  of  dearth,  and  who  delivered  Daniel  from  the  power  of  the 
lions,  still  watches  over  and  provides  for  His  people.  II.  By  recognising  Hta 
wisdom.  He  knows  (as  no  short-sighted  mortal  can)  when  it  is  safe  for  us  to 
enjoy  prosperity,  and  when  it  is  needful  for  our  soul's  health  to  endure  disappoint- 
ment and  trouble.  III.  By  a  frank  acknowledgment  of  His  goodness. 
If  our  Heavenly  Father  had  ceased  to  feel  an  interest  in  our  welfare,  He  would 
not  have  employed  the  means  to  do  us  good.  (J.  N.  Norton.)  The  Lord 
glorified  by  His  suffering  people  : — I.  Who  are  expected  to  glorify  the  Lord. 
If  "  to  glorify  "  is  exemplified  in  1  Chron.  xxix.  10-18 — 1.  Then  the  wicked  cannot 
do  that  (Job  xx.  5).     2.  But  the  Church  triumphant  does  (Rev.  vii.  11,  12). 

3.  And  the  Church  militant  ought  to  have  this  one  aim.  Let  us  take  as  an  example, 
St.  Paul  (Phil.  iii.  10-14).  II.  What  the  fires  are  in  which  wi  glorify 
God.     1.  Determined   self-humiliation,    &c. ;  duties   unpleasant,    but  religious. 

2.  Personal  troubles  are  often  perplexing.  Faith  is  given,  not  to  annihilate 
these,  but  to  endure  them.  3.  Others'  trials.  4.  Our  bodily  afflictions. 
5.  Amongst  the  hottest  "  fires  "  are  fiery  darts.  Paul  was  thus  tried.  6.  Enmity 
against  our  beloved  Church.  Foes  within  and  without.  7.  Fear  of  death. 
III.  But  One  is  ever  present  in  the  fires.  1.  In  them  once,  alone.  2.  Leads 
others  safely  through.  IV.  The  fires  are  burning  by  God's  permission. 
Like  powerful  remedies  of  surgeon  or  physician.  1.  To  manifest  His  chosen. 
2.  To  purify.  3.  To  strengthen.  Opposition  invigorates.  (W.  W.  Tyler.) 
How  to  honour  God  in  trouble  : — "  Whether  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xxit. 

do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  What  an  extensive  admonition  is  this !  And  yet 
even  this  does  not  include  the  whole  of  God's  claim  upon  us.  We  are  required  to 
honour  Him,  not  only  in  all  we  do,  but  in  all  we  suffer.  I.  The  state  herb 
supposed.  "In  the  tires."  Stripped  of  metaphor,  the  passage  supposes  a  state 
of  suffering.  In  this  state  we  may  be  found — 1.  As  men.  "  Man  is  born  to 
trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upward."  2.  As  Christians.  "  Many  are  the  afflictions 
of  the  righteous."  II.  The  duty  here  enjoined.  "  Glorify  ye  the  Lord  in 
the  fires."  The  glory  of  God  is  essential  or  declarative.  We  cannot  add  to 
the  former.  But,  "  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God."  All  His  works  praise 
Him.  How  T  By  the  impressions  and  displays  of  His  perfections  ;  by  showing 
us  what  He  is,  and  what  He  deserves.  Thus,  Christians  are  appointed  to  "  show 
forth  the  praises  " — virtues — excellences — "  of  Him  who  hath  called  them,"  &c. ; 
which  is  done  by  their  language  and  their  lives.  Hence,  we  glorify  God  in  our 
afflictions  when  we  verbally  and  practically  acknowledge — 1.  His  agency.  2.  His 
rectitude.  He  is  "  righteous  in  all  His  ways,  and  holy  in  all  His  works."  3.  His 
wisdom.  4.  His  goodness.  5.  His  power.  III.  The  seasons.  1.  Because  you 
have  the  finest  opportunity.  The  scene  naturally  awakens  attention.  Nothing 
is  so  impressive  as  the  graces  of  a  Christian  in  trouble.  2.  The  obligations 
you  are  under  to  the  blessed  God.  3.  Hope  should  influence  you.  "  Verily 
there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous."  (W.  Jay.)  Glorifying  God  in  affliction  : — 
"  There  never  was  such  affliction  as  mine,"  said  a  poor  sufferer,  restlessly  tossing 
on  a  sick-bed,  in  a  city  hospital.  "  I  don't  think  there  ever  was  such  a  racking 
pain."  "  Once,"  was  faintly  uttered  from  the  next  bed.  The  first  speaker 
paused  for  a  moment,  and  then  began,  in  a  still  more  impatient  tone  :  "  Nobody 
knows  what  I  pass  through ;  nobody  ever  suffered  more  pain."  "  One,"  was 
again  whispered  from  the  adjoining  bed.  "  I  take  it  you  mean  yourself,  poor 
soul !  but — "  "  Oh !  not  myself — not  myself,"  exclaimed  the  other,  her  pale 
face  flushing  as  if  some  wrong  had  been  offered,  not  to  herself  but  to  another. 
There  was  a  short  pause,  and  then  the  sweet,  gentle  voice  uttered  the  sacred 
words,  "  When  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  they  put  it  upon  His  head, 
and  a  reed  in  His  right  hand :  and  they  bowed  the  knee  before  Him,  and  mocked 
Him,  saying,  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  !  And  they  spit  upon  Him,  and  took  the 
reed,  and  smote  Him  on  the  head.  And  when  they  came  unto  a  place  called 
Golgotha,  they  gave  Him  vinegar  to  drink,  mingled  with  gall.  And  they  crucified 
Him.  And,  about  the  ninth  hour,  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying :  My 
God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  The  voice  ceased,  and  the  nurse 
handed  a  cup  of  barley  water,  flavoured  with  a  grateful  acid,  to  the  lips  of  both 
sufferers.  "  Thank  you,  nurse,"  said  the  last  speaker.  "  They  gave  Him  gall 
to  eat,  and  vinegar  to  drink."  "  She  is  talking  about  Jesus,"  said  the  other 
sick  woman,  "  but  talking  about  His  sufferings  can't  mend  mine."  "  But  it 
lightens  hers,"  said  the  nurse.  "  I  wonder  how  ?  "  "  Hush !  "  said  the  nurse. 
The  gentle  voice  began :  "  Surely  He  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
sorrows.  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions;  He  was  bruised  for  our 
iniquities  :  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him  ;  and  with  His  stripes 
we  are  healed."  Verily,  even  in  the  midst  of  affliction  and  suffering  God's  true 
children  will  learn  to  glorify  Him.  (J.  N.  Norton.)  Galileo's  recognition  of 
God  in  his  blindness  : — How  touching  that  saying  of  blind  Galileo,  "  It  has  pleased 
God  that  it  shall  be  so,  and  it  must  please  me  too."  (Ibid.)  "  The  fires  "  : — 
The  term  "  fires  "  is  a  local  designation  meaning  the  east,  as  the  land  of  sunrise,  or 
of  dawning  light,  and  so  standing  in  opposition  to  the  west,  which  is  represented  in 
the  next  clause  as  "  the  isles  of  the  sea."  The  deliverance  is  one  that  calls  for  a 
chorus  of  praise  from  one  end  of  the  earth  to  the  other.     (T.  W.  Chambers,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare,  are  upon  thee. — Fear,  and  the 
pit,  and  the  snare  : — The  expressions  here  used  seem  to  have  formed  a  pro- 
Terbial  saying,  as  appears  from  their  being  repeated  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah 
(xlviii.  43,  44).  They  allude  to  the  different  methods  of  taking  wild  beasts  that 
were  anciently  in  use.  The  fear,  or  terror,  was  a  line  strung  with  feathers  of 
different  colours,  which  was  so  constructed  as  to  flutter  in  the  air  and  to  make 
a  terrifying  noise,  that  frightened  the  beasts  into  the  pit,  or  the  snare,  that  was 
prepared  for  them.  The  pit  was  digged  deep  in  the  ground,  and  covered  over 
with  boughs  or  turf,  in  order  to  deceive  them,  that  they  might  fall  into  it  unawares. 
The  snare  was  composed  of  nets,  enclosing  a  large  space  of  ground  that  the  wild 
beasts  were  known  to  haunt,  which  was  drawn  gradually  narrower,  until  they 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  427 

were  at  last  entangled  and  shut  up.  Our  prophet,  addressing  himself  to  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  declares,  that  calamities  corresponding  to  each  of  these 
ways  of  destroying  wild  beasts,  were  to  seize  upon  them,  and  that  they  should 
be  so  ordered,  that  those  who  escaped  one  sort  would  be  arrested  by  another. 
(R.  Macculloch.) 

Vers.  18-20.  The  foundations  of  the  earth  do  shake. — The  religious  improvement 
of  earthquakes  (preached  in  1756) : — The  works  of  Creation  and  Providence 
were  undoubtedly  intended  for  the  notice  and  contemplation  of  mankind, 
especially  when  God  "  comes  out  of  His  place,"  that  is,  departs  from  the 
usual  and  stated  course  of  His  providence  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  for  their  iniquities ;  then  it  becomes  us  to  observe  the  operation  of  His 
hands  with  fear  and  reverence.  To  this  the  Psalmist  repeatedly  calls  us:  "  Come, 
behold  the  works  of  the  Lord,  what  desolations  He  hath  made  in  the  earth." 
"  Come,  and  see  the  works  of  God  ;  He  is  terrible  in  His  doing  toward  the  children 
of  men."  This  world  is  a  state  of  discipline  for  another  ;  therefore  chastisements 
of  various  kinds  and  degrees  are  to  be  enumerated  among  the  ordinary  works 
of  Providence  —  pain,  sickness,  losses,  bereavements,  disappointments.  But 
when  these  are  found  too  weak  and  ineffectual  for  their  reformation  ;  or  when, 
from  their  being  so  frequent  and  common,  men  begin  to  think  them  things  of 
course,  and  not  to  acknowledge  the  Divine  hand  in  them ;  then  the  universal 
Ruler  uses  such  signal  and  extraordinary  executioners  of  His  vengeance,  as  cannot 
but  rouse  a  slumbering  world,  and  render  it  sensible  of  His  agency.  These  extra- 
ordinary ministers  of  His  vengeance  are  generally  these  four :  the  Famine,  Sword, 
Pestilence,  and  Earthquakes.  I.  Let  the  majestic  and  terrible  phenomenon  of 
earthquakes  put  you  in  mind  of  the  majesty  and  power  op  God,  and  the 
dreadfulness  of  His  displeasuee.  II.  This  desolating  judgment  may  justly 
lead  you  to  reflect  upon  the  sinfulness  op  our  world.  III.  This  melancholy 
event  may  carry  your  minds  gratefully  to  reflect  upon  the  peculiar  kindness 
of  Heaven  towards  our  country,  in  that  it  was  not  involved  in  the  same 
destruction.  IV.  That  which  I  would  particularly  suggest  to  your  thoughts 
from  the  devastations  of  the  late  earthquake,  is  the  last  universal  destruction 
of  our  world  at  the  final  judgment.  Of  this,  an  earthquake  is  both  a  con- 
firmation to  human  reason,  and  a  lively  representation.  (S.  Davies,  M.A.) 
"  Removed  like  a  cottage  "  (ver.  20) : — "  Swayeth  to  and  fro  like  a  hammock." 
Such  is  the  more  literal  rendering.  The  hammock  (the  same  word  as  in  chap.  L  8) 
is  still  used  throughout  the  East  by  the  night-watchers  of  vineyards.  (Sir  E. 
Strachey,  Bart.) 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Ver.  1.  0  Lord,  Thou  art  my  God. — This  chapter  looks  as  pleasantly  upon 
the  Church  as  the  former  looked  dreadfully  upon  the  world.  (M.  Henry.) 
Calm  after  storm : — We  can  only  understand  the  highest,  sweetest  meaning 
of  this  chapter  in  proportion  as  we  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  chapter  which 
precedes  it.  That  chapter  is  full  of  clouds,  and  darkness,  and  judgment.  The 
very  terribleness  of  God  is  a  reason  for  putting  trust  in  Him.  Probably  this 
view  of  the  Divine  attributes  has  not  always  been  sufficiently  vivid  to  our  spiritual 
consciousness.  We  have  thought  of  God,  and  have  become  afraid  ;  whereas 
when  we  hear  Him  thundering,  and  see  Him  scattering  His  arrows  of  lightning 
round  about  Him,  and  behold  Him  pouring  contempt  upon  the  mighty  who 
have  defied  Him,  we  should  say,  See  !  God  is  love.  What  does  He  strike  ? 
No  little  ohild,  no  patient  woman,  no  broken  heart,  no  face  that  is  steeped  in 
tsars  of  contrition.  On  what  does  His  fist  fall  ? — on  arrogance,  on  haughtiness, 
on  self-conceit,  on  self-completeness.  He  turns  the  proud  away  with  an  answer 
of  scorn  to  their  prayer  of  patronage.  God  is  only  terrible  to  evil.  That  is 
the  reason  why  His  terribleness  should  be  an  encouragement  and  an  allurement 
to  souls  that  know  their  sin  and  plead  for  pardon  at  the  Cross.  (J.  Parker,  D.D. ) 
Song  of  assurance  : — I.  The  affinity  that  is  claimed.  "  O  Jehovah,  Thou 
art  my  God."  This  affinity  was  predetermined  by  God  the  Father ;  it  is  exhibited 
in  the  most  conspicuous  manner  in  the  person  of  God  the  Son ;  it  is  revealed, 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTFATOB.  [chap.  xxv. 

beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt,  to  the  heart  of  God's  elect  by  God  the  Holy  Ghoat. 
II.  The  wonders  acknowledged.  "  Thou  hast  done  wonderful  things."  I 
will  only  select  three  out  of  myriads  :  His  vicarious  work,  the  extension  of  the 
Redeemer's  kingdom,  and  the  deliverance  of  precious  souls  individually  by  con- 
version to  God.  III.  The  eternal  First  Cause  avowed.  "  Thy  counsels  of 
old."  (J.  Irons.)  The  faithfulness  of  God  : — That  Divine  perfection  which  the 
prophet  celebrates  is  a  fountain  of  consolation  to  every  one  that  "  thirsts  after 
righteousness."  I.  Enumerate  several  past  instances  of  the  faithfulness 
of  God.  1.  Connected  with  the  history  of  the  deluge.  2.  His  conduct  towards 
the  people  of  Israel.  3.  His  promise  to  the  father  of  the  faithful,  that  "  in  his 
seed  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed," — a  promise  afterwards 
repeatedly  confirmed  by  prophets.  4.  In  the  fulness  of  time,  God  sent  forth  His 
Son,  made  of  a  woman,  &c.  (Gal.  ir.  4,  5).  Having  thus  produced  an  instance  of 
the  faithfulness  of  God  from  each  of  the  several  kingdoms  of  nature,  providence, 
and  grace,  I  proceed  to — II.  Deduce  such  inferences  as  the  subject  appears 
to  suggest.  1.  We  should  cherish  gratitude.  2.  It  is  the  privilege  of  devout 
Christians  to  maintain  unshaken  confidence  in  God — with  reference  both  to  the 
Church  of  Christ  and  the  circumstances  of  individual  believers.  (1)  Of  the 
perpetuity  and  future  prosperity  of  the  Church  we  are  not  permitted  to  doubt. 
(2)  Since  the  Lord  is  faithful,  let  the  Christian  who  is  in  a  state  of  poverty,  re- 
member that  his  Saviour  hath  said,  "  Take  no  thought  saying,  What  shall  we  eat, 
or  what  shall  we  drink,  or  wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed.  .  .  .  Your  Heavenly 
Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  these  things,"  &c.  (3)  Since  God  is  faithful, 
let  those  who  feel  the  strength  of  indwelling  sin  in  their  hearts,  remember  that 
it  is  promised,  "  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you  :  for  ye  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace."  (4)  To  fearful  Christians  the  subject  is  also  calculated 
to  administer  great  relief.  It  should  inspire  a  cheerful  and  affectionate  con- 
fidence. (5)  In  short,  this  illustrious  attribute  presents  an  asylum,  whatever 
storms  you  are  called  upon  in  the  path  of  duty  to  endure.  3.  The  subject  should 
awaken  salutary  fear.  For  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  His  word  and  purpose 
is  an  attribute  no  less  to  be  dreaded  by  the  impenitent  than  valued  by  believers. 
(T.  Sims,  M.A.)  "  My  God  "  .• — Thou  art  my  God,  who  hast  invited  me  to 
sacred  intercourse  with  Thee;  who  hast  inclined  me  to  surrender  myself  and  all 
my  concerns  into  Thy  hands,  and  to  choose  Thee  for  my  God.  Thou  art  my  Father, 
who  hast  nourished  and  brought  me  up  among  Thy  children.  Thou  art  my 
Friend,  who  hast  loaded  me  with  a  rich  profusion  of  favours.  Thou  art  the  Portion 
that  I  have  chosen,  in  the  possession  of  which  I  shall  enjoy  the  most  permanent 
felicity.  Thou  art  my  God,  and  therefore  my  happiness  shall  be  complete.  I 
humbly  claim  from  Thy  all-sufficiency  the  supply  of  all  my  wants  ;  from  Thy 
wisdom,  direction  and  conduct ;  from  Thy  power,  assistance  and  protection  ; 
from  Thy  love,  refreshment  and  consolation ;  from  Thy  mercy,  forgiveness  and 
blessing  ;  from  Thy  faithfulness,  stability  and  support ;  and  from  Thy  patience, 
forbearance  and  long-suffering.  I  cheerfully  resign  myself  and  all  my  interests 
to  Thy  direction  and  disposal ;  and,  with  dutiful  affection,  I  consecrate  all  my 
powers  and  faculties  to  Thy  honour,  whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve,  that  they 
may  be  employed  in  promoting  Thy  glory.  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  Exalting  the 
Lord : — To  exalt  the  Lord  our  God  is — 1.  To  proclaim  the  glorious  honour 
of  His  majesty.  2.  To  extol  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace.  3.  To  magnify 
His  transcendent  excellences.  4.  To  celebrate,  with  affectionate  gratitude. 
His  wonderful  lovingkindness.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  For  Thou  hast  been  a  strength  to  the  poor. — "Poor"  and 
"needy":  —  Among  the  names  applied  to  God's  people  there  are  three 
which  were  destined  to  play  an  enormous  part  in  the  history  of  religion. 
In  the  English  version  these  appear  as  two :  "  poor  and  needy  " ;  but  in  th» 
original  they  are  three.     In  chap.  xxv.  4 :  "  Thou  hast  been  a  stronghold  to  the 

fjoor  and  a  stronghold  to  the  needy,"  "  poor  "  renders  a  Hebrew  word,  "  dal," 
iterally, " wavering,  tottering,  infirm,"  then  "slender"  or  "lean,"  then  "poor" 
in  fortune  and  estate  ;  "  needy  "  literally  renders  the  Hebrew  "  'ebhydn,"  Latin 
"egenus."  In  chap.  xxvi.  6:  "The  foot  of  the  poor  and  the  steps  of  the  needy," 
"  needy  "  renders  "  dal,"  while  "  poor  "  renders  "  'anl,"  a  passive  form — 
"  forced,  afflicted,  oppressed,"  then  "  wretched,"  whether  under  persecution, 
poverty,  loneliness,  or  exile,  and  so  "  tamed,  mild,  meek."  These  three  words, 
in  their  root  ideas  of  "  infirmity,"  "  need,"  and  positive  "  affliction,"  cover  among 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  429 

them  every  aspect  of  physical  poverty  and  distress.  (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 
Poverty  in  the  East  : — In  the  East  poverty  scarcely  ever  means  physical  disadvan- 
tage alone  ;  in  its  train  there  follow  higher  disabilities.  A  poor  Eastern  cannot 
be  certain  of  fair  play  in  the  courts  of  the  land.  He  is  very  often  a  wronged  man, 
with  a  fire  of  righteous  anger  burning  in  his  breast.  Again,  and  more  important, 
misfortune  is  to  the  quick,  religious  instinct  of  the  Oriental  a  sign  of  God's 
estrangement.  With  us  misfortune  is  so  often  only  the  cruelty,  sometimes  reaL 
sometimes  imagined,  of  the  rich ;  the  unemployed  vents  his  wrath  at  the  capitalist, 
the  tramp  shakes  his  fist  after  the  carriage  on  the  highway.  In  the  East  they  do 
not  forget  to  curse  the  rich,  but  they  remember  as  well  to  humble  themselves 
beneath  the  hand  of  God.  With  an  unfortunate  Oriental  the  conviction  is  supreme, 
God  is  angry  with  me ;  I  have  lost  His  favour.  His  soul  eagerly  longs  for  God. 
(Ibid.)  Israel's  poverty  of  heart : — These  were  four  aspects  of  Israel's  poverty 
of  heart:  a  hunger  for  pardon,  a  hunger  for  justice,  a  hunger  for  home,  and  a 
hunger  for  God.  (Ibid.)  A  refuge  from  the  storm.  —  A  refuge  from  the 
storm :  —  The  conditions  of  our  earth,  and  its  varied  phenomena,  are 
employed  by  the  sacred  writers  to  represent  many  circumstances  of  human  life. 
Troubles,  especially  when  heavy  and  expressive  of  Divine  displeasure,  are  repre- 
sented in  Holy  Scripture  as  storms.    I.  This  is  a  world  where  storms  often 

GATHER,  AND  TEMPESTS  ON  THIS  PLANET  ARE  NEVER  OUT  OP  PLACE.      The  Storm 

has  its  mission  as  well  as  the  calm.  Among  men,  adversity  of  all  kinds  is  a 
powerful  agent  in  accomplishing  necessary  spiritual  operations.    IX  This  is  a 

TIME  OP  STORMS,  AND  TEMPESTS  HERE  ARE  NOT  OUT  OP  SEASON.      The  days  of  man 

upon  earth  are  as  the  winter  of  his  life.  Death  is  the  seed-time,  and  immortality 
is  the  spring  and  summer  and  harvest.  When  the  spring  and  summer  have 
come,  snow  and  hail  are  out  of  season  ;  but  during  the  winter  of  our  being,  hail 
and  snow  and  rain  are  in  season.  III.  Every  storm  is  raised  and  guided 
under  the  eye  and  hand  of  God.  The  stormy  wind  does  not  surprise  Him. 
He  determined  that  it  should  blow  at  such  a  moment,  from  such  a  quarter,  with 
such  a  force,  and  with  particular  effects.  Neither  does  it  master  Him.  The 
stormy  wind  simply  accomplishes  His  word.  IV.  The  object  op  every  storm 
is  good,  although  the  present  experience  op  it  is  not  joyous,  but  grievous. 
Hence  the  need  of  a  refuge  to  the  man  of  God.  Have  you  marked  how  frequently 
God  is  spoken  of  as  "  a  refuge  "  ?  V.  A  place  to  be  a  refuge  must  be  out  op 
the  storm,  or,  if  in  the  midst  op  it,  must  be  stronger  than  the  storm.  But 
how  is  it  that  we  children  of  men  come  to  take  refuge  in  God  ?  The  Gospel  reaches 
us  with  its  wooing  voice.  In  the  mediation  of  Jesus,  in  His  sympathy,  love,  and 
power  we  find  refuge.  And  we  come  to  make  all  the  covenants  and  promises  of 
God  distinct  refuges.  There  is  a  harbour  or  haven  at  every  point  of  danger. 
Do  you  come  to  poverty  ?  There  are  promises  to  the  poor.  Are  you  a  widow  ? 
There  are  promises  to  the  widow.  And  all  the  hopes  which  these  covenants 
awaken  become  in  turn  so  many  refuges.  In  this  world,  quietness  of  mind  and 
heart  is  a  thing  utterly  impossible  to  a  man  who  does  not  rest  in  his  God.  If 
you  feel  the  need  of  a  refuge,  you  may  in  that  sorrow  which  another  professes  to 
despise  find  the  very  refuge  which  you  seek  in  your  God.  And  why  ?  Say  that 
your  sensitiveness  springs  from  weakness.  Well,  God  has  sympathy  with  your 
weakness.     (8.  Martin.) 

Vers.  6-9.  A  feast  of  fat  things.  —  The  Gospel  feast: — L  The  pbast. 
1.  Spiritual  blessings  are  here,  as  in  other  places,  set  forth  under  the  emblem  of 
a  feast  (Prov.  ix.  2-5 ;  Luke  xiv.  16-24 ;  Matt.  xxii.  4).  In  Christ,  and  in  His 
Gospel,  provision  is  made  for  our  refreshment  in  various  respects.  (1)  Truth  is 
afforded  for  the  understanding.  (2)  Beauty  (the  amiable  perfections  of  God 
and  Christ),  goodness,  love,  hope,  joy.  (3)  Provision  is  also  made  for  the  susten- 
ance of  the  Divine  life  in  the  soul  (John  vi.  32,  33,  47-57).  (4)  In  the  Gospel 
there  is  not  barely  provision,  but  "  a  feast " ;  abundant  provision.  A  rich  variety 
of  truths,  and  clear  and  satisfactory  discoveries  concerning  them.  Abundant 
mercy,  to  remove  the  most  aggravated  guilt,  and  to  give  assurance  of  pardon, 
reconciliation,  and  peace.  Abundant  grace,  to  purify  from  all  defilement,  and 
enrich  with  holiness  and  comfort.  There  is  most  agreeable,  rich,  and  delightful 
provision.  But,  for  whom  ?  For  those  who  have  their  spiritual  taste  rectified, 
and  have  spiritual  discernment  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  "  A  feast  of  fat  things."  Bishop 
Lowth  reads,  "  of  delicacies  "  ;  "  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,"  or,  "  of  delicacies 
exquisitely  rich."     The  truths  of  the  Gospel  are  enlarging,  ennobling,  and  coa- 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv- 

eoling  to  the  mind  ;  the  grace  of  it  enriching,  invigorating,  and  comforting  to  the 
spirit ;  its  doctrines,  precepts,  promises,  exhortations,  sweet  and  precious.  Cheer- 
ing, exhilarating  provision.  "  Wines  on  the  lees  "  ;  or,  old  wines  (Lowth).  The 
t  ruths  of  the  Gospel  give  the  fullest  satisfaction  and  comfort  to  believers.  "  Well 
refined."  Refined  from  every  impure  and  carnal  mixture.  2.  But  where  is  the 
feast  made  ?  "  In  this  mountain."  This  is  said  in  allusion  to  Judsea,  a  moun- 
tainous country,  and  especially  to  Jerusalem  and  Mount  Zion,  where  this  provision 
was  first  made.  There  Christ  died  and  rose  again,  the  Spirit  was  first  poured 
out,  the  Gospel  first  preached,  and  the  Christian  Church  first  formed.  But  the 
Christian  Church  itself  is  often  figuratively  described  under  the  terms,  Jerusalem 
and  Mount  Zion  (Heb.  xii.  22).  3.  Do  we  further  inquire,  for  whom  this  feast  is 
made,  and  on  what  terms  such  may  partake  of  it  T  It  is  made  "  for  all  people," 
on  the  terms  of  repentance  and  faith.  4.  To  this  feast  we  are  invited.  But  we 
neither  know  by  nature  our  want  of  these  blessings,  nor  the  worth  of  them,  nor 
the  way  of  attaining  them.  To  remedy  this  evil  we  have — II.  A  gracious 
promise.  "  He  will  destroy  the  face,"  &c.  The  "  face  of  the  covering  "  is  put 
by  a  hypallage,  for  the  "  covering  of  the  face."  The  expression  has  a  reference 
to  the  veil  that  was  upon  the  face  of  Moses,  or  to  that  of  the  tabernacle  and  temple, 
both  emblematical  of  the  obscurity  of  that  dispensation.  But  much  darker  was 
the  dispensation  the  heathen  were  under.  The  veil  of  unbelief  is  also  intended 
(Rom.  xi.  32) ;  and  that  of  prejudice.  These  veils  are  removed  by  the  plain  and 
powerful  preaching  of  the  Gospel  (2  Cor.  iii.  12,  13).  By  the  circulation  of  the 
Scriptures.  By  the  "  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  "  (Eph.  i.  17-19).  By  the 
"  heart  turning  to  the  Lord  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  16),  and  faith  in  Jesus  (John  xii.  46). 
Here  we  have  a  manifest  prophecy  of  the  illumination  and  conversion  of  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  of  the  universal  spread  of  religion.  III.  The  effect 
produced  (ver.  8).  The  Messiah,  who  is  the  "  light  of  the  world,"  is  the  "  light 
of  life."  1.  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory."  (1)  Spiritual  death,  intro- 
duced by  the  sin  of  Adam,  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.  Hence,  "  he  that  hath 
the  Son  hath  life ;  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life." 
(2)  Temporal  death.  2.  "  The  Lord  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  faces." 
He  will  remove  sufferings  and  sorrows,  and  the  causes  of  them  for  ever  (Rev.  xxi.  4). 
3.  "  And  the  rebuke  of  His  people,"  &c.  This  implies,  that  the  people  of  God 
have  been,  and  will  be  more  or  less,  under  reproach,  in  all  ages,  till  the  glorious 
period  here  spoken  of  arrive.  IV.  The  joy  and  triumph  of  God's  people 
(ver.  9).  Their  enemies  now  reproach  them,  "  Where  is  your  God  ?  "  But  what 
will  then  be  the  reply  of  the  Lord's  people  ?  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God  "  ;  we  have 
trusted,  hoped,  waited  for  Him,  and  now  He  hath  saved  us.  Henceforth  we  shall 
have  the  everlasting  fruition  of  His  glorious  presence.  The  presence  of  God  shall 
remain  with  the  Church  (ver.  10).  (J.  Benson,  D.D.)  A  feast  of  fatness: — 
This  prophecy  spans  the  Gospel  dispensation.  First,  it  presents  to  us  the  Gospel 
dispensation  in  its  present  state  of  grace.  The  prophet  says  "  In  this  mountain 
shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat  things."  By  "  this 
mountain  "  the  prophet  intends  Mount  Zion  ;  and  from  the  literal  Mount  Zion  it 
was  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  went  forth,  being  preached  in  the  first  instance 
by  the  forerunner  of  Christ,  and  then  by  the  incarnate  Son  of  God  Himself.  And 
all  the  blessings  which  have  flowed  to  the  Church  and  to  the  world  have  come  to 
us  from  Jerusalem — that  Jerusalem  which  is  the  type  of  the  Christian  Church, 
And  you  will  observe  that  this  Gospel  dispensation,  with  its  blessings  and  its 
privileges,  is  spoken  of  under  the  familiar  image  of  a  feast.  This  imagery  is 
eminently  calculated  to  present  to  us  an  idea  of  the  fulness  of  the  grace  of  the  Gospel. 
It  is  not  as  if  God  was  offering  provision  to  starving  men  just  enough,  as  we  should 
say  in  common  parlance,  to  keep  body  and  soul  together.  It  is  not  a  scanty  pro- 
vision :  it  is  not  a  provision  simply  of  bread  and  water.  Now,  in  order  to  see  what 
is  meant  let  us  apply  this,  in  the  first  place,  to  the  Gospel  dispensation  in  its 
bearing  upon  sinners  to  whom  the  invitation  is  first  addressed.  Yon  mark,  in 
the  first  verse,  that  it  is  a  feast  of  fat  things.  It  is  a  feast  of  wine  in  the  very 
best  condition— wine  which  is  old,  settled  upon  its  lees,  and  which  by  reason  of  its 
age  has  now  attained  its  very  best  and  choicest  flavour.  Now,  let  us  observe 
how  aptly  this  illustrates  the  provision  of  the  Gospel  in  its  aspect  to  those  to 
whom  the  message  and  the  invitation  are  still  addressed.  When  we,  for  instance, 
as  ministers,  are  oalled  upon  to  deliver  this  invitation  under  any  circumstances  * 
we  feel  that  we  are  entirely  unhampered  by  any  limitation  as  to  persons,  or  by 
any  limitation  as  to  the  question  of  sufficiency  and  adaptation  to  those  who  are. 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  431 

invited.  It  is  not,  I  mean,  a  scanty  hospitality  which  God  has  provided.  It  is 
not  such  that  he  who  has  to  deliver  the  invitation  in  this  church,  or  anywhere 
else  in  the  midst  of  the  streets  of  London,  has  to  consider,  "  Well,  the  Gospel 
is  only  intended  for  a  certain  class  of  sinners ;  the  Gospel  is  only  intended  for  a 
certain  kind  of  sins  ;  and  before  I  deliver  this  invitation  I  have  to  decide  whether 
this  is  a  case  which  it  will  suit, — whether  this  is  a  case  which  is  included  in  the 
provision  that  is  made, — whether  I  may  not  be  deceiving  and  disappointing 
this  man."  No  such  thing.  It  is  a  feast ;  it  is  a  feast  of  fat  things  ;  and  it  is  a 
feast  of  the  very  choicest  wines.  What  does  all  this  mean  when  we  strip  off  the 
imagery, — when  we  look  at  this  not  as  a  beautiful  piece  of  prophetic  poetry, 
but  in  its  reality,  in  its  actual  bearing  upon  men  to  whom  the  Gospel  is  addressed  T 
It  means  to  say  that  there  is  abundant  rich  provision  for  every  sinner.  It  means 
to  say  that  God  in  His  love  has  provided  for  the  case  of  every  man.  It  means 
that  the  blessings  of  salvation  which  we  have  to  offer  in  Jesus  Christ  are  not 
scanty  blessings, — that  they  are  not  such  blessings  as  leave  us  any  doubt  as  to 
whether  they  will  meet  the  case  of  this  particular  man,  but  that  the  salvation 
which  is  in  Christ  is  a  feast,  and  a  feast  of  fat  things.  And  then,  again,  take  the 
aspect  of  this  Gospel  towards  those  who  have  already  received  the  invitation, 
and  who  are,  so  to  say,  sitting  down  at  the  feast  table.  Every  believing  man  who 
is  in  Christ  is  as  a  man  sitting  down  at  a  perpetual  feast.  Every  day  is,  in  this 
Bense,  a  feast  day  to  him.  Every  day  is  a  day  upon  which  he  is  to  be  feeding  upon 
Christ,  and  to  be  nourishing  his  soul  with  the  rich  and  costly  blessings  of  salvation. 
Better  to  have  the  feeblest  faith  than  to  be  an  unbeliever.  But  is  this  the  condition 
in  which  God  would  have  His  believing  people  to  be  ?  I  say,  no  such  thing.  God 
intends  that  you  should  receive,  and  receive  without  doubting,  and  receive  without 
reserve,  when  you  come  to  Christ,  the  fulness  and  the  freeness  of  His  grace.  He 
intends  that  you  should  believe  Him  when  He  says  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven." 
He  does  not  expect  of  you  that  you  should  be  content  with  saying  "  Ah,  at  some 
time  or  other  God  will  forgive  my  sins  :  there  is  hope  that  my  sins  will  be  forgiven." 
He  intends  to  make  you  feel,  and  desires  to  have  you  realise  from  day  to  day, 
that  it  is  not  simply  bread  and  water,  but  that  it  is  wine  and  milk.  There  is  this 
unbroken  continuity  between  what  we  call  "  grace  "  and  what  we  very  properly 
call  "  glory."  You  observe  how  this  appears  clearly  in  the  end  of  the  passage, 
because  the  prophet  flows  from  one  thing  into  the  other  as  naturally  as  possible. 
What  I  want  you  particularly  to  mark,  as  one  of  the  chief  things  I  would  impress 
upon  you,  is  how,  beginning  with  this  Word  of  the  Lord  in  Jerusalem — beginning 
with  the  taking  away  of  the  veil  from  off  the  faces  of  all  people — beginning  with 
the  invitation  to  repent  and  believe  and  receive  the  remission  of  sins  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ — the  prophet  goes  on  to  what  we  find  ultimately  to  be  at  the 
very  end  of  the  dispensation;  how  naturally,  as  if  there  was  no  break,  as  if  it 
was  just  one  flow  of  grace  until,  if  I  may  so  express  it,  the  river  of  grace  is  lost 
in  the  vast  expanse  of  the  ocean  of  glory.  There  seems  to  be  no  chasm.  Indeed, 
wherever  there  is  in  any  young  man  or  in  any  old  man,  in  any  woman  or  in  any 
child,  a  work  of  grace — real,  saving  grace — that  is  the  beginning,  and  glory  with 
all  its  details  and  all  its  blessedness,  all  its  companionships  and  all  its  occupations, 
will  be  nothing  more  than  the  full  efflorescence  and  the  full  development  and  the 
full  consummation  of  that  work  of  grace  which  is  begun.  Well  now,  you  see, 
these  are  blended  together  in  the  text ;  and  the  apostle  says  that  God  will  in  thai 
day  fulfil  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  and  that  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory." 
He  will  not  do  it  before.  Death  is  not  swallowed  up  in  victory,  even  when  the 
triumphant  Christian  dies.  But  the  apostle  says,  interpreting  the  words  of  the 
prophet,  "  Then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying  which  is  written  "  ;  that  is, 
when  the  voice  of  the  archangel  shall  be  heard,  and  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and 
when  the  graves  shall  give  up  their  dead,  and  when  they  that  have  gone  down 
to  the  grave  in  a  natural  body,  in  dishonour,  in  corruption,  in  feebleness,  shall  be 
raised  in  power  and  in  incorruption  and  in  glory, — "  then  shall  be  brought  to 
pass  the  saying  which  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory."  And  this 
is  to  be  followed  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  declaration  of  the  prophet,  interpreted 
by  the  figure  of  the  Apocalypse.  God  is  then  to  wipe  away  all  tears.  Tears, 
as  we  know,  on  earth,  have  many  sources.  There  are  the  tears  of  penitence  : 
we  shall  have  to  shed  them  no  longer.  There  are  the  tears  of  anguish  on  account 
of  temporal  sorrow  and  bereavement  and  bodily  suffering :  we  shall  have  to 
shed  them  no  more.  There  are  the  tears  of  anxiety  amid  all  the  pressing  cares  of 
life.     There  are  the  tears  of  despondency  and  disappointment.     We  shall  have  to 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

shed  them  no  more.  There  is  another  source  of  tears  while  we  are  yet  in  the  body. 
You  and  I  have  often  shed  tears  from  another  cause — tears  of  joy.  And  why  do 
we  shed  tears  of  joy  ?  Because  the  joy  is  sometimes  so  sudden,  it  is  so  deep, 
it  is  so  great,  it  so  thoroughly  overmasters  us  and  transports  us,  that  the  feeble 
body  cannot  bear  it ;  and  the  result  is  that  tears  course  down  our  cheeks,  and, 
as  we  say  not  infrequently,  we  "weep  for  joy."  There  will  be  no  weeping  for 
joy  after  the  resurrection.  Because,  though  we  shall  have  the  joy,  we  shall  be 
capacitated  to  bear  it :  we  shall  have  the  joy,  even  the  joy  of  our  Lord,  but  our 
whole  nature  will  be  strong  enough  to  enjoy  that  joy,  and  so  there  will  be  no  more 
tears.  (J.  C.  Miller,  D.D.)  '  In  this  mountain  "  ; — A  poet's  imagination  and 
a  prophet's  clear  vision  of  the  goal  to  which  God  will  lead  humanity  are  both  at 
their  highest  in  this  great  song  of  the  future,  whose  winged  words  make  music 
even  in  a  translation.  No  doubt  it  starts  from  the  comparatively  small  fact  of 
the  restoration  of  the  exiled  nation  to  its  own  land.  But  it  soars  far  beyond 
that.  It  sees  all  mankind  associated  with  them  in  sharing  its  blessings.  It  is  the 
vision  of  God's  ideal  for  humanity.  That  makes  it  the  more  remarkable  that  the 
prophet,  with  this  wide  outlook,  should  insist  with  such  emphasis  on  the  fact  that 
it  has  a  local  centre.  That  phrase  "  in  this  mountain  "  is  three  times  repeated  in 
the  hymn ;  two  of  the  instances  have  lying  side  by  side  with  them  the  expressions 
"  all  people  "  and  "  all  nations,"  as  if  to  bring  together  the  local  origin  and  the 
universal  extent  of  the  blessings  promised.  The  sweet  waters  that  are  to  pour 
through  the  world  well  up  from  a  spring  opened  "  in  thia  mountain."  The  beams 
that  are  to  lighten  every  land  stream  out  from  a  light  blazing  there.  The  world's 
hopes  for  that  golden  age  which  poets  have  sung,  and  towards  which  earnest  social 
reformers  have  worked,  and  of  which  this  prophet  was  sure,  rest  on  a  definite 
fact,  done  in  a  definite  place,  at  a  definite  time.  Isaiah  knew  the  place,  but  what 
was  to  be  done,  or  when  it  was  to  be  he  knew  not.  You  and  I  ought  to  be  wiser. 
History  has  taught  us  that  Jesus  Christ  fulfils  the  visioned  good  that  inspired 
the  prophet's  brilliant  words.  We  might  say,  with  allowable  licence,  that  this 
mountain,"  in  which  the  Lord  does  the  good  things  that  this  song  magnifies,  is 
not  so  much  Zion  as  Calvary.  (.4.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  source  of  the  world's 
hope  : — I.  Where  does  the  world's  food  come  from  ?  Physiologists  can  tell, 
by  studying  the  dentition  and  the  digestive  apparatus  of  an  animal,  what  it  is 
meant  to  live  upon,  whether  vegetables  or  flesh,  or  a  mingled  diet  of  both.  And 
you  can  tell  by  studying  yourself,  what,  or  whom,  you  are  meant  to  live  upon. 
Look  at  these  hearts  of  yours  with  their  yearnings,  their  clamant  needs.  Will 
any  human  love  satisfy  the  heart-hunger  of  the  poorest  of  us  ?  No  !  Look  at 
these  tumultuous  wills  of  ours  that  fancy  they  want  to  be  independent,  and  really 
want  an  absolute  master  whom  it  is  blessedness  to  obey.  The  very  make  of  our 
being,  our  heart,  will,  mind,  desires,  passions,  longings,  all  with  one  voice  proclaim 
that  the  only  food  for  a  man  is  God.  Jesus  Christ  "brings  the  food  that  we  need. 
"  In  this  mountain  is  prepared  a  feast  .  .  .  for  all  nations."  Notice,  that 
although  it  does  not  appear  on  the  surface,  and  to  English  readers,  this  world's 
festival,  in  which  every  want  is  met,  and  every  appetite  satisfied,  is  a  feast  on  a 
sacrifice.  Would  that  the  earnest  men,  who  are  trying  to  cure  the  world's  evils 
and  still  the  world's  wants,  and  are  leaving  Jesus  Christ  and  His  religion  out  of 
their  programme,  would  ask  themselves  whether  there  is  not  something  deeper  in 
the  hunger  of  humanity  than  their  ovens  can  ever  bake  bread  for.     II.  Where 

DOES  THE   UNVEILING  THAT  GIVES  LIGHT  TO  THE  WORLD   COME  FROM  ?      My  text 

emphatically  repeats,  "  in  this  mountain."  The  pathetic  picture  that  is  implied 
here,  of  a  dark  pall  that  lies  over  the  whole  world,  suggests  the  idea  of  mourning, 
but  still  more  emphatically  that  of  obscuration  and  gloom.  The  veil  prevents 
vision  and  shuts  out  light,  and  that  is  the  picture  of  humanity  as  it  presents 
itself  before  this  prophet — a  world  of  men  entangled  in  the  folds  of  a  dark  pall 
that  lay  over  then*  heads,  and  swathed  them  round  about,  and  prevented  them 
from  seeing ;  shut  them  up  in  darkness  and  entangled  their  feet,  so  that  they 
stumbled  in  the  gloom.  It  is  a  pathetic  picture,  but  it  does  not  go  beyond  the 
realities  of  the  case.  There  is  a  universal  fact  of  human  experience  which  answers 
to  the  figure,  and  that  is  sin.  That  is  the  black  thing  whose  ebon  folds  hamper 
us,  and  darken  us,  and  shut  out  the  visions  of  God  and  blessedness,  and  all  the 
glorious  blue  above  us.  The  weak  point  of  all  these  schemes  and  methods  to 
which  I  have  referred  for  helping  humanity  out  of  the  slough,  and  making  men 
happier,  is  that  they  underestimate  the  fact  of  sin.  There  is  only  one  thing  that 
deals  radically  with  the  fact  of  human  transgression  ;  and  that  is  the  sacrifice  of 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  433 

Christ  on  Calvary,  and  its  result,  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  life  that  was  in 
Jesus  Christ,  breathed  into  us  from  the  throne  itself.  III.  Where  does  thh 
life  that  destroys  death  come  from  ?  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory  " 
Or,  as  probably  the  word  more  correctly  means,  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  for 
ever."  None  of  the  other  panaceas  for  the  world's  evils  even  attempt  to  deal  with 
that  "  shadow  feared  of  man  "  that  sits  at  the  end  of  all  our  paths.  Jesus  Christ 
has  dealt  with  it.  {Ibid. )  Needy  man  and  his  moral  provision  : — I.  Humanity 
is  morally  famishing — Christianity  has  provisions.  "  A  feast  of  fat  things," 
&c.  The  feverish  restlessness  and  the  earnest  racing  after  something  not  yet 
attained,  show  the  hungry  and  thirsty  state  of  the  soul.  Christianity  has  the 
provisions,  which  are — 1.  Adequate  :  for  all  people."  2.  Varied :  "  wines  and 
fat  things  full  of  marrow."  3.  Pleasant:  "wines  on  the  lees  well  refined." 
II.  Humanity  is  morally  benighted — Christianity  has  illumination.  "  He 
will  destroy  in  this  mountain,"  &c.  Men  are  enwrapped  in  moral  gloom ;  they 
have  their  "  understanding  darkened  "  (Eph.  iv.  18).  "  The  veil  is  upon  their 
hearts  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  15).  Physical  darkness  is  bad  enough,  intellectual  darkness 
is  worse,  moral  darkness  is  the  worst  of  all.  It  is  a  blindness  to  the  greatest 
Being,  the  greatest  obligations,  and  the  greatest  interests.  Christianity  has  moral 
light.  Christ  is  "  the  light  of  the  world."  Indeed,  Christianity  gives  the  three 
conditions  of  moral  vision : — the  visual  faculty ;  opens  the  eyes  of  conscience ; 
the  medium,  which  is  truth ;  and  the  object,  which  is  God,  &c.  IIL  Humanity 
is  morally  dead — Christianity  has  life.  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in 
victory."  Men  are  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sing."  The  valley  of  dry  bones  is 
a  picture  of  moral  humanity.  Insensibility,  utter  subjection  to  external  forces, 
ana  offensiveness,  are  some  of  the  characteristics  of  death.  Christianity  has  life. 
Its  truths  with  a  trumpet's  blast  call  men  up  from  their  moral  graves.  Its  spirit 
is  quickening.  "  You  hath  He  quickened,"  &c.  IV.  Humanity  is  morally 
unhappy — Christianity  has  blessedness.  There  are  tears  on  "  all  faces." 
Go  to  the  heathen  world,  and  there  is  nothing  but  moral  wretchedness.  The  whole 
moral  creation  groaneth :  conflicting  passions,  remorseful  reflections,  foreboding 
apprehensions,  make  the  world  miserable.  Christianity  provides  blessedness. 
V.  Humanity  is  morally  reproached — Christianity  has  honour.  "  And 
the  rebuke  of  His  people  shall  He  take  away  from  off  all  the  earth."  Man  morally 
rebukes  himself ;  he  is  rebuked  by  his  fellow-man ;  he  is  rebuked  by  his 
Maker.  He  is  under  "  condemnation."  And  the  rebuke  is  just.  Christianity 
removes  this.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus."  It  exalts  man  to  the  highest  honour.  (Homilist.)  Veils 
removed  and  souls  feasted : — I.  The  place  specified.  "  In  this  mountain." 
Mountains  are  often  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures,  and  wonderful  things  were  done 
on  some  of  them.  The  ark  rested  on  a  mountain  ;  Abraham  offered  up  his  son 
Isaac  on  a  mountain,  &c.  The  Church  may  be  compared  to  a  mountain— 
1.  Because  of  its  conspicuousness.  2.  Because  of  its  exposure  to  storms. 
3.  Because  of  its  stability.  4.  Because  it  is  beautiful  and  beneficial.  Mountains 
break  the  monotony  of  the  landscape,  are  good  for  shelter,  and  rich  with  valuable 
substances.  The  Church  is  a  thing  of  moral  beauty,  and  should  be  rich  in  faith, 
love,  and  zeal.  II.  The  business  to  be  done  in  this  mountain.  Face  coverings 
and  veils  have  to  be  destroyed.  People  have  to  be  prepared  for  a  feast :  and 
with  veiled  faces  and  muffled  mouths  they  can  neither  see  nor  eat.  The  coverings 
which  sin  has  thrown  over  all  people  are — 1.  Ignorance.  Sin  made  Adam  so 
ignorant  that  he  tried  to  hide  himself  from  the  presence  of  an  omnipresent  and 
omniscient  God  by  creeping  among  the  trees  in  the  Garden  of  Eden.  And  his 
children  are  also  as  ignorant  of  God.  2.  Shame  and  slavish  fear.  This  drives 
men  from  God  as  it  did  their  first  father.  3.  Unbelief;  causing  men  to  reject 
Christ,  and  to  stagger  at  God's  promises.  From  thousands  of  minds  such  cover- 
ings, thick  and  strong  though  they  be,  have  been  torn  and  destroyed.  III.  Thh 
feast  that  is  to  follow.  The  Church  is  not  a  place  of  amusement  merely, 
or  a  lecture  room,  but  the  soul's  feasting  place,  where  all  the  dainties  of  Heaven 
can  be  had.  At  a  feast  there  is  generally  found — 1.  Variety.  2.  Plenty. 
God's  stores  can  never  be  exhausted.  3.  Good  company  is  expected.  At  this 
feast  you  have  God's  nobility  on  earth,  princes  and  princesses,  kings  and  priests, 
and  you  are  favoured  with  the  presence  of  the  King  of  kings  Himself.  Nowhere 
out  of  Heaven  can  the  company  be  more  select.  4.  Here  all  is  gratis.  ("  V  "  in 
Homilist. )  The  marriage  feast  between  Christ  and  His  Church  : — These  words 
are  prophetical,  and  cannot  have  a  perfect  performance  all  at  once,  but  they  shall 

28 


434  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxr. 

be  performed  gradually.  I  will  show  why  Christ,  with  His  benefits,  prerogatives, 
graces,  and  comforts,  is  compared  to  a  feast.  I.  In  regard  of  the  choice  of  the 
things.  In  a  feast  all  things  are  of  the  best ;  so  are  the  things  we  have  in  Christ. 
They  are  the  best  of  everything.  Pardon  for  sin  is  a  pardon  of  pardon.  The 
title  we  have  for  Heaven,  through  Him,  is  a  sure  title.  The  joy  we  have  by  Him 
is  the  joy  of  all  joys.  The  liberty  and  freedom  from  sin,  which  He  purchased 
for  us  by  His  death,  is  perfect  freedom.  The  riches  of  grace  we  have  by  Him 
are  the  only  lasting  and  durable  riches.  IL  There  is  variety.  In  Christ  there 
is  variety  answerable  to  all  our  wants.  Are  we  foolish  ?  He  is  wisdom.  Have 
we  guilt  in  our  consciences  T  He  is  righteousness,  and  this  righteousness  is 
imputed  unto  us,  &c.  III.  There  is  full  sufficiency.  There  is  abundance  of 
grace,  and  excellency  and  sufficiency  in  Christ.  IV.  A  feast  is  for  company. 
This  is  a  marriage  feast,  at  which  we  are  contracted  to  Christ.  Of  all  feasts, 
marriage  feasts  are  most  sumptuous.  V.  For  a  feast  ye  have  the  choicest 
garments,  as  at  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb,  "  white  and  fine  linen  "  (Rev.  xix.  8). 
VI.  This  was  signified  in  old  time  by  the  Jews.  1.  In  the  Feast  of  the 
Passover.  2.  Manna  was  a  type  of  Christ.  3.  The  hard  rock  in  the  wilderness, 
when  it  was  struck  with  the  rod  of  Moses,  presently  water  gushed  out  in  abundance, 
which  preserved  life  to  the  Israelites ;  so  Christ,  the  rock  of  our  salvation,  when 
His  precious  side  was  gored  with  the  bloody  lance  upon  the  Cross,  the  blood  gushed 
out,  and  in  such  a  manner  and  such  abundance,  that  by  the  shedding  thereof  our 
souls  are  preserved  alive.  4.  All  the  former  feasts  in  times  past  were  but  types 
of  this.  5.  In  the  sacrament  you  have  a  feast,  a  feast  of  varieties,  not  only  bread, 
but  wine — to  shew  the  variety  and  fulness  of  comfort  in  Christ.  VII.  Because  there 
can  be  no  feast  where  the  greatest  enemy  is  in  force,  He  swallows  up  death  in 
victory.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  The  Gospel  feast : — In  the  single  circumstance 
that  the  feast  foretold  by  the  prophet  was  to  be  a  feast  "  to  all  people,"  there  is  an 
obvious  reference  to  the  Gospel  dispensation ;  for  feasts  among  the  Jews  were 
more  or  less  exclusive,  and  in  no  instance,  not  even  on  occasions  of  the  most 
intense  interest  and  joy,  were  they  made  accessible  to  the  Gentiles  by  open  and 
indiscriminate  invitation.  Besides,  in  the  subsequent  context,  there  is  a  pre- 
diction respecting  the  conquest  of  death  by  believers,  which  is  quoted  by  St.  Paul 
(1  Cor.  xv.),  and  is  directly  applied  by  him  to  that  most  blessed  and  triumphant 
result  of  the  death  of  Christ.  This  quotation  gives  to  the  whole  prediction  a 
New  Testament  aspect.  I.  Who  is  represented  as  making  this  feast.  "  The 
Lord  of  hosts."  This  is  one  of  God's  names,  which  calls  up  the  majesty  of  Hi* 
nature.  He  dwells  amidst  the  bright  angels,  controls  the  stormiest  tide  of  battle, 
prescribes  their  courses  to  the  great  lights  of  the  firmament ;  yet  though  thus 
almighty,  independent,  supreme,  He  makes  a  feast  for  guilty,  polluted  man.  Nor 
is  it  a  feast  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term.  As  the  world  is  now  constituted, 
He  may  be  said  to  have  spread  out  sach  a  feast  in  the  riches  of  that  universe 
which  He  has  so  skilfully  contrived,  and  so  munificently  adorned.  There  is  a 
feast  in  its  aspects  of  beauty  and  grandeur — in  its  vastness  and  variety — in  its 
perfection  and  magnificence — in  its  wondrous  laws  and  minute  provisions.  Still 
more  ;  there  is  a  feast  in  the  comforts,  the  privileges,  and  pleasures  of  civilised 
life — in  the  means  of  acquiring  knowledge — in  the  protection  of  righteous  laws — 
in  the  blessings  of  the  domestic  constitution — in  the  progress  of  nations — and 
in  the  triumphs  of  reason.  But  far  different  is  the  feast  foretold  in  the 
text.  It  is  a  spiritual  feast ;  a  feast  for  the  undeserving ;  a  feast  which 
required  important  arrangements  to  be  made  before  it  could  be  provided. 
II.  The  scene  of  entertainment.  "  On  this  mountain."  "  This  mountain  " 
means  Zion  or  Jerusalem,  which  was  the  select  scene  of  Divine  manifestation 
and  worship  to  the  chosen  people.  Zion  came  to  be  identified  with  the  Church 
of  God ;  and  in  the  Old  Testament  it  is  frequently  employed  as  synonymous 
with  it.  It  is  emphatically  styled  "  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house."  Its 
great  distinction  consisted  in  this — it  was  the  scene  where  the  Divine  presence 
was  manifested  in  a  visible  glory,  and  where  answers  were  vouchsafed  to  the  prayers 
of  the  faithful.  In  one  sense,  the  feast  might  be  said  to  have  been  prepared 
at  the  period  the  prediction  of  the  text  was  announced.  As  the  believing  Jews 
waited  on  the  spiritual  services  of  the  temple,  they  partook  of  this  feast.  Truths 
of  unspeakable  importance  occupied  their  attention  ;  their  minds  were  elevated, 
comforted  and  soothed  by  them  ;  and,  as  they  descended  from  the  sacred  hill, 
again  to  engage  in  the  ordinary  duties  and  cares  of  life,  it  must  have  been  with 
refreshed  and  joyful  hearts,  with  conscious  satisfaction,  and  with  a  settled  tran- 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  435 

quillity.  The  full  revelation  of  the  Gospel,  however,  was  more  appropriately 
and  emphatically  the  time  of  festivity.  Now  this  full  revelation  might  be  said 
to  have  been  made  on  Zion  or  in  Jerusalem.  It  was  in  the  temple  of  Zion  that 
the  infant  Redeemer  was  first  recognised  by  aged  Simeon ;  there  He  was  dedicated 
to  the  Lord  by  His  mother,  Mary.  From  time  to  time,  He  appeared  within  its 
gates,  addressing  the  people ;  while,  on  one  memorable  occasion,  He  asserted 
His  authority  as  its  master  by  driving  forth  the  dove-merchants  and  the  money- 
changers, by  whom  it  had  been  recklessly  profaned.  There,  too,  it  is  to  be 
remembered,  was  the  scene  of  His  last  suffering — there  He  shed  the  blood  of 
atonement,  and  there  He  abolished  death  by  dying.  When  He  had  left  our  world, 
it  was  in  Jerusalem  that  His  apostles  first  began  to  preach ;  it  was  "  in  an  upper 
room  "  there  that  they  met  with  one  accord,  and  engaged  in  prayer,  the  Spirit 
came  plentifully  down,  and  by  means  of  one  sermon,  three  thousand  converts 
were  added  to  the  Church.  Jerusalem  continued  to  be  the  scene  of  amazing 
triumphs.  The  city  of  the  prophets  was  shaken  to  its  centre  ;  the  feast  of  grace 
was  spread  out ;  the  invitation  was  freely  announced ;  multitudes  from  distant 
heathen  lands  heard  the  Gospel  sound,  and  crowded  to  the  scene  of  entertainment. 
There  is  a  peculiarity  respecting  this  feast  which  requires  to  be  considered.  It  is 
not,  like  other  feasts,  restricted  as  to  time  or  place  ;  it  is  a  feast  for  all  times  and 
for  all  places.  III.  The  feast  itself.  It  is  a  feast  of  best  things.  We  consider 
this  figurative  language  as  strikingly  descriptive  of  the  peculiar  blessings  the 
Gospel  offers  to  guilty,  ruined  man.  This  provision  grows  by  distribution  ;  like 
the  miraculous  loaves  in  the  Gospel,  the  fragments  after  every  participation 
are  more  abundant  than  the  original  supply.  IV.  Thb  guests  for  whom  thb 
feast  is  made.  "  All  people."  There  is  no  distinction,  and  there  is  no  limit. 
This  feast  presents  a  striking  contrast  with  the  feasts  usually  made  by  men.  When 
men  invite  to  a  feast,  they  select  a  class — kindred,  friends,  or,  perhaps  more 
frequently,  rich  neighbours.  But  the  feast  foretold  in  the  text,  is  to  be  a  feast 
"  for  all  people."  The  vastness  of  its  extent  strikingly  illustrates  the  power 
and  the  mercy  of  the  Divine  Entertainer.  Conclusion  : — There  is  one  question  of 
immense  importance,  Have  you  accepted  the  invitation  to  come  to  this  feast  T 
(A.  Bennie,  M.A.)  Good  cheer  for  Christmas  : — God,  in  the  verse  before  us, 
has  been  pleased  to  describe  the  provisions  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Other 
interpretations  are  all  flat  and  stale,  and  utterly  unworthy  of  such  expressions 
as  those  before  us.  When  we  behold  the  Person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whose 
flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  whose  blood  is  drink  indeed,  offered  up  upon  the  chosen 
mountain,  we  then  discover  a  fulness  of  meaning  in  these  gracious  words  of  sacred 
hospitality.  Our  Lord  Himself  was  very  fond  of  describing  His  Gospel  under 
the  self-same  image  as  that  which  is  here  employed.  I.  The  feast.  It  is  described 
as  consisting  of  viands  of  the  best,  nay,  of  the  best  of  the  best.  They  are  fat 
things,  but  they  are  also  fat  things  full  of  marrow.  Wines  are  provided  of  the 
most  delicious  and  invigorating  kind,  wines  on  the  lees,  which  retain  their  aroma, 
their  strength,  and  their  flavour ;  but  these  are  most  ancient  and  rare,  having 
been  so  long  kept  that  they  have  become  well  refined  ;  by  long  standing  they  have 
purified,  clarified  themselves,  and  brought  themselves  to  the  highest  degree  of 
brightness  and  excellence.  1.  Let  us  survey  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel,  and 
observe  that  they  are  fat  things,  and  fat  things  full  of  marrow.  (1)  Complete 
justification.  (2)  Adoption.  (3)  Every  child  of  God  is  the  object  of  eternal 
love,  without  beginning  and  without  end.  (4)  Union  to  Christ.  (5)  Resurrection 
and  everlasting  life.  2.  Changing  the  run  of  the  thought,  and  yet  really  keeping 
to  the  same  subject,  let  me  now  bring  before  you  the  goblets  of  wine.  These  we 
shall  consider  as  symbolising  the  joys  of  the  Gospel.  (1)  One  of  the  dearest 
joys  of  the  Christian  life  is  a  sense  of  perfect  peace  with  God.  (2)  A  sense  of 
security.  (3)  Communion  with  God.  (4)  The  pleasures  of  hope,  a  hope  most 
sure  and  steadfast,  most  bright  and  glorious.  (5)  These  joys  of  the  believer  are 
ancient  in  their  origin.  Old  wines  are  intended  by  "  wines  well  refined  "  ;  they 
have  stood  long  on  the  lees,  have  drawn  out  all  the  virtue  from  them,  and  have 
been  cleared  of  all  the  coarser  material.  (6)  The  fulness  of  their  excellence, 
because  the  wine  on  the  lees  holds  its  flavour,  and  retains  its  aroma ;  and  there 
is  a  fulness  and  richness  about  the  blessings  of  Divine  grace  which  endear  them 
to  our  hearts.  (7)  Their  refined  nature.  Gospel  joys  are  elevating.  (8)  How 
absolutely  peerless  are  the  provisions  of  grace.  II.  The  banquetino-hall. 
"  In  this  mountain."  There  is  a  reference  here  to  three  things — the  same  symbol 
bearing  three  interpretations.     1.  Literally,  the  mountain  upon  which  Jerusalem 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

is  built.  The  reference  is  here  to  the  hill  of  the  Lord  upon  which  Jerusalem 
stood  ;  the  great  transaction  which  was  fulfilled  at  Jerusalem  upon  Calvary 
hath  made  to  all  nations  a  great  feast.  2.  Frequently  Jerusalem  is  used  as  the 
symbol  of  the  Church  of  God.  and  it  is  within  the  pale  of  the  Church  that  the  great 
feast  of  the  Lord  is  made  unto  all  nations.  The  mountain  sometimes  means 
the  Church  of  God  exalted  to  its  latter-day  glory.  III.  The  host  of  the  feast. 
In  the  Gospel  banquet  there  is  not  a  single  dish  brought  by  man.  I  know  some 
would  like  to  bring  a  little  with  them  to  the  banquet,  something  at  least  by  way 
of  trimming  and  adornment,  so  that  they  might  have  a  share  of  the  honour ; 
but  it  must  not  be,  the  Lord  of  hosts  makes  the  feast,  and  He  will  not  even  permit 
the  guests  to  bring  their  own  wedding  garments — they  must  stop  at  the  door 
and  put  on  the  robe  which  the  Lord  has  provided,  for  salvation  is  all  grace  from 
first  to  last.  The  Lord  provides  sovereignly  as  "  Lord  of  hosts,"  and  ail-sufficiently 
as  Jehovah.  It  needed  the  all-sufficiency  of  God  to  provide  a  feast  for  hungry 
sinners.  If  God  spread  the  feast  it  is  not  to  be  despised.  If  He  provide  the 
feast,  let  Him  have  the  glory  of  it.  IV.  The  guests.  "  For  all  people."  This 
includes  not  merely  the  chosen  people,  the  Jews,  whose  were  the  oracles,  but 
it  encompasses  the  poor  uncircumcised  Gentiles,  who  by  Jesus  are  brought  nigh. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  rich  feast  for  hungry  souls: — The  prophets  of  old  pro- 
phesied  of  the  grace  of  Christ  which  should  come  unto  us  (1  Pet.  i.  10) ;  and  ol 
these  none  more  than  our  evangelical  prophet.  I.  The  Maker  and  Master  of 
the  feast,  the  Lord  Himself.  It  is  a  royal  feast,  with  which  the  King  of  Zion 
entertains  His  own  subjects.  Particularly,  it  is  the  Lord  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
who,  pitying  the  famished  condition  of  poor  sinners,  was  at  the  expense  of  this 
costly  feast  for  them  ;  for  the  Maker  of  it  is  the  same  who  swallows  up  death 
in  victory  (ver.  8).  A  warlike  title  is  ascribed  to  Him,  the  "  Lord  of  hosts," 
for  there  is  a  banner  in  Christ's  banqueting-house ;  and  this  feast  looks  both 
backward  and  forward  to  a  war.  II.  The  guests  for  whom  this  feast  is  pro- 
vided. It  is  made  for  "  all  people."  The  invitation  is  given  to  all  who  come 
in  its  way,  without  distinction  or  exception  of  any  sort  of  persons.  III.  The 
guest-chamber  where  this  feast  is  held.  "  In  this  mountain,"  namely, 
Mount  Zion,  that  is,  the  Church.  IV.  The  matter  of  the  feast.  A  feast 
imports  abundance  and  variety  of  good  entertainment ;  and  here  nothing  is 
wanting  which  is  suitable  for  hungry  souls.  In  this  valley  of  the  world  lying 
in  wickedness,  there  is  nothing  for  the  soul  to  feed  on  but  carrion,  nothing  but 
what  would  be  loathed,  except  by  those  who  were  never  used  to  better :  but 
in  this  mountain,  there  is  a  "  feast  of  fat  things,"  things  most  relishing  to  those 
who  taste  them,  most  nourishing  to  those  who  feed  on  them  ;  and  these  are  "  full 
of  marrow,"  most  satisfying  to  the  soul.  In  this  valley  of  the  world  there  is 
nothing  but  muddy  waters,  which  can  never  quench  the  thirst  of  the  soul,  but 
must  ruin  it  with  the  dregs  ever  cleaving  to  them  ;  but  here,  on  this  mountain, 
are  "wines  on  the  lees  well  refined."  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The  feast  prepared 
by  Jesus  Christ : — I.  Show  the  absolute  need  there  is  of  this  provision. 
A  lost  world,  by  Adam's  fall,  the  great  prodigal,  was  reduced  to  a  starving  con- 
dition. The  King  of  Heaven  set  down  Adam,  and  his  posterity  in  him,  to  a  well- 
covered  table  in  paradise,  in  this  lower  world,  making  a  covenant  of  friendship 
with  him,  and  with  them  in  him.  But  man  being  drawn  into  rebellion  against 
God,  Adam  and  all  his  posterity  were  driven  out  of  the  guest-chamber,  the  family 
was  broken  and  scattered,  having  nothing  left  them.  1.  In  point  of  need,  Adam 
left  us  with  hungry  hearts,  like  the  prodigal  (Luke  xv.  16).  Every  one  finds 
himself  not  self-sufficient,  and  therefore  his  soul  cleaves  to  something  without 
itself  to  satisfy  it.  He  left  us  also  with  thirsty  consciences,  scorched  and  burnt 
up  with  heat.  2.  In  point  of  supply,  he  left  os  without  any  prospect,  for  all  com- 
munication with  Heaven  was  stopped.  War  was  declared  against  the  rebels, 
so  that  there  could  be  no  transportation  of  provisions  from  thence.  Adam's 
sons,  abandoned  of  Heaven,  fell  a-begging  at  the  world's  door,  if  so  be  they  might 
find  rest  and  satisfaction  in  the  creature.  The  natural  man  is  born  weeping, 
lives  seeking,  and  will  die  disappointed,  if  not  brought  to  the  feast  of  fat  things. 
II.  Explain  what  the  pp.ovision  is  which  Christ  has  prepared  for  the 
souls  of  such  a  famished  world.  This,  in  a  word,  is  His  precious  self ;  the 
Maker  of  the  feast  is  the  matter  of  it.  III.  Consider  what  sort  of  a  feast 
it  is.  1.  It  is  a  feast  upon  a  sacrifice  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8).  2.  It  is  a  covenant  feast 
(Heb.  xiii.  20,  21).  3.  It  is  a  marriage  feast  (Matt.  xxii.  1-4).  The  Lord  Christ 
is  the  Bridegroom,  and  the  captive  daughter  of  Zion  the  bride.     4.  It  is  a  feast 


chap,  xxv.]  1SA1AB.  437 

which  has  a  respect  to  war.  The  Lord  of  hosts  made  it.  It  looks  backward 
to  that  terrible  encounter  which  Christ  had  with  the  law,  with  death,  with  hell, 
and  the  grave,  upon  the  account  of  His  ransomed  ones,  and  that  glorious  victory 
which  He  obtained  over  them,  by  which  He  wrought  the  deliverance  of  His  people. 
It  is  provided  for  and  presented  to  His  people  to  animate  and  strengthen  them 
for  the  spiritual  warfare  against  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh ;  and  none 
can  truly  partake  of  it,  but  those  who  are  resolved  on  that  battle,  and  are  deter- 
mined to  pursue  it,  till  they  obtain  the  complete  victory  at  death.  6.  It  is  a 
weaning  feast.  There  is  a  time  prefixed  in  the  decree  of  God,  at  which  all  who 
are  His  shall,  by  converting  grace,  be  weaned  from  their  natural  food.  IV.  Con- 
firm THAT  ALL  PEOPLE  WHO  WILL  COME,  MAY  COME,  AND  PARTAKE  OF  THIS  FEAST. 

1.  Christ  invites  all  without  distinction,  even  the  worst  of  sinners,  to  this  spiritual 
feast.  2.  For  what  end  does  Jesus  send  out  His  messengers  with  a  commission 
to  invite  all  to  come,  if  they  were  not  welcome  ?  (Matt.  xxii.  9).  3.  He  takes 
it  heinously  amiss  when  any  refuse  to  come.  V.  Practical  improvement. 
(Ibid.)  The  Gospel  feast : — In  this  sacred  feast  there  is — I.  Vast  abundance. 
The  unsearchable  riches,  and  all  the  fulness,  that  it  hath  pleased  the  Father 
should  dwell  in  Jesus  Christ.  Here  the  saints  receive  large  measures  of  know- 
ledge ;  such  degrees  of  holiness  as  shall  gradually  carry  them  forward  to  be  perfect 
as  their  Father  in  Heaven  is  perfect ;  and  such  plentiful  consolations  as  shall 
fill  them  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  II.  Rich  varietv.  Pardon 
of  sin,  &c.  The  Holy  Spirit  to  renew,  sanctify,  comfort,  &o. ;  strength  for  the 
performance  of  duty,  support  under  affliction,  &c.  Here  is  the  milk  of  the  Word 
for  babes,  strong  meat  for  them  whose  senses  are  exercised  to  discern  both  good 
and  evil,  the  water  of  life  for  such  as  are  thirsty,  the  bread  of  life  for  those  that 
are  hungry,  and  the  choicest  fruits  for  them  that  are  weak  and  languishing. 
III.  Most  excellent  provision.  "  Fat  things,  full  of  marrow,"  &o.  IV.  These 
are  joined  with  great  festivity  and  joy  among  those  who  partake  of  the  feast. 
(R.  Maccvlloch.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  And  He  win  destroy  in  this  mountain  the  face  of  the  covering  east 
over  all  people. — The  removal  of  the  covering  : — I.  The  Gospel  destroys  the 
covering  which  hides  the  true  nature  of  man.  The  covering  of  sin  has 
ever  concealed  the  nature,  the  nobility  of  nature,  the  capabilities  of  nature,  and 
the  possibilities  of  nature  in  mankind.  The  covering  is  thick  and  coarse.  Ignor- 
ance, brutality,  discord,  war,  barbaric  customs,  plunder,  and  gross  immoralities 
are  the  threads  of  the  textile.  They  are  so  closely  woven  that  the  very  features 
of  human  nature  are  hidden.  Take  off  the  covering.  You  have  seen  the  earth 
when  winter  has  possessed  its  vales,  its  forests,  its  gardens,  and  its  fields.  The 
frost  has  ploughed  the  ground.  The  sleet  has  destroyed  every  vestige  of  verdure. 
Even  the  ivy  leaf  is  covered  with  the  snow.  Spring  will  destroy  that  covering, 
and  life  will  shoot  up  from  the  roots  to  the  highest  boughs.  So  the  advent  of 
Christ  introduced  revivifying  influences,  and  the  true  nature  of  man  is  discovered 
in  kind  words  and  deeds  of  goodness.  Our  forefathers  never  thought  that  nature 
had  concealed  such  precious  ores  in  the  hearts  of  the  mountains.  A  few  years 
ago  even  we  had  no  conception  that  down  deep  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth  wells 
of  oil  waited  to  be  drawn  to  the  surface.  The  covering  has  been  taken  away 
since,  and  these  valuables  have  seen  the  light.  Jesus  Christ  sunk  shafts  through 
the  outward  crust  of  sin,  and  brought  forth  precious  ores  to  be  smelted  in  the 
furnace  of  His  love,  moulded  in  His  example,  and  circulated  through  the  ages. 
II.  The  Gospel  destroys  the  covering  which  hides  the  true  nature  of 
God.  Communion  with  the  source  of  peace  was  broken  by  the  first  shadow 
of  guilt.  Man  in  the  dark  is  seized  with  fear  of  the  God  who  made  him.  This 
fear  grows  into  dislike,  and  dislike  into  indifference,  and  indifference  into  defiance. 
The  fool  desireth  in  his  heart  that  there  might  be  no  God,  and  the  dislike  grows 
into  a  positive  refusal  of  entertaining  God  in  his  thoughts.  But  sin  has  not 
succeeded  to  remove  all  traces  of  God  from  the  human  mind.  The  sinner  cannot 
altogether  close  his  eyes  and  ears  to  those  manifestations  and  voices  which  force 
the  idea  of  God  upon  him.  Under  the  covert  of  sin  conceptions  of  Him  are 
entertained  at  variance  with  His  nature,  and  in  opposition  to  His  dealings.  Christ 
came  to  reveal  the  Father.  The  power  of  reconciliation  is  in  that  word.  HI.  Thh 
Gospel  destroys  the  covering  which  hides  the  true  affinity  between 
man  and  man.  "  Unto  Him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  The  basis 
of  the  Church  is  union  with  the  Father.     We  meet  in  Him  before  we   meet  in 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

one  another.  National  prejudice  and  society  caste,  family  feuds  and  personal 
animosity  will  perish  under  the  influence  of  the  Cross ;  humanity  will  be  raised 
into  union  with  the  Father,  and  "  God  will  be  all  and  in  all."     IV.  The  Gospel 

WILL    DESTROY    THAT   WHICH    HIDES   THE    FUTURE.       "  He    will    Swallow    up    death 

in  victory."  It  was  a  new  declaration  when  One  said,  "  I  am  the  resurrection 
and  the  life."     (T.  Davits,  M.A.) 

Ver.  8.  He  will  swallow  up  death  In  victory. — Death  swallowed  «p  in 
victory : — I.  The  text  sets  Christ  before  us  in  the  attitude  of  a 
conqueror  over  death.  "  He  shall  swallow  up  death  in  victory,"  it  is 
said,  and  again  in  Hosea,  "  O  death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues ;  0  grave,  I  will  be 
thy  destruction  "  ;  whilst  still  more  strikingly  in  Timothy,  we  read,  "  But  is 
now  made  manifest  by  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath 
abolished  death,  and  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the 
Gospel."  But  what  is  the  kind  of  death  of  which  the  advent  of  Christ  was  to  be 
the  swallowing  up  ?  Not  spiritual  death,  for  how  many  are  lying  under  its  power 
now — many  who  have  seen  the  day  of  Christ — but  who  yet  have  neither  rejoiced  in 
its  light,  nor  yielded  to  its  power !  Neither  does  it  ever  attain  to  His  covenant 
undertakings  to  swallow  up  death  eternal.  This  too  has  its  permitted  victims,  as 
well  as  the  death  spiritual,  the  one  being,  in  fact,  both  the  sequence  and  the 
penalty  of  the  other.  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  the  expression  is  to  be  limited 
to  the  death  of  the  body — that  death,  which  on  account  of  the  first  transgression, 
wai  to  pass  upon  all  men,  the  penalty  and  the  fruit  of  sin.  Now  this  death  is  to  be 
swallowed  up — quenched,  absorbed,  as  the  original  word  implies — just  as  some- 
thing which  the  sea  might  bury  in  its  depths,  or  the  fire  decompose  into  its 
elemental  forms.  II.  But  how  is  this  swallowing  up  of  death  by  Christ 
effected  ?  To  this  we  have  a  full  answer  returned  by  the  apostle  Paul.  "  The 
sting  of  death,"  he  says,  "  is  sin ;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  But  thanks 
be  to  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Here 
it  is  first  assumed  that  death  has  a  sting,  that  there  is  a  pungency  of  dread 
and  horror  arising  from  the  contemplation  of  death,  merely  as  a  penalty,  as  some- 
thing indissolubly  linked  with  evil  beyond  itself,  and  a  sense  of  the  deserved 
frown  of  God.  Hence,  in  order  to  show  that  Christ  had  made  a  conquest  over 
death,  we  must  show  that  He  was  victorious  over  the  sting  of  death,  and  hath 
swallowed  up  sin  in  victory.  1.  And  this  He  did  in  His  life.  In  this  way 
did  Christ  obtain  His  victory  over  sin — obtained  it  too,  not  by  the  putting 
forth  of  the  hidden  powers  of  Godhead,  not  by  any  invoked  succours  which  would 
be  given  at  His  bidding  from  the  angelic  world,  but  by  means  within  the  reach 
of  the  humblest  of  His  followers  to  command.  Thus,  in  the  destroyed  sting 
of  death,  was  laid  the  foundation  for  its  final  abolition.  Mortality  was  no  longer 
the  terrible  thing  to  look  upon  it  once  was.  Believers  are  bound  up  in  the 
Saviour's  conquests.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also  ;  because  I  have  over- 
come, ye  shall  overcome  also :  sin  shall  have  no  dominion  over  you,  because 
I  withstood  its  power  in  the  wilderness,  because  death  and  the  sting  of  death 
have  been  swallowed  up  in  victory."  2.  Again,  Christ  is  said  to  swallow  up 
death,  because  He  has  discharged  the  obligations  of  that  law  to  which  death 
owes  all  its  authority.  As  death  could  have  had  no  sting  if  it  had  not  been  for 
sin,  so  sin  could  have  had  no  existence,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  law.  "  The 
law  is  the  strength  of  sin,"  says  the  Word.  Why  ?  Because  where  no  law  is, 
there  is  no  transgression.  "  The  law  entered  that  the  offence  might  abound." 
And  this  law  never  relaxes,  never  can  relax.  Holy,  it  can  endure  no  blemish ; 
just,  it  can  tolerate  no  remission  of  penalties;  good,  it  will  not  encourage  dis- 
obedience in  the  many  by  misplaced  compassions  to  the  few ;  and  they  who 
are  under  this  law  must  be  eternally  under  it.  Hope  for  us  there  is  none,  nor 
yet  help,  unless  we  can  be  redeemed  from  its  curse,  released  from  its  thrall,  dis- 
charged from  its  obligations  by  One  who  shall  both  magnify  its  claims  and  make 
it  honourable  ;  and  Christ  has  done  all  this,  and  in  doing  it,  He  swallows  up  death, 
at  least  death  as  death,  for  the  strength  of  this  last  enemy  is  now  departed  from 
him.  The  law  which  was  Satan's  only  title-deed  thereto,  is  nailed  to  the  Cross. 
It  is  all  Emmanuel's  land  now — earth  and  paradise,  seen  and  unseen,  life  and 
immortality.  "  He  hath  swallowed  up  death  in  victory."  3.  And  then,  once 
more,  we  must  include  the  grave  as  part  of  the  conquered  things  spoken  of  in 
the  text.  Like  death  it  has  its  victory — an  all  but  universal  victory.  Distinc- 
tions it  knows  not,  age  it  regards  not :  it  is  the  house  appointed  for  all  living. 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  439 

*'  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  that  sleep  in 
Jesus  shall  God  bring  with  Him."  "  0  grave  !  "  says  the  apostle,  "  where  is  thy 
victory  ?  "  Where,  when  thy  keys  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Saviour,  when  thy 
dust  is  a  guarded  deposit,  when  the  bodies  of  the  faithful  committed  unto  thee 
are  century  by  century  throwing  off  their  gross  materialism,  in  order  that  in 
the  regeneration  of  a  glorified  and  spiritual  body  they  may  stand  at  the  latter 
day  upon  the  earth  ?  For,  that  the  prophet's  ken  looked  thus  far,  is  evident 
from  what  he  says  a  little  further  on  in  the  next  chapter,  "  Thy  dead  men,"  Ac. 
(xxvi.  19).  Thus  shall  Christ  swallow  up  death  in  victory ;  and  it  is  added,  the  "  Lord 
God  will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  faces."  The  same  forbidden  tree  whose 
mortal  taste  brought  death  into  our  world,  brought  therewith  all  our  woe.  If 
we  had  not  known  death,  we  had  not  known  tears.  The  whole  "  body  of  sin 
will  be  destroyed  " ;  the  glorified  spirit  can  neither  falter  nor  fall  again :  all  cor- 
rective discipline  will  be  over  :  there  will  be  neither  lessons  to  learn,  nor  infirmitie* 
to  subdue,  nor  murmurings  to  keep  down,  nor  mistaken  attachments  to  correct. 
No  erring  spirit  will  ever  seek  to  escape  from  those  holy  mansions,  neither  can 
any  graces  languish  which  are  fed  from  that  eternal  spring,  but  the  whole  company 
of  the  redeemed,  sanctified  throughout  by  the  power  of  an  Almighty  Spirit,  and 
made  one  with  Christ  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  shall  wait 
in  devout  ministrations  on  the  King  of  saints  in  a  service  that  shall  know  no 
weariness,  and  in  a  kingdom  that  shall  know  no  end.  "  He  shall  swallow  up 
death  in  victory,  and  wipe  away  all  tears  from  off  all  faces."  And  now  let  us 
glance  at  one  or  two  practical  conclusions  to  be  derived  from  our  subject.  1.  Thus, 
one  effect  of  it  should  be  to  fortify  us  against  the  fear  of  death.  This  fear,  I 
have  said  is  an  instinct  with  us — is  incorporated  as  it  were  upon  our  lapsed  and 
fallen  nature ;  it  is  not  necessarily  connected  with  any  anticipation  of  what  is 
to  follow,  but  springs  from  an  apparently  universal  feeling  that  death  is  a  punish- 
ment for  sin ;  that  originally  man  was  not  made  to  die,  that  some  wrong  has 
been  done  to  the  beneficent  purposes  of  the  Creator  of  which  our  dying  is  the 
bitter  fruit.  Then  it  is  a  part  of  Christ's  victory  to  have  the  rule  not  only  over 
death,  but  over  all  that  region  of  the  invisible  to  which  death  leads.  2.  Again, 
our  subject  should  suggest  to  us  the  wisdom  of  instant  submission  to  the  Saviour's 
authority.  A  twofold  end  would  seem  to  be  contemplated  in  giving  this  absolute 
dominion  over  death,  namely,  that  He  should  be  omnipotent  to  conquer  as  well 
as  mighty  to  save — a  terror  to  His  enemies  as  well  as  a  protector  to  His  friends, 
and  one  or  other  of  these  we  all  are.  The  whole  world  of  responsible  beings 
is  divided  into  those  who  are  under  the  sceptre,  and  those  who  are  under  the  rod. 
But  why  should  we  make  a  foe  of  Him  who  hath  assumed  universal  empire  only 
that  He  might  be  our  friend,  only  that  nothing  might  be  wanting  to  the  com- 

Eleteness  of  His  own  work  ?  3.  Is  it  needful  that  I  should  remind  you  that  this 
lessed  promise  we  have  been  considering,  like  all  our  Advent  promises,  belongs 
to  believers,  and  to  believers  only  ?  As  there  is  a  death  which  Christ  has  nob 
swallowed  up,  so  there  are  tears  which  the  Lord  God  has  not  promised  to  wipe 
away,  but  which  in  righteous  displeasure  at  His  despised  compassions,  He  will 
leave  to  flow  on  for  ever.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Victory  in  death  : — I.  He  who 
hath  swallowed  up  death  in  victory  is  the  Lord  God.  II.  The  accomplish- 
ment of  the  promise.  But  for  God's  eternal  purpose  in  Christ  Jesus,  every 
son  and  daughter  of  Adam  must  have  drunk  for  ever  of  the  cup  of  wrath  which 
is  without  mixture,  as  a  just  reward  for  their  enmity  to  God.  III.  The  persons 
and  their  characters  or  descriptions  that  shall  say,  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God ; 
we  have  waited  for  Him,  and  He  will  save  us,"  &c.  (F.  Silver.)  Light  in 
darkness  : — I.  The  truth  asserted.  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory." 
The  redemption  of  Jesus  Christ  deals  with  both  parts  of  man's  nature,  his  soul 
and  his  body.  But  the  application  of  redemption  to  the  body  is  as  yet  deferred. 
There  is — 1.  The  removal  of  all  sorrow.  "  The  Lord  God  shall  wipe  away,"  &c. 
2.  There  shall  be  the  removal  of  the  rebuke  of  God's  people  ;  by  which  I  would 
understand  death,  which  surely  is  the  greatest  reproach  which  God's  people 
now  lie  under.  H.  The  hymn  of  triumph  which  is  sung  by  the  risen  saints 
at  the  time  referred  to  in  our  text.  "  And  it  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo,  this 
is  our  God  ;  we  have  waited  for  Him,  and  He  will  save  us,"  &c.  It  is  impossible 
for  us  fully  to  enter  into  the  triumphant  feeling  contained  in  this  verse,  whilst 
we  are  ourselves  in  the  valley  of  humiliation  and  woe.  The  language  is  the 
language  of  victory,  and  that  we  have  not  yet  received.  There  are  parts,  how- 
ever, in  this  hymn  which  we  may  already  join  in.     The  language  of  our  text 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv. 

Is  the  language  of  present  realisation  of  expected  triumph.  "  Lo,  this  is  our 
God."  There  is  the  manifestation  of  Jehovah.  "  We  have  waited  for  Him." 
In  times  past  "  we  have  waited  for  Him."  In  sorrow,  in  distress,  in  agony  of 
spirit,  "  we  have  waited  for  Him."  When  death  has  entered  our  family,  and 
when  bitter  grief  has  entered  our  hearts,  "  we  have  waited  for  Him."  And  the 
darkness,  the  mist,  and  the  cloud  have  all  cleared  away.  "  We  have  waited 
for  Him,  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  His  salvation."  The  double  truth,  then, 
presented  to  us  in  our  text  is  the  assertion  of  coming  victory  and  the  assurance 
of  the  joy  which  shall  be  ours  when  that  victory  is  achieved.  (E.  Bailey,  M.A.) 
Death  swallowed  up  : — How  can  those  who  are  in  the  mountain  banquet-house 
be  happy  while  death  is  ravaging  down  below  T  The  Lord  says  in  reference 
to  that,  that  He  "  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory."  We  must  not  amend  that 
expression — "  swallow  up."  There  is  a  sound  in  it  which  is  equal  to  an  annota- 
tion. We  hear  a  splash  in  the  infinite  Atlantic,  and  the  thing  that  is  sunk  has 
gone  for  ever.  It  was  but  a  stone.  Death  is  to  be  not  mitigated,  relieved, 
thrown  into  perspective  which  the  mind  can  gaze  upon  without  agony ;  it  is 
to  be  swallowed  up.  Let  it  go!  Death  has  no  friends.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  gracioushe88  of  death : — Yet  in  another  aspect  how  gracious  has  death  been 
in  human  history  1  What  pain  he  has  relieved  ;  what  injuries  he  has  thrust  into 
the  silent  tomb ;  what  tumult  and  controversy  ho  has  ended.  Men  have  found 
an  altar  at  the  tomb,  a  house  of  reconciliation  in  the  graveyard,  music  for  the 
heart  in  the  toll  and  throb  of  the  last  knell.  Even  death  must  have  his  tribute. 
(Ibid.)  Victory  over  death  : — There  are  four  degrees  of  this  victory.  I.  The 
First  was  obtained  by  Christ  in  His  own  person,  in  single  combat  with  death 
and  hell.  Christ  taking  upon  Himself  our  sins,  death  assaults  Him  with  all  his 
strength  and  terror,  and  appears,  at  first,  to  get  the  better.  It  kills  Him  and 
lays  Him  in  the  grave.  But  as  Samson  arose  by  night,  and  carried  away  the 
"  gates  of  Gaza,  bars  and  all,"  so  Christ,  though  shut  up  in  the  grave,  and  a 

great  stone  rolled  upon  it,  arose  in  the  night,  and  carried  away  the  gates  and 
ars  of  death  and  the  grave,  and  bare  them  to  the  top  of  Mount  Zion,  to  be  His 
footstool  in  heaven.  II.  The  second  degree  of  this  victory  is  the  altering  of 
its  nature  TO  all  God's  people.  Before,  it  was  a  passage  into  prison  ;  now, 
it  is  a  passage  out  of  prison.  It  was  the  way  to  darkness,  misery,  despair,  and 
torment ;  now,  it  is  the  way  to  light,  peace,  triumph,  and  immortal  joy.  Before, 
it  was  loss,  as  he  who  died  lost  all  his  possessions ;  now,  it  is  gain.  III.  The 
third  degree  is  the  altering  op  our  judgments,  afpections,  and  apprehen- 
sions concerning  death,  which  is  often  strikingly  seen  in  the  dying  experience 
of  believers.  IV.  The  last  is  in  the  general  resurrection.  '  Then  shall 
be  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  written."  (The  Evangelist.)  Christ's 
victory  : — I.  The  holy  and  honourable  Victor.  "  He,"  the  King  of  glory ; 
"  He,"  the  Lord  Christ ;  "  He,"  the  Father's  co-equal  and  co-eternal  Son ; 
*'  He,"  who  is  called  in  the  6th  verse,  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  ;  "  He,"  who,  though 
He  "  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  made  Himself  of  no  reputa- 
tion, and  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  humbled  Himself,  and  became 
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  Cross,"  that  He  might  obtain  the  victory 
over  death  specified  in  the  text.  1.  The  victories  of  His  life  and  death  in  His 
own  person,  (1)  His  single-handed  combat  with  the  tempter.  (2)  We  find  Him 
attacked  by  the  devil's  sharpshooters  —  the  Sadducees,  the  scribes,  and  the 
Pharisees.  (3)  Our  glorious  Victor  now  enters  the  very  territory  of  "  the  king 
of  terrors,"  that  He  may  vanquish  him  in  his  own  dominions.  (4)  Let  us  advance 
from  this  point,  just  to  mark  His  victorious  proceedings  in  the  invincible  opera- 
tions of  His  grace ;  for,  you  must  know,  when  He  comes  down  on  earth  to  carry 
on  the  triumphs  of  His  redemption,  He  finds  all  the  persons  for  whom  He  shea 
His  precious  blood,  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  ;  and  "  He  will  swallow  up  " 
that  "  death  in  victory."  (5)  This  glorious  Victor  will  carry  on  a  civil  war  in 
the  hearts  of  His  people.  II.  The  interests  secured  by  these  victories. 
1.  The  interests  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and  we  may  just  write  upon  these  interests 
one  sweet  passage  of  Scripture :  "  So  all  Israel  shall  be  saved  in  the  Lord  with 
an  everlasting  salvation."  2.  Moreover,  the  official  character  of  Christ  is  herein 
honoured,  and  that  is  an  interest  peculiarly  His  own.  3.  While  the  honour  of 
Christ  is  to  be  maintained  by  His  victory,  and  emblazoned  before  all  worlds, 
the  relationship  existing  between  Him  and  His  Church  is  dear  to  His  heart. 
EEL  The  sacred,  the  sweet  peace,  everlastingly  settled  by  the  victories 
OP  OUR  glorious  Victor.     Sovereigns  generally  profess  that  the  object  of  their 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  441 

fighting  is  to  settle  peace  upon  honourable  terms,  so  that  it  shall  not  be  easily 
disturbed  ;  and  they  do  not  care  for  proclaiming  peace  until  it  has  been  settled 
upon  such  terms  that  it  is  not  likely  again  to  be  easily  broken.  Now,  our  glorious 
Conqueror  has  settled  peace  for  His  whole  Church ;  nay,  He  Himself  has  become 
her  peace.  (J.  Irons.)  The  progressive  march  of  death's  Conqueror : — In  nature 
God  is  constantly  "  swallowing  up  death  in  victory."  In  spring  He  opens  a 
million  graves  and  floods  the  world  with  life.  Indeed  everywhere  He  makes 
death  the  minister  of  life.  Death  generates,  nurtures,  and  develops  life.  But 
the  text  points  us  to  His  victory  over  the  mortality  of  man,  and  let  us  trace  the 
march  of  the  triumphant  Conqueror  in  this  direction.  L  We  sbb  His  first 
conquest  in  the  RESURRECTION  op  Christ.  The  strongest  victim  death  ever 
had  was  Christ.  The  Jewish  Sanhedrim  co-operated  with  the  Roman  power 
and  did  all  they  could  to  keep  his  Victim  in  the  grave.  But  the  Conqueror  of 
death  appeared,  invaded  the  territory  of  mortality,  broke  open  the  prison  doors, 
snapped  the  fetters,  and  led  the  prisoner  out  into  a  new  and  triumphant  life. 
II.  We  see  His  next  conquest  en  destroying  in  humanity  the  pear  op  death. 
The  essence,  the  sting,  the  power  of  death,  are  not  in  the  mere  article  of  dissolu* 
tion  of  soul  and  body,  but  in  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  men  regarding  the 
event.  To  overcome,  therefore,  in  the  human  mind  all  terrible  thoughts  and 
apprehensive  feelings  concerning  death,  is  the  most  effective  way  to  triumph 
over  it.  III.  We  see  His  crowning  conquest  in  the  general  resurrec 
tion.  1.  There  is  nothing  incredible  in  the  general  resurrection.  2.  There  are 
circumstances  that  render  the  event  exceedingly  probable.  3.  The  declarations 
of  God  render  it  absolutely  certain.  (Homilist.)  Death: — I.  The  enemy  ia 
60  formidable  that  he  is  justly  termed  "  the  king  of  terrors."  The  conquerors 
of  the  earth  have  themselves  been  conquered  by  this  universal  destroyer.  Though 
he  is  nature's  destruction,  and  consequently  nature's  aversion,  nature  knows 
no  method  of  resisting  his  violence.  You  cannot  avoid  the  approaches  of  this 
enemy ;  but  you  may  prevent  them  from  issuing  in  your  destruction.  II.  The 
Conqueror  of  death.  The  dignity  of  His  person,  and  the  greatness  of  Hia 
power  capacitate  Him  for  this  conquest.  The  Prince  of  life,  who  had  life  in 
Himself ;  who  had  power  to  lay  down  His  life,  and  power  to  take  it  up  again  ; 
He,  and  He  alone,  could  conquer  death.  III.  The  wonders  of  this  conquest. 
That  our  Lord  might  fairly  and  in  the  open  field  encounter  the  king  of  terrors, 
He  came  into  the  first  Adam's  world,  where  this  formidable  foe  had  carried  hia 
conquests  far  and  near,  and  where  none  was  found  able  to  withstand  him.  He 
came  into  it  an  infant  of  days.  This  gave  death  and  hell  a  strange,  though  but 
seeming,  advantage  over  Him.  They  flattered  themselves  that  they  should  be 
able  to  destroy  Him,  while  a  helpless  infant.  They  attempted  it.  They  murdered 
all  the  other  infants  in  Bethlehem,  from  two  years  old  and  under.  The  Child 
Jesus  alone,  who  came  to  fight  with  death,  and  triumph  over  hell  and  the  grave, 
escaped  their  hands.  Death  and  hell,  though  foiled  in  their  first  onset,  do  not 
despair.  He  appeared  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  Hence,  they  flattered 
themselves  that,  though  they  had  not  destroyed  Him,  when  an  infant,  by  the 
aword  of  Herod,  they  might  destroy  Him,  when  become  a  man,  by  enticing  Him 
into  sin,  which  gives  to  death  its  destroying  power.  The  prince  of  this  world 
tempts  Him  to  despair,  to  presumption,  to  self-murder,  to  worship  the  devil. 
But,  though  he  set  upon  Him  with  all  hia  power  and  policy,  he  could  find  no 
corruption  in  Him,  to  kindle  by  his  temptation.  Had  He  appeared,  which  He 
one  day  will  do,  as  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image 
of  Hia  person,  death  and  hell  would  have  fled  from  Him.  But  He  came  to  this 
world,  "a  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  The  powers  of  darknesa 
hoped  that  the  toils,  the  anguish  and  perplexity  which  He  endured,  would  sink 
and  discourage  Him,  or  would  lead  Him  to  leave  Hia  work  unfinished.  Here 
again  they  are  disappointed.  What  occasioned  the  most  exquisite  anguish, 
did  not  occasion  one  irregular  desire,  or  one  repining  thought.  By  a  few  years' 
obedience,  performed  in  such  trying  circumstances,  He  brought  in  an  everlasting 
righteousness,  and  accomplished  what  all  the  angels  of  heaven  could  not  have 
done  in  millions  of  ages.  God  made  Him  sin  for  us  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  The  Prince 
of  life  is  laid  in  a  grave.  There  His  enemies  hope  to  detain  Him.  But  the  joy 
of  the  wicked  was  short.  He,  who,  by  dying,  had  fully  paid  our  debts,  in  being 
raised  from  the  dead  receives  a  public  and  ample  discharge.  Such  was  the 
wonderful  victory  obtained  by  Jesus.  For  believers  is  this  victory  obtained. 
IV.  The  completeness  of  Christ's  conquest  over  death.     1.  The  great  things 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv, 

which  He  accomplished  on  earth.  (1)  There  was  not  one  criminal  action,  on© 
sinful  word,  one  irregular  thought  or  desire,  of  which  His  people  were  guilty,  which 
He  did  not  expiate.  (2)  Jesus  hath  not  left  one  precept,  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the 
law  unfulfilled.  The  law  is  friendly  to  the  believer,  for  the  believer's  best  Friend 
and  Head  has  done  it  infinite  honour.  (3)  Christ  hath  redeemed  His  people 
from  every  part  of  the  curse.  (4)  The  devil  hath  the  power  of  death  ;  and  there 
is  not  one  devil  who  was  not  overcome  and  led  in  triumph  by  Christ  on  the 
Cross,  where  the  powers  of  darkness  certainly  thought  to  have  triumphed  over 
Him  (Heb.  ii.  14).  (5)  Christ,  by  His  righteousness,  hath  obtained  the  power 
to  overrule  death  and  the  grave,  with  all  that  precedes,  accompanies,  or  follows 
them,  for  the  spiritual  and  everlasting  good  of  His  people,  in  a  blessed  subor- 
dination to  His  own  glory.  2.  The  completeness  of  Christ's  conquest  over  death, 
as  demonstrated  by  His  exaltation  and  His  glory.  He  was  raised  from  the  dead 
by  His  God  and  Father,  as  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour.  God  hath  highly  exalted 
Him,  and  given  Him  a  name  above  every  name.  The  height  of  His  exaltatioa 
speaks  the  greatness  of  His  victory.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  He  would  not  have 
been  invested  with  a  full  authority,  and  a  sufficient  power  to  raise  from  the  dead, 
in  glory,  all  the  bodies  of  His  saints,  wheresoever  they  have  died,  or  how  long 
soever  they  have  been  buried  in  the  grave;  and  to  change  their  bodies  also, 
who  shall  be  found  alive,  at  His  second  coming.  The  second  coming  of  Christ 
will  be  the  fullest  demonstration  that  He  hath  completely  conquered  death. 
(J.  Erskine,  D.D.)  Victory  over  death: — I.  I  propose  to  make  some  remarks 
on  this  singular  expression, — "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory."  The 
very  sound  of  the  words  conveys  the  idea  of  a  terrible  conflict.  A  poor  expiring 
worm  of  the  dust  is  the  occasion  and  subject  of  the  contest.  But,  while  we 
awaken  and  humble  ourselves  by  just  views  of  the  formidable  nature  of  death, 
let  us  rise  to  confidence  by  observing  how  the  expression  of  the  text  brings 
into  this  conflict  the  infinite  zeal  of  Deity.  The  effect,  in  the  experience  of 
dying  Christians,  must  be  an  abundant  sensation  of  victory.     II.  Let  us  inquire 

BY  WHAT  METHODS   THE   WISE   AND   MERCIFUL  GOD   RAISES   HlS   PEOPLE   TO   THB 

possession  OP  victory  over  death.  1.  This  is  done  by  a  clear  and  powerful 
revelation  of  the  glory  of  God.  2.  By  a  powerful  application  of  the  sacrifice 
of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  conscience.  Such  has  been  the  uniform  experience  of 
Christian  martyrs,  grappling  with  Satan,  and  with  death  in  every  terrifio  form 
(B«v.  xii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  55-57).  3.  The  heavens  are  opened  over  every  dying 
believer.  Your  God  swallows  up  death  in  victory  by  showing  you  the  fair 
fields,  rivers,  fruits,  of  His  paradise  in  the  heavens.  4.  He  discovers  to  you 
the  vanity  of  all  earthly  objects,  He  impresses  you  with  the  unavoidable  imper- 
fection and  misery  of  your  sojourning  condition.  In  that  new  birth,  which 
brings  the  sinner  near  to  God  through  Christ,  the  soul  rises  into  a  new  world, 
and  is  no  longer  capable  of  grossly  idolising  earthly  objects,  as  it  once  did.  At 
the  same  time,  the  true  enjoyment  of  lawful,  created  things  commences.  5.  In 
order  to  the  final  triumph,  the  Lord  grants  to  His  people  a  blessed  finishing 
of  their  sanctified  desires,  respecting  objects  within  time.  This  fulfilment 
of  desires  within  time,  relates  either  to  particular  points  of  inward,  spiritual 
attainment,  or  to  subjects  of  special  concern  respecting  the  cause  and  kingdom 
of  Christ  upon  earth ;  and,  in  some  cases,  to  blessings  and  deliverances,  bestowed 
in  reference  to  individuals  with  whom  the  Christian  is  peculiarly  connected. 
6.  That  this  work  of  God  may  become  perfect,  the  soul  is  raised  up  above 
the  pains  of  the  body.  7.  The  uncouth  strangeness  of  the  world  of  spirits  is 
taken  off,  by  faith's  piercing  views  of  the  invisible  God;  the  Mediator  reigning 
in  human  flesh ;  the  character  of  redeemed  spirits ;  and  of  spotless  angelic  beings, 
with  whom  the  Christian,  about  to  be  unloosed  from  earth,  feels  a  kindred 
alliance.  III.  The  different  periods  and  situations  in  which  victory 
over  death  is  enjoyed  by  the  saints  of  thb  Most  High.  1.  This  blessed 
victory  is  enjoyed,  by  a  gradual  anticipation,  from  the  day  of  their  effectual 
calling  and  conversion  to  God.  2.  This  anticipated  enjoyment  of  victory  is 
tenderly  and  powerfully  impressed  on  the  Christian  soul  by  sympathy  with 
his  dying  friends  and  brethren.  3.  At  length  the  solemn,  appointed  period 
arrives.  It  is  the  happiness  of  the  established  Christian  to  know  that  no  new, 
untried  course  is  now  to  be  sought  for.  He  has  only  to  go  over  his  old  exercises 
of  faith,  resignation,  patience,  and  spiritual  desire.  4.  This  victory  over  death 
is  enjoyed  by  the  soul  during  the  period  of  its  separation  from  the  body.  5.  We 
now  advance  to  that  scene  of  victory,  which  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angela 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  443 

cannot  describe  (1  John  iii.  2).  Application: — From  this  subject  various  duties 
open  to  view,  which  peculiarly  bind  those  who  are  in  any  degree  assured  that 
they  are  in  the  way  towards  such  victory  (2  Pet.  iii.  14).  (J.  Love,  D.D.) 
Victory  over  death  : — I.  Consider  the  victory  by  which  death  is  swallowed 
up.  The  words  refer  to  that  encounter  which  the  Redeemer  had  with  the  king 
of  terrors,  when  He  suffered  in  the  room  of  sinners.  Here,  among  other  things, 
the  following,  in  an  especial  manner,  deserve  our  attention.  1.  His  exhausting 
the  power  of  death  by  submitting  to  its  stroke.  When  He  died,  it  was  under 
the  pressure  of  Divine  wrath  ;  but  that  sacrifice  was  sufficient,  and  no  more 
can  be  demanded.  The  stroke  by  which  the  Redeemer  fell  left  no  remaining 
strength  in  His  enemy.  2.  His  manifesting,  by  His  resurrection,  that  He  was 
completely  delivered  from  its  dominion.  3.  His  enabling  His  people  to  over- 
come the  fear  of  death.  4.  His  preserving  His  people  safe  in  death,  so  that 
they  are  not  hurt  by  its  sting  when  their  bodies  must  submit  to  its  power.  5.  His 
delivering  His  people  completely  from  every  remains  of  its  power,  by  the  resurrec- 
tion of  their  bodies  at  the  last  day.  II.  The  happy  consequence  of  this  victory 
in  the  swallowing  up  of  death.  The  phrase  "  swallowing  up  "  is  expressive 
of  the  most  complete  destruction.  1.  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  the  victory 
of  Christ,  so  as  that  it  oan  never  appear  at  an  enemy  to  hurt  Himself.  The 
guilt  with  which  He  wag  charged  as  the  surety  of  sinners  gave  death  all  its 

Sower  over  the  Redeemer.     By  expiating  that  guilt,  however,  the  power  of 
eath  is  taken  away.     2.  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  the  victory  of  Christ,  inas- 
much as  it  is  by  this  victory  deprived  of  all  power  to  hurt  any  of  His  people. 
There  is  now  no  death  of  which  the  people  of  God  have  cause  to  be  afraid. 
(1)  Death  cannot  separate  believers    from  God.     (2)  Death  cannot  deprive 
believers  of  the  society  of  their  brethren  in  Christ.     (3)  Death  cannot  rob  the 
children  of  God  of  their  spiritual  privileges.     (4)  Death  cannot  prevent  believers 
from  the  full  enjoyment  of  that  happiness  and  glory  which  Christ  hath  pur- 
chased and  prepared  for  them  in  the  heavenly  state.     (O.  Campbell.)        Jesus 
victorious  over  death : — I.    The    combatants  ;    the    two   mightiest  that  ever 
encountered.     Upon  the  one  hand  is  death,  with  his  devouring  mouth,  a  champion 
who  never  yet  could  find  his  match  among  the  children  of  men,  till  the  great 
"  HE,"  in  the  text,  entered  the  lists  against  him,  even  Jesus  Christ,  who  being 
man,  was  capable  of  feeling  the  force  of  death  ;  but  being  the  Lord  of  hosts 
also  (ver.  6),  could  not  but  be  conqueror  at  length.     II.  The  encounter  of 
the  combatants,  implied  in  these  words,  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory," 
Though  death  could  not  then  reach  Him  the  deadly  blow,  it  pursued  Him,  shot 
out  its  poisonous  arrows  against  Him  all  along,  till  they  came  to  a  olose  engage- 
ment on  the  Cross,  where  it  wrestled  Him  down  even  into  the  grave,  the  proper 
place  of  its  dominion.     So  the  Mediator  got  the  first  fall.     III.  The  issue  of 
the  battle.     Death,  who  in  all  other  battles  wins  whatever  party  loses,  loses 
the  day  here  ;  the  victory  is  on  the  side  of  the  slain  Mediator.     The  slain  Saviour 
again  revives,  gets  up  upon  death,  stands  conqueror  over  it,  even  in  its  own 
territories,  breaks  the  bars  of  the  grave,  takes  away  the  sting  it  fought  with 
against  Him,  and  puts  it  and  all  its  forces  to  the  rout ;  so  that  it  can  never 
show  its  face  against  Him  any  more  (Rom.  vi  9).     IV.  The  Mediator's  pur- 
suit of  the  victory,  till  it  be  complete  for  those  that  are  His,  as  well  as  for 
Himself.     The  vanquished  enemy  has  yet  many  strongholds  in  his  hand,  and 
he  keeps  many  of  the  redeemed  ones  as  prisoners,  that  they  cannot  stir ;  others 
of  them  though  they  can  stir,  yet  can  go  nowhere,  but  they  must  drag  the  bands 
of  death  after  them.     But  the  Mediator  will  pursue  the  victory  till  He  totally 
abolish  it  out  of  His  kingdom,  that  there  shall  no  more  of  it  be  seen  there  for 
ever,  as  a  thing  that  is  swallowed  up  is  seen  no  more  at  all.     (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Jesus  victorious  over  death  : — I.  The  battle.     1.  Under  what  character  has  the 
Lord  of  life  fought  this  battle  ?    (1)  As  the  Head  and  Representative  of  the 
elect  world.     (2)  As  their  Redeemer  and  Deliverer  (Hos.  xiii.  14).     The  prey 
could  not  be  taken  from  the  Mighty  One,  without  both  price  and  power.     (3)  As 
a  Captain  or  General  at  the  head  of  His  people  (Heb.  ii.  10).    2.  The  attaok 
made  upon  Him  by  death.     (1)  Death  brings  up  its  strength  against  Him,  t.e., 
the  law.     (2)  Meanwhile  he  that  has  the  power  of  death  (Heb.  ii.  14)  advances 
against  Him ;  Satan  sets  upon  Him  in  the  wilderness  with  most  grievous  tempta- 
tions.    (3)  The  congregation  of  men  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  stir  up  them- 
selves against  Him  (Isa.  liii.  3).     Judas  betrays  Him,  the  Jews  gape  on  Him 
like  a  lion,  crying,  Crucify  Him ;  Pilate  condemns  Him  ;  He  is  scourged,  crowned 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

with  thorns,  smitten  on  the  crowned  head;  His  body,  racked  till  it  was  all  out 
of  joint,  nailed  to  the  Cross,  hangs  there  mocked,  and  pierced  with  a  spear. 
(4)  Death  comes  with  its  sting  upon  Him,  and  pierces  Him  to  the  heart,  and 
casts  Him  down  dead.  II.  The  victory  Christ  obtained.  1.  How  it  was 
obtained.  (1)  By  His  death.  This  was  the  decisive  stroke.  "  That  through 
death  He  might  destroy  death,  and  him  that  had  the  power  of  death."  It 
was  such  a  victory  as  Samson's  last  victory  over  the  Philistines,  when  he  pulled 
down  the  house,  and  died  himself  with  the  Philistines  in  the  fall  of  it ;  and 
therefore  He  cried  upon  the  Cross,  "  It  is  finished."  (2)  By  His  resurrection. 
2.  What  sort  of  victory  it  is  Jesus  hath  obtained  over  death.  (1)  A  dear-bought 
victory ;  it  cost  the  glorious  Conqueror  His  precious  life.  (2)  A  complete  victory 
in  respect  of  Himself,  though  not  yet  in  respect  of  His  members  (Rom.  vi.  9). 
(3)  A  glorious  victory,  saints  and  angels  singing  the  triumphant  song.  (4)  An 
everlasting  victory.  Death's  power  is  irrecoverably  broken.  III.  Thh  pursuit. 
1.  Christ  looses  the  bands  of  spiritual  death.  2.  He  looses  the  band  of  legal 
death.  3.  He  destroys  the  body  of  death  in  the  believer.  (1)  It  is  crucified, 
and  its  destruction  is  ensured  in  the  conversion  of  the  soul  to  God  (Bom.  vi. 
6  ;  Gal.  v.  24).  (2)  It  is  weakened  and  mortified  more  and  more,  in  the  gradual 
advances  of  sanctiflcation  (Rom.  viii.  13).  (3)  At  the  death  of  the  body,  the 
body  of  death  is  utterly  destroyed.  4.  He  dries  up  all  the  sorrows  of  death. 
6.  He  brings  all  His  people  safe  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death. 
6.  Now,  death  has  nothing  of  Christ's  but  the  bodies  of  the  saints,  not  a  foot 
of  ground  in  His  kingdom  but  the  grave ;  and  these  He  will  also  wrest  out  of 
his  hand  at  the  resurrection.  7.  In  consequence  of  the  absolute  victory  over 
death,  it  shall  be  shut  up,  and  confined  for  the  ages  of  eternity  to  the  lower 
regions  (Rev.  xx.  14).  IV.  Practical  improvement.  1.  Be  lively  Christians, 
as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead  through  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Join  issue  with 
the  Conqueror  in  pursuing  the  victory  in  your  own  souls.  3.  Join  issue  with 
the  Conqueror  in  pursuing  the  victory  in  the  world,  especially  in  the  places 
where  ye  live.  4.  Believe  this  truth  with  application  in  all  your  endeavours 
after  holiness.  5.  Be  weaned  from  the  world,  and  long  for  the  day  when  death 
shall  be  swallowed  up  in  victory.  (Ibid.)  Death  abolished: — We  shall  have 
no  more  to  do  with  death  than  we  have  with  the  cloak-room  at  a  governor's 
or  president's  levee.  We  stop  at  such  cloak-room,  and  leave  in  charge  of  a 
servant  our  overcoat,  our  overshoes,  our  outward  apparel,  that  we  may  not 
be  impeded  in  the  brilliant  round  of  the  drawing-room.  Well,  when  we  go  out 
of  this  world  we  are  going  to  a  King's  banquet,  and  to  a  reception  of  monarchs, 
and  at  the  door  of  the  tomb  we  leave  the  cloak  of  flesh,  and  the  wrappings  with 
which  we  meet  the  storms  of  this  world.  At  the  close  of  an  earthly  reception, 
under  the  brush  and  broom  of  the  porter,  the  coat  or  hat  may  be  handed 
to  us  better  than  when  we  resigned  it,  and  the  cloak  of  humanity  will  finally 
be  returned  to  us  improved,  and  brightened,  and  purified,  and  glorified. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  resurrection  of  the  dead: — The  far-up  cloud, 
higher  than  the  hawk  flies,  higher  than  the  eagle  flies,  what  is  it  made  of  ?  Drops 
of  water  from  the  Hudson,  other  drops  from  the  East  River,  other  drops  from 
a  stagnant  pool  out  on  Newark  flats — up  yonder  there,  embodied  in  a  cloud, 
and  the  sun  kindles  it.  If  God  can  make  such  a  lustrous  cloud  out  of  water- 
drops,  many  of  them  soiled  and  impure  and  fetched  from  miles  away,  can 
He  not  transport  the  fragments  of  a  human  body  from  the  earth,  and  out 
of  them  build  a  radiant  body  ?  (Ibid.)  The  Messiah  the  Victor  over  death  :— 
What  is  very  curious  is  that  most  of  the  Hebrew  seers  saw  in  their  Messiah 
the  Victor  over  death.  And  what  makes  it  curious  is  that  the  Jews  did  not, 
as  a  rule,  look  forward  to  a  life  beyond  the  grave.  The  life  eternal,  the  life 
which,  as  a  mere  incident  in  its  career,  can  match  itself  against  death  and  con- 
quer it,  was  unknown  to  them ;  they  were  not  conscious  of  it  even  when  they 
possessed  it.  To  only  a  few  rare  souls  was  this  great  truth,  this  great  hope 
revealed,  and  that  only  in  their  rarest  and  most  exalted  moments.  To  obey 
the  commandments  of  God,  to  render  the  service  He  demanded  of  them,  and 
to  enjoy  His  favour  here  and  now  was  enough  for  them.  Even  the  prophets 
themselves  were  mainly  taken  up  either  with  this  present  life,  with  its  urgent 
tasks  and  duties  ;  or,  if  they  travelled  beyond  it,  it  was  the  future  life  of  the 
nation  on  earth  on  which  they  speculated,  and  on  the  discipline  by  which  it 
was  to  be  purified  and  broadened  till  it  embraced  the  whole  family  of  man. 
But  when  they  looked  forward  to  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  all  the  horizon* 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  445 

of  their  thought  were  enlarged.  Whatever  might  change  and  perish,  He  must 
remain,  to  be  for  ever  the  Lord  and  Friend  of  men.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The 
Jewish  prevision  of  immortality  : — And  this  prevision  of  immortality  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  a  mere  inspiration,  a  secret  revealed  to  them  by  the  Spirit 
of  all  wisdom  and  knowledge.  Apparently,  it  was  also  the  result  of  a  logical 
process,  an  inference  from  moral  facts  with  which  they  were  familiar.  For 
all  the  prophets  held  that  the  Messiah  would  come  to  redeem  men — first  the 
Jew,  but  also  the  Gentile — from  their  sins,  to  establish  them  in  the  service  and 
to  draw  them  into  the  family  of  God.  But  death  is  simply  the  wage  and  fruit 
of  sin.  To  redeem  from  sin  is,  therefore,  to  abolish  death,  to  pluck  it  up  by 
the  root,  to  cut  it  off  at  the  fountain-head.  This  appears,  so  far  as  we  can 
trace  it,  to  have  been  the  foundation  of  their  hope  in  the  Christ  as  the  Conqueror 
of  death.  And  hence,  in  proportion  as  they  were  sure  that  He  would  save  men 
from  their  sins,  they  were  the  more  fully  persuaded  that,  in  overcoming  tin, 
He  would  also  overcome  and  annihilate  death.  No  one  of  the  goodly  fellow- 
ship has  given  a  nobler  utterance  to  this  animating  and  sustaining  hope  than 
the  prophet  Isaiah  in  the  words,  "  And  He  shall  destroy  in,  this  mountain," 
&c.  (Ibid. )  The  veil  and  web  of  death  destroyed  by  Christ  : — The  prophet 
speaks  of  death  as  "  a  veil  "  which  dims  the  perceptions  of  men,  or  even  blinds 
their  eyes  to  facts  which  it  is  essential  to  their  welfare  that  they  should  know ; 
and  as  "  a  web  "  in  which  their  active  powers  are  entangled  and  paralysed ; 
and  he  declares  that  in  the  day  on  which  God,  instead  of  asking  feasts  and  sacri- 
fices of  men,  shall  Himself  provide  a  sacrifice  and  feast  for  the  world,  this  blind- 
ing veil,  this  fettering  and  thwarting  net,  shall  be  finally  and  utterly  destroyed. 
"  He  shall  destroy  death  for  ever."  How  true  these  figurative  descriptions  of 
death  are  to  human  experience,  what  a  fine  poetic  insight  and  firm  imaginative 
grasp  they  disclose — as  of  one  with  both  eye  and  hand  on  the  fact — is  obvious 
at  a  glance,  and  becomes  the  more  obvious  the  more  we  meditate  upon  them. 
Always  the  veil  which  darkens  the  eyes  is  also  a  web  which  entangles  the  feet, 
as  we  have  only  to  watch  the  motions  of  any  blind  man  to  know.  Failing  sight 
and  impaired  activity  go  together  of  necessity ;  while  blindness  involves,  at 
least,  a  partial  paralysis  of  all  the  active  powers.  As  to  be  without  God  is  to 
be  without  hope,  so  to  be  without  the  hope  of  immortality  is  to  suffer  a  mental 
eclipse  which  cannot  fail  to  limit  our  scope  and  impair  our  moral  energies.  We 
have  only  to  consider  the  moral  conditions,  the  moral  collapse  of  men  and 
nations,  from  whom  the  future  life  has  been  hidden,  or  over  whom  it  had  no 
practical  power,  to  learn  how  terribly,  in  the  absence  of  this  hope,  the  moral 
ideal  is  degraded  and  the  moral  energies  enfeebled.  I  am  far  from  denying  that 
even  men  to  whom  this  life  is  all  have  risen,  by  a  marvellous  and  most  admirable 
feat  of  wisdom  and  natural  goodness,  into  the  conviction  that  to  be  wise  is  better 
than  to  be  rich,  to  be  good  better  than  to  be  wise,  to  live  for  others  better  than 
to  live  for  one's  self.  But  not  only  are  such  men  as  these  rare  and  heroic  excep- 
tions to  the  general  strain,  but  even  they  themselves,  admirable  as  their  spirit 
may  be,  can  know  no  settled  cheerfulness,  no  abiding  peace.  Human  life  is 
and  must  be  full  of  injustice,  as  well  as  misery,  to  those  who  do  not  believe  in 
a  hereafter  in  which  all  wrongs  are  to  be  righted,  all  sorrows  turned  into  joy, 
all  loss  into  gain.  And  when  they  bury  their  dead  out  of  their  sight,  with  what 
bitter  and  hopeless  pangs  must  their  hearts  be  torn  !  how  horrible  must  be  the 
darkness,  unbroken  and  unrelieved,  which  settles  down  upon  them  !  (Ibid. ) 
Imperfect  conceptions  of  Christ's  victory  over  death  —  their  effect  on  practical 
life  :  —  Nor  even  now  that  Christ  has  abolished  death  and  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  light,  Is  there  any  misconception  of  this  Divine  achievement 
into  which  we  fall  that  does  not  become  a  veil,  dimming  our  eyes,  and  a  web, 
entangling  our  feet.  1.  Those,  for  instance,  who  while  professing  to  entertain 
this  great  hope,  practically  put  it  away  from  them,  and  who  therefore  sacrifice 
the  future  to  the  present ; — is  not  the  veil  still  on  their  hearts,  the  web  about 
their  feet  ?  2.  So,  again,  in  a  less  but  sufficiently  obvious  degree  with  those 
who  so  misconceive  of  life  and  death  as  to  sacrifice  the  present  to  the  future  ; 
who  miss  or  forego  all  the  sweet  and  wholesome  uses  of  the  world  because  they 
have  not  learned,  what  yet  the  Gospel  plainly  teaches,  that  wisely  to  use  and 
enjoy  this  present  world  is  the  best  of  all  preparations  for  the  world  to  come. 
3.  And  even  those  who,  despite  the  Gospel  teaching,  will  think  of  dissolution 
as  death  rather  than  as  victory  over  death,  or  as  separating  and  alienating  them 
from  the  dear  cnes  of  whom  they  have  lost  sight,  rather  than  as  bringing  their 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

"lost  ones"  Dearer  to  their  true  life  and  binding  them  to  them  by  closer  because 
by  invisible  and  spiritual  ties, — even  these  have  their  eyes  still  dimmed  by  the 
veil  which  Christ  came  to  lift,  and  their  feet  still  entangled  in  the  net  from  which 
He  came  to  deliver  their  feet.  (Ibid.)  Has  Christ  destroyed  death  f — Death, 
as  a  mere  phenomenon,  was  in  the  world  before  sin  ;  and  therefore,  as  a  mere 
phenomenon,  it  may  and  does  remain  in  the  world  after  sin  has  been  taken  away. 
But  are  we,  who  have  discourse  of  reason,  even  if  we  have  not  the  more  piercing 
insight  of  faith,  such  victims  of  the  visible  and  the  apparent  that  we  cannot 
distinguish  between  substance  and  phenomena,  between  the  mere  act  of  dissolu- 
tion, which  seems  to  be  the  inevitable  condition  of  higher  spiritual  development, 
and  all  that  makes  death  really  death  to  us  ?  (Ibid.)  Christ's  victory  over 
death : — Of  this  victory  over  all  that  is  worthy  to  be  called  death  Christ  haa 
given  us  two  proofs  on  which  our  faith  may  lean ;  one  in  His  transfigura- 
tion, and  the  other  in  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  (Ibid.)  Victory 
over  death  and  sorrow  : — "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory ;  and  the  Lord 
God  will  wipe  avay  tears  from  off  all  faces  " — a  passage  of  which  the  poet  Burns 
said  that  he  "  could  never  read  it  without  weeping."  I.  The  promise  op 
swallowing  up  death  in  victory.  This  promise,  as  well  as  that  which  follows 
it,  may  have  a  primary  allusion  to  the  resuscitation  of  the  Jewish  people  after 
their  captivity,  but  this  is  only  an  allusion,  as  in  Hos.  xiii.  14.  What  the 
ultimate  meaning  is  we  learn  from  the  glowing  words  of  St.  Paul :  "  So  when 
this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on  incorruption,"  &c.  It  was  a  glorious  promise 
when  first  given,  but  its  full  meaning  was  not  know  a,  nor  will  it  be  completely 
understood  till  it  shall  be  actually  fulfilled.  Yet  the  revelations  of  the  Gospel 
enable  us  to  form  an  enlarged  idea  of  what  that  fufilment  will  be.  1.  The 
death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  an  expiation  for  sin  and  a  homage  to  the 
claims  of  law,  has  removed,  to  His  people,  that  which  chiefly  makes  death  terrible. 
That  with  man,  the  lord  of  the  inferior  creatures,  the  body  should  die  just  as 
they  do,  is  sufficiently  humbling.  Yet,  serious  as  this  is,  it  is  not  the  most  solemn 
feature  of  the  case.  "  After  death  the  judgment,"  and,  to  a  godless  soul,  how 
terrible  that  audit !  But  to  a  believer  sin  is  forgiven.  "  The  strength  of  sin  is 
the  law."  But  the  law  is  satisfied,  yea,  magnified  by  the  Redeemer's  expiatory 
work.  Peace  may  now,  therefore,  take  the  place  of  that  apprehension  which 
before  was  the  only  alternative  to  senseless  unconcern.  2.  As  the  Saviour's 
death  not  only  obtains  deliverance  for  believers  from  guilt  and  condemnation, 
but  is  the  channel  by  which  grace  "  reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life," 
death  becomes  to  them  the  gateway  of  life  and  the  passage  to  Heaven.  Here 
God  educates  them  by  the  discipline  of  life,  and  often  of  the  chamber  of  sickness, 
for  His  kingdom  and  the  receiving  of  the  promise.  Then  He  calls  them  home 
to  the  possession  of  it,  and  it  is  death  which  brings  the  summons.  3.  Still  the 
earthly  house  lies  in  ruins.  Death  seems  as  yet  to  triumph  there.  But  even 
those  ruins  are  to  be  built  again.  II.  The  wiping  away  the  tears  of  sorrow. 
The  two  things  are  intimately  related,  and  the  second  springs  out  of  the  first. 
Death  is  one  of  the  prolific  causes  of  sorrow.  Whilst  unreconciled  to  God,  the 
thought  of  mortality,  if  a  man  thinks  seriously  of  the  great  problems  of  his  being 
at  all,  casts  a  dark  shadow  over  his  anticipations  of  the  future.  And  even 
among  Christians  the  separations  which  death  occasions  are  a  frequent  cause  of 
sadness.  (E.  T.  Prust.)  Christ  the  Conqueror  of  death  : — Tennyson  tells,  in  the 
"  Idylls  of  the  King,"  of  a  knight  who  fought  with  death.  And  when  he  had 
overcome  him  and  pierced  through  his  ghastly  trappings,  "  there  issued  the 
bright  face  of  a  blooming  boy."  So  Christ  has  conquered  death  for  us,  and, 
penetrating  its  terror,  has  brought,  not  death,  but  life  and  immortality  to 
light."  (Sunday  School  Chronicle.)  Fear  of  death  removed: — Whitfield, 
the  prince  of  sacred  orators,  was  preaching  to  a  crowd  concerning  the  love  of 
God  :  its  height,  its  breadth,  its  infinity.  A  poor,  ignorant,  neglected  child 
heard  him,  and  drank  in  all  he  said  with  open  eyes  and  open  heart.  Some  little 
time  afterwards  the  poor  girl  was  smitten  with  a  deadly  disease.  A  Christian 
visited  her  bed  of  straw.  '  Child,"  said  he,  "  are  you  afraid  to  die  ?  "  "  No," 
she  replied,  "  I  am  not  afraid  to  die,  I  want  to  go  to  Mr.  Whitfield's  God." 
(P.  Norton.)  D.  L.  Moody  on  death: — Mr.  Moody  once  said,  "  Some  day  you 
will  read  in  the  papers  that  D.  L.  Moody,  of  East  Northfield,  is  dead.  Don't 
you  believe  a  word  of  it !  At  that  moment  I  shall  be  more  alive  than  I  am  now. 
I  shall  have  gone  up  higher,  that  is  all ;  gone  out  of  this  old  clay  tenement  into 
a  house  that  is  immortal,  a  body  tha'   death  cannot  touch,  that  sin  cannot  taint. 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  447 

a  body  like  unto  His  own  glorious  body."  Robert  HalVs  death: — Mrs.  Hall, 
observing  a  change  on  the  countenance  of  her  husband,  became  alarmed,  and 
exclaimed,  "  This  cannot  be  dying  !  "  He  replied,  "  It  is  death  ;  it  is  death — 
death  !  "  Mrs.  Hall  then  asked  him,  "  Are  you  comfortable  in  your  mind  ?  " 
He  immediately  answered,  "  Very  comfortable — very  comfortable  !  "  And 
exclaimed,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come — "  He  hesitated,  as  if  incapable  of 
bringing  out  the  last  word.  One  of  his  daughters  anticipated  him  by  saying 
*'  Quickly,"  on  which  her  departing  father  gave  her  a  look  expressive  of  the 
most  complacent  delight.  (King's  Highway.)  The  Lord  God  will  wipe 
away  tears  from  off  all  faces.  —  The  lake  of  tears :  —  It  would  be  a  sum 
for  an  arithmetician  to  tell  the  size  of  the  lake  that  all  the  tears  shed 
by  humanity  would  have  made.  I.  Let  us  notice  the  tears  on  somh 
faces.  1.  How  many  little  children  weep  when  they  might  have  been  made 
to  rejoice  !  We  often  expect  more  from  children  than  they  have  either  wisdom 
or  strength  to  perform.  Many  a  child  weeps  himself  to  sleep  when  he  might 
have  sung  had  he  been  rightly  treated.  2.  There  have  been  rivers  of  tears  upon 
the  faces  of  the  wives  of  our  country.  3.  There  are  many  tears  shed  by  widows. 
4.  There  are  the  tears  of  the  bereaved.  6.  Then  there  are  the  tears  of  that 
class  of  people  that  the  world  does  not  like  to  talk  of — the  "  unfortunate." 

6.  And  then  there  are  many  who  were  once  members  of  our  Churches,  who  have 
wandered  out  of  the  way ;  and  there  has  been  no  kind  hand  to  fetch  them  back. 

7.  Remember  the  tears  caused  by  the  crushing  weight  of  the  mountain  of  poverty. 
Charity  organisations  are  excellent  systems,  but  it  is  unwise  to  overdo  it. 
Because  there  are  so  many  deceivers,  it  does  not  prove  that  there  are  not  some 
who  suffer.  Let  us  be  just  to  the  poor.  8.  There  are  many  tears  shed  by  women 
whose  faces  are  very  plain.  They  are  passed  by  in  favour  of  those  who  have 
better  figures  and  prettier  faces.  9.  A  large  proportion  also  of  those  about  us 
are  crippled,  and  they  often  are  neglected.  II.  The  tears  op  the  world  have 
not  been  shed  in  vain.  The  tears  of  slavery  have  brought  about  freedom ; 
the  tears  of  ignorance  have  been  the  cause  of  education  being  placed  within  the 
reach  of  every  healthy  child  in  our  land  ;  the  tears  caused  by  pestilence  have 
compelled  us  to  cleanse  our  towns  and  villages ;  and  the  tears  shed  under  the 
scourge  of  oppression  have  given  to  us  freedom  of  conscience.  The  tears  of 
poverty  have  given  to  us  the  desire  to  alleviate  it.  The  tears  of  pain  and  sicknesa 
nave  brought  about  our  splendid  medical  system — the  hospitals  and  dispensaries 
of  our  country.  Tears  often  lead  to  joy.  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night, 
but  joy  often  cometh  to  us  in  the  morning.  III.  The  tears  op  affliction 
and  trial  are  needful.  If  affliction  had  not  been  necessary,  Christ  would 
have  borne  it  upon  His  own  head.  Afflictions  are  to  us  like  sand-paper,  to  make 
us  smooth  and  polished  to  take  our  place  in  the  society  of  Heaven.  Trials  are 
to  us  as  the  testing  of  iron.  A  heavier  weight  is  placed  upon  the  iron  in  the 
workshop  than  it  has  to  bear  in  its  service  outside  ;  and  so  a  heavy  weight  ia 
placed  upon  you  here.  IV.  The  tender  hand.  It  is  the  hand  of  a  Father, 
of  a  Lover,  of  a  Saviour,  of  a  Friend ;  it  is  the  hand  of  the  Lord  God  ! 
( W.  Birch. )  Man  born  to  trouble  : — There  is  a  fable  that  when  Affliction  was 
listening  to  the  roar  of  the  sea,  she  stretched  out  a  willow-branch  and  brought 
to  the  shore  a  beautiful  body.  As  it  lay  upon  the  sand,  Jupiter  passed  by,  and, 
entranced  with  its  beauty,  he  breathed  into  the  body  life  and  motion,  and 
called  it  man.  There  was  very  soon  a  discussion  as  to  whom  this  man  should 
belong.  Affliction  said,  "  I  am  the  cause  of  his  creation  "  ;  Earth  answered, 
"  I  furnished  the  materials  "  ;  and  Jupiter  urged,  "  I  gave  him  animation." 
The  gods  assembled  in  solemn  council,  and  it  was  decided  that  Affliction  should 
possess  the  man  whilst  he  lived ;  that  Death  should  then  receive  his  body,  and 
Jupiter  possess  his  spirit.  This  is  the  fable — pretty  well-nigh  true.  (Ibid.) 
God's  power  to  wipe  away  tears  : — Of  all  the  qualities  we  assign  to  the  Author 
and  Director  of  nature,  by  far  the  most  enviable  is  to  be  able  "  to  wipe  away 
all  tears  from  all  eyes."     (Robert  Burns.) 

Yer.  9.  And  It  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo,  this  la  our  God.  —  Waiting 
for  God  in  times  of  darkness  ; — Isaiah  is  thinking,  first  of  all,  of  Hezekiah's 
victory  over  Sennacherib.  It  was  no  ordinary  day  which  saw  the  dis- 
comfiture of  the  Assyrian  host  before  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  We  can 
scarcely  understand  the  terror  and  dismay  with  which  a  religious  Jew  must 
have  watched  the  growth  of  those  mighty  Oriental  despotisms  which,  rising  one 


448  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

after  another  in  the  great  valley  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  aspired  to  nothing 
less  than  the  conquest  of  the  known  world.  The  victory  of  a  conqueror  like 
Sennacherib  meant  the  extinction  of  national  life  and  personal  liberty  in  the 
conquered  people  ;  it  meant  often  enough  violent  transportation  from  their 
homes,  separation  from  their  families,  with  all  the  degrading  and  penal  accom- 
paniments of  complete  subjugation.  It  meant  this  by  the  conquered  pagan 
cities  ;  for  Jerusalem  it  meant  this  and  more.  The  knowledge  and  self-worship 
of  God  maintained  by  institutions  of  Divine  appointment,  maintained  only  in 
that  little  corner  of  the  wide  world,  were  linked  to  the  fortunes  of  the  Jewish 
Btate,  and  in  the  victory  of  Sennacherib  would  be  involved  not  merely  political 
humiliation,  but  religious  darkness.  When,  then,  his  armies  advanced  across 
the  continent  again  and  again,  making  of  a  city  a  heap,  and  of  a  fenced  city  • 
ruin,  and  at  last  appeared  before  Jerusalem,  when  the  blast  of  the  terrible  ones 
was  as  a  storm  against  the  wall,  there  was  natural  dismay  in  every  religious 
and  patriotic  soul.  It  seemed  as  though  a  veil  or  covering,  like  that  which  was 
spread  over  the  holy  things  in  the  Jewish  ritual,  was  being  spread  more  and 
more  completely  over  all  nations  at  each  step  of  the  Assyrian  monarch's  advance, 
and  in  those  hours  of  darkness  all  true-hearted  men  in  Jerusalem  waited  for 
God.  He  had  delivered  them  from  the  Egyptian  slavery.  He  had  given  them 
the  realm  of  David  and  Solomon.  He  who  had  done  so  much  for  them  would 
not  desert  them  now.  In  His  own  way,  at  His  own  time,  He  would  rebuke  this 
insolent  enemy  of  His  truth  and  His  people,  and  this  passionate  longing  for 
His  intervention  quickened  the  eye  and  melted  the  heart  of  Jerusalem  when  at 
last  it  came.  The  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  host  was  one  of  those  supreme 
moments  in  the  history  of  a  people  which  can  never  be  lived  over  again  by 
posterity.  The  sense  of  deliveranoe  was  proportionated  to  the  agony  which 
had  preceded  it.  To  Isaiah  and  his  contemporaries  it  seemed  as  though  a 
canopy  of  thick  darkness  was  lifted  from  the  face  of  the  world,  as  though  the 
recollections  of  slaughter  and  death  were  entirely  swallowed  up  in  the  absorbing 
sense  of  deliverance,  as  though  the  tears  of  the  city  had  been  wiped  away  and 
the  rebuke  of  God's  people  was  taken  from  earth,  and  therefore  from  the  heart 
of  Israel  there  burst  forth  a  welcome  proportionated  to  the  anxious  longing 
that  had  preceded  it :  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God ;  we  have  waited  for  Him ;  He  will 
save  us."  (H.  P.  Liddon,  D.D.)  God  in  history  : — The  recognition  of  God's 
presence  in  the  great  turning-points  of  human  history  is  in  all  ages  natural  to 
religious  minds.  God,  of  course,  is  here  in  quiet  times,  when  all  goes  smoothly, 
as  though  it  were  regulated  by  unchangeable  law.  But  His  presence  is  brought 
before  the  imagination  more  vividly  when  all  seems  at  stake,  when  the  ordinary 
human  resources  of  confidence  and  hope  are  clearly  giving  way,  when  nothing 
but  a  sudden,  sharp  turn  in  what  looks  like  the  predestined  course  of  events 
can  avert  some  fatal  catastrophe.  This  is  what  was  felt  by  our  ancestors  in 
the  days  of  the  Spanish  Armada.  This  is  what  was  felt  in  every  religious  mind 
throughout  Europe  when  the  power  of  the  First  Napoleon  was  broken,  first 
at  Leipsic,  and  then  at  Waterloo.  (Ibid.)  A  forecast  of  the  last  judgment  : — 
But  beyond  the  immediate  present  Isaiah  sees,  it  may  be  indistinctly,  into  a 
distant  future.  The  judgment  of  Assyria,  like  that  upon  Egypt  in  a  previous 
age,  like  that  upon  Babylon  afterwards,  foreshadowed  some  universal  judgment, 
some  judgment  upon  all  the  enemies  of  God.  The  visible  Divine  action  upon  a 
small  scale  was  itself  a  revelation  of  the  principles  upon  which  the  world  is 
governed,  and  which  one  day  will  be  seen  to  have  governed  it  in  the  widest  and 
most  inclusive  sense,  and  thus  Isaiah's  prediction  of  the  song  which  would  be 
sung  by  Israel  at  the  defeat  of  Sennacherib  is  a  prediction  of  the  song  which  will 
be  sung  by  the  redeemed  when  Christ  our  Lord  comes  to  judgment.  (Ibid.) 
Christ  our  God : — But  between  the  days  of  Hezekiah  and  the  final  judgment, 
there  is  another  event  ever  close  to  the  thought  of  the  prophet — the  appearance 
of  the  great  Deliverer  in  the  midst  of  human  history.  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God." 
Christ  is  not  for  us  Christians  merely  or  chiefly  the  preacher  or  herald  of  a  religion 
of  which  another  being,  distinct  from  Himself,  is  the  object.  The  Gospel  creed 
does  not  run  thus,  "  There  is  no  God  but  God,  and  Christ  is  His  prophet."  The 
Author  and  Founder  of  Christianity,  He  is  also  at  the  same  time  its  subject  and 
its  substance.  We  may  say,  with  truth,  that  Christ  is  Christianity.  (Ibid.) 
Waiting  for  God  : — I.  Contemplate  the  glorious  Object  we  are  here  invited 
to  behold.  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God."  The  words  express  strong  emotions  of 
pleasure,  admiration,  and  joy,  arising  from  the  merciful  interpositions  made  in 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  449 

behalf  of  His  people,  whereby  Jehovah  manifested  Himself  present  among 
them.  Though  God  is  invisible  to  our  bodily  eyes,  we  behold  Him  when  we 
eensiblv  discern  those  visible  effects  which  cannot  be  produced  by  any  other 
than  His  omnipotent  arm.  There  subsists  between  Him  and  us  a  reciprocal 
endearing  relation,  a  mutual  tender  affection,  a  continued  delightful  intercourse, 
a  most  agreeable  concord,  and  an  intimate  union  of  interest  and  design. 
11.  Consider  the  becoming  exercise  in  which  the  Church  was  employed.  "We 
have  waited  for  Him."  The  repetition  of  the  words  plainly  intimates  the  great 
earnestness  and  persevering  diligence  with  which  the  saints  had  waited  upon 
the  Lord  their  God.  This  duty  includes — 1.  Earnest  desire.  2.  Lively  expecta- 
tion. 3.  Holy  serenity  of  mind  (Lam.  iii.  26  ;  Isa.  xxx.  15).  This  sacred  tran- 
quillity of  soul  represses  those  uneasy  disquietudes  and  tumultuous  thoughts, 
which  disturb  the  mind,  and  unfit  for  the  right  performance  of  this  or  any  other 
duty.  It  composes  the  soul  attentively  to  observe  every  symptom  of  the 
Divine  approach,  every  appearance  from  which  may  be  deduced  favourable 
consequences,  and  every  opportunity  that  ought  to  be  diligently  improved. 
It  gives  a  seasonable  check  to  that  precipitation  and  haste  which  springs  from 
uneasiness  at  our  present  condition,  and  from  hurtful  anxiety  about  immediate 
deliverance.  III.  Attend  to  the  assured  confidence  in  God  which  the  Church 
expressed  in  these  words  :  "  He  will  save  us."  In  every  age  they  have  viewed 
the  Lord  as  their  Saviour.  Salvation  from  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  which  waa 
doubtless  primarily  intended  in  the  words  before  us,  is  employed  as  an  image, 
to  shadow  out  a  salvation  of  an  infinitely  higher  and  more  important  nature. 
IV.  Examine  the  consequent  resolution  adopted  by  the  Church.  "  We  will 
be  glad,  and  rejoice  in  His  salvation."  In  this  salvation,  which  is  admirably 
suited  to  our  character  and  circumstances,  we  ought  to  be  glad  and  rejoice. 
(R.  Maccvlloch.)  Third  Sunday  in  Advent: — (1)  In  this  lesson  there  is  an 
interlacement  of  praise  and  prophecy.  (2)  The  words  "  we  have  waited  for 
Him,"  describe  the  posture  of  the  Church  at  all  times,  but  especially  at  this 
season.  In  the  Old  Testament,  the  Jews  waited  for  the  first  coming  of  Christ. 
The  light  of  the  first  prophecy  became  wider  and  brighter  as  the  fulfilment  drew 
nigh.  The  Church  waits  for  the  second  coming.  I.  What  does  waiting  imply  ? 
1.  Faith.  Christians  believe  in  the  promise  of  His  coming  (1  Cor.  i.  7).  Those 
who  have  reduced  the  Christian  creed  to  its  smallest  dimensions  have  included 
in  it  the  belief  in  Christ's  second  coming  as  Judge.  2.  Desire  (2  Tim.  iv.  8; 
Rev.  xxii.  20;  Phil.  iii.  20;  Rom.  viii.  19).  3.  Patience  (James  v.  7).  4.  Pre- 
paration. II.  Why  wait  so  long  ?  1.  The  question  was  discussed  in  the 
Middle  Ages.  Why  was  the  Incarnation  so  long  delayed  ?  Why  was  not  the 
remedy  at  once  applied  to  the  disease  T  It  is  not  for  us  to  question  the  ways 
of  God  ;  but,  although  we  accept  them  in  the  spirit  of  faith,  yet,  having  done  so, 
we  should  reverently  exercise  our  reason,  so  far  as  we  can,  upon  matters  of 
faith.  2.  One  reason  for  this  delay  of  the  Incarnation  is  drawn  from  the  condition 
of  man.  He  had  to  be  humiliated  by  a  sense  of  his  sinfulness  in  order  that  he 
might  feel  his  need  of  a  Deliverer.  The  remedy  has  not  only  to  be  vouchsafed, 
but  to  be  accepted,  and  for  this  human  pride  must  be  broken  down.  We  see 
the  same  providence  in  individual  sinners  as  in  a  microcosm.  God  allows  the 
prodigal  to  pursue  his  downward  course  until  he  is  brought  to  his  senses,  and 
misery  brings  him  to  the  turning-point.  3.  All  delays  in  the  approaches  of  God 
are  for  the  sake  of  man  that  he  might  prepare  to  receive  Him.  The  ministry 
of  the  Baptist  is  a  visible  setting  forth  of  this  need  of  preparation.  IIL  What 
are  we  waiting  for  ?  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God,"  &c.  1.  That  there  is  a  primary 
reference  to  wonderful  interventions  of  God  on  behalf  of  His  people,  whether 
in  contemporary  or  subsequent  deliverances,  is  admitted.  Whatever  may  be  the 
historic  application,  it  cannot  be  more  than  a  type  of  the  full  accomplishment  of 
the  prophecy  in  the  Person  of  Christ.  He  alone  swallows  up  death  in  victory  ** ; 
and  "  wipes  away  tears  from  off  all  faces."  2.  The  text  is  fulfilled  by  the  Incarna- 
tion. *  This  is  our  God."  It  points  to  the  mystery  that  our  Lord  is  a  Divine 
Person,  and  that  therefore  He  can  "  save  us."  This  stirs  the  hymn  of  joy, 
"  We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  His  salvation."  This  is  no  mere  temporal 
deliverance,  but  freedom  from  the  powers  of  darkness — the  salvation  of  the 
soul,  pardon  for  sin,  gift  of  grace,  hope  of  glory ;  these  deep  inward  gifts  awaken 
such  chords  of  praise  in  the  redeemed,  that  all  joy  and  thanksgiving  for  earthly 
deliverances  are  but  a  faint  prelude  to  their  exultation.  The  great  mystery, 
"  The  V»*ord  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  "  ;  the  great  truth,  Unto 
29 


460  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxr. 

you  is  born  a  Saviour  "  ;  the  great  experience,  "  Ye  were  sometime  darkness, 
now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord  "  ; — by  these  is  fulfilled  the  blessed  promise,  that 
the  veil  of  darkness  and  the  wail  of  sorrow  through  Christ  shall  be  done  away, 
and  the  voice  of  rejoicing  and  salvation  be  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  righteous. 
IV.  Lessons.  1.  The  text  impresses  on  us  the  right  use  of  Advent  as  a  season  of 
preparation  for  the  ooming  of  Christ.  2.  This  preparation  to  consist  in  repent- 
ance for  sin,  and  faith  in  Christ.  3.  The  words  of  the  text  express  the  joy  of  an 
earnest  Christmas  Communion.  "  This  is  our  God ;  we  have  waited  for  Him  "  ; 
for  "  he  that  eateth  Me,  even  he  shall  live  by  Me  "  (John  vi.  57).  4.  They 
express  also  a  true  belief  in  the  Incarnation,  that  realisation  of  the  Divine  and 
human  united  for  ever  in  the  One  Person  of  the  Son  of  God,  which  thrilled 
the  soul  of  St.  Thomas  when  he  cried  out,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God  !  " 
{The  Thinker.)  Waiting  for  God: — Interwoven  with  all  human  experiences 
there  is  the  consciousness  of  a  conflict,  an  oppression,  a  captivity.  But  men 
expect  deliverance.  If  it  were  not  so,  effort  would  be  paralysed,  and  history 
would  end.  This  hope  is  not  illusive ;  the  God  who  has  implanted  in  the  hearts 
of  all  men  an  anticipation  of  deliverance  is  a  God  who  will  give  deliverance. 
But  deliverances  do  not  come  when  men  desire  them,  hope  for  them,  expect  them. 
Often  there  is  long  delay.  I.  God  keeps  men  waiting.  1.  Let  us  notice  how 
true  this  is  of  the  history  of  our  race.  The  race  is  wrestling  with  a  mighty  sorrow. 
We  look  through  the  ages,  and  we  see  that  every  age  has  its  burden  of  woe.  We 
go  among  the  diverse  peoples  of  mankind,  and  we  find  that  there  is  not  a  tribe 
which  does  not  exhibit  tokens  of  the  strife.  The  eternal  God  has  spoken,  and 
His  voice  has  told  the  world  that  the  secret  of  the  world's  sorrow  and  strife  and 
pain  is  the  world's  sin.  And  the  honest  conscience  echoes  back  the  truth  of  God. 
But  the  same  Voice  which  tells  the  world  of  sin,  tells  also  of  a  Saviour.  But 
how  long  man  had  to  wait  before  his  hope  was  realised  !  And,  even  now  that 
Christ  has  come,  His  advent  proves  to  be,  not  some  grand  final  stroke  of  triumph, 
but  only  the  beginning  of  another  waiting  that,  perhaps,  must  be  longer  still. 
2.  How  true  is  this  principle  with  respect  to  the  history  of  the  Church.  God 
is  fashioning  to  Himself  a  new  race  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  old.  But  think  how 
the  Church  has  had  to  wait.  3.  How  true  is  this  same  principle  of  the  history 
of  the  nations.  Each  nation  reproduces,  on  a  smaller  scale,  the  history  of  the 
race ;  and  each  has  its  burden  and  evil,  each  has  its  hope.  But  the  nations 
likewise  wait  for  their  deliverance  from  thrall  and  pain.  How  impressive  an 
example  of  waiting  is  the  history  of  the  Jews  !  Our  England,  too,  is  only 
gradually  emerging  from  what  it  has  been  to  what  it  shall  be.  So  of  the 
various  nationalities  of  Europe,  of  the  swarming  multitudes  of  Asia,  of  the 
tribes  of  dark  Africa,  and  the  rest — who  would  dare  to  think  that  the  goal  of 
their  history  is  reached  ?  4.  But  this  principle  is  still  further  true  in  regard 
to  individual  men.  Men  of  science,  like  Galileo ;  men  of  enterprise,  like 
Columbus  ;  men  of  letters,  like  Milton — these,  who  have  done  the  most  permanent 
work  for  the  world,  have  often  not  been  duly  recognised  as  benefactors  till  they 
were  gone.  Does  not  our  own  spiritual  history  illustrate  the  same  truth  ?  How 
long  it  is,  sometimes,  before  we  reach  a  settled  peace,  an  unquestioning  faith  ; 
how  long  before  we  gain  an  established  strength  of  purity,  and  are  made  perfect 
in  love  !  II.  Why  does  God  keep  men  waiting  ?  1.  It  is  in  accord  with 
God's  universal  way  of  working,  so  far  as  we  know.  We  could  conceive  of  a 
universe  in  which  everything  should  be  immediate  and  final ;  but  that  is  certainly 
not  the  method  of  our  universe.  The  records  of  geology  tell  of  the  earth's  slow 
development ;  the  researches  of  biology  attest  the  gradual  unfolding  of  life  ; 
the  annals  of  history  show  civilisation,  science,  and  culture  only  progressing  by 
degrees.  So  when  God,  in  His  providential  and  spiritual  dealings  with  men, 
keeps  them  waiting,  this  is  only  in  harmony  with  His  general  method  and  plan 
of  work.  2.  We  must  remember  the  bearing,  on  this  subject,  of  man's  own  free 
will.  Even  when  on  God's  part  all  is  ready,  this  sometimes  interferes  to  cause  a 
long  delay.  3.  Great  moral  purposes  are  served  by  God's  law  of  waiting.  It 
accomplishes  a  threefold  result :  it  is  for  the  discipline  of  effort,  of  patience,  of 
faith.  Of  course,  we  may  fail  to  abide  the  test ;  but  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  it 
rightly,  God's  principle  of  delay  tends  to  the  working  out  of  one  or  more  of  these 
results.  III.  The  waiting  does  end  some  time.  Otherwise,  the  pro''  le  i 
would  be  insoluble,  the  instincts  of  man's  own  nature  would  belie  themselves, 
and  the  very  government  of  God  itself  would  be  purposeless.  And  while,  unless 
man's    own    perverseness  frustrates   God's  designs,  the  waiting  will  end  some 


chap,  xxv.]  ISAIAH.  451 

time,  it  is  suggested  by  these  words  of  Isaiah  that  the  deliverance,  when  it  doea 
come,  will  be  a  glad  surprise.  It  is  said  that  the  poet  Cowper,  so  much  of  whose 
life  had  been  passed  in  bitter  bondage,  and  who  died  at  last  in  despair,  wore  on 
his  face  after  death  an  expression  of  astonished  joy.  So  it  is  true  of  the  lesser 
deliverances  of  life,  that  God  surprises  His  people  at  last  with  the  swift  removal 
of  their  fears,  and  with  His  more  abundant  benediction.  And  of  the  great  deliver- 
ance which  the  day  of  God  shall  usher  in  at  last,  it  is  said,  "  As  the  lightning 
cometh  forth  from  the  east,  and  is  seen  even  unto  the  west ;  so  shall  be  the  coming 
of  the  Son  of  Man  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  27) — so  sudden,  so  swift,  so  full !  What  a 
paean  shall  then  be  sung  over  a  transfigured  world  !  (T.  F.  Lockyer,  B.A.) 
Connection  between  the  confidence  and  the  character  of  the  true  Christian : — 
I.  Nothing  will  inspire  us  with  joy  and  confidence  in  the  day  or  judg- 
ment but  a  real  interest  in  Jesus  Christ.  I  might  go  further,  and  say, 
that  nothing  but  a  good  hope  of  an  interest  in  Christ  can  give  us  real,  abiding, 
exalted  enjoyment  in  this  life.  II.  None  will  in  that  day  have  a  real 
interest  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  consequently  will  rejoice  in  His  salvation, 
but  those  who  are  now  waiting  FOR  His  coming.  This  expression  of  "  waiting 
for  Christ,"  or  other  expressions  of  a  like  meaning,  are  frequently  used  in  the 
New  Testament,  as  descriptive  of  the  character  of  Christians.  1.  To  "  wait 
for  Christ,"  implies  a  firm  belief  of  His  second  coming,  and  of  the  infinitely 
momentous  consequences  which  will  follow  that  event.  The  true  Christian  is 
one  who  "  walks  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight."  2.  To  "  wait  for  Christ  "  implies 
a  constant  endeavour  to  be  prepared  for  that  event.  3.  It  implies  a  "  patient 
continuance  in  well-doing."  (E.  Cooper.)  Nativity: — I.  The  Person  here 
celebrated  :  who  is  made  known  to  us  in  the  prophet's  description  of  Him, 
by  His  actions  and  by  His  names.  The  greatest  wonder  in  this  subject  is  the 
dignity  of  the  Person  who  should  submit  to  redeem  His  Church.  II.  The 
expectation  op  His  coming.  However  strange  it  may  appear,  it  is  certainly 
true,  that  a  Saviour  was  expected  both  by  Jews  and  heathens,  however  they 
might  be  mistaken  with  regard  to  some  particular  circumstances.  III.  The 
works  the  Saviour  was  to  perform  at  His  coming.  The  particulars  are 
recounted  in  the  course  of  the  chapter  (vers.  4,  6-8).  IV.  With  this  hope  we 
are  to  comfort  ourselves  and  one  another.  "  We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice 
in  His  salvation."  The  day  of  His  nativity  was  a  blessed  day  :  but  what  will 
that  other  day  be  T  That  will  be  our  nativity  ;  for  then  only  we  may  be  said  to 
live,  when  the  last  enemy  is  conquered.  When  He  shall  appear  again,  He  will 
appear  as  our  life,  and  we  shall  be  clothed  with  His  immortality.  ( W.  Jones,  HI. A.) 
The  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ : — I.  This 
may  be  said  of  the  incarnation  of  God.  Emmanuel,  God  with  us,  in  one 
word  conveys  the  same  truth.  Christ  came  not  fortuitously  ;  He  came  not  in  a 
passing  current  of  compassion ;  but  with  full,  unshaken  continuity  of  purpose 
(Gal.  iv.  4,  5).  II.  In  the  abiding  presence  of  His  Spirit  can  we  most  joy- 
ously exclaim,  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God."  III.  Another  intermediate  sense  in  which 
we  may  consider  Christ  as  coming  to  us — intermediate  between  His  offering 
Himself  up,  and  the  bestowal  of  the  influences  of  His  Spirit — is  the  free  offer 
of  His  grace  in  the  Gospel.  IV.  In  His  execution  of  judgment  in  time. 
1.  Truly  of  Jerusalem  might  it  be  said,  that  not  one  stone  was  left  upon  another  ; 
and  now  she  is  not  Jerusalem ;  though  called  still  the  Holy  City,  where  is  her 
glory  ?  Where  are  her  children  T  2.  On  antichrist,  too,  the  first  shoot  of  present 
judgment  has  arisen.  3.  Christ  also  comes  to  judgment  in  time,  by  many  of  what 
appeared  to  be  temporal  accidents.  4.  And  in  His  afflictions  and  deprivations 
He  often  judges  the  abuse  of  a  possession,  or  deficient  appreciation  of  it,  and  often 
in  mercy  executes  thi3  temporal  judgment,  in  order  that  its  effects  upon  the 
awakened  conscience  may  obviate,  and  cause  to  be  avoided,  that  dreadful  punish- 
ment which  knows  no  reversion.  V.  In  one  sense,  Christ  has  still  to  come.  Ha 
has  to  come  to  final  judgment.  (/.  Eutchin,  M.A.)  National  thanks- 
giving : — I.  Let  us  consider  what  we  are  to  understand  by  waiting  foe 
God.  1.  Almost  innumerable  instances  might  be  referred  to  wherein  the 
Jewish  nation  did  evidently  wait  for  God  to  be  their  salvation.  2.  The  same 
may  be  observed  with  regard  to  mankind  in  general.  (1)  The  inseparable 
difficulties  attending  our  situation  as  dependent  creatures  are  sometimes  of  so 
severe  and  pressing  a  nature,  attended  with  such  intricate  consequences,  and 
even  in  the  eye  of  human  wisdom  so  plainly  productive  of  fatal  events,  that 
reason  will  naturally  show  us  the  necessity  of  applying  for  relief  from  a  power 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

more  unlimited  than  our  own,  and  cannot,  when  properly  improved,  but  teach 
us  to  make  our  appeal  to  that  Supreme  Being  who  disposeth  all  things  according 
to  the  infallible  counsel  of  His  will.  (2)  And  if  we  attend  to  the  satisfactory 
instructions  of  revelation,  this  will  not  only  show  us  the  necessity  of  such  a 
dependence,  but  also  make  us  sensible  of  its  usefulness  and  advantage.     II.  In 

WHAT  BESPECTS  WE  MAY  BE  SAID  TO  HAVE  WAITED  FOB  GOD.      III.  THE  NATUBH 

op  that  salvation  which  He  has  wrought  pob  us,  and  the  beneficial  tendency 
of  such  a  deliverance.  IV.  Some  useful  beflections.  1.  It  is  our  duty  to 
acknowledge  those  favourable  interpositions  of  Omnipotence,  by  which  either 
national  calamities  are  removed  or  national  distress  prevented.  2.  It  would 
be  highly  base  and  ungrateful  not  to  rejoice  in  His  salvation  which  He  has  so 
seasonably  enabled  us  to  obtain.  3.  Consider  what  abundant  advantages  may 
arise,  if  we  do  not  foolishly  negleot  to  improve  it,  from  the  blessing  of  peace. 
(B.  P.  Finch,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  Moab  shall  be  trodden  down  under  Him. — God's  judgments  as 
manure : — After  the  process  of  primary  ploughing  has  been  completed  our 
fields  are  covered  with  some  appropriate  manure,  that  the  earth  may  be 
enriched,  and  larger  orops  gathered  into  our  barns.  In  the  world  at  large 
which  is  God's  husbandry,  His  judgments,  which  deface  and  destroy  countries 
and  nations,  are  clearly  intended,  in  their  remoter  influence,  to  effect  the  sub- 
sequent fruitfulness  of  those  very  spots  :  and  the  products  of  righteousness, 
in  larger  abundance,  have  been  gathered  among  those  people  where  the  full 
measure  of  Divine  vengeance  had  been  previously  poured.  li  When  His  judgments 
are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  will  learn  righteousness."  (W.  Clayton.)  The 
ground  manured : — Our  text  will  furnish  us  with  an  occasion  to  establish  and 
illustrate  the  fact  that  Divine  vengeance  shall  overwhelm  the  enemies  of  the 
Church ;  and  from  their  disgraceful  ruin  shall  result  advantage  to  the  cause, 
and  glory  to  the  perfections  of  Deity.  I.  God  has  eevealed  His  wrath  from 
heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unbighteousness  of  men  ;  and  al- 
though slack  in  executing  His  threatenings,  as  some  men  count  slackness,  the 
expected  day  of  the  Lord's  vengeance  will  certainly  and  suddenly  arrive. 
1.  However  exalted  among  the  great  ones  of  the  earth  offenders  have  been,  the 
just  displeasure  of  God  has  been  displayed,  and  vengeance  has  overwhelmed 
them.  2.  As  no  person,  however  elevated,  is  exempt  from  the  judicial  control 
of  the  Most  High  ;  so  no  part  of  the  world  is  found  where  this  truth  has  not 
been  proclaimed.  3.  In  every  successive  age  have  these  truths  received  an 
awful  confirmation.  II.  These  signal  peoofs  of  God's  displeasure  pbomote 
the  best  interests  of  Zion,  and  consequently  redound  to  His  glory.  1.  A  large 
accession  to  the  Church  on  earth  is  stated  to  be  the  immediate  consequence  of 
the  ruin  of  Moab  (chap.  xxvi.  1,  2).  In  a  degree  infinitely  more  astonishing 
shall  the  final  destruction  of  Zion's  foes  precede  the  period  of  her  destined  per- 
fection on  earth.  2.  It  is  pleasant  to  see  the  strength  and  establishment  of 
Zion  resulting  from  the  demolition  of  the  schemes  which  were  formed  for  her 
rain.  3.  The  rich  and  abundant  fruitfulness  of  the  Church — the  field  which 
God  blesseth — is  advanced  by  these  displays  of  His  vindictive  wrath.  LIT.  Con- 
clusion. 1.  We  are  taught  to  whose  culture  we  are  exclusively  indebted,  if 
these  fruits  of  righteousness  are  in  our  case  the  results  of  beholding  God's  judg- 
ments. Manure  spread  on  the  ground  will  only  render  weeds,  its  natural  product, 
of  more  luxuriant  and  disgusting  growth;  nor  will  the  Divine  judgments,  but 
for  the  subsequent  care  and  cultivation  of  the  Great  Husbandman,  promote 
the  salutary  change  which  is  desired.  2.  Do  not  our  minds,  necessarily,  when 
contemplating  any  species  of  suffering,  revert  to  Him  who  was  bruised  or 
threshed  for  our  sakes ;  who,  bearing  the  indignation  of  the  Lord  because 
we  had  sinned  against  Him,  was  trodden  down  as  mire  in  the  streets  by 
ungodly  men,  and  finally  suffered  without  the  camp ;  and  to  those  also 
who,  being  conformed  to  His  death,  were  esteemed  the  off-scouring  of  all 
men,  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy  ?  3.  Estimate  aright  the  invaluable 
privilege  of  being  interested  in  the  cultivating  care  of  the  great  Husband- 
man. (Ibid.)  Moab: — As  the  name  "British"  in  our  own  revolutionary 
war  became  equivalent  to  "  hostile,"  without  losing  its  specific  sense,  so 
might  the  prophets  threaten  Moab  with  God's  vengeance,  without  meaning 
to  exclude  from  the  denunciation  other  like-minded  enemies.  (J.  A.  Alexander, 
U.8.A.) 


chap,  xxvl]  ISAIAH.  453 

Ver.  11.  And  He  shall  spread  forth  His  hands  In  the  midst  of  them. — 
Explanation: — In  ver.  11a  the  figure  is  Moab,  vainly  struggling  to  save 
himself  in  the  water  of  the  dungpit ;  in  116  "he"  is,  of  course,  Jehovah, 
who  frustrates  the  efforts  made  by  Moab.  (Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.)  Swim- 
ming to  save  : — This  text  represents  God  as  a  strong  swimmer,  striking  out  to 
push  down  iniquity  and  save  the  souls  of  men.  I.  Ottb  race  is  in  a  sinking 
condition.  You  sometimes  hear  people  talking  of  what  they  consider  the  most 
beautiful  words  in  our  language.  One  man  says  it  is  "  home,"  another  man 
says  it  is  "  mother,"  another  says  it  is  "  Jesus  " ;  but  I  will  tell  you  the  bitterest 
word  in  all  our  language,  the  word  saturated  with  the  most  trouble,  the  word 
that  accounts  for  all  the  loathsomeness  and  the  pang,  and  the  outrage,  and  the 
harrowing ;  and  that  word  is  "  Sin."  Give  it  a  fair  chance,  and  it  will  swamp 
you,  body,  mind,  and  soul  for  ever.  II.  Then  what  do  we  want  ?  A  swimmer, 
a  Btrong,  swift  swimmer  !  In  my  text  we  have  Him  announced.  1.  You  have 
noticed  that  when  a  swimmer  goes  out  to  rescue  any  one  he  puts  off  his  heavy 
apparel.  And  when  Christ  stepped  forth  to  save  us  He  shook  off  the  sandals  of 
heaven,  and  His  feet  were  free  ;  He  laid  aside  the  robe  of  eternal  royalty,  and 
His  arms  were  free ;  then  He  stepped  down  into  the  wave  of  our  transgression, 
and  it  came  up  over  His  wounded  feet,  and  it  came  above  the  spear-stab  in  His 
side — ay,  it  dashed  to  the  lacerated  temple,  the  high- water  mark  of  His  anguish. 
Then,  rising  above  the  flood,  "  He  stretched  forth  His  hands  in  the  midst  of 
them,  as  he  that  swimmeth  spreadeth  forth  his  hands  to  swim."  2.  If  you  have 
ever  watched  a  swimmer,  you  notice  that  his  whole  body  is  brought  into  play. 
The  arms  are  flexed,  the  hands  drive  the  water  back,  the  knees  are  active,  the 
head  is  tossed  back  to  escape  strangulation,  the  whole  body  is  in  propulsion. 
And  when  Christ  sprang  out  into  the  deep  to  save  us  He  threw  His  entire  nature 
in  it.  We  were  so  far  out  on  the  sea,  and  so  deep  down  in  the  waves,  and  so  far 
out  from  the  shore,  that  nothing  short  of  an  entire  God  could  save  us.  3.  If  any 
one  is  going  to  rescue  the  drowning,  he  must  be  independent,  self-reliant,  able 
to  go  alone.  When  Christ  sprang  out  into  the  sea  to  deliver  us,  He  had  no  life- 
buoy. "  Of  the  people  there  was  none  to  help."  "  All  forsook  Him  and  fled." 
Oh,  it  was  not  a  flotilla  that  sailed  down  and  saved  us.  It  was  one  Person, 
independent  and  alone.  4.  When  one  is  in  peril,  help  must  come  very  quickly, 
or  it  will  be  of  no  use.  That  is  just  the  kind  of  relief  the  sinner  wants.  The  case 
is  urgent,  imminent,  instantaneous.     (T.  Be  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXVT. 


Vers.  1-10.  In  that  day  shall  this  song  be  sung. — Periods  of  restoration : — 
If  it  be  demanded,  what  period  of  time  is  this  which  the  prophet  speaks 
of  ?  we  must  answer,  that  it  is  the  time  when  the  people,  who  for  their 
provocations  were  thrown  into  the  furnace  of  affliction,  and  had  continued  in  it 
till  they  were  purged  from  their  sins,  were  delivered  from  it,  and  restored  to  the 
favour  of  God,  and  the  enjoyment  of  His  former  mercies.  Of  which  restora- 
tion there  are  three  kinds  or  degrees  plainly  spoken  of  by  the  prophet  Isaiah. 

1.  The  Jews'  return  from  the  land  of  their  captivity,  especially  that  of  Babylon. 

2.  The  restoration  of  the  family  and  kingdom  of  David  in  the  person  of  the 
Messiah.  3.  The  perfect  felicity  of  that  kingdom  in  a  state  of  future  glory. 
(W.  Beading,  M.A.)  Three  elements  in  prophecy: — All  true  prophecy  seems 
to  have  in  it  three  elements :  conviction,  imagination,  inspiration.  The  seer 
■peaks  first  of  all  from  his  knowledge  of,  and  experience  with,  the  inherent  vitality 
of  right  and  righteousness.  He  is  sure  that  the  good  in  the  world  is  destined  to 
conquer  the  evil.  Then  when  he  attempts  to  tell  how  this  victory  is  to  be  brought 
about  he  uses  his  imagination.  He  employs  metaphors  and  figures  which  from 
the  necessities  of  the  case  may  not  be  literally  fulfilled.  And  then,  in  addition 
to  this,  his  prophecies  have  in  them  a  certain  comprehensiveness  of  plan  and 
structure,  and  a  certain  organic  relation  to  history,  such  as  can  be  revealed  only 
by  the  Divine  Maker  of  history  Himself.  It  took  a  man  of  large  parts  to  see 
above  the  wreck  and  ruin,  and  through  the  darkness  of  his  age,  such  visions  of 
hope  and  promise  as  Isaiah  saw.     Everywhere  around  him  were  sensuality  and 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvx. 


oppression.  The  Church  of  the  true  God  had  been  almost  swallowed  up  by  ths 
foul  dragon  of  paganism.  And  yet  the  prophet,  with  his  eye  upon  the  future, 
beheld  a  day  when  this  song  was  to  be  sung  in  the  land  of  Judah :  the  song  of 
salvation.  Sure  he  was  that  God  must  triumph,  and  with  the  poet's  instinct 
he  clothed  his  assurance  in  the  language  of  metaphor,  and  set  it  to  the  rhythm  of 
song.  (C.  A.  Dickinson.)  The  triumph  of  goodness : — 1.  Those  who  study 
this  song  in  the  light  of  succeeding  history  find  in  it  the  picture  of  the  ultimata 
triumph  of  the  Church.  The  central  figure  is  the  strong  city,  the  walls  and 
bulwarks  of  which  are  salvation,  and  through  whose  open  gates  the  righteous 
nation  which  keepeth  the  truth  is  allowed  to  enter.  This  picture  reminds  us  at 
once  of  that  vision  of  the  new  Jerusalem  which  fell  upon  the  eyes  of  the  seer  of 
Patmos  many  years  after,  and  which  was  evidently  the  type  and  symbol  of  the 
perfected  kingdom  of  Christ.  To  attempt  to  give  to  this  strong  city  and  this 
new  Jerusalem  a  literal  and  material  significance  is  to  involve  ourselves  in  inextric- 
able difficulties.  2.  There  are  two  views  concerning  the  progress  and  ultimate 
triumph  of  Christianity  in  the  world.  In  some  respects  these  views  are  the  same ; 
in  others  they  differ  radically.  (1)  The  first  theory  is  that  there  is  to  be  in  the 
near  or  remote  future  a  sudden,  visible  appearance  of  Christ  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
to  take  His  place  upon  the  throne  of  David  at  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  where  He  will 
reign  with  His  saints  for  a  thousand  years.  Meanwhile  the  world  is  to  come  mora 
and  more  under  the  Satanic  influence.  (2)  The  other  theory  is  that  of  a  gradual 
development  under  the  spiritual  forces  which  began  to  be  dominant  in  the  world 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  Christ,  according  to  His  own  promise,  began  His 
reign  in  His  new  kingdom.  This  I  believe  to  be  the  true  view :  the  one  which 
Christ  Himself  propounded  when  He  said  His  kingdom  should  be  like  the  seed  that 
should  "  grow  "  up.  3.  I  am  well  aware  that  those  who  claim  that  the  world 
is  fast  ripening  in  evil  for  its  final  catastrophe  can  point  to  many  facts  which  seem 
to  substantiate  their  theory.  But  just  here,  it  seems  to  me,  comes  in  one  of  their 
greatest  mistakes.  There  is,  of  course,  danger  of  generalising  too  much,  but 
there  is  certainly  great  danger  of  allowing  some  near  fact  to  blind  the  eyes  to 
the  great  general  truth  which  lies  beyond  it ;  to  hold  the  sixpence  so  near  the  eye 
that  we  cannot  see  the  sun.  There  is  danger  of  confining  our  thoughts  so  ex- 
clusively to  certain  specific  texts  as  to  get  a  wrong  conception  of  the  real  truth 
of  which  these  special  texts  may  be  only  a  small  part.  Now,  what  are  some 
of  the  signs  that  we  are  living  to-day  in  an  age  of  conquest?  (1)  Take  that 
law  of  decay  which  you  find  written  upon  evil  everywhere,  whether  in  the 
individual  or  the  nation.  "  He  bringeth  down  them  that  dwell  on  high ; 
the  lofty  city,  He  layeth  it  low."  Rome  in  her  arrogance  was  the  first 
great  organised  power  to  make  war  against  the  new  kingdom.  But  Rome  fell, 
and  over  the  ruins  of  her  pagan  temples  the  Christian  walks  to-day.  France 
posed  as  the  haughty  oppressor  of  the  weak  and  unfortunate,  as  the  instigator 
of  the  horrors  of  St.  Bartholomew's  day,  and  following  close  upon  her  dreadful 
sin  came  the  death  and  desolation  of  the  Revolution.  Our  own  great  nation 
allowed  to  ripen  in  her  very  heart  the  malignant  curse  of  slavery,  and  for  her 
sin  was  obliged  to  suffer  the  pangs  of  a  civil  war.  These  are  only  a  few  of  the 
conspicuous  illustrations  of  the  great  truth  that  righteousness  is  surely,  though 
perhaps  slowly,  vindicating  her  everlasting  strength.  (2)  I  might  call  your 
attention  to  the  other  side  of  this  conquest :  to  the  rapid  increase  in  the  present 
days  of  that  strong  City  whose  walls  are  salvation.  I  might  show  you  a  whole 
library  filled  with  missionary  literature  which  tells  that  the  kingdom  of  the  new 
King  has  extended  its  bounds  into  almost  every  habitable  part  of  the  earth.  I 
might  point  j  ou  to  the  Year-Books  of  our  Churches,  and  show  you  what  armies 
of  men  and  women  are  yearly  marching  through  the  gates  of  the  strong  City.  I 
might  show  you  how  the  spirit  of  the  Cross,  having  taken  possession  of  the  civilised 
nations  of  the  world,  has  materialised  into  churches  and  hospitals  and  asylums 
and  charitable  institutions  and  temperance  guilds  and  myriads  of  Christian  homes. 
(3)  But  further,  I  might  speak  of  another  phase  of  this  conquest.  "  When  Thy 
judgments  are  in  the  earth,"  says  the  prophet,  "  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  will 
learn  righteousness."  These  Divine  judgments  appear  as  a  subtle  tonic  atmosphere 
pervading  the  whole  world,  and,  li.  e  the  ozone  of  the  moun tains,  invigorating 
almost  unconsciously  every  age  and  generation.  (4)  The  influence  of  the  Gospel 
is  pervasive.  In  a  certain  sense  we  have  a  right  to  say  that  a  community  i3  a 
Christian  community  even  though  but  a  small  minority  of  its  inhabitants  profess 
to  accept  Christ  as  their  personal  Saviour.   The  spirit  of  Christ  is  in  that  community; 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  45a 

the  leaven  of  the  Gospel  is  leavening  it.  The  new  kingdom  is  established  there, 
and  even  they  who  deny  allegiance  to  it  are  in  many  ways  better  than  they  who 
are  without  it.  The  principles  of  Jesus  Christ  are  the  standard  principles  of 
morality  throughout  Christendom  to-day.  and  men  are  inevitably  judging  them- 
selves and  being  judged  by  others  according  to  these  standards.  4.  1  believe 
that  we  are  in  the  midst  of  mighty  spiritual  forces  which  are  working  successfully 
for  the  redemption  of  this  world  from  sin ;  and  I  have  two  great  incentives  to 
epur  me  on  to  earnest  effort.  (1)  The  one  is  faith  in  humanity  and  Christ.  I  say 
humanity  and  Christ,  because  I  believe  they  are  one.  That,  to  me,  is  the  meaning 
of  His  incarnation.  The  mighty  forces  of  righteousness  are  moving  with  their 
slow,  crushing  power  as  the  steam  roller  moves  over  the  newly  macadamised 
road,  breaking  and  levelling  everything  before  it,  that  the  chariot  of  the  King  may 
ride  smoothly  on  to  its  destination.  But  this  is  only  a  part  of  the  truth.  The 
other  part  is  that  the  new  kingdom  is  open  to  all.  (2)  The  other  thing  which 
spurs  me  on  is  hope — that  blessed  hope  which  the  apostle  had  of  the  glorious 
consummation  of  this  age  of  conquest.  (Ibid.)  We  have  a  strong  city.— 
A  city  the  emblem  of  security : — To  understand  this  figure  of  a  city  we  must  re- 
member what  a  city  was  in  the  earlier  ages ;  i.e.,  a  portion  of  land  separate  from 
the  general  surface,  in  which  the  people  of  a  locality  gathered,  and  put  their  homes 
into  a  condition  of  safety  by  building  walls  of  immense  strength,  which  should 
both  resist  the  attacks  of  enemies  and,  to  a  great  extent,  defy  the  ravages  of 
time.  Such  a  city,  then,  was  the  emblem  of  security.  (R.  H.  Davies.)  The 
song  of  salvation  : — I.  The  ground  of  rejoicing.  Salvation  ;  and  consequently 
eternal  security.  "  We  have  a  strong  city."  All  God's  people  are  represented 
as  citizens ;  the  whole  sainthood  is  represented  as  a  corporate  assemblage  of 
people  possessed  of  peculiar  privileges,  connected  with  an  eternal  condition,  and 
as  such  are  to  dwell  in  some  region  of  safety  and  bliss.  Here  they  find  not  such 
an  abode.  Here  they  have  "  no  continuing  city,  but  seek  one  to  come."  And, 
when  they  shall  be  gathered  together  in  the  presence  of  their  Lord,  they  will 
constitute  the  body  to  form  a  city.  II.  The  character  or  those  who  are 
to  partake  op  these  blessings.  "  The  righteous  nation  which  keepeth  the 
truth."  (Ibid.)  Salvation,  i.e.,  freedom  and  safety.  The  original  sense  of 
the  word  rendered  "  salvation  "  (as  Arabic  shows)  is  breadth,  largeness,  absence 
of  constraint.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  Saving  health  : — (1)  Political  theor  sts 
have  been  fond  of  picturing  an  ideal  State,  the  government  of  which  would  be 
perfect.  (2)  The  ideal  State  in  the  mind  of  the  average  Hebrew  was  limited  to 
his  own  race,  but  in  the  writings  of  the  inspired  psalmists  and  prophets  it  could 
not  be  so  restricted,  but  widened  itself  out  so  as  to  embrace  the  whole  world. 
Thus  was  the  way  prepared  for  the  grand  conception  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
as  first  proclaimed  and  then  established  by  the  Son  of  God.  (3)  But  it  is  a  difficult 
thing,  except  in  moments  of  great  exaltation,  to  put  much  intensity  of  feeling 
into  a  conception  so  vast.  It  was  a  great  deal  easier  to  conceive  an  ideal  State 
than  an  ideal  world,  and  an  ideal  city  was  still  more  manageable  for  the  imagina- 
tion. We  need  not  wonder,  then,  that  even  after  the  great  proclamation  about 
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  becoming  the  kingdom  of  God,  the  seer  of  Patmos 
should  fondly  return  to  the  thought  of  the  city,  and  revel  in  anticipating  the  advent 
of  the  New  Jerusalem.  Nor  shall  we  be  astonished  that  the  prophets,  though 
they  had  the  wider  outlook,  should  even  in  their  moods  of  highest  exaltation  cling 
fondly  to  the  thought  of  a  holy  city  as  the  best  picture,  the  more  serviceable  that 
it  was  a  miniature  of  the  coming  kingdom  of  God.  (4)  In  these  early  days  of 
insecurity,  the  first  requisite  of  a  city  was  strength.  So  it  is  natural  that  this 
■hould  be  the  feature  on  which  the  prophet  here  lays  special  stress.  But  wherein 
does  its  strength  lie  ?  He  speaks  not  of  ramparts  or  forts,  of  fleets  or  armies, 
but  of  salvation  as  the  bulwarks  of  the  city.  We  find  this  word  salvation  in  other 
places  translated  by  the  more  suggestive  rendering  "  health,"  or  "  saving  health." 
1.  The  first  thought  suggested  in  this  connection  is  that  the  city  should  be  a  clean 
place  to  live  in,  healthy  from  end  to  end  and  in  every  corner,  each  house  in 
it  a  fitting  abode  for  sons  of  God  and  daughters  of  the  King.  When  we  pass  from 
the  sanitation  of  the  city  to  the  saving  health  of  the  citizen,  we  think  first  of 
his  body,  and  recognise  the  necessity  of  having  all  the  conditions  as  conducive 
as  possible  to  its  health.  2.  But  clearly  we  cannot  stop  there.  We  must 
have  the  "  mens  sana  in  corpore  sano  "  ;  hence  the  need  of  universal  education, 
to  secure  intellectual  sanity.  3.  Nor  may  we  end  here,  for  moral  sanity,  a  sound 
conscience,  is  even  still  more  important.     The  nation  must  be  a  righteous  nation. 


436  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxw 

4.  Clearly,  there  must  be  sanitation  for  the  will  before  we  have  reached  saving 
health ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  will  is  swayed  by  desire,  the  sanitation  must  reach 
the  heart.  What  sanitary  measures  could  we  here  summon  to  our  aid  ?  The 
purest  water  will  not  cleanse  the  heart ;  the  most  bracing  air  will  have  no  effect 
upon  the  soul.  There  must  be  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness, 
and  some  breath  of  God  for  inspiration  to  the  soul.  5.  And  here  we  reach  the 
prophet's  highest,  dominating  thought.  "  In  that  day,"  the  passage  begins. 
What  day  ?  Look  back  (xxv.  9).  "  It  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo,  this  is  our 
God,  we  have  waited  for  Him,  and  He  will  save  us."  And  look  forward  (ver.  4), 
"  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength." 
"  Lord,  Thou  wilt  ordain  peace  for  us ;  for  Thou  also  hast  wrought  all  our  works 
in  us  "  (ver.  12).  This  introduces  us  to  one  of  the  most  important  questions  of 
the  day.  There  are  many,  sound  and  strong  on  the  subject  of  righteousness, 
who  yet  fail  to  realise  that  righteousness  is  so  bound  up  with  saving  truth — that 
truth  of  God  and  His  salvation  through  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  and  by  His  Holy 
Spirit  breathed  in  human  hearts,  which  they  sometimes  offensively  set  aside  as 
ii  ere  dogma — that  the  one  cannot  be  had  where  it  does  not  exist  already,  and 
cannot  be  retained  long  where  it  does  without  the  other.  "  Open  ye  the  gates 
that  the  righteous  nation  which  keepeth  the  truth  may  enter  in."  6.  How  can  we 
open  or  help  to  open  these  gates  of  national  strength  and  saving  health  ?  For 
individual  action  the  answer  would  be  such  as  this :  First,  by  loving  truth  and 
keeping  righteousness  ourselves ;  next,  by  doing  all  we  can  to  help  others  to  a  life 
of  godliness  and  righteousness  ;  further,  by  earnest  and  frequent  prayer  to  Him 
wh .->  gave  of  old  the  promise,  "  I  will  open  to  you  the  two-leaved  gates  "  ;  and 
lastly,  by  the  faithful  exercise  of  the  privileges  of  citizens,  seeing  to  it  that  in  the 
forming  of  our  opinions,  in  the  giving  of  our  votes,  in  the  use  of  all  our  influence, 
not  selfish  interest,  or  class  interest,  or  even  party  interest,  but  the  interests  of 
righteousness  and  truth  be  the  determining  factor.  But  individual  action  is  not 
enough.  We  must  combine  ;  we  must  bring  our  united  force  to  bear.  And  here 
the  main  reliance  must  be  on  the  Church  of  Christ,  on  which  is  laid  the  responsi- 
bility of  carrying  on  His  great  work  of  salvation.  (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.)  Our 
strong  city  : — There  are  three  things  here— I.  The  city.  No  doubt  the  prophet 
was  thinking  of  the  literal  Jerusalem,  but  the  city  is  ideal,  as  is  shown  by  the 
bulwarks  which  defend,  and  by  the  qualifications  which  permit  entrance.  And 
bo  we  must  pass  beyond  the  literalities  of  Palestine,  and  must  not  apply  the  symbol 
to  any  visible  institution  or  organisation  if  we  are  to  come  to  the  depth  and  great- 
ness of  the  meaning  of  these  words.  No  Church  which  is  organised  amongst  men 
can  be  the  New  Testament  representation  of  this  strong  city.  And  if  the  explana- 
tion is  to  be  looked  for  in  that  direction  at  all,  it  can  only  be  the  invisible  aggregate 
of  ransomed  souls  which  is  regarded  as  being  the  Zion  of  the  prophecy.  But, 
perhaps,  even  that  is  too  definite  and  hard.  And  we  are  rather  to  think  of  the 
unseen  but  existent  order  of  things  or  polity  to  which  men  here  on  earth  may 
belong,  and  which  will  one  day,  after  shocks  and  convulsions  that  shatter  all 
which  is  merely  institutional  and  human,  be  manifested  still  more  gloriously.  The 
central  thought  that  was  moving  in  the  prophet's  mind  is  of  the  indestructible 
vitality  of  the  true  Israel,  and  the  order  which  it  represented,  of  which  Jerusalem 
on  its  rock  was  but  to  him  a  symbol.  And  thus  for  us  the  lesson  is  that,  apart 
altogether  from  the  existing  and  visible  order  of  things  in  which  we  dwell,  there 
is  a  polity  to  which  we  may  belong,  for  "  ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  the  city 
of  the  living  God,"  and  that  order  is  indestructible.  There  is  a  lesson  for  us, 
in  times  of  fluctuation,  of  change  of  opinion,  of  shaking  of  institutions,  and  of  new 
social,  economical,  and  political  questions,  threatening  day  by  day  to  reorganise 
society.  "  We  have  a  strong  city  "  ;  and  whatever  may  come — and  much 
destructive  will  come,  and  much  that  is  venerable  and  antique,  rooted  in  men's 

Erejudices,  and  having  survived  through  and  oppressed  the  centuries,  will 
ave  to  go,  but  God's  polity,  His  form  of  human  society,  of  which  the  perfect 
ideal  and  antitype,  so  to  speak,  lies  concealed  in  the  heavens,  is  everlasting.  And 
for  Christian  men  in  revolutionary  epochs  the  only  worthy  temper  is  the  calm, 
triumphant  expectation  that  through  all  the  dust,  contradiction,  and  distraction 
the  fair  city  of  God  will  be  brought  nearer  and  made  more  manifest  to  man.  To 
this  city — existent,  immortal,  and  waiting  to  be  revealed — you  and  I  may  belong 
to-day.  II.  The  defences.  "  Salvation  will  God  appoint  for  walls  and  bul- 
warks." This  "  evangelical  prophet"  is  distinguished  by  the  fulness  and  depth 
which  he  attaches  t    that  word  "  salvation."     He  all  but  anticipates  the  New 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  457 

Testament  completeness  and  fulness  of  meaning,  and  lifts  it  from  all  merely 
material  associations  of  earthly  or  transitory  deliverance  into  the  sphere  in 
which  we  are  accustomed  to  regard  it  as  especially  moving.  By  "  salvation  " 
he  means,  and  we  mean,  not  only  negative  but  positive  blessings.  Negatively, 
it  includes  the  removal  of  every  conceivable  or  endurable  evil,  whether  they  be 
evils  of  sin  or  evils  of  sorrow  ;  and  positively,  the  investiture  with  every  possible 
ood  that  humanity  is  capable  of,  whether  it  be  good  of  goodness  or  good  of 
happiness.  This  is  what  the  prophet  tells  us  is  the  wall  and  bulwark  of  his  ideal- 
real  city.  Mark  the  eloquent  omission  of  the  name  of  the  builder  of  the  wall. 
*'  God  '  is  a  supplement.  Salvation  "  will  He  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks." 
No  need  to  say  who  it  is  that  flings  such  a  fortification  around  the  city.  There 
is  only  one  hand  that  can  trace  the  lines  of  such  walls ;  only  one  hand  that  can 
pile  their  stones  ;  only  one  that  can  lay  them,  as  the  walls  of  Jericho  were  laid,  in 
the  blood  of  His  first-born  Son.  "  Salvation  will  He  appoint  for  walls  and  bul- 
warks," i.e.d.,  in  a  highly  imaginative  and  picturesque  form,  that  the  defence  of  the 
city  is  God  Himself.  The  fact  of  salvation  is  the  wall  and  the  bulwark.  And 
the  consciousness  of  the  faot  is  for  our  poor  hearts  one  of  our  best  defences  against 
both  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  evil  of  sorrow.  So,  let  us  walk  by  the  faith  that  is 
always  confident,  though  it  depends  on  an  unseen  hand.  "  Salvation  will  God 
appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks,"  and  if  we  realise,  as  we  ought  to  do,  His  purpose 
ana  His  power  to  keep  us  safe,  and  the  actual  operation  of  His  hand  keeping  us 
safe  at  every  moment,  we  shall  not  ask  that  these  defences  shall  be  supplemented 
by  the  poor  feeble  earthworks  that  sense  can  throw  up.  III.  The  citizens. 
Our  text  is  part  of  a  "  song,"  and  is  not  to  be  interpreted  in  the  cold-blooded 
fashion  that  might  suit  prose.  A  voice,  coming  from  whom  we  know  not,  breaks 
in  upon  the  first  strain  with  a  command,  addressed  to  whom  we  know  not.  "  Open 
ye  the  gates  " — the  city  thus  far  being  supposed  to  be  empty, — "  that  the  righteous 
nation  which  keepeth  the  truth  may  enter  in."  The  central  idea  there  is  just  this, 
"  Thy  people  shall  be  all  righteous."  The  one  qualification  for  entrance  into  the 
city  is  absolute  purity.  Now,  that  is  true  in  regard  of  our  present  imperfect 
denizenship  within  the  city  ;  and  it  is  true  in  regard  to  men's  passing  into  it,  in  its 
perfect  and  final  form.  They  used  to  say  that  Venice  glass  was  so  made  that  any 
poison  poured  into  it  shivered  the  vessel.  Any  drop  of  sin  poured  into  your  cup 
of  communion  with  God  shatters  the  cup  and  spills  the  wine.  Whosoever  thinks 
himself  a  citizen  of  that  great  city,  if  he  falls  into  transgression,  and  soils  the 
cleanness  of  his  hands,  and  ruffles  the  calm  of  his  pure  heart  by  self-willed  sinful- 
ness, will  wake  to  find  himself  not  within  the  battlements,  but  lying  wounded, 
robbed,  solitary,  in  the  pitiless  desert.  "  The  nation  which  keepeth  the  truth," — 
that  does  not  mean  adherence  to  any  revelation,  or  true  creed,  or  the  like.  The 
word  which  is  employed  means,  not  truth  of  thought,  but  truth  of  character ; 
and  might,  perhaps,  be  better  represented  by  the  more  familiar  word  in  such  a 
connection,  '  faithfulness  "  A  man  who  is  true  to  God,  that  keeps  up  a  faithful 
relation  to  Him  who  is  faithful  to  us,  he,  and  only  he,  will  tread  and  abide  in  the 
city.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D. )  The  walls  and  bulwarks  of  a  city : — Accepting  the  vague 
but  universal  idea  that  there  is  an  abundance  of  sin  of  every  sort  massed  together 
in  any  great  city,  our  inquiry  concerns  the  main  lines  of  work  by  which  the 
welfare  of  the  city  may  be  promoted.  To  the  eye  of  the  prophet  there  comes  a 
vision  of  a  strong  city ;  and  the  walls  and  bulwarks  of  that  strength  is  said  to 
be  salvation — that  is,  the  strength  and  safety  of  a  city  is  in  the  men  and  women 
in  it  who  are  saved  through  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ.  I  know  there  are 
many  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  any  such  claim  as  this.  They  reject  it  as  being  too 
sweeping.  They  say  that  there  are  many  sources  from  which  the  life-giving 
waters  come.  Let  us  take  a  look  at  some  of  these  things  which  are  supposed  to 
give  safety.  I.  And  perhaps  the  first  thing  to  be  mentioned  is  law.  It  need  not 
be  any  highly  moral  or  religious  enactment,  but  simply  plain,  every-day,  matter-of- 
fact  law.  The  city  needs  it.  People  in  the  simplicity  of  country  life,  where  there 
is  an  abundance  of  room,  can  get  on  without  much  law.  But  the  city  needs  law. 
And  no  one  will  decry  the  beneficent  effect  of  righteous  laws.  It  must  be  said, 
however,  that  the  good  effect  of  law  is  very  much  diminished  by  the  many  bad 
laws  which  are  enacted.  Are  we  claiming  too  much  when  we  say  that  largely 
the  efficiency  of  law  is  due  to  the  Christian  men  and  women  who  are  in  the  city  T 
Righteous  laws  follow  in  the  train  of  progress  made  by  Christianity.  The  bulwark 
which  at  first  seemed  to  stand  out  alone  and  distinct  becomes  identified  with  that 
bulwark  in  the  vision  of  the  prophet  whose  foundation-stone,  as  well  as  its  lofty 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

capstone,  la  salvation.  II.  We  are  led  on  to  speak  of  another  bulwark  for  ths 
city.  It  is  A  beneficent  and  powerful  publio  opinion.  But  again,  I  assert 
that  very  largely  all  this  safety  is  due  to  the  presence  in  the  city  of  the  Gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  the  public  conscience  itself,  and  where  did  it  com© 
from  but  through  Christianity  ?  III.  But  again,  look  at  another  so-called  secular 
bulwark.  Call  it  thrift,  the  genius  of  success,  the  ability  to  get  on  in  the  world. 
Thrift  is  consistent  with  pure  selfishness.  Find  a  society  in  which  everybody 
is  only  thrifty,  where  no  man  cares  for  his  neighbour,  where  the  human  heart 
feels  nothing  of  the  flow  of  generosity  and  love,  and,  while  you  may  be  able  to 
point  to  fine  and  well-kept  houses,  neat  little  cottages,  well-dressed,  clean  children, 
you  are  really  looking  upon  a  hollow,  lifeless  sham.  I  do  not  want  to  live  there. 
A  sea  of  poverty  with  a  little  stream  from  Calvary  flowing  into  it  would  be  far 
better.  Just  a  touch  of  human  sympathy  and  love  would  transform  the  whole. 
(J.  C.  Cronin.)  A  song  of  salvation  : — I  What  is  the  period  referred  to  ? 
A  day  which  was  to  be  remarkable  for  the  destruction  of  the  Church's  enemies, 
for  the  salvation  of  her  friends,  and  for  the  glorious  extension  of  the  Gospel 
through  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  II.  What  is  the  subject  of  this  song  ? 
"  We  have  a  strong  city :  salvation  will  God  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks." 
The  inviolable  security  of  the  Church  was  to  be  the  subject.  III.  Where  is  this 
song  to  be  sung  ?  "In  the  land  of  Judah."  It  was  sung  when  the  great  salvation 
was  accomplished  by  the  one  offering  of  Christ  upon  the  Cross ;  and  the  risen 
Saviour  said  to  His  disciples,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to 
every  creature  " ;  and  the  tidings  were  sent  abroad  ;  and  the  Gospel,  which  was 
first  preached  at  Jerusalem,  was  sounded  forth  into  all  lands.  And  we  cannot 
but  indulge  the  confident  persuasion,  that  among  the  Jews,  though  they  are  for  the 
present  cast  out,  this  song  shall  be  sung  in  due  time,  which  shall  be  "as  life  from 
the  dead."  But  as  that  people  have  long  since  been  cut  off  because  of  their 
unbelief,  we  remark,  that  the  words  will  apply  to  others  also ;  "  for  he  is  not  a 
Jew  which  is  one  outwardly,"  &c. ;  "  we  are  the  circumcision  which  worship  God 
in  the  spirit,"  &c.  So  that  this  song  comes  down  to  us.  {0.  Clayton.)  The 
Church  not  in  danger : — I.  The  figurative  description  which  is  here  given  of 
the  Church.  1.  It  is  a  city  ;  from  which  metaphor  we  obtain  three  ideas  respect- 
ing it— (1)  Its  amplitude.  It  is  not  a  family,  or  a  village,  or  a  hamlet,  or  a 
provincial  town ;  but  a  city.  It  includes  as  its  inhabitants  all  the  good,  both  in 
heaven  and  in  earth,  who  form  "  an  exceeding  great  multitude."  The  dimensions 
of  this  city  are  such  as  comport  with  the  largeness  of  the  Father's  designs,  the 
transcendent  value  of  the  Saviour's  merits,  the  variety  and  immensity  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  influences.  (2)  Its  order  No  city  ever  flourished  long  without 
rule.    Christ  is  the  King  of  this  city,  and  He  establishes  His  laws  in  the  midst  of  it. 

(3)  Its  magnificence.  We  are  not  to  look  for  the  magnificence  of  the  Church  in 
outward  splendour  and  glory,  but  in  its  sanctity — its  holy  principles  and  practices. 
2.  But  this  city  has  an  important  appellative ; — it  is  "  a  strong  city."  And  this 
wfll^  appear,  if  you  consider — (1)  The  foundation  on  which  it  rests.  "Jesus 
Christ,  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  (2)  The  protection  it 
enjoys.  God  Himself  dwells  in  this  city ;  and  His  presence  is  our  stay  and  our 
defence.  All  His  attributes  and  promises  are  connected  with  this  safety.  (3)  The 
principles  by  which  its  unity  is  cemented.  Unity  is  strength.  And  the  unity 
subsisting  between  the  members  of  this  city  is  so  strong  as  not  to  be  dissolved 
by  any  earthly  power.  The  principles  by  which  the  members  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  are  united  are  these  two — truth  and  love.     "  We  have  a  strong  city." 

(4)  The  rude  assaults  it  has  sustained,  uninjured.  We  hardly  know  the  strength 
of  anything  till  it  is  put  to  the  test.  The  Church  has  been  exposed  to  the  opposition 
of  earth  and  the  fury  of  hell.  II.  Its  impregnable  safety.  How  do  I  know 
that  this  city  shall  continue,  and  its  interests  be  advanced,  until  its  glory  is  con- 
summated ?  Why,  for  this  reason :  "  Salvation  will  God  appoint  for  walls  and 
bulwarks."  1.  Hostility  is  implied.  2.  The  means  of  preservation  and  defence  are 
amply  provided.   3.  It  implies  a  glorious  issue.   All  these  means  shall  prove  effectual. 

III.    HOW  MAY  WE  HAVE  A  SATISFACTORY  ASSURANCE  THAT  WE  HAVE  PERSONALLY 

an  interest  in  this  city  of  the  great  King  ?  You  may  have  this — 1.  If  you 
have  chosen  Jesus  Christ  as  the  ground  of  your  dependence  for  salvation.  2.  If  you 
are  visibly  incorporated  with  the  inhabitants  of  this  city.  3.  If  you  are  enabled 
to  exemplify  the  distinguishing  character  of  those  who  are  citizens  of  Zion.  4.  If 
you  find  that  you  have  truly  merged  all  your  interests  in  the  interests  of  the  Church, 
and  have   identified  your  happiness  with  her  successes.      5.  If  you  find  your 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  459 

thoughts  and  affections  much  engaged  on  that  future  state  of  which  the  Church 
on  earth  is  but  a  type.  Conclusion — 1.  Let  me  call  upon  you  to  be  thankful  to 
God,  who  has  afforded  you  such  an  asylum.  2.  Let  me  invite  you  to  enter  this 
city.  3.  Let  us  dismiss  our  fears,  when  we  have  once  got  within  the  walls  of  this 
city.  4.  Endeavour  to  bring  as  many  as  you  can  to  be  inhabitants  of  that  Zion, 
the  privileges  of  which  you  enjoy.  (Ibid.)  The  saving  arm  of  God  a  sure  defence 
to  the  Church  of  Christ  against  all  her  enemies  : — I.  Mention  some  of  those  enemies 
against  whom  the  Church  is  fortified.  1.  She  is  fortified  against  all  the  attempts 
of  Satan.  2.  A  wicked  world  is  always  disposed  to  take  part  with  Satan  against 
her.  3.  The  Church  has  enemies  within  her  own  walls ;  and  is  often  in  the  greatest 
perils  by  false  brethren.  4.  The  Church  has  enemies  even  in  the  hearts  of  her  best 
friends  and  sincerest  members.  That  principle  of  corruption  that  is  not  totally 
subdued  in  the  best  Christians,  as  it  is  inimical  to  God,  must  also  be  inimical  to 
the  Church ;  and,  as  far  as  it  prevails,  its  effects  must  be  always  hurtful  to  her. 
II.  Speak  of  that  salvation  which  God  has  promised  to  appoint  for  walls  and 
bulwarks  to  the  Church.  1.  Salvation  bears  an  evident  relation  to  misery  and 
danger.  2.  It  is  but  a  partial  salvation  that  she  can  hope  to  enjoy  in  this  world. 
3.  But  her  salvation  shall  one  day  be  complete.  From  every  salvation  that  God 
has  already  wrought,  faith  draws  encouragement :  considering  it  as  a  pledge  of 
what  He  will  work  in  time  to  come.    III.  Consider  what  about  the  Church  is 

SECURED  AGAINST  THE  ATTEMPTS    OP  ENEMIES  BY  THE   SALVATION  OP   GOD.      She 

may  lose  much  of  what  may  appear  to  a  carnal  eye  as  most  valuable  to  her.  But 
in  the  eye  of  the  Church  herself,  and  of  all  her  genuine  children,  all  this  is  perfectly 
consistent  with  the  all-sufficiency  of  that  salvation  by  which  she  is  defended. 
All  is  still  safe  that  is  necessary  either  to  her  being  or  her  well-being,  and  all 
that  is  essential  to  the  happiness  of  any  of  her  citizens.  1.  Her  foundation  is 
always  safe.  She  is  "  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets, 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  corner-stone."  2.  Her  existence  is  always 
safe.  The  Church  may  be  driven  into  the  wilderness ;  but  she  shall  never  bo 
driven  out  of  the  world.  3.  Her  particular  citizens  are  all  safe,  under  the  pro- 
tection of  God's  saving  arm.  4.  Her  privileges  and  immunities  are  all  safe.  These 
having  been  purchased  for  her  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  bestowed  upon  her  by 
His  God  and  Father,  are  also  preserved  by  Divine  power  and  grace  ;  and  nona 
shall  ever  be  suffered  to  deprive  her  of  them.  5.  Her  treasures  are  all  safe.  She 
has  a  twofold  treasure  :  a  treasure  of  grace,  and  a  treasure  of  truth.  Both  theso 
are  lodged  in  the  hand  of  Christ.  6.  Her  real  interests  are  all  safe  and  secure  : 
and  that  to  such  a  degree,  that  neither  shall  she  suffer  any  harm,  in  the  issue, — nor 
shall  her  enemies  gain  any  advantage,  by  all  their  apparent  success.  7.  In  a 
word,  her  eternal  inheritance  is  perfectly  safe  and  secure.  IV.  Conclude  with  soma 
improvement  of  what  has  been  said.  1.  The  Church  of  Christ  has  but  little 
occasion  for  the  favour  and  protection  of  earthly  princes,  and  little  cause  to  regret 
the  want  of  it.  2.  It  is  neither  upon  ordinances  nor  instruments,  upon  her  own 
endeavours  nor  those  of  her  members,  nor  upon  any  created  assistance  that 
the  Church  of  Christ  ought  to  depend  for  safety  or  prosperity.  3.  Neither  the 
Church  of  God,  nor  any  particular  Christian,  has  anything  to  fear  from  the 
number,  the  power,  the  policy,  or  even  the  success  of  their  enemies.  4.  This 
subject  informs  us  what  it  is  that  really  brings  the  Church  of  Christ  into  danger. 
Nothing  but  her  own  sin  can  bring  her  into  real  danger  ;  because  this,  and  nothing 
else,  tends  to  deprive  her  of  her  protection,  or  to  cause  her  defence  to  depart 
from  her.  5.  We  may  here  see  plentiful  encouragement  to  every  member  of 
the  Church,  as  well  as  to  those  who  bear  office  in  her,  to  continue  strenuous  and 
undaunted,  in  opposing  every  enemy,  in  defending  every  privilege  that  God 
has  bestowed  upon  the  Church,  every  ordinance  that  He  has  instituted  in  her, 
and  every  truth  that  He  has  revealed  to  her.  6.  We  have  here  an  ample  fund 
of  consolation  to  all  those  who  are  affected  with  the  low  condition  of  the  Church 
of  God  in  our  day.  (J.  Young. )  The  city  of  salvation  : — In  the  Scriptures 
we  read  of  some  very  strong  cities,  that  are  now  levelled  with  the  dust.  But 
the  "  city  "  mentioned  in  the  text  is  stronger  than  all  the  rest.  The  state  of 
nature  may  be  called  the  city  of  destruction  ;  and  the  state  of  grace,  the  strong 
city,  or  the  city  of  salvation.  I.  The  name  of  this  city.  "  Salvation."  It  is 
a  very  old  name,  it  has  had  this  name  a  great  many  thousands  of  years ;  it  has 
never  changed  its  name  ;  it  is  a  durable  name ;  it  is  an  unchangeable  name. 
II.  What  kind  of  a  city  it  is.  1.  It  is  a  large  city.  It  would  hold  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  for  thousands  of  generations.    2.  It  is  a  free  city.     The 


460  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  xxu. 

Lord  Jesus  Christ  welcomes  you  to  come  and  live  in  it.  3.  It  is  a  wealthy  city. 
The  treasures  of  free  grace  are  in  the  city  of  salvation.  4.  It  is  a  healthy  city. 
They  breathe  good  air  who  live  in  it.  The  Physician  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  heals  every  disease.  5.  It  is  a  happy  city.  6.  This  city  will  last  for 
ever.  Where  is  Babylon  ?  Where  is  Tyre  ?  Where  is  Nineveh  ?  Where 
are  the  cities  of  Egypt  ?  Those  mighty  cities  are  levelled  with  the  dust,  but 
this  city  will  last  through  all  eternity.  III.  The  builder  of  this  city.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  London  there  is  a  constant  succession  of  streets  for  many 
miles  in  length,  and  the  whole  was  built  by  man.  IV.  Who  are  the  inhabitants 
of  this  city  ?  They  are  good  men,  women,  and  children.  1.  They  are  called 
"  saints."  The  word  "  saint "  means  a  holy  person.  2.  Another  name  given 
to  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  is  righteous.  3.  Another  name  is  believers. 
4.  Another  name  is  sons  and  daughters.  V.  The  watchmen  of  the  city.  There 
are  watchmen  placed  upon  the  walls  of  Zion — parental  watchmen,  teaching 
watchmen,  and  ministerial  watchmen.  VI.  The  guards  of  the  city.  Angela 
guard  you  while  you  sleep  and  while  you  are  awake.  They  are  wise  guards; 
powerful  guards  ;  affectionate  guards.  VII.  The  way  which  leads  to  this  city. 
The  road  of  repentance.  VIII.  The  wall  of  this  city.  It  is  so  high  that  no 
enemy  can  scale  it ;  it  is  so  strong  that  no  enemy  can  break  or  injure  it.  IX  The 
foundation  of  this  city.  The  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  X.  The 
streets  of  this  city.  There  are  some  very  remarkable  streets.  1.  The  high 
street  of  Faith.  This  street  runs  from  one  end  of  the  city  to  the  other.  In  almost 
every  town  and  city,  we  find  a  street  of  this  name — "  High  Street."  But  there 
is  no  such  street,  as  this  high  street  of  faith ;  it  is  a  very  long  and  beautiful  street. 
It  connects  the  gate  of  conversion  and  the  gate  of  Heaven.  This  high  street  is 
frequented  by  all  who  live  by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  street 
of  Humility.  It  lies  alongside  the  high  street  of  faith.  3.  The  street  of  Obedience. 
The  inhabitants  are  very  partial  to  this  street.  This  street  is  divided  into  ten 
parts.  The  ten  parts  are  the  ten  commandments.  This  is  a  very  broad  street. 
Thy  commandments  are  exceeding  broad."  It  is  a  remarkably  clean  street. 
4.  A  fourth  street  is  Worship  street.  XL  We  may  now  take  a  view  of  the 
schools  of  the  city.  1.  Providence.  2.  Revelation.  3.  Affliction.  4.  Experience. 
XII.  Come  and  see  the  palaces  of  the  city.  When  any  one  gets  to  London, 
they  want  to  see  the  palace  of  the  king.  I  will  show  nobler  palaces  than  palaces 
of  earthly  kings.  These  palaces  are  ordinances ;  such  as  prayer,  praise,  reading 
and  hearing  the  Holy  Gospel,  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  meditation  and 
8elf-examination.  Consider  the  reason  why  they  are  called  palaces.  A  palace 
is  a  place  where  the  ki  g  is  to  be  seen.  It  is  a  place  where  petitions  are  presented ; 
where  the  king  bestows  wealth  and  great  gifts.  Here  petitions  are  presented 
and  received  ;  here  King  Jesus  bestows  wealth  and  honour.  It  is  a  place  for 
conversing  with  the  king  ;  and  here  we  may  converse  with  Jesus.  In  a  palace 
grand  feasts  are  held ;  so  in  the  ordinances  noble  feasts  are  provided  for  souls 
immortal,  where  they  may  eat  abundantly  of  heavenly  provisions.  XIII.  The 
armoury  of  the  city.  A  beautiful  piece  is  hanging  up  called  the  helmet — the 
helmet  of  salvation.  Not  far  from  the  helmet  is  a  breastplate — the  breastplate 
of  righteousness.  Near  the  breastplate  is  a  girdle  or  sash,  with  this  inscription 
« — truth.  The  next  piece  of  armour  is  a  pair  of  shoes  with  this  name — "  pre- 
paration of  the  Gospel  of  peace."  Next  is  "  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is 
the  Word  of  God."  The  shield  of  faith.  XIV.  The  garden  of  the  city.  1.  The 
walks  in  the  garden.  The  walks  of  meditation  and  holy  fellowship.  2.  The 
fountains.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  principal  fountain.  There  is  another 
fountain,  called  the  consolation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  the  water  is  delicious.  All 
the  inhabitants  drink  of  it.  3.  The  flowers.  There  are  the  flowers  of  the  promises 
and  doctrines  ;  they  are  odoriferous  flowers,  and  never  failing.  4.  The  trees. 
The  tree  of  knowledge  ;  not  the  tree  of  knowledge  which  was  in  Eden,  but  of 
knowledge  and  wisdom.  There  is  not  a  poisonous  tree  in  the  garden.  The 
tree  of  life,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  there — "  whose  leaves  are  for  the  healing 
of  the  nations."  XV.  The  bank  of  this  city.  The  name  of  this  bank  is  written 
on  the  door  ;  it  is — the  covenant  of  grace.  It  is  so  free,  all  may  come  and  apply  ; 
and  all  who  apply,  receive.  The  bank,  too,  is  very  rich ;  and  it  is  free  for  the 
poorest  sinner.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Proprietor,  and  He  is  willing  to 
give  to  poor  sinners  as  much  as  they  need.  This  bank  cannot  fail ;  it  cannot 
break.  Whatever  is  drawn  out  during  the  day,  it  is  as  full  again  at  night.  It 
is  full  of  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."     XVI.  There  is  a  gate  through 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  461 

which  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  pass,  when  they  enter  Heaven.  It  is  the 
gate  of  death.  Tl>ere  is  a  valley  leading  to  the  gate  called  the  valley  of  the  shadow 
of  death.  It  is  illuminated  with  the  light  of  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  Pious 
children  pass  through  that  valley,  leaning  on  the  arm  of  Jesus.    {A.  Fletcher,  D.D. ) 

Ver.    2.    Open   ye    the    gates. — A    bunch    of    keys    (to    children): — 1.   The 
gate  of  healing.     What  would  you  say  is  the  key  of  that  gate  ?    Is  it  not  our 
need  t    What,  e.g.,  would  give  you  admission  into  any  hospital  ?    Would  it  not 
be  your  need  of  the  help  that  could  be  obtained  there  ?    Just  so  is  it  with  Jesus, 
the  good  Physician.     We  have  no  claim  except  His  own  exceeding  love  and  our 
exceeding  need.     There  are  no  incurables  so  far  as  the  Lord  Jesus  is  concerned. 
2.  The  door  of  hope.     The  key  for  that  is  promise.     You  may  read  about  it  in 
the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  (Christian  and  Hopeful  in  Doubting  Castle).     3.  The 
door  of  help.     The  key  is  sympathy.     Sympathy,  as  the  meaning  of  the  word 
implies,  understands  the  situation.     "  Thou  shalt  not  oppress  a  stranger,"  was 
one  of  God's  commands  to  the  Israelites,  "  for  ye  know  the  heart  of  a  stranger, 
seeing  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt."     That  was  sympathy  as  the  key 
to  the  door  of  help.     They  knew  what  it  was  to  be  strangers  in  a  strange  land, 
and  therefore  they  could  understand  how  a  stranger  among  themselves  would 
feel,  how  he  would  appreciate  a  friendly  spirit,  and  how  sensitive  he  would  be  to 
any  coldness  of  treatment.     Is  it  not  His  sympathy  that  makes  Jesus  the  perfect 
Saviour  ?     4.  The  door  of  communion.     For  that  we  need  two  keys,  just  as  in 
your  house  doors  two  keys  are  required  to  open  them — the  key  that  turns  the 
lock  and  the  key  that  lifts  the  latch.     Prayer  and  obedience  are  the  two  keys. 
5.  The  door  of  change,  that  door  that  stands  at  the  end  of  "  the  well-trodden 
path  to  the  grave."     What  is  the  key  for  this  door  T     We  have  none.     God  keeps 
it  in  His  own  hands.     (J.  S.  Maver,  M.A.)        The    righteous    nation   which 
keepeth   the   truth. — Truth,  and    its   influence   upon  society : — Truth  was   not 
intended  to  be  brought  before  the  world   by  the  God  of  truth  for  the  mere 
purpose  of  influencing  individual  character.     Hence  we  find  the  passage  before  us 
inviting  not  separate  men  in  their  respective  capacities,  but  the  righteous  nation 
to  enter  in  that  keepeth  the  truth.     I.  When  the  truth  spreads  through 
society  it  will  give  new  views  op  moral  obligation.     Looking  at  society 
as  it  stands  at  present  where  the  truth  has  made  but  little  way,  we  find  those 
views  of  moral  obligation  that  are  adopted  and  acted  upon,  accommodated  to  the 
selfishness  of  individuals,  and  society  has  but  little  place  in  their  consideration. 
But  let  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ  influence  society,  and  they  will  then  begin  to 
feel  that  the  great  source  of  moral  obligation  is  not  what  they  owe  to  themselves 
but  what  they  owe  to  God.     II.  If  we  find,  therefore,  that  our  sense  of  moral 
obligation  is  influenced  by  these  higher  considerations  when  we  come  to  the  truth, 
we  have,  in  the  next  place,  to  look  at  the  working  of  truth  under  this  high 
sesse  OP  moral  responsibility  to  God.     There  is  an  enlargement  of  feeling 
from  the  man  to  his  own  f an  ily — from  his  own  family  to  his  own  relatives — from 
his  own  relatives  to  his  own  social  circle — from  his  own  social  circle  to  his  nation — 
from  his  nation  to  the  body  of  nations  round  him — there  is  an  enlargement  of 
feeling  in  the  still  widening  circle  to  regions  beyond  these — an  enlargement  of 
feeling  that  carries  the  mind  onward  in  a  morally  spiritual  expansion  to  the  whole 
human  race,  and  after  the  feelings  of  the  man  under  the  power  of  truth  have 
been  thus  far  extended,  his  feelings  experience  still  a  desire  for  further  enlarge- 
ment.    He  looks  unto  another  and  an  eternal  world  and  feels  that  there  is  a 
fellowship  due  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  and  to  angels  that  seek  to 
learn  from  his  condition  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.     And  while  his  mind  is  thus 
enlarged  under  the  working  of  truth,  there  is  the  reflection  back  again  of  truth 
in  all  the  peace  that  it  propagates,  in  all  the  glories  that  it  conveys,  in  all  the 
safety  that  it  confers,  in  all  the  spirituality  that  it  kindles,  in  all  the  communion 
which  it  permits  between  the  creature  and  God,  which  will  be  found  to  tell  upon 
the  man,  so  that  instead  of  living  in  a  sphere  of  selfishness  where  his  light  burns 
but  dimly,  and  where  the  discoveries  of  the  power  of  truth  are  very  limited,  he 
feels  that  he  lives  in  a  blaze  of  spiritual  illumination,  and  when  he  finds  so  many 
kindred  souls  sympathise  with  him,  and  striking  up  an  anthem  to  God,  whence 
all  has  come,  he  feels  that  he  is  a  greater  man,  a  happier  man,  a  holier  man,  than 
if  he  were  to  stand  aloof  even  in  solitary  perfection  in  his  insulated  condition,  to 
worship  God  alone.     Instead  of  a  community  of  nations,  we  find  a  community  of 
parties,  and  each  frowning  upon  the  other,  and  each  watching  the  other  with  an 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap,  xxvl 

unworthy  yet  a  constant  and  an  anxious  jealousy.  But  when  the  truth  does 
begin  to  operate  upon  the  condition  of  the  nations  generally,  how  will  their  temporal 
circumstances  be  changed !  What  a  rising  of  a  new  spirit  in  the  human  community ! 
If  we  find  truth  thus  raising  our  sense  of  moral  obligation,  if  we  find  truth  thus 
calculated  to  open  so  many  sources  of  happiness,  let  us  look  to  the  source  whence 
this  mighty  element  derives  all  its  power.  It  is  not  the  truth  itself  regarded 
merely  as  conveyed  by  so  many  propositions  that  can  accomplish  this  mighty 
wonder.  But  it  is  the  truth  applying  these  propositions  by  the  Spirit  of  glory 
and  of  God.  Looking,  therefore,  to  all  these  views  of  truth  upon  society,  we  have 
another  great  reason  to  induce  us  to  endeavour  to  "  buy  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not." 
(J.  Burnet.)  National  responsibility  (with  Prov.  xiv.  34) : — From  these  and 
suchlike  passages  it  is  evident  that  nations  may  be  and  ought  to  be  righteous 
and  truth-keeping,  and  that  nations  which  are  of  this  character  occupy  the 
highest  position  in  relation  to  other  nations,  and  in  the  estimation  of  Him  by 
whom  kings  reign,  and  to  whom  national  as  well  as  individual  homage  is  due. 
That  nations  can  possess  such  a  moral  character,  and  render  such  homage  is  denied 
by  those  who  do  not  admit  that  nations,  in  their  corporate  capacity,  are  subjects 
of  God's  moral  government.  They  hold  that  nations  or  states  are  impersonal, 
that  they  have  no  will  and  no  conscience,  and  that  therefore  no  responsibility 
attaches  to  national  action,  if  indeed  there  can  be  such  action  at  alL  This  is  a 
serious  mistake,  and  one  which  cannot  but  prove  most  pernicious  in  its  influence 
and  consequences.  For  nothing  can  be  clearer,  alike  from  the  teaching  of  God's 
Word  and  the  facts  of  universal  history,  than  that  nations  are  responsible  subjects 
of  Divine  government ;  that  they  are  dealt  with  by  God  according  to  their  character 
and  conduct,  punished  when  they  do  evil,  and  blessed  and  prospered  when  they 
do  well  (Jer.  xviii.  7-10).  (Original  Secession  Magazine.)  National  righteous- 
ness : — I.  Let  us  inquire  what  that  righteousness  is  which  should  characterise 
a  nation,  and  by  which  a  nation  is  exalted.  How  does  it  manifest  itself  ?  1.  This 
righteousness  has  as  its  root — its  essence — the  foundation  principle  of  all  true 
religion — "  the  fear  of  God,"  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  of  rulers  and  ruled.  This 
must  be  the  prevailing  character  of  the  persons  of  whom  it  is  composed.  2.  It 
includes,  as  one  of  its  leading  elements,  the  due  observance  of  the  worship  of  God, 
according  to  the  rules  laid  down  in  the  Divine  Word.  3.  It  includes  a  national 
keeping  of  the  truth.  4.  It  includes  the  regulation  of  all  national  affairs,  in  the 
departments  of  legislation  and  administration,  by  the  principles  of  God's  Word, 
which  should  be  the  rule  of  faith  and  practice  to  the  nation  as  well  as  to  the  Church, 
the  family,  and  the  individual.  5.  It  includes  the  prevalence  of  Christian  morality, 
or  righteous  dealings  between  man  and  man  in  the  business  of  life,  and  the  practice 
of  all  those  moral  virtues  by  which  society  is  sweetened  and  adorned.  II.  How 
righteousness  exalts  a  nation.  A  twofold  exaltation  results  from  national 
righteousness — exaltation  in  the  estimation  of  men,  of  other  nations,  and  exaltation 
in  the  estimation  of  God.  EEL  How  this  nation- ex alttng  righteousness 
may  be  and  ought  to  BE  promoted.  1.  By  attending  to  the  cultivation  of 
personal  godliness.  2.  By  attending  to  the  duties  of  family  religion.  3.  By 
diffusing  the  Word  of  God  and  stirring  up  the  people  to  read  and  study  it  for 
themselves  in  secret  and  private,  and  by  securing  that  it  be  taught  in  all  our 
schools.  4.  By  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  Gospel  by  ministers  of  religion. 
5.  By  the  forth-putting  of  all  legitimate  moral  efforts  to  counteract  and  suppress 
whatever  is  contrary  thereto.  6.  With  all  such  means  must  be  mingled  fervent 
prayer  for  the  blessing  of  God,  which  can  alone  make  them  efficacious  for  the 
advancement  of  the  cause  of  righteousness.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee. — 
Perfect  peace  : — The  Scriptures  are  full  of  priceless  secrets,  and  here  is  one  of  them 
— the  secret  of  trust  in  God  as  revealed  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  sole  method 
and  means  of  that  peace  which  we  all  desire.  "  Thou  shalt  keep  him  in  perfect 
peace  " ;  or,  as  the  original  expresses  it  still  more  forcibly  in  its  Semitic  simplicity, 
"  Thou  shalt  keep  him  in  peace,  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee."  It  is 
not  the  promise  of  freedom  from  sorrow ;  it  is  not,  by  any  means,  a  promise  of 
success  or  prosperity  on  earth :  but  it  is  a  promise  of  that  inward  peace — of  that 
heart's  ease;  in  the  breast — with  which  sorrow  itself  is  a  tolerable  burden,  and 
without  which  prosperity  itself  is  a  questionable  boon.  The  existence  or  the 
absence  of  peace  in  our  hearts  is  no  slight  indication  of  our  true  condition,  for,  as 
peace  must  exist  with  the  righteous  even  in  the  midst  of  adversity,  it  cannot  exist 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  463 

in  the  hearts  of  the  wicked,  however  smiling,  however  prosperous  their  lot.  "  There 
is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  _Ihere  is,  I  know,  a  false,  as  well  as  a 
true  peace.  There  is  the  simulated  contentment  of  a  hard  indifference.  There 
is  the  cynical  self-complacency  of  a  moral  blindness.  There  is  the  deep  infatuation 
of  a  false  security.  There  is  the  dull  stupefaction  of  an  obstinate  despair.  But 
who  will  call  this  peace  ?  The  carelessness  of  a  traveller  by  night,  who  knows 
not  that  he  is  walking  all  the  time  along  the  edge  of  a  frightful  precipice — is  that 
peace  ?  For,  just  as  we  must  not  be  deceived  by  the  false  semblance,  or  by 
voices  which  cry  "  Peace,  peace,"  when  there  is  no  peace,  so  let  us  neither  be 
robbed  of  the  deep  reality  by  external  appearances,  or  by  passing  troubles. 
1.  Take,  for  instance,  the  case  of  personal  anxieties.  Most — perhaps  every  one — 
of  us  suffer  from  these  anxieties  for  ourselves ;  anxieties  about  our  families  ; 
anxieties  for  the  present ;  anxieties  of  a  still  deeper  kind  about  the  future.  Though 
we  are  children  of  God,  yet  the  cares  of  life  come  to  us  which  come  to  all.  They 
are  the  necessary  incentive  to  our  efforts.  They  are  the  necessary  impulse  to 
make  us  treasure  otherwhere  than  on  earth  our  hopes.  But,  oh,  how  differently 
do  they  happen  to  the  Christian  and  to  the  sinner  !  But  to  be  absorbed  in 
merely  private  agitations  is  the  characteristic  of  a  mean  soul,  and  the  lives  of 
many  men  who  rise  far  above  these  personal  and  domestio  egotisms  are  yet 
deeply  troubled  by  the  world's  agitation  and  unrest,  by  the  perils  of  institutions 
to  which  they  are  devoted,  by  the  perplexities  of  nations  which  they  love.  We 
have  heard  how  Augustus,  the  ruler  of  the  world,  constantly  moaned  in  his  sleep 
for  the  loss  of  his  three  legions.  We  remember  how  the  sad  English  queen,  who 
lies  with  her  great  sister  in  this  Abbey,  said  that  when  she  died  the  word  "  Calais  " 
would  be  found  written  on  her  heart.  We  have  known  how,  in  his  later  days, 
the  good  and  great  Lord  Falkland  fell  into  deep  melancholy,  ever  murmuring 
the  words  "  Peace,  peace,"  because  his  heart  bled  with  the  bleeding  wounds  of  his 
country.  We  recall  how  the  wasted  form  and  shattered  hopes  of  William  Pitt 
were  laid,  in  a  season  dark  and  perilous,  at  the  feet  of  his  great  father,  Chatham, 
with  the  same  pomp,  in  the  same  consecrated  mould,  and  how,  grieved  to  the 
soul  with  the  news  of  Austerlitz,  he  died,  with  broken  exclamations  about  the 
perils  of  his  country.  Well,  we  should  not  be  human  if  we  did  not  suffer  thus  with 
those  whom  we  see  suffer.  We  may  say  to  the  fools,  "  Deal  not  so  madly,"  and  to 
the  ungodly,  "  Lift  not  up  your  horn  on  high  " ;  but  the  issues  of  all  these  things 
we  must  leave  humbly,  calmly,  trustfully,  with  God.  The  earth  is  not  ours, 
nor  the  inhabiters  of  it ;  neither  do  we  hold  up  the  pillars  of  it.  Let  us  not 
think  much  of  our  own  importance.  Ah,  yes,  for  the  anxieties  of  the  statesmen, 
and  the  churchmen,  and  the  patriot,  here  again  is  the  remedy.  We  know  that  the 
angels  of  the  Churches  and  the  angels  of  the  nations  gaze  on  the  face  of  God. 
Troubled  was  the  life  of  David,  yet  he  could  say,  calmly  and  humbly,  "  God 
eitteth  above  the  water-floods,  and  God  remaineth  a  King  for  ever."  2.  Again,  the 
lives  of  how  many  of  us  are  troubled  by  the  strife  of  tongues  !  And  yet  even 
amid  these  flights  of  barbed  arrows ;  amid  these  clouds  of  poisonous  insects ; 
amid  these  insolences  of  anonymous  slander,  what  peace — what  perfect  peace — 
may  we  find  if  our  minds  be  stayed  on  God.  "  Let  them  say  what  they  will," 
Baia  a  good  man,  now  gone  into  his  rest,  "  they  cannot  hurt  me  ;  I  am  too  near 
the  great  white  throne  for  that."  Yes,  "  Thou  shalt  hide  them  privily  by  Thine 
own  presence  from  the  provoking  of  all  men.  Thou  shalt  keep  them  secretly 
in  Thy  tabernacle  from  the  strife  of  tongues."  "Thou  shalt  keep  him  in  peace, 
peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee."  3.  There  is  yet  another,  the  heaviest  of 
all  life's  troubles  in  which  this  promise  of  peace  comes  to  us  like  music  heard 
over  the  stormy  waters.  At  is  when  we  are  most  overwhelmed  with  shame  and 
eorrow  for  the  past, — when  our  sins  have  taken  such  hold  upon  us  that  we  are 
not  able  to  look  up.  Who  shall  count  the  number  of  the  men  whose  lives  are 
ruined  by  the  consequences  of  the  past,  but  who,  even  in  the  midst  of  that  ruin, 
are  far  more  embittered  by  shame  than  by  calamity,  and  who  feel  the  sickness  or 
the  downfall  far  less  than  they  feel  the  remorseful  accusing  of  the  evil  conscience. 
It  is  the  lost  Heaven  which  torments  no  less  surely  than  the  present  hell.  In 
Michael  Angelo's  great  picture  of  the  last  judgment,  one  of  the  evil  spirits  has 
seized  upon  a  doomed  transgressor,  and  is  dragging  him  downwards ;  and  as  he 
drags  him  in  down-rushing  flight  the  demon  is  driving  his  furious  teeth  into  the 
sinner's  flesh  ;  but,  with  a  touch  of  marvellous  spiritual  insight,  the  great  painter 
has  represented  the  poor  wretch  as  wholly  unconscious  of  that  agony — as  so 
unaware  of  it  that  his  clasped  hands  and  his  eyes  gazing  upwards  in  agony  on  his 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvt. 

offended  Lord,  show  that,  in  the  absorbing  sense  of  having  forfeited  the  blessing 
of  the  forgiven,  he  has  no  anguish  left  to  thrill  at  the  torture  of  the  condemned. 
Yes,  it  is  the  worst  sting  of  misery  to  have  once  been  happy, — the  worst  pang  of 
shame  to  have  once  been  innocent, — the  most  fearful  aggravation  of  punishment 
that  men  do  not  forget  the  Heavens  from  which  they  fall.  Look  at  the  white 
water-lily,  in  its  delicate  fragrance,  as  it  lifts  from  its  circle  of  green  floating  leaves 
the  immaculate  purity  of  its  soft  sweet  flower.  Its  roots  are  in  the  black  mud  ; 
its  resting-place  is  on  the  stagnant  wave.  Not  from  its  mean  or  even  foul  surround- 
ings— not  assuredly  from  the  blackness  of  the  mud,  or  the  stagnation  of  the  wave — 
did  it  draw  that  pure  beauty  and  that  breathing  beneficence,  but  from  some 
principle  of  life  within.  And  cannot  He  who  gave  to  the  fair  blossom  its  idea  of 
sweetness  draw  forth  from  us,  the  souls  whom  He  made  when  He  breathed  into  our 
nostrils  the  breath  of  life — oh,  though  we  have  debased  those  souls  with  the  stag- 
nancy of  idleness,  and  blackened  them  with  the  mud  of  sin — cannot  our  God  still 
bring  forth  from  those  souls  that  He  has  made  His  own  sweetness  and  purity  again? 
He  can,  if  we  trust  in  Him.  The  alchemy  of  His  love  can  transmute  dross  to 
gold,  and,  though  our  sins  be  as  scarlet,  the  blood  of  His  dear  Son  can  wash  them 
white  as  snow.  Let  the  very  depth  of  your  remorse,  if  God  grants  you  to  feel 
remorse  for  a  shameful  and  sinful  past — let  the  very  depth  of  this  remorse  be  your 
protection  from  despair.  Seek  God,  and  that  remorse  may  be  but  the  darkness 
which  is  deepest  before  the  dawn.  (Dean  Farrar,  D.D. )  Peace  is  the  balance  of  a 
thousand  forces  in  that  centre  of  all  things — the  human  heart ;  and,  if  we  regard 
the  question  apart  from  revelation,  such  a  balance  seems  quite  unattainable. 
History  discovers  the  successive  generations  plagued  by  inquietudes — mental, 
moral,  and  political.  And  the  most  popular  philosophy  in  the  world,  taking  for 
its  basis  the  common  experience  of  mankind,  teaches  that  peace  is  logically 
impossible  ;  that  all  nature  is  full  of  blind  and  endless  striving ;  that  existence 
means  desire,  and  desire  means  misery  ;  that  thus  the  world  and  life  are  funda- 
mentally and  essentially  evil,  and  there  is  no  escape  from  discontent,  except  in 
insensibility  and  extinction.  In  opposition  to  all  this,  revelation  teaches  that  the 
world  is  a  cosmos,  not  a  chaos ;  that  human  nature  is  intrinsically  noble  and  only 
accidentally  base  ;  and  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  waits  to  restore  the  lost  balance 
in  the  hearts  of  all  who  trust  in  Him,  bringing  their  life  into  accord  with  the  infinite 
music  of  God's  perfect  universe.  ( W.  L.  Watkinson. )  '■  Perfect  peace  : — Let 
us  trace  the  method  of  God's  operation  in  securing  to  us  the  peace  which  passeth 
all  understanding.  I.  There  is  the  antagonism  between  our  conscience 
and  history.  We  recall  all  we  have  been  and  done,  and  of  how  little  in  past 
years  can  an  instructed  conscience  approve  1  From  a  certain  historical  character 
came  the  sad  outburst :  "  My  whole  life  has  been  one  great  mistake  "  ;  and  this 
confession  is  wrung  from  all  when  the  law  comes  home  and  we  know  ourselves 
as  we  are  known  of  God.  Not  simply  an  intellectual  mistake  to  be  condoned  on 
grounds  of  infirmity,  but  a  profound  moral  mistake  also,  for  which  we  are  and 
ought  to  be  accountable.  Now  there  can  be  no  rational  peace  until  we  are  freed 
from  this  dead,  accusing  past.  Here  Christ  becomes  most  precious  to  all  who 
believe.  This  peace  in  Christ  is  of  the  noblest.  The  law  of  Heaven  is  not  relaxed 
one  jot  or  tittle.  Neither  is  the  tone  of  conscience  lowered  to  ensure  us  peace, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  He  who  gives  us  a  new  heart  gives  us  a  new  conscience ; 
conscience  in  evangelical  penitence  becomes  more  acute  and  authoritative  than 
ever,  and  yet  in  its  utmost  majesty  and  tenderness  is  satisfied  with  God's  reconciling 
work  and  word  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  yet  how  few  pardoned  ones  have  entered 
into  the  enjoyment  of  "  perfect "  peace  !  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  let  us  have 
peace  wi :  h  God."  II.  The  second  serious  antagonism  of  ltpe  is  that  between 
our  flesh  and  spieit.  The  apostle  describes  this  feud  in  language  which  brings 
the  sad  fact  home  irresistibly.  "  For  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward 
man :  but  I  see  another  law  in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind, 
and  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members."  This 
is  the  fundamental,  fatal  discord.  There  can  be  no  true  peace  until  this  inter- 
necine war  ends  in  the  utter  breaking  down  and  final  extinction  of  the  law  in 
our  members.  The  supremacy  of  the  flesh  would  not  ensure  rest;  such  tri- 
umphant usurpation  would  bring  all  hell  with  it.  Any  alliance  between  the  rival 
powers  is  also  impossible.  They  greatly  err  who  argue  that  the  law  in  the  members 
and  the  law  of  the  mind  are  simply  disturbed  polarities  of  our  nature  between 
which  harmony  may  be  established ;  that  they  correspond  to  the  antithetical 
laws  we  find  in  creation,  and  whose  just  mutual  action  is  altogether  beneficent. 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  465 

That  conflict  of  the  soul  in  which  all  other  fightings — elemental,  national,  or 
social — have  their  origin,  and  out  of  which  spring  the  manifold  miseries  of  human 
life,  is  not  the  result  of  powers,  properties,  and  laws  altogether  good  and  pure 
having  fallen  through  ignorance  and  accident  into  displacement  and  misrelation, 
and  needing  only  the  correction  of  culture ;  but  our  nature  has  lost  its  purity, 
that  is,  its  homogeneity  ;  an  exotic  element,  an  alien  power,  an  abnormal  law 
has  found  place  within  us,  working  our  destruction,  and  this  the  grace  of  God 
only  can  master  and  extirpate.  Christ  pours  into  us  the  light,  energy,  joy  of 
His  own  glorious  nature,  breaking  the  tyranny  of  the  law  in  the  members,  giving 
ascendency  to  the  law  of  the  mind,  and  thus  brings  back  the  paradisiacal  calm. 
Perfect  peace  goes  with  perfect  purity.  III.  A  fubtheb  antagonism  of  life 
19  that  between  feeling  and  reason.  One  of  the  most  painful  and  perplex- 
ing phases  of  life  is  the  conflict  between  instinct  and  logic  ;  our  reflective  reason 
contradicting  our  spontaneous  reason  on  many  of  the  greatest  questions  of 
existence.  A.  primitive  intuition  apprehends  the  goodness  of  the  Supreme,  but 
the  intellect  pondering  this  sad  world  cannot  confirm  the  intuition.  A  con- 
stitutional principle  prompts  us  to  prayer,  implies  the  intervention  of  God  in 
all  our  affairs  and  the  validity  of  supplication,  yet  our  dialectics  often  disown 
our  devotions,  and  it  seems  as  unphilosophical  to  pray  as  it  is  natural.  Our 
consciousness  assures  us  of  our  freedom  and  responsibility,  giving  grandeur  to 
thought  and  life ;  but  science  contradicts  consciousness,  degrading  us  into  mere 
mechanism.  The  fact  of  immortality  is  a  truth  found  in  the  depth  of  our  mind,  a 
glorious  instinctive  hope  lending  the  colour  of  gold  to  all  the  sphere  ;  but  science 
is  at  variance  with  sentiment;  and  we  look  into  the  black  grave  with  dismay. 
If  we  dare  trust  that  feeling  in  us  which  is  at  once  deep,  noble,  and  positive,  we 
could  welcome  all  the  glorious  articles  of  the  creed  and  rest  in  them  with  unmixed 
delight,  but  reason  enters  another  verdict,  and  we  are  overwhelmed  in  the  dilemma. 
Here,  once  more,  Christ  is  our  peace,  giving  us  rest  by  giving  us  light.  We  are 
far  from  asserting  that  the  New  Testament  formally  harmonises  syllogism  and 
sentiment,  that  it  demonstrates  agreement  between  intuitionalism  and  rationalism ; 
but  it  suspends  the  bitter  polemic  by  mightily  reinforcing  the  brightest  con- 
victions and  aspirations  of  our  nature.  It  shows  us  the  greatest,  wisest,  holiest 
Teacher  the  world  has  ever  seen — He  who  spake  as  never  man  spake — giving 
direct  and  ample  authentication  to  the  grand  creed  of  the  heart ;  and  this  is 
surely  an  adequate  reason  for  waiting  in  hope. the  final  solution  of  the  apparent 
antagonism  between  feeling  and  philosophy./  Here  also  many  who  believe  in 
Christ  have  not  the  "  perfect "  peace.  Wer  argue  these  questions  away  from 
Christ,  and  our  soul  is  troubled.  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  :  ye  believe 
in  God,  believe  also  in  Me."  It  is  perfectly  quiet  at  the  centre  of  the  whirl- 
wind. Jesus  Christ  is  the  centre  of  the  whirlwind  of  modern  controversy,  and 
whilst  our  lame  interpretations  of  the  universe,  our  little  systems  of  philosophy 

{rat  forth  with  so  much  pride  and  hope,  are  being  driven  about  and  driven  away 
ike  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floor,  with  Christ  at  the  centre  reason 
finds  lasting  quiet.  IV.  The  final  antagonism  of  life  is  that  of  character 
and  circumstance.  No  sooner  are  we  what  we  ought  to  be  than  we  painfully 
feel  the  world  is  not  what  it  ought  to  be,  and  the  more  nearly  we  are  right  the 
more  we  realise  how  deeply  the  world  is  wrong,  and  how  hard  a  thing  it  is  to 
carry  into  effect  high  principles  and  convictions.  Life  is  one  long  severe  trial. 
We  are  tried  in  every  possible  way — in  principle,  temper,  affection,  and  faith. 
Here  again,  however,  Christ  becomes  our  peace  by  giving  us  power.  He  makes 
us  to  share  in  His  own  triumphant  spirit  and  might,  thus  enabling  us  to  over- 
come the  trial  and  temptation,  the  allurement  and  sorrow  of  life.  We  are  filled 
with  wisdom,  love,  power  and  joy  as  He  was.  How  few  in  the  friction  and  strain 
of  this  worldly  life  attain  this  perfect  peace  "  !  We  have  solicitude,  fretful- 
ness,  misgiving,  and  sorrow.  And  we  explain  this  to  ourselves  by  regarding 
our  circumstances  as  specially  harsh  and  afflictive,  which  is  an  explanation  very 
wide  of  the  truth.  The  blame  of  our  lack  of  peace  is  not  to  be  laid  on  our  severe 
environment,  but  on  the  inner  defect  of  power  which,  in  its  turn,  is  caused  by 
our  qualified  faith.  If  we  fully  identified  ourselves  with  the  world -conquering 
Christ  we  should  know  no  more  irascibility  or  fear,  but  in  fiery  trials  prove  abiding 
equanimity  and  imperturbation.  (Ibid.)  The  blessing  attendant  upon  having 
the  mind  stayed  on  God : — I.  The  state  of  mind  here  spoken  of.  The  soul 
may  be  said  to  trust,  or  stay,  upon  anything,  when  it  relies  upon  it  for  its  present 
comfort  and  future  salvation.     The  soul  that  possesses  the  blessing  here  spoken 

30 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap,  xxvi, 

of,  has  for  the  ohject  of  its  trust  and  stay  the  Lord  Jehovah.  It  confides  in  His 
name  and  character  as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth :  it  relies  upon  His 
promises  of  mercy  and  grace  declared  unto  mankind  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  j 
and  derives  its  support  and  consolation  from  viewing  God  as  "  in  Christ  recon- 
ciling the  world  unto  Himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them."  This 
confidence  in  the  Almighty  stands  opposed  to  various  false  refuges  and  deceitful 
grounds  of  confidence.  1.  It  is  opposed  to  that  confidence  which  men  are  often 
apt  to  place  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  in  human  wisdom,  experience,  power,  interest, 
&c.  2.  This  affiance  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  likewise  directly  opposite  to  all 
reliance  on  our  own  services  and  performances.  3.  This  trust  in  Jehovah  is  very 
different  from  confidence  placed  in  any  feelings,  or  what  are  usually  termed  frames 
of  mind.  These  are,  at  best,  very  uncertain,  often  very  deceitful.  II.  Th» 
promise  or  blessing  hebe  spoken  of.  "  Perfect  peace."  1.  There  is  an  ener- 
getic simplicity  in  the  original  expression :  it  is  peace,  peace " ;  intimating 
that  the  soul  which  steadfastly  reposes  itself  on  God,  may  expect  every  kind 
of  peace  as  its  portion.  Whether  you  understand  by  the  word,  reconciliation 
with  God,  amity  with  men,  composure  in  the  conscience,  resignation  to  the 
appointments  of  providence,  rest  from  the  turbulency  of  sinful  passions  and 
appetites,  or  finally,  that  everlasting  state  of  rest  and  felicity  which  remain* 
for  the  people  of  God ; — in  all  these  senses  peace  is  the  happy  lot  of  those  whose 
minds  are  stayed  on  God.  2.  But  the  thing  especially  intended  here  seems  to 
be  composure  of  mind,  as  opposed  to  distraction  or  disquietude.  3.  This  may  be 
properly  termed,  perfect  peace,"  not  because  it  actually  excludes  every  degree 
of  disquietude  from  the  soul ;  nor,  as  if  in  the  measure  in  which  it  is  enjoyed, 
it  never  met  with  any  interruption ;  but  it  is  perfect  peace,  when  compared 
with  any  satisfaction  or  composure  of  mind  which  this  world,  or  anything  in 
it,  can  administer,  and  as  proceeding  from  Him  from  whom  cometh  every  good 
and  every  perfect  gift ;  as  being  the  best  preparative  for,  and  support  under, 
the  troubles  of  life,  and,  probably,  the  choicest  foretaste  that  can  be  communi- 
cated to  us  of  the  peace  of  God's  eternal  kingdom.  4.  This  blessing  will  be 
enjoyed,  this  peace  will  be  experienced  in  the  soul,  in  proportion  to  the  degree 
of  its  confidence  in  God.  \  III.  Enfobce  the  exhobtation  here  given.  "  Trust 
ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever  :  to  which  is  subjoined  the  encouraging  declaration, 
for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength."  Such  an  exhortation  as 
this  supposes  their  state  to  be  distressing  and  dangerous,  and  that  either  through 
ignorance  they  are  likely  to  betake  themselves  to  false  refuges,  or  through  fear 
may  be  deterred  from  venturing  upon  what  they  believe  to  be  the  true  one. 
1.  God  calls  upon  you  to  do  this.  2.  Whatever  your  wants  and  necessities  may 
be,  you  will  thu3  obtain  a  rich  and  full  supply  of  them.  3.  Take  the  precious 
promises  which  He  has  caused  to  be  recorded  for  this  purpose.  4.  Examples 
might  also  be  produced  from  Scripture,  in  abundance,  of  those  who  looked  unto 
Him  and  were  lightened.  (S.  Knight,  M.A.)  Peace  out  of  trust : — I.  An 
bxpbession  of  confidence  in  God.  It  is  characteristic  of  Jehovah — 1.  That 
He  seeks  the  trust  of  His  people.  Heathen  gods,  all  gods  that  are  the  mere 
creations  of  men's  minds  or  hands,  seek  the  service  of  things  ;  they  want  our 
gifts ;  they  claim,  not  the  man,  but  that  which  the  man  only  has.  Jehovah 
seeks  the  service  of  love  and  trust.  2.  That  He  rewards  the  trust  of  His  people. 
And  this  He  does— (1)  By  giving  them  the  perfect  peace,  which  is  inward  peace. 
(2)  By  giving  them  the  outward  peace  of  circumstances,  so  far  as  may  be  con- 
sistent with  higher  than  individual  ends.  If  we  can  see  that  the  true  issue  of 
the  discipline  of  life  is  character ;  then  we  shall  see  that  the  very  highest  reward 
God  can  give  us  is  that  soul-triumph  over  surrounding  circumstances,  that  soul- 
mastery  over  the  very  self,  which  goes  into  the  expressive  word  "  peace."  Out- 
ward things  are  to  us  according  as  we  are  within  us.  II.  An  appeal  to  thb 
people  fob  continuity  in  theib  tbust  in  God.  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for 
ever,"  &c.  We  cannot  keep  on  trusting  if  our  trust  is  in  things ;  for  the  "  fashion 
of  this  world  passeth  away."  We  cannot  keep  on  trusting  if  our  trust  is  in- 
man  ;  "  for  the  pain  of  living  is  our  disappointment  in  our  best-loved  friends." 
We  can  keep  on  trusting  in  God.  His  very  name  implies  a  basis  of  confidence. 
(Weekly  Pulpit.)  The  inhabitant  of  the  Bock  : — If  we  may  suppose  the  invoca- 
tion of  the  preceding  verses  to  be  addressed  to  the  watchers  at  the  gate  of  the 
strong  city,  it  is  perhaps  not  too  fanciful  to  suppose  that  the  invitation  in  my 
text  is  the  watchers'  answer,  pointing  the  way  by  which  men  may  pass  into  the 
city.     At  all  events,  I  take  it  as  by  no  means  accidental  that  immediately  upoa 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  467 

the  statement  of  the  Old  Testament  law  that  righteousness  alone  admits  to  the 
presence  of  God,  there  follows  so  clear  and  emphatic  an  anticipation  of  the  great 
New  Testament  Gospel  that  faith  is  the  condition  of  righteousness,  and  that 
immediately  after  hearing  that  only  "  the  righteous  nation  which  keepeth  the 
truth  "  can  enter  there,  we  hear  the  merciful  call,  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever." 
I.  The  insight  into  thb  true  nature  of  trust  or  faith  given  by  the  word 
employed  herb.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  expression  here  rendered  "  to 
trust  "  is  to  lean  upon  anything.  And  that  is  the  trust  of  the  Old  Testament ; 
the  faith  of  the  New.  II.  The  steadfast  pbaoefulness  of  trust.  (See 
R.V.  margin.)  It  is  the  steadfast  mind,  steadfast  because  it  trusts,  which  God 
keeps  in  the  deepest  peace  that  is  expressed  by  the  reduplication  of  the  word. 
And  if  we  break  up  that  complex  thought  into  its  elements,  it  just  comes  to  this — 
1.  Trust  makes  steadfastness.  No  man  can  steady  his  life  except  by  clinging 
to  a  holdfast  without  himself.  2.  The  steadfast  mind  is  rewarded  in  that  it  is 
kept  of  God.  The  real  fixity  and  solidity  of  a  human  character  comes  more 
surely  and  fully  through  trust  in  God  than  by  any  other  means ;  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  true  that,  in  order  to  receive  the  full  blessed  effects  of  trust  into  our 
characters  and  lives,  we  must  persistently  and  doggedly  keep  on  in  the  attitude 
of  confidence.  3.  Then,  still  further,  this  faithful,  steadfast  heart  and  mind, 
kept  by  God,  is  a  mind  filled  with  deepest  peace.  There  is  something  very 
beautiful  in  the  prophet's  abandoning  the  attempt  to  find  any  adjective  of  quality 
which  adequately  characterises  the  peace  of  which  he  has  been  speaking.  He 
falls  back  upon  the  expedient  which  is  the  confession  of  the  impotence  of  human 
speech  worthily  to  portray  its  subject  when  he  simply  says,  "  Thou  shalt  keep 
in  peace,  peace  .  .  .  because  he  trusteth  in  Thee."  The  reduplication  expresses 
the  depth,  the  completeness  of  the  tranquillity  which  flows  into  the  heart.  Such 
continuity,  wave  after  wave,  or  rather  ripple  after  ripple,  is  possible  even  for 
us.  For  the  possession  of  this  deep,  unbroken  peace  does  not  depend  on  the 
absence  of  conflict,  of  distraction,  trouble,  or  sorrow,  but  on  the  presence  of  God. 
III.  The  worthiness  of  the  Divine  name  to  evoke,  and  the  power  of  thb 
Divine  character  to  reward  the  trust.  "  In  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  ever- 
lasting strength."  1.  The  words  feebly  rendered  in  the  A.V.,  "  everlasting 
strength,"  are  literally  "  the  Rock  of  Ages  "  ;  and  this  verse  is  the  source  of 
that  hallowed  figure  which,  by  one  of  the  greatest  of  our  English  hymns,  is  made 
familiar  and  immortal  to  all  English-speaking  people.  2.  But  there  is  another 
peculiarity  about  the  words,  and  that  is  that  here  we  have,  for  one  of  the  only 
two  times  in  which  the  expression  occurs  in  Scripture,  the  great  name  of  Jehovah 
reduplicated.  "  In  Jah  Jehovah  is  the  Rock  of  Ages."  In  the  former  verse 
the  prophet  had  given  up  in  despair  the  attempt  to  characterise  the  peace  which 
God  gave,  and  fallen  back  upon  the  expedient  of  naming  it  twice  over.  In  this 
verse,  with  similar  eloquence  of  reticence,  he  abandons  the  attempt  to  describe 
or  characterise  that  great  name,  and  once  more,  in  adoration,  contents  himself 
with  twice  taking  it  upon  his  lips,  in  order  to  impress  what  he  cannot  express, 
the  majesty  and  the  sufficiency  of  that  name.  What,  then,  is  the  force  of  that 
name  ?  (1)  Jehovah,  in  its  literal  grammatical  signification,  puts  emphasis  upon 
the  absolute,  underived,  and  therefore  unlimited,  unconditioned,  unchangeable, 
eternal  being  of  God.  "  I  am  that  I  am."  In  that  name  is  the  Rock  of  Ages. 
(2)  That  mighty  name,  by  its  place  in  the  history  of  revelation,  conveys  to  us 
still  further  thoughts,  for  it  is  the  name  of  the  God  who  entered  into  covenant 
with  His  ancient  people,  and  remains  bound  by  His  covenant  to  bless  us.  3.  The 
metaphor  needs  no  expansion.  We  understand  that  it  conveys  the  idea  of 
unchangeable  defence.  IV.  The  summons  to  trust.  We  know  not  whose 
voice  it  is  that  is  heard  in  the  last  words  of  my  text,  but  we  know  to  whose  ears 
it  is  addressed.  It  is  to  all.  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever."  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Peace  : — Peace  has  ever  been  praised  and  desired  by  the  majority  of 
mankind.  It  is  generally  supposed  to  be  near,  to  be  possible  ;  but  it  moves  before 
or  follows  men  like  the  shadow  of  themselves,  which  cannot  overtake  them,  which 
they  cannot  overtake.  The  schoolboy  sees  it  in  release  from  his  lessons  and  hia 
school.  The  man  of  mid-life  sees  it  in  his  childhood,  and  by  the  fireside  of  an 
honoured  successful  age.  But  when  old  he  looks  back  with  regret  to  the  appetite 
for  repose  which  accompanied  an  active  life.  There  is  no  more  peace  in  twilight 
than  at  noon.  In  the  morning  we  eay,  "  Would  God  it  were  evening  "  ;  and  in  the 
evening,  "  Would  God  it  were  morning."  I.  There  is  much  peace  which  is 
imperfect.     1.  There  is  the  peace  of  ignorance.     The  child  plays  by  the  coffin 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

of  its  mother.  The  peasant  fool  stands  quietly  beneath  the  tree  which  draws 
the  lightning  stroke.  But  this  peace,  we  need  not  stop  long  to  see,  passes  away. 
We  learn,  our  eyes  are  opened,  and  we  regret  or  shudder  at  our  insensibility. 
2.  There  is  the  peace  of  corruption.  Dead  bodies  make  no  stir,  ask  no  questions, 
have  no  doubts.  Dead  minds  are  quiet  and  peaceable  enough.  Their  peace  is 
that  of  quiet,  painless  stagnation  ;  but  we  cannot  call  it  perfect.  3.  There  is  the 
dependent  peace :  when  we  leave  other  people  to  think  and  act  for  us.  This  is 
pleasing  enough  till  they  make  some  fatal  irremediable  mistake.  It  is  bad  enough 
to  lose  a  few  bank  notes ;  but  it  is  a  far  more  serious  thing  to  find  that  your 
conscience-keeper  has  embezzled  your  soul.  4.  There  is  the  peace  of  success. 
When  the  action  is  over  then  comes  reaction.  The  peace  it  gives  is  not  perfeot. 
It  needs  patching  and  polishing  as  soon  as  it  is  obtained.  It  entails  labour  and 
involves  additional  anxiety.  5.  All  these  kinds  of  mock  peace  die  out,  or  break 
down,  or  run  dry.  If  not  that,  they  hinder  our  being  what  we  might  be ;  they 
keep  us  down.  TL  What  we  associate  most  with  the  wobd  peace.  It  is 
the  opposite  to  war.  It  is  freedom  from  disorder,  disturbance.  But  it  is  by  no 
means  idleness.  The  time  of  peace  is  the  time  of  work.  The  surest  advance 
and  most  abundant  plenty  may  be  made  in  the  time  of  the  profoundest  peace. 
There  is  most  life  where  there  is  least  disorder.  It  is  thus  in  nature.  What  can 
be  more  quiet  than  a  field  of  wheat  on  a  still  summer  day  ?  and  yet  an  important 
work  is  going  on  then  ;  there  God  is  making  bread  for  man.  Again,  what  suggests 
more  repose  than  a  silent,  cloudless  night  ?  And  yet  the  globe  on  which  we 
stand,  and  the  brightest  of  the  stars  we  see,  and  which  seem  so  still,  are  really 
whirling  through  space  at  a  prodigious  speed.  Their  perfect  peace  is  perfect 
fulfilment  of  the  will  of  God.  III.  Is  there  such  a  thing  for  us — peace  which 
can  never  be  destroyed,  never  die  out  ?  "  Thou  shalt  keep  him  in  perfect 
peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee."  On  Thee — there  is  the  point.  On  God 
Himself.  We  are  not  the  masters  of  this  world,  or  time.  We  can  neither  make 
nor  destroy  it.  By  quietly  doing  our  own  work  we  do  our  share,  and  the  Great 
Master  will  look  after  us  and  the  rest.  Peace  is  found  only  along  with  Him,  by 
staying  upon  Him.  Those  who  do  the  work  He  plainly  sets  them  need  not  be 
distressed  about  the  main  chance  and  the  great  end  and  course  of  life.  The 
sailor  who  has  confidence  in  his  captain  and  pilot  is  at  peace ;  he  knows  the  ship 
is  in  good  hands.  So  if  we  would  believe  that  we  were  in  good  hands  ourselves, 
how  full  of  comfort  we  should  be.  An  explorer  is  searching  for  a  new  country 
He  sails  over  the  seas,  here  and  there,  in  vain  ;  he  is  deceived  by  low-lying  clouds 
which  look  like  land,  but  are  dispersed  as  he  approaches  them.  At  last,  after 
many  disappointments,  he  spies  the  shore,  sails  to  it,  finds  he  is  not  mistaken 
this  time ;  he  sets  his  foot  upon  the  beach,  he  sees  new  trees,  animals,  plants. 
He  returns  to  his  ship,  night  comes  and  he  can  perceive  nothing.  Neverthe- 
less the  discovery  is  made ;  the  sought-for  land  is  found.  There  is  an  end  to 
his  surmises,  expectations,  guesses,  watchings.  The  land  is  found,  though 
he  leave  or  lose  sight  of  it.  He  has  fulfilled  his  object ;  it  is  a  fact ;  it  is 
there.  So  the  man  who  has  been  beating  about  in  vain  in  the  waves  of  this 
troublesome  world,  looking  for  peace,  steering  this  way  and  that,  but  has  at 
last  laid  hold  of  the  great  immovable  fact  that  peace  is  in  God,  and 
not  to  be  got  from  himself  or  his  fellow-creatures,  may  often  seem  solitary 
and  disturbed ;  but  he  has  made  the  discovery,  and  all  is  well.  (H.  Jones, 
M.A.)  The  sustaining  power  of  faith  : — I.  The  source  op  faith  is  Divine. 
•'  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever  :  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength." 
1.  Faith  is  Divine  in  its  inception.  God  is  author  and  object  thereof.  2.  Faith 
is  Divine  in  its  inspiration.  Trust  in  God  is  not  a  single  act,  but  a  condition 
of  restfulness.  There  are  occasions  when  special  acts  are  called  forth,  but  these 
are  the  trials  of  faith.  When  Abraham  was  called  to  offer  up  Isaac  on  Moriah, 
God  proved  him  there.  II.  The  seat  of  faith  is  mental.  "  Whose  mind  (or 
thought)  is  stayed  on  Thee."  Mr.  Ruskin  says,  "  The  power,  whether  of  painter 
or  poet,  to  describe  rightly  what  he  calls  an  ideal  thing  depends  upon  its  being 
to  him  not  an  ideal  but  a  real  thing.  No  man  ever  did,  or  ever  will,  work  well 
but  either  from  actual  sight  or  sight  of  faith."  The  sight  of  faith  is  no  less  keen, 
or  complete,  or  perfect,  than  actual  sight.  There  are  many  thoughts  which 
agitate  the  human  heart — faith  is  the  solution  of  these.  1.  One  thought  is  our 
acceptance  before  God.  We  are  perplexed  by  many  aspects  of  this  all-important 
subject.  Take  one  of  them — how  can  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  atone  for  our 
eina  T     Faith  alone  can  make  the  matter  plain.     How  is  it  done  1     By  taking 


chap,  xxvr.]  ISAIAH.  469 

the  mind  to  God  to  be  saved  by  the  acceptance  of  this  great  truth.  Faith  never 
Bays,  How  is  it  ?  but,  Let  it  be.  God  Himself  is  the  solution  of  the  difficulty. 
2.  Thoughts  concerning  our  guidance  in  life.  We  are  the  creatures  of  circum- 
stances, and  often  fail  to  see  their  bearing.  Faith  brings  forth  tranquillising 
influences,  and  speaks  with  firmness.  "  Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in 
Him."  All  wrongs  will  be  avenged.  All  stolen  possessions  will  be  restored. 
Therefore,  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow :  He  who  measures  the  minutes  fills 
them  with  mercies.  III.  The  influence  of  faith  is  sustaining.  "  Thou 
wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  thought  is  stayed  on  Thee."  1.  Faith  is 
our  strength  in  duty.  To  do  the  right  is  not  always  easy.  We  are  often  tempted 
to  do  as  other  people  do,  and  sometimes  we  are  chided  because  we  do  not  follow 
the  way  of  the  world.  Whatever  may  be  the  temptation  to  do  wrong,  or  what- 
ever may  be  the  adverse  criticism  for  doing  right,  trust  in  God  will  sustain  us 
in  the  effort.  2.  Faith  is  our  stay  in  trouble.  3.  Faith  is  our  prospect  in  death. 
Charles  Wesley  said,  "  Satisfied  !  Satisfied  !  "  Benjamin  Abbot  said,  "  I  see 
Heaven  opening  out  before  me."  Baron  Humboldt  was  full  of  peace,  and  said, 
"  How  sweet  these  rays ;  they  beckon  me  up  to  Heaven."  Robert  Wilkinson 
exclaimed,  "  The  lovely  beauty  !  the  happiness  of  paradise."  Mrs.  Hemans 
bade  this  world  adieu  by  saying,  "  The  visions  cannot  be  told ;  the  mountain- 
tops  are  gleaming  from  peak  to  peak."  We  believe  in  the  same  Saviour.  God 
will  be  with  us  in  the  person  of  the  Good  Shepherd  to  lead  us  safely  home. 
Why  do  the  gracious  impressions  received  by  many,  while  listening  to  the 
Gospel,  die  out  ?  Because  they  are  not  sustained  by  faith.  (T.  Daviea,  M.A.) 
The  source,  of  true  peace  : — I.  A  state  of  mind  to  be  described.  "  Whose  mind  is 
stayed  on  Thee."  This  is  an  act  that  includes  in  it — 1.  A  renunciation  of  depend- 
ence on  the  creature.  2.  The  exercise  of  filial  dependence  on  God.  3.  This 
is  a  frame  of  mind  exercised  on  evangelical  principles.  It  is  the  shadow  of  that 
throne  where  the  Saviour  appears  as  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  it  beneath  which 
true  faith  causes  us  to  repose.  II.  A  gracious  assurance  to  be  considered. 
"  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace."  This  does  not  refer  to  external  peace, 
but  to  mental  peace  and  serenity  in  trying  circumstances  ;  and  this  is  very  great. 
1.  Reflect  on  the  Author  of  it.  "  Thou  wilt," — the  very  Being  on  whom  the 
soul  reposes,  who  is  the  Lord  God  all-sufficient.  2.  Consider  the  extent  of  this 
peace.  As  the  Redeemer  once  said  to  all  the  elements  of  nature  that  were  con- 
vulsed, "  Peace,  be  still ;  and  there  was  a  great  calm  "  ;  thus  He  speaks  to  all 
the  agitated  and  perturbed  powers  of  the  human  mind.  III.  An  intimate  con- 
nection to  be  established.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind 
is  stayed  on  Thee ;  because  he  trusteth  in  Thee."  This  connection  is  established — 
1.  By  the  dictates  of  reason.  It  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  he  who  reposes 
on  a  rock  should  feel  himself  immovable.  2.  In  the  promise  of  Scripture.  3.  In 
the  experience  that  trust  in  man  has  often  been  deceived  ;  but  the  benefits  of 
having  the  mind  reposed  on  the  infinite  and  eternal  God  can  be  attested  by 
thousands.  (C.  Gilbert.)  Confidence  in  God  composing  the  mind: — I.  What 
we  are  to  understand  by  staying  the  mind  on  God.  It  simply  means  rely- 
ing upon  Him  or  trusting  in  Him.  II.  This  staying  of  the  mind  on  God  keeps 
it  in  peace.  1.  This  alone  can  calm  the  mind  when  convinced  of  sin,  and  search- 
ing in  dreadful  distress  for  pardon.  2.  This  confidence  also  calms  the  mind  under 
delays.  3.  This  confidence  composes  the  mind  in  the  events  of  life,  and  this 
is  the  thing  principally  intended.  III.  The  peace  that  flows  from  this  trust 
in  God  is  said  to  be  perfect.  It  is  not  indeed  absolutely  so,  as  if  it  were  incap- 
able of  addition;  but  it  is  so — 1.  Comparatively.  What  is  every  other  peace 
to  this  ?  What  is  the  delusion  of  the  Pharisee,  the  stupidity  and  carelessness 
of  the  sinner,  the  corn  and  wine  of  the  worldling — what  is  everything  else,  com- 
pared with  this  peace  ?  2.  In  relation  to  this  confidence.  It  is  true  this  peace 
rises  and  falls  ;  but  it  is  only  because  this  confidence  varies.  (W.  Jay.)  Peact 
the  result  of  confidence  in  God : — I.  The  blessing  herb  described.  "  Thou 
wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace."  We  take  it  for  granted  that  the  prophet  is 
referring  to  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel.  Christ  is  called,  by  this  same  prophet, 
the  Prince  of  Peace ;  and  apart  from  Him,  true  peace  of  mind  can  never  be 
attained.  1.  The  word  peace  at  once  suggests  the  cessation  of  hostilities.  It 
is  true  there  never  was  any  hostility  in  the  mind  t  f  God  towards  man.  But 
when  we  look  at  the  aspect  of  man  towards  God,  we  see  him  in  an  attitude  of 
lebellion.  It  became  necessary  that  some  means  should  be  adopted  by  which 
his  enmity   might   be   destroyed,   and   reconciliation   effected.     The   wondrous 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvi 

plan,  devised  in  the  mind  of  God  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  purpose,  waa 
the  sacrifice  of  His  own  dear  Son,  who  thus  became  our  Mediator  between  God 
and  man.  2.  The  peace  which  God  bestows  arises  not  merely  from  a  conscious- 
ness of  pardon  and  restoration  to  the  Divine  favour,  it  springs  further  from  the 
calming  influence  which  He  exerts  on  the  mind  by  the  transforming  of  the  affections 
from  things  earthly  to  things  heavenly.  3.  But  the  peace  which  God  bestows 
is  a  "  perfect  peace  "  ;  by  which  we  understand  peace,  ever-flowing  like  a  river, 
broad,  deep,  and  calm, — peace,  including  all  spiritual  blessings,  and  available 
under  every  circumstance  of  Christian  trial.  4.  Mark  the  expression,  "  Thou 
wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace."  It  is  not  a  mere  transitory  feeling,  a  sun-flash 
on  the  storm  presently  to  be  lost  behind  the  cloud,  but  an  abiding  principle, 
which  God  keeps  for  His  people  and  in  His  people,  that  they  may  be  preserved 
from  dismay  whatever  may  befall  them.  II.  The  means  f  attaining  it. 
Who  is  the  happy  possessor  of  this  inestimable  blessing  of  peace  ?  He  whose 
mind  is  stayed  upon  God,  because  he  trusteth  in  Him.  We  cannot  take  a  single 
step  in  religion  without  trust,  or  faith.  As  this  trust  is  essential  to  the  first 
acquirement  of  peace,  so  is  it  equally  necessary  to  its  continued  possession.  It 
is  enjoyed  only  so  long  as  the  mind  is  "  stayed  "  upon  God.  But  all  men  have 
not  peace ;  and  some  never  will  have  peace.  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my 
God,  to  the  wicked."  There  is  no  peace  to  them  who  stay  their  minds  on  the 
world,  on  worldly  objects  and  worldly  pleasures.  There  is  no  peace  to  them 
who  keep  away  from  Christ.  ( 17.  J.  Brock,  B.A.)  Trust  in  God  brings  peace  : — 
That  almost  every  man  is  disappointed  in  his  search  after  happiness  is  apparent 
from  the  clamorous  complaints  which  are  always  to  be  heard ;  from  the  rest- 
less discontent  which  is  hourly  to  be  observed,  and  from  the  incessant  pursuit 
of  new  objects,  which  employ  almost  every  moment  of  every  man's  life.  As 
men  differ  in  age  or  disposition,  they  are  exposed  to  different  delusions  in  this 
important  inquiry.  I.  What  is  meant  by  this  trust  in  God,  to  which  perfect 
peace  is  promised  ?  Trust,  when  it  is  used  on  common  occasions,  implies  a 
kind  of  resignation  to  the  honesty  or  abilities  of  another.  Our  trust  in  God 
ought  to  differ  from  every  other  trust,  as  infinity  differs  from  an  atom.  It  ought 
to  transcend  every  other  degree  of  confidence,  as  its  object  is  exalted  above  every 
degree  of  created  excellence.  We  know  that  He  is  infinite  in  wisdom,  in  power, 
and  in  goodness  ;  that  therefore  He  designs  the  happiness  of  all  His  creatures ; 
that  He  cannot  but  know  the  proper  means  by  which  this  end  may  be  obtained  ; 
and  that,  in  the  use  of  these  means,  as  He  cannot  be  mistaken,  because  He  is 
omniscient,  so  He  cannot  be  defeated,  because  He  is  almighty.  He  therefore 
that  trusts  in  God  will  no  longer  be  distracted  in  his  search  after  happiness  ; 
for  he  will  find  it  in  a  firm  belief,  that  whatever  evils  are  suffered  to  befall  him, 
will  finally  contribute  to  his  felicity.  II.  How  this  trust  is  to  be  attained. 
There  is  a  fallacious  and  precipitate  trust  in  God — a  trust  which,  as  it  is  not 
founded  upon  God's  promises,  will,  in  the  end,  be  disappointed.  Trust  in  God, 
that  trust  to  which  perfect  peace  is  promised,  is  to  be  obtained  only  by  repent- 
ance, obedience,  and  supplication.  (John  Taylor,  LL.D.)  The  source  of  peace: 
— In  considering  the  great  event  of  the  Saviour's  first  advent,  there  is  one  cir- 
cumstance of  which  we  should  never  lose  sight — the  peculiar  character  in  which 
He  then  came  to  earth.  He  was  pleased  to  veil  His  more  awful  attributes  behind 
His  humanity ;  and,  instead  of  showing  Himself  as  our  future  Judge,  to  reveal 
Himself  as  our  "  Prince  of  Peace."  Hence  this  is  the  peculiar  characteristic 
of  the  Gospel,  that  in  looking  to  it  the  sinner  finds  it  to  be  a  message  of  peace. 
And  not  only  this,  but  he  finds,  as  he  proceeds  in  the  knowledge  of  "  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus,"  that  whilst  glory  is  the  prospect  which  it  holds  out  for  eternity, 
in  time  it  corresponds  with  what  might  well  be  called  the  Redeemer's  dying 
legacy  to  His  Church :  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  My  peace  I  give  unto  you : 
not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you."  I.  What  is  meant  by  having  our 
mind  stayed  on  God  ?  Nothing  is  more  evident  than  the  fact  that  man  always 
needs  some  one  on  whom  to  lean.  But  there  are  cases  in  which  it  must  appear 
peculiarly  necessary  to  stay  our  minds  on  the  Lord,  because  there  are  cases  in 
which  man  can  absolutely  do  nothing  to  help  us.  Look  at  the  various  sorrows, 
the  various  doubts,  the  various  fears  by  which  we  are  liable  to  be  assailed,  and 
say  whether  any  but  a  Divine  power  can  assist  us  there.  Our  natural  state  being 
enmity  with  God,  we  are,  whilst  still  unconverted,  more  inclined  to  forget  Him 
or  flee  from  Him,  than  to  draw  near  to  Him  and  depend  on  Him  for  assistance 
or  protection.     But  the  believer  has  been  led   by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  see  how 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  471 

ruinous  is  his  alienation  from  God.  He  has  therefore  turned  to  the  God  against 
whom  he  had  sinned  ;  he  has  entrusted  himself  to  the  mercy  and  faithfulness 
of  God ;  and,  having  done  so,  he  feels  that  it  is  a  little  matter  to  trust  to  Him 
for  support  and  comfort  in  that  conflict  here,  which  a  few  years  or  hours  may 
change  into  the  triumphs  of  eternity.  The  more  advanced  he  is,  the  more  humble 
will  he  be  ;  and  in  the  hour  of  trial,  instead  of  depending  on  his  former  attain- 
ments, or  looking  to  be  upheld  by  his  past  experience,  he  will  continue,  at  each 
fresh  assault  of  his  enemy,  to  look  for  strength  according  to  his  day.     II.  The 

BLESSING  PROMISED  TO  HIM  WHOSE  MIND  IS  THUS  STAYED  ON  THE  LOED.      "  Perfect 

peace."  1.  Peace  with  God  (Rom.  v.  1).  2.  Peace  of  conscience.  3.  Peace 
with  the  world.  I  do  not  say  that  the  world  has  peace  with  him.  But  the 
Christian  has  received  the  spirit  of  gentleness  and  love.  {It.  M.  Kyle,  B.A.) 
Peace  the  perfect  and  assured  portion  of  the  believer  : — There  is  a  sweetness  in  the 
very  word  "  peace  " ;  it  fills  the  mind  with  a  number  of  pleasing  thoughts,  and 
•ven  by  its  very  sound  seems  to  convey  something  which  attracts  and  charms 
us.  But  if  the  mere  sound  of  peace  be  thus  pleasing,  how  much  more  so  must 
be  the  substance.  Peace  is  what  every  one  may  be  said  to  prize,  and  to  be  in 
search  of.  Why  is  it  so  seldom  found  ?  Because  we  are  always  seeking  peace, 
and  saying  peace,  where  there  is  no  peace;  we  seek  it  anywhere,  and  in  any- 
thing, rather  than  in  Him,  and  from  Him,  who  alone  can  give  it.  I.  The  character 
brought  before  us  in  the  text  is  that  of  the  man  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  God. 
The  word  "  stayed  "  denotes — 1.  Eiunness.  It  is  that  kind  of  leaning  or  resting 
which  shows  full  confidence  in  the  strength  of  the  foundation  which  has  been 
chosen.  2.  Calmness  and  quietness.  3.  An  unchanging  trust ;  a  resolution 
of  the  soul  to  abide  by  its  choice  under  all  circumstances ;  a  fixed  adherence 
to  its  God.  n.  The  blessing  promised  and  secured  to  those  to  whom  the 
character  really  belongs.  "  Thou  shalt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace."  1.  The 
blessing  itself:  "perfect  peace."  Perfect,  because — (1)  Present.  He  who  gives 
it  is  about  our  path  and  about  our  bed.  (2)  Future.  (3)  Eternal.  2.  The  way 
in  which  this  blessing  is  said  to  be  secured  to  every  believer.  The  Lord,  on  whom 
his  mind  is  stayed,  will  keep  him  in  it.  III.  The  gracious  fulfilment  of  His 
Word  in  the  case  of  him  whose  remains  have  so  lately  gone  down  into  silence. 
(F.  Lear,  B.D.)  Peace  for  the  careworn  : — In  the  description  given  of  the  state 
of  the  ungodly  in  Rom.  iii.,  the  apostle  Paul  says :  "  The  way  of  peace  have 
they  not  known."  There  are  many  ways  in  this  world — ways  of  sin,  of  disappoint- 
ment, of  pleasure,  of  death,  of  misery,  but  beside  all  these  there  is  "  the  way 
of  peace."  I.  The  person  who  is  kept  in  peace.  He  is  a  person  whose  mind 
is  stayed  on  God,  and  who  trusts  in  God.  A  man's  self,  and  sin,  and  pleasure, 
and  false  religion,  and  vain  hopes  are  every  one  of  them  troubled  waves  in  one 
common  ocean  of  disquietude,  and  no  soul  can  stay  itself  upon  these,  though 
many  souls  have  sought  to  be  stayed  upon  them.  Mark  the  mighty  Rock  on 
which  such  an  one  lieth  down  and  findeth  repose.  That  rock  is  God.  Yet  it 
is  a  most  certain  fact  that  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire,  out  of  Christ.  Ah,  you 
say,  some  of  you,  "  I  trust  in  God,"  but  you  know  not  the  God  you  trust  in.  What 
is  the  sole  object  of  faith  1  It  is  the  God-man.  II.  The  power  which  keeps 
the  believer  in  peace.  (Not  the  power  of  his  own  faith,  as  some  would  think 
at  first  sight ;  not  the  power  of  his  own  effort  struggling  to  obtain  confidence, 
as  some  would  suppose  ;  but  the  power  of  God.]  III.  The  peace  in  which  such 
a  person  is  kept.  It  is  called  here  "  perfect /peace."  It  is  like  the  Redeemer 
with  His  head  on  the  pillow,  with  His  eyes  closed,  with  His  mind  in  conscious 
repose  and  sleep,  in  the  midst  of  the  wild  storm  at  night  upon  the  lake  of  Galilee, 
when  the  waves  beat  upon  the  trembling  vessel,  and  the  clouds  rolled  over  head, 
threatening  to  beat  the  waves  still  higher,  and  engulf  them  all.  He  slept  secure 
and  peaceful  amidst  the  storm.  So  does  the  soul  of  the  believer,  afterwards, 
that  stayeth  itself  upon  God.  Upon  what  lay  that  peaceful  head  of  Jesus  but 
on  the  unseen  arm  and  bosom  of  God  ?  Men  said  of  Christ  mockingly,  "  He 
trusted  in  God."  He  did  trust  in  God,  as  the  most  exalted  believer,  and  far 
more  than  the  most  exalted  believer ;  and  in  that  simplicity  of  faith,  amidst 
contending  elements  He  was  kept  in  peace,  sleeping  amidst  the  storm.  So  with 
the  believer.  And  he  that  thus  trusteth  in  God  findeth  not  only  that  peace 
in  life ;  for  death  to  him,  what  is  it  ?  It  is  as  a  peaceful  sunset.  (H.  G.  Guinness.) 
Hindrances  to  a  mind  stayed  on  God : — There  are  two  hindrances  to  a  steady 
mind.  1.  The  loving  of  unlawful  things.  2.  The  loving  of  lawful  things 
with  inordinate  affection.     (J.  Summerfield,  M.A.)        Perfect  peace: — I.   Thb 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

promised  gift.  "  Peace."  Not  freedom  from  sorrow,  not  assured  prosperity, 
not  a  certainty  of  success,  but  inward  tranquillity,  ease  of  heart,  without  which 
even  prosperity  would  be  a  burden.  Not  the  simulated  contentment  of  indif- 
ference. Not  the  cynical  self-complacency  of  moral  blindness.  Not  the  dull 
stupefaction  of  despair.  There  is  peace — 1.  Amid  personal  anxieties.  These 
come  to  God's  people  as  well  as  to  the  world.  But  the  effects  they  produce  in 
each  are  very  different.  2.  Amid  the  contests  of  the  world.  The  nations  are 
at  strife.  Good  is  at  war  with  eviL  The  noblest  institutions  are  threatened. 
Lawlessness  stalks  forth  threatening  all  that  is  true.  But  the  Christian  has 
peace  in  his  dwellings.  3.  Amid  the  struggles  of  sin  and  the  assaults  of  the  evil 
one.  The  remorse  of  sin,  the  anxieties  of  sin,  all  disturb  the  soul,  but  here  is 
peace.  4.  In  the  conflicting  emotions  of  sickness,  the  pain  of  death,  and  the 
realities  of  a  future  world.  II.  The  condition  exacted.  Faith.  "  Whose 
mind  is  stayed  on  Thee."  This  act  assures  us  of  the  promise — 1.  Because  it 
is  the  carrying  out  of  the  Divine  requirement.  It  is  God's  own  condition,  God's 
own  plan,  and  unless  that  is  complied  with  no  man  can  hope  to  obtain  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  promise.  2.  Because  it  is  in  itself  a  calming,  sanctifying  act.  The 
man  who  casts  all  his  cares  upon  God,  feels  no  responsibility  resting  on  himself. 
He  who  leaves  his  sins  on  Christ  ceases  to  trouble  about  the  consequences  of  those 
sins,  so  far  as  he  himself  is  concerned.  The  man  who  leaves  all  events  in  the 
hands  of  One  who  knows  all,  feels  that  whatever  happens  all  is  for  the  best.  How 
can  such  feel  anything  but  peace  ?  The  great  thing  wanting  is  the  power  to 
place  such  unreserved  confidence  on  an  unseen  Being.  III.  The  safe  assurance. 
Thou  wilt  keep."  Here  is  a  sure  ground  of  confidence — the  promise  and  power 
of  the  Author  and  Ruler  of  the  universe.  "  Thou."  1.  Here  is  the  source  of 
all  strength ;  He  is  therefore  able.  2.  Here  is  the  source  of  all  love ;  He  is  there- 
fore willing.  3.  He  is  the  supplier  of  all  comfort,  the  refuge  of  all  the  oppressed. 
If  peace  exists  at  all,  surely  it  can  be  obtained  from  Him.  (Homrlist.)  The 
song  of  a  city  and  the  pearl  of  peace  : — I.  What  is  this  perfect  peace  ?  1.  This 
"  peace,  peace  "  means,  an  absence  of  all  war,  and  of  all  alarm  of  war.  2.  This 
perfect  peace  reigns  over  all  things  within  its  circle.  3.  No  perfect  peace  can 
be  enjoyed  unless  every  secret  cause  of  fear  is  met  and  removed.  4.  Peace  in 
a  city  would  not  be  consistent  with  the  stoppage  of  commerce.  Where  there 
is  perfect  peace  with  God,  commerce  prospers  between  the  soul  and  Heaven. 
Good  men  commune  with  the  good,  and  thereby  their  sense  of  peace  increases. 
If  you  have  perfect  peace,  you  have  fellowship  with  all  the  saints  ;  personal 
jealousies,  sectarian  bitternesses,  and  unholy  emulations  are  all  laid  aside.  5.  It 
consists  in  rest  of  the  soul ;  a  perfect  resignation  to  the  Divine  will ;  sweet  con- 
fidence in  God ;  a  blessed  contentment.  6.  It  means  freedom  from  everything 
like  despondency.  7.  There  we  are  kept  from  everything  like  rashness.  II.  Who 
alone  can  give  us  this  peace  and  preserve  it  in  us  ?  How  does  the  Lord 
keep  His  people  in  peace  ?  1.  By  a  special  operation  upon  the  mind  in  the  time 
of  trial  (ver.  12).  2.  By  the  operation  of  certain  considerations  intended  by 
His  infinite  wisdom  to  work  in  that  manner.  3.  By  the  distinct  operations  of  His 
providence.  III.  Who  shall  obtain  this  peace?  The  whole  of  our  being  is 
stayed  upon  God  in  order  to  this  peace.    IV.  Why  is  it  that  the  Lord  wdll 

KEEP  THAT  MAN   IN   PERFECT  PEACE   WHO   STAYS  HIMSELF   ON   HlM  ?      "  Because 

he  trusteth  in  Thee."  That  means  surely — 1.  That  in  faith  there  is  a  tendency 
to  create  and  nourish  peace.  2.  His  faith  is  rewarded  by  peace.  3.  This  peace 
comes  out  of  faith  because  it  is  faith's  way  of  proclaiming  itself.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Peace  not  from  nature,  but  from  God  : — Man  alone  of  all  created  beings  of  whom 
we  know  anything  seems  strangely  out  of  harmony  with  the  circumstances  with 
which  he  is  surrounded,  and  the  conditions  of  his  existence.  Everything  around 
us,  and  much  within  us,  seems  specially  designed  to  militate  against  the  pos- 
sibility of  peace.  1.  If  man  is  to  be  at  peace,  why  does  he  hold  his  very  life, 
and  everything  else  that  he  values  best,  on  the  most  precarious  tenure  ?  The 
lower  animals  are  exposed  to  nothing  like  the  same  number  of  uncertainties ; 
they,  for  the  most  part,  live  out  their  own  appointed  span  of  existence,  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  their  incapacity  for  reflection  saves  them  those  gloomy  appre- 
hensions of  possible  disaster,  and  that  still  sadder  certain  anticipation  of  ultimate 
dissolution,  which  cast  so  dark  a  shadow  over  the  experience  of  man  just  because 
he  can  and  must  think.  Man's  affections  are  immeasurably  more  intense  than 
theirs,  and  yet  he  knows  what  they  do  not,  that  at  any  moment  he  may  be  robbed 
of  all  he  loves  most ;  thus  the  very  strength  of  his  affections  militates  against 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  473 

hie  peace.  They  seem  incapable  of  care,  and  what  they  need  usually  comes 
to  them  without  any  laborious  provision.  He  has  to  exercise  forethought  and 
skill,  and  to  expend  much  patient  labour  before  he  can  hope  to  obtain  so  much 
as  the  bare  necessaries  of  life  ;  and  even  then  he  cannot  make  sure  of  these,  owing 
to  the  apparent  caprices  of  nature.  2.  And  the  worst  of  it  is  that  these  are  not 
the  only  causes  of  our  disquiet  and  unrest.  There  are  disturbing  influences 
within  as  well  as  without.  Peace  is  broken  by  inward  war,  the  conflict  of  one 
element  of  our  nature  with  another.  3.  All  this  shows  us  that  either  we  are  to 
be  denied  even  such  a  peace  as  the  animals  apparently  enjoy,  and  that  their 
condition  in  this  respect  is  to  be  vastly  preferable  to  ours,  or  else  that  some  higher 
provision  must  have  been  made  for  inducing  this  feature  in  our  experience — 
some  provision  that  they  know  nothing  about,  and  that  does  not  lie  upon  th? 
surface  of  outward  nature  ;  some  provision  that  has  to  be  otherwise  made  known 
than  by  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  the  outer  world.  And  this  is  one  of  the 
most  cogent  amongst  many  proofs,  that  a  supernatural  revelation  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  supplement  the  phenomena  of  the  world  known  to  sense,  unless 
nature  is  to  be  found  guilty  of  strange  and  anomalous  inconsistencies.  The 
"  God  of  peace  "  knows  that  we  need  peace,  and  He  has  provided  it  for  us.  He 
who  has  blessed  His  lower  creatures  with  a  restful  uncarefulness,  that  renders 
existence  not  only  tolerable,  but  pleasant  to  them,  has  not  left  His  highest  creature 
to  be  the  victim  of  his  own  greatness,  and  to  be  tossed  about  aimlessly  upon 
a  sea  of  troubles,  until  at  last  the  inevitable  shipwreck  comes  upon  the  pitiless 
shoals  of  death.  Our  great  Father,  God,  dwells  Himself  in  an  atmosphere  of 
eternal  calm,  and  His  love  makes  Him  desire  to  share  His  peace  with  us — 
"the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding."  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
Peace  : — Let  us  ask,  What  is  it  that  hinders  peace  ?  in  order  that  we  may  better 
understand  the  things  that  belong  to  our  peace.  Here,  I  think,  we  shall  dis- 
cover three  distinct  sources  of  mental  disturbance  by  which  man  is  affected — 
three  distinct  and  terrible  discords  that  mar  the  harmony  of  human  life  until 
they  are  resolved  by  redemption.  Man  is,  to  begin  with,  oiiLiilpeaae- with  God  ; 
he  is,  in  consequence,  out  of  peace  with  nature,  or  the  order  of  things  with  which 
he  is  surrounded  ;  and,  in  the  third  place,  he  is  out  of  peace  with  himself.  These 
other  discords  which  break  in  upon  and  destroy  his  peace  are  dependent  upon 
and  spring  from  the  first.  It  is  because  man  is  not  at  peace  with  God  that  he 
finds  himself  at  war  with  nature,  and  the  victim  of  internal  feuds.  The  con- 
ditions of  his  existence  in  this  material  world  seem  of  a  kind  to  militate  against 
his  peace ;  but  this  is  only  so  when  they  are  viewed  apart  from  any  higher  and 
ultimate  object  to  which  they  may  be  designed  by  infinite  benevolence  to  con- 
tribute. Once  let  me  see  that  the  trials  and  uncertainties  of  life  are  intended 
to  enforce  upon  my  attention  the  true  character  of  my  present  position  and  its 
relations  to  the  future,  and  I  no  longer  quarrel  with  them.  I  confess  that  I  am 
a  stranger  and  a  sojourner,  and  I  see  wisdom  and  love  in  the  very  circumstances 
which  impress  this  upon  my  mind.  And  even  so  is  it  with  those  moral  discords 
that  disturb  my  peace  within.  They  spring  from  the  controversy  that  exists 
between  man  and  God.  Here  we  see  how  the  Gospel  is  adapted  to  the  deepest 
needs  of  the  human  heart,  and  how  skilfully  it  is  designed  to  deal  with  cause 
and  effect  in  their  own  proper  order  in  the  moral  sphere.  The  Gospel  is  primarily 
a  proclamation  of  peace  between  God  and  man,  a  revelation  of  a  wondrous  method 
of  reconciliation.  {H>id.)  The  way  of  peace : — The  text  contains  the  open 
Becret  of  a  spiritual  life,  which  is  peace,  and  discloses  the  sure  way  of  attaining 
It.  The  person  spoken  of  is  one  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  God.  The  man  has 
become  fixed  upon  this  centre,  and  he  cannot  be  moved  therefrom.  To  this 
man  God  is  omnipotent,  omniscient,  and  all-loving.  God  commands  his  entire 
nature.  There  is  a  prevalent  disposition  amongst  men  to  be  stayed  upon  them- 
selves, but  the  Scriptures  declare  that  "  he  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a 
fool."  A  self-centred  man  is  always  a  weak  man.  There  is  another  class  of 
men  who  desire  to  be  stayed  upon  riches.  But  God  says,  "  Labour  not  to  be 
rich,  for  riches  certainly  make  themselves  wings ;  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle 
towards  Heaven"  (1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10).  The  man  referred  to  in  the  text,  if  he 
have  money,  does  not  stay  himself  upon  it.  This  man  does  not  stay  himself 
on  his  fellow-men.  There  is  a  prevalent  disposition  amongst  men  to  pin  their 
confidence  to  some  human  sleeve,  and  when  that  proves  unfaithful,  as  it  often 
does,  such  people  are  thrown  into  confusion.  Peace  flows  alone  from  trust  in 
God.     But  faith  never  stands  alone.     Peace  never  stands  alone  in  the  heart 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvl 

of  man.  Trust  brings  peace,  but  it  brings  other  graces  besides.  Trust  does 
not  put  a  man  to  sleep.  It  does  not  alienate  a  man  from  the  source  of  power. 
It  does  not  scatter  a  man.  It  unites  him  and  unites  him  to  God.  It  animates 
him.  It  sets  him  in  motion.  The  ear  of  the  trusting  disciple  lies  close  to  the 
mouth  of  his  beloved  Master,  whose  words  are  the  sweetest  messages  that  can 
possibly  break  upon  his  consciousness.  The  feet  of  faitli  tremble  with  desire  to 
run  upon  the  errands  of  its  Lord.  Obedience  is  the  corollary  of  faith.  Without 
obedience,  peace  would  become  discord  in  the  soul.  Trust  stirs  us  to  industry 
and  success  in  prayer ;  it  makes  us  cheerful  and  faithful  in  obedience ;  it  makes 
us  patient  in  affliction;  it  makes  us  resolute  in  trials;  it  consoles  us  in  deser- 
tions ;  it  makes  us  fruitful  in  life,  and  triumphantly  victorious  in  death. 
(L.  R.  Foote,  D.D.)  Trust  gives  steadfastness  : — How  can  a  willow  be  stiffened 
into  an  iron  pillar  T  Only — if  I  might  use  such  a  violent  metaphor — when  it 
receives  into  its  substance  the  iron  particles  that  it  draws  from  the  soil  in  which 
it  is  rooted.  How  can  a  bit  of  thistledown  be  kept  motionless  amidst  the  tempest  T 
Only  by  being  glued  to  something  that  is  fixed.  What  do  men  do  with  light 
things  on  deck  when  the  ship  is  pitching  ?  Lash  them  to  a  fixed  point.  Lash 
yourselves  to  God  by  simple  trust,  and  then  you  will  partake  of  His  serene 
immutability  in  such  fashion  as  it  is  possible  for  the  creature  to  participate  in 
the  attributes  of  the  Creator.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Perfect  peace  a  medium 
of  revelation  : — When  you  have  a  really  calm  sea,  what  rare  things  the  placid 
waters  reveal !  Sculptured  coral,  whorled  shells,  iridescent  fish,  pearls — snow- 
flakes  of  the  deep  not  one  moment  white  but  white  for  ever,  gems  whose  strange 
fire  the  floods  cannot  quench,  with  glorious  plants  and  blossoms,  as  if  the  silver 
water  mirrored  the  flowers  of  Heaven  as  well  as  its  stars.  And  what  rare  things 
the  unstirred  sea  reflects  !  The  ambient  blue,  with  all  its  treasures  of  light  and 
colour ;  the  devious  coast,  with  all  its  fantasy  of  rock  forestry  and  mountain. 
But  let  one  ripple  pass  over  the  glassy  tide,  and  the  matchless  spectacle  is  sadly 
marred.  So  in  "  perfect  "  peace  we  realise  the  glory  of  our  own  being,  the  glory 
of  higher  worlds,  as  no  language  can  tell ;  but  the  first  ripple  of  passion,  or  care, 
or  doubt,  spoils  the  magic  of  the  picture  and  the  joy.  (If.  L.  Watkinson.)  The 
human  soul  needs  support : — When  the  mind  leans  for  strength  upon  itself  it 
cannot  be  at  peace.  Conflicting  thoughts  are  ever  passing  through  the  brain, 
and  we  need  something  solid  on  which  to  stay  ourselves.  The  mind  may  be 
compared  to  ivy,  which,  if  it  is  to  grow  vigorous,  needs  to  cling  to  an  upright 
support.  The  mind  may  be  also  likened  to  a  lever,  which  without  a  fulcrum 
is  almost  useless  ;  and  to  a  ladder,  which  when  placed  upright  will  fall,  but  when 
stayed  against  a  building  is  steady  and  strong  enough  to  bear  your  weight. 
(W.  Birch.)  Perfect  peace  in  peril: — A  respected  brother  in  the  ministry 
once  told  me  that  he  was  at  Villa  Franca  in  Italy,  when  a  shock  of  an  earthquake 
was  felt.  The  various  members  of  a  family  with  which  he  then  was  all  showed 
alarm  or  uneasiness  in  different  ways,  with  the  exception  of  one,  who  merely 
smiled  at  perceiving  the  effect  produced  on  them.  That  one  was  a  dying  man 
— in  about  a  week  after  he  died  in  the  Lord — and  he  knew  that  the  time  of  his 
departure  was  at  hand.  It  mattered  little  to  him  whether  he  were  summoned 
by  the  slow  wasting  hectic,  or  by  the  crush  of  an  earthquake.  His  mind  was 
stayed  on  the  Lord,  and  was  therefore  kept  in  perfect  peace  under  circumstances 
which  would  have  made  most  of  us  tremble.  (R.  M.  Kyle,  B.A.)  Member- 
ship in  the  ideal  city : — Ver.  3  (see  R.V.  margin)  states  the  conditions  of  member- 
ship in  the  ideal  Zion ;  a  "  steadfast  mind  "  may  share  the  "  peace  "  which  the 
ideal  city  is  to  enjoy.  {Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  Freedom  from  care: — A 
ship  is  made  to  go  in  the  water,  and  no  matter  how  deep  the  sea  nor  how  wild 
the  tempest,  all  goes  well  so  long  as  the  water  does  not  get  into  the  ship.  The 
problem  of  managing  a  ship  is,  not  to  keep  the  ship  out  of  the  water,  but  to  keep 
the  water  out  of  the  ship.  The  problem  of  true  Christian  living  is,  not  to  keep 
ourselves  out  of  cares  and  trials  and  temptations,  but  to  keep  the  cares  and  tempta- 
tions from  getting  into  our  souls.  (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)  God  between  the  soul 
and  circumstances  : — A  great  difference  comes  into  the  life  when,  instead  of  putting 
circumstances  between  ourselves  and  God,  we  put  God  between  ourselves  and 
circumstances.  Then  when  annoyance  and  fret,  unkind  speeches  and  unjust 
treatment,  worries  about  money  and  helpers  and  procedure  accumulate,  they 
seem  like  the  passage  of  crowds  up  and  down  a  London  thoroughfare,  whilst  we 
sit  quietly  within  and  pursue  our  work  behind  the  double  windows,  that  render 
the  room  almost  impervious  to  sound.     Happy  the  soul  which  has  learned  to 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  475 

live  inside  the  film  of  God's  invisible  protection,  poured  around  it  by  the  Spirit 
of  peace  !  (F .  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Mr.  Gladstone's  text : — It  is  said  that  Mr. 
Gladstone,  for  forty  years,  had  on  the  wall  of  his  bedroom  this  text :  "  Thou 
wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee."  These  were 
the  first  words  on  which  the  great  statesman's  eyes  opened  every  morning,  and 
they  were  one  of  the  sources  of  his  calm  strength.  {Sunday  School  Chronicle.) 
Trust  in  God  reasonable  : — George  M'Donald  says  somewhere  that  it  is  more 
absurd  to  trust  God  by  halves  than  it  is  not  to  believe  in  Him  at  all.  Stonewall 
Jackson's  faith  : — At  a  battle  in  the  American  Civil  War,  a  general  asked  Stonewall 
Jackson  how  it  was  he  kept  so  cool  while  the  bullets  literally  rained  about  him. 
Jackson  instantly  became  grave,  and  earnestly  answered,  My  religious  belief 
teaches  me  to  feel  as  safe  in  battle  as  in  bed.  God  has  fixed  the  time  of  my  death. 
I  do  not  concern  myself  about  that,  but  to  be  always  ready."  After  a  pause, 
he  added,  looking  his  questioner  in  the  face,  "  That  is  the  way  all  men  should 
live,  and  then  all  would  be  equally  brave."  Worry  : — Every  time  a  man  worries, 
physiologists  say,  he  changes  a  portion  of  his  nervous  system.  Sometimes  the 
change  is  serious ;  sometimes  it  is  permanent ;  sometimes  it  is  fatal.  What 
worry  does  for  the  body,  it  does  also  for  the  spirit.  It  is  the  destruction  of  energy, 
the  ruin  of  that  serenity  which  is  half  of  power,  and  the  fruitful  cause  of  a  large 
part  of  life's  failures.  The  bicycle  is  useful  because,  on  a  level  or  a  down  grade, 
it  relieves  a  man  not  only  of  the  weight  of  his  burdens,  but  even  of  his  own  weight, 
and  he  can  put  all  his  strength  into  the  matter  of  getting  along.  Now  that 
is  precisely  what  the  Christian's  trust  will  do  for  him.  God  never  intended  that 
we  should  carry  the  burdens  He  lays  upon  us.  He  never  intended  even  that 
we  should  carry  the  burden  of  our  own  evil  nature  and  sinful  tendencies.  He 
is  willing,  nay,  eager,  to  carry  them  all  for  us,  emancipating  all  our  strength 
for  pure  progress.     (A.  B.  Wells.) 

Ver.  4.  Trust  ye  In  the  Lord  for  ever. — Trusting  in  the  Lord: — L  The 
duty  itself.  1.  It  implies  an  acquiescence  or  submission  to  the  wul  of  God, 
whatever  it  may  be — trusting  in  Him,  assured  that  He  is  doing,  and  will  do,  what 
is  right.  This  was  the  spirit  of  Eli  of  old,  who,  though  under  great  family  trial, 
still  said,  "  It  is  the  Lord ;  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good."  This  was  the 
spirit  of  the  patriarch  Job,  who  under  all  his  trials  could  say,  "  Though  He  slay 
me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him."  2.  It  implies  also  an  application  to  the  Lord,  with 
confidence  that  the  application  will  not  be  in  vain.  Perhaps  the  best  passage  I 
can  give  you  upon  this  subject  will  be  that  which  contains  the  character  given 
of  Hezekiah.  Li  2  Kings  xviii.  5,  we  are  told,  "  He  trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel ;  so  that  after  him  was  none  like  him  among  all  the  kings  of  Judah,  nor 
any  that  were  before  him.  For  he  clave  to  the  Lord,  and  departed  not  from 
following  Him,  but  kept  His  commandments,  which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses." 
There  was  habitual  confidence  in  the  Lord,  which  led  Hezekiah  to  apply  to  the 
Lord  in  his  hours  of  trial ;  and  therefore,  when  he  was  in  danger  of  being  besieged, 
he  instantly  felt  that  his  whole  confidence  must  be  in  the  Lord  !  So  he  took 
the  letter,  and  in  close  communion  with  God  read  aloud  that  letter,  trusting  that 
the  Lord  would  deliver  him  from  all  the  threatenings  which  the  letter  contained. 
3.  Closely  connected  with  these  two  explanations  is  that  which  I  may  call  depend- 
ence and  expectation ;  so  that  we  may  say,  in  our  hours  of  anxiety,  "  Jehovah- 
jireh,  the  Lord  will  provide."  All  this  is  perfectly  compatible  with  the  energetic 
use  of  means  for  deliverance  out  of  our  trials.  Indeed,  wherever  there  is  the 
neglect  of  means,  there  is  simple  presumption.  4.  Notice,  again,  in  the  description 
of  the  duty  set  before  us  in  the  text,  that  it  is  to  endure  for  ever.  We  read  here, 
"  Trust  in  the  Lord  for  ever."  This  involves  both  time  and  circumstances. 
II.  The  encouragement.  The  text  tells  us,  "  For  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  there  is 
everlasting  strength "  ;  or,  "  The  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  Rock  of  Ages."  The 
encouragement,  therefore,  is  based  on  the  everlasting  strength  of  God.  (H.  M. 
ViUier8,  M.A.)  Trust  in  God  : — I.  As  a  religious  duty.  God,  in  our  view, 
either  in  His  wisdom,  power,  grace,  love,  or  fidelity,  must  always  be  the  object 
of  religious  trust  and  confidence ;  and  I  think  it  will  be  found  that  all  these  great 
qualities  and  perfections  in  God  are  peculiarly  exercised  for  the  benefit  and 
happiness  of  believers.  It  is  not  merely  in  these  abstract  qualities  that  the 
Christian  is  to  trust,  but  in  their  exercise  and  development,  for  his  own  benefit 
and  advantage.  II.  What  is  essential  to  the  exercise  of  trust  in  God. 
I.  It  will  be  essential  for  you  to  cultivate  scriptural  knowledge.     The  more  the 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvx. 

mind  is  brought  under  the  illumination  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Word  of  God — the 
more  we  are  in  the  habit  of  connecting  time  with  eternity,  taking  a  large  and 
extended  view  of  both — the  more  we  consult  the  nature  of  Divine  providence, 
as  developed  in  the  history  of  His  ancient  people,  in  every  age  of  the  world,  and 
the  manner  of  His  dealings  with  them — the  better  we  become  acquainted  with 
the  nature  and  spirit  of  His  own  work,  the  work  of  religion  in  the  human  heart, 
and,  certainly,  the  more  confidence  we  shall  be  enabled  to  exercise  in  God.  We 
are  very  often  brought  into  a  state  of  darkness,  doubt,  perplexity,  bondage,  and 
Buffering,  for  the  want  merely  of  enlightened  and  scriptural  views  of  God,  and 
the  method  of  His  dealings  with  His  church.  2.  Another  state  is  also  necessary — 
that  is,  living  in  a  reconciled  state  with  God.  III.  The  extent  to  which  we 
ought  to  cabby  this  confidence  in  God.  And  first  of  all  we  may  say,  we  ought 
to  trust  Him  with  everything.  But  then,  there  is  this  remark  to  be  made — that 
we  ought  to  engage  in  nothing  that  is  unlawful  and  sinful ;  for  we  cannot  trust 
God  with  that  which  is  evil.  Let  us  not  classify  events,  and  consider  some  little 
and  some  great,  some  to  be  reposed  on  God  and  others  not.  The  fact  is,  we  ought 
to  take  everything  to  Him  in  the  spirit  of  humble  prayer  and  confidence,  imploring 
His  blessing  upon  it.  Let  me  remark,  too,  that  we  ought  to  trust  God  for  every- 
thing, as  well  as  with  everything.  (J.  Dixon,  D.D.)  Unchanging  trust  in 
an  unchanging  God : — The  grandest  and  profoundest  truths  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  with  regard  to  the  Divine  nature  are  always  presented  as  the  bases 
of  exhortations  to  conduct  and  to  emotion.  There  is  no  such  thing  in  Scripture 
as  an  aimless  revelation  of  the  Divine  character.  That  great  "  for  "  of  my  text 
links  together  the  two  clauses.  I.  Observe  the  name  op  Jehovah  here  given  as 
the  ground  of  invitation  to  our  trust.  "  In  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting 
strength,"  or  "  the  Rock  of  Ages."  The  expression  that  is  here  employed,  the 
singular  reduplication  of  the  name,  which  only  occurs  in  one  other  place  in  Scrip- 
ture, is  no  doubt  intended  to  emphasise  the  idea  that  underlies  the  name. 
We  find  here  the  same  singular  appellation  which  occurs  in  one  of  the  Psalms, 
where  we  read  of  God  as  '  riding  in  the  Heavens  by  His  name  Jah."  So  here 
the  name  appears  as  "  Jah,  Jehovah  " — the  former  name  being,  as  I  suppose, 
the  abbreviated  form  of  the  latter,  and  the  purpose  of  employing  both  being  to 
call  attention  emphatically  to  the  name  and  what  it  means.  What  does  it  mean  ? 
It  speaks — (1)  Of  unchangeableness.  (2)  Of  a  sure  asylum  and  safe  dwelling-place 
and  inexpugnable  fortress  into  which  we  may  all  retreat.  "  His  place  of  defence 
shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks,"  and  high  above  all  possibility  of  escalade  and 
Bafe  from  all  fear  of  assault  or  of  change  they  may  dwell  who  dwell  in  the  secret 
place  of  the  Most  High.  (3)  And  besides  the  thought  of  a  safe  asylum  is  the  other 
thought  of  a  rock  for  a  foundation ;  who  builds  on  it  builds  secure.  II.  The  tbust 
which  corresponds  to,  and  lays  hold  of  the  Rock.  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever : 
for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  Rock  of  Ages."  The  word  which  is  here  rendered 
"  trust "  is  an  extremely  graphic  and  significant  one,  and  teaches  us  a  great  deal 
more  of  the  meaning  and  essence  of  the  act  of  faith  than  many  more  elaborate 
treatises  would  do.  It  simply  means  "  to  depend."  Charles  Wesley,  in  his  great 
hymn,  has,  with  the  Christian  poet's  unerring  instinct,  laid  his  finger  on  the  precise 
meaning  of  the  word  when  he  says — 

Hangs  my  helpless  soul  on  Thee. 

Incongruous  as  the  metaphor  hanging  on  the  rock  may  seem,  it  conveys  to  us 
the  true  idea  of  the  trust  which  is  peace  and  life.  But  did  you  ever  notice  that  in 
our  use  of  the  word  "  depend  "  we  have  two  different  expressions,  which  convey 
two  different  though  kindred  meanings  ?  To  be  dependent  on  gives  a  different 
shade  of  signification  from  to  depend  on.  The  former  acknowledges  inferiority, 
takes  a  position  of  receptivity,  and  recognises  that  from  another,  who  is  conceived 
as  being  above  us,  there  flow  down  upon  us  all  good  things,  strengths,  and  graces 
that  we  may  require.  So,  in  this  hanging  upon  God,  there  is  the  consciousness 
of  utter  emptiness  in  myself  and  of  my  need  of  receiving  all  that  I  can  have  or 
want  from  His  full  hand.  But  in  faith  or  trust  we  hang  on  God  in  that  other 
sense  too.  We  are  not  only  consciously  dependent  upon  Him,  as  conscious  of 
our  emptiness  and  of  His  fulness,  but  we  depend  upon  Him,  as  being  calmly 
and  completely  certain  of  Him  and  of  His  being  and  doing  all  that  we  need.  In 
other  words,  trust  is  reliance.  Dependence  and  reliance  are  both  metaphors. 
Both  picture  resting  one's  whole  weight  on  some  person  or  thing  beyond  one's  self, 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  477 

but  dependence  pictures  the  weight  as  hanging  from  and  upheld  by  a  fixed  point 
above,  and  reliance  pictures  it  as  reposing  on  and  upheld  by  a  fixed  point  beneath  ; 
and  each  sets  forth  in  graphic  fashion  the  act  of  the  soul  which  Old  and  New 
Testament  alike  regard  as  the  condition  of  vital  union  with  God.  That  trust  is 
reasonable.  People  pit  faith  against  reason,  as  if  the  two  things  were  antagonists. 
Faith  is  the  outcome  of  reason.  The  only  difference  between  it  and  reason,  in 
the  narrow  sense  of  the  word,  is  that  faith  has  got  longer  sight  than  reason,  and 
can  see  into  what  is  dark  to  it.  There  is  nothing  so  reasonable  as  to  trust  utterly 
in  Him  whose  name  is  Jehovah,  and  in  whom  is  the  Rock  of  Ages.  III.  Thb 
perpetuity  OP  the  confidenoe  which  corresponds  with  the  eternity  of  the 
Rock.  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever."  It  is  a  commandment  and  a  promise. 
An  unchanging  God  ought  to  secure  an  unchanging  trust.  "  For  ever  !  Amid 
all  the  fluctuations  of  our  minds  and  dispositions,  there  ought  to  be  this  one  stead- 
fast attitude  of  our  spirits  kept  up  continuously  through  a  whole  life.  "  For 
ever ! "  Whatever  may  happen  in  the  way  of  changing  conditions  and  altered 
circumstances,  for  the  same  unchanging  purpose  brings  all  changes.  The  same 
diurnal  motion  brings  day  and  night.  The  same  annual  revolution  brings  summer 
and  winter.  It  is  the  same  unchanging  purpose  of  the  steadfast  God  that  creates 
the  wintry  darkness  through  which  the  orb  of  our  lives  has  to  pass,  and  the  long 
summer  hours  of  sunshine.  But  my  text,  like  all  God's  commandments,  carries 
a  promise  hidden  in  its  bosom.  All  that  build  on  the  Rock  of  Ages  build 
imperishable  homes,  which  last  as  long  as  the  Rock  on  which  they  are  founded. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Strong  by  trusting  the  strong  : — Readers  of  Darwin  will 
recall  the  description  he  gives  of  a  marine  plant  which  rises  from  a  depth  of  one 
hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  feet,  and  floats  on  the  surface  of  the  water  in 
the  midst  of  the  great  breakers  of  the  Western  Ocean.  The  stem  of  this  plant 
is  less  than  an  inch  through  ;  yet  it  grows  and  thrives  and  holds  its  own  against 
the  fierce  smitings  and  pressures  of  breakers  which  no  masses  of  rock,  however 
hard,  could  long  withstand.  What  is  the  secret  of  this  marvellous  resistance 
and  endurance  ?  How  can  this  little,  slender  plant  face  the  fury  of  the  elements 
8o  successfully,  and,  in  spite  of  storms  and  tempests,  keep  its  hold,  and  perpetuate 
itself  from  century  to  century  ?  It  reaches  down  into  the  still  depths,  where  it 
fixes  its  grasp,  after  the  fashion  of  the  instinct  that  has  been  put  into  it,  to  the 
naked  rock3 ;  and  no  commotion  of  the  upper  waters  can  shake  it  loose. 
( Weekly  Pulpit.) 

Ver.  8.  Yea,  in  the  way  of  Thy  Judgments,  0  Lord,  have  we  waited  for 
Titee. — God's  people  waiting  for  Him  in  the  way  of  His  judgments  : — I.  The  words 
contain  a  solemn  peotestation — a  protestation,  on  the  part  of  these  faithful 
people  of  the  Lord,  to  Himself,  in  reference  to  His  "  judgments."  "  Yea,"  say 
they,  "  Verily  Thou,  0  Divine  Searcher  of  hearts,  knowest  that  we  lie  not,  when 
we  declare  that  in  the  way  of  Thy  judgments  we  have  waited  for  Thee."  What 
a  happy  state  of  mind  and  heart  is  this  !  There  may  be  a  multiplication  of 
observances,  fastings,  solemn  assemblies,  where,  on  the  part  of  multitudes,  there 
is  nothing  but  form.  II.  These  godly  Jews  speak  to  the  Lord  of  His 
"  judgments."  H  a  sparrow  cannot  fall  to  the  ground  without  Thy  knowledge 
and  permission,  how  much  more  is  Thy  agency  to  be  traced  in  those  mighty 
desolations  that  have  moved  the  earth,  and  come  down  with  such  appalling  fury 
on  the  land  of  Thine  own  people  I    III.  These  godly  people,  in  their  sinning 

AND  CHASTENED  LAND,  SPEAK  TO  GOD  OF  "  THE  WAY  "  OF  HlS  JUDGMENTS. 

We  read  of  Jehovah's  "  way  "  in  a  gracious  sense — His  way  of  mercy  to  lost 
sinners — the  wondrous  and  glorious  path  along  which  He  has  passed,  and  is  still 
passing,  in  saving  sinners  of  our  fallen  race  through  the  atonement  of  His  own 
beloved  incarnate  Son  (Psa.  Ixvii.  1,  2).  Blessed,  most  blessed,  are  they  who 
are  Divinely  taught  this  "way"  of  the  Lord  !  A  far  other  "way"  of  Judah's 
God  is  that  to  which  her  mourning  children  refer  in  the  verse  before  us.  It  is 
His  judicial  way — the  wrathful  way  in  which  He  is  provoked  to  "  come  out  of 
His  place,"  and  move  towards  highly  favoured  but  deeply  sinning  and  guilty 
lands.  IV.  Let  us  contemplate  and  imitate  the  exercise  of  this  "  small  remnant  " 
of  the  fearers  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  Judah.  They  waited  for  Him  in 
the  way  of  His  judgments.  What  are  the  elements  which  should  enter  into 
the  exercise  to  which  we  are  this  day  called  ?  1.  Solemn  recognition  of  God. 
2.  Solemn  adoration  of  this  high  and  holy  Lord  God.  3.  Justification  of  God. 
4.  Humiliation  of  soul  before  God.     5.  Pouring  out  the  heart  in  earnest  supplica* 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

tion  before  the  Lord.  (W.  Maclcray,  M.A.)  The  right  improvement  of  public 
or  private  calamities : — I.  In  every  afflictive  dispensation  of  Divine  provi- 
dence it  becomes  us  to  recognise  the  hand  of  the  Lord.  They  are  "  Thy  " 
judgments.  In  doing  this  we  imitate  the  example  of  the  wise  and  good  in  every 
age.  II.  Eveby  calamity,  whether  private  or  public,  should  be  considered 
as  a  manifestation  of  the  Divine  displeasure  against  sin.  They  are  Thy 
"  judgments."  III.  In  eveby  calamity  the  mend  of  the  believer  should 
be  directed  to  God.  "The  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  Thy  name,  and  to  the 
remembrance  of  Thee."  1.  This  part  of  the  passage  expresses  the  most  anxious 
solicitude  that  the  Divine  glory  might  be  promoted  by  all  the  dispensations  of 
His  providence  towards  the  children  of  men.  2.  This  part  of  our  text  seems  to 
intimate  also  to  whom  the  afflicted  believer  should  apply  for  support.  "  The 
desire  of  our  soul  is  to  Thy  name,  and  to  the  remembrance  of  Thee."  3.  This 
part  of  our  text  exhibits  the  believer  finding  a  source  of  encouragement  under 
present  trouble,  or  in  the  anticipation  of  future  difficulties,  in  a  reference  to  his 
former  experience  of  the  power,  the  faithfulness  and  grace  of  his  covenant  God. 
"  The  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  the  remembrance  of  Thee."  IV.  In  circumstances 
of  affliction,  whether  private  or  public,  it  is  the  duty  and  privilege  of 
the  believer  to  be  found  waiting  upon  God.  "  In  the  way  of  Thy  judgments 
have  we  waited  for  Thee,  0  God."  The  verb  "  to  wait,"  as  used  in  the  text, 
denotes  desire,  expectation,  patience,  and  perseverance.  Learn — 1.  That  it  is 
an  evil  thing  and  bitter  to  sin  against  God.  2.  The  infinite  value  of  that  system, 
which  opens  the  way  for  the  sinful  creature  to  return  to  God,  with  the  certain 
hope  of  being  pardoned,  adopted,  and  eternally  blessed.  3.  Let  the  sinner  be 
exhorted  to  seek  that  Divine  blessing  which  turns  the  curse  into  a  blessing. 
4.  Let  the  believer  labour  to  live  in  the  exercise  of  the  high  and  glorious  privilege 
— waiting  on  God.  (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  Christians,  and 
their  communion  with  Qod  (with  ver.  9) : — I.  There  is,  in  the  people  of  God, 
a  principle  of  communion  with  God.  1.  This  is  where  their  spiritual  life 
begins.  2.  This  is  where  the  life  of  the  real  Christian  grows.  3.  It  becomes  to 
the  believer  the  tenor  of  his  life  to  please  God.  4.  This  principle  of  communion 
with  God  becomes  the  very  flower  of  our  lives.  5.  This  is  the  hunger  and  thirst 
of  the  Christian.  6.  This  proves  that  there  has  been  a  Divine  renewal  wrought 
in  us.  7.  This  proves  your  sonship.  8.  This  proves  your  holiness,  too,  in  a 
measure,  for  like  will  to  like.  9.  This  proves  your  heavenliness,  too,  for  that 
same  desire  which  draws  you  to  God  is  drawing  you  to  Heaven.  II.  This 
principle  displays  itself  and  works  in  various  ways.  "  Yea,  in  the  way 
of  Thy  judgments,"  &c.  We  are  longing  for  God,  and  it  is  dark  and  cloudy. 
What  shall  we  do  then  ?  1.  Why,  wait  for  Him.  Sometimes,  the  way  of  God's 
judgments  may  mean  the  appointed  way,  the  regular  way.  Whenever  thou  hast 
a  great  trouble,  expect  a  great  mercy.  2.  This  communion  leads  to  desiring. 
"  The  desire  of  our  soul,"  &c.  3.  Your  desire  is  to  remember  the  Lord.  "  And 
to  the  remembrance  of  Thee."  I  wish  that  I  had  a  memory  that  was  so  narrow 
that  it  could  only  hold  the  things  of  God.  4.  This  principle  of  communion  shows 
itself  in  a  personal  yearning.  The  eighth  verse  is  in  the  plural,  the  ninth  in 
the  singular.  5.  This  principle  of  communion  takes  one  other  form,  that  of 
personal  seeking.  "  Yea,  with  my  spirit  within  me,"  &c.  III.  The  Lord  takes 
pleasure  in  this  communion  with  His  people  (ver.  20).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  Thy  name. — The  desire  of  the  renewed  soul : — 
What  is  personal  religion,  and  what  is  personal  evidence  of  it  ?  One  single  word 
in  my  text  is  a  key  to  all — "  desire."  The  sum  and  substance  of  a  believer's 
longings  towards  God  is  to  know  more  of  God,  to  enjoy  more  of  God,  to  live  more 
upon  the  fulness  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  become  abstracted  from  all  but  God 
Himself.  A  sound  creed  is  contained  in  these  three  things  :  I  am  a  guilty  wretch, 
deserving  hell ;  Jesus  is  everything  I  want,  for  time  and  for  eternity ;  I  am  His, 
and  He  is  mine.  Now,  keeping  this  in  view,  let  us  descant  upon — I.  The  Object 
of  the  begenebated  soul's  desire.  Look  at  this  as  it  relates  to  the  Holy 
Three  in  One.  The  soul  may  be  longing  for  another  sight  of  his  Bible.  But 
why  ?  Because  he  longs  to  meet  with  God  there.  He  may  be  longing  to  hear 
another  Gospel  sermon.  Why  ?  Because  it  sets  forth  the  perfections  of  the  God 
he  loves,  and  therefore  he  expects  to  meet  Him  there.  He  may  be  longing  for 
another  ordinance  day.  Why  ?  Because  Jesus  is  often  made  known  to  him  in 
**  breaking  of  bread."  And  so  whatever  means  and  ordinances  are  used,  whatever 
externals  are  laid  before  the  child  of  God  and  employed  by  him,  it  is  not  these 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  479 

that  will  satisfy  him.  It  is  God  in  them.  I  pass  on  to  show — II.  What  weaning 
work  is  essential  to  this.  Until  there  is  a  great  deal  of  weaning  in  the 
Christian's  experience  there  will  not  be  a  very  great  deal  of  spirituality.  III.  The 
negotiations  that  arise  out  of  this.  If  the  earnest  desire  of  my  soul  is  after 
the  enjoyment  of  God,  I  cannot  grow  careless  about  using  means.     (J.  Irons.) 

Ver.  9.    With    my  soul   have  I  desired    Thee  in  the  night. — The  religious 
craving  and  seeking  of  the  soul  at  night : — There  is  no  work  so  momentous, 
bo  influential,  as  the  work  of  the  soul  in  the  sleepless  hours  of  night.     Busy  in 
calling  up  departed  friends  and  interchanging  thoughts  again,  busy  in  recalling 
the  past  and  foreboding  the  future,  busy  in  reflections  concerning  itself  and  its 
God.     In  these  words  we  have — I.  The  soul's  religious  longing  in  the  night.     The 
Boul  has  many  instinctive  cravings,  cravings  for  knowledge,  for  beauty,  for  order, 
for  society ;  but  its  deepest  hunger  is  for  God.     "  My  heart  and  my  flesh  crieth  out 
for  the  living  God."     For  what  in  God  does  it  hunger  ?     1.  For  the  assurance  of 
His  love.     We  are  so  formed  that  we  crave  the  possession  of  the  object  of  our 
love.     Were  all  the  works  of  God  ours,  we  should  be  hungry  without  Him.     He 
who  gives  His  strongest  love  to  us  gives  Himself.     2.  For  revelations  of  His  mind. 
It  yearns  for  ideas  from  the  great  Fountain  of  intelligence  and  love.     II.  The 
soul's  religious  searching  in  the  night.     "  With  my  spirit  within  me  will  I  seek 
Thee  early."     The  soul  seeking  for  God  implies — 1.  A  consciousness  that  it  has 
not  got  Him.     All  have  God's  works  everywhere,  God's  influence  everywhere, 
God's  presence  everywhere ;  but  only  a  few  have  Himself,  the  assurance  of  His 
love.     Hence  the  searching.     2.  A  belief  that  He  may  be  obtained.     We  may 
all  have  God  as  our  portion  by  seeking  Him  in  Christ.     Men  hunger  for  some 
things  they  can  never  get — wealth,  power,  social  influence,  the  distinctions  of 
genius,  &c.     But  all  who    hunger  for    God  obtain  Him.     Conclusion — God  is 
the  great  want  of  the  soul.     Without  Him  what  are  we  ?     Planets  detached 
from  the  sun,  wandering  stars  for  whom  are  reserved  blackness  and  anarchy. 
"  Whom  have  I  in  Heaven  but  Thee  ?  "  &c.    (Homilist.)        Death  and  judgment : — 
The  judgments  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament  by  the  special  inspiration  of  God, 
showing  them  to  be,  as  common  centres,  retribution  on  the  sons  of  men,  are 
intended  to  lead  us  to  the  belief  in  that  final  judgment  after  death  of  which  we 
read  in  the  New  Testament.     These  early  judgments  of  nations  and  states  were 
the  shadows,  "  the  going  before,"  of  that  awful  time  when  all  mankind  shall 
appear  to  receive  the  sentence  with  its  eternal  consequences  for  good  or  evil. 
Now,  here  we  see  the  power  of  religion  in  sustaining  the  soul  of  man  under  the 
awfulness  of  Divine  retribution  and  the  expectations  of  God's  anger  on  the  sons 
of  the  world  ;  we  see  the  expression,  by  those  who  have  passed  through  such 
a  time,  set  before  us  as  indications  of  the  mind  we  are  to  cherish  and  the  hopes 
we  may  entertain  in  view  of  that  final  judgment,  and  it  shows  the  power  of 
religious  faith  to  maintain  the  soul  in  peace  against  the  two  greatest  fears  which 
darken  the  soul  of  man.     1.  The  fear  of  death.     How  nature  shrinks  from  what 
6eems  to  be  an  annihilation  of  this  life !    2.  Yet  there  is  a  greater  fear  than  this — 
the  thought  of  meeting  God  in  the  solitary  going  forth  into  what  seems  the  dark 
night.     It  was  not  always  so  with  man  s  soul.     He  did  not  fear  God  in  his 
original  creation.     But  as  soon  as  sin  was  committed  observe  the  change;  he 
shrank  from  the  thought  and  the  presence — from  the  approaching  sound  of  the 
Divine  appearance.     That  was  the  effect  of  one  si  i,  and  since  that  sin  has  spread 
through  the  whole  of  nature  and  has  caused  sinfulness  to  taint  the  whole  being  of 
men.     Men  shrink  from  their  fellow-creatures  when  they  are  better  than  them- 
selves.    Those  children  who  have  committed  faults  shrink  from  their  parents' 
eyes,  however  fond  they  may  be  of  them.     Men  shrink  from  themselves  when 
conscious  of  their  own  sin,  and  often  it  leads  them  to  commit  self-murder.     Now, 
religious  faith  raises  a  man  above  these  two  dark  fears  haunting  the  soul,  pro- 
duces peace,  and  kindles  brightest  hopes.     {T.  T.  Carter,  M.A.)        The  desire 
of  the  soul  in  spiritual  darkness  : — Night  appears  to  be  a  time  peculiarly  favourable 
to.  devotion.     Its  solemn  stillness  helps  to  free  the  mind  from  that  perpetual 
din  which  the  cares  of  the  world  will  bring  around  it ;  and  the  stars  looking  i  own 
from  Heaven  upon  us  shine  as  if  they  would  attract  us  up  to  God.     I  shall  not 
speak  of  night  natural  at  all,  althoug  i  there  may  be  a  great  deal  of  room  for 
poetic  thought  and  expression.     I.   I  shall  speak  to  confirm  d  Christians; 
and  I  shall  bring  one  or  two  remarks  to  bear  upon  their  case,  if  they  are  in 
darkness.     1.  The  Christian  man  has  not  always  a  bright,  shining  suu;  he  has 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

seasons  of  darkness  and  night.  It  is  a  great  truth,  that  the  true  religion  of  the 
living  God  is  calculated  to  give  a  man  happiness  below  as  well  as  bliss  above. 
But,  notwithstanding,  experience  tells  us  that  if  the  course  of  the  just  be  "  as 
the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day,"  yet  some- 
times that  light  is  eclipsed.  (1)  Sometimes  it  is  night  over  the  whole  Church 
at  once.  Of  course  each  Christian  participates  in  it.  (2)  At  other  times  this 
darkness  over  the  soul  of  the  Christian  rises  from  temporal  distresses.  (3)  "  But 
oh  !  "  says  another,  "  you  have  not  described  my  night.  I  have  not  much  amisa 
in  business  ;  and  I  would  not  care  if  I  had — but  I  have  a  night  in  my  spirit." 
"  Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  have  not  a  single  evidence  of  my  Christianity  now.  I  waa 
a  child  of  God,  I  know ;  but  something  tella  me  that  I  am  none  of  His  now." 
2.  A  Christian  man's  religion  will  keep  its  colour  in  the  night.  "  With  my  soul 
have  I  desired  Thee  in  the  night."  What  a  mighty  deal  of  silver-slipper  religion 
we  have  in  this  world.  Men  will  follow  Christ  when  every  one  cries  "  Hosanna !  " 
But  they  will  not  go  with  Him  in  the  night.  There  is  many  a  Christian  whose 
piety  did  not  burn  much  when  he  was  in  prosperity,  but  it  will  be  known  in 
adversity.  3.  All  that  the  Christian  wants  in  the  night  is  his  God.  "  With 
desire  have  I  desired  Thee  in  the  night."  By  day  there  are  many  things  that 
a  Christian  will  desire  besides  his  Lord  ;  but  in  the  night  he  wants  nothing  but 
his  God.  4.  There  are  times  when  all  the  saint  can  do  is  to  desire.  We  have 
a  vast  number  of  evidences  of  piety :  some  are  practical,  some  experimental, 
some  doctrinal ;  and  the  more  evidences  a  man  has  of  his  piety  the  better.  We 
like  a  number  of  signatures,  to  make  a  deed  more  valid,  if  possible.  We  like  to 
invest  property  in  a  great  number  of  trustees,  in  order  that  it  may  be  all  the 
safer ;  and  so  we  love  to  have  many  evidences.  But  there  are  seasons  when  a 
Christian  cannot  get  any.  He  can  scarcely  get  one  witness  to  come  and  attest 
his  godliness.  But  there  is  one  witness  that  very  seldom  is  gagged,  and  that 
is,  I  have  desired  Thee  —  I  have  desired  Thee  in  the  night."  II.  Speak  to 
newly  awakened  souls.  1.  The  first  question  they  would  ask  is  this — How 
am  I  to  know  that  my  desires  are  proofs  of  a  work  of  grace  in  my  soul  ?  (1)  You 
may  tell  whether  your  de-ires  are  of  God  by  their  constancy.  (2)  By  their 
efficacy.  If  your  desires  lead  you  into  real  "  works  meet  for  repentance,"  then 
they  come  from  God.  (3)  By  their  urgency.  2.  But  you  say,  "  If  I  have  desired 
God,  why  have  not  I  obtained  my  desire  before  now  ?  "  (1)  You  have  hardly 
a  right  to  ask  the  question ;  for  God  has  a  right  to  grant  your  petition  or  not 
as  He  pleases.  But  since  thine  anxiety  has  dictated  the  question,  let  my  anxiety 
attempt  to  answer  it.  (2)  Perhaps  God  has  not  granted  thy  desire  because  He 
wishes  thine  own  profit  thereby.  He  designs  to  show  thee  more  of  the  desperate 
wickedness  of  thine  heart,  that  in  future  thou  mayest  fear  to  trust  it ;  He  wants 
thee  to  see  more  of  the  blackness  of  darkness  and  of  the  horrible  pit  of  sin,  that 
like  a  burnt  child  thou  mayest  shun  the  fire  for  ever.  He  lets  thee  go  down  into 
the  dungeon,  that  thou  mayest  prize  liberty  the  better  when  it  comes.  And  He 
is  keeping  thee  waiting,  moreover,  that  thy  longings  may  be  quickened.  (3)  Besides, 
God  keeps  thee  waiting,  perhaps,  in  order  that  He  may  display  the  riches  of  His 

frace  more  fully  to  thee  at  the  last.  I  believe  that  some  of  us  who  were  kept 
y  God  a  long  while  before  we  found  Him,  loved  Him  better  perhaps  than  we 
should  have  done  if  we  had  received  Him  directly ;  and  we  can  preach  better 
to  others,  we  can  speak  more  of  His  lovingkindness  and  tender  mere  .  (4)  One 
thought  more.  Perhaps  it  has  come  already.  I  fancy  some  of  you  think  you 
will  have  a  kind  of  electric  shock — that  a  sort  of  galvanism,  or  something  or 
other,  will  pass  through  you,  such  as  you  never  had  before.  Do  not  be  expecting 
any  miracles  now.  If  you  will  not  think  you  are  pardoned  till  you  get  a  vision 
you  will  have  to  wait  many  a  year.  3.  But  there  is  one  more  serious  inquiry  : 
and  it  is,  Will  God  grant  my  desire  at  last  ?  Yes,  poor  soul,  verily  He  wilL  It 
is  quite  impossible  that  you  should  have  desired  God  and  should  be  lost.  (G.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  With  my  spirit  within  me  will  I  seek  Thee  early. — Seeking 
God  early : — 1.  Early,  in  the  morning  of  life,  which  is  the  most  proper 
season  for  this  employment,  your  faculties  being  then  most  active  and  vigorous. 
2.  Early,  in  preference  to  all  other  objects  which  solicit  your  attention,  seeking 
first,  and  above  all  things,  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness.  3.  Early, 
in  every  day  of  life,  after  you  are  refreshed  with  rest ;  before  you  engage  in  com- 
pany, in  business,  or  amusement ;  determined,  with  the  man  according  to  God's 
own  heart,  that  your  voice  the  Lord  shall  hear  in  the  morning.  (R.  Macculloch.) 
When   Thy  judgments    are    in    the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will 


-chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  481 

learn    righteousness.  —  The    judgments    of   God : — I.    The    Author  of   thosb 

JUDGMENTS  WITH  WHICH  WE  ARE  VISITED  ;  THE  ENDS  FOR  WHICH  THEY  ARE 
SENT  ;    AND   THEIR   FITNESS   TJ   INSTRUCT    US    IN    RIGHTEOUSNESS.       1.   Judgments 

come  from  God.  Judgments  that  would  crush  us  when  proceeding  from  any 
other  source,  can  be  bome  when  viewed  as  coming  from  the  hand  of  God.  2.  But 
why  does  God  visit  us  with  judgments  ?  Not  that  He  delights  in  the  miseries 
of  Kis  creatures.  "  He  afflicteth  not  willingly,  nor  grieveth  the  children  of  men." 
He  would  rather  "  draw  them  by  the  cords  of  love  "  ;  and  "  by  His  goodness 
lead  them  to  repentance."  3.  A  few  plain  considerations  are  sufficient  to  show 
that  the  judgments  of  God  have  a  natural  tendency  to  awaken  men  from  their 
security  and  to  teach  them  righteousness.  Man  is  a  depraved  and  corrupted 
creature.  The  very  multitude  of  Divine  favours  hides  the  hand  which  confers 
them,  and  makes  us  forget  our  Penefactor;  intoxicated  and  blinded  by  enjoyment, 
in  the  bosom  of  peace  and  abundance,  piety  languishes,  our  passions  are  inflamed, 
and  we  cease  to  "  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness."  In  this  situation, 
what  does  the  mercy,  the  compassion  of  our  Father,  require  from  Him  ?  To 
visit  us  with  His  judgments.  Then  we  see  the  impotence  of  the  idols  which  have 
seduced  us ;  conscience  wakes  from  its  lethargy,  and  retraces  to  us  in  accents 
awfully  impressive  all  our  wanderings  from  God  and  righteousness.  (1)  The 
judgments  of  God  deeply  affect  us  and  lead  us  to  repentance,  because  they  are 
rarer  than  mercies.  (2)  The  judgments  of  God  address  powerfully  that  passion 
which  has  most  influence  on  the  greater  part  of  mankind — the  passion  of  fear. 
(3)  These  judgments  of  God  lead  to  righteousness  because  they  teach  in  that 
most  compendious  and  efficacious  mode,  by  example.  On  beholding  them  we 
feel  that  the  threatenings  of  God  are  not  a  mere  dead  letter,  which  need  fill  us 
with  no  dismay,  (4)  Judgments  lead  to  righteousness  because  they  present  God  in 
such  a  character  that  even  the  most  stout-hearted  sinners  tremble  to  oppose  Him. 
When  He  comes  to  plead  with  them,  clothed  with  grace  and  compassion,  they 
may  abuse  these  attributes  to  their  destruction ;  but  to  sport  with  Him  when  "  He 
maketh  His  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  the  storm  "  ;  when  He  comes  armed  with 
the  thunders  of  omnipotence,  and  dressed  in  the  robes  of  vengeance,  requires  a 
depravity  worse  than  diabolical ;  since,  on  such  occasions,  even  devils  tremble." 
But  although  judgments  have  thus  a  natural  tendency  to  lead  men  to  God, 
although  they  have  often  in  an  eminent  degree  taught  righteousness,  yet  have 
they  invariably  this  effect  ?  Alas,  no  !  there  are  some  who  can  resist  judgment  as 
well  as  mercies.  II.  Inquire  why  the  judgments  of  God  do  not  always  havb 
this  happy  effect,  which  they  are  designed  and  calculated  to  produce.  Judg- 
ments are  frequently  rendered  useless  because  of  our  insensibility.  (H.  KoUoclc, 
D.D.)  The  judgments  of  God  : — I.  The  judgments  of  God  are  designed  by 
Hem,  and  in  their  own  nature  do  tend  to  teach  the  inhabitants  of  the 
world  true  repentance  and  righteousness.  1.  They  are  apt  to  work  on  our 
minds  a  stronger  conviction  of  the  providence  of  God.  2.  They  most  powerfully 
awaken  in  us  the  thoughts  of  the  great  day  of  judgment.  II.  Inquire  whether 
they  do  always  produce  this  effect.  And  here  experience  acquaints  us 
that  there  is  something  in  the  corruption  and  acquired  wickedness  of  some  men's 
hearts  that  baffles  this  as  well  as  other  methods  of  God's  dealing  with  them : 
they  are  so  far  from  repenting  and  learning  righteousness  by  the  corrections  of 
God  that  they  many  times  add  impiety  to  their  immoralities,  and  deny  that 
He  concerns  Himself  in  the  government  of  the  world.     Ill  Exhort   you  to 

LEARN   RIGHTEOUSNESS   FROM   THE   PRESENT   JUDGMENTS   OF  GOD.      (T.    Manning- 

ham,  D.D.)  The  judgments  of  God : — By  the  term,  "  judgments  of  God," 
the  Scriptures  sometimes  denote  the  decisions,  whether  favourable  or  adverse, 
which  God  passes  upon  the  conduct  of  men.  But  more  frequently  this  phrase 
is  employed  to  denote  the  effect  of  such  decisions  when  they  are  unfavourable — 
to  denote  those  remarkable  punishments  by  which  the  Almighty  chastises  the 
wickedness  of  guilty  individuals  and  the  crimes  of  guilty  nations.  In  the  course 
of  God's  providential  procedure,  we  often  see  His  judgments ;  we  see  misfortune 
and  distress  following  so  closely  and  visibly  the  conduct  of  men,  that  we  can 
have  no  doubt  whatever  concerning  the  connection  that,  by  His  appointment, 
subsists  between  them.  But  there  are  many  cases  where  the  precise  object  of 
the  Divine  visitation  is  unknown.  In  such  cases  it  would  therefore  be  rash  and 
uncharitable  to  interpret  particularly,  and  with  reference  to  individuals,  the 
views  of  Divine  judgment  when  affecting  a  multitude.  It  is  enough  for  as  to 
know  that  these  judgments,  whatever  be  their  kind,  their  nature,  or  their  degree, 

31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

are  instruments  of  God's  government  of  His  moral  and  rational  offspring,  and 
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  may  learn  from  them  lessons  of  righteousness. 
I.  The  judgments  of  God,  whatever  their  form  and  degree,  are  found  powerfully 
to  excite  sentiments  of  warm  piety  and  deep  devotion  toward  that  God 
from  whom  these  judgments  proceed.  There  are  various  principles  of  our  con- 
stitution, by  which  the  judgments  of  Heaven  contribute  to  a  salutary  effect  upon 
the  minds  of  a  thoughtless  world.  Unexpected  revolutions,  either  in  the  natural 
or  moral  world,  naturally  arrest  our  attention.  They  demonstrate,  in  the  most 
sensible  manner,  to  our  consciences,  our  own  weakness,  and  the  incompetency 
of  our  powers,  either  to  produce  or  control  the  changing  events  around  us  ;  and 
to  every  mind  that  is  not  totally  enfeebled  and  darkened,  through  corruption, 
such  revolutions  suggest  with  irresistible  force  the  notion  of  a  powerful  Supreme 
Ruler ;  they  alarm  our  fears  at  His  displays,  and  awaken  all  those  sentiments 
(this  is  at  least  their  natural  tendency,  or  oiight  to  be  their  constant  effect)  of 
humility  and  penitence,  which  form  the  beginning  of  a  pious  and  devout  temper. 
And  we  learn  from  Scripture  that  this  is  not  only  the  tendency  of  the  Divine 
judgments  when  rightly  improved,  but  often  the  very  purpose  for  which  they 
were  sent  by  the  providence  of  God.  II.  If,  then,  the  judgments  of  God  be  both 
fitted  and  designed  to  awaken  us  to  the  ways  of  His  providence,  how  should 
•we  labour  to  REGARD  and  improvb  them!  (G.  H.  Baird,  D.D.)  National 
judgments  : — I.  That  this  country  has  been  visited  by  the  judgments  of 
God.  1.  Our  nation  has,  indeed,  been  a  scene  of  many  and  extraordinary  mercies. 
The  rise  and  establishment  of  free  institutions,  and  that  wonderful  balance  of 
constitution  which  has  prevented  both  the  extremes  of  government, — royal 
despotism  on  the  one  hand,  and  popular  anarchy  on  the  other, — deserve  our 
grateful  recognition.  Our  own  soil  has  long  been  a  stranger  to  the  desolating 
ravages  of  war,  and  the  shouts  and  confused  noise  of  battle  have  been  heard 
only  at  a  distance.  The  discoveries  of  science  and  the  attainments  of  art  have 
been  unparalleled ;  and  useful  knowledge  has  been  diffused  to  an  unexampled 
extent  over  the  various  classes  of  society.  We  have  had  the  benefits  of  a  Divine 
religion,  reformed  from  the  corruptions  which  had  accumulated  with  the  course 
of  ages ;  we  have  had  an  almost  universal  diffusion  of  the  pure  Word  of  God,  the 
inspired  oracles  of  truth.  "  The  lines  are  fallen  to  us  in  pleasant  places  ;  yea, 
we  have  a  goodly  heritage  !  "  2.  Yet  it  is  also  true  that  the  judgments  of  God 
have  been  abroad  in  the  land.  That  mighty  hand  is  the  hand  of  God  ;  that 
mysterious  and  invisible  power  is  the  power  of  God.  There  is  indeed  a  sinful 
and  fatal  disposition  abroad,  to  account  for  things  only  by  speaking  of  fortune 
and  chance,  or  by  referring,  at  most,  to  the  passions  and  principles  of  those 
human  agents  by  whom  the  management  of  national  interests  is  conducted.  This 
forgetfulness  of  the  Most  High,  amounting  to  a  practical  atheism,  and  spread 
widely  over  the  habits  of  men,  is  one  of  the  worst  signs  of  the  times  in  which  we 
live.  II.  Whether,  by  the  inhabitants  of  this  country,  a  right  improve- 
ment of  its  visitations  has  been  madb.  "  When  Thy  judgments  are  in  the 
earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness."  We  do  not  imagine 
this  to  be  a  positive  assertion,  that  the  learning  of  righteousness  is  the  invariable 
consequence  of  the  Divine  judgments,  but  a  statement  that  such  ought  to  be 
their  result.  If  it  be  true  that  the  Divine  judgments  are  poured  forth  in  con- 
sequence of  transgression,  it  must  be  clear  that  the  right  conduct  to  be  pursued 
by  those  who  feel  them  is  to  repent  and  to  reform.     III.  The  reflections 

BY  WHICH  AN  IMMEDIATE  IMPROVEMENT  OF  PAST  VISITATIONS  IS  FORCIBLY  URGED. 

1.  Consider  what  must  be  expected  as  the  public  consequences  of  continued 
impenitence  and  transgression.  (1)  The  removal  of  religious  privileges  is  an 
event  scarcely  to  be  doubted  ;  and  it  seems  but  just  and  right  that  when  the 
means  of  spiritual  guidance  and  blessing  have  been  for  a  protracted  period  under- 
valued and  abused,  they  should  be  withdrawn  (Rev.  ii.  5).  (2)  The  removal 
of  religious  privileges  will  be  the  harbinger  of  national  desolation.  2.  Consider 
what  will  doubtless  be  the  results  of  the  desired  amendment  and  repentance. 
"Iniquity  shall  not  be  our  ruin."  New  glories  will  then  arise  upon  our  land. 
(James  Parsons.)  Instruction  from  the  judgment  of  God  : — It  is  an  act  of  right- 
eousness to  give  every  one  their  own ;  to  God,  the  things  that  are  God's ;  to  do 
right  to  all  men,  and  a  man's  self  also.  I.  Piety  towards  God  consists  in  these 
six  particulars — 1.  Reverence  and  awful  regard  of  the  Divine  majesty.  2.  The 
admiri  and  adoring  Him,  in  His  height,  excellency,  and  perfection.  3.  Love 
and  delight  in  Him,  because  of  His  grace  and  goodness  and  free  communication j 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  483 

with  thankfulness  for  His  benefits.  4.  Trust  in  God,  because  of  His  faithfulness  ; 
and  to  give  Him  credit,  because  of  His  approved  truth  and  goodness.  5.  Sub- 
mission to  Him,  because  of  His  superiority  and  sovereignty.  6.  Duty  and  service, 
because  of  His  dominion  and  property.  II.  Righteousness  towards  men. 
That  doth  comprehend  in  it  good  behaviour  and  equal  dealings.  1.  In  general,  it 
doth  take  in  the  obedience  and  subjection  that  all  inferiors  owe  to  their  superiors 
and  governors.  2.  That  fairness  and  complacency  which  ought  to  be  between 
all  those  that  converse  upon  terms  of  equality.  3.  That  tenderness  that  ought 
to  be  used  towards  inferiors,  or  in  a  worse  condition  than  ourselves.  4.  Thank- 
fulness, where  we  are  beholden.  5.  Uprightness  with  all  with  whom  we  have 
to  do.  (1)  In  our  speeches,  truth  and  honesty.  (2)  Fidelity,  where  we  are 
credited  and  trusted.  (3)  Performance  of  our  engagements  and  undertakings. 
(4)  Candour  in  all  our  judgments  and  censures.  (5)  Fair  and  benign  repre- 
sentations of  men,  and  handsome  constructions  and  interpretations :  always 
being  ready  to  take  things  in  the  best  sense  ;  and  to  interpret  other  men's  words, 
as  we  would  they  should  interpret  ours.  (6)  Lowliness  and  courtesy  in  our 
transactions  with  others.  (7)  Clearness  and  integrity  in  all  our  converse. 
(8)  Moderation  in  our  demand  of  reparation,  in  case  of  wrong  received.  (9)  Gentle- 
ness and  calmness,  in  case  of  provocation.  (10)  Clemency  and  compassion 
towards  those  that  have  done  us  evil.  (11)  Bounty  and  charity  towards  those 
that  are  in  necessity.  (12)  Love  and  goodwill  towards  all  men.  IIL  Righteous- 
ness to  ourselves.  1.  It  doth  comprehend  in  it  modesty  and  humility :  that 
is  the  soul's  temper.  2.  Sobriety:  that  is  the  mind's  balance.  3.  Temperance 
and  chastity:  that  is  the  body's  security.  More  particularly — (1)  The  mind 
equally  poised,  free  from  vanity,  conceit,  intoxication ;  and  the  body  ordered 
according  to  the  rules  of  reason  and  virtue.  (2)  The  soul  discharged  of  corroding 
envy  and  biting  malice  ;  and  the  body  gently  used.  For  as  we  should  not  live 
to  feed  the  beast,  which  is  done  by  epicurism,  and  giving  way  to  sensual  pleasure : 
eo  are  we  to  be  merciful  to  our  bodies.  4.  The  whole  man  at  heart's  ease,  through 
Christian  courage  and  resolution ;  reposing  in  God's  protection  and  providence ; 
charging  ourselves  only  with  the  use  of  lawful  means ;  and  when  we  have  done 
our  duty,  leaving  the  success  to  God,  acknowledging  our  dependence  upon  Him, 
and  the  need  of  His  blessing.  These  are  instances  of  righteousness,  wherein 
the  inhabitants  of  the  world  are  to  be  instructed,  when  God's  judgments  are 
upon  the  earth.  (B.  Whichcote,  D.D.)  The  judgments  of  God: — 1.  The  judg- 
ments of  God  ought  to  drive  the  open  transgressor  of  God's  law  from  his  sins 
and  criminal  indulgences.  2.  The  judgments  of  God  ought  to  stimulate  every 
individual,  who  is  destitute  of  personal  religion,  to  attend  to  his  spiritual  interests 
without  a  moment's  delay.  Religion  is  a  personal  concern,  and  essential  to 
extensive  usefulness  and  real  happiness.  3.  The  judgments  of  God  ought  to 
excite  in  every  Christian  more  of  the  spirit  and  exercise  of  prayer  both  for  himself 
and  others.  (Alex.  Harvey.)  Fast-day  sermon: — The  faculties  of  man  are 
too  limited  to  comprehend  the  nature  of  the  Divine  judgments.  The  direction 
of  events  in  the  moral  government  of  the  world  baffles  his  investigation.  With 
respect  to  individuals,  those  afflictions  are  improperly  called  judgments " 
which  may  be  merely  instances  of  trial  or  discipline,  or  even  of  highly  beneficial 
example.  Yet  we  can  seldom  err  in  calling  those  evils  which  visit  a  nation  by 
the  name  of  "  judgments."  We  may  justly  consider  them  as  the  penalty  and 
correctives  of  a  people's  sin.  For,  as  such  collective  bodies  may  have  national 
iniquities  of  a  flagrant  kind,  and  as  they  can  exist  in  that  collective  capacity  of 
sinning  as  nations  only  in  this  world,  we  may  conclude  that  such  wide  visitations 
of  evil  are  nothing  less  than  national  chastisements,  or  a  general  penal  discipline 
of  the  people  so  afflicted.  Still  their  object  is  always  some  ultimate  good.  1.  The 
perversion  of  great  wealth  in  a  life  of  dissipation  and  voluptuousness,  idleness 
and  uselessness,  as  it  is  a  spectacle  by  no  means  uncommon,  so  is  it  a  most  offensive 
and  insulting  sight  in  the  eyes  of  Him  "  who  maketh  poor  and  who  maketh  rich." 
2.  This  leads  me  to  another  crying  sin,  that  seems  to  pervade  all  the  ranks  of 
modern  society, — "  the  love  of  money  "  :  that  which  the  apostle  calls  "  the 
root  of  all  evil,"  and,  by  another  name,  the  most  offensive  to  a  jealous  God,  who 
claims  for  Himself  and  His  service  the  powers  of  the  mind,  the  strength  of  the 
body,  and  the  yearnings  of  the  heart,  namely,  "  idolatry."  It  is  habitual  covetous- 
ness,  which  early  blights  and  mildews  the  tender  shoots  of  religion  in  the  breast, 
hardens  every  finer  feeling,  and  concentrates  every  thought  and  care  and  wish 
upon  sell     3.  Another  alarming  sin  of  our  country  is  pride.     4.  This  leads  me 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  *  [chap.  xxvi. 

next  to  our  ingratitude.  5.  The  virtual  unbelief,  the  practical  infidelity  of  the 
present  day.  National  sins  are,  after  all,  the  collective  vices  of  individuals  ;  and 
every  man  has  his  own  peculiar  sins,  which  must  weigh  also  upon  his  country's 
welfare.  For  the  removal,  therefore,  of  present,  and  the  prevention  of  future 
judgments,  we  must  look  to  the  correction  of  individual  character.  (A.  B. 
Evans,  D.D.)  Affliction  a  school  of  instruction: — I.  Let  us  consider  what 
that  IS  which  MUST  instruct  us.  Our  sufferings  and  afflictions.  And  they 
are  here  described  in  a  threefold  notion.  1.  In  their  nature  and  propriety;  what, 
and  whose  they  are.  They  are  no  other  than  God's  "  judgments."  2.  By  their 
time  and  season ;  that  is  implied  in  this  particle  of  time,  "  when."  3.  By  the  circum- 
stance of  place,  where  they  are  inflicted.  That  which  God  makes  the  school  of  cor- 
rection ;  the  earth."  Are  our  afflictions  God's  "  judgments  "  ?  Then — 1.  They 
are  deserved  by  us ;  God  doth  justly  inflict  them  upon  us.  2.  They  are  wisely 
ordained.  3.  They  are  proportioned  in  a  just  and  holy  manner,  with  a  due 
measure  and  moderation.  II.  The  lesson  we  must  learn  by  them.  "  Right- 
eousness." 1.  Who  are  the  scholars  ?  They  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  world, 
2.  What  is  their  duty  ?  They  must  be  learners.  3.  What  is  their  lesson  ?  They 
must  learn  righteousness.  (Bishop  Brownrig.)  The  teaching  of  ordinary  life:-— 
Persons  are  apt  too  much  to  separate  spirituality  of  mind  from  the  teaching  of 
ordinary  life,  and  the  lessons  which  the  facts  of  this  world  convey.  Undoubtedly 
the  mind  may  be  spiritualised  without  this  teaching,  and  even  before  it  can  be 
had ;  at  the  same  time,  in  the  case  of  the  great  majority  of  men,  the  spiritual 
temper  is  not  attained  without  this  teaching.  (J.  B.  Mozley,  D.D.)  The 
world  a  great  monitor : — The  world  is  the  great  tempter,  but  at  the  same  time  it 
is  the  great  monitor.  It  is  the  great  saddener,  the  great  warner,  the  great 
prophet.  (Ibid.)  God's  judgments  best  awaken  sinners  : — I.  I  shall  endeavour 
to  confirm  the  truth  of  the  general  observation  in  the  text,  of  the  good 
effects  of  God's  judgments  upon  mankind.  1.  The  end  and  design  of  God, 
in  His  judgments,  is  to  do  good  to  men ;  to  make  the  bad  good,  and  the  good 
better.  God  has  told  us,  in  His  Holy  Word,  that  He  is  love,  and  that  fury  is  not 
in  Him.  Now,  it  is  demonstration  that  from  love  nothing  but  love  can  flow. 
2.  The  judgments  of  God  have  a  natural  tendency  and  efficacy  to  convert  and 
reform  sinners,  and  to  perfect  the  righteous.  The  two  predominant  and  ruling 
passions  in  human  nature  are  the  fear  of  evil  and  the  desire  of  happiness  ;  and 
nothing  is  more  proper  to  work  upon  these,  and  direct  them  to  and  fix  them  upon 
their  right  object,  than  the  judgments  of  God.  3.  And  that  thus  it  has  been  in 
fact  I  come  now  to  prove  by  examples.  The  Ninevites  were  so  terrified  with 
the  threatening  of  the  prophet  Jonah  that  they  repented,  and  escaped  the  judg- 
ment. The  same  did  Ahab  upon  the  threatening  of  Elijah,  and  had  the  same 
success,  &c.  II.  The  particular  example  of  the  good  effect  the  judgments 
of  God  had  upon  those  whom  the  prophet  personates,  and  in  whose  name  he 
speaks  in  the  text.  In  which  expressions  we  have  the  description  and  characters 
of  the  most  sincere,  excellent,  and  acceptable  conversion  of  the  soul  to  God ; 
which  are — 1.  To  turn  the  whole  bent  and  force  of  our  desire  wholly  to  God  alone. 
2.  To  turn  the  attention  and  application  of  our  soul  inward,  to  God  dwelling 
within  us,  by  endeavouring  to  live  in  a  constant  sense  of  His  presence,  and  in  a 
continual  seeking  Him  and  lifting  up  our  hearts  to  Him  in  prayer.  (Vol.  Nalson.) 
God's  relation  to  evil : — There  is  a  very  dark  side  to  human  history :  calamity, 
disappointment,  disease,  death  are  facts  and  factors  in  human  history  that  no 
one  of  us  can  deny.  And  the  minds  of  men  have  always  been  attempting  a  solution 
of  this  dark  aspect  of  human  experience.  There  have  been  three  solutions  which 
have  been  suggested:  (1)  We  have  been  told  that  this  is  the  work  of  chance, 
that  man  is  forced  up  and  down  on  the  capricious  waves  of  fate.  (2)  A  second 
attempt  at  solution  has  been  made  by  those  who  tell  us  that  there  are  twe  powers 
in  the  universe,  one  good  and  one  evil :  that  to  the  good  power  all  benevolent 
developments  of  human  history  are  to  be  traced  ;  that  to  the  evil  power  all  male- 
volent activities  are  to  be  traced,  and  that  there  is  no  telling  which  is  the  stronger, 
the  benevolent  or  the  malignant — that  now  it  seems  as  though  the  good  triumphed, 
and  now  it  seems  as  though  the  evil  triumphed  ;  and  so  the  old  Persians  embraced 
what  has  been  called  the  dual  theory,  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  the  good  and  the 
evil.  (3)  The  Holy  Scriptures  teach  us  quite  another  solution,  and  it  is  the  only 
one  that  brings  comfort  to  a  human  soul.  That  solution  is,  that  human  history 
is  the  unfolding  of  the  plan  of  God  ;  that  in  the  darker  and  in  the  brighter  aspects 
of  human  experience  God  is  still  ruling ;  that  He  governs  absolutely ;  that  there 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  485 

is  a  moral  purpose  in  things  evil :  that  success  comes  out  of  failure,  and  prosperity 
out  of  adversity,  and  that  therefore  we  are  to  rejoice  evermore,  because  He  occupies 
the  throne ;  and  when  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him,  be  assured 
that,  within  the  clouds  and  behind  the  darkness,  righteousness  and  judgment 
inhabit  that  throne.  (A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  The  Divine  sovereignty: — If  you 
take  the  Bible,  and  study  this  subject  from  Genesis  to  Revelation,  it  will  grow 
upon  you  how  magnificently  awful  is  this  sovereignty  of  God.  Take  the  ten 
plagues  of  Egypt ;  they  were  an  early  lesson  in  human  history  about  this  sove- 
reignty of  God,  that  reaches  through  all  things  as  well  as  to  all  creatures.  In 
these  ten  plagues,  for  instance,  we  have  examples  of  God's  control  over  the  forces 
of  nature.  In  those  same  plagues  we  have  illustrations  of  God's  control  over 
animated  nature.  And  we  have  illustrated  God's  control  over  those  subtle  and 
mysterious  influences  that  we  cannot  define,  and  the  nature  of  which  we  do  not 
understand,  but  which  lie  at  the  bottom  of  disease — the  murrain  among  cattle, 
the  boils  and  the  blains,  the  death  of  the  firstborn.  Now,  if  we  pass  along  in  this 
remarkable  history  we  shall  next  meet,  in  Exodus  xxiii.,  the  declaration,  "  I  will 
send  the  hornet  before  you,  and  drive  out  the  people  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  that 
ye  may  take  possession."  We  go  still  further,  and  we  read,  in  the  Book  of  the 
Psalms,  that  fie  "called  for  the  famine" ;  as  though  the  famine  were  an  obedient 
servant,  summoned  to  the  Master's  presence,  to  go  forth  and  do  the  Master's 
bidding.  In  these  Psalms  we  are  likewise  told  that  He  makes  the  winds  His 
messengers,  and  the  flames  of  fire  His  ministers.  In  Isaiah  liv.  we  are  told 
distinctly,  "  I  have  created  the  waster  to  destroy."  We  pass  to  the  Book  of 
Jonah,  and  Jonah  is  a  revelation  of  the  sovereignty  of  God  in  human  affairs. 
For  instance,  we  are  told  here,  in  four  separate  places,  how  the  Lord  had  "  pre- 
pared a  great  fish  "  to  swallow  Jonah,  and  He  spake  unto  the  fish."  "  The 
Lord  prepared  a  gourd,"  and  made  it  to  come  up  over  Jonah.  "  The  Lord 
prepared  a  worm,"  that  it  might  smite  the  gourd.  The  Lord  "  prepared  a 
vehement  east  wind,"  that  it  might  smite  upon  the  head  of  Jonah.  Notice  the 
comprehensiveness  of  these  declarations.  God  controls  the  wind,  which  is  not  an 
intelligent  form  of  life ;  God  controls  the  gourd,  which  belongs  to  the  vegetable 
kingdom;  God  controls  the  worm  that  is  among  the  insects;  God  controls  the 
great  fish  that  is  among  those  that  swim  the  waters.  Turn  now  to  the  Book  of  Joel, 
i.  4.  And  what  does  he  say  in  ii.  25  ?  "  And  I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that 
the  locust  hath  eaten,  the  cankerworm,  and  the  caterpillar,  and  the  palmerworm, 
My  great  army  which  I  sent  among  you."  There  is  no  more  sublimely  awful  verse  in 
the  whole  Old  Testament  than  that — "  My  great  army  which  I  sent  among  you." 
And  just  think  what  an  army  is  this  going  forth  in  four  detachments  one  after  the 
other  !  The  student  of  history  will  observe  that  about  three  times  in  a  century 
there  comes  among  men  some  form  of  disease  with  regard  to  which  science  is  utterly 
ignorant  and  impotent.  No  one  knows  how  to  prevent  it,  no  one  knows  how 
to  cure  the  disasters  which  it  engenders.  And  it  is  another  remarkable  fact, 
that  just  as  soon  as  science  begins  to  have  a  limited  control  over  these  forms 
of  scourge  a  new  plague  develops  about  which  they  know  nothing  ;  simply  show- 
ing that  Almighty  God  has  not  surrendered  the  throne  of  the  universe,  nor  given 
up  His  control  even  over  the  malignant  and  destructive  forces  of  nature.  If  God 
did  not  keep  the  scourges  of  nature  doing  their  work,  the  human  race  would  rot 
in  its  own  iniquity.  (Ibid.)  God's  judgments  and  their  lessons: — AVhat  are 
we  to  understand  by  "  judgments  of  God  "  ?  Judgments  are  the  activities  of  a 
judge,  and  a  judge  is  one  that  scans  the  conduct  of  men,  and  visits  it  accordingly. 
We  do  not  say,  of  course,  that  every  individual  instance  of  suffering  from  this 
chastisement  is  an  individual  instance  of  judgment  for  personal  sin.  We  are  bound 
up  in  society,  and  it  is  impossible  that  a  scourge  shall  come  down  upon  the  human 
family  that  does  not  involve  the  good  as  well  as  the  wicked  ;  for  we  are  dependent 
upon  one  another,  and  intimately  associated  in  social  fife.  Why  are  these  judg- 
ments of  God  visited  ?  1.  There  is  judgment  on  the  sin  of  dirt,  on  the  sin  of 
physical  uncleanness,  unwholesome  habits,  unwholesome  diet,  clothiDg,  habita- 
tion ;  and  for  that  reason  the  most  of  these  scourges  originate  in  those  districts 
where  humanity  is  most  thickly  congregated,  and  where  all  sanitary  laws  are 
sot  at  defiance.  2.  There  are  God's  judgments  on  moral  iniquity.  3.  These 
scourges  are  God's  judgments  on  the  sin  of  greed  and  selfishness.  Think  how 
many  forms  of  social  evil  there  are  in  the  various  communities  that  are  upheld 
by  the  greed  and  selfishness  of  man.  4.  There  are  two  sorts  of  judgments  :  one 
the  temporal,  which  is  corrective  and  preventive ;  the  other  the  eternal,  which 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv* 

is  punitive  and  retributive  only.  It  is  to  the  former  that  the  reference  is  made — ■ 
these  judgments  that  are  "  in  the  earth,"  not  in  the  next  world  or  in  the  next 
life.  And  these  judgments  are  designed  not  to  be  retributive,  but  to  be  corrective 
of  iniquity  and  preventive  of  further  sin.  Therefore,  just  as  soon  as  these  judg- 
ments come  upon  the  people,  they  should  begin  to  inquire  what  laws  of  God  have 
been  violated  that  ought  to  be  obeyed.  (Ibid.)  The  God  of  judgment  : — la 
the  Catskill  Mountains,  about  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  an  infidel  got  up  on 
one  of  those  heights,  and,  in  the  presence  of  some  atheistic  companions,  defied 
the  God  of  heaven  to  show  Himself  in  battle.  He  swung  his  sword  to  and  fro, 
and  challenged  the  Almighty  to  meet  him  in  single  combat.  The  Almighty 
paid  no  attention  to  him,  of  course ;  but  He  just  commissioned  a  little  gnat, 
so  small  that  it  could  scarcely  be  seen  by  a  microscope,  to  lodge  in  his  windpipe 
and  choke  him  to  death.  (Ibid.)  God's  judgment  on  American  slavery : — 
It  reigned  in  the  United  States  of  America  for  a  hundred  years.  It  was  defended 
by  almost  the  entire  body  of  preachers  in  the  southern  States — defended  and 
upheld,  and  its  extension  vindicated  and  advocated.  And  then  God  brought 
an  awful  war  of  four  years'  duration  upon  the  United  States,  and  Mr.  Lincoln, 
that  heroic  man  in  the  midst  of  that  country,  made  this  significant  announce- 
ment :  "  It  would  not  surprise  me  if,  in  view  of  the  long-continued  oppression 
of  the  slave  in  this  country,  it  should  please  Almighty  God  that  this  war  shall 
not  cease  until  the  life  of  one  freeman  has  been  exacted  for  the  life  of  every 
slave  that  has  been  sacrificed  during  these  hundred  years."  And  the  cost  of 
that  American  war  was  500,000  people  killed,  300,000  people  maimed,  300,000 
women  made  widows,  700,000  children  made  orphans,  and  3000  millions  of  dollars, 
or  600  million  sterling  expended.  God's  judgment  on  the  sin  of  greed  and  selfish- 
ness! (Ibid.)  Pestilence  and  prayer: — Minnesota  is  the  centre  of  the  great 
western  granary  of  the  world.  There  came  down  upon  those  splendid  fields  that 
extend  over  thousands  of  acres,  without  even  the  division  of  a  fence,  an  awful 
scourge,  known  as  the  grasshopper  scourge.  Nothing  could  be  done  by  man  to 
remove  the  scourge.  The  grasshoppers  laid  their  eggs,  and  the  next  year,  as  soon 
as  the  wheat  appeared,  the  destructive  insect  appeared  alongside  of  it,  and  the 
utmost  zeal  and  effort  of  the  farmers  failed  even  to  abate  this  dreadful  pestilence. 
The  governor  of  Minnesota,  who  was  a  very  high-toned  Christian  gentleman, 
called  upon  the  people  of  the  State  to  observe  a  day  of  fasting,  humiliation,  and 
prayer  for  the  removal  of  the  plague.  Secular  papers,  and  especially  the  infidel 
papers,  scouted  the  idea  of  reaching  this  natural  visitation  of  insects  by  an  appeal 
to  God.  They  made  the  thing  as  ridiculous  as  they  could  make  it,  but  still  the 
Christian  people  assembled  in  their  places  of  prayer,  and  many  came  together 
on  the  appointed  day.  Spring  came,  the  wheat  began  to  appear  in  the  furrow, 
and  the  grasshopper  appeared  alongside  of  the  wheat ;  and  then  the  secular 
papers,  that  had  scorned  the  idea  of  prayer  to  Almighty  God,  said,  "  Where  is 
the  result  of  your  day  of  prayer,  and  fasting,  and  humiliation  ?  "  The  grass- 
hoppers developed,  but  at  the  same  time  there  developed  a  parasite  that  attached 
itself  to  the  grasshopper  and  accomplished  two  results.  In  the  first  place,  it 
made  the  grasshopper  impotent  to  harm  the  wheat ;  and  in  the  second  place — 
which  was  more  important — it  made  the  grasshopper  impotent  to  reproduce 
itself.  And  from  that  year  there  has  been  no  scourge  of  grasshoppers  in  the 
State  of  Minnesota.  And  so  the  righteous  have  seen  it  and  rejoiced,  and  all 
iniquity  has  stopped  her  mouth  in  the  presence  of  the  manifest  interposition  of 
God.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Let  favour  be  shewed  to  the  wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn 
righteousness.  —  Insensibility  of  the  wicked :  —  God  has  written,  and  spread 
before  mankind,  three  large  books,  all  of  which  are  legible  and  intelligible  to 
such  as  have  eyes  to  see  and  a  disposition  of  mind  to  read  them  with  attention. 
These  are,  the  books  of  Nature,  of  Scripture,  and  of  Providence.  None  of  these 
books  should  be  despised,  overlooked,  or  neglected.  To  this  last  our  attention 
is  called  by  the  words  of  the  text.  I.  What  is  implied  in  leabning  righteous- 
ness. It  is  true  righteousness  which  is  here  meant.  1.  Not  hypocritical 
righteousness,  like  that  of  many  of  the  Pharisees.  2.  Not  ceremonial  righteous- 
ness, like  that  of  most  of  the  Jews,  who  confided  in  circumcision  and  other 
ceremonies  of  their  law.  'S.  Not  partial  and  inconstant  righteousness,  such  as  the 
tithing  of  "  mint,  and  anise,  and  cummin,"  and  the  neglecting  of  "  the  weightier 
matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy,  and  faith  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  23).     4.  Not  merely 


otap.  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  487 

external  righteousness,  such  as  that  of  St.  Paul  before  his  illumination,  and  that 
of  all  unawakened  sinners.  5.  Not  our  own  righteousness  (Phil.  iii.  9) ;  a  right- 
eousness proceeding  from  and  terminating  in  ourselves,  performed  by  the  mere 
strength  of  nature,  and  in  obedience  to  an  outward  law;  which  implies  neither 
forgiveness  of  the  past,  nor  renovation  for  the  present,  nor  holiness  for  the  future, 
bat  leaves  the  soul  under  guilt,  and  in  its  natural  state  of  depravity  and  weakness. 
6.  True  righteousness  is  intended :  that  which  was  possessed  by  "  righteous 
Abel "  and  others.  It  is  that  righteousness  through  which  "  grace  reigns  unto 
eternal  life  "  (Rom.  v.  21).  This  righteousness  must  be  learned  by  experience 
and  practice.  We  must  be  heartily  convinced  of  our  unrighteousness,  humbled 
on  that  account,  and  brought  to  repentance.  We  must  cordially  embrace  Chr'st 
by  faith.  Consider  the  vast  importance  of  learning  righteousness  in  this 
sense.  All  other  learning,  as  of  sciences,  arts,  gaining  wealth,  or  power,  or  honour, 
is,  compared  to  this,  insignificant.  This  is  the  end  of  all  providential  dispen- 
sations, and  especially  of  God's  judgments  in  the  earth  :  to  teach  us  righteousness. 
II.  When  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  mankind  will  leaen  righteousness. 
"  When  Thy  judgments  are  in  the  earth."  The  judgments  of  God  in  Scripture 
often  mean  His  ordinances,  or  His  laws  (Psa.  cxix.  7 ;  Ezek.  v.  6-8,  10).  These, 
if  attended  to,  would  teach  us  righteousness.  But,  alas  !  they  are  neglected 
or  abused.  It  becomes,  therefore,  necessary  God  should  give  us  judgments 
of  another  kind,  and  such  as  are  here  chiefly  meant,  as  the  sword,  the  famine, 
and  the  pestilence  (Ezek.  vii.  15,  xiv.  12-21).  These  visitations  cause  thought- 
fulness.  They  cause  a  spirit  of  prayer  for  Divine  light  and  grace ;  the  rectifying 
of  our  mistaken  views  of  God's  government  of  the  world,  and  of  the  nature  and 
obligation  of  holiness  ;  the  acknowledgment  of  His  righteousness  in  thus  correcting 
us ;  humiliation  and  contrition ;  hatred  to  sin,  the  evil  of  which  we  are  now 
so  severely  taught ;  reformation  of  life ;  deadness  to  the  world,  the  vanity  and 
misery  of  which  we  now  see  and  feel.  They  cause  us  to  seek  all  our  happiness 
in  God,  as  the  only  certain  source  of  felicity,  and  they  cause  subjection  to  His 
will ;  these  judgments  naturally  tending  to  subdue  us.  They  actually  do  produce 
this  effect  on  the  people  of  God,  and  on  persons  disposed  to  be  His  people 
(vers.  8,  9).  It  is,  moreover,  highly  reasonable  they  should  have  this  effect. 
Those  thus  chastised  may  hereby  see  that  God  governs  the  world,  and  that  He 
does  not  connive  at  sin,  but  severely  punishes  it ;  and  that  "it  is  an  evil  thing 
and  bitter  to  forsake  the  Lord  God,"  whether  as  individuals,  families,  or  as 
a  nation.  But  it  may  be  asked,  Will  not  gentler  methods  answer  the  same 
end  T  To  answer  this  inquiry  brings  me  to  show — III.  If  they  do  not  learn 
righteousness  then,  there  is  reason  to  fear  they  never  will  (ver.  10). 
(J.  Benson,  D.D.)  Man's  wickedness  provokes  Clod's  wrath : — I.  Sinners 
walk  contrary  to  God,  and  refuse  to  comply  with  the  means  used  for  their 
reformation,  and  to  answer  the  intentions  of  them.  1.  Favour  is  showed  to  them. 
Yet  it  is  all  in  vain.  They  will  not  learn  righteousness  ;  will  not  be  led  to  repent- 
ance by  the  goodness  of  God.  2.  They  live  in  a  "  land  of  uprightness,"  where 
religion  is  professed  and  is  in  reputation,  and  the  Word  of  God  preached,  and 
where  they  have  manv  good  examples  set  them  ;  yet  there  they  will  deal  unjustly, 
and  go  on  frowardly  in  their  evil  ways.  They  that  do  wickedly  deal  unjustly 
both  with  God  and  man,  and  with  their  own  souls.  God's  majesty  appears 
in  all  the  dispensations  of  His  providence,  but  they  regard  it  not,  and  therefore 
study  not  to  answer  the  ends  of  those  dispensations.  3.  God  lifts  up  His  hand 
to  give  them  warning,  that  they  may,  by  repentance  and  prayer,  make  their 
peace  with  Him ;  but  they  take  no  notice  of  it,  are  not  aware  that  God  is  angry 
with  them,  or  coming  forth  against  them ;  "  they  will  not  see  " — and  none  so 
blind  as  those  that  will  not  see — who  ascribe  that  to  chance  or  common  fate 
which  is  manifestly  a  Divine  rebuke.  II.  God  wtll  at  length  be  too 
hard  for  them.  When  He  judgeth  He  will  overcome.  "  They  will  not 
see,  but  they  shall  see."  They  will  not  see  the  evil  of  sin,  and  particularly 
the  sin  of  hating  and  persecuting  the  people  of  God ;  but  they  shall  see, 
by  the  tokens  of  God's  displeasure  against  them  for  it,  and  the  deliverances 
in  which  God  will  plead  His  people's  cause,  that  what  is  done  against 
them  He  takes  as  done  against  Himself,  and  will  reckon  for  it  accordingly. 
"  They  shall  see  "  that  they  have  done  God's  people  a  great  deal  of  wrong, 
and  therefore  shall  "  be  ashamed "  of  their  enmity,  and  envy  towards 
them,  and  their  ill  usage  of  such  as  deserved  better  treatment.  (Matthew 
Henry.) 


488  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvl. 

Ver.  11.  Lord,  when  Thy  hand  is  lifted  up  they  will  not  see.— Man's 
blindness  to  the  Divine  working : — Modern  scepticism  seeks  to  undeify  the 
Deity ;  and  yet,  feeling  that  man  must  have  a  god  of  some  sort,  it  deifies 
nature,  and  invests  matter  and  the  laws  of  the  universe  with  the  attributes  of 
Divinity.  This  is  no  new  form  of  scepticism.  The  same  evil  existed  among 
the  Jews  in  the  days  of  Isaiah.  To  this  the  prophet  emphatically  refers  in  our 
text.  The  lifting  up  of  the  hand  refers  to  the  gracious  and  loving  tokens  He 
had  given  of  Himself;  but  a  wilful  blindness  hid  the  Divine  glory  from  the  people. 
I.  Man's  blindness  to  the  Divine  working — 1.  In  the  realm  of  matter.  There 
are  men  who,  while  they  behold  and  admire  the  work,  care  not  to  see  or  own 
the  Worker.  2.  In  the  realm  of  history.  Men  who  look  at  events,  whether 
small  or  great,  in  the  lives  of  individuals  or  of  nations,  and  are  content  to  account 
for  them  by  alluding  simply  to  second  causes,  without  caring  to  trace  the  hand 
of  God,  are  guilty  of  the  sin  to  which  the  text  refers.  National  sins  bring  national 
judgments.  One  wicked  king  is  often  employed  to  scourge  another,  and  when 
the  scourger  has  done  his  work,  then  he  himself  in  turn  is  also  scourged.  One 
wioked  nation  is  employed  to  punish  another  for  its  sins,  to  humble  its  pride, 
and  to  check  its  guilty  ambition.  3.  In  the  realm  of  spirit.  A  vile  and  wicked 
person  enters  the  sanctuary.  His  character  is  notoriously  bad.  He  takes  his 
seat  in  the  pew  beside  you.  During  the  service,  God  by  His  Spirit  comes  down 
upon  him  with  mighty  power.  In  answer  to  his  prayer  he  experiences  a  renewal 
of  heart.  He  announces  the  fact  to  you.  And  yet  you  think  little  or  nothing 
about  it.  This  does  not  affect  you  half  as  much  as  if  you  were  told  that  you 
had  made  a  hundred  pounds  by  some  fortunate  speculation.  Look  at  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  Gethsemane.  The  case  is  unique.  Innocence  is  in  agony.  A  merciful 
God  pours  the  sorrows  of  abandonment  and  death  into  the  soul  of  our  holy  Sub- 
stitute. Yet  His  friends,  His  disciples,  for  whom  He  suffers,  are  fast  asleep. 
But  the  disciples  are  only  types  of  other  men.  II.  The  causes  of  this  blind- 
ness. 1.  Ignorance.  The  heathen,  having  no  direct  written  revelation,  are 
in  darkness,  and  know  not  the  truth.  But  their  blindness  to  the  supernatural 
can  scarcely  be  pronounced  wilful  or  criminal ;  it  must  be  regarded  as  the  fruit 
of  ignorance.  But  as  ignorance  cannot  be  pleaded  in  our  case,  with  our  fulness 
of  light,  our  blindness  is  wilful.  2.  Indifference.  3.  Absorption  of  thought 
in  other  things.  4.  Pride  of  intellect.  This  reason  reveals  itself  in  the  undue 
homage  rendered  to  human  reason.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  must  give  way 
to  "  Thus  saith  human  reason."  6.  Pride  of  heart.  It  develops  itself  in  an 
obstinate  refusal  to  submit  to  the  authority  of  God.  III.  The  bemoval  of  this 
blindness.  "  They  shall  see,  and  be  ashamed,"  &c.  1.  Sometimes  men  are 
brought  to  see  by  sad  calamities  and  sore  judgments.  2.  Men  are  also  brought 
to  see  by  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  Many  will  see  God  in  the  hour  of 
death.  At  the  moment  of  dissolution,  who  will  venture  to  say  what  strange 
visions  of  the  supernatural  will  people  the  whole  scene  around  them  ?  Every 
object  then  will  seem  full  of  God.  4.  In  the  day  of  judgment  all  men  shall  see. 
God  will  vindicate  Himself,  and  overthrow  the  unbelief  of  His  deniers  by  a  per- 
sonal revelation  of  Himself.  6.  The  result  of  all  this  unveiling  will  be  shame 
and  envy.  (1)  Whether  the  discovery  of  God  is  made  here  or  hereafter,  shame 
must  inevitably  be  the  result.  In  the  one  case  it  will  be  the  shame  of  the  penitent 
returning  to  God,  full  of  conscious  guilt ;  in  the  other  it  will  be  the  shame  of  utter 
despair.  It  is  to  the  latter  our  text  refers.  It  is  the  shame  of  those  who  shall 
discover  that  they  have  wronged  God,  when  there  is  no  possibility  of  repairing 
the  wrong.  When  the  man  discovers  in  the  light  of  the  future  how  full  every- 
thing is  of  God,  how  God  pervades  all,  he  will  be  covered  with  shame — shame 
at  his  folly  in  resisting  evidences  so  clear  and  conclusive ;  shame  for  having 
denied  and  rejected  so  reasonable  and  so  elevating  a  system  as  Christianity; 
shame  for  having  espoused  so  unreasonable  and  so  degrading  a  theory  as  infidelity 
(2)  Another  result  will  be  envy.  They  shall  "  be  ashamed  for  their  envy  at  the 
people."  In  the  margin  it  is  rendered,  "  Ashamed  of  their  envy  toward  Thy 
people."  It  seems  a  startling  truth,  that  the  wicked,  at  some  future  period 
of  their  history,  shall  have  such  an  insight  into  the  glorious  inheritance  of  the 

food  as  to  have  a  clear  conception  of  what  they  themselves  might  have  obtained 
y  grace,  and  of  what  they  have  lost  by  sin.  This  solemn  truth  is  alluded  to 
several  times  in  the  sacred  Scriptures.  Our  Saviour  saith,  "  There  shall  be  weeping 
and  gnashing  of  teeth  when  ye  shall  see  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  and  all 
the  prophets  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  you  yourselves  thrust  out."     The  rich 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  489 

man  saw  Lazarus  in  Abraham's  bosom.  When  the  unbelieving  shall  see  the 
glorious  portion  of  those  who  have  believed,  and  contrast  it  with  their  own 
degrading  wretchedness,  they  will  envy  the  glorified,  and  be  ashamed  of  that 
very  envy.     (jR.  Roberta.) 

Ver.  12.  Lord,  Thou  wilt  ordain  peace  for  us. — God  ordaining  -peace : — The 
expression  seems  to  allude  to  the  action  of  a  commander-in-chief  in  the  army, 
who  marshals  his  soldiers  according  to  the  plan  he  had  formed,  and  assigns  to  each 
the  proper  station  which  he  is  to  occupy  in  carrying  into  execution  his  projected 
enterprises.  It  plainly  intimates  the  lively  hope  which  they  felt  that  the  supreme 
Disposer  of  all  persons  and  events  would  be  graciously  pleased  to  assign  for  them 
both  outward  and  inward  tranquillity.  (R.  Macculloch.)  National  peace  the 
gift  of  God  (1814) .- — I.  What  there  is  in  the  restoration  of  peace,  generally 
considered,  to  excitb  our  gratitudb.  1.  The  first  consequence  of  peace  which 
naturally  presents  itself  to  our  attention  is,  that  the  effusion  of  human  blood  is 
stayed.  2.  The  injurious  effects  produced  by  war  upon  the  human  character 
afford  another  reason  for  thanksgiving  on  the  return  of  peace.  It  is  impossible 
that  a  state  of  warfare  should  be  long  continued  without  greatly  deteriorating, 
in  some  important  respects,  both  individual  and  national  character.  War  is 
unfriendly  to  humanity.  Tender  as  the  heart  may  naturally  be,  the  frequent 
recurrence  of  scenes  of  suffering  tends  to  harden  it.  During  the  state  of  warfare, 
too,  communities  are  usually  distracted  by  intestine  dissensions  ;  and  political 
strife  gives  birth  to  no  virtues.  Another  effect  of  war  is,  that,  when  long-continued, 
it  embitters  the  animosities  of  nations,  and  tends  to  confirm  those  national  anti- 
pathies which,  if  unchecked  by  peace,  would  settle  into  a  confirmed  and  malignant 
hatred.  3.  A  third  reason  for  gratitude  with  reference  to  the  peace  is,  that  it  has 
been  produced  by  the  signal  triumph  of  a  righteous  cause.  Peace  is  not  alwa  s  a 
blessing.  In  some  cases  it  is  only  a  term  for  the  stillness,  the  quiet  of  desolation 
and  death.  Peace  is  often  the  result  of  the  superiority  acquired  by  the  aggressor. 
The  cause  of  right  does  not  always  at  once  prevail.  4.  We  rejoice  in  peace  as 
the  completion  of  a  course  of  providential  dispensations  highly  conducive  to  the 
instruction  of  the  world.  II.  What  there  is  in  the  particular  circumstances 
of  this  country  to  warrant  us  in  considering  the  blessing  as  of  special 
and  particular  value.  1.  We  have  preserved  our  national  honour.  2.  The 
peace  was  seasonable.  3.  The  peace  may  be  considered  indicative  of  the  Divine 
favour  and  approbation.  4.  We  see  a  particular  reason  to  be  thankful  for  peace, 
as  it  will  increase  our  means  of  promoting  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  world, 
and  thus  establish  our  national  prosperity  by  continuing  to  us  the  blessing  of 
God.  III.  The  reason  of  our  thankful  acknowledgment  of  God.  He  is 
the  giver  of  the  blessing  of  peace.  "  Thou  hast  ordained  peace  for  us."  This  is 
a  most  important  principle ;  and  if  our  hearts  be  not  firmly  grounded  in  it,  our 
thanksgivings  are  mockery  ;  for  why  do  we  thank  Him,  if  we  ascribe  the  work  to 
second  causes  ?  (R.  Watson.)  Peace  from  God: — A  tourist  writes  of  a  spring 
as  sweet  as  any  that  ever  gushed  from  sunny  hillside,  which  one  day  he  found  by 
the  sea  when  the  tides  had  ebbed  away.  Taking  his  cup  he  tasted  the  water  and  it 
was  sweet.  Soon  the  sea  came  again  and  poured  its  bitter  surf  over  the  little 
spring,  hiding  it  out  of  sight.  When  the  tide  ebbed  away  again,  the  tourist  stood 
once  more  by  the  spring  to  see  if  the  brackish  waves  had  left  their  bitterness  in 
its  waters  ;  but  they  were  sweet  as  ever.  This  is  a  picture  of  the  peace  in  the 
heart  of  the  Christian  when  floods  of  bitter  sorrow  and  trial  sweep  over  his  life. 
From  secret  wells  the  sweet  waters  flow,  crystal  and  fresh  as  ever.  They  have 
their  source  in  the  heart  of  God.     (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Other  lords  beside  Thee  have  had  dominion  over  us.— The 
captivity  and  the  return  : — About  five  hundred  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ  an 
event  occurred  which  stands  almost  alone  in  the  world's  history.  After  a  long 
period  of  exile  a  whole  nation,  at  least  so  much  of  it  as  was  disposed,  was  freely 
permitted  to  return  to  its  own  land.  The  despotic  king  under  whose  sceptre  they 
were  then  living  not  (  nly  issued  an  edict  to  that  effect,  but  gave  up  the  sacred 
vessels  of  the  Holy  House  which  had  been  brought  away  as  trophies  by  previous 
monarchs,  empowered  the  leader  of  the  host  to  draw  on  the  royal  treasury  for 
whatever  might  be  necessary  to  refurnish  the  Holy  House,  and  supplied  him 
liberally  with  money,  corn,  wine,  and  oil  for  the  homeward  journey.  For  three 
days  that  mighty  host  of  returning  exiles  rested  in  their  tents  on  the  banks  of  the 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

Ahava.  A  solemn  and  sacred  fast  succeeded.  Then  came  the  marshalling  of  the 
enormous  caravan.  At  last,  on  the  dawning  of  the  fifteenth  morning  from  their 
first  setting  out,  they  began  in  real  earnest  their  homeward  march.  Four  long 
and  wearisome  months  did  that  great  caravan  of  exiles  creep  on  towards  their 
beloved  land.  At  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  month,  with  their  ranks  greatly 
swelled  by  others  who  had  joined  them  during  their  progress,  they  stood  in  sight 
of  Jerusalem.  The  song  now  I  roke  forth,  "  We  have  a  strong  city  :  salvation 
will  God  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks  "  ;  to  which  a  chorus  of  many  thousand 
voices  responded,  "  Open  ye  the  gates,  that  the  righteous  nation  which  keepeth 
truth  may  enter  in."  Then  followed  the  declaration  of  the  first  voices,  "  Thou 
wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee.  Trust  ye  in  the 
Lord  for  ever  ;  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength."  So  the  mighty 
song  of  praise  rolled  on,  until,  with  all  voices  blending  as  the  voice  of  many  waters, 
the  words  were  heard,  "  0  Jehovah  our  God  !  other  lords  beside  Thee  have  ruled 
over  us ;  but  henceforth  Thee,  Thy  name  only,  will  we  celebrate.  They  are 
dead,  they  shall  not  li  v  e ;  they  are  shades,  they  shall  not  rise  ;  because  Thou  hast 
visited  and  destroyed  them,  and  hast  made  all  their  memory  to  perish."  In  effect 
these  words  describe  the  whole  history  of  that  nation  in  its  exile,  and  its  purpose 
now  it  had  come  back  to  Judah.  (J.  J.  Ooadby. )  Bondage  and  freedom  : — A 
nation  is,  after  all,  only  an  aggregate  of  single  units ;  and  that  which  is  thus 
declared  of  a  whole  nation  was  equally  true  of  each  separate  ma  i  of  whom  that 
nation  was  composed.  It  is  the  history  and  purpose  of  a  single  soul.  I.  Here  is 
an  illustration  of  the  manifold  bondage  of  the  soul.  The  Jews  had  bowed 
before  many  idols.  They  had  served  under  many  kings.  Each  idol  and  king 
had  ruled  them  according  to  the  caprice  of  the  hiero  hants  or  viziers.  There 
are  also  many  lords  who  rule  over  the  souls  of  men  ;  whose  dominion  is  capricious, 
despotic,  and  even  destructive.  1.  There  is  worldliness,  one  of  the  hardest  of 
tyrants.  2.  Closely  akin  to  worldliness  is  frivolity ;  the  disposition  which  shows 
itself  in  a  strong  dislike  to  anything  grave  in  thought,  or  speech,  or  life  ;  a  vague 
belief,  so  far  as  frivolity  can  entertain  belief,  that  the  chief  end  in  life  is  to  be 
amused.  3.  Others  are  in  the  thralls  of  doubt.  One  man  doubts  concerning 
all  goodness  whatsoever.  He  has  been  bitterly  deceived  by  some  unworthy  man 
who  had  won  his  confidence,  and  he  refuses  to  believe  now  that  disinterestedness 
is  possible  in  any  quarter.  Another  man  doubts  whether  it  be  possible  to  discover 
truth  amidst  such  a  wrangle  of  apparently  conflicting  opinions  upon  it.  Perhaps 
he  has  allowed  his  mind  to  be  biassed  in  one  direction,  and  has  never  seriously 
set  hims  If  to  get  free  from  his  bias.  Or,  he  may  never  have  struggled  after  the 
truth  with  any  deep  and  true  wrestling  of  soul.  A  third  has  doubts  concerning 
evangelic  Christianity.  A  fourth  doubts  of  the  possibility  of  his  own  salvation. 
4.  There  are  other  forms  of  tyranny  over  the  soul ;  e.g.,  the  slavery  of  that  which  is 
known  to  be  sin.  The  particular  kind  of  sin  differs  with  different  men.  6.  Does 
it  not  become  of  unspeakable  interest  to  know  if  deliverance  can  actually  be 
secured  ;  by  whom  it  is  to  be  effected,  and  by  what  means ;  and  what  are  the 
signs  that  freedom  has  been  actually  obtained  T  To  all  these  questions  the  song 
of  the  liber  ted  exiles  points  to  the  sufficient  answer.  "  O  Jehovah  our  God  ! 
other  lords  beside  Thee  have  ruled  over  us,"  &c.  II.  Jehovah  was  the  Author 
of  the  Jews'  liberation :  God  alone  effects  the  deliverance  of  the  soul.  1.  He 
conceived  the  plan  of  that  redemption,  not  as  a  temporary  expedient,  a  Divine 
after-thought,  but  as  an  "  eternal  purpose  which  He  purposed  in  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord."  2.  The  method  of  this  deliverance  is  also  depicted  in  the 
words  of  the  exiles.  "  Thou  hast  visited  and  destroyed  them."  "  Visited,"  that 
is,  searched  out  with  the  keenest  scrutiny,  examined,  exposed.  How,  then,  does 
God  "  visit "  these  tyrants  of  man's  soul  ?  He  reveals  their  true  character  to 
those  who  are  under  their  ('ominion.  God  lays  bare  the  worthlessness  and  the 
wickedness  of  worl  liness,  frivolity,  and  sin.  Sometimes  He  does  this  by  the 
force  of  contrast,  bringing  in  close  proximity  the  brightness  of  an  opposite  life 
to  the  life  which  w  ourselves  are  living.  Sometimes  He  awakens  a  seed  of  Divine 
truth  that  has  long  been  buried  in  our  hearts.  Sometimes  the  revelation  is  made 
by  creating  a  sense  of  satiety,  or  of  nausea.  Sometimes  the  change  is  produced 
by  incidents  of  God's  good  providence.  But  the  one  great  means  which  Divine 
wisdom  has  set  apart  for  the  spiritual  liberation  of  man  is — the  Gospel  of  His  love. 
3.  There  are,  therefore,  certain  criteria  by  which  men  may  surely  know  that  they 
have  actually  entered  this  condition  of  freedom.  One  is,  their  relation  to  the 
past.     The  Jews  did  not  forget  the  hard  usage  they  i  ad  received  from  those  idol 


ohap.  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  491 

priests  and  capricious  tyrants  who  had  "  ruled  them  with  a  rod  of  iron."  But 
the  grave  closed  over  their  oppressors,  one  after  another.  They  were  extinct 
tyrants ;  "  shades,"  not  men ;  powerless  phantoms,  fallen  to  rise  no  more. 
They  were  remembered,  but  as  dead  men.  Nor  can  any  one  who  has  obtained 
spiritual  deliverance  utterly  forget  the  past.  The  recollection  of  what  that  past 
was  flits  across  the  mind,  like  a  cloud  over  the  face  of  the  sun  at  noonday.  But 
there  is  no  desire  to  return  to  that  condition.  The  past  has  lost  its  power  of 
attraction,  and  has  become  hateful.  The  old  tyrants  are  dead  ;  and  so  long  as 
we  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  they  shall  live  no  more.  There  is,  further, 
the  soul's  relation  to  the  future.  "  But  henceforth  Thee,  Thy  name  onl  /,  will  we 
celebrate."  Whatever  allegiance  may  have  been  rendered  to  others  in  the  past, 
the  allegiance  is  now  to  be  given  alone  to  God.  We  have  also  the  idea  of  service. 
The  "  celebration  "  is  incomplete  without  this,  the  worship  a  solemn  and  offensive 
pretence.  But  he  who  worships  most  sincerely  is  certain  to  live  most  uprightly. 
He  is  bound  to  faithful  service  by  the  strongest  of  all  ties — the  tie  of  a  grateful 
love.  4.  "  But,"  says  some  one,  "  is  not  this  mere  poetic  exaggeration  ?  Where  are 
the  proofs  that  this  freedom  has  actually  been  won  ?  "  Where  T  In  every  age 
of  the  Church's  history,  from  the  day  when  publicans  and  sinners  crowded  about 
the  pathway  of  the  Divine  Redeemer,  until  this  hour.  The  Gospel  is  not  an 
exhausted  force.  It  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  to  every  one  that 
believeth."  (Ibid.)  The  moral  history  of  the  soul  : — Here  we  have  the  soul  under 
the  sway — I.  Of  many  deities.  "Other  lords  beside  Thee."  The  Jews  in 
Babylon  had  knelt  at  the  shrine  of  many  false  deities,  and  rendered  allegiance 
to  a  succession  of  kings.  Many  "  lords  "  had  ruled  them.  This  is  true  of  all  souls 
in  an  unregenerate  state.  Who  is  the  real  Lord  or  God  of  the  soul  ?  Unhesitatingly 
and  emphatically,  the  chief  love.  Whatever  man  loves  most,  is  his  spiritual 
monarch,  the  deity  of  his  life.  The  chief  love  of  some  is  monev.  The  chief  love 
of  others  is  pleasure — sensual  indulgence.  "  Their  god  is  their  belly."  The  chief 
love  of  others  is  power.  Ambition  is  their  god.  II.  Of  one  God.  "  By  Thee 
only  will  we  make  mention  of  Thy  name,"  or,  as  some  render  it,  "  Henceforth  Thee, 
Thy  name,  will  we  celebrate."  They  had  left  heathen  altars,  and  come  back  to  the 
altar  of  Jehovah.  What  a  blessed  change  from  many  masters  to  one,  and  therefore 
free  from  spiritual  distraction.  From  worthless  masters  to  the  supremely  good, 
and  therefore  realising  all  that  the  soul  craves  for  or  requires.  1.  The  rule  of  this 
one  God  is  the  rule  of  right.  2.  The  rule  of  peace.  From  the  moral  constitution 
of  man  no  peace  of  soul  can  be  experienced  under  the  sway  of  any  other.  Under 
no  other  will  the  various  sympathies  flow  into  one  channel,  the  faculties  blend 
in  harmonious  action,  the  heart  fix  itself  in  a  centre.  3.  The  rule  of  growth.  Can 
vegetation  grow  and  flourish  under  the  reign  of  stars,  however  numerous  or 
brilliant  ?  No ;  it  must  have  the  empire  of  the  sun.  And  can  the  soul  advance 
under  the  sway  of  any  infinite  powers,  however  illustrious  t  No  ;  it  must  have 
the  rule  of  God,  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness."  Here  we  have  the  soul — 
III.  Passing  from  the  sway  of  the  many  to  the  One.  It  is  that  great 
moral  experience  which  is  represented  in  the  New  Testament  as  a  new  birth,  a  resur- 
rection, a  conversion,  a  repentance,  &c.  (HomUist. )  Confession,  resolution,  and 
dependence : — I.  Confession.  "  0  Lord  our  God,  other  lords  beside  Thee  have  had 
dominion  over  us."  There  are  two  things  connected  with  this  confession  ;  one  is 
recollection,  and  the  other  adoration.  II.  Resolution.  "  Henceforth  we  will 
make  mention  of  Thy  name."  God's  name  is  His  character, — what  He  is  in 
Himself,  and  what  He  is  to  His  people.  And  it  is  a  name  not  to  be  ashamed  of  :  it 
is  connected  with  every  thing  that  is  excellent,  glorious,  and  sacred.  It  is  a 
"  name  that  is  above  every  name."  Not  only  so,  it  is  a  name  you  need  not  be 
afraid  of  with  a  slavish  fear  ;  but  you  may  well  be  afraid  of  it  with  a  holy  fear.  It 
is  a  name  that  you  ought  to  love  with  all  your  hearts  !  III.  Dependence.  "  By 
Thee  only  will  we  make  mention  of  Thy  name  " ;  as  much  as  if  it  was  said,  We  are 
full  of  sin,  but  Thou  art  full  of  grace  and  mercy  ;  we  are  not  worthy  to  take  Thy 
name  upon  our  lips — to  stand  before  Thee,  or  to  enter  into  covenant  with  Thee, 
but  we  do  it  depending  upon  Thee,  and  upon  Thee  alone.     (T.  Mortimer,  B.D.) 

Ver.  15.  Thou  hast  increased  the  nation,  0  Lord. — The  increase  of  the 
true  Israel : — On  the  first  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  the  Lord  greatly  increased 
the  nation  of  them  that  are  Israelites  indeed.  In  following  ages  the  Lord  still 
continued  to  increase  them :  hence  the  remarkable  words  of  an  ancient  apologist 
for  Christianity  (Tertuiiian),  who  openly  told  the  heathen  "  that  this  despised 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvt. 

sect  had  filled  their  cities  and  provinces,  their  councils  and  camps,  the  palace 
and  the  senate-house,  and  what  not, — that  such  was  their  multitude  that  should 
they  have  withdrawn  themselves  into  some  remote  part  of  the  world  the  empire 
would  have  been  depopulated  and  left  in  dismal  solitude  and  silence."  (B. 
MaccuUoch.) 

Ver.  16.  Lord,  la  trouble  have  they  visited  Thee. — God  a  harbour  of 
refuge ; — It  is  a  blessed  loss  that  makes  us  find  our  God  !  What  we  gain  is  in- 
finitely  more  than  what  we  have  lost.  What  a  mercy  that  God  is  willing  to  hear 
us  in  the  time  of  trouble,  that  all  our  putting-off  and  rejection  of  Him  do  not  make 
Him  put  us  off  !  I  remember  one  who  wished  to  hire  a  conveyance  to  go  to  a 
certain  town,  and  he  went  to  the  place  where  he  could  hire  it,  and  asked  the  price ; 
he  thought  that  it  was  too  much,  so  he  went  round  the  town  to  other  people, 
and  found  that  he  could  not  get  it  any  cheaper ;  but  when  he  came  back  to  the  place 
visited  first,  the  man  said  to  him,  "  Oh,  no,  no  !  I  will  not  let  my  horses  to  you. 
You  have  been  round  to  everybody  else,  and  now  you  come  back  to  me  because 
yo  i  cannot  get  what  you  want  elsewhere  ;  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  you." 
That  is  man's  way  of  dealing  with  his  fellow-man ;  but  it  is  not  the  Lord's  method 
of  dealing  with  us.  When  you  and  I  have  gone  round  to  everybody  else,  the 
Lord  still  welcomes  us  when  we  come  back  to  Him.  Yes,  just  as  harbours  of 
refuge  are  meant  for  ships  in  distress  that  would  not  have  put  in  there  except 
for  the  storm  and  danger,  such  is  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  If 
you  are  forced  to  accept  it,  you  are  still  welcome  to  it.  If  you  are  driven  to  it  by 
stress  of  weather,  you  may  come  in,  for  the  harbour  was  made  for  just  such  as 
you  are.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  19.  Thy  dead  men  shall  live. — The  Jewish  hope  of  resurrection : — 
Granted  the  pardon,  the  justice,  the  temple,  and  the  God  which  the  returning 
exiles  now  enjoyed,  the  possession  of  these  only  makes  more  painful  the  shortness 
of  life  itself.  This  life  is  too  shallow  and  too  frail  a  vessel  to  hold  peace  and 
righteousness  and  worship  and  the  love  of  God.  St.  Paul  has  said,  '  If  in  this 
life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  What  avails 
it  to  have  been  pardoned,  to  have  regained  the  Holy  Land  and  the  face  of  God, 
if  the  dear  dead  are  left  behind  in  graves  of  exile,  and  all  the  living  must  soon  pass 
into  that  captivity  (Hezekiah's  expression  for  death,  chap,  xxxviii.  12)  from  which 
there  is  no  return  ?  It  must  have  been  thoughts  like  these  which  led  to  the 
expression  of  one  of  the  most  abrupt  and  powerful  of  the  few  hopes  of  the 
resurrection  which  the  Old  Testament  contains.  This  hope,  which  lightens 
chap.  xxv.  7,  8,  bursts  through  again — without  logical  connection  with  the  con- 
text— in  verses  14-19  of  chap.  xxvi.  (Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  resurrection 
of  the  life  to  come  : — I.  The  resurrection  of  the  bodies  of  believers.  "  Thy 
dead  men  shall  live,"  &c.  II.  The  efficient  cause  of  the  besurrection. 
"  Thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs,  and  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead."  In 
Eastern  countries  the  dew  is  extremely  heavy  and  almost  entirely  supplies  the 
place  of  rain.  It  is  frequently  referred  to  in  Scripture  (Psa.  exxxiii.  3; 
Hos.  xiv.  5).  The  "  dew  "  means  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is 
the  great  efficient  cause  of  the  raising  of  the  bodies  of  believers  ;  not  the  primary 
cause — that  is  the  atonement  made  by  our  Lord  Jesus.  But  the  text  adds, 
"  The  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead."  The  word  "  cast  out "  means  to  travail. 
The  earth  shall  put  forth  them  that  are  now  buried.  The  whole  creation  groaneth 
and  travaileth  in  pain  together  ;  but  when  the  Spirit  shall  come  forth  with  His 
mighty  influence,  the  earth  shall  be  no  longer  able  to  retain  its  dead.  III.  Thb 
joy  of  this  resurrection.  Without  doubt  the  joy  of  departed  saints  is  exceeding 
great ;  but  the  joy  will  be  so  much  greater  at  the  resurrection  that  the  Church 
may  with  propriety  sing  in  concert,  "  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  the  dust." 
They  will  then  see  the  full  glory  of  Christ  established  ;  they  will  see  sin  and  Satan 
in  chains  ;  they  will  see  hell  subdued,  death  quite  swallowed  up.  (R.  W.  Sibthorp.) 
The  dust  of  death  : — If  one  has  seen  a  place  of  graves  in  the  East,  he  will  appreciate 
the  elements  of  this  figure,  which  takes  "  dust "  for  death  and  "  dew  "  for  life. 
With  our  damp  graveyards  mould  has  become  the  traditional  trappings  of  death  ; 
but  where  under  the  hot  Eastern  sun  things  do  not  rot  into  lower  forms  of  life, 
but  crumble  into  sapless  powder,  that  will  not  keep  a  worm  in  life,  dust  is  the  natural 
eymbol  of  death.  When  they  die,  men  go  not  to  feed  fat  the  mould,  but  "  down 
into  the  dust  "  ;  and  there  the  foot  of  the  living  falls  silent,  and  his  voice  is  choked, 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  493 

and  the  light  is  thickened  and  in  retreat,  as  if  it  were  creeping  away  to  die.  The 
only  creatures  the  visitor  starts  are  timid,  unclean  bats,  that  flutter  and  whisper 
about  him  like  the  ghosts  of  the  dead.  There  are  no  flowers  in  an  Eastern 
cemetery ;  and  the  withered  branches  and  other  ornaments  are  thickly  powdered 
with  the  same  dust  that  chokes  and  silences  and  darkens  all.  Hence  the  Semitio 
conception  of  the  underworld  was  dominated  by  dust.  It  was  not  water  nor  fir© 
nor  frost  nor  altogether  darkness  which  made  the  infernal  prison  horrible,  but 
that  upon  its  floors  and  rafters,  hewn  from  the  roots  and  ribs  of  the  primeval 
mountains,  dust  lay  deep  and  choking.  Amid  all  the  horrors  he  imagined  for 
the  dead,  Dante  did  not  include  one  more  awful  than  the  horror  of  dust.  (Prof. 
O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Dew  for  dust : — For  dust  there  is  dew,  and  even  to  grave- 
yards the  morning  comes  that  brings  dew  and  light  together.  As,  when  the 
dawn  comes,  the  drooping  flowers  of  yesterday  are  seen  erect  and  lustrous  with 
the  dew,  every  spike  a  crown  of  glory,  so  also  shall  be  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
(Ibid.)  Awake  and  sins,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust. — The  Divine  call  to 
moral  grovellers : — This  call  may  be  addressed — L  To  the  sensualist.  All  his 
thoughts  and  activities  are  directed  to  the  pampering  of  his  animal  appetites 
and  the  gratification  of  his  animal  lusts.  To  such  the  word  may  be  fairly 
addressed,  "  Arise  from  the  dust."  Why  live  in  mud,  when  you  ought  ana 
might  live  in  "  heavenly  places  "  ?  II.  To  the  worldling.  By  a  worldling, 
I  rnea  i  a  man  who  gives  his  heart  and  energies  and  time  to  the  accumulation  of 
wealth ;  a  man  who  has  no  idea  of  worth  but  money ;  no  idea  of  dignity  apart 
from  material  parade  and  possessions  ;  a  man  whose  inspiration  in  ev  rything  is 
love  of  gold.  Such  a  man  is  literally  in  the  dust.  He  is  a  grub.  Now,  to  such  a 
man  the  call  comes  with  power  :  "  Arise  from  the  dust ;  break  away  from  that 
wretched  materialism  that  imprisons  thy  spirit."  A  man's  life  "  consisteth  not 
in  the  abundance  of  the  things  of  this  world."  Conclusion.  All  unregenerate 
men  are  in  the  dust.  "  He  that  is  born  of  the  flesh,  is  flesh  " — is  flesh  in  experience, 
in  character,  known  by  his  compeers  only  by  fleshly  or  material  characteristics. 
"  He  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit,  is  spirit  " — the  spirit  has  been  liberated  from  the 
bondage  of  the  flesh,  called  up  to  his  true  regal  position,  and  is  known  hence  on, 
not  by  material  features,  but  by  high  mental  and  moral  characteristics.  (Homilist.) 
Souls  sleeping  in  the  dust : — There  are  two  senses  in  which  men  may  be  considered 
dead  while  yet  living  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  (1)  They  may  be  civilly  dead: 
utterly  deprived  of  all  political  rights  and  privileges.  To  this  the  prophet  refers 
undoubtedly.  Ezekiel  in  a  vision  saw  them  as  a  "  valley  of  dry  bones."  Here 
is  a  call  for  the  restoration.  "  Thy  dead  men  shall  live  " — live  politically,  restored 
to  their  own  country,  reinstated  in  all  their  rights,  placed  again  amongst  the  nations 
of  the  earth.  (2)  Another  sense  in  which  men  may  be  considered  dead  whilst 
living  inhabitants  of  the  earth  is  spiritually.  Observe  then — I.  The  spiritual 
condition  of  unregenerated  men.  They  "  dwell  in  the  dust."  1.  Scientific 
materialists  are  in  the  dust.  All  their  attention  is  taken  up  with  material 
substances,  combinations,  forces,  operations,  laws.  They  have  no  world  outside 
beyond  the  tangible  and  the  visible.  2.  Mercenary  worldlings  are  in  the  dust. 
3.  Voluptuous  sensualists  are  in  the  dust.  4.  Ceremonial  religionists  are  in 
the  dust.  II.  The  urgent  call  made  on  unregenerate  men.  "  Awake  and 
sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust."  But  why  awake  ?  1.  Because  the  sleep  is  injurious. 
Physical  sleep  is  refreshing,  but  spiritual  sleep  is  pernicious;  it  enervates  the  powers; 
it  is  a  disease  that  wastes  and  destroys.  2.  Because  the  sleep  is  sinful.  It  is  a 
sin  against  our  constitution,  against  the  ordination  of  Heaven,  against  the  well- 
being  of  the  universe.  3.  Because  it  is  perilous.  In  their  dreams  they  feel  that 
they  are  "  increasing  in  goods  and  have  need  of  nothing,  whereas  they  are  poor 
and  wretched,  blind  and  naked."  (Ibid.)  Dwelling  in  the  dust: — I.  An 
invocation  or  address.  "  Ye  that  dwell  in  dust."  To  whom  is  this  designation 
applicable,  and  to  whom  does  it  in  point  of  fact  apply  ?  1.  All  men,  without 
exception,  may  be  described  as  dwelling  in  dust.  They  live  in  houses  of  clay ; 
their  foundation  is  in  the  dust ;  they  are  crushed  before  the  moth.  They  are 
made  of  the  earth,  earthy.  2.  This  address  is  still  more  descriptive  of  mankind, 
as  it  refers  to  their  sin  and  guilt  in  the  sight  of  God.  They  are  sunk  in  the  depths 
of  abject  servitude.  3.  But  it  is  not  to  sinners  in  their  natural  state  that  the 
words  of  our  text  are  addressed.  God  directs  them  to  His  chosen  people,  and 
says  even  unto  them,  "  Ye  that  dwell  in  dust."  Nor  is  the  expression  inappro- 
priate. For  humble  and  lowly  is  the  spiritual  estate  even  of  the  believer.  His 
home  is  in  Heaven,  his  treasure  is  there,  his  heart  is  there,  his  Redeemer  is  there ; 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixvi. 

and  though  he  wishes  to  be  in  thought  and  feeling  continually  there,  the  opposing 
influences  of  sin,  Satan,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  retard  his  efforts,  and  cloud  the 
sunshine  of  his  joys  with  ever-recurring  darkness.  Is  it  not  strange  that  an  heir 
of  immortality,  a  participant  in  Christ's  everlasting  redemption,  a  member  of 
the  Saviour's  ever-living  body,  a  being  who  is  destined  for  eternal  glory  should 
drink  the  cup  of  humiliation  and  suffering  in  the  dust  ?  There  ia  another  sense 
in  which  God's  people  may  be  described  by  this  epithet.  They  dwell  in  dust, 
inasmuch  as  their  life  in  this  world  is  a  life  of  affliction.  4.  But,  lastly,  the  addresa 
contained  in  our  text  refers  literally  to  those  who  dwell  in  the  dust — who  reside 
in  the  cold  and  cheerless  tomb.  II.  A  summons  or  command.  "  Awake  and 
i  ing."  The  passage  is  not  addressed  to  all  who  dwell  in  dust,  as  the  context 
clearly  shows,  but  only  to  those  who  are  God's  chosen  and  willing  people.  There 
is  a  night  of  death  that  has  no  morning,  but  it  is  yet  future,  distant,  and  unseen. 
All  who  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and  shall  come 
forth,  they  that  have  done  evil  as  well  as  they  that  have  done  good.  But  it  ia 
only  to  the  righteous  that  the  voice  of  Omnipotence  shall  say,  Awake  and  sing  1 
Brightly  and  beautifully  on  them  will  dawn  the  resurrection  morning.     III.  Thb 

REASON  WHY  GOD   COMMANDS  THEM  THAT  DWELL  IN  DUST  TO  AWAKE  AND  SING. 

It  is  because  their  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs.  Dew  in  countries  such  as  Judea, 
where  rain  seldom  falls,  is  the  grand  agent  that  fertilises,  fructifies,  and  waters 
the  earth.  They  that  dwell  in  dust  have  their  dew.  Their  dew  is  the  beneficent 
law  of  Heaven,  which  seals  them  up  in  the  grave,  until  such  time  as  the  fructifying 
influence  of  the  Spirit  shall  quicken  them  into  a  resurrection  life.  IV.  The 
result  of  the  command,  Awake  and  sing.  The  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead. 
The  subject  presents  to  us — 1.  A  ground  of  comfort  amidst  all  the  distresses  of 
life.  2.  A  most  powerful  motive  to  holiness  and  duty.  (A.  Nisbet.)  Thy 
dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs. — Resurrection  preservation : — I.  Against  decom- 
position. One  of  the  great  difficulties  connected  with  the  resurrection  is  the 
fact  that  the  bodies  of  the  dead  decompose,  and  that  oftentimes  some  of  their 
parts  go  to  make  up  the  growth  of  plants  and  animals.  But  is  not  this  difficulty 
removed  by  the  law  of  the  text ;  the  law  that  governs  the  reproduction  of 
plants,  and  which  is  so  forcibly  presented  by  the  apostle  in  his  argument  to  the 
Corinthians  for  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  ?  II.  Against  deportation.  Other 
dangers  threaten  the  bodies  of  the  dead.  Being  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  and 
mingled  with  its  particles,  they  must  necessarily  be  moved  about.  The  winds 
may  waft  them  to  other  regions  ;  birds  or  animals  or  men  may  carry  them  abroad  ; 
the  rivers  may  float  them  in  their  rapid  currents ;  the  ocean  may  heave  them  on 
its  mighty  billows.  How  then  shall  they  be  preserved  ?  God  has  purposely 
made  many  of  the  seeds  so  that  they  are  wafted  on  the  winds,  not  that  they  may 
be  destroyed,  but  may  be  brought  into  better  positions  for  their  preservation 
and  subsequent  prosperity.  And  shall  we  disbelieve  the  fact  that  the  great  God 
who  performs  these  wonders  in  the  ordinary  operations  of  nature,  is  able  and 
willing  so  to  control  winds,  and  birds,  and  beasts,  and  living  men,  and  flowing 
rivers,  and  heaving  oceans,  as  to  preserve  and  carry  to  safer  or  better  places  the 
germs  of  those  bodies  which  He  has  taught  us  shall  rise  at  the  resurrection  of  the 
last  day  ?  III.  Against  intermingling  or  loss  of  identity.  Take  the  many 
hundreds  of  plants  that  exist  about  us — there  are  computed  to  be  more  than 
80,000  kinds  on  the  globe — with  their  millions  of  seeds.  The  God  of  nature 
never  mixes  them  up.  Whatever  may  be  true  about  the  amalgamation  of  growing 
plants,  when  their  seeds  or  germs  are  perfected  it  is  impossible  so  to  mix  them  as 
to  confound  them.  And  think  you  that  the  God  who  works  such  wonders  of 
infallible  certainty  in  the  identification  of  the  untold  millions  of  these  varieties 
of  plant  seeds,  every  year  and  through  so  many  centuries,  however  they  may  be 
mixed  up,  cannot  or  will  not,  even  when  He  has  promised  it,  preserve  the  identity 
of  each  different  human  body,  so  that  it  shall  be  enstamped  with  all  the  char- 
acteristics of  its  own  individuality,  though  it  be  mingled  with  so  many  other 
human  bodies  through  so  many  centuries  T  IV.  Against  destruction  by 
External  forces.  The  seeds  of  many  species  resist  the  destructive  power,  not 
only  of  cold  but  of  great  heat,  and  of  drought  and  moisture,  in  a  wonderful  manner, 
not  only  through  the  lapse  of  one  season,  but  of  centuries.  And  as  God  does 
thus  preserve  these  inferior  and  feebler  creations  of  His,  amid  such  great  and  long 
continued  action  of  the  elements  of  destruction,  will  He  not  much  rather  preserve 
egainst  all  accidents  and  all  assaults  of  the  forces  of  destruction,  those  nobler 
creations  of  His  for  whose  use  and  control  the  inferior  things  of  earth  were  madt 


chap,  xxvi.]  ISAIAH.  495 

and  preserved  T  V.  Against  thb  "  gnawing  tooth  "  op  time.  So  far  as  the 
law  of  life  has  been  developed,  it  is  evident  that  mere  lapse  of  time  has  no  effect 
to  destroy  life,  so  long  as  circumstances  are  favourable  to  its  continuation.  Some 
Celtic  tombs  were  discovered  not  very  long  since  in  France,  which  had  been  filled 
nearly  two  thousand  years  ago.  Under  the  head  of  each  corpse  was  found  a  tile,  and 
um!er  each  tile  a  circular  hole  covered  with  cement,  and  containing  a  few  seeds. 
These  seeds  were  planted,  "  they  soon  vegetated  ;  and  the  heliotrope,  the  trefoil, 
and  the  corn-flower  were  seen  rising  to  life  again,  and  expanding  their  flowers  in  the 
light  of  spring  with  admirable  display,  after  their  seeds  had  slept  two  thousand 

J  fears  beneath  the  pillows  of  the  dead  in  the  dust  of  the  tomb."  Can  we  believe 
ess  of  the  power  and  willingness  of  God,  with  reference  to  the  preservation  through 
the  onstretching  centuries,  of  the  bodies  of  men  whom  He  made  in  His  own  image, 
and  whom  He  rescued  from  destruction  by  the  death  of  His  well-beloved  Son, 
who  "  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first- fruits  of  them  that  slept "  ? 
VI.  Against  premature  development.  But,  says  a  persistent  objector,  if  all 
these  things  are  true,  why  do  we  not  have  some  evidence  of  it ;  why  do  we  not 
find  such  occasionally  appearing  in  the  body  T  We  know  that  there  are  plants 
in  tropical  countries  called  "  air  plants,"  which  grow  from  the  sustenance  they 
receive  out  of  the  atmosphere.  One  species  of  these — the  "  live-for-ever  "  plant- 
grows  in  the  temperate  zone  ;  and  some  of  us  may  remember  seeing  these  plants 
suspended  from  the  beams  of  houses  and  flourishing  there.  Suppose  a  man  who 
had  never  seen  an  oak  grow,  but  who  was  told  that  an  acorn  contained  the  germ 
of  an  oak,  should  fasten  that  acorn  by  the  side  of  his  air  plants  to  a  beam  of  his 
house,  or  fasten  ten,  or  twenty,  or  a  hundred  acorns  there ;  and  then,  when  he 
eaw  his  air  plants  growing,  and  his  acorns  remaining  dry  and  unsprouted,  should 
declare  to  you  that  there  was  "  no  such  fact  as  that  oaks  would  grow  from  acorns, 
or  that,  anyhow,  those  acorns  would  never  produce  oaks  "  ;  what  would  be  your 
reply  ?  You  would  say  to  him,  "  There  is  a  law  of  germination  and  growth 
belonging  to  those  acorns  ;  and  whenever  you  bring  them  into  the  position  where 
that  law  is  met,  they  will  grow."  We  are  ignorant  equally  of  the  facts  in  what  the 
identity  or  germ  of  a  human  dead  body  consists,  and  what  conditions  are  necessary 
to  bring  it  into  active  resurrection  life  ;  these  are  the  affairs  of  the  Author  of 
existence.  But  we  do  know,  that  whatever  it  is  that  constitutes  the  identity  of 
the  dead  body's  existence,  cannot  and  will  not  develop  itself  in  a  resurrection  life 
power,  until  the  great  Keeper  of  man  brings  it  into  a  position  and  condition 
where  the  laws  of  its  development  are  fulfilled.     (N.  D.  Williamson.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  Come,  My  people,  enter  thou  Into  thy  chambers. — A  gracious 
invitation : — I.  The  form  op  the  invitation,  including  in  it  the  qualified 
subject.  "  Come,  My  people."  God's  own  peculiar  people,  who  have  chosen 
God  for  their  protection,  and  resigned  up  themselves  sincerely  to  Him  in 
the  covenant,  are  the  persons  here  invited,  the  same  which  He  before  called 
"  the  righteous  nation  that  kept  the  truth "  (ver.  2).  He  means  those  that 
remained  faithful  to  God  in  Babylon.  The  form  of  invitation  is  full  of  tender 
compassion.  "  Come,  My  people."  Like  a  tender  father  who  sees  a  storm  coming 
upon  his  children  in  the  fields,  and  takes  them  by  the  hand.  II.  The  privilege 
invited  TO.  "  Enter  thou  into  thy  chambers."  The  Divine  attributes  engaged 
in  the  promises  and  exercised  or  actuated  in  the  providences  of  God — these 
are  the  sanctuaries  of  God's  people  in  days  of  trouble.  III.  A  needful  caution 
for  the  securing  of  this  privilege  to  ourselves  in  evil  times.  "  Shut  thy  doors  about 
thee."  Care  must  be  taken  that  no  passage  be  left  open  for  the  devil  to  creep 
in  after  us,  and  drive  us  out  of  our  refuge ;  for  so  it  falls  out  too  often  with  God's 
people  when  they  are  at  rest  in  God's  name  or  promises.  Satan  creeps  in  by 
unbelieving  doubts  and  puzzling  objections,  and  beats  them  out  of  their  refuge 
back  again  into  trouble.  IV.  Note  with  what  arguments  ob  motives  they  are 
pressed  to  betake  themselves  to  this  refuge.  1.  A  supposition  of  a  storm  coming. 
The  indignation  of  God  will  fall  like  a  tempest ;  this  is  supposed  in  the  text,  and 
plainly  expressed  in  the  words  following.  2.  Though  His  indignation  fall  like 
a  storm,  yet  it  will  not  continue  long ;  better  days  and  more  comfortable  dis- 

?ensations  will  follow.  (J.  Flavel.)  The  righteous  man's  refuge  : — Doctrine — 
hat  the  attributes,  promises,  and  providences  of  God  are  the  chambers  of  rest 
and  security  in  which  His  people  are  to  hide  themselves  when  they  foresee  the 
storms  of  His  indignation  coming  upon  the  world.  Propositions — 1.  That  there 
are  times  and  seasons  appointed  by  God  for  the  pouring  out  of  His  indignation 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvl 

upon  the  world.  2.  That  God's  own  people  are  concerned  in,  and  ought  to  be 
affected  with,  those  judgments.  3.  That  God  hath  a  special  and  particular  care 
of  His  people  in  the  days  of  His  indignation.  4.  That  God  usually  premonishea 
the  world,  especially  His  own  people,  of  His  judgments  before  they  befall  them. 
5.  That  God's  attributes,  promises,  and  providences  are  prepared  for  the  security 
of  His  people,  in  the  greatest  distresses  that  befall  them  in  the  world.  6.  That 
none  but  God's  people  are  taken  into  those  chambers  of  security,  or  can  expect 
His  special  protection  in  evil  times.  For  the  right  stating  of  this  proposition, 
three  things  must  be  needfully  regarded — (1)  That  all  good  men  are  not 
always  exempted  from  the  stroke  of  outward  calamities.  (2)  That  all  wicked 
men  are  not  always  exposed  to  external  miseries  (Eccles.  vii.  15).  (3)  But 
none  but  the  people  of  God  have  right,  by  promise,  to  His  special  protection  in 
evil  days ;  that  all  such  shall  either  be  preserved  from  the  stroke  of  calamities, 
or  from  the  deadly  sting,  namely,  eternal  ruin  by  them.  (Ibid.)  Chambers 
for  God's  people  : — Let  us  view  our  chambers,  and  see  how  well  God  hath  provided 
for  His  children  in  all  the  distresses  that  befall  them  in  this  world.  I.  The  first 
chamber  which  comes  to  be  opened  as  a  refuge  to  distressed  believers  in  a  stormy 
day  is  the  attribute  of  Divine  power.  1.  Consider  the  power  of  God  in  itself. 
Omnipotent,  supreme,  everlasting.  2.  In  the  vast  extent  of  its  operations.  You 
will  find  it  working  beyond  the  line  (1)  of  creature-power  ;  (2)  of  creature-expecta- 
tion ;  (3)  of  human  probability.  3.  In  its  relation  to  the  promises.  If  the  power 
of  God  be  the  chamber,  it  is  the  promise  of  God  which  is  that  golden  key  that 
opens  it.  If  we  will  consult  the  Scriptures,  we  shall  find  the  almighty  power 
of  God  made  over  to  His  people  by  promise,  for  many  excellent  ends  and  uses 
in  the  day  of  their  trouble.  4.  As  it  is  continually  opened  by  the  hand  of  Provi- 
dence, to  receive  and  secure  the  people  of  God  in  all  their  dangers  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9). 
II.  The  next  chamber  of  Divine  protection  into  which  I  shall  lead  you  is,  the 
infinite  wisdom  of  God — the  original,  essential,  perfect,  only  wisdom.  The 
wisdom  of  God  makes  advantage  out  of  your  troubles.  1.  In  fortifying  your 
souls  and  bodies  with  suitable  strength  when  any  eminent  trial  is  intended  for 
you  (2  Cor.  i.  6).  2.  The  wisdom  of  God  can,  and  often  doth,  make  your  very 
troubles  and  sufferings  so  many  ordinances  to  strengthen  your  faith  and  fortify 
your  patience.  III.  A  third  chamber  of  safety  for  the  saints'  refuge  is,  t&a 
faithfulness  of  God — His  sincerity,  firmness,  and  constancy  in  performing 
His  word  to  His  people  in  all  times  and  cases.  Let  us  behold  with  delight  the 
faithfulness  of  God  making  good  six  sorts  of  promises  to  His  people  in  the  days 
of  their  affliction  and  trouble,  namely,  the  promises  of — 1.  Preservation.  2.  Sup- 
port. 3.  Direction.  4.  Provision.  5.  Deliverance.  6.  Ordering  and  directing 
the  event  to  their  advantage.  IV.  The  faithfulness  of  God  leads  into  a  fourth 
much  like  unto  it,  namely,  the  unchangeableness  of  God.  V.  The  care  of 
God  for  His  people  in  times  of  trouble  is  the  fifth  chamber  of  rest.  It  is — 1.  A 
fatherly  care.  2.  An  universal  care,  watching  over  all  His  people,  in  all  ages, 
places,  and  dangers.  3.  Assiduous  and  continual  (Lam.  iii.  22,  23).  4.  Exceeding 
tender  (Isa.  xlix.  15).  5.  Seasonable.  VI.  The  love  of  God  is  a  resting-place 
to  believing  souls.  (Ibid.)  Trust  in  God's  protection  induces  calmness : — 
The  heart  of  a  good  man  should  at  all  times  be  like  the  higher  heavens,  serene, 
tranquil,  and  clear,  whatever  thunders  and  lightnings,  storms  and  tempesta 
trouble  and  terrify  the  lower  world.  If  a  man  have  a  good  roof  over  his  head, 
where  he  can  sit  dry  and  warm,  what  need  he  trouble  himself  to  hear  the  winds 
roar,  see  the  lightnings  flash,  and  the  rains  pour  down  without  doors  ?  Why, 
this  is  thy  privilege,  Christian  (Isa.  xxxii.  2).  (Chrysostom.)  Religious  retire' 
ment : — The  retreat  from  the  world  which  the  Scripture  recommends,  is  temporary 
and  not  total ;  it  is  advised,  not  indeed  that  we  become  disjoined  from  the  world, 
but  that  we  may  be  the  fitter  for  intercourse  with  it.  I.  Retirement  is  emi- 
nently favourable  to  self-examination.  It  is  only  by  a  searching  inquiry 
into  the  purity  of  his  motives,  and  the  tendencies  of  his  actions,  that  the  Christian 
can  be  enabled  to  discern  and  correct  what  in  them  has  been  amiss,  and  to  "  walk 
worthily  of  the  high  vocation,  whereunto  he  hath  been  called."  II.  Retirement 
is  favourable  to  the  Christian,  inasmuch  as  it  enables  him  to  recover  that 
spiritual  tone  of  mind  so  essential  to  his  happiness,  which,  in  his  unavoid- 
able collision  with  the  world,  must  necessarily  have  been  disturbed,  as  well  as  to 
take  off  that  tendency  to  evil  which  its  presence  always  generates.  As  the  health 
of  the  plant  is  affected  by  its  soiL  and  the  nature  of  the  animal  by  the  pasture 
on  which  he  feeds  and  couches,  so  must  the  character  of  man  catch  a  line  from 


chap,  xxvij  ISAIAH.  497 

what  is  immediately  about  him,  and  his  mind  be  tinged  by  the  circumstances 
in  which  it  lives  and  has  its  being.  But  in  solitude  we  are  in  a  world  of  our  own. 
where  we  can  to  a  great  extent  command  our  ideas  and  feelings.  III.  Retire- 
ment   IS     FAVOURABLE    TO     THE     CHRISTIAN,    AS    AN    OPPORTUNITY    FOR    PRAYER. 

IV.  Retirement  is  eminently  favourable  for  the  contemplation  of  God. 

V.  Retirement  is  favourable  for  the  contemplation  of  the  sufferings 

AND  LOVE  OF  HlM  WHO  HATH  BROUGHT  "  LIFE  AND  IMMORTALITY  TO  LIGHT,  THROUGH 

the  Gospel."  VI.  Retirement  is  favourable  for  the  contemplation  of 
your  eternal  destiny.  (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  The  advan- 
tages of  religious  retirement : — Although  man  was  made  for  action,  he  was  also 
intended  for  contemplation.  There  is  a  time  when  solitude  has  a  charm  for 
the  soul ;  when  weary  of  the  world,  its  follies  and  its  cares,  we  love  to  be  alone, 
and  in  silence  to  commune  with  our  heart.  Such  a  retirement,  when  devoted 
to  pious  purposes,  is  highly  useful  to  man,  and  most  acceptable  to  God. 
I.  Religious  retirement  takes  off  the  impression  which  the  neighbourhood 
of  evil  example  has  a  tendency  to  make  upon  the  mind.  II.  This  devout 
retirement  is  favourable  for  fixing  pious  purposes  in  the  mind  and 
strengthening  our  habits  of  virtue.  III.  By  means  of  religious  retire- 
ment thou  wilt  be  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  thyself.  Here  wisdom 
begins.  IV.  Retirement  and  meditation  will  open  a  source  of  new  and 
better  entertainment  than  you  meet  with  in  the  world.  You  will  soon 
find  that  the  world  does  not  perform  what  it  promises.  The  circle  of  earthly 
enjoyments  is  narrow,  the  career  of  sensual  pleasure  is  soon  run,  and  when  the 
novelty  is  over,  the  charm  is  gone.  But  the  wise  man  has  treasures  within 
himself.  (J.  Logan,  F.R.S.)  The  hour  of  solitude  is  the  hour  of  meditation. 
He  communes  with  his  heart  alone.  He  reviews  the  actions  of  his  past  life.  He 
corrects  what  is  amiss.  He  rejoices  in  what  is  right,  and,  wiser  by  experience, 
lays  the  plan  of  his  future  life.  The  great  and  the  noble,  the  wise  and  the  learne ', 
the  pious  and  the  good,  have  been  lovers  of  serious  retirement.  On  this  field 
the  patriot  forms  his  schemes,  the  philosopher  pursues  his  discoveries,  the  saint 
improves  himself  in  wisdom  and  goodness.  Solitude  is  the  hallowed  ground 
which  religion  in  ever  y  age  has  adopted  as  its  own.  There  her  sacred  inspiration 
is  felt,  and  her  holy  mysteries  elevate  the  soul ;  there  devotion  lifts  up  the  voice  ; 
there  falls  the  tear  of  contrition ;  there  the  heart  pours  itself  forth  before  Him 
who  made,  and  Him  who  redeemed  it.  Apart  from  men,  you  live  with  nature, 
and  converse  with  God.  (Ibid.)  '"Enter  thou  into  thy  chambers"  : — The 
"  entering  into  the  chambers  "  may,  not  improbably,  allude  to  the  command 
that  the  children  of  Israel  should  not  go  out  during  the  night  of  the 
destruction  of  the  first-born  of  Egypt.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Duty  of 
reflection  on  God's  judgments : — I.  The  people  addressed.  "  My  people." 
1.  The  Lord  addresses,  in  these  words,  all,  in  general,  who  profess  His  name, 
and  are  named  from  Him ;  who  receive  His  Word  as  the  rule  of  their  faith  and 
practice ;  who  attend  His  ordinances,  and  use  the  means  of  grace.  2.  Therefore 
His  true  people  are  more  especially  meant  in  this  passage.  But  who  are  these  T 
They  are  described  by  St.  Peter,  who,  having  termed  them  "  a  chosen  generation, 
a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people,"  says,  they  "  are  translated 
out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light."  II.  The  advice  He  gives  them. 
"  Come,  My  people."  Come  to  Me,  and — 1.  Make  confession.  2.  Utter  your 
complaint.  3.  Exercise  trust  and  dependence  upon  Me.  4.  Praise  Me  for  My 
long  suffering  and  mercies,  and  devote  thyself  to  Me  afresh.  "  Come  with  Me 
into  thy  chambers."  The  word  means  retired,  secret  and  safe  places.  "  Let 
the  storm  which  disperses  others  bring  you  nearer  together,  to  Me  and  to  each 
other"  (Henry).  Withdraw  into  the  chambers  of  defence.  The  attributes  of 
God  are  the  "  secret  of  His  tabernacle  "  (Psa.  xxvii.  5).  His  name  is  "  a  strong 
tower "  (Prov.  xviii.  10).  III.  The  reason  of  this  advice  (ver.  21).  God 
"  comes  out  of  His  place  "  when  He  shows  Himself  in  an  extraordinary  manner 
from  heaven.  The  expression  is  borrowed  from  the  usage  of  princes  who  come 
out  of  their  palaces,  either  to  sit  in  judgment,  or  to  fight  against  their  enemies. 
(J.  Benson,  D.D. )  God's  care  for  His  people  : — Suppose  your  child  is  out  of 
doors,  and  you  see  danger — a  storm  gathering,  or  something  about  to  cross  his 
path  that  may  be  fatal  to  him,  what  do  you  do  ?  You  hasten  forth.  You  call 
out  with  anxious  voice,  "  Come  in  !  Come  in,  my  child  !  There  is  danger  where 
you  are  !  Make  haste  into  the  house,  and  stay  here  safe  until  the  storm  is  over- 
past !  "     The  great  Father  of  the  Church  is  not  less  watchful  of  His  children. 

3* 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvl 

Look  at  Noah's  case  just  before  the  flood  broke  forth.  Look  again  at  Israel's 
case  on  the  night  of  the  Passover.  Behold,  in  my  text,  a  third  instance  of  the 
Lord's  fatherly  care  over  His  people.  It  is  an  instance  which  extends  even  to 
ourselves.  I.  The  danger  pointed  out  The  words  are  applicable,  in  some 
measure,  to  every  instance  of  almighty  vengeance.  But  they  seem  to  refer 
to  some  more  sweeping  act  of  vengeance  than  ever  yet  has  taken  place.  It  is 
the  day  of  judgment  that  we  must  cast  our  eyes  upon.  It  is  then  that,  in  the 
fullest  sense,  the  Lord  will  come  out  of  His  place,  to  punish  the  inhabitants 
of  the  earth  for  their  iniquity."  An  awful  phrase  that !  "  The  Lord  will  come 
out  of  His  place."  For  what  is  His  place — the  place  He  occupies  at  present  T 
It  is  a  mercy-seat.  He  sits  there  as  a  Saviour — to  receive  and  bless  applying 
sinners.  But  on  that  day  He  "  will  come  out  of  His  place."  He  will  leave  the 
mercy-seat  for  a  throne  of  judgment.  II.  The  counsel  given.  How  tender  this 
invitation  !  For  such  it  is.  Look  at  the  first  word  of  it.  "  Come  " — not "  go." 
Not "  go  and  seek  a  shelter  where  you  can  " ;  but "  Come."  "  Come  "  is  an  inviting 
word.  "  Come,  My  people  "  ;  that  is  a  general  invitation.  "  Enter  thou  into  thy 
chambers  "  ;  that  is  an  invitation  addressed  to  each  particularly,  calling  them  in  one 
by  one.  III.  The  promises  implied.  "  Hide  thyself,"  &c.  These  words  are  a 
command  so  worded  as  to  convey,  at  the  same  time,  three  comfortable  promises. 

1.  "  Hide  thyself."  What  is  this  but  to  assure  them  that  by  doing  what  He  had  just 
been  telling  them  to  do  they  shall  be  hid  T  We  may  safely  view  this  as  a  promise 
of  security  to  all  who  separate  from  the  world  and  flee  for  refuge  to  a  Saviour. 

2.  "  For  a  little  moment."  Here  is  another  comfortable  hint  thrown  out  for 
the  believer.  As  soon  as  this  short  life  is  over  with  him,  all  danger  shall  be  past. 
There  will  be  nothing  more  to  hide  from.  He  will  have  a  broad  Heaven  to  move 
about  in,  where  there  are  no  enemies  to  fear,  no  wrath  to  apprehend.  3.  "  The 
indignation  shall  be  overpast " — there  is  the  third  encouraging  assurance.  The 
clouds  will  be  dispersed  for  ever ;  and,  having  put  all  enemies  under  His  feet,  He 
will  bless  all  those  that  are  about  Him  with  His  constant  smile.  (A.  Roberts,  M.A. ) 
Good  advice  for  troublous  times: — I.  Before  or  in  times  op  trouble  it  is 
well  to  draw  near  to  God.  As  the  hen  gives  her  peculiar  "  cluck  "  when 
the  hawk  is  in  the  air,  to  bid  her  chicks  come  and  hide  under  her  wing-i,  so  does 
God  here  give  a  gentle,  loving  note  of  alarm,  and  a  gracious  call  of  invitation. 
We  should  come — 1.  To  spread  our  case  before  God.  2.  To  consider  His 
mind  about  such  a  case.  3.  To  make  sure  of  the  greatest  matters.  The  world 
may  come  and  take  away  many  of  our.  external  and  temporary  comforts, 
but  we  have  a  treasure  that  it  never  gave  us,  and  cannot  take  away  from  us. 
4.  Having  made  sure  of  the  great  things,  you  may  leave  all  the  little  things 
with  God.  II.  It  is  wise  to  enter  into  the  chambers  of  security  which 
God  has  provided  for  us.  1.  The  store-chamber  of  Divine  power.  2.  The 
council-chamber  of  Divine  wisdom.  3.  The  drawing-room  of  Divine  love. 
4.  The  muniment-room  of  Divine  faithfulness.  5.  The  strong-room  of  Divine 
immutability.  6.  The  best  chamber  of  Divine  salvation.  III.  When  we  enter 
those  chambers  it  is  necessary  to  shut  the  door.  1.  To  shut  out  all  doubt. 
2.  To  shut  ourselves  in  with  God.  IV.  It  is  delightful  to  think  that  thb 
trouble  will  not  last  long.     "  A  little  moment."    (0.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  21.  For,  behold,  the  Lord  cometh  out  of  His  place.  —  Associations  in 
judgment : — 1.  Few  circumstances  of  our  life  are  more  mysterious  and  few 
more  important  than  the  influence  of  associations.  2.  The  language  suggests  a 
subtle  sympathy  between  the  earth  and  the  earth-born  ;  the  earth,  it  is  suggested, 
has  been  the  reluctant  witness  of  human  guilt :  within  her  bosom  she  holds  the 
memorials  of  human  crime,  and  in  due  course,  when  her  Creator  summons  her 
to  His  bar,  she  will  confess  her  fatal  secrets.  3.  This  notion  of  the  repugnance 
of  nature  to  human  crime  underlies  the  constant  association  of  physical  portents 
and  disturbances  with  exceptional  crimes.  They  strain  the  tolerance  of  nature 
to  breaking- point ;  she  proclaims  her  horror.  This  involuntary  associatioa 
emerges  in  the  record  of  the  Redeemer's  Passion.  "  The  darkest  hour  that  ever 
dawned  on  sinful  earth  "  was  dark  naturally,  as  well  as  morally.  4.  There  i* 
something  higher  than  rhetoric,  something  deeper  than  poetry,  in  the  prophetic 
habit  of  bringing  into  their  moral  witness  appeals,  earnest  to  the  point  of  passion, 
to  the  familiar  features  of  the  country.  The  patriot's  affection  is  blended  with 
the  mystic's  sympathy  and  the  seer's  insight  (Mic.  vi.  1,  2 ;  Jer.  xxii.  29 ; 
Josh.  xxiv.  26,  27).     5.  I  have  said  that  there  is  more  in  all  this  than  rhetoric 


chat,  xxvli.]  ISAIAH.  499 

and  poetry,  and  my  justification  lies  in  the  power  over  men  of  associations,  their 
origin  in  human  volition,  and  the  witness  they  are  able  to  bear  to  men's  character 
and  experience.  The  dramatic  language  of  the  prophet  conveys,  and  perhaps, 
to  modern  ears,  conceals,  a  truth  which  we  can  ill  afford  to  forget.  We  may 
express  it  in  this  way.  Every  man  is  at  once  the  author  and  the  victim  of  the 
associations  with  which  he  invests  material  things ;  so  that,  if  we  could  know 
what  associations  these  possess  for  him,  what  thoughts  they  set  in  motion  in  his 
mind,  what  coercion  they  exercise  upon  his  will,  what  appeals  they  address  to  his 
affections,  we  should  be  well  informed  as  to  his  past  life,  and  his  present  character. 
In  truth,  we  may  judge  ourselves,  we  ought  to  judge  ourselves,  by  habitual  associa- 
tions. What  is  the  moral  furniture  of  our  earthly  environment  ?  Be  sure  it 
is  the  faithful  reflection  of  ourselves.  "  To  the  pure,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  all  things 
are  pure :  but  to  them  that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  nothing  is  pure ;  but  both 
their  mind  and  their  conscience  are  defiled."  The  prophet  suggests  that  associa- 
tions will  appear  as  accusing  witnesses  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  Here  they  are 
written  in  cipher,  and  each  man  keeps  his  own  key ;  but  then  the  cipher  shall 
be  open  ana  manifest.  The  origin  of  associations  will  be  confessed.  "  The 
earth  shall  disclose  her  blood,  and  shall  no  more  cover  her  slain."  Before  us 
all  lies  exposure,  inexorable  and  complete.  6.  Associations  so  potent,  so  relentless, 
so  minatory  in  their  suggestiveness,  may  be  redeemed,  cleansed,  transformed. 
The  scenes  we  desecrated  with  our  sins  may  be  purged  by  our  penitence,  and 
reconsecrated  by  our  sacrifice.  History  records  the  reclaiming  of  associations,  the 
transmutation  of  the  symbols  and  scenes  of  evil  into  the  very  beacons  and  homes 
of  goodness.  But  do  not  underrate  the  cost  of  this  great  conversion.  It  is  no 
light  task  to  strip  off  one  set  of  associations  and  to  invest  with  another.  Yet 
one  final  stage.  Memories  of  evil  may  themselves  become  transmuted  into  allies 
of  goodness.  Christian  history  is  full  of  this  paradox.  The  protagonists  of  virtue 
are,  not  the  flawless  saints,  but  the  great  penitents.  There  are  who  find  in  their 
abandoned  sins  perpetual  incitements  to  service,  as  she  of  whom  He  said,  "  Her 
sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven ;  for  she  loved  much :  but  to  whom  little  is 
forgiven,  the  same  loveth  little."  (H.  H.  Henson,  B.D.)  The  earth  disclosing 
her  blood  : — In  a  characteristic  passage  Lord  Macaulay  has  described  the  impression 
made  on  observers  by  the  rank  growth  of  scarlet  poppies  on  the  battlefield  of 
Landen.  "  During  many  months  the  ground  was  strewn  with  skulls  and  bones 
of  men  and  horses,  and  with  fragments  of  hats  and  shoes,  saddles  and  holsters. 
The  next  summer  the  soil,  fertilised  by  twenty  thousand  corpses,  broke  forth 
into  millions  of  poppies.  The  traveller  who,  on  the  road  from  St.  Tron  to  Tirle- 
mont,  saw  that  vast  sheet  of  rich  scarlet  spreading  from  Landen  to  Neerwinden, 
could  hardly  help  fancying  that  the  figurative  prediction  of  the  Hebrew  prophet  was 
literally  accomplished,  that  the  earth  was  disclosing  her  blood,  and  refusing  to  cover 
the  slain."    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXVn. 


Veb.  1.  The  Lord  .  .  .  shall  punish  leviathan. — The  Church  has  formidabU 
enemies : — The  Church  has  many  enemies,  but  commonly  some  one  that  is 
more  formidable  than  the  rest.  So  Sennacherib  was  in  his  day,  and  Nebuchad- 
nezzar in  his,  and  Antiochus  in  his.  So  Pharaoh  had  been  formerly;  and 
he  is  called  "leviathan,"  and  the  "dragon"  (Psa.  lxxiv.  14;  Isa.  1L  9; 
Ezek.  xxix.  3).  And  the  New  Testament  Church  has  had  its  leviathans;  we 
read  of  a  "  great  red  dragon,  ready  to  devour  it "  (Rev.  xii.  3).  Those  malignant, 
persecuting  powers  are  here  compared  to  the  leviathan  in  bulk  and  strength, 
and  the  mighty  bustle  they  make  in  the  world ;  to  dragons,  for  their  rage  and 
fury ;  to  serpents,  piercing  serpents,  penetrating  in  their  counsels,  quick  in  their 
motions,  that  if  they  once  get  in  their  head,  will  soon  wind  in  their  whole  body; 
"  crossing  like  a  bar,"  so  the  margin,  standing  in  the  way  of  all  their  neighbours 
and  obstructing  them  ;  to  crooked  serpents,  subtle  and  insinuating,  but  perverse 
and  mischievous.     (M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  A  vineyard  of  red  wine. — The  Church  a  vineyard  of  red  wine  :— 
The  Church  of  God   is  here  compared  to  a  vineyard.     The  vine  is  a   tender 


SOO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvil 

plant,  needing  continual  care ;  and  if  the  vineyard  is  not  well  fenced 
and  guarded,  the  enemies  of  the  vine  are  sure  to  get  in  and  destroy  it.  The 
Church  is  called  "  a  vineyard  of  red  wine,"  because  the  red  grape  happened  to 
be  the  best  kind  grown  in  Palestine  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  God's  Church  is  to  Him 
the  best  of  the  best,  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  in  whom  is  all  His  delight.  But 
what  is  true  of  the  whole  Church  is  also  true  of  every  member ;  the  same  God 
who  keeps  the  vineyard  also  protects  every  vine,  nay,  not  only  so,  but  His  car© 
extends  to  every  little  branch,  to  every  spreading  leaf,  and  to  every  clinging 
tendril  of  that  vine  which  He  undertakes  to  keep  night  and  day.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  vineyard  of  red  wine  : — In  what  day  ?  The  day  of  threatening 
and  punishment  of  the  wicked.  The  Church  needs  encouragement  amid  danger 
and  darkness.  And  God  gives  it  when  required.  I.  What  she  is.  A  vineyard 
of  red  wine.  A  common  figure  of  the  Church.  It  is  to  intimate — 1.  That  members 
are  separate  from  the  world  and  enclosed  around.  2.  That  they  are  cultivated 
and  cared  for.  They  differ  from  the  world  as  flowers  from  weeds,  a  garden  from 
a  wilderness.  3.  That  they  are  owned.  Believers  are  God's  people,  His  chosen 
inheritance,  His  private  property.  4.  That  they  are  profitable.  A  vineyard 
yields  fruit,  and  so  adds  to  the  advantage  of  its  owner.  It  is  a  vineyard  of  red 
wine."  A  vineyard  from  which  is  extracted  the  richest  juice.  Everything  of 
God's  doing  is  not  only  perfect,  but  superior.  Everything  with  which  He  supplies 
His  people  is  the  best.  Their  peace  "  passeth  understanding."  Their  joy  is 
"  full  of  glory."  II.  What  she  is  to  possess.  "  I,  the  Lord,  do  keep  it,"  &c. 
Here  is — 1.  Guardianship.  The  Keeper  gives  His  whole  attention  to  its  protection. 
How  wise  a  guardian  is  God  !  "  Lest  any  hurt  it."  His  whole  army  of  angels 
act  as  a  guard  with  their  flaming  swords.  2.  Provision.  "  I  will  water  it." 
The  act  of  watering  means  all  the  necessary  provision  required  for  the  nourish- 
ment of  the  vines  and  the  production  of  fruit.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  likened  to 
the  water  of  life,  which  Christ  has  promised  to  give  freely  to  all  who  ask  Him. 
There  are  also  His  ordinances  and  sacraments.  3.  Vigilance.  "  Keep  it  con- 
stantly " — night  and  day.  The  great  God  slumbers  not  nor  sleeps.  His  eye  is 
ever  on  His  people.  No  foe  can  elude  His  guardianship.  (Homilist.)  The 
Church  as  Cod's  vineyard : — What  a  contrast  between  the  vineyard  here  spoken 
of  and  that  whose  history  was  given  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  this  prophet.  That 
was  a  favoured  vineyard.  Everything  was  done  for  it  to  promote  its  fruitful- 
ness ;  but  what  sort  of  fruit  did  it  produce  ?  "  God  looked  that  it  should  bring 
forth  grapes :  and  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes."  What  happened  then  ?  His 
indignation  fell  upon  it.  By  that  unfruitful  vineyard  was  r«  presente  I  the  Jewish 
people.  But  now  turn  and  behold  the  other  vineyard — that  which  is  brought 
before  us  by  my  text.  This  vineyard  is  the  real,  spiritual  Church  of  the  Redeemer. 
I.  The  description  given  of  this  vineyard.  The  spiritual  Church  of  Jesus 
is  "  a  vineyard  of  red  wine."  1.  By  this  "  red  wine  "  may  be  intended,  perhaps 
in  part,  the  faith  of  Christ's  elect  people.  "  Red  wine  "  was  in  great  esteem 
amongst  ancient  Jews,  as  appears  in  Prov.  xxiii.  31.  2.  The  Lord  may  call  His 
Church  "  a  vineyard  of  red  wine,"  in  reference  to  the  love  she  bears  to  Him. 
3.  Christ's  Church  is  a  "  vineyard  of  red  wine,"  because  she  "  abounds  in  all  the 
fruits  of  righteousness."  II.  The  privileges  which  it  is  represented  as 
enjoying.  The  vineyards  of  the  Jews  were  carefully  kept  and  cultivated.  The 
vines  in  the  country  of  the  Jews  appear  to  have  needed  constant  watering.  The 
Lord's  spiritual  vineyard  needs  perpetual  watering  from  above.  These  natural 
vineyards  in  which  the  Jewish  land  abounded  required,  however,  something 
more  than  cultivation.  A  chief  part  of  the  duty  of  the  "  keepers  of  the  vineyard 
was  to  protect  the  vines  from  depredation.  And  is  the  spiritual  vineyard  less 
exposed  ?  (.4.  Roberts,  M.A.)  God's  care  for  His  vineyard  a  subject  for  song  : — 
To  them  who  are  ready  to  conclude  that  God  hath  forgotten  to  be  gracious 
these  words  may  prove  a  source  of  encouragement.  They — I.  Represent 
the  people  of  God  as  a  vineyard.  As  God  values  His  vineyard  for  the  same 
reasons  that  men  value  their  vineyards  (because  of  its  fruit),  it  behoves  us  to 
inquire  what  sort  of  fruit  it  is  which  makes  His  vineyard  valuable  to  Him.  All 
the  asperities  of  disposition  and  all  the  want  of  spiritual  excellence,  which  we 
may  suppose  are  designed  by  wild  grapes,  must  give  place  to  "  whatsoever  things 
are  true ;  whatsoever  things  are  honest ;  whatsoever  things  are  just ;  whatso- 
ever things  are  pure ;  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  and  whatsoever  things  are 
of  good  report."  "  Love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, 
meekness,  temperance,"  must  adorn  and  beautify  your  character.     II.  Describe 


chap,  xxvii.]  ISAIAH.  501 

God's  care  for  His  vineyard.  The  care  of  God  for  His  vineyard  is  manifested 
in  two  ways :  by  His  unceasing  attention  to  the  culture  and  growth  of  these 
heavenly  fruits,  and  by  His  unremitting  vigilance  in  preserving  it.  The  soil  is 
not  congenial  with  a  plant  of  heavenly  origin.  For  the  heart  of  man  is  hard 
and  unfruitful.  The  clime  of  this  world  is  cold  and  variable :  the  atmosphere 
tainted  with  sin ;  and  every  wind  of  passion  blights  and  withers  the  vine.  If 
the  sun  of  persecution  and  trouble  smites  it  too  often  it  is  scorched.  He,  there- 
fore, who  has  planted  it  for  His  own  glory,  and  who  is  always  glorified  when  it 
brings  forth  much  fruit,  watches  over  it,  tends  it  with  solicitude.  There  is  not 
one  moment  when  you  who  love  and  serve  God  cease  to  be  the  objects  of  His 
care,  and  of  His  renovating  influence.  HI.  A  subject  fob  song.  This  song 
implies,  that  the  people  of  God  have  the  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  His  care 
and  protection.  It  is  not  the  will  of  God  that  you  who  have  repented,  and  are 
doing  works  meet  for  repentance ;  who  have  believed  in  Christ,  and  have  a  faith 
which  worketh  by  love,  should  continue  in  doubt  and  uncertainty  respecting 
your  state.  As  the  song  should  be  appropriate  to  the  occasion  and  suitable  to 
the  subject,  the  song  which  we  are  to  sing  is — 1.  A  song  of  adoring  admiration. 
2.  Of  joyful  gratitude.  3.  Of  holy  confidence.  4.  Of  deep  humility.  You  are 
called  upon  to  be  humble  because  you  have  nothing  that  you  have  not  received, 
but  also  because,  after  having  received  so  much,  and  after  being  laid  under 
obligations  so  many  and  so  distinguishing,  you  make  returns  so  inadequate 
and  so  unsuitable.     (M.  Jackson.) 

Ver.  3.  I,  the  Lord,  do  keep  it. — The  Lord  the  Keeper  of  His  people  : — There  is 
nothing  to  which  we  are  naturally  more  prone,  nothing  more  dangerous,  nothing  so 
difficult  to  eradicate  as  self-confidence.  And  yet  there  is  nothing  to  delightful  as 
to  feel  that  we  have  not  anything  in  ourselves  in  which  we  can  be  confident.  For 
the  moment  we  have  arrived  at  that  experience  we  are  prepared  to  turn  to  Hint 
without  whom  we  can  do  nothing.  I.  In  what  sense  the  Lord  is  the  keeper  of 
His  people.  1.  In  one  sense  the  Lord  is  the  keeper  of  all ;  for  "  in  Him  all  live, 
and  move,  and  have  their  being."  And  the  Apostle  Paul  (1  Tim.  iv.  10)  speaks  of 
Him  as  "  the  Saviour,  or  preserver,  of  all  men,  specially  of  those  that  believe." 
2.  He  speaks  of  keeping  them  as  a  city  from  an  enemy.  3.  He  speaks  again  of 
keeping  them  as  a  vineyard  from  foxes.  In  Solomon's  Song  i>  15  we  read,  '  Take 
us  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes  that  spoil  the  vines  :  for  our  vine?  nave  tender  grapes." 
Those  things  which  may  appear  gentle  and  innocent  have  a  tendency  to  undermine 
the  work  of  indwelling  grace.  4.  Again,  the  Lord  speaks  of  keeping  His  people 
as  the  apple  of  His  eye.  5.  I  might  speak  again  of  the  fires  of  persecution,  through 
which  His  people  are  called  to  pass.  For  here  again  the  Lord  is  the  Keeper  of  His 
people.  6.  He  not  only  defends  and  preserves  His  people,  but  He  keeps  them 
refreshed  in  seasons  of  drought  by  continual  and  plentiful  supplies  of  mercy  and 
grace.  So  in  the  text  He  says,  "  I  will  water  it  every  moment."  II.  When  is  IT 
that  He  keeps  them  ?  "  By  day  and  by  night."  He  watches  over  them  con- 
tinually, in  the  bright  day  of  prosperity  and  in  the  dark  night  of  adversity. 
III.  How  is  it  that  the  Lord  keeps  His  people  ?  1.  By  His  angels  (Heb.  i.  14). 
2.  By  His  ministers ;  by  their  warning  voice  in  public ;  or  by  that  advice  and 
reproof,  and  instruction  which  they  give  in  private.  3.  By  His  providential 
dispensations.  4.  By  His  own  omnipotent  arm.  His  people  are  "  kept  by  the 
power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation."  IV.  What  warrant  we  have 
as  His  people  to  expect  that  the  Lord  will  be  otxb  Keepeb.  1.  The  first 
plain  proof  of  this  is,  that  as  His  people  we  are  not  our  own,  but  given  to  Christ. 

2.  Coupled  with  this,  we  may  consider  the  faithfulness  of  Jesus  (2  Thess.  iii.  3). 

3.  Connect  with  this,  the  consideration  of  the  love  of  Jesus  for  His  people.  4.  In- 
deed, we  have  as  believers  the  warrant  of  the  Triune  Jehovah  for  believing  that 
the  Lord  will  be  our  keeper.  Bear  in  mind  that,  until  the  time  when  knowledge 
shall  be  increased,  and  faith  and  hope  end  in  sight  and  enjoyment,  we  shall  never  be 
aware  of  the  full  extent  of  our  obligations  to  Him  as  the  Keeper  of  His  people. 
Yet,  while  we  thankfully  lay  hold  of  the  comfort  which  this  truth  is  calculated  to 
give,  let  us  remember  that  our  own  responsibility  is  not  overthrown.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  increased.  For  though  encouraged  to  trust  in  the  Lord  as  our 
keeper,  there  is  no  excuse  for  neglect  of  duty  on  account  of  our  own  weakness ; 
but  rather  encouragement  to  say  with  the  apostle,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ,  who  strengthened  me."  (M.  Villiers  M.A.)  God's  care  of  His  vine- 
yard : — God  takes  care  — I.  Of  the  safety  of  this  vineyard.     "  I,  the  Lord,  do  keep 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvtl 

It."     II.  Of  the  fruitfulness  of  this  vineyard.     "  I  will  water  it  every  moment," 
and  yet  it  shall  not  be  overwatered.     ( M.  Henry.)        The  keeper  of  the  vineyard  :— 

I.  The  continual  keeping  which  the  Lord  promises  to  His  vineyard.     1.  Do 
I  need  keeping  ?      2.  Can  I  not  keep  myself  ?      3.  Do  I  enjoy  this  keeping  ♦ 

II.  The  Lord's  continual  watering.  1.  Do  I  need  watering  within  as  well  as 
keeping  without  ?  Yes,  for  there  is  not  a  single  grace  I  have  that  can  live  an  hour 
without  being  divinely  watered.  Besides,  the  soil  in  which  I  am  planted  is  very 
dry.  Then,  the  atmosphere  that  is  round  about  us  does  not  naturally  yield  us  any 
water.  The  means  of  grace,  which  are  like  clouds  hovering  over  our  heads,  are 
often  nothing  but  clouds.  The  beauty  of  the  text  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  the  last 
two  words  :  I  will  water  it  every  moment."  2.  Have  we  all  realised,  as  a  matter 
of  experience,  that  the  Lord  does  water  us  every  moment  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Kept  and  watered  : — God  is  both  a  wall  and  a  well  to  His  people.  (Ibid.)  God's 
vine  needs  keeping  : — 1.  There  is  the  arch-enemy ;  how  he  longs  to  lay  the  axe  at 
the  roots  of  God's  vines !  2.  There  is  a  wild  boar  of  the  woods,  that  would  fain 
tear  us  up  by  the  roots ;  I  mean,  that  wild  boar  of  unbelief  that  is  constantly 
prowling  around  us.  How  does  it  seek  with  its  sharp  tusks  to  bark  our  vines  and 
fig-trees !  3.  Then,  the  vine  is  often  subject  to  injury  from  various  kinds  of  insects. 
We  have  the  fly  of  pride.  4.  Then,  the  vine  is  subject  to  the  attacks  of  the  little 
foxes  that  Solomon  speaks  of, — I  mean,  false  doctrine  and  sceptical  teaching. 
5.  Besides,  when  we  have  a  few  grapes  that  are  beginning  to  ripen  there  are  the 
birds  that  come  and  try  to  pick  the  fruit, — those  dark-winged  thoughts  of  worldli- 
ness  and  selfishness  which  come  to  us  all.  (Ibid.)  God  the  Keeper  of  His  vine- 
yard : — A  vineyard  will  engross  the  whole  of  a  man's  time — perhaps  the  time  of 
many  men.  The  nourishing  of  the  soil,  the  pruning  of  the  branches,  the  syringing 
of  the  leaves,  the  thinning  of  the  grapes,  the  support  of  the  heavy  clusters — all 
demand  constant  and  assiduous  care.  There  is  a  tendency  in  all  cultivated  things 
to  go  back  to  their  original  type.  However  it  may  be  made  to  agree  with  the 
modern  ideas  of  development  and  evolution,  it  is  nevertheless  a  fact  that  the  fairest 
results  of  human  skill  are  not  in  themselves  permanent ;  but  tend  ever  backward 
to  the  rudest  and  simplest  forms  of  their  species — the  apple-tree  to  the  crab,  the 
vine  of  Sorek  to  the  wild  vine  of  the  hills.  Therefore  the  keeper  of  the  vineyard 
is  ever  engaged  in  fighting  every  tendency  towards  deterioration  with  unwavering 
patience.  With  similar  care,  but  with  much  more  tenderness,  God  is  ever  watching 
over  us.  With  eager  eyes  He  marks  the  slightest  sign  of  deterioration — a  hardening 
conscience  ;  a  deadening  spirituality  ;  a  waning  love.  Any  symptom  of  this  sort 
fills  Him  with — if  I  may  use  the  words — keen  anxiety  ;  and  His  gentle  but  skilful 
hand  is  at  once  at  work  to  arrest  the  evil,  restore  the  soul,  and  force  it  onward  to 
new  accessions  of  that  Divine  life  which  is  our  only  true  bliss  and  rest.  Let  us  not 
carry  the  responsibility  of  our  nurture.  It  is  too  much  for  us.  Better  far  is  it  to 
devolve  the  care  of  our  keeping  on  our  faithful  Creator.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  God 
the  great  Preserver  : — It  is  not  with  God  as  it  is  with  carpenters  and  shipwrights, 
who  make  houses  for  other  men  to  dwell  in,  vessels  for  others  to  sail  in,  and  therefore 
after  they  are  made  look  after  them  no  more  ;  God,  who  made  all  things  for  Himself, 
looks  after  the  preservation  of  all.  (John  Arrowsmith,  D.D.)  God's  solicitude 
for  His  people : — The  tear- water,  constantly  flowing  over  our  eyes,  removes  the  grit 
and  dust  that  alight  on  them,  impairing  our  power  of  vision.  The  eager  mother 
shields  her  children  from  any  polluting  words  or  influences  that  might  approach 
them  from  child- companion  or  school-fellow.  The  physician  is  eagerly  solicitous 
that  no  germ  of  disease  should  enter  an  open  wound,  and  lays  his  instruments  in 
carbolic  that  they  may  carry  no  spore  on  their  keen  edge.  And  may  we  not  count 
even  more  certainly  on  Him  who  says,  "  I,  the  Lord,  do  keep  it,"  &o.  (Christian 
Endeavour.)  I  will  water  it  every  moment.  —  A  refreshing  promise: — In 
warm  climates  irrigation  is  essential  to  fertility ;  hence  travellers  see  on  all 
sides  pools  and  watercourses,  wheels  and  cisterns,  and  channels  for  the  water  to 
flow  in.  I.  There  is  a  great  necessity  for  the  watering  promised  in  the  text. 
1.  This  we  might  conclude  from  the  promise  itself,  since  there  is  not  one 
superfluous  word  of  promise  in  the  whole  Scriptures,  but  it  becomes  more 
evident  when  we  reflect  that  all  creature  life  is  dependent  upon  the  perpetual 
outgoing  of  Divine  power.  2.  Moreover,  the  truth  is  specially  certain  as  touching 
the  believer,  for  a  multitude  of  agencies  are  at  work  to  dry  up  the  moisture  of 
his  soul.  3.  Neither  have  we  any  other  source  of  supply  but  the  living  God. 
"  All  my  springs  are  in  Thee."  4.  Our  need  of  Divine  watering  is  clearly  seen 
when  we  consider  what  drought,  and  barrenness,  and  death  would  come  upon  U3 


chap,  xxvir.]  ISAIAH.  503 

if  His  hand  were  withdrawn.  Without  watering  every  moment  the  most  faithful 
among  us  would  be  cast  forth,  and  be  only  fit  for  the  fire ;  every  prophet  would 
become  a  Balaam,  every  apostle  a  Judas,  every  disciple  a  Demas.  II.  The  manner 
in  which  the  Lord  promises  to  water  His  people — "I  will  water  it  every  moment." 
1.  Our  first  thought  is  excited  by  the  perpetual  act — "  every  moment."  Mercy 
knows  no  pause.  Grace  has  no  canonical  hours,  or  rather  all  hours  are  alike 
canonical :  yea,  and  all  moments  too.  2.  The  Lord's  watering  is  a  renewed  act. 
He  does  not  water  us  once  in  great  abundance,  and  then  leave  us  to  live  upon  what 
He  has  already  poured  out.  3.  A  personal  act.  "  I  will  water  it."  III.  The 
certainty  that  the  Lord  will  water  every  plant  that  His  own  right  hand  hath 
planted.  Here  a  vast  number  of  arguments  suggest  themselves,  but  we  will 
content  ourselves  with  the  one  ground  of  confidence  which  is  found  in  the  Lord 
Himself  and  His  previous  deeds  of  love.  Our  souls  need  supplies  so  great  as  to 
drain  rivers  of  grace,  but  the  all-sufficient  God  is  able  to  meet  the  largest  demands 
of  the  innumerable  company  of  His  people,  and  He  will  meet  them  to  His  own 
honour  and  glory  for  ever.  Here,  then,  we  see  His  truth,  His  power,  and  His 
all-sufficiency  pledged  to  provide  for  His  chosen,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  the 
guarantee  will  stand.  If  we  needed  further  confirmation  we  might  well  remember 
that  the  Lord  has  already  watered  His  vineyard  in  a  far  more  costly  manner  than 
it  will  ever  need  again.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  watered  it  with  a  sweat  of  blood,  and 
can  it  be  supposed  that  He  will  leave  it  now  ?  Hitherto  the  sacred  promise  has 
been  fully  kept,  for  we  have  been  graciously  preserved  in  spiritual  life.  Droughty 
times  have  befallen  us,  and  yet  our  soul  has  not  been  suffered  to  famish  ;  why, 
then,  should  we  question  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  a3  to  years  to  come  ?  One 
thing  is  never  to  be  forgotten — we  are  the  Lord's.  Therefore,  if  He  do  not  water 
us,  He  will  Himself  be  the  loser.  An  owner  of  vine-lands,  if  he  should  suffer  them 
to  be  parched  with  the  drought,  would  derive  nothing  from  his  estate  ;  the  vine- 
yard would  be  dried  up,  but  he  himself  would  receive  no  clusters.  With  reverence 
be  it  spoken,  our  Lord  Himself  will  never  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  in  untended 
vines,  nor  in  hearts  unsanctified,  nor  in  men  whose  graces  droop  and  die  for  want 
of  Divine  refreshings.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Fury  la  not  in  Me. — Of  all  the  senses  put  upon  this  difficult 
verse  there  are  only  two  which  can  be  looked  upon  as  natural  or  pro- 
bable. The  first  may  be  paraphrased  as  follows : — It  is  not  because  I  am  cruel 
or  revengeful  that  I  thus  afflict  My  people,  but  because  she  is  a  vineyard  overrun 
with  thorns  or  briars,  on  account  of  which  I  must  pass  through  her  and  consume 
her  (i.e.,  burn  them  out  of  her).  The  other  is  this :  I  am  no  longer  angry  with  My 
people ;  oh,  that  their  enemies  (as  thorns  and  briars)  would  array  themselves 
against  Me,  that  I  might  rush  upon  them  and  consume  them.  (J.  A.  Alexander.) 
Liberty  and  discipline  : — I.  A  blessed  absence  in  the  nature  op  God.  "  Fury 
is  not  in  Me."  Fury  seems  to  be  uncontrolled  and  uncontrollable  anger.  A 
vessel  in  a  storm,  with  its  rudder  gone  or  its  screw  broken,  is  passive  in  the  power 
of  winds  and  waves.  A  lion,  who  for  hours  has  been  disappointed  of  his  prey, 
is  passive  under  the  dominion  of  his  hunger.  In  both  cases  no  influence,  internal 
or  external,  is  able  to  resist  the  onward  course.  And  when  a  man  is  so  in  the 
hand  of  anger  that  no  consideration  from  within  or  intercession  from  without 
can  mollify  him,  when  he  is  passive  in  its  power,  he  is  in  a  state  of  fury.  But 
no  such  estate  is  possible  to  our  God.  His  anger  is  always  under  control,  and  we 
have  plentiful  evidence  that,  in  the  height  of  His  displeasure,  He  is  accessible  to 
intercession  on  behalf  of  His  creatures.  Nevertheless — I  [.  This  blessed  absence 
in  the  nature  op  God  is  compatible  with  contention  wrrH  the  unrepent- 
ino.  "  Who  would  set  the  briars  and  thorns  against  Me  in  battle  ?  "  &c. 
Imagine  a  father  and  son  at  variance,  the  father  being  in  the  right  and  the 
son  in  the  wrong.  There  are  two  ways  of  reconciliation :  either  the  son  must 
comply  with  the  conditions  of  the  father,  or  the  father  must  lower  his 
standard  to  the  level  of  the  son.  But  what  a  wrong  would  the  father  do  to 
himself,  his  family,  and  society  if  he  were  to  adopt  this  course.  He  ought  not, 
will  not.  If  the  son  resolves  to  fight  it  out,  reconciliation  is  impossible.  This 
is  the  relative  position  of  God  and  the  ungodly  man.  God  declares  His  conditions, 
"  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,"  &c.  Consider  what  is  involved  in  the  con- 
ditions of  the  ungodly.  Nothing  less  than  the  inversion  of  the  whole  moral  law. 
God  says,  "  I  am  Jehovah,  I  change  not."  It  is  a  blessed  impossibility.  But 
the  unrepentant  man  ought,  can,  must  I     If  not,  the  fire  of  goodness  must  be. 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

set  against  the  briars  of  wickedness,  a  contest  as  hopeless,  and  of  which  the  issue 
is  as  certain,  as  that  of  the  devouring  flame  with  briars  and  thorns.     III.  The 

ABSENCE   OF  FURY   IN   GOD  LEADS  HlM  TO   PREFER  PARDON  TO   PUNISHMENT,   AND 

to  provide  means  for  the  former.  "  Let  him  take  hold  of  My  strength,"  &c. 
Men,  churches,  and  nations  are  lovers  of  peace  in  proportion  as  they  are  righteous 
(Psa.  lxxii.  3).  The  preference  of  God  for  peace  depends  upon  the  very  attribute 
of  which  the  ungodly  would  rob  Him — namely,  His  righteousness.  Wha1  is 
God's  strength  ?  How  take  hold  of  it  ?  When  a  man  falls  overboard  at  sea, 
the  appointed  means  of  rescue  is  the  life-belt  which  is  thrown  to  him.  Seizing 
that,  he  takes  hold  of  the  strength  of  the  vessel  to  save  him.  When  the  man- 
slayer,  fleeing  from  the  avenger  of  blood,  entered  the  city  of  refuge,  he  took  hold 
of  God's  appointed  means  of  shelter.  God's  strength  is  His  pardoning  pre- 
rogative, exercised  to  us  through  Christ,  the  "  arm,"  or  "  strength,"  of  the  Lord. 
(H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  Fury  not  in  God  : — I.  Fury  is  not  in  God.  But  how  can 
this  be  ?  Is  not  fury  one  manifestation  of  His  essential  attributes — do  we  not 
repeatedly  read  of  His  fury — of  Jerusalem  being  full  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord — 
of  God  casting  the  fury  of  His  wrath  upon  the  world — of  Him  rendering  His 
anger  upon  His  enemies  with  fury — of  Him  accomplishing  his  fury  upon  Zion — 
of  Him  causing  His  fury  to  rest  on  the  bloody  and  devoted  city  ?  We  are  not, 
therefore,  to  think  that  fury  is  banished  altogether  from  God's  administration. 
There  are  times  and  occasions  when  this  fury  is  discharged  upon  the  objects 
of  it;  and  there  must  be  other  times  and  occasions  when  there  is  no  fury  in  Him. 
Now,  what  is  the  occasion  upon  which  He  disclaims  all  fury  in  our  text  ?  He  is 
inviting  men  to  reconciliation ;  and  He  is  assuring  them  that  if  they  will  only 
take  hold  of  His  strength  they  shall  make  peace  with  Him.  Fury  will  be  dis- 
charged on  those  who  reject  the  invitation.  But  we  cannot  say  that  there  is 
any  exercise  of  fury  in  God  at  the  time  of  giving  the  invitation.  There  is  the 
most  visible  and  direct  contrary.  This  very  process  was  all  gone  through  at 
and  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  It  rejected  the  warnings  and  invita- 
tions of  the  Saviour,  and  at  length  experienced  His  fury.  But  there  was  no  fury 
at  the  time  of  His  giving  the  invitations.  The  tone  of  our  Saviour's  voice  when 
He  uttered,  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,"  was  not  the  tone  of  a  vindictive  and 
irritated  fury.  There  was  compassion  in  it — a  warning  and  pleading  earnestness 
that  they  would  mind  the  things  which  belong  to  their  peace.  Let  us  make  the 
application  to  ourselves.  II.  God  is  not  wanting  to  glorify  Himself  by 
the  death  of  sinners.  When  God  says,  "  Who  would  set  the  thorns  and  the 
briars  against  Me  in  battle  ?  I  would  go  through  them,  I  would  burn  them 
together,"  He  speaks  of  the  ease  wherewith  He  could  accomplish  His  wrath 
upon  His  enemies.  They  would  perish  before  Him  like  the  moth.  Why  set 
up,  then,  a  contest  so  unequal  as  this  ?  God  is  saying  in  the  text  that  this  is 
not  what  He  is  wanting.  In  the  language  of  the  next  verse,  He  would  rather 
that  this  enemy  of  His,  not  yet  at  peace  with  Him,  and  who  may  therefore  be 
likened  to  a  briar  or  a  thorn,  should  take  hold  of  His  strength,  that  He  may  make 
peace  with  Him — and  as  the  fruit  of  his  so  doing,  He  shall  make  peace  with  Him. 
Now  tell  me  if  this  do  not  open  up  a  most  wonderful  and  a  most  inviting  view  of 
God  ?  It  is  the  real  attitude  in  which  He  puts  Himself  forth  to  us  in  the  gospel 
of  His  Son.  What  remains  for  you  to  do  ?  God  is  willing  to  save  you  :  are  you 
willing  to  be  saved  ?  HI.  The  invitation.  "  Or  let  him  take  hold  of  My  strength, 
that  he  may  make  peace  with  Me  ;  and  he  shall  make  peace  with  Me."  "  Or  " 
here  is  the  same  with  "  rather."  Rather  than  that  what  is  spoken  of  in  the 
fourth  verse  should  fall  upon  you.  We  have  not  far  to  seek  for  what  is  meant 
by  this  strength,  for  Isaiah  himself  speaks  (chap,  xxxiii.  6)  of  the  strength  of  sal- 
vation. 1.  We  read  of  a  mighty  strength  that  had  to  be  put  forth  in  the  work  of 
a  sinner's  justification.  Just  in  proportion  to  the  weight  and  magnitude  of  the 
obstacle  was  the  greatness  of  that  strength  which  the  Saviour  put  forth  in  the 
mighty  work  of  moving  it  away.  A  way  of  redemption  has  been  found  out  in 
the  unsearchable  riches  of  Divine  wisdom,  and  Christ  is  called  the  wisdom  of 
God.  But  the  same  Christ  is  also  called  the  power  of  God.  2.  But  there  is  also 
a  strength  put  forth  in  the  work  of  man's  regeneration.  3.  When  you  apply 
to  a  friend  for  some  service,  some  relief  from  distress  or  difficulty,  you  may  be 
said  to  lay  hold  of  him ;  and  when  you  place  firm  reliance  both  on  his  ability 
and  willingness  to  do  the  service,  you  may  well  say  that  your  hold  is  upon  your 
friend — an  expression  which  becomes  all  the  more  appropriate  should  he  promise 
to  do  the  needful  good  office,  in  which  case  your  hold  is  not  upon  his  power  only, 


chap,  xx vii.]  ISAIAH.  605 

but  upon  his  faithfulness.     And  it  is  even  so  with  the  promises  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus — you  have  both  a  power  and  a  promise  to  take  hold  of.     (T.  Chalmers,  D.D. ) 

Ver.  5.  Let  him  take  hold  of  My  strength. — Taking  hold  of  the  Divine 
strength : — I.  Thb  invitation.  "  Let  him  take  hold  of  My  strength."  This 
becomes  an  imperative  duty — a  duty  universal  in  its  application.  II.  The 
beason  of  this  mvitation — "  that  he  may  make  peace  with  Me."  1.  Observe 
how  very  unselfish  it  is,  if  we  may  so  call  it  with  reverence,  on  the  part  of  God. 
It  is  not  that  He  Himself  may  be  benefited,  but  that  the  sinner  might.  2.  Consider, 
too,  the  cogency  of  this  reason,  resting  as  it  does  in  that  which  all  men  most  need, 
and  most  of  us  long  for — "  peace."  3.  Regard  also  the  sublimity  of  this  reason — 
peace  with  "God.  III.  The  positive  assurance,  or  the  certainty  of  the  pro- 
mise. "  And  he  shall  make  peace  with  Me."  Nothing  shall  prevent  it.  Comply 
with  the  conditions,  and  then  all  is  certain.  Even  the  greatest  enemies  to  God 
among  men  are  permitted  to  make  peace  with  Him.  (W.  Horwood.)  Man 
seizing  the  strength  of  Omnipotence : — Some  substitute  the  word  "  protection  " 
for  "  strength  "  here,  and  suppose  the  words  refer  to  the  horns  of  the  altar  which 
fugitives  often  laid  hold  of  as  an  asylum.  But  the  refuge  of  safety  for  any  moral 
intelligence  is  nothing  without  God's  strength.  For  an  insignificant  creature 
like  man  to  lay  hold  upon  the  strength  of  Omnipotence  seems  at  first  not  only 
an  absurd,  but  a  blasphemous  thought,  and  yet  the  thought  is  not  without  support 
in  the  Word  of  God.  What  meaneth  the  expression,  Let  Me  alone,  Moses," 
&c.  T  I.  It  is  possible  for  man  to  lay  hold  on  the  strength  of  Omnipotence. 
In  what  does  the  real  strength  of  a  moral  intelligence  consist  ?  Not  in  material 
bulk  or  muscle,  if  he  has  them  ;  but  in  the  leading  disposition  of  his  heart.  This 
is  the  soul  of  strength,  the  sap  in  the  oak,  the  steam  in  the  engine,  the  vis  in  the 
muscle.  He  that  can  take  hold  of  this  in  a  man  takes  hold  of  his  strength. 
Vanity  is  the  leading  disposition  in  some  men  ;  and  if  you  would  take  hold  of 
their  strength  you  must  flatter  them.  By  adulation  you  will  grasp  them  body 
and  soul.  Greed  is  the  leading  disposition  in  others.  Avarice  controls  them, 
works  their  thoughts,  and  concentrates  their  energies.  Minister  to  this  greed 
and  you  will  take  hold  of  their  strength,  you  will  have  them  in  your  hands. 
Philanthropy  is,  thank  God,  the  leading  disposition  of  others.  Present  to  them 
the  claims  of  down-trodden  slaves,  of  broken-hearted  widows  and  starving 
orphans,  and  you  will  take  hold  of  their  strength.  Now,  the  leading  disposition 
of  God,  if  I  may  so  say,  is  benevolence.  He  not  only  loves,  but  is  love.  He, 
therefore,  who  appeals  to  His  compassion  takes  hold  of  His  strength.  See  how 
Omnipotence  halted  as  Abraham  prayed.  See  how  in  Christ  it  stood  still  on 
the  road  when  two  blind  beggars  said,  "  Jesus,  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy 
upon  me."  Thus  let  the  poor  sinner  go  stricken  in  penitence  and  appeal  in  all 
his  misery  to  the  Great  Father,  and  he  will  take  hold  of  His  strength.  II.  It  is 
necessary  for  man  to  lay  hold  on  the  strength  of  Omnipotence.  The  only  hope 
of  sinful,  dying  man  is  to  appeal  to  God's  compassion.  "  If  My  people  which 
are  called  by  My  name  shall  humble  themselves  and  pray,  and  seek  My  face,  and 
turn  from  their  wicked  ways ;  then  will  I  hear  from  heaven,  and  will  forgive 
their  sin."  "  Ye  shall  seek  Me  and  find  Me  when  ye  search  for  Me  with  all  your 
heart."  Elijah  prayed,  and  God  unsealed  the  heavens  for  him.  Stephen  prayed, 
and  the  Father  drew  the  curtains  of  the  invisible  world  and  revealed  to  him  the 
Son  of  God  in  all  His  glory.  (Homilist.)  Seizing  the  strength  of  the  Almighty  : — 
How  can  a  man  take  hold  on  the  strength  of  God  ?  The  following  facts  may 
give  meaning  to  the  phrase.  I.  The  pleading  of  the  promise  of  one  who  is 
faithful  will  take  hold  of  his  strength.  If  a  man  of  incorruptible  truthfulness 
were  to  make  me  a  promise,  and  I  pleaded  the  fulfilment  of  that  promise,  should 
I  not,  in  a  very  emphatic  sense,  "  take  hold  of  his  strength  "  in  pleading  it  before 
him  ?  I  should  seize  not  his  mere  limbs  or  any  particular  faculty,  but  himself, 
his  inflexible  sense  of  truthfulness.  II.  The  pleading  of  a  right  claim  to  one 
who  is  righteous  will  take  hold  of  his  strength.  H  you  have  a  righteous  claim 
upon  a  righteous  man  you  lay  hold  of  him  by  urging  it.  You  do  not  want  law 
with  such  a  man  to  enforce  your  obligation.  He  yields  it  by  the  necessity  of  his 
nature.  There  are  claims  which  all  moral  beings  who  are  commanded  to  love 
God  with  their  hearts,  souls,  and  strength  have  upon  Him.  III.  The  pleading 
of  misery  to  one  that  is  loving  will  take  hold  of  his  strength.  Thus  the  cry 
of  a  babe  will  take  hold  of  the  strength  of  a  father,  though  he  be  the  commander 
of  armies,  or  the  monarch  of  mighty  peoples.     By  suffering  and  sorrow  you  can 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

take  hold  of  the  most  noble  men  on  earth,  and  the  most  noble  are  the  most 
loving.  (Ibid.)  Strength  taken  hold  of: — Coriolanus  was  a  mighty  man.  He 
is  thus  described  by  Shakespeare :  "  The  tartness  of  his  face  sours  ripe  grapes. 
When  he  walks  he  moves  like  an  engine,  and  the  ground  shrinks  before  his  tread 
tag.  He  is  able  to  pierce  a  corset  with  his  eye,  talks  like  a  knell,  and  his  hum 
is  a  battery.  He  sits  in  his  state  as  a  thing  made  for  Alexander.  What  he  bids 
be  done  is  finished  with  his  bidding.  He  wants  nothing  of  a  god  but  eternity, 
and  a  heaven  to  throne  in."  And  yet  his  mother  and  wife,  by  appealing  to  the 
love  in  his  nature,  took  hold  of  his  strength ;  and  hence  we  hear  him  exclaim, 
"  Ladies,  you  deserve  to  have  a  temple  built  you.  All  the  swords  in  Italy  and 
her  confederate  arms  could  not  have  made  this  peace."    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.  He  shall  cause  them  that  come  of  Jacob  to  take  root. — The  future 
prosperity  of  the  Church  the  effects  of  Divine  influence: — I.  In  respect  ot 
number.  Under  the  ancient  dispensation,  the  spiritual  Israel  were  com- 
paratively few.  But  at  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  dispensation  the 
wall  of  partition  was  broken  down,  and  the  boundaries  of  the  Church  were  greatly 
enlarged.  H.  In  eespect  of  spiritual  vigour.  Others  remain  in  a  state  of 
spiritual  death.  But  concerning  them  "  that  come  of  Jacob,"  it  is  here  asserted 
that  they  shall  take  root.  HI.  In  respect  of  beauty.  Christ  Himself,  "  the 
branch  of  the  Lord,  is  beautiful  and  glorious  "  (Isa.  iv.  2) ;  and  believers  in  Christ 
are  made  comely  through  His  comeliness  put  upon  them  (Ezek.  xvi.  14).  IV.  In 
respect  of  fruitfulness.  Believers  are  denominated  in  Scripture,  "  trees 
of  righteousness,"  to  intimate  that  they  should  "  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God." 
They  abound  "  in  every  good  word  and  work."  V.  In  respect  of  joy.  It 
is  when  the  dews  of  heaven  "  drop  upon  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness "  that 
it  is  said,  "  the  little  hills  rejoice  on  every  side."  The  abundant  joy  of  New 
Testament  times,  especially  of  the  times  referred  to  in  the  passage  before  us,  is 
often  spoken  of  in  Scripture.  VI.  In  respect  of  stability.  It  is  here  promised 
that  the  Lord  "  shall  cause  them  that  come  of  Jacob  to  take  root  "  The  vicis- 
situdes which  take  place  in  human  affairs  teach  us  the  vanity  of  the  world,  and 
the  perishing  nature  of  all  that  seems  most  durable  in  this  region  of  shadows. 
The  Church  of  God,  however,  has  been  like  Mount  Zion,  which  cannot  be  moved. 
VIL  In  respect  of  extent.    (R.  Jack.) 

Ver.  8.  He  stayeth  His  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the  east  wind. — 
The  rough  wind  stayed : — Here  we  are  taught  two  things :  that  God  permits 
calamities  to  come  upon  man,  but  that  He  restrains  them  in  moderation  for 
some  wise  and  merciful  design.  It  would  by  no  means  be  difficult  to  trace  out 
historio  parallels  illustrative  of  this  truth,  both  in  the  history  of  nations  and 
the  annals  of  the  Church.  But  the  words  of  the  text  seem  capable  of  a  closer 
application  to  ourselves  and  the  various  calamities  which  so  often  overtake  us. 
In  Judea  the  east  wind  was  extremely  violent  and  destructive ;  allusions  to 
which  are  not  unfrequent  in  the  sacred  writings  (Job  xxvii.  21 ;  Jer.  xviii.  17). 
How  many  a  one  has  struggled  through  years  of  difficulty,  buoyed  up  with  the 
warm  hope  of  gaining  some  desired  object ;  and  just  as  his  hopes  are  brighten- 
ing, and  the  bow  is  expanding  with  promises  of  realisation,  the  east  wind  comes 
and  shrouds  the  whole  in  darkness.  The  east  wind  has  blighted  your  hopes 
and  your  joys,  but  the  rough  wind  has  been  restrained.  1.  Your  trials,  though 
great,  have  not  been  inflicted  with  intolerable  severity ;  they  have  been  dealt 
out  to  you  with  moderation  for  some  wise  and  gracious  design.  2.  The  modera- 
tion of  our  trials  will  appear,  if  we  compare  them  with  what  is  endured  by  others. 
What  are  our  utmost  trials  in  these  highly  favoured  days  compared  with  those 
of  the  early  saints  ?  What  are  our  trials  compared  with  those  endured  by  "  the 
noble  army  of  martyrs  "  ?  And  what  are  our  trials  compared  with  many  of 
our  brethren  in  the  present  day,  who  endure  suffering  and  privation,  and  even 
death,  in  their  intense  love  for  souls,  Beeking  to  advance  the  Redeemer's  king- 
dom T  3.  The  moderation  of  our  trials  will  further  appear  if  we  contrast  them 
with  what  we  have  deserved.  (W.  J.  Brock,  B.A.)  Compensations: — God 
determines  very  exactly  the  measure  of  our  tribulation,  ever  mingling  mercy 
with  judgment,  and  permitting  trial  no  further  than  our  moral  perfecting  requires. 
He  sometimes  sifts  by  a  violent  wind  ;  but  He  only  sifts,  He  does  not  mar  and 
destroy.  I.  Life  at  large  furnishes  us  with  an  illustration  of  the  text.  Through 
human  sin  the  whole  world  has  been  filled  with  disorder  and  suffering.     Wher- 


chap,  xxvn.]  ISAIAH.  507 

ever  we  look — whether  in  nature  or  the  race — we  witness  scenes  of  confusion 
and  misery.  God  did  not  threaten  us  in  vain ;  the  power  of  His  displeasure 
has  been  bitterly  felt  throughout  the  whole  creation.  Yet  are  we  sure  that  judg- 
ment has  not  come  upon  us  to  the  uttermost.  The  world  is  dark  enough  to  justify 
a  very  sad  philosophy,  and  yet  the  regulations  restrictive  of  evil,  the  restorative 
forces,  the  system  of  compensations,  the  wide  spaces  for  positive  pleasure  which 
we  find  in  nature  and  human  life,  show  the  world  to  be  far  from  a  condition  of 
unmixed  and  hopeless  evil.  The  fact  is,  the  central  truth  of  revelation,  the 
redemption  of  the  world  by  the  Son  of  God,  tells  at  every  point.  II.  God's  pro- 
vidential dealings  with  His  children  illustrate  abundantly  the  same  law 
of  mercy.  It  is  essential  to  the  unlearning  of  our  errors,  and  the  perfecting  of 
our  spirit  in  holiness,  that  we  should  be  familiar  with  tribulation  ;  but  it  is  deeply 
interesting  to  observe  the  various  methods  by  which  God  reduces  the  whirlwind 
to  a  winnowing  breeze.  1.  Sometimes  this  is  effected  by  educating  us  against 
the  day  of  adversity.  Most  likely  we  are  totally  unaware  of  the  process;  it 
is  only  when  we  have  passed  through  the  ordeal  that  the  discipline  of  years  stands 
revealed.  Then  we  perceive  why  our  mind  has  been  specially  directed  to  given 
truths ;  why  we  have  been  led  in  prayer  to  seek  special  gifts  and  graces ;  why 
we  have  formed  certain  friendships  and  associations.  2.  On  other  occasions 
the  force  of  disaster  is  broken  by  the  graduation  of  trial.  Is  not  this  exemplified 
in  the  instance  of  Job  T  Successive  messengers  bring  to  the  patriarch  their 
ead  tidings,  but  the  crowning  woe  comes  last.  The  same  order  has  been  observed 
in  the  sufferings  of  the  Primitive  Church.  "  So  when  they  had  further  threatened 
them,  they  let  them  go  "  (Acts  iv.  21).  "  And  laid  their  hands  on  the  Apostles, 
and  put  them  in  the  common  prison "  (v.  18).  "  When  they  had  called  the 
apostles,  and  beaten  them "  (v.  40).  And  they  stoned  Stephen  "  (vii.  69). 
Menaces  prepared  them  for  captivity ;  fetters  inured  them  for  the  scourge ; 
the  scourge  ascertained  their  royalty,  and  left  them  strong  enough  to  claim  the 
martyr's  diadem.  3.  Again,  tribulation  is  often  relieved  by  counterbalancing 
advantages.  Be  sure,  where  there  is  a  "  but "  against  us  there  are,  as  in  the 
case  of  Naaman,  several  grand  "  buts  "  for  us,  and  it  will  be  most  to  our  good 
to  ponder  these.  In  nature  we  constantly  see  this  compensatory  action — see 
the  rod  of  God,  like  that  of  Aaron,  breaking  into  flowers.  Losing  eyesight,  our 
other  faculties  forthwith  acquire  preternatural  acuteness.  4.  In  that  law  of 
sympathy  which  prevails  throughout  society  we  see  once  again  the  sword  of 
judgment  crossed  by  mercy's  sceptre.  The  sick  and  suffering  are  objects  of 
special  sympathy  and  succour.  Macaulay  writes  of  John  Bunyan :  "  He  had 
several  small  children,  and  among  them  a  daughter  who  was  blind,  and  whom 
he  loved  with  peculiar  tenderness.  He  could  not,  he  said,  bear  even  to  let  the 
wind  blow  on  her."  in.  In  God's  spiritual  kingdom  and  government  we 
find  our  last  illustration  of  the  inspiring  truth  we  seek  to  inculcate.  In  the 
kingdom  of  grace  are  special  equivalents  for  life's  losses,  special  inspirations 
for  the  passage  of  flood  and  flame.  In  dark  periods  we  acquire  a  special  interest 
in  the  Word  of  God.  Times  of  adversity  bring  out  multitudes  of  precious  pro- 
mises, as  night  brings  out  the  stars.  And  not  only  so,  but  in  the  bitter  conflicts 
of  life  we  gain  a  fuller,  clearer  vision  of  truth  in  general,  and  realise  its  peculiar 
preciousness.  This  fuller,  richer  apprehension  of  the  mind  and  purpose  of  God 
imbues  us  with  new,  strange  qualities,  and  the  fire  forgets  its  power  to  burn. 
In  dark  periods  we  also  receive  special  measures  of  the  grace  of  God.  We  must 
ever  gratefully  acknowledge  the  mercy  which  ameliorates  the  world  about  us 
and  makes  its  conditions  gentler ;  but  we  must  hold  firmly  the  truth  that  the 
rough  wind  is  stayed  in  the  day  of  His  east  wind,  chiefly  through  the  sanctifica- 
tion  and  exaltation  of  the  human  mind  in  Christ  Jesus.  Here  we  often  err.  We 
plead  for  the  rectification  and  amelioration  of  circumstances ;  that  our  path 
may  be  smoother,  our  load  lighter,  our  sky  brighter,  We  are  anxious  for  better 
health,  improved  trade,  the  restoration  of  friends,  the  reduction  of  life's  cares, 
griefs  and  losses.  We  want  life  tempering  by  making  our  environment  less 
exhaustive ;  by  adjusting  the  world  more  nearly  to  our  weakness.  But  this 
is  not  God's  most  approved  method.  He  does  not  modify  the  universe  about 
as  so  much  as  He  raises  the  mind  within  us  ;  giving  us  relief  and  victory  in  know- 
ledge, power,  faith,  hope,  love,  and  the  joy  which  is  inseparable  from  a  soul  so 
richly  dowered.  "  In  the  day  when  I  cried  thou  answeredst  me  and  strengthenedst 
me  with  strength  in  my  soul."  Lessons — (1)  We  gain  an  affecting  view  of 
the  love  of  God.     (2)  We  see  in  this  a  reason  for  submission  and  gratitude. 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvil 

(3)  We  see  the  justification  of  confidence  and  quietness.  (4)  Let  us  go  forth 
again  with  renewed  courage  and  hope.  It  -is  generally  allowed  that  Danie  nas 
pictured  Inferno  more  ably  than  Paradiso  ;  and  the  critics  explain  this  on  the 
ground  that  the  poet's  gloomy  genius  made  him  more  skilful  in  depicting  a 
dark  theme  than  a  cheerful  one.  The  measure  of  Dante's  genius  is  rare  ;  the 
kind  very  common  indeed.  Most  of  us  are  clever  at  painting  black  pictures. 
(W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Troubles  as  storms: — Troubles  are  compared  in  Holy 
Scripture  to  storms.  As  storms  are  not  constant,  not  the  normal  state  of  the 
atmosphere,  so  troubles,  except  in  some  cases,  are  but  occasional.  As  storms 
disturb  the  ordinary  course  of  the  elements,  so  troubles  interfere  with  our  usual 
mode  of  life,  with  our  duties,  with  our  joys,  with  all  our  habits.  As  storms  are 
useful  in  the  hand  of  the  Great  Ruler,  so  troubles  fulfil  the  good  purpose  of  the 
Divine  will.  As  storms  are  not  pleasant  while  they  last,  but  promote  discomfort, 
and  awaken  fear  and  apprehension,  so  troubles  are  not  for  the  present  joyous, 
but  grievous.  As  storms  are  often  destructive  in  their  influence,  so  troubles 
break  up  and  break  down  things  that  we  would  not  have  touched — precious 
things,  hoarded  things,  cherished  things,  things  upon  which  the  eye  and  the 
heart  rest,  things  which  the  hand  grasps  firmly,  things  in  which  we  rest,  and 
on  account  of  which  we  rejoice.  (S.  Martin.)  Sorrows  as  winds  : — I.  Sorrows 
are  strong  forcbs.  They  act  as  winds ;  they  are  forces  before  which  we 
bend  and  bow.  II.  Sorrows  have  their  appointed  time.  "  In  the  day  of 
the  east  wind."  There  are  certain  winds  that  blow  at  particular  seasons.  Just 
so  sorrows  have  their  appointed  times  in  a  man's  life.  There  is  a  time  to  mourn. 
Blessed  be  God,  in  the  life  of  Heaven's  children,  sorrows  have  their  day,  their 
morning,  their  noon,  and  their  night.  They  are  here,  and  the  day  of  their  resi- 
dence may  be  long,  but  every  hour  of  that  day  tells  of  the  day's  approaching 
end  when  the  trouble  v.  ill  be  no  more.  Now,  it  occasionally  happens  that  people 
in  trouble  say,  "  This  affliction  could  not  have  come  upon  me  at  a  worse  time." 
But  that  is  never  true,  unless  by  any  wilfulness  you  bring  your  own  sorrows 
upon  yourselves.  If  the  trouble  came  at  a  time  when  you  would  not  feel  it  at 
all,  why,  the  trouble  would  be  useless  to  you,  and  you  would  have  to  be  placed 
in  those  circumstances  again  and  again.  III.  Sorrows  are  God's  servants. 
"  He  stayeth  His  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the  east  wind,"  just  because  the  winds 
are  His.  He  holdeth  them  in  His  fist  so  long  as  He  pleases  to  hold  them — and 
then  sendeth  them  forth  from  the  hollow  of  His  hand  when  He  pleases  to  send 
them  forth,  and  calleth  them  back  into  His  own  hand  when  He  pleases  to  recall 
them.  Just  so  is  it  with  troubles.  {Ibid.)  The  adaptation  of  trial  to  the  state 
of  the  afflicted  : — I.  Adapted  by  whom.  "  He  stayeth  His  rough  wind,"  &c. 
Adapted  by  the  Almighty  Father.  If  God  could  not  adapt  a  rough  wind  to  a 
feeble  nature,  He  would  not  be  almighty.  The  very  omnipotence  of  God  involves 
power  to  do  the  tender  and  the  gentle.  II.  Adapted  to  what.  1.  The  strength 
of  the  sufferer.  There  is  no  man  who  thoroughly  knows  his  own  strength — 
certainly  not  until  it  has  been  developed  by  circumstances.  There  are  people 
who  overrate  it ;  and  they  will  say  to  you  that  they  can  bear  such  and  such  a 
thing  easily,  and  they  look  upon  others,  and  they  wonder  that  they  should  be 
bowed  down  by  events  of  a  certain  class.  They  are  placed  in  circumstances 
corresponding  to  those  of  their  fellow-men,  and  they  find  that  their  strength  is 
absolute  weakness.  Other  persons  say,  "  Oh  !  I  could  never  bear  such  a  trial." 
The  former  cannot  do  what  he  thinks  he  can  do ;  the  latter  can  do  what  he  thinks 
he  cannot  do.  Now  God  makes  no  such  mistakes.  He  knows  just  what  we  are. 
"  He  knows  our  frame:  He  remembers  that  we  are  but  dust."  2.  He  moderates 
it,  moreover,  according  to  the  work  which  has  to  be  accomplished.  Sometimes 
trouble  is  chastening.  Then  trouble  is  intended  to  do  a  preparatory  work.  Or 
there  is  something  that  a  man  has  to  do  either  down  here  or  yonder — some  work 
for  which  he  is  not  educated — and  God  sends  a  trouble  to  educate  the  man.  Now 
God  moderates  affliction  according  to  the  work  to  be  accomplished.  If  there  be 
a  fault  to  be  corrected,  then  the  trouble  must  have  great  force  in  it — it  must  be 
rough  in  its  character  ;  whereas,  if  it  be  purely  educational — just  simply  to  bring 
out  some  dormant  faculty — then  it  need  not  be  rough  in  its  character,  but  it 
requires  to  be  longer  continued.  3.  Adapted  to  the  time  during  which  this  work 
should  be  finished.  4.  Adapted  to  the  power  and  resources,  moreover,  of  fellow- 
sufferers — because  in  most  cases  others  suffer  with  us ;  and  you  do  not  suppose 
that  God  does  not  look  at  the  entire  family  when  He  sends  sorrow  unto  that  family. 
III.  How  does  God  do  this  ?     Sometimes  by  removing  one   trouble  before 


chap,  xxvii.]  ISAIAH.  509 

another  comes.  By  lightening  the  affliction  itself,  or  by  so  strengthening  the 
heart  of  the  sufferer,  that  the  affliction  is  relatively  lighter,  or  by  pouring  through 
the  soul  of  the  troubled  one  rich  and  abundant  consolation.  IV.  For  what 
purpose  does  God  do  this  ?  He  does  it  for  present  peace  and  joy.  Moreover, 
for  your  enduring  benefit,  and  in  manifestation  of  Himself  to  you  as  a  tender 
Father,  "  He  stayeth  His  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the  east  wind."  Now  this  is 
the  testimony  of  God  concerning  Himself ;  but  it  is  also  the  testimony  of  God's 
children  concerning  Him.  Isaiah  could  say  this  from  his  own  experience  and 
observation ;  and  he  addressed  the  words  of  our  text  to  those  who  could  acknow- 
ledge them  to  be  true.  Now,  tell  this  to  one  another.  God  intends  you  to  comfort 
each  other,  as  well  as  to  instruct  and  edify  one  another.  Then  we  say  to  others 
of  you,  be  not  afraid  of  the  rough  wind.  Those  of  you  who  have  not  felt  it  will 
feel  it.  {Ibid. )  A  grand  symbolic  picture  of  the  world  : — The  critics  find  fault 
with  Rubeos'  picture  of  the  Crucifixion — they  say  he  has  painted  Golgotha 
like  a  garden  where  you  can  scarcely  see  the  skulls  for  the  flowers.  This  may, 
perhaps,  be  a  defective  picture  of  Golgotha,  but  it  is  a  grand  symbolic  picture  of 
our  world ;  the  things  of  sadness,  pain,  and  death  being  half-hidden  by  the  flowers 
which  mercy  has  caused  everywhere  to  grow.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  God's 
thoughtfulness  in  imposing  burdens  : — Let  a  ponderous  weight  drop  suddenly 
on  a  machine,  and  the  jerk  brings  it  down  with  a  crash  ;  graduate  the  strain, 
and  no  harm  is  done.  How  easily  the  delicate  mechanism  of  the  moral  man  might 
be  broken  down  !  but  whilst  the  engineer  is  imperfectly  versed  in  "  the  theory  of 
strains,"  and  often  sadly  miscalculates  the  "  breaking-point "  of  materials  entering 
into  his  constructions,  He  who  made  us  knows  perfectly  the  strength  and  frailty 
of  each,  and  with  a  faultless  delicacy  lays  upon  us  the  burdens  of  life.  (Ibid.) 
Life's  roses  and  life's  thorns  : — In  countless  ways  God  makes  His  suffering  people 
to  know  that  if  the  roses  of  life  bear  thorns,  the  thorns  of  life  also  bear  roses. 
(Ibid.)  God's  angels — judgment  and  mercy: — The  Jewish  tradition  relates 
that  after  the  Fall  the  two  angels  of  God — judgment  and  mercy — were  sent 
forth  together  to  do  their  office  upon  the  sinning  but  redeemed  race,  and  together 
they  act  to  this  day.  Where  one  afflicts,  the  other  heals.  Where  one  makes  a 
rent,  the  other  plants  a  flower.  Where  one  carves  a  wrinkle,  the  other  kindles 
a  smile.  Where  one  scowls  a  storm,  the  other  spreads  a  rainbow.  Where  one 
poises  the  glittering  sword,  the  other  covers  our  naked  head  with  succouring  wing. 
It  is  ever  thus.  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  that  His  hands  have  made,  and 
although  we  have  brought  upon  ourselves  awful  sorrows,  yet  He  so  administers 
the  world  that  by  countless  devices  He  softens  our  lot  and  saves  us  from  despair. 
(Ibid.)  More  affliction,  more  grace  : — Miss  Havergal  writes  her  mother  :  "  j.ore 
pain,  dearest  mother  ?  Way  it  be  more  support,  more  grace,  more  tenderness 
from  the  God  of  all  comfort,  more  and  more  !  May  we  not  expect  the  '  mores  ' 
always  to  be  in  tender  proportion  to  each  other  ?  "  (Ibid.)  The  compensatory 
element  in  life  : — Plants  of  great  splendour  have  usually  little  fragrance,  and 
plants  of  much  fragrance  usually  little  colour  ;  birds  of  brilliant  plumage  have  no 
music,  and  musical  birds  little  glory  of  feather ;  strong  animals  ordinarily  lack 
speed,  swift  animals  strength.  Now  that  would  be  a  very  disordered  state  of 
things  in  which  the  brilliant  plant  ever  grieved  over  its  defect  of  sweetness,  and 
the  sweet  flower  its  lack  of  colour  ;  in  which  the  bird  of  paradise  should  lament  its 
vocalism,  and  the  nightingale  sigh  over  its  plumes ;  in  which  the  camel  should 
fret  its  slowness,  and  the  gazelle  deplore  its  frailty.  And  yet  this  error  is  common 
to  man.  We  look  on  the  side  of  our  limitations  and  bereavements,  quite  over- 
looking or  undervaluing  the  particulars  in  which  we  are  rich  or  strong.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  9.  By  this  therefore  shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  he  purged.  —  God's 
end  in  sending  calamities  and  afflictions  on  His  people  : — Motives  to  enforce  this 
duty  of  complying  with  the  Lord's  end,  in  afflicting  and  bringing  calamities  upon 
us.  1.  Otherwise  our  calamities  are  like  to  continue.  2.  This  may  increase 
the  affliction  upon  you,  add  more  weight,  and  put  more  sting  into  it.  3.  This 
may  multiply  your  afflictions,  and  make  them  come  in  upon  you  as  waves  and 
billows  in  a  storm.  4.  This  may  bring  more  grievous  evils  upon  you  than  any 
you  have  yet  met  with.  5.  The  Lord  may  give  you  over  and  refuse  to  correct 
any  more.  6.  He  may  leave  you  to  spiritual  judgments.  Outward  afflictions 
are  His  rods,  but  these  are  His  swords ;  and  when  upon  incorrigibleness  under 
those.  He  takes  up  these,  His  wrath  is  raised  to  the  height.  7.  This  is  the  way 
to  be  rejected  of  the  Lord ;  for  those  that  are  not  His  to  be  rejected  wholly,  for 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

those  that  are  His  to  be  in  part  rejected  (Jer.  vii.  28,  29).  8.  This  provokes  the 
Lord  to  bring  destruction.  {D.  Clarkson.)  Mortifying  sin : — If  you  would 
subdue  your  iniquity  and  mortify  your  sin — 1.  Get  mortifying  apprehensions 
of  it.  2.  Get  mortifying  resolutions.  Get  your  hearts  resolved  against  sin;  to 
prosecute  it  to  the  death  ;  to  engage  all  the  strength  you  have,  and  can  procure, 
m  such  a  prosecution  of  it ;  resolve  not  to  spare  it ;  not  to  forbear  it  in  the  least ; 
not  to  tolerate  it,  nor  suffer  it  to  have  any  quiet  abode  in  any  part  of  heart  or  life ; 
not  to  enter  into  a  parley  or  treaty  with  it ;  not  to  yield  to  any  cessation,  much 
less  to  make  any  peace  with  it,  no  more  than  the  Israelites  with  those  whom  the 
Lord  had  devoted  to  destruction.  3.  Get  mortifying  affections  —  affections 
which  carry  the  heart  from  sin,  or  set  it  against  it.  4.  Get  mortifying  graces, 
three  especially,  love  to  God,  faith  in  Him,  and  fear  of  Him.  6.  Use  mortifying 
means,  those  which  the  Lord  has  appointed  for  this  end.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  11.  It  is  a  people  of  no  understanding. — A  dreadful  denunciation  of 
judgment : — I.  Thb  judgment  denounced.  1.  Great  desolation  as  to  their 
outward  state  (ver  10,  and  former  part  of  ver.  11).  2.  Utter  destruction,  final 
ruin.  "  He  that  made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on  them."  It  is  the  highest 
severity,  where  no  Saviour  is  to  be  found,  where  judgment "  is  executed  "  with- 
out mercy."  And  this  is  amplified  by  the  consideration — (1)  Partly  of  the 
inflicter  of  the  judgment.  "  He  that  made  them."  They  were  not  to  fall  into 
the  hands  merely  of  men  like  themselves,  their  fellow-creatures ;  but  "  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God."  (2)  Partly  of  kindness  formerly  received  from  Him. 
"  He  that  made  them;  He  that  formed  them";  that  is,  He  that  created  them, 
gave  them  their  being,  or  He  that  not  only  made  them  as  His  creatures,  but 
formed  them  to  be  His  servants,  formed  them  into  a  State  and  into  a  Church, 
and  so  had  given  them  their  being,  not  only  a  natural  one,  but  a  civil  and  ecclesi- 
astical one  :  He  that  had  formerly  done  so  much  for  them,  vouchsafed  them 
such  choice  mercies,  yet  now  would  renounce  all  kindness  to  them.  II.  The 
cause  of  the  judgment  to  be  inflicted.  "  It  is  a  people  of  no  understanding," 
a  sottish,  ignorant  people,  such  as  take  no  notice  of  anything,  know  not  God, 
observe  not  His  works,  understand  not  their  duty.  Other  sins,  no  doubt,  they 
were  chargeable  with ;  but  the  Lord  takes  notice  especially  of  their  ignorance, 
and  it  is  for  that  they  are  here  threatened.  Hence  we  take  notice,  that — 
1.  Ignorance  of  God,  His  truths  or  ways,  is  no  security  against  His  judgments 
(Jer.  x.  25).  2.  The  knowledge  of  the  will  and  ways  of  God  is  necessary  for  them 
that  expect  to  find  favour  with  God.  They  that  desire  God  would  save  them, 
must  labour  to  know  Him.     {E.  Veal,  B.D.)        Spiritual  knowledge  : — I.  What 

IS   THAT   KNOWLEDGE   WE  ABE   TO   SEEK  AFTEB.      II.    DIRECTIONS   FOB  ATTAINING 

IT.  (Ibid.)  Spiritual  knowledge  necessary : — 1.  Supposing  it  were  certainly 
defined,  how  much  knowledge,  and  the  knowledge  of  what  truths,  were  sufficient 
to  salvation ;  yet  no  man,  that  is  in  a  capacity  of  getting  more  knowledge,  ought 
to  acquiesce  in  just  so  much.  2.  Men  should  in  their  seeking  knowledge  first 
study  those  truths  which  are  most  confessedly  necessary  to  salvation  before 
those  which  are  apparently  less  necessary.  3.  Men  should  labour  after  such  a 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  as  that  they  may  be  able  to  give  "  a  reason  of  the  hope 
that  is  in  them."  4.  Men  should  especially  give  themselves  to  the  study,  and 
labour  after  the  knowledge  of  the  present  truths  (2  Pet.  L  12),  i.e.,  those  which 
are  the  special  truths  of  the  times,  and  ages,  and  places  in  which  men  live. 
5.  Men  should  labour  for  such  knowledge  as  may  defend  them  from  the  errors 
of  the  times  and  places  in  which  they  live.  6.  Men  should  seek  especially  for 
such  knowledge,  and  study  such  truths,  as  have  the  greatest  influence  upon 
practice.  7.  Every  man  should  labour  to  get  as  much  spiritual  knowledge  as 
he  can,  by  the  means  of  the  knowledge  he  hath  gotten,  and  as  he  can  get  without 
the  neglect  of  other  necessary  duties.  {Ibid.)  Alan's  forfeiture  of  the  love  of 
his  Creator : — I.  The  relation  of  a  Creatob  strongly  engages  God  to  put 

FORTH  ACTS   OF  LOVE  AND   FAVOUB  TOWARDS   HlS   CREATURE.       This   i8  clear  from 

the  strength  of  the  antithesis  in  these  words,  "  He  that  made  them  will  not 
save  them  "  :  where,  for  the  advantage  of  the  expression,  it  is  redoubled,  "  He 
that  formed  them  will  show  them  no  favour."  As  if  He  should  say,  it  may  seen 
strange  to  you  that  your  Creator,  which  very  name  speaks  nothing  but  bowels 
of  love  and"  tenderness,  should  utterly  confound  and  destroy  you.  Yet  thus  it 
must  be  ;  though  the  relation  make  it  strange,  yet  your  sins  will  make  it  true. 
The  strength   of   this  obligement  appears  in  these  two  considerations.     1.  It  is 


chap,  xxvu.]  ISAIAH.  511 

natural ;  and  natural  obligements,  as  well  as  natural  operations,  are  always 
the  strongest.  2.  God  put  this  obligement  upon  Himself;  therefore  it  must 
needs  be  a  great  and  a  strong  one :  and  this  is  clear,  because  the  relation  of  a 
Creator  is,  in  order  of  nature,  antecedent  to  the  being  of  the  creature ;  which 
not  existing,  could  not  oblige  God  to  create  it,  or  assume  this  relation.  There 
are  three  engaging  things  that  are  implied  in  the  creature's  relation  to  God,  that 
oblige  Him  to  manifest  Himself  in  a  way  of  goodness  to  it.  (1)  The  extract  or 
original  of  the  creature's  being,  which  is  from  God  Himself.  It  is  the  nature 
of  every  artificer  to  tender  and  esteem  his  own  work :  and  if  God  should  not 
love  His  creature,  it  would  reflect  some  disparagement  upon  His  workmanship, 
that  He  should  make  anything  which  He  could  not  own.     God  is  not  a  heathen 

g)d,  a  Saturn,  to  devour  His  children.  Now  the  creature's  deriving  its  being 
om  God,  includes  in  it  two  other  endearing  considerations.  It  puts  a  certain 
likeness  between  God  and  the  creature.  Whatsoever  comes  from  God,  by  way 
of  creation,  is  good ;  and  so,  by  reason  of  the  native  agreement  that  is  between 
that  and  the  will  of  God,  there  naturally  does  result  an  act  of  love:  for  where 
there  is  nothing  but  goodness  on  the  creature's  part,  there  can  be  nothing  but 
love  on  God's.  (2)  The  dependence  of  its  being  upon  God.  (3)  The  end  of  the 
creature's  being  is  God's  glory.  Now  God,  that  loves  His  own  glory,  must  needs 
also  respect  the  instrument  that  advances  it.  II.  SrN  disengages  and  takes 
off  God  from  all  those  acts  of  favour  that  the  relation  of  a  creator 
engaged  Him  to.  1.  It  turns  that  which,  in  itself,  is  an  obligation  of  mercy, 
to  be  an  aggravation  of  the  offence.  True  it  is,  to  make  a  creature,  to  give  it 
being  upon  a  rational  ground,  is  an  argument  of  love.  But  for  a  creature  to  sin 
against  Him  from  whom  it  had  its  whole  being ;  and  that  a  puny  creature,  the 
first-born  of  nothing,  a  piece  of  creeping  clay,  one  whom,  as  God  created,  so  He 
might  uncreate  with  a  breath ;  for  such  a  one  to  fly  in  his  Creator's  face,  this 
gives  a  deeper  dye  to  sin.  2.  Sin  disengages  God  from  showing  love  to  the 
creature,  by  taking  away  that  similitude  that  is  between  God  and  him.  which  was 
one  cause  of  that  love.  The  creature,  indeed,  still  retains  that  resemblance  of 
God  that  consists  in  being ;  but  the  greatest  resemblance  that  consists  in  moral 
perfections,  this  is  totally  lost  and  defaced.  3.  Sin  discharges  God  from  showing 
love  to  the  creature,  by  taking  off  the  creature  from  his  dependence  upon  God. 
It  cannot  dissolve  his  natural  dependence  (Acts  xvii.  28).  But  our  moral  depend- 
ence, which  is  a  filial  reliance  upon  God,  this  it  destroys.  For  in  sin  the  creature 
quits  his  hold  of  God,  and  seeks  to  shift  for  himself  and  to  find  his  happiness 
within  the  circle  of  his  own  endeavours.  4.  Sin  disengages  the  love  of  God  to 
the  creature,  because  it  renders  the  creature  useless,  as  to  the  end  for  which  it 
was  designed.  The  souk  by  reason  of  sin,  is  unable  to  act  spiritually;  for  sin 
has  disordered  the  soul,  and  turned  the  force  and  edge  of  all  its  operations  against 
God :  so  that  now  it  can  bring  no  glory  to  God  by  doing^  but  only  by  suffering, 
and  being  made  miserable.  Application — 1.  First  use,  is  to  obviate  and  take 
off  that  usual  and  common  argument  that  is  frequently  in  the  mouths  of  the 
ignorant,  and  in  the  hearts  of  the  most  knowing  ;  that  certainly  God  would  never 
make  them  to  destroy  them ;  and  therefore  since  He  has  made  them,  they  roundly 
conclude  that  He  will  not  destroy  them.  God  formed  thee :  true ;  but  since 
thou  hast  sinned  against  so  dear  a  relation,  this  very  thing  is  an  argument  that 
He  should  destroy  thee ;  God  has  imprinted  His  image  upon  thee,  but  sin  has 
defaced  it.  Thou  art  God's  possession,  a  creature  designed  for  His  use :  true ; 
but  sin  has  made  thee  totally  useless.  Now  the  reasons  whence  men  frame  these 
kind  of  objections  may  be  these  two.  (1)  A  self-love  and  a  proneness  to  conceive 
some  extraordinary  perfection  in  themselves,  which  may  compound  for  their 
misdemeanours.  (2)  Our  readiness  to  think  that  God  is  not  so  exceeding  jealous 
of  His  honour,  but  He  may  easily  put  up  the  breach  of  it  without  the  rum  of  His 
creature.  Nay,  we  are  even  apt  to  doubt  whether  or  no  our  sins  make  any  breach 
upon  it  at  alL  2.  Second  use :  This  may  serve  to  inform  us  of  the  cursed  pro- 
voking nature  of  sin.  Certainly  there  is  something  in  it  more  than  ordinary, 
that  should  make  the  great  and  merciful  God  take  a  poor  creature,  and  shake  it 
almost  into  nothing,  to  rid  His  hands  of  it,  to  disown  and  let  it  fall  out  of  His 
protection  into  endless  unspeakable  woe  and  misery.  3.  Third  use :  This  may 
inform  us  under  what  notion  we  are  to  make  our  addresses  to  God ;  not  as  a 
Creator,  for  so  He  is  noways  suitable  to  our  necessities.  He  is  offended  and 
provoked,  and  we  stand  as  outlaws  and  rebels  to  our  Maker.  What  shall  poor 
sinners  do  ?  whither  shall  they  repair  ?     Why  there  is  yet  hope :  God's  wisdom 


512  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

has  reconciled  His  justice  to  His  mercy,  and  consequently  us  to  Himself.  And 
now  He  represents  Himself  under  a  more  desirable  relation,  as  a  reconciled  God. 
And  although,  under  the  former  relation,  He  drives  us  from  Him ;  yet,  under 
this,  He  tenderly  invites  us  to  Him.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  A  class  of  sinners 
excluded  from  mercy  : — I.  The  characters  here  mentioned  are  described  as 
persons  of  no  understanding.  But  what  is  here  meant  by  understanding  ?  No 
one  can  suppose  that  the  persons  here  censured  and  threatened  were  idiots  or 
madmen.  Had  this  been  their  character,  they  would  have  been  incapable  of 
sin,  and  consequently  undeserving  of  punishment.  The  word  "  understanding  " 
is  obviously  used  in  this  passage,  as  in  very  many  others,  to  signify  spiritual 
understanding,  or  a  knowledge  of  religious  truth.  But  some  may  ask,  if  all  men 
are  naturally  without  spiritual  understanding,  and  if,  as  the  text  asserts,  God 
will  not  have  mercy  on  such  as  sustain  this  character,  will  it  not  follow  that  He 
can  have  mercy  on  none  ?  Though  all  men  are  naturally  without  spiritual  under- 
standing, this  declaration  does  not  refer  to  all.  It  refers  to  those  only  who,  like 
the  Jews,  have  long  enjoyed,  but  have  abused  or  neglected  means  of  grace  and 
opportunities  of  acquiring  religious  knowledge.  II.  The  terribleness  of 
this  threatening*.  There  is  something  terrible  in  its  very  sound.  But  its 
meaning  is  much  more  terrible.  It  includes  everything  dreadful,  everything 
which  man  has  reason  to  deprecate.  This  threatening  implies — 1.  That  God 
will  either  deny  them  the  common  blessings  of  His  providence,  or  grant  them 
those  blessings  in  anger,  and  send  a  curse  with  them.  2.  That  God  will  either 
deprive  sinners  of  their  religious  privileges,  means,  and  opportunities,  or  withhold 
His  blessing  and  thus  render  them  useless.  Thus  He  dealt  with  the  Jews.  He 
still  sent  them  messengers  and  instructions  and  warnings,  but  did  not  send  a 
blessing  with  them.  3.  That  God  will  withhold  from  such  characters  the 
awakening,  enlightening,  and  sanctifying  influences  of  His  Spirit.  4.  That  at 
the  judgment-day  God  will  condemn  such  characters  to  depart  accursed  into 
everlasting  fire.  There  is  no  medium  between  mercy  and  condemnation.  III.  It 
is  perfectly  just.  1.  Because  the  persons  against  whom  this  threatening  is 
denounced  never  ask  for  mercy,  never  seek  the  favour  of  God.  2.  These  persons 
have  long  rejected  and  abused  the  offered  mercy  and  grace  of  God.  3.  This 
threatening  is  just  because  the  characters  to  whom  it  refers  must  be  guilty  of 
many  other  aggravated  offences.  They  must  have  been  destitute  of  the  fear  of 
God ;  for  to  fear  Him  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  They  must  have  refused  to 
renounce  their  sins ;  for  to  depart  from  evil  is  understanding.  They  must  have 
loved  darkness  rather  than  light ;  for  they  rejected  the  latter  and  chose  the 
former ;  and  the  reason  was,  their  deeds  were  evil.  They  must  have  followed 
and  imitated  sinners ;  for  this  all  do  who  are  void  of  understanding.  They  must 
have  disobeyed  God's  commands  ;  for  all  who  obey  them  have  a  good  understand- 
ing.    (E.  Pay  son,  D.D.) 

Ver.   12.    Ye  shall  be  gathered  one  by  one.  —  The  one-by-one  principle : — 
This   principle   is   developed — I.   In  the    dealings    of  Providence.     II.  In 

THE    PROVISIONS    OF    THE    GOSPEL.       III.   In    THE    REQUIREMENTS    OF    THE    LAW 

of  God.  (F .  Oreeves.)  Gathered  one  by  one : — 1.  There  is  a  country  whose 
mysterious  shores  are  visited  each  year  by  thousands  from  every  continent 
of  earth,  and  not  one  of  them  ever  returns  to  detail  its  marvels.  It  is  called  in 
Scripture  "  a  land  of  darkness,  and  the  shadow  of  death."  It  is  a  great  republic, 
though  it  has  a  despot  for  its  ruler  ;  and  it  is  the  only  one  in  which  the  dream  of 
human  equality  can  be  fully  realised.  There  "  the  rich  and  the  poor  meet 
together,"  and  are  on  a  perfect  level ;  there  the  cheek  of  beauty,  the  form  of 
grace,  and  the  withered  limbs  of  age,  are  alike  the  banquet  of  the  needless  worm ; 
"  there  the  prisoners  rest  together ;  they  hear  not  the  voice  of  the  oppressor ; 
the  small  and  the  great  are  there,  and  the  slave  is  free  from  his  master."  There, 
side  by  side,  in  peaceful  slumber,  lie  "  kings  of  the  earth,  and  all  people ;  princes, 
and  the  judges  of  the  earth  :  both  young  men  and  maidens ;  old  men,  and  children." 
Mysterious  land  !  And  oh  !  how  densely  peopled  !  But  does  it  not  throw  a 
fearful  solemnity  over  this  thought,  when  we  consider  that  to  it  we  shall  be 
gathered  one  by  one  ?  We  live  together;  we  act  together ;  but  we  must  die  alone. 
Shall  not  this  consideration  lead  you  to  remember  your  individuality  now,  and  one 
by  one  to  prepare  for  that  hour  by  working  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling  ?  2.  Solemn,  however,  as  is  this  gathering  of  the  grave,  it  derives  fresh 
importance  from  the  fact,  that  we  need  not  fear,  and  we  must  not  hope  that  it  will 


jthap.  xxvii.]  ISAIAH.  613 

be  the  last  gathering.  "  Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery ;  we  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last 
trump :  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  we  shall  be  raised  incorruptible."  What 
a  gathering  that  shall  be  !  They  shall  come,  the  dead  of  all  generations — from 
Adam  to  Noah,  from  Noah  to  Abraham,  from  Abraham  to  David,  from  David 
to  the  Saviour,  from  the  Saviour  to  us,  from  ourselves  to  the  judgment ;  all  shall 
come  ;  the  sea  shall  give  up  the  dead  that  are  in  it,  and  the  earth  the  dead  that 
are  in  it,  and  death  and  hell  the  dead  that  are  in  them ;  and  the  whole 
posterity  of  Adam,  young  and  old,  rich  and  poor,  countless  as  the  sands  on 
the  seashore,  or  the  stars  of  Heaven — all,  without  exception,  shall  be  gathered 
there.  But  let  us  not  forget  the  principle  before  us.  Each  individual  of 
that  mighty  gathering  will  retain  his  own  personal  identity.  3.  This,  how- 
ever, is  but  the  opening  scene  of  a  yet  more  tremendous  tragedy.  It  is 
but  the  lurid  dawning  of  "  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord."  There 
shall  be  yet  another  gathering,  the  most  momentous  gathering  of  our  race,  and 
the  last.  Each  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God.  4.  Learn  thus 
that  you  have  an  individuality.  Each  one  of  you  has  powers,  duties,  talents, 
responsibilities,  which  you  cannot  share  with  any  other  being  in  the  universe  of 
God.  You  may  commit  sin  in  a  crowd ;  but  when  you  are  judged  for  it  you 
must  stand  alone.  6.  Will  ye  be  gathered  now,  gathered  to  the  Saviour's  arms, 
"  gathered  one  by  one  "  ?  (Ibid.)  Gathered  in  death  one  by  one  : — We  often 
ask  why  should  we  die  alone  ?  It  is  not  for  us  to  give  an  answer  for  God.  The 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right.  Our  entrance  into  the  world  is  one  by  one  ; 
it  is  not  unnatural  that  our  departure  should  be  the  same.  Each  one's  conversion, 
marriage,  all  the  great  events  of  life,  are  passed  through,  not  in  the  mass,  but 
each  by  himself,  one  by  one.  I.  The  individuality  of  God's  dealings  with  men 
in  their  highest  and  most  solemn  experiences  is  an  honour  and  a  favour.  Each 
is  thus  made  His  special  care.  The  most  precious  fruit  is  gathered  by  hand. 
II.  The  shock  op  bereavement  is  thus  lessened  ;  a  sparing  mercy  to  those 
who  are  left  to  mourn.  III.  Warnings  op  the  inevitable  hour  are  thus 
multiplied,  that  survivors  may  prepare.  (Homiletic  Review.)  "  Gathered 
one  by  one,"  i.e.,  ye  shall  be  carefully  gathered  together,  and  brought  safe  into 
your  own  land.  The  words  are  taken  from  olives  or  apples  or  the  like  fruits, 
which  are  gathered  one  by  one,  and  so  laid  up  in  some  place  appointed  ;  which 
olives  or  apples  or  other  fruit  so  gathered  last  better  than  they  which  are  beaten 
off  or  shaken  down  from  the  tree.  He  seems  to  oppose  this  gathering  one  by  one, 
to  that  "  beating  off  "  mentioned  in  this  verse.     (W.  Day,  M.A.) 

Ver.  1 3.  The  great  trumpet  shall  be  blown. — The  Gospel  trumpet : — I.  The  preach- 
ing  of  the  Gospel  is  here  compared  to  the  blowing  op  a  trumpet.  1.  This 
figurative  expression  may  allude  to  the  trumpet  which  sounded  upon  Mount  Sinai, 
at  the  solemn  promulgation  of  the  law.  And  though  the  ministers  of  Christ 
must  not  blend  the  law  and  the  Gospel  together,  yet  they  are  not  Gospel  ministers 
who  do  not  preach  the  law,  both  as  a  ministration  of  wrath  and  as  a  rule  of  duty. 
2.  The  words  may  allude  to  the  trump  of  jubilee,  which  was  sounded  throughout 
the  land  of  Israel  at  the  end  of  every  forty-nine  years,  proclaiming  redemption 
and  liberty  to  all  prisoners  and  slaves,  and  causing  the  following  to  be  a  year  of 
national  festivity  and  joy  (Lev.  xxv.  8-13).  This  interesting  period  having  been 
prefigurative  of  our  redemption  by  Christ,  of  our  deliverance  from  the  curse  of 
the  law  and  the  dominion  of  sin,  and  of  our  introduction  to  the  glorious  liberty 
of  the  children  of  God,  it  is  with  great  propriety  that  the  proclamation  of  the 
Gospel  is  compared  to  the  trump  of  jubilee.  3.  Trumpets  were  also  used  on  other 
occasions,  which  may  bear  some  allusion  to  the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel. 
The  Jews  had  an  annual  solemnity,  which  by  way  of  distinction  was  called  the 
feast  of  trumpets,  and  which  introduced  the  new  year  (Lev.  xxiii.  24).  And 
these  demonstrations  of  joy,  like  the  rest  of  that  typical  dispensation,  were  only 
the  shadow  of  good  things  to  come ;  all  had  a  reference  to  the  promulgation 
of  the  Gospel.  4.  Whatever  be  the  immediate  allusion  in  the  text  it  is  evident 
that  the  principal  design  of  a  trumpet  is  to  sOund  an  alarm ;  and  such  is  the  direct 
object  of  the  Gospel  ministry.  5.  The  preaching  of  the  Gospel  is  compared  to  a 
"  great  trumpet."  Great  things  were  contained  in  God's  law,  but  still  greater 
things  are  made  known  by  the  Gospel.  6.  The  great  trnmpet  which  was  sounded 
by  the  first  heralds  of  salvation,  continues  still  to  proclaim  the  same  good  tidings. 
II.  The  effect  which  was  to  follow  upon  the  sounding  op  the  Gospel 

33 


514  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvil 

trumpet.  "  They  shall  come  which  were  ready  to  perish."  Men  as  sinner* 
are  in  a  perishing  condition.  But  those  only  who  see  and  feel  their  perishing 
condition  actually  "  come."  1.  This  "  coming  "  implies  repentance  towards  God. 
2.  Faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  for  with  this,  all  true  repentance  is  invariably 
connected.  3.  All  that  come  unto  God  by  a  Mediator,  will  also  come  to  Zion 
with  their  faces  thitherward,  openly  professing  their  attachment  to  Christ,  and 
devoting  themselves  to  His  service.  The  text,  indeed,  seems  to  be  a  prophecy 
of  the  union  that  should  take  place  between  Jews  and  Gentiles,  under  the  Gospel 
dispensation,  when  they  should  be  formed  into  one  body,  and  equally  participate 
in  the  blessings  of  salvation.  The  trumpet  of  the  Gospel  is  still  sounding  in  our 
ears,  proclaiming  the  great  jubilee,  the  day  of  salvation,  and  inviting  us  to  seek 
the  Lord  in  this  welcome  and  accepted  time.  Have  we  embraced  the  invitation, 
and  answered  to  the  call  ?  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  Gospel  trumpet : — I.  We 
make  two  explanatory  remarks.  1.  The  prediction  primarily  refers  to  the 
proclamation  of  Cyrus  for  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews  from  captivity.  2.  This 
prophecy  has  an  ulterior  reference  to  the  times  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  inb  ringing 
of  the  Jews  in  the  latter  days.  II.  We  consider  the  greatness  and  grandeur 
op  the  Gospel  here  represented  by  a  great  trumpet.  Trumpets  were  of  very 
common  use  among  God's  ancient  people.  They  directed  their  journeys,  animated 
them  on  the  march,  roused  them  to  arms  against  the  invader,  and  sounded  the 
dreadful  onset  to  battle,  proclaimed  the  tidings  of  victory,  and  summoned  the 
people  to  divide  the  spoil.  The  chief  use  of  the  instrument  is  to  give  strength 
to  the  human  voice,  that  warnings  or  invitations  might  be  more  extensively 
heard.  No  kind  of  wind  instrument  was  in  more  general  use,  and  therefore  no 
symbol  could  have  been  selected  with  which  they  were  more  familiarly  acquainted. 
Their  solemn  assemblies  were  convened  by  its  sound ;  and  surely  the  greatness 
and  the  grandeur  of  the  Gospel  is  hereby  strikingly  and  significantly  symbolised. 
1.  The  greatness  of  the  Gospel  will  appear  from  the  dignity  and  moral  grandeur 
of  its  Author.  2.  From  the  gracious  tidings  it  proclaims.  3.  From  the  objects 
it  hath  already  accomplished  and  is  destined  to  achieve.  III.  We  notice  that  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel  is  the  great  ordinance  of  God  for  the  salvation 
of  men.  "  The  great  trumpet  shall  be  blown."  Its  sound  shall  be  long  and  loud, 
bo  that  the  proclamation  of  "  the  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  "  shall  be  universal. 
Conclusion — 1.  Let  Christians  appreciate  their  advantages  and  highly  prize 
the  Gospel  (Psa.  lxxxix.  15).  2.  Let  Gospel  despisers  fear,  and  flee  for  refuge 
to  the  hope  set  before  them  in  the  Gospel  (Heb.  ii.  2).  3.  Let  all  rejoice  in  the 
glorious  results  adready  secured  and  yet  to  be  achieved  by  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel.  (W.  M' Queen.)  The  blast  of  the  Gospel  trumpet: — I.  The 
period  to  which  this  promise  or  prophecy  refers.  "  That  day."  In  the  pro- 
phetical parts  of  Scripture,  this  phrase  is  often  to  be  understood  of  New  Testament 
times.  II.  The  gtieat  means  that  God  promises  to  employ  in  New  Testament 
days  for  accomplishing  His  design  among  the  Gentiles.  "  The  great  trumpet 
shall  be  blown."  1.  The  Gospel  intimates  to  all  that  hear  it,  the  offering  of  a 
great  sacrifice.  2.  The  Gospel  contains  an  indication  of  a  joyful  and  solemn 
feast.  3.  The  Gospel  is  the  appointed  means  of  gathering  a  solemn  assembly. 
As  the  silver  trumpets  were  used  for  gathering  the  assemblies  in  Israel,  so  the 
Gospel  is  employed,  according  to  Christ's  appointment,  for  gathering  a  Church 
to  Himself.  4.  The  Gospel  is  the  great  means  of  directing  the  march  of  the  armies 
of  the  spiritual  Israel,  through  the  wilderness  of  this  world.  When  the  priests 
sounded  an  alarm  with  the  trumpets,  the  tribes  of  Israel  were  to  decamp,  and  set 
forward  in  their  journeys,  in  that  order  which  God  had  appointed.  6.  The  Gospel 
is  the  great  means  of  calling  forth  the  armies  of  the  living  God  to  that  spiritual 
warfare  in  which  they  are  engaged  under  Christ, — of  directing  their  motion  in 
the  day  of  battle, — and  of  animating  them  to  continue  the  combat,  amidst  all 
the  dangers  and  terrors  with  which  they  often  find  themselves  surrounded.  The 
silver  trumpets  were  also  to  be  used  to  blow  an  alarm  when  Israel  was  called 
to  go  to  war  against  any  enemy  that  should  oppress  them  in  their  land.  6.  The 
Gospel  proclaims  an  universal  jubilee  to  all  that  hear  it.  III.  The  persons 
upon  whom  the  sound  of  this  great  trumpet  shall  take  effect  are  de- 
scribed by  two  circumstances.  1.  They  are  persons  ready  to  perish.  The  original 
word  is  still  more  emphatical — there  shall  come  "  the  perishing  in  the  land  of 
Assyria."  All  mankind  are,  by  nature,  in  a  perishing  condition.  Situated  in  a 
desert  land,  which  affords  no  provision  but  empty  husks,  we  faint  for  spiritual 
thirst  and  hunger,  and  are  ready  to  perish  for  want.     Led  captive  by  a  cruel 


chap,  xxvn.]  ISAIAH.  515 

enemy,  we  are  ready  to  perish  by  the  weight  of  our  chains.  Enslaved  by  a 
tyrannical  •  aster,  and  employed  in  the  vilest  drudgery,  we  are  ready  to  perish 
through  fatigue  and  weariness.  Sunk  into  a  fearful  pit,  and  struggling,  without  a 
possibility  of  extricating  ourselves,  in  the  miry  clay,  we  must  quickly  perish  without 
supernatural  help.  Above  all,  being  condemned  to  death  by  a  just  sentence 
of  the  Court  of  Heaven,  we  are  every  moment  in  danger  of  perishing  by  the 
hand  of  justice.  2.  They  are  outcasts.  There  seems  to  be  here  an  allusion  to  tho 
situation  of  the  Hebrew  children  in  Egypt,  who,  by  Pharaoh's  inhuman  decree, 
were  all  to  be  cast  out  into  the  river.  IV.  The  places  from  which  these  persons 
were  to  be  gathered,  by  the  sound  of  the  great  trumpet,  are  also  two.  "  The 
land  of  Assyria,"  and  "  the  land  of  Egypt."  These  two  countries  are  mentioned 
as  examples :  and  what  is  here  said  of  them  has  been  verified,  and  will  again 
be  verified  in  all  other  countries  resembling  them.  Perishing  sinners  have  been 
gathered  from  every  quarter.  V.  The  end  to  be  gained  by  the  blast  of  this 
trumpet  among  them.  This  also  is  set  before  us  in  two  particulars.  1.  They 
shall  come.  (1)  They  shall  come  to  Christ  by  faith.  (2)  They  shall  come  to 
the  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem.  Jerusalem  was  of  old  the  place  of  God's  solemn 
worship.  Every  person  who  feels  the  efficacy  of  the  Gospel  becomes  a  genuine 
citizen  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  And  from  that  time  forth  he  takes  pleasure  in 
attending  upon  God's  ordinances ;  accounting  a  day  in  His  courts  better  than 
a  thousand.  (3)  They  come  to  God  Himself  who  dwells  in  the  holy  mount. 
2.  As  they  come,  they  worship.  This  imports — (1)  Their  cordial  renunciation 
of  all  idolatry  and  false  worship.  (2)  Their  careful  and  diligent  observance  of 
all  those  ordinances  by  which  God  has  required  Himself  to  be  worshipped. 
(3)  Their  carefulness  to  perform  every  act  of  worship  in  the  manner  that  the 
Word  of  God  has  prescribed.  (J.  Young.)  The  blowing  of  the  great  trumpet : — 
I.  The  blowing  op  the  great  trumpet.     EL  The  characters  in  whose  ears 

AND  HEARTS  THIS  GREAT  TRUMPET  IS  TO  BE  BLOWN.  III.  THE  EFPECT  WHICH 
THE   BLOWING   OP  THE   GREAT  TRUMPET  PRODUCES   UPON  THEM.      («/.    C.   Philpot.) 

The  great  trumpet: — I.  See  how  a  compaeison  of  Scripture  with  Scripture 

WILL  ENABLE  US  TO  UNDERSTAND  THE  WORD  "  TRUMPET."  II.  THE  BLOWING  OF 
THE   TRUMPET.      III.    THE   RESULTS   OF   THAT   BLOWING.      (J.    H.    Crowder,    M.A.) 

The  Gospel  trumpet : — I.  The  grandeur  of  the  Gospel.  "  The  great  trumpet." 
It  is  elsewhere  called  a  great  light — a  great  salvation.  There  is  a  grandeur  in 
the  glorious  Gospel  of  God  which  soars  far  beyond  all  finite  excellency  and  con- 
ception. 1.  The  period  of  its  introduction  is  called  "  the  fulness  of  time."  2.  The 
Gospel  regards  immediately  the  soul  and  eternity — the  only  two  things  in  the 
world  which  are  absolutely  great.  3.  The  Gospel  abounds  with  exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises;  it  unfolds  blessings  that  are  incomprehensible  in  their 
nature  and  excellency.  4.  Everything,  compared  with  the  Gospel,  is  trifling  and 
mean.  II.  The  dispensation  of  the  Gospel.  The  great  trumpet  is  to  be 
"  blown."  1.  Who  is  to  blow  this  trumpet  ?  Men,  and  not  angels.  There  is  a 
difference  here  between  the  administration  of  the  law  and  the  dispensation  of 
the  Gospel.  2.  How  is  this  trumpet  to  be  blown  ?  Common  sense  says,  in  such 
a  way  as  to  answer  the  design  of  its  being  blown.  There  must  be  no  ambiguity 
in  our  preaching.  It  should  be  blown  courageously.  III.  What  is  the  condition 
of  those  to  whom  the  Gospel  is  addressed  ?  "  Outcasts,  and  ready  to 
perish."  This  is  the  figure ;  and  what  is  the  fact  T  "  Remember  that  at  that 
time  ye  were  without  Christ,  being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and 
strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise ;  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in 
the  world."  You  are  not  heathen;  but  turn  to  Scripture,  and  you  will  find  that 
you  are  all  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others.  IV.  Its  attraction 
must  be  noticed.  "They  shall  come."  Whatever  knowledge  the  heathen  had, 
they  were  utterly  unable  to  carry  it  into  effect,  both  for  want  of  evidence  and 
want  of  authority.  None  of  them  could  speak  in  the  name  of  that  God  who  calleth 
the  things  that  are  not  as  though  they  were.  Hence,  we  find  Plato  complaining 
that  he  was  unable,  by  all  his  instructions,  to  bring  over  the  inhabitants  of  a 
single  village.  Now,  go  to  Thessalonica,  to  Corinth,  to  Colosse,  to  Ephesus ; 
survey  the  character  of  the  inhabitants  before  they  received  the  Gospel :  it  is 
largely  described  by  the  apostle ;  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  devil  himself  could 
make  or  wish  them  worse.  Yet  the  apostle  stands  forth,  and  says,  "  Such  were 
someof  you  ;  ye  were  sometimes  far  off  ;  ye  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  ; 
but,  "  you  hath  He  quickened.  Our  Gospel  came  unto  you,  not  in  word  only, 
but  in  power  also ;  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power."    Accordingly, 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTFATOR.  [chap,  xxvir 

the  Gospel  is  expressed  evermore  by  images  which  indicate  its  efficacy.  It  is 
called  a  two-edged  sword — leaven,  which  commences  its  operations  in  the  centre, 
and  extends  them  to  the  circumference  until  the  whole  is  leaver.ed — seed,  which, 
though  it  looks  dead,  yet  fills  the  earth  with  its  fruit,  thirty,  sixty,  a  hundred- 
fold. This  success  God  Himself  has  ensured,  or  we  could  not  reckon  upon  it. 
The  Gospel  never  leaves  people  as  it  finds  them :  it  enlightens  their  understandings  ; 
it  prevails  on  their  wills ;  it  purines  their  affections  ;  it  makes  them  new  creatures. 
How  can  we  honour  the  Gospel  so  much  as  by  showing  what  it  can  do  ?  The 
trumpet  is  blown ;  but  it  is  heard — it  is  answered — they  "  come."  1.  How 
do  they  come  T  With  weeping  and  with  supplication ;  they  come  eagerly, 
hastening,  running,  flying  like  doves  to  their  windows  when  they  behold  the 
approaching  storm.  2.  From  whence  do  they  come  ?  From  the  dark  dens  of 
ignorance — from  the  lurking  holes  of  hypocrisy— from  the  false  refuges  of  phar- 
isaism — from  the  service  of  sin — from  the  bondage  of  Satan.  3.  To  whom  do 
they  come  T  Christ  is  the  only  resource.  What  is  faith,  what  is  religion,  but 
the  soul  in  motion  to  Him,  and  negotiating  all  its  affairs  with  Him  t  V.  Thm 
effect  of  its  influence.  "  They  shall  come  and  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy 
mount  at  Jerusalem."  We  ever  find  this  dedication  of  themselves  to  God,  in 
connection  with  the  spread  and  influence  of  the  Gospel.  "  All  the  ends  of  the 
world  shall  hear,  and  shall  turn  unto  God ;  all  nations  whom  Thou  hast  made, 
shall  come  unto  Thee  and  worship  Thee  ;  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going 
down  of  the  same,  in  every  place  men  shall  offer  incense  and  a  pure  offering.' 
The  "  holy  mount "  means  the  Church  of  God.  And  in  this  mount  all  who  partake 
of  Gospel  grace,  worship.  They  do  so  habitually,  in  the  shop — in  the  warehouse— 
in  the  field;  for  "  where'er  they  seek  Him,  He  is  found."  They  do  so  in  private. 
All  these  worship  God  in  their  families  too.  In  His  sanctuary  also.  Conclusion— 
1.  This  Scripture  has  been  fulfilled.  Myriads  in  Heaven  have  exemplified  ita 
truth,  the  numbers  that  rejoice  in  it  in  our  day  are  wonderful ;  but  soon  there 
shall  be  vaster  accessions  still.  A  nation  shall  be  born  in  a  day.  Have  you 
heard  the  sound  of  this  trumpet  ?  Have  you  obeyed  ?  2.  If  the  sound  of 
this  peaceful  trumpet  is  despised,  I  must  remind  you  that  another  great  trumpet 
will  be  blown.  Ere  long  shall  be  heard  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  the  trump 
of  God.  3.  But,  here  are  some  who  are  alive  to  the  text.  You  have  heard  the 
sound  of  this  trumpet ;  you  have  come.  What  are  you  doing  ?  Surely,  you 
are  giving  thanks  unto  Him  who  has  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  light ;  who 
has  made  you  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints.  Surely,  you  are  endeavouring 
to  bring  others  into  the  same  condition.  (IF.  Jay.)  The  silver  trumpet: — • 
As  when  the  front  and  back  doors  of  a  barn  are  open,  a  gust  of  wind  scatters 
the  dust  and  chaff,  so  the  Jews  had  been  swept  every  whither — some  wandering 
in  Assyria,  and  some  exiled  in  Egypt;  but  their  coming  back,  as  by  the  call 
of  a  trumpet,  is  here  predicted.  The  passage  is  strongly  descriptive  of  the  exiled 
and  perishing  condition  of  sinful  men,  and  of  their  return  at  the  trumpet-call 
of  the  Gospel.  1.  Need  I  stop  to  prove  that  out  of  God  we  are  in  exile  ?  Who 
here  is  at  home  in  his  sins  ?  Does  he  not  wander  about  looking  for  a  home  ?  You 
have  been  expatriated.  You  are  in  worse  than  Siberian  exile.  The  chains  are 
harder.  The  mine  is  darker.  The  climate  is  colder.  The  gloom  is  ghastlier. 
"  Lost  in  the  land  of  Assyria  !  "  If  a  man  has  missed  his  way,  the  more  he  walks 
the  more  he  is  lost.  He  starts  off  and  goes  ten  miles  in  the  wrong  direction. 
Nor  can  you  find  your  way  out  of  this  spiritual  confusion.  Lost,  and  without 
food.  Lost,  and  without  water.  Ingenious  little  children  sometimes  tell  you 
how,  with  a  few  letters,  they  can  spell  a  very  large  word.  With  three  letters  I 
can  spell  "  bereavement."  With  three  letters  I  can  spell  "  disappointment." 
With  three  letters  I  can  spell  "  suffering."  With  three  letters  I  can  spell  "  death." 
With  three  letters  I  can  spell  "  perdition."  S-i-n,  Sin.  That  is  the  cause 
of  all  our  trouble  now.  That  is  the  cause  of  our  trouble  for  the  future.  2.  But 
upon  this  dark  background  of  the  text  a  light  falls.  Amidst  the  harsh  discords 
there  sound  the  sweet  and  thrilling  notes  of  a  great  trumpet.  A  trumpet,  God- 
made,  yet  needing  no  giants  to  use  it,  but  suited  to  faint  lips  and  trembling  hand 
and  feeble  lungs ;  so  that  sick  Edward  Payson,  leaning  against  the  pulpit,  might 
hold  it,  and  Frederick  Robertson,  worn  out  with  ulcers  and  spinal  complants, 
might  breathe  through  it.  This  Gospel  trumpet  is  great  in  its  power.  On  a 
still  night  you  may  hear  the  call  of  a  brazen  trumpet  two  or  three  miles ;  but 
this  is  so  mighty  that  it  is  not  only  heard  from  heaven  to  earth,  but  it  is  to  arrest 
the  attention  of  all  nations.    (1)  This  trumpet  is  great  in  its  sweetness.     In 


chap,  rxvn.]  ISA T AH.  517 

some  musical  instruments  there  is  noise  and  crash  and  power,  but  no  fineness  of 
eound.  Others  can  not  only  thunder,  but  weep  and  whisper  and  woo.  Like 
that  is  the  Gospel  trumpet.  In  all  tenderness  and  sweetness  and  sympathy 
it  excels.  (2)  The  Gospel  trumpet  is  a  trumpet  of  alarm.  (3)  It  is  one  of 
recruit.  War  is  declared.  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  T  There  is  no  neutral 
ground.  (4)  The  Gospel  trumpet  is  one  of  assault.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake 
his  way,"  &c.  (5)  This  Gospel  trumpet  is  also  one  of  retreat.  It  is  the  part 
of  good  generalship  sometimes  to  blow  the  trumpet  of  retreat.  There  is  no  need 
of  your  trying  to  face  certain  temptation ;  you  are  foolhardy  to  try  it.  Your 
only  safety  is  in  flight.  (6)  This  Gospel  trumpet  is  one  of  victory.  (7)  One 
of  reveille.  We,  who  are  the  soldiers  of  Christ,  cannot  always  be  marching  and 
fighting.  The  evening  will  come  ;  the  shadows  will  gather ;  and  we  must  go 
to  the  white  tents  of  the  grave.  There  we  shall  sleep  soundly.  But  the  night 
will  pass  along,  and  the  first  thing  we  shall  hear  will  be  the  trumpet-call  sounding 
the  reveille  of  the  resurrection ;  and  we  will  come  up  and  fall  into  a  long  line  of 
light,  the  sword  of  Christian  conflict  gleaming  in  the  unsetting  sun.  The  roll 
shall  be  called,  and  we  shall  answer  to  our  names ;  and  then  we  will  go  to 
the  morning  repast  of  heaven.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Blowing  of  the 
great  trumpet : — We  shall  look  at  the  text  as  applying  to  heathens  as  well  as 
Jews,  even  to  all  who  are  ignorant  of  and  are  rejecting  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
as  their  Saviour.     With  regard  to  these  there  are  three  things  to  be  looked  at — 

I.  Their  urgent  need.  They  are  described  as  "  ready  to  perish."  The  word 
is  literally  "  lost."  The  idea  is  that  of  a  lost  sheep.  Or  of  a  lost  child  who  has 
left  his  home  and  wandered  into  the  fields,  or  into  the  woods,  and  been  overtaken 
by  night  and  darkness.  There  is  no  one  to  care  for  him,  no  one  to  guide  him, 
no  one  to  shelter  him.  He  is  left  to  himself.  A  hundred  things  may  happen 
that  may  be  death  to  him.  Without  knowing  it,  he  may  be  on  the  point  of  falling 
over  a  precipice  or  into  a  river.  Now,  a  child  or  a  man  who  has  gone  astray  from 
God  is  ready  to  perish  too.  Still  more  is  it  true  of  every  one  who  is  not  a  believer 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  true,  alas  !  of  many  even  in  this  highly  favoured 
land  of  ours.     It  is  true  of  the  Jews.     And  what  shall  I  say  of  the  heathen  T 

II.  The  help  wanted.  What  is  to  be  done  to  meet  this  terrible  state  of  things  T 
If  it  were  a  djing  man — a  perishing  child — we  should  ask,  Is  there  anything 
that  will  save  the  dying  one — any  medicine  or  food — anything  we  can  give — 
anything  we  can  do  ?  And  that  should  be  our  question  about  the  perishing 
millions  all  over  the  world.  1.  The  sounding  of  the  trumpet  may  be  regarded 
as  typical  of  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  by  which  both  the  outcasts  of  Israel 
and  the  "  ready  to  die  "  of  all  nations  are  to  be  saved.  2.  But  there  must  be 
some  one  to  sound  the  trumpet.  It  cannot  sound  of  itself.  It  must  be  "  blown." 
And  who  are  to  do  this,  but  those  who  have  heard  it  and  complied  with  its  call 
themselves,  and  who,  with  hearts  full  of  love  and  thankfulness,  can  sing, 
"  Blessed  are  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound  "  ?  It  is  as  much  our  duty 
to  blow  the  trumpet  as  to  hear  it.  3.  How,  then,  are  we  to  blow  the  trumpet  ? 
None  of  us  are  too  young  or  feeble  to  sound  the  trumpet  ourselves.  In  our  own 
way  we  can  tell  the  story  of  redeeming  love.  (1)  The  best  that  any  of  you  can 
give  is  yourselves.  He  gives  by  far  the  largest  contribution  who  gives  himself. 
(2)  But  where  you  cannot  give  yourselves  you  can  do  something  by  giving  your 
money.  III.  The  success  promised.  "  They  which  were  ready  to  perish 
shall  come."  The  return  from  the  Jewish  captivity  was  wonderful  in  its  own  way  ; 
but  more  and  better  is  in  store,  for  "  all  Israel  shall  be  saved."  Already  many 
Jews  and  Jewesses  have  been  converted  to  Christ.  And  as  regards  the  heathen 
world,  the  history  of  the  progress  of  the  Gospel  in  recent  times  reads  almost 
like  a  chapter  of  the  A  cts  of  the  Apostles.  And  yet  it  must  be  owned  that  any- 
thing like  a  complete  fulfilment  of  the  promise  is  still  a  thing  of  the  future.  What 
is  to  be  done  ?  The  great  trumpet  must  be  sounded  as  it  never  has  been. 
(J.  H.  Wilson,  D.D.)  The  urgency  of  missions  : — Are  not  missions  to  Jews 
and  heathens  and  Mohammedans  hopeless  ?  They  don't  want  them ;  they 
won't  have  them.  But  does  it  not  only  malve  the  case  the  stronger  if  they 
do  not  know  their  need  and  their  danger,  and  do  not  ask  for  help  ?  Perhaps, 
in  some  cases,  they  refuse  help  when  it  is  offered.     And  what  of  that  ?    As  I 

fass  along  the  banks  of  a  stream,  I  see  something  in  a  pool.  On  going  nearer, 
see  it  is  the  body  of  a  boy.  There  is  no  cry  for  help,  there  is  no  outstretched 
hand.  He  is  past  all  that.  Am  I,  on  that  account,  not  to  give  help  T  Is  not 
the  call  all  the  louder  and  more  urgent  ?     (Ibid.) 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 


CHAPTER   XXVIII. 

Vebs.  1-6.  Woe  to  the  crown  of  pride. — Chapter  twenty -eight  is  the  first 
of  a  great  group  of  representative  discourses,  chap?,  xxviii.  to  xxxii.,  all 
dealing  with  the  relation  of  Judah  to  Assyria,  and  all  enforcing  the  same 
political  principles.  (Prof.  Driver,  D.D.)  Overcome  with  wine : — Words  are 
scarcely  possible  with  which  (o  express  greater  sorrow  and  calamity  falling  on 
those  who  are  overcome  with  wine.  God  is  said  to  be  against  them.  Their 
beauty  and  pride  shall  fade  away.  They  shall  err  in  judgment ;  shall  have  dim 
vision  of  truth  and  duty ;  shall  lose  all  susceptibility  of  moral  and  religious 
impressions;  shall  speak  with  stammering  tongue;  shall  be  ensnared  with  all 
evil.  Their  condition  shall  be  heart-sickening  and  hopeless.  I.  A  terrible 
contrast.  Ephraim  in  this  passage  stands  for  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes: 
the  drunkards  of  Ephraim  for  its  dissipated  and  dissolute  people ;  the  crown 
of  Samaria  for  its  capital  city ;  though  there  is  possibly  reference  here  to  th© 
magnificent  hill  on  which  the  city  stood.  Its  site  was  a  "  chosen  one,"  than  which, 
according  to  Rawlinson,  none  could  be  found  in  all  Palestine  of  greater  "  com- 
bined strength,  fertility,  and  beauty,"  having  in  these  respects  largely  the 
"  advantage  over  Jerusalem."  It  was,  however,  full  of  drunkards.  Intemperance 
was  not  only  the  prevailing  iniquity  of  the  place,  but  a  form  of  sin  and  shame 
which  was  the  fruitful  source  of  innumerable  afflictions  and  calamities.  The 
figure  is  of  a  people  "  smitten,  beaten,  knocked  down  "  with  wine,  as  with  a 
hammer ;  laid  prostrate  and  helpless  on  the  ground  in  utter  bewilderment,  and 
unconscious  as  to  what  would  happen  to  them,  their  homes,  or  their  nation.  This 
was  the  doom  represented  as  a  Divine  judgment  upon  them  ;  but  really  the 
natural  and  inevitable  result  of  their  being  overcome  with  wine.  Let  all  men 
be  warned,  especially  the  young.  The  loss  of  everything  desirable  goes  with 
the  loss  of  control  over  appetite.  But  the  contrast  is  as  terrible  in  communities, 
cities,  and  nations  where  drunkenness  prevails  !  In  the  place  of  industry,  indol- 
ence obtains  ;  in  the  place  of  intelligence,  ignorance  abounds  ;  in  the  place  of  thrift 
and  comfort,  poverty  and  wretchedness  exist ;  in  the  place  of  honour  and  virtue, 
dishonour  and  vice  run  riot ;  until  life  becomes  scarcely  endurable  for  one  who 
would  keep  his  "  crown  of  pride  "  and  preserve  the  "  glorious  beauty  "  of  true 
manhood.  II.  The  terrible  power  of  appetite.  It  is  absolutely  destructive 
of  the  whole  man  !  It  is  a  giant  bringing  his  captive  into  complete  subjection. 
All  goes  wrong  with  a  man  when  he  is  under  the  influence  of  strong  drink  !  He 
cannot  walk  as  a  man ;  cannot  work  as  a  man ;  cannot  talk  as  a  man ;  cannot 
think  as  a  man ;  nor  is  he  capable  of  accurate  judgment  in  matters  of  small  or 
large  concern.  He  tramples  under  his  feet  the  most  sacred  associations  and 
obligations  of  life ;  he  loses  his  love  as  a  husband,  father,  son ;  he  breaks  hearts 
that  cling  to  him  more  fondly  than  to  aught  else  in  all  the  world ;  he  finally 
becomes  so  bound  as  to  render  it  practically  impossible  for  him  to  cast  off  bis 
chains  !  All  this  comes  not  only  to  such  as  may  be  termed  the  ignorant  and 
naturally  vicious,  but  to  the  learned  and  naturally  virtuous.  Men  of  culture 
and  refinement,  of  education  and  position,  of  inheritances  and  attainments,  of 
rank  and  station,  give  way  to  the  same  indulgences  and  fall  into  the  same  deeps ! 
Fathers  send  the  consuming  currents  through  the  veins  of  their  sons.  Mothers 
give  birth  to  children  whose  feverish  bodies  flame  with  hidden  fires.     HE.  Thb 

DUTY  OF  EARNEST  OPPOSITION  AND  FEARLESS  WABFABE  AGAINST  INTEMPEBANCE. 

We  read  here  of  a  "  residue  of  the  people,"  to  whom  the  Lord  of  hosts  would 
be  for  a  "  crown  of  glory,  and  for  a  diadem  of  beauty,"  for  a  "  spirit  of  judgment 
to  him  that  sitteth  in  judgment,  and  for  strength  to  them  that  turn  the  battle 
to  the  gate."  The  literal  meaning  of  this  is  that  after  the  pride  of  the  apostat* 
tribes  had  fallen,  they  who  remained  true  to  God  and  to  themselves  should  glory 
and  delight  in  Jehovah  as  their  chief  privilege  and  honour.  This  was  the  prophecy, 
and  it  was  blessedly  fulfilled.  When  Israel  was  finally  ruined,  Judah  rose  to 
power  under  Hezekiah.  He  resisted  all  enticements,  and  in  every  way  sought 
the  reformation  of  his  people.  Many  were  held  back  from  being  overcome  with 
wine.  These  were  "  the  residue  of  the  people,"  and  for  their  sake  God  endued 
the  magistrates  and  counsellors  with  the  spirit  of  discernment  and  equity ;  also 
gave  courage  to  the  captains  who  led  forth  their  troops  from  the  gate  of  Jerusalem 
and  forced  the  war  even  to  the  gates  of  their  enemies.  The  lesson  here  is  one 
of  united  and  fearless  opposition  to  intemperance,  and  to  whatever  exposes  tha 


chap,  xxviii.]  ISAIAH.  619 

people  to  its  ravages.  While  all  practicable  efforts  should  be  made  to  reform 
those  who  are  addicted  to  their  cups,  special  care  should  be  taken  of  children 
«nd  youth  that  they  may  be  kept  from  forming  the  drink  habit.  1.  The  home 
should  present  no  temptation  on  this  line.  2.  Each  Sunday  school  should  be 
a  temperance  society,  organised  and  equipped  for  work.  3.  The  physical  effects 
of  intemperance  should  be  taught  in  all  our  public  schools.  4.  Pastors,  too,  have 
A  duty  on  this  line.  (Justin  E.  Twitchdl.)  Samaria: — The  beautiful  city 
of  Samaria  crowning  a  low  hill  rising  from  the  valley  is  like  a  garland  on  the  brow 
of  the  revellers.  The  crown  is  already  faded.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  Over- 
come with  wine : — Literally,  "  struck  down."  Hard  drinking  is  compared  to  a  combat 
between  the  toper  and  his  drink,  in  which  the  latter  is  victorious.  (Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.).  "  Dry  drunkenness" — Men  are  drunk,  but  not  with  wine  ; 
sometimes  they  are  drunk  with  prosperity,  with  vanity,  with  evil  thoughts, 
passionate  desires.  Men  may  be  sober,  and  yet  may  be  drunk.  Men  may  be 
total  abstainers  from  wine,  and  may  yet  go  straight  down  to  helL    (J.  Parker,  D.D. ) 

Ver.  6.  In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  he  for  a  crown  of  glory. — The 
Christian's  crown  : — There  is  scarcely  a  more  striking  evidence  to  be  found  of  the 
corrupt  and  perverted  state  of  the  human  heart  than  that  which  is  furnished 
in  the  views  which  commonly  prevail  of  the  distinctive  features  of  the  Christian 
religion.  The  pageantry  and  pomp  of  a  false  religion  it  will  admire  and  approbate  ; 
but  the  spirit  of  the  true  it  has  ever  contemned  and  repelled  as  a  spirit  of  weakness, 
fanaticism,  or  bigotry.  The  spirit  which  it  so  characterises  and  so  contemns  is 
what  God  in  our  text  styles  a  crown  of  glory  and  a  diadem  of  beauty  "  to 
His  people.  The  crown  and  the  diadem  are,  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  objects 
of  great  beauty  and  value.  They  are  usually  set  with  diamonds,  and  with  the 
most  brilliant  and  costly  gems,  and  are  worn  not  only  as  ornaments,  but  as  the 
insignia  of  royal  authority  and  power.  Hence  they  are  properly  employed  as 
emblems  to  represent  that  which  God  regards  as  the  most  precious  and  beauteous 
ornament  of  His  people.  He  says  He  will  be  to  them  for  a  crown  of  glory  and  a 
diadem  of  beauty.     By  which  He  means,  that  He  will  impart  to  them  by  His 

eace  that  which  shall  render  them  more  glorious  in  His  view,  and  which  shall 
i  infinitely  more  dear  and  valuable  to  them  than  the  most  costly  crown  that 
ever  monarchs  wore.  It  is,  then,  the  lustre  of  a  spiritual  crown,  the  glory  of  a 
heavenly  diadem,  that  is  to  be  so  comely  upon  the  people  of  God.  But  in  what 
deep  obscurity,  at  present,  are  these  heirs  of  heavenly  royalty  !  Would  you 
not  like  to  contemplate  some  of  the  characteristics  of  this  heavenly  crown,  by 
which  it  is  distinguished  from  all  earthly  crowns  ?  1.  It  is  unfading  and  imperish- 
able in  its  nature.  The  apostle  calls  it  an  incorruptible  crown,  and  a  crown  of 
glory  that  fadeth  not  away.  In  the  verses  which  precede  the  text  the  prophet 
opposes  this  crown  to  the  blasted  and  fading  glory  which  appertains  to  the 
possessions  of  the  wicked  (ver.  1).  Who  is  there  that  sees  not  the  vanity  and 
inconstancy  of  all  worldly  glory  T  But  it  is  not  so  with  the  glory  that  has  been 
given  to  the  saints.  This  is  substantial  and  immortal.  "  The  Lord  shall  be 
unto  thee  an  everlasting  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory."  2.  This  crown  will  be 
worn  without  care  or  peril.  The  crowns  of  earthly  princes  are  set  with  thorns. 
But  not  only  will  it  be  worn  without  care  or  peril,  it  will  have  the  power  to  satisfy 
every  want  of  its  possessor.  3.  This  is  "  a  crown  of  righteousness,"  rightfully 
obtained  and  rightfully  possessed, — indicative,  on  the  part  of  the  Giver,  of  His 
own  perfect  righteousness,  and  expressive  of  His  approbation  of  that  righteousness 
in  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  arrayed  His  people.  How  different  this  from 
those  crowns  which  earthly  princes  wear ;  often  obtained  by  fraud  and  violence 
and  saturated  with  blood,— emblems  of  injustice  and  tyranny,  and  frequently 
held  by  power,  without  right  1  4.  It  is  a  crown  of  life  "  (Rev.  ii.  10).  It  is 
so  called  for  two  reasons.  One  is,  that  death  has  no  power  over  it ;  it  cannot 
deprive  us  of  it,  neither  can  it  in  any  way  impart  it.  The  other  is,  that  it  is 
the  sure  pledge  of  a  perfect  and  immortal  life.  Life  will  be  life  in  heaven,  not 
that  weak,  imperfect,  suffering,  half-developed  existence  which  we  have  here. 
Conclusion — 1.  Have  we  not  good  reason  to  call  upon  all  to  strive  to  win  this 
crown  !  2.  Can  Christians  understand  the  value  of  this  crown,  or  its  nature, 
or  the  mode  of  its  procurement,  and  not  feel  that  obligations  the  most  solemn 
bind  them  to  the  love  and  service  of  their  Redeemer  ?  (J.  W  Adams. )  The 
coronation  of  Christian  character : — I.  The  signification  of  thk  royal  fromish 
in  the  text,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  as  a  crown,"  &o.     1.  The  salvation  of 


620  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvin. 

those  who  have  attained  good  characters  is  thus  certified.  2.  Their  satisfaction^ 
is  expressed  by  this  figure  of  the  royal  promise.  3.  Their  sanctification  is  pro- 
claimed. They  are  described  as  without  fault  as  they  stand  before  the  throne- 
of  God.  II.  The  banks  in  the  possession  op  the  royal  promise.  Christ 
did  not  deny  to  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  that  there  were  places  of  distinctive 
honou;,  but  said  they  should  be  given  to  those  for  whom  they  were  prepared 
by  the  Father.  The  same  truth  is  taught  in  the  parable  of  the  ten  talents.  1.  All 
in  that  land  are  joyful.  2.  No  one  will  have  the  same  joy  as  another.  3.  But 
each  one  will  be  joyful  according  to  his  capacity.  II.  The  revelation  op  this 
perfection  is  madb  for  a  purpose.  1.  It  sustains  the  hope  of  the  man  of  good 
character.  2.  To  think  of  this  gracious  promise  stimulates  growth.  3.  It 
separates  from  all  sin.  He  is  drawn  ever  heavenward.  (8.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 
A  diadem  of  beauty. — A  diadem  of  beauty : — 1.  "  A  diadem  "  is  an  orna- 
ment for  the  head — an  ornament  worn  by  kings  and  queens  as  a  badge  of 
royalty.  It  used  to  be  made  of  linen  or  silk,  set  with  pearls  and  precious  stones. 
Now  it  is  generally  a  fillet  or  band  of  gold  on  which  the  monarch's  crown  is  built. 
It  is  a  splendid  head-dress,  the  emblem  of  rank,  power,  sovereignty.  Not  any 
of  us  are  likely  ever  to  wear  an  earthly  diadem  of  jewels  and  gold.  But,  wonderful 
to  tell,  the  prophet  Isaiah  promises  that  the  living  God,  the  Lord  of  hosts," 
shall  be  to  His  people  "  for  a  crown  of  glory,  and  for  a  diadem  of  beauty."  We, 
the  least  of  God's  children,  may  have  Him  for  our  diadem,  our  beauty,  our  glory, 
and  our  eternal  joy.  2.  "  Beauty  "  is  something  we  all  love  and  prize.  Even 
the  ugliest  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth  have  some  notions  of  beauty,  and  try 
to  make  themselves  beautiful.  There  are  wild,  savage  tribes  who  have  no 
churches,  no  schools,  no  altars,  who  never  pray,  and  whose  only  heaven  is  their 
hunting-ground,  yet  they  have  ideas  of  beauty  and  are  vain  of  personal  adornment. 
The  red  Indian  sticks  a  few  feathers  in  his  hair,  puts  an  iron  ring  through  his 
nose,  ties  some  strings  of  coloured  glass  beads  around  his  waist,  and  a  chain  of 
shells  upon  his  wrists  and  neck,  and  then  thinks  himself  more  beautiful  than  any 
dandy  in  the  West  End  of  London.  This  love  of  beauty  is  natural.  God  Himself 
loves  beauty,  and  has  made  everything  beautiful.  Still,  there  is  beauty  and 
beauty.  Not  a  little  that  is  only  fading,  quickly  dimmed,  and  almost  worthless. 
Much  that  is  lasting,  precious,  and  noble.  Socrates,  one  of  the  wisest  men  of  his 
day,  knew  little  concerning  the  Supreme  Being  whom  we  worship  as  God,  and 
nothing  at  all  of  the  Gospel — for  he  lived  and  died  before  Jesus  Christ  was  born. 
And  Socrates  uttered  this  memorable  petition :  "  I  pray  Thee,  O  God,  that  I 
may  be  beautiful  within."  Keats  says  that  "  Beauty  is  truth,  and  truth  is  beauty." 
The  Bible  makes  mention  of  "  the  beauty  of  holiness."  And  the  prophet  Isaiah 
tells  us  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  to  His  people  for  "  a  diadem  of  beauty." 
Beauty  of  soul  is  true  beauty.  Sin  makes  us  ugly.  Sin  defaces  and  defiles  our 
nature.  "  Grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ "  ;  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
wi'l  transform  the  heart  and  life  of  every  one  who  receives  Him.  Meekness, 
goodness,  purity,  truth,  love  indwelling  in  the  soul  will  shine  out  in  the  face, 
and  be  a  "  diadem  of  beauty."  A  flower  is  the  diadem  of  a  plant.  You  don't 
tie  a  flower  on  its  stem.  It  grows  out  of  it.  And  if  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ 
dwell  in  your  heart,  the  beauty  of  His  grace  will  blossom  forth  in  your  character 
and  life.  It  will  be  not  a  mere  outward  decoration,  to  be  put  on  and  off  on  certain 
days,  like  a  lady's  feathers  or  a  queen's  crown;  it  will  be  always  there.  No 
wonder  the  Psalmist  prayed,  "  Let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us ! " 
This  is  a  beauty  brighter  and  better  than  the  diadem  of  kings.     (A.  A.  Ramsey.) 

Vet.  6.  For  a  spirit  of  judgment. — The  spirit  of  judgment : — Next  to  the 
enactment  of  just  and  wholesome  laws,  the  due  administration  of  them  is  of  the 
highest  importance  to  a  community.  If  the  distribution  of  justice  in  secular 
kingdoms,  and  in  relation  to  the  affairs  of  this  life,  is  of  so  great  moment,  it  must 
be  of  still  greater  importance  in  that  society  which  is  styled  "  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,"  and  in  relation  to  things  connected  with  the  eternal  interests  of  men. 
I.  The  warrants  and  nature  of  ecclesiastical  judicature.  Religious  society 
has  its  foundation  in  the  very  nature  of  man  considered  as  a  social  being.  Christ, 
as  King  of  His  C  hurch,  hath  appointed  a  government  in  her,  and  committed  to 
office-bearers,  under  Him,  a  power  to  execute  His  laws,  and  pronounce  judgment 
according  to  them,  for  the  preservation  of  order  and  peace,  and  the  promoting 
of  the  interests  of  truth  and  holiness  to  His  glory.  The  overlooking  of  the  im- 
portant ends  to  be  served  by  the  Church  as  a  visible  society  is  a  capital  error,  or 


chap,  xxviii.]  ISAIAH.  621 

at  least  has  been  the  source  of  many  hurtful  mistakes  in  our  own  as  well  as  in 
former  times.  To  ecclesiastical  judges  belong  the  interpretation  of  the  laws  of 
Christ,  by  a  judicial  declaration  of  truth  in  opposition  to  prevailing  error,  and  of 
duty  in  opposition  to  prevailing  sins ;  and  the  application  of  these  laws  to  such 
cases  as  occur.  1.  Ecclesiastical  judgment  is  spiritual,  in  distinction  from  that 
which  is  civil  or  secular.  2.  Ecclesiastical  judgment  is  ministerial  and  executive, 
not  lordly  or  legislative.  Christ  is  the  sole  lawgiver  in  His  spiritual  kingdom  ; 
and  the  proper  business  of  the  office-bearers  whom  He  hath  appointed  is  to  interpret 
and  carry  into  execution  those  laws  which  He  has  given  forth  and  enrolled  in  His 
Btatute  book.  3.  It  is  public  and  authoritative.  There  is  a  right  of  private  judg- 
ment, called  by  divines  the  judgment  of  discretion,  which  belongs  to  all  the 
members  of  the  Church,  and  extends  to  every  thing  connected  with  religion, 
and  among  others  to  the  decisions  of  ecclesiastical  judicatories.  But  there  must 
be  also  lodged,  in  every  well-ordered  society,  a  power  of  pronouncing  by  its  proper 
organs,  a  public  judgment  for  deciding  disputes  and  controversies  which  may 
arise,  and  for  determining  the  manner  in  which  its  affairs  shall  be  conducted. 
4.  It  is  to  be  exercised  by  select  persons  set  apart  for  this  purpose,  and  not  by 
the  community  of  the  faithful.  "  In  the  multitude  of  counsellors  is  safety," 
in  opposition  to  the  danger  incurred  by  him  who  relies  on  his  own  judgment, 
or  the  advice  of  one  or  two  favourites;  but  counsellors  consist  of  a  select  number 
taken  from  many.  6.  It  is  to  be  exercised  by  them  jointly,  and  in  parity.  The 
only  monarchical  power  in  the  Church  is  exercised  by  Jesus  Christ.     II.  The 

SPIRIT    WHICH   IS    REQUISITE    FOR    THE    EXERCISE    OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   JUDGMENT, 

and  which  is  promised  in  the  text.  Jesus  Christ  is  not  only  the  exemplar,  but 
also  the  foundation  of  all  qualifications  for  ruling  in  the  Church  (Isa.  xi.  2-4). 
1. 1  begin  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  or  a  deep  sense  of  religion.  This  is  the  ground 
into  which  all  the  other  qualities  must  be  wrought.  2.  The  spirit  of  wisdom  and 
understanding.  A  good  heart  and  upright  intentions  are  not  enough  here. 
Knowledge,  prudence,  and  discernment  are  peculiarly  requisite  for  the  manage- 
ment of  public  affairs.  Those  who  are  invested  with  office  in  the  Church  must 
be  men  '  full  of  wisdom,"  as  well  as  "  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  3.  The  spirit  of 
disinterestedness  and  impartiality.  This  is  "  the  spirit  of  judgment " — when 
the  individual  is  sunk  in  the  public  functionary — when  on  crossing  the  threshold 
of  the  sanctuary  and  ascending  the  seat  of  judgment  he  forgets  self  and  all  worldly 
considerations.  4.  A  spirit  of  patience  and  meekness.  6.  The  spirit  of  holy 
resolution  and  courage.  6.  The  spirit  of  humility  and  dependence  on  God. 
III.  Practical  lessons.  1.  The  great  importance  of  ecclesiastical  discipline, 
and  of  preserving  it  in  its  scriptural  purity  and  primitive  vigour.  Evangelical 
and  vital  religion  cannot  flourish  generally  or  permanently  in  any  Church  where 
this  is  neglected.  2.  We  may  see  one  duty  incumbent  on  those  who  have  devoted 
themselves  to  the  public  service  of  the  Church.  To  preach  the  gospel  is  a  principal 
part  of  their  employment,  but  it  is  not  the  whole  of  it.  It  is  possible  that  a  person 
may  be  able  to  make  a  sermon  which  shall  be  both  acceptable  and  edifying,  and, 
after  all,  be  but  poorly  qualified  for  "  taking  care  of  the  Church  of  God."  3.  We 
may  learn  what  care  ought  to  be  exercised  in  choosing  and  setting  apart  those 
who  are  to  bear  office  in  the  Church.  4.  We  may  see  the  scriptural  grounds  of 
subjection  to  the  authority,  and  obedience  to  the  determinations  of  church  rulers. 
These  are,  the  Divine  institutions  of  ecclesiastical  government,  the  connection 
between  it  and  the  regal  glory  of  Christ,  and  the  salutary  influence  which  it  is 
calculated  to  exert  upon  all  other  Divine  institutions,  as  well  as  upon  tho  peace, 
unity,  order,  purity,  and  general  prosperity  of  the  Church  as  a  visible  and  diffusive 
society.  5.  Our  subject  suggests  suitable  exercise  on  occasion  of  the  meeting 
of  ecclesiastical  judicatories.  It  was  a  custom  in  the  better  times  of  our  Church 
to  set  apart  a  day  for  fasting  and  prayer  before  the  meeting  of  a  General  Assembly, 
to  entreat  the  Divine  countenance  to  its  deliberations.     (T.  M'Crie,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  But  they  also  have  erred  through  wine. — "  Swallowed  up  of 
wine " : — This  is  how  all  debasement  continues,  aggravates  itself,  and  brings 
itself  to  shameful  issue.  No  man  begins  at  the  point  of  being  swallowed  up  in 
any  evil :  he  approaches  it  almost  stealthily,  he  touches  it  experimentally,  he 
retains  for  a  certain  time  his  self-control  in  relation  to  it, — he  will  handle  it,  but 
easily,  so  that  he  can  set  it  down  again  should  it  so  please  him.  But  at  the  end 
there  is  swallowing  up,  destruction— death  is  in  the  cup,  and  death  must  be  drunk 
up  by  those  who  put  their  lips  to  the  forbidden  vessel.     When  Edward  IV.  >.on. 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvni. 

demned  his  own  brother,  George  Duke  of  Clarence,  to  be  killed,  we  axe  told  that 
the  duke  desired  to  be  drowned  in  a  butt  of  Malmsey,  and  the  historian  well  adds, 
"  as  became  so  stout  a  drunkard."  To  this  end  may  men  come  who  never  dreamed 
of  coming  to  it,  who  meant  to  show  the  world  how  easy  it  would  be  to  toy  with 
the  devil,  to  touch  him,  set  him  back,  smile  at  him,  laugh  at  him,  use  him  as 
a  dog,  bind  him  as  a  slave  ;  and  to  all  these  initial  usages  will  the  devil  submit 
himself,  knowing  that  at  some  fatal  unsuspected  moment  he  will  lasso  the  man 
who  supposes  he  can  take  him  captive,  and  he  will  carry  him  away  to  the  chambers 
of  death.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Erred  through  wine : — Preaching  in  London, 
the  Rev.  Egerton  Young,  so  long  a  missionary  to  the  Hudson  Bay  Indians,  said 
he  would  like  to  bring  some  of  his  converts  to  this  land,  but  he  dared  not  until 
the  temperance  cause  was  more  advanced.  One  native  preacher  had  been  brought 
over,  but  kind  friends  thought  that  he  required  a  little  stimulant  after  the  fatigue 
of  the  meeting,  and  the  poor  Indian  had  gone  back  with  such  a  taste  for  spirits 
that  he  had  to  be  expelled  from  his  office,  and  finally  died  a  drunken  outcast. 

i  Australian  Sunday  School  Teacher.)  Intemperance  a  pestilence  : — No  pesti- 
ence  has  ever  destroyed  so  many  millions  of  men,  women,  and  children  as  intem- 
perance ;  for  a  pestilence  comes  and  goes,  and  often  at  long  intervals,  but  intem- 
perance is  a  fixed  and  permanent  plague,  always  spreading,  and  always  destroying 
our  people,  body  and  soul.  (Cardinal  Manning.)  Intemperance  a  peril  to 
national  life : — On  the  east  coast  of  our  country  the  sea  has  been  encroaching 
for  centuries.  Acre  after  acre  of  corn  land  has  tumbled  down  into  the  waves, 
and  churches,  threatened  by  every  high  tide,  are  pointed  out  which,  at  the  time 
of  their  erection,  stood  a  mile  from  the  sea.  And  by  a  similar  process  of  encroach- 
ment and  destruction  fruitful  sections  of  our  national  life  are  broken  down  and 
churned  in  the  raging  flood  of  this  terrible  curse,  and  places  are  not  unknown 
in  which  the  very  church  itself  threatens  to  topple  into  ignominy  and  ruin.  (T. 
G.  Selby.)  Drunkenness  degrades  : — Dr.  Louis  A.  Banks  tells  how  a  drunkard 
in  New  Orleans  was  reformed.  A  friend  of  his,  who  was  a  stenographer,  sat  down 
in  a  corner  of  the  saloon  in  which  he  was  carousing,  and  made  a  full  shorthand 
report  of  every  word  he  said.  The  next  morning  the  stenographer  copied  the 
whole  thing  neatly  and  sent  it  round  to  his  office.  In  less  than  ten  minutes  he 
came  tearing  with  his  eyes  fairly  standing  out  of  their  sockets.  "  Great  heavens," 
he  gasped,  what  is  this  ?  "  "  It's  a  stenographic  report  of  your  monologue 
at  the  restaurant  last  evening,"  and  gave  him  a  brief  explanation.  "  Did  I  really 
talk  like  that  ?  "  he  asked  faintly.  "  I  assure  you  it  is  an  absolutely  verbatim 
report,"  was  the  reply.  He  turned  pale  and  walked  out.  He  never  drank  another 
drop.  (Christian  Age.)  The  degradation  of  drunkenness: — It  is  told  by  Victor 
Hugo  that  in  the  capital  of  Burgundy  the  corporation  had  four  silver  goblets. 
When  a  prince  or  any  distinguished  person  passed  through  their  city  they  were 
offered  wine  in  these  silver  goblets.  The  wine  of  Burgundy  is  very  famous,  but 
the  people  knew  not  only  its  merits,  but  its  dangers.  On  the  first  goblet  was 
inscribed  a  monkey,  on  the  second  a  lion,  on  the  third  a  sheep,  and  on  the  fourth 
a  swine.  This  meant  to  denote  the  degrees  of  drunkenness  which  their  wine 
produced.     (0.  H.  Morrison,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9-13.  Whom  shall  He  teach  knowledge? — The  scoffing  drunkards: — 
They  scoff  at  the  prophet,  that  intolerable  moralist.  They  are  full-grown  and 
free ;  he  need  not  teach  them  knowledge  (xi.  9),  and  explain  his  preaching  to 
them ;  they  know  of  old  what  he  is  driving  at.  Are  they  mere  weaned  babes, 
who  need  to  be  tutored  ?  (F.  Delitzsch.)  The  occasion  of  this  remarkable 
encounter  was  probably  a  feast  held  to  celebrate  the  renunciation  of  allegiance 
to  Assyria.  Isaiah  has  surprised  the  drunkards  over  their  cups,  and  administered 
some  such  rebuke  as  we  read  in  vers.  7,  8.  (J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  angry 
false  priests  and  prophets : — What  really  angered  these  burly  scorners  was  that 
the  prophet  treated  them  as  though  they  were  children  only  just  weaned,  and 
not  as  masters  in  Israel,  giving  them  the  most  elementary  instruction  in  the 
simplest  words — words  of  one  syllable,  as  they  put  it.  They  were  weary  of 
hearing  him  repeat  the  first  rudiments  of  morality,  and  apply  them  to  the  sins 
and  needs  of  the  time.  How  dared  he  tutor  them  who  were  themselves  teachers  L 
How  dared  he  treat  them  as  babes  who  were  grown  men,  distinguished  men, 
the  foremost  men  and  statesmen  of  the  empire  !  A  pretty  figure  he  made  too  t 
No  one  listened  to  him,  or  hardly  any  one.  It  was  their  advice  which  was  taken, 
not  his ;  their  policy  which  was  followed,  not  his.     And  yet  he  dared  come  t* 


chap,  xxviii.]  ISAIAH.  623 

them,  day  after  day,  with  the  same  simple  message,  the  same  trite  moralities, 
the  same  dismal  warnings  and  rebukes  !  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Isaiah's  righteous 
indignation: — In  effect  he  said  to  them:  "  You  mock  at  the  simple  Divine  words 
I  have  been  moved  to  speak,  and  lisp  out  your  base  and  drunken  imitations  of 
them, — you,  who  should  be  the  first  to  welcome  and  enforce  the  word  of  God. 
Know,  then,  that  God  will  punish  your  sin  by  a  people  of  lisping  lips  and  an  alien 
tongue.  He  has  taught  you,  by  the  words  you  deride,  where  you  might  find 
rest  and  freedom,  how  you  might  give  peace  to  the  people  who  are  weary  of  war 
and  its  calamities ;  but  you  would  not  hearken  and  do.  The  word  of  the  Lord 
has  become  to  you  a  mere  '  bid  and  bid,  forbid  and  forbid,'  at  which  you  jest. 
Know,  then,  that  that  word,  which  might  have  been  a  light  to  your  path,  shall 
blaze  up  into  a  consuming  fire."  (Ibid.)  Retribution: — The  prediction  was 
fulfilled.  The  fierce  Assyrians,  when  they  heard  that  the  Hebrews  had  allied 
themselves  with  Egypt,  once  more  swept  through  the  land.  The  very  men  who 
had  lisped  their  scornful  imitations  of  Isaiah's  words,  who  had  affected  to  think 
that  he  used  the  broken  and  imperfect  dialect  which  mothers  employ  to  their 
babes,  were  destroyed  or  taken  captive  by  the  Assyrian  troops,  whose  language, 
while  it  closely  resembled  that  of  the  Hebrews,  had  just  those  differences  which 
made  it  sound  to  them  like  an  imperfect  and  barbarous  dialect.  So  terrible  and 
so  exact  was  the  retribution  that  fell  on  their  sin.  (Ibid.)  "  With  another 
tongue  "  : — They  shall  have  change  of  ministry  ;  the  Assyrians  do  not  talk  piously, 
whiningly ;  they  do  not  give  precept  upon  precept ;  theirs  is  a  terse  eloquence, 
a  bullock-like  rhetoric ;  when  they  come  they  will  make  these  drunkards  sober 
by  the  power  of  terror.  This  is  God's  way  in  all  providence ;  if  we  will  not  hear 
the  gentle  voice,  the  interpreting,  persuasive,  gospel  voice,  we  shall  have  to  listen 
to  thunder,  and  feed  our  souls  upon  lightning.  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou 
that  killest  the  prophets,  and  stonest  them  which  are  sent  unto  thee,  .  .  .  your 
house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Divine  wisdom: — "  That 
the  soul  be  without  knowledge,  it  is  not  good."  A  lamentable  instance  of  this 
truth  is  exemplified  in  the  preceding  part  of  the  chapter.  I.  The  characteb. 
of  the  Teacher.  God,  whose  wisdom  is  infinite,  is  our  only  teacher ;  for  what- 
ever others  we  may  possess,  either  in  the  works  of  nature,  of  providence,  or  of  grace, 
originate  entirely  from  His  bounty.  II.  The  subject  of  instruction.  Two  things 
are  to  be  learned,  namely,  knowledge  and  doctrine  ;  the  one  that  we  may  know 
ourselves,  the  other  that  we  may  know  God.  III.  The  persons  to  be  taught. 
"  Them  that  are  weaned,"  &c.  We  must  be  like  little  children  in  humility  of 
mind  and  teachableness  of  disposition.     (J.  Wright,  B.A.) 

Ver.  10.  For  precept  must  be  npon  precept  .  .  .  line  upon  line. — A 
drunken  jibe: — The  passage  is  commonly  used  in  a  sense  the  very  opposite 
to  that  in  which  it  was  originally  employed.  It  is  commonly  taken  as  a 
grave  description  of  the  abundance  and  variety  of  the  means  of  grace  which 
God  has  vouchsafed  to  the  Church;  whereas  it  is,  really,  a  drunken  sneer 
at  the  poverty  and  simplicity  of  the  means  vouchsafed  to  the  Church  of 
Isaiah's  time.  No  sooner  do  we  turn  to  the  original  and  study  it  than  the  case 
becomes  clear ;  we  see  that,  beyond  a  doubt,  we  not  only  have  here  a  jibe  at 
Isaiah  from  the  lips  of  drunken  men,  but  that  the  verse  is  so  constructed  as  to 
imitate  their  thickened  and  difficult  pronunciation.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The 
Divine  method  of  instruction  : — "  Here  a  little,  there  a  little."  This,  though 
it  was  said  in  scorn  by  the  haughty  revellers,  is  really  the  true,  the  Divine  method 
of  all  instruction.  What  is  the  difference  that  distinguishes  the  musician  or 
the  painter  from  the  mere  amateur  ?  What  is  it  but  the  long-continued  discipline 
of  hand,  of  ear,  of  eye,  which  has  made  all  the  faculties  of  body  and  mind  sub- 
eervient  to  the  purposes  of  the  art  T  (F.  Temple,  D.D.)  The  precept,  th* 
line  and  the  little : — I.  The  lesson  of  the  precept  is  in  order  that  we  may  be 
right  and  do  right.  God  tells  us  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again.  A  precept 
is  a  warning,  a  command,  which  says,  "  Take  care,"  "  Mind,  "  Keep  in  the 
way."  II.  The  lesson  of  the  line.  That  is,  in  order  that  we  may  be  right 
and  do  right,  we  must  try  over  and  over  again.  God  helps  all  honest  trying. 
An  old  proverb  says,  "  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves  "  ;  and  another 
says,  "  Practice  makes  perfect."  "  Line  upon  line," — that  is  the  way  we  all  learn, 
and  have  learnt  all  that  we  know  or  are  able  to  do.  It  is  so  in  learning  to  write. 
So  it  is  in  learning  arithmetic.  So  in  learning  to  draw.  III.  The  lesson  o» 
she  little.     That  is,  in  order  that  we  may  be  right  and  do  right  we  must  not 


£24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxrm. 

be  discouraged  if  we  do  not  make  great  advances ;  we  must  remember  that  it 
is  "  here  a  little  and  there  a  little."  How  slowly  most  great  and  valuable  things 
grow  !  The  harvest  does  not  spring  up  in  a  field  in  a  night.  A  step  at  a  time 
mounts  the  tallest  ladder  at  last,  but  it  must  be  a  step  at  a  time.  How  long  an 
oak  is  before  it  comes  to  its  prime  ;  yet  if  they  could  speak  they  would  each  say 
"  I  am  coming  on."  "  Here  a  little  and  there  a  little  "  makes  a  learned  man, 
a  prosperous  man,  a  useful  and  a  good  man.  "  Here  a  little  and  there  a  little  " 
makes  the  perfect  needle-woman,  and  sets  the  most  untidy  house  to  rights  at  last. 
How  great  some  ships  are  !  What  holds  the  mighty  anchor  which  holds  the 
ship  in  a  storm  ?  A  cable.  And  what  is  a  cable  made  of  ?  Why,  of  ropes  coiled 
over  ropes,  and  every  rope  made  out  of  little  threads.  So  it  is  with  the  habits 
of  life,  good  or  bad  ;  "  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,"  so  trifling  as  they  seemed 
st  first,  they  become  at  last  such  mighty  and  unconquerable  affairs.  (Anon.) 
Christian  education : — I.  The  true  nature  op  religious  teaching.  1.  As 
regards  Christian  doctrine,  it  will  probably  be  within  the  recollection  of  most 
of  us  that  it  formed  the  dullest  part  of  our  early  instruction ;  and  who  can  be 
surprised  at  it  who  recollects  that,  in  addition  to  the  natural  repugnance  of  the 
human  heart  to  all  Divine  things,  the  instruction  was  such  as  neither  to  enlighten 
the  head,  to  touch  the  heart,  or  to  interest  the  imagination  T  Let  me  express 
my  profound  conviction  that  the  great  human  cause  of  the  growth  of  error  among 
our  young  people,  and  the  falling  off  of  many  into  perilous  superstition,  or  no 
less  perilous  rationalism,  is  to  be  found  here.  Men  have  been  contented  to  com- 
prise in  their  religious  knowledge  only  a  few  bald,  bare  truths,  which  perhaps 
they  have  received  without  personal  inquiry  from  their  parents,  and  have  naturally 
thought  it  sufficient  to  hand  down  the  same  hereditary  belief,  the  same  bald  truths, 
to  their  children  after  them.  Truth  consequently  has  had  no  aspect  of  reality, 
has  been  no  living  thing  to  them.  Meanwhile  times  have  changed,  and  the 
mental  coldness  of  other  days  has  given  place  to  the  intellectual  activity  of 
our  own  day.  2.  Doctrinal  truth  is  only  one  half,  after  all,  if  it  be  even  that, 
of  religious  teaching.  There  remains  the  practical  part  of  the  faith  ;  that  by 
which,  on  the  one  side,  it  touches  the  conscience,  and  by  which,  on  the  other, 
it  regulates  the  life.  II.  The  effective  means  of  Christian  influence.  1.  The 
influence  of  example.  2.  The  influence  of  love,  and  of  that  confidence  which 
springs  from  love.  (E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  Precept  upon  precept  : — Suppose  you 
were  walking  from  London  to  Brighton ;  well,  as  you  go  upon  your  way  you  meet 
with  many  finger-posts,  or  mile-stones,  at  distances  not  far  apart,  the  finger- 
posts often  at  less  than  a  mile  apart ;  and  they  repeat  the  same  thing  — "  To 
Brighton — To  Brighton  "  ;  and  the  mile-stones,  they  say  so  many  miles  to 
Brighton  or  from  Brighton.  You  do  not  feel  angry  at  this  ;  you  do  not  say, 
"  Why  ever  did  they  put  up  so  many  finger-posts,  or  so  many  mile-stones  ?  " 
On  the  contrary,  if  you  were  in  any  doubt  about  the  road,  you  would  feel  exceed- 
ingly thankful  for  such  guides,  and  hardly  think  you  could  have  too  many.  So 
God  guides  and  warns.  (Anon)  Here  a  little,  and  there  a  little. —  Here 
a  little,  and  there  a  little  "  .* — We  take  this  text  because  it  seems  to  express  with 
extraordinary  conciseness  a  principle  in  God's  procedure  and  in  His  ways  towards 
man.  1.  Have  you  considered  the  manner  of  God's  revelation  to  His  people  in 
the  olden  time  ?  Have  you  considered  with  what  marvellous  patience  and  con- 
sideration it  was  conducted  ?  The  will  of  God  was  not  flashed,  as  in  a  moment, 
upon  the  minds  of  His  people,  but  unfolded  by  degrees  as  they  were  able  to  receive 
it.  And  when  through  unbelief  and  disobedience  they  lost  it,  it  was  brought 
back  to  them  by  fresh  messengers  from  God.  Is  not  the  Old  Testament  full 
of  kind  and  various  and  gracious  repetition  ?  That  is  because  it  is  the  record 
of  the  Divine  training  and  instruction  of  the  people  who  were,  alas  !  stiff-necked, 
and,  too  often,  proved  themselves,  as  the  martyr  Stephen  told  them,  uncircum- 
cised  in  heart  and  ears.  2.  Obviously  the  same  principle  runs  through  the  New 
Testament  also.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  deliver  His  message,  or  doctrine,  once 
for  all,  in  a  studied  manner.  He  spoke  to  His  followers  as  they  were  able  to 
receive.  3.  I  have  just  said  those  things  in  regard  to  the  two  testaments 
and  the  construction  of  the  Bible,  desiring  to  go  on  and  try,  if  I  can,  to  show  that 
this  is  a  principle  of  God  all  through  His  works,  and  all  through  His  training 
of  His  people.  Shallow  minds  are  apt  to  think  much  more  of  bold  and  rapid 
effects ;  but  those  who  have  observed  most  widely,  and  reflected  most  deeply, 
know  this  well — that  Omnipotence  works  slowly.  It  is  impotence  that  is  in  a 
hurry.     Now,  what  I  want  to  put  before  you  is  that,  it  being  so,  it  should  be 


chap,  xxvm.]  ISAIAH.  625 

expected,  and  it  turns  out  to  be  true,  that  the  supreme  wisdom  of  God  will,  on 
the  very  same  principle,  carry  on  the  work  of  human  enlightenment  in  the  truth. 
Now  take  a  lesson  from  this  earth  on  which  we  dwsll.  The  earth  was  not  built 
up  suddenly.  In  its  history,  as  expressed  in  the  records  that  science  can  decipher 
on  its  caves  and  its  seashores,  there  have  been  some  sudden  changes,  but,  far  more 
generally,  long,  long  processes,  small  in  detail,  but  working  out  immense  effects. 
Lands,  slowly  sunk  beneath  the  water,  slowly  rose  again.  Ice  patiently  rounded 
off  our  mountains  and  shaped  our  valleys.  Great  strata  slowly  formed  them- 
selves— deposited  themselves — grain  by  grain,  during  prodigious  periods  of  time. 
Innumerable  plants  and  trees  flourished  and  died,  and,  after  death,  prepared — ■ 
how  deliberately — those  vast  coal  measures  that  make  so  much  of  England's 
prosperity.  Look  at  man.  Look  at  that  microcosm — that  little  world  of  man. 
How  is  a  man  built  ?  Of  body,  and  mind,  and  heart,  and  character.  Is  it  not 
by  little  and  little  the  frame  grows  from  its  first  beginning  ?  Take  him  after 
birth.  See  how  he  grows  by  repetitions  of  natural  processes — repetitions — 
constant  repetitions.  A  little  sleep,  a  little  food,  a  little  exercise.  Over  again, 
a  little  sleep,  a  little  food,  a  little  exercise.  And  again,  a  little  sleep,  and  so  on. 
Well,  so  grows  his  mind — by  observation — by  comparison  of  objects — by  com- 
parison of  objects  near  him — by  asking  questions.  What  a  thing  it  is  to  teach 
a  child  the  letters,  and  to  teach  a  child  to  read  !  What  a  business — little  by 
little — repeating  over,  and  over,  and  over  again  !  Now,  then,  raise  the  subject 
a  little.  Take  the  question  of  moral  culture,  and  then  we  will  take  the  subject 
of  spiritual  advancement ;  but  no  otherwise  than  on  this  principle  can  moral 
culture  or  spiritual  advancement  be  attained.  There  are  some  moral  natures, 
if  I  may  so  speak,  much  stronger  and  healthier  to  start  with  than  others,  just 
as  there  are  physical  natures  that  are  stronger  ;  but  it  is  not  always  the  very  strong 
child  that  grows  up  the  very  strongest  man,  is  it  ?  You  see  some  poor  delicate 
child  grow  fast ;  and  so  it  is  with  the  moral  nature.  They  gain  habits  of  self- 
control,  and  integrity  becomes  inseparable  from  their  life.  There  is  no  real  moral 
strength  till  that  is  reached — till  integrity  is  wrought  into  the  character  so  that 
it  cannot  be  taken  out  of  it.  It  is  inseparable  from  the  character  and  life,  and 
thus,  "  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,"  are 
needed  to  form  an  honest  man,  that  noble  work  of  God."  And  if  it  be  so  with 
moral  progress,  is  it  not  also  so  with  what  we  call  spiritual  advancement  ?  Real 
spiritual  qualities  are  given  from  heaven,  but  they  are  given  upon  the  same  prin- 
ciple upon  which  God  gives  moral  strength,  and  upon  which  He  even  gives  physical 
strength  to  His  people.  How  is  a  Christian  made  ?  I  say,  by  a  process  to  which 
these  words  before  me,  "  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,"  may  be  very  well  applied. 
Let  us  just  study  this  a  little.  Let  us  develop  this  inquiry,  for  it  is  full  of 
practical  importance.  And  to  be  the  clearer  I  will  put  four  questions.  (1)  How 
does  a  Christian  receive  the  truth  through  the  faith  of  which  he  is  purified  ?  And 
I  answer,  not  by  one  lesson  but  by  many  lessons.  He  sees  his  sin.  The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  shows  you  the  way  of  pardon  and  peace  through  the  blood  of  Jesus 
crucified  for  our  sin.  By  and  by  you  see  that  more  clearly.  You  get  a  glimpse  ; 
you  get  another  glimpse ;  you  get  a  longer  look ;  you  get  a  steadier  vision  of 
Christ  crucified.  (2)  How  does  a  Christian  get  rid  of  indwelling  sin  ?  And  my 
answer  to  that  again  is,  by  little  and  little.  (3)  How  is  it  that  a  Christian 
learns  practical  wisdom  and  sobriety  of  mind,  so  much  needed  in  this  intoxicating 
world  ?  Not  at  a  bound.  It  is  not  a  miraculous  infusion  into  him  of  another 
mind  than  his  own.  It  is  his  own  mind  that  must  be  made  wise  ;  and  a  man 
can  never  be  made  wise,  I  think,  but  by  repeated  exposures  of  his  folly.  (4)  How 
does  a  Christian  gain  likeness  to  Jesus  Christ  ?  By  little  and  little.  Have  you 
seen  a  painter  at  work — a  portrait  painter,  we  will  say  ?  After  the  great  out- 
lines of  the  picture  are  placed  upon  the  canvas,  have  you  noticed  how  gradually 
and  how  minutely  he  produces  the  required  likeness  ?  A  touch  of  the  brush 
here,  and  then  a  pause.  Then  he  looks  at  it,  and  looks  at  it ;  and  then  another 
touch,  and  then  another  touch.  (7).  Fraser,  D.D.)  "  Here  a  little,  and  there 
a  little  "  : — The  application  of  the  text  is,  first  of  all,  to  the  impressions  produced 
by  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  efficacy  of  constant  religious  instruction.  But  it 
is  in  this  same  way,  by  little  and  little,  that  all  great  and  lasting  impressions 
are  made,  and  the  mightiest  results  accomplished.  Habit,  which  is  the  strongest 
thing  in  nature,  and  which  forms  a  second  nature,  is  thus  produced.  So  it  is 
in  the  invisible  growth  of  all  things,  gradual  and  imperceptible,  yet  constant 
and  sure.     So  it  is  in  all  the  processes  of  nature.     1.  It  is  by  little  and  little  that 


C26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvin. 

every  man's  character  is  formed.  Most  persons'  guilty  character  is  made  of 
little  sins.  They  may  be  scarcely  noticed  at  the  time,  but  a  constant  succession 
of  them  makes  a  great  weight.  Christian  character,  too,  is  made  up  of  little 
things.  The  Christian  spirit  must  enter  into  all  things,  and  then  all  things  become 
great  in  the  light  of  Heaven.  But  the  Christian  character  may  be  almost  spoiled 
by  little  sins,  or  what  are  called  such.  Almost  every  important  thing  depends 
upon  little  things  often  repeated.  It  seems  a  very  little  thing  to  live  near  to  God 
one  day ;  it  is  a  very  great  thing ;  but  still,  to  do  it  for  one  day  does  not  seem 
bo  great  a  task ;  not  so  great  a  thing  but  that  the  Christian,  by  the  help  of  God, 
may  easily  accomplish  it  for  one  day.  But  if  this  little  thing  were  accomplished 
every  day,  every  one  day  in  the  year,  then  the  whole  would  be  infinitely  glorious. 
On  the  other  hand,  to  a  man  forgetful  of  God  it  seems  but  a  very  little  evil  which 
is  wrought  with  the  character  in  one  day,  perhaps  none  at  all,  if  there  be  no  marked 
crime.  Nevertheless,  a  certain  number  of  those  imperceptible  advancements 
bring  him  to  his  destiny,  both  of  character  and  retribution,  for  eternity.  2.  It 
is  by  little  and  little  that  in  such  a  world  as  this  we  must  do  the  greater  part  of 
the  good  that  we  ever  accomplish.  He  that  is  faithful  in  great  things  is  faithful 
also  in  the  least ;  and  if  he  be  not  faithful  in  small  things,  God  will  not  give  him 
the  opportunity  to  be  so  in  large  ones.  What  is  surer  than  God's  great  promise 
in  regard  to  children,  that  if  you  train  them  up  faithfully  for  Him,  He  will  take 
care  of  them  and  bless  them  and  make  them  His  ?  But  the  result  of  good  character 
and  heavenly  habit  with  them  depends  upon  the  daily,  familiar,  minute,  but 
ever-recurring  examples  set  before  them,  and  influences  brought  to  bear  upon 
them.  But,  I  say,  God's  providence  takes  care  of  single  little  things  also,  and 
oftentimes  makes  much  out  of  them,  or  hangs  much  upon  them.  Nothing  can 
be  lost  that  is  done  for  God.  (0.  B.  Cheever,  D.D.)  Great  results  from  a  simple 
remark  : — It  is  said  to  have  been  a  single  remark  of  Rev.  Chas.  Simeon  in  regard 
to  the  blessings  which  had  resulted  from  the  labours  of  Dr.  Carey  in  India  that 
first  arrested  the  attention  of  Henry  Martyn  to  the  cause  of  missions.  His  mind 
began  to  stir  under  the  new  thought,  and  a  perusal  of  the  "  Life  of  Brainerd  "  fixed 
him  in  his  resolution  to  give  himself  to  his  Redeemer  in  the  service  of  preaching 
the  Gospel  to  the  dying  heathen.  (Ibid.)  Little  ways  and  great  service: — 
Joseph  Dunman  kept  a  small  seed  shop  in  Lambeth  Walk,  in  the  midst  of  a  crowded 
population  of  the  poor.  He  was  a  faithful  witness  for  Christ.  He  found  many 
opportunities  during  business  hours  of  testifying  to  the  truth  by  word  and  by 
distributing  tracts.  He  could  not  preach,  but  he  felt  he  could  invite  others  to 
hear.  Every  Sunday  evening,  for  about  an  hour  before  and  at  the  beginning 
of  service,  he  used  to  walk  up  and  down  in  front  of  Christ  Church  (Rev.  Newman 
Hall's),  and  invite  strangers  to  enter,  offering  them  a  seat  and  a  hymn-book. 
During  the  year  hundreds  have  thus  been  brought  under  the  sound  of  the  Gospel, 
of  whom  several  have  testified  that  they  have  yielded  their  hearts  to  God  through 
him.  At  the  after  prayer-meeting  he  often  addressed  young  men  with  simple 
and  touching  effect.  His  own  conversion  illustrated  the  good  results  of  little 
efforts.  He  used  to  be  a  toll-keeper  on  Waterloo  Bridge.  The  minister  of  Surrey 
Chapel,  on  crossing  the  bridge,  frequently  gave  him  a  little  book,  and  exchanged 
a  few  words  with  him.  When  the  toll  was  given  up,  and  he  was  at  liberty  on 
Sunday,  he  went  to  hear  the  preacher  who  had  thus  become  known  to  him,  and 
so  he  was  led  to  Christ.  He  was  not  fifty  years  old  when,  after  a  few  days' 
illness,  he  was  called  home;  yet  his  life  was  long  if  reckoned  by  usefulness. 
(The  Christian.) 

Ver.  11.  With  stammering  lips. — Assyrian  speech: — "By  men  of  strange 
lips  "  (R.V.)  Jehovah  will  speak  Assyrian  to  them ;  and  with  a  more  frightful 
iteration  than  the  prophet  used.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  A  great 
moral  principle :  —  We  gather  from  Isaiah  that  God  speaks  twice  to  men, 
first  in  words  and  then  by  deeds,  but  both  times  very  simply  and  plainly. 
(O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  This  Is  the  rest  wherewith  ye  may  cause  the  weary  to  rest. — 
Rest  in  Christ : — That  these  words  are  to  be  interpreted  as  relating  to  Jesus 
Christ  is  manifest  both  from  the  preceding  and  subsequent  context,  and 
from  the  general  tenor  of  the  Word  of  God.  The  doctrine  of  salvation 
through  the  Messiah  opens  the  sources  of  genuine  happiness  to  believing 
men.    This  is  eminently  the  rest, — it  is  here  alone  that  they  can  find  satis- 


chap,  xxvni.]  ISAIAH.  527 

faction.  I.  The  nature  of  that  rest  which  is  enjoyed  in  Christ.  The 
term  "  rest "  is  here  employed  to  denote  spiritual  enjoyment :  it  imports  that 
unspeakable  delight  and  satisfaction  with  which  a  believing  soul  reposes  itself  in 
Christ  Jesus,  as  its  portion  and  happiness,  its  all  and  in  all.  This  is  a  rest  far  more 
refreshing  than  the  most  seasonable  relief  from  bodily  labours  or  temporal  troubles 
— no  created  good  can  at  all  be  compared  with  it.  It  exclusively  deserves  the 
name  of  "  the  "  rest,  as  everything  else  which  assumes  the  appearance  of  rest 
is  ideal,  and  this  only  is  real  and  substantial.  1.  What  are  the  sources  of 
spiritual  rest?  This  rest  arises  from — (1)  A  spiritual  discovery  of  the  infinite 
excellence  of  the  Redeemer's  person.  When  the  enlightened  believer  is  possessed 
with  a  sense  of  the  glories  of  Christ's  person,  all  created  glory  vanishes,  as  the 
htars  do  before  the  sun.  (2)  A  view  of  the  all-atoning  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Consider  three  important  particulars  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ, — its  inherent  and 
infinite  merit,  the  authority  by  which  it  is  appointed,  and  the  public  declaration 
which  has  been  given  of  its  acceptance.  2.  The  effects  with  which  this  rest  is 
accompanied.  (1)  Pardon  of  sin.  (2)  Acceptance  with  God,  and  the  enjoyment 
of  His  special  favour  and  love.  (3)  Deliverance  from  the  reigning  power  and 
dominion  of  sin.  (4)  The  delightful  prospect  of  eternal  happiness  in  Heaven. 
II.  The  character  of  the  persons  for  whom  this  rest  is  provided.  "  The 
weary."  Under  this  description  we  may  include — 1.  All  unregenerated  sinners 
to  whom  this  rest  is  offered.  They  are  represented  as  wearying  themselves  with 
very  vanity  (Hab.  ii.  13),  wearying  themselves  to  commit  iniquity  (Jer.  ix.  6), 
and  as  wearying  God  (Isa.  vii.  13,  xliii.  24).  To  all  persons  of  this  description 
spiritual  rest  is  offered ;  but  it  will  never  be  relished  till  the  sinner  is  united  to 
the  Saviour.  2.  We  are  principally  to  understand  by  the  term  "  weary,"  all  the 
children  of  God  who  are  heavy  laden  with  their  spiritual  burdens.  They  are 
weary— (1)  With  a  sense  of  aggravated  guilt.  (2)  With  the  conflict  which  they 
maintain  with  sin  and  Satan.  (3)  With  their  crying  under  the  hidings  of  God's 
face  (Psa.  xiii.  1,  lxxvii.  7-10).  (4)  With  those  disquieting  fears  of  death  where- 
with they  are  harassed.  [T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Christ  the,  rest-giver  : — Talleyrand 
said,  "  Life  is  one  long  fatigue."  Christ  wishes  to  make  it  one  long  rest. 
(Mrs.  Skinner.)  Rejecters  of  the  Gospel  admonished  : — Isaiah  was  one  of  the  most 
eloquent  of  preachers,  yet  he  could  not  win  the  ears  and  hearts  of  those  to  whom 
he  spoke.  It  was  not  the  fault  of  the  preacher  that  Israel  rejected  his  warnings  : 
all  the  fault  lay  with  that  disobedient  and  gainsaying  nation.  The  people  to 
whom  he  spoke  so  earnestly  were  drunken  in  a  double  sense.  (1)  They  were 
overcome  with  wine  (vers.  7,  8).  (2)  They  were  also  intoxicated  with  pride. 
The  two  forms  of  drunkenness  are  equally  destructive.  I.  The  excellence 
of  the  Gospel.  This  Scripture  does  not  allude  to  the  Gospel  primarily,  but  to 
the  message  which  Isaiah  had  to  deliver,  which  was  in  part  the  command  of  the 
law  and  in  part  the  promise  of  grace  ;  but  the  same  rule  holds  good  of  all  the  words 
of  the  Lord  ;  and,  indeed,  any  excellence  which  was  found  in  the  prophet's  message 
is  found  yet  more  abundantly  in  the  fuller  testimony  of  the  Gospel  in  Christ  Jesus. 
1.  The  excellence  of  that  Gospel  lies  in  its  object,  for — (1)  It  is  a  revelation  of  rest. 

(2)  It  is  the  cause  of  rest.  (3)  This  rest  is  especially  meant  for  the  weary. 
(4)  In  addition  to  bringing  us  rest,  the  message  of  mercy  points  us  to  a  refreshing. 
If  the  rested  one  should  grow  weary  again,  the  Good  Shepherd  will  give  him 
refreshing ;  if  he  wanders,  the  Lord  will  restore  him ;  if  he  grows  faint  He  will 
revive  him.  Note,  that  Isaiah  did  not  come  to  these  people  to  talk  about  rest  in 
dubious  terms.  No  ;  he  puts  his  finger  right  down  on  the  truth,  and  says,  "  This 
is  the  rest,  and  this  is  the  refreshing."  So  we,  when  we  come  with  a  message  from 
God,  come  with  definite  teaching.  Nor  did  he  preach  a  rest  of  a  selfish  character. 
That  secret  something  which  your  own  heart  possesses  shall  enable  you  to  com- 
municate good  cheer  to  many  a  weary  heart,  and  hope  to  many  a  desponding 
mind.  2.  The  other  excellence  of  the  Gospel  lies  in  its  manner.  (1)  It  comes 
with  authority.  (2)  It  was  delivered  with  great  simplicity.  Isaiah  came  with 
it,  "  precept  upon  precept,"  &c.     It  is  the  glory  of  the  Gospel  that  it  is  so  plain. 

(3)  It  is  taught  us  by  degrees.  (4)  The  Gospel  is  repeated.  (5)  It  is  brought 
home  to  us  in  ways  suited  to  our  capacity.  II.  The  objections  which  abb 
taken  to  the  Gospel.  1.  They  are  most  wanton.  Men  object  to  that  which 
promises  them  rest.  2.  Wilful.  "  This  is  the  refreshing,  yet  they  would  not 
hear."  3.  Wicked,  because  they  are  rebellion  against  God,  and  an  insult  to  His 
truth  and  mercy.  4.  These  people  raised  objections  that  were  the  outgrowth  of 
their  pride.    They  objected  to  the  simplicity  of  Isaiah's  preaching.    They  said, 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

"  Who  is  he  ?  You  should  not  go  to  hear  him  ;  he  talks  to  us  as  if  we  were 
children.  Besides,  it  is  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again."  Too  many  wish 
for  a  map  to  Heaven  so  mysteriously  drawn  that  they  may  be  excused  from  follow- 
ing it.  III.  The  Divine  requital  of  these  objections.  1.  The  Lord  threatens 
them  with  the  loss  of  that  which  they  despised.  In  verse  20  he  warns  them  that 
they  shall  have  no  rest  henceforth.  "  For  the  bed  ia  shorter,"  &c.  2.  They 
shall  be  punished  by  a  gradual  hardening  of  heart  (ver.  13).  A  fall  backward 
is  the  worst  kind  of  fall.  3.  This  is  to  be  followed  by  a  growing  inability  to 
understand  (ver.  11).  4.  Whatever  refuge  they  choose  for  themselves  shall 
utterly  fail  them  (ver.  17).    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  14-22.  Hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  ye  scornful  men. — Isaiah's  response  : — 
The  prophet  replies  that  when  the  storm  does  sweep  over  the  land,  as  it 
assuredly  will,  these  "  refuges  of  lies  "  will  prove  no  shelter  to  their  builders ; 
they  have  been  tried  by  the  plummet  of  honesty  and  righteousness  and 
found  to  be  so  out  of  line  that  they  must  come  down  :  but  meanwhile,  nay,  from 
of  old,  Jehovah  has  Himself  founded  a  really  serviceable  house  for  His  people, 
namely,  the  ancient  constitution  and  polity  of  which  He  Himself  is  the  chief 
corner-stone ;  and  the  man  who  trusts  in  that  foundation,  believing  that  it  really 
is  there,  will  not  be  urged  to  any  impatient  acts  of  panic,  whatever  may  be  the 
apparent  danger.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Scornful  riders : — It  is  bad  with 
a  people  when  their  thrones  of  judgment  become  the  seats  of  the  scornful. 
( M.  Henry.)  Incongruous  scorning  : — That  the  rulers  of  Jerusalem  should  be 
men  of  such  a  character  is  very  sad.  Who  will  be  mourners  in  Zion  if  they  are 
ecomers  T  (Ibid.)  Scorners : — I.  How  these  scornful  men  lulled  them- 
selves asleep  in  carnal  security,  and  even  challenged  God  Almighty  to  do  His 
worst  (ver.  15).  II.  How  God  awakens  them  out  of  this  sleep,  and  shows 
them  the  folly  of  their  security.  1.  He  tells  them  upon  what  grounds  they  might 
be  secure.  He  doth  not  disturb  their  false  confidences  till  He  hath  first  showed 
them  a  firm  bottom  on  which  they  may  repose  themselves  (ver.  16).  This  founda- 
tion is — ( 1 )  The  promises  of  God  in  general.  (2)  The  promise  of  Christ  in  particular 
(1  Pet.  ii.  6-8).  2.  He  tells  them  that  upon  these  grounds  which  they  now  built 
on  they  could  not  be  safe,  but  their  confidences  would  certainly  fail  them  (vers. 
17-21).  III.  Here  is  the  use  and  application  of  all  this  (ver.  22).  (Ibid.) 
We  have  made  lies  our  refuge. — Refuges  of  lies : — Let  us  assemble  in  classes 
the  excuses  of  a  score  or  more  of  people  who  have  told  me  frankly  why 
they  had  decided  not  to  become  Christians.  1.  First  of  all,  is  a  class  who  excuse 
themselves  because  the  Church  has  stood  for  bigotry,  narrowness,  and  cruelty. 
It  is  said  that  in  all  ages  the  Church  has  included  hypocrites  among  its  members. 
But  can  anything  be  more  unfair  than  these  excuses  ?  Granted  that  Peter  cursed 
and  denied  with  vulgar  oaths  his  Master,  what  has  that  to  do  with  the  beauty 
of  Christ's  character  or  the  claim  of  His  kingdom  upon  your  life  ?  Confessedly, 
John  Calvin  was  simply  an  organised  syllogism,  an  animated  argument,  blood- 
less as  a  stone.  Even  if  he  did  play  the  traitor  like  Peter,  and  refuse  to  forgive 
his  enemy  and  forgot  the  God  who  makes  His  sun  rise  on  the  evil  and  the  good, 
how  does  his  recreancy  make  right  yours  ?  Here  is  the  world  of  business  and 
commerce.  To-morrow  merchants  will  adulterate  their  goods,  traders  will  tamper 
with  the  weights,  clerks  will  steal  money  from  the  bank,  assistants  will  rob  their 
employers.  Since  you  do  not  care  to  associate  with  hypocrites,  withdraw 
to-morrow  morning  from  business.  Give  up  all  physicians,  because  some  are 
quacks.  Draw  down  the  shades  over  your  windows,  because  there  are  spots  on 
the  sun ;  and  give  up  the  summer,  because  there  are  stormy  days  in  July ;  and 
give  up  the  fruits,  because  there  are  blemishes  on  the  apples.  2.  There  is  another 
class  that  emphasise  the  uncertainty  and  disagreements  concerning  Christianity. 
Since  it  is  all  so  hazy,  and  at  best  only  a  probability,  they  are  unwilling  to  commit 
themselves  to  the  Christian  life.  It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  understand 
all  doctrines,  and  the  philosophy  of  duty,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  moral  obligations. 
Life  is  governed  by  probability.  There  may  be  a  thousand  disagreements  as  to 
theology,  but  there  is  no  disagreement  as  to  what  it  is  to  be  a  Christian.  We  are 
asked  to  show  the  fruits  of  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness. 
3.  Others  there  are  who  urge  that  becoming  a  Christian  puts  restraints  upon  the 
individual,  narrows  the  range  of  his  enjoyments,  shuts  up  certain  highways  of 
happiness.  *'  I  want  always  to  feel  perfectly  free,"  exclaims  the  youth.  "  I 
mm  afraid  that  I  might  find  myself  somewhat  cabined  and  confined  by  taking  upon 


chap,  xxviii.]  ISAIAH.  629 

myself  these  obligations."  But  becoming  a  Christian  is  simply  to  obey  the  laws 
of  Christ.  This  objection  is  based  upon  a  false  theory  of  liberty.  Liberty  is 
obedience  to  law.  It  is  sin  that  narrows  the  life.  It  is  disobedience  that  cabino 
men  and  confines  them ;  it  is  loyalty  to  God's  laws  that  breaks  down  the  walla, 
pushes  back  the  horizons  and  makes  the  soul  a  citizen  of  the  universe. 
{N.  D.  Eillia,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone. — The  stone 
laid  in  Zion : — The  prophet  borrows  his  figure  from  the  huge  and  costly 
foundation  stones  upon  which  the  temple  rested  (1  Kings  v.  17) ;  and  the  thought 
which  he  desires  to  enforce  is  that  in  Zion  there  is  an  element  of  permanency, 
a  constitutional  fabric  capable  of  resisting  all  shocks.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.) 
Foundation  stones  : — The  force  of  the  figure  in  this  verse  is  much  enhanced  by 
the  statements  of  modern  travellers  in  relation  to  the  immense  stones  still  remain- 
ing at  the  foundation  of  ancient  walls.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  element  of 
permanency  to  which  Isaiah  here  looks  is,  of  course,  the  theocracy  centred  at 
Zion,  and  represented  by  the  Davidic  dynasty,  the  continuance  of  which  had  been 
promised  long  since  by  Nathan  to  David  (2  Sam.  vii.  13 ;  cf.  xxiii.  5 ;  1  Kings 
xi.  36).  As  the  people  of  Israel,  in  Isaiah';*  view,  is  indestructible,  so  is  the 
dynasty,  which,  since  it  was  established,  became  the  centre  and  pivot  of  the 
national  life.  (Prof.  Driver,  D.D.)  Is  this  prophecy  Messianic? — The  element 
of  security  to  which  the  prophet  appeals  is  opposed  to  the  plan  of  an  Egyptian 
alliance,  and  hence  must  be  something  not  pointing  entirely  to  a  distant  future, 
but  having  some  reference  to  present  needs.  But  it  is  true  that  a  Messianio 
reference  is  included  in  the  terms  of  the  prophecy,  as  it  was  included  similarly 
in  the  promise  of  permanency  to  David's  dynasty.  (Ibid.)  The  tried  stone 
(Festival  of  St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude) : — It  is  the  first  chapter  out  of  the  six  which 
form  the  "Book  of  Woes"  (Delitzsch).  The  Messianic  prophecy,  though  full 
of  consolation,  "  turns  its  dark  side  " — for  it  has  one — to  the  scoffing  magnates  of 
Jerusalem  (ver.  14).  The  zeal  of  the  prophet,  manifested  in  this  lesson,  against 
vice  and  unbelief,  may  have  led  to  its  selection  for  this  festival  of  St.  Simon  and 
St.  Jude.  The  Church  has  combined  them  together — these  two  apostles — in 
one  commemoration,  perhaps,  among  other  reasons,  because  they  shared  in  an 
especial  degree  the  same  spirit  of  zeal.  St.  Simon  was  called  the  Zealot,  it  may 
be,  because  the  quality  of  zeal  was  very  marked  in  his  temperament ;  and  St.  Jude 
has  the  name  Thaddaeus,  probably  for  the  same  reason.  At  any  rate,  his  Epistle 
is  one  of  denunciation — a  "  Book  of  Woes  "  against  ungodly  persons.  I.  Thh 
image.  1.  No  one  person  can  satisfy  the  "  majestically  unique  description  " 
but  Christ.  The  Divine  purpose  is  spoken  of  as  if  already  accomplished.  Behold, 
I  "  have  laid  "  in  Zion.  It  was  eternally  decreed.  It  is  the  acme  and  explanation 
of  Israel's  election  and  history.  2.  It  was  no  new  figure.  Isaiah  himself  had 
spoken  of  Jehovah  as  "  a  stone  of  stumbling"  (chap.  viii.  14).  We  must  go  back 
to  Jacob's  parting  blessing  upon  his  sons  to  find  the  same  figure  in  patriarchal 
days  (Gen.  xlix.  24).  Joseph's  history  was  a  picture  of  the  rejecting  of  "  the 
stone  "  and  of  its  final  triumph.  The  Psalmist  foretold  the  same  vicissitude 
•(Psa.  cxviii.  22).  Our  Lord  alluded  to  "  the  stone  "  as  signifying  Himself  (Matt. 
xxi.  42).  St.  Peter,  when  brought  before  the  council,  denounced  the  Jews  for 
setting  at  nought  this  "  stone  "  (Acts  iv.  11).  The  same  apostle  quotes  the  text  in 
his  first  Epistle  (chap.  ii.  6)  with  a  variance,  and  St.  Paul  a  portion  of  it  (Rom.  ix.  33). 
3.  The  frequency  of  its  use  or  reference  shows  some  especial  fitness  in  the  designa- 
tion. At  once  the  ideas  of  solidity  and  strength  suggest  themselves.  Other 
ideas  are  connected  with  "  the  stone  "  as  a  figure  of  our  Lord,  by  Zechariah. 
It  is  "  a  stone  of  seven  eyes,"  meaning  doubtless  that  the  seven  gifts  of  the  Spirit 
rested  upon  Him,  and  setting  Him  before  us  as  a  Being  full  of  light  and  knowledge. 
IL  Thb  qualities  of  the  stone.  1.  A  "  tried  "  stone.  We  miss  this  in  the 
quotation  of  the  text  in  the  New  Testament.  Both  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  cite 
the  LXX.,  which  omits  it,  and  cite  it  freely,  one  of  them  blending  it  with  another 
prophecy.  The  word  "  tried  "  may  be  interpreted  also  "  trial-stone  "  or  "  stone 
of  probation."  Both  interpretations  are  true  of  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  was  tried 
and  "  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin,"  and  through  Hia 
sufferings  was  not  only  proved,  but  "  approved  of  God  "  (Acts  ii.  22).  He  is 
also  a  stone  which  puts  others  to  the  test,  like  the  Lydian  stone,  which  was  said 
to  distinguish  the  genuine  metal  and  to  detect  the  presence  of  alloy — to  separate 
the  true  from  the  false  (Luke  ii.  34).     Throughout  our  Lord's  life  we  see,  as  He 

34 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

came  in  contact  with  men,  this  discerning  of  spirits,  hut  especially  during  His 
Passion.  2.  A  "  precious  corner-stone."  St.  Peter  says,  "  elect,  precious  " — 
chosen,  that  is,  of  God,  and  precious  both  in  itself  and  in  relation  to  the  building 
of  which  it  was  the  corner-stone.  A  corner-stone  is  the  stone  of  junction,  where 
the  walls  meet.  The  expression  in  its  highest  sense  may  indicate  the  union 
between  the  Divine  and  human  natures  in  the  One  Person  of  the  Word  ;  or,  in  a 
less  elevated  sense,  it  may  refer  to  the  union  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  the  on© 
Body  of  Christ  (Eph.  ii.  15).  3.  A  "  sure  foundation."  A  foundation-stone 
implies  a  building — implies  here  the  Church,  and  the  "  corner-stone  "  does  the 
same  (Eph.  ii.  20,  6.Kpoywvialos) — the  stone  at  the  extreme  corner.  The  image 
is  somewhat  different— the  one  points  to  the  base,  the  other  to  the  extreme  angle 
of  the  building.  Christ  is  "  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  Beginning  and  the  End,  the 
First  and  the  Last "  (Rev.  xxii.  13).  There  is  no  contradiction  between  the 
statement  that  the  Church  is  "  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles,"  and 
that "  no  other  "  foundation  can  be  laid  "  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ " 
( 1  Cor.  iii.  11).  Christ  is,  St.  Augustine  explains, "  Fundamentum  fundamentorum." 
We  are  built  upon  the  apostles,  because  through  the  apostles  we  are  built  upon 
Christ.  He  is  a  "  sure  "  foundation,  so  that  the  gates  of  hell,  though  they  may 
war  against,  yet  can  they  not  overcome  the  Church.  The  foundation  is  most 
surely  laid  "  by  "  the  Lord  God  Himself."  IIL  Lessons.  1.  As  Christ  is  the 
foundation-stone,  so  each  Christian  is  a  stone  built  upon  Him,  and  deriving 
his  spiritual  life  from  Him.  St.  Peter  speaks  of  Christ  as  a  "  living  stone. 
The  apostle  passes  here  from  the  metaphor  to  the  reality.  "  Dead  as  a  stone  ** 
is  a  common  saying ;  but  the  stone  which  the  builders  rejected  came  forth  from 
the  tomb,  not  only  living,  but  life-giving.  Each  Christian,  "  baptized  into  one 
body,"  and  living  in  fellowship  with  Christ,  is  a  living  stone  from  contact  with 
Him  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  See,  then,  that  we  are  living  in  union  with  Christ.  2.  We  are 
not  only  built  upon  Christ,  hut  are  cemented  together  with  other  stones  in  the 
walls  of  the  "  spiritual  house."  We  are  members  of  a  Divine  society,  and  not 
isolated  Christians.  Hence  love  of  the  brethren  is  a  duty  which  devolves  upon 
every  Christian — union  with  them  as  well  as  with  Christ,  as  we  are  cemented 
together  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  3.  Though  living  stones  differ  from  ordinary 
stones  in  that  the  latter  have  no  wills  or  powers  of  motion,  but  are  simply  passive 
in  the  hands  of  the  quarryman  or  mason ;  yet  the  living  stone  depends  for  its 
vitality  upon  the  absolute  surrender  of  the  will  into  the  hands  of  God,  so  that  it 
may  be  hewn  and  shaped  and  polished,  by  the  trials  of  this  life,  as  the  Master- 
Builder  thinks  best.  (W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.)  The  foundation-stone  of  the 
Church  : — I.  The  character  of  Jescts  Christ  as  the  support  and  ornament 
of  His  Church.  1.  A  stone.  (1)  To  convey  the  idea  of  stability.  The  hopes 
of  God's  people  in  all  ages  were  to  have  the  most  substantial  foundation  to  rest 
upon.  (2)  Because  of  the  idea  of  its  durability.  It  has  endured  through  all 
ages  to  the  present  day,  and  it  will  endure  to  the  end  of  time.  (3)  Life  is  also 
attributed  by  the  apostles  to  this  stone.  2.  "  A  tried  stone."  Completely 
adapted  to  answer  all  the  ends  for  which  it  is  laid.  3.  "  A  precious  corner-stone." 
Examine  its  excellences.  What  Solomon  said  of  true  wisdom  is  strictly  applicable 
here — "  it  is  more  precious  than  rubies."  "  Precious  "  for  the  situation  which 
it  occupies  ;  because  it  is  the  bond  which  unites  the  Church  of  God  in  all  ages. 
The  patriarchal,  the  Levitical,  the  Christian  Churches  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus. 
All  the  people  of  God,  however  denominated — wherever  placed — in  whatever 
age  or  circumstances — feel  the  uniting  power  of  this  corner-stone.  And  it  binds 
and  unites  the  Church  militant  and  the  Church  triumphant.  4.  To  complete  and 
give  greater  interest  and  solidity  to  the  hopes  of  His  people,  it  is  called  "  a  sure 
foundation."  Observe  by  whom  it  is  laid.  Not  by  mortal  hands,  but  by  the 
Founder  of  the  universe.  "  Sure !  "  How  vain  have  been  all  the  assaults  of 
infidelity.  II.  It  is  necessary  that  we  should  ascertain  our  characters, 
and  see  by  those  tests  which  God  has  furnished,  whether  we  have  built  on  this 
foundation.  Christians  are  related  to  Christ  after  the  analogy  of  stones  to  the 
foundation.  And  what  does  this  imply  ?  1.  Separation  from  all  other  purposes. 
Those  who  are  thus  separated  are — 2.  Appropriated  to  the  especial  purpose 
for  which  this  stone  is  laid  in  Zion,  namely,  the  building  of  a  spiritual  house. 
The  manner  in  which  Solomon's  temple  was  built,  was  a  type  of  the  manner  in 
which  this  building  is  to  be  erected.  Each  stone  was  previously  squared  and 
polished  before  it  was  placed  in  its  permanent  situation.  It  is  expressly  said  of 
these  stones,  that  they  were  made  ready  before  they  were  brought  thither ;  so 


chap,  xxvm.]  ISAIAH.  531 

that  no  sound  of  wither  hammer  or  axe  was  heard  in  the  house.  This  is  to  teach 
us  that  every  living  stone,  to  occupy  a  place  in  the  celestial  temple,  must  be  hewn 
out  of  nature's  quarry,  by  the  ministration  of  God's  Word,  by  Christian  communion, 
&c,  and  squared  and  polished  before  it  is  placed  in  the  temple.  3.  These  stones 
are  themselves  endued  with  spiritual  life.  By  their  conjunction  with  Christ, 
they  obtain  a  spiritual,  celestial  life.  Do  you  ask,  what  is  the  ultimate  design 
of  all  this  ?  It  is  that  all  the  stones  may  be  brought  together,  and  form  a  fit 
habitation  for  Deity  Himself  (Eph.  ii.  19-22).  III.  The  principle  by  which 
we  come  to  this  living  stone,  are  attached  to  the  building,  and  become  par- 
takers of  the  privileges.  "  He  that  believeth."  What  is  the  believing  here 
spoken  of  ?  We  must  look  at  the  analogy.  It  is  the  resting  of  the  soul  on  the 
foundation  God  has  laid.  IV.  What  advantages  are  to  result  from  this 
trusting  of  THE  soul  to  Christ  ?  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste." 
(S.  Warren,  LL.D.)  Jesus  Christ  the  only  foundation: — I.  The  properties 
OF  this  foundation.  1.  It  is  a  stone ;  for  solidity,  stability,  and  durableness. 
2.  A  tried  stone.  (1)  His  obedience  was  tried,  and  it  appeared  upon  trial  that 
it  was  perfect  and  universal.  His  meekness  was  tried  by  the  abusive  treatment 
He  met  with  from  men.  His  patience  and  resignation  to  the  Divine  will  were 
tried,  when  the  bitter  cup  of  the  wrath  of  God  was  put  into  His  hand.  His  love 
to  His  Father  and  His  zeal  for  His  honour  were  tried,  and  they  were  found  an 
unquenchable  flame,  that  glowed,  without  once  languishing,  through  the  whole 
of  His  life.  His  love  to  men — to  sinners,  to  enemies,  was  tried  ;  tried  to  the  utter- 
most ;  it  was  put  to  the  trial  whether  His  own  life  or  theirs  was  most  dear  to  Him. 
In  short,  this  stone  was  thoroughly  tried  by  God  and  man,  and  it  still  remained 
firm  without  a  flaw.  Jesus  also  has  been  tried  under  the  capacity  of  a  Saviour, 
by  millions  and  millions  of  depraved,  wretched,  ruined  creatures,  who  have  always 
found  Him  perfectly  able,  and  as  perfectly  willing,  to  save  to  the  very  uttermost 
all  that  come  unto  God  through  Him.  (2)  It  may  be  rendered,  "  a  stone  of  trial  "  ; 
or,  "  a  trying  stone  "  ;  this  is  the  true  touch-stone  of  men's  characters.  Only 
propose  Jesus  Christ  to  them  as  a  Saviour,  and  according  as  they  receive  or  reject 
Him,  you  may  know  their  true  character,  and  their  everlasting  doom.  This 
touch-stone  has  discovered  many  glittering  virtues  to  be  but  dross.  The  Pharisees 
and  scribes  had  a  high  character  among  the  Jews  for  piety,  till  this  trying  stone 
was  applied  to  them  ;  and  then  it  appeared  what  they  were.  This  test  made 
strange  discoveries  also  in  the  heathen  world.  Many  of  the  sages  of  Greece  and 
Roue  had  a  high  reputation  for  wisdom  and  virtue.  But  when  this  stone  was 
pointed  out  to  them  as  the  only  foundation  of  their  hopes,  they  rejected  it  with 
proud  disdain,  and  thought  it  much  more  safe  to  depend  upon  their  own  virtue 
and  merit,  than  upon  the  virtue  and  merit  of  one  that  was  crucified  like  a  male- 
factor. And  thus  it  appeared  they  were  not  truly  good  and  virtuous.  Let  this 
touch-stone  be  applied  likewise  to  the  men  of  this  generation,  and  it  will  discover 
a  great  many  counterfeits.  As  this  is  a  trying-stone  with  regard  to  men's  present 
characters,  so  it  will  be  also  as  to  their  final  doom  and  everlasting  state.  3.  This 
is  a  precious  stone.  4.  This  stone  is  a  sure  foundation.  "  Such  (says  Mr.  Hervey) 
as  no  pressure  can  shake  ;  equal,  more  than  equal  to  every  weight ;  even  to  sin, 
the  heaviest  load  in  the  world.  The  Rock  of  Ages,  such  as  never  has  failed,  never 
will  fail  those  humble  penitents  who  cast  their  burden  upon  the  Lord  Redeemer  ; 
who  roll  all  their  guilt,  and  fix  their  whole  hopes  upon  this  immovable  basis." 
The  foundation  is  sure,  because  it  is  of  Divine  appointment.  5.  This  is  a  corner- 
stone. Jesus  Christ  may  be  called  a  corner-stone,  to  signify  His  peculiar  import- 
ance in  this  spiritual  building.  II.  This  stone  is  a  foundation.  Jesus  Christ 
must  lie  at  the  bottom  of  all,  or  the  superstructure  cannot  stand.  To  join  our 
own  righteousness  with  His  in  our  justification,  is  to  form  a  foundation  of  solid 
stone,  and  hay,  straw,  and  stubble,  blended  together.     III.  Would  you  then 

KNOW  WHETHER  YOU  ARE  REALLY  BUILT  UPON  THIS  SURE  FOUNDATION  7       1.    Hav© 

you  ever  seen  the  utter  insufficiency  of  every  other  foundation  ?  You  will  never 
build  upon  Christ,  while  you  can  build  anywhere  else  with  hopes  of  safety. 
2.  Have  you  ever  been  sensible  of  the  preciousness,  the  excellency,  and  the 
stability  of  this  Divine  foundation  ?  If  you  have  ever  built  upon  Christ,  it  has 
been  at  once  an  act  of  the  last  necessity,  and  of  the  most  free  choice.  3.  Where 
is  your  habitual  dependence  ?  Is  it  upon  Jesus  Christ  alone  ?  Or  is  it  upon 
something  else  T  4.  Have  you  been  formed  into  proper  stones  for  this  spiritual 
kingdom?  (8.  Davies,  M.A.)  The  sure  foundation  : — I.  The  Lord  declares 
that  He  has  laid  this  great  foundation.     "  Behold,  /  lay  in  Zion  a  founda- 


532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvm. 

tion."  Here,  as  in  many  other  parts  of  Scripture,  the  great  work  of  the  salvation 
of  sinners  is  traced  up  to  its  fountain-head.     II.  The  Lord  declares  the  blessed 

PROPERTIES  AND  EXCELLENCES  OP  THIS  FOUNDATION.       III.  THE  LORD  SETS  FORTH 

the  blessedness  of  those  who  BUILD  upon  it.  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not 
make  haste."  (W.  Hancock,  B.D.)  The  ground  of  a  sinner's  hope: — In  the 
preceding  context  the  prophet  speaks  of  unsafe  refuges.  To  bring  sinners  to  the 
apprehension  of  the  Saviour,  God  announces  the  declaration  of  the  text.     I.  Thb 

IMPORTANCE  WHICH  GOD  ATTACHES  TO  THE   DECLARATION  which  He  WES  about  to 

make.  He  introduces  it  with  the  solemn  asservation,  "  Therefore,  thus  saith  the 
Lord."  This  is  further  apparent  from  the  solemn  manner  in  which  He  calls  the 
minds  of  all  to  it.  "  Behold,  I  lay."  He  thus  summons  the  attention  of  men  and 
angels.  It  can  be  no  trivial  matter  to  which  the  infinitely  wise  God  thus  summon* 
the  attention  of  all.  The  truth  is,  He  is  about  to  erect  a  stately  temple,  unspeak- 
ably more  glorious  than  either  of  the  temples  that  stood  once  on  Mount  Moriah. 
They  were  only  types  and  obscure  shadows  of  this  splendid  structure.  It  is  a 
tomple  which  shall  be  built  up  for  ever.  The  stones  of  it  are  lively  stones,  being 
the  immortal  souls  of  men.  It  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  God  of  the 
whole  earth.  Never  shall  "  Ichabod,  the  glory  is  departed,"  be  written  upon 
its  walls.  But  to  employ  another  figure  of  the  same  signification,  God  is  about 
to  build  a  glorious  city.  But  what  is  meant  by  the  temple  and  city  ?  They 
refer  to  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  which  is  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  cornerstone.  The 
words  have  also  a  reference  to  sinners  of  mankind.  God  may  be  viewed  as  laying 
the  foundation-stone  of  a  gracious  plan  for  redeeming  them  from  sin  and  hell. 
II.  It  is  God  who  has  laid  the  foundation  in  Zion.  "  I  lay."  None  else 
had  sufficient  knowledge  to  discover  a  safe  and  suitable  method  of  acceptance. 
Besides,  He  alone  had  it  in  His  power  to  lay  such  a  foundation.  Here  is  matter 
of  comfort.  Had  it  been  laid  by  another,  how  could  we  have  had  the  same  evidence 
that  it  was  safe  ?  Might  it  not  have  been  disallowed  by  God  ?  But  since  it  is 
the  doing  of  the  Lord,  who  may  prohibit  us  from  building  upon  it  ?  and  who 
shall  cast  any  reflection  upon  its  security  ?  Here  a  question  suggests  itself, 
and  it  is,  When  was  this  foundation  laid  ?  God  speaks  of  it  as  if  He  was  laying 
it  at  the  time  when  He  used  these  words.  But  it  will  be  remembered  that  there 
is  no  succession  of  time  with  God.  It  was  laid  in  decree  from  all  eternity.  The 
saints  of  the  former  dispensations  sought  it  and  relied  upon  it  for  safety.  But 
again,  this  foundation  was  laid,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  by  Christ's  coming  into 
the  world,  and  offering  Himself  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  III.  This  stone  is  laid  in 
Zto  , — in  the  Church.  Christ  is  the  foundation  upon  which  it  is  built.  Without 
His  mission  and  death  no  Church  could  h  ave  been  erected.  And  from  Him  proceeded 
all  the  ordinances  and  institutions  by  which  the  blessings  of  redemption  are  com- 
municated to  her  members.  From  Him  likewise  proceeds  all  the  invisible 
grace  which  is  necessary  to  gather,  edify,  and  purify  a  Church.  Again,  it  is  in  the 
ordinances  and  assemblies  of  the  Church  that  He  is  chiefly  to  be  found.  IV.  Thb 
stone  laid  for  a  foundation  has  been  tried.  Though  Christ  had  not  been 
tried,  the  fact  that  He  was  God  as  well  as  man  would  have  been  sufficient  to  warrant 
our  strongest  confidence  in  Him.  But  in  what  respects  was  Christ  tried  and 
proved  ?  1.  Like  Adam,  His  innocence  was  tried.  His  temper  was  severely  tested. 
ft  was  tried  by  His  disciples.  2.  Christ's  confidence  in  the  promises  made  to 
Him  was  greatly  tried.  God  had  promised  that  to  Him  would  be  the  gathering 
of  the  people,  and  that  the  heathen  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  would 
be  given  Him  for  His  possession ;  but,  instead  of  witnessing  the  fulfilment  of 
these  promises,  He  was  rejected  and  despised  of  men ;  and  His  retinue  often 
amounted  to  no  more  than  twelve  fishermen ;  and  yet  He  continued  to  trust 
that  all  would  be  accomplished  in  due  time.  3.  His  qualifications  to  act  the  part 
of  our  Saviour  have  likewise  been  proven.  (1)  His  mercy  has  been  tried.  It 
has  been  proven  by  all  who  have  applied  to  Him  for  deliverances  of  any  kind  ; 
and  they  have  always  found  it  very  tender.  (2)  Christ's  readiness  to  hear  prayer 
has  been  tried.  (3)  His  power  has  been  likewise  proved.  He  has  completely 
demonstrated  His  ability  to  save.  What  comfort  is  here  for  the  awakened !  In 
coming  to  Christ  for  peace  and  salvation,  they  incur  no  risk.  V.  Christ  is  a 
precious  corner-stone.  1.  It  is  easy  to  see  some  reasons  why  He  is  called  precious. 
(1)  He  is  precious  to  God  on  account  of  the  ineffable  love  that  subsists  between 
Him  and  the  Son,  who  is  His  delight.  (2)  He  is  precious  to  the  Father,  likewise, 
on  account  of  the  work  of  redemption  which  the  Father  gave  Him  to  do,  and 


CHAr.  xxvm.]  ISAIAH.  633 

which  He  cheerfully  undertook  and  faithfully  performed.  (3)  To  believers  He 
possesses  transcendent  excellence  on  account  of  the  nature  and  perfections  of 
Deity  with  which  He  is  invested,  and  because  He  is  a  suitable  and  compassionate 
Saviour.  2.  But  why  is  He  also  termed  a  corner  stone  ?  This  seems  intended  to 
teach  us  that  Christ  must  be  all  in  all  in  the  work  of  our  salvation.  VI.  Christ 
is  A  sure  foundation.  1.  God  has  laid  Him  for  a  foundation,  and  the  foundation 
of  the  Lord  standeth  sure.  2.  That  Christ  is  a  sure  foundation  is  evident  from 
the  fact  that  He  stood  His  trial.  3.  It  is  manifest  also,  from  the  many  promises 
and  oaths  made  to  Himself,  and  to  His  people,  through  Him.  4.  In  addition 
to  all  other  grounds  of  security,  be  it  remembered,  that  while  our  first  represen- 
tative was  a  creature,  the  second  is  the  Lord  from  heaven,  the  Creator. 
VII.  He  that  believeth  on  Christ  shall  not  make  haste.  This  mode  of 
expression  is  evidently  borrowed  from  the  idea  of  a  house  about  to  fall — the 
inmates  making  haste  to  get  away  from  under  it.  When  an  unexpected  inundation 
has  sapped  away  the  sand  or  earth  on  which  the  house  was  built,  then  there  is  a 
running  to  and  fro :  every  one  tries  to  secure  his  own  safety,  and  to  give  warning 
to  his  relatives.  And  confusion  and  haste  far  greater  than  this  will  attend  those 
who  now  cover  themselves  with  lies  and  falsehood.  There  are  three  seasons  of 
this  haste — the  season  of  death,  the  season  of  the  resurrection,  and  the  season 
of  judgment.  These  are  times  of  the  greatest  alarm  and  confusion  to  all  who 
stumble  upon  the  stone  laid  in  Zion ;  but  the  case  is  very  different  with  him  that 
trusteth  in  the  Lord.     (.4.  Boss,   M.A.)        God's  foundation : — I.  Man  needs 

A    FOUNDATION    ON    WHICH    TO    BUILD    HIS    HOPES    FOR   TIME    AND    FOB    ETERNITY. 

Because  of  his  nature,  the  nature  of  sin,  the  character  of  God ;  man's  duties  and 
responsibilities  ;  the  faculties  and  capabilities  of  his  immortal  souL  II.  Man 
cannot  lay  a  sufficient  foundation.  The  history  of  the  world  shows  that 
humanity  has  ever  been  trying  to  do  this.  The  various  systems  of  religion. 
Human  reason  has  been  deified.  Reliance  on  God's  abstract  mercy.  Correct 
creeds,  good  works — all  fail  in  the  time  of  man's  necessity.  III.  God  has  laid 
a  foundation.  While  men  and  angels  would  have  failed,  God  gave  His  Son, 
a  foundation  for  pardon,  purity,  peace,  heaven.  IV.  This  foundation  has 
been  tried.  1.  By  persecution — Church  and  individual.  2.  By  trust — all 
classes,  all  times,  under  all  circumstances,  in  life  and  in  death.  V.  The  assur- 
ance of  the  text.  "  Shall  not  make  haste."  No  guilt  too  deep  for  pardon ; 
no  trial  and  temptation  too  great  for  consoling  grace  ;  nothing  beyond  the  power 
of  Christ.  (J.  T.  Murrish.)  The  foundation  of  God : — I.  The  foundation. 
Christ.  In  a  very  deep  sense  Jesus  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  the  whole  of  the 
Divine  dealings  with  us ;  and  historically,  since  the  day  on  which  He  appeared 
on  earth,  He  has  more  and  more  manifestly  and  completely  been  the  foundation 
of  the  whole  of  the  history  of  the  world.  But  passing  these  aspects,  let  us  rather 
fix  upon  those  which  are  more  immediately  in  the  prophet's  mind.  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  foundation  laid  for  all  men's  security  against  every  tempest  or  assault. 
We  may  look  at  the  same  thought  under  somewhat  different  aspects.  1.  He  is  the 
foundation  for  all  our  thinking  and  opinions,  for  all  our  belief  and  our  knowledge. 
In  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom,  and  whatsoever  of  solid  fact  men  can 
grasp  in  their  thinking  in  regard  of  all  the  most  important  things  with  which  they 
come  into  relation,  is  to  be  found  in  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  the 
truths  which  that  reveals.  He  is  the  foundation  of  all  our  knowledge  of  God,  of  all 
our  true  knowledge  of  ourselves,  of  all  our  true  knowledge  of  duty,  of  all  our  true 
knowledge  of  the  relations  between  the  present  and  the  future,  between  man  and 
God.  And  in  His  life,  in  the  history  of  His  death  and  resurrection,  is  the  only 
foundation  for  any  real  knowledge  of  the  awful  mysteries  that  he  beyond  the 
grave.  Certitude  is  in  Him.  2.  He  is  the  foundation  of  all  restful  love.  3.  He 
is  the  foundation  for  all  noble  and  pure  living.  He  is  the  fixed  pattern  to 
which  it  may  be  conformed.  Otherwise  man's  notions  of  what  is  virtuous  and 
good  are  much  at  the  mercy  of  conventional  variations  of  opinion.  4.  As  the  one 
sufficient  motive  for  holy  and  beauteous  living,  He  is  the  foundation.  "  If  ye 
love  Me,  keep  My  commandments."  They  that  find  the  reason  and  the  motive 
for  goodness  and  purity  in  Christ's  love  to  them  and  their  answering  love  to  Christ, 
will  build  a  far  fairer  fabric  of  a  life  than  any  others,  let  them  toil  at  the  building 
as  they  may.  II.  The  tried  preciousness  of  the  foundation.  Because 
it  is  a  tested  stone,  it  therefore  is  a  precious  stone.  There  are  two  kinds  of  testing — 
the  testing  from  the  assaults  of  enemies,  and  the  testing  by  the  building  upon  it 
of  friends.     And  both  these  methods  of  proof  have  been  applied,  and  it  has  stood 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

the  test.  HT.  The  process  op  building.  The  metaphor  seems  to  be  abandoned 
in  the  last  words  of  our  text,  but  it  is  only  apparently  so.  "  He  that  believeth 
shall  not  make  haste."  The  act  of  building  is  simple  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  (A. 
Madartn,  D.D.)        God's  foundation  for  man  : — This  passage  represents  in  a  word 

est  very  much  the  contrast  between  God's  way  and  man's  way  of  doing  things. 
an,  according  to  his  natural  ideas,  is  all  for  doing  things  by  his  own  efforts. 
What  he  has  and  what  he  does  he  must  and  shall  produce  from  himself.  He  must 
Invent,  he  must  devise,  he  must  judge,  he  must  plan,  he  must  execute,  and  God 
is  to  be  ignored.  His  science  is  to  be  a  science  from  which  God  is  excluded, 
and  His  name  is  not  to  be  mentioned.  His  social  theories  are  to  be  social  theories 
rounded  off  and  complete  in  themselves,  and  God  is  not  to  be  allowed  to  touch 
them.  His  moral  life  is  to  be  built  up  upon  its  own  foundations,  and  God  is  not 
to  be  called  in  for  help.  God's  way  of  doing  things  is  the  very  opposite  of  this. 
In  His  way  of  doing  things  men  also  are  called  upon  to  put  forth  all  the  efforts 
they  can,  but  it  is  in  building  up  on  the  foundations  He  has  laid  for  them,  not 
in  laying  a  foundation  for  themselves.  He  calls  on  them  to  put  forth  their  efforts 
in  doing  what  they  can  do,  and  not  in  attempting  to  do  what  they  never  can 
accomplish.  (Prof.  J.  Orr,  D.D.)  The  sure  foundation  : — 1.  If  history  teaches 
us  anything,  it  is  surely  this — that  man  needs  God  to  lay  his  foundation 
FOR  him,  and  that  he  cannot  dispense  with  God's  help.  1.  In  the  matter  of  thought 
man  is  laid  under  this  very  peculiar  condition — that,  on  the  one  hand,  he  needs 
a  foundation  of  certainty  in  regard  to  the  great  questions  and  subjects  of  exist- 
ence,— those  great  questions  on  which  men's  minds  have  tortured  and  perplexed 
themselves  in  all  ages — the  questions  of  God,  the  soul,  and  the  hereafter,  on  which 
to  build  up  his  life ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he  cannot  give  himself  this  certainty. 
Men  need  a  foundation  of  assurance  on  these  great  questions  in  order  that  their 
individual  lives,  their  institutions,  their  societies  even,  may  be  built  upon  a  strong 
and  stable  basis.  "  I  dare  say  you  feel  as  I  do,"  says  one  of  the  speakers  in  a 
conversation  with  Socrates,  how  very  hard,  or  almost  impossible,  is  the  attain- 
ment of  any  certainty  about  questions  such  as  these  in  the  present  life.  And 
yet  I  should  deem  him  a  coward  who  did  not  prove  what  is  said  about  them  to 
the  uttermost,  or  whose  heart  failed  him  before  he  had  examined  them  on  every 
side.  For  he  should  persevere  till  he  has  achieved  one  of  two  things :  either 
he  should  discover  or  be  taught  the  truth  about  them ;  or,  if  this  is  impossible, 
I  would  have  him  take  the  best  and  most  irrefragable  of  human  theories,  and  let 
this  be  the  raft  upon  which  he  sails  through  life — not  without  risk,  as  I  admit, 
if  he  cannot  find  some  word  of  God  which  will  more  safely  and  surely  carry  him." 
2.  It  is  the  same  in  regard  to  moral  life.  Men  seek  to  build  up  their  own  moral 
life  and  the  morality  of  their  societies  on  a  basis  which  shall  be  independent  of 
religion ;  but  how  little  they  succeed,  how  abortive  have  been  their  efforts,  all 
history  might  again  be  cited  to  prove.  God  lays  the  foundation  of  the  true  moral 
life  in  that  new  nature  He  bestows  on  us  in  Christ,  in  the  light  and  power  that  are 
imparted  to  us  through  Him,  and  without  this  divinely  laid  foundation  the  builders 
build  in  vain.  3.  Is  it  otherwise  with  religion,  with  the  relation  of  man  to  God, 
and  the  state  and  standing  of  men  before  God  ?  Here,  too,  men  have  ever  been 
found,  and  are  found  still,  putting  forth  painful  efforts  to  secure  their  own  peace ; 
going  about,  as  Paul  said,  to  establish  their  own  righteousness,  not  knowing 
that  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth. 
Yet  how  hollow,  and  temporary,  and  uncertain  is  the  peace  gained  by  all  such 
efforts ;  how  far  removed  from  the  glorious  certainty  of  reconciliation  and  acceptance 
with  God  which  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  can  impart !  II.  It  is  the  great  central 
assertion  of  the  Christian  faith  that  God  has  laid  for  mankind  such  a  founda- 
tion as  it  needs,  and  that  this  foundation  has  been  laid  in  Jesus  Christ.  With 
Christ's  coming  into  the  world  a  new  era  began  in  the  history  of  the  world,  a 
new  direction  was  given  to  the  thoughts  of  men,  a  new  revelation  of  God  was 
made  to  them,  a  new  gospel  of  sonship  was  preached  to  them,  a  new  light  was 
thrown  on  human  nature,  human  needs,  and  human  destiny,  new  hopes  and 
prospects  were  opened  up  for  humanity.  On  this  foundation  the  race  has  gone 
on  building  up  ever  since.  But  there  are  those  who  tell  us  that  this  is  passing 
away — that  this  may  have  done  for  the  past,  but  will  not  do  for  the  future ;  that 
this  foundation-stone  is  becoming  obsolete,  and  that  men  must  have  done  with 
it,  and  leave  it  behind.  They  must,  in  obedience  to  truth  and  the  advance  in 
the  world's  ideas,  part  with  it.  Well,  the  text  itself  does  not  anticipate  that 
this  stone  laid  by  God,  being  planted  there,  will  remain  there  without  being  put 


chap,  xxvm.]  ISAIAH.  635 

to  test  and  trial.  It  is  not  a  stone  which  God  is  to  lay,  and  no  one  dispute  the 
laying  of  it — which  God  is  to  lay,  and  no  one  refuse  to  build  upon  it — which  God 
is  to  lay,  and  no  one  contest  its  right  to  be  there.  III.  This  subject  has  a 
relation  to  the  preacher.  We  are  told  in  the  text  that  it  is  God  who  is  laying, 
and  has  laid,  this  foundation-stone  on  which  everything  is  to  be  built  up.  It 
is  the  preacher's  function  to  unite  himself  with  this  great  purpose  of  God.  His 
function  is  to  exhibit  and  commend  this  foundation-stone.  It  is  the  preacher's 
duty  to  clear  it  of  the  human  rubbish  which  from  time  to  time  may  have  been 
heaped  upon  it ;  to  stand  upon  it  himself,  and  to  induce  others  to  stand  upon  it 
too,  and  to  rear  their  life,  their  work,  everything,  upon  this  foundation.  IV.  But 
THE  TEXT  besides  has  A  relation  to  the  hearer.  It  is  a  matter  of  infinite 
importance  for  hearers  of  the  Gospel  to  recognise  the  preciousness  and  importance 
of  this  stone  which  God  has  laid ;  for  us  all  that  we  should  ourselves  come  to 
this  stone  and  build  our  lives  and  hopes  upon  it.  How  great  the  comfort  to  those 
in  spiritual  darkness  and  perplexity  to  know  that  it  is  not  left  to  them  to  lay  the 
foundation  stone  of  their  spiritual  peace ;  but  that  God  has  laid  it  for  them,  and 
that  all  they  have  to  do  is  to  build  on  that  sure  and  tried  foundation !  Jesus 
Himself  has  identified  Himself  with  this  stone,  and  has  warned  us  that  men  cannot 
come  into  collision  with  Him  and  not  suffer  grievous  spiritual  harm.  (Ibid.) 
God1 8  foundation  for  the  stability  of  His  Church  : — 1.  This  foundation  was  planned 
in  the  eternal  counsels  of  Jehovah.  2.  It  was  actually  laid  in  the  incarnation 
and  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  It  is  proclaimed  in  the  preaching  of  the  GospeL 
(J.  Sherman.)  True  character : — I.  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  a  good 
character.  II.  Believing  is  the  rearing  of  a  true  character.  III.  God 
is  the  judge  of  a  true  character.  1.  He  measures  it  by  the  law  of  rectitude. 
He  lays  "  judgment "  to  the  line,  &c.  2.  He  tests  it  by  the  dispensation  of  His 
government.  "  Had  shall  sweep  away,"  &c.  Truly,  "  other  foundation  can 
no  man  lay,"  &c.  (Homilist.)  A  tried  stone. — A  stone  of  proof : — "  A 
tried  stone,  literally,  a  stone  of  proof ;  and  that  may  be  regarded  in  either  of 
two  senses  or  in  both.  1.  It  is  a  stone  of  proof,  because  it  stands  every  test  that 
can  be  applied  to  it.  Praise  no  stone  until  you  have  tested  it.  Laud  no  doctrine 
until  you  have  tried  it  in  the  market-place,  in  the  sick-chamber,  in  the  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  the  deepest  distress ;  then  come  forward  and  say  what  the 
stone  was  worth.  When  you  hear  the  last  patented  religion  praised,  pay  no  heed 
to  the  trivial  eulogium  ;  it  is  a  patent  that  has  not  been  put  to  the  proof ;  it  has 
done  nothing  for  the  world  ;  it  has  no  long,  noble,  dignified  history  behind  it ; 
it  glitters,  but  it  has  not  been  proved  in  life's  long  night  of  pain  and  restlessness 
and  sorrow.  Herein  it  is  true  that  antiquity  signifies  experience,  uses  that  can 
be  employed  for  purposes  of  inference  and  solid  deduction.  In  this  sense  Jesus 
Christ  was  a  stone  of  proof :  He  was  tried  morning,  noon,  and  night,  in  the  cold 
and  in  the  heat,  in  all  the  variation  of  life's  changeful  scene  ;  and  this  is  the  record 
which  is  made  of  Him  by  those  who  have  followed  Him  throughout.  "  Jesus 
Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever," — most  precious  when 
most  needed,  strongest  when  the  enemy  is  most  importunate,  completest  in  all 
attribute,  faculty,  and  grace  when  hell  gathers  itself  up  for  final  tremendous 
onslaught  upon  His  dignity  and  worth.  Is  it  too  much  to  ask  that  those  who 
have  tested  Christ  and  known  Him  to  be  a  stone  of  proof  should  say  so  publicly, 
privately,  quietly,  emphatically,  and  gratefully  ?  2.  Then,  the  second  sense  in 
which  the  test  would  hold  good  would  be  that  Jesus  Christ  tries  every  character. 
Not  only  is  Jesus  Christ  Himself  tried,  but  He  tries  every  man.  Therefore  many 
have  left  Him.  He  tries  whether  the  heart  is  giving  itself  in  full  consecration 
to  His  service,  or  whether  it  is  trifling  with  the  occasion,  yielding  to  the  spirit 
of  compromise  and  concession.  In  the  Church  there  is  but  one  badge,  one  symbol, 
one  password  ;  it  is  not  genius,  learning,  intellectual  capacity,  profound  acquisi- 
tion in  difficult  subjects, — it  is  the  Cross.  Therefore  so  few  men  understand 
Christianity.  He  is  a  Christian  who  has  no  self ;  he  has  denied  himself ;  he  has 
said  "  No '  to  himself.  This  is  a  conquest  which  is  only  won  in  solitude  ;  this  is  a 
victory  of  which  a  man  need  not  speak,  because  his  whole  life  tells  the  tale  in 
simplest  eloquence.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        The  tried  stone  : — I.  Jesus  Christ  is 

1  HE  FOUNDATION  STONE  OF  THAT  SYSTEM  OF   DOCTRINE  WHICH  GOD  HAS  REVEALED 

in  His  Word.  In  every  age  of  the  world  too  many  have  been  found  who  employ 
all  their  time  in  laying  the  foundation,  without  being  able  to  build  thereupon 
with  any  pleasure  to  themselves  or  advantage  to  others.  And  the  reason  is, 
rather  than  build  on  the  "  Rock  of  Ages,"  they  are  for  associating  with  the  founda- 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

tion,  stones  which  are  only  designed  for  the  superstructure.  Now,  the  foundation 
is  to  be  laid  of  mere  grace,  in  the  atonement  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
This  is  the  chief  doctrine  of  Christianity,  and  is  the  basement  of  all  the  others. 
This  foundation  is  impregnable.  II.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  teied  foundation- 
stone.  The  word  "  tried  "  bears  three  meanings  in  Holy  Scripture.  Sometimes 
it  means  to  elect  or  choose,  sometimes  to  prove  or  put  to  the  test,  and  sometimes 
to  approve.  Answerably  to  these  views,  Jesus  Christ  was,  from  eternity,  "  chosen 
of  God"  to  be  the  basis  of  the  Christian  system,  the  foundation  of  individual 
faith,  and  the  "  corner  stone"  of  His  believing  people  in  their  collective  and  corporate 
character.  In  these  capacities  He  has  been  openly,  solemnly,  severely  experi- 
mented and  put  to  the  test.  And  the  result  of  the  whole  has  been  His  complete 
approval.  1.  He  has  been  "  tried,"  in  point  of  true  and  faithful  attachment  to 
all  the  great  interests  whioh  we  have  mentioned,  by  the  sufferings  to  which  He 
subjected  Himself  in  support  of  them.  2.  He  has  been  "  tried  "  in  reference 
to  the  strength  and  security  of  the  fabric,  by  the  unfailing  success  of  all 
attempts  to  build  upon  it.  3.  He  has  been  "  tried  "  by  the  entire  failure  of  all 
attempts  to  undermine  the  foundation  or  shake  the  building.  (H.  Clare.)  Jesus 
Christ  the  tested  foundation : — This  is  historically  true  and  verifiable.  In 
science  we  have  a  process  called  verification.  A  law  of  nature,  however  strong 
the  induction  by  which  it  is  supported  may  seem  to  be,  is  not  regarded  as  scientifi- 
cally or  perfectly  established  till  it  is  brought  to  the  test  of  verification — that  is, 
until  men  by  experiment  or  new  experience  have  put  it  to  the  trial,  and  found 
that  their  induction  holds  the  field.  And  so  in  a  sense  we  may  say  it  has  been  with 
Jesus  Christ.  This  stone  has  been  tested  by  time,  and  we  have  now  centuries  of 
verification  to  fall  back  upon.  In  many  ways,  in  nearly  all  possible  ways,  this  stone 
has  been  tested,  and  it  has  come  victoriously  out  of  them  all.  It  has  been  tried 
by  the  upheavals  of  society  in  times  of  the  greatest  social  and  political  convulsion. 
It  has  been  tried  by  the  fires  of  persecution ;  for  often  have  the  rage  and  enmity 
of  man  done  their  worst  against  it.  It  has  been  tried  by  error  and  corruption — 
by  the  faithlessness  of  the  builders  themselves,  who  sought  to  remove  it  from  it3 
place,  and  put  some  other  stone  in  its  stead.  It  has  been  tried  in  the  fires  of 
controversy,  and  by  the  corroding  influences  of  scepticism.  All  that  the  intellect 
or  wit  of  man  could  do  has  been  employed  to  destroy  it.  It  has  been  tested  in 
a  negative  respect  by  the  failure  of  men  to  find  an  adequate  substitute  for  it.  Men 
have  tried  from  the  beginning  to  remove  this  stone,  and  find  a  substitute  for  it. 
They  have  sought  for  substitutes  in  science,  in  philosophy,  in  culture,  but  they 
have  not  been  able  to  find  them.  I  could  quote  the  confessions  of  many  of  our 
leaders  of  modern  unbelief  who  think  they  see  the  old  foundations  going,  but 
who  sorrowfully  confess  that  they  have  nothing  adequate  to  put  in  the  place  of 
Christianity,  or  to  restore  to  man  the  hopes  of  which  they  have  deprived  him. 
Finally,  this  stone  has  been  tested  in  the  most  effectual  way  of  all  by  men  actually 
coming  to  it,  and  trying  whether  it  will  bear  the  weight  they  need  to  lean  on  it. 
And  who  that  has  thus  tried  the  religion  of  Jesus  experimentally  has  not  found 
that  it  can  do  all,  or  more  than  all,  for  them  that  their  highest  spiritual  life  requires  ? 
{Prof.  J.  Orr,  D.D.)  The  tried  foundation  : — I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  corner- 
stone. 1.  He  is  the  foundation  of  Christianity  as  a  theological  and  religious 
system.  (1)  Of  all  Christian  doctrine.  (2)  Of  all  the  authentic  institutions 
of  Christianity.  He  is  the  foundation  of  all  the  public  worship  of  Almighty 
God.  (3)  So  He  is  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  morality  of  the  Christian 
system.  2.  He  is  the  foundation  of  personal  confidence  and  salvation.  3.  He 
is  the  "  corner  stone  "  of  the  general  Church — of  His  people  in  their  associated 
character.  (1)  As  the  "  corner  stone  "  of  His  Church  He  sustains  to  it  a  natural 
relation.  (2)  He  unites  the  various  parts  of  the  building.  (3)  He  supports  the 
system.  "  On  this  rock  will  I  build  My  Church,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not 
prevail  against  it."  (4)  He  is  the  ornament  and  glory  of  the  Church,  fitly, 
neatly,  gracefully,  beautifully  "  framed  together  in  Him,  it  groweth  unto  a 
holy  temple  in  the  Lord,"  and  shall  finally  be  presented  " a  glorious  Church,  not 
having  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing."  II.  Jesus  Christ  is  "  a  tried  stone." 
(W.  M.  Bunting.)  The  well-tested  Friend  of  humanity : — Man's  destiny  depends 
upon  his  character.  In  it  are  the  germs  of  Paradise  and  the  elements  of  Tophet. 
It  is  our  blessedness  to  know  that  He  who  came  to  give  the  world  a  new  and 
holy  character  is  no  empirical  or  charlatanic  reformer,  but  one  who  has  been 
thoroughly  "  tried  "  in  the  glorious  work.  I.  He  has  been  "  tried  "  by  the 
Mission  He  undertook.     He  came  here  to  give  such  a  knowledge  of  the  nature, 


chap,  xxvrn]  ISAIAH.  537 

the  love,  the  relations,  and  the  claims  of  God  as  would  effect  a  moral  restoration 
of  the  world.  Salvation  consisteth  in  the  knowledge  of  God.  But  in  His  God- 
revealing  mission,  how  was  He  tried  ?  His  love,  the  root  of  all  excellence,  was 
tried  in  its  two  great  branches  of  piety  and  philanthropy.  In  prosecuting  His 
Divine  undertaking  He  became  so  completely  the  victim  of  human  and  hellish 
malignity  that  He  seemed  to  be  forsaken  of  His  Father.  Was  not  this  trying  to 
His  piety  ? — trying  to  His  loving  confidence  in  the  everlasting  Father  ?  Yet 
He  bore  the  test.  He  was  tried  in  His  philanthropy  also.  What  had  He  to  gain 
for  Himself  for  His  amazing  self-sacrifice  T  Nothing  but  the  Cross.  And  yet 
these  sufferings,  instead  of  cooling  the  ardour  or  dimming  the  lustre  of  this  heavenly 
fire,  made  it  more  intense  and  more  radiant.  II.  He  has  been  "  tried  "  by 
the  rigorous  scrutiny  of  His  enemies.  1.  The  scrutiny  of  His  contemporaneous 
enemies  has  done  so.  He  lived  His  publio  life  under  a  system  of  keen-eyed  and 
vigilant  espionage.  The  eye  of  malignant  scrutiny  glared  on  Him  at  every  turn. 
Every  test  that  could  be  invented  was  applied  in  order  to  convict  Him  of  wrong. 
But  now  triumphantly  He  passed  through  the  ordeal !  Even  Pilate,  who,  over- 
borne by  public  clamour,  pronounced  the  sentence,  confessed  belief  in  His  innocence 
by  washing  his  hands  in  the  open  court.  The  day  of  Pentecost  brought  new  and 
resistless  testimony  to  His  rectitude.  2.  The  scrutiny  of  His  succeeding  enemies 
has  done  so.  He  has  had  keen-eyed  enemies  from  Celsus,  the  Epi  urean  who 
wrote  his  "  Logos  Alethes,"  down  to  the  hostile  critics  of  the  present  day.  Straus  * 
of  Germany,  and  Renan  of  France,  men  of  signal  ability  and  high  attainments, 
stand  prominently  amongst  those  who  have  submitted  Christ  to  the  most  crucial  of 
hostile  criticism  in  order  to  prove  Him  unworthy  of  the  unbounded  faith  of  man 
as  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  But  who  that  has  read  the  works 
of  Neander,  Rothe,  Tholuck,  Ullmann,  Dorner,  Lange,  Hengstenberg,  including 
not  a  few  able  French  and  English  authors  who  have  answered  those  hostile  critics, 
does  not  feel  that  Christ  has  stood  well  the  severest  of  these  tests  ?     III.  He  has 

BEEN  "  TRIED  "  BY   THE    INFLUENCE    HE    HAS    EXERTED    ON    HUMANITY.       If  every 

tree  is  to  be  judged  by  its  fruits,  it  is  natural  to  ask,  what  has  been  the  fruit  of 
Christ's  history  upon  the  world  ?  And  here  we  may  raise  two  questions— 1.  What 
has  been  His  influence  upon  His  faithful  followers  ?  Ask  them  if  Christ  has  been 
to  them  according  to  His  Word.  We  fear  not  the  reply.  Those  of  His  followers 
who  have  studied  Him  most  profoundly,  and  followed  Him  most  loyally,  have 
ever  uttered  with  the  greatest  emphasis,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
living  God."  2.  What  has  been  His  general  influence  upon  the  world  ?  Has 
His  influence  been  as  unique  as  His  personal  character  revealed  in  the  Evangelists  ? 
Undoubtedly,  yes.  And  this  wide,  ever-growing  influence  is,  on  the  whole, 
salutary.  It  has  always  been  in  favour  of  the  highest  intelligence,  liberty,  morality, 
social  order,  and  true  progress.  He  stands  to-day,  in  the  mind  of  humanity, 
more  powerful  and  more  glorious  than  ever  !  Why  this  ?  One  reason  is,  His 
character  answers  to  the  highest  ideal  of  moral  excellence  that  rises  to  the  souls  of 
men.  Another  reason  is,  His  spirit  gives  to  man  the  highest  life.  Conclusion: 
The  subject  suggests — 1.  An  encouragement  to  Christians.  Our  religion  is  no 
experiment.  We  are  resting  on  one  for  our  guidance  and  happiness  who  has 
borne  the  test  of  ages.  2.  A  warning  to  infidels.  (1)  In  the  light  of  the  thoughts 
we  have  propounded  does  not  your  opposition  to  Christ  appear  impious  ?  (2)  To 
oppose  Him  is  to  set  yourself  against  the  heavens,  against  omnipotence  itself. 
To  oppose  Him  is  futile.  (3)  It  is  inhuman.  In  opposing  Him  you  are  sinning 
against  the  interest  of  your  species.  Who  has  helped  your  race  as  Jesus  has  T 
3.  An  invitation  to  all.  Your  character  is  your  spiritual  house,  your  spiritual 
world,  that  in  which  you  will  spend  an  existence  either  of  misery  or  of  bliss.  The 
only  true  foundation  of  that  house  is  Christ.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  foundation 
of  rock : — When  the  men  of  Ely  contemplated  building  their  cathedral  they 
distrusted  the  loose,  unstable  fen  country ;  and  in  order  to  have  a  foundation 
they  dug  deep  into  the  fenny  soil,  and  laid  stones  and  mortar  and  cement  there  in 
great  abundance,  and  upon  this  foundation  they  reared  their  noble  cathedral. 
It  stood  decade  after  decade,  but  of  late  years  it  showed  signs  of  settling  down, 
and  men  tried  to  remedy  its  precarious  condition  without  full  success.  But  lately 
they  made  a  most  important  discovery,  so  we  have  read.  They  dug  deep  through 
the  concrete  foundation  that  had  been  laid  of  yore,  and  there,  some  twenty  feet 
beneath  it,  they  found  rock,  rock  which  had  always  been  there,  but  which  the 
builders  had  not  known  or  found.  And  to-day  works  are  on  foot  to  unite  the 
cathedral  with  the  rock.     When  this  has  been  done  they  know  the  cathedral  will 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xivm. 

stand.  (J.  A.  Davies,  B.D.)  Human  systems  no  foundation  for  the  soul : — 
There  have  been  systems  offered  to  men  as  the  basis  of  life ;  but  time  has  tested 
them,  and  they  have  been  "  found  wanting."  Men  had  not  gone  deep  enough. 
Positivism,  secularism,  humanitarianism,  and  such  systems  fail  because  they  do 
not  go  deep  enough.  They  do  not  reach,  nor  build  upon,  the  rock.  And  men 
have  made  foundations  for  themselves  other  than  those  that  are  laid,  but  find 
these  cannot  bear  the  weight  of  all  the  years.  Time  has  told  against  their  founda- 
tions ;  and  they  must  dig  down  through  them,  dig  deeper,  and  unite  their  Uvea 
to  the  "  Rock  of  Ages."  Down  through  the  man-laid,  deceptive  foundations  of 
self-righteousness,  self-will,  and  self-sufficiency,  or  of  a  profession  of  faith  that 
has  no  substance  in  it,  or  of  worldly  and  intellectual  possessions,  right  down 
through  these  they  must  dig  until  they  reach  the  rock,  and  there  by  faith  they 
must  fix  and  fasten  their  lives  upon  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Building  on  the  rock : — 
I  would  rather  have  a  mere  shanty  of  deal  boards,  if  it  was  safe  on  a  rock,  than 
I  would  have  the  most  pretentious  building  if  it  only  rested  on  quicksand. 
(John  Wesley.)  The  stability  of  Christian  faith  and  hope : — Macaulay  once 
imagined  that  in  some  far  distant  day  a  "  traveller  from  New  Zealand  might, 
in  the  midst  of  a  vast  solitude,  take  his  stand  on  a  broken  arch  of  London  Bridge 
to  sketch  the  ruins  of  St.  Paul's."  Such  may  happen.  Neither  London,  nor  St. 
Paul's,  nor  aught  that  is  human  on  the  earth  is  proof  against  the  mouldering  breath 
of  time.  How  blessed  the  knowledge,  how  soul-inspiring  the  assurance  that  He 
on  whom  we  are  building  our  all  for  eternity  will  remain  "  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christ  the  one  solid  foundation  : — 
Men  who  stand  on  any  other  foundation  than  the  Rock,  Christ  Jesus,  are  like 
birds  who  build  their  nests  in  trees  by  the  side  of  rivers.  The  bird  sings  in  th» 
branches  and  the  river  sings  below,  but  all  the  while  the  waters  are  undermining 
the  soil  about  the  roots,  till,  in  some  unsuspected  hour,  the  tree  falls  with  a  crash 
into  the  stream,  and  then  the  nest  is  sunk,  the  home  is  gone,  and  the  bird  is  a 
wanderer.  But  birds  that  hide  their  young  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock  are  undis- 
turbed, and  after  overy  winter  coming  again,  they  find  their  Dests  awaiting  them, 
and  all  their  life-long  brood  in  the  same  places,  undisturbed  by  stream  or  storm. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Jesus  Christ  a  stone  : — Two  Jews,  one  recently  converted 
to  Christ,  the  other  strongly  opposed  to  and  incensed  against  his  brother  because 
of  his  renunciation  of  Judaism,  were  walking  together  in  warm  debate.  Being 
much  angered,  the  opponent  of  Christ  said  to  his  companion,  "  As  for  your  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  I  think  no  more  of  Him  than  of  this  stone  that  is  in  our  path." 
Grieved,  but  not  disheartened,  the  disciple  of  Christ  said,  as  he  picked  up  the  stone 
and  held  it  in  his  hand,  "  And  I,  too,  think  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  stone  ;  but  to  me 
He  is  the  Foundation-stone  laid  in  Zion,  the  Elect  stone,  the  Tried  stone,  the 
precious  Corner-stone.  But  to  you,  my  brother,"  he  added  in  deep  sorrow,  "  Jesus 
is  a  Stone  of  f  tumbling  and  a  Rock  of  offence,  that  may  fall  in  judgment  upon 
you,  even  as  I  build  upon  Him  in  safety  and  mercy."  (Nye's  Anecdotes.)  He 
that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste. — The  equanimity  of  the  believer: — If  you 
observe  attentively  the  works  of  God  you  will  perceive  what  may  be  called 
a  leisurely  growth.  But  this  ill  accords  with  our  natural  inclinations.  We  would 
fain  be  at  once  what  we  can  only  become  by  degrees.  Neither  is  such  a  remark 
limited  in  its  application  to  matters  which  are  wholly  terrestrial.  It  may  be 
said  to  hold  good  in  a  still  greater  degree  when  spiritual  concerns  are  brought 
under  review.  But  God,  who  precisely  knows  what  is  most  for  our  advantage, 
has  determined  against  any  sudden  transition.  Many  of  the  most  brilliant  pro- 
mises of  the  Bible  are  made  to  those  who  "  wait  upon  the  Lord."    I.  The  Christian 

THRIVES  BETTER  FROM  NOT  BEING  PERMITTED  TO  MAKE  HASTE  IN  ACQUIREMENTS. 

The  passage  is  directed  against  anything  of  hurry  or  bustle.  It  does  not  so  much 
declare  that  the  believer  can  never  advance  rapidly,  as  that  he  shall  never  move 
with  that  agitated  step  which  betokens  insecurity.  It  does  not  denote  a  sluggish 
pace  to  be  unavoidable,  but  simply  implies  that  what  is  hasty  and  sudden  will 
not  be  allowed.  And  a  little  reflection  will  convince  you  of  the  advantages  which 
result  from  such  an  arrangement.  It  holds  good  in  almost  everything,  that  what 
is  done  hastily  is  seldom  done  well.  In  mental  acquirements  the  more  especially, 
that  which  is  speedy  is  likely  to  be  showy  rather  than  solid — so  that  what  is  gained 
in  time  is  lost  in  strength.  The  case  is  just  the  same  in  regard  of  religion.  Where 
the  Spirit  of  God  actually,  and  in  good  earnest,  takes  a  man  in  hand,  it  will  not 
allow  him  to  make  haste  through  the  preliminaries  of  righteousness  ;  he  shall 
be  brought  down  to  the  dust,  so  as  to  abhor  himself  for  his  countless  iniquities ; 


chap.  xxvni.l  ISAIAH.  539 

he  shall  be  reduced  to  the  position  of  one  who  is  thoroughly  conscious  that,  unless 
God  interfere,  he  must  eternally  perish.  And  it  will  ordinarily  be  after  this 
process  that  the  Gospel  in  all  its  beauty  is  expanded  before  him.  This  is  for 
the  advantage  of  the  believer.  Take  the  experience  of  Christians,  and  you  will 
find  that  where  progress  has  been  most  rapid,  the  commencement  has  been  most 
arduous.  And  neither  is  it  only  at  the  beginning  that  the  Christian  thrives 
better  from  not  being  allowed  to  "  make  haste."  Take  him  at  any  other  stage 
of  his  course,  and  you  will  find  that  he  advances  rapidly  by  walking  slowly. 
Suppose    him    under    affliction,    then   patience    must    have   its    perfect   work. 

II.  EXAMINE  CERTAIN  OF  THE  COMFORTS  AND  ENJOYMENTS  WHICH  ARE  EN3URED 
TO   THE   BELIEVER   BY   THE   PROMISE    THAT    HE    "  SHALL  NOT  MAKE   HASTE."      We 

reckon  as  chief  amongst  these  that  he  has  a  Protector  always  at  hand,  so 
that  in  seasons  of  emergency  he  need  not  run  to  and  fro  in  search  of  succour. 
"  God  is  our  refuge  and  strength  ;  a  very  present  help  in  trouble."  The  believer 
has  nothing  to  hasten  from,  for  he  is  shielded  against  every  assault ;  he  has  nothing 
to  hasten  to,  for  he  is  already  enclosed  within  a  rampart  of  security.  Tt  is  only 
by  bartering  away  or  forgetting  my  rights  or  my  duties  as  a  Christian  that  I 
can  possibly  make  what  is  termed  a  false  step.  The  believer  ought  to  take  no 
step  without  prayer ;  and  if  he  ask  God's  counsel,  he  shall  not  go  wrong.  Then, 
in  respect  of  the  termination  of  life,  the  believer  may  feel  it  far  better  to  depart 
and  be  with  the  Lord.  He  may  sometimes  be  tempted  to  long  for  the  time  when 
the  earthly  house  shall  be  taken  down,  in  order  to  be  rebuilt  for  eternity ;  but 
he  cannot  forget  that  his  times  are  in  God's  hands ;  that  it  would  not  be  good 
for  him  to  die  whilst  his  heavenly  Father  sees  it  fit  that  he  should  live  ;  and  thus 
he  keeps  down  what  is  impatient  in  desire,  and  makes  not  haste  to  be  emanci- 
pated from  the  flesh.  He  longs,  moreover,  for  the  final  triumph  of  Christianity, 
the  time  "  when  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  the 
Lord  and  His  Christ."  But  there  will  be  mixed  with  this  longing  no  fraction  of 
impatience  (27.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  quieting  antidote  to  haste  : — Is  not  this 
making  haste,  this  restless  hurrying,  turning,  questioning  a  quite  precise  picture 
of  too  many  modern  thoughts  and  lives  ?  How  many  people  are  waveringly 
making  haste  about  doctrine,  duty,  &c.  But  our  Scripture  is  the  quieting  anti- 
dote. I.  Faith's  object.  "  He  that  believeth  " ;  but  he  must  have  somewhat 
or  some  one  as  the  object  of  belief.  Notice  faith's  object  as  disclosed  in  our 
Scripture.  1.  An  object  given  of  God.  2.  An  object  sure.  3.  Tried  or  tested. 
4.  Precious,  worthy.  II.  The  result  of  faith.  "  Shall  not "  worryingly,  nervously 
"  make  haste."  1.  As  to  doctrine,  Christ  is  the  truth.  2.  As  to  the  forgiveness 
of  sins,  Christ's  word  is  pledged.  3.  As  to  the  issue  of  things,  the  helm  is  grasped 
by  the  piei  ced  hand.  4.  As  to  death,  the  risen  Christ  is  death's  master.  ( Wayl-and 
Hoyt,  D.D.)  The  objective  ground  of  faith  : — 1.  Two  things  are  necessary  to 
give  stability  to  a  man.  (1)  A  principle  of  faith  within  his  own  mind.  (2)  An 
objective  ground  of  faith,  real  or  imaginary.  The  man  thus  believes  in  some- 
thing. In  itself  it  may  be  unreal,  but  to  him  it  is  a  reality.  Therefore  he  follows 
after  it  with  constancy.  Take  away  his  belief  in  this  something  and  he  is  immedi- 
ately at  sea,  without  compass  or  rudder,  the  sport  of  the  winds  and  waves.  And 
precisely  in  proportion  to  the  grandeur  and  the  durability  of  that  on  which  his 
faith  rests,  and  to  the  simplicity  and  entireness  of  his  faith  itself,  will  he  be  found 
to  be  steadfast  and  immovable,  full  of  energy,  full  of  hope,  full  of  perseverance. 
I  appeal  to  the  history  of  the  race.  Look  at  all  those  who  have  been  remark- 
able for  strength  and  stability  of  character,  and  who  swayed  by  the  magic  of  their 
firmness  the  minds  of  others.  They  all  believed  in  something :  in  their  mission, 
or  in  their  destiny,  or  in  their  wisdom,  or  in  the  power  of  truth,  or  in  the  progress 
of  the  race,  or  in  the  constancy  of  nature,  or  in  the  future  of  their  country,  or  in 
the  revelation  of  God.  Faith  it  was  that  upheld  them  from  first  to  last,  that 
imparted  a  consistency  and  a  unity  to  all  they  did,  and  invested  them  with  a 
kind  of  awe  as  beings  of  another  and  higher  order.  Now,  this  being  the  case, 
you  can  easily  see  of  what  importance  it  is  that  the  objective  ground  of  faith 
should  be  something  that  is  real,  true,  Divine ;  something  that  has  substance 
in  it,  so  that  I  feel  I  have  hold  of  it,  and  am  not  grasping  a  shadow ;  something 
that  lives  out  of  myself  altogether,  so  that  I  can  feel  independent  of  the  ever 
varying  phases  of  my  own  mind ;  something  that  is  itself  secure,  and  beyond  the 
possibility  of  danger,  so  that  1  can  feel  the  most  perfect  confidence  in  it.  2.  And 
now  comes  the  question  than  which  none  can  be  more  intensely  interesting, 
at  least  to  the  earnest,  awakened,  thoughtful  mind — Where  is  this  objective 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

ground  of  faith  to  be  found  ?  Here  is  the  answer,  and  mark  from  whom  it  comes, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a  tried 
stone."  Well  may  it  be  added,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  His 
faith  will  partake  of  the  stability  of  the  foundation  on  which  it  rests.  So  far 
as  his  safety  is  concerned  that  is  secure.  And  then,  so  far  as  his  own  feeling 
or  persuasion  of  his  safety  is  concerned,  if  his  faith  is  simple  it  will  impart  sta- 
bility not  merely  to  his  state,  but  to  his  mind.  It  will  bring  an  assured  peace 
to  his  souL  Here,  then,  is  the  foundation.  Examine  it.  (1)  See  how  strong 
it  is ;  there  is  not  one  element  of  weakness  about  it.  It  is  all  Divine.  (2)  And 
see  how  broad  it  is.  There  is  room  for  thee  to  build,  my  brother.  (3)  See  how 
accessible  it  is.  So  near,  that  one  step  will  place  thee  on  it.  A  single  step,  and 
thou  art  on  the  rock  !  (4)  See  how  it  bears  the  stamp  of  the  Divine  approbation. 
The  Father  laid  it ;  the  Father  has  further  signified  His  approbation  of  the  Living 
Stone,  by  making  Him  the  headstone  of  the  corner.  And  what  satisfied  the 
Father's  justice  may  well  satisfy  thy  conscience.  Well,  here  is  the  foundation. 
If  thou  believest  not,  surely  thou  shalt  not  be  established.  (A.  L.  R.  Foote.) 
The  establishing  power  of  faith  (with  chap.  vii.  9) : — I.  The  first  aspect  in  which 
these  words  may  be  viewed,  namely,  in  reference  to  one's  first  establishment 
in  the  peace  op  the  Gospel.  II.  A  second  aspect  in  which  they  admit  of  being 
viewed  is  in  reference  to  one's  continued  establishment  in  that  peace. 
I  do  not  believe  there  is  anything  in  the  Gospel  itself  viewed  as  a  system,  or  any- 
thing in  sovereignty  viewed  as  a  principle  of  the  Divine  procedure,  or  anything 
in  the  believer's  condition  in  this  world  viewed  as  a  state  of  discipline,  that 
renders  it  impossible  for  him,  on  the  whole,  to  retain  undiminished  the  peace  in 
which  he  was  first  established  ;  that  necessitates  his  falling  away  in  any  measure 
from  that  assurance  into  which  his  early,  simple,  affectionate  faith  introduced 
him.  The  secret  of  any  one's  declension  in  this  respect  is  afforded  us  here,  "  If 
ye  believe  not,"— continue  not,  that  is,  to  believe ;  for  faith  is  a  life,  a  habit, — 
surely  ye  shall  not  be  established,"  continue,  that  is,  to  be  established.  As 
faith  decays,  so  also  will  your  feeling  of  stability,  of  security,  be  impaired.  On 
the  contrary,  "  He  that  believeth  " — fives  habitually  in  the  exercise  of  faith — 
"  shall  not  make  haste,"  shall  ever  maintain  a  calm,  undisturbed  repose. 
HI.  There  yet  remains  a  third  aspect  in  which  these  passages  may  be  viewed, 
namely,  in  reference  to  duty,  or  the  work  of  sanctification  generally. 
We  live  in  a  world  of  temptation.  Do  we  need  some  mighty  principle  of  steadfast- 
ness ?  What  is  that  principle  ?  It  is  faith  ;  faith  resting  on  Christ,  and  drawing 
strength  and  stability  from  Him ;  faith  realising  the  love  of  God,  and  enjoying 
it  actually  in  the  soul ;  faith  looking  beyond  this  present  scene  of  things,  and 
bringing  near  to  us  another  and  more  attractive  scene.  I  must  feel  that  the 
grasp  of  the  eternal  God  is  upon  me.  Let  us  have  a  faith  like  this,  and  under 
its  influence  we  shall  act  our  part  in  life,  however  difficult  it  may  be — 1.  With 
calmness  ;  for  we  shall  do  nothing  rashly — we  shall  learn  to  wait.  2.  With  dignity  ; 
for  we  shall  do  all  things  as  in  God's  sight,  and  under  His  protection ;  and  we 
shall  be  raised  immeasurably  above  the  petty  schemes  and  the  little  meannesses 
of  the  people  of  the  world.  3.  With  consistency;  for  having  once  entered  on 
what  we  deem  the  path  of  truth  and  duty,  we  will  follow  it  out.  (Ibid.)  The 
equanimity  of  faith  : — The  Hebrew  word  for  the  "  making  haste  "  means  quite 
as  accurately  the  being  "  ashamed,"  or,  the  being  "  confounded."  Accordingly, 
when  St.  Paul  is  arguing  with  the  Romans  he  sets  forth  Christ  as  the  foundation- 
stone  promised  by  Isaiah,  affirming  that  "  whosoever  believeth  on  Him  shall 
not  be  ashamed  " ;  and  when  St.  Peter  is  exhorting  the  strangers  he  counsels 
them  to  build  themselves  up  "  as  lively  stones  "  on  the  redemption  provided 
in  the  Gospel,  quoting  the  verse  from  the  prophet  as  if  it  stood  thus, — "  He  that 
believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be  confounded.  There  is  wonderful  significance 
in  this  ambiguity,  or,  rather,  interchangeableness  of  meaning.  This  will  be 
our  subject — the  deliberateness,  and,  therefore,  the  solidity  of  all  those  who  are 
"  God's  building."  1.  It  has  really  passed  into  a  truism,  as  regards  temporal 
and  common  affairs,  that  haste  is  dangerous,  and  that  slowness,  for  the  most 
part,  is  sureness.  If  there  be  one  attribute  in  the  works  of  the  Creator  Himself 
more  universal  than  any  other  it  is  that  of  doing  things  by  degrees,  and  never 
despising  in  His  own  government  "  the  day  of  small  things."  Now  take  the 
case  of  the  Christian  on  the  highway  of  the  Gospel.  No  doubt  there  is  one  sense 
in  which  he  travels  with  the  utmost  velocity.  In  the  sense  of  mortality  we  are 
all  "  making  haste."    But  we  limit  you  to  the  moral  pilgrimage  of  the  soul  going 


chap,  xxvin.]  ISAIAH.  541 

towards  Heaven,  with  its  perfection,  whether  of  holiness  or  of  happiness,  and 
we  are  reminded  by  the  very  character  of  a  "  believer  "  named  in  the  text  that 
we  must  avoid  hurry,  or  bustle,  or  impatience.  Faith  in  its  own  nature  consents 
to  travel  slowly,  and  agrees  to  the  interval  between  the  being  "  justified  "  and 
the  being  "  glorified."  There  would  remain  no  one  behind  to  be  the  "  salt  of 
the  earth  "  if  every  new  convert  "  made  haste  "  from  the  mercy-seat  of  repentance 
to  the  land  of  the  palm  and  the  crown.  2.  Now  we  turn  to  the  "  making  haste  " 
considered  rather  as  an  affliction  than  as  an  error,  and  the  "  not  making  haste  " 
rather  as  a  privilege  than  as  a  duty.  There  is  quite  as  much  of  a  promise  as  there 
is  of  a  counsel  in  the  words  we  are  considering,  more  especially  if  you  couple 
them  with  the  New  Testament  paraphrase  about  the  being  "  ashamed  "  and 
the  being  "  confounded."  It  is  not  only  wrong  to  be  impatient  and  neglect 
the  duties  of  the  passing  moment,  it  is,  moreover,  very  distressing  and  very  costly. 
What  is  the  reason  why  some  person  of  your  acquaintance  never  seems  to  be 
at  ease  in  other  people's  company,  carrying  an  appearance  of  perpetual  flutter, 
and  the  crimson  mounting  to  the  face  for  no  reason  at  all  ?  That  is  often  a 
symptom  of  ill-health;  but  the  ill-health  is  generally  the  excess  of  self- 
consciousness — a  morbid  suspicion  that  every  one  is  observing  and  pro 
nouncing  upon  me.  It  is  a  great  affliction,  and  very  often  beyond  very 
much  control ;  but  we  merely  give  it  you  as  a  sign  of  self- absorption 
and  a  token  that  there  is  not  enough  to  depend  upon  in  one's  self  when 
the  features  and  the  manners  of  your  friend  seem  to  be  always  "  making 
haste."  Apply  that  doctrine  higher  up,  to  the  moral  and  spiritual  nature, 
and  you  will  come  at  the  reasons  for  instability,  for  fickleness,  for  sudden 
;  anic,  and  for  half  the  disorders  of  the  Christian  life.  (H.  Christopherson.) 
Unhasting : — I.  The  haste  so  conspicuous  in  modern  society.  1.  In  what  haste 
men  are  to  accumulate  wealth.  2.  How  eager  to  gain  public  recognition.  3.  The 
s-ame  spirit  of  unwise  haste  has  entered  into  the  Christian  Church,  and  exercises 
there  a  baneful  influence.  II.  The  haste  so  conspicuous  in  modern  society  arises 
from  several  causes.  1.  It  may  spring  from  ill -regulated  ambition.  Men 
are  hurried  on  by  impulse  and  passion,  and  reason  oft  yields  to  desire.  2.  There 
is  the  haste  of  rivalry,  due  to  the  strain  of  competition.  3.  There  is  the  haste 
arising  from  the  fear  of  poverty  and  the  hardships  that  poverty  brings.  III.  The 
evil  results  are  palpable  and  grave.  1.  The  injurious  effects  physically  are 
very  obvious.  The  imperfect  development,  the  impaired  vitality  of  men  are  due 
in  no  small  degree  to  the  restless  haste  and  the  rapid  pace  of  life.  It  has  been 
said  that  nervous  diseases,  so  common  in  our  time  and  country,  "  scarcely  exist 
among  barbarians  and  semi-civilised  people,  and  that  the  primary  cause  is  civilisa- 
tion, with  all  its  recent  accompaniments,  the  telegraph,  the  railway,  and  the 
periodical  press,  which  continue  to  draw  each  year  most  severely  on  the  nerves 
of  all  classes  .  .  .  and  have  intensified  in  ten  thousand  ways  cerebral  activity  and 
worry."  The  same  writer  adds,  "  Our  fathers  in  medicine  of  the  last  century, 
if  they  could  be  brought  from  their  graves,  would  have  to  be  told  what  we  mean 
by  nervousness."  Doctors  would  render  yet  greater  service  to  humanity  if  they 
were,  at  least  occasionally,  to  ascend  the  pulpit,  and  taking  as  their  text  "  Do 
thyself  no  harm,"  discourse  to  us  from  the  stores  of  their  experienced  observation 
on  the  manifold  and  increasing  bodily  and  mental  maladies  due  to  the  overstrained 
activity  and  feverish  haste  of  society.  2.  The  intellectual  evils  of  haste  are  also 
many  and  serious.  Through  the  ingenious  but  misleading  theories  thrown  out 
in  haste,  with  imperfect  knowledge,  investigators  have  been  diverted  from  the 
right  track,  and  discoveries  delayed  for  many  years.  "  Haste  slowly  "  is  wise 
counsel.  In  this  age  of  doctrinal  unrest,  a  much  needed  counsel  is  :  Be  slow 
to  part  with  the  old  faiths,  be  cautious  in  the  acceptance  of  new  doctrines.  Close 
not  your  eyes  to  the  light,  but  be  ready  to  receive  the  truth  from  whatever  quarter 
it  may  come.  Remember,  however,  that  all  is  not  gold  that  glitters.  3.  The 
moral  evils  of  haste  in  the  conduct  of  life  also  deserve  earnest  consideration. 
(1)  The  loss  of  opportunity  for  religious  meditation.  (2)  The  developed  selfishness 
due  to  the  ruling  spirit  of  haste.  In  the  common  rush  for  the  prizes  and  pleasures 
of  life,  the  danger  is  that  every  man  should  think  only  of  himself,  and  be  careless 
of  the  claims  and  comfort  of  others.  Conclusion — 1.  Believing  in  God,  you  will 
not  tremble  for  the  safety  of  His  ark.  2.  You  will  not  be  in  danger  of  adopting 
hastily  unspiritual  methods  of  doing  Christ's  work.  Tempted  to  unbelieving 
haste  in  the  conduct  of  religious  work,  let  the  example  of  Jesus  be  remembered. 
{A    Cowe,  31. A.)         The  characteristic  of  our  times  : — There  is  a  great  diversity 


542  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

of  opinion  as  to  the  character  of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  If  one  set  of  critics 
is  to  be  credited,  our  world  is  rushing  to  perdition  at  an  alarming  pace.  Other 
observers  are  sanguine  and  hopeful.  Considering  that  stir  and  activity  are  pre* 
ferable  to  stagnation  and  torpor,  these  persons  see  much  that  is  really  encouraging 
in  the  conflict  of  opinion,  and  are  inclined  to  expect  the  birth  of  a  new  and  brighter 
era  out  of  the  throes  of  the  period  through  which  we  are  passing.  Our  day  is  one 
in  which  men  emphatically  "  make  haste."  In  the  passage  to  which  the  text 
belongs,  a  contrast  seems  to  be  drawn  between  those  persons  who  construct  some 
refuge  of  their  own  to  protect  them  from  the  ills  of  life,  and  those  others  who  are 
willing  to  avail  themselves  of  that  well-built  and  well-founded  house  which  the 
Lord  God  hath  provided  for  them ;  and  then  the  dismay  and  disappointment  of 
the  one  party,  when  their  expectations  are  found  to  deceive  them,  are  contrasted 
with  the  calm  security  and  confidence  of  the  other.  But,  we  will  take  up,  from 
the  surface  of  the  text,  this  idea — that  if  a  man  believes  in  God,  and  trusts  in  God, 
and  will  consent  to  work  on  the  lines  which  God  has  laid  down,  he  will  be  saved 
from  that  restless,  worldly  agitation  of  mind  which  produces  so  frequently  such 
calamitous  results.  Let  us  notice,  in  one  or  two  particulars,  how  this  desirable 
state  of  things  will  be  brought  about.  I.  As  to  temporal  matters.  I  have 
been  told,  that  as  business-life  is  constituted  now,  it  is  impossible  for  a  man,  if 
he  would  "  hold  his  own,"  to  act  in  entire  accordance  with  the  dictates  of  an 
enlightened  conscience ;  that  competiton  is  so  keen  and  risks  so  great,  and  the  area 
of  labour  so  crowded,  that  a  man  cannot  make  his  footing  good  without  resorting, 
at  least  in  some  matters,  to  tricks,  and  evasions,  and  subterfuges,  and  misrepresenta- 
tions, which  shock  his  moral  sense,  and  which  he  cannot,  without  much  difficulty, 
persuade  himself  at  first  to  practise.  Now  why  do  men  maintain  that  it  is  an 
impossible  thing  to  obey  conscience  in  matters  of  business  T  The  root  lies  here — 
in  the  want  of  full  belief  in  God.  If  I  believed  that  God  went  partners  with  the 
devil  in  the  management  of  the  world,  then  it  would  be  quite  consistent  for  me  to 
try  to  appease  Satan  by  acknowledging  his  co-ordinate  authority,  and  falling  in 
with  his  ways.  But  if  I  believed  that  God  was  the  Ruler  of  the  universe, — that 
He  was  continually  working  and  continually  upholding  the  right, — I  should  be 
saved  from  these  sad  and  painful  deviations  from  the  path  of  rectitude  ;  because 
I  should  be  perfectly  satisfied,  that  he  who  did  the  right,  at  whatever  cost,  and 
left  the  matter  in  God's  hands,  would  be  sure  to  be  borne  harmless  in  the  end. 
Much  of  the  feverish  restlessness  of  the  present  day  arises  from  a  real,  but 
unavowed  and  perhaps  unconscious  distrust  of  the  results  of  honest,  conscientious 
work.  The  idea  is  too  frequently  entertained,  that  merely  to  work  does  not 
answer  ;  and  that  work  must  be  supplemented  and  made  successful  by  something 
else.  This  feeling  is,  in  its  root,  distrust  of  God.  II.  We  turn,  now,  to  spiritual 
matters.  I  know  that,  at  a  time  like  this,  there  must  be  discussion  amongst 
young  men  on  points  affecting  the  very  foundation  of  our  holy  religion. 
But  I  am  not  inclined  to  make  the  circumstance  a  subject  of  unmixed 
lamentation.  "Easily  gotten;  soon  parted  with,"  —  applies  to  religion  as 
well  as  to  other  things.  At  the  same  time,  I  dread  that  discussion  which 
never  seems  to  get  beyond  discussion.  The  purpose  for  which  we  are 
placed  in  the  world  is  not  that  we  should  be  for  ever  asking  questions, 
and  raising  and  solving  doubts,  —  but  that  we  should  be  living  a  life.  But 
how  can  that  be  accomplished,  unless  we  have  fixed  principles  to  start  from  t 
Do  I  wish  to  be  a  geometrician  T  I  shall  make  very  little  progress  if  I  am  per- 
petually employed  in  discussing  and  settling,  in  arranging  and  re-arranging  my 
axioms  and  definitions.  And  how  am  I  to  be  advancing  with  that  life  which 
is  to  be  the  seed  plot  of  my  eternity,  if  I  go  on,  month  after  month,  year  after 
year,  unable  to  settle  anything  T  Contrast  with  this  vacillation  and  incertitude 
the  condition  of  the  man  who  believeth."  When  a  strain  comes  upon  him,  he 
has  not  to  run  helplessly  hither  and  thither,  seeking  for  principles  to  sustain  him 
in  the  hour  of  trial.  He  has  got  his  principles,  and  they  are  ready  for  use.  In 
other  words,  he  believes  in  the  living  God,  and  therefore  he  does  not  "  make 
haste."  III.  The  man  who  believes  in  a  living:  God  will  not  be  pull  of 
nbbvous  apprehensions  about  the  puture  of  Christianity.  Men  may  break 
themselves  to  pieces  against  the  Rock  of  Ages,  but  the  Rock  itself  will  never  move. 
(<?.  Calthrop,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  line. — God's  judgments : — I.  The 
Lord  ponders,  with  most  exact  attention,  all  the  distinctions  of  characters, 


chap,  xxvm.]  ISAIAH.  543 

times,  and  circumstances;  all  the  various  motives  both  to  lenity  and  severity. 
II.  He  acts  in  a  manner  suited  to  His  perfect  knowledge.  (R.  Macculloch.) 
Mercy  and  judgment:  —  Upon  the  roses  of  grace  grow  the  thorns  of  justice. 
Whenever  the  Lord  bares  HiB  arm  for  mercy  towards  believers  He  gives  a  back 
stroke  to  His  enemies.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Privilege  and  responsibility: — A 
great  privilege  involves  a  great  responsibility.  It  is  a  very  high  favour  to  see 
the  foundation  which  God  has  laid  in  Zion  and  to  be  exhorted  to  build  upon  it ; 
but  of  those  who  reject  that  foundation  vengeance  will  be  exacted.  (Ibid.) 
Refuges  of  lies  and  what  will  become  of  them : — I.  The  Lord  judging  man's  refuges. 
He  says,  Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet." 
Observe  that,  however  carelessly  we  may  judge  ourselves,  God  will  not  so  judge 
us.  His  survey  is  performed  with  the  utmost  accuracy.  There  are  three  ways 
by  which  we  may  judge  whether  our  confidences  are  refuges  of  lies  or  not. 
(1)  If  they  are  sate  hiding-places  they  are  founded  upon  Christ.  "  Behold,  I  lay 
in  Zion,"  &c.  (2)  If  our  confidence  be  a  right  one  it  comes  to  us  through  faith 
(ver.  16).  If  your  hope  is  grounded  upon  sight,  or  feeling,  or  working,  it  will 
one  day  fail  you.  (3)  A  third  test  seems  to  me  to  be  proposed  in  my  text. 
"Judgment  will  I  lay  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet."  Here, 
then,  is  the  test  of  righteousness.  If  our  hope  is  sound,  it  is  a  holy,  sanctifying 
hope,  which  purges  us  from  sin,  and  breeds  in  us  all  that  is  true  and  good.  We 
shall  now  apply  these  tests  to  certain  refuges  which  I  am  sure  will  turn  out  to  be 
refuges  of  lies.  1.  The  first  is  the  hope  which  some  men  ground  upon  their  own 
moral  goodness.  It  will  not  stand  trial  by  the  first  plummet ;  it  is  not  based 
upon  the  foundation  which  God  has  laid.  Try  the  second  touch  stone  as  to  faith. 
Your  hope  is  not  based  on  faith  in  Jesus ;  you  have  no  faith  except  in  yourself. 
Moreover,  is  not  this  plea  of  moral  goodness  a  falsehood  from  top  to  bottom  ? 
Recollect  that  even  if  your  outward  life  may  have  been  correct,  God  regards  the 
heart,  and  takes  account  of  the  inner  life.  2.  A  number  of  persons  make  a  refuge 
for  themselves  out  of  the  notion  of  fate.  This  would  not  endure  one  of  the  tests 
and  assuredly  not  the  last,  for  its  tendency  is  to  deny  all  moral  obligation,  and 
hence  it  is  no  friend  to  holiness.  It  deliberately  charges  God  with  the  creature's 
sin,  and  makes  out  the  sinner  to  be  the  injured  person.  3.  The  third  shelter 
of  lies  which  many  fly  to  is  a  hope  based  upon  novel  doctrines.  So  far  as  my 
observation  goes,  these  modern  notions  go  with  looseness  of  life,  with  world- 
liness  of  heart,  with  decay  of  prayerfulness,  and  with  backsliding  from  the  living 
God.  4.  We  have  another  brood  of  men  whose  refuge  is  that  they  make  a 
profession  of  religion.  5.  Let  me  speak  a  word  concerning  certain  who  have  a 
hope  of  being  saved  which  does  not  sanctify  them.  6.  Some,  too,  make  a  refuge 
of  their  old  experience.  A  true  experience  continues  and  grows  day  by  day. 
II.  Picture  the  destruction  of  these  refuges  of  lies.  A  man  has  been 
very  comfortable  in  one  or  other  of  these  refuges  for  a  good  number  of  years, 
but  at  last  he  is  getting  old,  and  is  laid  aside  to  think  ;  infirmities  are  increasing, 
death  is  drawing  nigh,  and  he  takes  a  look  into  the  dark  future.  He  finds  himself 
facing  an  eternal  state,  and  has  need  of  all  his  confidences  and  hopes  to  sustain 
him.  Now,  what  happens  ?  His  spirit  undergoes  a  great  storm,  and  what  is 
the  result  ?  Does  he  dwell  in  a  fortress  which  defies  the  hurricane  ?  No,  his 
shelter  is  so  frail  that,  according  to  the  text,  "  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the 
refuges  of  lies."  A  cold,  hard  tru  t  h  falls  from  Heaven  like  a  hailstone,  and  crashes 
right  through  the  glass  roof  of  his  false  confidence.  He  looks  up  astonished, 
and,  lo !  another  and  another  forgotten  truth  descends  with  like  violence  and 
crushes  through  all  opposition  till  it  smites  his  soul  Down  falls  all  his  comfort 
and  peace  of  mind,  as  hailstone  after  hailstone  pounds  all  his  hope  to  pieces. 
"  After  all,  I  never  was  born  again,  and  the  Scripture  hath  well  said,  *  Ye  must 
be  born  again.'  I  never  yielded  up  my  selfishness,  and  I  cannot  be  saved  unless 
Christ  is  my  King.  I  did  not  really  close  in  with  Christ  and  cast  my  naked  soul 
on  Him."  Another  impressive  picture  is  set  before  us.  "  The  flood  shall  over- 
flow his  hiding-place."  Imagine  one  who,  in  the  time  of  Noah's  flood,  does  not 
choose  to  enter  into  the  ark,  for  he  does  not  care  to  be  tied  down  to  God's  way 
of  deliverance.  He  wants  a  more  philosophic  way.  Besides,  he  does  not  care 
to  be  cooped  up  with  Noah  and  a  handful  of  narrow-minded  people,  who  shut 
themselves  in  and  shut  everybody  else  out.  He  has  broader  views,  and  therefore 
he  has  found  a  shelter  on  the  side  of  the  hill,  in  a  great  cave  where  thousands 
can  assemble,  and  enjoy  a  liberty  denied  them  within  the  pale  of  the  ark.  It 
is  utterly  preposterous  to  suppose  the  flood  will  ever  reach  so  high  as  this  elevated 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai    xxvnr. 

cave.  After  a  day  or  two  of  extraordinary  rain  the  man  would  look  down  from 
his  hiding-place  and  see  the  waters  covering  all  the  lower  area,  and  creeping  up 
the  valleys  foot  by  foot,  and  he  would  remark  upon  the  abundance  of  rain,  but 
scoff  at  the  idea  of  a  general  deluge.  He  would  be  easy,  hoping  that  the  rain 
would  cease,  but  as  it  continued  he  would  begin  to  think,  "  I  may  not  be  quite 
so  safe  after  all."  Imagine  his  horror  when  the  flood  at  last  fills  up  the  ravine,  and 
creeps  up  the  rocky  steep.  With  cruel  lip,  seeking  his  destruction,  the  water 
threatens  the  cave  wherein  he  thought  to  dwell  so  safely.  At  last  it  penetrates 
his  hiding-place,  it  climbs  to  the  very  roof,  it  sweeps  over  his  head,  and  his  false 
confidence  has  proved  his  ruin.  Such  will  be  the  end  of  all  who  hide  themselves, 
but  hide  not  in  Christ.  I  will  tell  you  in  what  fashion  this  overthrow  will  come. 
First,  the  mirth  of  the  mind  is  damped  with  doubt.  The  man  does  not  feel  so 
easy  as  he  used  to  be ;  he  is  afraid  that  God's  Word  may  be  true,  and  that  things 
will  go  amiss  with  him.  Soon  the  doubt  has  oozed  into  his  refuge,  and  become 
a  pool  of  fear:  the  man  is  sadly  afraid,  and  the  dread  saturates  and  dissolves 
all  his  joy.  The  truth  of  God's  Word  still  further  comes  home  to  his  conscience, 
and  he  begins  to  be  more  and  more  alarmed :  nor  does  he  continue  long  in  one 
stay,  for  he  is  growingly  distressed,  the  waters  are  evidently  advancing  upon  him 
and  he  cannot  escape.  He  has  come  to  be  altogether  dismayed,  he  hardly  knows 
what  will  become  of  him ;  and  within  a  little  while,  unless  God's  mercy  shall 
prevent  and  enable  him  to  find  the  true  shelter,  he  will  be  drenched  in  despair 
and  washed  away  in  terror.  At  last  he  cannot  believe  that  there  is  any  salvation 
possible  for  him.  III.  The  lesson  op  warning.  Let  us  build  on  God's  founda- 
tion. He  knows  better  than  we  do  what  is  right  and  safe.  (Ibid.)  God' a 
careful  tests  of  character: — An  ordinary  builder  who  should  be  sent  to  examine 
a  house  would  probably  content  himself  with  hastily  looking  to  see  whether  the 
walls  were  perpendicular,  and  whether  the  work  was  of  the  quantity  and  quality 
specified  in  the  contract ;  he  could  tell  this  pretty  nearly  with  his  eye,  or  by 
measuring  with  his  foot ;  but  if  a  very  careful  and  scientific  survey  was  wanted, 
he  would  then  produce  his  plummet  and  his  line,  and  try  everything  by  the  regular 
accepted  tests  of  builder's  work :  hence  our  text  describes  the  Lord  as  laying 
judgment  to  the  line  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet ;  that  is  to  say,  He  makes 
a  deliberate  trial  of  our  confidences,  compares  our  hopes  with  our  conduct,  our 
beliefs  with  the  truth,  and  our  expectations  with  the  facts  of  the  case.  Oh,  that 
we  might  have  grace  to  invite  such  a  test  at  once  by  praying,  "  Search  me,  0  God, 
and  know  my  heart ;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts."  If  the  Lord  will  help  us 
to  know  ourselves  now  it  will  save  us  from  a  sad  discovery  at  the  last.  (Ibid.) 
The  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  lies. — Refuges  of  lies  : — It  is  very  remark- 
able to  what  an  extent  men  will  deceive  themselves  on  the  subject  of  religion.  In 
connection  with  this  subject,  more  than  any  other,  we  find  the  most  remarkable 
cases  of  self-delusion :  they  are  so  very  remarkable  sometimes,  as  to  appear 
altogether  incredible.  I.  A  false  refuge  in  which  many  indulge  is  a  selfish 
religion.  Selfishness  in  any  form  is  in  exact  opposition  to  religion.  It  makes 
no  difference  as  to  the  type  which  selfishness  pnts  on.  The  question  is,  does  a 
man  make  his  own  interest  the  object  of  pursuit  ?  If  so,  such  conduct  is  the 
exact  opposite  of  that  benevolence  which  Christ  manifested,  when  He  laid  Himself 
out  for  the  good  of  mankind  and  the  glory  of  God.  We  should  love  God  for  what 
God  is,  and  we  should  love  our  neighbours  as  ourselves.  Where  there  is  true 
religion  it  will  manifest  itself  in  prayer,  praise,  and  obedience.  It  will  manifest 
itself  with  respect  to  God  in  efforts  to  please  Him,  to  honour  Him,  and  to  glorify 
Him,  and  an  earnest  desire  to  secure  the  love,  confidence,  and  obedience  of  all 
men.  It  is  not  selfishness  for  a  man  to  have  a  proper  regard  for  his  own  salvation ; 
but  it  is  for  him  to  regard  his  own  salvation  only,  and  care  not  for  the  salvation 
of  his  neighbour.  Further,  this  is  the  true  way  for  a  man  to  secure  his  own 
salvation;  by  caring  for  the  salvation  of  others.  "  Whosoever  will  save  his  life," 
said  Christ,  shall  lose  it ;  but  whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  My  sake  shall  find  it." 
II.  Another  refuge  of  lies  to  which  mankind  betake  themselves  is  religious 
impulse.  This  is  a  prevailing  form  of  selfishness.  This  delusion  consists  in 
appealing  to  the  feelings  instead  of  to  God's  law  as  developed  in  the  conscience 
ana  reason.  Such  persons  as  these  think  themselves  very  religious,  because 
they  feel  deeply  upon  the  subject.  Let  the  circumstances  subside  which  excited 
their  feelings,  and  you  see  that  they  have  not  the  root  of  the  matter  within  them. 
ILL  Others  have  a  hire  religion  of  opinion,  which  is  just  the  opposite  of  a 
religion  of  impulse.     These  opinions  do  not  mould  their  lives.     IV.  Another 


chap,  xxvm.]  ISAIAH.  545 

refuge  of  lies  is  the  religion  of  sectarianism.  V.  Another  refuge  of  lies  is 
having  regard  to  what  is  outward,  the  performance  of  certain  external  actions 
without  love  to  God  in  the  heart.  There  are  a  great  many  men  who  think  them- 
selves very  religious  because  they  pay  their  debts.  (G.O.Finney.)  Refuges 
of  lies : — It  is  certain  that,  from  the  time  of  Adam  down  to  the  present  day, 
thousands  have  taken  refuge  from  the  threatenings  of  God's  wrath  beneath 
the  lies  of  the  Evil  One.  I.  You  say,  "  If  I  am  elect  I  shall  be  saved,  do  what  I 
may ;  but  if  I  am  not  elect  I  must  be  damned,  do  what  I  will ;  and,  therefore, 
there  is  no  use  in  my  trying  to  do  anything."  Election  is  not  iron  fate,  but 
unutterable  love.  Do  you  act  in  this  manner  about  carnal  things  ?  A  friend 
invites  you  to  dinner ;  the  table  is  spread  before  you.  You  are  asked  to  sit 
down.  Stop,"  you  say,  "  does  not  God  know  everything  ?  "  "  Yes,"  says 
your  friend.  "  Well,"  you  say,  "  God  knows  whether  I  shall  eat  this  food  or 
not :  so  it's  all  fixed,  and  I  can't  alter  it ;  and  if  I  am  not  to  eat  that  dinner, 
I  cannot  eat  it,  even  though  I  were  to  try  to  eat  it :  whereas,  if  I  am  to  eat  it, 
I  must  eat  it,  even  though  I  were  to  rise  and  leave  the  room  and  try  to  go  without 
it;  and,  therefore,  I  will  sit  still  and  do  nothing."  Would  you  reason  thus  T 
If  not,  why  say,  when  God  lays  the  "  Bread  of  Life  "  before  you,  "  If  I  am 
to  eat  of  the  Bread  of  Life,  I  must,  do  what  I  may ;  if  I  am  not  to  partake  of 
it,  I  cannot,  do  what  I  will ;  and,  therefore,  I  will  sit  still  awl  do  nothing  "  ?  If 
Christ  does  not  really  offer  to  save  you  I  have  nothing  further  to  say,  but  you  admit 
He  does.  II.  "  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God."  If  that  is  all  your  trust  it  is  "  a 
refuge  of  lies."  You  answer,  Is  not  God  merciful  ?  More  merciful  than  you  can 
conceive,  but  it  will  not  do  to  trust  in  the  mere  mercy  of  God.  God's  mercy 
will  not  save  you  till  you  are  inside  the  tower  of  refuge,  Christ  Jesus.  III.  "  We 
do  the  best  we  can."  What !  You  do  the  best  you  can  T  Then  you  are  safe. 
If  you  really  have  done  the  best  you  could  to  this  present  hour,  you  are  this 
moment  as  safe  as  the  angel  Gabriel.  But  will  you  solemnly  declare  that  you 
have  never  sinned  ?  Ah  no  !  The  best  thing  you  can  do  is  to  look  to  what 
another  has  done  for  you,  even  Jesus  !  IV.  Some  are  flattering  themselves 
that  they  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  in  the  road  to  Heaven,  while  they  are 
without  that  faith  which  alone  can  save  the  soul.  Let  me  ask  you  who  say, 
"  I  do  believe,"  what  it  is  you  believe  that  can  justify  you  ?  You  say,  "  I  believe 
that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  teach  us  the  way  to  Heaven."  So  did 
that  young  man  who  came  to  Christ  of  old.  You  answer,  I  believe  in  the  great 
judgment  to  come."  So  did  Felix,  when  Paul  stood  before  him  "  and  leasoned 
of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come."  You  answer,  "  I  believe 
that  Jesus  was  the  innocent  sufferer  for  the  guilty,  and  that  He  is  truly  the  Son  of 
God."  So  did  Judas.  You  answer,  "  I  believe  that  Jesus  died  that  He  might 
save  sinners,  and  rose  to  glory  everlasting."  So  did  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  Do 
3  ou  ask,  at  last,  what  am  I  to  believe,  that  I  may  be  saved  ?  What  did  that 
dying  thief  believe  who  went  to  Heaven  ?  More  than  either  Judas  or  Satan. 
Did  he  not  believe  that  Jesus  was  his  own  Saviour,  and  did  he  not  confidently 
trust  in  Him  that  He  would  bear  him  in  everlasting  remembrance,  and  did  he 
not  call  Him  "  Lord  "  ?  V.  "  I  must  wait  God's  time."  The  solemn  truth  is, 
Christ  is  waiting  for  you.  Did  you  ever  read  His  own  words  ?  "  Behold,  I  stand 
at  the  door  and  knock."  Is  not  that  waiting  ?  VI.  "  We  know  all  this  is  true, 
and  we  mean  to  turn,  but  there  is  time  enough  yet."  Oh,  the  unreasonableness 
of  your  course  !  Why  would  you  turn  by  and  by  T  1.  Because  Christ  beseeches 
you  ?  And  does  not  He  as  much  beseech  you  now  T  And  will  you  not  grieve 
and  insult  Him  by  delaying  ?  2.  Because  God  commands  you  ?  And  does  He 
not  as  much  command  you  now  ?  And  are  you  not  disobeying  and  defying  Him 
by  delaying  ?  3.  Because  danger  threatens  you  ?  And  is  not  death  behind 
your  back  even  now?  (H.  Grattan  Guinness.)  Befuges  of  lies: — All  men 
know  themselves  to  be  sinners  against  God.  They  know  also  that,  as  sinners, 
they  are  in  peril.  Hence  their  anxiety  to  find  some  refuge  for  safety.  They 
know  they  might  find  this  in  the  way  of  forsaking  sin  and  turning  to  the  Lord ; 
but  they  do  not  choose  to  forsake  their  sins.  Hence  there  seems  to  be  no  <  travenient 
resource  but  to  hide  themselves  under  some  refuge.  It  is  obvious  that  men 
who  resort  to  lies  for  a  refuge  regard  those  lies  not  as  lies,  but  as  troth.  Thi3 
fact  leads  us  to  raise  the  primary  fundamental  question,  Have  we  any  rule  or 
standard  which  will  show  what  is  truth,  and  what  is  falsehood  ?  Men  have 
countless  opinions  about  religion  ;  how  can  we  determine  which  are  true  and 
which  not  true  ?     We  have  an  infallible  test.     Salvation,  to  be  real  and  Available, 

35 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvm. 

must  be  salvation  from  sin.  Again,  if  it  does  not  beget  prayer,  does  not  unify 
us  with  God,  and  bring  us  into  fellowship  and  sympathy  with  Him,  it  is  a  li». 
If  it  does  not  produce  a  heavenly  mind,  and  expel  a  worldly  mind,  it  is  a  lie.  Here 
*I  must  notice  an  objection.  It  is  said,  The  Gospel  does  not,  in  fact,  do  for  men 
all  you  claim.  It  does  not  make  professed  Christians  heavenly  minded,  dead 
to  the  world,  full  of  love,  joy,  and  peace.  I  reply,  Here  is  medicine  which,  applied 
in  a  given  disease,  will  certainly  cure.  But  it  must  be  fairly  applied.  So  with 
the  Gospel.  I.  I  will  now  proceed  to  name  some  things  that  lack  this  decisive 
characteristic.  They  do  not  save  the  soul  from  sin.  1.  An  unsanctifying 
hope  of  Heaven.  2.  An  old  experience,  that  is  all  old.  3.  There  are  two  forms 
of  self-righteousness — the  legal  and  the  Gospel — both  of  which  are  refuges  of  lies. 
The  legal  depends  on  duty-doing — evermore  trying  to  work  out  salvation  by  deeds 
of  law.  The  Gospel  form  sets  itself  to  get  grace  by  works.  4.  Universalism. 
II.  And  now  take  notice  of  what  God  says.  "  The  hail  shall  sweep  away 
the  refuge  of  lies,  and  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  hiding-place."  This  hail 
is  the  symbol  of  God's  displeasure.  It  is  fit  that  God  should  be  displeased  with 
these  refuges  of  lies.  He  loves  truth  too  well  to  have  the  least  sympathy  with 
lies.  He  loves  the  souls  of  men  too  deeply  to  have  any  patience  with  agencies 
so  destructive.  The  waters,  He  declares,  shall  overflow  the  hiding-places.  Every 
resort  that  leaves  the  soul  in  sin  is  a  hiding-place.  1.  All  religious  affectation  is 
such,  and  is  nothing  better.  2.  So  of  all  religious  formality — going  through 
the  forms  of  worship,  being  in  the  Church,  being  baptized — what  avails  it  all 
unless  their  piety  be  instinct  with  life  and  that  life  be  the  soul  of  real  holiness  T 
3.  A  great  many  people  hide  in  the  Church.  4.  Others  hide  under  the  plea  of  a 
sinful  nature.  They  are  naturally  unable  to  do  anything.  5.  Some  dodge  under 
professors  of  religion.     (C.  O.  Finney.) 

Ver.  20.  For  the  bed  is  shorter  than  that  a  man  can  stretch  himself  on  it. — The 
short  bed  and  the  narrow  covering : — The  Jewish  beds  were  only  mattresses,  laid 
on  the  floor ;  and  the  cover  was  a  sheet,  or  carpet,  laid  over  it,  in  which  the  person 
wrapped  himself.  In  this  adage,  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  condition  of  one  who, 
being  weary  and  inclined  to  rest,  goes  to  bed,  that  he  may  get  refreshing  repose. 
Having  betaken  himself  to  a  bed  that  is  too  short  for  him,  and  having  got  a  covering 
that  is  too  narrow  to  wrap  himself  in,  he  is  disappointed  of  the  comfortable  rest 
that  he  expected  to  enjoy  ;  and,  instead  of  getting  agreeable  warmth  and  refresh- 
ment, he  becomes  cold,  restless,  and  uneasy.  This  painful  state  represents  the 
distressed,  disappointed  condition  of  those  who  hide  themselves  under  falsehood 
and  refuges  of  lies,  in  order  to  obtain  either  temporal  or  spiritual  deliverance. 
The  truth  of  this  aphorism,  thus  explained,  was  exemplified  in  the  Jews,  who 
resorted  to  other  expedients  for  safety  than  Divine  wisdom  had  ordained,  and 
found  all  their  expectations  frustrated.  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  The  growth  of 
religious  conception : — This  proverb  of  Isaiah  about  the  growth  of  religious  concep- 
tion has  had  many  applications.  Again  and  again  it  has  happened  since  Isaiah's 
time  that  the  framework  of  theological  theory  formed  by  the  intellect  has  become 
too  narrow  for  the  growing  knowledge  and  spirit  of  man ;  and  there  has  followed 
the  discomfort,  the  strain,  the  struggle,  the  stretching  or  the  dissolution  of  conven- 
tional beliefs,  and  out  of  them  the  reconstruction  on  a  larger  scale  of  a  theology 
that  somewhat  inadequately  expresses  the  actual  revelation  to  man  of  the  Unseen 
and  the  Divine.  The  foundations  of  religion  are  ever  the  same — the  elementary 
force  in  the  heart  of  man,  the  sense  of  weakness,  of  sin,  of  fear ;  the  upward 
reaching  of  man  to  the  unattainable  God,  and  the  blessed  shining  downwards 
of  God  into  the  heart  of  man.  But  the  speculations,  the  imagery,  the  language 
of  theology  have  varied  with  human  knowledge,  and  are  varying  now  before 
our  eyes.  (J.  M.  Wilson,  D.D.)  The  expansion  of  the  Jewish  conception  of 
God : — It  was  in  Isaiah's  age  that,  for  the  first  time,  the  Jews  became  pressingly 
conscious  of  their  own  littleness  compared  with  the  vast  nations  that  pressed 
on  them  from  either  side.  They  lay  between  the  vast  continental  empires  of 
Assyria  and  Egypt,  and  in  the  grasp  of  these  great  barbaric,  almost  inhuman 
forces,  they  felt  themselves  as  nothing.  There  was,  for  the  first  time,  a  painful 
contrast  between  the  political  insignificance  of  the  Jews  and  their  boundless 
pretensions  to  the  favour  of  Jehovah,  the  Lord  of  hosts.  They  were  stricken 
with  terror.  But  Isaiah  was  inspired  with  heavenly  wisdom  to  see  that  the  agony 
of  the  terror  sprang  rather  from  the  theology  of  the  Jews  than  from  the  might 
of  their  enemies,  for  their  theology  was,  in  brief,  this — that  Jehovah  was  the  God 


chap,  xxvm.]  ISAIAH.  547 

of  the  Jews  only,  and  that  the  Assyrian  was  the  foe  of  God.  They  now  saw  that 
he  might  be  the  victorious  foe.  To  them  the  victory  of  the  Assyrian  would  be 
the  defeat  of  God  and  the  shattering  of  their  faith,  and  it  seemed  inevitable.  It 
was  the  undivine,  the  material,  relentlessly  crushing  God  that  they  deemed 
Divine ;  it  led  straight  to  practical  atheism.  Now,  Isaiah  dared  to  think  and 
to  see  that  God  was  the  God  of  the  Assyrians  also,  that  He  wielded  their  forces 
in  His  hand,  and  that  His  one  supreme  aim  was  righteousness,  and  not  favour 
to  Israel ;  it  was  an  extension  of  their  theology,  beyond  what  they  could  bear. 
It  was  not  only  latitudinarian ;  it  was  absurd.  They  ridiculed  him  and  his 
message,  and  finally,  it  is  said,  they  put  him  to  death.  But,  nevertheless,  Isaiah 
had  a  vision  of  a  iruth  which  the  world  has  now  made  its  own — that  God's  pro- 
vidence extends  to  all  mankind,  and  that  no  nation  and  no  Church  can  monopolise 
God's  blessing  and  protection,  and  that  God  has  one  moral  aim  only — the  growth 
of  righteousness  and  the  coming  of  His  kingdom  on  earth.  He  thus  extended 
his  conception  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Present  day  need  :  a  larger  conception  of  God  : — 
The  terror  of  our  time  to  those  who  feel  it  is  the  aggregate  of  the  brute  unspiritual 

f)owers  of  nature,  whether  of  human  passion  or  material  force,  in  whose  cease- 
ess  whirl  man  seems  to  be  a  mere  plaything.  Our  Assyria  is  materialism.  We 
may  learn  from  Isaiah  how  to  meet  it— not  by  denying  the  existence  of  these  forces, 
or  underrating  them  or  their  mystery,  but  by  enlarging  our  conception  of  God. 
Perhaps  if  God  would  give  England  an  Isaiah  now,  his  message  would  be  the 
consecration  of  natural  forces,  a  declaration  that  all  things  are  working  towards 
a  spiritual  end  for  the  coming  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Expansion  m 
theology  and  religion  : — We  need  to  expand  also  our  whole  conception  of  theology 
and  of  religion,  giving  it  a  wider  foundation  in  human  nature  and  in  facts,  and 
thus  making  faith  more  obviously  compatible  with  intellectual  honesty.  (Ibid.y 
The  lengthening  of  the  bed,  the  widening  of  the  covering,  is  generally  effected  without 
a  fracture  or  a  rent.  It  is  altered  partly  by  the  infusion  of  new  life  and  meaning 
by  the  spiritual  interpretation  of  what  were  thought  to  be  physical  and  scientifio 
statements,  partly  by  the  transference  of  emphasis  from  worship  to  life,  partly 
by  the  ever-varying  meaning  assigned  to  old  words  and  old  forms.  Jehovah 
did  not  cease  to  be  Jehovah  when  the  Jews  ceased  to  regard  Him  as  the  God  of 
the  Jews  only.  (Ibid.)  A  word  of  caution  to  the  enthusiast  for  an  enlarged 
and  scientific  theology,  and  for  what  might  seem  to  him  a  rational  religion.  It 
cannot  be  invented  prematurely  ;  it  must  grow  as  daylight  grows,  and  this  is  a 
very  slow  and  gradual  process.  (Ibid.)  The  bed  and  its  covering  : — God  has 
6o  made  men,  that  there  are  two  things  essential  for  their  comfort,  if  not  for  their 
very  existence,  namely,  sleep  and  clothing.  Man's  bocty  is,  after  all,  only  a  picture 
of  his  inner  being ;  just  what  the  body  needs  materially,  that  the  soul  needs 
spiritually.  It  requires  rest,  which  is  pictured  to  us  in  sleep.  And  it  needs 
covering ;  the  naked  soul  would  be  unhappy,  noxious  to  the  eye  of  God,  and 
utterly  miserable  in  itself.  I.  Men  try  to  make  beds  on  which  their  souxs 
may  rest.  One  of  the  most  uncomfortable  things  in  the  world,  I  should  think, 
would  be  a  spare  bed — a  bed  so  spare  that  a  man  should  not  have  room  to  stretch 
himself  on  it.  But  that  is  just  the  condition  of  all  men  while  they  are  seeking 
a  rest  anywhere  else  but  in  the  "rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. 
1.  As  to  the  present  world,  how  many  beds  are  there  of  man's  own  invention. 

(1)  One  man  has  made  himself  a  bedstead  of  gold  ;  the  pillars  thereof  are  of  silver, 
the  covering  thereof  is  of  Tyrian  purple,  the  pillows  are  filled  with  down,  such  as 
only  much  fine  gold  could  buy  him ;  the  hangings  he  hath  embroidered  with 
threads  of  gold  and  silver,  and  the  curtains  are  drawn  upon  rings  of  ivory.  Lo, 
this  man  hath  ransacked  creation  for  luxuries,  and  invented  to  himself  all  manner 
of  sumptuous  delights.  He  becomes  a  merchant  prince,  a  millionaire,  and  he 
says  unto  himself,  "  Soul,  take  thine  ease ;  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry ;  thou  hast 
much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years."  If  he  makes  riches  his  God,  and  seeks  in 
them  his  happiness,  you  never  find  the  man  has  money  enough,  his  lands  axe  still 
too  narrow  and  his  estate  too  small.  The  soul  is  wider  than  creation,  broader 
than  space ;  give  it  all,  it  would  be  still  unsatisfied,  and  man  would  not  find  rest. 

(2)  Other  men  have  been  ambitious.  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  if  I  might  be  famous, 
what  would  I  not  do  ?  Oh,  if  my  name  might  be  handed  down  to  posterity,  as 
having  done  something,  and  having  been  somebody,  a  man  of  note,  how  satisfied 
would  I  be  1  "  And  the  man  has  so  acted,  that  he  has  at  last  made  for  himself 
a  bed  of  honour.  He  has  become  famous.  But  did  you  ever  read  the  history 
of  famous  men,  or  hear  them  tell  their  tale  in  secret  ?     "  Uneasy  lies  the  head 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvnr. 

that  wears  the  crown,''  even  though  it  be  the  laurel  coronet  of  honour.  When 
the  nan  is  known,  it  is  not  enough  ;  he  asks  for  wider  praise.  (3)  There  is  another 
bed  on  which  man  thinks  he  could  rest.  There  is  a  witch,  a  painted  harlot,  who 
wears  the  richest  gems  in  her  ears,  and  a  necklace  of  precious  things  about  her 
neck.  Her  name  is  Madam  Wanton.  She  keeps  a  house  wherein  she  feasteth 
men,  and  maketh  them  drunken  with  the  wine  of  pleasure,  which  is  as  honey  to 
the  taste,  but  is  venom  to  the  soul.  This  witch,  when  she  can,  entices  men  into 
her  bed.  (4)  You  may  have  all  the  vices  and  pleasure  and  mirth  of  this  metropolis, 
and  when  you  have  it  all,  you  will  find  it  does  not  equal  your  expectation  nor 
satisfy  your  desires.  When  the  devil  is  bringing  you  one  cup  of  spiced  wine, 
you  will  be  asking  him  next  time  to  spice  it  higher ;  and  he  will  flavour  it  to  your 
fiery  taste,  but  you  will  be  dissatisfied  still,  until  at  last,  if  he  were  to  bring  you 
a  cup  hot  as  damnation,  it  would  fall  tasteless  on  your  palate.  Now  think  of 
the  Christian,  and  see  the  picture  reversed.  In  the  Christian  religion  there  is 
a  rest  that  no  one  can  enjoy  elsewhere.  And  now  let  me  stretch  myself  upon 
this  bed.  Let  me  think  of  the  largest  desire  that  heart  ever  had,  and  I  find  it 
not  at  all  greater  than  this  bed.  I  pant  to  be  God's  child,  I  have  it  here.  I  pant 
to  be  rich  to  all  intents  of  bliss,  I  have  the  promise  here,  and  I  shall  have  the 
fruition  of  it  hereafter.  I  long  for  perfection.  Is  not  that  a  stretch  indeed  ? 
And  that  I  have,  "  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus."  2.  Now,  think  of  this  bed  in  the  sense 
of  another  world.  And  here  we  may  say  of  all  the  sinner's  hope,  that  it  is  a 
bed  shorter  than  that  he  can  stretch  himself  upon  it.       Let  conscience  strain 

}rou,  let  death  put  you  on  the  rack,  and  pull  you  out  a  little,  and  the  bed  is  not 
ong  enough  for  you.  You  are  uneasy.  There  is  no  man  who  has  a  solid  peace, 
a  perfect  satisfaction  in  his  own  mind,  but  the  man  who  believes  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  trusts  Him  entirely  for  his  soul's  salvation,  and  puts  his  hopes  and 
his  expectations  only  in  the  Lord  his  God.  II.  Men  must  have  a  covering. 
And  here  we  are  told  that  there  are  some  people  who  make  a  covering,  but  it 
is  narrower  than  they  can  wrap  themselves  in  it.  There  is  one  garment  that 
never  is  too  narrow,  though  the  sinner  be  the  hugest  sinner  that  ever  trod  this 
earth,  and  that  is  the  perfect  righteousness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  short  bed  and  its  scanty  covering : — You  can  hardly  imagine 
a  more  unpleasant  position  for  a  man  to  find  himself  in.  A  traveller  haa 
just  come  a  long  journey,  weary,  footsore,  cramped ;  he  longs  for  "  tired 
nature's  sweet  restorer,  balmy  sleep."  On  reaching  his  bed,  however,  he 
finds  it  altogether  inadequate  for  purposes  of  rest.  Man  has  been  so  con- 
stituted by  his  Almighty  Creator  that  sleep  and  clothing  are  essential  to 
his  existence.  Angels,  for  aught  we  know  to  the  contrary,  may  be  eternal 
watchers,  sleepless  workers.  "  They  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying,  Holy,  holy, 
holy,  Lord  God  Almighty.**  It  is  otherwise  with  man.  He  must  sleep  or 
die.  Inability  to  sleep  has  often  been  the  punishment  inflicted  by  the  Almighty 
Avenger  upon  the  murderer,  as  foretaste  of  the  pains  of  hell.  Between  him 
and  placid  sleep  a  great  gulf  has  been  fixed.  Pausanias,  from  the  hour  Cleonice 
fell  pierced  by  his  sword,  is  a  haunted  man.  "  Sleep  no  more,"  is  the  dread 
fiat  of  Him  who  maketh  inquisition  for  blood.  The  spectre  of  his  victim,  says 
the  historian,  disturbed  him  every  night.  Now,  as  every  reader  of  the  Bible 
knows  well,  God  has  seen  fit  to  illustrate  and  set  forth  the  needs  of  the  soul  by 
referring  to  the  well-known  wants  and  necessities  of  the  body.  Therefore,  just 
as  man's  corporeal  frame  needs  sleep  and  clothing,  so  the  soul,  the  spiritual  part 
of  man,  needs  rest  and  covering,  without  which  it  can  be  neither  happy  nor  safe. 
The  prophet's  complaint  in  the  context  is  not  that  man  seeks  for  these  things 
if  haply  he  may  find  them,  but  seeks  for  them  in  wrong  places,  and  in  wrong 
ways — fashions  for  himself  beds  which  are  too  short  to  give  him  comfortable 
repose,  and  weaves  coverings  which  are  too  narrow  to  conceal  his  spiritual 
nakedness.  Favour  me  with  your  company  while  I  walk  forth  and  watch 
some  of  these  spiritual  bedmakers.  We  have  not  gone  very  far  before  our  steps 
are  arrested  by  the  spectacle  of  a  man  who  is  fashioning  for  himself  a  golden  bed. 
A  very  splendid  piece  of  workmanship  it  is,  and  we  can  hardly  wonder  at  the 
incredulous  look  and  compassionate  smile  with  which  the  maker  turns  upon  us 
when  we  whisper,  Too  short,  you'll  never  be  able  to  find  soul  rest  there !  Solomon 
lay  in  just  such  a  bed  as  that,  and  he  tossed  and  rolled  from  side  to  side,  exclaiming, 
"All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."  Over  the  front  of  this  bed  is  written 
a  text  out  of  the  Bible :  "  Money  answereth  all  things."  Wait  a  moment :  the 
Bplendid  piece  of  upholstery  is  just  receiving  its  finishing  touch,  the  owner  will 


chap,  xxvin]  ISAIAH.  BtP 

lie  down  on  it  presently,  and  we  shall  hear  what  he  thinks  of  his  work.  Hush  I 
what  is  that  you  say,  sir  ?  No  rest,  no  peace  !  Sleep  is  a  shy  goddess,  which 
all  this  magnificence  cannot  woo.  Do  you  really  mean  to  tell  us  that  you  slumbered 
more  peacefully  and  soundly  when,  a  poor  apprentice  lad,  you  lay  beneath  the 
counter  of  your  master's  shop,  ere  you  had  heaped  up  all  these  thousands  of  gold 
and  silver  ?  Ay,  ay,  he  says,  it  is  even  so.  Oh,  replies  one  of  my  hearers,  I  think 
I  should  be  happy  and  satisfied  if  I  only  had  a  little  more.  Keep  the  wolf  of 
poverty  at  a  respectable  distance  from  my  door,  give  me  all  the  necessaries  of 
life,  and  a  few  of  its  comforts,  and  I  should  be  as  happy  as  the  day  is  long.  I 
must  be  rude  enough  to  contradict  you ;  you  would  not,  you  do  not  know  your- 
self. If  your  affections  and  desires  are  of  the  earth,  earthy,  you  would  find  your 
appetite  growing  with  every  fresh  indulgence.  The  human  heart  is  like  the  horse- 
leech, ever  crying,  Give,  give.  "  Did  you  not  assure  me  that  your  ambition  would 
be  satisfied  with  a  revenue  of  one  hundred  thousand  crowns  ?  "  said  Charles  the 
Ninth,  to  a  lordly  abbot  who  was  begging  further  preferment.  Having  been  already 
made  Bishop  of  Auxerre,  Grand  Almoner  of  France,  and  holder  of  numerous  rich 
abbacies,  the  king  thought  his  greed  was  inexcusable.  How  suggestive  the  reply 
of  the  insatiable  pluralist :  "  True,  sire,  but  there  are  some  appetites  which 
grow  as  you  feed  them."  Oh,  here  is  another  dainty-looking  couch,  it  belongs 
to  the  man  of  ambition,  worldly  ambition.  This  man  is  an  enemy  to  all  greed 
and  avarice.  He  says  public  opinion  serves  the  money  grubber  right,  when  it 
fixes  on  him  the  stigma  of  miser,  which,  being  interpreted,  is  wretch.  Thank 
God,  he  says,  I  can  give,  and  spend,  and  lend.  The  accursed  thirst  for  gold 
has  not  struck  its  fangs  into  me.  No,  this  man  despises  money,  but  he  pants 
for  fame.     Oh,  he  says,  that  I  could  become  famous.     If  my  name  were  only 

handed  down  to  posterity  as  the  great  ,  I  should  be  satisfied.     He  thirsts 

for  fame  as  the  fever-stricken  patient  thirsts  for  the  cool  refreshing  fountain. 
Well,  after  a  while  his  wish  is  granted.  The  world  gladly  prepares  his  bed  of 
honour,  and  bids  her  favourite  lie  down  and  rest.  But,  lo !  the  thorns  are  there. 
"  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown,"  although  it  be  the  laurel  coronet 
of  honour  and  worldly  fame.  Oh,  he  says,  these  thorns,  they  pierce  to  the  very 
quick — let  me  return  to  my  original  obscurity.  I  can  get  no  rest  here,  the  bee! 
is  too  short,  the  covering  is  too  narrow !  Let  them  pursue  the  history  of  Alexander 
the  Great ;  the  life  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte,  of  whom  it  was  said  by  a  companion 
in  arms,  when  at  the  very  zenith  of  his  prosperity,  "  He  has  gained  everything, 
and  yet  he  is  unhappy  "  ;  the  life  of  Cardinal  Wolsey,  whose  advice  to  Cromwell 
might  well  have  been,  as  our  great  poet  represents  it,  "  I  charge  thee,  fling  away 
ambition.  By  that  sin  fell  the  angels ;  how  can  man  then,  the  image  of  his  Maker, 
hope  to  win  by  it  ?  "  and  whose  dying  regret  was  that  he  had  not  served  his  God 
as  faithfully  as  he  had  served  the  king  who  had  forsaken  him,  and  left  him  to 
die  unhonoured  and  unwept.  The  truth  is,  the  soul  cannot  live  upon  the  incense 
of  human  applause  any  more  than  the  body  can  exist  upon  the  fumes  of  smoking 
frankincense.  But  look  once  more.  See  this  pretty  and,  one  would  think, 
sleep-enticing  couch,  the  bed  of  worldly  pleasure.  There  are  men  who  despise 
saving  and  hoarding,  nor  do  they  care  to  climb  the  slippery  ladder  of  earthly  fame. 
The  cares  of  popularity  are  not  for  them.  But  they  are  seeking  rest  too,  and 
they  hope  to  find  it  in  the  pleasures  of  the  world.  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,"  is 
their  maxim,  "  for  to-morrow  we  die."  "  A  short  life,  and  a  merry  one,"  is  their 
motto.  Let  us  have  our  fill  of  pleasure.  Let  the  most  successful  pleasure-seekers 
relate  their  experience.  Suppose  we  take  the  evidence  of  the  celebrated  Chesterfield. 
He  was  no  fox  crying  sour  grapes  because  the  fruit  was  out  of  his  reach.  Probably 
a  more  fortunate  man,  so  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,  never  lived.  He  was 
high-born,  wealthy,  and  honoured.  In  almost  everything  he  undertook  he  was 
successful.  He  was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  speakers  in  the  House  of  Lords, 
a  most  accomplished  gentleman,  and  one  of  the  best  scholars  of  the  day.  He 
had  troops  of  friends,  honours  were  showered  upon  him,  ribbons,  royal  appro- 
bation, and  diplomatic  appointments.  Prime  ministers  honoured  him  as  the 
ablest  of  their  supporters  ;  princesses  and  peeresses  gave  him  their  smiles,  and 
called  him  the  greatest  of  men.  In  all  history  there  is  no  greater  instance  of 
worldly  success.  All  that  the  world  could  give  of  pleasure — he  had  good  measure, 
shaken  together,  pressed  down,  and  running  over — men  poured  into  his  bosom. 
Did  he  find  rest  on  this  sumptuous  couch  ?  Hear  his  own  testimony.  "  I  have 
recently  read  Solomon  with  a  kind  of  sympathetic  feeling.  I  have  been  as  wicked 
and  vain,  though  not  as  wise,  as  he ;  but  I  feel  the  truth  of  his  reflection,  '  All 


550  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.'  I  have  been  behind  the  world's  gaudy  scenes, 
have  smelt  the  tallow  candles,  and  seen  all  the  clumsy  machinery  by  which  the 
raree-show  is  worked,  and  the  spectators  deceived ;  I  have  no  desire  to  repeat 
the  nauseous  dose."  "  I  have  tried  both  services,  God  and  the  world,"  said 
Captain  Hedley  Vicars,  who  perished  gallantly  leading  on  his  regiment  in  the  war 
with  Russia.  "  For  twenty-four  years  I  lived  under  the  yoke  of  sin.  The  retro- 
spect of  my  past  life  is  now  miserable  to  me,  and  yet  I  thought  and  called  it  a 
life  of  pleasure.  The  very  name,  when  applied  to  sin,  makes  my  heart  sicken ; 
even  then  I  could  never  enjoy  reviewing  the  occupations  of  a  single  day."  All 
who  have  tried  this  daintily  spread  couch  assure  us  that  soul  rest  comes  not  there. 
Is  there  a  couch  in  all  this  wide  world  whereon  man,  wearied,  deceived,  disappointed, 
can  find  repose  ?  There  is  a  bed  on  which  the  sinner,  were  he  as  tall  as  the  pole, 
and  as  broad  as  the  earth,  could  not  fail  to  find  rest.  Rest  and  peace  are  only 
to  be  found  in  God.  In  that  dread  yet  sweet  name  is  found  the  answer  to  man's 
sin,  man's  sorrow,  and  man's  yearnings  after  something  better,  truer,  and  holier. 
Believe  me,  you  will  find  that  rest  nowhere  else.  What  a  comfort  it  must  be 
to  stretch  one's  self  upon  this  bed  and  to  feel  that  all  is  well,  for  time  and  for 
eternity.  (W.  E.  Langhorne.)  Delusive  expectations: — A  proverb  contains  a 
soul  of  truth  for  every  age  and  people.     The  words  apply  to — I.  Thb  world's 

OFFERS   OF  SATISFACTION  TO   MAN'S   NATURE.      II.    FALSE   CONFIDENCES.      1.    Self. 

In  the  expression  "  self-help  "  there  is  much  that  is  commonly  suggestive ;  but 
when  it  comes  to  religious  interests  we  may  soon  make  mistakes.  Sin  is  too 
much  for  a  man.  2.  Mere  formal  religion.  3.  Comparison  with  others. 
"  Common  sins  I  shudder  at ;  the  self-indulgent,  disgraceful  life  of  many  I  hate. 
I  love  culture  ;  am  a  good  husband — wife — sister — brother."  God  looks  at  the 
heart.  III.  Self-excuses.  1.  Temptation  was  so  subtle  and  my  nature  weak. 
Remember,  the  key  of  the  door  is  inside.  You  must  consent.  Did  you  pray  T 
2.  I  was  surrounded  by  bad  examples  and  influences.  But  were  there  no  times 
when  conscience  corrected  and  truth  attracted  ?  no  means  by  which  you  may  have 
been  fortified  ?  3.  I  have  no  time  for  piety.  If  piety  consisted  in  a  succession 
of  onerous  duties  this  plea  might  stand.  But  it  is  the  spirit  of  a  life,  the  heart 
centred  in  Christ.  4.  I  have  no  power  for  self-renewal.  Have  you  availed  your- 
self of  impressions ;  allowed  the  attractions  of  Christ  on  your  heart  ?  IV.  Vain 
hopes.  1.  After  all,  it  may  be  otherwise  than  preachers  say.  Will  a  man  be 
so  mad  as  to  trust  his  life  to  a  peradventure  ?  2.  I  may  feel  more  inclined  as 
I  advance  in  life.  Are  you  likely  to  do  so  in  resistance  of  impressions  ?  3  I  may 
repent  at  the  last.  That  is,  you  will  sin  no  more  when  you  have  no  more  power 
to  sin.  May  not  accident  or  disease  suddenly  overtake  you  ?  Can  any  one  who 
has  a  spark  of  generosity  or  right  feeling  think  such  conduct  a  fit  return  to  Christ  ? 
{0.  M'Michael,  B.A.) 

Ver.  22.  Be  ye  not  mockers. — A  warning  to  mockers : — Enough  is  recorded 
in  the  chapter  before  us  to  justify  this  serious  admonition.  I.  A  solemn  warn- 
ing. "  Be  ye  not  mockers."  1.  Are  there  no  mockers  in  our  religious  assemblies  ? 
Let  us  pursue  the  inquiry.  God  has  given  us  His  Word ;  but  how  is  that  Word 
regarded  ?  (1)  The  Word  of  God  denounces  threatenings.  But  if  no  rousing 
effect  is  produced,  can  it  be  that  the  awful  sentence  is  believed  ?  Faith  invari- 
ably produces  an  effect  corresponding  with  the  nature  of  the  truth  it  receives : 
a  consolatory  truth  yields  comfort,  an  alarming  truth  creates  dread:  if  then, 
by  the  threatenings  of  the  Bible,  you  are  not  excited  to  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come,"  and  "  warned  to  escape  the  damnation  of  hell,"  how  is  it  accounted  for  t 
Are  ye  not  "  mockers  "  ?  (2)  This  Word  is  also  enriched  with  promises.  How 
are  these  promises  regarded  ?  When  the  message  of  grace  is  disregarded ;  when 
its  joyful  tidings  are  heard  with  unconcern ;  when  no  need  of  the  Saviour  is  felt, 
no  desire  of  His  salvation  indulged ;  what  does  it  prove  ?  Are  ye  not "  mockers  "  1 
(3)  The  Bible  contains,  likewise,  a  variety  of  precepts.  But  if  unfeeling  selfishness 
be  the  temper  we  cherish ;  if  fraud  and  extortion  be  the  practices  we  allow ;  if 
"  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes  and  the  pride  of  life  "  be  the  element 
we  love,  are  we  not  mockers  ?  (4)  In  this  Holy  Book  sin  is  severely  censured. 
But  are  there  not  persons  to  be  found  who  make  light  of  this  malignant,  destruc- 
tive evil  ?  2.  Who  can  utter  the  egregious  folly  of  this  ?  Fools  mock,  while 
God  frowns.  They  mock  at  that  which  cast  angels  down  from  Heaven,  which 
excluded  Adam  from  paradise,  and  which  spread  disorder  through  all  the  works 
of  creation.     They  mock  at  that  which  is  the  spring  of  all  the  miseries  of  man— 


chap,  xxvin.]  ISAIAH.  651 

at  that  which  is  their  own  disease  and  disgrace — at  that  which  procures  their 
own  death,  which  kindles  the  flames  of  hell.  As  many  as  are  guilty  of  this  deepest 
folly  mock  at  all  the  sorrows  and  suffering  of  the  compassionate  Redeemer.  Can 
you  wonder  at  this  earnest  expostulation,  this  solemn  and  faithful  warning  ? 
IX  A  powerful  argument  to  enforce  the  warning.  It  is  founded  on  the  danger 
which  evidently  attends  the  indulgence  of  this  evil,  and  is  well  adapted  to  interest 
and  affect  the  mind.  "  Be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  your  bands  be  made  strong." 
It  implies  that  mockers  are  in  "  bands,"  already  in  a  state  of  bondage.  And 
what  is  this  bondage  T  They  are  "  tied  and  bound  with  the  chain  of  their  sins." 
Now  the  danger  is,  perpetuating  this  bondage  ;  so  securing  the  cords,  and  riveting 
the  fetters,  as  that  destruction  becomes  inevitable.  In  tracing  the  fatal  progress 
of  this  danger,  observe — 1.  The  sin  against  which  you  are  warned  weakens 
every  virtuous  restraint.  2.  The  sin  of  mocking  strengthens  vicious  propensities. 
This  naturally  results  from  the  relaxing  of  restraints :  as  the  one  declines,  the 
other  gains  ground.  3.  This  sin  gives  great  advantage  to  your  worst  enemies. 
Among  these  are  improper  companions.  Every  compliance  you  grant  only 
emboldens  their  demands  and  facilitates  their  conquest.  But  there  is  a  worse 
enemy  than  these :  "  the  spirit  which  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedi- 
ence." Resist  him,  and  he  will  flee  from  you ;  but  invite  his  attacks,  by  parleying 
with  temptation,  and  you  inevitably  fall — "  your  bands  are  made  strong."  4.  It 
exposes  to  peculiar  marks  of  the  displeasure  of  God.  5.  It  terminates  in  remedi- 
less ruin.  III.  We  attempt  an  improvement  of  the  subject,  by  recommending 
the  opposite  of  what  is  reproved  in  the  text.  (T.  Kidd. )  Mocking  the  messengers 
of  the  Lord  was  Jerusalem's  measure-filling  sin.  (M.  Henry.)  Lest  your 
bands  be  made  strong. — Growing  bands : — In  the  tropical  forests  of  South  America, 
where  everything  climbs,  and  everything  seeks  to  overcome  everything  else, 
there  is  a  curious  class  of  plants,  to  which  the  natives  give  the  name  of  lianas 
or  bush-ropes.  They  are  creeping  plants,  and  twine  round  large  trees  in  order 
to  be  lifted  up  above  the  dense  mass  of  vegetation  into  the  pure  air  and  bright 
sunshine  overhead.  The  lianas  do  not  belong  to  the  same  family  of  plants ; 
often  there  are  great  differences  between  their  leaves  and  flowers  ;  but  they 
have  this  peculiarity  in  common,  that  they  all  climb  round  certain  trees  to  reach 
the  full,  unbroken  sunshine  above  the  billowy  top  of  the  forest.  When  the  seed 
of  one  of  them,  say  the  one  known  to  the  natives  as  the  Sipo  Matador,  or  Murderer 
Liana,  is  dropped  by  the  wind  or  by  a  bird  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  that  is  suitable, 
it  begins  to  grow  at  once.  At  first  it  sends  forth  a  slender,  thread-like  stem, 
that  leans  upon  the  tree  for  support.  At  this  stage  it  is  soft  and  brittle,  and  looks 
like  a  vein  of  sap  flowing  and  hardening  as  it  flows,  and  a  child's  finger  could 
snap  it  across  with  ease.  But  as  it  grows  and  lengthens  it  becomes  thicker  and 
tougher,  and  twines  itself  round  the  tree  like  a  strongly  twisted  cable,  composed 
of  several  strands.  Its  grasp  of  the  tree  becomes  tighter  the  older  it  grows  ; 
and  by  and  by  the  tree  becomes  strangled  by  its  thick  bands,  which  it  would 
require  an  axe  to  cut.  The  leaves  of  the  poor  victim  wither  and  fall  off,  the 
veins  cannot  circulate  the  sap  through  the  branches,  and  thus  it  slowly  diea 
and  becomes  a  mere  mass  of  dry,  rotten  wood,  still  clasped  by  its  cruel  enemy, 
which  flourishes,  green  and  vigorous,  upon  its  decay.  Ephraim  was  the  noblest 
of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  But  it  suffered  certain  evil  habits  to  grow  around  it.  It 
indulged  in  idolatry,  and  covetousness,  and  drunkenness.  And  these  evil  habits, 
which  might  at  first  have  been  given  up  without  any  great  difficulty,  became  at 
last  so  strong  that  they  could  not  be  broken,  and  completely  bound  and  enslaved 
the  people.     (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 

Vera.  23-29.  The  ploughman. — The  parable  of  the  ploughman  and  the  thresher  : — 
1.  The  general  drift  of  the  parable  is  obvious.  The  husbandman  does  not  for 
ever  vex  and  wound  the  tender  bosom  of  the  earth  with  the  keen  edge  of  the 
ploughshare  or  the  sharp  teeth  of  the  harrow.  He  ploughs  only  that  he  may  sow  ; 
he  harrows  the  ground  only  that  he  may  produce  a  level  and  unclodded  surface 
on  which  to  cast  his  seeds.  And  when  he  sows,  he  gives  to  every  seed  its  appro- 
priate place  and  usage.  He  scatters  the  dill  and  strews  the  cummin  broadcast ; 
out  the  wheat  he  sets,  according  to  the  Oriental  fashion,  in  long  rows,  and  the 
barley  in  a  place  specially  marked  out  for  it,  so  marked  as  to  exclude  the  borders 
of  the  field  :  and  here,  along  the  edges  of  the  field,  where  it  is  most  likely  to  be 
bitten  or  trampled  by  passing  beasts,  he  sows  the  less  valuable  spelt.  And  this 
he  does  because  God  has  given  him  discretion.     Is  God,  then,  less  wise  than  the 


652  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvth. 

husbandman  whom  He  has  taught  T  So,  again,  when  the  harvest  is  gathered 
in,  the  wise  husbandman  still  varies  and  adapts  his  means  to  his  end.  He  does 
not  go  on  threshing  "  for  ever  "  ;  his  single  aim  is  to  separate  the  chaff  from  the 
wheat,  to  save  as  much  of  the  grain  as  he  can,  and  to  save  it  in  the  best  condition 
he  can,  that  it  may  be  gathered  into  his  garner.  And  he  thus  varies  his  modes 
of  treatment,  and  adapts  them  to  the  several  kinds  of  seeds,  because  God  has 
given  him  sagacity  and  wisdom.  Will  God,  then,  who  gave  the  husbandman 
this  sagacity,  be  less  observant  of  time  and  measure  ?  Will  He  crush  and  waste 
the  precious  grain  of  His  threshing-floor  ?  2.  Nor  is  the  historical  application 
of  the  parable  difficult  to  recover.  Isaiah  had  to  warn  and  admonish  the  chosen 
nation  at  a  period  in  which  they  were  utterly  corrupt,  when  the  judges  took 
bribes  and  the  priests  mocked  at  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  the  very  prophets 
saw  "  lying  visions,"  or  pretended  to  see  them,  and  the  people  had  made  a  covenant 
with  Death  and  Hades.  He  had  to  threaten  them  with  disaster  on  disaster. 
So  corrupt  were  they,  however,  that  they  made  a  jest  of  him  for  his  fidelity  to 
their  King  and  God.  In  their  drunken  carousals  the  priests  and  prophets 
mimicked  and  burlesqued  the  simplicity  and  directness  of  his  speech,  and  turned 
his  warnings  into  a  theme  for  laughter  and  derision.  But  even  in  this  godless 
and  scoffing  age  there  was  a  "  remnant "  faithful  among  the  faithless,  who  were 
true  to  God  and  to  the  Word  which  He  sent  by  the  prophet.  Were  they  to  be 
consumed  in  the  fire  of  the  Divine  indignation  against  the  popular  sins  ?  Or, 
if  they  were  preserved,  were  they  to  stand  by  and  see  the  elect  nation  destroyed 
out  of  its  place  ?  Was  there  no  hope  for  them  ?  none  even  for  the  nation  at  large  ? 
There  was  hope  ;  and  that  they  might  see  it  and  be  sustained  by  it  in  the  cloudy 
and  dark  day  of  judgment,  Isaiah  discloses  to  them,  in  his  parable,  the  secret  of 
the  Divine  administration,  namely,  that  judgment  is  mercy,  and  that  it  prepares 
the  way  for  a  mercy  more  open  and  full  than  itself.  But  the  prophet  has  a 
message  to  the  faithful  remnant,  as  well  as  to  the  nation  at  large.  And  to  them 
his  message  is,  that  even  the  good  grain  must  be  threshed,  that  even  those  who 
are  faithful  to  Jehovah  must  share  in  the  judgments  which  are  about  to  fall  on 
the  entire  nation.  They  cannot  be  exempted  from  the  misery  of  the  time  ;  they 
must  suffer,  as  for  their  own  sins,  so  also  for  the  sins  of  their  neighbours.  But 
this  is  then"  comfort,  that  the  Divine  Husbandman  measures  out  His  strokes 
with  wisdom  and  grace.  God  is  but  separating  that  which  is  good  in  those  whom 
He  loves  from  that  which  is  evil  and  imperfect  in  them  ;  and,  even  in  this  process 
of  separation,  He  will  not  lay  upon  them  more  than  they  are  able  to  bear.  3.  So 
that,  in  this  parable,  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  providence  is  laid  open,  its  secret 
disclosed.  All  ploughing  is  for  sowing  ;  all  threshing  is  intended  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  grain.  When  God  chastens  us,  it  is  not  because  He  means  to  destroy 
us,  but  because  He  has  set  His  heart  on  saving  us,  because  He  has  appointed  us 
to  life  and  not  to  death.  Nor  are  the  ordinances  and  chastenings  of  His  provi- 
dence arbitrary  and  without  discrimination.  He  employs  various  methods, 
sends  "  sorrows  of  all  sorts  and  sizes,"  that  He  may  adapt  Himself  to  every  man's 
needs,  and  to  all  our  varieties  of  place,  time,  and  circumstance.  "  Cure  sin  and 
you  cure  sorrow,"  say  the  reason  and  conscience  of  the  world :  and  the  sorrow 
comes  that  the  sin  may  be  cured,  adds  the  prophet ;  the  very  miseries  that  spring 
from  evil  are  intended  to  eradicate  the  evil  from  which  they  spring.  It  was  in 
the  strength  of  this  sublime  conception  of  the  ministry  of  pain  and  sorrow  that 
the  Hebrew  prophets  met  the  terrible  miseries  they  were  called  to  endure  and 
behold.  (8.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  spiritual  sower: — A  knowledge  of  agriculture  is 
almost  essential  to  the  right  appreciation  of  many  portions  of  the  Bible.  I.  The 
process  op  sowing  implihs  a  son.  peepared  for  the  seed.  The  reception  of 
the  Gospel  implies  preceding  thought,  reflection,  and  resolution ;  which  may 
be  beautifully  and  characteristically  expressed  by  the  agricultural  term,  cultiva- 
tion. II.  The  process  of  sowing  implies  seed  adapted  to  the  soil.  There 
is  a  variety  of  seed  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  modern  as  well  as  ancient  agriculture 
verifies  the  truth  of  the  prophet's  description.  1.  Let  the  seed  for  the  mind 
be  marked  as  with  a  seal.  As  the  ancients  chose  the  best  of  their  crops  for  seed, 
eo  let  the  truths  selected  for  the  mind  be  of  the  highest  and  holiest  description. 
2.  Let  the  seed  for  the  mind  be  varied.  The  Word  of  God,  independent  of  other 
Bources,  furnishes  a  great  variety  of  truths  to  suit  the  soul  in  every  conceivable 
state.  And  the  same  truth  is  set  forth  in  many  different  ways,  and  couched 
under  many  different  figures,  to  fit  all  descriptions  of  minds.  III.  The  process 
of  sowing  implies  a  suitable  season.     Men  do  not  sow  at  all  times.     "  Thei » 


chap,  xxvin.]  ISAIAH.  653 

is  a  time  to  sow,  and  a  time  to  reap."  So  there  is  a  season  for  sowing  the  good 
seed  of  the  kingdom.  Life  is  that  season.  IV.  The  sowing  process  implies 
skill  and  faith.  All  are  sowers  in  the  moral  sense.  Some,  however,  are  not 
skilful  sowers ;  and  what  an  abundance  of  seed  they  destroy  !  They  have  great 
privileges,  high  immunities,  transcendently  overtowering  those  of  their  fellow-men ; 
and  yet  it  is  to  be  feared  they  will  reap  but  a  poor  harvest.  But  it  is  delightful 
to  know,  that  others,  with  few  privileges,  and  comparatively  few  opportunities, 
are  sowing  in  their  own  minds,  and  the  minds  of  others,  the  seeds  of  truth ;  and 
by  their  skilful  sowing  will  reap  a  great  harvest  of  future  glory.  (.4.  Gray,  M.A.) 
The  discreet  ploughman: — The  drift  of  these  words  is  to  comfort  God's  children 
In  afflictions  ;  and,  because  when  one  is  sorrowful,  weak,  taken  up  and  overpressed 
with  grief,  we  are  then  unfit  and  incapable  of  instruction,  the  anguish  of  the 
suffering  destroying  our  attention,  He  therefore  says,  doubling  it  four  times, 
"  Give  ye  ear,"  hear  My  voice,"  "  hearken  ye,"  and  hear  My  voice  "  ;  wherein 
He  insinuates  that  the  matter  He  is  about  to  deliver  requires  attention.  1.  The 
only  way  to  quiet  one's  heart,  and  pacify  one  in  all  distresses,  is  to  hearken  what 
God  says.  (1)  Because  God's  Word  will  work  faith,  which  does  purify  the  heart, 
overcome  the  world,  and  quench  the  fiery  darts  of  Satan.  (2)  It  will  teach  a  man 
wisdom,  whence  and  why  it  comes,  and  that  struggling  with  God  is  in  vain,  and 
that  in  so  doing  we  shall  have  the  worse.  (3)  It  will  be  a  means  to  work  patience 
in  the  heart.  (4)  It  will  make  us  go  to  God  and  pray,  and  prayer  will  bring  comfort 
and  ease  to  the  heart  ere  long.  2.  All  God's  children  must  be  ploughed.  3.  God 
will  make  a  sweet  and  seasonable  end  of  afflicting  His  children.  He  doth  correct 
us  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  His  holiness.  4.  When  the  Lord 
hath  made  us  plain,  and  hath  filled  us  with  hearts  to  receive  good  seed,  then  is 
the  time  of  rest.  5.  When  God  hath  humbled  us  by  His  Word,  then  He  will 
furnish  and  arm  us  with  His  Word,  and  enable  us  with  strength  that  way.  Many 
heaths  do  meet  with  streams  and  floods  of  water,  and  yet  are  nothing  the  better 
nor  more  fruitful ;  but  God's  arable,  the  saints,  are  ploughed  and  instructed, 
as  the  Psalmist  speaks :  "  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  Thou  correctest,  and  teachest 
in  Thy  law,"  &c.  To  have  the  one  without  the  other  is  nothing,  and  does  no 
good,  but  when  correction  and  teaching  go  together,  then  one  sees  all  the  good 
of  affliction,  and  why  God  sent  it  upon  him.  6.  Skill  in  husbandry  is  the  gift 
of  God ;  wisdom  must  come  from  Him.  7.  All  God's  grain  needs  threshing  and 
ploughing,  and  as  they  need  it,  so  they  shall  have  it.  8.  The  best  grain  shall 
nave  the  sorest  trial  and  hardest  pressure.  The  fitches  are  not  threshed  with 
a  threshing  instrument,  but  are  beaten  with  a  staff  ;  neither  is  a  cart  wheel  turned 
about  upon  the  cummin,  but  beaten  with  a  rod  ;  but  the  wheat  must  have  the 
wheel  go  on  it.  The  meaning  is  an  allusion  unto  that  manner  of  the  ancient 
Jews  in  treading  their  wheat,  as  appears  by  that  precept :  "  Thou  shalt  not 
muzzle  the  mouth  of  the  ox  or  the  ass  that  treadeth  down  thy  corn  "  (Deut.  xxv.  4), 
for  then  the  oxen,  drawing  a  wheel  over  the  wheat,  did  so  bruise  it,  but  not  break 
it.  9.  God  Almighty  knows  best,  and  He  appoints  what  shall  be  the  means,  time, 
and  measure  of  the  trials  of  His  children.  10.  God,  in  the  chastisements,  trials, 
and  afflictions  of  His  elect,  hath  wonderful  wisdom  and  power  beyond  our  under- 
standing. He  knows  not  only  which  is  the  best  way  to  lead  us  to  Heaven,  but 
also  He  is  excellent  in  working,  to  bring  His  counsel  to  pass.  See  it  in  examples. 
As  in  Joseph,  appointed  to  be  the  greatest,  save  Pharaoh,  in  all  Egypt.  So  David, 
after  he  was  anointed  king,  in  a  state  of  honour  and  all  pomp  and  pleasure,  how 
was  he  vexed  and  ploughed  with  many  crosses  !  11.  Nothing  can  stay  Him 
from  working,  to  hinder  our  comfort  and  deliverance  in  due  time.  Why  ?  Because 
He  is  "  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  and  all  the  creatures  must  do  what  He  wills. 
(R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  The  voice  of  God  in  the  tillage  of  the  field: — The  Scriptures  are 
full  of  the  fresh  air  of  the  country ;  it  is  easy  to  see  that  many  of  the  writers  of 
them  were  country  people,  or,  if  not,  at  least  went  about  the  world  with  their  eyes 
open,  and  had  a  keen  interest  in  those  matters  of  the  street  and  the  field  that 
make  up  the  life  of  the  people.  When  Moses  described  the  Land  of  Promise 
to  the  Israelites  it  was  a  husbandman's  description  that  he  gave  of  it.  It  was 
"  a  land  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  vines,  and  fig-trees,  and  pomegranates;  a  land 
of  oil  olives  and  honey."  The  Psalmists  looked  out  upon  the  open  face  of  nature, 
and  saw  in  it  a  world  eloquent  of  God — the  dew  and  the  rain,  the  valleys  and 
the  hills,  the  lilies  and  the  cedars  spake  of  Him.  He  made  the  earth  soft  with 
showers,  and  blessed  the  springing  thereof.  One  prophet  describes  the  evil  case 
of  the  people  in  this  way :  "  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  ended,  and  we 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxviii. 

are  not  saved."  Another  calls  the  same  people  to  repentance :  "  Sow  to  your- 
selves in  righteousness,  reap  according  to  mercy ;  break  up  your  fallow  ground  : 
for  it  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord,  till  He  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  you." 
The  great  Lord  Himself,  standing  in  the  midst  of  His  works,  bade  men  "  consider 
the  lilies  of  the  field,"  and  in  His  doctrine  said,  "  Behold,  a  sower  went  forth 
to  sow."  And  when  Isaiah,  in  the  words  before  us,  draws  out  a  detailed  account 
of  the  operations  of  husbandry,  in  order  to  drive  home  lessons  in  Divine  things, 
he  was  well  within  a  long  line  of  precedents.  (E.  Medley,  B.A.)  God's  pro- 
cesses of  moral  and  spiritual  husbandry  : — I.  There  is  an  element  of  timeliness 
in  God's  working.  "  Doth  the  ploughman  plough  continually  to  sow  T  Doth 
he  continually  open  and  break  the  clods  of  his  ground  ?  "  That  is,  is  the  man 
always  at  one  thing,  for  ever  engaged  in  one  line  of  work  T  Is  there  not  order, 
is  there  not  succession,  are  there  not  appointed  seasons  T  Men  do  not  plough 
at  midsummer,  and  reap  at  Christmas.  There  is  a  time,  a  day,  an  hour,  and  the 
careful  husbandman,  who  would  make  the  most  of  his  opportunity,  must  submit 
to  this  element  of  timeliness.  He  must  have  his  spells  of  hard  work,  and  his 
days  of  comparative  inaction.  And  herein  he  is  not  exceptional,  this  tidal  system 
holds  good  in  all  spheres.  Is  it  not  so  very  evidently  in  the  general  life  of  man  1 
Is  there  not  there  a  sowing-time,  a  most  blessed  spring-tide ;  is  there  not  a  period 
of  watching  and  waiting,  and  anxious  carefulness,  and  then,  by  and  by,  the 
harvest  ?  Ay ;  and  when  the  spring-time  is  neglected,  then  by  no  effort,  and 
by  no  tears,  can  the  loss  be  retrieved.  It  is  so  in  the  life  of  the  spirit.  Looking 
at  the  facts  as  we  find  them,  and  they  are  of  God,  is  there  not  the  element 
of  timeliness  there  ?  There  are  tides  of  the  Spirit ;  seasons  when  repentance 
and  faith  are  easy ;  seasons  when  Heaven  seems  very  near  to  this  world,  and 
by  a  step  we  find  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  Christ.  There  are  days  of  the  Son 
01  Man,  the  dew  sparkles  upon  the  grass,  the  sun  rises  without  clouds,  and  sheds 
a  tender  light.  God  and  Christ,  indeed,  are  no  more  real,  no  more  actual  than 
they  always  are,  but  they  are  more  real  to  us.  And  then  all  is  different,  we  come 
into  another  world.  But  what  are  all  these  facts  of  life  but  so  many  expressions 
of  the  higher  fact,  that  there  is  an  element  of  timeliness  in  the  working  of  God 
Himself  ?  The  urgent  lesson  from  this  fact  is  this — let  us  work  while  we  work, 
let  us  catch  the  opportunity  on  the  wing.  II.  There  is  an  element  of  variety 
in  God's  working.  Through  multiplied  detail  does  the  prophet  enforce  this 
fact.  Different  sorts  of  seed  are  sown  in  a  different  fashion.  And  a  like  variety 
obtains  when  the  harvesting  comes ;  one  is  dealt  with  after  this  manner  and 
another  after  that.  And  has  not  the  Creator  therein  given  us  a  visible  example 
of  the  methods  He  pursues  in  that  great  field  wherein  He  is  the  husbandman, 
and  we  are  the  husbandry  T  He  has  no  fear  of  precedent,  He  works  out  His 
end  in  every  variety  of  method.  The  life  of  Christ,  as  that  stands  recorded  in 
the  Gospels,  supplies  the  confirming  illustration !  Run  over  in  your  thought 
His  dealings  with  NathanaeL  and  Peter,  and  Thomas,  and  John.  See  how  He 
handled  Nicodemus  and  Mary  of  Bethany.  He  cast  truth  into  their  minds  in 
a  different  way,  and  wrought  for  the  spiritual  harvest  just  as  variously.  From 
all  of  which  there  comes  the  Divine  voice  that  bids  us,  above  all  things,  be  simple, 
be  natural,  not  striving  after  another  type  and  style  of  experience  than  that  which 
is  our  own.  If  we  are  true  to  ourselves  and  to  our  God,  we  shall  have  our  own 
experience,  that  which  for  us  is  most  fitting  and  the  best.  LU.  God's  working 
is  a  process.  Your  parable  is  full  of  method,  of  succession,  of  processes.  And 
every  ploughing-time,  every  sowing,  and  every  reaping,  are  but  visible  examples 
of  what  happens  in  the  higher  field  of  God's  activity  in  the  spirits  of  men.  Con- 
science grows,  character  grows ;  light  comes  slowly,  there  is  dawn,  twilight,  the 
mellow  morning,  and  the  golden  day.    There  is  no  antagonism  between  nature  and 

Saoe,  between  God  speaking  in  nature  and  God  speaking  in  the  life  and  death  of 
is  Son.  (Ibid.)  Physical  husbandry  the  effect  and  emblem  of  Divine  teaching: — 
I.  That  physical  husbandry  is  the  effect  of  Divine  teaching.  How  did  man 
come  to  know  that  by  depositing  a  seed  in  a  soil  which  had  been  dressed  after 
a  certain  fashion,  that  solitary  seed  would  produce  thirty,  sixty,  or  a  hundred- 
fold  T  We  are  familiar  with  the  operation  now,  and  the  wonderfulness  does 
not  strike  us  ;  but,  antecedently,  nothing  seems  to  us  more  marvellous.  Whence, 
then,  came  this  great  agricultural  truth  ?  It  is  not  innate,  nor  of  necessary 
discovery.  The  text  gives  the  most  satisfactory  answer :  "  His  God  doth 
instruct  him."  The  point  suggested,  and  which  we  wish  to  insist  upon,  is,  that 
all  true  secular  ideas,  as  well  as  spiritual,  are  from  God.     Christians  refer  true 


chap,  xx vm.]  ISAIAH.  655 

ideas  of  worship  to  God,  but  not  true  ideas  of  commerce,  agriculture,  navigation, 
medicine,  architecture,  and  the  like.  In  fact,  they  do  not  regard  God  as  having 
much  to  do  with  the  practical  mind  of  this  working  world.  1.  Our  position  is 
suggested  by  a  priori  reasoning.  One  might  justly  infer  that  He  who  gave  ua 
an  organisation,  which  so  connects  us  with  the  material  world  as  to  render  a 
certain  course  of  conduct  indispensable  to  our  physical  well-being,  would  give 
us  some  ideas  to  guide  us  in  the  matter,  and  the  more  so  when  we  remember  that 
the  welfare  of  the  soul  itself  greatly  depends  upon  the  condition  of  the  body. 
2.  Our  position  is  sustained  by  Scripture.  There  are  specific  examples  in  the 
Bible,  of  God's  condescending  to  teach  men  secular  work,  such  as  the  building 
of  the  ark  and  the  tabernacle,  and  the  passages  are  numerous  which  imply  that 
God  acts  upon  the  general  mind  of  mankind.  3.  Our  position  is  implied  in  the 
doctrine  of  providence.  How  does  God  interpose  on  behalf  of  men  now  ?  Not 
miraculously,  but  by  giving  us  directing  ideas.  A  good  man  is  brought  to  a 
painful  crisis  in  his  business.  He  is  filled  with  anxiety.  One  step  will  decide 
his  commercial  fate.  What  will  help  him  ?  A  true  directing  idea  would  dispel 
his  darkness  and  clear  his  path.  Or,  a  government  is  brought  to  a  solemn  crisis 
in  its  history.  The  fate  of  nations  depends  upon  the  next  act.  How  can  provi- 
dence help  it  at  that  moment  ?  By  suggesting  an  idea  that  will  reveal  the  true 
and  safe  path.  Ideas  are  our  guides  in  all  the  labyrinth  walks  of  life,  and  all 
our  true  ones  come  from  God.  This  doctrine  should  lead  us— (1)  To  recognise 
God  in  all  the  true  developments  of  mind.  (2)  To  seek  His  aid  in  all  secular 
undertakings.  II.  That  physical  husbandry  is  thb  emblem  of  Divine  teach- 
ing.    The  prophet  here  describes  the  operations  of  the  husbandman  in  order  to 

illustrate  God's  method  of  training  humanity.     Two  thoughts  are  here  implied 

1.  That  moral  fruitfulness  is  the  great  end  of  God's  dealings  with  man.  What 
is  moral  fruitfulness  ?  Right  heart-qualities  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  2.  That  to  realise 
this  end,  God  employs  a  variety  of  instrumentalities.  Does  not  this  subject 
impress  us  with  the  divinity  of  life  ?  Man  is  the  organ  of  Divine  thought,  and 
the  object  of  Divine  operation.  Away  with  all  frivolous  ideas  of  life  !  Life  is 
solemn  and  sacred.  We  are  ever  in  close  connection  with  the  Infinite:  He  besets 
us  "  behind  and  before."  (Homilist).  Breaking  clods : — I.  The  various 
ways  in  which  God  deals  with  His  people.  1.  He  ploughs  the  ground,  i.e., 
He  breaks  up  the  hard,  natural  heart.  For  this  purpose  He  employs — (1)  The 
terrors  of  the  law.  (2)  Judgments  in  providence.  2.  The  second  process  is 
harrowing.  "  Doth  He  open  and  break  the  clods  of  Kis  ground  ?  When  He  hath 
made  plain  the  face  thereof,"  &c.  The  object  is  to  bring  the  ploughed  ground 
into  such  a  condition  as  will  best  secure  the  proper  reception  of  the  seed.  There 
are  many  clods  in  the  human  heart,  too,  which  need  to  be  broken.  (1)  The  clod 
of  prejudice.  (2)  Of  pride.  3.  The  third  process  is  that  of  sowing  the  seed. 
4.  The  threshing.  In  order  that  the  Christian  may  become  useful  as  well  as  fit 
for  Heaven,  affliction  is  necessary.  II.  The  skill  displayed  en  these  various 
opebations.  1.  The  skill  is  not  expressly  referred  to  in  connection  with  the 
ploughing.  But  it  may  nevertheless  be  seen.  Farmers  know  that  there  is  such 
a  thing  as  ploughing  too  deep,  and  also  ploughing  too  shallow.  In  the  one  case 
the  gravel  may  be  reached  and  turned  up  to  the  surface,  and  so  render  the  seed 
to  be  afterwards  sown  comparatively  useless.  Or,  the  too  cold  soil  may  be  turned 
up,  and  thus  the  seed  sown  will  perish.  In  the  other  case,  the  proper  depth  of 
the  soil  is  not  reached,  and  the  crop  will  therefore  be  but  a  thin  and  sickly  one. 
So  it  is  with  God  in  His  dealings  with  His  people.  Some  natures  need  to  be 
thoroughly  aroused,  some  hearts  to  be  opened  up  to  their  very  depths,  in  order 
that  the  Word  may  take  root  and  bring  forth  fruit.  No  superficial  work  will 
do  here.  And  although  God's  messengers  may  and  often  do  err,  God  Himself 
never  will,  for  "  He  is  wonderful  in  counsel  and  excellent  in  working."  Again, 
other  natures  need  to  be  dealt  with  in  a  different  way.  They  require  to  be  dealt 
with  gently  and  lovingly,  and  the  wise  Husbandman  acts  accordingly.  2.  But 
the  skill  of  the  farmer  is  referred  to  in  this  passage  in  connection  with  the  sowing 
of  the  seed.  Different  soils  require  different  kinds  of  seed,  if  there  is  to  be  a  good 
crop.  So  does  God  act  too.  Some  souls  need  doctrine,  others  history.  Some 
need  words  of  Divine  love  and  pity,  others  the  Divine  warnings  and  threatenings. 
3.  The  skill  of  the  farmer  is  seen,  too,  in  employing  different  kinds  of  threshing 
instruments  for  the  different  kinds  of  grain.  So  also  does  God  deal  with  His 
people.  Some  need  only  a  comparatively  light  affliction,  their  natures  being 
of  such  a  kind  that  treatment  of  a  different  kind  would  utterly  overwhelm  them 


556  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  xxvni- 

and  drive  them  to  despair.  Others  need  to  be  put  into  the  furnace  seven  times 
heated.  And  it  is  to  be  observed  that  as  the  bread  corn,  or  most  precious  material, 
gets  as  it  were  the  roughest  treatment,  so  it  is  God's  choice  ones  that  are  subjected 
to  the  greatest  trials.  (D.  Macaulay,  M.A.)  Inspiration  in  common  life  : — 
Observe — I.  How  God  guides  the  lowliest  of  His  children  in  all  the 
affairs  OF  their  worldly  life.  Why  should  we  be  surprised  to  read  of  inspira- 
tion in  common  life  ?  1.  It  arises  from  the  fact  that  we  distinguish  between 
intellectual  life  and  vulgar  life,  and  exclude  God  from  the  latter.  Inspiration 
is  not  limited  to  the  world  of  scholars,  scientists,  painters,  and  musicians ;  God 
is  equally  in  the  so-called  vulgar  world,  giving  the  lowliest  toiler  mastery  in  all 
that  relates  to  his  sphere  of  life.  The  vulgar  world  is  vulgar  no  more.  The 
whole  world  of  human  duty  is  one  kingdom,  the  working  out  of  one  Divine  purpose. 
2.  Because  of  our  habit  of  distinguishing  between  influential  life  and  insignificant 
life,  and  excluding  God  from  the  latter.  We  are  not  surprised  to  hear  of  God 
inspiring  princes ;  it  seems  quite  in  order  when  God  gives  to  Solomon  super- 
natural enlightenment.  But  the  ploughman  seems  utterly  insignificant,  his 
affairs  so  few  and  simple.  But  is  the  ploughman  so  utterly  insignificant  ?  The 
fact  is,  he  is  one  of  the  most  important  characters  in  the  world ;  if  things  go 
wrongly  with  him,  they  go  wrongly  with  us  all.  We  might  do  without 
a  king ;  we  could  not  do  without  a  ploughman.  3.  Because  of  our  habit  of 
distinguishing  between  sacred  life  and  secular  life,  and  excluding  God  from  the 
latter.  We  readily  think  of  God  inspiring  the  prophet  and  the  priest.  Yet  the 
passage  before  us  makes  us  feel  that  the  ploughman's  realm  is  not  less  spiritual 
than  that  of  the  prophet.  II.  How  God  guides  the  lowliest  of  His  children 
in  at.t.  the  affairs  of  their  inner  life.  There  is  a  great  spiritual  nature  in 
the  lowliest  of  men.  We  have  heard  of  the  epitaph  once  put  over  a  peasant : 
"  Only  a  clod."  I  do  not  know  whether  that  epitaph  was  written  in  a  pathetio 
or  in  a  cynical  temper,  but  it  was  really  very  full  of  suggestion.  What  wonderful 
things  are  in  a  clod  !  All  possibilities  of  music,  colour,  light,  fragrance,  are  there. 
"  So  you  think  you  know  what  a  clod  is,  do  you  ?  "  archly  asks  Schopenhauer. 
Indeel,  we  do  not.  It  will  astonish  you  on  the  morning  of  the  resurrection  to 
see  what  God  will  bring  out  of  that  clod.  And  God  is  ever  ready  to  guide  and 
save  His  lowly  children.  He  makes  them  to  know  the  deepest  truths  of  revelation 
and  spiritual  life  (Matt.  xi.  25,  26).  All  through  life  God  continues  the  same 
gracious  guidance.  "The  Lord  preserveth  the  simple."  (W.  L.  Watkinson.) 
Agriculture  is  the  most  ancient  of  all  pursuits,  for  Adam  was  a  gardener,  Cain 
a  farmer,  Abel  a  herdsman,  and  Cain  did  not  go  to  live  in  a  city  or  attempt  to 
bu'ld  one  until  after  he  had  committed  his  great  crime.  It  is  not  only  the  most 
ancient,  but  also  the  most  necessary,  and  all  other  pursuits  could  be  more  readily 
spared  than  this.  The  most  careless  observer  who  walks  through  an  agricultural 
show  must  be  forcibly  struck  with  the  great  importance  of  agriculture.  All 
kinds  of  inventions,  yea,  almost  all  sciences,  are  consecrated  to  this  pursuit — 
the  products  of  the  mine,  the  forest,  the  quarry,  the  hammer,  forge,  saw,  and 
engine  have  been  pressed  into  its  service.  How  many  kinds  of  toilers  and  artisans 
have  brought  their  inventions  and  labour  to  make  tilling  the  ground  profitable  ? 
How  many  sciences  wait  reverently  upon  husbandry  ?  For  it  geology  ransacks 
the  bowels  of  the  earth ;  chemistry  proclaims  what  nutriment  certain  plants 
absorb  from  soil,  and  what  enrichment  certain  alkalies  will  give  ;  botany  collects 
her  varied  grasses  to  make  possible  the  permanent  pasture,  on  the  principle  of 
the  survival  of  the  fittest ;  astronomy  smiles  on  it,  and  causes  the  sun  to  do  more 
for  its  prosperity  than  any  king,  however  gracious,  and  the  clouds  more  than 
any  landlord,  however  beneficent.  (F.  Standfast.)  The  value  of  agricultural 
labour : — How  foolish  and  sinful  it  is  for  those  who  possess  wealth  acquired  by 
the  toil  of  others,  and  who  are  designated  independent,  to  despise  or  oppress 
those  on  whose  humble  toil  they  are  indeed  most  dependent.  What  would  be 
the  value  of  the  broad  acres,  if  left  without  culture  T  It  is  the  toil  of  the  peasant 
which  makes  them  productive,  and  which  wrings  from  the  soil  those  ample  revenues 
that  sustain  the  proprietor  in  luxurious  ease.  Of  what  benefit  would  be  those 
pieces  of  silver,  gold,  or  paper  which  we  call  cash,  without  indefatigable  industry 
producing  the  necessaries  and  comfort  which  money  brings  ?  Would  shillings 
and  sovereigns  satisfy  the  cravings  of  hunger  ?  No  more  than  molten  gold  could 
assuage  thirst.     The  painter  must  lay  down  his  brush  and  palette,  the  poet  his 

Sen,  the  philosopher  suspend  his  experiments,  and  the  voice  of  the  orator  be 
umb,  the  jewelled  crown  become  a  worthless  bauble,  the  most  stately  palace 


chap,  xxvra.]  ISAIAH.  557 

become  a  region  of  desolation,  but  for  the  labour  of  the  agriculturist  and  fisher- 
man. (Ibid. )  Interdependence  of  the  man  of  leisure  and  the  son  of  toil ; — Labour 
is  the  foundation  on  which  the  mighty  fabric  of  human  society  rests,  and  none 
but  the  vain,  proud,  and  foolish  will  overlook  their  obligation  to  the  toilers. 
Acknowledged  reciprocity  of  advantage  should  bind  all  classes  together  in  one 
strong  common  bond  of  mutual  support ;  for  if  the  man  of  leisure  is  dependent  on 
those  sons  of  toil  for  the  very  necessity  of  existence,  it  is  equally  certain  that  to  such 
♦he  toilers  are  indebted  for  the  social  order  which  preserves  liberty  and  life,  for 
the  books  which  inspire  to  intellectual  elevation,  and  for  the  sciences  which  inde- 
finitely expand  the  compass  of  our  being.  If  the  arch  be  indebted  to  the  foundation  - 
stone  for  its  very  existence,  it  could  not  retain  its  graceful  sweep  or  strength  one 
moment  without  its  key-stone.  {Ibid.)  Doth  the  ploughman  plough  all  day 
to  sow? — The  ploughman .-—1.  Oub  text  may  be  answered  en  the  affirma- 
tive. "  Yes,  the  ploughman  does  plough  all  day  to  sow."  When  it  is  ploughing  - 
time  he  keeps  on  at  it  till  his  work  is  done  ;  if  it  requires  one  day,  or  two  days, 
or  twenty  days  to  finish  his  fields,  he  continues  at  his  task  while  the  weather 
permits.  1.  So  doth  God  plough  the  heart  of  man,  and  herein  is  His  patience. 
The  team  was  in  the  field  in  the  case  of  some  of  us  very  early  in  the  morning, 
for  our  first  recollections  have  to  do  with  conscience  and  the  furrows  of  paiu 
which  it  made  in  our  youthful  mind.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  have  remained 
an  unbeliever  all  these  years ;  but  yet  the  grace  of  God  does  not  stop  short  at 
a  certain  age.  2.  The  text  teaches  perseverance  on  our  part.  "  Doth  the  plough- 
man plough  all  day  T  "  Yes,  he  does.  (1)  Then  if  I  am  seeking  Christ,  ought 
I  to  be  discouraged  because  I  do  not  immediately  find  Him  T  (2)  The  same 
is  true  in  seeking  the  salvation  of  others.  Ploughing  is  hard  work  ;  but  as  there 
will  be  no  harvest  without  it,  let  us  put  forth  all  our  strength,  and  never  flag  till 
we  have  performed  our  Lord's  will,  and  by  His  Holy  Spirit  wrought  conviction 
in  men's  souls.  Some  soils  are  very  stiff,  and  cling  together,  and  the  labour 
is  heart-breaking  ;  others  are  like  the  unreclaimed  waste,  full  of  roots  and  tangled 
bramble ;  they  need  a  steam-plough,  and  we  must  pray  the  Lord  to  make  us 
such,  for  we  cannot  leave  them  untitled,  and  therefore  we  must  put  forth  mor>3 
strength  that  the  labour  may  be  done.  I  heard  some  time  ago  of  a  minister 
who  called  to  see  a  poor  man  who  was  dying,  but  he  was  not  able  to  gain  admittance ; 
he  called  the  next  morning,  and  some  idle  excuse  was  made  so  that  he  could  not 
see  him  ;  he  called  again  the  next  morning,  but  he  was  still  refused ;  he  went  on 
till  he  called  twenty  times  in  vain,  but  on  the  twenty-first  occasion  he  was  per- 
mitted to  see  the  sufferer,  and  by  God's  grace  he  saved  a  soul  from  death.  "  Why 
do  you  tell  your  child  a  thing  twenty  times  ?  "  asked  some  one  of  a  mother. 
"  Because,"  said  she,  "  I  find  nineteen  times  is  not  enough."  We  prize  that 
which  costs  us  labour  and  service,  and  we  shall  set  all  the  higher  value  upon  the 
saved  ones  when  the  Lord  grants  them  to  our  efforts.  It  is  good  for  us  to  learn 
the  value  of  our  sheaves  by  going  forth  weeping  to  the  sowing.  Start  close  to 
the  hedge,  and  go  right  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  field.  Plough  as  close  to  the 
ditch  as  you  can,  and  leave  small  headlands.  What  though  there  are  fallen 
women,  thieves,  and  drunkards  in  the  slums  around,  do  not  neglect  any  of  them  ; 
for  if  you  leave  a  stretch  of  land  to  the  weeds  they  will  soon  spread  amongst  the 
wheat.  When  you  have  gone  right  to  the  end  of  the  field  once,  what  shall  you 
do  next  t  Why,  just  turn  round,  and  make  for  the  placeyou  started  from.  And 
when  you  have  thus  been  up  and  down,  what  next  ?  Why,  up  and  down  again. 
And  what  next  ?  Why,  up  and  down  again.  Yon  have  Tisited  that  district 
with  tracts ;  do  it  again,  fifty-two  times  in  the  year — multiply  your  furrows. 
We  must  learn  how  to  continue  in  well-doing.  II.  The  text  may  be  answered 
en  the  negative.  "  Doth  the  ploughman  plough  all  day  to  sow  ?  "  No,  he 
does  not  always  plough.  After  he  has  ploughed  he  breaks  the  clods,  sows,  reaps, 
and  threshes.  In  the  chapter  before  us  you  will  see  that  other  works  of  husbandry 
are  mentioned.  The  ploughman  has  many  other  things  to  do  beside  ploughing. 
There  is  an  advance  in  what  he  does.  1.  On  God's  part,  there  is  an  advance 
in  what  He  does.  He  will  not  always  make  furrows  by  His  chiding.  He  will 
come  and  cast  in  the  precious  corn  of  consolation,  and  water  it  with  the  dews 
of  Heaven,  and  smile  upon  it  with  the  sunlight  of  His  grace  ;  and  there  shall 
soon  be  in  you,  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear, 
and  in  due  season  you  shall  joy  as  with  the  joy  of  harvest.  But  what  if  the  plough- 
ing should  never  lead  to  sowing ;  what  if  you  should  be  disturbed  in  conscience, 
and  should  go  on  to  resist  it  all  ?    Then  God  will  make  another  advance,  but 


C53  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvni. 

it  will  be  to  put  up  the  plough,  and  to  command  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no 
rain  upon  the  land,  and  then  its  end  is  to  be  burned.  2.  This  advance  is  a  lesson 
to  us ;  for  we,  too,  are  to  go  forward.  Don't  be  making  furrows  all  day ;  get 
to  your  sowing.  Let  the  ministers  of  Christ  follow  the  rule  of  advance.  Let  us 
go  from  preaching  the  law  to  preaching  the  Gospel.  You  cannot  get  a  harvest 
if  you  are  afraid  of  disturbing  the  soil,  nor  can  you  save  souls  if  you  never  warn 
them  of  hell  fire.  Still,  we  must  not  plough  all  day.  The  preaching  of  the  law 
is  only  preparatory  to  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  3.  Another  lesson  to  those 
of  you  who  are  as  yet  hearers  and  nothing  more.  I  want  you  to  go  from  plough- 
ing to  something  better,  namely,  from  hearing  and  fearing  to  believing.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Spiritual  husbandry  : — 1.  Never  was  seed  or  plant  better  adapted 
to  the  soil  than  the  Word  of  God  is  adapted  to  universal  man.  2.  Since  the  Bible 
is  adapted  to  our  moral  nature,  it  is  ours  to  adapt  our  lives  to  its  great  teachings. 
If  we  find  unseemly  pride  springing  up  in  the  soul,  let  us  go  and  see  the  terrible 
effects  of  self-confidence  by  the  Red  Sea,  as  Pharaoh  and  his  army  sink  into  its 
depths ;  or  by  the  plains  of  Babylon,  as  Nebuchadnezzar  herds  among  the  beasts. 
If  you  find  any  vice  growing  in  rank  deformity  in  your  soul,  go  and  look  at  the 
Deluge  or  the  Dead  Sea.  If  you  find  self-sufficiency  springing  up  in  the  heart, 
and  condemn  the  shortcomings  of  others,  go  and  listen  to  the  claims  of  God. 
How  penetrating !  far-reaching !  and  absolute !  If  everywhere  around  you, 
you  see  tokens  and  footprints  of  the  king  of  terrors,  in  mourning  garbs  and 
joyless  faces,  in  darkened  earthly  prospects,  go  listen  to  the  promises  of  immor- 
tality, the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  If  you  mark  manifestations  of  the  being 
of  an  awful  Deity,  go  find  a  near,  visible,  and  all-beneficent  Deity  whose  presence 
makes  the  earth  itself  a  heaven ;  get  proofs  of  His  love  by  its  being  shed  abroad 
in  your  own  heart.  If  you  see  around  you  all  nature  in  bondage,  groaning 
and  waiting  for  its  redemption,  go  see  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  in  which 
shall  dwell  righteousness.  (F.  Standfast. )  Beneficent  ploughing  : — When  the 
plough  of  God's  providence  first  cuts  up  a  man's  life,  what  wonder  if  the  man 
should  exclaim  a  little,  yea,  if  he  should  give  way  to  one  hour's  grief,  and  say 
he  thought  he  had  escaped  all  that  kind  of  treatment !  But  the  man  may  come 
to  himself  ere  eventide  and  say,  Plough  on,  Lord  ;  I  want  my  life  to  be  ploughed 
all  over  that  it  may  be  sown  all  over,  and  that  in  every  corner  there  may  be  golden 
grain  or  beautiful  flowers  :  pity  me  that  I  exclaimed  when  I  first  felt  the  plough- 
share, Thou  knowest  my  frame,  Thou  rememberest  that  I  am  but  dust,  but  now 
I  recollect,  I  put  things  together,  I  see  Thy  meaning ;  so  drive  on,  Thou  Plough- 
man of  eternity!  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  principal  wheat. — The  principal 
wheat : — I.  The  prophet  mentions  it  as  a  matter  of  wisdom  on  the  part  of  the 
husbandman  that  he  knows  what  is  the  principal  thing  to  cultivate,  and 
makes  it  his  principal  care.  Here  let  us  learn  a  lesson.  Do  keep  things  distinct 
in  your  minds.  Sort  things  out,  and  divide  and  distinguish  between  the  precious 
ana  the  vile.  The  farmer,  who  finds  that  wheat  ought  to  be  his  principal  crop, 
makes  it  so,  and  lays  himself  out  with  that  end  in  view :  learn  from  this  to  have 
a  main  object,  and  to  give  your  whole  mind  to  it.  1.  This  farmer  was  wise,  because 
he  counted  that  to  be  principal  which  was  the  most  needful.  His  family  could 
do  without  cummin,  which  was  but  a  flavouring.  They  certainly  must  have 
wheat,  for  bread  is  the  staff  of  life.  That  which  is  necessary  he  regarded  as  the 
principal  thing.  Is  not  this  common  sense  ?  A  creature  cannot  be  satisfied 
unless  he  is  answering  the  end  for  which  he  is  created ;  and  the  end  of  every 
intelligent  creature  is,  first,  to  glorify  God,  and  next,  to  enjoy  God.  Other  things 
may  be  desirable,  but  this  thing  is  needful.  Other  herbs  may  take  their  place 
in  due  order,  but  grace  is  the  principal  wheat,  and  we  must  cultivate  it.  2.  This 
farmer  was  wise,  because  he  made  that  to  be  the  principal  thing  which  was  the 
most  fit  to  be  so.  Of  course,  barley  is  useful  as  food,  for  nations  have  lived  on 
barley  bread,  and  lived  healthily  too  ;  and  rye  has  been  the  nutriment  of  millions : 
neither  have  they  starved  on  oats  and  other  grains.  Still,  give  me  a  piece  of 
wheaten  bread,  for  it  is  the  best  staff  for  life's  journey.  And  what  is  there  that 
is  so  fit  for  the  heart,  the  mind,  the  soul  of  man,  as  to  know  God  and  His  Christ  ? 
Other  mental  foods,  such  as  the  fruits  of  knowledge,  and  the  dainties  of  science, 
excellent  though  they  may  be — are  inferior  nutriment  and  unsuitable  to  build 
up  the  inner  manhood.  3.  Moreover,  this  farmer  was  wise,  because  he  made 
that  the  principal  thing  which  was  the  most  profitable.  Our  grandfathers  used 
to  rely  upon  the  wheat  stack  to  pay  their  rent.  The  figure  holds  good  with  regard 
to  spiritual  religion.    That  is  the  most  profitable  thing.     II.  The  husbandman 


chap,  xxvra.]  ISAIAH.  659 

is  a  lesson  to  us  because  hb  gives  this  principal  thing  the  principal  place. 
I  find  that  the  Hebrew  is  rendered  by  some  eminent  scholars,  "  He  puts  the  wheat 
into  the  principal  place."  That  little  handful  of  cummin  for  the  wife  to  flavour 
the  cakes  with  he  grows  in  a  corner ;  and  the  various  herbs  he  places  in  their 
proper  borders.  The  barley  he  sets  in  its  plot,  and  the  rye  in  its  acre ;  but  if 
there  is  a  good  bit  of  rich  soil  he  appropriates  it  to  the  principal  wheat.  He 
gives  his  choicest  fields  to  that  which  is  to  be  the  main  means  of  his  living.  Here 
is  a  lesson  for  you  and  me.  Let  us  give  to  true  godliness  our  principal  powers 
and  abilities.     1.  Let  us  give  to  the  things  of  God  our  best  and  most  intense  thought. 

2.  Be  sure,  also,  to  yield  to  this  subject  your  most  earnest  love.  3.  Towards 
God  and  His  Christ  also  turn  your  most  fervent  desires.  4.  Then,  let  the  Lord 
have  the  attentive  respect  of  your  life.  5.  We  should  give  to  this  principal 
wheat  our  most  earnest  labours.  6.  This  should  also  take  possession  of  us  so  as 
to  lead  to  our  greatest  sacrifices.  III.  The  husbandman  selects  the  principal 
seed-corn  when  hb  is  sowing  his  wheat.  When  a  farmer  is  setting  aside 
wheat  for  sowing,  he  does  not  choose  the  tail  corn  and  the  worst  of  his  produce, 
but  if  he  is  a  sensible  man  he  likes  to  sow  the  best  wheat  in  the  world.  Let  me 
learn  that  if  I  am  going  to  sow  to  the  Lord  and  to  be  a  Christian,  I  should  sow 
the  best  kind  of  Christianity.  1. 1  should  try  to  do  this  by  believing  the  weightiest 
doctrines.  I  would  believe  not  this  "  ism,"  nor  that,  but  the  unadulterated 
truth  which  Jesus  taught ;  for  a  holy  character  will  only  grow  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  out  of  true  doctrine.     2.  Next  to  that,  we  ought  to  sow  the  noblest  examples. 

3.  We  should  sow  the  best  wheat  by  seeing  that  we  have  the  purest  spirit.  4.  And 
then,  we  should  endeavour  to  live  in  closest  communion  with  God.  It  should 
be  our  desire  to  rise  to  the  highest  form  of  spiritual  life.  IV.  The  husbandman 
grows  the  principal  wheat  with  thb  principal  care.  It  is  said  that  the 
large  crops  in  Palestine  in  olden  time  were  due  to  the  fact  that  they  planted  the 
wheat.  They  set  it  in  lines,  so  that  it  was  not  checked  or  suffocated  by  its  being 
too  thick  in  one  place,  neither  was  there  any  fear  of  its  being  too  thin  in  another. 
The  wheat  was  planted,  and  then  streams  of  water  were  turned  by  the  foot  to 
each  particular  plant.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  land  brought  forth  abund- 
antly. We  should  give  our  principal  care  to  the  principal  thing.  Our  godliness 
should  be  carried  out  with  discretion  and  care.  V.  Do  this,  because  from  this 
you  may  expect  your  principal  crop.  If  religion  be  the  principal  thing,  you 
may  look  to  religion  for  your  principal  reward.  The  harvest  will  come  to  you 
in  various  ways.  You  will  make  the  greatest  success  in  this  life  if  you  wholly 
live  to  the  glory  of  God.  The  Eastern  farmer's  prosperity  hinges  on  his  wheat, 
and  yours  upon  your  devotion  to  God.  In  the  world  to  come  what  a  crop,  what 
a  harvest  will  come  of  serving  the  Lord  1     [C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  26-29.  For  his  God  doth  instruct  him. — Chastising  with  judgment : — 
More  literally,  and  with  better  significance,  "  And  he  chastiseth  it  with 
judgment;  his  God  doth  instruct  him."  This  judgment  is  shown  in  two  ways. 
(1)  In  the  choice  and  adaptation  of  the  mode  of  threshing.  There  were  four 
modes  in  use  among  the  Jews ;  first  there  was  the  wain,  a  very  ponderous  and 
formidable  instrument  brought  out  only  for  the  heavier  and  harder  kinds  of  fruits ; 
then  there  was  the  cart,  the  wheels  of  which  also  were  for  the  same  purpose ; 
then  there  was  the  horse  or  the  ox,  whose  feet  were  employed  to  tread  out  the 
corn;  and  then  there  was  the  staff,  an  instrument  corresponding  with  our  flail. 
Well,  says  the  prophet,  fitches,  the  lighter  kinds  of  seeds,  are  not  threshed  with  a 
wain,  nor  is  a  cart  wheel  turned  upon  the  cummin ;  upon  these  the  farmer,  using 
sound  judgment,  employs  only  a  staff  or  flail.  Bread  corn  requires  a  heavier 
threshing,  and  bread  corn  is  therefore  bruised.  But  (2)  he  does  not  go  on  threshing 
it  for  ever,  nor  does  he  continue  so  long  turning  the  wheel  of  his  cart  upon  it,  or 
crushing  it  with  his  horses,  that  it  is  broken  into  pieces  and  spoiled  ;  in  the  measure 
of  his  threshing  no  less  than  in  its  mode  does  he  exercise  discretion ;  in  the  amount 
which  he  inflicts  no  less  than  in  the  form  which  he  selects.  "  This  also  cometh  forth 
from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  is  wonderful  in  counsel,  and  excellent  in  working." 
(R.  H.  Roberts,  B.A.)  Tribulation  .-—Though  not  a  parable  in  form,  the  passage 
is  intended  to  be  parabolically  interpreted  by  us.  The  unsown  land  indicates 
human  nature  in  its  native  condition  ;  the  fruit  of  that  land  after  it  has  been 
sown  indicates  human  nature  taken  possession  of  by  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God. 
I.  Just  as  the  corn,  after  it  has  grown  up  from  the  seed  sown,  needs  the  cleansing 
process  of  threshing,  so  the  soul,  after  it  has  appropriated  the  gracb  o» 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvoi. 

God  in  salvation  thbough  faith,  needs  to  be  disciplined  and  chastened 
and  perfected  by  suffering.  It  used  to  be  a  great  puzzle  with  some  of  the 
Old  Testament  saints  why  a  man  of  God  should  be  subjected  to  trial.  Perhaps 
their  bewilderment  arose  out  of  the  exceeding  dimness  which  surrounded  a  future 
life ;  but  the  life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  in  the  Gospel  has  made  this  all 
clear  to  us,  and  the  suggestion  contained  in  the  figure  of  the  text,  whilst  it  cannot 
be  pressed  too  strictly,  may  be  taken  to  remind  us  that  in  our  first  salvation  we 
have  not  reached  our  final  development.  The  corn  is  not  grown  for  itself,  it  is 
meant  for  something  beyond ;  and  that  beyond  can  only  be  attained  through 
bruising.  It  must  be  beaten  into  its  future  life.  Even  so  our  salvation  is  only 
a  step  in  the  onward,  heavenward  progress ;  and  into  that  higher  king- 
dom we  must  enter  through  the  narrow  pass  of  tribulation.  This  is  Christ's 
teaching.  "  Every  branch  in  Me  that  beareth  fruit,  He  purgeth  it."  This  is 
brought  out,  too,  in  the  words  of  John  the  Baptist  regarding  Christ.  "I,"  he 
says,  "  baptize  you  with  water,  but  He  will  baptize  you  in  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
in  fire."  When  first  we  are  separated  from  the  rook  of  nature  and  raised  out  of 
the  pit  of  corruption,  we  are  like  iron  ore,  having  in  us  a  vast  deal  of  dross  which 
must  become  slag  and  refuse,  and  we  need  the  blast-furnace  not  only  that  this  dross 
may  be  removed,  but  that  we  may  be  in  a  condition  to  run  into  the  mould,  and  so 
take  the  shape  which  the  Master  desires,  and  be  prepared  for  the  utilities  unto  which 
He  destines  us.  It  often  happens,  too,  that  the  more  noble  the  elements  which 
exist  in  a  man,  the  more  severe  is  the  process  required  unto  the  perfecting  of  their 
possibilities.  Corn  wants  heavier  threshing  than  cummin,  not  because  it  is  less 
valuable,  but  because  its  superior  value  gives  it  a  greater  power  of  resistance  and 
makes  it  worth  while  to  accept  the  heavier  toil.    II.  The  discipline  experienced 

BY  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GOD  WILL  BE  CERTAINLY  SUCH  AS  IS  BEST  ADAPTED  TO  SECURE 

THE  highest  possible  ends.  It  is  being  administered  and  superintended  by  One 
who,  whilst  He  sets  much  value  upon  them,  is  distinguished  by  the  profoundest 
wisdom.  And  we  may  be  sure  that  His  wisdom  will  be  applied  to  the  adaptation 
of  the  discipline  to  the  character  with  which  He  has  to  deal ;  the  husbandman  does 
not "  thresh  fitches  with  a  wain,  nor  is  a  cart  wheel  turned  about  upon  the  cummin ; 
but  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  with  a  staff,  and  the  cummin  with  a  rod."  You 
look  at  your  children  and  you  discriminate ;  you  say  that  boy  has  a  sensitive, 
gentle,  yielding  nature,  and  I  must  be  careful  that  I  do  not  handle  him  too  roughly, 
lest  I  brush  the  bloom  off  and  spoil  the  possible  beauty  which,  by  careful  training, 
may  be  made  to  blossom  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  that  lad  is  made  of  a  coarser 
grain,  which  is  not  readily  injured,  and  with  a  dash  of  self-will  and  obstinacy  in 
it,  upon  which  I  must  lay  a  firm  and  strong  hand.  And  so,  it  may  be,  you  put 
your  arm  around  the  one,  and  you  have  a  rod  for  the  other ;  and  yet  all  the  while 
you  mean  the  same  by  both.  He  who  is  wonderful  in  counsel  is  also  wonderful 
in  working.  (R.  H.  Roberts,  B.A.)  The  ploughman  taught  of  Qod : — Let  us 
contemplate  the  method  of  the  Divine  teaching.  The  ploughman  teaches  us — 
I.  A  lesson  of  preparation.  God  prepared  much  for  man  before  He  introduced 
him  into  Eden.  God  would  not  bring  His  favourite  creature  man  into  a  dreary, 
cheerless  world,  but  into  one  glowing  with  beauty,  impressive  in  magnificence,  over- 
flowing with  goodness.  II.  A.  lesson  of  activity.  The  ploughman  has  passed 
the  time  of  deliberation ;  he  has  decided,  and  decision  has  led  to  action.  There 
is  much  truth  in  Bacon's  complaint,  "  That  some  men  object  too  much,  consult 
too  long,  adventure  too  little,  repent  too  soon,  and  seldom  drive  business  home." 
This  aphorism  applies,  alas,  to  too  many  alike  in  the  world  and  the  Church.  Ulysses 
could  not  discover  a  happier  method  of  making  his  foes  believe  in  his  insanity 
than  by  ploughing  up  the  sand  by  the  seashore.  How  much  quick-witted  invention 
degenerates  to  the  same  folly  !  Often  within  the  Church,  where  heavenly  wisdom 
ought  to  shine,  matters  are  not  much  improved.  How  many  are  at  ease  in  Zion  ! 
How  many  shirk  the  ploughing  altogether  1  How  many  let  noxious  weeds  grow 
apace  t  How  many  miss  the  time  of  open-handed  sowing,  and  yet  expect  to 
wake  up  when  the  song  of  harvest-home  fills  the  air,  and  to  gather  their  own 
golden  sheaves !  There  is  still  a  sense  in  which  the  children  of  the  world  are 
wiser  than  the  children  of  light.    Many  of  these  count  years  not  wasted  to  acquire 

Eficienoy  in  mere  vanities  and  trivialities  over  which  angels  well  may  weep. 
,  A  lesson  of  prudence.  "  God  giveth  him  discretion."  All  toil  that  is 
honest,  is  honourable,  but  that  is  the  most  honourable  which  employs  the  greatest 
variety  of  our  powers.  How  much  of  the  service  offered  to  pomp,  pride,  vanity, 
and  fashion  lacks  discretion  I    This  faculty  of  discretion  men  are  called  upon  to 


chap,  xxvra.]  ISAIAH.  56! 

exercise  daily.  Prudence  or  discretion  is  a  good  commander-in-chief :  it  has 
won  battles  over  the  stubbornness  of  the  soil,  the  inclemency  of  the  climate,  the 
stormy  elements.  If  we  thoughtfully  and  prayerfully  take  care  of  our  own  actions, 
God  will  take  care  of  results.  We  have  no  right  to  tempt  providence  in  any  part 
of  its  wide  domains.  He  who  walks  in  dangerous  ways  will  perish  in  them,  even 
as  Josiah — favourite  of  God  though  he  was — was  wounded  unto  death,  because 
he  pressed  further  against  his  enemies  than  the  words  of  God  permitted.  IV.  A 
lesson  of  oeder.  The  discreet  husbandman  ploughs  in  the  proper  season  in 
order  that  the  Lord's  plough,  the  frost,  may  pulverise  the  soil  a  thousand  times 
finer  than  any  human  implement.  And  is  not  order  one  of  the  greatest  of  Heaven's 
Appointed  laws  ?  The  Church  itself  is  to  be  an  army  with  banners,  to  consist 
of  governors  and  governed,  some  to  tend,  some  to  serve,  some  to  hear.  Evolve 
your  heaven  in  due  order,  out  of  holy  desires,  pure  affection,  spiritual  principle, 
full  consecration.  (F.  Standfast.)  The  need  and  measure  of  afflictive  dispensa- 
tions : — I.  The  need  of  trial  to  the  children  of  God.  To  the  wicked  afflictions 
may  come  as  present  manifestations  of  Divine  displeasure,  and  most  unwelcome 
earnests  of  future  judgment.  And  God  may  cause  the  very  pleasant  vices  in 
which  they  indulged  to  become  whips  and  scourge  them.  As  for  the  children  of 
God,  however, — the  corn,  the  fitches,  and  the  cummin,  it  is  not  so  with  them. 
Every  providential  dealing  of  their  Heavenly  Father  is  linked  with  the  intentions 
of  His  grace,  and  subserves  them.  The  grain  is  beaten,  the  corn  is  bruised,  that 
they  may  become  useful  to  man,  in  providing  him  with  food.  Even  so,  afflictions 
may  be  for  the  good  of  others,  as  well  as  for  the  glory  of  God.     II.  The  wisb 

AND  GRACIOUS  MANNER  IN  WHICH  GOD  LAYS  AFFLICTION  ON  HlS  CHILDREN.      The 

text  beautifully  exhibits  the  skilful  and  tender  adaptation  of  means  to  their  end. 
(R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  Threshing: — I.  We  all  need  threshing.  What 
is  the  object  of  threshing  the  grain  ?  Is  it  not  to  separate  it  from  the  straw  and 
the  chaff  ?  1.  About  the  best  of  men  there  is  still  a  measure  of  chaff.  There 
is  something  superfluous,  something  which  must  be  removed.  Either  in  spirit,  or 
motive,  or  lack  of  zeal,  or  want  of  discretion,  we  are  faulty,  if  before  an 
action  we  are  right,  we  err  in  the  doing  of  it,  or,  if  not,  we  become  proud 
after  it  ia  over.  If  sin  be  shut  out  at  the  front  door,  it  tries  the  back  gate,  or 
climbs  in  at  the  window,  or  comes  down  the  chimney.  Those  who  cannot  perceive 
it  in  themselves  are  frequently  blinded  by  its  smoke.  They  are  so  thoroughly 
in  the  water  that  they  do  not  know  that  it  rains.  2.  Threshing  is  useful  in  loosen- 
ing the  connection  between  the  good  corn  and  the  husk.  If  it  would  slip  out 
easily  from  its  husk,  the  corn  would  only  need  to  be  shaken.  But  there's  the 
rub :  our  soul  not  only  lieth  in  the  dust,  but  "  cleaveth  "  to  it.  As  the  work  of 
threshing  is  never  done  till  the  corn  is  separated  altogether  from  the  husk,  so 
chastening  and  discipline  have  never  accomplished  their  design  till  God's  people 
give  up  every  form  of  evil,  and  abhor  all  iniquity.  Threshing  becomes  needful 
for  the  sake  of  our  usefulness  ;  for  the  wheat  must  come  out  of  the  husk  to  be 
of  service.  Eminent  usefulness  usually  necessitates  eminent  affliction.  3.  The 
threshing  instrument  is  a  prophecy  of  our  future  perfection.  II.  God's  threshing 
is  done  with  great  discretion.  1.  Reflect  that  your  threshing  and  mine  are  in 
God's  hands.  Our  chastening  is  not  left  to  servants,  much  less  to  enemies ;  "  we 
are  chastened  of  the  Lord  "  !  How  roughly  some  ministers,  some  good  men  and 
women  will  go  to  work  with  timid,  tender  souls ;  yet  we  need  not  fear  that  they 
will  destroy  the  true-hearted,  for,  however  much  they  may  vex  them,  the  Lord 
will  not  leave  His  chosen  in  their  hands,  but  will  overrule  their  mistaken  severity, 
and  preserve  His  own  from  being  destroyed  thereby.  As  the  Lord  has  not  left 
us  in  the  power  of  man,  so  also  He  has  not  left  us  in  the  power  of  the  deviL  Satan 
may  sift  us  as  wheat,  but  he  shall  not  thresh  us  as  fitches.  He  may  blow  away 
the  chaff  from  us  even  with  his  foul  breath,  but  he  shall  not  have  the  management 
of  the  Lord's  corn.  "  The  Lord  preserveth  the  righteous."  2.  The  instruments 
used  for  our  threshing  are  chosen  also  by  the  great  Husbandman.  The  Eastern 
fanner  has  several  instruments,  and  so  has  our  God.  Xo  form  of  threshing  is 
pleasant  to  the  seed  which  bears  it ;  indeed,  each  one  seems  to  the  sufferer  to  be 
peculiarly  objectionable.  3.  God  not  only  selects  the  instruments,  but  He  chooses 
the  place.  Farmers  in  the  East  have  large  threshing-floors  upon  which  they 
throw  the  sheaves  of  corn  or  barley,  and  upon  these  they  turn  horses  and  drags ; 
but  near  the  house  door  I  have  often  noticed  in  Italy  a  much  smaller  circle  of 
hardened  clay  or  cement,  and  here  I  have  seen  the  peasants  beating  out  their 
garden  seeds  in  a  more  careful  manner  than  would  naturally  be  used  towards  the 

36 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap    xxvie. 

greater  heaps  upon  the  larger  area.  Some  saints  are  not  afflicted  in  the  common 
affairs  of  life,  but  they  have  peculiar  sorrow  in  their  innermost  spirits :  tbey  are 
beaten  on  the  smaller  and  more  private  threshing-floor ;  but  the  process  is  none 
the  less  effectual.  4.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  in  the  text  the  limit  of  this  thresh- 
ing. The  husbandman  is  zealous  to  beat  out  the  seed,  but  he  is  careful  not  t/v 
break  it  in  pieces  by  too  severe  a  process.  In  the  same  way  the  Lord  has  a  measure 
in  all  His  chastening.  The  wisdom  of  the  husbandman  in  limiting  his  threshing 
is  far  exceeded  in  the  wisdom  of  God  by  which  He  sets  a  limit  to  our  griefs.  We 
see  that  our  God  uses  discretion  in  the  chastisement  of  His  people ;  let  us  use  a 
loving  prudence  when  we  have  to  deal  with  others  in  that  way.  Be  gentle  as 
well  as  firm  with  your  children  ;  and  if  you  have  to  rebuke  your  brother  do  it 
very  tenderly.  Do  not  drive  your  horses  over  the  tender  seed.  III.  The  thresh- 
ing will  not  last  for  EVER.  The  threshing  will  not  last  all  our  days  even  here. 
"  Bread  corn  is  bruised,  but  He  will  not  always  be  threshing  it."  Oh,  no !  "  He 
will  not  always  chide,  neither  will  He  keep  His  anger  for  ever."  "  Weeping  may 
endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning."  Threshing  is  not  an  operation 
which  the  corn  requires  all  the  year  round ;  for  the  most  part  the  flail  is  idle. 
Then,  we  shall  soon  be  gone  to  another  and  better  world.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
How  the  Lord  threshes  us : — I.  It  is  no  complement  to  its  if  we  escape  great 
trial.  IL.  God  proportions  our  trials  to  what  wb  can  bear.  III.  Goo 
keeps  trial  ON  us  until  wb  let  GO.  The  farmer  shouts  "  whoa  !  "  to  his  horses 
as  soon  as  the  grain  has  dropped  from  the  stalk.  The  farmer  comes  with  his  fork 
and  tosses  up  the  straw,  and  he  sees  that  the  straw  has  let  go  the  grain,  and  the 
grain  is  thoroughly  threshed.  So  God.  Smiting  rod  and  turning  wheel,  but 
cease  as  soon  as  we  let  go.  We  hold  on  to  this  world  with  its  pleasures,  and  riches, 
and  emoluments,  and  our  knuckles  are  so  firmly  set  that  it  seems  as  if  we  could 
hold  on  for  ever.  God  comes  along  with  some  threshing  troubles,  and  beats  us 
loose.  IV.  Christian  sorrow  is  going  to  have  a  sure  terminus.  (T.  De 
Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  wisdom  of  God  in  discipline  : — Some  men  require 
very  little  hard  usage.  A  tap  will  do,  a  gentle  stroke,  a  touch  that  hardly  amounts 
to  a  blow,  a  ministry  that  may  be  wrought  out  with  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Other 
men  require  flail,  and  iron  instrument,  and  harrow,  and  cart  wheel,  and  rough 
treatment:  they  are  differently  organised,  they  are  differently  constituted.  What 
would  be  thought  of  a  man  who  blew  up  birds'  nests  with  gunpowder  ?  Who 
would  not  say,  There  is  great  want  of  proportion  in  that  man's  method  of  looking 
St  things  ;  he  is  expending  far  too  much  energy  upon  the  object  ?  So  with  regard 
to  the  Divine  discipline.  Some  men  could  be  almost  brought  to  fulness  or  fruition 
by  a  smile.  Of  some  men  God  says,  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven ; 
one  little  step  would  bring  thee  right  home.  God  whispers  some  men  into  heaven. 
But  what  thunder  He  needs  for  others  !  God  treats  character  according  to  the 
variety  of  character.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Chastisement  not  pleasant : — There 
is  no  pleasing  us  in  the  matter  of  chastisement.  When  I  was  at  school,  with 
my  uncle  for  master,  it  often  happened  that  he  would  send  me  out  to  find  a  cane 
for  him.  It  was  not  a  very  pleasant  task,  and  I  noticed  that  I  never  once  succeeded 
in  selecting  a  stick  which  was  liked  by  the  boy  who  had  to  feel  it.  Either  it  was  too 
thin,  or  too  stout;  and  in  consequence  I  was  threatened  by  the  sufferers  with 
condign  punishment  if  I  did  not  do  better  next  time.  I  learned  from  that  experi- 
ence never  to  expect  God's  children  to  like  the  particular  rod  with  which  they  are 
chastened.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Moral  threshing  : — We  all  go  through  some  kind 
of  threshing  process.  The  fact  that  you  may  be  devoting  your  life  to  honourable 
and  noble  purposes  will  not  win  you  any  escape.  Wilberforce,  the  Christian 
emancipator,  waa  in  his  day  derisively  called  "  Doctor  Cantwell."  Thomas 
Babington  Macaulay,  the  advocate  of  all  that  was  good  long  before  he  became 
the  most  conspicuous  historian  of  his  day,  was  caricatured  in  one  of  the  Quarterly 
Reviews  as  '*  Babble- tongue  Macaulay."  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The 
higher  nature  requires  the  more  force : — "  Bread  corn  is  bruised."  There  are  more 
blows  given  by  the  sculptor  to  carve  a  saint  or  angel  than  by  the  mason  to  square  a 
paving-stone.  (F.  Standfast.)  Tribulation  comes  from  the  word  "tribulum," 
and  tribulum  means  a  threshing  instrument.  Whatever  the  man  used  who  was 
treating  the  growth  in  its  latest  phases  was  called  a  tribulum,  and  he  tribulated 
the  harvest  into  bread.  The  seed  did  not  go  from  the  field  into  the  oven  ;  it  had 
to  undergo  the  action  of  the  tribulum.  Watch  it  there :  what  is  that  seed  now 
undergoing  T  Tribulation.  This  is  the  bread  that  came  out  of  much  tribulating, 
tribulation,  tearing  asunder,  shaking,  beating.     [J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


chap,  xxvui.]  ISAIAH.  663 

Ver.  29.  The  Lord  of  hosts,  which  is  wonderful  in  counsel. — God's  presidency 
over  all  things : — Let  us  consider  this  point  as  related  to — I.  The  Bible  and  its 
contents.  This  Book,  to  the  secular  world,  is  a  perpetual  puzzle.  What  amazing 
power  it  has  exerted  in  the  world,  and  what  exalting  energy  !  Yet  it  is  the  litera- 
ture of  a  people  comparatively  insignificant,  to  whom  we  are  not  drawn  as  we 
have  been  toward  the  august  grandeur  of  Roman  genius,  or  to  the  poetic  and 
philosophic  Greek.  It  is  the  oldest  of  books,  large,  obscure  in  some  things,  but 
bold  in  its  challenges  to  geologist,  astronomer,  and  men  of  science ;  provoking 
discussion  at  a  thousand  points.  Think  of  the  mysteries  of  doctrine — the  Trinity, 
the  Incarnation,  and  the  future  life — what  can  we  do  ?  A  tone  of  authority 
over  our  convictions  and  judgments  is  assumed.  The  thoughts  of  the  Bible 
are  God's  thoughts.  II.  The  redemption  op  Christ.  This  is  too  vast,  grand, 
marvellous  to  be  understood  without  this  illuminating  truth.  III.  In  the  spiritual 
sphere,  in  the  soul  of  man.  We  act  on  man's  feelings  through  his  judgment, 
or  upon  his  judgment  through  his  sensibilities.  Yet  how  feebly !  But  all  these 
are  open  to  the  royal,  inspiring  Spirit  of  God.  IV.  The  method  and  develop- 
ment op  providence  in  the  world.  Gathering  up  some  of  the  results  of  this 
survey,  we  may  see — 1.  How  Christendom  is  builded.  Coleridge  speaks  fitly 
of  "  the  miracle  of  Christendom,"  for  the  tendency  of  society,  unilluminated  by 
the  Gospel,  ever  has  been  downward.  2.  We  should  read  the  future  in  the  same 
light.  If  God  be  behind  all  the  movements  of  history,  there  is  no  room  for  dis- 
couragement. At  important  crises  He  will  interfere,  putting  forth  silent  forces, 
perhaps,  but  terrific  in  energy.  3.  There  is  a  city  of  God  for  me.  His  promises, 
thick  as  the  fragments  of  the  jasper  floor,  will  all  be  redeemed.  (R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.) 
The  wonderfulness  of  God's  counsel : — The  context  presents  to  us  physical  husbandry 
in  two  very  different  aspects.  (1)  As  the  effect  of  God's  teaching.  (2)  As  the 
emblem  of  God's  teaching.  God's  counsel  is  wonderful  in  all  His  departments 
of  action  as  Creator,  Sovereign,  and  Redeemer.  Our  illustration  shall  be  taken  from 
the  nature,  formation,  and  propagation  of  the  redemptive  system.  I.  Its  nature 
is  wonderful.  What  is  it  ?  One  word,  perhaps,  will  best  describe  it.  Reconcilia- 
tion. To  see  its  wonderfulness  think  of  four  things.  1.  That  the  reconciliation 
originates  with  the  offended  party.  2.  The  offended  party,  who  seeks  the  recon- 
ciliation, is  infinitely  superior  to  the  offender.  3.  The  offended  party,  who  is 
infinitely  superior,  offers  reconciliation  to  the  lowest  class  of  His  foes.  There  are 
two  great  classes  of  enemies  to  God — fallen  angels  and  fallen  men  ;  men  are  the 
inferior.  Yet  He  passed  by  the  angels  and  took  hold  upon  the  seed  of  Abraham. 
4.  The  offended  party,  who  is  infinitely  superior,  offers  reconciliation  to  the 
lowest  classes  of  His  foes  at  a  most  stupendous  sacrifice.  II.  Its  formation  is 
wonderful.  How  is  this  system  of  reconciliation  formed  ?  There  are  two 
things  as  to  the  mode  which  show  the  wonderfulness  of  the  arrangement.  1.  Its 
gradualness.  We,  when  we  have  a  work  to  do,  to  which  we  attach  importance, 
hurry  at  it,  and  are  impatient  for  its  accomplishment ;  but  God,  to  ripen  this 
scheme,  took  four  thousand  long  years.  2.  Its  instruments.  When  we  have  a 
work  to  do,  we  select  the  best  men  we  can  get.  God  employed  the  agenc  /  of 
wicked  men  in  the  working  out  of  His  great  reconciling  plan.  "  Him,  being 
delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,"  &c.  III.  Its 
propagation  is  wonderful.  Three  things  show  the  wonderfulness  of  its  propaga- 
tion. 1.  The  character  of  the  persons  to  whom  its  propagation  was  first  entrusted. 
To  whom  did  He  commit  the  ministry  of  this  wonderful  scheme  T  To  the  magnates, 
or  the  literati  of  His  age  ?  No,  to  a  few  poor  fishermen.  2.  The  class  of  persona 
to  whom  it  was  first  offered.  The  greatest  sinners  on  earth  ;  the  sinners  at 
Jerusalem,  who  imbrued  their  hands  in  the  blood  of  His  only  begotten  Son. 
3.  The  pressing  of  it  on  the  attention  of  those  who  frequently  reject  it.  (Homilist.) 
A  feast  for  faith  : — (1)  The  sentiment  of  the  text  on  the  surface  is,  that  the  art 
and  science  and  skill  of  man,  are  the  gifts  of  God.  (2)  If  God  thus  instructs 
man  in  wisdom,  how  wise  must  He  be  Himself !  I.  Let  us  behold  the  vision  of 
God  which  is  presented  to  us  in  the  text.  1.  God  does  not  work  without  a 
plan.  2.  This  plan  is  wonderful  in  itself,  and  is  found  to  be  excellent  when  it 
is  carried  out.  (1)  This  is  illustrated  in  nature.  (2)  In  providence.  (3)  In 
personal  experience.  (4)  In  the  great  economy  of  redemption.  (5)  In  the 
Gospel.  This  Gospel  is  suited  to  the  most  abject  and  depraved.  Many  preachers 
have  had  to  confess  the  upelessness  of  mere  moral  preaching ;  one  of  ihem  said 
he  preached  up  honesty  till  his  parish  swarmed  with  thieves.  (6)  The  experience 
of  every  Christian  is,  in  some  respects,  different  from  the  experience  of  every 


564  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvnr. 

other,  but  it  is  the  result  of  God's  plan.  (7)  The  use  of  instrumentality.  It  is 
a  wonderful  design  of  God  to  use  one  man  to  be  the  means  of  the  conversion  of 
another,  because  the  man  who  does  the  work  is  as  much  benefited  as  the  man 
upon  whom  the  work  is  done.  (8)  The  grandest  illustration  of  all  will  be  when, 
at  the  last,  God's  counsels  shall  be  perfectly  fulfilled.  II.  Some  of  the  lessons 
from  rr.  I.  I  have  a  word  to  say  to  those  unconverted  persons  who  have  some 
desire  after  salvation.  I  would  to  God  that,  seeing  His  counsel  is  so  wondrous, 
you  would  agree  to  it.  It  is  in  His  counsel  that  sinners  shall  be  saved  by  grace 
through  believing  in  Christ.  2.  Another  word  to  you,  the  people  of  God.  Agree 
to  this  in  your  own  particular  case.  You  say,  "  I  cannot  understand  God's 
dealings  with  me."  As  if  it  were  expected  that  you  should  !  But  you  also  add, 
"  I  cannot  believe  that  God  has  good  designs  in  it."  John  said  that  if  a  man 
did  not  believe  God,  he  made  God  a  liar,  and  so  you  who  do  not  believe  in  God's 
wisdom  make  Him  a  fool  1  Do  you  not  shrink  from  that  T  3.  I  now  desire  to 
speak  to  my  fellow- workers.  When  we  are  going  to  work  for  God  do  not  let  us 
be  in  such  a  mighty  hurry.  Let  us  have  a  well-formed  plan,  and  let  it  be  God's 
plan.  4.  When  we  know  God's  plan  we  must  carry  it  out.  5.  Expect  singular 
assistance.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  council-chamber  and  workshop : — The 
Lord  of  hosts  is  seen  by  the  enlightened  eye,  first  of  all  in  His  council-chamber, 
and  then  in  His  great  workshop.  He  is  "  wonderful  in  counsel " ;  He  is 
"excellent  in  working."  (Ibid.)  The  husbandman  taught  by  God: — Some  may 
remember  the  story  of  a  Rugby  public-school  boy,  who  heard  when  studying  at 
Oxford  of  the  sudden  death  of  Dr.  Arnold,  his  old  head-master,  and  lamented 
it  bitterly,  as  indeed  every  one  who  had  known  him  did,  but  turned  to  a  com- 

E anion  who  sat  by,  and  remarked  that,  after  all,  he  perhaps  owed  more  personal 
enefit  to  a  dearly  loved  school  friend,  then  dead,  than  to  his  master's  influence. 
"  You  did  not  know,  then,"  said  his  companion,  "  that  Dr.  Arnold  chose  him  for 
you,  and  gave  him  to  you  purposely  for  your  sake  ?  "  This  was  a  revelation  to 
the  youth  which  completely  overcame  him,  and  after  which  he  was  ready  to  fall 
down  and  worship  his  good  head- master's  memory.  A  strong  feeling  often  exists 
in  a  manly,  vigorous  farmer  and  hard-working  men  employed  under  him  to  this 
effect  at  harvest-time :  "  We  raised  those  good  crops,  we  raised  and  thatched 
those  fine  stacks,  and  we  deserve  what  we  have  got."  Yes,  you  did,  replies  the 
text,  for  Divine  providence  taught  and  instructed  you.  (C.  S.  Bird,  M.A.) 
The  Almighty  the  all-methodical : — This  last  word  of  the  chapter  is  very  expres- 
sive. It  literally  means  furtherance,  help,  salvation,  and  then  the  true  wisdom 
or  insight  which  ensures  these :  the  wisdom  which  carries  things  through.  It 
splendidly  sums  up  Isaiah's  Gospel  to  the  Jews,  cowering  like  dogs  before  the 
coming  calamity :  God  is  not  mere  force  or  vengeance.  His  judgments  are 
not  chaos.  But  "  He  is  wonderful  in  counsel,"  and  all  His  ways  have  "  further- 
ance "  or  "salvation"  for  their  end.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Jehovah 
wonderful  in  counsel : — In  one  of  the  squares  of  the  Public  Garden  in  Boston  is 
a  unique  granite  monument.  On  it  are  several  devices  symbolic  of  its  design. 
On  one  side  are  the  words,  "  To  commemorate  the  fact  that  the  inhaling  of  ether 
produces  insensibility  to  pain ;  first  proved  to  the  world  at  the  Massachusetts 
General  Hospital  in  October,  a.d.  1856."  On  another  side  is  a  quotation  from 
Isaiah,"  This  also  cometh  from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  is  wonderful  in  counsel, 
and  excellent  in  working."  On  another  side  are  the  Revelator's  words,  "  There 
shall  be  no  more  pain."  The  monument  is  a  testimony  that  relief  from  suffering 
is  an  outcome  of  the  Gospel,  and  that  the  means  thereto  are  from  the  Lord. 
(Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)  God  wonderful  in  counsel,  and  excellent  in  work- 
ing : — When  you  see  a  plan  in  an  architect's  office  that  is  very  new  and  very 
pretty  to  look  at,  you  say,  "  Ah !  nothing  has  been  done  with  it "  ;  but  when 
you  see  a  plan  that  is  smudgy  and  torn  and  almost  broken  through  where  it  has 
been  folded,  you  know  that  the  man  has  done  something  with  it.  When  Dr. 
Guthrie  wanted  his  ragged-schools  founded,  he  called  on  a  certain  minister, 
who  said.  "  Well,  you  know,  Mr.  Guthrie,  there  is  nothing  very  new  in  your 
scheme ;  I  and  Mr.  So-and-so  have  been  thinking  over  a  similar  plan  to  yours 
for  the  last  twenty  years."  "  Oh,  yes,"  said  Dr.  Guthrie,  "  I  dare  say ;  but 
you  have  never  carried  it  out."  So  some  people  are  always  thinking  over  some 
very  fine  plan  of  their  own ;  but  while  the  grass  grows  the  steed  starves.  Now 
the  God  who  plans,  also  works.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


chap,  xxix.]  ISAIAH.  565 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Vbb.  1.  Woe  to  Ariel. — Arid  : — The  simplest  meaning  of  *'  Ariel "  is  "  lion 
of  God  "  ;  but  it  also  signifies  "  hearth  of  God  "  when  derived  from  another 
root.  In  the  former  sense  it  comes  to  mean  "  a  hero,"  as  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  20 ; 
Isa.  xxxiii.  7  ;  and  in  the  latter  it  occurs  in  Ezek.  xliii.  15,  16  for  the  brazen 
hearth  of  the  great  altar  of  burnt-offerings,  thence  commonly  called  "  the  brazen," 
though  the  rest  of  it  was  of  stone.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Jerusalem  is  pointed 
out  by  this  enigmatical  name ;  and  the  immediate  context,  as  well  as  the  expression 
in  chap.  xxxi.  9 — "  Jehovah,  whose  fire  is  in  Zion,  and  His  furnace  in  Jerusalem  " — 
makes  it  probable  that  Isaiah  intended  to  involve  both  meanings  in  the  word, 
as  though  he  had  said,  "  Woe  to  the  city  of  heroes,  woe  to  the  city  of  sacrifices  : 
it  shall  now  be  put  to  the  test  what  God  and  what  man  think  as  to  both."  (Sir 
E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Jerusalem,  "  the  lion  of  Ood  "  : — David,  that  lion  of  God, 
had  first  encamped  against  Jerusalem,  and  then  made  it  the  abode  of  his  royal 
house,  and  the  capital  of  his  kingdom ;  so  that  it  became  itself  an  Ariel,  the  lion 
of  God,  in  the  land  (Gen.  xlix.  9,  10).  (Ibid.)  Jerusalem,  "  the  hearth  of 
God  "  ; — By  David's  pitching  his  camp  and  then  bringing  the  sacred  ark  there, 
Jerusalem  became  God's  hearth.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  Ariel: — The  Rabbins  com- 
bine the  two  explanations  of  the  Hebrew  word  by  supposing  that  the  altar  was 
itself  called  the  lion  of  God,  because  it  devoured  the  victims  like  a  lion,  or  because 
the  fire  on  it  had  the  appearance  of  a  lion,  or  because  the  altar  (or  the  temple) 
was  in  shape  like  a  lion,  that  is,  narrow  behind  and  broad  in  front.  (J.  A. 
Alexander. )  Ariel  : — In  either  case  applied  as  a  symbol  of  hope.  "  But  she 
shall  be  unto  Me  as  an  Ariel,"  i.e.,  in  the  extremity  of  her  need  I  will  enable  her 
to  verify  her  name  (Cheyne).  (Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.)  Woe  to  Ariel : — 
After  the  vicissitudes  of  300  years,  and  in  the  midst  of  present  dangers,  the  people 
of  Jerusalem  were  still  confident  in  the  strength  of  their  "  lion  of  God,"  and  year 
by  year  came  up  to  the  public  festivals  to  lay  their  accustomed  offeiings  on  the 
"  altar  of  God  "  ;  though  with  little  remembrance  that  it  was  not  in  the  altar 
and  the  city,  but  in  Jehovah  Himself,  that  David  put  trust,  and  found  his  strength. 
Therefore  Jehovah  will  bring  Ariel  low  ;  the  proud  roar  of  the  lion  shall  be  changed 
for  the  weak,  stridulous  voice,  which  the  art  of  the  ventriloquising  necromancer 
brings  out  of  the  ground  ;  and  the  enemies  of  Jehovah  shall  be  sacrificed  and 
consumed  on  the  hearth  if  this  altar.  First,  His  spiritual  enemies  among  the 
Jews  themselves,  but  afterwards  the  heathen  oppressors  of  His  people ;  and  the 
lion  shall  recover  his  God-derived  strength;  and  thus,  both  in  adversity  and 
in  success,  "  it  shall  be  unto  Me  as  Ariel."  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  Woe 
to  Ariel : — The  prophet  has  a  very  startling  message  to  deliver :  that  God  wiE 
besiege  His  own  city,  the  city  of  David  !  Before  God  can  make  her  in  truth 
His  own,  make  her  verify  her  name,  He  will  have  to  beleaguer  and  reduce  her. 
For  so  novel  and  startling  an  intimation  the  prophet  pleads  a  precedent :  "  City 
which  David  "  himself  "  beleaguered."  Once  before  in  thy  history,  ere  the  first  time 
thou  wast  made  God's  own  hearth,  thou  hadst  to  be  besieged.  As  then,  so  now. 
Before  thou  canst  again  be  a  true  Ari-El  I  must  "  beleaguer  thee  like  David." 
This  reading  and  interpretation  gives  to  the  enigma  a  reason  and  a  force  which 
it  does  not  otherwise  possess.  (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  "  The  city  where 
David  dwelt "  : — We  consider  it  every  way  remarkable  that  David  should  be 
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  woe  about  to  be  uttered.  If  it  had  been,  "  Woe 
unto  Ariel,  the  city  where  flagrant  sins  are  committed,  the  city  which  is  over- 
run with  idols,  and  filled  with  all  kinds  of  abomination,"  we  should  have  seen 
at  once  the  force  of  the  sentence,  and  must  have  felt  the  wrath  warranted  by 
the  alleged  crimes.  But  why  bring  it  as  a  chief  accusation  against  Jerusalem — 
indeed,  as  the  only  charge  that  was  to  justify  God  in  pouring  out  His  vengeance — 
that  it  was  the  city  where  David  had  dwelt  ?  We  can  hardly  think  that  the 
definition  is  meant  as  nothing  more  than  a  statement  of  fact.  David  had  long 
been  dead  ;  strange  changes  had  occurred,  and  it  would  be  making  the  essential 
term  too  insignificant  to  suppose  it  to  contain  only  a  historical  reference  to  an 
assertion  that  no  one  doubted,  but  which  is  quite  unconnected  with  the  present 
message  from  God.  We  must  rather  believe  that  the  city  is  characterised, 
"  where  David  dwelt,"  in  order  to  show  that  it  deserved  the  woe  about  to  be 
denounced.  This  is  evidently  mentioned  as  aggravating  the  guiltiness  of  the  city. 
(H.  MelviU,  B.D.)        Good  men  increase  the  responsibility  of  a  community : — 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mix. 

We  seem  warranted  in  concluding  that,  its  having  been  made  eminent  by  the 
piety  of  the  servants  of  God,  by  their  zeal  for  God,  and  by  their  earnestness  in 
preserving  the  purity  of  their  worship,  entails  a  weighty  responsibility  on  a  city 
or  country  ;  so  that  if,  in  any  after  time,  that  city  or  country  degenerate  in  godli- 
ness, and  become,  by  its  sins,  obnoxious  to  vengeance,  it  will  be  one  of  the  heaviest 
items  in  the  charge  brought  against  it,  that  it  was  dwelt  in  by  saints  so  distin- 
guished. (Ibid.)  National  mercies : — I.  The  connection  between  the 
woe  of  Jerusalem,  and  Jerusalem  being  the  city  where  David  dwelt. 
There  are  other  considerations,  over  and  above  the  general  one  of  the  responsi- 
bility fastened  on  a  people  by  the  having  had  a  king  of  extraordinary  piety,  which 
go  to  the  explaining  why  the  woe  upon  Jerusalem  should  be  followed  by  a  reference 
to  David.  David  was  eminent  as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord ;  he  had  been  com- 
missioned to  announce,  in  sundry  most  remarkable  predictions,  the  Messiah,  of 
whom,  in  many  respects,  he  was,  moreover,  an  illustrious  type.  It  was  true, 
there  had  been  others  of  whom  the  prophet  might  think.  There  is  a  peculiar 
appositeness  in  the  reference  to  David,  because  his  writings  were  the  very  best 
adapted  to  the  fixing  themselves  on  the  popular  mind.  These  writings  were 
the  national  anthems ;  they  were  the  songs  to  be  chanted  in  those  daily  and  annual 
solemnities  which  belonged  to  the  Jews  in  their  political  as  much  as  in  their 
religious  capacity,  in  which  the  princes  were  associated  with  the  priests,  so  that 
the  civil  was  hardly  to  be  distinguished  from  the  ecclesiastic.  So  beloved  as 
David  was  of  God,  he  must  have  bequeathed  a  blessing  to  the  nation :  for  righteous 
kings,  like  righteous  fathers,  entail  good  on  a  nation.  Indeed,  it  is  evident, 
from  other  parts  of  Isaiah,  that  the  memory  of  David  was  still  a  tower  of  strength 
at  Jerusalem,  so  that,  for  his  sake,  was  evil  averted  from  the  city.  When  Sen- 
nacherib and  his  hosts  encamped  against  the  city,  and  the  heart  of  Hezekiah 
was  dismayed,  it  was  in  terms  such  as  these  that  God  addressed  Israel,  "  I  will 
defend  this  city,  to  save  it  for  Mine  own  sake,  and  for  My  servant  David's  sake." 
Was  it  not  like  telling  the  Jews  that  they  were  no  longer  to  be  borne  with  for  the 
sake  of  David,  to  pronounce,  "  Woe  to  Ariel,  to  Ariel,  the  city  where  David  dwelt  "  ? 
Was  it  not  declaring,  that  the  period  was  drawing  to  a  close,  during  which  the 
conservatism  of  the  monarch's  piety  could  be  felt  ?  The  prophet  might  be  con- 
sidered as  showing  both  how  just  and  how  terrible  those  judgments  would  be. 
He  showed  their  justice,  because  the  having  had  amongst  them  such  a  king  and 
prophet  as  David,  made  the  Jews  inexcusable  in  their  wickedness:  he  showed 
their  severity,  because  it  was  the  city  of  David  which  God  was  about  to  punish. 
II.  Make  an  application  of  the  subject.  We  pass  at  once  to  the  Reformation, 
and  substitute  the  reformers  for  David,  and  England  for  Ariel.  We  must  consider 
what  it  was  that  the  reformers  did  for  us  ;  from  what  they  delivered  us ;  and 
in  what  they  instructed  us.  (Ibid.)  Ariel  : — "  It  will  be  to  Me  as  an  Ariel  " 
(ver.  2),  i.e.,  through  My  help  it  will  prove  itself  a  hearth  of  God,  consuming  its 
enemies  like  a  fiery  furnance,  or  these  enemies  finding  destruction  in  Jerusalem, 
like  wood  heaped  on  an  altar  and  set  ablaze.  (F.  Dditzsch.)  Love  and  chastise- 
ment : — The  Lord  has  never  spared  the  elect.  Election  gives  Him  rights  of 
discipline.  We  may  inflict  punishment  upon  those  who  are  ours,  when  we  may 
not  lay  the  hand  of  chastisement  upon  those  who  do  not  belong  to  us.  Lovo 
has  its  own  law-court.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Add  ye  year  to  year;  let  the 
feasts  come  round  (R.V.). — Links  in  a  golden  chain  (from  R.V.) : — Speaking  of 
the  gay  temper  of  the  Greeks,  Quinet  describes  them  as  "  a  people  who  count  their 
years  by  their  games."  In  a  more  serious  spirit  the  Jews  counted  their  years 
by  their  religious  festivals.  We  have  a  Christian  year  whose  festivals  celebrate 
the  great  events  in  the  life  of  our  Lord.  We  are  adding  year  to  year,  the  feasts 
come  and  go,  and  it  behoves  us  to  inquire  what  we  are  doing  with  them,  what 
they  are  doing  for  us.  I.  There  is  an  unsatisfactory  way  of  spending  the 
years.  The  implied  complaint  of  the  text  is  that  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
failed  to  benefit  by  their  recurring  privileges,  and  that  the  lapse  of  time  brought 
them  nearer  to  destruction.  The  trumpet  of  the  new  year  in  vain  called  them 
to  a  new  life ;  the  day  of  atonement  passed  leaving  them  with  uncancelled  sin ; 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  and  that  of  Pentecost  awoke  in  them  no  love,  con- 
strained them  to  no  obedience  to  the  Giver  of  the  harvest.  Is  this  not  true  of 
thousands  of  those  over  whom  pass  the  festivals  of  the  Christian  year  ?  They 
are,  indeed,  all  the  worse  for  the  lengthening  days  and  multiplying  opportunities. 
II.  There  is  a  true  way  of  spending  the  years,  and  that  is  in  enjoying  and 
improving  this  life  in  the  fear  of  God  and  in  the  light  of  eternity.     Victor  Hugo 


chap,  xxix.]  ISAIAH.  567 

g peaks  of  an  old  man  as  "  a  thinking  ruin."    Paul  the  aged  was  such  a  "  ruin," 
and  he  had  something  grand  to  think  about.     ( W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  As  a  dream  of  a  night  vision. — Tht  virion*  of  sin : — There  are 
two  grand  truths  of  a  most  stirring  import  unfolded  in  the  text.  1.  That  wicked 
men  are  frequently  employed  to  execute  the  Divine  purpose.  The  Almighty 
determined  to  humble  Jerusalem,  and  He  employed  Sennacherib  as  the  engine 
of  His  justice.  "  He  makes  "  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.  What  a  revela- 
tion is  this  of  His  absolute  command  over  the  fiercest  and  freest  workings  of  the 
most  depraved  and  rebellious  subjects  t  2.  That  whilst  wicked  men  execute 
the  Divine  purpose,  they  frustrate  their  own.  Sennacherib  worked  out  the 
Divine  result,  but  all  his  own  plans  and  wishes  were  like  the  visions  of  the  famished 
traveller  on  the  Oriental  desert,  who,  hungry,  thirsty,  and  exhausted,  lies  down 
and  dreams,  under  the  rays  of  a  tropical  sun,  that  he  is  eating  and  drinking,  but 
awakes  and  discovers,  to  his  inexpressible  distress,  that  both  his  hunger  and  thirst 
are  but  increased.  Hell  works  out  God's  plans,  and  frustrates  its  own ;  Heaven 
works  out  God's  plans,  and  fulfils  its  own.  Let  us  look  at  the  vision  before  us 
as  illustrating  the  visions  of  sin.  L  It  is  a  dreamy  vision.  It  is  "  as  a  dream 
of  a  night  vision."  There  are  waking  visions.  The  orient  creations  of  poetry, 
the  bright  prospects  of  hope,  the  appalling  apprehensions  of  fear — these  are 
visions  occurring  when  the  reflective  powers  of  the  soul  are  more  or  less  active, 
and  are,  therefore,  not  entirely  unsubstantial  and  vain.  But  the  visions  which 
occur  in  sleep,  when  the  senses  are  closed,  and  the  consciousness  is  torpid,  and 
the  reason  has  resigned  her  sway  to  the  hands  of   a   lawless  imagination,  are 

fenerally  without  reality.  Now,  the  Scriptures  represent  the  sinner  as  asleep, 
tut  where  is  the  analogy  between  the  natural  sleep  of  the  body  and  the  moral 
sleep  of  sin  ?  1.  Natural  sleep  is  the  ordination  of  God,  but  moral  is  not. 
2.  Natural  sleep  is  restorative,  but  moral  is  destructive.  3.  In  both  there  is  the 
want  of  activity.  The  inactivity  of  the  moral  sleep  of  the  sinner  is  the  inactivity 
of  the  moral  faculty — the  conscience.  4.  In  both  there  is  the  want  of  conscious- 
ness. With  the  sinner  in  his  moral  slumbers — God,  Christ,  the  soul,  heaven, 
hell,  are  nothing  to  him.  II.  It  is  an  appetitive  vision.  What  is  the  dream 
of  the  man  whom  the  Almighty  brings  under  our  notice  in  the  text,  who  lies  down 
to  sleep  under  the  raging  desire  for  food  and  water  ?  It  is  that  he  was  eating 
and  drinking.  His  imagination  creates  the  very  things  for  which  his  appetite 
was  craving.  His  imagination  was  the  servant  of  his  strongest  appetites.  So 
it  is  ever  with  the  sinner :  the  appetite  for  animal  gratifications  will  create  its 
visions  of  sensual  pleasure  :  the  appetite  for  worldly  wealth  will  create  its  visions 
of  fortune ;  the  appetite  for  power  will  create  its  visions  of  social  influence  and 
applause.  The  sinner's  imagination  is  ever  the  servant  of  his  strongest  appetites, 
and  ever  pictures  to  him  in  airy  but  attractive  forms  the  objects  he  most  strongly 
desires.  HL  It  is  an  illusory  vision.  The  food  and  water  were  a  mirage 
in  the  visionary  desert,  dissipated  into  air  as  his  eye  opened.  All  the  ideas  of 
happiness  entertained  by  the  sinner  are  mental  illusions.  There  are  many  theories 
of  happiness  practically  entertained  by  men  that  are  as  manifestly  illusive  as 
the  wildest  dream.  1.  Every  notion  of  happiness  is  delusive  that  has  not  to  do 
more  with  the  soul  than  the  senses.  2.  Every  notion  of  happiness  is  delusive 
that  has  not  more  to  do  with  the  character  than  the  circumstances.  3.  Every 
notion  is  delusive  that  has  not  more  to  do  with  the  present  than  with  the  future. 
He  that  is  preparing  intentionally  for  happiness  is  not  happy,  nor  can  he  be : 
the  selfish  motive  renders  it  impossible.  He  that  seeketh  his  life  shall  lose  it." 
Heaven  is  for  the  man  that  is  now  "  blessed  in  his  deeds,"  and  for  him  only.  The 
present  is  everything  to  us,  because  God  is  in  it,  and  out  of  it  starts  the  future. 
4.  Every  notion  is  delusive  that  has  not  more  to  do  with  the  absolute  than  the 
contingent.  IV.  It  is  a  transitory  vision.  In  the  text,  the  supposed  dreamer 
was  led  to  feel  the  illusion  which  his  wayward  imagination  had  practised  upon 
him.  "  He  awaketh,  and  his  soul  is  empty."  Every  moral  sleeper  must  awake 
either  here  or  hereafter ;  here  by  disciplinary  voices,  or  hereafter  by  retributive 
thunders.  (Homilist.)  Dreaming : — As  the  army  of  Sennacherib  were 
dreaming,  literally  or  figuratively,  of  a  conquest  which  had  no  real  existence, 
so  are  there  multitudes  of  persons  now  dreaming  that  they  are  accomplishing 
the  great  object  of  their  existence  who  are  no  more  doing  so  than  if  they  lay  wrapped 
in  the  slumbers  of  the  night.  I  propose  to  speak  of  them  under  three  heads. 
All  three  are  capable  of  being  substituted,  and  often  are  substituted,  for  the  real 


568  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

and  proper  business  of  life.  I.  Pleasure.  1.  How  comes  it  to  pass  that  people 
can  live  such  lives,  dreaming  all  the  while  that  they  are  fulfilling  the  true  purpose 
of  their  existence,  or,  at  least,  without  any  uneasy  sense  that  they  are  criminally 
failing  to  do  so  ?  (1)  One  cause  of  it  is  that  the  thing  in  question  is  pleasure. 
"  Nothing  succeeds  like  success."  (2)  Another  explanation  is,  that  many  of  the 
pleasures  for  which  men  live  make  great  demands  on  their  exertions.  Some 
kinds  of  play  are  harder  than  work.  Men,  therefore,  feel  it  difficult  to  believe 
that  what  bears  so  near  a  resemblance  to  work  is  not  work,  and  that  very  work 
which  they  were  sent  into  the  world  to  do.  (3)  A  great  many  of  the  pleasures  of 
life  are  enjoyed  in  association  with  others.  And  amidst  the  exhilaration  of 
spirits,  the  brisk  laughter,  the  friendly  encounters,  it  is  very  difficult  to  believe 
that  a  life  made  up  largely  of  such  occupations  is  not  the  life  we  were  intended 
to  live.  (4)  Then,  a  great  deal  of  the  pleasure  is  intimately  associated  with  fashion. 
(5)  The  alleged  innocence  of  the  pleasures  indulged  in  contributes  also  to  the 
deception.  (6)  Again,  it  is  sometimes  said  that,  however  censurable  a  life  of 
pleasure  may  be  for  those  in  advanced  life,  it  is  innocent  and  even  suitable  for  the 
young.  2.  But  it  may  be  said,  What  is  there  to  show  that  such  a  life  is  only  a 
dream-like  substitute  for  our  real  life  ?  (1)  It  leaves  our  best  faculties  unused. 
(2)  A  life  of  pleasure,  moreover,  is  a  selfish  life.  (3)  A  life  of  pleasure  also  exposes 
to  temptation.  (4)  A  life  devoted  to  pleasure,  too,  unfits  men  for  another  world. 
II.  Work.  By  "  work  "  is  meant  some  secular  occupation  by  which  money, 
or  its  equivalent,  is  gained.  The  Bible  praises  work.  Work  keeps  us  from  being 
dependent  on  others.  It  tends  to  the  benefit  of  those  dependent  on  us.  And 
work  is  good  as  furnishing  a  man  with  the  means  of  helping  his  neighbours,  and 
of  contributing  to  the  support  of  the  great  movements  in  operation  for  lessening 
the  suffering  and  the  sin  of  the  world.  And  work  is  good,  as  giving  a  man  influence 
by  means  of  the  wealth  it  produces.  It  is  also  in  favour  of  a  life  of  diligent  employ- 
ment, that  it  keeps  from  much  evil.  And  yet  neither  is  work,  any  more  than 
pleasure,  the  great  end  of  man ;  and  those  who  deem  it  so  are  indulging  in  a  baseless 
dream.  The  moral  value  of  work  is  to  be  measured  by  its  motive  and  its  influence. 
A  life  of  excessive  devotion  to  work  is  hostile  to  the  higher  life  of  a  man.  It 
leaves  but  little  time  for  those  exercises  which  are  found  so  essential  to  a  life  of 
godliness.  It  indisposes  for  such  employments.  It  shuts  out  the  other  world 
by  the  undue  prominence  it  gives  to  this.  It  banishes  God  from  the  thoughts. 
It  is  a  practical  neglect  of  the  soul.  Others  suffer  also.  Such  a  life  makes  us 
indifferent  to  the  interests  of  others.  III.  Religion.  And  this  time,  you  will 
perhaps  say,  they  are  likely  to  be  right.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  more  danger 
of  their  going  wrong  here  than  in  either  of  the  previous  cases.  And  for  this  reason 
— -that  the  sacred  name  of  religion  disposes  men  to  think  all  is  as  it  should  be 
if  they  can  persuade  themselves  that  they  are  religious.  Religion  assumes  a 
great  variety  of  forms,  and  some  of  them  not  only  worthless,  but  pernicious. 

1.  Can  it  be  questioned  that  a  great  deal  of  the  religion  of  England  now  is  nothing 
more  than   amusement,  and   often   amusement  of   the   most  childish  nature? 

2.  If  religion  in  other  cases  seems  to  go  deeper,  it  is  too  often  only  another  name 
for  superstition,  where  chief  importance  is  attached  to  the  conventional  sanctity 
of  the  persons  who  officiate,  the  garments  they  wear,  the  sacraments  they  administer, 
the  postures  they  adopt,  the  seasons  they  observe.  3.  Then  there  is  the  religion 
of  sentiment,  of  which  the  chief  object  is  to  awaken  certain  emotions.  4.  There 
is  also  a  religion  in  which  the  intellect  performs  the  principal  function.  5.  We 
might  speak  of  that  religion  which  is  hereditary,  where  a  man  adopts  a  particular 
faith  or  worship  because  his  ancestors  did  so  before  him.  6.  We  might  speak  of 
the  religion  of  fashion,  where  the  fashionable  gathering  forms  the  great  attraction. 
7.  We  might  speak  of  the  religious  observances  in  which  men  engage  to  fill  up 
time  which  they  are  forbidden  by  custom  to  employ  in  secular  pursuits ;  or  of 
the  religion  which  is  only  occasional  and  spasmodic ;  or  of  that  which  consists 
in  bustle  and  superficial  activity.  These  religions  all  agree  in  being  good  for 
nothing.  Some  of  them  do  harm.  Religion  is  a  life.  Religion  has  two  sides. 
On  the  one  it  turns  toward  God,  on  the  other  toward  man.  But  all  dreams 
must  come  to  an  end.  There  is  a  dread  awaking  in  prospect.  Think  of  the 
disappointment  that  will  attend  the  awaking  !  Let  us  not  be  deceived  by  the 
apparent  reality  of  the  life  we  are  leading.  What  can  seem  more  real  than  a 
dream  ?  yet  what  more  unsubstantial  ?  With  the  feeling  of  disappointment 
will  be  mingled  one  of  contempt.  "  As  a  dream  when  one  awaketh,  so,  0  Lord, 
when  Thou  awakest,  Thou  shalt  despise  their  image."     We  experience  a  sort  of 


chap,  xxix.]  ISAIAH.  669 

resentment  on  finding  that  we  have  been  so  deceived  by  that  which  had  no  reality. 
Will  there  be  nothing  like  this  on  awaking  from  a  life  wasted  in  trifling  ? 
(D.  P.  Pratten,  B.A.)  The  disappointments  of  sin: — The  general  truth  taught 
by  these  words  is  this :  wrong-doing  promises  much,  but  it  certainly  ends  in 
bitter  disappointment.  The  good  to  be  gained  by  sin  is  seen  and  tasted  and 
handled  only  in  dream.  It  is  never  actually  possessed,  and  visible  disappointment 
is  the  bitter  fruit  of  transgression.  L  The  veby  nature  op  sin  suggests  this 
pact.  1.  Sin  is  a  wandering  from  the  way  which  God  has  appointed  for  us — 
the  way  which  was  in  His  mind  when  He  made  man — the  only  way  which  has 
ever  been  in  His  mind  as  the  right  way.  There  is  no  adaptation  in  man's  real 
nature  to  any  way  but  one,  and  that  is  obedience  to  a  Father  in  Heaven,  the  result 
and  fruit  of  true  love  for  that  Father.  2.  Sin  is  a  practical  withdrawing  from 
the  protection  of  Divine  providence.  It  thus  wounds,  sometimes  instantly, 
and  always  eventually,  the  transgressor  himself.  It  is  as  when  a  hungry  man 
dreameth,  and  awaketh,  and  behold,  he  is  faint.  II.  Look  at  a  pew  recognised 
pacts  about  sin.  1.  The  angels  who  kept  not  their  first  estate  left  their  own 
habitation.  So  far  as  we  can  understand  the  matter  they  sought  freedom,  but 
they  found  chains.  They  sought  light;  they  found  darkness.  They  sought 
happiness ;  they  found  misery, — as  when  a  hungry  man  dreameth  and  eateth, 
and  awaketh  and  finds  himself  famishing.  2.  Our  first  parents,  in  yielding  to  the 
first  temptation,  sought  equality  with  God ;  but  they  soon  found  themselves 
fallen  below  the  natural  human  level.  3.  The  general  history  of  sin  is  found  in 
epitome  in  the  life  of  every  sinner.  In  families  and  Churches  and  nations,  in 
societies  of  all  kinds,  we  see  illustrated  the  truth  that  sin  everywhere,  by  whom- 
soever committed,  is  the  occasion  of  most  bitter  disappointment.  (S.  Martin.) 
Life  a  dream : — Lord  Brougham  relates  an  occurrence  which  strikingly  shows 
how  short  a  thing  a  dream  is.  A  person  who  had  asked  a  friend  to  call  him  early 
in  the  morning,  dreamed  that  he  was  taken  ill,  and  that,  after  remedies  had  been 
tried  in  vain  by  those  about  him,  a  medical  man  was  sent  for  who  lived  some 
miles  away,  and  who  did  not  arrive  before  some  hours  had  elapsed.  On  his  arrival 
he  threw  some  cold  water  upon  the  face  of  the  patient.  Thereupon  the  sleeper 
awoke.  The  water  was,  in  fact,  applied  by  his  friend,  for  the  purpose  of  awaking 
him.  The  inference  is  that  this  apparent  dream  of  hours  was  the  affair  of  a 
moment.  Such  is  human  life.  (Z>.  P.  Pratten,  B.A.)  A  dream  : — The  figure 
of  the  dream  is  applied  in  two  ways.  1.  Objectively,  to  the  vanishing  of  the 
enemy.  2.  Subjectively,  to  his  disappointment.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
Disenchantment  (ver.  8) : — A  more  vivid  representation  of  utter  disenchantment 
than  this  verse  gives  can  scarcely  be  conceived.  (Ibid.)  Disappointing  fancies  : — 
No  sooner  had  I  shut  my  eyes  than  fancy  would  convey  me  to  the  streams  and 
rivers  of  my  native  land.  There,  as  I  wandered  along  the  verdant  bank,  I  surveyed 
the  clear  stream  with  transport,  and  hastened  to  swallow  the  delightful  draught ; 
but  alas!  disappointment  awakened  me,  and  I  found  myself  a  lonely  captive, 
perishing  of  thirst  amid  the  wilds  of  Africa.    (Mungo  Park's  Journal.) 

Vers.  9-12.  Stay  yourselves,  and  wonder  .  .  .  they  are  drunken,  but  not  with 
wine. — Spiritual  drunkenness  : — By  spiritual  drunkenness  (ver.  9)  we  are  probably 
to  understand  unsteadiness  of  conduct  and  a  want  of  spiritual  discernment. 
(J.  A.  Alexander. )  Spiritual  drunkenness  worse  than  bodily,  and  more  prevalent : — 
Drunkenness  in  itself  is  a  horrible  vice,  and  it  is  the  mother  of  innumerable  more. 
But  besides  this  there  is  a  spiritual  drunkenness.  I.  This  worse  drunkenness, 
Bays  the  text,  is  spiritual  blindness,  spiritual  rNSENSiBiuTY,  or  rNSANrrY. 
In  this  respect  it  resembles  the  other  drunkenness.  The  man  who  is  drunk  has 
eyes,  but  he  cannot  see ;  ears,  but  he  cannot  hear ;  a  heart  that  has  not  ceased 
to  beat,  but  he  cannot  understand.  He  mistakes  one  person  and  thing  for  another. 
So  it  is  with  the  spiritual  sort  in  regard  to  the  spiritual  world.  Look  at  a  few  of 
the  varieties.  Drunkenness — 1.  From  ignorance  of  the  truth.  2.  From  perversion 
or  profanation  of  the  truth.  3.  From  rejection  of  the  truth.  LI.  What  is  the 
quality  or  curse  OE  this  spiritual  drunkenness,  compared  with  the  other  ? 
Compare  it — 1.  In  regard  to  the  drunkard's  intelligence  or  powers  of  perception. 
2.  In  regard  to  the  drunkard's  life,  affections,  passions,  habits.  3.  In  regard  to 
the  drunkard's  state  before  God,  the  salvation  of  soul  and  body.  What  shall 
we  say,  if  we  discover  the  terrific  truth  ?  (1)  That  the  spiritual  is  more  besotting 
and  blinding  to  the  spirit.  (2)  That  it  is  more  maddening  and  brutalising  to 
the  drunkard's  life.     What  crime  will  the  drunkard  not  perpetrate  ?    But  what 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

is  the  life  of  the  spiritual  drunkard  who  goes  on  in  his  wickedness  T  One  lifelong 
defiance  of  God.  (3)  That  it  is  a  drunkenness  still  more  infernal,  more  devilish, 
and  more  deadly  to  both  soul  and  body.  (R.  Paisley.)  Judicial  blindness; — 
The  Jews  are  represented  as  given  over  by  God  to  a  judicial  blindness.  Now, 
we  regard  it  as  a  fixed  principle  in  the  interpretation  of  Scripture  that  God  never 
does  more  than  leave  men  to  themselves ;  doing  nothing  directly  to  harden  them 
in  wickedness,  or  to  place  them  out  of  the  reach  of  forgiveness.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Drunken,  but  not  with  wine  : — Are  there,  then,  other  forms  of  insobriety  and 
resultant  demoralisation  distinct  from  that  of  the  familiar  cup  ?  The  phrases 
which  suggest  this  abnormal  state  are  continually  in  our  mouths.  Thus,  we 
Bpeak  of  people  being  intoxicated  with  delight,  with  fanaticism,  with  political 
excitement,  or  with  the  spirit  of  gambling.  Wendell  Holmes  speaks  01  people 
who  become  intoxicated  with  music,  with  poetry,  with  love,  with  religious 
enthusiasm.  He  remarks  how  convalescents  are  sometimes  made  tipsy  by  a 
beef  steak.  It  is  said  of  one  that  he  was  too  intoxicated  with  certain  good  news 
to  be  able  to  imbibe  anything  else.  Indeed,  it  is  told  of  certain  company  that 
it  was  so  intoxicating  that  some  of  the  circle  were  compelled  to  drink  to  keep 
themselves  sober.  (J.  J.  Ingram.)  Intoxication : — What  are  the  main 
characteristics  of  intoxication  !  The  drunken  man  is  one  who  has  lost  his  power 
of  self-control,  one  to  whose  eye  and  thought  the  proportions  and  relationships 
of  life  have  become  disordered,  one  whose  vigour,  both  physically  and  mentally, 
has  become  enfeebled  and  inefficient.  He  is  a  man  who  for  the  time  being  loses 
his  true  relation  to  the  things  of  outer  life.  He  is  abnormal.  His  appetites 
are  deranged,  his  engrossments  disproportionate,  his  views  beclouded  or  oblique. 
(Ibid.)  For  the  Lord  hath  poured  out  upon  you  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep. — The 
spirit  of  a  deep  sleep  : — "  The  Lord  hath  poured  out,"  &c.  That  is  an  appalling 
judgment.  What  have  been  the  steps  which  have  led  up  to  so  terrible  a  consumma- 
tion ?  Men  do  not  lose  their  moral  sensitiveness  by  a  stroke  ;  it  is  the  ultimate  issue 
of  a  process.  Drowsiness  precedes  sleep ;  the  twilight  ushers  in  the  night.  We 
do  not  reach  moral  abysses  by  a  precipice ;  we  reach  them  by  a  gradient.  We 
do  not  drop  into  bondage ;  we  walk  into  it.  1 .  Here  are  the  men  of  my  text ; 
what  was  the  first  step  in  the  degradation  ?  We  have  it  clearly  indicated  in  the 
thirteenth  verse.  If  we  take  the  thirteenth  verse,  and  place  it  before  verse  9,  we 
have  unfolded  before  us  the  process  of  degeneracy,  which  is  re-enacted  in  multitudes 
of  lives  in  every  succeeding  age.  The  first  step  towards  moral  benumbment 
is  the  evisceration  of  religious  worship.  Take  the  heart  out  of  worship,  and  you 
will  take  the  life  out  of  morals.  "  And  their  fear  of  Me  is  a  commandment  of 
men  which  has  been  taught  them."  What  does  that  mean  ?  The  man-made 
has  supplanted  the  God-born.  And  what  does  that  further  mean  but  the  intrusion 
of  the  casuist  into  religion  T  The  casuist  is  he  who  turns  a  shining  principle 
into  a  dull  maxim,  who  makes  breaches  and  loop-holes  of  escape  in  the  great 
moral  law,  who  changes  the  searching  inwardness  of  religion  into  an  easy  external 
ordinance,  who  removes  the  fearful  sense  of  the  eternal,  and  makes  us  feel  perilously 
at  home  in  the  small  demands  of  his  own  commandments.  2.  Now  let  us  mark 
the  progress  of  the  degeneracy.  Religious  formalism  issues  in  moral  laxity. 
Note  the  analysis  of  the  process  which  is  given  in  the  ninth  verse.  First  there 
is  dimness  of  moral  vision.  "  Tarry  ye,  and  wonder."  The  figure  is  that  of  a 
man  who  pulls  himself  up  in  bewilderment.  He  does  not  remember  quite  clearly 
whether  this  is  the  way,  or  whether  he  should  take  the  next  turning.  Moral 
law  does  not  stand  out  in  clear  bold  relief.  His  conscience  does  not  act  readily. 
There  is  hesitancy.  He  "  tarries "  !  There  is  confusion.  He  "  wonders  ! 
"  Take  your  pleasure  and  be  blind."  With  dimness  there  comes  wilfulness. 
The  little  truth  they  saw  they  resented.  The  people  liked  the  restfulness  of  the 
dulness.  There  was  nothing  searching  or  self-revealing  in  the  adulterated  light. 
They  preferred  the  twilight  in  which  they  can  partially  hide.  Let  us  go  on  with 
the  analysis.  Moral  dimness ;  moral  wilfulness ;  what  is  the  next  step  in  the 
degeneracy  ?  Moral  stupor.  "  They  are  drunk,  but  not  with  wine.  They 
stagger,  but  not  with  strong  drink."  3.  Now  let  us  proceed  to  the  third  step 
in  the  appalling  gradient.  When  a  man  has  eviscerated  his  religion,  changing 
its  inwardness  to  a  thin  superficialness,  and  from  this  proceeds  to  moral  laxity, 
I  am  told  by  the  words  of  my  text  that  by  a  judicial  act  of  God  his  stupor  becomes 
fixed.  If  a  man  will  not,  he  shall  not!  Ye  have  taken  the  cup  of  wilfulness, 
and  drugged  yourselves  into  sin,  and  "  the  Lord  hath  poured  out  upon  you  the 
spirit  of  deep  sleep."     4.  What  is  the  next  step  in  the  awful  gradient  ?     "  And 


chap,  xxix.]  ISAIAH.  571 

all  vision  is  become  to  you  as  a  book  that  is  sealed."  The  great  writings  of 
the  great  books  have  no  illuminating  message.  The  books  are  sealed  !  What 
books  ?  There  is  the  book  of  conscience.  "  Thine  ears  shall  hear  a  word  behind 
thee,  saying,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  That  book  is  sealed.  There 
is  the  book  of  experience,  the  teachings  of  yesterday,  the  witness  of  history. 
"  Ask  now  of  the  days  that  are  past."  That  book  is  sealed.  There  is  the 
book  of  nature.  The  book  of  nature  began  to  be  read  by  William  Wordsworth 
when  the  atmosphere  of  English  life  had  been  warmed  by  the  evangelical  revival. 
When  the  evangelical  is  dead  nature's  inner  significance  is  concealed.  Let  us 
therefore  watch,  with  intensest  vigilance,  against  the  intrusion  of  all  insincerity 
into  our  worship.     (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  vision  of  all  Is  become  unto  you  as  the  words  of  a  book  that  is 

sealed. — The  universality  of  spiritual  blindness  : — What  is  affirmed  in  these  verses 
holds  so  strikingly  true  of  God's  general  revelation  to  the  world,  that  we  deem  the 
lesson  contained  in  them  to  be  not  of  partial,  but  permanent  application.  I.  There 
is  a  complaint  uttered  in  these  verses  (1)  by  the  learned,  (2)  by  the  unlearned. 
1.  If  a  book  be  closed  down  by  a  material  seal,  then,  till  that  seal  be  broken,  there 
lies  a  material  obstacle  even  in  the  way  of  him  who  is  able  to  read  the  contents 
of  it.  Is  there  any  hindrance  in  virtue  of  which  the  critics,  and  the  grammarians, 
and  the  accomplished  theologians  of  our  age,  are  unable  to  reach  the  real  and 
effective  understanding  of  the  words  of  this  prophecy  ?  Yes,  and  it  is  wonderful 
to  tell,  how  little  the  mere  erudition  of  Scripture  helps  the  real  discernment  of 
Scripture.  The  learned  just  labour  as  helplessly  under  a  want  of  an  impression 
of  the  reality  of  this  whole  matter,  as  the  unlearned ;  and  if  this  be  true  of  many 
a  priest  and.  theologian,  with  whom  Christianity  is  a  science,  and  the  study  of 
the  Bible  the  business  of  their  profession,  what  can  we  expect  of  those  among 
the  learned,  who,  in  the  pursuits  of  a  secular  philosophy,  never  enter  into  oontact 
with  the  Bible,  either  in  its  doctrine  or  in  its  language,  except  when  it  is  obtruded 
on  them  ?  To  make  the  wisdom  of  the  New  Testament  his  wisdom,  and  its  spirit 
his  spirit,  and  its  language  his  best-loved  and  best-understood  language,  there 
must  be  a  higher  influence  upon  the  mind,  than  what  lies  in  human  art,  or  in 
human  explanation.  And  till  this  is  brought  to  pass,  the  doctrines  of  the  atone- 
ment, and  of  regeneration,  and  of  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and 
of  a  believer's  progressive  holiness,  under  the  moral  and  spiritual  power  of  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  will,  as  to  his  own  personal  experience  of  its  meaning, 
remain  so  many  empty  sounds,  or  so  many  deep  and  hidden  mysteries:  and  just 
as  effectually,  as  if  the  book  were  held  together  by  an  iron  clasp,  which  he  has 
not  strength  to  unclose,  may  he  say  of  the  same  book  lying  open  and  legible  before 
him,  that  he  cannot  read  it,  because  it  is  sealed.  2.  As  for  the  complaint  of  the 
unlearned,  it  happily,  in  the  literal  sense  of  it,  is  not  applicable  to  the  great 
majority  of  our  immediate  countrymen,  even  in  the  very  humblest  walks  of 
society.  They  can  read  the  book.  There  may  remain  a  seal  upon  its  meaning 
to  him,  who,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  is  learned,  while  the  seal  may 
be  removed,  and  the  meaning  lie  open  as  the  light  of  day  to  him,  who  in  the  same 
sense  is  unlearned.  In  pressing  home  the  truths  and  overtures  of  Christianity 
on  the  poor,  we  often  meet  with  the  very  answer  of  the  text,  "  I  am  not  learned." 
They  think  that  there  is  an  ignorance  which  necessity  attaches  to  their  condition, 
and  that  this  should  alleviate  the  burden  of  their  condemnation,  in  that  they 
know  not  God.  Now  we  refuse  this  apology  altogether.  The  Word  of  the  Lord 
is  in  your  hands,  and  you  can  at  least  read  it.  The  Gospel  is  preached  unto  you 
as  well  as  unto  others — and  you  can,  at  least,  attend  to  it.  II.  Let  us  now  proceed 
to  explain  a  circumstance  which  stands  associated  in  our  text  with  the 
incapacity  both  of  learned  and  unlearned  to  discover  the  meaning  of  God's 
communications — that  is  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep  which  had  closed  the  eyes  of 
the  people,  and  buried  in  darkness  and  insensibility  the  prophets,  the  rulers,  and 
the  seers,  as  well  as  the  humblest  and  most  ignorant  of  the  land.  The  connection 
between  the  one  circumstance  and  the  other  is  quite  palpable.  If  a  peasant 
and  a  philosopher  were  both  literally  asleep  before  me — and  that  so  profoundly, 
as  that  no  voice  of  mine  could  awaken  them — then  they  are  just  in  the  same 
circumstances,  with  regard  to  any  demonstration  which  I  addressed  to  their 
understandings.  Neither  would  it  at  all  help  the  conveyance  of  my  meaning 
to  their  mind,  that  while  dead  to  all  perception  of  the  argument  which  issued 
from  my  lips,  or  even  of  the  sound  which  is  its  vehicle,  the  minds  of  both  of  them 


572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

were  most  busily  alive  and  active  amongst  the  imagery  of  a  dream — the  one 
dreaming  too,  perhaps,  in  the  style  of  some  high  intellectual  pursuit,  and  the 
other  dreaming  in  the  style  of  some  common  and  illiterate  occupation.  Such, 
it  is  possible  to  conceive,  may  be  the  profoundness  of  this  lethargy,  as  to  be 
unmoved  by  the  most  loud  and  terrifying  intimations.  That  the  vast  majority 
of  the  world  are,  in  truth,  asleep  to  all  those  realities  which  constitute  the  great 
materials  of  religion,  may  be  abundantly  proved  by  experience.  Now,  the  question 
comes  to  be,  how  is  this  sleep  dissipated  ?  Not,  we  affirm,  and  all  experience 
will  go  with  us,  by  the  power  of  natural  argument — not  by  the  demonstrations 
of  human  learning,  for  these  are  just  as  powerless  with  him  who  understands 
them,  as  with  him  who  makes  his  want  of  learning  the  pretence  for  putting  them 
away.  There  must  be  a  something  equivalent  to  the  communication  of  a  new 
sense,  ere  a  reality  comes  to  be  seen  in  those  eternal  things.  It  is  true,  that  along 
the  course  of  our  ordinary  existence,  we  are  awake  to  the  concerns  of  our  ordinary 
existence.  But  this  is  not  a  wakefulness  which  goes  to  disturb  the  profoundness 
of  our  insensibility  as  to  the  concerns  of  a  higher  existence.  We  are  in  one  sense 
awake ;  but  in  another  most  entirely,  and,  to  all  human  appearance,  most  hope- 
lessly and  irrecoverably  asleep.  We  are  just  in  the  same  condition  with  a  man 
who  is  dreaming,  and  so  moves  for  the  time  in  a  pictured  world  of  his  own.  And 
the  transition  is  not  greater  from  the  sleeping  fancies  of  the  night  to  the  waking 
certainties  of  our  daily  business,  than  is  the  transition  from  the  day-dreams  of 
a  passing  world  to  those  substantial  considerations  which  wield  a  presiding 
authority  over  the  conduct  of  him  who  walketh  not  by  the  sight  of  that  which 
is  around  him,  but  by  the  faith  of  the  unseen  things  that  are  above  him,  and 
before  him.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  voices  of  life : — Here,  we  find  the  picture 
of  the  two  great  classes  of  excuses  men  make  to-day,  when  duties  are  urged  upon 
them.  I.  The  first  great  answer  of  human  nature  to  the  call  of  duty — the  first 
and  readiest  excuse  which  the  easy-going,  self-indulgent  life  has  to  offer — is  this 
first  excuse  of  the  men  of  Jerusalem  to  the  unpleasant  vision  of  the  future.  It 
is  as  a  book  which  is  sealed,  and  he  who  is  able  to  read  it  does  not  read  it,  simply 
because  it  is  closed,  or  sealed.  Here  we  have  a  definite  excuse  given,  which  looks 
plausible  enough,  but  which  only  means,  after  all,  the  lack  of  will-power,  which 
bo  frequently  lodges  behind  some  prominent  excuse.  Powbrlessness  of  will  ! 
Who  does  not  make  this  excuse  in  life  ?  II.  The  other  great  excuse  which  is  so 
freely  given  is  the  lack  op  opportunity.  He  who  has  the  will  has  not  the  one 
requisite,  the  one  condition  of  success,  the  longed-for  opportunity.  The  poor 
man  with  his  tastes  envies  the  rich  their  command  over  the  forces  of  life.  The 
struggling  student  by  his  midnight  lamp,  with  his  book  borrowed  from  the  library, 
sighs  as  he  sees  the  elegantly  bound  but  unopened  volumes  of  those  who  have 
abundant  opportunities  but  no  appreciation  of  their  hidden  treasures,  or  will 
to  read  them.  The  invalid  upon  the  bed  of  pain,  whose  life  is  a  dream  of  im- 
possible realities,  cherishing  noble  yearnings  for  the  strife,  sees  life  passing  by, 
padlocked  and  bound,  with  every  aspiration  chained  and  fettered  by  the  hopeless 
impossibility  of  ever  achieving  anything.  Practical  lessons — 1.  This  very 
incompleteness  of  our  nature  shows  us  the  soul's  rightful  demand  for  another 
life  without  these  limiting  human  conditions.  2.  Eight  in  the  midst  of  these 
voices  of  life,  these  excuses  for  our  failure,  from  whatever  source  these  excuses 
come,  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  appears  as  a  new  creation  of  power.  3.  Just 
when  we  feel  that  our  motive  power  is  failing  us,  or  that  we  are  helpless  in  our 
surroundings,  and  are  lacking  an  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  our  suppressed 
faculties,  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  is  the  Comforter  of  the  sanctified  heart  of  man 
and  the  Inspirer  of  his  better  nature,  appears  with  His  Divine  mission,  and  opens 
the  way  out  of  dead  levels  and  land-locked  vistas,  into  new  and  unforeseen  stretches 
of  existence.  What  a  power  there  is  in  this  thought  of  the  soul's  higher  deliverance 
by  the  interposing  hand  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  lifting  us  out  of  our  poor  every- 
day life!  {W.  W.  Newton.)  Bible  neglect  reproved: — The  general  division  of 
**  the  learned "  and  "  the  unlearned  "  is  introduced  as  offering  an  excuse  for  the 
not  understanding  the  revelation  of  God.  There  is  diversity,  indeed,  in  the  excuse 
itself,  but  there  is  thorough  agreement  upon  the  point,  that,  from  some  reason 
©r  another,  the  Bible  is  unintelligible ;  the  one  class  taking  refuge  in  the  alleged 
obscurity  of  Scripture,  and  the  other  in  their  own  defective  education.  None 
are  represented  as  actually  throwing  scorn  upon  the  book,  but  all  render  it  a  kind 
of  involuntary  homage.  And  we  believe  that  no  truer  description  could  be 
given  of  the  great  body  of  men,  considered  relative  to  the  light  in  which  they 


chap,  mix.]  ISAIAH.  573 

view  Scripture.  If  there  were  anything  like  a  general  suspicion  that  the  Bible 
is  not  what  it  professes  itself — a  revelation  from  God,  there  would  be  nothing 
to  surprise  us  in  the  general  neglect  with  which  it  is  treated  ;  we  should  quite 
expect  that  if  there  were  doubt  as  to  the  origin  there  would,  for  the  most  part, 
be  indifference  as  to  the  contents  ;  but  with  the  great  body  of  men  its  origin  is 
no  more  brought  into  question  than  is  the  duty  of  preparing  for  eternity.  And 
here  we  have  a  manifest  inconsistency,  to  be  accounted  for  only  on  the  supposition 
that  men  have  provided  themselves  with  some  specious  apology.  I.  We  shall 
consider,  therefore,  the  case  and  apology  of  the  learned.  There  is  something 
of  truth  in  the  representation  that  the  Bible  is  a  sealed  book.  We  always  regard 
it  as  a  standing  proof  of  the  divinity  of  the  volume,  that  it  is  not  to  be  unfolded 
by  the  processes  which  we  apply  to  a  mere  human  composition,  and  that  every 
attempt  to  enter  deeply  into  its  meaning,  without  the  assistance  of  its  Author, 
issues  in  nothing  but  conjecture  and  confusion.  But  in  all  these  excuses,  however 
specious,  and  however,  in  a  certain  sense,  grounded  on  a  truth,  there  is  nothing 
to  warrant  that  refusal  to  examine  Holy  Writ  which  they  are  invented  to  justify. 
We  know  of  no  conclusion  which  can  be  fairly  drawn  from  the  confessed  mysterious- 
ness  of  Scripture,  and  the  consequent  need  of  a  superhuman  interpreter,  but  that 
the  volume  should  never  be  approached  in  our  own  wisdom,  and  never  without  prayer 
for  the  teaching  of  God's  Spirit.  If  it  would  be  our  duty  to  study  the  volume 
were  it  not  sealed,  it  must  be  equally  our  duty  to  study  it  when,  though  sealed, 
the  way  is  prescribed  in  which  it  may  be  opened.  We  have  only  to  bring  this 
consideration  into  the  account,  and  there  is  an  end  of  all  arguing  from  the  obscurity 
of  the  study  of  Scripture.  II.  The  case  and  apology  of  the  unlearned  man. 
Here,  again,  the  excuse  is  based  on  a  truth,  but  nevertheless,  it  in  no  degree 
justifies  neglect.  It  is  of  vast  importance  that  the  poor  be  set  right  in  this  matter, 
and  that  they  be  taught  that  there  is  no  necessary  connection,  as  they  seem  to 
suppose,  between  scholarship  and  salvation.  It  is  easier  for  the  educated  man 
to  become,  what  is  called  a  skilful  divine,  but  it  is  not  one  jot  easier  for  him  to 
discover  and  follow  the  narrow  path  of  life.  Indeed,  if  there  be  advantage  at 
all,  it  is  on  the  side  of  the  unlearned.  If  the  understanding  the  Bible,  so  as  to 
become  morally  advantaged  by  its  statements,  depend  on  the  influences  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  it  is  clear  that  the  learned  may  read  much  and  gain  no  spiritual 
benefit,  and  the  unlearn'  d  read  little  and  yet  be  mightily  profited.  (H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  Learned,  and  unlearned: — The  passage  is  interesting  as  illustrating  the 
diffusion  of  literary  education  in  Isaiah's  time  (Jer.  v.  4,  5).  {Prof.  J.  Skinner, 
D.D.)  Gradual  revelation : — Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  says  that  when  he  first 
visited  Italy  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  the  celebrated  masterpieces  of  art 
he  was  much  cast  down.  The  renowned  masters  maintained  towards  him  a 
quiet  and  dignified  silence  ;  they  refused  to  confide  to  him  their  thoughts.  He 
gazed  steadfastly  at  the  wondrous  pictures  whose  fame  had  filled  the  world,  and 
could  not  behold  their  glory.  Persevering,  however,  in  his  studies,  the  pictures 
gradually  began,  one  after  another,  to  raise  their  veils  and  permit  him  to  have 
an  occasional  peep  at  their  rare  beauty ;  they  softly  whispered  to  him  a  few  of 
their  secrets  ;  and  as  he  continued  unwavering  in  his  devotion,  they  at  last 
flung  away  their  reserve,  showed  themselves  with  an  open  face,  and  revealed 
to  him  the  wealth  of  beautiful  ideas  that  was  lodged  in  them.  (J.  C.  Jones.) 
The  Holy  Spirit  the  Illuminator  : — I  remember  to  have  heard  from  one  who 
was  a  spectator  at  the  time,  of  his  having  once  seen  a  little  child  playing  upon  a 
headland  over  the  sea,  who  took  a  telescope  from  the  hand  of  one  near  him,  and 
handed  it  to  a  blind  old  sailor  who  was  sitting  on  the  cliff,  and  the  child  asked 
the  blind  man  to  sweep  the  far  horizon  and  tell  him  with  the  glass  what  ships 
were  there.  The  old  man,  however,  could  only  turn  bitterly  towards  the  child 
with  those  sightless  eyes  of  his  ;  and,  it  seems  to  me,  that  you  might  as  well 
give  a  telescope  to  a  sightless  man  as  to  give  the  Bible  to  a  man  whom  you  do 
not  suppose  to  possess  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit.     (Bp.  W.  Alexander.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  This  people  draw  near  Me  with  their  month. — Ritualism : — 
When  any  form  so  obtrudes  itself  as  to  be  a  hindrance  instead  of  a  help  to  the 
worshipper,  that  is  ritualism.  (Et.  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone.)  Formalism : — 
All  vice  is  said  to  be  an  abuse  of  virtue  ;  all  evil,  good  run  mad.  Generosity 
may  become  extravagance.  So  formalism  really  consists  in  the  abuse  of  that 
which,  up  to  a  certain  point,  is  absolutely  necessary,  which,  up  to  a  further  point, 
may  be  helpful,  but  which,  carried  to  an  extreme,  becomes  a  snare  and  a  sin. 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxix 

(D.  Jones  Hamar.)  Formalism  in  doctrine  and  life  : — That  we  may  see  clearly 
who  the  formalist  is,  think  of  this  truth :  that  there  are  formalism  of  doctrine, 
and  formalism  of  life  and  practice,  distinguishable  and  yet  connected.  1.  Formal- 
ism of  doctrine — what  is  that  ?  In  one  of  its  lowest  phases  we  frequently  meet 
with  it.  Have  you  not  come  across  men  who  say  "  Yes  "  to  every  assertion  of 
truth  that  you  make;  men  who  make  you  almost  angry  by  their  persistency 
in  declaration  of  agreement  ?  There  are  very  few  of  all  the  thousands  who  are 
not,  and  know  they  are  not,  servants  of  Christ,  who  take  the  pains  to  deny  what 
they  nevertheless  do  not  really  accept.  What  can  you  say  to  such  men  ?  You 
cannot  argue,  for  they  agree  with  you  already.  You  cannot  appeal  to  them, 
for  their  creed  seems  to  compass  all  that  you  hold  as  true.  2.  There  is  such  a 
thing  as  formality  of  worship  and  life.  Just  as  truth  must  be  put  into  words, 
but  the  word  is  not  the  truth,  so  worship  has  to  be  put  into  some  expression, 
but  the  expression  is  not  the  worship.  Isaiah's  great  charge  against  the  people 
was  that  they  had  reversed  the  thing  entirely.  (Ibid.)  Formalism  unsatisfy- 
ing : — What  must  be  the  creed  of  the  formalist  in  worship  and  in  life  ?  This : 
that  what  is  said  to  be  the  means  of  grace  is  grace  itself ;  that  the  mechanical 
reading  of  the  Bible,  without  any  reverent,  hungering  spirit,  communicates  in 
some  mysterious  fashion  heavenly  truth ;  that  the  prostration  of  the  body,  while 
another  offers  prayer,  brings  blessing ;  that  to  sing  a  hymn,  be  its  meaning  felt 
or  not,  is  an  expression  of  praise;  that  these  things,  with  the  enduring  of  the 
infliction  of  half  an  hour's  sermon,  constitute  Christianity.  There  is  too  much 
of  formalism  in  the  best  of  us.  What  is  the  creed  of  the  formal  worshipper  T 
This :  "  God  doth  not  know,  neither  is  there  knowledge  in  the  Most  High  "  ; 
that  He  who  receives  the  humble  adorations  of  archangels  will  accept  from  men 
not  only  the  imperfect  praises  they  can  render,  not  only  the  scarce  articulate 
waiting  of  the  troubled  spirit,  panting  forth  its  prayer  for  help,  but  the  sound  of 
song  without  the  spirit,  the  utterance  of  petition  without  desire ;  that  He  who 
searches  all  hearts  is  deceived,  as  men  prostrate  their  bodies,  and  accepts  that  as 
homage ;  or  that  He  cares  for  nothing,  and  to  mock  His  presence  is  no  insult. 
Does  that  creed  shape  itself  in  accordance  with  your  ideas  of  God  ?  Yet  it  is 
just  an  interpretation  of  the  practice  of  the  man  whose  worship  is  nothing  more 
than  a  form.  And  as  it  affects  yourself  is  it  satisfactory  ?  Does  it  do  you  any 
good  ?  The  sin  in  the  heart  is  not  to  be  cured  by  any  sort  of  outward  observance. 
The  truth  of  God  is  not  to  be  reached  by  any  sort  of  mechanical  contrivance. 
This  Book  has  no  mysterious  sanctity  in  its  paper  and  print,  or  in  the  sound  of 
its  words.  It  is  the  meaning  and  the  spirit  that  alone  are  valuable.  Our  faith 
passes  on  the  wings  of  the  things  that  are  seen  and  temporal,  up  to  the  things 
that  are  unseen  and  eternal,  through  the  word  to  catch  the  revelation,  through 
prayer  and  praise  to  hold  communion  with  God.  Why  trifl?  with  your  nature's 
deepest  wants  t  Why  mock  the  everlasting  love  T  There  is  a  reality  in  prayer. 
There  is  an  expression  of  gratitude  which  inspires  praise.  There  is  a  Saviour  of 
sinners.  Come  to  Him.  He  only,  appearing  and  speaking  through  the  means 
He  has  appointed,  can  take  away  the  burden  and  the  sting  of  sin,  and  give  to  the 
weary  rest.  (Ibid.)  The  danger  of  formal  worship: — The  best  commentary  on 
our  text  is  just  the  history  of  the  reigns  during  which  Isaiah  prophesied.     I.  It 

WAS    NO    SLIGHT    CRIME    WITH    WHICH    THE    PEOPLE    OP   JUDAH   WERE   ACTUALLY 

chargeable — it  was,  indeed,  a  denial  of  God's  sovereignty,  although  by  that 
very  sovereignty  it  was  that  they  and  their  fathers  had  for  seven  hundred  years 
been  in  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  Though  they  might  make  an  outward 
profession  of  respect  for  the  ordinances  of  God,  yet  the  spirit  by  which  they  were 
actuated  was  essentially  an  atheistical  spirit,  inasmuch  as  with  all  the  outward 
observance  of  Divine  ordinances  they  looked  for  continued  prosperity  or  deliver- 
ance from  adversity,  not  to  the  wisdom  of  God,  but  to  their  own  counsels,  and 
the  help  promised  to  them  by  their  idolatrous  allies.  II.  The  judgment 
threatened  was  in  accordance  with  the  nature  and  manifestation  of  their  sin. 
They  were  not  to  be  overwhelmed  with  irresistible  calamity,  in  order  to  punish 
their  flagrant  idolatry  ;  but  they  were  to  be  left  to  the  effect  of  their  own  devices. 
They  were  to  work  by  their  own  skill,  and  in  so  doing  to  be  working  their  own 
ruin :  and  when  all  their  plans  were  brought  to  their  completion,  the  effect  was 
to  be  to  bring  utter  desolation  on  the  land  (ver.  14).     III.  Mankind,  with  all 

THEIR   VARIETIES   OP    CHARACTER,    ARE    ESSENTIALLY    SO    MUCH   THE    SAME    IN    ALL 

ages,  and  the  Scriptures  do,  on  the  one  hand,  so  graphically  portray  the  leading 
features  of  human  nature,  and,  on  the  other,  set  forth  so  clearly  the  great  unchange- 


oha?.  xxxx.]  ISAIAH.  576 

able  principles  of  the  Divine  administration,  that  none  who  read  that  book  with 
soberness  and  attention,  and  look  around  them  on  the  world  with  ordinary  ob- 
servation, can  fail  to  see  that  the  sins  of  individuals  or  of  nations  there  reproved 
are,  with  some  modifications  it  may  be,  the  same  sins  which  are  still  prevalent, 
and  that,  if  unrepented  of  and  unforgiven,  their  consequences  must  in  the  end  be 
the  same.  No  nation,  it  is  true,  is  precisely  in  the  same  circumstances  with  the 
kingdom  of  Judah,  but  still  the  great  principles  of  the  Divine  government  are 
unchangeable  and  eternal.  It  is  one  of  these,  that  sin  is  the  reproach  of  any 
people.  If  there  be  among  us,  possessing  as  we  do  a  full  revelation  of  the  will 
of  God,  a  disposition  to  deny  or  overlook  His  supremacy  as  Sovereign  Disposer  of 
all  events,  and  to  trust  to  the  wisdom  of  human  counsels  for  national  deliverance  or 
prosperity,  without  any  devout  recognition  of  absolute  dependence  upon  Him, 
are  we  not  chargeable  with  the  very  sin  with  which  Judah  of  old  was  charged, 
and  which  was  the  source  of  all  their  multiplied  offences  ?  And  if,  along  with 
this,  there  be  a  profession  of  faith — an  external  compliance  with  the  ordinances 
of  the  Gospel,  are  we  not  in  the  condition  of  drawing  near  to  God  with  our  mouths. 
and  honouring  Him  with  our  lips,  while  our  heart  is  far  removed  from  Him  ? 
(E.  Gordon,  D.D.)  A  wrong  religious  attitude: — This  spiritual  insensibility  of  the 
people  is  the  outcome  of  its  whole  religious  attitude,  which  is  insincere,  formal,  and 
traditional.  (J.  Skinner,  D.D. )  Plain  speaking  : — Let  us  use  these  words  ( ver.  1 3 ) 
as  Jesus  Christ  used  them  in  Matthew  (xv.  7).  There  are  three  points — 1.  The  im- 
portance of  plain  speaking  on  all  questions  affecting  the  interests  of  truth.  Jesus 
Christ  was  pre-eminently  a  plain  speaker.  2.  The  far-seeing  spirit  of  prophecy. 
Jesus  Christ  said  to  the  men  of  His  day,  "  Esaias  prophesied  of  you."  Observe 
the  unity  of  the  moral  world ;  observe  the  unchangeableness  of  God's  laws  ; 
see  how  right  is  ever  right  and  wrong  is  ever  wrong ;  how  the  centuries  make 
no  difference  in  the  quality  of  righteousness,  and  fail  to  work  any  improvement 
in  the  deformity  of  evil.  If  any  man  would  see  himself  as  he  really  is,  let  him 
look  into  the  mirror  of  Holy  Scripture.  God's  book  never  gets  out  of  date, 
because  it  deals  with  eternal  principles  and  covers  the  necessities  of  all  mankind. 
Let  us  then  study  the  Word  of  God  more  closely.  No  man  can  truly  know  human 
nature  who  does  not  read  two  Bibles, — namely,  the  Bible  of  God  as  written  in 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  the  Bible  of  God  as  written  in  his  own  heart  and  con- 
science. Human  nature  was  never  so  expounded  as  it  is  expounded  in  holy 
writ.  3.  The  high  authority  of  the  righteous  censor.  When  Jesus  Christ  spoke 
in  this  case  He  did  not  speak  altogether  in  His  own  name.  He  used  the  name 
of  Esaias.  All  time  is  on  the  side  of  the  righteous  man  ;  all  history  puts  weapons 
into  the  hands  of  the  man  who  would  be  valiant  for  truth.  The  righteous  man 
does  not  draw  his  authority  from  yesterday.  The  credentials  of  the  righteous 
man  are  not  written  with  ink  that  is  hardly  dry  yet.  It  draws  from  all  the  past. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  True  prayer  : — The  power  of  a  petition  is  not  in  the  roof 
of  the  mouth,  but  in  the  root  of  the  heart.  (J.  Trapp.)  Lip-service : — 
Panchcowrie,  a  Hindu  convert,  thus  spoke  one  day  in  the  market :  "  Some 
think  they  will  avert  God's  displeasure  by  frequently  taking  His  name  on  their 
lips,  and  saying,  '  O  excellent  God  !  '  *  O  Ocean  of  Wisdom  !  '  '  0  Sea  of  Love  !  ' 
and  so  on.  To  be  sure,  God  is  all  this  ;  but  who  ever  heard  of  a  debt  being  paid 
in  words  instead  of  rupees  !  "  (Sunday  at  Home.)  The  best  treasure : — A 
rabbi,  who  lived  nearly  twenty  years  before  Christ  was  born,  set  his  pupils  thinking 
by  asking  them,  "  What  is  the  best  thing  for  a  man  to  possess  ?  "  One  of  them 
replied,  '  A  kind  nature  "  ;  another,  "  A  good  companion  "  ;  another,  "  A  good 
neighbour."  But  one  of  them,  named  Eleazer,  said,  "  A  good  heart."  "  I  like 
your  answer  best,  Eleazer,"  said  the  master,  "  for  it  includes  all  the  rest." 
(Christian  Age.)  Heartless  prayers  : — "  I  met  in  India  an  intelligent  Sikh  from 
the  Punjab,  and  asked  him  about  his  religion.  He  replied,  '  I  believe  in  one 
God,  and  I  repeat  my  prayers,  called  Japji,  every  morning  and  evening.  These 
prayers  occupy  six  pages  of  print,  but  I  can  get  through  them  in  little  more  than 
ten  minutes.  He  seemed  to  pride  himself  on  this  rapid  recitation  as  a  work  of 
increased  merit."  Fashionable  church-going : — M.  went  to  church  because  it 
was  the  right  thing  to  do :  God  was  one  of  the  heads  of  society,  and  His  drawing- 
rooms  had  to  be  attended.  (O.  Macdonald,  LL.D.)  Their  fear  toward  Me  is 
taught  toy  the  precept  of  men. — A  fear  of  God  taught  by  the  precept  of  men  : — 
I.  There  is  a  fear  towards  God  which  is  taught  by  the  precept  op  men. 
It  is  unquestionable  that,  although  it  is  nothing  but  the  recklessness  of  infidelity 
which  would  speak  of  religion  as  an  engine  of  state  policy,  still  no  state  policy 


576  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

can  be  effective  which  looks  not  to  religion  as  an  auxiliary.  If  there  could  be 
taken  off  from  a  community  those  restraints  which  are  imposed  on  it  by  the 
doctrine  of  the  soul's  immortality,  and  of  a  future  dispensation  of  rewards  and 

fiunishments,  there  would  be  done  more  towards  the  introduction  of  a  universal 
awlessness  and  profligacy  than  if  the  statute-books  of  the  land  were  torn  up 
and  the  courts  of  justice  levelled  with  the  ground.  But  if  religion  be  thus  sus- 
ceptible of  being  employed  with  advantage  as  an  auxiliary,  there  is  a  corresponding 
risk  of  its  being  resorted  to  as  a  human  engine  and  not  as  a  Divine.  All  inculcations 
of  religion  which  are  dictated  by  the  consciousness  that  it  is  politic  to  stand  by 
religion  would  turn  into  inculcations  of  infidelity  the  moment  it  should  appear 
that  it  would  be  politic  to  stand  by  infidelity.  It  is  a  possible  case  that  rulers 
might  do  on  the  political  principle  what  Hezekiah  did  on  the  God-fearing  principle 
— they  might  busy  themselves  with  exacting  from  their  subjects  attention  to 
the  laws  of  the  Almighty,  and  so  might  bring  round  great  outward  conformity 
to  many  commands  of  the  Bible.  The  result  in  the  two  cases  might  be  similar : 
the  tokens  of  the  absence  of  God's  fear  might  be  swept  from  the  land  ;  and  there 
might,  on  the  contrary,  be  seen  on  the  whole  outspread  of  the  population,  appear- 
ances of  the  maintenance  of  that  fear.  What  is  to  be  said  of  that  fear  of  God 
which  seems  to  discover  itself  in  its  attention  to  ordinances,  but  which  is  only 
dictated  by  habit — or  respect  for  appearances — or  concern  for  religion  as  an 
engine  of  state  ?  If  we  could  mark  each  individual,  as  he  enters  the  house,  who 
is  only  brought  hither  by  custom — by  the  feeling  that  it  is  decorous  to  come — 
by  the  sense  that  it  is  right  that  old  institutions  should  be  upheld,  why,  since  in 
the  whole  assemblage  of  such  motives  there  is  no  real  recognition  of  the  authority 
of  Jehovah,  we  should  be  bound  to  say  of  all  those  who  thus  render  to  God  a 
spurious  and  inferior  homage,  that  their  fear  towards  Him  was  "  taught  by  the 
precept  of  men."  The  motive  or  sentiment  which  is  the  prime  energy  in  producing 
that  fear  towards  God  which  is  not  according  to  His  word  is  the  opinion  of  merit, 
the  attachment  of  worth  to  this  or  that  action,  which  is  ordinarily  described  as 
self-righteousness.  The  cases  of  the  fear  towards  God,  which  is  taught  by  the 
precept  of  men,  might  be  further  multiplied.  If  you  went  the  round  of  even 
the  religious  world  you  would  find  much  of  a  restless  endeavour  to  bring  down 
godliness  to  something  of  the  human  standard.     II.  The  fear  towards  God, 

TAUGHT  BY  MAN'S  PRECEPT,  IS  MOST  OFFENSIVE  IN  THE  SIGHT  OF  THE  ALMIGHTY. 

We  conclude  the  fact  of  the  offensiveness  from  God's  express  determination  of 
punishing  the  Jews  with  a  signal  punishment.  Our  simple  business  is  there- 
fore to  search  after  the  reason  of  this  offensiveness.  1.  The  fear  must  be  a 
defective  fear.  If  you  take  your  standard  from  aught  else  than  the  Bible,  you 
will  necessarily  have  a  standard  which  is  low  and  imperfect ;  and  although  you 
may  act  unflinchingly  up  to  this  standard,  where  it  is  the  standard  of  other  men's 
opinions  or  long  practice  or  custom,  you  stand  accountable  for  the  adoption  of 
the  standard.  2.  This  fear  involves  a  contempt  of  revelation  ;  and  on  this 
account  as  well  as  on  the  former  most  peculiarly  incurs  the  wrath  of  Jehovah. 
(H.  Mdvill,  B.D.)  "Their  fear  toward  Me  "  .•— R.V.  "Their  fear  of  Me," 
i.e.,  their  piety,  religion.  "  Is  taught  by  the  precept  of  men."  Better  as  R.V. : 
"  is  (or,  "has  become  ")  a  commandment  of  men  which  hath  been  taught "  ; — a 
human  ordinance  learned  by  rote  (Matt.  xv.  1-9).  This  pregnant  criticism 
expresses  with  epigrammatic  force  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  pagan 
and  the  biblical  conceptions  of  religion.  Religion,  being  personal  fellowship 
with  God,  cannot  be  "  learned  "  from  men,  but  only  by  revelation  (Matt,  xvi  17). 
{Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15, 16.  Woe  onto  them  that  seek  deep  to  hide  their  counsel  from  the  Lord. — 
The  folly  of  acting  separately  from  God: — L  Their  politics  described  (ver.  15). 
The  consultations  they  had  about  their  own  safety  they  kept  to  themselves, 
and  never  asked  God's  advice  concerning  them.  See  what  foolish,  fruitless  pains 
sinners  take  in  their  sinful  ways ;  they  seek  deep,  they  sink  deep,  to  hide  their 
counsel  from  the  Lord,  who  sits  in  heaven  and  laughs  at  them.  A  practical 
disbelief  of  God's  omniscience  is  at  the  bottom  both  of  the  carnal  worship 
and  carnal  confidences  of  the  hypocrites  (Psa.  xciv.  7  ;  Ezek.  viii.  12,  ix.  9). 
EL  The  absurdity  of  thetr  politics  demonstrated  (ver.  16).  Your  inverting 
the  order  of  things,  and  thinking  to  make  God's  providence  give  attendance 
on  your  projects,  and  that  God  must  know  no  more  than  you  think  fit,  which 
is  perfectly      turning  things  upside  down,"  and  beginning  at  the  wrong  end, — 


■ohap.  xxix.]  ISAIAH.  677 

"  it  shall  be  esteemed  as  the  potter's  clay "  ;  i.e.,  God  will  turn  and  manage 
you,  and  all  your  counsels,  with  as  much  ease,  and  as  absolute  a  power,  as  the 
potter  forms  and  fashions  his  clay.  They  that  think  to  hide  their  counsels  from 
God — 1.  In  effect  deny  Him  to  be  their  Creator.  2.  Or,  which  comes  to  the 
same  thing,  deny  Him  to  be  a  wise  Creator.     (M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  17-19.  Lebanon  shall  be  turned  into  a  fruitful  Held. — The  fruitful 
field  and  the  forest : — The  comparison  is  evidently  not  between  the  high  and  the 
low,  but  between  the  cultivated  and  the  wild,  the  field  and  the  forest.  (J.  A. 
Alexander.)  The  first  last  and  the  last  first : — The  only  natural  interpretation 
of  the  verse  is  that  which  regards  it  as  prophetic  of  a  mutual  change  of  condition, 
the  first  becoming  last  and  the  last  first.  If  the  previous  context  has  respect  to 
the  Jews  under  the  old  dispensation,  nothing  can  be  more  appropriate  or  natural 
than  to  understand  the  verse  before  us  as  foretelling  the  excision  of  the  unbelieving 
Jews  and  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  Church.  (Ibid.)  Jew  and 
Gentile : — L  I  shall  show  how  the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  verify  this 

SCRTPTUBB   GENERALLY.      II.   THE    SIGNS    THAT   MUST   ACCOMPANY   THE    WORK    IN 

these  latter  days.  1.  The  deaf  shall  hear  the  words  of  the  book.  2.  The 
blind  shall  see  out  of  obscurity  and  darkness.  3.  "  The  meek  also  shall  increase 
their  joy  in  the  Lord,"  &o.    III.  Improve  the  subject.    {F.  0.  Crossman.) 

Vers.  18, 19.  The  deaf  .  .  .  the  blind  .  .  .  the  meek  .  .  .  the  poor. — The  Gospel 
dap  : — I.  We  may  regard  these  words  as  containing  a  description  op  the  state 
in  which  the  Gospel  finds  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  The  epithets  are 
designed  to  be  descriptive  of  their  spiritual  character.  II.  The  pleasing  inti- 
mation WHICH  THE  TEXT  CONTAINS  OF  THEIR  RECOVERY  TO  A  BETTER  AND 
happier  condition.  "  In  that  day  the  deaf  shall  hear,  and  the  blind  shall  see." 
That  is,  the  spiritual  ignorance  and  insensibility  of  men  shall  be  subdued,  and 
the  delusion  and  stupidity  of  idolatrous  Gentiles  in  particular,  shall  be  succeeded 
by  a  clear  and  saving  knowledge  of  the  truth.  1.  This  prophecy  may  be  con- 
sidered as  receiving  its  fulfilment,  in  part,  in  every  instance  in  which  an  individual 
is  savingly  converted  to  God.  2.  But  the  prophecy  refers  to  something  on  a 
more  extensive  and  general  scale.  3.  The  words,  besides  intimating  the  fact  of  their 
recovery,  appear  also  to  intimate  the  means  by  which  their  recovery  shall  be 
effected.  They  shall  hear  the  words  of  the  book."  What  is  "  the  book"  the 
hearing  of  whose  "  words  "  is  connected  with  results  so  wondrous  and  delightful  ? 
(1)  Is  it  the  book  of  nature  ?  Alas,  that  book,  all  radiant  as  it  is  with  the 
Divine  glory  of  its  Author,  conveys  little  or  no  instruction  on  spiritual  subjects 
to  those  whom  sin  has  covered  with  its  dark  and  stupefying  shade.  (2)  Or  is  it 
the  book  of  human  philosophy  and  arts  and  sciences  ?  The  history  of  all  past 
ages,  to  say  nothing  of  the  present  times,  laughs  to  scorn  all  such  pretensions 
on  the  part  of  "  the  wisdom  of  this  world."  (3)  An  inspired  apostle  tells  us  that 
"  the  mystery  "  of  God  is  to  be  "  made  known  to  all  nations  for  the  obedience 
of  faith,  by  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets  "  ;  and  "  the  gospel  is  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation,  to  every  one  that  believeth:  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to 
the  Greek."  (4)  And  though  not  designed,  perhaps,  to  intimate  so  much,  yet 
does  not  the  expression  "  they  shall  hear  the  words  of  the  book"  serve  to  remind 
us  of  the  mode  in  which,  chiefly,  this  "  book  "  is  intended  to  diffuse  among  mankind 
the  experimental  knowledge  of  the  "  truth  and  grace  "  which  it  reveals  ?  Does" 
it  not  remind  us  that,  for  th&t  purpose,  it  is  to  be  proclaimed  by  the  oral  teaching 
of  a  living  ministry  ?    III.  These  latter  words  we  may  suppose  to  be  descriptive 

Of   CERTAIN    CIRCUMSTANCES    WITH   WHICH   THE    SPIRITUAL   RECOVERY   OF   MEN   IS 

found  to  be  connected.  1.  As  well  as  the  preceding  words,  they  are  applicable 
to  cases  of  individual  conversion.  In  this  view  they  remind  us  of  the  state  to 
which  the  sinner's  heart  is  humbled  when,  having  heard  "  the  words  of  the  book," 
he  is  made  to  tremble  under  the  threatenings  which  it  thunders  forth  against 
the  guilty  and  impenitent ;  and  when,  having  begun  to  "  see  out  of  obscurity 
and  out  of  darkness,"  he  discovers  the  tremendous  ruin  on  the  brink  of  which 
he  has  been  standing.  2.  But  then,  besides  describing  the  state  to  which  the 
sinner's  mind  is  humbled  in  the  first  instance,  these  words  remind  us  also  of  the 
blessedness  of  that  state  to  which,  when  he  is  once  made  truly  meek  and  poor 
in  spirit,  he  is  designed  to  be  exalted.  For  the  "  meek  shall  increase  their  joy 
in  the  Lord."  At  first,  indeed,  this  joy  may  not  be  anything  beyond  the  joy 
of  hope.     But  this  joy  he  "  shall  increase."     It  shall  grow  "  brighter  and  brighter 

37 


878  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

to  that  perfect  day  "  in  which  it  shall  become  a  "  fulness  of  joy  "  at  God's  right 
hand  for  evermore.  3.  If  these  words  be  more  extensively  applied,  as  having 
reference  to  those  nations  and  communities  of  men  amongst  whom  the  Gospel 
is  already  known,  or  as  having  reference  to  the  whole  of  that  world  throughout 
whose  wide  extent  it  must  ultimately  be  proclaimed,  they  still  point  out  the 
circumstances  under  which  this  Gospel  shall  be  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation," 
and  the  delightful  effects  which  shall  ensue  on  its  reception,  in  the  increase  of 
human  happiness,  and  in  the  turning  of  men  from  a  vain  confidence  in  "  lying 
vanities,"  to  faith  in  the  one  living  and  eternal  God.  4.  It  would  appear  also 
to  be  intimated,  that  these  delightful  results  of  evangelical  instruction  should  be 
especially  exemplified  in  the  case  of  the  most  despised  and  degraded  of  mankind. 
For  they  are  "  the  poor  amongst  men,"  who  shall  especially  rejoice  in  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel."  5.  These  things  are  delightful  to  contemplate ;  but  let  us  not 
forget,  in  the  pleasure  of  such  contemplations,  the  personal  and  practical  interest 
which  we  are  called  to  take  in  them.     (J.  Crowther.) 

Ver.  19.  The  poor  among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel. — Reasons 
why  the  poor  may  rejoice  in  Ood  : — One  of  the  most  striking  proofs  of  the  Divine 
origin  of  Christianity  is  its  universal  adaptation  to  the  condition  and  the  wants  of 
the  whole  family  of  men.  It  is  not  designed  to  be  the  religion  of  a  sect  or  an 
age,  but  the  religion  of  the  whole  world.  The  universality  of  its  character  proves 
that  it  comes  from  Him  who  sustains  all,  preserves  all,  feeds  and  blesses  all.     We 

Eropose  to  assign  reasons  why  the  poor  may  well  "  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of 
jrael."    L  Because  Christ  in  His  humiliation  condescended  to  be  poob, 

AND   THUS   HONOURED   AND    HALLOWED   THE    CONDITION    OP   THE   POOR.      Who    of 

all  the  legislators,  moralists,  and  teachers  that  have  appeared  in  the  world  ever 
conferred  such  honour  on  humanity,  or  displayed  such  regard  for  the  poor  ?  Who, 
after  this,  shall  dare  to  look  down  upon  honest  poverty  ?  Who,  after  this,  shall 
dare  to  convert  want  into  a  crime  ?  Let  the  poor,  then,  "  rejoice  in  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel."  He  can  enter  into  your  sorrows,  and  feel  for  your  wretchedness. 
II.  Because  the  blessings  of  Christ's  salvation  are  provided  and  bestowed 

GRATUITOUSLY,    AND    ARE    THUS    PECULIARLY    ADAPTED    TO    THE     CONDITION     Off 

the  poor.  1.  Money  has  been  paid  down  for  the  imperial  purple  of  Rome, — 
the  empire  of  the  Caesars  has  been  sold  to  the  highest  bidder ;  but  were  salvation 
only  to  be  purchased  with  money,  or  did  it  require  resources  in  man  himself, 
black  despair  might  seize  and  petrify  the  heart  of  every  poor  man.  2.  Or  were 
salvation  a  work  that  required  expensive  and  tedious  elaboration  at  home, — 
were  it  like  the  erection  of  a  palace,  or  the  building  of  a  pyramid,  or  the  construction 
of  such  vast  works  as  those  by  which  you  cross  a  gulf  or  span  a  sea, — alas  for  the 

Jioor !  for  then  their  souls  must  perish.  But  let  the  poor  among  men  rejoice, 
or  the  salvation  which  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  provides  and  bestows  is  a  salvation 
"  without  money  and  without  price."  3.  There  is  another  circumstance  which 
ought  mightily  to  enhance  these  Gospel  blessings  in  the  estimation  of  the  poor ; 
namely,  the  exclusion  from  many  earthly  privileges  to  which  poverty  subject* 
them.  It  is  very  true  that  many  of  the  simpler,  purer,  and  more  exquisite  pleasures 
of  life  are  as  free  to  the  poor  as  to  the  rich.  But  in  this  world  poverty  does 
exclude  from  some  privileges.  But,  oh !  how  does  my  heart,  as  that  of  a  poor 
man,  exult  in  the  free  salvation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  Here,  in  the  Gospel 
of  Jesus,  is  full  compensation  for  all  the  contumely  and  scorn  cast  on  humble 
poverty,  in.  Because,  in  addition  to  all  that  He  Himself  has  done  fob 
them,  His  authority,  as  a  law-giver,  enjoins  special  attention,  charity, 
and  sympathy  towards  the  poor.    IV.  Because  the  condition  of  poverty 

18  MORE  FAVOURABLE  THAN  THAT  OF  RICHES  TO  THE  RECEPTION  OF  CHRIST,  AND 

TO  the  display  of  religious  principle.  The  Saviour's  language  seems  fully 
to  warrant  this  sentiment  when  He  says,  "  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  !  " — and  again :  "  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go 
through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  Poverty  seems  to  be  the  favourite  element  in  which  religious  principle 
is  produced  and  nurtured.  It  is  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  poor  that  the  light  and 
heat  of  Divine  truth  love  to  radiate.     {J.  French.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  For  the  terrible  one  is  brought  to  nought.  —  Scorners  and 
their  punishment : — Observe  what  had  been  the  wickedness  of  these  scorners, 
for  which  they  should  be  cut  off.     1.  They  ridiculed  the  prophets  and  the  serious 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  579 

professors  of  religion.  They  despised  them,  and  did  their  utmost  to  bring  them 
into  contempt ;  they  were  scorners,  and  sat  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.  2.  They 
lay  at  catch  for  an  occasion  against  them.  By  their  spies  they  watch  for  iniquity, 
to  see  if  they  can  lay  hold  on  anything  that  is  said  or  done  that  may  be  called 
an  iniquity.  Or,  they  themselves  watch  for  an  opportunity  to  do  mischief,  as 
Judas  did  to  betray  our  Lord  Jesus.  3.  They  took  advantage  against  them 
for  the  least  slip  of  the  tongue ;  and  if  anything  were  never  so  little  said  amiss, 
it  served  them  to  ground  an  indictment  upon.  They  made  a  man,  though  he 
were  never  so  wise  and  good  a  man,  though  he  were  a  man  of  God,  an  offender 
for  a  word,  a  word  mischosen  or  misplaced,  when  they  could  not  but  know  that 
it  was  well  meant.  They  cavilled  at  every  word  that  the  prophets  spoke  to  them 
by  way  of  administration,  though  never  so  innocently  spoken,  and  without 
any  design  to  affront  them.  They  put  the  worst  construction  upon  what  was 
said,  and  made  it  criminal  by  strained  innuendos.  4  They  did  all  they  could 
to  bring  those  into  trouble  that  dealt  faithfully  with  them  and  told  them  of  their 
faults.  Those  that  reprove  in  the  gates,  namely,  reprovers  by  office,  that  were 
bound  by  the  duty  of  their  place  as  prophets,  as  judges,  and  magistrates  to  show 
people  their  transgressions,  they  hated  these,  and  laid  snares  for  them.  It  is 
next  to  impossible  for  the  most  cautious  to  place  their  words  so  warily  as  to  escape 
such  snares.  6.  They  pervert  judgment,  and  will  never  let  an  honest  man  carry 
an  honest  cause ;  they  "  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  nought,"  i.e.,  they 
condemn  him,  or  give  the  cause  against  him  upon  no  evidence,  no  colour  or  pretence 
whatsoever.  They  run  a  man  down,  and  misrepresent  him  by  all  the  little  acts 
and  tricks  they  can  devise,  as  they  did  our  Saviour.  But  wait  a  while,  and  God 
will  not  only  bring  forth  their  righteousness,  but  cut  off  and  consume  these 
s,  orners.     (M.  Henry.) 


CHAPTER  XXX 


Vers.  1-3.  Woe  to  the  rebellious  children. — A  foolish  mission : — In  chapter 
xxx.  the  negotiations  with  Egypt  are  represented  as  having  reached  a 
further  stage :  an  embassy,  despatched  for  the  purpose  of  concluding  a 
treaty,  is  already  on  its  way  to  the  court  of  the  Pharaohs.  Isaiah  takes 
the  opportunity  of  reiterating  his  sense  of  the  fruitlessness  of  the  mission, 
and  derides  the  folly  of  those  who  expect  from  it  any  substantial  result. 
(Prof.  S.  E.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  only  Counsellor  : — These  words  contain  a  most 
important  lesson  for  all  such  as  have  anything  to  do  with  managing  the  affairs  of 
nations :  and  it  would  be  well  for  the  world  if  its  rulers  would  give  heed  to  that 
lesson,  and  keep  guard  against  the  sins  on  account  of  which  the  prophet  here 
denounces  woe  against  the  rulers  of  Judah.  They  entered  into  an  alliance  with 
Pharaoh,  with  the  view  of  gaining  assistance  from  him  which  might  enable  them 
to  cope  with  Sennacherib  in  the  field.  This  is  just  what  a  statesman,  who  plumed 
himself  on  his  wisdom  in  these  days,  would  do.  Yet  it  is  for  doing  this  very  thing 
that  the  prophet  Isaiah  in  the  text  denounces  woe  against  them.  Their  conduct 
therefore  must  have  been  sinful.  Let  us  try  to  discover  in  what  their  sin  lay. 
1.  They  were  making  use  of  human  means  to  ward  off  the  danger  which  threatened 
them.  Not  that  this  in  itself  is  altogether  wrong  in  God's  eyes.  On  the  contrary, 
we  are  so  placed  here  on  earth,  in  the  midst  of  so  many  wants  and  necessities, 
and  so  helpless  by  ourselves,  that  we  are  compelled  to  be  for  ever  making  use  of 
human  and  earthly  means.  Only,  we  ought  to  make  use  of  these  means  with  the 
conviction  that  they  are  merely  instruments  in  the  hands  of  Him  who  can  alone 
endow  them  with  the  power  of  being  of  use  to  us.  This  is  what  the  rulers  of  Judah 
forgot  and  entirely  lost  sight  of.  They  trusted  in  Pharaoh.  We  are  all  apt  to 
take  counsel  of  ourselves,  of  our  own  understandings,  our  own  wishes,  our  own 
convenience,  our  passions,  our  interest,  our  sloth,  our  purses,  our  appetites.  Or 
we  take  counsel  of  our  friends,  of  our  neighbours,  of  such  men  as  are  esteemed 
to  be  quick  and  far-sighted,  of  every  person,  and  of  every  thing,  except  of  God. 
His  counsel  is  the  last  we  seek.  Therefore  does  the  prophet's  woe  fall  upon  us 
also.  And  why  is  it  that  we  are  so  loth  to  take  counsel  of  God  ?  Our  unwilling- 
ness can  only  proceed  from  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief ;  from  that  unbelief  which 
loses  sight  of  the  Ruler  and  Lawgiver  of  the  world,  and  which  is  prone  to  worship 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

whatever  dazzles  the  senses  and  flatters  our  carnal  nature.  2.  But  there  was 
another  feature  in  the  conduct  of  the  princes  of  Judah  which  deepened  their  sin. 
They  were  not  merely  putting  their  trust  in  an  arm  of  flesh, — they  who  had  been 
so  strongly  forbidden  to  trust  in  such  vanities,  and  who  had  the  living  God  to 
trust  in :  but  the  arm  they  were  trusting  to  wa3  the  arm  of  Egypt.  Egypt  had 
from  the  first  been  the  deadly  enemy  of  the  Israelites,  and  of  their  God.  Egypt 
was  the  source  from  which  all  manner  of  idolatrous  abominations  had  flowed  in 
upon  them  :  out  of  Egypt  they  had  been  called  ;  and  they  were  no  longer  to  hold 
any  intercourse  with  it.  Therefore  the  prophet  goes  on  to  cry,  "  Woe  to  those 
who  walk  to  go  down  into  Egypt,  to  strengthen  themselves  in  the  strength  of 
Pharaoh,  and  to  trust  in  the  shadow  of  Egypt !  "  and  he  declares  that,  because  they 
do  so,  "  the  strength  of  Pharaoh  shall  be  their  shame,  and  the  trust  in  the  shadow 
of  Egypt  their  confusion."  Nor  will  it  be  otherwise  with  us.  If  we  are  guilty  of 
their  sin  we  shall  not  escape  their  woe.  And  alas  !  how  often  in  moments  of 
fear,  of  distress, — when  some  danger  starts  up  suddenly  in  our  path,  when  the 
enemy  seems  to  be  hard  at  hand,  and  just  ready  to  overwhelm  us,— do  we  feel 
tempted  to  go  down  into  Egypt,  in  the  hope  of  strengthening  ourselves  with  the 
strength  of  Pharaoh,  and  of  sheltering  ourselves  with  the  shadow  of  Egypt !  Satan 
at  such  moments  is  always  close  at  our  ear,  whispering  to  us,  that,  if  we  will  but 
take  counsel  of  him,  and  do  as  he  bids  us,  he  will  help  us  out  of  our  difficulty. 
It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that,  every  time  we  sin  we  weaken  our  souls,  we  cripple 
our  good  feelings,  we  blunt  our  conscience,  we  drive  away  the  Spirit  of  God  from 
our  hearts.  Therefore,  instead  of  our  being  better  able  to  meet  the  next  tempta- 
tion, the  odds  against  us  are  increased.  (J.  C.  Hare,  31. A.)  The  Jews'  depend- 
ence on  Egypt : — The  advantages  which  the  Jews  promised  themselves  from  their 
alliance  with  Egypt  were  these — 1.  The  Egyptians  abounded  in  chariots  and 
horses,  which  the  Jews  were  destitute  of.  For  Palestine,  being  a  country  full 
of  steep  hills  and  narrow  difficult  ways,  was  in  many  places  impassable  by  horses, 
and  therefore  their  beasts  of  burden  were  camels,  asses,  and  mules,  which  are  not 
apt  to  start,  but  tread  sure  in  dangerous  ways.  These  served  them  very  com- 
modiously  in  times  of  peace.  But  when  they  were  invaded  by  armies  of  the 
Assyrians  and  Chaldeans,  who  had  troops  of  horse,  and  multitudes  of  chariots, 
they  wanted  the  like  forces  to  oppose  them ;  and  such  the  Egyptians  could  very 
well  supply  them  with.  2.  Besides,  the  Assyrians  and  Chaldeans  were  at  that 
time  the  most  formidable  Powers  of  the  East,  ambitious  of  universal  monarchy, 
and  threatening  to  subdue  Egypt  as  well  as  other  rich  kingdoms.  On  which 
account  the  Egyptians  were  jealous  of  them,  and  therefore  were  most  easily 
prevailed  upon,  and  more  cheaply  engaged  to  assist  the  Jews,  or  any  other  people 
in  their  wars  against  them.  (W.  Reading.  M.A.)  Ood's  prohibition  of  alliance 
with  Egypt : — The  reasons  why  God  prohibited  His  people  to  confederate  with 
the  Egyptians,  are  these — 1.  He  had  delivered  their  forefathers  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  hand,  stretched  out  from  Heaven,  and  unassisted  by  any 
human  means.  He  had  manifested  Himself  to  be  far  above  all  their  gods,  in  that 
He  triumphed  over  them  in  the  ten  plagues,  and  drowned  their  king  and  army 
in  the  Red  Sea.  Notwithstanding  all  which  sufficient  convictions,  the  Egyptians 
still  persisted  in  their  gross  idolatry ;  which  might  justly  provoke  God  to  forbid 
His  people  any  dealing  with  them.  2.  Their  applying  to  Egypt  for  aid  against 
their  enemies,  was  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  God,  who  having  anciently  demon- 
strated His  ability  to  save  His  people,  and  having  promised  still  to  vouchsafe 
them  His  protection  in  proportion  to  their  obedience,  these  idolaters  might  be 
apt  to  conclude  that  His  former  power  was  now  decayed,  and  that  their  gods 
had  gained  the  ascendant  over  Him,  since  they  were  called  in  to  the  protection  of 
His  people.  3.  An  Egyptian  had  proved  fatal  to  Israel  in  their  happiest  state ; 
I  mean  the  daughter  of  an  Egyptian  king,  who  was  one  of  the  wives  of  King 
Solomon,  and  helped  with  other  strange  women  to  entice  him  to  idolatry.  The 
immediate  consequence  of  which,  by  the  just  judgment  of  God,  was  the  division 
of  the  twelve  tribes  into  two  kingdoms,  who  often  waged  unnatural  wars  one  with 
another.  4.  God  had,  in  general,  forbidden  His  people  to  make  confederacies 
with  any  of  the  nations  round  about  them,  lest  they  should  defile  themselves  with 
their  idolatrous  principles  and  abominable  practices ;  or  lest  they  should  put 
their  trust  in  man  and  make  flesh  their  arm,  and  their  heart  depart  from  the  Lord. 
(Ibid.)  "  Cover  with  a  covering  "  : — Perhaps,  "  weave  a  web,"  hatch  a  scheme. 
(A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  R.V.  marg.  gives  two  translations  between  which 

it  is  diffioult  to  choose*    The  latter  is  perhaps  preferable,  although  the  noun 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  581 

does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  sense  of  "  libation."  The  allusion  would  be  to 
drink-offerings  accompanying  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty.  (J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
Adding  sin  to  sin  : — The  sin  of  forsaking  God,  and  trusting  in  the  arm  of  flesh. 
to  their  sin  of  drunkenness  (chap,  xxviii.  8),  and  their  other  sins.     (W.  Day,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  Their  strength  is  to  sit  still. — A  policy  in  an  epigram  .'—Some- 
times a  policy  is  summed  up  in  an  epigram,  or  in  an  easily  quotable 
sentence ;  and  it  can  be  used  as  a  war-cry  or  aa  an  election-cry ;  it  can 
be  adapted  to  political  uses  of  many  sorts.  Thus  it  was  said  of  the  Bourbons 
that "  they  forgot  nothing,  and  remembered  nothing."  It  was  said  of  an  illustrious 
statesman  in  Europe  that  his  policy  was  "  blood  and  iron."  In  relation  to  many 
persona  we  are  recommendea  to  use  "  masterly  inactivity  " — to  be  appearing 
capable  of  doing  miracles,  and  yet  to  take  infinite  care  not  to  attempt  the  perform- 
ance of  one  of  them.  This  is  precisely  the  spirit  of  the  text.  The  peoples  to  whom 
the  worda  were  addressed  were  mocked,  and  the  paraphrase  which  the  spirit  of 
the  text  would  justify  is  this : — They  have  great  mouths,  but  say  nothing ;  the 
hippopotamus  cannot  make  his  voice  heard ;  the  ox-mouth  is  closed :  their 
energy  is  inaction ;  when  they  are  about  to  come  forward  to  do  wonders  they 
shrink  back  and  do  nothing.  It  is  a  taunt — an  exclamation  wholly  ironical, 
thrown  in  the  face  of  a  detested  enemy,  or  an  absconding  friend,  or  one  who  has 
great  appearance  of  energy,  and  yet  is  unable  to  move  the  tiniest  of  his  fingers. 
(«/.  Parker,  D.D.)  "  Rahab,  that  sitteth  still  "  .• — So  full  were  Egyptian  politics 
of  bluster  and  big  language,  that  the  Hebrews  had  a  nickname  for  Egypt.  They 
called  her  Rahab — "Stormy-speech,"  "Blusterer,"  "Braggart."  It  was  the  term 
also  for  the  crocodile,  as  being  a  "  monster,"  so  that  there  was  a  picturesqueness 
as  well  as  moral  aptness  in  the  name.  Ay,  says  Isaiah,  catching  at  the  old  name, 
and  putting  to  it  another  which  describes  Egyptian  helplessness  and  inactivity, 
I  call  her  "Rahab  sit-still,"  "  Braggart  -that-  sitteth-  still,"  "Stormy -speech 
stay-at-home."  Blustering  and  inactivity,  blustering  and  sitting  still,  that  is 
her  character.  "  For  Egypt  helpeth  in  vain  and  to  no  purpose.'  (Prof.  G.  A . 
Smith,  D.D.)  Strength  and  stillness: — The  context  reveals  two  things.  (1)  A 
great  national  danger.  (2)  A  great  national  sin.  Wherein  ia  the  truth  of  the 
statement,  that  man'a  strength  is  in  sitting  still  ?  or,  rather,  what  is  meant  by 
sitting  still  ?  It  is  not  the  stillness  of  indolence.  Indolence  is  weakness — is 
ruin.  Activity  is  the  condition  of  strength.  Industry  is  essential  to  progress 
in  all  that  is  great  and  happy.  What,  then,  is  the  stillness  ?  It  is  the  stillness  of 
unbounded  trust  in  God.  I.  Stillness  of  confidence  in  relation  to  God's 
redemptive  provision  is  strength.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  all-sufficient. 
II.  Stillness  of  confidence  in  relation  to  your  future  history  is 
strength.  "  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,"  &c.  III.  Stillness  of 
confidence  in  relation  to  present  providential  trials  is  strength. 
The  Israelites,  with  piled  mountains  on  each  side  of  them,  the  sea  rolling  before 
them,  and  Pharaoh  and  his  host  approaching  them,  were  exhorted  by  their 
leader  to  "  stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord."  Peter  slept  between 
two  soldiers ;  and  Paul  said,  "  None  of  these  things  move  me."  (Ilomilist.) 
Strength  in  sitting  still : — I.  Some  things  to  which  the  sentence  of  the  text 
will  not  apply.  1.  It  will  not  apply  when  we  have  to  get  our  daily  bread.  We 
are  to  be  diligent  in  business,  as  well  as  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord. 
2.  Neither  do  we  say  so  when  learning  is  to  be  acquired.  This  is  to  be  sought 
by  application,  and  earned  by  incessant  toil.  Neither  is  our  preaching  by  sitting 
still.  If  any  think  to  enter  the  ministry  that  they  may  sit  still,  and  spend  a  life 
of  ease,  they  utterly  mistake  the  office.  3.  Nor  when  any  temptation  is  to  be 
resisted,  or  any  evil  overcome.  You  are  to  resist  the  tempter.  And  you  are 
to  maintain  that  particular  virtue,  which  is  in  direct  defiance  of  the  particular 
temptation.  If  you  are  tempted,  there  is  another  thing  which  you  can  do.  You 
can  flee.  Safety  is  often  in  flight.  Joseph  fled.  "  Flee  youthful  lusts." 
4.  Nor  does  the  text  apply  when  duties  of  any  kind  are  to  be  done.  Idleness  is  a 
base  condition.  Better  dig  a  hole  and  fill  it  up  again.  Better  roll  a  stone  up 
and  down  a  hill,  than  pass  your  time  in  listlessness  and  languor.  There  are  duties 
belonging  to  every  state  of  life.  Let  them  be  attended  to  in  promptitude  and 
despatch.  5.  Nor  is  the  text  applicable  when  good  works  are  to  be  undertaken. 
We  have  many  instructions  in  Scripture  on  this  subject.  "  Be  not  weary  in 
well  doing."  &c.  "  Be  steadfast,  unmovable,"  &c.  "  These  things,"  says  St. 
Paul,  "  I  will  that  ye  affirm  constantly,  that  they  which  have  believed  in  God, 


682  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  xxx. 

may  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."  6.  We  do  not  say  it  when  the  heavenly 
prize  of  eternal  life  is  to  be  contended  for.  II.  Statu  the  condition  of  things 
to  which  the  axiom  does  apply.  1.  It  will  apply  to  many  important  questions 
concerning  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  It  will  apply  to  the  expiation  of  guilt. 
So  respecting  regeneration.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  There  must  be  wrought 
an  inward  change.  It  will  be  wrought  of  God.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  works 
when,  how,  and  where  He  pleases.  2.  There  are  some  matters  belonging  to  our 
daily  and  nightly  life,  in  which  the  principle  is  likewise  of  great  value  and  import- 
ance. For  example,  the  evening  is  come.  The  day's  labour  is  finished.  It  is 
time  to  cease.  God  says  to  you,  Lie  down ;  go  to  sleep.  And  when  you  sleep, 
"  Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  waketh  but  in  vain."  Be  not 
afraid.  God  will  keep  both  the  city  and  the  watchman.  Then,  here  is  God's 
own  day.  This  is  the  day  when  God  emphatically  says,  "  Sit  still "  ;  and  in 
quietness  and  rest  is  your  strength.  Be  not  afraid.  Commerce  will  be  uninjured, 
and  none  the  worse  for  your  being  quiet  on  this  day.  You  will  return  to  your 
occupations  with  augmented  might  and  vigour  on  the  morrow.  3.  Then,  again, 
there  are  providential  conjunctures,  in  which  we  can  do  nothing,  in  which  every 
effort  and  interference  of  ours  is  of  no  avail.  And  now  the  end  of  all  this  is  manifest. 
Man's  chief  wisdom  is — (1)  To  be  active  and  diligent  in  all  his  appointed  fields  of 
labour  and  exertion.  (2)  To  be  tranquil,  and  resigned,  and  passive  in  matters 
over  which  he  has  no  control.  (3)  To  trust  God,  and  acquiesce  in  the  Divine 
will  in  everything.  (J.  Stratten.)  Passive  hours: — I.  The  attitude  enjoined 
by  the  text.  What  is  it  to  "  sit  still  "  ?  1.  It  indicates  a  condition  of  silence. 
Times  occur  for  silence  before  men — when  it  is  best  to  refrain  from  all  vindications 
touching  our  character  and  doings.  There  are  seasons  for  silence  before  God — 
times  when  our  lips  are  neither  opened  in  complaint  nor  importunity.  "  Rest  in 
the  Lord  (be  silent  to  the  Lord),  and  wait  patiently  for  Him."  2.  A  condition  of 
resting  is  suggested.  We  must  resign  our  opinions,  anxieties,  merit,  strength, 
and  resources,  looking  simply  into  heaven.  3.  It  is  also  the  attitude  of  waiting. 
"  I  bide  my  time,"  is  the  motto  of  one  of  our  noble  families,  and  he  who  can  bide 
his  time,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  can  bide  God's  time,  is  perfect  in  the  sublime 
art  of  sitting  still.  4.  The  text  also  sets  forth  a  condition  of  expectation.  Sir 
Thomas  Lawrence  painted  the  portrait  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  when 
the  portrait  was  half  finished,  the  Duke  was  represented  as  holding  a  watch  in 
his  hand,  waiting  for  the  Prussians  at  Waterloo.  When  the  great  soldier  under- 
stood what  the  watch  was  intended  to  indicate,  he  observed,  "  That  will  never 
do.  I  was  not  waiting  for  the  Prussians  at  Waterloo.  Put  a  telescope  in  my 
band,  if  you  please,  but  no  watch."  The  temper  here  enjoined  is  very  different 
to  stoicism,  involving  no  sacrifice  of  sensibility ;  it  is  distinct  from  fatalism, 
because  it  recognises  the  good  and  righteous  God  freely  acting  in  all  the  govern- 
ment of  the  world  ;  and  it  cannot  be  confounded  with  despair,  for  its  inspiration 
is  faith  and  hope.  II.  The  several  occasions  when  the  admonition  before 
us  is  specially  applicable.  1.  In  the  development  of  our  religious  life  we  may 
sometimes  remember  the  text  with  advantage.  Spiritual  life  commences  in 
the  passive  mood.  2.  But  "  justified  by  faith  we  often  forget  we  must  "  live 
by  faith,"  and  by  pure  and  simple  faith  pass  into  the  highest  stages  of  spiritual 
life.  3.  There  are  two  sides  to  a  complete  Christian  life — the  contemplative 
and  enterprising,  the  hearkening  and  speaking,  the  receptive  and  communi- 
cative— and  it  is  of  prime  importance  that  both  sides  receive  full  attention. 
4.  Distressed  by  the  problems  and  tribulations  of  life  we  may  justly  rest  in  th© 
passive  mood.  Sometimes  we  are  bitterly  bereaved.  In  these  days  when  our 
eyes  are  full  of  heart-break  let  us  not  go  down  into  the  Egypt  of  carnal  reason 
for  light  or  help — only  be  still.  God  does  not  even  expect  us  to  say  big  words 
in  such  crises — only  to  be  still.  Sometimes  we  are  prostrated  by  extreme  physical 
suffering.  Said  a  poor  afflicted  woman,  "  All  that  God  requires  from  me  now 
is  to  lie  here  and  cough."  Yes ;  simple  suffering  and  quiet  confidence — that, 
and  nothing  more.  Sometimes  we  are  defamed.  When  our  reputation  is 
unjustly  eclipsed,  are  we  to  agitate  and  worry  ourselves  ?  Let  us  rather  exemplify 
the  maxim  of  Lavater :  "  I  can  wait "  ;  let  there  be  no  impatience,  no  fretful- 
ness,  no  bitterness.  In  the  days  of  sorrowful  surprise,  of  overwhelming  mis- 
fortune, of  sore  dilemma,  let  us  not  go  down  into  Egypt  for  wisdom  to  explain, 
or  strength  to  bear,  or  consolation  to  soothe,  but  looking  up  to  the  everlasting 
Love,  a  whole  army  of  fiery  cars  and  coursers  shall  shelter  and  deliver  us.  5.  The 
counsel  of  the  text  is  applicable  to  us  when  oppressed  by  spiritual  conflict  and 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  883 

darkness.  "  Who  is  there  among  you  that  feareth  the  Lord,"  &c.  (chap.  1.  10). 
6.  This  monition  is  applicable  to  us  also  when  we  are  discouraged  in  our  evangel- 
istic enterprises.  The  Indian  juggler  is  said  to  contrive  to  make  a  flower  grow 
from  a  seed  to  maturity  before  the  eyes  of  the  spectators  in  a  few  moments ; 
and  thus  we  expect  the  truth  we  sow  to  spring  forth  speedily  bearing  its  rich 
crown  of  beauty  and  fruit.  But  alas  !  we  wait,  wait  long,  and  sometimes  sink 
into  a  state  very  like  despair.  Then  again,  when  the  triumph  of  the  truth  is  delayed, 
workers  are  tempted  to  alloy  it,  with  a  view  to  its  speedier  popularity ;  hoping 
that  in  its  debased  form  it  may  secure  an  entrance  denied  to  pure  doctrine.  And 
yet  once  more,  when  the  faith  of  Christ  has  not  forthwith  run  and  been  glorified, 
the  Church  has  been  tempted  to  form  political,  artistic,  and  worldly  alliances, 
which  in  the  end  only  betray  and  mock.  Paradoxical  as  it  may  seem,  it  is  a 
grand  thing  for  workers  to  "  sit  still "  ;  having  with  both  hands  toiled  for  God, 
calmly  and  confidently  to  wait  the  issue  (James  v.  7,  8).  The  difficulty  of 
rendering  obedience  to  this  injunction  is  really  great.  There  is  a  sitting  still 
easy  enough  and  common  enough,  but  to  rest  in  God  with  an  absolute  faith  is 
neither  easy  nor  common.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Over-solicitude  injurious  : — Our 
solicitudes,  intermeddlings,  overdoing3  ruin  us,  or,  at  least,  bring  us  into  many 
and  sore  distresses.  1.  They  do  in  regard  to  our  character.  When  shall  we 
understand  we  are  clay  in  the  Potter's  hand,  and  our  grand  business  the  simple 
yielding  of  ourselves  to  the  fashioning  of  God's  sovereign  Spirit  ?  How  often 
our  overweening  care,  our  intrusive  curiosity,  our  vanity  and  self-will  have  spoiled 
God's  grand  handiwork,  and  arrested  the  growing  completeness  of  our  spirit! 
2.  And  so  in  regard  to  our  circumstances — our  safety  is  in  quietness.  In  days 
of  tempest  the  helm  is  safest  in  charge  of  the  pilot ;  in  moments  of  alarm  the 
reins  are  best  in  the  driver's  skilful  grasp ;  and  if  the  man  overboard  will  only 
be  still  all  the  waves  of  the  sea  shall  not  drown  him.  Oh  !  when  shall  we  learn 
the  blessedness  of  resignation,  the  power  of  passivity,  the  victory  of  faith  ?  (Ibid.) 
The  secret  of  spiritual  power : — I.  Rest  in  another  necessarily  implies  that 
WB  must  learn  to  rest  in  ourselves.  No  man  has  a  right  to  say  that  he  is 
living  the  Divine  life,  without  faith,  without  patience,  without  trust  in  God, 
without  that  spirit  of  waiting  upon  God,  to  which  all  the  Scriptures  exhort  and 
encourage  us.  The  patient  places  himself  in  the  hands  of  a  physician,  but  he 
will  keep  meddling  with  the  physician's  prescriptions ;  he  will  keep  taking 
nostrums  of  his  own.  And  the  physician  says  very  properly,  "  Not  so ;  this 
must  not  be.  I  can  do  nothing  for  you  if  it  is  so."  And  men  who  put  their 
salvation  into  God's  hands,  as  Israel  ought  to  have  done,  must  stand  by  that 
— stand  by  it  always.  II.  As  arising  from  this,  we  are  strong  in  life  just 
▲s  we  lay  hold  of  this  principle  and  learn  to  restrain  ourselves.  (W.  Baxen- 
dale.)  The  stillness  of  faith  (with  ver.  15) : — Does  this  expression  embody 
a  universal  principle — one  applicable  under  all  possible  circumstances  ?  The 
least  consideration  will  convince  us  that  this  cannot  be  the  case.  1.  You  are 
naturally,  it  may  be,  somewhat  apathetic.  I  fear  we  all  are  so  in  religion — 
in  the  concerns  of  the  soul.  And  this  natural  indolence  is  sometimes  greatly 
strengthened  by  a  false  theology,  a  one-sided,  overstrained  evangelism,  which, 
by  for  ever  insisting  on  the  one  point  of  human  inability,  has  a  tendency  to  lull 
men  asleep.  And  thus  it  is  that  multitudes  sit  down  with  folded  hands,  in  an 
attitude  of  waiting,  as  they  say,  for  I  know  not  what  mysterious  influence  from 
on  high  to  visit  their  souls.  The  error  is  a  very  grievous  one.  Scripture  bids 
us  awake  out  of  sleep,  it  bids  us  flee  from  the  coming  wrath,  it  bids  us  turn  from 
sin  unto  God,  avoid  temptation,  resist  Satan,  restrain  our  own  evil  tendencies ; 
it  bids  us  repent,  and  believe,  and  pray,  and  use  the  means  of  grace.  2.  There 
is  another  class,  however,  who  are  likely  to  fall  into  an  opposite  error.  They 
are  not  apathetic,  their  natural  constitution  of  mind  is  the  very  reverse  of  this. 
These  are  your  active,  bustling,  restless  people.  There  is  no  quietness  about 
them,  no  repose,  no  calmness.  You  read  their  character  in  their  very  look. 
There  is  an  uneasy  air,  a  feverishness,  a  fretfulness,  characterising  them  and 
all  their  actions,  which  distinguish  them  from  others,  and  place  them  in  a  class 
by  themselves.  When  the  Gospel  comes  to  one  of  this  class,  saying,  Cease  from 
all  efforts  of  your  own  for  acceptance ; — "  your  strength  is  to  sit  still,  to  rest 
in  God,  to  believe  in  Jesus ;  in  returning  and  rest  thou  shalt  be  saved  ;  in  quiet- 
ness and  confidence  shall  be  your  strength," — is  there  no  risk  that  there  be  a 
temporary  recoil  from  a  system  that  thus  comes  so  directly  into  collision  with 
his  individualism  of  character  ?    His  first  prompting  is  to  something  quite  different* 


684  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

Let  him  have  his  own  way,  then  ;  it  is  humbling  he  needs.  It  is  not  necessary 
we  should  follow  him  in  his  efforts ;  they  are  the  same  as  the  efforts  of  those 
who  "  go  about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness."  We  know  what  the  result 
must  be ;  nor  are  we  mistaken,  for  by  and  by  we  find  him  by  the  Cross — he 
has  sunk  down  there  exhausted.  Yet  there  are  other  occasions  on  which  his 
natural  constitution — strong,  because  deeply  rooted — will  rise  up,  and  place 
itself  in  antagonism  with  the  dealings  of  God ;  and  chiefly,  perhaps,  in  these 
two  ways — duty  and  suffering.  (1)  Suffering.  He  is  now  a  child  of  God,  but 
not  on  that  account  exempt  from  chastisement ;  nay,  rather  on  that  very  account 
exposed  to  it  as  part  of  that  salutary  discipline  by  which  he  is  training  up  for 
Heaven.  Perhaps  such  a  man  as  he  needs  a  severer  discipline  than  that  of  a 
more  quiet,  subdued,  restful  disposition,  to  humble  him,  and  wean  him  from 
all  vain  confidences  ;  and  so  affliction  comes  in  some  shape  or  other — such  as 
will  touch  him  most  acutely.  We  need  not  think  it  strange  if  he  go  down  to 
Egypt  for  help  ;  if  he  have  recourse  to  false  physicians  ;  if,  instead  of  looking  to 
God,  he  trust  in  an  arm  of  flesh  to  deliver  him ;  if  he  weary  under  God's  chasten- 
ing hand,  and  wish  it  removed  ere  the  end  in  view  has  been  answered.  He  finds 
no  rest  till  he  returns  to  God,  and  says,  He  hath  put  me  into  the  furnace,  and 
here  will  I  lie  quietly  till  He  take  me  out  again.  (2)  Passing  now  from  the  sphere 
of  suffering  to  that  of  duty,  we  find  him  maintaining  the  same  conflict  between 
the  Divine  authority  and  hfe  own  will.  Remember  he  is  essentially  active.  He 
loves  a  conspicuous  position.  It  is  not  exactly  that  he  is  vain  or  ambitious, 
but  something  within  him  stimulates  him  to  come  forward ;  he  feels  as  if  he 
were  formed  for  a  position  of  usefulness  and  eminence ;  and  perhaps  he  is  right. 
Only  he  must  wait  God's  time  for  this ;  he  must  suffer  God  to  choose  for  him ; 
and  this  is  what  he  is  rather  unwilling  to  do.  (A.  L.  R.  Foote.)  The  strength 
of  the  Church  in  troublous  times  : — I.  Negatively.  1.  The  strength  of  the  Church 
in  troublous  times  is  not  in  listening  to  carnal  counsel.  2.  Nor  in  trusting  in 
carnal  confidences.  II.  Positively.  1.  The  strength  of  the  Church  in  troublous 
times  is  to  sit  still  in  the  way  of  seeking  and  obeying  Divine  direction.  2.  To 
sit  still  in  the  way  of  exercising  a  humble  dependence  upon  Divine  aid  (ver. 
15).     3.  To  sit  still  in  the  way  of  holding  fast  all  her   scriptural  attainments. 

4.  To  return  to  the  Lord  in  those  respects  in  which  she  has  departed  from  Him. 

5.  To  go  forward  in  the  performance  of  whatever  work  God  is  laying  to  her  hand. 
(James  Patrick.)  Strength  perfected  in  weakness: — When  we  sit  down,  God 
stands  up ;  when  we  are  silent,  He  speaks ;  when  we  have  laid  down  our  reeds, 
He  Himself  becomes  our  shield  and  salvation.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Diffi- 
culty of  spiritual  passivity  : — Theatrical  performers  affirm  that  to  play  at  statues, 
which,  of  course,  require  perfect  motionlessness,  is  the  hardest  trial  of  human 
nature  ;  and  all  who  have  sat  for  their  photograph  know  something  of  this 
experience.  The  difficulty  of  physical  stillness  may  serve  to  represent  the  extreme 
difficulty  of  spiritual  passivity  under  the  truth  and  discipline  of  God.  (Ibid.) 
The  albatross  a  symbol  of  power : — The  albatross  sailing  over  the  sea  with  vast 
unstirring  wings  is  a  symbol  of  power,  not  of  weakness  ;  and  the  soul  which 
sustains  its  flight  in  the  empyrean  without  noise  or  flutter,  does  so  in  the  fulness 
of  power,  in  the  |  erfection  of  life.  (Ibid.)  Waiting  may  contribute  to  victory  : — 
The  Duke  at  Waterloo  ordered  certain  regiments  to  form  and  wait.  For  many 
hours  this  order  remained  in  force,  and  only  late  in  the  day  were  the  obedient 
warriors  led  to  victory.  We  may  be  sure  those  hours  of  waiting  were  the  hardest 
hours  in  those  soldiers'  lives.  In  that  space  of  anxious  suspense  the  Duke  was 
winning  the  battle  for  them,  but  they  would  much  rather  have  been  doing  some- 
thing to  the  winning  of  it  for  themselves.  So  is  it  frequently  with  us  in  the  strife 
of  life.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  8.  Note  It  In  a  book. — Keeping  a  journal  (for  children) : — I.  The 
journal  you  may  keep.  You  may  spend  your  pocket-money  in  a  book,  pen 
and  ink,  and  set  up  a  journal.  If  so — 1.  Its  nature.  (1)  Not  about  self.  Do 
not  write  much  about  yourself,  your  own  thoughts  and  feelings.  Let  there  be 
but  few  capital  I's.  (2)  Not  a  dreary,  lifeless  chronicle.  If  you  can  do  no  better 
than  the  following,  day  after  day,  do  not  keep  a  journal  at  all :  "  Got  on  all  right 
through  the  day,  went  for  a  walk  at  night,  came  home  and  went  to  bed  at  nine," 
which  was  the  constant  entry  in  the  diary  of  a  boy  I  know.  (3)  But  a  record 
of  facte  and  events.  Do  as  did  Doyle  and  Dickens  when  lads — record  in  a  journal 
fresh  places  seen  and  persons  me;— the  substance  of  new  books  read,  things  heard 


chap,  xxx  ]  ISAIAH.  585 

new  to  you,  sights  and  scenes  in  town  and  country.  2.  Its  use.  (1)  It  assists 
observation  and  expression.  Two  most  important  things  to  you.  Develops 
faculties  of  attention,  memory,  reproduction.  Prepares  you  for  science,  poetry, 
writing,  and  speech.  (2)  It  is  helpful  in  after-life.  Not  only  from  above  con- 
siderations, but  also  because  it  will  awaken  tender  and  pleasant  memories,  evoke 
gratitude  to  God,  and  keep  you  in  touch  with  boys  when  a  man.  II.  The  journal 
you  must  keep.  1.  For  yourself.  Your  brain  is  a  self-acting  journal.  In 
its  cell  lies  hidden,  all  unknown  to  you,  a  register  of  all  your  past  deeds,  words, 
and  thoughts.  Sometimes  the  door  of  recollection  flies  open,  and  you  see  this 
record  of  the  past.  The  record  is  written  in  invisible  ink,  but  the  fire  of  memory 
brings  it  out.  And  if  sometimes  now,  how  much  more  at  the  last !  2.  And  partly 
for  others.  Every  day  you  also  write  something  down  in  the  brain — journals 
of  others,  of  parents,  brothers  and  sisters,  playfellows,  teachers.  The  words 
and  deeds  which  they  hear  and  see.  Be  careful  to  write  down  for  them  good 
and  pleasant  things — things  sweet  and  helpful.  III.  The  journal  God  keeps. 
1.  Instance  in  the  text.  Prophet  to  write  that  Jews  were  "  lying  children — 
children  that  will  not  hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  9),  and  to  write  it  "  that 
it  may  be  for  the  time  to  come,  for  ever  and  ever  "  (ver.  8).  A  terrible  entry 
in  God's  journal.  May  no  such  entry  be  written  concerning  us !  2.  God's  journal 
complete.  He  makes  no  omissions.  He  puts  all  in,  good  and  bad.  We  make 
selections  to  our  own  advantage.  We  may  deceive  ourselves — we  may  hide 
much  from  our  friends,  but  not  from  Him.  "  Thou  God  seest  me  "  ;  and  when 
at  the  judgment  "  God's  books  are  opened,"  His  will  be  a  check-diary  to  supply 
all  our  omissions.  Therefore,  let  us  wisely  number  our  days,  and  see  that  our 
names  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life.     (8.  E.  Keeble.) 

Vers.  9-11.    This    is    a   rebellious    people. — Dislike  to  ministerial  fidelity: — 
The  Jews  have  very  many  followers  under  the  Christian  dispensation.     I.  Stats 

THE    TRUTHS    WHICH    ARE    USUALLY    OBNOXIOUS    TO    SUCH    PERSONS.      There    are 

many  doctrines  to  which  every  faithful  preacher  of  God's  Word  feels  bound  to 
give  ample  room  in  his  stated  ministry,  that  are  by  no  means  welcome  to  many 
of  his  hearers ;  such,  for  instance,  as  the  spirituality  and  unbending  strictness 
of  the  Divine  law,  the  deep  depravity  of  human  nature,  the  exceeding  sinfulness 
of  man's  conduct,  the  universal  necessity  of  regeneration,  the  inefficacy  of  works 
for  justification,  and  the  indispensable  obligation  to  a  separation  from  the  world. 
The  Scriptures,  not  only  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  of  the  New,  abound  with 
the  most  appalling  descriptions  of  the  Divine  displeasure  against  sin.  It  is  a 
striking  fact,  that  He  who  was  love  incarnate — who  was  named  Jesus,  because 
He  was  to  be  the  Saviour  of  His  people — delivered,  during  the  course  of  Hia 
personal  ministry,  more  fearful  descriptions  of  Divine  justice  and  the  punish- 
ment  of  the  wicked,  than  are  to  be  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  Word  of  God. 
No  man  can  fulfil  his  ministry,  therefore,  without  frequently  alluding  to  the 
justice  of  God  in  the  punishment  of  sin.  But  such  a  subject  frequently  calls 
up  all  the  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind.  II.  The  causes  to  which  we  must  trace 
this  dislike  OF  ministerial  fidelity,  and  this  love  of  smooth  and  delusive 
preaching.  1.  In  some  cases  it  is  occasioned  by  absolute  unbelief.  Multitudes 
who  admit  in  gross  the  authority  of  the  Bible,  deny  it  in  detail.  2.  The  refine- 
ments of  modern  society  and  taste  lead  many  to  ask  for  smooth  things.  There 
is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God ;  before  Him  the  distinctions  of  society  have  no 
place.  3.  Wounded  pride  is  with  some  the  cause  of  a  dislike  of  faithful  preaching. 
They  hate  the  doctrine  which  disturbs  their  self-complacency,  and  revile  the  man 
who  attempts  to  sink  them  in  their  own  esteem.  4.  But  in  by  far  the  greater 
number  of  instances,  this  dislike  of  the  truth,  and  this  love  of  smooth  things, 
is  the  result  of  painful  forebodings  of  future  misery.    III.  The  folly,  the  sin, 

AND  THE  '.DANGER  OF  A  DESIRE  TO  SUPPRESS  THE  FAITHFUL  VOICE  OF  TRUTH,  and 

to  be  flattered  with  the  soothing  language  of  deceit.  1.  Its  folly  is  apparent 
from  the  consideration  that  no  concealment  of  the  situation  of  the  sinner  can 
alter  his  condition  in  the  sight  of  God,  or  change  the  relation  in  which  he  stands 
to  eternity.  2.  The  sin  of  this  disposition  is  equal  to  its  folly.  It  is  sinful  alike 
in  its  origin,  its  nature,  and  its  consequences.  Why  does  a  person  wish  to  have 
a  false  representation  of  his  state  ?  For  this  one  reason,  that  as  he  is  deter- 
mined to  go  on  in  sin,  he  may  be  left  to  sin  with  less  reluctance  and  remorse. 
As  it  is  sinful  in  its  origin,  it  is  manifestly  so  in  its  nature,  for  it  is  the  love  of 
falsehood ;  a  desire  to  confound  the  distinction  between  sin  and  holiness.     Nor 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap    xxx. 

is  this  all ;  in  aiming  to  suppress  the  voice  of  warning  and  the  note  of  alarm, 
he  acts  the  part  of  that  infatuated  and  cruel  wretch,  who  would  bribe  the  sentinel 
to  be  silent  when  the  foe  is  about  to  rush,  sword  in  hand,  into  the  camp  ;  or  would 
seduce  the  watchman  to  be  quiet,  when  the  fire  had  broken  out  at  midnight, 
and  was  raging  through  the  city.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  0  son  of  man. 
I  have  set  thee  a  watchman  over  the  house  of  Israel,"  &c.  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  7,  8). 
3.  The  danger  of  such  a  disposition  to  the  individual  himself,  is  as  great  as  its 
sin  and  its  folly.  The  man  who  is  unwilling  to  hear  of  approaching  misery,  is 
not  likely  to  use  any  means  by  which  it  may  be  averted.  By  way  of  application 
I  infer,  how  great  are  the  importance,  responsibility,  and  difficulty  which  attach 
to  the  ministerial  office,  and  how  anxious  should  those  be  who  sustain  it,  to  dis- 
charge its  duties  with  uncompromising  fidelity.  1.  The  conversion  of  sinners 
should  be  the  leading  object  of  every  minister  of  Christ.  2.  This  must  be  sought 
by  suitable  means.  The  means  for  awakening  the  unconverted  are,  of  course, 
various.  What  might  be  called  the  alarming  style  of  preaching  is  most  adapted 
to  convert  the  impenitent.  3.  Ministers  are  under  a  great  temptation  to  preach 
smooth  things,  and  to  shrink  from  what  may  emphatically  be  called  the  burden 
of  the  Lord.  A  false  charity  leads  them,  in  some  instances,  to  be  unwilling  to 
disturb  the  peace  or  distress  the  feelings  of  their  hearers ;  or,  perhaps,  there  are 
some  in  their  congregation  who  may  feel  an  objection  to  what  they  contemptu- 
ously call  the  harrowing  style.  But  most  of  all  are  those  in  danger  of  com- 
promising their  duty,  who  are  appointed  to  minister  to  well  educated  and  wealthy 
audiences.  4.  A  word  of  admonition  is  here  needed  for  professing  Christians. 
Are  there  not  many  who  are  dissatisfied  with  everything  but  words  of  comfort 
and  statements  of  privilege  ?  They  object  to  everything  of  a  searching  and 
practical  tendency.  (J.  A.  James.)  Church  and  world : — I.  A  chief  part 
of  the  work  of  the  pulpit  is  the  plain  and  fervent  teaching  op  daily-life 
morality.  There  is  no  Gospel  without  morality,  and  the  morality  of  Christ, 
i.e.,  a  morality  whose  inspiration  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  is  a  very  large  part  of 
the  Gospel  indeed.  What  of  our  Lord's  own  teachings  ?  Are  they  chiefly  moral 
teachings  or  theological  ?  It  is  needless  to  answer  the  question.  What  do 
we  mean  when  we  talk  of  being  saved  from  sin  ?  Just  what  the  words  say, — 
that  sin  shall  be  taken  away ;  that  is,  that  men  shall  obey  God's  law  instead 
of  the  devil's  ;  that  is,  that  they  shall  live  pure,  virtuous,  and  moral  lives.     II.  And 

do  not  MORALS  OCCUPY  A  VERY  FOREMOST  PLACE  IN  THE  WELFARE  OF  MANKIND  T 

What  is  it  makes  the  world  often  so  miserable  ?  It  is  sin,  that  is,  immorality  ; 
and  if  we  can  do  away  with  the  sin  and  immorality,  and  bring  in  virtue  and  morality, 
then  we  shall  do  much  to  diminish  the  miseries  of  our  fellow-ir.en.  And  if  it  is 
important  that  morals  should  be  taught  for  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  mankind, 
who  are  to  teach  morals,  if  not  the  ministers  of  religion  ?  It  is  for  us  to  educate 
the  publio  conscience,  until  men  feel  each  moral  distinction  as  a  solemn  fact, 
until  the  force  of  public  opinion  fall  heavily  upon  him  who  violates  the  moral 
law,  until  a  fairer  morality  take  its  place  among  us.  III.  But  why  have  we 
succeeded  so  ill  ?  Why  is  the  general  morality  so  low  ?  It  is  because  the 
people  have  said,  "  Speak  unto  us  smooth  things,"  and  we  have  yielded  to  their 
words.  If  you  tell  men  the  faults  which  are  diseases  in  their  characters,  slowly 
but  surely  bringing  them  down  to  the  grave,  they  cannot  bear  it,  but  keep  the 
disease  and  dismiss  the  physician.  Whether  it  hurts  or  not,  the  truth  must  be 
said,  if  men  are  to  be  saved  from  the  error  of  their  ways.  ( W.  Page-Roberts,  B.A.) 
Speak  unto  us  smooth  things. — The  smooth  things  by  which  men  are  apt  to 
be  deceived  : — I  propose  to  instance  a  few  of  those  smooth  things  which  teachers 
may  address  to  the  people  who  love  to  be  deceived,  or  wherewith  the  people 
themselves  lay  a  flattering  unction  to  their  own  souls.  L  The  first  of  these,  which 
though  not  generally  ranked  among  the  smooth  things,  I  hold  to  be  the  universal 
deceit,  and  that  in  virtue  of  which  we  so  magnify  the  present  world,  give 
such  an  exaggerated  importance  to  things  present  and  things  sensible,  regard 
time  as  if  it  had  all  the  worth  and  endurance  of  eternity,  and  look  on  eternity 
as  a  thing  of  remote  and  shadowy  insignificance,  the  care  and  consideration  of 
which  may  be  indefinitely  postponed.  II.  A  meagre  and  superficial  imagina- 
tion of  their  guilt,  and  proportionally  to  this,  a  slight  apprehension 
of  their  danger.  III.  A  man  who  feels  his  disease  so  slight,  will  be  satisfied 
with  a  very  slight  remedy ;  and  accordingly  the  remedy  which  men  are  satisfied 
with,  is  resting  ON  thb  general  MERCY  of  God.  God  is  represented  as  a  Being 
full  of  tenderness,  thus  making  it  the  whole  character  of  the  Godhead,  and  in 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  687 

this  way  lulling  themselves  into  a  deceitful  security  —  not  thinking  of  one  set 
of  attributes,  justice,  truth,  and  righteousness,  but  keeping  these  in  the  back- 
ground, and  bringing  in  the  foreground,  God  being  of  universal  tenderness  and 
benignity,  and  who  will  not  be  severe  on  the  follies  of  His  poor  erring  creatures. 
IV.  A  certain  antinomian  secueity  which  they  connect  with  the  doctrines 
of  grace  and  justification  by  faith.  When  we  see  people  reposing  on  their  ortho- 
doxy, and  making  use  of  it  as  a  soporific  to  lull  themselves,  we  should  ply  them 
with  questions  founded  on  the  true  representation  which  the  New  Testament 
gives.  Are  they  running  so  as  that  they  may  obtain  T  Are  they  fighting  so  as 
that  they  may  gain  a  hard  won  victory  ?  Are  they  striving  so  as  that  they 
may  force  an  entrance  at  the  strait  gate  ?  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  craving 
for  the  entertaining  : — What  did  the  speakers  want  T  They  wanted  what  is  desired 
by  every  age,  namely,  to  be  entertained.  It  is  entertainment  that  is  often  fritter- 
ing away  the  noblest  courage  and  finest  faculty  of  the  Church.  There  may  be 
parts  of  the  service  which  are  instructive,  and  they  are  tolerated  that  the  enter- 
tainment may  be  enjoyed  :  entertain  us  with  ritual,  with  music,  with  stories, 
with  something  that  will  give  us  intellectual  excitement  and  even  a  degree  of 
intellectual  delight :  but  do  not  prophesy,  do  not  teach,  do  not  become  rigorously 
moral :  let  the  day  of  judgment  alone  ;  if  we  have  to  go  to  hell  let  us  go  down  a 
bank  covered  with  velvet  moss.  The  people  make  the  pulpit.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  demand  for  smooth  things  : — What  was  the  utility  of  the  Hebrew  prophet, 
and  what  were  the  errors  to  which  he  was  more  particularly  exposed  ?  I.  It  was 
the  duty  an  >  the  privilege  of  Israel  to  keep  alive  monotheism  in  the  world. 
It  was  no  less  the  duty  of  the  prophetic  school  to  preserve  in  the  chosen  nation 
itself  the  spirituality  of  religion.  Both  agents  were  in  the  same  relative  position 
—a  hopeless  minority.  And  both  had  but  an  imperfect  success.  Yet  the  nation 
and  the  institution  served  each  an  important  purpose.  Monotheism  languished, 
but  did  not  die.  And  though  the  prophets  were  not  very  successful  in  imbuing 
the  nation  generally  with  their  own  spirituality,  yet  they  kept  the  flame  alive. 
They  served  to  show  to  the  people  the  true  ideal  of  spiritual,  not  ritualistic, 
Judaism,  and  thus  supplied  a  corrective  to  priest-taught  Judaism.     II.  What 

WAS  THE  GREAT  SOURCE  OF  ERROR  IN  THE  PROPHET'S  UTTERANCES  ?   What  Wa3 

the  great  pressure  that  pushed,  or  tended  to  push  him  aside  from  the  path  of 
duty  ?  The  text  has  told  us.  "  Prophesy  not  unto  us  right  things,  speak  unto 
us  smooth  things."  The  desire  of  man — king  or  peasant — to  hear  from  the 
prophet,  or  the  courtier,  or  the  demagogue,  not  truth,  but  flattery, — it  was  that 
fatal  longing  which  led  them  to  put  a  pressure  on  the  prophet  which  often  crushed 
the  truth  within  him.  III.  Flatiery  exists  still.  If  nations  have  not  prophets 
to  flatter  them,  they  have  those  whom  they  trust  as  much.  Far  from  attempting 
to  correct  their  faults,  the  guides  whom  they  trust  are  constantly  labouring  to 
impress  on  them  that  they  are  the  most  meritorious  and  the  most  ill-used  nation 
in  the  world.  Eyes  blinded  to  present  faults;  eyes  sharpened  to  past  wrongs, — 
there  is  no  treatment  which  will  more  completely  and  more  rapidly  demoralise 
the  nation  which  is  subjected  to  it.  There  will  be  no  improvement  where  there 
is  no  consciousness  of  fault ;  and  no  forgiveness  where  the  mind  is  invited,  almost 
compelled,  to  a  constant  brooding  over  wrong.  With  the  growth  of  such  feelings 
no  nation  can  thrive  ;  and  he  who  encourages  them  is  not  the  saviour  but  the 
destroyer  of  his  country.  (J.  H.  Jellett.)  Cause  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to 
cease  from  before  us. — The  Holy  One  of  Israel  repudiated : — The  meaning  is 
not,  of  course,  that  the  people  disown  Jehovah  as  the  national  Deity,  but  that 
they  repudiate  Isaiah's  conception  of  Him  as  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  the 
teaching  based  on  that  conception.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Flattery: — 
Smooth  talk  proves  often  sweet  poison.  Flattery  is  the  very  spring  and  mother 
of  all  impiety.  It  unmans  a  man,  it  makes  him  call  black  white,  and  white  black  ; 
it  makes  a  man  change  pearls  for  pebbles,  and  gold  for  counters ;  it  makes  a 
man  judge  himself  wise,  when  foolish ;  knowing,  when  he  is  ignorant ;  holy, 
when  he  is  profane  ;  free,  when  he  is  a  prisoner  ;  rich,  when  he  is  poor ;  high, 
when  he  is  low  ;  full,  when  he  is  empty  ;  happy,  when  he  is  miserable.  (J.  Bate.) 
Truth  sometimes  unpopular  : — An  animated  debate  took  place  whether  Martinelli 
should  continue  his  "Histo  y  of  England"  to  the  present  day.  Goldsmith:  "To 
be  sure  he  should."  Johnson  :  "  No,  sir ;  he  would  give  great  offence.  He 
would  have  to  tell  of  almost  all  the  living  great  what  they  do  not  wish  told.'* 
Goldsmith  :  "  There  are  people  who  tell  a  hundred  political  lies  every  day,  and 
are  not  hurt  by  it.     Surely,  then,  one  may  tell  truth  with  safety."     Johnson  t 


583  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

"  Why,  sir,  in  the  first  place,  he  who  tells  a  hundred  lies  has  disarmed  the  fore© 
of  his  lies.  But  besides,  a  man  had  rather  have  a  hundred  lies  told  of  him  than 
one  truth  which  he  does  not  wish  to  be  told."  Goldsmith :  "  For  my  part,  I'd 
■fell  the  truth,  and  shame  the  devil."  Johnson:  "Yes,  sir;  but  the  devil  will 
be  angry.  I  wish  to  shame  the  devil  as  much  as  you  do,  but  I  should  choose 
to  be  out  of  the  reach  of  his  claws."  Goldsmith :  "  His  claws  can  do  you  no 
harm  when  you  have  the  shield  of  truth."  (BosweWs  Johnson.)  Harmless 
preaching  : — Two  Chinese  jugglers  have  been  making  a  public  exhibition  of  their 
skill.  One  of  these  is  set  up  as  a  target,  and  the  o  ^her  shows  his  dexterity  by 
hurling  knives  which  stick  into  the  board  at  his  comrade's  back,  close  to  the 
man's  body.  These  deadly  weapons  fix  themselves  between  his  arms  and  legs, 
and  between  his  fingers ;  they  fly  past  his  ears,  and  over  his  head  and  each  side 
of  his  neck.  The  art  is  not  to  hit  him.  Are  there  not  to  be  found  preachers 
who  are  remarkably  proficient  in  the  same  art  in  the  mental  and  spiritual  depart- 
ments T  (0.  H.  Spur  g  eon.)  Faithful  preaching : — Our  preaching  must  not 
be  general,  but  particular.  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  her  to  wife."  This 
was  John  Baptist's  style.  We  must  collar  men.  "  Thou  art  the  man — I  mean 
you,  sir."  We  are  not  half  enough  convinced  of  the  evil  of  general  preaching. 
The  beef  must  have  the  salt  of  truth,  and  the  saltpetre  of  life,  but  it  must  b© 
rubbed  in  by  particular  application,  and  rubbed  into  every  part  by  a  compre- 
hensive mind,  and  rubbed  in  by  clean  hands.     (R.  Cecil.) 

Ver.  13.  As  a  breach  ready  to  fall. — A  retributive  crash : — The  best  trans- 
lation seems  to  be :  "  Therefore  this  guilt  shall  be  to  you  as  a  rent  descending 
(literally,  "  falling  ")  (and)  bulging  out  in  a  high  wall,  whose  crash  comes," 
&c.  The  slight  beginnings  of  transgression,  its  inevitable  tendency  to  gravitate 
more  and  more  from  the  moral  perpendicular,  till  a  critical  point  is  reached, 
then  the  suddenness  of  the  final  catastrophe, — are  vividly  expressed  by  this 
magnificent  simile.  Comp.  Psa.  lxii.  3.  (Prof.  J  Skinner,  D.D.)  Nemesis: — 
1  The  people,  on  account  of  the  eminence  and  grandeur  to  which  they  were 
elevated,  are  compared  to  a  high  wall.  2.  The  sin  whereby  they  despised  th© 
Word  of  the  Lord,  the  instructions  of  His  servants,  and  even  the  name  of  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  sought  assistance  from  Egypt,  was  to  prove  ruinous  to 
them,  as  the  swelling  out  in  a  high  wall.  The  breach,  or  bulge,  which  is  supposed 
to  have  been  in  the  lower  part  of  the  wall,  as  often  happens  in  old  buildings,  might 
signify  the  insolence  and  pride  whereby  the  posterity  of  Israel  were  puffed  up  in 
the  confidence  of  being  aided  by  the  Egyptians.     (R.  Macculloch.)        Nemesis  : — 

I.  Who  it  is  that  gives  judgment  upon  them.  "  The  Holy  One  of  Israel " 
(ver.  12).  See  ver.  11.  Faithful  ministers  will  not  be  driven  from  using 
such   expressions  as  are  proper  to  awaken  sinners,  though  they  be  displeasing. 

II.  What  the  ground  of  the  judgment  is.  "  Because  ye  despise,"  &c. 
(ver.  12).  III.  What  the  judgment  is  that  is  passed  upon  them.  The  ruin 
they  should  bring  upon  themselves  should  be — 1.  A  surprising  ruin,  coming 
suddenly.    2.  An  utter  ruin,  universal  and  irreparable  (ver.  14).     (M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  14.  He  shall  break  it  as  the  breaking  of  the  potter's  vessel. — A  pottery 
mound  : — One  of  the  most  curious  objects  in  Rome  is  a  huge  artificial  mound  called 
Monte  Testaccio.  It  stands  near  the  gate  of  St.  Paul's,  between  the  Aventine  Hill 
and  the  Tiber.  ...  It  is  a  conspicuous  object,  being  nearly  one-third  of  a  mile  in 
circumference,  and  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  high,  commanding  from  its 
top  an  extensive  view  of  the  most  desolate  and  historical  parts  of  the  Eternal 
City,  and  the  Campagna  beyond.  It  is  an  easy  task  to  climb  it,  for  on  different 
sides  there  are  well-worn  tracks  from  the  base  to  the  summit.  Th©  surface  is 
covered  in  a  few  places  with  a  little  sprinkling  of  soil,  and  a  spars©  vegetation 
of  grass  and  coarse  weeds ;  but  a  close  examination  reveals  the  remarkable  fact 
that  the  mound  is  almost  entirely  composed  of  fragments  of  broken  earthenware. 
Specimens  of  ancient  pottery  of  all  kinds  may  be  found  lying  loosely  on  the  surface 
of  the  heap,  or  by  digging  a  little  way  into  the  mass.  .  .  .  Not  one  vessel  was 
whole,  nor  could  the  broken  pieces  be  united  to  form  even  the  least  important 
part  of  any  vessel.  The  mound,  from  the  nature  of  its  materials,  is  evidently 
of  very  ancient  origin,  nothing  having  been  added  to  it  since  the  early  Christian 
ages ;  but  it  must  have  taken  many  centuries  to  form  it  by  slow  accumulation. 
Various  theories  have  been  proposed  regarding  it ;  but  the  most  plausible  con- 
jecture is  that  which  connects  it  with  the  neighbouring  emporium  or  custom- 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  6S9 

house,  where  all  the  goods  that  were  landed  at  the  ancient  quay  of  Rome  were 
stored  up  for  a  time.  It  was  the  practice  in  those  days  to  import  not  only  wine 
and  oil,  and  other  fluids,  but  also  corn  and  solid  articles  of  food  and  of  domestic 
use  into  the  imperial  city  in  earthenware  jars  for  more  convenient  carriage.  In 
the  act  of  unloading,  immense  quantities  of  these  fragile  vessels  would  be  broken, 
and  the  fragments  carried  away  to  this  spot,  where  they  would  accumulate  in 
course  of  time  into  the  huge  heap  which  now  astonishes  every  spectator.  This 
explanation,  however,  is  only  a  partial  one ;  for  were  it  complete  we  should  expect 
to  find  in  the  mound  only  vessels  of  one  kind,  fitted  for  storage  purposes.  But 
it  contains,  as  I  have  said,  fragments  of  the  most  varied  assortment  of  vessels 
for  household  use  and  for  ornamental  and  even  for  sepulchral  purposes.  ...  It 
became,  in  fact,  the  general  receptacle  for  the  broken  pottery  of  the  whole  city. 
That  this  was  carefully  collected  into  this  one  spot,  instead  of  being  thrown  out 
anywhere,  and  that  no  other  rubbish  was  allowed,  except  accidentally,  to  mingle 
with  it,  shows  clearly  that  the  heap  was  intended  for  some  economical  use.  We 
have  indeed  reason  to  believe  that  this  broken  earthenware,  ground  into  smaller 
fragments  and  pulverised,  formed  an  ingredient  in  the  famous  Roman  cement 
employed  in  the  construction  of  buildings  whose  hardness  and  durability  were 
proverbial.  But  it  is  not  in  Rome  only  that  such  ancient  mounds  of  broken 
pottery  are  found.  Similar  heaps  of  potsherds,  not  on  quite  so  large  a  scale, 
may  be  seen  outside  the  walls  of  Alexandria  and  Cairo.  The  sites,  indeed,  of 
many  ancient  towns,  especially  those  built  of  crude,  sun-dried  bricks,  are  often 
covered  with  great  quantities  of  such  fragments  exposed  to  view  and  collected 
together  by  the  disintegrating  action  of  the  weather  upon  the  ruins,  giving  them 
the  appearance  of  a  deserted  pottery  rather  than  that  of  a  town.  Parti-coloured 
heaps  of  broken  pottery  are  common  in  the  neighbourhood  of  old  villages  and 
towns  in  Palestine.  They  are  especially  abundant  in  one  or  two  places  near 
Jerusalem.  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  shivering  of  the  potter's  vessel: — The 
passage  is  literally,  "  And  its  shivering  (i^v  shever,  from  which  perhaps  comes 
our  'shiver')  shall  be  like  the  shivering  of  a  potter's  vessel,  a  shattering  unspar- 
ingly ;  so  that  there  shall  not  be  found  in  the  bursting  of  it  a  potsherd  to  take 
fire  from  the  hearth,  or  to  take  water  out  of  the  pit."  Bearing  in  mind  the  size 
and  strength  of  many  potters'  vessels  in  Palestine,  it  is  clear,  that  a  mere  dashing 
out  of  the  hand  upon  the  ground  would  fail  to  effect  a  "  shivering  "  anything 
like  this.  To  what  then  do  the  prophets  refer  ?  We  think  the  matter 
admits  of  a  very  clear  explanation.  One  of  the  most  constant  features  of 
the  land  is  the  well  or  "  beer,"  which,  as  no  rain  falls  for  many  months 
together,  and  springs  and  streams  are  rare,  becomes  an  essential  adjunct 
to  every  house.  In  these  large  underground  structures  rain-water  is  collected 
from  surface  drainage,  and  stored  for  use  during  the  year.  The  "  Moabite  stone  " 
records  an  act,  passed  by  Mesha,  King  of  Moab,  so  far  back  as  the  days  of 
Jehoshaphat,  King  of  Judah,  directing  every  man  to  make  a  "  beer,"  or  rain  cistern, 
in  his  house.  But  such  testimony  would  not  be  needed  to  establish  the  great  age 
of  these  huge  artificial  cisterns.  They  abound  everywhere,  and  many  of  them, 
in  fine  preservation,  mark  the  sites  of  very  ancient  cities,  where  no  other  structure 
remains.  There  are  no  less  than  thirty  of  them,  some  of  vast  size,  built  on  piers, 
and  arched  like  the  crypt  of  a  church,  to  be  found  within  the  precincts  of  the 
temple  area  at  Jerusalem.  They  are  specially  numerous  in  the  fine  olive  grove 
to  the  north  of  the  city,  where  they  are  in  such  a  ruinous  condition,  apparently 
from  extreme  age,  that  they  now  form  a  series  of  dangerous  pitfalls.  In  addition 
to  these  wells  is  to  be  found  a  system  of  immense  artificial  pools,  or  rain  reservoirs, 
which  are  often  referred  to  in  the  Bible,  and  of  which  no  less  than  6even  may 
now  be  traced  in  and  around  Jerusalem  itself.  To  all  these  cisterns  and  reservoirs, 
whether  cut  in  the  rock,  or  built  of  rough  masonry,  one  thing  is  common.  To 
render  them  perfectly  water-tight,  a  peculiar  cement  has  to  be  used.  This  cement 
is  composed  partly  of  lime  and  partly  of  a  large  admixture  of  what  is  called  in 
Arabic,  "  homrah."  This  "  homrah  is  nothing  else  than  broken  pottery  of 
every  description,  ground  down  generally  into  very  small  pieces,  and  sometimes  into 
powder.  It  answers  excellently  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  employed.  Every 
year  it  grows  harder ;  until,  in  the  case  of  those  wells  and  pools  where  it  is  pre- 
sumably many  hundred  years  old,  it  is  as  firm  as  the  rock  to  which  it  adheres. 
This  "  homrah  "  is  consequently  an  article  of  daily  commerce  throughout  the 
country.  Its  preparation  by  the  peasants  still  remains  the  same  simple  and 
striking  sight  that  must  always  have  been  familiar  to  the  dwellers  in  every  Judeaa 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

town,  but  especially  to  those  who  lived  within  the  waterless  precincts  of  Zion. 
(J.  Neil,  B.A.)  Shivering  the  potter's  vessel : — It  may  be  seen  now  every  autumn 
in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom.  Upon  the  upper  terrace,  on  the  side  adjoining 
the  city,  several  "fellahin"  (peasants),  both  men  and  women,  sit  on  the  ground 
in  front  of  small  brown  heaps.  They  have  under  their  hands  a  huge  stone  or 
rather  rough  piece  of  rock  slightly  rounded,  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  which  they 
push  backwards  and  forwards  over  the  mounds  before  them.  These  mounds 
consist  of  broken  pottery,  which  they  have  purchased  in  the  city,  or  picked  up  from 
the  heaps  outside.  Here  we  may  see  the  whole  of  this  simple  but  very  effective 
process  of  shivering  or  crushing  the  "  potter's  vessel."  (Ibid.)  The  potter'* 
vessel : — It  could  hardly  be  expected  that  a  custom  so  ancient  and  so  suggestive 
as  this  should  have  remained  unutilised  by  the  spiritual  teachers  of  Israel  to 
point  a  moral.  It  lent  itself  so  easily  and  naturally  to  the  peculiar  didactic  method 
of  instruction  which  the  Orientals  affect,  that  it  was  early  taken  advantage  of 
for  this  purpose.  Throughout  the  Bible  there  are  numerous  direct  and  indirect 
allusions  to  it.  In  the  second  Psalm  it  is  said  of  those  who  oppose  the  Messianic 
kingdom  of  God  that  they  shall  be  dashed  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel ;  and 
Isaiah  foretells  that  a  similar  fate  should  happen  to  those  who  despised  God's 
Word  and  placed  their  confidence  in  Egypt.  They  should  be  like  one  of  those 
high  mud  walls — like  the  cob-walls  of  Devonshire,  said  to  be  derived  from  the 
East — which  so  often  decline  from  the  perpendicular,  and  bulge  out  in  different 
parts.     (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15  In  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved. — The  vanity  of  earthly 
help  in  time  of  trial,  and  the  profit  of  patient  waiting : — I.  The  insufficiency 
of  all  hitman  dependence.  The  records  of  the  Jewish  nation,  which  have 
come  down  to  us,  abundantly  prove  this  truth.  1.  These  words  were  especially 
spoken  to  the  Church  of  old  time.  We  must  gather  therefore  great  instruction 
herefrom,  in  respect  to  the  community  of  God's  people  in  all  after  time,  and  perhaps 
in  our  own  days  especially.  2.  What  is  true  in  respect  of  the  Church,  considered 
as  a  community,  is  equally  true  in  respect  of  all  its  members,  if  we  consider  them 
in  their  individual  character.  God  teaches  them  separately,  as  He  teaches  the 
Church  collectively,  that  upon  Him  they  are  to  depend,  and  not  upon  human 
help.  And  in  order  that  they  may  learn  the  lesson  the  more  certainly,  and  that 
it  may  stay  with  them  the  more  abidingly,  God  oftentimes  brings  them  down 
into  circumstances  where  human  assistance  can  render  them  no  avail.  II.  The 
nature  and  the  profit  of  patient  waiting.  In  this  way  it  is  that  God  gives 
the  instruction  which  the  hearts  of  His  people  want.  He  suffers  them  oftentimes 
to  lean  upon  other  helps,  and  to  cast  their  dependence  upon  other  agencies,  than 
His  appointed  one.  Then,  when  they  have  found  that  these  have  been  but  as 
a  broken  reed  to  trust  to,  they  come  back  again  to  Him — their  faith  confirmed — 
a  precious  lesson  learned  in  the  time  of  their  wandering,  which  henceforth  they 
shall  find  in  the  establishment  of  their  souls.  Faith  has  indeed  oftentimes  its 
best  exercise  in  the  time  of  the  heaviest  trial.  It  is  made  to  bring  forth  its  richest 
and  rarest  fruits.  (S.  Robins,  M.A.)  National  salvation : — Let  us  ponder 
the  four  words  which  the  prophet  here  uses  to  indicate  in  what  direction  their 
salvation  lay,  and  upon  what  terms  they  might  be  sure  of  the  Divine  interposition 
and  abiding  protection.  1.  "  Returning."  Instead  of  going  to  Egypt  for  help, 
and  impoverishing  themselves  by  an  alliance  forbidden,  senseless,  and  unprofitable, 
they  might  be  assured  of  God's  forgiveness  and  favour  by  returning  in  brokenness 
of  spirit  to  Him.  The  place  of  confession  is  the  place  of  forgiveness.  2.  "  Rest." 
The  meaning  is,  of  course,  such  a  resting  in  God  as  would  prove  the  genuineness 
of  their  return  to  Him.  Vain  was  their  reliance  on  the  multitude  of  chariots 
and  the  strong  body  of  cavalry  to  which  they  would  point  as  a  valuable  addition 
to  the  fighting  strength  of  Judah  (chap.  xxxi.  3).  3.  Quietness."  How  the  very 
word  rebukes  the  haste,  excitement,  and  trepidation  with  which  they  had  prepared 
for  the  siege  of  their  city !  4.  "  Confidence.  (J.  G.  Mantle. )  In  quietness  and 
in  confidence  shall  be  your  strength. — The  strength  obtained  from  quietness 
and  confidence : — I.  The  state  of  mind  here  noticed.  1.  Consider  "  quietness  " 
of  mind.  It  means  strength  of  purpose,  combined  with  calm  collectednes9  of 
thought  as  well  as  of  word  and  act.  2.  Consider  "  confidence  "  as  another  feature 
of  true  Christian  character.  Confidence  is  something  more  than  a  dead  theory 
of  belief ;  it  is  faith  in  exercise.  And  is  there  not  something  very  sublime  and 
beautiful  in  "  confidence,"  as  we  see  it  linking  the  heart  of  man  to  the  Creator 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  591 

and  Redeemer  of  the  world  ?  II.  The  advantages  to  be  derived  from  the 
state  of  mind  described.  1.  The  promise  expressed  in  the  words,  "  shall  be 
your  strength,"  is  very  encouraging  and  full  of  meaning.  It  points  to  the  Deity 
as  the  only  source  of  strength.  2.  The  strength  here  spoken  of  is  Divine,  granted 
to  us  through  the  instrumentality  of  quietness  and  confidence.  3.  This  strength, 
too,  implies  safety.  4.  But  the  strength  promised  is  conditional.  (W.  D.  Hor- 
toood.)  The  promise  associated  with  quietness  and  confidence  : — I.  The  frame 
OF  mind  which  God  encouraged  His  people  to  have  under  all  these  circumstances 
— "  quietness  and  confidence."  1.  Observe  what  the  fault  of  Israel  had  been. 
God  had  said  one  thing,  and  Israel  thought  another.  God  had  told  them  that 
He  would  be  their  refuge.  2.  Their  warrant  for  their  confidence  was  the  Word 
of  God.  Here  is  the  distinction  to  be  made  between  what  is  presumption,  and 
what  is  faith.  3.  Observe,  next,  the  peculiar  relation  in  which  Israel  stood  to 
Jehovah,  which  made  their  unbelief  so  reprehensible.  The  Lord  seems  to  bring 
this  before  their  minds,  as  that  which  should  cause  the  most  stinging  con- 
viction in  their  hearts.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel." 
II.  The  promise  that  is  here  annexed.  God  says,  "  In  quietness  and  in 
confidence  shall  be  your  strength."  Take,  for  instance,  Hezekiah's  history 
(2  Kings,  xviii.).  Again,  remember  the  story  of  Israel's  deliverance,  as  recorded 
in  Exod.  xiv.  I  might  refer  you  to  other  passages,  such  as  that  beautiful 
narrative  in  Dan.  iii.,  where  we  are  told  of  three  believing  men  being  cast  into 
a  burning  fiery  furnace.  Look  at  their  quietness  and  confidence,  which  was 
their  strength.  There  is  a  direct  promise  upon  this  subject  in  Deut.  xxxii.  "  The 
Lord  shall  judge  "  (avenge,  or  come  to  the  help  of)  "  His  people,  and  repent 
Himself  for  His  servants,  when  He  seeth  that  their  power  is  gone."  If  you  want 
a  New  Testament  promise  to  the  same  effect,  you  have  it  in  that  word  which 
was  spoken  by  our  Lord — "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour,  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Do  you  say  then,  are  we  not  to  use  means  ? 
There  may  be  as  much  unbelief  when  men  despise  means,  as  there  may  be  in 
their  over-anxiety  to  use  means.  (W.  H.  Krause,  M.A.)  The  duty  of  conserva- 
tives in  a  time  of  theological  conflict : — 1.  It  is  our  duty  to  recognise  the  inevitable 
margin  of  difference  among  those  who  substantially  agree.  It  is  only  in  the 
exact  sciences  that  a  formula  has  absolutely  the  same  value  for  all  men  and  for 
the  same  man  at  all  times.  But  theology  is  not  an  exact  science.  2.  It  is  the 
second  duty  of  conservatives  in  a  time  of  theological  conflict  to  recognise  the 
margin  of  error  in  all  human  views  of  truth.  If  the  writers  of  the  Bible  were 
infallible,  the  readers  of  it  are  not.  But  have  we  not,  it  may  be  asked,  the  promise 
of  the  Paraclete  to  lead  us  into  all  the  truth  ?  Yes,  and  wonderfully  has  the 
promise  been  fulfilled.  But  here  again  two  things  should  be  observed.  (1)  That 
promise  was  not  given  to  any  particular  branch  of  the  Church.  (2)  It  guarantees 
infallibility  to  no  one.  3  It  is  especially  the  duty  of  conservatives  at  the  present 
moment  in  the  history  of  the  Church  to  discriminate  between  those  who  are  seeking 
to  defend  and  those  who  are  seeking  to  overthrow  the  fundamental  principles  of 
Christianity.  Criticism  must  be  met  by  criticism,  scholarship  by  scholarship. 
4.  We  should  beware  of  testing  the  views  in  regard  to  the  Bible,  which  are  now 
more  and  more  freely  expressed,  by  what  seem  to  be  their  tendencies.  (1)  One 
of  these  is  the  tendency  to  unsettle  the  minds  of  simple  and  devout  believers. 
They  certainly  have  such  a  tendency,  and  it  is  much  to  be  regretted.  But  the 
questions  are  here.  We  are  not  responsible  for  their  presence.  They  are  forced 
upon  us.  (2)  Another  thing  concerning  whi  h  no  little  apprehension  is  entertained 
is  that  these  discussions  may  tend  to  diminish  the  reverence  which  is  felt  for  the 
Bible,  and  to  weaken  the  faith  of  men  in  Christianity  itself.  The  apprehension 
is  natural.  So  Erasmus  felt  concerning  what  he  called  "  the  noisy  quarrel  of 
religion  "  that  had  broken  out  in  his  day,  when  (as  he  says)  "  I  wrote  frequently 
and  industriously  to  my  friends,  begging  that  they  would  admonish  this  man 
(Luther)  to  observe  Christian  meekness  in  his  writings,  and  to  do  nothing  to 
disturb  the  peace  of  the  Church."  The  true  conservative  is  always  prone  to 
apprehend  the  worst  results  from  anything  that  disturbs  the  ancient  order  of 
ideas  and  practices.  But  how  many  times  over  has  experience  shown  these  fears 
*o  be  groundless  ?  In  quietness  and  in  confidence  is  our  strength.  Let  us  be 
•onest.  Let  us  not  be  afraid.  "  If  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  men,  it  will 
ye  overthrown  ;  but  if  it  is  of  God,  ye  will  not  be  able  to  overthrow  it,  lest  haply 
ye  be  found  even  to  be  fighting  against  God."  (E.  B.  Coe,  D.  .)  Quietness 
and  confidence  : — "  Quietness  "  is  just  collectedness,  repose,  equanimity,  freedom 


592  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

from  excitement  and  boisterousness.  "Confidence"  is  trust,  re/iance  upon 
God,  producing,  if  not  implying,  a  calm  and  steadfast  courage.  I.  "  Quietness 
and  confidence  "  are  strength  of  character.  They  bespeak  the  existence  of 
thought,  reflection,  judgment ;  they  evidence  self-control ;  they  mark  a  nature 
that  is  not  superficial ;  they  show  a  superiority  to  influences  which  rouse  the 
stormy  passions  of  other  men,  and  leave  them  the  victims  of  blind  impulse ; 
and  all  this  implies  true  strength  of  character.  II.  "  Quietness  and  confidence  " 
are  strength  for  work  and  achievement.  The  quiet,  steady,  hopeful  man — 
other  things  being  equal,  and  sometimes  when  they  are  very  unequal — will  prove, 
far  away,  the  best  workman.  For  one  thing,  such  a  man  will  lose  no  time  in 
vain  speculation,  in  day-dreams  about  his  work,  in  clearing  away  self-imposed 
hindrances,  the  result  of  his  own  hurry  or  forgetfulness  or  pre-occupation.  Calm 
and  thoughtful,  he  will  always  settle  to  his  employment  at  once,  while  another 
man  will  have  to  give  himself  time  to  acquire  the  proper  mood  for  it.  "  Con- 
fidence "  will  also  yield  him  resolution,  and  that  will  make  him  proof  against 
interruption,  which  often  defers  the  results  of  men's  endeavours  and  chafes  their 
temper  as  well  Nearly  all  the  men  who  have  won  renown  in  the  sphere  of 
successful  toil,  whether  secular  or  sacred,  have  been  men  of  quiet  energy,  rather 
than  men  of  powerful  impulses ;  of  steadfast  reliance  upon  a  Power  above  them, 
rather  than  of  mere  human  enthusiasm.  And  in  fact,  such  are  the  discourage- 
ments and  trials  that  wait  upon  all  kinds  of  labour,  whether  for  ourselves  or 
others — such  the  sameness,  the  dryness,  the  weariness,  that  only  quiet  confidence 
will  enable  a  man  to  persevere.  It  was  this  that  kept  Moses  at  the  head  of  the 
chosen  tribes  till  they  reached  the  borders  of  Canaan.  It  was  this  that  carried 
St.  Paul  through  his  almost  superhuman  toils  and  exertions.  It  was  this  that 
sustained  such  men  as  Columbus  and  Newton,  Washington  and  Wellington,  and 
a  host  of  others,  in  carrying  out  enterprises,  differing,  indeed,  in  their  objects, 
but  all  encompassed  with  difficulties  that  would  have  driven  weaker  men  to 
despair  at  their  outset.  And,  if  we  would  do  any  real  work  for  God  and  our 
fellow-men,  we  must  seek  more  to  possess  "  the  quietness  and  confidence  "  of 
the  text,  than  those  more  shining  qualities  which  gain  popular  applause,  but  often 
leave  no  real  impress  upon  a  man's  age  and  sphere.  III.  "  Quietness  and  con- 
fidence "  are  strength  for  endurance.  Restlessness,  impatience,  distrust, 
do  but  aggravate  trials,  and  intensify  suffering.  Like  the  struggles  of  a  prisoner 
in  his  fetters — like  the  beating  itself  against  the  wires  of  the  poor  caged  bird, 
they  only  serve  to  augment  pain,  and  to  bring  on  the  dejection  and  weariness 
that  follow  fruitlessly  expended  energy.  But  to  have  a  mind  stayed  on  God  is 
to  take  the  most  certain  method  to  lighten  every  burden,  to  diminish  the  bitter- 
ness of  every  sorrow,  to  modify  and  transmute  every  curse  into  a  blessing,  and  to 
make  even  the  path  of  tribulation  pleasant  and  attractive.  IV.  "  Quietness 
and  confidence  "  are  specially  the  strength  of  spiritual  advancement.  All 
religious  progress  depends,  primarily  and  efficiently,  upon  the  grace  of  God.  But 
the  order  of  God's  working  is  such  that  this  process  may  be  very  much  helped 
or  hindered  by  ourselves.  The  growth  of  plants  and  flowers  depends  materially 
upon  the  nature  of  the  soil  in  which  they  are  set,  and  upon  their  capacity  for 
receiving  the  influences  of  air  and  sunshine,  dew  and  shower.  And  it  is  much 
the  same  as  to  the  growth  of  holy  character ;  it  is  checked  or  advanced  by  our 
prevailing  moral  dispositions.  Now,  "  quietness  and  confidence  "  imply  a  state 
of  mind  the  most  favourable  to  Divine  operations.  The  subject  may  be  viewed 
in  another  light.  In  the  endeavour  to  live  a  holy  life,  we  are  all  conscious  of  our 
exposure  to  hindrances,  arising  from  our  lapses  and  failures.  We  go  on,  it  may 
be,  somewhat  well  for  a  time ;  but  a  temptation  overtakes  us,  unwatchfulness 
supervenes,  and  we  fall,  not  into  any  great  sin,  but  from  the  vantage-ground 
that  we  thought  ourselves  to  have  reached.  Now,  what  will  be  the  effect  of 
this  upon  a  Christian  person  of  excitable,  impulsive,  unsteady  mind!  Why, 
commonly,  he  will  be  discouraged  and  dismayed.  But  it  will  not  be  thus  with 
the  Christian  who  is  marked  by  "quietness  and  confidence."  He  will  say, 
"  Rejoice  not  over  me,  O  mine  enemy ;  for  though  I  fall,  I  shall  rise  again." 
(0.  M.  Merry.)  Rev.  John  Keble'a  motto : — In  Poet's  Corner,  at  Westminster 
Abbey,  there  is  a  medallion  erected  to  the  memory  of  John  Keble,  upon  which 
is  inscribed  the  prophetic  utterance  which  was  the  motto  of  his  simple,  beautiful, 
well-ordered  life:  "In  quietness  and  confidence  shall  be  your  strength." 
(B.  Bebbron.)  Faith  and  introspection  : — In  quietness  and  confidence  is  our 
strength,  but  not  in  thinking  of  quietness  and  confidence,  or  grieving  that  we  have 


chat,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  693 

so  little  of  either,  but  in  simply  assuring  ourselves  of  the  ground  that  we  have  to 
believe  that  God  is  our  Friend  now  and  ever,  and  that  He  can  be  nothing  else, 
and  that  the  forgetf  ulness  of  this  and  nothing  else  has  been  our  sin  and  our  shame. 
(F.  D.  Maurice  to  his  mother.)  The  triumph  of  simple  trust : — I  am  to  be  like 
General  Gordon  in  Khartoum  during  the  last  weeks  of  the  long  siege.  He  built 
himself  a  tower  of  observation,  from  the  top  of  which  he  could  command  the 
whole  country  round.  At  dawn  he  slept ;  by  day  he  looked  to  his  defences,  and 
administered  justice,  and  cheered  the  spirit  of  his  people ;  every  night  he  mounted 
to  his  tower,  and  there,  as  one  of  his  biographers  says,  "  alone  with  his  God,  a 
universal  sentinel,  he  kept  watch  over  the  ramparts,  and  prayed  for  the  help  that 
never  came."  He  could  not  work  out  the  deliverance  himself,  but  he  had  child- 
like confidence  in  God.  And  the  Divine  help  did  come  —  the  martyr's  crown, 
the  everlasting  rest,  the  good  soldier's  welcome  from  his  Commander-in-chief. 
(A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  Settling  down  upon  Ood : — What  can  explain  the  con- 
fidence of  Judson  and  many  another  noble  missionary,  working  steadily  on  for 
years  without  any  sign  of  visible  success,  but  the  settling  down  of  the  spirit  upon 
God — an  attitude  which  had,  with  them,  become  a  habit  of  life  T  (J.  6.  Mantle.) 
Working  with  Divine  resources : — "  I  used  to  think  I  had  to  do  it,"  says  one  of 
the  most  successful  evangelists  of  the  nineteenth  century,  "  and  the  result  was 
great  physical  strain  and  exhaustion ;  but  now  I  feel  He  has  to  do  it  through 
me:  the  responsibility  His;  the  message  His;  the  strength  His."     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  17.  Till  ye  be  left  as  a  beacon  upon  the  top  of  a  mountain. — Israel's 
past,  present,  and  future : — I.  The  past.     1.  Sins  of  God's  people  (vers.  1,  2,  9, 

10,  11,  12).  Rejecting  His  Word;  trusting  in  arm  of  flesh.  2.  Judgment  on 
them  (vers.  16,  17).  3.  Mercy  to  them  in  things  spiritual  and  temporal  (vers.  19, 
20,  21,  26,  29,  and  23,  24).  Deliverance  from  their  enemies  (vers.  30-33). 
Especially  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army  (ver.  31).  4.  Glory  to  God,  who 
is  exalted  " — in  His  judgments — in  His  meicies.  H.  Thb  present.  1.  The 
people  now  left  as  a  "  beacon  "  upon  the  top  of  a  mountain  (marg.,  "  tree  bereft 
of  branches  ").  Condition  bare,  and  seen  of  all.  And  "  as  an  ensign  on  an 
hill."  Word  for  ensign  same  as  "  sign  "  in  Numb.  xxvi.  10.  The  people  "  cannot 
be  hid."  2.  Now  God  waits  for  the  set  time ;  for  the  filling  up  of  His  people's 
sins  (Hos.  v.  15) ;  for  the  filling  up  of  His  judgments ;  for  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  to  be  come  in  (Rom.  xi.  25);  for  the  showing  mercy  in  the  end. 
III.  The  future.  It  will  be  as  the  past,  but  greater.  1.  Sin  still  continues  in 
unbelief  of  Messiah,  in  pride,  worldliness,  and  self-righteousness.  2.  Judgment 
on  these  sins  up  to  the  end.  3.  Mercy  when  they  "  cry."  Deliverance  from  their 
enemies,  as  prophesied  in  Isa.  lxvi.  13-16.  4.  Glory  to  God,  the  "God  of  judg- 
ment," the  Father  of  mercies.     He  shall  be  "  exalted,"  as  prophesied  in  Isa.  ii.  10, 

11,  17-22.  5.  "  Beacon  "  and  "  ensign  " — refer  to  again.  Israel  conspicuous  now, 
will  be  more  so  in  the  last  days,  as  a  landmark  amidst  waves  of  trouble  and  strife. 
"  Ensign,"  the  same  word  as  rendered  "  pole  "  in  Numb.  xxL  8,  9.  See  again 
in  Exod.  xviL  15,  "  Jehovah-Nissi."  See  Isa.  xxxi.  9,  xi.  11,  12,  xviii.  3,  xlix.  22, 
Ixii.  10.  Israel  the  rallying  centre  of  the  nations,  in  the  midst  of  them  the  royal 
standard  of  the  King,  high  on  "  God's  hill,  in  the  which  it  pleaseth  Him  to  dwell " 
(Psa.  lx.  4 ;  see  Zech.  viii.  2,  3,  22,  23).  IV.  The  blessing.  1.  "  To  the  Jew 
first."  2.  "  And  also  to  the  Gentile."  3.  Note  the  correspondence  between 
God's  waiting  and  His  people's  waiting.     (Flavel  Cook,  B.A.) 

Ver.  18.  And  therefore  will  the  Lord  wait,  that  He  may  be  gracious  unto  you.— 
The  waiting  hours  of  life : — We  are  all  familiar  with  the  waiting  hours  of  life,  when 
the  stream  hardly  seems  to  move,  or  the  air  to  stir ;  when  the  heart  grows  sick 
with  deferred  hope.  There  are  hours  on  languid  summer  days  when  all  nature 
seems  to  have  become  stagnant — the  aspen  leaf  does  not  quiver ;  the  fish  does 
not  rise  in  the  pool ;  the  hum  of  the  bee  becomes  less  frequent  and  more  drowsy ; 
and  the  shadow  hardly  moves  on  the  dial — and  these  hours  in  nature  find  their 
counterpart  in  the  monotony  of  life's  common  round,  the  commonplace  routine 
of  its  daily  task.  Such  waiting  times  were  wearily  passing  over  the  godly  at 
Jerusalem  while  the  invader  was  drawing  his  coils  ever  nearer  to  the  doomed 
city,  and  the  ambassadors  were  being  cajoled  in  Egypt  by  false  hopes  ;  and  ceaseless 
prayers  to  God  were  apparently  bringing  no  response.  To  such  the  prophet 
addressed  these  words,  encouraging  them  to  believe  that  God  was  not  unmindful 
of  their  case,  but  was  waiting  that  He  might  act  more  graciously  towards  them 

3& 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

than  He  could  by  answering  them  at  once.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  God's  delays : — 
He  waits  that  He  may  be  gracious ;  i.e.,  until  there  is  such  a  combination  of 
circumstances,  and  such  a  refining  of  character,  that  He  can  do  ever  so  much 
better  than  if  He  had  interposed  in  the  first  moments  of  our  agonised  appeal. 
I.  He  does  hot  delay  because  of  any  caprice.  Heaven  has  no  favourites, 
who  are  always  served  first.  II.  He  does  not  delay  because  of  any  neglect. 
A  woman  may  forget  her  sucking  child,  but  our  Saviour  cannot  forget  us.  III.  He 
does  not  delay  because  He  denies.  The  remittance  is  not  sent  as  asked  ; 
yet  that  does  not  prove  that  it  is  not  there  in  our  name,  but  only  that  it  is  being 
kept  at  interest,  accumulating  till  it  reach  a  higher  figure,  and  be  more  of  service, 
because  coming  at  a  time  of  greater  need.  (Ibid.)  Reasons  for  God's  delays  : — 
What  results  are  served  by  this  prolonged  delay  ?  1.  The  energy  of  the  flesh  dies 
down.  There  is  nothing  which  so  tames  and  subdues  us  as  waiting.  And  there 
is  no  kinder  thing  that  God  can  do  for  us  than  to  destroy  the  egotism,  the  self- 
assertiveness  of  our  life,  and  to  bring  its  pride  to  the  dust.  Waiting  with  mountains 
on  either  side,  the  sea  in  front,  and  the  toe  behind,  is  enough  to  empty  the  stoutest 
heart  of  its  self-confidence,  and  to  make  it  cry  out  to  the  strong  for  aid.  2.  We 
often  cease  to  want  the  very  things  on  which  we  had  set  our  hearts.  Thus  it 
has  happened,  as  the  years  have  passed,  that  we  have  seen  reason  to  admire 
and  adore  the  wise  love  which  withheld  that  on  which  we  had  set  our  hearts  with 

Eassionate  intensity.  3.  Our  character  also  becomes  riper  by  waiting.  It  is 
etter  for  the  young  man  to  accumulate  his  fortune  slowly,  because  he  Teams  to 
value  his  money  rightly,  and  to  spend  it  well.  Better  for  the  student  to  acquire 
knowledge  by  degrees,  because  he  gains  habits  of  industry  which  are  simply 
invaluable.  Better  for  the  saint  to  grow  to  goodness  by  long  and  insensible 
progress,  that  he  may  be  able  to  sympathise  with  those  who  are  beginning  to  take 
the  upward  path.  4.  Moreover,  we  secure  larger  results  by  waiting.  If  the 
Egyptian  farmer  is  too  impatient,  and  sows  his  seeds  before  the  Nile  has  reached 
its  full  flood,  they  will  not  be  carried  to  the  furthest  limit  of  his  ground,  and  his 
harvest  will  suffer.  So  often  there  is  a  result  which  may  be  gained  by  patient 
waiting,  which  would  defy  us  if  we  snatched  at  it.  (Ibid.)  God's  gracious 
purposes  towards  His  people  : — I.  The  gracious  purposes  of  God  towards  His 
people.  He  "  waits,  that  He  may  be  gracious  "  ;  He  is  "  exalted,  that  He  may 
have  mercy."  The  Jewish  people  are  here  supposed  to  be  in  a  state  of  suffering ; 
and  they  are  assured  that  when  the  design  of  these  sore  judgments  was  fully 
answered,  God  would  have  mercy  upon  them.  In  what  manner  the  Lord  will 
be  gracious  unto  them,  the  prophet  unfolds  (vers.  19-21).  To  these  promises  of 
spiritual  blessings  and  permanent  prosperity  others  are  added  ;  and  the  passage 
closes  with  this  munificent  prediction, — "  The  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the 
light  of  the  sun,"  &e.  (ver.  26).  This  splendid  prophecy  points  to  a  period  which  is 
yet  future,  and  to  which  the  Church  is  still  looking  forward.  II.  The  character 
of  God  in  reference  to  these  purposes.  In  all  our  undertakings  we  have 
encouragement  from  the  character  of  God.  The  text  speaks  of  Him  as  "  a  God 
of  judgment," — a  title  which  is  calculated  to  awaken  the  most  useful  reflections.  He 
does  as  He  pleases,  and  all  He  does  is  right.  The  word  also  implies  deliberation — 
prudence:  the  will  of  God  is  not  an  arbitrary  determination,  but  the  will  of 
deliberation.  The  word  is  opposed  to  haste  and  inconsideration.  The  term  is 
applicable  to  all  God's  proceedings.  III.  The  spirit  in  which  we  should  look 
for  the  accomplishment  of  this  purpose.  H  the  question  be  now  asked, 
What  is  the  posture  the  Church,  which  has  been  gathered  from  among  the  Gentiles, 
should  assume  in  reference  to  the  rich  provision  made  for  the  Jews  ?  the  answer  is, 
They  should  "  wait  for  Him."  1.  In  a  spirit  of  patient  expectation.  2.  In  the  use 
of  diligent  exertions.  3.  In  the  exercise  of  fervent  prayer.  (T.  Thomason,  M.A.) 
Mercy  acknowledged  : — God  sets  forth  Britain  amid  the  nominal  Christian  nations, 
as  He  set  forth  Israel  of  old  amid  the  heathen  world,  as  a  mighty  field  in  which 
He  displays  His  dispensations  and  dealings  towards  nations  in  professed  and  visible 
covenant  with  Himself.  We  are,  therefore,  not  only  warranted,  but  bound  to 
take  the  words  addressed  to  the  ancient  people  of  God,  and  to  apply  them  to  His 
people  in  modern  times.  I.  The  spirit  and  attitude  which  God  is  here  represented 
as  sustaining  toward  a  guilty  and  corrected,  though  not  forsaken  people,  is  ajt 
aspect  and  attitude  of  long-suffering  and  patient  forbearance.  EL  But 
there  is  yet  another  feature  in  the  attitude  and  aspect  of  God  towards  a  land  that 
He  waits  to  see  repenting — for  God  is  a  God  of  judgment.  HX  Let  us  apply 
all  this  view  of  the  aspect  of  God  towards  nations  to  His  recent  dealings  witk 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  595 

ourselves.  IV.  Let  us  not  pass  lightly  by  what  constitutes  the  great  moral 
lesson  that  springs  from  the  view  of  God  we  have  been  taking.  "  Blessed  are 
they  that  wait  for  Him."  We  are  not  to  become  impatient  under  God's  hand ; 
we  are  not,  because  His  chastisement  yet  remains,  to  forget  His  mercies. 
(H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  Strange,  but  true: — Some  have  thought,  Oh,  how  I  wait 
upon  God."  It  will  be  nearer  the  truth  if  you  think,  "  How  marvellous  it  is 
that  God  should  wait  upon  men  !  "  I.  The  strangeness  of  this  Bible  truth.  1.  It 
is  quite  contrary  to  our  common  experience,  that  favours  should  be  kept  waiting 
out  of  doors.  Favours  do  not  generally  wait  for  clients,  but  clients  have  to  wait 
for  favours.  2.  You  will  be  struck  with  the  strangeness  of  this  statement  if  you 
keenly  watch  the  early  experiences  of  an  anxious  souL  The  man  determines 
to  be  a  seeker  after  God,  and  you  would  suppose  that  immediately  the  soul  turned 
to  God  it  would  be  flooded  with  light,  whereas  it  very  often  happens  that  God  never 
seems  so  far  away  from  a  man  as  when,  first  of  all,  the  man  begins  to  seek  Him. 
Yet,  all  the  while,  God  upon  His  throne  waits  to  be  gracious.  3.  I  doubt  whether 
we  Christian  men  are  not  a  little  to  blame  for  the  strangeness  of  this  beautiful 
text.  Do  we  not  often  pray  as  if  we  were  praying  into  an  unwilling  ear  ?  Do 
we  not  often  cry  as  if  we  were  crying  to  a  hard  heart  T  We  have  failed  fairly  to 
represent  in  our  prayers  the  great  readiness  of  our  Father's  heart,  and  so  we  have 
in  the  matter  of  our  Christian  standing.  How  few  of  us  know  well  our  standing 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  a  life  and  death  confidence  in  it.  And  then  in  our 
relationship  to  others,  where  are  the  abounding  compassions  of  Christ  ?  where  the 
undying  energy  with  which  a  man  who  knows  the  heart  of  the  great  Father,  will 
seek  to  reclaim  His  erring  sons  and  daughters,  His  children  far  away  upon  the 
wild  T  II.  The  blessed  certainty  of  this  Bible  truth.  1.  We  have  first  of 
all  the  testimony  of  Isaiah,  a  testimony  given  with  a  boldness  that  indicates 
that  behind  this  testimony  there  is,  first  of  all,  a  Divine  inspiration ;  that  behind 
it  there  is,  in  the  second  instance,  a  God-given  experience.  Here  is  a  man  whose 
testimony  ought  to  be  received.  Of  all  the  men  of  the  Old  Testament  I  believe 
there  was  not  one  who  was  more  sensitive  to  the  nation's  sin  than  Isaiah.  Not  a 
man  who  was  more  sensitive  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  who  went  down  lower 
into  himself,  who  rose  higher  unto  God,  than  Isaiah.  For  spiritual  insight  he 
stood  upon  a  par  at  least  with  his  contemporaries.  He  was  the  salvation  of 
Jehovah :  that  is  his  name.  The  man  ought  to  know.  2.  His  testimony,  too, 
is  abundantly  and  blessedly  confirmed,  not  by  detached  experiences  or  single 
events.  If  you  judge  about  God  you  must  have  something  more  than  a  single 
experience ;  you  must  take  some  experience  that  has  been  rounded  off  and  Divine  ly 
finished.  We  have  such  experiences  in  this  book.  We  may  come  down  to  more 
modern  times  and  more  recent  experiences.  Take  the  poets  of  the  past  century, 
the  men  whose  hymns  we  sing  service  after  service.  They  do  not  all  belong  to  one 
Church  or  to  one  school  of  thought  or  theology,  but  their  testimony  is  uniform 
upon  this  great  subject.  3.  We  have  evidence  that  God  waits  to  be  gracious  in 
this  present  service.  His  Word  is  near  to  us  this  moment ;  the  Gospel  is  here  with 
its  pleadings  and  its  overtures  of  mercy.  (J.  R.  Wood.)  The  waiting  Lord  : — 
Notice  two  or  three  times  in  which  God  is  compelled  to  wait  that  He  may  be 
gracious  unto  us.  I.  The  time  of  disobedience.  II.  The  time  of  false  con- 
fidence (vers.  7,  15-18).  III.  The  time  of  apathy.  (J.  Brash.)  A  waiting 
Ood  and  a  waiting  people  : — I.  A  waiting  God.  1.  A  wonderful  reason  for  waiting. 
"  Therefore  " — mark  the  word !  The  Lord  Jehovah  does  as  He  wills  both  in 
heaven  and  earth,  and  His  ways  are  past  finding  out ;  but  He  never  acts  unreason- 
ably ;  He  does  not  tell  us  His  reasons,  but  He  has  them  ;  for  He  acts  "  according 
to  the  counsel  of  His  will."  God  has  His  "  therefores,"  and  these  are  of  the  most 
forcible  kind.  Full  often  His  "  therefores  "  are  the  very  reverse  of  ours :  that 
which  is  an  argument  with  us  may  be  no  argument  with  God,  and  that  which  is  a 
reason  with  Him  might  seem  to  be  a  reason  in  the  opposite  direction  to  us.  For 
what  is  there  in  this  chapter  that  can  be  made  into  a  "  therefore  "  T  Whence 
does  He  derive  the  argument  ?  Assuredly  it  is  a  reason  based  on  His  own  grace, 
and  not  on  the  merit  of  man.  (1)  The  chapter  contains  a  denunciation  of  the  false 
confidences  of  the  people,  and  because  of  these  one  might  have  concluded  that  the 
Lord  would  cast  them  off  for  ever.  If  they  will  have  Egypt  to  lean  upon,  let 
them  lean  on  Egypt,  till  like  a  spear  it  pierces  their  side.  (2)  Further,  these 
people  were  rebels  against  God,  and  the  Lord  was  waiting  to  let  them  fully  manifest 
their  rebellious  spirit,  and  be  made  ashamed  of  it.  The  chapter  begins  that  way : 
*'  Woe  to  the  rebellious  children."     Further  on  He  calls  them  "  a  rebellious  people. 


596  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

lying  children,  children  that  will  not  hear  the  law  of  the  Lord  " — was  that  a 
reason  for  waiting  to  be  gracious  ?  Yes,  with  the  Lord  sin  shows  the  need  of 
grace,  and  so  becomes  a  reason  for  grace.  I  think  the  Lord  permits  many  sinners 
to  go  to  the  full  length  of  their  tether  in  order  that  they  may  know  in  future  what 
stuff  they  are  made  of,  and  may  never  trust  in  themselves.  (3)  The  Lord  would 
wait  for  yet  another  reason,  namely,  to  let  them  suffer  somewhat  the  effect  of  their 
sin.  It  is  well  that  they  should  see  what  kind  of  serpent  is  hatched  from  the  egg  of 
evil.  Perhaps  some  of  us  were  left  in  the  same  way,  and  we  shall  never  forget  what 
we  thus  learned.  We  put  our  hand  into  the  fire  un*il  it  was  burned,  and  now  we 
dread  the  fire.  (4)  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  Lord  waited  in  this  case  to  be  gracious 
until  the  people  should  begin  to  pray,  for  that  seems  to  be  the  turning-point  in  this 
affair.  The  prophet  says,  "  He  will  be  very  gracious  unto  thee  at  the  voice  of 
thy  cry."  The  Lord  is  listening  for  the  sinner's  prayer.  2.  The  singular  patience 
of  God  in  that  waiting.  What  does  it  mean  when  we  are  told  that  the  Lord 
waiteth  that  He  may  have  mercy  upon  us  ?  (1)  It  means  that  He  kept  back 
the  sword  of  justice.  (2)  It  means  the  continuance  of  privileges  ;  for  the  Lord 
told  these  people  that,  although  He  might  give  them  the  bread  of  adversity  and 
the  water  of  affliction  on  account  of  their  sins,  yet  He  would  not  take  away  their 
teachers  from  them  any  more ;  they  should  still  be  instructed,  and  warned,  and 
invited  to  come  to  Him.  (3)  So  singular  was  God's  patience  that  He  even  increased 
His  holy  agencies  to  lead  the  people  to  Himself.  He  says,  "  Thine  ears  shall 
hear  a  word  behind  thee,  saying,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  Do  we  not 
remember  how  when  the  public  ministry  seemed  to  miss  us  we  began  to  be  bestirred 
by  an  inward  force  more  powerful  than  visible  ministries  ?  Conscience  cried 
aloud  and  accused  us  from  within  doors.  (4)  This  is  not  all ;  for  all  this  while 
God  was  passing  by  our  rejections  of  Him,  blotting  out  our  sinful  refusals,  and 
insulting  despisings  of  His  goodness.  (5)  Please  remember  that  all  this  while 
God  has  been  waiting  but  everything  has  been  ready,  ready  for  the  sinner  to  come 
to  Him.  3.  A  most  remarkable  action  which  follows  upon  the  waiting.  After 
the  Lord  had  displayed  His  patience  to  His  people,  He  resolved  to  go  further, 
and  proceeded  to  a  most  notable  matter  which  is  thus  described —  Therefore 
will  He  be  exalted,  that  He  may  have  mercy  upon  you."  You  and  I  would  have 
turned  the  text  round  the  other  way,  and  said,  "  Therefore  will  He  have  mercy 
upon  you,  that  He  may  be  exalted  "  :  that  would  be  true,  but  it  is  not  the  truth 
here  taught.  The  picture  represents  the  Lord  as  it  were  as  sitting  still,  and  allowing 
His  people  through  their  sin  to  bring  suffering  upon  themselves  ;  but  now,  after 
long  patience,  He  arouses  Himself  to  action.  Methinks  I  hear  Him  say,  "  They 
will  not  come  to  Me,  they  refuse  all  My  messengers,  they  plunge  deeper  and  deeper 
into  sin,  now  will  I  see  what  My  grace  can  do  "  !  It  also  bears  this  meaning. 
When  a  man  is  about  to  deal  a  heavy  stroke  he  lifts  up  himself  to  give  the  blow : 
he  exalts  himself  to  bring  down  the  scourge  more  heavily  upon  the  shoulder. 
Even  so  the  Lord  seems  to  say,  "  I  will  put  forth  all  My  might,  I  will  exercise  all 
My  skill,  I  will  display  all  My  attributes  up  to  their  greatest  height,  that  I  may 
have  mercy  upon  these  hardened,  stiff-necked  sinners — I  will  be  exalted  that  I 
may  have  mercy  upon  them."  4.  There  is  a  final  success  to  all  this  waiting  (vers. 
19-22).  See  what  free  grace  can  do :  it  is  no  enemy  to  holiness,  but  the  direct 
cause  of  it.  II.  We  have  a  waiting  people.  "  Blessed  are  all  they  that  wait  for 
Him."  1.  God's  waiting  people  wait  upon  God  only.  2.  Expectantly.  3.  What 
are  they  waiting  for  ?  For  many  things.  Sometimes  they  wait  for  the  tokens  of 
His  grace.  Sometimes  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  promises.  Every  promise  will 
be  kept,  but  not  to-day  nor  to-morrow.  God's  word  has  its  due  season,  and  His 
times  are  the  best  times.  We  may  also  have  to  wait  for  answers  to  our  prayers. 
Frequently  we  may  have  to  wait  for  temporal  blessings.  There  may  be  somewhat 
in  your  character  which  cannot  be  perfected  except  by  suffering  and  labour  ; 
and  it  is  better  that  your  character  be  perfected  than  your  substance  increased. 
Wait  cheerfully.  If  God  sees  fit  to  say  "  Wait,"  do  not  be  angry  with  Him.  (C.  H. 
8purgeon.)  The  Lord  is  a  God  of  judgment. — "  A  God  of  judgment  »'s  the  Lord  " 
is  an  unfortunately  ambiguous  translation.  We  must  not  take  "  judgment  "  here 
in  our  familiar  sense  of  the  word.  It  is  not  a  sudden  deed  of  doom,  but  a  long 
process  of  law.  It  means  manner,  method,  design,  order,  system,  the  ideas,  in  short, 
which  we  sum  up  under  the  word  "  law."  Just  as  we  say  of  a  man,  "  He  is  a  man 
of  judgment,"  and  mean  thereby  not  that  by  office  he  is  a  doomster,  but  that  by 
character  he  is  a  man  of  discernment  and  prudence;  so  simply  does  Isaiah  say 
here  that  "  Jehovah  is  a  God  of  judgment,"  and  mean  thereby  not  that  He  is 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  697 

One  whose  habit  is  sudden  and  awful  deeds  of  penalty  or  salvation,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  that,  having  laid  down  His  lines  according  to  righteousness  and  estab- 
lished His  laws  in  wisdom,  He  remains  in  His  dealings  with  men  consistent  with 
these.  (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  Lord  is  a  God  of  judgment  in  the  several 
important  senses  in  which  the  word  is  used  in  Scripture.  1.  His  understanding 
is  infinite ;  so  that  He  is  intimately  acquainted  with  all  the  characters,  the  actions 
and  circumstances  of  mankind.  2.  The  decisions  which  He  forms,  concerning 
their  condition  and  conduct,  are  perfectly  equitable  and  just.  3.  All  the  punish- 
ments which  He  inflicts  and  the  deliverances  which  He  works,  are  conducted 
with  the  highest  wisdom  and  prudence,  executed  at  the  Attest  season,  in  the  most 
proper  measure  and  for  the  best  purposes.  When  He  corrects  them  for  their 
faults,  He  does  it  not  in  anger  but  in  judgment,  with  affection  and  moderation ; 
not  in  His  hot  displeasure,  with  unrelenting  severity,  but  with  kindness  and 
forbearance.  They  may  therefore  be  assured  that,  at  the  very  time  wherein  He 
knows  His  own  glory  and  their  real  benefit  will  be  most  effectually  promoted, 
He  will  interpose  in  their  behalf  and  send  them  deliverance.  {R.  Macculloch.) 
The  God  of  judgment: — What  are  all  our  histories  but  God  manifesting  Himself, 
that  He  hath  shaken  and  tumbled  down  and  trampled  upon  everything  that 
He  hath  not  planted  !  (Oliver  Cromwell.)  Blessed  are  all  they  that  wait  for 
Him  — Waiting  for  God  : — 1.  In  steadfast  faith.  2.  In  living  hope.  3.  In  patient 
humility.  4.  In  active  preparation.  (Homiletic  Review.)  The  spiritual  waiter  and 
his  blessing : — I.  Describe  the  beal  waiting  character,  and  endeavour  to 
show  what  is  real  waitino.  1.  The  real  waiter  is  a  person  who  does  not  possess 
something  he  wants.  A  real  waiter  is  a  real  beggar.  2.  But,  then,  the  real  waiting 
man  must  not  only  be  poor  but  needy.  3.  When  a  man  is  thus  brought  into  experi- 
mental poverty,  and  experimental  need,  he  will  also  be  led  into  experimental 
helplessness ;  he  is  delivered  from  looking  to  his  prayers,  his  Bible  reading,  his 
alms  doing ;  he  is  brought  to  feel  he  needs  another  refuge,  he  is  brought  to  feel 
these  waters  cannot  cleanse  away  his  pollution,  that  these  webs  cannot  become 
garments,  that  these  are  works  with  which  he  cannot  cover  himself.  But  what 
is  true  waiting  ?  1.  Not  working.  2.  Nor  sleeping.  3.  Nor  stealing.  There  are 
many  who  do  not  trust  in  works,  but  like  a  thief  take  the  blessings  into  their  hands 
the  Lord  has  never  put  there.  How  many  presume  all  is  well  without  having 
had  the  atonement  applied,  or  even  without  ever  having  been  truly  brought  to 
feel  the  need  of  reconciliation  to  God  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  4.  Neither  is  it 
despairing.  II.  Where  does  the  true  waiter  wait  ?  He  goes  to  the  means, 
saying,  '  Oh,  let  not  the  oppressed  return  ashamed;  let  the  poor  and  needy 
praise  Thy  name."  Mercy's  door  is  the  place  at  which  he  waits.  III.  What  does 
he  wait  for  ?  "  Blessed  are  all  they  that  wait  for  Hul"  IV.  The  blessedness 
op  true  waiters.  (S.  Sear 8.)  Waiting  for  God : — I.  The  nature  op  bight 
waiting  upon  God.  1.  There  must  be  continual  waiting.  "  Turn  thou  to  thy 
God  :  keep  mercy  and  judgment,  and  wait  on  thy  God  continually."  "  Thou 
art  the  God  of  my  salvation  ;  on  Thee  do  I  wait  all  the  day."  Not  that  we  are 
always  to  be  engaged  in  formal  acts  of  devotion.  Waiting  upon  God  is  not 
wholly  comprehended  in  praying  to  Him.  By  inward  meditation,  by  heartfelt 
desires,  by  continual  supplications  as  suggested  to  us  in  the  Church,  or  as  carried 
on  in  the  closet,  or  the  family,  we  must  never  fail  to  wait  upon  God  for  those 
blessings  generally,  which  He  has  promised  ;  or  particularly,  which  we  know  that 
we  individually  require.  We  must  be  constant  expectants ;  unawed  by  the 
suggestions  of  Satan,  the  coldness  and  apathy  of  our  own  hearts,  or  the  low  and 
unchristian  standard  of  those  around  us.  2.  There  must  be  importunate  waiting. 
We  are  not  to  suppose  that  "  waiting  "  implies  a  sitting  still  in  listless  supineness, 
as  if  no  exertion  were  to  be  made.  The  waiting  upon  God  which  will  prove  suc- 
cessful, is  a  waiting  that  will  take  no  denial.  It  springs  from  a  heartfelt  sense  of 
the  necessities  of  the  soul ;  and  it  calls  into  exercise  all  the  energies  of  the  whole 
man.  3.  There  must  be  patient  waiting  (Psa.  xl.  1,  xxxvii.  7).  4.  There  must  be 
a  waiting  on  the  name  of  Jehovah.  David  has  a  remarkable  expression :  "  I 
will  wait  on  Thy  name ;  for  it  is  good  before  Thy  saints."  The  name  of  God 
imports  His  attributes  and  perfections.  A  calm,  serious  contemplation  of  the 
Divine  character  is  an  important  part  of  waiting  upon  God.  5.  The  soul  must 
wait  upon  God.  Many  mistake  here.  They  satisfy  themselves  with  the  external 
homage  of  the  body,  without  the  inward  bending  of  the  soul.  6.  There  must  be 
waiting  only  upon  God.  7.  We  must  wait  God's  own  time  and  way.  II.  The 
blessedness  of  thus  waiting  upon  Him.     1.  "  The  Lord  is  good  to  them  that 


698  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

wait  for  Him:  to  the  soul  that  seeketh  Him."  2.  He  is  good  beyond  conception. 
3.  The  blessedness  of  waiting  upon  God  appears  likewise  in  the  increase  of  spiritual 
strength.  4.  They  who  thus  wait  shall  at  length  take  up  the  language  of  holy 
triumph.  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God ;  we  have  waited  for  Him,"  &c.  Application — 
1.  Our  subject  condemns  many  amongst  you.  2.  Let  the  faithful  learn  their  duty. 
(Carus  Wilson.)  Waiting  shovld  be  expectant : — We  must  not  cower  in  the  dark 
closet,  but  climb  to  our  watch-tower  and  scan  the  horizon.  We  must  look  out 
for  God's  carrier-pigeons;  lest  they  come  to  the  cote  with  messages  under  their 
wings  which  we  may  miss.  We  must  go  down  to  the  quay ;  or  God's  heavily 
freighted  ships  may  touch  there,  and  go  away  again  without  discharging  their 
cargoes.  We  must  imitate  the  shipwrecked  sailor,  who  keeps  the  fire  lit  by  night, 
and  is  incessantly  on  the  outlook  for  passing  ships  •  else  a  search  expedition  may 
come  near  his  poor  islet  and  miss  him.  Those  who  wait  thus  cannot  be  ashamed. 
It  is  impossible  that  God  should  disappoint  the  hope  which  He  has  instilled  and 
nourished  in  the  heart  of  His  child.     (F .  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  19.  He  will  be  very  gracious  unto  thee. — Encouragement*  for  faith : — 
Observe  the  kind  of  prayer  which  is  here  said  to  move  the  Divine  pity  and  win 
the  Divine  favour.  It  is  designated  a  cry,  i.e.,  it  is  a  very  fervent,  earnest, 
importunate  prayer.  It  is  a  prayer  that  comes  out  of  the  depths  of  the  heart. 
It  expresses  a  very  deep  sense  of  need.  It  utters  a  very  longing  desire  after  God. 
There  is  very  good  reason  why  our  prayers  should  very  often  take  this  form.  Our 
sins  are  such  that  they  should  work  in  us  a  penitence  that  may  fitly  take  expression 
in  a  cry.  Our  spiritual  needs  are  so  urgent  that  we  may  give  utterance  to  them 
in  a  cry.  The  strife  is,  sometimes  at  least,  so  hot,  and  the  battle  seems  so  going 
against  us,  that  it  may  very  reasonably  be  expected  from  us  that  we  should  cry 
unto  God  for  His  help.  And  God  is  such  a  necessity  to  these  natures  of  ours, 
and  God  as  a  possession  is  so  sufficing,  that  our  desire  for  Him  may  well  be  intense 
enough  to  require  this  language  to  give  expression  to  our  prayer.  I.  There  ia 
encouragement  for  faith  in  prayer  to  be  found  in  the  nature  of  God  Himself, 
as  we  cannot  help  conceiving  of  it.  Goodness  enters  into  His  very  nature.  Wo 
find  it  necessary  to  believe  that.  It  is  too  dreadful  to  believe  the  contrary.  If 
I  apprehend  Him  as  perfectly  good  He  must  be  pitiful,  He  must  be  tender  in 
His  pity ;  and  if  so,  He  is  surety  likely  to  be  very  gracious  when  He  hears  the 
voice  of  our  cry.  EL  There  is  encouragement,  too,  in  the  relations  which  wb 
must  conceive  God  as  sustaining  to  us.  He  is  our  Creator,  and  there  is  no 
reason  at  all  in  the  suspicion  that  He  who  has  made  us  is  looking  with  indifferent 
eyes  upon  us  or  listening  with  indifference  when  the  voice  of  our  cry  reaches  His 
ear.  He  is  our  Father.  He  has  communicated  to  us  of  His  own  nature,  and  so 
has  become  our  Father  as  He  is  not  the  Father  of  other  creatures  that  live  on  the 
face  of  this  earth.  But  how  does  He  fill  up  your  idea  of  Father  if,  when  you 
are  in  want,  He  does  not  heed  ?  if,  when  you  express  your  want  of  Him  and 
of  His  help  by  a  cry,  He  is  not  moved  ?  III.  The  instinct  of  prayer  which  we 
have  offers  encouragement  to  us  that  He  will  be  moved  when  we  call.  We  are  in 
pain  ;  some  One  is  near  who  can  relieve  us,  and  we  instinctively  cry  for  relief  at 
His  hands.  Your  child  is  in  imminent  peril,  and  there  is  a  man  near  who  can 
rescue  him ;  you  instinctively  call  for  the  help  of  that  man.  And  so  we  feel  great 
wants  which  God  only  can  supply.  We  are  in  great  peril,  from  which  God  only 
can  deliver  us.  There  is  something  which  instinctively  moves  us  to  appeal  to 
God,  to  cry  to  Him.  H  God  has  put  that  instinct  in  our  nature,  He  must  havo 
intended  to  gratify  it.  There  is  no  instinct  of  human  nature  for  the  gratification 
of  which  God  has  not  in  some  way  provided.     IV.  We  have  encouragement, 

tOO,    in   THE   ANALOGY   TO   ALL   HUMAN   RESPONSE    GIVEN   TO    GREAT   NEED.      It   13 

not  to  children  only  that  we  give  our  compassion  when  they  appeal  to  us  in  great 
distress ;  we  are  moved  by  the  lower  animals  when  in  their  great  trouble  they 
make  an  appeal  to  us.  But  you  are  not  more  pitiful  than  God.  There  is  no 
love  or  pity  in  man  that  was  not  first  in  God.  V.  We  have  the  highest  encourage- 
ment to  this  faith  in  God  in  the  revelation  of  Him  in  the  Scriptures.  It  ia 
a  positive  command  of  His  that  we  should  call  upon  Him  when  we  need  Him, 
that  we  should  cry  unto  Him  when  we  are  in  distress.  His  command  means 
His  purpose  to  hear ;  His  command  involves  a  promise  in  it.  What  do  we  find 
given  in  the  revelation  T  Explicit  promises  without  number,  and  in  every  form — 
proofs  and  illustrations  and  examples  without  number  of  God's  readiness  to  be 
very  gracious  unto  those  that  cry  unto  Him.    What  do  we  see  in  the  revelation 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  699 

of  God  in  the  Christian  Scriptures  ?  God  showing  what  He  is  through  a  man. 
He  went  about  in  the  form  of  a  man.  The  sinning,  and  the  needy,  and  the  suffer- 
ing came  to  Him,  surrounded  Him,  tracked  His  steps,  and  cried  to  Him  for  His 
Sity  and  for  His  help.  And  was  He  not  very  gracious  ?  When  He  was  suffering, 
ying  Himself,  there  came  a  cry  from  another  who  was  in  great  distress,  saying 
to  Hun,  "  Remember  me  " ;  and  He  was  very  gracious  at  the  voice  of  that  cry. 
But  some  are  thinking  that  it  is  all  true  about  the  nature  of  God,  but  that  they 
are  guilty,  and  there  are  God's  law,  and  God's  government,  and  God's  justice, 
in  the  way  of  His  nature  expressing  itself  in  His  pitifulness  to  them  in  answer 
to  their  cry.  Whatever  hindrance  they  put  in  the  way  has  been  taken  away 
by  Christ.    (D.  Thomas,  B.A.)        Encouragement  to  trust  and  pray : — I.  This 

ASSURANCE    IS    PARTICULARLY    SUITABLE    TO    CERTAIN    CHARACTERS.      1.    This    is 

applicable  and  comfortable  to  all  afflicted  people.  2.  To  those  who  are  troubled 
on  account  of  sin.  3.  To  backsliders  filled  with  their  own  ways,  who  are  alarmed 
and  distressed  at  their  grievous  departures  from  their  God.  4.  To  all  believers 
in  Christ  who  are  at  all  exercised  in  heart.  II.  The  assurance  here  given  is 
very  firmly  based.  The  words  of  our  text  are  no  old  wives'  fable,  they  are  not 
such  a  pretty  tale  as  mothers  sometimes  tell  their  children,  a  story  made  to  please 
them,  but  not  actually  true.  What  is  the  ground  of  this  assurance  ?  1.  The 
plain  promise  of  God.  2.  The  gracious  nature  of  God.  3.  The  prevalence  of 
prayer.  "  He  will  be  very  gracious  unto  thee  at  the  voice  of  thy  cry." 
4.  Pergonal  testimony  as  to  the  result  of  faith  in  God  and  supplication  to  Him. 
III.  The  assurance  of  the  text  being  so  well  confirmed  should  be 
practically  accepted  at  once.  1.  Let  us  renounce  all  earthborn  confidences. 
2.  Refuse  despair.  3.  Try  the  power  of  prayer  and  childlike  confidence  in  God. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  20.  Thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers. — Trouble  making  the  heavenly 
Teacher  real : — The  siege  shall  surely  come,  with  its  sorely  concrete  priva- 
tions, but  the  Lord  will  be  there,  equally  distinct.  .  .  .  Real,  concrete 
sorrows,  —  these  are  they  that  make  the  heavenly  Teacher  real !  It  is 
linguistically  possible,  and  more  in  harmony  with  the  rest  of  the  passage, 
to  turn  "  teachers,"  as  the  E.V.  has  it,  into  the  singular,  and  to  render 
it  by  "  revealer."  The  word  is  an  active  participle,  "  moreh,"  from  the  same 
verb  as  the  noun  "  torah,"  which  is  constantly  translated  "  law  "  in  our  version, 
but  is,  in  the  Prophets  at  least,  more  nearly  equivalent  to  "  instruction,"  or  to 
our  modern  term  "  revelation "  (ver.  9).  Looking  thus  to  the  One  Revealer, 
and  hearkening  to  the  One  Voice,  "  the  lying  and  rebellious  children  "  shall  at 
last  be  restored  to  that  capacity  for  truth  and  obedience,  the  loss  of  which  has 
been  their  ruin.  (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Unseen  teachers: — There  are 
troubled  hours  in  life,  in  which  we  long  to  see  our  teachers ;  to  know  what 
certain  things  mean ;  and  to  have  it  explained  why  some  special  trials  have  been 
put  upon  us,  and  to  what  end  events,  now  inexplicable,  are  tending.  Devout 
men  and  women  suspect,  or  feel  sure,  already ;  they  think  that  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  is  in  all  this.  They  rest  assured  that  what  seems  wrong  now  will  be  made 
right  by  and  by :  that  all  is  for  the  best ;  and,  more  than  this,  they  are  per- 
suaded that  some  time  or  other,  perhaps  as  death  approaches,  perhaps  in  the 
shadowy  and  thoughtful  place  of  departed  spirits,  perhaps  at  the  last  great  day 
of  God,  they  shall  see  their  teachers,  and  comprehend  it  alL  (Morgan  Dix.) 
The  blessing  of  Christian  teachers  : — Though  the  Gospel  first  began  to  be  preached 
by  the  Lord,  yet,  as  it  was  expedient  that  He  should  go  away,  He  has  instituted, 
and  in  every  age  preserved  an  order  of  men,  for  guiding  others  in  the  way  of 
faith,  of  holiness,  and  of  peace.  I.  A  brief  survey  of  the  advantages  which 
men  derive  from  this  institution.  1.  Attend  to  the  thousands  who  devote 
themselves  to  the  service  of  the  sanctuary,  and  whose  characters  are  improved 
and  ennobled  by  their  previous  studies.  With  what  diligence  and  success, 
prompted  by  motives  of  piety  and  benevolence,  do  they  search  for  the  good 
way.  that  they  may  walk  in  it  themselves,  and  teach  and  recommend  it  to  others 
with  advantage  !  Their  gifts  ripen  and  expand ;  their  moral  and  religious 
excellences  become  distinguished.  Giving  themselves  to  the  Word  of  God  and 
to  prayer,  and,  in  subserviency  to  these,  to  inquiries  after  truth,  to  meditation, 
and  to  the  perusal  of  useful  human  writings,  their  good  resolutions  strengthen  ; 
and  their  knowledge,  wisdom,  activity,  and  usefulness  increase.  2.  Publio 
teachers  often  refine  the  taste,  improve  the  genius,  civilise  the  manners,  and  pro- 


600  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

mote  the  literary  pursuits  of  a  nation.  3.  Instructions  from  the  pulpit  greatly 
promote  a  virtuous  behaviour.  4.  Attend  to  the  gentle,  penetrating,  beneficent 
effects  of  pastoral  instruction,  on  the  sorrowful,  the  disconsolate,  the  tempted, 
the  doubting,  the  feeble-minded,  the  sick,  and  the  dying.  5.  Teachers  are  profit- 
able as  they  spread  and  defend  the  doctrines  of  religion,  and  excite  and  cherish 
just  sentiments  of  Divine  things.  6.  Pastoral  instruction  is  a  chief  means  which 
God  hath  appointed  to  rescue  sinners  from  the  ruins  of  their  apostasy,  and  to 
interest  them  in  His  favour  and  friendship.  II.  But,  must  it  not  be  acknow- 
ledged that  CONGREGATIONS  SOMETIMES  DERIVE  LITTLE  OR  NO  BENEFIT  FROM 
8ERM0NS,  and  that  to  their  teachers  much  of  the  blame  belongs  T  1.  Bad  men 
regard  the  effect  of  what  they  preach  with  cold  indifference,  except  in  so  far  as 
worldly  honour  or  interest  is  advanced  by  their  seeming  success ;  and  efforts 
naturally  are  feeble  and  ineffectual,  where  desire  is  languid.  2.  Sometimes  a 
clergyman's  behaviour  is  not  visibly  influenced  by  the  doctrines  and  duties  of 
religion.  Men  of  small  sagacity  discern  it,  infer  his  craft  and  disingenuity,  or 
conclude  that  they  may  imitate  him  without  hazard.  3.  The  natural  abilities, 
extent  of  knowledge,  and  persuasive  talents,  highly  important  in  a  teacher  of 
religion,  do  not  always  accompany  true  piety.     [J.  Erskine,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  And  thine  ears  shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee. — The  Bath  kol  : — 
The  voice  is  evidently  that  of  a  faithful  guide  and  monitor;  according 
to  the  Rabbins  the  Bath  kol  or  mysterious  echo  which  conducts  and  warns  the 
righteous.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  A  voice  behind  thee : — The  direction  of  the 
voice  "  from  behind  "  is  commonly  explained  by  saying  that  the  image  is  borrowed 
from  the  practice  of  shepherds  going  behind  their  flocks,  or  nurses  behind  children, 
to  observe  their  motions.  A  much  more  natural  solution  is  the  one  proposed 
by  Henderson,  to  wit,  that  their  guides  were  to  be  before  them,  but  that  when 
they  declined  from  the  right  way  their  backs  would  be  turned  to  them,  conse- 
quently the  warning  voice  would  be  heard  behind  them.  (Bbid.)  The  way 
of  life  and  the  ways  of  death: — This  world  is  full  of  ways,  as  it  is  of  men ;  and 
one  way  only  is  right.  One  only  is  the  straight  way  of  God's  commandments, 
that  leadeth  to  eternal  life.  The  rest  are  the  ways  of  men,  that  lead  to  destruction ; 
and  the  most  deceitful  of  them  all  are  those  which  branch  off  from  this  one, 
going,  some  of  them  more,  some  of  them  less  in  its  direction,  and  then  by  a  sudden 
turn  forsaking  it.  So  that  amid  the  multitude  of  ways  many  travellers  through 
life  never  find  the  right  one  at  all.  And  too  many,  after  they  have  been  graciously 
set  upon  it,  forsake  it  for  the  many  byways  of  sm.  But  the  promises  of  God  are 
found  on  His  one  way  only ;  there  alone  their  light  guides  amid  darkness,  on 
that  alone  will  men  meet  their  Saviour.  (R.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)  Care  needed 
in  going  through  the  world : — We  should  never  forget  our  true  position  in  this 
mortal  life.  We  have  to  pick  our  way  in  it.  The  best  known  road  in  the 
world  may  be  missed  by  such  want  of  proper  attention.  {Ibid.)  Good 
company  in  the  right  road : — What  words  do  we  hear  behind  us  ?  what  company 
is  following  us  T  If  it  be  not  good  company,  can  we  be  on  the  right  road  ? 
If  a  person  going  (as  he  thought)  towards  London,  heard  persons  behind  him 
talking  as  if  they  were  going  towards  Manchester,  would  he  not  be  alarmed, 
suspecting  that  he  had  missed  his  way  ?  How  then  can  he  be  on  the  right  road 
to  Heaven,  who  hears  the  company  that  treads  on  his  steps,  talk  of  very  different 

aces,  of  very  different  ends  of  their  journey  ?  (Ibid.)  The  guiding  word:-— 
The  sinner's  attitude  before  God  is  unseemly  and  dangerous.  "A 
word  behind  thee."  A  man  who  hears  a  word  behind  him  has  his  back  to 
the  speaker.  He  is,  for  some  reason,  not  in  a  friendly  attitude.  1.  The  fact 
is  implied,  in  the  context,  that  the  sinner  has  not  only  his  back  turned  to- 
God,  but  is  actually  going  away  from  Him.  And  that  the  going  away  is  not 
an  inadvertency  or  oversight,  but  the  result  of  a  set  purpose.  2.  That  he  is 
self-willed,  stubborn,  and  persistent  in  his  efforts;  he  continues  his  course 
of  separation,  in  spite  of  the  constant  overtures  and  entreaties  of  love. 
II.  God's  warnings  and  overtures  are  simple  and  easily  under- 
stood.    "  A  word  behind  thee."    Not  a  confusing,  rapidly  uttered  discourse 

not  a  cold  philosophical,  or  logical  treatise ;  not  a  metaphysical  disquisition, 

couched  in  scientific  phrase — bewildering  and  vague,  but,  "  a  word."  Not  a 
mysterious  echo  from  the  hill-tops,  or  an  unknown  voice  speaking  from  afar, 
but,  "  a  word  behind  thee."  "  Thine  ears  shall  hear."  God  is  not  unreason- 
able in  His  demands.     When  He  calls,  man  possesses  the  God-given  capacity 


f. 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  <$01 

to  hear  and  obey.  III.  A  knowledge  of  his  duty  is  not  optional  with  the 
sinner.  "  Thine  ears  shall  hear."  A  man's  knowledge  of  his  duty  is  not  con- 
ditioned by  his  conduct,  as  are  the  blessings  of  religion.  God  never  gives  any 
man  up  until  he  becomes  so  wedded  to  his  sins  that  he  indignantly  spurns  all 
efforts  for  his  salvation,  both  human  and  Divine.  IV.  God  s  warnincs  and 
instructions  are  adequate  and  ample,  therefore  the  sinner  is  without 
excuse.  "  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  In  His  teachings,  Jesus  Christ 
always  presents  duties  as  well  as  doctrines, — practice  as  well  as  principles.  1.  Here 
we  have  doctrine.  "  This  is  the  way."  Not  one  of  a  number  of  ways,  or  an 
improvement  on  the  old.  No ;  it  has  neither  duplicate  nor  substitute.  2.  We 
have  also  the  practical.  "  Walk  ye  in  it."  V.  The  life  of  the  sinner  is  not 
necessarily  fixed  and  monotonous.  "  When  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand, 
or  to  the  left."  The  tremendous  prerogative  of  free  agency  leaves  it  with  every 
man  to  formulate  and  determine  his  own  activities.  1.  Notice  the  broad  sphere 
open  to  the  sinner,  and  from  which  he  is  to  select  the  pathway  of  his  activities. 
(1)  He  may  go  straight  ahead.  This  may  involve  very  little  that  is  specially 
good  or  bad.  (2)  He  may  "  turn  to  the  right  hand."  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  right-hand  sins.  "  Popular,  paying  iniquities,"  which  evoke  but  little  human 
condemnation.  (3)  He  may  also  turn  to  the  left.  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  "  left  -  hand "  sins,  awkward,  unseemly,  embarrassing.  Conduct  that 
destroys  reputation,  health,  character,  destiny.  The  forger,  the  liar,  the  thief, 
the  drunkard,  the  sensualist,  all  come  in  here.  Everything  sacred,  noble,  manly, 
valuable,  is  sacrificed  to  the  absorbing  demand  of  the  present.  2.  Notice 
the  grandest  possibility  within  reach  of  the  sinner.  Right  about  face.  This 
grand  movement  at  once  brings  to  an  end  both  his  conduct  and  character 
as  a  sinner.  (Thomas  Kelly.)  The  guiding  word : — Man  is  a  traveller.  He 
has  lost  his  way.  He  needs  a  guide,  both  to  bring  him  back  to,  and  keep  him 
in,  the  right  path  to  the  end  of  the  journey.  Where  is  that  guide  to  be  found  ? 
It  is  referred  to  in  the  text.  "  A  word  behind  thee."  The  following  remarks 
are  suggested  concerning  this  guiding  word.  I.  It  comes  to  man  from  without. 
There  are  inner  guides  placed  there  by  our  Maker  in  our  constitution.  Reason. 
Conscience.  But  both  these  have  failed  us.  They  themselves  are  lost  in  the 
haze  of  depravity.  Hence  the  need  of  a  guide  from  without;  such  a  guide  as 
*'  the  word."  It  comes  from  God  to  man — 1.  Through  nature.  2.  Through 
Christ.  II.  It  comes  to  man  in  explicitness.  "  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in 
it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  ye  turn  to  the  left."  There  is  no 
indefiniteness  here,  no  vagueness,  and  no  uncertainty ;  no  suggesting  a  choice 
between  different  ways.  The  word  reveals  the  right  and  only  way,  and  that 
way  is  Christ.  "  I  am  the  way  " — "  Follow  Me."  III.  It  comes  to  man  from 
mystery.  "  Behind  thee."  Thou  dost  not  see  the  speaker.  The  voice  breaks 
out  from  the  dark  past.  It  comes  from  "  behind."  Behind  all  that  is  seen 
and  heard,  behind  all  the  phenomena  of  nature,  behind  the  universe,  from  God 
Himself,  the  Mysterious  One.  IV.  It  comes  to  man,  but  he  must  listen.  "  Thou 
shalt  hear."  This  hearing  is  the  want.  Men's  spiritual  ears  are  deaf.  The 
guiding  word  is  everywhere.  "  There  is  no  speech  nor  language  where  His  voice 
is  not  heard."  Open  thine  ear  :  listen,  and  thou  shalt  catch  the  guiding  directions. 
(Homilist.)  Divine  guidance  and  admonition  : — The  text  may  be  applied  to 
the  abundant  means  of  grace,  and  the  plentiful  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  under 
the  Gospel  dispensation — to  the  privileges  which  we  enjoy,  and  the  assistance 
promised  to  us.  I.  The  way,  referred  to  in  the  text,  may  be  applied — 1.  To 
God's  method  of  saving  sinful  men,  through  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It 
was  said  of  the  apostles,  "These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  Most  High  God, 
who  show  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation."  We  must  walk  in  it,  actually  choosing 
Him  to  be  our  Redeemer  and  Advocate,  committing  ourselves  entirely  to  Him, 
and  earnestly  seeking  the  continual  supplies  of  His  Spirit,  that  we  may  be  saved 
from  sin.  2.  The  text  may  be  applied  to  the  way  in  which  the  sanctification 
of  the  believer  is,  through  Divine  grace,  effected.  We  are  not  only  to  receive 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  but  also  to  walk  in  Him ;  and  to  prove  that  we  live  in 
the  Spirit,  by  walking  in  the  Spirit.  It  is  by  daily  prayer,  and  the  daily  improve- 
ment of  Scripture,  of  Divine  ordinances,  and  providential  occurrences,  and  a 
steadfast  adherence  to  the  will  of  God,  that  we  must  expect  to  grow  in  grace, 
and  go  from  strength  to  strength.  3.  It  may  be  applied  to  that  particular  course 
of  service  to  which  each  Christian  is  called,  by  the  circumstances  in  which  he 
is  placed,  the  talents  committed  to  him,  or  the  relations  he  bears  to  others. 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixx. 

Knowing  that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself,  that  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh 
to  direct  his  steps — how  liable  he  is  to  mistake  the  path  of  duty  on  various 
occasions,  he  will  pray,  "  Teach  me  Thy  way,  O  God  "  (Psa.  xxvii.  1 1,  cxix.  33-37). 
II.  The  promise  meets  all  the  cases  which  have  been  mentioned.  1.  It  is  a 
promise  of  the  direction  which  God  will  afford  to  all  who  really  seek  it.  2.  It 
is  a  promise  of  Divine  grace  to  incline  us  to  walk  in  God's  way.  '  Thine  ears  shall 
hear  a  word  behind  thee,"  &c.  3.  It  is  a  promise  that  He  will  quicken  us  in  the 
path  of  duty.  4.  It  is  a  promise  that  the  Lord  will  preserve  His  people,  and  enable 
them  to  endure  unto  the  end.  (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  The  teachings 
of  the  past : — I.  The  value  of  every  experience  that  befalls  us.     H.  The  sou 

ROAD  TO  BLESSEDNESS,  TO  PEACE,  TO  JOY,  TO  TRUE  PROSPERITY  OF  LIFE,  IS  RIGHT- 
EOUSNESS. III.  God's  outdance  of  the  faithful  soul.  (H.  Varley,  B.A.) 
The  word  behind  thee  : — I.  The  monitor  in  these  words.  "  Thine  ears  shall  hear 
a  word,"  &c.  II.  The  admonition  itself.  "  This  is  the  way,"  &c.  III.  The 
occasion.  "  When  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,"  &c.  ( T.  Horton.)  The  Divine 
monitor: — It  is  a  promise — 1.  Of  ministerial  opportunities.  2.  Of  the  con- 
tinuance of  spiritual  suggestions.  (Ibid.)  The  voice  behind : — 1.  It  is  a 
pursuing  and  overtaking  word  ;  a  word  that  follows  us  and  comes  at  our  heels. 
2.  A  revoking  and  recalling  word.  A  word  of  restraint.  3.  An  impulsive  and 
provoking  word.  A  word  that  puts  thee  forward,  that  furthers  thee  and  pro- 
motes thee  in  thy  way.  (Ibid.)  The  admonition: — "This  is  the  way,  walk 
ye  in  it."  1.  A  word  of  correction  and  reformation  in  case  of  miscarriage.  It 
is  very  fitly  said  to  those  who  wander  and  are  out  of  the  way,  to  bring  them 
again  into  it.  2.  A  word  of  direction  and  instruction  in  case  of  ignorance.  3.  A 
word  of  strengthening  and  confirmation  in  case  of  unsettledness.  It  is  very 
suitably  said  to  those  who  are  doubtful  and  wavering  and  uncertain  in  them- 
selves whether  they  be  right  in  the  way  or  no,  to  encourage  them  to  persevere 
and  go  on  in  those  good  ways  which  they  have  made  entrance  upon.  (Ibid.) 
Turning  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left : — The  expression  plainly  intimates  that  there 
are  dangerous  bypaths  on  both  hands,  into  which  the  people  of  God  are  apt  to 
turn  aside.  I.  On  the  right  hand,  there  are  erroneous  principles  and  practices 
which  are  mistaken  for  that  truth  and  holiness  whereof  they  are  really  destitute. 
Such  are — 1.  Professed  confidence  in  God's  pardoning  mercy,  disjoined  from 
the  acknowledged  necessity  of  His  sanctifying  grace.  2.  High  pretensions  to 
faith  which  are  not  verified  by  solicitude  to  maintain  good  works.  3.  Flaming 
profession  of  piety  toward  God,  unaccompanied  with  the  exercises  of  justice, 
mercy,  and  charity  toward  men.  4.  Great  pretended  zeal  against  public  vices, 
attended  with  indifference  as  to  secret  personal  transgressions.  5.  Loud  appro- 
bation of  discourses  that  expose  infidelity,  hypocrisy,  and  iniquity,  whilst  these 
sins  are  indulged  in  heart  and  life.  II.  On  the  left  hand  there  are  also  pernicious 
principles  and  dangerous  practices  into  which  men  are  prone  to  deviate.  Such 
are — 1.  The  confession  that  holiness  is  indispensably  requisite  to  the  enjoyment 
of  God,  whilst  the  necessity  of  atonement  for  sin  is  denied  or  overlooked. 
2.  Strenuous  assertions  of  the  importance  of  good  works,  separate  from  a  proper 
regard  to  faith,  the  active  principle  from  which  they  proceed.  3.  High  respect 
for  the  duties  of  justice,  mercy,  and  charity,  joined  with  criminal  indifference 
and  neglect  of  the  exercises  of  piety  and  devotion.  4.  Partiality  to  their  own 
favourite  sins  and  unaffectedness  with  the  transgressions  of  other  people,  whereby 
God  is  offended,  His  law  transgressed,  and  His  truth  dishonoured.  (R.  Mac- 
culloch.)  Virtue  lies  in  the  middle,  between  two  extremes,  which  are  equally 
to  be  avoided.  (Ibid.)  The  voice  behind  thee  : — I.  The  position  of  the 
wanderer  to  whom  this  special  blessing  comes.  How  does  God  find  men  when 
He  declares  that  they  shall  hear  a  word  behind  them  ?  1.  With  their  backs 
turned  to  Him.  The  wanderer  seeks  not  God,  but  God  seeks  him.  Man  turns 
from  the  God  of  love,  but  the  love  of  God  turns  not  away  from  him.  2.  They 
were  going  further  and  further  away  from  Him.  Of  course,  when  you  have 
once  turned  your  back  upon  the  right,  the  further  you  travel  the  more  wrong 
you  become.  3.  They  were  pursuing  their  course  in  spite  of  warning.  Read 
the  twentieth  verse :  "  Thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers  "  :  there  they  stood, 
good  men,  right  in  the  way,  entreating  their  hearers  to  cease  from  provoking 
their  God  and  destroying  their  own  souls.  4.  They  had  many  ways  in  which 
to  wander.  Sometimes  they  roamed  to  the  right  hand,  at  other  times  they 
wandered  to  the  left,  but  they  never  turned  face  about.  Some  men  have  right- 
hand  sins,  respectable  iniquities  which  challenge  little  censure  from  their  fellows. 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  603 

Others  have  left-hand  sins ;  they  plunge  into  the  sins  of  the  flesh  ;  no  vice  is 
too  black  for  them.  II.  The  call  of  mercy.  1.  It  is  a  call  that  is  altogether 
undesired,  and  comes  unsought  to  the  man  who  has  gone  astray.  2.  "  A  word 
behind  thee  " :  it  is  the  voice  of  an  unseen  Caller  whose  existence  has  been  almost 
forgotten.  It  is  not  the  teachers  that  speak  in  this  powerful  way.  The  teachers 
you  have  seen  with  your  eyes,  and  they  have  done  you  no  good ;  but  some  One 
calls  whom  you  never  saw,  and  never  will  see,  till  He  sits  on  the  throne  of  judg- 
ment at  the  last  great  day ;  but  still  He  utters  a  word  which  cannot  be  kept 
out  of  your  ears.  It  will  come  to  you  mysteriously  at  all  sorts  of  hours  crying, 
"  Return,  return,  return."  3.  This  voice  pursues  and  overtakes  the  sinner. 
4.  That  voice  when  it  comes  to  sinners  is  generally  most  opportune,  for  they 
are  to  hear  this  voice  behind  them  when  they  turn  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the 
left.  5.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  potent  word  should  be  spoken,  and 
should  be  heard  For  the  man  had  seen  his  teachers,  but  they  had  not  wrought 
him  any  good.  HI.  What  was  the  wobd  of  that  call  T  It  is  stated  at  full 
length.  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  1.  It  contains  within  itself  specific 
instruction.  "  This  is  the  way."  There  is  a  kind  of  preaching  which  has  nothing 
specific,  definite,  and  positive  in  it :  it  is  a  bit  of  cloud-land,  and  you  may  make 
what  you  like  out  of  it.  2.  This  definite  instruction  may  also  be  said  to  be  a 
special  correction.  It  as  good  as  says  the  opposite  path  is  not  the  way.  3.  It 
is  also  a  word  of  sure  confirmation.  "  This  is  the  way."  4.  This  is  followed 
up  by  a  word  of  personal  direction.  Do  not  merely  hear  about  it,  but  "  walk  ye 
in  it."  5.  This  takes  the  form  of  encouraging  permission.  "This  is  the  way." 
Do  not  sit  looking  at  it :  "  walk  ye  in  it."  But  I  am  so  big  a  sinner."  "  Christ 
is  the  way ;  walk  ye  in  it."  There  is  room  enough  for  big  sinners  in  Jesus. 
"  But  I  have  been  so  long  coming."  Never  mind :  this  is  the  way,  "  walk  ye 
in  it."  "  But  I  am  afraid  my  feet  are  so  polluted  that  I  shall  stain  the  way." 
"This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  IV.  The  success  of  the  word.  " Thine  ears 
shall  hear."  God  not  only  gives  us  something  to  hear,  but  He  gives  us  ears  to 
hear  with.  This  is  effectual  grace.  1.  This  means  that  the  message  of  Divine  love 
shall  come  to  the  man's  mind  so  as  to  create  uneasiness  in  it.  2.  After  awhi'e  there 
gets  to  be  a  desire  in  his  heart.  3.  As  that  voice  continues  to  sound,  it  pulls 
him  up  and  leads  to  resolve.  ( C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it.  — 
The  right  way  is  possessed  of  every  qualification  and  advantage  that  you  can 
possibly  desire,  i.  It  is  a  highway,  open  to  persons  of  every  description.  2.  It 
is  the  way  of  holiness,  wherein  the  unclean  shall  not  walk.  3.  It  is  a  patent  way, 
wherein  the  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err.  4.  It  is  a  safe  way, 
wherein  you  shall  be  protected  from  the  hostile  attacks  of  your  enemies.  5.  It 
is  a  pleasant  way,  wherein  you  shall  enjoy  sacred  peace.  6.  It  is  an  infallible 
way  to  arrive  at  fulness  of  joys,  and  rivers  of  pleasures  for  evermore. 
(R.  MaccvUoch.) 

Ver.  23.  Then  shall  He  give  the  rain  of  thy  seed. — The  effusion  of  the 
Holy  Spirit :  —  These  words  are,  in  their  literal  sense,  a  promise  of  a 
bountiful  supply  from  God  of  the  showers  of  dew  and  rain,  by  which  the 
earth  would  be  made  abundantly  fruitful.  The  promise  is  given  with  reference 
to  the  casting  away  of  their  idols  by  the  Jewish  people.  But  the  words  are 
capable  of  a  larger  interpretation.  The  whole  chapter  looks  to  blessings  greater 
than  any  that  can  be  counted  by  the  numbers  of  time.  The  plentiful  effusion 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  which  is  so  often  spoken  of  under  the  emblem  of  "  rain  " 
and  "  dew,"  is  hereby  intended.  As  the  rain  and  dew  could  elicit  no  fertility 
without  preparation  of  the  ground,  and  industrious  tilling  upon  the  part  of  man, 
— as  the  concurrence  of  both  these  conditions  is  requisite  in  order  to  secure  a 

Eroduce, — so  is  it  true  likewise  with  regard  to  spiritual  husbandry.  There  must 
e  on  the  part  of  man  the  use  of  means,  as  well  as  the  bestowing  of  His  gifts  on 
the  part  of  God.  But  it  may  be  asked,  How  is  God's  grace  to  be  obtained  ? 
Have  any  means  or  channels  been  appointed  for  its  supply  T  1.  Prayer  is  one 
appointed  channel  2.  So  is  hearing  the  Word  of  God.  3.  The  sacraments. 
(H.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.) 

Ver.  26.  The  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  sun. — Faith's 
astronomy : — It  is  worthy  of  closest  observation  that  the  Bible  standpoint 
is  as  distinct  from  the  astrologer's  position  as  it  is  from  that  of  the  modern 
observer.    It  differs  equally  from  each   in   this  respect,  that  God's  believing 


604  7 HE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

children  are  ever  taught  to  regard  these  mightiest  natural  powers  as  our  servants, 
and  not  as  our  sovereigns.  Instead  of  their  regulating  our  destiny,  it  Lb  our  destiny 
which  regulates  their  continuance  and  perpetuity.  So  in  this  passage  we  have 
an  example  of  faith's  astronomy.  I.  We  have  here  a  vision  off  intense  glory. 
We  are  told  that  even  now  the  moonlight  in  the  lands  with  which  Isaiah  waa 
familiar  is  far  more  brilliant  than  that  with  which  we  are  favoured.  It  is  the 
strength  of  those  moonbeams  that  gives  significance  to  the  promise,  "  The  sun 
shall  not  smite  thee  by  day  nor  the  moon  by  night."  And  yet  the  prophet,  with 
all  his  acquaintance  with  brighter  heavens  than  ours,  ventures  upon  the  con- 
ception of  still  fuller  splendour  both  by  night  and  by  day.  It  is  evident  that 
he  is  not  looking  at  these  things  from  a  bare  mundane  standpoint.  But  he  is  in 
an  ecstasy  over  the  blessed  intents  of  love  which  God  has  for  His  people,  and 
he  finds  all  the  ordinary  accounts  of  well-being  too  scant  and  meagre  to  portray 
the  good  which  is  in  store ;  and  so,  in  a  bold  flight  of  descriptive  eloquence,  he 
tells  of  sevenfold  suns  and  of  sun-like  moons  diffusing  through  renovated  skies 
all  the  myriad  benefits  of  their  beams  with  unfailing  profusion.  We  observe 
that  this  forecast  of  increased  glory  is  the  reverse  of  that  which  natural  calcula- 
tion would  give.  The  natural  theory  that  finds  favour  is  that  the  sun  once  shone 
more  potently  than  now  he  does,  and  that  in  the  future  his  ray  will  become  still 
feebler,  until  night  and  death  settle  down  upon  the  entire  solar  system.  While 
science,  then,  tells  us  of  exhausting  power  and  expiring  energy,  it  is  the  province 
of  revelation  and  of  faith  which  accepts  it  to  speak  of  superior  founts  of  being, 
those  original  sources  from  which  the  sun  itself  and  all  on  which  it  shines  first 
derived  their  existence.  We  observe,  again,  that  human  calculation,  if  it  did 
foresee  such  an  augmentation  of  sunlight,  would  be  ready  to  account  it  disastrous 
rather  than  welcome.  A  sevenfold  sun  would  only  emit  one  flash,  and  anon  this 
globe  would  be  drawn  into  its  flaming  vortex,  and  the  brightness  would  be  but 
that  of  conflagration  and  ruin.  Again,  then,  we  have  to  hail  another  wisdom 
besides  that  of  men,  which  contemplates  exaltation  where  sense  only  detects 
degradation,  and  which  effects  felicity  where  carnal  reason  would  only  anticipate 
evil.  For  "  the  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man."  There 
was  as  much  disposition  in  Isaiah's  day  as  there  is  in  ours  to  think  that  the  world 
and  the  sun  are  wearing  out  and  growing  old,  and  also  to  think  that  an  intense 
blaze  would  be  obnoxious  rather  than  welcome.  But  Isaiah  was  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  tell  us  of  a  light  that  should  be  at  once  of  surpassing  effulgence, 
and  yet  of  sweet  and  benign  influence ;  a  light  that  should  shine,  not  upon  a 
trembling  and  alarmed  race,  but  upon  those  whose  breach  had  been  bound  up 
and  whose  wound  had  been  healed.  A  vision  this,  then,  of  fuller  fight,  of  fairer 
sight,  and  of  people  with  capacities  of  beholding  and  revelling  in  these  sun-like 
moons  and  sevenfold  suns.  Intellectually  this  promise  is  accomplished  in  our 
days  by  our  discoveries  in  the  structure  of  the  heavens.  The  moon  is  for  us  a 
grander  object  than  the  sun  was  to  the  beholders  of  ancient  days,  and  the  sun 
now  strikes  our  minds  as  sevenfold,  yea,  as  we  speak  now,  a  thousandfold,  more 
magnificent  than  they  thought  him  then.  But  the  benefit  of  these  discoveries 
to  our  spirits  was  all  vouchsafed  to  Isaiah  when  the  Holy  Ghost  moved  him  to 
contemplate  in  believing  rapture  the  great  resources  of  God  and  the  beneficence 
with  which  He  would  unlock  those  resources  for  the  enrichment  of  men  upon 
whom  He  would  shine  with  other  light  than  that  of  suns  and  moons  in  the  day 
when  the  Lord  shall  bind  up  the  breach  of  His  people.  The  sevenfold  sun  is  the 
visage  of  God  Himself ;  the  moon  equalling  the  sun  is  the  glory  of  the  Lamb 
illuminating  the  Holy  City.  II.  This  glory  is  set  forth  as  tarrying  for  a  certain 
day.  Our  temptation  is  to  think  that  our  circumstances  make  our  characters. 
But  there  is  more  of  truth  in  the  contrary  thought,  that  our  characters  make 
our  circumstances.  The  land  of  Palestine  has  become  barren,  but  this  did  not 
produce  the  degeneracy  of  her  people,  but  the  people  degenerated  first  and 
the  land  subsequently.  God  "  turneth  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness  for  the 
wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein."  So  material  things  may  lend  their 
aid  to  spiritual  results,  but  really  it  is  the  spiritual  that  regulates  the  material. 
The  first  great  change  must  happen  in  us,  then  we  shall  be  qualified  to  behold 
and  to  enjoy  the  splendour  that  God  will  disclose  without  us.  "  The  light  of 
the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  sun  "  on  a  certain  day  at  a  date  which  is 
determined,  not  by  the  chronology  of  suns  and  moons,  but  by  that  of  quickened 
spirits  and  broken  hearts  in  the  day  that  the  Lord  shall  bind  up  the  breach  of 
His  people.    III.  Notice,  on  what  it  is  this  vision  of  glory  is  thus  suspended. 


chap,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  605 

There  is  "  joy  amongst  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,**  and 
it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  events  that  transpire  within  human  hearts 
are  of  more  account  in  God's  eyes  than  the  vastest  convulsions  of  nature.  And 
the  wonder  is  that  sin  has  not  altered  that.  The  story  of  Joshua's  command 
over  the  heavenly  orbs  is  not  too  severe  a  demand  upon  my  faith  when  once  I  have 
a  firm  grasp  of  the  truth  that  the  sun  has  a  personal  Maker  and  Master.  But 
that  when  we  have  erred  and  offended,  when  the  constancy  and  regularity  which 
the  heavenly  masses  show  is  found  wanting  in  us,  and  we  become  like  shooting 
stars,  wandering  on  a  devious  way  without  settled  orbit  or  consistency  of  course, 
that  God  should  still  track  us  with  His  pity,  that  He  should  still  reserve  lines 
of  gracious  attraction  for  us,  and  that  even  for  such  offenders  as  we  He  should 
submit  an  entire  universe  to  reconstruction — is  not  this  the  most  incredible 
thing  of  all  ?  Two  practical  interpretations  may  be  assigned  to  this  imagery. 
( 1 )  The  joy  of  the  new  convert  may  be  depicted  thus.  The  exultation  of  the  delivered 
one  often  causes  all  outward  sights  to  appear  brighter  because  of  the  soul's 
quickened  enjoyment.  (2)  Or,  again,  the  prosperity  that  attends  upon  Christian 
union  and  concord  may  be  delineated  by  this  imagery.  {J.  M.  Stephens,  B.A.) 
The  sevenfold  light  of  the  sun  : — There  is  a  glory  above  the  brightness  of  the  mid- 
day sun  ;  it  is  the  more  excellent  glory  of  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness."  There 
is  a  beauty  softer  and  more  tender  than  the  pale  splendour  of  the  queen  of  night ; 
it  is  that  of  the  Church,  walking  in  the  beauty  and  light  of  her  Lord.  Taking 
it  all  in  all,  the  Church,  even  now,  is  the  glory  of  humanity,  and  the  light  of  the 
world.  And  better  days  are  in  store  for  her,  when  the  clouds  and  shadows  shall 
flee  away,  and  a  more  glorious  illumination  shall  break  forth  upon  her  and  from 
her.  This  promise,  in  common  with  many  other  texts  of  Isaiah,  shines  out  like 
a  sim  from  an  angry  and  troubled  sky.  But  the  gathering  clouds  only  add  to 
the  intensity  of  the  splendour.  God's  richest  love  ever  shines  on  the  blackest 
clouds  of  sorrow  and  sin.  We  have  here — I.  The  Church's  unhappy  condition. 
"  The  breach  of  His  people,  and  the  stroke  of  their  wound,"  may  represent 
more  than  internal  division  or  disunion  ;  but  it  may  well  stand  for  that,  as  being 
among  the  most  grievous  of  the  Church's  wounds,  and  the  invariable  outcome 
and  index  of  other  maladies.  1.  As  a  cause  of  pain.  All  the  Christians  of  most 
Christlike  spirit  have  mourned  over  these  divisions,  and  have  had  great  search- 
ings  of  heart  because  of  them.  2.  There  is  also  the  disfigurement  of  a  wound, 
in  the  marring  of  a  most  perfect  and  glorious  creation  by  these  internal  divisions. 
3.  There  is  also  fatal  weakness  for  work  and  service  from  these  wounds.  II.  God'3 
gracious  visitation  of  His  Church.  "  The  Lord  shall  bind  up  the  breach 
of  His  people,  and  heal  the  stroke  of  their  wound."  We  know  that  the  wounds 
of  the  body  are  healed,  not  by  external  applications,  but  by  the  vigour  of  the 
vital  forces  within  itself  pouring  out  their  overflowing  life,  bringing  the  parts 
together,  and  making  them  whole;  and  the  Church's  wounds  are  to  be  healed 
by  the  Lord's  infusion  of  a  larger  measure  of  spiritual  and  Divine  life ;  of  more 
piety,  more  power,  more  zeal,  more  affection.  III.  The  blessed  consequences 
of  the  healing  of  these  wounds.  "  The  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the 
light  of  the  sun,  and  the  light  of  the  sun  sevenfold,  as  the  light  of  seven  days." 
1.  These  images  denote  an  immense  increase  of  the  Church's  light,  or  future  glory, 
as  the  consequence  of  the  healing  of  the  Church's  wounds.  Where  there  is  more 
love  there  will  be  more  light.  2.  The  healing  of  the  breach  would  bring  an  immense 
increase  of  light  to  the  Church  within  her  actual  boundaries.  This  light  of  the 
various  portions  of  the  Church  when  brought  together,  will  be  more  intense- 
will  shine  with  a  mightier  fulness,  than  when  separated.  3.  The  healing  of  the 
Church's  wounds  would  bring  increase  of  light  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the 
Church.  The  Church  is  destined  to  be  the  light  of  the  world.  "  Sevenfold  !  " 
There  are  days  that  have  a  sevenfold  fulness  of  light  in  comparison  of  other  days, 
when  the  summer  sunshine  has  a  splendour,  and  a  glory,  and  a  fulness,  that  are 
equal  to  the  light  of  many  cloudy  and  dark  days.  And  what  is  it  that  makes 
the  difference  ?  It  is  the  intervening  atmosphere  that  is  different ;  it  is  the 
thick  and  murky  air  that  intercepts  and  weakens  his  light.  Only  let  the  Church 
be  in  a  right  condition,  and  the  revealed  Christ  will  shine  forth  in  gladness,  and 
the  revelation  will  discover  itself  in  all  its  fulness.  There  is  no  glory  of  the 
Church  that  is  not  made  up  of  individual  excellence,  and  the  only  way  to 
promote  its  splendour  and  glory  is  to  elevate  individually  the  Christian  spirit. 
( J.  Riddell. )  The  transfiguring  power  of  righteousness  : — As  men  grow  in  godliness 
end  righteousness  so  will  the  glory  of  all  things  be  revealed  and  heightened.     Just 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

as  men  realise  the  grace  of  God  will  human  nature  itself  be  uplifted  and  all  things 
be  transfigured  with  it.  I.  The  text  finds  an  illustration  in  the  direction  of  nature. 
How  wonderfully  science  has  enlarged  our  conception  of  the  magnitude  of  the 
universe ;  it  is  always  pushing  back  the  sky.  How  wonderfully,  too,  has  science 
raised  our  conception  of  the  orbs  which  fill  the  infinite  abyss  !  To  us  also  the 
sea  has  become  mysterious  and  magnificent  as  an  inverted  sky.  And  the  earth 
itself  has  become  a  veritable  wonderland.  The  microscope,  the  spectroscope, 
the  telescope,  have  discovered  unexpected  treasures.  But  some  one  asks,  What 
have  godliness  and  righteousness  to  do  with  that  science  which  is  ever  more  fully 
interpreting  the  world  T  I  reply,  Godliness  and  righteousness  make  science 
possible.  Godliness  creates  that  infinite  curiosity  of  soul  which  is  the  life  of  science, 
and  righteousness  secures  that  condition  of  things  which  makes  the  prosecution  of 
science  possible.  Galileo  was  a  Christian,  and  it  was  whilst  he  was  worshipping  in  the 
Cathedral  of  Pisa  that  the  swinging  of  the  lamp  set  him  thinking  aright  about  the 
Bublime  forces  and  laws  of  the  universe.  Which  historical  fact  is  a  parable,  for  again 
and  again  has  science  lit  her  torch  at  the  lamp  of  the  temple.  Faith  and  righteous- 
ness make  science  possible.  And  the  more  pure  in  heart  men  become  the  more 
vividly  do  they  see  and  appreciate  the  beauty  and  grandeur  of  the  world.  IL  The 
text  will  be  illustrated  in  the  perfecting  op  humanity.  As  the  Spirit  of  God 
frees  us  from  unbelief,  fear,  passion,  and  puts  us  into  fellowship  with  our  Heavenly 
Father,  so  does  our  nature  unfold  all  its  wonderful  faculties.  Just  as  men  become 
spiritual  and  righteous  so  do  they  gloriously  realise  themselves.  1.  The  fact 
is  that  our  bodily  organs  are  growing,  they  are  ever  becoming  enlarged  in  range 
and  heightened  in  ability.  Our  senses  are  becoming  sevenfold.  What  a  wonder- 
ful ear  the  telephone  has  given  us !  What  a  penetrating  quality  the  telegraph 
has  imparted  to  our  voice  !  What  a  splendid  eye  the  telescope,  the  microscope, 
and  camera  have  given  us  !  What  marvellously  manifold  and  facile  hands  we 
have  acquired  in  the  scientific  and  mechanical  apparatus  of  our  times.  All 
this  is  equivalent  to  the  enlargement  of  the  bodily  organs  themselves.  2.  A 
higher  moral  and  spiritual  life  will  realise  most  gloriously  our  intellectual 
faculties.  Ruskin  assures  us  that  none  of  the  great  masters  had  faults  of  character 
but  those  faults  told  in  their  work,  mysteriously  staining  and  darkening  the 
prismatic  splendours  of  their  masterpieces.  3.  Man's  highest  moral  possibilities 
are  being  attained  in  Jesus  Christ.  III.  The  text  finds  fulfilment  in  the  trans- 
formation of  society.  By  the  action  of  the  Spirit  of  God  society  is  being 
Eurified  and  uplifted ;  instead  of  being  a  mere  convention  for  selfish  ends  it  is 
ecoming  a  brotherhood,  its  spirit  the  spirit  of  kindness,  its  law  the  law  of  love. 
And  how  wonderfully  will  this  change,  silently,  deeply  working,  ennoble  and 
glorify  everything.  Nothing  glorifies  like  unselfishness.  How  a  noble,  unselfish 
spirit  will  exalt  government !  And  ennoble  commerce  !  And  all  industrialism  ! 
And  so  everything  else  will  be  uplifted  and  beautified  as  you  get  more  of  the 
spirit  of  love  into  it.  All  culture,  all  pleasure,  all  domesticity,  all  friendship. 
I  heard  a  brother  say  in  a  love-feast  that  when  he  walked  home  after  his  con- 
version he  thought  that  all  the  sign-boards  in  the  street  had  been  freshly  painted. 
Yes,  indeed,  love  will  paint  everything  freshly,  both  the  commonplace  and  grand ; 
paint  them  with  the  hues  of  heaven,  gild  them  with  untarnished  gold.  To-day 
we  have  to  apologise  for  government  whenever  we  mention  it ;  we  have  to  confess 
the  vulgarity  of  trade  and  industrialism ;  we  have  sorrowfully  to  acknowledge 
how  much  there  is  in  social  life  that  justifies  cynicism  and  satire ;  we  have  to 
blush  for  pleasure  ;  there  is  little  poetry  and  greatness  in  these  things,  but  it 
shall  not  be  always  so.  Poor  sentiments  are  yielding ;  nobler  thoughts  are 
prevailing ;  and  the  prophecy  in  our  text  is  being  fulfilled  every  day.  ( W.  L. 
Watkinson. )  The  Christian  should  cherish  large  expectations  concerning  the  Church 
and  the  race  : — God  has  done  wonderful  things,  but  He  will  do  greater  yet.  A 
brother  in  York  told  me  that  one  day  he  noticed  an  American  eagerly  scanning 
one  of  their  ancient  buildings.  Said  the  visitor :  "lam  looking  at  your  grand 
cathedral."  "  Our  cathedral,"  said  the  citizen ;  "  Stranger,  come  with  me," 
and  taking  the  pilgrim  a  little  distance,  he  pointed  him  to  the  magnificent  pile, 
and  said,  "  That  is  our  cathedral,  sir."  We  are  always  being  tempted  to  pause 
at  some  miserable  shanty  or  other  as  if  it  were  the  final  shrine  of  God.  We  look 
at  our  nation  as  if  it  were  about  the  embodiment  of  ultimate  civilisation.  We 
look  at  our  Church  as  if  it  were  the  perfected  Church  of  God.  But  the  Spirit 
is  ever  showing  us  beyond  all  the  poor  present  an  idea  home,  Church,  nation, 
an  ideal  full  of  righteousness.    {Ibid.) 


chat,  xxx.]  ISAIAH.  607 

Ver.  29.  Ye  shall  have  a  song.  — Communion  memories : — These  Jewish 
wayfarers  returned  to  their  several  homes  to  resume  their  usual  occupations. 
So  it  is  with  us.  After  the  most  sacred  festal  and  sacramental  seasons,  the  world's 
business  and  cares  necessarily  reassert  their  claims.  But,  would  these  old  Jewish 
worshippers  in  casting  off  their  holiday  attire,  cast  off  also  their  holiday  and 
festive  spirit?  In  the  midst  of  the  coarse  contacts  of  daily  exi-tence,  would  the 
recollections  of  the  Jerusalem  festival  no  longer  linger  in  their  memories  ?  Nay, 
rather,  w  uld  not  these  songs  of  Sion  still  haunt  their  ears  and  hang  upon  their 
lips  ? — would  not  the  shepherd  be  heard  chanting  them  in  the  midst  of  his  fleecy 
charge  by  green  pastures  and  still  waters  ? — would  not  the  fisherman  warble 
them  in  his  night-watch  on  the  lake  ?  and  the  sailor  as  he  bounded  over  the 
great  ^ea,  and  the  dim  mountains  of  his  fatherland  were  receding  from  view? — 
would  not  the  cottager,  as  he  reached  his  home  among  the  hills  of  Kedesh  or  on 
the  spurs  of  Hermon,  evening  after  evening,  in  returning  from  his  toil,  gather 
his  little  ones  by  his  knee,  and  rehearse  to  them  the  joyful  remembrances  of  the 
holy  season  ?  Be  it  ours,  while  we  leave  the  New  Testament  feast,  and  engage 
in  our  daily  avocations,  to  carry  the  hallowed  memories  of  it  along  with  us. 
(J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  The  song  of  God's  redeemed  : — I.  A  glorious  anticipa- 
tion. This  is  represented  under  two  figures.  1.  A  holy  service.  "  The  night 
when  a  holy  solemnity  is  kept."  (1)  Observe  the  time,  the  "  night."  It  is  not 
until  the  day  of  life  is  past  and  the  turmoil  of  earth  is  done,  that  the  great 
and  solemn  assembly  shall  be  convened.  (2)  Observe  the  character,  "holy." 
Impurity  is  done  away.  There  shall  nothing  enter  which  can  pollute  or  mar 
or  injure.  (3)  Observe  the  proceedings,  "  a  solemnity."  Our  meetings  with  God 
lack  proper  solemnity.  But  how  great  and  solemn  will  be  the  eternal  service  ! 
2.  A  joyous  meeting.  "  As  when  one  goeth  forth  with  a  pipe  to  come  to  the 
mountain  of  the  Lord."  Here  are  subjects  going  forth  to  meet  their  King,  who 
is  good  and  great.  Here  are  friends  going  forth  to  meet  their  Brother,  whom 
they  have  long  desired  to  embrace.  Here  are  guests  going  forth  to  the  banquet 
of  their  Beloved.  II.  A  suitable  state  of  mind.  "  Ye  shall  have  a  song  and 
gladness  of  heart."  1.  Ye  shall  have  a  song.  There  are  two  things  involved  in 
this.  (1)  There  is  a  subject  to  sing  of.  "  He  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth." 
(2)  There  shall  be  a  disposition  to  sing.  The  redeemed  soul  will  be  filled  with 
praise.  2.  Ye  shall  have  gladness  of  heart.  It  will  be  caused  by — ( 1 )  The  presence 
of  God.  (2)  Happy  surroundings.  (3)  Blessed  re-unions.  III.  A  present 
encouragement.  This  future  promise  may  be  now  realised  by  faith.  And 
what  a  different  aspect  will  this  give  to  the  present  life  !  We  may  not  sing  the 
full  chorus  of  the  songs  of  Heaven,  but  we  can  hear  the  echo.  We  cannot  see 
our  Lord,  but  we  can  feel  His  arms  and  hear  His  voice.  IV.  A  desirable  con- 
dition. The  text  affords  a  most  urgent  stimulus  to  our  present  life.  It  speaks 
of  a  song  which  the  people  of  God  will  be  enabled  to  sing  with  confidence  when 
their  Lord's  judgments  are  abroad.  Let  us  endeavour  to  realise  the  confidence, 
the  peace,  the  happiness  of  that  future  time.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  33.  For  Tophet  is  ordained  of  old. — The  annihilation  of  the  Assyrian 
power  is  graphically  set  forth  as  one  great  funeral  obsequy,  such  as  were  well 
known  among  Eastern  nations.  The  Divine  command  prepares  the  Tophet  or 
pyre ;  and  in  its  flames  all  the  glory  of  Assyria  shall  consume  away.  What  had 
been  prepared  by  human  wisdom  for  the  idolatrous  worship  of  Moloch,  shall  now 
by  Divine  decree  be  used  for  Assyria's  destruction :  her  king  shall  be  the  great 
victim.  (Buchanan  Blake,  B.D.)  The  destruction  of  Assyria  in  Tophet : — 
The  description  is,  of  course,  figurative ;  and  the  details,  as  is  often  the  case  in 
prophecy,  are  not  to  be  understood  literally ;  they  merely  constitute  the  drapery 
in  which  the  prophet  clothes  his  idea.  No  such  scene  as  is  here  described  was 
ever  actually  enacted ;  Sennacherib,  in  point  of  fact,  perished  twenty  years  after 
his  invasion  of  Judah,  in  his  own  land  being  assassinated  by  his  own  sons  (chap, 
xxxvii.  38).  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  wicked  man  warned : — I.  The 
first  doctrine  that  we  have  is — that  there  is  a  hell.  1.  Justice  requires  it. 
If  a  man  sins,  doth  not  justice  require  that  he  should  be  punished  ?  2.  But  more 
than  this,  doth  not  Divine  benevolence  require  it  ?  Would  it  be  benevolent  in 
any  man  to  propose  to  take  away  our  police,  to  pull  down  our  gaols,  to  abolish 
our  penal  settlements,  and  t  stop  for  ever  all  imprisonment  and  punishments 
for  sin  ?  It  might  appear  to  be  liberal  and  charitable,  but  the  fate  of  the  rest  of 
the  community  would  be  so  direful  that  verily  we  might  say,  "  Build  up  the  gaola 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

once  more  !  Let  it  be  seen  that  sin  cannot  go  unpunished  here,  and  that  the  ruler 
beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain !  "  3.  We  ask,  If  there  were  no  hell  for  the  wicked, 
where  are  they  to  be  put  to  T  The  answer  is,  "  Why,  let  them  all  go  to  Heaven." 
But  have  you  never  heard  me  expose  the  absurdity  of  the  idea  of  a  wicked  man 
being  carried  to  Heaven  as  he  is  t  4.  0  sinner  1  why  need  I  argue  that  "  Tophet  is 
ordained  of  old  "J  Is  there  not  something  within  thyself  which  tells  thee  that 
there  is  such  a  place  T  5.  How  is  it  that  so  many  people  in  the  world  are  always 
laughing  at  the  idea  of  hell  ?  I  will  tell  you.  The  worse  men  are,  the  less  they 
like  hell  Scorning  is  sweet  to  the  mouth,  but  it  is  bitter  afterwards.  IL  The 
size  of  this  place.  It  is  "  deep  and  large."  We  do  delight  in  the  thought  that 
Heaven  is  great  and  large ;  that  there  will  be  more  saved  than  there  will  be  lost. 
But  this  is  a  sad  thought  to  us — that  hell  is  "  deep  and  large."  Persons  siy  that 
"  if  the  heathen  lives  up  to  his  light  and  knowledge,  will  he  not  be  saved  by  the 
blood  of  Christ  T  "  The  heathen  does  not  live  up  to  his  light  and  knowledge,  and, 
therefore,  it  is  an  assumption  that  is  not  correct.  Tophet  is  deep  and  large. 
There  is  room  for  you  great  sinners,  room  for  you  rich  sinners,  room  for  you  proud, 
stiff-necked  sinners,  room  for  the  whole  mass  of  sinners,  for  though  you  should 
join  in  hand,  yet  shall  not  the  wicked  go  unpunished.  III.  The  fuel  of  it. 
"  The  pile  thereof  is  fire  and  much  wood."  The  wicked  are  their  own  woodmen  ; 
they  find  their  own  fuel  for  their  own  flame.  IV.  The  flame  of  it.  "  The 
breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a  stream  of  brimstone,  doth  kindle  it."  What  kind  of 
breath  will  that  be  T  1.  It  will  be  His  condemning  breath.  God  on  high  will 
breathe  out  sentences  of  condemnation  against  the  wicked  perpetually.  2.  His 
reproving  breath.  For  He  will  be  always  saying,  "  Son,  remember,  remember 
such  a  time  you  heard  a  sermon ;  such  a  time  you  sinned ;  such  a  time  your 
conscience  smote  you ;  such  a  time  in  your  life  you  attended  Sabbath  school ; 
such  a  time  you  cursed  Me  to  My  face ;  such  a  time  you  blasphemed  My  day ; 
such  a  time  you  spoke  ill  of  My  servants ;  such  a  time  you  did  this ;  such  a  time 
you  did  that."  3.  The  eternal  life  of  God  Himself  shall  kindle  the  flame.  The 
breath  of  God  shall  keep  the  flame  burning.    (C.  H.  Spwrgeon.) 


WX9  09  TO5»  t» 


friimilmSft"1  St"""^-Sp«r  Libi 


1    1012  01128  4934 


Date  Due 


Ap  1 


;■;  t  L'ii. 

i  urn     m 


G    ■■  ' 


3- 


MCULTJ 


up  1 1  $t 


rr  jw^Htiig? 


^Agg^ 


— — 


^^h*00 


MAY 2  8-S8 


^T 


---  '  "■>> 


*  - '  m 


