Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



BV 
772 

THE . U/1 S 

ISS'J 



GOSPEL MINISTRY : 

DUTY AND PRIYEEGE OF SUPPORTING IT. 



-y 



JAMES AV WYLIE, LL.D., 

▲UTHOIt or " THE PI PACT," "PILGBIMAOB FROM THE ALPS TO THE TIBER," ETC, 



4 
* • • >* 



" Quod Deo redditur, reddenti additor. " 

August. Epist. ad Armeit. bt Paul. 

*' Freely ye have receiyed, fireely give." 

Matthew x. 8. 



^econb CSbiticn. 



LONDON: 
JAMES NISBET AND CO., 21 BERNERS STREET. 

M.DCCC.LTn. 



bdimj^bob: 

PRIKTED BT BAlfX^nVB AND OOMPAlTr, 
PA^S^WOBK. 






TYf*^ %^' ^** 



TO 

THE CHEISTIAN PEOPLE, 

THE BEST MAINSTAY OF THE GOSPEL MINISTRY, 

THE FOLLOWING ESSAY, 

ON ONE OF THEIR HIGHEST PRIVILEGES 
AS WELL AS HOLIEST DUTIES, 
IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, 

BT THEIR OBEDIENT SERVANT, 

THE AUTHOR. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE. 



A OBOWINO conTiction, strengthened by careful ob6er7ation and minute 
inquiry^ that the obligations resting upon members of the various sections 
of the Church; in reference to upholding the ordinances of religion, are in 
general very improperly discharged, induced the promoters of the 

GLASGOW PEIZE ESSAYS 

to call attention to the subject, by inviting members of all Evangelical 
denominations throughout the three kingdoms to compete for two premiums 
of £150 and £75, to be awarded for the best papers on 

THE DUTY AND PEIVILEGE OF CHEISTIANS IN EEaARD TO 
THE SUPPOET OF THE OEDINANOES OF THE GOSPEL. 

The Adjudicators, who cordially accepted the appointment, were the Eev. 
J>r Bobert Buchanan, of the Free Church of Scotland ; Eev. Dr John Eadie, 
of the United Presbyterian Church; and the Rev. Dr William Symington, 
of the Reformed Presbyterian Church. The first of these gentlemen, after 
devoting some weeks to the work of examination, was necessitated to 
relinquish all mental labour, and remove to another climate for his health. 
The Eev. D. Patrick Fairbairn, Principal of the Free College, Glasgow, was 
solicited, and at once acquiesced in assuming his place. 

The number of Essays lodged for competition was eighty-one, of which 
fifty-nine were from various parts of Scotland, seventeen from England, and 
five from Ireland. Many of these papers contained highly valuable matter, 
tending to elucidate and enforce the subject, and bringing out a great 
variety of practical suggestions for the faithful discharge of this important 
Christian duty. It is hoped that a few more of them may yet be given to 
the public. 

The Adjudicators, after careful and patient investigation, were unanimous 
in awarding the two prizes respectively to the Rev. Dr J. A. Wylie, Edin- 



VI EXPLANATOEY NOTE. 

buigli, and tlie Bev. Josepli Parker^ Banbuiy; while they recommended a 
third one for publication, being the production of the Bev. Peter Bichard- 
son, Dailly. The following is the digest of their report : — 

" A considerable portion of the Essays are of inferior merit, but not a 
few are distinguished by solid thought, careful examination, and a full 
exhibition of scriptural principles on the subject of inquiry. Having 
respect to the leading object in view on the part of the promoters of the 
competition, the Adjudicators deemed it necessary to keep prominently before 
them, when estimating the comparative merits of the Essays, their relative 
adaptation to popular use ; on which account they were obliged to set aside 
several which displayed vigorous thinking, and contained much valuable 
matter, but which failed to present the subject in a manner fitted to interest 
and impress the popular mind. The Essay that appeared to all the Adjudi- 
cators to be the best for the purpose aimed at, turned out to be the pro- 
duction of the Bev. Dr Wylie, Edinburgh. It proved more difficult to 
decide upon the Essay that should be ^titled to the second prize ; but after 
conferring with each other, and comparing together the two or three Essays 
that seemed to come nearest the point, a unanimous finding was arrived at 
in &vour of number sixty- two, the production, as shewn by the accompany- 
ing letter, of the Bev. Joseph Parker, Banbury. Essay number seven 
approached, in some respects, so near to this, and appeared so well adapted 
for reaching a considerable dass of minds, that the Adjudicators are dis- 
posed to recommend also the publication of this Essay. 

/PATBICK PAIBBAIBN. 
Signed <JOHN EADIE. 

V WILLIAM SYMINGTON." 



CONTENTS. 



pias 

CHAFTEB I. GOD^S CHIEF END OUGHT TO BE MAM^S CHIEF END, 1 

„ II. WHAT IS god's WORK? 5 

„ ra. HOW MAT MAN CO-OPERATE WITH GOD ? . . 9 
„ IV. god's plan, and man's duty to CO-OPERATE, THE 

SAME UNDER BOTH ECONOMIES, .... 17 

r, V. THE PATRIARCHAL SCALE OF GIVING, ... 24 

„ VL THE LEVITICAL TITHES, . . . . ". 82 
„ VIL A FORTIORI ARGUMENT FROM THE LAW TO THE 

GOSPEL, 88 

„ Vni. NEW TESTAMENT PRINCIPLES — ORDINANCE OP 

CHRIST, 51 

„ IX. ARGUMENT FROM EQUITY, 60 

„ X. AMOUNT OF GIVING— TITHES, . . » . 75 

„ XI. THE MODE OF GIVING, 88 

„ Xn. SIN OF INADEQUATE GIVING, .... 96 
„ Xin. INADEQUATE GIVING DESECRATES THE MINIS- 
TERIAL OFFICE, ... V .. 102 
„ XTV. INADEQUATE GIVING DEGRADES THE MINISTER-r 

MINISTERIAL INCOMES, 108 

„ XV. INJURIOUS CONSEQUENCES OF INADEQUATE GIVING, 121 
„ XVI. BLESSEDNESS OF GIVING — ^BLESSEDNESS TO THE 

INDIVIDUAL, 127 

„ XVn. BLESSEDNESS TO THE FAMILY, . . . .133 

„ XVni. BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION, .... 188 

APPENDIX, 147 



THE 



GOSPEL MINISTEY. 



CHAPTER L 

ood's chief end ought to be man's chief end. 

We set out with what we take to be a fundamental axiom 
in the region of human duty, namely, that whatever God 
makes the chief and highest end of His existence, that ought 
man too to make his chief and highest end. As there is but 
one Supreme Mind in the universe, and that mind infinitely 
wise, infinitely just, and infinitely powerful, so there can be 
but one supreme plan in the universe, and that plan, like 
the mind of which it is the grand expression, must be in- 
finitely wise, infinitely just, and infinitely powerfuL All 
that exists must exist as part of this plan, and for the end 
of furthering its execution. Why othei-wise should it have 
existed at all ? Not, surely, that the All-wise Arranger 
should be thwarted at every step by the conflicting agejicies 
of his creatures ! No 1 its Maker meant that the universe, 
from the planet down to the flower, from the seraph down 
to the insect, should present the spectacle of one vast army 
marching as God leads, and contiibuting, each after his 
nature and according to his powers, to the execution of that 

A 



/ 



2 GOD*S CHIEF END OUGHT TO BE MAN'S CHIEF END. 

one and transcendently majestic design. Even reason ap- 
proves of this as the true idea of the -tiniverse. 

Revelation says the same thing, and says it yet more clearly. 
Man was made in the image of God. So says the Bible, and 
in saying so it decisively proclaims man's chief and highest 
end. Why should he have been made in God*s image, ^.e., 
with intellectual and moral powers akin to those of God, if 
he was not to be employed in the work of God ? We argue 
the end of anything from its obvious design. Never were 
there clearer data on which to found an inference — God's 
image shining in moral glory on man's soul — ^and never was 
inference more irrefragably just than this, even that it was 
meant that there should be the most perfect, continual, and 
harmonious coincidence betwixt the plans and purposes of 
man on the earth and of God in the heavens; in other words, 
that one work should occupy both. 

In taking part with God in His work, man finds his high- 
est employment and his chief blessedness. 

He finds herein his highest employment. Is it not that 
which occupies God, and can it be other, therefore, than the 
highest — ^the noblest in itself, and the noblest as respects the 
issues to which it tends ? In this work God has concen- 
trated all that is lovely in mercy and illustrious in wisdom — 
all that is awful in justice and venerable in holiness — all 
that is sublime in goodness and impressive in power ; in it, 
in short, he has incarnated the inefiable glories and exhaust- 
less riches of the Godhead. Equally exalted is it as regaixis 
its issues. To what does it tend ? It tends to an end that 
is inconceivably and inexpressibly sublime, even the highest 
glory of the highest Being, and the largest happiness of all 
beings. 

To take part in this work ennobles man. As is the work, 
so is the workman. If it is base, he is base; if it is noble, 
he is noble. Not that which entereth into a man, but that 



god's chief end ought to be man's chiet end. 3 

■wMcli proceedeth out of him — ^the purposes of his soul, the 
acts of his life — lower or exalt, vilify or ennoble him. But 
this is the highest work, and he who is occupied in it is 
therefore the highest being. He tastes the power, the 
wisdom, the beneficence of God. 

In taking part with God in His work, man finds, too, his 
chief blessedness. 

He finds his chief blessedness herein, because this work, 
and this work alone, afibrds scope for the powers of his 
nature. Man was made in the image of God, and it is here 
alone that the faculties in which that image consists can find 
their proper field of exertion and of pleasure. To act is to 
live j and according to the character of our acts, so will be 
the complexion of our lives — happiness if in accordance with 
our nature, misery if in violation of it. When we act with 
God, then only do we act in accordance with our nature in 
its originally sound and healthy state, and then only do we 
find scope for the heaven-implanted aspiration of our bosoms, 
which is to be like God. Man's fall was through a right 
aspiration perverted. He sought to be as God — a noble 
aim, but, through the temptation of the devil, attempted to 
be realised in a wrong way. But what man impiously sought 
for by violating the will of God, he may lawfully aspire to 
by becoming a worker with Him. He can gain the high end 
of his being only by identifying himself, in purpose and in 
action, with God. 

Here, in a word, man enjoys an infallible guarantee that 
what he labours to accomplish shall, beyond all peradventure, 
be crowned with success. Wrong he cannot be, for he follows 
in God's footsteps. His work bears the stamp of infinite and 
unerring rectitude. And to whatever God imparts his sanc- 
tion, to that He will vouchsafe His blessing. That cause 
shall infallibly prosper. The handwriting of doom is on all 
that is opposed to God. All plans that are contrary to His 



4 god's chief end ought to be man's chief end. 

plan — ^however profound the wisdom with whidi they were 
contrived — however great the numbers or vast the power 
by which they are supported — ^however dazzling the success 
with which for a while they may be attended — are destined, 
to but one result^ and that is annihilation. God hath said, 
it, and neither man's pride nor power, neither man's wisdom, 
nor craft, can reverse God's irreversible decree. Those pro- 
jects, now so flourishing, which lift their top to the very 
heavens, and draw after them the wondering eyes of earth, 
shall soon be cut down, and wither as the grass; while around 
their grave shall stand their friends and supporters, casting 
dust upon their heads, and weeping and wailing, saying, 
Alas ! alas ! for the mighty schemes that have come to nought, 
and the high hopes that have set for ever in darkness. 

But no such end awaits the Christian's work. It shall 
live as sure as God lives. It is rooted in God's being, and 
shall be borne onwards in God's existence to endless durar 
tion. Feeble as the Christian is, he can regard himself as 
the ally of Omnipotence. And small as his work may ap- 
pear to be, and insignificant as it may be deemed by a world 
which neither understands its true character, nor is able to 
perceive its real grandeur, the Christian nevertheless can 
look along the line of coming ages and see his work opening 
out into the all-wise, the all-holy, and the all-glorious plan 
of God ; the complete and perfected realisation of which will 
bring to Him who devised it a revenue of endless praise, and 
to him who co-operated in it a revenue of endless blessedness. 

But the question remains, "What is the work of God? 



"WHAT IS GOP'S WOBK ? 5 



CHAPTER IL 

WHAT IS god's WORkI 

The ^ork of God must be worthy of God ; but in order 
that it may be so, it must be the exhibition of God. God 
is the most excellent of beings. His attributes are supremely 
and infinitely good; and if God would exhibit to the uni- 
verse the noblest being in the noblest way, He must exhibit 
himself. And such, accordingly, has been His work from 
the beginning, even the manifestation of himself. That 
manifestation has consisted of successive epochs, each epoch 
permitting the display of a greater number of the Divine 
attributes than that which went before it, and so going on, 
step by step, to the full and perfected manifestation of God. 

First came creation, a wondrous, a sublime spectacle ! In 
extent how illimitable! How countless the number of its 
bodies ! how vast their bulk ! how majestic their movements ! 
how harmonious their action! how exact and perfect the 
laws by which they are regulated! and how boundlessly 
beneficent their results! Here is God revealed — ^revealed 
as power, order, beauty. But this is not the full Deity : it 
is only part of God. It is but the lower circle of his attri- 
butes. The more illustrious perfections of the Divine 
character are yet unrevealed. 

Next comes man; and with man there breaks on the 
universe a new and more glorious light. Perfections undis- 
covered tUl now — perfections which creation, whatever 
insight it gave into God's power and wisdom, was not fitted 



6 WHAT IS god's work ? 

to reveal — ^found in man a medium of exhibition. The first 
epoch, creation to wit, had revealed the physical attributes 
of God; the second, man, namely, had revealed his moral 
perfections. Man stood forth as the image of Grod, which is 
knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness. The revelation 
had been advanced, still it was not perfected. There were 
depths in the Infinite Essence which had not yet been ex- 
plored — attributes in the Divine character which had found 
hitherto no vent in the way of outwai'd manifestation. God 
had not yet fully developed either himself or his plan. 
Another step was needed. 

Next came redemption. That is emphatically the MAiar- 
FESTATiON of God ; and for this reason, that it is the mani- 
festation of all God. There remains behind, awaiting some 
subsequent epoch of manifestation, no new order of attri- 
butes. That which could not struggle through nature, be- 
cause the medium was too opaque, that which could not find 
vent through man even, seeing his faculties were too narrow- 
to form the channel by which the whole of Divine excellence 
might flow forth, has found a perfect medium of display in 
the God-man and the redemption accomplished by Him. 
Thus, beginning with a revelation of himself as power, and 
going on to a revelation of himself as holiness, God has ended 
with a revelation of himself as love ; but in revealing his 
love, He has completed the circle of the Divine attributes, He 
has exhibited to the gaze of the universe the last and crown- 
ing excellency of the Godhead. No farther can even God go : 
and in the plan that stands connected with that revelation, 
and which forms, in fact, its channel, the plan of redemption 
to wit, God has reached obviously what emphatically is His 
one and great work, because it is a work which yields a display 
and calls for the exercise of all the attributes of His nature. 

This, then, is the work of God, even the manifestation of 
His glory through the work of redemption— the restoration 



WHAT IS god's work 1 7 

of man to that purity of nature and that felicity and glory of 
state from which he fell by sin. In this work God specially 
invites man to take part. 

Let us consider, first of all, how supremely the mind of 
God is set upon this plan, and how entirely He has subor- 
dinated all else that He has done to its advancement. For 
this He created the world : for this He sent prophets forth 
to make known His will to the fathers : for this He arranged 
a train of stupendous providences — now of terror, now of 
mercy : for this He instituted a system of worship, symbolic 
outwardly, yet illuminated within by glorious truths, which, 
like bright lamps, burned all through the ages : for this He 
permitted kingdoms to arise, legislation to flourish, and the 
arts to be cultivated : for this, when the fulness of the time 
was come. He sent forth His Son — God was manifest in 
flesh. Nor did the work stop here. The culminating point 
of one dispensation has ever become the starting-point of 
another. The law carried down this scheme so far, and then 
handed it over to the gospel : when Aaron and his sons re- 
tired from the scene, Christ and his apostles appeared upon 
it. The temple and its sacrifices vanished, but only to let 
the Cross be seen. The type set in the surpassing splendour 
of the antitype. Thus the mighty plan has gone on : there 
has been no pause. It is seen rising from the past eternity, 
and is beheld passing on to the coming one. It has appeared 
at times to die, but its apparent death has been a real resur- 
rection. As the soul drops this poor mortal body in the 
dust, that it may emerge on a higher state of existence, so 
this glorious plan has changed the form of its dispensation 
only that it might enshrine itself in one more spiritual and 
glorious. By sublime and majestic footsteps has it been 
advancing to its predestined issue in God's fully manifested 
glory and man's completed happiness. The world's redemp- 
tion was the goal, even when the world's destruction was 



8 WHAT IS god's work 1 

the way. There is nothing so distant in time or so remote 
in space as not to bear on this plan. God never had a pur- 
pose in His mind or did a deed of His hand which did not 
help it onwards. Go round the entire circle of providences, 
examine one by one the judgments, the wars, the revolutions, 
the arts which compose the history of mankind, you can trace 
their several lines of influence, like the radii of a circle, 
all meeting in the cross. To set up that cross, and by that 
cross to open to man the portals of eternal blessedness, has 
been the end of all that God has done ; and from the moment 
that He formed that purpose (though all His purposes are, 
like himself, eternal), not an agency has been wasted, nor a 
moment lost, in carrying it into efiect. What a combination 
of forces ! what a concentration of energies ! what a manifes- 
tation of wisdom and power ! what a revelation of love ! 

Is it thus that God prosecutes this glorious scheme ? then 
what a lesson to man ! Shall he stand idly by while all else 
in the universe is hastening to bring aid — the earth becom- 
ing the stage of this mighty scheme — the sun meting out the 
days and years of its accomplishment — and the angels of 
heaven rejoicing to wing their flight to our distant world on 
errands connected with it 1 Shall man, for whom this plan 
was devised, and to whom it brings restoration to God's 
favour and the enjoyment of endless happiness, be the only 
being who is unconcerned and inactive ? While the princi- 
palities and powers of heaven watch its progress with an in- 
terest that grows continually as they see it passing on, stage 
by stage, to its full accomplishment, shall man stand unmoved, 
finding nothing here to awaken his rapture, nothing to arouse 
his diligence? It cannot be. Let him summon all his 
energies; let him consecrate all his powers; and, placing 
himself at the head of creation, let him become the leader of 
all creatures in the glorious work of co-operating with God in 
the execution of his purposes of mercy towards a fallen world. 



HOW MAY MAIT CO-OPERATE WITH GOD | 



CHAPTETt III. 

HOW MAY MAN CO-OPEBATE WITH GOD ? 

But the qnestion suggests itself — In what way and to what 
extent does God invite man to take part with himself in this 
enterprise of love 1 What part of the work is it that is 
assigned to man ? 

Is it the work of expiation ? Mnst man first atone for 
his sin, and then be admitted into God's favour, and ulti- 
mately, into heaven 1 Blessed be God, it is not this. Had it 
been so, this work would have stopped as soon as it was com- 
menced. To have called man to a work of this sort would 
have been to sport with his helplessness, and, instead of miti- 
gating, would have aggravated the miseries of his condition, 
by tantalising him with the prospect of a salvation which he 
could never possibly enjoy. God does not set on foot futile 
schemes, or hang out before the eyes of men blessings that 
are beyond their reach. That part of the work which man 
cotdd not do God has done. On the cross a full expiation 
was made ; and in the gospel a full salvation is offered — a 
righteousness to justify man, and a Holy Spiiit to sanctify 
and fit him for God's blessed and eternal presence. The 
whole of that moral and spiritual agency which is requisite 
to eflfect man's recovery has been created by God. Here 
man can take no part. If he attempts to co-operate here, he 
but perverts and defeats the whole scheme. 

But along with the spiritual and moral agency, God has 



10 HOW MAT MAN CO-OPERATE WITH GOD 1 

ordained a material and Imman instrumentality. It is here 
tliat man's co-operating aid comes in. The expiation God 
has made — ^the fact of the expiation God has revealed ; it is 
by that truth in the hands of the Spirit, applied to the soul^ 
that man is regenerated and saved. But in order that the 
work of redemption may go on, and reach its objects, it is 
essential that the knowledge of this tiidh — ^the doctrine oi 
the expiation, to wit — ^be maintained among men, and be 
diffused throughout the earth. " How shall they believe on 
him of whom they have not heard 1 and how shall they hear 
without a preacher r* 

So stands the case : the blessing is God's — ^the instrumen- 
tality is man's. A Divine hand has reached down redemp- 
tion from heaven, but men must be its carriers over the 
earth. And is it too much that man should bestow a little 
labour on that which occasioned to God infinite cost 1 Has 
the Son of God come from heaven to die; and shall man 
begrudge a small expenditure of his wealth, a little sacrifice 
of his ease, or life itself even, that he may convey to his 
fellow-men that " name" in which alone there is salvation ? 
Labour and sacrifice ! did we say ? — ^there is, in acting thus, 
a positive and mighty blessing. The joy of diffusing this 
redemption is a material part of the happiness ordained to 
spring from it. To monopolise or hoard its blessings the Chris- 
tian has neither motive nor wish. In beholding, through 
his humble instrumentality, the perishing rescued and the 
miserable made happy, he finds the highest gratification of 
the unselfish and generous sympathies of his new nature. 
The happiness he imparts to others comes back upon himsel£ 

In this we behold a grand analogical proof of the divinity 
of the gospel. That man's co-operation should be necessary 
in order that the gospel may reach its end, is just what 
we would expect from observing the procedure of God in 
other departments of His creation. The law of His working 



HOW MAY MAN CO-OPEBATE WITH GOD ? H 

is this — to do what He, and He alone, can do, and to 
leave the rest to man, that, by aflfording scope for his acti- 
vities. He may provide for his enjoyment. There is not a 
function in nature, there is not an institution in society, in 
which man's co-operation is not necessary; and why should 
that co-operation be dispensed with in grace 1 The universe 
was created without man, for that work was beyond his 
power. The great laws on which its continuance depends 
are equally independent of man, and for the same reason. 
His will could neither increase nor diminish the force of 
gravity. The stars roll on, the sun shines, and the tides 
flow, without his intervention. The vitalities of the universe 
are of God, but not so its instrumentalities : man must guide 
the living forces of nature to their end. The eai-th will not 
of its own accord bring forth harvests : man must plough and 
sow it, that it may feed him, God has implanted in its 
bosom the powers of vegetation. He has created " the herb 
yielding seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind;" 
but the labour of man must co-operate with the powers of 
the earth. Even Paradise had to be dressed; and though 
the earth were all to become as fair and fertile as the 
primeval abode, the neglect of a single generation would 
suffice to throw it back into the inhospitable waste. 

And BO, too, in social life. Grod has sown in the bosom 
of society the seeds of government, of science, and of art, 
but man must develop and apply them. Law and govern- 
ment come not of themselves, though God has clearly shewn 
that He intended that man should live under them, by 
planting in his bosom those ideas of right and of order 
in which they have their origin: they are the hard- won 
fruits of the statesman's wisdom and the legislator's toiL 
Not a single •machine, not even the simplest, has Grod con- 
structed. But he has bequeathed to man the six elementaiy 
mechanic powers, and left him to discover for himself the 



12 HOW MAT MAN CO-OPERATE WITH GOD 1 

method of constructing machines. And that method man 
has discovered. He takes the simple powers, the lever, the 
screw, the piQley; he skilfully combines them, and evolves 
such accumulations of mechanic power as give him the com- 
plete sovereignty of matter. The laws of taste, too, God has 
ordained; but it is the chisel of the architect and the pencil 
of the artist that give embodiment to these laws in the noble 
temple and the magnificent picture. And what man educes 
by his genius and achieves by his labour, he must retain by 
his diligence ; otherwise, the force of anarchy will soon over- 
whelm the rule of law, and the night of barbarism will 
speedily extinguish the day of knowledge and art. Thus, in. 
every department, God says to man, " Come and work along 
with me. I ordain that you shall enjoy only by shewing 
that you are able to appreciate, and willing to preserve, the 
blessings which I have placed within your reach." 

Following the settled order of His working, God has com- 
municated His gospel to man, but has left to man himself 
the preservation and transmission of it from one age to 
another, and from one country of the world to another. By 
human feet must it be carried over the earth; by human 
tongues must it be preached unto the nations. And " there 
is no discharge in that war." Every man is bound to be a 
minister and missionary himself, or to assist, in his sphere, 
and according to his ability, those who are. The one 
supreme end of man the individual, the one supreme end of 
man the race, is to spread abroad God's message of love, 
implying thereby the erection and support of the whole 
of that machinery by which alone it is possible to do 
this, namely, churches, ministers, colleges, schools, books, 
at home; and missionaries and mission-buildings, Bibles, 
tracts, abroad. The highest form of dedicatioji here is pe?-- 
sonal dedication. "I give myself," says the man whose 
heart God has moved, and to whom, in token of having 



HOW MAY MAN CO-OPERATE WITH GOD 1 13 

called him, He has given the requisite gifts. God needs 
men to tell sinners that He "so loved the world that He 
gave His only-begotten Son, * that whosoever believeth on 
Him might not perish, but might have everlasting life." I 
will be a carrier of the tidings. The world is perishing, and 
shall I sit still when this message would save it? No; I 
consecrate myself; I empty my hands of worldly labours, 
my heart of worldly cares, my mind of worldly aspirations, 
that so, being emptied of these, I may be the more com- 
pletely filled with the gifts and. graces of my great office as 
God's ambassador. Labour comes and says, I must enlist 
myself in this great service. I cannot speak; but these 
roughened hands can plough, can dig, can teach the earth to 
bring forth, and God's minister shall be fed. Honest Handi- 
craft comes and says. There is room for me, too, here. The 
eloquence of the tongue I cannot give, but the sweat of the 
brow and the cunning of the hand I can. I shall ply the 
loom, and the forge, and the house of God shall be built. 
Commerce comes and says, I, too, must have a share in this 
work. I will visit the remotest shores; I will traffic with 
the rudest tribes; I will pioneer the missionary's way; and 
gathering the riches of all the earth, I will bring them and 
consecrate them as holiness unto the Lord. If I rob the 
nations, it is that I may enrich them. The wool of Thibet, 
the spices of India, the cereals of Kussia and of Canada, the 
ivory of Ethiopia, the gold of Australia shall all return in a 
form that will enrich these nations a hundred times more 
than they ever could have done in any other. Science comes 
and says, I cannot stand aloof; I am needed here. It is 
not mine to enter the sacred desk; but I can do much 
towards certifying the truth of the message delivered from 
that desk. I can travel backwards, lamp in hand, into the 
past, or downwards into the bowels of the earth, and bring 
up from the darkness, where they have long lain hidden 



14 HOW MAY MAN CO-OPERATE WITH GOD ? 

from man's eye, and even unsuspected by him, those majes- 
tic proofs of the Bible's truth, which shew with what pro- 
found attention the ear ought to listen to its message, and 
with what profound repose the heart ought to rest upon it. 
I, too, says Learning, must bear my part in this great work. 
I will search the chronicles of the olden time, and extract 
from their dim characters and their moth-eaten pages a 
light which shall irradiate the "Word of God. The graven 
column, which rises amid the sands of Lybia, with the 
hoar of four thousand years jipon it, shall be taught to speak 
in attestation of the Scriptures, Voices from the mounds 
of Assyria and from the tombs of Egypt shall cry, " All flesh, 
is grass, .... but the word of the Lord endureth for ever." 
I will take the rude sounds of barbarous tribes; I will frame 
alphabets from them; I will mould them into grammars, 
and make them fitting vehicles for God's message of love) 
and the Indian under his banana, the Red Man in his wig- 
wam, the Kaffir in hi^ kloof, and the Esquimaux in his hut 
shall read, each in his own tongue, the wonderful works of 
Grod. There is need of me, too, here, says Art. I have skill 
for the minutest, strength for the greatest labours required 
in connexion with this work. I can mould types, I can set 
a thousand printing presses in motion, and multiply in mil- 
lions of copies the Word of God. I will throw open its page 
to every eye under heaven. I will go to the quarry and 
hew great stones, and build sanctuaries in which that Word 
may be preached. I will go to the mountain, and the 
monarchs of the forest shall fall beneath the axe, the earth 
shall be spanned with railroads, the ocean whitened with 
ships, and the tidings of redeeming love shall be borne afar, 
even to the very ends of the earth. Even War proffers its 
services — and there are many things that war only can do 
— ^here is work which a more gentle and refined instru- 
mentality would be totally unable to accomplish in connexion 



HOW MAY MAN CXM)PERATE WITH GOD ? 15 

with the spread of the gospel. War can break up the torpor 
whicli may sit for ages, in times of peace, upon the energies 
of a people. It can mingle races and ideas. It can sweep 
away with its rude blast, like so many cobwebs, the im- 
memorial usages, the stereotyped opinions, the national 
antipathies which gather and thicken in the course of ages 
till they darken the light, and seal up whole races and 
empires in ignorance and barbarism. In a word, though 
not its province to carry the gospel itself, war can make wide 
gaps in the walls of despotism and superstition by which the 
truth may enter. 

Such is the holy concert that ought to prevail amongst all 
creatures. They ought to know no other end of existence 
as a supreme and ultimate one, and no other object of labour 
as a last and highest one, save this. Towards this end Grod 
worketh hitherto, and so ought man. Not that men are to 
leave their posts. Their callings are the appointment of 
God, and they must therein abide. Were all to become 
preachers of the gospel, how could Bibles be printed ? how 
oould churches be built ? how could missionaries be carried 
over the earth ? and how could they be supported in their 
several spheres of labour ? It is the will of God that huma- 
nity should continue as it is, in the unremitting use of 
all its faculties and functions, yet so directing them as that 
all shall bear now on one supreme end, .and all issue at last 
in one supreme result, even the subjugation of the whole 
earth to the sway of the Messiah. All, like the faces of the 
cherubim, are to be turned towards this glorious object. 
The minister ought to preach that the world may be con- 
verted, and the peasant ought to plough that the world may 
be converted. The world's conversion ought to animate the 
merchant in his counting-room and the artisan in his work- 
shop, the statesman in the senate and the student in his 
closet, the artist in his studio and the soldier in the camjj. 




16 HOW MAY MAN CO-OPERATE WITH GOD 1 

To this crowning object all the aims and aspirations of men, 
all the labours and purposes of earth, ought continually and 
unitedly to tend. And tending towards this object, they 
tend unerringly and infallibly towards success. It is not 
possible that they should miss of their aim. Nations go to 
their grave, empires flourish and fade, puissant kings and 
renowned conquerors paSs from off the stage, leaving but 
evanescent traces behind ; but the labours and the aspira- 
tions of the Church in one age and country, mingling -with 
those of other ages and countries, grow continually in 
strength, and, allying themselves with the purposes of the 
Eternal Mind, are borne onward, in the current of the Di- 
vine plans, towards their final goal in the world's evange- 
lisation. " As truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled 
with the glory of the Lord." 

Blessed be God, who has called man to be a fellow- worker 
with himself in this great matter. He admitted him to no 
partnership in creating the world, but in the yet more 
blessed and glorious work of regenerating it, He invites him 
to take part. How illustrious the honour ! As God sent 
the gospel to the race, so man is called to send it to his 
fellow-man. In doing so he is blessed — he tastes the very 
blessedness of God. In extending the gospel, he exhibits 
himself as animated by the same beneficent and compas- 
sionate nature with that in which the gospel originated. He 
shews what the gospel is, and what it can make man ; and 
before he has adduced a single proof of its divinity, he has 
presented the heathen with the strongest of all evidences of 
its excellence in the self-sacrificing and loving spirit under 
which he acts when he comea to preach it to them. 



t 

d' 



}t 

to 

id 

i 



jd's plan, and man's duty to co-operate, etc 17 



CHAPTER IV. 

god's plan, and man's dutt to co-operate, the same 

under both economies. 



In paradise were laid the foundations of both Church and 
State. In that holy clime, and for the benefit of a jet un- 
&llen race, were the seeds of both ecclesiastical and civil 
society deposited. In the institution of the Sabbath we 
behold the germ of the Church, and in the institution of 
marriage we behold the germ of the State ; for out of that 
relation grow all those other relations that subsist amongst 
men, from the parental up to the patriarchal and kingly. 
These two mighty streams, which have descended through 
all the ages of the world, and have borne on their bosom so 
many blessings to the race, we can thus trace to their primal 
sources in the territory of Eden. They had gone forth, even 
in that blessed age, to water the earth, which without them 
would have been as a wilderness. August and venerable in 
their origin, and yet more so in their issue, to the eye of 
&ith, which, looking back, can see them flowing forth &om 
one paradise, and, looking forward, can see them ending in 
another — even a millennium of holy rest on earth, and an 
eternity of perfect purity and felicity in heaven. 

It is of tliejl7'st only that we are to speak. In the Sabbath 
we have, as we have said, the Church in embryo, as in mar- 
riage we have the State in embryo. The Sabbath was the 
first positive revelation of the duty of worship ; it was a 

B 



^ I 



18 god's plan, and man's duty to co-operate, 

revelation, not in the form of precept, but in the form of 
institution. 

The Sabbath taught man that his time was not all his 
own : a seventh of it belonged to his Maker, and was to be 
j spent in His special and formal service. Labour was to 
cease : not a tree was to be pruned, not a flower was to be 
dressed, that day in paradise ; and, relieved from his wonted 
toil, light or heavy as might be, man was to pass the time in 
spiritual communings with his Maker, and in such works of 
beneficence or acts of devotion as God might appoint. 
I The Sabbath taught man that his substance was not all 
/ his own. A part of it (it does not appear that he was as yet 
taught what part) was due to Grod, and was to be formally 
oflfered to him. This was necessarily implied in the appoint- 
ment of visible worship; for to outward and visible worship 
two things are required — ^first, time in which to perform it, 
and, second, an outward act or material oflering. For the 
first of these, provision was made in the special appointment 
of the seventh day; and, for the second, instructions were 
given, we know for certain, immediately after the fall, and 
most probably even in paradise ; for it is not easy to account 
for Cain's obstinate adherence to his offering of fruits, unless 
on the supposition that he knew and clung to it as the para- 
disaical form of worship. Worship, it is true, is a spiritual 
thing; in vain the victim dies if the homage of the heart is 
withheld; still, a mere spiritual and invisible worship could 
not serve as a public token of man's submission and of God's 
supremacy. The individual worshipper might be bene- 
fitted by a worship purely and exclusively spiritual; his 
homage would be expressed, and the feelings of his soul 
exercised, though not a word should be spoken or an act 
done; but worship is not meant for the profit of only the 
man who offers it — it is meant for that of others also. Their 
devotion will be inflamed by his. And, even as regards the 



THE SAKE UNDER BOTH ECOKOMIES. 19' 

individual worshipper, he will not derive all the benefit he is 
capable of deriving from worship, unless there is conjoined 
•with it some visible sign. We are creatures of sense; we 
natiu»Uy seek to express our feelings through sensible signs, 
and these signs again react upon our feelings, and help to 
intensify and elevate them. Worship, therefore, like the 
worshipper, must have a body. Love is the soul of worship, 
bat it must be enshrined in material acts and offerings. 
Such, doubtless, there were in paradise, where not only from 
the heart pure love, from the lips holy songs, but from the 
hands of unfallen man, in t.oken of homage, were presented 
the choicest fruits which the earth yielded. 

Outside the walls of Eden the worship continued, but its 
form was changed Sin had entered, and the worshipper 
Btood differently related to Grod. Formerly man needed 
only to offer thanks for mercies received, and to do so it 
vaa enough to present to God part of what God had given 
him — ^his time and his substance, which last consisted as yet 
solely of the flowers and fruits of paradise. But now his 
offering fulfilled not its end — ^was not worship at all — ^unless 
it expressed, either as a facfc accomplished, or a fact to be 
accomplished, expiation for sin done. Fruits which the 
earth pours forth and the sun ripens, adequate and becoming 
in the hands of unfallen man, were no longer adequate and 
becoming in the hands of fallen and guilty man. The only 
offering that became him now was hloody wherein is the life, 
life had been forfeited, and with life only could the forfeiture 
be redeemed. 

Not that an altar blazing with fire, and streaming in 
blood, is in itself a more acceptable sight to God than one 
breathing the fragrance of the field. " Will I eat thte flesh 
of bulls, or drink the blood of goats 1 " said God, when He 
would rebuke this notion. It was not His pleasure, but the 
^Borshippet^s profit that waa sought hereby. God meant the 



20 GOD'S PLAN, A2ffD MAN's DUTY TO CO-OPERATE, 

worship, even the sacrificial and ceremonial worship of the 
age, to be a channel of instruction ; and He so framed the 
worship as to convey, in the clearest, fullest, and most im- 
pressive manner then possible, those truths which it was 
necessary man should know in order to salvation. The in- 
stitution of sacrifice was a revelation in hieroglyph of the 
atonement ; it was a sermon in symbol on " Christ cruci- 
fied " — ^an announcement from the beginning of the cardinal 
doctrine of salvation through mcarious suffering, and there- 
fore oifree salvation. 

This institution — sacrifice, namely — ^was the life of the 
world. It was the one door of hope that opened to man's eye 
after the catastrophe of the fall. In the first sacrifice was 
seen the whole of the gospel in embryo, the germ out of 
which was to grow that great system of spiritual truth, and 
that gi'eat organisation of spiritual and moral agencies, which, 
like a mighty lever, were destined to lift the world up to the 
position from which it had fallen, and ultimately to a posi- 
tion greatly higher. All depended on this institution ; and 
hence the pains God was at to plant, to nurture, and to ex- 
pand it ; and hence the numerous and stringent injunctions 
He laid on man with reference to his duty in this matter. 
God's great work of manifesting himself had now, in fiict, 
resolved itself into this one channel ; and by it did God ad- 
vance, with majestic steps, towards the final and glorious 
unfolding of himself in the gospel of Jesus Christ. Out of 
the various countries of the world He selected one whole 
country in which He might place this institute ; and out of 
the various nations of the earth He selected one whole 
nation who might be its guardians ; and in that nation he 
appointed temples, altars, offerings, priests, Levites, for its 
service, and inwove it, so to speak, with the whole political 
and social arrangements, the national and domestic obser- 
vances and manners of that nation, so that it could not 



THE SAME UNDER BOTH EOONOMIES. 21 

perish but with the nation itsel£ And further, seeing men 
then could but feebly perceive the gre&t truths "wrapt up in 
this institute, and but feebly feel the essential connexion 
of that institute with the world's future and final welfare, 
and were apt to form a correspondingly low estimate of the 
duty of supporting it, God was pleased to interpose, and by 
law prescribe the portion of his substance which each man 
was to give for its maintenance, that thus not only an ample 
but a sure provision might bo made, and there might be 
no risk of what would have been a tremendous evil to the 
world, even the fire going out upon His altars, or priests and 
Levites wanting to minister thereat. 

The coming of Christ has changed the form, not the essen- 
tials, of worship once more. The important end proposed in 
the appointment of the sacrificial worship of the Old Testa- 
ment, even the conveyance to man of those truths by which 
alone he can be saved, is one of the grand objects of worship 
stilL The revealing medium — the priest, the altar, the 
sacrifice — has been changed; but the revelation — ^the same 
in ite subjective matter as befor^is stiU going on. It is 
by this revelation of truth that God's glory in man's redemp- 
tion progresses, and there is as much room as ever here for 
man's co-operation. Under the old economy, man's co-ope- 
ration was directed chiefly to the conservation of truth: 
under the new, man's co-operation is directed chiefly to the 
difusion of truth. But if the substance of the Jew was 
demanded for the one object, how much more that of the 
Christian for the other ! If man's -labour and wealth were 
needed to conserve, how much more to diffvse! 

Let us think of the vastly wider space which the light is 
now required to fill ! It is not enough that it should irra- 
diate a country, it is a world that waits to be illuminated. 
Let us think of the new, the more flexible, and more power- 
ful instrumentalities that are now placed at the service of 



22 god's plan, and man's duty to co-operate, 

truth, and of which it is our duty to avail ourselves to the 
very uttermost: let us think also how much more clearly 
we can now see, than could the Old Testament saint, the 
intimate connexion betwixt the diffusion of the truth and 
the world's present welfare and eternal salvation, and we 
shall feel that we have no excuse for a feeble zeal or a 
stinted liberality: our exertions ought to expand as our 
opportunities increase. The measure of past ages is whoUy 
inapplicable to the present. What would have been a 
princely gift for a country would be but a beggarly donation 
for a world. Every day new doors are opening, every year 
the cry, "Come over and help us," is coming from some 
hitherto un visited region ; and as our sphere widens, so ought 
the scale of our givings and our sacrifices. We see, as we 
never saw it before, the greatness of the work. It is not to 
be wondered at if God's people, in the first dawn of their 
responsibilities, when the true mission of the gospel was but 
dimly perceived, and their own duties and privileges connected 
therewith but indistinctly and confusedly felt, kept them- 
selves within Uie prescribed measure of liberality. But to keep 
within that narrow circle now — ^to keep doling out the same 
measured liberality when all is altered — ^would argue a heart 
wofully dead to the noblest stirrings of the gospel, and a 
mind but iU fitted to take the high measure of its claima 
The Jew even would rise in judgment to condemn suck 
His offering was sufficient for the object, as that object was 
then understood. The boundary of Judea was his horizon; 
and, to his eye, all beyond was shut out by the middle wall 
of partition. But the Christian's horizon is the world. No 
middle wall of partition hides from his eye the perishing 
heathen, or intercepts their cry for help. He has no 
material temple, no carnal priesthood to transport, at great 
labour and cost, into heathen lands; the Bible and the 
missionary form the whole machineiy requisite for the con- 



THE SAME UNDER BOTH ECONOMIES. 23 

yersion of the world. When the means are so simple, and 
the necessities so great, his only inquiry should be, not what 
was the measure of past givings, but what ought to be the 
measure of mine ? It is not my own country only, though 
that first, but all the countries of the globe; it is not my 
own age only, but all the ages of time, that prefer demands 
upon ma In the midst of exigencies and claims like these, 
what is my duty? What ought to be my scale of effort and 
giving? This brings us full in front of our subject. 






24 THE PATRIABCHAL SCALE OF OIYIira 



CHAPTER Y. 

THE PATRIABCHAL SCALE OF GIYIKa. 

Fbom patriarchal times there falls a great light on this 
Ohristiaii duty. Let us cast a glance back on these times, 
and; by the example of the patriarchs, have our zeal stimu- 
lated and our liberality enlarged in giving to the cause of 
God. 

It is not necessary that we should go largely into this 
subject. Our space does not permit that we should indulge 
in any disquisition upon the origin of tithes, or upon the 
question of their continued obligation; nor does our pur- 
pose require this. We shall content ourselves, at this stage 
of our subject, with adducing the acknowledged £sicts and 
examples, and availing ourselves of the aid they give us in 
pressing upon the conscience the great duty of supporting 
the gospel ministry. 

The great fact here is, that in those ages a tenth was given 
for the worship of Grod. The origin of this custom has been 
variously stated. Some have traced it to a Divine injunc- 
tion, which, though not recorded, must, they believe, have 
been given. !N'o one doubts, say such, that the method of 
worsMp by sacrifice had its origin in a Divine appointment, 
and yet nowhere have the terms of that appointment been 
recorded. Might it not have been so with tithes ? And 
how otherwise can we account, they ask, for the universality 
of the practice ? Others have seen no necessity for suppos- 



THE PATBIABCHAL SCALE OF GIYlKa 25 

ing a Divine revelation on the point. There is, they feel, 
something like a natural fitness in the tenth being given for 
such a purpose. It would recommend itself, they say, to 
the pious men of these early times, and grow at last into a 
practice. Whichever of these be the true account of the 
case, it matters not to our argument. The main point here 
is, that to give the tenth was felt then to be a solemn duty; 
that it was conscientiously discharged by the godly men of 
those days ; and that it comes down to us stamped with the 
sanction of their example, and the yet higher sanction of 
God's authority, who afterwards adopted it, if He did not 
originally appoint it, and erected it into the standard of 
giving for all Israel 

Abraham is the first who is seen paying tithes. The 
scene is interesting on that account, as well as from the 
more than usual amount of meaning with which it is 
charged. Let us pause a moment over it. The patriarch 
stands in " the valley of Shaveh, which is the king's dale." 
The dust and sweat of battle are upon him, for he has lust 
x«tamed from his conflict with thfldngs. He vest, iere 
with his company, and gathered into one vast heap on the 
sward of the dale are the goods of the citizens of Sodom, and 
of Lot, his brother, which Abraham has recovered from the 
marauding chiefs. Forth from the neighbouring town 
conies Melchizedeck, the priest-king of Salem, bearing in his 
hands bread and wine. Slowly descending into the dale, he 
stands in the midst of the company, and congratulating 
them on their victory over the confederate kings, he distri- 
butes to Abraham and his followers the bread and wine he 
had brought with him, and closes the scene by blessing them 
in the name of the Most High God. Abraham goes to the 
heap of spoil which his sword had recovered, and which, 
according to the usages of those times, was now his own, and, 
taking the tithe of it, he lays it at the feet of Melchizedeck. 



26 THE PATRIARCHAL SCALE OF GIVING. 

As the earliest revelations were the widest, so the earliest 
types were offctimes the clearest and most comprehensive. 
In this mirror we can see the image of a glorious, though 
then far distant future. A greater than Melchizedeck is 
here. Behind the priest-king of Salem rises the priest-king 
of Zion ; and behind Abraham is seen the Church, whicb. 
was then in his loins. Here then the Church, in a figure, 
pays tithes to Him who is at once her priest and the world's 
king. The action in the valley of Shaveh becomes prophecy^. 
It speaks of a time when the Church shsdl rise to the full 
measure of her duty and privilege in this matter; when 
going foi-th to conquer the world with the gospel of peace, 
not the sword of war, and gathering the spoils of its riches, 
of its power, of its learning, and of its arts, she shall lay them. 
aU at the feet of her King. Let us hasten to fulfil fche pro- 
phecy. Let us be the first to lead in a path which shall yet 
be trodden by all the nations and monarchs of the earth, 
** The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents, 
the kings of Sheba and Seba shall ofier gif(}s ; yea, all kings 
shall fall down before him ; all nations shall serve him." 

The next example has less of prophecy but more of precept 
in it. It has respect, we apprehend, not so much to the Church 
collective and to the spirit of enlarged liberality that will 
actuate her. in the latter days, as to the individual Christian 
and to what is his duty in the matter. Let us look at it. 
Unattended and sohtary, with nothing but his pilgrim-staff 
and his father's blessing, Jacob goes forth on his way to 
Padan-aram. Night overtakes him amid the mountains of 
Ephraim, and resting his head on a pillow of stone, he sinks 
in slumber on the plain of Luz. That was the sweetest 
slumber he ever enjoyed; for as he slept he dreamed, and in 
his dream he saw the God of his fathers, who entered into 
covenant with him, sealing it with many gracious assurances 
and promises. When the morning broke, Jacob took the 



THE PATBIABCHAL SCALE OF QlVmO. 27 

gtone which had served him as a pillow, and having set it up 
for a pillar, and poured oil npon the top of it, he solemnly 
vowed to give the tenth of all his substance to God. 

This instance is to the full more satisfactory than the 
former, inasmuch as it bears more explicitly upon the every- 
day life and practice of the patriarchs. The occasion of 
Abraham in the king's dale was scarce an ordinary one. 
Though one might surrender the tenth of the spoils which 
the chances of battle had thrown into his possession, it did 
not follow that his ordinary possessions and the fruits of his 
daily industry were dealt with in the same way. But the 
instance of Jacob is valuable, as shewing that the godly men 
of those times recognised the duty of giving of their sub- 
stance to God; and that the regular and ordinary practice 
was to give the tenth — a large proportion, when we take into 
account that the worship of God consisted then of but a few 
simple rites, and that the facilities for diffusing the know- 
ledge of the true God, which may now so largely occupy the 
efforts and the contributions of Christians, were in that age 
unknown. No sooner does Jacob contract saving relations 
with God than he says, " Of all that thou shalt give me, I 
will surely give the tenth unto thee." 

So far these patriarchal examples. They are decisive on 
the question of the patriarchal usages. They teach us 
several great lessons in connexion with the duty under dis- 
cussion, to which we shall advert before proceeding further. 
They shew us that the piety of those early times was of a 
more practical cast than it is sometimes believed to have 
been. The men who then lived very distinctly recognised 
this duty even, that if it was their privilege to get, it was 
not less their duty to give. Largely they had received in 
point of blessing; and as they had largely received, so they 
fireely give. They did not hold themselves acquitted of 
what they owed to religion, when they made profession of 



28 THE PATRIABCHAL SCALE OF GIVING. 

the true God before idolaters; they held even then what 
an apostle wrote long afterwards, that " faith without works 
is dead"— that a reUgion that yields nothing in return, that 
gives nothing to God and does nothing for maD, is a vain 
religion. God would have been ashamed to be called their 
God, had he not prepared for them a city; and they, in 
return, would have been ashamed to be called His people^ 
had they offered ffim a worship which cost them nothing. 
They woidd have blushed before the heathen, had the altar 
of the true God been worse served than those of the pagan 
deities. This would have drawn reproach upon the name of 
Jehovah; for it might have been said that they served Him, 
not because they loved Him, but because His service was 
less costly than that of the gods around them ; that they 
had adopted their creed, not because it was true, but because 
it was cheap — not because it approved itself to their con- 
sciences, but because it was convenient for their purses. To 
these taunts might their religion, we say, have been exposed ; 
but to these taunts they took care not to expose it. They 
saw to it that the altar of Jehovah should not be an empty 
one. Cheerfully they laid upon it the tenth of all their 
substance. 

Another lesson taught by the patriarchal examples under 
this head is, that the Christian's consecration is an entire 
and universal consecration. When he gives himself to God, 
he gives, not a part, but the whole of himself. The act of 
consecration covers the entire range of his faculties, of his 
opportunities, and of his possessions. How can it possibly 
be otherwise ? Shall he give himself, and withhold his sub- 
stance? This did not the patriarchs. They gave their 
possessions to Him to whom they had given their persons. 
No sooner was Jacob converted, than lo, " of all that thou 
shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thea" So 
with the Christian still : when he comes into covenant with 



THE PATRIABCHAL SCALE OF GIVING. 29 

God, he comes, as Noah into the ark, " he and all his honse.*' 
He cannot divide himself — his soul to God, his goods to the 
world. Is he a man of genius 1 he lays upon the altar of 
God all the gifts of his mind, all the ripe fruits of his 
learning, and all the costly acquisitions of his study. Is he 
a man of social position 1 he consecrates to God*s cause all 
the influence he is able to wield in society. Is he a man of 
wealth ? that wealth he unsparingly devotes to the support 
of the ordinances of the gospel, and the general extension of 
the cause of Christ. Of all that God gives him he gives a 
tenth unto Grod. Not that he confines himself within the 
limits of a literal tenth, but that he meets every call of duty 
with a HberaHty of gift and a wilHngness of heart which 
fulfil the spirit of the injunction, even when it does not 
exactly meet its letter — ^falling below, it may be, or rising 
high above it. He would blush to confess himself a believer 
in the doctrine of the gospel, and an expectant of its hopes, 
were he not prepared to sacrifice on its altar the rank, the 
genius, the riches, which thousands daily offer at the shrine 
of fame, of pleasure, and of ambition. 

In fine, the patriarchal measure of giving was a large one. 
It was large compared with the claims of religion in those 
days upon the liberality of its professors. Religion then 
needed no rich exchequer. Her wants were few : her 
operations were on a scale of but limited extent. The time 
was not come for her to launch out into those great enter- 
prises which now task all her energies, and would more than 
exhaust all her available resources. Abraham and Jacob 
had but the necessities of their own family and tribe to 
provide for. The daily provision of the altar was by no 
means a costly charge : and we read of no attempts to pro- 
selytise the communities that lived in their neighbourhood. 
Anything like evangelistic enterprises were then unthought 
of : there was no opportunity given for them, nor was it the 



30 THE PATMABCHAL SCALE OF GIYlKa 

design of God that the patriarchs should engage in them, 
beyond the influence exerted by their holy lives. The world 
lay locked in darkness around the Church : her great duty 
was to keep her ground, and cultivate her own territory ; 
and to wait for the coming of an age when, her own prin- 
ciples being better developed, and her instrumentalities 
multiplied, she might go forth on the high enterprise of 
converting a world. 

And yet with these comparatively slender claims, how 
large their liberality ! Their scale of giving is one that 
astonishes us. A tenth ! and when we take into account 
the ample possessions of these men, their numerous flocks 
and herds, and the much silver and gold which they posh 
sessed, we cannot but feel that the tenth of all this wealth 
must have amounted to a large yearly sum ; so large a sum, 
in short, that we have some difficulty in conceiving of its 
being all expended within the strict limits of the special 
object for which it was given. And yet this sum was given. 
What a high place did these men assign to the duty of giving 
for the worship of Grod ! 

Let New Testament Christianity, then, come and do 
obeisance before Patriarchal Christianity. We boast of 
the greatness of our enterprises, and speak of our liberality 
as if the virtue of giving to the cause of God had been 
unknown in the world tiU our times, and was peculiarly a 
virtue of our own age. We must abate somewhat of these 
boastings. Look at the patriarchs, and consider the scale of 
their givings. Let us take into account the narrow horizon 
around them : Christendom was simply the valley in which 
their encampment was placed : the great duty of evangelis- 
ing the world was unknown : they had only the family altar, 
including the religioTis instruction of their servants and de- 
pendents, to provide for; they could not feel the excite- 
ments of those powerful motives which spring from the wider 



THE PATRIABCHAL SCALE OF GlVmO. 31 

yiews of Cliristianity, and its blessed fonctions to the world, 
which have opened upon us; and yet when we compare 
their givings with our own, we find, despite the much that 
tended to lower theirs, and that tends to elevate ours, that 
there are few among us who have been able to attain to 
even the letter of their liberality, and still fewer to its spirit 
The great body of professing Christians still £eJ1 below the 
tenth. Let then, we say, the liberality of the nineteenth 
century, all boastful as it is, draw near and humble itself, 
and confess its shortcomings, in the presence of the liberality 
of the patriarchal ages. 



32 THE LEVITICAX TITHES. 



CHAPTER YI. 

THE LEVITICAL TITHES. 

The patriarchs had now grown into a nation. The little 
encampment, with its altar in the midst, beside which, morn- 
ing and night, the smoke of sacrifice was seen and the voice 
of prayer beard, was now changed into an orderly state, with 
its laws and institutions, civil and religions. This change 
brought with it wider openings, more numerous claims, and 
a correspondingly enlarged scale of giving. Religious ordi- 
nances had now to be organised, not for a family only, but 
for a nation. First a tabernacle and next a temple had to 
be reared, whose magnificence might be such as would add 
to the impressiveness and solemnity of the worship celebrated 
in it. A hierarchy had to be appointed and sustained in 
circumstances befitting the importance of their functions 
and the dignity of their office. Ceremonies and rites had to 
be instituted, the symbols of great truths to be afterwards 
plainly revealed. The object of Gk>d in all this was first the 
instruction and discipline of "His own chosen people — ^their 
initiation into the mysteries of supernatural religion ; and, 
in the second place, the instruction, to some extent, of sur- 
rounding nations. The Levitical institute was a prophet 
of redemption : it was a preacher of that righteousness by 
which God was to justify the heathen. It was a home 
mission for the world set up in Judea, and the Jews were 
taught that the^ were there because it was there : that they 



THE LEVITICAL TITHES. 33 

had been selected, redeemed from Egypt, and planted in 
Canaan that they might be the conservators of the holy 
oracles. The one object which, as a nation, they were to 
cultivate and pursue w^, not merchandise, like the Tyrians, 
not art, like the Greeks, not war, like the Romans, but truth, 
even that truth which God*s Spirit had brought down from 
heaven, and which was to grow and unfold itself in this land 
'till it should become ripe for being transplanted into all the 
countries of the world. Such was the provision which God 
made in those ages for the support of religious ordinances. 
He set apart a whole country and a whole nation, and in 
so doing bore a testimony that speaks with unequivocal 
voice to all time. 

The whole nation -?n a general way, and one tribe in a 
special, the tribe of Levi to wit, was set apart to the service 
of religion. "What provision was made for Levi and his sons 
— ^the ministers of that dispensation 1 This brings us to the 
subject of tithes. Now, it is not in the least necessary that 
we should go at large into the question, or determine with 
great accuracy the precise amount paid yearly in the land of 
Israel in the shape of tithes. It is enough for our purpose 
that we present the reader with a fair general idea of the 
position of the priests and Levites in respect of temporal 
sustenance. It was a matter of Divine arrangement, and 
this makes it the more worthy of our study. God himself 
was the financier of the Old Testament Church, and we are 
to regard the scheme of finance devised and enacted by Him 
as an "ensample" for all ages, not indeed to be followed in 
the letter, but undoubtedly to be followed in the spirit. It 
shews us that the right position of His ministers in point 
of emolument is far from a matter of indifference in His 
eye — that it nearly concerns the prosperity of the Church, 
and ought to receive the earnest and conscientious attention 
of her members. And we can scarce avoid the conclusion 



34 THE LEVrnCAL TITHES. 

that that on the whole is the best position for the ministers 
of the gospel^ in respect of social status and pecuniary emo- 
lument, which most nearly approximates the position which 
God himself assigned to His ministers under the law, all 
reasonable regard, of course, being had to the difference 
betwixt the two economies. 

"All the tithe of the land is the Lord's." This clause 
briefly enunciates the law of the matter ; it expounds at the* 
same time the iheoi^y of tithes. They belonged primarily to 
God. He was the sovereign of the nation ; the Israelites 
were His tenants; and the tithe formed the rent of the 
land which was the Lord's. This God was pleased to make 
over to the priests and Levites as pay for the services 
rendered by them to the state. Thi^, then, was their stated 
provision, even the tenth of the whole produce of the country 
—of the increase of the trees, of the field, and of the flock. 
Over and above, they had forty-eight ready built cities 
assigned to them as residences, with a belt of land, of about 
three-fourths of a mile in breadth, running round each 
city. This they held immediately of God. It was the 
wages which their Master, not only just but generous, gave 
them as the servants of His household. 

Kow, we regard this as an ample provision, and such as 
placed those for whom it was made not only on a level with 
the other classes of society, in point of temporal emolument, 
but considerably above them. The tribe of Levi was a 
small one — not amounting, it is supposed, to more than a 
third or a fourth of the average of the other tribes ; and 
yet, though only a thirtieth or so of the nation, they en- 
joyed the tenth of its wealth. The most comfortable homes 
in all the land of Israel must have been those of the priests 
and Levites. Nor was this all ; over and above their legal 
and stated revenue they enjoyed what in our times would 
be called a large "supplement," which flowed in u|)on 



THE MVITICAL TITHES. ' 35 

them from the numerous offeiings, free or appointed, of 
the people. 

To ihe first tithe, which we have just explained, was added 
a second. This was not wholly the property of the priests 
and Levites, as the other was, yet they were permitted 
largely to share in it. The second tithe, which the Israelite 
was to set apart after the first had been paid, he was com- 
manded to carry, either in kind or in its pecuniary equiva- 
lent, to Jerusalem, and expend it in the courts of the temple 
in entertainments to the Levites, to which also he was at 
liberty to invite his family and friends. There was, too, 
vhat is called the third tithe ; but we incline to the opinion 
vhich is held by many that this was but another name for 
the second tithe, which was expended every third year, not 
in Jerusalem, but in the Israelite's own house, in feasting 
the Levites, the fatherless, the widow, and the poor. This 
vas an important addition to the regular income of the 
Levites ; and by efiectually securing them against all anxiety 
as regarded the provision of their families, left them free to 
give the whole strength of their mind to the performance of 
their duties as religious ministers^ judges, and teachers. 

Nor did the provision appointed by God for the support of 
His worship and the maintenance of His priests end here. 
Additional and oft-recurring demands were made on the 
Israelite by the numerous offerings appointed in the law, 
and the great festivals of the nation. There were sin-offer- 
ings, trespass-offerings, and thank-offerings. There were the 
first-fruits of the field and of the vineyard ; there were the 
firstlings of man and of beast. Let us sum up all, and see 
how honourable and ample the provision for the ministry then 
was. There was, first of all, the tithes which was wholly 
Levi's; there was next the second tithe, which, to the 
extent of a half at least, was his also ; there, were forty- 
eight cities, with lands adjoining, to the extent, we shall 



36 THE LEYinCAL TITHES. 

say, of a hundred thousand acres ; then there were the first- 
fruits from every field, every vineyard, and every oliveyard in 
Palestine ; then, and last of all, there were the firstlings, and 
the trespass and thank-ofierings, &Q,, from half a million of 
families. Here was no stinted maintenance verily : a princely 
provision in sooth, and consisting of every kind of property 
and produce in the land — of cities, houses, and lands— ^f cattle 
and sheep — of com, oil, and wine. We do not err when we 
say that every Israelite gave a fourth of his property to the 
service of religion. A fourth forms a higher average of 
religious giving than has ever perhaps been attained to by 
any Christian nation since ; and yet it was far from being 
oppressive to the Israelite. It was a lighter burden than 
that which the idolatries, whether ancient or modern^ 
imposed upon their votaries. Half ' the wealth of Europe 
(in some countries three-fourths) was, in Popish times, given 
to the Church of Rome. Compared with this, God's yoke 
was easy— easy in itself; and made yet easier by the rich 
returns which it secured. The bams and presses of the 
Israelites overflowed ; and the com and wine carried to the 
temple came back multiplied tenfold in the plenty which 
every field, and rock, and tree rained upon them. 

The whole arrangement, contemplated intelligently, seta 
in a striking light the value of religious ordinances, and by 
consequence the paramoimt obligation of giving for their 
support The maintenance of these was the one object and 
end of the Jewish state. In fact, that nation may be viewed 
as one great religious community. Every member of it 
was engaged, more or less immediately, in the temple service. 
And the land of Palestine may be looked upon but as one large 
glebe. Every foot-breadth of it, with everything that grew 
thereon, was dedicated, more or less directly, to the worship 
of Grod. The priests and Levites existed for the temple, and 
the rest of the nation existed for the priests and Levites. 



THE LEVITICAL TITHES. 37 

That the Levitical tribe might be free to give their whole 
time and strength to their duties, the other tribes were com- 
manded to take the lands of Levi, and cultivate them for 
him, rendering to him the produce : and that the other 
tribes might be able to do so, the rest of the land, with all 
that grew thereon — a tenth excepted — waa assigned to them 
as their portion. Thus Levi served in the temple ; and the 
other tribes served Levi, as he God. Everything in that 
land had respect to Grod's altar,; it was the keystone of the 
state — the grand centre around which all else revolved. 
All labour, whether in the temple or in the field, was for 
God ; and every man, from the high priest down to the 
tiller and the vine-dresser, bore a sacred character. They 
-were a "kingdom of priests'* — "a holy nation." Here we 
have the divinely-sketched programme of what Christian 
nations ought to exhibit, not indeed in the letter, but in the 
spirit. Undoubtedly it is God s intention that they should 
occupy, morally not legally, the very same position in rela- 
tion to the gospel and its ordinances which the Jewish nation 
did in relation to the temple and its services. 



38 A FOBTIOBI ABGUHENT 



CHAPTEE YIL 

A FORTIORI ARGUMENT FROM THE LAW TO THE GOSPEL. 

Let us pause here to contemplate the uses and lessons of this 
arrangement. The grand and final end of the institution of 
the Levitical economy was not simply the enlightenment of 
the land of Judea, but the evangelisation of the world. The 
Jew lived not for himself, but for the race; but in handing 
down to posterity the mighty blessing intrusted to his keep- 
ing, he was permitted largely to share in it himself He 
derived from it prodigious benefits of a personal and national 
kind, which recompensed him a thousand times over for the 
office he performed to the world. His individual character 
was ennobled, and the national mind was toned to lofty aims 
and heroic deeds. The temple became the powerful pro- 
moter of the country's industry, the divine nurse of its 
patriotism, and the impregnable bulwark of its independence. 
The like uses does the gospel serve, only in a way more, 
direct, and in measure yet larger, inasmuch as truth is now- 
better understood and more directly operative, being sur- 
rounded no longer by the symbols and shadows which some- 
what hid its splendour and abated its energy in other ages. 

First of all, then, the temple cost the Jew much. It cost 
him the fifth of all his increase, directly ; and it cost him 
offerings and first-fruits, which swelled the amotmt to at 
least a fourth. It cost him, moreover, a good deal of his 
time. But if it cost him much^ it was worth a great deal-— 



FBOM THE LAW TO THE GOSPEL. 39 

It -was worth all to him. From the temple flowed all the 
blessings that enriched his land — ^the fertility and beauty of 
its fields, the happiness of its homes, the sobriety, industry, 
and contentment of its people, the patriotism of its judges, 
and the heroism of its soldiers — all flowed from the temple. 
There, there dwelt a power, and thence there emanated an 
influence, silent and unseen, but not unfelt, which, finding its 
'way to every hearth, and penetrating into every heart, made 
the Jewish people the brave, wise, wealthy, and prosperous 
people which they were, 

A mere utilitarian, who can see value only in what is 
material, when he thought of the tithes which supported the 
priesthood, and the rich oflerings that were daily carried up 
to the temple, would have cried out, with him who saw the 
box of spikenard poured upon the head of Jesus, *** To what 
purpose is this waste ?" He would have predicted the im- 
poverishment of the people, and demanded the abatement, if 
not the suppression, of an institution that was devouring 
the land. But what did experience testify on the point? 
It testified that, so far from being the canker of the nation's 
ivealth, the temple was the fountainhead of its prosperity ; 
and that the more numerous the gifts which the people 
carried into its courts, the greater the plenty which flowed 
into their bams. It was not till the temple had become but 
a name, and the tithes and offerings were withheld, that 
beggary and barrenness began to afflict the land of Israel, 
and that a brave and independent people bowed their neck 
to a foreign yoke, and emptied their treasures into the lap of 
foreign tax-gatherers. 

The temple, in this respect, was but a feeble type of the 
gospel Bicher and larger blessings stDl does the gospel 
shower on those nations that are so happy as to enjoy it. 
Wherever the gospel comes, there the earth is green ; smil- 
ing fields and happy homes deck its surface. Wherever the 



40 A FOBTIOBI ABQUHENT 

gospel comes, tHere science kindles her lamp, and murky 
ignorance, with her horrid train of attendants, takes her 
departure. Wherever the gospel comes, there art finds a 
home, the savage becomes the civilised man, and happy and 
gainful industry plies the loom and the forge, or, spreading 
the sail of commerce, visits, on golden ventures, distant shores. 
Wherever the gospel comes, there desp'otism dare not build 
a dungeon or forge a chain. What the temple made the 
Jew — a fearless, because a God-fearing man, who, as he 
sat beneath the fig-tree that shaded his dwelling, looking 
forth on his beauteous land which he knew how to defend, 
bade defiance to the world — ^the gospel has made the Anglo- 
Saxon — a man of erect front, of unquailing eye, of skilful 
hand, and of venturous foot. It is the gospel, not nature, 
that has made the Anglo-Saxon's dwelling in the greenest 
parts of the earth — ^in the midst of flourishing fields, of seas 
whitened with ships, and cities into which are gathered the 
riches of the earth — while surrounding countries lie scathed 
and burned up by the baleful breath of superstition. Can 
living man calculate the worth of the gospel, in its character 
merely of a temporal benefactor 1 We say in its character 
of a temporal benefactor, the figures are not yet invented 
which can express its value. All the gold ever dug from 
the bowels of the earth were but as dust in the balance, if 
weighed against the blessings with which the gospel is 
freighted. But if the temple was worth all that it cost, 
and a great deal more, to the Jew, d fortiori the gospel is 
worth all that it costs, and a great deal more, to Christian 
nations. Of the gospel, as of the law, we may say that its 
great mission has regard to the future — the future of time 
in the world's millennial rest, and the future of eternity, in 
which the mighty amplitude of its infinite beneficence will 
be unfolding for ever ; but in passing down to that future it 
scatters rich blessings, such as those we have spoken of, on 



FROM THE LAW TO THE GOSPEL. 41 

its path. Now^ if the security and peace of our homes be 
of any value, if our commerce, our independence, and all 
our other national blessings be of any value, of how much 
greater value is the gospel ? They are but effects ; it is the 
oa%8e^ the great parent cause. And yet what have we been 
doing % Begrudging the gospel its support I throwing to it 
the most miserable pittance, and looking on even that pit- 
tance as too much — as lost ! The little we have given has 
had to be wrung from us ! as if the gospel was a beggar — 
A devourer of our substance — an institution to be merely 
tolerated in the world, and one from which society had never 
leaped a single benefit, nor ever would. Well may we 
fifcand astonished at our own shortsightedness and infatuated 
penuriousness. How much richer are we of the money 
v^hich we ought to have given, but have not given ? Richer ! 
sre we not poorer, greatly poorer, temporally and spiritually 1 
Ours has truly been a spendthrift economy. The money we 
lave denied to the gospel and its ordinances we have been 
compelled to pay ten times over to vice and its institutions. 
There is another point in which the temple, with its 
ritual, teaches a lesson to us as regards the support of the 
gospel ministry. Why was the temple so gorgeous and the 
HLtual so burdensome 1 Did the polished stones of the build- 
ing, the golden vessels of the altar, and the rich robes of the 
ligh priest, minister pleasure to the Most Higk) How poor 
' aid beggarly a show to Him that sitteth on the seraph-en- 
crcled throne in the temple above ! Not for Him, but for 
tie worshipper, was the temple with its ritual made thus 
g<rgeous. Jehovah judged it meet, for the most important 
enls, to maintain the Jewish institute, in point of external 
magnificence, on a level with the rival religions of the 
heathen world. Our estimate of the intrinsic worth of a 
thing is often founded on a comparative standard, and is 
alw^rs affected, more or less, by outward show. It was 



\ 



42 A FOBTIOBI ABQUMENT 

especially so in the early ages. £^ypt and other countries 
could boast of their sumptuous temples, of their numerous 
and wealthy hierarchy, of their attractive and dazzling 
ceremonies, supported by costly offerings. Had the worship 
of Jehovah been placed on a much inferior footing as regards 
these particulai-s-had it been performed in a mean sanctuary, 
and by a pauperised priesthood — ^not only the Gentile who 
chanced to visit Palestine, but the Jew himself even, would 
have been in danger of despising it. Therefore Jehovah 
planted in the midst of the land a temple which it required 
the treasures of two kings, with all the artistic taste and 
science of the time, to rear, and which was renowned for its 
beauty through all the countries. He permitted none but 
the flower of the popidation — ^the finest in respect of per- 
sonal comeliness, and the first in respect of social position 
— ^to minister in its courts; and He would allow only the 
choice of the country's produce— the firstlings of its flocks, 
and the best of its fruits — ^to be offered on its altars. And 
did not God's service merit all this ? Did it not deserve to 
have, in these points, eqwdUy at least, if not precedence, 
with the rival pagan systems, while it had this vast superiority 
to them all, that beneath its golden splendour there lay hid, 
not fatal errors, but eternal verities % 

Now we demand, for similar reasons, a similar equalitr 
for the gospel ministry. "We have not yet advanced so far 
as to be able wholly to disconnect the things of sense froiu 
the things of the Spirit, or to form an estimate of the latter 
wholly unbiassed by the external guise in which they are 
presented. If our churches are very much inferior to cur 
factories — ^if, while we build palaces for our commerce, uid 
temples for our art, we content ourselves with worshipping 
Grod in a house little better than a hovel, religion, it is true, 
will be none the worse, but the estimate formed of he? by 
the world will be decidedly lower ; nay, she will, to 3ome 



FROM THE LAW TO THE GOSPEL. 43 

extent, unavoidably suffer in the eyes even of those who are 
not of the world. And if to this be added the yet greater 
evil of an ill-furnished pulpit — ^a minister of meagre gifts, of 
slender acquirements, of no information, unread in the 
literature and science of his time, and, as usually happens, 
despising what he cannot value ; and if, instead of solid and 
deep-thoughted expositions of Gk>d's Word, strongly en- 
trenched in the theological and scientific literature of the 
day, he present his hearers with frothy harangues, slovenly 
in style, pointless in argument, and vapid in thought — ^then 
we have a picture, and an affecting one truly, of religion 
wounded in the house of her friends. 

We shall have other opportunities of speaking of the 
social status which a minister ought to occupy; but it is 
proper, in connexion with the present stage of our subject, 
to remark, that the world has at its service the best gifts 
that are to be found. Foremost, and in its highest posts, it 
places the men of largest intellect, of profoimdest scientific, 
mechanical, or political attainments. These are the men whom 
it summons to do its work. If their cost is great, it says, 
that matters not, they are worth their cost. And the world 
is wise in its generation. " Be conformed to the world," we 
would say hera Let the Church summon to her service 
something like the same intellectual gifts, the same mental 
training, the same acquired knowledge and familiarity with 
the facts of science, of history, and of travel, which the 
world finds when it needs them, because willing to pay their 
price. Not that the minister, instead of being a preacher of 
the gospel, is to be a lecturer on science, or, instead of an 
ambassador of Christ, a mere litterateur; but that he ought 
to possess, in some measure, all these qualifications, and 
know how to use them in the exposition, the defence, and 
the application of God's Word. In short, the hierarchy of 
the house of God ought to be as learned, as accomplished. 



44 ▲ FOBTIOBI ABOUUENT 

and as well found as the hierarchy of science, or the hier- 
archy of letters, or the hierarchy of politics. 

But this cannot be done by merely saying to the man, 
!Read, study — science and literature are making prodigious 
strides, you must keep abreast of them. You but mock him 
while you bid him grow in knowledge, and withhold from 
him the means of access to it. This is like saying to the 
hungry, Be fed; to the naked. Be clothed; while you give 
them not wherewithal to feed and clothe them. How can 
the minister read without books? and books — ^good books 
especially — cost dear. How can he acqtiaint himself with 
the £)>cts of science while debarred access to the records of 
scientific discovery? Is his knowledge to come by inspira- 
tion, as in the primitive age ? Let church members reflect 
on their own duty here. You expect your pastor to be a 
labourer, an efficient labourer, a labourer '^not needing to 
be ashamed ;" why then do you deny him the tools of his 
labour? And you do deny him these when you give him 
such a salary as puts beyond his reach the best systems, the 
ablest Zment^es; in short, the learning, the wisdom, the 
deep and rich thoughts which successive generations of 
studious and prayerful men have accumulated in elucidation 
of the sacred oracles. When the library is full of know- 
ledge, then may we expect the pulpit to be full of light. If 
the shelves of the former are empty, or, what is just as 
bad, laden with rubbish, what can proceed £rom the latter 
but vapid and empty harangues, expositions that leave all in 
hopeless obscurity, and defences and answers that only pro- 
voke a curl on the lip of the sceptic Your pastor must 
have food; clothing is equally indispensable; and if you 
give him only what is barely sufficient to provide the neces- 
saries which himself and his family must have, how can he 
or dare he purchase other things ? The erudite tome, the 
magasdne, and journal, which record the discoveries of science. 



FBOH THE LAW TO THE GOSPEL. 45 

the maxcb. of invention, or the painfully gathered fruits 
of foreign travel, are beyond his reach. Could he have 
access to these, they would help to replenish the fountains of 
thought and feeling in his own mind; and coming thus 
equipped by subsidiaiy knowledge to the prayerful study of 
the Word of Crod, when he entered the pidpit the sanctuanr 
-would be filled with the perfume of his gifts and graces as 
-was the temple of old by the scent of the precious oint- 
ment poured on the head of the high-priest. But this, too 
often, alas ! is denied the minister, because, forsooth, it would 
cost a little more money to his flock. Oh, what a wrong 
they do their pastor! what an injury they inflict upon 
themselves ! for it is themselves they defraud and impoverish, 
not reflecting that what they gave would be paid back, and 
paid with usury, in the deeper veins of thought, aud the 
-wider views of Divine truth, mantling with the warm flush 
of novel illustration, which would attract and delight them 
in the ministry of their pastor. Instead of this, they con- 
demn themselves to listen, Sabbath after Sabbath, to the 
same subjects and thoughts, wearisomely restated in almost 
the same dead and withered words. Their minister is 
smitten with intellectual paralysis. A conscious sense of 
inferiority enfeebles and benumbs him. It is this that 
makes the gospel too often blush before science, and hang 
down its head and remain speechless in the presence of 
infideUty. 

Again, we observe that the gospel is worth so much more 
than the law by how much it is more excellent in its own na- 
ture. In the one we have that in its perfected form, which 
in the other we had but in its rudiments. The law was 
carnal, the gospel is spiritual ; the law was the shadow, the 
gospel iB the substance. Aiid by how much its nature is 
more spiritual, by so much is its operation more powerful. 
The one was a sword in its scabbard, the other is a sword 



46 A FORTIORI ARGUMENT 

unsheathed. The one was the fire in the voltaic pile, the 
other is the living fire set free, and pervading with, 
quickening energy the whole mass of society. The gospel 
has produced a new and higher type of both individual and 
national life. Virtues grow and flourish freely in the sun- 
shine of Christianity, which the obscure Hght and feeble 
warmth of the former economy could not nourish, save in 
rare cases only. It blesses the Church; it blesSes the com- 
monwealth in measure far larger. There is a higher piety 
in the one; there is a purer justice, a loftier patriotism in 
the other. But in proportion to the gospel's power to bless, 
so is our duty to support it. 

In fine, the Mosaic institute was placed in Judea for 
Judea alone. "Not, indeed, exclusively so. Its ultimate 
reference was to the world ; and even then it conferred in- 
direct and partial benefits upon contemporary nations. Like 
a lofty Pharos, set up in the midst of the earth, the Mosaic 
institute threw out its rays beyond the limits of the land in 
which it existed, and voyagers there were on the dark ocean 
of paganism who saw its light, and found the port. But 
this was an incidental result ; its main purpose respected the 
land of Palestine and the seed of Abraham ; and yet, though 
thus limited in its immediate end and object, what ample 
revenues, what a secure and princely provision did it enjoy 
— ^the fourth even of what was then, perhaps, the richest 
country in the world. But ifi as we have shewn, the Mosaic 
ritual was worth its cost, d fortiori the gospel is worth its 
cost. lb is worth its cost because of the higher and wider 
uses it is destined to serve. A world now leans upon the 
ChurcL In patriarchal times, when a family or a tribe 
simply were dependent upon it, a tenth was given ; in later 
times, when a nation only had to be provided for, a fouHh 
was given ; and now, when the necessities of a world have 
to be met, there is given — a fourth 1 a tenth 1 a hundredth 



FBOM THE LAW TO THE 008PEL. 47 

part of the wealth of Britain 1 Alas ! our practical answer 
ia, that less is required for a world than for a nation. As 
the gospel widens its sphere, we contract our liberality; and 
as its work increases, we curtail the means at its disposal. 
Is it wonderful, however melancholy it may be, that the 
gospel lingers on its way, and that, instead of hastening to 
gladden all the ends of the earth, which " shall remember, 
and turn unto the Lord,*' generations pass away, and its 
mission is not sped 9 

Though the Christianity of Britain existed for Britain 
alone, our scale of giving would be pronounced inadequate 
and stinted; so very stinted that, as lamentable &Lcts shew, 
it does not even suffice to preserve our own population from 
lapsing into heathenism. But the Christianity of Britain 
does not exist for Britain alone; it has been set in its high 
place that it may shed the light of the evangelical day over 
all the earth; and, therefore, our scale of giving ought as 
far to transcend that of the Jew as the world-wide aims 
of Christianity transcend the limited and national range 
of the Mosaic dispensation. This we ought to do, pro- 
Tided we are worthily to meet the claims of the gospel, 
and the exigencies of a perishing world. What numerous 
deniands for Bibles and missionaries come daily to us i^om 
every hemisphere of earth ! To Christian Britain the mil- 
lions of India turn their eyes ; to Christian Britain the 
sable sons of Africa stretch out their hands ; to Christian 
Britain the tribes of the Pacific cry across the ocean for the 
bread of life. Even China, which has kept her hieroglyphic- 
inscribed gates closed against the world, is now content to 
open them, and to sit at the feet of a nation which she has 
long despised. Such is the multitude of suppliants that 
crowd to our gates. Shall we send them away empty? 
Shall we say to them, " There is not bread in our Father's 
house for us and for you " 1 Shall we spare to take of those 



48 A FORTIORI ARGUMENT 

treasures wbicli our commerce and our skill have amassec^ 
and expend them on Bibles and missionaries 1 Shall -we sa^ 
to these outcasts, We will help you, but not now ; first let 
us provide for our own wants — ^luxurious furniture, gay 
clothing, dainty viands, fine equipages, and, when our own 
comforts are complete, we shall attend to your spiritual neces- 
sities 1 This were enough to bring heaven's curse down upoiij 
our commerce, and on all the sources of our wealth, and toi 
make this our isle a spectacle of loathing and detestation I 
to all the earth. We trust we shall act a part better befit- ] 
ting the rank we hold as a nation, and the crisis of the 
world's history in which it is our lot to live. But if we 
would do so, we must be prepared to give in measure far 
exceeding that in which the men of former ages gava 
What were a tenth, though every Christian in Britain should 
give to that extent, to such a destitution as this? It were but 
a drop to the ocean ; it were but trifling with an enormous 
exigency. No ; let us meet world-wide necessities with 
world-wide beneficence. We have the means of doing so^ — 
have we the heart 9 the piety 1 the faith 1 The Christians of 
the first century heroically faced the lions ; the Christians of 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries braved the falminations 
and crusades of Rome; have the Christians of the nine- 
teenth century the self-denial to part with their wealth — 
gathered from every field on earth — for the evangehsation 
of the world 1 Let us not fear that we shall starve our 
commerce and cripple our other great enterprises. The 
nation that will save its wealth in this cause shall lose it ; 
and the nation that loses its wealth in this cause shall find 
it, and find it a thousandfold even in this life. We shall 
root our power in every quarter of the globe, and open mar- 
kets for our products amongst every people ; and in return 
for our gifts, a stream of blessing, larger a thousand times 
than any that ever flowed outwards from our shores, shall 



FBOM THE LAW TO THE GOSPEL. 49 

low inward upon tis, breaking aronnd our isle in a multi- 
idinous symphony of fervent thanksgivings and reciprocal 
yfcindnesses. 

ijf !But we shall reap a yet higher recompense. We shall 
oiiiasten the coming — ^perhaps we may see the dawn^-of that 
i3ybles8ed era, when the sun, as he rises on a Sabbath morning, 
and looks down on the earth, not, as now, mantled in the 
t, fihadows of superstition and foul with the stains of crime, 
but bathed in light and beautified on mountain and vale 
with Christian sanctuaries, shall be followed in his course 
westward by the voice of prayer and the melody of praise. 

Let us regale ourselves by anticipation of the scene. 
The first light breaks over the islands of Japan, and the 
song begins. A low harmony, breathed foi-th in deep melo- 
dious numbers, like the fabled music which flowed of old 
from the stony throat of Memnon, when struck by the first 
xay, iB heard iiBg to Wb. Onwaxd it con. J Hark ! 
the nations of China swell the song, and the peal is solemn 
and grand, like the voice of many waters. Westward still 
comes that mighty voice ; over slumbering ocean, over spicy 
isle, over tall cliff and bold rocky headland — the sentinels 
of continents. Now it sweeps along over reedy jungle and 
green savannah; now it breaks in thunder around the proud 
domes of magnificent cities ; and now it rolls upwards to 
where the white crest of the Himalaya girdles the sky. The 
nations of India, bound in caste no longer, awake, and 
shout, " Alleluia, the Lord God omnipotent reigneth." From 
nation to nation that triumphant anthem is borne onwards. 
Old Elam now takes up the notes and passes them on to the 
Afghan amid his hills on the one hand, and the far-off tents 
of Kedar on the other. The peasant of the Kussian steppes, 
the herdsman of the Alps, and the wandering tribes of sable 
Africa hear it, and with bended knee and uplifted hands join 
in the hymn. Nature listens entranced, and bursts into a 



60 A FORTIORI ARGUMENT, ETa 

song ; tHe wilderness and the solitary place is glad at tlie 
hearing of that voice; the sea roars, the floods clap their 
hands; the mountains and the hills break forth into sing- 
ing; the trees of the wood rejoice, the valleys laugh, they also 
sing. Now Europe takes up the anthem, and joins in it 
with all her nations, from where Minerva's ruins croT?vn 
the marble steep of Sunium to where Kamskatcha's ice 
spreads out beneath the star of the pole. How loud and 
triumphant is the shout! It is as the voice of a great 
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the 
voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Blessing, and honour, 
and glory, and power be unto Him that sitteth upon the 
throne, and unto the Lamb. Song like this has not been 
heard beneath heaven's vault since that day when the 
morning stars sang ix>geiher, and all the sons of God shouted 
for joy. Wafbed across the Atlantic, the millions on its 
seaboard resume and prolong the anthem. The thousands 
and tens of thousands inhabiting the plain of the Mississippi 
and the valley of the St Lawrence peal forth the song, 
and pass it onwards, over pathless meadow and brown, 
forest, over rocky mountain and crystal river, over the 
white man's dwelling and the red man's wigwam, in ever- 
growing magniflcence of volume, to the shores of the Paciflc. 
It has circled the earth, and its last cadences are heard rising 
to heaven as evening descends over the solitude of the 
western prairies. 



NEW TESTAMENT PBINCIPLES. 51 



CHAPTER YIII. 

ITEW TESTAMENT PRINCIPLES — OBDINANCE OP CHRIST. 

When Christianity passed into tlie new dispensation, it 
carried with it all its doctrines, all its institutions, and, by 
consequence, all its claims. Christianity carried with it all 
its doctrines; not one of them was changed in a single iota as 
regardod its true meaning and essence. The altar of stone 
was taken down ; the bodies of slain beasts ceased to be pie-^ 
sented as sacrifices; but the doctrine hid beneath these 
idiadows remained, and the veil being withdrawn, the doc- 
trine came the more fully forward into the light. The 
altar, with its material sacrifice, had disappeared, and in 
its room the Atonement stood forth fblly unveiled to the 
Church. 

Christianity carried with it all its institutions. It had still 
its seventh day's rest ; it had still its seals of the covenant 
of grace; only, instead of the Pascal lamb came the Supper; 
and instead of circumcision came now the baptismal water; 
it had still its public assemblies for the worship of God, and 
its instrumentalities and organisations for the difiusion of 
that truth by which man is sanctified and saved. And as 
Christianity carried over to the new dispensation all its 
doctrinos and all its institutions, it followed that it carried 
over also all its claims. Being in truth the same gospel, its 
claims on the heart of man, on the life of man, and on the 



B2 NEW TESTAMENT PRINCIPLES — 

substance of mail, must necessarily be the very same as 
before. It says not less authoritatively, " Honour the Lord 
with thy substance." 

In accordance with this, we do not know of a single new 
commandment contained in the s^ospeL It appears to take 
for granted, that whatever .a. olli^tory thef is obUgato^ 
now, and that Christians should feel it to be so ; that alone 
excepted that had its foundation obviously in the ceremonial 
form of the dispensation. The former was the legislative 
age of the Church ; this is the expository, it is the grand 
unfolding, the withdrawing of type and symbol, and the 
open manifestation of the body of truth ; and if the Church 
sometimes feels as if she were face to face with principles 
unseen by her before, it is not because these principles did 
not previously exist, but because they were wrapt up in a 
symbolic covering. Christianity, we think, honours itself 
by not re-enacting its old statutes. It takes higher ground 
than if it re-enacted them. It sustains itself as the religion 
that was from the beginning — ^the religion that came £rom 
Eden — ^that in which the patriarchs Enoch, and Abraham, 
and David lived, and which therefore needed not to re-enact 
its old laws. It thus retains fast hold on both our aJSections 
and our services. 

Taking this principle with us, let us go to the study of the 
Duty, as seen in the light of the New Testament. God 
himself appointed the Levite his portion of old; it was a 
fundamental law in the Jewish state, and one of the very 
first arrangements made, that the tenth should be paid to 
him. So again, Christ, the King and Lord of His Church, 
has appointed to the minister of the gospel his portion; and 
He shewed His sense of the importance of the matter by 
making it one of the very earliest arrangements of his king- 
douL In deed and in truth, it is the old arrangement revived ; 
it is the act of Jehovah, King of Israel, adopted and sane- 



OBDINANCE OF CHRIST. 53 

tioned by Jesus, the King of Zion, with the necessary 
modifications to adapt it to the new economy. 

It is instructive to observe here, first of all, that the 
institution of the order of gospel ministers, and the law of 
their support, came together. They were announced to- 
gether and bound up together. " Go, preach," said Christ, 
giving to his apostles their great commission, and added He, 
with reference to their support, without which their com- 
mission could not be fulfilled, " the labourer is worthy of hia 
hire " (Luke x 7). Here, in point of fact, was a new Levi- 
tical order appointed ; and as the ancient Levites were to be 
neither tillers of the soil nor dressers of the vine, and yet 
were to receive, along with the rest of the nation, a fair 
share of what the land of Palestine produced, so again, this 
order of spiritual Levites were bound to separate themselves 
fix)m the avocations of other men, from the labours of agri- 
culture, from the cares of government, from the gains of 
commerce, from the perils of war, and to give themselves 
wholly to sacred employments; but they were, nevertheless, 
to share and share alike with their brethren in the general 
wealth and comfort of the community in which their func- 
tions were discharged. This, certainly, is the spirit of 
Christ's injunction. The ancient arrangement for the priest- 
hood, divested of the nomenclature and the stringencies of 
the ceremonial economy, was hereby transferred substantially 
into the gospel dispensation. Levi was again bound to the 
altar; his lot was again parted among his brethren; they 
were bound to cultivate it for him, and bring him the 
increase ; that is, he was entitled to an equal share with 
them in the good things of this life. 

That this is the right interpretation of the matter is 
evident from the words of the apostle Paul in 1 Corinthians 
ix. 13, 14. In vindicating the right of ministers to be 
supported by those among whom they labour. Paid ex- 



5i NEW TESTAMENT PKINCIPLES — 

pressly compares the appointment for their temporal support 
under the gospel with that made for the priesthood under 
the law. "Do ye not know," says he, "that they -wlio 
minister about holy things live of the things of the temple f 
Ajid they who wait at the altar are partakers with the altar ? 
Even so hath the Lord ordained, that they who preaeh tlie 
gospel should live of the gospel." There ^e certain great 
principles implied in this passage, which go a great way to 
settle every question that may arise in connexion with this 
duty. The passage does not determine the amount the 
minister is to receive j it does not determine the mode in 
which it is to be paid him : there were obvious reasons for 
leaving a certain latitude of application to an injunction 
referring to all time and to every country. But the passage 
determines this prindple, even that the minister's right to 
his temporal support is as valid and strong as that of Levi 
to the tithes, and that, correspondingly, the giving of that 
support is as obligatory on the part of the people as was the 
payment of the tithes on the ancient Israelites : and ^rther, 
we think it is fair to infer from this passage that it is the 
will of Grod that the support of the gospel ministry should 
be not less liberal than was that of the priesthood formerly, 
and that His ministers now, in point of social status, and of 
all that appertains to temporal emolument, should occupy a 
relative position with that of His priests of old. 

This, then, is the light in which this matter is presented 
in the Kew Testament. It is an ordinance of Christ. Here 
lies the foundation of the duty, " So hath the Lord ordained." 
Not, so doth the principle of equity demand : not, so do con- 
siderations of self-interest and gratitude prompt; but, "so 
hath the Lord ordained." "We place this argument in the 
forefront as the highest and strongest. We make our appeal 
farst to the conscience. We might argue this duty from a 
host of other considerations : we might urge its performance 



OBBINAXCE OF CHBIST. 55 

from the consideration of equity to the minister : we might 
I urge it from the consideration of a blessed recompense and 
F return to the giver : we might urge it from the considera- 
tion of the temporal blessings which spring up around the 
gospers path, as flowers around a fountain. All these we shall 
speak of in due time — they are valuable subsidiary argumenta 
But we must let the master-motive have precedence. We 
must move the conscience if we wish any real after-help 
from the feelings ; and that only a Divine command can da 
And happily here the command is plain : so plain that the 
simplest cannot misunderstand it, nor the most sophistical 
set it aside. It is, first of all, briefly and emphatically enun- 
ciated by the Lord : " The labourer is worthy of hia hire ; " 
and it is next proclaimed by His servant and apostle as the 
great and fdndamental law of His kingdom : '' Even so hath 
the Lord ordained, that they who preach the gospel should 
live of the gospel** Equity says it is just : gratitude says it 
19 MEET : wisdom says it is expedient : but God says, " I 

OBDAIN.* 

From the summit of the gospd Zion, then, and spoken 
by the voice of the Church's King, comes this preoepl Let 
US hear and obey. It is an old commandment repromul- 
gated j for of this it may well be said, it is no new com- 
mandment, but one that was from the beginning. It existed 
in patriarchal times ; Jacob recognised it when he said, " Of 
all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto 
thee.** It was more formally defined and moi*e stringently 
enjoined under the law ; and now it comes forth once more 
under the gospel, having all the heavenly sanctions and 
gracious motives of this new dispensation to recommend and 
enforce it. 

But let us not, amid the freedom and sweetness of the 
gospel, lose sight of the iBuct that this is a command; and lot 
not its authority as a law be the less felt that it comes fr^m' ;^ 



56 NEW TESTAMENT PMNCIPLES — 

One who puts on so little of the majesty and authority of 
the lawgiver. On that very account it ought to be the 
more cheerfully complied with. If it is not terror that 
urges, but love that draws, how easy is it to obey 1 and. the 
more easy our obedience, the more complete and entire it 
ought to be. Christ is a King ; this truth we ought never 
to forget ; but we do forget it practically when we refuse to 
give what is fair and just to His ministers. It is easy to 
make the confession, to bow the knee, and say Hail ! but 
that confession is worthless, it is a mockery, when we de- 
fraud Him in the person of his ambassador of the homage to 
which, as a king. He is entitled, even the offering of our 
substance for His service. The Israelite of old who with- 
held his tithes virtually denied Jehovah as the head of the 
Jewish state, by refusing the tribute to which God, as sove- 
reign, was entitled, and which the Israelite, as subject, was 
bound to pay. The wrong was done not so much to the 
Levite as to Him whose servant the Levite was. It was 
God who was a&onted, because His command it was that 
was violated ; it was God who waa robbed, because it was 
to Him the tithes were primarily due. " Ye have robbed 
Me." 

The crime is equally heinous still. Christ is as really 
king of the Evangelical theocracy as God was of the Jewish 
theocracy ; the support of His ministers by the offerings of 
the people is as really the ordination of Christ, as the sup- 
port of the priests by the tithes of the Israelites was the 
appointment of Jehovah ; and the church member who fidls 
to implement that appointment, who refuses to the minister 
what is just and right, virtually denies that Christ is Head 
of the ChurcL He refuses the tribute to which, as King of 
Zion, Christ is entitled, and robs Him in the person of his 
ambassador. The minister is wronged and defrauded, no 
deubt, but Christ much more. It is Sis command that is 



OSDINAKCE OF CHRIST. 57 

yiolated, it is His ordinance that is profaned; against ffim, 
•then, eminently is the sin committed. It is not the am- 
bassador, it is the Master that is rejected. "We will not 
have this man to reign over ns. Not only is the sin equally 
heinous, it is much more heinous than under the law. It 
is a sin clothed with aggravations that did not and could 
not attach to it then. The claims of the gospel are now 
better understood ; the motives that enforce them are a 
hundred times more powerful; and the guilt of resisting 
these claims is proportionally great. The tendency of our 
conduct is to extinguish the gospel, to cut off all its blessings 
from the world, and to perpetuate the horrors and cruelties 
of heathenism ; this were a crime of enormous magnitude, 
exceeding the crime of extinguishing Judaism in the same 
proportion in which the dimensions of the world exceed 
those of Palestine. And were every one to act in the way 
we have supposed — in the way that too many professing 
• Christians act — where were Christ*s kingdom? would not 
His gospel speedily disappear, and the grand end of TTis 
coming into the world be frustrated ? 

But, farther, the man who neglectp this duty ought to 
reflect on the position in which he places himself. The 
Israelite who paid no tithes, and who thereby disowned 
Grod*s government over the nation, put himself by that act 
beyond the protection of that government. He pronounced 
a sentence of virtual outlawry upon himself. In the bless- 
ings promised to Israel — ^the dew of heaven above, and the 
&tness of the earth beneath — ^he could claim no share right- 
fully. Living amongst others on whom these blessings were 
bestowed, he shared per force in them, it is true. The sun 
shone and the rains fell on his field, as well as on that of his 
neighbour ; and the earth filled his bams with her harvests 
not less plenteously, it may be, than the bams of the pious 
Israelite. But in the sight of God and of his nation, he was 



58 NEW TESTAMENT PBINCIPLES — 

a robber. He occupied lands for which he paid no rent; and 
every penny of wealth, and every morsel of bread which he 
called his, he had possessed himself of, as it were, by violence. 
Bight he had none. Or if he pleaded that he was no rebel, 
he was compelled to put forward the plea of the pauper — ^he 
was too poor to pay anything, and had to be fed and clothed 
at Crod's and the nation's expense. 

So with the member of the Christian commonwealth who 
refuses the tribute of its Head, defrauds the ambassador of 
his right, and appropriates to his own use what is the gos- 
pel's due : he, too, forfeits the privileges and blessings of that 
kingdom. He enjoys, or attempts to enjoy, immunities and 
honours to which he has no right. He makes a violent 
seizure, as it were, on the blessings of the gospel; forgetting 
that the fiat of retribution, if less palpable, is now mor« 
direct and speedy than under the law, and that God has 
but to speak, and the heavens over him will be as brassy 
and the earth under him as iron. Or if not a rebel, he* 
is a pauper: he claims admission into God's house^ that 
he may be fed, as a matter of charily. We put it to 
the reader, are you willing to accept the privileges of the 
gospel on this plea 1 The widow gave her two mites — ^Maiy 
emptied her box of spikenard — ^the first Christians sold all 
they had, and laid down the price at the apostles' feet; and 
yet you say that you have nothing to give ! How manifest 
is it that your spirit is not theirs, nor is it the spirit of the 
gospeL We would think meanly of the gospel did it not 
nourish a far nobler and more generous spirit than this, 
and we would be ashamed to appear in its train were it 
not followed by men who think more highly of it and 
of themselves than to be content to live on alms. No; 
Christ's kingdom is not a kingdom of paupers, but a king- 
dom of priests: it is not their profession to beg, but their 
function to offer: they assemble in His courts not only 



OBDIKANCE OF CHBIST. 59 

to receive blessings, 'but to present their gifts. "What 
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward 
me )" Such is ever the language of the true disciple. Not 
that he hopes ever to repay, but because it is a necessity 
of his nature so to act, because he wishes to mark his im- 
mense sense of the blessings conferred, and because his Lord 
has so " ordainedp and ordained so, he feels, quite as much 
for his profit as for His own glory. 

But though we have, first of all, held forth the comkaud, 
and appealed to the conscience, that every one who is either 
guilty of the total neglect or of but the partial discharge of 
this duty may know that he is living in violation of a law 
of Christ's house, and in contempt of the authority of the 
£ing of Zion; yet, to the genuine disciple, how soon does 
thd c&mmand pass into the privilege^ and how easily and na- 
turally does the sense of dtUtf rise into the higher feeling 
of law/ But of this we shall have ampler opportunity of 
speaking at a future stage. 



60 ARGUMENT FROM EQUITY. 



CHAPTER IX. 

ARGUMENT FROM EQUITY. 

"We have established the minister's right to his support 
His claim is the strongest imaginable, for he holds imme- 
diately of Heaven. He who clothed him with his office 
gave him a right to be supported in it. What is given to 
the gospel minister, then, is not given in the character of a 
beneficence; it is not a payment which may be withheld, 
and no injustice committed. It is a payment due, on the 
ground, first, that God has appointed it j and second, as we 
now come to shew, on the ground that the minister has 
feirly earned it. Just as Levi's lot was his, though ploughed, 
and sown, and reaped by other hands, so, on the principles 
already enunciated, the minister's fair temporal support is 
his : nay, not so much his as his Father's. It belongs, first * 
of all, to God, who has formally and solemnly set it apart for 
the support of the gospel, and commanded it to be paid to 
His ministers :. and who shall dare alienate it from its proper 
purpose, or call that unclean which God has made holy 9 It 
is His own that is kept fi:om the minister, if he be not sup- 
ported in his office. He is not a suppliant denied, he is a 
labourer defirauded, or rather despoiled of his inheritance. 

The second great argument here is that from equity. It 
is worthy of notice that Christ has so worded the original 
appointment as to include this great argument, "The 
labourer is worthy of his hire." The minister is a " labourer," 



ABOUKENT FBOM EQUITY. 61 

— the gospel ministiy is a "work;" not a post of dignity 
merely, filled that the pension may be drawn, but a real and 
onerous work, yielding great and valuable results to those to 
whom it is performed. " He that desireth the office of a 
bishop desireth a good work." The appointment, then, that 
remunerates the workman for his work has justice written 
upon the front of it. It is not an arbitrary ordination of 
Christ, but one, like all God's ordinations, embodying the 
eternal principles of equity. They " minister at the altar," 
and it is just that " they should live of the altar.*' 

That men may the more powerfully feel the force of the 
plea fix)m equity, God has put himself, as it were, under it. 
He is the Master; the minister is His servant; and, by 
speaking of the relation of master and servant in that con- 
nexion, He plainly intimates that He holds himself bound 
to provide a fair and equitable recompense for those who are 
doing His work. He took care that Levi, who served at 
His altar of old, should have his full share with the other 
tribes in the ancient Palestine. And one of the first 
arrangements, as we have shewn, in the gospel kingdom was 
to make an analogous provision for the successors of Levi in 
the spiritual temple. God will take no man's services, and 
deny him his reward. " Masters, give unto your servants 
that which is just and equal," is His own command, and He 
has gone before man in the observance of His own maxim. 
He wiU not take the services of an enemy. He wiU not 
take the services of the men of the world, without amply 
repaying them. Does He call them to endure toil, or en- 
counter danger for society's sake? they shall have wages — 
such wages as they most desire — fame, wealth, dignities. 
Just to enemies, God can never be unjust to His own 
ministers. It shall never be said of Him that He clothed 
the one in purple, it may be, and gave but rags to the 
other — ^that he fed the one with the foiest of the wheat, 



62 ARGUMENT PROM EQUITY. 

and left the other to be famished. If this has happened at 
times, it has not been the Master's fault, who has amply pro- 
vided for His servants, by ordaining that they should be 
rewarded for their work, and ojccordmg to their work ; but 
it has proceeded from the neglect and injustice of man, who 
has set at nought the express will and ordination of Christ 
herein. 

After God's example, how ought the force of this claim to 
be recognised by man? and there is great wisdom in placing 
the support of a gospel ministry, aa one (^ its subordinate 
grounds, on a principle universally recognised and habitually- 
acted upon. The very ox that ploughs our fields, and by his 
strength opens to us the riches of the earth, we permit to 
share in the blessings he creates. We would account that 
we had defrauded the dumb animal of his right if we com- 
pelled him ever to earn but never enjoy. No: we make 
him welcome to eat to the full of the grass that waves on 
our valleys and the grain that covers our fields. *'Thou shalt 
not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the com.** 
We would account ourselves something worse than mean if 
we did not promptly and cheerfully recognise the claim of 
the humblest menial in our service. No : he has done his 
work, and shall have his wages. Surely we cannot do less 
with regard to the labourer in word and doctrine. 

But eqmJty has respect to the amownJt of support, as well 
as to the foAot of support. This principle is taught by our 
Lord, certainly, when He terms the support of His ministers 
the "hire" of the workman. In all ages there has been a 
relation betwixt the work and the hire. Tho value of the 
one has determined the magnitude of the other. Why not 
here % Any support will not do. It must be a just sup- 
port ; that is, such a support as bears some fair proportion 
to the value of the work done. We don't mean its spiritual 
and eternal value ; there can be no proportion here, unless 



ABOUMENT FROM EQITITT. 63 

in that reward which the Master only can bestow. We speak 
of that reward which comes from society, and which, to bo 
jnst and equal, must bear a proportion to the value of the 
work to society, to the qualifications demanded on the part 
of him who performs it, and to the efforts it costs him. But 
what ought that proportion to be ? We answer unhesitatingly 
the same, or something like the same, with that observed in 
remunerating other public functionaries. A certain amount 
of skill and labour in other departments of duty bring a cer- 
tain return ; why should they not bring the same return in 
this ? No good reason can be pleaded why they should not. 
We know there is an idea abroad that ministers ought 
to be content with less than the average income of other 
professional men, and that they betray something like a 
worldly and avaricious spirit provided they aim at equality 
with lawyers, merchants, physicians, &c. Now, provided it 
can be shewn that ministers need fewer qualifications for 
their ofiice, that the discharge of that office costs them less 
labour, and that its worth to society is less, then, by all 
means, let their scale of remuneration be lower. But if, on 
the other hand, it can be shewn, as we contend it can, that 
on all these points they are at least equal to the classes men- 
tioned, that their qualifications are as numerous, the labours 
of their office as great, and its worth as high, then, on every 
principle of equity and justice, their remuneration ought to 
be the same. The only way in which this reasoning can be 
set aside is by attempting to shew that it is the will of God 
that ministers should lead lives of obscurity and poverty, or 
at least that they should occupy a position considerably 
below that of men who are not more than their equals in 
point of intellectual and official accomplishments, or that 
there is something in the possession of a competency — such 
competency as the middle classes enjoy — that would unfit 
them for the discharge of their duties. We do not think 



64 ARGUMiarr from equity. 

that anj of these propositions will be maintained. Tlie 
very opposite propositions would express the trutL A« 
regards God's will in the matter, that has been sulSEiciently 
indicated in the high social position and ample emoluments 
assigned to the priesthood of old ; and as regards the ques- 
tion of compatability, we do think that a fair competency is 
the position most compatible with the spirituality of the 
minister and the sacredness of his duties, inasmuch as it is 
the position which places him at an equal distance from the 
temptations and harassments which wait alike on wealth 
and on poverty. Provided the mind be engrossed with the 
matter of one's daily bread, it really matters very little 
whether it is the want of it or the too great abundance 
of it. Either way the mind is distracted, weakened, seco- 
larised. 

But let us look a little more nearly at the matter, and see 
how the argument from equity bears on the support of the 
gospel ministry. The ministry, we have said, is a work; and 
it is a work for which a long and costly preparation must be 
made. Any of our handicrafts from which, in a flourishing 
state of the country, our workmen may e9«m incomes not 
more than a third below the average stipends of our ministers 
can be learned in a season or two ; and when once learned 
can be practised through life without further study or effort, 
save, of course, the physical exertion. The more skilled avo- 
cations, and the various branches of trade and commerce 
which yield average incomes considerably higher than those 
of our ministers, may be thoroughly mastered in three or 
four years. Even the learned professions, which conduct to 
high social position and large incomes, are acquired at a 
smaller expenditure of time and money. The pulpit is 
reached only after a training of twelve years j four at the 
grammar school, four at college, and four at the Divinity 
Hall ; to which two years may be added during which the 



ABQUMENT FBOM EQUITY. 65 

future minister is undergoing a sort of novitiate as a proba- 
tioner. Here is a preparatory course at least a third longer 
than that required in almost any other profession. We do 
not say that this training should be abbreviated. Consider- 
ing the dignity of the function, the varied gifts and experi- 
ence essential to its right discharge, and the mighty issues 
dependent upon it, it is all short enough. It is the noblest 
office — " we are ambassadors for Christ " — and the best men, 
with the best training, should fill it. But we say it is 
surely yi«^ that the temporal maintenance of the office should 
bear some proportion to the time and cost expended in pre- 
paring for it. We do not say, place the ministers of the 
gospel above other professional men; convert their manses 
into palaces, and their glebes into princely estates ; this we 
do not ask ; though perhaps something might be urged for 
superiority of status on the ground of the longer and severer 
course that conducts to the pulpit. But though we do not 
plead for superioi'iti/, we certainly plead for equality — equality 
in pecuniary remuneration and social position with their 
compeers ; and certainly the lawyer, the physician, the man 
of Hterature, of art, or of commerce, is not , more than the 
compeer of the minister in point either of natural talent, of 
acquired gifts, or of the real value of his services. With less 
than equality justice cannot be satisfied ; and we plead for 
this not so much for the minister's sake, as for his office's 
sake, and his Master's sake. 

Let us look at the minister after he has reached his office, 
and see how the argument from justice will apply. Bidding 
adieu to days and nights of severe study, as things which he 
once knew, but now is to know no more, is he to sit down 
and enjoy himself? Quenching the lamp which he lit so oft 
at midnight, and putting away the ponderous tome over 
which he pored when soft sleep fell upon the eyelids of 
others, is he to repose upon the fruits of past labours ? Alas, 

s 



66 ARGUMENT PROM EQUITY. 

no I It is no elegant, dignified, or luxurious retreat whicli 
he has reached; it is a post of hard and life-long labour 
■which has been assigned him. His work is but beginning. 
And what a work ! " Who is sufficient for these things ?" 
was the exclamation which a feeling of its difficulty extorted 
from perhaps the most gifled human intellect that has ever 
arisen. Let us cast a glance at the variety of labours for 
which the minister must gird himself, and see how his work 
must tax his resources, strain his energies, and occupy his 
time to the very uttermost. First of all comes his pulpit- 
work. To wield the pulpit with effect — ^to unlock the sacred 
volume, and scatter around, with a skilful and liberal hand, 
its heavenly treasures, demands no ordinary range of accom- 
plishment. To acquaintance with the original tongues of 
the Bible the minister must add the mastery of his own. 
He must be much at home in the history, the opinions, and 
the customs of the nations among whom the Bible was 
written; he must have some tolerable acquaintance with the 
manv learned commentaries and dissertations which the 
theological mind of Christendom has produced in elucidation 
of Holy Scripture since the Reformation; he must know 
the present aspects of the controversies waged against reve- 
lation, and the sources of their solution ; he must be familiar 
with the more important facts of modem science, and the 
leading discoveries of modem travel, bearing as these do most 
intimately upon the historical truth of Holy Writ. Unless 
fiilly armed, he can never be safe on a field so beset by 
enemies. This is a formidable array of requisites ; . and to 
obtain possession of all these requisites two things are 
obviously indispensable — ^means to purchase the proper books, 
and an undistracted miud to study them; we much question 
whether almost any other profession demands so many : but 
the list is not yet complete. When the minister has j 
acquired all this, he has but half mastered his subject. He 



ARGUMENT FROM EQUITY. 67 

must know thorouglily tlie Imman heart; for if he does not, 
his other knowledge will be but of little use to him in the 
pulpit — ^he will appear before his hearers like a man borne 
down by the weight of his armour, or like a man beating 
the air; he must know the workings of the heart, its dis- 
guises, and its self-deceptions, its secret fears and its cherished 
hopes. These, without appearing to see, he must know how 
to move. He must make himself acquainted with the con- 
dition of his flock, their peculiar temptations, their tempers, 
their family circumstances, their sorrows and joys. His 
discourses must not be written for any given number of 
human beings who may chance to assemble, and to whom 
he is to deal out instructions, reproofs, and counsels, at hap- 
hazard, not knowing whether they are the instructions and 
reproofs that are needed or not, but pleasing himself with 
the thought that though most of the arrows shot by him at 
a venture may miss the mark, all will not. He is to have 
in his eye not a chance assembly, but a deflnite and stated 
flock, whose circumstances are known to him, whose hearts 
too are known to him, and to whom, therefore, the Spirit 
helping him, he may be able to speak " a word in season,** 
and to "reprove, rebuke, exhort," with all affection, skill, 
and fidelity. " Now I am ready for my work," says the 
minister, "open the pulpit door and let me enter." Stop 1 
You are not ready yet. " All these things have I attained 
to, what lack I ? " Much study of the Word of God, much 
inward digesting of it in the way of applying it to your own 
heart, and much prayer for the " fire" from above to come 
down and enkindle your discourse. The prayer has ascended, 
the fire has fallen: now you are ready; go, preach: now 
your words will be as "a sharp two-edged sword, dividing 
between the joints and the marrow, proving a discemer of 
the thoughts and the intents of the heart." 
To this prime and cardinal labour the minister of the 






68 AEGUMENT FEOM EQUITY, 

gospel must add a host of subsidiary, but certainly not un-i 
important duties. His humanity will find ample scop0| 
among the poor of his flock, and his affection and counsel 
among the young. Numbers will seek to him for advice J 
and numbers for sympathy and assistance ; some will comQ 
to unburden their sorrows, and some to give vent to their 
joys. He must weep with those that weep, and rejoice with 
those that rejoice. He must be by every sick-bed and by| 
every death-bed, dropping, with the pathos of genuine sym- 
pathy and compassion, into the ear of the dying and thai 
heart of the mourner, the words of heavenly consolation.] 
"We do not hesitate to say, that what with the officesi of 
friendship which he must cultivate with some, and the 
offices of a pastor which he must discharge to all, what 
with the daily reading and study in view of the pulpit, 
there is work here involving a strain both on mind and 
body greater than is demanded by any other profession, the 
highest departments of law and government excepted. And 
there is this difference to be borne in mind as a not im- 
material one, that whereas these last are discharged amid 
the powerful excitements of conspicuous position and golden 
rewards, the labours of the pastor are prosecuted in a sphere 
remote ordinarily from the notice of the world, and where 
his zeal can neither be awakened nor sustained by the ghtter 
of rank or the gifts of fortuna No journal records his visit 
to the home of the widow, or proclaims his deeds of kindness 
to the orphan ; his labours for the dying are entombed 
with them till the last day ; and his studies in the closet are 
not lightened or stimulated by the thought that a listening 
senate will applaud the ingenuity of his arguments, or an 
admiring nation hang upon the eloquence of his periods. 
Uncheered and unrewarded, so far as regards the rewards 
which man can bestow, the pastor must prolong his labours 
far beyond the period when other hard-worked functionaries 



ABGUMENT PROM EQUITY. 09 

retire — ^past the bloom of youth, paat the strength of man- 
hood, far into the eve, till the deepening furrows on the 
brow, and the gathering snows on the temples, and the 
bending frame, which stoops lower and lower to meet the 
grave, give warning that the time is nigh when the weary 
labourer must quit his task, and go to his Master to receive 
his reward — the welcome, even, "Well done, good and 
faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.*' 

Is not this work enough to engross the whole time and 
the whole heart of any man 1 It matters not how powerfiil 
his intellect, or how large his gifts ; more than commensurate 
they cannot be with the demands of his great office. " Give 
thyself wholly to these things," wrote the great apostle to his 
son Timothy. " Give thyself wholly to these things," says 
Christ to every one who enters into the office of the ministry. 
^^ I give myself wholly to these things,^^ is the solemn declara- 
tion and vow of every minister at ordination. But if the 
minister is solemnly bound to give himself t^Ao^^y to his work, 
the people are just as solemnly bound to support him wholly 
in it. The one obligation is but the correlative of the other. 
Most obviously there is a strong plea in equity here. The 
right of the people to the whole time and the whole strength 
of their pastor is undoubted, and is often pleaded : but that 
right is not a whit more undoubted than is the pastor's right 
to his full temporal maintenance from his flock. " Even so 
hath the Lord ordained, that they who preach the gospel 
should live of the gospel :" not paiily by it, and partly by 
some other profession or avocation, but wholly by it. And, 
as we have already remarked, this Divine ordination embo- 
dies the principles of equity, for the apostle observes, at the 
same time, " If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it 
a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things'?" Is the 
minister your debtor? as if the apostle had said. Is he a 
pensioner on your bounty ? Is it a marvellous generosity 



70 ARGUMENT FROM EQUITY. 

on your part that you have given him food and clothing in 
return for time and talents which, if devoted to some other 
profession, would have brought, it may be, high position and 
great wealth ? Is* this a great matter ? Is it not, after all, 
only what is fair, and equal, and just ? It is but the pay- 
ment of a debt most righteously due, and which you could 
not have refused without at once defrauding him and con- 
temning his Master. 

It is, indeed, a fearful crime for the pastor to forget his 
ordination vow, to trifle with the dread responsibilities of his 
office, and to combine other avocations with his work as 
Christ's ambassador. The crime is the greater when the 
office assumed into partnership with the other is a secular 
one. The sacred and the profane, the holy and the unholy, 
are in this case joined, and a most unseemly and incongruous 
union it is. But this may not be the minister's fault — ^it may 
be quite as much the fault of his people. And when they 
deny him a just 8uppo7% when they give what is not suffi- 
cient to maintain him in decency and respectability, what is 
he to do ? He has before him but the alternative of running 
in debt, or of betaking himself to other labours to supply 
what is lacking on the part of his people. To run in debt 
he ought not : for no man is at liberty to do evil that good 
may come ; or to retain his office in the way of disgracing it 
He is shut up, therefore, to supplement his necessities in the 
way that will trench least upon his time, and most consort 
with the sacredness of his office. But if it is fearful guQt in 
the minister to permit himself to be drawn away from his 
office by the love of lucre, it is not less fearful guilt in the 
people to drive him from it by their penuriousness. The 
compact at the altar did not bind one party only, but botL 
If the pastor vowed to give his whole time and strength to 
his flock, the flock vowed to give a whole support to their 
pastor. While they remember his obligations, let them not 



' ABGUHENT FROM EQUITY. 71 

foi^t their won; and neither party can neglect his dutj 
herein without provoking consequences most injurious to 
hotk If the minister's strength is withdrawn from his 
work : if the pulpit and the soul's salvation have their rivals 
in his thoughts — ^it matters not whether from his own world- 
liness or his people's niggardliness : if^ we saj^ the soul's 
salvation be not his one cardinal object^ how soon will he 
feel that his locks are shom^ and that virtue as aforetime 
does not go out of him. The change may not be instantly 
apparent : he may continue^ for a little space, to draw upon 
his former stores, but soon these will be spent, and then the 
evil can no longer be concealed — ^the spiritual bankruptcy 
will proclaim itself The pulpit will appear to have under- 
gone some malign transformation : and as the people wonder 
at the change, where, they will ask, are the prayers that 
were wont to ascend from this pulpit, so vehement, so 
instinct with celestial ardour, that they carried our souls 
aloft into thB very presence of the King Eternal ? Why is 
it that the chariot of fire comes not now every Sabbath 
morning to carry our souls upwards from the earth ? And 
where are now those words of power that were wont to 
come from this pulpit, which pricked the conscience, 
revealed the thoughts of many hearts, and while they fed 
and comforted the humble Christian, smote the sinner like 
the bolt of heaven? Why are our souls not shaken and 
thrilled by such words now? The minister is there; the 
audience is there ; in these respects all is unchanged : but 
the POWER that was wont to rest on both is not there. Alas 
the change ! On our pulpit we may write " Ichabod," on 
our pews we may write " Ichabod," the glory is departed. 
But while the people see and bemoan the change, how 
often do they forget that its originating cause is with them- 
selves % — that the chilling, deadening influence that descends 
from the pulpit upon the pew, first rose from the pew to 



72 ARGUMENT FROM EQUITY. 

the pulpit. It is a poisonous malaria from the fens of 
worldliness. 

Let us look next at the value received from a gospel 
ministry, and see how in this, too, the argument from 
equity applies. Value for value is a universally recognised 
principle of equity. Take the plainest and commonest article 
in our market, we willingly give its price — its fair and full 
price. We do not expect it on any other terms. Why not 
apply the same principle in this case 1 Why not value for 
value here? And who can tell the value of a faithful gospel 
ministry ? But we talk of an impossibility when we talk of 
giving value for value here. Nothing we can give can ever 
repay our debt to the gospel ; the riches of the globe, though 
emptied at the feet of Christianity, would not form an 
equivalent for its blessings. But wherein lies the value of 
the gospel ? Alas ! that we should need to answer this 
question. The gospel caa neither spin nor plough ; it can 
neither weave those curious. fabrics, nor forge those wondrous 
machines in which. consists our wealth. Is not, then, the 
gospel an unproductive labourer ? Alas ! there are thou- 
sands who reason thus — at least who think thus. There are 
thousands who can see v-alue only in what can be weighed, 
or measured, or counted— in short, in what puts money into 
their pockets. In the spiritual power that works unseen 
behind these material agencies they can see no value what- 
ever, and yet in this power lies all the value. Without that 
influence, our morality, industry, and skill, could not exist ; 
and without our morality and industry our wealth could not 
exist. Whether it be individual virtue, social order, national 
riches, or other possession that is of real value to mankind, 
the gospel is the first great creator of it. 

We do not at present speak of the blessings which the 
gospel confers on nations ; we restrict our view to house- 
holds. Who can tell how innumerable are the precious 



ABGUKENT FROM EQUITT. 73 

benefits which a gospel ministry creates within even the 
narrow circle of a family? Enter the dwelling where 
religion reigns, and you "feel at once its power to make 
happy. It is a new clime into which you have entered; 
the breath of love, Hke a gale from heaven, meets you on 
the threshold. There is a secret joy filling every heart in 
that dwelling, beaming in every face, making itself audible 
in every tone. No wealth could buy that happiness. Here 
is value received ; value which costs the family little, and 
yet in worth transcends aU price. 

The gospel sets up an altar in every house ; it makes the 
father a priest. In that arrangement we find the bond of 
domestic union and the fountainhead of domestic virtue. 
By baptism all the members of the family are taken into the 
same covenant of life ; they grow up together heirs of the 
same hope. Thus, the family grows rich apaca Kich in 
what ] It may not be in gold, but in something better than 
gold : rich in love, rich in domestic order and virtue. Their 
fare is simple, their garb is homely, their speech is plain ; 
but their manners breathe the odour of a politeness that can 
spring only from purity of heart and conscious dignity of 
character. Their humble home is pervaded and embalmed 
by an air of happiness which is wanting often in the palaces 
of the great. This is great wealth. Multiply such families 
— ^families whose wealth (of which it may be permitted 
them to be proud) lies in the industry and intelligence of 
their sons, the modesty, virtue, and beauty of their daughters 
— cover the land with such families, and what a land you will 
have ! how rich ! how happy ! how powerful I Such a people 
no power on earth could subdue ; and however stem the clune 
in which their dwelling may be cast, their indomitable energy 
and creative skill will teach the very rock to blossom, and 
the bleakest deserts of earth to bloom with beauty and sing 
for joy. Such is the wealth the gospel creates ; and such is 



74 ARGUMENT FEOM EQUITY. 

the measure in wMcli it blesses its supporters. For every 
penny expended in its support, it yields a return of a thou- 
sandfold. 

It thus appears that the minister is no unproductive 
labourer ; on the contrary, there is no functionary that con- 
tributes more largely to the wealth and happiness of society ; 
and it appears, too, that the gospel is no pensioner on the 
general bounty. When it craves to be supported, it but asks 
to live upon its own. The plea from justice, then, is irre- 
sistibla But how soon does the genuine disciple, who re- 
flects on the value of a gospel ministry, especially to his own 
soul, reach the line where, as we have already said, justice 
merges into generosity, the command to give into the privilege 
of giving, and the sense of duty into the feeling of love. 
When shall I be able to repay my gracious Lord for all He 
has done for me? asks the Christian. All the long way 
from heaven to my prison, where I sat in darkness, the chain 
upon my arm, and the sentence of death upon my soul. He 
came seeking me, and having found me, He bought my 
liberty with His own blood. Since that day how numberless 
have His mercies been ; " how great is the sum of them ! if I 
should count them, they are more in number than the sand." 
Every day he has fed ine with the bread of life, and every 
Sabbath he has feasted me at the banquet-table of the gospel. 
He has counselled me amid all the straits, defended me amid 
all the dangers, and comforted me amid all the sorrows of 
my pilgrimage. " He restoreth my soul, he leadeth me in 
the paths of righteousness for his name's sake." How can 
I but love, and what can love do but ask, " What shall I 
render unto the Lord for all his benefits ? " "I will go into thy 
house with burnt-offerings; I will pay thee my vows, which 
my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was 
in trouble ; I will offer unto thee burnt-sacrifices of fatlings, 
with the incense of rams ; I will offer bullocks with goats." 



AHOXmr OP GIVING — ^TITHBS. 75 



CHAPTER X. 

AMOUNT OP GIVING — TITHES. 

We have set forth so far the claims of the gospel ministiy. 
These claims are founded in its nature and ends; they are 
sanctioned by the authority of God, who has ordained that 
" they who preach the gospel should live of the gospel ;" and 
embodying as they do the principles of equity, they are in 
themselves strictly just and righteous. The gospel is no 
claimant for eleemosynary aid : it is no pensioner on public 
bounty, much less is it a hard master, gathering where it 
has not strewed, and reaping where it has not sown. It 
seeks only to eat of the fruit of its own labours, and that for 
the purpose of enriching man with yet more abundant bless- 
ings. Let us now turn to the other side — ^the duty of the 
Church's members. 

All duty is founded in God's authority. The authority of 
Qod in the matter in hand has been very explicitly made 
known. Now, in express conformity with the ordination of 
Qod in this matter is the nature which has been given to 
the Christian. Conversion brings the old life of the man 
to an end, and gives him a new life, with new principles, 
motives, and aims. He is dead : he has passed through a 
resurrection: he is risen with Christ and /or Christ: he lives 
together with Him in heavenly places. So far as he is a 
Christian, he is wholly consecraied to the objects of this new 
life— he has consecrated himself in soul and body, he has con- 



76 AMOUNT OP GIVING— TITHES. 

secrated himself tlii'ougliout the entire range of his faculties, 
of his actions, and of his possessions. By a necessity of his 
nature, himself and all that is his exist only for God. If the 
Christian is able to realise his real position, as a man wholly 
devoted to God and bound to use every gift he possesses for 
God, as a man, in short, who is the denizen of a new world, 
for which alone he lives, he will find it no very difficult 
matter to regulate himself both as to the mode and as to the 
amount of giving for the ordinances, of the gospel. 

As to the amount, in the high sense just referred to, the 
Christian is bound to give all. But to prevent misappre- 
hensions here, we must make one or two brief explanatory 
statements. Anxious as we are to press upon the conscience 
the duty of giving, we do not wish to go a hair's breadth 
farther than reason and Scripture will carry us. Every 
inch beyond is only so much loss of power to our cause. 
Those on whom we most depend for filling steadily the 
Church's exchequer are precisely those over whom Scripture 
and reason have the greatest power, and who, in consequence, 
will be the least moved by what is exaggerated in statement 
or overstrained in argument. 

We remark^ generally, that though the gospel is the 
highest object, and its universal diffusion, therefore, the 
ultimate end of man, yet this ultimate end is to be prose- 
cuted through a variety of subordinate and intermediate 
ends. The worship of God is the highest employment of 
man, and yet it is not the will of God that all man's time 
should be spent in acts of praise and prayer. He must 
work that he may eat; and in the performance of his daily 
task, however humble, he is serving God. So here; the 
maintenance and diffusion of the gospel is the first and 
highest duty of man. To that duty he is to be wholly 
devoted. But it is evidently the will of God that the earth 
should be tilled, that trade should- be carried on, that kndW- 



AMOUlfF OP GIVING — ^TITHES. 77 

ledge and art shotdd be prosecuted; and, therefore, it is the 
will of God that the time and the money of man should be 
given, in due proportion, to these objects. These are not 
only lawful but necessary, and to neglect them, even for the 
holier end of concentrating exclusively our energies and 
resources on the diffusion of the gospel, would be not only 
eminently foolish, but highly criminal; it would arrest the 
progress of the world, dissolve society, and, instead of further- 
ing, would completely defeat the very end we desire to at- 
tain. It is manifestly the will of God that the machinery 
of life should go on much as at present, only that it should 
be sanctified by being made subservient to man's highest 
good. "We say, then, to all, "Be diligent in business." 
Let the labourer go to his field, the artisan to his workshop, 
the merchant to his counting-house, the philosopher to his 
study; let the earth be cultivated till it bring forth in 
handfiils; let our manufactures be improved to the utmost 
stretch of our ingenuity, and the utmost extent of our 
necessities; let our commerce be extended till it has opened 
highways and created markets in the now remotest wilder- 
nesses of the world; let our science be prosecuted till every 
secret has been brought within our ken, and every element 
has been reduced under our dominion: but let no one of 
these labourers, as he strives to excel in his own special 
department, ever forget that he is Christ's; that he is labour- 
ing for a worthier object than gain; that he is a fellow- 
worker with God; and that, whether he is digging the field 
or ploughing the seas, whether he is deciphering the ancient 
tablets of history, probing the deep secrets of nature, or 
constructing machines of new and marvellous powers, he 
is doing all with an ultimate view to the promotion of one 
paramount and eternal cause, even the erection of Christ's 
kingdom in the earth. In this way man will gain that high 
end sooner than if he prosecuted it alone, because in this 



78 AMOUirr of giving — tithes. 

way he enlists in the service of the world's evangelisation a 
vast variety of powers and forces. He opens his way to the 
very ends of the earth by his mechanical skill ; he conciliates 
and knits together all its tribes by the benefits of commerce. 
By the printing-press he multiplies copies of the Word oi 
God, and by steam he scatters them over the earth. Much 
time may be spent — to some it may appear lost — ^in prepar- 
ing all these forces, and in bringing them upon the scene of 
action, but in the end our progress will be much more rapid, 
and the conquest achieved far more complete, than if we 
had gone forward without waiting for these auxiliaries. 

We observe, in the second place, that it is lawful in every 
one to live according to his station in life. As God, by 
giving different tastes to men, evidently designed that there 
should be a variety of employments, so by giving different 
talents to. men. He evidently meant that there should be a 
variety of ranks in society. It is agreeable, therefore, to 
God's will that every man should live in manner befitting 
his rank. His house, his fdmiture, his table, may all be 
according to his means. The education of his family not 
only ma^y but ought to be such as shall fit them for the duties 
of their station. He may even indulge without sin in such 
things as tend to gratify taste and embellish life ; God has 
made these tastes part of our nature ; to these tastes in man 
He has largely conformed his works of creation, and He 
cannot frown, therefore, on the gratification of them when 
kept within legitimate bounds. We would not forbid 
to the man of wealth and rank the pictures and statuary 
that adorn his mansion within, or the parks and parterres 
that embellish it without. This he may do, provided he 
does not leave the other and greater duty undone. The 
gospel inculcates simplicity of life, but it does not demand, 
and would not be benefited by a return to barbarism. 

We may also remark here that we see nothing incom- 



AMOUNT OP GIVING TITHES. 79 

patible betwixt the paramount claims of the gospel and the 
due accumulation of capital Some have doubted, in con- 
nexion with this subject, whether capital be lawful ; but not 
wisely, we think. Capital is a power. It is one of the great 
powers of the world, and though, like other great powers, it 
may sometimes be guilty of abuse, yet that is no argument 
against its use, much less against its existence. Capital is 
not only itself a power, it is the creator of other powers. It 
is the creator of commercial enterprise, of mechanical skill, 
and scientific discovery. In short, our modem civilisation 
rests to a large extent on capital, and to adopt practically 
the conclusion that it is unlawful, would just be to divest 
Christianity of all the help which modem civilisation can 
give it. Besides, it is certain the men of the world would 
not act on this principle ;• they would still continue to accu- 
mulate capital, and would retain in their hands all the 
influence which capital gives its possessor. Civilisation 
would change sides. From the cause of the gospel it wotdd 
go over to that of the world, and Christianity would have to 
fight a second battle to recover it. The objection arises, we 
think, from an exaggerated idea of the value of mere money- 
giving. There are a thousand other ways in which a man 
can minister to the gospel besides this. There are times 
when his personal or official influence, his learning, his 
eloquence, may be more useful than his money. It ought 
also to be borne in mind that by extinguishing capital, and 
giving all at once, we denude ourselves of the power of 
repeating the gift. Our sudden liberality would create a 
deluge. In grace, as in nature, it is the gentle shower and 
the nightly dews that are most to be desired. 

Having made these statements, for the purpose of obvi- 
ating misapprehensions, we come now to speak of the duty 
itself. The nature of this duty, and the sources of its obli- 
gation, we have sufficiently expounded in the foregoing part 



80 AMOUNT OP GIVING — TITHES. 

of tliis treatisa It remaiiis that we speak of the amowni 
and the rnode of giving. The master principle here is that 
which we have already stated, even that the Christian is a man 
dead to the world and alive to God. His vow of consecra- 
tion includes his substance as well as himself. All is holy. 
Let him carry this principle into all his expenditure, and we 
are assured that, whether he give little or much, he will give 
what God requires him to give. " But," demands the Chris- 
tian, " how much does God require me to give? What pro- 
portion of my substance is due to the gospel?" If you ask 
us to lay down a rule which will guide you, without any 
trouble or consideration on your part, to the amount you are 
to give, we answer that we cannot. The New Testament 
has stated no fixed rule, nor shall we. Each man must 
determine for himself, in the presence of God, what he is to 
give. But though we cannot state the amount, there is, 
nevertheless, a certain proportional amount below which 
you ought not to fall; and though we can devise no formula 
by which, as in a question of arithmetic or of algebra, you 
can make the sum appear, we can yet lay down principles 
which will guide you infallibly, by the help of God*s Spirit, 
and a mind honestly set on the performance of the duty, to 
what is right in this matter. 

"We begin, then, by saying, that the lowest limit of giving 
to the gospel is a tenth of one's income. Ko one ought to 
fall below this, unless in very extraordinary circumstances 
indeed, as in the case of all but entire destitution; in which 
case something is still to be given, though perhaps not a 
tenth. It is, we say, our firm belief, after much considera- 
tion, that a tenth is the least which a professing Christian 
can offer. This belief we rest on a variety of considerationa 
It was the proportion fixed by God himself for the Israelites; 
and, surely, if the Jew gave a tenth for a worship that had 
respect only to a nation, the Christian ought not to give less 



AMOUNT OP GIVING — TITHEa 81 

for a worsldp that has respect to a -world. We are further 
confirmed in our belief from the fact, that this was the 
measure of giving practised by godly men before the Levitical 
economy. The patriarchs gave a tenth; and this would 
seem to warrant the inference, that the duty has a deeper 
foundation than a mere positive enactment, and that it did 
not grow out of the peculiar and temporary arrangements 
respecting the priesthood and nation of IsraeL There was, 
too, a sort of general consent among heathen nations, that 
this was a fair and fitting proportion to be given for religion, 
or what they accounted as such. And looking at the matter 
in these broad lights, there is nothing Jewish about it ; it 
becomes a great moral duty, obligatory through all time. 
But it must be remembered that we make the tenth not the 
point to stop at, but the point to start from. We begin 
here, and we go upward as far as a large heart and a strong 
&ith can carry us. 

But when we say the tenth, we do not mean the tenth 
of one's gross income, but the tenth of one's dear and avail- 
able income. We desire to place the Christian on equal 
footing, as respects this matter, with the Israelite in ancient 
times. Now, the tithes of the Israelite were paid on his 
Ofvailahle income only; for the whole of his income was 
available. He paid no rent for his house — ^he paid no rent 
for his lands; they were his inheritance: taxes to govern- 
ment were unknown to him, at least as distinct payments 
from the tithes. The first tithe may be regarded, in some 
sort, as in lieu of government taxes; it was given to Levi as 
pajrment for both the civil and religious services he rendered 
to the nation, and, till the times of the monarchy, it sufiiced 
to defray all expenses connected with the public administra- 
tion. We do feel, then, that the Christian is warranted, 
when estimating the tenth which is God's, to deduct those 
burdens which the artificial state of society imposes upon 

F 



82 AMOUNT OP GIVING — ^TITHES. 

him. This wealth is strictly no part of his income; he is 
merely the medium of conveying it to its real owner. We 
are also disposed to allow some latitude a^ regards those 
expenses which are inseparable to one's station in Mfe, such 
as one's dwelling, and especially the education of one's 
family. It is better for Christianity that her friends should 
retain in their hands the important offices and influences 
of society, than that by becoming disqualified for holding 
these, Christianity should be compelled to descend to a lower 
platform, and so lose more in the end than all she can gain 
meanwhile by a more liberal supply of money-gifts.* 

It is well to be reminded here, however, that it is mainly 
owing to a neglect of the duty of giving to God that our 
other burdens have become so heavy. It is the neglect of 
the gospel, and the consequent prevalence of vice, that ren- 
der police, prisons, tribunals, and armies necessary. Were 
the gospel supported as it ought to be, government would be 
cheap, the machinery for the punishment of injustice would 
cost us little, and society would return to its primitive state, 
when the tenth of one's substance sufficed to defray botli the 

* Take a minister, for example, or a professor, with £400 of salary. From this 
one must pay, in order to secm-e a mere locus gtandi, or be in a position to live and 
act in one's proper station, £60, at the least, of house rent, £25 of general and local 
taxes, £36 of insiirances— in all fully jB120 ; which is no more his, for any matter of 
choice or personal appropriation, than a farmer's rent for his land is his. The 
farmer has a free house, while the other must pay for one; the farmer has, or 
ought to have, his stock, as capital for his family, in case of his being taken from 
them, for which the other must adopt the substitute of insurances ; and his local 
and general taxes the farmer naturally includes in his rent. The proprietor now, 
or the Israelite with his inheritance in ancient times, might fairly be r^arded as, 
in these respects, still more advantageously situated, in comparison with that of 
the person supposed. It is only, therefore, on what remaius after those necessaiy 
deductions that the tenth properly faUs to be deducted. And, in truth, otherwise 
it might be absolutely impossible for any one, with the income and in the situation 
supposed, to g^ve a tenth of his gross inconde to religious purposes, and still clothe, 
educate, decently maintain his family, and provide for contingencies — that is, sup* 
posing the family to consist of five or six. We are in an artificial state of socie^, 
and this brings with it certain demands which must be set down as a sort of taza* 
tion or ground-rent. 



AMOUNT OP GIVING — ^TITHES. 83 

civil and the religious expenses of the state. We may be 
assured that God would not enact what would be oppressive, 
or what would be found unworkable in a sound state of 
society; and if any incompatibility should appear betwixt 
the two, we may be certain that it is not the institution, 
but society, that is wrong; and no time should be lost in 
bringing society into harmony with the institution. 

Our conclusion that the tenth of his available substance is 
the very least which a Christian ought to give for religious 
purposes, is strengthened by the reflection, that what the 
Isi'aelite gave was not a tenth but a flfth, and that various 
superadded gifts raised that amount to a fourth. It will not 
be maiQtained, surely, that less than the half of what the 
Jew gave is enough for the Christian; or that it is too 
high as a starting point. The duty must ever be in propor- 
tion to the motive. What were the motives presented to 
the Jew compared with those that are presented to us? 
They were as nothing ! No longer circumscribed by terri- 
torial limits, or fettered by ceremonial observances, the 
gospel has risen up and gone forth on its sublime mission of 
enlightening a world. It calls Jew and Gentile into the 
fellowship of the same faith now, and the same glory here- 
after. Pointing to the most distant regions of the earth, 
and to the triumphs to be won there, it solicits our help in 
the name of benighted and perishing nations. " Give me," 
it says to us, " your prayers and your contributions, and I 
will plant the standard of the cross on the ramparts of 
Bomanism and Hinduism. I will overthrow those mighty 
systems of spiritual and secular despotism that have so long 
burdened the world., I will recover the lapsed masses of 
your own country. I will cure the rankling ills of dis- 
tempered humanity, and convert this enthralled and 
wretched world into a very paradise of holy and happy 
nations. I will silence the hoarse trump of war, dispel the 



84 AMOUNT OF GIVING — TITHES* 

black cloud of superstition, break the fetter of the slave, and 
still the cry of oppression and suffering.'* But in proportion 
as its objects are vast, so the claims of the gospel are high 
What cause is like this ? What cause can have claims upon 
our liberality like this 1 Where can our money be so well 
bestowed ? If the Jew could give a fifth of his income for 
objects that were local, and comparatively narrow and insig- 
nificant, how vast and wide ought our liberality to be ! A 
tenth ! why we may well blush to offer such a sum to such 
a cause ! We cannot but feel that we are treating its 
paramount claims with a sort of decent contempt, and that 
we are pouring a kind of refined mockery upon its trans- 
cendently glorious objects. 

Brought thus to the subject of tithes, we must be per- 
mitted to remark that we have not been able, with all our 
attention to the ^subject, to see our way to maintain that 
tithes are binding in their character of a special institution. 
The sum of the argument in their favour is, that as they 
were undoubtedly binding under the law, and have not been 
expressly repealed under the gospel, therefore they are bind- 
ing still; in short, that, being moral and not typical, they 
passed over into the new dispensation, along with the Sab- 
bath and other institutions. But it is material to observe 
that these institutions have been modified, although pre- 
served. The Sabbath, baptism, and the supper have re- 
appeared under the gospel in a new form; and this would 
lead us to expect some change in the institution of tithes, 
consistent with its preservation as a duty, and in harmony 
with the spirit of the new dispensation. As the seals of the 
covenant of grace remain, but freed from whatever was 
national and ceremonial in their outward form, so the great 
duty of giving of our substance to God remains, but freed from 
whatever about it had peculiar reference to the Jews. The 
principle of tithes, then, we think, remains; the institidion 



r 



AMOUNT OP GIVING — ^TITHES. 85 

of tithes is at an end. It is better to cherish liberality and 
benevolence by leaving much to free will, even with some 
loss to the object meanwhile, than to attempt to reach a 
higher ratio of giving by coercing the wills and regulating 
the gifts of men by the authority of law. The Church, on 
the whole, will gain by a liberty without which true 
liberality cannot exist. 

We may further remark, that we desiderate any instance 
among the primitive Christians of the payment of tithes. 
Many of them gave much more, but some of them also gave 
less; and the proof of this we have in the fact that the 
apostle Paul found it necessary at times to support himself 
by the labour of his own hands. And it is further notice- 
able, that though his epistles abound with exhortations to 
Hherality, and though he vindicates his own and his fellow- 
labourers' right to their support, he never once reminds 
those whom he addressed that the institution of tithes was 
still obligatory. He alludes, indeed, to that institution, but 
only as an illustration, and to enforce his exhortation to 
Hherality. The whole course of his reasoning from the 
Levitical tithes goes to shew that he did not wish the primi- 
tive believers to limit their givings to a tenth, or to any 
fixed sum, but to conform their liberality to the claims of 
the gospel and their own ability. 

The great rule, then, that should guide Christians in this 
impoi'tant matter is, what does the gospel demand, and what 
am I able to give 1 The artisan can give so much ; with a 
little wise economy and a little elevating self-denial, he can 
give a tenth; with a strong faith, he may be able to give 
more. He will ply his daily task with none the less courage 
of heai*t and skill of hand that he does so. The man in 
easy, though, perhaps, not affluent circumstances, may rise, 
perhaps, to a seventh, or even to a fifth; the merchant prince 
to a third, or even to a half; and the nobleman, emulous of 






86 AMOUNT OF GIVING — TITHES. 

» 

standing foremost in Christian liberality as in social rank, 
may take precedence of all other classes and dedicate three- 
fourths of his income to the cause of God. Why should not 
this large scale of giving be exemplified? It will be reached, 
we feel assured, when the gospel comes to be more felt as a 
power. It is but a small part of one's income that one can 
spend on personal necessities. Louis Philippe of France is 
said not to have expended more than ^400 annually on 
himself. The vast incomes of British noblemen are spent 
on party politics, and in other less justifiable ways. The 
day will come when what is now given to politics, to plea- 
sure, to folly, and too often, alas ! to vice, shall be given to 
the gospeL 

The New Testament arrangements for giving provide for 
this. They set free the duty from the rigidity of a formal 
precept, and leave to the obligation scope to develop itsel£ 
The obligation acquires a flexibility, a self-regulating power, 
which enables it the more completely to gain its end. It 
can expand as the wealth and ability of the rich expand, and 
it can contract to the narrower limits of the poor man. It 
can accept of his two mites, and yet not oppress his con- 
science with the feeling that he is violating a formal institu- 
tion. It presents the matter of giving less as a duty and more 
as a privilege; and such is the manner of the gospel, even to 
replace the power of precept by the power of principle, and 
for the compulsion of law to substitute the sweeter compul- 
sion of motiva True liberality cannot flourish under a law. 
Its hope is in the creation of a free, liberal, enlarged spirit- 
a soul " that deviseth Kberal things." When there is a law, 
the person feels, when he has reached its limit, that he has 
done enough, and he asks, " Why should I go beyond ?" But 
from the precept turn his eye upon the object; let its great- 
ness and grandeur fill his soul ; he- thinks not now how much 
he mtist give, but how much he can give; his liberality is 



AMOUNT OP GIVINGI — TITHES. 87 

eroked, and pours itself forth in a constant and ever- 
enlarging stream of giving. It is by openirg this free foun- 
tain of liberality in the heart of all the Church's members, 
that we shall ever be able to fill the Church's treasury in 
such measure as it needs to be filled, in order that the 
Church may be able to accomplish her great ends. Thus 
the claim of the gospel rises high above a tenth; whatever 
the Chriiitian is able to give, that, the gospel tells him, it is 
his duty to give. 



88 THE HOD£ OF GIVINQ. 



CHAPTER XL 

THE MODE OP GIVING. 

So much for tlie ammimt of giving; let us briefly indicate the! 
mjode^ which is scarcely of less importance. We portray curl 
own character, and we enhance or diminish the value of the J 
gift by the manner of giving it. First, we ought to give on 3 
principle; that is, we ought to recognise the duty of giving ^ 
for the support of the gospel as one of the grand Christian j] 
duties. " Do this in obedience to me," says Christ. It is' 
an act of homage to our King. We may give from custom, 
and so do the deed mechanically, as it were. We may give 
from impulse. Or we may pay away money for the gospel, 
as we pay away money in the market-place, with the cold, 
commercial spirit of men who give value for value. We may 
buy the. ordinances of grace as we buy the coat we are to 
wear or the loaf we are to eat. This is not the spirit in 
which we ought to give. This is to pay a debt, not perform 
a religious duty. Now, God will not bless the gift, if given 
as an equivalent, for equivalent it is not; it can be accepted 
only as a token of love and thankfulness. Therefore, let 
whatever we give be given with the reverent and devout 
spirit with which the Israelite carried up his offering to the 
temple. Since the Keformation this duty has scarce had its 
place among the other great duties of the Christian life. It 
is time to restore it to its proper rank. Let it be deemed 
nearly as essential to the Christian character to give, where 



THE MODE OF GIYINO. 89 

tlie means exist, as it is to pray or to offer praise; and let 
prayer always accompany giving, that with the gift there 
may go forth a Divine though invisible power, that so it 
may avail to the conversion of souls. 

In the second place, we are to give as God has prospered 
us. If there be a rule in the New Testament fixing the 
amount which each is to give, this is it — "Let every one of 
you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him " (1 Cor. 
xvi 2). How just and equitable the rule ! How infallibly 
does it provide against everything like oppression. It asks 
nothing from the man till first God has given to him. " As 
God hath prospered him." Nor does it ask back all, but 
only a part — a part bearing a certain relation to the increase 
bestowed. How reasonable is it that part of what God has 
given us should be devoted to His service! What is the 
ratio here 1 Is it a simple arithmetical ratio, doubling our 
givings when our gains have been doubled ? We are dis- 
posed to think that a higher than an arithmetical ratio is 
here meant ; and is not this, too, reasonable 1 for it is clear 
that if the man with £100 of yearly income is able to give 
a tenth, the man with £500 a-year is just as able, other 
things being equal, to giV'e a fifth. Or, to state the case 
more correctly, if our income is doubled, our obligations 
remaining much as they were before, we are now able to 
give, not merely double what we gave aforetime, but quad- 
ruple, or, it may be, according to a higher ratio still. 

"As God hath prospered'* you. This lightens the burden 
to the poor, and lays it upon the rich. This exacts from all 
what is just and equal ; and being not a tax, but a thank- 
ofiering, it invests all with the aroma of beneficence. 

" As God hath prospered " you. How sweet the motive 
to obedience ! How well fitted to open the heart in grati- 
tude, and to fill the hand with offerings ! Hath God pro- 
spered us 1 Have our ventures sped 1 Has plenty filled our 



90 THE MODE OF GIVING. 

bams 1 Has the skill of our hand or the strength of onr 
intellect been continued to us ? Has our family been pro- 
tected from danger, or recovered from sickness? Let us 
hasten to acknowledge God's goodness by ministering to His 
cause in measure corresponding to the prosperity He has 
bestowed upon us. It would not only be unchristian, it 
would be unnatural to refiise to do so. Who has so good a 
claim as God ? and what so likely to secure a continuance of 
these blessings in time to come as a thankful acknowledg- 
ment of those already received 1 And let not the rich trust 
"in uncertain riches," but "in the living God," without 
whose providence their possessions are altogether without 
defence, and may, how ample soever, be dissipated in a mo- 
ment. Between the extreme of opulence and the extreme 
of poverty is often but a single step. A single gale may 
engulph the ships of the merchant; a single cloud may 
drown the harvests of the husbandman ; a single spark may 
reduce to ashes the palace of the noble. A panic or a failure 
on 'Change may annihilate in an hour all the hoards of the 
millionaire. We read of such revolutions every day; the 
keenest foresight, the wariest prudence, the largest sagacity 
are ineffectual to guard against fhem : the best security is 
to make a good use of riches while we have them ; and then 
should they be taken from us, we can better submit to the 
dispensation by the thought that while our wealth was with 
us, we used it for the advancement of God's cause, and 
the best interest of our fellow-men. It will put a terrible 
sting into a fall from riches that we have been defrauders of 
God, and refused Him all share in the blessings He be- 
stowed. On the other hand, every pound we give to the 
gospel we put beyond the reach of accident ; we place it 
where we shall find it at a future day; the rest of our 
fortune may be lost or torn from us — ^this we cannot losa 
^ Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not 



THE MODE OF GIVING. 91 

high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living 
God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy ; that they do 
good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, 
willing to communicate ; laying up in store for themselves a 
good foundation for the time to come.'* 

But, thirdly, it appears to be the will of God that this 
giving should be regular, and should take place, so far as is 
practicable or convenient, in connexion with some act of 
worship. So much is intimated by the apostle, if we mis- 
take not — " Upon the first day of the week let every one of 
you lay by him in store." Of the two modes of giving, 
namely, to give in small sums and to repeat the act oft, or 
to give in large sums and only at long intervals, the first i» 
by much the one to be preferred. It is better for the giver. 
It tends to create the habit of giving ; it brings' his mind 
more frequently under the hallowing influence of the act, 
and it enables him more continually to realise the truth, 
that the great end of both life and property is to serve God. 
It is better, too, for the person who receives. The same 
sum is more valuable when paid at short intervals than 
when paid at long \ what comes oft and regularly inspires a 
feeling of greater confidence than that which comes round 
less seldom. It is, moreover, an index of a better state of 
feeling among the members of the Church. It is more satis- 
factory, surely, to find that men give from the steady uniform 
working of principle within the heart, than from the stimu- 
lus of eloquence or the stimulus of a crisis upon the feelings. 
The latter, though productive of more imposing results at 
theiiime, is necessarily transient; the oration is forgotten, 
the crisis has passed away, and with it, in too many in- 
stances, has passed away the liberality it evoked; but 
principle abides, and the liberality that springs from it flows 
forth in a continuous, daily, and refreshing stream. Not 
that we do not delight to see large and princely offerings ; 



92 



THE MODE OP GIVING. 



not that we cannot admire the strength of Christian prin- 
ciple and the heroism of Christian faith displayed in thell 
great sacrifices and herculean efforts by which great crises] 
can alone be met ; but, in an ordinary state of things, weS 
prefer the quiet, unostentatious, steady liberality of Christian! 
principle. The thunder shower and the winter torrent have^ 
their uses ; the crystal waters of the deep, still fountain,! 
stealing noiselessly but continuously forth, are, for ordinary^ 
purposes, much to be preferred. 

The primitive Christians were enjoined to lay by them inj 
store on the first day of the week. This points to hoih 
regularity and the connexion of the act with public wor-" 
ship. It were well that Christians still should act on thisj 
rule. Those of the humbler classes would find great advan- 
tage in doing so. The store of the rich is already gathered,' 
and, to make it available, he needs only the willing mind ; 
but if the poor man would meet the call as it arises, he must 
lay by him beforehand. He should do so in small sums,; 
that the duty may be the easier ; and oft, that the gracious! 
feeling inseparable from the act may be deepened, and the; 
habit of giving strengthened. And what day so appropriate j 
for the consecration of part of our substance to God as the. 
Sabbath ? Amid the Sabbath rest and blessings, the heart is, 
more open. "When enjoying the privileges of the gospeV 
the duty of giving for its support is likely to be the moreij 
felt. And what happier and more sacred rite than the'j 
offering of this first sheaf can inaugurate the week? — ^a rite^ 
tliat is at once a thank-offering for the mercies of the weekj 
past, and a prayer for their continuance throughout that nowl 
come. 

" Let every one" says the apostle, the poor as well as the| 
rich. As no one is exempt from the duty, so no one isi 
excluded from the privilege ; and giving for the gospel isj 
both. The very poorest, then, ought to give something. 



THE MODE OF GIVINO. 93 

The gospel is no respecter of persons : it does not mortify 
the poor man by telling him, I do not need your offering, it is 
too insignificant ; or flatter the wealthy by courting his gift 
because it is large. It welcomes the penny of the poor not 
less than it does the pound of the rich man. " However 
small," it says, " though but two mites, bring it hither : it 
will dignify your own character, and you shall taste the hap- 
piness of giving equally with your wealthier brother, whom, 
though you cannot rival in the munificence of the sum, you 
may rival in the faith and love with which you present it, 
and in the recompense that follows it." The poor themselves 
almost never plead exemption from this duty, and certainly 
they are not their best friends who would persuade them that 
they are too poor to give for the gospel. This is not the way 
to better their circumstances : in truth, it tends but to 
stereotype them in pauperism. " There is that withholdeth 
more than is meet, and it tendeth to poverty." Giving for 
the cause of God is ordinarily the first indications of that 
self-denial, energy, and faith which are sure ultimately to 
raise one from indigence to competency. 

Finally, as regards the mode of giving : we must give will- 
ingly. " Every man, according as he purposeth in his heart, 
so let him give; not grudgingly or of necessity; for God 
loveth a cheerful giver." Even under the former economy, 
the gift wanted its savour if not given with a willing heart. 
" Take ye from among you," said God to Moses (Exod. xxxv. 
6), " an offering unto the Lord ; whosoever is of a willing 
heart, let him bring it, an offering of the Lord : gold, and 
silver, and brass." " The children of Israel brought a willing 
offering unto the Lord, every man and woman whose heart 
Jnade them willing to bring, for all manner of work which 
the Lord had commanded to be made by the hand of Moses." 
What is it that gives a gift its value in the eyes of man 1 
Is it not the love it expresses 1 If given with a grudge, or 



U THE UODE OF GIVING. 

given in the secret and selfish hope of drawing forth a return, 
the person to whom it is offered accounts that he has T^een 
but mocked, the gift is odious in his eyes, and every time he 
sees it the feeling of indignation at the meanness it embodies 
and the deceit it expresses rises afresh in his bosom. But 
in religion, above all things, spontaneity is essential Eveiy 
act and every offering must come from a heart penetrated 
with a sense of the greatness of God's blessings and the little- 
ness of its own deserts, and filled to overflow with love, which. 
finds no greater happiness than to pour itself out in gififcs, 
and having given all it can give, bemoans itself that it cannot 
give more.^ If we give from ostentation, or in the hope of 
getting in return, or unwillingly and of compulsion, we spoil 
the gift ; it wants the rich flavour of love, and going forth into 
the world with the frown of God upon it, it can be expected 
to accomplish but little good. It matters not how princely 
in amount the gift may be, the widow's two mites will out- 
weigh it in solid value, and very probably surpass it in real 
efficacy. "If a man would give all the substance of his 
house for love, it would utterly be contemned." Let the 
Christian, then, give to the very uttermost of his ability j 
but whether he give much or whether he give little, let him 
give it ungrudgingly and with perfect willingness. Let the 
heart ratify the act of the hand. He that gives thus gives 
twice ; he gives his money, and he gives kn influence mightier 
than money, even " the blessing " that accompanies the will- 
ing gift. And to dispose the Christian to give "ungrudgingly 
and with all his heart, let him ponder the many obligations 
that lie upon him. Is he not infinitely God's debtor ? "Was 
not the blood of Christ shed to redeem him 1 Is it not of 
God's mercy that he has not been all his life a worshipper 
of idob, and a sharer in all the superstition and misery of 
those who never heard of a Saviour's name ? Was it not 
God that made the day-spring of the gospel to rise upon 



THE MODE OP GIVING. 95 

h\m — that gospel from which has come all that imparts 
dignity to his own chai^axster, all that gives value to the 
Mendships that surround him, and all that gives stability to 
the hopes that fill his breast 1 Is it not God who has given 
him all his life bread to eat and raiment to wear, and assured 
him that to life's end nothing shall be wanting that is really 
for his good? But the Christian, duly under the influence 
of the gospel, needs no formal argument. He has that 
within him which pleads more powerfully than anything 
else can— even love. Love will ever be giving, and after it 
has given aU, it will still ask, as if it had given nothing, 
'^What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits 
toward mel" 



96 SIN OF INADEQUATE GIVING. 



CHAPTER XII 

SIN OP INADEQUATE GIVING. 

We come now still further to illiistrate and enforce the duty 
of giving for the support of the gospel, by shewing how 
blessed a thing it is to give, like every other subject, this has 
two sides, a negative and a positive. Evils of great magni- 
tude follow the neglect of this duty. Of these we shall 
speak first; and then we shall, last of all, attempt some 
estimate of those numerous and incalculable blessings which 
flow from giving to the gospel, when done in the right spirit 
and in the required measure. 

The evils that follow the neglect of this duty are manifold. 
First of all, we disobey Gk)d and contract guilt. There is 
no more binding command in all the Bible than this, that 
they who enjoy the gospel should support the gospel This 
is a duty not left to be inferred; it is not incidentally brought 
in among the other rules and arrangements of Christ. It 
has been posted in the most conspicuous place, where every 
eye may see it. It stands on the most public pillar of the 
gospel kingdom, graven in letters brief and emphatic, " I 
ORDAIN," so that no one may plead ignorance. If, then, we 
are not supporting the gospel according as Providence calls 
upon us, and as our means enable us, we are living in viola- 
tion of Christ's will in this most important matter. We are 
acting a disloyal part, for we are refusing the tribute due to 
Christ our King; we are acting ^fraudvlent part, for we are 



SIN OF INADEQUATE GIVING. 97 

Tiolating the tacit compact made with our brethren, to take 
an equal share in the common burdens, and especially are 
we violating the compact made with the minister whom we 
defraud of his " hire.*' We are acting a selfish and cruel part, 
for we are doing nothing to extend the gospel to the heathen, 
who, we know, without it must perish ; and we are acting a 
most disorganising part, for we are striking at a fundamental 
arrangement of Christ's kingdom, and doing what, were it 
to be universally followed, would result in the overthrow 
of that kingdom altogether. Such are the evils that enter 
into our conduct — disloyalty to Christ, unfairness to our 
brethren, dishonesty to our pastor, and cruelty to the 
heathen ; conduct, in short, altogether opposed to the self- 
denied, honourable, promise-keeping, loving, and liberal 
spirit that ought to characterise the Christian. The citizen 
who should act thus would place himself beyond the pale of 
the state, and would be comp elled, with the duties, to cast 
off the privileges also, of society. 

" No man liveth unto himself," is the noble motto under 
which the followers of Christ associate themselves. Christ 
their Captain has gone before them in this. He did not 
Ikve unto himself; and all they have been baptized into 
I'Sa spirit. The Christian Church is a brotherhood, into 
which whosoever enters strikes hands with all the others, to 
the effect that he will share equally their perils, burdens, 
and enjoyments. He who shirks these burdens violates the 
vow of br<^therhood. He reverses his motto, and instead of 
Hving for others lives u^on others. He declines the duty, yet 
grasps, or attempts to grasp, the privilege. Even a heathen 
could feel the inspiration of the principle that "no man 
liveth unto himself," so far at least as his country was 
concerned. When the state was menaced, he did not hesitate 
to give goods, and life, and all to save it. In repairing to 
the battle-field he accounted that he but fulfilled his first 

G 



98 SIN OP INADEQUATE GIVING. 

duty to his countiy, and had neither earned special distinc- 
tion nor deserved special reward. And shall it be said that 
the Christian is less self-denied, less noble in spirit, and less 
generous in his sympathies than were the heathen 1 or that 
the love of Christ cannot enable him to do for the Church 
and for mankind what the love of country or of fame could 
enable the Roman to do for the state ? This, indeed, were to 
bring up an evil report of the gospel, as if it gathered to its 
standard only cowards and self-seekers — men who are put to 
shame by the self-denial and the generosity of the world's 
heroes. 

This sin becomes its own punishment "We contract guilt, 
and a sense of that guilt we carry with us into every duty 
in which we engage. Whether we go to the closet or to the 
sanctuary, there comes the recollection of our tmdutiful 
conduct, like an invisible accuser whispering his charges into 
the ear of our conscience. Whether it is praise or prayer 
we engage in, we are alike unfit for the duty. To offer 
praise we feel to be but a mockery so long as we withhold 
more substantial tokens of our gratitude j and to pray is but 
a mockery, too, while doing nothing to help on the accom- 
plishment of our prayers iji the extension of Christ's king- 
dom on the earth* We have sowed sparingly, and we are 
reaping sparingly. Once the light of God's countenance 
shone upon us, and our hearts beat with a joy far transcend- 
ing that which the men of the world feel when their corn 
and their wine are increased. Whither has that sun gone 
now 1 It has set behind a cold, dark cloud. Once we had 
in heaven a better and more enduring substance, the thought 
of which made all the possessions of earth seem but very 
dross. What has become of it now ^ We have not lost our 
title to it, it may be; but we have lost the sense of our 
interest in it : and what have we to shew in its room ? poor, 
miserable riches, which the fire may bum, the moth corrupt. 



SIN OP IKABEQUATE GIVING. 99 

or the tHef steal ! This is all ! Verily we have dearly 
purchased the miserable portion of earth's goods^ which we 
have withheld from God. 

But have we really increased our goods, or added to our 
riches thereby? Has the portion withheld been an actual 
gain or a real addition to our substance? We never yet 
heard or read of any one who brought himself to beggary by 
giving to the gospel, and we doubt whether any one ever yet 
permanently enriched himself by withholding. " There is 
, that scattereth and yet increaseth" There is all the differ- 
ence betwixt giving to the gospel and not giving, which 
there is betwixt the blessing of God and his curse. With 
that curse on our substance all our labour and pains will 
avail but little. We may rise early and sit up late, but 
I instead of increaang our stores, our wealth wiU melt and 
; disappear before our very eyes. We send our ships on long 
' voyages, we seek out the best markets, but our ventures do 
not speed. Our sagacity and our skill are baffled. Why is 
this ? We have defrauded the gospel and its ministers of 
their due, and therefore God writes disappointment and 
, disaster upon our schemes. " Ye looked for much, and, lo^ 
it came to little ; and when ye brought it home, I did blow 
upon it. Why 1 saith the Lord of hosts. Because of mine 
house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own 
house. Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, 
and the earth is stayed from her fruit. And I called for a 
drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon 
the com, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon 
that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and 
upon cattle, and upon all the labour of the hands" (Haggai i. 
9, 10, 11). 

In addition to these temporal inflictions we expose our- 
selves by this sin to the spiritual judgments of God. To 
have leanness sent upon the soul is a yet sorer mark of the 



.100 SIN OF INADEQUATE GIVING. 

Divine displeasure than to have our temporal comforts 
smitten. In Palestine anciently when the tithes were duly 
paid, the shower feU in its season, the fertile land yielded its 
harvests, and com and wine filled the bams and presses, and 
gladdened every home in Israel But when the Levite ^was 
robbed of his tithes and the temple of its offerings, 'Vfrhat a 
different picture was exhibited ! The firmament became 
rainless and dewless, the field was burnt up, the olive i^vas 
smitten, and famine devoured the inhabitants of the land. 
The very earth groaned beneath the sin of the people. Tliis 
sin is not less displeasing to God now; nay, it is far more so^ 
inasmuch as our privileges, the motives to give, and the evil 
consequences of not giving, are all greatly enhanced. And 
as it is displeasing to Him, so He will certainly visit it "with 
his curse. The spiritual heavens will be sealed, and tKen 
there will be seen the spectacle of a dead church, ayetsadd.er 
spectacle than that of a withered land. All life and gro-wth 
will cease. In the room of love and unity will come stiiTeSy 
divisions, and every evil work. The Spirit wiU not honour 
with His presence those ordinances which are so undervalued 
and contenmed. If He does not withdraw them from so 
undutiful a people. He will render them profitless. He mak:es 
them " dry breasts," " wells without water." Their temple 
door may not be shut, but the heavens over them will l>e 
closed, and the shower will not come down in its seaison. 
The minister may appear duly every Sabbath morning in the 
pulpit, but the great Minister of the upper sanctuary will 
not honour the assembly with His presence. The Word 
may be preached as faithfully as before in its letter, but it 
will be felt to be sadly lacking in its spirit : the blessing 
that was wont to attend it is wanting. All externally 
remains as before; but the beauty, power, and atti-active- 
ness of God's house are gone. The people first dishonoured 
it by refusing to bring the tithes into it, and now €rod has 



SIN OP INADEQUATE OITING. 101 

put the brand of His displeasure upon it by forsaking it. 
Its pulpit grows cold apace, its pews grow empty apace. 
The forms of religion begin to be disused and forgotten in 
the neighbourhood. The evening and morning psalm is 
less seldom heard. The oath begins to startle the ear, and 
the tavern and the drunkard to afflict the sight. As piety 
grows ashamed, iniquity grows bold ; and the rapid down- 
ward career of that unhappy community in vice and crime, 
in dependence and beggary, fearfully avenge the sin of those 
who neglected to " honour God with their substance, and 
the first-fruits of all their increase." 



102 INADEQUATS OITING DESECRATES 



CHAPTER XIIL 

IKADEQUATE GIVING DESECRATES THE MIKISTERIAL OFFICE. 

The consequences of this sin fall heavy on the pastor — on his 
office, on his person, and on his family. This, we are avrare, 
is not the most grateful part of the subject. Ministers 
themselves are not much disposed to dwell largely upon it, 
or to bring it frequently or very prominently into view. 
But they must suffer us here. We feel that we should not 
be doing our duty to the gospel did we pass this branch of 
our theme without observation. 

First of all, an inadequate support of the gospel desecrates 
the ministerial office. That office is a power. Man did not 
create it ; it was the gift of God, It was given for the most 
beneficent ends as regards mankind — the implantation of 
the principles of order and happiness in nations, and of holi- 
ness and immortal life in the individual. The integrity and 
vigour of that office it becomes us most sacredly to guard. 
Whatever desecrates the gospel ministry, tends to annihilate 
one of the great agencies for good which God has created in 
the world. Its desecration inflicts a great injury on man^ 
kind, whose benefit we destroy in the same proportion in 
which we weaken the influence of this institution. But the 
inadequate support of the minister does desecrate his oflice, 
sometimes to the extent of rendering it contemptible. This 
it is not difficult to shew. We are so constituted that we 
irresistibly associate dignity and respectability with the 



THE MINIBTEaiAL OFFICE. 103 

possession of at least ordinary comforts. Where these are 
absent, we cannot, unless in great and exceptional cases, 
believe in the existence of those qualities which create power 
or confer authority; and all pretensions to these, when they 
come in this guise, we are apt to treat as offensive assump- 
tions or impudent imposture. To this the office of the 
ministry ia no exception. If we surround it with worldly 
anxieties and penury — with what is low, and mean, and 
grovelling — ^we vastly lower its standing in the eyes of 
"Worldly men ; and even we, who, we shall suppose, are 
(Spiritual men, and wish to hold the office and those who fill 
it in all reverence, are drawn to think more lightly of it — 
its power over us is weakened. When situated thus, in 
unseemly and incongruous conjunction with what is little 
and. worldly, it is seen that, despite our best efforts, contempt 
for the office is engendered. We visit our own fault, and 
the fault of our fellow Church members, upon the man 
who fills it. We are even conscious that we are doing 
him injustice ; nevertheless, the reflection that his office 
is above his position, and that his worth, and learning, 
and epirit, are not to be estimated J^y his worldly wealth, 
goes but a little way to counteract the inward disposition 
to undervalue the office, arising from the trivial and con- 
temptible matters with which it comes to be mixed up. 

We should ill like ever to see a gew-gaw splendour in our 
churches, or anything approaching mitred dignity in our 
ministers. It can never be safe to place a gulf betwixt the 
etation of a minister and the sym];)athies of his flock ; nor 
even, as regards himself, if» this desirable. Princely titles 
do not dignify, but degi*ade the ambassador of Christ ; and 
princely revenues, instead of diminishing, very much enhance 
his worldly anxieties and cares. But in avoiding the one 
extreme, it is not necessary that we rush into the other. 
There is a deftent sobriety, both in the style of our churches. 



104 INADEQUATE GIVING DESECRATES 

and in the station of our ministers, that never can be de- 
parted from without positive injury to religion. The mem- 
bers of the Church are bound to provide in both departments 
what is "honest" in the sight of all men. The Israelite would 
have blushed had the name of Jehovah been enshrined in a 
less glorious fabric than that which contained some poor 
Gentile vanity, or had the high priest appeared at the altar 
in less seemly robes than those of the priests of Baal. The 
Jew (in better times of his nation at least) would have re- 
pelled the idea with scorn, that He to whom belonged the 
fulness of the earth and the glory of the heavens should be 
served by beggarly priests and neglected altars — ^that God*s 
worship should be stinted, and God's ministers starved in 
His own land — ^that the only house which the plenty of that 
land did not fill should be God's, and the only heart which 
it' did not gladden should be the Levite's; he would have 
repelled the idea, we say, as a triumph to Paganism, and an 
insult to Jehovah. 

And so should the Christian feel as regards all that per- 
tains to the celebration of God's worship. He ought not to 
be content to dwell in his own ceiled house, while the house 
of God is roofless. He ought not to be content to sit down 
at his own table, and see it covered with luxuries, while that 
of his pastor is in want of necessaries. He ought not to be 
content to have his library stored with the best science and 
the choicest literature, while that of his pastor lacks the 
most necessary and ordinary works. He ought not to be 
content that his own family are educated in the first style of 
elegant accomplishment, while that of his pastor can with 
difficulty be kept at the most ordinary school, and be taught 
the commonest branches ; nor ought he to be content that 
he has thousands to lay out on the prosecution of trade, 
while but a few pounds to give for the evangelisation of the 
world. This narrow, cold, selfish spirit hsis, we regret 



THE MimSTERIAL OFFICE. 105 

to say, been the predominating one hitherto — ^not that of 

an individual here and there, but that of the vast body of 

professing Christians. If they have paid their miserable 

dues quarterly or annually, they have thought that their 

duty was done, and their responsibility at an end. Their 

^whole liberality consisted in throwing from the table of 

tlieir own affluence a few crumbs to the gospel and its 

ministers. Thus have they obeyed the Saviour's maxim, 

" The labourer is worthy of his hire " ! The minister (so 

they reasoned) has chosen his profession, and must take his 

chances like other men. He may fail ; but so do hundreds 

of lawyers, physicians, and other professional men ; and 

■whsit more have we to do with the one than with the other 1 

How unfair this is to the minister, we need not say. The 

minister has chosen his profession, but not for his own special 

advantage. On the contrary, he has embarked with his flock 

in a common enterprise, the burdens of which all have 

tacitly bound themselves to bear, accordiug to their several 

ability. The minister gives his talents, his learning, his 

life ; this is the capital he invests in the enterprise. He 

has a right to expect that others will meet him on fair terms 

by an equally large investment of the " talents,'* whatever 

they may be, that God has intrusted them with. If the 

whole burden is thrown on him, where is the equity, the 

fairness ? If he occupies the pulpit in penury, while his 

flock occupy the pews in affluence ; if all the sacrifice shall 

be his, and all the enjoyment theirs — then we say, he has 

been most unfairly and unjustly dealt with, and the sin is 

all the greater that it is in violation of the people's sacred 

compact, and in opposition to the love, the liberality, and 

the brotherly-kindness of the gospel. 

This, surely, is not the time to lower the ci-edit and 
curtail the power of the pulpit. Every day new agencies 
are springing up around it of great power and amazing 



106 INADEQUATE GIVING DESECfiATES 

flexibility. With some of these the gospel has to compete; 
others of them it must confront and subdue. And how can it 
be expected to maintain its ground and do its work if but 
meagrely furnished with those subsidiary helps and appli- 
ances with which the rival and antagonistic agencies are, 
for the most part, so liberally supplied? There is the press, 
there is the platform, there is science, there are a thousand 
schemes of moral and social reformation ; and there is, too, 
an impudent and arrogant atheism* These will be the 
ministers or the masters of the pulpit according as it goes 
before them or lags behind them. In the character of its 
handmaids they are capable of rendering it great assistance 
in its work ; but should it lose its control over them, they 
will trample it under foot, and mar the world's work by 
attempting to perform it bereft of the guidance of their 
natural leader. How much need, then, to preserve intact 
the power of the pulpit ! In saying so, we, of course, do not 
overlook the Spirit's aid, wherein its great strength lies. 

Some have said, and more have thought, why this ado 
about the worldly status of ministers, and the decent embel- 
lishing of edifices ? Did not religion thrive better in times of 
persecution, when it had neither stipends nor temples to give 
it outward prestige? Then, some bosky gorge or green 
basin amid the mountains received the worshippers; and 
when the concluding psalm had died away on the moorland, 
the minister retired to his dwelling in the dank dripping 
cave. • Was not the Spirit present then ? was not the 
Word spoken with power? and were not souls converted? 
All very true. But such should extend their argument, and 
plead for persecution also. They should pray for edicts of 
fining and intercommuning, with their inevitable attendants 
— ^namely, dragoons scouring the waste, and the scaffold 
standing in the Grassmarket of Edinburgh. Should these 
things return, we doubt not that God would give strength to 



THE MINISTEBIAL OFFICE. 107 

confront them, and that the Holy Spirit would countenance 
TTis ordinances, though dispensed by men in " sheep's skins 
and goat skins," and without " certain dwelling-place." But 
Tvere such a state of things to be created by the worldliness 
and selfishness of professing Christians, we have no right to 
expect that our neglect of duty would be supplemented by 
a double portion of the influences of the Spirit. When per- 
secution on the one hand, and conscience on the other, compel 
men to go to the mountain and the scaffold, religion is 
lionoured. She becomes sublime and venerable in even the 
•vrorld's eyes. But when it is the niggardliness of her pro- 
fessed friends that thrusts her into circumstances of poverty 
and want, religion is as much vilified as in the other case she 
vvas honoured. Her wrongs come not from enemies, but friends : 
she is robbed and oppressed by the very hands that ought to 
nourish her. The Spirit avenges the affront by withdrawing 
— ^indeed, it is but too evident that He has already withdrawn; 
and instead of appealing to former times in proof that the 
evils we have specified are not the legitimate consequences 
of our neglect to support the gospel "as God hath prospered 
lis," we ought to feel that these times are the strongest po{3- 
sible proof of this, for the men of those days were liberal, 
not of their goods only, the spoiHng of which they took joy- 
fully, but of their blood also, which they freely shed for the 
gospeL Their devotion is the strongest condemnation of our 
selfish and sinftil parsimony. We are sparing of our sub- 
stance, where they were not sparing of their lives. Hence the 
homage which religion extorted amid circumstances of deepest 
poverty and suffering. The bonnet of the outed minister 
became her better in those days than the mitre of the 
enthroned prelate ; and the rock beneath which her worship 
was offered was a temple more sublime than aisled and 
vaulted cathedral. 



108 INADEQUATE GIVING DEGRADES THE MINISTER — 



CHAPTER XIV. 

INADEQUATE GIVING DEGRADES THE MINISTER — MINISTERIAL 

INCOMES. 

If the inadequate support of the gospel desecrates the office, 
it not less degrades the man. 

It weakens the tone and spirit of the minister. The in- 
feriority of his circumstances, as compared with his position, 
oppresses him. The artisan and the day labourer feel no 
such depression, because there is no such disparity betwixt 
their means and their position. The meclmnic dons his 
dress of moleskin, goes forth to his daily task, which is 
cheerfully performed, and returns to a home the comforts of 
which are in keeping with his wages, as his wages are in 
keeping with his station. It is his rank that is humble, 
and not his circumstances that are poor. In sober fact, he 
is a wealthier man than the majority of ministers. His 
dwelling, his food, his clothing, the whole condition and 
enjoyments of his family, are relatively better than those of 
the minister. The real comforts of life are more accessible 
to him, because less of his income is required for appearances. 
And his position has this mighty advantage — it is true; 
there is no latent wrong under it to fret and gall him every 
hour. He can meet his feUow-men, whether his equals or 
his superiors, with the soil of labour upon him, not only 
without being humiliated, but with manly confidence and 
honest pride. He is like his work. 



J 



IHNISTEBIAL INCOMES. 109 

I^ot SO the minister. Between his station, with the pe- 
cuniaiy outlay that station imposes, and his income, there is 
no agreement. His income is relatively below that of many 
of the skilled artisans and labourers of our country j and not 
only so, it is in too many cases absolutely below it. It is no 
uncommon thing for the latter to earn from three to four 
pounds a week. That is affluence itself compared with the 
income of a minister. But coming lower, and taking the 
average wages of our artisans at only half this rate, it is not 
difflcult to shew that an annual income on that scale, £100 
viz., expresses an amount of personal comfort and independ- 
ence beyond the reach of p, minister with a stipend of £150, 
or even £200. We do not speak of the incomes of the 
highest grade of our legal and medical practitioners ; these 
are far beyond what the highest salaried of our city ministers 
can aspire to. Nor do we speak even of the incomes of the 
same classes in our provincial towns, nor of those of our 
merchants, manufacturers, and shopkeepers throughout the 
country. These classes — the highest of them not excepted 
— have not so expensive and lengthy a course of training 
as our ministers; they do not need a higher range of 
accomplishment; and the actual discharge of their profes- 
sion does not demand a greater strain on their mental and 
physical energies ; and yet there is not one of these classes 
— even the lowest — which would not deem the ordinary 
income of a minister a very inadequate remuneration. We 
must descend to a much humbler region, that of the skilled 
labourer, to wit. Even he, it can be demonstrated, occupies 
a position of more substantial comfort and of more real 
independence than the minister. Let us take the average 
ministerial incomes of Scotland at £150 per annum; and we 
think this is rather above than below the mark. Let us 
deduct all those expenses which a minister's position make 
imperative — all those expenses that rrmst be paid before he 



110 INADEQUATE GIVING DEGRADES THE lUNISTER — 

can provide either food or clothing for himself and family — 
and having seen what remains over as real income, we may 
be able to judge how he stands as compared with the labour- 
ing classes of the community. His income in the gross^ 
then, is £150 annually. Put aside so much for property 
tax, so much for poors' rates, so much for the widows' fund, 
so much for professional journeys. He must have a larger 
house than the labourer — this his position makes indispen- 
sable ; put aside so much for that : he must use " hospitality 
without grudging," put aside so much for that : he must 
have books and journals, as tools of trade, put aside so mucli 
for these : he must have better clothes for himself and fa- 
mily — fustian, however it might suit his finances, would 
scarce suit his character : he must have a somewhat better 
education for his famfly : he must give alms to the poor : he 
must have at least one servant : he cannot be in the pulpit 
eyeryr Sabbath of tbe year-absence and sickneas wUl necessi- 
tate help for at least six or eight days. Allow the most 
moderate sum possible for these several items, and sum up 
the whole ; you will find that the aggregate is something 
between £80 and £90. Here is the full half of the minis- 
ter's income gone — gone for purely professional objects — 
gone before a penny can be laid aside for food and the other 
essentials of housekeeping. His gross income of £150 has 
dwindled to £70, and with this poor balance is he lefb to 
meet, as best he may, the expenses of his family. This is 
the most favourable view of the case. A stipend of £100 is 
a more common occurrence than one of £150. From £100 
deduct from £70 to £80 for professional expenses (for where 
the stipend is smaller these will be somewhat smaller also), 
and what a miserable pittance remains as real income. 
Verily, the artisan exceeds the minister, and the day la- 
bourer equals him at least, in their eommand of real comfort 
and substantial independence. 



i 



MINISTERIAL INCOMES. Ill 

The unwillingness or inability of the people to give for 
the support of the gospel is not the only evil with which we 
Lave here to contend; there is an amount of delusion and 
thoughtlessness in connexion with this subject which it were 
doing a vast service to the gospel to dissipate. Many classes 
of the community seem to look upon XI 50 in the hands of 
a minister as a sum quite inexhaustible. The upper classes 
expect the minister to be as well informed and as well 
dressed as themselves, to head charitable subscriptions, and 
generally take part with them in all movements for the 
good of the community, and to do all this on as many 
pounds as they on hundreds. The agricxdtural classes, too, 
exaggerate the capabilities of a minister's income, from the 
fact of forgetting that many of their own comforts come 
tvithout money. Their tables, to a large extent, are served 
of their own fields, whereas every article of food or wearing 
apparel in the manse must come from market, and be paid 
for in money. "Would such sit down and estimate at its 
ordinary market value every article they use, but for which 
they do not pay, because it is of their own production, they 
"would be amazed to find that their housekeeping costs a sum 
far exceeding the ministerial XI 50. The same delusion ex- 
tends to the men of handicraft. The artisan earns his £200 
or his £300, and is affluent. The labourer receives his £75, 
and enjoys a competency; why, surely, he says, with double 
that sum the minister ought to be rich. He forgets that 
the minister must have new tools every month, in the shape 
of books and magazines, while his spade and mattock, which 
are his only tools, may last him half a lifetime. He forgets 
that the minister must have broadcloth, while he is equally 
comfortable and equally respectable in moleskin ; he forgets 
subscriptions, and taxes, and the other professional et ceteras 
already enumerated, which pare down the minister's income 
to a point below his own. And when to inadequacy of 



112 INADEQUATE GIVING DEGRADES THE MINISTER — 

stipend is added irregularity of payment (an error that Las 
its cause very commonly in thoughtlessness, too), an addi- 
tional wrong is done the minister. This last drop makes 
the cup of his harassment and suffering to overflow. This 
is the real state of things. If the other classes of the com- 
munity would but seriously consider it, they would find the 
fact to be that ministers are the hardest worked and the 
worst remunerated class in the community ; and finding it 
so, they would, we believe, pronounce this state of matters 
intolerable, grossly unjust, and fearfully oppressive — ^a wrong 
done not to ministers only, but to the whole community, 
whose interest suffers through theirs ; and they would with 
one voice demand that an end be put to this crying injustica 
To sum up : this whole matter of ministerial support is at 
present, and has long been, on a footing that is altogether 
faulty and false, and ought, without a day's delay, to be put 
right. Why should ministers have more hard work and less 
pay than other men 1 Why should they be denied equality 
in emolument with the middle classes of their flocks, seeing 
they are expected to shew equality with them in expendi- 
ture? And equality is all we ask for them. We do not 
ask style or riches, but ordinary comforts. We do not ask 
that they should be able to live luxuriously, but that they 
should be able to live without carefulness. We seek for them 
not palaces that may be the abode of splendour, but homes 
that may be the abode of comfort; not viands that may 
pamper the appetite, but food that may promote the health; 
not fine linen that may inflame the pride, but decent apparel 
that may become the station. This is the " hire " the Lord 
hath ordained. Who would be the poorer although the 
minister received this just and equal recompense? What 
class or individual would be oppressed thereby? We 
boldly affirm, no one. Nay, all would be gainers, even 
temporally. Why, then, should not the Churches of Christ 



J 



XINISTEBIAL INCOMES. 113 

cmite in measures for putting an end, once for all, to this 
state of matters? It is noways an unattainable object. 
2Tothing is of easier attainment, provided only the method 
"which the Scriptures recommend be taken. That the gospel 
and its ordinances may be adequately supported, it is not 
necessary that the estates of the noble and the capital of the 
merchant be taken to fill the treasury of the Church. It is 
enough that every man give as God hath prospered him. 
Our hope is not in the largesses of the rich, but in the mites 
of the poor. The former, from its very nature, cannot be 
permanent ; the superfluity of one age would be the beggary 
of the next; but the latter may. Let all, then, give some- 
thing, however little. The light that flUs the firmament 
comes forth in atoms; the shower that waters mountain and 
plain comes down in drops; and millions and millions of 
hands must contribute that wealth by which the gospel is 
to be adequately supported. Let prayer be made, that the 
Spirit may come down and open every heart; and when all 
hearts have been opened, all hands will be outstretched, that 
of prince and peasant alike. And as millions of atoms form 
the sunbeam, as millions of drops form the shower, and as 
millions of rivulets form the river on which navies may ride; 
80 these millions of gifts, insignificant individually, will yet, 
in the aggregate, grow into a magnificent tide of Christian 
beneficence ; and when the tithes are brought thus into God's 
storehouse, He will remember His work and His ministers 
on earth, and will open the windows of heaven and pour 
out a blessing till there be not room enough to receive it. 

Let every man decide this matter for himself. Let him 
decide it on his knees before God. How much am I able to 
give for the gospel 1 Let every man decide this question in the 
prospect of that hour when he must part fix>m all he has on 
earth. Let him decide it in the prospect of that hour when 
he must stand at the bar of Christ and give account of the 

H 



114: INADEQUATE GIVING DEGRADES THE MINISTEB — 

use he made of every penny of his property. If we defraud 
the gospel in this matter, those hoards which now we gather 
with so much toil, and contemplate with so much delight, 
will then be unspeakably awful. They will rise up as our 
accusers; they wiU say Amen to our condemnation; and how 
much we glorified ourselves in them here, so much torment 
and sorrow will they give us then. 

There is not a greater vanity under the sun than to toil, 
and to deny ourselves the comforts of our station, and espe- 
cially to stint our contributions to the cause of Grod, that our 
children may be rick Wealth gathered in this way is 
almost always gathered to the ruin of its heirs. Indeed, it 
is only sometimes • that riches, however acquired, benefit 
those to whom they are transmitted. They take away the 
need of exertion, they engender self-indulgent and extrava- 
gant habits, and the wealth earned by toil and parsimony is 
too often dissipated by spendthriftcy and vice. On this 
account it is that the children of humble parents commonly 
succeed better in life than those who inherit fortunes. They 
are trained to sobriety, industry, and self-denial, both mind 
and character acquire a vigour unknown to others, and such 
Tnake a fortune, while others lose one. Parents need deem 
it no misfortune that they cannot leave their children 
affluent; their early struggles will teach them lessons which, 
together with the fear of God, will be of infinitely more 
value to them than any conceivable amount of gold and 
silver. The practical lesson from this is, that those who 
find their wealth increasing, instead of hoarding it up, to the 
hurt of their children, ought to use it as the Lord's stewards in 
doing good. Money is valuable only as a means of enabling 
us to become " rich in good works." When so used, we con- 
vert perishing riches into imperishable treasures, and we come, 
in our own happy experience, to understand the truth of our 
Lord's saying, « It is more blessed to give than to receive" 



i 



MINISTERIAL INCOMES. 1 15 

This evil of an inadequately supported gospel ministry is 
one of ancient standing. It hath prescription on its side, 
like many other evils on our fallen m)rld. That is no reason, 
however, why we should suffer it to continue. On the con- 
trary, the very fact that it has already wrought so much 
mischief, darkened so many homes, worn down with anxiety 
and grief so many noble spirits, and ruined, shall we say, so 
many immortal souls, is the very reason why we should 
strain every nerve to extinguish it now. ShaU its withering 
shadow be stretched out upon the Church fix)m generation 
to generation? Surely no. It is, too, it must be observed, 
a wide-spread evil. An inadequately supported ministry is 
at this hour the reproach, not of this Church, or of that 
Church, but of all Churches. There is not one that can 
say, " I am clear in this matter!" To begin with America, 
The various evangelical denominations in the United States 
comprise about 16,000 ministers. In 1853, the Presbyterian 
Synod of Philadelphia, a body that counts upwards of 2000 
ministers, issued a pastoral address, in which they say, " We 
may claim for these ministers that they are, in the aggre- 
gate, men of liberal education, of intelligence, of earnest 
piety, and of eminent usefulness. They are the efficient 
Mends of popular education. The great charities of the 
country find in them their ablest supporters. They are the 
zealous advocates of all judicious schemes of social progress. 
They are always on the side of law and order. Their whole 
influence goes to extinguish vice, to repress turbulence, to 
impregnate the public mind with virtuous and patriotic sen- 
timents, to mould the discordant materials of our population 
into a homogeneous mass, and to consolidate our social and 
political institutions. . . . And yet this body of men 
is not suppo7^edI So far from being supported, the greater 
part of them are kept in a state of precarious dependence, 
or, as the alternative, obliged to eke out a livelihood by com- 



116 INADEQUATE GIVING DEGRADES THE MINISTEE — 

billing some secular avocation with their appropriate work. 
It has been estimated that the pastors of this country are 
compelled to devote from one-third to one-half of theii' time 
to worldly callings. In numerous instances they are op- 
pressed with habitual anxiety^ and driven to painful expe- 
dients, in order to provide their famiUes with the common 
comforts oi life. Not unfrequently they have to deny their 
children the advantages of a suitable education. They can 
purchase but few books. They must forego those occasional 
remissions of pastoral toil, without which the best constitu- 
tion will wear out prematiurely. And, instead of laying by 
a moderate competence for the future, old age or sickness 
presents itself to their minds associated only with images of 
penury and sorrow; and in the event of death, the cheerless 
prospect before their families is that of the faithful wife, who 
now shares their burdens, driven in her widowhood to some 
laborious occupation for a subsistence, and their children, 
possibly, dispersed here and there, wherever relatives or 
Christian friends can be found willing to receive them." 

This is anything but a bright picture ; and what imparts 
to it its darkest shadings is the fact, that it exists in a country 
where there is not the excuse of straitened circumstances for 
the neglect of Christ's ministers. It is a cold, worldly, un- 
dutiful spirit that has created this deplorable state of things. 
Men are " lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God," and 
therefore His ministers are in want of the ordinary comforts 
of life in a land of rising cities, flourishing trade, and over- 
flowing wealth. The same description would apply to Canada 
and the other North American colonies of Britain, with 
this difference, that there matters are, or were till very re- 
cently, worse. What a contrast betwixt the home of the 
colonist, filled with a rude plenty, and surrounded by acres 
yielding richer harvests every year, and that of the minister, | 
who, simply that he may live, is obliged to conjoin the 



MQaSTEBIAL INCOMES. 117 

labours of some four or six different stations. It is the 
same in our Australian settlements. There, amid the full 
bams and groaning tables of the colonists, the gospel is left 
to pick up but an indifferent subsistence. A little of the 
young wealth of these new countries is all that the gospel 
craves; but the people, in too many cases, are too busy 
getting rich to give it that little. To come to the countries 
of the Old World, the Protestant pastors of France and Ger- 
many are not better supported — as a class, not so well sup- 
ported as the ministers in America, though to the contribu- 
tions of their flocks is added in many cases the beneficence of 
government. As a rule, wherever it goes ill with Chris- 
tianity, there it goes ill with ministers. The low state of 
religion on the continent is well known, and the temporal 
condition of its ministers is correspondingly low j nor do we 
expect it to be raised till the gospel reassert its power. 
Perhaps in no country in the world is the average income of 
ministers higher than in Britain. But even Britain cannot 
free herself from the reproach of an inadequately supported 
gospel ministry. There are parsonages in the south and 
manses in the north over which hangs, day and night, sum- 
mer and winter, the cold cloud of penury. "There is a 
number of the clergy," said the Rev. Hobart Seymour, on a 
late public occasion, " whose incomes are so very small, that, 
when business or health demands for them absence or rest, 
they have not the means of providing themselves with clerical 
assistance to fulfil their duties; being unable, from incomes 
under £150 a-year, to pay for clergymen to take their places 
for a few weeks of repose after years of uninterrupted service. 
Poor curates are frequently obliged to pay two guineas a 
Sunday out of their miserable salaries, varying from £50 to 
£100 a-year, to occasional substitutes. I do not hesitate in 
saying, that there is many a wife who must soon be a widow, 
and many a child who must soon be an orphan, owing to the 



118 INADEQUATE GIVING DEGRADES THE MINISTER — 

total inability of many clergymen to get their places supplied 
during temporary absence. I have myself, when a humble 
curate, stayed at the house of an aged and pious clergyman 
and his wife, now both gone to a happier world, whose only 
provision of food for themselves and their children was pota- 
toes and milk. They were utterly unable to procure more. 
And there are many clergymen's families now living who 
are clothed, and thankfully clothed, in the left-off garments 
of other families collected for them." Is this picture a true 
one? We fear it is. What a reproach to the wealth of 
England ! She lodges in palaces and clothes in purple her 
nobles, her bishops, and her merchants, and leaves many of 
the pious and laborious ministers of the Lord Jesus to be fed 
by the hand of charity, and clothed in the habiliments in 
which respectability can no longer appear. Need we wonder 
that the go^el does not make progress ? Can we look for 
the Spirit to come down so long as the cry of these labourers 
is daily entering into the ears of the Lord (rod of Sabaoth 1 

Scotland, though without the rich ecclesiastical revenues 
of England, has a ministry better supported on the whole. 
Perhaps in no country in the world is the average of minis- 
terial income higher than in Scotland ; and yet the spots of 
heathenism that dot the country, and the suffering silently 
endured in many of its manses, tell that even Scotland has 
not come up to the mark, and that there is still room for a 
greatly enlarged liberality on the part of its Chiistian people. 

So stands the case. All Churches have sinned and come 
short of their duty in this matter. We need a second Refor- 
mation — a reformation in which men shall yield fealty to the 
gospel, not simply by professing its doctrines, but by minis- 
tering to it of their substance. But where and how is this 
reformation to begin? A judicious administration of the 
Church's finances will do something : union among evan- 
gelical- churches, followed by a more equal and economical 



HINISTEBIAL IKCOMES. 119 

distribution of their labourers, will do something : schemes 
of mutual support, by which confidence may be strengthened 
aqid liberality increased among both ministers and congre- 
gations, will do something : but no man has yet deyised a 
scheme, or ever will, which will act as a talisman in indefi- 
nitely midtiplying the Church's income. We know of only 
two forces that can enlarge that income — ^Duty the one, 
Conscience the other. This great duty, in all the solem- 
nity that invests it as an ordinance of Christ, must be 
pressed home on the conscience of every man. Over the 
length and breadth of Christendom the incomes of ministers 
are, on the average, a fourth below what ought to be their 
minimum. Well, then, it is clear that over the length and 
breadth of Christendom the givings of the people, on the 
average, are a fourth below what ought to be their minimum. 
Sere, then, we have at once the evil and its cure. Every 
man, with few exceptions, may safely conclude, "To this 
extent am J a defatdter, and to this extent henceforward 
will I enlarge my givings — a fourth, to wit — for this one 
special object." Whenever this conviction shall have 
become general over Christendom, and been followed by 
the corresponding change of conduct, then, but not till 
then, will the evil of inadequate ministerial support cease 
to be the reproach of the ChurcL* 

The Church, no more than the world, can be reformed in the 
mass. This great reformation must begia with individuals. 
Header, thou art the man. Your inadequate giving it is 
that has brought matters to this pass. "Mine !" you ex- 
claim ; " all that I can give or withhold is so very insigni- 
ficant that it cannot possibly be missed." It is missed. It 
is missed by your Master, who stands beside the treasury as 
of old; and when your gift is cast in, He weighs it in His 
balances and finds it wanting. It is missed by your pastor, 

* See Appendix. 



120 INADEQUATE GIVING DEGBABES THE lONISTEB, ETC 

who lacks it, when he sits down at his meagre board, or sees 
his children without the clothing and the education which 
befit his station. It is missed by your feUo^ church mem- 
bers, who must either bear the burden your shortcomings 
impose, or suffer the Church's treasury to be deficient. Or, 
worse still, they imitate your example, and your little multi- 
plies itself a thousandfold. If, then, you really wish to 
remove this sin from the Church, remove it from your own 
door. If you really wish to bring up the whole Church to 
her duty in this matter, bring yourself up to it. Do not 
look to this wealthy man, or to that numerous congregation, 
and breathe the profitless ejaculation. Oh ! that they would 
increase their liberality; Oh ! that they would give more : 
look only to yourself and to your own givings. Deal with 
this matter in the same earnest, conscientious, and resolute 
spirit, as if it depended solely upon yourself In the presence 
of €rod, and in the light of eternity, and without the least 
regard to what this man gives or does not give, determine 
for yourself what you ought to give; and, with one eye on 
the command, and the other on the promise, that they that 
fear the Lord ''shall not want any good thing/' continue 
all life long in the performance of your duty in this matter. 
It is no difficult or unattainable object we are striving 
after. ITothing is easier, if but the right means are taken. 
All that 'is needed is, that all the members of the Church 
have grace, courage, and self-denial to deal with the matter 
after this fashion. 



IHJUBIOUS CONSEQUENCES OP INADEQUATE GIVING. 121 



CHAPTER XV. 

INJITEIOTJS CONSEQUENCES OP INADEQUATE GIVING. 

"We have already entered on the mischiefs which grow out of 
inadequate giving. Under this head we took occasion, first 
of all, to exhibit the real position of the minister, as com- 
pared with that of other professional men. It is, we have 
seen, greatly below theirs ; and the painful disparity betwixt 
his official status and his actual one is productive of a very 
injurious action upon his whole character. It insensibly 
lowers his tone and weakens his spirit As rust eats at last 
through steel, so this pressure, acting continually upon his 
mind, wears out at last its spring. No vigour, no saliency 
can long withstand this silent but irresistible corrosion — 
this ever-gnawing viper, from whose cankero\is tooth there 
comes no respite. The energy of the man fades apace. 
Though in mid-life, he already appears like one on whom 
old age has laid its withering toucL He is a man who 
lives continually in a cloud of cares : summer aud winter, 
its cold, icy folds are about him : if it opens for a moment, 
it is not to let in the warm sunshine of hope, but to reveal, 
in the far vista, the dire spectacle of an old age of penury. 
It is in these circumstances that you ask the minister to 
be self-possessed, to be tranquil, to be concentrated, and to 
give his every thought and his every labour to you ! 

Let us think how hard a task it is which we exact of him. 
We place him in circumstances in which he is compelled to 



122 INJUBIOUS CONSEQUENCES OF INADEQUATE GIVING. 

think of earthly things ; for if he loves his wife and children, 
he must think of such things, and often with intense anxiety 
and anguish; and yet we expect him to be spiritual — an 
example to his flock of calm, intrepid heavenly-mindedness. 
You must first take the father's heart out of him. To see 
poverty at the door, to tremble at every step that crosses 
his threshold lest it should be that of one who has a claim to 
prefer which he is unable to meet, and yet to live in a kind 
of transcendental or seraphic indifference to earthly things, 
verily he must be more than man, or less than man. You 
shew but little interest in his comfort, or in that of those 
dearer to him than himself; you stand aloof when cares 
thicken and straits press ; and you expect him to be aU alive 
to what touches you, to bear you and your circumstances on 
his heart at a throne of grace, rejoicing when you rejoice, 
and weeping when you weep. You expect impossibilities. 
You must pipe to him before he can dance ; you must mourn 
to him before he can lament. 

The inadequate giver impoverishes his pastor intellectually. 
By the anxiety to which you subject him, you occasion to 
him a vast expenditure of intellect, which, if applied to other 
objects, might achieve very splendid results. As it is, it is 
simply the loss of so much mental power; nay, not only the 
loss, it is the partial destruction of that power; for its exer- 
cise in the case supposed being an unhealthy one, the faculty 
itself wears out. The literary power is one that cannot in 
these days be safely dispensed with; yet how can it be 
attained or cultivated with such means as are at the com- 
mand of ministers? They are denied access to the best 
models. First-class books they cannot purchase. It is by 
converse with these that the pastor is to refine his taste, 
strengthen his understanding, and give precision, vigour, 
and variety to his thinking; yet he is shut out from 
them. It is at the deep, pure fountains of the seventeenth 



INJURIOUS CONSEQUENCES OP INADEQUATE GIVING. 123 

century that he may expect most readily to replenish his 
o"wn. mental stores. But these are to him " a fountain 
sealed, a spring shut up." He has heard the fame of these 
great minds, as the queen of Sheba did that of Solomon, but 
to stand before them daily, and hear their wisdom, is a 
happiness he dare scarce aspire to. Almost equally beyond 
his reach are those able theological works, the fruit of an 
improved exegesis, which issue at intervals from the press of 
Bidtain and Germany. For the same reason he is shxit out 
from the records of science and discovery. Those great facts, 
that so fill the mind with the idea of God's power and the 
-Bible's truth, he can hear only at second hand. In our day 
voices have come from the mounds of Babylon, prophets 
have arisen from the pagan tombs, and their testimony is of 
thrilUng interest, but in vain they speak when there are few 
or none to transmit their voices to the people. What a 
"wretched economy ! In shutting out your pastor from these 
sources of information, you are shutting out yourself. In 
vain we multiply churches if our ministers lack the literary 
and spiritual anointing. In vain we study the splendour 
of our edifices if we suffer to decline the intellectual and 
spiritual glory of our pulpits. 

Again we say to the inadequate giver, you impoverish 
your pastor morally. You close around him almost every 
avenue through which his moral nature can be exercised 
and cultivated. Charity he cannot exercise, or to but a 
very limited extent. In noble objects of a public kind, 
devised for the social amelioration or the intellectual im- 
provement of his fellows, his means rarely permit him to 
take a part. He sees others around 1dm tasting the luxury 
of relieving distress — of making the widow's heart to sing 
for joy — of furthering public schemes of beneficence, and by 
doing so, elevating their natures, enlarging their happiness^ 
and strengthening their influence; but in these labours, with 



124 INJURIOITS CONSEQUENCES OP INADEQUATE GIVING. 

all lihe moral and social benefit resulting from them, lie can 
rarely share. 

You impoverish him spiritually. His straitened circum- 
stances act most injuriously upon him when they shut him 
out from converse with his fellow-men ; ' but they act yet 
more fatally when they shut him out from converse with his 
heavenly Father. This they sometimes do. His spirit is so 
grieved, so burdened, that he has no heart even to talk with 
God. He is bowed down to the earth, and often struggles 
in vain to break the chain, and soar away into the free 
realms above, and forget, in the light and joy of God's favour, 
the little cares of earth. Yet will these cares intrude — 
intrude into his most secret retirement; distracting and 
weakening his energies when he would converse with his 
Father, or would give himself to the study of God's Word. 
The successful prosecution of literature even requires no 
small mental tranquillity ; how much more the sacred office, 
whose responsibilities and anxieties are in themselves so 
weighty! If distracted every day, and every hour of every 
day, by the thought of how food and clothing are to be pro- 
vided for his family, how is it possible that he can bring a 
strong, because a calm and concentrated mind, to the study of 
the sacred oracles % In his library he is surrounded by an 
atmosphere of anxiety. In the pulpit even, he is surrounded 
by the same atmosphere. He has carried the burden thither; 
how is it possible that he can speak as the lively oracles of 
God ought to be spoken ? Congregations ought to remember 
that their pastors are " men of like passions " with them- 
selves. Cares will depress and coldness will chill them just 
as they do others. Kindness will warm their hearts and 
invigorate their powers, and, as a consequence, they will do 
more work, and do it better. The attachment of their flocks, 
next to the presence of their Master, is one grand source of 
their strength and consolation. Were this more generally 



J 



INJUBIOUS CONSEQUENCES OF INADEQUATE GIVINO. 125 

taken into account, it would result in rich blessings to both 
minister and people. ' It is good policy in a congregation to 
take care of its pastor. Those that have tried it have uni- 
formly found it to be so. Perhaps no class of men are more 
alive to offices of kindness than ministers; and never is 
kindness to them thrown away. It returns to the flock in 
manifold usury, in the increased power and larger success of 
tlieir pastor's ministrations. 

In fine, in the unhappy circumstances of which we speak, 
ajxd which, unhappily, are but too common, the whole power 
and efficiency of the gospel ministry visibly decline. The 
pastor cannot bend the calm, full force of his mind to study; 
his subject and his work do not pervade him — are not 
breathed deeply forth in every word and act; the fine tonings 
and shadings of human sympathy, the rich mellow lights of 
spiritual experience, breaking like sunlight upon the land- 
scape of his discourse, all are wanting. In delivery he lacks 
the self-possession and the moral courage necessary for effec- 
tive preaching. He appears in the pulpit with sunken eye 
and clouded brow, with air and attitude constrained, and 
utterance irresolute and feeble. Altogether, the figure he 
exhibits is very unlike that which one pictures to himself as 
the figure of Christ's ambassador, humbly conscious of his 
great office, and discharging it with a calm firmness and 
earnestness, alike removed from fear and from pride. He 
looks as if he felt himself an intruder into the pulpit, and 
i*an the risk of being detected and turned out, instead of 
realising it as the place where he has God's authority to 
stand, and where he has God's message to deliver. 

How sad the change ! Formerly the pulpit was a power. 
The glory that dwelt between the cherubim rested above 
it. To the sinner the voice that came from it seemed like 
the echoes of that awful voice that spoke on Sinai. It 
caUed up his sins in array before him, and pointed his 



126 INJURIOUS CONSEQUENCE OF INADEQUATE GIVING. 

afltighted eye to a judgment to come. To the saint it 
spoke in tones of ineffable sweetness, such as those that were 
heard eighteen centuries ago on the mountains and bj the 
shores of Galilee. The pulpit to him was as a well of living 
waters, to which he came weary of heart, and from which 
he returned strong in spirit. Even beyond the range of its 
regular attendants, the pulpit was a power, scattering over 
the neighbourhood the seeds of virtue, of industry, and of 
prosperity. But now all is changed; there are no longer 
beauty, strength, and glory in the sanctuary. There comes 
no voice of power from the pulpit now. Within the church, 
instead of an assemblage devout, reverent, yet all alive, turn- 
ing as one man, with beating hearts and moistened eyes, to 
the pulpit, there is now a thin gathering of cold, irreverent 
forms, which have sent their bodies to make apology for their 
souls, which linger in their counting-houses, shops, farms, or 
in the haunts of pleasure, occupied with more agreeable mat- 
ters. Outside the church is a disorderly, dissipated, and 
beggarly neighbourhood. All these evils come of inadequate 
giving. Verily their name is Legion. 



BLESSEDNESS OP GIVIBTG, ETC. 127 



CHAPTER XVL 

BLESSEDNESS OP GIVING ^BLESSEDNESS TO THE INDIVIDUAL. 

"We turn now to the other side of the picture — the blessed- 
ness^ to wit, of giving for the gospeL The more this sub- 
ject is pondered, the more will the force of our Lord's saying 
be felt, " It is more blessed to give thaai to receive." It is 
truly a blessed thing to receive the gospel ; it is the day- 
spring to them who sit in darkness ; and whether we con- 
fine our view to one soul, with the misery from which it 
is rescued, or enlarge our vision to a nation, with, all 
the complicated horrors which it brings to an end, and 
■which it replaces with joys durable and celestial, it is im- 
possible to estimate adequately the blessedness of receiving 
the gospeL But it is a yet more blessed thing to give the 
gospel. To do so is to taste over again, in fuUer measure 
and more exquisite degree, the happiness we first felt on 
receiving it. t 

This blessedness is manifold. It is as manifold as are the 
relations which man fills, and as vast as is the sphere of his 
interests. It begins first in the soul, which it fills with 
peace ; it descends next on the family, which it fills with 
love; it then diffuses itself over the neighbourhood, which it 
enriches with order and prosperity; and, lastly, it embraces 
the nation, which it crowns with wealth, glory, and dominion. 

Let us speak first of the blessedness of giving to the inclir 



128 BLESSEDNESS OF OIYINCI — 

vidual It must have struck the reader that much of the 
time and a large proportion of the substance of the Israelite 
were devoted to the worship of God. The due maintenance 
of that worship was not the only thing aimed at in this. 
That worship might have been made less magnificent, and by 
consequence less costly ; but would it have been equally pro- 
fitable for the Israelite had less of his time and less of his sub- 
stance been spent in this way? Assuredly no. It was good 
that he should be brought into almost daily contact with 
sacred persons and appointed mysteries. It counteracted the 
continually operating influences of idolatry and worldliness 
around him. The best way of preserving privileges is 
to use them : disuse is often the precursor of loss. There- 
fore all the enjoyments and occasions of daily life in the case 
of the Jew were linked with the temple and the priesthood. 
It was, moreover, a grand training to benevolence ; and 
latter times have shewn how much the facility of this virtue 
depends on habit. The Israelite was taught what was the 
true end of life; that it is not to enjoy; a poor miserable 
object of living is this, devoid of dignity and barren of 
happiness ; he was taught that the true end of existence is 
to do good and to communicate. 

This habit of giving of all that grew upon their soil for 
the worship of God was a consecration of their whole land. 
It connected the labours of the Israelite in the field and in 
the vineyard with the solemn rites and songs of the temple. 
Whether he was called to cast his seed into the furrows of 
the earth, or thrust his sickle into the harvest of his land — 
whether he pruned his vine or gathered its grapes — ^the hus- 
bandman could tliink that he was doing all unto the Lord, 
and that the labour and the enjoyment alike were sanctified. 
To his senses, thus quickened and purified, every flower and 
blossom exhaled a sweeter fragrance, and a halo of beauty 
rested on every hill and plain of his beauteous Palestine. 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE IKDIYIDUAL. 129 

Is there no need to baptize onr daily labours and enjoy- 
ments in the same sanctified spirit 1 Is there no need, by 
cidtivating the habit of giving, and giving oft, to bring our- 
selves into daily contact with Divine things? Quite as 
much as ever; nay more, owing to the increasing ardour 
•with which business is pursued. If we did not recognise 
religion every day by pausing, amid the busy pursuits of life, 
to recognise her high claims, how soon should we forget 
her altogether ! how soon would the whole bent and feeling 
of the mind become worldly ! The mist arising fix)m earth's 
engrossments would so thicken and darken, that soon we 
should lose sight of heaven altogether, and feel only the 
ground on which we trode. 

There is, then, need that we should hallow our labours as 
the Israelite hallowed his. It is sad to think that we toil 
only that we may eat ; there is oppression in such a thought- 
monotony and weariness in such a task, which at length 
makes the mind to lose its energy and the hand to forget its 
cunning. But when we think that we toil to give a portion 
to God, the mind acquires a fresh spring and the hand a 
new alacrity. Our daily labour, humble as it is, is for' no 
passing enjoyment; it is for more than food and raiment; its 
results rise as high ^ heaven, and run onwards into eternity. 
Everything our hand does, contributes its modicum of influ- 
ence towards the grand result of the world's conversion. Do 
we plough the soil to reap its harvests, or do we plow the main 
to gather the riches of commerce — do we dig deep in thought 
to bring up the hidden and precious treasures of truth — or 
do we sit at the helm of kingdoms, and labour to evolve the 
destinies of humanity — ^we feel that, having God's glory in. 
eye, God's hand is assisting with us, and that His fructifying 
blessing rests on all we do. Do we succeed in our labours 
— do plenteous harvests wave on our fields — do our ships, 
richly freighted, return safely from their far voyages — or do 

I 



130 BLESSEDNESS OF GIVING — 

the growing concord and prosperity of nations proclaim the 
wisdom and patriotism witli which we have laboured for 
their good— our pleasure is the greater that our success has 
come with the token of God's approval upon it. 

By giving a due portion of our substance to God, we vastly 
heighten our enjoyment in what remains. Having honoured 
God's claims, we feel that we have now a right to enjoy. 
He that created the blessing, and poured it into our lap, bids 
us enjoy it. But when we refuse God's due, we cannot but 
feel that we are using what is not our own, and there is a 
sting in every morsel we swallow down. It is honest bread 
we eat in the one case, it is stolen dainties we devour in the 
other — sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly. With 
what zest might the Israelite sit down and enjoy the boun- 
ties with which his fertile land covered his table ! He had 
brought all the tithes into the storehouse, and he felt that he 
was the owner, not the robber, of the plenty and beautv 
which he saw around him. His substance was sanctified b^ 
being consecrated to God ; and in the falling shower, the 
budding vine, and the golden grain, he saw the tokens of his 
Father's blessing. Around him, and around his land, there 
was, he felt, the almighty arm of the Lord of hosts. This 
ecstatic feeling that man never can taste who wastes his 
possessions upon himself, and makes his end in living the 
ignoble and unworthy one of self-gratification. 

As a general rule it may be affirmed, that those enjoy- 
ments which are of an active kind bring with them a larger 
measure of happiness than those enjoyments which are of a 
passive kind. In receiving we are passive ; we submit our 
minds to be acted upon by another. Our attitude is one of 
subordination and dependence. Our happiness centres in 
and terminates with ourselves. But in giving we are active 
A far larger range of faculties is called into play. We 
originate — ^we create ; our happiness, instead of being ab- 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE INDIYmUAL. 181 

Borbed in ourselves, is emanative, spreads itself out, aud 
creates joy and love wherever we look. We multiply our 
o^wn happiness in proportion as we multiply around us 
the hearts in which we kindle the same flame. Verily it is 
xaore blessed to give than to receive. 

This is true of all giving. It is pre-eminently true of 
giving for the gospel, for here we have the reflection of 
the immeasurable and eternal good which we confer on 
those whom we bring within the sphere of its blessings. 
Our happiness is still further ennobled by the thought that 
■we are fellow-workers with God in His plans of transcen- 
dent and eternal good, and that we are workers in no mean 
measure. When a soul is converted, a power is called into 
existence — a power whose action will be felt far and wide, 
and whose influence will be lasting as eternity. Who was 
it that Andrew led to Jesus] His own brother. But 
that brother was Simon Peter, to whom was given the 
honour of opening the kingdom of heaven to the Gentiles'. 
A Christian woman on her way to chapel accosted John 
Williams, and asked him to accompany her. She doubtless 
aimed at nothing higher than the saving of his soul ; and 
yet that was but the least of the consequences growing out 
of what she did. She had brought one to Jesus who was to 
he the apostle of civilisation and eternal life to the savage 
islanders of the Pacific, and whose name is now identified 
with some of the brightest triumphs of the gospel in modem 
times. When by our instrumentality a soul is converted, 
who can tell how many, many thousands may by that act be 
rescued' from eternal death! 

In ^Q, giving for the gospel deepens and enlarges one's 
own piety, and with every addition to one's personal piety 
there is an addition to one's . personal happiness. The soul 
has found its rest when it has returned to God. The person 
feels that his foot is upon a rock, and this gives stability 



132 BLESSEDNESS OF GIVING, ETa 

and strength to the whole man. His bosom is the dwelling 
of a love that runs upwards to God and outwards to man, 
linking him in sweetest ties at once to heaven and to earth; 
and the peace within drops in graciousness from the lips, and 
mantles in sunshine on the countenance. The capacity of 
the man for work is enlarged ; he can stand the cares and 
harassments of life better than other men. He will live 
longer, for the serenity of true piety is fia.vo}LLrable to health, 
ffis sphere of enjoyment is larger; and his horizon is ex- 
tended beyond that of earth and time. Nature is fairer, for 
he can see through it the glory of a reconciled Grod. Man- 
kind are better and nobler, for he knows now the lofty 
virtues and inflexible principles which will animate them 
when Christianised. His whole nature is elevated, refined^ 
and enlarged in its sympathies, and fltted for receiving a 
larger measure of both natural and social enjoyment. Here 
is a happiness which would be cheap though purchased with 
the wealth of a world, and which the rich man, as he sits 
gloomy and fretful amidst his riches, might be but too glad 
to purchase with the half, or even the whole^ of his posses- 
sions. 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE FAMILY. 133 



CHAPTER XYII. 

1 

BLESSEDNESS TO THE FAMILY. 

"We have touclied only the beginning of this blessedness — 
its first dawn in the bosom. In addition to the happiness 
Mrhich it creates within the man, how vast the happiness 
Tvhich it creates around him ! It fills his home, as it fills 
his heart, with countless pleasures. It rears and nourishes 
virtues and joys which no other influence under heaven 
could produce — virtues and joys that were, unknown in the 
^world till Christianity entered it, and which would be un- 
known again were Christianity to leave it. These it diflFuses 
aU over the homes of a neighbourhood, and, in giving for 
the gospel, we very directly foster and multiply these virtues 
and pleasures. 

To the gospel is owing the sweetness and tenderness of 
the conjugal relation. It sanctifies marriage, and makes it 
the root of manifold blessings. To the gospel is owing the 
obedience and love of children, whom it enters into the same 
covenant of life with the parents — " I will be thy God, and 
the Grod of thy seed" — and in whose heart it awakens the 
love of the heavenly Father in aid of that of the earthly. 
To the gospel is owing the fidelity and respect of servants, 
whom it teaches to act not as man-pleasers, but as servants 
of the Lord Jesus. To what is it owing but to the gospel, 
that there are no homes, no happy domestic scenes, like those 
with which Christian Britain abounds 1 Such homes were 



134 BLESSEDNESS TO THE FAMILY. 

unknown in the most enlightened and civilised lands of 
paganism. There is no sun that can ripen such fruit but 
Christianity, brought home to the heart by the Sabbath-day 
ministrations of the pastor, and brought home to the hearth 
by his week-day visits. Are not blessings like these worth 
all the money that can be given for them ? Is any luxury 
of which one may deny himself that he may have to give for 
the gospel, to be once compared with a luxury like this? 
True, it requires a little of his substance ; but, in return, it 
fills his house with love, and it rears up within that house 
virtues — ^those of order, industry, frugality — by which, in 
the long run, it repays a tho\isandfold, even in temporal 
riches, all that the man ever gave for the support of the 
gospeL 

In the Bible we have the promise of " the new heavens 
and the new earth." How and when are the new heavens 
and the new earth to be created? They are already come. 
Where? Look into that family — -look at that community. 
You see all loving all, all praying for all, all working for €dl — 
the man of learning edifying with his knowledge his less 
gifted brother, the man of wealth assisting with his goods his 
humbler brother; each making his talent, whatever it may 
be, minister to the use of all. Here is the germ of " the new 
heavens and the new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.*' 
Here is the hope of the future. Extend such a community 
over the world, and you have a "new creation." Every penny 
given for the support of the gospel brings nearer the era 
when it shall be said, " Behold, all things are become new." 

From the household we pass to the neighbourhood ; and 
here, in the larger circle, we meet the same beauteous fruits 
of order and love, which we saw, blooming so richly, quick- 
ened and nourished by the gospel, within the smaller. The 
gospel is the parent of order. It restrains the hand by 
restraining the conscience. It eradicates disorder and vie- 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE FAMILY, 135 

lence by eiudicating the passions of hatred and covetouS" 

ness, from which they proceed ; and it plants order and 

peace by planting love in the human hearty and making 

each man his " brother's keeper." Other guardians of the 

public peace may slumber; this is always awake. When the 

^world is sunk in sleep, this power keeps watch and ward, 

going its silent rounds, stifling the evil purpose in the bud, 

-whispering into the ear of the assassin and the thief, " Thou 

sbalt do no violence," and doing more to prevent crime, with 

all the pecuniary and moral loss that accompanies it, than 

the whole costly array of policemen and judges, of prisons 

and scaffolds. Were each man to tax himself to the tenth 

of his income for the support of the gospel, he would be a 

prodigious gainer in respect of his other burdens. 

The gospel is the parent of intelligenca The first thing 
to awaken mind in childhood is Christianity ; and the best 
thing to keep it awake in old age is Christianity. The 
power of the gospel to awaken mind is seen in the case of 
the savage. No tribe has yet been discovered so barbarous 
that the gospel is unable to reclaim them. To no region has 
it gone where it has failed to plant intelligence and civilisa- 
tion. There is a native affinity betwixt the gospel and light. 
It founds institutions of learning, and from these, as cen- 
tres, it carries down the light, and diffuses it all over the 
land. It enriches and enlarges the mind of the very peasant 
with its own great truths. The Christian peasants of 
Britain are not what the peasants of Greece and Home 
were, and what the peasants of Italy and Spain at this day 
are — clowns. A purer morality than Plato ever taught has 
refined their minds, and loftier imagery than that of Homer s 
verse has elevated their tastes, and, beneath their homely 
manners, it is not difficult to mark a native dignity and 
a refined grace which belong to no other peasantry on the 
earth. And as regards the more choice of a country's 



136 BLESSEDNESS TO THE FAMILY. 

population, it nurtures into strength those faculties whicli, 
exerted in the walks of literature, of science, or of legislar 
tion, bring to their owner renown, and to the country large 
and enduring good. It is surely a blessed thing to support 
an influence that Alls a realm with light. 

The gospel is the parent of industry and wealth. What 
other proof of this need we adduce than the state of the 
wqrld at this hour? Where is it that we find commerce and 
riches — ^in Turkey where the gospel is unknown, or in Bri- 
tain where it is known? There is a closer connexion than 
many suspect betwixt the pulpits of a country and its looms 
and forges. The skill of the right hand has its source high up, 
even in the lessons of that Book which is weekly expounded 
in the sanctuary. And not the intelligence and skill only, but 
the truth and honesty, without which the confidence between 
man and man, which is essential to commerce, would not 
exist, is created by the gospeL Extinguish the sanctuaries 
of a land, and you extinguish its factories and its marts of 
business. To stint a gospel ministry is, then, wofdlly short- 
sighted and flagrantly unjust. It is short-sighted, because 
you are blighting the source of those virtues that create 
wealth, and it is unjust, because you are denying a gospel 
ministry its fair and righteous share in that very wealth 
which it creates. 

In California, and similar communities, the industrial 
value of the gospel has been signally tested. Even irreligious 
men, who never contributed a penny at home for the support 
of ordinances, have contributed liberally there, being " tired 
of living in a land without religion." The Rev. Martin 
Kellog, writing fi:om California, in the October number of 
the American H<yme Missionary , says, " It reqtdres no long 
residence here to be convinced of the desirableness, the 
pressing need, of the old influences. Those who may have 
been indifferent, or even hostile, at home, are here willing 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE FAMILY. 137 

to purchase, at considerable cost, so essential a good. Men 
-who there belonged to no ecclesiastical society, here become 
the hearty supporters — ^more or less efficient — of any pro- 
mising religious enterprise." This is high praise, because it 
is praise from an enemy. 

In fine, here, liberality to the cause of God stands con- 
nected with the promise of temporal abundance. As God's 
curse can blight, so His blessing can multiply our possessions; 
and that blessing has been repeatedly and most emphatically 
promised in connexion with that virtue. " Honour the Lord 
with thy substance, and the first fruits of all thine increase ; 
so shall thy bams be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall 
burst out with new wine." " The liberal deviseth liberal 
things, arid by liberal things shall he stand." " There is that 
scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth 
more than is meet, and it tendeth to poverty." " The liberal 
soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth shall be watered 
also himself." " He that soweth bountifully shall reap also 
bountifully. God loveth a cheerful giver." Such are a few 
of the promises scattered throughout the Bible, assuring us 
that we shall be no losers by our liberality; but that aU we 
give shall be returned to us, and returned with usuiy. 



138 BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION. 



CHAPTEE XVIIL 

BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION* 

Let us glance for a moment at the blessings whicli tlie 
gospel confers on society. It wjll need here no lengthened 
argument to shew that it is worth a thousand times more 
than all it costa It is not only in the virtuous life and the 
happy deathbed that we see the good fruits of the gospel. 
Look around on these richly cultivated fields and these opu- 
lent cities^ mark that growing trade and that far-extending 
commerce, and observe those stable political institutions 
under whose shield all these flourish, and you behold the good 
fruits of the gospeL The trunk that bears these fair blos^ 
soms— the comer-stone that sustains this goodly farbrio — is 
Christianity. How does. this appear? 

In the bosom of every man is a high and mysterious 
power, which, when in action, governs the man. That power 
is termed conscience. If you can control conscience, you can 
control the man. There is but one influence in the world 
that can control conscience; that influence is the gospel. It 
is the true Ithuriel's spear, at the touch of which the great 
tribunal is seen, and the conscience of the man rises up in 
all its strength. In proportion as you multiply such men — 
men in whose breast you create a power perpetually pleading 
in behalf of right — ^in the dark night, in the solitude of the 
desert not less than in the open day — ^in the same proportion 
do you create a groundwork for law in the community. 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION. 139 

Every law takes for granted that there is a conscience, more 
or less, in the nation. Every law is an appeal to the sense of 
right and wrong in the man ; and every penalty leans upon the 
sanctions of conscience. Where there is no conscience, the 
penalty will not be feared; where the penalty is not feared, 
the law will not be obeyed; and where the law is not obeyed, 
rights will not exist or be enjoyed; there, there will be no 
security for the person, no protection for the property; and 
where there is no protection for property, property can have 
no value. There will be no motive to create it; no branch 
of industry or trade will be prosecuted, or, if prosecuted, 
it will be but feebly. Thus the gospel lies at the foun- 
dation of the whole temporal order and prosperity of a 
country. Should it not, then, be supported ? 

To the gospel we owe our stable political institutions. 
Why are those of other nations so shifting and so short-lived 1 
They want the groundwork the gospel creates on which 
political institutions must rest. They have new theories, 
but the old men. The gospel is a regenerating power, work- 
ing persistently and silently in the heart of the individual, 
leavening the mass, and, in this way, slowly and steadily 
building society up into a temple of order, truth, and justice. 
Could any sum adequately express the worth of the gospel ? 

The pulpit, which is but another name for the gospel, is 
the grand enemy of vice. There is nothing so costly as vice. 
In the first place, society loses the labour of the criminaL 
It loses, in the next place, the sums he squanders in vice 
and dissipation. It loses, too, the property which is stolen 
and destroyed. In each of our large cities the amount of 
property stolen amounts annually to many thousands of 
pounds. Nor is this all, great as it is. Society must tax 
itself to pay officers and executioners, to build prisons, and 
salary judges. The cost is prodigious. Nothing but the 
gospel, which foretells a judgment-day, can restrain vice and 



140 BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION. 

crime ; and were tlie nation to spend on the difl^ision of the 
gospel but half of what it now spends on the detection and 
punishment of crime, what an immense^ gainer it woidd be ! 
For every pound so spent, it would save ten, 

Yice, too, is the great fountainhead of our pauperism. 
Some few there are who have been rendered paupers by the 
events of providence, or by original inferiority of bodily 
and mental powers ; but these are the exceptions ; the vast 
majority of those who are dependent and in beggary have 
so become in consequence of vice. The pecuniary burden 
entailed by that pauperism upon the honest and industrious 
classes is already enormous, and is every year becoming 
heavier. Where shall we look for a remedy for these sore 
evils 1 There is but one effectual remedy, the gospel, even, 
incomparably, the best and cheapest remedy. The gospel 
will soon cleanse a realm from idleness, vagabondism, and 
rags. It feeds the springs of industry, by creating in the 
mind that honest independence which disdains to eat the 
bread of idleness. It implants fingality, moderation, con- 
tentment, and teaches the man to provide " things honest in 
the sight of all men." "Were it more widely diffused, what 
abundance and happiness would cover the country ! Prisons, 
poor's-houses, and penitentiaries would disappear. In their 
room would come smiling cottages, and hives of busy, happy 
industry. Rags would be supplanted by decent raiment ; 
and theatres and gin-palaces by schools and lecture-rooms. 
What a reformation, and at how small a cost ! There is no 
agency so cheap, yet no agency so powerful, as the gospeL 
How much we lose, in even a temporal point of view, by 
our lukewarmness in its diffusion ! Were we but to double 
our contributions to the gospel, we would diminish, in a 
tenfold ratio, our public burdens. There is no money that 
yields so good a return, even in a pecuniary view, as that 
which is invested in the support of a gospel ministry. We 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATIOIT. 141 

may safely reckon that for every penny which we deny to 
the minister, we have to give a poxind to the tax-gatherer. 

The gospel produces, too, a high-toned, chivalrous, and 
patriotic spirit amongst a country's population. This is not 
the least of the benefits which a gospel ministry confers. 
The infusion of the noble sentiments of the Bible, and the 
high lessons and high standard of acting exhibited week 
after week in the ministrations of the sanctuary, insensibly 
mould the character of a nation, and fit it for worthy deeds. 
This alone is of inestimable value — ^worth a thousand times 
over all the money it costs ; for this high-toned feeling is the 
best shield of even the secular and sordid interests of a nation. 
Care for the higher interests of a country, and you may leave 
the minor interests to care for themselves. 

The more the gospel flourishes^ the more will commerce 
flourish. All our mechanical operations take for granted 
the existence of a certain force in nature — the power of 
gravity, to wit. On that force are based all the works we con- 
struct and all the machines we invent. So here. All our trad- 
ing and commercial operations are based on an assumed moral 
power in the community — conscientiousness, to wit. Confi- 
dence is as essential as capital to our commerce. Legal 
bonds will secure the merchant so far against dishonesty and 
fraud, but only so far. Many a debt is paid which never 
would be so, and many a calamity passes him by which 
would strike him with ruin, but for the high principle and 
conscientiousness fostered by the gospel Is it much that 
the merchant should liberally support an institution which 
is the best patron of his own profession and the best guar- 
dian of his earnings ? 

It is the gospel that gives property its value. Under 
feeble laws and tottering institutions property loses more 
than half its security, and by consequence loses well-nigh all 
its value. And what is it that gives law its strength, and 



142 BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION. 

political institutions their stability — ^is it not tlie gospel? 
Why is property less valuable in Spain than in Britain, and 
less valuable in Turkey than in either 1 Because in Turkey 
it is greatly less secure. And why less secure ? Because there 
the pulpit does not exist — ^the healthful, moral, civilising spirit 
of a gospel ministry, making law respected and order loved, 
is not felt. A man may be the possessor to-day of houses 
and lands, but a revolution may break out to-morrow and 
leave him a beggar: his property is worth just what its 
tenure is worth, and its tenure is worth just what the law is 
worth. If Britain is a garden while Turkey is a wild^ness, 
the cause of the difference lies here — it possesses what Turkey 
wants, the pulpit. In every other respect, the latter country 
has the advantage Its sun is warmer, its soil is more fertile, 
and a countless variety of useful and generous fruits are native 
to it : and yet, while golden harvests wave on the fields of 
Britain, while opulent cities rise on its soU, and white sails 
gleam on its coasts, Turkey, by nature the paradise of the 
world, presents a dreary and saddening spectacle of an- 
ploughed fields, of ruinous and tenantless cities, of silent 
shores and untrodden highways, and a population devoured 
by idleness and brutalised by ignorance. 

Who, then, can estimate the worth of the pulpit ? We 
speak not now of its high spiritual and eternal value, we are 
talking of its temporal wortL Who can estimate even that? 
The gospel nourishes and sustains every manly and virtuous 
sentiment, every polite art, every social privilege, every 
political institution. It is the gospel that makes it day ; 
extinguish it, and the thick night of barbarism would settle 
down over aU the earth. And at how amazingly small a 
cost does the pulpit accomplish all this good ! Is there any 
other agency in the world that at a hundred times the cost 
could accomplish even a tithe of what the pulpit effects? 
We unhesitatingly affirm, there is not. To the pulpit, as we 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION. 143 

liave shewn, is owing the certainty and success with which 
our merchants carry on their trade, and the value which 
attaches to the estates of our nobles. Yerily, the pulpit is no 
Tjurden on the nation — ^it is the nation's best benefactor. It 
comes, not gathering alms, but strewing its path with bless- 
ings. And yet, notwithstanding the demonstrable fact that 
the pulpit is eminently the fountainhead of the nation's 
prosperity, what a miserable pittance is it which is given for 
its support I The nation has been growing in wealth, the 
income and the comforts of all classes have been greatly 
augmented; but, like the fleece of Gideon of old, which 
remained unmoistened by the dew which bathed so copiously 
every tree and flower in its neighbourhood, the pulpit has 
not shared in the shower which has been falling all around 
it. Society in this respect has not known its best institu- 
tion; it has acted unjustly towards it; and, instead of 
enlarging its sphere, has narrowed and circumscribed it. 
A more shortsighted policy men covld not have pursued, 
though they had looked no higher than their mere temporal 
interests 1 We trust to see the day when this great error 
will be corrected; and when the Church, awakening through- 
out all her bounds to a sense of her duty, will at once do 
honour to her Head, and justice to herself, by decreeing an 
adequate and equitable support for her ministers; and then, 
a mighty incubus being lifted off, the pulpit will exhibit yet 
more signally than ever its prodigious power to elevate, 
to ennoble, and to bless the world. 

In conclusion, let us remark, by way of pressing home 
this great duty, that the one paramount work of the Chiis- 
tian is the self-same with that which is the one paramount 
WORK of the Church, namely, the evangelisation of the world. 
To him— even the individual Christian — ^the great command 
was spoken, ^' Go, teach all nations." He is to teach all 
nations, beginning with his own. Those at home he can 



144 BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION. 

evangelise with the least expenditure of means and the least 
loss of time, and having converted them, he can associate 
them with himself in the task of converting others. What 
a new and inconceivable impulse would the thorough evan- 
gelisation of our own country give to the work of God all 
over the earth ! It would enlist a countless multitude of 
hands and minds in that great work, now occupied in the 
service of the world or of Satan. Many more contributions 
w;ould flow into the Church's treasury, and many more 
prayers would ascend to the throne of her King. One 
thoroughly Christianised country would be a moral omnipo- 
tence upon the earth. What a unity in its action ! what a 
power in its example ! what an irresistible strength in its 
working ! and what a rich blessing would rest upon aU its 
operations 1 What a glorious achievement to subdue the 
heathenism of Britain, to make our country a fiilly converted 
and sanctified land, and bring the full force of its combined 
Christianity to bear upon the world ! How soon would the 
task of the world's conversion be accomplished ! What is 
wanting, as respects human instrumentality, to a consummsr 
tion so surpassingly grand but a little more of the wealth of 
which Britain is so full ? We appeal to those to whom God 
has given wealth. See to what a noble use you may put 
your money, what glorious achievements you may compass 
by it, and what inestimable blessings you may make it the 
instrument of conferring on the present, and on many coming 
generations ! 

When the late war was at its height, a statesman an- 
nounced the doctrine, amidst the applause of British mer- 
chants, that the first use of money earned by commerce was 
to carry on the war of liberty. Compared with the selfish 
and base uses to which money is too often put, it is truly 
noble to devote it to the defence of liberty. But the Chris- 
tian can imagine a yet nobler use of money. He can soar as 



BLESSEDNESS TO THE KATIOIT. 145 

high in devotion to his king and countty, which are Christ 
and the Churchy as the statesman to his; and he can say, the 
first and highest end of money is the evangelisation of the 
world — the bringing of all its nations to bow before the 
throne of the Lamb. Prophecy reveals a time when this 
truth shall be fiilly recognised, and when '* the gain of the 
whole earth shall be holiness unto the Lord." 

Britain is the great moneyed power of the world; and we 
would have its men of landed and commercial wealth to 
reflect on what a position theirs is, and how vast a responsi- 
bility attaches to it. You stand in the world's centre. 
Britain is the fountainhead of influences which radiate to 
the veiy extremities of the earth. Her language is spoken 
over a large portion of the globe; her commerce brings her 
into contact with every tribe of earth's population; the 
prestige of her name and the fame of her arts have pene- 
trated into the very heart of the African deserts; and her 
political power is felt in every court and capital of the world, 
from Pekin in the east to Washington in the west: her 
spirit and influence have a terrestrial omnipresence-they 
are acting everywhere. Oh ! is it not a matter of unspeak- 
able and infinite moment for the wellbeing of all earth's 
children, that this influence, so universally pervasive, felt 
alike in the divans of Constantinople and the hut of the 
Kaffir, should be thoroughly Christian and evangelistic. 
To you, Christian princes and merchants of Britain, it 
falls to make it so. God has put you at the head of this 
great country. He has given you vast treasures — ^the gain 
of the whole earth is yours. And to what nobler use can 
you devote it — ^to what use that will bring at last so rich 
a harvest of honour to yourselves, and of blessing to the 
world — ^as that of the full and complete reclamation of 
all BritatQ to the observances and virtues of Christianity, 
and the planting of every part of the land with a Mthfrd, 



146 BLESSEDNESS TO THE NATION. 

zedlonSf and well-^mislied gospel miiustry? When this 
object shall have been accomplished — ^when Britain shall 
have become a thoroughly Christianised country — a moral 
atmosphere will begin to envelop the globe^ in which the 
systems of superstition, unable longer to live, will crumble 
and fall, and the clouds of the world'« night will break up 
and flee before the golden light of the long wished-for day. 



APPENDIX. 



On -ps^e 119, the author has taken the liberty of stating his conviction 
that the givings of the members of the Ghnrch, all over Christendom, for 
the support of a gospel ministry, are a fourth below what onght to be their 
minvrnvm. He believes he would have been nearer the truth had he said a 
half. He thinks it better, however, to put the matter in a form that will carry 
universal acquiescence. The fact, then, on the admission of all, the author 
takes it, is this, that the Church catholic, in the matter of the sustentation 
of her ministry, is a full fov/rth below what ought to be her very lowest point. 
It is something to have put the evil before the Church in a definite form. 
Let the Church look at it steadily. This is the first step towards a refor- 
mation. But how or where is that reformation to begin? In speaking to 
this point, the author may be permitted to state his own experience in con- 
nexion with that branch of the Church to which he belongs, fraught as that 
experience is with encouragement to all the Churches of Christ. 

It was early in June 1854. The General Assembly of the Free Church of 
Scotland had just closed its sittings. A dividend had been declared from 
the Sustentation Fund slightly below that of the previous year, and the 
author, having occasion, from his connexion with the Home cmd Foreign 
Record of the Free Church, to write very often, and think occasionally, on 
the subject of the sustentation of the ministry, was turuing over the matter 
of the year's deficit very anxiously in his mind. While so occupied, he had 
occasion to visit a friend at a short distance from town. The evening was 
one of the loveliest of the season, and the various vegetation which covered 
the fields, refceshed by the mild showers of the momiug, and stimulated by 
the warmth of the afternoon, was giving signs of very luxuriant growth. 
Fulling up a stalk of wheat, his friend remarked to the author that its 
growth for the day might be a fourth of an inch. "This," he continued, 
''seems a small matter, and will go but a little way towards filling our 



148 APPENDIX. 

barns ; bnt mtdtiply it by the number of stalks in the whole fields and you 
wiQ find that a great many waggons would scarce suffice to carry home the 
produce of this single field for this one day." 

The remark flashed on the author as strikingly applicable to the subject 
on which his mind was dwelling. In fiict, it suggested the true mode (fur- 
nishing at the same time its finest illustration) of raising the Sustentalion 
Fund. Here, thought the author, is the way in which the great Creator 
feeds nations. Here is the way in which Nature provides that great susten- 
tation fond by which she supports the species. She does not exact of the 
productive powers of the earth any spasmodic effort : she does not unduly 
tax this or that field by requiring of it an increase miraculously large : she 
teaches every blade of grass, and every stalk of com, to grow after its own 
measure — ^to add, day by day, a little to its stature ; and in this way, in 
due time, she prepares her harvests, and feeds every thing that lives. 

So, thought the author, must the Church proceed, if she would realise a 
competent maintenance for her ministers. She must not lean on the gifts 
of the rich, or be content with the temporary success of a spasmodic effort ; 
but, casting herself on the great principles of the question, and bringing 
these principles to bear on every mind, she must, by a natural, easy, smd 
universal operation, raise the scale of giving permanently over the whole 
Church. She must find how much she is deficient, and call on each of her 
members, the humblest not excepted, to supplement that deficiency, by an 
increase, after his measure, upon his present givings. And turning to that 
part of the subject which regarded the Free Church, the author found that 
she had fixed the minimum stipend of her ministers at £150 ; that in order to 
realise that mvnimvm, she must add about £25,000, or a fourth more, to 
her present annual income ; and that the only way in which she could do 
this was, by every one of her four hundred thousand contributors making a 
proportional increase on his present monthly contributions. And pointing 
out how very small a sum from each individual, in addition to what he 
now gave, would suffice to extinguish the deficit and raise the stipend to 
its minimum, the author laid his suggestion before the Free Church through 
her Record, with the request that, through the Church's machinery, every 
member should have an opportunity afforded him of co-operating in the pkm. 
Our laymen, who have ever evinced an enlightened and generous sense of what 
is due to the ministerial office in respect of temporal emolument, were the 
first, as was fitting, to take action on the point. Thereafter it was embraced 
by our ministers ; and the Convener of the Sustentation Committee, the 
Kev. Dr Buchanan of Glasgow, adopting the proposal humbly suggested by 
the author, has, with that calm judgment and untiring energy for which he 
is distinguished, now conducted it, under the name of the One-Fourth More 
Movement, to all but complete success. 

The author has entered thus minutely into these details, because, in 
recommending a similar movement throughout the Church catholic and 



APPENDIX. 149 

universal^ he wishes to shew how easily the thing may be done ; and that it 
is no untried and doubtfol experiment which he recommends^ but an expe- 
riment which has already been tested, and has succeeded in. one section of 
the Church. Let each branch of the Church of Christ give its serious atten- 
tion to this great subject. Especially let the laity, who share so imme- 
diately and laigely in the vast and growing prosperity of the empire, do so. 
Let them take the whole position of a minister into account ; let them 
fix the minimum on which, a(KX)rding to their judgment, he can with 
respectability £dl that position, and discharge without oppression its claims ; 
and having found the minimum of what he ought to receive, let them next 
find what he actucUly receives ; and having struck a balance — ^a deficit in the 
minority of cases, a very great deficit in some cases — ^let them put it in the 
power of every man to wipe out that deficit by the small, the very small, 
additional contribution which will suffice, in virtue of a common effort, to 
extinguish it. In this way only is the remedy to be sought. Surely, in 
each of the evangelical Churches of Great Britain, half-a-dozen laymen will 
be found public-spirited enough to initiate such a movement. 

The author has seen numerous proposals, emanating on both sides the 
Atlantic, for reaching this object by a sort of royal road. He deems it idle 
here even to recapitulate these projects. In one and all of them he disbe- 
lieves. Almost all of them take for their model what is deemed the veiy 
worst kind of taxation in States, and which, if introduced into Churches, 
would but succeed in compelling the form and stifling the 8pirU of libe- 
rality. While urging the utmost diligence and regularity in collecting the 
Church's liberality, and the utmost discretion in distributing it, he depre- 
cates the idea of evoking that liberality itself suddenly and as if by enchant- 
ment — by some ingenious and perilous scheme, some novel expedient of 
ecclesiastical legislation. But while he has no faith in these, he has un- 
bounded faith in the sore though slow operation of adequate causes. 

There must be an application of the truth to the conscience in respect of 
this duty. Its sense must be revived on the mind of the Church, from 
which it has been all but entirely worn o£f. Let her sin be held up before 
her eye, and kept in her view, till she sees it in all its magnitude, repents of 
it, and puts it away from her. Let the great truth go forth, that the dedi- 
cation of part of our substance to Qod is not less a duty than the dedication 
of part of our time; and that if the v>rUten law of the Sabbath exacts a 
seventh of the one, the implied law of property exacts a tenth of the other. 

Though no formal law proclaims the amount the Christian is to give, great 
principles do. The words may not be in the New Testament ; the spirit is. 
He cannot recall the argument of this treatise (very inadequately conducted) 
without feeling that the tenth of his property is, like the seventh of his 
time, holy to the Lord. He has first a train of examples ; he has next a train 
of enactments, all pointing to the tentk; and though under the gospel the 
duty has been released from the fetters of law, that it may take more purely 



150 APPENDIX. 

the form of liberality^ its foundations are unchanged, and its exercise is not 
less needed— nay, is greatly more so than before. The Christian in this, as in 
every virtue, ought to exceed, not £eJ1 below, the measure of those who lived 
in times less enlightened, and under a dispensation less spirituaL What 
we wish to bring all Christians throughout the world to, is to d«al with 
their substance as they deal with their time, and regularly and on prindide 
to sanctify the whole by the dedication of a part to God. Let the man find 
what his available income is, by deducting all such expenses as his position 
in life imposes upon him ; for we do not wish to render the duty oppressive, 
or to convert into a burden what God has made a privilege — ^and we are less 
solicitous that the sum given by the individual should be large, than that it 
should be given on principle and plan, and as a stated Christian duty; 
having found, we say, what his available income is, let the Christian say, 
these nine i)arts are my own, they may be used for my own lawfol ends ; 
this tenth is God's. This I cannot appropriate without being a robber — 
a robber of holy things. 

If these sentiments be in any degree in accordance with God's revealed 
will, then how solemn to reflect in what fearful guilt both the Church 
and the world have been living ! By the men of the world, the claims of 
God on their property have been totally disregarded. As if they were sole 
and exclusive owners, they have disposed of all without one thought of the 
great Owner. From the vast revenues of the noble downwards, all, to the 
last penny, has been spent upon themselves. This is robbery of the worst 
kind. There is no human law to punish it as such : but in the grand assise 
of the last day, this fearful abuse of property shall not escape the righteous 
judgment of God. And as regards the professors of religion, they are only a 
few degrees less guilty than the men of the world. There are noble excep- 
tions, but the members of the Church generally have given hitherto but the 
most wretched pittance towards the support of the gospd. There has been 
no sense of the duty : no conscience made of its performance : the most 
niggardly gift — ^niggardly in measure, and niggardly in spirit — has been 
thrown into the treasury of the gospel, as if the gospel was a beggar, from 
whose disagreeable importunity the man was glad to rid himself by suffer- 
ing this wrong. This is to aflEront, not support the gospel. Th^ Church must 
learn what the first principles of this duty are. She must herself do due 
fealty to her King in both branches of her homage — the dedication of h^ 
time, and the dedication of her substance — ^and then lift up a testimony 
which shall condemn and shame the world. 

Already, if we mistake not, the dawn of a better day has broke. No 
one need be told that Christian liberality has now begun to exceed that 
stinted measure and those narrow limits to which it so strictly adhered in 
days not long gone by. And although the great body of Christians still 
come far short of their duty in this matter, we have now some examples of 
giving to the gospel on a scale truly worthy of the gospel — of men with 



